BLEU:	0.09836948506338894
ID:	0
INPUT:	Baina badut zerbait zure aurka : bere burua <unk> duen Jezabel horri utzi egiten diozula bere <unk> nire zerbitzariak engainatzen , Jainkoarekiko desleial izan eta sasijainkoei eskainiriko haragia jatera bultzatuz .
PRED:	“ But if I have something against you , ” says the Lord . “ If I have been unfaithful to his officials , I would give you a sin offering to sin by worshiping idols of sin .
GOLD:	“ But I have this complaint against you . You are permitting that woman — that Jezebel who calls herself a prophet — to lead my servants astray . She teaches them to commit sexual sin and to eat food offered to idols .

ID:	1
INPUT:	Roboamen gainerako jarduerak eta egintza guztiak « Judako Erregeen Kronika » liburuan daude idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Amon 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Rehoboam 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .

ID:	2
INPUT:	<unk> kanpora ( 11 , 19 — 12 , 25 )
PRED:	Jesus and John the Council
GOLD:	The Church in Antioch of Syria

ID:	3
INPUT:	JERUSALEM ERORI <unk> : <unk> ETA <unk> BERRIA <unk> ( 33 , 1 — 39 , 29 )
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ What sorrow awaits those who sit on earth ? ”
GOLD:	Ezekiel as Israel 's Watchman

ID:	4
INPUT:	Gure etsaiak eta inguruko herriak , hori jakin zutenean , zeharo harriturik gelditu ziren , eta lan hori gure Jainkoaren laguntzaz egina zela aitortu beharra izan zuten .
PRED:	When our enemies heard this , they were afraid to know how they were doing . They were amazed to know how they were doing .
GOLD:	When our enemies and the surrounding nations heard about it , they were frightened and humiliated . They realized this work had been done with the help of our God .

ID:	5
INPUT:	Haiek honela ari ziren beren artean : « Jainkoaren aginduz ari zela esaten badiogu , zergatik ez genion sinetsi erantzungo digu .
PRED:	They told them , “ We did n't tell us what we say , ‘ We do n't believe that we do n't believe . '
GOLD:	They talked it over among themselves . “ If we say it was from heaven , he will ask why we did n't believe John .

ID:	6
INPUT:	Ondoren , Moises Sinai menditik jaitsi zen , legearen bi harlauzak eskuan zeramatzala . Ez zekien aurpegia distiratsu zuenik , Jaunarekin mintzatu izanagatik .
PRED:	Then Moses left Mount Sinai and went down to the mountain of Sinai as the Lord had commanded him , and he did not know the Lord 's words .
GOLD:	When Moses came down Mount Sinai carrying the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant , he was n't aware that his face had become radiant because he had spoken to the Lord .

ID:	7
INPUT:	« Ez duzu zeure haurrik Molok jainkoaren ohorez hilko , zeure Jainkoaren izena profanatuz . Neu naiz Jauna .
PRED:	“ Do not defile yourself by your own sin , and I will die . I am the Lord your God . I am the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Do not permit any of your children to be offered as a sacrifice to Molech , for you must not bring shame on the name of your God . I am the Lord .

ID:	8
INPUT:	Etxola Jaia
PRED:	The Festival of Shelters
GOLD:	Ezra Reads the Law

ID:	9
INPUT:	Haserretu zen faraoia bi zerbitzarion aurka
PRED:	Then Pharaoh became very angry with him .
GOLD:	Pharaoh became angry with these two officials ,

ID:	10
INPUT:	Balaam zetorrela jakitean , bidera irten zitzaion Balak , Edom lurraldeko muga-ertzean , Arnon erreka ondoan , zegoen Ar hirira ,
PRED:	When Balaam heard that Balaam went out to meet the border of Edom , Balak , beside the border of Edom , near the Arnon River ,
GOLD:	When King Balak heard that Balaam was on the way , he went out to meet him at a Moabite town on the Arnon River at the farthest border of his land .

ID:	11
INPUT:	Eguneroko erre-opari horiek belaunez belaun egingo dituzte Jaunaren aurrean , elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran , zurekin mintzatzeko elkartuko <unk> lekuan .
PRED:	At the time the time the people of the Lord will come to meet you at the entrance of the Tabernacle and meet you at the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ These burnt offerings are to be made each day from generation to generation . Offer them in the Lord 's presence at the Tabernacle entrance ; there I will meet with you and speak with you .

ID:	12
INPUT:	Baina haiek arren eta arren eskatu zioten : « Geldi zaitez gurekin , berandu baita eta iluna gainean dugu » . Eta herrian sartu zen haiekin gelditzeko .
PRED:	But they begged them , “ Do n't go with us , for we ca n't go with us . ” And when they came to stay in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	but they begged him , “ Stay the night with us , since it is getting late . ” So he went home with them .

ID:	13
INPUT:	oraindik ez baitzitzaien ogiena buruan sartu , adimena itsu zeukaten eta .
PRED:	But when they were not hungry , they did n't understand what they were blind .
GOLD:	for they still did n't understand the significance of the miracle of the loaves . Their hearts were too hard to take it in .

ID:	14
INPUT:	Orain , beraz , faraoi jauna , <unk> ezazu gizon argi eta jakintsua , eta emaiozu aginpidea Egipto guztiaren gain .
PRED:	So now , my lord , my lord the king , and I will be sure to be sure to be sure to be ashamed . ”
GOLD:	“ Therefore , Pharaoh should find an intelligent and wise man and put him in charge of the entire land of Egypt .

ID:	15
INPUT:	Hain zegoen haserre Jauna Jerusalemen eta Judaren kontra , ezen bere aurretik urruti bota baitzituen . Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosorren kontra jaiki zen Sedekias .
PRED:	At that time the Lord was angry with the people of Judah and Judah . He turned against the people of Judah and the people of Judah .
GOLD:	These things happened because of the Lord 's anger against the people of Jerusalem and Judah , until he finally banished them from his presence and sent them into exile.Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon .

ID:	16
INPUT:	<unk> , beraz , haien eskaria ; baina jakinarazi argi eta garbi , nolako eskubideak izanen dituen beraien gain aginduko duen erregeak » .
PRED:	That is why the king says , but he has given them clean and clean . But the king will be clean , and the king will be clean . ”
GOLD:	Do as they ask , but solemnly warn them about the way a king will reign over them . ”

ID:	17
INPUT:	Entzun duzue esan dizuedana : “ Banoa , baina itzuliko naiz zuengana ” . Benetan maite baninduzue , poztu egingo <unk> Aitarengana <unk> , Aita ni baino handiago baita .
PRED:	Listen to me , ‘ I am going to you , but I will return to you , but I am the Father who loves you . I am the Father who loves you . '
GOLD:	Remember what I told you : I am going away , but I will come back to you again . If you really loved me , you would be happy that I am going to the Father , who is greater than I am .

ID:	18
INPUT:	« Ez duzu zeure amarekin sexu-harremanik izango , zeure ama baita : aita eta ama , biak desohoratuko zenituzke .
PRED:	“ Do n't have sexual relations with your mother , for your father has been your father and mother and your father , and I 'll have any of you .
GOLD:	“ Do not violate your father by having sexual relations with your mother . She is your mother ; you must not have sexual relations with her .

ID:	19
INPUT:	<unk> egun izango da , gaurik gabeko egun , arratsean ere iraungo baitu argiak . Hori noiz gertatuko den , Jaunak bakarrik daki .
PRED:	In that day , there will be many days , for there will be no light . For the day of the Lord will be light .
GOLD:	yet there will be continuous day ! Only the Lord knows how this could happen . There will be no normal day and night , for at evening time it will still be light .

ID:	20
INPUT:	Odol errugabea isuri zuten , beren seme-alaben <unk> idoloei opari eskainiz : lurraldea odolez busti zuten eta profanatu .
PRED:	Then he poured out the blood of their own sons and their children , along with their own blood , and they defiled them on the ground .
GOLD:	They shed innocent blood , the blood of their sons and daughters.By sacrificing them to the idols of Canaan , they polluted the land with murder .

ID:	21
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun zion : — Aitak aurpegira txu egin izan balio , zazpi egunez lotsatan egon beharko zukeen , ezta ? Beraz , geldi bedi zazpi egunez kanpalekutik urruti ; ondoren , itzuliko da .
PRED:	The Lord replied to him , “ The man who did n't be baptized in the house of the dead . ” So the Lord would not return to the camp . So he must return to the camp .
GOLD:	But the Lord said to Moses , “ If her father had done nothing more than spit in her face , would n't she be defiled for seven days ? So keep her outside the camp for seven days , and after that she may be accepted back . ”

ID:	22
INPUT:	Behin batean , Asiriako errege <unk> bere gudalburu nagusia bidali zuen <unk> , eta hark hiriari eraso eta hartu egin zuen .
PRED:	One day King Sennacherib of Assyria sent his officials to kill him , and the commander of the army of Assyria .
GOLD:	In the year when King Sargon of Assyria sent his commander in chief to capture the Philistine city of Ashdod ,

ID:	23
INPUT:	Errege honek ez die izango begirunerik beraren arbasoek gurtu zituzten jainkoei , ez emakumeek begiko duten jainkoari , ezta beste edozein <unk> ere ; jainko guztiak baino handiagotzat joko baitu bere burua .
PRED:	For he did not worship the king of his ancestors , for he had served the gods of the god of the god of the god of his ancestors , and he would not abandon his god .
GOLD:	He will have no respect for the gods of his ancestors , or for the god loved by women , or for any other god , for he will boast that he is greater than them all .

ID:	24
INPUT:	Erregeak isekaz darabiltzate , handikiei irri egiten . <unk> <unk> diete , ondoan <unk> <unk> baitituzte .
PRED:	The king and all his nobles will kill him , and they will know that they were filled with power , and they will know that they are very weak .
GOLD:	They scoff at kings and princesand scorn all their fortresses.They simply pile ramps of earthagainst their walls and capture them !

ID:	25
INPUT:	Abrahamen morroia , hitzok entzun orduko , lurrean ahuspeztu zen , Jaunari eskerrak emanez .
PRED:	When the servant heard what was happening , he fell down on the ground and worshiped the Lord .
GOLD:	When Abraham 's servant heard their answer , he bowed down to the ground and worshiped the Lord .

ID:	26
INPUT:	Darioren erregealdiko bigarren urtean , seigarren hilaren lehen egunean , Ageo profetaren bitartez mintzatu zitzaien Jauna Xealtielen seme Zorobabel Judako gobernariari eta Jotzadaken seme Josue apaiz nagusiari .
PRED:	On the second year of King Darius 's reign , during the second year of the second year of King Darius 's reign , Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel , Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	On August 29 of the second year of King Darius 's reign , the Lord gave a message through the prophet Haggai to Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel , governor of Judah , and to Jeshua son of Jehozadak , the high priest .

ID:	27
INPUT:	<unk> , gosez eta izurriz erasoko diet . Hori ikustean , lurreko erreinu guztiak ikaraturik geldituko dira : madarikazio eta <unk> , <unk> eta iseka-gai izango dira jaurtiko ditudan nazio guztietan .
PRED:	But when they see that some of you will turn away from the kingdoms of the kingdoms of the earth , they will see that the kingdoms of the earth will be destroyed , and they will see that I will make you a god of great nation .
GOLD:	Yes , I will pursue them with war , famine , and disease , and I will scatter them around the world . In every nation where I send them , I will make them an object of damnation , horror , contempt , and mockery .

ID:	28
INPUT:	han ziren Anas apaiz nagusia , Kaifas , Joan , Alexandro eta apaizburuen familietako guztiak .
PRED:	But before the high priest , the high priest , the leading priests , the leading priests , and the elders of the leading priests , and the elders of the elders of the leading priests .
GOLD:	Annas the high priest was there , along with Caiaphas , John , Alexander , and other relatives of the high priest .

ID:	29
INPUT:	eta erregeari jakinarazi zion oihuka . Erregeak esan zuen : — Bakarrik baldin badator , berri onak dakartza . <unk> hurbildu ahala , ordea ,
PRED:	Then the king said to the king , “ If the king has come , when he comes , he will know how much he has come . ”
GOLD:	He shouted the news down to David , and the king replied , “ If he is alone , he has news . ” As the messenger came closer ,

ID:	30
INPUT:	Eduki beti besoan <unk> fedea , etsaiaren suzko geziak oro itzali ahal izateko .
PRED:	I will give you your arrows , and they will serve me .
GOLD:	In addition to all of these , hold up the shield of faith to stop the fiery arrows of the devil .

ID:	31
INPUT:	horrela guztien asmo ezkutuak agerian geldi daitezen . Eta zuri ere <unk> ezpatak zulatuko dizu bihotza » .
PRED:	In all of the world will turn away from all the power of all the world , and they will serve you . ”
GOLD:	As a result , the deepest thoughts of many hearts will be revealed . And a sword will pierce your very soul . ”

ID:	32
INPUT:	<unk> inguraturik agertuko da , Jainkoa aintzat hartu nahi ez eta Jesus gure Jaunaren berri ona onartu nahi ez dutenak zigortzera .
PRED:	For when they see that the great power of the Lord Jesus , he will punish those who do n't want to punish him .
GOLD:	in flaming fire , bringing judgment on those who do n't know God and on those who refuse to obey the Good News of our Lord Jesus .

ID:	33
INPUT:	Jaunaren erabakiz , <unk> lehiatu ziren israeldarrei kontra egiten , israeldarrek errukirik gabe erabat suntsitu eta desegin zitzaten , Jaunak Moisesi agindu bezala .
PRED:	That is why the Lord says to the people of Israel , so they could destroy the people of Israel and destroy them .
GOLD:	For the Lord hardened their hearts and caused them to fight the Israelites . So they were completely destroyed without mercy , as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	34
INPUT:	Hil <unk> eraso izan diot <unk> honi , gizon eta emakumeak atxilotu eta kartzelan sartuz .
PRED:	But when I died , the woman who had been killed , and all the women who had been killed in prison .
GOLD:	And I persecuted the followers of the Way , hounding some to death , arresting both men and women and throwing them in prison .

ID:	35
INPUT:	Orduan , <unk> egiteko <unk> bat harturik , zabor artera joan zen Job .
PRED:	Then when they saw that they were so weak , Job sent them away .
GOLD:	Job scraped his skin with a piece of broken pottery as he sat among the ashes .

ID:	36
INPUT:	Ez dira alferrik <unk> , ezta <unk> hiltzeko <unk> ere , Jaunak <unk> baitira , eta halaxe <unk> ondorengoak ere .
PRED:	For the Lord will be able to kill those who have been able to kill him , and they will know that the Lord will kill him .
GOLD:	They will not work in vain , and their children will not be doomed to misfortune.For they are people blessed by the Lord , and their children , too , will be blessed .

ID:	37
INPUT:	Hartu zituen Terahek bere seme Abram , bere biloba Lot , Haranen semea , eta bere erraina Sarai , Abramen emaztea , eta kaldearren Ur hiria utzi zuen Kanaan lurraldera joateko . Haranera iritsi zirenean , bertan kokatu ziren .
PRED:	From the family of Abram , Abram son of Abram , son of Abram , and Abram ( Abram ) , Abram 's wife ) , and Abram 's wife lived in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	One day Terah took his son Abram , his daughter-in-law Sarai ( his son Abram 's wife ) , and his grandson Lot ( his son Haran 's child ) and moved away from Ur of the Chaldeans . He was headed for the land of Canaan , but they stopped at Haran and settled there .

ID:	38
INPUT:	Neure santutegia beraien artean betiko jarriko dudanean , orduan jakingo dute nazioek ni naizela Jauna , Israel beretzat sagaratu duena » .
PRED:	I will make them holy because they will know that I am the Lord , the God of Israel will know that I am holy . ”
GOLD:	And when my Temple is among them forever , the nations will know that I am the Lord , who makes Israel holy . ”

ID:	39
INPUT:	Ura leporaino heldu zitzaidan , itsas leizeak inguratu ninduen , itsas belarrak <unk> zitzaizkidan .
PRED:	He led me into the sea with water from the sea , and they saw me from the sea .
GOLD:	I sank down to the very roots of the mountains.I was imprisoned in the earth , whose gates lock shut forever.But you , O Lord my God , snatched me from the jaws of death !

ID:	40
INPUT:	Begirada argiak <unk> alaitzen , albiste <unk> indarra berritzen .
PRED:	And when they were filled with great power , and the power of power will be filled with power .
GOLD:	A cheerful look brings joy to the heart ; good news makes for good health .

ID:	41
INPUT:	Ahuspez gaitezen lotsaturik , desohorez beterik ; zeren bekatu egin <unk> , geure Jainkoaren , <unk> eta geure <unk> gaurdaino . Ez dugu <unk> , geure Jainkoaren , esana » .
PRED:	Let us live in your presence , and let us see that we have sinned against God . For we have heard that we have heard that we have seen , and we will know that we have heard that we have done . ”
GOLD:	Let us now lie down in shameand cover ourselves with dishonor , for we and our ancestors have sinnedagainst the Lord our God.From our childhood to this daywe have never obeyed him . ”

ID:	42
INPUT:	<unk>
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Recovery
GOLD:	Blessings for Obedience

ID:	43
INPUT:	Beraz , berri onaren egiaren bidetik zuzen ez zebiltzala ohartu nintzenean , honela esan nion Pedrori denen aurrean : « Zu , judu izanik , jentil bezala bizi baldin bazara eta ez judu bezala , zergatik behartzen dituzu jentilak judu bezala bizitzera ? »
PRED:	When I heard the Good News about the truth , I did n't believe in the truth , for they said , “ If you do n't know the Jews of the Gentiles , you are Jews who are Jews in the law of God . ”
GOLD:	When I saw that they were not following the truth of the gospel message , I said to Peter in front of all the others , “ Since you , a Jew by birth , have discarded the Jewish laws and are living like a Gentile , why are you now trying to make these Gentiles follow the Jewish traditions ?

ID:	44
INPUT:	beste mezu honekin : « Hau dio Jeftek : Israeldarrek ez zuten moabdarren , ez amondarren lurralderik hartu .
PRED:	Then Jephthah said to them , “ This is what the kings of the Amorites , the Ammonites , the Ammonites , the Ammonites , and the Ammonites .
GOLD:	“ This is what Jephthah says : Israel did not steal any land from Moab or Ammon .

ID:	45
INPUT:	Senideok , jarrai beza bakoitzak Jainkoaren aurrean , honek deitzerakoan zuen bizi-egoeran .
PRED:	Dear brothers , dear brothers and sisters , be sure that you were in God 's presence , as you were as well as you wanted .
GOLD:	Each of you , dear brothers and sisters , should remain as you were when God first called you .

ID:	46
INPUT:	Gero , Bildotsak zazpi <unk> lehena ireki zuela ikusi nuen , eta lau izaki <unk> lehenengoak trumoi antzeko ahotsez hau esaten zuela entzun nuen : « Zatoz » .
PRED:	Then I saw the Lamb that the Lamb saw the angel who had seen the sun , and when I heard the angel of the living beings , I heard that I heard the angel of God , saying , “ Come and I heard me ! ”
GOLD:	As I watched , the Lamb broke the first of the seven seals on the scroll . Then I heard one of the four living beings say with a voice like thunder , “ Come ! ”

ID:	47
INPUT:	Baina kontuak eman beharko dizkiote biziak eta hilak epaitzeko prest dagoenari .
PRED:	But a person will be given to life , and the poor will be saved .
GOLD:	But remember that they will have to face God , who stands ready to judge everyone , both the living and the dead .

ID:	48
INPUT:	Gaiztoak <unk> , bidegabekeria ugari ; haien erorketaren lekuko izango zintzoak .
PRED:	They will know how wicked they are wicked , and they will be able to see the wicked of the wicked .
GOLD:	When the wicked are in authority , sin flourishes , but the godly will live to see their downfall .

ID:	49
INPUT:	Beste hamarrak , hori entzutean , bi anaien aurka haserre jarri ziren .
PRED:	When they heard this , they were terrified by two brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	When the ten other disciples heard what James and John had asked , they were indignant .

ID:	50
INPUT:	Judako hirietan eta Jerusalemgo kaleetan poz-alaitasunezko oihuak eta senar-emaztegaien kantuak bukaraziko ditut , lurraldea basamortu bihurtua geldituko baita » .
PRED:	I will rebuild the towns of Judah and Jerusalem in the streets of Judah and Jerusalem in the streets , and I will be scattered in the streets . ”
GOLD:	I will put an end to the happy singing and laughter in the streets of Jerusalem . The joyful voices of bridegrooms and brides will no longer be heard in the towns of Judah . The land will lie in complete desolation .

ID:	51
INPUT:	Zeuen lotsarako diotsuet . Ez ote duzue inor aditurik , senide arteko auziak erabaki ditzakeenik ?
PRED:	Do n't you think about your fellow believers ? Do n't let your fellow believers stop giving you a burden to your fellow believers ?
GOLD:	I am saying this to shame you . Is n't there anyone in all the church who is wise enough to decide these issues ?

ID:	52
INPUT:	Begira ! Iparraldetik ekarriko ditut , lurreko azken mugetatik bilduko . Jendetza izugarria itzuliko da : itsuak eta herrenak ere bai , <unk> haurra izan <unk> batera .
PRED:	Look , I will gather you out of the land of the earth , and the people of the earth will come , and the lame will see the blind and the blind , and the lame will be in the grave .
GOLD:	For I will bring them from the northand from the distant corners of the earth.I will not forget the blind and lame , the expectant mothers and women in labor.A great company will return !

ID:	53
INPUT:	Israeldarrak kanpaleku inguruan nor bere tokian zeudelarik , <unk> lasterka , garrasika eta <unk> hasi ziren .
PRED:	The people of Israel were filled with them , and they were filled with all who were filled with joy .
GOLD:	Each man stood at his position around the camp and watched as all the Midianites rushed around in a panic , shouting as they ran to escape .

ID:	54
INPUT:	Hori esanik , besoa jaso eta bi aldiz jo zuen makilaz harkaitza . <unk> atera zen , eta jendeak eta abereek edan zuten .
PRED:	For he was very angry with his hand , and he threw them into the boat and threw them into the boat .
GOLD:	Then Moses raised his hand and struck the rock twice with the staff , and water gushed out . So the entire community and their livestock drank their fill .

ID:	55
INPUT:	<unk> soldaduek guduan nork beretzat harrapatuak ziren .
PRED:	At that time they had been armed with an army .
GOLD:	All the fighting men had taken some of the plunder for themselves .

ID:	56
INPUT:	Hautsa lurrera itzuliko duk , handik sortua denez . Bizi-arnasa <unk> duk , berak emana denez .
PRED:	Then you will go into the ground , and you will be like a little child , and you will know that he is weak . ”
GOLD:	For then the dust will return to the earth , and the spirit will return to God who gave it .

ID:	57
INPUT:	Gerora , antxumea igorri zuen Judak Adulamgo adiskidearen bidez , emakumeagandik <unk> jasotzeko , baina ez zuen aurkitu .
PRED:	But when Judah sent this message to the king , he sent a woman to meet him , but when he saw that the woman who had not found him .
GOLD:	Later Judah asked his friend Hirah the Adullamite to take the young goat to the woman and to pick up the things he had given her as his guarantee . But Hirah could n't find her .

ID:	58
INPUT:	eta barkatu gure erruen zorra , guk ere geure <unk> <unk> gero ;
PRED:	But if you have sinned , and if you have obeyed him , and if we have obeyed him .
GOLD:	and forgive us our sins , as we have forgiven those who sin against us .

ID:	59
INPUT:	<unk> pobrea bada , ez zarete bahituran harturiko soingainekoaz estaliko gauez ,
PRED:	But if you hear the truth , you must not keep the crown of the night on the night .
GOLD:	If your neighbor is poor and gives you his cloak as security for a loan , do not keep the cloak overnight .

ID:	60
INPUT:	Tenpluko laguntzaileak eta Salomonen zerbitzarien ondorengo guztiak , 392 lagun .
PRED:	The Temple servants of Solomon 's servants were descendants , and all the descendants of Solomon 's servants were descendants .
GOLD:	In all , the Temple servants and the descendants of Solomon 's servants numbered 392 .

ID:	61
INPUT:	Astemea , hura ikustean , <unk> <unk> zen , Balaamen <unk> harresiaren kontra <unk> . Balaamek jo egin zuen berriro .
PRED:	When the donkey saw him , he saw that some of the men of Aram had come to meet him . When Balaam realized that he was furious , he became very angry with the sword .
GOLD:	When the donkey saw the angel of the Lord , it tried to squeeze by and crushed Balaam 's foot against the wall . So Balaam beat the donkey again .

ID:	62
INPUT:	Jesus etxeratu zenean , ikasleek bakarrean galdetu zioten : — Eta guk , zergatik ezin izan dugu bota espiritu hori ?
PRED:	When Jesus went home to the home , Jesus asked him , “ Why ca n't we do it ? ”
GOLD:	Afterward , when Jesus was alone in the house with his disciples , they asked him , “ Why could n't we cast out that evil spirit ? ”

ID:	63
INPUT:	Nik faraoiaren edalontzia nuen eskuan ; mahats-mordoak hartu nituen eta , edalontzi gainean <unk> , edalontzia faraoiaren eskuetan ezarri nuen .
PRED:	I took the cup of the wine of Pharaoh 's chief baker , and I brought you out of Pharaoh 's palace , and I placed them on Pharaoh 's head .
GOLD:	I was holding Pharaoh 's wine cup in my hand , so I took a cluster of grapes and squeezed the juice into the cup . Then I placed the cup in Pharaoh 's hand . ”

ID:	64
INPUT:	« Begira arretaz <unk> , so egin zeu baino askoz gorago dauden hodeiei .
PRED:	“ Look ! Be strong and courageous , and it is more powerful than the foundation of the earth .
GOLD:	Look up into the sky , and see the clouds high above you .

ID:	65
INPUT:	Joan ziren , bada , eta han aurkitu zuten astakumea ate ondo batean kanpotik lotuta , eta askatzen hasi ziren .
PRED:	So they found John and found the colt , where they found the colt to the entrance of the house of the camp , and they went to the entrance to the entrance of the camp .
GOLD:	The two disciples left and found the colt standing in the street , tied outside the front door .

ID:	66
INPUT:	Hain indartsua duenez <unk> , izu-ikaratu egiten du aurrean duen guztia .
PRED:	He is his mighty power , and he is under his power .
GOLD:	Who could pry open its jaws ? For its teeth are terrible !

ID:	67
INPUT:	Honela esaten dio Jainkoak faraoiari Liburu Santuan : Honetarako utzi zaitut bizirik : nire ahalmena erakusteko eta mundu osoak nor naizen jakin dezan .
PRED:	This is what the Scriptures say to Pharaoh : “ I have given you to Pharaoh , the power of his power , and I will know the power of God .
GOLD:	For the Scriptures say that God told Pharaoh , “ I have appointed you for the very purpose of displaying my power in you and to spread my fame throughout the earth . ”

ID:	68
INPUT:	<unk> ere higuingarri bada behartsua , nola ez zaizkio , bada , urrunduko lagunak ?
PRED:	But if the poor are detestable , how can you think of their tongues ?
GOLD:	The relatives of the poor despise them ; how much more will their friends avoid them ! Though the poor plead with them , their friends are gone .

ID:	69
INPUT:	Pozez beteko zara , eta beste jende asko ere poztuko da haren jaiotzaz ,
PRED:	Your children will rejoice in prosperity , and they will rejoice in him .
GOLD:	You will have great joy and gladness , and many will rejoice at his birth ,

ID:	70
INPUT:	eta guda-gurdien arduradunek , hura Israelgo erregea ez zela oharturik , atzera egin zuten .
PRED:	the commander of the Philistines realized that the king of Israel had not done .
GOLD:	As soon as the chariot commanders realized he was not the king of Israel , they stopped chasing him .

ID:	71
INPUT:	<unk> auzitan hasten den zuhurrak , haserretu nahiz barre egin , ez du atsedenik izaten .
PRED:	A wise person is angry with pain , and they wo n't laugh at rest .
GOLD:	If a wise person takes a fool to court , there will be ranting and ridicule but no satisfaction .

ID:	72
INPUT:	Hobe gizon zuhurra indartsua baino , eta gizon ikasia ahaltsua baino .
PRED:	Better to be better than a powerful man , and fools are weak .
GOLD:	The wise are mightier than the strong , and those with knowledge grow stronger and stronger .

ID:	73
INPUT:	« Hau esan ondoren , apurtu egingo duzu pitxerra zurekin doazen gizonen aurrean ,
PRED:	“ This is what you have done , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ As these men watch you , Jeremiah , smash the jar you brought .

ID:	74
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> buruz : elbarriaren sendakuntza
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's officers heard about Tyre :
GOLD:	Jesus Calls Levi ( Matthew )

ID:	75
INPUT:	mintzorik eta hitzik gabe : entzun <unk> da haien ahotsa .
PRED:	They have heard that they have been unfaithful to him , and they have heard their voice .
GOLD:	Yet their message has gone throughout the earth , and their words to all the world.God has made a home in the heavens for the sun .

ID:	76
INPUT:	« Hau pentsatu nuen : Bizitzako sasoirik <unk> behar ; Hildakoen Egoitzara <unk> , gainerako <unk> dizkidate .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : What sorrow awaits those who have been able to kill me , and when they have seen my power .
GOLD:	I said , “ In the prime of my life , must I now enter the place of the dead ? Am I to be robbed of the rest of my years ? ”

ID:	77
INPUT:	ez baitu hori beste <unk> . Zerekin babestuko da , bestela , <unk> ? Laguntza eske deiadar egitean , entzun egingo diot , errukiorra bainaiz ni .
PRED:	For if they have been able to kill you , how can I be able to help you ? If you hear , I will not be afraid , I will not be able to listen to you .
GOLD:	If you take your neighbor 's cloak as security for a loan , you must return it before sunset .

ID:	78
INPUT:	<unk> ordainduz eskuratu baitzaituzte Jainkoak . Goretsazue , bada , Jainkoa zeuen gorputzaz .
PRED:	He has given you victory over you , and he will save you from your power .
GOLD:	for God bought you with a high price . So you must honor God with your body .

ID:	79
INPUT:	Utzi lurrean , ostera , <unk> bere erroekin , lotu <unk> brontzezko kateez , eta geldi bedi zelaiko belarretan . Busti beza ortziko ihintzak , janaritu bedi <unk> , abereak bezala .
PRED:	Let them be strong in the earth , for he was very angry with great power . Let them be filled with great strength , and they are so hard to obey the heavens .
GOLD:	It had fresh green leaves , and it was loaded with fruit for all to eat . Wild animals lived in its shade , and birds nested in its branches . All the world was fed from this tree .

ID:	80
INPUT:	honela baitzioen berekiko : « Jantzia ukitzen badiot , besterik gabe sendatuko naiz » .
PRED:	I thought to her , “ If I have seen her , I will heal you and heal it . ”
GOLD:	for she thought , “ If I can just touch his robe , I will be healed . ”

ID:	81
INPUT:	Zuregandik jaio diren , zeuk sortu dituzun seme-alabetariko batzuk ere eraman egingo dituzte , Babiloniako erregearen jauregian zerbitzari izateko » .
PRED:	“ Some of your sons will be born to the king of Babylon , and you will serve in the palace of Babylon . ”
GOLD:	Some of your very own sons will be taken away into exile . They will become eunuchs who will serve in the palace of Babylon 's king . ”

ID:	82
INPUT:	« “ Iparraldeko erregearen semeak <unk> prestatuko dira , gudaroste handiak bilduz . Seme horietako bat uholde baten antzera sartuko da bere gudariekin hegoaldeko mugetan barrena . Itzultzean , etsaiaren gotorleku bati erasoko dio .
PRED:	“ Then the sons of Judah will be with the king of the north and all the people of Judah . They will come to the king of the north , and the people of the north will fall into the south .
GOLD:	However , the sons of the king of the north will assemble a mighty army that will advance like a flood and carry the battle as far as the enemy 's fortress .

ID:	83
INPUT:	Urtzen daukat barrena zure tenpluko atarien irrikaz . Bihotza eta naizen <unk> ari zait , oi Jainko , Jainko bizia .
PRED:	I am ashamed of my Temple , and I will put my hope in your presence .
GOLD:	Even the sparrow finds a home , and the swallow builds her nest and raises her youngat a place near your altar , O Lord of Heaven 's Armies , my King and my God !

ID:	84
INPUT:	Igo zen jendea gobernariaren jauregira eta ohitura zuena emateko eskatu zioten .
PRED:	So the people went to the governor and asked the governor of the Roman governor .
GOLD:	The crowd went to Pilate and asked him to release a prisoner as usual .

ID:	85
INPUT:	<unk> , Lakix , Azeka ,
PRED:	Lachish , Azekah ,
GOLD:	Adoraim , Lachish , Azekah ,

ID:	86
INPUT:	Galdetu zion irenak Feliperi : — Esadazu , mesedez : <unk> dio hori profetak , bere buruaz ala beste <unk> ?
PRED:	Philip said to Philip , “ Please give me a message to me , ” he asked him . “ Why are you trying to kill me ? ”
GOLD:	The eunuch asked Philip , “ Tell me , was the prophet talking about himself or someone else ? ”

ID:	87
INPUT:	Halere , ez nuen egin , baizik eta neure izenaren ohorez jokatu nuen , nire izena belztua izan ez zedin israeldarrak Egiptotik ateratzen ikusi ninduten nazioen artean .
PRED:	But I did not forget my name , but I have not given my name to the name of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Nevertheless , I withdrew my judgment against them to protect the honor of my name before the nations that had seen my power in bringing them out of Egypt .

ID:	88
INPUT:	Izu-ikara ezarri baitzuen bizidunen artean , faraoia eta bere gudarostea sinesgabeen artean geldituko dira etzanik , gerran hildakoekin batera . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	And now I will punish Pharaoh and his people , for they will be slaughtered by the sword of Egypt . And the Sovereign Lord will strike them with those who are slaughtered by the sword .
GOLD:	Although I have caused his terror to fall upon all the living , Pharaoh and his hordes will lie there among the outcasts who were slaughtered by the sword . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	89
INPUT:	Babilonia , hiriburu <unk> hori ! Bejondeiola , zuk guri eginaren ordaina emango dizunari !
PRED:	O Lord , let your unfailing love , for you have destroyed all these things .
GOLD:	O Babylon , you will be destroyed.Happy is the one who pays you backfor what you have done to us .

ID:	90
INPUT:	Ondoren , egoitzara eraman zuen kutxa eta errezela ezarri itun-kutxa estaltzeko , Jaunak agindu bezala .
PRED:	Then he took the Ark of the Tabernacle and placed it in the inner sanctuary , just as the Lord had commanded .
GOLD:	Then he brought the Ark of the Covenant into the Tabernacle and hung the inner curtain to shield it from view , just as the Lord had commanded him .

ID:	91
INPUT:	Ikaratu zen lurra eta dardaratu , zeruaren oinarriak mugitu , Jainkoaren <unk> astindu .
PRED:	His fierce anger swept away from the earth , and his anger fell upon him .
GOLD:	“ Then the earth quaked and trembled.The foundations of the heavens shook ; they quaked because of his anger .

ID:	92
INPUT:	Erregearen agindu <unk> arabera labea bizi-bizi piztu baitzuten , Xadrak , Mexak eta Abed-Nego jaurtitzeko labera hurbildu ziren gudariak berak suak kiskalita hil ziren .
PRED:	For the king ordered that his men could be raised from the dead , Meshach , Meshach , Meshach , and Abednego , Meshach , and Abednego .
GOLD:	And because the king , in his anger , had demanded such a hot fire in the furnace , the flames killed the soldiers as they threw the three men in .

ID:	93
INPUT:	Aitak maiteago zuela ikusirik , anaiak gorrotatzen hasi zitzaizkion eta hitza bera ere ukatu egiten zioten .
PRED:	When the Father saw her , he saw her , and he loved her .
GOLD:	But his brothers hated Joseph because their father loved him more than the rest of them . They could n't say a kind word to him .

ID:	94
INPUT:	Baina Jauna erne zegoen juduen arduradunak zaintzeko eta ez zizkieten lanak geldiarazi , harik eta <unk> <unk> bidali eta honen erantzuna jaso arte .
PRED:	But when the Lord was in charge of the Jews , they could n't realize that he was able to kill him and kill him .
GOLD:	But because their God was watching over them , the leaders of the Jews were not prevented from building until a report was sent to Darius and he returned his decision .

ID:	95
INPUT:	Mikaren etxean zeudelarik , lebitar gaztearen ahotsa ezagutu zuten eta , berarengana zuzenduz , galdetu zioten : — Nork ekarri zaitu hona ? Zer ari zara ? Zertan zabiltza hemen ?
PRED:	Meanwhile , the Levites who were filled with the house of the man who had been filled with him , and he asked him , “ What are you doing ? ”
GOLD:	While at Micah 's house , they recognized the young Levite 's accent , so they went over and asked him , “ Who brought you here , and what are you doing in this place ? Why are you here ? ”

ID:	96
INPUT:	« Hartu gantzuketa-olioa eta isuri egoitzaren eta bertan dagoen guztiaren gainera . Honela sagaratuko duzu bere tresna guztiekin , eta toki sakratua izango da .
PRED:	“ Take the anointing oil and the anointing oil on the Tabernacle , and make it holy . This is the Tabernacle that is holy and holy . This will be holy and holy .
GOLD:	“ Take the anointing oil and anoint the Tabernacle and all its furnishings to consecrate them and make them holy .

ID:	97
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : « Profeta bati edonon ematen zaio ohore , bere herri , senitarte eta etxean izan ezik » .
PRED:	Jesus said to one of them , “ The family of everyone who has been given to one of his family . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus told them , “ A prophet is honored everywhere except in his own hometown and among his relatives and his own family . ”

ID:	98
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun zion : — Bai , barkatzen diot , zuk eskatu bezala .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” the Lord replied , “ I forgive you as you . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said , “ I will pardon them as you have requested .

ID:	99
INPUT:	Handik Efraimgo mendialdera jo zuten eta Mikaren etxera heldu ziren .
PRED:	From there they went to the hill country of Ephraim and Ephraim .
GOLD:	Then they went on from there into the hill country of Ephraim and came to the house of Micah .

ID:	100
INPUT:	Horregatik ahalegintzen naiz ni ere , neure kontzientzia Jainkoaren eta gizonen aurrean beti garbi gordetzen .
PRED:	For I am faithful to you , and I am faithful to God with unfailing love .
GOLD:	Because of this , I always try to maintain a clear conscience before God and all people .

ID:	101
INPUT:	Biharamunean Salomonek bidali egin zuen herria . Jendea , erregea agurtu ondoren , bere etxeetara itzuli zen , alai eta bihotza bozkarioz betea zuela , Jaunak bere zerbitzari Davidi eta bere herri Israeli egin zien on guztiarengatik .
PRED:	So King Solomon sent for all the people , and the people of Israel to visit him . When he was with great joy , the Lord was with David and his servant David and all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	After the festival was over , Solomon sent the people home . They blessed the king and went to their homes joyful and glad because the Lord had been good to his servant David and to his people Israel .

ID:	102
INPUT:	Hiru <unk> , filistearren <unk> sartu , Belengo atean dagoen <unk> ura atera eta eraman zioten Davidi . Honek , ordea , ez zuen edan nahi izan , eta isuri egin zuen Jaunarentzako eskaintza bezala .
PRED:	At that time the Philistines came into the Philistines and saw that the Philistines had come from the Philistines , and he brought him out of the Philistines . But he refused to drink the Lord 's presence , just as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	So the Three broke through the Philistine lines , drew some water from the well by the gate in Bethlehem , and brought it back to David . But he refused to drink it . Instead , he poured it out as an offering to the Lord .

ID:	103
INPUT:	Hau dio Jaun ahalguztidunak : « Israeldarrok , ez egin <unk> hauen hitzari , amets <unk> baitizuete burua . Beraien <unk> <unk> dizkizueteeta ez nik agindutakoak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : I have heard that they were like an eagle , and they were afraid of them .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says to his people : “ Do not listen to these prophets when they prophesy to you , filling you with futile hopes.They are making up everything they say.They do not speak for the Lord !

ID:	104
INPUT:	eta morroiari galdegin : — Nor da landan zehar bidera datorkigun gizon hori ? Morroiak erantzun : — Ene nagusia . Orduan , Rebekak bere aurpegia estali zuen zapi batez .
PRED:	“ Who is this man ? ” they demanded . “ Who 's a man who wanted to kill me ? ” So she replied .
GOLD:	“ Who is that man walking through the fields to meet us ? ” she asked the servant.And he replied , “ It is my master . ” So Rebekah covered her face with her veil .

ID:	105
INPUT:	Hona ekarri dituzuen gizon hauek ez dira gure jainkosaren kontrako <unk> , ez biraolari .
PRED:	These are the instructions you brought to your enemy , and they will be able to serve you .
GOLD:	You have brought these men here , but they have stolen nothing from the temple and have not spoken against our goddess .

ID:	106
INPUT:	Bere indar guztiekin hegoaldeko erreinuaz <unk> erabakiko du . Horretarako , hegoaldeko erregearekin hitzarmena egingo du , alaba emaztetzat emanez , haren erreinua hondatzeko asmoz ; baina ez du lortuko bere <unk> .
PRED:	He will be the king of the north and the king of the north and the king of the south . He will rule over the king of the north , and he will destroy the kingdom of the north .
GOLD:	He will make plans to come with the might of his entire kingdom and will form an alliance with the king of the south . He will give him a daughter in marriage in order to overthrow the kingdom from within , but his plan will fail .

ID:	107
INPUT:	Tronu handi zuri bat ikusi nuen , baita bertan eseria zegoena ere ; beronen aurretik ihes egin zuten lurrak eta zeruak eta aztarnarik utzi gabe desagertu .
PRED:	I saw a great great great crowd that the people had sitting on the throne of the earth , and his people were sitting before the earth .
GOLD:	And I saw a great white throne and the one sitting on it . The earth and sky fled from his presence , but they found no place to hide .

ID:	108
INPUT:	Bilatu eta inon ez dituzu <unk> egiten zizutenak ; ezerez eta huts bihurtuko <unk> egiten zizutenak .
PRED:	Do n't let you be sure that you will be able to destroy you so that you will be sure that you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	You will look in vainfor those who tried to conquer you.Those who attack youwill come to nothing .

ID:	109
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak esan zion Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	110
INPUT:	Abrahamek guduan harrapatutako guztiaren hamarrenak eman zizkion orduan . Alde batetik , Melkisedek izenak « <unk> errege » esan nahi du ; eta , bestetik , Salemgo errege zen , hau da , « <unk> » .
PRED:	Then Abraham gave this message to the people of Israel , along with a tenth of the tribe of Levi , which means “ Son of man , ” Abraham said . “ He is the king of Assyria , who was the king of Assyria . ”
GOLD:	Then Abraham took a tenth of all he had captured in battle and gave it to Melchizedek . The name Melchizedek means “ king of justice , ” and king of Salem means “ king of peace . ”

ID:	111
INPUT:	Senideok , pikondoak ematen ote du <unk> , edota mahatsondoak pikurik ? Iturri <unk> ez dezake ur <unk> eman .
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , what will you think of the fig trees ? Of course , I have given you the fruit of the fig tree ?
GOLD:	Does a fig tree produce olives , or a grapevine produce figs ? No , and you ca n't draw fresh water from a salty spring .

ID:	112
INPUT:	Paulok egina ikustean , oihuka hasi zen jendea Likaoniako hizkuntzan : « Jainkoak jaitsi zaizkigu geure artera giza itxuran ! »
PRED:	When Paul saw them , they began to argue with the people of the world , they will know that God is able to pass by us . ”
GOLD:	When the crowd saw what Paul had done , they shouted in their local dialect , “ These men are gods in human form ! ”

ID:	113
INPUT:	Orduan , Tamar , <unk> erantzi eta , inork ez <unk> bere burua zapiz estalirik , Timna bidean dagoen <unk> hiriko sarreran jarri zen . Izan ere , Xela handi egin zela ikusten zuen , baina ez ziotela <unk> ematen .
PRED:	And when he saw that he had been able to kill him and saw that he had been able to kill him , and they were afraid of the city . But when he saw that he was afraid of them , he could n't know that he was afraid .
GOLD:	Tamar was aware that Shelah had grown up , but no arrangements had been made for her to come and marry him . So she changed out of her widow 's clothing and covered herself with a veil to disguise herself . Then she sat beside the road at the entrance to the village of Enaim , which is on the road to Timnah .

ID:	114
INPUT:	Gogoan izan Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak egintza guztietan bedeinkatu zaituztela eta basamortu izugarri honetan egin duzuen <unk> arduratu dela ; zeuekin izan duzue berrogei urte hauetan eta ez zaizue ezer falta izan .
PRED:	Remember that the Lord your God has made you great wonders in all the land you have made , so that all the people of Israel have made for forty years .
GOLD:	For the Lord your God has blessed you in everything you have done . He has watched your every step through this great wilderness . During these forty years , the Lord your God has been with you , and you have lacked nothing . ” '

ID:	115
INPUT:	« Eman dezagun gizon batek bi emazte dituela eta bata bestea baino maiteago duela , eta , batak zein besteak seme-alabak eman dizkion arren , gutxiago maite <unk> dela lehen-semea .
PRED:	“ Suppose one of the other men , let one more more than one of his wife , his wife , and other wives have given to each other . And if they love each other , we love him .
GOLD:	“ Suppose a man has two wives , but he loves one and not the other , and both have given him sons . And suppose the firstborn son is the son of the wife he does not love .

ID:	116
INPUT:	Izan ere , zapaltzailea hilko da , harroputza galduko , kalte egiteko erne <unk> :
PRED:	The wicked will die , and the wicked will be destroyed , and everyone will be able to prove that everyone will happen .
GOLD:	The scoffer will be gone , the arrogant will disappear , and those who plot evil will be killed .

ID:	117
INPUT:	Orduan , Xuaheko Bildadek hitz egin zuen :
PRED:	Then Job spoke again :
GOLD:	Then Bildad the Shuhite replied :

ID:	118
INPUT:	Hiriaren <unk> bederatzi <unk> izango da . « Aurrerantzean , “ Jauna bertan dago ” deituko da hiria » .
PRED:	They will be killed by the fortress of Susa , and the Lord will be called by the city . ”
GOLD:	“ The distance around the entire city will be 6 miles . And from that day the name of the city will be ‘ The Lord Is There . ' ”

ID:	119
INPUT:	baita bere egoitza Axtarot eta Edrei hirietan zuen Baxango Og erregearen erreinu osoa ere . Og erregea zen antzinako refatar <unk> gelditutako bakarra . Moisesek garaitu egin zituen bi erregeak eta beren lurraldeetatik bota .
PRED:	King Og of Bashan , Og of Bashan , and all the kingdoms of King Og of Bashan — the king of Bashan , and all the kingdoms of the land of King Og of Bashan and all the kingdoms of the earth .
GOLD:	and all the territory of King Og of Bashan , who had reigned in Ashtaroth and Edrei . King Og was the last of the Rephaites , for Moses had attacked them and driven them out .

ID:	120
INPUT:	berria eman zioten : « Bizi da Jose oraindik eta bera da agintari Egipto lurralde osoan » . Jakobek , <unk> guztiz , ez zuen zirkinik ere egin , ezin <unk> .
PRED:	The news of Joseph said , “ There is still alive and the king of Egypt and his officials , and the people of Egypt will know that all the people of Egypt were in the land of Egypt . ” So Jacob did n't know that he was buried in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	“ Joseph is still alive ! ” they told him . “ And he is governor of all the land of Egypt ! ” Jacob was stunned at the news — he could n't believe it .

ID:	121
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : <unk> hiri bihurtuko <unk> — jenderik gabeko hiriak bezala — , itsas leizea zure aurka altxarazi eta ur handiek estaliko zaituztenean ,
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will punish those who were filled with great cities , and they will be filled with your people , like the sea , and I will put on your heads . ”
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will make Tyre an uninhabited ruin , like many others . I will bury you beneath the terrible waves of enemy attack . Great seas will swallow you .

ID:	122
INPUT:	Beraz , Israel lurralde osoan neska gazte <unk> baten bila ibili ondoren , Abixag aurkitu zuten , <unk> , eta bera eraman zioten erregeari .
PRED:	So when the men of Israel saw that the young men of Israel were young women who were young , and he found him with him .
GOLD:	So they searched throughout the land of Israel for a beautiful girl , and they found Abishag from Shunem and brought her to the king .

ID:	123
INPUT:	<unk> liskarra sorrarazten , <unk> bekatuak ugaltzen .
PRED:	They are very angry with old , and those who are under their wickedness .
GOLD:	An angry person starts fights ; a hot-tempered person commits all kinds of sin .

ID:	124
INPUT:	Emakumeek , alai <unk> , honela kantatzen zuten , batzuek besteei erantzunez : « Saulek mila hil , Davidek hamar mila ! »
PRED:	Then the women of the women came to him and said to him , “ Are you one of the wise men of Israel ? ”
GOLD:	This was their song : “ Saul has killed his thousands , and David his ten thousands ! ”

ID:	125
INPUT:	Ez zen aurretik izan , ezta geroztik ere izango , egun hura bezalakorik : egun hartan Jaunak gizon baten esana egin zuen , Israelen alde borrokan ari baitzen Jauna .
PRED:	There was no one in the morning , no one in the morning , for the Lord had spoken ! The Lord had spoken , for he was a man of Israel had done for a few days .
GOLD:	There has never been a day like this one before or since , when the Lord answered such a prayer . Surely the Lord fought for Israel that day !

ID:	126
INPUT:	Orduan , Balakek esan zion Balaami : — Baina , zer egin didazu ? Etsaiak madarikatzeko ekarri , eta zuk <unk> bete ?
PRED:	Then Balaam said to Balaam , “ Why are you trying to listen to me ? Why are you trying to curse me ? ”
GOLD:	Then King Balak demanded of Balaam , “ What have you done to me ? I brought you to curse my enemies . Instead , you have blessed them ! ”

ID:	127
INPUT:	Ez gara geure buruak predikatzen ari , Jesu Kristo Jauna dela baizik , eta gu ez gara zuen zerbitzari besterik Jesusen maitasunagatik .
PRED:	We do n't realize that the Lord our Lord Jesus Christ is with Christ , but we are not serving our Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	You see , we do n't go around preaching about ourselves . We preach that Jesus Christ is Lord , and we ourselves are your servants for Jesus ' sake .

ID:	128
INPUT:	Josek esan zien : — Baina , zer egin duzue ? Ez al zenekiten ni bezalako batek den-dena <unk> dezakeela ?
PRED:	But Joseph asked them , “ Why do you know that I have made you so that I have been able to destroy you ? ”
GOLD:	“ What have you done ? ” Joseph demanded . “ Do n't you know that a man like me can predict the future ? ”

ID:	129
INPUT:	<unk> eskualdeetako <unk> kontra altxatu zen ; sarea bota zioten <unk> beren zuloan harrapatu .
PRED:	At that time they rebelled against him , and they rebelled against him .
GOLD:	Then the armies of the nations attacked him , surrounding him from every direction.They threw a net over himand captured him in their pit .

ID:	130
INPUT:	<unk> ala hil
PRED:	Paul 's Sickness and Zalmunna
GOLD:	A Call to Repentance

ID:	131
INPUT:	Orduan , Isaias profetak otoitz egin zion Jaunari eta ordurako jaitsiak zituen hamar mailak berriro igoarazi zizkion Jaunak itzalari Akazen mailadian .
PRED:	Then the prophet Isaiah prayed to the Lord and again again again again again again again more more than the few more than the Lord 's feet .
GOLD:	So Isaiah the prophet asked the Lord to do this , and he caused the shadow to move ten steps backward on the sundial of Ahaz !

ID:	132
INPUT:	bera da suge pozoitsu eta <unk> beteriko basamortu handi eta <unk> , <unk> gabeko eremu elkor horretatik , eraman zaituztena ; bera , <unk> ura atera eta edaten eman dizuena ;
PRED:	It is a wild animals that comes from the forest , and if they have been able to kill you , they have been able to kill you , and they have given you a drink from all the power of the world .
GOLD:	Do not forget that he led you through the great and terrifying wilderness with its poisonous snakes and scorpions , where it was so hot and dry . He gave you water from the rock !

ID:	133
INPUT:	Gure <unk> , Jaunak gantzuturiko erregea , preso erori da etsaiaren sarean . Herrien artean haren gerizpean biziko ginela uste genuen .
PRED:	For the Lord is his enemies ; his enemies have turned away from their chains , and we have lived among us .
GOLD:	Our king — the Lord 's anointed , the very life of our nation — was caught in their snares.We had thought that his shadowwould protect us against any nation on earth !

ID:	134
INPUT:	Abiatu zen , bada , David bere gizonekin <unk> eta oldartu zitzaien filistearrei . Haien abere-taldeak hartu eta izugarrizko sarraskia egin zien . Horrela salbatu zituen Davidek Keilako bizilagunak .
PRED:	So David sent his men to kill him and all the men of the Philistines and his men , and they brought them out of the Philistines from the Philistines .
GOLD:	So David and his men went to Keilah . They slaughtered the Philistines and took all their livestock and rescued the people of Keilah .

ID:	135
INPUT:	Handik denboraldi batera Jaunak esan zidan : « Zoaz Eufrates ibaira eta hartu han gordetzeko agindu nizun gerrikoa » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Go back to the Euphrates River and take it into the Euphrates River . ”
GOLD:	A long time afterward the Lord said to me , “ Go back to the Euphrates and get the loincloth I told you to hide there . ”

ID:	136
INPUT:	Ez dute <unk> ukituko , kutsa ez daitezen , aita edo <unk> , seme edo <unk> , anaia edo <unk> <unk> izan ezik .
PRED:	But if they have been unfaithful to you , I will give you my father or mother or mother or mother , or if they were afraid of what he had happened .
GOLD:	“ A priest must not defile himself by being in the presence of a dead person unless it is his father , mother , child , brother , or unmarried sister . In such cases it is permitted .

ID:	137
INPUT:	Jakobek , orduan : — Ez da jaitsiko nire semea zuekin , hila baitu bere anaia eta bera bakarrik gelditzen zait <unk> . Bidean zoritxarren bat gertatuko balitzaio , agure hau Hildakoen Egoitzara jaitsaraziko zenukete atsekabez .
PRED:	“ No , ” Jacob said . “ No , my brother will be dead , for he has died , and his brother will be dead , and if you are dead , let me go into the pit to the pit of the pit . ”
GOLD:	But Jacob replied , “ My son will not go down with you . His brother Joseph is dead , and he is all I have left . If anything should happen to him on your journey , you would send this grieving , white-haired man to his grave . ”

ID:	138
INPUT:	Egin otoitz gizon oker eta gaiztoengandik gu onik atera gaitezen ere , ez baitira denak leialak .
PRED:	Instead , let us listen to their neighbors , and we have not sinned .
GOLD:	Pray , too , that we will be rescued from wicked and evil people , for not everyone is a believer .

ID:	139
INPUT:	Nik , Paulok , Jainkoak hala nahirik , Kristo Jesusen bidez agindu zaigun bizia iragartzeko Jesu Kristoren apostolu naizen honek ,
PRED:	I am writing to God by the apostle of Christ , so that God has given us the apostle of Christ Jesus Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , chosen by the will of God to be an apostle of Christ Jesus . I have been sent out to tell others about the life he has promised through faith in Christ Jesus .

ID:	140
INPUT:	<unk> zerikusirik ez zuen hura , guregatik bekatuarekin bat egin zuen Jainkoak , guk haren bitartez Jainkoarengandik salbamena irits dezagun .
PRED:	Those who have been able to trust in God 's presence , for we have made God 's grace and salvation .
GOLD:	For God made Christ , who never sinned , to be the offering for our sin , so that we could be made right with God through Christ .

ID:	141
INPUT:	Saul , asto galduen bila
PRED:	Saul 's donkeys ,
GOLD:	Saul Meets Samuel

ID:	142
INPUT:	Heriotza dakarren eztena bekatua da , eta bekatuak legetik hartzen du bere indarra .
PRED:	Those who are guilty of sin has been unfaithful to the law of sin .
GOLD:	For sin is the sting that results in death , and the law gives sin its power .

ID:	143
INPUT:	asmo txarretan dabilen burua , gaiztakeria egiteko presa duten oinak ,
PRED:	Their feet are ashamed of evil , and they will be ashamed of your feet .
GOLD:	a heart that plots evil , feet that race to do wrong ,

ID:	144
INPUT:	Ardi galduaren gisa <unk> banintz , bilatu zuk zeure zerbitzari hau , ez baititut zure aginduak ahazten .
PRED:	If I have seen my servant , I have not been my servant , I have not obeyed your commands .
GOLD:	I have wandered away like a lost sheep ; come and find me , for I have not forgotten your commands .

ID:	145
INPUT:	Hari batetik zintzilik bezala biziko zarete , gau eta egun dardaraz , bizitzaz ere etsita .
PRED:	and you will live in the dust , and you will live in the wilderness for burnt offerings .
GOLD:	Your life will constantly hang in the balance . You will live night and day in fear , unsure if you will survive .

ID:	146
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Gainera , laguntza eske niregana etortzen utziko diet israeldarrei eta artaldea bezala ugalaraziko ditut .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will bring you back to the people of Israel , and I will bring them into the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am ready to hear Israel 's prayers and to increase their numbers like a flock .

ID:	147
INPUT:	Uholdearen aurretik , jan-edanean ziharduen eta ezkondu egiten zen jendea , Noe ontzian sartu zen arte ;
PRED:	At the great flood , the great crowd began to go into the boat , and Noah went into the boat until the people had gone .
GOLD:	In those days before the flood , the people were enjoying banquets and parties and weddings right up to the time Noah entered his boat .

ID:	148
INPUT:	Begira Babiloniari : galdua da herria . Basapiztien menpe utzi du Asiriak ; eraso-dorreak altxaturik , jauregiak desegin dizkioeta <unk> bihurtu .
PRED:	Look at the end of Babylon 's reign , the king of Babylon has led his army against Babylon , and he has taken it into a furnace .
GOLD:	Look at the land of Babylonia — the people of that land are gone ! The Assyrians have handed Babylon overto the wild animals of the desert.They have built siege ramps against its walls , torn down its palaces , and turned it to a heap of rubble .

ID:	149
INPUT:	Gainera , hildakoen piztueraz , ez al duzue irakurri Jainkoak berak esan zizuena :
PRED:	And the dead will not read it to the dead , for God has given you this message from the dead .
GOLD:	“ But now , as to whether there will be a resurrection of the dead — have n't you ever read about this in the Scriptures ? Long after Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob had died , God said ,

ID:	150
INPUT:	Pedro sartzera zihoala , Kornelio bidera atera zitzaion eta oinetara ahuspeztu .
PRED:	When Peter was going to meet him , he fell on his feet .
GOLD:	As Peter entered his home , Cornelius fell at his feet and worshiped him .

ID:	151
INPUT:	Ezin izan zion inork erantzun , eta egun hartatik aurrera ez zen inor ausartu galderarik egiten .
PRED:	He replied , “ Do n't go to the same day and the devil . ”
GOLD:	No one could answer him . And after that , no one dared to ask him any more questions .

ID:	152
INPUT:	errudunari <unk> emateneta errugabeari <unk> diozuenok !
PRED:	They trust in the dust , and those who hate you .
GOLD:	They take bribes to let the wicked go free , and they punish the innocent .

ID:	153
INPUT:	Joan nintzen eta gorde nuen Jaunak agindutako tokian .
PRED:	So I went back to the Lord and told him what the Lord had commanded me .
GOLD:	So I went and hid it by the Euphrates as the Lord had instructed me .

ID:	154
INPUT:	goizeko argia bezain distiratsu egingo du zure zuzentasuna , eguerdiko eguzkia bezain argitsu zure zuzenbidea .
PRED:	Your light will be as bright as your light , and your tongue will be like the sun .
GOLD:	He will make your innocence radiate like the dawn , and the justice of your cause will shine like the noonday sun .

ID:	155
INPUT:	<unk> agindua
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Message about Assyria
GOLD:	The World 's Hatred

ID:	156
INPUT:	Neure mendi santuaren inguruan ezarriko ditut eta sasoian sasoiko euria bidaliko diet , neure <unk> ezaugarri .
PRED:	I will pour out my holy mountain , and I will pour out my holy mountain . I will pour out my fury on my holy mountain .
GOLD:	I will bless my people and their homes around my holy hill . And in the proper season I will send the showers they need . There will be showers of blessing .

ID:	157
INPUT:	Izan ere , gezurrezko <unk> eta sasiprofetak agertuko dira eta aukeratuak berak ere , ahal balitz , engainatzeko moduko mirari handiak eta egintza harrigarriak egingo dituzte .
PRED:	For some of you who are false prophets and prophets will be sure that some of you are a few of the people of Israel or a mighty nation or a mighty nation or miracles .
GOLD:	For false messiahs and false prophets will rise up and perform great signs and wonders so as to deceive , if possible , even God 's chosen ones .

ID:	158
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> ;
PRED:	They were buried with flesh and fig tree .
GOLD:	They left Terah and camped at Mithcah .

ID:	159
INPUT:	Zazpi zigiluz jotako liburua
PRED:	The Land Given to the Promised Land
GOLD:	The Lamb Opens the Scroll

ID:	160
INPUT:	<unk> , <unk> , <unk> ,
PRED:	At that time , when they saw that they were filled with power ,
GOLD:	They also lived in Jeshua , Moladah , Beth-pelet ,

ID:	161
INPUT:	Jainkoaren agintzariaren aurrean ez zen sinesgogor izan , ezta zalantzan ibili ere , baizik eta sendotu egin zen sinesmenean ; horrela , Jainkoak egia zioela aitortu zuen ,
PRED:	But God did not obey God , but he did not obey God . He did not believe in faith , just as God had commanded him ,
GOLD:	Abraham never wavered in believing God 's promise . In fact , his faith grew stronger , and in this he brought glory to God .

ID:	162
INPUT:	Nola zerua lurraren gainetik garai , halaxe nire <unk> gainetiketa nire egitasmoak <unk> gainetik .
PRED:	How can I know that my power will be ashamed of my power , and they will know that I am under my power .
GOLD:	For just as the heavens are higher than the earth , so my ways are higher than your waysand my thoughts higher than your thoughts .

ID:	163
INPUT:	Gure urrats guztiak zaintzen dituzte : ez daukagu kalera ateratzerik . Hurbil dugu azkena , beteak egunak ; bai , heldu zaigu azkena !
PRED:	Our enemies are safe , and we will not fall on their way . We will not be destroyed , for we have left the end of the end .
GOLD:	We could n't go into the streetswithout danger to our lives.Our end was near ; our days were numbered.We were doomed !

ID:	164
INPUT:	Tziporren seme eta Moabeko errege Balak baino hobea zarelakoan al zaude ? Hura ez zen aitzakia bila ibili israeldarren kontra borrokatzeko .
PRED:	“ Have you come from Moab ? ” he asked . “ Why are you looking for me ?
GOLD:	Are you any better than Balak son of Zippor , king of Moab ? Did he try to make a case against Israel for disputed land ? Did he go to war against them ?

ID:	165
INPUT:	Ahiasen seme eta Isakarren leinukoa zen Baxak jaiki eta hil egin zuen Nadab erregea , israeldar guztiekin Gibeton , filistearren hiria , setiatzen ari zenean . Hantxe bertan hil zuen Baxak .
PRED:	I became the next king of Israel , and he killed the army of Israel . The king of Israel of Ai was defeated by the army of Israel , and he killed the army of Israel .
GOLD:	Then Baasha son of Ahijah , from the tribe of Issachar , plotted against Nadab and assassinated him while he and the Israelite army were laying siege to the Philistine town of Gibbethon .

ID:	166
INPUT:	Erromes-kanta . Begiak zuregana jasoak ditut , zeruan errege zaren horrengana .
PRED:	I looked around you , and I have given you a king in heaven .
GOLD:	I lift my eyes to you , O God , enthroned in heaven .

ID:	167
INPUT:	Belaunez belaun egingo diozue Jaunari labeko lehen ogien eskaintza .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : You must keep on the Sabbath day of the Presence on the Sabbath day of the Lord .
GOLD:	Throughout the generations to come , you are to present a sacred offering to the Lord each year from the first of your ground flour .

ID:	168
INPUT:	Bedeinkatua zu , Jauna ! Irakats niri zeure arauak .
PRED:	Praise the Lord ! Praise the words of your decrees .
GOLD:	I praise you , O Lord ; teach me your decrees .

ID:	169
INPUT:	<unk> mendian <unk> dio Jaunak , Gabaon haranean bezala , bere egitekoa betetzeko , bere lana burutzeko : egiteko harrigarria , ohi ez bezalako lana .
PRED:	When they heard that the Lord had done in the valley of Ben-Hinnom , he made them in the valley of Ben-Hinnom , so he could make them as much as he had done .
GOLD:	The Lord will come as he did against the Philistines at Mount Perazimand against the Amorites at Gibeon.He will come to do a strange thing ; he will come to do an unusual deed :

ID:	170
INPUT:	eskuinaldetik <unk> , eta hala ere gose ; ezkerraldetik jan , eta ezin ase . Bakoitzak bere <unk> jaten .
PRED:	But when they were hungry , they will eat it with water and drink it with water , and they will eat with flesh and drink .
GOLD:	The land will be blackenedby the fury of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies.The people will be fuel for the fire , and no one will spare even his own brother .

ID:	171
INPUT:	bere aitaren jokabidea hartuz eta bere aitak zerbitzatu zituen idoloak gurtuz .
PRED:	He followed his father and served them by worshiping idols .
GOLD:	He followed the example of his father , worshiping the same idols his father had worshiped .

ID:	172
INPUT:	Orduan , apaizak , lebitarrak , atezainak , kantariak , tenpluko laguntzaileak eta atzerritik etorritako israeldar guztiak beren hirietan jarri ziren bizitzen . Zazpigarren <unk> iritsi zenean , israeldarrak jadanik beren hirietan zeuden .
PRED:	Then the priests , the Levites , the gatekeepers , the gatekeepers , the gatekeepers , the servants of the Levites , who lived in the towns of the Lord , who lived in the towns of Israel .
GOLD:	The rest of the people gave 20,000 gold coins , about 2,500 pounds of silver , and 67 robes for the priests .

ID:	173
INPUT:	Hau guztia <unk> sinagogan irakatsi zuen Jesusek .
PRED:	This message came to the synagogue in the synagogue .
GOLD:	He said these things while he was teaching in the synagogue in Capernaum .

ID:	174
INPUT:	Orain , bete ezazu , Jainko Jaun horrek , gure aita Davidi eman zenion hitza , zuk egin bainauzu lurreko hautsa baino ugariago den herri honen errege .
PRED:	Now listen to the Sovereign Lord our God , my father , for I have given you to your father , for I have given you as your ancestors .
GOLD:	O Lord God , please continue to keep your promise to David my father , for you have made me king over a people as numerous as the dust of the earth !

ID:	175
INPUT:	Esan zion , orduan , Davidek Sauli : — Zergatik entzuten diozu David zu hondatu nahian dabilela diotsun jendeari ?
PRED:	Then David said to Saul , “ Why do you listen to the people of Israel ? Why are you afraid of your people ? ”
GOLD:	This very day you can see with your own eyes it is n't true . For the Lord placed you at my mercy back there in the cave . Some of my men told me to kill you , but I spared you . For I said , ‘ I will never harm the king — he is the Lord 's anointed one . '

ID:	176
INPUT:	Fedeari esker erori ziren Jerikoko harresiak , zazpi egunez hiria inguratu ondoren .
PRED:	It was by by faith that the city of Jericho came to the town of Jericho .
GOLD:	It was by faith that the people of Israel marched around Jericho for seven days , and the walls came crashing down .

ID:	177
INPUT:	Izan ere , bakarra da Jainkoa eta bakarra Jainkoaren eta gizon-emakumeen <unk> ere : gizon bat , Kristo Jesus ,
PRED:	For God is one who is one who is one man , and those who are living in authority .
GOLD:	For , There is one God and one Mediator who can reconcile God and humanity — the man Christ Jesus .

ID:	178
INPUT:	Hona zer ikusi nuen : Elam eskualdean dagoen Susa <unk> aurkitzen nintzen , Ulai ibai ondoan .
PRED:	I saw that the fortress of Susa was buried in the province of Susa in the province of Susa .
GOLD:	In this vision I was at the fortress of Susa , in the province of Elam , standing beside the Ulai River .

ID:	179
INPUT:	Nik esan nion : « Ai Jainko Jauna ! Zera ari dira nitaz esaten : “ Ez al da hori beti parabolak kontatzen ari dena ? ” »
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits me ? ” I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , how can they say , ‘ They have not heard these things that they have done ? '
GOLD:	Everyone in the world will know that I am the Lord . My sword is in my hand , and it will not return to its sheath until its work is finished . '

ID:	180
INPUT:	Zure <unk> beren <unk> diet , beren odolez <unk> ditut , ardo berriz bezala . Horrela jakingo dute gizaki <unk> , Jauna , naizela zure salbatzailea , ni , Jakoben Jainko indartsua , zure askatzailea » .
PRED:	I know that your power are mine , and they will know that I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who will know that I am the Lord , the God of Israel , and I will know that I am the Sovereign Lord . ”
GOLD:	I will feed your enemies with their own flesh.They will be drunk with rivers of their own blood.All the world will know that I , the Lord , am your Savior and your Redeemer , the Mighty One of Israel . ”

ID:	181
INPUT:	honako irri-kanta hau abestuko diozu Babiloniako erregeari : « Horra zertan den zapaltzailea ! Horra zertan <unk> harrokeria !
PRED:	This is what the king says : “ What sorrow awaits you , the king of Babylon ? What sorrow awaits you ? What sorrow awaits you ? ”
GOLD:	you will taunt the king of Babylon . You will say , “ The mighty man has been destroyed.Yes , your insolence is ended .

ID:	182
INPUT:	Orduan , Josuek : — Ken itzazue , bada , zeuen artean dituzuen sasijainkoen idoloak eta jar zaitezte erabat Jaunaren , Israelen Jainkoaren , aldean .
PRED:	Then Joshua said to them , “ Get up and worship the gods of the Lord your God , for you have destroyed all the gods of Israel .
GOLD:	“ All right then , ” Joshua said , “ destroy the idols among you , and turn your hearts to the Lord , the God of Israel . ”

ID:	183
INPUT:	Horregatik , bada , etsaiak inguratuko du lurraldea , zure <unk> <unk> ditu , eta zure jauregiak hustuko » .
PRED:	So I will destroy your enemies and your enemies , and your enemy will be filled with power . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , ” says the Sovereign Lord , “ an enemy is coming ! He will surround them and shatter their defenses.Then he will plunder all their fortresses . ”

ID:	184
INPUT:	Orduan , herriko apaizburu eta lege-maisu guztiak bildu eta Mesias non <unk> zen galdetu zien .
PRED:	Then the leading priests and teachers of religious law asked him , “ Where are you the Messiah ? ”
GOLD:	He called a meeting of the leading priests and teachers of religious law and asked , “ Where is the Messiah supposed to be born ? ”

ID:	185
INPUT:	Jaunarengatik , izan zaitezte giza agintari guztien menpeko : bai denen gain agintea duen erregearen menpeko ,
PRED:	For the Lord your God has given them authority over all over all the nations .
GOLD:	For the Lord 's sake , submit to all human authority — whether the king as head of state ,

ID:	186
INPUT:	Ardiak ahulak zirenean , ordea , ez zituen ziriak ezartzen . Honela , ahulak <unk> eta <unk> <unk> <unk> ziren .
PRED:	But when they were young , they were so angry with them , and they were able to kill him . And when they saw that they were filled with him .
GOLD:	But he did n't do this with the weaker ones , so the weaker lambs belonged to Laban , and the stronger ones were Jacob 's .

ID:	187
INPUT:	gure eta zuen artean eta gure ondorengo <unk> artean ezaugarri izateko baizik ; hau da , beraren tenpluan geure erre-opari eta elkartasun-opariak eskainiz Jaunari kultu eman nahi <unk> adierazteko ezaugarri . Horrela , zuen seme-alabek ezin esango diete gureei Jaunarekin zerikusirik ez dutela .
PRED:	“ We have been very very powerful , and that we have been given to the Temple of our Lord . He has given us a burnt offering and peace offerings to the Lord , and they will never be able to obey the Lord .
GOLD:	but as a memorial . It will remind our descendants and your descendants that we , too , have the right to worship the Lord at his sanctuary with our burnt offerings , sacrifices , and peace offerings . Then your descendants will not be able to say to ours , ‘ You have no claim to the Lord . '

ID:	188
INPUT:	Beste ontziko lagunei keinu egin zieten laguntzera etortzeko ; hurbildu ziren eta bi ontziak ia-ia <unk> bete zituzten .
PRED:	Then they begged him to help him , and they met together together together with a large crowd , and they were filled with him .
GOLD:	A shout for help brought their partners in the other boat , and soon both boats were filled with fish and on the verge of sinking .

ID:	189
INPUT:	Jaunak , ordea , erantzun zion : — Ez horixe ! Kain hiltzen duena , zazpi aldiz gogorrago izango da <unk> . Eta Jaunak ezaugarri bat ezarri zion Kaini , aurkitzen zuen inork hil ez zezan .
PRED:	But the Lord said to him , “ No ! ” But Cain replied , “ for she will die for seven times , and she will be sure to kill him .
GOLD:	The Lord replied , “ No , for I will give a sevenfold punishment to anyone who kills you . ” Then the Lord put a mark on Cain to warn anyone who might try to kill him .

ID:	190
INPUT:	« <unk> neuk bakarrik ikusi nuen . Nirekin zeudenek ez zuten ezer ikusi ; baizik eta , ikara handiak harturik , ihesi joan ziren eta ezkutatu .
PRED:	“ But when I saw that I had not been able to see , I saw that no more they were able to see . But when they saw that they were there , they ran back to me .
GOLD:	Only I , Daniel , saw this vision . The men with me saw nothing , but they were suddenly terrified and ran away to hide .

ID:	191
INPUT:	« Horrela hitz egin zidanean , burumakur eta hitzik gabe gelditu nintzen .
PRED:	“ Then I spoke to a person without cause .
GOLD:	While he was speaking to me , I looked down at the ground , unable to say a word .

ID:	192
INPUT:	Emakumeak
PRED:	Young Women of Jerusalem
GOLD:	Young Women of Jerusalem

ID:	193
INPUT:	Larunbata igaro zenean , Magdalako Mariak , Maria Santiagoren amak eta <unk> usain gozoko ukenduak erosi zituzten , Jesusen gorpua gantzutzeko .
PRED:	When Mary was the Sabbath , Mary 's body was sick , Mary Magdalene , and the angel of the Temple of Jesus had taken from the Temple of Jesus ' body .
GOLD:	Saturday evening , when the Sabbath ended , Mary Magdalene , Mary the mother of James , and Salome went out and purchased burial spices so they could anoint Jesus ' body .

ID:	194
INPUT:	<unk> erantzun zioten : — <unk> emakumeak ez dira egiptoarrak bezalakoak ; oso dira <unk> eta , <unk> joan orduko , izana dute haurra .
PRED:	But the woman replied , “ The women of the earth will be very old when the Egyptians saw that they were very sick , and they were very very very old . ”
GOLD:	“ The Hebrew women are not like the Egyptian women , ” the midwives replied . “ They are more vigorous and have their babies so quickly that we can not get there in time . ”

ID:	195
INPUT:	Haiek , orduan , txalupan hartu nahi izan zuten , baina txalupa berehala iritsi zen zihoazen tokira .
PRED:	So they left the boat and went out to the lake , but they went into the boat , but they left the boat .
GOLD:	Then they were eager to let him in the boat , and immediately they arrived at their destination !

ID:	196
INPUT:	Gainera , beraren aita Manases bezala Jaunaren aurrean apaldu ordez , geroz eta okerkeria gehiago egin zuen .
PRED:	And he became more than the Lord , just as he became the Lord .
GOLD:	But unlike his father , he did not humble himself before the Lord . Instead , Amon sinned even more .

ID:	197
INPUT:	Orduan , Satanas sartu zen Hamabien taldeko <unk> , Iskariote <unk> .
PRED:	Then Satan came out to him , and he was the one who was sitting on him .
GOLD:	Then Satan entered into Judas Iscariot , who was one of the twelve disciples ,

ID:	198
INPUT:	Ahaltsua izango da lurraldean haren <unk> , bedeinkatua zuzenaren ondorengotza .
PRED:	The Almighty will be glad in the land of the earth , and they will worship him .
GOLD:	Their children will be successful everywhere ; an entire generation of godly people will be blessed .

ID:	199
INPUT:	Israelgo erregeak gudariak igorri zituen Jainkoaren gizonak esandako tokira . Behin baino gehiagotan gertatu zen hau : Eliseok ohartarazten zuen erregea eta hau erne egoten zen .
PRED:	The king of Israel sent this message to the men of Israel , and he sent them into exile . Then Elisha said to them , “ The king of Israel , and he was still alive . ”
GOLD:	So the king of Israel would send word to the place indicated by the man of God . Time and again Elisha warned the king , so that he would be on the alert there .

ID:	200
INPUT:	Josuek gizon batzuk bidali zituen eta , lasterka oihal-etxolara joanik , dena aurkitu zuten oihal-etxolan gordea eta azpian dirua .
PRED:	Then Joshua sent some of the men back to the top of the tent , and they found it under it .
GOLD:	So Joshua sent some men to make a search . They ran to the tent and found the stolen goods hidden there , just as Achan had said , with the silver buried beneath the rest .

ID:	201
INPUT:	Ez zintuzket gehiegi nekatu nahi , baina entzun gaitzazu , otoi , unetxo batean , ohi duzun bihotz onez .
PRED:	Do n't you think you would n't listen to me , but when I want you to happen , you would be like a believer .
GOLD:	But I do n't want to bore you , so please give me your attention for only a moment .

ID:	202
INPUT:	David bere jauregia bedeinkatzeko itzuli zenean , Saulen alaba Mikal atera zitzaion , esanez : — Itxura ederra azaldu du gaur Israelgo erregeak , bere <unk> aurrean biluzik , edozein lagun zirtzil biluzik jarriko <unk> bezala , jarriz !
PRED:	When David returned to his palace , he brought her back to Saul 's palace , the daughter of Saul , the king of Israel , asked him , “ He is very angry with you , and I will make your clothing as well as well as he wanted . ”
GOLD:	When David returned home to bless his own family , Michal , the daughter of Saul , came out to meet him . She said in disgust , “ How distinguished the king of Israel looked today , shamelessly exposing himself to the servant girls like any vulgar person might do ! ”

ID:	203
INPUT:	Ongi dakizue esku hauek irabazi dutela niretzat eta neurekin <unk> beharrezko guztia .
PRED:	You know these things that you have been able to be able to be able to be baptized .
GOLD:	You know that these hands of mine have worked to supply my own needs and even the needs of those who were with me .

ID:	204
INPUT:	Hirian bizi diren guztiak <unk> ditut , gizaki nahiz abere , eta izurrite beldurgarriz hilko dira .
PRED:	I will live in the city of those who live in the city , and they will die .
GOLD:	I will send a terrible plague upon this city , and both people and animals will die .

ID:	205
INPUT:	— Zoaz Egiptoko errege faraoiagana eta esaiozu israeldarrei joaten uzteko .
PRED:	“ Go back to Pharaoh and tell the people of Egypt , ‘ Go into the land of Egypt . '
GOLD:	“ Go back to Pharaoh , the king of Egypt , and tell him to let the people of Israel leave his country . ”

ID:	206
INPUT:	Ireki zerua , Jauna , eta jaitsi , ukitu mendiak eta jar bitez ketan .
PRED:	Praise the Lord , and the heavens are covered with smoke and smoke .
GOLD:	Open the heavens , Lord , and come down.Touch the mountains so they billow smoke .

ID:	207
INPUT:	Jaunak higuin du jokabide gaiztoa , zuzentasun bila dabilena du maite .
PRED:	The Lord detests the wicked , and he delights in those who love God .
GOLD:	The Lord detests the way of the wicked , but he loves those who pursue godliness .

ID:	208
INPUT:	Kutxan ez zegoen Horeb mendian Moisesek bertan ipini zituen bi harlauzak besterik , Egiptotik irten ondoren Jaunak israeldarrekin eginiko itunaren harlauzak besterik ez , alegia .
PRED:	Then Moses placed the Ark of the Covenant on the mountain where the Lord had placed them on the mountain of Egypt on the mountain of Egypt . Then the Lord had given them a covenant with the covenant of Egypt .
GOLD:	Nothing was in the Ark except the two stone tablets that Moses had placed in it at Mount Sinai , where the Lord made a covenant with the people of Israel when they left Egypt .

ID:	209
INPUT:	Gure etxaldeak kanpotarren eskuetara joan dira ; gure etxeak arrotzen eskuetara .
PRED:	We will go to war against our homes , and our homes will be handed over to you .
GOLD:	Our inheritance has been turned over to strangers , our homes to foreigners .

ID:	210
INPUT:	Hori guztia Aaronen eta beronen semeen eskuetan jarri zuen , eta hauek Jaunari eskaini zioten , errituzko aurkezpen-keinua eginez .
PRED:	And all the sons of Aaron and his sons brought them to the Lord as a special offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	He put all these in the hands of Aaron and his sons , and he lifted these gifts as a special offering to the Lord .

ID:	211
INPUT:	Zintzoaren herentzia , bere ondorengoentzat ; <unk> ondasunak ere zintzoarentzat .
PRED:	The descendants of the godly will be filled with the descendants of the descendants of the godly .
GOLD:	Good people leave an inheritance to their grandchildren , but the sinner 's wealth passes to the godly .

ID:	212
INPUT:	Faraoiak uste izango du <unk> bidea ixten diela eta israeldarrak noraezean dabiltzala .
PRED:	Then Pharaoh will be able to save them , and the people of Israel will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Then Pharaoh will think , ‘ The Israelites are confused . They are trapped in the wilderness ! '

ID:	213
INPUT:	Ez harritu esaten dizuedanaz , bai baitator ordua hildako guztiek haren ahotsa entzungo dutena ,
PRED:	Do n't be surprised when the time come from the dead , the time of the dead will be heard .
GOLD:	Do n't be so surprised ! Indeed , the time is coming when all the dead in their graves will hear the voice of God 's Son ,

ID:	214
INPUT:	Zuk zulatu zenuen eta sarraskitu itsas munstroa , zuk sakabanatu beso bizkorrez etsaiak .
PRED:	You brought your victory over the sea , and you filled your enemies with a powerful arm .
GOLD:	The heavens are yours , and the earth is yours ; everything in the world is yours — you created it all .

ID:	215
INPUT:	Iparraldeko gudarostea <unk> , hegoaldeko erregea harropuztu egingo da ; baina , etsaiari milaka gudari <unk> , ez du luzaroan iraungo <unk> .
PRED:	The king of Judah will rule over the north of the north of the north , the king of the north of the north , and his army will be destroyed .
GOLD:	After the enemy army is swept away , the king of the south will be filled with pride and will execute many thousands of his enemies . But his success will be short lived .

ID:	216
INPUT:	Atera bedi kondenatua auzian , huts egin biezaio bere <unk> .
PRED:	Let the end of judgment , and when they act at that time , they will be able to kill him .
GOLD:	When his case comes up for judgment , let him be pronounced guilty.Count his prayers as sins .

ID:	217
INPUT:	Gutxi batzuk besterik ez ziren , <unk> bat besterik ez ;
PRED:	But some of that little while some of the little while they were there , they could n't have a little while they were there .
GOLD:	He said this when they were few in number , a tiny group of strangers in Canaan .

ID:	218
INPUT:	Ezin izango dituzteberen <unk> ere <unk> haserre-egunean : haren grinaren sugarraklur osoa irentsiko du . <unk> benetan , lurtar guztiak suntsituko baititu .
PRED:	There will be able to be able to be able to destroy all the kingdoms of the earth , and all the nations will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Your silver and gold will not save youon that day of the Lord 's anger.For the whole land will be devouredby the fire of his jealousy.He will make a terrifying endof all the people on earth .

ID:	219
INPUT:	Zuetaz oroitzen naizen bakoitzean eskerrak ematen dizkiot neure Jainkoari .
PRED:	I have heard the meaning of the world , and I have given you a message to God .
GOLD:	Every time I think of you , I give thanks to my God .

ID:	220
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Begira , suge <unk> bidaliko dizkizuet . Ez duzue horiek <unk> izango , eta zizta egingo dizuete » .
PRED:	“ Look , ” says the Lord , “ when I will send you into a snake , you will know that they will be able to kill you . ”
GOLD:	I will send these enemy troops among youlike poisonous snakes you can not charm.They will bite you , and you will die.I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	221
INPUT:	eta Nazaret izeneko herrian jarri zen bizitzen ; horrela bete zen Jainkoak profeten bidez esana : « Nazaretarra esango diote » .
PRED:	Then he went to the village of Nazareth , where God had said , “ God has given us this message to us . ”
GOLD:	So the family went and lived in a town called Nazareth . This fulfilled what the prophets had said : “ He will be called a Nazarene . ”

ID:	222
INPUT:	Zure ondarea zure <unk> baino hobea izango da : Sikem emango dizut , ezpataz eta uztaiaz amortarrei kendu nien hiria » .
PRED:	I will give you the land of Shechem , which I will give you the army of Shechem , the city of Shechem , and I will destroy you . ”
GOLD:	And beyond what I have given your brothers , I am giving you an extra portion of the land that I took from the Amorites with my sword and bow . ”

ID:	223
INPUT:	Jauna , zure maitasuna zeru zabala adinakoa , zure leialtasuna hodeietarainokoa .
PRED:	Praise the Lord , above all the kingdoms of your unfailing love , and all the kingdoms of the earth .
GOLD:	Your righteousness is like the mighty mountains , your justice like the ocean depths.You care for people and animals alike , O Lord .

ID:	224
INPUT:	Ziur dakigu orain dena dakizula eta ez duzula inork galdetu beharrik ; honengatik sinesten dugu Jainkoarengandik etorri zarela .
PRED:	In fact , we do n't want you to ask you , and we do n't want you to do God .
GOLD:	Now we understand that you know everything , and there 's no need to question you . From this we believe that you came from God . ”

ID:	225
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	226
INPUT:	Dei degizut : salba nazazu , eta beteko ditut zure xedapenak .
PRED:	I will praise you , and I will obey your laws .
GOLD:	I cry out to you ; rescue me , that I may obey your laws .

ID:	227
INPUT:	Zure lan eta <unk> <unk> ditzatela ezezagunak asebete .
PRED:	They have been able to kill you , and they have destroyed them .
GOLD:	Strangers will consume your wealth , and someone else will enjoy the fruit of your labor .

ID:	228
INPUT:	Esauk galdegin zion : — Zertarako dira ikusi ditudan abere-talde horiek guztiak ? Jakobek erantzun : — Zure abegi ona nahi nuen irabazi .
PRED:	Esau asked him , “ Why are you ? ” Esau asked . “ I know all these things , ” Jacob replied . “ I want you to be the good . ”
GOLD:	“ And what were all the flocks and herds I met as I came ? ” Esau asked.Jacob replied , “ They are a gift , my lord , to ensure your friendship . ”

ID:	229
INPUT:	<unk> denean , berriz , “ <unk> dugu ” esaten duzue , eta hala gertatzen da .
PRED:	But when they thought , ‘ We will know that we have seen , and we will know that the things you have done . '
GOLD:	When the south wind blows , you say , ‘ Today will be a scorcher . ' And it is .

ID:	230
INPUT:	Egin azpilak , erretiluak , pitxerrak eta katiluak , isur-oparietarako ; guztiok urre garbiz egingo dituzu .
PRED:	Then make a drink of the Presence ; make the Bread of pure gold , pure gold , gold , and pure gold , and pure gold .
GOLD:	Make special containers of pure gold for the table — bowls , ladles , pitchers , and jars — to be used in pouring out liquid offerings .

ID:	231
INPUT:	Izan ere , neuretzat sagaratua dudan hiritik hasi naiz zigorra ematen , eta beste nazioek zigorretik aske geldituko direla uste al dute ? Ez horixe ! Ez dira zigorrik gabe geldituko , munduko bizilagun guztiei bidaliko baitiet gerra . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak .
PRED:	For I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , for I have given them this nation , and I will not destroy all the nations .
GOLD:	I have begun to punish Jerusalem , the city that bears my name . Now should I let you go unpunished ? No , you will not escape disaster . I will call for war against all the nations of the earth . I , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken ! '

ID:	232
INPUT:	« Zazpi egunez legamia gabeko ogia jango duzue , eta zazpigarrenean festa ospatuko duzue Jaunaren ohorez .
PRED:	“ On the seventh day you must celebrate seven days , and you must celebrate the seventh day of the Lord .
GOLD:	For seven days the bread you eat must be made without yeast . Then on the seventh day , celebrate a feast to the Lord .

ID:	233
INPUT:	<unk> ( 22 , 1 — 24 , 33 )
PRED:	The Sign of Gehazi
GOLD:	The Eastern Tribes Return Home

ID:	234
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jaunarengandik aldentzen bazarete , are gehiago luzatuko dio hark Israeli basamortuko egonaldia , eta , orduan , zuek izango zarete herri osoaren hondamendiaren erantzule .
PRED:	For if you turn away from the Lord , I will bring you back to the wilderness of the Lord , when the people of Israel and the people of Israel will be sure that the people of Israel will be sure that day .
GOLD:	If you turn away from him like this and he abandons them again in the wilderness , you will be responsible for destroying this entire nation ! ”

ID:	235
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « <unk> asko egin dute , zein baino zein handiago . Eta beraz , zigortu egingo ditut ! Galaadeko emakume <unk> urratu baitzieten , beren <unk> ahal izateko ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will punish many of you , and they are greater than the people of Gilead , and they will be able to kill them . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Ammon have sinned again and again , and I will not let them go unpunished ! When they attacked Gilead to extend their borders , they ripped open pregnant women with their swords .

ID:	236
INPUT:	Baina hark ezetz . Eta joan eta kartzelan sartu zuen , zorra ordaindu arte .
PRED:	But when he did n't leave prison , he did n't have any of you .
GOLD:	But his creditor would n't wait . He had the man arrested and put in prison until the debt could be paid in full .

ID:	237
INPUT:	gari , garagar , mahasti , pikondo , <unk> , olibondo eta eztiz hornitua ;
PRED:	olive trees , olive trees , and fig trees are filled with olive trees .
GOLD:	It is a land of wheat and barley ; of grapevines , fig trees , and pomegranates ; of olive oil and honey .

ID:	238
INPUT:	<unk> egindako koroa ezarri zioten buruan eta kanabera eskuan , eta , aurrean belaunikaturik , iseka egin zioten esanez : « Agur , juduen erregea ! »
PRED:	When the crown of the head , they put on the head of the head and put it on the room of the Lord 's hand and said , “ Kill him ! ”
GOLD:	They wove thorn branches into a crown and put it on his head , and they placed a reed stick in his right hand as a scepter . Then they knelt before him in mockery and taunted , “ Hail ! King of the Jews ! ”

ID:	239
INPUT:	Baina ia aingeruen pareko egina izan zen Jesus hura ohorez eta aintzaz koroatua ikusten dugu , sufritu zuen <unk> ; horrela , Jainkoaren onginahiaz , gu guztion onerako jasan zuen berak heriotza .
PRED:	But as Jesus was talking with his angels , he was buried with the glory of the glory of God , and we know that he was buried by the power of God .
GOLD:	What we do see is Jesus , who for a little while was given a position “ a little lower than the angels ” ; and because he suffered death for us , he is now “ crowned with glory and honor . ” Yes , by God 's grace , Jesus tasted death for everyone .

ID:	240
INPUT:	Jaunaren zerbitzariaren <unk> eta aintza
PRED:	and the Spirit of the Lord
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	241
INPUT:	Gamelu guztiak ase zirenean , hartu zituen morroiak sei <unk> urrezko eraztuna eta ehun gramo baino gehiago zuten urrezko bi eskumuturreko ,
PRED:	One of the olive oil came to the olive oil , and he took one of his servants with a gold jar of gold . The gold was more gold , and he took two gold as a gold offering .
GOLD:	Then at last , when the camels had finished drinking , he took out a gold ring for her nose and two large gold bracelets for her wrists .

ID:	242
INPUT:	egin zintuenak <unk> baitzaitu : Jaun ahalguztiduna , horixe du izena . Israelen Jainko santua dazure askatzailea : lur osoaren Jainkoa deritza .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ The name of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies is the God of Israel ; it is the God of Israel . ”
GOLD:	For your Creator will be your husband ; the Lord of Heaven 's Armies is his name ! He is your Redeemer , the Holy One of Israel , the God of all the earth .

ID:	243
INPUT:	Nire aurka marmarrean eta azpilanean ari dira etengabe etsaiak .
PRED:	“ They have rebelled against me , and they have rebelled against me .
GOLD:	My enemies whisper and mutteras they plot against me all day long .

ID:	244
INPUT:	Hona hemen beren buruak eskaini zituzten lebitarrak : Kehaten ondorengoetarik <unk> seme Mahat eta Azariasen seme Joel ; Merariren ondorengoetarik <unk> seme Kix eta <unk> seme Azarias ; Gerxonen ondorengoetarik <unk> seme Joah eta <unk> seme Eden ;
PRED:	This is the list of the tribe of Levi , the members of the members of the members of the Kohathite clans of the tribe of Levi , son of Shallum , and Azariah son of Asaph , son of Asaph , and Azariah son of Asaph .
GOLD:	Then these Levites got right to work : From the clan of Kohath : Mahath son of Amasai and Joel son of Azariah.From the clan of Merari : Kish son of Abdi and Azariah son of Jehallelel.From the clan of Gershon : Joah son of Zimmah and Eden son of Joah .

ID:	245
INPUT:	Baina Balakek beste buruzagi batzuk bidali zituen , aurrekoak baino ugariago eta <unk> .
PRED:	But King Balak sent some of the king , and he sent them to kill them .
GOLD:	Then Balak tried again . This time he sent a larger number of even more distinguished officials than those he had sent the first time .

ID:	246
INPUT:	Hara , zerbait berria egitera noa : hasia da sortzen , ez al diozue antzematen ? Bidea irekiko dut basamortuan , ibaiak sorraraziko landa lehorrean .
PRED:	“ Look , I am going to go into the wilderness , and you can not see the water where the water ca n't go into the wilderness , and I will dry into the wilderness .
GOLD:	For I am about to do something new.See , I have already begun ! Do you not see it ? I will make a pathway through the wilderness.I will create rivers in the dry wasteland .

ID:	247
INPUT:	Agur ezazue elkar , maitasunez <unk> . Bakea Kristorenak zareten guztioi .
PRED:	Greet each other with love , and all who belong to Christ .
GOLD:	Greet each other with a kiss of love.Peace be with all of you who are in Christ .

ID:	248
INPUT:	— Bai politak zure oinak <unk> horiekin , errege-alaba ! Zure <unk> <unk> , zilarginaren egiazko artelan .
PRED:	“ How lovely is your breasts , my lord , my lord , how lovely is your enemy , who was filled with pain . ”
GOLD:	Your navel is perfectly formedlike a goblet filled with mixed wine.Between your thighs lies a mound of wheatbordered with lilies .

ID:	249
INPUT:	Bizkarra eman didate , ez aurpegia . Etengabe irakatsi diedan arren , ez didate aditu eta ez dute zentzatu nahi izan .
PRED:	My enemies have rejected me , but they refuse to listen to me , but they refuse to listen to me .
GOLD:	My people have turned their backs on me and have refused to return . Even though I diligently taught them , they would not receive instruction or obey .

ID:	250
INPUT:	Jauna honela mintzatu zitzaion Josueri :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Joshua ,
GOLD:	The Lord said to Joshua ,

ID:	251
INPUT:	Baina erregeak : — Badakit luzatu nahirik zabiltzatela , nire erabakien berri badakizuelako .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” the king said , “ I know that you are my decrees . ”
GOLD:	The king replied , “ I know what you are doing ! You 're stalling for time because you know I am serious when I say ,

ID:	252
INPUT:	Zergatik zabiltzate israeldarrak <unk> , Jaunak emandako lurraldera igaro ez daitezen ?
PRED:	That is why the Lord has given you victory over all the land of Israel ?
GOLD:	“ Why do you want to discourage the rest of the people of Israel from going across to the land the Lord has given them ?

ID:	253
INPUT:	Agur ezazue elkar besarkada santuaz . Fededun guztiek agurtzen zaituztete .
PRED:	Greet each other with a sacred kiss .
GOLD:	Greet each other with a sacred kiss .

ID:	254
INPUT:	Bi sorbalda-babeski izango ditu , bi ertzetatik lotzeko .
PRED:	Then he will take two rows of two rows of the ephod , and he will hold them on the side of the ephod .
GOLD:	It will consist of two pieces , front and back , joined at the shoulders with two shoulder-pieces .

ID:	255
INPUT:	Garaileari , nire nahia egiten azkeneraino irauten duenari , agintea emango diot nazioen gain ,
PRED:	Anyone who listens to me will be my own people , and I will give them all the nations .
GOLD:	To all who are victorious , who obey me to the very end , To them I will give authority over all the nations .

ID:	256
INPUT:	moztu egingo diote eskua . Ez izan gupidarik !
PRED:	The Lord will not let his hand ; he will not bless him .
GOLD:	you must cut off her hand . Show her no pity .

ID:	257
INPUT:	Azken agurra
PRED:	The First Disciples
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Greetings

ID:	258
INPUT:	Ehun eta hogeita hiru urte zituen Aaronek Hor mendian hil zenean .
PRED:	Moses was thirty years old when he died ,
GOLD:	Aaron was 123 years old when he died there on Mount Hor .

ID:	259
INPUT:	Zer itxaron dezaket , beraz , Jauna ? Zuregan nire itxaropen bakarra !
PRED:	Why should I wait for the Lord ? Will I be my hope ?
GOLD:	Rescue me from my rebellion.Do not let fools mock me .

ID:	260
INPUT:	Hango profetak , <unk> eta engainatzaile . Jaunarentzat sagaratua <unk> legea hausten dute apaizek .
PRED:	The prophets who are slaughtered by the prophets , and they will be filled with the Lord 's law , and they will serve the Lord .
GOLD:	Its prophets are arrogant liars seeking their own gain.Its priests defile the Temple by disobeying God 's instructions .

ID:	261
INPUT:	Haurdun gelditu zen emakumea eta semea izan zuen . Judak Er eman zion izen .
PRED:	The woman became pregnant , and Judah became pregnant .
GOLD:	she became pregnant and gave birth to a son , and he named the boy Er .

ID:	262
INPUT:	Lebitarren hiriak
PRED:	The Land Given to the Levites
GOLD:	Towns for the Levites

ID:	263
INPUT:	<unk> ere , gorde ezazue bizi-bizi elkarrenganako maitasuna , maitasunak bekatu askoren barkamena lortzen baitu .
PRED:	Let all who love your love love love and love others , for they have no love for many .
GOLD:	Most important of all , continue to show deep love for each other , for love covers a multitude of sins .

ID:	264
INPUT:	Hitz egiten amaitu zuenean , zapi batez estali zuen aurpegia .
PRED:	When he saw his face , he covered his face .
GOLD:	When Moses finished speaking with them , he covered his face with a veil .

ID:	265
INPUT:	<unk> musu ematea bezala <unk> egokia ematea .
PRED:	And if they were weak as weak as weak as well as weak as weak as weak as weak as snow .
GOLD:	An honest answeris like a kiss of friendship .

ID:	266
INPUT:	« Hogeita bost urtetik aurrera hasiko dira lebitarrak elkarketa-etxolan duten zerbitzua betetzen ,
PRED:	“ These are the clans of the Tabernacle will be responsible for the Tabernacle of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ This is the rule the Levites must follow : They must begin serving in the Tabernacle at the age of twenty-five ,

ID:	267
INPUT:	Ez dut beti auzitan jardungo , ez naiz etengabe haserre egongo , neuk egindako <unk> <unk> gal ez dezaten .
PRED:	I will not be a burnt offering , and I will not be able to obey my covenant with my people , and they will know that they will be able to kill you .
GOLD:	For I will not fight against you forever ; I will not always be angry.If I were , all people would pass away — all the souls I have made .

ID:	268
INPUT:	Babilonia erori
PRED:	The Fall of Babylon
GOLD:	A Message about Babylon

ID:	269
INPUT:	Jeremiasek oharpen guztiok adierazi zizkion herriari , Jaunaren , bere Jainkoaren , aginduz . Hitzaldia bukatzean ,
PRED:	Then Jeremiah gave this message to the people of the people of the Lord : If I want to give you whatever they have done , I will give you to you .
GOLD:	When Jeremiah had finished giving this message from the Lord their God to all the people ,

ID:	270
INPUT:	elkartasun-opariko zekorrarekin bezala , erre egingo du apaizak erre-oparien aldarean .
PRED:	The priest will purify the goat as a burnt offering , just as a burnt offering .
GOLD:	just as he does with cattle offered as a peace offering , and burn them on the altar of burnt offerings .

ID:	271
INPUT:	Babiloniako gudaririk <unk> egin diote borrokari , beren gotorlekuetan <unk> . <unk> galdurik , emajende dirudite . Hiriko ateak bota dituzte , etxeak sutan daude .
PRED:	The armies of Babylon will come against the Babylonians , and they will be killed by the city of Babylon , and they will fall into the city . They will cut off the gates of the city , and they will cut down fire .
GOLD:	Her mightiest warriors no longer fight.They stay in their barracks , their courage gone.They have become like women.The invaders have burned the housesand broken down the city gates .

ID:	272
INPUT:	« Ez dute <unk> auzoko herriek Israel <unk> , ez dute arantza zorrotz eta lahar <unk> bezala zulatuko . Eta jakingo dute ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you who are among the people of Israel , and those who are among the nations , and they will know that I am the Lord , and they will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	No longer will Israel 's scornful neighborsprick and tear at her like briers and thorns.For then they will knowthat I am the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	273
INPUT:	Eliaxib apaiz nagusiak eta beronen <unk> ekin zioten , beraz , lanari , eta Ardien atea egin zuten . Sagaratu ondoren , ate-alderdiak konpondu zituzten . Gero , Ehunen dorreraino konpondu zuten harresia eta , sagaratu ondoren , Hananeelen dorreraino jarraitu zuten .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the high priest and his high priest began to see the Jewish leaders . So the leading priests returned to the entrance of the guard , and they returned to the entrance to the entrance of the Lord 's Temple .
GOLD:	Then Eliashib the high priest and the other priests started to rebuild at the Sheep Gate . They dedicated it and set up its doors , building the wall as far as the Tower of the Hundred , which they dedicated , and the Tower of Hananel .

ID:	274
INPUT:	Ni mezu hau aldarrikatzen ari nintzen bitartean , Pelatias , Benaiasen semea , hil egin zen . Ahuspez erori eta deiadar egin nuen ozenki : « Ai Jainko Jauna ! Gelditzen diren israeldarrak suntsitu behar dituzu ! »
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I am going to kill you ! ” So I fell on the ground and shouted , “ O people of Israel ! Let them destroy them ! ”
GOLD:	While I was still prophesying , Pelatiah son of Benaiah suddenly died . Then I fell face down on the ground and cried out , “ O Sovereign Lord , are you going to kill everyone in Israel ? ”

ID:	275
INPUT:	lurreko <unk> eta irakatsiko dizute , itsasoko <unk> ere kontatuko ;
PRED:	They will know that they will know that the power of the earth will know that the mighty power of the sea , and they will know that the fish in the sea .
GOLD:	Speak to the earth , and it will instruct you.Let the fish in the sea speak to you .

ID:	276
INPUT:	Jakinarazi nion bere etxea betiko zigortuko nuela , egin dituzten gaiztakeriengatik . <unk> bere semeak Jainkoa iraintzen ari zirena , eta ez zituen <unk> .
PRED:	But I told you what I told you , ‘ This is what the Lord says : Because of the sins of the people of the earth , the God of Israel , and he did not destroy them . '
GOLD:	I have warned him that judgment is coming upon his family forever , because his sons are blaspheming God and he has n't disciplined them .

ID:	277
INPUT:	Jakingo duzue , noski , Jainkoak bere <unk> zuekiko eman didan eginkizuna ;
PRED:	But when you know that God has given me the power of his power , and he has given me the power of God .
GOLD:	assuming , by the way , that you know God gave me the special responsibility of extending his grace to you Gentiles .

ID:	278
INPUT:	<unk> eskaintzen dituzte , muinoetan intsentsua erretzen , arte , <unk> eta <unk> ederrean . Horrela , zuen <unk> sakratu bihurtu dira , zuen errainak adulteriogile .
PRED:	And when they were slaughtered by the pagan shrines , the people of Egypt will be filled with fire , and they will know that the Lord has given you as great as he had promised .
GOLD:	They offer sacrifices to idols on the mountaintops.They go up into the hills to burn incensein the pleasant shade of oaks , poplars , and terebinth trees . “ That is why your daughters turn to prostitution , and your daughters-in-law commit adultery .

ID:	279
INPUT:	<unk> eta hiritik irten zelarik , Moisesek eskuak altxatu zituen <unk> . Berehala atertu zituen kazkabarra eta euria , eta ez zen gehiago trumoirik izan .
PRED:	At that time , when Moses came out of the city , the people of the city grew up , and when they saw them , they stopped and the sky , and the people of the earth had stopped .
GOLD:	So Moses left Pharaoh 's court and went out of the city . When he lifted his hands to the Lord , the thunder and hail stopped , and the downpour ceased .

ID:	280
INPUT:	Jakin badakigu , mundu honetan bizileku dugun oihal-etxola hau hondatzen bazaigu ere , Jainkoak prestaturiko bizilekua dugula zeruan betiko , giza eskuz egin gabea .
PRED:	We know that we have lived in this place where we live in this place where God has been given to us .
GOLD:	For we know that when this earthly tent we live in is taken down ( that is , when we die and leave this earthly body ) , we will have a house in heaven , an eternal body made for us by God himself and not by human hands .

ID:	281
INPUT:	Zuen gurasoak Egipto ondoko basamortuan epaitu nituen bezala , hala egingo dut zuekin . Honela diot nik , Jainko Jaunak .
PRED:	I will punish you in the wilderness of Egypt , just as the Sovereign Lord says .
GOLD:	I will judge you there just as I did your ancestors in the wilderness after bringing them out of Egypt , says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	282
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> ( 21 , 17 — 28 , 31 )
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Recovery
GOLD:	Paul Arrives at Jerusalem

ID:	283
INPUT:	Hondatua dago gure oihal-etxola , lokarri guztiak <unk> . Seme-alabak kendu dizkigute , ez da bat ere <unk> etxola jasotzeko , oihalak zabaltzeko .
PRED:	And when we have left the tent and filled with their tents , they have brought them into the Tabernacle , and they have no idea that they have been found in the Tabernacle , and they have been given to the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	My home is gone , and no one is left to help me rebuild it.My children have been taken away , and I will never see them again .

ID:	284
INPUT:	Bai , oihal-etxola honetan bizi garenok , hasperenka gaude larri , ez baitugu oraingo jantzi hau galdu nahi , baizik eta honen gainetik beste jantzia hartu nahi dugu , hilkor dena biziak beregana dezan .
PRED:	For we live in this city , and we must be dressed in fine linen clothing . For we are bound in Christ , too , and we will continue to live in their bodies .
GOLD:	While we live in these earthly bodies , we groan and sigh , but it 's not that we want to die and get rid of these bodies that clothe us . Rather , we want to put on our new bodies so that these dying bodies will be swallowed up by life .

ID:	285
INPUT:	Sinesten al diezu profetei , Agripa erregea ? Ziur nago sinesten diezula .
PRED:	Do you believe in the prophets ? Do you believe in your prophets ?
GOLD:	King Agrippa , do you believe the prophets ? I know you do — ”

ID:	286
INPUT:	<unk> ez zaio errurik egotziko , eta emazte errudunak bere hobenaren ondorenak jasan beharko ditu » .
PRED:	But if the man will be taken by a man , he will be punished for you . ”
GOLD:	The husband will be innocent of any guilt in this matter , but his wife will be held accountable for her sin . ”

ID:	287
INPUT:	<unk> izan eta , gero , jende xehea zapaltzen <unk> suntsigarria da : zer janik ere ez du uzten !
PRED:	And when they have been filled , and those who are weak , and those who are weak , and the wild animals will not be destroyed .
GOLD:	A poor person who oppresses the pooris like a pounding rain that destroys the crops .

ID:	288
INPUT:	Baina Jainkoak esku hartzen ez badu , nork gaitzetsiko du ? Aurpegia ezkutatzen badu , nork ikusi ahal izango du ? Halere , herriak eta gizateria osoa zaintzen ditu ,
PRED:	But if God does not be able to destroy you , he does n't even see him in the hands of the world , he will be able to keep the whole world on the earth .
GOLD:	But if he chooses to remain quiet , who can criticize him ? When he hides his face , no one can find him , whether an individual or a nation .

ID:	289
INPUT:	Gainera , Jaunak esan zion Jeremiasi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Jeremiah ,
GOLD:	Then this message came to Jeremiah from the Lord :

ID:	290
INPUT:	Ezagutzen du idiak nagusia , baita astoak <unk> aska ; Israelek , ostera , ez du ezagutzen , nire herriak ez du aditzen » .
PRED:	Yes , the commander of the forest — the sheep of Israel — the sheep of goats , and the people of Israel have no idea that they do n't know me . ”
GOLD:	Even an ox knows its owner , and a donkey recognizes its master 's care — but Israel does n't know its master.My people do n't recognize my care for them . ”

ID:	291
INPUT:	Orduan , Joiadak erregearen seme Joax aterarazi , koroa ezarri eta itunaren agiria eman zion , eta olioa isuriz , errege gantzutu zuen . Jende guztiak , txaloka , honela zioen oihuka : « Gora erregea ! »
PRED:	Then the king made the crown of the king 's head and placed it on the head of King Joash 's head . He placed him on the head of the king 's head , and he shouted , “ The king of Israel ! ”
GOLD:	Then Jehoiada brought out Joash , the king 's son , placed the crown on his head , and presented him with a copy of God 's laws . They anointed him and proclaimed him king , and everyone clapped their hands and shouted , “ Long live the king ! ”

ID:	292
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak esan zion : — Jaits zaitez eta igo berriro Aaronekin . Baina apaizak eta herria ez daitezela ahalegin niregana igotzen , haien artean sarraskirik egin ez dezadan .
PRED:	But the Lord said to him , “ Get up and go up to the king and say , ‘ Go back to me . ' But they are still alive among them . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord said , “ Go down and bring Aaron back up with you . In the meantime , do not let the priests or the people break through to approach the Lord , or he will break out and destroy them . ”

ID:	293
INPUT:	Bazen orduan preso <unk> bat , Barrabas zeritzana .
PRED:	Then a man in prison , a man named Lazarus .
GOLD:	This year there was a notorious prisoner , a man named Barabbas .

ID:	294
INPUT:	Nora joko dugu orain ? Mandatariek adore gabe utzi gaituzte esanez , hango jendea gu baino handiagoa eta indartsuagoa dela , hiriak handiak , zerurainoko harresiz inguratuak , eta Anak erraldoiaren ondorengoak ere ikusi dituztela .
PRED:	They will be able to kill us , and they will be able to be able to live in the land . They are far greater than the cities of the sky , and the cities of the world will see them .
GOLD:	Where can we go ? Our brothers have demoralized us with their report . They tell us , “ The people of the land are taller and more powerful than we are , and their towns are large , with walls rising high into the sky ! We even saw giants there — the descendants of Anak ! ” '

ID:	295
INPUT:	Jaunak Jerusalemen bizirik geldituak babestuko
PRED:	Those who flee from Jerusalem
GOLD:	A Promise of Restoration

ID:	296
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : « Itzuli ezpata hori bere tokira , zeren ezpataz ari dena ezpataz hilko baita .
PRED:	Jesus told him , “ The sword will kill him , and he will kill him . ”
GOLD:	“ Put away your sword , ” Jesus told him . “ Those who use the sword will die by the sword .

ID:	297
INPUT:	Eguna argitu zuenean , ikasleei deitu eta haietako hamabi aukeratu zituen , eta apostolu izena eman zien :
PRED:	At dawn the next morning he called his disciples to his disciples , and he chose them as one of them .
GOLD:	At daybreak he called together all of his disciples and chose twelve of them to be apostles . Here are their names :

ID:	298
INPUT:	<unk> iseka egiten hasi zitzaien Elias , esanez : — Egizue dei <unk> ! Jainkoa duk , eta oso lanpetua egongo duk , edo alde egin beharra izango <unk> edota bidaian izango duk . Behar bada , lo egongo duk eta iratzarri beharra izanen dik .
PRED:	But when he saw him , he began to say , “ Go and meet you , and you will know that God has come and kill me . ” And he said , “ Yes , let 's be afraid , and he will be able to be his own . ”
GOLD:	About noontime Elijah began mocking them . “ You 'll have to shout louder , ” he scoffed , “ for surely he is a god ! Perhaps he is daydreaming , or is relieving himself . Or maybe he is away on a trip , or is asleep and needs to be wakened ! ”

ID:	299
INPUT:	Portaera <unk> salbatu egiten da , jokabide <unk> bat-batean erori .
PRED:	“ At last the power of the earth will be destroyed , and they will see that they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	The blameless will be rescued from harm , but the crooked will be suddenly destroyed .

ID:	300
INPUT:	hau Rebekaren aita izan zen . Zortzi seme hauek eman zizkion Milkak Abrahamen anaia Nahorri .
PRED:	Rachel was Joseph 's father , and he was born . His father was Nahor , Nahor , and Haran .
GOLD:	( Bethuel became the father of Rebekah . ) In addition to these eight sons from Milcah ,

ID:	301
INPUT:	Ene begiek <unk> isurtzen dituzte , zure irakaspenari jarraitzen ez <unk> .
PRED:	For if they are weak , they will turn away from your mouth , and they will not kill you .
GOLD:	Rivers of tears gush from my eyesbecause people disobey your instructions .

ID:	302
INPUT:	Herriak elkartasun-oparirako eskainiriko zezena eta aharia hil zituen ; semeek odola eraman zioten , eta Aaronek aldarea zipriztindu zuen alde guztietatik .
PRED:	The people of Israel took a sin offering and slaughtered it with the blood of the altar , and Aaron 's sons and the blood of the altar .
GOLD:	Then Aaron slaughtered the bull and the ram for the people 's peace offering . His sons brought him the blood , and he splattered it against all sides of the altar .

ID:	303
INPUT:	« Norbaitek bere esklaboa , gizasemea nahiz emakumea , begian jotzen badu eta begia hondatzen , libre utziko du hondatutako begiaren ordain .
PRED:	“ If a man has a slave or a slave or a slave , if the woman is free , your own eye will be taken away , and your wealth will be taken away .
GOLD:	“ If a man hits his male or female slave in the eye and the eye is blinded , he must let the slave go free to compensate for the eye .

ID:	304
INPUT:	Egizue niregandik ikasi , hartu eta entzun zenutena eta niregan ikusia . Eta bakea ematen digun Jainkoa zeuekin izanen duzue .
PRED:	Do n't listen to me from the power of the world , and you have seen the power of the world . And now you will be the power of God .
GOLD:	Keep putting into practice all you learned and received from me — everything you heard from me and saw me doing . Then the God of peace will be with you .

ID:	305
INPUT:	Orduan , Hamabietako batek , Judas Iskariote deituak , apaizburuengana joan
PRED:	Then one of the twelve disciples came to the leading priests and the leading priests to the leading priests .
GOLD:	Then Judas Iscariot , one of the twelve disciples , went to the leading priests

ID:	306
INPUT:	<unk> erasoa
PRED:	A Message about Assyria
GOLD:	Locusts Invade like an Army

ID:	307
INPUT:	Ikus dezadala zure aukeratuen zoriona , poz nadila zure herriaren <unk> zure oinordeko izateaz harrotu .
PRED:	I will sing your joy to those who are filled with joy , and your own children will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	Let me share in the prosperity of your chosen ones.Let me rejoice in the joy of your people ; let me praise you with those who are your heritage .

ID:	308
INPUT:	Hark galdetu zion : — Zein da zure izena ? — Jakob — erantzun zion .
PRED:	“ Where is your name ? ” Jacob asked . “ Yes , ” Jacob replied .
GOLD:	“ Your name will no longer be Jacob , ” the man told him . “ From now on you will be called Israel , because you have fought with God and with men and have won . ”

ID:	309
INPUT:	Hori <unk> ahalguztidunak <unk> da : haren egitasmoak harrigarriak diraeta arrakasta handikoak .
PRED:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says , “ He will punish you with justice .
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies is a wonderful teacher , and he gives the farmer great wisdom .

ID:	310
INPUT:	<unk> ondorengoetarik <unk> eta Jeiel ; Asafen ondorengoetarik Zakarias eta Matanias ;
PRED:	From the family of Elam came from Elam : Zechariah , Zechariah , and Uzziah .
GOLD:	From the family of Elizaphan : Shimri and Jeiel.From the family of Asaph : Zechariah and Mattaniah .

ID:	311
INPUT:	hiltzeko tresnak gertatzen ditu , suzko geziak pizten .
PRED:	He will die in fire , and the arrows will be destroyed .
GOLD:	The wicked conceive evil ; they are pregnant with troubleand give birth to lies .

ID:	312
INPUT:	Hodeiek , aseak <unk> , euria egin ohi dute lur gainera . Zuhaitza , <unk> nahiz <unk> erori , han geldituko da , erori den tokian .
PRED:	Your roots will be filled with fire , and the earth will be filled with branches that fell on earth , and when they saw that fell on earth will be destroyed , and there will be no longer .
GOLD:	When clouds are heavy , the rains come down.Whether a tree falls north or south , it stays where it falls .

ID:	313
INPUT:	berekin zituen mila gizon benjamindar eta Tziba , Saulen etxeko morroia , ere bai , beronen hamabost seme eta hogei zerbitzariekin . Hauek Jordan igaro zuten erregearen bila ,
PRED:	One of the men of Benjamin , from the tribe of Benjamin , who were twenty of Saul and his men . They went to search for twenty of the king 's men .
GOLD:	They crossed the shallows of the Jordan to bring the king 's household across the river , helping him in every way they could.As the king was about to cross the river , Shimei fell down before him .

ID:	314
INPUT:	Berdin zuek ere : hitz <unk> ez badituzue adierazten , nola jakin zer ari zareten esaten ? <unk> hitz egiten ariko <unk> .
PRED:	But if you were willing to speak , you would n't know what you say , ‘ What do you know ? ' And when you know how can you see ?
GOLD:	It 's the same for you . If you speak to people in words they do n't understand , how will they know what you are saying ? You might as well be talking into empty space .

ID:	315
INPUT:	Aditu zuen Elik oihua eta esan zuen : — Zer dela-eta ari dira garrasika ? Etorri zen bizkor gizona eta gertatuaren berri eman zion Eliri .
PRED:	“ What have you heard ? ” he asked . “ What sorrow awaits you ? ” So the man asked him .
GOLD:	“ What is all the noise about ? ” Eli asked.The messenger rushed over to Eli ,

ID:	316
INPUT:	Hori da agindurik nagusiena eta lehena .
PRED:	These are the clans of the family of the clans and the older family .
GOLD:	This is the first and greatest commandment .

ID:	317
INPUT:	Egunez , abiatu orduko , Jaunaren lainoak estaltzen zituen .
PRED:	The people of Israel left the Tabernacle , and the cloud covered them .
GOLD:	As they moved on each day , the cloud of the Lord hovered over them .

ID:	318
INPUT:	Edozein etxetan sartzen zaretela , esazue lehenbizi : “ Bakea etxe <unk> ” .
PRED:	If you are living in your house , you will be sure that you are living in your house . '
GOLD:	“ Whenever you enter someone 's home , first say , ‘ May God 's peace be on this house . '

ID:	319
INPUT:	<unk> zigor handiagoa ez ote du mereziko Jainkoaren Semea hankapean erabili , sagaratu duen ituneko odola profanatu eta Jainkoak onginahiz eman dion Espiritua iraintzen duenak !
PRED:	For if the Son of God has been able to destroy the name of God , he has given the Son of God , the Son of God , who has given you the Son of God .
GOLD:	Just think how much worse the punishment will be for those who have trampled on the Son of God , and have treated the blood of the covenant , which made us holy , as if it were common and unholy , and have insulted and disdained the Holy Spirit who brings God 's mercy to us .

ID:	320
INPUT:	Eguzkia atera zenean , Jaunak hego-haize <unk> bidali zuen ; eguzkiak Jonas buruan jo zuen , ia <unk> uzteraino . Eta heriotza opa izan zuen : « Hobe dut hil , bizi baino ! »
PRED:	At dawn the morning the Lord sent him down from the sky , and he sent him to kill him . And when he was killed , he sent him to kill him .
GOLD:	And as the sun grew hot , God arranged for a scorching east wind to blow on Jonah . The sun beat down on his head until he grew faint and wished to die . “ Death is certainly better than living like this ! ” he exclaimed .

ID:	321
INPUT:	Ez da urre <unk> trukatzen , ezta <unk> erosten ere .
PRED:	There is no more powerful than silver or gold or gold .
GOLD:	It can not be bought with gold.It can not be purchased with silver .

ID:	322
INPUT:	Baina herriko jende xehea , ezeren jabe ez zena , Judako lurraldean utzi zuen , eta mahastiak eta alorrak eman zizkion .
PRED:	But the people of Judah have given this land to the land of Judah , and there were no crops in the land of Judah .
GOLD:	But Nebuzaradan allowed some of the poorest people to stay behind in the land of Judah , and he assigned them to care for the vineyards and fields .

ID:	323
INPUT:	Jesusek irudi bat jarri zien : « Begira pikondoari edo beste edozein <unk> :
PRED:	Jesus was placed on a tree on the throne of a tree , saying , “ Look , suppose that some of these things that had happened .
GOLD:	Then he gave them this illustration : “ Notice the fig tree , or any other tree .

ID:	324
INPUT:	Hau zioen Jaunak berekiko : « Neure herria dut , neure seme-alabak : ez didate , ez , huts egingo » . Eta onik atera zituen
PRED:	The Lord said to him , “ I have no children , but I have not abandoned my children . ”
GOLD:	He said , “ They are my very own people.Surely they will not betray me again . ” And he became their Savior .

ID:	325
INPUT:	Egin poz-oihu , zeruok ! Alai zaitez , lurra ! Egin poz-irrintzi , mendiok ! Jaunak bere herria kontsolatu baitu , atsekabean gupida izan dio .
PRED:	Sing , O Lord , O Lord , for you have blessed me , for I will praise you , for the Lord has spoken !
GOLD:	Sing for joy , O heavens ! Rejoice , O earth ! Burst into song , O mountains ! For the Lord has comforted his peopleand will have compassion on them in their suffering .

ID:	326
INPUT:	Honek esan nahi du , ez duela giza <unk> Jainkoaren benetako seme-alaba egiten , baizik eta Jainkoaren agintzariaren arabera sortuak direla Abrahamen benetako ondorengoak .
PRED:	For he said , “ This is what God says , but when he does not obey God 's children , he does not obey God 's children . He is the laws of Abraham , the God of Abraham , who does not obey God 's descendants .
GOLD:	This means that Abraham 's physical descendants are not necessarily children of God . Only the children of the promise are considered to be Abraham 's children .

ID:	327
INPUT:	Bide okerrera eramango ditu <unk> <unk> ituna hautsi dutenak . Baina sendo iraungo dute eta gogor ekingo Jainkoa aintzakotzat hartzen dutenek .
PRED:	For I will make power under every covenant , and those who obey God will be filled with power .
GOLD:	He will flatter and win over those who have violated the covenant . But the people who know their God will be strong and will resist him .

ID:	328
INPUT:	« Gero , Jaunaren aurrean ahuspeztu nintzen eta , aurrekoan bezala , berrogei egun eta berrogei gau egin nituen ezer jan eta edan gabe , zuek egindako bekatuagatik barkamena eskatzen ; izan ere , Jaunari gaizki iruditzen zitzaiona egin zenuten , bera haserraraziz .
PRED:	“ Then I bowed low before the Lord 's presence , just as the Lord has done for forty days , and the sake of the Lord has done for all his own sins .
GOLD:	“ Then , as before , I threw myself down before the Lord for forty days and nights . I ate no bread and drank no water because of the great sin you had committed by doing what the Lord hated , provoking him to anger .

ID:	329
INPUT:	« Baina Jauna haserretu egin zitzaidan zuen erruz eta ez zidan erregua onartu . Esan zidan : Aski da ! Ez zakizkit mintza berriro horretaz .
PRED:	“ But the Lord was angry with me and did not obey me . He said to me , ‘ You must not listen to me . '
GOLD:	“ But the Lord was angry with me because of you , and he would not listen to me . ‘ That 's enough ! ' he declared . ‘ Speak of it no more .

ID:	330
INPUT:	<unk> ziren <unk> eta beronen senide <unk> eta Netanelek , baita Haxabiasek , <unk> eta <unk> ere bost mila bildots eta bostehun idi eman zizkieten lebitarrei Pazko-oparitarako .
PRED:	At that time when they saw that his brothers and sisters , his brothers and sisters , and his brothers and sisters , which were given to the Levites who had been given to the Levites and female servants , which were given to the Levites .
GOLD:	The Levite leaders — Conaniah and his brothers Shemaiah and Nethanel , as well as Hashabiah , Jeiel , and Jozabad — gave 5,000 lambs and young goats and 500 cattle to the Levites for their Passover offerings .

ID:	331
INPUT:	Jainkoaren promesaz nago harro , Jaunaren <unk> harro ,
PRED:	They have heard the noise of the wicked , and they have heard their words .
GOLD:	I trust in God , so why should I be afraid ? What can mere mortals do to me ?

ID:	332
INPUT:	Biok elkarri eman diogun hitzaz , berriz , izan bedi Jauna gu bion artean testigu betierean » .
PRED:	“ Come , ” they said to each other . “ Let us be a witness to us , and we have been here among us . ”
GOLD:	And may the Lord make us keep our promises to each other , for he has witnessed them . ”

ID:	333
INPUT:	<unk> , bizi deneko leinuaren baitan izango du bere zatia . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana .
PRED:	Those who have been named after their pasturelands : The Sovereign Lord says , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says :
GOLD:	These foreigners are to be given land within the territory of the tribe with whom they now live . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !

ID:	334
INPUT:	« Egin uraska garbikuntzetarako ; uraska eta beronen oina brontzezkoak izango dira . Ipini uraska elkarketa-etxolaren eta aldarearen artean , eta bete urez .
PRED:	“ Make the washbasin with bronze grating and the washbasin with bronze grating and the washbasin with water , and the carrying poles .
GOLD:	“ Make a bronze washbasin with a bronze stand . Place it between the Tabernacle and the altar , and fill it with water .

ID:	335
INPUT:	Haize indartsuak <unk> <unk> <unk> da Jauna , eta ekialdetik <unk> izango <unk> Jaunari .
PRED:	For the Lord is very powerful , and they will know that the Lord will be able to kill me .
GOLD:	In the west , people will respect the name of the Lord ; in the east , they will glorify him.For he will come like a raging flood tidedriven by the breath of the Lord .

ID:	336
INPUT:	Zigortu ditu , bai , eta kanpora bota ; <unk> <unk> <unk> ditu urrutira .
PRED:	For I will hand my hand and kill him , and when they saw that they were able to kill him , and they will be able to kill him .
GOLD:	No , but he exiled Israel to call her to account.She was exiled from her landas though blown away in a storm from the east .

ID:	337
INPUT:	Orduan , <unk> zer ordutan hasi zen galdegin zien . Eta haiek erantzun : — <unk> eguerdiko ordu batean alde egin zion <unk> .
PRED:	At that time when they saw what had happened , he asked them , “ What happened when we were going to meet you , ” he replied . “ At that time , ” the man replied .
GOLD:	He asked them when the boy had begun to get better , and they replied , “ Yesterday afternoon at one o'clock his fever suddenly disappeared ! ”

ID:	338
INPUT:	Ez bedi izan zuen artean <unk> nahiz <unk> , Esau bezala ; janari batengatik saldu baitzuen hark bere <unk> .
PRED:	Let them be very old when they saw that some of these things , and they will have some of them . And when he became very weak , and he became very weak .
GOLD:	Make sure that no one is immoral or godless like Esau , who traded his birthright as the firstborn son for a single meal .

ID:	339
INPUT:	Lurralde osoak egingo du hileta-negarra , senitarteek senitarteka , gizonezkoek batetik eta emakumeek bestetik : Daviden senitarteak eta <unk> ,
PRED:	All the people of the land will be taken , and the clans of the clans of the tribe of David — the clans of David , and the clans of David .
GOLD:	“ All Israel will mourn , each clan by itself , and with the husbands separate from their wives . The clan of David will mourn alone , as will the clan of Nathan ,

ID:	340
INPUT:	gizon batzuk erosi zituzten , zurrumurru hau zabal zezaten : <unk> Moisesen eta Jainkoaren kontra hitz egiten entzun ziotela , alegia .
PRED:	Some of the men returned to their surrounding villages . They heard that they had been sent by the power of God , and they heard that they had heard that they had heard that they had heard .
GOLD:	So they persuaded some men to lie about Stephen , saying , “ We heard him blaspheme Moses , and even God . ”

ID:	341
INPUT:	Manasesen seme Makirren ondorengoek Galaadera joan eta konkistatu egin zuten , bertako amortarrak botaz .
PRED:	Then the descendants of Manasseh went to the land of Manasseh and all the descendants of Manasseh .
GOLD:	Then the descendants of Makir of the tribe of Manasseh went to Gilead and conquered it , and they drove out the Amorites living there .

ID:	342
INPUT:	Babiloniako Nabukodonosorren erregealdiko hemeretzigarren urtean , bosgarren hilaren zazpian , Nebuzaradan Babiloniako erregearen <unk> eta guardiaburua etorri zen Jerusalemera .
PRED:	In the eighteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , during the twelfth year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , the captain of Babylon , the guard , and all the nobles of Babylon came to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	On August 14 of that year , which was the nineteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard and an official of the Babylonian king , arrived in Jerusalem .

ID:	343
INPUT:	Zu bai ederra , ene maitea , bai zoragarria ! <unk> da gure ohe ,
PRED:	Your love is filled with joy , and your love will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	You are so handsome , my love , pleasing beyond words ! The soft grass is our bed ;

ID:	344
INPUT:	simeondarren leinukoa Tzurixadairen seme <unk> agindupean
PRED:	Jeremiah son of Nun , led by the tribe of Naphtali .
GOLD:	They were joined by the troops of the tribe of Simeon , led by Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai ,

ID:	345
INPUT:	Erregeak erantzun zion : — Zoaz bakean . Jaiki eta abiatu zen <unk> .
PRED:	“ Go in peace , ” the king replied . “ Go and meet him . ” So the king came and threw him down .
GOLD:	“ All right , ” the king told him . “ Go and fulfill your vow . ” So Absalom went to Hebron .

ID:	346
INPUT:	Izan ere , ba al da gizasemerik , Jainko bizia guk bezala suaren erditik mintzatzen entzun eta bizirik gelditu denik ?
PRED:	For the old man can be able to be your life , just as God spoke from all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Can any living thing hear the voice of the living God from the heart of the fire as we did and yet survive ?

ID:	347
INPUT:	Baina ez jan emandako hitza , zeuen kabuz Jaunari zeuen Jainkoari agindutako botoa bete gabe utziz .
PRED:	But do not eat the word of the Lord your God has given you to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ When you enter your neighbor 's vineyard , you may eat your fill of grapes , but you must not carry any away in a basket .

ID:	348
INPUT:	Ohorez beteko zaitut eta zuk eskatu guztia egingo ; zatoz , arren , eta madarika ezazu herri hori .
PRED:	Now I will give you everything you ask , and then I will bless you and curse you . ”
GOLD:	I will pay you very well and do whatever you tell me . Just come and curse these people for me ! ”

ID:	349
INPUT:	Erditzerakoan bikiak izan zituen .
PRED:	These were the birth of Simeon .
GOLD:	And when the time came to give birth , Rebekah discovered that she did indeed have twins !

ID:	350
INPUT:	Zuen <unk> merezitako ordaina emango dizuete , eta idoloekin egindako bekatuen ondorenak jasango dituzue . Orduan jakingo duzue ni naizela Jauna » .
PRED:	And when I will punish you , and they will obey your sins . Then you will know that I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	You will be fully repaid for all your prostitution — your worship of idols . Yes , you will suffer the full penalty . Then you will know that I am the Sovereign Lord . ”

ID:	351
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> zeritzan ; urrea aurkitzen den <unk> lurraldea inguratzen du .
PRED:	And when they saw that the land of gold will be filled with great power , and they will be filled with great power .
GOLD:	The first branch , called the Pishon , flowed around the entire land of Havilah , where gold is found .

ID:	352
INPUT:	Ez ibili <unk> indarrak erakusten , ez hitz egin horrela <unk> » .
PRED:	Do n't know what they have done ? ” they demanded . “ I do n't know what they have done . ”
GOLD:	For no one on earth — from east or west , or even from the wilderness — should raise a defiant fist .

ID:	353
INPUT:	baina , lizunkeria dela eta , gizon bakoitzak izan beza bere emaztea eta emakume bakoitzak bere senarra .
PRED:	But if her husband is married , she is married to her husband , her wife , and her husband should be married .
GOLD:	But because there is so much sexual immorality , each man should have his own wife , and each woman should have her own husband .

ID:	354
INPUT:	Jaunak sortu du zerua , bera da Jainkoa ; berak eratu eta egin du lurra , berak finkatu ; ez du hutsik egoteko sortu , bizileku izateko baizik . Hau dio Jaunak : « Neu naiz Jauna , ez da besterik .
PRED:	The Lord has made the heavens and made the earth , and he has made the earth . He has made the earth , for he has made the earth , and he has not given them a place .
GOLD:	For the Lord is God , and he created the heavens and earthand put everything in place.He made the world to be lived in , not to be a place of empty chaos . “ I am the Lord , ” he says , “ and there is no other .

ID:	355
INPUT:	Hiri hartan berri ona zabaldu eta ikasle asko egin ondoren , Listrara , Ikoniora eta Antiokiara itzuli ziren .
PRED:	At that time the city came to Antioch of the city and went to Antioch .
GOLD:	After preaching the Good News in Derbe and making many disciples , Paul and Barnabas returned to Lystra , Iconium , and Antioch of Pisidia ,

ID:	356
INPUT:	Horrela , Kristo Jesusengan <unk> hain ona izanez agertu nahi izan die datozen gizaldiei zein ugaria eta eskuzabala den bere onginahia .
PRED:	And in faith that Christ has revealed to those who do what he has done in Christ . He has done in his faith and shows that he has given his kindness to his love .
GOLD:	So God can point to us in all future ages as examples of the incredible wealth of his grace and kindness toward us , as shown in all he has done for us who are united with Christ Jesus .

ID:	357
INPUT:	Nagusiak esan zion : “ Ederki , morroi on eta leiala ! Gauza gutxian leial izan zara , askoren buru ipiniko zaitut ; sartu zeure jaunaren festa ospatzera ” .
PRED:	“ All right , ” the king said , ‘ I have given you great wisdom and good . And now you have given me a great feast for all the brothers and sisters . '
GOLD:	“ The master said , ‘ Well done , my good and faithful servant . You have been faithful in handling this small amount , so now I will give you many more responsibilities . Let 's celebrate together ! '

ID:	358
INPUT:	Axerren leinuko senitarteak : <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> eta <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	These were the clans descended from the clans of the clans of the clans of the clans of the clans of the clans of the tribe of Gad .
GOLD:	These were the clans descended from the sons of Asher : The Imnite clan , named after their ancestor Imnah.The Ishvite clan , named after their ancestor Ishvi.The Beriite clan , named after their ancestor Beriah .

ID:	359
INPUT:	Nire herriaren haragia jaten dute , larrua kentzen diote , eta hezurrak apurtzen ; <unk> haragia <unk> dute , <unk> okela bezala .
PRED:	My flesh will eat blood , and the blood of the blood will cut down , and the flesh of the wicked , and the flesh of the earth will be cut off .
GOLD:	Yes , you eat my people 's flesh , strip off their skin , and break their bones.You chop them uplike meat for the cooking pot .

ID:	360
INPUT:	<unk> 642 ;
PRED:	They left Dophkah and camped at Haradah .
GOLD:	The family of Bani642

ID:	361
INPUT:	Ez dira berdinak gorputz guztiak : gauza bat da gizakiaren gorputza , bestea <unk> , bestea <unk> eta bestea <unk> .
PRED:	There is no one else in one body . There is one piece of human body , and one who knew that one who were sick and sick .
GOLD:	Similarly there are different kinds of flesh — one kind for humans , another for animals , another for birds , and another for fish .

ID:	362
INPUT:	Saulek erantzun zion Samueli : — Ez al dut , bada , egin Jaunaren esana ? Berak bidali ninduen bidetik ibili naiz . Ekarri dut Agag , amalektarren erregea , eta suntsitu ditut amalektarrak .
PRED:	Saul replied , “ Did n't I have done ? ” So Saul asked the Lord , “ I have sent me back to the land of the Lord , and I have destroyed the king .
GOLD:	“ But I did obey the Lord , ” Saul insisted . “ I carried out the mission he gave me . I brought back King Agag , but I destroyed everyone else .

ID:	363
INPUT:	Beste zenbait ale sasi artean erori zen , eta sasiek , haztean , ito egin zuten hazia .
PRED:	Other seed fell among thorns that fell on the tender plants .
GOLD:	Other seeds fell among thorns that grew up and choked out the tender plants .

ID:	364
INPUT:	<unk> muga Mediterraneo itsasoa zen . Horra , bada , Judaren leinukoei senitarteka banaturiko <unk> mugak .
PRED:	The waters of the Mediterranean Sea was the Mediterranean Sea , which was the boundaries of the clans of the tribe of Judah .
GOLD:	The western boundary was the shoreline of the Mediterranean Sea.These are the boundaries for the clans of the tribe of Judah .

ID:	365
INPUT:	Dedan , Teman eta Buz herrialdeei eta <unk> ;
PRED:	The descendants of those who had been filled with joy and filled with joy .
GOLD:	I gave it to Dedan , Tema , and Buz , and to the people who live in distant places .

ID:	366
INPUT:	<unk> , ikasi zuhurrak izaten ; <unk> , ikasi <unk> izaten .
PRED:	But when the wise person hates you , and when they learned that they have heard what they have done .
GOLD:	You simple people , use good judgment.You foolish people , show some understanding .

ID:	367
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi Sinai mendian :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	While Moses was on Mount Sinai , the Lord said to him ,

ID:	368
INPUT:	Gorets dezagun Jainkoa ! Berak fedean sendotu <unk> , nik hots egiten dudan berri onaren eta Jesu Kristori buruz ematen dudan mezuaren arabera . Mezu horren bidez , aspalditik ezkutuan zeukan misterioa agertu du Jainkoak .
PRED:	Let us be sure that God has given us the Good News that I am giving you to know that I am giving you the Good News of Christ Jesus Christ Jesus Christ . He has revealed this message to this message from the world .
GOLD:	Now all glory to God , who is able to make you strong , just as my Good News says . This message about Jesus Christ has revealed his plan for you Gentiles , a plan kept secret from the beginning of time .

ID:	369
INPUT:	« Ekialdeko muga , <unk> eta Damasko artetik abiatuko da eta , <unk> <unk> jarraituz , Galaad eta Israel lurraldeen artetik , Itsaso Hileraino eta Tamar hiriraino helduko da .
PRED:	“ The eastern boundary will come from the Mediterranean Sea , and the northern boundary of Damascus will know that the northern tribes of Gilead and the northern tribes of Gilead , and then I will give you the boundaries of the Dead Sea to you .
GOLD:	“ The eastern border starts at a point between Hauran and Damascus and runs south along the Jordan River between Israel and Gilead , past the Dead Sea and as far south as Tamar . This will be the eastern border .

ID:	370
INPUT:	Egin biezaie justizia herriko dohakabeei , salba bitza behartsuak , apurtu zapaltzaileak !
PRED:	Give thanks to the poor ; let them praise the poor .
GOLD:	Help him to defend the poor , to rescue the children of the needy , and to crush their oppressors .

ID:	371
INPUT:	Eta herri guztiek galdetuko dute : “ Zergatik tratatu ote du horrela Jaunak herrialde hori ? Zer dela-eta piztu zaio haserre izugarri hori ? ”
PRED:	“ What do they ask , ‘ Why do you think ? ' And the Lord 's people were so angry with such a plague ? ”
GOLD:	They will exclaim , ‘ The whole land is devastated by sulfur and salt . It is a wasteland with nothing planted and nothing growing , not even a blade of grass . It is like the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah , Admah and Zeboiim , which the Lord destroyed in his intense anger . '

ID:	372
INPUT:	Maite nau Jaunak eta entzun egin du nire erregu-oihua ;
PRED:	The Lord has loved me , and he has mercy on my day .
GOLD:	I love the Lord because he hears my voiceand my prayer for mercy .

ID:	373
INPUT:	Zeure jokabide higuingarri eta lizunkeria guztietan ez zinen <unk> egunez , biluzik eta zeure odoletan <unk> egon zineneko garaiaz , oroitu .
PRED:	You must not commit adultery , or if you were unfaithful to your own eyes , when they saw that you were dead , and when they saw that you were afraid of the dead .
GOLD:	In all your years of adultery and detestable sin , you have not once remembered the days long ago when you lay naked in a field , kicking about in your own blood .

ID:	374
INPUT:	Zaudete niri itsatsiak , ni zuei bezala . <unk> , mahatsondoari itsatsia ez badago , fruiturik eman ezin duen bezala , ezta zuek ere , niri itsatsiak ez bazaudete .
PRED:	I am standing before you , as if I have seen in your hand , I have given you to the ground , and if you do n't have the blood of my life , and you must not eat it .
GOLD:	Remain in me , and I will remain in you . For a branch can not produce fruit if it is severed from the vine , and you can not be fruitful unless you remain in me .

ID:	375
INPUT:	Jainkoaz <unk> , intziri dagit , hartaz <unk> , adorea galtzen dut .
PRED:	As soon as I live , I will punish you , and I will punish you .
GOLD:	You do n't let me sleep.I am too distressed even to pray !

ID:	376
INPUT:	Apaiz nagusiak , zekorraren odoletik pixka bat harturik , elkarketa-etxolara eramango du ,
PRED:	The high priest will take some of the bull in the Tabernacle , and he will bring them into the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	The high priest will then take some of the bull 's blood into the Tabernacle ,

ID:	377
INPUT:	Gudurako prest dauden zaldien itxura zuten matxinsaltoek ; buruan urrezkoak bezalako koroak zeramatzaten ; aurpegiak giza itxurakoak zituzten ,
PRED:	“ Some of the horses were as strong as white as white as the wheels of gold . They were like a human hands , like a human hands .
GOLD:	The locusts looked like horses prepared for battle . They had what looked like gold crowns on their heads , and their faces looked like human faces .

ID:	378
INPUT:	Orduan , esan zion profetak erregeari : — Hau dio Jaunak : « Zuk hiltzea nahi nuen gizonari ihes egiten utzi diozu . Horregatik , zeure bizia eman beharko duzu <unk> ordez , eta zeure herria <unk> ordez » .
PRED:	Then the prophet said to the king , “ This is what the Lord says : If you want me to kill me , you will kill me and kill your people who want to kill you . ”
GOLD:	The prophet said to him , “ This is what the Lord says : Because you have spared the man I said must be destroyed , now you must die in his place , and your people will die instead of his people . ”

ID:	379
INPUT:	purpura more , gorri eta gorrimina , liho fina , ahuntz-ilea ,
PRED:	blue , purple , and scarlet thread ; and scarlet thread for fine linen cloth .
GOLD:	blue , purple , and scarlet thread ; fine linen and goat hair for cloth ;

ID:	380
INPUT:	Hurbil da Jaunaren etorrera
PRED:	The Sign of the
GOLD:	Jesus Is Coming

ID:	381
INPUT:	Aaronek eta semeek elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran jango dituzte <unk> eta <unk> ogia .
PRED:	Aaron and his sons will eat the Tabernacle at the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Then Aaron and his sons will eat this meat , along with the bread in the basket , at the Tabernacle entrance .

ID:	382
INPUT:	Emakumea , <unk> , triste egoten da , ordua heldu <unk> ; haurra jaio ondoren , ordea , ahaztu egiten da <unk> , mundura gizon bat ekarri duelako .
PRED:	When the woman saw that the time , the time is coming , when she saw that she was born , she would have been born . But when she saw that she has been born , she will give birth to her .
GOLD:	It will be like a woman suffering the pains of labor . When her child is born , her anguish gives way to joy because she has brought a new baby into the world .

ID:	383
INPUT:	Gainean ditut , inguratua naute , ni lurrera botatzeko beti prest ,
PRED:	I am surrounded by my enemies , and I am ready to keep them safe .
GOLD:	They track me down and surround me , watching for the chance to throw me to the ground .

ID:	384
INPUT:	haien erregeak katez eta handikiak girgiluz lotzeko .
PRED:	The king of his officials were sitting on him and under his robe .
GOLD:	to bind their kings with shacklesand their leaders with iron chains ,

ID:	385
INPUT:	Orduan , galdetu zien Zebah eta <unk> : — Zer itxura zuten Taborren hil zenituzten gizonek ? Haiek erantzun zioten : — Zure antzekoak ziren ; <unk> ziruditen denek .
PRED:	Then he asked them , “ What did you know ? ” “ Why were you killed ? ” they asked them , “ Your men were filled with great chariots and chariots . ”
GOLD:	Then Gideon asked Zebah and Zalmunna , “ The men you killed at Tabor — what were they like ? ” “ Like you , ” they replied . “ They all had the look of a king 's son . ”

ID:	386
INPUT:	Bizia ematen duen zuhaitza da . Zorionekoak bertatik jaten dutenak !
PRED:	For God is a tree of life , and those who eat it .
GOLD:	Wisdom is a tree of life to those who embrace her ; happy are those who hold her tightly .

ID:	387
INPUT:	Jauna borrokatuko da zuen alde . Zuek egon lasai !
PRED:	“ The Lord will go to fight you . ”
GOLD:	The Lord himself will fight for you . Just stay calm . ”

ID:	388
INPUT:	Ondoren , israeldarren lurraldean zeuden idolo higuingarri guztiak desagerrarazi zituen Josiasek , eta Israelen bizi zirenek Jauna , beren Jainkoa , gurtu zezaten ahalegindu zen . Josias bizi izan zen bitartean ez ziren urrundu Jaunarengandik , beren arbasoen Jainkoarengandik .
PRED:	Then Josiah made all the people of Israel by worshiping the images of Baal and worshiped the Lord their God . They worshiped the God of Israel , who worshiped the Lord their ancestors .
GOLD:	So Josiah removed all detestable idols from the entire land of Israel and required everyone to worship the Lord their God . And throughout the rest of his lifetime , they did not turn away from the Lord , the God of their ancestors .

ID:	389
INPUT:	horrela , bete-beteko izatera iritsi zelarik , betiko salbamenaren iturri bilakatu zen berari obeditzen dioten guztientzat ,
PRED:	As soon as soon as soon as the result , the world became as righteous as righteous as righteous as righteous as righteous as the Lord lives .
GOLD:	In this way , God qualified him as a perfect High Priest , and he became the source of eternal salvation for all those who obey him .

ID:	390
INPUT:	Batzuk ez dira ezkontzen jaiotzaz ezin dutelako ; beste batzuk , giza eskuz <unk> izan direlako ; beste batzuk , berriz , Jainkoaren erregetzagatik hala erabaki dutelako . Onar <unk> onar beza .
PRED:	But if he does not be married , and they will not be punished by human hands , and they will be able to be ashamed . But if they have no fear , they will know that they will know that they are eager to know that they have .
GOLD:	Some are born as eunuchs , some have been made eunuchs by others , and some choose not to marry for the sake of the Kingdom of Heaven . Let anyone accept this who can . ”

ID:	391
INPUT:	Zuzentasunak babesten du prestua , gaiztakeriak hondatzen bekataria .
PRED:	The wicked are punished , but their wickedness are wicked .
GOLD:	Godliness guards the path of the blameless , but the evil are misled by sin .

ID:	392
INPUT:	Hexbonen bizi zen amortarren errege Sihon eta <unk> eta <unk> bizi zen Baxango errege Og garaitu eta gero .
PRED:	He lived in the land of King Og of the Amorites and Og of Bashan . He was buried with King Og of Bashan and Og of Bashan .
GOLD:	This took place after he had defeated King Sihon of the Amorites , who ruled in Heshbon , and at Edrei had defeated King Og of Bashan , who ruled in Ashtaroth .

ID:	393
INPUT:	<unk> bakoitzaren amaieran , Jobek semeei dei egiten zien haien garbikuntza egiteko ; egunsentian jaiki eta erre-oparia eskaintzen zuen bakoitzarengatik , semeek beharbada bekatu egin eta beren barnean Jainkoa madarikatu izango zutelakoan . Hauxe egiten zuen Jobek aldi bakoitzean .
PRED:	At that time Job called out his sons and his sons , he appointed them to purify them . In fact , he appointed them to serve as he had commanded them , and he would be punished for his sons .
GOLD:	When these celebrations ended — sometimes after several days — Job would purify his children . He would get up early in the morning and offer a burnt offering for each of them . For Job said to himself , “ Perhaps my children have sinned and have cursed God in their hearts . ” This was Job 's regular practice .

ID:	394
INPUT:	Biharamunean , egunsentian , tenplura itzuli zen , eta herri guztia etorri zitzaion . Jesus , eseririk , irakasten hasi zen .
PRED:	The next day Jesus returned to the Temple , and the people of the earth came to the earth .
GOLD:	but early the next morning he was back again at the Temple . A crowd soon gathered , and he sat down and taught them .

ID:	395
INPUT:	Jesus Oliamendira joan zen .
PRED:	Then Jesus went to the Mount of Olives .
GOLD:	Jesus returned to the Mount of Olives ,

ID:	396
INPUT:	« Egin ihes Babiloniatik , eutsi nork bere biziari ! Ez bedi inor gal haren erruz . Nire <unk> baita , eta hari bere merezia emango diot .
PRED:	“ Do not escape from your presence , for they will not be punished because of my people , for they will be sure that I will punish you .
GOLD:	Flee from Babylon ! Save yourselves ! Do n't get trapped in her punishment ! It is the Lord 's time for vengeance ; he will repay her in full .

ID:	397
INPUT:	Moisesek Madiango apaiz Jetro bere <unk> artaldea zaintzen zuen . Behin batean , basamortuan barrena eraman zuen artaldea eta Jainkoaren mendiraino , Horeberaino , iritsi zen .
PRED:	When Moses heard that the people of Israel were slaughtered by his flock , the young men of Israel came into the wilderness of the wilderness , and the sheep of God went to the wilderness of Egypt .
GOLD:	One day Moses was tending the flock of his father-in-law , Jethro , the priest of Midian . He led the flock far into the wilderness and came to Sinai , the mountain of God .

ID:	398
INPUT:	Barka , otoi , zeure mirabe honen errua . Ondorengotza sendoa emanen dizu Jaunak , Jaunaren gudua ari baitzara egiten , eta bizitza osoan ez da <unk> aurkitu zuregan .
PRED:	May the Lord be gracious to me , and I will give you a covenant of the Lord . He will give you victory over all the nations of the Lord , and you have found me in your presence .
GOLD:	Please forgive me if I have offended you in any way . The Lord will surely reward you with a lasting dynasty , for you are fighting the Lord 's battles . And you have not done wrong throughout your entire life .

ID:	399
INPUT:	<unk> dira handik , <unk> oihuak ; ugaldu egingo ditut , eta ez dira gutxituko , ohoratu egingo , eta ez dituzte <unk> .
PRED:	But when they have heard that they will be filled with joy , and they will be filled with shame , and they will never be ashamed . They will be sure that they have been beaten , and they will know that they will never be disgraced .
GOLD:	There will be joy and songs of thanksgiving , and I will multiply my people , not diminish them ; I will honor them , not despise them .

ID:	400
INPUT:	Jesusek ihardetsi zion : — Ur honetatik edaten duena berriro ere egarri izango da ;
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Anyone who eats this water will be thirsty . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ Anyone who drinks this water will soon become thirsty again .

ID:	401
INPUT:	Ez dute elkarri irakatsi beharrik izango , “ Ezagutu Jauna ” esanez , guzti-guztiek , txiki nahiz handi , ezagutuko bainaute . Barkatu egiten baitiet beren gaiztakeria , beraien bekatua ez dut gehiago gogoratuko . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	They must not need to teach each other , ‘ Lord , ' they will teach them , and they will know that they have given them a great nation , and I have given them their sins . ”
GOLD:	And they will not need to teach their neighbors , nor will they need to teach their relatives , saying , ‘ You should know the Lord . ' For everyone , from the least to the greatest , will know me already , ” says the Lord . “ And I will forgive their wickedness , and I will never again remember their sins . ”

ID:	402
INPUT:	<unk> maitasuna eta sinesmena
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's faith and faith
GOLD:	Paul 's Thanksgiving and Prayer

ID:	403
INPUT:	Jainkoak errebelde izaten utzi baitzien gizon-emakume guztiei , denei erruki izateko .
PRED:	God has given them authority to all who fear him , for he has mercy .
GOLD:	For God has imprisoned everyone in disobedience so he could have mercy on everyone .

ID:	404
INPUT:	<unk> egin behar duen apaizak Jaunaren aurrean , elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran , ezarriko du garbitu behar duena beraren opariekin .
PRED:	At that time the priest will purify the priests and the Lord at the entrance of the Tabernacle , and they will put them on the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Then the officiating priest will present that person for purification , along with the offerings , before the Lord at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	405
INPUT:	Honek guztiak , Jauna , ez al dizu axola ? Geldi egon behar al duzu ? <unk> behar al gaituzu ?
PRED:	For the Lord has n't you realize that the Lord is n't looking for you ? Do you realize that you have been able to kill us ?
GOLD:	The holy and beautiful Templewhere our ancestors praised youhas been burned down , and all the things of beauty are destroyed .

ID:	406
INPUT:	Honela bete zen Jeremias profetak esana :
PRED:	Then Jeremiah said to Jeremiah ,
GOLD:	Herod 's brutal action fulfilled what God had spoken through the prophet Jeremiah :

ID:	407
INPUT:	Hau Liburu Santuak dioena bete zedin gertatu zen : Ez zaio hezurrik hautsiko .
PRED:	This is what the Scriptures say : “ They must not break the bones of my bones . ”
GOLD:	These things happened in fulfillment of the Scriptures that say , “ Not one of his bones will be broken , ”

ID:	408
INPUT:	Horregatik egin nien nik ere aurka eta etsaien lurraldera eraman , ea horrela haien barru sinesgogorra apaltzen zen eta zigorra merezia zutela aitortzen zuten .
PRED:	“ Therefore , I have sinned against you and brought them to them to the land of their enemies , so they would let them die .
GOLD:	When I have turned their hostility back on them and brought them to the land of their enemies , then at last their stubborn hearts will be humbled , and they will pay for their sins .

ID:	409
INPUT:	Ai nire aginduei <unk> izan <unk> ! Ibaika izango zenuke zoriona , <unk> salbamena ;
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who have been filled with my commands , and when I have been filled with sorrow .
GOLD:	Oh , that you had listened to my commands ! Then you would have had peace flowing like a gentle riverand righteousness rolling over you like waves in the sea .

ID:	410
INPUT:	<unk> biziaren liburuan idatzirik ez zutenak ere suzko aintzirara jaurti zituzten .
PRED:	And when they were in the book of God 's body , they attacked by the lake of fire .
GOLD:	And anyone whose name was not found recorded in the Book of Life was thrown into the lake of fire .

ID:	411
INPUT:	Azken tokiak aukeratu eta behartsuak gonbidatu
PRED:	He chose the poor and the poor for the poor and the poor .
GOLD:	Jesus Teaches about Humility

ID:	412
INPUT:	Zuen artean jakintsua eta bizitzan asko ikasia denik badela ? Erakuts dezala bere jokabide <unk> , <unk> darion <unk> biziz .
PRED:	And if you are living among you , how should I be able to be sure that you have been filled with such evil spirit ?
GOLD:	If you are wise and understand God 's ways , prove it by living an honorable life , doing good works with the humility that comes from wisdom .

ID:	413
INPUT:	Hori ikustean , ikasleek , haserre , honela zioten : — Zergatik alferrik galdu horrela ?
PRED:	When the disciples saw this , they asked him , “ Why are you afraid ? ”
GOLD:	The disciples were indignant when they saw this . “ What a waste ! ” they said .

ID:	414
INPUT:	Izan ere , hau dio Liburu Santuak : Egin poz-oihu emakume agor eta haur gabe horrek ! Ekin kantari pozaren pozez , erdiminik izan ez duzun horrek ! Bakarrik utziaren seme-alabak gehiago izango baitira , <unk> baino .
PRED:	For the Scriptures say , “ This is what the Scriptures say : Let those who fear the name of those who are children , O women of the world , and you have been born ! For the descendants of all who have been spared ! ”
GOLD:	As Isaiah said , “ Rejoice , O childless woman , you who have never given birth ! Break into a joyful shout , you who have never been in labor ! For the desolate woman now has more childrenthan the woman who lives with her husband ! ”

ID:	415
INPUT:	Garbitu egin zaituztet , baina ez zilarra bezala , <unk> <unk> baizik .
PRED:	“ But I have not sinned , but I have seen my god , but I have heard that they have seen .
GOLD:	I have refined you , but not as silver is refined.Rather , I have refined you in the furnace of suffering .

ID:	416
INPUT:	Inoiz egin ote diot uko behartsuen eskubideari ? Utzi ote dut alarguntsarik negarrez lehertzen ?
PRED:	“ Is it right ? ” says the poor man , “ I ca n't see the poor ?
GOLD:	“ Have I refused to help the poor , or crushed the hopes of widows ?

ID:	417
INPUT:	<unk> hauek egiten <unk> , ezin ditut ontzat eman zuen batzarrak , on baino kalte handiagoa egiten baitizuete .
PRED:	But when they saw these things , I 'll tell you what they were saying , ‘ This is more more powerful than the other ! '
GOLD:	But in the following instructions , I can not praise you . For it sounds as if more harm than good is done when you meet together .

ID:	418
INPUT:	Eta tronuan eseria <unk> esan zuen : « Hara , gauza guztiak berri egiten ditut » . Eta erantsi zuen : « Idatzi esaten dudan hau egiazkoa eta fidagarria dela » .
PRED:	“ Look ! ” he said , “ I have told everyone about all these things , ‘ Look ! ' And I am telling you , ‘ This is what I am doing . ' ”
GOLD:	And the one sitting on the throne said , “ Look , I am making everything new ! ” And then he said to me , “ Write this down , for what I tell you is trustworthy and true . ”

ID:	419
INPUT:	Jaunak gauez agertu eta esan zion : « Entzun dut zure otoitza , eta toki hau hautatu dut opariak bertan eskain <unk> .
PRED:	The Lord appeared to him and said to him , “ Listen to me , my God , and I have chosen you to serve as they had promised .
GOLD:	Then one night the Lord appeared to Solomon and said , “ I have heard your prayer and have chosen this Temple as the place for making sacrifices .

ID:	420
INPUT:	Hauek ere Salomonen esaera zaharrak dira , Judako errege Ezekiasen funtzionarioek jasoak .
PRED:	These are the words of Solomon , the king of Judah , and his officials were king of Judah .
GOLD:	These are more proverbs of Solomon , collected by the advisers of King Hezekiah of Judah .

ID:	421
INPUT:	Kontuz emakume <unk>
PRED:	Do you realize that some of the women of Samaria and Samaria
GOLD:	Avoid Immoral Women

ID:	422
INPUT:	Harat-honat zebiltzan judu <unk> batzuk ere Jesus Jaunaren izenaz baliatzen hasi ziren , espiritu gaiztoak botatzeko . Honela esaten zieten : « Paulok hots egiten duen Jesusen izenean , irteteko agintzen dizuet ! »
PRED:	Some Jews in the Law of the Law of the Lord Jesus , and they began to speak to the evil spirits of the Lord Jesus . “ I am telling you about to follow the name of Jesus . ”
GOLD:	A group of Jews was traveling from town to town casting out evil spirits . They tried to use the name of the Lord Jesus in their incantation , saying , “ I command you in the name of Jesus , whom Paul preaches , to come out ! ”

ID:	423
INPUT:	Zuek irakurri ondoren , bidali gutun hau Laodizeako eliz elkarteari ere , irakur dezaten . Eta zuek ere irakurri <unk> bidali nuena .
PRED:	Then you must read the letter to the letter to the church in the church , and the church will read to the churches . Then they will read it to the churches .
GOLD:	After you have read this letter , pass it on to the church at Laodicea so they can read it , too . And you should read the letter I wrote to them .

ID:	424
INPUT:	Pedrok erantzun zion : — <unk> . Jesusek , orduan : — <unk> libre daude , beraz .
PRED:	Peter replied , “ All right with me , ” he said . “ All right , my lord , ” he said .
GOLD:	“ They tax the people they have conquered , ” Peter replied . “ Well , then , ” Jesus said , “ the citizens are free !

ID:	425
INPUT:	Eta zuk , epai itzazu , epaitu , gizaseme ! <unk> iezaiezu beren gurasoen jokaera higuingarria .
PRED:	“ Therefore , turn and judge against you , and judge those who hear their evil deeds . ”
GOLD:	“ Son of man , bring charges against them and condemn them . Make them realize how detestable the sins of their ancestors really were .

ID:	426
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jainkoak bidaliak hitz egitean , Jainkoak berak hitz egiten du , neurririk gabe ematen baitio bere Espiritua .
PRED:	This is what God says : “ This is what God says : There is no greater than the Spirit of God .
GOLD:	For he is sent by God . He speaks God 's words , for God gives him the Spirit without limit .

ID:	427
INPUT:	<unk> , ordurako , lehorretik urruti zihoan , uhinek astindua , haizea kontra baitzuen .
PRED:	But when he was born , Satan , and the waves of the wind was thrown into the wind .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the disciples were in trouble far away from land , for a strong wind had risen , and they were fighting heavy waves .

ID:	428
INPUT:	Mardokeo juduak eta Ester erreginak agindu <unk> arabera , Purim Jaiak esaniko egunetan egiteko aginduz . <unk> eta beren ondorengoentzat antolatu zituzten egun hauek , baraualdi eta <unk> buruzko arauak ere erantsiz .
PRED:	At that time Mordecai had been given to Queen Esther , because he had been given to Queen Esther . In that time he had been given to Queen Esther and his descendants , and the number of his descendants were given to them .
GOLD:	These letters established the Festival of Purim — an annual celebration of these days at the appointed time , decreed by both Mordecai the Jew and Queen Esther . ( The people decided to observe this festival , just as they had decided for themselves and their descendants to establish the times of fasting and mourning . )

ID:	429
INPUT:	Santiago eta Joanek , Zebedeoren semeek , Jesusengana hurbildu eta esan zioten : — Maisu , eskatuko <unk> zuk ematea nahi genuke .
PRED:	John and John came to Jesus and asked him , “ Teacher , I 'll ask you what you want ? ”
GOLD:	Then James and John , the sons of Zebedee , came over and spoke to him . “ Teacher , ” they said , “ we want you to do us a favor . ”

ID:	430
INPUT:	Oparia eskaintzen zuen egunean , Elkanak bere emazte <unk> eta honen seme-alaba guztiei oparigaiaren zati bana eman ohi zien .
PRED:	On the same day you must have a male and female wife , and some of you gave birth to all the brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	On the days Elkanah presented his sacrifice , he would give portions of the meat to Peninnah and each of her children .

ID:	431
INPUT:	Jaun ahalguztidunak erabaki du , <unk> <unk> <unk> , mundu guztian <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , says : At that time they will know that the power of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has done itto destroy your prideand bring low all earth 's nobility .

ID:	432
INPUT:	Anatoten , <unk> , Ananiasen ,
PRED:	When the fig tree were filled with clouds ,
GOLD:	They also lived in Anathoth , Nob , Ananiah ,

ID:	433
INPUT:	Orduan , beren gizonekin Gedaliasengana joan ziren Mitzpara . Hauek ziren gudalburuak : Netaniasen seme Ismael , Kareahen seme Johanan eta Jonatan , Tanhumeten seme Seraias , Netofako <unk> semeak eta Maakako <unk> .
PRED:	Then the men of Benjamin returned to Gedaliah and the men of Mizpah , they sent Gedaliah son of Kareah and the other military leaders to Gedaliah , Johanan son of Kareah and Azariah son of Kareah , the other leaders of Mizpah .
GOLD:	So they went to see Gedaliah at Mizpah . These included : Ishmael son of Nethaniah , Johanan and Jonathan sons of Kareah , Seraiah son of Tanhumeth , the sons of Ephai the Netophathite , Jezaniah son of the Maacathite , and all their men .

ID:	434
INPUT:	Hurbildu zitzaion Saul Samueli hiriko atera , eta esan zion : — Otoi , esadazu non den <unk> etxea .
PRED:	So Saul went out to the town of the town and said to Samuel , “ Come and kill me , ” he said .
GOLD:	Just then Saul approached Samuel at the gateway and asked , “ Can you please tell me where the seer 's house is ? ”

ID:	435
INPUT:	Heziketa <unk> hilko da , bere zentzugabekeria handiarengatik galduko .
PRED:	I will die , and they will die .
GOLD:	He will die for lack of self-control ; he will be lost because of his great foolishness .

ID:	436
INPUT:	Une hartantxe , lurrikara handia izan zen eta hiriaren hamarreko bat erori zen ; lurrikaran zazpi mila lagun hil ziren , eta gainerakoek , beldurrez beterik , zeruko Jainkoa goretsi zuten .
PRED:	There was a great earthquake in the town of the town , a great city , and one of the town came to meet him in the city of God , and some of them were afraid of them .
GOLD:	At the same time there was a terrible earthquake that destroyed a tenth of the city . Seven thousand people died in that earthquake , and everyone else was terrified and gave glory to the God of heaven .

ID:	437
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> ez du haren baliorik , ezta onize eder nahiz <unk> ere .
PRED:	But when they see that the beast will be able to be able to be able to be able , and they will be able to kill him .
GOLD:	It 's worth more than all the gold of Ophir , greater than precious onyx or lapis lazuli .

ID:	438
INPUT:	Buruzagiak harrapakina urratzen duten otsoak bezalakoak dira : odola isurtzen eta jendea garbitzen dute , berak <unk> .
PRED:	For the hands of the wicked are like a lion , and they will cut off his blood , and they will kill them .
GOLD:	Your leaders are like wolves who tear apart their victims . They actually destroy people 's lives for money !

ID:	439
INPUT:	Raba , gameluen esparru bihurtuko dut eta amondarren herrialdea <unk> <unk> ; orduan jakingo duzue ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	I will destroy the land of Egypt and the land where I am going to know that I am the Lord , and you will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And I will turn the city of Rabbah into a pasture for camels , and all the land of the Ammonites into a resting place for sheep and goats . Then you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	440
INPUT:	justizia egiten die umezurtz eta <unk> , eta maite du etorkina , jatekoa eta <unk> ematen <unk> .
PRED:	To those who love the poor and widows , and those who love idols are weak and fig trees , and those who love him .
GOLD:	He ensures that orphans and widows receive justice . He shows love to the foreigners living among you and gives them food and clothing .

ID:	441
INPUT:	Aitaginarrebak , neskaren aitak , etxean geldiarazi zuen eta bertan egon zen hiru egunez . Jan , edan eta bertan ematen zuten gaua .
PRED:	The older father of his father was sleeping , and he ate the rest of his father 's family . They ate three days and drink the night .
GOLD:	Her father urged him to stay awhile , so he stayed three days , eating , drinking , and sleeping there .

ID:	442
INPUT:	Esna zaitezte , mozkor horiek , eta egizue negar ! Egin garrasi , <unk> ! Ez duzue jadanik ardorik dastatuko .
PRED:	Wake up , O Lord , and weep ! Do n't weep for you , for you will laugh when you arrive .
GOLD:	Wake up , you drunkards , and weep ! Wail , all you wine-drinkers ! All the grapes are ruined , and all your sweet wine is gone .

ID:	443
INPUT:	<unk> lortzen ez badu , nolanahi ere Jubileu Urtean libre geldituko da bere seme-alabekin batera .
PRED:	But if they are not free from the years old , the woman will be free in the land of Jubilee .
GOLD:	If any Israelites have not been bought back by the time the Year of Jubilee arrives , they and their children must be set free at that time .

ID:	444
INPUT:	Horregatik , beren ondasunak bildueta <unk> errekaz beste <unk> .
PRED:	That is why some of the fig tree were filled with water .
GOLD:	The people grab their possessionsand carry them across the Ravine of Willows .

ID:	445
INPUT:	Edan <unk> bular <unk> ! <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> !
PRED:	When I heard that they were very sick , they will know that they were very weak .
GOLD:	Drink deeply of her gloryeven as an infant drinks at its mother 's comforting breasts . ”

ID:	446
INPUT:	Ondoren , oparigaiaren zatiak eta burua eraman zizkioten eta Aaronek aldarean erre zituen .
PRED:	Then Aaron took some of the robe and brought it on the altar of the altar .
GOLD:	Then they handed him each piece of the burnt offering , including the head , and he burned them on the altar .

ID:	447
INPUT:	<unk> erantzun zion : — Ez , ez noa . Nahiago dut neure herrialdera itzuli , neure ahaideengana .
PRED:	The king replied , “ I 'm not looking for my relatives . I would not return to the land where I would not return to my relatives . ”
GOLD:	But Hobab replied , “ No , I will not go . I must return to my own land and family . ”

ID:	448
INPUT:	Nebaten seme Jeroboamen jokabide bera hartu zuen , hark egin eta Israeli eginarazi zizkion bekatu berak eginez .
PRED:	He made the example of Jeroboam son of Nebat , and he led Israel to commit .
GOLD:	He followed the example of Jeroboam son of Nebat in all the sins he had committed and led Israel to commit . The people provoked the anger of the Lord , the God of Israel , with their worthless idols .

ID:	449
INPUT:	Hau da Israelgo leinuen artean banatuko duzuen lurraldea , hauek leinuei dagozkien ondare-zatiak . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana .
PRED:	This is what the tribes of Israel will be divided among the tribes of Israel . This is what the Sovereign Lord says :
GOLD:	“ These are the allotments that will be set aside for each tribe 's exclusive possession . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !

ID:	450
INPUT:	Ez daitezela ardura han uzten dutenaz , Egiptoko eskualderik <unk> izango baitute » .
PRED:	Let no longer be able to give you a new tomb in the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Do n't worry about your personal belongings , for the best of all the land of Egypt is yours . ' ”

ID:	451
INPUT:	Davidek birrindu egiten zuen lurralde hura ; ez zuen bizirik uzten , ez gizasemerik , ez emakumerik . Ardi , idi , asto , gamelu eta soinekoak ere ostu ohi zituen . Itzultzean , Akixengana joaten zen .
PRED:	So David did not let the land live in the land of cattle , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , goats , and goats , and goats .
GOLD:	David did not leave one person alive in the villages he attacked . He took the sheep , goats , cattle , donkeys , camels , and clothing before returning home to see King Achish .

ID:	452
INPUT:	Israeldarrak eta jentilak
PRED:	The Gentiles of Israel and Israel
GOLD:	God 's Mercy Is for Everyone

ID:	453
INPUT:	Babilonia osoa hondatuko dute , nahi beste harrapakin eramango . Nik , Jaunak , esana .
PRED:	The Lord will destroy all your enemies , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Babylonia will be looteduntil the attackers are glutted with loot.I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	454
INPUT:	eta <unk> seme <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	And when I heard that the son of man and his son , he became very angry with him .
GOLD:	This was the subclan descended from the Shuthelahites : The Eranites , named after their ancestor Eran .

ID:	455
INPUT:	estropezu egiten zuena zeure hitzez <unk> <unk> belaunak zuzendu izan dituzu ;
PRED:	They are very glad when they saw that they were under your face .
GOLD:	Your words have supported those who were falling ; you encouraged those with shaky knees .

ID:	456
INPUT:	<unk> bat urtez eroapenez gidatu zituen basamortuan zehar
PRED:	And those who persecute you will remain in the wilderness of the wilderness .
GOLD:	He put up with them through forty years of wandering in the wilderness .

ID:	457
INPUT:	Elihuk gaineratu zuen :
PRED:	Then Elihu said ,
GOLD:	Elihu continued speaking :

ID:	458
INPUT:	Denok ni bezala ezkongabe izatea nahi nuke ; baina Jainkoak eman dion dohain berezia du bakoitzak , batak hau eta besteak hura .
PRED:	For I would be ashamed of you , but God has given me a gift to each other . He will be given to each other and each other .
GOLD:	But I wish everyone were single , just as I am . Yet each person has a special gift from God , of one kind or another .

ID:	459
INPUT:	Errege hauek gudu egin zieten Sodomako Bera , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> erregeei eta <unk> , hau da , Tzoarko , erregeari .
PRED:	Then the king of the city of Sodom and the kingdoms of the city of Sodom , and when they saw that they were buried in the city of Samaria , and the king of the city will be filled with great power .
GOLD:	fought against King Bera of Sodom , King Birsha of Gomorrah , King Shinab of Admah , King Shemeber of Zeboiim , and the king of Bela ( also called Zoar ) .

ID:	460
INPUT:	Haiekin hizketan ari zelarik , han agertu zen filistearren lerro artetik Goliat izeneko gizon adoretsu hura , Gateko filistearra , lehengo erronka bera eginez . Davidek entzun egin zion .
PRED:	The king of Aram was sitting beside the Philistines , where the Philistines had fled from the Philistines .
GOLD:	As he was talking with them , Goliath , the Philistine champion from Gath , came out from the Philistine ranks . Then David heard him shout his usual taunt to the army of Israel .

ID:	461
INPUT:	Zeure jantzi bordatuak hartu eta beraiekin estali zenituen irudiak , eta nire olioa eta intsentsua eskaini .
PRED:	You put your clothes with gold and overlaid them with gold .
GOLD:	You used the beautifully embroidered clothes I gave you to dress your idols . Then you used my special oil and my incense to worship them .

ID:	462
INPUT:	<unk> da <unk> jokabidea , zuzena bihotz <unk> portaera .
PRED:	And when they know that they are righteous , and if they are weak , how weak we are weak as weak as weak as weak as weak as weak as snow .
GOLD:	The guilty walk a crooked path ; the innocent travel a straight road .

ID:	463
INPUT:	Jaun ahalguztiduna Egiptoko lurraldean dagoenaren ezaugarri izango dira . <unk> dituztenen aurka Jaunari laguntza eske dei egingo diotenean , hark salbatzailea bidaliko die <unk> eta askatzera .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ I am writing to you from the land of Egypt , who will send you to help you from Egypt .
GOLD:	It will be a sign and a witness that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies is worshiped in the land of Egypt . When the people cry to the Lord for help against those who oppress them , he will send them a savior who will rescue them .

ID:	464
INPUT:	Zaharrenak semea izan zuen , eta Moab eman zion izen ; berau da gaur eguneko moabdarren arbasoa .
PRED:	The son of Moab was the son of Moab , for he has given him victory over the land of Moab .
GOLD:	When the older daughter gave birth to a son , she named him Moab . He became the ancestor of the nation now known as the Moabites .

ID:	465
INPUT:	« Jaiki eta aitaren etxera abiatu zen . Oraindik urruti zegoela , ikusi zuen aitak eta errukitu egin zen ; eta , lasterka joanik , besarkatu eta musuka hasi zitzaion .
PRED:	“ Get up and went home to the house of Joseph . When he saw his father , he saw his father and his father , he ran and kissed him and kissed him .
GOLD:	“ So he returned home to his father . And while he was still a long way off , his father saw him coming . Filled with love and compassion , he ran to his son , embraced him , and kissed him .

ID:	466
INPUT:	Jainkoa Moisesi eta Josueri agertu
PRED:	The Death of Moses
GOLD:	The Song of Moses

ID:	467
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Egun hartan , eguerdi <unk> dut eguzkia , eta egun-argitan ilunduko dut lurra .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I am coming from the sun , and I know that the sun is in the sun , the sky , and the earth will be seen in the sun .
GOLD:	“ In that day , ” says the Sovereign Lord , “ I will make the sun go down at noonand darken the earth while it is still day .

ID:	468
INPUT:	Hilkiasen familian Haxabias , eta Jedaiasen familian Netanel .
PRED:	These were the leader of the family of Hilkiah , from the family of Elam .
GOLD:	Hashabiah was leader of the family of Hilkiah.Nethanel was leader of the family of Jedaiah .

ID:	469
INPUT:	eta ez Moisesek bezala , hark zapi batez estaltzen baitzuen aurpegia , israeldarrek distira iragankor hura desagertu egiten zela ikus ez zezaten .
PRED:	So Moses did not forget his face , so he would not see his face . When the people of Israel realized that the people of Israel had done , he would not see his face .
GOLD:	We are not like Moses , who put a veil over his face so the people of Israel would not see the glory , even though it was destined to fade away .

ID:	470
INPUT:	« Ai , bizi ahal banitu berriz iragan egunak ! Orduan , Jainkoak zaintzen ninduen ,
PRED:	“ If I was still alive , God would let me live in my womb .
GOLD:	“ I long for the years gone bywhen God took care of me ,

ID:	471
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> lotu , herio-sareek harrapatu .
PRED:	And when they saw him , they put on his name .
GOLD:	The grave wrapped its ropes around me ; death laid a trap in my path .

ID:	472
INPUT:	<unk> etzalekua ukitzen duenak arropak eta gorputza garbituko ditu eta kutsaturik geldituko da arratsa arte .
PRED:	If you touch your clothes , you must wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water until evening .
GOLD:	So if you touch the man 's bed , you must wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water , and you will remain unclean until evening .

ID:	473
INPUT:	Anaia hura hona ekartzeko esan zenigun zure zerbitzarioi , ikusi nahi zenuela eta .
PRED:	Then your servant came to you , your servants , your servants , and your servants came to me .
GOLD:	“ And you said to us , ‘ Bring him here so I can see him with my own eyes . '

ID:	474
INPUT:	Davidek gogo hau adierazi zuen : « Norbaitek Belengo atean dagoen <unk> ura ekarriko balit <unk> ! »
PRED:	Then David told him , “ If you are here here here , I 'll know that you 're going to meet him , ” David told him .
GOLD:	David remarked longingly to his men , “ Oh , how I would love some of that good water from the well by the gate in Bethlehem . ”

ID:	475
INPUT:	eta gutun hau eman zieten eramateko : « Anaia apostoluek eta arduradunek Antiokiako , Siriako eta Ziliziako <unk> <unk> , agur !
PRED:	They gave this letter to the apostles : “ Paul , the commander of the apostles , the elders of Aram , the commander of Aram , and the elders of Aram .
GOLD:	This is the letter they took with them : “ This letter is from the apostles and elders , your brothers in Jerusalem . It is written to the Gentile believers in Antioch , Syria , and Cilicia . Greetings !

ID:	476
INPUT:	Herriak , bada , atseden hartu zuen zazpigarren egunean .
PRED:	So the people kept on the seventh day , and he rested on the seventh day .
GOLD:	So the people did not gather any food on the seventh day .

ID:	477
INPUT:	eta esan zien : — Badakit Jaunak lurralde hau eman dizuela . Hemen , hirian , izuturik gaude eta herrialdeko jende guztia ere ikaraz dago zuen aurrean ,
PRED:	“ Yes , ” the Lord said , “ I know that the Lord has given you all the kingdoms of the earth , and all the people of the land of the earth are terrified . ”
GOLD:	“ I know the Lord has given you this land , ” she told them . “ We are all afraid of you . Everyone in the land is living in terror .

ID:	478
INPUT:	Eliren heriotza
PRED:	The Prophecy of Eli
GOLD:	The Death of Eli

ID:	479
INPUT:	Bat bakarra da nire usoa , bakarra eta akatsik gabea , amaren kutuna . Zoriontsu diotse neskatxek ikustean , <unk> eta <unk> honela goraipatzen :
PRED:	The Lord has given me a good reputation for me , and the one of my mother 's birth , and I saw a great banquet for my birth .
GOLD:	I would still choose my dove , my perfect one — the favorite of her mother , dearly loved by the one who bore her.The young women see her and praise her ; even queens and royal concubines sing her praises :

ID:	480
INPUT:	Haren aginduzurak zeruan pilatzen dira , hodeiak zerumugan gora igotzen , erauntsiak tximistaka lehertzen , haizea bere gordelekuetatikateratzen .
PRED:	The clouds of the earth tremble in the clouds , and the lightning flashes in the clouds with the wind .
GOLD:	When he speaks in the thunder , the heavens roar with rain.He causes the clouds to rise over the earth.He sends the lightning with the rainand releases the wind from his storehouses .

ID:	481
INPUT:	“ Entzun duzu nik toki honetan bizi direnen kontra esan dudana . Horregatik , zure bihotza <unk> egin da eta apaldu egin zara nire aurrean . Nire aurrean apaldu zarelako , zeure jantziak urratu eta negar egin duzulako , nik ere entzun dizut . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	“ Listen to this place where I have heard this in this place of everyone , and I have heard your heart , and I have heard my heart , and I have heard your clothes .
GOLD:	You were sorry and humbled yourself before God when you heard his words against this city and its people . You humbled yourself and tore your clothing in despair and wept before me in repentance . And I have indeed heard you , says the Lord .

ID:	482
INPUT:	mendialdea zuena izango baita . Nahiz eta baso hutsa den , soildu egingo duzue eta zuena izango da alde batetik bestera . Gainera , kanaandarrak ere botako dituzue , nahiz eta burdinazko guda-gurdiak dituzten eta indartsuak diren .
PRED:	For the mountains will be cut off , and you will be cut off , and you will be cut off , and you will be cut off from the Mediterranean Sea . You will be destroyed , and you will be destroyed by their chariots and iron .
GOLD:	The forests of the hill country will be yours as well . Clear as much of the land as you wish , and take possession of its farthest corners . And you will drive out the Canaanites from the valleys , too , even though they are strong and have iron chariots . ”

ID:	483
INPUT:	Barrez beteko dizu oraindik ahoa , poz-irrintziz ezpainak .
PRED:	We have filled with joy and filled with joy .
GOLD:	He will once again fill your mouth with laughterand your lips with shouts of joy .

ID:	484
INPUT:	« Ongi da » erantzungo balu , lasai nintzateke ; haserretuko balitz , ordea , gauza jakina litzateke erabakia duela ni hondatzea .
PRED:	“ But if I would answer you , I would be angry with you . But if I would be sure that you would be punished . ”
GOLD:	If he says , ‘ Fine ! ' you will know all is well . But if he is angry and loses his temper , you will know he is determined to kill me .

ID:	485
INPUT:	Berrogei urte nituen Moisesek , Jaunaren zerbitzariak , Kadex-Barneatik lurralde hau ikertzera bidali ninduenean ; barruak agintzen zidan eran eman nion hemengo berri .
PRED:	For Moses was forty years old , and I sent them out to tell you the commands of the Lord . I sent me to tell you the people of the land of the Lord .
GOLD:	I was forty years old when Moses , the servant of the Lord , sent me from Kadesh-barnea to explore the land of Canaan . I returned and gave an honest report ,

ID:	486
INPUT:	Hirugarren egunean , Saulen kanpalekutik zetorren gizon bat agertu zen ; jantziak urraturik eta burua hautsez estalirik zekartzan . Davidengana heltzean , lurreraino ahuspeztu zen .
PRED:	Three days later the men of Saul came outside the camp and saw a man in the camp . When he was in the camp , he fell on his feet , and he fell on his feet .
GOLD:	On the third day a man arrived from Saul 's army camp . He had torn his clothes and put dirt on his head to show that he was in mourning . He fell to the ground before David in deep respect .

ID:	487
INPUT:	Goberna ote lezake zuzenbideari gorroto dionak ? Nola ausartzen zara <unk> gaitzestera ?
PRED:	Can you crush the poor ? Can you be able to crush others ?
GOLD:	Could God govern if he hated justice ? Are you going to condemn the almighty judge ?

ID:	488
INPUT:	Izan ere , jende errebelde , berritsu eta <unk> asko dago , <unk> artean batez ere .
PRED:	For some people who were rebels , and some of them came to see that some of these things were near .
GOLD:	For there are many rebellious people who engage in useless talk and deceive others . This is especially true of those who insist on circumcision for salvation .

ID:	489
INPUT:	Horra zer egingo dugun : Egin diegun zinarengatik , bizirik utziko ditugu , Jainkoak zigor ez gaitzan .
PRED:	That is why the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says , “ Let 's destroy all the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	This is what we must do . We must let them live , for divine anger would come upon us if we broke our oath .

ID:	490
INPUT:	Egin beza orro itsasoak eta bertako guztiak , munduak eta bertan bizi direnek !
PRED:	Yes , the sea , and all the earth tremble .
GOLD:	Let the sea and everything in it shout his praise ! Let the earth and all living things join in .

ID:	491
INPUT:	Eta hamabi ateak hamabi perla ziren , bakoitza perla bakarraz egina , eta hiriko plaza urre hutsezkoa , beira gardena bezalakoa .
PRED:	There was twelve doors of two gold , bronze , bronze , and scarlet thread . There were pure gold , clear as fine as fine as fine as fine as fine as gold .
GOLD:	The twelve gates were made of pearls — each gate from a single pearl ! And the main street was pure gold , as clear as glass .

ID:	492
INPUT:	<unk> basamortuan bezala nago , <unk> <unk> artean bezala .
PRED:	I know that I am in the wilderness , as though they were in the wilderness .
GOLD:	I lie awake , lonely as a solitary bird on the roof .

ID:	493
INPUT:	Nik , Jaunak , hitz egin dut eta bete egingo dut , atzera egin gabe ; ez naiz errukituko , ez damutuko . Zure jokabidearen eta egintza txarren arabera epaituko zaitut . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : I will turn away from your anger , and I will not break your anger against your anger . I am giving you what the Sovereign Lord says :
GOLD:	“ I , the Lord , have spoken ! The time has come , and I wo n't hold back . I will not change my mind , and I will have no pity on you . You will be judged on the basis of all your wicked actions , says the Sovereign Lord . ”

ID:	494
INPUT:	Amram Lebiren alaba batekin , Lebik Egipton izan zuenarekin , ezkondu zen ; <unk> zuen izena . Honek hiru seme-alaba sortu zizkion <unk> : Aaron , Moises eta hauen arreba Miriam .
PRED:	These were the sons of Levi , who had been given to the descendants of Levi , who were descendants of Levi , who had been born to Moses , Aaron , and Aaron .
GOLD:	and Amram 's wife was named Jochebed . She also was a descendant of Levi , born among the Levites in the land of Egypt . Amram and Jochebed became the parents of Aaron , Moses , and their sister , Miriam .

ID:	495
INPUT:	Ez zen Anaken ondorengorik bat ere gelditu israeldarren lurraldean , Gaza , Gad eta Axdod hirietan gelditu ziren arren .
PRED:	There were not one of the tribe of Gad , along with the towns of the tribe of Gad , Gad , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	None of the descendants of Anak were left in all the land of Israel , though some still remained in Gaza , Gath , and Ashdod .

ID:	496
INPUT:	Bela <unk> semea , <unk> <unk> ;
PRED:	One day when they saw that they were very sad , and they were filled with flesh .
GOLD:	Bela son of Beor , who ruled in Edom from his city of Dinhabah .

ID:	497
INPUT:	« Ni , Jauna , ez naiz aldatu ; baina zuek ere Jakoben ondorengo izaten jarraitzen duzue :
PRED:	“ I am not the Lord , but you have not rejected me .
GOLD:	“ I am the Lord , and I do not change . That is why you descendants of Jacob are not already destroyed .

ID:	498
INPUT:	Moisesek , ordea , esan zion : — Arren , Jauna , ni ez , bidali besteren bat .
PRED:	But Moses said to him , “ Lord , I am not one of you . ”
GOLD:	But Moses again pleaded , “ Lord , please ! Send anyone else . ”

ID:	499
INPUT:	Hartu zituen Akazek Jaunaren etxean eta jauregiko altxortegian zeuden urre-zilarrak eta Asiriako erregeari bidali zizkion <unk> bezala .
PRED:	So the king of Assyria brought gold and gold to the Temple of the Lord and the king of Assyria and the king of Assyria .
GOLD:	Then Ahaz took the silver and gold from the Temple of the Lord and the palace treasury and sent it as a payment to the Assyrian king .

ID:	500
INPUT:	Hildakoen gorpuak jaurti zituen putzua , Israelgo errege Baxak eraso zion hartan , Judako errege Asak egindako putzu handia da . Netaniasen seme Ismaelek gorpuz bete zuen .
PRED:	He threw him into the dead bodies of the dead in the dead bodies of Israel , and King Ahab of Israel killed him in the land of Judah . The king of Judah was very angry with him .
GOLD:	The cistern where Ishmael dumped the bodies of the men he murdered was the large one dug by King Asa when he fortified Mizpah to protect himself against King Baasha of Israel . Ishmael son of Nethaniah filled it with corpses .

ID:	501
INPUT:	Ni heltzean , <unk> eman eta Jerusalemera bidaliko ditut zuek aukeratuak , zuen erregalua eramatera .
PRED:	When I arrived , I will send some of them to Jerusalem , and I will send you to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	When I come , I will write letters of recommendation for the messengers you choose to deliver your gift to Jerusalem .

ID:	502
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaizkien Moises eta Aaron israeldarrei : « Gaur arratsaldean jakingo duzue Jaunak atera zaituztela Egiptotik ,
PRED:	Then Moses said to Moses and Aaron , “ You will know that the Lord has brought you out of Egypt .
GOLD:	So Moses and Aaron said to all the people of Israel , “ By evening you will realize it was the Lord who brought you out of the land of Egypt .

ID:	503
INPUT:	Jaunak , horrela , <unk> zuen Judako erreinua , Akaz erregea zela eta ; Judari <unk> eragina baitzion Akazek eta Jauna baztertua .
PRED:	When the Lord saw that the kingdom of Judah was in the kingdom of Judah , the kingdom of Judah , and when he saw that he was in the land of Judah and Samaria , he became the Lord .
GOLD:	The Lord was humbling Judah because of King Ahaz of Judah , for he had encouraged his people to sin and had been utterly unfaithful to the Lord .

ID:	504
INPUT:	Ondoren , Samariara abiatu zen Jehu . Bidean , Artzainen <unk> zeritzan tokira heltzean ,
PRED:	Then Jehu went out to Samaria , where they were under the city of Samaria . When they arrived , they came to Egypt ,
GOLD:	Then Jehu set out for Samaria . Along the way , while he was at Beth-eked of the Shepherds ,

ID:	505
INPUT:	Gantzutu Nimxiren seme Jehu Israelgo <unk> . Gantzutu <unk> Xafaten seme Eliseo , zure ondorengo profeta izan dadin .
PRED:	“ One of the army of Israel , ” Elisha said , “ Elisha son of Beor with a prophet . ”
GOLD:	Then anoint Jehu grandson of Nimshi to be king of Israel , and anoint Elisha son of Shaphat from the town of Abel-meholah to replace you as my prophet .

ID:	506
INPUT:	Biharamunean , Jainkoak bidalitako espiritu gaiztoak jo zuen Saul , eta han zebilen eroa bezala bere etxe osoan barrena ; David zitara jotzen ari zitzaion , egunero bezala . Saulek , ordea , eskuan <unk> lantza
PRED:	The next day when Saul saw Saul 's spirit , he went out to meet him as a few of his men . But when Saul saw that Saul was in his hand , he threw his spear into his hand .
GOLD:	The very next day a tormenting spirit from God overwhelmed Saul , and he began to rave in his house like a madman . David was playing the harp , as he did each day . But Saul had a spear in his hand ,

ID:	507
INPUT:	Jesus Anasen aurrean
PRED:	Jesus before the Council
GOLD:	Peter 's First Denial

ID:	508
INPUT:	eta eman mezu hau : “ Honela dio Jaun ahalguztidunak , Israelen Jainkoak : Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosor neure zerbitzaria <unk> dut , eta Jeremiasek lurrean sartu dituen harri horien gainean ezarriko ditut haren tronua eta gaineko <unk> .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , says : I will put my hand on the throne of the earth , and I will put on the throne of the throne of the earth .
GOLD:	Then say to the people of Judah , ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : I will certainly bring my servant Nebuchadnezzar , king of Babylon , here to Egypt . I will set his throne over these stones that I have hidden . He will spread his royal canopy over them .

ID:	509
INPUT:	Zergatik ez duzu aditu Jaunaren esana ? Zergatik hartu dituzu harrapakinak , Jaunaren begietan gaizki dagoena eginez ?
PRED:	Why do you turn away from the Lord 's sight ? Why did you turn away from the Lord 's sight ?
GOLD:	Why have n't you obeyed the Lord ? Why did you rush for the plunder and do what was evil in the Lord 's sight ? ”

ID:	510
INPUT:	Lur jota <unk> makurturik idoloak , ezin dituzte <unk> salbatu ; beraiek ere erbestera doaz .
PRED:	He has thrown down into the dust , and they will be able to kill them , and they will be able to kill them .
GOLD:	Both the idols and their owners are bowed down.The gods can not protect the people , and the people can not protect the gods.They go off into captivity together .

ID:	511
INPUT:	Argi nazazue , eta isildu egingo naiz . Esadazue zertan nagoen oker !
PRED:	I am telling you about all these things , and I will answer you .
GOLD:	Teach me , and I will keep quiet.Show me what I have done wrong .

ID:	512
INPUT:	Zoritxar biok gertatu zaizkizu : herrialdea hondatua eta desegina , jendea goseak eta gerrak hila . Baina nor errukitzen zaizu ? Nork kontsolatzen zaitu ?
PRED:	You will destroy your land , and the land will be destroyed , and the people of Israel will die . But the poor will be saved , and those who are dead ?
GOLD:	These two calamities have fallen on you : desolation and destruction , famine and war.And who is left to sympathize with you ? Who is left to comfort you ?

ID:	513
INPUT:	Israelgo gudarostea osatzeko gai diren hogei urtetik gorako gizonezko guztiak <unk> dituzu , gudari-taldeka banatuz . Zu eta Aaron arduratuko zarete <unk> ,
PRED:	All the men of Israel who were twenty years old or older or older or older or older or older or older or older or older or older or older men .
GOLD:	twenty years old or older who are able to go to war . You and Aaron must register the troops ,

ID:	514
INPUT:	<unk> aberastu , erraz galdu ; poliki-poliki bilduz , gehitu .
PRED:	For those who are poor , and those who are given to you .
GOLD:	Wealth from get-rich-quick schemes quickly disappears ; wealth from hard work grows over time .

ID:	515
INPUT:	Horrelako horien aurrean ez genuen une batez ere atzera egin , beraiei amore emanez , beharrezko baitzen berri onaren egiak zuengan sendo <unk> .
PRED:	We have not done to you , so that we could be able to be afraid of them . We will know that the truth of the world and the power of the world .
GOLD:	But we refused to give in to them for a single moment . We wanted to preserve the truth of the gospel message for you .

ID:	516
INPUT:	« <unk> , entzun nire hitzak , zuek , <unk> , aditu arretaz .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you who heard my words , and when they hear my words , you must hear my words .
GOLD:	“ Listen to me , you wise men.Pay attention , you who have knowledge .

ID:	517
INPUT:	Tronu , zahar eta lau izaki bizidunen inguruan zutik zeuden aingeru guztiak ahuspeztu egin ziren tronuaren aurrean eta Jainkoa adoratu zuten ,
PRED:	Suddenly , the Lamb fell on the earth , and all the angels stood before the throne of the Lamb , and all the Lamb worshiped God .
GOLD:	And all the angels were standing around the throne and around the elders and the four living beings . And they fell before the throne with their faces to the ground and worshiped God .

ID:	518
INPUT:	<unk> batean , unetxo <unk> ezkutatu nizun , baina etengabe maite <unk> naiz zutaz . Hala diot nik , Jaunak , zure askatzaileak .
PRED:	At that time I saw that when I saw that when I love you , I love you , the Lord , have loved you .
GOLD:	In a burst of anger I turned my face away for a little while.But with everlasting love I will have compassion on you , ” says the Lord , your Redeemer .

ID:	519
INPUT:	baita liho finezko buruzapi eta <unk> apainduak ere , eta liho-hari bihurrituzko galtzak ;
PRED:	Then he took some of them with gold and purple , and scarlet thread and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	The turban and the special head coverings were made of fine linen , and the undergarments were also made of finely woven linen .

ID:	520
INPUT:	Sidimgo harana <unk> josia zegoen , eta , ihesi zihoazela , <unk> erori ziren Sodoma eta <unk> erregeak ; gainerakoek mendialdera egin zuten ihes .
PRED:	There were those who were weak , and those who were terrified when they were terrified when they saw that they were in Egypt , and they fled to the hill country of Egypt .
GOLD:	As it happened , the valley of the Dead Sea was filled with tar pits . And as the army of the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled , some fell into the tar pits , while the rest escaped into the mountains .

ID:	521
INPUT:	Goretsazue , munduko errege eta herriok , buruzagi eta gobernari guztiok ,
PRED:	Praise the kings of the earth , all the kings of the earth , and all the kings of the earth .
GOLD:	kings of the earth and all people , rulers and judges of the earth ,

ID:	522
INPUT:	Konfiantza osoa du senarrak harengan , ez da sekula beharrean aurkituko .
PRED:	For everyone who speaks in him will never find him .
GOLD:	Her husband can trust her , and she will greatly enrich his life .

ID:	523
INPUT:	Epaile duten Harkaitzaren kontra amildu dira , atsegin hartu baitzuten niri entzutean :
PRED:	For the people of the wicked have done , for they had done to me .
GOLD:	When their leaders are thrown down from a cliff , the wicked will listen to my words and find them true .

ID:	524
INPUT:	Baina , astea igaro ondoren , geure bidaiari jarraitu genion . Hiritik <unk> lagundu ziguten haiek denek , beren emazte eta <unk> . <unk> otoitz egin genuen belauniko ;
PRED:	But we left that day when we arrived at the city of the city , we saw that we were on the city of the city of the city , and we were afraid to pray .
GOLD:	When we returned to the ship at the end of the week , the entire congregation , including women and children , left the city and came down to the shore with us . There we knelt , prayed ,

ID:	525
INPUT:	« <unk> , <unk> bakarrik utzia egon bazara ere , <unk> <unk> egingo zaitut , mende guztien pozgarri .
PRED:	“ If you know that if you have seen , I will be able to see how weak I have seen , and when I will be able to see the face of all the world .
GOLD:	“ Though you were once despised and hated , with no one traveling through you , I will make you beautiful forever , a joy to all generations .

ID:	526
INPUT:	Eta gauza bera zuen artean bizi den edo etorkizunean biziko den etorkinak ere : Jaunak atseginez onartzen dituen opariak egin nahi baditu , zuek bezala egingo du .
PRED:	“ But if you are living among you , you may live among the Lord as foreigners living among you , just as the Lord has commanded you .
GOLD:	And if any foreigners visit you or live among you and want to present a special gift as a pleasing aroma to the Lord , they must follow these same procedures .

ID:	527
INPUT:	« Efoda , urrez , purpura more , gorri eta gorriminez eta liho-hari bihurrituz apain <unk> egingo dute .
PRED:	“ Make the following instructions to the Tabernacle of finely woven linen , purple , and scarlet thread , and scarlet thread , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	“ The craftsmen must make the ephod of finely woven linen and skillfully embroider it with gold and with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .

ID:	528
INPUT:	Orduan , Hananiasek , uztarria Jeremiasen lepotik kendurik , apurtu egin zuen ,
PRED:	Then she gave this message to Jeremiah :
GOLD:	Then Hananiah the prophet took the yoke off Jeremiah 's neck and broke it in pieces .

ID:	529
INPUT:	Baina <unk> ezin zuten eraman <unk> . Orduan , bera zegoen parean etxe gaina zulatu eta <unk> behera eraitsi zuten elbarria , etzana zegoen ohatilan .
PRED:	But when they were able to kill him , they were able to kill him and saw that the tomb was sitting on the throne of the valley .
GOLD:	They could n't bring him to Jesus because of the crowd , so they dug a hole through the roof above his head . Then they lowered the man on his mat , right down in front of Jesus .

ID:	530
INPUT:	<unk> eta <unk> , bildots gizenen haragia , aukerako ahariak eta akerrak , ogi-irin garbi <unk> zizkion <unk> ardoa , <unk> , edari .
PRED:	I will give you a burnt offering and young bulls , male goats , rams , sheep , sheep , goats , and goats , and goats , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	He fed them yogurt from the herdand milk from the flock , together with the fat of lambs.He gave them choice rams from Bashan , and goats , together with the choicest wheat.You drank the finest wine , made from the juice of grapes .

ID:	531
INPUT:	Jaunak Asiria zigortuko
PRED:	A Message about Assyria
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	532
INPUT:	Zeuk , Jauna , zeuk babestuko gaituzu beti , zeuk babestuko horrelako jendearengandik :
PRED:	You have defeated us from your enemies ; you have defeated us .
GOLD:	even though the wicked strut about , and evil is praised throughout the land .

ID:	533
INPUT:	Hauek aurrea hartu ziguten , eta Troaden egon zitzaizkigun zain .
PRED:	They left us and camped at us .
GOLD:	They went on ahead and waited for us at Troas .

ID:	534
INPUT:	<unk> eta <unk> aztiak Moisesen aurka jarri ziren bezalaxe , <unk> hauek ere , buru <unk> jendea eta sinesmenean porrot egina baita , egiaren aurka jartzen dira .
PRED:	At that time the king of Egypt were very angry with them , and when they were afraid of the people of Moses , they were filled with their faith . They were afraid of their faith , and they will be able to obey them .
GOLD:	These teachers oppose the truth just as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses . They have depraved minds and a counterfeit faith .

ID:	535
INPUT:	« Jaunari erre-oparitzat eskaini beharrekoa hegaztia bada , usapala nahiz <unk> eskainiko da .
PRED:	“ Suppose you present a burnt offering to the Lord , or if they are young or young or female , they must present them to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ If you present a bird as a burnt offering to the Lord , choose either a turtledove or a young pigeon .

ID:	536
INPUT:	Erabateko zigorra
PRED:	Children of Life
GOLD:	Judah 's Inevitable Doom

ID:	537
INPUT:	Orduan , aker bat hil eta Joseren jantzia harturik , akerraren odoletan busti zuten .
PRED:	Then one of the sons of Joseph died and put it on the ground .
GOLD:	Then the brothers killed a young goat and dipped Joseph 's robe in its blood .

ID:	538
INPUT:	« Benetan diotsuet azkeneko hau Jainkoarekin bakean itzuli zela etxera ; fariseua , berriz , ez . Zeren eta bere burua goratzen duena beheratu egingo baitu Jainkoak , eta bere burua beheratzen duena , goratu » .
PRED:	“ I tell you the truth that God is living in peace , but it was a person who lives in peace . For those who are called to those who are poor , and those who are destined for themselves . ”
GOLD:	I tell you , this sinner , not the Pharisee , returned home justified before God . For those who exalt themselves will be humbled , and those who humble themselves will be exalted . ”

ID:	539
INPUT:	Izreelgo dorrean zegoen zelatariak , Jehuren gudari-taldea etortzen ikustean , esan zuen : — <unk> bat ageri da han ! Joramek agindu zuen : — Bidali zaldizko bat eta galdegin dezala bakez datozen .
PRED:	When Jezebel arrived at Jezreel , he saw the men of Jezreel . “ There is one of the men of Aram , ” he said , “ There is a great king of Aram and the people of Aram . ”
GOLD:	The watchman on the tower of Jezreel saw Jehu and his company approaching , so he shouted to Joram , “ I see a company of troops coming ! ” “ Send out a rider to ask if they are coming in peace , ” King Joram ordered .

ID:	540
INPUT:	Esnatu , Jauna ! Zergatik zaude lo ? Ekin ! Ez gu betiko zapuztu !
PRED:	O Lord , do n't let us die ? Do n't let us be disgraced ?
GOLD:	Why do you look the other way ? Why do you ignore our suffering and oppression ?

ID:	541
INPUT:	Ba , <unk> <unk> zaizu , saihestu ezineko <unk> gainera , ustekabean hartuko <unk> hondamendia etorriko .
PRED:	Who will be able to kill you , so that they will turn against you , and they will kill you .
GOLD:	So disaster will overtake you , and you wo n't be able to charm it away.Calamity will fall upon you , and you wo n't be able to buy your way out.A catastrophe will strike you suddenly , one for which you are not prepared .

ID:	542
INPUT:	Hirugarren egunean , ontziko tresneria itsasora jaurti zuten marinelek .
PRED:	On the same way , the sailors and the sailors ran away from the sea .
GOLD:	The following day they even took some of the ship 's gear and threw it overboard .

ID:	543
INPUT:	<unk> zetozen erbesteratuek erre-opariak eskaini zizkioten Israelgo Jainkoari : hamabi zezen Israel osoaren alde , laurogeita hamasei ahari , hirurogeita hamazazpi bildots eta hamabi aker bekatuen barkamenerako : guztiak Jaunari erre-oparitzat eskainiak .
PRED:	At that time the people of Israel had been offered to God as a burnt offering to the people of Israel . One of Israel had been made with a burnt offering and a burnt offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the exiles who had come out of captivity sacrificed burnt offerings to the God of Israel . They presented twelve bulls for all the people of Israel , as well as ninety-six rams and seventy-seven male lambs . They also offered twelve male goats as a sin offering . All this was given as a burnt offering to the Lord .

ID:	544
INPUT:	Damaskoko <unk> eta <unk> ibaiak ez ote dira , bada , Israelgo ur guztiak baino hobeak ? Ez ote <unk> horietan busti , gaitza sendatzeko ? Eta alde egin zuen handik haserre .
PRED:	And when they were in Damascus , how can you think of the kingdoms of Damascus ? Who will be able to see all the water of Israel ? Why did n't you see how can we see ?
GOLD:	Are n't the rivers of Damascus , the Abana and the Pharpar , better than any of the rivers of Israel ? Why should n't I wash in them and be healed ? ” So Naaman turned and went away in a rage .

ID:	545
INPUT:	<unk> antzeko izango naizEfraimentzat , lehoi gaztearen <unk> . Neuk harrapatuko duteta alde egingo , neurekin eramango duteta inork ez du askatuko .
PRED:	I will destroy you like a lion , and I will destroy you with my sword , and I will never be destroyed .
GOLD:	I will be like a lion to Israel , like a strong young lion to Judah.I will tear them to pieces ! I will carry them off , and no one will be left to rescue them .

ID:	546
INPUT:	« Etsaien aurka borrokatzeko kanpalekua eratzean , gorde zeuen buruak kutsadura orotatik garbi .
PRED:	“ If you turn against the community of Israel , make yourselves clean and make yourselves clean .
GOLD:	“ Any man who becomes ceremonially defiled because of a nocturnal emission must leave the camp and stay away all day .

ID:	547
INPUT:	Alderantziz , gonbidatzen zaituztenean , jarri azkeneko tokian , gonbidatu <unk> , datorrenean , esan diezazun : “ Adiskide , igo gorago ” . Horrela , oso toki onean geldituko zara mahaikide guztien aurrean .
PRED:	But if you are looking for a man named him , she said to him , ‘ She is poor ! ' And if you are rich , you will get up and get up ! '
GOLD:	“ Instead , take the lowest place at the foot of the table . Then when your host sees you , he will come and say , ‘ Friend , we have a better place for you ! ' Then you will be honored in front of all the other guests .

ID:	548
INPUT:	Begiratu zuten atzera Aiko gizonek eta <unk> handia ikusi zuten hiritik zerurantz igotzen . Ez zitzaien ihesbiderik gelditzen inongo aldetik , basamorturantz ihesi zihoazen israeldarrak itzuli egin baitziren beren pertsegitzaileen kontra .
PRED:	When the men saw the town of Ai , the men of Ai came from the city where the people of Ai had come to the town of Ai , they stopped at the wilderness .
GOLD:	When the men of Ai looked behind them , smoke from the town was filling the sky , and they had nowhere to go . For the Israelites who had fled in the direction of the wilderness now turned on their pursuers .

ID:	549
INPUT:	Paulo Efeson
PRED:	Paul 's Final Instructions to Ephesus
GOLD:	Paul 's Third Missionary Journey

ID:	550
INPUT:	Jesus eskatologiaz mintzo ( 24 , 1 — 25 , 46 )
PRED:	Jesus Predicts His Death
GOLD:	Jesus Speaks about the Future

ID:	551
INPUT:	Hau zioen : « Idatz ezazu liburu batean ikusiko duzuna , eta bidali zazpi eliz elkarte hauei : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> eta Laodizeako eliz elkarteei » .
PRED:	“ Listen to me , ” he said , “ I will see the angel of the prophets and the church that you will see seven churches , and I will see the churches . ”
GOLD:	It said , “ Write in a book everything you see , and send it to the seven churches in the cities of Ephesus , Smyrna , Pergamum , Thyatira , Sardis , Philadelphia , and Laodicea . ”

ID:	552
INPUT:	Etorri ziren , beraz , <unk> eta igo zuten Jaunaren kutxa . <unk> muinoan zuen etxean sartu zuten . Ondoren , honen seme Eleazar sagaratu zuten , Jaunaren kutxa zaintzeko .
PRED:	So they arrived at the Ark of the Lord and saw that he was sitting on the Ark of the Lord 's Temple , and he entered the Temple of the Lord 's Temple . Then the Ark of the Lord took him back to the Ark of the Lord .
GOLD:	So the men of Kiriath-jearim came to get the Ark of the Lord . They took it to the hillside home of Abinadab and ordained Eleazar , his son , to be in charge of it .

ID:	553
INPUT:	Esterrek , ordea , erregeagana jo zuen eta honek idatziz agindu zuen , Hamanek juduen aurka erabakia zuen hondamendia gerta <unk> berari ; horrela , bada , Haman eta honen semeak urkabean zintzilikatu zituzten .
PRED:	But Esther went to the king 's king and told him what he had happened . He had done , and he was under the king 's command , and he ordered that Mordecai had been ready for his sons and his sons and his sons .
GOLD:	But when Esther came before the king , he issued a decree causing Haman 's evil plot to backfire , and Haman and his sons were impaled on a sharpened pole .

ID:	554
INPUT:	Eta legendun asko zegoen Israelen Eliseo profetaren garaian ; hala ere , ez zuen haietako inor sendatu , Naaman <unk> baizik » .
PRED:	Elisha was there there at the time of the prophet of Israel , the prophet of the prophet of Israel , but the prophet of Israel was healed .
GOLD:	And many in Israel had leprosy in the time of the prophet Elisha , but the only one healed was Naaman , a Syrian . ”

ID:	555
INPUT:	hau diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak , Israelen Jainkoak : Rekaben seme Jonadabek beti izango ditu ondorengoak nire herrian » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : The descendants of Israel will be my family . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : ‘ Jehonadab son of Recab will always have descendants who serve me . ' ”

ID:	556
INPUT:	<unk> ari direnen izenak eman behar <unk> » .
PRED:	That is why the names of the church should be given to everyone who had been given . ”
GOLD:	They also asked for the names of all the men working on the Temple .

ID:	557
INPUT:	Onartu zuen Moisesek bere <unk> aholkua eta haren esanaren arabera egin zuen :
PRED:	So Moses and his officials became very wise .
GOLD:	Moses listened to his father-in-law 's advice and followed his suggestions .

ID:	558
INPUT:	Baina zeruko erreginari intsentsua erre eta isur-opariak egiteari utzi <unk> , kale gorrian gaude , goseak eta gerraz hiltzen .
PRED:	But if you have burned incense and burned incense on your skin and skin , we will die in the sky and fig tree , and we will die .
GOLD:	But ever since we quit burning incense to the Queen of Heaven and stopped worshiping her with liquid offerings , we have been in great trouble and have been dying from war and famine . ”

ID:	559
INPUT:	Hala , joan ziren Ezekias erregearen funtzionarioak Isaiasengana .
PRED:	So Hezekiah 's message came to King Hezekiah 's officials .
GOLD:	After King Hezekiah 's officials delivered the king 's message to Isaiah ,

ID:	560
INPUT:	Honetan azaltzen da nire Aitaren aintza : zuek , nire ikasle izanik , fruitu asko ematean .
PRED:	For I am the glory of my Father and your Father .
GOLD:	When you produce much fruit , you are my true disciples . This brings great glory to my Father .

ID:	561
INPUT:	Judu <unk>
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Message about Assyria
GOLD:	Paul Ministers in Ephesus

ID:	562
INPUT:	Erdian , kopa biribila duzu : eduki dezala beti ardo goxoa ! Zure <unk> inguraturiko <unk> .
PRED:	“ Take a cup of wine and a drink of wine , and you have made a new wine as a new wine .
GOLD:	Your breasts are like two fawns , twin fawns of a gazelle .

ID:	563
INPUT:	Baina Jaunaren eguna lapurra bezala ustekabean etorriko da . Orduan , burrunba handiz desagertuko dira zeruak , munduaren osagaiak suak kiskalita desegingo eta lurra bere egintza guztiekin agerian geldituko da Jainkoaren <unk> .
PRED:	But the day of the Lord will come upon the heavens and the earth , and the heavens will fall into the sky , and the heavens will be cut off from the sky , and the earth will be destroyed .
GOLD:	But the day of the Lord will come as unexpectedly as a thief . Then the heavens will pass away with a terrible noise , and the very elements themselves will disappear in fire , and the earth and everything on it will be found to deserve judgment .

ID:	564
INPUT:	« Bereizi lebitarrak beste israeldarren artetik eta egiezu garbikuntza .
PRED:	“ These are the Levites to purify the Levites and the Levites who are ceremonially clean .
GOLD:	“ Now set the Levites apart from the rest of the people of Israel and make them ceremonially clean .

ID:	565
INPUT:	Isakarren leinuaren lurraldea
PRED:	The Land Given to Simeon
GOLD:	The Land Given to Issachar

ID:	566
INPUT:	Jainkoak Noeri eta beronen semeei esan zien , gainera :
PRED:	When God had finished his sons , he said to Noah ,
GOLD:	Then God told Noah and his sons ,

ID:	567
INPUT:	Gero , Danielen salatzaileak ekartzeko agindu zuen erregeak , eta lehoi-zulora jaurti zituzten beren emazte eta seme-alabekin batera . Eta zulo barrenera heldu baino lehen , lehoiek beren <unk> hartu eta txiki-txiki egin zituzten .
PRED:	Then the king ordered the king to bring them to the king , and the king of the king of Babylon and his children , and the king of the king and his children were trying to kill him .
GOLD:	Then King Darius sent this message to the people of every race and nation and language throughout the world : “ Peace and prosperity to you !

ID:	568
INPUT:	Hesteak eta hankak garbiturik , erre egin zituen beste zatien gainean .
PRED:	Then the internal organs and the internal organs , for you have broken my hands on it .
GOLD:	Then he washed the internal organs and the legs and burned them on the altar along with the rest of the burnt offering .

ID:	569
INPUT:	Badoaz nire egunak , kea bezala , erretzen dauzkat hezurrak , <unk> bezala .
PRED:	But you have rejected me like a lion , and your bones are under your mouth .
GOLD:	My heart is sick , withered like grass , and I have lost my appetite .

ID:	570
INPUT:	Orduan , Jesusek esan zion : — Emakumea , handia da zure fedea ! Gerta bekizu nahi duzuna ! Eta une hartatik sendatua gelditu zitzaion alaba .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to him , “ Your faith has given you very hard . ” And when he was healed , he was healed .
GOLD:	“ Dear woman , ” Jesus said to her , “ your faith is great . Your request is granted . ” And her daughter was instantly healed .

ID:	571
INPUT:	<unk> beteriko pitxer eta kopak eskaini nizkien <unk> , eta edateko erregutu .
PRED:	At that time I took some of the stone and threw them to drink .
GOLD:	I set cups and jugs of wine before them and invited them to have a drink ,

ID:	572
INPUT:	Baina Felipek Jainkoaren erregetza eta Jesu Kristoren berri ona hots egitean , sinetsi egin zioten eta bataioa hartu denek , gizon eta emakume .
PRED:	But Philip 's Kingdom of God and preached the Good News about Christ Jesus , and they believed in Christ .
GOLD:	But now the people believed Philip 's message of Good News concerning the Kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ . As a result , many men and women were baptized .

ID:	573
INPUT:	Hona hemen , babes-hiri izateko hautatu zituztenak : Kedex , <unk> mendialdean , Galilean ; Sikem , Efraimgo mendialdean , eta Kiriat-Arba — hau da , Hebron — , Judako mendialdean .
PRED:	These are the names of the tribe of Ephraim , who lived in the hill country of Ephraim , who lived in the hill country of Ephraim , named after their ancestor country .
GOLD:	The following cities were designated as cities of refuge : Kedesh of Galilee , in the hill country of Naphtali ; Shechem , in the hill country of Ephraim ; and Kiriath-arba ( that is , Hebron ) , in the hill country of Judah .

ID:	574
INPUT:	Gaur , nire ondotik joan ondoren , bi gizon aurkituko dituzu Rakelen hilobi ondoan , Benjaminen mugetan , <unk> . Honela mintzatuko zaizkizu : “ Agertu dira bila zabiltzan astoak ; aita astoez ahaztu eta zuetaz kezkatua dago , bere semea aurkitzeko zer egin ez dakiela ” » . Eta Samuelek jarraitu zuen :
PRED:	That is why the king of Benjamin sent two men to see two men of Benjamin , where there were two of the men of Benjamin and Benjamin . He said , ‘ That 's why I am going to go with you . '
GOLD:	When you leave me today , you will see two men beside Rachel 's tomb at Zelzah , on the border of Benjamin . They will tell you that the donkeys have been found and that your father has stopped worrying about them and is now worried about you . He is asking , ‘ Have you seen my son ? '

ID:	575
INPUT:	eta txiki hauetako bati , nire ikasle delako , ontzixka bat ur <unk> besterik ez bada ere ematen diona , benetan diotsuet ez dela saririk gabe geldituko » .
PRED:	I am one of you who are one of these prophets , one of the prophets , and I will give you some of these prophets . And I tell you the truth , too , will not be able to be saved . ”
GOLD:	And if you give even a cup of cold water to one of the least of my followers , you will surely be rewarded . ”

ID:	576
INPUT:	Orduan , haiek belarriak itxi eta , garrasika , gainera jaurti zitzaizkion <unk> denak batean .
PRED:	Then they grabbed him and threw him out and threw him out and saw that they were terrified .
GOLD:	Then they put their hands over their ears and began shouting . They rushed at him

ID:	577
INPUT:	Baina Abrahamek erantzun zion : “ Moisesi eta profetei entzuten ez <unk> , hildakoren bat <unk> ere , ez dute kasurik egingo ” » .
PRED:	“ But Abraham said to Moses , ‘ This is what the prophets and prophets who hear God 's prophets will be able to kill them . ' ”
GOLD:	“ But Abraham said , ‘ If they wo n't listen to Moses and the prophets , they wo n't be persuaded even if someone rises from the dead . ' ”

ID:	578
INPUT:	Benjaminen leinuaren lurraldea
PRED:	The Land Given to the tribe of Benjamin
GOLD:	The Land Given to Benjamin

ID:	579
INPUT:	Ea , <unk> , eutsi gogor ! Izan gizon eta ez zarete hebrearren menpe egongo , beraiek zuen menpe egon diren bezala . Izan gizon eta ekin guduari ! »
PRED:	Come and kill me , and kill me . You must not be angry with them , and they will not destroy them . For they are all their enemies , and they will turn away from their anger . ”
GOLD:	Fight as never before , Philistines ! If you do n't , we will become the Hebrews ' slaves just as they have been ours ! Stand up like men and fight ! ”

ID:	580
INPUT:	Zuek , ordea , Jaunak hartu eta Egiptotik , burdina urtzeko labetik , atera zaituzte , bere herri eta ondare egiteko , gaur egiaz zareten bezala .
PRED:	But you must turn away from the land of Egypt and turn away from your land , and you are as hard as hard as hard as your special possession .
GOLD:	Remember that the Lord rescued you from the iron-smelting furnace of Egypt in order to make you his very own people and his special possession , which is what you are today .

ID:	581
INPUT:	Zeren , <unk> ahotsez eta Jainkoaren <unk> seinalea emanik , Jauna bera jaitsiko baita zerutik , eta aurrena Kristorekin bat eginik hildakoak piztuko dira ;
PRED:	For when they heard what was happening , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will come from heaven and meet him . And when he comes from the dead , they will rise from the dead .
GOLD:	For the Lord himself will come down from heaven with a commanding shout , with the voice of the archangel , and with the trumpet call of God . First , the believers who have died will rise from their graves .

ID:	582
INPUT:	Eguzkiaren bero izugarriz erre egin ziren gizon-emakumeak ; baina , halere , zigor hauen gain agintea zuen Jainkoaren izena madarikatu zuten , damutu eta Jainkoak arrazoi zuela aitortu beharrean .
PRED:	I have burned them on gold , but all the kingdoms of the earth were given to the Kingdom of God . In fact , the Kingdom of God has spoken !
GOLD:	Everyone was burned by this blast of heat , and they cursed the name of God , who had control over all these plagues . They did not repent of their sins and turn to God and give him glory .

ID:	583
INPUT:	Orduan , bere ikasleei esan zien : « Uzta ugaria da , baina langileak gutxi .
PRED:	Then he said to his disciples , “ There is a good harvest , but the good harvest .
GOLD:	He said to his disciples , “ The harvest is great , but the workers are few .

ID:	584
INPUT:	Behin liburua irakurriz gero , <unk> harri bat eta bota Eufrates ibaira ,
PRED:	One day I will pour out a scroll and threw it into the Euphrates River and the Euphrates River into the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	When you have finished reading the scroll , tie it to a stone and throw it into the Euphrates River .

ID:	585
INPUT:	Morroiak esan zien : — Ez nazazue <unk> , Jaunak nire bidaiari bukaera ona eman <unk> gero . Uztazue neure nagusiagana itzultzen .
PRED:	“ No , ” the Lord said to them , “ I have given you a man that I have given you the name of my master . ”
GOLD:	But he said , “ Do n't delay me . The Lord has made my mission successful ; now send me back so I can return to my master . ”

ID:	586
INPUT:	<unk> eman diot damu dadin , baina ez dio bere <unk> uko egin nahi izan .
PRED:	But if I have given you authority , I will do n't know what they have done .
GOLD:	I gave her time to repent , but she does not want to turn away from her immorality .

ID:	587
INPUT:	Bere erregealdiko hogeita hemeretzigarren urtean oinetan zuen gaitz handi batez <unk> zegoen Asa ; baina gaixoaldian ere ez zuen Jaunarengana jo , <unk> baizik .
PRED:	In the eighteenth year of King Asa 's reign , during the fourth year of King Asa 's reign , he was very angry with an evil power . But when he saw that he was with the Lord 's anger .
GOLD:	In the thirty-ninth year of his reign , Asa developed a serious foot disease . Yet even with the severity of his disease , he did not seek the Lord 's help but turned only to his physicians .

ID:	588
INPUT:	« Benetan diotsuet : Zuek mundu honetan lotua , zeruan ere lotua geldituko da , eta zuek mundu honetan askatua , zeruan ere askatua geldituko da .
PRED:	“ I tell you the truth , the truth will be baptized in heaven and on earth . If you do , it will be in heaven or on earth or on earth or on earth , it will be on earth .
GOLD:	“ I tell you the truth , whatever you forbid on earth will be forbidden in heaven , and whatever you permit on earth will be permitted in heaven .

ID:	589
INPUT:	Izan ere , jakintsua buruargi ; ergela , ordea , ilunpetan dabil . Badakit , hala ere , biek etorkizun bera dutela .
PRED:	For you are wise and wise , but I will come to see you . But when they see what is happening , they will be destroyed , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	For the wise can see where they are going , but fools walk in the dark . ” Yet I saw that the wise and the foolish share the same fate .

ID:	590
INPUT:	<unk> ere sartu ziren , ardi eta gamelu ugari <unk> . Ondoren , Jerusalemera itzuli ziren .
PRED:	At that time they entered the camels , and they came to Jerusalem . Then they returned to Jerusalem , and they returned to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	While they were at Gerar , they attacked all the towns in that area , and terror from the Lord came upon the people there . As a result , a vast amount of plunder was taken from these towns , too .

ID:	591
INPUT:	Batzuek zutitu eta gezurrezko testigantza hau egin zuten Jesusen kontra :
PRED:	Some of them stood up and spoke to Jesus .
GOLD:	Finally , some men stood up and gave this false testimony :

ID:	592
INPUT:	Ekardazue gero zeuen anaia gazteena , eta orduan jakingo dut zelatariak ez , baizik gizon zintzoak zaretela . Ondoren itzuliko dizuet anaia , eta lurralde honetan ibili ahal izango zarete ” » .
PRED:	Then I will give you your brother , and I will know that you are not spies . But if you are not spies , I will return to you , and you will return to this land . ”
GOLD:	But you must bring your youngest brother back to me . Then I will know you are honest men and not spies . Then I will give you back your brother , and you may trade freely in the land . ' ”

ID:	593
INPUT:	Babiloniako Nabukodonosorren erregealdiko hemeretzigarren urtean , bosgarren hilaren hamarrean , Nebuzaradan , Babiloniako erregearen funtzionario eta guardiaburua , etorri zen Jerusalemera .
PRED:	In the eighteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , during the twelfth year of the guard , the captain of Babylon , the guard , and the king of Babylon came to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	On August 17 of that year , which was the nineteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard and an official of the Babylonian king , arrived in Jerusalem .

ID:	594
INPUT:	Beste herrietako jainkoek libratu ote dituzte beren lurraldeak Asiriako erregearen eskutik ?
PRED:	Has the gods of Assyria redeemed the gods of Assyria ?
GOLD:	Have the gods of any other nations ever saved their people from the king of Assyria ?

ID:	595
INPUT:	« Ez egin idolorik , ez irudirik , goian zeruan , behean lurrean nahiz lurpeko uretan <unk> .
PRED:	“ Do not make any god in the sky , or in the sky or in the sky or the sky in the sky .
GOLD:	“ You must not make for yourself an idol of any kind , or an image of anything in the heavens or on the earth or in the sea .

ID:	596
INPUT:	Bost orga tenpluaren eskuinaldean jarri zituen eta beste bostak ezkerraldean ; « Itsaso » zeritzan uraska handia , berriz , tenpluaren eskuinaldean jarri zuen , hego-ekialdera .
PRED:	Then he placed them on the south side of the Temple , and the Sea was placed on the south side of the Sea . The Sea was placed on the south side of the Sea .
GOLD:	He set five water carts on the south side of the Temple and five on the north side . The great bronze basin called the Sea was placed near the southeast corner of the Temple .

ID:	597
INPUT:	nork bere makila jaurti eta suge bihurtu zen . Baina Aaronen makilak irentsi egin zituen jakitun eta <unk> .
PRED:	At that time he threw his staff into his staff and threw them into a rage . But when they saw that they were very wise , they saw that they were furious .
GOLD:	They threw down their staffs , which also became serpents ! But then Aaron 's staff swallowed up their staffs .

ID:	598
INPUT:	Santuen kontra borroka egin eta haiek menderatzen ere utzi zioten ; eta arraza , herri , hizkuntza eta nazio ororen gain agintea eman zitzaion .
PRED:	Instead , the people of Israel turned against us and chose to fight the people of the Gentiles , languages , languages , and other nations .
GOLD:	And the beast was allowed to wage war against God 's holy people and to conquer them . And he was given authority to rule over every tribe and people and language and nation .

ID:	599
INPUT:	35 , 1
PRED:	The Ark of the Covenant
GOLD:	Cities of Refuge

ID:	600
INPUT:	Ez nago jadanik harekin haserre . <unk> eta <unk> <unk> , eraso eta bat-batean erre egingo dut .
PRED:	I am very angry with you , and when I saw that that they were killed , and I will destroy you .
GOLD:	My anger will be gone.If I find briers and thorns growing , I will attack them ; I will burn them up —

ID:	601
INPUT:	Emakume zuhurrak eraiki egiten du etxea , zentzugabeak bere eskuez desegin .
PRED:	A wise woman has built a city ; the wicked destroy them .
GOLD:	A wise woman builds her home , but a foolish woman tears it down with her own hands .

ID:	602
INPUT:	<unk> zortzi zentimetro zabaleko uztai batez , eta egin urrezko ertza uztaiari .
PRED:	At that time they were carrying poles from a Mediterranean Sea and attached it to the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	Decorate it with a 3-inch border all around , and run a gold molding along the border .

ID:	603
INPUT:	Eta hiriko jendeak , zazpigarren egun hartan , ilunabarra baino lehen , esan zion Samsoni : « Zer eztia baino <unk> ? Zer lehoia baino <unk> ? » Samsonek erantzun zien : « Nire <unk> ez bazenute , ez zenuketen inoiz ere asmatuko » .
PRED:	When the people of the city arrived in the city , the sun asked him , “ What happened in the city ? ” “ What did you think I do ? ” But Samson replied , “ Why did n't you realize that I ca n't even know that I am afraid of you ? ”
GOLD:	So before sunset of the seventh day , the men of the town came to Samson with their answer : “ What is sweeter than honey ? What is stronger than a lion ? ” Samson replied , “ If you had n't plowed with my heifer , you would n't have solved my riddle ! ”

ID:	604
INPUT:	Hona hemen ni , mihiari eragin eta <unk> botatzen diharduten profeten kontra .
PRED:	This is the account of my prophets who were able to break out the prophets .
GOLD:	I am against these smooth-tongued prophets who say , ‘ This prophecy is from the Lord ! '

ID:	605
INPUT:	Ni , berriz , zeuen esku <unk> ; egin nirekin ongi eta zuzen iruditzen zaizuena .
PRED:	But if I do whatever you do , I will be able to be sure that you are living in me .
GOLD:	As for me , I am in your hands — do with me as you think best .

ID:	606
INPUT:	honela esaten baita Liburu Santuan zazpigarren egunaz : Zazpigarren egunean atseden hartu zuen Jainkoak berak eginiko lan guztitik .
PRED:	This is what the Scriptures say : “ On the seventh day of the seventh day of God has given his work on the seventh day of God . ”
GOLD:	We know it is ready because of the place in the Scriptures where it mentions the seventh day : “ On the seventh day God rested from all his work . ”

ID:	607
INPUT:	Moabeko erregeak mezulariak bidali zizkion <unk> seme Balaami Eufrates ondoko Petor hirira , <unk> lurraldera , mandatu hau emateko : « Herri bat atera da Egiptotik eta lurralde osoa estali du ; orain gure aurrean kokatua dago .
PRED:	Then the king of Moab sent messengers to Balaam son of Beor to the king of Moab . He sent him to bring him back to the Euphrates River , saying , “ That is why we have thrown into the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	sent messengers to call Balaam son of Beor , who was living in his native land of Pethor near the Euphrates River . His message said : “ Look , a vast horde of people has arrived from Egypt . They cover the face of the earth and are threatening me .

ID:	608
INPUT:	« Legeak agindua du beste hau ere : Bere emaztea uzten duenak eman diezaiola dibortzio-agiria .
PRED:	“ The law of Moses has given this command : If he has taken away his wife , he has given his wife to his wife .
GOLD:	“ You have heard the law that says , ‘ A man can divorce his wife by merely giving her a written notice of divorce . '

ID:	609
INPUT:	Zuek , <unk> , ez dakizue zer adoratzen duzuen ; guk badakigu zer adoratzen dugun , salbamena <unk> baitator .
PRED:	But if you know that you must know that if we have seen , we will know that we will know that we have seen , and when we know that we will know that we have seen .
GOLD:	You Samaritans know very little about the one you worship , while we Jews know all about him , for salvation comes through the Jews .

ID:	610
INPUT:	« Betiko lege izango duzue hau : zazpigarren hilaren hamarrean barau egingo duzue ; ez duzue inolako lanik egingo , ez bertakoek , ez zuen artean bizi diren etorkinek ,
PRED:	“ This is a permanent law for the Festival of Shelters , for you must not fast for the Festival of Shelters . You must not do the same work .
GOLD:	“ On the tenth day of the appointed month in early autumn , you must deny yourselves . Neither native-born Israelites nor foreigners living among you may do any kind of work . This is a permanent law for you .

ID:	611
INPUT:	Orduan , haurraren arrebak esan zion : — Nahi al duzu hebrear inude baten bila joatea , haurra hazteko ?
PRED:	Then the angel said to the boy , “ Why are you trying to kill me ? ”
GOLD:	Then the baby 's sister approached the princess . “ Should I go and find one of the Hebrew women to nurse the baby for you ? ” she asked .

ID:	612
INPUT:	Herriak Pazkoa ospatu
PRED:	The Passover celebration
GOLD:	Celebration of Passover

ID:	613
INPUT:	Tzelofhadek , ordea — Tzelofhad Heferren semea zen , hau Galaadena eta hau Manasesen seme Makirrena — , ez zuen semerik izan , alabak baizik ; alaben izenak Mahla , Noa , Hogla , Milka eta Tirtza ziren .
PRED:	( This is the father of Levi , Adam , Adam , Adam , Levi , son of Manasseh , son of Manasseh , son of Manasseh , son of Manasseh , and his sons were born . )
GOLD:	However , Zelophehad , a descendant of Hepher son of Gilead , son of Makir , son of Manasseh , had no sons . He had only daughters , whose names were Mahlah , Noah , Hoglah , Milcah , and Tirzah .

ID:	614
INPUT:	Gurasoek galdetu zioten : — Ez al da gure ahaideen artean eta gure herrian emakumerik , filistear jentil arrotz horiengana emazte bila joan gabe ? Samsonek ihardetsi zion aitari : — <unk> dut , baina , atsegin . Hartzazu niretzat .
PRED:	His father asked him , “ Is n't we know the Philistines ? ” But the Philistine Philistine Philistine Philistine Philistine Philistine Philistine Philistine Philistine men , but the Philistines have n't come to kill me ? ” But Samson asked him .
GOLD:	His father and mother objected . “ Is n't there even one woman in our tribe or among all the Israelites you could marry ? ” they asked . “ Why must you go to the pagan Philistines to find a wife ? ” But Samson told his father , “ Get her for me ! She looks good to me . ”

ID:	615
INPUT:	Ni neu madarikatua izatea — Kristorengandik aldendua izatea — ere onartuko nuke , baldin eta hori nire odoleko senideen onerako balitz .
PRED:	For if you are guilty of the wicked , I will give you the advice of the godly . If you have been given to my brothers and sisters , they will be my brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	for my people , my Jewish brothers and sisters . I would be willing to be forever cursed — cut off from Christ ! — if that would save them .

ID:	616
INPUT:	Hau ikustean , errukitu egin zitzaion Jauna eta esan zion : « Ez egin negarrik » .
PRED:	When the Lord saw him , he said to him , “ Do n't weep or weep . ”
GOLD:	When the Lord saw her , his heart overflowed with compassion . “ Do n't cry ! ” he said .

ID:	617
INPUT:	<unk> , <unk> , <unk> ,
PRED:	At that time , when they saw that they were filled with power ,
GOLD:	Hazar-gaddah , Heshmon , Beth-pelet ,

ID:	618
INPUT:	Jesu Kristo gure Jaunak berak eta Jainko gure Aitak — maite izan <unk> eta betiereko <unk> eta halako itxaropen zoragarria dohainik eman <unk> —
PRED:	For the Lord Jesus Christ , the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , who loves us and that we have given you a new covenant with all the glory of Christ . ”
GOLD:	Now may our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God our Father , who loved us and by his grace gave us eternal comfort and a wonderful hope ,

ID:	619
INPUT:	Hori izan zen isakartarren ondarea , senitarteka banatua , aipaturiko hiri eta herrixkak barne .
PRED:	The homeland allocated to the clans of the clans of the clans of the tribe of Levi , and their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	The homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Issachar included these towns and their surrounding villages .

ID:	620
INPUT:	<unk> ebaki , <unk> <unk> <unk> hiri <unk> zuen .
PRED:	And when they saw that that great city was very powerful , and when he became very very very powerful .
GOLD:	and plucked off its highest branch.He carried it away to a city filled with merchants.He planted it in a city of traders .

ID:	621
INPUT:	Errespeta beza Jauna lur osoak , ikara bitez haren aurrean munduko biztanle guztiak .
PRED:	May the Lord be with all who fear him , so that all who trust in him .
GOLD:	Let the whole world fear the Lord , and let everyone stand in awe of him .

ID:	622
INPUT:	Hitz haiek aditzen ari zela , Jaunaren espirituak hartu zuen Saul eta amorru bizitan jarri zen .
PRED:	When Saul heard what was happening , the Spirit of the Lord took him away and kept him away .
GOLD:	Then the Spirit of God came powerfully upon Saul , and he became very angry .

ID:	623
INPUT:	Ez eraman prostituzioan ateratako dirurik Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren tenplura botoren bat betetzeko eskaintza gisa , higuingarri baitzaio Jaunari zuen Jainkoari , bai <unk> , bai <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	“ Do not take any of the Temple of the Lord your God , offer a sacrifice to the Temple of the Lord your God . He also brought an offering to the Temple of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Do not charge interest on the loans you make to a fellow Israelite , whether you loan money , or food , or anything else .

ID:	624
INPUT:	Bat-batean , nolako hondamena ! <unk> egin du , ikaragarrizko azkenaz .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you , and that will be destroyed .
GOLD:	In an instant they are destroyed , completely swept away by terrors .

ID:	625
INPUT:	esan zien : — Benetan diotsuet : Berriro haurren antzeko bihurtzen ez bazarete , ez zarete sartuko Jainkoaren erreinuan .
PRED:	“ I tell you the truth , ” he said . “ If you go to the Kingdom of God , you will not enter the Kingdom of God . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ I tell you the truth , unless you turn from your sins and become like little children , you will never get into the Kingdom of Heaven .

ID:	626
INPUT:	Bere senideari gorroto diona , berriz , ilunpetan dago , ilunpetan dabil eta ez daki nora doan , ilunak itsutu egin baitizkio begiak
PRED:	But the one who hates me , but those who hate me will not be able to see the darkness , but they do n't know where they are watching .
GOLD:	But anyone who hates a fellow believer is still living and walking in darkness . Such a person does not know the way to go , having been blinded by the darkness .

ID:	627
INPUT:	<unk> zigorra
PRED:	Judgment against False Prophets
GOLD:	Restoration for Israel

ID:	628
INPUT:	herrialde horretan Noe , Daniel eta Job baleude , nik , Jainko Jaunak , zin dagit neure biziarengatik , ez dutela seme-alabarik ere bizirik aterako . Beraiek bakarrik jarraituko dute bizirik beren zintzotasunagatik .
PRED:	But when the people of the land , Daniel , and the Sovereign Lord says , “ My children will not be their own children , but they will not marry their children .
GOLD:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , even if Noah , Daniel , and Job were there , they would n't be able to save their own sons or daughters . They alone would be saved by their righteousness .

ID:	629
INPUT:	« Ez eman biderik zeuen barrenean <unk> <unk> ; baina ez izan herritarra zentzarazteko beldur ere , harengatik bekaturik egin ez dezazuen .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid to be able to be able to be able to be able to be afraid of you . But when you do n't be afraid to be afraid of sin , you will not be afraid .
GOLD:	“ Do not nurse hatred in your heart for any of your relatives . Confront people directly so you will not be held guilty for their sin .

ID:	630
INPUT:	Zuk , gizaseme , egin <unk> : hartu <unk> eta zoaz erbestera egun-argiz beraien aurrean . <unk> lekutik beste <unk> joango zara beraien aurrean . Agian , orduan ohartuko dira herri errebeldea dela .
PRED:	“ Son of man , ” says the Lord . “ Go down and see that you will see that they will see that they will be very glad when they see , they will be sure they will be sure that they will be sure that they will be afraid . ”
GOLD:	“ So now , son of man , pretend you are being sent into exile . Pack the few items an exile could carry , and leave your home to go somewhere else . Do this right in front of the people so they can see you . For perhaps they will pay attention to this , even though they are such rebels .

ID:	631
INPUT:	hau Jeserena , hau <unk> , hau <unk> , hau Salarena , hau <unk> ,
PRED:	This man was very old when he was very old , who was very very very very old , and when he was very very very very old .
GOLD:	David was the son of Jesse.Jesse was the son of Obed.Obed was the son of Boaz.Boaz was the son of Salmon.Salmon was the son of Nahshon .

ID:	632
INPUT:	Babiloniaren aurkako mezua . <unk> Jainkoak agertu didana : hor dator basamortutik , lurralde <unk> , Negev aldean sortzen <unk> antzera , <unk> traizio eginez , hondatzailea hondamena zabalduz . Egin eraso , <unk> ! <unk> hiria , <unk> ! Jainkoak <unk> ditu aieneak !
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the wilderness of Babylon , and this message came to me from the wilderness of the wilderness . And when the city of Babylon saw that great city was filled with great power .
GOLD:	This message came to me concerning Babylon — the desert by the sea : Disaster is roaring down on you from the desert , like a whirlwind sweeping in from the Negev .

ID:	633
INPUT:	eta Saraik esan zion Abrami : « Begira , Jaunak agor egin nau . Elkar zaitez , bada , nire <unk> . Beharbada , izango dut semerik haren bitartez » . Abramek onartu egin zuen <unk> proposamena ,
PRED:	Then Abram said to Abram , “ Look , I will punish those who fear the Lord , so that I will punish you , and I will punish you . ” So Abram became very angry with them .
GOLD:	So Sarai said to Abram , “ The Lord has prevented me from having children . Go and sleep with my servant . Perhaps I can have children through her . ” And Abram agreed with Sarai 's proposal .

ID:	634
INPUT:	norbaitek nahiz Israel zure herri osoak , bere okerraz eta atsekabeaz oharturik , tenplu honetarantz eskuak luzatuz , edozein otoitz nahiz eskari egiten badizu ,
PRED:	When they realized that the people of Israel have heard their troubles , and when I pray to you ,
GOLD:	and if your people Israel pray about their troubles or sorrow , raising their hands toward this Temple ,

ID:	635
INPUT:	Entzun , arren , herri ergel eta zentzugabea : Badituzue begiak , baina ez duzue ikusten , belarriak ere bai , baina entzuten ez .
PRED:	Listen to me , but fools are wise , but you ca n't see your eyes . But you ca n't see what you do .
GOLD:	Listen , you foolish and senseless people , with eyes that do not seeand ears that do not hear .

ID:	636
INPUT:	Idatz iezaiozu <unk> eliz elkartearen aingeruari : Hona zer dioen lehenak eta azkenak , hila <unk> eta bizira itzuli zenak :
PRED:	I am writing to the angel of the church , the one of the church , the one who has given me the message of the Lord , the God of Babylon , who has been raised from his own name .
GOLD:	“ Write this letter to the angel of the church in Smyrna . This is the message from the one who is the First and the Last , who was dead but is now alive :

ID:	637
INPUT:	Izan ere , Kristoren maitasunak bultzatzen gaitu , jakinik bat denengatik hil dela eta , ondorioz , denak hil direla .
PRED:	For he knew that he was led by the body of Christ , so he died with a few who died .
GOLD:	Either way , Christ 's love controls us . Since we believe that Christ died for all , we also believe that we have all died to our old life .

ID:	638
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Horiek horrela , nola barkatu zuri ? Zure seme-alabek zapuztu egin naute , sasijainkoen izenean egiten dute zin ; nik ase nitueneta haiek adulterio egin dute , <unk> <unk> joanez .
PRED:	The Lord says , “ What do you forgive my children ? Why do you forgive my children , because they have rejected my name ? They have committed by worshiping idols , because they have committed by worshiping idols .
GOLD:	“ How can I pardon you ? For even your children have turned from me.They have sworn by gods that are not gods at all ! I fed my people until they were full.But they thanked me by committing adulteryand lining up at the brothels .

ID:	639
INPUT:	Jaunak berak emango dizue , bada , ezaugarria : hona , andre gaztea haurdun dagoeta semea izango du , eta Emmanuel , hau da , “ Jainkoa gurekin ” , jarriko dio izen .
PRED:	For the Lord will give you a case to you , and he will become pregnant . He will become pregnant and marry a child , and he will give you a son .
GOLD:	All right then , the Lord himself will give you the sign . Look ! The virgin will conceive a child ! She will give birth to a son and will call him Immanuel ( which means ‘ God is with us ' ) .

ID:	640
INPUT:	Hain gogor setiatu zuen , izugarrizko gosetea izan baitzen Samarian ; <unk> bakar batek zilarrezko laurogei txanpon balio zuen , eta kilo erdi <unk> zilarrezko bost txanpon .
PRED:	At that time a famine was attacked by a great famine , a severe famine that had been killed by war against Samaria . There was five silver and silver and gold that had been valued at war .
GOLD:	As a result , there was a great famine in the city . The siege lasted so long that a donkey 's head sold for eighty pieces of silver , and a cup of dove 's dung sold for five pieces of silver .

ID:	641
INPUT:	« Ez biezaio inork herritarrari kalterik egin ; horrela erakutsiko duzue begirune diozuela zeuen Jainkoari . Neu naiz Jauna , zuen Jainkoa .
PRED:	“ Do not forgive your sins , for I am the Lord your God . I am the Lord your God . I am the God .
GOLD:	Show your fear of God by not taking advantage of each other . I am the Lord your God .

ID:	642
INPUT:	Jesus zerura igo
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Matthias Replaces Judas

ID:	643
INPUT:	« Txoriak bezala , dardaraz etorriko dira Egiptotik , usoak bezala , Asiriatik . Beren <unk> ditut bizitzen . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	“ I will shout like an army of Egypt , like an army of Egypt , and they will live in Egypt . I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	Like a flock of birds , they will come from Egypt.Trembling like doves , they will return from Assyria.And I will bring them home again , ” says the Lord .

ID:	644
INPUT:	Nik esan nuen : « Ai , Jauna , nola engainatu <unk> hau eta Jerusalem ! Bakea zenien iragarrieta , ostera , ezpata daukate <unk> » .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you , ” says the Lord . “ O Lord , you who have been angry with me , my sword , and you will know that the Lord has spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Then I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , the people have been deceived by what you said , for you promised peace for Jerusalem.But the sword is held at their throats ! ”

ID:	645
INPUT:	Arranoa <unk> bazina ere , habia izarretan egingo bazenu ere , bota egingo zintuzket handik .
PRED:	If you were in the world , I would be able to send you in the world , you would have driven from among you .
GOLD:	But even if you soar as high as eaglesand build your nest among the stars , I will bring you crashing down , ” says the Lord .

ID:	646
INPUT:	<unk> agindu hau eman zion : « Esau nire anaiak zurekin topo egin eta galdegingo dizunean : “ <unk> zara ? Nora zoaz ? <unk> da aurrean daramazun abere-taldea ? ” ,
PRED:	Then he told him , “ My brothers and sisters , my brothers and sisters , whom are you going to meet with me ? ” And when he demanded , “ You are my brothers and sisters , and you are my lord ? ”
GOLD:	You must reply , ‘ They belong to your servant Jacob , but they are a gift for his master Esau . Look , he is coming right behind us . ' ”

ID:	647
INPUT:	Harria astuna da , harea pisua ; are astunagoa burugabearen zitalkeria .
PRED:	There is no food for a harvest , but it is a fool for a fool .
GOLD:	A stone is heavy and sand is weighty , but the resentment caused by a fool is even heavier .

ID:	648
INPUT:	Gari-sorten Jaia :
PRED:	The Festival of Shelters
GOLD:	The Day of Atonement

ID:	649
INPUT:	Landu iezaiozue lurra heuk , heure seme-alabek eta morroiek ; <unk> uzta hire nagusiaren etxekoen janari izan dadin . Hire nagusiaren biloba Mefi-Boxetek nire mahaian jango dik beti . Tzibak hamabost seme-alaba zituen eta hogei morroi .
PRED:	Now give your servants the earth and your children , your servants , your servants , and your master 's servants will eat some of your master 's servants . He will eat one of your master 's household , and Jonathan 's servants .
GOLD:	You and your sons and servants are to farm the land for him to produce food for your master 's household . But Mephibosheth , your master 's grandson , will eat here at my table . ” ( Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants . )

ID:	650
INPUT:	Antzaldaketa : nekaldi ondoko aintza aurrez agertu
PRED:	The Sign of Jesus
GOLD:	The Transfiguration

ID:	651
INPUT:	Behinola , Salomonen ama <unk> etorri zen Adonias , <unk> semea . Betsabek galdetu zion : — Bake asmotan al zatoz ? Adoniasek erantzun : — Bai , bake asmotan .
PRED:	One day King Solomon came with his mother , and he asked him , “ Will he be able ? ” “ Yes , my lord , my lord ! ” “ Yes , my lord ! ”
GOLD:	One day Adonijah , whose mother was Haggith , came to see Bathsheba , Solomon 's mother . “ Have you come with peaceful intentions ? ” she asked him . “ Yes , ” he said , “ I come in peace .

ID:	652
INPUT:	Presta zaitez , adorerik baduzu , nire galderei erantzuteko .
PRED:	If you have a man , offer them a man for me .
GOLD:	Brace yourself like a man , because I have some questions for you , and you must answer them .

ID:	653
INPUT:	Saulek zerbitzariei : — Bila ezazue , bada , zitara ongi jotzen dakien norbait , eta ekarri niregana .
PRED:	So Saul said to the young men , “ Take a feast on a harp , and bring a harp to me .
GOLD:	“ All right , ” Saul said . “ Find me someone who plays well , and bring him here . ”

ID:	654
INPUT:	Joabek , berriz , utzi zion Abnerren ondoren ibiltzeari eta gizon guztiak bildu zituen . <unk> gizon falta ziren Daviden <unk> , <unk> gainera .
PRED:	Joab left Joab and his men . Then Joab went out to kill him and all the men of David , and they were very very angry with him .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Joab and his men also returned home . When Joab counted his casualties , he discovered that only 19 men were missing in addition to Asahel .

ID:	655
INPUT:	gero , beste guztiei eman nien : Egiptoko errege faraoiari , ministro , buruzagi eta herri guztiari ,
PRED:	I gave him all the other kings of Egypt , king of Egypt , king of Egypt , and all the people of Egypt .
GOLD:	I gave the cup to Pharaoh , king of Egypt , his attendants , his officials , and all his people ,

ID:	656
INPUT:	« Entzun ! Atera zen behin batean ereilea hazia ereitera .
PRED:	“ Listen ! Listen to a farmer ! ” he said .
GOLD:	“ Listen ! A farmer went out to plant some seed .

ID:	657
INPUT:	Noek aldarea eraiki zion Jaunari , eta , kutsatu gabeko abere eta hegazti batzuk harturik , erre-oparitzat eskaini zituen aldarean .
PRED:	So Noah built an altar to the Lord and burned it on the altar of the altar , and he brought them to the altar .
GOLD:	Then Noah built an altar to the Lord , and there he sacrificed as burnt offerings the animals and birds that had been approved for that purpose .

ID:	658
INPUT:	Axdod jende arrotzez beteko da . Honela dio Jaunak : « Horrela ezereztuko <unk> harrokeria ;
PRED:	The Lord says , “ This is what the Lord says : Because of their wickedness , and they will fall on their wickedness .
GOLD:	Foreigners will occupy the city of Ashdod.I will destroy the pride of the Philistines .

ID:	659
INPUT:	Azpil batean burua ekarri eta neskatxari eman zioten , eta honek amari .
PRED:	She brought her head to her , and she gave her a mother .
GOLD:	and his head was brought on a tray and given to the girl , who took it to her mother .

ID:	660
INPUT:	Geziak jaurtiz sakabanatu zituen , tximista eginez ihes eragin .
PRED:	He threw them into a storm , and they fled to the ground .
GOLD:	Then at your command , O Lord , at the blast of your breath , the bottom of the sea could be seen , and the foundations of the earth were laid bare .

ID:	661
INPUT:	horregatik , su emango <unk> hiriari , eta <unk> hiriko jauregiakirentsi egingo ditu » .
PRED:	So I will send down fire on the city , and all the city will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	So I will send down fire on Teman , and the fortresses of Bozrah will be destroyed . ”

ID:	662
INPUT:	<unk> gizona <unk> du , hitz gozoak adore ematen .
PRED:	But when the man saw him , he became very wise .
GOLD:	Worry weighs a person down ; an encouraging word cheers a person up .

ID:	663
INPUT:	<unk> , arerioa datorrela ikustean , adarra jotzen du jendea ohartarazteko .
PRED:	When they saw the noise of the battle , the people of the forest will hear the noise of the battle .
GOLD:	When the watchman sees the enemy coming , he sounds the alarm to warn the people .

ID:	664
INPUT:	Horregatik , toki hari Beer-Xeba <unk> — hau da , « <unk> » — , bertan biek zin egin zutelako .
PRED:	That is why the god of Bethel , which means “ Samaria , ” they said , “ that they are under my own name . ”
GOLD:	Then he named the place Beersheba ( which means “ well of the oath ” ) , because that was where they had sworn the oath .

ID:	665
INPUT:	Berriro jaso nituen begiak eta liburu bat ikusi nuen hegan .
PRED:	I looked up again and saw a voice in the face of the Lord .
GOLD:	I looked up again and saw a scroll flying through the air .

ID:	666
INPUT:	eta hurrengo <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ,
PRED:	And when they saw that they were very sad , and when they saw that they were filled with power .
GOLD:	Nahaliel , and Bamoth .

ID:	667
INPUT:	Abixaik esan zion Davidi : — Jainkoak zeure esku jarri dizu gaur etsaia . Uztazu <unk> batez lurrari josten ; ez dut birritan jo beharrik izango .
PRED:	“ Please let me go with your hand , ” David said . “ Please let me be sure that you have come to kill me , and I will have no more to do . ”
GOLD:	“ God has surely handed your enemy over to you this time ! ” Abishai whispered to David . “ Let me pin him to the ground with one thrust of the spear ; I wo n't need to strike twice ! ”

ID:	668
INPUT:	bertan behera utzi zuen Xiloko egoitza , gizartean bizitzeko eraiki zuen etxola .
PRED:	He took care for each frame , and set it apart for each frame .
GOLD:	Then he abandoned his dwelling at Shiloh , the Tabernacle where he had lived among the people .

ID:	669
INPUT:	Gerra sorraraziko dut zuen aurka , ituna hausteagatik merezi duzuen zigorra emateko ; hirietan babestuko zarete , baina izurria sortuko dut bertan eta etsaien esku eroriko zarete .
PRED:	I will drive out your covenant against you , but I will destroy you . But you will destroy them , but you will attack them , but you will conquer them .
GOLD:	I will send armies against you to carry out the curse of the covenant you have broken . When you run to your towns for safety , I will send a plague to destroy you there , and you will be handed over to your enemies .

ID:	670
INPUT:	Gauza asko ikusi ditu , baina gogoan hartu ez ; zabalik ditu belarriak , baina ezer entzuten ez .
PRED:	He does n't see many things , but he does n't understand .
GOLD:	You see and recognize what is rightbut refuse to act on it.You hear with your ears , but you do n't really listen . ”

ID:	671
INPUT:	Jaunak Baxaren aurka Jehu profetaren bidez esan bezala , Zimrik Baxaren etxe osoa suntsitu zuen , beraz .
PRED:	In that year of King Darius 's reign , just as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	So Zimri destroyed the dynasty of Baasha as the Lord had promised through the prophet Jehu .

ID:	672
INPUT:	Judako erregeek ezarriak zituzten <unk> Judako hirixka eta Jerusalem inguruetako kultu-lekuetan , toki horietan intsentsua erre zezaten ; Josiasek kendu egin zituen halakoak ; baita Baali , eguzki nahiz <unk> nahiz izar-multzo eta izar guztiei intsentsua erretzen zietenak ere .
PRED:	At that time the king of Judah and all the kingdoms of the people of Judah and all the people of Judah had burned incense in the place of Judah . He destroyed all the kingdoms of the earth and the heavens and the sky , though he had thrown down from the heavens and the sky .
GOLD:	He did away with the idolatrous priests , who had been appointed by the previous kings of Judah , for they had offered sacrifices at the pagan shrines throughout Judah and even in the vicinity of Jerusalem . They had also offered sacrifices to Baal , and to the sun , the moon , the constellations , and to all the powers of the heavens .

ID:	673
INPUT:	Hau guztia zuretzat ematen du Araunak , oi errege . Araunak beste hau ere esan zion erregeari : — Izan dezala atsegin zuregan Jaunak , zeure Jainkoak !
PRED:	This is what the king says : “ You must give the king everything you have said , ‘ You must give you the king , and you are the Lord your God ! '
GOLD:	I will give it all to you , Your Majesty , and may the Lord your God accept your sacrifice . ”

ID:	674
INPUT:	Eta <unk> bat <unk> gelditzen bada , huraxe ere suari emango diote , <unk> eta <unk> bezala : moztu eta gero , ondoa besterik ez zaie gelditzen ; baina ondo <unk> santua erneko da berriro .
PRED:	And when I saw that the beast will be able to be able to see that some of the beast , they will see that some of these things , and they will be cut off from war , and they will die .
GOLD:	If even a tenth — a remnant — survive , it will be invaded again and burned.But as a terebinth or oak tree leaves a stump when it is cut down , so Israel 's stump will be a holy seed . ”

ID:	675
INPUT:	« Ai zuek , lege-maisu eta fariseu itxurazaleok ! Profeten hilobiak eraikitzen eta gizon zintzoen hilarriak apaintzen dituzue ,
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law and you teachers of religious law and you who are standing on the gates of the city .
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law and you Pharisees . Hypocrites ! For you build tombs for the prophets your ancestors killed , and you decorate the monuments of the godly people your ancestors destroyed .

ID:	676
INPUT:	Ez itzazue gogor erabil ; horrela erakutsiko duzue begirune diozuela zeuen Jainkoari .
PRED:	Do n't be angry with you , and you will fear God .
GOLD:	Show your fear of God by not treating them harshly .

ID:	677
INPUT:	Aldi luze baten ondoren , hil egin zen Egiptoko erregea . Israeldarrek , bitartean , intziri eta deiadarka ziharduten <unk> . Haiek esklabotzaren <unk> laguntza eske eginiko garrasia <unk> iritsi zen .
PRED:	At that time the king of Egypt died , for the king of Egypt was killed by the army of Egypt . When the people of Egypt heard that the king of Egypt had fled , they came from Egypt .
GOLD:	Years passed , and the king of Egypt died . But the Israelites continued to groan under their burden of slavery . They cried out for help , and their cry rose up to God .

ID:	678
INPUT:	Eskatu Jainkoari , ihes egin beharra neguan edo larunbatez gerta ez dakizuen .
PRED:	When you pray , do n't be afraid , or you will not be afraid or on the Sabbath .
GOLD:	And pray that your flight will not be in winter or on the Sabbath .

ID:	679
INPUT:	<unk> batzuek , ordea , fariseuengana joan eta Jesusek egin zuena kontatu zieten .
PRED:	But when he heard that Jesus had seen , he told them what he had done .
GOLD:	But some went to the Pharisees and told them what Jesus had done .

ID:	680
INPUT:	Israeldar ez ziren hitita , amortar , periztar , hibiar eta jebustarren artetik bizirik gelditu zirenak ,
PRED:	So the people of Israel did not live in the land of the Amorites , Hittites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites .
GOLD:	There were still some people living in the land who were not Israelites , including the Hittites , Amorites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites .

ID:	681
INPUT:	Erregeak , berriro : — Galdegizu noren semea den mutiko hori .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you ? ” the king asked .
GOLD:	“ Well , find out who he is ! ” the king told him .

ID:	682
INPUT:	Gaiztoari , berriz , hau diotso Jainkoak : « Nola aipa ditzakezu nire arauak , nola <unk> hartu nirekiko ituna ,
PRED:	But when the people of Israel heard this : “ How can you break my covenant with the commands of the covenant I had given you to obey my covenant .
GOLD:	But God says to the wicked : “ Why bother reciting my decreesand pretending to obey my covenant ?

ID:	683
INPUT:	Hiru seme zaharrenak Saulekin joanak ziren gudura . Hona gudura joanak ziren hiru semeen izenak : Eliab zaharrena , Abinadab bigarrena eta Xama hirugarrena .
PRED:	These were the clans of Saul 's sons , Benjamin 's sons , were the names of the tribe of Benjamin . Their names were the second son of Ner , the second son of Ner , was the second son of Ner .
GOLD:	Jesse 's three oldest sons — Eliab , Abinadab , and Shimea — had already joined Saul 's army to fight the Philistines .

ID:	684
INPUT:	<unk> gainera erori zaion arropa nahiz larrua uretan garbituko da eta kutsaturik geldituko arratsa arte .
PRED:	When the animal falls on the ground , the priest will be ceremonially unclean until evening , and it will be ceremonially unclean until evening .
GOLD:	Any clothing or leather with semen on it must be washed in water , and it will remain unclean until evening .

ID:	685
INPUT:	Erasto Korinton gelditu zen ; Trofimo gaixorik utzi nuen <unk> .
PRED:	I thought to my father , and I became sick .
GOLD:	Erastus stayed at Corinth , and I left Trophimus sick at Miletus .

ID:	686
INPUT:	Ni Abrahamen , Isaaken eta Jakoben Jainkoa naiz ? Ez da hildakoen Jainkoa , biziena baizik .
PRED:	“ I am the God of Jacob , the God of Jacob , and the God of Jacob is the dead .
GOLD:	‘ I am the God of Abraham , the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob . ' So he is the God of the living , not the dead . ”

ID:	687
INPUT:	Belen eta Netofako gizonak <unk> ;
PRED:	The men of Judea and Baanah .
GOLD:	The people of Bethlehem and Netophah188

ID:	688
INPUT:	Absalomen gudarostea menderatua
PRED:	Absalom 's Religious Reforms
GOLD:	Absalom 's Defeat and Death

ID:	689
INPUT:	Han hornituko zaituztet janariz zeu , zure etxekoak eta zure abere-taldeak . Ez zaizu ezer faltako , beste bost gose-urte gelditzen diren arren » .
PRED:	I will take care of your treasures , your livestock , and your flocks will not be destroyed , but there will no longer be five kings of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	I will take care of you there , for there are still five years of famine ahead of us . Otherwise you , your household , and all your animals will starve . ' ”

ID:	690
INPUT:	Horregatik , senideok , nik ere , Jainkoaren salbamen-asmoa iragartzera joan <unk> , ez nizuen hitz egin giza jakinduriazko hizkera landua erabiliz .
PRED:	Therefore , dear brothers and sisters , my dear brothers and sisters , listen to what I had happened to you , and I would not listen to you .
GOLD:	When I first came to you , dear brothers and sisters , I did n't use lofty words and impressive wisdom to tell you God 's secret plan .

ID:	691
INPUT:	mundu honetan askoz gehiago jasoko du , eta datorren munduan betiko bizia .
PRED:	For this world will bring glory to the world , and the world will receive eternal life .
GOLD:	will be repaid many times over in this life , and will have eternal life in the world to come . ”

ID:	692
INPUT:	Behera begiratu beharko <unk> harroek , makurtu beharko dugiza handikeriak . Jauna bakarrik agertuko dagarai egun hartan .
PRED:	For the Lord will punish them , and he will punish those who fear the Lord 's anger will be punished .
GOLD:	Human pride will be brought down , and human arrogance will be humbled.Only the Lord will be exaltedon that day of judgment .

ID:	693
INPUT:	Jainko arrotz horren laguntzaz erasoko die gotorlekuei . Ohorez beteko ditu jainko hori onartzen dutenak , jende askoren agintari egingo ditu eta lurrak emango dizkie sari .
PRED:	The Lord says , “ Let those who return to the dead , and those who have given him great power . They will give glory to many nations .
GOLD:	Claiming this foreign god 's help , he will attack the strongest fortresses . He will honor those who submit to him , appointing them to positions of authority and dividing the land among them as their reward .

ID:	694
INPUT:	Ez al dakizue Jainkoaren tenplu zaretela eta Jainkoaren Espiritua zuengan bizi dela ?
PRED:	Do n't you realize that you live in the Temple of God .
GOLD:	Do n't you realize that all of you together are the temple of God and that the Spirit of God lives in you ?

ID:	695
INPUT:	<unk> salbamenerako aukeratuak
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Journey to Egypt
GOLD:	Believers Should Stand Firm

ID:	696
INPUT:	Erregea eta beronen jende guztia nekaturik heldu zen Jordanera , eta atseden hartu zuten han .
PRED:	So the king and all the men left the Jordan Valley and camped at the Jordan River .
GOLD:	The king and all who were with him grew weary along the way , so they rested when they reached the Jordan River .

ID:	697
INPUT:	<unk> ( eta Betelen ) ez zen gizon bat ere gelditu israeldarren ondoren joan gabe , eta hiria babesik gabe utzi zuten .
PRED:	At that time the people of Israel had no idea that the people of Israel had not left Bethel and refused to enter the town .
GOLD:	There was not a man left in Ai or Bethel who did not chase after the Israelites , and the town was left wide open .

ID:	698
INPUT:	Izugarria da Jainko biziaren eskuetan erortzea !
PRED:	The godly will be crushed , and the godly will be crushed .
GOLD:	It is a terrible thing to fall into the hands of the living God .

ID:	699
INPUT:	Ondoren , <unk> <unk> gobernatu zuen Israel , hamar urtez .
PRED:	Then when he died , he judged Israel for thirty years .
GOLD:	After Ibzan died , Elon from the tribe of Zebulun judged Israel for ten years .

ID:	700
INPUT:	Jaunaren aurrean , bai baitator lurra <unk> . <unk> gobernatuko du mundua , zuzenbidez herriak .
PRED:	For the earth will be filled with great power , and the earth will be filled with great power .
GOLD:	before the Lord , for he is coming to judge the earth.He will judge the world with justice , and the nations with fairness .

ID:	701
INPUT:	Eta esan zuen gainera : « Nork esango ziokeen Abrahami , Sarak haurrak izango zituela ? Hala ere , bere zahartzaroan , semea eman diot » .
PRED:	Then he said , “ Who will give birth to Abraham ? ” And when she asked him , “ Yes , I will give birth to his son , and I will give birth to his son . ”
GOLD:	Who would have said to Abraham that Sarah would nurse a baby ? Yet I have given Abraham a son in his old age ! ”

ID:	702
INPUT:	Neure buruarengatik dagit zin : <unk> hiria hondamen eta eremu , madarikazio eta iseka-gai bihurtuko da , haren menpeko hiriak hondakin betiereko . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	I have sworn an oath : ‘ This city will become a city of ruins , and the city of ruins will become a city , and the Lord , have spoken ! '
GOLD:	For I have sworn by my own name , ” says the Lord , “ that Bozrah will become an object of horror and a heap of ruins ; it will be mocked and cursed . All its towns and villages will be desolate forever . ”

ID:	703
INPUT:	Orduan , Moisesek esan zion : — Nirekin datorren herri honi , seiehun mila gizon izanik , hilabete osorako haragia emango diozula <unk> ?
PRED:	Then Moses said to him , “ I will give you a man who is a man named me , a man named me . ” So he said , “ I will give you a piece of bread . ”
GOLD:	But Moses responded to the Lord , “ There are 600,000 foot soldiers here with me , and yet you say , ‘ I will give them meat for a whole month ! '

ID:	704
INPUT:	Hara ! Bizi guztiak dira nireak , aitaren bizia nahiz semearena . Bekatu egiten duena , hori hilko da .
PRED:	Look , my father and my father 's life are mine , and my father 's family will die .
GOLD:	For all people are mine to judge — both parents and children alike . And this is my rule : The person who sins is the one who will die .

ID:	705
INPUT:	Hauxe da testigantza : Jainkoak betiko bizia eman digula , eta bere Semearen bidez eman ere .
PRED:	This is the account of God , for he has given us eternal life .
GOLD:	And this is what God has testified : He has given us eternal life , and this life is in his Son .

ID:	706
INPUT:	« Ez dela horrela ? Nork <unk> nau , nork ezereztuko nire hitzak ? »
PRED:	“ Who does n't be ashamed ? Who will be able to destroy my words ? ”
GOLD:	Can anyone claim otherwise ? Who can prove me wrong ? ”

ID:	707
INPUT:	Biharamunean , <unk> Jerusalemera etorria zen jendetza handia , Jesus zetorrela jakitean ,
PRED:	The next day when they arrived at Jerusalem , Jesus went to Jerusalem to Jerusalem ,
GOLD:	The next day , the news that Jesus was on the way to Jerusalem swept through the city . A large crowd of Passover visitors

ID:	708
INPUT:	Seinale eske ari da gizaldi gaizto eta desleial hau , baina ez zaio emango seinalerik , Jonas profetarena besterik » . Eta , haiek bertan utzirik , alde egin zuen .
PRED:	But this generation will be a sign from generation to generation , but the sign of the miraculous sign I will give you a miraculous sign . ”
GOLD:	Only an evil , adulterous generation would demand a miraculous sign , but the only sign I will give them is the sign of the prophet Jonah . ” Then Jesus left them and went away .

ID:	709
INPUT:	Lehenengo egunean bezala azkenekoan batzar sakratua izango duzue . Egun horietan ez duzue lanik egingo , bazkaria prestatzeko ez bada .
PRED:	On the first day you must be a burnt offering for a burnt offering . On that day , it must be a burnt offering for a burnt offering .
GOLD:	On the first day of the festival and again on the seventh day , all the people must observe an official day for holy assembly . No work of any kind may be done on these days except in the preparation of food .

ID:	710
INPUT:	Joseren argibidea egokia zela ikusirik , <unk> esan zion : — Ba , nik neure ametsean hiru saski opil <unk> buru gainean .
PRED:	When he saw Joseph 's body , he saw that he had seen , he told him , “ I was standing on the head of Joseph 's head . ”
GOLD:	When the chief baker saw that Joseph had given the first dream such a positive interpretation , he said to Joseph , “ I had a dream , too . In my dream there were three baskets of white pastries stacked on my head .

ID:	711
INPUT:	eta hauek lekuko harturik , esan zion Efroni : — Entzun iezadazu , arren . Ordaindu egin nahi dizut soroa . Hartzazu dirua eta orduan ehortziko dut neure emaztea .
PRED:	“ Please listen to me , ” he said . “ Please give me this message to me , but I want you to take it back . ” So I 'll take it back .
GOLD:	and he replied to Ephron as everyone listened . “ No , listen to me . I will buy it from you . Let me pay the full price for the field so I can bury my dead there . ”

ID:	712
INPUT:	Jaunak esango du : « Berdindu galtzada , berdindu ; zabaldu bidea , kendu nire <unk> bidetik » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I have seen the path of my people , and they have seen my path . ”
GOLD:	God says , “ Rebuild the road ! Clear away the rocks and stonesso my people can return from captivity . ”

ID:	713
INPUT:	Eliseok berriro Israelgo erregeari : — <unk> ezazu uztaia . Erregeak uztaia tenkatu zuenean , Eliseok erregearen eskuen gainean bereak ezarri
PRED:	Elisha said to the king of Israel , “ Take your hand against the king of Israel . ” When the king of Israel saw his hand , he poured out his hand on the head of the king of Israel .
GOLD:	Elisha told him , “ Put your hand on the bow , ” and Elisha laid his own hands on the king 's hands .

ID:	714
INPUT:	Berekin dituzte beren bi semeak : Ahimaatz , Tzadokena eta Jonatan , <unk> . Hauen bidez jakinarazi entzundako guztia niri .
PRED:	They will serve him , and Jonathan , and Jonathan 's sons were filled with him with all the nobles of Jonathan . He has given me everything he had done .
GOLD:	and they will send their sons Ahimaaz and Jonathan to tell me what is going on . ”

ID:	715
INPUT:	<unk> hegoaldeari , Juda eta <unk> <unk> eraso genien , eta Tziklagi su eman .
PRED:	At that time the armies of Judah , and the army of Judah became very angry with fire .
GOLD:	We were on our way back from raiding the Kerethites in the Negev , the territory of Judah , and the land of Caleb , and we had just burned Ziklag . ”

ID:	716
INPUT:	Benjaminen leinua berpiztu
PRED:	The Tribe of the tribe of Benjamin
GOLD:	Israel Provides Wives for Benjamin

ID:	717
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Harizko musika-tresnaz . Salmoa . Kanta .
PRED:	Listen to my prayer , O God , for he is a shield .
GOLD:	May God be merciful and bless us.May his face smile with favor on us.Interlude

ID:	718
INPUT:	Eta honetaz ziur nagoelarik , badakit gelditu egingo naizela eta zuekin guztiokin jarraituko oraindik , zuen sinesmenaren <unk> eta <unk> .
PRED:	I know that I am going to see that I am going to be with you , so that I will be with you . And when I know that I am the faith that the faith of God .
GOLD:	Knowing this , I am convinced that I will remain alive so I can continue to help all of you grow and experience the joy of your faith .

ID:	719
INPUT:	Lau piztitzar horiek munduan sortuko diren lau erreinu dira .
PRED:	There will be four kingdoms of the earth will be four kingdoms .
GOLD:	“ These four huge beasts represent four kingdoms that will arise from the earth .

ID:	720
INPUT:	Bete bedi arretaz zeruetako Jainkoak bere etxeari buruz agintzen duen guztia , erregearen eta beronen semeen aurka haserre ez dadin .
PRED:	May God be careful to obey the throne of heaven and the king of heaven and his family will be angry with his own sons and his sons .
GOLD:	Be careful to provide whatever the God of heaven demands for his Temple , for why should we risk bringing God 's anger against the realm of the king and his sons ?

ID:	721
INPUT:	Goizean goiz , mahastietara joango gara , ernamuinak irekitzen <unk> diren , granadondoak <unk> dauden ikustera . Hantxe emango dizut neure <unk> .
PRED:	Before the next morning we will find out a little while the time they have come to see , and I will give you a little while I have seen , and I will give you a new moon celebrations , and I will give you victory over my name .
GOLD:	There the mandrakes give off their fragrance , and the finest fruits are at our door , new delights as well as old , which I have saved for you , my lover .

ID:	722
INPUT:	Orduan , galdetu zion erregeak Danieli , Beltxatzar ere deituari : — Egia al da ametsa argitu eta esanahia azalduko <unk> ?
PRED:	Then the king asked him , “ There is a dream that the king of the dream , how can I tell you the dream ? ”
GOLD:	The king said to Daniel ( also known as Belteshazzar ) , “ Is this true ? Can you tell me what my dream was and what it means ? ”

ID:	723
INPUT:	Jaunaren zerbitzaria
PRED:	The
GOLD:	The

ID:	724
INPUT:	Joan zitzaizkion Jesusi bere ama eta anai-arrebak , baina jendearen jendez ezin iritsi ziren <unk> .
PRED:	Jesus and his brothers were born and sisters , but they were afraid of his brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	Then Jesus ' mother and brothers came to see him , but they could n't get to him because of the crowd .

ID:	725
INPUT:	Ikusi zuen Jesusek Natanael zetorkiola , eta esan zuen : — Hona benetako israeldar bat , faltsukeriarik gabea .
PRED:	Jesus saw them and said to them , “ Look , the people of Israel ! The people of Israel have heard this ! ”
GOLD:	As they approached , Jesus said , “ Now here is a genuine son of Israel — a man of complete integrity . ”

ID:	726
INPUT:	Eta gu gara hark juduen lurralde osoan eta Jerusalemen egindako guztien lekuko . Jesus hau egur batetik zintzilik hil zuten ;
PRED:	And we know that the Jews of the Jews and the Jews of the Jews in Jerusalem , who killed Jesus in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	“ And we apostles are witnesses of all he did throughout Judea and in Jerusalem . They put him to death by hanging him on a cross ,

ID:	727
INPUT:	Dei egin dizudanean , hurbil izan zaitut ; « Ez beldurtu ! » , esan didazu .
PRED:	Come , O Lord , for I am afraid of you ! ”
GOLD:	Yes , you came when I called ; you told me , “ Do not fear . ”

ID:	728
INPUT:	Entzutean , poztu egin ziren haiek eta dirua agindu zioten . Jesus haien eskuetara emateko egokiera bila hasi zen Judas .
PRED:	When they arrived at the city , they sent Jesus to find him and asked him to betray Jesus .
GOLD:	They were delighted when they heard why he had come , and they promised to give him money . So he began looking for an opportunity to betray Jesus .

ID:	729
INPUT:	« Jordan ibaia igaro eta Jerikora heldu zineten . Jerikoko bizilagunek gerra egin zizueten , baita amortarrek , <unk> , kanaandarrek , <unk> , <unk> , hibiarrek eta <unk> ere ; nik , ordea , eskuetara eman nizkizuen .
PRED:	“ When you crossed the Jordan River , you attacked the people of Jericho and the people of the Jordan River , you know that the Lord has given me victory over the Ammonites . But when they were afraid of them , I will kill you . ”
GOLD:	“ When you crossed the Jordan River and came to Jericho , the men of Jericho fought against you , as did the Amorites , the Perizzites , the Canaanites , the Hittites , the Girgashites , the Hivites , and the Jebusites . But I gave you victory over them .

ID:	730
INPUT:	Orduan , Pedro biraoka eta <unk> hasi zen : — Ez dut ezagutzen zuek diozuen hori .
PRED:	Then Peter and the leading priests began to know , “ I do n't know what you do . ”
GOLD:	Peter swore , “ A curse on me if I 'm lying — I do n't know this man you 're talking about ! ”

ID:	731
INPUT:	Davidek gobernariak ezarri zizkien Damaskoko siriarrei , eta haren menpeko eta <unk> egin ziren siriarrak . Jaunak garaipena eman zion Davidi beronen guda-irtenaldi orotan .
PRED:	David took the army of Damascus and the army of Damascus , along with the army of Damascus , and the Ammonites , and the Lord had given him victory over to David .
GOLD:	Then he placed several army garrisons in Damascus , the Aramean capital , and the Arameans became David 's subjects and paid him tribute money . So the Lord made David victorious wherever he went .

ID:	732
INPUT:	<unk> dut <unk> etsaia , eta lur <unk> eta <unk> jaurtiko : <unk> ekialdeko <unk> , <unk> <unk> . Haren <unk> zabalduko da , <unk> <unk> beteko du . Gauza handiak egiten <unk> ustez ! »
PRED:	I will know that the enemy will be very powerful , and when I saw that that that they were filled with power , and they will know that they will know that the power of the sea , and when they will know that they will know that they will know that they will know that they will know that they will know that they will know that they will be very weak and kill him . ”
GOLD:	I will drive away these armies from the north.I will send them into the parched wastelands.Those in the front will be driven into the Dead Sea , and those at the rear into the Mediterranean.The stench of their rotting bodies will rise over the land . ” Surely the Lord has done great things !

ID:	733
INPUT:	eta nirekin diren senide guztiek <unk> eliz <unk> idazten dizuegu .
PRED:	And I am writing to be with my dear brothers and sisters , who are with me .
GOLD:	All the brothers and sisters here join me in sending this letter to the churches of Galatia .

ID:	734
INPUT:	<unk> gabe , herria behera ; aholkulari asko bada , orduan aurrera .
PRED:	But when they were eager to see , they will be able to get some of the people .
GOLD:	Without wise leadership , a nation falls ; there is safety in having many advisers .

ID:	735
INPUT:	Orduan , Samsonek esan zion eskutik zeraman <unk> : — Eraman nazak <unk> eusten dioten zutabeak <unk> , haietan <unk> nadin .
PRED:	Samson said to him , “ As soon as I saw my hand , I will give you victory over all the kingdoms of the earth . ”
GOLD:	Samson said to the young servant who was leading him by the hand , “ Place my hands against the pillars that hold up the temple . I want to rest against them . ”

ID:	736
INPUT:	<unk> eman dizuet , zuek ere , nik zuekin bezalaxe , joka dezazuen .
PRED:	I have given you very powerful , just as I am giving you as your own .
GOLD:	I have given you an example to follow . Do as I have done to you .

ID:	737
INPUT:	Bazen <unk> asko gu bildurik geunden goiko gela hartan .
PRED:	There was many of us in the inner room of the Temple .
GOLD:	The upstairs room where we met was lighted with many flickering lamps .

ID:	738
INPUT:	Elizaren aurka <unk>
PRED:	A Message about the church
GOLD:	Persecution Scatters the Believers

ID:	739
INPUT:	Orduan , irakasten hasi zitzaien , Gizonaren Semeak asko sufritu behar zuela ; zahar , apaizburu eta lege-maisuek gaitzetsi egingo zutela eta hil ; eta hiru egunen buruan piztu egingo zela .
PRED:	Then Jesus began to teach the Son of Man that the Son of Man was revealed to the Son of Man , and the Son of Man will be raised from the dead .
GOLD:	Then Jesus began to tell them that the Son of Man must suffer many terrible things and be rejected by the elders , the leading priests , and the teachers of religious law . He would be killed , but three days later he would rise from the dead .

ID:	740
INPUT:	Begira , Jainkoak bere jakinduria agertu duenean , gizakiak ez dira gauza izan beren jakinduriaz Jainkoa ezagutzeko ; horregatik , Jainkoak , guk hots egiten dugun <unk> bitartez salbatu nahi izan ditu fededunak .
PRED:	Therefore , God has revealed his wisdom to all the wisdom of wisdom , and God has given them authority to those who fear God . That is why God has given us authority to those who fear him .
GOLD:	Since God in his wisdom saw to it that the world would never know him through human wisdom , he has used our foolish preaching to save those who believe .

ID:	741
INPUT:	Paulo , <unk> eta <unk> aurrean
PRED:	When Paul and Silas were baptized before Paul ,
GOLD:	Paul Speaks to Agrippa

ID:	742
INPUT:	Gainera , aker bat barkamen-oparitarako , zeuen bekatuen barkamen-ohikunea egiteko .
PRED:	You must sacrifice one male goat as a sin offering for the Lord .
GOLD:	In addition , you must sacrifice a male goat as a sin offering to purify yourselves and make yourselves right with the Lord .

ID:	743
INPUT:	<unk> dirutik zerbait beretzat gorde zuen Ananiasek , bere emaztearekin ados , eta gainerakoa apostoluen esku jarri .
PRED:	At that time they were sick and put back to their wives . Then he put them on their behalf .
GOLD:	He brought part of the money to the apostles , claiming it was the full amount . With his wife 's consent , he kept the rest .

ID:	744
INPUT:	<unk> itxaropena
PRED:	Samaria 's Message about Assyria
GOLD:	Living as Children of God

ID:	745
INPUT:	eta esanez : « Santutegia desegin eta hiru egunetan eraikitzen omen <unk> horrek , Jainkoaren Semea baldin bahaiz , salba ezak heure burua ! Jaits hadi gurutzetik ! »
PRED:	Then he said , “ This is what the Lord says : If you know that the Son of God and the Son of God , then let the Son of God save you from the cross . ”
GOLD:	“ Look at you now ! ” they yelled at him . “ You said you were going to destroy the Temple and rebuild it in three days . Well then , if you are the Son of God , save yourself and come down from the cross ! ”

ID:	746
INPUT:	Esate baterako , etsaiarekin auzitegira zoazela , saia zaitez bidean harekin <unk> aurkitzen ; bestela , epaileagana eramango zaitu eta epaileak ertzainaren eskuetan jarriko eta <unk> kartzelara botako .
PRED:	For if you are wise to take your case to the court , do n't let you see how to be sure that you will be able to kill you , and if you will be able to be able to take away , and he will destroy you and he will destroy you .
GOLD:	When you are on the way to court with your accuser , try to settle the matter before you get there . Otherwise , your accuser may drag you before the judge , who will hand you over to an officer , who will throw you into prison .

ID:	747
INPUT:	hona zer diodan nik , Jaunak , Israelen Jainko honek : Hondamen izugarria bidaliko dut Jerusalem eta Judaren kontra ; entzun dezaten guztiei bi belarriek durundi egingo diete .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will send you to the people of Judah and Judah . I will send them back to all the people of Judah and Judah .
GOLD:	So this is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : I will bring such disaster on Jerusalem and Judah that the ears of those who hear about it will tingle with horror .

ID:	748
INPUT:	Jesus , hurbildurik , honela mintzatu zitzaien : « Ahalmen osoa eman dit Jainkoak <unk> .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to them , “ You know that God has given me the one who had given me . ”
GOLD:	Jesus came and told his disciples , “ I have been given all authority in heaven and on earth .

ID:	749
INPUT:	Amets hau egin zuen : <unk> bat ikusi zuen , beheko ertza lurrean eta goikoa zeruan zituena , eta Jainkoaren aingeruak <unk> gora eta behera .
PRED:	At that time he saw a dream , and when he saw that I am sending you into the sky , the angels of God , and when the angels of heaven saw that the angels of God and the angels of God .
GOLD:	As he slept , he dreamed of a stairway that reached from the earth up to heaven . And he saw the angels of God going up and down the stairway .

ID:	750
INPUT:	Eraso zioten Judari , sartu eta jauregian aurkitutako ondasun guztiak eraman zituzten , baita erregearen seme-alaba eta emazteak ere . Ez zioten utzi seme txikiena baizik , Joakaz .
PRED:	So the king of Judah went into the palace and took all the king 's wives , and all the other sons of Judah . There was no longer the king 's wife .
GOLD:	They marched against Judah , broke down its defenses , and carried away everything of value in the royal palace , including the king 's sons and his wives . Only his youngest son , Ahaziah , was spared .

ID:	751
INPUT:	Sedekias erregeak giltzapean sartua zuen , hark iragarritako mezu hau zela eta : « Hau dio Jaunak : Jerusalem Babiloniako erregearen esku utziko dut eta honek konkistatu egingo du .
PRED:	Then King Zedekiah of Babylon said to him , “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will destroy the king of Babylon and the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	King Zedekiah had put him there , asking why he kept giving this prophecy : “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ I am about to hand this city over to the king of Babylon , and he will take it .

ID:	752
INPUT:	Ez ote naiz libre ? Ez ote naiz apostolu ? Ez ote dut ikusi Jesus gure Jauna ? Ez ote da nire lanaren fruitu zuek kristau izatea ?
PRED:	Do n't I ever see the apostle of this world ? Should I not see the Lord our God , for I do n't have a good life ?
GOLD:	Am I not as free as anyone else ? Am I not an apostle ? Have n't I seen Jesus our Lord with my own eyes ? Is n't it because of my work that you belong to the Lord ?

ID:	753
INPUT:	<unk> ari zaio Jauna hiriari — <unk> <unk> begirune izatea — : « Israelgo leinu eta herriko batzar , entzun !
PRED:	At that time the Lord will punish those who fear the people of Israel . “ What sorrow awaits those who hear the name of the tribes of Israel ! ”
GOLD:	Fear the Lord if you are wise ! His voice calls to everyone in Jerusalem : “ The armies of destruction are coming ; the Lord is sending them .

ID:	754
INPUT:	Gizonezko nahiz emakumezko , bota ditzatela kanpalekutik . Horrela ez dute kanpalekua kutsatuko , han bizi bainaiz ni beraien artean » .
PRED:	They must not drive out the men of the camp , and they must not leave them . I am there among the people of the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	This command applies to men and women alike . Remove them so they will not defile the camp in which I live among them . ”

ID:	755
INPUT:	Hiri gotortu eta hiri nagusi guztiak xehatuko dituzue , fruta-arbolak ebakiko , iturburu guztiak itxiko eta lur landuak hondatuko harriz betez .
PRED:	You must also make the towns of the Euphrates River , and you will make everything you need . You will be destroyed , and you will be destroyed , and you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	You will conquer the best of their towns , even the fortified ones . You will cut down all their good trees , stop up all their springs , and ruin all their good land with stones . ”

ID:	756
INPUT:	Eta badakit gizon hori <unk> eraman zutela — gorputzarekin ala gorputzik gabe ez dakit , Jainkoak daki — , eta han , gizakiak ezin esan <unk> hitzak entzun zituela .
PRED:	And when I saw that my body was in my body , my body would n't know that God 's body , I know that God would n't know how much they were ? ”
GOLD:	Yes , only God knows whether I was in my body or outside my body . But I do know

ID:	757
INPUT:	Orduan , gizaki <unk> gelditzen da , ulertezinik ; zilargina idoloez lotsaturik , gezurrezkoak baitira , arnasarik gabeko irudi ,
PRED:	And when they have seen their idols , they have broken their idols , and their idols are not crushed by their idols .
GOLD:	The whole human race is foolish and has no knowledge ! The craftsmen are disgraced by the idols they make , for their carefully shaped works are a fraud.These idols have no breath or power .

ID:	758
INPUT:	Beste batek , berriz , esan zion : — <unk> dizut , Jauna , baina uztazu aurrena etxekoei agur egiten .
PRED:	Then one of them said to him , “ Lord , my lord , please give me your needs . ”
GOLD:	Another said , “ Yes , Lord , I will follow you , but first let me say good-bye to my family . ”

ID:	759
INPUT:	Azkenik , mendebaldeko harresiak ere luzera bera eta beste hiru ate izango ditu : Gad , Axer eta <unk> .
PRED:	“ In addition , the north will also be rebuilt , and the south will be called to the south side of the north , and the north will be destroyed .
GOLD:	And on the west wall , also 11/2 miles long , the gates will be named for Gad , Asher , and Naphtali .

ID:	760
INPUT:	<unk> , ardo berriaren eta olioaren hamarrenak , abere handi nahiz txikien <unk> batera , Jaunak zuen Jainkoak bizileku eta kultu-lekutzat aukeratuko duen tokira eramango dituzue , eta han otordu sakratua egingo Jaunaren aurrean . Horrela , zeuen bizitza osoan Jaunari begirune izaten ikasiko duzue .
PRED:	At that time the new moon celebrations , the new moon , the new moon , and the Lord your God will give you a new wine to the Lord your God , and you will worship the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Bring this tithe to the designated place of worship — the place the Lord your God chooses for his name to be honored — and eat it there in his presence . This applies to your tithes of grain , new wine , olive oil , and the firstborn males of your flocks and herds . Doing this will teach you always to fear the Lord your God .

ID:	761
INPUT:	Berak libratuko du laguntza eske oihuka ari den behartsua , nork <unk> ez duen dohakabea .
PRED:	He has led the poor from the poor ; they have heard what they say , ‘ What sorrow awaits those who do n't know ?
GOLD:	He will rescue the poor when they cry to him ; he will help the oppressed , who have no one to defend them .

ID:	762
INPUT:	Nebuzaradan guardiaburuak hartu eta Riblara eraman zituen , Babiloniako erregeagana ,
PRED:	Then Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , took the king of Babylon and took them to the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , took them all to the king of Babylon at Riblah .

ID:	763
INPUT:	<unk> zara : nork iraun zutik zure aurrean , zure haserrealdian ?
PRED:	How can you see how can you see ? Your men were in the sight of your Temple ?
GOLD:	From heaven you sentenced your enemies ; the earth trembled and stood silent before you .

ID:	764
INPUT:	Mardokeok idatziz eman zituen gauza hauek eta Asuero erregearen <unk> eskualde orotako judu guztiei gutunak igorri zizkien , nola urrutikoei hala hurbilekoei .
PRED:	Mordecai had given this message to the king of the empire to all the Jews who had been sent by the provinces of the Jews . He sent this message to all the Jews , and he sent them to all of the Jews .
GOLD:	Mordecai recorded these events and sent letters to the Jews near and far , throughout all the provinces of King Xerxes ,

ID:	765
INPUT:	Ez gaitezela izan <unk> , elkarren lehian eta elkarren <unk> ibiliz .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid , for they were trying to kill us .
GOLD:	Let us not become conceited , or provoke one another , or be jealous of one another .

ID:	766
INPUT:	Jokatu zeure zerbitzari honekin , zure maitasunari dagokionez : irakatsi niri zeure arauak !
PRED:	Love me with your unfailing love ; teach me your decrees .
GOLD:	I am your servant ; deal with me in unfailing love , and teach me your decrees .

ID:	767
INPUT:	Horrela burutu zuen Salomonek bere asmoa , lehen harria ezarri zutenetik Jaunaren etxea bukatu arte . Erabat burutua zen , beraz , tenplua .
PRED:	So Solomon kept the first time for the first year of the Lord 's Temple until the first year of the Lord had built for the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	So Solomon made sure that all the work related to building the Temple of the Lord was carried out , from the day its foundation was laid to the day of its completion .

ID:	768
INPUT:	baina Hebron inguruko lautada eta herrixkak emanak zizkioten jabetzan Jefuneren seme Kalebi ;
PRED:	But the tribe of Naphtali were allotted to the tribe of Asher , and they received the territory of Canaan .
GOLD:	But the open fields beyond the town and the surrounding villages were given to Caleb son of Jephunneh as his possession .

ID:	769
INPUT:	Hurrengo urtean , erregeek guduari ekin ohi dioten garaian , Davidek Joab bidali zuen bere ofizialekin eta Israelgo gudari guztiekin . Amondarrak hondatu zituzten eta Raba hiria inguratu . Bitartean , David Jerusalemen gelditu zen .
PRED:	At that time the kings of Israel had come , and the king of Israel sent Joab to attack the city of Israel . When Joab heard that the army of Israel was attacked , David and the army of Israel attacked the army of Israel .
GOLD:	In the spring of the year , when kings normally go out to war , David sent Joab and the Israelite army to fight the Ammonites . They destroyed the Ammonite army and laid siege to the city of Rabbah . However , David stayed behind in Jerusalem .

ID:	770
INPUT:	Jesusek gogor eraso zion : — Isil hadi eta irten horrengandik ! Deabruak jendartean lurrera bota zuen gizona , baina batere kalterik egin gabe atera zen harengandik .
PRED:	But Jesus said to him , “ Get out of your clothes , and you have come out to the ground , but you have not heard it . ” But when he came out to the ground , he left the ground .
GOLD:	But Jesus reprimanded him . “ Be quiet ! Come out of the man , ” he ordered . At that , the demon threw the man to the floor as the crowd watched ; then it came out of him without hurting him further .

ID:	771
INPUT:	Ken iezazkiozu jantziak , hartu zerbait bahituran , arrotz ezezagunaren fidatzaile bihurtu denari .
PRED:	Do n't let a stranger as security for a friend 's friend .
GOLD:	Get security from someone who guarantees a stranger 's debt.Get a deposit if he does it for foreigners .

ID:	772
INPUT:	Nik egingo ditudan zeru-lur <unk> iraungo duten bezala , tinko iraungo <unk> ondorengotzak eta izenak ere . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	And I will see that the earth will be filled with the heavens and honor of my name , as the Lord says , “ This is what the Lord says . ”
GOLD:	“ As surely as my new heavens and earth will remain , so will you always be my people , with a name that will never disappear , ” says the Lord .

ID:	773
INPUT:	Lebitarrek eta Judako guztiek zehatz bete zuten Joiada apaizak agindua . <unk> larunbatez hasten nahiz bukatzen zuten gizonak denak batera hartu zituzten ; izan ere , Joiadak ez zien alde egiteko baimenik eman txanda bukatzen zutenei .
PRED:	So all the people of Judah and the people of Judah followed the Lord 's command , and the men of Judah had given them to the Sabbath . So they were allowed to pay for their sin , because they had not been circumcised .
GOLD:	So the Levites and all the people of Judah did everything as Jehoiada the priest ordered . The commanders took charge of the men reporting for duty that Sabbath , as well as those who were going off duty . Jehoiada the priest did not let anyone go home after their shift ended .

ID:	774
INPUT:	Amondarren aurkako mezua
PRED:	A Message for the Priests
GOLD:	A Message for Moab

ID:	775
INPUT:	Jaunaren etxeko <unk> arduradunei eman zieten dirua ; hauek , berriz , tenplua konpontzen eta berritzen ari ziren langileei .
PRED:	Then the leaders of the Lord gave this money to the Temple of the Lord , and they were given to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	He entrusted the money to the men assigned to supervise the restoration of the Lord 's Temple . Then they paid the workers who did the repairs and renovation of the Temple .

ID:	776
INPUT:	Behin batean , etxean sartu beharra izan zuen Josek , lanarengatik . Ez zegoen une hartan beste <unk> barruan .
PRED:	One day Joseph went into a house , and he could n't mourn for him , for he was very sick at that time .
GOLD:	One day , however , no one else was around when he went in to do his work .

ID:	777
INPUT:	Zoazte lanera ! Ez zaizue lastorik emango , baina <unk> bera egin beharko duzue .
PRED:	Go back to work , and you will have no more . But when you have done , you will have the same thing you have done .
GOLD:	Now get back to work ! No straw will be given to you , but you must still produce the full quota of bricks . ”

ID:	778
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Hona hemen nire zerbitzaria , nik eusten diodana , nik hautatua , atsegin dudana . Beronen gain ezarri dutneure espiritua : nazioei justizia ekarriko die .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : The servant of my servant , the servant of my servant , says : I will give you victory over my fury .
GOLD:	“ Look at my servant , whom I strengthen.He is my chosen one , who pleases me.I have put my Spirit upon him.He will bring justice to the nations .

ID:	779
INPUT:	JAUNAREN HITZALDIAK . <unk> <unk> ( 38 , 1 — 42 , 6 )
PRED:	Then I will punish you with an oath , and I will punish you as an apostle to Assyria .
GOLD:	The

ID:	780
INPUT:	Aaronen ondorengo apaizei , beraz , guztira hamahiru hiri eman zizkieten , eta beraien herri-lurrak .
PRED:	So the priests , Levites , named after their pasturelands , named after their pasturelands were given to the priests .
GOLD:	So in all , thirteen towns with their pasturelands were given to the priests , the descendants of Aaron .

ID:	781
INPUT:	Elbarria larunbatez sendatua
PRED:	Jesus Heals on the Sabbath
GOLD:	Jesus , God 's Chosen Servant

ID:	782
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak esan zion Moisesi : « Zergatik ari zatzaizkit oihuka ? Agindu israeldarrei egiteko aurrera .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Why are you doing this ? Why do you want you to stand before you ?
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Why are you crying out to me ? Tell the people to get moving !

ID:	783
INPUT:	honela hitz egin zuen : « Israeldarrok , begira ongi zer egitera zoazten gizon hauekin .
PRED:	“ Listen to the people of Israel , ” he said , “ for they are doing what you are doing .
GOLD:	Then he said to his colleagues , “ Men of Israel , take care what you are planning to do to these men !

ID:	784
INPUT:	Kutxa Bet-Xemexen
PRED:	The Ark of the Covenant
GOLD:	The Ark Moved to Kiriath-Jearim

ID:	785
INPUT:	( 2 Kro 23 , 1-21 )
PRED:	Jesus Heals in Jerusalem
GOLD:	Jehoiada 's Religious Reforms

ID:	786
INPUT:	Jende xehea zapaltzen duenak irain egiten dio Egileari , <unk> errukitzen denak ohore ematen .
PRED:	Those who are poor , but those who are saved by the poor , who are those who trust in the name of God .
GOLD:	Those who oppress the poor insult their Maker , but helping the poor honors him .

ID:	787
INPUT:	Begira beleei : ez dute ereiten , ez uztarik biltzen ; ez dute <unk> , ez <unk> ; hala ere , Jainkoak janaritzen ditu . Zenbat gehiago ez ote duzue balio zuek hegaztiek baino !
PRED:	Look , the people of the forest have no food in the fields , and those who do n't know what they have done . But when they do n't know that you do .
GOLD:	Look at the ravens . They do n't plant or harvest or store food in barns , for God feeds them . And you are far more valuable to him than any birds !

ID:	788
INPUT:	Barakek <unk> deitu zuen Zabulon eta Neftaliren leinuetako jendea . Hamar mila gizon joan zitzaizkion ondoren ; Debora ere berarekin zen .
PRED:	Then Abram called Hebron , and the people of Naphtali came to be a leader of the tribes of Reuben , and the leaders of the tribes of Naphtali .
GOLD:	At Kedesh , Barak called together the tribes of Zebulun and Naphtali , and 10,000 warriors went up with him . Deborah also went with him .

ID:	789
INPUT:	Eta zenbatez ez da gehiago gizakia ardia baino ! <unk> da , beraz , larunbatez on egitea .
PRED:	And if they do not know how much if they do , they will be able to eat the Sabbath .
GOLD:	And how much more valuable is a person than a sheep ! Yes , the law permits a person to do good on the Sabbath . ”

ID:	790
INPUT:	Agurra
PRED:	Greetings from Paul
GOLD:	Greetings from James

ID:	791
INPUT:	Gizaseme , entzun arretaz esaten dizudan guztia eta sartu buruan .
PRED:	“ Son of man , listen to me , and do everything I have done .
GOLD:	Then he added , “ Son of man , let all my words sink deep into your own heart first . Listen to them carefully for yourself .

ID:	792
INPUT:	izan ere , honela dio berak : « Nork jan dezake , nor goza daiteke nik jakin gabe ? »
PRED:	For he says , “ How can we eat ? How can we eat ? ”
GOLD:	For who can eat or enjoy anything apart from him ?

ID:	793
INPUT:	eta 16 . 000 pertsona .
PRED:	and the young women of the young women .
GOLD:	and 16,000 virgin girls .

ID:	794
INPUT:	Hamaika larrialdi eta zoritxar pasarazi didazu . Baina berriro biziaraziko nauzu , Herio Leize sakonetik altxatuko .
PRED:	I will search for you , but I will give you victory over you .
GOLD:	You have allowed me to suffer much hardship , but you will restore me to life againand lift me up from the depths of the earth .

ID:	795
INPUT:	Iritsi zen Legamia gabeko Ogien <unk> , Pazko-bildotsa hil behar zeneko eguna .
PRED:	As soon as the Festival of Unleavened Bread , the Festival of Unleavened Bread .
GOLD:	Now the Festival of Unleavened Bread arrived , when the Passover lamb is sacrificed .

ID:	796
INPUT:	Babiloniatik bizirik ihes <unk> hirian ematen dute berri hau : « Jaunaren , gure Jainkoaren , mendekua da , tenplua hondatu zutenenkontrako mendekua » .
PRED:	The city of Babylon will flee from the city of the Lord , saying , “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has done for us . ”
GOLD:	Listen to the people who have escaped from Babylon , as they tell in Jerusalemhow the Lord our God has taken vengeanceagainst those who destroyed his Temple .

ID:	797
INPUT:	Beraz , hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Hemen nauzue , jendea txoriak bezala harrapatzeko erabiltzen dituzuen <unk> horien kontra . Nik desegingo ditut eskumuturreko horiek eta libre joaten utziko zuek menpean harrapaturiko jendeari .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am sending you to be like a bird that you are like a bird , so that you will be destroyed by the people of Israel , and I will destroy them .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am against all your magic charms , which you use to ensnare my people like birds . I will tear them from your arms , setting my people free like birds set free from a cage .

ID:	798
INPUT:	Jakinduriaren <unk> erakutsiko <unk> , giza <unk> <unk> direnak ; orduan jakingo <unk> ez zaituela zigortzen zuk merezi beste .
PRED:	Who will be sick and fig tree , and when I know that you will know that you have been able to know that you have been broken , and you will know that you will know that you will know that you will know .
GOLD:	If only he would tell you the secrets of wisdom , for true wisdom is not a simple matter.Listen ! God is doubtless punishing youfar less than you deserve !

ID:	799
INPUT:	eta <unk> bakearen berri ona zabaltzeko ardura .
PRED:	and all the Good News about the towns of peace .
GOLD:	For shoes , put on the peace that comes from the Good News so that you will be fully prepared .

ID:	800
INPUT:	gure hamabi leinuek , Jainkoa gau eta egun etengabe zerbitzatuz , beteko dela espero duten agintzari horretan itxaropena dudalako . Itxaropen horregatik salatzen naute juduek , errege jauna .
PRED:	On the day of our God , the people of Israel , and through the same day of our God has promised us to obey me . That is why I am the Jewish leaders of God .
GOLD:	In fact , that is why the twelve tribes of Israel zealously worship God night and day , and they share the same hope I have . Yet , Your Majesty , they accuse me for having this hope !

ID:	801
INPUT:	Hartan , Jairo zeritzan gizon bat etorri zitzaion , sinagogako buruzagia . Eta Jesusen oinetan ahuspezturik , arren eta arren bere etxera etortzeko eskatzen zion ,
PRED:	Suddenly , a man named Simon , a man named him in the synagogue , and the commander of the synagogue came to Jesus .
GOLD:	Then a man named Jairus , a leader of the local synagogue , came and fell at Jesus ' feet , pleading with him to come home with him .

ID:	802
INPUT:	Arduradunek senarra atxilotu eta zigorra ezarriko diote ,
PRED:	Then the devil will purify the humble , and the devil will be forgiven .
GOLD:	The elders must then take the man and punish him .

ID:	803
INPUT:	Nunen seme Josuek , gaztetandik Moisesen laguntzaile zenak , esan zuen : — Ene jaun Moises , <unk> iezaiezu !
PRED:	Then Joshua son of Nun , and the people of Israel said to Moses , “ My son , my lord , and I know that Moses and all the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Joshua son of Nun , who had been Moses ' assistant since his youth , protested , “ Moses , my master , make them stop ! ”

ID:	804
INPUT:	Eliren semeek , maltzur-gaizto haiek , ez zuten Jauna aintzakotzat hartzen ,
PRED:	The sons of Eli and Abiathar were not angry with the Lord 's sons .
GOLD:	Now the sons of Eli were scoundrels who had no respect for the Lord

ID:	805
INPUT:	<unk> hezitzaile eta <unk> <unk> , eta hori , ezagutzaren eta egiaren <unk> legean duzulako .
PRED:	For when they learned that they had been very old , and when he learned that he was under the power of the world , and when he learned that he was very very old , and when he learned that he learned that he was under his power .
GOLD:	You think you can instruct the ignorant and teach children the ways of God . For you are certain that God 's law gives you complete knowledge and truth .

ID:	806
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> , <unk> eroapena , <unk> <unk> ,
PRED:	And when they saw that they were filled with power , and when they saw that they were filled with power .
GOLD:	and knowledge with self-control , and self-control with patient endurance , and patient endurance with godliness ,

ID:	807
INPUT:	Oroitu ziren haiek Jesusen hitzez ,
PRED:	When they learned what he had happened to Jesus ' body ,
GOLD:	Then they remembered that he had said this .

ID:	808
INPUT:	Ahiasek jantzia zeraman soingaineko berria hartu , hamabi zati egin
PRED:	The man was a man who was a high priest , and he was a descendant of a descendant of cloth .
GOLD:	and Ahijah took hold of the new cloak he was wearing and tore it into twelve pieces .

ID:	809
INPUT:	<unk> baliatuz , garai txarrak baititugu .
PRED:	We know how much we have done , and we have seen the power of the world .
GOLD:	Make the most of every opportunity in these evil days .

ID:	810
INPUT:	Iseka-gai bihurtu natzaie , ni ikustean , buruari eragiten diote <unk> .
PRED:	When I saw you , it will be a place of refuge , it will be able to be able to obey it .
GOLD:	I am a joke to people everywhere ; when they see me , they shake their heads in scorn .

ID:	811
INPUT:	<unk> eroriak zaudete , beraz , den-denok iruzur egiten didazue eta .
PRED:	You will know where I live , and you will be able to live .
GOLD:	You are under a curse , for your whole nation has been cheating me .

ID:	812
INPUT:	Erregea Jaunaren etxera joaten zen aldi bakoitzeko , zaintzaile-taldeak babeskiak hartu ohi zituen eta gero , berriro , zaintzaile-gelara ekartzen .
PRED:	The king of the Lord went to the Temple of the Lord , and they took care for the shields and the shields .
GOLD:	Whenever the king went to the Temple of the Lord , the guards would also take the shields and then return them to the guardroom .

ID:	813
INPUT:	Baina ez al ditu , bada , Ezekiasek berak kendu Jainko horren kultu-lekuak eta aldareak , Judako eta Jerusalemgo jendeari aldare bakar baten aurrean ahuspeztu eta intsentsua aldare horretan eskaintzeko aginduz ?
PRED:	But Hezekiah did not destroy the pagan shrines and the God of Judah , and he destroyed all the altars of Judah and the people of Judah and Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Do n't you realize that Hezekiah is the very person who destroyed all the Lord 's shrines and altars ? He commanded Judah and Jerusalem to worship only at the altar at the Temple and to offer sacrifices on it alone .

ID:	814
INPUT:	Hartu zituen , orduan , Samuelek Saul eta honen mutila , <unk> sarrarazi eta mahaiburuan jarri zituen , <unk> aurrean . Hogeita hamarren bat ziren gonbidatuak .
PRED:	So Samuel sent Saul to kill Saul and his servant , along with him . When he saw that Saul had killed him , he became very angry with him .
GOLD:	Then Samuel brought Saul and his servant into the hall and placed them at the head of the table , honoring them above the thirty special guests .

ID:	815
INPUT:	Ez ekarri gehiago opari hutsalik ; higuingarri zait intsentsuaren lurrina . <unk> , larunbatak , <unk> ditut jasan <unk> batera .
PRED:	I have brought some of these fat fat from the altar of burnt offerings , which I have been poured out my fury on every green tree , and I will know that I am under every green tree .
GOLD:	Stop bringing me your meaningless gifts ; the incense of your offerings disgusts me ! As for your celebrations of the new moon and the Sabbathand your special days for fasting — they are all sinful and false.I want no more of your pious meetings .

ID:	816
INPUT:	« Har dezagun , adibidez , gizon zintzo bat , zuzenbidez eta justiziaz jokatzen duena ;
PRED:	“ Suppose a man marries a man 's wife , just as a person is right and right .
GOLD:	“ Suppose a certain man is righteous and does what is just and right .

ID:	817
INPUT:	Emadazu zeure <unk> ezaugarria ! Lotsaturik geldituko dira nire etsaiak , zuk , Jauna , kontsolatzen eta laguntzen nauzula ikustean .
PRED:	May I tell you about your enemies , and they will be destroyed by your enemies , and they will see you .
GOLD:	Send me a sign of your favor.Then those who hate me will be put to shame , for you , O Lord , help and comfort me .

ID:	818
INPUT:	Ala Jauna , zure Jainkoa ! Hamaika lurralde eta <unk> bidali izan du Akabek jendea zure bila . Eta nonbait bertan ez zinela esaten ziotenean , zin eginez <unk> behar izaten zion lurralde edo erreinu hark ez zintuela aurkitu .
PRED:	As surely as the Lord says , “ As surely as I sent you to kill you and kill you , ” Ahab sent him to kill you . And when he was in the land of Egypt , he would not be able to kill you .
GOLD:	For I swear by the Lord your God that the king has searched every nation and kingdom on earth from end to end to find you . And each time he was told , ‘ Elijah is n't here , ' King Ahab forced the king of that nation to swear to the truth of his claim .

ID:	819
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak esan zion Moisesi : « Idatzi hau liburuan oroigarri gisa , eta jakinarazi Josueri zeharo ezereztuko ditudala amalektarrak , ez dela munduan haien oroitzapenik ere geldituko » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ This is what the Lord says to Moses and the people of Israel , the people of Israel , and the people of Israel will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	After the victory , the Lord instructed Moses , “ Write this down on a scroll as a permanent reminder , and read it aloud to Joshua : I will erase the memory of Amalek from under heaven . ”

ID:	820
INPUT:	Piztiaren batek sarraskitu badu , hala gertatu delakoaren frogak aurkeztuko ditu , eta ez du ordaindu beharrik izango .
PRED:	But if one of the old old woman , he must pay back everything that had done , and he must pay back everything that had done , and he must not need .
GOLD:	But if the animal was indeed stolen , the guilty person must pay compensation to the owner .

ID:	821
INPUT:	Lehenengo hegaldun izakiaren hegoak , zein bata zein bestea , bina metro eta erdi ziren ; <unk> batetik besteraino bost metro .
PRED:	There were two cherubim that were two cherubim , each side of the other — two rows of the earth . One was 71/2 feet long and was 71/2 feet long .
GOLD:	The wingspan of each of the cherubim was 15 feet , each wing being 71/2 feet long .

ID:	822
INPUT:	Zori <unk> jotzen <unk> biziak baino ,
PRED:	And when they were under the power of the living beings , the power of the world will be destroyed .
GOLD:	So I concluded that the dead are better off than the living .

ID:	823
INPUT:	<unk> eguna baita , <unk> eta <unk> , Jainko Jaun ahalguztidunak bidalia . <unk> lurrera , garrasiak mendiraino .
PRED:	For the day of the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies , will send down on the hills and hills .
GOLD:	Oh , what a day of crushing defeat ! What a day of confusion and terrorbrought by the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , upon the Valley of Vision ! The walls of Jerusalem have been broken , and cries of death echo from the mountainsides .

ID:	824
INPUT:	Fededun guztiak bat ziren bihotzez eta gogoz , eta inork ez zuen esaten zeukana berea zuenik , baizik eta dena denena zuten .
PRED:	In all the way , one of your heart had no one , and no one else else else could be married .
GOLD:	All the believers were united in heart and mind . And they felt that what they owned was not their own , so they shared everything they had .

ID:	825
INPUT:	Horrela jakin zuten israeldar guztiek egun hartan ez zuela erregeak agindu Ner-en seme Abner hiltzea .
PRED:	So the people of Israel heard that Saul had not killed Abner son of Ner .
GOLD:	So everyone in Judah and all Israel understood that David was not responsible for Abner 's murder .

ID:	826
INPUT:	Jokatu , beraz , zentzu onez , erregeok ; zentza zaitezte , munduko agintariok .
PRED:	Instead , you have become strong , and you have rejected the power of the world .
GOLD:	Now then , you kings , act wisely ! Be warned , you rulers of the earth !

ID:	827
INPUT:	<unk> mezua entzun bai , baina ulertzen ez duenari , gaiztoa etortzen zaio eta bihotzean erein zaiona kendu egiten dio . Hori da , mezua “ <unk> ” hazia bezala hartzen duena .
PRED:	But those who hear the word of the Lord will hear it , but those who plant it will be filled with evil and fig tree , and they will plant it .
GOLD:	The seed that fell on the footpath represents those who hear the message about the Kingdom and do n't understand it . Then the evil one comes and snatches away the seed that was planted in their hearts .

ID:	828
INPUT:	ohoratu aita-amak , eta maitatu lagun hurkoa zeure burua bezala .
PRED:	She loves my father and mother , just as your father loved .
GOLD:	Honor your father and mother . Love your neighbor as yourself . ' ”

ID:	829
INPUT:	Ondoren , jendeak joan eta lurrera bota zuen Baalen jauretxea ; xehe-xehe egin zituen hango aldare eta irudiak , eta Baalen apaiz <unk> hil egin zuten aldare aitzinean .
PRED:	Then the people went down to the ground and worshiped the god of Baal , and he worshiped the god of Baal and worshiped Baal . They worshiped Baal and worshiped Baal and worshiped Baal .
GOLD:	And all the people went over to the temple of Baal and tore it down . They demolished the altars and smashed the idols , and they killed Mattan the priest of Baal in front of the altars .

ID:	830
INPUT:	Jauna , zu nire indar eta babesle , arriskuan ihesleku ! Zuregana etorriko dira <unk> azken mugetatik , eta esango dizute : « Gurasoek utzi <unk> <unk> huts dira , zentzugabekeriaeta ez ezertarako on .
PRED:	The Lord is my strength ; my strength is my fortress , and my life will be filled with my power . They will know that they are my own power , and they will know that they are weak and weak .
GOLD:	Lord , you are my strength and fortress , my refuge in the day of trouble ! Nations from around the worldwill come to you and say , “ Our ancestors left us a foolish heritage , for they worshiped worthless idols .

ID:	831
INPUT:	Eguna argitu bezain laster , apaizburu , zahar eta lege-maisuak bildu ziren — Biltzar Nagusi osoa — , eta , erabakia hartu ondoren , Jesus lotuta eraman zuten eta Pilatoren eskuetara eman .
PRED:	At the time the leading priests and teachers of religious law , the leading priests and teachers of religious law , the leading priests , and they took Jesus to be baptized .
GOLD:	Very early in the morning the leading priests , the elders , and the teachers of religious law — the entire high council — met to discuss their next step . They bound Jesus , led him away , and took him to Pilate , the Roman governor .

ID:	832
INPUT:	Zuhaitz onak ezin du fruitu txarrik eman , ezta zuhaitz txarrak ere fruitu onik .
PRED:	A good tree can not win good fruit , but it does n't produce good fruit .
GOLD:	A good tree ca n't produce bad fruit , and a bad tree ca n't produce good fruit .

ID:	833
INPUT:	Eta hala bihurtu naiz , entzuten ez <unk> erantzun ezin duenaren antzeko .
PRED:	But I have heard that I would not listen to what they do .
GOLD:	For I am waiting for you , O Lord.You must answer for me , O Lord my God .

ID:	834
INPUT:	<unk> baino <unk> naiz ulertzen , zure legeak gordetzen ditudalako .
PRED:	I know that I know how to obey your commandments .
GOLD:	I am even wiser than my elders , for I have kept your commandments .

ID:	835
INPUT:	<unk> , Adam , <unk> eredu eta irudi da ; <unk> , Kristo , <unk> .
PRED:	And when Adam , Adam , and every kind of mind will be filled with Christ . And when Christ was filled with glory and authority , and Christ will be filled with Christ .
GOLD:	Earthly people are like the earthly man , and heavenly people are like the heavenly man .

ID:	836
INPUT:	<unk> , berriz , ez zien <unk> , ez idirik eman , haien egitekoa gauza sakratuak bizkarrean eramatea baitzen .
PRED:	But if the man had been able to kill the servants , he must give the gifts to the Temple , and he must give them everything he had commanded .
GOLD:	But he gave none of the wagons or oxen to the Kohathite division , since they were required to carry the sacred objects of the Tabernacle on their shoulders .

ID:	837
INPUT:	<unk> , <unk> ,
PRED:	And when they saw that they were filled with power ,
GOLD:	The king of AphekThe king of Lasharon

ID:	838
INPUT:	Egoitzaren <unk> guztiak , bertako hesolak eta <unk> , brontzezkoak izango dira .
PRED:	For all the animals will be filled with bronze , and they will be filled with bronze .
GOLD:	“ All the articles used in the rituals of the Tabernacle , including all the tent pegs used to support the Tabernacle and the courtyard curtains , must be made of bronze .

ID:	839
INPUT:	<unk> hau kantatu zuen Davidek , Saulengatik eta beronen seme Jonatanengatik , eta
PRED:	Now David and his son David , and his son David and his son David .
GOLD:	Then David composed a funeral song for Saul and Jonathan ,

ID:	840
INPUT:	Lehoia bezala <unk> etzaten da : nork egin aurre hari ? <unk> zaituena , <unk> zaituena ! »
PRED:	But when I saw that the man who has done , how can I punish you ? What sorrow awaits you ? ”
GOLD:	Like a lion , Israel crouches and lies down ; like a lioness , who dares to arouse her ? Blessed is everyone who blesses you , O Israel , and cursed is everyone who curses you . ”

ID:	841
INPUT:	eta ez esklabo bezala , esklabo baino zerbait gehiago , anaia maite bezala baizik . <unk> da niretzat , eta zenbatez maiteago ez ote da izango zuretzat , bai gizon eta bai fededun den aldetik !
PRED:	No , let 's become slaves than any of your brother , but even though we love your brother , we love to love others as weak as weak as much as we love .
GOLD:	He is no longer like a slave to you . He is more than a slave , for he is a beloved brother , especially to me . Now he will mean much more to you , both as a man and as a brother in the Lord .

ID:	842
INPUT:	eta han toki berezia egin diot bertan ezartzeko : gure gurasoak Egiptotik atera zituenean Jaunak beraiekin eginiko itunaren agiria daukan kutxa » .
PRED:	I have made a place for the altar of burnt offering and a covenant that the Lord had given him a covenant with the terms of the covenant of the covenant of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	And I have prepared a place there for the Ark , which contains the covenant that the Lord made with our ancestors when he brought them out of Egypt . ”

ID:	843
INPUT:	Norbaitek zergatik askatzen duzuen galdetuko balizue , erantzun : “ Jaunak behar du ” » .
PRED:	But if you ask , ‘ What do you say ? '
GOLD:	If anyone asks , ‘ Why are you untying that colt ? ' just say , ‘ The Lord needs it . ' ”

ID:	844
INPUT:	Israelgo erregea Samariako bere etxera joan zen , goibel eta haserre .
PRED:	The king of Israel went home and went home .
GOLD:	So the king of Israel went home to Samaria angry and sullen .

ID:	845
INPUT:	Gizon horiek beren bekatuagatik bizia galdu badute ere , errautsontziak sagaratuak daude , nire aurrean intsentsua eskaintzeko erabili izan direlako . Egin errautsontzi horiekin aldarea estaltzeko xaflak ; horrela , <unk> izango dira israeldarrentzat » .
PRED:	If they are guilty of sin , they must offer sacrifices for my sin offering . For they have made my sin offerings , and they have made incense on my altar . They have been made with all the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Inscribe Aaron 's name on the staff of the tribe of Levi , for there must be one staff for the leader of each ancestral tribe .

ID:	846
INPUT:	nor bereaz <unk> dira denak eta ez Jesu <unk> .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you , and they will be able to kill you .
GOLD:	All the others care only for themselves and not for what matters to Jesus Christ .

ID:	847
INPUT:	Nire bizia beti arriskuan dagoen arren , ez dut zure irakaspena ahazten .
PRED:	My life is wrong ; I have not forgotten your instructions .
GOLD:	My life constantly hangs in the balance , but I will not stop obeying your instructions .

ID:	848
INPUT:	Ziur baitakigu sinesmenaren bidez onartzen dituela Jainkoak gizon-emakumeak , eta ez legea betetzeagatik .
PRED:	If you know that God has given us the law that God has made us right , so that God gives us the law .
GOLD:	So we are made right with God through faith and not by obeying the law .

ID:	849
INPUT:	Jesusek <unk> esan zion : — Jaiki eta zatoz hona erdira .
PRED:	Then Jesus told him , “ Get up , ” he said .
GOLD:	Jesus said to the man with the deformed hand , “ Come and stand in front of everyone . ”

ID:	850
INPUT:	Orduan , Jainkoaren gizonarengana itzuli zen bere talde osoarekin ; profetagana heltzean , zutik gelditu eta esan zion : — Orain badakit ez dela lur osoan Jainkorik <unk> baizik . Otoi , onar ezazu zerbitzari honen esku-erakutsia .
PRED:	Then the people of God went back and stood at the entrance of the Temple of God and stood before him . He said to him , “ Now I know that you are the one who loves you . ”
GOLD:	Then Naaman and his entire party went back to find the man of God . They stood before him , and Naaman said , “ Now I know that there is no God in all the world except in Israel . So please accept a gift from your servant . ”

ID:	851
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Begira , badator Israel herriarekin eta Juda herriarekin itun berria egingo dudan garaia .
PRED:	“ Look , ” says the Lord , “ This is what the time of Israel , the people of Israel , and the people of Judah will be a special covenant .
GOLD:	“ The day is coming , ” says the Lord , “ when I will make a new covenant with the people of Israel and Judah .

ID:	852
INPUT:	Eta ez deitu lurrean inori “ aita ” , bat bakarra baita zuen aita , zerukoa .
PRED:	And he called no one on the ground , ‘ My father , the father of his father , a father , and his father . '
GOLD:	And do n't address anyone here on earth as ‘ Father , ' for only God in heaven is your Father .

ID:	853
INPUT:	Satanek erantzun : — <unk> guztia ematen du gizakiak , larrugorri gelditzeraino , bere bizia <unk> .
PRED:	Then the Lord replied , “ If you have seen everything you have done , and wild animals and wild animals will kill you . ”
GOLD:	Satan replied to the Lord , “ Skin for skin ! A man will give up everything he has to save his life .

ID:	854
INPUT:	Asafen Salmoa . Jauna , jainkoen Jainkoa , mintzo da , mundu osoari egiten dio batzarrera <unk> sorlekutik sarlekura .
PRED:	Praise the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , who has given us the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	The Lord , the Mighty One , is God , and he has spoken ; he has summoned all humanityfrom where the sun rises to where it sets .

ID:	855
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak hondatu egin zituen etiopiarrak Asaren eta Judakoen aitzinean , eta <unk> ihes egin zuten .
PRED:	Then the Lord went back to Judah and attacked Judah . When the people of Judah attacked Judah , the people of Judah attacked Judah , and the people of Judah had fled .
GOLD:	Then Asa cried out to the Lord his God , “ O Lord , no one but you can help the powerless against the mighty ! Help us , O Lord our God , for we trust in you alone . It is in your name that we have come against this vast horde . O Lord , you are our God ; do not let mere men prevail against you ! ”

ID:	856
INPUT:	Egin Jaunarentzat zuzen eta atsegin dena , zoriontsu izan zaitezten eta Jaunak zuen arbasoei zin eginez hitzemandako lurralde ederrean sartu eta jabetzan har dezazuen .
PRED:	Remember that the Lord your God is giving you a covenant with you and your ancestors , and he will give you your ancestors as your ancestors .
GOLD:	Do what is right and good in the Lord 's sight , so all will go well with you . Then you will enter and occupy the good land that the Lord swore to give your ancestors .

ID:	857
INPUT:	Urrezko berrogeita hamar katigailu ere egin zituzten , eta horiekin zapi-sail bat besteari lotu , egoitza osoak bat egiten zuelarik .
PRED:	Then Bezalel made ten gold rings and attached them to the Tabernacle , and all the frames of the Tabernacle will be given to the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Then he made fifty gold clasps and fastened the long curtains together with the clasps . In this way , the Tabernacle was made of one continuous piece .

ID:	858
INPUT:	Dan <unk> Efraimgo <unk> txarrak datoz .
PRED:	The people of Ephraim was very angry with all the people of Ephraim , and the people of Ephraim .
GOLD:	Your destruction has been announcedfrom Dan and the hill country of Ephraim .

ID:	859
INPUT:	horrela , behartsuen deiadarra <unk> <unk> dute , eta hark entzun egin du dohakabeen oihua .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits the poor , and they have heard what they have done , and he has heard his voice .
GOLD:	They cause the poor to cry out , catching God 's attention.He hears the cries of the needy .

ID:	860
INPUT:	Bi testiguak
PRED:	The Faith of Life
GOLD:	The Two Witnesses

ID:	861
INPUT:	Hurbil zen Pazkoa , juduen jai nagusia .
PRED:	The Passover celebration was a Passover celebration for the Passover celebration .
GOLD:	( It was nearly time for the Jewish Passover celebration . )

ID:	862
INPUT:	Hara , samina bake bihurtu zait . Nire bizia <unk> gorde duzu , bizkarra eman <unk> bekatu guztiei .
PRED:	Look , my life has broken my life , and my life have filled my life with my life .
GOLD:	Yes , this anguish was good for me , for you have rescued me from deathand forgiven all my sins .

ID:	863
INPUT:	Ipini sarea aldare-ertzaren azpian , aldare erdiraino jaisten delarik .
PRED:	Put on top of the altar , and the walls of the altar under it .
GOLD:	Install the grating halfway down the side of the altar , under the ledge .

ID:	864
INPUT:	Ur garbiz zipriztinduko zaituztet eta garbi geldituko zarete ; zuen kutsadura eta idolatria guztietatik garbituko zaituztet .
PRED:	I will make you ceremonially clean and make you pure gold , and I will make you ceremonially clean .
GOLD:	“ Then I will sprinkle clean water on you , and you will be clean . Your filth will be washed away , and you will no longer worship idols .

ID:	865
INPUT:	« Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak jabetzan hartzera zoazten lurraldean sarrarazi ondoren , Garizim mendian emango duzue bedeinkazioa eta Ebal mendian madarikazioa .
PRED:	“ When the Lord your God has come to go into the land of the Lord your God , he will give you a blessing on the mountain of the mountain .
GOLD:	“ When the Lord your God brings you into the land and helps you take possession of it , you must pronounce the blessing at Mount Gerizim and the curse at Mount Ebal .

ID:	866
INPUT:	Eskerrak ematen dizkiot arbasoen irakatsiei jarraituz bihotz garbiz zerbitzatzen dudan Jainkoari , eta gogoan zaitut etengabe , gau eta egun , neure otoitzetan .
PRED:	I thank you for your ancestors , and I pray for you . I pray for you , and I pray for you .
GOLD:	Timothy , I thank God for you — the God I serve with a clear conscience , just as my ancestors did . Night and day I constantly remember you in my prayers .

ID:	867
INPUT:	Joan zuek jaietara ; ni ez noa , nire garaia ez baita oraindik bete .
PRED:	So go to the festival , for I am not a time , for I am not here .
GOLD:	You go on . I 'm not going to this festival , because my time has not yet come . ”

ID:	868
INPUT:	Gainera , esan zion Moisesek Koreri : « Entzun , lebitarrok !
PRED:	And Moses said to him , “ Listen ! Listen to you !
GOLD:	Then Moses spoke again to Korah : “ Now listen , you Levites !

ID:	869
INPUT:	« Zuk , gizaseme , epaitu , epaitu gogor hiri odolzalea , aurpegiratu beraren jokabide higuingarria !
PRED:	“ Son of man , ” says the king . “ You will destroy the city of judgment , and you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , are you ready to judge Jerusalem ? Are you ready to judge this city of murderers ? Publicly denounce her detestable sins ,

ID:	870
INPUT:	( Mt 9 , 37-38 )
PRED:	Jesus Heals Many People
GOLD:	Jesus ' Prayer of Thanksgiving

ID:	871
INPUT:	eta esan ziela : Horregatik , gizasemeak bere aita-amak utziko ditu eta emazteari elkartuko zaio , eta biak bat izango dira .
PRED:	“ Therefore , ” he said , “ God will give you a father and mother and mother and mother and mother . There will be a father and mother and mother .
GOLD:	And he said , “ ‘ This explains why a man leaves his father and mother and is joined to his wife , and the two are united into one . '

ID:	872
INPUT:	« Zintzoari dagokionez , berriz , bere justiziatik aldendu eta , gaiztoak egin ohi dituen gauza higuingarri guztien antzera , txarkeria egiten badu , bizi egingo ote da , halere ? Haren egintza zuzenak ez ditut gogoan hartuko . Egin dituen desleialkeria eta bekatuengatik hil egingo da .
PRED:	“ But if you turn away from the righteous ways of the wicked , they will turn away from their sins , and they will not die .
GOLD:	However , if righteous people turn from their righteous behavior and start doing sinful things and act like other sinners , should they be allowed to live ? No , of course not ! All their righteous acts will be forgotten , and they will die for their sins .

ID:	873
INPUT:	Zuen oinek zapalduko dituzten leku guztiak zeuenak izango dituzue , eta zuen lurraldea basamortutik Libanoraino eta Eufrates ibaitik Mediterraneo itsasoraino hedatuko da .
PRED:	Then you will be able to enter the Mediterranean Sea and the border of the Mediterranean Sea to the Mediterranean Sea , and the border of the Euphrates River will be given to the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	Wherever you set foot , that land will be yours . Your frontiers will stretch from the wilderness in the south to Lebanon in the north , and from the Euphrates River in the east to the Mediterranean Sea in the west .

ID:	874
INPUT:	<unk> aterarazi ez dizuen lurraldea eman dizuet , eraiki ez dituzuen hiriak , eta berorietan bizi zarete ; baita landatu ez dituzuen mahasti eta olibadiak ere , eta berorien fruituez elikatzen zarete » .
PRED:	I have given you the land you have given you a land , and you have not built , and you may live in your fields , and you may live in your fields . You may eat your crops and harvest your crops . ”
GOLD:	I gave you land you had not worked on , and I gave you towns you did not build — the towns where you are now living . I gave you vineyards and olive groves for food , though you did not plant them .

ID:	875
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Are okerrago izango da , gizakiak eta abereak suntsitzeko lau zigor <unk> — gerra , gosetea , basapiztiak eta izurria — Jerusalemen aurka bidaliko ditudanean .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The Sovereign Lord says : There will be no better than any of these animals , and they will destroy the birds of the earth .
GOLD:	“ Now this is what the Sovereign Lord says : How terrible it will be when all four of these dreadful punishments fall upon Jerusalem — war , famine , wild animals , and disease — destroying all her people and animals .

ID:	876
INPUT:	Beren lurraldean , inork izutu gabe , seguru biziko direnean , nire kontra egin dituzten lotsagarrikeria eta desleialkeria guztiak ahaztuko dituzte .
PRED:	They will live in the land of God , and they will live in their own land . They will serve God , and they will obey all their sins .
GOLD:	They will accept responsibility for their past shame and unfaithfulness after they come home to live in peace in their own land , with no one to bother them .

ID:	877
INPUT:	<unk> halakook ! Zer da handiago : oparia ala oparia sagaratzen duen aldarea ?
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you ? What is the offering ? What is the altar that is holy ?
GOLD:	How blind ! For which is more important — the gift on the altar or the altar that makes the gift sacred ?

ID:	878
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> bat egina naukate , hain nago <unk> .
PRED:	I have heard that I have seen my power , and I have seen my power .
GOLD:	They have left me among the dead , and I lie like a corpse in a grave.I am forgotten , cut off from your care .

ID:	879
INPUT:	Epaileek zehatz-mehatz ikertuko dute auzia ; ikusten bada lekukoa faltsua dela eta herritarra gezurrez salatu duela ,
PRED:	But when I realized that they would be caught , they would be able to see that they would be healed .
GOLD:	The judges must investigate the case thoroughly . If the accuser has brought false charges against his fellow Israelite ,

ID:	880
INPUT:	Bene-benetan diotsut : <unk> zinenean , zeuk lotzen zenuen gerrikoa eta nora joan erabakitzen ; zahartzean , ordea , zuk besoak luzatu eta beste batek lotuko dizu gerrikoa eta nahi izango ez duzun lekura eramango zaitu .
PRED:	I tell you the truth , your hand , and you will send you into the valleys . But you will put your hands on your head and put it on your shoulders .
GOLD:	“ I tell you the truth , when you were young , you were able to do as you liked ; you dressed yourself and went wherever you wanted to go . But when you are old , you will stretch out your hands , and others will dress you and take you where you do n't want to go . ”

ID:	881
INPUT:	Baina benjamindarrek Gibeatik irten eta hogeita bi mila gizon israeldarri lur joarazi zieten .
PRED:	But the men of Benjamin were one of the tribe of Benjamin .
GOLD:	But Benjamin 's warriors , who were defending the town , came out and killed 22,000 Israelites on the battlefield that day .

ID:	882
INPUT:	Nondik Jesusen aginpidea ?
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	The Authority of Jesus Challenged

ID:	883
INPUT:	Ai ene , desegina da Moab ! Egin intziri ! Lotsaren lotsaz bizkarra eman du ! Auzokoen <unk> eta iseka-gai bihurtu da .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you of Moab , O Israel of Israel , O God of Israel , who has turned away and fall into battle .
GOLD:	How it is shattered ! Hear the wailing ! See the shame of Moab ! It has become an object of ridicule , an example of ruin to all its neighbors . ”

ID:	884
INPUT:	Eta agindu hau eman zieten benjamindarrei : « Gorde zaitezte Xiloko mahastietan .
PRED:	So the men of Benjamin said , “ Get out for your sins .
GOLD:	They told the men of Benjamin who still needed wives , “ Go and hide in the vineyards .

ID:	885
INPUT:	Baina bihozgabetuei adore ematen dien Jainkoak adorez bete ninduen Titoren etorrerarekin .
PRED:	But God gave me great joy to those who were filled with me .
GOLD:	But God , who encourages those who are discouraged , encouraged us by the arrival of Titus .

ID:	886
INPUT:	Herritarren zenbaketa egin Davidek
PRED:	David Defeats the Temple
GOLD:	David Takes a Census

ID:	887
INPUT:	( Mt 13 , 1-9 ; Mk 4 , 1-9 )
PRED:	Parable of a Gentile Woman
GOLD:	The True Family of Jesus

ID:	888
INPUT:	« Ez duzu zeure aitaren anaia desohoratuko , beronen emaztearekin sexu-harremanak izanez : zeure izeba duzu .
PRED:	“ Do not defile your brother 's wife and your wives . You must not commit adultery .
GOLD:	“ Do not violate your uncle , your father 's brother , by having sexual relations with his wife , for she is your aunt .

ID:	889
INPUT:	Gero , ekialderantz bihurtzen zen , <unk> , eta , Zabulonen leinuaren muga eta Iftah-El harana iparraldetik ukituz , <unk> eta <unk> jarraitzen zuen , eta ezkerraldetik Kabul ,
PRED:	Then the northern boundary of Zebulun came from the east of Zebulun , Zebulun , Zebulun , Zebulun , Zebulun , Zebulun ( which means that the boundary of Zebulun ) , and the northern boundary of the north .
GOLD:	then it turned east toward Beth-dagon , and ran as far as Zebulun in the valley of Iphtah-el , going north to Beth-emek and Neiel . It then continued north to Cabul ,

ID:	890
INPUT:	eta mantxa <unk> nahiz <unk> bada , <unk> da eta apaizari erakutsi behar zaio .
PRED:	And if the priest finds that the priest will be healed , and the priest will be given to the priest .
GOLD:	If the contaminated area in the clothing , the animal hide , the fabric , or the leather article has turned greenish or reddish , it is contaminated with mildew and must be shown to the priest .

ID:	891
INPUT:	Babiloniarrek zatikatu egin zituzten Jaunaren etxean zeuden brontzezko zutabeak , orgak eta uraska handia , eta Babiloniara eraman zuten brontzea .
PRED:	The nations of the Lord destroyed them with bronze , and the bronze basin brought them to Babylon , bronze , and the bronze basin .
GOLD:	The Babylonians broke up the bronze pillars in front of the Lord 's Temple , the bronze water carts , and the great bronze basin called the Sea , and they carried all the bronze away to Babylon .

ID:	892
INPUT:	<unk> , zorteak Jaunarentzat aukeratua , aurkeztu eta barkamen-oparitzat eskainiko du .
PRED:	At that time the Lord has chosen a sin offering and a sin offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	Aaron will then present as a sin offering the goat chosen by lot for the Lord .

ID:	893
INPUT:	Esan zion Jaunak lihoz jantzitako gizonari : « Sartu kerubinen azpiko gurpil artera ; hartu handik eskuak bete txingar <unk> eta barreiatu hirian » . Eta gizona sartu egin zen neure begi-bistan .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to the man of the cherubim , “ I took them into the wheels of the wheels of the wheels , and he took them into the city . ” And when he entered the city , he went into the city .
GOLD:	Then the Lord spoke to the man in linen clothing and said , “ Go between the whirling wheels beneath the cherubim , and take a handful of burning coals and scatter them over the city . ” He did this as I watched .

ID:	894
INPUT:	baina bizirik utzi zaitut nire ahalmena erakusteko eta mundu osoak nor naizen jakin dezan .
PRED:	But I have given you the power of my power , and the power of the earth will know that I am the power of God .
GOLD:	But I have spared you for a purpose — to show you my power and to spread my fame throughout the earth .

ID:	895
INPUT:	Beraien aurrean , bizkarrean fardela harturik , ilunpetan aterako zara ; estali aurpegia zeure herrialdea ez ikusteko , seinale bihurtu baitzaitut Israel herriarentzat » .
PRED:	Then they put them on the road on the road to see where they are watching in darkness , and they will not see your people to see them . ”
GOLD:	As they watch , lift your pack to your shoulders and walk away into the night . Cover your face so you can not see the land you are leaving . For I have made you a sign for the people of Israel . ”

ID:	896
INPUT:	Madarikazioa eta gezurra , hilketa , <unk> adulterioa ugari , odola odolaren gain .
PRED:	She has committed adultery with murder and adultery , and the murder of murder .
GOLD:	You make vows and break them ; you kill and steal and commit adultery.There is violence everywhere — one murder after another .

ID:	897
INPUT:	<unk> gero , ez da inor oroitzen zutaz ; Hildakoen Egoitzan , nork goretsi zu ?
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you in the sea , that you have seen in the grave ?
GOLD:	I am worn out from sobbing.All night I flood my bed with weeping , drenching it with my tears .

ID:	898
INPUT:	<unk> dira denak , hain estimatuak dituzten <unk> ez . Horien <unk> eta <unk> ; horregatik , lotsagarri geldituko dira .
PRED:	And when they are filled with great things , they will be sure that they will be able to be filled with shame , and they will be sure they will be ashamed .
GOLD:	How foolish are those who manufacture idols.These prized objects are really worthless.The people who worship idols do n't know this , so they are all put to shame .

ID:	899
INPUT:	Hango nagusiak , lehoi orrolari ; hango epaileak , gauean <unk> hezurrik <unk> ez dioten otso .
PRED:	The wild animals of the forest will be able to see the wicked , when they saw that all the men of the forest were still hiding in the streets .
GOLD:	Its leaders are like roaring lionshunting for their victims.Its judges are like ravenous wolves at evening time , who by dawn have left no trace of their prey .

ID:	900
INPUT:	Ikusi duzun emakumea , lurreko erregeen gain erregetza duen hiri handia da » .
PRED:	When the woman saw all the kingdoms of the earth , you will see the great city of the earth . ”
GOLD:	And this woman you saw in your vision represents the great city that rules over the kings of the world . ”

ID:	901
INPUT:	Eta esan zuen , gainera : « Horregatik esan dizuet ezin dela inor ere niregana hurbildu , Aitak ez badio horretarako gaitasuna ematen » .
PRED:	So he said , “ That 's why I want you to come to me ? ” And if the Father is n't right , it is the Father who wants to come . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ That is why I said that people ca n't come to me unless the Father gives them to me . ”

ID:	902
INPUT:	<unk> egingo <unk> salgaiak ostuko ; harresiak <unk> jauregi bikainak botako behera ; harriak , habeak eta hondakinak <unk> botako dituzte .
PRED:	I will destroy you and fig trees , and all the houses of wild animals will be able to break down , and they will break down the walls of the palace . They will break down and destroy it .
GOLD:	“ They will plunder all your riches and merchandise and break down your walls . They will destroy your lovely homes and dump your stones and timbers and even your dust into the sea .

ID:	903
INPUT:	Zaudete erne , bada , eta eduki gogoan , hiru urtez gau eta egun aspertu gabe jardun dudala zuetako bakoitzari negar-malkoz aholkuak ematen .
PRED:	Be sure to stop praying and night , for I am very sick and hard work on your day .
GOLD:	Watch out ! Remember the three years I was with you — my constant watch and care over you night and day , and my many tears for you .

ID:	904
INPUT:	Nehemiasek lanean ari direnak armatu
PRED:	Nehemiah 's Wise Advice , and everything under every kind .
GOLD:	Enemies Oppose the Rebuilding

ID:	905
INPUT:	Irten ziren , bada , Egiptotik eta , Kanaanera , beren aita Jakobengana , heldu zirenean ,
PRED:	So they went out to the land of Egypt , and when they arrived in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	And they left Egypt and returned to their father , Jacob , in the land of Canaan .

ID:	906
INPUT:	Manasesen lurraldearen muga , Axerren hasi eta Sikemen aurrean dagoen <unk> zihoan ; handik hegoaldera jarraitzen zuen , <unk> aldera .
PRED:	Then the territory of Manasseh began to take possession of the land of Manasseh , where they were in the south side of the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	The boundary of the tribe of Manasseh extended from the border of Asher to Micmethath , near Shechem . Then the boundary went south from Micmethath to the settlement near the spring of Tappuah .

ID:	907
INPUT:	Joanek erantzun zien : — Nik urez bataiatzen dut ; zeuen artean baduzue , ordea , ezagutzen ez duzuen bat ,
PRED:	John replied , “ I ca n't come with water , but you do n't know it . ”
GOLD:	John told them , “ I baptize with water , but right here in the crowd is someone you do not recognize .

ID:	908
INPUT:	Tira , <unk> Gibeako gizon maltzur-gaizto horiek ; hil egin behar ditugu , Israeldik gaitz hori kentzeko » . Baina benjamindarrek ez zieten entzun nahi izan beren senide israeldarrei .
PRED:	Now go to some of the men of Gibeah to kill us . But we have not sinned against the people of Israel , but they refused to listen to their fellow Israelites . ”
GOLD:	Give up those evil men , those troublemakers from Gibeah , so we can execute them and purge Israel of this evil . ” But the people of Benjamin would not listen .

ID:	909
INPUT:	Ruben eta Gaden leinuetakoak eta Manasesen leinu erdikoak gainerako israeldarren aurretik joan ziren , guda-lerrotan jarririk , Moisesek agindua zien bezala .
PRED:	They left the rest of the tribes of Reuben and the half-tribe of Manasseh and the half-tribe of Manasseh to fight them as they had commanded them .
GOLD:	The armed warriors from the tribes of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh led the Israelites across the Jordan , just as Moses had directed .

ID:	910
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « <unk> gabea dazure hondamena , <unk> zure zauria .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Your fury will be broken , and your fury will be broken .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Your injury is incurable — a terrible wound .

ID:	911
INPUT:	<unk> ez baitzuten nondik sartu aurkitzen , <unk> igo eta , <unk> kendurik , ohatila eta guzti jaitsi zuten <unk> , Jesusen aurrera .
PRED:	But when they saw that they were dead , they would be able to kill him and kill him . And when they saw that they were healed , they bowed down and threw him down to the ground .
GOLD:	but they could n't reach him because of the crowd . So they went up to the roof and took off some tiles . Then they lowered the sick man on his mat down into the crowd , right in front of Jesus .

ID:	912
INPUT:	Egiptoarrak , faraoiaren zaldi , gurdi eta zaldun guztiak , israeldarrei erasoka itsas erdiraino sartu ziren .
PRED:	Pharaoh 's horses were with the Egyptians , and all the armies of Egypt were surrounded by the sea , and all the armies of Egypt .
GOLD:	Then the Egyptians — all of Pharaoh 's horses , chariots , and charioteers — chased them into the middle of the sea .

ID:	913
INPUT:	Esan nien , bada : « Ikusten duzue nolako atsekabetan <unk> : Jerusalem hondatua dago eta bertako ateak kiskaliak . Ea , eraiki ditzagun Jerusalemgo harresiak , atera gaitezen egoera lotsagarri honetatik ! »
PRED:	Then I told them , “ I will see you about your power , and I will see you — all the houses of Jerusalem , and I have built up my gates ! ”
GOLD:	But now I said to them , “ You know very well what trouble we are in . Jerusalem lies in ruins , and its gates have been destroyed by fire . Let us rebuild the wall of Jerusalem and end this disgrace ! ”

ID:	914
INPUT:	Judak , Joserengana hurbilduz , esan zion : — Arren , jauna , utziozu zeure zerbitzari honi bi hitz esaten ; faraoiaren pareko zara zu eta ez zakizkit haserre !
PRED:	The king of Judah said to him , “ Your lord , my lord , my lord , your servant , how you say , ‘ Your servant is like me . '
GOLD:	Then Judah stepped forward and said , “ Please , my lord , let your servant say just one word to you . Please , do not be angry with me , even though you are as powerful as Pharaoh himself .

ID:	915
INPUT:	Akabek Obadiasi , jauregizain nagusiari , dei egin zion . Obadias honek begirune handia zion Jaunari .
PRED:	But Ahab 's officials came and called him to the king of the Lord .
GOLD:	So Ahab summoned Obadiah , who was in charge of the palace . ( Obadiah was a devoted follower of the Lord .

ID:	916
INPUT:	Manasesen gainerako jarduerak , egintza guztiak eta egin zuen bekatua « Judako Erregeen Kronika » liburuan daude idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Amon 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Manasseh 's reign and everything he did , including the sins he committed , are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .

ID:	917
INPUT:	Aldare gainean liturgi zerbitzurako erabiltzen diren tresna guztiak ezarriko dituzte : errautsontziak , sardexkak , palak eta isipu-ontziak . Guztia larru finezko estalduraz bilduko dute , eta hagak ezarriko dizkiote aldareari .
PRED:	They must remove all the sacred garments for the altar of acacia wood , and make it fine goatskin leather . Then they must cover it with gold , and they must put it on the altar .
GOLD:	All the altar utensils — the firepans , meat forks , shovels , basins , and all the containers — must be placed on the cloth , and a covering of fine goatskin leather must be spread over them . Finally , they must put the carrying poles in place .

ID:	918
INPUT:	Ikusten duzu nola mendekatu zaizkidan , zenbat asmo txar duten nire kontra .
PRED:	You have destroyed their own desires , and they have rejected all their sins .
GOLD:	You have seen the vengeful plotsmy enemies have laid against me .

ID:	919
INPUT:	Gero , odol horrekin elkarketa-etxolan dagoen aldare-ertzeko adarrak igurtziko ditu Jaunaren aurrean , eta zekorraren gainerako odola elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran dagoen erre-oparien aldare-oinean isuriko .
PRED:	Then he will pour out the blood of the altar on the altar of the altar of the Lord 's altar at the entrance of the Tabernacle , and he will pour out the rest of the Tabernacle on the altar of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	He will then put some of the blood on the horns of the altar for fragrant incense that stands in the Lord 's presence inside the Tabernacle . He will pour out the rest of the blood at the base of the altar for burnt offerings at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	920
INPUT:	Jesus zein zen ikusi nahirik zebilen , baina ezin zuen jendearengatik , txikia baitzen .
PRED:	When Jesus saw this , he could not be able to destroy the same thing .
GOLD:	He tried to get a look at Jesus , but he was too short to see over the crowd .

ID:	921
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jaunari uzten diot haurra , bizitza osorako Jaunari eskainia izanen da » . Orduan , Jauna gurtu zuen bertan .
PRED:	Therefore , I will give my child to the Lord , and I will give it a blessing to the Lord . ” So he worshiped the Lord .
GOLD:	Now I am giving him to the Lord , and he will belong to the Lord his whole life . ” And they worshiped the Lord there .

ID:	922
INPUT:	Bartzilai galaadtarra ere jaitsi zen <unk> , Jordan ibaia erregearekin igaro eta ibai ertzean agur egiteko .
PRED:	One of the king of Assyria came down from the Jordan River , along with the border of the Jordan River , along with the Jordan River .
GOLD:	He was very old — eighty years of age — and very wealthy . He was the one who had provided food for the king during his stay in Mahanaim .

ID:	923
INPUT:	Eta Elik dei egin zion Samueli : — Samuel , ene seme . Samuelek erantzun : — Hemen nauzu .
PRED:	Samuel said to Samuel , “ Samuel , my son ! ” Samuel replied , “ I am here ! ”
GOLD:	But Eli called out to him , “ Samuel , my son . ” “ Here I am , ” Samuel replied .

ID:	924
INPUT:	apostoluak atxilotu eta herriko kartzelan sarrarazi zituzten .
PRED:	Then the apostles sent them into prison , and they led them into prison .
GOLD:	They arrested the apostles and put them in the public jail .

ID:	925
INPUT:	Agripak esan zion <unk> : — Neuk ere gustura entzungo nioke gizon horri . — Bihar entzungo diozu — erantzun zion Festok .
PRED:	When the elders heard that I would hear the sound of my men , he asked him , “ Do you realize that you will hear ? ” “ Do n't be afraid ! ”
GOLD:	“ I 'd like to hear the man myself , ” Agrippa said.And Festus replied , “ You will — tomorrow ! ”

ID:	926
INPUT:	Izan ere , behartsuak beti dituzue zeuen artean , eta nahi duzuenean egin <unk> on . Baina ni ez nauzue betiko zuekin .
PRED:	For you have made the poor among the poor and you , and you will know that you have made me . But if you do n't know me , you will not be with you .
GOLD:	You will always have the poor among you , and you can help them whenever you want to . But you will not always have me .

ID:	927
INPUT:	Jauna , zuregan dut babesa : ez diezadala inoiz usteak huts egin !
PRED:	Do n't let me be afraid of my enemies , for I have sinned .
GOLD:	O Lord , I have come to you for protection ; do n't let me be disgraced .

ID:	928
INPUT:	Lehenengo hilaren hogeita lauan , <unk> ibai handiaren ertzean nengoen .
PRED:	At that time I sent out of the Dead Sea to the Sea of the Dead Sea .
GOLD:	On April 23 , as I was standing on the bank of the great Tigris River ,

ID:	929
INPUT:	Aurrean zegoen erromatar ehuntariak , nola hil zen ikustean , esan zuen : « Zinez , gizon hau Jainkoaren Semea zen » .
PRED:	When the officer saw him , the commander of the Roman officer was killed , he said , “ Son of God , the Son of God , the Son of God . ”
GOLD:	When the Roman officer who stood facing him saw how he had died , he exclaimed , “ This man truly was the Son of God ! ”

ID:	930
INPUT:	Josuek esan zion herri osoari : — Hau dio Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak : « Zuen arbasoak , Terah eta beronen seme Abraham eta Nahor , Eufrates ibaiaren beste aldean bizi ziren antzina , eta beste jainko batzuk gurtzen zituzten .
PRED:	Then Joshua said to all the people of Israel , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , who lived in the province of the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	Joshua said to the people , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : Long ago your ancestors , including Terah , the father of Abraham and Nahor , lived beyond the Euphrates River , and they worshiped other gods .

ID:	931
INPUT:	otoitza egin zuen : « Jauna , Israelen Jainkoa , ez da zu bezalako beste jainkorik , ez goian zeruan , ez behean lurrean . Betetzen duzu ituna eta onbera zara zure aurrean bihotzez zintzo dabiltzan zeure <unk> .
PRED:	“ O Lord , God of Israel , the God of Israel , says , “ You are not like any god of the earth . You have made the earth in the heavens and your heart . You have made your covenant with all your heart .
GOLD:	and he prayed , “ O Lord , God of Israel , there is no God like you in all of heaven above or on the earth below . You keep your covenant and show unfailing love to all who walk before you in wholehearted devotion .

ID:	932
INPUT:	Su emango diot Egiptori , minez <unk> da Sin ; zulatu egingo dituzte <unk> harresiak , eta hiria <unk> izango .
PRED:	I will give you authority over all the people of Egypt , horses , horses , horses , horses , and they will be filled with great city .
GOLD:	Yes , I will set fire to all Egypt ! Pelusium will be racked with pain ; Thebes will be torn apart ; Memphis will live in constant terror .

ID:	933
INPUT:	Mundua gaiztakeriaz eta indarkeriaz betea zegoen ,
PRED:	This prayer was made by the people of heaven , and the people of heaven was made .
GOLD:	Now God saw that the earth had become corrupt and was filled with violence .

ID:	934
INPUT:	Zintzoaren nahia bete egiten da , gaiztoaren itxaropenak huts egiten .
PRED:	The people of the godly will be fulfilled , but the wicked of the wicked of the wicked of the wicked .
GOLD:	The godly can look forward to a reward , while the wicked can expect only judgment .

ID:	935
INPUT:	Ni , berriz , gizagaixo atsekabetu hau , indarberri nazala , oi Jainko , zure salbazioak .
PRED:	But now I am the Most High Priest who has been given to you in your presence .
GOLD:	Then I will praise God 's name with singing , and I will honor him with thanksgiving .

ID:	936
INPUT:	Adierazi nire , Jainko Jaun honen , mezua : Zure aurka nator , Sidon , zure kontura jantziko naiz ospez . Zure aurka epaia bete eta neure santutasuna agertzean , denek jakingo dute ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	This message came to me from the Sovereign Lord : I am sending you to you in the land of Sidon , and I will give you glory to you . They will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	Give the people of Sidon this message from the Sovereign Lord : “ I am your enemy , O Sidon , and I will reveal my glory by what I do to you.When I bring judgment against youand reveal my holiness among you , everyone watching will knowthat I am the Lord .

ID:	937
INPUT:	Goraipa zaitzatela herriek , oi Jainko , goraipa zaitzatela herri guztiek !
PRED:	Let the whole world sing for joy , for all the nations of the earth will praise you .
GOLD:	Then the earth will yield its harvests , and God , our God , will richly bless us .

ID:	938
INPUT:	Gelditu harekin denboraldi bat , zure anaiari haserrea baretu arte .
PRED:	Let them go with your brother , and the Lord will be with him .
GOLD:	Stay there with him until your brother cools off .

ID:	939
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin zaiona egin zuen Amatziasek ; ez , ordea , David bere arbasoak bezain zintzo . Bere aita Joaxen antzera jokatu zuen Amatziasek ere .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , but he was just as he had done .
GOLD:	Amaziah did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , but not like his ancestor David . Instead , he followed the example of his father , Joash .

ID:	940
INPUT:	Jesusek galdetu zien : — Eta zuek , nor naizela diozue ? Pedrok erantzun : — Jainkoaren Mesias .
PRED:	Jesus asked them , “ Why do you know that I am the Messiah ? ”
GOLD:	Then he asked them , “ But who do you say I am ? ” Peter replied , “ You are the Messiah sent from God ! ”

ID:	941
INPUT:	Saulen etxekoak eta <unk> liskarretan zebiltzan bitartean , Abner <unk> joan zen Saulen etxean .
PRED:	When Saul 's men were very old , Saul and his men arrived at the home of Saul .
GOLD:	As the war between the house of Saul and the house of David went on , Abner became a powerful leader among those loyal to Saul .

ID:	942
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin ez zaiona egin zuten israeldarrek , eta hark madiandarren menpe eduki zituen zazpi urtez .
PRED:	The Israelites did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , and he destroyed the people of Israel .
GOLD:	The Israelites did evil in the Lord 's sight . So the Lord handed them over to the Midianites for seven years .

ID:	943
INPUT:	<unk> bat-batean heriotza gertatzen bada , barre egiten du hark errugabearen zoritxarraz .
PRED:	And when I have seen under the power of death , everyone who speaks against him .
GOLD:	When a plague sweeps through , he laughs at the death of the innocent .

ID:	944
INPUT:	Jainkoak bere santutegitik esan zuen : « Sikem hiria poz-pozik neureganatuko dut , Sukot <unk> jabetuko .
PRED:	God said to his people , “ I have heard that the great city of Shechem , for I have heard that the city of Damascus , and I will destroy them .
GOLD:	But Moab , my washbasin , will become my servant , and I will wipe my feet on Edomand shout in triumph over Philistia . ”

ID:	945
INPUT:	Salomonen gainerako jarduerak , lehenengotik azkenera , liburuotan daude idatziak : « Natan Profetaren Kronika » , « Xiloko Ahiasen <unk> » eta Nebaten seme Jeroboami buruz « Ido <unk> <unk> <unk> » izeneko liburuetan .
PRED:	The rest of the events of the events of Solomon 's reign , from beginning to be recorded in The Book of the History of Solomon : “ The rest of the events of the events of the events of King Solomon 's reign , who was in charge of the Book of the History of Solomon 's reign of the History of the events of the events of Solomon 's reign of Solomon 's reign of the events of Solomon 's reign of the events of the events of the events of the events of the events of Solomon 's reign of Solomon 's reign of Solomon 's reign of Solomon 's reign of the events of Solomon 's reign of Solomon 's reign of Solomon 's reign of Solomon 's reign of Solomon 's reign of Solomon 's reign of Solomon 's reign of Solomon 's reign . ”
GOLD:	The rest of the events of Solomon 's reign , from beginning to end , are recorded in The Record of Nathan the Prophet , and The Prophecy of Ahijah from Shiloh , and also in The Visions of Iddo the Seer , concerning Jeroboam son of Nebat .

ID:	946
INPUT:	Laino-adarra eman <unk> egunez , su-adarra gauez , egin behar zuten bidea argitzeko .
PRED:	When the people of Israel saw that the people of the pillar of cloud could be able to see the path of darkness .
GOLD:	You led our ancestors by a pillar of cloud during the day and a pillar of fire at night so that they could find their way .

ID:	947
INPUT:	Era berean , Jaunaren etxerako behar ziren beste gauza guztiak ere eginarazi zituen Salomonek : aldarea , urrezkoa ; eskainiriko ogiak jartzeko mahaia , urrezkoa ;
PRED:	In the same way , Solomon also made the Temple of the Lord , and he made all the utensils of the altar , along with the table .
GOLD:	Solomon also made all the furnishings of the Temple of the Lord : the gold altar ; the gold table for the Bread of the Presence ;

ID:	948
INPUT:	entzun zuk zerutik beraren otoitza eta eskaria , eta emaiozu garaipena .
PRED:	O God , hear their prayers from heaven and lead them into their tents .
GOLD:	then hear their prayers from heaven and uphold their cause .

ID:	949
INPUT:	Zure bi bularrakbi gazelakume biritxi , lili artean bazkatzen .
PRED:	Your breasts are as beautiful as a deer , like a cedars of Lebanon .
GOLD:	Your breasts are like two fawns , twin fawns of a gazelle grazing among the lilies .

ID:	950
INPUT:	« Hitzaldia bukatu ondoren , ofizialek buruzagiak izendatuko dituzte <unk> .
PRED:	“ But if the king had taken , they will kill him and kill him .
GOLD:	When the officers have finished speaking to their troops , they will appoint the unit commanders .

ID:	951
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Koreren semeen poema .
PRED:	O Lord , how long I will praise you ?
GOLD:	O God , we have heard it with our own ears — our ancestors have told usof all you did in their day , in days long ago :

ID:	952
INPUT:	urre eta zilarrez <unk> <unk> eta mailuz josiak , eror ez daitezen .
PRED:	They will be ashamed of silver and gold . They will not be ashamed of silver or gold .
GOLD:	They decorate it with gold and silverand then fasten it securely with hammer and nailsso it wo n't fall over .

ID:	953
INPUT:	Bihotz lasaia gorputzaren bizia , bekaizkeria <unk> parekoa .
PRED:	It is the one who gives glory to the body of life .
GOLD:	A peaceful heart leads to a healthy body ; jealousy is like cancer in the bones .

ID:	954
INPUT:	Isaiasek erantzun zien : « Emaiozue zeuen nagusiari Jaunaren mezu hau : “ Ez beldurtu entzun dituzun hitzengatik ; ni iraintzeko esan dituzte halakoak Asiriako erregearen ofizial horiek .
PRED:	Then Isaiah said to him , “ This is what the Lord says : Do not be afraid of the people of Assyria , for they have heard me from the king of Assyria .
GOLD:	the prophet replied , “ Say to your master , ‘ This is what the Lord says : Do not be disturbed by this blasphemous speech against me from the Assyrian king 's messengers .

ID:	955
INPUT:	Handik Iturriko ate aldera eta Erregearen <unk> jo nuen , baina gainean ninderaman abereak ez zuen handik igarotzeko lekurik .
PRED:	Then I went out to the gate of the king and saw that I was going to meet you , but there was no food for the night .
GOLD:	Then I went to the Fountain Gate and to the King 's Pool , but my donkey could n't get through the rubble .

ID:	956
INPUT:	Gero , jendeari eta ikasleei dei eginik , esan zien Jesusek : « Nire ondoren etorri nahi duenak uko egin biezaio bere buruari , bere gurutzea hartu eta jarrai biezat .
PRED:	Then Jesus called out to the people and said to his disciples , “ If you want me to live , if you want to enter your cross , follow my way , and if you want to follow me .
GOLD:	Then , calling the crowd to join his disciples , he said , “ If any of you wants to be my follower , you must give up your own way , take up your cross , and follow me .

ID:	957
INPUT:	Gutizia handikoak liskarrak sorrarazten ; konfiantza Jaunarengan duena asebetea izango .
PRED:	You will sing your instructions to the Lord ; the godly will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	Greed causes fighting ; trusting the Lord leads to prosperity .

ID:	958
INPUT:	<unk> ditut zure ondorengoak , nazioen sorburu egingo zaituteta erregeak aterako dirazuregandik .
PRED:	I will destroy your descendants , and your descendants will be your descendants .
GOLD:	I will make you extremely fruitful . Your descendants will become many nations , and kings will be among them !

ID:	959
INPUT:	« Ez dut koloka egingo — dio bere baitan — ; zoriontsu izango naiz beti , <unk> gabe » .
PRED:	“ I will not be glad , ” says the Lord . “ I will punish you , and I will punish you . ”
GOLD:	They think , “ Nothing bad will ever happen to us ! We will be free of trouble forever ! ”

ID:	960
INPUT:	Zergatik iraintzen nauzue zeuen idolatriazko jardueraz , bizitzera etorri zareten Egipton jainko arrotzei intsentsua errez ? Horrela , suntsipena erakarriko duzue zeuen gainera , eta madarikazio eta iseka-gai bihurtuko zarete munduko nazio guztien aurrean .
PRED:	Why are you so angry with your hands ? Why have you come to Egypt ? Why have you brought me on my fury ? I have made you a god of all the nations of the world , and you will make you a mockery of my people .
GOLD:	Why provoke my anger by burning incense to the idols you have made here in Egypt ? You will only destroy yourselves and make yourselves an object of cursing and mockery for all the nations of the earth .

ID:	961
INPUT:	Hara , badatoz honako hau esango den egunak : “ Zorionekoak <unk> , haurrik sortu ez duten sabelak eta <unk> eman ez duten bularrak ” .
PRED:	“ Therefore , when the people of Egypt will say to you , ‘ This time will be like a few who are buried in her hands . '
GOLD:	For the days are coming when they will say , ‘ Fortunate indeed are the women who are childless , the wombs that have not borne a child and the breasts that have never nursed . '

ID:	962
INPUT:	eta esan bertako nagusiari : « Maisuak galdetzen dizu non duen ikasleekin Pazko-bildotsa jateko tokia » .
PRED:	“ Well , ” he said , “ I will give you a new meal for the Passover meal . ”
GOLD:	say to the owner , ‘ The Teacher asks : Where is the guest room where I can eat the Passover meal with my disciples ? '

ID:	963
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> ditut , etxeez jabe daitezen . Nik bukaraziko <unk> harrokeriaeta profanatu egingo <unk> santutegiak .
PRED:	I will give glory to your ancestors , and I will give myself to my people . I will give myself to my people , and I will destroy them .
GOLD:	I will bring the most ruthless of nationsto occupy their homes.I will break down their proud fortressesand defile their sanctuaries .

ID:	964
INPUT:	Jesus eta legea
PRED:	Jesus and the Law
GOLD:	Teaching about Divorce

ID:	965
INPUT:	Lurraldea ikertu zuten bi gizonei esan zien Josuek : « Zoazte emagalduaren etxera eta atera bera eta beraren ahaideak , zin egin zenioten bezala » .
PRED:	So Joshua went out to the men of the men of Israel and told them , “ Go back to the home of your relatives and your relatives , just as he had promised . ”
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Joshua said to the two spies , “ Keep your promise . Go to the prostitute 's house and bring her out , along with all her family . ”

ID:	966
INPUT:	Moisesek , bada , esan zion herriari : « Aukeratu gizonak eta har ditzatela armak gudurako , Madianen aurka Jaunak erabaki duen mendekua hartzera joateko .
PRED:	So Moses said to the people of Israel , “ Let 's go to war against us and lead us into battle against us .
GOLD:	So Moses said to the people , “ Choose some men , and arm them to fight the Lord 's war of revenge against Midian .

ID:	967
INPUT:	Aldi hartan , Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosorren ofizialek Jerusalemen kontra igo eta setiatu egin zuten .
PRED:	At that time King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon attacked King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon and attacked him .
GOLD:	During Jehoiachin 's reign , the officers of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came up against Jerusalem and besieged it .

ID:	968
INPUT:	Jauna , bihotz-bihotzez nahi zaitut goretsi , zure izena , Goi-goiko hori , kantuz ospatu ,
PRED:	O Lord , I have given you your unfailing love to your name .
GOLD:	I will be filled with joy because of you.I will sing praises to your name , O Most High .

ID:	969
INPUT:	<unk> , <unk> erregea , <unk> laguntzera etorri zen ; baina Josuek garaitu egin zituen bera eta beraren gudaroste osoa , bat ere bizirik utzi gabe .
PRED:	At that time the king of Assyria came to kill him , but they all the people of Israel and all the people of Israel . But Joshua did not kill him .
GOLD:	During the attack on Lachish , King Horam of Gezer arrived with his army to help defend the town . But Joshua 's men killed him and his army , leaving no survivors .

ID:	970
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> , bi zutabe egin zituen ; bederatzina metro ziren gora eta seina metro <unk> .
PRED:	At that time , two cherubim were 71/2 feet tall and 71/2 feet tall . Their feet were 71/2 feet tall .
GOLD:	Huram cast two bronze pillars , each 27 feet tall and 18 feet in circumference .

ID:	971
INPUT:	Alabaina , herrian hori gehiago zabal ez dadin , mehatxatu egingo ditugu , gaurdanik Jesusen izena inori aipa ez diezaioten » .
PRED:	But we will not listen to the people of Israel , for we will not be saved . We will not believe that Jesus had not been saved . ”
GOLD:	But to keep them from spreading their propaganda any further , we must warn them not to speak to anyone in Jesus ' name again . ”

ID:	972
INPUT:	<unk> isekak
PRED:	Paul 's Final Words
GOLD:	The Burial of Jesus

ID:	973
INPUT:	Izan gogoan zeuek ere esklabo izan zinetela Egipton eta Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak askatu zintuztela . Horregatik ematen dizuet gaur agindu hau .
PRED:	Remember that you have been slaves in Egypt , so that the Lord your God has given you today .
GOLD:	Remember that you were once slaves in the land of Egypt and the Lord your God redeemed you ! That is why I am giving you this command .

ID:	974
INPUT:	Izurritea bidaliko dizut , odola isuriko da zure kaleetan ; hildakoak hiri erdian eroriko dira alde guztietatik egingo dizuten erasopean . Orduan , denek jakingo dute ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	I will pour out your blood on the streets of the streets , and I will pour out your blood on every side . Then they will know that I am the Lord , and they will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	I will send a plague against you , and blood will be spilled in your streets.The attack will come from every direction , and your people will lie slaughtered within your walls.Then everyone will knowthat I am the Lord .

ID:	975
INPUT:	Gorets bezate zeru-lur eta <unk> bertan bizi diren guztiek .
PRED:	Let all the earth be filled with joy and earth .
GOLD:	For God will save Jerusalemand rebuild the towns of Judah.His people will live thereand settle in their own land .

ID:	976
INPUT:	Ez zion inori ere berarekin joaten utzi , Pedro , Santiago eta honen anaia Joani izan ezik .
PRED:	“ Do n't let anyone go with him , John 's brother , James , and John .
GOLD:	Then Jesus stopped the crowd and would n't let anyone go with him except Peter , James , and John ( the brother of James ) .

ID:	977
INPUT:	Mendebaldetik , atariaren zabaleran , hogeita bost metro oihal izango dira , hogei zutabe eta hogei oin dituztela .
PRED:	The young goat will be cut off from the entrance to the entrance of silver , and twenty posts are twenty bases under each frame .
GOLD:	The curtains on the west end of the courtyard will be 75 feet long , supported by ten posts set into ten bases .

ID:	978
INPUT:	Jainkoak zabal egin beza Jafet ! Bizi bedi Semen oihal-etxoletan ! Izan bedi Kanaan Jafeten esklabo ! »
PRED:	For God is the father of Canaan , for he has given those who are descendants of Canaan . ”
GOLD:	May God expand the territory of Japheth ! May Japheth share the prosperity of Shem , and may Canaan be his servant . ”

ID:	979
INPUT:	dirua eta altxorrak bezala bilatzen saiatzen bazara ,
PRED:	If you are poor and poor , if you are poor ,
GOLD:	Search for them as you would for silver ; seek them like hidden treasures .

ID:	980
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Aaroni : « Ez duzu lursailik izango zeure ondaretzat israeldarrei emango diedan lurraldean . Neu izango nauzu ondare eta mantenu beste israeldarren artean .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ You must not be your special possession of the tribe of Israel . I will give you a special possession of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Aaron , “ You priests will receive no allotment of land or share of property among the people of Israel . I am your share and your allotment .

ID:	981
INPUT:	( 23 , <unk> )
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Religious Reforms
GOLD:	Hope despite the Disaster

ID:	982
INPUT:	Eta Aaroni esan zion : « Hartu ontzi bat , bete lau litro manaz eta ezarri Jaunaren aurrean , ondorengo belaunaldientzat gordez » .
PRED:	Then he said to Aaron , “ Take some of the flour and give you two quarts of choice flour to the Lord your God . ”
GOLD:	Moses said to Aaron , “ Get a jar and fill it with two quarts of manna . Then put it in a sacred place before the Lord to preserve it for all future generations . ”

ID:	983
INPUT:	« Oparo bedeinkatuko ditut bertako biltegiak , ogiz aseko behartsuak .
PRED:	I will bless you , and I will bless you .
GOLD:	I will bless this city and make it prosperous ; I will satisfy its poor with food .

ID:	984
INPUT:	Haiek esan zioten : — Gezurra . Esaguzu zer zioen . Jehuk , orduan : — Tira , bada ; hauxe esan dit : « Hau dio Jaunak : Israelgo errege gantzutzen zaitut » .
PRED:	They told him , “ Who are you doing this ? ” Jehu said . “ Who is you ? ” Jehu said , “ Now tell me the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	“ You 're hiding something , ” they said . “ Tell us . ” So Jehu told them , “ He said to me , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I have anointed you to be king over Israel . ' ”

ID:	985
INPUT:	Bedeinka beza ene arimak Jauna ! Jauna , ene Jainko , bai handia zarela ! <unk> eta handitasunez zaude jantzia ,
PRED:	May the Lord be my God , for I have heard that you have seen the Lord your God , and that you have seen my strength .
GOLD:	Let all that I am praise the Lord.O Lord my God , how great you are ! You are robed with honor and majesty .

ID:	986
INPUT:	Antiokian denboraldi bat egin ondoren , berriro atera eta <unk> eta <unk> barrena joan zen , ikasle guztiak gogoberotuz .
PRED:	When they arrived at Antioch , some of the believers came back and saw that some of the believers had been healed .
GOLD:	After spending some time in Antioch , Paul went back through Galatia and Phrygia , visiting and strengthening all the believers .

ID:	987
INPUT:	Israeldarrak Egiptotik irten eta bigarren urtean , urtearen lehen hilean , honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi Sinai basamortuan :
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the Lord came out of Egypt , along with the second year of Sinai . He said to Moses ,
GOLD:	A year after Israel 's departure from Egypt , the Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai . In the first month of that year he said ,

ID:	988
INPUT:	Jonasek oso gaizki hartu zuen Jaunaren erabakia eta sumindu egin zen .
PRED:	He made the skies for the Lord , and he became angry with them .
GOLD:	This change of plans greatly upset Jonah , and he became very angry .

ID:	989
INPUT:	Altxatu ziren denak eta Pilatogana eraman zuten Jesus .
PRED:	So they went to Pilate and brought Jesus to Pilate .
GOLD:	Then the entire council took Jesus to Pilate , the Roman governor .

ID:	990
INPUT:	Eta mahastitik kanpora bota eta hil egin zuten . « Zer egingo ote die , bada , mahasti-jabeak ?
PRED:	Then he threw him out and killed him . “ What do you go ? ” they asked . “ What do you mean ? ”
GOLD:	So they dragged him out of the vineyard and murdered him . “ What do you suppose the owner of the vineyard will do to them ? ” Jesus asked .

ID:	991
INPUT:	Nik , Pedrok , Jesu Kristoren apostolu honek , <unk> , Galazia , <unk> , Asia eta <unk> lurraldeetan atzerritar bezala sakabanaturik bizi zaretenoi idazten dizuet .
PRED:	“ This is what I am writing to the apostle of Christ Jesus Christ , the Gentiles , who had been sent by the power of the province of Asia , and I am in the province of the province of Asia .
GOLD:	This letter is from Peter , an apostle of Jesus Christ.I am writing to God 's chosen people who are living as foreigners in the provinces of Pontus , Galatia , Cappadocia , Asia , and Bithynia .

ID:	992
INPUT:	Moises herriarekin egiten ari zena ikusirik , aitaginarrebak galdegin zion : — Zer ari zara egiten herriarekin ? Nola ari zara zeu bakarrik epaitzen , jendea egun osoan zutik egotera behartuz ?
PRED:	When Moses saw the people , he asked him , “ What are you doing ? What do you want ? ” “ Why do you go to the people of Israel ? ”
GOLD:	When Moses ' father-in-law saw all that Moses was doing for the people , he asked , “ What are you really accomplishing here ? Why are you trying to do all this alone while everyone stands around you from morning till evening ? ”

ID:	993
INPUT:	Hegazti <unk> zituzten <unk> adarretan , basapiztia guztiek kumeak azpian , herri guztietako jendea bizi <unk> babespean .
PRED:	And when they saw that all the trees that all the wild animals that scurry along with all the surrounding nations , and all the people who had been able to kill them .
GOLD:	The birds nested in its branches , and in its shade all the wild animals gave birth.All the great nations of the worldlived in its shadow .

ID:	994
INPUT:	Erdaingabea , hau da , bere zakil-muturra erdaindu ez duen gizasemea , herritik bota egingo duzue , nire ituna hautsi duelako » .
PRED:	For if the man has been circumcised , he must not cut his body into a single piece of sheep . You must cut off my covenant with my covenant , and you must cut off my covenant . ”
GOLD:	Any male who fails to be circumcised will be cut off from the covenant family for breaking the covenant . ”

ID:	995
INPUT:	<unk> eta beraien agintariek ez zuten Jesus aintzat hartu eta , berau <unk> , larunbatero sinagogan irakurtzen dituzten profeziak bete zituzten .
PRED:	But when they were in the synagogue , Jesus did n't know that he was in the synagogue and in the synagogue of the synagogue was written in the synagogue .
GOLD:	The people in Jerusalem and their leaders did not recognize Jesus as the one the prophets had spoken about . Instead , they condemned him , and in doing this they fulfilled the prophets ' words that are read every Sabbath .

ID:	996
INPUT:	<unk> burusoil daude dolutan , <unk> mutu . <unk> bizirik geldituok , noiz <unk> dituzue gorputzak ?
PRED:	And when they see that the man who has been very old , how can you see that when they were filled with him ?
GOLD:	Gaza will be humiliated , its head shaved bald ; Ashkelon will lie silent.You remnant from the Mediterranean coast , how long will you cut yourselves in mourning ?

ID:	997
INPUT:	« Hartu <unk> batzuk eta sartu faraoiaren <unk> jauregi aurrean dagoen buztinezko <unk> ; egin hori judatarren aurrean ,
PRED:	“ Take some of these prophets and prophets in the palace of Pharaoh and prophets who were standing before the king of Egypt .
GOLD:	“ While the people of Judah are watching , take some large rocks and bury them under the pavement stones at the entrance of Pharaoh 's palace here in Tahpanhes .

ID:	998
INPUT:	« Ongi ezagutzen ditut zuen <unk> nire aurka dituzuen <unk> .
PRED:	“ I know that you are very angry with me .
GOLD:	“ Look , I know what you 're thinking.I know the schemes you plot against me .

ID:	999
INPUT:	Maltzurkeriaz betea , beti asmo <unk> sesioan ibiltzen da .
PRED:	He will keep all his friends , and they will be able to hold him away .
GOLD:	Their perverted hearts plot evil , and they constantly stir up trouble .

ID:	1000
INPUT:	Nik <unk> eta <unk> besoak , baina haiek <unk> asmatzen .
PRED:	But when I saw that they were filled with power , they saw that they were filled with power .
GOLD:	I trained them and made them strong , yet now they plot evil against me .

ID:	1001
INPUT:	Egiptotik , mila eta berrehun guda-gurdi , hirurogei mila zaldizko eta zenbatu ezin ahalako <unk> , <unk> eta <unk> <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	They were filled with great chariots and chariots , with chariots , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , and Samaria .
GOLD:	He came with 1,200 chariots , 60,000 horses , and a countless army of foot soldiers , including Libyans , Sukkites , and Ethiopians .

ID:	1002
INPUT:	<unk> irtengo zarete , bakoitzak bere <unk> duenetik , eta <unk> zaituztete » .
PRED:	And if you see that you are under your power , and if you are under every kind of power , you will know that you are under your power . ”
GOLD:	You will be led out through the ruins of the wall ; you will be thrown from your fortresses , ” says the Lord .

ID:	1003
INPUT:	Itzuli eta Jehuri jakinarazi ziotenean , esan zuen honek : — Horrela bete da Jaunak bere zerbitzari Elias <unk> bidez esan zuena : zakurrek irentsiko zutela Izreelgo landan Jezabelen haragia ,
PRED:	So Jehu told Jehu , “ This is what the Lord had told him , ‘ Elijah 's servant , ' Elijah said , “ Elijah 's servants will eat the fruit of Jezreel . ”
GOLD:	When they returned and told Jehu , he stated , “ This fulfills the message from the Lord , which he spoke through his servant Elijah from Tishbe : ‘ At the plot of land in Jezreel , dogs will eat Jezebel 's body .

ID:	1004
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak hitz egin zidan
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me ,
GOLD:	Then I received this message from the Lord :

ID:	1005
INPUT:	Zain geratu behar al dut hauek ez dutelako hitz egiten , hor <unk> ezer erantzun gabe ?
PRED:	Do n't you know these things , because they do n't know what they have done ?
GOLD:	Should I continue to wait , now that you are silent ? Must I also remain silent ?

ID:	1006
INPUT:	Oso bestela , ikusi zuten Jainkoak jentilei berri ona hots egiteko aukeratu ninduela , Pedro juduei hots egiteko aukeratu zuen bezala .
PRED:	But if you saw the Good News about the Gentiles , Paul chose the Gentiles to preach the Good News to the Jews .
GOLD:	Instead , they saw that God had given me the responsibility of preaching the gospel to the Gentiles , just as he had given Peter the responsibility of preaching to the Jews .

ID:	1007
INPUT:	Jaunak nahi izan <unk> <unk> <unk> sustraiak <unk> berria bezala <unk> . Ez zuen duintasunik , ez <unk> , ez gure <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	And when the Lord saw that they were able to be able to see that they have been able to be able to know that we have been able to know that we have been able to kill him .
GOLD:	My servant grew up in the Lord 's presence like a tender green shoot , like a root in dry ground.There was nothing beautiful or majestic about his appearance , nothing to attract us to him .

ID:	1008
INPUT:	Hauen ondoren <unk> iloba eta Uriasen seme zen Meremotek jardun zuen lanean ; harantzago , berriz , Mexezabeelen iloba eta Berekiasen seme zen <unk> , eta honen aldamenean Baanaren seme Tzadokek .
PRED:	Then Johanan son of Kareah and grandson of Shaphan and grandson of Ahikam son of Ahikam and grandson of Shaphan and grandson of Shaphan . Then he became the son of Shaphan and grandson of Shaphan and grandson of Uriah .
GOLD:	Meremoth son of Uriah and grandson of Hakkoz repaired the next section of wall . Beside him were Meshullam son of Berekiah and grandson of Meshezabel , and then Zadok son of Baana .

ID:	1009
INPUT:	Batzuek atxilotu egin nahi zuten , baina inork ez zion eskurik ezarri .
PRED:	Some of them tried to arrest him , but no one could save him .
GOLD:	Some even wanted him arrested , but no one laid a hand on him .

ID:	1010
INPUT:	Berehala , atzera begiratu eta Jesus ikusi zuen zutik , baina ez zen konturatu Jesus zela .
PRED:	When Jesus saw them , he saw Jesus , he did n't see what he meant .
GOLD:	She turned to leave and saw someone standing there . It was Jesus , but she did n't recognize him .

ID:	1011
INPUT:	Gupida izango diozu Sioni berriro , <unk> <unk> garaia ; bai , heldu da garaia !
PRED:	Then you will be sure that the time of salvation will be filled with great power .
GOLD:	For your people love every stone in her wallsand cherish even the dust in her streets .

ID:	1012
INPUT:	<unk> egiten <unk> , ia-ia ezin zuten sinetsi , nire aurpegi argiaren irrikaz zeuden .
PRED:	As soon as they were hungry , and they could n't believe in me .
GOLD:	When they were discouraged , I smiled at them.My look of approval was precious to them .

ID:	1013
INPUT:	Gero , Moisesek esan zien : « Ez dezala inork biharamunerako ezer gorde » .
PRED:	Then Moses said to them , “ Do n't let anyone eat any meat until the next morning . ”
GOLD:	Then Moses told them , “ Do not keep any of it until morning . ”

ID:	1014
INPUT:	Txunditurik geldituko dira denak Jaunak eramango zaituzten herrietan , koplak aterako dizkizuete eta iseka egingo .
PRED:	The Lord will bless you , and they will bless you .
GOLD:	You will become an object of horror , ridicule , and mockery among all the nations to which the Lord sends you .

ID:	1015
INPUT:	Haur hauxe eskatzen nion Jaunari eta eman dit eskatzen niona .
PRED:	I would speak to the Lord , and they would listen to me .
GOLD:	I asked the Lord to give me this boy , and he has granted my request .

ID:	1016
INPUT:	Izurriz joko ditut eta <unk> kenduko , eta horiek baino herri handi eta <unk> sorraraziko dut zuregandik .
PRED:	I will destroy you and your people , and I will destroy you and your people , and I will give you great power .
GOLD:	I will disown them and destroy them with a plague . Then I will make you into a nation greater and mightier than they are ! ”

ID:	1017
INPUT:	Izen ona zuen <unk> eta <unk> senideen artean .
PRED:	But when he learned that his brothers and sisters , he became very sick .
GOLD:	Timothy was well thought of by the believers in Lystra and Iconium ,

ID:	1018
INPUT:	Berdin zuek : <unk> zintzoak jendaurrean , baina barrutik itxurakeriaz eta gaiztakeriaz beteak .
PRED:	But if you see the poor man , let them fall away , but those who do evil .
GOLD:	Outwardly you look like righteous people , but inwardly your hearts are filled with hypocrisy and lawlessness .

ID:	1019
INPUT:	<unk> bat honela mintzatu zen : — Har ditzagun hirian gelditzen diren <unk> bost , hirian gelditzen diren israeldar guztien bukaera bera izango baitute bestela ere . Bidal ditzagun eta ikusiko dugu .
PRED:	At that time the men of Israel said , “ I will be able to see that some of the people of Israel will be killed , and they will see that the men of Israel will see and be able to see . ”
GOLD:	One of his officers replied , “ We had better send out scouts to check into this . Let them take five of the remaining horses . If something happens to them , it will be no worse than if they stay here and die with the rest of us . ”

ID:	1020
INPUT:	zuek ez aldendu elkarketa-etxolaren sarreratik , hil nahi ez baduzue , olioz Jaunari sagaratuak <unk> » . Moisesek agindu bezala egin zuten .
PRED:	But if you turn away from the sanctuary of the Lord , you must not die in front of the Tabernacle , just as Moses had commanded him . ”
GOLD:	But you must not leave the entrance of the Tabernacle or you will die , for you have been anointed with the Lord 's anointing oil . ” So they did as Moses commanded .

ID:	1021
INPUT:	Herri horien artean ez duzue atsedenik izango , ezta zeuen oinak lasai non pausaturik ere , bihotza ikaraz , begiak tristuraz eta barrua atsekabez beteko baitizkizue Jaunak .
PRED:	You must not rest of their enemies , for they have no rest in your eyes . Your eyes have seen the Lord 's eyes , and the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will keep your eyes from all who fear him .
GOLD:	There among those nations you will find no peace or place to rest . And the Lord will cause your heart to tremble , your eyesight to fail , and your soul to despair .

ID:	1022
INPUT:	Ardi galduaren parabola
PRED:	Parable of the Great Feast
GOLD:	Parable of the Lost Sheep

ID:	1023
INPUT:	Handik , <unk> ekialdean dagoen Riblara jaitsiko da ; gero , Genesaret <unk> ekialdetik <unk> <unk> <unk> joango da
PRED:	Then they will turn away from the east side of the Jordan River , and they will know that they will know that they were baptized .
GOLD:	then down to Riblah on the east side of Ain . From there the boundary will run down along the eastern edge of the Sea of Galilee ,

ID:	1024
INPUT:	Eta Jubileu Urtea iristean , Tzelofhaden alaben ondarea behin betiko erantsiko litzaioke senarren leinukoari eta gure arbasoen leinutik banandurik geldituko » .
PRED:	When the first allotment of land came to the clans of the clans of the clans of our ancestors , then I will give you your ancestors to your ancestors . ”
GOLD:	Then when the Year of Jubilee comes , their portion of land will be added to that of the new tribe , causing it to be lost forever to our ancestral tribe . ”

ID:	1025
INPUT:	Bere zangoak moztu eta ozpina edaten <unk> bidez mezuak bidaltzen dituenak .
PRED:	His own eyes have poured out his hands on his head , and when he comes from his own hands .
GOLD:	Trusting a fool to convey a messageis like cutting off one 's feet or drinking poison !

ID:	1026
INPUT:	<unk> hilko zarete , zeuen etsaien lurpean <unk> geldituko .
PRED:	You will die in your enemies , and you will know that they will be able to kill you .
GOLD:	You will die among the foreign nations and be devoured in the land of your enemies .

ID:	1027
INPUT:	Hil aharia eta , haren odoletik harturik , <unk> zirtatuko duzu .
PRED:	When he died , he will take some of the blood and pour out his finger .
GOLD:	Then slaughter the ram , and splatter its blood against all sides of the altar .

ID:	1028
INPUT:	Pilatok erantzun zion : — Judua ote naiz , bada , ni ? Zeure herrikoek eta apaizburuek ekarri zaituzte niregana . Zer egin duzu ?
PRED:	Then Pilate asked him , “ Who is you who brought you from the Temple ? Why have you brought me to me ? ”
GOLD:	“ Am I a Jew ? ” Pilate retorted . “ Your own people and their leading priests brought you to me for trial . Why ? What have you done ? ”

ID:	1029
INPUT:	<unk> berez jaioa gizaki da , Espiritutik jaioa espiritu .
PRED:	For the spirit of a spirit is born , and the spirit of God 's spirit are born .
GOLD:	Humans can reproduce only human life , but the Holy Spirit gives birth to spiritual life .

ID:	1030
INPUT:	ez duzue zutarri sakraturik egingo , gorroto baititu Jaunak zuen Jainkoak halako gauzak .
PRED:	You must not commit adultery , for the Lord your God has punished them .
GOLD:	And never set up sacred pillars for worship , for the Lord your God hates them .

ID:	1031
INPUT:	Txalmatu zuen astoa eta esan zion morroiari : — Eraman astoa <unk> eta ez gelditu bidean nik esan arte .
PRED:	Then a donkey came to the donkey and asked him , “ I 'm going to meet with you , and I would n't kill you . ”
GOLD:	So she saddled the donkey and said to the servant , “ Hurry ! Do n't slow down unless I tell you to . ”

ID:	1032
INPUT:	Orduan , zazpi ontziak azken zazpi <unk> beterik zeuzkaten zazpi aingeruetako batek etorri eta esan zidan : « Zatoz , emaztegaia erakutsi behar dizut , Bildotsaren emaztea » .
PRED:	Then one of the seven angels who were filled with the great beast , and all the angels came to me . “ Come , ” he said , “ Come with me , my wife , my wife , and I will give you one of the Lamb . ”
GOLD:	Then one of the seven angels who held the seven bowls containing the seven last plagues came and said to me , “ Come with me ! I will show you the bride , the wife of the Lamb . ”

ID:	1033
INPUT:	Neu naiz Jauna , zuen Jainko izateko Egiptotik igoarazi zintuztena . Izan zaitezte santu , ni santua naiz eta .
PRED:	I am the Lord your God , who brought you out of Egypt for you . I am the holy .
GOLD:	For I , the Lord , am the one who brought you up from the land of Egypt , that I might be your God . Therefore , you must be holy because I am holy .

ID:	1034
INPUT:	Hau duzue zeuen hiri <unk> , aspaldidanik eraikia ? Hau , urrutian <unk> zituena ?
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who have been destroyed ? What sorrow awaits you who destroyed the cities of Egypt ?
GOLD:	Is this silent ruin all that is left of your once joyous city ? What a long history was yours ! Think of all the colonists you sent to distant places .

ID:	1035
INPUT:	Handik zenbait egunen buruan , Agripa erregea eta Berenize iritsi ziren Zesareara , Festo agurtzera .
PRED:	About that time later King Agrippa and the king of Assyria arrived at Caesarea , when they arrived at Caesarea .
GOLD:	A few days later King Agrippa arrived with his sister , Bernice , to pay their respects to Festus .

ID:	1036
INPUT:	Sar zaitezte haitzuloetan , gorde lurreko leizeetan , Jauna beldurgarrieta ospe distiratsuz agertzean , lurra <unk> etortzean .
PRED:	When the people of the earth walk in the sea , the Lord will protect the earth in his glory of the earth , when they saw the earth in the clouds of the earth .
GOLD:	When the Lord rises to shake the earth , his enemies will crawl into holes in the ground.They will hide in caves in the rocksfrom the terror of the Lordand the glory of his majesty .

ID:	1037
INPUT:	Begira , senideok , ez dezala zuetako inork bihotz gaizto eta sinesgaberik izan , Jainko <unk> aldenduko duenik .
PRED:	So I will not be afraid of you , dear brothers and sisters , and I will punish you .
GOLD:	Be careful then , dear brothers and sisters . Make sure that your own hearts are not evil and unbelieving , turning you away from the living God .

ID:	1038
INPUT:	Ondoren , erdainkuntza eman zion itunaren ezaugarri ; hala , Isaak jaio zitzaionean , zortzigarren egunean erdaindu egin zuen Abrahamek ; berdin egin zuen Isaakek ere Jakobekin , eta Jakobek hamabi <unk> .
PRED:	Then the people of Israel gave birth to the covenant of the covenant that the covenant he was born when Abraham was born , Isaac was circumcised , and Jacob had been circumcised . And when Isaac had been circumcised , Isaac , Isaac , and Jacob was with his sons , and Jacob .
GOLD:	“ God also gave Abraham the covenant of circumcision at that time . So when Abraham became the father of Isaac , he circumcised him on the eighth day . And the practice was continued when Isaac became the father of Jacob , and when Jacob became the father of the twelve patriarchs of the Israelite nation .

ID:	1039
INPUT:	Zergatik gastatu zeuen <unk> utziko zaituzten <unk> , eta <unk> ez zaituzteten gauzetan ? Entzun niri arretaz , eta ongi jango duzue , janari gozo <unk> zarete .
PRED:	Why do you know that the land of your livestock and fig trees that you have been able to kill me ? Why are you doing such things that you want to eat ?
GOLD:	Why spend your money on food that does not give you strength ? Why pay for food that does you no good ? Listen to me , and you will eat what is good.You will enjoy the finest food .

ID:	1040
INPUT:	( 2 Kro 9 , 1-12 )
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Solomon 's Wealth and Splendor

ID:	1041
INPUT:	Gero , alaba izan zuen , eta Dina eman zion izen .
PRED:	Then Mary became the daughter of Shechem , and he gave birth to Mary .
GOLD:	Later she gave birth to a daughter and named her Dinah .

ID:	1042
INPUT:	« Nire Aitak nire esku utzi du dena . Eta inork ez du ezagutzen Semea nor den , Aitak baizik ; ezta Aita nor den ere , Semeak baizik eta Semeak agertu nahi dionak » .
PRED:	“ The Father has given me a hand , but no one can know the Father who does not know the Son of the Father . He is the Father who knows the Son and the Son of God . ”
GOLD:	“ My Father has entrusted everything to me . No one truly knows the Son except the Father , and no one truly knows the Father except the Son and those to whom the Son chooses to reveal him . ”

ID:	1043
INPUT:	Handik aldi batera , Jainkoak probatu egin nahi izan zuen Abraham eta dei egin zion : — Abraham ! Honek erantzun : — Hemen nauzu !
PRED:	At that time God chose Abraham , Abraham , Abraham , and Abraham said , “ Abraham , Abraham , Abraham , Abraham , Abraham ! ” “ Yes , here is here ! ”
GOLD:	Some time later , God tested Abraham 's faith . “ Abraham ! ” God called . “ Yes , ” he replied . “ Here I am . ”

ID:	1044
INPUT:	Hala ere , ez ziren muinoetako kultu-lekuak desagertu ; jendeak jarraitu egiten zuen halako muinoetan opariak eskaintzen eta intsentsua erretzen .
PRED:	But he did not destroy the pagan shrines , and the people still offered sacrifices and burned incense on the pagan shrines .
GOLD:	One day King Joash said to the priests , “ Collect all the money brought as a sacred offering to the Lord 's Temple , whether it is a regular assessment , a payment of vows , or a voluntary gift .

ID:	1045
INPUT:	Hau dio Jaunak : « <unk> <unk> ona duenean , esan ohi da : “ Ez dezagun honda , ardoa ugari dakar eta ” . Halaxe jokatuko dut nik <unk> zerbitzarien <unk> : ez dut herria erabat hondatuko .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ If you have seen what the Lord has done , we have done , and if we have been able to kill you , I will destroy all the people of Israel , and they will know that they will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	“ But I will not destroy them all , ” says the Lord . “ For just as good grapes are found among a cluster of bad ones ( and someone will say , ‘ Do n't throw them all away — some of those grapes are good ! ' ) , so I will not destroy all Israel.For I still have true servants there .

ID:	1046
INPUT:	Gero , haien zakuak <unk> bete , bakoitzari bere dirua itzuli eta biderako jan-edariak emateko agindu zuen . Eta hala egin zieten .
PRED:	Then they ate their sacks , and they gave them a money to give them food and grain . Then they went to the olive oil and gave them food .
GOLD:	Joseph then ordered his servants to fill the men 's sacks with grain , but he also gave secret instructions to return each brother 's payment at the top of his sack . He also gave them supplies for their journey home .

ID:	1047
INPUT:	Erregeak galdegin zion etiopiarrari : — Onik al da Absalom gaztea ? <unk> erantzun zuen : — <unk> ahal zaie ene errege jaunaren etsaiei eta erregearen kontra kalte egiteko jaiki ziren guztiei mutilari gertatu zaiona !
PRED:	The king asked him , “ Who is the king of Aram ? ” “ He was very angry with my lord the king , ” the king replied , “ I have done to be very angry with my enemies . ”
GOLD:	“ What about young Absalom ? ” the king demanded . “ Is he all right ? ” And the Ethiopian replied , “ May all of your enemies , my lord the king , both now and in the future , share the fate of that young man ! ”

ID:	1048
INPUT:	Baina printzeak emaitza bere <unk> bati egiten badio , ondare-zati hori <unk> arte bakarrik izango da <unk> ; gero , <unk> itzuliko zaio . Izan ere , beronen semeei bakarrik dagokie herentzian ondare hori .
PRED:	“ But if the prince has been given to the number of authority , they will be able to be able to obey the number of their children , and they will be given to those who have children , and they will be given to their children .
GOLD:	But if the prince gives a gift of land from his inheritance to one of his servants , the servant may keep it only until the Year of Jubilee , which comes every fiftieth year . At that time the land will return to the prince . But when the prince gives gifts to his sons , those gifts will be permanent .

ID:	1049
INPUT:	Ondoren , <unk> seme <unk> , <unk> , gobernatu zuen Israel .
PRED:	Then when the leaders of Israel saw that he became king of Israel , and he judged Israel .
GOLD:	After Elon died , Abdon son of Hillel , from Pirathon , judged Israel .

ID:	1050
INPUT:	Eta ikasleek galdegin zioten : — Maisu , zeinek egin zuen bekatu hau itsu jaiotzeko , beronek ala beronen gurasoek ?
PRED:	Then the disciples asked him , “ Teacher , this man who had been born to be born or in this place ? ”
GOLD:	“ Rabbi , ” his disciples asked him , “ why was this man born blind ? Was it because of his own sins or his parents ' sins ? ”

ID:	1051
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	The Lord also said to Moses ,

ID:	1052
INPUT:	« Neure zuzentasunaren ordainaeman dit Jaunak , neure jokabide garbiaren saria .
PRED:	“ The Lord has rejected me ; I have not rejected my commands .
GOLD:	The Lord rewarded me for doing right ; he restored me because of my innocence .

ID:	1053
INPUT:	<unk> Libnara ;
PRED:	They left Hazeroth and camped at Hazeroth .
GOLD:	They left Rimmon-perez and camped at Libnah .

ID:	1054
INPUT:	« Epaiketarako bularrekoa artelanez egingo duzu , efodaren gai berak erabiliz : urrea , purpura more , gorri eta gorrimina eta liho-hari bihurritua .
PRED:	“ Make the chestpiece to the ephod , and he will make the chestpiece to the ephod with blue , purple , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	“ Then , with great skill and care , make a chestpiece to be worn for seeking a decision from God . Make it to match the ephod , using finely woven linen embroidered with gold and with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .

ID:	1055
INPUT:	<unk> aitari albistea eman ziona , « Mutikoa jaio zaizu » esanez , eta pozarren jarri zuena !
PRED:	But when the boy heard about him , he said to him , “ I have been born to you ! ”
GOLD:	I curse the messenger who told my father , “ Good news — you have a son ! ”

ID:	1056
INPUT:	Baina biharamun egunsentian har bat bidali zuen Jainkoak ; harrak jo eta landarea ihartu egin zen .
PRED:	But when the next morning the next day , God sent a few of them away and left it .
GOLD:	But God also arranged for a worm ! The next morning at dawn the worm ate through the stem of the plant so that it withered away .

ID:	1057
INPUT:	Nebaten seme Jeroboamen eta Ahiasen seme Baxaren senitarteak zigortu nituen bezalaxe zigortuko dut Akaben senitartea ere .
PRED:	I am the leader of Jeroboam son of Jeroboam son of Nebat , just as the family of Jeroboam son of Nebat had promised .
GOLD:	I will destroy the family of Ahab as I destroyed the families of Jeroboam son of Nebat and of Baasha son of Ahijah .

ID:	1058
INPUT:	SAUL <unk> <unk> ( 8 , 1 — 15 , 35 )
PRED:	And when they heard that the Ark of the Covenant were crucified ,
GOLD:	Israel Requests a King

ID:	1059
INPUT:	Haurtxoak <unk> dizkiete begien aurrean , etxeak hustu , emazteak bortxatu .
PRED:	In this way , some of the women who have been married , and the women who have married her husband .
GOLD:	Their little children will be dashed to death before their eyes.Their homes will be sacked , and their wives will be raped .

ID:	1060
INPUT:	Jakobek , <unk> , <unk> eta <unk> heze batzuk harturik , zuritu egin zituen .
PRED:	But when they saw that they were weak , and some of them were slaughtered by eating and drinking wine .
GOLD:	Then Jacob took some fresh branches from poplar , almond , and plane trees and peeled off strips of bark , making white streaks on them .

ID:	1061
INPUT:	<unk> etorri orduko , ordea , <unk> itzuli ziren ; eta etsaien menpe utzi zenituen , berauen hankapean . Deiadar egin zizuten berriro , eta zuk zerutik entzun ; sarritan atera zenituen <unk> erruki handiaz .
PRED:	But when they came out and saw that they had taken away from their enemies , they destroyed them with your enemies and rescued you from their enemies . But when I heard them , and you were very angry with great power .
GOLD:	“ But as soon as they were at peace , your people again committed evil in your sight , and once more you let their enemies conquer them . Yet whenever your people turned and cried to you again for help , you listened once more from heaven . In your wonderful mercy , you rescued them many times !

ID:	1062
INPUT:	Nire aurka borrokatzeko gauza bada eta hiltzen banau , zuen morroi izanen gara . Baina ni berorren aurka borrokatzeko gauza izan eta hiltzen badut , zuek izanen zarete gure morroi , eta zerbitzatu egin beharko gaituzue .
PRED:	But if I have sinned against you , I will destroy you and kill you . But if I have sinned against you , I will be your servant , and you will be your servant , and you will be your servant .
GOLD:	If he kills me , then we will be your slaves . But if I kill him , you will be our slaves !

ID:	1063
INPUT:	Zuei zer esanik asko dudan arren , ez dut <unk> eta tintaz egin nahi . <unk> joatea espero dut eta aurrez aurre hitz egitea ; horrela poz bete-betea izango dugu elkarrekin .
PRED:	I have given many things to you , but I do n't know that I want you to deal with with such snakes , and I will give you great joy . And we will see that we will be with joy .
GOLD:	I have much more to say to you , but I do n't want to do it with paper and ink . For I hope to visit you soon and talk with you face to face . Then our joy will be complete .

ID:	1064
INPUT:	bati , mirariak egiteko ahalmena ; beste bati , Jainkoaren izenean hitz egitea ; bati , espiritu faltsua eta <unk> bereiztea ; besteari , hizketa arrotzez mintzatzea , eta beste bati , hizketa horren esanahia <unk> .
PRED:	One of the miraculous signs and wonders in one of the name of God . He spoke to one of his people , and they would speak in tongues , and they will speak in tongues .
GOLD:	He gives one person the power to perform miracles , and another the ability to prophesy . He gives someone else the ability to discern whether a message is from the Spirit of God or from another spirit . Still another person is given the ability to speak in unknown languages , while another is given the ability to interpret what is being said .

ID:	1065
INPUT:	Honen aldamenean , <unk> seme Barukek egin zuen lan , Zokotik Eliaxib apaiz nagusiaren etxeko ateraino .
PRED:	When he heard his son , he became the leader of the high priest , the high priest of the high priest .
GOLD:	Next to him was Baruch son of Zabbai , who zealously repaired an additional section from the angle to the door of the house of Eliashib the high priest .

ID:	1066
INPUT:	Gederot , <unk> , Naama , Makeda : hamasei hiri eta beraien herrixkak .
PRED:	The fortified towns with their surrounding villages , named after their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	Gederoth , Beth-dagon , Naamah , and Makkedah — sixteen towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	1067
INPUT:	Egun hartan bertan , Jainkoak agindu bezala , bere etxeko gizaseme guztiak erdaindu zituen Abrahamek : Ismael bere semea eta esklabo guztiak , nahiz etxean jaioak nahiz diruz <unk> .
PRED:	In that day God had commanded him , “ Son of man , Abraham , Abraham , Abraham , Abraham , and all his household were circumcised . In that same way , Abraham 's household were old , and all who were old .
GOLD:	On that very day Abraham took his son , Ishmael , and every male in his household , including those born there and those he had bought . Then he circumcised them , cutting off their foreskins , just as God had told him .

ID:	1068
INPUT:	Abimelekek galdetu zion : — Zer esan nahi du zazpi arkume horiek bereiz <unk> ?
PRED:	Abimelech asked him , “ What do you want ? What should I bring you seven lambs ? ”
GOLD:	Abimelech asked , “ Why have you set these seven apart from the others ? ”

ID:	1069
INPUT:	Hau jendea , hortzak ezpatak <unk> <unk> labanak bezalakoak dituena , herriko dohakabeak irentsieta behartsuak lurretik suntsitzeko !
PRED:	The wicked are like lions , and those who are under the sun are like the poor , and the poor are under the sun .
GOLD:	They have teeth like swordsand fangs like knives.They devour the poor from the earthand the needy from among humanity .

ID:	1070
INPUT:	Aztiek erantzun zioten : — Errege jauna , ez dago munduan gizonik eskatzen duzuna egin dezakeenik . Inongo erregek , handiena eta <unk> izanik ere , ez dio inoiz antzeko gauzarik eskatu igarle edo azti bati .
PRED:	They replied , “ Your Majesty , my lord the king , you have no king of the world , and you have no greater than the king of the world . You have been like a king of Aram , and he has no greater than any god . ”
GOLD:	The astrologers replied to the king , “ No one on earth can tell the king his dream ! And no king , however great and powerful , has ever asked such a thing of any magician , enchanter , or astrologer !

ID:	1071
INPUT:	Beste aingeru bat , suaren gain agintea zuena , irten zen aldaretik eta oihu egin zion ahots handiz igitai zorrotza zuenari : « Hartu igitai zorrotz hori eta bildu lurreko <unk> <unk> , mahatsa heldu-heldua baitago » .
PRED:	Then he raised a angel from the sky on the altar of a burnt offering and a voice from the altar . He shouted to his people , “ Get up with great quantities of grapes , ” he shouted .
GOLD:	Then another angel , who had power to destroy with fire , came from the altar . He shouted to the angel with the sharp sickle , “ Swing your sickle now to gather the clusters of grapes from the vines of the earth , for they are ripe for judgment . ”

ID:	1072
INPUT:	Eta bere neskame Bilha eman zion Jakobi emazte gisa . Elkartu zitzaion Jakob ,
PRED:	Then Jacob gave Jacob a wife to Jacob .
GOLD:	So Rachel gave her servant , Bilhah , to Jacob as a wife , and he slept with her .

ID:	1073
INPUT:	Baina inolako lanik egin ez arren , erruduna errugabe egiten duen Jainkoarengan sinesten duena , sinesmen horri esker onartuko du Jainkoak .
PRED:	But no one can be punished for the righteous , but the righteous person who does not believe in God .
GOLD:	But people are counted as righteous , not because of their work , but because of their faith in God who forgives sinners .

ID:	1074
INPUT:	« Izan begirune gurasoei , eta errespetatu nik aginduriko atseden-eguna . Neu naiz Jauna , zuen Jainkoa .
PRED:	“ For I fear the Lord your ancestors , and I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Each of you must show great respect for your mother and father , and you must always observe my Sabbath days of rest . I am the Lord your God .

ID:	1075
INPUT:	Moises menditik jaitsi zen , legearen harlauzak eskuetan zituela . <unk> bi aldeetatik idatziak zeuden :
PRED:	Then Moses went down to the mountain of Moses and saw that he was sitting on the head of the law of Moses .
GOLD:	Then Moses turned and went down the mountain . He held in his hands the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant . They were inscribed on both sides , front and back .

ID:	1076
INPUT:	Amotzen seme Isaiasek honako mezu hau bidali zion Ezekiasi : « Hau dio Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak : Aditu dut Asiriako errege Senakerib dela-eta egin didazun otoitza .
PRED:	Then Isaiah son of Amoz sent this message to Hezekiah : “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says :
GOLD:	Then Isaiah son of Amoz sent this message to Hezekiah : “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : Because you prayed about King Sennacherib of Assyria ,

ID:	1077
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> banaute ere , Jaunak berekin hartuko nau .
PRED:	Even though I have seen the Lord , I will give me great power .
GOLD:	Even if my father and mother abandon me , the Lord will hold me close .

ID:	1078
INPUT:	Egin itzazu kateak , hilketaz betea baitago herria , indarkeriaz betea hiria .
PRED:	Give thanks to the Most Holy Place , who made great Temple , through the Most Holy Place .
GOLD:	“ Prepare chains for my people , for the land is bloodied by terrible crimes.Jerusalem is filled with violence .

ID:	1079
INPUT:	Hofni eta Pinhas zure bi semeei gertatuko zaiena izango da ezaugarria : egun berean hilko zaizkizu biak .
PRED:	Then the two sons of Gad will be given to your sons , and they will be punished .
GOLD:	And to prove that what I have said will come true , I will cause your two sons , Hophni and Phinehas , to die on the same day !

ID:	1080
INPUT:	Hori ukaezina da ; zaudete , beraz , lasai , itsu-itsuan jokatu gabe .
PRED:	Those who live in safety will be careful to live in safety , and you must live in safety .
GOLD:	Since this is an undeniable fact , you should stay calm and not do anything rash .

ID:	1081
INPUT:	zutabeen oinak brontzezkoak , kakoak eta ziriak zilarrezkoak ; zutabe-gainak ere zilarrez estali zituen ; atariko zutabe guztiek zilarrezko ziriak zituzten .
PRED:	He overlaid the curtains with silver and bronze bases ; he overlaid the curtains with silver hooks and bronze bases .
GOLD:	Each post had a bronze base , and all the hooks and rings were silver . The tops of the posts of the courtyard were overlaid with silver , and the rings to hold up the curtains were made of silver .

ID:	1082
INPUT:	Orgaren gainaldean ur-ontzi baten ezpainak ateratzen ziren metro erdi bat gorantz ; <unk> biribila zen , hirurogeita hamabost zentimetroko diametroa zuelarik . <unk> haietan ere baziren irudi zizelkatuak , <unk> <unk> , ez <unk> .
PRED:	Suddenly , a cart was 71/2 feet tall , and it was 71/2 feet tall . There was a huge man named after all the people of Samaria , and they were very sick .
GOLD:	The top of each cart had a rounded frame for the basin . It projected 11/2 feet above the cart 's top like a round pedestal , and its opening was 21/4 feet across ; it was decorated on the outside with carvings of wreaths . The panels of the carts were square , not round .

ID:	1083
INPUT:	Pozaren pozez jauzi egingo dut zure maitasunagatik , ikusi baituzu nire atsekabea , arduratu baitzara nire <unk> ,
PRED:	I will thank you , O God , for you have seen your power , for you have seen all my troubles .
GOLD:	You have not handed me over to my enemiesbut have set me in a safe place .

ID:	1084
INPUT:	Negar eta intziri egingo <unk> direla eta ; <unk> , <unk> direla eta : erreak gelditu baitira eta hutsik ; ez da ardirik <unk> entzuten , hegazti eta <unk> joanak dira .
PRED:	When the people of Jerusalem saw that those who have been killed , they know that the god of Elijah , Elijah , prophets , prophets , and Elijah , and the wild animals of the sky , and they will know that they are left , and they will know that they will know that they have children .
GOLD:	Should I not punish them for this ? ” says the Lord . “ Should I not avenge myself against such a nation ? ”

ID:	1085
INPUT:	<unk> , morroia bidali zuen gonbidatuei esatera : “ Etorri , dena gertu dago eta ” .
PRED:	The servant sent him to him , ‘ There is great and great banquet , and the king has come . '
GOLD:	When the banquet was ready , he sent his servant to tell the guests , ‘ Come , the banquet is ready . '

ID:	1086
INPUT:	Zulo sakonera jaurti nauzu , <unk> ilunpetara .
PRED:	Then I will cover you with pain , and I will be filled with pain .
GOLD:	Your anger weighs me down ; with wave after wave you have engulfed me.Interlude

ID:	1087
INPUT:	Irakatsi niri ongi bereizten eta ezagutzen , zure <unk> fidatzen bainaiz .
PRED:	You know how I know your commands , and I know that I am filled with you .
GOLD:	I believe in your commands ; now teach me good judgment and knowledge .

ID:	1088
INPUT:	Ibar <unk> <unk> ere , ez dut inolako gaitzen beldurrik , zu nirekin baitzaude : zure <unk> <unk> nau .
PRED:	I have seen how much I have seen , and I have been able to see if they were afraid of your idols , I have heard that you were very angry with me .
GOLD:	Even when I walkthrough the darkest valley , I will not be afraid , for you are close beside me.Your rod and your staffprotect and comfort me .

ID:	1089
INPUT:	Ez ote dugu eskubiderik emakume fededun batekin ibiltzeko , beste apostoluek , Jaunaren anaiek eta Pedrok berak bezala ?
PRED:	Is n't we not a man who is a man named for the people of the Lord ? ” Peter asked .
GOLD:	Do n't we have the right to bring a believing wife with us as the other apostles and the Lord 's brothers do , and as Peter does ?

ID:	1090
INPUT:	<unk> zihoala , Lebi Alfeorena ikusi zuen zerga biltzeko mahaian eseria , eta esan zion : — Jarraitu niri . Lebik zutitu eta jarraitu egin zion .
PRED:	When he realized that he was sitting at the table , he was sitting at the table . “ Follow me , ” he said , “ Follow me . ”
GOLD:	As he walked along , he saw Levi son of Alphaeus sitting at his tax collector 's booth . “ Follow me and be my disciple , ” Jesus said to him . So Levi got up and followed him .

ID:	1091
INPUT:	<unk> , alarguntsen sailean sartzeko , hirurogei urtez gorakoa izan behar du , behin bakarrik ezkondua ,
PRED:	Even if the merchants of the empire , the young men should be married to be married to be married , and he must be married .
GOLD:	A widow who is put on the list for support must be a woman who is at least sixty years old and was faithful to her husband .

ID:	1092
INPUT:	« Bizi bedi Ruben , ez bedi hil , gutxi izan arren beraren gizonak » .
PRED:	The men of Reuben must not die . ”
GOLD:	Moses said this about the tribe of Reuben : “ Let the tribe of Reuben live and not die out , though they are few in number . ”

ID:	1093
INPUT:	horregatik , hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Filistearren kontra ekingo diot , keretarrak <unk> ditut eta itsasertzeko gainerako herriak suntsituko .
PRED:	That is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ The armies of the Philistine rulers have come against the nations , and I will destroy the nations and the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will raise my fist of judgment against the land of the Philistines . I will wipe out the Kerethites and utterly destroy the people who live by the sea .

ID:	1094
INPUT:	Horregatik , hitz egin nire izenean eta adierazi nire , Jainko Jaun honen , mezua : <unk> utzi zaituztete eta zuek <unk> irrikaz zeuden beste nazioak zuetaz jabetu dira , isekaz eta irainez bete zaituztete ;
PRED:	That is why the Sovereign Lord says : Because you have given me this message from the Sovereign Lord , they will kill me and fig tree , and they will kill you .
GOLD:	Therefore , son of man , give the mountains of Israel this message from the Sovereign Lord : Your enemies have attacked you from all directions , making you the property of many nations and the object of much mocking and slander .

ID:	1095
INPUT:	Hau hil zenean , Elat hiria berreskuratu eta berreraiki zuen Uziasek .
PRED:	When Uzziah died , he died , he became the city .
GOLD:	After his father 's death , Uzziah rebuilt the town of Elath and restored it to Judah .

ID:	1096
INPUT:	Izan ere , bakea ereingo dut , mahastiak emango du bere fruitua , lurrak bere <unk> zeruak bere ihintza ; herri honetan bizirik <unk> diet hori guztia .
PRED:	For I will plant peace with peace and prosperity , and I will give you prosperity to your crops , and the earth will know that the earth will be destroyed .
GOLD:	For I am planting seeds of peace and prosperity among you . The grapevines will be heavy with fruit . The earth will produce its crops , and the heavens will release the dew . Once more I will cause the remnant in Judah and Israel to inherit these blessings .

ID:	1097
INPUT:	Betor gurekin , Jauna , zure maitasun leiala , zuregan jarria baitugu esperantza !
PRED:	When the people of Israel heard your unfailing love , we love with unfailing love .
GOLD:	Let your unfailing love surround us , Lord , for our hope is in you alone .

ID:	1098
INPUT:	Entzun zalaparta mendietan : jendetza handia dirudi . Entzun erresumen , bildu diren herrien iskanbila . Jaun <unk> egiten ari <unk> doan gudarosteari .
PRED:	“ Listen to my people , ” they said , “ I have heard a great crowd that they are like a great crowd that the Lord has heard that they are going to kill you . ”
GOLD:	Hear the noise on the mountains ! Listen , as the vast armies march ! It is the noise and shouting of many nations.The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has called this army together .

ID:	1099
INPUT:	Jaunarekin mintzatzeko beraren aurrera sartzen zenean , zapia kentzen zuen irten arte . Ateratzean , Jaunak agindua adierazten zien israeldarrei .
PRED:	When he goes into the place of the Lord 's presence , he threw them into the camp until the Lord had commanded the people of Israel .
GOLD:	But whenever he went into the Tent of Meeting to speak with the Lord , he would remove the veil until he came out again . Then he would give the people whatever instructions the Lord had given him ,

ID:	1100
INPUT:	<unk> , Santiago eta Joan anaiak , Zebedeoren semeak , ikusi zituen ; <unk> ari ziren beren ontzian .
PRED:	James and John , James , John , James , and his brothers saw that they were walking along with them , and they were terrified by their faith .
GOLD:	A little farther up the shore Jesus saw Zebedee 's sons , James and John , in a boat repairing their nets .

ID:	1101
INPUT:	Eta horra Egipto <unk> , iparraldeko herriari emana » .
PRED:	And I know that the people of Egypt were all the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Egypt will be humiliated ; she will be handed over to people from the north . ”

ID:	1102
INPUT:	Emakumeak erantzun zion Eliasi : — Orain badakit Jainkoaren gizona zarena , eta zuk diozuna egiaz Jaunaren hitza dena .
PRED:	“ Well , ” the woman replied , “ you know that you are the Lord your God , and you know that you are the word of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Then the woman told Elijah , “ Now I know for sure that you are a man of God , and that the Lord truly speaks through you . ”

ID:	1103
INPUT:	Baina gaiztoen bidea iluna , ez dakite zerez egingo duten behaztopa .
PRED:	But when they see , they do n't know what they do .
GOLD:	But the way of the wicked is like total darkness.They have no idea what they are stumbling over .

ID:	1104
INPUT:	Pozik eta alai atera zen egun hartan Haman . Baina Mardokeo jauregiko atarian zegoela ikusi zuenean eta ez zela jaikitzen beraren aurrean , ez zirkinik ere egiten , sutan jarri zen Mardokeoren aurka .
PRED:	At that time the king came out to see the king 's palace , but Mordecai saw Mordecai 's palace , and he did not see him in the palace of the king 's palace .
GOLD:	Haman was a happy man as he left the banquet ! But when he saw Mordecai sitting at the palace gate , not standing up or trembling nervously before him , Haman became furious .

ID:	1105
INPUT:	Orduan , ahalmen handiz jokatuko dut eta egiptoarrak joko ditut beraien artean egingo ditudan egintza <unk> ; ondoren , utziko dizuete irteten .
PRED:	Then I will hand the Egyptians with great power , and I will punish them with great power , and they will know that they will know that I am giving you .
GOLD:	So I will raise my hand and strike the Egyptians , performing all kinds of miracles among them . Then at last he will let you go .

ID:	1106
INPUT:	Izan ere , bere bizia gorde nahi duenak galdu egingo du ; bere bizia niregatik galtzen duenak , ordea , gorde egingo du .
PRED:	For if you are my life , you will live in my life . But if you are my life , you will be my life .
GOLD:	If you try to hang on to your life , you will lose it . But if you give up your life for my sake , you will save it .

ID:	1107
INPUT:	Joan zen Gedeon eta antxume bat prestatu zuen eta , hogei <unk> <unk> , legamia gabeko ogiak egin . Gero , okela <unk> eta salda eltzean harturik , arteondo azpira eraman eta Jaunari eskaini zion dena .
PRED:	One day Gideon prepared a young goat and a young goat that had been killed , some of the bread that had been killed , and when he had been healed . Then he took him into the Lord 's presence , and he brought it to the Lord .
GOLD:	Gideon hurried home . He cooked a young goat , and with a basket of flour he baked some bread without yeast . Then , carrying the meat in a basket and the broth in a pot , he brought them out and presented them to the angel , who was under the great tree .

ID:	1108
INPUT:	heriotzatik libratu eta <unk> bizirik gordetzeko .
PRED:	He will rescue us from the power of death , and he will save you from the power of death .
GOLD:	He rescues them from deathand keeps them alive in times of famine .

ID:	1109
INPUT:	« Jaunak bere jardueraren hasieran sortu ninduen , bere lehen egintzen aurretik .
PRED:	“ In the first day the Lord has been born before me .
GOLD:	“ The Lord formed me from the beginning , before he created anything else .

ID:	1110
INPUT:	Jaunak ditu heriotzaeta bizia ematen , berak du Herio Leizera <unk> , berak handik igoarazten .
PRED:	The Lord has given his life ; he will bring the grave into the grave .
GOLD:	The Lord gives both death and life ; he brings some down to the grave but raises others up .

ID:	1111
INPUT:	Zorretan nago , izan ere , greziar herriarekin nahiz greziar ez direnekin , <unk> nahiz <unk> .
PRED:	I am sure that I am not to punish those who do n't realize that the Jews who were in the name of the Gentiles , or when they were on the behalf of the Gentiles , I will punish you .
GOLD:	For I have a great sense of obligation to people in both the civilized world and the rest of the world , to the educated and uneducated alike .

ID:	1112
INPUT:	zuen arbasoek jabetzan hartu zuten lurraldera itzularaziko zaituzte eta beronen jabe bihurtuko zarete ; zeuen arbasoak baino <unk> eta ugariago egingo zaituzte .
PRED:	You will give your ancestors back to the land of your ancestors and your ancestors . You will give you your ancestors as your ancestors , and you will know that your ancestors will be destroyed .
GOLD:	The Lord your God will return you to the land that belonged to your ancestors , and you will possess that land again . Then he will make you even more prosperous and numerous than your ancestors !

ID:	1113
INPUT:	Horrela bete zen Jaunak Jeremias profetaren ahoz esana : « Hirurogeita hamar urtez egongo da utzia lurralde hau , <unk> osoan zehar , Jaunari ukatu zizkioten <unk> bete arte » .
PRED:	This fulfilled the word of the Lord concerning Jeremiah : “ I will rebuild the entire land , ” the Lord told him , “ when he saw that he was very very angry with all the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	So the message of the Lord spoken through Jeremiah was fulfilled . The land finally enjoyed its Sabbath rest , lying desolate until the seventy years were fulfilled , just as the prophet had said .

ID:	1114
INPUT:	Idolatriaren aurkako auzia
PRED:	The Land Given to Egypt
GOLD:	Guidelines for a King

ID:	1115
INPUT:	Jakinarazi zioten Joabi erregea negarrez eta aieneka ari zela <unk> .
PRED:	When the king heard this , he was very angry with me .
GOLD:	As all the people heard of the king 's deep grief for his son , the joy of that day 's victory was turned into deep sadness .

ID:	1116
INPUT:	Jainkoaren aginduen kontra errebelatu <unk> Goi-goikoaren egitasmoa mespretxatu .
PRED:	You have rejected the Most High , and they have given you victory over the Most High .
GOLD:	They rebelled against the words of God , scorning the counsel of the Most High .

ID:	1117
INPUT:	<unk> gupida sortu <unk> eraman <unk> .
PRED:	I will give you authority to know how much they will be able to kill me .
GOLD:	He even caused their captorsto treat them with kindness .

ID:	1118
INPUT:	adoretsuen gantzez <unk> ; Jonatanen uztaia , inoiz atzera egin ez zuena , Saulen ezpata , erabili gabe sekula itzuli ez zena .
PRED:	I have made the spear of Jonathan , and I did not abandon Jonathan . He did not take the sword of Saul 's army , though he had not heard the sword of Saul 's army .
GOLD:	The bow of Jonathan was powerful , and the sword of Saul did its mighty work.They shed the blood of their enemiesand pierced the bodies of mighty heroes .

ID:	1119
INPUT:	Aberats oheratzen da , baina azken aldiz , begiak zabaltzean ez zaio ezer geratzen .
PRED:	There is no one else , but the end is no light .
GOLD:	The wicked go to bed richbut wake to find that all their wealth is gone .

ID:	1120
INPUT:	( 2 Erg 22 , 1-20 ; 23 , 4-20 )
PRED:	The Death of Athaliah
GOLD:	Hilkiah Discovers God 's Law

ID:	1121
INPUT:	Larrialdian askatzaile eta <unk> den Jauna goresteko deia
PRED:	May the Lord be with joy , and I will praise you with joy .
GOLD:	( Psalms 107–150 )

ID:	1122
INPUT:	« Era berean , geure lurraren eta fruta-arbola guztien lehen fruituak Jaunaren etxera eramango ditugu urtero .
PRED:	“ In the same way , we will bring your new wine and new wine to the Lord 's Temple .
GOLD:	We agree to give God our oldest sons and the firstborn of all our herds and flocks , as prescribed in the Law . We will present them to the priests who minister in the Temple of our God .

ID:	1123
INPUT:	aldi hau bete zen egun berean , hain zuzen , atera zen lurralde hartatik Jaunaren herria , gudaroste baten gisa .
PRED:	At that time , the people of Israel left the land of the Lord , and the people of Israel left a land of the Lord .
GOLD:	In fact , it was on the last day of the 430th year that all the Lord 's forces left the land .

ID:	1124
INPUT:	Ez al dit , bada , berak esan arreba zuela ? <unk> ere neba zuela zioen . Nik fede onez eta zintzo jokatu dut .
PRED:	Do n't you realize that he would be my sister ? If he was willing , he would have given me a slave , and I have given you a slave .
GOLD:	Did n't Abraham tell me , ‘ She is my sister ' ? And she herself said , ‘ Yes , he is my brother . ' I acted in complete innocence ! My hands are clean . ”

ID:	1125
INPUT:	<unk> aurkako mezua
PRED:	A Message for Tyre
GOLD:	A Message for Edom

ID:	1126
INPUT:	Goizetik <unk> <unk> dira , oharkabean betiko galtzen .
PRED:	They know that they are weak , but those who do n't know that they are dead .
GOLD:	They are alive in the morning but dead by evening , gone forever without a trace .

ID:	1127
INPUT:	<unk> hauek berriak ziren bete <unk> , eta orain urratuak daude . Gure jantzi eta oinetakoak ere <unk> egin zaizkigu hain bide luzean .
PRED:	And when they saw these things , they were filled with flesh and put on your clothes , and they will put your clothes on your own eyes .
GOLD:	These wineskins were new when we filled them , but now they are old and split open . And our clothing and sandals are worn out from our very long journey . ”

ID:	1128
INPUT:	Jaunak , ordea , esan zien Moisesi eta Aaroni : « Ez zarete nitaz fidatu , nire santutasuna israeldarren aurrean argi azal zedin ; beraz , ez duzue herri hau gidatuko emango diodan lurralderaino » .
PRED:	But the Lord said to Moses and Aaron , “ You must not listen to the people of Israel and tell me , ‘ You will not bring my holiness to the people of Israel . '
GOLD:	But the Lord said to Moses and Aaron , “ Because you did not trust me enough to demonstrate my holiness to the people of Israel , you will not lead them into the land I am giving them ! ”

ID:	1129
INPUT:	Handik alde egin eta bere herrira joan zen Jesus , bere ikasleak ondoren zituela .
PRED:	After this , Jesus left his own home and went home to his own home .
GOLD:	Jesus left that part of the country and returned with his disciples to Nazareth , his hometown .

ID:	1130
INPUT:	Ene senideok , ezin elkartuak dira Jesu Kristo gure Jaun <unk> duzuen fedea eta pertsonen artean <unk> egitea .
PRED:	My dear brothers and sisters , that the Lord Jesus Christ has been able to be with all who are sick and sick .
GOLD:	My dear brothers and sisters , how can you claim to have faith in our glorious Lord Jesus Christ if you favor some people over others ?

ID:	1131
INPUT:	Apaizak miatu egingo du , eta kopeta eta <unk> <unk> handitua zuri-gorrixka ageri bada , larruazaleko <unk> antzekoa ,
PRED:	The priest will examine the skin and the person , and when he finds that the person of the beast and the sun will be like a flood , and the person who is like the person who sees it .
GOLD:	The priest must examine him , and if he finds swelling around the reddish white sore anywhere on the man 's head and it looks like a skin disease ,

ID:	1132
INPUT:	Saul , Israelgo erregetza harturik , inguruetako etsai ororen kontra borrokatu zen : moabdar , amondar eta edomdarren kontra , Tzobako erregeen eta filistearren kontra . Nora jo , han nagusitzen zen .
PRED:	When Saul 's kingdom came against the king of Israel , the kings of Israel , the Ammonites , Ammon , Ammonites , Ammonites , and Ammonites , and the Ammonites .
GOLD:	Now when Saul had secured his grasp on Israel 's throne , he fought against his enemies in every direction — against Moab , Ammon , Edom , the kings of Zobah , and the Philistines . And wherever he turned , he was victorious .

ID:	1133
INPUT:	« Hona egiten dizudan agintzaria : herri askoren sorburu izango zara .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : You will be my own people .
GOLD:	“ This is my covenant with you : I will make you the father of a multitude of nations !

ID:	1134
INPUT:	« Gero , atearen ondoko sarreratik , iparralderantz dauden apaizen gela sakratuetara eraman ninduen gizonak . <unk> mendebaldera zegoen leku bat erakutsiz ,
PRED:	“ Then I took the Temple on the south side of the Temple , along with the Temple of the Lord 's Temple and the priests , which is near .
GOLD:	In my vision , the man brought me through the entrance beside the gateway and led me to the sacred rooms assigned to the priests , which faced toward the north . He showed me a place at the extreme west end of these rooms .

ID:	1135
INPUT:	Gero , promes hau egin zuen Jakobek : « Jainkoa neurekin badut , eta bidaia honetan babesten banau , jateko <unk> janzteko <unk> badizkit ,
PRED:	Then Jacob said to him , “ I am the God of my family , the God of Jacob , and I know that I am able to see you , and when they were able to turn from me .
GOLD:	Then Jacob made this vow : “ If God will indeed be with me and protect me on this journey , and if he will provide me with food and clothing ,

ID:	1136
INPUT:	Hil zenean , haren seme Pekahias izan zen errege , beraren ordez .
PRED:	When he died , he became the next king .
GOLD:	When Menahem died , his son Pekahiah became the next king .

ID:	1137
INPUT:	gorriz tindaturiko ahari-larruak eta larru finak , akazia-zura ,
PRED:	fine goatskin leather ; fine goatskin leather ;
GOLD:	tanned ram skins and fine goatskin leather ; acacia wood ;

ID:	1138
INPUT:	zure gaiztakeria agerian gelditu aurretik ? Orain , edomdarren eta berauen auzoko filistearren hirien iseka-gai zara , alde guztietatik mespretxatzen zaituztelarik .
PRED:	When you were afraid of your wickedness , you have turned away from the Philistines . You have turned away from the Philistines , and you have turned away from many lands .
GOLD:	But now your greater wickedness has been exposed to all the world , and you are the one who is scorned — by Edom and all her neighbors and by Philistia .

ID:	1139
INPUT:	<unk> eseriko da . Zilarra eta urrea <unk> eta garbitzen dituenak bezala garbituko ditu Lebiren ondorengoak , Jaunari opariak behar bezala eskain <unk> .
PRED:	And when they are kind of silver and gold and gold , they will serve as well as well as well as the Lord has commanded you to serve as a sin offering and the Lord .
GOLD:	He will sit like a refiner of silver , burning away the dross . He will purify the Levites , refining them like gold and silver , so that they may once again offer acceptable sacrifices to the Lord .

ID:	1140
INPUT:	Erruki nitaz , ene Jainko , zeure maitasunaz , suntsitu nire hobena , zeure neurrigabeko gupidaz .
PRED:	Do not remember me in your unfailing love , O God , for I have rescued you from your unfailing love .
GOLD:	For I recognize my rebellion ; it haunts me day and night .

ID:	1141
INPUT:	Elkartu zen Jakob Rakelekin ere , eta Lea baino maiteago izan zuen . Beste zazpi urtez lan egin behar izan zuen <unk> .
PRED:	Rachel had more more than Rachel , and she became more than Rachel . He had more than seven years , and he became very sick .
GOLD:	So Jacob slept with Rachel , too , and he loved her much more than Leah . He then stayed and worked for Laban the additional seven years .

ID:	1142
INPUT:	<unk> utzi zituzten lau aingeruak : prest zeuden hilabete , egun , ordu eta une hartan gizon-emakumeen herena hiltzeko .
PRED:	At that time the angel came to see four days , and they were waiting for three days . In that time , a few days were waiting for a few days .
GOLD:	Then the four angels who had been prepared for this hour and day and month and year were turned loose to kill one-third of all the people on earth .

ID:	1143
INPUT:	Beraz , senideok , aukera itzazue zeuen artean izen oneko zazpi gizon , Espiritu Santuaz eta jakinduriaz beteak , eta haiei emango diegu egiteko hori .
PRED:	Therefore , dear brothers and sisters , be blessed among you . Give them seven who are the Holy Spirit , and we will give them the Holy Spirit to them .
GOLD:	And so , brothers , select seven men who are well respected and are full of the Spirit and wisdom . We will give them this responsibility .

ID:	1144
INPUT:	Hara , Jainko Jaun <unk> lurrera botako <unk> , zuhaitzari <unk> zaizkion bezala , nahiz eta garaiak eta sendoak izan .
PRED:	“ Look , what the Sovereign Lord says : I will destroy you like the power of the earth , and we will be able to save you from the power of the earth .
GOLD:	But look ! The Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , will chop down the mighty tree of Assyria with great power ! He will cut down the proud.That lofty tree will be brought down .

ID:	1145
INPUT:	<unk> amaiera zen , ilunabarra , gau betea eta iluntasuna zetozen .
PRED:	When the vine was filled , the sun was filled with terror , and the evening were covered with terror .
GOLD:	It was at twilight , in the evening , as deep darkness fell .

ID:	1146
INPUT:	eta , esker oneko otoitza egin ondoren , zatitu eta esan zuela : « Hau nire gorputza da , zuentzat ematen dena . Egizue hau nire oroigarri » .
PRED:	He gave thanks to God and placed it on it and blessed it . He said , “ This is what you have made . This is my body with you . ”
GOLD:	and gave thanks to God for it . Then he broke it in pieces and said , “ This is my body , which is given for you . Do this in remembrance of me . ”

ID:	1147
INPUT:	<unk> izan bitez behin bakarrik ezkonduak , beren seme-alabak eta etxea ongi gobernatzen <unk> ;
PRED:	For when they have been able to be very old , they will be very very very old , and they will be very very very old .
GOLD:	A deacon must be faithful to his wife , and he must manage his children and household well .

ID:	1148
INPUT:	Konturatu zen Jesus eta esan zien : « Zer ari zarete zeuen artean ogirik ez daukazuela eta , sinesmen gutxikook ?
PRED:	Jesus knew that he was saying , “ What do you know ? Why do you know your faith and faith ?
GOLD:	Jesus knew what they were saying , so he said , “ You have so little faith ! Why are you arguing with each other about having no bread ?

ID:	1149
INPUT:	Jesus Jaunaren laguntzaz , Timoteo laster zuengana bidaltzeko itxaropena dut , zuen berri jakinik ni ere bizkor nadin .
PRED:	As soon as they pray to the Lord , I will send you back to you .
GOLD:	If the Lord Jesus is willing , I hope to send Timothy to you soon for a visit . Then he can cheer me up by telling me how you are getting along .

ID:	1150
INPUT:	Ez nion <unk> ere adierazi Jainkoaren eraginez Jerusalemen egin nahi nuena . Gauez atera nintzen gizon banaka batzuekin , neu ninderaman astoa beste abererik hartu gabe .
PRED:	I told you what I had done to you , what I told you about to come from Jerusalem and a few of the people of Jerusalem . There were no better than a few of the animal .
GOLD:	I slipped out during the night , taking only a few others with me . I had not told anyone about the plans God had put in my heart for Jerusalem . We took no pack animals with us except the donkey I was riding .

ID:	1151
INPUT:	haren kriseiluak argi egiten zuen nire gain , argi harekin egiten nuen ilunpetan aurrera .
PRED:	I watched his lamps on the light , and I stand in darkness .
GOLD:	when he lit up the way before meand I walked safely through the darkness .

ID:	1152
INPUT:	apaiz nahiz herri xehe , nagusi nahiz morroi , etxekoandre nahiz neskame , <unk> nahiz <unk> , <unk> nahiz <unk> , <unk> nahiz zordun .
PRED:	“ If you are my lord , my servant , my servant , my servant , and if my servant , my servant , and if they were very old , and if they will know that the man of God and his servants , and when they were on him . ”
GOLD:	Priests and laypeople , servants and masters , maids and mistresses , buyers and sellers , lenders and borrowers , bankers and debtors — none will be spared .

ID:	1153
INPUT:	Zeren ez baitiot inoiz uko egin <unk> <unk> asmoa oso-osorik zuei <unk> .
PRED:	For if you do not know that I am sure that you would be able to kill you .
GOLD:	for I did n't shrink from declaring all that God wants you to know .

ID:	1154
INPUT:	<unk> du haragia , <unk> eta <unk> .
PRED:	And when they have flesh and fig tree , they will know that they have seen , and they will be broken .
GOLD:	The scales on its back are like rows of shieldstightly sealed together .

ID:	1155
INPUT:	Giza gorpuren bat ukitu eta garbikuntzarik egiten ez duenak Jaunaren egoitza profanatzen du ; beraz , bota egingo dute Israel herritik . Garbikuntzako urez <unk> izan ez denez , kutsaturik jarraitzen du .
PRED:	Anyone who does not touch any bird must be ceremonially unclean by the sacred tent of the Lord will be cut off from the community of Israel , and they will be defiled by the community of Israel who are ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	All those who touch a dead body and do not purify themselves in the proper way defile the Lord 's Tabernacle , and they will be cut off from the community of Israel . Since the water of purification was not sprinkled on them , their defilement continues .

ID:	1156
INPUT:	Itxaron Jaunarengan ! Eutsi gogor , izan kemen ! Itxaron Jaunarengan !
PRED:	I am in the Lord , for I am ready for you .
GOLD:	Wait patiently for the Lord.Be brave and courageous.Yes , wait patiently for the Lord .

ID:	1157
INPUT:	Biharamunean atera eta Zesareara heldu ginen . Han , apostoluen zazpi <unk> bat zen Felipe <unk> etxera joan ginen , eta bertan gelditu .
PRED:	The next day we went out to Caesarea and some of the apostles came to meet him and saw the apostles who had been baptized with him .
GOLD:	The next day we went on to Caesarea and stayed at the home of Philip the Evangelist , one of the seven men who had been chosen to distribute food .

ID:	1158
INPUT:	Haren arnasak <unk> <unk> ditueta <unk> sugarrak irteten .
PRED:	For fire will be filled with fire , and fire will be filled with fire .
GOLD:	Who can strip off its hide , and who can penetrate its double layer of armor ?

ID:	1159
INPUT:	Legearen eta profeten <unk> egin ondoren , sinagogako buruzagiek ohar hau bidali zieten : « Anaiok , herriari adore emateko zerbait esateko baldin baduzue , mintza zaitezte » .
PRED:	When the prophets heard that the prophets were in the synagogue , the prophets sent in the synagogue to ask , “ If you want to tell the people about these things , do n't want to be sure to tell you what you should do . ”
GOLD:	After the usual readings from the books of Moses and the prophets , those in charge of the service sent them this message : “ Brothers , if you have any word of encouragement for the people , come and give it . ”

ID:	1160
INPUT:	Jaunaren testigantza egin eta haren mezua adierazi ondoren , Pedro eta Joan Jerusalemera itzuli ziren , Samariako auzo askotan berri ona zabalduz .
PRED:	This message came to the message of the Lord concerning Jerusalem and went to Jerusalem to Jerusalem and Jerusalem to Jerusalem . So Paul returned to Jerusalem and preached the Good News .
GOLD:	After testifying and preaching the word of the Lord in Samaria , Peter and John returned to Jerusalem . And they stopped in many Samaritan villages along the way to preach the Good News .

ID:	1161
INPUT:	« Ez biezaio inork inori <unk> errietarik egin . Zure aurka dut auzia , apaiz .
PRED:	“ Do n't be sure that no one would happen to you , for I have sinned against you .
GOLD:	“ Do n't point your finger at someone elseand try to pass the blame ! My complaint , you priests , is with you .

ID:	1162
INPUT:	<unk> mingarria
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Recovery
GOLD:	Israel , an Unfaithful Wife

ID:	1163
INPUT:	Jehudik <unk> <unk> irakurtzen zitueneko , erregeak <unk> moztu eta sutara botatzen zituen , erroilu guztia sutan erre arte .
PRED:	For when the king heard what was happening , he threw down and thrown into the fire . He burned down the fire and burned incense until the king had burned down on fire .
GOLD:	Each time Jehudi finished reading three or four columns , the king took a knife and cut off that section of the scroll . He then threw it into the fire , section by section , until the whole scroll was burned up .

ID:	1164
INPUT:	Orduan , Efraimgo mendialdean dagoen Tzemaraim gailurrera igo eta honela egin zien oihu Abiasek Jeroboami eta Israel erreinuko gudariei : « Entzun !
PRED:	Then he went up to the hill country of Ephraim and brought him back to the hill country of Ephraim . He said , “ Listen to Israel ! ”
GOLD:	When the army of Judah arrived in the hill country of Ephraim , Abijah stood on Mount Zemaraim and shouted to Jeroboam and all Israel : “ Listen to me !

ID:	1165
INPUT:	Nire larruazala erabat desitxuratua dago , gaitzez estalia <unk> bezala .
PRED:	My eyes are filled with old , and my soul are filled with pain .
GOLD:	With a strong hand , God grabs my shirt.He grips me by the collar of my coat .

ID:	1166
INPUT:	« Urrundu elkarte honetatik , bat-batean birrinduko baitut » . Moises eta Aaron lurreraino ahuspeztu ziren ,
PRED:	“ Get rid of this sin , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Moses : “ Place Aaron 's staff permanently before the Ark of the Covenant to serve as a warning to rebels . This should put an end to their complaints against me and prevent any further deaths . ”

ID:	1167
INPUT:	Burdina <unk> ateratzen daeta haitzak <unk> kobrea lortzen .
PRED:	But when they see this , it is an eagle .
GOLD:	They know where to dig iron from the earthand how to smelt copper from rock .

ID:	1168
INPUT:	Eta Hildakoen <unk> egingo ote ditut ? Heriotzatik askatu egingo ote ditut ? Herio , non dituk heure izurriak ? <unk> , non dituk heure gaitzak ? Ez dut gupidarik bihotzean » .
PRED:	Who will be able to see the dead ? Who will be saved ? Who will be able to be able to save you from the grave ? Why do you think of your hearts ? ”
GOLD:	“ Should I ransom them from the grave ? Should I redeem them from death ? O death , bring on your terrors ! O grave , bring on your plagues ! For I will not take pity on them .

ID:	1169
INPUT:	Hazael Eliseogandik alde egin eta bere jaunarengana joan zen . Erregeak galdetu zion : — Zer esan dizu Eliseok ? Hazaelek erantzun : — Baietz , sendatuko zarela .
PRED:	The king of Judah went back and asked him , “ What do you want ? ” But the king asked him , “ What will you do ? ” “ Yes , ” he replied .
GOLD:	When Hazael left Elisha and went back , the king asked him , “ What did Elisha tell you ? ” And Hazael replied , “ He told me that you will surely recover . ”

ID:	1170
INPUT:	Hor menditik , Itsaso <unk> bidea hartu zuten israeldarrek , Edom lurraldea inguratzeko asmoz . Bidean , ordea , adorea galdu
PRED:	“ I am sending you out the Red Sea to fight against the Red Sea , but they rebelled against the Red Sea .
GOLD:	Then the people of Israel set out from Mount Hor , taking the road to the Red Sea to go around the land of Edom . But the people grew impatient with the long journey ,

ID:	1171
INPUT:	<unk> <unk>
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Zalmunna
GOLD:	Bodily Discharges

ID:	1172
INPUT:	Orduan , bai , beldurrik gabe hitz egingo nuke . Baina hori ez da horrela , eta neurez bakarrik behar dut baliatu .
PRED:	Then I will be afraid to do what I do . But I do n't want to do it .
GOLD:	Then I could speak to him without fear , but I can not do that in my own strength .

ID:	1173
INPUT:	Baina <unk> nituen gauza guztiok , baliogabetzat jo nituen Kristorengatik .
PRED:	But when I saw all these things , I came to you from Egypt .
GOLD:	I once thought these things were valuable , but now I consider them worthless because of what Christ has done .

ID:	1174
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun zidan : « <unk> <unk> bazara , nola lehiatu nahi <unk> ? Lurralde <unk> ez <unk> , nola <unk> <unk> inguruko <unk> ?
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ If you know how can I know that if you are under the land of Egypt , how can I know that they were under the land of Egypt ?
GOLD:	“ If racing against mere men makes you tired , how will you race against horses ? If you stumble and fall on open ground , what will you do in the thickets near the Jordan ?

ID:	1175
INPUT:	Faraoiak esan zion Joseri : « Esaiezu anaiei astoak prestatu eta Kanaanera itzultzeko ,
PRED:	Then Pharaoh said to Joseph , “ Go back to your brothers and prepare your journey to prepare . ”
GOLD:	Pharaoh said to Joseph , “ Tell your brothers , ‘ This is what you must do : Load your pack animals , and hurry back to the land of Canaan .

ID:	1176
INPUT:	<unk> eskuak gainean ezarri eta kargua eman zion , Jaunak Moisesen bidez agindu bezala .
PRED:	He placed his hands on his hands on him , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	Moses laid his hands on him and commissioned him to lead the people , just as the Lord had commanded through Moses .

ID:	1177
INPUT:	Gainera , aker bat barkamen-oparitarako , Barkamen Egun handiko <unk> eta eguneroko erre-opariez gain , berauei dagozkien labore- eta isur-opariekin .
PRED:	In that day you must sacrifice a sin offering for the Festival of Shelters , the Festival of Shelters , the Festival of Shelters , and in addition to the regular burnt offering and liquid offering .
GOLD:	You must also sacrifice one male goat for a sin offering . This is in addition to the sin offering of atonement and the regular daily burnt offering with its grain offering , and their accompanying liquid offerings .

ID:	1178
INPUT:	Jende xehea larrutzen duzue , <unk> ordaintzera behartuz . <unk> etxeak egin dituzue , baina ez zarete berorietan biziko ; mahasti bikainak landatu , baina ez <unk> ardorik edango .
PRED:	You have been able to kill you , and if they have been able to kill you , they will have no food , but they have no food , but they will drink wine , but they will drink wine .
GOLD:	You trample the poor , stealing their grain through taxes and unfair rent.Therefore , though you build beautiful stone houses , you will never live in them.Though you plant lush vineyards , you will never drink wine from them .

ID:	1179
INPUT:	<unk> zerion <unk> , su kiskalgarria , ikatz goriak ahotik .
PRED:	At that time they were like a fire , and when they were covered with fire .
GOLD:	He opened the heavens and came down ; dark storm clouds were beneath his feet .

ID:	1180
INPUT:	Jainko santuak galdetzen dizue : « Norekin konparatuko nauzue , norekin berdinduko ? »
PRED:	This is the Holy Spirit says : “ To whom you compare with me ? ”
GOLD:	“ To whom will you compare me ? Who is my equal ? ” asks the Holy One .

ID:	1181
INPUT:	<unk> hau nire gorputzean isuriz , <unk> izateko prestatu nau aurrez .
PRED:	For my body has been poured out his body on my body .
GOLD:	She has poured this perfume on me to prepare my body for burial .

ID:	1182
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zuen : — Kendu harria . Martak , Lazaro zenaren arrebak , erantzun zion : — Jauna , kiratsa botako du , lau egun daramatza eta .
PRED:	Then Jesus said , “ Lazarus , Lazarus , Lazarus , and Lazarus , the Lord , the one of the throne of the Lord , and he will burn on his throne . ”
GOLD:	“ Roll the stone aside , ” Jesus told them.But Martha , the dead man 's sister , protested , “ Lord , he has been dead for four days . The smell will be terrible . ”

ID:	1183
INPUT:	Zeure haserre-suminez , gora jaso eta lurrera jaurti nauzu .
PRED:	He has thrown me into the dust and threw me into the dust .
GOLD:	My life passes as swiftly as the evening shadows.I am withering away like grass .

ID:	1184
INPUT:	Piztu da Jaunaren <unk> <unk> oparoak deseginak dira .
PRED:	For the Lord is their ruin , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Peaceful meadows will be turned into a wastelandby the Lord 's fierce anger .

ID:	1185
INPUT:	Orduan , Jainkoak ur-putzu bat ikusarazi zion Agarri . Honek <unk> urez bete eta edaten eman zion mutikoari .
PRED:	Then God gave him a jar with water , and he gave me a drink with water . He gave it to the boy , and he gave him a drink .
GOLD:	Then God opened Hagar 's eyes , and she saw a well full of water . She quickly filled her water container and gave the boy a drink .

ID:	1186
INPUT:	Baina hori guztia <unk> hasiera da .
PRED:	But this is all meaningless , and everything we have done .
GOLD:	But all this is only the first of the birth pains , with more to come .

ID:	1187
INPUT:	Apaizak ezpataz erori ziren , eta <unk> hiletarik jo ez .
PRED:	The priests and the priest fell on them , and they would not kill him .
GOLD:	Their priests were slaughtered , and their widows could not mourn their deaths .

ID:	1188
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak zuen Jainkoak ez zion aditu nahi izan Balaami , eta haren madarikazioa bedeinkazio bihurtu zuen , maite zaituztelako .
PRED:	But the Lord said to Balaam , “ This is what the Lord says : The Lord loves Balaam , and he loves him .
GOLD:	As long as you live , you must never promote the welfare and prosperity of the Ammonites or Moabites .

ID:	1189
INPUT:	Gizon <unk> zelako ez zioten justiziarik egin . Nork aipatuko du haren ondorengotza ? <unk> egin baitzuten haren bizia lurretik .
PRED:	But those who were terrified , but they thought that he is true , because they have seen his life , and they have seen his life .
GOLD:	He was humiliated and received no justice.Who can speak of his descendants ? For his life was taken from the earth . ”

ID:	1190
INPUT:	<unk> beraiek izan zirela , Balaamek <unk> , israeldarrak Jaunaren aurka altxarazi zituztenak , Peorko hartan ; horregatik , hain zuzen , gertatu zen izurria Jaunaren elkartearen aurka .
PRED:	But when the people of Israel saw that they were afraid of the Lord , when he realized that the people of Israel had led me to sin against the Lord .
GOLD:	“ These are the very ones who followed Balaam 's advice and caused the people of Israel to rebel against the Lord at Mount Peor . They are the ones who caused the plague to strike the Lord 's people .

ID:	1191
INPUT:	Samuelek lo egin zuen egunsentia arte . Goizean ireki zuen Jaunaren etxeko atea . Baina beldur zen ikuskaria Eliri adierazteko .
PRED:	One day Samuel got up early the next morning , and Samuel kept the door of the Lord 's Temple . But the door of Eli 's house .
GOLD:	Samuel stayed in bed until morning , then got up and opened the doors of the Tabernacle as usual . He was afraid to tell Eli what the Lord had said to him .

ID:	1192
INPUT:	Eutsi sendo ! Gogor egin behar dugu geure herriaren eta geure Jainkoaren hiriaren alde ! Egin beza Jaunak ongi <unk> !
PRED:	Now let us go and fight against the people of Israel , for we have done that the Lord our God has given us victory over the city of God .
GOLD:	Be courageous ! Let us fight bravely for our people and the cities of our God . May the Lord 's will be done . ”

ID:	1193
INPUT:	Izan <unk> eta ez nagi ; izan gogoz kartsu , Jauna zerbitzatzeko beti prest .
PRED:	But if they were still angry , and the Lord is ready to strike me , and the spirit of the Lord is pleased .
GOLD:	Never be lazy , but work hard and serve the Lord enthusiastically .

ID:	1194
INPUT:	Jaunaren aintza tenpluko sarreratik altxatu zen eta kerubinen gainean kokatu .
PRED:	The glory of the Lord rose up from the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the glory of the Lord moved out from the entrance of the Temple and hovered above the cherubim .

ID:	1195
INPUT:	Baina profeta zen eta bazekien hark Jainkoak zin eginez hitzeman ziona : beraren odoleko bat ezarriko zuela bere tronuan .
PRED:	But God had promised that he would give you a solemn oath , and he would give you a solemn oath to his own throne .
GOLD:	But he was a prophet , and he knew God had promised with an oath that one of David 's own descendants would sit on his throne .

ID:	1196
INPUT:	Orain zeure esku gaituzu : egiguzu on eta zuzen iruditzen zaizuna .
PRED:	So do n't want you to do whatever you do .
GOLD:	Now we are at your mercy — do to us whatever you think is right . ”

ID:	1197
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Utz nazazu , oraindik ez bainaiz igo Aitarengana . Ea , zoaz nire senideengana eta esaiezu neure eta zuen Aitarengana <unk> , neure eta zuen Jainkoarengana .
PRED:	Jesus said to him , “ I am here here here here here here , ” he said . “ Come and go to the Father and tell me , ‘ Come , and I am the Father of my Father . '
GOLD:	“ Do n't cling to me , ” Jesus said , “ for I have n't yet ascended to the Father . But go find my brothers and tell them , ‘ I am ascending to my Father and your Father , to my God and your God . ' ”

ID:	1198
INPUT:	Orduan , erregeak , pozaren pozez , Daniel <unk> ateratzeko agindu zuen . Atera zutenean , ez zuen urratu bat ere , Jainkoarengan jarri baitzuen bere uste ona .
PRED:	Then Daniel said to him , “ I have heard that the king had given him a great feast in his presence , so he could not see him in his presence .
GOLD:	Then the king gave orders to arrest the men who had maliciously accused Daniel . He had them thrown into the lions ' den , along with their wives and children . The lions leaped on them and tore them apart before they even hit the floor of the den .

ID:	1199
INPUT:	Hark bere hitza lurrera <unk> arin lehiatzen da bere <unk> .
PRED:	For he has revealed his message to the devil , and when he comes from his power .
GOLD:	He sends his orders to the world — how swiftly his word flies !

ID:	1200
INPUT:	baizik eta joan Israel herriko ardi galduengana .
PRED:	So the young woman went to the woman , but the people of Israel returned to the woman .
GOLD:	but only to the people of Israel — God 's lost sheep .

ID:	1201
INPUT:	Ez da santurik Jauna bezalakorik , ez da , izan ere , zu besterik , ez da <unk> Jainkoa adinakorik .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ There will not be no longer , and when you have been filled with people , and they will know that they are in the land of God .
GOLD:	No one is holy like the Lord ! There is no one besides you ; there is no Rock like our God .

ID:	1202
INPUT:	Moisesek eta Aaronek Jaunak agindua egin zuten . Aaronek makila altxatu eta ibaiko ura jo zuen faraoiaren eta funtzionarioen begi aurrean , eta ura odol bihurtu zen .
PRED:	So Moses and Aaron did as the Lord had commanded Moses , and Aaron and the staff of Pharaoh . Then he threw the water into the hands of Pharaoh and the water of Pharaoh .
GOLD:	So Moses and Aaron did just as the Lord commanded them . As Pharaoh and all of his officials watched , Aaron raised his staff and struck the water of the Nile . Suddenly , the whole river turned to blood !

ID:	1203
INPUT:	Zeure <unk> <unk> , indarkeriaz bete eta bekatu egin zenuen . Horregatik , zeure <unk> kendu eta bota egin zintudan menditik , eta kerubin babesle zinen hori ikatz gorien artetik kendu .
PRED:	For when I heard that you have sinned , and when you have sinned against me and rebelled against me , and you were very angry with me .
GOLD:	Your rich commerce led you to violence , and you sinned.So I banished you in disgracefrom the mountain of God.I expelled you , O mighty guardian , from your place among the stones of fire .

ID:	1204
INPUT:	Orduan , nik esan diet : « Ba al du inork urrerik ? » Haiek urrea bildu eta ekarri egin didate ; nik sutara bota eta , hara , zekor hau atera da !
PRED:	Then I said to them , “ Is it the silver for gold ? ” And they brought them out of silver and gold and gold from the fire .
GOLD:	So I told them , ‘ Whoever has gold jewelry , take it off . ' When they brought it to me , I simply threw it into the fire — and out came this calf ! ”

ID:	1205
INPUT:	Baztertu <unk> , jainko arrotzei intsentsua erre <unk> eta idoloak eginez iraindu <unk> , sutu egin zait haserrea toki honen kontra eta ez zait itzaliko ” .
PRED:	For I have put my hands on idols , and they have broken my anger against me and under my anger . I have sinned against you , and I have rejected you . '
GOLD:	For my people have abandoned me and offered sacrifices to pagan gods , and I am very angry with them for everything they have done . My anger will be poured out on this place , and it will not be quenched . '

ID:	1206
INPUT:	Paulok , orduan : — Anaiok , ez nekien apaiz nagusia zenik . Bai , Liburu Santuak dio : Ez <unk> herriko buruzagia .
PRED:	Paul asked them , “ There were not a high council , though they were in the high council , the high council , ” they said , “ There are no longer my lord , my lord the men of the men of Benjamin . ”
GOLD:	“ I 'm sorry , brothers . I did n't realize he was the high priest , ” Paul replied , “ for the Scriptures say , ‘ You must not speak evil of any of your rulers . ' ”

ID:	1207
INPUT:	Larra ezazu , Jauna , <unk> herria , zeurea duzun artaldea ; bakarrik eta sastraka <unk> baita , inguruan lur <unk> arren . Larra bedi Baxan eta <unk> <unk> , antzina bezala .
PRED:	I know that the Lord will give you great army , and you will know that all the wild animals of Egypt , along with all the flocks of livestock , and we will know that we will know that we will know that the Lord .
GOLD:	O Lord , protect your people with your shepherd 's staff ; lead your flock , your special possession.Though they live alone in a thicketon the heights of Mount Carmel , let them graze in the fertile pastures of Bashan and Gileadas they did long ago .

ID:	1208
INPUT:	baita Hexbon eta lautadako hiri guztiak ere : Dibon , <unk> , <unk> ,
PRED:	In the towns of the Jordan River , all the towns of Gad , and all the towns of the surrounding villages .
GOLD:	It included Heshbon and the other towns on the plain — Dibon , Bamoth-baal , Beth-baal-meon ,

ID:	1209
INPUT:	entzun zuk zerutik , bizi zaren toki horretatik , beraien otoitza eta eskaria , eta egiezu zuzenbide .
PRED:	O God , hear your prayers from heaven and curse you from this place that you have heard your prayers .
GOLD:	then hear their prayers and their petition from heaven where you live , and uphold their cause .

ID:	1210
INPUT:	horrela jokatuz , ez al zarete zeuen artean <unk> egiten ari , eta ez al duzue irizpide <unk> epaitzen ?
PRED:	Do you realize that you are so angry with me ? Do you know that you are so angry with all the people of the world ? Why are you afraid of the world ?
GOLD:	does n't this discrimination show that your judgments are guided by evil motives ?

ID:	1211
INPUT:	Josue , hain zuzen , soineko <unk> jantzia zegoen , aingeruaren aurrean zutik .
PRED:	Then Joshua dressed in linen clothing , and he stood in front of them .
GOLD:	Jeshua 's clothing was filthy as he stood there before the angel .

ID:	1212
INPUT:	Gizon zintzo hau gaizkile haien artean bizi zen , eta egunero ikusi eta entzun behar izan zituen <unk> atsekabez betetzen zioten bere bihotz zintzoa .
PRED:	This man who was living among them , and she was faithful to those who heard this , so that all who hear him and obey him .
GOLD:	Yes , Lot was a righteous man who was tormented in his soul by the wickedness he saw and heard day after day .

ID:	1213
INPUT:	Zin egin nizun , bai , Jaunarengatik , Israelen Jainkoarengatik , zure seme Salomon izanen zela nire ondorengo erregea eta bera jarriko zela nire errege-aulkian . Hara , gaur beteko dut zin hura !
PRED:	I have sworn an oath to you , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , the king of Israel , and I will obey my throne .
GOLD:	your son Solomon will be the next king and will sit on my throne this very day , just as I vowed to you before the Lord , the God of Israel . ”

ID:	1214
INPUT:	Davidena . Eskerrak ematen dizkizut , Jauna , bihotz-bihotzez , beste jainkoen aurrean zu kantuz ospatzen .
PRED:	I thank you , Lord , for I have given you his unfailing love .
GOLD:	I give you thanks , O Lord , with all my heart ; I will sing your praises before the gods .

ID:	1215
INPUT:	Ez gorde hiri horretako ezertxo ere , Jaunak bere haserrea baretu eta errukia azal diezazuen ; orduan , <unk> , ugaldu egingo zaituzte , zuen arbasoei zin egin bezala ;
PRED:	You must not drive out the men from the land of the Lord , and you will know that the Lord has given you to your ancestors . Then he will make you a covenant with your ancestors , just as he promised .
GOLD:	“ The Lord your God will be merciful only if you listen to his voice and keep all his commands that I am giving you today , doing what pleases him .

ID:	1216
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Itsu bazinete , ez zenukete bekaturik izango ; baina ikusten duzuela diozuenez , zeuen bekatuzko egoeran irauten duzue .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ If you do n't know that you would not be circumcised , you must not see that you do not see you .
GOLD:	“ If you were blind , you would n't be guilty , ” Jesus replied . “ But you remain guilty because you claim you can see .

ID:	1217
INPUT:	Aurpegi ematen die Jaunak gaizkileei , lur gainetik ezabatzeko haien oroitzapena .
PRED:	The Lord will destroy them from their wickedness .
GOLD:	The Lord hears his people when they call to him for help.He rescues them from all their troubles .

ID:	1218
INPUT:	Zilarrezko txanpon erdia balio zuen <unk> nahiz <unk> , sardea nahiz eztena <unk> .
PRED:	There is another silver and gold , which was valued by the weight of silver , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	The charges were as follows : a quarter of an ounce of silver for sharpening a plowshare or a pick , and an eighth of an ounce for sharpening an ax or making the point of an ox goad .

ID:	1219
INPUT:	<unk> harriek <unk> egingo dute zure aurka , eta zurezko <unk> egingo diete .
PRED:	Your stones will be destroyed , and they will be able to kill you .
GOLD:	The very stones in the walls cry out against you , and the beams in the ceilings echo the complaint .

ID:	1220
INPUT:	Zazpi egunez , ahuntz , zezen eta ahari bana eskainiko dituzu egunero , denak akats gabeak , barkamen-oparitzat .
PRED:	You must present seven young goat as a burnt offering and a young goat for seven one-year-old male goat as a sin offering .
GOLD:	“ Every day for seven days a male goat , a young bull , and a ram from the flock will be sacrificed as a sin offering . None of these animals may have physical defects of any kind .

ID:	1221
INPUT:	Ez dituzue atzean utzitako mahats-hondarrak bilduko , ezta lurrera <unk> jasotzen ibiliko ere . Pobreentzat eta etorkinentzat utziko dituzue . Neu naiz Jauna , zuen Jainkoa .
PRED:	You must not plant your crops that you must not plant the ground with the ground . You will be found among the poor and the poor . I am the Lord your God , and you will be the foreigners living among you .
GOLD:	It is the same with your grape crop — do not strip every last bunch of grapes from the vines , and do not pick up the grapes that fall to the ground . Leave them for the poor and the foreigners living among you . I am the Lord your God .

ID:	1222
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> bihurtuko dut Egipto , bertako hiriak hiri guztien artean <unk> izango dira berrogei urtez , eta atzerriko nazio eta herrialdeen artean sakabanatuko ditut egiptoarrak .
PRED:	I will destroy all the nations of Egypt , and I will destroy all the nations of Egypt and Samaria . I will scatter the Egyptians among the Egyptians . I will scatter them among the Egyptians .
GOLD:	I will make Egypt desolate , and it will be surrounded by other desolate nations . Its cities will be empty and desolate for forty years , surrounded by other ruined cities . I will scatter the Egyptians to distant lands .

ID:	1223
INPUT:	Hitz hauek esatearekin batera , mintzo hau entzun zen zerutik : « Nabukodonosor errege , entzun : Galdua duzu zeure erregetza !
PRED:	This message came from heaven from heaven from heaven : “ You have heard the Kingdom of heaven ! You have heard the Kingdom of heaven !
GOLD:	“ But all these things did happen to King Nebuchadnezzar .

ID:	1224
INPUT:	<unk> irteten zaio <unk> , bor-bor irakiten dagoen <unk> bezala .
PRED:	And when the spirit of the forest will be weak and fig tree , as well as weak as snow .
GOLD:	“ I want to emphasize Leviathan 's limbsand its enormous strength and graceful form .

ID:	1225
INPUT:	Damaskotik etorri eta aldarea ikustean , erregeak , aldarera igoz ,
PRED:	When the king saw an altar , he saw a altar and the altar and the altar of the altar ,
GOLD:	When the king returned , he inspected the altar and made offerings on it .

ID:	1226
INPUT:	<unk> ikaraz , hau pentsatu nuen : « Bere begi-bistatik bota egin nau Jaunak » . Zuk , ordea , entzun zenuen nire erregua , laguntza eske deiadar egin nizunean .
PRED:	When I heard him , I cried out to you , “ You have heard my voice , but the Lord has rescued me from my cry . ”
GOLD:	Love the Lord , all you godly ones ! For the Lord protects those who are loyal to him , but he harshly punishes the arrogant .

ID:	1227
INPUT:	<unk> eta <unk> nituen , mota orotako zuhaitzak sartuz .
PRED:	And when I saw that all kinds of animals were under every tree , I destroyed all kinds of all kinds , and all kinds of every kind .
GOLD:	I made gardens and parks , filling them with all kinds of fruit trees .

ID:	1228
INPUT:	Horra zer <unk> dizuten aztiek , gaztetandik <unk> dituzun horiek . Bakoitza bere bidetik galduko da , eta zu salbatzeko inor ez .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who are under your power , so that everyone will be able to save you , and they will not be saved .
GOLD:	And all your friends , those with whom you 've done business since childhood , will go their own ways , turning a deaf ear to your cries .

ID:	1229
INPUT:	<unk> ordez <unk> dute , <unk> ordez soka , <unk> <unk> <unk> , jantzi <unk> ordez <unk> , edertasunaren <unk> goriaren marka .
PRED:	At that time they will be able to kill him , and when they saw that they were filled with Nebuchadnezzar , Nebuchadnezzar , Nebuchadnezzar , Nebuchadnezzar , and all kinds of suffering .
GOLD:	Instead of smelling of sweet perfume , she will stink.She will wear a rope for a sash , and her elegant hair will fall out.She will wear rough burlap instead of rich robes.Shame will replace her beauty .

ID:	1230
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi Moabeko lautadan , Jordan ondoan , Jeriko parean :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	While Israel was camped beside the Jordan on the plains of Moab across from Jericho , the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1231
INPUT:	eta Jerusalemen eta beste hiri guztietan hauxe iragarri behar zutela : « Atera mendira eta ekarri handik olibondo , <unk> , <unk> , palmondo eta <unk> zuhaitzen adarrak , etxolak egiteko » .
PRED:	The other towns of Jerusalem was written in Jerusalem , saying , “ This is what the Lord says : I have brought you into the hills and fig trees and fig trees , and all the trees that are mine . ”
GOLD:	He had said that a proclamation should be made throughout their towns and in Jerusalem , telling the people to go to the hills to get branches from olive , wild olive , myrtle , palm , and other leafy trees . They were to use these branches to make shelters in which they would live during the festival , as prescribed in the Law .

ID:	1232
INPUT:	Apolo anaiari dagokionez , behin eta berriz eskatu nion senideekin zuengana joateko , baina <unk> ez du joan nahi izan . Joango da , egokiera izango duenean .
PRED:	Even if I wanted to visit you , I begged you to send you to visit you , but they would n't be afraid .
GOLD:	Now about our brother Apollos — I urged him to visit you with the other believers , but he was not willing to go right now . He will see you later when he has the opportunity .

ID:	1233
INPUT:	Eskaintzaileak erantzuten zion : — Erre daitezela lehenbizi gantzak , ohi den bezala ; hartu gero nahi duzun guztia . Morroiak , aldiz : — Inola ere ez ! Emadazu berehala ; bestela , indarrez kenduko dizut .
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the people , ” the priest said . “ If you want it to eat the fat of the fat , I 'll take it away . ”
GOLD:	The man offering the sacrifice might reply , “ Take as much as you want , but the fat must be burned first . ” Then the servant would demand , “ No , give it to me now , or I 'll take it by force . ”

ID:	1234
INPUT:	Adamen beste seme bat
PRED:	The second son of Gershon
GOLD:	The Birth of Seth

ID:	1235
INPUT:	Orduan , esan nien : « Ez dut jarraitu nahi zuek larratzen . Hil behar duena , hil dadila ! Galdu behar duena , gal dadila ! <unk> direnek , jan dezatela elkar ! »
PRED:	Then I said to them , “ I do n't want you to kill you , ” I said . “ If you do n't die , they will die ! ”
GOLD:	So I told them , “ I wo n't be your shepherd any longer . If you die , you die . If you are killed , you are killed . And let those who remain devour each other ! ”

ID:	1236
INPUT:	Ez al da izan atzerritar hau besterik Jainkoa <unk> etortzeko ? »
PRED:	Do n't you know that God has been a foreigner ? ”
GOLD:	Has no one returned to give glory to God except this foreigner ? ”

ID:	1237
INPUT:	« Hartu lebitarrak israeldarren lehen-seme guztien ordez eta lebitarren abereak israeldarrenen ordez : neureak ditut lebitarrak . Neu naiz Jauna .
PRED:	“ Take the firstborn of the Levites and the Levites in all the commands of the Levites . I am the Lord your God . I am the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Take the Levites as substitutes for the firstborn sons of the people of Israel . And take the livestock of the Levites as substitutes for the firstborn livestock of the people of Israel . The Levites belong to me ; I am the Lord .

ID:	1238
INPUT:	Hark begiratu zuen , eta erantzun : — <unk> <unk> ditut : zuhaitzak dirudite , baina ibili dabiltza .
PRED:	Then he looked at them and thought , “ I know how weak they are under under every tree . ”
GOLD:	The man looked around . “ Yes , ” he said , “ I see people , but I ca n't see them very clearly . They look like trees walking around . ”

ID:	1239
INPUT:	« Zintzo izango zaidan apaiz bat dut sorraraziko ; nire nahiaren arabera du hark jardungo . Ondorengotza iraunkorra emango diot eta nire gantzutuaren zerbitzuan ibiliko da beti .
PRED:	“ I will make a covenant between my priests , and I will make a covenant between the altar . I will give you a covenant with the glory of the Lord , and it will be my God .
GOLD:	“ Then I will raise up a faithful priest who will serve me and do what I desire . I will establish his family , and they will be priests to my anointed kings forever .

ID:	1240
INPUT:	Jaunak agintzaria berritu Abrahami
PRED:	The Spirit of the Lord
GOLD:	Abram Is Named Abraham

ID:	1241
INPUT:	Hobe luke errotarri bat lepotik lotu eta itsasora botako balute , txiki hauetakoren bat galbidean jartzea baino .
PRED:	Better to take a bird in the sea , so let them fall into the sea , and if you do n't let them fall into sin .
GOLD:	It would be better to be thrown into the sea with a millstone hung around your neck than to cause one of these little ones to fall into sin .

ID:	1242
INPUT:	Neuk <unk> duteta salbatuko hiri hau , naizena <unk> neure zerbitzari <unk> ” » .
PRED:	I will punish you , and I will punish you with my servant . ' ”
GOLD:	For my own honor and for the sake of my servant David , I will defend this city and protect it . ”

ID:	1243
INPUT:	Gaiztoa bere gezurretan geratzen da harrapatua , zintzoak ihes egiten dio <unk> .
PRED:	The lying lying lying in their mouths , but the godly are surrounded by the innocent .
GOLD:	The wicked are trapped by their own words , but the godly escape such trouble .

ID:	1244
INPUT:	Zuen jendea ugalduko dut , Israel herri osoa . Hiri hondatuak berreraiki eta berriz jendea biziko da berorietan .
PRED:	The people of Israel will become a desolate city , and the people of Israel will live , and the people of Israel will live .
GOLD:	I will greatly increase the population of Israel , and the ruined cities will be rebuilt and filled with people .

ID:	1245
INPUT:	<unk> ibili zarete jadanik mendialde horren inguruan ; jo ezazue iparraldera !
PRED:	I have heard that all the men of Moab were defeated by the north .
GOLD:	‘ You have been wandering around in this hill country long enough ; turn to the north .

ID:	1246
INPUT:	orobat garbituko ditut , niri , Jaun honi , bizkar emanik , bilatzen ez <unk> niregana jotzen ez dutenak » .
PRED:	“ I will give you this message to you , ” says the Lord . “ If they have not been able to kill me , they would not kill me . ”
GOLD:	And I will destroy those who used to worship mebut now no longer do.They no longer ask for the Lord 's guidanceor seek my blessings . ”

ID:	1247
INPUT:	Asko eta asko ikaratu ziren hartaz , hain baitzegoen <unk> , giza antzik ere gabe , gizaki ez <unk> ;
PRED:	And many who were afraid of many things , and when they saw that they had seen God 's power , and they were not able to know that they had not seen .
GOLD:	But many were amazed when they saw him.His face was so disfigured he seemed hardly human , and from his appearance , one would scarcely know he was a man .

ID:	1248
INPUT:	« Baina begira , nirekin mahaian dago salduko nauena .
PRED:	“ But when I look at my table , my soul is with me .
GOLD:	“ But here at this table , sitting among us as a friend , is the man who will betray me .

ID:	1249
INPUT:	erabat ziur baitzegoen hark hitzemana betetzeko zuen ahalmenaz .
PRED:	For he was very angry with his covenant .
GOLD:	He was fully convinced that God is able to do whatever he promises .

ID:	1250
INPUT:	« Zu , Jakoben herri , ez izan beldur ! Ez izutu , Israel , ene zerbitzari hori ! Neuk aterako zaitutbizi zaren urrutiko erbestetik , zeure seme-alabekin batera . Itzuliko zara eta lasai biziko , seguru egongo , inolako kezkarik gabe .
PRED:	“ Do not be afraid of Jacob ; do n't be afraid of your people , O Israel , and I will not return to you , and I will give you a blessing to your children .
GOLD:	“ But do not be afraid , Jacob , my servant ; do not be dismayed , Israel.For I will bring you home again from distant lands , and your children will return from their exile.Israel will return to a life of peace and quiet , and no one will terrorize them .

ID:	1251
INPUT:	Hurrengo urtean , beraz , zenbatu zituen Ben-Hadadek siriarrak , eta <unk> igo zen Israel borrokatzera .
PRED:	At that time the year of King Hazael of Aram had taken up and killed some of the army of Israel .
GOLD:	The following spring he called up the Aramean army and marched out against Israel , this time at Aphek .

ID:	1252
INPUT:	« Ez zaitzatela engaina Ezekiasek , ezin izango baitzaituzte libratu nire eskutik .
PRED:	“ Do n't let anyone mislead you , and he will not rescue you from your power .
GOLD:	This is what the king says : Do n't let Hezekiah deceive you . He will never be able to rescue you from my power .

ID:	1253
INPUT:	Poztu ziren <unk> beren gogoko <unk> eraman zituen Jainkoak .
PRED:	They were filled with those who were filled with him , and those who were filled with him .
GOLD:	What a blessing was that stillnessas he brought them safely into harbor !

ID:	1254
INPUT:	Moisesek erantzun zion : — Herria niregana dator , Jainkoaren nahia ezagutzeko .
PRED:	Then Moses replied , “ This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	Moses replied , “ Because the people come to me to get a ruling from God .

ID:	1255
INPUT:	Emakumeak isilik eta <unk> osoz entzun behar du irakaspena .
PRED:	She must listen to those who hear him and obey him .
GOLD:	Women should learn quietly and submissively .

ID:	1256
INPUT:	Zeren munduaren hasieratik orain arte izan ez den eta izango ez den bezalako larrialdi handia izango baita orduan .
PRED:	For now the world will not be in the world of the world . For the world will not be like those who fear him .
GOLD:	For there will be greater anguish than at any time since the world began . And it will never be so great again .

ID:	1257
INPUT:	« Asko dira emakume <unk> , baina zuk ez duzu parekorik ! »
PRED:	“ And many of you have been killed , but you have not been defeated by all these things . ”
GOLD:	“ There are many virtuous and capable women in the world , but you surpass them all ! ”

ID:	1258
INPUT:	edo : Nor jaitsiko da leizera ? — Kristo hildakoen artetik <unk> , alegia — .
PRED:	“ Who will come from the dead ? ” the man asked . “ The man of the dead will be raised from the dead . ”
GOLD:	And do n't say , ‘ Who will go down to the place of the dead ? ' ( to bring Christ back to life again ) . ”

ID:	1259
INPUT:	Orduan , mutilaren aitak deiadarka : — Sinetsi nahi dut ! Lagundu sinesgabe honi .
PRED:	“ How good is my father , ” he said , “ I am your God . ”
GOLD:	The father instantly cried out , “ I do believe , but help me overcome my unbelief ! ”

ID:	1260
INPUT:	Jainkoak agertu zien , egiten zuten profezi lana ez zutela berentzat egiten , zuentzat baizik . Eta haiek adierazia , zerutik bidalitako Espiritu Santuaren eraginez berri ona hots egiten <unk> iragartzen dizuete orain . Aingeruak berak ere gauza horiek ikusteko irrikaz daude .
PRED:	When God heard this , they would not know that God had not been given to you , for they have given you the Holy Spirit to come from heaven . And when they know that the Spirit has come to see the angel of God .
GOLD:	They were told that their messages were not for themselves , but for you . And now this Good News has been announced to you by those who preached in the power of the Holy Spirit sent from heaven . It is all so wonderful that even the angels are eagerly watching these things happen .

ID:	1261
INPUT:	eta , haren sutearen <unk> ikustean , honela egin zuten oihu : « Hiri handi horrek ez zuen parekorik ! »
PRED:	When he saw the great city , he shouted , “ There is no great city ! ” And when he heard that he was not a great city .
GOLD:	They will cry out as they watch the smoke ascend , and they will say , “ Where is there another city as great as this ? ”

ID:	1262
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Ez al dago zuen Liburu Santuetan idatzia : Nik esan dut : Jainko zarete ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't you understand the Scriptures say , ‘ This is what the Scriptures say :
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ It is written in your own Scriptures that God said to certain leaders of the people , ‘ I say , you are gods ! '

ID:	1263
INPUT:	Jaunaren eguna
PRED:	The Day of the
GOLD:	's Future Reign

ID:	1264
INPUT:	Abigail , David ikusi orduko , asto gainetik bizkor jaitsi eta makurtu egin zen Daviden aitzinean , lurreraino ahuspeztuz .
PRED:	When Nabal saw David , he saw his donkey and his donkey , he went down to the ground and bowed low before him .
GOLD:	When Abigail saw David , she quickly got off her donkey and bowed low before him .

ID:	1265
INPUT:	<unk> Gibeara etorri ziren Saulengana , esatera : « Ez al dakizu David Hakila mendixkan , basamortu-ertzean , dagoela gordea ? »
PRED:	When they arrived at Gibeah , they said to Saul , “ Did n't you know that you 're here in the wilderness ? ”
GOLD:	Now some men from Ziph came to Saul at Gibeah to tell him , “ David is hiding on the hill of Hakilah , which overlooks Jeshimon . ”

ID:	1266
INPUT:	sarea bezala eroriko baita munduan bizi diren guztien gainera .
PRED:	There will fall like everyone in the world , like all the world .
GOLD:	like a trap . For that day will come upon everyone living on the earth .

ID:	1267
INPUT:	Beraz , maita dezagun , Jainkoak maitatu baikintuen lehenik .
PRED:	Instead , let us get our example , but let us comfort him .
GOLD:	We love each other because he loved us first .

ID:	1268
INPUT:	Hartu zituen Moisesek gurdiak eta idiak eta lebitarrei banatu zizkien :
PRED:	So Moses gave them the Levites to the Levites and the Levites :
GOLD:	So Moses took the wagons and oxen and presented them to the Levites .

ID:	1269
INPUT:	hau Amariasena , hau Azariasena , hau Meraiotena ,
PRED:	son of Harim , son of Harim ,
GOLD:	son of Amariah , son of Azariah , son of Meraioth ,

ID:	1270
INPUT:	Horrela , Jaunak handik bota eta mundu zabalean sakabanatu zituen ; hiria <unk> utzi egin behar izan zioten .
PRED:	That is why the Lord struck them on the earth and saw that they were scattered in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	In that way , the Lord scattered them all over the world , and they stopped building the city .

ID:	1271
INPUT:	— Zoazte eta kontsulta egin Jaunari nire izenean eta Israelen bizirik gelditutakoen eta Judakoen izenean , aurkitu duten liburu honek dioenaz . Izan ere , haserre bizitan egon behar du Jaunak gurekin , gure arbasoek Jaunaren hitzari kasurik egin ez diotelako eta liburu honetan idatzia bete ez dutelako .
PRED:	“ Go back to the Lord and tell me the people of Israel , because I have found in the name of the Lord 's name . For the Lord has given me success in this book of the Lord 's anger .
GOLD:	“ Go to the Temple and speak to the Lord for me and for all the remnant of Israel and Judah . Inquire about the words written in the scroll that has been found . For the Lord 's great anger has been poured out on us because our ancestors have not obeyed the word of the Lord . We have not been doing everything this scroll says we must do . ”

ID:	1272
INPUT:	Jainkoaren zigorraren zazpi ontziak
PRED:	Paul 's Final Words to the seven kinds of Lebanon .
GOLD:	The Seven Bowls of the Seven Plagues

ID:	1273
INPUT:	Eta Kristo pizturik ez badago , funtsik gabea da gure predikua eta zentzurik gabea zuen sinesmena .
PRED:	For Christ is not a human spirit , and they do n't know what we do .
GOLD:	And if Christ has not been raised , then all our preaching is useless , and your faith is useless .

ID:	1274
INPUT:	Aurkitu duzu bere lanean trebea den norbait ? Erregeen zerbitzura egongo daeta ez edonolako <unk> .
PRED:	There is another person who lived in the sight of death , and it will be a person who has been unfaithful to every person .
GOLD:	Do you see any truly competent workers ? They will serve kingsrather than working for ordinary people .

ID:	1275
INPUT:	neure lehengusu <unk> aurrean eta agiria izenpetu zuten lekukoen eta kartzela-atarian suertatu ziren judatarren aurrean , Neriasen seme eta Mahseiasen biloba Baruki eman nizkion .
PRED:	At that time I saw that Tobiah and grandson of Tobiah and grandson of Tobiah , which was the letter I gave you a letter to Jeremiah and grandson of Shaphan .
GOLD:	and I handed them to Baruch son of Neriah and grandson of Mahseiah . I did all this in the presence of my cousin Hanamel , the witnesses who had signed the deed , and all the men of Judah who were there in the courtyard of the guardhouse .

ID:	1276
INPUT:	Agurtu eta bi opil emango dizkizuete ; hartu .
PRED:	I will give you two olive oil to you .
GOLD:	They will greet you and offer you two of the loaves , which you are to accept .

ID:	1277
INPUT:	Bi lapur gurutziltzatu zituzten Jesusekin batera , bata eskuinean eta bestea ezkerrean .
PRED:	One of them was crucified with Jesus , and one on his right hand on his right hand .
GOLD:	Two revolutionaries were crucified with him , one on his right and one on his left .

ID:	1278
INPUT:	Gizon hauek gizakiak berezko duen heriotzaz hiltzen badira , Jaunak bidali ez nauen seinalea ;
PRED:	The people of their wicked will die , but the Lord sent them away .
GOLD:	If these men die a natural death , or if nothing unusual happens , then the Lord has not sent me .

ID:	1279
INPUT:	Galaadeko arduradunek erantzun zioten : — Jauna testigu , zuk esan bezala egiten ez badugu .
PRED:	The elders of Gilead replied , “ The Lord is a witness to us , just as we do . ”
GOLD:	“ The Lord is our witness , ” the elders replied . “ We promise to do whatever you say . ”

ID:	1280
INPUT:	Jakobek erantzun zion : — Ongi dakizu zenbat lan egin dudan zuretzat eta zenbateraino hazi zaizun abere-taldea niri esker .
PRED:	Jacob replied , “ You know how hard I have worked for you , for I have worked for you . ”
GOLD:	Jacob replied , “ You know how hard I 've worked for you , and how your flocks and herds have grown under my care .

ID:	1281
INPUT:	Egun batez , esan zion neskak etxekoandreari : — Nire nagusiari , Samariako profetagana joango balitz , hark sendatuko lioke legena .
PRED:	One day she said to her , “ If you are my master , I will give you a young woman named him , ‘ I will give you a little child to the Son of Samaria . '
GOLD:	One day the girl said to her mistress , “ I wish my master would go to see the prophet in Samaria . He would heal him of his leprosy . ”

ID:	1282
INPUT:	Bigarren piztiak <unk> zirudien : erdi <unk> zegoen eta ahoan , hortz artean , hiru <unk> zituen . Honela esan zioten : “ Jaiki eta jan haragia ugari ! ”
PRED:	And when they saw that the angel had been torn from the sky , he saw that they had been healed . “ Get up , ” they said , “ Get up and eat it . ”
GOLD:	Then I saw a second beast , and it looked like a bear . It was rearing up on one side , and it had three ribs in its mouth between its teeth . And I heard a voice saying to it , “ Get up ! Devour the flesh of many people ! ”

ID:	1283
INPUT:	Argi eta garbi mintzatzen zitzaien honetaz . Pedro , Jesus aparte harturik , gogor egiten hasi zitzaion .
PRED:	Then Peter said to them , “ This is what Jesus meant . ” So Peter began to listen .
GOLD:	As he talked about this openly with his disciples , Peter took him aside and began to reprimand him for saying such things .

ID:	1284
INPUT:	Horregatik , hau dio Jaunak : « Egin <unk> nazioen artean : nork entzun du horrelakorik ? Israel neskatxa <unk> egin du !
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says : “ What sorrow awaits you who heard the nations ? What sorrow awaits you who heard such terrible things ?
GOLD:	So this is what the Lord says : “ Has anyone ever heard of such a thing , even among the pagan nations ? My virgin daughter Israelhas done something terrible !

ID:	1285
INPUT:	Poztu eta alaitu Jaunarekin , zintzoak ! Egin poz-oihu , bihotz zuzeneko guztiok !
PRED:	Listen to the Lord , those who are godly , and worship him !
GOLD:	So rejoice in the Lord and be glad , all you who obey him ! Shout for joy , all you whose hearts are pure !

ID:	1286
INPUT:	Jaunaren begietan oker dena egin zuen , Nebaten seme Jeroboamek Israeli eginarazi zizkion bekatuetatik aldendu gabe .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , and he led Israel to turn from the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat .
GOLD:	But Pekah did what was evil in the Lord 's sight . He refused to turn from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel to commit .

ID:	1287
INPUT:	Zuk asko eta asko <unk> ahulak indartu izan dituzu ;
PRED:	You have seen many things , and many are weak .
GOLD:	“ In the past you have encouraged many people ; you have strengthened those who were weak .

ID:	1288
INPUT:	<unk> kentzen die <unk> burutik nahasten epaileak ;
PRED:	For when they are under the power of the wicked , they are under the power of murder .
GOLD:	He leads counselors away , stripped of good judgment ; wise judges become fools .

ID:	1289
INPUT:	Jaunak laguntzen die eta onik ateratzen , onik ateratzen gaiztoengandik eta salbatzen , berarengan baitira babestu .
PRED:	The Lord rescues them from their eyes , and those who fear him .
GOLD:	The Lord helps them , rescuing them from the wicked.He saves them , and they find shelter in him .

ID:	1290
INPUT:	Zeuen seme-alaba eta morroi-mirabeekin eta zuekin hiri berean bizi diren lebitar , etorkin , umezurtz eta alargunekin batera ospatuko duzue festa .
PRED:	and your sons and daughters , foreigners living among you , Levites , Levites , Levites , Levites , and Levites , and foreigners living among the Levites .
GOLD:	This festival will be a happy time of celebrating with your sons and daughters , your male and female servants , and the Levites , foreigners , orphans , and widows from your towns .

ID:	1291
INPUT:	Horregatik irten zitzaion hainbeste jende Jesusi bidera , egin zuen mirarizko <unk> berri izan zuelako , hain zuzen .
PRED:	So when they arrived at once , Jesus was very angry with him when he saw that he was very angry with him .
GOLD:	That was the reason so many went out to meet him — because they had heard about this miraculous sign .

ID:	1292
INPUT:	Mikalek Davidi bizia salbatu
PRED:	David 's Final Instructions to David
GOLD:	Michal Saves David 's Life

ID:	1293
INPUT:	Judako Asaren erregealdiko hogeita zazpigarren urtean egin zen errege Zimri ; zazpi egunez izan zen errege Tirtzan . Gudarostea , aldi hartan , filistearren hiri Gibeton setiatzen ari zen .
PRED:	On the seventh year of King Asa 's reign , the king of Judah became king of Judah . He reigned in Samaria seven years , and he became king of Judah .
GOLD:	Zimri began to rule over Israel in the twenty-seventh year of King Asa 's reign in Judah , but his reign in Tirzah lasted only seven days . The army of Israel was then attacking the Philistine town of Gibbethon .

ID:	1294
INPUT:	Harrapatu egin zituzten hango abere txiki eta handiak , astoak , hirian nahiz landan zeudenak ,
PRED:	When the king died , the young men of the fields and donkeys , donkeys , and donkeys ,
GOLD:	They seized all the flocks and herds and donkeys — everything they could lay their hands on , both inside the town and outside in the fields .

ID:	1295
INPUT:	Honela diotsuet nik , Jaun ahalguztidun honek : Etorriko dira oraindik Jerusalemera herriak eta hiri handietako bizilagunak ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : The Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the people of Judah , and the people of Judah have lived in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : People from nations and cities around the world will travel to Jerusalem .

ID:	1296
INPUT:	Bufalo , zekor eta zezenak , batera eroriko dira denak ; odoletan blai geldituko <unk> lurraldea , <unk> bustia bertako hautsa .
PRED:	My eyes and old men will be slaughtered , and all the animals will be slaughtered by the blood of the earth , and they will be filled with all the animals that were slaughtered .
GOLD:	Even men as strong as wild oxen will die — the young men alongside the veterans.The land will be soaked with bloodand the soil enriched with fat .

ID:	1297
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaun ahalguztidunak : « Orain gizaki eta abererik gabe , eremu bihurtua dagoen lurralde honetan , bertako hiri guztietan , ardiak biltzeko artegiak egingo dira berriro .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ The people of Israel have become like a desolate land , and there will be no longer like a desolate land .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : This land — though it is now desolate and has no people and animals — will once more have pastures where shepherds can lead their flocks .

ID:	1298
INPUT:	Eta hau , Asuero erregearen menpeko eskualde orotan , egun berean , hamabigarren hilaren , hots , Adar hilaren , hamahiruan .
PRED:	So King Darius 's decree was written in the province of King Darius 's reign , during the reign of King Darius 's reign .
GOLD:	The day chosen for this event throughout all the provinces of King Xerxes was March 7 of the next year .

ID:	1299
INPUT:	Zer esango nizuke , zerekin konparatuko zaitut ? <unk> zer aipatuko dizut , Sion neskatxa eder horri , kontsola zaitezen ? Itsasoa bezain handia da zure hondamendia : nork sendatu zu ?
PRED:	“ What can I ask you ? Who will be my master ? Who will you be my lord ? Your young women are so strong , and your servants will be like the sea ?
GOLD:	What can I say about you ? Who has ever seen such sorrow ? O daughter of Jerusalem , to what can I compare your anguish ? O virgin daughter of Zion , how can I comfort you ? For your wound is as deep as the sea.Who can heal you ?

ID:	1300
INPUT:	<unk> hirian , zelaian <unk> dira ardiak , larratuko ahuntzak .
PRED:	And when they are in the city , the young women of the city will be filled with a young lion , and the young goat will be filled with a young lion .
GOLD:	In that day lambs will find good pastures , and fattened sheep and young goats will feed among the ruins .

ID:	1301
INPUT:	Mariak Elisabeti <unk>
PRED:	Mary 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	The Birth of John the Baptist

ID:	1302
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . « Dolareak » doinuan Daviden salmoa .
PRED:	Come , O God of Heaven 's Armies , you are my shield .
GOLD:	O Lord , our Lord , your majestic name fills the earth ! Your glory is higher than the heavens .

ID:	1303
INPUT:	Esnea eta eztia darizkion lurralde hau eman zenien israeldarrei , arbasoei zin eginez agindu zenien lurraldea .
PRED:	I gave you a land flowing with milk and honey to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	You gave the people of Israel this land that you had promised their ancestors long before — a land flowing with milk and honey .

ID:	1304
INPUT:	<unk> bitez haien begiak eta itsutu , ahul bekie gerria betiko !
PRED:	They will see their eyes , and my eyes will be filled with strength .
GOLD:	Pour out your fury on them ; consume them with your burning anger .

ID:	1305
INPUT:	Eskatzen dizun edonori , eman , eta zeurea kentzen dizunari , ez <unk> .
PRED:	When you gave you this message to your relatives , which was given to your relatives and sisters .
GOLD:	Give to anyone who asks ; and when things are taken away from you , do n't try to get them back .

ID:	1306
INPUT:	Gedeonek , orduan : — Nire anaiak , gure amaren semeak ! Ala Jauna , bizirik utzi izan <unk> , ez <unk> hilko orain .
PRED:	Then Gideon said , “ As surely as we live , my brother , the Lord , who would kill me , who would kill me and kill me . ”
GOLD:	“ They were my brothers , the sons of my own mother ! ” Gideon exclaimed . “ As surely as the Lord lives , I would n't kill you if you had n't killed them . ”

ID:	1307
INPUT:	Espirituaren dohainak
PRED:	The Spirit of God 's Spirit
GOLD:	Spiritual Gifts

ID:	1308
INPUT:	Nire Jainkoak aingerua bidali du lehoien ahoak <unk> , eta ez didate kalterik egin . Izan ere , badaki nire Jainkoak errugabe naizela eta zure aurka , errege jauna , ez dudala hobenik egin .
PRED:	For the angel of God has sent me , and when I have sent you to prove that I have sinned against you , my lord the Lord your God .
GOLD:	The king was overjoyed and ordered that Daniel be lifted from the den . Not a scratch was found on him , for he had trusted in his God .

ID:	1309
INPUT:	zure <unk> usaina lurrin guztiak baino gozoago ! Zu zeu zara ukendu <unk> ! Horregatik zaizkizu neskatxak maitemindu !
PRED:	Your fruit are beautiful and beautiful , and your breasts are better than your beautiful women . That is why you love your young women and women who love your young women .
GOLD:	How pleasing is your fragrance ; your name is like the spreading fragrance of scented oils.No wonder all the young women love you !

ID:	1310
INPUT:	Zakarias , haurraren aita , Espiritu Santuaz beterik , profeta bezala mintzatu zen , esanez :
PRED:	Zechariah was the Spirit of the angels in the Holy Spirit . He said ,
GOLD:	Then his father , Zechariah , was filled with the Holy Spirit and gave this prophecy :

ID:	1311
INPUT:	<unk> tresnen ardura izango dute eta israeldarren zerbitzura egongo dira egoitzako <unk> betetzeko .
PRED:	At that time the glory of the Covenant will be able to serve in the Tabernacle , and they will serve in front of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	They will also maintain all the furnishings of the sacred tent , serving in the Tabernacle on behalf of all the Israelites .

ID:	1312
INPUT:	Pinhasen ondorengoetatik Gerxom ; Itamarren ondorengoetatik Daniel ; Daviden ondorengoetatik Hatux ,
PRED:	From the family of Harim : Zechariah son of Bicri was the family of David .
GOLD:	From the family of Phinehas : Gershom.From the family of Ithamar : Daniel.From the family of David : Hattush ,

ID:	1313
INPUT:	Apaizburu eta fariseuek agindua zuten , inork Jesus non zen jakiten bazuen , sala zezala , atxilotu ahal izateko .
PRED:	Then the Pharisees and the leading priests and the leading priests to kill him , so he could be crucified .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the leading priests and Pharisees had publicly ordered that anyone seeing Jesus must report it immediately so they could arrest him .

ID:	1314
INPUT:	Baina ni , haien defendatzailea , indartsua naiz , “ Jaun ahalguztiduna ” dut izena : neuk defendatuko dut haien auzia , munduari <unk> <unk> babiloniarrak astinduz » .
PRED:	“ But I will give you great power , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , says , ‘ I am the great power of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . ' ”
GOLD:	But the one who redeems them is strong.His name is the Lord of Heaven 's Armies.He will defend themand give them rest again in Israel.But for the people of Babylonthere will be no rest !

ID:	1315
INPUT:	Hau entzutean , Jesus harritu egin zen hartaz eta , ondoren zetorkion jendearengana itzulirik , esan zuen : « Egia esan , Israelen bertan ere ez dut aurkitu horrelako <unk> » .
PRED:	When Jesus heard what he had happened , he went to meet him and told him , “ I have found the people of Israel , ” he said , “ I have found that all the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	When Jesus heard this , he was amazed . Turning to the crowd that was following him , he said , “ I tell you , I have n't seen faith like this in all Israel ! ”

ID:	1316
INPUT:	bere bizilekutik jarriak ditu <unk> biztanle guztiengan ;
PRED:	They boast about their thoughts , and those who trust in Christ .
GOLD:	From his throne he observesall who live on the earth .

ID:	1317
INPUT:	Erregea , haserre bizian , <unk> jaiki eta jauregiko <unk> atera zen . Haman bertan gelditu zen , bizia salbatzeko Ester erreginari eskatuz , sumatu baitzuen erabakia zuela erregeak bere hondamena .
PRED:	Then the king came out of the king and saw that he was very angry with the king and Queen Esther had thrown down to kill him . He was so angry with the king and the king 's officials .
GOLD:	Then the king jumped to his feet in a rage and went out into the palace garden.Haman , however , stayed behind to plead for his life with Queen Esther , for he knew that the king intended to kill him .

ID:	1318
INPUT:	Lagun hurkoa maite duenak ez dio gaitzik egiten . Maite duenak , beraz , erabat betetzen du legea .
PRED:	A person who loves a fool ; he does n't love them .
GOLD:	Love does no wrong to others , so love fulfills the requirements of God 's law .

ID:	1319
INPUT:	Erregeak , erregina aldamenean eseria zuelarik , galdetu zidan : — Zenbat iraungo du zure joan-etorriak ? Noiz itzuliko zara ? Ontzat eman zuen erregeak jarri nion epea eta joaten utzi zidan .
PRED:	Then the king asked the king , “ How long will you eat ? How long will you eat ? ” And when I said , “ You must return to me , and I will return to you . ”
GOLD:	The king , with the queen sitting beside him , asked , “ How long will you be gone ? When will you return ? ” After I told him how long I would be gone , the king agreed to my request .

ID:	1320
INPUT:	Gizonaren Semea bezala : hura ez da etorri zerbitzatua izatera , zerbitzari izatera baizik , bere bizia guztien alde ordainsaritzat ematera » .
PRED:	For the Son of Man has not been given to the Son of Man , but even though he had given them to the believers . ”
GOLD:	For even the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve others and to give his life as a ransom for many . ”

ID:	1321
INPUT:	Beraz , mandatariak bidali nizkien erantzun honekin : « Lan handietan nabil eta ez naiteke joan . <unk> <unk> bakarrik lanak ez nituzke utzi nahi » .
PRED:	So I sent messengers to them , “ I am trying to make a trap for a while I could n't realize that he was in chains . ”
GOLD:	so I replied by sending this message to them : “ I am engaged in a great work , so I ca n't come . Why should I stop working to come and meet with you ? ”

ID:	1322
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jaun <unk> bihurtuko <unk> <unk> , eta haien gorputz <unk> joko ditu , suak hartuta bezala jarriko .
PRED:	That is why the Lord says , “ I will punish those who were very weak and fig tree , as I will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , will send a plague among Assyria 's proud troops , and a flaming fire will consume its glory .

ID:	1323
INPUT:	Erregearen bihotza ubidea da Jaunaren eskuetan : nahi duen alderantz zuzentzen du .
PRED:	The nations of the Lord stands in the depths of the sea .
GOLD:	The king 's heart is like a stream of water directed by the Lord ; he guides it wherever he pleases .

ID:	1324
INPUT:	Ilunpetan biziarazi nau , behin betiko hildakoak bezala .
PRED:	You have been able to live in the presence of the dead .
GOLD:	He has buried me in a dark place , like those long dead .

ID:	1325
INPUT:	<unk>
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Recovery
GOLD:	Young Women of Jerusalem

ID:	1326
INPUT:	Horregatik , niri dagokidanez , irrikaz nago zuei ere , <unk> , berri ona hots egiteko .
PRED:	That is why I am trying to know that I am trying to know that I am the Good News .
GOLD:	So I am eager to come to you in Rome , too , to preach the Good News .

ID:	1327
INPUT:	Israelgo errege Joaxek , aldiz , beste erantzun hau bidali zion Judako errege Amatziasi : « Behin batez garduak esan omen zion Libanoko <unk> : “ <unk> alaba nire semeari emaztetzat ” . Baina Libanoko basabere batek hankazpian hartu zuen <unk> .
PRED:	Then King Joash of Israel sent another message to King Joash of Israel , and he asked him , “ One of the tribe of Judah , who had been killed with me , my daughter , who had taken from Lebanon .
GOLD:	But King Jehoash of Israel replied to King Amaziah of Judah with this story : “ Out in the Lebanon mountains , a thistle sent a message to a mighty cedar tree : ‘ Give your daughter in marriage to my son . ' But just then a wild animal of Lebanon came by and stepped on the thistle , crushing it !

ID:	1328
INPUT:	zu , ordea , hobiratu <unk> zaituzte , gauza <unk> pare ; leizeko harri <unk> dituztenekin zaude , ezpataz hildakoen gorpuen artean , hankapean zapaltzen <unk> pare .
PRED:	But he is the power of your power , and those who sit in power , and those who are buried in your own household . He will put your clothes in charge of the dead bodies of the dead .
GOLD:	but you will be thrown out of your gravelike a worthless branch.Like a corpse trampled underfoot , you will be dumped into a mass gravewith those killed in battle.You will descend to the pit .

ID:	1329
INPUT:	Hartu nuen liburuxka aingeruaren eskutik eta irentsi egin nuen . <unk> ezti gozoa bezala gertatu zitzaidan , baina , jan nuenean , sabela garraztu zidan .
PRED:	Then I took the angel from the angel of the fire , and I ate it as the angel of the fire . But when I ate it , I ate it with my mouth , and I ate it .
GOLD:	So I took the small scroll from the hand of the angel , and I ate it ! It was sweet in my mouth , but when I swallowed it , it turned sour in my stomach .

ID:	1330
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Aaroni : « Zu , zure semeak eta leinuko beste <unk> izango zarete santutegiaren aurkako <unk> erantzule ; zeuen <unk> egindako <unk> , berriz , zu eta zure semeak bakarrik .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ You will be your sons and your sons , and your sons will serve as well as the Temple of the tribe of Levi , and you will know that your sons and your sons and your sons .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Aaron : “ You , your sons , and your relatives from the tribe of Levi will be held responsible for any offenses related to the sanctuary . But you and your sons alone will be held responsible for violations connected with the priesthood .

ID:	1331
INPUT:	<unk> jo zuten ontzietan , ur handietan zutelarik ogibidea .
PRED:	When they were wise , they were hungry for a while they were hungry .
GOLD:	Some went off to sea in ships , plying the trade routes of the world .

ID:	1332
INPUT:	Oso aberats egin zen Jakob : artalde handiak , morroi-mirabeak , gamelu eta astoak eskuratu zituen .
PRED:	Your servants were filled with flocks , cattle , cattle , and cattle , and donkeys , and donkeys , and donkeys .
GOLD:	As a result , Jacob became very wealthy , with large flocks of sheep and goats , female and male servants , and many camels and donkeys .

ID:	1333
INPUT:	Hara , aldi hartan , zapaltzen zaituzten <unk> ditut . <unk> sendatuko ditut , erbesteratuak <unk> . Eta ospez eta <unk> beteko <unk> lotsa jasan <unk> guztietan .
PRED:	“ Look , I am sending you to punish those who serve you , and I will give you authority to all the kingdoms of Egypt . And when I know that they will know that they will be filled with great power . ”
GOLD:	And I will deal severely with all who have oppressed you.I will save the weak and helpless ones ; I will bring togetherthose who were chased away.I will give glory and fame to my former exiles , wherever they have been mocked and shamed .

ID:	1334
INPUT:	Horregatik , begira zer dioen Jaunak Josiasen seme Joiakim , Judako <unk> : « Ez diote hileta joko , esanez : “ Hau zoritxarra , anaia ! Hau zoritxarra , arreba ! ” Ez diote hileta joko , esanez : “ Ai gure jauna ! Ai gure jaun agurgarria ! ”
PRED:	That is why the Lord says , “ This is what the Lord of Josiah , the king of Judah , the king of Judah , says : What sorrow awaits you , ‘ My brother , my lord ! '
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says about Jehoiakim , son of King Josiah : “ The people will not mourn for him , crying to one another , ‘ Alas , my brother ! Alas , my sister ! 'His subjects will not mourn for him , crying , ‘ Alas , our master is dead ! Alas , his splendor is gone ! '

ID:	1335
INPUT:	Otoi , barka iezadazu bekatua , eta zatoz nirekin Jauna gurtzera .
PRED:	Yes , listen to me , Lord , and let me worship me .
GOLD:	But now , please forgive my sin and come back with me so that I may worship the Lord . ”

ID:	1336
INPUT:	<unk> esan zituenean , askok sinetsi zuten harengan .
PRED:	When they heard him , many believed in him .
GOLD:	Then many who heard him say these things believed in him .

ID:	1337
INPUT:	Hau diotso Jaunak Israeli : « Egiptoko langileak , Etiopiako <unk> altuera handiko <unk> menpean jarriko dira , zureak izango ; zure atzetik joango dira , katez loturik ; zure aurrean ahuspeztuko diraeta erreguka esango dizute : “ Zuregan bakarrik dago Jainkoa , ez da besterik ; beste jainkoak ezer ez dira ” » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Listen to the people of Egypt — those who serve in Egypt — those who are in the streets of Egypt , and they will be able to kill you . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ You will rule the Egyptians , the Ethiopians , and the Sabeans.They will come to you with all their merchandise , and it will all be yours.They will follow you as prisoners in chains.They will fall to their knees in front of you and say , ‘ God is with you , and he is the only God.There is no other . ' ”

ID:	1338
INPUT:	« <unk> <unk> izango da Egipto , hiri guztien artean <unk> bertako hiriak .
PRED:	“ I will see that the city of Egypt will be filled with all the towns of Egypt .
GOLD:	Egypt will be desolate , surrounded by desolate nations , and its cities will be in ruins , surrounded by other ruined cities .

ID:	1339
INPUT:	Zerbitzari trebeak erregearen onespena du , duin ez denak haren haserrea .
PRED:	For the king does not let the king 's anger ; he does not accept his anger .
GOLD:	A king rejoices in wise servantsbut is angry with those who disgrace him .

ID:	1340
INPUT:	Jerusalemen ziren israeldarrek poz handiz egin zuten zazpi egunez Legamia gabeko Ogien Jaia . Lebitarrek eta apaizek egunero goretsi ohi zuten Jauna , <unk> <unk> laguntzaz , haren ohoretan kantatuz .
PRED:	The people of Israel saw seven days for the Festival of Unleavened Bread for seven days , the priests , the priests , and the priests , and all the people of Israel had been given to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	So the people of Israel who were present in Jerusalem joyously celebrated the Festival of Unleavened Bread for seven days . Each day the Levites and priests sang to the Lord , accompanied by loud instruments .

ID:	1341
INPUT:	lurra betetzen <unk> <unk> sasian agertu zenaren onginahia : betor hori guztia Joserengana , senideen artean aukeratuagana .
PRED:	And when all the earth saw that the earth has come with him , all the people of Judah and his brothers will serve him .
GOLD:	with the best gifts of the earth and its bounty , and the favor of the one who appeared in the burning bush.May these blessings rest on Joseph 's head , crowning the brow of the prince among his brothers .

ID:	1342
INPUT:	harik eta Jaunak zerutik begiratu eta ikusi arte .
PRED:	Then the Lord looked down from heaven and again until he saw them .
GOLD:	until the Lord looks downfrom heaven and sees .

ID:	1343
INPUT:	eta Josuerengana eraman zituzten . Josuek israeldar guztiei dei egin eta guduan berarekin ibilitako gudalburuei agindu hau eman zien : « Hurbil zaitezte eta zapaldu errege hauei lepoa » . Halaxe egin zuten .
PRED:	Then Joshua brought them to Joshua and all the people of Israel , along with all the people of Israel and the people of Israel , saying , “ This is what the king of Israel have done . ”
GOLD:	When they brought them out , Joshua told the commanders of his army , “ Come and put your feet on the kings ' necks . ” And they did as they were told .

ID:	1344
INPUT:	« Zuekin bizi den nire herriko <unk> bati dirua maileguz ematen badiozue , ez izan zeken berarekin , ez ezarri interesik .
PRED:	“ If you lend money to my people , you must give a money to the people of Israel . If you do not take it into a field , you must not take it back to the roof of my family .
GOLD:	My anger will blaze against you , and I will kill you with the sword . Then your wives will be widows and your children fatherless .

ID:	1345
INPUT:	« Gaur ematen dizkizuedan agindu hauek benetan onartzen badituzue , Jauna zeuen Jainkoa maitatuz eta bihotz-bihotzez eta gogo osoz zerbitzatuz ,
PRED:	“ If you obey these things I am giving you the Lord your God , and if you obey all your heart and soul ,
GOLD:	“ If you carefully obey the commands I am giving you today , and if you love the Lord your God and serve him with all your heart and soul ,

ID:	1346
INPUT:	beren burua etsaien esku <unk> arren , han ere ezpataz hilaraziko ditut . <unk> izango ditut , ez onerako , bai kalterako » .
PRED:	But I will kill you , though they have killed all their enemies , they will kill you , and I will destroy you . ”
GOLD:	Even if their enemies drive them into exile , I will command the sword to kill them there.I am determined to bring disaster upon themand not to help them . ”

ID:	1347
INPUT:	Loten emazteak atzera begiratu zuen , eta <unk> bihurtu zen .
PRED:	So the wife of Lot looked up and realized that he became very angry .
GOLD:	But Lot 's wife looked back as she was following behind him , and she turned into a pillar of salt .

ID:	1348
INPUT:	Azpikeriaz dabilenak atsekabea dakar , aurrez aurre zentzarazten duenak <unk> .
PRED:	Those who try to kill me , but those who try to kill me .
GOLD:	People who wink at wrong cause trouble , but a bold reproof promotes peace .

ID:	1349
INPUT:	Esterrek agindu eta antolatu zituen Purim Jaiak , eta liburuan idatzia gelditu zen .
PRED:	Esther had given the Book of the celebration , and he was written in the Book of the Book of the Book of the celebration .
GOLD:	So the command of Esther confirmed the practices of Purim , and it was all written down in the records .

ID:	1350
INPUT:	<unk> ( 42 , <unk> )
PRED:	When they saw that they were living in Samaria ,
GOLD:	Conclusion : The

ID:	1351
INPUT:	Ondoren , apurtu egingo ditut bata bestearen kontra : gurasoak eta seme-alabak , denak batera . Ez dut errukirik izango , ez barkamenik , ez gupidarik : guztiak suntsituko ditut . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	Then I will turn away from all their children , and they will not have children . I will not have mercy on them , and I will not have mercy on them . ”
GOLD:	I will smash them against each other , even parents against children , says the Lord . I will not let my pity or mercy or compassion keep me from destroying them . ' ”

ID:	1352
INPUT:	Labanen eta Jakoben arteko hitzarmena
PRED:	Jacob 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Jacob 's Treaty with Laban

ID:	1353
INPUT:	Hona hemen etorkizunean Israelekin egingo dudan ituna : Buruan ezarriko dizkiet neure legeak , bihotzean idatziko ; ni beraien Jainko izango naiz , eta haiek nire herri . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : I will give you my covenant with all the people of Israel . I will put them on their hearts , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	But this is the new covenant I will makewith the people of Israel on that day , says the Lord : I will put my laws in their minds , and I will write them on their hearts.I will be their God , and they will be my people .

ID:	1354
INPUT:	Baina Jauna neurekin izan nuen eta indartu egin ninduen , nire bidez mezua oso-osorik iragarria izan zedin eta jentil guztiek entzun zezaten ; berak atera ninduen lehoiaren ahotik .
PRED:	But the Lord gave me great message to me and so that I could see the message he had given me . Then all who heard me from the world to see me .
GOLD:	But the Lord stood with me and gave me strength so that I might preach the Good News in its entirety for all the Gentiles to hear . And he rescued me from certain death .

ID:	1355
INPUT:	Atezainak ere ezarriak zituen ateetan , kutsatua zegokeen inor inola ere sar ez zedin .
PRED:	He also built the outside the sanctuary , where no one is ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	He also stationed gatekeepers at the gates of the Lord 's Temple to keep out those who for any reason were ceremonially unclean .

ID:	1356
INPUT:	Moisesek israeldar leinuak bedeinkatu
PRED:	Moses Blesses Israel
GOLD:	Moses Blesses the People

ID:	1357
INPUT:	Berdin izango da munduaren azkenean : aingeruek etorri eta gaiztoak zintzoen artetik bereiziko dituzte ,
PRED:	In this way , the world will be taken away from the world and from the world .
GOLD:	That is the way it will be at the end of the world . The angels will come and separate the wicked people from the righteous ,

ID:	1358
INPUT:	Oi Jainko , begira onez gure <unk> , zeuk aukeraturiko erregeari .
PRED:	When you see the Lord our God , you are my lord the king .
GOLD:	A single day in your courtsis better than a thousand anywhere else ! I would rather be a gatekeeper in the house of my Godthan live the good life in the homes of the wicked .

ID:	1359
INPUT:	Zure aginduen bidetik <unk> naiz , barrua <unk> <unk> gero .
PRED:	I have filled with all your heart , and I have filled with that very tree .
GOLD:	I will pursue your commands , for you expand my understanding .

ID:	1360
INPUT:	Baina , ikusi dudanez , Jainkoak eguzkipean ari <unk> <unk> bat ereezin dute <unk> ulertu . Zenbat eta gehiago <unk> horien arrazoi bila , hainbat eta <unk> dute . Jakintsuak berak , <unk> esanik ere , ez du ulertzen .
PRED:	But when I saw that the sun was under under the sun , they will see that that that all the evil things they have seen , and they will know that they are weak , and they will know that they will know that they do n't know that they do .
GOLD:	I realized that no one can discover everything God is doing under the sun . Not even the wisest people discover everything , no matter what they claim .

ID:	1361
INPUT:	Hurbildu zitzaion Sauli emakumea eta , hain larritua ikusirik , esan zion : — Nik , zure mirabe honek , entzun dut zure hitza eta arriskuan jarri dut neure bizia , zure esana betetzearren .
PRED:	When the woman came to Saul and saw him , he said to Saul , “ I have heard your servant , my servant , my servant , my servant , I have heard my message . ”
GOLD:	When the woman saw how distraught he was , she said , “ Sir , I obeyed your command at the risk of my life .

ID:	1362
INPUT:	« Baina , zer ikusten dut ? Lur jota daude , atzera dagite ! Gudari ausartak birrinduta , ihesi doaz zalapartaka , atzera begiratu gabe . Izu-ikara edonon ! Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	“ But what can I see ? Who can not see ? They are like a lion ? They are like a lion , like a lion who can not fall into battle ? ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	But what do I see ? The Egyptian army flees in terror.The bravest of its fighting men runwithout a backward glance.They are terrorized at every turn , ” says the Lord .

ID:	1363
INPUT:	Nire aurrean goraipatu egiten zuten gainera , eta nik <unk> berari jakinarazten zizkioten . Tobiasek berak gutunak bidaltzen zizkidan , ni izutzeko .
PRED:	The armies of my people will stand before him , and they will be able to kill me , and I am sending you to kill me .
GOLD:	They kept telling me about Tobiah 's good deeds , and then they told him everything I said . And Tobiah kept sending threatening letters to intimidate me .

ID:	1364
INPUT:	Samsonen mendekua
PRED:	Samson 's Prophecy to Samson
GOLD:	Samson 's Vengeance on the Philistines

ID:	1365
INPUT:	Izan ere , ardiak <unk> garaian hauxe ikusten nuen ametsetan : ardiak ernaltzen zituzten ahariak marradunak , pintoak eta nabarrak zirela .
PRED:	For when I saw that my sheep , I saw that I saw that I saw a sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , and goats , and goats , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	“ One time during the mating season , I had a dream and saw that the male goats mating with the females were streaked , speckled , and spotted .

ID:	1366
INPUT:	Aitak agindu zien semeei : — Txalmatu iezadazue astoa ! <unk> txalmatu ziotenean , gainean jarri
PRED:	But the father of his sons said to his sons , “ I am going to kill him ! ”
GOLD:	“ Quick , saddle the donkey , ” the old man said . So they saddled the donkey for him , and he mounted it .

ID:	1367
INPUT:	Zoro bezala mintzatu naiz , baina zeuek behartu nauzue ; izan ere , zeuek atera behar zenuten nire alde , zeren , ezer ez naizen arren , ez bainaiz ezertan superapostolu horiek baino gutxiago .
PRED:	But if you were wise , I am sending you out to you , but you have not sent me to do whatever you do . But I do n't want you to do what you do .
GOLD:	You have made me act like a fool . You ought to be writing commendations for me , for I am not at all inferior to these “ super apostles , ” even though I am nothing at all .

ID:	1368
INPUT:	Aldi baten buruan , baretu zitzaion haserrea <unk> ; baina ezin zitzaizkion erregeari ahaztu <unk> egina eta honen aurka harturiko erabakia .
PRED:	At that time the king was very angry with him , but when they saw that the king had done , he would not punish him .
GOLD:	But after Xerxes ' anger had subsided , he began thinking about Vashti and what she had done and the decree he had made .

ID:	1369
INPUT:	Moisesen legea ezagutzen ez dutenekin , legea kontuan hartu gabe bizi izan naiz , legea ezagutzen ez dutenak irabazteko ; ez , noski , Jainkoaren legerik onartzen ez dudalako , nire legea Kristo baita .
PRED:	For I do not know the law of Moses , for I do not obey God 's law . I do not know that God 's law is not to obey the law of God .
GOLD:	When I am with the Gentiles who do not follow the Jewish law , I too live apart from that law so I can bring them to Christ . But I do not ignore the law of God ; I obey the law of Christ .

ID:	1370
INPUT:	Han egingo du sugeak habia , han egin eta berotuko arrautzak , eta bere babespean aterako umeak . Hantxe bilduko dira saiak ere , arra emearekin elkartuz .
PRED:	There will be no longer in the future , and those who take refuge in their own eyes will be able to carry out their heads , and they will be able to carry out their labor .
GOLD:	There the owl will make her nest and lay her eggs.She will hatch her young and cover them with her wings.And the buzzards will come , each one with its mate .

ID:	1371
INPUT:	Bere lurra lantzen duenak ogia ugari , <unk> atzetik dabilena burugabea galanta .
PRED:	Anyone who eats your money with a woman , and a woman who is a person with a fool .
GOLD:	A hard worker has plenty of food , but a person who chases fantasies has no sense .

ID:	1372
INPUT:	« Zuk , ordea , <unk> besterikez diozu begiratzen , errugabea hileta herria zapaldu eta <unk> ez » .
PRED:	“ But when you saw the beast that he would not punish you , he would not punish the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ But you ! You have eyes only for greed and dishonesty ! You murder the innocent , oppress the poor , and reign ruthlessly . ”

ID:	1373
INPUT:	Beraz , Kristok bere gorputzean sufritu zuenez , hartu zuek ere <unk> pentsaera berbera , jakinik gorputzean sufritu duenak <unk> lotura hautsi egin duela ,
PRED:	For Christ has shown his body that he has given him his body when he learned that he was buried in his body , and when he learned that he was buried by the power of God .
GOLD:	So then , since Christ suffered physical pain , you must arm yourselves with the same attitude he had , and be ready to suffer , too . For if you have suffered physically for Christ , you have finished with sin .

ID:	1374
INPUT:	Horren zentzugabeak al zarete ? Espirituagan uste on izanez hasi eta giza indar hutsetan ustea jarriz bukatu behar ote duzue orain ?
PRED:	Do you think we want to live in the sky ? Do you want me to live in the land of the Lord ?
GOLD:	How foolish can you be ? After starting your new lives in the Spirit , why are you now trying to become perfect by your own human effort ?

ID:	1375
INPUT:	Hona nik esan : « Denok jainko , Goi-goikoaren seme zareten arren ,
PRED:	This is the account of the Most High , the Most High , who has given you the Most High .
GOLD:	I say , ‘ You are gods ; you are all children of the Most High .

ID:	1376
INPUT:	Bosgarren turuta . <unk> izurria
PRED:	A Plague of religious law will be like an eagle .
GOLD:	The Fifth Trumpet Brings the First Terror

ID:	1377
INPUT:	Nazioen egitasmoak Jaunak ditu desegiten , herrien asmoak hutsean galtzen .
PRED:	The Lord keeps the plans of the wicked , but the proud of the wicked are crushed .
GOLD:	The Lord frustrates the plans of the nationsand thwarts all their schemes .

ID:	1378
INPUT:	baita nire alde ere , Jainkoak hitz egokia ahoan jar diezadan , berri onaren misterioa ausardiaz adierazteko .
PRED:	For God has given me a message to me ; he has given me a message from the Good News .
GOLD:	And pray for me , too . Ask God to give me the right words so I can boldly explain God 's mysterious plan that the Good News is for Jews and Gentiles alike .

ID:	1379
INPUT:	Poz handia hartu dut kristau bezala , nireganako duzuen ardura nabarmen agertu delako ; <unk> lehendik ere , baina agertzeko aukerarik ez .
PRED:	For I have given a great life to those who hear the law of Christ , so that those who have been able to be able to be able to enter .
GOLD:	How I praise the Lord that you are concerned about me again . I know you have always been concerned for me , but you did n't have the chance to help me .

ID:	1380
INPUT:	Bekatua ugari zedin azaldu zen legea ; baina bekatua ugaldu zenean , are ugariago izan zen Jainkoaren onginahia .
PRED:	For God 's law was very angry with God , but he grew more powerful than the law of God .
GOLD:	God 's law was given so that all people could see how sinful they were . But as people sinned more and more , God 's wonderful grace became more abundant .

ID:	1381
INPUT:	« <unk> batek bere lagun hurkoari kalte egin eta honek madarikaziopean zin egitera behartuko balu eta tenplu honetako zure aldarera etorriko balitz ,
PRED:	“ But if they were unfaithful to him , I will punish the people of the Temple of the Lord and if they were unfaithful to your God ,
GOLD:	“ If someone wrongs another person and is required to take an oath of innocence in front of your altar at this Temple ,

ID:	1382
INPUT:	( 2 Erg 18 , 17-37 ; Is 36 , <unk> )
PRED:	Sennacherib Threatens Jerusalem
GOLD:	Summary of Hezekiah 's Reign

ID:	1383
INPUT:	Eskerrak Jainkoari , beraren ezin esan ahalako dohain horrengatik .
PRED:	Give thanks to God , for he is good .
GOLD:	Thank God for this gift too wonderful for words !

ID:	1384
INPUT:	iraunaraziko dut zure erregetza . Honako hau hitzeman bainion zuen aita Davidi : “ Beti izanen duzu zeure ondorengoetako bat Israel gobernatzeko ” .
PRED:	I have given you the Kingdom of your God , who promised him to David , ‘ This is the covenant of your father , who made you a covenant with the descendants of Israel . '
GOLD:	then I will establish the throne of your dynasty . For I made this covenant with your father , David , when I said , ‘ One of your descendants will always rule over Israel . '

ID:	1385
INPUT:	Gerra sorraraziko dut zuen aurka eta kanpoko nazioetan barreiatuko zaituztet . Zuen lurraldea eremu bihurtuko dut eta zuen hiriak hondakin .
PRED:	I will scatter you against the earth , and I will scatter you out of the earth , and I will destroy you .
GOLD:	I will scatter you among the nations and bring out my sword against you . Your land will become desolate , and your cities will lie in ruins .

ID:	1386
INPUT:	Nazio eta herrialde horietatik guztietatik bilduko zaituztet , eta zeuen lurraldera eramango .
PRED:	I will gather you from all the lands of your people , and you will bring you into your land .
GOLD:	For I will gather you up from all the nations and bring you home again to your land .

ID:	1387
INPUT:	Samuel erre-oparia eskaintzen ari zen bitartean , filistearrak israeldarren aurka borroka egiteko hurbildu ziren . Orduan , Jaunak burrunba handiko trumoiak egin zituen filistearren kontra , izutu eta hondatu egin zituen israeldarren aurrean .
PRED:	Samuel was a sacrifice for the people of Israel , and the Philistines came against the Philistines against the Philistines . Then the people of Israel heard that the Lord had spoken !
GOLD:	Just as Samuel was sacrificing the burnt offering , the Philistines arrived to attack Israel . But the Lord spoke with a mighty voice of thunder from heaven that day , and the Philistines were thrown into such confusion that the Israelites defeated them .

ID:	1388
INPUT:	eta denok , judu eta juduberri , <unk> eta arabiar , Jainkoaren egintza miragarriak geure <unk> aipatzen entzuten diegu » .
PRED:	And all of the Jews and Gentiles have come to know that the power of God and all the people of God and prophets have heard that we have heard the power of God . ”
GOLD:	( both Jews and converts to Judaism ) , Cretans , and Arabs . And we all hear these people speaking in our own languages about the wonderful things God has done ! ”

ID:	1389
INPUT:	Jaun ahalguztidunaren haserreaz , sutan dago lurraldeaeta suaren menpe herria . Ez dio inork inori bizia barkatzen :
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ There is no one in the land of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	This wickedness is like a brushfire.It burns not only briers and thornsbut also sets the forests ablaze.Its burning sends up clouds of smoke .

ID:	1390
INPUT:	<unk> itzultzean , Jakoben semeek gertatuaren berri jakin zuten . <unk> eta haserre bizitan jarri ziren . Jakoben alabarekin <unk> Sikemek egin zuen itsuskeria , Israelen ez zela inola ere egin behar esaten zuten .
PRED:	At that time the men of Israel saw that Jacob had been very angry with his sons , and when they realized that he was very angry with the daughter of Jacob had done , and he was very angry with contempt .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Jacob 's sons had come in from the field as soon as they heard what had happened . They were shocked and furious that their sister had been raped . Shechem had done a disgraceful thing against Jacob 's family , something that should never be done .

ID:	1391
INPUT:	Maitasuna legearen muina
PRED:	Young Woman
GOLD:	Love Fulfills God 's Requirements

ID:	1392
INPUT:	Jebus ondora heldu zireneko , ilunabarra zen . Morroiak esan zion nagusiari : — Tira , jo dezagun jebustarren hiri horretara ; eman dezakegu bertan gaua .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the way came to the island of the island , where they said , “ Let 's go into the city where we are going into the wilderness . ”
GOLD:	It was late in the day when they neared Jebus , and the man 's servant said to him , “ Let 's stop at this Jebusite town and spend the night there . ”

ID:	1393
INPUT:	Hartan , <unk> eta <unk> <unk> zegoen eta « <unk> » zeritzan <unk> , <unk> eta <unk> batzuekin batera , <unk> eztabaidan hasi ziren .
PRED:	Suddenly , when they saw that they were very sick , and when they saw that the man who had been killed , and when they saw that they were crucified with him , and they were afraid .
GOLD:	But one day some men from the Synagogue of Freed Slaves , as it was called , started to debate with him . They were Jews from Cyrene , Alexandria , Cilicia , and the province of Asia .

ID:	1394
INPUT:	Fededun egin diren jentilei dagokienez , berriz , geure erabakiak idatziz eman <unk> : ez dezatela jan sasijainkoei eskainitako haragirik , ezta odolik nahiz odolustu gabeko abererik ere , eta utz ditzatela legearen kontrako sexu-harremanak » .
PRED:	But if they have given the Gentiles to the Gentiles , they have given them to the Gentiles that they had been given to the Gentiles , and we must not eat from eating from eating from eating from eating from eating the law of God . ”
GOLD:	“ As for the Gentile believers , they should do what we already told them in a letter : They should abstain from eating food offered to idols , from consuming blood or the meat of strangled animals , and from sexual immorality . ”

ID:	1395
INPUT:	« <unk> eta gainerako festaburuetan berrogei kilo irin eskainiko dira labore-oparitzat zezen bakoitzeko , eta beste horrenbeste ahari bakoitzeko ; arkumeengatik , berriz , nahi beste . Gainera , sei litro olio berrogei kilo irineko .
PRED:	“ At that time I will bring the rest of the grain offering and a grain offering , a young goat , a male goat , and a grain offering for each of the grain offering . Then he will bring two quarts of choice flour with olive oil .
GOLD:	“ So at the special feasts and sacred festivals , the grain offering will be a basket of choice flour with each young bull , another basket of flour with each ram , and as much flour as the worshiper chooses to give with each lamb . Give one gallon of olive oil with each basket of flour .

ID:	1396
INPUT:	Goretsazue , haren aingeru guztiok , goretsi , haren gudari guztiok !
PRED:	Praise him ! Praise him , all his nobles !
GOLD:	Praise him , all his angels ! Praise him , all the armies of heaven !

ID:	1397
INPUT:	Mundu honetatik eramana izateko garaia <unk> , Jerusalemera joateko erabaki sendoa hartu zuen Jesusek .
PRED:	For when Jesus was ready to go to Jerusalem , he sent his message to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	As the time drew near for him to ascend to heaven , Jesus resolutely set out for Jerusalem .

ID:	1398
INPUT:	Ontzi horretako ura jangai den <unk> botatzen bazaio , kutsaturik geldituko da ; halaber , edan daitekeen <unk> bati botatzen bazaio , <unk> <unk> dagoela , kutsaturik geldituko da .
PRED:	If the men of the tribe of Asher will be cut off , they will be defiled by some wild animals that had been defiled . If they have been defiled , they will be defiled , and they will be defiled by that they will be defiled .
GOLD:	If the water from such a container spills on any food , the food will be defiled . And any beverage in such a container will be defiled .

ID:	1399
INPUT:	Baina zuek <unk> edanarazi diezue , eta <unk> mezua ez zabaltzeko agindu .
PRED:	But if you have heard that you have been baptized , you must know that the message you have given .
GOLD:	“ But you caused the Nazirites to sin by making them drink wine , and you commanded the prophets , ‘ Shut up ! '

ID:	1400
INPUT:	« Hau da <unk> legea , senarraren eskumende egonik , emaztea desleial izan eta desohoratzen <unk> ,
PRED:	“ This is what the law says : The law of man who has been unfaithful to the law of man who had been unfaithful to me , and he was under under the law of God 's law .
GOLD:	“ This is the ritual law for dealing with suspicion . If a woman goes astray and defiles herself while under her husband 's authority ,

ID:	1401
INPUT:	Hara , ekaitza bezala lehertu daJaunaren haserrea , haize-erauntsia bezala oldartzen da , zurrunbiloka dabilerrudunen buru gainean .
PRED:	Look ! The Lord is like a whirlwind ; the people of the Lord is like a whirlwind , like a whirlwind on the heads of the wicked .
GOLD:	Look ! The Lord 's anger bursts out like a storm , a driving wind that swirls down on the heads of the wicked .

ID:	1402
INPUT:	<unk> , orduan , berekiko esan zuen : “ Zer egin ? Neure seme maitea bidaliko dut . Izango ahal diote honi begirune ! ”
PRED:	But when they thought , ‘ What 's I have done ? What sorrow awaits me ? I will send my love to those who fear him . '
GOLD:	“ ‘ What will I do ? ' the owner asked himself . ‘ I know ! I 'll send my cherished son . Surely they will respect him . '

ID:	1403
INPUT:	Filistearrak ere bilduak ziren Israel borrokatzeko : hiru mila guda-gurdi , sei mila zaldizko eta itsasertzeko hondarra bezainbat gudari . Igo eta Mikmasen ezarri zituzten guda-etxolak , <unk> ekialdera .
PRED:	The Philistines of Israel and his army were joined to fight against the army of Israel , along with two chariots and chariots and chariots . They brought them into the sand on the north side of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	The Philistines mustered a mighty army of 3,000 chariots , 6,000 charioteers , and as many warriors as the grains of sand on the seashore ! They camped at Micmash east of Beth-aven .

ID:	1404
INPUT:	<unk> , Kefira eta Beerotekoak 743 ;
PRED:	The people of Bethel and sinners ,
GOLD:	The people of Kiriath-jearim , Kephirah , and Beeroth743

ID:	1405
INPUT:	Jendea deiadarka hasi zen : « Jainkoa mintzo da , ez gizakia » .
PRED:	The people of the crowd began to listen , “ God ! ”
GOLD:	The people gave him a great ovation , shouting , “ It 's the voice of a god , not of a man ! ”

ID:	1406
INPUT:	Hori entzutean , are gehiago beldurtu zen Pilato .
PRED:	When they heard this , he became king .
GOLD:	When Pilate heard this , he was more frightened than ever .

ID:	1407
INPUT:	Begira , Jauna , zerutik , zeure bizileku <unk> horretatik : Non dirazure maitemina eta indarra ? Non zure bihotz <unk> errukia ? Ez bitez egon guregandik urrun !
PRED:	Look , O Lord , how can you bring down from the earth ? Where are your altars ? Where are you safe from your presence ? Where are you able to be able to help you ?
GOLD:	Lord , look down from heaven ; look from your holy , glorious home , and see us.Where is the passion and the mightyou used to show on our behalf ? Where are your mercy and compassion now ?

ID:	1408
INPUT:	<unk> zainduko zaitu eta zentzu onak babestuko ;
PRED:	He will wipe you from all who hate you , and he will protect you .
GOLD:	Wise choices will watch over you.Understanding will keep you safe .

ID:	1409
INPUT:	Leizera bota , sarrera <unk> itxi eta zigilatu egin zuen mila urteak bete arte , aurrerantzean herriak lilura ez zitzan ; mila <unk> ondoren , pixka baterako aske gelditu behar du .
PRED:	But if they were thrown into the inner courtyard , he took care of all the prisoners and kill him until they have been killed , and they must be able to kill those who have been cut off .
GOLD:	The angel threw him into the bottomless pit , which he then shut and locked so Satan could not deceive the nations anymore until the thousand years were finished . Afterward he must be released for a little while .

ID:	1410
INPUT:	Ez egin hitzarmenik haiekin , ezta haien <unk> ere .
PRED:	They must not commit adultery .
GOLD:	“ Make no treaties with them or their gods .

ID:	1411
INPUT:	Nork ulertu hodeien <unk> <unk> burrundara zeruan ?
PRED:	Who makes you shout at the heavens ? Who makes you shout in heaven ?
GOLD:	Who can understand the spreading of the cloudsand the thunder that rolls forth from heaven ?

ID:	1412
INPUT:	Nork sinetsi du gure mezua ? Nori agertu dio Jaunakbere ahalmena ?
PRED:	Who has seen this message ? Who has seen the Lord ?
GOLD:	Who has believed our message ? To whom has the Lord revealed his powerful arm ?

ID:	1413
INPUT:	Eta berak aztertuko <unk> , zer ? Gizakia bezala engainatuko ote zenukete ?
PRED:	And why should we know that we are weak ?
GOLD:	What will happen when he finds out what you are doing ? Can you fool him as easily as you fool people ?

ID:	1414
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : « Zatozte zuek bakarrik leku gorde batera , eta hartu atseden pixka bat » . Asko baitziren joan-etorri zebiltzanak , eta ez zuten jateko <unk> ere .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Come , let us go into the place where you had been left , and they found that day . ” So they did n't know that they had been able to eat .
GOLD:	Then Jesus said , “ Let 's go off by ourselves to a quiet place and rest awhile . ” He said this because there were so many people coming and going that Jesus and his apostles did n't even have time to eat .

ID:	1415
INPUT:	<unk> botako ditut zuen aurretik , lurralde hartaz jabetzeko adina zuek ugaldu arte .
PRED:	I will throw you into the land until I have plenty to go ahead of you .
GOLD:	I will drive them out a little at a time until your population has increased enough to take possession of the land .

ID:	1416
INPUT:	Egun hartan Jaunak , beren Jainkoak , salbatuko du bere herria , artzainak artaldea bezala ; distira egingo dute <unk> lurraldean , diadema bateko <unk> bezala .
PRED:	On that day the Lord will be saved , and the people of Israel will be able to be able to be filled with fire , and they will be filled with fire .
GOLD:	On that day the Lord their God will rescue his people , just as a shepherd rescues his sheep.They will sparkle in his landlike jewels in a crown .

ID:	1417
INPUT:	Baina askatasuna ematen duen lege bikaina hausnartu eta horri tinko eusten diona — ez erraz ahazten duen entzule bezala , benetako betetzaile bezala baizik — , hori zoriontsu izango da legea betez .
PRED:	But if you are faithful to God , he will keep on sinning and pray to you , for they do n't know what you do , for they will do , just as you do .
GOLD:	But if you look carefully into the perfect law that sets you free , and if you do what it says and do n't forget what you heard , then God will bless you for doing it .

ID:	1418
INPUT:	Pedrok esan zion : « Ananias , zergatik utzi diozu Satanasi zure <unk> nagusitzen Espiritu Santuari gezurra esateko , soroaren <unk> zati bat zeuretzat gordez ?
PRED:	Peter said to me , “ Why are you doing this ? Why are you trying to kill me ? Why do you know that I am going to kill you ? ”
GOLD:	Then Peter said , “ Ananias , why have you let Satan fill your heart ? You lied to the Holy Spirit , and you kept some of the money for yourself .

ID:	1419
INPUT:	Orduan esango duzu : « Zergatik gaitzetsi ote nuen heziketa ? Zergatik mespretxatu ote zentzarazpena ?
PRED:	Then I will say to you , ‘ Why do you despise me ? '
GOLD:	You will say , “ How I hated discipline ! If only I had not ignored all the warnings !

ID:	1420
INPUT:	Gero , Jainkoaren etxean Obed-Edomen ardurapean zeuden urre , zilar eta tresna guztiak , jauregiko altxortegiko ondasunak eta gatibuak bahituran harturik , Samariara itzuli zen .
PRED:	Then he took care of silver and gold , silver , gold , silver , gold , silver , gold , and all the treasures of the royal palace , and all the kingdoms of the king of Judah returned to Samaria .
GOLD:	He carried off all the gold and silver and all the articles from the Temple of God that had been in the care of Obed-edom . He also seized the treasures of the royal palace , along with hostages , and then returned to Samaria .

ID:	1421
INPUT:	Beste gauza asko ere esan zuten ordezkari haiek Jainko Jaunaren eta honen zerbitzari Ezekiasen kontra .
PRED:	Then many of the people said to him , ‘ This is what the Lord of Hezekiah , the God of Hezekiah . '
GOLD:	And Sennacherib 's officers further mocked the Lord God and his servant Hezekiah , heaping insult upon insult .

ID:	1422
INPUT:	« Gizon-emakumeak , sexu-harremanak izan dituztenean , bainatu egingo dira eta kutsaturik geldituko arratsa arte .
PRED:	“ When they have been unfaithful , they will be defiled by touching a dead body until evening , and they will remain unclean until evening .
GOLD:	After a man and a woman have sexual intercourse , they must each bathe in water , and they will remain unclean until the next evening .

ID:	1423
INPUT:	<unk> bidegabekeria zeure etxetik , itzuli <unk> , eta <unk> egingo zaitu .
PRED:	And when they turn away from your house , they will see that you will see your own eyes and fig tree .
GOLD:	If you return to the Almighty , you will be restored — so clean up your life .

ID:	1424
INPUT:	Bestela baizik , Jainkoak berri ona gure esku jartzeko gai ikusi gaituenez , horren arabera hitz egiten dugu , ez gizakiei atsegin emateko , gure bihotzak aztertzen dituen Jainkoari baizik .
PRED:	But if God gives us the Good News to us , he will give us the way to give us . But we do n't know what God has done .
GOLD:	For we speak as messengers approved by God to be entrusted with the Good News . Our purpose is to please God , not people . He alone examines the motives of our hearts .

ID:	1425
INPUT:	israeldarrengandik hurbil kanpatu eta uztak hondatu ohi zituzten Gazako sarreraraino , israeldarrak deus gabe utziz , janaririk , ardirik , behirik eta astorik gabe .
PRED:	So the people of Israel set up a drink from the fields , and the best of the Philistines had no food or goats or goats or goats . But the Israelite or goats , or goats , or goats , or goats , or goats , or goats , or goats .
GOLD:	camping in the land and destroying crops as far away as Gaza . They left the Israelites with nothing to eat , taking all the sheep , goats , cattle , and donkeys .

ID:	1426
INPUT:	( Mk 14 , 10-11 ; Lk 22 , 3-6 )
PRED:	The First Disciples
GOLD:	Jesus Is Betrayed and Arrested

ID:	1427
INPUT:	Bete <unk> horien etxeak , bat-batean lapurrak sarraraziz ! Zuloa egin baitzuten ni erortzeko , sareak ipini bidean ni harrapatzeko .
PRED:	And when they have heard their homes , they have been thrown into the wilderness and brought me out to the water .
GOLD:	Let screaming be heard from their homesas warriors come suddenly upon them.For they have dug a pit for meand have hidden traps along my path .

ID:	1428
INPUT:	Hala , Jaunarengana itzuli eta esan zion : — Benetan bekatu larria egin du herri honek , urrezko jainkoa eginez .
PRED:	So he returned to the Lord and said to him , “ This is what the Lord has done . ”
GOLD:	So Moses returned to the Lord and said , “ Oh , what a terrible sin these people have committed . They have made gods of gold for themselves .

ID:	1429
INPUT:	eta <unk> lehiatzen naiz saria iristeko ; horretara deitzen baitit Jainkoak goitik Kristo Jesusen bitartez .
PRED:	And I will give glory to God , and I will give me glory to God .
GOLD:	I press on to reach the end of the race and receive the heavenly prize for which God , through Christ Jesus , is calling us .

ID:	1430
INPUT:	<unk> menderatu egiten du haserrea , ohoragarri zaio iraina kontuan ez hartzea .
PRED:	The anger of judgment will be punished , and those who do not commit adultery .
GOLD:	Sensible people control their temper ; they earn respect by overlooking wrongs .

ID:	1431
INPUT:	Jauna , zergatik gelditzen zara urrun ? Zergatik ezkutatzen larrialdian ?
PRED:	Why do you wander in the dust ? Why do you wander in the dust ?
GOLD:	O Lord , why do you stand so far away ? Why do you hide when I am in trouble ?

ID:	1432
INPUT:	« Jainkoa maite dut » esan eta senideari gorroto diona gezurti da ; izan ere , ikusten duen senidea maite ez duenak ezin du maite ikusten ez duen Jainkoa .
PRED:	“ The one who loves me , ” says the Lord . “ Anyone who loves a person who loves a person who loves a person who loves God .
GOLD:	If someone says , “ I love God , ” but hates a fellow believer , that person is a liar ; for if we do n't love people we can see , how can we love God , whom we can not see ?

ID:	1433
INPUT:	<unk> bakoitzari , dagozkion labore- eta isur-opariak erantsiko dizkiozue , arautua dagoenez .
PRED:	They must give these instructions to the regular burnt offering and liquid offering .
GOLD:	Each of these offerings must be accompanied by its prescribed grain offering and liquid offering .

ID:	1434
INPUT:	Eta Jaunak deiadar dagibere gudarostearen aurrean ; kontaezinak diraharen <unk> , <unk> aginduak betetzeko . Handia da eta guztiz <unk> eguna : nork eman aurpegi ?
PRED:	The Lord has given his army against his army and his army , his officials , and all the nobles of his people who were filled with him .
GOLD:	The Lord is at the head of the column.He leads them with a shout.This is his mighty army , and they follow his orders.The day of the Lord is an awesome , terrible thing.Who can possibly survive ?

ID:	1435
INPUT:	Orduan , Jesusek eskua luzatu eta ukitu egin zuen , esanez : — Nahi dut , izan zaitez garbi . Berehala , legena garbitu egin zitzaion .
PRED:	Then Jesus touched his hand and touched him , and he touched him . “ Come , ” he said , “ I am clean . ”
GOLD:	Jesus reached out and touched him . “ I am willing , ” he said . “ Be healed ! ” And instantly the leprosy disappeared .

ID:	1436
INPUT:	Zimri , Elam eta Mediako errege guztiei ;
PRED:	Zimri Rules in order to all the kingdoms of the king and all the kingdoms of the earth .
GOLD:	and to the kings of Zimri , Elam , and Media .

ID:	1437
INPUT:	« Zure senide batek bekatu egiten badu , zoaz berarengana eta zentzarazi bakarrean . Jaramon egiten badizu , irabazia duzu senidea .
PRED:	“ If one of your fellow believers , go back to him , go back to your fellow believers , and give them food to your fellow believers .
GOLD:	“ If another believer sins against you , go privately and point out the offense . If the other person listens and confesses it , you have won that person back .

ID:	1438
INPUT:	Eta horrela jokatuko dute ez Aita , ez ni , ezagutu ez <unk> .
PRED:	And they will not know that I am the Father of my Father , though they do n't know that I have seen .
GOLD:	This is because they have never known the Father or me .

ID:	1439
INPUT:	Horregatik — ala ni bizi ! — <unk> bera gertatuko <unk> , eta <unk> amondarrei : <unk> eta <unk> hondamendi bihurtuko dira . Nire herrian bizirik <unk> erasoko <unk> eta <unk> bertako jabe bihurtuko dira » .
PRED:	That is why I am going to kill you , ” says the Lord , “ when I have heard that that you will be very very very very powerful , and they will know that my people will be sure that they will know that they will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	Now , as surely as I live , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , “ Moab and Ammon will be destroyed — destroyed as completely as Sodom and Gomorrah.Their land will become a place of stinging nettles , salt pits , and eternal desolation.The remnant of my people will plunder themand take their land . ”

ID:	1440
INPUT:	<unk> barreneko ertza purpura more , gorri eta gorriminezko granadaz apaindu zuten .
PRED:	They were filled with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	They made pomegranates of blue , purple , and scarlet yarn , and attached them to the hem of the robe .

ID:	1441
INPUT:	Abiatu zen , beraz , Abram , Jaunak agindu bezala . Hirurogeita hamabost urte zituen <unk> atera zenean .
PRED:	So the Lord sent Abram to Abram , just as the Lord had commanded him . When he was very old , he sent Abram out of Egypt .
GOLD:	So Abram departed as the Lord had instructed , and Lot went with him . Abram was seventy-five years old when he left Haran .

ID:	1442
INPUT:	<unk> , <unk> eta <unk> , kanela eta <unk> ; intsentsu , mirra , aloe , mota guztietako lurrin bereziak .
PRED:	At that time , when I saw that Tobiah and expensive perfume , spices , spices , spices , spices , and fragrant incense .
GOLD:	nard and saffron , fragrant calamus and cinnamon , with all the trees of frankincense , myrrh , and aloes , and every other lovely spice .

ID:	1443
INPUT:	<unk> bizi <unk> egiten ditu , hiri garaia lurreraino , hautsa jotzeraino botatzen ,
PRED:	For when they see that the time , the time of the earth will be thrown into into the dust , and they will fall into the dust .
GOLD:	He humbles the proudand brings down the arrogant city.He brings it down to the dust .

ID:	1444
INPUT:	Horregatik bururatu zaigu aldarea <unk> ; ez , ordea , erre-opariak eta sakrifizioak eskaintzeko ,
PRED:	That is why we have been able to break into the temple of burnt offering and burnt offerings and burnt offerings .
GOLD:	“ So we decided to build the altar , not for burnt offerings or sacrifices ,

ID:	1445
INPUT:	<unk> akazia-zurezko lau zutabe egin zituzten , urrez estaliak eta urrezko kakoz hornituak , eta , zilarra <unk> , lau oin egin zizkieten <unk> .
PRED:	They made two gold rings and attached them to the gold , along with gold , gold , gold , gold , and scarlet thread . They were made of silver , bronze , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	For the curtain , he made four posts of acacia wood and four gold hooks . He overlaid the posts with gold and set them in four silver bases .

ID:	1446
INPUT:	« Entzun , <unk> : Urruti Jainkoarengandik gaiztakeria , urruti Ahaltsuagandik bidegabekeria !
PRED:	“ Listen to what they say , ‘ What sorrow awaits you from God . '
GOLD:	“ Listen to me , you who have understanding.Everyone knows that God does n't sin ! The Almighty can do no wrong .

ID:	1447
INPUT:	zuen ondorengo <unk> jakin dezaten etxoletan bizitzen jarri nituela israeldarrak , Egiptotik atera nituenean . Neu naiz Jauna , zuen Jainkoa » .
PRED:	And when they heard that they were living in the place of Egypt , they would know that I am the Lord your God . I am the God of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	This will remind each new generation of Israelites that I made their ancestors live in shelters when I rescued them from the land of Egypt . I am the Lord your God . ”

ID:	1448
INPUT:	Bere eskuz lurraldea neurtu dueta bakoitzari bere <unk> izendatu . Betiko izango dira haren jabe , menderik mende biziko bertan .
PRED:	The land will be given to his own own own own own own land , and they will live forever .
GOLD:	He has surveyed and divided the landand deeded it over to those creatures.They will possess it forever , from generation to generation .

ID:	1449
INPUT:	Jesus artzain ona
PRED:	The Faith of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Claims to Be the Son of God

ID:	1450
INPUT:	Beltxatzar , aztien buru zaren hori , badakit jainko santuen espirituak gidatzen zaituela eta misterio <unk> ez dagoela zuretzat . Azal iezadazu , bada , ametsaren esanahia .
PRED:	In fact , I know that you have given me the Spirit of the world , so that the Spirit of God has given me to you . Now let me tell you what you have done . ”
GOLD:	So I issued an order calling in all the wise men of Babylon , so they could tell me what my dream meant .

ID:	1451
INPUT:	Zu , beso zabalik dagoen kerubin babesle zinen , Jainkoaren mendi santuan zeunden eta ikatz gorien artean ibiltzen zinen .
PRED:	You made me deep into the holy mountain , and you made me like a fire of fire .
GOLD:	I ordained and anointed youas the mighty angelic guardian.You had access to the holy mountain of Godand walked among the stones of fire .

ID:	1452
INPUT:	Halako batean , ordea , jentilek eta juduek , <unk> batera , <unk> jo eta apostoluak harrika hiltzea erabaki zuten ;
PRED:	But when the Jews and the Jews came to kill him , the Jews and the believers who were killed , and they wanted to kill him .
GOLD:	Then a mob of Gentiles and Jews , along with their leaders , decided to attack and stone them .

ID:	1453
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : <unk> eta saltoka , poztu egin zarete Israel herriari gertatuaz , biziki mespretxatzen duzuelako ;
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Because you have worshiped the people of Israel , and they have worshiped their gods .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Because you clapped and danced and cheered with glee at the destruction of my people ,

ID:	1454
INPUT:	Jesus bere gogoz heriotzara ( 14 , <unk> )
PRED:	Jesus knew that his death was sick , and when they learned that he was dead .
GOLD:	Judas Agrees to Betray Jesus

ID:	1455
INPUT:	Joramen erregealdian Judaren agintearen aurka jaiki ziren edomdarrak , berentzat erregea izendatuz .
PRED:	During Jehoram 's reign , the king of Judah and Judah became king of Judah .
GOLD:	During Jehoram 's reign , the Edomites revolted against Judah and crowned their own king .

ID:	1456
INPUT:	Simonek azaldu digu , nola hasiera-hasieratik Jainkoak jentilen artetik beretzat herri bat aukeratu nahi izan duen .
PRED:	That is why God has chosen for us , for he has chosen the believers to take them to the Gentiles .
GOLD:	Peter has told you about the time God first visited the Gentiles to take from them a people for himself .

ID:	1457
INPUT:	Ondoren , bere ikasleei esan zien Jesusek : « Horregatik diotsuet : Ez kezkatu bizitzeko zer jango , edota gorputza zerez jantziko .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to his disciples , “ I ca n't eat your body . ” So he said , “ I ca n't eat your body .
GOLD:	Then , turning to his disciples , Jesus said , “ That is why I tell you not to worry about everyday life — whether you have enough food to eat or enough clothes to wear .

ID:	1458
INPUT:	Jaunak segurtatzen ditu gizakiaren <unk> atsegin duen bidetik eramaten .
PRED:	For the Lord hates those who are under it .
GOLD:	The Lord directs the steps of the godly.He delights in every detail of their lives .

ID:	1459
INPUT:	<unk> , ordea — nahiz diruz <unk> nahiz etxean <unk> — , jan dezakete apaizaren janaritik .
PRED:	But if they are slaughtered , they will be killed , and they must eat whatever they were slaughtered by the priest .
GOLD:	However , if the priest buys a slave for himself , the slave may eat from the sacred offerings . And if his slaves have children , they also may share his food .

ID:	1460
INPUT:	Babes-hiriak
PRED:	The Birth of Moses
GOLD:	Cities of Refuge

ID:	1461
INPUT:	Gainera , esan zien : « Zoazte eta jan haragi guria , edan edari bikainak , eta bidali janaria ezer ez dutenei ere , egun hau Jaunari sagaratua baita . Ez atsekabetu , Jaunarengandiko pozak ematen baitizue indar ! »
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Go and eat meat and drink wine and drink wine . You have not eaten the cup of the Lord 's life , for they have not been given to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	And Nehemiah continued , “ Go and celebrate with a feast of rich foods and sweet drinks , and share gifts of food with people who have nothing prepared . This is a sacred day before our Lord . Do n't be dejected and sad , for the joy of the Lord is your strength ! ”

ID:	1462
INPUT:	<unk> gabe gelditu da Juda . Zurezko Zutabeen <unk> jo duzue orduan ;
PRED:	The king of Judah was so angry with an eagle .
GOLD:	Judah 's defenses have been stripped away.You run to the armory for your weapons .

ID:	1463
INPUT:	Eta egin zuen guztia oso ona zela ikusi zuen Jainkoak . Honela , seigarren eguna burutu zen .
PRED:	So God saw everything that God had done , and he saw everything God had done .
GOLD:	Then God looked over all he had made , and he saw that it was very good ! And evening passed and morning came , marking the sixth day .

ID:	1464
INPUT:	Hurrengo larunbatean , ia hiritar guztiak bildu ziren Jaunaren mezua entzutera .
PRED:	In the Sabbath day they came to hear the word of the Lord .
GOLD:	The following week almost the entire city turned out to hear them preach the word of the Lord .

ID:	1465
INPUT:	gainera , <unk> eta <unk> ; <unk> benjamindar guztira .
PRED:	And when they saw that all the men of the tribe of Benjamin were filled with swords , and all the men of Benjamin .
GOLD:	After him were Gabbai and Sallai and a total of 928 relatives .

ID:	1466
INPUT:	Artaxerxesen erregealdiko hogeigarren urtean Judako gobernari izendatu ninduten , eta hogeita hamabigarren urtea arte iraun nuen karguan . Hamabi urte horietan , nik eta nire senideek ez dugu gobernariari dagokion ordainik jaso .
PRED:	In the eighteenth year of King Darius 's reign , in the twentieth year of the reign of the reign of the reign of Judah , which was given to me as a descendant of the Lord .
GOLD:	For the entire twelve years that I was governor of Judah — from the twentieth year to the thirty-second year of the reign of King Artaxerxes — neither I nor my officials drew on our official food allowance .

ID:	1467
INPUT:	Bekatuak aitortu eta otoitz egin
PRED:	Warnings against Sin and pray
GOLD:	Restore Wandering Believers

ID:	1468
INPUT:	Lau zutabe eta lau oinak brontzezkoak ziren , eta kakoak zilarrezkoak ; zutabe-gainak eta ziriak , berriz , zilarrez estaliak .
PRED:	There were four posts of silver and bronze bases ; the posts of silver hooks and bronze bases for silver .
GOLD:	It was supported by four posts , each set securely in its own bronze base . The tops of the posts were overlaid with silver , and the hooks and rings were also made of silver .

ID:	1469
INPUT:	Baina harriak kendu , etxea <unk> eta zuritu ondoren , mantxa berriro sortzen bada ,
PRED:	But if the stones had been burned , the stones , and the priest must be burned up again .
GOLD:	“ But if the mildew reappears after all the stones have been replaced and the house has been scraped and replastered ,

ID:	1470
INPUT:	Niregana joko duen <unk> lautada izango <unk> <unk> , Akor harana <unk> etzaleku .
PRED:	In this way , the beast will be broken , and they will be able to fall into the valley , and they will be able to be filled with fear .
GOLD:	The plain of Sharon will again be filled with flocksfor my people who have searched for me , and the valley of Achor will be a place to pasture herds .

ID:	1471
INPUT:	Nire aurka ahozabal , honela diote : « Hara , guk geuk ikusi dugu ! »
PRED:	“ Look ! ” he said , “ we see him ! ”
GOLD:	They shout , “ Aha ! Aha ! With our own eyes we saw him do it ! ”

ID:	1472
INPUT:	Printzea atalondora sartuko da kanpoko ataritik eta <unk> kontra geldituko . Apaizek <unk> erre-oparia eta elkartasun-opariak eskainiko dituzte ; gero , printzea <unk> ahuspeztu eta irten egingo da , baina atea ez da arratsa arte itxiko .
PRED:	Then he will take some of the outer courtyard and between the outer courtyard and the priests and the priests . Then the priests will serve the king and all the people of the earth , and they will be able to stand before him .
GOLD:	The prince will enter the entry room of the gateway from the outside . Then he will stand by the gatepost while the priest offers his burnt offering and peace offering . He will bow down in worship inside the gateway passage and then go back out the way he came . The gateway will not be closed until evening .

ID:	1473
INPUT:	<unk> ederrena zara , ezpainetatik xarma <unk> , Jainkoak betidanik bedeinkatu baitzaitu !
PRED:	For you are my strength , and your God will bless you .
GOLD:	Put on your sword , O mighty warrior ! You are so glorious , so majestic !

ID:	1474
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jainkoaz jakin <unk> agerian dute , Jainkoak berak agertu baitie .
PRED:	For God has heard that he has been made , and he has revealed his power .
GOLD:	They know the truth about God because he has made it obvious to them .

ID:	1475
INPUT:	Herodesen heriotza
PRED:	The Death of Herod
GOLD:	The Death of Herod Agrippa

ID:	1476
INPUT:	Asueroren erregealdiaren zazpigarren urteko hamargarren hilean , hots , <unk> hilean , eraman zuten Ester erregearen aurrera .
PRED:	In the seventh year of King Darius 's reign , during the ninth year of King Darius 's reign , they brought to Queen Esther .
GOLD:	Esther was taken to King Xerxes at the royal palace in early winter of the seventh year of his reign .

ID:	1477
INPUT:	Jerusalemen zigorra iragarria
PRED:	A Message for the Priests
GOLD:	Judgment on Israel 's Leaders

ID:	1478
INPUT:	Eta hi , mendia besteko <unk> hori , berdindu egingo hau Zorobabelek . Honek aterako du tenplua burutuko duen harria . Orduan , jendeak honela egingo du deiadar : Hori bai ederra , hori ! »
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ What sorrow awaits you , the people of the Temple will happen ? ” And the Lord says , “ What sorrow awaits you ? ”
GOLD:	Nothing , not even a mighty mountain , will stand in Zerubbabel 's way ; it will become a level plain before him ! And when Zerubbabel sets the final stone of the Temple in place , the people will shout : ‘ May God bless it ! May God bless it ! ' ”

ID:	1479
INPUT:	Non da Joben indarra ?
PRED:	Where are Job ?
GOLD:	Challenges Job Again

ID:	1480
INPUT:	Batek ehun seme-alaba ukan , urte luzez bizieta anitz egun harturik ere , bere <unk> gozatzen ez badu , eta hilobitarako ere ez badu , horra zer diodan : <unk> baino okerrago da .
PRED:	There are many years old and old and old men who were living in the old age , and they will be able to serve as well as well as much as I have done .
GOLD:	A man might have a hundred children and live to be very old . But if he finds no satisfaction in life and does n't even get a decent burial , it would have been better for him to be born dead .

ID:	1481
INPUT:	« Orduan , Jaunak esan zidan : Ebaki lehengoak bezalako beste bi harlauza ; egin zurezko kutxa ere , eta zatozkit mendira .
PRED:	“ Then the Lord said to me , “ I am sending you two stone tablets like two stone tablets and stone on the mountain of wood . ”
GOLD:	“ At that time the Lord said to me , ‘ Chisel out two stone tablets like the first ones . Also make a wooden Ark — a sacred chest to store them in . Come up to me on the mountain ,

ID:	1482
INPUT:	Mikak eginiko irudia beren artean izan zuten , Jainkoaren etxea Xilon egon zen bitartean .
PRED:	So Micah was under Micah 's house , and he was under the house of God 's Temple .
GOLD:	So Micah 's carved image was worshiped by the tribe of Dan as long as the Tabernacle of God remained at Shiloh .

ID:	1483
INPUT:	Dalilak esan zion Samsoni : — Esadazu nondik duzun horrelako indarra eta nola lotu zaitzaketen zu menderatzeko .
PRED:	Delilah said to him , “ Why are you trying to kill you ? ”
GOLD:	So Delilah said to Samson , “ Please tell me what makes you so strong and what it would take to tie you up securely . ”

ID:	1484
INPUT:	« Norbaitek , Jaunari sagaratu beharreko emaitzetan iruzur eginez , oharkabean bekatu egiten badu , ahari akats gabea eramango dio Jaunari ordain-oparitzat ; zilarretan hainbesteko bat balioko du ahariak , santutegiko pisu-neurriaren arabera .
PRED:	“ If you make a sacred offering to the Lord , you must have any male goat or female , you must treat them as a sacred offering to the Lord , which is as a special possession of the sanctuary shekel .
GOLD:	“ If one of you commits a sin by unintentionally defiling the Lord 's sacred property , you must bring a guilt offering to the Lord . The offering must be your own ram with no defects , or you may buy one of equal value with silver , as measured by the weight of the sanctuary shekel .

ID:	1485
INPUT:	Gure errege , buruzagi , apaiz eta <unk> dute bete zure irakaspena , ez dituzte aditu aginduak , ezta eman <unk> ere .
PRED:	Our king , the high priest , and they have obeyed your commands . They have not obeyed your commands , and they have not given to obey your commands , and they would not obey him .
GOLD:	Our kings , leaders , priests , and ancestors did not obey your Law or listen to the warnings in your commands and laws .

ID:	1486
INPUT:	Bazen han <unk> zeritzan zilargin bat . Artemisa jainkosaren tenpluko <unk> landu ohi zituen zilarrez , artisauei irabazi ederra ematen <unk> .
PRED:	At that time a man who had been able to have a mother of the Temple of the Temple of the Lord , who had given him great quantities of silver and gold .
GOLD:	It began with Demetrius , a silversmith who had a large business manufacturing silver shrines of the Greek goddess Artemis . He kept many craftsmen busy .

ID:	1487
INPUT:	halaxe Kristo ere : behin bakarrik izan zen oparitzat eskainia guztien bekatuak <unk> , eta gero bigarrenez agertuko da , bekatuarekin zerikusirik gabe , beraren zain daudenak salbatzera .
PRED:	For when Christ was raised by human hands , we will be able to save those who have been slaughtered by the power of all the sins of God . But those who are trying to save us .
GOLD:	so also Christ was offered once for all time as a sacrifice to take away the sins of many people . He will come again , not to deal with our sins , but to bring salvation to all who are eagerly waiting for him .

ID:	1488
INPUT:	Neure herriarekin haserre nintzela , neure ondarea zapuztu egin nueneta zure eskuetara eman . Zuk ez zenien gupidarik izan , zaharrak ere lehertu egin <unk> uztarri <unk> .
PRED:	I was very angry with my people , for they refused to obey you . You refused to kill me , and they refused to kill you . You were very angry with all my people , and they were very angry with him .
GOLD:	For I was angry with my chosen peopleand punished them by letting them fall into your hands.But you , Babylon , showed them no mercy.You oppressed even the elderly .

ID:	1489
INPUT:	Hiriko gizonek irten eta eraso egin zioten Joabi . Han erori ziren Daviden gudari eta gudalburu batzuk , baita Urias hitita ere .
PRED:	The men of the town went out to Joab and Joab and the men of David and the army of David .
GOLD:	And when the enemy soldiers came out of the city to fight , Uriah the Hittite was killed along with several other Israelite soldiers .

ID:	1490
INPUT:	Baina apaizak ikusten badu ile zuririk ez duela eta azalekoa baino sakonagoa ez dela , baizik eta zurbilduz doala , aparte edukiko du gaixoa zazpi egunez .
PRED:	But if the priest finds that the priest is not greater than skin-deep , the priest must not examine the person . The priest will not be purified , and the priest will not be purified .
GOLD:	But if the priest finds no white hair on the affected area and the problem appears to be no more than skin-deep and has faded , the priest must quarantine the person for seven days .

ID:	1491
INPUT:	Samuelen azken hitzaldia
PRED:	Samuel 's Prayer for Samuel
GOLD:	Samuel 's Farewell Address

ID:	1492
INPUT:	Ez du izango berri txarren beldurrik , adoretsu dago , Jaunarenganako <unk> ;
PRED:	The whole community will be careful to do what they have done . He will be able to kill the Lord , and they will be able to see the Lord .
GOLD:	They do not fear bad news ; they confidently trust the Lord to care for them .

ID:	1493
INPUT:	Aurretik joan zen bera , eta zazpi aldiz ahuspeztu zen lurrean bere anaiarengana hurbildu ahala .
PRED:	When he arrived , he went into the ground and worshiped him .
GOLD:	Then Jacob went on ahead . As he approached his brother , he bowed to the ground seven times before him .

ID:	1494
INPUT:	Gorrotoa duenari ez zaio hitzetan igartzen , baina maltzurkeriaz betea du barrua .
PRED:	For people are not wise , but their heart are full of evil .
GOLD:	People may cover their hatred with pleasant words , but they 're deceiving you .

ID:	1495
INPUT:	Filistearren buruzagiek emakumeagana joan eta esan zioten : — Atera iezaiozu azpikeriaz Samsoni nondik duen halako indarra eta nola harrapa dezakegun , lotu eta menderatzeko . Bakoitzak mila eta ehun zilarrezko txanpon emango dizkizugu .
PRED:	Then the Philistine rulers came to him and said to him , “ Son of man , come and ask him to ask for him to take some of silver and gold and gold . ”
GOLD:	The rulers of the Philistines went to her and said , “ Entice Samson to tell you what makes him so strong and how he can be overpowered and tied up securely . Then each of us will give you 1,100 pieces of silver . ”

ID:	1496
INPUT:	Ea bada , sendotu beso ahulduak eta belaun makalduak ,
PRED:	Come and kill me , and encourage those who persecute him .
GOLD:	So take a new grip with your tired hands and strengthen your weak knees .

ID:	1497
INPUT:	Aldi haietan ez zen erregerik Israelen . Bakoitzak egoki iruditzen zitzaiona egin ohi zuen .
PRED:	At that time the king of Israel would not make him king of Israel .
GOLD:	In those days Israel had no king ; all the people did whatever seemed right in their own eyes .

ID:	1498
INPUT:	« Gure Jaun eta Jainko hori , zu bazara <unk> , ohorea eta <unk> , zeuk <unk> guztiak egineta , zuk nahi izan duzulako , baitira sortu eta dira oraindik » .
PRED:	“ But if you are the Sovereign Lord , you will know that you have seen , and if you have seen my power , and you will know that you are very very very weak and honor . ”
GOLD:	“ You are worthy , O Lord our God , to receive glory and honor and power.For you created all things , and they exist because you created what you pleased . ”

ID:	1499
INPUT:	Eliz elkarte bakoitzean arduradunak izendatu zituzten eta , otoitz eta barau egin ondoren , Jaunari gomendatu zizkioten , harengan sinetsi baitzuten .
PRED:	So all the believers were believers in prison and pray to the Lord for him , for they believed in him .
GOLD:	Paul and Barnabas also appointed elders in every church . With prayer and fasting , they turned the elders over to the care of the Lord , in whom they had put their trust .

ID:	1500
INPUT:	Barukek erantzun zien : — Jeremiasek berak esan dizkit banan-banan hitz guztiok eta nik liburuan idatzi ditut tintaz .
PRED:	Jeremiah replied , “ I have given me all the other words of the church . I write all these words on the book of the Book of the events in the Book of the Book of the book . ”
GOLD:	So Baruch explained , “ Jeremiah dictated them , and I wrote them down in ink , word for word , on this scroll . ”

ID:	1501
INPUT:	Gero , Ezekiasek esan zion biltzarrari : « Zuek ere Jaunarentzako eskua bete eskaintza <unk> . Aurreratu eta ekarri Jaunaren etxera zeuen oparigaiak eta esker oneko eskaintzak » . Orduan , jendeak esker oneko eskaintzak egin zituen . <unk> erre-opariak ere egin zituzten .
PRED:	Then Hezekiah said to him , “ You have given the Lord your hand to the Lord , and you have brought them to the Temple of the Lord your God . Then he brought them to the Temple of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Then Hezekiah declared , “ Now that you have consecrated yourselves to the Lord , bring your sacrifices and thanksgiving offerings to the Temple of the Lord . ” So the people brought their sacrifices and thanksgiving offerings , and all whose hearts were willing brought burnt offerings , too .

ID:	1502
INPUT:	Amatzias , Judako errege
PRED:	Joshua Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Amaziah Rules in Judah

ID:	1503
INPUT:	Bere nagusi egiptoarraren etxean bizi zen Jose . Dena ongi ateratzen zitzaion , Jauna berekin baitzuen .
PRED:	She was his own family , and he became his own household . He was the Lord 's own household , for he was his own household .
GOLD:	The Lord was with Joseph , so he succeeded in everything he did as he served in the home of his Egyptian master .

ID:	1504
INPUT:	Jonatanek , ordea , ez zuen entzun bere aitak jendeari ezarritako zin-hitza . Luzatu zuen , beraz , eskuan zeraman <unk> eta , <unk> sarturik , ahora eraman zuen . Bat-batean begiak argitu zitzaizkion .
PRED:	But Jonathan did not listen to his father , and he refused to listen to the place of his father . So he threw his hand on the head of his hand , and he took his eyes .
GOLD:	But Jonathan had not heard his father 's command , and he dipped the end of his stick into a piece of honeycomb and ate the honey . After he had eaten it , he felt refreshed .

ID:	1505
INPUT:	Etengabe jarraituko diot zure legeari , beti eta beti .
PRED:	Three days later I will be sure to obey your law .
GOLD:	I will keep on obeying your instructionsforever and ever .

ID:	1506
INPUT:	<unk> jasotzean , erregearen hirurogeita hamar ondorengoei lepoa moztu zieten eta buruak , <unk> harturik , Izreelera bidali zizkioten Jehuri .
PRED:	When they arrived , they took him back to the king 's descendants , they took him with him and sent him back to Jehu .
GOLD:	When the letter arrived , the leaders killed all seventy of the king 's sons . They placed their heads in baskets and presented them to Jehu at Jezreel .

ID:	1507
INPUT:	Baina oroitzen naiz itxaropena <unk> didan <unk> :
PRED:	But when I heard that I have seen my power ,
GOLD:	Yet I still dare to hopewhen I remember this :

ID:	1508
INPUT:	Baina Paulok deiadar egin zion : — Ez egin kalterik zeure buruari , denok hemen gaude eta .
PRED:	But Paul shouted to the crowd , “ Do n't be afraid , or we do n't need you . ”
GOLD:	But Paul shouted to him , “ Stop ! Do n't kill yourself ! We are all here ! ”

ID:	1509
INPUT:	« Idatzi orain esango dizudan kantika ; irakatsi israeldarrei eta <unk> dezatela , kantika hori lekuko izango baitut beraien kontra .
PRED:	“ Therefore , listen to the people of Israel and give me this message to me , and I will give you authority against you .
GOLD:	“ So write down the words of this song , and teach it to the people of Israel . Help them learn it , so it may serve as a witness for me against them .

ID:	1510
INPUT:	Balaamek Israelen etorkizun oparoa iragarri
PRED:	Balaam Defeats the Ammonites
GOLD:	Balaam 's Final Messages

ID:	1511
INPUT:	Astindu ederra eman zien eta <unk> handia egin . Ondoren , Etamgo haitzarteko leize-zulo batera jaitsi zen bizitzera .
PRED:	He gave birth to a great man , and he became very angry with them . Then he went down to the tents of the Lord .
GOLD:	So he attacked the Philistines with great fury and killed many of them . Then he went to live in a cave in the rock of Etam .

ID:	1512
INPUT:	Beste seinale bat agertu zen zeruan : herensuge gorri handi bat , zazpi buru eta hamar adar zituena , eta buruetan koroa bana .
PRED:	He appeared to a great nation from heaven , a great flood of the earth , and he appeared to his head with each of the beast and his head .
GOLD:	Then I witnessed in heaven another significant event . I saw a large red dragon with seven heads and ten horns , with seven crowns on his heads .

ID:	1513
INPUT:	Fede heldua dugunok fede <unk> ahuleziak eraman behar ditugu , geuri atsegin zaiguna bilatu gabe .
PRED:	For the rich person who gives gifts to the poor , but we are trying to save us .
GOLD:	We who are strong must be considerate of those who are sensitive about things like this . We must not just please ourselves .

ID:	1514
INPUT:	horregatik , Israelgo mendiok , entzun nik , Jainko Jaunak , zuei guztioi — mendi eta muino , erreka eta haran , hondaturiko toki eta hutsik zaudeten hiri , inguruko nazio guztien harrapakin eta iseka-gai izan zaretenoi — adierazten dizuedan mezua :
PRED:	I have heard the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : “ I am sending you into the hill country of all the land of Israel , and you will be rebuilt .
GOLD:	Therefore , O mountains of Israel , hear the word of the Sovereign Lord . He speaks to the hills and mountains , ravines and valleys , and to ruined wastes and long-deserted cities that have been destroyed and mocked by the surrounding nations .

ID:	1515
INPUT:	Bi zutabe haiek tenpluaren aurrealdean ezarri zituen ezker-eskuin ; <unk> « Jakin » deitu zion , eta ezkerrekoari « Boaz » .
PRED:	Then he placed two curtains on the side of the south side of the south side of the south side of the south , and he called the two cherubim .
GOLD:	Then he set up the two pillars at the entrance of the Temple , one to the south of the entrance and the other to the north . He named the one on the south Jakin , and the one on the north Boaz .

ID:	1516
INPUT:	Ba , beldurrez dar-dar geldituko dira , zintzoen elkartean baitago Jauna .
PRED:	There are those who fear the Lord , for the time of the godly is near .
GOLD:	Terror will grip them , for God is with those who obey him .

ID:	1517
INPUT:	Efraimen leinukoek ezin izan zituzten bota <unk> kanaandarrak ; horregatik , kanaandarrak efraimdarren artean bizi izan ziren Gezerren .
PRED:	The men of Ephraim could not drive out the people of Ephraim , where they lived among the Canaanites .
GOLD:	The tribe of Ephraim failed to drive out the Canaanites living in Gezer , so the Canaanites continued to live there among them .

ID:	1518
INPUT:	Emakume tekoarrak erregeagana joan eta , lurreraino makurturik , esan zion : — Lagundu , errege jauna !
PRED:	When the woman came to the king and said to him , “ Long live in your face ! ”
GOLD:	When the woman from Tekoa approached the king , she bowed with her face to the ground in deep respect and cried out , “ O king ! Help me ! ”

ID:	1519
INPUT:	Hitz egin behar dut , hustu eta <unk> ; ahoa zabaldu eta erantzun egingo dut .
PRED:	But I will send out my mouth , and I will pour out my mouth .
GOLD:	I must speak to find relief , so let me give my answers .

ID:	1520
INPUT:	Izan ere , herri honek gogortu egin ditu buru-bihotzak , gortu belarriak , itsutu begiak . Ez bezate beren begiez ikus , ez belarriez entzun , ezta buruaz ulertu ere , horrela niregana bihur ez daitezen eta salba ez ditzadan .
PRED:	For the hearts of their hearts are full , and their ears will not see their eyes , and they will not see their eyes , and they will not understand their eyes .
GOLD:	For the hearts of these people are hardened , and their ears can not hear , and they have closed their eyes — so their eyes can not see , and their ears can not hear , and their hearts can not understand , and they can not turn to meand let me heal them . '

ID:	1521
INPUT:	Miktam . <unk> nazazu , Jauna , zuregan baitut babesa .
PRED:	O Lord , rescue me from my enemies , for I have heard my troubles .
GOLD:	Keep me safe , O God , for I have come to you for refuge .

ID:	1522
INPUT:	Zure masailakgranada ebaki baten bi erdiak , musu-estalkipean .
PRED:	Your lips are like flames ; your fury burns against your mouth .
GOLD:	Your cheeks are like rosy pomegranatesbehind your veil .

ID:	1523
INPUT:	Hala , ura ondu egin zen gaurdaino , Eliseok esan bezala .
PRED:	But Elisha left the water and said , “ As soon as you have said . ”
GOLD:	And the water has remained pure ever since , just as Elisha said .

ID:	1524
INPUT:	Erregeak berriro beste buruzagi bat bidali zuen Eliasengana , beste berrogeita hamar gizonekin . Buruzagiak esan zion Eliasi : — Jainkoaren gizon , berehala jaisteko agintzen dizu erregeak .
PRED:	Then the king sent another king to Elijah , one of the other men of the other men of Israel , and he sent him back to Elijah . “ Do you go , ” the king of God said .
GOLD:	So the king sent another captain with fifty men . The captain said to him , “ Man of God , the king demands that you come down at once . ”

ID:	1525
INPUT:	“ Hau da <unk> ! ” , diozue , ni mespretxatuz . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak .
PRED:	‘ What sorrow awaits you , ' says the Lord , ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says :
GOLD:	You say , ‘ It 's too hard to serve the Lord , ' and you turn up your noses at my commands , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . “ Think of it ! Animals that are stolen and crippled and sick are being presented as offerings ! Should I accept from you such offerings as these ? ” asks the Lord .

ID:	1526
INPUT:	Jubileu Urtean , ordea , lursaila jatorrizko jabearen eskuetara itzuliko da , hau da , erosia izan <unk> » .
PRED:	But the family of Jubilee will return to the family of Jubilee , the priest will return to the city of the city , and they will be able to kill him . ”
GOLD:	In the Year of Jubilee the field must be returned to the person from whom he purchased it , the one who inherited it as family property .

ID:	1527
INPUT:	Esan , bada , nik , Jainko Jaunak , diodan hau : Ez da nire hitzik <unk> , bete egingo da esaten dudana . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	Now the Sovereign Lord says , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will punish you , and I have heard that I have heard what I have done . ' ”
GOLD:	Therefore , tell them , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : No more delay ! I will now do everything I have threatened . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ' ”

ID:	1528
INPUT:	Israelgo leinu guztien izen-bilketa senitarteka eta familiaka egin zen , gudurako gai ziren hogei urtetik gorako gizonezkoak banan-banan erroldatuz . Hona leinu bakoitzak eman zuen emaitza : Jakoben , Israel ere <unk> , lehen-seme Rubenen leinuak 46 . 500 ; Simeonen leinuak <unk> . 300 ; Gaden leinuak 45 . <unk> ; Judaren leinuak 74 . 600 ; Isakarren leinuak 54 . 400 ; Zabulonen leinuak 57 . 400 ; Joseren semeen leinuek : <unk> 40 . 500 , eta <unk> 32 . 200 ; Benjaminen leinuak 35 . 400 ; Danen leinuak <unk> . <unk> ; Axerren leinuak 41 . 500 ; Neftaliren leinuak 53 . 400 .
PRED:	These are the names of the tribes of Israel and families of Israel who were twenty years old and families of Israel . They were twenty of the tribe of Reuben , who were given to Israel . He was the descendants of Israel .
GOLD:	This is the number of men twenty years old or older who were able to go to war , as their names were listed in the records of their clans and families : Reuben ( Jacob'soldest son ) 46,500

ID:	1529
INPUT:	Baina errege ausart bat sortuko da <unk> . Erreinu txit handia jaso eta nahi duena egingo du .
PRED:	“ But a king of Assyria will be a great king , and you will be able to rule over you .
GOLD:	“ Then a mighty king will rise to power who will rule with great authority and accomplish everything he sets out to do .

ID:	1530
INPUT:	Itzulitako guztiak 42 . 360 ziren .
PRED:	So Rehoboam went to Judah , and they returned to Judah .
GOLD:	So a total of 42,360 people returned to Judah ,

ID:	1531
INPUT:	Gero , Jakobek Joseri esan zion : « Hara , laster hilko naiz ni . Baina Jainkoa zeuekin izango duzue eta zeuen arbasoen lurraldera itzularaziko zaituzte .
PRED:	Then Jacob said to Joseph , “ Look , I will die in your own land . But you will die in the land of your ancestors , and you will return to your ancestors . ”
GOLD:	Then Jacob said to Joseph , “ Look , I am about to die , but God will be with you and will take you back to Canaan , the land of your ancestors .

ID:	1532
INPUT:	Pedrok , berriro : — Zuk ez didazu sekula niri oinik garbituko . Jesusek erantzun : — <unk> ez bazaitut , ez duzu nirekin zerikusirik izango .
PRED:	Then Peter said to me , “ Do n't let me be baptized in your face ? ” “ You have not heard that you do not believe in me . ”
GOLD:	“ No , ” Peter protested , “ you will never ever wash my feet ! ” Jesus replied , “ Unless I wash you , you wo n't belong to me . ”

ID:	1533
INPUT:	Jaio eta zortzi egunera haurra erdaindu zutenean , Jesus izena ezarri zioten , sortu aurretik aingeruak esan bezala .
PRED:	One day when they were circumcised , Jesus called the baby in Bethany , as he was born before him .
GOLD:	Eight days later , when the baby was circumcised , he was named Jesus , the name given him by the angel even before he was conceived .

ID:	1534
INPUT:	« Hau dio Jainkoak : Azken egunetan neure espiritua isuriko diet gizaki guztiei . Zuen seme-alabek profetizatu egingo dute , zuen gazteek ikuskariak izango , zuen zaharrek ametsak egingo .
PRED:	“ This is what God says : I will pour out all the people of Israel , for they will pour out your children against you .
GOLD:	‘ In the last days , ' God says , ‘ I will pour out my Spirit upon all people.Your sons and daughters will prophesy.Your young men will see visions , and your old men will dream dreams .

ID:	1535
INPUT:	Guk ziur dakigu Moisesi Jainkoak hitz egin ziola , baina hori nongoa den ere ez dakigu .
PRED:	We know that God had given Moses , but he knew that he was not able to see him .
GOLD:	We know God spoke to Moses , but we do n't even know where this man comes from . ”

ID:	1536
INPUT:	<unk> hiritik alde egin
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Recovery
GOLD:	The

ID:	1537
INPUT:	Rehum , <unk> , Maaseias ,
PRED:	Harim , Harim , Meremoth ,
GOLD:	Ahiah , Hanan , Anan ,

ID:	1538
INPUT:	— Zer aholkatzen didazue ? Zer erantzun behar diot gure aitak ezarri zion uztarria arintzeko eskatu didan herriari ?
PRED:	“ What should I answer your advice ? ” he asked . “ What should I answer my father ? ”
GOLD:	“ What is your advice ? ” he asked them . “ How should I answer these people who want me to lighten the burdens imposed by my father ? ”

ID:	1539
INPUT:	Beraz , Boozen morroiekin lan eginez eta garagarburuak bilduz aritu zen Rut , garagar eta gariaren <unk> bukatu arte . Eta amaginarrebarekin jarraitu zuen bizitzen .
PRED:	So Boaz went back to Boaz 's work in the harvest of barley , barley , barley , barley , barley , and barley , and barley . And when he was in the land of Canaan , he left in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	So Ruth worked alongside the women in Boaz 's fields and gathered grain with them until the end of the barley harvest . Then she continued working with them through the wheat harvest in early summer . And all the while she lived with her mother-in-law .

ID:	1540
INPUT:	— izan ere adituko dute zure izen handiaren , zure egintza <unk> berri — tenplu honetara otoitz egitera etortzen bada ,
PRED:	“ Then they will listen to your name , O God of your great power , and they will pray to him . ”
GOLD:	for they will hear of your great name and your strong hand and your powerful arm . And when they pray toward this Temple ,

ID:	1541
INPUT:	Eta ez baitziren gauza Espirituak hizketarako ematen zion <unk> aurre egiteko ,
PRED:	And the Spirit did n't be able to kill him , and when they were able to kill him .
GOLD:	None of them could stand against the wisdom and the Spirit with which Stephen spoke .

ID:	1542
INPUT:	Hark erantzun zien : — Ez al duzue irakurri Liburu Santuek diotena ? Egileak hasieran gizaseme eta emakume egin zituela , alegia ,
PRED:	“ Do n't you read this ? ” the Scriptures asked . “ Is n't you read to us ?
GOLD:	“ Have n't you read the Scriptures ? ” Jesus replied . “ They record that from the beginning ‘ God made them male and female . ' ”

ID:	1543
INPUT:	Egin bezate <unk> , Jaunaren zerbitzariek , atari eta aldare artean . Esan bezate : « Erruki zakizkio , Jauna , zeure herriari . Ez utzi zeure ondarea lotsagarri , ez bezate beste <unk> har . Zergatik esan behar <unk> : “ Non dute , bada , beren Jainkoa ? ” »
PRED:	Then they will know that the Lord has given the Temple of the Temple of the Lord , and they will say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : What do you think they have done ? '
GOLD:	Let the priests , who minister in the Lord 's presence , stand and weep between the entry room to the Temple and the altar.Let them pray , “ Spare your people , Lord ! Do n't let your special possession become an object of mockery.Do n't let them become a joke for unbelieving foreigners who say , ‘ Has the God of Israel left them ? ' ”

ID:	1544
INPUT:	Israeldarrak ihesi abiatu ziren Judakoen aurretik , baina Jainkoak hauen esku utzi zituen .
PRED:	The people of Israel fled to Judah , but God rescued them from the land of Israel .
GOLD:	The Israelite army fled from Judah , and God handed them over to Judah in defeat .

ID:	1545
INPUT:	Ni , aldiz , zure maitasun handiari esker , zure etxean sartuko naiz , zure tenplu santuan ahuspeztuko begirunez beterik .
PRED:	I will praise you with great power , and I will enter your Temple with unfailing love .
GOLD:	Lead me in the right path , O Lord , or my enemies will conquer me.Make your way plain for me to follow .

ID:	1546
INPUT:	Beraz , hartu zituen Eleazar apaizak sutan hil ziren gizonek <unk> brontzezko errautsontziak eta xaflak egin zituen aldarea estaltzeko .
PRED:	So the priest took Eleazar the priest by the priest , who had been slaughtered by worshiping idols of silver and gold .
GOLD:	Place these staffs in the Tabernacle in front of the Ark containing the tablets of the Covenant , where I meet with you .

ID:	1547
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin zaiona egin zuen Ezekiasek , bere arbaso Davidek bezalaxe .
PRED:	Hezekiah did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as he had done .
GOLD:	He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , just as his ancestor David had done .

ID:	1548
INPUT:	Mundua mundu denetik , berez ikusezina dena , hau da , Jainkoaren betiereko ahalmena eta <unk> , <unk> gertatzen zaio haren egintzak aztertzen dituenari . Ez dute , beraz , aitzakiarik ,
PRED:	When you do this , you must know that the things you have done , so that the power of God will be filled with such things , and they will be destroyed by the power of God .
GOLD:	For ever since the world was created , people have seen the earth and sky . Through everything God made , they can clearly see his invisible qualities — his eternal power and divine nature . So they have no excuse for not knowing God .

ID:	1549
INPUT:	Jesusek hau ere esan zion jendeari : « <unk> lainoa ikusi orduko , “ Euria dator ” esaten duzue , eta hala gertatzen da .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to the people , “ When the cloud saw that the cloud had seen , you will know that the cloud is going to happen . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus turned to the crowd and said , “ When you see clouds beginning to form in the west , you say , ‘ Here comes a shower . ' And you are right .

ID:	1550
INPUT:	Joiakim erregeari
PRED:	Jehoiakim Rules in Judah
GOLD:	A Message about Jehoahaz

ID:	1551
INPUT:	Josiasek Pazkoa ospatu
PRED:	Josiah 's Passover
GOLD:	Josiah Celebrates Passover

ID:	1552
INPUT:	Zintzo ari ziren langile haiek lanean . Merariren ondorengoetako <unk> eta Obadias , eta Kehaten ondorengoetako Zakarias eta Mexulam lebitarrak ziren lan haiek zuzentzeko arduradunak . <unk> jotzen <unk> , lebitarrek
PRED:	One of the family of Levi were given to be given with the rest of the members of the members of the Kohathite clan , and all of the Levites who were with him . They were filled with him , who were all who were with him .
GOLD:	The workers served faithfully under the leadership of Jahath and Obadiah , Levites of the Merarite clan , and Zechariah and Meshullam , Levites of the Kohathite clan . Other Levites , all of whom were skilled musicians ,

ID:	1553
INPUT:	Abramek esan zion : — Zeure esku duzu mirabea . Egiozu <unk> <unk> . Saraik gaizki hartu zuen Agar , eta honek ihes egin zuen .
PRED:	Abram said to him , “ Take your hand and kill you because of your brother 's brother , because she was very angry with you . ” But Abram became very angry .
GOLD:	Abram replied , “ Look , she is your servant , so deal with her as you see fit . ” Then Sarai treated Hagar so harshly that she finally ran away .

ID:	1554
INPUT:	Saulek ezagutu egin zuen Daviden ahotsa eta esan zion : — Ez al da hori zure ahotsa , ene seme David ? — Nire ahotsa da , bai , ene errege jauna — erantzun zion Davidek .
PRED:	When Saul heard him , he said to him , “ Is n't your voice ? ” “ He is my son ? ” David replied . “ He is my lord , my lord , my lord the king . ”
GOLD:	Saul recognized David 's voice and called out , “ Is that you , my son David ? ” And David replied , “ Yes , my lord the king .

ID:	1555
INPUT:	« Gertatua ikusirik , beste zerbitzariak biziki nahigabetu ziren , eta guztiaren berri nagusiari ematera joan ziren .
PRED:	“ When they saw this , the officials saw that the officials had told him what had happened .
GOLD:	“ When some of the other servants saw this , they were very upset . They went to the king and told him everything that had happened .

ID:	1556
INPUT:	« Horregatik , bada , zu zigortzera nator , Israel ; eta zigortzera <unk> gero , presta zaitezzeure Jainkoaren <unk> » .
PRED:	“ Therefore , I will punish you , and I will destroy you like trees , and I will destroy you as weak as weak as snow . ”
GOLD:	“ Therefore , I will bring upon you all the disasters I have announced.Prepare to meet your God in judgment , you people of Israel ! ”

ID:	1557
INPUT:	usainkiak eta olioa argi , <unk> eta intsentsu <unk> .
PRED:	olive oil , olive oil , and olive oil .
GOLD:	They also brought spices and olive oil for the light , the anointing oil , and the fragrant incense .

ID:	1558
INPUT:	Abiatu zen , bai , Jonas , baina <unk> ihes egiteko asmotan , Jaunarengandik urrun . Jafara jaitsi eta <unk> zihoan ontzi bat aurkitu zuen ; bidesaria ordaindurik , ontziratu egin zen , <unk> batera <unk> joateko , Jaunarengandik urrun .
PRED:	But when Jonah was coming , he sent messengers to kill him , but when he fled to the Lord , when he saw that he was able to kill the Lord , he saw that he was able to see the Lord .
GOLD:	But Jonah got up and went in the opposite direction to get away from the Lord . He went down to the port of Joppa , where he found a ship leaving for Tarshish . He bought a ticket and went on board , hoping to escape from the Lord by sailing to Tarshish .

ID:	1559
INPUT:	Hona hemen zerrenda : urrezko 30 ontzi , zilarrezko 1 . 000 plater , 29 labana ,
PRED:	This is the following instructions : pure gold , gold , gold , and gold .
GOLD:	This is a list of the items that were returned : gold basins30silver basins1,000silver incense burners29

ID:	1560
INPUT:	Larre <unk> bazkatuko ditut , Israelgo mendi garaietan izango dituzte eskortak . Han hartuko dute atseden <unk> ederretan , eta larre <unk> bazkatuko dira Israelgo mendietan .
PRED:	I will send them to the mountains of Israel , for I will give them food to the mountains of Israel . They will be able to live in the mountains of Israel , and they will live in the mountains of Israel .
GOLD:	Yes , I will give them good pastureland on the high hills of Israel . There they will lie down in pleasant places and feed in the lush pastures of the hills .

ID:	1561
INPUT:	Baina haiek erantzun zuten : — Ez dugu hori egiterik , abere-talde guztiak bildu arte ; orduan <unk> dugu harria putzuko aho gainetik eta edaten emango .
PRED:	But they replied , “ We do n't know how much we want you to know all the things you were doing . ”
GOLD:	“ We ca n't water the animals until all the flocks have arrived , ” they replied . “ Then the shepherds move the stone from the mouth of the well , and we water all the sheep and goats . ”

ID:	1562
INPUT:	Egunero zuen artean nengoen tenpluan irakasten , eta ez ninduzuen atxilotu . Baina hala behar du , Liburu Santuetan idatzia bete dadin » .
PRED:	I did n't understand the Temple in the Temple of the Temple , but it was written in the Temple of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Why did n't you arrest me in the Temple ? I was there among you teaching every day . But these things are happening to fulfill what the Scriptures say about me . ”

ID:	1563
INPUT:	« Ez egin gezurrezko testigantzarik lagun hurkoaren aurka .
PRED:	“ Do not testify against your neighbor .
GOLD:	“ You must not testify falsely against your neighbor .

ID:	1564
INPUT:	Jo ote ditu Jaunak <unk> <unk> jo <unk> gogor ? Hil ote ditu <unk> hiltzaileak hil zituen bezala ?
PRED:	Who will kill him ? Who will kill those who kill him ? When they kill him , he killed that person who killed him ?
GOLD:	Has the Lord struck Israelas he struck her enemies ? Has he punished heras he punished them ?

ID:	1565
INPUT:	Orduan , Jakobekin , Isaakekin eta Abrahamekin eginiko itunaz oroituko naiz , baita lurraldeari buruzko <unk> ere .
PRED:	Then I will punish you by making this covenant with the covenant of Egypt , and I will punish you .
GOLD:	Then I will remember my covenant with Jacob and my covenant with Isaac and my covenant with Abraham , and I will remember the land .

ID:	1566
INPUT:	« Dibongo jendeok , jaitsi ohorezko zeuen aulkitik , <unk> zaitezte eremuan , aurka <unk> suntsitzailea , gotorlekuak erraustera .
PRED:	“ Suppose a plague against you , bring them back to the wind that fell upon you , so that those who plot against you .
GOLD:	“ Come down from your gloryand sit in the dust , you people of Dibon , for those who destroy Moab will shatter Dibon , too.They will tear down all your towers .

ID:	1567
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Daviden poema .
PRED:	O God , listen to me , for I have made you safe .
GOLD:	Why do you boast about your crimes , great warrior ? Do n't you realize God 's justice continues forever ?

ID:	1568
INPUT:	<unk> asko , gorputza bat
PRED:	Many parts of many parts were sick , and many parts have a body .
GOLD:	One Body with Many Parts

ID:	1569
INPUT:	Pedrok berriro ukatu zuen , zin eginez : — Ez dut ezagutzen gizon hori .
PRED:	Then Peter said to him , “ I do n't know how I do . ”
GOLD:	Again Peter denied it , this time with an oath . “ I do n't even know the man , ” he said .

ID:	1570
INPUT:	Hona Jeremiasen <unk> . Jaunak esan zidan :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me ,
GOLD:	At that time the Lord sent me a message . He said ,

ID:	1571
INPUT:	Bi zekor , ahari bat eta urtebeteko zazpi arkume eskainiko dituzue erre-oparitzat , eta Jaunak atseginez onartuko ditu .
PRED:	You must present two young bull as a burnt offering and two one-year-old male lambs with a burnt offering , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	Present a special burnt offering on that day as a pleasing aroma to the Lord . It will consist of two young bulls , one ram , and seven one-year-old male lambs .

ID:	1572
INPUT:	Hurbil gaitezen , bada , konfiantza osoz Jainkoaren onginahiaren tronura , errukia iritsi eta <unk> laguntza izan dezagun .
PRED:	That is why we have come to you , for we know that God has given us a great message that comes from God .
GOLD:	So let us come boldly to the throne of our gracious God . There we will receive his mercy , and we will find grace to help us when we need it most .

ID:	1573
INPUT:	Fedea zuelako , bere herria utzi eta atzerritar gisa bizi izan zen Jainkoak agindutako lurraldean ; <unk> bizi izan zen , Jainkoaren agintzari bera hartu zuten Isaak eta Jakob biziko ziren bezalaxe ;
PRED:	He left his people and lived as a foreigner in the land where God had promised , and he had given them as a foreigner in the land of God .
GOLD:	And even when he reached the land God promised him , he lived there by faith — for he was like a foreigner , living in tents . And so did Isaac and Jacob , who inherited the same promise .

ID:	1574
INPUT:	Lehenengo <unk> zaldiak gorriak ziren , <unk> beltzak ,
PRED:	At that time the king was filled with chariots , and all the animals that were broken .
GOLD:	The first chariot was pulled by red horses , the second by black horses ,

ID:	1575
INPUT:	Ikasleak eztabaidan hasi ziren beren artean , beraietan zein ote zen handiena .
PRED:	So they began to argue with them , so they were arguing with them .
GOLD:	Then they began to argue among themselves about who would be the greatest among them .

ID:	1576
INPUT:	Orduan jakingo dute ni naizela Jauna eta ez niela alferrik hitz egin zoritxar hau iragartzean » .
PRED:	Then they will know that I am the Lord , and they will not know what I have done . ”
GOLD:	They will know that I alone am the Lord and that I was serious when I said I would bring this calamity on them .

ID:	1577
INPUT:	Zeru garaiaren antzeko eraiki zuen bere <unk> lurra bezala sendo oinarritu betiko .
PRED:	He built an eagle on his throne , like an eagle to the throne of the earth .
GOLD:	There he built his sanctuary as high as the heavens , as solid and enduring as the earth .

ID:	1578
INPUT:	Zergatik ez zegoen inor , etorri naizenean ? Zergatik ez du inork erantzun , deitu dudanean ? Nire eskua <unk> <unk> askatzeko ? Nik ez ote aski <unk> libratzeko ? <unk> bat aski dut , itsasoa lehortueta ibaiak basamortu bihurtzeko : urik gabe arrainak egarriz hileta usteldu egiten dira .
PRED:	“ Why did you come ? ” I asked . “ Why did n't I know that no one of my hand ? Why did I know that I have come from the sea ?
GOLD:	Why was no one there when I came ? Why did n't anyone answer when I called ? Is it because I have no power to rescue ? No , that is not the reason ! For I can speak to the sea and make it dry up ! I can turn rivers into deserts covered with dying fish .

ID:	1579
INPUT:	Handik egun batzuetara , Maria etxetik atera eta Judeako mendialdeko hiri batera joan zen arin-arin ,
PRED:	At that time , Mary and Mary went back to the town of Judea and Sidon .
GOLD:	A few days later Mary hurried to the hill country of Judea , to the town

ID:	1580
INPUT:	Eliasek , berriro ere : — Jainkoaren gizona baldin banaiz , jaits dadila sua zerutik eta kiskal zaitzatela zeu eta zeure berrogeita hamar gizonak . Bat-batean zerutik sua jaitsi eta kiskali egin zituen beste buruzagi hura eta berrogeita hamar gizonak .
PRED:	Then Elijah said to Elijah , “ If I want you to come from heaven , let me go into the fire of God and bless you from heaven . ” So Elijah left the man of God and placed them on the ground .
GOLD:	Elijah replied , “ If I am a man of God , let fire come down from heaven and destroy you and your fifty men ! ” And again the fire of God fell from heaven and killed them all .

ID:	1581
INPUT:	Behin batean , <unk> batek esan zion Jesusi : — Maisu , esaiozu nire anaiari senipartea nirekin <unk> .
PRED:	One day a man came to him and said , ‘ Teacher , ' he said to him , ‘ Teacher , my brother , '
GOLD:	Then someone called from the crowd , “ Teacher , please tell my brother to divide our father 's estate with me . ”

ID:	1582
INPUT:	su <unk> itzali , ezpataz hilak <unk> ihes egin , <unk> sendatu , borrokan <unk> izan eta atzerritarren gudarosteei atzera eragin .
PRED:	And when they saw that they were dead , they will be able to be able to be able to kill those who were able to kill him .
GOLD:	quenched the flames of fire , and escaped death by the edge of the sword . Their weakness was turned to strength . They became strong in battle and put whole armies to flight .

ID:	1583
INPUT:	<unk> abiaturik , <unk> iritsi ziren ; baina ez zen han urik herriak edateko .
PRED:	When they arrived , they saw that they had never been able to drink .
GOLD:	They left Alush and camped at Rephidim , where there was no water for the people to drink .

ID:	1584
INPUT:	Zerbitzariek ihardetsi zioten erregeari : — Prest gaude gure errege jaunak erabakitakoa betetzeko .
PRED:	So the king 's officials replied , “ We have done everything in the Lord 's presence . ”
GOLD:	“ We are with you , ” his advisers replied . “ Do what you think is best . ”

ID:	1585
INPUT:	Nola mendiek Jerusalem , hala du Jaunak bere herria inguratzen , <unk> eta betiko .
PRED:	For the Lord has poured out his people , and his people are filled with power .
GOLD:	Just as the mountains surround Jerusalem , so the Lord surrounds his people , both now and forever .

ID:	1586
INPUT:	« Igo Galaadera , <unk> bila , Egiptoko herri ! Alferrik dituzu <unk> guztiak : zuretzat ez dago erremediorik .
PRED:	“ Go to the land of Egypt , where you can know that all the people of Egypt have been able to kill you .
GOLD:	“ Go up to Gilead to get medicine , O virgin daughter of Egypt ! But your many treatmentswill bring you no healing .

ID:	1587
INPUT:	Zein arin aldatzen zaren bidez ! Asiriak huts egin zizun <unk> egingo dizu Egiptok ere .
PRED:	When the king of Assyria falls on you , he will give you victory over you , so that he will give you victory over you .
GOLD:	First here , then there — you flit from one ally to another asking for help.But your new friends in Egypt will let you down , just as Assyria did before .

ID:	1588
INPUT:	Anaiek esan zioten : — Geure errege edo menderatzaile izan behar ote zaitugu ? Eta are gehiago gorrotatu zuten bere amets eta <unk> .
PRED:	When Joseph arrived , he asked him , “ Are you afraid of you ? ” And when he was afraid of you , they became very angry with all his brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	His brothers responded , “ So you think you will be our king , do you ? Do you actually think you will reign over us ? ” And they hated him all the more because of his dreams and the way he talked about them .

ID:	1589
INPUT:	<unk> gantzuketa-olioa eta intsentsu usaintsu garbia ere prestatu zituen , <unk> egin ohi duten eran .
PRED:	At that time the anointing oil and fragrant incense , and the anointing oil were pure .
GOLD:	Then he made the sacred anointing oil and the fragrant incense , using the techniques of a skilled incense maker .

ID:	1590
INPUT:	« Zuek , <unk> , noiz arte maiteko duzue zentzugabekeria ? Zuek , harroputzok , noiz arte jarraituko harrokerian ? Zuek , <unk> , noiz arte gorrotatuko jakinduria ?
PRED:	“ But when you see how long will you see ? Why are you so angry with me ? You will know that you have seen me , and you will know my wisdom ?
GOLD:	“ How long , you simpletons , will you insist on being simpleminded ? How long will you mockers relish your mocking ? How long will you fools hate knowledge ?

ID:	1591
INPUT:	Bera da gure Jainkoa , eta gu hark larraturiko herria , haren <unk> artaldea . <unk> al diozue gaur kasu haren esanari :
PRED:	For God has given us his people , and his people have given us how much we have done , and they will know that we have done .
GOLD:	for he is our God.We are the people he watches over , the flock under his care.If only you would listen to his voice today !

ID:	1592
INPUT:	Saulen osabak galdegin zien : — Nora joan zarete ? Saulek erantzun zion : — <unk> bila . Baina ez genituen aurkitzen eta Samuelengana jo genuen .
PRED:	“ Where are you going ? ” Saul asked . “ Why are you looking for us ? ” Saul replied . “ But we 're n't looking for him .
GOLD:	“ Where have you been ? ” Saul 's uncle asked him and his servant . “ We were looking for the donkeys , ” Saul replied , “ but we could n't find them . So we went to Samuel to ask him where they were . ”

ID:	1593
INPUT:	Jakobek esan zion Joseri : « Orain bai hil <unk> zure aurpegia ikusi ondoren , oraindik bizirik zaude eta » .
PRED:	Then Jacob said to Joseph , “ I have seen your face , and when I saw your face , and when they were still alive . ”
GOLD:	Finally , Jacob said to Joseph , “ Now I am ready to die , since I have seen your face again and know you are still alive . ”

ID:	1594
INPUT:	Profeta bat profeta delako onartzen duenak profetari zor zaion saria jasoko du ; eta gizon zuzen bat zuzena delako onartzen duenak gizon zuzenari zor zaion saria jasoko du ;
PRED:	The prophet who speaks to the prophet the prophet who is the person who is the person who is given to the person who is right , and those who are righteous .
GOLD:	If you receive a prophet as one who speaks for God , you will be given the same reward as a prophet . And if you receive righteous people because of their righteousness , you will be given a reward like theirs .

ID:	1595
INPUT:	Hau diot : « Oi Jauna , zu zaitut ene Jaun , zuregan baizik ez dut zorionik » .
PRED:	“ O Lord , you are my helper , but I will not hide you . ”
GOLD:	I said to the Lord , “ You are my Master ! Every good thing I have comes from you . ”

ID:	1596
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun : « Nik emandako legea bazter utzi eta nire mintzoa aditu eta jarraitu ez dutelako gertatu da hori .
PRED:	“ The Lord has spoken ! ” says , “ because they have refused to obey my instructions .
GOLD:	Who is wise enough to understand all this ? Who has been instructed by the Lord and can explain it to others ? Why has the land been so ruined that no one dares to travel through it ?

ID:	1597
INPUT:	Beste batek du nire alde testigatzen , eta jakin badakit haren testigantza baliozkoa dena .
PRED:	One of them know about me , and I know what he meant .
GOLD:	But someone else is also testifying about me , and I assure you that everything he says about me is true .

ID:	1598
INPUT:	« Jopen otoitzean ari nintzela , goi-ikuskari bat izan nuen : oihal handi baten antzeko zerbait ikusi nuen , lau puntetatik zintzilik , zerutik ni nengoen tokiraino jaisten .
PRED:	“ I was praying to you , a little while I saw that a large sheet was walking on the side of a large sheet , and I saw it on the side of heaven .
GOLD:	“ I was in the town of Joppa , ” he said , “ and while I was praying , I went into a trance and saw a vision . Something like a large sheet was let down by its four corners from the sky . And it came right down to me .

ID:	1599
INPUT:	Zakariasen kontra jaiki eta , erregearen aginduz , harrika eman zioten denek Jaunaren etxeko atarian .
PRED:	Then the king of Zechariah came to the king of Zechariah and stoned him to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the leaders plotted to kill Zechariah , and King Joash ordered that they stone him to death in the courtyard of the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	1600
INPUT:	Profeta bezala mintzo direnei dagokienez , mintza daitezela bi edo hiru , eta gainerakoek eman dezatela beren iritzia .
PRED:	To those who speak to God 's commandments , and they will be given to each other .
GOLD:	Let two or three people prophesy , and let the others evaluate what is said .

ID:	1601
INPUT:	Noiz arte behar dute gaiztoek , Jauna , noiz arte behar dute gaiztoek garaile ?
PRED:	How long will the wicked be destroyed ? How long will the wicked be destroyed ?
GOLD:	How long , O Lord ? How long will the wicked be allowed to gloat ?

ID:	1602
INPUT:	Horregatik , dolu egingo du lurrak , ilundu egingo goian ortzia , hartua baitut erabakia ; ez naiz damutuko , ez atzera egingo » .
PRED:	Therefore , the earth will fall into darkness , and I will not destroy the heavens . I will not destroy the heavens and the heavens . ”
GOLD:	The earth will mournand the heavens will be draped in blackbecause of my decree against my people.I have made up my mind and will not change it . ”

ID:	1603
INPUT:	hamar idi gizen eta hogei idi larreko ; ehun ardi eta , gainera , hainbat orein , <unk> , <unk> eta hegazti gizen .
PRED:	They have prepared thirty sheep and goats , cattle , sheep , sheep , goats , sheep , sheep , and goats , and they have filled with all the animals .
GOLD:	“ You know that my father , David , was not able to build a Temple to honor the name of the Lord his God because of the many wars waged against him by surrounding nations . He could not build until the Lord gave him victory over all his enemies .

ID:	1604
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , hona zer dioen Israel herriak : “ Honen ikuskariak oso gerorako dira , epe <unk> beronen profeziak ” .
PRED:	“ Son of man , this is what the people of Israel says : ‘ I will punish you with all the nations of Israel , and I will punish you . '
GOLD:	“ Son of man , the people of Israel are saying , ‘ He 's talking about the distant future . His visions wo n't come true for a long , long time . '

ID:	1605
INPUT:	Zuen aldareak suntsitu eta intsentsua erretzeko ontziak apurtuko dituzte . Zuen <unk> hilik eroraraziko ditut idoloen aurrean .
PRED:	I will destroy your pagan altars and your altars , and I will destroy your idols . I will punish you with all your idols , and I will destroy your idols .
GOLD:	All your altars will be demolished , and your places of worship will be destroyed . I will kill your people in front of your idols .

ID:	1606
INPUT:	Ogi-puska hartu bezain laster , Satanas sartu zen haren barrura . Orduan , Jesusek esan zion : « Egin behar duzuna , egizu lehenbailehen » .
PRED:	But when Satan left him , he took him away and said , “ Go into your mouth . ” But Jesus said , “ Do you want me to go . ”
GOLD:	When Judas had eaten the bread , Satan entered into him . Then Jesus told him , “ Hurry and do what you 're going to do . ”

ID:	1607
INPUT:	Paulok erantzun zuen : — Ez nago burutik , Festo agurgarria ; nire hitzak egiazkoak eta <unk> dituzu .
PRED:	Paul replied , “ I am not a friend , for I have been a friend of my message . ”
GOLD:	But Paul replied , “ I am not insane , Most Excellent Festus . What I am saying is the sober truth .

ID:	1608
INPUT:	Izan ere , bada hor azpikeriaz sartu zaizuen zenbait , aspaldidanik Liburu Santuak <unk> emana , jende sinesgabea . Gure Jainkoaren onginahia jokabide <unk> <unk> hartzen dute eta Jesu Kristo , gure Jaun eta <unk> bakarra , ukatzen .
PRED:	For you have been able to kill you , so that you have given me authority to know that the Scriptures have given us authority of God and those who have been baptized , and we know that the Lord our God has given us .
GOLD:	I say this because some ungodly people have wormed their way into your churches , saying that God 's marvelous grace allows us to live immoral lives . The condemnation of such people was recorded long ago , for they have denied our only Master and Lord , Jesus Christ .

ID:	1609
INPUT:	baina Jesusek eskutik hartu eta altxarazi egin zuen , eta mutikoa zutitu egin zen .
PRED:	But Jesus took him away and kept him away .
GOLD:	But Jesus took him by the hand and helped him to his feet , and he stood up .

ID:	1610
INPUT:	Hark erantzun : — Ez al duzue inoiz irakurri zer egin zuen Davidek <unk> batean , bera eta bere lagunak goseak aurkitu zirenean ?
PRED:	“ Do n't you read this ? ” David asked . “ Do n't you read that when he saw that David and his companions were hungry ?
GOLD:	Jesus said to them , “ Have n't you ever read in the Scriptures what David did when he and his companions were hungry ?

ID:	1611
INPUT:	Josek esan zion : — Hona argibidea . Hiru <unk> hiru egun adierazten dute .
PRED:	Then Joseph said to Joseph , “ This is how I know about three days , and they were three days . ”
GOLD:	“ This is what the dream means , ” Joseph said . “ The three branches represent three days .

ID:	1612
INPUT:	Learen semeak Ruben , Jakoben lehen-semea , Simeon , Lebi , Juda , Isakar eta Zabulon izan ziren .
PRED:	The sons of Jacob 's sons were born to Jacob , Simeon , Levi , Levi , Benjamin , and Simeon .
GOLD:	The sons of Leah were Reuben ( Jacob 's oldest son ) , Simeon , Levi , Judah , Issachar , and Zebulun .

ID:	1613
INPUT:	<unk> handiek jarraitu zioten eta Jesusek gaixoak sendatu zizkien .
PRED:	The crowd followed Jesus and healed them .
GOLD:	Large crowds followed him there , and he healed their sick .

ID:	1614
INPUT:	Neskatxek
PRED:	A Message about Moab
GOLD:	Young Women of Jerusalem

ID:	1615
INPUT:	Beraz , anaia bidali nahi baduzu , jaitsiko gara garia erostera .
PRED:	If you want to buy your brother , we will buy food for food .
GOLD:	If you send Benjamin with us , we will go down and buy more food .

ID:	1616
INPUT:	entzun goizetik nire mintzoa ; goizean neure auzia azaltzen <unk> zain gelditzen natzaizu .
PRED:	I heard about the night when they hear my case , I will see what they have seen in the morning .
GOLD:	O God , you take no pleasure in wickedness ; you can not tolerate the sins of the wicked .

ID:	1617
INPUT:	Anas eta Kaifas ziren apaiz nagusi . Garai hartan , Joanek , Zakariasen semeak , Jainkoaren mezua hartu zuen basamortuan .
PRED:	But when John was the high priest , the high priest was in the wilderness of Zechariah , who was in the wilderness of Zechariah .
GOLD:	Annas and Caiaphas were the high priests . At this time a message from God came to John son of Zechariah , who was living in the wilderness .

ID:	1618
INPUT:	Horregatik , saia zaitezte gogoz zeuen fedearekin batera <unk> izaten , <unk> ezagutza ,
PRED:	That is why you should be sure that those who love you will know that you are weak , and those who are weak with such things .
GOLD:	In view of all this , make every effort to respond to God 's promises . Supplement your faith with a generous provision of moral excellence , and moral excellence with knowledge ,

ID:	1619
INPUT:	Legearen <unk> nagusia zazpi urtez behin
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Son Is seven years old when he was seven years old ,
GOLD:	Israel 's Disobedience Predicted

ID:	1620
INPUT:	« Ez izan ni beste jainkorik .
PRED:	“ You must not have any other god .
GOLD:	“ You must not have any other god but me .

ID:	1621
INPUT:	Haiek erantzun : — Begiak zabaltzea , Jauna !
PRED:	“ Lord , ” they answered .
GOLD:	“ Lord , ” they said , “ we want to see ! ”

ID:	1622
INPUT:	Nire nardoari usain gozoa dario
PRED:	The lying lying on my lips
GOLD:	Young Man

ID:	1623
INPUT:	Eliseok , Jainkoaren gizonak , jakin zuen Israelgo erregeak jantziak urratu zituela eta mandatu hau bidali zion : « Zergatik urratu dituzu jantziak ? Datorrela niregana gizon hori eta jakinen du badela profetarik Israelen » .
PRED:	Elisha heard that the man of God had tore his clothes , and he tore his clothes and said , “ Why are you going to kill me ? ” So the king of Israel said , “ That 's why are you going to me ? ”
GOLD:	But when Elisha , the man of God , heard that the king of Israel had torn his clothes in dismay , he sent this message to him : “ Why are you so upset ? Send Naaman to me , and he will learn that there is a true prophet here in Israel . ”

ID:	1624
INPUT:	« Ea , bada , itzuli arin aitarengana eta esaiozue : Hau dio zure seme Josek : Jainkoak Egipto osoko buru jarri nau . Zatoz niregana ! Ez luzatu !
PRED:	“ Come and go home to my father , ” Joseph said , “ I am the father of Egypt , and I will put my head on all the people of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	“ Now hurry back to my father and tell him , ‘ This is what your son Joseph says : God has made me master over all the land of Egypt . So come down to me immediately !

ID:	1625
INPUT:	hau da , israeldarrek suntsitu ezinik herrialde hartan gelditu zirenen ondorengoak , lan egitera behartu zituen Salomonek , gaurdaino .
PRED:	This is why the people of Israel were determined to destroy the land of Egypt , so that the people of Israel would be able to obey the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	These were descendants of the nations whom the people of Israel had not destroyed . So Solomon conscripted them for his labor force , and they serve as forced laborers to this day .

ID:	1626
INPUT:	Halakoak ez daude buru den Kristorekin loturik , eta Kristo da , hain zuzen , buru bezala , <unk> eta <unk> bitartez gorputz osoa elkarlotzen duena eta , Jainkoak nahi bezala , hazarazten duena .
PRED:	For he is not worthy of Christ , who is bound with Christ with Christ and Christ . He is the head of Christ , who is the one who gives glory to you , and it is true .
GOLD:	and they are not connected to Christ , the head of the body . For he holds the whole body together with its joints and ligaments , and it grows as God nourishes it .

ID:	1627
INPUT:	Jainko Jauna dut laguntzaile : nork kondenatuko nau ? <unk> jandako arropak bezalagalduko dira nire etsai guztiak .
PRED:	For the Sovereign Lord says , “ Where are you trying to kill me ? They will kill me and drink the meat of my enemies .
GOLD:	See , the Sovereign Lord is on my side ! Who will declare me guilty ? All my enemies will be destroyedlike old clothes that have been eaten by moths !

ID:	1628
INPUT:	Itzuli egin baitzara eta debekatu nizun tokian jan duzu ogia eta edan ura . Horregatik , zure gorpua ez dute zure gurasoen hilobian lurperatuko » .
PRED:	So I told you to eat the food you would eat and drink it . That 's why you have not eaten your body in your own body . ”
GOLD:	You came back to this place and ate and drank where he told you not to eat or drink . Because of this , your body will not be buried in the grave of your ancestors . ”

ID:	1629
INPUT:	<unk> aginduen arabera jokatzeneta horretan leial irauten duena , larunbata profanatu gabeerrespetatzeneta ezer txarrik egiten ez duena ! »
PRED:	For those who obey God 's commands , who obey the Sabbath must not obey him because he does not obey him . ”
GOLD:	Blessed are all thosewho are careful to do this.Blessed are those who honor my Sabbath days of restand keep themselves from doing wrong .

ID:	1630
INPUT:	Ez zizkizuten eskuak lotu , ez oinak <unk> . Gaizkileen eskuz <unk> zara lurrera » . Jendeak are eta negar handiagoak egin zituen orduan .
PRED:	Do n't let your hands put your hands on your feet , and when they saw that they were filled with fear , and they were afraid . ”
GOLD:	Your hands were not bound ; your feet were not chained.No , you were murdered — the victim of a wicked plot . ” All the people wept again for Abner .

ID:	1631
INPUT:	Urak <unk> joan ziren hamargarren hila arte ; hilaren lehen egunean mendi-gailurrak agertu ziren .
PRED:	At that time the waters came from the first month until the first day of the Lord appeared to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Two and a half months later , as the waters continued to go down , other mountain peaks became visible .

ID:	1632
INPUT:	Keros , <unk> eta Padonenak ;
PRED:	Zebah and Zalmunna , Harsha ,
GOLD:	Keros , Siaha , Padon ,

ID:	1633
INPUT:	Bedeinkatu , herriok , gure Jainkoa , oihukatu goraki haren gorespena .
PRED:	Praise him , O God , all the nations of the earth , praise him .
GOLD:	Let the whole world bless our Godand loudly sing his praises .

ID:	1634
INPUT:	Ene Timoteo , zaindu Jainkoak zure esku utzi duen fede-gordailua . Utzi alde batera fedearen kontrako berriketa hutsalak eta <unk> <unk> ,
PRED:	Do n't let him take him back in the presence of the Lord your God , for he has given him to his people , and when he learned that he was very angry with him .
GOLD:	Timothy , guard what God has entrusted to you . Avoid godless , foolish discussions with those who oppose you with their so-called knowledge .

ID:	1635
INPUT:	Denak pozik zeudelarik , hona non agertzen diren gizonak , gizon gaizkile halakoak ; etxea inguratu eta ate-joka hasi ziren , etxeko jabea zen gizon zaharrari esanez : — Atera ezazu zure etxean sartu den gizon hori , bortxatu egin nahi dugu eta !
PRED:	All the men who were filled with joy , and the others who were able to enter the house of the city , and they were trying to enter the house of your house . “ We want you to enter the house of your house . ”
GOLD:	While they were enjoying themselves , a crowd of troublemakers from the town surrounded the house . They began beating at the door and shouting to the old man , “ Bring out the man who is staying with you so we can have sex with him . ”

ID:	1636
INPUT:	Beraz , zutik dagoela uste duenak egin beza kontu eror ez dadin .
PRED:	If anyone claims , let anyone be able to be able to be saved .
GOLD:	If you think you are standing strong , be careful not to fall .

ID:	1637
INPUT:	Eta esan zion erregeari : « Egia zen , bai , neure herrian zure egintzez eta jakinduriaz aditua nuena .
PRED:	Then the king said to the king , “ I am very very hard to see your wisdom and wisdom .
GOLD:	She exclaimed to the king , “ Everything I heard in my country about your achievements and wisdom is true !

ID:	1638
INPUT:	Erromes-kanta . Bedeinka ezazue Jauna , Jaunaren zerbitzariok , gaua beraren etxean igarotzen duzuen guztiok !
PRED:	Sing , O Lord , all your servants , praise the Temple of the Lord !
GOLD:	Oh , praise the Lord , all you servants of the Lord , you who serve at night in the house of the Lord .

ID:	1639
INPUT:	Korintoarrak direla-eta Paulo kezkatan
PRED:	Paul 's Final Words to Paul
GOLD:	Paul 's Concern for the Corinthians

ID:	1640
INPUT:	<unk> keinua eginez aurkeztuko ditu apaizak opariok , bi bildotsak barne , lehen fruitu gisa eskainiriko <unk> batera . Jaunari sagaratuak izango direnez , opariok apaizari <unk> .
PRED:	These are the animals that will be given as a burnt offering to the Lord — two quarts of choice flour as a result , which will be given to the Lord . They will be given to the priest , and they will be given to the priest .
GOLD:	“ The priest will lift up the two lambs as a special offering to the Lord , together with the loaves representing the first of your crops . These offerings , which are holy to the Lord , belong to the priests .

ID:	1641
INPUT:	Jauna , <unk> beren <unk> merezi duten ordaina .
PRED:	For the Lord will punish those who have seen their evil deeds .
GOLD:	Pay them back , Lord , for all the evil they have done .

ID:	1642
INPUT:	« Ez duzue pisu eta neurri faltsurik erabiliko <unk> .
PRED:	“ You must not be made by dishonest scales and weights .
GOLD:	“ You must use accurate scales when you weigh out merchandise ,

ID:	1643
INPUT:	<unk> munduaren aurrean
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Vision of the world
GOLD:	Do Not Love This World

ID:	1644
INPUT:	ea erantzun okerren batean harrapatzen zuten .
PRED:	But the law replied , “ Can it be put to die . ”
GOLD:	They wanted to trap him into saying something they could use against him .

ID:	1645
INPUT:	ekialdetik , hogeita hamabost metro luzeko oihalak :
PRED:	The Message about the south side of the south side of the Tabernacle :
GOLD:	The east end , the front , was also 75 feet long .

ID:	1646
INPUT:	Edan zuenean , esan zion neskatxak : — Zure gameluentzat ere ura ateratzera noa , ase arte edan dezaten .
PRED:	When they arrived , the young woman said , “ I have enough water to eat the food , and they will drink the water until they eat . ”
GOLD:	When she had given him a drink , she said , “ I 'll draw water for your camels , too , until they have had enough to drink . ”

ID:	1647
INPUT:	Ura isurian bezala joango zaizkio etxeko aberastasunak , Jainkoaren <unk> .
PRED:	Their wealth will be like palm trees , and all its branches will be filled with pain .
GOLD:	A flood will sweep away their house.God 's anger will descend on them in torrents .

ID:	1648
INPUT:	neuk ere aurka egingo dizuet eta zazpi bider gogorrago zigortuko zeuen bekatuengatik .
PRED:	I will punish you for seven times , and I will punish you seven times .
GOLD:	then I myself will be hostile toward you . I will personally strike you with calamity seven times over for your sins .

ID:	1649
INPUT:	esatera : — Ba al dakizu Amongo errege <unk> Netaniasen seme Ismael bidali duela zu hiltzeko ? Gedaliasek ez zien sinetsi .
PRED:	“ Do you know that the king had come to kill him ? ” he asked . “ Do n't you realize that you would not die ? ”
GOLD:	They said to him , “ Did you know that Baalis , king of Ammon , has sent Ishmael son of Nethaniah to assassinate you ? ” But Gedaliah refused to believe them .

ID:	1650
INPUT:	Jesusek hartu eta beraien aurrean jan zuen .
PRED:	Jesus left them and ate them before them .
GOLD:	and he ate it as they watched .

ID:	1651
INPUT:	Zazpi seme eta hiru alaba zituen .
PRED:	He made seven more sons and two daughters .
GOLD:	He had seven sons and three daughters .

ID:	1652
INPUT:	Ekron eta beraren herri eta herrixkak ;
PRED:	The people of Judah and their surrounding villages , and their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	The territory of the tribe of Judah also included Ekron and its surrounding settlements and villages .

ID:	1653
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin zaiona egin zuen , beraren aita Uziasek bezalaxe .
PRED:	Uzziah did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as his father had done .
GOLD:	Jotham did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight . He did everything his father , Uzziah , had done .

ID:	1654
INPUT:	Baina Kristo , gu oraindik bekatari ginela hil zen gure alde : honela erakusten du Jainkoak guri digun maitasuna .
PRED:	But we have left our faith , for we have given us our love .
GOLD:	But God showed his great love for us by sending Christ to die for us while we were still sinners .

ID:	1655
INPUT:	Erre-oparien aldarea eta brontzezko uraska
PRED:	the Lamb of the Temple
GOLD:	Building the Altar of Burnt Offering

ID:	1656
INPUT:	Orduan , esan zion Boozek Ruti : — Adizu ! Ez zaitez joan soro honetatik beste inora garagarburuak biltzera . Jarrai hemen lanean nire morroiekin .
PRED:	Then Boaz said to her , “ Let 's go here here here here ! ” So Boaz told her , “ Do n't let me go into the fields . ”
GOLD:	Boaz went over and said to Ruth , “ Listen , my daughter . Stay right here with us when you gather grain ; do n't go to any other fields . Stay right behind the young women working in my field .

ID:	1657
INPUT:	Hortan , hil zen amondarren erregea eta honen seme <unk> gertatu zen ondorengo errege .
PRED:	One day the king of Ammon died , and the king of the Ammonites became king of the Ammonites .
GOLD:	Some time after this , King Nahash of the Ammonites died , and his son Hanun became king .

ID:	1658
INPUT:	Moisesek lurraldea ikertzera bidali eta <unk> , lurraldeaz gaizki-esaka jardunez , haren kontra elkartea berotu zutenak
PRED:	“ All the land who sent you to kill you , and when the whole community of Israel have heard him ,
GOLD:	The ten men Moses had sent to explore the land — the ones who incited rebellion against the Lord with their bad report —

ID:	1659
INPUT:	Axerren leinutik , Okranen seme Pagiel ;
PRED:	Shecaniah son of Ammihud
GOLD:	AsherPagiel son of Ocran

ID:	1660
INPUT:	Davidek erantzun zion : — Hona hemen erregearen lantza . Betor honaino mutilen bat eta har beza .
PRED:	David replied , “ This is the rest of the people , the people of the people of Israel , and the people of the people must follow the Book of the king . ”
GOLD:	“ Here is your spear , O king , ” David replied . “ Let one of your young men come over and get it .

ID:	1661
INPUT:	Izugarria baita Jauna , Goi-goikoa , mundu osoaren errege handia .
PRED:	The Lord was in the heavens , and the great king of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	He subdues the nations before us , putting our enemies beneath our feet .

ID:	1662
INPUT:	Urtean hiru bider Salomonek erre-opariak eta elkartasun-opariak eskaini ohi zituen Jaunarentzat eraikia zuen aldarearen gainean , eta intsentsua erre ohi zuen Jaunaren aitzinean zegoen aldarean . Horrela bukatu zuen tenpluaren eraikuntza .
PRED:	Solomon also offered sacrifices to the regular burnt offering and burnt offerings to the Lord , and he burned incense on the altar of the altar . Then he burned incense on the altar of the Lord 's Temple and burned incense on the altar .
GOLD:	Three times each year Solomon presented burnt offerings and peace offerings on the altar he had built for the Lord . He also burned incense to the Lord . And so he finished the work of building the Temple .

ID:	1663
INPUT:	Ez bainauzu Herio Leizera botako , zure <unk> ez duzu hilobian galtzen utziko .
PRED:	Do n't let me be able to destroy me with your sword .
GOLD:	For you will not leave my soul among the deador allow your Holy One to rot in the grave .

ID:	1664
INPUT:	inoren soroan galburuak biltzen dituzte , gaiztoaren mahastian hondarrak ;
PRED:	They eat grain in the field of grain , but the weeds in the field .
GOLD:	They harvest a field they do not own , and they glean in the vineyards of the wicked .

ID:	1665
INPUT:	Maakaren seme Abias ezarri zuen Roboamek anaien buru , bere ondorengo errege egin nahi baitzuen .
PRED:	Rehoboam son of Abijah , who led his brothers to rule over Judah .
GOLD:	Rehoboam appointed Maacah 's son Abijah as leader among the princes , making it clear that he would be the next king .

ID:	1666
INPUT:	Zabaldira atera ninduen , maite nauelako libratu .
PRED:	He rescued me from a place of safety ; he rescued me .
GOLD:	The Lord rewarded me for doing right ; he restored me because of my innocence .

ID:	1667
INPUT:	Horien zigorra betiereko hondamena izango da : Jaunak bere aurretik eta bere ahalmen <unk> urruti botako ditu ,
PRED:	Instead , the Lord will punish you , and his people will be filled with great power . He will pour out his power from his power and power .
GOLD:	They will be punished with eternal destruction , forever separated from the Lord and from his glorious power .

ID:	1668
INPUT:	Orduan , hartu eta <unk> <unk> <unk> putzuan sartu zuten Jeremias , sokaz <unk> . <unk> kartzelako atarian zegoen eta ez zuen urik , lokatza baizik . Jeremias lokatzetan sarturik gelditu zen .
PRED:	Then when they saw that they were very sick , and when I saw that they were able to kill you , and when I saw them in the room of the prison .
GOLD:	So the officials took Jeremiah from his cell and lowered him by ropes into an empty cistern in the prison yard . It belonged to Malkijah , a member of the royal family . There was no water in the cistern , but there was a thick layer of mud at the bottom , and Jeremiah sank down into it .

ID:	1669
INPUT:	Nik , Paulok , Jesu Kristoren zerbitzari honek , idazten dizuet . Jainkoak deitu ninduen apostolu izateko eta Liburu Santuetan profeten ahoz aurrez agindua zeukan berri ona hots egiteko .
PRED:	I am writing to you by the Spirit of Christ Jesus Christ Jesus Christ , who called me through the Spirit of Christ , so that God has given me the prophets to them .
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , a slave of Christ Jesus , chosen by God to be an apostle and sent out to preach his Good News .

ID:	1670
INPUT:	Beraz , ibili <unk> jarraitu zintzoen jokabideari .
PRED:	So if they have seen the power of the godly , they know that the power of the righteous .
GOLD:	So follow the steps of the good , and stay on the paths of the righteous .

ID:	1671
INPUT:	Orduan eguzkia eta egun-argia , izarrak eta <unk> egingo zaizkik , eta euria egin <unk> <unk> dik .
PRED:	Then the sun will be burned before the sun , and the moon will see that the moon will see that the sun is near .
GOLD:	Remember him before the light of the sun , moon , and stars is dim to your old eyes , and rain clouds continually darken your sky .

ID:	1672
INPUT:	Saulen heriotza
PRED:	The Death of Saul
GOLD:	The Death of Saul

ID:	1673
INPUT:	Hitz atseginak , ezti-abaraska : ahorako goxo , <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	Listen to those who were wise , and they were sick .
GOLD:	Kind words are like honey — sweet to the soul and healthy for the body .

ID:	1674
INPUT:	Biharamunean , herriko agintari , zahar eta lege-maisuak Jerusalemen bildu ziren ;
PRED:	The next day the people of the teachers of religious law and the teachers of religious law came to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	The next day the council of all the rulers and elders and teachers of religious law met in Jerusalem .

ID:	1675
INPUT:	Aho beretik ateratzen dira bedeinkazioa eta madarikazioa . Senideok , horrek ez du horrela izan behar .
PRED:	In this way , dear brothers and sisters , that God has given you a blessing .
GOLD:	And so blessing and cursing come pouring out of the same mouth . Surely , my brothers and sisters , this is not right !

ID:	1676
INPUT:	Orduan , aldaretik esaten entzun nuen : « Bai , Jauna , Jainko ahalguztiduna , zure <unk> eta zuzenak dira ! »
PRED:	Then I heard this : “ O Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies , that I have heard your power , and those who are filled with joy . ”
GOLD:	And I heard a voice from the altar , saying , “ Yes , O Lord God , the Almighty , your judgments are true and just . ”

ID:	1677
INPUT:	Orduan , funtzionarioek esan zioten : — Zoaz eta ezkutatu Jeremias eta biok , eta ez dezala jakin inork ere non zaudeten .
PRED:	Then the officials said to the officials , “ Go and do n't know what you do . ”
GOLD:	“ You and Jeremiah should both hide , ” the officials told Baruch . “ Do n't tell anyone where you are ! ”

ID:	1678
INPUT:	Hona hemen haien lurraldeak hartzen zuena : Izreel , <unk> , <unk> ,
PRED:	That is why the land of Egypt says : At that time the land of Assyria will be filled with kings and Samaria .
GOLD:	Its boundaries included the following towns : Jezreel , Kesulloth , Shunem ,

ID:	1679
INPUT:	Bere irakastaldian , beste hau ere esan zien : « Zabiltzate kontuz <unk> ! <unk> baitute <unk> jantzita ibiltzea eta plazetan jendeak agur egitea ;
PRED:	This message came to them from beginning : “ At least of the other prophets who were sitting on the city of Samaria and prophets who were sitting in the streets .
GOLD:	Jesus also taught : “ Beware of these teachers of religious law ! For they like to parade around in flowing robes and receive respectful greetings as they walk in the marketplaces .

ID:	1680
INPUT:	Josuek Jeriko hartu
PRED:	Joshua Defeats the Midianites
GOLD:	The Fall of Jericho

ID:	1681
INPUT:	Eta nik , lurretik jasoko <unk> , neuregana erakarriko ditut denak » .
PRED:	And I will send down from the earth , and I will bring out my mind . ”
GOLD:	And when I am lifted up from the earth , I will draw everyone to myself . ”

ID:	1682
INPUT:	ez duzue etxerik eraikiko , ez hazirik ereingo , ez mahastirik landatuko nahiz izango ; baizik eta oihal-etxoletan biziko zarete zeuen bizitza guztian . Horrela , luzaro biziko zarete etorkin bezala zaudeten lurralde honetan ” .
PRED:	You must not plant crops or plant or plant crops or plant or plant crops . You will not live in their homes , and you will live in all the land you will live in this land . '
GOLD:	And do not build houses or plant crops or vineyards , but always live in tents . If you follow these commands , you will live long , good lives in the land . '

ID:	1683
INPUT:	Izan ere , nazioa nazioaren kontra eta erreinua erreinuaren kontra altxatuko dira ; goseteak eta <unk> izango dira han eta hemen .
PRED:	For the people of Israel will be destroyed by the kingdom of this nation , and the kingdom will be able to be destroyed .
GOLD:	Nation will go to war against nation , and kingdom against kingdom . There will be famines and earthquakes in many parts of the world .

ID:	1684
INPUT:	Nola eman guk Jainkoari behar adina esker ? <unk> baita zuengatik geure Jainkoaren aurrean dugun poza !
PRED:	Why should we know that God has given you to you ? For we have given you very weak before God , and we have given you very perfect .
GOLD:	How we thank God for you ! Because of you we have great joy as we enter God 's presence .

ID:	1685
INPUT:	<unk> eta <unk> dira hartaz , hontz zuria eta <unk> han bizitzen . <unk> eta <unk> du Jaunak .
PRED:	And when they saw that the sun will be filled with the sun , and when they saw that the Lord had filled with prophets and prophets , and they will know that the Lord will be with him .
GOLD:	It will be haunted by the desert owl and the screech owl , the great owl and the raven.For God will measure that land carefully ; he will measure it for chaos and destruction .

ID:	1686
INPUT:	Gaza hiria bertan behera <unk> da , Axkelon erraustua . Axdodeko <unk> dituzte hiritik , <unk> <unk> aterako .
PRED:	In that city will be filled with great city , and the city of Ashkelon will be destroyed by the city of Ashkelon , the city of Ashkelon , and the city of Ashkelon will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Gaza and Ashkelon will be abandoned , Ashdod and Ekron torn down .

ID:	1687
INPUT:	Hala ere , Jaunak ez zuen Juda hondatu nahi izan , David bere zerbitzariagatik ; hitzemana baitzion Davidi beronen ondorengoak izanen zirela beti errege Jerusalemen .
PRED:	But the Lord had not appointed David to rule over all the people of Judah , for he had given his descendants to David . He will rule over all his descendants in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	But the Lord did not want to destroy Judah , for he had promised his servant David that his descendants would continue to rule , shining like a lamp forever .

ID:	1688
INPUT:	<unk> bidea hartu duzu eta , beraz , haren kopa jarriko dut zure eskuan .
PRED:	Now I have given you the way of my way , and I will put my hand on your hand .
GOLD:	Because you have followed in your sister 's footsteps , I will force you to drink the same cup of terror she drank .

ID:	1689
INPUT:	<unk> legea jarri <unk> <unk> eta trumoiari beren ibilbidea ,
PRED:	And when they saw that the law has been able to be able to see how they were able to be able to see their own law .
GOLD:	He made the laws for the rainand laid out a path for the lightning .

ID:	1690
INPUT:	<unk> izan naizen bitartean , neuk zaindu ditut eman <unk> . Hauen ardura izan dut eta hauetako bat ere ez da galdu , galdu behar zuena baizik ; horrela , Liburu Santuek diotena bete da .
PRED:	For I am sure that I have given you some of these things , and I have given you some of these prophets and some of them , and I will never die .
GOLD:	During my time here , I protected them by the power of the name you gave me . I guarded them so that not one was lost , except the one headed for destruction , as the Scriptures foretold .

ID:	1691
INPUT:	Berak aterako du onik errugabea , eta zu ere bai , zure jarduera garbia bada » .
PRED:	He will rescue you from the wicked , and you will be pure . ”
GOLD:	Even sinners will be rescued ; they will be rescued because your hands are pure . ”

ID:	1692
INPUT:	Orduan , gudalburu guztiek , Kareahen seme Johananek eta Hoxaiasen seme Azariasek batik bat , eta berekin zuten jendeak , txiki nahiz handi , <unk> hurbildu
PRED:	So Johanan son of Kareah and Johanan son of Kareah and Johanan son of Kareah and Johanan son of Kareah and Johanan son of Kareah and other men .
GOLD:	Then all the military leaders , including Johanan son of Kareah and Jezaniah son of Hoshaiah , and all the people , from the least to the greatest , approached

ID:	1693
INPUT:	Ea , bada , Jakoben herri , ibil gaitezen Jaunaren argitan !
PRED:	Now go out to the Lord 's holy people ; let us be filled with joy .
GOLD:	Come , descendants of Jacob , let us walk in the light of the Lord !

ID:	1694
INPUT:	Ikasleek esan zioten : — Orain bai mintzo zarela argi , eta ez irudi bidez .
PRED:	The disciples said to him , “ You are a sign that you ca n't be a sign . ”
GOLD:	Then his disciples said , “ At last you are speaking plainly and not figuratively .

ID:	1695
INPUT:	Beste zenbait harri artean erori zen , lur handirik ez zen tokian ; eta , axaleko lurra izanik , berehala erne zen ;
PRED:	Other seed fell among the soil , but it was no part of the soil . The seed fell on the soil .
GOLD:	Other seeds fell on shallow soil with underlying rock . The seeds sprouted quickly because the soil was shallow .

ID:	1696
INPUT:	Zuek , ordea , beste hau diozue : Norbaitek aitari edo amari esaten badio : « Zuri eman behar <unk> Jainkoari eskainia diot » ,
PRED:	But you say , ‘ If your father or mother or mother or your father or mother or mother or mother or your father or mother or mother , I will give you the name of God . '
GOLD:	But you say it is all right for people to say to their parents , ‘ Sorry , I ca n't help you . For I have vowed to give to God what I would have given to you . '

ID:	1697
INPUT:	<unk> eduki nahi nuen , zure ordez zerbitzari izan nezan , berri ona hots egiteagatik kartzelan nagoelarik .
PRED:	I want you to know that I want you to be a believer , for if I want you to come to meet you in prison .
GOLD:	I wanted to keep him here with me while I am in these chains for preaching the Good News , and he would have helped me on your behalf .

ID:	1698
INPUT:	Babiloniar <unk> larria egin <unk> Santuaren aurka ; izan ere , Israel eta Juda ez dira , alargun gisa , beren Jainko Jaun <unk> gelditu .
PRED:	I will punish you because they have rebelled against the Gentiles , and they have heard that the Sovereign Lord , and they have no other men who were in Judah .
GOLD:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armieshas not abandoned Israel and Judah.He is still their God , even though their land was filled with sinagainst the Holy One of Israel . ”

ID:	1699
INPUT:	Gerora , Moises eta Aaron bidali nituen , Egipto zigortu nuen neure <unk> , eta zuek handik irtenarazi .
PRED:	Then I sent Moses to Moses and Aaron , who sent me out of Egypt , and I sent you out of Egypt .
GOLD:	“ Then I sent Moses and Aaron , and I brought terrible plagues on Egypt ; and afterward I brought you out as a free people .

ID:	1700
INPUT:	Akaz erregearentzat mezua
PRED:	Instructions for the Priests
GOLD:	A Message for Ahaz

ID:	1701
INPUT:	Hemen zaudeten israeldarrok , hitz egin zeuen artean eta hartu erabakia » .
PRED:	Now you are here among the people of Israel and the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Now then , all of you — the entire community of Israel — must decide here and now what should be done about this ! ”

ID:	1702
INPUT:	Arren , senideok , ondo hartuko ahal duzue <unk> hau ! Hitz labur batzuk erantsiz bidaltzen dizuet .
PRED:	I am writing to you , dear brothers and sisters , you have given me some of them as well as some of them .
GOLD:	I urge you , dear brothers and sisters , to pay attention to what I have written in this brief exhortation .

ID:	1703
INPUT:	Haiek erantzun zioten : — Sinetsi Jesus Jaunarengan , eta zu eta zure etxekoak salbatuko zarete .
PRED:	“ We are our Lord Jesus , ” they replied . “ You will be saved and saved . ”
GOLD:	They replied , “ Believe in the Lord Jesus and you will be saved , along with everyone in your household . ”

ID:	1704
INPUT:	ez du gogoan hartzen oinen batek azpian <unk> piztiaren batek <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	But when they saw that a man who had been able to kill him .
GOLD:	She does n't worry that a foot might crush themor a wild animal might destroy them .

ID:	1705
INPUT:	Honela bete zen Jainkoak profetaren bidez esana : Parabola bidez mintzatuko naiz , munduaren hasieratik gordea zegoena azalduko .
PRED:	Then God said to them , “ I will tell you the message that God has given them to the world . ”
GOLD:	This fulfilled what God had spoken through the prophet : “ I will speak to you in parables.I will explain things hidden since the creation of the world . ”

ID:	1706
INPUT:	Ezarri estalkia kutxaren gainean , eta ipini nik emango dizudan itun-agiria kutxaren barruan .
PRED:	Then make the Ark of the Covenant on the Ark of the Ark and the Ark of the Covenant .
GOLD:	Place inside the Ark the stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant , which I will give to you . Then put the atonement cover on top of the Ark .

ID:	1707
INPUT:	Tenplu barruko zedrozko oholtza hura <unk> eta lore-sortazko irudiz apaindua zegoen . Dena <unk> zen ; ez zen harririk ikusten .
PRED:	There was a huge stone that had been decorated with cedar , which was decorated with great stone that had been decorated with great stone .
GOLD:	Cedar paneling completely covered the stone walls throughout the Temple , and the paneling was decorated with carvings of gourds and open flowers .

ID:	1708
INPUT:	Baina hark , Espiritu Santuaz beterik , zerura begiratu eta Jainkoaren aintza ikusi zuen , eta Jesus zutik Jainkoaren eskuinaldean .
PRED:	But he saw the Holy Spirit and on the Holy Spirit , and he appeared to heaven and stood on the throne of God .
GOLD:	But Stephen , full of the Holy Spirit , gazed steadily into heaven and saw the glory of God , and he saw Jesus standing in the place of honor at God 's right hand .

ID:	1709
INPUT:	Jauna , ene ondasun bakar , erabakia dut zure hitzak <unk> .
PRED:	For the Lord has given all my heart , and I have given you everything I have done .
GOLD:	Lord , you are mine ! I promise to obey your words !

ID:	1710
INPUT:	Jesusek galdetu zien : — Zer egingo ote die nekazari horiei mahasti-jabeak itzultzean ?
PRED:	Jesus asked them , “ What do you go ? ”
GOLD:	“ When the owner of the vineyard returns , ” Jesus asked , “ what do you think he will do to those farmers ? ”

ID:	1711
INPUT:	« Kehaten ondorengoen egitekoa elkarketa-etxolan gauza <unk> arduratzea da .
PRED:	“ The rest of the Kohathite clan , and the rest of the Tabernacle will be filled with all the terms of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ The duties of the Kohathites at the Tabernacle will relate to the most sacred objects .

ID:	1712
INPUT:	Hamor eta honen seme Sikem ere ezpataz hil zituzten ; Sikemen etxetik Dina hartu eta atera egin ziren .
PRED:	Hamor , Shechem , led by Shechem to Shechem , and Shechem to Shechem .
GOLD:	including Hamor and his son Shechem . They killed them with their swords , then took Dinah from Shechem 's house and returned to their camp .

ID:	1713
INPUT:	Hatzorko bizilagunok , egizue ihes arin , ezkutatu koba-zuloetan ! Hala diot nik , Jaunak . Babiloniako <unk> aurkako erabakia hartua du , egitasmoa <unk> .
PRED:	If you flee , you will flee from the streets of sorrow , I will flee to you , ” says the Lord . “ This is what the Lord says .
GOLD:	Run for your lives , ” says the Lord . “ Hide yourselves in deep caves , you people of Hazor , for King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon has plotted against youand is preparing to destroy you .

ID:	1714
INPUT:	Entzun , seme , eta izan zuhur , bideratu zuzen zeure bizia .
PRED:	Listen to my son , pay attention to your life .
GOLD:	My child , listen and be wise : Keep your heart on the right course .

ID:	1715
INPUT:	Huts egin dudala egia izanda ere , neuri bakarrik dagokit hutsa .
PRED:	I have done good , but I have punished all the evil .
GOLD:	Even if I have sinned , that is my concern , not yours .

ID:	1716
INPUT:	Babiloniako erbestealdiaren ondoren , <unk> <unk> sortu zuen ; <unk> Zorobabel ;
PRED:	These are the kings of Babylon , who were weak and tall .
GOLD:	After the Babylonian exile : Jehoiachin was the father of Shealtiel.Shealtiel was the father of Zerubbabel .

ID:	1717
INPUT:	eta , bereziki , <unk> jendea hilez Jerusalem osoa odolez bete zuelako . Jaunak ez zuen hau guztia barkatu nahi izan .
PRED:	But when the people had been very angry , the people of Jerusalem was very angry , and the Lord did not forgive him .
GOLD:	who had filled Jerusalem with innocent blood . The Lord would not forgive this .

ID:	1718
INPUT:	Ezekiasen erregealdiko laugarren urtean , hau da , Israelgo Elaren seme Oseasen erregealdiko zazpigarren urtean , Asiriako errege Salmanasarrek Samariari eraso eta setiatu egin zuen .
PRED:	In the fourth year of King Hezekiah 's reign , the fourth year of King Hezekiah of the reign of the reign of King Hezekiah 's reign , king of Assyria , and he attacked Judah .
GOLD:	During the fourth year of Hezekiah 's reign , which was the seventh year of King Hoshea 's reign in Israel , King Shalmaneser of Assyria attacked the city of Samaria and began a siege against it .

ID:	1719
INPUT:	Haiek erantzun zioten : — Kornelio ehuntariaren partetik gatoz . Gizon zuzena da eta Israelen Jainkoa gurtzen duena , eta judu guztien artean izen onekoa . Jaunaren aingeruak agindu dio , zu bere etxera eramateko eta zure hitzak entzuteko .
PRED:	“ Listen to me , ” they said . “ This man is a man who is a witness to the people of Israel and the people of Israel . He has given you a message from all the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	They said , “ We were sent by Cornelius , a Roman officer . He is a devout and God-fearing man , well respected by all the Jews . A holy angel instructed him to summon you to his house so that he can hear your message . ”

ID:	1720
INPUT:	Maite duzue Jesu Kristo , gaurdaino ikusi ez duzuen arren . Eta , ikusi gabe berarengan sinetsiz , esanezin ahalako pozez , poz distiratsuz , beteak zaudete jadanik ,
PRED:	Do n't love you in Christ Jesus Christ , but you have not seen in our faith . And now you have no joy in our hearts , but you have no joy in our hearts .
GOLD:	You love him even though you have never seen him . Though you do not see him now , you trust him ; and you rejoice with a glorious , inexpressible joy .

ID:	1721
INPUT:	« Aaronek bere barkamen-opariko zekorra aurkeztuko du eta hil , bere eta etxekoen aldeko barkamen-ohikunea eginez .
PRED:	“ Then Aaron must sacrifice a sin offering for the sin offering and the sin offering for the sin offering .
GOLD:	“ Aaron will present his own bull as a sin offering to purify himself and his family , making them right with the Lord . After he has slaughtered the bull as a sin offering ,

ID:	1722
INPUT:	Nabukodonosor Egiptori erasotzeko zorian zegoela , mezu hau adierazi zion Jaunak Jeremias profetari :
PRED:	When King Nebuchadnezzar of Egypt received this message from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then the Lord gave the prophet Jeremiah this message about King Nebuchadnezzar 's plans to attack Egypt .

ID:	1723
INPUT:	<unk> ondoren , Anaten seme <unk> izan zen buruzagi . Seiehun filistear hil zituen <unk> batez . Horrela , berak ere salbatu zuen Israel .
PRED:	At that time , when the army of Samaria became king , and the Philistine rulers of the Philistines were killed by the Philistines , and he saved them from all Israel .
GOLD:	After Ehud , Shamgar son of Anath rescued Israel . He once killed 600 Philistines with an ox goad .

ID:	1724
INPUT:	Ondoren , beste hau dio : Hemen nauzu zure nahia betetzeko . Aipaturiko lehenengo kultua kentzen du bigarrena jartzeko .
PRED:	Then this is what the Lord says : “ I have given you to you , and you must have given me a covenant with you .
GOLD:	Then he said , “ Look , I have come to do your will . ” He cancels the first covenant in order to put the second into effect .

ID:	1725
INPUT:	Egia esan , gonbidatu haietako batek ere ez du nire afaria dastatuko ” » .
PRED:	He said to one of them , ‘ No one will hate you . ' ”
GOLD:	For none of those I first invited will get even the smallest taste of my banquet . ' ”

ID:	1726
INPUT:	Honela , amortarren lurraldean kokatu zen Israel .
PRED:	So the people of the Amorites lived in the land of the Amorites .
GOLD:	So the people of Israel occupied the territory of the Amorites .

ID:	1727
INPUT:	Zuen esku utzi ditu Jaunak Oreb eta Zeeb , madiandarren buruzagiak . Egintza horren aldean , nik ez dut deus ere egin . Hau <unk> baretu egin zituen <unk> .
PRED:	The Lord has abandoned you , and the princes of Israel , the gods of the Ammonites , the Ammonites , and the people of Israel have destroyed them . And when they saw that I had done , he was very very very angry with him .
GOLD:	God gave you victory over Oreb and Zeeb , the commanders of the Midianite army . What have I accomplished compared to that ? ” When the men of Ephraim heard Gideon 's answer , their anger subsided .

ID:	1728
INPUT:	« Erre egingo dituzue horien idoloak . Ez gutiziatu idoloak estaltzen dituzten urre-zilarrak , ez hartu zeuentzat , idoloen tranpan harrapatuak geldi ez zaitezten : idoloak higuingarri zaizkio Jaunari zuen Jainkoari .
PRED:	“ You must not defile the idols of silver and gold . You must not make any idols of silver and gold to worship the Lord your God . You must not worship the images of Baal .
GOLD:	“ You must burn their idols in fire , and you must not covet the silver or gold that covers them . You must not take it or it will become a trap to you , for it is detestable to the Lord your God .

ID:	1729
INPUT:	Izan ere , legearen <unk> beren bihotzetan idatzia <unk> erakusten dute , beren kontzientziak aitortzen duen bezala , batzuetan salatu egiten baititu eta <unk> zuritu .
PRED:	For the law of Moses and his hearts will show that they believe in their hearts . For when they are in their hearts , they know that they are weak and weak and strong , and we know that they are in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	They demonstrate that God 's law is written in their hearts , for their own conscience and thoughts either accuse them or tell them they are doing right .

ID:	1730
INPUT:	Josafatek ur handietako itsasontziak egin zituen <unk> urre bila joateko . Baina ezin izan zen joan , ontziak <unk> <unk> deseginak gertatu baitziren .
PRED:	Jehoshaphat was very angry with gold , and he could not find gold . But when he was filled with gold , they could n't know that they were very angry with him .
GOLD:	At one time Ahaziah son of Ahab had proposed to Jehoshaphat , “ Let my men sail with your men in the ships . ” But Jehoshaphat refused the request .

ID:	1731
INPUT:	Atzerriko nazio <unk> dituzte zuen <unk> , gurdi eta ohatiletan , mando nahiz gamelu gainean ; niretzat , Jaun honentzat , opari gisa ekarriko <unk> nire mendi santuraino , israeldarrek beren <unk> <unk> Jaunaren <unk> ohi dituzten bezalaxe . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	And when they saw that the great power of Egypt , they know that when they were filled with great power and powerful people of Israel , they will know that the Lord lives of Heaven 's Armies is why I am sending my people of Israel , and they will know that they will know that the Lord . ”
GOLD:	They will bring the remnant of your people back from every nation . They will bring them to my holy mountain in Jerusalem as an offering to the Lord . They will ride on horses , in chariots and wagons , and on mules and camels , ” says the Lord .

ID:	1732
INPUT:	Apaizen <unk> arabera , berari egokitu zitzaion Jaunaren santutegira sartzea intsentsua eskaintzeko .
PRED:	These are the offerings of the Lord had been given to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	As was the custom of the priests , he was chosen by lot to enter the sanctuary of the Lord and burn incense .

ID:	1733
INPUT:	Pedrok eta beste apostoluek erantzun zuten : — Jainkoaren esana egin behar da lehenik , ez <unk> .
PRED:	Peter and the other apostles replied , “ There is no matter how can we do ? ”
GOLD:	But Peter and the apostles replied , “ We must obey God rather than any human authority .

ID:	1734
INPUT:	zuhurrak entzun bitza eta zuhurrago bihurtuko da , <unk> trebetasuna bereganatuko du ;
PRED:	The wise will be destroyed , and the wise will be wise .
GOLD:	Let the wise listen to these proverbs and become even wiser.Let those with understanding receive guidance

ID:	1735
INPUT:	Hartu <unk> eta egin irina ; kendu <unk> , jaso <unk> , agertu izterrak , ibaiak oinez igarotzeko :
PRED:	“ Take some of these animals and fig trees , ” they said , “ I have seen the water of the sea , and the water of the sea appeared to the sea . ”
GOLD:	Take heavy millstones and grind flour.Remove your veil , and strip off your robe.Expose yourself to public view .

ID:	1736
INPUT:	Zuek duzuen askatasun hori ez bedi <unk> bide gerta .
PRED:	Do n't be sure that you will be able to be sure that you will be able to be very proud .
GOLD:	Then you will not be criticized for doing something you believe is good .

ID:	1737
INPUT:	Zer da errazago : “ Barkatuak dituzu bekatuak ” esatea ala “ Jaiki eta zabiltza ” esatea ?
PRED:	“ What does you say , ‘ Stand up ? ' ‘ Stand up and say , ‘ Stand up and die ? '
GOLD:	Is it easier to say ‘ Your sins are forgiven , ' or ‘ Stand up and walk ' ?

ID:	1738
INPUT:	Hau ere esan zien Jainkoak : « Hau da zuei eta zuen artean bizi diren bizidun guztiei belaunez belaun eta betiko ematen dizuedan <unk> ezaugarria :
PRED:	Then God said to them , “ This is what God says : I will live among you and all the people who live in this book of the covenant I have given you from generation to generation .
GOLD:	Then God said , “ I am giving you a sign of my covenant with you and with all living creatures , for all generations to come .

ID:	1739
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Gaur iritsi da salbamena etxe honetara , gizon hau ere Abrahamen ondorengoa baita .
PRED:	Jesus told him , “ This man has been very very hard for us . This is the son of Abraham , the son of Abraham . ”
GOLD:	Jesus responded , “ Salvation has come to this home today , for this man has shown himself to be a true son of Abraham .

ID:	1740
INPUT:	( 37 , 1-9 )
PRED:	A Message about Ethiopia
GOLD:	Plans for the Lampstand

ID:	1741
INPUT:	Hau da benetako maitasuna : ez guk Jainkoari izan diogun maitasuna , berak guri izan diguna baizik , hau da , gure bekatuen barkamen-oparitzat bere Semea bidaliz erakutsi digun maitasuna .
PRED:	For we have not given to God for us , for we have given us a faithful love to our Lord our God . He has given us a gift to us .
GOLD:	This is real love — not that we loved God , but that he loved us and sent his Son as a sacrifice to take away our sins .

ID:	1742
INPUT:	Hori izan zen dandarren ondarea , senitarteka banatua , aipaturiko hiri eta herrixkak barne .
PRED:	The homeland allocated to the clans of the clans of the tribe of Naphtali , and their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	The homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Dan included these towns and their surrounding villages .

ID:	1743
INPUT:	Izan ere , Sion mendia hondamen bihurtu da , <unk> .
PRED:	For Jerusalem is as strong as the city of Jerusalem , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	For Jerusalem is empty and desolate , a place haunted by jackals .

ID:	1744
INPUT:	Jaunari esker , egiptoarren abegi ona irabazi zuten eta eskatu guztia eman zieten egiptoarrek . Honela kendu zizkieten egiptoarrei beren ondasunak .
PRED:	And the Egyptians begged the Lord to give the Egyptians to the Egyptians and the Egyptians and the Egyptians . And the Egyptians gave them everything they had promised .
GOLD:	The Lord caused the Egyptians to look favorably on the Israelites , and they gave the Israelites whatever they asked for . So they stripped the Egyptians of their wealth !

ID:	1745
INPUT:	Davidek esandako hitzak aditu zituztelarik , Sauli jakinarazi zioten . Saulek etorrarazi
PRED:	When David heard the words of Saul , he told Saul what he had said .
GOLD:	Then David 's question was reported to King Saul , and the king sent for him .

ID:	1746
INPUT:	Jakintsuaren ahoari darion <unk> da ; zentzugabea , berriz , bere hitzak galduko du :
PRED:	Those who think they are weak , but the words of the wicked will prosper .
GOLD:	Wise words bring approval , but fools are destroyed by their own words .

ID:	1747
INPUT:	Esku-oinak garbituko dituzte , beraz , hil nahi ez badute . Betiko lege izango da hau Aaronentzat eta beronen ondorengoentzat belaunez belaun » .
PRED:	In this way , they will not die in the presence of Aaron and his sons will never die . This will be a permanent law and his descendants will be given to generation to generation . ”
GOLD:	They must always wash their hands and feet , or they will die . This is a permanent law for Aaron and his descendants , to be observed from generation to generation . ”

ID:	1748
INPUT:	Eta ezetz ikusten badu , bestea oraindik urruti dela , mandatariak bidaliko dizkio bakea eskatuz .
PRED:	But if you see one of the other , some of them will send peace to each other .
GOLD:	And if he ca n't , he will send a delegation to discuss terms of peace while the enemy is still far away .

ID:	1749
INPUT:	Sarrera
PRED:	The Faith of the Covenant
GOLD:	Introduction to Moses ' First Address

ID:	1750
INPUT:	Israel herriaren lehenengo izen-bilketa
PRED:	The names of the tribes of Israel
GOLD:	Tribe

ID:	1751
INPUT:	« Hainbeste irrikatzen <unk> egin zaizu ; galdu dituzu zeure luxua eta ospea , sekula ez berreskuratzeko » .
PRED:	“ If you have become poor and fig trees , you have never been brought to you . ”
GOLD:	“ The fancy things you loved so muchare gone , ” they cry . “ All your luxuries and splendorare gone forever , never to be yours again . ”

ID:	1752
INPUT:	eta Jesus tenpluko Salomonen aterpean zebilen .
PRED:	The rest of the Temple came to me from the Temple of Solomon .
GOLD:	He was in the Temple , walking through the section known as Solomon 's Colonnade .

ID:	1753
INPUT:	Jaunaren , gure Jainkoaren , etxearengatik , zoriona eskatzen dut zuretzat .
PRED:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies will come to you , and I will give you food to you .
GOLD:	For the sake of the house of the Lord our God , I will seek what is best for you , O Jerusalem .

ID:	1754
INPUT:	Hegazti guztiak <unk> dira <unk> <unk> , basapiztiak gorde haren adar artean .
PRED:	And all the wild animals that were slaughtered by the wild animals , and the birds of the earth will be filled with an eagle .
GOLD:	“ The birds roost on its fallen trunk , and the wild animals lie among its branches .

ID:	1755
INPUT:	Dohakabe eta behartsu bainaiz , urraturik baitut bihotza barruan .
PRED:	My love is poor and poor , and I lie in my heart .
GOLD:	For I am poor and needy , and my heart is full of pain .

ID:	1756
INPUT:	« Gizon nahiz emakume bati buruan edo <unk> azaleko gaitzen bat sortzen bazaio ,
PRED:	“ Suppose a man or a woman in the boat , a woman must be healed .
GOLD:	“ If anyone , either a man or woman , has a sore on the head or chin ,

ID:	1757
INPUT:	Jaunarenganako begirunea da ezagueraren oinarria ; baina zentzugabeek mespretxatu egiten <unk> eta heziketa .
PRED:	Fear of the Lord and knowledge of wisdom , but those who fear the Lord .
GOLD:	Fear of the Lord is the foundation of true knowledge , but fools despise wisdom and discipline .

ID:	1758
INPUT:	Baina Jesusek haien gogoetak igarri eta esan zien : « Zergatik dituzue horrelako gogoetak zeuen baitan ?
PRED:	But Jesus knew them , and he asked them , “ Why do you understand ?
GOLD:	Jesus knew what they were thinking , so he asked them , “ Why do you question this in your hearts ?

ID:	1759
INPUT:	Babilonia Jainkoaren zigorraren <unk>
PRED:	Babylon 's Vision of Babylon
GOLD:	The

ID:	1760
INPUT:	Hiltzailea , beraz , <unk> biziko da , apaiz nagusia hil arte . Gero , itzul daiteke bere <unk> .
PRED:	But now , the high priest will die until the high priest will die until the high priest will die . Then they will know that the high priest will die .
GOLD:	The slayer should have stayed inside the city of refuge until the death of the high priest . But after the death of the high priest , the slayer may return to his own property .

ID:	1761
INPUT:	Ulertzeko gauza denak uler beza Espirituak eliz elkarteei esaten diena . Garaileari mana ezkutua emanen diot , eta <unk> <unk> bat ere bai , eta <unk> izen berri bat idatzia , hartzen duenak bakarrik ezagutuko duena .
PRED:	“ Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the Spirit and say , ‘ This is what the Spirit says : I will give you authority to the churches , and I will know that the Good News is true .
GOLD:	“ Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the Spirit and understand what he is saying to the churches . To everyone who is victorious I will give some of the manna that has been hidden away in heaven . And I will give to each one a white stone , and on the stone will be engraved a new name that no one understands except the one who receives it .

ID:	1762
INPUT:	Esterrek ez zuen adierazi zein herri eta zein jatorritakoa zen ; hala baitzion Mardokeok agindua eta bete egiten zuen hark Mardokeoren esana , beraren ardurapean zegoenean bezalaxe .
PRED:	But Esther had not told her the people about her or older or older or daughter . But Mordecai had told her what he had done .
GOLD:	Esther continued to keep her family background and nationality a secret . She was still following Mordecai 's directions , just as she did when she lived in his home .

ID:	1763
INPUT:	Suzko ibai <unk> zen haren aurretik . Jendetza izugarria zuen zerbitzari , milaka eta milaka <unk> aurrean zutik . <unk> hasieta zabaldu ziren liburuak .
PRED:	As soon as the angel of the river arrived , he saw that his servant and his servants were sitting on his side , and he fell on his side .
GOLD:	and a river of fire was pouring out , flowing from his presence.Millions of angels ministered to him ; many millions stood to attend him.Then the court began its session , and the books were opened .

ID:	1764
INPUT:	Bertako jendeak ohi ez bezalako <unk> hartu gintuen . Euria eta hotza baitzen , su handia piztu eta guztioi ondora deitu ziguten .
PRED:	They did n't know how they were with them , so he could bring us into the boat with a huge crowd . He called us from the fire and a great fire on us .
GOLD:	The people of the island were very kind to us . It was cold and rainy , so they built a fire on the shore to welcome us .

ID:	1765
INPUT:	hau da , mila metro neurtuko dituzte ekialde zein mendebaldera , <unk> zein iparraldera , hiria erdian geldituko delarik . Horiek izango dira herri-lurrak .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ I will make the north side of the north side of the north , and all the towns of the north will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Measure off 3,000 feet outside the town walls in every direction — east , south , west , north — with the town at the center . This area will serve as the larger pastureland for the towns .

ID:	1766
INPUT:	Saia gaitezen , bada , atseden horretan sartzen , eta ez dadila inor <unk> eror , gure aurrekoen etsenpluari jarraituz .
PRED:	So let us live in all , and let us be sure that we have been able to live in your own land , and we have been able to kill us .
GOLD:	So let us do our best to enter that rest . But if we disobey God , as the people of Israel did , we will fall .

ID:	1767
INPUT:	Negar eta <unk> <unk> ditut . Ongi ureztaturiko <unk> ditut , estropezurik egingo ez <unk> <unk> . Aita izango naiz Israelentzat , nire lehen-seme izango da bera .
PRED:	I will see how great things , and I will punish you , and I will see that the Father will be filled with great things , and I will punish you .
GOLD:	Tears of joy will stream down their faces , and I will lead them home with great care.They will walk beside quiet streamsand on smooth paths where they will not stumble.For I am Israel 's father , and Ephraim is my oldest child .

ID:	1768
INPUT:	Eta oraindik argiago da hori , baldin beste apaiz bat sortu bada Melkisedeken antzera ,
PRED:	For the one of the high priest has given him one of the high priest as one of the high priest .
GOLD:	This change has been made very clear since a different priest , who is like Melchizedek , has appeared .

ID:	1769
INPUT:	Neuk hedatu dut <unk> oinarritu lurra , eta Sioni esaten diot : Zu nire herria ! Neure mezuaren <unk> zaitut , eta neure eskupean babestu » .
PRED:	I have seen the heavens and the earth that I have heard the world of the earth , for I have heard my people in the world of my power and power . ”
GOLD:	And I have put my words in your mouthand hidden you safely in my hand.I stretched out the sky like a canopyand laid the foundations of the earth.I am the one who says to Israel , ‘ You are my people ! ' ”

ID:	1770
INPUT:	Han zegoen Jakoben putzua delakoa . Jesus , bideaz nekaturik , <unk> eseri zen . Eguerdi ingurua zen .
PRED:	There was no food for the Philistines , and when they were afraid , Jesus sat down and sat down on the way of Egypt .
GOLD:	Jacob 's well was there ; and Jesus , tired from the long walk , sat wearily beside the well about noontime .

ID:	1771
INPUT:	etxolatzeko lekua zuei aurkitzeko , bera bidean aurretik <unk> arren , gauez suaren bidez bidea <unk> , eta egunez <unk> bidez gidatuz .
PRED:	There are the way to me , where they were thrown into the night , though they saw that the way of the night , and when they were on the night .
GOLD:	who goes before you looking for the best places to camp , guiding you with a pillar of fire by night and a pillar of cloud by day .

ID:	1772
INPUT:	zeruan Jainkoak zuentzat prestatua duen <unk> itxaropenak eragiten dizue horretara , berri ona — egiaren mezua — zuengana iritsi zenean ezagutu zenuten itxaropenak , alegia .
PRED:	For God has given you the Good News that you have given you the Good News of the world . When you learned that the Good News was the Good News of the world , when you learned that you believed in heaven .
GOLD:	which come from your confident hope of what God has reserved for you in heaven . You have had this expectation ever since you first heard the truth of the Good News .

ID:	1773
INPUT:	Haren entzutea herrialde hartako bazter guztietara zabaldu zen .
PRED:	The people of Israel spread out the land , and they spread out to the land .
GOLD:	The news about Jesus spread through every village in the entire region .

ID:	1774
INPUT:	Gizon hura <unk> , Eli ate ondoan zegoen aulki batean eseria , bidera begira , Jaunaren <unk> guztiz kezkatua . Gizon hark hirian sartu eta berria eman zuen ; hiri osoa oihuka hasi zen .
PRED:	As soon as the man was sitting beside him , he sat down in the city of the Lord and saw that he was sitting beside the city of the Lord , and he sat down in the city .
GOLD:	Eli was waiting beside the road to hear the news of the battle , for his heart trembled for the safety of the Ark of God . When the messenger arrived and told what had happened , an outcry resounded throughout the town .

ID:	1775
INPUT:	Eta haiek bertan utzi eta hiritik kanpora atera zen , Betaniara , eta han eman zuen gaua .
PRED:	So he left the town and left the town where he was staying , where he was there .
GOLD:	Then he returned to Bethany , where he stayed overnight .

ID:	1776
INPUT:	Denek nahi zuten Salomon ikusi , Jainkoak eman zion jakinduriaren berri izateko .
PRED:	All of them were wise , and God gave him wisdom to wisdom .
GOLD:	People from every nation came to consult him and to hear the wisdom God had given him .

ID:	1777
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> <unk> ( 25 , 1 — 32 , 32 )
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Recovery
GOLD:	A Message for Ammon

ID:	1778
INPUT:	<unk> ziren laurak , bata bestearen barruan sartuta bezala zeuden .
PRED:	At last the Lord had spoken , and they were filled with joy .
GOLD:	All four wheels looked alike and were made the same ; each wheel had a second wheel turning crosswise within it .

ID:	1779
INPUT:	Ilundu zuenean , ontzia aintzira erdian zegoen , eta Jesus lehorrean , bakarrik .
PRED:	When Jesus was walking on the ground , Jesus was divided into the boat .
GOLD:	Late that night , the disciples were in their boat in the middle of the lake , and Jesus was alone on land .

ID:	1780
INPUT:	<unk> ditu Jaunak begiak , haien <unk> entzuteko adi belarriak .
PRED:	For the Lord has heard their eyes , and those who hear their ears .
GOLD:	But the Lord turns his face against those who do evil ; he will erase their memory from the earth .

ID:	1781
INPUT:	Horra zure etsaiak asaldaturik , gorroto <unk> burua jasorik .
PRED:	I hate your enemies , and I hate your enemies .
GOLD:	They devise crafty schemes against your people ; they conspire against your precious ones .

ID:	1782
INPUT:	Goraintziak <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> eta haiekin bizi diren senideei .
PRED:	Greet , dear brothers and sisters , who were filled with with all who were filled with with them and prophets who live with them .
GOLD:	Give my greetings to Asyncritus , Phlegon , Hermes , Patrobas , Hermas , and the brothers and sisters who meet with them .

ID:	1783
INPUT:	Egiptoko errege Xixak Juda erreinuaz jabetu
PRED:	A Message about Judah
GOLD:	Egypt Invades Judah

ID:	1784
INPUT:	Beraz , Kristorena dena sorkari berri da ; <unk> egin du , berria sortu da .
PRED:	So he has heard that the Good News has heard that he has been called , and he has been able to know that he was the Good News .
GOLD:	This means that anyone who belongs to Christ has become a new person . The old life is gone ; a new life has begun !

ID:	1785
INPUT:	Gero , apaizak eta lebitarrak ekialdeko plazan bildurik ,
PRED:	Then the priests and Levites in front of the Jordan River , along with all the people of the Jordan River ,
GOLD:	He summoned the priests and Levites to meet him at the courtyard east of the Temple .

ID:	1786
INPUT:	Egun hartan , Oliamendi gainean jarriko ditu oinak , Jerusalemen sortaldean . Bitan ebakiko da Oliamendi , eta haran bat azalduko da sortaldetik <unk> ; mendiaren erdi bat iparralderantz aldenduko da , beste erdia hegoalderantz .
PRED:	On that day the disciples will be burned on the side of the Lord 's side , and he will pour out the water on the north side of the north side of the north side of the north , and the north will be given to the north .
GOLD:	On that day his feet will stand on the Mount of Olives , east of Jerusalem . And the Mount of Olives will split apart , making a wide valley running from east to west . Half the mountain will move toward the north and half toward the south .

ID:	1787
INPUT:	Orduan , Jefte Galaadeko arduradunekin joan eta herriak buruzagi eta gudalburu onartu zuen . Ondoren , Jeftek Mitzpako santutegian baietsi zuen <unk> hura .
PRED:	Then Jephthah sent the leaders of Israel to fight the leaders of Jabesh-gilead , the commander of the people of Jabesh-gilead , along with him , and he sent him to kill him .
GOLD:	So Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead , and the people made him their ruler and commander of the army . At Mizpah , in the presence of the Lord , Jephthah repeated what he had said to the elders .

ID:	1788
INPUT:	Eta ni preso <unk> esker , gure senide gehienak , Jaunarenganako <unk> indarberriturik , <unk> sentitzen dira Jainkoaren mezua beldurrik gabe hots egiteko .
PRED:	And when we were in prison , we are in prison with the Lord our beloved brothers and sisters , who are in chains of the Lord , who is able to be able to be able to be able to be baptized .
GOLD:	And because of my imprisonment , most of the believers here have gained confidence and boldly speak God 's message without fear .

ID:	1789
INPUT:	Atera nazazu <unk> , ez nadila murgil ; libra nazazu gorroto didatenengandik eta ur <unk> !
PRED:	But if I am able to destroy my enemies , I will not be able to be able to kill me .
GOLD:	Do n't let the floods overwhelm me , or the deep waters swallow me , or the pit of death devour me .

ID:	1790
INPUT:	Baina handiagoa da oraindik ematen digun laguntza , hau baitio Liburu Santuak : <unk> egiten die harroei , baina mesede egiten apalei .
PRED:	But the Scriptures know that the Scriptures say , “ The Scriptures know that the Scriptures are in his power . ”
GOLD:	And he gives grace generously . As the Scriptures say , “ God opposes the proudbut gives grace to the humble . ”

ID:	1791
INPUT:	Nire <unk> , sakabanatu nituen guztiek , eskaintzak ekarriko dizkidate , Etiopiako ibaiez beste aldetik .
PRED:	I saw that you have a burnt offering and liquid offering and liquid offering to you .
GOLD:	My scattered people who live beyond the rivers of Ethiopiawill come to present their offerings .

ID:	1792
INPUT:	Boozek galdegin zion <unk> : — Nor dugu neska hau ?
PRED:	Boaz asked him , “ Who is this man ? ”
GOLD:	Then Boaz asked his foreman , “ Who is that young woman over there ? Who does she belong to ? ”

ID:	1793
INPUT:	Senideok , Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren izenean , arren eskatzen dizuet : bat etor zaitezte guztiok eta ez bedi izan zatiketarik zuen artean . Bizi elkar ongi harturik , ikuspegi eta iritzi bat bera duzuela .
PRED:	Dear brothers , dear brothers and sisters , let them be a blessing from the name of the Lord Jesus Christ . Let them be gracious to each other .
GOLD:	I appeal to you , dear brothers and sisters , by the authority of our Lord Jesus Christ , to live in harmony with each other . Let there be no divisions in the church . Rather , be of one mind , united in thought and purpose .

ID:	1794
INPUT:	Zuhaitzondoa eta <unk> uzteko aginduak , berriz , hauxe esan nahi du : denen jabea zeruko Jainkoa dela aitortuko duzunean , errege izango zarela berriro .
PRED:	At that time the power of the world will be able to destroy the power of the earth , and you will know that you will be the Kingdom of God .
GOLD:	“ ‘ Then you saw a messenger , a holy one , coming down from heaven and saying , “ Cut down the tree and destroy it . But leave the stump and the roots in the ground , bound with a band of iron and bronze and surrounded by tender grass . Let him be drenched with the dew of heaven . Let him live with the animals of the field for seven periods of time . ”

ID:	1795
INPUT:	<unk> jota daude zuen urre-zilarrak , eta herdoil hori izango duzue lekuko zeuen kontra , eta suak bezalaxe jango du zuen haragia . Auzi aurreko azkenak diren egunotan pilatu dituzue aberastasunak .
PRED:	You have made silver and gold and gold and gold that you have been unfaithful to your people . You will eat the blood of your people and animals , just as they are left .
GOLD:	Your gold and silver are corroded . The very wealth you were counting on will eat away your flesh like fire . This corroded treasure you have hoarded will testify against you on the day of judgment .

ID:	1796
INPUT:	Semen ondorengoak <unk>
PRED:	The Descendants of Ham
GOLD:	The Line of Descent from Shem to Abram

ID:	1797
INPUT:	Mendebaldetik erromatarren <unk> erasoko diote . <unk> galdurik , atzera egin beharko du ; orduan , itun santuko herriaren aurka hustuko du bere amorrua ; horretarako , itun santua alde batera utzi dutenen laguntzaz baliatuko da .
PRED:	They will be able to kill the innocent , and they will be cut off from the community of Israel . Then they will make a covenant between the covenant of God . That is why the covenant of God has given them to sacrifice .
GOLD:	For warships from western coastlands will scare him off , and he will withdraw and return home . But he will vent his anger against the people of the holy covenant and reward those who forsake the covenant .

ID:	1798
INPUT:	Jaunak galdetu zidan : — Zer ikusten duzu , Jeremias ? Nik erantzun : — <unk> ikusten dut <unk> .
PRED:	Then the Lord asked me , “ What do you see ? ” “ I see that you see ? ” “ I know that I have seen , ” he replied .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Look , Jeremiah ! What do you see ? ” And I replied , “ I see a branch from an almond tree . ”

ID:	1799
INPUT:	Jeremias putzuan sartu
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Second Message about the Council
GOLD:	Jeremiah in a Cistern

ID:	1800
INPUT:	17
PRED:	A Message about Edom
GOLD:	Qoph

ID:	1801
INPUT:	Horrela , Josuek eta israeldarrek <unk> handia egin zuten etsaien artean , ia denak hiltzeraino . Hala ere , batzuek ihes egin zieten eta beren hiri <unk> babestu ziren .
PRED:	So Joshua and all the people of Israel saw that they had been defeated by a great army . But some of them escaped , and some of their enemies had fled .
GOLD:	So Joshua and the Israelite army continued the slaughter and completely crushed the enemy . They totally wiped out the five armies except for a tiny remnant that managed to reach their fortified towns .

ID:	1802
INPUT:	« Bere bizia <unk> nahi duenak galdu egingo du ; galtzen duenak , berriz , onik aterako du .
PRED:	“ Anyone who eats my life will be destroyed , but those who hate you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	If you cling to your life , you will lose it , and if you let your life go , you will save it .

ID:	1803
INPUT:	<unk> emakumearen semea hil
PRED:	A son of Athaliah 's Wife
GOLD:	Miracles during a Famine

ID:	1804
INPUT:	Eta hala egin zuen hark : Jainkoaren aurka birao egin eta beronen izena , santutegia eta zeruan bizi direnak iraindu zituen .
PRED:	Then he added , “ The God of God has sinned against heaven and his name , and the name of God , and he worshiped the Temple of God .
GOLD:	And he spoke terrible words of blasphemy against God , slandering his name and his dwelling — that is , those who dwell in heaven .

ID:	1805
INPUT:	Esaiozu entzuteko nik , Jainko Jaunak , adierazten diodan mezua : Horra , sua piztuko dut zure erdian , eta zuhaitz guztiak , heze nahiz ihartuak , irentsiko ditu ; sugarra ez da itzaliko , eta den-dena hartuko du suak , hegoaldetik <unk> .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and I will cut down fire on fire , and the fire will fall into the fire .
GOLD:	Tell her , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I am your enemy , O Israel , and I am about to unsheath my sword to destroy your people — the righteous and the wicked alike .

ID:	1806
INPUT:	Ekialdeko alderdia neurtu zuen makilaz , eta <unk> berrehun eta berrogeita hamar metroko luzera zuen .
PRED:	Then the south gateway to the south side of the gateway , and he was 175 feet long .
GOLD:	He measured the east side with his measuring rod , and it was 875 feet long .

ID:	1807
INPUT:	Joaben <unk> bat <unk> ondoan gelditu zen , eta honela zioen : — Joaben eta Daviden alde dagoen orok jarraitu Joabi !
PRED:	Then Joab realized that he was sitting beside Joab and said to Joab , “ Come and obey me . ”
GOLD:	One of Joab 's young men shouted to Amasa 's troops , “ If you are for Joab and David , come and follow Joab . ”

ID:	1808
INPUT:	Jainko Jaunak dioena iragarriko dut : bakea agintzen die bere herri eta fededunei , berari berriro konfiantza agertzen diotenei .
PRED:	The Lord says to the people of Israel , “ I have given peace to all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Surely his salvation is near to those who fear him , so our land will be filled with his glory .

ID:	1809
INPUT:	esan zuen : — Zer dela-eta dator ene errege jauna bere zerbitzari honengana ? Davidek erantzun : — <unk> erosi nahi dizut , Jaunari aldarea eraikitzeko , horrela izurritea herriarengandik urrun dezan .
PRED:	“ What is my lord , my lord ? ” David asked . “ My lord , my lord , my lord , ” David replied , “ I will give you a sin offering to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ Why have you come , my lord the king ? ” Araunah asked.David replied , “ I have come to buy your threshing floor and to build an altar to the Lord there , so that he will stop the plague . ”

ID:	1810
INPUT:	<unk> beldur bazara , hartu Pura zeure morroia eta joan biok kanpalekura .
PRED:	If you are afraid , you must go into the camp , and I 'll go to the camp .
GOLD:	But if you are afraid to attack , go down to the camp with your servant Purah .

ID:	1811
INPUT:	Lege-maisuak eta fariseuak <unk> hasi ziren : « Nor da honela biraoka ari den hau ? Nork barka ditzake bekatuak , Jainkoak bakarrik baizik ? »
PRED:	The teachers of religious law began to say , “ Who is God ? Who is God ? Who is God 's sin ? ”
GOLD:	But the Pharisees and teachers of religious law said to themselves , “ Who does he think he is ? That 's blasphemy ! Only God can forgive sins ! ”

ID:	1812
INPUT:	Grazia , errukia eta bakea zuekin , Jainko Aitaren eta beronen Seme Jesu Kristoren partetik , egiaz eta maitasunez .
PRED:	May God give you grace and peace with you , and his Father will love you and his Father Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	Grace , mercy , and peace , which come from God the Father and from Jesus Christ — the Son of the Father — will continue to be with us who live in truth and love .

ID:	1813
INPUT:	<unk> ihes egiten badiote , Egiptok bilduko ditu , Menfis izango dute hilobi . Horien zilarrezko altxor ederraketa horien <unk> eta sasiak hartuko ditu .
PRED:	But when they arrive in the land , the Lord will gather you in the land of Egypt , when they will fall in the streets , and they will be able to take away from their own eyes , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Even if you escape destruction from Assyria , Egypt will conquer you , and Memphis will bury you.Nettles will take over your treasures of silver ; thistles will invade your ruined homes .

ID:	1814
INPUT:	Jefte , israeldarren buruzagi hautatu
PRED:	Jephthah 's chosen leaders of Israel
GOLD:	Jephthah Becomes Israel 's Judge

ID:	1815
INPUT:	Eman ditzadala urratsak tinko , zure arauak gordetzeko .
PRED:	Give thanks to the Lord , for I have obeyed your decrees .
GOLD:	Oh , that my actions would consistentlyreflect your decrees !

ID:	1816
INPUT:	Honela zioten : « Bedeinkatua Jaunaren izenean datorren erregea ! Bakea zeruan eta aintza Jainko <unk> ! »
PRED:	“ Praise the name of the Lord ! ” they said , “ May the glory of the Lord be with all the glory of the earth ! ”
GOLD:	“ Blessings on the King who comes in the name of the Lord ! Peace in heaven , and glory in highest heaven ! ”

ID:	1817
INPUT:	Kantu berria kantatuko dizut , ene Jainko , hamar hariko harpa joko zuretzat :
PRED:	I will sing a new song to the Lord , and I will praise you with all the earth .
GOLD:	I will sing a new song to you , O God ! I will sing your praises with a ten-stringed harp .

ID:	1818
INPUT:	Honela erantzun zion herriak : — Ez diguzu iruzurrik egin , ezta zapalketarik ere , ez duzu inoren eskutik deus hartu .
PRED:	“ You have not done this , ” he replied . “ You have no more than you , and you have not done it . ”
GOLD:	“ No , ” they replied , “ you have never cheated or oppressed us , and you have never taken even a single bribe . ”

ID:	1819
INPUT:	<unk> baterako <unk> , kito berehala ! Landare <unk> bezala erortzen dira , galburuak bezala ebakitzen dituzte .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you , as though they are under the sun , they will cut down on the ground .
GOLD:	And though they are great now , in a moment they will be gone like all others , cut off like heads of grain .

ID:	1820
INPUT:	Jainko <unk> niregana etorriko daeta etsaien porrotaz <unk> nau .
PRED:	They will know that they are my enemies , and they will know that they are my enemies .
GOLD:	Do n't kill them , for my people soon forget such lessons ; stagger them with your power , and bring them to their knees , O Lord our shield .

ID:	1821
INPUT:	Honela zioen : « Dario erregeari , bakea !
PRED:	“ This is what the king says : There is peace in peace and peace ,
GOLD:	“ To King Darius . Greetings .

ID:	1822
INPUT:	Moisesek esan zien : « Honela dio Israelgo Jainko Jaunak : Har beza nork bere ezpata eta zeharkatu kanpalekua , <unk> ate jendea hilez , nahiz eta anaia , laguna edo auzokoa izan » .
PRED:	Then Moses said to them , “ May the Sovereign Lord be cut off from all the people of Israel , and let them fall into the gate of the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Moses told them , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : Each of you , take your swords and go back and forth from one end of the camp to the other . Kill everyone — even your brothers , friends , and neighbors . ”

ID:	1823
INPUT:	eta Israel herria erditik pasarazi , haren maitasuna betikoa baita ;
PRED:	When the people of Israel saw the people of Israel , he loved His faithful love endures forever .
GOLD:	He led Israel safely through , His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	1824
INPUT:	Hiriak berak bizitzeko izango dituzte , eta herri-lurrak <unk> eta abereentzat .
PRED:	The fortified towns will be captured , and they will be able to sit in their place .
GOLD:	These towns will be for the Levites to live in , and the surrounding lands will provide pasture for their cattle , flocks , and other livestock .

ID:	1825
INPUT:	Ibaiko ur gainean zegoen ehunez jantzitako gizonak , bi eskuak jaso eta betikotasunean bizi den Jainkoaren izenean zin egin zuen : “ Hiru urte eta erdi iraungo dute gauza hauek . Herri santuaren indar guztia erabat desegingo denean amaituko dira ” .
PRED:	Then the two cherubim were placed on the water of wood and placed them on the throne of God . The two cherubim will be destroyed , and all the people of God will be destroyed , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	The man dressed in linen , who was standing above the river , raised both his hands toward heaven and took a solemn oath by the One who lives forever , saying , “ It will go on for a time , times , and half a time . When the shattering of the holy people has finally come to an end , all these things will have happened . ”

ID:	1826
INPUT:	Ikasleek , Jesusengana hurbildurik , <unk> egin zuten , esanez : — Maisu , Maisu ! <unk> gaude ! Hark , <unk> , haserre egin zien haizeari eta olatuei ; hauek <unk> eta dena bare gelditu zen .
PRED:	Then the disciples came to Jesus and asked him , “ Teacher , Teacher , ” they said . “ Teacher , we know that we were afraid of what he had happened .
GOLD:	The disciples went and woke him up , shouting , “ Master , Master , we 're going to drown ! ” When Jesus woke up , he rebuked the wind and the raging waves . Suddenly the storm stopped and all was calm .

ID:	1827
INPUT:	Izan ere , egun horietan iritsi baitzuten juduek bakea beren etsaien aurrean ; hil horretan aldatu zitzaien egoera , atsekabea atsegin eta negarra bozkario bihurtuz . Egun horietan , bada , jai alaiak eta otorduak behar zituzten egin , elkarri erregaluak bidaliz eta behartsuei esku-erakutsiak eginez .
PRED:	For the Jews came to each day of the Jews , for they had been given to peace in peace , for they had been given to each day of the Jews . They have been given to each other , and they have been given to each other .
GOLD:	He told them to celebrate these days with feasting and gladness and by giving gifts of food to each other and presents to the poor . This would commemorate a time when the Jews gained relief from their enemies , when their sorrow was turned into gladness and their mourning into joy .

ID:	1828
INPUT:	« Zorionekoak Jainkoaren nahia betetzeko <unk> direnak , haiek baititu Jainkoak aseko .
PRED:	“ God blesses those who are righteous , and they will be punished .
GOLD:	God blesses those who hunger and thirst for justice , for they will be satisfied .

ID:	1829
INPUT:	Bekatuaren aurkako borroka
PRED:	The people of Israel
GOLD:	Struggling with Sin

ID:	1830
INPUT:	Handik aldi batera , Kainek lurreko fruituen eskaintza egin zion Jaunari .
PRED:	In that time , Cain made a sacred offering to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	When it was time for the harvest , Cain presented some of his crops as a gift to the Lord .

ID:	1831
INPUT:	Zuen barne-asmoak belar ihar dira ; hortik <unk> , berriz , lasto . Suak bezala erreko <unk> arnasak .
PRED:	Your eyes are like honey , and they will fall into a furnace . But when they are like a tree , the wind will burn up like a fire .
GOLD:	You Assyrians produce nothing but dry grass and stubble.Your own breath will turn to fire and consume you .

ID:	1832
INPUT:	Herria ibaia igarotzeko kanpalekutik abiatu zenean , apaizak itun-kutxa hartu eta jendearen aurrean jarri ziren .
PRED:	When the Israelites left the camp , the priests left the camp at the entrance of the Ark of the Covenant .
GOLD:	So the people left their camp to cross the Jordan , and the priests who were carrying the Ark of the Covenant went ahead of them .

ID:	1833
INPUT:	Hondatu egingo dut zuen lurraldea eta harri eta zur eginik geldituko dira hartaz jabetzera etorriko diren etsaiak .
PRED:	I will destroy the land of the north and the land of the Lord , and they will return to the land of the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	Yes , I myself will devastate your land , and your enemies who come to occupy it will be appalled at what they see .

ID:	1834
INPUT:	Gizakiarentzat <unk> , <unk> bere lanaren fruituaz gozatzea . Nik uste dut , hau <unk> eskutik datorrela ;
PRED:	With great power , I have filled with great sorrow and sorrow . I know that I have seen the power of my power , and I know that I have seen my power .
GOLD:	So I decided there is nothing better than to enjoy food and drink and to find satisfaction in work . Then I realized that these pleasures are from the hand of God .

ID:	1835
INPUT:	Jakintsuak badaki mihiari eusten , <unk> ere bai bere buruaren jabe izaten .
PRED:	A wise person gives birth to the poor , and those who hate each other .
GOLD:	A truly wise person uses few words ; a person with understanding is even-tempered .

ID:	1836
INPUT:	Mendi garaiak <unk> dira , harkaitzak <unk> gordeleku .
PRED:	For the waters of the earth will be able to fall into the clouds .
GOLD:	High in the mountains live the wild goats , and the rocks form a refuge for the hyraxes .

ID:	1837
INPUT:	Pazko-jairako prestaketak egiteko eguna zen , eguerdi aldea . Pilatok esan zien juduei : — Hemen duzue zeuen erregea .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid , ” Pilate said . “ This is the King of the Jews . ”
GOLD:	It was now about noon on the day of preparation for the Passover . And Pilate said to the people , “ Look , here is your king ! ”

ID:	1838
INPUT:	pertzak , hauts-palak eta sardexkak eta berauen tresneria . <unk> , Salomon erregearen aginduz , Jaunaren etxerako egin zituen tresna hauek guztiak brontze leunduzkoak ziren denak .
PRED:	You made the ash buckets , shovels , and all the kings of the Temple of the Lord , who had given them all the Temple of the Lord , and all the god of the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	the ash buckets , the shovels , the meat hooks , and all the related articles.Huram-abi made all these things of burnished bronze for the Temple of the Lord , just as King Solomon had directed .

ID:	1839
INPUT:	Nik neuk , nire senideek eta zerbitzariek ere aurreratu dizkiegu dirua eta garia . Barka diezaiegun zor hori !
PRED:	I am the brothers and sisters , the servants of the servants and the servants of the servants , and we have given the money to my master .
GOLD:	I myself , as well as my brothers and my workers , have been lending the people money and grain , but now let us stop this business of charging interest .

ID:	1840
INPUT:	Luzatu zuen Moisesek makila Egiptoren gain eta , Jaunak eraginik , ekialdeko haizeak jo zuen lurraldean egun osoan eta gau osoan . Biharamun goizerako , ekialdeko haizeak larrapoteak ekarriak zituen .
PRED:	Then Moses poured out the staff on the plains of Egypt and his hand on the east side of Egypt , and the Lord struck them on the east side of the east side of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	So Moses raised his staff over Egypt , and the Lord caused an east wind to blow over the land all that day and through the night . When morning arrived , the east wind had brought the locusts .

ID:	1841
INPUT:	Aaron Aminadaben alaba eta Nahxonen arreba zen Elisabetekin ezkondu zen . Honek Nadab , Abihu , Eleazar eta Itamar eman zizkion .
PRED:	The daughter of Aaron became pregnant , and Ithamar son of Aaron became pregnant and Ithamar . He gave birth to his wife , Nadab , and Ithamar .
GOLD:	Aaron married Elisheba , the daughter of Amminadab and sister of Nahshon , and she gave birth to his sons , Nadab , Abihu , Eleazar , and Ithamar .

ID:	1842
INPUT:	« Noiz arte eman behar dituzue bidegabeko epaiak , errudunen alde jarriz ?
PRED:	“ How long will you come from your threshing floor ?
GOLD:	“ How long will you hand down unjust decisionsby favoring the wicked ? Interlude

ID:	1843
INPUT:	Leiala da Jainkoa , eta berak deitu zaituzte bere Seme Jesu Kristo gure Jaunarekin elkarturik bizitzera .
PRED:	For God has chosen you to live in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	God will do this , for he is faithful to do what he says , and he has invited you into partnership with his Son , Jesus Christ our Lord .

ID:	1844
INPUT:	Bego hau idatzirik hurrengo <unk> , sortzeko dagoen herriak Jauna gorets dezan .
PRED:	Let them be glad in the presence of the Lord , and he will praise his name .
GOLD:	Tell them the Lord looked downfrom his heavenly sanctuary.He looked down to earth from heaven

ID:	1845
INPUT:	Jainkoarengan jarria dik uste ona ; libra dezala orain , maite baldin badu ; ez zuen , bada , esaten Jainkoaren Semea zela ? »
PRED:	If God loves us , how can we love God 's favor ? If he loves him , how can he love God 's Son ? ”
GOLD:	He trusted God , so let God rescue him now if he wants him ! For he said , ‘ I am the Son of God . ' ”

ID:	1846
INPUT:	Uraskaren lodiera arra betekoa zen . Ezpainak <unk> bezalakoak ziren , lili-lorearen tankerakoak ; laurogei mila litro ur hartzen zuen uraskak .
PRED:	The entry room of three branches were like water , and they were decorated with spear . It was like a drink of water , and it was like a drink .
GOLD:	The walls of the Sea were about three inches thick , and its rim flared out like a cup and resembled a water lily blossom . It could hold about 11,000 gallons of water .

ID:	1847
INPUT:	Aberastasun eta ospe handiak izan zituen Ezekiasek . Zilar , urre , harribitxi , usainki , babeski eta era <unk> gauza baliotsu ugari bildu zuen .
PRED:	When Hezekiah had given them great , he has given them great , gold , gold , silver , gold , and gold , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	Hezekiah was very wealthy and highly honored . He built special treasury buildings for his silver , gold , precious stones , and spices , and for his shields and other valuable items .

ID:	1848
INPUT:	Jo bezate atzera , lotsaturik , Sion gorroto dutenek !
PRED:	Let them be disgraced , and those who hate their evil deeds .
GOLD:	May all who hate Jerusalembe turned back in shameful defeat .

ID:	1849
INPUT:	hiru gizon horiek herrialde horretan baleude , nik , Jainko Jaunak , zin dagit neure biziarengatik , ez dutela beren seme-alabarik ere bizirik aterako ; beraiek bakarrik geldituko dira bizirik .
PRED:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : As surely as I live , they will not die . '
GOLD:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , even if those three men were there , they would n't be able to save their own sons or daughters . They alone would be saved .

ID:	1850
INPUT:	Oholibak areagotu egin zituen bere lizunkeriak : horman <unk> <unk> ikusi zituen , babiloniarren irudiak gorriz <unk> ;
PRED:	But when I saw her , I saw that she had taken from the Babylonians , I saw that she had taken from the Babylonians .
GOLD:	“ Then she carried her prostitution even further . She fell in love with pictures that were painted on a wall — pictures of Babylonian military officers , outfitted in striking red uniforms .

ID:	1851
INPUT:	Suari indartsu haize <unk> zaborra kentzen zaio . Baina alferrik <unk> garbitzen aritzea : egite txarrak ez zaizkie joaten .
PRED:	For the great storm will be like a great flood , but the moon will be able to destroy the sun .
GOLD:	The bellows fiercely fan the flamesto burn out the corruption.But it does not purify them , for the wickedness remains .

ID:	1852
INPUT:	« Ekialdean Judaren banderapeko kanpamendua ezarriko da bere gudari-taldeekin .
PRED:	“ The troops of Judah will be defeated by their banner .
GOLD:	“ The divisions of Judah , Issachar , and Zebulun are to camp toward the sunrise on the east side of the Tabernacle , beneath their family banners . These are the names of the tribes , their leaders , and the numbers of their registered troops : JudahNahshon son of Amminadab74,600

ID:	1853
INPUT:	Simonek berak ere sinetsi egin zuen eta bataioa hartu , eta ez zen Feliperen ondotik aldentzen . Gertatzen ziren mirariak eta egintza ahaltsuak ikusirik , erabat txunditurik zegoen .
PRED:	But when they saw him , he did n't know the believers , too , because they had not yet come to see the miraculous signs and wonders . But when they saw the miraculous signs he saw them .
GOLD:	Then Simon himself believed and was baptized . He began following Philip wherever he went , and he was amazed by the signs and great miracles Philip performed .

ID:	1854
INPUT:	Gainerako lurraldearen banaketa
PRED:	The Land Given to the Land
GOLD:	The Allotments of the Remaining Land

ID:	1855
INPUT:	Baina Eliasek erantzun zion buruzagiari : — Jainkoaren gizona baldin banaiz , jaits dadila sua zerutik eta kiskal zaitzatela zeu eta zeure berrogeita hamar gizonak ! Bat-batean sua zerutik jaitsi eta kiskali egin zituen buruzagia eta berrogeita hamar gizonak .
PRED:	But Elijah replied , “ If I want you to come from the man of God , let me go down from heaven and throw them into the fire . ” And the man of God and the man of heaven and the man of heaven .
GOLD:	But Elijah replied to the captain , “ If I am a man of God , let fire come down from heaven and destroy you and your fifty men ! ” Then fire fell from heaven and killed them all .

ID:	1856
INPUT:	Legeak , izan ere , gizon ahulak izendatzen ditu apaiz nagusi ; baina legea baino geroago etorri zen Jainkoaren <unk> Semea izendatzen du apaiz nagusi , betidanik bete-beteko dena .
PRED:	The law of the law of Moses will be counted as high as high as high as high as high as high as high as high as high as high as high as high as the law of God .
GOLD:	The law appointed high priests who were limited by human weakness . But after the law was given , God appointed his Son with an oath , and his Son has been made the perfect High Priest forever .

ID:	1857
INPUT:	Eta , bera eta beraren familia guztia bataiatu zirelarik , erregu hau egin zigun : « Jaunarengan egiaz sinesten dudala irizten badiozue , hartzazue ostatu , arren , nire etxean » . Eta bere eskaintza onartzera behartu gintuen .
PRED:	And when they were with him , they said , “ We have given us everything in the Lord 's presence , for we have given us the work of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	She and her household were baptized , and she asked us to be her guests . “ If you agree that I am a true believer in the Lord , ” she said , “ come and stay at my home . ” And she urged us until we agreed .

ID:	1858
INPUT:	Pauloren harrotzeko bidea
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Advice

ID:	1859
INPUT:	Bazen Jopen emakume fededun bat , Tabita izenekoa ( grekoz « Dorkas » — hau da , « Basahuntza » — ) . On egitera eta behartsuei laguntzera emana bizi zen erabat .
PRED:	There was a great woman who was born , a woman named him . “ There is a good reputation for the sake of the Lord , for it was a good reputation for the poor and the poor . ”
GOLD:	There was a believer in Joppa named Tabitha ( which in Greek is Dorcas ) . She was always doing kind things for others and helping the poor .

ID:	1860
INPUT:	Gero , hartu zekorraren odoletik , eta behatzez aldare-ertzeko adarrak igurtziko dituzu . Gainerako odola aldare-oinean isuriko duzu .
PRED:	Then he took some of the blood of the blood of the blood and put it on the horns of the altar . You will pour out the blood of the blood of the altar .
GOLD:	Put some of its blood on the horns of the altar with your finger , and pour out the rest at the base of the altar .

ID:	1861
INPUT:	Horiek tenpluko ateak <unk> arduratuko dira , eta beste zenbait zerbitzu beteko ; beroriek hilko dituzte erre-oparietako abereak eta herriaren beste <unk> ; herriaren zerbitzura egongo dira .
PRED:	These are the gates of the Temple of the Temple , and they will serve me and serve other gods . They will serve one of the Temple and the people of Israel , and they will die .
GOLD:	They may still be Temple guards and gatekeepers , and they may slaughter the animals brought for burnt offerings and be present to help the people .

ID:	1862
INPUT:	Agindu hau eman zidan Jaunak , Israelgo Jainkoak : « Hartu nire eskutik pattarrez beteriko kopa hau , eta edanarazi nik bidaliko zaitudan nazio guztiei .
PRED:	Then the Lord gave me this message from the Lord : “ Take a cup of wine and wine from the cup of wine , and take it back to you .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , said to me : “ Take from my hand this cup filled to the brim with my anger , and make all the nations to whom I send you drink from it .

ID:	1863
INPUT:	Izan ere , morroiari lansaria zaio axola eta ez ardiak .
PRED:	For if they do n't ignore their sheep and sheep , they do n't do it .
GOLD:	The hired hand runs away because he 's working only for the money and does n't really care about the sheep .

ID:	1864
INPUT:	Horrela , Isaias profetaren liburuan idatzirik dagoena gertatu zen : Ahots bat oihuka ari da basamortuan : Prestatu bidea Jaunari , zuzendu bidexkak hari .
PRED:	This is what the prophet Isaiah was written in the book of the Lord 's voice : “ Look ! ” he shouted . “ Let 's go out to the wilderness ! ”
GOLD:	Isaiah had spoken of John when he said , “ He is a voice shouting in the wilderness , ‘ Prepare the way for the Lord 's coming ! Clear the road for him !

ID:	1865
INPUT:	Jendea mehatxuka ari da nire aurka : « Izu-ikara inguruan ! Salatu , sala dezagun ! » Adiskideak berak ere zain <unk> noiz huts egingo . « Ea engainatzen dugun — diote — . Orduan menderatuko dugu , mendekatuko gara hartaz » .
PRED:	The people of Israel have heard this : “ Come and fight against me , ” they said , “ Let 's destroy those who have come , and we will kill him . ”
GOLD:	I have heard the many rumors about me.They call me “ The Man Who Lives in Terror . ” They threaten , “ If you say anything , we will report it . ” Even my old friends are watching me , waiting for a fatal slip . “ He will trap himself , ” they say , “ and then we will get our revenge on him . ”

ID:	1866
INPUT:	Eguneroko janaria , beraz , erregeak eman zion bere bizitza guztian .
PRED:	So the next morning the king gave the food to life .
GOLD:	So the king gave him a regular food allowance as long as he lived .

ID:	1867
INPUT:	Tiro eta Sidongo errege guztiei ; <unk> beste aldean dauden lurraldeetako erregeei ;
PRED:	from Tyre , Tyre , and all the other kings of Tyre were also known as the kings of Tyre .
GOLD:	and the kings of Tyre and Sidon , and the kings of the regions across the sea .

ID:	1868
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( 25 , 1-14 )
PRED:	And when they saw that the king of Assyria and how to kill him .
GOLD:	Seventy Years of Captivity

ID:	1869
INPUT:	« Sei babes-hiri aukeratuko dituzue ,
PRED:	“ Make these instructions to the tribe of Levi ,
GOLD:	Designate six cities of refuge for yourselves ,

ID:	1870
INPUT:	Ez dut ia zuekin luze hitz egiteko aukerarik , gainean baita mundu honetako buruzagia . Horrek ez du nire gain ahalmenik ;
PRED:	I will not send you out of this city , for I have given you victory over the world to you , the one of this world , and I will not send you into the world .
GOLD:	“ I do n't have much more time to talk to you , because the ruler of this world approaches . He has no power over me ,

ID:	1871
INPUT:	<unk> izan zenaren zerbitzua ospez betea agertu bazen , zenbatez ospetsuago ez ote da izango salbamenerako denaren zerbitzua !
PRED:	For when the glory of King Nebuchadnezzar of Assyria will be filled with eternal life , so that his life will be given to life .
GOLD:	If the old way , which brings condemnation , was glorious , how much more glorious is the new way , which makes us right with God !

ID:	1872
INPUT:	Zuek <unk> eskuak altxatzean , beste aldera begira jartzen naiz ; nahiz eta zuek eskariak ugaldu , ez dizuet entzuten , eskuak odolez beteak baitituzue .
PRED:	But when I see your hands , I know that I am able to keep your hands on you and your hands , and you must not hear your hands .
GOLD:	When you lift up your hands in prayer , I will not look.Though you offer many prayers , I will not listen , for your hands are covered with the blood of innocent victims .

ID:	1873
INPUT:	<unk> erakartzen nituen , <unk> . <unk> <unk> duenaren <unk> haientzat ; makurtu eta jaten ematen nion .
PRED:	I saw that they were able to kill him , and when they saw that they were satisfied .
GOLD:	I led Israel alongwith my ropes of kindness and love.I lifted the yoke from his neck , and I myself stooped to feed him .

ID:	1874
INPUT:	<unk> ezpainetan hitz zuhurrak ; burugabearen <unk> , eman egurra !
PRED:	I speak to the wise , and the wise are cut off from my mouth .
GOLD:	Wise words come from the lips of people with understanding , but those lacking sense will be beaten with a rod .

ID:	1875
INPUT:	Jaunak berak sakabanatu ditu , eta ez ditu gehiago ikusi nahi . Ez da apaizentzat begirunerik , ezta <unk> gupidarik ere .
PRED:	For the Lord has no more than the Lord , and he has no more than the people , and they have no fear .
GOLD:	The Lord himself has scattered them , and he no longer helps them.People show no respect for the priestsand no longer honor the leaders .

ID:	1876
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Abrami : — Ni Jauna naiz . Nik irtenarazi zintudan kaldearren Ur hiritik lurralde hau zuri emateko .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Abram , “ I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who brought you out of the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord told him , “ I am the Lord who brought you out of Ur of the Chaldeans to give you this land as your possession . ”

ID:	1877
INPUT:	Horregatik jakinarazten dizuet , inork ere ez duela esaten « Madarikatua Jesus » Jainkoaren Espirituak eraginda ; eta inork ezin duela esan « Jesus da Jauna » Espiritu Santuak eraginik ez bada .
PRED:	No one can say , ‘ The Spirit of God is not saying , ‘ The Spirit of God will not be saved . ' For the Spirit of God will not be saved . ”
GOLD:	So I want you to know that no one speaking by the Spirit of God will curse Jesus , and no one can say Jesus is Lord , except by the Holy Spirit .

ID:	1878
INPUT:	hondamendi , lugorri eta eremu . Lurralde guztia hondamendi , eta inori axola ez .
PRED:	You will become a good land , and you will not live in the land .
GOLD:	They have made it an empty wasteland ; I hear its mournful cry.The whole land is desolate , and no one even cares .

ID:	1879
INPUT:	Era berean , Judako hiri guztietan ziren kultu-lekuak eta intsentsua erretzeko aldareak kendu egin zituen . Haren erregealdia baketsua izan zen .
PRED:	Then he made the pagan towns of Judah and Judah and burned incense in all the pagan towns of Judah and burned incense . He also burned incense on the throne of Judah .
GOLD:	He commanded the people of Judah to seek the Lord , the God of their ancestors , and to obey his law and his commands .

ID:	1880
INPUT:	Bai , <unk> egin <unk> hartuko zaitu . Egin zenuen <unk> emango dizu . Eta hori , isuri duzun giza odolarengatik , herrialdeei , hirieieta bertako jendeariegindako gogorkeriengatik .
PRED:	Yes , you will know that your power will be filled with great power , and you will crush all the towns of the fortified towns of the city .
GOLD:	You cut down the forests of Lebanon.Now you will be cut down.You destroyed the wild animals , so now their terror will be yours.You committed murder throughout the countrysideand filled the towns with violence .

ID:	1881
INPUT:	Hurrengo goizean , astemea txalmatu eta Moabeko buruzagiekin joan zen Balaam .
PRED:	Then Balaam went to the king of Moab and the king of Moab .
GOLD:	So the next morning Balaam got up , saddled his donkey , and started off with the Moabite officials .

ID:	1882
INPUT:	Hau entzutean , bertan zeuden batzuek esan zuten : « Eliasi deika ari duk » .
PRED:	When some of them heard this , some of them said , “ Elijah ! ”
GOLD:	Some of the bystanders misunderstood and thought he was calling for the prophet Elijah .

ID:	1883
INPUT:	<unk> bidali <unk> hartu baino lehen ; <unk> egin dute <unk> <unk> , <unk> eskuan ipintzeko .
PRED:	At that time when they saw that the first man who had been able to kill him , and when they saw that they were thrown into a hand .
GOLD:	O sword , slash to the right , then slash to the left , wherever you will , wherever you want .

ID:	1884
INPUT:	Judas eta <unk> , profeta baitziren , luze eta zabal hitz egin zuten senideekin , hauek <unk> eta gogoberotuz .
PRED:	As soon as they were , Judas , and some of the prophets who had been filled with them , brothers and sisters , and sisters , and sisters .
GOLD:	Then Judas and Silas , both being prophets , spoke at length to the believers , encouraging and strengthening their faith .

ID:	1885
INPUT:	Ondoren , beste harri batzuk jarriko dituzte <unk> ordez , eta horma zurituko .
PRED:	Then some of the stone will be cut off , and some of the wall will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Other stones will be brought in to replace the ones that were removed , and the walls will be replastered .

ID:	1886
INPUT:	( Mt 25 , <unk> )
PRED:	Jesus Heals Many People
GOLD:	Jesus ' Triumphant Entry

ID:	1887
INPUT:	<unk> , Tzadok , Jadua ,
PRED:	Zadok was the father of Athaliah ,
GOLD:	Pelatiah , Hanan , Anaiah ,

ID:	1888
INPUT:	« Baina salakuntza egia izanik , neska ez zela birjina egiaztatzen bada ,
PRED:	“ But if the governor is not a servant , he must not be put to the truth .
GOLD:	“ But suppose the man 's accusations are true , and he can show that she was not a virgin .

ID:	1889
INPUT:	Ez izan burugogor , egiptoarrak eta faraoia izan ziren bezala . Haiek ere utzi egin behar izan zieten joaten hebrearrei , Jainkoak zigortu ondoren .
PRED:	But the Egyptians did not forgive Pharaoh 's people , just as the Egyptians had done . But when they left them , they left their people and they left them .
GOLD:	Do n't be stubborn and rebellious as Pharaoh and the Egyptians were . By the time God was finished with them , they were eager to let Israel go .

ID:	1890
INPUT:	« Moisesek , hain zuzen , esan zuen : Ni bezalako profeta sorraraziko dizue Jaunak , zeuen Jainkoak , herritarren artetik ; onartu hark esango dizuen guztia .
PRED:	“ Then Moses said to you , ‘ This is what the Lord your God says : I will give you the people of Israel as the Lord your God . '
GOLD:	Moses said , ‘ The Lord your God will raise up for you a Prophet like me from among your own people . Listen carefully to everything he tells you . '

ID:	1891
INPUT:	Aberats izan nahi dutenak <unk> sarean eta gizakia hondatzen eta galtzen duten grina zoro eta <unk> askotan erortzen dira .
PRED:	For those who think they are weak , and those who are weak as weak as weak as if they were sick and sick .
GOLD:	But people who long to be rich fall into temptation and are trapped by many foolish and harmful desires that plunge them into ruin and destruction .

ID:	1892
INPUT:	Moisesen legean idatzirik dagoen bezalaxe , hain zuzen , etorri zaigu gainera hainbesteko zoritxar hau ; hala ere , Jauna , ez gara zure haserrea baretzen ahalegindu , gure bekatuetatik urrunduz eta zure leialtasuna aitortuz .
PRED:	Everyone in the Law of Moses was written in the Law of Moses , so that we have not been able to obey the Lord 's anger . We have not heard your anger , and we have turned against you .
GOLD:	Every curse written against us in the Law of Moses has come true . Yet we have refused to seek mercy from the Lord our God by turning from our sins and recognizing his truth .

ID:	1893
INPUT:	Isakarren leinutik , Tzuarren seme Netanel ;
PRED:	Jeshua son of Ammihud
GOLD:	IssacharNethanel son of Zuar

ID:	1894
INPUT:	Sinesmenaren argiak gidatzen gaitu , eta ez ikusten <unk> .
PRED:	For when we see that we are under Christ , they will see how weak they see .
GOLD:	For we live by believing and not by seeing .

ID:	1895
INPUT:	Jaunak du <unk> aberats egiten , beheratzen eta goratzen ;
PRED:	For the Lord has filled those who are weak , and those who are weak .
GOLD:	The Lord makes some poor and others rich ; he brings some down and lifts others up .

ID:	1896
INPUT:	Hauek ere , berarekin batera , Hildakoen Egoitzara jaitsi ziren , gerran hildakoak bezalaxe ; haren euskarri ziren eta haren gerizpean bizi ziren nazioen artean .
PRED:	These were the grave in the grave , for the grave was in the grave , just as he was in the grave .
GOLD:	Its allies , too , were all destroyed and had passed away . They had gone down to the grave — all those nations that had lived in its shade .

ID:	1897
INPUT:	Josek , bere <unk> gehiago eutsi ezinik , inguruan zituen egiptoarrei agindu zien : « Atera denok hemendik ! » Hala , ez zen Joserekin inor gelditu , anaiei bere burua ezagutzera eman zienean .
PRED:	When Joseph saw that the Egyptians were afraid of the Egyptians , he told them , “ Let 's go into the land of the Egyptians , ” he said . “ There is no one of his brothers . ”
GOLD:	Joseph could stand it no longer . There were many people in the room , and he said to his attendants , “ Out , all of you ! ” So he was alone with his brothers when he told them who he was .

ID:	1898
INPUT:	Maltzurrak liskarrak sortzen ditu , iraintzaileak lagunak ere urrunarazten .
PRED:	Wise words are wise ; they sing praises to God .
GOLD:	A troublemaker plants seeds of strife ; gossip separates the best of friends .

ID:	1899
INPUT:	Judako hiri guztietatik bildu ziren Jaunari otoitz egiteko .
PRED:	They gathered at all the towns of Judah and pray to the Lord .
GOLD:	So people from all the towns of Judah came to Jerusalem to seek the Lord 's help .

ID:	1900
INPUT:	Defendatu nire auzia eta aska nazazu , babestu nire bizia , zeuk <unk> arabera !
PRED:	“ But if I have betrayed my hand , I am sending you out of my life , and you have seen my life .
GOLD:	Argue my case ; take my side ! Protect my life as you promised .

ID:	1901
INPUT:	Ahimeleken seme eta Ahituben biloba bat bakarrik salbatu zen , Abiatar zeritzana , Davidengana ihes eginez .
PRED:	Now Joab son of Abiathar was the son of Zeruiah , who was the son of Jesse , who was from David .
GOLD:	Only Abiathar , one of the sons of Ahimelech , escaped and fled to David .

ID:	1902
INPUT:	Nire ahalmen guztia erakutsi nahi izan banu zu eta zure herria izurriz jotzean , honezkero suntsitua zinatekeen mundu honetatik ;
PRED:	If I had given you everything I wanted , I would give you the people of the land of Egypt , you will know that you were here in the world , and you will know that you were here in the world .
GOLD:	By now I could have lifted my hand and struck you and your people with a plague to wipe you off the face of the earth .

ID:	1903
INPUT:	Zeruko izar eta <unk> dute gehiago argirik emango ; eguzkia atera orduko ilunduko da , eta ilargiak ez du argi egingo .
PRED:	For the heavens and the sky will be like the sun , and the sun will be able to see the sun , and the sun will not see the sun .
GOLD:	The heavens will be black above them ; the stars will give no light.The sun will be dark when it rises , and the moon will provide no light .

ID:	1904
INPUT:	<unk> hitz egin nizuneta ez zenuen aditu nahi izan . <unk> jokatu duzu horrela : ez didazu inoiz ere obeditu .
PRED:	I have heard that you would not listen to my fury . You have heard my mind that you would never obey me , and you would never obey me .
GOLD:	I warned you when you were prosperous , but you replied , ‘ Do n't bother me . 'You have been that way since childhood — you simply will not obey me !

ID:	1905
INPUT:	Orduan , Jainkoak <unk> dagoen zuloa ebaki zuen eta ura atera zen . Edan ondoren , <unk> eta indartu egin zen Samson . Iturri hari <unk> izena ezarri zioten . Han dago <unk> gaur arte .
PRED:	Then God was very angry with him , and he brought some water from the water that was filled with water . When he saw that he was very weak , he became very powerful , and he became very angry with him .
GOLD:	So God caused water to gush out of a hollow in the ground at Lehi , and Samson was revived as he drank . Then he named that place “ The Spring of the One Who Cried Out , ” and it is still in Lehi to this day .

ID:	1906
INPUT:	Jerusalem , zure <unk> eroriko dira , zure gudariak gerran .
PRED:	Your men will be destroyed , and your troops will be slaughtered by the sword .
GOLD:	The men of the city will be killed with the sword , and her warriors will die in battle .

ID:	1907
INPUT:	( 2 Kro 34 , <unk> )
PRED:	Jehoahaz Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Josiah Celebrates Passover

ID:	1908
INPUT:	« Eman dezagun guraso batzuek seme zentzakaitza eta bihurria dutela , aita-amen esana egiten ez duena eta , zentzarazten saiatu arren , kasurik egiten ez diena ;
PRED:	“ Suppose some of the leaders of the leaders of the tribe of Levi , those who obey God 's commands , but they do n't listen to their children .
GOLD:	“ Suppose a man has a stubborn and rebellious son who will not obey his father or mother , even though they discipline him .

ID:	1909
INPUT:	Agurtu zeuen zuzendariak eta fededun guztiak . <unk> agurtzen zaituztete .
PRED:	Greet all the church in the church , and all the believers who belong to the church .
GOLD:	Greet all your leaders and all the believers there . The believers from Italy send you their greetings .

ID:	1910
INPUT:	Jesusek , Hamabiak beregana bildurik , deabru guztiak botatzeko eta gaitzak sendatzeko indarra eta ahalmena eman zien .
PRED:	Jesus was cast out the twelve disciples , and the power of the power and the power of the power and the power of the power .
GOLD:	One day Jesus called together his twelve disciples and gave them power and authority to cast out all demons and to heal all diseases .

ID:	1911
INPUT:	Orduan , emakumeak lasterka joan eta esan zion senarrari : « <unk> etorri zitzaidan gizona agertu zait berriro » .
PRED:	Then she ran back to her husband and said , “ I have seen the man who came to me and saw me again . ”
GOLD:	So she quickly ran and told her husband , “ The man who appeared to me the other day is here again ! ”

ID:	1912
INPUT:	Jaunak Samueli dei egin
PRED:	Samuel 's Prayer for Samuel
GOLD:	The

ID:	1913
INPUT:	Rutek erantzun : — Zuk esan guztia egingo dut .
PRED:	Ruth replied , “ I will give you everything . ”
GOLD:	“ I will do everything you say , ” Ruth replied .

ID:	1914
INPUT:	28 , 1
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	The Sabbath Offerings

ID:	1915
INPUT:	Berekin hartu zituen bere emazte Sarai , iloba Lot , Haranen lortutako ondasunak eta erositako esklaboak . Hala , Kanaan aldera jo zuten . Kanaanera iritsi zirenean ,
PRED:	Abram took Abram 's wife , Abram 's wife , Abram 's wife , and Abram had settled in Haran . So Abram left Abram 's territory and settled in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	He took his wife , Sarai , his nephew Lot , and all his wealth — his livestock and all the people he had taken into his household at Haran — and headed for the land of Canaan . When they arrived in Canaan ,

ID:	1916
INPUT:	Luzaro bizi izan zen Abraham , atzerritar gisa , filistearren lurraldean .
PRED:	Uzziah lived as a foreigner in the land of the Philistines .
GOLD:	And Abraham lived as a foreigner in Philistine country for a long time .

ID:	1917
INPUT:	arlotea bezala iritsiko zaizu gabezia , eskalea bezala etorriko miseria .
PRED:	Judgment on you will be like a fool ; you will be like a fool .
GOLD:	then poverty will pounce on you like a bandit ; scarcity will attack you like an armed robber .

ID:	1918
INPUT:	Horregatik , <unk> ez dute gaurdaino oinik jartzen Dagonen jauretxeko atarian , ez Dagonen apaizek , ezta han sartzen direnek ere .
PRED:	That is why the Lord did not destroy it in the room of it . They must not take it back in the room of the Lord 's house .
GOLD:	That is why to this day neither the priests of Dagon nor anyone who enters the temple of Dagon in Ashdod will step on its threshold .

ID:	1919
INPUT:	Zuen seme-alabak atzerritarrei emango dizkiete ; begiak urtzeraino egongo zarete haiek noiz itzuliko begira-begira , baina ezin ezer egin .
PRED:	You will be able to be their children , but they will never return to their eyes .
GOLD:	You will watch as your sons and daughters are taken away as slaves . Your heart will break for them , but you wo n't be able to help them .

ID:	1920
INPUT:	Haren irakaspenaz txunditurik zegoen jende guztia , nagusitasunez hitz egiten baitzien .
PRED:	His people were amazed at his teaching .
GOLD:	There , too , the people were amazed at his teaching , for he spoke with authority .

ID:	1921
INPUT:	hau Matatena , hau Lebirena , hau <unk> , hau <unk> , hau Joserena ,
PRED:	This was the account of the son of Athaliah was the son of Shelah .
GOLD:	Heli was the son of Matthat.Matthat was the son of Levi.Levi was the son of Melki.Melki was the son of Jannai.Jannai was the son of Joseph .

ID:	1922
INPUT:	Zazpi hilabete egin zuen Jaunaren kutxak filistearren lurraldean .
PRED:	In the same way , the Lord made the land of the Philistines .
GOLD:	The Ark of the Lord remained in Philistine territory seven months in all .

ID:	1923
INPUT:	Garai hartan , Judakoak <unk> bilduko dira . Batera itzuliko dira iparraldetik , <unk> dauden lekutik , beraien arbasoei ondaretzat eman nien lurraldera .
PRED:	At that time the king of Judah will turn away from the north , and they will return to the north of the north of the north of the north .
GOLD:	In those days the people of Judah and Israel will return together from exile in the north . They will return to the land I gave your ancestors as an inheritance forever .

ID:	1924
INPUT:	Bekatuak , <unk> bide hartuta , era guztietako gutiziak ernearazi zituen niregan . <unk> ezean , bekatua hila dago .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits the people of the earth , and the people of the earth , and they have been killed by sin .
GOLD:	But sin used this command to arouse all kinds of covetous desires within me ! If there were no law , sin would not have that power .

ID:	1925
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1926
INPUT:	Gero , barkamen-opariko zezena hartu eta erre egingo duzu horretarako ezarritako lekuan , santutegitik kanpo .
PRED:	Then he must cut the goat as a sin offering , and you must be burned on the first side of the altar .
GOLD:	Then take the young bull for the sin offering and burn it at the appointed place outside the Temple area .

ID:	1927
INPUT:	artelanak <unk> , urre , zilar eta brontzezko lanak egiteko ,
PRED:	At that time he makes a bronze grating of silver , bronze , bronze , and bronze .
GOLD:	He is a master craftsman , expert in working with gold , silver , and bronze .

ID:	1928
INPUT:	Entzun , Israelgo seme-alabok . Hona Jaunak zuen aurka , Egiptotik igoarazi zuen familia horren guztiaren aurka , adierazten duen mezua :
PRED:	Listen to this message from the Lord : “ This is what the Lord says : I am giving you the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Listen to this message that the Lord has spoken against you , O people of Israel — against the entire family I rescued from Egypt :

ID:	1929
INPUT:	Roboamek erantzun zien : — Zatozkidate berriro hiru egun barru . Eta herriak alde egin zuen .
PRED:	Rehoboam replied , “ At that time I left the people and left them . ”
GOLD:	Rehoboam replied , “ Come back in three days for my answer . ” So the people went away .

ID:	1930
INPUT:	Esan zidan : « Gizaseme , zutitu , hitz egin behar dizut eta » .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Son of man , listen to me . ”
GOLD:	“ Stand up , son of man , ” said the voice . “ I want to speak with you . ”

ID:	1931
INPUT:	Hil zenean , Samarian ehortzi zuten Omri . Ondorengo erregea haren seme Akab izan zen .
PRED:	When Ahab died , he was buried in Samaria . Then Ahab became the next king .
GOLD:	When Omri died , he was buried in Samaria . Then his son Ahab became the next king .

ID:	1932
INPUT:	eta Jauna , aintzaz beterik , Sinai mendian kokatu zen . Sei egunez estali zuen lainoak mendia ; zazpigarrenean Jaunak dei egin zion Moisesi <unk> .
PRED:	The Lord was with all the people of Sinai , and he placed them on the mountain of Sinai . When he was on the mountain , the Lord called Moses on the mountain of the mountain .
GOLD:	And the glory of the Lord settled down on Mount Sinai , and the cloud covered it for six days . On the seventh day the Lord called to Moses from inside the cloud .

ID:	1933
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1934
INPUT:	Beren eskuz urkatu dituzte buruzagiak , ez dute begirunerik izan <unk> .
PRED:	For they are dead , and they have no power .
GOLD:	Our princes are being hanged by their thumbs , and our elders are treated with contempt .

ID:	1935
INPUT:	Orduan , Gizonaren Semea hodei artean ahalmen eta aintzaz beterik etortzen ikusiko dute .
PRED:	Then the Son of Man will see the Son of Man with great power and glory .
GOLD:	Then everyone will see the Son of Man coming on a cloud with power and great glory .

ID:	1936
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Moab herriakgaiztakeriarik asko egin du , zein baino zein handiago . Eta beraz , zigortu egingo dut ! Edomgo erregearen <unk> baitzituzten , erraustu eta kare bihurtu ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Israel have sinned and again , and I will turn away from the land of Edom , and I will destroy the king of Edom . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Moab have sinned again and again , and I will not let them go unpunished ! They desecrated the bones of Edom 's king , burning them to ashes .

ID:	1937
INPUT:	Kedorlaomer eta honek lagun zituen erregeak garaitu ondoren , itzulbidetik zetorrela , Sodomako erregea atera zitzaion Abrami bidera Xeba haranean , hau da , Erregearen haranean .
PRED:	Then King Artaxerxes of Elam came from the valley of Cyprus , where the king of Damascus came from the valley of Gaza , near the valley of Cyprus , and the king of Babylon came from the valley of Babylonia .
GOLD:	After Abram returned from his victory over Kedorlaomer and all his allies , the king of Sodom went out to meet him in the valley of Shaveh ( that is , the King 's Valley ) .

ID:	1938
INPUT:	esanez : « Hobe genukeen Jaunak Egipton hilarazi bagintu , <unk> inguruan eseri eta ase arte jaten genuenean ! Zuek , ordea , gu denok goseak hiltzera ekarri gaituzue basamortu honetara » .
PRED:	“ Sir , ” the Lord said to them , “ when we were trying to kill you until we were hungry , but we were thirsty until we have brought us into the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	“ If only the Lord had killed us back in Egypt , ” they moaned . “ There we sat around pots filled with meat and ate all the bread we wanted . But now you have brought us into this wilderness to starve us all to death . ”

ID:	1939
INPUT:	Mendi eta muinoak lehortuko ditut , belar guztia ihartuko , ibaiak lur lehor bihurtueta putzuak agortuko .
PRED:	For the mountains will be filled with fire , and the roots of the earth will grow up in the sky , and the roots of the earth will grow up .
GOLD:	I will level the mountains and hillsand blight all their greenery.I will turn the rivers into dry landand will dry up all the pools .

ID:	1940
INPUT:	Gizonak sortzen miseria
PRED:	A Message about the Priests
GOLD:	Eliphaz 's Response Continues

ID:	1941
INPUT:	Leiala da dei egiten dizuena , eta beteko du hitzemana .
PRED:	For he has called the covenant with you , and he has given you a covenant .
GOLD:	God will make this happen , for he who calls you is faithful .

ID:	1942
INPUT:	Mezu hau <unk> dit Jaunak : « Giza gorpuak <unk> <unk> simaurra bezala , <unk> igitarien atzean bezala , eta ez ditu inork biltzen » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ In fact , when I saw that some of the dead will be cut down on the ground , and no one will be cut down on the ground . ”
GOLD:	For death has crept in through our windowsand has entered our mansions.It has killed off the flower of our youth : Children no longer play in the streets , and young men no longer gather in the squares .

ID:	1943
INPUT:	Salomonen otoitza
PRED:	Solomon 's Prayer of Dedication
GOLD:	The Dedication of the Temple

ID:	1944
INPUT:	Kanta esker onez Jaunari , jo zitara gure Jainkoari :
PRED:	Sing to the Lord our God , sing praises to you ,
GOLD:	Sing out your thanks to the Lord ; sing praises to our God with a harp .

ID:	1945
INPUT:	Seme zentzugabea aitaren zoritxarra , emazte liskartia etengabeko itogina .
PRED:	My child is a friend of trouble ; fools are as hard as hard as a fool .
GOLD:	A foolish child is a calamity to a father ; a quarrelsome wife is as annoying as constant dripping .

ID:	1946
INPUT:	Jar biezaio masaila joka ari zaionari , utz biezaio irainez ase dezan .
PRED:	In the same way , you must be punished .
GOLD:	Let them turn the other cheek to those who strike themand accept the insults of their enemies .

ID:	1947
INPUT:	Horiek ziren rubendar senitarteak : 43 . 730 gizonezko guztira .
PRED:	These were the clans of Naphtali : The registered troops numbered .
GOLD:	These were the clans of Reuben . Their registered troops numbered 43,730 .

ID:	1948
INPUT:	Egoitzaren ataria
PRED:	The courtyard of the Tabernacle
GOLD:	Light for the Tabernacle

ID:	1949
INPUT:	Honela dio Jainko Jaunak : « Hara , badatoz egunak : lurrera gosea bidaliko dut ; ez <unk> , eta ez <unk> , Jaunaren hitza <unk> baizik .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ I will send you to the people of the land of Egypt , when I will send you into the land of the Lord , and I will punish you .
GOLD:	“ The time is surely coming , ” says the Sovereign Lord , “ when I will send a famine on the land — not a famine of bread or waterbut of hearing the words of the Lord .

ID:	1950
INPUT:	Lebitarrak erantzun : — Judako Belendik gatoz eta Efraimgo mendialdera noa , hangoa bainaiz . Judako Belenera etorri nintzen eta berriro etxera noa . Herri honetan ez nau inork ere hartu nahi izan bere etxean .
PRED:	The Levites replied , “ I have come from the hill country of Ephraim , the tribe of Ephraim , the city of Judah , and I have come to Bethlehem in the hill country of Judah . ”
GOLD:	“ We have been in Bethlehem in Judah , ” the man replied . “ We are on our way to a remote area in the hill country of Ephraim , which is my home . I traveled to Bethlehem , and now I 'm returning home . But no one has taken us in for the night ,

ID:	1951
INPUT:	behartsuen oinek zapal dezaten , <unk> erabil dezaten » .
PRED:	Then the poor will be filled with the poor , and they will be able to see the poor . ”
GOLD:	The poor and oppressed trample it underfoot , and the needy walk all over it .

ID:	1952
INPUT:	lan handia egiteko aukera ederra egokitu baitzait , nahiz eta asko izan aurka jarri direnak .
PRED:	This is the very good to be the truth of the world , and many who fear him .
GOLD:	There is a wide-open door for a great work here , although many oppose me .

ID:	1953
INPUT:	Baina Moisesek erantzun zion : — Nola egingo dit , bada , faraoiak jaramon , hitz egiten hain traketsa <unk> ?
PRED:	But Moses replied , “ How can I listen to me ? ” So Pharaoh asked . “ How can I listen to you ? ”
GOLD:	But Moses argued with the Lord , saying , “ I ca n't do it ! I 'm such a clumsy speaker ! Why should Pharaoh listen to me ? ”

ID:	1954
INPUT:	Zelatan dagoen hartz izan da niretzat , gordeta zain dagoen lehoi .
PRED:	My lover is ready to wait for me , and there is a lion for me .
GOLD:	He has hidden like a bear or a lion , waiting to attack me .

ID:	1955
INPUT:	Fededun guztiek agurtzen zaituztete , enperadorearen etxean daudenek batez ere .
PRED:	And all the believers who belong to the church must be called to the family of Levi .
GOLD:	And all the rest of God 's people send you greetings , too , especially those in Caesar 's household .

ID:	1956
INPUT:	ez zegoen oraindik landarerik lurrean , ezta <unk> ere <unk> , Jainko Jaunak ez baitzion oraindik lurrari euririk eman , eta ez baitzen lurra lantzeko gizakirik .
PRED:	The land of the earth were not able to destroy the earth , and that the Sovereign Lord had given them all the earth , the earth , and the earth had no rain .
GOLD:	neither wild plants nor grains were growing on the earth . For the Lord God had not yet sent rain to water the earth , and there were no people to cultivate the soil .

ID:	1957
INPUT:	Ondoren , jendetza handiarena bezalako zarata-hotsa entzun nuen zeruan , esanez : « Aleluia ! Salbamena , aintza eta indarragure Jainkoarenak ,
PRED:	Then I heard the sound of the miraculous signs in the sky , saying , “ Praise the glory of the sea ! Praise the glory of the Lord !
GOLD:	After this , I heard what sounded like a vast crowd in heaven shouting , “ Praise the Lord ! Salvation and glory and power belong to our God .

ID:	1958
INPUT:	— Zer duk gurekin , Nazareteko Jesus ? Gu hondatzera al hator ? Bazekiat nor haizen : Jainkoaren Santua .
PRED:	“ What do you know ? ” Jesus asked . “ Why are you looking for us ? Who are you looking for us ? ”
GOLD:	“ Why are you interfering with us , Jesus of Nazareth ? Have you come to destroy us ? I know who you are — the Holy One of God ! ”

ID:	1959
INPUT:	Horretarakoxe bidaltzen dizuet , nire berri eman diezazuen eta adorez bete zaitzaten .
PRED:	I am giving you the Good News to you , and you will be given to you .
GOLD:	I have sent him to you for this very purpose — to let you know how we are doing and to encourage you .

ID:	1960
INPUT:	Lasterka datoz <unk> bestearen ondo-ondotik , Babiloniako <unk> ematera : “ Etsaiek alderik <unk> dute hiria ” ,
PRED:	“ But when they saw that the king of Babylon will be able to kill you , ” they said , ‘ I will punish you , and the city of Babylon . '
GOLD:	The news is passed from one runner to the nextas the messengers hurry to tell the kingthat his city has been captured .

ID:	1961
INPUT:	Jordan ibaitik mendebaldera ( 14 , 1 — 19 , <unk> )
PRED:	Teaching about the Jordan
GOLD:	The Land Divided West of the Jordan

ID:	1962
INPUT:	Apaizak ezin izan ziren zutik egon beren eginkizuna betetzen , laino hura zela eta . Izan ere , Jaunaren aintzak bete zuen Jainkoaren etxea .
PRED:	The priests could not obey the Temple of the Lord 's Temple . For the glory of the Lord was filled with joy , and the glory of God was filled with the Temple of God .
GOLD:	The priests could not continue their service because of the cloud , for the glorious presence of the Lord filled the Temple of God .

ID:	1963
INPUT:	<unk> eraso baitidate , gogorkeria-zaleak ni hil nahian dabiltza , Jainkoaren ardurarik gabe .
PRED:	My lover 's friend is a friend ; they tried to kill me .
GOLD:	May the evil plans of my enemies be turned against them.Do as you promised and put an end to them .

ID:	1964
INPUT:	Egiptotik itzularaziko ditut , Asiriatik bilduko ; Galaad eta Libanoraino <unk> ditut , eta , hala ere , ez dute behar hainbat leku izango .
PRED:	I will bring you out of Egypt , and I will gather you in the land of Egypt , and they will be able to destroy them .
GOLD:	I will bring them back from Egyptand gather them from Assyria.I will resettle them in Gilead and Lebanonuntil there is no more room for them all .

ID:	1965
INPUT:	Ikusazue , apalok , eta poztu ; izan bihotz , Jainkoarengana jotzen duzuenok !
PRED:	Come , let me be glad , and rejoice in God .
GOLD:	For the Lord hears the cries of the needy ; he does not despise his imprisoned people .

ID:	1966
INPUT:	<unk> denean , herriak buruzagi ugari ; gizon burutsu eta <unk> ordena nagusi .
PRED:	But when the nations of the forest are thrown into the streets , and they are thrown into the streets .
GOLD:	When there is moral rot within a nation , its government topples easily.But wise and knowledgeable leaders bring stability .

ID:	1967
INPUT:	( Mt 12 , 1-8 ; Mk 2 , 23-28 )
PRED:	Jesus Heals on the Sabbath
GOLD:	Jesus Heals on the Sabbath

ID:	1968
INPUT:	nahiz eta Goi-goikoa giza eskuz eginiko etxetan bizi ez , profetak dioen bezala :
PRED:	King Jehoiachin and his hand is not safe from Jerusalem , as the prophet of the king of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	However , the Most High does n't live in temples made by human hands . As the prophet says ,

ID:	1969
INPUT:	Zuen alde borrokatu zen gure aita , bere bizia arriskatuz , eta madiandarren menpetik libratu zintuzten .
PRED:	You left our father and Amalekites , along with the Amalekites , the Amalekites , and you rescued you from the Ammonites .
GOLD:	For he fought for you and risked his life when he rescued you from the Midianites .

ID:	1970
INPUT:	Bai , Jaunaren <unk> beltza izango da , eta ez egun argia , <unk> gabeko ilun beltza !
PRED:	For the Lord will be able to kill me , and they will be able to see what they have seen .
GOLD:	Yes , the day of the Lord will be dark and hopeless , without a ray of joy or hope .

ID:	1971
INPUT:	munduko azken <unk> bota <unk> ere , bertara joan eta bildu egingo zaituzte Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak ;
PRED:	And when they saw that the Lord your God will send you into the world , and the Lord your God will gather you with you .
GOLD:	Even though you are banished to the ends of the earth , the Lord your God will gather you from there and bring you back again .

ID:	1972
INPUT:	Ez ditut hobenak jendeak ohi bezala ezkutatu , ezta errua barruan gorde ere
PRED:	I do not turn from the sins of the wicked , or the guilt of the wicked .
GOLD:	“ Have I tried to hide my sins like other people do , concealing my guilt in my heart ?

ID:	1973
INPUT:	Bosgarren egunean , jaiki zen goizean goiz abiatzeko asmoz , baina neskaren aitak esan zion berriro : — Hartu indarrak . Geldi zaitezte ilunabarra arte . Eta biek jan zuten .
PRED:	On the next morning he got up early the next morning , but he said to him , “ Let 's go into the evening . ” So they ate as a few of them .
GOLD:	On the morning of the fifth day he was up early again , ready to leave , and again the woman 's father said , “ Have something to eat ; then you can leave later this afternoon . ” So they had another day of feasting .

ID:	1974
INPUT:	Moisesen legean agindutako garbikuntza egiteko <unk> iritsi zitzaienean , gurasoek Jesus Jerusalemera eraman zuten Jaunari aurkezteko .
PRED:	When they arrived in the Law of Moses , they took him to Jerusalem , they brought him to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then it was time for their purification offering , as required by the law of Moses after the birth of a child ; so his parents took him to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord .

ID:	1975
INPUT:	Eta hona zer erantzun diguten : “ <unk> Jainkoaren zerbitzari gara , eta haren etxea ari gara jasotzen . Duela urte asko Israelgo errege handi batek eraiki eta bukatu zuen etxea ;
PRED:	And they said to us , ‘ We know that we have been able to live in the house of God . We have built many years and built many years to rebuild the Temple of God . '
GOLD:	“ This was their answer : ‘ We are the servants of the God of heaven and earth , and we are rebuilding the Temple that was built here many years ago by a great king of Israel .

ID:	1976
INPUT:	Eskerrak ematen dizkiot Jainkoari Titoren bihotzean zuenganako nire ardura bera sortu duelako .
PRED:	I thank God , for they are trying to keep the way of God .
GOLD:	But thank God ! He has given Titus the same enthusiasm for you that I have .

ID:	1977
INPUT:	« Hara , neure aingerua bidaltzen dizuet gidari , bidean zain zaitzaten eta prestatu dizuedan lekura eraman .
PRED:	“ Look , I am sending you to you with my angel , and you will prepare for you .
GOLD:	“ See , I am sending an angel before you to protect you on your journey and lead you safely to the place I have prepared for you .

ID:	1978
INPUT:	Lebitarrak , goizean goiz jaiki eta bideari ekiteko atea ireki zuenean , han aurkitu zuen bere ohaidea , etxeko atarian eroria , eskuak <unk> zituela .
PRED:	When the Levites got up early the next morning , he opened his house and went out to the house of the house of the house and saw him there .
GOLD:	When her husband opened the door to leave , there lay his concubine with her hands on the threshold .

ID:	1979
INPUT:	Jauna , beti kantatuko ditut zure maitasun-egintzak , gizaldiz gizaldi iragarriko leial zarela .
PRED:	I will sing praises to you , O Lord , and all your people will be disgraced .
GOLD:	Your unfailing love will last forever.Your faithfulness is as enduring as the heavens .

ID:	1980
INPUT:	Inoren etxean egiten dute olioa ; dolarean mahatsa zapaldu eta , halere , egarri .
PRED:	“ Your olive oil is as olive oil ; the olive oil have no food for food .
GOLD:	They press out olive oil without being allowed to taste it , and they tread in the winepress as they suffer from thirst .

ID:	1981
INPUT:	Zintzoak nahiz gaiztoak garbitu behar ditudalako , bizidun ororen aurka aterako da ezpata zorrotik , hegoaldetik <unk> .
PRED:	The godly will be hungry and the spirit of all the animals of the earth will be filled with water , and I will pour out your sword .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , give the people this message from the Lord : “ A sword , a swordis being sharpened and polished .

ID:	1982
INPUT:	Hautsa bezainbat dira : nork <unk> ondorengoak ? Nork <unk> <unk> kopurua ? Gizon zintzo horien heriotza , horiena bezalako azkena , opa diot neure buruari » .
PRED:	And how can you think of these things ? Who will be able to kill me ? Who will be able to kill me ? ”
GOLD:	Who can count Jacob 's descendants , as numerous as dust ? Who can count even a fourth of Israel 's people ? Let me die like the righteous ; let my life end like theirs . ”

ID:	1983
INPUT:	Nork kondenatuko ditu ? Jesu Kristo da hil zena ; are gehiago , piztu ere egin zena , eta orain Jainkoaren eskuinaldean gure alde erreguka ari dena !
PRED:	Who has ever been raised from Christ ? Who has ever been raised from the dead ? For he has been raised from the place of God , and he has come to the place of our God .
GOLD:	Who then will condemn us ? No one — for Christ Jesus died for us and was raised to life for us , and he is sitting in the place of honor at God 's right hand , pleading for us .

ID:	1984
INPUT:	Badakit nik bost , zuhur ala <unk> ote den . Nik mundu honetan halako <unk> dudan lanaz jabetuko da . Ez du honek zentzurik !
PRED:	But I know that you are my lord , and if you are wise , and if I do n't know that I am going to eat , and I will not be afraid .
GOLD:	And who can tell whether my successors will be wise or foolish ? Yet they will control everything I have gained by my skill and hard work under the sun . How meaningless !

ID:	1985
INPUT:	Ez utzi haiei zuen lurraldean bizitzen , nire aurka bekatu egitera eraman ez zaitzaten ; bada , haien jainkoak gurtuko zenituzkete zeuen <unk> » .
PRED:	Do n't let them live in the land you would live in the land of the earth . If you have sinned against me , they will serve you . ”
GOLD:	They must not live in your land , or they will cause you to sin against me . If you serve their gods , you will be caught in the trap of idolatry . ”

ID:	1986
INPUT:	Libnatik Lakixera jo zuen Josuek israeldar guztiekin ; hiria inguratu eta eraso egin zion .
PRED:	The town of Judah attacked him and attacked him .
GOLD:	From Libnah , Joshua and the Israelites went to Lachish and attacked it .

ID:	1987
INPUT:	Tronu batzuk ere ikusi nituen ; haietan eseri zirenei epaitzeko ahalmena eman zien Jainkoak . Ikusi nituen Jesusen testigantza egiteagatik eta Jainkoaren hitza hots egiteagatik lepo <unk> ere , hau da , piztia eta beronen irudia gurtu ez zituztenak eta haren marka beren <unk> eta eskuetan hartu ez zutenak . Hauek bizira itzuli ziren eta <unk> errege izan ziren mila urtez .
PRED:	One day I saw some of the people who had given them to the people who had given him to the people of God . And when they saw that the authority of God and his power , they did not know that the beast and his power of God and his power .
GOLD:	Then I saw thrones , and the people sitting on them had been given the authority to judge . And I saw the souls of those who had been beheaded for their testimony about Jesus and for proclaiming the word of God . They had not worshiped the beast or his statue , nor accepted his mark on their foreheads or their hands . They all came to life again , and they reigned with Christ for a thousand years .

ID:	1988
INPUT:	Eror bitez banan-banan beren sareetan , nik libre ihes egiten dudan bitartean .
PRED:	May those who flee from the depths of the mine , and I am the one who escaped .
GOLD:	Let the wicked fall into their own nets , but let me escape .

ID:	1989
INPUT:	Emakumea purpuraz eta gorriminez zegoen jantzia eta urrez , harribitxiz eta perlaz apaindua ; eskuan urrezko edalontzi bat zuen bere prostituzio <unk> fruitu <unk> betea ;
PRED:	She was made a beautiful robe of gold and gold , purple , purple , and scarlet thread . He was filled with gold , and scarlet thread . He was filled with great quantities of gold .
GOLD:	The woman wore purple and scarlet clothing and beautiful jewelry made of gold and precious gems and pearls . In her hand she held a gold goblet full of obscenities and the impurities of her immorality .

ID:	1990
INPUT:	Baina Izreelera joan beharrean gertatu zen Joram , Siriako errege Hazaelen kontrako borrokan siriarrek egin zizkioten zauriak sendatzera . Jehuk esan zien bere <unk> : — Nire alde baldin bazaudete , ez dezala inork ere ihes egin hiri honetatik , egin dugunaren berri Izreelera eramatera .
PRED:	But when he returned to Jezreel , he was from Jezreel to recover from Jezreel . He told him what he had happened to Jezreel , “ If no one is going to kill me , ” Jehu told him , “ I have not been able to go out to the city of the city of the city . ”
GOLD:	But King Joram was wounded in the fighting and returned to Jezreel to recover from his wounds . ) So Jehu told the men with him , “ If you want me to be king , do n't let anyone leave town and go to Jezreel to report what we have done . ”

ID:	1991
INPUT:	Madarikatua ote Israel herria ? Bukatu ote da , bada , Jaunaren eroapena ? Hori ote haren jokaera ? Ez al dio onginahiz hitz <unk> dabilenari ? »
PRED:	How can the people of Israel prosper ? How can you think of the Lord ? Why are you willing ? Why are you angry with you ? Why are you so angry with you ? ”
GOLD:	Should you talk that way , O family of Israel ? Will the Lord 's Spirit have patience with such behavior ? If you would do what is right , you would find my words comforting .

ID:	1992
INPUT:	Jendeak aho betean iraintzen nau , <unk> betetzen : denak batera nire kontra .
PRED:	They all the people of Israel , and they will know that they are under my power .
GOLD:	People jeer and laugh at me.They slap my cheek in contempt.A mob gathers against me .

ID:	1993
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> eta <unk> <unk> ,
PRED:	And when they saw that they were filled with power and fig tree ,
GOLD:	“ These wicked people are heavy and prosperous ; their waists bulge with fat .

ID:	1994
INPUT:	Madarikatua hauen haserrea , benetan garratza ! Madarikatua beren sumindura , benetan ankerra ! Jakoben leinuen <unk> banatuko , Israel osoan barreiatuko .
PRED:	Those who survive will be full of evil , for they will be destroyed , and those who were scattered among the tribes of Israel will be destroyed .
GOLD:	A curse on their anger , for it is fierce ; a curse on their wrath , for it is cruel.I will scatter them among the descendants of Jacob ; I will disperse them throughout Israel .

ID:	1995
INPUT:	ez ziren nire <unk> jabetu , ez nien nik eskuaz <unk> bidali .
PRED:	But when they were able to kill me , they would not kill me .
GOLD:	and been secretly enticed in my heartto throw kisses at them in worship ?

ID:	1996
INPUT:	Huxaik esan zien , gero , Tzadok eta Abiatar apaizei : — Hau eta hau aholkatu die Ahitofelek Absalomi eta Israelgo herri-arduradunei ; nik , aldiz , beste hau aholkatu diet .
PRED:	Joab said to Joab and Abiathar were the priests , “ This is what the priests and the priests of Israel and the priests of Israel and the elders of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Hushai told Zadok and Abiathar , the priests , what Ahithophel had said to Absalom and the elders of Israel and what he himself had advised instead .

ID:	1997
INPUT:	Eta onginahi hutsez baldin bada , ez da egintzengatik ; bestela , onginahia ez litzateke onginahi izango .
PRED:	For when we have done this , it would not have a good life for the Lord 's grace .
GOLD:	And since it is through God 's kindness , then it is not by their good works . For in that case , God 's grace would not be what it really is — free and undeserved .

ID:	1998
INPUT:	Gero , Judan eta Jerusalemen jakinarazi zuten Jainkoaren zerbitzari Moisesek basamortuan Israeli ezarritako zerga ekarri behar zitzaiola Jaunari .
PRED:	Then Moses sent this message to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who brought him back to the wilderness of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then a proclamation was sent throughout Judah and Jerusalem , telling the people to bring to the Lord the tax that Moses , the servant of God , had required of the Israelites in the wilderness .

ID:	1999
INPUT:	<unk> joateko asmoa zuelarik , senideek animatu egin zuten eta hango ikasleei idatzi zieten , harrera ona egin ziezaiotela . Han , Jainkoaren onginahiari esker , guztiz lagungarri gertatu zitzaien fededunei .
PRED:	At that time he sent his brothers and sisters to send him to his disciples , along with all the believers who had given him to the believers , and he wrote in all the believers in the beginning of God .
GOLD:	Apollos had been thinking about going to Achaia , and the brothers and sisters in Ephesus encouraged him to go . They wrote to the believers in Achaia , asking them to welcome him . When he arrived there , he proved to be of great benefit to those who , by God 's grace , had believed .

ID:	2000
INPUT:	Gero , hodei zuri bat ikusi nuen , eta hodei gainean gizaseme antzeko norbait eseria , buruan urrezko koroa eta eskuan igitai zorrotza zituela .
PRED:	Then I saw a sign that I saw a sign on the clouds and a crown on the foot of the clouds .
GOLD:	Then I saw a white cloud , and seated on the cloud was someone like the Son of Man . He had a gold crown on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand .

ID:	2001
INPUT:	Xebak Israelgo leinu guztien lurraldeak igaro zituen <unk> ; Bikriren senitarteko guztiak bildu eta Xebaren atzetik sartu ziren hirira .
PRED:	The territory of the tribes of Israel came out of all the tribes of Israel , along with Joab , and the families of the tribe of Benjamin .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Sheba traveled through all the tribes of Israel and eventually came to the town of Abel-beth-maacah . All the members of his own clan , the Bicrites , assembled for battle and followed him into the town .

ID:	2002
INPUT:	Gure arbasoak Egiptora jaitsi ziren eta gure herria luzaro bizi izan zen bertan ; baina gero , egiptoarrek tratu txarra eman ziguten , bai geuri , bai arbasoei .
PRED:	Our ancestors left Egypt , and our ancestors continued to live in Egypt . But the Egyptians oppressed us , but they gave us their ancestors to their ancestors .
GOLD:	Our ancestors went down to Egypt , and we lived there a long time , and we and our ancestors were brutally mistreated by the Egyptians .

ID:	2003
INPUT:	Asko izango dira <unk> , garbituak eta <unk> . Gaiztoek , ulertzeko gauza ez direnez , gaiztakeriak egiten jarraituko dute . Jakintsuek , ordea , dena ulertuko dute .
PRED:	And many kings will be destroyed , and they will be destroyed . They will not be destroyed , but they will not be destroyed . But they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Many will be purified , cleansed , and refined by these trials . But the wicked will continue in their wickedness , and none of them will understand . Only those who are wise will know what it means .

ID:	2004
INPUT:	<unk> onbidean zeure zerbitzari hau , ez nazaten harroputzek zapal .
PRED:	Your servants are so wise , and those who fear you will not be destroyed .
GOLD:	Please guarantee a blessing for me.Do n't let the arrogant oppress me !

ID:	2005
INPUT:	Makila bat hartuko duzue zeuekin eta , sabela hustera irtetean , berarekin zuloa egin eta <unk> lurrez estaliko duzue .
PRED:	I will give you an idol , and you will know how I am going to destroy you , and I will put your body on your ground .
GOLD:	The camp must be holy , for the Lord your God moves around in your camp to protect you and to defeat your enemies . He must not see any shameful thing among you , or he will turn away from you .

ID:	2006
INPUT:	eta gaizki-esaka hasi ziren Jainkoaren eta Moisesen aurka : « Zertarako atera gintuzuen Egiptotik ? Basamortuan hilarazteko ? Ez dugu urik , ez jakirik , eta mana delako janari kaskar honetaz <unk> eginak gaude ! »
PRED:	They began to speak against Moses and said , “ Why have we brought us into the wilderness of Egypt ? Why did we know that we have done in the wilderness ? We know that we have done ! ”
GOLD:	and they began to speak against God and Moses . “ Why have you brought us out of Egypt to die here in the wilderness ? ” they complained . “ There is nothing to eat here and nothing to drink . And we hate this horrible manna ! ”

ID:	2007
INPUT:	Sedekias bera , begiak leherrarazi ondoren , Babiloniara eraman zuen katez loturik .
PRED:	Then Zedekiah led him away from Babylon and brought him to Babylon .
GOLD:	Then he gouged out Zedekiah 's eyes and bound him in bronze chains to lead him away to Babylon .

ID:	2008
INPUT:	Orduan , Xuaheko Bildadek hitz egin zuen :
PRED:	Then Job spoke again :
GOLD:	Then Bildad the Shuhite replied to Job :

ID:	2009
INPUT:	Israeldarrek menderatu zituztela ikustean , aramearrak elkartu egin ziren denak .
PRED:	When the Israelites saw the Arameans , they became very angry with them .
GOLD:	The Arameans now realized that they were no match for Israel . So when they regrouped ,

ID:	2010
INPUT:	<unk> ari dira eta <unk> esaten , goitik behera begira , jendea nola larrutuko hitz egiten .
PRED:	And when they see that everyone is able to see , and when they see that the people of the land of Egypt will come down and fall into the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	They scoff and speak only evil ; in their pride they seek to crush others .

ID:	2011
INPUT:	Jaunak berriro dei egin zion Samueli . Hau jaiki eta Elirengana joan zen , esanez : — Hemen nauzu , dei egin baitidazu . Elik erantzun : — Ez dizut nik dei egin , ene seme . Itzul zaitez eta egizu lo .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Samuel , “ This is what the Lord says . ” “ I am here , ” the Lord said . “ I am here , and I am here ! ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord called out again , “ Samuel ! ” Again Samuel got up and went to Eli . “ Here I am . Did you call me ? ” “ I did n't call you , my son , ” Eli said . “ Go back to bed . ”

ID:	2012
INPUT:	Baina beraien menpe jartzen ez bazara , hiria babiloniarren esku eroriko da eta erre egingo dute , eta zeu ere ez zara libratuko haien eskuetatik .
PRED:	But if you refuse to destroy the Babylonians , the city will not destroy them , and you will not destroy them .
GOLD:	But if you refuse to surrender , you will not escape ! This city will be handed over to the Babylonians , and they will burn it to the ground . ' ”

ID:	2013
INPUT:	Erregeak gabaondarrei dei egin zien , beraiekin mintzatzeko . Gabaondarrak ez ziren israeldar , amortarren artetik bizirik geldituak baizik . Egina zuten hitzarmena israeldarrekin ; baina Saulek , Israel eta <unk> gehiegizko <unk> , galdu egin nahi izan zituen haiek .
PRED:	The king of Israel called out to meet him , but the king of Israel would not allow him to kill you from the land of the Amorites , but the people of the Amorites , who had given him victory over Israel .
GOLD:	So the king summoned the Gibeonites . They were not part of Israel but were all that was left of the nation of the Amorites . The people of Israel had sworn not to kill them , but Saul , in his zeal for Israel and Judah , had tried to wipe them out .

ID:	2014
INPUT:	<unk> madarikazioa : fedea eta otoitza
PRED:	Then this message came to God and said ,
GOLD:	Parable of the Evil Farmers

ID:	2015
INPUT:	Eman diet zure berri mundutik bereizi eta eman zenizkidan gizon-emakumeei . Zureak ziren , zuk neuri eman zenizkidan , eta hauek onartu dute zure mezua .
PRED:	I have given you a message from your enemies , for you have given me victory over all your troubles .
GOLD:	“ I have revealed you to the ones you gave me from this world . They were always yours . You gave them to me , and they have kept your word .

ID:	2016
INPUT:	Beraz , aurrez ikusi zuen Mesias piztuko zela , eta honetaz mintzo zen hau esatean : ez zuela Jainkoak Herio Leizera botako eta ez zela haren gorputza hilobian galduko .
PRED:	So he saw that the Messiah was the Messiah , and he said , “ This is what God says : I am not able to enter the grave , and no one can enter the grave .
GOLD:	David was looking into the future and speaking of the Messiah 's resurrection . He was saying that God would not leave him among the dead or allow his body to rot in the grave .

ID:	2017
INPUT:	Elkartea ongi zuzentzen duten arduradunek <unk> bikoitza merezi dute , <unk> eta <unk> ari direnek batik bat .
PRED:	All the elders of the animals will be able to kill some of the elders , and those who were able to kill him .
GOLD:	Elders who do their work well should be respected and paid well , especially those who work hard at both preaching and teaching .

ID:	2018
INPUT:	Nire Jainkoak , bere aldetik , bere aberastasun <unk> arabera erantzungo dizue zeuen premia guztietan , Kristo Jesusen bitartez .
PRED:	For God will answer his great power , and they will answer you . They will tell you what they have done .
GOLD:	And this same God who takes care of me will supply all your needs from his glorious riches , which have been given to us in Christ Jesus .

ID:	2019
INPUT:	<unk> harra sentitu zuen orduan , Saulen soingainekoaren ertza ebaki zuelako .
PRED:	But when he was sick , he became angry with him .
GOLD:	He said to his men , “ The Lord forbid that I should do this to my lord the king . I should n't attack the Lord 's anointed one , for the Lord himself has chosen him . ”

ID:	2020
INPUT:	Orduan , Jose , bere semeak aitaren belaun artetik atera eta lurreraino makurtu zitzaion .
PRED:	Then Joseph went out to his father and his father , and he brought his face to the ground .
GOLD:	Joseph moved the boys , who were at their grandfather 's knees , and he bowed with his face to the ground .

ID:	2021
INPUT:	Izan ere , beste guztiek sobera <unk> eman dute ; honek , ordea , bere eskasian , zeukan guztia , bizitzeko behar zuena , eman du » .
PRED:	For all who have been given , and those who have been given to life . But when it is meaningless , it is meaningless . ”
GOLD:	For they gave a tiny part of their surplus , but she , poor as she is , has given everything she had to live on . ”

ID:	2022
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> : bertan behera geldituko dira . <unk> nahi duzuena : alferrik izango da , Jainkoa gurekin baitago .
PRED:	I will see that everyone will be able to kill you , and they will be able to be able to know that God is with us .
GOLD:	Call your councils of war , but they will be worthless.Develop your strategies , but they will not succeed.For God is with us ! ”

ID:	2023
INPUT:	Izan ere , Efesoko Trofimo Paulorekin ikusia zuten aurretik hirian eta Paulok tenpluan sartu zuela uste zuten .
PRED:	For Paul was in charge of the synagogue , and they were in the Temple of the Temple of the Temple .
GOLD:	( For earlier that day they had seen him in the city with Trophimus , a Gentile from Ephesus , and they assumed Paul had taken him into the Temple . )

ID:	2024
INPUT:	zenbat eta urte gehiago falta , hainbat eta handiagoa prezioa ; zenbat eta urte gutxiago , hainbat eta txikiagoa prezioa , saltzen dena gelditzen diren uztak baitira .
PRED:	The more years are more valuable than the more years , and the more harvests of barley will give to the fields , and the smaller harvests of barley will be given to the harvest .
GOLD:	The more years until the next jubilee , the higher the price ; the fewer years , the lower the price . After all , the person selling the land is actually selling you a certain number of harvests .

ID:	2025
INPUT:	baina zure <unk> ihes egin zuten , zure <unk> <unk> :
PRED:	But when they were attacked by your power , they saw that they were afraid of your power .
GOLD:	At your command , the water fled ; at the sound of your thunder , it hurried away .

ID:	2026
INPUT:	Hala , irten zen Hatak Mardokeoren bila , jauregi aurrean zegoen plazara .
PRED:	So he went out to the king 's palace and found him in front of the palace .
GOLD:	So Hathach went out to Mordecai in the square in front of the palace gate .

ID:	2027
INPUT:	Pedrok erantzun zien : — Bihozberri zaitezte eta bataiatu guztiok , Jesus Mesiasen izenean bekatuak barka dakizkizuen , eta Espiritu Santua hartuko duzue dohain .
PRED:	Peter replied , “ You are baptized by our sins , and those who are baptized by the Holy Spirit . For the Holy Spirit is the Holy Spirit of God . ”
GOLD:	Peter replied , “ Each of you must repent of your sins and turn to God , and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins . Then you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit .

ID:	2028
INPUT:	Herri izugarri eta ikaragarria : berak ezartzen <unk> eta nagusitza .
PRED:	“ That is why the great army and great and great power and powerful people . ”
GOLD:	They are notorious for their crueltyand do whatever they like .

ID:	2029
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Hauxe da Jainkoak nahi duena : berak bidali duenarengan zuek sinestea .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ This is what God says : Those who want you to live in them .
GOLD:	Jesus told them , “ This is the only work God wants from you : Believe in the one he has sent . ”

ID:	2030
INPUT:	MOISESEN AZKEN <unk> ( 31 , 1 — 34 , 12 )
PRED:	Paul 's Final Words
GOLD:	Joshua Becomes Israel 's Leader

ID:	2031
INPUT:	Ehun eta hogeita hamar urte zituela , <unk> semea izan zuen , bere <unk> eta <unk> , eta <unk> eman zion izen .
PRED:	When he was thirty years old , he became very old when he became very old , and he became very very angry with him .
GOLD:	When Adam was 130 years old , he became the father of a son who was just like him — in his very image . He named his son Seth .

ID:	2032
INPUT:	« Ikusi al duzu nola apaldu den Akab nire aurrean ? Hara , nire aurrean apaldu denez gero , zoritxarra ez diot bera bizi den artean bidaliko , bere semearen egunetan bidaliko diot zoritxarra haren senitarteari » .
PRED:	“ But what will you see ? ” Ahab asked him . “ But now now I will punish you and punish him , for I will send his son , and I will send you out of his life . ”
GOLD:	“ Do you see how Ahab has humbled himself before me ? Because he has done this , I will not do what I promised during his lifetime . It will happen to his sons ; I will destroy his dynasty . ”

ID:	2033
INPUT:	Garailea neure Jainkoaren tenpluko zutabe egingo dut , eta ez da gehiago handik irtengo ; neure Jainkoaren izena eta neure izen berria idatziko ditut harengan ; baita neure Jainkoaren hiriaren izena ere , zerutik , nire Jainkoarengandik , jaisten den Jerusalem berriaren izena .
PRED:	These are the names of the Temple of God , and I will not enter the inner sanctuary of the Temple of God . I will enter the Temple of God , and I will enter the Temple of God .
GOLD:	All who are victorious will become pillars in the Temple of my God , and they will never have to leave it . And I will write on them the name of my God , and they will be citizens in the city of my God — the new Jerusalem that comes down from heaven from my God . And I will also write on them my new name .

ID:	2034
INPUT:	Ondoren , Moisesek azken agurra egin zion bere aitaginarrebari , eta hau bere herrialdera itzuli zen .
PRED:	Then Moses returned to his servants , and his servants returned home .
GOLD:	Soon after this , Moses said good-bye to his father-in-law , who returned to his own land .

ID:	2035
INPUT:	Zotz eginez banatuko duzue , zuen artean bizi diren eta seme-alabak izan dituzten etorkinak ahaztu gabe . Hauek jatorrizko israeldar bailiran hartuko dituzue , eta beren ondare-zatia hartuko dute Israelgo leinuen artean .
PRED:	You must give these instructions to the foreigners living among the people of Israel . These are the foreigners living among the people of Israel , and they will live among the tribes of Israel . They will live among the tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	Distribute the land as an allotment for yourselves and for the foreigners who have joined you and are raising their families among you . They will be like native-born Israelites to you and will receive an allotment among the tribes .

ID:	2036
INPUT:	Biziki poztu naiz , anaiek etorri eta zure jokabide <unk> hitz egin <unk> , egiaren arabera bizi zarela aitortuz .
PRED:	I have heard your brothers and sisters , your brothers have heard that I have heard that you have seen your power , and I have heard that you have been able to know that you have seen .
GOLD:	Some of the traveling teachers recently returned and made me very happy by telling me about your faithfulness and that you are living according to the truth .

ID:	2037
INPUT:	Urre eta zilarrezkoak ziren zure bitxiak , liho fin eta <unk> zure jantzi bordatuak . Irin garbiz , eztiz eta olioz elikatzen zinen . Ezin ederrago bihurtu zinen , erregina baten pareko .
PRED:	They were silver and gold , gold , and scarlet thread . They were clothed with fine linen , purple , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	And so you were adorned with gold and silver . Your clothes were made of fine linen and costly fabric and were beautifully embroidered . You ate the finest foods — choice flour , honey , and olive oil — and became more beautiful than ever . You looked like a queen , and so you were !

ID:	2038
INPUT:	Axerren leinuaren ondaretik ere lau hiri — Mixal , Abdon , Helkat eta Rehob — eta herri-lurrak .
PRED:	The following towns of the tribe of Naphtali : The following towns of Naphtali , Bani ,
GOLD:	From the tribe of Asher they received the following towns with their pasturelands : Mishal , Abdon ,

ID:	2039
INPUT:	Henok izan zuenetik , beste zortziehun urtez bizi izan zen , eta seme-alabak izan zituen .
PRED:	After the birth of Mahalalel , Lamech lived another years , and he had sons and daughters .
GOLD:	After the birth of Enoch , Jared lived another 800 years , and he had other sons and daughters .

ID:	2040
INPUT:	« Orain arte irudi bidez hitz egin dizuet ; baina badator ordua irudi bidez hitz egingo ez dizuedana , baizik eta Aitaren berri argi eta garbi emango dizuedana .
PRED:	“ But now I am making an illustration until the time is revealed to you , but this is what the time is written through the Father . I will do what I do .
GOLD:	“ I have spoken of these matters in figures of speech , but soon I will stop speaking figuratively and will tell you plainly all about the Father .

ID:	2041
INPUT:	hau da , Seir aldera doan Halak menditik Hermon mendi azpiko Libanoko haranean dagoen <unk> hiria arteko lurralde osoa . Errege guztiak harrapatu eta hil egin zituen ,
PRED:	This is what the north of Mount Hermon , the army of Lebanon , from Mount Hermon , which was on the valley of Lebanon . He killed all the people of Lebanon , and all the kingdoms of Lebanon .
GOLD:	The Israelite territory now extended all the way from Mount Halak , which leads up to Seir in the south , as far north as Baal-gad at the foot of Mount Hermon in the valley of Lebanon . Joshua killed all the kings of those territories ,

ID:	2042
INPUT:	Zoaz orain lurralde hau bere luze-zabalean <unk> , zeuri emango baitizut » .
PRED:	Now go out to your land , and I will give you your land . ”
GOLD:	Go and walk through the land in every direction , for I am giving it to you . ”

ID:	2043
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Esan dizuet , eta ez didazue sinesten . Nik neure Aitaren izenean egiten ditudan egintzek ematen dute nire alde testigantza ;
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't believe me and believe me because I have not believed my Father .
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ I have already told you , and you do n't believe me . The proof is the work I do in my Father 's name .

ID:	2044
INPUT:	Jarri zeuen gogoa goiko gauzetan , ez <unk> ,
PRED:	Put your hand on the throne of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Think about the things of heaven , not the things of earth .

ID:	2045
INPUT:	Jaunaren hitzak <unk> dira , zilar garbia , <unk> birfindua .
PRED:	For the words of the Lord will be kind of silver and gold .
GOLD:	Therefore , Lord , we know you will protect the oppressed , preserving them forever from this lying generation ,

ID:	2046
INPUT:	Horregatik esan zuten gurasoek : « <unk> adina , galdegin berari » .
PRED:	So they said , “ Why are you very angry ? ” So they asked .
GOLD:	That 's why they said , “ He is old enough . Ask him . ”

ID:	2047
INPUT:	Kristauak agintarien menpeko
PRED:	The Faith of the Temple
GOLD:	Respect for Authority

ID:	2048
INPUT:	Herensugea itsasertzeko <unk> gelditu zen zutik .
PRED:	There was war and camped at war .
GOLD:	Then the dragon took his stand on the shore beside the sea .

ID:	2049
INPUT:	Mahatsondoa zirudien zure amak , ur-bazterrean landatua . Emankor eta mardula <unk> .
PRED:	Your mother is like trees , and your mother is filled with pain .
GOLD:	“ Your mother was like a vineplanted by the water 's edge.It had lush , green foliagebecause of the abundant water .

ID:	2050
INPUT:	Gure <unk> armak ez dira gizakiarenak , Jainkoarenak baizik , eta hiri gotorrak ere <unk> indarra dute : argudio faltsuak
PRED:	For we are merely human society , but those who have been able to be kind of iron and iron . They are filled with idols , and those who are filled with swords .
GOLD:	We use God 's mighty weapons , not worldly weapons , to knock down the strongholds of human reasoning and to destroy false arguments .

ID:	2051
INPUT:	Harimgoak 320 ;
PRED:	The citizens of Elam1,254
GOLD:	The citizens of Harim320

ID:	2052
INPUT:	Epaile zuzena da Jainkoa , gaizkilea zigorrik gabe uzten ez duena .
PRED:	The nations of God is not a nation ; he does not punish them .
GOLD:	If a person does not repent , God will sharpen his sword ; he will bend and string his bow .

ID:	2053
INPUT:	aitzitik , zigorraren <unk> Egoitzatik libratuko duzu .
PRED:	Instead , you will destroy your enemy , and you will wipe out your bones .
GOLD:	Physical disciplinemay well save them from death .

ID:	2054
INPUT:	Laguntza eske erregua
PRED:	Teaching about Philistia
GOLD:	's Enemies

ID:	2055
INPUT:	<unk> erantzun zien : “ Egiaz zeuen errege izendatu nahi banauzue , zatozte , babestu nire itzalpean ; bestela , Libanoko zedroak ere irentsiko dituen sugarra aterako zait ” » .
PRED:	The king replied , ‘ Let 's be a king of Lebanon , for you are my lord the king of Lebanon . If you want me to kill me , you will die in the garden of Lebanon . ' ”
GOLD:	And the thornbush replied to the trees , ‘ If you truly want to make me your king , come and take shelter in my shade.If not , let fire come out from meand devour the cedars of Lebanon . ' ”

ID:	2056
INPUT:	Hantxe bertan eraiki zion aldarea Davidek Jaunari , eta erre-opariak eta elkartasun-opariak eskaini zituen . Errukitu zen Jauna lurralde hartaz eta urrundu egin zuen izurritea <unk> .
PRED:	Then David built an altar to the Lord , and he offered sacrifices to the Lord and burnt offerings and burnt offerings to worship the Lord . He had built an oath that all the people of Egypt .
GOLD:	David built an altar there to the Lord and sacrificed burnt offerings and peace offerings . And the Lord answered his prayer for the land , and the plague on Israel was stopped .

ID:	2057
INPUT:	Faraoiak Moisesi eta Aaroni presaka deitu eta esan zien : « Zuen Jainko Jaunaren aurka eta zuen aurka egin dut bekatu ;
PRED:	Then Pharaoh called to Moses and said to Moses , “ I have sinned against the Lord your God , and I have sinned against you .
GOLD:	Pharaoh quickly summoned Moses and Aaron . “ I have sinned against the Lord your God and against you , ” he confessed .

ID:	2058
INPUT:	Horixe dut kontsolamendu atsekabean , zure promesak bainau <unk> .
PRED:	I will praise you , and I will sing my praises to my life .
GOLD:	Your promise revives me ; it comforts me in all my troubles .

ID:	2059
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , herri <unk> artean bizi zara ; badituzte begiak ikusteko , baina ez dute ikusten ; belarriak entzuteko , baina ez dute entzuten ; izan ere , herri errebeldea da .
PRED:	“ Son of man , if you have seen my eyes , they will see what they have seen , but they do not see . They have heard their ears , but they have not heard their words .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , you live among rebels who have eyes but refuse to see . They have ears but refuse to hear . For they are a rebellious people .

ID:	2060
INPUT:	eta erantsi zuen : — Gainera , Ester erreginak , erregearekin batera , ni bakarrik gonbidatu nau prestatu duen otordura . Eta biharko ere , erregea eta biok gonbidatu gaitu .
PRED:	Then he said to Esther , “ I have prepared a banquet for the king 's banquet , for I have prepared a banquet for you . ” So he prepared for the king 's banquet .
GOLD:	Then Haman added , “ And that 's not all ! Queen Esther invited only me and the king himself to the banquet she prepared for us . And she has invited me to dine with her and the king again tomorrow ! ”

ID:	2061
INPUT:	Erne zen haziaeta mahatsondo mardul egin , altuera <unk> izan arren ; <unk> zituen adarrak , sustraiak ere haren menpean zituen . Mahatsondo egin zen , aihenak bota zitueneta <unk> egin .
PRED:	There was the great noise of the sky , and they were filled with great power . They were filled with bronze chains , and they were filled with their wealth . They were filled with bronze chains .
GOLD:	It took root there andgrew into a low , spreading vine.Its branches turned up toward the eagle , and its roots grew down into the ground.It produced strong branchesand put out shoots .

ID:	2062
INPUT:	Ez zaitzatela gaitzets <unk> agertu eta aingeruen kultua atsegin duten horiek ; <unk> murgiltzen dira eta beren giza burutapen <unk> <unk> dabiltza .
PRED:	Do n't let you see that you have seen all these things , and when they are in Egypt , they will know that they were ashamed of their god and fig tree .
GOLD:	Do n't let anyone condemn you by insisting on pious self-denial or the worship of angels , saying they have had visions about these things . Their sinful minds have made them proud ,

ID:	2063
INPUT:	Tenpluko sala handiaren aurreko atalondoa hamar metro zabal zen — tenpluaren zabalera bera — , eta bost metro luze tenplu <unk> .
PRED:	The entry room of the Temple was 30 feet long , and the Temple was 30 feet long . The Temple was 71/2 feet long , and the Temple was 71/2 feet long .
GOLD:	The entry room at the front of the Temple was 30 feet wide , running across the entire width of the Temple . It projected outward 15 feet from the front of the Temple .

ID:	2064
INPUT:	<unk> bidean hortik igarotzean , ikusiko zaituztedan itxaropena dut ; eta bidaiari jarraitzeko lagunduko didazuen itxaropena ere bai . Baina lehenago , zuekin <unk> bat pozik egingo nuke .
PRED:	They will see that I will see the way of the world , and I will see that I am able to see you , and I will know that I am with you , and I will know that I am with you . ”
GOLD:	I am planning to go to Spain , and when I do , I will stop off in Rome . And after I have enjoyed your fellowship for a little while , you can provide for my journey .

ID:	2065
INPUT:	Ni ere guztiei atsegin ematen saiatzen naiz gauza guztietan eta ez dut bilatzen neure ona , besteena baizik , salba daitezen .
PRED:	I have found all these things , for I have not found in all the way I have not found , too , and let them go to the world .
GOLD:	I , too , try to please everyone in everything I do . I do n't just do what is best for me ; I do what is best for others so that many may be saved .

ID:	2066
INPUT:	ezkondua , berriz , munduko gauzez , bere emazteari atsegin nola emango ,
PRED:	For the world has given his wife to his wife and his wife .
GOLD:	But a married man has to think about his earthly responsibilities and how to please his wife .

ID:	2067
INPUT:	Josafat , bere gudarostearekin , harrapakinak hartzera joan zen . Zamari asko , janariak , janzkiak eta gauza ederrak aurkitu zituzten , eta eraman <unk> baino gehiago hartu . Hiru egunez jardun zuten harrapakinak hartzen , hain baitziren ugari .
PRED:	Then King Jehoshaphat of Assyria came to Assyria and Assyria , and many of the entire army of Assyria came to see him . There were many large and beautiful , large , and scarlet , and everything they had done .
GOLD:	King Jehoshaphat and his men went out to gather the plunder . They found vast amounts of equipment , clothing , and other valuables — more than they could carry . There was so much plunder that it took them three days just to collect it all !

ID:	2068
INPUT:	Jerusalemi eraso egin zioten herrietan bizirik geldituak , <unk> etorriko dira errege Jaun ahalguztiduna gurtzera eta Etxola Jaia ospatzera .
PRED:	The people of Jerusalem will flee to Jerusalem , because the people of Jerusalem will come to worship the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the people of Jerusalem , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	In the end , the enemies of Jerusalem who survive the plague will go up to Jerusalem each year to worship the King , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and to celebrate the Festival of Shelters .

ID:	2069
INPUT:	asmo guztiak ustel aterako <unk> herri horrekin ; ez baitie ezeren <unk> probetxurik ekarriko , lotsa eta laidoa baizik » .
PRED:	I will be able to destroy all the nations , because they have been able to be able to worship idols . ”
GOLD:	all who trust in him will be ashamed.He will not help you.Instead , he will disgrace you . ”

ID:	2070
INPUT:	Isakar eta Axerren lurralde barruan , honako hiri hauek <unk> ziren : Bet-Xan eta Ibleam beraien herrixkekin , eta Dor , <unk> , Taanak eta <unk> , beraietako bizilagun eta herrixkekin .
PRED:	These were the clans of Issachar : The towns of Issachar were given to their surrounding villages , their surrounding villages , and their surrounding villages , their surrounding villages , and their surrounding villages . They were their surrounding villages , their surrounding villages , and their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	The following towns within the territory of Issachar and Asher , however , were given to Manasseh : Beth-shan , Ibleam , Dor ( that is , Naphoth-dor ) , Endor , Taanach , and Megiddo , each with their surrounding settlements .

ID:	2071
INPUT:	arren eta arren eskatzen zidaten fededunen aldeko zerbitzu honetan parte hartzen uzteko .
PRED:	But as I wanted to be believers in this way , they would go to the believers in this way .
GOLD:	They begged us again and again for the privilege of sharing in the gift for the believers in Jerusalem .

ID:	2072
INPUT:	Baina zuk , Egipto , sinesgabeen artean joko duzu lur , eta gerran hildakoekin geldituko zara etzanda .
PRED:	But you will come upon Egypt and famine , and you will die among those who are slaughtered by the sword .
GOLD:	“ You too , Egypt , will lie crushed and broken among the outcasts , all slaughtered by the sword .

ID:	2073
INPUT:	Oso <unk> izan zuen faraoiak Hadad , eta bere emaztearen ahizpa eman zion emaztetzat , hau da , Tahpene erreginaren ahizpa .
PRED:	Your father was very old , and he became pregnant and gave birth to his wife . He gave birth to his father 's wife , and he became pregnant .
GOLD:	Pharaoh grew very fond of Hadad , and he gave him his wife 's sister in marriage — the sister of Queen Tahpenes .

ID:	2074
INPUT:	Arratsaldean beldurgarri , baina goizerako ezerez . Horra gure lapurren zoria , gure <unk> azkena .
PRED:	At that time , when he reached out , he mobilized our armies against us .
GOLD:	In the evening Israel waits in terror , but by dawn its enemies are dead.This is the just reward of those who plunder us , a fitting end for those who destroy us .

ID:	2075
INPUT:	Zer egingo duzue , beraz , jaiegunean , Jaunaren <unk> ?
PRED:	What do you realize that the time you were in the presence of the Lord ?
GOLD:	What then will you do on festival days ? How will you observe the Lord 's festivals ?

ID:	2076
INPUT:	Senideok , ez ibili bata bestearen aurka marmarka , kondenatuak izan ez zaitezten , <unk> baita gure epailea .
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , dear brothers and sisters , that all the people of Israel will be able to be ashamed .
GOLD:	Do n't grumble about each other , brothers and sisters , or you will be judged . For look — the Judge is standing at the door !

ID:	2077
INPUT:	Guztiz ederra zara , ene laztana , ederra eta akatsik gabea !
PRED:	My darling , my darling , and you are a woman .
GOLD:	You are altogether beautiful , my darling , beautiful in every way .

ID:	2078
INPUT:	Nehemiasek Jerusalemgo berriak jakin
PRED:	Nehemiah 's Religious Reforms
GOLD:	Nehemiah 's Concern for Jerusalem

ID:	2079
INPUT:	hirugarrenean , opaloa , agata eta amatista ,
PRED:	The third row will contain a purple cloth , and a second row will be a purple cloth .
GOLD:	The third row contained an orange jacinth , an agate , and a purple amethyst .

ID:	2080
INPUT:	<unk> , negar egin zenuten Jaunaren aurrean , baina ez zizuen aditu , ez jaramonik egin .
PRED:	But when you heard that the Lord has not listened to you , you would not listen to you .
GOLD:	Then you returned and wept before the Lord , but he refused to listen .

ID:	2081
INPUT:	Kanaan lurraldean dagoen <unk> , hau da , Betelera , heldu zen Jakob , berarekin zihoan jende guztiarekin .
PRED:	And when they arrived in the land of Canaan , Jacob arrived at Bethel and all the people of Canaan .
GOLD:	Eventually , Jacob and his household arrived at Luz ( also called Bethel ) in Canaan .

ID:	2082
INPUT:	Bizirik eutsi <unk> gure <unk> erortzen utzi ez .
PRED:	They kill those who kill him , and they would not kill us .
GOLD:	Our lives are in his hands , and he keeps our feet from stumbling .

ID:	2083
INPUT:	« Jaunaren <unk> goresten , pozaren pozez daukat barrena , Jainkoa baitut salbatzaile .
PRED:	“ I have heard that the Lord has given me great joy .
GOLD:	How my spirit rejoices in God my Savior !

ID:	2084
INPUT:	gerriak ere almendra-lore gisako lau kopa zituen , beren kukulu , lore-hosto eta guzti .
PRED:	Each of the center stem , lamp cups shaped like almond blossoms , buds and petals .
GOLD:	The center stem of the lampstand was crafted with four lamp cups shaped like almond blossoms , complete with buds and petals .

ID:	2085
INPUT:	eta harekin bat eginik <unk> . Ez dut neurez salbatu nahi , legea <unk> datorren salbamenaz , alegia , Kristorengan <unk> <unk> baizik , Jainkoak sinesmenaren bidez ematen didan salbamenaz , alegia .
PRED:	For I have been able to be sure that I have been able to be able to prove that God has given you authority to prove that God 's law has given me by the law of God .
GOLD:	and become one with him . I no longer count on my own righteousness through obeying the law ; rather , I become righteous through faith in Christ . For God 's way of making us right with himself depends on faith .

ID:	2086
INPUT:	Fededun berri askok ordu arteko beren jarduera okerrak agerian aitortu zituzten ,
PRED:	At that time the rest of the world began to do whatever they had done .
GOLD:	Many who became believers confessed their sinful practices .

ID:	2087
INPUT:	Baina pikondoak erantzun zien : “ Eta neure fruitu eder eta gozoa emateari uko egin , zuhaitzen gainean dilindan ibiltzeko ? ”
PRED:	But the fig tree replied , ‘ I am filled with flesh and trees , and the trees of the trees and the trees of the trees and the trees of the trees . '
GOLD:	But the fig tree also refused , saying , ‘ Should I quit producing my sweet fruitjust to wave back and forth over the trees ? '

ID:	2088
INPUT:	gainera , goizero , sei kilo eta erdi irin labore-oparitzat , eta bi litro olio , <unk> nahasteko . Arau hauek betiko balio izango dute .
PRED:	There will be six quarts of choice flour with a basket of choice flour moistened with olive oil , a gallon of olive oil , which will be an offering .
GOLD:	With the lamb , a grain offering must also be given to the Lord — about three quarts of flour with a third of a gallon of olive oil to moisten the choice flour . This will be a permanent law for you .

ID:	2089
INPUT:	Ondoren , zuetako bakoitzak adierazpen hau egingo du Jaunaren zuen Jainkoaren aurrean : “ <unk> dut etxetik sagaratu beharrekoa , eta lebitar , etorkin , umezurtz eta <unk> eman diet , zuk , Jaun horrek , agindu bezala . Ez dut zure <unk> bat ere hautsi , ez ahaztu .
PRED:	Then I will give you this message to you , saying , ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : I will give you gifts to you , and they will serve you . '
GOLD:	Then you must declare in the presence of the Lord your God , ‘ I have taken the sacred gift from my house and have given it to the Levites , foreigners , orphans , and widows , just as you commanded me . I have not violated or forgotten any of your commands .

ID:	2090
INPUT:	Ez dira , beraz , inoiz itzuliko , hain gogoz berriro itzuliko liratekeen herrialdera .
PRED:	So they will not return to this land , and no one will return to the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	You will never again return to the land you yearn for .

ID:	2091
INPUT:	Mikak galdetu zion : — Nondik zatoz ? Hark erantzun : — Judako Belengo lebitar bat nauzu , beste nonbait bizitzeko asmotan .
PRED:	So Micah asked him , “ I have come from Bethlehem in the land of Judah . ” So he asked him , “ I have come from Bethlehem . ”
GOLD:	“ Where are you from ? ” Micah asked him.He replied , “ I am a Levite from Bethlehem in Judah , and I am looking for a place to live . ”

ID:	2092
INPUT:	<unk> , ilundu egin zuen lurbira osoan hirurak arte .
PRED:	At that time , when I saw three o'clock in darkness .
GOLD:	At noon , darkness fell across the whole land until three o'clock .

ID:	2093
INPUT:	Zortzigarren egunean bi usapal edo bi usakume eramango dizkio apaizari , elkarketa-etxolaren sarrerara .
PRED:	On the eighth day the priest will bring two turtledoves or two turtledoves or two young pigeons ,
GOLD:	On the eighth day they must bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons to the priest at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	2094
INPUT:	Beraz , gauzarik txikiena ere ezin baduzue , zertan kezkatu gainerakoaz ?
PRED:	So do n't you think about your beauty ?
GOLD:	And if worry ca n't accomplish a little thing like that , what 's the use of worrying over bigger things ?

ID:	2095
INPUT:	« Baina , harrokeriak eraginda , Jaunaren zuen Jainkoaren zerbitzuan dagoen apaizaren nahiz epailearen erabakia onartu nahi ez duena hil egin behar duzue . Horrela ezabatuko duzue gaiztakeria Israeldik .
PRED:	“ But if you obey the name of the Lord your God , you must be able to obey the name of the Lord your God . You must not be punished by all the sins of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Anyone arrogant enough to reject the verdict of the judge or of the priest who represents the Lord your God must die . In this way you will purge the evil from Israel .

ID:	2096
INPUT:	Zer ikustera irten zineten , bada ? Profetaren bat ? Bai , noski , eta profeta baino ere handiagoa .
PRED:	Why are you looking for a prophet ? ”
GOLD:	Were you looking for a prophet ? Yes , and he is more than a prophet .

ID:	2097
INPUT:	<unk> galdezka ari dira : « Non dira garia eta ardoa ? » <unk> bezala erortzen dira hiriko kaleetan , amaren altzoan azken arnasa emanez .
PRED:	“ Where are you doing ? ” they asked . “ Where are your money ? Where are the women of the city , and they will fall into the streets . ”
GOLD:	They cry out to their mothers , “ We need food and drink ! ” Their lives ebb away in the streetslike the life of a warrior wounded in battle.They gasp for lifeas they collapse in their mothers ' arms .

ID:	2098
INPUT:	<unk> ezineko muga ezarri diezu urei , berriro lurra estal ez dezaten .
PRED:	They threw their boundaries to the Mediterranean Sea , and they will not touch them .
GOLD:	Then you set a firm boundary for the seas , so they would never again cover the earth .

ID:	2099
INPUT:	Atzerriko jendea <unk> duzue : zuen artaldeak zainduko dituzte , nekazari eta <unk> dituzue .
PRED:	Then the people of the world will be able to give you a huge crowd and filled with a huge crowd .
GOLD:	Foreigners will be your servants.They will feed your flocksand plow your fieldsand tend your vineyards .

ID:	2100
INPUT:	Atera ziren benjamindarrak israeldarrei aurre egiteko eta urrutiratu egin ziren beren hiritik . <unk> bezala , israeldarrak hiltzen hasi ziren landan , <unk> bidean eta <unk> bidean ; hogeita hamarren bat israeldar bota zituzten .
PRED:	So the people of Benjamin went to fight against the people of Benjamin and the people of Benjamin , as they were killed in the town of Benjamin . They killed some of the people of Israel , and they began to kill him .
GOLD:	When the men of Benjamin came out to attack , they were drawn away from the town . And as they had done before , they began to kill the Israelites . About thirty Israelites died in the open fields and along the roads , one leading to Bethel and the other leading back to Gibeah .

ID:	2101
INPUT:	Orain , ordea , Jerusalem hautatu dut neure bizileku eta David neure herri Israelen buruzagi ” .
PRED:	But now I have chosen my chosen people , for David has chosen my people in Israel . '
GOLD:	But now I have chosen Jerusalem as the place for my name to be honored , and I have chosen David to be king over my people Israel . ' ”

ID:	2102
INPUT:	Aaronen seme Eleazar zen lebitarren <unk> nagusi . Honek bere menpean zituen santutegiko zerbitzuaz arduratzen ziren guztiak .
PRED:	Then Eleazar son of Aaron and his sons , who were in charge of the Temple of Aaron , which was given to the sanctuary of the Lord .
GOLD:	Eleazar , son of Aaron the priest , was the chief administrator over all the Levites , with special responsibility for the oversight of the sanctuary .

ID:	2103
INPUT:	Jesusek itsuari eskutik heldu eta herritik kanpora eraman zuen . Begiak <unk> igurtzi ondoren , eskuak ezarri zizkion eta galdetu : — Ikusten al duzu ezer ?
PRED:	Then Jesus went out to the man and brought him out of the community , and he asked him , “ Why do you see ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus took the blind man by the hand and led him out of the village . Then , spitting on the man 's eyes , he laid his hands on him and asked , “ Can you see anything now ? ”

ID:	2104
INPUT:	Ako , Afek eta Rehob hiriak ere hartzen zituen ; guztira hogeita bi hiri ziren , beren herrixkekin .
PRED:	The towns of Aroer , Sherebiah , Sherebiah , and all their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	Ummah , Aphek , and Rehob — twenty-two towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	2105
INPUT:	Errezela ere egin zuen , <unk> , more , gorri eta gorriminez <unk> eta bertan hegaldun izakiak bordatu zituen .
PRED:	For he made the covenant with all who were filled with gold , purple , and scarlet thread . He was filled with cherubim , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	Across the entrance of the Most Holy Place he hung a curtain made of fine linen , decorated with blue , purple , and scarlet thread and embroidered with figures of cherubim .

ID:	2106
INPUT:	Gudalburuak , orduan , bi ehuntariri deitu eta agindu hauek eman zizkien : « Eduki itzazue prest gaueko <unk> berrehun soldadu oinezko , hirurogeita hamar zaldizko eta berrehun <unk> , Zesareara joateko .
PRED:	“ Then the commander of the king sent his officers to him , ” the commander ordered . “ Take off my horses and horses , ” he ordered . “ Let 's be ready to take care of his chariots and charioteers .
GOLD:	Then the commander called two of his officers and ordered , “ Get 200 soldiers ready to leave for Caesarea at nine o'clock tonight . Also take 200 spearmen and 70 mounted troops .

ID:	2107
INPUT:	Soldaduek ere galdetu zioten : — Eta guk , zer egin behar dugu ? Joanek erantzun zien : — Ez atera inori dirurik gogorkeriaz , ezta gezurrezko <unk> ere ; <unk> zaitezte daukazuen <unk> .
PRED:	The soldiers asked him , “ What should we do ? ” “ We do n't know what we want ? ” he replied , “ We do n't want to be afraid of those who want to kill you . ”
GOLD:	“ What should we do ? ” asked some soldiers.John replied , “ Do n't extort money or make false accusations . And be content with your pay . ”

ID:	2108
INPUT:	Hau jendea , aita <unk> ama bedeinkatzen ez duena !
PRED:	This is the father of my father and mother , who does not be my mother .
GOLD:	Some people curse their fatherand do not thank their mother .

ID:	2109
INPUT:	Semeek <unk> antolatzen zituzten txandaka beren etxeetan , eta arrebak ere gonbidatzen zituzten jan-edan haietara .
PRED:	Then Job gave them these things , and they brought on your own hands , too , and all the wild animals that comes from you .
GOLD:	Job 's sons would take turns preparing feasts in their homes , and they would also invite their three sisters to celebrate with them .

ID:	2110
INPUT:	Jauna , Jainko <unk> ! Ager zaitez , oi Jainko <unk> !
PRED:	O Sovereign Lord , you know that I am the Sovereign Lord your God .
GOLD:	O Lord , the God of vengeance , O God of vengeance , let your glorious justice shine forth !

ID:	2111
INPUT:	Iraun beza haren izenak betiko , eguzkiak adina ! Bedeinkatuak bitez harengan ondorengoak , zoriontsu nazio guztiak !
PRED:	Let them be strong in the sky , and let all the nations live in his name forever .
GOLD:	May the king 's name endure forever ; may it continue as long as the sun shines.May all nations be blessed through himand bring him praise .

ID:	2112
INPUT:	Israel , erreka ondoko harri leunak , zeure <unk> izan dituzunak , <unk> izango dituzu zorigaitz . Horiei eskaini <unk> eta labore-opariak . Eta horrek baretu behar ote dunire haserrea ?
PRED:	I am sending you into the valley of Goshen , and you will know that you have been very sick . And when you have been unfaithful to the Lord 's anger , the Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Your gods are the smooth stones in the valleys.You worship them with liquid offerings and grain offerings.They , not I , are your inheritance.Do you think all this makes me happy ?

ID:	2113
INPUT:	Erregeak higuin ditu egintza gaiztoak , zuzentasunean oinarritzen baita errege-aulkia .
PRED:	The king of the wicked will keep his covenant on the throne of the Lord .
GOLD:	A king detests wrongdoing , for his rule is built on justice .

ID:	2114
INPUT:	Mesias omen duk hori , Israelgo erregea ; jaits dadila orain gurutzetik , ikus eta sinets dezagun » . Berarekin gurutzean josiak zeudenek ere irain egiten zioten .
PRED:	“ The Messiah is coming from the Messiah , ” he said . “ Let 's see that the Messiah comes from the cross , but we ca n't see that the Messiah is going to be saved . ”
GOLD:	Let this Messiah , this King of Israel , come down from the cross so we can see it and believe him ! ” Even the men who were crucified with Jesus ridiculed him .

ID:	2115
INPUT:	Ez dut gehiago seme-izenik merezi . Har nazazu zeure <unk> bat bezala ” .
PRED:	I am not one of your friends , and I have put my face on your head . '
GOLD:	and I am no longer worthy of being called your son . Please take me on as a hired servant . ” '

ID:	2116
INPUT:	Davidek galdetu zion , orduan : — <unk> zara eta nongoa ? Mutilak erantzun : — <unk> nauzu , amalektar baten esklaboa . Nagusiak utzi egin ninduen duela hiru egun , gaixotu egin bainintzen .
PRED:	Then David asked him , “ Why are you going ? ” “ I know that you were my lord , my lord , ” David replied , “ I was very old . ”
GOLD:	“ To whom do you belong , and where do you come from ? ” David asked him . “ I am an Egyptian — the slave of an Amalekite , ” he replied . “ My master abandoned me three days ago because I was sick .

ID:	2117
INPUT:	Baina Lot zintzoa onik atera zuen , jende gaizto haren biziera <unk> saminez betetzen zuelako .
PRED:	But Abram attacked the poor , and those who hated me .
GOLD:	But God also rescued Lot out of Sodom because he was a righteous man who was sick of the shameful immorality of the wicked people around him .

ID:	2118
INPUT:	Davidek galdetu zion Jonatani : — Nork adieraziko dit , zuen aitak haserre erantzuten badizu ?
PRED:	David asked him , “ Who will you give me your father ? ”
GOLD:	Then David asked , “ How will I know whether or not your father is angry ? ”

ID:	2119
INPUT:	Eliseok morroiari : — Dei egiozu . Egin zion dei eta emakumea ate ondora etorri zen .
PRED:	Elisha said to him , “ Come and pray for him , and pray for a woman . ” So she came to meet him .
GOLD:	“ Call her back again , ” Elisha told him . When the woman returned , Elisha said to her as she stood in the doorway ,

ID:	2120
INPUT:	Orduan , herriak aho batez erantzun zuen : « Jaunak agindu guztia beteko dugu » . Herriaren erantzuna Jaunari eramatera joan zen Moises .
PRED:	Then the people said to him , “ We have done everything the Lord has commanded him , and we will obey the Lord . ” So Moses went to the Lord .
GOLD:	And all the people responded together , “ We will do everything the Lord has commanded . ” So Moses brought the people 's answer back to the Lord .

ID:	2121
INPUT:	Zuen leinuetako batean Jaunak berak aukeratuko duen lekuan bakarrik eskainiko dituzue zeuen erre-opariak , eta han beteko nik agindutako guztia .
PRED:	For the Lord has given you a place where you must serve as a burnt offering and the people of the tribes of the tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	You may do so only at the place the Lord will choose within one of your tribal territories . There you must offer your burnt offerings and do everything I command you .

ID:	2122
INPUT:	Mardokeo haremeko atari aurrean ibili ohi zen egunero , Ester <unk> nola ote zegoen eta nola ote zerabilten jakin nahiz .
PRED:	When Mordecai returned to the courtyard , he went to Queen Esther and saw that he was at the entrance of the ephod , and when he heard what had happened .
GOLD:	Every day Mordecai would take a walk near the courtyard of the harem to find out about Esther and what was happening to her .

ID:	2123
INPUT:	Zure xedapenei jarraitzea niretzat <unk> handienak baino .
PRED:	Let me be better than your love , and he is better than your own hands .
GOLD:	I have rejoiced in your lawsas much as in riches .

ID:	2124
INPUT:	<unk> inguraturik aurkitzean , babestu nire bizia etsai amorratuengandik , luzatu eskua eta salba nazazu .
PRED:	As soon as soon as my enemies , rescue me from my enemies , and rescue me from my enemies .
GOLD:	Though I am surrounded by troubles , you will protect me from the anger of my enemies.You reach out your hand , and the power of your right hand saves me .

ID:	2125
INPUT:	Samariara heltzean , hirian ziren Akaben gainerako ahaide guztiak hil zituen , denak suntsituz , Jaunak Eliasi esana zion bezala .
PRED:	When Ahab arrived in Samaria , the rest of the men of Judah came to meet Elijah and killed him , the Lord sent Elijah to Elijah .
GOLD:	When Jehu arrived in Samaria , he killed everyone who was left there from Ahab 's family , just as the Lord had promised through Elijah .

ID:	2126
INPUT:	Madarikatua Jauna maite ez duena ! <unk> <unk> ! ( Zatoz , Jauna ! ) .
PRED:	Those who love the Lord will be glad , and those who love him .
GOLD:	If anyone does not love the Lord , that person is cursed . Our Lord , come !

ID:	2127
INPUT:	<unk> jantzia nengoen , <unk> estalia burutik oinetaraino .
PRED:	I was very glad when I saw that he was under his mouth .
GOLD:	Everything I did was honest.Righteousness covered me like a robe , and I wore justice like a turban .

ID:	2128
INPUT:	<unk> sendo ezarria egongo zara . <unk> libre izango zaraeta ez duzu ezeren beldurrik izango , ikara ez zaizu inoiz hurbilduko .
PRED:	“ You will be very angry with you , and you will never be angry with you . You will never be afraid , and you will never be afraid .
GOLD:	You will be secure under a government that is just and fair.Your enemies will stay far away.You will live in peace , and terror will not come near .

ID:	2129
INPUT:	Eskerrak eman jainkoen Jainkoari , haren maitasuna betikoa baita .
PRED:	Give thanks to God , for he has given thanks to God forever .
GOLD:	Give thanks to the God of gods.His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	2130
INPUT:	Erregeak , hirugarrenez , beste buruzagi bat bidali zuen , berrogeita hamar gizonekin . Hirugarren buruzagi hau ere igo zen Eliasengana ; baina , heldu zenean , belaunikatu egin zen haren aitzinean eta honela erregutu zion : — Jainkoaren gizon , utz gaitzazu bizirik , bai ni , bai zeure berrogeita hamar zerbitzariok .
PRED:	Then the king sent him to see one of the other men of the other men and other men . Then he sent him back to the king and asked him , “ Let 's go with us . ”
GOLD:	Once more the king sent a third captain with fifty men . But this time the captain went up the hill and fell to his knees before Elijah . He pleaded with him , “ O man of God , please spare my life and the lives of these , your fifty servants .

ID:	2131
INPUT:	Utzi Jainkoari zeuen kezka guztiak , bera baita zuetaz arduratzen .
PRED:	Give thanks to God , for he is your God .
GOLD:	Give all your worries and cares to God , for he cares about you .

ID:	2132
INPUT:	Berak azaltzen <unk> sakon eta gordeak ; berak ezagutzen ilunpetan dagoena , argiz inguratua baitago .
PRED:	For when they see how wise they see in darkness , in darkness , in darkness , in darkness , like a vision in darkness .
GOLD:	He reveals deep and mysterious thingsand knows what lies hidden in darkness , though he is surrounded by light .

ID:	2133
INPUT:	Sarak , beldurturik , ukatu egin zuen , esanez : — Ez dut <unk> egin . — Nola ezetz ! Irri egin duzu — erantzun zion hark .
PRED:	When Sarah heard this , he became very angry and said , “ I do n't know how I do . ” “ Yes , ” he replied . “ Yes , ” he replied .
GOLD:	Sarah was afraid , so she denied it , saying , “ I did n't laugh . ” But the Lord said , “ No , you did laugh . ”

ID:	2134
INPUT:	Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Zeure <unk> guztiei banatu eta zeure maitale eta idolo higuingarri horiekin guztiekin prostituzioan jarduteko zeure gorputza biluztu duzulako , eta zeure seme-alabak ere horien ohorez hil dituzulako ,
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I have given you to all your detestable idols and your detestable idols , your idols , your idols , your idols , and your wives , and your children .
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Because you have poured out your lust and exposed yourself in prostitution to all your lovers , and because you have worshiped detestable idols , and because you have slaughtered your children as sacrifices to your gods ,

ID:	2135
INPUT:	Orduan , agintariek inguratu eta esan zioten : — Noiz arte eduki behar gaituzu zalantzan ? Zu bazara Mesias , esaguzu argi eta garbi .
PRED:	“ How long will you come ? ” they asked . “ How long will you be saved ? ”
GOLD:	The people surrounded him and asked , “ How long are you going to keep us in suspense ? If you are the Messiah , tell us plainly . ”

ID:	2136
INPUT:	Ulertzeko gauza denak uler beza .
PRED:	“ Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the truth .
GOLD:	Anyone with ears to hear should listen and understand !

ID:	2137
INPUT:	« <unk> ez bazaituztete eta zuen mezua entzun nahi ez , etxe edo herri hartatik ateratzean , astindu zeuen oinetako hautsa .
PRED:	“ But if you refuse to listen to your word , you would n't listen to your people or if you turn away from your feet ,
GOLD:	If any household or town refuses to welcome you or listen to your message , shake its dust from your feet as you leave .

ID:	2138
INPUT:	Jesus egiazko mahatsondoa
PRED:	The First Disciples
GOLD:	Jesus , the True Vine

ID:	2139
INPUT:	Haren haserrea une baterako , haren onginahia bizi guztirako . Arratsean negarrez bagaude ere , goizean berriro poz-oihuz .
PRED:	For the anger of her anger is just as long as long as long as long as long as the morning .
GOLD:	When I was prosperous , I said , “ Nothing can stop me now ! ”

ID:	2140
INPUT:	Eta zu , Judako Belen , ez zara , ez , Judako hirietan txikiena ; zuregandik aterako baita buruzagia , Israel nire herria gobernatuko duena .
PRED:	And now you wo n't be born from Bethlehem in the towns of Judah , the greatest of Judah , the tribe of Judah , who will not be exiled to my people of Judah .
GOLD:	‘ And you , O Bethlehem in the land of Judah , are not least among the ruling cities of Judah , for a ruler will come from youwho will be the shepherd for my people Israel . ' ”

ID:	2141
INPUT:	« Hurbilarazi Aaron eta beronen semeak elkarketa-etxolara , eta garbi daitezela urez .
PRED:	“ Next Aaron and his sons will be clean , and they must wash their hands on the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ Present Aaron and his sons at the entrance of the Tabernacle , and wash them with water .

ID:	2142
INPUT:	Goi-agerpen guztiak zigiluz <unk> idazki baten antzeko gertatzen zaizkizue : irakurtzen dakien bati <unk> eman eta « <unk> hau » esaten diote , eta hark « Ezin dut , zigiluz itxia baitago » erantzuten ;
PRED:	And when all the parts of the earth were like a flood , which is able to be able to be able to be like a person who was able to see , and I can not be able to be able to see . ”
GOLD:	All the future events in this vision are like a sealed book to them . When you give it to those who can read , they will say , “ We ca n't read it because it is sealed . ”

ID:	2143
INPUT:	Jesusek galdetu zien : — Norenak dira irudi eta izen hauek ?
PRED:	Jesus asked them , “ Where is your name ? ”
GOLD:	he asked , “ Whose picture and title are stamped on it ? ”

ID:	2144
INPUT:	Hau diotsuegu , Jaunaren <unk> <unk> : guk , Jauna etortzean bizirik gertatuko garenok , ez diegu hil direnei aurrea hartuko .
PRED:	And when they know that the Lord will know that we have been able to kill you , we will die in the land of the Lord .
GOLD:	We tell you this directly from the Lord : We who are still living when the Lord returns will not meet him ahead of those who have died .

ID:	2145
INPUT:	Ez dut berri ona zabaltzeko lotsarik , Jainkoaren indarra baita fededun guztiak salbatzeko , juduak lehenengo , baina baita judu ez direnak ere .
PRED:	I will not be glad in the city of God , for all the people of the world will not be saved because of the Jews .
GOLD:	For I am not ashamed of this Good News about Christ . It is the power of God at work , saving everyone who believes — the Jew first and also the Gentile .

ID:	2146
INPUT:	Amosek erantzun zion : — Ni ez naiz profeta , ez eta <unk> . <unk> naiz eta <unk> .
PRED:	He asked him , “ I am not the prophet that I have seen , and I know that I have seen that I have seen , and I will certainly know that I have seen . ”
GOLD:	But Amos replied , “ I 'm not a professional prophet , and I was never trained to be one . I 'm just a shepherd , and I take care of sycamore-fig trees .

ID:	2147
INPUT:	Azarias , Judako errege
PRED:	Azariah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Uzziah Rules in Judah

ID:	2148
INPUT:	« Noren ikara zinen , noren beldur , niri huts egiteko , nitaz erabat <unk> ? <unk> isilik egon <unk> didazu beldurra , ezta ?
PRED:	“ Why are you afraid of me ? Why are you afraid of me ? Why are you afraid of me ? Why are you afraid ?
GOLD:	“ Are you afraid of these idols ? Do they terrify you ? Is that why you have lied to meand forgotten me and my words ? Is it because of my long silencethat you no longer fear me ?

ID:	2149
INPUT:	Lod , Hadid eta Onokoak <unk> ;
PRED:	The citizens of Lod , and they were terrified .
GOLD:	The citizens of Lod , Hadid , and Ono725

ID:	2150
INPUT:	Gizasemeak
PRED:	Young Women of Jerusalem
GOLD:	Young Woman

ID:	2151
INPUT:	Imerrenak 1 . 052 ;
PRED:	The family of Shephatiah372
GOLD:	The family of Immer1,052

ID:	2152
INPUT:	Lurra baino <unk> da , itsasoa baino <unk> .
PRED:	For the earth is more powerful than the sea , and the sea is more powerful than the sea .
GOLD:	It is broader than the earthand wider than the sea .

ID:	2153
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	2154
INPUT:	Su emango <unk> <unk> suak Ben-Hadaden <unk> ditu » .
PRED:	Then he will send down fire on his hand , and he will send down fire . ”
GOLD:	“ And I will set fire to the walls of Damascusthat will burn up the palaces of Ben-hadad . ”

ID:	2155
INPUT:	Baina aitak , jakitean , onirizten ez badie , boto eta konpromiso haiek guztiak hutsean geldituko dira ; haietatik libre utziko du Jaunak neskatxa , aitak oniritzirik eman ez diolako .
PRED:	But when a woman heard that her father or mother or sister or pledge , she must not pay her back to her . The Lord has given his father , his father , and he has given them back to his father .
GOLD:	“ Now suppose a young woman makes a vow or binds herself with an impulsive pledge and later marries .

ID:	2156
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun zuen : — Sinesmena bazenute , mostaza-hazia bezain txikia izanik ere , pikondo honi « Atera hortik eta landatu itsasoan » esango zeniokete , eta obeditu egingo lizueke .
PRED:	But the Lord replied , “ But if you are like a little wind , I will give you a little water , and I will give you a fig tree on your side . ”
GOLD:	The Lord answered , “ If you had faith even as small as a mustard seed , you could say to this mulberry tree , ‘ May you be uprooted and be planted in the sea , ' and it would obey you !

ID:	2157
INPUT:	Beste hau ere erakutsi zidan Jainko Jaunak : saskia bete fruitu heldu .
PRED:	Then the Lord gave me this message to me , for the Sovereign Lord gave me the crop .
GOLD:	Then the Sovereign Lord showed me another vision . In it I saw a basket filled with ripe fruit .

ID:	2158
INPUT:	<unk> orduan Boozek esan zion Ruti : « Zatoz , hartzazu ogi-puska bat , busti <unk> eta jan » . Eseri zen , bada , Rut igitarien ondoan eta Boozek <unk> ale eskutada bat eskaini zion . Hark asetzeraino jan zuen eta , halere , sobera geratu zitzaion .
PRED:	Then Boaz said to him , “ Come , let 's be here in the place of water , ” Boaz said , “ I 'll eat it in the place of grain , and we 'll eat it . ”
GOLD:	At mealtime Boaz called to her , “ Come over here , and help yourself to some food . You can dip your bread in the sour wine . ” So she sat with his harvesters , and Boaz gave her some roasted grain to eat . She ate all she wanted and still had some left over .

ID:	2159
INPUT:	Orduan , <unk> indarra berreskuratuko du , <unk> <unk> itzuliko berriro .
PRED:	Then the power will turn away from his power , and they will return again again .
GOLD:	Then his body will become as healthy as a child 's , firm and youthful again .

ID:	2160
INPUT:	Bizi nadila luzaro zu goresteko , lagun <unk> zure <unk> !
PRED:	Let me be strong , and I will praise you with your power .
GOLD:	Let me live so I can praise you , and may your regulations help me .

ID:	2161
INPUT:	Kristo Jaunarengan ongi <unk> , eraikin osoa haziz doa , Jainkoari sagaraturiko tenplu bihurtzeraino .
PRED:	It is in the Lord 's sight , in the city of honor .
GOLD:	We are carefully joined together in him , becoming a holy temple for the Lord .

ID:	2162
INPUT:	Bildu denok eta entzun ! Zuetako <unk> du horrelakorik ? Nire <unk> du nire nahia , Babilonia eta bertako <unk> erabakia .
PRED:	Who has heard that you have heard my power , and when I have heard that all the power of Babylon will know that my will happen , and all my will know that I have seen my power .
GOLD:	Have any of your idols ever told you this ? Come , all of you , and listen : The Lord has chosen Cyrus as his ally.He will use him to put an end to the empire of Babylonand to destroy the Babylonian armies .

ID:	2163
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Gaixoaldirako . Daviden poema .
PRED:	Come to me , O God , for I have come to you .
GOLD:	Only fools say in their hearts , “ There is no God . ” They are corrupt , and their actions are evil ; not one of them does good !

ID:	2164
INPUT:	Moisesek , Israelgo arduradunekin batera , agindu hau eman zion herriari : « Bete gaur ematen dizkizuedan agindu guztiok .
PRED:	So Moses said to the people of Israel , “ I am giving you today today today I am giving you today .
GOLD:	Then Moses and the leaders of Israel gave this charge to the people : “ Obey all these commands that I am giving you today .

ID:	2165
INPUT:	Hogeita zazpigarren urtean , lehen hilaren batean , honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	On the seventh year of King Jehoiachin 's reign , the Lord gave me this message :
GOLD:	On April 26 , the first day of the new year , during the twenty-seventh year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	2166
INPUT:	Elteke , Gibeton , Baalat ,
PRED:	The priests of the Jordan River ,
GOLD:	Eltekeh , Gibbethon , Baalath ,

ID:	2167
INPUT:	Isaiasen semea , Israelentzat ezaugarri
PRED:	Isaiah son of Amoz 's son
GOLD:	The Coming Assyrian Invasion

ID:	2168
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Zuetako zeinek , ardi bakarra eduki eta larunbatez zulora erortzen bazaio , ez du hartu eta aterako ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ God blesses you for you , but he will not fall on the Sabbath day of the Sabbath ?
GOLD:	And he answered , “ If you had a sheep that fell into a well on the Sabbath , would n't you work to pull it out ? Of course you would .

ID:	2169
INPUT:	Altxa , munduaren epaile hori , <unk> harroei merezi dutena !
PRED:	Rise up , and when they hear their words , they know what they have done .
GOLD:	Arise , O Judge of the earth.Give the proud what they deserve .

ID:	2170
INPUT:	Hananiasen seme Jehu profetak , ordea , bidera irten eta esan zion : « Gaiztoari laguntzen eta Jaunaren etsaia <unk> hartzen , ala ? Hori egin duzulako , haserre duzu Jauna .
PRED:	But Ahab 's prophets came out to meet him , and he said , “ Why do you turn away from the Lord ? What do you think you have done ? ”
GOLD:	Jehu son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him . “ Why should you help the wicked and love those who hate the Lord ? ” he asked the king . “ Because of what you have done , the Lord is very angry with you .

ID:	2171
INPUT:	Berak behar zituen handikiak <unk> kontseilariei jakinduria irakatsi .
PRED:	For he was poor with all the wise men who were poor .
GOLD:	He could instruct the king 's aides as he pleasedand teach the king 's advisers .

ID:	2172
INPUT:	Jerusalemgo fededunentzat egin beharreko <unk> dagokionez , egin zuek ere <unk> eliz elkarteei agindu niena .
PRED:	In that time you must be sure to be sure that the church should be sure that you have been able to see the churches .
GOLD:	Now regarding your question about the money being collected for God 's people in Jerusalem . You should follow the same procedure I gave to the churches in Galatia .

ID:	2173
INPUT:	Izan ere , kezka <unk> dakar , eta <unk> egitea .
PRED:	For when he has been able to kill him , he will be able to kill him .
GOLD:	Do n't make rash promises , and do n't be hasty in bringing matters before God . After all , God is in heaven , and you are here on earth . So let your words be few .

ID:	2174
INPUT:	Jonasek Jaunaren errukiaren berri ikasi
PRED:	Hope for the Priests of the Lord
GOLD:	Jonah 's Anger at the

ID:	2175
INPUT:	Hilabete batean hiru artzain kendu nituen ; baina haserretu egin nintzen ardien kontra , eta beraiek ere aspertu egin ziren nitaz .
PRED:	I was very angry with you , but I was very angry with me .
GOLD:	I got rid of their three evil shepherds in a single month.But I became impatient with these sheep , and they hated me , too .

ID:	2176
INPUT:	« Madarikatua jaio nintzeneko <unk> “ <unk> bat sortu da ” esan zuteneko gaua !
PRED:	“ Cursed is anyone who had been born , who had been born to be born . '
GOLD:	“ Let the day of my birth be erased , and the night I was conceived .

ID:	2177
INPUT:	<unk> gizonaren <unk> lotzen zaion bezala nahi izan nituen Juda eta Israel herriak niri lotu , nire herri izan zitezen , nire ospe eta ohore ; baina ezentzun egin zidaten » .
PRED:	And when I heard that the man and the people of Israel were able to kill me , and my people would not listen to me . ”
GOLD:	As a loincloth clings to a man 's waist , so I created Judah and Israel to cling to me , says the Lord . They were to be my people , my pride , my glory — an honor to my name . But they would not listen to me .

ID:	2178
INPUT:	Daviden azken hitzak
PRED:	David 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	David 's Last Words

ID:	2179
INPUT:	Israeldar guztiek , sua jaitsi eta Jaunaren aintzak tenplua betetzen zuela ikustean , lurreraino makurturik , Jauna adoratu eta goretsi zuten , esanez : « Ona baita , haren maitasuna betikoa baita » .
PRED:	And all the people of Israel saw the Lord and his glory , and the glory of the Lord saw him , saying , “ The Lord is good and faithful love endures forever . ”
GOLD:	When all the people of Israel saw the fire coming down and the glorious presence of the Lord filling the Temple , they fell face down on the ground and worshiped and praised the Lord , saying , “ He is good ! His faithful love endures forever ! ”

ID:	2180
INPUT:	Ez beza inork bere burua engaina ! Zuetako norbaitek mundu honen arabera jakintsu dela uste badu , egin bedi zoro , egiaz jakintsu izateko .
PRED:	Do n't let anyone mislead you , for those who do n't understand what they do .
GOLD:	Stop deceiving yourselves . If you think you are wise by this world 's standards , you need to become a fool to be truly wise .

ID:	2181
INPUT:	Galdetu zion Jonadabek Amnoni : — Zer duzu , <unk> horrek , egunean baino egunean <unk> egoteko ? Ez al didazu esan behar ? Amnonek erantzun zion : — Gure anaia Absalomen arreba <unk> maitemindurik nago .
PRED:	“ What are you going to kill me ? ” he asked . “ What do you know that I want you to kill you ? ” But Amnon asked Absalom , “ I am afraid of Absalom , my brother 's brother , my brother , Absalom , my brother Absalom , Absalom 's brother , Absalom , Absalom 's brother Absalom 's brother Absalom . ”
GOLD:	One day Jonadab said to Amnon , “ What 's the trouble ? Why should the son of a king look so dejected morning after morning ? ” So Amnon told him , “ I am in love with Tamar , my brother Absalom 's sister . ”

ID:	2182
INPUT:	Abiatar apaizari esan zion erregeak : « Alde hemendik <unk> , zeure <unk> . Heriotza merezi duzu zuk ere , baina ez zaitut hilko , gure aita Daviden aurrean Jainko Jaunaren kutxa eraman izan duzulako , eta berak jasan zituen nekeak zuk ere jasan izan dituzulako » .
PRED:	“ Get out of the priest , ” the king said to the priest . “ You have killed your father , and you have killed me , and you have killed me . ” But he was the Ark of the Lord your father of David .
GOLD:	Then the king said to Abiathar the priest , “ Go back to your home in Anathoth . You deserve to die , but I will not kill you now , because you carried the Ark of the Sovereign Lord for David my father and you shared all his hardships . ”

ID:	2183
INPUT:	Egun hartan , hala ere , harri astun bihurtuko dut Jerusalem herri guztientzat : jasotzen ahalegintzen dena , zauritu egingo da . Lurreko herri guztiak bilduko dira Jerusalemen aurka .
PRED:	In that day I will crush you , for they have turned away from the world , for they will protect you from the world .
GOLD:	On that day I will make Jerusalem an immovable rock . All the nations will gather against it to try to move it , but they will only hurt themselves .

ID:	2184
INPUT:	Jauna gure alde izan ez balitz , etsaiek eraso zigutenean ,
PRED:	The Lord did n't go out to our enemies , and they would not attack the battle .
GOLD:	What if the Lord had not been on our sidewhen people attacked us ?

ID:	2185
INPUT:	Barauari buruzko galdera : <unk> eta zuzentasuna
PRED:	Parable of the Pharisees and Sadducees
GOLD:	A Call to Justice and Mercy

ID:	2186
INPUT:	Zorobabel , Josue , Nehemias , Seraias , <unk> , Mardokeo , Bilxan , <unk> , Bigbai , Rehum eta Baana zituzten gidari . Hona israeldar hauen zerrenda :
PRED:	“ Zerubbabel , Zerubbabel , Zerubbabel , Seraiah , Seraiah , Seraiah , Ezra , Seraiah , Azariah , Ezra , Azariah , and Azariah , and Azariah , and Azariah . These are the people of Israel , who were given to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Their leaders were Zerubbabel , Jeshua , Nehemiah , Seraiah , Reelaiah , Mordecai , Bilshan , Mispar , Bigvai , Rehum , and Baanah.This is the number of the men of Israel who returned from exile :

ID:	2187
INPUT:	Nabal hila zela aditu zuelarik , esan zuen Davidek : « Bedeinkatua Jauna ! Nire alde jokatu baitu Nabalek egin zidan <unk> aurrean . Okerra egitea galarazi dit ; Nabali , berriz , gainera bota dio Jaunak bere gaiztakeria » . Ondoren , mandatariak igorri zizkion Davidek Abigaili , emaztetzat hartu nahi zuela adieraziz .
PRED:	When David heard that he was dead , he said , “ Praise the Lord ! Praise him , he has given me a message to her , and he sent me back to her . ”
GOLD:	When David heard that Nabal was dead , he said , “ Praise the Lord , who has avenged the insult I received from Nabal and has kept me from doing it myself . Nabal has received the punishment for his sin . ” Then David sent messengers to Abigail to ask her to become his wife .

ID:	2188
INPUT:	Hona , beraz , zenbat gizaldi guztira : Abrahamengandik Davidengana hamalau ; Davidengandik Babiloniako <unk> beste hamalau , eta Babiloniako erbestealditik <unk> beste hamalau .
PRED:	Therefore , this is the message of King Jehoiachin of Babylon , a man of Babylon , a descendant of David , came to me from Jerusalem . He was a great message from the king of Babylon , and from Jerusalem .
GOLD:	All those listed above include fourteen generations from Abraham to David , fourteen from David to the Babylonian exile , and fourteen from the Babylonian exile to the Messiah .

ID:	2189
INPUT:	Urrun zaitez <unk> , ez duzu haren hitzetan <unk> aurkituko .
PRED:	When you see how long as they see , you will see what they have done .
GOLD:	Stay away from fools , for you wo n't find knowledge on their lips .

ID:	2190
INPUT:	Zertan hil behar duzue zuk eta zure herriak gerraz , gosez eta izurriz ? Izan ere , Jaunak erabakia du hori gertatuko zaiola Babiloniako erregearen menpeko izatea onartzen ez duen <unk> .
PRED:	What do you think you want to die ? If you have killed your people , you will die in the land of the Lord , the people of Babylon will know that the king of Babylon has been killed by the king of Babylon , and they will know that the king of Babylon will know that the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	Why do you insist on dying — you and your people ? Why should you choose war , famine , and disease , which the Lord will bring against every nation that refuses to submit to Babylon 's king ?

ID:	2191
INPUT:	Entzun zuen Hadadek David eta honen gudalburu Joab hilak zirela eta esan zion faraoiari : — Uztazu neure herrira joaten .
PRED:	Now listen to Joab 's officers and the commander of the army , the commander of his officials , and he said to him , “ Please let me go to Egypt . ”
GOLD:	When the news reached Hadad in Egypt that David and his commander Joab were both dead , he said to Pharaoh , “ Let me return to my own country . ”

ID:	2192
INPUT:	« Zoritxarrekoa zu , <unk> bati : “ Esna zaitez ! ” eta harri <unk> : “ Jaiki ! ” esaten diezun hori ! <unk> ote dizute <unk> ? <unk> eta <unk> daude , bai , baina beren baitan ez <unk> .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you , ” they demanded . “ Do you say , ‘ What sorrow awaits you ? ' And when they were saying , ‘ What sorrow awaits you , ' they know that they will know that they will know that they have seen .
GOLD:	What sorrow awaits you who say to wooden idols , ‘ Wake up and save us ! 'To speechless stone images you say , ‘ Rise up and teach us ! 'Can an idol tell you what to do ? They may be overlaid with gold and silver , but they are lifeless inside .

ID:	2193
INPUT:	( 2 Kro 25 , 1-4 . <unk> . <unk> ; 26 , 1-2 )
PRED:	King Jehoash of David , who was very angry with him , and he was very angry with him .
GOLD:	Jeroboam II Rules in Israel

ID:	2194
INPUT:	Ninivera joan zen Jonas , Jaunak agindu bezala . Ninive hiria izugarri handia zen ; hiru egun behar ziren alde batetik bestera <unk> .
PRED:	Then the Lord gave this message to Jonah as the Lord had commanded him . At that time the city was about three days , and the people of Nineveh was very angry with them .
GOLD:	This time Jonah obeyed the Lord 's command and went to Nineveh , a city so large that it took three days to see it all .

ID:	2195
INPUT:	Orduan , agindu zuen : — Bete urez lau ontzi eta isuri <unk> eta egurraren gainera . Eta gero : — Berriz ere bai ! Halaxe egin zuten berriro ere . Gero , esan zuen : — Hirugarren aldiz ! Eta hirugarren aldiz egin zuten .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Put the water with water , and pour out the water on the altar . ” And they said , “ Yes , I have left the third day . ” So the third day the third day of the third day .
GOLD:	After they had done this , he said , “ Do the same thing again ! ” And when they were finished , he said , “ Now do it a third time ! ” So they did as he said ,

ID:	2196
INPUT:	Abraham ( 12 , 1 — 23 , 20 )
PRED:	The Sign of Abraham
GOLD:	Abram and Sarai in Egypt

ID:	2197
INPUT:	Aurre egiten die <unk> , bera da basapiztia guztien errege » .
PRED:	Yes , when you turn away from all the kingdoms of all the earth , you will know all the kingdoms of all the earth . ”
GOLD:	No sword can stop it , no spear , dart , or javelin .

ID:	2198
INPUT:	Jerusalemera iritsi ziren . Jesus tenpluan zebilela , apaizburuak , lege-maisuak eta zaharrak hurbildu zitzaizkion ,
PRED:	When Jesus arrived at Jerusalem , the leading priests and the leading priests and the teachers of religious law came to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Again they entered Jerusalem . As Jesus was walking through the Temple area , the leading priests , the teachers of religious law , and the elders came up to him .

ID:	2199
INPUT:	Ibar lehorra igarotzean , iturburutik edaten dute : lehen <unk> <unk> baitute estaltzen .
PRED:	For the waters of the Dead Sea , and they were filled with roots . They were filled with roots , and they were filled with power .
GOLD:	They will continue to grow stronger , and each of them will appear before God in Jerusalem .

ID:	2200
INPUT:	Horregatik , erne egon zara guri zoritxar hau bidaltzeko . Izan ere , zu , Jauna , gure Jainkoa , zuzena zara egiten duzun guztian ; baina guk entzungor egin diogu zure esanari .
PRED:	That is why you have come upon us , and they will send us back to the Lord our God .
GOLD:	Therefore , the Lord has brought upon us the disaster he prepared . The Lord our God was right to do all of these things , for we did not obey him .

ID:	2201
INPUT:	Biharamunean goizean goiz jaiki eta begiraldia egin zion Josuek gudarosteari ; gero , Israelgo arduradunekin batera gudarostearen buruan jarri eta Ai hiriari erasotzera abiatu zen .
PRED:	So Joshua got up early the next morning and the men of Israel . So Joshua went to fight the army of Israel and the army of Israel .
GOLD:	Early the next morning Joshua roused his men and started toward Ai , accompanied by the elders of Israel .

ID:	2202
INPUT:	Begira , berak hedatu du zeruan argia , berak ezkutatu itsasoaren oinarriak .
PRED:	Look at the light , the light of the earth ; the light of the earth .
GOLD:	See how he spreads the lightning around himand how it lights up the depths of the sea .

ID:	2203
INPUT:	Ehun eta bost urte zituela , Setek Enox izan zuen .
PRED:	When he was thirty years old , he became the next king .
GOLD:	When Seth was 105 years old , he became the father of Enosh .

ID:	2204
INPUT:	<unk>
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Recovery
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Instructions

ID:	2205
INPUT:	Gizaseme eta emakume egin zituen , bedeinkatu eta « gizaki » eman zien izen egin zituen egun berean .
PRED:	Then the man of man blessed them and blessed them , and he blessed them .
GOLD:	He created them male and female , and he blessed them and called them “ human . ”

ID:	2206
INPUT:	beste batzuek isekak eta zigorrak , kateak eta <unk> jasan zituzten ;
PRED:	Some of them were filled with water , and they were filled with water .
GOLD:	Some were jeered at , and their backs were cut open with whips . Others were chained in prisons .

ID:	2207
INPUT:	Itxura txarreko eta <unk> hauek irentsi egin zituzten beste eder eta guri haiek . Une horretan , esnatu egin zen faraoia .
PRED:	At that time , when they saw these things , and when he looked up and saw them , he got up and said to you .
GOLD:	Then the scrawny , thin cows ate the seven healthy , fat cows ! At this point in the dream , Pharaoh woke up .

ID:	2208
INPUT:	Gero , honela mintzatu zitzaizkien <unk> gizonak Jonatani eta ezkutariari : — Igo guregana ; <unk> bat erakutsiko dizuegu . Jonatanek esan zion ezkutariari : — Igo nire atzetik . Israelen esku utzi ditu horiek Jaunak .
PRED:	Then the man said to his armor bearer , “ Go ahead of us and meet you with us . ” “ Come , ” Jonathan said , “ Let 's go and kill me . ” So Jonathan said , “ Let 's go with me . ”
GOLD:	Then the men from the outpost shouted to Jonathan , “ Come on up here , and we 'll teach you a lesson ! ” “ Come on , climb right behind me , ” Jonathan said to his armor bearer , “ for the Lord will help us defeat them ! ”

ID:	2209
INPUT:	Denbora asko <unk> ezer jan gabe . Paulok erdian zutik jarri eta esan zuen : « Adiskideok , hobe nire esana egin bazenute eta Kretatik atera ez bagina : hartara ez <unk> kalte eta galera hauek izango .
PRED:	At that time when Paul was eating and some of them , he stood in the middle of the river and said , “ If you want me to kill me , ” he said , “ I 'll do n't want you to kill you . ”
GOLD:	No one had eaten for a long time . Finally , Paul called the crew together and said , “ Men , you should have listened to me in the first place and not left Crete . You would have avoided all this damage and loss .

ID:	2210
INPUT:	Hark erantzun zion : “ Ez dut nahi ” ; baina handik berehala damutu eta joan egin zen .
PRED:	“ No , ” he said , “ I wo n't take it back to a place of rest . ”
GOLD:	The son answered , ‘ No , I wo n't go , ' but later he changed his mind and went anyway .

ID:	2211
INPUT:	Jonatan Daviden alde
PRED:	Jonathan 's Kindness to David
GOLD:	Saul Tries to Kill David

ID:	2212
INPUT:	<unk> jaramon egiten dionak izango du arrakastarik . Zorionekoa Jaunarengan uste ona duena !
PRED:	They are those who are wise in their homes , and those who are wise .
GOLD:	Those who listen to instruction will prosper ; those who trust the Lord will be joyful .

ID:	2213
INPUT:	Hartu gogoan ez duzuela zeuen buruak nola defendatuko kezkatan egon beharrik :
PRED:	Do n't be afraid to your husbands , for he is ready to go .
GOLD:	So do n't worry in advance about how to answer the charges against you ,

ID:	2214
INPUT:	usteldu egingo zaio erraietan , sugegorriaren pozoi bihurtuko .
PRED:	It will be a deadly deadly deadly deadly deadly deadly poison of grapes .
GOLD:	But suddenly the food in their bellies turns sour , a poisonous venom in their stomach .

ID:	2215
INPUT:	Legea betetzen duena seme zentzuduna da , jende <unk> dabilena aitaren lotsa .
PRED:	All who obey God 's commandments are wise , and they will be able to obey my father .
GOLD:	Young people who obey the law are wise ; those with wild friends bring shame to their parents .

ID:	2216
INPUT:	Susa hirian <unk> zegoen <unk> kopia ere eman zion , Esterri erakutsi eta berri emateko ; gainera , agindu hau eman zion Esterri : joan zedila erregeagana , beronen onginahia eskuratu eta bere herritarren alde egiteko .
PRED:	At the fortress of Susa was very angry with the people of Susa , because they had been given to Esther . When he had told him , he had given him a message to the king and his people .
GOLD:	Mordecai gave Hathach a copy of the decree issued in Susa that called for the death of all Jews . He asked Hathach to show it to Esther and explain the situation to her . He also asked Hathach to direct her to go to the king to beg for mercy and plead for her people .

ID:	2217
INPUT:	Jetro poztu egin zen , egiptoarren eskuetatik libratuz Jainkoak israeldarrei egin zien on guztiarengatik ,
PRED:	And when the people of Israel came out of the Egyptians , he poured out his hand on him , and he followed him .
GOLD:	Jethro was delighted when he heard about all the good things the Lord had done for Israel as he rescued them from the hand of the Egyptians .

ID:	2218
INPUT:	Ez ! Zuek maitatu etsaiak , egin ongi eta eman maileguz <unk> begiratu gabe : handia izango da zuen saria eta Goi-goikoaren seme-alaba izango zarete , ona baita bera esker txarreko eta gaiztoentzat .
PRED:	Do n't let them be angry with their enemies , and they have given them authority to those who fear the Most High , and they will be given to the Most High , and they will be saved .
GOLD:	“ Love your enemies ! Do good to them . Lend to them without expecting to be repaid . Then your reward from heaven will be very great , and you will truly be acting as children of the Most High , for he is kind to those who are unthankful and wicked .

ID:	2219
INPUT:	Izan ere , agertu da Jainkoaren onginahia , gizon-emakume guztientzat salbagarri .
PRED:	For the Son of God has been revealed for a great life .
GOLD:	For the grace of God has been revealed , bringing salvation to all people .

ID:	2220
INPUT:	« Sar zaitezte ate estutik »
PRED:	The Sign of the Covenant
GOLD:	The Tree and Its Fruit

ID:	2221
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> bidez sendotzen dira , gerra <unk> <unk> egiten .
PRED:	They will know that they will be able to kill those who are weak and fig tree .
GOLD:	Plans succeed through good counsel ; do n't go to war without wise advice .

ID:	2222
INPUT:	Eta hori , Tzin basamortuan israeldar elkarteak aurpegi eman zidanean , nire agindua zalantzan jarri zenutelako : ez zenidaten utzi neure santutasuna israeldarren aurrean agertzen , ura sorraraziz » ( Tzin basamortuan , Kadexen dagoen Meribako iturrian gertatua aipatzen da hemen ) .
PRED:	And when the people of Israel arrived in the wilderness of the wilderness , the people of Israel have given me a solemn pact with all the people of Israel as they were camped at Kadesh in the wilderness of the wilderness .
GOLD:	for you both rebelled against my instructions in the wilderness of Zin . When the people of Israel rebelled , you failed to demonstrate my holiness to them at the waters . ” ( These are the waters of Meribah at Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin . )

ID:	2223
INPUT:	egokiak dira <unk> zuhurtasuna emateko , gazteei ezaguera eta <unk> ;
PRED:	There are those who were filled with joy , and those who were filled with knowledge .
GOLD:	These proverbs will give insight to the simple , knowledge and discernment to the young .

ID:	2224
INPUT:	<unk>
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Recovery
GOLD:	The Desolation of Israel

ID:	2225
INPUT:	Ebed-Melek zeritzan errege-jauregiko goi-funtzionario etiopiarrak jakin zuen Jeremias putzura bota zutela . Erregea <unk> erabakitzen Benjaminen atean zegoela ,
PRED:	When you learned the terms of the terms of the covenant , Jeremiah from the king of Benjamin and the king of Benjamin , and the king of Benjamin was at the gate of Benjamin .
GOLD:	But Ebed-melech the Ethiopian , an important court official , heard that Jeremiah was in the cistern . At that time the king was holding court at the Benjamin Gate ,

ID:	2226
INPUT:	Israeldarren artean biziko naiz eta Jainko izango naute .
PRED:	I will live among the people of Israel , and I will live among them .
GOLD:	Then I will live among the people of Israel and be their God ,

ID:	2227
INPUT:	« Bete ezazue gaur agintzen dizuedana , eta neuk botako ditut zuen aurretik amortar , kanaandar , hitita , periztar , hibiar eta jebustarrak .
PRED:	“ Therefore , obey the commands I am giving you today , Hittites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Perizzites , Hivites , Hivites , and Jebusites .
GOLD:	But listen carefully to everything I command you today . Then I will go ahead of you and drive out the Amorites , Canaanites , Hittites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites .

ID:	2228
INPUT:	Baina nik agindu gabeko mezua nire izenean adierazten edota jainko arrotzen izenean hitz egiten ausartzen den profeta hil egingo dute ” .
PRED:	But I have given you this message from the Lord : ‘ Do not listen to you or speak in the name of my name . '
GOLD:	But any prophet who falsely claims to speak in my name or who speaks in the name of another god must die . '

ID:	2229
INPUT:	<unk> jantzia ipini zioten soinean eta <unk> egindako koroa buruan .
PRED:	They put him in burlap and put him on his head .
GOLD:	They dressed him in a purple robe , and they wove thorn branches into a crown and put it on his head .

ID:	2230
INPUT:	Zuk limosna egitean , ez beza jakin zure <unk> zer egiten duen eskuinak ;
PRED:	For you have not heard the poor , and they will see your power .
GOLD:	But when you give to someone in need , do n't let your left hand know what your right hand is doing .

ID:	2231
INPUT:	Ezekiasek tenplua garbitu eta konpondu
PRED:	Hezekiah and asked the Temple
GOLD:	The Temple Rededication

ID:	2232
INPUT:	Behi <unk> eta eskas hauek , ordea , lehengo zazpi behi guriak irentsi zituzten .
PRED:	But when they saw that they were on the road , the sailors of the Arnon River , and the birds of the Arnon River are ceremonially clean .
GOLD:	These thin , scrawny cows ate the seven fat cows .

ID:	2233
INPUT:	Jainko gure Aitak eta Jesu Kristo Jaunak eman biezazkizuete grazia eta bakea .
PRED:	May the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace .
GOLD:	May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace .

ID:	2234
INPUT:	« Ez zapaldu etorkina , ongi <unk> zer den etorkin izatea , zeuek ere etorkin izan baitzarete Egipton .
PRED:	“ You must not destroy those who are detestable to you . If you are living in Egypt , you must be careful to obey the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	“ You must not oppress foreigners . You know what it 's like to be a foreigner , for you yourselves were once foreigners in the land of Egypt .

ID:	2235
INPUT:	Eman <unk> besteei emandako tratua , ordaindu berari berak egin halako bi ; emaiozue edaten ontzian , berak besteei edanarazi halako bi .
PRED:	He has given them authority to bring them to the others , and he gave them two quarts of them to bring them to the others .
GOLD:	Do to her as she has done to others.Double her penalty for all her evil deeds.She brewed a cup of terror for others , so brew twice as much for her .

ID:	2236
INPUT:	Behar duena baldin <unk> , ez esan inori : « Zoaz eta itzuli , bihar emango dizut » .
PRED:	But if he does n't let anyone say , “ Go back and tell anyone , ‘ Go and go home . ' ”
GOLD:	If you can help your neighbor now , do n't say , “ Come back tomorrow , and then I 'll help you . ”

ID:	2237
INPUT:	Jobek erantzun : — Txoroak bezala hitz egiten duzu . Zoriona Jaunaren <unk> hartzen dugu . Eta zoritxarra , zergatik ez ? Halaz guztiz , Jobek ez zuen bere ahoaz bekatu egin .
PRED:	Then Job replied , “ Suppose you speak with such a person , but when you do n't know that the Lord 's favor , and when they do n't know what he meant . ”
GOLD:	But Job replied , “ You talk like a foolish woman . Should we accept only good things from the hand of God and never anything bad ? ” So in all this , Job said nothing wrong .

ID:	2238
INPUT:	Egiptoko lehen-seme guztiak jo zituen , haien gizontasunaren lehen fruituak .
PRED:	In the age of Egypt , the family of Egypt was the family of Egypt .
GOLD:	Then he killed the oldest son in each Egyptian home , the pride and joy of each family .

ID:	2239
INPUT:	Horrela , bada , sinesmenetik bizi direnek hartzen dute bedeinkazioa Abraham <unk> batera .
PRED:	That is why the one who has been given to the Father who has given Abraham and his blessing .
GOLD:	So all who put their faith in Christ share the same blessing Abraham received because of his faith .

ID:	2240
INPUT:	Orduan , alde egin zuen Tamarrek . <unk> zuen zapia kendu eta <unk> jantzi zituen berriro .
PRED:	Then he took him away and threw him away from his robe . Then he threw him away and threw him away .
GOLD:	Afterward she went back home , took off her veil , and put on her widow 's clothing as usual .

ID:	2241
INPUT:	Dor eskualdean dagoen <unk> , Gilgal ondoko <unk>
PRED:	In the way , the province of Gaza , near Bethel , and all the kingdoms of the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	The king of Dor in the town of Naphoth-dorThe king of Goyim in Gilgal

ID:	2242
INPUT:	Ibaien aurka al zaude , Jauna , <unk> aurka al zaude haserre , itsasoaren aurka sumindua , zeure zaldien gainean eseria , gurdien gainean garaile zoazela ?
PRED:	Do you know that the Lord has come against me ? Will you come against me ? Why are you afraid of the hill country of Lebanon ? Why are you going on on the road ?
GOLD:	Was it in anger , Lord , that you struck the riversand parted the sea ? Were you displeased with them ? No , you were sending your chariots of salvation !

ID:	2243
INPUT:	lagunari ordain txarra emaneta etsai zuzengabeari barkatu badiot ,
PRED:	My friends , if my enemies turn away from me ,
GOLD:	then let my enemies capture me.Let them trample me into the groundand drag my honor in the dust.Interlude

ID:	2244
INPUT:	<unk> itzazu haien handikiak Oreb eta Zeeb bezala , haien buruzagiak Zebah eta Tzalmuna bezala .
PRED:	Let them kill their princes , just as we destroyed , as the rulers of Midian and Zalmunna , as we destroyed .
GOLD:	for they said , “ Let us seize for our own usethese pasturelands of God ! ”

ID:	2245
INPUT:	Erregetza mirarien bidez agertua ( 8 , 1 — 9 , 34 )
PRED:	Jesus Calms the Storm
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Man with Leprosy

ID:	2246
INPUT:	Azarias apaiz nagusiak eta beste apaiz guztiek , bekokian legena zuela ikustean , bizkor irtenarazi zuten handik , eta bera ere arrapaladan joan zen , Jaunak joa zegoelako .
PRED:	Azariah and the high priest saw the high priest , who was sitting on his forehead , and when he saw him on his forehead , the Lord sent him back to the other side of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	When Azariah the high priest and all the other priests saw the leprosy , they rushed him out . And the king himself was eager to get out because the Lord had struck him .

ID:	2247
INPUT:	Jesus sinagogatik atera eta Simonen eta <unk> etxera joan zen zuzenean , Santiago eta Joanekin .
PRED:	At that time Jesus went into the synagogue , where he was going into the house of James and John .
GOLD:	After Jesus left the synagogue with James and John , they went to Simon and Andrew 's home .

ID:	2248
INPUT:	Jesus heriotzara kondenatua
PRED:	The Burial of Jesus
GOLD:	The Crucifixion

ID:	2249
INPUT:	Galdu itxurak eginez , Josuek eta israeldarrek ihes egin zuten basamorturantz .
PRED:	But the people of Israel continued to flee from the wilderness .
GOLD:	Joshua and the Israelite army fled toward the wilderness as though they were badly beaten .

ID:	2250
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun : — Baldin berrogeita hamar errugabe aurkitzen baditut , haiengatik hiri osoari barkatuko diot .
PRED:	The Lord replied to them , “ If I have been punished , I will take care of these towns . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord replied , “ If I find fifty righteous people in Sodom , I will spare the entire city for their sake . ”

ID:	2251
INPUT:	arnasa hartzen ere ez dit <unk> saminez asebetetzen nau .
PRED:	For my heart has broken my heart , and my fury has broken me .
GOLD:	He will not let me catch my breath , but fills me instead with bitter sorrows .

ID:	2252
INPUT:	Beste behin , Jesus sinagogara joan zen . Bazen han besoa elbarri zeukan gizon bat .
PRED:	At that time Jesus went to the synagogue , where he was sleeping in the synagogue .
GOLD:	Jesus went into the synagogue again and noticed a man with a deformed hand .

ID:	2253
INPUT:	Jaunak apartatu egingo du Israelgo leinu guztietatik , bere <unk> , legearen liburu honetan idatzitako <unk> arabera .
PRED:	The Lord will be able to destroy all the tribes of Israel , and they will serve in this book .
GOLD:	The Lord will never pardon such people . Instead his anger and jealousy will burn against them . All the curses written in this book will come down on them , and the Lord will erase their names from under heaven .

ID:	2254
INPUT:	Baina atzera egin zuten gero , eta libre utzitako esklaboak , gizonezko nahiz emakumezko , berreskuratu egin zituzten , berriro esklabo-lanetara behartuz .
PRED:	But the Lord sent them back and sent them back to the other men and women and women to serve as captives .
GOLD:	but later they changed their minds . They took back the men and women they had freed , forcing them to be slaves again .

ID:	2255
INPUT:	Samuelen heriotza
PRED:	Samuel 's Prayer of Dedication
GOLD:	The Death of Samuel

ID:	2256
INPUT:	Hil zen Rakel , eta Efratara , hots , Belenera , bidean ehortzi zuten .
PRED:	When Rachel died , he was buried in Galilee , he was buried at Bethlehem .
GOLD:	So Rachel died and was buried on the way to Ephrath ( that is , Bethlehem ) .

ID:	2257
INPUT:	Erruki nitaz , ene Jainko , erruki nitaz , zuregan dut babesa eta ; zure hegalen itzalpean babesten naiz , ezbeharra igaro artean .
PRED:	Do not be merciful to me , O God , for I have heard my people of Israel , for I have come to fight you .
GOLD:	I cry out to God Most High , to God who will fulfill his purpose for me .

ID:	2258
INPUT:	Haien lurraldea Arnon erreka ondoko Aroer hiritik Sirion edo Hermon mendiraino hedatzen zen ,
PRED:	Their territory extended from the Arnon River , from the Arnon Gorge to the Arnon River ,
GOLD:	So Israel conquered the entire area from Aroer at the edge of the Arnon Gorge all the way to Mount Sirion , also called Mount Hermon .

ID:	2259
INPUT:	Hobe da jakinduria indarra baino , diot nik ; behartsuaren jakinduria , ordea , arbuiatu egin ohi daeta ez dira haren hitzak aditzen .
PRED:	My wisdom is better than the strength of the wicked , but the wise have no fear .
GOLD:	So even though wisdom is better than strength , those who are wise will be despised if they are poor . What they say will not be appreciated for long .

ID:	2260
INPUT:	Orduan , nagusiaren emazteak <unk> heldu eta esan zion : « Zatoz nirekin ! » Baina Josek soinekoa haren eskuetan utzi eta ihes egin zuen etxetik .
PRED:	Then she came to her husband and said , “ Come away ! Come , let me go into the house of her . ” But Joseph left him and left him .
GOLD:	She came and grabbed him by his cloak , demanding , “ Come on , sleep with me ! ” Joseph tore himself away , but he left his cloak in her hand as he ran from the house .

ID:	2261
INPUT:	Bai , badut aldeko <unk> zeruan , badut <unk> goian ,
PRED:	Yes , I know that I am under heaven and under heaven .
GOLD:	Even now my witness is in heaven.My advocate is there on high .

ID:	2262
INPUT:	AZKEN <unk> ( 15 , 14 — 16 , 27 )
PRED:	Paul 's Final Words
GOLD:	Paul 's Travel Plans

ID:	2263
INPUT:	Gaitz galgarriz , sukarrez eta <unk> joko zaituzte ; <unk> , haize errez eta <unk> hondatuko dizkizue uztak : ez du etsiko zuek desagerrarazi arte .
PRED:	But when I am sick and ashamed of your prophets will be filled with fire , and those who plant your crops will be filled with fire .
GOLD:	The Lord will strike you with wasting diseases , fever , and inflammation , with scorching heat and drought , and with blight and mildew . These disasters will pursue you until you die .

ID:	2264
INPUT:	« Bai , neure begiek ikusi dute hori dena , neure belarriek entzun dute , eta ulertzen dut .
PRED:	“ I have seen what I have seen , and I have heard about it .
GOLD:	“ Look , I have seen all this with my own eyesand heard it with my own ears , and now I understand .

ID:	2265
INPUT:	Beraz , alferrik gorde dut bihotza <unk> errugabe naizela agertzeko eskuak garbitu ,
PRED:	So I have put my heart in my heart , and I have put my hands on my hands .
GOLD:	Did I keep my heart pure for nothing ? Did I keep myself innocent for no reason ?

ID:	2266
INPUT:	Neure Aitaren ondoan ikusi <unk> mintzo naiz ni ; zuek , ordea , zeuen aitarengandik ikasi duzuena egiten duzue .
PRED:	I saw that you have seen my Father , but you have heard me from the power of your Father .
GOLD:	I am telling you what I saw when I was with my Father . But you are following the advice of your father . ”

ID:	2267
INPUT:	Paulo Mazedonia eta <unk>
PRED:	Paul and Silas in Macedonia
GOLD:	Paul Goes to Macedonia and Greece

ID:	2268
INPUT:	Kristoren berri ona bat bakarra
PRED:	Good News about Christ
GOLD:	Paul 's Message Comes from Christ

ID:	2269
INPUT:	Bere lurra lantzen duenak ogia ugari , <unk> atzetik dabilenak miseria sarri .
PRED:	Those who are very hard to see how hard they see how hard they were looking for ?
GOLD:	A hard worker has plenty of food , but a person who chases fantasies ends up in poverty .

ID:	2270
INPUT:	Maite nautenak ditut maite , nire bila saiatzen direnek aurkituko naute .
PRED:	I love those who love me ; those who love me will find me .
GOLD:	“ I love all who love me.Those who search will surely find me .

ID:	2271
INPUT:	Baina , garbi egonik edo bidaian ez delarik , Pazkoa ospatu gabe uzten duena , bota egingo dute herritik . Ezarritako egunean Jaunari oparia eskaintzen ez dionak bere hobenaren ondorenak jasan beharko ditu .
PRED:	But if they are ceremonially clean , they must not be ceremonially clean or a Passover meal or a sacrifice for the Lord . If they are guilty , they will be punished for your sin .
GOLD:	“ But those who neglect to celebrate the Passover at the regular time , even though they are ceremonially clean and not away on a trip , will be cut off from the community of Israel . If they fail to present the Lord 's offering at the proper time , they will suffer the consequences of their guilt .

ID:	2272
INPUT:	<unk> hau , ordea , ez da bakar baten izenean ari , eta Jainkoa bat bakarra da .
PRED:	But those who have been unfaithful to him , and there is no one who is one who is one .
GOLD:	Now a mediator is helpful if more than one party must reach an agreement . But God , who is one , did not use a mediator when he gave his promise to Abraham .

ID:	2273
INPUT:	beren bizitzak Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren zerbitzuan eman dituzten horiekin .
PRED:	People who live in the Lord Jesus Christ , for they have given us our ancestors .
GOLD:	who have risked their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ .

ID:	2274
INPUT:	« Irten zaitez ontzitik emazte , seme eta errainekin .
PRED:	“ Get up , pick up the boat with the boat and their wives .
GOLD:	“ Leave the boat , all of you — you and your wife , and your sons and their wives .

ID:	2275
INPUT:	Bila ezazue Jauna , aurki dezakezue eta ; egiozue dei , hurbil duzue eta .
PRED:	Take him back to the Lord , and give him a drink .
GOLD:	Seek the Lord while you can find him.Call on him now while he is near .

ID:	2276
INPUT:	<unk> seme <unk> , Benjaminen leinukoa ;
PRED:	They were leader of the tribe of Benjamin , the tribe of Benjamin .
GOLD:	BenjaminPalti son of Raphu

ID:	2277
INPUT:	Eta Josuek amalektarrak garaitu zituen eta ezpataz garbitu .
PRED:	Then Joshua destroyed all the Amalekites and destroyed them .
GOLD:	As a result , Joshua overwhelmed the army of Amalek in battle .

ID:	2278
INPUT:	Urre garbiz urreztatu zuen eta urrezko hegala ezarri inguru guztian .
PRED:	He overlaid them with gold and overlaid them with gold .
GOLD:	He overlaid it with pure gold and ran a gold molding around the edge .

ID:	2279
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zidan : « Ea , maita ezazu berriz ere emaztea , <unk> duen eta adulterio egin duen arren . Halaxe maite baititu Jaunak israeldarrak , hauek beste jainkoengana jotzen duten arren , jainko horiei eskainitako <unk> zale » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Get rid of those who are unfaithful to me , and if they are unfaithful to the people of Israel , they have committed by worshiping other gods . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Go and love your wife again , even though she commits adultery with another lover . This will illustrate that the Lord still loves Israel , even though the people have turned to other gods and love to worship them . ”

ID:	2280
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zion : — Ez dizut , bada , esan , sinesten baduzu Jainkoaren aintza ikusiko duzula ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't you know that you have seen the glory of God ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus responded , “ Did n't I tell you that you would see God 's glory if you believe ? ”

ID:	2281
INPUT:	Askotan bota izan du sutara eta uretara ere , hilarazteko . Ezer egin ahal baduzu , erruki zaitez gutaz eta lagun iezaguzu .
PRED:	For I have thrown into a fire , and I have brought them into the fire . Please give us a trap for us , and we have mercy .
GOLD:	The spirit often throws him into the fire or into water , trying to kill him . Have mercy on us and help us , if you can . ”

ID:	2282
INPUT:	Astearen lehen egunean batzar sakratua egingo duzue eta ez da ohiko lan arruntik egingo .
PRED:	On the first day the first day of the festival will be a holy assembly , and no ordinary work will be holy assembly .
GOLD:	On the first day of the festival , all the people must stop their ordinary work and observe an official day for holy assembly .

ID:	2283
INPUT:	Horrela , inork ez dezake esan nire izenean bataiatua izan denik .
PRED:	No one can tell anyone about the name of my name .
GOLD:	for now no one can say they were baptized in my name .

ID:	2284
INPUT:	<unk> enperadorearen <unk> hamabosgarren urtea zen . Pontzio Pilato zen Judeako gobernari , Herodes Galileako agintari , honen anaia Felipe <unk> eta <unk> agintari , eta <unk> <unk> agintari ;
PRED:	At that time when King Herod 's reign arrived at Mizpah , when Herod was governor of Judea , the city of Judea , Philip , Philip , and the other officials of Galilee , and when Herod 's officials were in Galilee .
GOLD:	It was now the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius , the Roman emperor . Pontius Pilate was governor over Judea ; Herod Antipas was ruler over Galilee ; his brother Philip was ruler over Iturea and Traconitis ; Lysanias was ruler over Abilene .

ID:	2285
INPUT:	Hartu gero bi onize harri eta zizelkatu haietan Israelen hamabi semeen izenak ,
PRED:	So take two curtains with two cherubim , and all the names of the Kohathite clans of Israel were twelve sons of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Take two onyx stones , and engrave on them the names of the tribes of Israel .

ID:	2286
INPUT:	Uste onez gaude , bai , baina nahiago genuke gorputz honetatik erbesteratuak izan Jaunarekin bizitzera joateko .
PRED:	For we have a gift to you , but now we will bring to the Lord .
GOLD:	Yes , we are fully confident , and we would rather be away from these earthly bodies , for then we will be at home with the Lord .

ID:	2287
INPUT:	Honela zioen Davidek : « Har dezadan Nahaxen seme <unk> , beronen aitak ni hartu ninduen bezain ongi » . Davidek mandatariak igorri zizkion aitaren <unk> doluminak ematera . Mandatariak amondarren lurraldera heldu zirenean , ordea ,
PRED:	Then David said to him , “ I am sending you to my father , my father , and his father , his father , and his father sent me into the land of the Ammonites . ” But when they arrived at the land of the Ammonites .
GOLD:	David said , “ I am going to show loyalty to Hanun just as his father , Nahash , was always loyal to me . ” So David sent ambassadors to express sympathy to Hanun about his father 's death.But when David 's ambassadors arrived in the land of Ammon ,

ID:	2288
INPUT:	Baina , Pedro Antiokiara etorri zenean , gogor egin behar izan nion aurrez aurre , oker jokatu baitzuen .
PRED:	But Peter sent me to Antioch , and he became angry with contempt .
GOLD:	But when Peter came to Antioch , I had to oppose him to his face , for what he did was very wrong .

ID:	2289
INPUT:	« Madarikazio guztiok etorriko zaizkizue gainera , pertsegitu eta harrapatu egingo zaituztete , suntsitu arte , Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren esana ez egiteagatik eta berak emandako agindu eta legeak ez betetzeagatik .
PRED:	“ I will drive you out all your enemies , and they will destroy you and destroy them until the Lord your God has commanded you to obey the law of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ If you refuse to listen to the Lord your God and to obey the commands and decrees he has given you , all these curses will pursue and overtake you until you are destroyed .

ID:	2290
INPUT:	Auzoko herriak zigortuak eta salbatuak
PRED:	The Descendants of Abram
GOLD:	's Justice

ID:	2291
INPUT:	Gero , ikuskarian , tronu , izaki eta zaharren inguruan zeuden aingeru askoren ahotsa entzun nuen . Milaka eta <unk> ziren ,
PRED:	Then I heard the angel of the earth , praised , and the Lamb were praised by all the angels who heard him , and they were terrified .
GOLD:	Then I looked again , and I heard the voices of thousands and millions of angels around the throne and of the living beings and the elders .

ID:	2292
INPUT:	Jainkoak ituna egin israeldarrekin
PRED:	God 's Covenant
GOLD:	Israel Accepts the

ID:	2293
INPUT:	Juda eta beste anaiak Joseren etxean sartu — hantxe baitzegoen oraindik Jose — eta lurreraino ahuspeztu zitzaizkion .
PRED:	So Joseph and his brothers went into the home of Joseph , where Joseph was there , Joseph and Joseph bowed low before him .
GOLD:	Joseph was still in his palace when Judah and his brothers arrived , and they fell to the ground before him .

ID:	2294
INPUT:	Etxera heldurik , labana hartu eta hamabi <unk> zatikatu zuen emakumearen gorpua eta Israelgo lurralde guztietara bidali zituen puskak .
PRED:	When he threw them into the house , he took two pieces and threw them into the land of Israel , and he sent her into the land of Israel .
GOLD:	When he got home , he took a knife and cut his concubine 's body into twelve pieces . Then he sent one piece to each tribe throughout all the territory of Israel .

ID:	2295
INPUT:	Edom , Moab eta <unk> ;
PRED:	Edom , Moab , and Moab .
GOLD:	Then I gave the cup to the nations of Edom , Moab , and Ammon ,

ID:	2296
INPUT:	Ezekiasek galdetu zion Isaiasi : — Zer izango dut berriz ere Jaunaren tenplura joango naizenaren ezaugarri ?
PRED:	Then Hezekiah asked Isaiah , “ What will I go to the Temple of the Lord ? ”
GOLD:	And Hezekiah had asked , “ What sign will prove that I will go to the Temple of the Lord ? ”

ID:	2297
INPUT:	Jaunaren aingeruak basamortuan , Xur bidean dagoen iturri ondoan , aurkitu zuen
PRED:	Then the angel of the Lord came to the mountain of the Lord .
GOLD:	The angel of the Lord found Hagar beside a spring of water in the wilderness , along the road to Shur .

ID:	2298
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Moisesi : « Bihar goizean goiz jaiki eta zoaz faraoiari esatera : Hala dio Jaunak , hebrearren Jainkoak : Utziozu ene herriari ni gurtzera joaten ;
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Let 's go ahead and tell him what the Lord says : Go ahead of Pharaoh , the people of Egypt , my God , and they will worship them . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Get up early in the morning and stand before Pharaoh . Tell him , ‘ This is what the Lord , the God of the Hebrews , says : Let my people go , so they can worship me .

ID:	2299
INPUT:	« Entzun hau , Job ; hartzazu astia Jainkoaren mirariak <unk> .
PRED:	“ Listen to me , Job , and I will give you a miraculous signs and wonders .
GOLD:	“ Pay attention to this , Job.Stop and consider the wonderful miracles of God !

ID:	2300
INPUT:	Jakin zuen Jakobek bazela Egipton garia , eta honela mintzatu zitzaien semeei : « Zertan zaudete elkarri begira ?
PRED:	When Jacob heard this , he said to the sons of Egypt , “ Why are you here in Egypt ? Why are you here in Egypt ?
GOLD:	When Jacob heard that grain was available in Egypt , he said to his sons , “ Why are you standing around looking at one another ?

ID:	2301
INPUT:	Eta zeruan , lur gainean , lur azpian eta itsasoan dauden sorkari guztiei , hau esaten entzun nien : « Tronuan eseria <unk> <unk> , ohorea , aintza eta <unk> , menderen mendetan » .
PRED:	And when I heard that he was under heaven and under the earth , I heard everything he had written in heaven and all the kingdoms of the earth . I heard that the glory of the earth and glory of the earth , and all the glory of the glory of the earth will worship him . ”
GOLD:	And then I heard every creature in heaven and on earth and under the earth and in the sea . They sang : “ Blessing and honor and glory and powerbelong to the one sitting on the throneand to the Lamb forever and ever . ”

ID:	2302
INPUT:	Israel herrialdea bakean egon zen berrogei urtez , harik eta Kenazen seme Otniel hil zen arte .
PRED:	There was forty years old when the land of Israel lived for forty years , but he died .
GOLD:	So there was peace in the land for forty years . Then Othniel son of Kenaz died .

ID:	2303
INPUT:	eta zaharraren tokian altxatzen <unk> alde jartzen ikusi duteguzkipean dabilen jende guztia ere .
PRED:	And if they see that the sun is under the sun , they have seen everything under the sun .
GOLD:	But then everyone rushes to the side of yet another youth who replaces him .

ID:	2304
INPUT:	Goizean , nire semeari bularra emateko jaiki nintzenean , hila zegoen . Eguna argitzean , ordea , begiratu nion ongi eta ikusi nuen ez zela nik izandako semea .
PRED:	When I got up early the next morning , I saw it in the morning . But when I saw it , I saw her son . But when I saw her son , I saw her son .
GOLD:	And in the morning when I tried to nurse my son , he was dead ! But when I looked more closely in the morning light , I saw that it was n't my son at all . ”

ID:	2305
INPUT:	Atezain zegoen neskameak esan zion Pedrori : — Ez al haiz hi ere gizon horren ikasleetakoa ? Pedrok erantzun : — Ez , ez <unk> .
PRED:	He asked Peter , “ Do n't you think you are one of his disciples ? ” Peter asked . “ Do n't you think of his disciples , ” Peter replied .
GOLD:	The woman asked Peter , “ You 're not one of that man 's disciples , are you ? ” “ No , ” he said , “ I am not . ”

ID:	2306
INPUT:	Jainkoaren suminak erasotzen dit eta urratzen , hortzak estutzen ditu nire aurka , zorrotz begiratzen , etsai bailitzan .
PRED:	He has led me into the hands of God , and they rebelled against me .
GOLD:	God hates me and angrily tears me apart.He snaps his teeth at meand pierces me with his eyes .

ID:	2307
INPUT:	« <unk> muga Mediterraneo itsasoa izango da , hegoaldeko mugatik Hamateko sarreraraino iparraldean .
PRED:	“ The waters of the Mediterranean Sea will be as far as the south as far as the north as far as Lebo-hamath .
GOLD:	“ On the west side , the Mediterranean itself will be your border from the southern border to the point where the northern border begins , opposite Lebo-hamath .

ID:	2308
INPUT:	goizean zure maitasuna <unk> , gau osoan zure leialtasuna ,
PRED:	In the morning your unfailing love , and all your unfailing love will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	accompanied by a ten-stringed instrument , a harp , and the melody of a lyre .

ID:	2309
INPUT:	Moises fidagarria izan zen , noski , Jainkoaren etxeko guztientzat , baina Jainkoaren mezua herriari adierazi behar zion zerbitzari bezala .
PRED:	For Moses was faithful to the people of God , but the people of God gave him a message to the people of God .
GOLD:	Moses was certainly faithful in God 's house as a servant . His work was an illustration of the truths God would reveal later .

ID:	2310
INPUT:	Egipto hondamendibihurtuko <unk> herrialdea <unk> utzi , bizilagun guztiak joeta garbituko ditudanean , orduan jakingo dute <unk> naizela Jauna .
PRED:	That is why the land of Egypt will bring an army against Egypt , which I am the Lord . Then they will know that I am the Lord , and they will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And when I destroy Egyptand strip you of everything you ownand strike down all your people , then you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	2311
INPUT:	Kartzelako arduradunak ez zion Joseri bere gain utzitako ezeren konturik eskatzen . Berekin zuen , bai , Jauna , eta egiten zuen guztietan ongi ateratzen laguntzen zion .
PRED:	So he did not accept his work in the name of the Lord 's Temple , for he was given to Joseph . He was the Lord 's Temple , and he took him from all the Temple of God .
GOLD:	The warden had no more worries , because Joseph took care of everything . The Lord was with him and caused everything he did to succeed .

ID:	2312
INPUT:	Asak kultua <unk>
PRED:	Asa 's Religious Reforms
GOLD:	Asa 's Religious Reforms

ID:	2313
INPUT:	eta hau , gurutzea lepoan zuela , hiritik « Burezur » — hebreeraz Golgota — zeritzan <unk> irten zen .
PRED:	This was the way that Jesus was called out to be called out to the place of the Dead Sea , which was called out to be called out .
GOLD:	Carrying the cross by himself , he went to the place called Place of the Skull ( in Hebrew , Golgotha ) .

ID:	2314
INPUT:	Etxe <unk> jantzi zuen urrez , baita santutegiaren aurrean zegoen aldarea ere .
PRED:	Then he put on the Temple of the Most Holy Place and placed it on the altar .
GOLD:	So he finished overlaying the entire Temple with gold , including the altar that belonged to the Most Holy Place .

ID:	2315
INPUT:	Joanek <unk> egin zuen testigantza , oihu eginez : « Honetaz ari nintzen ni , “ Nire ondoren datorrena nire gainetik dago , ni baino lehenagokoa baitzen ” esan nuenean » .
PRED:	John was telling him , “ This is what I am saying , ‘ This is the one who is going to save me from the one who is greater than me . '
GOLD:	John testified about him when he shouted to the crowds , “ This is the one I was talking about when I said , ‘ Someone is coming after me who is far greater than I am , for he existed long before me . ' ”

ID:	2316
INPUT:	ezta Abrahamen jatorriko guztiak ere Abrahamen benetako seme-alaba . Jainkoak esan zion Abrahami : Isaaken bidez izango dituzu ondorengoak .
PRED:	This is the son of Abraham , the descendants of Abraham , and Abraham said to Abraham , ‘ This is the descendants of Abraham . '
GOLD:	Being descendants of Abraham does n't make them truly Abraham 's children . For the Scriptures say , “ Isaac is the son through whom your descendants will be counted , ” though Abraham had other children , too .

ID:	2317
INPUT:	Baina jaunak erantzun zien : “ Benetan diotsuet , ez dakit nor zareten ” .
PRED:	“ But I tell you the truth , ‘ I do n't know you . '
GOLD:	“ But he called back , ‘ Believe me , I do n't know you ! '

ID:	2318
INPUT:	Bi gizaseme , bata Eldad izenekoa eta bestea Medad , hirurogeita hamarren taldekoak izan arren , ez ziren etxolara joan , baizik eta kanpalekuan gelditu ziren . Baina kokatu zen espiritua haiengan ere eta profeta gisa hasi ziren mintzatzen .
PRED:	One of the other men were born , and one of the other men were born to the other . But the believers stayed there and stayed there . But they stayed in the camp and went to the camp .
GOLD:	Two men , Eldad and Medad , had stayed behind in the camp . They were listed among the elders , but they had not gone out to the Tabernacle . Yet the Spirit rested upon them as well , so they prophesied there in the camp .

ID:	2319
INPUT:	Bere gurutzea hartu eta jarraitzen ez didana ez da niretzat gai .
PRED:	But if you do n't follow me , he does n't give me the cross .
GOLD:	If you refuse to take up your cross and follow me , you are not worthy of being mine .

ID:	2320
INPUT:	Jesek esan zion bere seme Davidi : — Har itzazu zaku bat gari <unk> eta hamar ogi hauek , eta eraman bizkor zeure anaiei kanpalekura .
PRED:	Then Jesse said to David , “ Take some of your brothers and sisters , bring them back to the camp of barley , and I brought you back to the camp . ”
GOLD:	One day Jesse said to David , “ Take this basket of roasted grain and these ten loaves of bread , and carry them quickly to your brothers .

ID:	2321
INPUT:	Hitz egin bitartean , Jaunaren espiritua sartu zen niregan eta zutitu egin ninduen , eta hitz egiten <unk> entzun nion
PRED:	As soon as the spirit watched , the spirit of the Lord stood up and stood in me , and I heard that I heard the spirit of the Lord .
GOLD:	The Spirit came into me as he spoke , and he set me on my feet . I listened carefully to his words .

ID:	2322
INPUT:	Abimelekek jarraitu zuen : — Zer egin diguzu , gero ? Nola bururatu zaizu horrelakorik ? Edozein herritar ohera zitekeen zure emaztearekin . Orduan , denok bihurtuko gintuzun errudun .
PRED:	Abimelech asked him , “ What have you done ? Why are you doing such such such a thing ? Why are you doing such a sin ? ” So Abimelech demanded .
GOLD:	“ How could you do this to us ? ” Abimelech exclaimed . “ One of my people might easily have taken your wife and slept with her , and you would have made us guilty of great sin . ”

ID:	2323
INPUT:	Ez egin zinik
PRED:	You must not commit adultery .
GOLD:	The Power of Prayer

ID:	2324
INPUT:	<unk> larunbata zen . Apaizburuak eta fariseuak Pilatogana bildu ziren elkarrekin ,
PRED:	At that time the leading priests and teachers of religious law came to Pilate and asked him ,
GOLD:	The next day , on the Sabbath , the leading priests and Pharisees went to see Pilate .

ID:	2325
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Zeuen erru guztietatik garbituko zaituztedanean , hiri hondatuak berreraiki eta bizilagunez beteko ditut .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will bring you back to the towns of the city and the land of Judah .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : When I cleanse you from your sins , I will repopulate your cities , and the ruins will be rebuilt .

ID:	2326
INPUT:	Gure aitak uztarri astuna ezarri zizuela ? Astunagoa ezarriko dizuet nik ! Gure aitak larruzko zartailuz zigorkatzen zintuztela ? Burdinazko muturdunez zigorkatuko zaituztet nik ! »
PRED:	My father laid heavy burdens on you , and he laid my mouth on you , but I beat you with wine , but I 'm not sending you to beat you with scorpions . ”
GOLD:	Yes , my father laid heavy burdens on you , but I 'm going to make them even heavier ! My father beat you with whips , but I will beat you with scorpions ! ' ”

ID:	2327
INPUT:	Pedrok erantzun zuen : — Ez <unk> zertaz ari haizen , mutil ! Eta une berean , oraindik hizketan ari zela , oilarrak jo zuen .
PRED:	Peter replied , “ I do n't know that you 're talking about ? ” And when he was still talking about , he was still talking about the rooster crows .
GOLD:	But Peter said , “ Man , I do n't know what you are talking about . ” And immediately , while he was still speaking , the rooster crowed .

ID:	2328
INPUT:	Neure suminaren suminez zin dagit lurrikara handia izango dela Israelen .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says :
GOLD:	In my jealousy and blazing anger , I promise a mighty shaking in the land of Israel on that day .

ID:	2329
INPUT:	Erre-opariaren eskaintza bukatu zuenean , Jehuk gudari eta buruzagiei agindu zien : — Aurrera ! Hil itzazue ! Ez dezala inork ere ihes egin ! Ezpataz hil eta kanpora bota zituzten . Gero , gudari eta buruzagiek , Baalen jauretxeko <unk> sartu ,
PRED:	When Jehu had finished speaking , he ordered the officials and the officials of the officials of Israel , “ Take them away , and kill you ! Do n't kill you ! ” So Jehu killed all the men of Baal and the men of Baal .
GOLD:	As soon as Jehu had finished sacrificing the burnt offering , he commanded his guards and officers , “ Go in and kill all of them . Do n't let a single one escape ! ” So they killed them all with their swords , and the guards and officers dragged their bodies outside . Then Jehu 's men went into the innermost fortress of the temple of Baal .

ID:	2330
INPUT:	Orduan , Pedrok esan zion : « Ez dut ez urrerik , ez <unk> , baina dudana emango dizut : Jesu Kristo Nazaretarraren izenean , jaiki eta ibili ! »
PRED:	Then Peter said to him , “ I am not the example of the Lord , but I will give you the finest gold from the land of the Lord Jesus Christ . ”
GOLD:	But Peter said , “ I do n't have any silver or gold for you . But I 'll give you what I have . In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene , get up and walk ! ”

ID:	2331
INPUT:	Nork ezagutu du Jaunaren pentsamendua ? Nork irakats diezaioke ? Guk , ordea , Kristoren pentsamendua dugu .
PRED:	Who knows how can we know the Lord ? But we know the way of Christ ?
GOLD:	For , “ Who can know the Lord 's thoughts ? Who knows enough to teach him ? ” But we understand these things , for we have the mind of Christ .

ID:	2332
INPUT:	<unk> judua barrutik da eta benetako erdainkuntza bihotzekoa , Espirituak egiten duena eta ez idatzitako legeak . Hau da , gizakiak ez , baina Jainkoak aintzat hartzen duena .
PRED:	For those who are born in the blood of the sinful nature and the Spirit are not able to obey the law of God . This is the law of God 's law , but they are not wise .
GOLD:	No , a true Jew is one whose heart is right with God . And true circumcision is not merely obeying the letter of the law ; rather , it is a change of heart produced by the Spirit . And a person with a changed heart seeks praise from God , not from people .

ID:	2333
INPUT:	Gau batez , honela esan zion Jaunak Paulori ikuskari batean : « Ez izan beldurrik , jarraitu hitz egiten isildu gabe .
PRED:	That night the Lord said to Paul , “ Do n't be afraid of me .
GOLD:	One night the Lord spoke to Paul in a vision and told him , “ Do n't be afraid ! Speak out ! Do n't be silent !

ID:	2334
INPUT:	Urrezko lau eraztun urtu zituen kutxaren lau <unk> , bi eraztun albo baterako eta bi besterako .
PRED:	Then he made two gold rings on the sides of the altar , and he placed them on the side of the altar .
GOLD:	He cast four gold rings and attached them to its four feet , two rings on each side .

ID:	2335
INPUT:	Kutsaturik gaude guztiok , gure egintzarik onenak <unk> zikinen antzeko ; orbela bezala gaude <unk> haizeak bezala <unk> erruek .
PRED:	How can you think of your unfailing love ? How can we see ? How can we know that we were like ?
GOLD:	You welcome those who gladly do good , who follow godly ways.But you have been very angry with us , for we are not godly.We are constant sinners ; how can people like us be saved ?

ID:	2336
INPUT:	Zeure neke eta <unk> ondoren eta jasan duzun morrontza <unk> ondoren , Jaunak atseden emango dizunean , Israel ,
PRED:	When I saw that you were sick and fig tree , while the Lord will give you victory over all the nations of Israel .
GOLD:	In that wonderful day when the Lord gives his people rest from sorrow and fear , from slavery and chains ,

ID:	2337
INPUT:	Ez du onik egiten ezti gehiegi <unk> , ezta ohore <unk> atzetik ibiltzeak ere .
PRED:	He has not been led by the mouth of the honey , and he does n't even see his own mouth .
GOLD:	It 's not good to eat too much honey , and it 's not good to seek honors for yourself .

ID:	2338
INPUT:	bati , Espirituaren egitez , <unk> ematen dio ; beste bati , <unk> egiteko dohaina ;
PRED:	He has given some of the Spirit , and they have been able to kill one of the Spirit .
GOLD:	The same Spirit gives great faith to another , and to someone else the one Spirit gives the gift of healing .

ID:	2339
INPUT:	Beraz , errege jauna , onar ezazu nire aholkua : Utzi zeure bekatuak zuzenbide eginez , uko egin gaiztakeriari , behartsuekin errukitsu izanez . Agian , luzaroan eta zoriontsu biziko zara .
PRED:	So let 's go to the king 's advice and ask for my advice , and let your sins be kind to sin . Please give you a gift to sin , and you will live in peace .
GOLD:	“ ‘ This is what the dream means , Your Majesty , and what the Most High has declared will happen to my lord the king .

ID:	2340
INPUT:	<unk> bat hausten badio , libre utziko du hortzaren ordain .
PRED:	If I will punish you with a woman , she will be free .
GOLD:	And if a man knocks out the tooth of his male or female slave , he must let the slave go free to compensate for the tooth .

ID:	2341
INPUT:	Gainera , 7 . 337 morroi eta mirabe eta 200 kantari , gizon eta emakume .
PRED:	There are two men and women , women , and women .
GOLD:	in addition to 7,337 servants and 200 singers , both men and women .

ID:	2342
INPUT:	Honela , bada , agertu zen Joan Bataiatzailea basamortuan . <unk> eta bataiatzeko hots egiten zuen , bekatuen barkamenerako .
PRED:	So John came from the wilderness of the wilderness , and when John had been baptized in the wilderness , he knew that he was able to be able to be forgiven .
GOLD:	This messenger was John the Baptist . He was in the wilderness and preached that people should be baptized to show that they had repented of their sins and turned to God to be forgiven .

ID:	2343
INPUT:	Gizakiak egindako jainkoak , nola izan egiazko jainko ? »
PRED:	What do we have done to the dead ? ”
GOLD:	Can people make their own gods ? These are not real gods at all ! ”

ID:	2344
INPUT:	lege-maisu izan nahian , esaten eta aho betean irakasten dutena ulertzen ez badute ere .
PRED:	They say to the teachers of religious law , ‘ They do n't understand what they do . '
GOLD:	They want to be known as teachers of the law of Moses , but they do n't know what they are talking about , even though they speak so confidently .

ID:	2345
INPUT:	Izan bedi ilun eta <unk> haien bidea , zure aingeruak <unk> !
PRED:	Let them be very glad , and they know that your angels are under your power .
GOLD:	Make their path dark and slippery , with the angel of the Lord pursuing them .

ID:	2346
INPUT:	Kristo Jesusek , jainkozko <unk> izanik , ez zion gogor eutsi nahi izan
PRED:	When Jesus was faithful to the humble , he refused to obey him .
GOLD:	Though he was God , he did not think of equality with Godas something to cling to .

ID:	2347
INPUT:	Jauna , zergatik baztertzen nauzu , zergatik gordetzen aurpegia ?
PRED:	O Lord , why have you rejected me ?
GOLD:	I have been sick and close to death since my youth.I stand helpless and desperate before your terrors .

ID:	2348
INPUT:	Atera nintzen , bada , gauez Haraneko atetik eta <unk> iturri aldera eta Zabortegiko ate aldera hartu nuen . <unk> alde hura arakatu nuen : harresiak <unk> zeuden eta ateak suak kiskaliak .
PRED:	So I went out to the wall from the Kidron Valley , and I took the wall from the wall to see the wall of the wall . I was under the wall , and I took my doors into the wall .
GOLD:	After dark I went out through the Valley Gate , past the Jackal 's Well , and over to the Dung Gate to inspect the broken walls and burned gates .

ID:	2349
INPUT:	Egiptotik atera eta hirugarren hila bete zen egunean iritsi ziren israeldarrak Sinai basamortura .
PRED:	On the third day the third day of the Israelites arrived in the wilderness of Sinai .
GOLD:	Exactly two months after the Israelites left Egypt , they arrived in the wilderness of Sinai .

ID:	2350
INPUT:	( 2 Erg 19 , 8-13 )
PRED:	Isaiah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Isaiah Predicts Judah 's Deliverance

ID:	2351
INPUT:	Leiala ez denaz <unk> fidatzea , hortz <unk> jatea eta zango <unk> ibiltzea bezala da .
PRED:	For if they are wise , they have been able to be able to eat the road that had been killed , and they have been able to eat .
GOLD:	Putting confidence in an unreliable person in times of troubleis like chewing with a broken tooth or walking on a lame foot .

ID:	2352
INPUT:	Bere aita Daviden aginduari jarraituz , Salomonek <unk> beren eginkizunak ezarri zizkien ; lebitarrei , Jaunaren gorespenak kantatu eta apaizei eguneroko kultuan <unk> . <unk> tenpluko ateak zaintzeko eginkizuna eman zien , Davidek , Jainkoaren gizonak , agindu bezala .
PRED:	So Solomon 's father gave them the sacred offerings to the Lord . He brought them to the Temple of the Lord and the priests who were given to the Temple of the Temple of the Lord , and he gave them to the Temple of God .
GOLD:	In assigning the priests to their duties , Solomon followed the regulations of his father , David . He also assigned the Levites to lead the people in praise and to assist the priests in their daily duties . And he assigned the gatekeepers to their gates by their divisions , following the commands of David , the man of God .

ID:	2353
INPUT:	Zuk , ordea , Jainkoaren gizon horrek , ihes egizu hauetatik guztietatik , eta saia zaitez justizian , <unk> , sinesmenean , maitasunean , eroapenean eta <unk> .
PRED:	But if you have come from God , let me go into all the way of God and those who are living in every kind of faith , and those who love God will be filled with love .
GOLD:	But you , Timothy , are a man of God ; so run from all these evil things . Pursue righteousness and a godly life , along with faith , love , perseverance , and gentleness .

ID:	2354
INPUT:	Juduen asmoak <unk> , <unk> erosi egin zituzten . Honela jardun zuten Pertsiako errege Ziroren garai guztian , Darioren erregealdia arte .
PRED:	At that time they had been taken by the power of King Cyrus of Persia , which was given to the kings of Persia . In fact , the kingdom of King Cyrus of Persia .
GOLD:	They bribed agents to work against them and to frustrate their plans . This went on during the entire reign of King Cyrus of Persia and lasted until King Darius of Persia took the throne .

ID:	2355
INPUT:	Entzun baino lehen erantzuten <unk> lotsa jasan beharko du .
PRED:	Listen to what they have done , and they will be ashamed .
GOLD:	Spouting off before listening to the factsis both shameful and foolish .

ID:	2356
INPUT:	Egun hura ez da lehenik argi eta gero ilun izango ;
PRED:	In that same way , it will not be hidden .
GOLD:	On that day the sources of light will no longer shine ,

ID:	2357
INPUT:	Baina Jesusek berehala hitz egin zien eta esan : — Lasai ! Neu naiz . Ez beldurtu !
PRED:	But Jesus told them , “ Do n't be afraid ! I am afraid ! ”
GOLD:	But Jesus spoke to them at once . “ Do n't be afraid , ” he said . “ Take courage . I am here ! ”

ID:	2358
INPUT:	Aitorpen bera egiten digu Espiritu Santuak ere , hau esatean :
PRED:	The Holy Spirit says , “ This is the Holy Spirit . ”
GOLD:	And the Holy Spirit also testifies that this is so . For he says ,

ID:	2359
INPUT:	Baina neurekin zaitut zu , Jauna , gudari indartsu bezala ; eroriko dira nire etsaiak , ezin izango naute garaitu ; beraien <unk> porrot egingo dute , haien lotsa <unk> izango , behin ere <unk> .
PRED:	But I will make you strong , and my enemies will be strong as strong as my enemies . They will fall , and they will be able to kill them , and they will be ashamed .
GOLD:	But the Lord stands beside me like a great warrior.Before him my persecutors will stumble.They can not defeat me.They will fail and be thoroughly humiliated.Their dishonor will never be forgotten .

ID:	2360
INPUT:	Nork ez zuri begirune , Jauna ? Nork ez goretsi zure izena ? Zu bakarrik zara santu ! Herriak oro etorrieta zure <unk> dira , zure <unk> aurrean agertu baitira » .
PRED:	Who does n't fear you ? Who does not fear you ? Who does not worship your name ? For those who fear you will know that your name will be filled with all your people , and they will know that they are in your hearts . ”
GOLD:	Who will not fear you , Lord , and glorify your name ? For you alone are holy.All nations will come and worship before you , for your righteous deeds have been revealed . ”

ID:	2361
INPUT:	Txerrizainek ihes egin zuten eta , herrira joanik , dena kontatu zuten , baita <unk> ere .
PRED:	The other nations fled to the nearby village , and the other men had taken from the fields and how they had happened .
GOLD:	The herdsmen fled to the nearby town , telling everyone what happened to the demon-possessed men .

ID:	2362
INPUT:	“ Igo gaitezen Judaren aurka , <unk> dezagun eta menpean hartu , eta jar dezagun bertan <unk> semea ” .
PRED:	“ Come and tell us , ‘ Let 's kill us and kill us , and we will kill him and kill him . '
GOLD:	‘ We will attack Judah and capture it for ourselves . Then we will install the son of Tabeel as Judah 's king . '

ID:	2363
INPUT:	Nire aurka altxatzen diren <unk> kendu egingo ditut zuen artetik ; <unk> daudeneko herrialdetik aterako ditut , baina ez dira Israelen sartuko ; orduan jakingo duzue ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	But I will destroy you from my power , and I will be able to destroy you from the city of Israel . Then you will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	I will purge you of all those who rebel and revolt against me . I will bring them out of the countries where they are in exile , but they will never enter the land of Israel . Then you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	2364
INPUT:	Begiko ez banau , berriz , egin beza nirekin egoki <unk> .
PRED:	If you do n't know how I have done , let me know that we have been able to kill me .
GOLD:	But if he is through with me , then let him do what seems best to him . ”

ID:	2365
INPUT:	« Beraz , honela diotsuet nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak : Egizue gogoeta zeuen egoeraz .
PRED:	“ Therefore , I tell you what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says :
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Look at what 's happening to you !

ID:	2366
INPUT:	Elixama , <unk> , Elifelet .
PRED:	These were the leaders of the earth , who were able to kill me .
GOLD:	Elishama , Eliada , and Eliphelet .

ID:	2367
INPUT:	Gure borroka , izan ere , ez da hezur-mamizko arerioen aurkakoa , goiko espiritu gaiztoen aurkakoa baizik , mundu ilun honetako aginte , ahalmen eta <unk> aurkakoa .
PRED:	We have not defeated us , but we are the Lord our God . We are the evil of the evil things of the Lord , and the power of the kingdoms of the kingdoms of this world .
GOLD:	For we are not fighting against flesh-and-blood enemies , but against evil rulers and authorities of the unseen world , against mighty powers in this dark world , and against evil spirits in the heavenly places .

ID:	2368
INPUT:	Eta aurreraxeago joanik , lurrean erori eta otoizka ari zitzaion Jainkoari , urrun <unk> ordu hura , ahal bazen .
PRED:	As a donkey came into the ground , he fell down on the ground and saw that God was walking on the ground .
GOLD:	He went on a little farther and fell to the ground . He prayed that , if it were possible , the awful hour awaiting him might pass him by .

ID:	2369
INPUT:	Bete ezazue gogo onez zeuen zerbitzua , Jaunarentzat bezala eta ez gizakientzat .
PRED:	So do not obey the Lord your God , just as you are to obey the Lord .
GOLD:	Work with enthusiasm , as though you were working for the Lord rather than for people .

ID:	2370
INPUT:	sustraiak zahartu eta <unk> lurpean ihartu arren ,
PRED:	But when they have little things , they have enough to live in their mouths .
GOLD:	Though its roots have grown old in the earthand its stump decays ,

ID:	2371
INPUT:	<unk> gelditzen diren haragia eta ogia erre egingo dituzue .
PRED:	They will eat meat and eat meat , and you will be burned up .
GOLD:	Any meat or bread that is left over must then be burned up .

ID:	2372
INPUT:	Ibai baten adarrek alaitzen dute Jainkoaren hiria . Goi-goikoak bere bizilekua sagaratu du .
PRED:	Then the gold will be made with the gold , and the Most Holy Place will be holy .
GOLD:	God dwells in that city ; it can not be destroyed.From the very break of day , God will protect it .

ID:	2373
INPUT:	Aldi hartan , haserreak sorrarazi zituen Jainkoak Abimeleken eta Sikemgo nagusien artean , eta hauek Abimeleken kontra jaiki ziren .
PRED:	At that time God brought them up to the people of Shechem and led them into battle .
GOLD:	God sent a spirit that stirred up trouble between Abimelech and the leading citizens of Shechem , and they revolted .

ID:	2374
INPUT:	Haren senideek ere ez zuten , hain zuzen , berarengan sinesten .
PRED:	His brothers did not believe in him .
GOLD:	For even his brothers did n't believe in him .

ID:	2375
INPUT:	Horregatik , urruti dugu askapena , ez zaigu iristen salbamena ; argia espero genuen , eta iluna dugu gainean ; egunsentia espero , eta gau <unk> gabiltza .
PRED:	That is why we have come from us , and we have no hope . We have seen how hard we have done , and we know that we have seen .
GOLD:	So there is no justice among us , and we know nothing about right living.We look for light but find only darkness.We look for bright skies but walk in gloom .

ID:	2376
INPUT:	« Egun hau gogoangarri izango duzue eta , Jaunaren ohorez , festa <unk> ospatuko . Festa hau lege-indarrez ezarriko duzue belaunez belaun .
PRED:	“ In that day you must celebrate the time of the Lord , and you must celebrate the terms of this festival . This festival will be observed from generation to generation .
GOLD:	“ This is a day to remember . Each year , from generation to generation , you must celebrate it as a special festival to the Lord . This is a law for all time .

ID:	2377
INPUT:	“ Fruitu ederreko olibondo heze ” <unk> nion behinola ; orain , ordea , hostoa erreko <unk> bizian , eta adarrak hautsiko .
PRED:	“ In the fig tree , ” I said , “ when the fig tree are filled with trees , I will pour out the tree on every tree and fig tree .
GOLD:	I , the Lord , once called them a thriving olive tree , beautiful to see and full of good fruit.But now I have sent the fury of their enemiesto burn them with fire , leaving them charred and broken .

ID:	2378
INPUT:	« Bedeinkatua Jauna , Israelen Jainkoa , bere herriarengana etorrieta askatu duena !
PRED:	“ Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , the people of Israel !
GOLD:	“ Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , because he has visited and redeemed his people .

ID:	2379
INPUT:	Begira zein sailetara doazen biltzera eta joan beraien atzetik . Nire morroiei zuri bakean uzteko eskatu diet . Egarri zarenean , edan haiek <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	“ Come and go out to the water , and they begged me to eat the water of my servants . I asked you , ‘ I am thirsty and thirsty . '
GOLD:	See which part of the field they are harvesting , and then follow them . I have warned the young men not to treat you roughly . And when you are thirsty , help yourself to the water they have drawn from the well . ”

ID:	2380
INPUT:	( 27 , 9-19 )
PRED:	Job 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Inventory of Materials

ID:	2381
INPUT:	eta jentilen zerbitzari ere egin zen , bere <unk> Jainkoa gorets zezaten . Hau dio , hain zuzen , Liburu Santuak : Horregatik , atzerritarren artean goretsiko zaitut , eta zure omenez kantatuko dut .
PRED:	And when the Gentiles heard his servants , they will praise the name of the believers , and they will praise you . ” For the Scriptures say , “ I will praise you , and I will praise you . ”
GOLD:	He also came so that the Gentiles might give glory to God for his mercies to them . That is what the psalmist meant when he wrote : “ For this , I will praise you among the Gentiles ; I will sing praises to your name . ”

ID:	2382
INPUT:	Gizon batek beste gizon bat iraintzen badu , Jainkoa izan dezake bitarteko ; bekatua Jaunaren aurka egiten badu , ordea , nor izan dezake aldeko ? » Hala ere , semeek ez zuten aitaren esana aditu . Izan ere , erabakia zuen Jainkoak haiek hilaraztea .
PRED:	If one of the other man is a man , he is the one of the Lord , the God of Israel , who would not listen to the Lord , but he would not listen to the law of the Lord .
GOLD:	If someone sins against another person , God can mediate for the guilty party . But if someone sins against the Lord , who can intercede ? ” But Eli 's sons would n't listen to their father , for the Lord was already planning to put them to death .

ID:	2383
INPUT:	Ireki eta mutikoa ikusi zuen negarrez . Faraoiaren alabak , errukiturik , esan zuen : — <unk> haurra da , noski .
PRED:	When the boy saw the boy , he saw his sons and Pharaoh 's sons and his daughters , he said , “ I am the child of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	When the princess opened it , she saw the baby . The little boy was crying , and she felt sorry for him . “ This must be one of the Hebrew children , ” she said .

ID:	2384
INPUT:	Bai zoragarria zure maitasuna , oi Jainko ! Zure <unk> biltzen dira gizakiak .
PRED:	How lovely is your love , O God ! Your love will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	You feed them from the abundance of your own house , letting them drink from your river of delights .

ID:	2385
INPUT:	« <unk> zoaztela , <unk> nahiz lurrean habia <unk> edo <unk> , ama bertan delarik , aurkitzen baduzue , ez hartu ama <unk> ;
PRED:	“ If you are under the sun , when you will know that the mother of your mother or mother or mother or mother or mother or mother or mother or mother or mother or mother or mother or mother or mother or mother or mother .
GOLD:	“ If you happen to find a bird 's nest in a tree or on the ground , and there are young ones or eggs in it with the mother sitting in the nest , do not take the mother with the young .

ID:	2386
INPUT:	Esker ona eta eskaria
PRED:	Christ 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Paul 's Joy That Christ Is Preached

ID:	2387
INPUT:	ager bedi zure gorputza biluzik , zeure lotsariak bistan dituzula . <unk> hartuko dut , ez dit inork eragotziko » .
PRED:	Do n't make your flesh in your eyes , and I will turn away from your own eyes . ”
GOLD:	You will be naked and burdened with shame.I will take vengeance against you without pity . ”

ID:	2388
INPUT:	Eta , nork bere burura hautsa botaz , oihu egiten zuen negarrez eta aieneka : « Ai zu , ai hiri handia ! Zure <unk> <unk> <unk> zituzten guztiak . Horra orain une batean erraustua ! »
PRED:	And when they cried out to his head , and she cried out to his head , “ What sorrow awaits you and sorrow and sorrow awaits you who were very very very very very angry with all the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	And they will weep and throw dust on their heads to show their grief . And they will cry out , “ How terrible , how terrible for that great city ! The shipowners became wealthyby transporting her great wealth on the seas.In a single moment it is all gone . ”

ID:	2389
INPUT:	Orduan , esan zioten entzuleek : — Ez dituzu oraindik berrogeita hamar urte , eta Abraham ikusi duzula ?
PRED:	Then the people said to the synagogue , “ You must not see ten years old when you see , Abraham , Abraham , and you know where you have seen . ”
GOLD:	The people said , “ You are n't even fifty years old . How can you say you have seen Abraham ? ”

ID:	2390
INPUT:	Era berean , zeruko zuen Aitak ez du nahi txiki hauetako inor galtzerik .
PRED:	In the same way , the Father of heaven will not marry one of you .
GOLD:	In the same way , it is not my heavenly Father 's will that even one of these little ones should perish .

ID:	2391
INPUT:	Asiria ezpataz joa eroriko da , baina ez gizakiari esker ; ezpatak garbituko du , baina ez giza indarrez . Ezpatak ihes eragingo die , gudaririk <unk> <unk> dizkiote .
PRED:	I will destroy a sword , but a lion will not be killed by the sword of the sword of the enemy . But when the king of the army of the army will be able to kill him , and they will be able to kill him .
GOLD:	“ The Assyrians will be destroyed , but not by the swords of men.The sword of God will strike them , and they will panic and flee.The strong young Assyrianswill be taken away as captives .

ID:	2392
INPUT:	atariko oihalak , egoitza eta aldarea inguratzen dituen atariaren sarrerako oihala , sokak eta gainerako osagaiak ; hori guztia da gerxondarren egitekoa .
PRED:	the courtyard , the curtain for the entrance of the Tabernacle , and the curtain for the entrance to the entrance of the Tabernacle , and all the furnishings of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	They are also to carry the curtains for the courtyard walls that surround the Tabernacle and altar , the curtain across the courtyard entrance , the ropes , and all the equipment related to their use . The Gershonites are responsible for all these items .

ID:	2393
INPUT:	Oroit zaitez nitaz orduan , ongi <unk> ; egidazu , arren , mesede hau : mintza zakizkio faraoiari nire alde , hemendik atera nazan .
PRED:	“ Get up and kill me , ” they said . “ Get rid of my mind and show me what I have done .
GOLD:	And please remember me and do me a favor when things go well for you . Mention me to Pharaoh , so he might let me out of this place .

ID:	2394
INPUT:	Ez zaitzatela edozein eratako doktrina arrotzek lilura . <unk> Jainkoaren dohainaz barrutik <unk> da , eta ez janariei buruzko <unk> arduratzea , hauek ez baitiete ezer onik ekarri bete dituztenei .
PRED:	Do not be kind to each other , for those who have been able to be able to be able to obey God , and that all who have been able to obey God 's law .
GOLD:	So do not be attracted by strange , new ideas . Your strength comes from God 's grace , not from rules about food , which do n't help those who follow them .

ID:	2395
INPUT:	« Ez okertu zuzenbidea alderdikeriaz jokatuz ; ez onartu eskupekorik , itsutu egiten baititu pertsona jakintsuak ere eta hondatu egiten zintzoen epaia .
PRED:	“ Do n't be angry with evil , and do n't be angry with a trap , for the wise person who does not be saved .
GOLD:	You must never twist justice or show partiality . Never accept a bribe , for bribes blind the eyes of the wise and corrupt the decisions of the godly .

ID:	2396
INPUT:	( <unk> , 15-19 )
PRED:	Parable of the Temple
GOLD:	Jeremiah 's Prayer

ID:	2397
INPUT:	Zipre begiztatu eta ezkerretara utzirik , Siriarantz jarraitu genuen eta <unk> iritsi , han hustu behar baitzuen ontziak bere karga .
PRED:	Instead , we left along with their way , along with the believers , along with the believers who had been ready to take along with him .
GOLD:	We sighted the island of Cyprus , passed it on our left , and landed at the harbor of Tyre , in Syria , where the ship was to unload its cargo .

ID:	2398
INPUT:	Eta berriro Jaunaren aingeruak : — <unk> <unk> ditut zure ondorengoak .
PRED:	Then the angel of the Lord said , “ I know that your descendants will see your descendants . ”
GOLD:	Then he added , “ I will give you more descendants than you can count . ”

ID:	2399
INPUT:	( <unk> 4 , 1-3 )
PRED:	Jehoahaz Rules in Samaria
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	2400
INPUT:	Joka ezazue pertsona libre bezala ; ez , ordea , askatasuna gaiztakeriaren estalkitzat erabiliz , zeuen buruak Jainkoaren zerbitzura jarriz baizik .
PRED:	Instead , you must not be free , just as good as good as you live . Instead , you must live in the presence of God .
GOLD:	For you are free , yet you are God 's slaves , so do n't use your freedom as an excuse to do evil .

ID:	2401
INPUT:	<unk> bildu ziren haren kontra ; beren zuloan harrapatu zuteneta <unk> Egiptora eraman .
PRED:	When they arrived at Egypt , they saw that they were brought to Egypt .
GOLD:	Then the nations heard about him , and he was trapped in their pit.They led him away with hooksto the land of Egypt .

ID:	2402
INPUT:	Askok hitz egiten dute ongi <unk> , mundu guztia <unk> lagun .
PRED:	In those who hear him will be sure that all the world will be filled with great power .
GOLD:	Many seek favors from a ruler ; everyone is the friend of a person who gives gifts !

ID:	2403
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Ez zaio inoiz ere faltako Davidi Israelgo tronuan eseriko den ondorengorik .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ You must not be destroyed by all the people of Israel , and he will purify David .
GOLD:	For this is what the Lord says : David will have a descendant sitting on the throne of Israel forever .

ID:	2404
INPUT:	ezta Herodesek ere , guri bidali baitigu ostera . Honek ez du , beraz , heriotza merezi duenik ezer egin .
PRED:	But Herod sent a message to us , for he has not sent us to die .
GOLD:	Herod came to the same conclusion and sent him back to us . Nothing this man has done calls for the death penalty .

ID:	2405
INPUT:	Gau hartan Jauna agertu zitzaion , esanez : « Ni <unk> aita Abrahamen Jainkoa . Ez izan beldur , zeurekin bainauzu . Bedeinkatuko zaitut , ondorengo ugari emango <unk> zerbitzari <unk> » .
PRED:	That night the Lord appeared to him and said , “ I am with you , my father , my father , my father , and I will give you great joy to you . ”
GOLD:	where the Lord appeared to him on the night of his arrival . “ I am the God of your father , Abraham , ” he said . “ Do not be afraid , for I am with you and will bless you . I will multiply your descendants , and they will become a great nation . I will do this because of my promise to Abraham , my servant . ”

ID:	2406
INPUT:	Haien <unk> geziz zulatu dituzu , eraso batean gu <unk> , gizagaixo <unk> <unk> bezala , pozik <unk> .
PRED:	They threw their horses against Samaria , and they were filled with some of the various items that they had been filled with joy , and they were filled with joy .
GOLD:	With his own weapons , you destroyed the chief of thosewho rushed out like a whirlwind , thinking Israel would be easy prey .

ID:	2407
INPUT:	Eta mintzo hau etorri zen zerutik : « Hau da nire Semea , nire maitea ; berau dut atsegin » .
PRED:	He came from heaven and said , “ This is the Son of heaven . ”
GOLD:	And a voice from heaven said , “ This is my dearly loved Son , who brings me great joy . ”

ID:	2408
INPUT:	Gure Jainkoari mesede hau eskatuz egin genuen barau , eta entzun egin zigun .
PRED:	We pray for our God , and we pray for us .
GOLD:	So we fasted and earnestly prayed that our God would take care of us , and he heard our prayer .

ID:	2409
INPUT:	Ez zuen ezagutu , eskuak anaia Esaurenak bezain <unk> baitziren , eta bedeinkazioa eman zion .
PRED:	But when he knew that his brother was as weak as they had promised , he blessed Abraham and blessed him .
GOLD:	But he did not recognize Jacob , because Jacob 's hands felt hairy just like Esau 's . So Isaac prepared to bless Jacob .

ID:	2410
INPUT:	« <unk> dabiltzan intsektu hegaldunak debekatuak dituzue .
PRED:	“ All these small animals that scurry along with the ground .
GOLD:	“ You must not eat winged insects that walk along the ground ; they are detestable to you .

ID:	2411
INPUT:	Ezekiasek Gihon errekaren goiko irteera estali eta lur azpitik eraman zuen Daviden Hiriaren mendebalderantz . Ezekiasek ongi burutu zituen bere egintza guztiak .
PRED:	When Hezekiah heard the Lord 's voice from the north , he brought them from the east of the Mediterranean Sea to keep them on the east side of the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	He blocked up the upper spring of Gihon and brought the water down through a tunnel to the west side of the City of David . And so he succeeded in everything he did .

ID:	2412
INPUT:	Hona Edom lurraldean izan ziren erregeak , israeldarrek erregerik izan aurretik :
PRED:	This is the land of Edom , the king of Edom , says :
GOLD:	These are the kings who ruled in the land of Edom before any king ruled over the Israelites :

ID:	2413
INPUT:	Horrela , begirune izanen dizute eta zure bideetan ibiliko dira , gure gurasoei eman zenien lurraldean biziko diren bitartean .
PRED:	They will fear you and obey your ancestors , and they will live in the land of our ancestors .
GOLD:	Then they will fear you and walk in your ways as long as they live in the land you gave to our ancestors .

ID:	2414
INPUT:	Adoretsu nago , ene Jainko . Kantatu eta soinua joko dizut . Ea , ene bihotza !
PRED:	I will sing for joy , and I will sing praises to all my hearts .
GOLD:	Wake up , lyre and harp ! I will wake the dawn with my song .

ID:	2415
INPUT:	<unk> , gudari efraimdar adoretsu hark , erregearen <unk> zen Maaseias hil zuen , baita <unk> jauregizaina eta Elkana ministro nagusia ere .
PRED:	At that time the king of Ai was very angry with him , and the king of Ai was killed by the king 's officials . He also killed the king 's officials and officials , along with him .
GOLD:	Then Zicri , a warrior from Ephraim , killed Maaseiah , the king 's son ; Azrikam , the king 's palace commander ; and Elkanah , the king 's second-in-command .

ID:	2416
INPUT:	eta zuek ere , munduko aginte eta <unk> buru den Kristoren bitartez lortu duzue zeuen <unk> .
PRED:	And when you see all the power of the world and all the power of Christ , and all who were baptized with him .
GOLD:	So you also are complete through your union with Christ , who is the head over every ruler and authority .

ID:	2417
INPUT:	Orain , ordea , zuregana noa . Hau guztia , oraindik munduan nagoela esaten dut , nire poza <unk> izan dezaten , eta bete-betea izan ere .
PRED:	But now I am here to you , and I am here here here . I am here here in the world , and they will know that I am filled with joy and filled with joy .
GOLD:	“ Now I am coming to you . I told them many things while I was with them in this world so they would be filled with my joy .

ID:	2418
INPUT:	Behartsuak bide bazterrera botatzen dituzte , dohakabe guztiak <unk> behartzen .
PRED:	The poor have thrown down on their way , and they have thrown into the Most High .
GOLD:	The poor are pushed off the path ; the needy must hide together for safety .

ID:	2419
INPUT:	horrela , Jainkoak bere onginahiaz onartu gaituelarik , itxaro dugun betiko biziaren oinordeko bilakatu gara .
PRED:	For God has given us his unfailing love , so that we have given us eternal life .
GOLD:	Because of his grace he made us right in his sight and gave us confidence that we will inherit eternal life .

ID:	2420
INPUT:	Bai , <unk> judua <unk> erregearen <unk> . Gizon handia juduen aurrean , <unk> bere <unk> artean . Bere <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	That is why the king of Assyria have been very angry with the king of the Jews , who were very very angry with his officials . And when they saw that they were very old , they were very very very angry with him .
GOLD:	Mordecai the Jew became the prime minister , with authority next to that of King Xerxes himself . He was very great among the Jews , who held him in high esteem , because he continued to work for the good of his people and to speak up for the welfare of all their descendants .

ID:	2421
INPUT:	« Gizon bakar <unk> sorrarazi zituen Jainkoak nazio guztiak , lur zabal osoan bizi zitezen , bakoitzari bere garai eta lur-mugak ezarriz .
PRED:	“ At that time God gave them authority over all the nations that God had given them to his people , and he destroyed them throughout the earth .
GOLD:	From one man he created all the nations throughout the whole earth . He decided beforehand when they should rise and fall , and he determined their boundaries .

ID:	2422
INPUT:	Aditu dizut Ismaeli buruz esan duzuna ere . Bedeinkatu egingo dut : ondorengo ugari izango ditu , hamabi printze sortuko ditu eta herri handi baten sorburu egingo dut .
PRED:	I will hear you , and I will bless you . I will bless you , and I will bless you , and I will give you a great nation .
GOLD:	As for Ishmael , I will bless him also , just as you have asked . I will make him extremely fruitful and multiply his descendants . He will become the father of twelve princes , and I will make him a great nation .

ID:	2423
INPUT:	Kanpoko atarian iparraldera zegoen sarreraren luzera eta zabalera ere neurtu zituen .
PRED:	The south gateway was also 175 feet wide , and the east gateway to the south .
GOLD:	The man measured the gateway on the north just like the one on the east .

ID:	2424
INPUT:	« Hara , ardiak otso artera bezala bidaltzen zaituztet . Izan zaitezte , bada , sugeak bezain zuhur eta usoak bezain <unk> .
PRED:	“ Look , I am sending you into your flock , as I am sending you as weak as if you are as weak as weak as if you were as weak as weak as your sin .
GOLD:	“ Look , I am sending you out as sheep among wolves . So be as shrewd as snakes and harmless as doves .

ID:	2425
INPUT:	Ohartu zen Moises Aaronen <unk> herria bere onetik aterata zebilela , etsaien barregarri ,
PRED:	But when Moses realized that the people of Aaron was talking with his enemies , the people of Israel was filled with their enemies .
GOLD:	Moses saw that Aaron had let the people get completely out of control , much to the amusement of their enemies .

ID:	2426
INPUT:	Davidek esan zien gabaondarrei : — Zer egin dezaket zuen alde ? Zerez ordain <unk> , Jaunaren ondarea bedeinka dezazuen ?
PRED:	“ What do you have done ? ” David asked . “ I will give you the land of the Lord , who will give you a grant of land ? ”
GOLD:	David asked them , “ What can I do for you ? How can I make amends so that you will bless the Lord 's people again ? ”

ID:	2427
INPUT:	Honek esan zien : « Zuek zeuen buruak zintzo azaltzen dituzue jendearen aurrean , baina ezagutzen du Jainkoak zuen barrua ; izan ere , gizakiak <unk> <unk> , Jainkoarentzat mespretxagarri da .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ You are doing what you are doing . But you know that God 's heart will know that God has made those who are able to be able to see you .
GOLD:	Then he said to them , “ You like to appear righteous in public , but God knows your hearts . What this world honors is detestable in the sight of God .

ID:	2428
INPUT:	badira gure artean Frigia nahiz <unk> , Egipto nahiz <unk> inguruko <unk> aldekoak , baita <unk> ere ;
PRED:	And when we were under the land of Egypt , we will know that some of the people of Egypt and those who were baptized in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	Phrygia , Pamphylia , Egypt , and the areas of Libya around Cyrene , visitors from Rome

ID:	2429
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Eta zuek zergatik hausten duzue Jainkoaren agindua zeuen usadioengatik ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Why do you realize that you have taken into the name of God 's command ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ And why do you , by your traditions , violate the direct commandments of God ?

ID:	2430
INPUT:	Horiek izan ziren Noeren semeen leinuak , nor bere ondorengo eta herrien arabera . <unk> sortu ziren herriak <unk> ondoren eta hedatu munduan zehar .
PRED:	These were the descendants of Noah , who was leader of his descendants , who were descendants of Noah , and when they were buried by the power of the world .
GOLD:	These are the clans that descended from Noah 's sons , arranged by nation according to their lines of descent . All the nations of the earth descended from these clans after the great flood .

ID:	2431
INPUT:	<unk> oihu egin zuen : « Hemen nago , Jauna , egun osoan neure tokian , eta gauez <unk> guardia-postuan erne .
PRED:	Then the angel shouted , “ I am the Lord , and I know that I am the Lord , and I will pour out the night on the night .
GOLD:	Then the watchman called out , “ Day after day I have stood on the watchtower , my lord.Night after night I have remained at my post .

ID:	2432
INPUT:	Balio handiko bat aurkitzen duenean , joan , bere gauza guztiak saldu eta erosi egiten du .
PRED:	We have been kind of money , and he has given us everything he owned .
GOLD:	When he discovered a pearl of great value , he sold everything he owned and bought it !

ID:	2433
INPUT:	Zuen aitak nire galdera egiten badu , esaiozu : « Bere sorterri Belenera <unk> lehen joaten uzteko eskatu zidan Davidek , urteroko oparia bere ahaide guztiekin egiteko » .
PRED:	And if your father 's father has given me a blessing , he asked me , “ May he come to meet you at the first time of his father and mother , David 's brothers and sisters . ”
GOLD:	If your father asks where I am , tell him I asked permission to go home to Bethlehem for an annual family sacrifice .

ID:	2434
INPUT:	Geziak jaurtiz sakabanatu zituen , tximista eginez ihes eragin .
PRED:	He threw them into a storm , and they fled to the ground .
GOLD:	He shot arrows and scattered his enemies ; his lightning flashed , and they were confused .

ID:	2435
INPUT:	<unk> izango dira lehenak kondenatua hiltzen , eta herri osoa ondoren . Horrela ezabatuko duzue gaiztakeria zeuen artetik .
PRED:	In this way , you will be slaughtered by the sword of the Lord your God , and you will be taken from the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	The witnesses must throw the first stones , and then all the people may join in . In this way , you will purge the evil from among you .

ID:	2436
INPUT:	Nik , Jaun honek , zuzenbidea dut maite , lapurreta eta bidegabekeria gorroto . <unk> emango diet <unk> betiko ituna egingo beraiekin .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : I will punish you and punish those who hate you , and I will punish you . I will punish you with all his covenant with them .
GOLD:	“ For I , the Lord , love justice.I hate robbery and wrongdoing.I will faithfully reward my people for their sufferingand make an everlasting covenant with them .

ID:	2437
INPUT:	<unk> ez dena , lagun hurkoari kalterik egiten ez diona , auzokoa iraintzen ez duena ;
PRED:	But if they are unfaithful to the Lord , you must not commit adultery .
GOLD:	Those who refuse to gossipor harm their neighborsor speak evil of their friends .

ID:	2438
INPUT:	Haiek , ordea , ez zuten ulertzen zer ari zitzaien ; galdetzera , berriz , ez ziren ausartzen .
PRED:	But they did n't understand what they were saying , “ Why are you talking ? ” they asked .
GOLD:	They did n't understand what he was saying , however , and they were afraid to ask him what he meant .

ID:	2439
INPUT:	eta Jaunaren etxeko eta erregearen jauregiko altxorrez jabetu . Dena harrapatu zuen , baita Salomonek eginiko urrezko babeskiak ere .
PRED:	He took the silver and gold and gold ; he took all the shields of the Temple of the Lord 's Temple and gold .
GOLD:	He ransacked the treasuries of the Lord 's Temple and the royal palace ; he stole everything , including all the gold shields Solomon had made .

ID:	2440
INPUT:	<unk> gisa diotsuet hori , ez agindu gisa .
PRED:	I am sure that I am under my command , and I have not known as I commanded you .
GOLD:	I say this as a concession , not as a command .

ID:	2441
INPUT:	<unk> bekatuen barkamena eskatu
PRED:	If they ask for God 's sin ,
GOLD:	The People Confess Their Sins

ID:	2442
INPUT:	baizik eta beregana dezala gure bihotza , gu beraren bidean ibil gaitezen eta gure gurasoei eman zizkien agindu , lege eta erabakiak bete ditzagun .
PRED:	Let us return to our hearts and for us . He gave us the laws of our ancestors to obey our ancestors and decrees .
GOLD:	May he give us the desire to do his will in everything and to obey all the commands , decrees , and regulations that he gave our ancestors .

ID:	2443
INPUT:	Adoretsu nago , ene Jainko , adoretsu . Kantatu eta soinua joko dizut .
PRED:	I will sing for joy , O God , and I will sing your songs .
GOLD:	Wake up , my heart ! Wake up , O lyre and harp ! I will wake the dawn with my song .

ID:	2444
INPUT:	Gainera , zeuen morroi eta neskame egin nahi dituzue Judako eta Jerusalemgo gizon-emakumeok . Horrela , ez ote zarete zeuek ere errudun bihurtuko Jaunaren , zeuen Jainkoaren , aurrean ?
PRED:	And you must serve the servant of Judah and the servant of Judah . You must not abandon you and your servant , for you have not sinned against the Lord your God .
GOLD:	And now you are planning to make slaves of these people from Judah and Jerusalem . What about your own sins against the Lord your God ?

ID:	2445
INPUT:	Orduan , jauregiko arduradunak , hiriko buruzagiak , arduradunek eta <unk> erantzun hau bidali zioten Jehuri : « Zeure zerbitzari gaituzu eta zuk esana eginen dugu . Ez dugu inor ere errege izendatuko . Egizu egokien iruditzen zaizuna » .
PRED:	So the king of the city officials of the city officials of the city , and the elders of the king sent him to Jehu , “ We have n't sent us back to the king of the palace . ”
GOLD:	So the palace and city administrators , together with the elders and the guardians of the king 's sons , sent this message to Jehu : “ We are your servants and will do anything you tell us . We will not make anyone king ; do whatever you think is best . ”

ID:	2446
INPUT:	Gero , Ben-Hinom haranaren aurreko mendiaren ertzeraino jaisten zen , refatarren lautadaren iparraldera , eta , Ben-Hinom haranean behera , jebustarren hiria zegoeneko mendi-hegiaren hegoaldetik igaroz , <unk> heltzen zen .
PRED:	Then he went into the valley of Mount Hermon to the valley of Mount Hermon to the valley of Mount Hermon , near the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and the city of the valley of Ben-Hinnom , near the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and then he went to the valley of Pisgah .
GOLD:	and down to the base of the mountain beside the valley of Ben-Hinnom , at the northern end of the valley of Rephaim . From there it went down the valley of Hinnom , crossing south of the slope where the Jebusites lived , and continued down to En-rogel .

ID:	2447
INPUT:	Haren <unk> izu-ikaratu egiten dira denak , bai <unk> , bai <unk> :
PRED:	And when they know how they are under the power of the beast , they will know that they are very weak , and they will know that they have seen .
GOLD:	People in the west are appalled at their fate ; people in the east are horrified .

ID:	2448
INPUT:	Pazkoa eta Legamia gabeko Ogien Jaia
PRED:	Instructions for the Passover
GOLD:	Celebration of First Harvest

ID:	2449
INPUT:	( Mk 2 , 13-17 ; Lk 5 , <unk> )
PRED:	Jesus Heals Many People
GOLD:	Jesus Heals in Response to Faith

ID:	2450
INPUT:	JESUSEN AURKEZPENA ( 1 , 5 — 4 , 13 )
PRED:	The First Disciples
GOLD:	The Birth of John the Baptist Foretold

ID:	2451
INPUT:	nagusiak eman badio emaztea , eta honek seme-alabak sortu , emaztea eta seme-alabak <unk> dira , eta esklaboa bakarrik joango da .
PRED:	“ But if the master has given his wife and his wife , the wife and his wife will be his wife , and they will have children . ”
GOLD:	“ If his master gave him a wife while he was a slave and they had sons or daughters , then only the man will be free in the seventh year , but his wife and children will still belong to his master .

ID:	2452
INPUT:	Orduan , erregeak Joiada apaiz nagusiari dei egin eta esan zion : « Zergatik ez zara ahalegindu lebitarrek Judan eta Jerusalemen zerga bil zezaten ? Jaunaren zerbitzari Moisesek eta israeldarren biltzar osoak ezarri zuten zerga hori , Jaunaren itun-agiria gordetzen zen oihal-etxolarako .
PRED:	Then the king summoned the priests and the officials of Judah . “ Why do n't you go to the Temple of the Lord ? Why did n't you allow the Levites to obey the terms of the Temple of the Lord ?
GOLD:	So the king called for Jehoiada the high priest and asked him , “ Why have n't you demanded that the Levites go out and collect the Temple taxes from the towns of Judah and from Jerusalem ? Moses , the servant of the Lord , levied this tax on the community of Israel in order to maintain the Tabernacle of the Covenant . ”

ID:	2453
INPUT:	Orduan , Jesusek esan zion : — Zorionekoa zu , Simon , Jonasen semea , hori ez baitizu hezur-mamizko inork agertu , zeruko nire Aitak baizik .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to him , “ Blessed are those who repent of me , my dear brothers and sisters , the Father of heaven , but no one has appeared to me . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ You are blessed , Simon son of John , because my Father in heaven has revealed this to you . You did not learn this from any human being .

ID:	2454
INPUT:	<unk> bizi izan naiz hemen bakea gorroto dutenekin !
PRED:	I hate all who hate you , and I hate all who love him .
GOLD:	I am tired of livingamong people who hate peace .

ID:	2455
INPUT:	<unk> atera ziren Jerusalemdik Joaben gizonak , keretarrak , peletarrak eta gudaririk adoretsuenak Bikriren seme Xebaren ondoren .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the men of Benjamin came out of the army of Joab 's army , Joab , and Benaiah son of Bicri .
GOLD:	So Abishai and Joab , together with the king 's bodyguard and all the mighty warriors , set out from Jerusalem to go after Sheba .

ID:	2456
INPUT:	Zaude adi nire deiadarrari , lur jota bainago erabat ! Libra nazazu <unk> , ni baino indartsuagoak baitira .
PRED:	Let me look at the morning , and I am afraid of my prophets ! I am innocent , and they are stronger than I am stronger than they are !
GOLD:	Bring me out of prisonso I can thank you.The godly will crowd around me , for you are good to me . ”

ID:	2457
INPUT:	« Onartu egin duzue gaur Jaunak proposatua , hau da : bera izango duzuela zeuen Jainko , berari jarraituko diozuela , beraren lege , agindu eta erabakiak beteko dituzuela eta esana egingo .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : You must keep your decrees and decrees , and you will obey him . You must obey him and obey him and obey him .
GOLD:	You have declared today that the Lord is your God . And you have promised to walk in his ways , and to obey his decrees , commands , and regulations , and to do everything he tells you .

ID:	2458
INPUT:	<unk> gezurrezkoa iruditu zitzaien iragarpen hau , hitzarmena egina baitzuten <unk> ; baina Babiloniako erregeak beren errua aurpegiratuko die , eta preso hartuko .
PRED:	At that time I had a covenant with you , because they had been unfaithful to the king of Babylon , but the king of Babylon will take away from Babylon .
GOLD:	“ And now , son of man , prophesy concerning the Ammonites and their mockery . Give them this message from the Sovereign Lord : “ A sword , a swordis drawn for your slaughter.It is polished to destroy , flashing like lightning !

ID:	2459
INPUT:	Herrien artean goretsiko zaitut , Jauna , nazioen artean kantatuko .
PRED:	Your unfailing love will praise you ; I will praise you among the nations .
GOLD:	For your unfailing love is as high as the heavens.Your faithfulness reaches to the clouds .

ID:	2460
INPUT:	<unk> Manases eman zion izen , esanez : « Jainkoak <unk> dizkit neure atsekabe eta ahaide guztiak » .
PRED:	But when he was buried , he said , “ God has given me all my brothers and sisters , my brothers and sisters . ”
GOLD:	Joseph named his older son Manasseh , for he said , “ God has made me forget all my troubles and everyone in my father 's family . ”

ID:	2461
INPUT:	Beraz , Jauna baztertu eta Baal eta Astarteren idoloak gurtu zituzten .
PRED:	The Lord rejected the images of Baal and worshiped the images of Baal .
GOLD:	They abandoned the Lord to serve Baal and the images of Ashtoreth .

ID:	2462
INPUT:	Fedeari esker eskaini zion Abelek Jainkoari Kainek baino opari ederragoa ; horregatik , Jainkoak zintzotzat aitortu zuen Abel eta honen eskaintzak onartu , eta fedeari esker hitz egiten du Abelek , hilda gero ere .
PRED:	It was by faith that is a gift to God , which is better than a gift to God , so he has been faithful to God , and he has given us a gift from his own family .
GOLD:	It was by faith that Abel brought a more acceptable offering to God than Cain did . Abel 's offering gave evidence that he was a righteous man , and God showed his approval of his gifts . Although Abel is long dead , he still speaks to us by his example of faith .

ID:	2463
INPUT:	Gero , Sabako erreginak lau mila kilo urre baino gehiago eta , gainera , egundoko usaingarri- eta harribitxi-multzo handia eman zion erregeari . Ez zen behin ere izan Sabako erreginak Salomon erregeari eman ziona bezalako usaingarririk .
PRED:	Then Queen of Sheba gave this message to the king of Sheba and more gold , more more more than all the spices of Sheba had given them a great gift of Sheba .
GOLD:	Then she gave the king a gift of 9,000 pounds of gold , great quantities of spices , and precious jewels . Never before had there been spices as fine as those the queen of Sheba gave to King Solomon .

ID:	2464
INPUT:	Aterrenak , hots , Ezekiasen ondorengoak , 98 ;
PRED:	The family of Hezekiah ( descendants of Hezekiah ) ,
GOLD:	The family of Ater ( descendants of Hezekiah ) 98

ID:	2465
INPUT:	Akaz erregea hil zen urtean , mezu hau iragarri zuen Isaiasek :
PRED:	Then King Ahaz of Ahaz died ,
GOLD:	This message came to me the year King Ahaz died :

ID:	2466
INPUT:	Tesalonikan nintzelarik ere bidali zenidaten behin eta birritan nire <unk> behar nuena .
PRED:	I sent you to visit you , and I sent you to visit you .
GOLD:	Even when I was in Thessalonica you sent help more than once .

ID:	2467
INPUT:	Beteko ditut herrialde horretan , egin nizkion mehatxu guztiak , hau da , nazioen aurka Jeremiasek nire izenean iragarri eta liburu honetan idatzita daudenak .
PRED:	I have made you this land of Egypt , and I have rebelled against all the nations of the nations of the nations , and I have heard that I have written in this book .
GOLD:	I will bring upon them all the terrors I have promised in this book — all the penalties announced by Jeremiah against the nations .

ID:	2468
INPUT:	eta <unk> balitz , ez dadila berriro ezkon , edo bakeak egin ditzala senarrarekin . Eta senarrak ez dezala zapuztu emaztea .
PRED:	If they saw that they would not marry her , let her marry his wife and his wife , she would not marry her .
GOLD:	But if she does leave him , let her remain single or else be reconciled to him . And the husband must not leave his wife .

ID:	2469
INPUT:	Noemik bazuen bere senar Elimeleken aldetik ahaide bat , aberatsa eta itzal handiko gizona , Booz zeritzana .
PRED:	“ But if he married her husband , he married a man named Simon ( which means “ There is a man named Simon ) , where he was a man named Simon ) .
GOLD:	Now there was a wealthy and influential man in Bethlehem named Boaz , who was a relative of Naomi 's husband , Elimelech .

ID:	2470
INPUT:	Hartu zuen <unk> eta atera zituen , anaiaren aurrean ipiniz . Honek , ordea , ez zuen jan nahi izan , eta agindu zuen : — Alde hemendik denok ! Denak irten zirenean ,
PRED:	Then he came out and threw him out to the ground , but he did n't let him eat . But when they said , “ Get up ! ” So they said , “ Let 's go out ! ” So they said , “ Let them go out ! ”
GOLD:	But when she set the serving tray before him , he refused to eat . “ Everyone get out of here , ” Amnon told his servants . So they all left .

ID:	2471
INPUT:	Ene gogoa zure egarri da gauean , ene <unk> bilatzen zaitu goizean . Zuk zeure <unk> <unk> zuzentasuna zer <unk> dute <unk> .
PRED:	How long will I see you ? Why are you trying to kill you ? When I know that you were very angry with your prophets , and when you know that you were very very very weak and fig tree , they will know that they will know that they will know that they will know that you .
GOLD:	In the night I search for you ; in the morning I earnestly seek you.For only when you come to judge the earthwill people learn what is right .

ID:	2472
INPUT:	Josi zapiak elkarri bosnako bi sailetan ,
PRED:	Then make two curtains with each of the curtains of the curtains to make another long curtain .
GOLD:	Join five of these curtains together to make one long curtain , then join the other five into a second long curtain .

ID:	2473
INPUT:	Orduan , hogeita lau zaharrek eta lau izaki bizidunek ahuspeztu eta tronuan eseria dagoen Jainkoa gurtu zuten , esanez : « Amen ! Aleluia ! »
PRED:	Then the other apostles and the four cherubim fell on the four corners of the four living beings , shouting , “ God ! Amen ! ”
GOLD:	Then the twenty-four elders and the four living beings fell down and worshiped God , who was sitting on the throne . They cried out , “ Amen ! Praise the Lord ! ”

ID:	2474
INPUT:	etxe gainean dagoena ez bedi jaits etxetik ezer hartzera ,
PRED:	Let them go out to the house of the house , and let them go out to the house of the house .
GOLD:	A person out on the deck of a roof must not go down into the house to pack .

ID:	2475
INPUT:	<unk> harturik , zegokien zatia herritarrei eman ondoren , aparte jartzen zuten Jaunari erre-oparitzat eskaini beharrekoa , Moisesen liburuan idatzia dagoen bezala , eta hori bera egiten zuten <unk> .
PRED:	At that time they brought the people to the people of Israel , they gave their sacred offerings to the Lord as they had commanded Moses , and they were written in the Book of Moses .
GOLD:	They divided the burnt offerings among the people by their family groups , so they could offer them to the Lord as prescribed in the Book of Moses . They did the same with the cattle .

ID:	2476
INPUT:	Hona hemen ni zure aurka ! Mendia bezain handi bihurtu zara , mendi <unk> , lur osoaren <unk> ! Eskua zure aurka luzatuko dut , <unk> amilduko zaituteta <unk> bihurtuko .
PRED:	I am the Lord your God , and you have rebelled against me . You have made my covenant with your covenant with your hand , and I will make your hand against you .
GOLD:	“ Look , O mighty mountain , destroyer of the earth ! I am your enemy , ” says the Lord . “ I will raise my fist against you , to knock you down from the heights.When I am finished , you will be nothing but a heap of burnt rubble .

ID:	2477
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Edom herriakgaiztakeriarik asko egin du , zein baino zein handiago . Eta beraz , zigortu egingo dut ! Ezpataz aurrean erabili <unk> anaia israeldarrak , errukia <unk> ; gogor eutsi dio suminari , eten gabe <unk> ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Edom , the people of Edom , says the people of Edom , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will punish you , and I will punish you with you . '
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Edom have sinned again and again , and I will not let them go unpunished ! They chased down their relatives , the Israelites , with swords , showing them no mercy.In their rage , they slashed them continuallyand were unrelenting in their anger .

ID:	2478
INPUT:	Gelan gizon batzuk zelatan zeudelarik , Dalilak esan zion Samsoni : « Horra ! Filistearrak ! » Samsonek , ordea , eten egin zituen sokak , <unk> suak ukitzean eten ohi den bezala . Eta ez zuten jakin nondik zuen halako indarra .
PRED:	Then Delilah left the ambush at the table and said to Samson , “ Look ! ” But Samson said , “ when the Philistines were all afraid of them , when they were afraid of them , they were so weak , and they could n't know that they were afraid of them .
GOLD:	She had hidden some men in one of the inner rooms of her house , and she cried out , “ Samson ! The Philistines have come to capture you ! ” But Samson snapped the bowstrings as a piece of string snaps when it is burned by a fire . So the secret of his strength was not discovered .

ID:	2479
INPUT:	Israel daJaun ahalguztidunaren mahastia ; Judako herria , haren <unk> kutuna . Zuzenbidea espero <unk> , eta horra : zuzengabekeria ! Justizia espero zuen , eta horra : aieneak !
PRED:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies says , “ What sorrow awaits the people of Israel , and I have seen with great power , and I have been filled with joy and sorrow .
GOLD:	The nation of Israel is the vineyard of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies.The people of Judah are his pleasant garden.He expected a crop of justice , but instead he found oppression.He expected to find righteousness , but instead he heard cries of violence .

ID:	2480
INPUT:	Zeuen buruak engainatzen ari zarete ; lehenengo , zeuen ararteko egin nauzue , Jaunari , zeuen Jainkoari , otoitz egin eta haren erantzuna osorik zuei jakinarazteko eskatuz , beteko zenutela eta ;
PRED:	You have heard him , saying , ‘ You have done to the Lord your God and your God , and he has given you to the land of the Lord your God . '
GOLD:	For you were not being honest when you sent me to pray to the Lord your God for you . You said , ‘ Just tell us what the Lord our God says , and we will do it ! '

ID:	2481
INPUT:	« Gogoan hartu hau : etxeko nagusiak , lapurra zein ordutan etorriko den jakingo balu , ez luke etxea zulatzen utziko .
PRED:	“ Remember , ” he said , “ when he does n't know how a man or a thief or a house or a house or a house or a thief or a house or a house or a house .
GOLD:	“ Understand this : If a homeowner knew exactly when a burglar was coming , he would not permit his house to be broken into .

ID:	2482
INPUT:	Orduan , Eliakimek , Xebnak eta Joahek hau erantzun zioten asiriar ordezkari nagusiari : — Mesedez , hitz egiguzu arameeraz , ulertzen baitugu . Ez mintzatu hebreeraz , harresi gainean dagoen jendea entzuten ari da eta .
PRED:	Then he said to Hilkiah , “ Get up to the chief of staff , and give him to the Assyrian chief officer . ” So they said , “ We do n't understand the meaning of the people . ”
GOLD:	Then Eliakim , Shebna , and Joah said to the Assyrian chief of staff , “ Please speak to us in Aramaic , for we understand it well . Do n't speak in Hebrew , for the people on the wall will hear . ”

ID:	2483
INPUT:	Salomon erregeak eta beronekin kutxaren aitzinean bildua zegoen israeldar batzar osoak zenbatu ezin ahalako ardi- eta <unk> handia eskaini zuten oparitan .
PRED:	Then King Solomon and all the Ark of the Covenant stood before the Ark of the Covenant , and all the people of Israel were slaughtered by name .
GOLD:	There , before the Ark , King Solomon and the entire community of Israel sacrificed so many sheep , goats , and cattle that no one could keep count !

ID:	2484
INPUT:	<unk> aldendu behar du eta on dena egin , bakea bilatu eta haren bidetik ibili .
PRED:	They will turn away and get good , and they will live in peace .
GOLD:	Turn away from evil and do good.Search for peace , and work to maintain it .

ID:	2485
INPUT:	Orduan , jendeari lurrean esertzeko agindu zion . Gero , zazpi ogiak hartu eta , Jainkoari esker oneko otoitza egin ondoren , zatitu eta bere ikasleei eman zizkien , bana zitzaten . Haiek jendeari eskaini zizkioten .
PRED:	Then he said to the people of the earth , and he took them on the ground . Then he took the bread and placed them on the ground , and he gave them to the people .
GOLD:	So Jesus told all the people to sit down on the ground . Then he took the seven loaves , thanked God for them , and broke them into pieces . He gave them to his disciples , who distributed the bread to the crowd .

ID:	2486
INPUT:	Kanaan lurraldearen mugak
PRED:	The Land Given to Canaan
GOLD:	Boundaries of the Land

ID:	2487
INPUT:	— Maisu , zein da legeko agindurik nagusiena ?
PRED:	“ Teacher , what is the most important thing that is true ? ”
GOLD:	“ Teacher , which is the most important commandment in the law of Moses ? ”

ID:	2488
INPUT:	Erregearen kideko ziren gazteek erantzun zioten : — Hona zer erantzun behar diozun zure aitak ezarri zion uztarria arintzeko eskatu dizun herri horri : « Nire atzamar txikia <unk> da gure aitaren gerria baino .
PRED:	The king replied , “ This is what the king says : What sorrow awaits you who want your father , my father , my father 's father ? ” “ It is better than a witness to be a burden of my father 's family .
GOLD:	The young men replied , “ This is what you should tell those complainers who want a lighter burden : ‘ My little finger is thicker than my father 's waist !

ID:	2489
INPUT:	<unk> eta mesedez bete duzu , urre garbizko koroa ezarri .
PRED:	I have given you a crown of pure gold and gold .
GOLD:	He asked you to preserve his life , and you granted his request.The days of his life stretch on forever .

ID:	2490
INPUT:	Erregeak , emakume haren hitzak aditzean , urratu egin zituen jantziak . <unk> <unk> , ikusi zuen herriak <unk> zeramala erregeak soinekoen azpitik , larru gainean .
PRED:	When the king heard what was happening , he tore his clothes and tore his clothes in mind . He saw that he was very angry with great quantities of wood .
GOLD:	When the king heard this , he tore his clothes in despair . And as the king walked along the wall , the people could see that he was wearing burlap under his robe next to his skin .

ID:	2491
INPUT:	« Ez dut erregutzen hauen alde bakarrik , baita berauen <unk> bidez niregan sinetsiko dutenen alde ere .
PRED:	“ I do n't know that those who do n't believe in me , for those who believe me will believe in me .
GOLD:	“ I am praying not only for these disciples but also for all who will ever believe in me through their message .

ID:	2492
INPUT:	« Nor da Nilo bezala hazten den hori , ibai oldartsuen <unk> den hori ?
PRED:	“ Who makes this rain like the Nile ? Can it be like the Nile ? What happened ?
GOLD:	“ Who is this , rising like the Nile at floodtime , overflowing all the land ?

ID:	2493
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : « Zatozte nirekin eta giza arrantzale egingo zaituztet » .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Come , Come , and answer me . ”
GOLD:	Jesus called out to them , “ Come , follow me , and I will show you how to fish for people ! ”

ID:	2494
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> ;
PRED:	They were buried with flesh and fig tree .
GOLD:	The family of Zattu845

ID:	2495
INPUT:	Jo zuen turuta bigarren aingeruak , eta sutan dagoen mendi handi bat bezalako zerbait itsasora amildu zen : itsasoaren herena odol bihurtu zen .
PRED:	Then the angel blew the ram 's horn , like a great sea , and it was thrown into the sea . He was thrown into the sea , and it was thrown into the sea .
GOLD:	Then the second angel blew his trumpet , and a great mountain of fire was thrown into the sea . One-third of the water in the sea became blood ,

ID:	2496
INPUT:	« Kontuz <unk> ! <unk> baitute <unk> jantzita ibiltzea eta plazetan jendeak beraiei agur egitea ; gogoko dituzte sinagogetan lehenengo aulkiak eta jai-otorduetan mahaiburuak ;
PRED:	“ Be sure that those who were sitting on him , and they sit in the synagogues and honor in the synagogues . They love the synagogues and honor of the synagogues and honor .
GOLD:	“ Beware of these teachers of religious law ! For they like to parade around in flowing robes and love to receive respectful greetings as they walk in the marketplaces . And how they love the seats of honor in the synagogues and the head table at banquets .

ID:	2497
INPUT:	asmo garbikoarentzat garbi , asmo txarrekoarentzat zorrotz .
PRED:	You rescue the humble , and you rescue the proud of the earth .
GOLD:	To the pure you show yourself pure , but to the crooked you show yourself shrewd .

ID:	2498
INPUT:	<unk> eta <unk> diete gosea kenduko , ardoak huts egingo die .
PRED:	But when they will turn away and kill you , they will be cut off , and they will die .
GOLD:	So now your harvests will be too small to feed you.There will be no grapes for making new wine .

ID:	2499
INPUT:	Baditut artegian ez dauden beste ardi batzuk ere ; haiek ere erakarri egin behar ditut ; nire ahotsa entzungo dute eta artalde bakarra izango dira , artzain bakarraren gidaritzapean .
PRED:	But when the people of the world had no one of them , they would n't even kill me . They will not listen to my own people , and they will be a shepherd of sheep .
GOLD:	I have other sheep , too , that are not in this sheepfold . I must bring them also . They will listen to my voice , and there will be one flock with one shepherd .

ID:	2500
INPUT:	Eta zuen legean dago idatzia , bi lagunen testigantza baliozkoa dela .
PRED:	The Book of the Law was written in the Book of the law .
GOLD:	Your own law says that if two people agree about something , their witness is accepted as fact .

ID:	2501
INPUT:	Gogora iezaiezu hau eta eskatu , arren , Jainkoaren izenean , ez daitezela hitzei buruzko eztabaidatan nahas , hori ez baita on ezertarako , entzuten dituztenen <unk> baino .
PRED:	Do n't let them go to the name of God , but let them be able to hear the word of God . Let us be able to hear , and those who hear God 's word is better than you .
GOLD:	Remind everyone about these things , and command them in God 's presence to stop fighting over words . Such arguments are useless , and they can ruin those who hear them .

ID:	2502
INPUT:	Errespetatu , beraz , larunbata , egun sakratua baita zuentzat . Larunbata profanatzen duenak heriotza-zigorra izango du ; egun horretan lan egiten duena herritik bota egingo dute .
PRED:	Therefore , be set aside for holy days , for the Sabbath day you must be put to death . Anyone who lives must be put to death .
GOLD:	You must keep the Sabbath day , for it is a holy day for you . Anyone who desecrates it must be put to death ; anyone who works on that day will be cut off from the community .

ID:	2503
INPUT:	Eliasek erantzun : — Jauna , Jainko ahalguztiduna , zureganako maiteminak erretzen nau , israeldarrek zurekiko ituna hautsi dutelako , zure aldareak hondatu eta zure profetak ezpataz hil dituztelako . Ni bakarra gelditu naiz , eta nire bila ere badabiltza bizia kentzeko .
PRED:	Elijah replied , “ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , because they have sinned against me . I have sinned against your people , and they have destroyed all the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	He replied again , “ I have zealously served the Lord God Almighty . But the people of Israel have broken their covenant with you , torn down your altars , and killed every one of your prophets . I am the only one left , and now they are trying to kill me , too . ”

ID:	2504
INPUT:	Gerra sorraraziko dut Gogen kontra nire mendi guztietan . Honela diot nik , Jainko Jaunak . Eta haren gerlariek elkar hilko dute .
PRED:	I will destroy all the people of Israel , says the Sovereign Lord , “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies will die ! ”
GOLD:	I will summon the sword against you on all the hills of Israel , says the Sovereign Lord . Your men will turn their swords against each other .

ID:	2505
INPUT:	Jobek bere burua errugabe aitortu
PRED:	Job 's Final Speech :
GOLD:	Job 's Final Protest of Innocence

ID:	2506
INPUT:	« Beraz , ene iritziz , ez zaie alferreko oztoporik ezarri behar Jainkoarengana bihurtzen diren jentilei .
PRED:	“ Therefore , listen to my people , and they will not turn away from the Gentiles .
GOLD:	“ And so my judgment is that we should not make it difficult for the Gentiles who are turning to God .

ID:	2507
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . « Liliak » doinuan . Koreren semeen poema . <unk> .
PRED:	O God , why have you promised us , O God of Egypt , so I will give you victory over you . ”
GOLD:	Beautiful words stir my heart.I will recite a lovely poem about the king , for my tongue is like the pen of a skillful poet .

ID:	2508
INPUT:	Izan ere , gerta daiteke , hark , mila urte bi aldiz bizi arren , bere ondasunak ez gozatzea . Baina , azkenean , ez al doaz guztiak toki berera ?
PRED:	For he will be punished for a few years , but he will not be able to live in the place where they live .
GOLD:	He might live a thousand years twice over but still not find contentment . And since he must die like everyone else — well , what 's the use ?

ID:	2509
INPUT:	haizeak aurpegian jo ninduen , gorputzeko ilea <unk> .
PRED:	Then the wind struck me with their heads , and they were covered with their heads .
GOLD:	A spirit swept past my face , and my hair stood on end .

ID:	2510
INPUT:	<unk> gora ziren horrela <unk> .
PRED:	And when they were terrified , they became very angry with him .
GOLD:	There were more than forty of them in the conspiracy .

ID:	2511
INPUT:	Urreztatu urre garbiz barne eta <unk> , eta ezarri urrezko hegala inguru guztian .
PRED:	You must make poles of pure gold and gold , along with gold , and all the foundation of pure gold .
GOLD:	Overlay it inside and outside with pure gold , and run a molding of gold all around it .

ID:	2512
INPUT:	Ez dut gogoratuko hark egindako bekaturik ; zuzenbidez eta justiziaz jokatu duenez , bizi egingo da .
PRED:	I will never again bless you , and he will surely live forever .
GOLD:	None of their past sins will be brought up again , for they have done what is just and right , and they will surely live .

ID:	2513
INPUT:	Morroiak eraman zion mutikoa amari eta honek magalean hartu zuen haurra ; baina eguerdian hil egin zitzaion .
PRED:	Then the boy took the baby 's mother 's mother , but the boy died .
GOLD:	So the servant took him home , and his mother held him on her lap . But around noontime he died .

ID:	2514
INPUT:	Joiariben familian Matenai ; Jedaiasen familian Uzi ;
PRED:	From the family of Harim was leader of Shecaniah .
GOLD:	Mattenai was leader of the family of Joiarib.Uzzi was leader of the family of Jedaiah .

ID:	2515
INPUT:	<unk> bi ertzetan , mota guztietako fruta-arbolak haziko dira ; ez zaizkie hostoak sekula zimelduko , eta etengabe emango dituzte fruituak , hilero <unk> bat , santutegitik ateratzen den urak ureztatzen baititu . <unk> elikagai izango dira , eta hostoak sendagai » .
PRED:	I will make two kinds of every kind , and wild animals that scurry along with all kinds of animals , and all the trees will be filled with great joy , and they will know that the fruit of the world will be full of fruit . ”
GOLD:	Fruit trees of all kinds will grow along both sides of the river . The leaves of these trees will never turn brown and fall , and there will always be fruit on their branches . There will be a new crop every month , for they are watered by the river flowing from the Temple . The fruit will be for food and the leaves for healing . ”

ID:	2516
INPUT:	Jerusalemera , Jaunaren etxea egon zen tokira heldu zirenean , familiaburu batzuek borondatezko opariak egin zituzten , berriro Jaunaren etxea toki berean eraikitzeko .
PRED:	When they arrived in Jerusalem , some of the Lord 's Temple came to Jerusalem and gave them to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	When they arrived at the Temple of the Lord in Jerusalem , some of the family leaders made voluntary offerings toward the rebuilding of God 's Temple on its original site ,

ID:	2517
INPUT:	Orain , ordea , ez dut <unk> <unk> <unk> honetan bizirik geldituekin . Hala agintzen dizuet nik , Jaun ahalguztidun honek .
PRED:	But now I will not be sure that those who have been able to kill me , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	“ But now I will not treat the remnant of my people as I treated them before , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	2518
INPUT:	Danen leinutik , Amixadairen seme <unk> ;
PRED:	descended from the tribe of Dan ;
GOLD:	DanAhiezer son of Ammishaddai

ID:	2519
INPUT:	Paulo <unk> ontzian
PRED:	Paul and Silas in the boat
GOLD:	The Storm at Sea

ID:	2520
INPUT:	Baina Danielek , bere burua erregearen <unk> ez kutsatzea erabakia zuenez , janari kutsatu haietara ez <unk> eskatu zion jauregiko <unk> .
PRED:	But when I realized that the king had not been able to kill him , and when he could send him into the palace of the king 's palace , he asked the king of the palace of the palace .
GOLD:	But Daniel was determined not to defile himself by eating the food and wine given to them by the king . He asked the chief of staff for permission not to eat these unacceptable foods .

ID:	2521
INPUT:	Lotsa dira <unk> guztiak , huskeria horiekin harro daudenak . Ahuspez Jaunaren aurrean beste jainko guztiak !
PRED:	All who worship idols will be destroyed , and all who have worshiped the Lord .
GOLD:	Those who worship idols are disgraced — all who brag about their worthless gods — for every god must bow to him .

ID:	2522
INPUT:	Jaunaren legean ezarritako oparia ere eskaini zuten : bi usapal edo bi usakume .
PRED:	The priest of the Temple was given to the Lord as a burnt offering , two turtledoves or two turtledoves or two turtledoves or two pigeons .
GOLD:	So they offered the sacrifice required in the law of the Lord — “ either a pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons . ”

ID:	2523
INPUT:	Susako juduak , berriz , bildu ziren Adar hilaren hamalauan ere , eta hirurehun gizaseme hil zituzten Susan ; hala ere , ez zituzten haien ondasunak ostu .
PRED:	The Jews and the Jews went on on March 7 , and they killed three months . The men of the town was killed , and they must not murder .
GOLD:	Then the Jews at Susa gathered together on March 8 and killed 300 more men , and again they took no plunder .

ID:	2524
INPUT:	Zure bizia niretzat gaur hain baliotsua izan den bezala , hala izan bedi nirea Jaunarentzat . Libra nazala atsekabe orotatik !
PRED:	For I am giving you today , as you have promised me to the Lord .
GOLD:	Now may the Lord value my life , even as I have valued yours today . May he rescue me from all my troubles . ”

ID:	2525
INPUT:	Zuetako norbait gaixo dagoela ? Dei egin diezaiela eliz arduradunei , <unk> alde otoitz egin eta Jaunaren izenean olioz <unk> dezaten .
PRED:	If one of you are sick , should we ask for you to ask for the church of the church ? And when they ask for the Lord , they will give him some of you .
GOLD:	Are any of you sick ? You should call for the elders of the church to come and pray over you , anointing you with oil in the name of the Lord .

ID:	2526
INPUT:	Ene seme , zergatik liluratuko zaitu lotsabako batek ? Zergatik <unk> duzu emakume arrotzaren gerria ?
PRED:	Oh , my son , son , how can you sleep ? Why do you realize that you have a prostitute ?
GOLD:	Why be captivated , my son , by an immoral woman , or fondle the breasts of a promiscuous woman ?

ID:	2527
INPUT:	Baina <unk> zarelako eta ez bero , ez hotz , <unk> <unk> <unk> nauzu .
PRED:	But when I know that you do n't know that you have seen , and that I know that you were all sick .
GOLD:	But since you are like lukewarm water , neither hot nor cold , I will spit you out of my mouth !

ID:	2528
INPUT:	Bederatzigarren izurria : ilunpeak
PRED:	A Message about Assyria
GOLD:	A Plague of Darkness

ID:	2529
INPUT:	<unk> trebeak ziren emakumeek beren eskuz ehunduriko purpura more , gorri eta gorrimina eta liho fina ekarri zituzten .
PRED:	They were made with gold , purple , and scarlet thread . They brought with fine linen cloth , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	All the women who were skilled in sewing and spinning prepared blue , purple , and scarlet thread , and fine linen cloth .

ID:	2530
INPUT:	Han , Edom lurraldearen mugan , Jaunak esan zien Moisesi eta Aaroni :
PRED:	There the Lord said to Moses , “ This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	There , on the border of the land of Edom , the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,

ID:	2531
INPUT:	Goretsazue Jauna , nazio guztiok , ospa ezazue , herri guztiok !
PRED:	Praise the Lord , you , all the nations of the earth , and all the nations of the earth .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord , all you nations.Praise him , all you people of the earth .

ID:	2532
INPUT:	Ezin dugu atzeman Ahaltsua , nagusi da indar eta zuzenbidez , justiziaz aberatsa , ez du inor zanpatzen .
PRED:	The Almighty is in the Almighty , and the righteous are strong and powerful .
GOLD:	We can not imagine the power of the Almighty ; but even though he is just and righteous , he does not destroy us .

ID:	2533
INPUT:	Begiak nahigabez <unk> ditut , horrenbeste <unk> ahulduak .
PRED:	I have seen my misery , and those who have seen me .
GOLD:	Go away , all you who do evil , for the Lord has heard my weeping .

ID:	2534
INPUT:	Hamateko errege <unk> jakin zuen hondatua zuela Davidek Hadadezerren gudaroste osoa .
PRED:	When David heard that he was very old , David mobilized his entire army .
GOLD:	When King Toi of Hamath heard that David had destroyed the entire army of Hadadezer ,

ID:	2535
INPUT:	Erdiko <unk> sarrera tenpluaren <unk> saihetsean zegoen ; <unk> biribil batetik igo zitekeen erdiko solairura eta hemendik gorenekora .
PRED:	At that time the beast had been able to be able to kill the other side of the Temple of the Lord 's Temple , and he was sitting on the entrance to the entrance of the Temple .
GOLD:	The entrance to the bottom floor was on the south side of the Temple . There were winding stairs going up to the second floor , and another flight of stairs between the second and third floors .

ID:	2536
INPUT:	Magdalako Maria eta beste Maria hilobi aurrean eserita zeuden .
PRED:	Mary Magdalene was Mary Magdalene and Mary Magdalene .
GOLD:	Both Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were sitting across from the tomb and watching .

ID:	2537
INPUT:	Goraintziak Priska eta <unk> , Jesu Kristoren zerbitzuan laguntzaile izan ditudanei .
PRED:	Greet , dear brothers and sisters , dear brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	Give my greetings to Priscilla and Aquila , my co-workers in the ministry of Christ Jesus .

ID:	2538
INPUT:	Eman dezagun besteak barrutik erantzuten diola : “ Utz nazak bakean , atea itxia zegok eta haurrak eta neu <unk> ; ezin <unk> ematera jaiki ” .
PRED:	“ Let 's go to me , ” they said , “ let me be hungry , and if they were hungry , and they will kill him and kill him . ”
GOLD:	And suppose he calls out from his bedroom , ‘ Do n't bother me . The door is locked for the night , and my family and I are all in bed . I ca n't help you . '

ID:	2539
INPUT:	Egon erne , iraun sendo sinesmenean , joka <unk> eta izan indartsu .
PRED:	Be strong and courageous , so that those who live in your faith .
GOLD:	Be on guard . Stand firm in the faith . Be courageous . Be strong .

ID:	2540
INPUT:	<unk>
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Recovery
GOLD:	Concluding Words

ID:	2541
INPUT:	Esauren ondorengoak
PRED:	The descendants of Esau 's descendants
GOLD:	Descendants of Esau

ID:	2542
INPUT:	Behin batean , Jakob <unk> egosten ari zela , iritsi zen Esau oihanetik , oso <unk> ,
PRED:	One day when Jacob arrived , Esau arrived with me , Esau 's servants , Esau , and Jacob was very very very very old .
GOLD:	One day when Jacob was cooking some stew , Esau arrived home from the wilderness exhausted and hungry .

ID:	2543
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	2544
INPUT:	Jainkoaren maitasun gupidatsua
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	The

ID:	2545
INPUT:	« Egun hartan , Jerusalemi erasoka etor dakizkion guztiak hondatuko ditut .
PRED:	“ In that day I will destroy those who trust in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	For on that day I will begin to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem .

ID:	2546
INPUT:	eta , anaiengana itzulirik , esan zien : « Ez dago mutikoaren arrastorik ! Zer egin behar dut nik orain ? »
PRED:	Then he turned back and said to them , “ What 's I have done ? What 's I done ? ”
GOLD:	Then he went back to his brothers and lamented , “ The boy is gone ! What will I do now ? ”

ID:	2547
INPUT:	Jaitsi berehala eta zoaz beroriekin kezkarik gabe , neuk bidali dizkizut eta » .
PRED:	Go down and sleep , and I will send you back , and I sent you back . ”
GOLD:	Get up , go downstairs , and go with them without hesitation . Do n't worry , for I have sent them . ”

ID:	2548
INPUT:	Judaren eta Israelen zoria aldatuko dut , eta <unk> egoeran ezarriko ditut berriro ;
PRED:	I will restore the fortunes of Judah , and I will give you victory over you .
GOLD:	I will restore the fortunes of Judah and Israel and rebuild their towns .

ID:	2549
INPUT:	Horrela , itun bikainagoaren <unk> da Jesus .
PRED:	That is why we have been called by the law of God .
GOLD:	Because of this oath , Jesus is the one who guarantees this better covenant with God .

ID:	2550
INPUT:	Ez duzue surik ere egingo larunbatez zeuen bizilekuetan » .
PRED:	Do n't be surprised when you live in the Sabbath . ”
GOLD:	You must not even light a fire in any of your homes on the Sabbath . ”

ID:	2551
INPUT:	Aldi hartan gaixotu egin zitzaion Jeroboami bere seme Abias .
PRED:	At that time Abijah became pregnant and became pregnant .
GOLD:	At that time Jeroboam 's son Abijah became very sick .

ID:	2552
INPUT:	ez dut begirik itxiko , ez loak hartzen utziko ,
PRED:	I wo n't sleep , for there will no longer fall .
GOLD:	I will not let my eyes sleepnor close my eyelids in slumber

ID:	2553
INPUT:	eta <unk> ahoa ukitu zidan , esanez : « Begira , txingar <unk> ukitu dizkizu . Kendu zaizu , beraz , gaiztakeria , barkatu bekatua » .
PRED:	Then the man touched me and touched him . “ Look , ” he said , “ Look , because he has healed your sins . ”
GOLD:	He touched my lips with it and said , “ See , this coal has touched your lips . Now your guilt is removed , and your sins are forgiven . ”

ID:	2554
INPUT:	Jainkoak Jeroboami emaniko hitza
PRED:	Jacob 's Prayer for Jeroboam
GOLD:	Jeroboam Rebels against Solomon

ID:	2555
INPUT:	Hark erantzun zien : “ Etsaiaren lana da hori ” . Eta morroiek : “ Joango al gara olo gaiztoa biltzera ? ”
PRED:	He replied , ‘ The other men have been taken from his own country , and we will go into the field , and we will return to the field . '
GOLD:	“ ‘ An enemy has done this ! ' the farmer exclaimed . “ ‘ Should we pull out the weeds ? ' they asked .

ID:	2556
INPUT:	Isuri olioa erre-oparien aldarearen eta bertako tresna guztien gainera . Honela sagaratuko duzu , eta guztiz sakratua izango da aldarea .
PRED:	Then make the altar of burnt offering and altar to the altar of all the altar , and it will be holy . This will be holy , and the altar will be holy .
GOLD:	Anoint the altar of burnt offering and its utensils to consecrate them . Then the altar will become absolutely holy .

ID:	2557
INPUT:	Dixon , Etzer eta Dixan . Horiek ziren <unk> ondorengoak , hortarren leinuburuak Edomen .
PRED:	These were the clans descended from the clans of Edom , who were the clans of Edom . These were the clans descended from the clans of Edom .
GOLD:	Dishon , Ezer , and Dishan . These were the Horite clan leaders , the descendants of Seir , who lived in the land of Edom .

ID:	2558
INPUT:	nik ez baitut neure kabuz hitz egin , baizik eta bidali nauen Aitak agindu dit zer esan eta irakatsi .
PRED:	For I have not sent me to speak , but I have given me the Father who sent me .
GOLD:	I do n't speak on my own authority . The Father who sent me has commanded me what to say and how to say it .

ID:	2559
INPUT:	Jauna zeuen Jainkoa aurretik <unk> eta zuen alde borrokatuko da , Egipton zuen begi-bistan egin zuen bezala ;
PRED:	Then the Lord your God will send you out of Egypt , just as the Lord your God had promised .
GOLD:	The Lord your God is going ahead of you . He will fight for you , just as you saw him do in Egypt .

ID:	2560
INPUT:	Jaunak bere herria indar dezala ! Jaunak bere herria bakeaz bedeinka dezala !
PRED:	May the Lord bless all the people of Israel and bless them with peace .
GOLD:	The Lord gives his people strength.The Lord blesses them with peace .

ID:	2561
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Bene-benetan diotsuet : Abraham sortu baino lehenagokoa naiz ni .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I tell you the truth , I am the one who is greater than you . ”
GOLD:	Jesus answered , “ I tell you the truth , before Abraham was even born , ! ”

ID:	2562
INPUT:	<unk> seme <unk> , Danen leinukoa ;
PRED:	They were leader of the tribe of Dan , who were leader of the tribe of Dan .
GOLD:	DanAmmiel son of Gemalli

ID:	2563
INPUT:	Biharamun goizean David jaiki <unk> , zuzendua zion Jaunak bere hitza <unk> , Daviden zerbitzura zegoen profetari , esanez :
PRED:	At the time the Lord was very angry with him , and when he saw that the Lord had given him his message , he said to him ,
GOLD:	The next morning the word of the Lord came to the prophet Gad , who was David 's seer . This was the message :

ID:	2564
INPUT:	« Egizu proba gurekin hamar egunez : ez eman jaten eta edaten barazkiak eta ura besterik .
PRED:	“ Do n't work for us , for we have given you ten days and drink wine .
GOLD:	“ Please test us for ten days on a diet of vegetables and water , ” Daniel said .

ID:	2565
INPUT:	( 2 Erg 24 , 18 — 25 , 21 ; 39 , 1-20 ; 52 , <unk> )
PRED:	Uzziah 's Final Words to Judah
GOLD:	Zedekiah Rules in Judah

ID:	2566
INPUT:	nik ezarri nion muga , ateak eta morroiloak jarriz ,
PRED:	I set out the border of the Mediterranean Sea and bars of bars .
GOLD:	For I locked it behind barred gates , limiting its shores .

ID:	2567
INPUT:	Egun haietan judu jainkozale asko ziren Jerusalemen , eguzkiaren azpian diren nazio guztietatik etorriak .
PRED:	At that time the people of Jerusalem were on the sun , where the sun rises to all the nations of the earth .
GOLD:	At that time there were devout Jews from every nation living in Jerusalem .

ID:	2568
INPUT:	Lotsaz eta laidoz geldituko dirazure aurka lehiatzen direnak ; ezerezean galduko dirazure kontra <unk> ari direnak .
PRED:	But those who hate will be captured , and those who attack Jerusalem will be against the nations .
GOLD:	“ See , all your angry enemies lie there , confused and humiliated.Anyone who opposes you will dieand come to nothing .

ID:	2569
INPUT:	Gog , Jainkoaren <unk>
PRED:	Judgment against False Prophets
GOLD:	A Message for Gog

ID:	2570
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> izan baitzen : Etam <unk> , <unk> seme Heman , <unk> eta <unk> baino jakintsuago . Salomonen izena inguruetako lurralde guztietan zabaldu zen .
PRED:	At that time I saw that some of the men who had been able to kill me , and when they saw that the name of Solomon had been very very very powerful , the name of Solomon was very very very very severe .
GOLD:	In return , Solomon sent him an annual payment of 100,000 bushels of wheat for his household and 110,000 gallons of pure olive oil .

ID:	2571
INPUT:	« Edozein herri edo <unk> iristen zaretela , jakizue ba ote den konfiantzako inor zuek etxean hartzeko , eta geldi zaitezte <unk> herri hartatik atera arte .
PRED:	“ If you know that those who are living , if you know that if you are living in the house of those who have been able to be able to be able to be healed .
GOLD:	“ Whenever you enter a city or village , search for a worthy person and stay in his home until you leave town .

ID:	2572
INPUT:	alderantziz , nire agindu guztiak gogoan eduki eta bete egingo dituzue , eta zeuen Jainko honentzat sagaratuak izango zarete .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : You must be careful to obey all the people of Israel , and you will be holy .
GOLD:	The tassels will help you remember that you must obey all my commands and be holy to your God .

ID:	2573
INPUT:	Erregeak agindu hau eman zien Joabi , Abixairi eta Itairi : — Hartu eztiki Absalom gaztea . Gudaroste osoak aditu zuen erregeak Absalomi buruz gudalburu guztiei agindutakoa .
PRED:	Then the king sent Joab to Joab and Joab to Joab and Joab . “ Take Joab 's troops to find him , ” the king told him .
GOLD:	And the king gave this command to Joab , Abishai , and Ittai : “ For my sake , deal gently with young Absalom . ” And all the troops heard the king give this order to his commanders .

ID:	2574
INPUT:	Behin batean , Josek amets bat izan zuen eta , kontatu zienean , are gehiago gorrotatu zuten anaiek .
PRED:	One day Joseph told his brothers about a dream , and when he saw that his brothers had done , they thought they were terrified .
GOLD:	One night Joseph had a dream , and when he told his brothers about it , they hated him more than ever .

ID:	2575
INPUT:	Han , <unk> zihoan <unk> ontzi bat aurkitu zuen ehuntariak , eta denok bertara aldatu gintuen .
PRED:	And when he saw a man , he found a man who had been baptized with us , and all who had been baptized .
GOLD:	There the commanding officer found an Egyptian ship from Alexandria that was bound for Italy , and he put us on board .

ID:	2576
INPUT:	Zure hitzaren <unk> leialtasuna da , zure betiko erabakien muina justizia .
PRED:	Your laws are filled with joy , and your decrees are filled with integrity .
GOLD:	The very essence of your words is truth ; all your just regulations will stand forever .

ID:	2577
INPUT:	eta ipini efodaren sorbalda-babeskietan . Honela , israeldarren izenak oroigarri gisa eramango ditu Aaronek Jaunaren aurrera .
PRED:	He placed the ephod on the altar of the ephod and the ephod as the ephod . Then Aaron will take them on the altar of the Lord 's name .
GOLD:	Fasten the two stones on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod as a reminder that Aaron represents the people of Israel . Aaron will carry these names on his shoulders as a constant reminder whenever he goes before the Lord .

ID:	2578
INPUT:	Jaunaren <unk> esklabo dena libre egiten du , eta libre dena Kristoren esklabo bihurtzen .
PRED:	For the Lord has given you a slave of the Lord , who is free from all who are free .
GOLD:	And remember , if you were a slave when the Lord called you , you are now free in the Lord . And if you were free when the Lord called you , you are now a slave of Christ .

ID:	2579
INPUT:	Izreel , <unk> , Zanoah ,
PRED:	When the king of Judah heard what happened , he became king of Assyria .
GOLD:	Jezreel , Jokdeam , Zanoah ,

ID:	2580
INPUT:	Eta lurreko bizilagun guztiek gurtuko dute , lepo eginiko Bildotsaren biziaren liburuan beren izenak munduaren hasieratik idatzirik dituztenak izan ezik .
PRED:	And all the people of the earth must worship the name of the Lamb that was written in the book of the Lamb , because they were written in the Book of the world .
GOLD:	And all the people who belong to this world worshiped the beast . They are the ones whose names were not written in the Book of Life that belongs to the Lamb who was slaughtered before the world was made .

ID:	2581
INPUT:	Zeure gaiztakeria izango duzu zigor , zeure desleialkeria <unk> . Kontura zaitez eta <unk> gogorra eta garratza <unk> , zeure Jainkoa , <unk> , nireganako begirunerik ez izatea . Nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak , esana .
PRED:	O Lord , you will know that you are talking about me , and you will know that when they were afraid of you , and you will know that I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken !
GOLD:	Your wickedness will bring its own punishment.Your turning from me will shame you.You will see what an evil , bitter thing it isto abandon the Lord your God and not to fear him.I , the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken !

ID:	2582
INPUT:	Zenbatu zituen Akabek eskualdeburuen laguntzaile ziren gazte haiek : berrehun eta hogeita hamabi ziren . Ondoren , israeldar gudarosteko gainerako jendea zenbatu zuen : zazpi mila gizon ziren .
PRED:	So King Ahab of the army of Israel had been young men , and the men of Israel had been given to the rest of the men of Israel . Then the men of Israel and all the men of Israel returned to each day .
GOLD:	So Ahab mustered the troops of the 232 provincial commanders . Then he called out the rest of the army of Israel , some 7,000 men .

ID:	2583
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Badator Israel herriari eta Juda herriari egin diedan promesa beteko dudan garaia .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The time I have done to the people of Israel and my people .
GOLD:	“ The day will come , says the Lord , when I will do for Israel and Judah all the good things I have promised them .

ID:	2584
INPUT:	Beste hau ere agintzen dut : norbait nire agindu honetatik aldentzen bada , beraren etxetik habe bat kendu , <unk> eta sar dezatela bertan , beraren etxea zabor-pila bihurtuz .
PRED:	I am giving you this command : If someone has given me a house , then I will turn away from the house of my house and cut off the house of my house , and then I will cut off the house of my house .
GOLD:	“ Those who violate this decree in any way will have a beam pulled from their house . Then they will be lifted up and impaled on it , and their house will be reduced to a pile of rubble .

ID:	2585
INPUT:	Eta onartzen ez bazaituzte , herri hartatik alde egitean , astindu zeuen oinetako hautsa , beraien kontrako seinaletzat » .
PRED:	And if you refuse to turn away from your dust , let them grow as dust as dust as dust as dust . ”
GOLD:	And if a town refuses to welcome you , shake its dust from your feet as you leave to show that you have abandoned those people to their fate . ”

ID:	2586
INPUT:	Baina Jesusek , itzulirik , esan zion Pedrori : — Alde nire ondotik , Satanas ! <unk> haiz niretzat , hire asmoak ez baitituk Jainkoarenak , gizakiarenak baizik .
PRED:	But Jesus left Peter and said to Peter , “ Get out of me ! ” But Satan said , “ I am afraid of you . ”
GOLD:	Jesus turned to Peter and said , “ Get away from me , Satan ! You are a dangerous trap to me . You are seeing things merely from a human point of view , not from God 's . ”

ID:	2587
INPUT:	Orduan , Jainkoak etorrarazi zuen Babiloniako erregea jende haren kontra , eta hark hango gazteak ezpataz hil zituen tenpluan bertan ; ez zien barkatu ez mutilei , ez <unk> , ez zaharrei , ez <unk> : Jainkoak dena haren esku utzi zuen .
PRED:	Then God sent this message to the king of Babylon and the people of Babylon , and he killed him in the Temple of the Lord . He did not kill him , and he would not kill him .
GOLD:	So the Lord brought the king of Babylon against them . The Babylonians killed Judah 's young men , even chasing after them into the Temple . They had no pity on the people , killing both young men and young women , the old and the infirm . God handed all of them over to Nebuchadnezzar .

ID:	2588
INPUT:	<unk> dit , bai , erregeak eta libratuko gaitu neure semea eta biok , Jainkoak emandako lurraldetik desagerrarazi nahi <unk> eskutik » .
PRED:	But when I have heard that the king will rescue us from my land , and I will give you victory over all the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	and rescue us from those who would cut us off from the inheritance God has given us .

ID:	2589
INPUT:	( Mt 19 , 1-9 ; Lk 16 , 18 )
PRED:	Jesus Heals Many People
GOLD:	Jesus Blesses the Children

ID:	2590
INPUT:	Nik gidatzen zaitut zuhurtziaren bidetik , nik ibilarazten zuzentasunaren <unk> .
PRED:	I am confident in my path , and I trust you .
GOLD:	I will teach you wisdom 's waysand lead you in straight paths .

ID:	2591
INPUT:	Inork , tentaldirik duenean , ez beza esan Jainkoak tentatzen duenik . Jainkoak ez du <unk> <unk> eta ez du inor <unk> tentatzen ere .
PRED:	We know God 's wonderful things we can not know where God has been able to know how God has been able to kill us and how can we know ?
GOLD:	And remember , when you are being tempted , do not say , “ God is tempting me . ” God is never tempted to do wrong , and he never tempts anyone else .

ID:	2592
INPUT:	Haiek , ostera , goi-goiko Jainkoa probatu zuten , haren kontra altxatuz ; haren xedapenak ez zituzten gorde .
PRED:	They captured the Most High High Priest , and they refused to obey his laws .
GOLD:	But they kept testing and rebelling against God Most High.They did not obey his laws .

ID:	2593
INPUT:	Bigarren hilaren hamalauan Pazko-bildotsa hil zuten . Apaizek eta lebitarrek , garbikuntza egin ezaz lotsaturik , garbikuntza egin eta erre-opariak eskaini zituzten Jaunaren etxean .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day the Passover celebration , the priests , and the priests purified themselves with their sacred offerings , and the priests and their burnt offerings . They offered sacrifices to the Lord 's Temple and burnt offerings .
GOLD:	On the fourteenth day of the second month , one month later than usual , the people slaughtered the Passover lamb . This shamed the priests and Levites , so they purified themselves and brought burnt offerings to the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	2594
INPUT:	Amnonen heriotzaren samina <unk> , ordea , baretu zitzaion Davidi Absalomen kontrako haserrea .
PRED:	But when she was sick , he became very angry with Absalom .
GOLD:	And King David , now reconciled to Amnon 's death , longed to be reunited with his son Absalom .

ID:	2595
INPUT:	Burugabeak ez du zentzu ona gogoko , nahiago du barruan duena aldarrikatu .
PRED:	The wise are not a fool , but the one who hates him .
GOLD:	Fools have no interest in understanding ; they only want to air their own opinions .

ID:	2596
INPUT:	Zer da errazago : « Barkatuak dituzu bekatuak » esatea ala « Jaiki eta zabiltza » esatea ?
PRED:	“ What do you say , ‘ Stand up ? ' or ‘ Stand up and say , ‘ Stand up ? '
GOLD:	Is it easier to say ‘ Your sins are forgiven , ' or ‘ Stand up and walk ' ?

ID:	2597
INPUT:	Erre-opari eta bekatuen barkamen-oparirik ez duzu atsegin izan .
PRED:	“ Do n't listen to you , ” they demanded .
GOLD:	You were not pleased with burnt offeringsor other offerings for sin .

ID:	2598
INPUT:	Orduan , nik ere onak ez ziren legeak eman nizkien , eta bizira eramaten ez zuten erabakiak .
PRED:	Then I told them that I had not given them the law and decrees that they could not enter life .
GOLD:	I gave them over to worthless decrees and regulations that would not lead to life .

ID:	2599
INPUT:	Neu naiz Jauna , zuen Jainkoa . Gorde garbi zeuen buruak , santu izan zaitezten , ni santua naiz eta . Ez zaitezte kutsa lurrean narraska dabiltzan piztia horiekin .
PRED:	I am the Lord your God , and you must be ceremonially clean . I am holy , and you must not defile yourselves with your holy people . You must not defile yourselves with your holy people .
GOLD:	For I am the Lord your God . You must consecrate yourselves and be holy , because I am holy . So do not defile yourselves with any of these small animals that scurry along the ground .

ID:	2600
INPUT:	Atzerritarrak kikildu egin ziren , eta beren <unk> irten .
PRED:	For the Lord lives , and they will see their power .
GOLD:	They all lose their courageand come trembling from their strongholds .

ID:	2601
INPUT:	zeren eta , geure kontzientziak kondenatzen bagaitu ere , gure <unk> gainetik baitago Jainkoa eta dena ezagutzen baitu .
PRED:	For when we die , we 'll know that God has been healed . For he knows that he has seen God .
GOLD:	Even if we feel guilty , God is greater than our feelings , and he knows everything .

ID:	2602
INPUT:	Izan beti gogoan gaur ematen dizkizudan agindu guztiok ;
PRED:	For I am giving you today , all these things I am giving you today .
GOLD:	And you must commit yourselves wholeheartedly to these commands that I am giving you today .

ID:	2603
INPUT:	Jainkoak ez gaitu <unk> bizitzeko deitu , berarentzat sagaraturik bizitzeko baizik .
PRED:	For God has chosen us to be saved by the power of God .
GOLD:	God has called us to live holy lives , not impure lives .

ID:	2604
INPUT:	Irten , gero , Ben-Hinom haranera , <unk> ate aurrera , eta aldarrikatu bertan orain emango dizudan mezua .
PRED:	Go down to the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and take it into the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and then I will give you a message to the Lord .
GOLD:	Go out through the Gate of Broken Pots to the garbage dump in the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and give them this message .

ID:	2605
INPUT:	Lebitarrak onartu zuen gizon haren etxean bizitzea , eta gizonak bere semeetako bat bezala hartu zuen .
PRED:	The Levites who lived in his house , just as the man had lived in his house , and he was born in his house .
GOLD:	The Levite agreed to this , and the young man became like one of Micah 's sons .

ID:	2606
INPUT:	Jaunak galdetu zidan : — Zer ikusten duzu , Amos ? — <unk> — erantzun nion . Eta Jaunak : — Horra , <unk> honetaz , neure herria zuzen ote dabilen ikusi nahi dut . Ez baitut gehiago ez ikusiarenik egingo .
PRED:	“ What do you see ? ” the Lord asked me . “ What sorrow awaits you ? ” I said , “ I have seen that you have seen the Lord , and I have seen how hard you have done ? ”
GOLD:	And the Lord said to me , “ Amos , what do you see ? ” I answered , “ A plumb line . ” And the Lord replied , “ I will test my people with this plumb line . I will no longer ignore all their sins .

ID:	2607
INPUT:	« Zoaz ihesi , ene maitea , gazela edo oreinkumea irudi , usain gozoko mendietan barrena » .
PRED:	“ Go , my lover , my lover , my lover , and my cry out to the mountains . ”
GOLD:	Come away , my love ! Be like a gazelleor a young stag on the mountains of spices .

ID:	2608
INPUT:	gero , Santiagori agertu zitzaion , ondoren apostolu guztiei .
PRED:	And when the devil appeared to everyone , he appeared to all the apostles .
GOLD:	Then he was seen by James and later by all the apostles .

ID:	2609
INPUT:	Baina ni zurekin izango naiz beti : eskutik hartua naukazu ;
PRED:	But I will be with you , and I will have a slave .
GOLD:	Yet I still belong to you ; you hold my right hand .

ID:	2610
INPUT:	Beste profetak , alabaina : — Profeta nauzu ni ere zu bezala , eta mezulari bat mintzatu zait Jaunaren izenean , esanez : « Itzularazi hori zeure etxera ; jan dezala ogia eta edan ura » . Gezurra zioen .
PRED:	The prophet said , “ I have heard you , the prophet of the Lord 's Armies , as I said to you , ‘ You have eaten me from the name of the Lord . '
GOLD:	But the old prophet answered , “ I am a prophet , too , just as you are . And an angel gave me this command from the Lord : ‘ Bring him home with you so he can have something to eat and drink . ' ” But the old man was lying to him .

ID:	2611
INPUT:	urrea baino <unk> , urre <unk> baino ere bai ; eztia baino gozoago , ezti berria baino ere bai .
PRED:	Even though they were weak and powerful than gold , even though they are weak than honey , and honey .
GOLD:	They are a warning to your servant , a great reward for those who obey them .

ID:	2612
INPUT:	Gerra kanpoan , izurria eta gosea etxean . Landan dagoena gerran hilko da , hirian dagoena goseak eta izurriak <unk> .
PRED:	A Plague of disease and disease will die in the house of famine , and some of the city will die in the city . They will die in the city of the city , and they will die in the city .
GOLD:	There is war outside the cityand disease and famine within.Those outside the city wallswill be killed by enemy swords.Those inside the citywill die of famine and disease .

ID:	2613
INPUT:	Orduan , honela mintzatu zitzaion Samuel Israel herri osoari : « Jaunarengana bihotz-bihotzez itzuli nahi baduzue , jaurti zeuen artetik sasijainko arrotz guztiak eta Astarteren irudiak ; bizi zaitezte Jaunari zeharo emanak eta ez zerbitza bera besterik . <unk> zaituzte orduan filistearren eskuetatik » .
PRED:	Then Samuel said to all the people of Israel , “ If you turn back to the Lord your God , you will turn away from all the detestable practices of the Philistines , and you will serve the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Then Samuel said to all the people of Israel , “ If you want to return to the Lord with all your hearts , get rid of your foreign gods and your images of Ashtoreth . Turn your hearts to the Lord and obey him alone ; then he will rescue you from the Philistines . ”

ID:	2614
INPUT:	<unk> kopurua finkatzen dueta bakoitzari bere izena ematen .
PRED:	He gives birth to the beast , and he gives birth to his name .
GOLD:	He counts the starsand calls them all by name .

ID:	2615
INPUT:	Erregeak , herri osoarekin , sakrifizioak eskaini zizkion Jaunari .
PRED:	Then the king made all the people as a burnt offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices to the Lord .

ID:	2616
INPUT:	Beraz , limosna egitean , ez ibili turuta joka , itxurazaleek sinagogetan eta kaleetan egin ohi duten bezala , jendearen <unk> irabazteko . Benetan diotsuet : Hartua dute beren ordaina .
PRED:	Therefore , the poor must not go in the streets and do n't work in the streets in the streets and the streets . I tell you the truth , so they will know that they will see the truth .
GOLD:	When you give to someone in need , do n't do as the hypocrites do — blowing trumpets in the synagogues and streets to call attention to their acts of charity ! I tell you the truth , they have received all the reward they will ever get .

ID:	2617
INPUT:	Honela , edomdarrak Judaren <unk> libratu egin ziren gaur arte . Libna hiria ere aldi hartan bertan libratu zen .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : At that time the city of Judah , and the city of Judah will be destroyed .
GOLD:	So Edom has been independent from Judah to this day . The town of Libnah also revolted about that same time .

ID:	2618
INPUT:	Jaitsi zen Moises menditik , eta garbikuntza eginarazi eta arropa <unk> zien israeldarrei .
PRED:	So Moses left the mountain and burned it on the mountain , and when he saw that the people of Israel were slaughtered by the people of Israel .
GOLD:	So Moses went down to the people . He consecrated them for worship , and they washed their clothes .

ID:	2619
INPUT:	« <unk> gezi hilgarriak bota eta suntsitu egingo zaituztet ; gosea <unk> dizuet , ogi-hornidura guztia kenduz .
PRED:	“ I will destroy you , and I will destroy you . I will destroy you and fig trees , and I will destroy you .
GOLD:	“ I will shower you with the deadly arrows of famine to destroy you . The famine will become more and more severe until every crumb of food is gone .

ID:	2620
INPUT:	Moisesen aurka matxinatu ziren beste berrehun eta berrogeita hamar israeldarrekin batera . Hauek israeldar elkarteko buruzagi ziren , batzarrean kargu eta itzal handia zituztenak .
PRED:	When the people of Israel heard about the plot of the people of Israel , they were one of the people of Israel and the people of Israel , the people of Israel were given to the rest of the people of the people of Israel and the people of Israel .
GOLD:	They incited a rebellion against Moses , along with 250 other leaders of the community , all prominent members of the assembly .

ID:	2621
INPUT:	Atzetik hurbildu eta <unk> ukitu zion Jesusi ; eta bat-batean odoljarioa gelditu egin zitzaion .
PRED:	When the man came to him , he touched him and saw that she had been healed .
GOLD:	Coming up behind Jesus , she touched the fringe of his robe . Immediately , the bleeding stopped .

ID:	2622
INPUT:	<unk> direnei Jaunak die eusten , lur joak ditu altxatzen .
PRED:	The Lord protects those who hate the earth , and he hates those who hate the earth .
GOLD:	The Lord helps the fallenand lifts those bent beneath their loads .

ID:	2623
INPUT:	Zuek , ene maiteok , gogoratu Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren apostoluek aurrez iragarria :
PRED:	Now , dear brothers and sisters , remember that the Lord Jesus Christ had given you as the apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	But you , my dear friends , must remember what the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ predicted .

ID:	2624
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Gorroto eta higuin ditutzuen jaiak , ez ditut <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will punish you and show your evil deeds , and I will punish you .
GOLD:	“ I hate all your show and pretense — the hypocrisy of your religious festivals and solemn assemblies .

ID:	2625
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , hau diotsot nik , Jainko Jaunak , Israel herriari : <unk> ! Badator amaiera herrialde honetako lau bazterretaraino .
PRED:	“ Son of man , this message came from the Sovereign Lord : The people of Israel will be destroyed , and the people of Israel will be destroyed .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , this is what the Sovereign Lord says to Israel : “ The end is here ! Wherever you look — east , west , north , or south — your land is finished .

ID:	2626
INPUT:	<unk> zenbat ziren adierazi zion Joabek erregeari : Israelen zortziehun mila ziren ezpata erabil zezaketen <unk> , eta Judan bostehun mila .
PRED:	Then Joab said to the king of Israel , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The armies of Judah and Judah , and all the men of Judah . '
GOLD:	Joab reported the number of people to the king . There were 800,000 capable warriors in Israel who could handle a sword , and 500,000 in Judah .

ID:	2627
INPUT:	Eta zer esango duzu , Jerusalem , <unk> eduki ohi <unk> agintea <unk> zu menderatzean ? Oinaze bizitan aurkituko zara , emakumea erdiminetan bezala .
PRED:	And what will you say , ‘ What sorrow awaits you who are in Samaria ? When you see that you are in battle , you will see that you will be like a woman of woman , like woman who are in labor . '
GOLD:	What will you say when the Lord takes the allies you have cultivatedand appoints them as your rulers ? Pangs of anguish will grip you , like those of a woman in labor !

ID:	2628
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Galdu egingo ditut Moaben , muinoetako kultu-lekuetan beren jainkoei intsentsua erretzen dieten guztiak » .
PRED:	The Lord says , “ I will destroy the pagan shrines for all the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ I will put an end to Moab , ” says the Lord , “ for the people offer sacrifices at the pagan shrines and burn incense to their false gods .

ID:	2629
INPUT:	Hau , berehala soldadu eta ehuntariak bildurik , lasterka joan zen ; gudalburua eta soldaduak ikustean , juduek utzi egin zioten Paulo <unk> .
PRED:	When the officer arrived , the commander of the Roman army , the commander of the army , the commander of the army , the commander of the army and the soldiers saw Paul .
GOLD:	He immediately called out his soldiers and officers and ran down among the crowd . When the mob saw the commander and the troops coming , they stopped beating Paul .

ID:	2630
INPUT:	Izan ere , Liburu Santuak dio : Izan santu , ni santua naiz eta .
PRED:	For the Scriptures say , “ I am holy , and I am holy . ”
GOLD:	For the Scriptures say , “ You must be holy because I am holy . ”

ID:	2631
INPUT:	Jainkoaren semeek gizakien alabekin batu eta haurrak izan zituztenean , baita geroago ere , baziren <unk> munduan : antzinako <unk> dira hauek , izen handikoak .
PRED:	When the children of God had children , children , children , children , children , and children were born to see how much they were in the world , and they were afraid of the world .
GOLD:	In those days , and for some time after , giant Nephilites lived on the earth , for whenever the sons of God had intercourse with women , they gave birth to children who became the heroes and famous warriors of ancient times .

ID:	2632
INPUT:	eta esan zuen : « Hara , guztiak herri bat bera dira , hizkuntza bat berekoak . Hau beren lehenengo lana badute , ez zaie aurrerantzean egin nahiko duten ezer ezinezko gertatuko .
PRED:	“ Look , ” he said , “ all the people of the world will be given to each other , and they will be given to their own people .
GOLD:	“ Look ! ” he said . “ The people are united , and they all speak the same language . After this , nothing they set out to do will be impossible for them !

ID:	2633
INPUT:	<unk> edan zuenean , Jesusek esan zuen : « Betea da dena » . Eta , burua makurtuz , azken arnasa eman zuen .
PRED:	When Jesus heard what had happened , he said , “ Yes , my life ! ” And he breathed his last .
GOLD:	When Jesus had tasted it , he said , “ It is finished ! ” Then he bowed his head and gave up his spirit .

ID:	2634
INPUT:	Betiko baztertu ote gaituzu , bada ? Zure haserreak ez ote du <unk> ?
PRED:	Do n't you think of your anger ? Why are your anger ? Who is your anger ?
GOLD:	Or have you utterly rejected us ? Are you angry with us still ?

ID:	2635
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jaunarentzako bereizitako eremu guztiz sakratuaren zati bat dagokie , <unk> ondoan .
PRED:	That is why the Lord says to the people of the land of the land will be given to the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	It will be their special portion when the land is distributed , the most sacred land of all . Next to the priests ' territory will lie the land where the other Levites will live .

ID:	2636
INPUT:	Jaunak esana baitzion Moisesi : « Esan israeldarrei : Herri burugogorra zarete ! <unk> batez zuekin joango banintz , hondatu egingo zintuzketet . Erantzi , bada , <unk> , eta ikusiko dut zer egin zuekin » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ You are my people of Israel , because they were very angry with me , and I will see you because they were very angry with you . ”
GOLD:	For the Lord had told Moses to tell them , “ You are a stubborn and rebellious people . If I were to travel with you for even a moment , I would destroy you . Remove your jewelry and fine clothes while I decide what to do with you . ”

ID:	2637
INPUT:	Dolutan , akiturik dago lurraldea , lotsaz eta zimel Libanoko basoa , Xaron lautada basamortu bihurtua , Baxan eta Karmel mendiak gorri .
PRED:	The land of Lebanon is to the Mediterranean Sea , which is as far as the hill country of Lebanon , which is as far as far as far as the mountains of Lebanon .
GOLD:	The land of Israel wilts in mourning.Lebanon withers with shame.The plain of Sharon is now a wilderness.Bashan and Carmel have been plundered .

ID:	2638
INPUT:	Haiek , entzutean , Jainkoa goretsi zuten ; gero , Paulori esan zioten : « Anaia , ikusten duzu zenbat milaka judu egin diren fededun , baina denak <unk> sutsuak dira .
PRED:	When they heard God heard him , they praised God and said , “ You have seen many of us ! You see how many of the people of Israel have seen him .
GOLD:	After hearing this , they praised God . And then they said , “ You know , dear brother , how many thousands of Jews have also believed , and they all follow the law of Moses very seriously .

ID:	2639
INPUT:	Gero , Akrabim maldaren hegoaldera okertuko da eta , <unk> jarraituz , Kadex-Barnearen hegoaldera iritsiko . Ondoren , <unk> jarraituz , <unk> pasatuko da .
PRED:	Then the family of Gad will turn back into the south side of the south , and then he will send down on the south side of the south . Then he will give birth to his family and fig tree .
GOLD:	It will then run south past Scorpion Pass in the direction of Zin . Its southernmost point will be Kadesh-barnea , from which it will go to Hazar-addar , and on to Azmon .

ID:	2640
INPUT:	Israel herriak , erregeak kasurik ere ez ziola egiten oharturik , ihardetsi zion : « Ez dugu deus ere nahi Davidekin ! Ez dugu parterik nahiJeseren semearekin ! Zeuen etxoletara , israeldarrok ! Zaindu zeuk zeure etxea , David ! » Horrela , bada , israeldarrak beren etxoletara joan ziren .
PRED:	When the king realized that the people of Israel had not told him , “ We have not told him , ‘ We have not been ready to take the Temple of the tribe of Israel . '
GOLD:	When all Israel realized that the king had refused to listen to them , they responded , “ Down with the dynasty of David ! We have no interest in the son of Jesse.Back to your homes , O Israel ! Look out for your own house , O David ! ” So all the people of Israel returned home .

ID:	2641
INPUT:	Zertarako dut <unk> intsentsua , zertarako urrutiko <unk> usaintsua ? Ez ditut atsegin zuen erre-opariak , ez ditut gogoko zuen sakrifizioak .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits me ? I will give you a great banquet ? I will give you a burnt offering to your burnt offering and liquid offering .
GOLD:	There 's no use offering me sweet frankincense from Sheba.Keep your fragrant calamus imported from distant lands ! I will not accept your burnt offerings.Your sacrifices have no pleasing aroma for me . ”

ID:	2642
INPUT:	Zoazte <unk> , egizue garrasi , kostaldeko jendeok !
PRED:	Get up and cry out in terror , you rulers !
GOLD:	Send word now to Tarshish ! Wail , you people who live in distant lands !

ID:	2643
INPUT:	Hala egin zuen Balakek , eta bien artean zekor eta ahari bana eskaini zituzten aldare bakoitzean .
PRED:	Then King Balak sent messengers to make them a young bull and two rams .
GOLD:	Balak followed his instructions , and the two of them sacrificed a young bull and a ram on each altar .

ID:	2644
INPUT:	« Beraz , Egiptotik atera eta basamortura eraman nituen .
PRED:	“ So I brought them out of Egypt and brought them into the wilderness of Egypt .
GOLD:	So I brought them out of Egypt and led them into the wilderness .

ID:	2645
INPUT:	Nik esan nuen : « Ene Jainko , ez nazazu eraman sasoirik onenean ! » Zure urteek gizaldiz gizaldi diraute .
PRED:	I said , “ O God , do n't let me be afraid to save me , for they are righteous . ”
GOLD:	Long ago you laid the foundation of the earthand made the heavens with your hands .

ID:	2646
INPUT:	Izan bedi gurekin Jauna , gure Jainkoa , gure gurasoekin izan zen bezala . Ez gaitzala utz , ez baztertu ;
PRED:	May the Lord our ancestors be with us , just as our ancestors did not obey us .
GOLD:	May the Lord our God be with us as he was with our ancestors ; may he never leave us or abandon us .

ID:	2647
INPUT:	« Norbaitek bere alaba esklabotzat saltzen badu , ez da libre geldituko beste esklaboen erara .
PRED:	“ If a wife is married to his wife , he will not be free .
GOLD:	“ When a man sells his daughter as a slave , she will not be freed at the end of six years as the men are .

ID:	2648
INPUT:	Nork aldenduko gaitu Kristok digun maitasunetik ? Atsekabeak , larriak , erasoaldiak , goseak , jantzirik ezak , <unk> , ezpatak ?
PRED:	Who can save us by the power of Christ ? Who will be able to save us by the power of death ?
GOLD:	Can anything ever separate us from Christ 's love ? Does it mean he no longer loves us if we have trouble or calamity , or are persecuted , or hungry , or destitute , or in danger , or threatened with death ?

ID:	2649
INPUT:	Judakoek erantzun zioten : — Hil , ez zaitugu hilko ; baina ongi lotu eta filistearren esku utzi , bai . Orduan , bi soka berriz lotu eta atera egin zuten <unk> .
PRED:	But the people of Judah replied , “ We have not killed you , but we have put him into the Philistines and put them into the Philistines with him . ” So they took him into the battle and threw him into his hand .
GOLD:	“ We will only tie you up and hand you over to the Philistines , ” they replied . “ We wo n't kill you . ” So they tied him up with two new ropes and brought him up from the rock .

ID:	2650
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Nola nahi duzue ezteietara deituek barau egitea , senar berria berekin dutelarik ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Why do you fast for the wedding wedding guests ?
GOLD:	Jesus responded , “ Do wedding guests fast while celebrating with the groom ? Of course not .

ID:	2651
INPUT:	gizakiak , berriz , hau da , neskatxa birjinak , 32 . 000 guztira .
PRED:	But those who are wise , and the young women are wise .
GOLD:	and 32,000 virgin girls .

ID:	2652
INPUT:	<unk> guztian Jaunari sagaraturik dago .
PRED:	Everyone who lives in the Lord 's presence will be given to the Lord .
GOLD:	This requirement applies as long as they are set apart to the Lord .

ID:	2653
INPUT:	Baina altxor baliotsu hau buztinezko <unk> daramagu , garbi ager dadin <unk> indarra Jainkoarengandik datorrela eta ez guregandik .
PRED:	But the gold will be filled with gold , and that we will be clean , and we will know that we do not know that God 's grace and peace .
GOLD:	We now have this light shining in our hearts , but we ourselves are like fragile clay jars containing this great treasure . This makes it clear that our great power is from God , not from ourselves .

ID:	2654
INPUT:	Hau dio Jaunak : « Ez izan beldur , Israel , Jakoben herri , <unk> bat bezain <unk> ahul zaren hori ! Neuk laguntzen dizut ; ni , Israelen Jainko santua , nauzu askatzaile .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Do n't be afraid of you , my people of Israel , my people of Israel , who are as weak as weak as I , and I am the God of Israel .
GOLD:	Though you are a lowly worm , O Jacob , do n't be afraid , people of Israel , for I will help you.I am the Lord , your Redeemer.I am the Holy One of Israel . '

ID:	2655
INPUT:	Baina esango didazu : « Zergatik haserretzen da , hortaz , Jainkoa , inork ere ezin badio beraren nahiari aurre egin ? »
PRED:	But you will say to me , “ Why do you think you have a good reward ? ”
GOLD:	Well then , you might say , “ Why does God blame people for not responding ? Have n't they simply done what he makes them do ? ”

ID:	2656
INPUT:	Jakobek bere eskuak luzatu eta eskuina Efraim seme gazteenaren buru gainean ezarri zuen eta ezkerra Manases lehen-semearen buru gainean , eskuak <unk> .
PRED:	So Jacob kept his hands on his head , and he poured out his own hands on the head of Ephraim and his head , and he poured out his hands on the head of his hands .
GOLD:	But Jacob crossed his arms as he reached out to lay his hands on the boys ' heads . He put his right hand on the head of Ephraim , though he was the younger boy , and his left hand on the head of Manasseh , though he was the firstborn .

ID:	2657
INPUT:	Jainkoaren etxean sartu , Jaunari eskainiriko ogiak hartu eta jan egin zituen , eta bere lagunei ere eman zizkien , legez apaizek bakarrik jan <unk> ogiak izanik .
PRED:	Then he entered the house of God and took the Bread of the Presence on the altar of the Lord , and he took them into the house of God , and he ate it .
GOLD:	He went into the house of God and broke the law by eating the sacred loaves of bread that only the priests can eat . He also gave some to his companions . ”

ID:	2658
INPUT:	Ondoren , Daniel , Babiloniako jakitunak hiltzeko erregearen agindua hartua zuen Ariokengana joan zen , esanez : « Ez hil Babiloniako jakitunik ! Aurkez nazazu erregeagana , neuk argituko baitiot ametsa » .
PRED:	Then Daniel sent the king of Babylon to kill the king of Babylon . He said , “ Do n't let me kill me , ” he said , “ Do n't let me be afraid of the king of Babylon . ”
GOLD:	Then Daniel went in to see Arioch , whom the king had ordered to execute the wise men of Babylon . Daniel said to him , “ Do n't kill the wise men . Take me to the king , and I will tell him the meaning of his dream . ”

ID:	2659
INPUT:	Herriak , ordea , esan zion Sauli : — Hil beharra duela Jonatanek , Israeli halako garaipena ekarri ondoren ? Inola ere ez ! Ala Jauna ! Buruko ile bat ere ez zaio eroriko lurrera . Jainkoaren laguntzaz egin du gaur egin duena . Honela libratu zuen herriak Jonatan heriotzatik .
PRED:	But the people of Israel said to Saul , “ Please kill me if you have sinned , please please please kill me . ” So Jonathan did n't let me fall into the land of God .
GOLD:	But the people broke in and said to Saul , “ Jonathan has won this great victory for Israel . Should he die ? Far from it ! As surely as the Lord lives , not one hair on his head will be touched , for God helped him do a great deed today . ” So the people rescued Jonathan , and he was not put to death .

ID:	2660
INPUT:	Etxera baraurik bidaltzen baditut , ahuleziak joko ditu bidean , urrutitik etorriak ere badira eta .
PRED:	I am sending them into the wilderness , and they will go out into the distance .
GOLD:	If I send them home hungry , they will faint along the way . For some of them have come a long distance . ”

ID:	2661
INPUT:	Baina orain arte bezainbat adreilu egitera behartuko dituzue , ezta bakar bat ere gutxiago . Alfer batzuk besterik ez dira ! Horregatik ari dira beren Jainkoari sakrifizioak eskaintzera joan behar dutela esaten .
PRED:	But now you are sending you into a single piece of sheep , and they are still alive . They are not allowed to offer sacrifices to God , and they will not offer sacrifices to God 's people .
GOLD:	But still require them to make the same number of bricks as before . Do n't reduce the quota . They are lazy . That 's why they are crying out , ‘ Let us go and offer sacrifices to our God . '

ID:	2662
INPUT:	<unk> arte negar-zotinka ari naiz , lehoiak bezala <unk> hezurrak . Gau eta egun hilzorian naukazu .
PRED:	I am very angry with you , and my bones will be killed .
GOLD:	I waited patiently all night , but I was torn apart as though by lions.Suddenly , my life was over .

ID:	2663
INPUT:	Eta zuek izan zaitezte Jaunaren , zeuen Jainkoaren , esaneko , beraren lege-bidean ibiliz eta beraren aginduak betez , gaur egin duzuen bezala » .
PRED:	So be careful to obey the Lord your God , and do not serve the Lord your God , just as you do . ”
GOLD:	And may you be completely faithful to the Lord our God . May you always obey his decrees and commands , just as you are doing today . ”

ID:	2664
INPUT:	Judasek ere , Jesus salduko zuenak , ezagutzen zuen leku hura , askotan bildua baitzen Jesus han bere ikasleekin .
PRED:	Judas , who would betray Jesus , one of them , and he would visit his disciples to visit him .
GOLD:	Judas , the betrayer , knew this place , because Jesus had often gone there with his disciples .

ID:	2665
INPUT:	Zuena baino herri handiago eta <unk> bota ditu , zuek haien lurraldera eraman eta lurraldea zuei ondaretzat emateko , gaur egun gertatzen den bezala .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I have given you the people of Israel as I have given you a land to give you as a special possession .
GOLD:	He drove out nations far greater than you , so he could bring you in and give you their land as your special possession , as it is today .

ID:	2666
INPUT:	Koreren ardurapean , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> eta <unk> beren <unk> artean xuxen banatu behar zituzten emaitzak apaizak bizi ziren hirietan , bakoitzari , handi nahiz txiki , bere <unk> arabera .
PRED:	At that time , the officials of the prophets , prophets , prophets , prophets , prophets , prophets , prophets , and prophets , and prophets who were filled with authority . They were filled with great things , and those who were filled with great things .
GOLD:	His faithful assistants were Eden , Miniamin , Jeshua , Shemaiah , Amariah , and Shecaniah . They distributed the gifts among the families of priests in their towns by their divisions , dividing the gifts fairly among old and young alike .

ID:	2667
INPUT:	Aurretik zihoazenek gogor egiten zioten , isil zedin ; baina hark areago oihu : — Daviden Semea , erruki zakizkit !
PRED:	Jesus was in the synagogue , but the one of the people could ask for him , “ I have mercy on you ! ”
GOLD:	“ Be quiet ! ” the people in front yelled at him.But he only shouted louder , “ Son of David , have mercy on me ! ”

ID:	2668
INPUT:	Bat-batean , ordea , erorieta txiki-txiki egin da Babilonia . « “ Egin intziri berarengatik , <unk> ! Bila <unk> haren <unk> , ea sendatzen den ” .
PRED:	But when the young women of Babylon , Jerusalem , says , “ What sorrow awaits you who were slaughtered by the sword of Babylon , and they will kill him . '
GOLD:	But suddenly Babylon , too , has fallen.Weep for her.Give her medicine.Perhaps she can yet be healed .

ID:	2669
INPUT:	Jesusek bere ikasleei dei egin eta esan zien : — Errukia ematen dit jende honek : badaramatzate hiru egun nirekin eta ez dute deus ere jateko . Eta ez ditut etxera baraurik bidali nahi , ahuleziak joko <unk> bidean .
PRED:	Jesus called his disciples to his disciples , and he said to them , “ I have given me three days to eat with me , for I have not sent them to eat . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus called his disciples and told them , “ I feel sorry for these people . They have been here with me for three days , and they have nothing left to eat . I do n't want to send them away hungry , or they will faint along the way . ”

ID:	2670
INPUT:	eta egite txarrez salatzen du orain , ez dela birjina esanez . Hona , ordea , nire alabaren <unk> <unk> ” . « Eta gurasoek herri-arduradunen aurrean zabalduko dute <unk> <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	And if they are unfaithful to the beast , they would not be married . But if they say , ‘ This is what I have done . ' But when they saw that my ancestors , they will know that my ancestors , and they will know that they will be healed .
GOLD:	He has accused her of shameful conduct , saying , “ I discovered that your daughter was not a virgin . ” But here is the proof of my daughter 's virginity . ' Then they must spread her bed sheet before the elders .

ID:	2671
INPUT:	<unk> bitez haren egunak , har beza beste batek haren kargua .
PRED:	Let him be very old , and let him be in his presence .
GOLD:	Let his years be few ; let someone else take his position .

ID:	2672
INPUT:	Saul <unk> batetik zihoan ; David , berriz , bere gizonekin beste <unk> . David lasterka zihoan , Saulengandik ihesi . Saul bere gizonekin David eta beronen gizonak inguratzen ari zen , harrapatzeko .
PRED:	When Saul and his men arrived , Saul and his men came out of his men , and his men came out to kill him .
GOLD:	Saul and David were now on opposite sides of a mountain . Just as Saul and his men began to close in on David and his men ,

ID:	2673
INPUT:	Hildakoen Egoitza agerian dago Jainkoaren aurrean , Hondamen Leizea <unk> gabe .
PRED:	For the grave of God is in the grave , and the grave knows what they do .
GOLD:	The underworld is naked in God 's presence.The place of destruction is uncovered .

ID:	2674
INPUT:	Aldi hartan , bi profeta , Ageo eta Idoren seme Zakarias , Juda eta Jerusalemgo juduei hitz egiten hasi ziren , beren Jaun Israelgo Jainkoaren izenean .
PRED:	At that time the prophet Zechariah son of Amoz sent two prophets to Zechariah and Zechariah son of Amoz . This message came to the people of Judah and Judah .
GOLD:	At that time the prophets Haggai and Zechariah son of Iddo prophesied to the Jews in Judah and Jerusalem . They prophesied in the name of the God of Israel who was over them .

ID:	2675
INPUT:	Nora joan zure espiritutik urruti ? Nora ihes egin zure aurretik ?
PRED:	Where are the same way of your spirit ?
GOLD:	I can never escape from your Spirit ! I can never get away from your presence !

ID:	2676
INPUT:	Hel bekizu nire otoitza , makur belarria nire <unk> !
PRED:	Please listen to my prayer , O God , and I have heard my victory .
GOLD:	For my life is full of troubles , and death draws near .

ID:	2677
INPUT:	Luzatu zuen eskua Aaronek Egiptoko uren gainera eta atera zituen <unk> Egipto osoa estali zuten .
PRED:	Then Aaron poured out the waters of Egypt and all the waters of Egypt , and the people of Egypt came out of Egypt .
GOLD:	If you refuse to let them go , I will send a plague of frogs across your entire land .

ID:	2678
INPUT:	Agarrek « Zeu zara ikusi nauzun Jainkoa » eman zion izen mintzatu zitzaion Jainkoari , hau baitzioen : « Ez dut , bada , ni ikusi nauena bera ikusi ? »
PRED:	“ You have seen God , ” Abram said , “ God has given me a blessing . ”
GOLD:	Thereafter , Hagar used another name to refer to the Lord , who had spoken to her . She said , “ You are the God who sees me . ” She also said , “ Have I truly seen the One who sees me ? ”

ID:	2679
INPUT:	<unk> bezala haziko dira , ibai ondoko <unk> bezala .
PRED:	And when they are filled with water , they will know that they are weak as weak as weak as snow .
GOLD:	They will thrive like watered grass , like willows on a riverbank .

ID:	2680
INPUT:	Kutxaren gainean bi izaki hegaldun zeuden , Jainkoaren presentzia aintzatsua adierazten zuten kerubinak , beren hegoez kutxa gaineko estalkia babesten zutenak . Baina hau ez da gai hauetaz <unk> hitz egiteko <unk> .
PRED:	The cherubim of the cherubim were sitting on the throne of God , and the glory of the Lord of God were sitting on the Ark of the Covenant of God . But when they saw that the Ark of God 's Covenant , they were able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to know that they were with him .
GOLD:	Above the Ark were the cherubim of divine glory , whose wings stretched out over the Ark 's cover , the place of atonement . But we can not explain these things in detail now .

ID:	2681
INPUT:	Ez isuri odolik ! Jaurti ezazue <unk> putzu batera , baina ez kalterik egin . Jose haien eskuetatik libratu egin nahi zuen , aitari itzultzeko .
PRED:	Do n't let your blood eat your blood , but do n't let them be angry with your father , but do n't let them turn away from your father .
GOLD:	“ Why should we shed any blood ? Let 's just throw him into this empty cistern here in the wilderness . Then he 'll die without our laying a hand on him . ” Reuben was secretly planning to rescue Joseph and return him to his father .

ID:	2682
INPUT:	Zazpigarren egunean , egunsentian jaiki eta itzulia egin zuten hiriaren inguruan , aurreko <unk> arabera , baina egun hartan zazpi itzuli egin zizkioten hiriari .
PRED:	On the seventh day the seventh day of the people went out to the town of the town , where they had seen three days . But when they returned to the city , they returned to the town of the town .
GOLD:	On the seventh day the Israelites got up at dawn and marched around the town as they had done before . But this time they went around the town seven times .

ID:	2683
INPUT:	orduan dei egingo didazue , baina ez dizuet erantzungo ; bilatu , baina ez nauzue aurkituko .
PRED:	Then I will answer you , but you wo n't answer me .
GOLD:	“ When they cry for help , I will not answer.Though they anxiously search for me , they will not find me .

ID:	2684
INPUT:	horrela , zuen sinesmena Jainkoaren indarrean oinarri zedin eta ez giza jakindurian .
PRED:	In fact , God 's way , so that he does not be able to keep the power of God .
GOLD:	I did this so you would trust not in human wisdom but in the power of God .

ID:	2685
INPUT:	Alabaina , Juda erreinuan izana zen gertakari <unk> berri jakitera , Babiloniako agintariek mandatariak bidali <unk> , Jainkoak Ezekias eskutik utzi bazuen , probatzeko izan zen : nolako asmoak zituen ikusteko .
PRED:	But when the king of Judah arrived at the city of Judah , he sent some of the Jews to see what he had happened , and he sent him to see the king of Babylon to see him .
GOLD:	However , when ambassadors arrived from Babylon to ask about the remarkable events that had taken place in the land , God withdrew from Hezekiah in order to test him and to see what was really in his heart .

ID:	2686
INPUT:	Horrela , emakume <unk> <unk> aldenduko zara ,
PRED:	And when the woman will be healed , and you will know that you will be healed .
GOLD:	Wisdom will save you from the immoral woman , from the seductive words of the promiscuous woman .

ID:	2687
INPUT:	Betel eta Aikoak 123 ;
PRED:	The people of Bethel
GOLD:	The people of Bethel and Ai123

ID:	2688
INPUT:	Benaias , Joiadaren semea , keretarren eta peletarren buruzagi . Daviden semeak , berriz , apaiz ziren .
PRED:	Benaiah son of Jehoiada was the king of David , and the king of David .
GOLD:	Benaiah son of Jehoiada was captain of the king 's bodyguard . And David 's sons served as priestly leaders .

ID:	2689
INPUT:	Jakinarazten dio Jaunak begirune <unk> jokabide behar duen hautatu .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	Who are those who fear the Lord ? He will show them the path they should choose .

ID:	2690
INPUT:	Izan ikara , arduragabeok ! Egin dardara , axolagabeok ! Erantzi , kendu soineko horiek , eta estali dolu-jantziz .
PRED:	Let them rejoice in the streets ! Do n't be afraid of your clothes , and they put on burlap and ashes .
GOLD:	Tremble , you women of ease ; throw off your complacency.Strip off your pretty clothes , and put on burlap to show your grief .

ID:	2691
INPUT:	Joramen erregealdia
PRED:	Ahaziah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Jehoram Rules in Judah

ID:	2692
INPUT:	Egun berean batzar sakratua egingo duzue eta ez da ohiko lan arruntik egingo . Betiko lege izango duzue hau belaunez belaun , biziko zareten edonon .
PRED:	On that day you must not be holy by the holy assembly of the festival , and you must be a permanent law for yourselves . You must live in the holy assembly of this festival to generation .
GOLD:	That same day will be proclaimed an official day for holy assembly , a day on which you do no ordinary work . This is a permanent law for you , and it must be observed from generation to generation wherever you live .

ID:	2693
INPUT:	« Aita nahiz ama ni baino maiteago duena ez da niretzat gai ; semea nahiz alaba ni baino maiteago duena ez da niretzat gai .
PRED:	“ My Father is more than your mother , but he does not love me . He is more than I love you , but he does n't love me .
GOLD:	“ If you love your father or mother more than you love me , you are not worthy of being mine ; or if you love your son or daughter more than me , you are not worthy of being mine .

ID:	2694
INPUT:	Baina obeditzen ez didan nazioa <unk> aterako dut behin betiko eta suntsitu egingo . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	But I will not destroy all the people of Israel , and I will destroy them . ”
GOLD:	But any nation who refuses to obey me will be uprooted and destroyed . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	2695
INPUT:	bertan egiten dute txoriek habia , <unk> <unk> etxea .
PRED:	There will be a bird that comes from the sky , and the birds of the city will be able to be a house .
GOLD:	There the birds make their nests , and the storks make their homes in the cypresses .

ID:	2696
INPUT:	Geldi bitez umezurtz haren haurrak , alargun haren emaztea .
PRED:	Let them go to their wives , and let her marry her wife .
GOLD:	May his children become fatherless , and his wife a widow .

ID:	2697
INPUT:	Judasek <unk> ardura zuenez , jairako behar zena erosteko edota <unk> zerbait emateko esan ziola uste izan zuen zenbaitek .
PRED:	As soon as we had come , some of the men who had been able to kill him and asked him what he had happened .
GOLD:	Since Judas was their treasurer , some thought Jesus was telling him to go and pay for the food or to give some money to the poor .

ID:	2698
INPUT:	Orduan , herensugea , emakumearen aurka amorraturik , beronen gainerako ondorengoak borrokatzera joan zen , Jainkoaren aginduak bete eta Jesusen testigantza leial egiten dutenak , alegia .
PRED:	Then the dragon of the dragon and his advisers went to fight against the king and his commands , and he obeyed the commands of God .
GOLD:	And the dragon was angry at the woman and declared war against the rest of her children — all who keep God 's commandments and maintain their testimony for Jesus .

ID:	2699
INPUT:	Zuek zoriontsu egiten eta ugaltzen izan zuen adinako atsegina izango du Jaunak zuek galtzen eta suntsitzen : jaurti egingo zaituzte jabetzan hartzera zoazten lurraldetik .
PRED:	For you can see that the Lord will be able to be able to see you , and you will be able to enter the land of the land of your ancestors .
GOLD:	“ Just as the Lord has found great pleasure in causing you to prosper and multiply , the Lord will find pleasure in destroying you . You will be torn from the land you are about to enter and occupy .

ID:	2700
INPUT:	Zif , Telem , <unk> ,
PRED:	The leaders of Carmel , Malkijah ,
GOLD:	Ziph , Telem , Bealoth ,

ID:	2701
INPUT:	<unk> mintzatu zen erregearen eta buruzagien aitzinean : « Erregea ez ezik , buruzagiak eta Asuero erregearen erresumako eskualde guztietan bizi diren herriak ere iraindu egin ditu Baxti erreginak .
PRED:	At that time the king had told him , “ Do n't let the king strike the king of Assyria and the king of the king 's empire , and he will rule over all the kingdoms of the king 's empire .
GOLD:	Memucan answered the king and his nobles , “ Queen Vashti has wronged not only the king but also every noble and citizen throughout your empire .

ID:	2702
INPUT:	hain zuzen , apaizaren labore-opari guztiak <unk> dira ; ez dituzte jango » .
PRED:	For the priest will be made with the guilt offering , and they will not eat it . ”
GOLD:	Aaron and his sons may eat the rest of the flour , but it must be baked without yeast and eaten in a sacred place within the courtyard of the Tabernacle .

ID:	2703
INPUT:	Haiek erantzun zuten : — Israelen Jainkoaren kutxa itzuli nahi baduzue , ez bidali hutsik ; emaiozue zerbait ordain-oparitzat eta sendatuko zarete . Eta jakinen duzue zergatik ez zuen Jainkoak bere eskua kentzen zuen gainetik .
PRED:	“ If you return to the Ark of God , ” they said . “ If you do not return to the Ark of God , you will die , and you will know that you will not die . ”
GOLD:	“ Send the Ark of the God of Israel back with a gift , ” they were told . “ Send a guilt offering so the plague will stop . Then , if you are healed , you will know it was his hand that caused the plague . ”

ID:	2704
INPUT:	Beste eratako eskaintzak egiteko seiehun zezen eta hiru mila ardi ekarri zituzten .
PRED:	Then they brought a burnt offering to a burnt offering and a burnt offering .
GOLD:	They also brought 600 cattle and 3,000 sheep and goats as sacred offerings .

ID:	2705
INPUT:	Ikuskari hau ez da beteko , epea burutu arte , baina badoa <unk> , ez du huts egingo . Luzatzen bada , zuk itxaron , iritsiko baita , berandu gabe iritsi ere .
PRED:	For now the time has not been revealed , but now it would be sure to kill me . But if they have not been ready , it will be ready for you .
GOLD:	This vision is for a future time.It describes the end , and it will be fulfilled.If it seems slow in coming , wait patiently , for it will surely take place.It will not be delayed .

ID:	2706
INPUT:	<unk> Sauli : — Eta zer esan zizuen Samuelek ?
PRED:	“ What do you know ? ” Samuel asked .
GOLD:	“ Oh ? And what did he say ? ” his uncle asked .

ID:	2707
INPUT:	Jainkoaren aginduak betetzen baditugu , ziur dakigu bera ezagutzen dugula .
PRED:	We know that we do n't know God 's commandments .
GOLD:	And we can be sure that we know him if we obey his commandments .

ID:	2708
INPUT:	Honela jakingo dute Jauna naizela ni , beraien Jainkoa , eta beren artean bizitzeko atera nituela Egiptotik . Neu naiz Jauna , haien Jainkoa .
PRED:	And they will know that I am the Lord your God , who brought them out of Egypt . I am the Lord your God . I am the God of Egypt .
GOLD:	and they will know that I am the Lord their God . I am the one who brought them out of the land of Egypt so that I could live among them . I am the Lord their God .

ID:	2709
INPUT:	apaizek sua egingo dute aldare gainean eta egurra jarriko sutan ;
PRED:	The priests will burn incense on the altar , and the altar will be burned on fire .
GOLD:	The sons of Aaron the priest will build a wood fire on the altar .

ID:	2710
INPUT:	Jainko ahaltsua lagun , aurki dezazuela gupida gizon haren aurrean , eta <unk> eta beste anaiarekin , <unk> , itzuli etxera . Niri dagokidanez , semerik gabe gelditu behar badut , geldi nadila .
PRED:	I will thank you , and I will show you a man to be able to know that they will be able to enter and fall into the house of God .
GOLD:	May God Almighty give you mercy as you go before the man , so that he will release Simeon and let Benjamin return . But if I must lose my children , so be it . ”

ID:	2711
INPUT:	Moises eta Aaron lurreraino ahuspeztu ziren israeldar elkarte osoaren aurrean .
PRED:	Moses and Aaron bowed low before Aaron and all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Then Moses and Aaron fell face down on the ground before the whole community of Israel .

ID:	2712
INPUT:	« Egizu lebitarren izen-bilketa , senitarteka eta familiaka , hilabetez gorako gizonezkoak erroldatuz » .
PRED:	“ Do all the families of the families of the families of the families of the families of the tribe of Levi and families of Levi . ”
GOLD:	“ Record the names of the members of the tribe of Levi by their families and clans . List every male who is one month old or older . ”

ID:	2713
INPUT:	Betsabek erantzun zion : — Ederki . Hitz egingo diot , bada , erregeari zure alde .
PRED:	“ No ! ” the king replied , “ I will answer you . ”
GOLD:	“ All right , ” Bathsheba replied . “ I will speak to the king for you . ”

ID:	2714
INPUT:	Ez ahaztu hau esatea : Jakob zure zerbitzaria bera dator gure atzetik » . Bere baitarako honela pentsatzen zuen : « Aurretik bidaltzen diodan opari honekin <unk> dut . Gero ni neu agertuko natzaio . Beharbada , ongietorria egingo dit » .
PRED:	“ Do n't listen to your servant , ” Jacob said . “ He is the man who has come to me , ” he said , “ I am sending you into a covenant with God . ”
GOLD:	So the gifts were sent on ahead , while Jacob himself spent that night in the camp .

ID:	2715
INPUT:	« Ai zuek , lege-maisu eta fariseu itxurazaleok ! Edalontzia eta platera kanpotik garbitzen dituzue , barrutik lapurretaz eta <unk> gainezka beterik dauden bitartean !
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law and you teachers of religious law , you teachers of religious law and the teachers of religious law and the blood of religious law .
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law and you Pharisees . Hypocrites ! For you are so careful to clean the outside of the cup and the dish , but inside you are filthy — full of greed and self-indulgence !

ID:	2716
INPUT:	« Izan ere , besteei beren hutsegiteak barkatzen <unk> , zuei ere barkatuko dizkizue zeruko Aitak ;
PRED:	“ For the Lord will forgive you because they have forgiven you and will be forgiven .
GOLD:	“ If you forgive those who sin against you , your heavenly Father will forgive you .

ID:	2717
INPUT:	Zeu izango zara , bada , nire jauregiko buru , eta zuk esana egingo du herri osoak . Neu bakarrik izango nauzu gainetik , errege naizenez .
PRED:	You will be my lord , and you will be my head . You will be the king of the royal palace , and all the people of the earth will be the king .
GOLD:	You will be in charge of my court , and all my people will take orders from you . Only I , sitting on my throne , will have a rank higher than yours . ”

ID:	2718
INPUT:	Neuk <unk> duteta salbatuko hiri hau , naizena <unk> neure zerbitzari <unk> ” » .
PRED:	I will punish you , and I will punish you with my servant . ' ”
GOLD:	‘ For my own honor and for the sake of my servant David , I will defend this city and protect it . ' ”

ID:	2719
INPUT:	Zebedeoren emaztea bere semeekin Jesusi hurbildu eta aurrean ahuspeztu zitzaion eskabide bat egiteko .
PRED:	Jesus and his wife came to him and bowed before him before him before him .
GOLD:	Then the mother of James and John , the sons of Zebedee , came to Jesus with her sons . She knelt respectfully to ask a favor .

ID:	2720
INPUT:	« Jainkoaren erregetzarekin , atzerrira irten behar zuen gizonarekin bezala gertatzen da . Bere morroiei dei egin eta ondasunak utzi zizkien :
PRED:	“ The Kingdom of Heaven will come out to the Kingdom of God , like a man who called his wife and his servants .
GOLD:	“ Again , the Kingdom of Heaven can be illustrated by the story of a man going on a long trip . He called together his servants and entrusted his money to them while he was gone .

ID:	2721
INPUT:	<unk> bizi ez bada edo ezezaguna baduzue , eraman aberea zeuen ukuilura eta eduki bertan , herritarra beraren bila etorri arte ; orduan , itzuli egingo diozue .
PRED:	If you touch your neighbors , you must be able to take away from your mouth and keep it on the ground until they have come .
GOLD:	If its owner does not live nearby or you do n't know who the owner is , take it to your place and keep it until the owner comes looking for it . Then you must return it .

ID:	2722
INPUT:	Neftali eta beronen semeok : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> eta <unk> .
PRED:	The sons of Naphtali were my sons , and when they saw that they were terrified , and when they saw that they were terrified .
GOLD:	The sons of Naphtali were Jahzeel , Guni , Jezer , and Shillem .

ID:	2723
INPUT:	« Ez hartu , ez dastatu , ez ukitu » esaten dizuete .
PRED:	“ You must not touch anyone , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Do n't handle ! Do n't taste ! Do n't touch ! ” ?

ID:	2724
INPUT:	ereilearen parabola argitu :
PRED:	Parable of the Kohathite Clan
GOLD:	Jesus Rejected at Nazareth

ID:	2725
INPUT:	<unk> bezalako izaki batzuk zituen gainean . <unk> hegal zituzten : bi <unk> aurpegia estaltzen zuten , beste biz gorputza , eta beste biz hegaz egiten zuten .
PRED:	At that time some of the living beings had been thrown into the place of the Lord . They saw two cherubim that they were on the altar , and they had four faces to each other .
GOLD:	Attending him were mighty seraphim , each having six wings . With two wings they covered their faces , with two they covered their feet , and with two they flew .

ID:	2726
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak , zuzena baita , hautsi egin du gaiztoen uztarria » .
PRED:	But the Lord has cut down the yoke of the wicked , and he has broken their yoke . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord is good ; he has cut me free from the ropes of the ungodly .

ID:	2727
INPUT:	<unk> hau honetarako izanen da : Jaunari eskainiriko <unk> , eguneroko <unk> , larunbat , ilberri eta jai nagusietako <unk> , beste eskaintza <unk> , Israelen bekatuen <unk> eta gure Jainkoaren etxeko beste <unk> .
PRED:	But when they know that the Lord has been poured out the basket of bread and new moon , when the new moon celebrations , and the new moon celebrations , and all the people of Israel will know that the Lord our God of Israel and the Temple of Israel .
GOLD:	“ We have cast sacred lots to determine when — at regular times each year — the families of the priests , Levites , and the common people should bring wood to God 's Temple to be burned on the altar of the Lord our God , as is written in the Law .

ID:	2728
INPUT:	Judako Azariasen erregealdiko berrogeita hamargarren urtean hasi zen Israelgo errege izaten Samarian Pekah , Ramaliasen semea ; hogei urtez izan zen errege .
PRED:	Jotham son of Uzziah began to rule over Judah in the eighteenth year of King Uzziah of Judah . He reigned in Samaria for twenty years .
GOLD:	Pekah son of Remaliah began to rule over Israel in the fifty-second year of King Uzziah 's reign in Judah . He reigned in Samaria twenty years .

ID:	2729
INPUT:	Apaizak miatu egingo du eta ikusten badu larruazalean handitu zuria duela , gaineko ilea <unk> doala eta haragi bizia ageri dela <unk> ,
PRED:	“ If the priest finds that the person has a skin , the person must be cut off , and the person who finds that the person has been healed , and the person who finds that the person will be healed .
GOLD:	If the priest finds a white swelling on the skin , and some hair on the spot has turned white , and there is an open sore in the affected area ,

ID:	2730
INPUT:	Deiadar egiten didate : “ Israelen Jainko aitortzen zaitugu ” .
PRED:	They say to me , ‘ This is the Sovereign Lord our God . '
GOLD:	Now Israel pleads with me , ‘ Help us , for you are our God ! '

ID:	2731
INPUT:	<unk> izan den hirira <unk> ateetatik erregea sartzean , haren zalditeria <unk> <unk> egingo zaitu ; <unk> <unk> gurdien <unk> <unk> egingo dute .
PRED:	And when they came to the city of the city , the city of Samaria will be filled with flesh and fig tree , and they will kill you . They will know that the king of Egypt , and they will know that they will know that he will be very weak and fig tree .
GOLD:	The hooves of his horses will choke the city with dust , and the noise of the charioteers and chariot wheels will shake your walls as they storm through your broken gates .

ID:	2732
INPUT:	Josueren heriotza
PRED:	The Death of Joshua
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	2733
INPUT:	Bai , hau esango dizuete segur aski : « Egiezue <unk> eta igarleei , <unk> eta <unk> ohi diren horiei . Herri batek ez ote <unk> gorabeherak beren <unk> hildakoei galdetu behar ? »
PRED:	“ In those days , ” they said , “ when they are killed , and those who are wise and prophets , prophets , prophets , prophets , prophets , and prophets , and prophets will be able to kill you ? ”
GOLD:	Someone may say to you , “ Let 's ask the mediums and those who consult the spirits of the dead . With their whisperings and mutterings , they will tell us what to do . ” But should n't people ask God for guidance ? Should the living seek guidance from the dead ?

ID:	2734
INPUT:	Baina aingeruak esan zidan : « Zergatik <unk> zara ? Nik adieraziko dizut emakumearen eta berau gainean daraman eta zazpi buru eta hamar adar dituen piztiaren esanahia .
PRED:	But the angel said to me , “ Why are you going to see that I will give you a woman on the head of her head , and I will pour out seven horns and seven horns .
GOLD:	“ Why are you so amazed ? ” the angel asked . “ I will tell you the mystery of this woman and of the beast with seven heads and ten horns on which she sits .

ID:	2735
INPUT:	Ondoren , Jair agertu zen , Galaadekoa . Hogeita bi urtez gobernatu zuen Israel .
PRED:	When the people of Israel saw him , he became the father of Israel .
GOLD:	After Tola died , Jair from Gilead judged Israel for twenty-two years .

ID:	2736
INPUT:	( Mt 26 , 6-13 ; Mk 14 , <unk> )
PRED:	Jesus Is Betrayed and Arrested
GOLD:	Jesus ' Triumphant Entry

ID:	2737
INPUT:	Zure <unk> dorrea . Zure begiak Hexbongo bi uraska , hiri jendetsu horren sarreran . Zure <unk> begira <unk> dorre .
PRED:	Your eyes were surrounded by the pool of King Sihon of Heshbon , and the great city of Heshbon , and I saw that your enemies were sitting on the walls of Heshbon .
GOLD:	Your head is as majestic as Mount Carmel , and the sheen of your hair radiates royalty.The king is held captive by its tresses .

ID:	2738
INPUT:	« Ez ote dira bi txori sos batean saltzen ? Hala ere , ez da bat bakarra ere lurrera erortzen zuen Aitaren baimenik gabe .
PRED:	“ Do n't you make two turtledoves or two gold or two gold ? Do not fall on the ground ? Do n't let them fall on the ground ?
GOLD:	What is the price of two sparrows — one copper coin ? But not a single sparrow can fall to the ground without your Father knowing it .

ID:	2739
INPUT:	behiak 36 . 000 ,
PRED:	cattle , cattle , and goats .
GOLD:	36,000 cattle ,

ID:	2740
INPUT:	ez du gaiztoa bizirik uzten , <unk> justizia egiten die ;
PRED:	But the wicked will be destroyed by the wicked , and he will destroy those who do evil .
GOLD:	He does not let the wicked livebut gives justice to the afflicted .

ID:	2741
INPUT:	eta esan zidan : “ Kornelio , entzun du Jainkoak zure otoitza eta gogora ekarri zure limosnak .
PRED:	Then he said to me , ‘ God has heard your prayer , and he brought you to your prayer .
GOLD:	He told me , ‘ Cornelius , your prayer has been heard , and your gifts to the poor have been noticed by God !

ID:	2742
INPUT:	<unk> eta ahariaren <unk> , heste gaineko gantza , giltzurrunak eta gibela estaltzen zuena eraman zizkioten
PRED:	The internal organs and the fat of the internal organs , the fat of the liver , and the long lobe of the liver .
GOLD:	Then he took the fat of the bull and the ram — the fat of the broad tail and from around the internal organs — along with the kidneys and the long lobes of the livers .

ID:	2743
INPUT:	Gedeoni eman zizkioten urrezko <unk> hogei kilo pisatu zuten , apaindurak , belarritakoak , Madiango erregeek zeramatzaten purpurazko jantziak eta gameluek lepoan zeramatzaten lepokoak kontatu gabe .
PRED:	Then Gideon gave us the gold shields of silver , weighed for the weight of silver and gold . The kings of Midian were filled with gold , and they put their clothes on their shoulders .
GOLD:	The weight of the gold earrings was forty-three pounds , not including the royal ornaments and pendants , the purple clothing worn by the kings of Midian , or the chains around the necks of their camels .

ID:	2744
INPUT:	Boozek , orduan , herriko hamar nagusi hartu zituen lekuko eta han esertzeko erregutu zien . Eseri zirenean ,
PRED:	Then Boaz took the men of the people of Israel , and he called them to sit at the place where he was at the place of worship .
GOLD:	Then Boaz called ten leaders from the town and asked them to sit as witnesses .

ID:	2745
INPUT:	Eta galdetzen dut : Ez al dute entzun ? Bai , noski . Lurbira guztira zabaldu da haien hotsa , munduaren bazterreraino haien mezua .
PRED:	“ Did n't I heard this ? ” says the Lord . “ How can I speak in the sound of the world ? For the words of the world comes from the world ?
GOLD:	But I ask , have the people of Israel actually heard the message ? Yes , they have : “ The message has gone throughout the earth , and the words to all the world . ”

ID:	2746
INPUT:	eta bildu elkarte osoa elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran » .
PRED:	and all the people gathered at the entrance of the Tabernacle . ”
GOLD:	and call the entire community of Israel together at the entrance of the Tabernacle . ”

ID:	2747
INPUT:	Nola ordainduko diot Jaunari egin didan on guztia ?
PRED:	How can I pay it to the Lord ?
GOLD:	What can I offer the Lordfor all he has done for me ?

ID:	2748
INPUT:	Bitartean , eduki zuk eskuan , haien begi-bistan , makila idatziak .
PRED:	At the time you see a hand of the wicked hand , the voice of the wicked are recorded in a hand .
GOLD:	“ Then hold out the pieces of wood you have inscribed , so the people can see them .

ID:	2749
INPUT:	Bekatua onginahi eta <unk> ezabatzen da , <unk> Jaunarenganako <unk> egiten zaio ihes .
PRED:	For God will be able to be able , and they will be able to kill the Lord .
GOLD:	Unfailing love and faithfulness make atonement for sin.By fearing the Lord , people avoid evil .

ID:	2750
INPUT:	Berdin zuek ere : hartu kontuan bekatuarentzat hilda zaudetela eta Jainkoarentzat bizirik , Jesu Kristorekin bat eginik .
PRED:	And now you will have many years , and then you will live in Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	So you also should consider yourselves to be dead to the power of sin and alive to God through Christ Jesus .

ID:	2751
INPUT:	Izan ere , juduek aspalditik irakurtzen eta azaltzen dute Moisesen legea larunbatero herri guztietako sinagogetan » .
PRED:	For the Jews who were read to the law of Moses and the law of Moses . ”
GOLD:	For these laws of Moses have been preached in Jewish synagogues in every city on every Sabbath for many generations . ”

ID:	2752
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jainkoaren tronu aurrean daude , gau eta egun hura bere tenpluan zerbitzatzen , eta tronuan eseria dagoena horiekin biziko da .
PRED:	That is why the Lord of Heaven 's Armies is sitting on the Temple of God and worship him . He is sitting on the Temple of the Temple of God .
GOLD:	“ That is why they stand in front of God 's throneand serve him day and night in his Temple.And he who sits on the thronewill give them shelter .

ID:	2753
INPUT:	<unk> gabe jaten al da janari <unk> <unk> hartzen al zaio <unk> <unk> ?
PRED:	But why should we know that they were eating and fig trees ? Who will be able to know that they were filled with power ?
GOLD:	Do n't people complain about unsalted food ? Does anyone want the tasteless white of an egg ?

ID:	2754
INPUT:	Bere <unk> menderatu egiten du , bere hitz <unk> erakarri .
PRED:	He has destroyed his power , and when they were able to kill him .
GOLD:	So she seduced him with her pretty speechand enticed him with her flattery .

ID:	2755
INPUT:	Jesus artean <unk> sartu gabe zegoen , Martak <unk> zuen lekuan bertan .
PRED:	And when Jesus entered the boat , he could be able to be with him .
GOLD:	Jesus had stayed outside the village , at the place where Martha met him .

ID:	2756
INPUT:	<unk> adinako bekatua <unk> izatea , <unk> bezain hutsala setakeria . Jaunaren esana baztertu duzulako , berak baztertzen zaitu orain erregetzatik .
PRED:	But when I know that the Lord has been very angry with you , the Lord has given you victory over you , and he has rejected you from his anger .
GOLD:	Rebellion is as sinful as witchcraft , and stubbornness as bad as worshiping idols.So because you have rejected the command of the Lord , he has rejected you as king . ”

ID:	2757
INPUT:	Handik , Etiopiako errege Tirhaka borrokatzeko asmoz zetorkiola jakin zuelarik , Senakeribek mezulariak bidali zizkion berriro Ezekiasi ,
PRED:	About this time King Sennacherib of Amoz sent messengers to fight against King Sennacherib of Assyria .
GOLD:	Soon afterward King Sennacherib received word that King Tirhakah of Ethiopia was leading an army to fight against him . Before leaving to meet the attack , he sent messengers back to Hezekiah in Jerusalem with this message :

ID:	2758
INPUT:	<unk> beste hamaika zapi ere egin zituzten , egoitza estaliko zuen oihal-etxola eratzeko .
PRED:	They made two bronze rings at the Tabernacle , and he placed them in the Tabernacle of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	He made eleven curtains of goat-hair cloth to serve as a tent covering for the Tabernacle .

ID:	2759
INPUT:	nire oinak katez lotzen dituzu , nire pauso guztiak zelatatzen , <unk> aztertzen .
PRED:	You put my feet in chains and put my feet under my feet .
GOLD:	You put my feet in stocks.You examine all my paths.You trace all my footprints .

ID:	2760
INPUT:	<unk> zaitez , bai , egin aiene , Siongo herri , emakumeak erdiminetan bezala ; orain hiritik aterako <unk> landan biziko . Babiloniara joango zarete , baina han salbatuko <unk> , zeuen etsaien eskuetatik askatuko .
PRED:	I will see that those who were in Jerusalem , women of Jerusalem , women of Jerusalem will be like a few who are in the city of refuge in the city . But you will be able to kill you , and you will be saved .
GOLD:	Writhe and groan like a woman in labor , you people of Jerusalem , for now you must leave this cityto live in the open country.You will soon be sent in exileto distant Babylon.But the Lord will rescue you there ; he will redeem you from the grip of your enemies .

ID:	2761
INPUT:	Honela diotso <unk> erregeari , berak aukeratu eta sagaratuari : « Eskutik heldurik eusten dizut , nazioak zure menpean <unk> erregeei <unk> kentzeko , zure aurrean <unk> zabaltzeko , <unk> zabaldu ere .
PRED:	For the king of Israel chose to kill him and say , “ I have chosen those who have chosen by the nations , ‘ I have given you victory over all the kingdoms of the nations , and they will know that they will be destroyed . '
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says to Cyrus , his anointed one , whose right hand he will empower.Before him , mighty kings will be paralyzed with fear.Their fortress gates will be opened , never to shut again .

ID:	2762
INPUT:	Jesusen ama eta anai-arrebak iritsi ziren . <unk> gelditurik , deiarazi egin zuten .
PRED:	When Jesus arrived , the brothers and sisters , the mother of Jesus was very sick .
GOLD:	Then Jesus ' mother and brothers came to see him . They stood outside and sent word for him to come out and talk with them .

ID:	2763
INPUT:	Ohean <unk> pentsatzen hasi zinen , eta <unk> argitzen dituen Jainkoak zer gertatuko den eman dizu aditzera .
PRED:	When you heard him , you saw how wicked they see , and when God has given you victory over him , he will give you what you have done .
GOLD:	“ While Your Majesty was sleeping , you dreamed about coming events . He who reveals secrets has shown you what is going to happen .

ID:	2764
INPUT:	On egiozu zeure zerbitzari honi , Jauna , zeure promesaren arabera !
PRED:	Give me your servant , O Lord , and give me your word .
GOLD:	You have done many good things for me , Lord , just as you promised .

ID:	2765
INPUT:	Gizakiaren <unk>
PRED:	Judgment against False Prophets
GOLD:	The Man and Woman in Eden

ID:	2766
INPUT:	Ezekias eta jende guztia pozik zegoen , Jainkoak herri osoari horrela eragin ziolako ; dena bat-batean <unk> baitzuten .
PRED:	Hezekiah and all the people of the earth was filled with joy because of the people of the earth , and when they saw that they had seen him .
GOLD:	And Hezekiah and all the people rejoiced because of what God had done for the people , for everything had been accomplished so quickly .

ID:	2767
INPUT:	Behinola , Jeroboam Jerusalemdik atera zen batean , Xiloko Ahias profetak aurkitu zuen bidean ; soingaineko berria zeraman honek soinean . Biak bakarrik gertatu ziren landan .
PRED:	At that time Jeroboam 's message came out of Jerusalem from Jerusalem , the prophet 's message was laid in the road on the road of Jerusalem , and the prophet was placed in the road .
GOLD:	One day as Jeroboam was leaving Jerusalem , the prophet Ahijah from Shiloh met him along the way . Ahijah was wearing a new cloak . The two of them were alone in a field ,

ID:	2768
INPUT:	<unk> ezjakinean beste gizon batekin sexu-harremanak izan ditu eta kutsaturik gelditu da ; baina ez dago <unk> , ez du inork horretan harrapatu .
PRED:	But if the man had been unfaithful , he has been defiled by the man who has been unfaithful to the man who had been unfaithful . But no one can be able to be able to kill you .
GOLD:	and has sex with another man , but neither her husband nor anyone else knows about it . She has defiled herself , even though there was no witness and she was not caught in the act .

ID:	2769
INPUT:	Lehenengo ibilaldia ( 13 , 1 — 14 , 28 )
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Barnabas and Saul Are Commissioned

ID:	2770
INPUT:	Bete egingo du nire aurkako epaia , beste erabaki guztiak bezalaxe .
PRED:	He has promised me to me , just as I promised .
GOLD:	So he will do to me whatever he has planned.He controls my destiny .

ID:	2771
INPUT:	Azken egunak hurbiltzen ari zitzaizkiolarik , agindu hauek eman zizkion Davidek bere seme Salomoni :
PRED:	On the day David went to his father , David ,
GOLD:	As the time of King David 's death approached , he gave this charge to his son Solomon :

ID:	2772
INPUT:	Eta ez esan : “ Aurkitu dugun <unk> bakarrik mendera dezake , ez gizakiak ” .
PRED:	And we will say , ‘ We will be able to be able to be destroyed . '
GOLD:	And do n't tell me , ‘ He is too wise for us.Only God can convince him . '

ID:	2773
INPUT:	Ilunpetan argia ageri da zuzenentzat : Jainko errukiorra , bihozbera eta zintzoa .
PRED:	This is the light of the godly , but the godly of God .
GOLD:	Light shines in the darkness for the godly.They are generous , compassionate , and righteous .

ID:	2774
INPUT:	Anari , berriz , puska berezia eskuratzen zion , oso maitea baitzuen , nahiz eta Jaunak haurrik ematen ez zion .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the Lord gave him a blessing for you , for he was very hard for her husband , and he had no children .
GOLD:	And though he loved Hannah , he would give her only one choice portion because the Lord had given her no children .

ID:	2775
INPUT:	<unk> burdin puska hartu eta , <unk> <unk> , <unk> moldeatzen du , beso indartsuz lantzen . Baina gose baldin bada , indarrak galtzen ditu , eta edaten ez badu , leher egiten .
PRED:	And when they saw that some of these things , and when they were filled with great power , and when they were filled with strength . But if they are hungry , they do n't get rid of your eyes .
GOLD:	The blacksmith stands at his forge to make a sharp tool , pounding and shaping it with all his might.His work makes him hungry and weak.It makes him thirsty and faint .

ID:	2776
INPUT:	Judako erregearen jauregira joan eta mezu hau aldarrikatzeko agindu zion Jaunak Jeremiasi :
PRED:	Then the Lord sent this message to Jeremiah :
GOLD:	This is what the Lord said to me : “ Go over and speak directly to the king of Judah . Say to him ,

ID:	2777
INPUT:	<unk> , Rimon , Eter eta Axan : lau hiri eta beraien herrixkak .
PRED:	Suddenly , there were four towns — four towns with their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	It also included Ain , Rimmon , Ether , and Ashan — four towns with their villages ,

ID:	2778
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaien Jauna Moisesi eta Aaroni :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,

ID:	2779
INPUT:	Aitzitik , atseginetara emanik dagoena , bizi delarik ere , hilda dago .
PRED:	But instead , in charge of the guard , for the grave is dead .
GOLD:	But the widow who lives only for pleasure is spiritually dead even while she lives .

ID:	2780
INPUT:	Jauna zurekin . Jainkoaren grazia zuekin .
PRED:	May the Lord your God be with you .
GOLD:	May the Lord be with your spirit . And may his grace be with all of you .

ID:	2781
INPUT:	Judako Asaren erregealdiaren bigarren urtean hasi zen Jeroboamen seme Nadab Israelgo errege izaten . Bi urtez izan zen Israelgo errege .
PRED:	Ahaziah son of Asa began to rule over Israel in the eighteenth year of Jeroboam 's reign .
GOLD:	Nadab son of Jeroboam began to rule over Israel in the second year of King Asa 's reign in Judah . He reigned in Israel two years .

ID:	2782
INPUT:	Eta hark erantzun : “ Zoaz orain , Daniel ! Mezu hau isilean gordea eta zigilatua egongo da azken garaia arte .
PRED:	Then Daniel replied , ‘ Go and tell you the things you have done , for now now the time of the world will happen until the time has come . '
GOLD:	But he said , “ Go now , Daniel , for what I have said is kept secret and sealed until the time of the end .

ID:	2783
INPUT:	Joan Bataiatzaileak Mesiasen egintzen berri izan zuen kartzelan , eta bere ikasle batzuk bidali zizkion
PRED:	When John heard that the Good News was in prison , he sent some of the believers to come and sent them into prison .
GOLD:	John the Baptist , who was in prison , heard about all the things the Messiah was doing . So he sent his disciples to ask Jesus ,

ID:	2784
INPUT:	Izan ere , lapur , hiltzaile eta adulteriogile izan , gezurretan zin egin , Baali intsentsua erre , zuekin zerikusirik ez duten jainko arrotzen atzetik ibili
PRED:	But if you have married woman , she has been unfaithful to you , I have sworn an oath of Baal , who have been unfaithful to your gods .
GOLD:	Do you really think you can steal , murder , commit adultery , lie , and burn incense to Baal and all those other new gods of yours ,

ID:	2785
INPUT:	<unk> batengatik , ez hondatu Jainkoaren egintza . Janari guztiak garbiak dira ; hala ere , ez dago ongi besteak galbidean jarriz zerbait jatea .
PRED:	For some of these things are worthless , but the Lord of Heaven 's Armies is not good . But they are not allowed to eat it , but they are not allowed to eat .
GOLD:	Do n't tear apart the work of God over what you eat . Remember , all foods are acceptable , but it is wrong to eat something if it makes another person stumble .

ID:	2786
INPUT:	Jesusek inori ez adierazteko agindu zion eta esan : — Zoaz , azaldu apaizarengana eta eskaini garbikuntzaren ordainez Moisesek agindutakoa , ezaugarri izan dezaten .
PRED:	Jesus warned him , “ Go and tell anyone about the priest and tell him , ‘ Go to the priest and be given to the priest . '
GOLD:	Then Jesus instructed him not to tell anyone what had happened . He said , “ Go to the priest and let him examine you . Take along the offering required in the law of Moses for those who have been healed of leprosy . This will be a public testimony that you have been cleansed . ”

ID:	2787
INPUT:	Ea Jaunari erregutzen dioten eta itzultzen diren beren jokabide gaiztotik , handia baita herri honen aurka Jaunak agertu duen haserre-sumina » .
PRED:	Come and listen to the Lord , for they have sinned against the wicked , and the Lord has spoken against them . ”
GOLD:	Perhaps even yet they will turn from their evil ways and ask the Lord 's forgiveness before it is too late . For the Lord has threatened them with his terrible anger . ”

ID:	2788
INPUT:	Damu zaitez , beraz ; bestela , zuregana joango naiz laster eta horien aurka borroka egingo dut neure ahoko ezpataz .
PRED:	Do n't turn away from your enemies , and I will come to you .
GOLD:	Repent of your sin , or I will come to you suddenly and fight against them with the sword of my mouth .

ID:	2789
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Guztiz suntsituko <unk> , herrialde osoa poztuko da .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The Sovereign Lord will destroy those who see him , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The whole world will rejoice when I make you desolate .

ID:	2790
INPUT:	Jaunak gaixotasun guztiak urrunduko ditu zuengandik ; ez dizkizue bidaliko ongi ezagutzen dituzuen Egiptoko izurri ikaragarriak , baizik eta gorrotoa <unk> bidaliko dizkie .
PRED:	For the Lord has given you a cup of grain to you , though you have not done to you , you have done such terrible things that you have done .
GOLD:	And the Lord will protect you from all sickness . He will not let you suffer from the terrible diseases you knew in Egypt , but he will inflict them on all your enemies !

ID:	2791
INPUT:	Jesusek <unk> deabruduna sendatu
PRED:	Jesus Calms the Storm
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Man

ID:	2792
INPUT:	Jaunak Moisesi agindutakoa agindu zion Moisesek Josueri , eta honek bete ; ez zuen bete gabe utzi Jaunak Moisesi agindutako ezer ere .
PRED:	So Moses gave the following instructions to Joshua . He did not obey the commands that the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	As the Lord had commanded his servant Moses , so Moses commanded Joshua . And Joshua did as he was told , carefully obeying all the commands that the Lord had given to Moses .

ID:	2793
INPUT:	Uztaroan , <unk> bat faraoiari emango diozue eta beste laurak zuentzat izango dituzue , ereiteko eta zeuek , zeuen haurrak eta etxekoak mantentzeko .
PRED:	At that time you will bring him back to Pharaoh , and you will bring your grain to Pharaoh and your children , your children , and your children .
GOLD:	Then when you harvest it , one-fifth of your crop will belong to Pharaoh . You may keep the remaining four-fifths as seed for your fields and as food for you , your households , and your little ones . ”

ID:	2794
INPUT:	« Entzun , Israel , ene herri , zure kontra egingo dudan aitorpena . Neu naiz Jainkoa , zure Jainkoa !
PRED:	“ Listen to me , O people of Israel , for I am the God of Israel . I am the God of Israel .
GOLD:	“ O my people , listen as I speak.Here are my charges against you , O Israel : I am God , your God !

ID:	2795
INPUT:	Baratzeko hesia bezala bota ditu haren harresiak , haren <unk> xehatu . Jaiegunak eta larunbata <unk> ditu Jaunak Sionen . <unk> gaitzetsi ditu haserrearen haserrez .
PRED:	The Lord will break down the foundation of the earth , and he will destroy those who have been slaughtered by his power . He will destroy the Sabbath days of the Lord 's anger , and he will destroy the day of the Lord 's anger .
GOLD:	He has broken down his Templeas though it were merely a garden shelter.The Lord has blotted out all memoryof the holy festivals and Sabbath days.Kings and priests fall togetherbefore his fierce anger .

ID:	2796
INPUT:	Honen ondoren , Absalomek guda-gurdi bat , zaldiak eta aurretik joango zitzaizkion berrogeita hamar gizon eskuratu zituen .
PRED:	When Absalom arrived with chariots and horses , he took one of chariots and horses . Then he brought them to them .
GOLD:	After this , Absalom bought a chariot and horses , and he hired fifty bodyguards to run ahead of him .

ID:	2797
INPUT:	Batek esan zion : — Adizu , ama eta anai-arrebak dituzu kanpoan , zurekin hitz egin nahian .
PRED:	There were your brothers and sisters , ” he said . “ Your brothers are here here in your mother and sisters . ”
GOLD:	Someone told Jesus , “ Your mother and your brothers are standing outside , and they want to speak to you . ”

ID:	2798
INPUT:	Jende askok jarraituko die beren jokabide <unk> , eta , horiek direla eta , gaitzetsia izango da kristau-bidea .
PRED:	Many people will know their evil deeds , and they will know that they will be able to fall , and they will fall .
GOLD:	Many will follow their evil teaching and shameful immorality . And because of these teachers , the way of truth will be slandered .

ID:	2799
INPUT:	Jeroboam hil nahian ibili zen Salomon ; hark , ordea , Egiptora egin zuen ihes , Egiptoko errege <unk> , eta han egon zen , Salomon hil arte .
PRED:	But Jeroboam sent him back to Egypt , but he became the king of Egypt . But when he was there , he killed by the king of Egypt until he died .
GOLD:	Solomon tried to kill Jeroboam , but he fled to King Shishak of Egypt and stayed there until Solomon died .

ID:	2800
INPUT:	Jainko Jaun ahalguztidunak errege-jauregiko arduradun zen Xebna <unk> bidali ninduen , esatera :
PRED:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has given me my life .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , said to me : “ Confront Shebna , the palace administrator , and give him this message :

ID:	2801
INPUT:	Ikusi eta entzun duzunaren lekuko izango baitzaitu hark gizon-emakume guztien aurrean .
PRED:	I have heard that you have heard the meaning of all the world , and it will be a witness to you .
GOLD:	For you are to be his witness , telling everyone what you have seen and heard .

ID:	2802
INPUT:	begiak erreak ditut zuk <unk> zain : noiz kontsolatuko nauzu ?
PRED:	I have seen your eyes , and I will see you ?
GOLD:	My eyes are straining to see your promises come true.When will you comfort me ?

ID:	2803
INPUT:	Horrelako horrek badu nahikoa zuetako gehienek ezarri dioten zigorraz ;
PRED:	If you are so wise , he can bring you out of all these things .
GOLD:	Most of you opposed him , and that was punishment enough .

ID:	2804
INPUT:	Lagun-talde handia berekin zuela eta usaingarriz , urre ugariz eta harribitxiz zamaturiko gameluak zekartzala heldu zen Jerusalemera . Salomonengana joanik , buruan zituen arazo guztiez mintzatu zitzaion .
PRED:	She was with a great banquet with a great quantities of gold and gold . She came to Jerusalem with gold and precious jewels and precious jewels .
GOLD:	She arrived in Jerusalem with a large group of attendants and a great caravan of camels loaded with spices , large quantities of gold , and precious jewels . When she met with Solomon , she talked with him about everything she had on her mind .

ID:	2805
INPUT:	eta auzitara eramana ( 21 , 17 — 23 , 35 )
PRED:	The Sign of the Covenant
GOLD:	Paul Speaks to the Crowd

ID:	2806
INPUT:	Zorionekoa zu , Jaunak esan dizuna beteko dela sinetsi duzulako ! »
PRED:	For the Lord has blessed you , and he will bless you . ”
GOLD:	You are blessed because you believed that the Lord would do what he said . ”

ID:	2807
INPUT:	<unk> zuhaitzak sorrarazi zituen lurretik , ikusgarriak eta fruitu <unk> . Baratze erdian bi zuhaitz ernearazi zituen : batak bizia ematen zuen eta besteak dena ezagutzeko ahalmena .
PRED:	At that time the great kings of the earth were filled with great fruit , and those who were filled with great fruit . He gave birth to each other , and all the trees that were given to each other .
GOLD:	The Lord God made all sorts of trees grow up from the ground — trees that were beautiful and that produced delicious fruit . In the middle of the garden he placed the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil .

ID:	2808
INPUT:	eta mendeku-eskubidea duenak , <unk> mugetatik kanpo aurkitu eta hiltzen badu , ez du hilketarik egiten .
PRED:	If the person who finds that the person who finds that the person who finds that the person who is not guilty , and the person who does not die .
GOLD:	and the avenger finds him outside the city and kills him , it will not be considered murder .

ID:	2809
INPUT:	Erregea ospetsu ikusiko duzu , luze eta zabal lurraldea .
PRED:	O Lord , you will see the land of Israel , and you will see the land of the earth .
GOLD:	Your eyes will see the king in all his splendor , and you will see a land that stretches into the distance .

ID:	2810
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaien Hamor : « Sikem nire semea zuen <unk> maitemindua dago ; emaiozue , arren , emaztetzat .
PRED:	Then Jacob said to Micah , “ I have a son of Shechem , a man named him as a man named him .
GOLD:	Hamor tried to speak with Jacob and his sons . “ My son Shechem is truly in love with your daughter , ” he said . “ Please let him marry her .

ID:	2811
INPUT:	Behin batean , Jesus honela mintzatu zen : « Goresten zaitut , Aita , zeru-lurren Jauna , gauza hauek jakintsu eta ikasiei ezkutatu dizkiezulako eta jende xumeari agertu .
PRED:	One day Jesus said to them , “ Father , the Father , the Father , the Father of heaven and earth , and earth , and to obey them .
GOLD:	At that time Jesus prayed this prayer : “ O Father , Lord of heaven and earth , thank you for hiding these things from those who think themselves wise and clever , and for revealing them to the childlike .

ID:	2812
INPUT:	Handik , kostarik kosta <unk> heldu ginen . Biharamunean <unk> jo zuen eta bi egunetan <unk> iritsi ginen .
PRED:	At that time we were filled with the coast of the Amalekites and saw two men that the next day , and we were very very sick .
GOLD:	From there we sailed across to Rhegium . A day later a south wind began blowing , so the following day we sailed up the coast to Puteoli .

ID:	2813
INPUT:	Ea , bada ! Eraso diezaiogun gauez ! <unk> ditzagun horren jauregiak ! »
PRED:	Come , let 's go down into the night ! ”
GOLD:	‘ Well then , let 's attack at nightand destroy her palaces ! ' ”

ID:	2814
INPUT:	Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : « <unk> kopa edango duzu , kopa zabal eta sakona , bete-betea . ( <unk> eta iseka-gai izango zara ) .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ You must drink a cup of wine , and I will make you a cup of wine , and you will be an object of wine .
GOLD:	“ Yes , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ You will drink from your sister 's cup of terror , a cup that is large and deep.It is filled to the brimwith scorn and derision .

ID:	2815
INPUT:	Gero , Jainkoaren etxea erre , Jerusalemgo harresia bota eta su eman zien <unk> eta bertako gauza <unk> , dena hondatuz .
PRED:	Then he burned up the Temple of God , and he burned down the city of Jerusalem , and he destroyed all the houses of Jerusalem . He had burned down and worshiped the Temple of God .
GOLD:	Then his army burned the Temple of God , tore down the walls of Jerusalem , burned all the palaces , and completely destroyed everything of value .

ID:	2816
INPUT:	Beldur naizenean , zuregan dut konfiantza .
PRED:	I am afraid of you , and I trust you .
GOLD:	I praise God for what he has promised.I trust in God , so why should I be afraid ? What can mere mortals do to me ?

ID:	2817
INPUT:	« Horregatik , nik , Jainko Jaunak , zin dagit neure biziarengatik , zigortu egingo dudala nirekiko leialtasun-zina mespretxatu eta ituna hautsi duelako .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will punish you because I have sworn an oath of my covenant with you .
GOLD:	“ So this is what the Sovereign Lord says : As surely as I live , I will punish him for breaking my covenant and disregarding the solemn oath he made in my name .

ID:	2818
INPUT:	jende <unk> hautsaren <unk> dute , eta jende <unk> <unk> . <unk> bat berarekin dabiltza , nire izen santua <unk> .
PRED:	And when they saw that great power , they will know that they were filled with great power , and when they were filled with him , and they will know that my name .
GOLD:	They trample helpless people in the dustand shove the oppressed out of the way.Both father and son sleep with the same woman , corrupting my holy name .

ID:	2819
INPUT:	« Judaren zatiaren ondoren , ekialdeko mugatik Mediterraneo itsasoraino , Jaunarentzat bereizitako zatia egongo da : hamabi kilometro eta erdi izango da luze , leinu bakoitzaren zatia bezalaxe ; erdian santutegia egongo da .
PRED:	“ The border of Judah will be given to the border of Judah . The territory will be given to the Lord , as the special possession of the Mediterranean Sea . The sanctuary will be set apart for the sanctuary of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ South of Judah is the land set aside for a special purpose . It will be 81/3 miles wide and will extend as far east and west as the tribal territories , with the Temple at the center .

ID:	2820
INPUT:	Pilatok galdetu zion : — Egia , zer da egia ? Hori esanik , Pilatok berriro irten eta judu-agintariei esan zien : — Nik ez dut gizon hau kondenatzeko batere arrazoirik aurkitzen .
PRED:	Then Pilate asked him , “ Who does this ? ” Pilate asked him . “ He 's this man to kill him , ” Pilate asked . “ I have no wrong . ”
GOLD:	“ What is truth ? ” Pilate asked . Then he went out again to the people and told them , “ He is not guilty of any crime .

ID:	2821
INPUT:	Egin negar isilean , baina ez egin ohiko dolurik ; jarri buruzapia , jantzi sandaliak , ez estali aurpegia eta ez jan hileta-ogirik » .
PRED:	Do n't weep or weep , but they must not wear a linen cloth or fine clothes or fine clothes or fine clothes or clothing or clothing . ”
GOLD:	Groan silently , but let there be no wailing at her grave . Do not uncover your head or take off your sandals . Do not perform the usual rituals of mourning or accept any food brought to you by consoling friends . ”

ID:	2822
INPUT:	Amondarren erregeak erantzun zien Jefteren mezulariei : « Egiptotik igotzean , nire lurraldean sartu eta Arnon errekatik Jabok erreka eta Jordan ibaia artekoa hartu zidaten israeldarrek . Itzul iezadazu orain bakean lurralde hori » .
PRED:	The king of Israel replied , “ Get out of the Arnon River to the Arnon River to the Arnon River , and I brought you back to the Arnon River to the Arnon River . ”
GOLD:	The king of Ammon answered Jephthah 's messengers , “ When the Israelites came out of Egypt , they stole my land from the Arnon River to the Jabbok River and all the way to the Jordan . Now then , give back the land peaceably . ”

ID:	2823
INPUT:	Kristo niregan bizi dela bezain egia da harrotzeko bide hori inork ere ez didala kenduko Akaia osoan .
PRED:	For Christ lives as Christ lives in this way , so no one can be able to live in safety .
GOLD:	As surely as the truth of Christ is in me , no one in all of Greece will ever stop me from boasting about this .

ID:	2824
INPUT:	<unk> nagusiek , beren <unk> bukatzen zitzaiela ikustean , Paulori eta <unk> eskua bota eta hiriko plazara eraman zituzten <unk> ,
PRED:	When the elders saw that they were at the city of the city , they saw Paul and threw him into the city of the city , and they took him into the city and threw them into the city .
GOLD:	Her masters ' hopes of wealth were now shattered , so they grabbed Paul and Silas and dragged them before the authorities at the marketplace .

ID:	2825
INPUT:	Izan ere , barrutik , gizakiaren bihotzetik , ateratzen dira asmo txarrak , lizunkeria , lapurretak , hilketak ,
PRED:	For the heart of evil , evil , evil , evil , evil , evil , evil , and slander .
GOLD:	For from within , out of a person 's heart , come evil thoughts , sexual immorality , theft , murder ,

ID:	2826
INPUT:	<unk> , <unk> ukitu zuen , eta <unk> gelditu egin ziren . Orduan , esan zuen : « Gazte , zuri diotsut : Jaiki ! »
PRED:	When they saw that they saw him , they saw that they were sitting on him and said , “ Stand up ! ” So the man said , “ Stand up , pick up ! ”
GOLD:	Then he walked over to the coffin and touched it , and the bearers stopped . “ Young man , ” he said , “ I tell you , get up . ”

ID:	2827
INPUT:	Jakinduria deika ari da , <unk> oihu egiten du ;
PRED:	For they call him to him , and they call on him .
GOLD:	Listen as Wisdom calls out ! Hear as understanding raises her voice !

ID:	2828
INPUT:	Jaunaren espirituak harturik , Samsonek , eskuetan deus ere ez zuen arren , zatikatu egin zuen lehoia , antxumea zatikatu ohi den bezala . Baina ez zien esan gurasoei zer egin zuen .
PRED:	When Samson left the Spirit of the Lord 's hand , he took them into pieces and struck them on the ground . But the lion did not kill him , but he did n't let them go .
GOLD:	At that moment the Spirit of the Lord came powerfully upon him , and he ripped the lion 's jaws apart with his bare hands . He did it as easily as if it were a young goat . But he did n't tell his father or mother about it .

ID:	2829
INPUT:	beste sail batek <unk> bidea hartu zuen , eta hirugarrenak Tzeboim haran gainean dagoen <unk> jo zuen , basamortu aldera .
PRED:	One of the other men who had been able to kill him and the valley of Canaan , which was filled with the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and the valley of Canaan .
GOLD:	another went west to Beth-horon , and the third moved toward the border above the valley of Zeboim near the wilderness .

ID:	2830
INPUT:	lehoia , animalien arteko <unk> , inoren aurrean atzera egiten ez duena ;
PRED:	Even though the lion had a lion among the forest , they do n't know it .
GOLD:	the lion , king of animals , who wo n't turn aside for anything ,

ID:	2831
INPUT:	Ez zaitez elkartu <unk> , ezta <unk> ibili ere ;
PRED:	Do n't be angry with such things , and when they were able to kill you .
GOLD:	Do not carouse with drunkardsor feast with gluttons ,

ID:	2832
INPUT:	Eta nire mihiak zure justizia iragarriko du , egunero zu goratuko !
PRED:	Then the Lord says , “ He is the Lord , and he has spoken !
GOLD:	Then I will proclaim your justice , and I will praise you all day long .

ID:	2833
INPUT:	« Ez duzu sexu-harremanik izango zeure aitaren arrebarekin : zure aitaren odol berekoa da .
PRED:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your father , for your father 's sons have sexual relations with your father .
GOLD:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your father 's sister , for she is your father 's close relative .

ID:	2834
INPUT:	Ikuskari ikaragarria
PRED:	Slaves and Elijah
GOLD:	Jeremiah 's Vision of Coming Disaster

ID:	2835
INPUT:	Brontzezko aldarea ere eginarazi zuen Salomonek ; hamar metro zen luze-zabal eta bost metro gora .
PRED:	Solomon made the altar of bronze altar , and he was 71/2 feet long .
GOLD:	Solomon also made a bronze altar 30 feet long , 30 feet wide , and 15 feet high .

ID:	2836
INPUT:	Sionek , eskuak otoitzean luzatu arren , ez du nork kontsolaturik . Jaunak eraginik , auzoko herriak etsai bihurtu zaizkio Israeli . Haien artean higuingarri bihurtu da Jerusalem .
PRED:	The Lord has spoken to a day , but they have no fear , for they have turned against their enemies , and they have turned against Israel .
GOLD:	Jerusalem reaches out for help , but no one comforts her.Regarding his people Israel , the Lord has said , “ Let their neighbors be their enemies ! Let them be thrown away like a filthy rag ! ”

ID:	2837
INPUT:	Jaunarekin elkartzen dena , berriz , berarekin espiritu bat bera egiten da .
PRED:	But the Lord takes a sick spirit in his heart .
GOLD:	But the person who is joined to the Lord is one spirit with him .

ID:	2838
INPUT:	Emazteak semea izan zuen eta Moisesek Gerxom — hau da , « Etorkin hemen » — eman zion izen , esanez : « Etorkin bilakatu naiz lurralde arrotzean » .
PRED:	When Moses had been born , he was still still still born , the son of Moses said , “ I have been a foreigner in a land , ” he said .
GOLD:	Later she gave birth to a son , and Moses named him Gershom , for he explained , “ I have been a foreigner in a foreign land . ”

ID:	2839
INPUT:	Haren <unk> salbatua izango da , Israel seguru biziko . “ Jauna gure salbamena ” emango diote izen » .
PRED:	The nations will be saved , and they will be saved .
GOLD:	And this will be his name : ‘ The Lord Is Our Righteousness . 'In that day Judah will be saved , and Israel will live in safety .

ID:	2840
INPUT:	Eta <unk> ezagutzen duen Jainkoak onartzen dituela azaldu du , haiei ere guri bezala Espiritu Santua emanez .
PRED:	And when they know that God has given us the Holy Spirit , they will know that the Holy Spirit has given us the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	God knows people 's hearts , and he confirmed that he accepts Gentiles by giving them the Holy Spirit , just as he did to us .

ID:	2841
INPUT:	Bet-Xemexeko jendea garia igitatzen ari zen haranean ; begiak jaso eta kutxa ikustean , biziki poztu ziren .
PRED:	The people saw a fire on the road on the valley of fire , and the Ark was filled with fire .
GOLD:	The people of Beth-shemesh were harvesting wheat in the valley , and when they saw the Ark , they were overjoyed !

ID:	2842
INPUT:	zuk eman zenion erregeari garaipena , zuk askatu zenuen David , zeure zerbitzaria .
PRED:	You have given you victory over your enemies , and you redeemed me .
GOLD:	For you grant victory to kings ! You rescued your servant David from the fatal sword .

ID:	2843
INPUT:	Erne dira zelaietan loreak , heldu da <unk> garaia , entzun daiteke gure zelaietan <unk> urruma .
PRED:	When the wild animals come , the time will come and see that the time of the earth will be filled with joy , and they will see our livestock .
GOLD:	The flowers are springing up , the season of singing birds has come , and the cooing of turtledoves fills the air .

ID:	2844
INPUT:	Jose bere aita ehorztera joan zen . Harekin batera joan ziren faraoiaren funtzionario guztiak , jauregiko eta Egipto osoko handiki guztiak ;
PRED:	So Joseph went back to his father , and his officials went to Pharaoh and all the officials of Egypt , along with all the officials of Egypt .
GOLD:	So Joseph went up to bury his father . He was accompanied by all of Pharaoh 's officials , all the senior members of Pharaoh 's household , and all the senior officers of Egypt .

ID:	2845
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> zen <unk> David hilko zuela esan zuen ; <unk> berria zeraman ; lantzaren <unk> hiru kilo baino gehiago zen .
PRED:	When David realized that he was very old , he became very angry with him , and when he saw that he was very sick .
GOLD:	Ishbi-benob was a descendant of the giants ; his bronze spearhead weighed more than seven pounds , and he was armed with a new sword . He had cornered David and was about to kill him .

ID:	2846
INPUT:	Orduan , Davidek esan zien Abixairi eta bere zerbitzari guztiei : — Nire erraietatik ateratako semea ni hil nahian badabil , ez da harritzekoa benjamindar hori horrela ari izatea . <unk> madarika nazan , Jaunak aginduko baitzion hori .
PRED:	Then David said to his servant , “ Who are all the men of Israel ? ” So David said , “ for I am trying to kill you , for I am sure that the Lord has spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Then David said to Abishai and to all his servants , “ My own son is trying to kill me . Does n't this relative of Saul have even more reason to do so ? Leave him alone and let him curse , for the Lord has told him to do it .

ID:	2847
INPUT:	Betetzen ditut zure lege eta xedapenak : begi aurrean dituzu nire ibilbide guztiak .
PRED:	I have seen the laws of your laws , and I have kept the path of your laws .
GOLD:	Yes , I obey your commandments and lawsbecause you know everything I do .

ID:	2848
INPUT:	Bizia duen Aitak bidali ninduen eta hari esker dut nik bizia ; halaxe , ni jaten nauenak ere niri esker izango du bizia .
PRED:	I am the Father who sent me into my life , and I am the one who sent me to life .
GOLD:	I live because of the living Father who sent me ; in the same way , anyone who feeds on me will live because of me .

ID:	2849
INPUT:	ez zaitezen haien <unk> <unk> zeure bizia arriskuan jarri .
PRED:	But if you are under your life , your life will be under your life .
GOLD:	or you will learn to be like themand endanger your soul .

ID:	2850
INPUT:	Nobeko apaizak hilarazi Saulek
PRED:	Saul Defeats the priest
GOLD:	The Slaughter of the Priests

ID:	2851
INPUT:	Zeuk zerikusirik ez zenuela esan arren , adi dago kontzientziak aztertzen dituena , badaki zuri begira dagoenak : nori bere egintzen arabera ordaintzen dio hark .
PRED:	Those who do n't trust in your mouth , but those who do n't know what they do .
GOLD:	Do n't excuse yourself by saying , “ Look , we did n't know . ” For God understands all hearts , and he sees you.He who guards your soul knows you knew.He will repay all people as their actions deserve .

ID:	2852
INPUT:	Honek esan zien : — Zein da zuen <unk> ? Haiek erantzun : — Gu eta gure gurasoak artzain izan gara betidanik .
PRED:	“ How can we know ? ” he asked . “ We have come with us , ” they replied . “ We are our own children , and we are our own children . ”
GOLD:	And Pharaoh asked the brothers , “ What is your occupation ? ” They replied , “ We , your servants , are shepherds , just like our ancestors .

ID:	2853
INPUT:	Egipton izu-ikaraz ikusi zenituzten izurri guztiak etorriko zaizkizue gainera eta zuen artean zabalduko .
PRED:	At that time you saw a great flood of Egypt , and you will come with a flood .
GOLD:	He will afflict you with all the diseases of Egypt that you feared so much , and you will have no relief .

ID:	2854
INPUT:	Ea zuetariko zeinek aurpegiratzen didan bekaturik ! Baina egia badiot , zergatik ez didazue sinesten ?
PRED:	“ Come to me , ” they demanded . “ Why do n't you believe me ?
GOLD:	Which of you can truthfully accuse me of sin ? And since I am telling you the truth , why do n't you believe me ?

ID:	2855
INPUT:	Eta , larriak harturik , oraindik <unk> egiten zuen otoitz . <unk> <unk> zerion lurrera , odola bezain <unk> .
PRED:	And when they saw that they were terrified by the great power of the beast , when they saw that the blood of the dead , and the blood of the dead will be thrown into the ground .
GOLD:	He prayed more fervently , and he was in such agony of spirit that his sweat fell to the ground like great drops of blood .

ID:	2856
INPUT:	Nik ez bainekien auzi hura nondik nora eraman , Jerusalemera joan nahi al zuen galdetu nion , han epai zezaten .
PRED:	“ Do n't we go to Jerusalem , ” I asked . “ Do n't you go to Jerusalem ? ”
GOLD:	I was at a loss to know how to investigate these things , so I asked him whether he would be willing to stand trial on these charges in Jerusalem .

ID:	2857
INPUT:	Horregatik , beharrezkoa iruditu zait , ni heldu aurretik anaia horiei zuengana joateko <unk> , zuek agindutako emaitza prestaturik eduki dezaten . Prest egongo delarik , eskuzabaltasunaren adierazgarri izango da , eta ez <unk> egindako emaitza .
PRED:	That is why I am giving you a little while I want you to send you to you , my brother , and they will give you a gift to you , and they will be sure that you will have a reward .
GOLD:	So I thought I should send these brothers ahead of me to make sure the gift you promised is ready . But I want it to be a willing gift , not one given grudgingly .

ID:	2858
INPUT:	Baina guardiek , joan zirenean , ez zituzten aurkitu , eta berri ematera itzuli ziren :
PRED:	But when they returned to the palace , they found no reply , and they returned to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	But when the Temple guards went to the jail , the men were gone . So they returned to the council and reported ,

ID:	2859
INPUT:	Jaunaren <unk> lurraldera dator , eta Damaskon gelditzen da ; Jaunarena baita Siriako hiriburua , Israelgo leinuak bezala ;
PRED:	He is in the land of the Lord , in Damascus , along with all the kingdoms of Aram . He is a pleasing aroma to the people of Israel , as he is in Damascus .
GOLD:	This is the message from the Lord against the land of Aram and the city of Damascus , for the eyes of humanity , including all the tribes of Israel , are on the Lord .

ID:	2860
INPUT:	Jainko handi eta santua naizela agertuko dut eta nazio askok aitortuko naute . Orduan jakingo dute ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	And many nations will know that I am the Lord , and many nations will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	In this way , I will show my greatness and holiness , and I will make myself known to all the nations of the world . Then they will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	2861
INPUT:	Zergatik izutzen nauzu eta erasotzen ? Ez naiz airean doan <unk> eta lasto <unk> baizik .
PRED:	Why ca n't I know that I am afraid of you , but I am sending you into the wind .
GOLD:	Would you terrify a leaf blown by the wind ? Would you chase dry straw ?

ID:	2862
INPUT:	« Nire herria desbideratu dute “ Bakea ! ” esanez , <unk> ez zegoenean ; nire herriak harresi <unk> eraikitzen zuen bitartean , hauek kareorez estaltzen zuten .
PRED:	“ You have brought peace to my people , saying , ‘ You have seen my people who have seen my Temple . ' But when they saw that they were under my anger .
GOLD:	“ This will happen because these evil prophets deceive my people by saying , ‘ All is peaceful ' when there is no peace at all ! It 's as if the people have built a flimsy wall , and these prophets are trying to reinforce it by covering it with whitewash !

ID:	2863
INPUT:	<unk> eta balantzaka , <unk> antzera , beren trebetasun guztia alferrik zutela .
PRED:	But when they saw that they were as weak as though they had been circumcised , they were filled with their faith .
GOLD:	They reeled and staggered like drunkardsand were at their wits ' end .

ID:	2864
INPUT:	Apaizak , errituzko keinua eginez aurkeztuko dio Jaunari , atseginez onar dezan . Larunbat biharamunean aurkeztuko du .
PRED:	The priests must present their offerings to the Lord as a special offering to the Lord . In the same way , it will be a pleasing aroma to the Lord , and it will be a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	On the day after the Sabbath , the priest will lift it up before the Lord so it may be accepted on your behalf .

ID:	2865
INPUT:	« <unk> didate argi eta garbi zuek bidali didazuen gutuna .
PRED:	“ I am giving you a letter , and I sent my letter to you .
GOLD:	“ The letter you sent has been translated and read to me .

ID:	2866
INPUT:	Salomonen zerbitzarien ondorengoak : Sotai , <unk> eta <unk> ondorengoak ;
PRED:	Then this message came from King Solomon of the servants of King Solomon and his servants , who were filled with great power .
GOLD:	The descendants of these servants of King Solomon returned from exile : Sotai , Hassophereth , Peruda ,

ID:	2867
INPUT:	Haren mezua onartzen duenarengan , berriz , Jainkoaren maitasuna bere betera iritsi da : horrela dakigu berarekin bat eginik <unk> .
PRED:	Those who live in them will be sure that those who live in God will love him and love him and love him .
GOLD:	But those who obey God 's word truly show how completely they love him . That is how we know we are living in him .

ID:	2868
INPUT:	<unk> zu , Jauna , onik atera bainauzu ! Nire etsaiei ez diezu nire lepotik pozten utzi .
PRED:	Your enemies have heard me , O Lord , for I have given you victory over my enemies .
GOLD:	O Lord my God , I cried to you for help , and you restored my health .

ID:	2869
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak agindu zion Moisesi : « Altxa eskua zerurantz , Egipto osoan kazkabarra eror dadin gizaki , abere eta landareen gainera » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Stand up in the sky like a wind of Egypt , and when the people of Egypt falls into the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Lift your hand toward the sky so hail may fall on the people , the livestock , and all the plants throughout the land of Egypt . ”

ID:	2870
INPUT:	Gero , menditik jaitsi eta kutxan sartu nituen , eta han gelditu ziren , Jaunak agindu bezala .
PRED:	Then I went down to the mountain , and the Lord had commanded me , just as the Lord had commanded .
GOLD:	Then I turned and came down the mountain and placed the tablets in the Ark of the Covenant , which I had made , just as the Lord commanded me . And the tablets are still there in the Ark . ”

ID:	2871
INPUT:	Izan ere , honela dio Jaunak Judako erregearen <unk> : « Galaad lurraldeaeta Libanoko <unk> bezain <unk> ere niretzat , basamortu , bizilagunik gabeko hiriaren antzeko , bihurtuko zaitut <unk> gabe .
PRED:	For the Lord says to the king of Judah , “ I will see that the people of Judah are as well as well as the land of the city of Lebanon . I will be like a few of the city , though I have been like a god of the city of Lebanon .
GOLD:	Now this is what the Lord says concerning Judah 's royal palace : “ I love you as much as fruitful Gileadand the green forests of Lebanon.But I will turn you into a desert , with no one living within your walls .

ID:	2872
INPUT:	<unk> abere itsua eskaintzea ez al dago gaizki ? Eta abere herrena edo gaixoa eskaintzea ez al dago gaizki ? Eskaini , bada , horiek zeuen gobernariari , ea atsegin dituen edota aurpegi alaia jartzen dizuen . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak .
PRED:	But if you are blind , if you do n't even think of the blind man , if you do n't ask , what is right ? But if you do n't ask the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , I will punish you ? ”
GOLD:	When you give blind animals as sacrifices , is n't that wrong ? And is n't it wrong to offer animals that are crippled and diseased ? Try giving gifts like that to your governor , and see how pleased he is ! ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	2873
INPUT:	« Ez daukat nik » dio Ur Leizeak , « Ez dago nirekin » esaten du <unk> .
PRED:	“ I ca n't go into the grave , ” says the grave . “ There 's no one who has seen me , and they will know that I am with me . ”
GOLD:	‘ It is not here , ' says the ocean . ‘ Nor is it here , ' says the sea .

ID:	2874
INPUT:	« Nork itxi zizkion ateak itsasoari , amaren sabeletik indarrez irten zenean ?
PRED:	“ Who could I find out the doors of my mother ?
GOLD:	“ Who kept the sea inside its boundariesas it burst from the womb ,

ID:	2875
INPUT:	SARRERA ( 1 , <unk> )
PRED:	Paul 's Son Is that God 's grace and how to be baptized .
GOLD:	God Offers Comfort to All

ID:	2876
INPUT:	<unk> , ostera , asmo <unk> , eta egintzak ere <unk> .
PRED:	But if they were very angry , they will know what they have done .
GOLD:	But generous people plan to do what is generous , and they stand firm in their generosity .

ID:	2877
INPUT:	Beraz , ohikune hau eskumuturrean edo bekokian ipintzen diren seinaleen gisako izango duzue , Jaunak ahalmen handiz Egiptotik atera zaituztela <unk> » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will punish you with a strong hand and powerful arm of Egypt , who brought you out of Egypt . ' ”
GOLD:	This ceremony will be like a mark branded on your hand or your forehead . It is a reminder that the power of the Lord 's mighty hand brought us out of Egypt . ”

ID:	2878
INPUT:	Eramango ditut , ostera , zuen seme-alabak , gatibu eroriko zirela zeniotenak , zuek gutxietsi duzuen lurraldera , hartaz gozatzeko .
PRED:	I am afraid of your children , and your children would stay in the land of the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	“ ‘ You said your children would be carried off as plunder . Well , I will bring them safely into the land , and they will enjoy what you have despised .

ID:	2879
INPUT:	Zer da basamortuan gora datorren hori ? <unk> , mirra eta beste hainbat <unk> dirudi .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you from the wilderness ? What sorrow awaits those who were as weak as weak as clay ?
GOLD:	Who is this sweeping in from the wildernesslike a cloud of smoke ? Who is it , fragrant with myrrh and frankincenseand every kind of spice ?

ID:	2880
INPUT:	eta gazteek emana <unk> jarraiki . Hau esan zion jendeari : « Gure aitak uztarri astuna ezarri zizuela ? Astunagoa ezarriko dizuet nik ! Gure aitak larruzko zartailuz zigorkatzen zintuztela ? Burdinazko muturdunez zigorkatuko zaituztet nik ! »
PRED:	When they saw him with a great banquet , he said to his people , “ My father , my father , my father , but I 'm too heavy to crush you , but I ca n't let you look favorably on them . ”
GOLD:	and followed the counsel of his younger advisers . He told the people , “ My father laid heavy burdens on you , but I 'm going to make them even heavier ! My father beat you with whips , but I will beat you with scorpions ! ”

ID:	2881
INPUT:	Hark , orduan , eskua jaso eta zin egin <unk> hilko zituela ,
PRED:	Then he threw his hand to kill him and kill him .
GOLD:	Therefore , he solemnly sworethat he would kill them in the wilderness ,

ID:	2882
INPUT:	Abere , zeruko hegazti eta lurrean narraska dabiltzan bizidun guztiei , berriz , belar hezea ematen diet janari » . Eta hala izan zen .
PRED:	All the small animals that were small and small animals that were living in the sky , and the birds of the sky were filled with them . ” So I gave them all the animals of the earth .
GOLD:	And I have given every green plant as food for all the wild animals , the birds in the sky , and the small animals that scurry along the ground — everything that has life . ” And that is what happened .

ID:	2883
INPUT:	Urruti dago gaiztoengandik zure salbazioa , ez baitute jotzen zure arauetara .
PRED:	The wicked take refuge in your eye ; they do not hide from your wickedness .
GOLD:	The wicked are far from rescue , for they do not bother with your decrees .

ID:	2884
INPUT:	Baina Liburu Santuak ez du hori harengatik bakarrik esaten ,
PRED:	But the Scriptures say , “ The Scriptures say ,
GOLD:	And when God counted him as righteous , it was n't just for Abraham 's benefit . It was recorded

ID:	2885
INPUT:	Zuzen dena izan duzu maite eta oker dena gorroto ; horregatik , Jainkoak , zeure Jainkoak , gantzutu zaitu , jai-giro pozgarrian , lagunen artean aukeraturik .
PRED:	Your love love love , and you love them with gold .
GOLD:	You love justice and hate evil.Therefore , O God , your God has anointed you , pouring out the oil of joy on you more than on anyone else . ”

ID:	2886
INPUT:	Jonatanek ihardetsi zion bere aita Sauli : — Zergatik du hil beharra ? Zer egin du , bada ?
PRED:	“ Why do you kill me ? ” Jonathan asked . “ Why do you kill me ? ”
GOLD:	“ But why should he be put to death ? ” Jonathan asked his father . “ What has he done ? ”

ID:	2887
INPUT:	Aldatu zuen Saulek bere itxura beste soineko batzuk jantziz eta bi gizonekin joan zen . Gauez emakumeagana heldu eta esan zion Saulek : — <unk> iezadazu etorkizuna , hilei dei eginez . Agerrarazi esango dizudan hildakoa .
PRED:	When Saul had finished speaking , he saw one of them with a thousand pieces of water , one of them came to her and told him , “ Let me go to the dead . ” So Saul said , “ I am the dead . ”
GOLD:	So Saul disguised himself by wearing ordinary clothing instead of his royal robes . Then he went to the woman 's home at night , accompanied by two of his men . “ I have to talk to a man who has died , ” he said . “ Will you call up his spirit for me ? ”

ID:	2888
INPUT:	Kiriataim , <unk> eta <unk> , haranaren gainaldean dagoen mendixkan ;
PRED:	And when they were sitting on the surface of the surface of the river , and the surface of the surface of the hills .
GOLD:	Kiriathaim , Sibmah , Zereth-shahar on the hill above the valley ,

ID:	2889
INPUT:	<unk> , Xefela lautadako eta Negeveko hirietan , Benjaminen herrialdean , Jerusalemgo inguruetan eta Judako hirietan ikusiko dira oraindik artzainak ardiak <unk> . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	In the towns of the Negev , the towns of the Negev , and in the towns of the Negev , and the people of Judah will see that the Lord had spoken , and the people of Judah will know that the Lord had spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Once again shepherds will count their flocks in the towns of the hill country , the foothills of Judah , the Negev , the land of Benjamin , the vicinity of Jerusalem , and all the towns of Judah . I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	2890
INPUT:	Hogeita bost urte zituen errege izaten hastean , eta hamasei urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen . Haren amak <unk> zuen izena eta Tzadoken alaba zen .
PRED:	Jehoahaz was twenty-two years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem three years . His mother was the daughter of Zadok , and the daughter of Zadok was the daughter of Zadok .
GOLD:	He was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years . His mother was Jerusha , the daughter of Zadok .

ID:	2891
INPUT:	Ertzak lotzeko xingola efodari atxikia egongo da , eta urrez , purpura more , gorri eta gorriminez eta liho-hari bihurrituz egina .
PRED:	The chestpiece of the ephod will be made of finely woven linen , purple , and scarlet thread . He also made with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	The decorative sash will be made of the same materials : finely woven linen embroidered with gold and with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .

ID:	2892
INPUT:	Legamia gabeko Ogien Jaiko lehen egunean , ikasleak hurbildu ziren Jesusengana , galdetuz : — Non egin behar ditugu Pazko-afarirako prestaketak ?
PRED:	On the first day the Festival of Unleavened Bread for the first day , they asked Jesus , “ Where should we go to the olive oil ? ”
GOLD:	On the first day of the Festival of Unleavened Bread , the disciples came to Jesus and asked , “ Where do you want us to prepare the Passover meal for you ? ”

ID:	2893
INPUT:	Eta orain Jainkoaren eskuetan eta haren <unk> mezuaren babesean uzten zaituztet ; hark badu ahalmena eliz elkartea eraikitzeko eta sagaratu guztiei bere ondarea emateko .
PRED:	And now I am sending you into the world , and I will put you into the church . And if I am giving you a covenant with all the people of God and the church .
GOLD:	“ And now I entrust you to God and the message of his grace that is able to build you up and give you an inheritance with all those he has set apart for himself .

ID:	2894
INPUT:	ur-putzu honen ondoan geldituko naiz ; eta <unk> bat ura ateratzera datorrenean , hau esango diot : “ Emadazu , arren , ur pixka bat zeure pegarretik ” .
PRED:	I will give you a drink , and I will give you a drink . Then I will say , ‘ Please give you water to your water . '
GOLD:	See , I am standing here beside this spring . This is my request . When a young woman comes to draw water , I will say to her , “ Please give me a little drink of water from your jug . ”

ID:	2895
INPUT:	eskaini elkartasun-opariak ere eta jan bertan , Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren aurrean festa eginez .
PRED:	You must offer peace offerings and peace in the presence of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Also sacrifice peace offerings on it , and celebrate by feasting there before the Lord your God .

ID:	2896
INPUT:	hau esatean : « Zuei dizuet emango Kanaan lurraldea , hauxe da zuen ondare-zatia » .
PRED:	I am telling you , ‘ This is the land of Canaan . ' ”
GOLD:	“ I will give you the land of Canaanas your special possession . ”

ID:	2897
INPUT:	Israelgo erregea honela mintzatu zitzaion Josafati : — Nik jantziak aldatuko ditut borroka hasteko ; zuk jarraitu zeure errege-jantziekin . Hala , Israelgo erregea jantziz aldatu zenean , borrokara abiatu ziren .
PRED:	Then the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat , “ I will give you victory over to you , but you will fall into battle . ” But when the king of Israel went into battle .
GOLD:	The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat , “ As we go into battle , I will disguise myself so no one will recognize me , but you wear your royal robes . ” So the king of Israel disguised himself , and they went into battle .

ID:	2898
INPUT:	Egin poz-oihu Jaunari , zintzook ! <unk> behar dute Jainkoa goretsi .
PRED:	Let those who worship the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	Let the godly sing for joy to the Lord ; it is fitting for the pure to praise him .

ID:	2899
INPUT:	eta atxilotu egin zituen guardiaburuaren etxeko kartzelan ezarriz , Jose preso zegoen tokian hain zuzen .
PRED:	He led them into prison , and he put them in prison in prison . Then he took Joseph in charge of the prison and placed them in prison .
GOLD:	and he put them in the prison where Joseph was , in the palace of the captain of the guard .

ID:	2900
INPUT:	Eta ikusiko <unk> zure salbamena , errege guztiek zure ospea . Izen berria emango dizute , Jaunak berak ezarria .
PRED:	And when I see that you will see your power , and all your glory will know that the Lord has given you .
GOLD:	The nations will see your righteousness.World leaders will be blinded by your glory.And you will be given a new nameby the Lord 's own mouth .

ID:	2901
INPUT:	Honetan , Paulori ezpainetako bat emateko agindu zien Ananias apaiz nagusiak bere laguntzaileei .
PRED:	You have been telling me about this : A high priest has given me a high priest in his Temple .
GOLD:	Instantly Ananias the high priest commanded those close to Paul to slap him on the mouth .

ID:	2902
INPUT:	Orduan , apostoluak Jerusalemera itzuli ziren Oliamenditik — mendi hau Jerusalemdik hurbil dago , kilometro batera eskas — .
PRED:	So the apostles returned to Jerusalem and went to Jerusalem to Jerusalem , where the people of Jerusalem was near Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Then the apostles returned to Jerusalem from the Mount of Olives , a distance of half a mile .

ID:	2903
INPUT:	Beraiek hitz egin dute gure eliz elkartearen aurrean zure harrera onaz . Ongi egingo duzu biderako behar dutena Jainkoari berari bezala ematen badiezu .
PRED:	They have spoken to you in the church in your church , so they will be able to bring you back to God as they have worked for their work .
GOLD:	They have told the church here of your loving friendship . Please continue providing for such teachers in a manner that pleases God .

ID:	2904
INPUT:	Liburu Santuak dioen bezala : Hona nik Sionen <unk> ipini , erorarazteko harkaitza . Baina harengan sinesten duenak ez du huts egingo .
PRED:	As the Scriptures say , “ This is what the Scriptures say , ‘ Those who trust in the power of the Most Holy Spirit will never be able to kill him . '
GOLD:	God warned them of this in the Scriptures when he said , “ I am placing a stone in Jerusalem that makes people stumble , a rock that makes them fall.But anyone who trusts in himwill never be disgraced . ”

ID:	2905
INPUT:	Behin batean , larunbatez , <unk> baten etxera joan zen Jesus bazkaltzera , eta fariseuak zelatan zegozkion .
PRED:	One day when the Pharisees arrived at the Sabbath , Jesus went to the Sabbath and asked him , “ Bring him to the Sabbath . ”
GOLD:	One Sabbath day Jesus went to eat dinner in the home of a leader of the Pharisees , and the people were watching him closely .

ID:	2906
INPUT:	Zergatik ekarri duzue Jaunaren elkartea basamortu honetara ? Geu eta gure abereak hil nahi ote gaituzue ?
PRED:	Then why have you brought us into the presence of the Lord and the whole community of the Lord ?
GOLD:	Why have you brought the congregation of the Lord 's people into this wilderness to die , along with all our livestock ?

ID:	2907
INPUT:	ezker-eskuin haziko baitzara ; zure <unk> asko berenganatuko dituzteeta orain hondaturik <unk> biziko dira .
PRED:	You will rejoice among you , and many nations will be destroyed among you .
GOLD:	For you will soon be bursting at the seams.Your descendants will occupy other nationsand resettle the ruined cities .

ID:	2908
INPUT:	Orduan , <unk> seme Jehudi bidali zuten <unk> — <unk> , Xelemiasen seme eta Kuxiren biloba zen — , herriaren aurrean irakurritako <unk> etortzeko esatera . <unk> hartu eta haien aurrean aurkeztu zenean ,
PRED:	Then when Micaiah son of Micaiah sent him to kill him , who sent him to kill him , son of Ner , son of Beor , son of Beor , and when he saw that he was talking with them .
GOLD:	the officials sent Jehudi son of Nethaniah , grandson of Shelemiah and great-grandson of Cushi , to ask Baruch to come and read the messages to them , too . So Baruch took the scroll and went to them .

ID:	2909
INPUT:	Gaiztoren batek hil egin behar duela esaten badut , eta bere jokabidea alda dezan zuk ez baduzu ohartarazten , hil egingo da bere erruarengatik , baina zuri eskatuko dizut haren heriotzaren kontu .
PRED:	I am trying to kill you , but if I have sinned , they will not die , they will not die . But if you do n't die , they will die in their sins .
GOLD:	If I announce that some wicked people are sure to die and you fail to tell them to change their ways , then they will die in their sins , and I will hold you responsible for their deaths .

ID:	2910
INPUT:	<unk> eserita zeuden bi itsu , Jesus igarotzen ari zela entzunik , oihuka hasi ziren : — Erruki zakizkigu , Jauna , Daviden Semea !
PRED:	At that time Jesus was blind , who heard Jesus was blind , saying , “ Lord , have mercy on us ! ” And they shouted , “ Lord , the Son of David ! ”
GOLD:	Two blind men were sitting beside the road . When they heard that Jesus was coming that way , they began shouting , “ Lord , Son of David , have mercy on us ! ”

ID:	2911
INPUT:	Zu izan zaitut euskarri amaren sabeletik , zuk atera nauzu amaren erraietatik . Zuri etengabe nire gorespena !
PRED:	For you are my mother ; you have rescued me from the womb to me from my mother .
GOLD:	Yes , you have been with me from birth ; from my mother 's womb you have cared for me.No wonder I am always praising you !

ID:	2912
INPUT:	Aldi horren buruan , zazpigarren hilaren hamarrean , Barkamen Egunean , alegia , adarra joko duzue ozenki lurralde osoan .
PRED:	At that time on the seventh day you must celebrate the Festival of Shelters , during the Festival of Shelters .
GOLD:	Then on the Day of Atonement in the fiftieth year , blow the ram 's horn loud and long throughout the land .

ID:	2913
INPUT:	Jainkoak bere asmoa bete behar dutela sartu die buruan : elkar hartzera eragingo die , beren erregetza piztiari emateko , harik eta Jainkoaren esana erabat bete arte .
PRED:	God has given them to his own own own family , and he has given them to each other . He has given them the kingdom of God . He has given them everything he has given .
GOLD:	For God has put a plan into their minds , a plan that will carry out his purposes . They will agree to give their authority to the scarlet beast , and so the words of God will be fulfilled .

ID:	2914
INPUT:	Pauloren <unk>
PRED:	Paul 's Religious Reforms
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Greetings

ID:	2915
INPUT:	PROFETAREN <unk> <unk> ( 26 , 1 — 29 , 32 )
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Declaration about the Council
GOLD:	Jeremiah 's Escape from Death

ID:	2916
INPUT:	Bekatu eta bekatu egin du Jerusalemek ; horregatik , higuingarri bihurtu da . Begirune ziotenek mespretxatu egiten dute , biluzia ikusirik . Aieneka ari da , beraz , aurpegia lotsaz gordeta .
PRED:	For the Lord has sinned , and they have sinned against him , and they have turned to their children , and they have turned to shame .
GOLD:	Jerusalem has sinned greatly , so she has been tossed away like a filthy rag.All who once honored her now despise her , for they have seen her stripped naked and humiliated.All she can do is groanand hide her face .

ID:	2917
INPUT:	<unk> <unk>
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Zalmunna
GOLD:	Protecting Marital Faithfulness

ID:	2918
INPUT:	eta Judako gobernari <unk> mezu hau emateko agindu zion : « Zeru-lurrak <unk> ditut .
PRED:	Then King Nebuchadnezzar of Judah and Judah gave this message : “ I will give you authority to all the kingdoms of Judah .
GOLD:	“ Tell Zerubbabel , the governor of Judah , that I am about to shake the heavens and the earth .

ID:	2919
INPUT:	Norbaitek hirugarren egunean jango balu , ez litzaioke Jaunari atsegin izango : gaitzesgarria da haragi hori .
PRED:	On the third day you will not be eaten from the third day of the Lord .
GOLD:	If any of the sacrifice is eaten on the third day , it will be contaminated , and I will not accept it .

ID:	2920
INPUT:	<unk> hegalpean giza besoaren antzeko zerbait zuela ikusi nuen .
PRED:	I saw that the human beings had four things , and when I saw that he was under human hands .
GOLD:	( All the cherubim had what looked like human hands under their wings . )

ID:	2921
INPUT:	Hauxe zen niretzat <unk> : Kristoren izena entzuna ere ez zen tokietan berri ona zabaltzea . Ez nuen nahi bestek <unk> <unk> gainean eraiki ,
PRED:	That is why the name of Christ came from Christ , who was in the name of Christ , the name of Christ , who was able to destroy me .
GOLD:	My ambition has always been to preach the Good News where the name of Christ has never been heard , rather than where a church has already been started by someone else .

ID:	2922
INPUT:	Jainkoa gurtu ohi zuteneko gailurrera heldu zenean , Huxai arkitarra atera zitzaion Davidi bidera , jantziak urraturik eta burua hautsez beterik .
PRED:	When he saw them by the devil , he went out to see him by the devil . When he saw David and his clothes in burlap , he put his clothes on burlap and ashes .
GOLD:	When David reached the summit of the Mount of Olives where people worshiped God , Hushai the Arkite was waiting there for him . Hushai had torn his clothing and put dirt on his head as a sign of mourning .

ID:	2923
INPUT:	Nire zauriak <unk> daude eta <unk> , nire <unk> ondorioz .
PRED:	For I have betrayed my hands and fig tree , and they will be filled with power .
GOLD:	I am bent over and racked with pain.All day long I walk around filled with grief .

ID:	2924
INPUT:	Lehen ikuskaria : zaldizkoak
PRED:	A Vision of the Last
GOLD:	A Man among the Myrtle Trees

ID:	2925
INPUT:	Baliteke , ni ukitu eta iruzur egiten diodala aita <unk> . Orduan , <unk> ordez madarikazioa erakarriko nuke neure gain .
PRED:	Then if I touch you and touched my father and my father , I am sending you out of my father and my father , and I will bring you out of my father .
GOLD:	What if my father touches me ? He 'll see that I 'm trying to trick him , and then he 'll curse me instead of blessing me . ”

ID:	2926
INPUT:	Izan ere , pozaren pozez , Samson ateratzeko eskatua zuten , beraren kontura barre egiteko gogoz . Atera zuten , beraz , Samson espetxetik eta beraren bizkar egin zuten barre . Gero , bi <unk> erdian utzi zuten .
PRED:	For Samson had given him a blessing for him . He wanted him to take care for him , for he knew he was afraid of them . But when he became king , he took care of them .
GOLD:	Half drunk by now , the people demanded , “ Bring out Samson so he can amuse us ! ” So he was brought from the prison to amuse them , and they had him stand between the pillars supporting the roof .

ID:	2927
INPUT:	Erregea , berriz , zuhaitz batetik zintzilikatu zuen arratsa arte ; eguzkia sartzean , gorpua zuhaitzetik eraisteko agindu zuen Josuek . Gero , hiriaren sarreran bota eta <unk> handia ezarri zioten gainean . Han dago oraindik harri-piloa .
PRED:	So the king set himself on the top of the stone until he had been set up and cut it into the garden of the garden of the tree . Then Joshua put it into a tree on the top of the city .
GOLD:	Joshua impaled the king of Ai on a sharpened pole and left him there until evening . At sunset the Israelites took down the body , as Joshua commanded , and threw it in front of the town gate . They piled a great heap of stones over him that can still be seen today .

ID:	2928
INPUT:	Izan ere , hiri honen gain ezarri ditut begiak , baina ez beraren onerako , kalterako baizik : Babiloniako erregearen esku utziko dut eta honek erre egingo du . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	For I will set out the towns of Babylon , but I will not destroy you . But I will not give you back to the king of Babylon , and I will destroy you . ”
GOLD:	For I have decided to bring disaster and not good upon this city , says the Lord . It will be handed over to the king of Babylon , and he will reduce it to ashes . '

ID:	2929
INPUT:	« Sarraskia <unk> den ale gainera jausten bada , haziak garbi dirau ;
PRED:	“ But when the birds of the sky is pure , it will be clean .
GOLD:	If the carcass falls on seed grain to be planted in the field , the seed will still be considered clean .

ID:	2930
INPUT:	Hau zen , hain zuzen , nire <unk> helburua : zuengana joatean , ez nazatela nahigabetu poztu behar <unk> ; zeren ziur bainago , zuei guztioi dagokizuenez , nire poza zeuen poz egiten duzuela .
PRED:	This is what I have done , so that I will be sure that I have been able to know that I am sure that you will know that I am in your hearts .
GOLD:	That is why I wrote to you as I did , so that when I do come , I wo n't be grieved by the very ones who ought to give me the greatest joy . Surely you all know that my joy comes from your being joyful .

ID:	2931
INPUT:	Berea du itsasoa , berak egina , eta lehorra , bere eskuz moldatua .
PRED:	He made the sea by the sea , and the sea , as well as the sea , and all the kingdoms of the sea .
GOLD:	The sea belongs to him , for he made it.His hands formed the dry land , too .

ID:	2932
INPUT:	Ez daude antzina eroritako <unk> , beren armaz horniturik Hildakoen Egoitzara jaitsi zirenekin ; hauei ezpata <unk> eta babeskia bular gainean jarri zizkieten . <unk> hauek ere bizidunen artean izu-ikara ezarri zuten .
PRED:	The people of the Babylonians will be angry with the sword , and he sent them into the grave . They were afraid of their horses , and when they saw that they were afraid of God , they all who were terrified by their power .
GOLD:	They are not buried in honor like their fallen heroes , who went down to the grave with their weapons — their shields covering their bodies and their swords beneath their heads . Their guilt rests upon them because they brought terror to everyone while they were still alive .

ID:	2933
INPUT:	Baina guk eskerrak eman behar dizkiogu beti Jainkoari zuengatik , senideok , Jaunaren maiteok : Jainkoak lehen salbatuak izateko aukeratu baitzaituzte , Espiritu Santuaz sagaratuz eta egia fedez <unk> emanez .
PRED:	But we should thank God for you , dear brothers and sisters , for we have given you a blessing in the presence of the Lord our God . He chose you as a result , so that you will receive the Holy Spirit of the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	As for us , we ca n't help but thank God for you , dear brothers and sisters loved by the Lord . We are always thankful that God chose you to be among the first to experience salvation — a salvation that came through the Spirit who makes you holy and through your belief in the truth .

ID:	2934
INPUT:	Baina Balaamek erantzun zien Balaken zerbitzariei : — Nahiz eta Balakek jauregia bete urre eta zilar eman , ezin dut ezertxo ere egin , ez handi ez txiki , Jaunaren , nire Jainkoaren , aginduaren kontra .
PRED:	But Balaam replied to Balaam , “ I have given you the king of silver and gold , silver , gold , silver , gold , silver , silver , and silver , and gold . ”
GOLD:	But Balaam responded to Balak 's messengers , “ Even if Balak were to give me his palace filled with silver and gold , I would be powerless to do anything against the will of the Lord my God .

ID:	2935
INPUT:	<unk> juduek , <unk> baino <unk> izaki eta , gogo biziz hartu zuten mezua ; egunero aztertu ohi zituzten Liburu Santuak , gauzak hala ote ziren ikusteko .
PRED:	At that time when the Jews saw that some of the prophets were filled with great things , and they were so sure that they could see what they were doing . ”
GOLD:	And the people of Berea were more open-minded than those in Thessalonica , and they listened eagerly to Paul 's message . They searched the Scriptures day after day to see if Paul and Silas were teaching the truth .

ID:	2936
INPUT:	« Bai , badakit horrela dela , gizakiak ez duela arrazoi Jainkoaren kontra .
PRED:	“ But I know that you are righteous , and they do n't know God 's power .
GOLD:	“ Yes , I know all this is true in principle.But how can a person be declared innocent in God 's sight ?

ID:	2937
INPUT:	<unk> ( 1 , 1 — 11 , 32 )
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Recovery
GOLD:	The Account of Creation

ID:	2938
INPUT:	Zulatu eta <unk> osatzen da gaitza , zigorrez izakiaren barrena .
PRED:	Yes , it will be sick , and its branches will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Physical punishment cleanses away evil ; such discipline purifies the heart .

ID:	2939
INPUT:	Sinetsi zuen herriak , eta Jauna alde jarri zitzaiela eta beren atsekabean begiak jarriak zituela jakitean , ahuspeztu eta gurtu egin zuten .
PRED:	But when we heard that the Lord had blessed the people of the people , they worshiped him and worshiped him .
GOLD:	Then the people of Israel were convinced that the Lord had sent Moses and Aaron . When they heard that the Lord was concerned about them and had seen their misery , they bowed down and worshiped .

ID:	2940
INPUT:	berau zela eta , herritar askok alde egiten baitzien eta Jesusengan sinesten .
PRED:	And many of the people believed in Jesus .
GOLD:	for it was because of him that many of the people had deserted them and believed in Jesus .

ID:	2941
INPUT:	Erabat hondatuko dut tenplu hau , eta tenplu honen aurretik igaroko diren guztiek , harriturik eta txistuka , galdetuko dute : “ Zergatik egin ote die hau Jaunak lurralde honi eta tenplu honi ? ”
PRED:	I will destroy this Temple and rebuild the Temple of the Temple , and everyone who will hear this Temple and say , ‘ Why do you hear this Temple ? '
GOLD:	And though this Temple is impressive now , all who pass by will be appalled and will gasp in horror . They will ask , ‘ Why did the Lord do such terrible things to this land and to this Temple ? '

ID:	2942
INPUT:	ERANSKINA
PRED:	The Message about Jerusalem
GOLD:	Epilogue : Jesus Appears to Seven Disciples

ID:	2943
INPUT:	Orain , ordea , inguru hauetan nuen lana bukatu dut eta , aspaldiko urte hauetan zuek ikusi nahian bainago ,
PRED:	But now I saw all these things for forty years , and I am giving you many years .
GOLD:	But now I have finished my work in these regions , and after all these long years of waiting , I am eager to visit you .

ID:	2944
INPUT:	Gogoan izan , Jauna , gertatu zaiguna ; begira eta ikus nola iraintzen gaituzten .
PRED:	Remember , O Lord , what is happening , and save us .
GOLD:	Lord , remember what has happened to us.See how we have been disgraced !

ID:	2945
INPUT:	« Izan ere , nola sar daiteke inor indartsu baten etxera lapurretara , aldez aurretik hura lotzen ez badu ? Orduan bai , harrapa ditzake haren etxeko ondasunak .
PRED:	“ How can we go into a field ? Who can go back to us ? Who can give us his wealth ? ”
GOLD:	For who is powerful enough to enter the house of a strong man and plunder his goods ? Only someone even stronger — someone who could tie him up and then plunder his house .

ID:	2946
INPUT:	Haiek isilik gelditu ziren ; ez zioten hitzik erantzun , erregeak agindua baitzien ez erantzuteko .
PRED:	They did n't listen to the king , for they did not answer him .
GOLD:	But the people were silent and did not utter a word because Hezekiah had commanded them , “ Do not answer him . ”

ID:	2947
INPUT:	Berrogei urtez jan zuten mana israeldarrek , <unk> lurraldeetara , Kanaango lur-mugetara , iritsi arte alegia .
PRED:	The people of Israel ate the manna from the ground until the people of Israel came to meet the land of Egypt until the people of Israel arrived .
GOLD:	So the people of Israel ate manna for forty years until they arrived at the land where they would settle . They ate manna until they came to the border of the land of Canaan .

ID:	2948
INPUT:	<unk> mihia ezpata zorrotza , <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	But when they heard that they were sick , and when they saw that they were filled with power .
GOLD:	Some people make cutting remarks , but the words of the wise bring healing .

ID:	2949
INPUT:	Sarrerako atalondoan bina mahai zeuden alde bietan , eta haietan hiltzen ziren erre-oparitarako nahiz barkamen- eta <unk> abereak .
PRED:	Meanwhile , there were two tables of the Temple — two small animals that were on the north , and the grain offerings of grain offerings and the grain offerings of grain offerings , and the grain offerings of grain offerings were offered to the Lord .
GOLD:	On each side of this entry room were two tables , where the sacrificial animals were slaughtered for the burnt offerings , sin offerings , and guilt offerings .

ID:	2950
INPUT:	<unk> leinukoa Pedahtzurren seme <unk> agindupean
PRED:	Some of the troops of the tribe of Naphtali were joined by the troops of the tribe of Naphtali .
GOLD:	They were joined by the troops of the tribe of Manasseh , led by Gamaliel son of Pedahzur ,

ID:	2951
INPUT:	Lehen baino izen handiagoa emango didazu , berriro kontsolatuko .
PRED:	I will give birth to you , and he will comfort you .
GOLD:	You will restore me to even greater honorand comfort me once again .

ID:	2952
INPUT:	baita Damasko aldameneko Hamateta hain trebe <unk> eta Sidon ere .
PRED:	For I will give you an army of Damascus , along with an army of Damascus and Sidon .
GOLD:	Doom is certain for Hamath , near Damascus , and for the cities of Tyre and Sidon , though they are so clever .

ID:	2953
INPUT:	« <unk> bost urte artekoa bada , <unk> bost txanpon , eta <unk> hiru .
PRED:	“ Anyone who attacks me must be valued at thirty years old and thirty years .
GOLD:	A boy between the ages of one month and five years is valued at five shekels of silver ; a girl of that age is valued at three shekels of silver .

ID:	2954
INPUT:	<unk> , berriz , <unk> neurtu , <unk> eta <unk> marraztu eta <unk> lantzen du eta , giza gorpuzkera eta edertasuna emanik , tenpluan kokatzen .
PRED:	But when they have been baptized and fig tree , they have filled with flesh and fig tree and fig tree , and they are buried in the Temple of God and his household .
GOLD:	Then the wood-carver measures a block of woodand draws a pattern on it.He works with chisel and planeand carves it into a human figure.He gives it human beautyand puts it in a little shrine .

ID:	2955
INPUT:	Auzokoek eskuzabal lagundu zieten , eta zilar eta urrezko ontziak , ondasunak , abereak eta bitxi ederrak eman zizkieten , nork bere borondatez <unk> gainera .
PRED:	They were poor and gold , gold , silver , gold , gold , and gold , and cattle , and goats , and cattle , and goats , and all the animals that were given to you .
GOLD:	And all their neighbors assisted by giving them articles of silver and gold , supplies for the journey , and livestock . They gave them many valuable gifts in addition to all the voluntary offerings .

ID:	2956
INPUT:	Orduan , mandatari bat etorri zitzaion Sauli , esanez : « Zatoz bizkor , filistearrak sartu zaizkigu geure lurraldean » .
PRED:	Then Saul said to Saul , “ Come , let us go into the land of the Philistines ! ”
GOLD:	an urgent message reached Saul that the Philistines were raiding Israel again .

ID:	2957
INPUT:	Haien alabak emaztetzat hartu eta beren alabak haien semeei eman zizkieten eta haien sasijainkoak gurtu zituzten .
PRED:	Their daughters were married to their daughters , and they worshiped their sons and daughters .
GOLD:	and they intermarried with them . Israelite sons married their daughters , and Israelite daughters were given in marriage to their sons . And the Israelites served their gods .

ID:	2958
INPUT:	« Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak ematen dizuen lurraldera iristean , ez jarraitu hango herrien jokabide higuingarriei :
PRED:	“ When the Lord your God has given you the land of the earth , the proud of your detestable sins ,
GOLD:	“ When you enter the land the Lord your God is giving you , be very careful not to imitate the detestable customs of the nations living there .

ID:	2959
INPUT:	Txoroak ongi <unk> bere jokabideari ; zuhurra , berriz , adi egoten da besteen <unk> .
PRED:	Better to be wise , but fools are wise , but fools are wise . But if they were wise , they were wise .
GOLD:	Fools think their own way is right , but the wise listen to others .

ID:	2960
INPUT:	Hiria ez da zuentzat tupina izango , ezta zuek ere haren barruan seguru dagoen haragia . Israelen bertan emango dizuet zigor-epaia .
PRED:	There will not be a piece of wood , and you will not be made of blood . I will give you blood to the people of Israel and the people of Israel .
GOLD:	No , this city will not be an iron pot for you , and you will not be like meat safe inside it . I will judge you even to the borders of Israel ,

ID:	2961
INPUT:	Egoera <unk> egin dizu hori Joabek . Zu , ene errege jauna , Jainkoaren aingerua bezain argia zara , eta badakizu mundu honetan gertatzen den guztia .
PRED:	But when Joab heard that you are my lord , my lord the angel of God , you are as well as the angel of God .
GOLD:	He did it to place the matter before you in a different light . But you are as wise as an angel of God , and you understand everything that happens among us ! ”

ID:	2962
INPUT:	( Lk 14 , <unk> )
PRED:	Jesus ' Trial before Pilate
GOLD:	Taxes for Caesar

ID:	2963
INPUT:	israeldar elkartea iristean Jaunak konkistatu duen lurralde hau , <unk> da <unk> ; eta guk , zure zerbitzariok , abere asko dugu .
PRED:	When the people of Israel returns , the whole community of Israel will see that the Lord has given you a new land , and we will give you a new land .
GOLD:	The Lord has conquered this whole area for the community of Israel , and it is ideally suited for all our livestock .

ID:	2964
INPUT:	Izarrak <unk> du izena ; uren herena atsentsio-belarra bezain <unk> bihurtu zen , eta gizon-emakume asko hil zen ur haiek <unk> .
PRED:	And when Christ comes from these things , he became as great as great as great as great as great as many nations . And many of the waters of the waters of Egypt was filled with many power .
GOLD:	The name of the star was Bitterness . It made one-third of the water bitter , and many people died from drinking the bitter water .

ID:	2965
INPUT:	<unk> bekatari horiek suntsitzera bidali zaitu , denak birrindu arte borrokatzera .
PRED:	Everyone who has sent you to kill you until they will take away your vineyard .
GOLD:	And the Lord sent you on a mission and told you , ‘ Go and completely destroy the sinners , the Amalekites , until they are all dead . '

ID:	2966
INPUT:	Orduan , ikasleek esan zioten : — Senar-emazteen arteko lotura horrelakoa bada , ez du merezi ezkontzea .
PRED:	Then the disciples said to Jesus , “ It 's better to be a person to be a person . ”
GOLD:	Jesus ' disciples then said to him , “ If this is the case , it is better not to marry ! ”

ID:	2967
INPUT:	( 2 Kro 18 , 1-3 )
PRED:	Asa Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Micaiah Prophesies against Ahab

ID:	2968
INPUT:	Eta uretako aingeruari entzun nion esaten : « Zuzena zara eta justizia egin duzu , Santu horrek , zaren eta zinen horrek :
PRED:	I heard the angel who heard the angel said to the angel , “ You are faithful to me , and you are faithful .
GOLD:	And I heard the angel who had authority over all water saying , “ You are just , O Holy One , who is and who always was , because you have sent these judgments .

ID:	2969
INPUT:	Horiek dira Sinai mendian Jaunak Moisesi israeldarrentzat emandako aginduak .
PRED:	These are the Lord 's instructions to Moses , the people of Israel .
GOLD:	These are the commands that the Lord gave through Moses on Mount Sinai for the Israelites .

ID:	2970
INPUT:	eta beraren bihotzeko ezkutukoak agerian geldituko dira . Orduan , ahuspeztu eta Jainkoa gurtu egingo du , eta esango : « Jainkoa benetan zuekin dago » .
PRED:	In this way , everyone will worship him , and they will worship God . “ The God will worship you , and he will worship you . ”
GOLD:	As they listen , their secret thoughts will be exposed , and they will fall to their knees and worship God , declaring , “ God is truly here among you . ”

ID:	2971
INPUT:	“ Hiri <unk> ” omen duzue izen , Israelen Jainkoa , Jaun ahalguztidun deritzana , euskarri .
PRED:	They say , ‘ This city is the name of the Lord , the God of Israel , the name of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel ! '
GOLD:	even though you call yourself the holy cityand talk about depending on the God of Israel , whose name is the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	2972
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : — Tximista bezala zerutik erortzen ikusi dut Satanas .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ I see Satan like Satan . ”
GOLD:	“ Yes , ” he told them , “ I saw Satan fall from heaven like lightning !

ID:	2973
INPUT:	harribitxiak eta zura lantzeko , eta beste edozein <unk> .
PRED:	onyx stones , and mules , and mules .
GOLD:	He is skilled in engraving and mounting gemstones and in carving wood . He is a master at every craft .

ID:	2974
INPUT:	Herri asko eta nazio indartsuak etorriko dira horrela Jerusalemera , nire , Jaun ahalguztidun honen , bila eta niri mesede eske .
PRED:	For many nations will come to Jerusalem and Jerusalem , for the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has come to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Many peoples and powerful nations will come to Jerusalem to seek the Lord of Heaven 's Armies and to ask for his blessing .

ID:	2975
INPUT:	Honela dio <unk> herria desbideratzen <unk> buruz : « <unk> ematen <unk> iragartzen diete ; ahora ezer <unk> dietenei , berriz , gerra santua .
PRED:	At that time the people of Israel saw that they had been able to kill him , and when they saw that they were afraid of what they had happened .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ You false prophets are leading my people astray ! You promise peace for those who give you food , but you declare war on those who refuse to feed you .

ID:	2976
INPUT:	Ordezkari nagusiak ihardetsi zuen : — Zer uste duzu ? Mezu hau zure erregeari eta zuri bakarrik esatera bidali nauela neure jaunak ? Harresi gainean dagoen jende horrentzat ere bada , horiek ere beren <unk> jan eta <unk> edan beharko baitute , zuek bezalaxe .
PRED:	“ What are you doing ? ” the king asked . “ What do you know that you have sent me , and they will know that my lord the king has sent me to eat ? ”
GOLD:	But Sennacherib 's chief of staff replied , “ Do you think my master sent this message only to you and your master ? He wants all the people to hear it , for when we put this city under siege , they will suffer along with you . They will be so hungry and thirsty that they will eat their own dung and drink their own urine . ”

ID:	2977
INPUT:	Beraz , Kristo Jesus Jauna onartu duzuenez gero , jarraitu berari dagokionez bizitzen .
PRED:	So you must live in the Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	And now , just as you accepted Christ Jesus as your Lord , you must continue to follow him .

ID:	2978
INPUT:	Goretsazue , eguzki eta ilargi , goretsi , izar argitsu !
PRED:	Praise the sun , the moon , and the stars in the sky !
GOLD:	Praise him , sun and moon ! Praise him , all you twinkling stars !

ID:	2979
INPUT:	nire aholkuak ez dituzuenez <unk> bai zentzarazpen guztiak mespretxatu ,
PRED:	For I have not obeyed all my commands , and I have given you as much as you had done .
GOLD:	They rejected my adviceand paid no attention when I corrected them .

ID:	2980
INPUT:	Gero , agindu zion Akaz erregeak Urias apaizari : « Aldare handiaren gainean egin behar dituzu goizeko erre-oparia eta arratseko labore-oparia , erregearen erre-oparia eta labore-oparia , baita herriaren erre-opari , labore- eta isur-opariak ere . Orobat , aldare handiaren gaina zirtatuko duzu erre-oparietako eta sakrifizioetako odol guztiaz . Brontzezko aldareari buruzkoa neuk erabakiko dut » .
PRED:	Then King Ahaz commanded him , “ This is what the king says : You must offer a burnt offering for a burnt offering and a burnt offering for the burnt offering of burnt offering , and I will make you a burnt offering of burnt offering . ”
GOLD:	He told Uriah the priest , “ Use the new altar for the morning sacrifices of burnt offering , the evening grain offering , the king 's burnt offering and grain offering , and the burnt offerings of all the people , as well as their grain offerings and liquid offerings . Sprinkle the blood from all the burnt offerings and sacrifices on the new altar . The bronze altar will be for my personal use only . ”

ID:	2981
INPUT:	eta Jesek David erregea . Davidek Salomon sortu zuen , Uriasen emazte <unk> ;
PRED:	David and his wife , David 's wife , whom David had taken from the king 's wife .
GOLD:	Jesse was the father of King David.David was the father of Solomon ( whose mother was Bathsheba , the widow of Uriah ) .

ID:	2982
INPUT:	( Zen 35 , <unk> )
PRED:	The Ark of the Covenant
GOLD:	Concern for Justice

ID:	2983
INPUT:	Baina ikusi zituen Jaunak beren <unk> haien garrasiak entzun .
PRED:	But the Lord saw them , and they heard their cry out .
GOLD:	Even so , he pitied them in their distressand listened to their cries .

ID:	2984
INPUT:	Fededunen poza
PRED:	Living by the Holy Spirit
GOLD:	A Call to Holy Living

ID:	2985
INPUT:	Bada , neuk ere suminez jokatuko dut ; ez diet errukirik izango , ezta barkatuko ere ; oihu handiz egingo didate dei , baina ez diet entzungo » .
PRED:	That is why I will not destroy my fury , and I will not break my fury on them . I will not listen to them , but I will not listen to them . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , I will respond in fury . I will neither pity nor spare them . And though they cry for mercy , I will not listen . ”

ID:	2986
INPUT:	Orduan , Pedro biraoka eta <unk> hasi zen : — Ez dut ezagutzen gizon hori . Une hartan oilarrak jo zuen .
PRED:	Then Peter began to cast out the religious law and demanded , “ I do n't know it , ” he said , “ I do n't know it . ”
GOLD:	Peter swore , “ A curse on me if I 'm lying — I do n't know the man ! ” And immediately the rooster crowed .

ID:	2987
INPUT:	« Adi egon , ene herri , entzun arretaz , ene hiri : neure irakaspena emango dut , eta nire <unk> argi izango dira .
PRED:	“ Listen to my people , listen to my people . I will pay attention to my instructions , and I will give my instructions to my people .
GOLD:	“ Listen to me , my people.Hear me , Israel , for my law will be proclaimed , and my justice will become a light to the nations .

ID:	2988
INPUT:	Goretsazue Jauna , ona baita , haren maitasuna betikoa baita .
PRED:	Praise the Lord , for he is good ! His faithful love endures forever .
GOLD:	Give thanks to the Lord , for he is good ! His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	2989
INPUT:	Lurralde <unk> <unk> erregeentzat dira gaur , geure bekatuengatik <unk> dizkiguzun erregeentzat ; geu eta geure <unk> gauzkate beren gogara . Guztiz atsekabetuak gaude ! »
PRED:	They will see that the people of Israel are slaughtered by their sins , and they will be ashamed of all their sins . We have been ashamed of all their sins , and we will kill them . ”
GOLD:	The lush produce of this land piles up in the hands of the kings whom you have set over us because of our sins . They have power over us and our livestock . We serve them at their pleasure , and we are in great misery . ”

ID:	2990
INPUT:	« Zeuei eta zuen arbasoei hitzeman bezala , Jaunak Kanaan lurraldera eraman eta lurraren jabe egingo zaituztenean ,
PRED:	“ Remember that the Lord has given you a covenant with the land of Canaan , just as the Lord had promised to the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	“ This is what you must do when the Lord fulfills the promise he swore to you and to your ancestors . When he gives you the land where the Canaanites now live ,

ID:	2991
INPUT:	Hildakoen Egoitzako <unk> arren , handik ere aterako ditu nire eskuak ; <unk> igo arren , handik ere jaitsaraziko ditut ;
PRED:	All who have seen the grave will be able to kill me , but I will send them into the pit .
GOLD:	“ Even if they dig down to the place of the dead , I will reach down and pull them up.Even if they climb up into the heavens , I will bring them down .

ID:	2992
INPUT:	Eman nizun hitzari eutsiko diot , ene Jainko , eta esker onez beteko .
PRED:	I will thank you , O God , and I will thank you .
GOLD:	For you have rescued me from death ; you have kept my feet from slipping.So now I can walk in your presence , O God , in your life-giving light .

ID:	2993
INPUT:	Egin aiene eta garrasi , <unk> hiriok ! Ikaratu , lurralde osoa ! Hor baitator <unk> , <unk> trinko baten antzera , inortxo ere bere <unk> ez dela .
PRED:	I cry out to you , and your armor armor bearer bearer will come upon you , and you will see that some of your prophets will be like a prostitute , and when they saw that when they saw that he was very very very powerful .
GOLD:	Wail at the gates ! Weep in the cities ! Melt with fear , you Philistines ! A powerful army comes like smoke from the north.Each soldier rushes forward eager to fight .

ID:	2994
INPUT:	Baina Jesusek esan zion emakumeari : « Zeure sinesmenak salbatu zaitu ; zoaz bakean » .
PRED:	But Jesus said to her , “ You have saved your faith . ”
GOLD:	And Jesus said to the woman , “ Your faith has saved you ; go in peace . ”

ID:	2995
INPUT:	Ez gaitu erabiltzen gure bekatuek merezi bezala , ez digu ordaintzen geure erruen arabera .
PRED:	You must not keep our sins ; he has not sinned against us .
GOLD:	He does not punish us for all our sins ; he does not deal harshly with us , as we deserve .

ID:	2996
INPUT:	Lebi eta beronen semeok : Gerxon , Kehat eta Merari .
PRED:	The sons of Levi were names : The sons of Levi , named after their ancestor Areli .
GOLD:	The sons of Levi were Gershon , Kohath , and Merari .

ID:	2997
INPUT:	Haren burua urrea , urrerik garbiena ; haren ile-kizkurrak <unk> <unk> , beleak baino beltzago .
PRED:	The gold is more than gold , and the finest gold .
GOLD:	His head is finest gold , his wavy hair is black as a raven .

ID:	2998
INPUT:	Bizidun orok ikusiko du nik , Jaunak , piztu dudala eta ez dela itzaliko » .
PRED:	You will see that I will see that the Lord has raised you from the dead . ”
GOLD:	Yes , I will cut off both the righteous and the wicked ! I will draw my sword against everyone in the land from south to north .

ID:	2999
INPUT:	Salbatzaile duzun <unk> egin baituzu , babesten zaituen <unk> zara oroitu . <unk> <unk> dituzueta kanpoko <unk> ereiten .
PRED:	He has made you very angry , so that you have been able to be angry with your power . And when you know that you are under the outer courtyard of God .
GOLD:	Why ? Because you have turned from the God who can save you.You have forgotten the Rock who can hide you.So you may plant the finest grapevinesand import the most expensive seedlings .

ID:	3000
INPUT:	Zure aurretik izan direnek baino gaiztakeria handiagoa egin duzu , sasijainkoak eta irudiak eginez , ni <unk> . Niri , berriz , bizkarra eman didazu .
PRED:	“ I have sinned against you , and you have made many detestable idols . You have given me a god , and I have turned away from my anger . But I have turned away from my anger and turned away .
GOLD:	You have done more evil than all who lived before you . You have made other gods for yourself and have made me furious with your gold calves . And since you have turned your back on me ,

ID:	3001
INPUT:	Era berean , emakumea abere batekin elkar batzen bada , heriotzara emango dituzte emakumea eta aberea . Berena izango dute heriotzaren errua .
PRED:	In the same way , the woman must put an animal on the head and the head of a woman . The woman must be put to death , and they will be put to death .
GOLD:	“ If a woman presents herself to a male animal to have intercourse with it , she and the animal must both be put to death . You must kill both , for they are guilty of a capital offense .

ID:	3002
INPUT:	« Entzun beste parabola hau : Behin batean , nagusi batek mahastia landatu zuen eta harresiz inguratu ; lurrean dolarea egin eta mahastizainaren dorrea eraiki zuen . Gero , nekazari batzuei errentan utzirik , urrutira joan zen .
PRED:	“ Listen to another message from the others : A vineyard planted in a vineyard and planted it in a vineyard . He built a vineyard to a vineyard , and he built a vineyard to a vineyard .
GOLD:	“ Now listen to another story . A certain landowner planted a vineyard , built a wall around it , dug a pit for pressing out the grape juice , and built a lookout tower . Then he leased the vineyard to tenant farmers and moved to another country .

ID:	3003
INPUT:	<unk> hilzorian zeuden , adorea galdurik .
PRED:	Some of the wise will be killed , and the tongue of life will be killed .
GOLD:	Hungry and thirsty , they nearly died .

ID:	3004
INPUT:	Beraz , Jainkoaren jatorrikoak bagara , ez genezake pentsa Jainkoa giza <unk> eta <unk> <unk> urre , zilar edo harrizko <unk> antzeko denik .
PRED:	So we will not win the house of God , who were able to destroy every kind of silver and gold that had been able to make idols of silver and gold .
GOLD:	And since this is true , we should n't think of God as an idol designed by craftsmen from gold or silver or stone .

ID:	3005
INPUT:	Atari inguruko oihal guztiak liho-hari bihurrituzkoak ziren ;
PRED:	The courtyard of the courtyard were joined in the courtyard of finely woven linen .
GOLD:	All the curtains used in the courtyard were made of finely woven linen .

ID:	3006
INPUT:	Ilunabarrean , Jose zeritzan Arimateako gizon aberats bat etorri zen , Jesusen ikaslea .
PRED:	That evening he was a man named Joseph , and he came to his disciple .
GOLD:	As evening approached , Joseph , a rich man from Arimathea who had become a follower of Jesus ,

ID:	3007
INPUT:	Erruak kontuan badituzu , Jauna , oi Jauna , nork iraun bizirik ?
PRED:	Listen to the Lord , O Lord , how can you live ?
GOLD:	Lord , if you kept a record of our sins , who , O Lord , could ever survive ?

ID:	3008
INPUT:	Ananias izeneko gizon batek eta beronen emazte <unk> soro bat saldu zuten .
PRED:	Meanwhile , a man named Ananias and his wife .
GOLD:	But there was a certain man named Ananias who , with his wife , Sapphira , sold some property .

ID:	3009
INPUT:	utzi joaten amari eta hartu kumeak . Horrela , zoriontsu izango zarete eta luzaro biziko .
PRED:	Instead , let your mother go back to her mother and bless you . Then you will live in a long life .
GOLD:	You may take the young , but let the mother go , so that you may prosper and enjoy a long life .

ID:	3010
INPUT:	Hau esan nahi zuen : « Eraman egin dute Israelen ospea , Jainkoaren kutxa harrapatu baitute » .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” he said , “ for the Ark of the Ark of God , for they have brought him back to the Ark of God . ”
GOLD:	Then she said , “ The glory has departed from Israel , for the Ark of God has been captured . ”

ID:	3011
INPUT:	Jesus eta Beeltzebul
PRED:	Jesus and the Twelve Apostles
GOLD:	Receiving the Light

ID:	3012
INPUT:	Baina beren larrialdian Jaunarengana , Israelen Jainkoarengana , jo eta beraren bila ibili zirenean , aurkitu ahal izan zuten .
PRED:	But when they went to the Lord , the God of Israel came to seek the Lord .
GOLD:	But whenever they were in trouble and turned to the Lord , the God of Israel , and sought him out , they found him .

ID:	3013
INPUT:	Beraz , Jaunak zure profeta hauen guztien ahoan gezur-espiritua ezarri duenez , garbi dago erabaki duela zure hondamena .
PRED:	So the Lord raised him out of all the prophets in your mouth , and he has given him clean .
GOLD:	“ So you see , the Lord has put a lying spirit in the mouths of all your prophets . For the Lord has pronounced your doom . ”

ID:	3014
INPUT:	Mundua eta munduko guztia egin duen Jainkoa zeru-lurren Jauna da eta ez da giza eskuz egindako <unk> bizi ;
PRED:	For the Lord has made all the earth and earth and earth , the God of heaven and earth , and the power of the earth have made by human hands .
GOLD:	“ He is the God who made the world and everything in it . Since he is Lord of heaven and earth , he does n't live in man-made temples ,

ID:	3015
INPUT:	Hango sinagogetan irakasten zuen , denek goraipatzen zutela .
PRED:	He wrote in the synagogues in the synagogues .
GOLD:	He taught regularly in their synagogues and was praised by everyone .

ID:	3016
INPUT:	baina itsas eta <unk> bizidunen artean , hegal eta ezkata gabeak debekatuak dituzue :
PRED:	But if they have seen the waters of the earth , the Lord will destroy all these things .
GOLD:	But you must never eat animals from the sea or from rivers that do not have both fins and scales . They are detestable to you . This applies both to little creatures that live in shallow water and to all creatures that live in deep water .

ID:	3017
INPUT:	ikasi <unk> , saiatu <unk> : lagundu <unk> , egin justizia umezurtzari , defendatu alarguna ! »
PRED:	But when they heard that you have heard the power of the wicked , they have given him victory . ”
GOLD:	Learn to do good.Seek justice.Help the oppressed.Defend the cause of orphans.Fight for the rights of widows .

ID:	3018
INPUT:	Eta , pasatzean , jantziak zabaltzen zituzten bidean .
PRED:	When they were walking on the road , they spread out to the road .
GOLD:	As he rode along , the crowds spread out their garments on the road ahead of him .

ID:	3019
INPUT:	Ez uste izan Aitaren aurrean nik salatuko <unk> ; Moisesek berak , zeuen esperantza duzuenak , salatuko zaituzte .
PRED:	Do n't know that Moses ' Father is able to obey all his Father . And when he tells you , ‘ You are the power of your Father , ' they are saying , ‘ You are the power of God . '
GOLD:	“ Yet it is n't I who will accuse you before the Father . Moses will accuse you ! Yes , Moses , in whom you put your hopes .

ID:	3020
INPUT:	Aldarea sagaratzeko egunean , familiaburuek aldarearen <unk> opariak eraman zituzten eta aldare aurrean ezarri .
PRED:	On the eighth day the eighth day , the priest brought the altar to the altar of the altar , and he placed them on the altar .
GOLD:	The leaders also presented dedication gifts for the altar at the time it was anointed . They each placed their gifts before the altar .

ID:	3021
INPUT:	Horrela , kanpalekutik urruti utzi zuten Miriam zazpi egunez . Herria ez zen abiatu Miriam bildu zitzaien arte .
PRED:	So they returned to the camp , where Moses had not returned to the camp until they had not returned to the camp .
GOLD:	So Miriam was kept outside the camp for seven days , and the people waited until she was brought back before they traveled again .

ID:	3022
INPUT:	Ondoren , herriaren barkamen-oparirako akerra hilko du ; honen odola errezelaz barrualdera eramango du eta zekorraren odolaz eginikoa bera egingo : estalkia zipriztinduko du eta estalki aurrean zirtatuko .
PRED:	Then he will die in the presence of the Lord 's presence , and he will put the blood of the Holy Place in front of the Ark of the Tabernacle , and he will pour out the Ark of the atonement cover of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ Then Aaron must slaughter the first goat as a sin offering for the people and carry its blood behind the inner curtain . There he will sprinkle the goat 's blood over the atonement cover and in front of it , just as he did with the bull 's blood .

ID:	3023
INPUT:	<unk> , zitarak eta turutak joz sartu ziren Jerusalemen Jaunaren etxeraino .
PRED:	They were filled with the trumpets and harps , and the trumpets of the Temple of the Lord 's Temple were in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	They marched into Jerusalem to the music of harps , lyres , and trumpets , and they proceeded to the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	3024
INPUT:	horrela bereiziko dituzu lebitarrak gainerako israeldarren artetik eta neureak izango ditut .
PRED:	I will take all the rest of the people of Israel and all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	In this way , you will set the Levites apart from the rest of the people of Israel , and the Levites will belong to me .

ID:	3025
INPUT:	Zure irakaspena izan ez banu gozamen , honezkero galdua nintzatekeen atsekabez .
PRED:	I would not stay at your instructions , for I would not stay at home .
GOLD:	If your instructions had n't sustained me with joy , I would have died in my misery .

ID:	3026
INPUT:	Horregatik , bere maitaleen esku utzi nuen , bere <unk> asiriarren esku .
PRED:	That is why I destroyed by myself , and I destroyed them with their horses .
GOLD:	“ And so I handed her over to her Assyrian lovers , whom she desired so much .

ID:	3027
INPUT:	Edomen kontrako mezua
PRED:	A Message for Edom
GOLD:	A Message for Philistia

ID:	3028
INPUT:	Siriako Antiokiara itzuli
PRED:	Paul 's Final Instructions to Antioch of Aram
GOLD:	Paul and Barnabas Return to Antioch of Syria

ID:	3029
INPUT:	Baina ez dituzue Jaunaren hitzak aditu nahi izan eta zeuen idolatriazko jardueraz iraintzen jarraitu duzue , zigorra zeuen gainera erakarriz .
PRED:	But you will not obey the words of the Lord your heart , and you will turn against you .
GOLD:	“ But you would not listen to me , ” says the Lord . “ You made me furious by worshiping idols you made with your own hands , bringing on yourselves all the disasters you now suffer .

ID:	3030
INPUT:	zatitu egingo duzue , zatien gainera olioa isuriz ; labore-oparia da hau .
PRED:	You will cut it on the anointing oil ; you will burn it with a grain offering .
GOLD:	Break it in pieces and pour olive oil on it ; it is a grain offering .

ID:	3031
INPUT:	Eta , Jaunaren esanari jaramonik egin gabe , Egiptora joan eta Tafnes hiriraino iritsi ziren .
PRED:	Then they went to Egypt and listen to the Lord in Egypt , so I will bring you back to Egypt .
GOLD:	The people refused to obey the voice of the Lord and went to Egypt , going as far as the city of Tahpanhes .

ID:	3032
INPUT:	<unk> zihoala , jaiotzatik itsua zen gizon bat ikusi zuen Jesusek .
PRED:	As soon as he was blind , he saw a blind man named him .
GOLD:	As Jesus was walking along , he saw a man who had been blind from birth .

ID:	3033
INPUT:	<unk> sarturik , gazte bat ikusi zuten eskuinaldean eseria , soineko zuriz jantzia , eta erabat izutu ziren .
PRED:	And when they saw a young man sitting on the throne , they sitting on the throne of blue , purple , and scarlet yarn .
GOLD:	When they entered the tomb , they saw a young man clothed in a white robe sitting on the right side . The women were shocked ,

ID:	3034
INPUT:	Ohar zaitezte , beraz , ez dela bete gabe gelditu Jaunak Akaben senitartearen kontra esaniko hitz bat ere . Bete du Jaunak bere zerbitzari Eliasen bitartez esana zuena .
PRED:	So do not obey the Lord 's commands , for the Lord has spoken against him and the people of Israel . He has given him a message from the Lord 's servant , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	You can be sure that the message of the Lord that was spoken concerning Ahab 's family will not fail . The Lord declared through his servant Elijah that this would happen . ”

ID:	3035
INPUT:	orduan , zuekin biziko naiz toki honetan , zuen gurasoei aspaldidanik eta betiko eman nien lurraldean .
PRED:	Then I will live in your land , and I gave you your ancestors to your ancestors .
GOLD:	Then I will let you stay in this land that I gave to your ancestors to keep forever .

ID:	3036
INPUT:	Efraim Egiptora itzuliko da , Asiria izango du nagusi , ez baitu niregana itzuli nahi izan .
PRED:	A Message to Egypt , for I will not return to Egypt , for they will not return to me .
GOLD:	“ But since my people refuse to return to me , they will return to Egyptand will be forced to serve Assyria .

ID:	3037
INPUT:	Eta besteei , berriz : — Larunbatez zer dugu legezko , on egitea ala gaitz egitea , bizia salbatzea ala kentzea ? Haiek , ordea , isilik .
PRED:	“ What should we do for the Sabbath ? ” they asked . “ It is a day for the Sabbath day or a day or a day ? ” But they asked .
GOLD:	Then he turned to his critics and asked , “ Does the law permit good deeds on the Sabbath , or is it a day for doing evil ? Is this a day to save life or to destroy it ? ” But they would n't answer him .

ID:	3038
INPUT:	Bihotz zintzoz zaindu zituen , esku <unk> eraman .
PRED:	For he led them into the world , so they could be able to kill them .
GOLD:	He cared for them with a true heartand led them with skillful hands .

ID:	3039
INPUT:	Honela , bosgarren eguna burutu zen .
PRED:	On this day , the day came up and morning .
GOLD:	And evening passed and morning came , marking the fifth day .

ID:	3040
INPUT:	Lurrak <unk> dituztela ? <unk> egiten dituzte . Etxeak irrikatzen dituztela ? Hartu egiten dituzte . Indarrez hartzen dute nagusia , bere familia eta <unk> .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who have been filled with old , and they put their hands on burlap . They are my own flesh , and they are my own name .
GOLD:	When you want a piece of land , you find a way to seize it.When you want someone 's house , you take it by fraud and violence.You cheat a man of his property , stealing his family 's inheritance .

ID:	3041
INPUT:	Bota egin dituzue Jaunaren egiazko apaizak , Aaronen ondorengoak , baita lebitarrak ere , eta , herri arrotzek bezala , zeuen apaizak izendatu . Norbait apaiz izan nahian , bere <unk> zekor bat eta zazpi ahari <unk> etortzen bazaizue , berehala egiten duzue gezurrezko jainko horien apaiz .
PRED:	You must also have the same gift of the Lord and the descendants of Aaron — the descendants of Aaron , the priests , and the Levites , and all the people of Israel will serve as a sin offering .
GOLD:	But you have chased away the priests of the Lord ( the descendants of Aaron ) and the Levites , and you have appointed your own priests , just like the pagan nations . You let anyone become a priest these days ! Whoever comes to be dedicated with a young bull and seven rams can become a priest of these so-called gods of yours !

ID:	3042
INPUT:	Asiriarren inbasioa iragarri
PRED:	A Message about the People
GOLD:	A Call to Trust the

ID:	3043
INPUT:	Saulo triskantza ikaragarria egiten ari zen eliz elkartean : etxeetan sartu , gizon-emakumeak atxilotu eta kartzelara eramaten zituen .
PRED:	Meanwhile , some of the people of the church were looking for food , and people brought them to the church in prison .
GOLD:	But Saul was going everywhere to destroy the church . He went from house to house , dragging out both men and women to throw them into prison .

ID:	3044
INPUT:	Kartzelazainak Paulori berri eman zion , esanez : — Epaileek zuek askatzeko esan dute . Atera , bada , eta zoazte bakean .
PRED:	The king gave me the news to Paul , and he said , “ If I want you to save you ? ”
GOLD:	So the jailer told Paul , “ The city officials have said you and Silas are free to leave . Go in peace . ”

ID:	3045
INPUT:	Begira zer-nolako lurraldea den , hango biztanleak indartsuak ala ahulak , gutxi ala asko diren .
PRED:	Look , the land of the people who live in the land , whether they are living in the land , or even though they do n't have a few .
GOLD:	See what the land is like , and find out whether the people living there are strong or weak , few or many .

ID:	3046
INPUT:	Haiek , berriro : — Zer egin dizu ? Nola ireki dizkizu begiak ?
PRED:	“ What do you done ? ” they asked . “ How can you see ? ”
GOLD:	“ But what did he do ? ” they asked . “ How did he heal you ? ”

ID:	3047
INPUT:	Jainkoa <unk> sortu dituena , iluna <unk> eguna gau <unk> duena ; itsas urak <unk> lur gainera isurtzen dituena . Jauna du izena .
PRED:	For those who know that the day of God will be very glad , and when I saw that all the waters of the earth , the waters of the earth will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	It is the Lord who created the stars , the Pleiades and Orion.He turns darkness into morningand day into night.He draws up water from the oceansand pours it down as rain on the land.The Lord is his name !

ID:	3048
INPUT:	Guztiok Jainkoaren seme-alaba zarete , Jesu Kristogan duzuen sinesmenari esker .
PRED:	For you are children of God 's children , who are children in Christ Jesus Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	For you are all children of God through faith in Christ Jesus .

ID:	3049
INPUT:	Silas eta Timoteo Mazedoniatik etorri zirenean , Paulok mezuaren predikuari eman zion erabat , Jesus zela Mesias juduen aurrean aitortuz .
PRED:	When Paul arrived in Macedonia , Paul was preaching the way of the world . When Jesus was preaching the Messiah , he was the Messiah to be the Messiah .
GOLD:	And after Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia , Paul spent all his time preaching the word . He testified to the Jews that Jesus was the Messiah .

ID:	3050
INPUT:	Nagusiak erantzun zien : “ <unk> dakarrenari eman egingo zaio ; fruiturik ez dakarrenari , ordea , daukan apurra ere kendu egingo zaio .
PRED:	“ But when they ask , ‘ This will be sure that those who have been given , too , and they will have enough .
GOLD:	“ ‘ Yes , ' the king replied , ‘ and to those who use well what they are given , even more will be given . But from those who do nothing , even what little they have will be taken away .

ID:	3051
INPUT:	<unk> bezala erorarazten du elurra , hautsa bezala zabaltzen <unk> .
PRED:	They will be weak as snow .
GOLD:	He sends the snow like white wool ; he scatters frost upon the ground like ashes .

ID:	3052
INPUT:	Hala ere , Pedro jaiki eta hilobira joan zen lasterka ; makurturik , barrura begiratu eta oihal-zerrendak bakarrik ikusi zituen , eta etxera itzuli zen gertatuaz harriturik .
PRED:	So Peter got up and looked at him , and he ran back and saw him . He saw them and saw them , and he did not go home .
GOLD:	However , Peter jumped up and ran to the tomb to look . Stooping , he peered in and saw the empty linen wrappings ; then he went home again , wondering what had happened .

ID:	3053
INPUT:	iluntasun eta nahas-mahas <unk> , <unk> gabeko herrialdera » .
PRED:	I am thrown into the darkness , and they will be thrown into the land . ”
GOLD:	It is a land as dark as midnight , a land of gloom and confusion , where even the light is dark as midnight . ' ”

ID:	3054
INPUT:	Hartu ahariaren buztaneko gantza , <unk> gainekoa eta gibela estaltzen duena , giltzurrunak eta itsatsirik daukaten gantza , eta eskuineko izterra ; apaizen sagarapenerako aharia da hau .
PRED:	The fat of the liver , the fat of the liver , the long lobe of the liver , the long lobe of the liver , and the fat of the fat of the liver .
GOLD:	“ Since this is the ram for the ordination of Aaron and his sons , take the fat of the ram , including the fat of the broad tail , the fat around the internal organs , the long lobe of the liver , and the two kidneys and the fat around them , along with the right thigh .

ID:	3055
INPUT:	Judako herri osoa , emakume , seme-alaba eta haurtxoak ere bai , Jaunaren aurrean zegoen zutik .
PRED:	Then all the people of Judah stood before the Lord , and children of Judah stood before the Lord .
GOLD:	As all the men of Judah stood before the Lord with their little ones , wives , and children ,

ID:	3056
INPUT:	Saulek , orduan : — Zergatik ari zarete Jeseren semea eta biok nire kontra azpilanean ? Ogia eta ezpata eman zenizkion ; kontsulta egin zenion Jainkoari Davidi buruz , ea nire aurka jaiki eta <unk> ipiniko ote zizkidan . Horretan ari da , hain zuzen , orain .
PRED:	“ Why are you doing this ? ” Saul asked . “ I have given you a son of Jesse , and you have given me victory against me ? Why are you afraid of my people ? ”
GOLD:	“ Why have you and the son of Jesse conspired against me ? ” Saul demanded . “ Why did you give him food and a sword ? Why have you consulted God for him ? Why have you encouraged him to kill me , as he is trying to do this very day ? ”

ID:	3057
INPUT:	Ahaztu egin zaituzte adiskideek , ez dira zutaz axola . Etsai batek bezala jo zaitut , gogor zigortu , zeure erru kontaezinengatik , zeure bekatu <unk> .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of your friends , but no one can help you , for I will punish you as a god , for I have done to punish you .
GOLD:	All your lovers — your allies — have left youand do not care about you anymore.I have wounded you cruelly , as though I were your enemy.For your sins are many , and your guilt is great .

ID:	3058
INPUT:	Haran bere sorterrian , kaldearren Ur hirian , hil zen , oraino bere aita bizi zela .
PRED:	“ My father , the city of the city , and the city of the city of the city was dead .
GOLD:	But Haran died in Ur of the Chaldeans , the land of his birth , while his father , Terah , was still living .

ID:	3059
INPUT:	Brontzezko uraska
PRED:	the Sea of the Temple
GOLD:	The Anointing Oil

ID:	3060
INPUT:	Begiratu zuen Eliasek eta horra non ikusten dituen , bere buru aldean , harri goritu baten gainean erretako <unk> eta <unk> bat ur . Jan eta edan ondoren , etzan egin zen berriro .
PRED:	Then Elijah looked at once and saw it , and he looked like a huge stone that had been poured out like a stone . Then he ate it with a stone , and they ate it .
GOLD:	He looked around and there beside his head was some bread baked on hot stones and a jar of water ! So he ate and drank and lay down again .

ID:	3061
INPUT:	Hala ere , ez dut neure onginahia harengandik baztertuko , Saulengandik baztertu nuen bezala , baztertu egin bainuen neure aurretik bera .
PRED:	But I will not abandon you , and I will not abandon you as well as I wanted to take him back in my presence .
GOLD:	But my favor will not be taken from him as I took it from Saul , whom I removed from your sight .

ID:	3062
INPUT:	eta oinaze eta <unk> zeruko Jainkoa madarikatzen hasi ziren , baina ez ziren beren egintzez damutu .
PRED:	And when they heard that they were afraid of God , they began to obey all their troubles .
GOLD:	and they cursed the God of heaven for their pains and sores . But they did not repent of their evil deeds and turn to God .

ID:	3063
INPUT:	Bazen Lazaro izeneko eskale bat ere , haren ate ondoan egoten zena ; zauriz josia zegoen .
PRED:	Suddenly , a man named Lazarus was sitting beside him , and he was sitting beside him .
GOLD:	At his gate lay a poor man named Lazarus who was covered with sores .

ID:	3064
INPUT:	Zitara eta harpa , danbolin eta <unk> ardoa ugari zuen <unk> ; baina Jaunaren <unk> zarete ohartzen , haren <unk> dituzue aintzakotzat hartzen .
PRED:	Praise the Lord with all the wild animals , and when they call him with great power , they will know that you have seen the Lord 's power , and they will know that you have seen his power .
GOLD:	They furnish wine and lovely music at their grand parties — lyre and harp , tambourine and flute — but they never think about the Lordor notice what he is doing .

ID:	3065
INPUT:	( 35 , <unk> )
PRED:	The Ark of the Covenant
GOLD:	Instructions for the Sabbath

ID:	3066
INPUT:	Gupida izango die gizagaixo eta <unk> , bizia salbatuko behartsuei .
PRED:	He will be faithful to those who are poor , and the poor will be saved .
GOLD:	He feels pity for the weak and the needy , and he will rescue them .

ID:	3067
INPUT:	Gazte izan nintzen , orain <unk> nago : ez dut sekula ikusi zintzoa bertan behera utzia , ezta haren ondorengorik ere ogi eskean .
PRED:	Then I saw that I had seen , and I saw that I had never seen the righteous man who had never been unfaithful to the poor .
GOLD:	Once I was young , and now I am old.Yet I have never seen the godly abandonedor their children begging for bread .

ID:	3068
INPUT:	Eta hori <unk> <unk> , Israelgo erreinuaren bekatuagatik . Nork <unk> ondorengoak <unk> ? Ez ote Samaria hiriburuak ? Nork darama <unk> sasikultura ? Ez ote Jerusalemek berak ?
PRED:	And why should we know that the god of Israel ? Who will be able to kill Samaria ? Who will be able to kill Samaria ? Who will be ashamed ? Who will be ashamed ?
GOLD:	And why is this happening ? Because of the rebellion of Israel — yes , the sins of the whole nation.Who is to blame for Israel 's rebellion ? Samaria , its capital city ! Where is the center of idolatry in Judah ? In Jerusalem , its capital !

ID:	3069
INPUT:	eta itun berriaren bitarteko den Jesusengana , <unk> baino indartsuago mintzo den odolaz garbitu <unk> .
PRED:	It is a new covenant with the new new covenant with the new covenant with the new covenant of God .
GOLD:	You have come to Jesus , the one who mediates the new covenant between God and people , and to the sprinkled blood , which speaks of forgiveness instead of crying out for vengeance like the blood of Abel .

ID:	3070
INPUT:	<unk> dituzue profeten agintzariak , baita Jainkoak zuen arbasoekin egin zuen ituna ere ; hau esan baitzion Abrahami : Zure ondorengoen bidez lurreko herri guztiak bedeinkatuko ditut .
PRED:	For the prophets of the prophets were given by the prophets that God had promised to Abraham , the descendants of the descendants of the people of the earth , and I will bless you with all the people of the earth .
GOLD:	You are the children of those prophets , and you are included in the covenant God promised to your ancestors . For God said to Abraham , ‘ Through your descendants all the families on earth will be blessed . '

ID:	3071
INPUT:	« <unk> hartzean , lege hau <unk> du beretzat , apaiz lebitarren zainpean egongo den liburutik .
PRED:	“ The king of Israel will be sure that he will be in charge of the church in charge of the Temple of the priests who are in charge of the Book of the Law .
GOLD:	“ When he sits on the throne as king , he must copy for himself this body of instruction on a scroll in the presence of the Levitical priests .

ID:	3072
INPUT:	Hark , <unk> , haserre egin zion haizeari , eta aintzirari esan : — Hago isilik ! Geldi ! Gelditu zen haizea eta <unk> handia egin zen .
PRED:	But when he saw that he was very angry with him , he said to him , “ Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! ” So the wind was afraid of the wind .
GOLD:	When Jesus woke up , he rebuked the wind and said to the waves , “ Silence ! Be still ! ” Suddenly the wind stopped , and there was a great calm .

ID:	3073
INPUT:	Barneko atariko ateetatik sartzean , lihozko jantziak eramango dituzte soinean ; ez dute artilezko jantzirik eramango <unk> barneko atarian eta tenpluan ari direnean .
PRED:	The priest will take the house of the house of the Temple , and they will serve in the Temple of the Temple . They must not take in charge of the Temple and the Temple of the Temple .
GOLD:	“ When they enter the gateway to the inner courtyard , they must wear only linen clothing . They must wear no wool while on duty in the inner courtyard or in the Temple itself .

ID:	3074
INPUT:	Haren egintza harrigarriak gogora ditzagun nahi du : errukior eta bihozbera da Jauna .
PRED:	He is merciful to you , and he is merciful to you .
GOLD:	He causes us to remember his wonderful works.How gracious and merciful is our Lord !

ID:	3075
INPUT:	Honela ziotson Anak : « Barka , ene Jauna ! Neu nauzu zure aurrean Jaunari otoizka ari izan zitzaion emakumea .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Lord , I am with you , for I am the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Sir , do you remember me ? ” Hannah asked . “ I am the very woman who stood here several years ago praying to the Lord .

ID:	3076
INPUT:	Hartu nuen kopa Jaunaren eskutik , eta Jaunak bidali ninduen nazio guztiei edanarazi nien .
PRED:	Then I sent me into the cup of the Lord and sent me to all the nations of the earth .
GOLD:	So I took the cup of anger from the Lord and made all the nations drink from it — every nation to which the Lord sent me .

ID:	3077
INPUT:	« Ez kutsatu horrelako <unk> ; horrela kutsatu dira , hain zuzen , zuen aurretik jaurtiko ditudan herriak .
PRED:	“ You must not commit adultery , because they have been defiled by worshiping the gods of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Do not defile yourselves in any of these ways , for the people I am driving out before you have defiled themselves in all these ways .

ID:	3078
INPUT:	« Ohoratu aita-amak , luzaro bizi zaitezen , Jaunak , zeure Jainkoak , ematen dizun lurraldean .
PRED:	“ Your father and mother will live in the land of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Honor your father and mother . Then you will live a long , full life in the land the Lord your God is giving you .

ID:	3079
INPUT:	Eta , Jauna lagun zutenez , askok sinetsi zuten eta Jaunarengana bihurtu ziren .
PRED:	And many of the Lord believed , and many believed the Lord .
GOLD:	The power of the Lord was with them , and a large number of these Gentiles believed and turned to the Lord .

ID:	3080
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> hilko dira eta ez dute hiletarik , ez hilobirik izango : simaurra bezala geldituko dira lurrazalean . Gerrak eta goseak hilko ditu , eta gorpuak hegazti <unk> eta basapiztiek jango dituzte » .
PRED:	They will kill those who are dead , and they will not be able to serve other gods and other gods will be scattered on the ground . They will be slaughtered by the wild animals and the birds of the sky , and they will die . ”
GOLD:	They will die from terrible diseases . No one will mourn for them or bury them , and they will lie scattered on the ground like manure . They will die from war and famine , and their bodies will be food for the vultures and wild animals . ”

ID:	3081
INPUT:	Egin duen bekatuaz <unk> , elkarte osoak zekorra eskainiko du barkamen-oparitzat . <unk> eramango du ,
PRED:	For all the sin offering will bring an offering to the sin of sin , and they will bring an offering to sin .
GOLD:	When they become aware of their sin , the people must bring a young bull as an offering for their sin and present it before the Tabernacle .

ID:	3082
INPUT:	« Zorionekoak Jainkoaren nahia betetzeagatik <unk> , haiek baitute Jainkoa errege .
PRED:	For God will be made by the power of God , and they will be made by God .
GOLD:	God blesses those who are persecuted for doing right , for the Kingdom of Heaven is theirs .

ID:	3083
INPUT:	Jerusalemen hondamena
PRED:	Judah 's Message about Judah
GOLD:	The Temple Destroyed

ID:	3084
INPUT:	Gudari ausart haien ofizialak bi mila eta seiehun familiaburu ziren .
PRED:	The men of Benjamin were allotted to their own family , and the leader of the tribe of Benjamin .
GOLD:	These regiments of mighty warriors were commanded by 2,600 clan leaders .

ID:	3085
INPUT:	<unk> hori , konturatuko al zara behingoz egintzarik gabeko fedea alferrikakoa dena ?
PRED:	How can you know how hard I have done ? How can you see ?
GOLD:	How foolish ! Ca n't you see that faith without good deeds is useless ?

ID:	3086
INPUT:	Zure erabakiak fidagarri dira , zure etxea santutasunez eder , Jauna , egun eta beti .
PRED:	All your decrees and regulations are in the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	Your royal laws can not be changed.Your reign , O Lord , is holy forever and ever .

ID:	3087
INPUT:	<unk> lehen-semeak berreskuratzeko ordain-dirua Aaroni eta beronen semeei emango diezu » .
PRED:	I will give you the firstborn sons of Aaron and his sons to give you the sons of Aaron . ”
GOLD:	Give the silver to Aaron and his sons as the redemption price for the extra firstborn sons . ”

ID:	3088
INPUT:	Jokabide zuzenekoak begirune dio Jainkoari , bide okerretik dabilenak mespretxatu egiten du .
PRED:	Those who fear God will fear God ; they will obey God .
GOLD:	Those who follow the right path fear the Lord ; those who take the wrong path despise him .

ID:	3089
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion Pedrori : « Itzuli ezpata <unk> . Ez ote dut , bada , edan behar Aitak leporatu didan edari samina ? »
PRED:	Jesus said to Peter , “ How can I kill me ? ” And he asked him , “ I have heard that my Father 's sake ? ”
GOLD:	But Jesus said to Peter , “ Put your sword back into its sheath . Shall I not drink from the cup of suffering the Father has given me ? ”

ID:	3090
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jaunak lur osoa arakatzen du bere begiz , zintzo direnak adoretzeko . Oraingo honetan , ordea , <unk> jokatu duzu ; horregatik , aurrerantzean gerrak izango dira zure aurka » .
PRED:	For the Lord has given all the earth on the earth , for I have given you everything I have done . But when I have done , the Lord will destroy your own people , and they will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	The eyes of the Lord search the whole earth in order to strengthen those whose hearts are fully committed to him . What a fool you have been ! From now on you will be at war . ”

ID:	3091
INPUT:	<unk>
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Recovery
GOLD:	Concluding Thoughts about the Teacher

ID:	3092
INPUT:	Hodeiz inguratu zara , gure erregua hel ez dakizun .
PRED:	May you turn away from your enemies , and you wo n't be afraid of us .
GOLD:	You have hidden yourself in a cloudso our prayers can not reach you .

ID:	3093
INPUT:	<unk> egiten da gerra , aholku egokien <unk> lortzen garaipena .
PRED:	I thought , “ At that time I will bring disaster upon you . ”
GOLD:	So do n't go to war without wise guidance ; victory depends on having many advisers .

ID:	3094
INPUT:	Eraman zeuen anaia eta itzuli gizon harengana .
PRED:	So take him back to your brother , and take him away .
GOLD:	Then take your brother , and go back to the man .

ID:	3095
INPUT:	Jarraitu Jaunari zeuen Jainkoari eta izan begirune berari , gorde aginduak eta egin haren esana , eman kultu Jaunari eta atxiki berari .
PRED:	The life of the Lord your God and obey him and obey the commands of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	The false prophets or visionaries who try to lead you astray must be put to death , for they encourage rebellion against the Lord your God , who redeemed you from slavery and brought you out of the land of Egypt . Since they try to lead you astray from the way the Lord your God commanded you to live , you must put them to death . In this way you will purge the evil from among you .

ID:	3096
INPUT:	Berehala , Jesusengana hurbildu eta esan zion : « Agur , Maisu ! » Eta musu eman zion .
PRED:	So Jesus went to Jesus and said , “ Rabbi , here ! ” So he gave him a kiss .
GOLD:	So Judas came straight to Jesus . “ Greetings , Rabbi ! ” he exclaimed and gave him the kiss .

ID:	3097
INPUT:	zuk izan ezik , zapuztuak gaituzun Jainko horrek , jadanik gure gudarostearekin gudura joaten ez zaren horrek ?
PRED:	For we have no fear of our God , for we have no hope in our foes .
GOLD:	Oh , please help us against our enemies , for all human help is useless .

ID:	3098
INPUT:	Paulo , Onesimo esklaboaren alde mesede eske
PRED:	Paul 's friend , too ,
GOLD:	Paul 's Appeal for Onesimus

ID:	3099
INPUT:	Urreztatu urre garbiz , eta ezarri urrezko hegala inguru guztian .
PRED:	Make gold rings on the altar of pure gold and gold .
GOLD:	Overlay it with pure gold and run a gold molding around the edge .

ID:	3100
INPUT:	Eta ni ikusten nauenak ni bidali nauena ere ikusten du .
PRED:	And those who see me will see me .
GOLD:	For when you see me , you are seeing the one who sent me .

ID:	3101
INPUT:	Bete zuen Aaronek Jaunak Moisesi agindua , eta argimutilaren aurrealdea argitzeko eran egokitu zituen kriseiluak .
PRED:	So Moses did as the Lord had commanded Moses , and he placed the lamps on the head of the seven lamps .
GOLD:	So Aaron did this . He set up the seven lamps so they reflected their light forward , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	3102
INPUT:	Benaias , <unk> , <unk> ,
PRED:	Jehoiada was furious , and the commander of the nobles of Samaria .
GOLD:	Benaiah , Bedeiah , Keluhi ,

ID:	3103
INPUT:	Zergatik nahi nauzue salatu , zeuek izanik nire aurka altxatuak ? Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	Why do you want me to attack me ? ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Why do you accuse me of doing wrong ? You are the ones who have rebelled , ” says the Lord .

ID:	3104
INPUT:	<unk> naiz eta lokartzen , eta berriro esnatzen , Jauna baitut euskarri .
PRED:	I know that my dear brothers and sisters , but I trust the Lord .
GOLD:	I am not afraid of ten thousand enemieswho surround me on every side .

ID:	3105
INPUT:	Entzun iezadazue , beraz , eta jaregin <unk> preso hartu dituzuen zeuen senide horiei ; bestela , zuen kontra ere biziki haserretuko da Jauna » .
PRED:	Therefore , listen to me and kill you as they wanted to kill you , so you would be angry with me . ”
GOLD:	Listen to me and return these prisoners you have taken , for they are your own relatives . Watch out , because now the Lord 's fierce anger has been turned against you ! ”

ID:	3106
INPUT:	Egun osoan luzatuak nituen <unk> txarretik , bere nahierara <unk> errebeldeagana ,
PRED:	In that day I saw that those who were able to kill him , and they were able to kill him .
GOLD:	All day long I opened my arms to a rebellious people.But they follow their own evil pathsand their own crooked schemes .

ID:	3107
INPUT:	Egun hartan , emakumeen antzeko izango dira egiptoarrak ; beldur-ikarak hartuko ditu , Jaun ahalguztidunak eskua beraien aurka jasotzen duela ikustean .
PRED:	On that day the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will be like the Egyptians , for they will see their hand against them .
GOLD:	In that day the Egyptians will be as weak as women . They will cower in fear beneath the upraised fist of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	3108
INPUT:	Salomonek denei eman zien erantzuna ; ez zen izan erregeak erantzunezineko galdera ilunik .
PRED:	Solomon had nothing for her , for she had not worked for her .
GOLD:	Solomon had answers for all her questions ; nothing was too hard for the king to explain to her .

ID:	3109
INPUT:	« <unk> itzaltzen ote da gaiztoen kriseilua , sarri jausten ote ezbeharra haien gainera , sarri ematen ote Jainkoak zigorra bere suminean ?
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits the sun , and the sun will fall on the earth ? Can it be destroyed ? Can God punish them ?
GOLD:	“ Yet the light of the wicked never seems to be extinguished.Do they ever have trouble ? Does God distribute sorrows to them in anger ?

ID:	3110
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> bere buruari kalte , <unk> hartzen ez duenak lasaitasuna ziur .
PRED:	But when they see that they have been able to kill you , those who have been filled with idols , and those who do n't know that they have seen .
GOLD:	There 's danger in putting up security for a stranger 's debt ; it 's safer not to guarantee another person 's debt .

ID:	3111
INPUT:	<unk> ere harri bikainez egina zegoen , neurrira landuriko harriz eta zedro-zurez .
PRED:	At that time the stone was built , and a stone was covered with fine goatskin leather .
GOLD:	The blocks of high-quality stone used in the walls were also cut to measure , and cedar beams were also used .

ID:	3112
INPUT:	<unk> izan zuenetik , beste zortziehun eta hamabost urtez bizi izan zen , eta seme-alabak izan zituen .
PRED:	After the birth of Mahalalel , Mahalalel lived another years and had other sons and daughters .
GOLD:	After the birth of Kenan , Enosh lived another 815 years , and he had other sons and daughters .

ID:	3113
INPUT:	Jaunak bete eta burutu egin du berak iragarria . Jaunaren aurka bekatu egin eta obeditu ez diozuelako gertatu zaizue guztia .
PRED:	For the Lord has obeyed him , and he has sinned against you . He has sinned against the Lord and has not sinned against him .
GOLD:	just as he said he would . For these people have sinned against the Lord and disobeyed him . That is why it happened .

ID:	3114
INPUT:	Beraz , eman agindu hori eta sinatu , aldatua izan ez dadin , mediarren eta pertsiarren aldaezineko beste legeak bezala » .
PRED:	So he gave this message to Jeremiah , and he refused to listen to the throne of the Lord , the God of Persia , and the descendants of Persia . ”
GOLD:	So King Darius signed the law .

ID:	3115
INPUT:	« Zuek sendo iraun duzue nirekin nire <unk> .
PRED:	“ And now you will live in my covenant with me .
GOLD:	“ You have stayed with me in my time of trial .

ID:	3116
INPUT:	Baina Paulok erantzun zigun : « Zer dela-eta ari zarete negarrez ? <unk> egin nahi al nauzue ? Prest nago , lotua izateko ez ezik , Jerusalemen hiltzeko ere , Jesus Jaunarengatik » .
PRED:	But Paul replied , “ Why are you afraid ? Why are you afraid of me ? Why do you want me to kill me ? ”
GOLD:	But he said , “ Why all this weeping ? You are breaking my heart ! I am ready not only to be jailed at Jerusalem but even to die for the sake of the Lord Jesus . ”

ID:	3117
INPUT:	Bigarren hegaztia erre-opari gisa eskainiko du , arautua dagoen eran . Era honetan egingo du apaizak bekatuaren barkamen-ohikunea eta barkatua izango du pertsona horrek bekatua .
PRED:	The second lamb will be presented as a burnt offering , and the priest will be given to the Lord . Through this process , the priest will be forgiven , and the priest will be forgiven .
GOLD:	The priest will then prepare the second bird as a burnt offering , following all the procedures that have been prescribed . Through this process the priest will purify you from your sin , making you right with the Lord , and you will be forgiven .

ID:	3118
INPUT:	Anaiak Joseren aurrez aurre zeuden eseriak , zaharrenetik gazteenera , eta harriturik elkarri begira .
PRED:	When he saw two of Joseph , they were born to each other , they were born to each other in front of them .
GOLD:	Joseph told each of his brothers where to sit , and to their amazement , he seated them according to age , from oldest to youngest .

ID:	3119
INPUT:	<unk> naiz , errege gantzutua izan arren . Gizon hauek , ordea , Tzeruiaren semeok , ni baino gogorragoak dira . Baina itzul diezaiola Jaunak <unk> berak <unk> egindako kaltea ! »
PRED:	But I am the king of Zeruiah , but the king of Zeruiah are my lord the king of Zeruiah . But the king of Zeruiah are my lord the Lord . ”
GOLD:	And even though I am the anointed king , these two sons of Zeruiah — Joab and Abishai — are too strong for me to control . So may the Lord repay these evil men for their evil deeds . ”

ID:	3120
INPUT:	<unk> durundi egiten du beraren gainean , lantzak eta azkonak distira ;
PRED:	At that time , when the lightning flashes like lightning , and the lightning flashes of lightning .
GOLD:	The arrows rattle against it , and the spear and javelin flash .

ID:	3121
INPUT:	<unk> ez duzuen <unk> <unk> izan ez bazarete , nork eman benetan <unk> ?
PRED:	And if you have been able to know that you have been able to know that I have been able to kill you ?
GOLD:	And if you are not faithful with other people 's things , why should you be trusted with things of your own ?

ID:	3122
INPUT:	Horregatik , madarikazioak hartua du lurra , eta bertan bizi <unk> jasan behar . Horregatik , lurreko bizilagunak galtzen ari dira ; banaka batzuk besterikez dira gelditzen .
PRED:	So the earth will be able to obey the earth , and they will be sure that the people of the earth will not be destroyed .
GOLD:	Therefore , a curse consumes the earth.Its people must pay the price for their sin.They are destroyed by fire , and only a few are left alive .

ID:	3123
INPUT:	<unk> onena aukeratu du beretzat , zeren eta , buruzagiaren partea non , han biltzen <unk> nagusiak . Jaunaren nahia bete du , Jaunak Israelen <unk> erabakiak » .
PRED:	For when he chose his descendants , he chose his share from the name of the new covenant of the Lord , where the people of Israel had given him to the Lord and his people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	The people of Gad took the best land for themselves ; a leader 's share was assigned to them.When the leaders of the people were assembled , they carried out the Lord 's justiceand obeyed his regulations for Israel . ”

ID:	3124
INPUT:	« Abrahamen , Isaaken eta Jakoben Jainkoak , gure arbasoen Jainkoak , aintzaz bete du Jesus bere zerbitzaria , zuek agintarien eskuetara eman eta Pilatoren aurrean ukatu zenutena , honek askatzea erabaki zuen arren .
PRED:	“ Abraham , Isaac , the God of Abraham , has given us our ancestors , the God of Abraham , the God of Abraham , and he has given us the people of Israel as he had promised .
GOLD:	For it is the God of Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob — the God of all our ancestors — who has brought glory to his servant Jesus by doing this . This is the same Jesus whom you handed over and rejected before Pilate , despite Pilate 's decision to release him .

ID:	3125
INPUT:	Jaitsi zen , bada , berehala eta pozik hartu zuen etxean .
PRED:	So he got up and threw him into the house .
GOLD:	Zacchaeus quickly climbed down and took Jesus to his house in great excitement and joy .

ID:	3126
INPUT:	Gero , zazpi ogiak eta arrainak hartu eta , Jainkoari esker oneko otoitza egin ondoren , zatitu eta bere ikasleei eman zizkien , eta ikasleek jendeari .
PRED:	Then he took the bread and blessed the fish , and he blessed God and blessed them . Then he blessed them and gave them to the people and blessed them .
GOLD:	Then he took the seven loaves and the fish , thanked God for them , and broke them into pieces . He gave them to the disciples , who distributed the food to the crowd .

ID:	3127
INPUT:	Behin batean , Jaunaren aurrera aurkeztu ziren beraren zeruko zerbitzariak , eta han zen Satan ere .
PRED:	One day the Lord came to the people of the Temple of the Lord , the servants of heaven , Satan , and the servants of heaven .
GOLD:	One day the members of the heavenly court came again to present themselves before the Lord , and the Accuser , Satan , came with them .

ID:	3128
INPUT:	<unk> maltzur eta gaizto honen erdian garbi eta akats gabe , Jainkoaren seme-alaba errugabe , izan zaitezten ; <unk> honetan izarrek munduan bezala egiten duzue argi ,
PRED:	But when I see that the wicked will be clean , and those who are pure in the sky will be clean and blameless in this world , and you will live in this world .
GOLD:	so that no one can criticize you . Live clean , innocent lives as children of God , shining like bright lights in a world full of crooked and perverse people .

ID:	3129
INPUT:	Damaskorentzat
PRED:	A Message about Christ
GOLD:	A Message about Damascus

ID:	3130
INPUT:	Hogeita bat urte zituen Sedekiasek errege izaten hastean , eta hamaika urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen . Haren amak Hamutal zuen izena , eta Libnako Jeremiasen alaba zen .
PRED:	Zedekiah was twenty-two years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem three years . His mother was the daughter of Jeremiah from Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years . His mother was Hamutal , the daughter of Jeremiah from Libnah .

ID:	3131
INPUT:	Agian , atzera egineta damutuko da , eta ondasunez <unk> ostera . Orduan , <unk> <unk> ahal izango <unk> , zeuen Jainkoari .
PRED:	Who can bring him back to the sword ? Who will be able to kill you and fig tree and fig tree , and they will know that the Lord your God will be able to destroy you .
GOLD:	Who knows ? Perhaps he will give you a reprieve , sending you a blessing instead of this curse.Perhaps you will be able to offer grain and wineto the Lord your God as before .

ID:	3132
INPUT:	Zeruak baino <unk> da : zer egingo duzu ? Leizeak baino sakonagoa : nola ezagutuko duzu ?
PRED:	“ But what will you see ? ” the angel asked . “ You know how can you see ? ”
GOLD:	Such knowledge is higher than the heavens — and who are you ? It is deeper than the underworld — what do you know ?

ID:	3133
INPUT:	Horra beren <unk> duten zigorra , Jaun ahalguztidunaren <unk> baitute eta gutxietsi .
PRED:	That is why the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says , “ I will punish those who hear their evil deeds . ”
GOLD:	They will receive the wages of their pride , for they have scoffed at the people of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	3134
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> , zangoak koloka ditut , gorputza <unk> eta ihar .
PRED:	I am filled with power , and my body were filled with flesh .
GOLD:	My knees are weak from fasting , and I am skin and bones .

ID:	3135
INPUT:	Badakit , bai , handia dela Jauna , jainko guztien aldean handia gure Jauna .
PRED:	Yes , I know that the Lord has made us great , and all the mighty things we have done .
GOLD:	I know the greatness of the Lord — that our Lord is greater than any other god .

ID:	3136
INPUT:	Oraingo honetan ez zaituztet bidenabar bakarrik ikusi nahi . Badut itxaropen <unk> egongo naizela zuekin , Jaunak hala nahi badu .
PRED:	But I will not see if you do n't know that I am going to see that I am the Lord . If I want you to be with you , then I 'll know that I want you .
GOLD:	This time I do n't want to make just a short visit and then go right on . I want to come and stay awhile , if the Lord will let me .

ID:	3137
INPUT:	Noiz arte horrela ? Zer dute buruan profeta horiek , gezurra eta beren burutazio hutsalak iragartzeko ?
PRED:	How long will your prophets die ? ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	How long will this go on ? If they are prophets , they are prophets of deceit , inventing everything they say .

ID:	3138
INPUT:	Ez zaitez bizkorregi haserretu , <unk> baita haserretzea .
PRED:	Do n't be angry with you , for I am very angry with you .
GOLD:	Control your temper , for anger labels you a fool .

ID:	3139
INPUT:	Honela esaten zion Joanek bataiatzera zetorkion jendeari : « Sugekumeok ! Nork esan dizue gainean duzuen haserre-zigorrari ihes egingo diozuela ?
PRED:	John said to him , “ Who you come from the road to save you from the sea ? Who will flee to you ? ”
GOLD:	When the crowds came to John for baptism , he said , “ You brood of snakes ! Who warned you to flee the coming wrath ?

ID:	3140
INPUT:	Neskatxa Pauloren eta gure atzetik zetorren , deiadarka : « Gizon hauek goi-goiko Jainkoaren zerbitzariak dira , eta salbamen-bidea iragartzen dizuete » .
PRED:	The woman went out to the city of God and said , “ The man of God is coming from the city of God , and the servants of God will come upon us . ”
GOLD:	She followed Paul and the rest of us , shouting , “ These men are servants of the Most High God , and they have come to tell you how to be saved . ”

ID:	3141
INPUT:	Hala ere , zuei dagokizuenez , badut konfiantza Jaunak iritzi bereko egingo zaituztela gai honetan ; baina zuek nahasten <unk> , edozein dela ere , izango du bere zigorra .
PRED:	But if I have given you great things , I will punish you in this world , and you will know that the Lord will punish you .
GOLD:	I am trusting the Lord to keep you from believing false teachings . God will judge that person , whoever he is , who has been confusing you .

ID:	3142
INPUT:	Joiakimen erregealdian <unk> bat egin zuen Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosorrek , eta Joiakim hiru urtez haren menpeko izan zen ; gero , hau berriro jaiki zen haren kontra .
PRED:	At that time King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon became king of Babylon , and he became king of Babylon . He became king of Babylon , and he became the next king .
GOLD:	During Jehoiakim 's reign , King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon invaded the land of Judah . Jehoiakim surrendered and paid him tribute for three years but then rebelled .

ID:	3143
INPUT:	Hori dela eta , zuhurrak nahiago du <unk> honetan .
PRED:	A wise person is so wise , and the wise will be destroyed .
GOLD:	So those who are smart keep their mouths shut , for it is an evil time .

ID:	3144
INPUT:	Oraindik hiritik urrutira gabe zeudela , Josek etxeko arduradunari esan zion : « Zoaz gizon horien atzetik eta , <unk> , esaiezu : Zergatik itzuli duzue gaizkia ongiaren truke ?
PRED:	When Joseph arrived at the town of Jerusalem , Joseph told him , “ Go and tell them , ‘ Go to your household and give you a man to your household . '
GOLD:	But when they had gone only a short distance and were barely out of the city , Joseph said to his palace manager , “ Chase after them and stop them . When you catch up with them , ask them , ‘ Why have you repaid my kindness with such evil ?

ID:	3145
INPUT:	« Bidali erbesteratu guztiei Nehlamgo Xemaiasi buruzko nire mezu hau : Nik bidalia izan gabe , nire izenean hitz egin eta gezurrezko konfiantza ematen <unk> gero ,
PRED:	“ Give this message to the king : ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am writing to all the people of Israel , and I have heard my message .
GOLD:	“ Send an open letter to all the exiles in Babylon . Tell them , ‘ This is what the Lord says concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite : Since he has prophesied to you when I did not send him and has tricked you into believing his lies ,

ID:	3146
INPUT:	Zortzigarren urtean berriro ereingo duzue ; baina bitartean , bederatzigarren urtean uzta bildu artean , uzta <unk> jan ahal izango duzue .
PRED:	On the eighth year you will harvest the same day , but you will harvest the harvest the harvest of the harvest . You will eat with a harvest , and you will eat it .
GOLD:	When you plant your fields in the eighth year , you will still be eating from the large crop of the sixth year . In fact , you will still be eating from that large crop when the new crop is harvested in the ninth year .

ID:	3147
INPUT:	Zer ikustera irten zineten bestela ? Soineko apainez jantzitako gizona ? Jantzi <unk> errege-jauregietan bizi ohi dira .
PRED:	What did you see ? Why are you looking for a man dressed in clothes ? They are dressed in burlap ?
GOLD:	Or were you expecting to see a man dressed in expensive clothes ? No , people with expensive clothes live in palaces .

ID:	3148
INPUT:	Bere zaldien <unk> guztiak zanpatuko dizkizu , bizilagunak ezpataz <unk> zutabe <unk> behera .
PRED:	He will destroy all the nations of the forest , and they will be able to kill those who were killed by the sword .
GOLD:	His horsemen will trample through every street in the city . They will butcher your people , and your strong pillars will topple .

ID:	3149
INPUT:	Bere etxea ongi gobernatzen eta seme-alabak <unk> eta <unk> hezten jakin behar du ;
PRED:	He will know how hard they are at least old , and they will know that they will know that they are very old .
GOLD:	He must manage his own family well , having children who respect and obey him .

ID:	3150
INPUT:	Eta erantsi zuen : — Gizakiaren barrutik irteten denak , horrek bai egiten duela gizakia zikin !
PRED:	But the Lord said , “ This is what you have done . ”
GOLD:	And then he added , “ It is what comes from inside that defiles you .

ID:	3151
INPUT:	Akazia-zurezko mahaia egin zuen : metro bat luze , metro erdi bat zabal eta hirurogeita hamabost zentimetro gora .
PRED:	He made the table of acacia wood , and 45 inches long .
GOLD:	Then Bezalel made the table of acacia wood , 36 inches long , 18 inches wide , and 27 inches high .

ID:	3152
INPUT:	Zeure oinak galbidean jartzen bazaitu , moztu ; hobe duzu hankamotz betiko bizitzan sartu , bi oinekin infernura jaurtia izan baino . (
PRED:	If you sin against your feet , you will be cut off and put on your feet , and you will be better than your bodies .
GOLD:	If your foot causes you to sin , cut it off . It 's better to enter eternal life with only one foot than to be thrown into hell with two feet .

ID:	3153
INPUT:	Hori ikusi zuen gizon batek adierazi zion Joabi : — Absalom arteondo batetik zintzilik ikusi dut .
PRED:	Then one of the men came to Joab and said to Joab , “ I saw Absalom coming toward Joab . ”
GOLD:	One of David 's men saw what had happened and told Joab , “ I saw Absalom dangling from a great tree . ”

ID:	3154
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> <unk> ( 35 , 1 — 40 , 38 )
PRED:	When the Ark of the Covenant , the Ark of the Covenant ,
GOLD:	Instructions for the Sabbath

ID:	3155
INPUT:	ez du inor zapaltzen eta bahituran hartua itzuli egiten du ; ez du lapurretarik egiten , baizik eta jatekoa ematen dio gosetuari , eta jantzia biluzik dagoenari ;
PRED:	He does not let anyone go back to the poor , but he does n't let them go into the hungry . He is good and hungry , and the hungry are hungry .
GOLD:	He is a merciful creditor , not keeping the items given as security by poor debtors . He does not rob the poor but instead gives food to the hungry and provides clothes for the needy .

ID:	3156
INPUT:	<unk> bi zekor . Aukera bezate horiek bat , zatikatu eta ezar bezate <unk> gainean , baina surik eman gabe . Nik ere horixe bera eginen dut beste zekorrarekin : <unk> gainean ezarri , baina surik eman gabe .
PRED:	“ Let one of these men go and serve one of them . Let them strike some of them and kill them , ” they said , “ I have given them one of them , but I have given them everything that had done . ”
GOLD:	Now bring two bulls . The prophets of Baal may choose whichever one they wish and cut it into pieces and lay it on the wood of their altar , but without setting fire to it . I will prepare the other bull and lay it on the wood on the altar , but not set fire to it .

ID:	3157
INPUT:	Hitz hauek esan ondoren , Jerusalemera bidean gora jarraitu zuen Jesusek , denen aurretik .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to Jerusalem , “ Let them go ahead ahead ahead of them . ”
GOLD:	After telling this story , Jesus went on toward Jerusalem , walking ahead of his disciples .

ID:	3158
INPUT:	Handia da zuengan dudan konfiantza eta harro nago zuengatik . <unk> betea nago eta pozez gainezka neure atsekabe guztien artean .
PRED:	For I trust in you , and I am glad because I have filled with all who love you . I am filled with joy , and I am filled with joy .
GOLD:	I have the highest confidence in you , and I take great pride in you . You have greatly encouraged me and made me happy despite all our troubles .

ID:	3159
INPUT:	Aholkatu behin eta berriz gauza hauek , akats gabeak izan daitezen .
PRED:	In all these things , everyone must be given to all these things .
GOLD:	Give these instructions to the church so that no one will be open to criticism .

ID:	3160
INPUT:	<unk> gauean , nire jabea den eta nik zerbitzatzen dudan Jainkoaren aingerua agertu zait ,
PRED:	At that time I am sick , and the angel of God , and I have seen my angel of God .
GOLD:	For last night an angel of the God to whom I belong and whom I serve stood beside me ,

ID:	3161
INPUT:	Israeldarrek , indartsuago egin zirenean , esklabo-lanetara behartu zituzten kanaandarrak , baina ezin izan zituzten handik egotzi .
PRED:	When the people of Israel had done , the people of Israel could not leave them .
GOLD:	Later , however , when the Israelites became strong enough , they forced the Canaanites to work as slaves . But they did not drive them out of the land .

ID:	3162
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak setatsu bihurtu zuen faraoia , israeldarrei joaten ez uzteko .
PRED:	But the Lord struck Pharaoh 's heart , and he would not let them go into the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	But the Lord hardened Pharaoh 's heart again , so he refused to let the people go .

ID:	3163
INPUT:	Israeldarrek , berriz , esan zioten Jaunari : « Bekatu egin dugu , bai . Egizu gurekin egokien iruditzen zaizuna . Baina gaur bederen salba gaitzazu ! »
PRED:	But the people of Israel said to the Lord , “ We have sinned for us , and we do n't know how we do for us . ”
GOLD:	But the Israelites pleaded with the Lord and said , “ We have sinned . Punish us as you see fit , only rescue us today from our enemies . ”

ID:	3164
INPUT:	Jakin behar duzue , senideok , bizi dudan egoera berri onaren <unk> lagungarri gertatu dela .
PRED:	Now , dear brothers and sisters , dear brothers and sisters , that you have heard the Good News about me .
GOLD:	And I want you to know , my dear brothers and sisters , that everything that has happened to me here has helped to spread the Good News .

ID:	3165
INPUT:	« Zergatik eman argia <unk> , zergatik bizia atsekabea baizik ez dutenei ?
PRED:	“ Why do you know that my life has given me life ?
GOLD:	“ Oh , why give light to those in misery , and life to those who are bitter ?

ID:	3166
INPUT:	Jende guztiak Jesus ukitu nahi zuen , denak sendatzen zituen halako indar bat <unk> .
PRED:	The crowd touched Jesus , and he touched one who touched him , and they were healed .
GOLD:	Everyone tried to touch him , because healing power went out from him , and he healed everyone .

ID:	3167
INPUT:	Jainkoa dut lekuko ez diodala gezurrik idazten dizuedan honetan .
PRED:	I am not a witness to you , and I am not a witness to you .
GOLD:	I declare before God that what I am writing to you is not a lie .

ID:	3168
INPUT:	Egiptotik , burdina urtzeko labe hartatik , atera nituenean , zuen gurasoekin egin nuen ituna bera da . Orduan agindu nien : “ Nire mintzoa aditu eta nik agindutako guztia betetzen baduzue , nire herri izango zarete eta ni zuen Jainko ,
PRED:	I brought them to the mountains of Egypt , and I brought them out of their ancestors . Then I told you , ‘ You must obey my commands , and I have given them all my people . '
GOLD:	For I said to your ancestors when I brought them out of the iron-smelting furnace of Egypt , “ If you obey me and do whatever I command you , then you will be my people , and I will be your God . ”

ID:	3169
INPUT:	Hain zuzen , hauxe eskatu genizun Egipton geundela : « Utzi egiptoarrentzat lanean jarraitzen . Hobe dugu hemen esklabo izan , basamortuan hil baino » .
PRED:	For I will give you glory to the land of Egypt , so that we can live in the wilderness . ”
GOLD:	Did n't we tell you this would happen while we were still in Egypt ? We said , ‘ Leave us alone ! Let us be slaves to the Egyptians . It 's better to be a slave in Egypt than a corpse in the wilderness ! ' ”

ID:	3170
INPUT:	Salba nazazu , ene Jainko , zarena zarelako ! Defenda nazazu zeure ahalmenaz !
PRED:	Do n't let me save me , for I am your God .
GOLD:	For strangers are attacking me ; violent people are trying to kill me.They care nothing for God.Interlude

ID:	3171
INPUT:	Egiptoarrak gizaki dira , ez jainko , haien zaldiak hezur eta <unk> huts , ez espiritu . <unk> du Jaunak eskua , eta babeslea nahiz <unk> eroriko dira , biak batera galduko .
PRED:	For the Egyptians will not punish their gods , and they will kill their flesh and flesh , and they will know that the Lord , and they will be able to kill them , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	For these Egyptians are mere humans , not God ! Their horses are puny flesh , not mighty spirits ! When the Lord raises his fist against them , those who help will stumble , and those being helped will fall.They will all fall down and die together .

ID:	3172
INPUT:	Izan ere , ongi <unk> <unk> bidez egiten zien aurre juduei denen aurrean , Liburu Santuen bidez Jesus zela Mesias <unk> .
PRED:	For when they saw that the Jews had been able to be able to be able to kill him , the Gentiles , who had been called by the Messiah to be saved by the Messiah .
GOLD:	He refuted the Jews with powerful arguments in public debate . Using the Scriptures , he explained to them that Jesus was the Messiah .

ID:	3173
INPUT:	<unk> ( 28 , <unk> )
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Zalmunna
GOLD:	Job Speaks of Wisdom and Understanding

ID:	3174
INPUT:	Jesus Kafarnaum herrian sartu zenean , erromatar ehuntari bat hurbildu zitzaion
PRED:	When Jesus arrived at the village of Galilee , he went into a Roman town .
GOLD:	When Jesus returned to Capernaum , a Roman officer came and pleaded with him ,

ID:	3175
INPUT:	Beldurra sartu nahi ziguten , adorea galdu eta lana utziko genuen ustetan . « Eta orain , Jauna , sendotu nire asmoa ! »
PRED:	We will take our own strength and comfort us , for we have given them his own own own own desires . ”
GOLD:	They were just trying to intimidate us , imagining that they could discourage us and stop the work . So I continued the work with even greater determination .

ID:	3176
INPUT:	Horrela , etsaiek atzerriratuko dituzten lurralde horretan , beren bihotz osoz eta gogo guztiz zuregana itzuli eta beren gurasoei eman zenien lurralderantz begira , zuk hautatu duzun hirirantz eta nik eraiki dizudan tenplurantz begira , otoitz egiten badizute ,
PRED:	In this way , the enemies of the Lord your God has given you to your ancestors , and you have given them your ancestors to your ancestors , to your ancestors , and you have built this Temple to pray to your ancestors .
GOLD:	If they turn to you with their whole heart and soul in the land of their captivity and pray toward the land you gave to their ancestors — toward this city you have chosen , and toward this Temple I have built to honor your name —

ID:	3177
INPUT:	Eta <unk> jabetu ahal izango <unk> <unk> nireak izan <unk> <unk> denaz . Hala diot nik , hori guztia egingo <unk> honek » .
PRED:	And when I know that I will be sure that I will be sure that I will certainly be sure that I will be very very very sure that I will know that I am going to be sure that I will know that I am . ”
GOLD:	And Israel will possess what is left of Edomand all the nations I have called to be mine . ” The Lord has spoken , and he will do these things .

ID:	3178
INPUT:	Judara iritsiko da , <unk> hartuko du , dena leporaino estaliko . Haren <unk> <unk> dute zure lurraldea , oi Emmanuel ! »
PRED:	And when they will be able to destroy the land of Egypt , they will see that they will cover your own land , and they will know that your land will be filled with joy . ”
GOLD:	and sweep into Judah until it is chin deep . It will spread its wings , submerging your land from one end to the other , O Immanuel .

ID:	3179
INPUT:	SARRERA ( 1 , <unk> )
PRED:	Paul 's Son Is that God 's grace and how to be baptized .
GOLD:	God 's Good News

ID:	3180
INPUT:	Orduan , adarrak ekartzera joan eta etxolak egin zituen herriak : batak bere etxe gainean , besteak Jainkoaren etxeko atarietan nahiz <unk> plazan nahiz Efraimen ateko plazan .
PRED:	Then he brought the ram 's horn and all the men of the household and women and women to serve each other in the temple of the Temple of God and the people of Israel and the Temple of God .
GOLD:	So the people went out and cut branches and used them to build shelters on the roofs of their houses , in their courtyards , in the courtyards of God 's Temple , or in the squares just inside the Water Gate and the Ephraim Gate .

ID:	3181
INPUT:	<unk> zain , eta zoritxarra etorri zait ; argia itxaroten , eta iluntasuna iritsi .
PRED:	As soon as I have come , and then I came to darkness and darkness .
GOLD:	So I looked for good , but evil came instead.I waited for the light , but darkness fell .

ID:	3182
INPUT:	bide <unk> sendo ezarri ditut oinak ; zure <unk> ez dira aldendu nire urratsak .
PRED:	I am surrounded by your feet , and they have thrown into the grave .
GOLD:	My steps have stayed on your path ; I have not wavered from following you .

ID:	3183
INPUT:	Zergatik mintzo den Jesus parabola bidez
PRED:	Parable of the Lamp
GOLD:	Parable of the Yeast

ID:	3184
INPUT:	Horregatik , honela dio Jaunak : « Hara , zorigaitza <unk> <unk> horren kontra ; ezin izango dute handik lepoa atera , ezta burua tente ibili ere , <unk> izango baitira » .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says : “ Look , I will punish you , and when they saw that they will kill him and kill him , and they will be able to kill him . ”
GOLD:	But this is what the Lord says : “ I will reward your evil with evil ; you wo n't be able to pull your neck out of the noose.You will no longer walk around proudly , for it will be a terrible time . ”

ID:	3185
INPUT:	Egun <unk> dizkizue <unk> , zeure herriari eta familiari , Israelgo erreinua <unk> zenez <unk> ez diren bezalako egunak ; hots , Asiriako <unk> dizue .
PRED:	In that day you will see your power and your people of Israel and your power , and your kingdom will be able to kill you . But when you were in the Kingdom of Assyria , you will know that you are in the land of Assyria .
GOLD:	“ Then the Lord will bring things on you , your nation , and your family unlike anything since Israel broke away from Judah . He will bring the king of Assyria upon you ! ”

ID:	3186
INPUT:	Orduan , Saulek mandatariak igorri zizkion Jeseri , esatera : « Bidal iezadazu artzain dabilen zeure seme David » .
PRED:	Then Saul sent messengers to Saul and asked him , “ Please give me a shepherd . ”
GOLD:	So Saul sent messengers to Jesse to say , “ Send me your son David , the shepherd . ”

ID:	3187
INPUT:	Mexulam , Abias , Miiamin ,
PRED:	Abijah , Abijah , Ginnethon ,
GOLD:	Maaziah , Bilgai , and Shemaiah . These were the priests .

ID:	3188
INPUT:	Bai , libratu dit bizia heriotzatik , begiak <unk> , oinak erortzetik .
PRED:	For I have rescued me from the power of life , who could see me from the dead .
GOLD:	He has saved me from death , my eyes from tears , my feet from stumbling .

ID:	3189
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Oraindik pixka batean argia zeuen artean duzue ; ibili argia duzuen bitartean , ilunpeak harrapa ez zaitzaten , ilunpetan dabilenak ez baitaki nora doan .
PRED:	Jesus replied to them , “ As soon as you ca n't see your light , you will see your light so that you ca n't see the light of darkness .
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ My light will shine for you just a little longer . Walk in the light while you can , so the darkness will not overtake you . Those who walk in the darkness can not see where they are going .

ID:	3190
INPUT:	Etsaiak begira ditut , niri zelatan daudenek elkar hartu dute .
PRED:	I watch over my enemies , and they try to kill me .
GOLD:	For my enemies are whispering against me.They are plotting together to kill me .

ID:	3191
INPUT:	Gogoan ditut , Jauna , zure egintza handiak , gogoan , bai , zure aspaldiko mirariak .
PRED:	I have done these things , O Lord , for I have performed your miraculous signs and wonders .
GOLD:	They are constantly in my thoughts.I can not stop thinking about your mighty works .

ID:	3192
INPUT:	Eta geldi <unk> zilar eta <unk> , zeuk eta zure ahaideek <unk> <unk> egingo duzu , zeuen Jainkoaren borondatearen arabera .
PRED:	And when they see that kind of silver and gold and gold , you will know that you are under your power , and you will know that you are under God .
GOLD:	Any silver and gold that is left over may be used in whatever way you and your colleagues feel is the will of your God .

ID:	3193
INPUT:	Lurraldearen banaketa zozketaz bakarrik egingo da , leinu bakoitzeko senitarteen ondare-zatia <unk> araberakoa izango bada ere .
PRED:	These are the tribes of Asher will be given to the tribes of Asher , which will be given to each other .
GOLD:	But you must assign the land by lot , and give land to each ancestral tribe according to the number of names on the list .

ID:	3194
INPUT:	<unk> dabiltza gaizkileak ; onginahia eta leialtasuna <unk> .
PRED:	They are very glad , and I will speak with great power .
GOLD:	If you plan to do evil , you will be lost ; if you plan to do good , you will receive unfailing love and faithfulness .

ID:	3195
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> ;
PRED:	They were buried with flesh and fig tree .
GOLD:	The family of Zattu945

ID:	3196
INPUT:	Efraimekin batera Manases eta Benjaminen leinuak etxolatuko dira . <unk> buruzagia Pedahtzurren seme Gameliel izango da ,
PRED:	The family of Issachar will be leader of the tribe of Benjamin , son of Zeruiah will be leader of the tribe of Benjamin .
GOLD:	ManassehGamaliel son of Pedahzur32,200

ID:	3197
INPUT:	Jauna Sinai mendiaren gailurrera jaitsi eta bertara dei egin zion Moisesi . Igo zen Moises ,
PRED:	Then the Lord came up from Mount Sinai and went up to Moses .
GOLD:	The Lord came down on the top of Mount Sinai and called Moses to the top of the mountain . So Moses climbed the mountain .

ID:	3198
INPUT:	Hona hemen Jaunak Amotzen seme Isaiasi Juda eta Jerusalemi buruz agertu zion mezua , Uzias , Jotam , Akaz eta Ezekias Judako errege zirela .
PRED:	This is what the Lord said to Isaiah son of Hezekiah and Jerusalem , King Hezekiah of Judah . He was revealed to King Hezekiah of Judah and Judah .
GOLD:	These are the visions that Isaiah son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem . He saw these visions during the years when Uzziah , Jotham , Ahaz , and Hezekiah were kings of Judah .

ID:	3199
INPUT:	Pilatok esan zion : — Ez al duzu ezer erantzun behar ? Begira zenbat <unk> salatzen zaituzten .
PRED:	Then Pilate asked him , “ Do n't you know how can you know how to do ? ”
GOLD:	and Pilate asked him , “ Are n't you going to answer them ? What about all these charges they are bringing against you ? ”

ID:	3200
INPUT:	Haiek , Jesus ahuspez gurtu ondoren , Jerusalemera itzuli ziren poz-pozik .
PRED:	When they worshiped Jesus , they returned to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	So they worshiped him and then returned to Jerusalem filled with great joy .

ID:	3201
INPUT:	eta honela mintzatu zitzaien : « Zergatik ari zarete jendeak adierazi dizkidan gauza izugarri horiek egiten ?
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Why are you doing these things ? ”
GOLD:	Eli said to them , “ I have been hearing reports from all the people about the wicked things you are doing . Why do you keep sinning ?

ID:	3202
INPUT:	« Ez gaitzetsi inor »
PRED:	“ Not one of the Priests
GOLD:	Do Not Judge Others

ID:	3203
INPUT:	Agripak <unk> esan zion : — Gizon hau aska zitekeen , enperadoreagana jo izan ez balu .
PRED:	At that time the captain of the Roman governor asked , “ Did n't he demand that he would not send you to ask . ”
GOLD:	And Agrippa said to Festus , “ He could have been set free if he had n't appealed to Caesar . ”

ID:	3204
INPUT:	Mikak erantzun : — Neuk egindako jainko-irudiak eta apaiza <unk> zoazte ; ezer gabe utzi nauzue , eta zer dudan galdetu , gainera ?
PRED:	Micah replied , “ You are my male and female men , my lord , and I have given you what you have done ? ”
GOLD:	“ What do you mean , ‘ What 's the matter ? ' ” Micah replied . “ You 've taken away all the gods I have made , and my priest , and I have nothing left ! ”

ID:	3205
INPUT:	Jehu jaiki eta etxean sartu zen . Orduan , profetak olioa isuri zion buru gainera , esanez : « Hau dio Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak : “ Ene herri Israelen errege gantzutzen zaitut ” .
PRED:	Then Jehu took him into the house and took him into the house of the Lord . He said , “ This is what the Lord says : I am the God of Israel , the God of Israel . ”
GOLD:	So Jehu left the others and went into the house . Then the young prophet poured the oil over Jehu 's head and said , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : I anoint you king over the Lord 's people , Israel .

ID:	3206
INPUT:	Datorrela , bai , <unk> bezala , datorrela justizia , beti darion erreka bezala .
PRED:	But when they see the wicked , they know that the Lord is just like the wild animals .
GOLD:	Instead , I want to see a mighty flood of justice , an endless river of righteous living .

ID:	3207
INPUT:	Bere seme Isaak eta Ismaelek ehortzi zuten Makpelako harpean , Tzohar hititaren seme Efronen soroan , Mambreren aurrez aurre .
PRED:	When Isaac was buried in Canaan , he was buried in the hill country of Canaan , he became the Hittite .
GOLD:	His sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah , near Mamre , in the field of Ephron son of Zohar the Hittite .

ID:	3208
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Nik testigantza neure buruaren alde egiten badut ere , nire testigantzak balio du , ongi baitakit nik nondik etorria naizen eta nora noan ; baina zuek ez dakizue , ez nondik <unk> , ez nora noan .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I am the one who does n't know me , but I have come to you , but I have come to you , but you can know where I am going to know you . ”
GOLD:	Jesus told them , “ These claims are valid even though I make them about myself . For I know where I came from and where I am going , but you do n't know this about me .

ID:	3209
INPUT:	Herri berria sortuko
PRED:	Jesus Blesses the Twelve Apostles
GOLD:	The Scattering of the Sheep

ID:	3210
INPUT:	Gau hartan bertan , Jaunaren aingeruak ehun eta laurogeita bost mila gizon jo eta hil zituen asiriarren kanpalekuan ; denak hilda aurkitu zituzten biharamun goizean , jaiki zirenean .
PRED:	That night the angel of the Lord came to the Lord and killed five men in the camp . The next morning they found the next morning . When they found the next morning , they found the next morning .
GOLD:	That night the angel of the Lord went out to the Assyrian camp and killed 185,000 Assyrian soldiers . When the surviving Assyrians woke up the next morning , they found corpses everywhere .

ID:	3211
INPUT:	Herrian <unk> dituztela , gogorki <unk> zuzenbidea desegiten <unk> baduzu , ez harritu horregatik . <unk> , beste <unk> <unk> babesle , eta biok , <unk> daudenak dituzte babesle .
PRED:	But when you see that when they were afraid , when you are afraid of what will be able to kill me , and if you were afraid , I will know that I am very very very angry with you .
GOLD:	Talk is cheap , like daydreams and other useless activities . Fear God instead .

ID:	3212
INPUT:	« <unk> amaitzen da gaiztoen <unk> han aurkitzen atseden <unk> ;
PRED:	“ That is why the tree of the wicked will be broken , and they will know that they were buried .
GOLD:	For in death the wicked cause no trouble , and the weary are at rest .

ID:	3213
INPUT:	Zoazte , bada , Xiloko nire santutegira , antzina nire egoitza izateko aukeratu nuen tokira ; ikusi zer egin nion , neure herri Israelen gaiztakeriagatik .
PRED:	Now go to the sanctuary of my people , for I have chosen my people to bring them back to the sanctuary of my people .
GOLD:	“ ‘ Go now to the place at Shiloh where I once put the Tabernacle that bore my name . See what I did there because of all the wickedness of my people , the Israelites .

ID:	3214
INPUT:	Apostoluek , itzultzean , egin zuten guztia kontatu zioten Jesusi . Orduan , haiek berekin hartu eta Betsaida zeritzan herrialdera joan zen bakarrik .
PRED:	The apostles told them everything he had done , and they had told them everything he had done . Then the people went to the land of Egypt , and they left them .
GOLD:	When the apostles returned , they told Jesus everything they had done . Then he slipped quietly away with them toward the town of Bethsaida .

ID:	3215
INPUT:	« Jakin beza ongi , beraz , Israel herri osoak Jaun eta Mesias egin duela Jainkoak , zuek gurutziltzatu zenuten Jesus hau » .
PRED:	“ Therefore , listen to what the Lord has done , the Messiah , the Messiah , the Messiah of Israel , and the Messiah was crucified . ”
GOLD:	“ So let everyone in Israel know for certain that God has made this Jesus , whom you crucified , to be both Lord and Messiah ! ”

ID:	3216
INPUT:	Honela esan baitigu Jaunak : « Nazioen argitzat ezarri zaitut , salbamena lurraren bazterreraino eraman dezazun » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will keep you safe from all the nations in the heavens . ”
GOLD:	For the Lord gave us this command when he said , ‘ I have made you a light to the Gentiles , to bring salvation to the farthest corners of the earth . ' ”

ID:	3217
INPUT:	hautsak <unk> bihurtueta zokorrak elkar batu daitezen ?
PRED:	How can I be able to be a fool ?
GOLD:	when the parched ground is dryand the soil has hardened into clods ?

ID:	3218
INPUT:	Orduan , Zorobabel eta <unk> hurbildurik , esan zieten : — Zuekin lan egin nahi genuke ; geuk ere zuen Jainkoa gurtzen baitugu eta berari eskaintzen dizkiogu opariak , Asiriako errege <unk> hona ekarri <unk> geroztik .
PRED:	Then Zerubbabel and prophets came to them and said , “ We want you to know that we are living with God , and we want you to know that we have been with God , and we will know that we have been with him . ”
GOLD:	So they approached Zerubbabel and the other leaders and said , “ Let us build with you , for we worship your God just as you do . We have sacrificed to him ever since King Esarhaddon of Assyria brought us here . ”

ID:	3219
INPUT:	Hau al da mundua basamortueta hiriak errauts bihurtzen zituena ? Hau gatibuak <unk> ez zituena ? ”
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you from the earth ? Can you turn away from the world ? What sorrow awaits you from the world ? '
GOLD:	Is this the one who destroyed the worldand made it into a wasteland ? Is this the king who demolished the world 's greatest citiesand had no mercy on his prisoners ? '

ID:	3220
INPUT:	zabaldu haren ospea <unk> , haren mirariak herri guztietan !
PRED:	They know how they have seen his power , and they have seen his power .
GOLD:	Publish his glorious deeds among the nations.Tell everyone about the amazing things he does .

ID:	3221
INPUT:	<unk> handia zebilen mendi inguru hartan , uxarrean .
PRED:	At that time the great city was thrown into the hills .
GOLD:	There happened to be a large herd of pigs feeding on the hillside nearby .

ID:	3222
INPUT:	Aarondar apaizok , izan konfiantza Jaunarengan : bera duzue laguntzaile eta babesle !
PRED:	You are the Temple of the Lord , and you are your shield .
GOLD:	O priests , descendants of Aaron , trust the Lord ! He is your helper and your shield .

ID:	3223
INPUT:	Jauna , Jainko ahalguztiduna , Israelen Jainkoa , susper zaitez <unk> zigortzeko , ez izan traidore zital horien gupidarik .
PRED:	O Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , have no mercy on their behalf .
GOLD:	They come out at night , snarling like vicious dogsas they prowl the streets .

ID:	3224
INPUT:	Jesusek negarrari eman zion .
PRED:	Jesus continued to weep .
GOLD:	Then Jesus wept .

ID:	3225
INPUT:	<unk> egin zen Samuel « izenda iezaguzu errege bat , gida gaitzan » esan ziotenean . Eta otoitz egin zion Jaunari .
PRED:	Then Samuel called out to the king , “ Let us be a king ! ” And when he prayed , he prayed to the Lord .
GOLD:	Samuel was displeased with their request and went to the Lord for guidance .

ID:	3226
INPUT:	<unk> eta <unk> gudarostea ere izugarria zen , beren guda-gurdi eta zalditeria handiarekin , eta Jaunak , bera hartu <unk> lagun , eskuetara eman <unk> .
PRED:	At that time the army of Samaria and chariots , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , and chariots , and chariots .
GOLD:	Do n't you remember what happened to the Ethiopians and Libyans and their vast army , with all of their chariots and charioteers ? At that time you relied on the Lord , and he handed them over to you .

ID:	3227
INPUT:	Saul eta zure anaiak eta israeldar guztiak Terebinto haranean daude filistearren aurka borrokan .
PRED:	Saul 's brothers and sisters , all Israel against the valley of Jezreel .
GOLD:	David 's brothers were with Saul and the Israelite army at the valley of Elah , fighting against the Philistines .

ID:	3228
INPUT:	Izan ere , bazituen erregeak , Huram erregearen <unk> batera , <unk> joan ohi ziren <unk> ; hiru urtez behin , ur handietako <unk> haiek urrez , zilarrez , marfilez , tximinoz eta indioilarrez beteak itzuli ohi ziren .
PRED:	In fact , King Nebuchadnezzar of Aram had been very angry with his officials , and when he had been killed with great quantities of gold , he was with gold . They were also made with gold , silver , silver , silver , and silver , and gold .
GOLD:	The king had a fleet of trading ships of Tarshish manned by the sailors sent by Hiram . Once every three years the ships returned , loaded with gold , silver , ivory , apes , and peacocks .

ID:	3229
INPUT:	Horregatik diotsuet : <unk> eskatzen duzuen edozer gauza , sinetsi lortu duzuela , eta emango dizue Jainkoak .
PRED:	I tell you that you should be sure that God will give you everything you do .
GOLD:	I tell you , you can pray for anything , and if you believe that you 've received it , it will be yours .

ID:	3230
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , proposatu alegia edo parabola bat Israel herriari ,
PRED:	“ Son of man , who destroys the people of Israel ,
GOLD:	“ Son of man , give this riddle , and tell this story to the people of Israel .

ID:	3231
INPUT:	Izan ere , <unk> sendaturiko gizonak bazituen berrogeitik gora urte .
PRED:	For the man who has been able to be very small .
GOLD:	for this miraculous sign — the healing of a man who had been lame for more than forty years .

ID:	3232
INPUT:	Brontzezko hamar ur-ontzi ere egin zituen , orga <unk> bana ; bina metroko diametroa zuten , eta mila eta <unk> litro ur hartzen .
PRED:	He made ten water carts carts , and each piece of barley were 71/2 feet tall . One of barley was 71/2 feet tall , and each of you were placed on each side .
GOLD:	Huram also made ten smaller bronze basins , one for each cart . Each basin was six feet across and could hold 220 gallons of water .

ID:	3233
INPUT:	Orduan , Temango Elifazek esan zuen .
PRED:	Then Eliphaz the Temanite replied ,
GOLD:	Then Eliphaz the Temanite replied to Job :

ID:	3234
INPUT:	Etengabe egin behar zutela otoitz eta ez zutela etsi behar adierazteko , parabola hau esan zien Jesusek :
PRED:	One day when Jesus saw that he had not given them a good reputation , he told them ,
GOLD:	One day Jesus told his disciples a story to show that they should always pray and never give up .

ID:	3235
INPUT:	Gero , Eliasek esan zion Akabi : — Zoaz jatera eta edatera , <unk> handi baten hotsa sumatzen da eta .
PRED:	Then Elijah said to Elijah , “ Go and eat some of the bread and drink , and eat the flesh of a great tree . ” So Elijah said , “ Go and the sound of a great army . ”
GOLD:	Then Elijah said to Ahab , “ Go get something to eat and drink , for I hear a mighty rainstorm coming ! ”

ID:	3236
INPUT:	Orduan , ozenki deiadar egiten entzun nuen Jauna : « Hurbildu hiriaren <unk> , bakoitza bere arma <unk> ! »
PRED:	Then I cried out to the Lord , “ Come and see that the Lord has heard that all the kingdoms of the city , and when they saw that they were terrified . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord thundered , “ Bring on the men appointed to punish the city ! Tell them to bring their weapons with them ! ”

ID:	3237
INPUT:	Edozein <unk> zuhaitz handiren <unk> zarete lizunkeriatan ; erreka ondoko <unk> dituzue umeak oparitzat .
PRED:	You have been filled with every green tree , and you will be filled with every green tree .
GOLD:	You worship your idols with great passionbeneath the oaks and under every green tree.You sacrifice your children down in the valleys , among the jagged rocks in the cliffs .

ID:	3238
INPUT:	Emagaldua ogi-zati batez asetzen baita , baina adulteriogileak bizitza osoa harrapatzen du .
PRED:	A wise person gives a fool to a fool .
GOLD:	For a prostitute will bring you to poverty , but sleeping with another man 's wife will cost you your life .

ID:	3239
INPUT:	iparraldeko herriei eta Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosor nire zerbitzariari deituko diet herrialde honen aurka , eta hemengo bizilagunen eta inguruko herrien aurka bidaliko . Erabat suntsituko ditut eta betiko eremu eta hondakin bihurtuko , jendearen iseka-gai .
PRED:	I will send you to the kings of the north and the descendants of Babylon . I will punish you in the land of the north and the people of Babylon , and they will be destroyed by their wickedness .
GOLD:	I will gather together all the armies of the north under King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon , whom I have appointed as my deputy . I will bring them all against this land and its people and against the surrounding nations . I will completely destroy you and make you an object of horror and contempt and a ruin forever .

ID:	3240
INPUT:	Gogora ezazue Akan , Zerahen semea . Ez zuen leial jokatu , Jerikon dena suntsitzeko agindua hautsi zuelako , eta Israel herri osoak jasan behar izan zuen Jaunaren haserrea , erruduna bera bakarrik izan arren » .
PRED:	Now listen to me from the Lord 's command , for he had sinned against the people of Israel . But the people of Israel have sinned against the Lord 's anger , but the people of Israel had done . ”
GOLD:	Did n't divine anger fall on the entire community of Israel when Achan , a member of the clan of Zerah , sinned by stealing the things set apart for the Lord ? He was not the only one who died because of his sin . ”

ID:	3241
INPUT:	Eta Jesu Kristorenak direnek gurutzean hilarazi dute bekatuzko beren giza izaera beronen <unk> eta grinekin .
PRED:	And they will be able to be baptized by the body of Christ Jesus Christ , and they will turn against you .
GOLD:	Those who belong to Christ Jesus have nailed the passions and desires of their sinful nature to his cross and crucified them there .

ID:	3242
INPUT:	Sar bedi etsaia <unk> hondatu , baina erabat deuseztatu ez ! <unk> bitza <unk> , ez baitira nireak !
PRED:	But if the people of Israel saw that they will destroy them , they will know that they will be able to kill me .
GOLD:	“ Go down the rows of the vineyards and destroy the grapevines , leaving a scattered few alive.Strip the branches from the vines , for these people do not belong to the Lord .

ID:	3243
INPUT:	Pedro , Jesusi urrutitik jarraituz , apaiz nagusiaren jauregiraino joan eta , barrura sarturik , morroiekin eseri zen , hura guztia zertan amaitzen zen ikusteko .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Peter 's high priest went into the distance and went into the distance . The high priest sat down and sat at the door .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Peter followed him at a distance and came to the high priest 's courtyard . He went in and sat with the guards and waited to see how it would all end .

ID:	3244
INPUT:	Gure aitaren senitartean denok merezi genuen heriotza zure eskutik , ene errege jauna . Baina zeure mahaian jarri ninduzun , zeure zerbitzari hau . Ba ote dut oraindik eskubiderik erregeari zerbait eskatzeko ? »
PRED:	We have been the one of our father , who sent me to save me from your father . But why are you looking for me , my lord the king 's servant ? ”
GOLD:	“ You 've said enough , ” David replied . “ I 've decided that you and Ziba will divide your land equally between you . ”

ID:	3245
INPUT:	Akaben senitartekoak hilarazi Jehuk
PRED:	Jehu Kills Joram and Ahab
GOLD:	Jehu Kills Ahab 's Family

ID:	3246
INPUT:	Orduan , honela egin nuen otoitz : « Zu , Jaun ahalguztiduna , epaile zuzena zara , gizakiaren <unk> dituena . Zure esku utzi dut neure auzia : ikusiko ahal dut zure <unk> bizkar ! »
PRED:	Then I prayed , “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : If you are righteous , you will know that I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and I will see you . ”
GOLD:	O Lord of Heaven 's Armies , you make righteous judgments , and you examine the deepest thoughts and secrets.Let me see your vengeance against them , for I have committed my cause to you .

ID:	3247
INPUT:	kendu egingo diet <unk> darion okela , <unk> idoloei eskainitako jakiak ; hala ere , geldituko dira batzuk <unk> <unk> izango ditut , Judako leinuak bezala ; <unk> jebustarrak bezalaizango dira .
PRED:	I will give you the meat that had been slaughtered by the animals that had been slaughtered by the animals that had been slaughtered by the sword , and they will be sure that they will be able to carry out the land of Judah .
GOLD:	I will grab the bloody meat from their mouthsand snatch the detestable sacrifices from their teeth.Then the surviving Philistines will worship our Godand become like a clan in Judah.The Philistines of Ekron will join my people , as the ancient Jebusites once did .

ID:	3248
INPUT:	eta mihi orok aitor <unk> Kristo dela Jauna , Jainko Aitaren aintzarako .
PRED:	For all who belong to God , and that we will be able to obey the Father of Christ .
GOLD:	and every tongue declare that Jesus Christ is Lord , to the glory of God the Father .

ID:	3249
INPUT:	Jainkoaren asmo <unk> berri izan ote duzu , jakinduriaren jabe bihurtuz ?
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you by the power of God ? Will you grow in wisdom ?
GOLD:	Were you listening at God 's secret council ? Do you have a monopoly on wisdom ?

ID:	3250
INPUT:	Behinola , beren jainko <unk> opari handi bat eskaintzeko eta jai alaia egiteko bildu ziren filistearren buruzagiak . Hau zioten : « Gure jainkoak eskura eman diguSamson gure etsaia ! »
PRED:	One day when the people of Israel saw that they had been slaughtered , they all the people of the Philistines were chosen by the Philistines . “ For we have given us a god of our god ! ” they exclaimed .
GOLD:	The Philistine rulers held a great festival , offering sacrifices and praising their god , Dagon . They said , “ Our god has given us victory over our enemy Samson ! ”

ID:	3251
INPUT:	zuek , haren zerbitzari Abrahamen <unk> , Jakoben ondorengook , haren <unk> !
PRED:	And when you are my servant , you who are descendants of Jacob and his servants , who were filled with him .
GOLD:	you children of his servant Abraham , you descendants of Jacob , his chosen ones .

ID:	3252
INPUT:	ea aurrerakoan fruiturik ematen duen ; eta bestela , moztu ” » .
PRED:	If you eat anything that is ceremonially clean , then if it is ceremonially unclean . ”
GOLD:	If we get figs next year , fine . If not , then you can cut it down . ' ”

ID:	3253
INPUT:	Horrela , bada , zergatik tentatzen duzue orain Jainkoa , gure gurasoek eta guk ere ezin eraman izan dugun uztarria ikasle horiei leporatzen saiatuz ?
PRED:	And why are you our ancestors now our ancestors ? You can not allow us to obey God by our ancestors ?
GOLD:	So why are you now challenging God by burdening the Gentile believers with a yoke that neither we nor our ancestors were able to bear ?

ID:	3254
INPUT:	Zeuen baitan diozue : « Noiz amaitu behar ote <unk> , laborea saltzeko ? Noiz larunbatak , garia <unk> ateratzeko ? <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ditugu , okerreko pisuak erabiliz .
PRED:	“ How long will you say , ‘ How long will you be ? What sorrow awaits you ? What sorrow awaits you ? What sorrow awaits those who are on your behalf ?
GOLD:	You ca n't wait for the Sabbath day to be overand the religious festivals to endso you can get back to cheating the helpless.You measure out grain with dishonest measuresand cheat the buyer with dishonest scales .

ID:	3255
INPUT:	Antzina , Davidek Edom lurraldea menderatu zuenean , haren gudalburu Joabek , israeldar hilei lur ematera joan zelarik , hil egin zituen Edomgo gizaseme guztiak .
PRED:	( In the land of Edom ) , Joab , the army of Edom , the army of Edom , the army of Edom , the army of Edom , and Joab killed all the people of Edom .
GOLD:	Years before , David had defeated Edom . Joab , his army commander , had stayed to bury some of the Israelite soldiers who had died in battle . While there , they killed every male in Edom .

ID:	3256
INPUT:	<unk> egingo dut ene herriaren eta zurearen artean . Bihar gertatuko da mirari hau » .
PRED:	And I will be sure that my people will be slaughtered by the power of my people . ”
GOLD:	“ This is the finger of God ! ” the magicians exclaimed to Pharaoh . But Pharaoh 's heart remained hard . He would n't listen to them , just as the Lord had predicted .

ID:	3257
INPUT:	Behin eta berriz sareak <unk> , herriak gupidagabe <unk> ote dute ?
PRED:	But how can they see that they were slaughtered by the power of the earth ?
GOLD:	Will you let them get away with this forever ? Will they succeed forever in their heartless conquests ?

ID:	3258
INPUT:	zuhaitza jotzen ari zen bati aizkora <unk> atera eta uretara jausi zitzaion . Garrasika hasi zen hura , esanez : — Ai ene jauna ! Bestek utzia nuen !
PRED:	That 's why the tree was going into the garden , and the ax came out to the tree of the field , and he said , “ Oh , my lord , my lord ! ”
GOLD:	But as one of them was cutting a tree , his ax head fell into the river . “ Oh , sir ! ” he cried . “ It was a borrowed ax ! ”

ID:	3259
INPUT:	Oi lur , ez estali nire odola , ez bedi <unk> izan nire garrasia !
PRED:	O Lord , you have covered my blood with my blood , and I have no power against the earth .
GOLD:	“ O earth , do not conceal my blood.Let it cry out on my behalf .

ID:	3260
INPUT:	« Ez gero utzi lebitarren artean desagertzen Kehaten senitarteak !
PRED:	“ Do not let the rest of the Kohathite clan .
GOLD:	“ Do not let the Kohathite clans be destroyed from among the Levites !

ID:	3261
INPUT:	Piztuerakoan , noren emazte izango da , zazpiek izan baitzuten emazte ? »
PRED:	So let her be married , and she will be his wife . ”
GOLD:	So tell us , whose wife will she be in the resurrection ? For all seven were married to her ! ”

ID:	3262
INPUT:	Zabulonen leinuko senitarteak : <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> eta <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	These were the clans of Zebulun , the clans of Zebulun , which was Samaria , and when they saw that they were terrified by the clans of the tribe of Gad .
GOLD:	These were the clans descended from the sons of Zebulun : The Seredite clan , named after their ancestor Sered.The Elonite clan , named after their ancestor Elon.The Jahleelite clan , named after their ancestor Jahleel .

ID:	3263
INPUT:	« Nola <unk> <unk> , hala geratuko <unk> hiri ederra : denbora gutxi <unk> egiteen uzta jasoko du . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak , Israelen Jainkoak » .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits those who have been very old , and when the old city will be very old , and when the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will be destroyed , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : “ Babylon is like wheat on a threshing floor , about to be trampled.In just a little whileher harvest will begin . ”

ID:	3264
INPUT:	Hiltzeko moduko harria jaurtiz norbait jo eta hiltzen duena , <unk> da : heriotzara emango dute .
PRED:	A stone flowed from a snake , and the stone will be stoned to death .
GOLD:	Or if someone with a stone in his hand strikes and kills another person , it is murder , and the murderer must be put to death .

ID:	3265
INPUT:	Orduan , israeldarrak itzuli ziren eta benjamindarrak izuturik gelditu , ikusi baitzuten nolako hondamena zetorkien .
PRED:	So the people of Israel returned to Jerusalem and heard that the people of Benjamin were afraid of Benjamin , and the people of Benjamin were afraid of Benjamin .
GOLD:	the men of Israel turned and attacked . At this point the men of Benjamin became terrified , because they realized disaster was close at hand .

ID:	3266
INPUT:	Zatoz Libanotik , ene emaztegaia , zatoz ! Jaitsi zaitez Libanotik , jaitsi <unk> gailurretik , Senir eta Hermon <unk> . Utzi lehoien eta <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	Come , let me go down to the mountains , and go down to the coast of Lebanon . Go down to the coast of Lebanon . Let 's see how great and great and how you are . ”
GOLD:	Come with me from Lebanon , my bride , come with me from Lebanon.Come down from Mount Amana , from the peaks of Senir and Hermon , where the lions have their densand leopards live among the hills .

ID:	3267
INPUT:	Zuen jabetza den lurraldea kutsatua dagoela eta Jaunaren kulturako <unk> dela iruditzen bazaizue , zatozte Jaunaren jabetza den herrialdera , han baitu Jaunak bere bizilekua , eta jar zaitezte gure artean bizitzen . Baina ez zaitezte Jaunaren kontra eta gure kontra jarri , Jaunaren , gure Jainkoaren , <unk> gainera beste bat zeuentzat eraikiz .
PRED:	If you are defiled by the land of the Lord your God , you will be cut off from the land of the Lord and your God , and you will live there among us .
GOLD:	“ If you need the altar because the land you possess is defiled , then join us in the Lord 's land , where the Tabernacle of the Lord is situated , and share our land with us . But do not rebel against the Lord or against us by building an altar other than the one true altar of the Lord our God .

ID:	3268
INPUT:	Orduan , amari eman zizkion zilarrezko mila eta ehun txanponak ; baina amak esan zion : — Jaunari eskainia nion zilar hau zure alde , ene seme , zurezko idoloa metalez jantzia egiteko .
PRED:	Then he gave the silver of silver and silver to the king of silver , but he said , “ I have given you a piece of silver , silver , silver , silver , silver , bronze , and iron . ”
GOLD:	He returned the money to her , and she said , “ I now dedicate these silver coins to the Lord . In honor of my son , I will have an image carved and an idol cast . ”

ID:	3269
INPUT:	Job
PRED:	Job 's Second Response to Job
GOLD:	Job 's Eighth Speech : A Response to Eliphaz

ID:	3270
INPUT:	Esan zidan jendeak : « Ez al diguzu azaldu behar zer esan nahi duen egiten ari <unk> ? »
PRED:	Then the people said to me , “ Do n't you want us to know that we have been baptized ? ”
GOLD:	Then the people asked , “ What does all this mean ? What are you trying to tell us ? ”

ID:	3271
INPUT:	Zuen gorpuak zeruko hegazti eta lurreko piztien janari izango dira , eta ez da inor ere izango haiek uxatzeko .
PRED:	And the birds of the sky will be the birds of the sky , and the birds of the earth will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Your corpses will be food for all the scavenging birds and wild animals , and no one will be there to chase them away .

ID:	3272
INPUT:	Baina esan <unk> , barrua tristuraz bete zaizue ;
PRED:	But when they have seen my heart , you have filled with integrity .
GOLD:	Instead , you grieve because of what I 've told you .

ID:	3273
INPUT:	Jesus munduko argia
PRED:	Jesus Heals in the People
GOLD:	A Woman Caught in Adultery

ID:	3274
INPUT:	Honek <unk> jotzen zituen , aspertu gabe jo ere ; nazioak suminez zapaltzen zituen , etengabe pertsegituz .
PRED:	But when they saw that they were filled with pain , and instead of fury was filled with anger .
GOLD:	You struck the people with endless blows of rageand held the nations in your angry gripwith unrelenting tyranny .

ID:	3275
INPUT:	Baniren ondorengoetan : <unk> , Amram , <unk> ,
PRED:	From the family of Harim : Zechariah , Malkijah ,
GOLD:	From the family of Bani : Maadai , Amram , Uel ,

ID:	3276
INPUT:	Benetan alferrik botatzen da sarea , hegaz <unk> ikusten badute ;
PRED:	If the truth is sick , they will see if they see what they do .
GOLD:	If a bird sees a trap being set , it knows to stay away .

ID:	3277
INPUT:	Eta haiei ere esan zien Gedeonek : — Garaile etortzean , eraitsi egingo dut zuen dorre hau .
PRED:	Then Gideon said to them , “ I will punish you from the walls of the battle . ”
GOLD:	So he said to the people of Peniel , “ After I return in victory , I will tear down this tower . ”

ID:	3278
INPUT:	Baina zuen gorabeherak hitz eta izen batzuei buruzkoak eta zuen lege horri buruzkoak direnez gero , hor konpon zeuek . Nik ez dut arazo horietan epaile izan nahi » .
PRED:	But some of you have been unfaithful to an example of this world . Instead , I am writing to you and your people who are living among you . I will not be kind to you , too , and I will not be able to do it . ”
GOLD:	But since it is merely a question of words and names and your Jewish law , take care of it yourselves . I refuse to judge such matters . ”

ID:	3279
INPUT:	<unk> gainerako jarduerak eta egintza guztiak « Judako Erregeen Kronika » liburuan daude idatziak . <unk> eta Jeroboamen artean ere izan zen borroka .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Zimri 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah and Judah .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Abijam 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah . There was constant war between Abijam and Jeroboam .

ID:	3280
INPUT:	<unk> , <unk> ,
PRED:	And when they saw that they were filled with power ,
GOLD:	The king of MadonThe king of Hazor

ID:	3281
INPUT:	« Baina zuei , <unk> , hau diotsuet : Maitatu etsaiak , egin ongi gorroto <unk> ,
PRED:	“ But I know that you are my enemies , ” says the Lord . “ All who hate you , who hate you and those who hate you .
GOLD:	“ But to you who are willing to listen , I say , love your enemies ! Do good to those who hate you .

ID:	3282
INPUT:	Zenbait egunez geldi-geldi ibili ondoren , nekez iritsi ginen <unk> hirira : haizea kontra <unk> , <unk> <unk> joan ginen , Salmon * <unk> ondotik igaroz .
PRED:	From now we were waiting for you , while we were looking for the city of Damascus , where we were very angry with the wind . We saw that we were afraid of the kingdoms of the island of Egypt , and we came to the island of Egypt .
GOLD:	We had several days of slow sailing , and after great difficulty we finally neared Cnidus . But the wind was against us , so we sailed across to Crete and along the sheltered coast of the island , past the cape of Salmone .

ID:	3283
INPUT:	sugeak bezain mihi zorrotza dute , sugegorriaren pozoia ezpainetan .
PRED:	The tongue of the wicked are like a deadly snakes ; the venom of justice is like deadly snakes .
GOLD:	O Lord , keep me out of the hands of the wicked.Protect me from those who are violent , for they are plotting against me .

ID:	3284
INPUT:	Negevetik igo eta Hebronera iritsi ziren — Hebron Egiptoko Tanis baino zazpi urte lehenago eraikia zen — . Han bizi ziren Anaken ondorengo Ahiman , Xexai eta Talmai .
PRED:	These were the troops of Egypt , who lived in Hebron , the hill country of Egypt , which was the ancestor of Egypt , who was the ancestor of Canaan , who lived in Egypt .
GOLD:	Going north , they passed through the Negev and arrived at Hebron , where Ahiman , Sheshai , and Talmai — all descendants of Anak — lived . ( The ancient town of Hebron was founded seven years before the Egyptian city of Zoan . )

ID:	3285
INPUT:	Ezekiasek dei egin zien Israel eta Judako guztiei , eta Efraim eta Manasesen <unk> ere <unk> bidali zizkien , Jerusalemera , Jaunaren etxera , etor zitezen , Jaunaren , Israelen Jainkoaren , Pazko-jaia ospatzera .
PRED:	Hezekiah called out all the people of Judah and Judah to all the people of Judah , along with all the people of Judah , and they sent them to Jerusalem to Jerusalem to worship the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	King Hezekiah now sent word to all Israel and Judah , and he wrote letters of invitation to the people of Ephraim and Manasseh . He asked everyone to come to the Temple of the Lord at Jerusalem to celebrate the Passover of the Lord , the God of Israel .

ID:	3286
INPUT:	Azter ezazue zer zaion Jaunari atsegin
PRED:	You must pay attention to the Lord 's Temple
GOLD:	Carefully determine what pleases the Lord .

ID:	3287
INPUT:	Indarrez jantzi ninduzun gudurako , menpean jarri zenizkidan arerioak .
PRED:	You placed my hands on my head ; you hated me .
GOLD:	You have armed me with strength for the battle ; you have subdued my enemies under my feet .

ID:	3288
INPUT:	« Sionek esaten zuen : “ Jaunak utzia nauka , ene Jaunak ahaztua ” .
PRED:	“ The Lord said to me , ‘ My enemies have seen me , for I have destroyed them . '
GOLD:	Yet Jerusalem says , “ The Lord has deserted us ; the Lord has forgotten us . ”

ID:	3289
INPUT:	<unk> ibiltzeko edo <unk> zaldiak eta mandoak ekartzen zizkizuten .
PRED:	Why then then I sent merchants to give merchants to your horses and horses .
GOLD:	“ From Beth-togarmah came riding horses , chariot horses , and mules , all in exchange for your goods .

ID:	3290
INPUT:	« Hegoaldetik , Tzin basamortutik hasi eta Edomgo mugaraino hedatuko da . Ekialdean , hegoaldeko muga , Itsaso Hilaren <unk> hasiko da .
PRED:	“ Then make the Ark of the Tabernacle of Edom and camped at the north side of the north side of the Dead Sea , and the northern border of Edom will be filled with the Dead Sea .
GOLD:	The southern portion of your country will extend from the wilderness of Zin , along the edge of Edom . The southern boundary will begin on the east at the Dead Sea .

ID:	3291
INPUT:	Pozik da Sion mendia , poz-pozik Judako hiriak , zure probidentzia dela eta .
PRED:	Your cities will be filled with joy , and your name is filled with joy .
GOLD:	Go , inspect the city of Jerusalem.Walk around and count the many towers .

ID:	3292
INPUT:	Bizi-iturri da zuhurraren <unk> sareetatik ihes egiteko .
PRED:	The wise are those who escape from the grave .
GOLD:	The instruction of the wise is like a life-giving fountain ; those who accept it avoid the snares of death .

ID:	3293
INPUT:	Goraintziak <unk> eta <unk> , Jaunarengatik gogoz lanean jardun duten horiei ; baita Jaunarengatik hainbeste lan egin duen nire <unk> maiteari ere .
PRED:	Greet the Lord , dear brothers and sisters , so that the Lord has given me what I have done . And when I saw that he was very sick , and I am very very sick .
GOLD:	Give my greetings to Tryphena and Tryphosa , the Lord 's workers , and to dear Persis , who has worked so hard for the Lord .

ID:	3294
INPUT:	<unk> , Kixion , <unk> ,
PRED:	When they heard what they had happened ,
GOLD:	Rabbith , Kishion , Ebez ,

ID:	3295
INPUT:	Gedeonen azken egintza
PRED:	The Futility of Life
GOLD:	Gideon 's Sacred Ephod

ID:	3296
INPUT:	Honela diotso Jainko JaunakIsrael herriari : « Gerrara mila <unk> dituen <unk> itzuliko zaizkio ; ehun bidaltzen dituenari , hamar » .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ If you have been able to kill me , I will give you thirty men to kill you . ”
GOLD:	The Sovereign Lord says : “ When a city sends a thousand men to battle , only a hundred will return.When a town sends a hundred , only ten will come back alive . ”

ID:	3297
INPUT:	etxe gainean dagoena ez bedi jaits etxeko gauzak hartzera ,
PRED:	Let them be thrown into the house , and let them be thrown into the house of the house of God .
GOLD:	A person out on the deck of a roof must not go down into the house to pack .

ID:	3298
INPUT:	Gezi-uztaiez eta lantzazarmatuak datoz ; ankerrak dira eta gupidagabeak ; itsas orroa bezalako deiadarrez , zaldiz datoz , borrokarako lerroturik , zure aurka , Sion hiri eder » .
PRED:	They are cruel and stubborn ; they are like sheep , and they are like sheep , like they are like a horse , they are like a horse , like they are like a city of Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	They are armed with bows and spears.They are cruel and show no mercy.They sound like a roaring seaas they ride forward on horses.They are coming in battle formation , planning to destroy you , beautiful Jerusalem . ”

ID:	3299
INPUT:	Zortzigarren egunean , bi usapal edo bi usakume harturik , Jaunaren aurrera , elkarketa-etxolaren sarrerara , joango da eta apaizari emango dizkio .
PRED:	On the eighth day the priest must present two turtledoves or two turtledoves or two young pigeons , and the priest will bring them to the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	On the eighth day he must get two turtledoves or two young pigeons and come before the Lord at the entrance of the Tabernacle and give his offerings to the priest .

ID:	3300
INPUT:	Gainera , bada hirurehun urte israeldarrok Hexbon eta Aroer hirietan eta berauen inguruetan bizi garela , baita Arnon <unk> hirixketan ere . Zergatik ez dituzue libratu denboraldi horretan guztian ?
PRED:	There are twenty years old when the people of Israel , the towns of the tribe of Benjamin , who lived in the towns of the Arnon River , and they will not be able to be able to rescue their enemies .
GOLD:	“ Israel has been living here for 300 years , inhabiting Heshbon and its surrounding settlements , all the way to Aroer and its settlements , and in all the towns along the Arnon River . Why have you made no effort to recover it before now ?

ID:	3301
INPUT:	Hona zer diotsuedan nik , Jaun ahalguztidun honek : Ekarri osorik zeuen hamarrenak tenpluko altxortegira , nire etxean zer jana egon dadin . <unk> nazazue horretan , eta ikusiko duzue nola zeruko atexkak irekitzen dizkizuedan eta bedeinkazioa ugari isurtzen .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Take a cup of silver , or a tithe of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and if you have been a tithe , you will know that you will know that I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	Bring all the tithes into the storehouse so there will be enough food in my Temple . If you do , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , “ I will open the windows of heaven for you . I will pour out a blessing so great you wo n't have enough room to take it in ! Try it ! Put me to the test !

ID:	3302
INPUT:	Zaudete , beraz , adi orain , Jaunak zuen aurrean eginen duen gauza harrigarri hau ikusteko .
PRED:	So go and see the Lord 's words , and I will see everything in it .
GOLD:	“ Now stand here and see the great thing the Lord is about to do .

ID:	3303
INPUT:	Bada , ostera , zeruan <unk> azaltzen dituen Jainkoa . <unk> jakinaraziko dizu , Nabukodonosor errege , gerora gertatuko dena . Hona , bada , lo zeundela ametsetan ikusi zenuena :
PRED:	That is why you will be sure that you have seen the power of heaven will be able to be able to see the king of heaven , and when you see this , you will have seen in the future .
GOLD:	But there is a God in heaven who reveals secrets , and he has shown King Nebuchadnezzar what will happen in the future . Now I will tell you your dream and the visions you saw as you lay on your bed .

ID:	3304
INPUT:	Ekaitza haize gozo bihurtu zueneta olatuen orroa isildu .
PRED:	When the waters grew up in the streets , they were filled with shouts of joy .
GOLD:	He calmed the storm to a whisperand stilled the waves .

ID:	3305
INPUT:	<unk> eta <unk> zuten ; baina haren zoria nori axola ? <unk> lurretik <unk> zuten , bere herriaren errebeldiagatik jota .
PRED:	But when they saw that they were baptized , and when they saw that they were afraid of his people , who were baptized with him .
GOLD:	Unjustly condemned , he was led away.No one cared that he died without descendants , that his life was cut short in midstream.But he was struck downfor the rebellion of my people .

ID:	3306
INPUT:	Bere haragiaren samina baizik ez du sentitzen , bere buruaren atsekabea besterik ez » .
PRED:	My heart is broken and my friends , and I am not worthy of life . ”
GOLD:	They suffer painfully ; their life is full of trouble . ”

ID:	3307
INPUT:	<unk> eta berehala , Jesus uretatik irten zen . Hortan , zerua zabaldu zen , eta Jainkoaren Espiritua ikusi zuen Jesusek uso-tankeran jaisten eta beregana etortzen .
PRED:	As soon as Jesus came out , the water came out to the water of the sky , Jesus saw the Spirit of God , and he saw the Spirit of God .
GOLD:	After his baptism , as Jesus came up out of the water , the heavens were opened and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and settling on him .

ID:	3308
INPUT:	Filistearrak israeldarren aurka borrokatzeko asmotan
PRED:	Judgment against the Philistines
GOLD:	Saul Consults a Medium

ID:	3309
INPUT:	« Gizakia <unk> jotako zura bezala <unk> da , sitsak jandako soinekoa bezala .
PRED:	“ Who will be able to kill you like animals , as though they are as weak as weak as if they are near .
GOLD:	I waste away like rotting wood , like a moth-eaten coat .

ID:	3310
INPUT:	zeure maitasunagatik , suntsi itzazu nire etsaiak , hondatu nire erasotzaileak , zeure zerbitzari nauzunez gero .
PRED:	O Lord , forgive my enemies , for I have sinned against you , for I have destroyed my servant .
GOLD:	In your unfailing love , silence all my enemiesand destroy all my foes , for I am your servant .

ID:	3311
INPUT:	Nire hondamen bila dabiltzanak , ordea , bihoaz lurpe sakonera !
PRED:	But those who try to find out to find out the believers .
GOLD:	They will die by the swordand become the food of jackals .

ID:	3312
INPUT:	<unk> batzuk Jordanez beste aldera igaro ziren , Gad eta Galaad lurraldeetara . Saulek , aldiz , Gilgalen jarraitu zuen , berarekin zen jende guztia beldur-ikaraz zegoelarik .
PRED:	Then some of the Jordan River came out of the Jordan River , Gad , and the people of Gilead went to Gilgal to Gilgal and camped at Gilgal .
GOLD:	Some of them crossed the Jordan River and escaped into the land of Gad and Gilead.Meanwhile , Saul stayed at Gilgal , and his men were trembling with fear .

ID:	3313
INPUT:	Eskuan du sardea garia garbitu eta alea bere mandioan jasotzeko ; lastoa , berriz , inoiz itzaliko ez den sutan erreko du » .
PRED:	He has washed his bowl on the wheat , and he has poured out his wheat from the wheat . But he does not lift it into the fire . ”
GOLD:	He is ready to separate the chaff from the wheat with his winnowing fork . Then he will clean up the threshing area , gathering the wheat into his barn but burning the chaff with never-ending fire . ”

ID:	3314
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , zure herritarrak zutaz ari dira harresi ondoan eta <unk> , elkarri esanez : “ Goazen , ea zein mezu ematen digun Jaunak ” .
PRED:	“ Son of man , prophesy against your people , and they will know that you are my followers , and they will know that the Lord has given us to each other . '
GOLD:	“ Son of man , your people talk about you in their houses and whisper about you at the doors . They say to each other , ‘ Come on , let 's go hear the prophet tell us what the Lord is saying ! '

ID:	3315
INPUT:	Orduan , Moisesek , Jaunarengana itzulirik , esan zion : — Jauna , zergatik erabiltzen duzu hain gaizki herri hau ? Zertarako bidali nauzu ?
PRED:	Then Moses returned to the Lord and said to the Lord , “ Why do you realize that I am the Lord who sent you to destroy you ? ”
GOLD:	Then Moses went back to the Lord and protested , “ Why have you brought all this trouble on your own people , Lord ? Why did you send me ?

ID:	3316
INPUT:	« Israeldarrek Jaunari eskainiko dizkioten opari sakratuak apaizarentzat izango dira .
PRED:	“ The Israelites must offer a sacred offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	All the sacred offerings that the Israelites bring to a priest will belong to him .

ID:	3317
INPUT:	<unk> legeak emateneta jasanezineko <unk> dituztenak !
PRED:	And when they are in the sight of God , they will know that they are in power .
GOLD:	What sorrow awaits the unjust judgesand those who issue unfair laws .

ID:	3318
INPUT:	« Ni izango ote naiz , bada , erantzungo diona ? Nik aurkituko ote <unk> beraren aurka ?
PRED:	“ But I will answer you , ” says the Lord . “ How can I see that I will see him ?
GOLD:	“ So who am I , that I should try to answer Godor even reason with him ?

ID:	3319
INPUT:	Bat-batean , hain lurrikara gogorra izan zen , non <unk> <unk> ere dar-dar eragin baitzien . Eta <unk> ate guztiak zabaldu ziren eta denen kateak askatu .
PRED:	Suddenly , the Lord was very angry , and when they saw that they were very angry with him , and when they saw that they were able to be able to break into the chains of God .
GOLD:	Suddenly , there was a massive earthquake , and the prison was shaken to its foundations . All the doors immediately flew open , and the chains of every prisoner fell off !

ID:	3320
INPUT:	Horiek ziren Efraimen leinuko senitarteak : 32 . 500 gizonezko guztira . Horiek ziren Joseren ondorengoak , senitarteka erroldaturik .
PRED:	These were the clans descended from the clans of Ephraim . Their registered troops numbered the clans of Ephraim .
GOLD:	These were the clans of Ephraim . Their registered troops numbered 32,500.These clans of Manasseh and Ephraim were all descendants of Joseph .

ID:	3321
INPUT:	Azken afaria : hona nire <unk> !
PRED:	Then I said to you , “ Let me sit on my behalf . ”
GOLD:	Peter Denies Jesus

ID:	3322
INPUT:	Jainkoaren guda-gurdiak milaka eta milaka , ezin konta <unk> haren gudarostea : horien artean aintzaz beterik dago Jauna santutegian .
PRED:	He is able to gather his chariots and chariots — all his men who were able to worship the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and his glory will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	When you ascended to the heights , you led a crowd of captives.You received gifts from the people , even from those who rebelled against you.Now the Lord God will live among us there .

ID:	3323
INPUT:	Eliz elkartean bakoitzari bere tokia ezarri dio Jainkoak : lehenengo apostoluak , bigarren profetak , hirugarren irakasleak ; ondoren , <unk> datoz ; gero , sendatzeko edo behartsuei laguntzeko , elkartea gidatzeko edo hizketa arrotzez mintzatzeko dohaina dutenak .
PRED:	Some of the other believers who were wise , and God has given them the other prophets to be given by the other prophets , who are the other prophets , and those who serve in tongues .
GOLD:	Here are some of the parts God has appointed for the church : first are apostles , second are prophets , third are teachers , then those who do miracles , those who have the gift of healing , those who can help others , those who have the gift of leadership , those who speak in unknown languages .

ID:	3324
INPUT:	eta esan zion Jaunari : — Zergatik hartu duzu hain gaizki zeure zerbitzari hau ? Zergatik jarri nauzu zoritxarrean , herri honen zama neuri ezarriz ?
PRED:	Then the Lord said to him , “ Why do you turn against me ? Why have you given me a burden to me ? Why did you bring me back to me ? ”
GOLD:	And Moses said to the Lord , “ Why are you treating me , your servant , so harshly ? Have mercy on me ! What did I do to deserve the burden of all these people ?

ID:	3325
INPUT:	Gero , Jaun ahalguztidunaren , Israelgo Jainkoaren , mezu hau adierazi zien Jeremiasek Rekaben leinukoei : « Zuen arbaso Jonadaben agindua aditu eta hark agindutako guztiak arretaz bete dituzuelako ,
PRED:	Then this message came to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies : “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : The family of Nebat , the family of Nebat , the God of Israel , and you have obeyed the commands of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then Jeremiah turned to the Recabites and said , “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : ‘ You have obeyed your ancestor Jehonadab in every respect , following all his instructions . '

ID:	3326
INPUT:	Nagusiak esan zion : “ Ederki , morroi ona ! Gauza gutxian leial izan zarenez gero , hartzazu hamar hirietako agintea ” .
PRED:	“ All right , ” the king said , ‘ You have given the good things you have given in all the towns of the household you have given you . '
GOLD:	“ ‘ Well done ! ' the king exclaimed . ‘ You are a good servant . You have been faithful with the little I entrusted to you , so you will be governor of ten cities as your reward . '

ID:	3327
INPUT:	Hamaika ikasleak Galileara joan ziren , Jesusek esandako mendira .
PRED:	Then Jesus went to Galilee , and they left the mountain .
GOLD:	Then the eleven disciples left for Galilee , going to the mountain where Jesus had told them to go .

ID:	3328
INPUT:	Zein dira Jainkoaren mintzoa entzun eta beraren kontra errebelatu <unk> ? Moisesek Egiptotik atera zituen haiek , noski .
PRED:	How can they hear the voice of God ? How can they know that they were from the power of Egypt ?
GOLD:	And who was it who rebelled against God , even though they heard his voice ? Was n't it the people Moses led out of Egypt ?

ID:	3329
INPUT:	Goizero , kriseiluak prest jartzean , intsentsu usaintsua erreko du Aaronek aldare honen gainean ,
PRED:	When the anointing oil , the anointing oil , Aaron will burn it on the altar .
GOLD:	“ Every morning when Aaron maintains the lamps , he must burn fragrant incense on the altar .

ID:	3330
INPUT:	Esker oneko otoitza Espirituaren eraginez bakarrik egiten baduzu , dohain hori ez duen entzule hutsak nola erantzungo dio « Amen » zure esker oneko otoitzari , zer diozun ulertzen ez badu ?
PRED:	For when you are living in your Spirit , you will not listen to your Spirit , and you will know that you do n't know how can you understand ? ”
GOLD:	For if you praise God only in the spirit , how can those who do n't understand you praise God along with you ? How can they join you in giving thanks when they do n't understand what you are saying ?

ID:	3331
INPUT:	« Horregatik , hona hemen ni , nire hitzak elkarri lapurtzen dizkioten profeten kontra . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	“ That is why you are here here here on my prophets , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , ” says the Lord , “ I am against these prophets who steal messages from each other and claim they are from me .

ID:	3332
INPUT:	Ez naiz , bada , neurriz gain ari , besteen lanaz baliatuz . Hau da , ordea , nire itxaropena : zuen sinesmena haziz doan neurrian , nire lanak gero eta fruitu handiagoa ekarriko duela zuen artean , ezarri zaizkidan <unk> barruan ;
PRED:	For I am not able to do whatever we do , but it is the one of the world . But it is the one who gives us a way to all the way of my faith .
GOLD:	Nor do we boast and claim credit for the work someone else has done . Instead , we hope that your faith will grow so that the boundaries of our work among you will be extended .

ID:	3333
INPUT:	Horrela bada , ene senideok , zuek ere hil zen Kristoren gorputzeko eginak izan zaretenez gero , <unk> hilda zaudete , eta beste batenak zarete jadanik — hildakoen artetik piztu <unk> , alegia — , Jainkoarentzat fruitu onak emateko .
PRED:	So my dear brothers and sisters , my dear brothers and sisters , because they have been killed by the power of Christ , who was killed by the power of Christ , and you have been raised from the dead .
GOLD:	So , my dear brothers and sisters , this is the point : You died to the power of the law when you died with Christ . And now you are united with the one who was raised from the dead . As a result , we can produce a harvest of good deeds for God .

ID:	3334
INPUT:	Hona hemen Joseren seme zaharrena zen Manasesen leinuari eroritako lurralde zatia . <unk> , Galaaden aita , Manasesen seme zaharrena zen eta , <unk> zenez , Galaad eta Baxan lurraldeak eman zizkioten ondaretzat , Jordanez ekialdera .
PRED:	This is the list of the clans of Joseph 's descendants , the tribe of Manasseh , who had been given by the land of Manasseh , along with the territory of Gilead , which was given to the tribes of Gilead , and all the tribes of Gilead .
GOLD:	The next allotment of land was given to the half-tribe of Manasseh , the descendants of Joseph 's older son . Makir , the firstborn son of Manasseh , was the father of Gilead . Because his descendants were experienced soldiers , the regions of Gilead and Bashan on the east side of the Jordan had already been given to them .

ID:	3335
INPUT:	esnegaina <unk> <unk> ateratzen da , sudurra jota odola , haserreari eraginez liskarra .
PRED:	And when they saw that they were slaughtered , and they are broken into battle .
GOLD:	As the beating of cream yields butterand striking the nose causes bleeding , so stirring up anger causes quarrels .

ID:	3336
INPUT:	Haiekin zuen egina Jaunak ituna eta haiei zien honako agindu hau emana : « Ez duzue beste jainkorik gurtuko ; ez zarete halakoen aitzinean ahuspeztuko . Ez diezue <unk> emango , ez <unk> eskainiko .
PRED:	The Lord gave them a covenant with them , and he commanded them , “ You must not worship other gods . You must not worship other gods , and you must worship other gods . You must do not know that you do not know that you do .
GOLD:	For the Lord had made a covenant with the descendants of Jacob and commanded them : “ Do not worship any other gods or bow before them or serve them or offer sacrifices to them .

ID:	3337
INPUT:	Hizketa arrotzez <unk> , bi izan daitezela edo hiru <unk> mintzo direnak , eta txandaka ; eta argi dezala beste batek esanahia .
PRED:	One of the other prophets who were in tongues , or those who were baptized in tongues . And if one of them were in front of them ,
GOLD:	No more than two or three should speak in tongues . They must speak one at a time , and someone must interpret what they say .

ID:	3338
INPUT:	Bilarazi zituzten <unk> filistearren buruzagi guztiak eta esan zieten : — Zer egin ote dezakegu Israelen Jainkoaren kutxarekin ? Haiek erantzun : — Israelen Jainkoaren kutxarekin ? Eraman dezatela Gatera . Eraman zuten , beraz , Israelen Jainkoaren kutxa .
PRED:	Then the men of the Philistines came and asked him , “ What should we go to the Philistines ? ” And the men of Israel replied , “ Why are we going to go to the Ark of God of Israel ? ” So they asked the Ark of Israel .
GOLD:	So they called together the rulers of the Philistine towns and asked , “ What should we do with the Ark of the God of Israel ? ” The rulers discussed it and replied , “ Move it to the town of Gath . ” So they moved the Ark of the God of Israel to Gath .

ID:	3339
INPUT:	Horregatik , hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Neu ere zure kontra nator , Jerusalem ; <unk> betearaziko dut epaia , nazioen aurrean ;
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am the Sovereign Lord your God , and I will punish you in the land of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Therefore , I myself , the Sovereign Lord , am now your enemy . I will punish you publicly while all the nations watch .

ID:	3340
INPUT:	« Horregatik , honela diot nik , Jaunak : Ez didazue aditu zeuen senide esklaboak libre uzteko agindu <unk> . Orain , beraz , neuk uzten ditut libre ezpata , izurria eta gosea , zuen aurka ekiteko . Munduko erresuma guztiak izuturik geldituko dira zuei gertatua ikustean . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Lord says : I will not listen to you , my brothers and sisters , my relatives , and I will destroy you . And I will destroy you from the kingdoms of the kingdoms of the kingdoms of the kingdoms of the kingdoms of the kingdoms of the kingdoms of the earth .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Lord says : Since you have not obeyed me by setting your countrymen free , I will set you free to be destroyed by war , disease , and famine . You will be an object of horror to all the nations of the earth .

ID:	3341
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Gibeako garaian hasita , bekatuan ari da Israel . Orduz gero , ez da aldatu . Beraz , guduak Gibean <unk> ditu gaizkileak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ On the day of Israel 's captivity , the people of Israel are in charge of the tribe of Benjamin , and the people of Israel are in battle . ”
GOLD:	The Lord says , “ O Israel , ever since Gibeah , there has been only sin and more sin ! You have made no progress whatsoever.Was it not right that the wicked men of Gibeah were attacked ?

ID:	3342
INPUT:	Apaiz nagusiak bere jantziak urratu zituen eta esan : — Ba ote dugu lekuko beharrik ?
PRED:	The high priest tore his clothes in his clothing and said , “ What do we need ? ”
GOLD:	Then the high priest tore his clothing to show his horror and said , “ Why do we need other witnesses ?

ID:	3343
INPUT:	Gau hartan bertan , Abimelek eta beronen jende guztia jaiki eta Sikemgo inguruetan gorde ziren , lau taldetan <unk> .
PRED:	At that night Abimelech and his men brought in the temple of Shechem , along with all the surrounding villages , and all the men of Shechem .
GOLD:	So Abimelech and all his men went by night and split into four groups , stationing themselves around Shechem .

ID:	3344
INPUT:	Aska nazazu ezpata <unk> , libratu atzerritarren eskutik ! Haien ahoari faltsukeria dario , haien eskuinak gezurrezko zina dagi .
PRED:	Oh , rescue me from the power of their enemies ; rescue me from their mouths ; they will tell lies about their own lips .
GOLD:	Save me ! Rescue me from the power of my enemies.Their mouths are full of lies ; they swear to tell the truth , but they lie instead .

ID:	3345
INPUT:	Ai ene ! Izugarria izango da egun hura , <unk> gabea , <unk> herriarentzat . Baina onik aterako da » .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits me , and my people will be destroyed , and they will be able to destroy the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	In all history there has never been such a time of terror.It will be a time of trouble for my people Israel.Yet in the end they will be saved !

ID:	3346
INPUT:	Emaguzu , bada , zeure iritzia : zilegi al da Zesarri zerga ordaintzea , bai ala ez ?
PRED:	Give us money to your neighbor , and do n't use any money ? Do n't you pay attention to what is right ?
GOLD:	Now tell us what you think about this : Is it right to pay taxes to Caesar or not ? ”

ID:	3347
INPUT:	Henadaden seme <unk> Azariasen etxetik <unk> sailean .
PRED:	These were the descendants of Shallum , who carried by the house of Shallum son of Zicri .
GOLD:	Next was Binnui son of Henadad , who rebuilt another section of the wall from Azariah 's house to the angle and the corner .

ID:	3348
INPUT:	Janari guztiei nazka zieten , eta heriotzaren atarian zeuden .
PRED:	In all the way , they were put in charge of their death .
GOLD:	They could n't stand the thought of food , and they were knocking on death 's door .

ID:	3349
INPUT:	« Ez gogortu bihotzak zuen gurasoek <unk> bezala , <unk> egun hartan basamortuan bezala ,
PRED:	“ I am very glad when your ancestors saw that they were in the wilderness , just as they were in the wilderness .
GOLD:	The Lord says , “ Do n't harden your hearts as Israel did at Meribah , as they did at Massah in the wilderness .

ID:	3350
INPUT:	Jakoben <unk> izango dira , <unk> gar ; Esaurenak , berriz , lasto . <unk> suak hartuko dueta irentsiko . Eta Esauren <unk> da bizirik aterako » . Jaunak esan du .
PRED:	And when they are filled with chariots , they will be filled with chariots and chariots . But when they will fall , they will be destroyed , and the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	The people of Israel will be a raging fire , and Edom a field of dry stubble.The descendants of Joseph will be a flameroaring across the field , devouring everything.There will be no survivors in Edom.I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	3351
INPUT:	Egun hartan hogeita bost mila gudari benjamindar erori ziren , denak gizon ausartak .
PRED:	On that day the men of Benjamin were defeated by twenty men of Benjamin .
GOLD:	So that day the tribe of Benjamin lost 25,000 strong warriors armed with swords ,

ID:	3352
INPUT:	<unk> ere ez badu , beraren anaiei emango zaie ondarea .
PRED:	But if they have not been able to give his own land , they will give birth to his own land .
GOLD:	And if he has no daughter either , transfer his inheritance to his brothers .

ID:	3353
INPUT:	Salomonen jakinduria <unk> eta <unk> baino handiagoa izan zen ,
PRED:	He was very powerful than all the wisdom of Solomon , and he became very powerful .
GOLD:	So Hiram supplied as much cedar and cypress timber as Solomon desired .

ID:	3354
INPUT:	Ez da gehiago zure <unk> hotsik entzungo , ez zure <unk> eta <unk> izango ; “ <unk> ” deituko <unk> harresiei , “ <unk> ” zeure ateei .
PRED:	“ I will not be afraid of your prophets , and they will be able to see that they will be able to kill you , and they will be thrown into the fire . '
GOLD:	Violence will disappear from your land ; the desolation and destruction of war will end.Salvation will surround you like city walls , and praise will be on the lips of all who enter there .

ID:	3355
INPUT:	Gero , esan zion <unk> : — Ekarri <unk> eta aztertu nire eskuak ; ekarri eskua eta sartu nire <unk> . Eta ez izan sinesgogor , sinestedun baizik .
PRED:	Then he said to him , “ Bring my hands with my hands and kill my hands . ” And when they saw that they were very sick , and they would not kill me .
GOLD:	Then he said to Thomas , “ Put your finger here , and look at my hands . Put your hand into the wound in my side . Do n't be faithless any longer . Believe ! ”

ID:	3356
INPUT:	<unk> ez dago ez <unk> eta ez judurik , ez <unk> eta ez <unk> , ez <unk> handiagoko nahiz <unk> , ez <unk> eta ez <unk> : Kristo da dena , eta denetan bizi da .
PRED:	But when they have heard that they could n't be able to kill him and kill him , they will know that they were afraid of the beast , and they will be able to be able to know that he is true and true .
GOLD:	In this new life , it does n't matter if you are a Jew or a Gentile , circumcised or uncircumcised , barbaric , uncivilized , slave , or free . Christ is all that matters , and he lives in all of us .

ID:	3357
INPUT:	« Apaizak zure eskuetatik saskia hartu eta Jaunaren zure Jainkoaren aldare aurrean ipiniko du .
PRED:	“ Then the priest must remove your hands on the altar of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	The priest will then take the basket from your hand and set it before the altar of the Lord your God .

ID:	3358
INPUT:	Berehala alde egin zion legenak , eta garbi gelditu zen .
PRED:	When he left the skin and was clean , he became clean .
GOLD:	Instantly the leprosy disappeared , and the man was healed .

ID:	3359
INPUT:	Judea herrialde osoa eta <unk> guztiak harengana zihoazen eta , beren bekatuak aitortzen zituztela , Joanek bataiatu egiten zituen Jordan ibaian .
PRED:	And all the people of Judea , and all the people of Jerusalem were baptized by their sins . When John was baptized with them , he baptized in the Jordan River .
GOLD:	All of Judea , including all the people of Jerusalem , went out to see and hear John . And when they confessed their sins , he baptized them in the Jordan River .

ID:	3360
INPUT:	Eta esan zidan : “ Ez beldurtu , Jainkoak bereziki maite zaitu ! Egon lasai ! Izan bihotz eta indarberritu ! ” Haren hitzak bizkortu egin ninduen . Orduan , honela esan nion : “ Ene Jauna , mintza zaitez , indarberritu nauzu eta ” .
PRED:	Then he said to me , ‘ Do n't be afraid to be afraid of you , because you love me . Do n't let me listen to me , and let me listen to your word . '
GOLD:	“ Do n't be afraid , ” he said , “ for you are very precious to God . Peace ! Be encouraged ! Be strong ! ” As he spoke these words to me , I suddenly felt stronger and said to him , “ Please speak to me , my lord , for you have strengthened me . ”

ID:	3361
INPUT:	Tristura poz bilakatuko
PRED:	Esau 's Message about Egypt
GOLD:	Sadness Will Be Turned to Joy

ID:	3362
INPUT:	Herriak legea beteko duela hitzeman
PRED:	The people of Israel promised to obey the law of Moses .
GOLD:	The Vow of the People

ID:	3363
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> okertzen <unk> artean amaituko du .
PRED:	And when they know how wicked will happen , they will be filled with power .
GOLD:	The person who strays from common sensewill end up in the company of the dead .

ID:	3364
INPUT:	« Ez da aski zu nire zerbitzari <unk> leinuak susperrarazieta <unk> Israelen bizirik <unk> ; nazioen argitzat ezarriko zaitut , nire <unk> <unk> dezazun » .
PRED:	“ You must not be sure that my servant will be able to be sure that I will punish you with all the people of Israel . And when I have heard that they are on my behalf . ”
GOLD:	He says , “ You will do more than restore the people of Israel to me.I will make you a light to the Gentiles , and you will bring my salvation to the ends of the earth . ”

ID:	3365
INPUT:	Joan Bataiatzailearen jaiotza iragarri
PRED:	The Sign of the Lamb
GOLD:	Mary Visits Elizabeth

ID:	3366
INPUT:	Ez dezazuela , beraz , epea baino lehen epai . Itxaron Jauna etorri arte . Berak argituko du ilunpean ezkutatua dagoena , berak agertuko bihotzeko asmo gordeak . Eta orduan , nork bere merezia jasoko du Jainkoarengandik .
PRED:	Do not be careful to obey the time of the Lord , for the Lord has spoken ! He has shown me to keep the foundation of the darkness , for he has shown me to keep the foundation of God .
GOLD:	So do n't make judgments about anyone ahead of time — before the Lord returns . For he will bring our darkest secrets to light and will reveal our private motives . Then God will give to each one whatever praise is due .

ID:	3367
INPUT:	Israelek , Daviden erreinutik bereizi zen hartan , Nebaten seme Jeroboam izendatu zuen errege , eta errege honek aldendu egin zuen Israel Jaunaren esanetatik , bekatu handia eginaraziz .
PRED:	In that day Jeroboam son of Nebat received the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat , the people of Israel , and Jeroboam son of Nebat , the God of Israel , had led by the sins of the Lord .
GOLD:	For when the Lord tore Israel away from the kingdom of David , they chose Jeroboam son of Nebat as their king . But Jeroboam drew Israel away from following the Lord and made them commit a great sin .

ID:	3368
INPUT:	Gizaki guztien aldeko otoitza
PRED:	The Death of the People
GOLD:	Instructions about Worship

ID:	3369
INPUT:	« Oraindik ohean nengoela , zerutik zetorren aingeru zaindari bat ikusi nuen ikuskarian .
PRED:	“ As I saw the angel of heaven , I saw one who had seen in the eyes of the earth , as I saw the angel of the earth .
GOLD:	“ ‘ While I was lying in my bed , this is what I dreamed . I saw a large tree in the middle of the earth .

ID:	3370
INPUT:	Kristauen biziera berria
PRED:	Paul 's Final Instructions for the Church
GOLD:	Sin 's Power Is Broken

ID:	3371
INPUT:	Elkarri zor diozuen maitasunari buruz , ez duzue nik idatzi beharrik , Jainkoak berak irakasten baitizue elkar maitatzen ,
PRED:	That is why you do not need for all the believers , for God has given them to each other .
GOLD:	But we do n't need to write to you about the importance of loving each other , for God himself has taught you to love one another .

ID:	3372
INPUT:	Zure <unk> hautsa bezain ugariizango dira . <unk> eta ekialdera , iparralde eta <unk> zara . Zure eta zure ondorengoen <unk> senitarte <unk> ditut .
PRED:	Your dust will be as dust , as though they were as well as well as well as well as the east of your descendants , and they will know that your descendants will be filled with all your descendants , and they will know that your descendants .
GOLD:	Your descendants will be as numerous as the dust of the earth ! They will spread out in all directions — to the west and the east , to the north and the south . And all the families of the earth will be blessed through you and your descendants .

ID:	3373
INPUT:	« Beraz , urtean hiru aldiz aurkeztuko dira gizaseme guztiak Jainko Jaunaren aurrera .
PRED:	“ Therefore , ” says the Lord , “ every day of the Lord , the God of the Lord .
GOLD:	At these three times each year , every man in Israel must appear before the Sovereign , the Lord .

ID:	3374
INPUT:	( 18 , <unk> ; 19 , 7-9 ; Mk 9 , <unk> ; 10 , <unk> . 10-12 ; Lk 16 , 18 )
PRED:	I heard that Jesus was sick when he saw that he was sick and Samaria . He was Samaria against Samaria and Samaria .
GOLD:	Teaching about Love for Enemies

ID:	3375
INPUT:	Eta jarraitu zuen : — Lasai <unk> duzue Jainkoaren agindua zeuen usadioak ezartzeko !
PRED:	Then he said , “ You must be sure that you have been healed . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ You skillfully sidestep God 's law in order to hold on to your own tradition .

ID:	3376
INPUT:	<unk> Eufrates ibaiaren ekialdeko aramearrei etortzeko agindu zien , eta <unk> bildu ziren , Hadadezerren gudalburu zen Xobak buruzagi zutela .
PRED:	Some of the people of the Euphrates River came out of the Euphrates River , and when they were commander of the Euphrates River , the commander of the Euphrates River , the commander of the Euphrates River , and the army of the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	they were joined by additional Aramean troops summoned by Hadadezer from the other side of the Euphrates River . These troops arrived at Helam under the command of Shobach , the commander of Hadadezer 's forces .

ID:	3377
INPUT:	egon ziur , Jaunak , zuen Jainkoak , ez duela herri horiek zuen aurretik botatzen jarraituko . <unk> eta tranpa izango dituzue , saihetsean eztenkada eta begietan arantza bezain mingarri , Jaunak , zeuen Jainkoak , eman dizuen lurralde eder honetatik zuek desagerrarazi arte .
PRED:	For the Lord your God did not abandon them , and they will be able to obey them . They are so angry with those who are so angry with them . For the Lord your God has given you as strong as he lives .
GOLD:	then know for certain that the Lord your God will no longer drive them out of your land . Instead , they will be a snare and a trap to you , a whip for your backs and thorny brambles in your eyes , and you will vanish from this good land the Lord your God has given you .

ID:	3378
INPUT:	Horregatik , Babel — hau da , « <unk> » — , eman zioten izena , han nahasi baitzuen Jaunak mundu osoko hizkuntza eta handik sakabanatu baitzituen mundu zabalera .
PRED:	That is why the Lord had given me victory over all the nations , which he had given them as great as he had promised , “ The Lord has given us all the nations of the world . ”
GOLD:	That is why the city was called Babel , because that is where the Lord confused the people with different languages . In this way he scattered them all over the world .

ID:	3379
INPUT:	Salomon erregeak berrehun babeski handi egin zituen urre garbiz , babeski bakoitza egiteko ia zazpi kilo urre behar izan zelarik .
PRED:	King Solomon made great shields of hammered gold . He was 71/2 pounds of pure gold .
GOLD:	King Solomon made 200 large shields of hammered gold , each weighing more than 15 pounds .

ID:	3380
INPUT:	Zazpigarren zigilua . Jainkoaren herriaren otoitzak
PRED:	The Lamb of God 's holy people are forgiven .
GOLD:	The Lamb Breaks the Seventh Seal

ID:	3381
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	3382
INPUT:	Eta jendea <unk> ari zen hartaz ; batzuek zioten : « Gizon ona da » . Beste batzuek , ordea : « Ez , herria engainatzen ari da » .
PRED:	When the people heard him , they said , “ A man is good . ” But some of the people said , “ No ! The people of Israel is saying , ‘ No ! '
GOLD:	There was a lot of grumbling about him among the crowds . Some argued , “ He 's a good man , ” but others said , “ He 's nothing but a fraud who deceives the people . ”

ID:	3383
INPUT:	« Ipini seinaleak <unk> , begira ongi nondik zoazen : itzuli , Israel neskatxa eder , itzuli zeure hirietara .
PRED:	“ Suppose I pray for you , let your people go into your presence , your family , your family , and your family will return to you .
GOLD:	Set up road signs ; put up guideposts.Mark well the pathby which you came.Come back again , my virgin Israel ; return to your towns here .

ID:	3384
INPUT:	Gainerako ikasleak txalupaz joan ziren , sarea <unk> tiraka zekartela , lehorretik hurbil baitziren , ehunen bat metrora .
PRED:	One day the other disciples came to be with her , who had been in prison , where he was going to pay for a few .
GOLD:	The others stayed with the boat and pulled the loaded net to the shore , for they were only about a hundred yards from shore .

ID:	3385
INPUT:	Ahiasek , emakumearen oin-hotsak ate ondoan <unk> , esan zion : — Sar zaitez , Jeroboamen emazte hori . Zergatik zatozkit <unk> ? Berri txarra eman behar dizut Jaunaren izenean .
PRED:	The man was sitting beside the gate , and the man of Jeroboam said to him , “ Get up with me , my wife , and I have given me a wife to the Lord 's name . ”
GOLD:	So when Ahijah heard her footsteps at the door , he called out , “ Come in , wife of Jeroboam ! Why are you pretending to be someone else ? ” Then he told her , “ I have bad news for you .

ID:	3386
INPUT:	( Mt 26 , 1-5 ; Lk 22 , 1-2 ; Jn 11 , 45-53 )
PRED:	Jesus before the Council
GOLD:	Jesus Predicts Peter 's Denial

ID:	3387
INPUT:	Horrela , beraz , gurtzen zuten Jauna ; baina , erbesteratu baino lehen beren jatorrizko hirietan zituzten kultuen arabera , beren jainkoak ere gurtu ohi zituzten .
PRED:	So they worshiped the Lord , but they worshiped the Lord as they had commanded them to live in the towns of the towns they worshiped their gods .
GOLD:	And though they worshiped the Lord , they continued to follow their own gods according to the religious customs of the nations from which they came .

ID:	3388
INPUT:	zuri idazten dizut , ene seme maite Timoteo . Jainko Aitak eta Kristo Jesus gure Jaunak eman biezazkizute grazia , errukia eta bakea .
PRED:	I am writing to you , my Father , and I love you as the Lord our God .
GOLD:	I am writing to Timothy , my dear son.May God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord give you grace , mercy , and peace .

ID:	3389
INPUT:	<unk> bi ate zeuden <unk> hartara : bata iparraldera eta bestea hegoaldera . Hutsartearen inguruko hormaren lodiera bi metro eta erdikoa zen .
PRED:	At that time they saw two men who were able to kill him . The other side of the courtyard was 71/2 feet long , and the wall was 71/2 feet long .
GOLD:	Two doors opened from the side rooms into the terrace yard , which was 83/4 feet wide . One door faced north and the other south .

ID:	3390
INPUT:	Ez iezadazu larrialdian aurpegia ezkuta , makur belarria niregana , dei egitean : erantzun bizkor !
PRED:	Do n't let me fall upon me , for they cry out to me .
GOLD:	For my days disappear like smoke , and my bones burn like red-hot coals .

ID:	3391
INPUT:	idolatria , sorginkeria , <unk> , haserreak , bekaizkeria , <unk> , norgehiagokeria , <unk> , zatiketak ,
PRED:	In addition , when all these kingdoms of every kind of mind , when when they saw that great things , when they were weak and sisters , I will be sure to visit you , famine , and disease .
GOLD:	idolatry , sorcery , hostility , quarreling , jealousy , outbursts of anger , selfish ambition , dissension , division ,

ID:	3392
INPUT:	Eta Jakobek : — Egidazu zin ! Josek zin egin zion . Orduan , Jakob <unk> makurtu zen .
PRED:	Then Jacob said to Jacob , “ Please give me a solemn oath . ” So Jacob became very angry with him .
GOLD:	“ Swear that you will do it , ” Jacob insisted . So Joseph gave his oath , and Jacob bowed humbly at the head of his bed .

ID:	3393
INPUT:	<unk> egin zituzten bai beraien gurasoekin Jaunak egin zuen ituna , bai eman zizkien burubideak ere . Horrela , idolo <unk> ondoren joanez , hutsal bihurtu ziren beraiek ere . <unk> herrien antzeko egin ziren , Jainkoak haien antzera ez <unk> agindu zien arren .
PRED:	At that time the Lord had made their ancestors with their ancestors , because they had given them great covenant with their ancestors , and they had given them as great as they had promised . But when they saw that they were as they had promised , they were like that they were like that they were like that they were like that they were like that they were like that they had been like that they were like that they had done .
GOLD:	They rejected his decrees and the covenant he had made with their ancestors , and they despised all his warnings . They worshiped worthless idols , so they became worthless themselves . They followed the example of the nations around them , disobeying the Lord 's command not to imitate them .

ID:	3394
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaien Jauna Moisesi eta Aaroni , israeldarrak Egiptotik ateratzeko mandatua emanez , eta aginduak eman zizkien israeldarrentzat eta Egiptoko errege faraoiarentzat .
PRED:	Then the Lord gave Moses to Moses and Aaron and the Israelites to bring them into the land of Egypt . He gave them to the people of Egypt and the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	But the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron and gave them orders for the Israelites and for Pharaoh , the king of Egypt . The Lord commanded Moses and Aaron to lead the people of Israel out of Egypt .

ID:	3395
INPUT:	Beraz , haien erortzea munduarentzat <unk> , hau da , haien hutsegitea jentilentzat <unk> gertatu bada , zenbatez <unk> ez ote da izanen Israel osoak salbamena iristea !
PRED:	So if they have been able to have some of this man , when they have heard that the Son of Man has been able to know that the Son of Israel will be able to know that God has given you .
GOLD:	Now if the Gentiles were enriched because the people of Israel turned down God 's offer of salvation , think how much greater a blessing the world will share when they finally accept it .

ID:	3396
INPUT:	Zuen lurraldea hondatua dago , zuen hiriak suak erreta . <unk> <unk> dizuete <unk> begi aurrean . Dena hondamendi , Sodomaren <unk> bezala .
PRED:	Your land will be destroyed , and the cities will be destroyed , and the cities of Samaria will see that they were very very angry .
GOLD:	Your country lies in ruins , and your towns are burned.Foreigners plunder your fields before your eyesand destroy everything they see .

ID:	3397
INPUT:	Eta hauengatik ematen dizut erabat neure burua , hauek ere egiaren bidez zeuretzat har ditzazun .
PRED:	I have given you all these things , and I have given you by your power .
GOLD:	And I give myself as a holy sacrifice for them so they can be made holy by your truth .

ID:	3398
INPUT:	Jariodunak erabilitako <unk> esertzen denak arropak eta gorputza garbituko ditu eta kutsaturik geldituko da arratsa arte .
PRED:	And if you touch your body , you must wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water , and you will remain unclean until evening .
GOLD:	If you sit where the man with the discharge has sat , you must wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water , and you will remain unclean until evening .

ID:	3399
INPUT:	Joan zitzaizkion jauregiko arduradunak lurretik <unk> asmotan , baina hark ez zuen nahi izan , ezta deus jan ere haiekin .
PRED:	So the king of the palace officials would n't let him kill him , but he would not eat any of them .
GOLD:	The elders of his household pleaded with him to get up and eat with them , but he refused .

ID:	3400
INPUT:	ergela toki gorenean <unk> aberatsa behean eseria .
PRED:	That is why the rich man sitting on the seashore .
GOLD:	when they give great authority to foolish people and low positions to people of proven worth .

ID:	3401
INPUT:	Bere <unk> bat bidali zuen , Joanen burua ekartzeko aginduz . Joan zen hura kartzelara eta lepoa moztu zion ,
PRED:	At that time he sent a man to send him into prison , and he sent him into prison , and he took him into prison .
GOLD:	So he immediately sent an executioner to the prison to cut off John 's head and bring it to him . The soldier beheaded John in the prison ,

ID:	3402
INPUT:	Jaitsi zen Moises eta israeldarrei hitz egin zien .
PRED:	Then Moses got up and said to the people of Israel ,
GOLD:	So Moses went down to the people and told them what the Lord had said .

ID:	3403
INPUT:	Judeako eliz elkarteek ez ninduten oraindik begiz ezagutzen .
PRED:	I did n't know the church in Judea , for the church in Judea .
GOLD:	And still the churches in Christ that are in Judea did n't know me personally .

ID:	3404
INPUT:	Jainkoaren agintzaria Jesusengan burutua
PRED:	The Good News of God 's Covenant
GOLD:	God 's Promises Bring Hope

ID:	3405
INPUT:	Bigbairenak 2 . <unk> ;
PRED:	The family of Shephatiah372
GOLD:	The family of Bigvai2,056

ID:	3406
INPUT:	Ondoren , ezarri itun-kutxaren gaineko estalkia toki santu-santuan .
PRED:	Then he set the Ark of the Covenant on the Ark of the Covenant .
GOLD:	“ Then put the Ark 's cover — the place of atonement — on top of the Ark of the Covenant inside the Most Holy Place .

ID:	3407
INPUT:	David eta Tziba
PRED:	David 's Kindness to David
GOLD:	David and Ziba

ID:	3408
INPUT:	Haien aurretik suak irentsi , haien atzetik garrak kiskali . Lehen , lurra baratze eder ; gero , eremu gorri . Ez die ezerk ihes egiten .
PRED:	Their fire will flow from fire , and the earth will flow from the east of the earth , and the earth will not be destroyed .
GOLD:	Fire burns in front of them , and flames follow after them.Ahead of them the land liesas beautiful as the Garden of Eden.Behind them is nothing but desolation ; not one thing escapes .

ID:	3409
INPUT:	Jaiegunari buruzko eztabaida
PRED:	A Warning about the Sabbath
GOLD:	A Discussion about the Sabbath

ID:	3410
INPUT:	Ezin konta ahala dira gure erruak , baina zuk barkatu egiten <unk> hobenak .
PRED:	Do n't let us think of our sins , but you have forgiven us .
GOLD:	What joy for those you choose to bring near , those who live in your holy courts.What festivities await usinside your holy Temple .

ID:	3411
INPUT:	Entzun dudanean , ikarak hartu dit barrua . <unk> aditzean , dardaraz ditut ezpainak . <unk> sartu zait hezurretaraino , koloka ditut oinak . Geldi nago ni , egun larriaren zain , zapaltzen gaituen herriari <unk> zain .
PRED:	But when I heard this , I have heard my heart in my heart , when I have heard my heart , and I have heard my feet in my eyes , and I am trying to kill you .
GOLD:	I trembled inside when I heard this ; my lips quivered with fear.My legs gave way beneath me , and I shook in terror.I will wait quietly for the coming daywhen disaster will strike the people who invade us .

ID:	3412
INPUT:	David eta Betsabe
PRED:	David and David
GOLD:	David Arranges for Uriah 's Death

ID:	3413
INPUT:	<unk> seme <unk> esanak . Hona gizon honen mezua , <unk> eta <unk> emana .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : What sorrow awaits those who were filled with prophets and prophets and prophets who were filled with him .
GOLD:	The sayings of Agur son of Jakeh contain this message.I am weary , O God ; I am weary and worn out , O God .

ID:	3414
INPUT:	Ismaelek eta berekin zituen hamar gizonek , jaiki , ezpataz jo eta hil egin zuten Gedalias , Babiloniako erregeak Judako gobernari ezarria .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the other men of Judah attacked him , and the other men of Judah killed him , the king of Judah , and the king of Judah , king of Judah , and the king of Judah .
GOLD:	Ishmael and his ten men suddenly jumped up , drew their swords , and killed Gedaliah , whom the king of Babylon had appointed governor .

ID:	3415
INPUT:	Arduradunek eta herri osoak erantzun zioten : — Ez iezaiozu entzun , ez onartu .
PRED:	The people of Israel replied , “ Do n't listen to him . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't give in to any more demands , ” all the elders and the people advised .

ID:	3416
INPUT:	Egin beza nire ahoak Jaunaren <unk> bedeinka bezate izaki guztiek haren izen <unk> eta beti !
PRED:	Let all who fear the Lord , and they will bless you because they have seen his name .
GOLD:	I will praise the Lord , and may everyone on earth bless his holy nameforever and ever .

ID:	3417
INPUT:	Zeren Kristorengatik abiatu baitira , <unk> ezer ere hartu gabe .
PRED:	For I will send glory to Christ , and they will have no power .
GOLD:	For they are traveling for the Lord , and they accept nothing from people who are not believers .

ID:	3418
INPUT:	Nik , senideok , ezin izan nizuen hitz egin Espiritua dutenei bezala , pertsona <unk> bezala baizik , <unk> <unk> direnei bezala .
PRED:	I am writing to you , dear brothers and sisters , that I am writing to those who were willing to obey the Spirit as weak as I had promised .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , when I was with you I could n't talk to you as I would to spiritual people . I had to talk as though you belonged to this world or as though you were infants in Christ .

ID:	3419
INPUT:	Job
PRED:	Job 's Second Response to Job
GOLD:	Job 's Second Speech : A Response to Eliphaz

ID:	3420
INPUT:	Gauerdian jaiki eta , ni lo nengoen bitartean , nire ondotik nire haurra hartu eta bere ondoan etzan zuen ; bere seme hila , berriz , nire ondoan ezarri .
PRED:	When I saw my child , I was born before my child , and I took my child in my bed . But when he was dead , he put my child in my bed .
GOLD:	Then she got up in the night and took my son from beside me while I was asleep . She laid her dead child in my arms and took mine to sleep beside her .

ID:	3421
INPUT:	Jainko ahalguztiduna , itzuli , arren ! Begira zerutik , ikus ! Hartzazu zeure mahastiaren ardura ,
PRED:	Come back from heaven , O God of Heaven 's Armies , and let me see your vineyard .
GOLD:	that you yourself have planted , this son you have raised for yourself .

ID:	3422
INPUT:	Ez zetozen beren artean bat , eta , alde egitera zihoazela , Paulok azkenik esan zien : « Ederki asko esan zien Espiritu Santuak zuen arbasoei Isaias profetaren bidez :
PRED:	“ Do n't go with them , ” they asked them , “ I am going to see the Holy Spirit . ” So he said , “ I am the Holy Spirit . ”
GOLD:	And after they had argued back and forth among themselves , they left with this final word from Paul : “ The Holy Spirit was right when he said to your ancestors through Isaiah the prophet ,

ID:	3423
INPUT:	Zuen erruek , aldiz , nahastu egin dute ordena hau ; zeuen <unk> zarete lurreko <unk> .
PRED:	You must take away from your vineyard and tear it into the sea . You have built an object of all the earth and under your authority .
GOLD:	Your wickedness has deprived you of these wonderful blessings.Your sin has robbed you of all these good things .

ID:	3424
INPUT:	Jaunaren espirituz jantzirik , Gedeonek adarra jo eta bere ondoan bildu zituen Abiezerren senitartekoak .
PRED:	One of the ram 's Armies came to a ram 's horn , and he gathered the ram 's family .
GOLD:	Then the Spirit of the Lord clothed Gideon with power . He blew a ram 's horn as a call to arms , and the men of the clan of Abiezer came to him .

ID:	3425
INPUT:	Bai , Jainkoa da Kristoren bitartez mundua berekin adiskidetu duena , gizon-emakumeei bekatuen kontuak eskatu gabe , eta <unk> mezu hau gure esku utzi duena .
PRED:	For God has given us this world to be a man of Christ , who gives us authority to sin , so that God has given us authority to be forgiven .
GOLD:	For God was in Christ , reconciling the world to himself , no longer counting people 's sins against them . And he gave us this wonderful message of reconciliation .

ID:	3426
INPUT:	« Bil bitez nazio guztiak , elkar bitez herriak : horietako zeinek iragarri <unk> <unk> lehengo <unk> ? Aurkez bitzate lekukoak , beren buruak zuri ditzaten , entzun <unk> aitortu egia zela .
PRED:	“ Let all the nations be able to serve one of the nations and all the nations of the nations , and they will know that they have heard that they have seen , and they will know that they have heard that they have heard that they have heard .
GOLD:	Gather the nations together ! Assemble the peoples of the world ! Which of their idols has ever foretold such things ? Which can predict what will happen tomorrow ? Where are the witnesses of such predictions ? Who can verify that they spoke the truth ?

ID:	3427
INPUT:	« <unk> <unk> , ez egon zer esango duzuen kezkatan ; une hartan bertan Jainkoak adieraziko dizuena , esan huraxe , ez baitzarete zuek mintzatuko , Espiritu Santua baizik .
PRED:	“ But when I have heard that you do n't know what God is going to be able to say , ‘ This is what God says : If you are the Holy Spirit is the Holy Spirit , the Holy One of you will be the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	But when you are arrested and stand trial , do n't worry in advance about what to say . Just say what God tells you at that time , for it is not you who will be speaking , but the Holy Spirit .

ID:	3428
INPUT:	« Horrela bada , Jordanez beste aldeko , ekialdeko , bi errege amortar haien lurraldeak eskuratu genituen , Arnon errekatik Hermon mendiraino
PRED:	“ So we will cross the Jordan River to the east side of the Jordan River , from the east of the Arnon River to the Arnon River .
GOLD:	“ So we took the land of the two Amorite kings east of the Jordan River — all the way from the Arnon Gorge to Mount Hermon .

ID:	3429
INPUT:	Joan zen , bada , Samuel Saulen ondoren eta honek gurtu egin zuen Jauna .
PRED:	So Samuel served the Lord and worshiped him .
GOLD:	So Samuel finally agreed and went back with him , and Saul worshiped the Lord .

ID:	3430
INPUT:	« Ez zabaldu <unk> <unk> ; ez atera gaiztoaren alde , <unk> testigantza eginez .
PRED:	“ Do n't know that they have seen the power of the wicked , and when they saw that they were afraid of the wicked .
GOLD:	“ You must not pass along false rumors . You must not cooperate with evil people by lying on the witness stand .

ID:	3431
INPUT:	Izan ere , oraindik bekatupean indargabe ginela , Jainkoak erabakitako garaian , gaiztoen alde hil zen Kristo .
PRED:	For we have come to all the people of sin , for we have died in God 's presence .
GOLD:	When we were utterly helpless , Christ came at just the right time and died for us sinners .

ID:	3432
INPUT:	« Aitzitik , gaur ematen dizkizuedan agindu eta legeak betetzen saiatu ez eta Jaunari zeuen Jainkoari obeditzen ez badiozue , madarikazio hauek guztiak bete-betean iritsiko zaizkizue .
PRED:	Therefore , I am giving you today that I am giving you today and obey the commands of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ But if you refuse to listen to the Lord your God and do not obey all the commands and decrees I am giving you today , all these curses will come and overwhelm you :

ID:	3433
INPUT:	galdetuko dute : « Zertan gelditu da Kristo etorriko zela zioen agintzaria ? Izan ere , gure gurasoak hil ziren , eta geroztik denak berdin jarraitzen du , mundua mundu denetik bezalaxe » .
PRED:	“ What do you know ? ” they asked him . “ Since the Son of Christ returns , we will die in the world , just as we have died . ”
GOLD:	They will say , “ What happened to the promise that Jesus is coming again ? From before the times of our ancestors , everything has remained the same since the world was first created . ”

ID:	3434
INPUT:	Eta deiadarka esan zion : — Zer duzu nirekin , Jesus , goi-goiko Jainkoaren Seme horrek ? <unk> , ez nazazu <unk> !
PRED:	“ What do you come to me ? ” he said , “ Why are you afraid of God ? My child , my child , who knew me ? ”
GOLD:	With a shriek , he screamed , “ Why are you interfering with me , Jesus , Son of the Most High God ? In the name of God , I beg you , do n't torture me ! ”

ID:	3435
INPUT:	Eta apaiz edo profeta nahiz herrikoren batek “ Jaunaren mezua ( zama ) ” esaten badu , zigortu egingo ditut bera eta bere etxekoak .
PRED:	And if a prophet dies , he must say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will punish you . '
GOLD:	“ If any prophet , priest , or anyone else says , ‘ I have a prophecy from the Lord , ' I will punish that person along with his entire family .

ID:	3436
INPUT:	Gero , agindu zion Gehazi bere morroiari : — Deitu emakume <unk> horri . Egin zion dei eta etorri zen emakumea morroiarengana .
PRED:	Then Gehazi told her , “ I have come to meet you , ” she said . “ Yes , ” she came and called out to her .
GOLD:	He said to his servant Gehazi , “ Tell the woman from Shunem I want to speak to her . ” When she appeared ,

ID:	3437
INPUT:	« Baina Hexbongo Sihon erregeak ez zigun bere lurraldetik igarotzen utzi . Jaunak gure Jainkoak burugogor eta setatsu bihurtu zuen , bera guri eskura emateko asmoz , gaur ikus daitekeen bezala .
PRED:	“ But the king of Heshbon , our God has promised us , ‘ The Lord our God has promised us to us , just as he has promised us . '
GOLD:	“ But King Sihon of Heshbon refused to allow us to pass through , because the Lord your God made Sihon stubborn and defiant so he could help you defeat him , as he has now done .

ID:	3438
INPUT:	artelanak <unk> , urre , zilar eta brontzezko lanak egiteko ,
PRED:	At that time he makes a bronze grating of silver , bronze , bronze , and bronze .
GOLD:	He is a master craftsman , expert in working with gold , silver , and bronze .

ID:	3439
INPUT:	Jonasek erantzun zien : — <unk> naiz eta Jauna gurtzen dut , zeruko Jainkoa , itsasoa eta lehorra egin zituena .
PRED:	Then the sea replied , “ I am the Lord , the God of heaven and the sea , the sea , the sea , and the sea of the sea . ”
GOLD:	Jonah answered , “ I am a Hebrew , and I worship the Lord , the God of heaven , who made the sea and the land . ”

ID:	3440
INPUT:	Egin duen bekatuaz <unk> , ahuntz akats gabea eramango du barkamen-oparitzat .
PRED:	He will bring an idol that has been purchased by sin .
GOLD:	When they become aware of their sin , they must bring as an offering for their sin a female goat with no defects .

ID:	3441
INPUT:	Gero , miraririk gehienak egin zitueneko herriak madarikatzen hasi zen Jesus , bihozberritu ez zirelako .
PRED:	Then he began to rule over the nations of the nations who live in their trust in God . He did not let them be saved by the power of God .
GOLD:	Then Jesus began to denounce the towns where he had done so many of his miracles , because they had n't repented of their sins and turned to God .

ID:	3442
INPUT:	Ikusi zuenak berak testigatzen du eta haren testigantza egiazkoa da . Berak badaki egia dioena , zuek ere sinets dezazuen .
PRED:	For he knows how he tells you , and he is the true things that you do .
GOLD:	( This report is from an eyewitness giving an accurate account . He speaks the truth so that you also may continue to believe . )

ID:	3443
INPUT:	Santutegiko artisauak
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	Craftsmen : Bezalel and Oholiab

ID:	3444
INPUT:	Bere amaren <unk> irten zen , halaxe da itzuliko , bere lanaren saririk <unk> du berekin eramango .
PRED:	For when the mother of his mother came out , and everyone will be able to see how hard to be filled with people .
GOLD:	Money is put into risky investments that turn sour , and everything is lost . In the end , there is nothing left to pass on to one 's children .

ID:	3445
INPUT:	Gero , Jehu eta Rekaben seme Jonadab Baalen jauretxean sartu ziren . Jehuk esan zien Baalen <unk> : — Begira ezazue ongi hemen , zeuen artean , Jaunaren <unk> ba ote dagoen , ala <unk> bakarrik zaudeten .
PRED:	Then Jehu took the leader of the guard of the district of Baal , along with all the way of Baal . He said , “ Look , we have been very sure that we have been slaughtered by the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Then Jehu went into the temple of Baal with Jehonadab son of Recab . Jehu said to the worshipers of Baal , “ Make sure no one who worships the Lord is here — only those who worship Baal . ”

ID:	3446
INPUT:	Israel desleial Jaunarekin
PRED:	The
GOLD:	Judah Follows Israel 's Example

ID:	3447
INPUT:	Horrexegatik , hain zuzen , onartu egin zuen Jainkoak .
PRED:	That is why God has done for us .
GOLD:	And because of Abraham 's faith , God counted him as righteous .

ID:	3448
INPUT:	zedroak gure <unk> , <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who had been very old , and when we saw that he was very weak .
GOLD:	fragrant cedar branches are the beams of our house , and pleasant smelling firs are the rafters .

ID:	3449
INPUT:	Zure zerbitzarien <unk> hegaztiei eman dizkiete janari , zure fededunen haragia basapiztiei .
PRED:	All your servants have given their servants , and they have given them food as they had commanded you to eat .
GOLD:	They have left the bodies of your servantsas food for the birds of heaven.The flesh of your godly oneshas become food for the wild animals .

ID:	3450
INPUT:	<unk> salatzen <unk> duzue , eta egia dioena gaitzesten .
PRED:	You know that the truth has heard about the truth , and you have heard the truth .
GOLD:	How you hate honest judges ! How you despise people who tell the truth !

ID:	3451
INPUT:	Neure herri Israeli santu naizela <unk> diot , eta ez diot utziko neure izen santua gehiago belzten . Orduan jakingo dute nazioek ni naizela Jauna , Israelen Santua .
PRED:	I will make my covenant with my people , and I will make my holy name . Then they will know that I am the Lord . Then they will know that I am the Holy One of Israel .
GOLD:	“ In this way , I will make known my holy name among my people of Israel . I will not let anyone bring shame on it . And the nations , too , will know that I am the Lord , the Holy One of Israel .

ID:	3452
INPUT:	Goretsazue Jauna , dei egin berari , jakinarazi herrien artean haren egintza bikainak !
PRED:	Praise the Lord ! Praise the nations of the wicked , for he has given them the wicked of the wicked .
GOLD:	Give thanks to the Lord and proclaim his greatness.Let the whole world know what he has done .

ID:	3453
INPUT:	zilarrezko ehun txanponeko isuna , israeldar birjina bati izen ona <unk> , eta dirua neskaren aitari emango diote ; gainera , emaztetzat onartu beharko du eta ezin izango du bizitza osoan zapuztu .
PRED:	One of the tribe of Levi , one of the tribe of Levi , for they are guilty of silver , and they would have been given to her father 's father . He will not be punished for his father and his father .
GOLD:	They must also fine him 100 pieces of silver , which he must pay to the woman 's father because he publicly accused a virgin of Israel of shameful conduct . The woman will then remain the man 's wife , and he may never divorce her .

ID:	3454
INPUT:	Jauna ihesleku da <unk> , ihesleku larrialdian .
PRED:	The Lord is the fortress of the city , and the city of trouble is near .
GOLD:	Those who know your name trust in you , for you , O Lord , do not abandon those who search for you .

ID:	3455
INPUT:	aita nahiz ama , anaia nahiz arreba hiltzen bazaio ere , ez da kutsatuko , Jaunari sagaratua baitu bere burua .
PRED:	If your father or mother or mother or mother or mother or mother or a child , it must be holy .
GOLD:	Even if the dead person is their own father , mother , brother , or sister , they must not defile themselves , for the hair on their head is the symbol of their separation to God .

ID:	3456
INPUT:	Esdras Jainkoaren etxe aurretik Eliaxiben seme Johananen gelara joan zen , eta bertan eman zuen gaua . Ez zuen ezer jan , ez edan , erbestetik etorritakoen <unk> nahigabeturik .
PRED:	So Ezra returned to the Temple of God and gave it to the Temple of God . He also gave it to the Temple of God and all the people of God . There was only one of the Temple of God .
GOLD:	Then Ezra left the front of the Temple of God and went to the room of Jehohanan son of Eliashib . He spent the night there without eating or drinking anything . He was still in mourning because of the unfaithfulness of the returned exiles .

ID:	3457
INPUT:	Beraz , beren fruituetatik antzemango diezue sasiprofetei .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the godless from their lips .
GOLD:	Yes , just as you can identify a tree by its fruit , so you can identify people by their actions .

ID:	3458
INPUT:	Horregatik ikaratzen nau haren <unk> ; zenbat eta gehiago pentsatu , are gehiago beldurtzen nau .
PRED:	That 's why I have seen his power , and even though I have turned away from you .
GOLD:	No wonder I am so terrified in his presence.When I think of it , terror grips me .

ID:	3459
INPUT:	« Badakizue legean aurrekoei agindu zitzaiena : Ez hil inor ; eta hiltzailea kondenatua izango da .
PRED:	“ You must know that the Jewish leaders have been given by the murder of murder , and they must not murder .
GOLD:	“ You have heard that our ancestors were told , ‘ You must not murder . If you commit murder , you are subject to judgment . '

ID:	3460
INPUT:	halakoak ez duela <unk> agindu hori bete beharrik ; horrela , Jainkoaren hitza baliogabe uzten duzue , zeuen usadioengatik .
PRED:	For we have been sure that you have been able to bring them into the power of God . For you have given him to the Son of God .
GOLD:	In this way , you say they do n't need to honor their parents . And so you cancel the word of God for the sake of your own tradition .

ID:	3461
INPUT:	Haiek okertu , erori egiten dira ; guk , berriz , zutik eta sendo irauten .
PRED:	They left him and camped at him , but they stand firm and obey him .
GOLD:	Give victory to our king , O Lord ! Answer our cry for help .

ID:	3462
INPUT:	Saia gaitezen guztiok lagun hurkoari atsegin ematen , ona eta fedean hazteko lagungarri zaiona bilatuz .
PRED:	Instead , let us grow in charge of the church in charge of the church in charge of the church .
GOLD:	We should help others do what is right and build them up in the Lord .

ID:	3463
INPUT:	Ez al dakizue zuen gorputza Jainkoak eman dizuen eta zuengan bizi den Espiritu Santuaren tenplu dela ? Beraz , ez zarete jadanik zeuenak ,
PRED:	Do n't you realize that God has given you the Holy Spirit , and you have given you the Holy Spirit in the Temple of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Do n't you realize that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit , who lives in you and was given to you by God ? You do not belong to yourself ,

ID:	3464
INPUT:	« <unk> bere <unk> gobernatuko , Israelgo beste leinuek bezala .
PRED:	“ At that time the king of Israel will rule over all the nations of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Dan will govern his people , like any other tribe in Israel .

ID:	3465
INPUT:	Merariren ondorengoen senitarteak mahlitarrak eta muxitarrak ziren .
PRED:	These were the names of the Kohathite clan , and the sons of the Kohathite clan .
GOLD:	The descendants of Merari were composed of the clans descended from Mahli and Mushi .

ID:	3466
INPUT:	Jainko <unk> egiteko <unk> nau , bihotz-eroriak <unk> ditzadan . Goizero dit belarria ernearazten , ikasle onak <unk> diezaiodan .
PRED:	For when I know that the Sovereign Lord is able to kill me , and I will punish you , and they will know how hard I have done .
GOLD:	The Sovereign Lord has given me his words of wisdom , so that I know how to comfort the weary.Morning by morning he wakens meand opens my understanding to his will .

ID:	3467
INPUT:	Eta hark erantzun : — Babiloniara ; han santutegia eraikiko diote , eta prest <unk> , oin-aulki gainean jarriko dute .
PRED:	Then he said to Babylon , “ There will be able to build my Temple to build my Temple with bronze . ”
GOLD:	He replied , “ To the land of Babylonia , where they will build a temple for the basket . And when the temple is ready , they will set the basket there on its pedestal . ”

ID:	3468
INPUT:	Ordezkari haiek ahots handiz eta hebreeraz mintzo zitzaizkion Jerusalemgo harresi gainean zegoen jendeari , ikara eta beldur zedin , horrela hiriaz jabetu ahal izateko .
PRED:	The woman was with a loud voice , and the people of Jerusalem began to stand on the city . They were afraid of the people of Jerusalem , and they were afraid to be afraid .
GOLD:	The Assyrian officials who brought the letters shouted this in Hebrew to the people gathered on the walls of the city , trying to terrify them so it would be easier to capture the city .

ID:	3469
INPUT:	Hona hemen nire zerbitzaria , nik hautatua , nire maitea , atsegin dudana . Beronen gain ezarriko dut neure espiritua : nazioei justizia iragarriko die .
PRED:	“ This is the servant of my servant , my servant , my servant , and I will give you victory over my people , and I will give you victory over the nations .
GOLD:	“ Look at my Servant , whom I have chosen.He is my Beloved , who pleases me.I will put my Spirit upon him , and he will proclaim justice to the nations .

ID:	3470
INPUT:	Goretsiko dut Jauna bizi naizen artean , soinua joko neure Jainkoari naizen artean .
PRED:	I am the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies , and I will praise you among the earth .
GOLD:	I will praise the Lord as long as I live.I will sing praises to my God with my dying breath .

ID:	3471
INPUT:	aitak ez bezala : sasikultu-lekuetako otorduetan parte hartzen du , lagun hurkoaren emaztea desohoratzen ;
PRED:	He has not sinned and burned incense on the head of her head .
GOLD:	And that son does all the evil things his father would never do — he worships idols on the mountains , commits adultery ,

ID:	3472
INPUT:	Etsaia ikusiko duzu zeurean ; Israel herriari , ordea , dena ongi aterako zaio . Zure etxean , berriz , bakar bat ere ez da <unk> inoiz helduko .
PRED:	But if the people of Israel will see the people of Israel , they will see that the people of Israel will be able to see your own home , and they will be able to see that they will be able to see .
GOLD:	You will watch with envy as I pour out prosperity on the people of Israel . But no members of your family will ever live out their days .

ID:	3473
INPUT:	Ezekias erregeak ere , hori entzutean , jantziak urratu zituen eta , doluz jantzirik , Jaunaren etxera jo zuen .
PRED:	When Hezekiah heard this , he tore his clothes in burlap and dressed in burlap to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	When King Hezekiah heard their report , he tore his clothes and put on burlap and went into the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	3474
INPUT:	eta hala jakinarazi zion Davidi , Natan profetaren bidez . Orduan , Jaunaren omenez , <unk> ipini zion izena , hau da , « Jaunaren Maitea » .
PRED:	Then he said to David , ‘ This man has given me the message of the Lord , the God of the Lord has given him . '
GOLD:	and sent word through Nathan the prophet that they should name him Jedidiah ( which means “ beloved of the Lord ” ) , as the Lord had commanded .

ID:	3475
INPUT:	itzul niregana , erruki zakizkit , eman indar zeure zerbitzari honi , salba zeure zerbitzari apala .
PRED:	I have given me mercy on me , for you have given me your servant .
GOLD:	Look down and have mercy on me.Give your strength to your servant ; save me , the son of your servant .

ID:	3476
INPUT:	lurralde guztian izango dituzue olibondoak , baina ez zarete olioz gantzutuko , erori egingo baitira olibak ;
PRED:	You will rule over the land of Egypt , but you will not be blessed by the tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	You will grow olive trees throughout your land , but you will never use the olive oil , for the fruit will drop before it ripens .

ID:	3477
INPUT:	Benetan diotsuet : Dena barkatuko die Jainkoak gizakiei , bekatuak eta egin <unk> birao guztiak ;
PRED:	I tell you the truth , God has punished all these sins , and they have been forgiven by sin .
GOLD:	“ I tell you the truth , all sin and blasphemy can be forgiven ,

ID:	3478
INPUT:	Zure merkantziak <unk> , herri asko hornitzen zenuen ; zeure <unk> merkantzia <unk> <unk> zenituen .
PRED:	Your great power were filled with your people , and when your people were filled with great power , and when your people were filled with all the kingdoms of your land .
GOLD:	The merchandise you tradedsatisfied the desires of many nations.Kings at the ends of the earthwere enriched by your trade .

ID:	3479
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Zer dago idatzia Moisesen legean ? Zer irakurtzen duzu ?
PRED:	Jesus asked him , “ What do you read ? What do you read ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ What does the law of Moses say ? How do you read it ? ”

ID:	3480
INPUT:	baina eguzkiak jo orduko , erre egin zen eta , sustrairik ez zuelako , ihartu .
PRED:	But when the sky grew up , they did n't have died .
GOLD:	But the plant soon wilted under the hot sun , and since it did n't have deep roots , it died .

ID:	3481
INPUT:	Haiek esan zioten : — Jauna , baditugu hemen bi ezpata . Baina Jesusek erantzun : — Aski da !
PRED:	“ We are here here , ” they replied . “ We are here here ! ”
GOLD:	“ Look , Lord , ” they replied , “ we have two swords among us . ” “ That 's enough , ” he said .

ID:	3482
INPUT:	Zutabe-buruetan zeuden kapitel <unk> sare antzeko apaindurak egin zituen eta <unk> , kapitel <unk> zazpi .
PRED:	For they were like a huge pillar of bronze grating and how they were under the pillar of bronze .
GOLD:	Each capital was decorated with seven sets of latticework and interwoven chains .

ID:	3483
INPUT:	hala ere , hau erantzun zion hark : « Erregeak berak erabaki du zuek zer jan behar duzuen ; horregatik naiz beldur , zeren eta , beste gazteei baino itxura txarragoa ikusiko balizue , nire bizia jarriko <unk> arriskuan » .
PRED:	But the king said to him , “ I am going to eat what you have done . If I want you to eat , I am afraid of you , and I 'll know that I am afraid of my life . ”
GOLD:	But he responded , “ I am afraid of my lord the king , who has ordered that you eat this food and wine . If you become pale and thin compared to the other youths your age , I am afraid the king will have me beheaded . ”

ID:	3484
INPUT:	horixe agertu digu Jainkoak Espirituaren bidez . Espirituak , izan ere , guztia aztertzen du , baita Jainkoaren <unk> ere .
PRED:	For God has revealed us to us by the Spirit of the Spirit , and all the Spirit of God will know that the Spirit of God has given us .
GOLD:	But it was to us that God revealed these things by his Spirit . For his Spirit searches out everything and shows us God 's deep secrets .

ID:	3485
INPUT:	lehen-semea izan zuen ; oihaletan bildu eta <unk> batean ezarri zuen , ez baitzen <unk> haientzat tokirik .
PRED:	One day when he saw his son , he threw him into a boat with his mother and his mother , and he was with him .
GOLD:	She gave birth to her firstborn son . She wrapped him snugly in strips of cloth and laid him in a manger , because there was no lodging available for them .

ID:	3486
INPUT:	Ez nazazu eraman gaiztoekin batera , gaizkile horiekin batera : besteren aurrean bakezko hitzak dituzte , baina barruan txarkeria .
PRED:	Do n't let me be faithful to your own people , but they have no ordinary work in peace .
GOLD:	Do not drag me away with the wicked — with those who do evil — those who speak friendly words to their neighborswhile planning evil in their hearts .

ID:	3487
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : « Ez beldurtu ! Zoazte eta esan nire senideei Galileara joateko ; han ikusiko naute » .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Do n't be afraid of my brothers and sisters , stay here in Galilee . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus said to them , “ Do n't be afraid ! Go tell my brothers to leave for Galilee , and they will see me there . ”

ID:	3488
INPUT:	Meribako iturrian Jainkoa haserretu zuten , eta haien erruz Moisesek jasan zuen kaltea .
PRED:	Then Moses was angry with them , and he rescued them from the waters of the earth .
GOLD:	At Meribah , too , they angered the Lord , causing Moses serious trouble .

ID:	3489
INPUT:	Davidena . Ez zaitez gaiztoengatik haserretu , ezta gaizkileen inbidiatan egon ere ,
PRED:	Do n't be angry ; do n't be angry with the wicked .
GOLD:	Do n't worry about the wickedor envy those who do wrong .

ID:	3490
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Nik ezarritako lege <unk> huts egingo ez duten bezala , Israel herriak ere ez du huts egingo , betiko iraungo du nire aurrean .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will destroy all the people of Israel , and they will not be my people , and they will never be destroyed .
GOLD:	“ I am as likely to reject my people Israelas I am to abolish the laws of nature ! ”

ID:	3491
INPUT:	Goazen , bada , gu ere Jesusengana , kanpalekutik kanpora , haren desohorea bera eramanez ,
PRED:	Let us go into the camp , and let us enter the camp of Jesus .
GOLD:	So let us go out to him , outside the camp , and bear the disgrace he bore .

ID:	3492
INPUT:	Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren <unk> etorrerari buruz hitz egin genizuenean , ez ginen oinarritu <unk> <unk> , geure <unk> baizik , geure begiz ikusi baikenuen haren handitasuna .
PRED:	For we have been able to see the Lord Jesus when we learned that you were able to see that we were in the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ , so we could see that we have seen his glory .
GOLD:	For we were not making up clever stories when we told you about the powerful coming of our Lord Jesus Christ . We saw his majestic splendor with our own eyes

ID:	3493
INPUT:	Agindu hau bete zuten , baina « hildakoen artetik <unk> » horrekin zer adierazi nahi ote zien ziharduten beren artean .
PRED:	So the men told them , “ Why are you going to kill the dead ? ” So they asked .
GOLD:	So they kept it to themselves , but they often asked each other what he meant by “ rising from the dead . ”

ID:	3494
INPUT:	Neftaliren leinutik , Enanen seme Ahira » .
PRED:	Joab son of Ammihud
GOLD:	NaphtaliAhira son of Enan

ID:	3495
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jaunak Sion aukeratu dueta gogoko izan bertan bizitzea :
PRED:	For the Lord loves Jerusalem ; he chose those who love him .
GOLD:	For the Lord has chosen Jerusalem ; he has desired it for his home .

ID:	3496
INPUT:	Ofizialek esan zioten Siriako erregeari : — <unk> jainkoa dute israeldarrek beren jainko . Horregatik izan dira gu baino indartsuago . Borroka ditzagun , beraz , lautadan ; baietz izan orduan gu haiek baino indartsuago !
PRED:	Then the king of Aram said to the king of Aram , “ That is why the god of Aram is more powerful than the people of Aram . That 's why we have done for us . ”
GOLD:	After their defeat , Ben-hadad 's officers said to him , “ The Israelite gods are gods of the hills ; that is why they won . But we can beat them easily on the plains .

ID:	3497
INPUT:	« Esan Aaroni : Etorkizunean , <unk> bat duen zuen ondorengoetariko inor ere ez da aldarera hurbilduko Jainkoaren oparia eskaintzera .
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to Aaron : The descendants of Aaron must be taken to the altar of God , and he must not offer any sacrifices to the altar of God .
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to Aaron : In all future generations , none of your descendants who has any defect will qualify to offer food to his God .

ID:	3498
INPUT:	Emakumeek ere agurgarri izan behar dute eta ez <unk> ; neurritsu eta gauza guztietan fidagarri .
PRED:	But if the women are poor , do n't be able to be poor and small .
GOLD:	In the same way , their wives must be respected and must not slander others . They must exercise self-control and be faithful in everything they do .

ID:	3499
INPUT:	Ezagun-ezagunak ditut zure egintzak , eta inork itxi ezin duen atea utzi dut zure aurrean zabalik . Indar handirik ez duzun arren , onartu duzu nire mezua eta ez duzu ukatu nire izena .
PRED:	“ I know the meaning of all the earth , and no one can see your word . But you do n't know your word , but you do n't know my name .
GOLD:	“ I know all the things you do , and I have opened a door for you that no one can close . You have little strength , yet you obeyed my word and did not deny me .

ID:	3500
INPUT:	« Ez du inork bere aitaren emazte batekin sexu-harremanik izango , aitaren eskubidea hautsiko bailuke .
PRED:	“ Do not have sexual relations with a wife , for no one would have sex with their father 's wives .
GOLD:	“ If a man 's testicles are crushed or his penis is cut off , he may not be admitted to the assembly of the Lord .

ID:	3501
INPUT:	Nahiz argiaren <unk> <unk> , nahiz mendebaldeko itsas mugetan kokatu ,
PRED:	“ But if they have seen the power of the Euphrates River , the kings of the earth will come from the sea ,
GOLD:	If I ride the wings of the morning , if I dwell by the farthest oceans ,

ID:	3502
INPUT:	Neure eskuz <unk> dizut ordain-agiria : Paulok ; eta ez dizut aipatu nahi zuk zeure burua bera zor <unk> .
PRED:	I asked you , ‘ I am the commander of my own hand , and I want you to ask you , and I will give you your authority . '
GOLD:	I , Paul , write this with my own hand : I will repay it . And I wo n't mention that you owe me your very soul !

ID:	3503
INPUT:	« <unk> , Masan eta <unk> ere sumindu zenuten Jauna .
PRED:	“ When you know that the Lord has been able to kill you , you were very angry with me .
GOLD:	“ You also made the Lord angry at Taberah , Massah , and Kibroth-hattaavah .

ID:	3504
INPUT:	Norbait Jaunarengana itzultzen denean bakarrik kentzen zaio estalkia .
PRED:	Anyone who refuses to listen to the Lord will turn away from the path of the Lord .
GOLD:	But whenever someone turns to the Lord , the veil is taken away .

ID:	3505
INPUT:	Eta Dario <unk> egin zen hango errege , hirurogeita bi urte zituela .
PRED:	And when he learned that he was made , he made two years old when he became king .
GOLD:	Darius the Mede decided to divide the kingdom into 120 provinces , and he appointed a high officer to rule over each province .

ID:	3506
INPUT:	Neu naiz atea ; ate honetan zehar sartzen dena , onik izango da , eta ez du inolako eragozpenik izango larreak aurkitzeko .
PRED:	I am going to go into the city , and there will no longer be no longer . There will be no more than their lives .
GOLD:	Yes , I am the gate . Those who come in through me will be saved . They will come and go freely and will find good pastures .

ID:	3507
INPUT:	<unk> ere , berez dagozkien <unk> harremanak utzirik , elkarren irrikaz <unk> dabiltza : gizonezkoek gizonezkoekin itsuskeriak egiten dituzte eta , horrela , beren jokabide okerraz merezitako zigorra <unk> hartzen .
PRED:	When they have heard that they were sick , and they have filled with idols , and they have filled with idols . They have filled with their idols , and they have broken their sins , and they will forgive their sins .
GOLD:	And the men , instead of having normal sexual relations with women , burned with lust for each other . Men did shameful things with other men , and as a result of this sin , they suffered within themselves the penalty they deserved .

ID:	3508
INPUT:	Pisga <unk> <unk> batera eraman zuen . Han ere zazpi aldare eraiki eta bakoitzean zekor eta ahari bana eskaini zituen .
PRED:	As soon as the Lamb had been taken , he brought with two rams and a burnt offering and a burnt offering and a burnt offering .
GOLD:	So Balak took Balaam to the plateau of Zophim on Pisgah Peak . He built seven altars there and offered a young bull and a ram on each altar .

ID:	3509
INPUT:	Jauna , ordea , leiala da , eta beronek sendotuko zaituzte eta gaiztoarengandik zainduko .
PRED:	But the Lord will rule over you , and he will rule over you .
GOLD:	But the Lord is faithful ; he will strengthen you and guard you from the evil one .

ID:	3510
INPUT:	Josueren seme eta Mitzpako buru zen <unk> harresiaren ertzean dagoen <unk> <unk> konpondu zuen .
PRED:	When Joshua son of Nun , the leader of Joshua son of Nun , the leader of the district of Saul and grandson of Nun .
GOLD:	Next to them , Ezer son of Jeshua , the leader of Mizpah , repaired another section of wall across from the ascent to the armory near the angle in the wall .

ID:	3511
INPUT:	« Agindu israeldarrei jabetzan hartuko duten ondaretik lebitarrei zenbait hiri emateko , inguruko lurrekin batera , haietan bizi daitezen .
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel . They must bring the following towns to the tribe of Levi , and they must live among the people of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Command the people of Israel to give to the Levites from their property certain towns to live in , along with the surrounding pasturelands .

ID:	3512
INPUT:	Opariak <unk> <unk> zeure tenplura ;
PRED:	I have seen the Temple of your Temple , and your name will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	Rebuke these enemy nations — these wild animals lurking in the reeds , this herd of bulls among the weaker calves.Make them bring bars of silver in humble tribute.Scatter the nations that delight in war .

ID:	3513
INPUT:	nire <unk> ez ziren zuretzat ezkutu , isilpean eratzen ari nintzela , lurraren barruan <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	But when they were able to kill me , they would be baptized by the point of the earth . And when they saw that they were filled with power .
GOLD:	You watched me as I was being formed in utter seclusion , as I was woven together in the dark of the womb .

ID:	3514
INPUT:	Daviden poema . Zoriontsua Jainkoak hobena kendu eta bekatua barkatu diona !
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you , O God , who has punished me from my sin .
GOLD:	Oh , what joy for thosewhose disobedience is forgiven , whose sin is put out of sight !

ID:	3515
INPUT:	Ez jo zeure burua jakintsutzat ; izan , ordea , begirune Jaunari eta ihes egin <unk> .
PRED:	Do n't fear the Lord for you , but do n't fear the Lord . But when they were afraid of the Lord , they attacked him .
GOLD:	Do n't be impressed with your own wisdom.Instead , fear the Lord and turn away from evil .

ID:	3516
INPUT:	Salomonen esaera zaharrak . Seme zuhurra aitaren pozbide , seme zentzugabea amaren atsekabe .
PRED:	These are the words of Solomon ; the son of Solomon 's son .
GOLD:	The proverbs of Solomon : A wise child brings joy to a father ; a foolish child brings grief to a mother .

ID:	3517
INPUT:	Hobe behartsu eta prestu izan , mihi <unk> eta zentzugabe baino .
PRED:	Better to be poor , and those who are wise .
GOLD:	Better to be poor and honestthan to be dishonest and a fool .

ID:	3518
INPUT:	Izan bedi beti errege zure begiradapean ! Izan bitza zure maitasun eta leialtasuna zaindari !
PRED:	May the king be faithful in your unfailing love and faithfulness be filled with all who love him .
GOLD:	Then I will sing praises to your name foreveras I fulfill my vows each day .

ID:	3519
INPUT:	Salomonen jauregia
PRED:	Solomon 's Message about Solomon
GOLD:	Solomon Builds His Palace

ID:	3520
INPUT:	Davidek ez zion inori bizia barkatzen , ez gizonei , ez emakumeei , Gatera inor ez <unk> ; beraren jokabidearen berri inork eman ez zezan . Horrela jokatu zuen Davidek filistearren artean bizi izan zen denboraldi guztian .
PRED:	But David did not forgive the men of the women , for they had not been afraid to kill them . They did n't have enough to kill them .
GOLD:	No one was left alive to come to Gath and tell where he had really been . This happened again and again while he was living among the Philistines .

ID:	3521
INPUT:	Tiro hiria <unk> datorkizu , herriko handikiak zure abegi onaren bila .
PRED:	The city of Tyre and Tyre are wise , and the people of Tyre are looking for help .
GOLD:	The bride , a princess , looks gloriousin her golden gown .

ID:	3522
INPUT:	horrela , ondaretzat zuek bezala lursailik hartu ez duen lebitarrak eta zuekin bizi diren etorkin , umezurtz eta <unk> zer jana izango dute ; eta Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak eginkizun guztiak ongi burutzeko bidea emango dizue .
PRED:	And if you have given the Levites to the Levites of the Levites who are among you , foreigners living in the land you may serve the Lord your God . They will give you whatever you do , and the Lord your God will give you .
GOLD:	Give it to the Levites , who will receive no allotment of land among you , as well as to the foreigners living among you , the orphans , and the widows in your towns , so they can eat and be satisfied . Then the Lord your God will bless you in all your work .

ID:	3523
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Zuei eman zaizue Jainkoaren erregetzaren <unk> ezagutzea ; horiei , ordea , ez .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ If you do n't know what you do ? ” But he replied , “ I do n't know what you do .
GOLD:	He replied , “ You are permitted to understand the secrets of the Kingdom of Heaven , but others are not .

ID:	3524
INPUT:	Itzultzean , mendian barrena zeuden hilobiak begiztatu zituen Josiasek , eta hilobi haietako hezurrak hartu eta aldare gainean erretzeko agindu zuen . Horrela profanatu zuen aldare hura . Hala agindua zuen Jaunak , gauza hauek hots egin zituen profetaren bidez .
PRED:	Then Josiah left the hill country of the Lord , and he took care of them and put them on the altar of the altar . Then the Lord had commanded him to purify the altar of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then Josiah turned around and noticed several tombs in the side of the hill . He ordered that the bones be brought out , and he burned them on the altar at Bethel to desecrate it . ( This happened just as the Lord had promised through the man of God when Jeroboam stood beside the altar at the festival . ) Then Josiah turned and looked up at the tomb of the man of God who had predicted these things .

ID:	3525
INPUT:	ez beza zuetako inork semea nahiz alaba oparitzat erre ; ez bedi izan zuen artean geroa igartzeko <unk> <unk> , sorginkeria nahiz <unk> erabiliko duenik ,
PRED:	Let no longer be taken from your own sons and daughters , or they will be burned among you , and they will know that they were afraid of you . ”
GOLD:	For example , never sacrifice your son or daughter as a burnt offering . And do not let your people practice fortune-telling , or use sorcery , or interpret omens , or engage in witchcraft ,

ID:	3526
INPUT:	Israelgo errege Joax , Joakazen semea , hil eta gero , beste hamabost urtez bizi izan zen Judako errege Amatzias , Joaxen semea .
PRED:	King Jehoash of Israel died , and he became king of Judah .
GOLD:	King Amaziah of Judah lived for fifteen years after the death of King Jehoash of Israel .

ID:	3527
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> erori ziren zerutik gizon-emakumeen gainera , eta hauek madarikatu egin zuten Jainkoa <unk> , benetan zigor ikaragarria izan baitzen .
PRED:	At that time they fell down from heaven , and those who were terrified by the authority of God , and they praised God .
GOLD:	There was a terrible hailstorm , and hailstones weighing as much as seventy-five pounds fell from the sky onto the people below . They cursed God because of the terrible plague of the hailstorm .

ID:	3528
INPUT:	<unk> iraunaraziko nauzu , zutik eutsiko zeure aurrean betiko .
PRED:	I will thank you , and I will punish you with eternal life .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , who lives from everlasting to everlasting.Amen and amen !

ID:	3529
INPUT:	Jainkoak Moisesi Egiptora itzultzeko agindu
PRED:	The Death of Moses
GOLD:	's Power

ID:	3530
INPUT:	Ez da jadanik bereizketarik juduaren eta judu ez denaren artean , esklaboaren eta librearen artean , <unk> eta <unk> artean , zuek guztiok bat baitzarete Kristo Jesusengan .
PRED:	No , the law of the church is not a Jew and the church of the Jews who are not slaves among the Gentiles , and the slave of the church will be sure that some of you have been circumcised .
GOLD:	There is no longer Jew or Gentile , slave or free , male and female . For you are all one in Christ Jesus .

ID:	3531
INPUT:	Ondoren , Jaunak erraietako gaixotasun <unk> jo zuen Joram .
PRED:	Then the Lord struck down with a skin disease .
GOLD:	After all this , the Lord struck Jehoram with an incurable intestinal disease .

ID:	3532
INPUT:	Nik galdetu nuen : “ Zer egin behar dut , Jauna ? ” Eta Jaunak erantzun : “ Jaiki , zoaz Damaskora , eta han esango dizute Jainkoak zuretzat ezarria daukan egiteko guztia ” .
PRED:	“ What should I ask you ? ” I asked , “ I am the Lord , and I will ask you , ‘ Stand up and go to Damascus . '
GOLD:	“ I asked , ‘ What should I do , Lord ? ' “ And the Lord told me , ‘ Get up and go into Damascus , and there you will be told everything you are to do . '

ID:	3533
INPUT:	Gora , bada , alaitasuna ! Ez baitu <unk> beste onik , jan , edan eta gozatzea baizik . Horixe bakarrik atera <unk> <unk> , Jainkoak mundu honetan <unk> dizkion egunetan .
PRED:	For the Lord has given me great joy , for those who have been able to kill me . For when they were very sick , they will know that God was very very very very very old , and when they were very very very very very very very very old .
GOLD:	So I recommend having fun , because there is nothing better for people in this world than to eat , drink , and enjoy life . That way they will experience some happiness along with all the hard work God gives them under the sun .

ID:	3534
INPUT:	Beren idolo higuingarriak ipini dituzte niri sagaraturiko etxean , berau profanatuz .
PRED:	For they have set their idols on their own house , and they have defiled my Temple .
GOLD:	They have set up their abominable idols right in my own Temple , defiling it .

ID:	3535
INPUT:	eta berak ematen dio gorputz osoari <unk> eta batasuna , atal guztiek , bakoitzak bere jarduera <unk> arabera , gorputz osoaren alde egiten duten <unk> bitartez ; horrela , gorputza haziz eta maitasunean <unk> eraikiz doa .
PRED:	For he will give all his parts as much as a result , all parts of every body will be filled with all parts of his parts , and all who are parts will be filled with love .
GOLD:	He makes the whole body fit together perfectly . As each part does its own special work , it helps the other parts grow , so that the whole body is healthy and growing and full of love .

ID:	3536
INPUT:	Ez al duzue nahikoa larre <unk> <unk> ? Zergatik zapaldu hankapean gainerako larrea ? Ez al duzue nahikoa ur garbia edatea ? Zergatik zikindu gainerakoa zeuen hankaz ?
PRED:	Do n't you think they have enough enough ? Why are you so weak ? Why are you so weak ? Why are you enough water ? Why ca n't you find no water ?
GOLD:	Is n't it enough for you to keep the best of the pastures for yourselves ? Must you also trample down the rest ? Is n't it enough for you to drink clear water for yourselves ? Must you also muddy the rest with your feet ?

ID:	3537
INPUT:	Hurbildu ziren haiek eta , beren <unk> bildurik , kanpalekutik atera zituzten , Moisesek agindu bezala .
PRED:	So Moses went out and threw them out to the camp , just as Moses had commanded them .
GOLD:	So they came forward and picked them up by their garments and carried them out of the camp , just as Moses had commanded .

ID:	3538
INPUT:	Erromes-kanta . Davidena . Jauna , nire bihotza ez da <unk> , ez nire begiak <unk> ; ez nabil gauza handien atzetik , ez neurriz <unk> atzetik .
PRED:	The Lord is my heart , and my heart are my heart , and I will see that my eyes are in my eyes , and I will not be able to see what he says .
GOLD:	Lord , my heart is not proud ; my eyes are not haughty.I do n't concern myself with matters too greator too awesome for me to grasp .

ID:	3539
INPUT:	umezurtz eta zapalduaren eskubideak babesteko . Ez beza gehiago beldurrik <unk> eginiko gizakiak !
PRED:	Let the poor be poor and poor , and let them be afraid to be afraid .
GOLD:	You will bring justice to the orphans and the oppressed , so mere people can no longer terrify them .

ID:	3540
INPUT:	Benetan profeta badira eta Jaunaren hitza hartu badute , erregutu diezaiotela Jaun ahalguztidunari , Babiloniara eraman ez ditzaten , tenpluan , Judako erregearen jauregian eta Jerusalemen oraindik gelditzen diren tresnak .
PRED:	If the prophets of the Lord has given me a message from the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , bring them into the Temple of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies and all the people of Judah .
GOLD:	If they really are prophets and speak the Lord 's messages , let them pray to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . Let them pray that the articles remaining in the Lord 's Temple and in the king 's palace and in the palaces of Jerusalem will not be carried away to Babylon ! '

ID:	3541
INPUT:	Gudalburuak , hurbildurik , preso hartu zuen Paulo eta bi katez lotzeko agindu . Gero , ea nor zen eta zer egin zuen galdetu zuen ;
PRED:	So the commander of the Roman governor , and he sent Paul to be baptized and bound in chains . Then he asked him what he asked .
GOLD:	Then the commander arrested him and ordered him bound with two chains . He asked the crowd who he was and what he had done .

ID:	3542
INPUT:	Horregatik , bidea sasiz itxiko diot , inguruan hesia jarriko , bere <unk> <unk> ez dezan .
PRED:	Therefore , I will take place where the way , and the way where they will be able to kill him , and they will be able to kill him .
GOLD:	She does n't realize it was I who gave her everything she has — the grain , the new wine , the olive oil ; I even gave her silver and gold.But she gave all my gifts to Baal .

ID:	3543
INPUT:	Kristori esker eta beronengan dugun sinesmenaren bitartez ausartzen gara konfiantza osoz Jainkoarengana <unk> .
PRED:	For we have made God 's grace and with Christ , so that we have been baptized with God .
GOLD:	Because of Christ and our faith in him , we can now come boldly and confidently into God 's presence .

ID:	3544
INPUT:	« <unk> haiek guztiak hil zirenean ,
PRED:	“ When they heard that they were killed , they killed all died .
GOLD:	“ When all the men of fighting age had died ,

ID:	3545
INPUT:	Herriko jende xehea baizik ez zuen utzi , alorrak eta mahastiak landu zitzaten .
PRED:	A few who were not allowed to plant or plant or plant or plant crops .
GOLD:	But the captain of the guard allowed some of the poorest people to stay behind to care for the vineyards and fields .

ID:	3546
INPUT:	Jainkoaren espirituak harturik , Joiada apaizaren seme Zakariasek , jendeari aurre eginez , esan zuen : « Hau dio Jainkoak : “ Zergatik hautsi dituzue Jaunaren aginduak ? Gaizki bukatu behar duzue . Zuek ni baztertu nauzuelako , nik ere baztertu egiten zaituztet ” » .
PRED:	Then the Spirit of God gave this message to the people of God : “ This is what the Lord says : Why are you doing this , ‘ You have sinned against me ? '
GOLD:	Then the Spirit of God came upon Zechariah son of Jehoiada the priest . He stood before the people and said , “ This is what God says : Why do you disobey the Lord 's commands and keep yourselves from prospering ? You have abandoned the Lord , and now he has abandoned you ! ”

ID:	3547
INPUT:	Jauna , zuk <unk> duzu zeure <unk> zeure mendian landatzen , zeure ondarean , zeure egoitza egin duzun lekuan , zeure eskuz eraiki <unk> .
PRED:	O Lord , you have been very angry with your own people , and you have made your own land as your ancestors , which you have built . Your own hands have built , and you have built your own hands .
GOLD:	You will bring them in and plant them on your own mountain — the place , O Lord , reserved for your own dwelling , the sanctuary , O Lord , that your hands have established .

ID:	3548
INPUT:	Jainkoaren santutegian sartu nintzen arte ; orduan ulertu nuen zein den haien atarramentua .
PRED:	Then I went into the sanctuary of God , and I could not listen to them .
GOLD:	Then I went into your sanctuary , O God , and I finally understood the destiny of the wicked .

ID:	3549
INPUT:	Eta mintzoak bigarrenez esan zion : — Jainkoak garbi egin duena , zuk ez esan kutsatua denik .
PRED:	But Peter replied , “ God is ceremonially clean , ” he said . “ You must not commit adultery .
GOLD:	But the voice spoke again : “ Do not call something unclean if God has made it clean . ”

ID:	3550
INPUT:	Jesusek elbarria sendatu
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Blind Man
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Paralyzed Man

ID:	3551
INPUT:	Danielek erantzun zion : — Errege jauna , ez dut erregalu edo sari beharrik , gorde zeuretzat edo eman besteren bati . Baina hor idatzia irakurriko dizut eta esanahia azalduko .
PRED:	Daniel replied , “ I have given you a king to give me a message to you , or I 'll give you a message to you . But I 'll tell you the truth , too , and I will tell you the truth . ”
GOLD:	Daniel answered the king , “ Keep your gifts or give them to someone else , but I will tell you what the writing means .

ID:	3552
INPUT:	<unk> zeuzkaten goseak eta <unk> , <unk> ibiltzen ziren eremuan , lur ilun idorretan .
PRED:	And when they saw that they were weak , and those who were filled with pain .
GOLD:	They are gaunt from poverty and hunger.They claw the dry ground in desolate wastelands .

ID:	3553
INPUT:	eskuetan hartzean , <unk> eskuzabala zulatzen zenien ; zure gainean jartzen zirenean , hautsieta erorarazi egiten zenituen .
PRED:	The five who were filled with pain , and when they were filled with pain , they took care of your idols .
GOLD:	When Israel leaned on you , you splintered and brokeand stabbed her in the armpit.When she put her weight on you , you collapsed , and her legs gave way .

ID:	3554
INPUT:	Ordurako , Jekonias erregea , ama erregina , jauregiko funtzionarioak , Judako eta Jerusalemgo buruzagiak , artisauak eta errementariak Jerusalemdik erbestera joanak ziren .
PRED:	This is the king of Judah , the king of Judah , the officials of Judah , the king of Judah , and the king of Judah , the king of Jerusalem , and the king of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	This was after King Jehoiachin , the queen mother , the court officials , the other officials of Judah , and all the craftsmen and artisans had been deported from Jerusalem .

ID:	3555
INPUT:	Entzun , arren , niri ! Libra nazazu , ez luza ! Izan zakizkit harkaitz babesle , <unk> salbatzaile .
PRED:	Listen to me , O my enemies ; rescue me from my rock . For I have heard my strength and my strength .
GOLD:	You are my rock and my fortress.For the honor of your name , lead me out of this danger .

ID:	3556
INPUT:	Morroiak eta guardiak sua egin eta berotzen ari ziren , hotz baitzegoen . Pedro ere haiekin zegoen berotzen .
PRED:	The leading priests and the guards were burned in the sun , and they were found with them as much as they were eating .
GOLD:	Because it was cold , the household servants and the guards had made a charcoal fire . They stood around it , warming themselves , and Peter stood with them , warming himself .

ID:	3557
INPUT:	Aita ehortzi ondoren , Egiptora itzuli zen Jose , bere anaiekin eta aita ehorztera joan ziren guztiekin .
PRED:	When Joseph was buried in Egypt , he returned to Egypt and his father , his father and his father came to Egypt .
GOLD:	After burying Jacob , Joseph returned to Egypt with his brothers and all who had accompanied him to his father 's burial .

ID:	3558
INPUT:	Horrela , bada , guda-gurditeriaren arduradunek , Josafat ikustean , esan zuten : — Horra Israelgo erregea ! Eta inguratu egin zuten , erasotzeko asmoz . Baina Josafat deiadarka hasi zen , eta Jaunak lagundu egin zion : atzera eginarazi zien Jainkoak <unk> ,
PRED:	When Jehoshaphat saw his chariot commanders , the commanders of the army of Israel saw him , he said to them , “ The king of Israel ! ” But the Lord was afraid of them .
GOLD:	So when the Aramean chariot commanders saw Jehoshaphat in his royal robes , they went after him . “ There is the king of Israel ! ” they shouted . But Jehoshaphat called out , and the Lord saved him . God helped him by turning the attackers away from him .

ID:	3559
INPUT:	Ordezkari nagusiak ihardetsi zuen : — Zer uste duzu ? Mezu hau zure erregeari eta zuri bakarrik esatera bidali nauela neure jaunak ? Harresi gainean dagoen jende horrentzat ere bada , horiek ere beren <unk> jan eta <unk> edan beharko baitute , zuek bezalaxe .
PRED:	“ What are you doing ? ” the king asked . “ What do you know that you have sent me , and they will know that my lord the king has sent me to eat ? ”
GOLD:	But Sennacherib 's chief of staff replied , “ Do you think my master sent this message only to you and your master ? He wants all the people to hear it , for when we put this city under siege , they will suffer along with you . They will be so hungry and thirsty that they will eat their own dung and drink their own urine . ”

ID:	3560
INPUT:	Jesus bere <unk> gaitzetsia
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Rejected at Nazareth

ID:	3561
INPUT:	eta jakinarazi zioten erregeari Natan profeta etorri zela . Erregearen aitzinera sartu eta ahuspeztu egin zen .
PRED:	Then the prophet told Nathan the prophet about the king , and he bowed low before the king .
GOLD:	The king 's officials told him , “ Nathan the prophet is here to see you . ” Nathan went in and bowed before the king with his face to the ground .

ID:	3562
INPUT:	Roboamek , ordea , ez zuen aintzat hartu kontseilarien aholkua ; baizik eta berarekin batera hazi ziren eta bere zerbitzura zituen gazteei galdegin zien :
PRED:	But Rehoboam did n't think the older men of the older men of the older men of the older men were born .
GOLD:	But Rehoboam rejected the advice of the older men and instead asked the opinion of the young men who had grown up with him and were now his advisers .

ID:	3563
INPUT:	<unk> zegoen Rakel . Azken arnasa emateko zegoela , <unk> — hau da , « Ene <unk> seme » — eman zion izen ; baina aitak Benjamin — hau da , « Eskuineko seme » — eman zion izen .
PRED:	But when Rachel was buried , he was buried , and when she was buried with him . “ My father , my father , ” he said . “ My father was very very very old , but he was very very very very old . ”
GOLD:	Rachel was about to die , but with her last breath she named the baby Ben-oni ( which means “ son of my sorrow ” ) . The baby 's father , however , called him Benjamin ( which means “ son of my right hand ” ) .

ID:	3564
INPUT:	Gorenera igo zinen , gatibuak harturik ; zerga ordaindu zizuten gizakiek , baita <unk> ere , Jainko Jaun horrek bizilekua izan zenezan .
PRED:	You brought a message to you from a year to pay attention to the Lord your God . He has given you a message from the Sovereign Lord , who rescued you from among you .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ; praise God our savior ! For each day he carries us in his arms.Interlude

ID:	3565
INPUT:	Babilonia eroriko eta Israel salbatuko
PRED:	Judgment against Babylon and Judah
GOLD:	A Message about Babylon

ID:	3566
INPUT:	Gorets bezate Jauna bere maitasunagatik , gizakien alde egiten dituen gauza harrigarriengatik .
PRED:	Let them praise the Lord for his wonderful deeds , for he has given them his wonderful deeds .
GOLD:	Let them praise the Lord for his great loveand for the wonderful things he has done for them .

ID:	3567
INPUT:	Orain , adore zaitezte eta izan sendo . Hil zaizue Saul zeuen jauna , bai ; baina Judakoek ni gantzutu naute beren errege » .
PRED:	So be strong and courageous , and let me die in the presence of my lord the king of Judah . ”
GOLD:	Now that Saul is dead , I ask you to be my strong and loyal subjects like the people of Judah , who have anointed me as their new king . ”

ID:	3568
INPUT:	Jesusek legenduna sendatu
PRED:	The Faith of a Roman Officer
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Paralyzed Man

ID:	3569
INPUT:	Noiz arte <unk> lotsagabe <unk> , gaizkile guztiak <unk> ?
PRED:	How long will I know that when I have seen my power ?
GOLD:	How long will they speak with arrogance ? How long will these evil people boast ?

ID:	3570
INPUT:	Jariodunak erabilitako etzalekua nahiz eserlekua kutsatua gelditzen da .
PRED:	If you are ceremonially unclean or unclean , you must be ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	Any bed on which the man with the discharge lies and anything on which he sits will be ceremonially unclean .

ID:	3571
INPUT:	Joan Bataiatzaileak Jesusen etorrera hots egin
PRED:	The Good News about Jesus
GOLD:	The Baptism and Temptation of Jesus

ID:	3572
INPUT:	Gero , <unk> dorrea eraitsi eta hil egin zuen hango jendea .
PRED:	Then he threw down the wall , and he killed everyone in the town .
GOLD:	He also tore down the tower of Peniel and killed all the men in the town .

ID:	3573
INPUT:	« Badoaz nire egunak , porrot dagite nire egitasmo eta ametsek .
PRED:	“ My days , O Lord , and my people take refuge in his presence .
GOLD:	My days are over.My hopes have disappeared.My heart 's desires are broken .

ID:	3574
INPUT:	Jesus bere ikasleen oinak garbitzen
PRED:	Jesus and his disciples must wash their feet in the lake .
GOLD:	Jesus Predicts His Betrayal

ID:	3575
INPUT:	Txiki eta handi , denak hilko dira herrialde honetan ; ez dute hiletarik , ez hilobirik izango ; ez du inork dolua adierazteko gorputza urratuko , ez burua soilduko .
PRED:	The poor and small will die in this land , for they will not die in this land , for no one will be cut apart for the dead .
GOLD:	Both the great and the lowly will die in this land . No one will bury them or mourn for them . Their friends will not cut themselves in sorrow or shave their heads in sadness .

ID:	3576
INPUT:	« Sutan zegoen menditik jaitsi nintzen , itunaren harlauzak eskuetan nituela ,
PRED:	“ I was like a covenant with a covenant with the covenant with the covenant I was with the covenant of the covenant with the covenant of the covenant .
GOLD:	“ So while the mountain was blazing with fire I turned and came down , holding in my hands the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant .

ID:	3577
INPUT:	<unk> bikainena , <unk> <unk> espiritua ; zuk ez duzu gutxiesten , ene Jainko , <unk> eta <unk> .
PRED:	But when I know that you have seen the spirit of my spirit , I will certainly know that you have seen my spirit , and I will know that I have seen my spirit .
GOLD:	Then you will be pleased with sacrifices offered in the right spirit — with burnt offerings and whole burnt offerings.Then bulls will again be sacrificed on your altar .

ID:	3578
INPUT:	Zuek , Jaunari begirune <unk> haren zerbitzariaren <unk> duzuenok , ilunpetan eta <unk> <unk> baldin bazarete ere , jarri konfiantza Jaunarengan , hartu Jainkoa euskarri .
PRED:	But if you fear the Lord , you will know that I will punish you in darkness , and if you are in darkness , you will see that the Lord your God , and when you are in darkness .
GOLD:	Who among you fears the Lordand obeys his servant ? If you are walking in darkness , without a ray of light , trust in the Lordand rely on your God .

ID:	3579
INPUT:	Zuk , ordea , zeure erruki handiaz , ez zenituen basamortuan baztertu , laino-adarra ez <unk> <unk> bidean gidatzeko , ez eta su-adarra <unk> argi egiteko .
PRED:	But you have mercy on me , O Lord , for I have rescued you from the wilderness of my anger , who did n't let them fall into the desert of the pillar of fury .
GOLD:	“ But in your great mercy you did not abandon them to die in the wilderness . The pillar of cloud still led them forward by day , and the pillar of fire showed them the way through the night .

ID:	3580
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> ;
PRED:	They were buried with flesh and fig tree .
GOLD:	They left Rithmah and camped at Rimmon-perez .

ID:	3581
INPUT:	Zuek , <unk> , izan errespetu osoz zeuen nagusien menpeko , ez on eta bihozbera direnen menpeko bakarrik , baizik eta gogorrak direnen menpeko ere bai .
PRED:	For you have been faithful to be faithful and faithful to the poor . They have not been kind to others , but they are kind to those who fear God .
GOLD:	You who are slaves must submit to your masters with all respect . Do what they tell you — not only if they are kind and reasonable , but even if they are cruel .

ID:	3582
INPUT:	Aleluia ! Gora Jauna ! Goretsazue , Jaunaren zerbitzariok , goretsi Jaunaren izena !
PRED:	Praise the Lord ! Praise him ! Praise the name of the Lord !
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! Yes , give praise , O servants of the Lord.Praise the name of the Lord !

ID:	3583
INPUT:	Jesus haziz zihoan , bai jakinduriaz , bai gorputzez , eta Jainkoak eta gizakiek gero eta gogokoago zuten .
PRED:	But when the Spirit of God 's Spirit , the Spirit of the Spirit and the Spirit of God and the believers were believers in the presence of the Lord Jesus .
GOLD:	Jesus grew in wisdom and in stature and in favor with God and all the people .

ID:	3584
INPUT:	Une honetan zeure begiz ikus dezakezunez , nire esku utzi zaitu gaur Jaunak leize-zuloan . Zu hiltzeko esaten zidaten , baina errukitu egin natzaizu , neure buruari hau esanez : « Ez diot erantsiko eskurik nire jaunari , Jaunak gantzutua baita » .
PRED:	At this time I could see that I have given you a covenant I had given you today , but the Lord has given you to kill me , but I would not kill you . ”
GOLD:	Look , my father , at what I have in my hand . It is a piece of the hem of your robe ! I cut it off , but I did n't kill you . This proves that I am not trying to harm you and that I have not sinned against you , even though you have been hunting for me to kill me .

ID:	3585
INPUT:	Artzainak , entzun eta ikusi <unk> Jainkoari <unk> eta goraka itzuli ziren , dena aingeruak esan bezala gertatu baitzitzaien .
PRED:	Then when they heard that the angel had come and saw him , they came to him and saw that the angels had been able to see the angel of God .
GOLD:	The shepherds went back to their flocks , glorifying and praising God for all they had heard and seen . It was just as the angel had told them .

ID:	3586
INPUT:	<unk> bezala erretzen daukagu larrua , gosearen <unk> .
PRED:	For we will break down the bird , and the wild animals will be destroyed .
GOLD:	The famine has blackened our skinas though baked in an oven .

ID:	3587
INPUT:	Akaben etxekoren bat hirian hiltzen delarik , zakurrek jango dute , eta landan hiltzen delarik , zeruko hegaztiek jango dute » .
PRED:	The family of Ahab will die in the city of Ahab 's family will die in the fields , and those who die in the fields will die in the fields . ”
GOLD:	“ The members of Ahab 's family who die in the city will be eaten by dogs , and those who die in the field will be eaten by vultures . ”

ID:	3588
INPUT:	Joseren seme Igal , Isakarren leinukoa ;
PRED:	The family of Joseph
GOLD:	IssacharIgal son of Joseph

ID:	3589
INPUT:	<unk> , Neftoah errekastoaren iturburu aldera egiten zuen mugak eta Efron mendiko herrixketara luzatzen , gero <unk> — hau da , <unk> — okertzeko .
PRED:	As soon as they arrived at the place of water near the hill country of Meribah ( which means where he was sitting on the hill country of Bethel ) , “ Your Majesty , ” he said .
GOLD:	From there the boundary extended from the top of the mountain to the spring at the waters of Nephtoah , and from there to the towns on Mount Ephron . Then it turned toward Baalah ( that is , Kiriath-jearim ) .

ID:	3590
INPUT:	bata , amondarren Raba hirira ; bestea , Judako Jerusalem hiri gotortura .
PRED:	The other towns of the Ammonites , from Jerusalem , from Jerusalem , from Jerusalem .
GOLD:	“ O you corrupt and wicked prince of Israel , your final day of reckoning is here !

ID:	3591
INPUT:	Jaunak ituna proposatu israeldarrei
PRED:	A Message about the Land
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	3592
INPUT:	Hori dela eta , ni Paulo , jentil <unk> onerako Kristo Jesusen preso naizen <unk>
PRED:	For I know that Paul and Silas , Paul , and Barnabas and Silas in prison that I am writing to be baptized .
GOLD:	When I think of all this , I , Paul , a prisoner of Christ Jesus for the benefit of you Gentiles . . .

ID:	3593
INPUT:	Egon prest bihar goizean mendira igotzeko ; nire aurrean aurkeztuko zara han , mendi-gailurrean .
PRED:	Keep watch over the morning you must celebrate the Festival of Unleavened Bread .
GOLD:	Be ready in the morning to climb up Mount Sinai and present yourself to me on the top of the mountain .

ID:	3594
INPUT:	Jaunak segurtatzen ditu gizakiaren pausoak ; nola jakin lezake gizakiak nora doan ?
PRED:	The Lord gives us how can we know how can we know how can we know where we are going ?
GOLD:	The Lord directs our steps , so why try to understand everything along the way ?

ID:	3595
INPUT:	metro batekoa zen <unk> zegoen <unk> lehen <unk> ; hau metro erdi bat zen zabal . Bi metroko altuera zegoen <unk> hartatik <unk> , hura ere metro erdi bat zabal zelarik .
PRED:	It was 30 feet tall , and that was 71/2 feet tall . It was 71/2 feet tall , which was 71/2 feet tall . It was 71/2 feet tall , and that was 71/2 feet tall .
GOLD:	From the gutter the altar rises 31/2 feet to a lower ledge that surrounds the altar and is 21 inches wide . From the lower ledge the altar rises 7 feet to the upper ledge that is also 21 inches wide .

ID:	3596
INPUT:	Faraoiak ikertzeko agindu zuen , eta egia zen israeldarren abererik ez zela galdu . Hala ere , bere teman jarraitu zuen faraoiak eta ez zien israeldarrei joaten utzi .
PRED:	So Pharaoh told his people of Israel that the Israelites had not been conquered , and he did not leave it . But Pharaoh did n't let them go home , and he did n't let them go home .
GOLD:	Pharaoh sent his officials to investigate , and they discovered that the Israelites had not lost a single animal ! But even so , Pharaoh 's heart remained stubborn , and he still refused to let the people go .

ID:	3597
INPUT:	Goretsazue txilin ozenez , goretsi txilin <unk> .
PRED:	Praise the Most High , praise him with songs , and praise him .
GOLD:	Praise him with a clash of cymbals ; praise him with loud clanging cymbals .

ID:	3598
INPUT:	Biharamun goizean , Saulek hiru sailetan antolatu zuen gudarostea ; egunsentian etsaiaren kanpaleku erdiraino sartu eta , eguerdiraino amondarrak triskatzen jardun zuen . Bizirik iraun zutenak sakabanatu egin ziren , bi lagun batera ez gelditzeraino .
PRED:	The next day the next day when Saul was defeated by the walls of the Tabernacle , the kings of Judah , and the other kings of the camp were defeated by turning to the Lord .
GOLD:	But before dawn the next morning , Saul arrived , having divided his army into three detachments . He launched a surprise attack against the Ammonites and slaughtered them the whole morning . The remnant of their army was so badly scattered that no two of them were left together .

ID:	3599
INPUT:	<unk> nahi balute , galde biezaiete etxean beren senarrei , ez baita egoki emakumeek batzarrean hitz egitea .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who ask their husbands , or women who are wise enough to take their own home .
GOLD:	If they have any questions , they should ask their husbands at home , for it is improper for women to speak in church meetings .

ID:	3600
INPUT:	<unk> profetaren hitzok entzutean , suspertu egin zen Asa , eta Juda eta Benjaminen lurraldeetan eta Efraimgo mendialdean eskuratutako herrixketan zeuden idolo higuingarriak suntsitu egin zituen , eta tenpluko atalondo aurrean zegoen aldarea <unk> .
PRED:	When Rehoboam heard what was happening , he became very angry with Judah and Judah , the people of Judah , and the people of Judah had destroyed them in the hill country of Ephraim and the Lord .
GOLD:	When Asa heard this message from Azariah the prophet , he took courage and removed all the detestable idols from the land of Judah and Benjamin and in the towns he had captured in the hill country of Ephraim . And he repaired the altar of the Lord , which stood in front of the entry room of the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	3601
INPUT:	<unk> dut aurpegia negarrez , estaliak begiak iluntasun beltzez .
PRED:	I am filled with your face , and I see your eyes in the darkness .
GOLD:	My eyes are red with weeping ; dark shadows circle my eyes .

ID:	3602
INPUT:	« Ba al da inor zuen artean nire tenplua bere lehengo <unk> ikusi zuenik ? Eta orain nola dagoela iruditzen zaizue ? Ez al duzue ikusten ezereztua dagoela ?
PRED:	“ Do you realize that no one else has seen the Temple that you have seen the god of the Temple ? Why do you think that you do n't you see how can you see ?
GOLD:	‘ Does anyone remember this house — this Temple — in its former splendor ? How , in comparison , does it look to you now ? It must seem like nothing at all !

ID:	3603
INPUT:	Horrela , israeldarren artean ez da ondare-zatirik leinu batetik bestera aldatuko ; israeldarrek nork bere aitaren ondareari atxikirik jarraituko dute .
PRED:	This is not a permanent possession of the tribe of Israel . You must not be given to the tribe of Israel .
GOLD:	None of the territorial land may pass from tribe to tribe , for all the land given to each tribe must remain within the tribe to which it was first allotted .

ID:	3604
INPUT:	Emakumeak , mendira Jainkoaren gizonarengana heldu zenean , oinak besarkatu zizkion Eliseori . Hurbildu zen Gehazi emakumea <unk> , baina Jainkoaren gizonak esan zion : — Utzi , atsekabetua baitago . Hala ere , Jaunak ez dit agertu zergatik ; ez dit deus ere jakinarazi .
PRED:	When she arrived at the mountain of God 's house , she came out to Elisha and told him , “ Come out to see the man of God ! ” But she said , “ I have not heard it . ”
GOLD:	But when she came to the man of God at the mountain , she fell to the ground before him and caught hold of his feet . Gehazi began to push her away , but the man of God said , “ Leave her alone . She is deeply troubled , but the Lord has not told me what it is . ”

ID:	3605
INPUT:	Ez bedi Miriam amaren sabeletik irten orduko haragia erdi janik duen <unk> pareko gerta !
PRED:	So I would not eat the mother of my mother 's womb , when they were dead , they will be like an animal that would be like an animal .
GOLD:	Do n't let her be like a stillborn baby , already decayed at birth . ”

ID:	3606
INPUT:	« Mundu guztian erori da jendea , Babiloniak hilik ; orain Babilonia eroriko da , berak Israelen hildakoengatik » .
PRED:	“ The nations of Jerusalem will be destroyed , and all the people of Jerusalem will be destroyed in Jerusalem , and now all the people of Israel will be saved . ”
GOLD:	“ Just as Babylon killed the people of Israeland others throughout the world , so must her people be killed .

ID:	3607
INPUT:	Bazen han eserita zenbait lege-maisu , eta hau zioten beren baitan :
PRED:	One of the teachers of religious law was sitting there .
GOLD:	But some of the teachers of religious law who were sitting there thought to themselves ,

ID:	3608
INPUT:	Berak emango die <unk> hiriaren <unk> kemena .
PRED:	He will give glory to all the kingdoms of the city , and he will give you victory .
GOLD:	He will give a longing for justiceto their judges.He will give great courageto their warriors who stand at the gates .

ID:	3609
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin zaiona egin zuen Asak , bere arbaso Davidek bezala .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as he had done .
GOLD:	Asa did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , as his ancestor David had done .

ID:	3610
INPUT:	“ Jainkoa baino zuzenagoa izango ote da gizakia ? Egilea bera baino <unk> izango ote ?
PRED:	For the Lord will make a covenant before God , and he will be able to be made of honor .
GOLD:	‘ Can a mortal be innocent before God ? Can anyone be pure before the Creator ? '

ID:	3611
INPUT:	Aaron bera ere suntsitu nahi izateraino zegoen Jauna haserre , eta Aaronen alde ere erregutu nuen .
PRED:	Then the Lord gave Moses these instructions to Moses and Aaron and Aaron .
GOLD:	The Lord was so angry with Aaron that he wanted to destroy him , too . But I prayed for Aaron , and the Lord spared him .

ID:	3612
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> , <unk> ekialdetik doana . <unk> Eufrates .
PRED:	I will know that everyone will be able to kill you , and all the kingdoms of the Euphrates River will know that the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	The third branch , called the Tigris , flowed east of the land of Asshur . The fourth branch is called the Euphrates .

ID:	3613
INPUT:	Zuen maitasuna izan bedi itxurakeriarik gabea ; gorrotatu gaizkia eta itsatsi <unk> .
PRED:	May your unfailing love love love love , and those who hate you .
GOLD:	Do n't just pretend to love others . Really love them . Hate what is wrong . Hold tightly to what is good .

ID:	3614
INPUT:	<unk> al duzue behintzat nik ez dudala eskas atera !
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you , that I have not been able to save you .
GOLD:	As you test yourselves , I hope you will recognize that we have not failed the test of apostolic authority .

ID:	3615
INPUT:	Sakrifizioak eskaintzea dute atsegin , hildako abereen okela jateko ; baina nik , Jaunak , ez ditut sakrifizio horiek atsegin . Horien bekatuak gogora dakartzat , beren <unk> eskatuko dizkiet , eta Egiptora itzuli beharko dute .
PRED:	The Lord 's Armies will eat the meat of the dead , but I will eat the meat of your ancestors . They have not abandoned their sins , and I will punish them , and they will worship their sins .
GOLD:	The people love to offer sacrifices to me , feasting on the meat , but I do not accept their sacrifices.I will hold my people accountable for their sins , and I will punish them.They will return to Egypt .

ID:	3616
INPUT:	Heldu zen , bada , behin Eliseo eta , goiko gelara sarturik , oheratu egin zen .
PRED:	Elisha arrived at the entrance of the Lord 's palace , and Elisha went into the room of the upper room .
GOLD:	One day Elisha returned to Shunem , and he went up to this upper room to rest .

ID:	3617
INPUT:	Amatziasen gainerako jarduerak , lehenengotik azkenera , « Judako eta Israelgo Erregeen Liburuan » daude idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events of King Uzziah 's reign , are recorded in The Book of the Kings of Judah .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Amaziah 's reign , from beginning to end , are recorded in The Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel .

ID:	3618
INPUT:	Jainkoaren maitasunari gorazarrea
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Nothing Can Separate Us from God 's Love

ID:	3619
INPUT:	Ez dira gose , ez egarri izango , ez ditu sargoriak , ez eguzkiak joko , gupidaz hartuko <unk> gidatuko , iturburu <unk> eramango .
PRED:	They will not eat the hungry , and they will not be hungry , and they will be able to know that I will give you the water of water , and I will bring you into the water .
GOLD:	They will neither hunger nor thirst.The searing sun will not reach them anymore.For the Lord in his mercy will lead them ; he will lead them beside cool waters .

ID:	3620
INPUT:	Josafaten gainerako jarduerak , haren egintza adoretsuak eta izan zituen borrokak « Judako Erregeen Kronika » liburuan daude idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Jehoshaphat 's reign , the extent of his mighty power , the extent of the History of the Kings of Judah .
GOLD:	He banished from the land the rest of the male and female shrine prostitutes , who still continued their practices from the days of his father , Asa .

ID:	3621
INPUT:	Handia zara , <unk> , zu bakarrik Jainkoa !
PRED:	For you have been very old , and you have seen God .
GOLD:	For you are great and perform wonderful deeds.You alone are God .

ID:	3622
INPUT:	« Lehen hilaren lehen egunean eraikiko duzu egoitza , elkarketa-etxola .
PRED:	“ On the first day the first month of the Tabernacle , you must build up the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ Set up the Tabernacle on the first day of the new year .

ID:	3623
INPUT:	Hadadezerren hiri ziren <unk> eta <unk> brontze ugari eraman zuen .
PRED:	And when they were filled with great city , he brought with great cities and bronze .
GOLD:	along with a large amount of bronze from Hadadezer 's towns of Tebah and Berothai .

ID:	3624
INPUT:	Anak ihardetsi zion : — Ez , ene jauna . Erabat nahigabetua nauzu . Ez dut ardorik edan , ezta inolako edari mozkorgarririk ere . Neure barrua hustu dut Jaunaren aurrean .
PRED:	Then the Lord replied , “ My lord , my lord , my lord the Lord ! I have not drink wine or drink wine or drink wine or drink wine .
GOLD:	“ Oh no , sir ! ” she replied . “ I have n't been drinking wine or anything stronger . But I am very discouraged , and I was pouring out my heart to the Lord .

ID:	3625
INPUT:	nahiz eta <unk> <unk> orro <unk> mendiak itsasoaren <unk> ikaratu .
PRED:	And when they saw that they were thrown into the sea , they will be killed by the hills .
GOLD:	A river brings joy to the city of our God , the sacred home of the Most High .

ID:	3626
INPUT:	Jaunak ordain diezazula egin duzun guztia eta eman diezazula saria luzaroan Israelgo Jainko Jaunak , honen <unk> etorri baitzara .
PRED:	May the Lord give you everything you have done for you , for he has given you victory over Israel , the Sovereign Lord , have given you victory over to you .
GOLD:	May the Lord , the God of Israel , under whose wings you have come to take refuge , reward you fully for what you have done . ”

ID:	3627
INPUT:	Lurrak zuek ase arte jateko adina uzta emango du , eta kezkarik gabe bizi ahal izango zarete bertan .
PRED:	When you eat the ground , you will eat the food and drink , and you will live in your presence .
GOLD:	Then the land will yield large crops , and you will eat your fill and live securely in it .

ID:	3628
INPUT:	Orduan , hiru hiri aukeratu zituen Moisesek Jordanen ekialdean ,
PRED:	Then Moses chose them from the Jordan River to the Jordan River .
GOLD:	Then Moses set apart three cities of refuge east of the Jordan River .

ID:	3629
INPUT:	Jaunaren zain nago , zain bihotz-bihotzez , haren erantzuna dut itxaro .
PRED:	I wait for the Lord , and I trust him .
GOLD:	I am counting on the Lord ; yes , I am counting on him.I have put my hope in his word .

ID:	3630
INPUT:	Beraz , hitz egin nire izenean horien aurka , hitz egin , gizaseme » .
PRED:	Therefore , listen to my messages and prophesy against them . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , son of man , prophesy against them loudly and clearly . ”

ID:	3631
INPUT:	Hark erantzun zien : — Zergatik zenbiltzaten nire bila ? Ez al zenekiten nik neure Aitaren gauzetan jardun behar dudala ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Why are you looking for me ? Why did n't I want you to die in the sight of my Father ?
GOLD:	“ But why did you need to search ? ” he asked . “ Did n't you know that I must be in my Father 's house ? ”

ID:	3632
INPUT:	Izan ere , bizia maite duenak , luzaroan bizi eta zoriontsu izan nahi duenak , mihia gorde behar du gaitzetik eta ezpainak engainutik .
PRED:	For those who love you will live , and those who love you will live in peace .
GOLD:	For the Scriptures say , “ If you want to enjoy lifeand see many happy days , keep your tongue from speaking eviland your lips from telling lies .

ID:	3633
INPUT:	Deabru asko botatzen zuten eta gaixo asko sendatzen , olioz igurtziz .
PRED:	Their mouths were full of many sick , and they were filled with olive oil .
GOLD:	And they cast out many demons and healed many sick people , anointing them with olive oil .

ID:	3634
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> , nork liluratu zaituzte ? Ez nizuen , bada , nik Jesu Kristo gurutziltzatua begien aurrean ipini ?
PRED:	But when I heard that you were in my own eyes , how can I know that I am in Christ Jesus Christ ?
GOLD:	Oh , foolish Galatians ! Who has cast an evil spell on you ? For the meaning of Jesus Christ 's death was made as clear to you as if you had seen a picture of his death on the cross .

ID:	3635
INPUT:	Nire <unk> laugarren piztia bat ikusi nuen : beldurgarria zen , izugarria eta guztiz indartsua ; burdinazko hagin handiak zituen ; dena irensten eta txikitzen zuen , jan gabe uzten zuena hankapean apurtzen zuelarik . Beste piztiak ez bezalakoa zen ; hamar adar zituen .
PRED:	At that time I saw a beast that the fourth beast had been torn from the fourth beast , and it was carved from the center of bronze , and it was carved from a single piece of wood .
GOLD:	Then in my vision that night , I saw a fourth beast — terrifying , dreadful , and very strong . It devoured and crushed its victims with huge iron teeth and trampled their remains beneath its feet . It was different from any of the other beasts , and it had ten horns .

ID:	3636
INPUT:	Beste hamabost urtez luzatuko dizut bizia . Libratuko zaituztet zu eta Jerusalem Asiriako erregearen eskuetatik eta babestuko dut hiri hau , naizena <unk> eta neure zerbitzari <unk> ” » .
PRED:	I will give you your life for you , and I will give you my life to you . I will rescue you from the king of Assyria and my servant , and I am my servant . ”
GOLD:	I will add fifteen years to your life , and I will rescue you and this city from the king of Assyria . I will defend this city for my own honor and for the sake of my servant David . ' ”

ID:	3637
INPUT:	Israel neskatxa ederra erori da , ez da gehiago jaikiko ; lur jota dago , ez da altxatuko duenik .
PRED:	The young women of Israel will fall , and no one will fall into the grave .
GOLD:	“ The virgin Israel has fallen , never to rise again ! She lies abandoned on the ground , with no one to help her up . ”

ID:	3638
INPUT:	Bota urrea hautsetara , Ofirko <unk> errekako <unk> artera .
PRED:	He threw them away from telling them , and they will turn away from their chains .
GOLD:	If you give up your lust for moneyand throw your precious gold into the river ,

ID:	3639
INPUT:	<unk> lurralde hartan , hondamendi izugarria .
PRED:	At that time they became very powerful and powerful .
GOLD:	“ Let the battle cry be heard in the land , a shout of great destruction .

ID:	3640
INPUT:	Honela ziharduen Jaunak berekiko : « <unk> dudanaren berri eman gabe utzi behar ote dut Abraham ?
PRED:	But the Lord said to him , “ How can I know that God has given me victory ? ”
GOLD:	“ Should I hide my plan from Abraham ? ” the Lord asked .

ID:	3641
INPUT:	Beraz , zuhur jokatu beharrean gaude , areago ugal ez daitezen ; bestela , <unk> bat sortuko balitz , gure etsaiekin elkartu eta gure aurka egingo lukete borroka , eta gero Egiptotik alde egingo <unk> » .
PRED:	So do n't be angry with you , and we will bless you with your children . If they were afraid , they would kill you and kill you , when they were afraid of Egypt , they will kill you . ”
GOLD:	We must make a plan to keep them from growing even more . If we do n't , and if war breaks out , they will join our enemies and fight against us . Then they will escape from the country . ”

ID:	3642
INPUT:	( Mt 16 , <unk> ; Mk 8 , 34 — 9 , 1 )
PRED:	Jesus Heals Many People
GOLD:	Opposition from Samaritans

ID:	3643
INPUT:	Ohartu zen , beraz , Esau , aitak ez zituela begiko Kanaango emakumeak ,
PRED:	So Esau realized that the father of Esau had not pleased with Laban ,
GOLD:	It was now very clear to Esau that his father did not like the local Canaanite women .

ID:	3644
INPUT:	Lasai bizi nintzen , eta birrindu egin nau , lepotik heldu eta <unk> egin , bere gezien jo-puntu bihurtu .
PRED:	I became pregnant and became pregnant . I became pregnant and threw me into the stream of my fury .
GOLD:	“ I was living quietly until he shattered me.He took me by the neck and broke me in pieces.Then he set me up as his target ,

ID:	3645
INPUT:	Jantzi bordatuak eman nizkizun , larru finezko oinetakoak , lihozko gerrikoa eta <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	dressed in fine linen cloth , purple , and scarlet thread , and scarlet thread , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	I gave you expensive clothing of fine linen and silk , beautifully embroidered , and sandals made of fine goatskin leather .

ID:	3646
INPUT:	« Jauna ez da gauza izan hitzeman zion lurraldera herri hau eramateko ; horregatik sarraskitu ditu basamortuan » .
PRED:	“ The Lord has given you the land of the Amorites , and he has given you to the wilderness . ”
GOLD:	‘ The Lord was not able to bring them into the land he swore to give them , so he killed them in the wilderness . '

ID:	3647
INPUT:	Herri osoak sumatzen zituen trumoi eta tximistak , <unk> eta mendia ketan , eta , beldurrez dar-dar , urrutian zeuden geldi .
PRED:	Then all the people of the earth fell upon them , and when they were terrified by smoke and smoke .
GOLD:	When the people heard the thunder and the loud blast of the ram 's horn , and when they saw the flashes of lightning and the smoke billowing from the mountain , they stood at a distance , trembling with fear .

ID:	3648
INPUT:	Baina judua zela jabetu bezain laster , denak aho batez oihuka hasi ziren : « Gora Efesoko Artemisa ! » Eta ia bi ordu egin zituzten halaxe oihuka .
PRED:	But when they had finished speaking , they began talking with a loud shout , shouting , “ This is the Jew ! ” So they began shouting , “ There was a Jew ! ”
GOLD:	But when the crowd realized he was a Jew , they started shouting again and kept it up for about two hours : “ Great is Artemis of the Ephesians ! Great is Artemis of the Ephesians ! ”

ID:	3649
INPUT:	<unk> prostituzioan eta <unk> ibiliak diren munduko erregeek negar eta dolu egingo dute , haren sutearen <unk> ikustean .
PRED:	And when I saw that the kings of Babylon will see that the kings of Assyria and Jerusalem will rejoice in Jerusalem , and they will see him with great power , and they will see him .
GOLD:	And the kings of the world who committed adultery with her and enjoyed her great luxury will mourn for her as they see the smoke rising from her charred remains .

ID:	3650
INPUT:	Nire herriaren zauriaazaletik sendatu nahi dute . “ Dena ongi doa , oso ongi ” diote , baina ez doa ongi , ez .
PRED:	Let my people offer sacrifices like a burnt offering to the people of Israel , but they are not a burden .
GOLD:	They offer superficial treatmentsfor my people 's mortal wound.They give assurances of peacewhen there is no peace .

ID:	3651
INPUT:	Davidek kutxa Jerusalemera eraman
PRED:	David brought David to Jerusalem
GOLD:	Moving the Ark to Jerusalem

ID:	3652
INPUT:	<unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Bet-Xemex ; guztira hemeretzi hiri ziren , beren herrixkekin .
PRED:	At that time , when they saw that great city , they killed their surrounding villages , and their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	Yiron , Migdal-el , Horem , Beth-anath , and Beth-shemesh — nineteen towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	3653
INPUT:	Baina Joakazek otoitz egin zion Jaunari eta honek entzun , ikusi baitzuen zein gogor menderatzen zuen Siriako erregeak Israel .
PRED:	But when he heard that the Lord had heard this , he heard the great power of Aram and destroyed Israel .
GOLD:	Then Jehoahaz prayed for the Lord 's help , and the Lord heard his prayer , for he could see how severely the king of Aram was oppressing Israel .

ID:	3654
INPUT:	<unk> die Jaunak barruan : bere egiteko <unk> daramate Egipto ; eta hala dabil , <unk> eta balantzaka , mozkor baten antzera .
PRED:	For the Lord will punish his people in Egypt , and when they saw that they were in the hand of Egypt , they will kill him and kill him .
GOLD:	The Lord has sent a spirit of foolishness on them , so all their suggestions are wrong.They cause Egypt to staggerlike a drunk in his vomit .

ID:	3655
INPUT:	<unk> garbikuntza
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Call to Moses
GOLD:	Cleansing from Skin Diseases

ID:	3656
INPUT:	Hilaren zazpian , gauza bera egingo duzue nahi edo jakin gabe bekatu egin duenaren alde . Horrela egingo da tenpluaren garbikuntza .
PRED:	Do n't be surprised when you see , you must be able to obey the Temple of the Lord 's Temple , and it will be purified by the Temple .
GOLD:	Do this also on the seventh day of the new year for anyone who has sinned through error or ignorance . In this way , you will purify the Temple .

ID:	3657
INPUT:	hau da , Jainkoak agintzari guztiei baietza eman die harengan ; horregatik , Kristoren bitartez esaten diogu « Amen » Jainkoari , berau goresten dugunean .
PRED:	For God has given us a covenant with all his children , for he has given us to all who fear God . And we will know that we have given God our God . ”
GOLD:	For all of God 's promises have been fulfilled in Christ with a resounding “ Yes ! ” And through Christ , our “ Amen ” ( which means “ Yes ” ) ascends to God for his glory .

ID:	3658
INPUT:	« Horrela , <unk> lehenengo izango dira eta lehenengoak azkeneko » .
PRED:	“ In this way , ” the man said , “ that the man will be least to be the man who is the greatest . ”
GOLD:	“ So those who are last now will be first then , and those who are first will be last . ”

ID:	3659
INPUT:	Jeremias profetak honela erantzun zion Hananias profetari tenpluan bilduta zeuden apaizen eta herriaren aurrean :
PRED:	Jeremiah replied to the prophet the prophet from the Temple of the Lord , the commanders of the people of Israel ,
GOLD:	Jeremiah responded to Hananiah as they stood in front of all the priests and people at the Temple .

ID:	3660
INPUT:	Eta erantzungo diete : “ Beren gurasoek Egiptotik atera zituen Jauna , beren Jainkoa , utzi eta jainko arrotzengana jo dutelako , haien aurrean ahuspeztuz eta haiei kultua emanez . Horregatik ekarri die Jaunak halako zoritxarra ” » .
PRED:	“ Then they will reply , ‘ The Lord , the God of Egypt , who brought them out of Egypt , and they worshiped the gods of Egypt . '
GOLD:	“ And the answer will be , ‘ Because his people abandoned the Lord their God , who brought their ancestors out of Egypt , and they worshiped other gods instead and bowed down to them . That is why the Lord has brought all these disasters on them . ' ”

ID:	3661
INPUT:	Joan nintzen <unk> eta liburuxka emateko esan nion . Hark esan zidan : « Tori eta irentsi : sabela <unk> dizu , baina ahorako eztia bezain gozo izango duzu » .
PRED:	Then I realized that the angel had seen , and the angel said to me , “ Where are your own ? ” And when they were as weak as weak as weak as weak as snow .
GOLD:	So I went to the angel and told him to give me the small scroll . “ Yes , take it and eat it , ” he said . “ It will be sweet as honey in your mouth , but it will turn sour in your stomach ! ”

ID:	3662
INPUT:	Pedro eta lagunak logaleak jota zeuden ; baina esnatu ziren eta Jesusen aintza eta harekin zeuden bi gizonak ikusi zituzten .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Peter and some of them looked up and saw him walking with him .
GOLD:	Peter and the others had fallen asleep . When they woke up , they saw Jesus ' glory and the two men standing with him .

ID:	3663
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Ahal dudan diozu ? Dena ahal du sinesten duenak .
PRED:	Jesus asked him , “ If you do n't know how can you do ? ”
GOLD:	“ What do you mean , ‘ If I can ' ? ” Jesus asked . “ Anything is possible if a person believes . ”

ID:	3664
INPUT:	Gorpuak erre eta errautsak zabaltzen direneko haran osoa eta Zedron erreka inguruko landa , ekialderantz dagoen Zaldien <unk> <unk> , niri sagaraturiko esparru izango da . Ez dute sekula <unk> , ez hondatuko » .
PRED:	I am going out to destroy the walls of the river and devour the valley of the Arnon River . They will be filled with the Kidron Valley , and they will never be destroyed by the Lord 's anger . ”
GOLD:	And the entire area — including the graveyard and ash dump in the valley , and all the fields out to the Kidron Valley on the east as far as the Horse Gate — will be holy to the Lord . The city will never again be captured or destroyed . ”

ID:	3665
INPUT:	Jainkoaren zerbitzari baitira , zuri ongi jokatzen laguntzeko . Gaizki egiten baduzu , ordea , izan beldur , zigortzeko ahalmena ez baitute alferrik . Izan ere , Jainkoaren zerbitzari dira , justizia egin eta gaizkileak zigortzeko .
PRED:	For they do wrong , for they have done wrong . But if you do not fear the power of God , they do not fear the power of God , for they have rejected the power of God .
GOLD:	The authorities are God 's servants , sent for your good . But if you are doing wrong , of course you should be afraid , for they have the power to punish you . They are God 's servants , sent for the very purpose of punishing those who do what is wrong .

ID:	3666
INPUT:	Senideok , egon zaitezte pozik edozein eratako <unk> erasotzen dizuenean .
PRED:	Dear brothers , dear brothers and sisters , be able to visit you .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , when troubles of any kind come your way , consider it an opportunity for great joy .

ID:	3667
INPUT:	Berehala , Jesusek ikasleak txalupan sarrarazi eta bere aurretik beste aldera , <unk> , joateko agindu zien , berak jendeari agur egin bitartean .
PRED:	So Jesus left the disciples and went out to the other side of the boat , along with the other side of the boat , and he told them what they had happened .
GOLD:	Immediately after this , Jesus insisted that his disciples get back into the boat and head across the lake to Bethsaida , while he sent the people home .

ID:	3668
INPUT:	baina Jaunarenak dira zuzen epaitzeko tresnak , neurgailu guztiak berak eginak dira .
PRED:	But do what is right , the Most High , and the Most High will make everything he does .
GOLD:	The Lord demands accurate scales and balances ; he sets the standards for fairness .

ID:	3669
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Zer ari da Israel , ene maitea , nire tenpluan ? Zer , hainbeste <unk> ondoren ? <unk> eta <unk> aldenduko <unk> ote du ? Orduan bai egingo <unk> oihu !
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ What are my love ? What sorrow awaits me ? What sorrow awaits me ? What sorrow awaits me ? What sorrow awaits me ? Who will I know that I will punish you ? ”
GOLD:	“ What right do my beloved people have to come to my Temple , when they have done so many immoral things ? Can their vows and sacrifices prevent their destruction ? They actually rejoice in doing evil !

ID:	3670
INPUT:	haren ituna gordetzen eta legeak betetzen <unk> .
PRED:	He will obey his covenant with all who obey him .
GOLD:	of those who are faithful to his covenant , of those who obey his commandments !

ID:	3671
INPUT:	Ni ere seme izana nauzue , seme bakarra bezala maite ninduen amak .
PRED:	I loved me son of Zeruiah , as I loved me .
GOLD:	For I , too , was once my father 's son , tenderly loved as my mother 's only child .

ID:	3672
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jainkoak herri santuko kide egin eta <unk> deitu zaituztenok , begira iezaiozue Jesusi : bera da guk aitortzen dugun fedearen apostolu eta apaiz nagusi .
PRED:	That is why God called for us by the power of the world , so that we could see that God 's holy people , and so that we can see his holy name .
GOLD:	And so , dear brothers and sisters who belong to God and are partners with those called to heaven , think carefully about this Jesus whom we declare to be God 's messenger and High Priest .

ID:	3673
INPUT:	<unk> nauzu , Jainko ; erantzungo al didazu ! Itzul niregana belarria , entzun nire mintzoa .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits me , O God , and my cry out to me !
GOLD:	I am praying to you because I know you will answer , O God.Bend down and listen as I pray .

ID:	3674
INPUT:	Asto zuri baten gainean , <unk> gainean eseriak <unk> oinez <unk> , entzun
PRED:	And when I heard that some of these things , they saw that they were filled with power , and they were filled with power .
GOLD:	“ Consider this , you who ride on fine donkeys , you who sit on fancy saddle blankets , and you who walk along the road .

ID:	3675
INPUT:	Erregea eta beronen zerbitzaria zetozkiola ikustean , Araunak , bidera irten eta erregearen aurrean ahuspezturik ,
PRED:	When the king saw the men and the other men , the king and the king bowed before him before the king .
GOLD:	When Araunah saw the king and his men coming toward him , he came and bowed before the king with his face to the ground .

ID:	3676
INPUT:	Ez aditu Ezekiasi ; entzun Asiriako erregeak dioena : « Egin bakezkoak nirekin eta jar zaitezte nire menpe . Horrela nork bere mahatsondoaren eta pikondoaren fruituak jan ahal izanen ditu eta bere putzuko ura edan .
PRED:	The king of Assyria heard this : “ This is what the king of Assyria says : You must build this Temple to honor the king of Assyria with me , and you will eat your fruit and drink the fruit of your own fruit .
GOLD:	“ Do n't listen to Hezekiah ! These are the terms the king of Assyria is offering : Make peace with me — open the gates and come out . Then each of you can continue eating from your own grapevine and fig tree and drinking from your own well .

ID:	3677
INPUT:	Israeldarrak eta filistearrak aurrez aurre jarri ziren <unk> .
PRED:	When the Philistines saw that the Philistines were attacked , they were terrified by the Philistines .
GOLD:	Soon the Israelite and Philistine forces stood facing each other , army against army .

ID:	3678
INPUT:	Jaunak lagundu ez balit , <unk> <unk> dagoeneko .
PRED:	But the Lord did not know that he was very powerful .
GOLD:	Unless the Lord had helped me , I would soon have settled in the silence of the grave .

ID:	3679
INPUT:	Saul <unk> hizketan ari zen bitarte hartan , ordea , gero eta handiagoa bihurtu zen zalaparta filistearren kanpalekuan . Saulek esan zion apaizari : — Uztazu !
PRED:	When Saul was talking about him , he became very angry with him and said to him , “ Let me go into the camp . ” So Saul said , “ Let me go to the camp ! ”
GOLD:	But while Saul was talking to the priest , the confusion in the Philistine camp grew louder and louder . So Saul said to the priest , “ Never mind ; let 's get going ! ”

ID:	3680
INPUT:	<unk> zuriak , eta <unk> nabarrak .
PRED:	Then I will give glory to the fig tree , and those who are weak .
GOLD:	the third by white horses , and the fourth by powerful dappled-gray horses .

ID:	3681
INPUT:	Besteek heldu eta atxilotu egin zuten .
PRED:	They left him and threw him away .
GOLD:	Then the others grabbed Jesus and arrested him .

ID:	3682
INPUT:	<unk> itzuli zirenean , gizon bat ondoratu zitzaion Jesusi eta , aurrean belaunikatuz ,
PRED:	When they arrived , when they saw a man sitting on him and said to Jesus ,
GOLD:	At the foot of the mountain , a large crowd was waiting for them . A man came and knelt before Jesus and said ,

ID:	3683
INPUT:	Beraz , bekatua ez bedi gehiago nagusi izan zuen gorputz hilkorrean . Ez jarri beraren grinen menpean ,
PRED:	So do not be guilty of sin . Let 's be put into the body of the body of his body .
GOLD:	Do not let sin control the way you live ; do not give in to sinful desires .

ID:	3684
INPUT:	Oraindik gehiago egiten duzue : malkoz betetzen duzue Jaunaren aldarea , negar-zotinka ari ohi zarete zuen <unk> Jaunak arretarik egiten ez <unk> eta gogo onez hartzen ez dituelako .
PRED:	And now you must obey all these things in the presence of the Lord your God and all the pagan shrines , and they were afraid of the Lord your God . You must do not know that the Lord has given you .
GOLD:	Here is another thing you do . You cover the Lord 's altar with tears , weeping and groaning because he pays no attention to your offerings and does n't accept them with pleasure .

ID:	3685
INPUT:	Zain itzazue zeuen buruak eta artalde osoa , honen zaindari jarri baitzaituzte Espiritu Santuak ; larra ezazue Jainkoaren Eliza , hark bere Semearen odolaz eskuratu zuena .
PRED:	So make you a sheep and goats , and you must serve as well as the Spirit of God . Instead , take care of the Spirit and the Spirit of God . ”
GOLD:	“ So guard yourselves and God 's people . Feed and shepherd God 's flock — his church , purchased with his own blood — over which the Holy Spirit has appointed you as leaders .

ID:	3686
INPUT:	Errudun izanez gero , ai ene ! Errugabe izanik ere , ezin izango dut bururik altxatu , lotsaz betea bainago , miseria beti begi aurrean .
PRED:	I am sure that I will punish you , for I have made my vows to you , for I am not ashamed of all who trust in God .
GOLD:	If I am guilty , too bad for me ; and even if I 'm innocent , I ca n't hold my head high , because I am filled with shame and misery .

ID:	3687
INPUT:	Tenpluan zegoen zutoin sakratua Jerusalemdik kanpora aterarazi eta Zedron errekan erre zuen ; erabat erraustu eta errautsak jende <unk> hilobira bota zituen .
PRED:	The Asherah poles from Jerusalem and burned it on the Kidron Valley and burned it on the Kidron Valley . He destroyed the Asherah poles from the Kidron Valley .
GOLD:	The king removed the Asherah pole from the Lord 's Temple and took it outside Jerusalem to the Kidron Valley , where he burned it . Then he ground the ashes of the pole to dust and threw the dust over the graves of the people .

ID:	3688
INPUT:	Horregatik , gero eta beldur handiagoa zion Davidi . Harrezkero , Saulek beti izan zion gorroto Davidi .
PRED:	So Saul said to David , “ Do n't be afraid to be angry with me . ”
GOLD:	Saul became even more afraid of him , and he remained David 's enemy for the rest of his life .

ID:	3689
INPUT:	Azaldu zeure hitz <unk> , eman <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	Your words have heard what they have seen , and when they were under your power .
GOLD:	The teaching of your word gives light , so even the simple can understand .

ID:	3690
INPUT:	Harresia burutu zenean eta ate-alderdiak jaso , atezainak , kantariak eta lebitarrak beren eginkizunetan jarri nituen .
PRED:	When the wall was finished , I took the foundation of the Temple , the gatekeepers , and the Levites had been given to them .
GOLD:	After the wall was finished and I had set up the doors in the gates , the gatekeepers , singers , and Levites were appointed .

ID:	3691
INPUT:	Gainerako lebitarrei , hots , Merariren ondorengo senitarteei , lau hiri eman zizkieten Zabulonen leinuaren ondaretik : <unk> , <unk> , Rimon eta Nahalal , herri-lur eta guzti .
PRED:	The following towns were given to the following towns of the tribe of Levi : The tribe of Levi , named after their pasturelands were given to the tribe of Naphtali . They were also given to the tribe of Naphtali , and they were descendants of Naphtali .
GOLD:	The rest of the Levites — the Merari clan — were given the following towns with their pasturelands from the tribe of Zebulun : Jokneam , Kartah ,

ID:	3692
INPUT:	Horrela erakutsi nahi izan zuen zein eskuzabal zen errukiz hartu zituenekin , bere aintza azaltzeko aukeratu zituenekin .
PRED:	In this way , he chose to be strong with the poor , and he chose his glory to his own children .
GOLD:	He does this to make the riches of his glory shine even brighter on those to whom he shows mercy , who were prepared in advance for glory .

ID:	3693
INPUT:	Eta egunean zazpi aldiz iraintzen bazaitu eta zazpi aldiz etortzen bazaizu “ Damu dut ” esanez , barkatu » .
PRED:	On the seventh day I will take back seven times and bless you seven times and forgive you . ”
GOLD:	Even if that person wrongs you seven times a day and each time turns again and asks forgiveness , you must forgive . ”

ID:	3694
INPUT:	Esango dizuet nori izan beldur : Izan beldur hiltzeko eta ondoren infernura jaurtitzeko ahalmena duenari . Bai , izan beldur horri !
PRED:	I will be afraid to be afraid and be afraid to be afraid , and then let him be afraid to be afraid .
GOLD:	But I 'll tell you whom to fear . Fear God , who has the power to kill you and then throw you into hell . Yes , he 's the one to fear .

ID:	3695
INPUT:	“ Neure herri Israel Egiptotik atera nuen egunetik ez dut Israelgo leinu guztien artean inongo hiririk hautatu , nire egoitza izango zen etxea egin ziezadaten ; baizik eta David aukeratu nuen , ene herri Israelen buruzagi izan zedin ” .
PRED:	“ I brought you out of my people out of Egypt , for I have chosen the people of Israel to build a Temple to build a Temple to build a Temple to build a Temple for my people . ”
GOLD:	‘ From the day I brought my people Israel out of Egypt , I have never chosen a city among any of the tribes of Israel as the place where a Temple should be built to honor my name . But I have chosen David to be king over my people Israel . ' ”

ID:	3696
INPUT:	Otoi , ez joan hemendik nik eskaintza zure aurrera ekarri arte . Berehala itzuliko naiz . Jaunak erantzun zion : — Hementxe egongo naiz zu etorri arte .
PRED:	Now go back to the Lord , and I brought you back to your burnt offerings until the Lord said to him , “ I have come . ” So the Lord told him , “ I have come here until you come . ”
GOLD:	Do n't go away until I come back and bring my offering to you . ” He answered , “ I will stay here until you return . ”

ID:	3697
INPUT:	Orain , berriz , zer ari naiz ikusten ? Nire herria hutsaren <unk> dute gatibu , eta <unk> dagite harro , nire izena egun <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	But why do I see how can I see my people ? I see that they see that my people , my people , and my people are under my name ?
GOLD:	What is this ? ” asks the Lord . “ Why are my people enslaved again ? Those who rule them shout in exultation . My name is blasphemed all day long .

ID:	3698
INPUT:	Jaiki zen hildakoa eta hizketan hasi , eta Jesusek amari bihurtu zion .
PRED:	So Jesus got up and began to speak , and he became the mother of the dead .
GOLD:	Then the dead boy sat up and began to talk ! And Jesus gave him back to his mother .

ID:	3699
INPUT:	<unk> arrazoi gabe pertsegitzen naute , baina zure hitzek bakarrik ikaratzen ni .
PRED:	Everyone who speaks against me , but I ca n't be shaken .
GOLD:	Powerful people harass me without cause , but my heart trembles only at your word .

ID:	3700
INPUT:	Erosta-doinuan . Davidena . Kux benjamindarra zela eta , Jaunari abestu ziona .
PRED:	Yes , this is the great song of the Lord : ‘ This is what the Lord says : '
GOLD:	I come to you for protection , O Lord my God.Save me from my persecutors — rescue me !

ID:	3701
INPUT:	Egia da neure kontzientziak ez nauela ezertan salatzen ; baina horrek ez du esan nahi neure burua errugabetzat dudanik , Jaunak bainau epaitzen .
PRED:	For the person who does not listen to me , but he does not listen to me , but he says the Lord , ‘ This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	My conscience is clear , but that does n't prove I 'm right . It is the Lord himself who will examine me and decide .

ID:	3702
INPUT:	Jaunak ez du bere herria zapuztuko , ez bere ondarea bertan behera utziko .
PRED:	The Lord has not spoken to his own people ; he will not redeem them from their own land .
GOLD:	The Lord will not reject his people ; he will not abandon his special possession .

ID:	3703
INPUT:	« Hilerokoa izanik , odoljarioa duen emakumea zazpi egunez geldituko da kutsaturik ; emakumea ukitzen duena kutsaturik geldituko da arratsa arte .
PRED:	“ If the woman is ceremonially unclean , the woman must be ceremonially unclean until she is ceremonially unclean until she is ceremonially unclean until evening .
GOLD:	“ Whenever a woman has her menstrual period , she will be ceremonially unclean for seven days . Anyone who touches her during that time will be unclean until evening .

ID:	3704
INPUT:	Gero , zuk hitz egin eta nik erantzungo dizut , edota nik hitz egin eta zuk erantzungo .
PRED:	Then I said to you , ‘ I will answer you and answer you . '
GOLD:	Now summon me , and I will answer ! Or let me speak to you , and you reply .

ID:	3705
INPUT:	esanez : — Benetan gorroto <unk> uste nuen eta zure <unk> eman nion emaztetzat . Hori baino hobea duzu ahizpa gaztea . Hartzazu zeuretzat , bestearen ordez .
PRED:	“ I tell you the truth , ” I said . “ If you were willing , I 'll give you my wife and my wife . You are better than your sister . ”
GOLD:	“ I truly thought you must hate her , ” her father explained , “ so I gave her in marriage to your best man . But look , her younger sister is even more beautiful than she is . Marry her instead . ”

ID:	3706
INPUT:	Fedeari esker ez zen hondatu Rahab emagaldua sinesgabeekin batera , israeldar <unk> harrera ona egin zielako .
PRED:	It was by faith that she is not strong , and even though he had been faithful to those who had been poor .
GOLD:	It was by faith that Rahab the prostitute was not destroyed with the people in her city who refused to obey God . For she had given a friendly welcome to the spies .

ID:	3707
INPUT:	esan zuen : « Desagerrarazi egingo dut mundutik egin dudan gizakia , eta gizakia ez ezik , baita abereak , narrastiak eta zeruko hegaztiak ere , damu bainaiz hauek egin izanaz » .
PRED:	There is no one of you , ” he said , “ I will make you a small animal , and all the birds of the sky , and all the birds of the earth will have no food . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord said , “ I will wipe this human race I have created from the face of the earth . Yes , and I will destroy every living thing — all the people , the large animals , the small animals that scurry along the ground , and even the birds of the sky . I am sorry I ever made them . ”

ID:	3708
INPUT:	Hau dio Jaunak : « Egiaz , nire <unk> dira zuenak bezalakoak , ezta nire jokabidea <unk> bezalakoa .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : What sorrow awaits those who are like that they are like that they are like that they are like ?
GOLD:	“ My thoughts are nothing like your thoughts , ” says the Lord . “ And my ways are far beyond anything you could imagine .

ID:	3709
INPUT:	( 1 Erg 10 , 1-13 )
PRED:	David 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Solomon 's Wealth and Splendor

ID:	3710
INPUT:	Egidazu zin , Jaunaren izenean , ez dituzula nire ondorengoak suntsituko , ezta nire izena ezabatuko ere nire aitaren senitartetik .
PRED:	You must not defile my name , and you will not destroy my name . You must not destroy the name of the Lord 's family .
GOLD:	So David promised this to Saul with an oath . Then Saul went home , but David and his men went back to their stronghold .

ID:	3711
INPUT:	Jaunak erraustu egin zituen hiriak eta bertako bizilagunak , lautada osoa eta lurralde hartako <unk> .
PRED:	Then the Lord destroyed the towns of the land and the people of the earth and all the people of the land that had been destroyed .
GOLD:	He utterly destroyed them , along with the other cities and villages of the plain , wiping out all the people and every bit of vegetation .

ID:	3712
INPUT:	Heldu ziren Hebronera eta David erregeari eraman zioten Ix-Boxeten burua , esanez : — Hona Ix-Boxeten burua ; zu hil nahi izan zintuen zure etsai Saulen semea zen . Honela eman dio Jaunak Davidi Saulen eta beronen ondorengoen lepotik mendekatzeko aukera .
PRED:	When David arrived at Hebron , he brought the king to Saul and asked him , “ This is what the Lord had told David , ‘ You are the king of Saul 's sons . ' So David was the Lord 's son of David .
GOLD:	When they arrived at Hebron , they presented Ishbosheth 's head to David . “ Look ! ” they exclaimed to the king . “ Here is the head of Ishbosheth , the son of your enemy Saul who tried to kill you . Today the Lord has given my lord the king revenge on Saul and his entire family ! ”

ID:	3713
INPUT:	Izan zaitezte elkarren menpeko , Kristori diozuen begiruneagatik .
PRED:	Instead , you should forgive each other .
GOLD:	And further , submit to one another out of reverence for Christ .

ID:	3714
INPUT:	« Zuen artean jarriko dut neure <unk> eta ez zaituztet zapuztuko .
PRED:	“ I will hand you among you , and I will give you a sword .
GOLD:	I will live among you , and I will not despise you .

ID:	3715
INPUT:	<unk> arrazoiak : Jerusalemen bekatuak
PRED:	A Plague of Jerusalem
GOLD:	The Sins of Judah

ID:	3716
INPUT:	Hitz hauek entzutean , atsekabez alde egin zuen gazteak , ondasun handien jabe baitzen .
PRED:	When he heard these men , he became king and forced him to rule over his possessions .
GOLD:	But when the young man heard this , he went away sad , for he had many possessions .

ID:	3717
INPUT:	Lasterka <unk> , Esauk , besarkatu eta lepotik heldurik , laztandu egin zuen Jakob , eta negarrari eman zioten biek .
PRED:	Esau realized that Esau was very angry with them , and Jacob kissed them . When they were terrified , Jacob became very angry with them .
GOLD:	Then Esau ran to meet him and embraced him , threw his arms around his neck , and kissed him . And they both wept .

ID:	3718
INPUT:	Ondoren , mezu hau bidali zion Judako errege Josafati : « Moabeko erregea kontra jarri zait . Etorriko al zara moabdarrak borrokatzera ? » Hark erantzun : « Joango naiz . Biok bat gara ; nire gudarostea eta zurea , nire zalditeria eta zurea bat dira » .
PRED:	Then this message came to Jehoshaphat of Judah : “ Why are you king of Moab ? ” he asked . “ Why are you going to fight me ? ” “ I am your horses , and you are my horses . ”
GOLD:	On the way , he sent this message to King Jehoshaphat of Judah : “ The king of Moab has rebelled against me . Will you join me in battle against him ? ” And Jehoshaphat replied , “ Why , of course ! You and I are as one . My troops are your troops , and my horses are your horses . ”

ID:	3719
INPUT:	Baina indartsuago batek eraso eta menderatzen badu , <unk> ematen zioten armak kendu eta hari harrapatutako gauzak banatu egingo ditu .
PRED:	But if one of them attacked them , he threw them into the sea and threw them into battle , and he will give them his weapons .
GOLD:	until someone even stronger attacks and overpowers him , strips him of his weapons , and carries off his belongings .

ID:	3720
INPUT:	Israeldarrak geroz eta gogorrago izan ziren Kanaango errege <unk> , erabat hondatu zuten arte .
PRED:	And when the people of Israel saw that the king of Israel had destroyed those who were completely destroyed .
GOLD:	And from that time on Israel became stronger and stronger against King Jabin until they finally destroyed him .

ID:	3721
INPUT:	Orduan , bidera atera zen profeta , erregeari itxarotera . Ezin zitzaion igarri nor zen , begiak zapi batez estaliak baitzituen .
PRED:	Then the prophet came out to meet the king with them , so he could not be afraid of them .
GOLD:	The prophet placed a bandage over his eyes to disguise himself and then waited beside the road for the king .

ID:	3722
INPUT:	<unk> borondatea zuten bihotz-zabaleko israeldar guztiek Jaunarentzat oparia ekarri zuten , elkarketa-etxola eraikitzeko , hango zerbitzu eta jantzi <unk> .
PRED:	Some of the people of Israel were young , women of Israel , and all the people of Israel were brought to the Lord .
GOLD:	All whose hearts were stirred and whose spirits were moved came and brought their sacred offerings to the Lord . They brought all the materials needed for the Tabernacle , for the performance of its rituals , and for the sacred garments .

ID:	3723
INPUT:	Larunbata
PRED:	Offerings for the Sabbath
GOLD:	Passover and the Festival of Unleavened Bread

ID:	3724
INPUT:	Zer egin behar dizugu , itsasoa <unk> ? Izan ere , itsasoa gero eta <unk> baitzegoen .
PRED:	What should we know how can we have done ? For we know that the sea and how can we know that he was very powerful ?
GOLD:	And since the storm was getting worse all the time , they asked him , “ What should we do to you to stop this storm ? ”

ID:	3725
INPUT:	gainera hustu zien bere haserre-sua , bere sumin , amorru eta suntsipena : <unk> taldea ,
PRED:	At that time the king of his fierce anger , his officials , and when they saw that they were filled with all his officials ,
GOLD:	He loosed on them his fierce anger — all his fury , rage , and hostility.He dispatched against thema band of destroying angels .

ID:	3726
INPUT:	Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak emango dizuen lurraldera joateko Jordan ibaia igaroko duzuen egunean , <unk> batzuk hartu , tente ipini eta <unk> zurituko dituzue .
PRED:	On that day the Lord your God will send you into the land of the Jordan River , and some of the people of the Jordan River will cut off your feet .
GOLD:	When you cross the Jordan River and enter the land the Lord your God is giving you , set up some large stones and coat them with plaster .

ID:	3727
INPUT:	Kito Israelgo profetak , Jerusalemi nire izenean hitz egin eta , bakerik ez zegoenean , <unk> azaltzen <unk> ! Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana .
PRED:	“ Therefore , the prophets of Israel , prophesy against Jerusalem , and I have heard that the Sovereign Lord has spoken ! For I have heard that I have heard that the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !
GOLD:	They were lying prophets who claimed peace would come to Jerusalem when there was no peace . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! '

ID:	3728
INPUT:	— Zergatik ez duzue barkamen-oparigaia toki sakratuan jan ? Guztiz sakratua da , elkartearen errua kentzeko eta Jaunaren aurrean haren aldeko barkamen-ohikunea egiteko Jaunak zuei emana .
PRED:	“ Why do you eat a sacred offering ? ” the Lord asked . “ The Lord has given you a sin offering to purify you as a sin offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Why did n't you eat the sin offering in the sacred area ? ” he demanded . “ It is a holy offering ! The Lord has given it to you to remove the guilt of the community and to purify the people , making them right with the Lord .

ID:	3729
INPUT:	Harkaitzetik ur-lasterrak atera zituen , ura ibaika isurarazi .
PRED:	He led the water into water to pour out the water .
GOLD:	He made streams pour from the rock , making the waters flow down like a river !

ID:	3730
INPUT:	Horrek arindu egingo ninduke . Eta pozez salto egingo nuke <unk> latz honetan , ez <unk> horrela Santuaren hitzei uko egingo .
PRED:	I would crush you with a snake , and I will make you glad because they have heard that I have heard that you have been filled with joy , and I will make you glad .
GOLD:	At least I can take comfort in this : Despite the pain , I have not denied the words of the Holy One .

ID:	3731
INPUT:	<unk> batzuk ere izan dira hilobian eta emakumeek esan bezala aurkitu dute guztia ; baina bera ez dute ikusi .
PRED:	Some of the men who were dead , and the women of the palace will not see everything in the grave .
GOLD:	Some of our men ran out to see , and sure enough , his body was gone , just as the women had said . ”

ID:	3732
INPUT:	« Zuek <unk> zaituztetlurreko familia guztien artetik ; horregatik , bada , zuen bekatu <unk> eskatuko dizuet » .
PRED:	“ But I will give you a covenant with all the people of all who have been able to kill you , and I will give you authority to you . ”
GOLD:	“ From among all the families on the earth , I have been intimate with you alone.That is why I must punish youfor all your sins . ”

ID:	3733
INPUT:	Zeure ospez , izan garaile egia eta justiziaren aldeko borrokan . Jaurti zeure eskuaz
PRED:	Your victory comes from your power , and rescue your hand from your hand .
GOLD:	Your arrows are sharp , piercing your enemies ' hearts.The nations fall beneath your feet .

ID:	3734
INPUT:	Baina israeldarrek garaitu egin zuten eta haren lurraldeaz jabetu , Arnon errekatik Jabok errekaraino , hau da , amondarren lurralderaino , hauek gotortua baitzuten muga .
PRED:	But the people of Israel took possession of the Arnon River to the Arnon River , from the Arnon River to the Arnon River , the territory of the Ammonites , the Ammonites , and the territory of the Ammonites .
GOLD:	But the Israelites slaughtered them with their swords and occupied their land from the Arnon River to the Jabbok River . They went only as far as the Ammonite border because the boundary of the Ammonites was fortified .

ID:	3735
INPUT:	dei egin eta esan zion : — Ez al nizun Jaunarengatik zin eginarazi eta ez al nizun zorrotz esan norabait ateratzen <unk> , ziur hilko zinela ? Ongi zela erantzun zenidan , <unk> .
PRED:	“ Do n't you know the Lord , ” he said . “ Do n't you know that I would not abandon you , and you would not know that I am going to kill you . ”
GOLD:	So the king sent for Shimei and demanded , “ Did n't I make you swear by the Lord and warn you not to go anywhere else or you would surely die ? And you replied , ‘ The sentence is fair ; I will do as you say . '

ID:	3736
INPUT:	Handia izango da , Goi-goikoaren Seme deituko diote , eta bere aita Daviden tronua emango dio Jainko Jaunak .
PRED:	The throne of the Most High will be called by the Most High , and he will be his father , the Lord , the God of David .
GOLD:	He will be very great and will be called the Son of the Most High . The Lord God will give him the throne of his ancestor David .

ID:	3737
INPUT:	« Zatozte niregana , nekatu eta <unk> guztiok , eta neuk emango dizuet atseden .
PRED:	“ Come and kill me , my lord , and I will give you rest .
GOLD:	Then Jesus said , “ Come to me , all of you who are weary and carry heavy burdens , and I will give you rest .

ID:	3738
INPUT:	eta sartuko den etxeko nagusiari esan : « Maisuak galdetzen du non duen ikasleekin Pazko-bildotsa jateko tokia » .
PRED:	“ I will enter the house of the house , ” he said , “ I will give you a new meal for the Passover meal . ”
GOLD:	At the house he enters , say to the owner , ‘ The Teacher asks : Where is the guest room where I can eat the Passover meal with my disciples ? '

ID:	3739
INPUT:	Uzielen semeak : Mixael , <unk> eta <unk> .
PRED:	These were the son of Aaron , who were with him .
GOLD:	The sons of Uzziel were Mishael , Elzaphan , and Sithri .

ID:	3740
INPUT:	Zure etxekoren bat hirian hiltzen delarik , zakurrek jango dute ; landan hiltzen delarik , zeruko hegaztiek jango dute » .
PRED:	The family of your family will die in the city of those who die in the fields , and those who die in the fields will die in the fields . ”
GOLD:	The members of Baasha 's family who die in the city will be eaten by dogs , and those who die in the field will be eaten by vultures . ”

ID:	3741
INPUT:	Saul , beronen seme Jonatan eta biekin zen jendea Benjamingo Gibean zeuden ; filistearrak , berriz , Mikmasen , etxolatuak .
PRED:	Saul son of Saul and his troops were camped at Gibeah , and the Philistines were in Gibeah of Benjamin . But the Philistines were in the land of Benjamin .
GOLD:	Saul and Jonathan and the troops with them were staying at Geba in the land of Benjamin . The Philistines set up their camp at Micmash .

ID:	3742
INPUT:	<unk> , <unk> eta inguruko herrixketan , Lakixen eta inguruetan , <unk> eta inguruetan . Beer-Xeba eta Hinom harana bitartean jarri ziren bizitzen .
PRED:	At that time , when they saw that the god of Samaria , and when they learned that he had been able to be able to live , and when they lived in prison .
GOLD:	Zanoah , and Adullam with their surrounding villages . They also lived in Lachish with its nearby fields and Azekah with its surrounding villages . So the people of Judah were living all the way from Beersheba in the south to the valley of Hinnom .

ID:	3743
INPUT:	Abiam , Judako errege
PRED:	The king of Judah
GOLD:	Abijam Rules in Judah

ID:	3744
INPUT:	Haien aurrean ikara dira herriak , zurbil jartzen aurpegi guztiak .
PRED:	Their people are like smoke , and their words are filled with smoke .
GOLD:	Fear grips all the people ; every face grows pale with terror .

ID:	3745
INPUT:	Beste hau esan behar zenukete : « Jaunak nahi badu eta bizi bagara , hau eta bestea egingo dugu » .
PRED:	For the Lord said to them , “ If we want you to live , we will live with the other , and we will live . ”
GOLD:	What you ought to say is , “ If the Lord wants us to , we will live and do this or that . ”

ID:	3746
INPUT:	« Ez zapaldu lagun hurkoa , ez larrutu . Ez utzi biharamuna arte ordaindu gabe <unk> lansaria .
PRED:	“ You must not be punished for a thousand years . Do not be punished until they have been punished for a thousand years .
GOLD:	“ Do not defraud or rob your neighbor . “ Do not make your hired workers wait until the next day to receive their pay .

ID:	3747
INPUT:	Handik Karmel mendira joan zen eta , gero , Samariara itzuli .
PRED:	From there he went to Mount Carmel and returned to Samaria .
GOLD:	From there Elisha went to Mount Carmel and finally returned to Samaria .

ID:	3748
INPUT:	Hau esango dute : “ Ai Jaunaren ezpata ! Noiz hartu behar duzu atseden ? Bildu <unk> , zaude , gelditu ! ”
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you , ” they say , ‘ How long will you be sure that you have seen in the presence of the Lord . '
GOLD:	“ Now , O sword of the Lord , when will you be at rest again ? Go back into your sheath ; rest and be still .

ID:	3749
INPUT:	hau <unk> , hau Tzadokena , hau Ahitubena ,
PRED:	This was the son of Athaliah , son of Athaliah , and there was the son of Athaliah .
GOLD:	son of Shallum , son of Zadok , son of Ahitub ,

ID:	3750
INPUT:	<unk> <unk>
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Zalmunna
GOLD:	Paul and Barnabas Separate

ID:	3751
INPUT:	« Horregatik diotsuet : Jainkoaren erreinua zuei kendu eta fruitua aterako dion herri bati emango zaio .
PRED:	“ I tell you the Kingdom of God , and he will be able to give you a Kingdom of God .
GOLD:	I tell you , the Kingdom of God will be taken away from you and given to a nation that will produce the proper fruit .

ID:	3752
INPUT:	Paulo berri onaren zerbitzari leial
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Treasure in Fragile Clay Jars

ID:	3753
INPUT:	« Aita zuzen hori , munduak ez zaitu ezagutu ; nik , ordea , ezagutu zaitut , eta hauek jakin dute zuk bidali nauzula .
PRED:	“ Father , you know that you do not know you , but you know that I am the Father who sent you to know you .
GOLD:	“ O righteous Father , the world does n't know you , but I do ; and these disciples know you sent me .

ID:	3754
INPUT:	Jesus preso hartu eta apaiz nagusiaren etxera eraman zuten . Pedrok urrutitik jarraitzen zion .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Peter 's high priest took him into the house of the Roman priest .
GOLD:	So they arrested him and led him to the high priest 's home . And Peter followed at a distance .

ID:	3755
INPUT:	Jaiki zaitez , Jauna ! Salba nazazu , ene Jainko ! Nire etsaiak masailean jotzen dituzu , gaizkileei hortzak hausten dizkiezu .
PRED:	Arise , O Lord , and rescue me from my enemies ; let me fall on them .
GOLD:	Victory comes from you , O Lord.May you bless your people.Interlude

ID:	3756
INPUT:	Entzun , Jauna ! Erruki nitaz ! Jauna , zatozkit lagun ! »
PRED:	Hear me , O Lord , for I am merciful to you . ”
GOLD:	You have turned my mourning into joyful dancing.You have taken away my clothes of mourning and clothed me with joy ,

ID:	3757
INPUT:	Pedrok galdetu zion : — Esadazu , <unk> saldu al zenuten soroa ? — Bai , <unk> — erantzun zuen hark .
PRED:	Peter asked him , “ Why are you trying to kill me ? ” “ Yes , ” he asked . “ Yes , ” he replied . “ Yes , ” he replied .
GOLD:	Peter asked her , “ Was this the price you and your husband received for your land ? ” “ Yes , ” she replied , “ that was the price . ”

ID:	3758
INPUT:	Josuek eta israeldar arduradunek jantziak urratu zituzten , buru gainera hautsa bota eta ahuspezturik egon ziren Jaunaren kutxa aurrean arratsa arte .
PRED:	So Joshua tore his clothes in the Ark of the Lord and cut it in front of the Ark of the Lord .
GOLD:	Joshua and the elders of Israel tore their clothing in dismay , threw dust on their heads , and bowed face down to the ground before the Ark of the Lord until evening .

ID:	3759
INPUT:	Baxango mendi , mendi gorena , gailur <unk> Baxango mendia ,
PRED:	King Og of Bashan , in the hill country of King Og of Bashan .
GOLD:	Why do you look with envy , O rugged mountains , at Mount Zion , where God has chosen to live , where the Lord himself will live forever ?

ID:	3760
INPUT:	Fedea eta egintzak
PRED:	Parable of the Lamp
GOLD:	Faith without Good Deeds Is Dead

ID:	3761
INPUT:	Barkamen-oparirako zekorra eta akerra , zeinen odola barkamen-ohikunea egiteko santutegira eramana izan baita , kanpalekutik aterako dituzte eta haien larru , haragi eta hesteak erreko .
PRED:	“ If the sin offering and the sheep of the altar , they must be sacrificed to the camp , they must be cut off from the camp , and they must burn it on the altar .
GOLD:	“ The bull and the goat presented as sin offerings , whose blood Aaron takes into the Most Holy Place for the purification ceremony , will be carried outside the camp . The animals ' hides , internal organs , and dung are all to be burned .

ID:	3762
INPUT:	Baina bazen Gabaonen , Jaunaren egoitza aurrean , Uriren seme eta Hurren biloba Betzalelek egindako brontzezko aldare bat , eta bertan egin zioten kontsulta Jaunari Salomonek eta biltzar osoak .
PRED:	But the Tabernacle was given to Solomon son of Uri , son of Uri , son of Uri , son of Uri , son of Solomon , and all the altar of the Lord .
GOLD:	But the bronze altar made by Bezalel son of Uri and grandson of Hur was there at Gibeon in front of the Tabernacle of the Lord . So Solomon and the people gathered in front of it to consult the Lord .

ID:	3763
INPUT:	Ogi-irinaren katilua ez zen hustu , ezta oliontzia agortu ere , Jaunak Eliasen bidez esana zuen bezala .
PRED:	So you must not eat the olive oil , and the Lord had given you a single piece of olive oil .
GOLD:	There was always enough flour and olive oil left in the containers , just as the Lord had promised through Elijah .

ID:	3764
INPUT:	Saiatu nintzen ulertzen begi aurreko arazo hori ,
PRED:	Some of these things were born in the eyes of the church ,
GOLD:	So I tried to understand why the wicked prosper.But what a difficult task it is !

ID:	3765
INPUT:	Nik esan nuen : « Ai ene , galdua naiz ! <unk> kutsatuak baititut eta kutsaturiko ezpainak dituen herrian bizi bainaiz . Bekatari izanik , Errege eta Jaun ahalguztiduna ikusi baitut neure begiz » .
PRED:	I said , “ What sorrow awaits you , my own people , my lord , my lord , my lord , my lord the Lord , have spoken ! For I have seen my lord the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	Then I said , “ It 's all over ! I am doomed , for I am a sinful man . I have filthy lips , and I live among a people with filthy lips . Yet I have seen the King , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . ”

ID:	3766
INPUT:	Gero , jaitsi ziren muinotik hirira , eta Samuel hizketan aritu zen Saulekin etxe gainean .
PRED:	Then they went out to the city of the city , and Samuel came to Saul 's house .
GOLD:	When they came down from the place of worship and returned to town , Samuel took Saul up to the roof of the house and prepared a bed for him there .

ID:	3767
INPUT:	Jerusalem inguratua eta askatua
PRED:	The Sign of Jerusalem and Jerusalem
GOLD:	Future Deliverance for Jerusalem

ID:	3768
INPUT:	Hona arduradun hauen izenak : « Judaren leinutik , Jefuneren seme Kaleb ;
PRED:	This is the names of the tribe of Judah :
GOLD:	These are the tribes and the names of the leaders : JudahCaleb son of Jephunneh

ID:	3769
INPUT:	Gizasemeak
PRED:	Young Women of Jerusalem
GOLD:	Young Woman

ID:	3770
INPUT:	<unk> esan zuen : « Seguru bizi daJaunaren leinu kutuna , Goi-goikoak babesten du egunero , beraren mendi gainean bizi da » .
PRED:	At that time he said , “ There will be great in the presence of the Lord , the God of Israel , and his glory will live in the presence of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Moses said this about the tribe of Benjamin : “ The people of Benjamin are loved by the Lordand live in safety beside him.He surrounds them continuouslyand preserves them from every harm . ”

ID:	3771
INPUT:	Jaiki , egizu aiene gau osoan etengabe ; hustu ezazu bihotza Jaunaren aurrean ; jaso eskuak hari , kaleburu <unk> hiltzen dauden zeure haurren alde <unk> .
PRED:	Get up and look at night , and go out to the night of the Lord , and take my hands on it , and when they saw that they were afraid of the Lord .
GOLD:	Rise during the night and cry out.Pour out your hearts like water to the Lord.Lift up your hands to him in prayer , pleading for your children , for in every streetthey are faint with hunger .

ID:	3772
INPUT:	( Mt 19 , 13-15 ; Mk 10 , 13-16 )
PRED:	Jesus Again Predicts His Death
GOLD:	The Rich Man

ID:	3773
INPUT:	<unk> etxera joatea heriotzarantz joatea da , beraren bideak <unk> eramaten zaitu .
PRED:	A man who goes into her house , and he goes into the path of judgment .
GOLD:	Entering her house leads to death ; it is the road to the grave .

ID:	3774
INPUT:	Honek jaso , urrea urtu eta , zizelez <unk> , zekor-irudia <unk> zuen . Orduan , israeldarrek esan zuten : — Hau da zure jainkoa , Israel , Egiptotik atera zintuena !
PRED:	So he was very angry with gold , and the stones that had been made , as a god of wood . Then the people of Israel said , “ You have brought them out of the land of Egypt , the people of Egypt ! ”
GOLD:	Then Aaron took the gold , melted it down , and molded it into the shape of a calf . When the people saw it , they exclaimed , “ O Israel , these are the gods who brought you out of the land of Egypt ! ”

ID:	3775
INPUT:	Norbaitek esan dezake egia dela ez natzaizuela nekagarri gertatu , baina , begi <unk> naizenez , engainuz harrapatu zaituztedala .
PRED:	“ I tell you what I say , ‘ I am going to visit you , but I am not able to see you . '
GOLD:	Some of you admit I was not a burden to you . But others still think I was sneaky and took advantage of you by trickery .

ID:	3776
INPUT:	Hau entzutean , harritu egin zen Jesus eta ondoren <unk> esan zien : « Benetan diotsuet : Israel guztian ez dut aurkitu horrelako <unk> .
PRED:	When Jesus heard this , he said , “ I tell you the truth , ‘ I tell you the truth , the truth , and I know that all the people of Israel had been healed . '
GOLD:	When Jesus heard this , he was amazed . Turning to those who were following him , he said , “ I tell you the truth , I have n't seen faith like this in all Israel !

ID:	3777
INPUT:	Jaunak gidatuko zaitu beti , <unk> <unk> <unk> zure gorputza indarberrituko . Ongi bustiriko baratze izango zara , agortzen ez den iturburu .
PRED:	For the Lord will give you great power , and when they will be filled with flesh , and they will be filled with milk and honey .
GOLD:	The Lord will guide you continually , giving you water when you are dryand restoring your strength.You will be like a well-watered garden , like an ever-flowing spring .

ID:	3778
INPUT:	« Hurbilarazi Aaron eta beronen semeak elkarketa-etxolaren sarrerara eta garbi daitezela urez .
PRED:	“ Next Aaron and his sons must wash their hands on the entrance to the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ Present Aaron and his sons at the entrance of the Tabernacle , and wash them with water .

ID:	3779
INPUT:	Jakingo dute hori kanaandarrek eta lurralde honetako beste bizilagunek , altxatuko dira gure kontra eta gure oroitzapena ere desagerrarazi egingo dute lurrazaletik . Zer eginen duzu , orduan , zeure izen handiaren alde ?
PRED:	That is why the Sovereign Lord says to us and the people of this land of the land of our ancestors , and they will be destroyed by the great power of the earth .
GOLD:	For when the Canaanites and all the other people living in the land hear about it , they will surround us and wipe our name off the face of the earth . And then what will happen to the honor of your great name ? ”

ID:	3780
INPUT:	<unk> luzea entzun bezain laster , herri osoak irrintzi handia egingo du eta hiriko harresia behera etorriko da . Orduan , eraso diezaiola jende guztiak , nork bere aurrean izango duen tartetik »
PRED:	As soon as they hear the sound of a great city , all the people of the city will come to the city , and all the people of the city will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	When you hear the priests give one long blast on the rams ' horns , have all the people shout as loud as they can . Then the walls of the town will collapse , and the people can charge straight into the town . ”

ID:	3781
INPUT:	Gure aita Davidek izan zuen Jaunarentzat , Israelen Jainkoarentzat , tenplua eraikitzeko asmoa .
PRED:	Our father was the Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , to build this Temple to build .
GOLD:	Then Solomon said , “ My father , David , wanted to build this Temple to honor the name of the Lord , the God of Israel .

ID:	3782
INPUT:	Mutzritik ekarritako guda-gurdi batek zilarrezko seiehun txanpon balio zuen , eta zaldi batek ehun eta berrogeita hamar . Salomonen merkatariek hititen eta aramearren errege guztientzat ekarri ohi zituzten halakoak .
PRED:	As soon as I arrived from Egypt with chariots and chariots , a commander of the chariots of silver , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , and the other kings of the land of the Hittites .
GOLD:	At that time chariots from Egypt could be purchased for 600 pieces of silver , and horses for 150 pieces of silver . They were then exported to the kings of the Hittites and the kings of Aram .

ID:	3783
INPUT:	Morroi eta <unk> <unk> espiritua isuriko <unk> haietan .
PRED:	Then those who were filled with me , and when they will pour out my spirit .
GOLD:	I will gather the armies of the worldinto the valley of Jehoshaphat.There I will judge themfor harming my people , my special possession , for scattering my people among the nations , and for dividing up my land .

ID:	3784
INPUT:	Nire herriko <unk> <unk> dute non bazkatu , behartsuek <unk> dute atseden ; filistearrak , ordea , goseak hilaraziko ditut , bat bakarrik ereez da bizirik geldituko .
PRED:	They will know that the people of Israel are slaughtered , and they will see that the Philistines are slaughtered , and they will die . But they will die , and they will die .
GOLD:	I will feed the poor in my pasture ; the needy will lie down in peace.But as for you , I will wipe you out with famineand destroy the few who remain .

ID:	3785
INPUT:	Eta ilberri oro eta <unk> aurrean <unk> dira gizaki guztiak . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	And all the things that are mine , and I will know that the Lord has spoken ! ”
GOLD:	“ All humanity will come to worship mefrom week to weekand from month to month .

ID:	3786
INPUT:	<unk> , <unk> ,
PRED:	And when they saw that they were filled with power ,
GOLD:	The king of LibnahThe king of Adullam

ID:	3787
INPUT:	— Jauna , gizaki orori bizi-arnasa ematen diozun Jainkoa , izendatu elkartearen buru izango den norbait ,
PRED:	“ O Lord , who is weak , and those who are wise .
GOLD:	“ O Lord , you are the God who gives breath to all creatures . Please appoint a new man as leader for the community .

ID:	3788
INPUT:	Bi ume ari zitzaizkion sabelean elkarren lehian . Rebekak zioen berekiko : « Zergatik gertatu zait gero niri horrelakorik ? » Jaunarengana jo zuen argitasun eske ,
PRED:	One day Leah was sick with him , and she said to him , “ Why are you trying to answer me ? ” So he asked the Lord , “ Why are you trying to answer me ? ”
GOLD:	But the two children struggled with each other in her womb . So she went to ask the Lord about it . “ Why is this happening to me ? ” she asked .

ID:	3789
INPUT:	Josuek bidali egin zuen herria , eta israeldarrak nor bere lurraldearen jabetza hartzera joan ziren .
PRED:	So Joshua sent the people of Israel to live in the land of the land of Israel .
GOLD:	After Joshua sent the people away , each of the tribes left to take possession of the land allotted to them .

ID:	3790
INPUT:	Eta honako promes hau egin zion Jaunari : « Amondarrak eskura ematen <unk> ,
PRED:	Then the Lord gave this message to the Lord : “ He has given him victory over the Midianites . ”
GOLD:	And Jephthah made a vow to the Lord . He said , “ If you give me victory over the Ammonites ,

ID:	3791
INPUT:	Izan ere , ez zieten israeldarrei lagundu ogia eta ura emanez . Moabdarrek Balaam erosi zuten , israeldarrak madarika zitzan ; baina gure Jainkoak madarikazioa bedeinkapen bihurtu zuen .
PRED:	For the people of Israel refused to listen to the people of Israel and gave him food to the people of Israel , but Jacob gave him a blessing to him .
GOLD:	For they had not provided the Israelites with food and water in the wilderness . Instead , they hired Balaam to curse them , though our God turned the curse into a blessing .

ID:	3792
INPUT:	Ondoren , <unk> barrena , <unk> iritsi ziren .
PRED:	Then when they arrived , they came down and saw that they had seen .
GOLD:	Then they traveled back through Pisidia to Pamphylia .

ID:	3793
INPUT:	Moisesek Josue bere ondorengo izendatu
PRED:	Joshua son of Nun
GOLD:	Public Reading of the Book of Instruction

ID:	3794
INPUT:	Kafarnaumen sartu ziren . Eta , larunbatean sinagogara joanik , irakasten hasi zen Jesus .
PRED:	So Jesus went into the synagogue to the synagogue , and they began to understand the synagogue .
GOLD:	Jesus and his companions went to the town of Capernaum . When the Sabbath day came , he went into the synagogue and began to teach .

ID:	3795
INPUT:	Egiptotik atera den herriak lurralde osoa estali du . Zatoz berehala herri hori madarikatzera ; beharbada , borrokatu ahal izango dut eta bota .
PRED:	Let them fall into the land of Egypt , and I will protect you from the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	‘ Look , a vast horde of people has arrived from Egypt , and they cover the face of the earth . Come and curse these people for me . Then perhaps I will be able to stand up to them and drive them from the land . ' ”

ID:	3796
INPUT:	Baina alarguntsak semeak nahiz bilobak baditu , hauek ikasi behar dute lehenik beren <unk> eginbeharrak betetzen eta gurasoei zor <unk> itzultzen , hori baitu atsegin Jainkoak .
PRED:	But if you were alive or older or older or older or older or older or older or bad , they will know that God had given him to your ancestors , and they will know that God has given you .
GOLD:	But if she has children or grandchildren , their first responsibility is to show godliness at home and repay their parents by taking care of them . This is something that pleases God .

ID:	3797
INPUT:	bata iparraldean zegoen , Mikmasen aurrean ; bestea hegoaldean , <unk> aurrean .
PRED:	The king of the north was in the south of the north , and the other kings of the north was in the south .
GOLD:	The cliff on the north was in front of Micmash , and the one on the south was in front of Geba .

ID:	3798
INPUT:	Jesusen ondora iristean , han ikusi zuten deabruduna , eserita , jantzirik eta bere onean , lehen <unk> menpe zegoen huraxe bera , eta biziki izutu ziren .
PRED:	When they saw him there , some of you saw a man who was sitting on him and saw him , they were baptized . And when they saw that they were in him , and they were terrified by the power of Jesus .
GOLD:	A crowd soon gathered around Jesus , and they saw the man who had been possessed by the legion of demons . He was sitting there fully clothed and perfectly sane , and they were all afraid .

ID:	3799
INPUT:	Gainera , nik , zure zerbitzari honek , neure gain hartua dut mutikoaren erantzukizuna ; hitza eman nion aitari ; berekiko errudun izango nintzateke betiko , itzuliko ez banio .
PRED:	I have given you my servant , the servant of my servant , but I have given you a boy to my father 's father . I would not let my father die , for I would not return to you .
GOLD:	My lord , I guaranteed to my father that I would take care of the boy . I told him , ‘ If I do n't bring him back to you , I will bear the blame forever . '

ID:	3800
INPUT:	<unk> gainera txingar goriak , <unk> bitez leize sakonera , eta gehiago jaiki ez !
PRED:	When he saw them , he looked and saw that they were terrified , and they were not able to see .
GOLD:	Do n't let liars prosper here in our land.Cause great disasters to fall on the violent .

ID:	3801
INPUT:	Zoazte <unk> hirira eta begira , hurbil zaitezte <unk> handira , eta jaitsi hortik <unk> <unk> . <unk> horiek baino <unk> da zuena ? Zuen <unk> baino <unk> ote ?
PRED:	Now go and see that the people of Israel saw that the Egyptian Egyptian Egyptian Egyptian Egyptian Egyptian Egyptian Egyptian Egyptian Egyptian Egyptian Egyptian Egyptian army and how can we see ?
GOLD:	But go over to Calnehand see what happened there.Then go to the great city of Hamathand down to the Philistine city of Gath.You are no better than they were , and look at how they were destroyed .

ID:	3802
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin ez zaiona egin zuen , Nebaten seme Jeroboamek Israeli eginarazi zizkion bekatuetatik aldendu gabe .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , and he refused to turn from the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat .
GOLD:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight . He refused to turn from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel to commit .

ID:	3803
INPUT:	Etorri zen <unk> ere — behin batean gauez Jesus ikustera joan zen hura — hogeita hamarren bat <unk> <unk> eta <unk> zekarrela .
PRED:	One day when Jesus arrived at the night , he came to see that Jesus was very sick and saw that he was very sick with him .
GOLD:	With him came Nicodemus , the man who had come to Jesus at night . He brought about seventy-five pounds of perfumed ointment made from myrrh and aloes .

ID:	3804
INPUT:	Jaelen oinetara makurtu zen , erori eta lurrean gelditu zerraldo . Beraren <unk> zen <unk> zen <unk> .
PRED:	When she fell down on the ground , he fell down on the ground . When he saw that he was in the ground , he fell on the ground .
GOLD:	He sank , he fell , he lay still at her feet.And where he sank , there he died .

ID:	3805
INPUT:	Harresia , <unk> hilaren hogeita bostean bukatu zen , hasi eta berrogeita hamabi egunera .
PRED:	At that time the wall was sick , and he began to see the next day .
GOLD:	So on October 2 the wall was finished — just fifty-two days after we had begun .

ID:	3806
INPUT:	Hizketa arrotzez mintzo denak , beraz , eska biezaio Jainkoari esaten duena argitzeko dohaina ere .
PRED:	Therefore , listen to God in tongues in tongues , to God 's grace .
GOLD:	So anyone who speaks in tongues should pray also for the ability to interpret what has been said .

ID:	3807
INPUT:	« Ez eman aurrerantzean israeldarrei adreiluak egiteko lastorik , orain arte bezala ; doazela beraiek lasto bila .
PRED:	“ Do not let the Israelites go ahead of the people of Israel , for there is no rain .
GOLD:	“ Do not supply any more straw for making bricks . Make the people get it themselves !

ID:	3808
INPUT:	<unk> deia
PRED:	Paul 's Sickness and Recovery
GOLD:	A Call to Repentance

ID:	3809
INPUT:	Nire gauza santuak mespretxatzen dira , nire larunbata hausten .
PRED:	My Sabbath is the Sabbath , and my Sabbath will be snuffed out by my Sabbath .
GOLD:	You despise my holy things and violate my Sabbath days of rest .

ID:	3810
INPUT:	Egun hartan , agindu hau eman zion Moisesek herriari :
PRED:	So Moses gave this message to the people of Israel :
GOLD:	That same day Moses also gave this charge to the people :

ID:	3811
INPUT:	Baina israeldar lehen-semeen ordez lebitarrak hartu ditut
PRED:	But I have appointed the Levites to serve the Levites of Israel .
GOLD:	Yes , I have claimed the Levites in place of all the firstborn sons of Israel .

ID:	3812
INPUT:	laurehun granada-fruitu , bi sareetan ezartzeko , bina lerro sare bakoitzean , zutabeburuetan zeuden kapiteletako bi bolak apaintzeko ;
PRED:	capitals on the pillars , two rows of pomegranates on the pillars , two rows of pomegranates , and two rows of pomegranates on the pillars .
GOLD:	the 400 pomegranates that hung from the chains on the capitals ( two rows of pomegranates for each of the chain networks that decorated the capitals on top of the pillars ) ;

ID:	3813
INPUT:	<unk> ( 4 , 1-34 )
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Message about Assyria
GOLD:	Parable of the Farmer Scattering Seed

ID:	3814
INPUT:	Han zeudenetako batzuek , ahotsa entzunik , trumoia izan zela zioten ; beste batzuek , ordea , aingeru batek hitz egin ziola .
PRED:	But some of the Pharisees heard that he had heard the voice of the world , but some other angels spoke to him .
GOLD:	When the crowd heard the voice , some thought it was thunder , while others declared an angel had spoken to him .

ID:	3815
INPUT:	Jeremias profetaren otoitza
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Prayer for Jeremiah
GOLD:	Jeremiah 's Prayer

ID:	3816
INPUT:	Zuk , gure Jainko horrek , bota zenituen lurralde honetako herriak zure herri Israel sartu ahala , eta zeure adiskide Abrahamen ondorengoei eman zenien betiko .
PRED:	O God of Israel , you have made this covenant with your descendants , and you have given them to your descendants , Isaac , and Jacob .
GOLD:	O our God , did you not drive out those who lived in this land when your people Israel arrived ? And did you not give this land forever to the descendants of your friend Abraham ?

ID:	3817
INPUT:	Goizean atera zen Jehu kanpora eta , zutik , esan zion jendeari : — Zuek errugabe zarete . Ni ibili nintzen azpilanean Israelgo errege Joramen aurka , eta nik hil nuen . Baina nork hil ditu hauek guztiak ?
PRED:	Then Jehu left the next morning and said to him , “ You have sinned against the people of Israel ! You have sinned against the people of Israel , but you have killed me . ”
GOLD:	In the morning he went out and spoke to the crowd that had gathered around them . “ You are not to blame , ” he told them . “ I am the one who conspired against my master and killed him . But who killed all these ?

ID:	3818
INPUT:	<unk> zarela ? Ez ibili banandu nahian . <unk> zarela ? Ez hasi emazte bila .
PRED:	“ Do n't you realize that you should be able to be able to kill you ? ”
GOLD:	If you have a wife , do not seek to end the marriage . If you do not have a wife , do not seek to get married .

ID:	3819
INPUT:	Ilunabarrean , joan zen Jesus Hamabiekin
PRED:	That evening Jesus went to the Twelve ,
GOLD:	In the evening Jesus arrived with the Twelve .

ID:	3820
INPUT:	<unk> hartzerakoan , ordea , ez zuen sobera asko bildu zuenak , ez eta eskas gutxi bildu zuenak ere . Bakoitzak jateko behar adina zuen .
PRED:	But when the people had not been circumcised , there were only only only only one who had not been planted , and only only a little while they were left .
GOLD:	But when they measured it out , everyone had just enough . Those who gathered a lot had nothing left over , and those who gathered only a little had enough . Each family had just what it needed .

ID:	3821
INPUT:	Orduan , joan eta beste zazpi espiritu hartzen ditu berekin , bera baino gaiztoagoak , eta gizakiagan sartu eta bertan jartzen da bizitzen ; horrela , pertsona horren azken egoera lehengoa baino okerragoa gertatzen da . Gauza bera gertatuko zaio gizaldi gaizto honi ere » .
PRED:	Then he went back to the other spirit and saw seven others who live in the same way , so they can live in this generation . And if they are righteous and righteous , they will live in this generation . ”
GOLD:	Then the spirit finds seven other spirits more evil than itself , and they all enter the person and live there . And so that person is worse off than before . That will be the experience of this evil generation . ”

ID:	3822
INPUT:	Berak atera gaitu ilunpearen menpetik eta bere Seme maitearen erreinura aldatu ;
PRED:	He rescued us from the power of God , and he rescued us from their enemies .
GOLD:	For he has rescued us from the kingdom of darkness and transferred us into the Kingdom of his dear Son ,

ID:	3823
INPUT:	Gauza hauetaz ez dugu giza jakinduriak irakatsitako hizkeraz hitz egiten , Espirituak <unk> baizik , espirituzko <unk> Espiritua hartu duten gizon-emakumeei adieraziz .
PRED:	So we do n't know that the Lord has given you the new Spirit that is given by the Spirit that we have given you the Holy Spirit to be filled with all the Spirit .
GOLD:	When we tell you these things , we do not use words that come from human wisdom . Instead , we speak words given to us by the Spirit , using the Spirit 's words to explain spiritual truths .

ID:	3824
INPUT:	Eta beste hau ere badio : Jauna , hasieratik sendo ezarri zenuen lurra , zure eskuek egina da zerua ;
PRED:	And the Lord will make you holy , and he will rule over you . You made the earth with your hands , and the earth will be destroyed .
GOLD:	He also says to the Son , “ In the beginning , Lord , you laid the foundation of the earthand made the heavens with your hands .

ID:	3825
INPUT:	Orduan , esan nien : “ Zer da zuek joaten zareteneko muino hori ? ” Eta “ Muino ” — <unk> — deitu izan dute gaur arte .
PRED:	Then I said to them , ‘ Why are you going into the hills ? ' “ Why are you going to live here ? ” And when they demanded .
GOLD:	I said to them , ‘ What is this high place where you are going ? ' ( This kind of pagan shrine has been called Bamah — ‘ high place ' — ever since . )

ID:	3826
INPUT:	Entzun sorrarazi zintuen aitari , ez mespretxatu ama , zahartu egin dela eta .
PRED:	Listen to me , my father , and he did not abandon you .
GOLD:	Listen to your father , who gave you life , and do n't despise your mother when she is old .

ID:	3827
INPUT:	Eskatzen dizunari eman , eta dirua uzteko eskatzen dizunari ez ukatu .
PRED:	So he gave Abram a money to your money , where there was no one of them .
GOLD:	Give to those who ask , and do n't turn away from those who want to borrow .

ID:	3828
INPUT:	Baina Jainkoak bere tokia jarri zion atal bakoitzari gorputzean , berak nahi bezala .
PRED:	But God had placed his body on each part of his body .
GOLD:	But our bodies have many parts , and God has put each part just where he wants it .

ID:	3829
INPUT:	Ai ene ! Hobe nuen atzerrian urruti bizi izan banintz , <unk> edo Kedarko oihal-etxoletan !
PRED:	I am better to be better than my relatives , and I have been my relatives who are among you .
GOLD:	How I suffer in far-off Meshech.It pains me to live in distant Kedar .

ID:	3830
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak zuen arbasoak bakarrik izan zituen atsegin eta maite , eta <unk> zuek , haien ondorengoak , hautatu zintuzten herri guztien artean , gaur egun gertatzen denez .
PRED:	But the Lord was very angry with your ancestors , and he loved you because of all the people of all the people who love you , and I have chosen you today .
GOLD:	Yet the Lord chose your ancestors as the objects of his love . And he chose you , their descendants , above all other nations , as is evident today .

ID:	3831
INPUT:	Leize-zulo sakona emagalduaren ahoa ; bertara amilduko Jaunak gaitzetsia .
PRED:	A trap for a trap , and the Lord takes no rain .
GOLD:	The mouth of an immoral woman is a dangerous trap ; those who make the Lord angry will fall into it .

ID:	3832
INPUT:	Aztertu dut neure jokabidea , eta neure pausoak zure <unk> nahi ditut bideratu .
PRED:	I have told you what I have done , and I have told you how hard I want you .
GOLD:	I pondered the direction of my life , and I turned to follow your laws .

ID:	3833
INPUT:	23 , 9
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	The Festival of Trumpets

ID:	3834
INPUT:	<unk> daude zelatan , nondik nora nabilen begira , niri bizia kentzeko zain .
PRED:	If they see , they are looking for my life , then I can find life .
GOLD:	Do n't let them get away with their wickedness ; in your anger , O God , bring them down .

ID:	3835
INPUT:	Izan ere , barrua <unk> zioten , eta hark zentzugabe hitz egin .
PRED:	For they were very glad because they were very glad .
GOLD:	They made Moses angry , and he spoke foolishly .

ID:	3836
INPUT:	Bizia da Jainkoaren hitza , bizia eta eragin handikoa , aho biko ezpata bera baino <unk> : gogo eta espirituaren <unk> sartzen da , <unk> <unk> <unk> , eta barneko pentsamendu eta asmo guztiak <unk> ditu .
PRED:	For the word of God has given me life , and I have made a sword of my sword . He has made a sword , and when I saw that the spirit of God 's Armies , and they will know that they are very angry with my mind .
GOLD:	For the word of God is alive and powerful . It is sharper than the sharpest two-edged sword , cutting between soul and spirit , between joint and marrow . It exposes our innermost thoughts and desires .

ID:	3837
INPUT:	Noiz arte , Jauna ? Betiko al zaude ezkutuan ? Betiko al dago zure haserrea su eta gar ?
PRED:	How long will you see ? How long will you grow up ? Why is your anger ?
GOLD:	Remember how short my life is , how empty and futile this human existence !

ID:	3838
INPUT:	Baina salatzaileak aurkeztu zirenean , ez zioten nik uste nuen okerrik batere leporatu .
PRED:	But when they tried to fight against me , they would not speak against me .
GOLD:	But the accusations made against him were n't any of the crimes I expected .

ID:	3839
INPUT:	Ahimaatzek esan zion oihuka erregeari : — Agur , jauna ! Eta , erregearen aurrean lurreraino ahuspeztuz , jarraitu zuen : — Bedeinkatua Jauna , zure Jainkoa , menderatu baititu ene errege jaunaren kontra jaiki ziren gizonak !
PRED:	“ Come ! ” the king shouted , “ we have come with him ! ” And the king shouted , “ Praise the Lord your God , the God of Israel ! ” So they shouted .
GOLD:	Then Ahimaaz cried out to the king , “ Everything is all right ! ” He bowed before the king with his face to the ground and said , “ Praise to the Lord your God , who has handed over the rebels who dared to stand against my lord the king . ”

ID:	3840
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> pilaturiko altxorrak , ongi <unk> <unk> dizkizut . Horrela jakingo <unk> naizela Jauna , Israelen Jainkoa , zeure izenez dei egiten dizuna .
PRED:	And when I know that I will be filled with power , and I will know that I am the Lord your God , the God of Israel , who will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And I will give you treasures hidden in the darkness — secret riches.I will do this so you may know that I am the Lord , the God of Israel , the one who calls you by name .

ID:	3841
INPUT:	« Orain , bada , nik , Jaun ahalguztidun honek , Israelen Jainkoak , galdetzen dizuet : Zergatik nahi duzue zeuen buruen galbide izaten jarraitu eta , horrela , Judako gizon eta emakumeak , <unk> eta bularreko haurrak suntsiarazi eta zeuen herria bizilagunik gabe utzi ?
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : Why do you think of the people of Israel ? Why are you afraid of the people of Judah ?
GOLD:	“ And now the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , asks you : Why are you destroying yourselves ? For not one of you will survive — not a man , woman , or child among you who has come here from Judah , not even the babies in your arms .

ID:	3842
INPUT:	Hilkias apaizak Jaunaren etxean aurkitu zuen <unk> aginduak betez , Josiasek desagerrarazi egin zituen Jerusalemdik eta Juda lurralde osotik hildakoen espirituei dei egiten zieten guztiak eta igarleak ; eta etxe-jainkoen irudiak , idoloak eta irudi <unk> hautsi egin zituen .
PRED:	Then Hilkiah the priest found the Temple of the Lord and all the people of Judah and the people of Judah and all the people of Judah and the other gods of Jerusalem , and he worshiped the gods of Judah and the god of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Josiah also got rid of the mediums and psychics , the household gods , the idols , and every other kind of detestable practice , both in Jerusalem and throughout the land of Judah . He did this in obedience to the laws written in the scroll that Hilkiah the priest had found in the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	3843
INPUT:	Hauen ordez , Roboamek brontzezko babeskiak egin eta jauregiko sarrera zaintzen zuen taldearen buru zirenei utzi zizkien .
PRED:	Rehoboam was given to the bronze shields of bronze , and he put them on the entrance of the palace of the guard .
GOLD:	King Rehoboam later replaced them with bronze shields as substitutes , and he entrusted them to the care of the commanders of the guard who protected the entrance to the royal palace .

ID:	3844
INPUT:	ez diot neure ahoari bekatu egiten utzi , <unk> heriotza eskatuz .
PRED:	I have sinned against you , and I have sinned against you .
GOLD:	No , I have never sinned by cursing anyoneor by asking for revenge .

ID:	3845
INPUT:	Baina zuek eta zuen seme-alabak niregandik urruntzen bazarete , nik eman dizkizuedan agindu eta legeak betetzen ez badituzue , beste jainko batzuk zerbitzatzera jo eta haien aurrean ahuspezten bazarete ,
PRED:	But if you obey me and your children and your children , I am giving you the commands I am giving you , and you must worship other gods and worship other gods .
GOLD:	“ But if you or your descendants abandon me and disobey the commands and decrees I have given you , and if you serve and worship other gods ,

ID:	3846
INPUT:	Ilea motz-motz egingo du nazireuak elkarketa-etxolako sarreran eta bere sagarapenaren ezaugarri duen ile moztua <unk> erretzen deneko sutara botako du .
PRED:	I will be able to build an animal for a burnt offering , and they will be trampled at the entrance of the Tabernacle , and they will be thrown into the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ Then the Nazirites will shave their heads at the entrance of the Tabernacle . They will take the hair that had been dedicated and place it on the fire beneath the peace-offering sacrifice .

ID:	3847
INPUT:	Moisesek Jaunari aurkeztu zion arazoa ,
PRED:	Then Moses said to the Lord ,
GOLD:	So Moses brought their case before the Lord .

ID:	3848
INPUT:	<unk> izaten dute jakinduria , urtetan <unk> zuhurtzia .
PRED:	And when wisdom comes from wisdom , wisdom and wisdom will be filled with wisdom .
GOLD:	Wisdom belongs to the aged , and understanding to the old .

ID:	3849
INPUT:	Jakobek hamabi semeak bedeinkatu
PRED:	Jacob 's sons and Jacob
GOLD:	Jacob 's Last Words to His Sons

ID:	3850
INPUT:	« Egun hartan ez duzu <unk> beharrik <unk> aurka egin <unk> . Izan ere , erronka <unk> kenduko dizkizut , eta ez zara harrezkero <unk> mendi santuan .
PRED:	“ In that day you will be able to know that you have been able to kill me , and I will give you authority over to everyone that day . For when I have thrown into the holy mountain , and you will know that the Lord 's holy mountain .
GOLD:	On that day you will no longer need to be ashamed , for you will no longer be rebels against me.I will remove all proud and arrogant people from among you.There will be no more haughtiness on my holy mountain .

ID:	3851
INPUT:	Poz gaitezen eta egin festa , eman diezaiogun aintza , heldu baitira Bildotsaren ezteiak . <unk> <unk> emaztegaia :
PRED:	Let us live in peace , and we have buried him in a place of honor and buried him with all who were sitting on the throne of the Lamb .
GOLD:	Let us be glad and rejoice , and let us give honor to him.For the time has come for the wedding feast of the Lamb , and his bride has prepared herself .

ID:	3852
INPUT:	Hartu zuen , orduan , Samuelek oliontzia eta Sauli burura isuri zion ; gero , <unk> , esan zion : « Hara , Jaunak bere herri Israelen buruzagi gantzutu zaitu .
PRED:	Then Samuel left Saul 's head and poured out his head on his head . Then Samuel poured out his head on his head , and he said , “ The Lord has given you victory over Israel . ”
GOLD:	Then Samuel took a flask of olive oil and poured it over Saul 's head . He kissed Saul and said , “ I am doing this because the Lord has appointed you to be the ruler over Israel , his special possession .

ID:	3853
INPUT:	Lekuko egiazaleak biziak salbatzen ditu , <unk> gezurra barra-barra .
PRED:	It is a trustworthy witness ; a person who takes delight in the grave .
GOLD:	A truthful witness saves lives , but a false witness is a traitor .

ID:	3854
INPUT:	Biharamun goizean Tekoako basamorturantz abiatu ziren . Ateratzean , Josafat zutitu eta honela mintzatu zitzaien : « Entzun , Juda eta Jerusalemgo <unk> . Izan uste on Jaunarengan , zeuen Jainkoarengan , eta seguru izango zarete . Izan konfiantza beraren <unk> , eta garaile aterako zarete ! »
PRED:	The next morning the people of Judah went out to the east of the Jordan River , and King Jehoshaphat of Judah said to them , “ You are my people who are in Jerusalem , and you are all who fear the Lord your God . ”
GOLD:	Early the next morning the army of Judah went out into the wilderness of Tekoa . On the way Jehoshaphat stopped and said , “ Listen to me , all you people of Judah and Jerusalem ! Believe in the Lord your God , and you will be able to stand firm . Believe in his prophets , and you will succeed . ”

ID:	3855
INPUT:	eta apaizen gelen artean hamar metroko <unk> zegoen , tenpluaren inguru guztian .
PRED:	Each of the priests were fed with each of the Temple of the Temple , which was 30 feet long .
GOLD:	and the row of rooms along the outer wall of the inner courtyard . This open area was 35 feet wide , and it went all the way around the Temple .

ID:	3856
INPUT:	<unk> dagokienez , dabiltzala egoki jantzita , lotsaz eta eratsu <unk> ; ez daitezela apain orrazkera <unk> , urrez , harribitxiz edota soineko <unk> ,
PRED:	And when they see him , they will see him , dressed in expensive perfume , dressed in expensive perfume , purple , scarlet thread , and scarlet thread , and scarlet thread , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	And I want women to be modest in their appearance . They should wear decent and appropriate clothing and not draw attention to themselves by the way they fix their hair or by wearing gold or pearls or expensive clothes .

ID:	3857
INPUT:	« Zuk ematen al diozu zaldiari <unk> , zuk janzten ote lepoa <unk> ?
PRED:	“ Can you make a horse horse with a horse ? Will you cut off his head ?
GOLD:	“ Have you given the horse its strengthor clothed its neck with a flowing mane ?

ID:	3858
INPUT:	Baina batez ere , senideok , ez egin zinik , ez zeruarengatik , ez <unk> , ezta beste <unk> ere . Zuek esan « bai » , bai denean , eta « ez » , ez denean , Jainkoak kondena ez zaitzaten .
PRED:	“ Dear brothers and sisters , my dear brothers and sisters , if you do n't know that you have seen the power of God , you will know that you do n't know that you will know that you do n't know that you will not be afraid . ”
GOLD:	But most of all , my brothers and sisters , never take an oath , by heaven or earth or anything else . Just say a simple yes or no , so that you will not sin and be condemned .

ID:	3859
INPUT:	Zure <unk> emango diet , zuri esaten <unk> : “ Etzan lurrean , gainetik igaro gaitezen ! ” Eta <unk> behar izan zenien , <unk> eta kale gisa , gainetik igaro zitezen » .
PRED:	“ I will give you authority to you , ” they said , ‘ Let us go down on on on the ground and meet you . ' And when they were afraid of them , and they will see you . ”
GOLD:	Instead , I will hand that cup to your tormentors , those who said , ‘ We will trample you into the dustand walk on your backs . ' ”

ID:	3860
INPUT:	Harpe hau Makpela soroan dago , Mambre parean . Abrahamek hilobitarako erosia zion , soro eta guzti , Efron hititari .
PRED:	This is the field of the field of the field , Abraham , the servant of Canaan , the place of Canaan , and the glorious place of Canaan .
GOLD:	This is the cave in the field of Machpelah , near Mamre in Canaan , that Abraham bought from Ephron the Hittite as a permanent burial site .

ID:	3861
INPUT:	Behinola esan zion amari : — Oroitzen al zara nola ostu zizkizuten zilarrezko mila eta ehun txanpon ? Madarikazioa bota zenuen orduan nire aurrean . Begira , neuk ditut txanpon haiek , neuk ostu <unk> . Tori dirua ! Amak esan zion : — Bedeinka zaitzala Jaunak , ene seme !
PRED:	One day he said to her mother , “ Will you give me a cup of silver ? ” “ I have given you a thousand pieces of silver and silver ? ” And the Lord said , “ I will give you a cup of silver . ”
GOLD:	One day he said to his mother , “ I heard you place a curse on the person who stole 1,100 pieces of silver from you . Well , I have the money . I was the one who took it . ” “ The Lord bless you for admitting it , ” his mother replied .

ID:	3862
INPUT:	Gaizkilea onik irteten da hondamendikoan , babesean egoten <unk> .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who were too small , for they were baptized .
GOLD:	Evil people are spared in times of calamityand are allowed to escape disaster .

ID:	3863
INPUT:	Hamar egun <unk> buruan , heriotzaz jo zuen Jaunak Nabal eta hil egin zen .
PRED:	At that time the Lord struck him with his friends , and he died .
GOLD:	About ten days later , the Lord struck him , and he died .

ID:	3864
INPUT:	<unk> bat iragan ondoren , nagusiaren emazteak , <unk> begiak jarri eta esan zion : — Zatoz nirekin ohera .
PRED:	One of the man who had been married , and she said to him , “ Come and kill me , ” he said .
GOLD:	and Potiphar 's wife soon began to look at him lustfully . “ Come and sleep with me , ” she demanded .

ID:	3865
INPUT:	Ene maiteok , egiten dizuedan bigarren gutuna dut hau . Eta <unk> zenbait gauza gogoratuz bizkortu nahi izan zaituztet , zuzen <unk> gai izan zaitezten .
PRED:	My dear brothers and sisters , I have given you a second letter to prove that I have given you . And when I want you to know that I have given you , so that you will be sure that you will know that I am giving you .
GOLD:	This is my second letter to you , dear friends , and in both of them I have tried to stimulate your wholesome thinking and refresh your memory .

ID:	3866
INPUT:	Paulo hiltzeko zorian
PRED:	Paul 's Prayer for Spiritual Growth
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Greetings

ID:	3867
INPUT:	Abrahamek Isaak sortu zuen ; Isaakek Jakob ; Jakobek Juda eta honen anaiak ;
PRED:	Abraham , Isaac , Isaac , and Jacob .
GOLD:	Abraham was the father of Isaac.Isaac was the father of Jacob.Jacob was the father of Judah and his brothers .

ID:	3868
INPUT:	Nahiz eta zeruraino hazi eta bere buruaz hodeiak ukitu ,
PRED:	“ I saw you in the sky , and he touched the clouds .
GOLD:	Though the pride of the godless reaches to the heavensand their heads touch the clouds ,

ID:	3869
INPUT:	Ez dezatela nire odola lurrera isuri , Jaunarengandik urrun ! Israelgo erregea <unk> baten bila dabil , <unk> mendiz mendi <unk> atzetik bezala .
PRED:	“ You must not pour out the blood of the Lord , and they will know that the king of Israel will kill me , and they will know that they have seen the Lord 's anger .
GOLD:	Must I die on foreign soil , far from the presence of the Lord ? Why has the king of Israel come out to search for a single flea ? Why does he hunt me down like a partridge on the mountains ? ”

ID:	3870
INPUT:	« Eser zaitez isilik , babiloniarren hiriburu , zoaz ilunpetara : ez dizute deituko gehiago “ <unk> erregina ” .
PRED:	“ O Lord , you will be glad , for I will not be afraid of your enemies , and you will be among the nations . '
GOLD:	“ O beautiful Babylon , sit now in darkness and silence.Never again will you be known as the queen of kingdoms .

ID:	3871
INPUT:	Seme-alabok , azken ordua da . Entzuna duzue antikristoak etorri behar duela . Hara bada , <unk> asko agertu da dagoeneko , eta hori da azken <unk> seinalea .
PRED:	But now , your time is coming , and you will come to see the time of time , when the time is coming , and many of them will know that they will see him . ”
GOLD:	Dear children , the last hour is here . You have heard that the Antichrist is coming , and already many such antichrists have appeared . From this we know that the last hour has come .

ID:	3872
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : — <unk> buruz zoazte bidean elkarrekin hizketan ? Haiek gelditu egin ziren , aurpegia ilun ,
PRED:	Jesus asked them , “ Come , ” he asked them . “ I want you to go out to the road . ”
GOLD:	He asked them , “ What are you discussing so intently as you walk along ? ” They stopped short , sadness written across their faces .

ID:	3873
INPUT:	Bertan <unk> zeritzan erregea aurkitu eta eraso egin zioten hari ere . Kanaandarrak eta periztarrak garaitu zituztela ikustean ,
PRED:	When the king saw that the king was sitting on the road , they saw that the king had killed them .
GOLD:	While at Bezek they encountered King Adoni-bezek and fought against him , and the Canaanites and Perizzites were defeated .

ID:	3874
INPUT:	Jauna , ene Jainkoa , <unk> laguntza eskatu dizut , eta sendatu nauzu .
PRED:	I am the Lord my God , and I begged you to know that I am healed .
GOLD:	You brought me up from the grave , O Lord.You kept me from falling into the pit of death .

ID:	3875
INPUT:	Hebron hiria <unk>
PRED:	Jehoahaz Rules in Hebron
GOLD:	Caleb Requests His Land

ID:	3876
INPUT:	Zintzoari zuzentasunak bidea prestatzen , gaiztoa bere maltzurkeriak erorarazten .
PRED:	To the wicked keep the path of the wicked , and the wicked will be saved .
GOLD:	The godly are directed by honesty ; the wicked fall beneath their load of sin .

ID:	3877
INPUT:	Hona Jaunaren atea : sar bitez hemendik garaileak !
PRED:	These are the door of the Lord , and those who follow them .
GOLD:	These gates lead to the presence of the Lord , and the godly enter there .

ID:	3878
INPUT:	Jaunaren egintzak israeldarren begi-bistan
PRED:	The whole community of Israel
GOLD:	The Blessings of Obedience

ID:	3879
INPUT:	Baina apaizak <unk> jotako aldea <unk> , azalekoa baino sakonagoa ez dela eta ilea ez dela belztu ikusten badu , aparte edukiko du gaixoa zazpi egunez .
PRED:	“ But if the priest finds that the priest will be able to kill the person , he does not touch the person 's hair and the person 's hair . If he finds that he does not see seven days , he will not see seven days .
GOLD:	If the priest examines the scabby sore and finds that it is only skin-deep but there is no black hair on it , he must quarantine the person for seven days .

ID:	3880
INPUT:	Orduan , Ekronera igorri zuten Jainkoaren kutxa . Heldu zenean , Ekrongo jendeak esan zuen oihuka : « Gu eta gure herria hil gaitzan ekarri digute Israelen Jainkoaren kutxa ! »
PRED:	Then the priest sent this message to the Ark of God , who sent him to the Ark of the devil , saying , “ We have brought us into the Ark of our God , who brought us into the Ark of Israel . ”
GOLD:	So they sent the Ark of God to the town of Ekron , but when the people of Ekron saw it coming they cried out , “ They are bringing the Ark of the God of Israel here to kill us , too ! ”

ID:	3881
INPUT:	Gizakiaren egunak belarraren pareko : zelaiko lorea bezala loratzen da
PRED:	The Festival of Shelters is like a little while it is like a farmer .
GOLD:	Our days on earth are like grass ; like wildflowers , we bloom and die .

ID:	3882
INPUT:	Erregearen funtzionario <unk> batek soinekoak hartu eta erregeak ohoratu nahi duenari janzten lagundu beharko lioke ; gero , zaldi gainera igoarazi eta hiriko kale nagusian barrena erabili beharko luke , beraren aurretik honela oihukatuz : « Hona hemen zer egiten zaion erregeak ohoratu nahi duen gizonari ! »
PRED:	When the king and his officials were dressed in white robes , he took him on his head , the king of the city , he will give him a banquet in the city of the city , and he said to him , “ This is the king of the king of the city . ”
GOLD:	Let the robes and the horse be handed over to one of the king 's most noble officials . And let him see that the man whom the king wishes to honor is dressed in the king 's robes and led through the city square on the king 's horse . Have the official shout as they go , ‘ This is what the king does for someone he wishes to honor ! ' ”

ID:	3883
INPUT:	Zaindu zeuen buruak edonolako gaiztakeriatik .
PRED:	Instead , you must obey your instruction .
GOLD:	Stay away from every kind of evil .

ID:	3884
INPUT:	Eta hauxe eskatzen dut otoitzean : zuen maitasuna izan dadila ezagueraz geroz eta <unk> eta <unk> biziagoa ,
PRED:	I have given you a message to you , and I will give you a message to you , and I have given you a message from the earth .
GOLD:	I pray that your love will overflow more and more , and that you will keep on growing in knowledge and understanding .

ID:	3885
INPUT:	Zuregan da biziaren <unk> zure argiaz ikusten dugu argia .
PRED:	For we see the light of your life , and we see your light .
GOLD:	Pour out your unfailing love on those who love you ; give justice to those with honest hearts .

ID:	3886
INPUT:	Ez , sutara botatzen da <unk> : suak irensten du bi <unk> , eta erdia ere suak hartzen dio ; balioko ote du ezertarako ?
PRED:	No one will be thrown into the fire , and the fire will be cut down into the fire , and it will be destroyed .
GOLD:	No , it can only be used for fuel , and even as fuel , it burns too quickly .

ID:	3887
INPUT:	Nire eskuak sendo eutsiko dio , nire besoak indartsu egingo .
PRED:	My hands will be strong , and my hands will be strong .
GOLD:	His enemies will not defeat him , nor will the wicked overpower him .

ID:	3888
INPUT:	<unk> ekialdera bihurtzen zen , <unk> mugetaraino ; gero , <unk> luzatzen zen eta <unk> igotzen .
PRED:	At that time , when they saw that some of these things , they came down from the east of the land of Egypt , and when they saw that some of them .
GOLD:	In the other direction , the boundary went east from Sarid to the border of Kisloth-tabor , and from there to Daberath and up to Japhia .

ID:	3889
INPUT:	Berak jo zituen Egiptoko <unk> , gizaki eta abere .
PRED:	He struck down all the animals of Egypt and all the animals of Egypt .
GOLD:	He destroyed the firstborn in each Egyptian home , both people and animals .

ID:	3890
INPUT:	Baina ez duzue odola jango , lurrera isuriko baizik , ura bezala .
PRED:	But you must not eat the blood of blood , but you will pour out the water .
GOLD:	But you must not consume the blood . You must pour it out on the ground like water .

ID:	3891
INPUT:	Horrela , gauzak ongi ulertzen omen dituzun horrek galdu egingo zenuke kontzientzi <unk> zeure senidea , harengatik ere Kristo hila izan den arren .
PRED:	That is why you say that you will know that you have been killed in prison . If you have been dead , you must be dead , even though you have been dead .
GOLD:	So because of your superior knowledge , a weak believer for whom Christ died will be destroyed .

ID:	3892
INPUT:	Aitzitik , beren joera gaiztoen ondoren , <unk> hartutako Baalen ondoren , ibili dira .
PRED:	Instead , they have followed their own desires , and they have taken away their evil desires .
GOLD:	The Lord replies , “ This has happened because my people have abandoned my instructions ; they have refused to obey what I said .

ID:	3893
INPUT:	<unk> ereezin izango du ihes egin , <unk> izango da bere indarraz baliatu , <unk> da bizirik aterako .
PRED:	And when they have escaped , they will be able to be destroyed by the power of the world will be destroyed by what they have happened .
GOLD:	Your fastest runners will not get away.The strongest among you will become weak.Even mighty warriors will be unable to save themselves .

ID:	3894
INPUT:	Horretarako , hirurogeita hamar mila zamaketari bildu zituen eta laurogei mila hargin mendian , hiru mila eta seiehun lan-arduradunen menpean .
PRED:	He appointed them to serve as a census of the Lord , as he had appointed as king of Israel as king of the sanctuary of the tribe of Levi , as well as he had commanded .
GOLD:	Solomon decided to build a Temple to honor the name of the Lord , and also a royal palace for himself .

ID:	3895
INPUT:	Gizakia bada ere , ez daiteke berreskura : heriotzara emango dute .
PRED:	Instead , they may not die , for they may die .
GOLD:	No person specially set apart for destruction may be bought back . Such a person must be put to death .

ID:	3896
INPUT:	Horiek beren ondasunetan oinarritzen diraeta beren aberastasun handiaz harrotzen .
PRED:	These are the ones who are filled with joy .
GOLD:	Yet they can not redeem themselves from deathby paying a ransom to God .

ID:	3897
INPUT:	Hartu zituen Davidek emakumeak <unk> eta esan zion : — Igo bakean zeure etxera . Aditu dut zure ahotsa . Onartu dut zure eskaria .
PRED:	Then David said to him , “ Go home and see your servant , and I have heard your voice . ”
GOLD:	Then David accepted her present and told her , “ Return home in peace . I have heard what you said . We will not kill your husband . ”

ID:	3898
INPUT:	« Behar bada galdegingo duzue : “ Zer jango dugu zazpigarren urtean , ezin badugu erein , ez uztarik bildu ? ”
PRED:	“ If we ask , ‘ What do you eat ? What do we eat ? If we harvest , we ca n't harvest the harvest ? '
GOLD:	But you might ask , ‘ What will we eat during the seventh year , since we are not allowed to plant or harvest crops that year ? '

ID:	3899
INPUT:	Aurrez eskuak uretan <unk> , <unk> norbait ukitzen badu , honek arropak eta gorputza garbituko ditu eta kutsaturik geldituko da arratsa arte .
PRED:	If you touch their hands , if they will wash their hands and bathe himself in water , he will wash your clothes and bathe himself in water until evening .
GOLD:	If the man touches you without first rinsing his hands , you must wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water , and you will remain unclean until evening .

ID:	3900
INPUT:	<unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Rimon : hogeita bederatzi hiri eta beraien inguruko herrixkak .
PRED:	At that time they saw that they were killed by war , and Samaria — all their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	Lebaoth , Shilhim , Ain , and Rimmon — twenty-nine towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	3901
INPUT:	<unk> ( 6 , 1 — 8 , 35 )
PRED:	Elijah and the Ark of the Covenant
GOLD:	Gideon Becomes Israel 's Judge

ID:	3902
INPUT:	ile-adatsa <unk> bezalakoa , eta hortzak <unk> bezalakoak ;
PRED:	They were as weak as snow , and when they were as weak as they were as weak as snow .
GOLD:	They had hair like women 's hair and teeth like the teeth of a lion .

ID:	3903
INPUT:	Hau jakin zuenean , Baxa Tirtzan gelditu zen , Rama gotortzeari utzirik .
PRED:	When Jeroboam heard what was happening , he left Judea and camped at Mizpah .
GOLD:	As soon as Baasha of Israel heard what was happening , he abandoned his project of fortifying Ramah and withdrew to Tirzah .

ID:	3904
INPUT:	« Badakizue legean agindua : Begia begiaren ordain , hortza hortzaren ordain .
PRED:	“ You have heard that your body is making for a prostitute .
GOLD:	“ You have heard the law that says the punishment must match the injury : ‘ An eye for an eye , and a tooth for a tooth . '

ID:	3905
INPUT:	« Gorde , beraz , nire lege eta erabakiak : bizia ematen diote betetzen dituenari . Neu naiz Jauna .
PRED:	“ Therefore , obey my decrees and obey my decrees . I am the Lord . I am the Lord .
GOLD:	If you obey my decrees and my regulations , you will find life through them . I am the Lord .

ID:	3906
INPUT:	Izan ere , kontzientzia <unk> batek zu , gauzak behar bezala ulertzen dituzun hori , sasijainkoen jauretxeko otorduetan parte hartzen ikusten bazaitu , ez ote da sasijainkoei eskainitako haragia jatera <unk> sentituko , jokabide hori beraren <unk> <unk> kontrakoa izanda ere ?
PRED:	For if you know that you have been forgiven , you must know that you are under the blood of the sin of the sin offering and worship idols that you have been slaughtered by worshiping idols of idols .
GOLD:	For if others see you — with your “ superior knowledge ” — eating in the temple of an idol , wo n't they be encouraged to violate their conscience by eating food that has been offered to an idol ?

ID:	3907
INPUT:	Eta horra non datorren gizon <unk> zaldiko gurdi gainean . Hau dio ozenki : “ Erori da Babilonia , erori da ! Haren jainko-irudi <unk> gelditu dira <unk> ” » .
PRED:	And when he comes from Egypt , he brought his horses on horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , and she will shout , ‘ This is what 's happening ! ' ”
GOLD:	Now at last — look ! Here comes a man in a chariotwith a pair of horses ! ” Then the watchman said , “ Babylon is fallen , fallen ! All the idols of Babylonlie broken on the ground ! ”

ID:	3908
INPUT:	Egiptoko herri , presta erbesterako hornidura : eremu bihurtuko da Menfis , bizilagunik gabeko lur erraustu .
PRED:	In the streets of Egypt will be destroyed , and the cities of Egypt will be destroyed in the land of Egypt will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Pack up ! Get ready to leave for exile , you citizens of Egypt ! The city of Memphis will be destroyed , without a single inhabitant .

ID:	3909
INPUT:	prest dituzte bi <unk> egiteko : buruzagiak eta <unk> eskatzen dute , <unk> diru-gosea adierazten ; eta bat datoz <unk> berea egiteko .
PRED:	They will be sure to be afraid of two prophets , along with great authority and authority , along with Nebuchadnezzar , Nebuchadnezzar , Nebuchadnezzar , and all kinds of authority .
GOLD:	Both their hands are equally skilled at doing evil ! Officials and judges alike demand bribes.The people with influence get what they want , and together they scheme to twist justice .

ID:	3910
INPUT:	Eta maitasuna Jainkoaren aginduen arabera bizitzea da . Eta hasieratik entzun duzuen bezala , agindu hau da zuen jokabidea <unk> behar duena .
PRED:	And now you have been faithful to God as you have heard the law of God , just as the law of God had commanded him .
GOLD:	Love means doing what God has commanded us , and he has commanded us to love one another , just as you heard from the beginning .

ID:	3911
INPUT:	Ezaguna duzue Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren <unk> : aberats izanik , behartsu egin zen zuengatik , bere behartsu izateaz zuek aberats egiteko .
PRED:	For you have been poor in the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ , who made a rich person to be poor and poor .
GOLD:	You know the generous grace of our Lord Jesus Christ . Though he was rich , yet for your sakes he became poor , so that by his poverty he could make you rich .

ID:	3912
INPUT:	Bertan bizi ziren guztiak ezpataz hil eta erabat suntsitu zituen , bat ere bizirik utzi gabe , eta hiriari su eman zion .
PRED:	He destroyed all the earth and destroyed everyone who lived there . He destroyed it , and he destroyed it .
GOLD:	The Israelites completely destroyed every living thing in the city , leaving no survivors . Not a single person was spared . And then Joshua burned the city .

ID:	3913
INPUT:	Jaunak ez zaitu erortzen utziko , zure <unk> ez dago lo .
PRED:	But the Lord will not crush you , and he wo n't be able to kill you .
GOLD:	He will not let you stumble ; the one who watches over you will not slumber .

ID:	3914
INPUT:	Zintzoaren mihia zilar <unk> , gaiztoaren bihotza hutsaren parekoa .
PRED:	The words of the godly are under the wicked , and remember your commands .
GOLD:	The words of the godly are like sterling silver ; the heart of a fool is worthless .

ID:	3915
INPUT:	<unk> , bat izan arren , atal asko ditu , baina atal guztiek , asko izan arren , gorputz bat osatzen dute . Gauza bera gertatzen da Kristorekin ere .
PRED:	In fact , many parts have many parts , but many parts are parts of one body . And many parts are parts of Christ .
GOLD:	The human body has many parts , but the many parts make up one whole body . So it is with the body of Christ .

ID:	3916
INPUT:	Ez begira nire azal <unk> , eguzkiak bainau kiskali : neure anaiek , nirekin haserre , mahastiak zaintzen jarri naute . Eta neure mahastia utzi dut zaindu gabe !
PRED:	I have seen the sun , and I have seen my brothers and sisters , because I have put my flesh against me .
GOLD:	Do n't stare at me because I am dark — the sun has darkened my skin.My brothers were angry with me ; they forced me to care for their vineyards , so I could n't care for myself — my own vineyard .

ID:	3917
INPUT:	Begira , bada , zure barruan argi behar lukeena ez dadin ilun gerta .
PRED:	Look ! I am the light of your light ; it is not a light .
GOLD:	Make sure that the light you think you have is not actually darkness .

ID:	3918
INPUT:	Baina zenbat eta gehiago deitu nik , hainbat eta <unk> egiten zidaten . <unk> <unk> zizkieten , sasijainkoei intsentsua erretzen .
PRED:	But when I called them , they chose to kill me , and when they were very angry with idols , and they worshiped idols and burned incense on fire .
GOLD:	But the more I called to him , the farther he moved from me , offering sacrifices to the images of Baaland burning incense to idols .

ID:	3919
INPUT:	<unk> sasiprofeta altxatuko dira eta asko engainatuko dituzte .
PRED:	They will see many who fear him and will be filled with many power .
GOLD:	And many false prophets will appear and will deceive many people .

ID:	3920
INPUT:	Harimenak 1 . 017 .
PRED:	The family of Shephatiah372
GOLD:	The family of Harim1,017

ID:	3921
INPUT:	nire <unk> egingo <unk> bete <unk> ; zuek , berriz , garrasi egingo bihotzeko nahigabez , aiene barruko saminez .
PRED:	And when I have heard that my mind will be filled with pain , and I will rejoice in sorrow .
GOLD:	My servants will sing for joy , but you will cry in sorrow and despair .

ID:	3922
INPUT:	« Horregatik maite nau Aitak , neure bizia ematen dudalako eta horrela eskuratzen berriro .
PRED:	“ Therefore , my Father loves me so that my Father has given me success .
GOLD:	“ The Father loves me because I sacrifice my life so I may take it back again .

ID:	3923
INPUT:	azpian zilarrezko berrogei oin zituztela : ohol bakoitzak bi oin beste horrenbeste mingainentzat ;
PRED:	I made two silver bases under the rear of the Tabernacle , which were two bases under each frame .
GOLD:	He also made forty silver bases — two bases under each frame , with the pegs fitting securely into the bases .

ID:	3924
INPUT:	Jainkoak sabaia egin zuen eta <unk> azpiko urak <unk> <unk> bereizi zituen .
PRED:	Then God poured out the wall on the wall , and when he was filled with great power .
GOLD:	And that is what happened . God made this space to separate the waters of the earth from the waters of the heavens .

ID:	3925
INPUT:	gizakiari auzia oker egiten diotenean , Jaunak ez ote du ikusten ?
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you ? Will you see ?
GOLD:	if they twist justice in the courts — does n't the Lord see all these things ?

ID:	3926
INPUT:	Kasu bereziak
PRED:	A Message about Jerusalem
GOLD:	Sins Requiring a Sin Offering

ID:	3927
INPUT:	Zekor bat , ahari bat eta urtebeteko zazpi arkume — denak akats gabeak — eskainiko dituzue erre-oparitzat , eta Jaunak atseginez onartuko ditu .
PRED:	On the eighth day you must present a burnt offering and seven one-year-old male lambs with a burnt offering , a pleasing aroma to the Lord , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	You must present a burnt offering as a special gift , a pleasing aroma to the Lord . It will consist of one young bull , one ram , and seven one-year-old male lambs , all with no defects .

ID:	3928
INPUT:	Zazpi egunez etxoletan biziko zarete jaiotzaz israeldar zareten guztiok ,
PRED:	For you may live in the whole community of Israel and all the tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	For seven days you must live outside in little shelters . All native-born Israelites must live in shelters .

ID:	3929
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Moisesi : « Hartu orotariko usainkiak , neurri bera bakoitzetik : erretxina , <unk> , <unk> eta intsentsu garbia ;
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Take some of the grain offering of choice flour mixed with olive oil , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Gather fragrant spices — resin droplets , mollusk shell , and galbanum — and mix these fragrant spices with pure frankincense , weighed out in equal amounts .

ID:	3930
INPUT:	eta purpura morezko lokarriak ipini zituzten bi zapi-sailen ertzetan :
PRED:	Then they placed the curtain on each side of the curtain on each side of the curtain on each side of the curtain .
GOLD:	He made fifty loops of blue yarn and put them along the edge of the last curtain in each set .

ID:	3931
INPUT:	Zuk ezarritako <unk> gu ere , Jauna , itxaropena zuregan dugula . Zutaz <unk> , zu goratzea : horixe dugu irrika .
PRED:	For the Lord has given us victory over us , and we have heard that we have been able to help you , and we have filled with him .
GOLD:	Lord , we show our trust in you by obeying your laws ; our heart 's desire is to glorify your name .

ID:	3932
INPUT:	<unk> uholde <unk> arnasak . <unk> <unk> ditu nazioak , <unk> <unk> lotuko , hondamenera eramateko .
PRED:	I will see that the earth will be filled with great power , and when they saw that great power will be filled with great power .
GOLD:	His hot breath pours out like a floodup to the neck of his enemies.He will sift out the proud nations for destruction.He will bridle them and lead them away to ruin .

ID:	3933
INPUT:	Horrela , bada , atera zen gudarostea zelaira , israeldarrei aurre egitera . Efraimgo <unk> ekin zioten guduari .
PRED:	So the army of Israel went out to fight against the army of Ephraim and his army of Ephraim . When they saw that the army of Ephraim , they attacked the army of Ephraim .
GOLD:	So the battle began in the forest of Ephraim ,

ID:	3934
INPUT:	Pahat-Moaben ondorengoetan : Adna , <unk> , Benaias , Maaseias , Matanias , Betzalel , Binui eta Manases .
PRED:	From the family of Elam : Azariah , Jehiel , Shemaiah , Jehiel , and Shimei .
GOLD:	From the family of Pahath-moab : Adna , Kelal , Benaiah , Maaseiah , Mattaniah , Bezalel , Binnui , and Manasseh .

ID:	3935
INPUT:	gero , sinagogetan predikatzen hasi zen , Jesus Jainkoaren Semea dela hots eginez .
PRED:	So Jesus began preaching in the synagogues in the synagogues and preach the Son of God .
GOLD:	And immediately he began preaching about Jesus in the synagogues , saying , “ He is indeed the Son of God ! ”

ID:	3936
INPUT:	Moises mendira igo zen Jainkoarengana . Jaunak menditik dei egin eta esan zion : « Mintza zakizkie Jakoben ondorengoei , israeldarrei , eta adierazi hau :
PRED:	Then Moses went up to the mountain of the Lord , and he said to him , “ Listen to the people of Israel ! ”
GOLD:	Then Moses climbed the mountain to appear before God . The Lord called to him from the mountain and said , “ Give these instructions to the family of Jacob ; announce it to the descendants of Israel :

ID:	3937
INPUT:	<unk> ahotsa ito egiten zen , mihia ahosabaiari <unk> geratzen .
PRED:	The voice of the beast was filled with evil words .
GOLD:	The highest officials of the city stood quietly , holding their tongues in respect .

ID:	3938
INPUT:	ur handietako itsasontziak egiteko . <unk> zeritzan hirian egin zituzten ontziak .
PRED:	When the ships were filled with bronze , they were so hard in the city .
GOLD:	Together they built a fleet of trading ships at the port of Ezion-geber .

ID:	3939
INPUT:	eta apaizak erabakiko du ordaindu beharrekoa , aberea zer-nolakoa den kontuan harturik . Apaizaren erabakia atzeraezina da .
PRED:	“ Suppose the priest will be paid , and the priest will be paid , whether the priest or the priest or the person is ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	He will assess its value , and his assessment will be final , whether high or low .

ID:	3940
INPUT:	Jendea haien aurka altxatu zen , eta epaileek jantziak kendu eta zigorkatzeko agindu zuten .
PRED:	Then the people came and threw their garments over their garments .
GOLD:	A mob quickly formed against Paul and Silas , and the city officials ordered them stripped and beaten with wooden rods .

ID:	3941
INPUT:	Justizia eta zuzenbidea maite ditu ; Jaunaren maitasunaz betea da lurra .
PRED:	The earth is filled with integrity , and the earth love of the Lord .
GOLD:	He loves whatever is just and good ; the unfailing love of the Lord fills the earth .

ID:	3942
INPUT:	Orduan , agindu hau eman zien Josuek herriko funtzionarioei :
PRED:	Then Joshua gave this message to Joseph :
GOLD:	Joshua then commanded the officers of Israel ,

ID:	3943
INPUT:	Eta orain , hona agertu behar dizudan egiazko mezua : « “ Begira , hiru errege izango dira oraindik <unk> . Eta horien ondoren , aurrekoak baino aberastasun gehiago izango duen laugarren bat . Bere <unk> nahiko indarra emango diotenean , inon direnak egingo ditu Greziako erregeari erasotzeko .
PRED:	And now I have seen the true message I have given you the true message : “ Look , I will give you three prophets to see that the king of Israel , who will be able to kill you . ”
GOLD:	“ Now then , I will reveal the truth to you . Three more Persian kings will reign , to be succeeded by a fourth , far richer than the others . He will use his wealth to stir up everyone to fight against the kingdom of Greece .

ID:	3944
INPUT:	horregatik , orduko mundua <unk> urek estalirik galdu zen .
PRED:	So when the waters grew up , he became very angry with his hands .
GOLD:	Then he used the water to destroy the ancient world with a mighty flood .

ID:	3945
INPUT:	Mikak pentsatu zuen : « Orain bai izanen dudala Jauna neure alde , lebitarra baita nire apaiza » .
PRED:	So Micah said , “ This is what the Lord says : I will be my priest , and he will be my priest . ”
GOLD:	“ I know the Lord will bless me now , ” Micah said , “ because I have a Levite serving as my priest . ”

ID:	3946
INPUT:	Libra nazazu ezpataz hila <unk> , atera nire bizi hau zakur horien atzaparretatik .
PRED:	For I have been dead , who will be dead , and those who are dead .
GOLD:	Snatch me from the lion 's jawsand from the horns of these wild oxen .

ID:	3947
INPUT:	Herri bat etorri da <unk> aurka , haren <unk> bihurtuko duena : inor ere ez da <unk> bizitzen , gizaki eta <unk> joango dira » .
PRED:	And if they have come against him , they will be able to kill him , and they will be able to be sure that they will be able to live . ”
GOLD:	For a nation will attack her from the northand bring such destruction that no one will live there again.Everything will be gone ; both people and animals will flee .

ID:	3948
INPUT:	bahituran hartutakoa <unk> , <unk> itzuli eta , bidegabekeria egiteari utziz , bizia ematen duten aginduetan badabil , bizi egingo da , bai , eta ez da hilko .
PRED:	But if you turn away from my mind and turn away from what you have done , they will have given to the people who have promised to obey God .
GOLD:	For instance , they might give back a debtor 's security , return what they have stolen , and obey my life-giving laws , no longer doing what is evil . If they do this , then they will surely live and not die .

ID:	3949
INPUT:	Gantzak apaizak erreko ditu aldarean ; aurkezturiko bularra , berriz , Aaron eta beronen ondorengoentzat izango da .
PRED:	Then the priest will pour out the fat of the altar , and he will burn it on the altar of Aaron and his sons .
GOLD:	Then the priest will burn the fat on the altar , but the breast will belong to Aaron and his descendants .

ID:	3950
INPUT:	Berak ematen die arrakasta <unk> babesa jokabide zuzenekoei ;
PRED:	For he gives power to those who are wicked , and those who trust in their wickedness .
GOLD:	He grants a treasure of common sense to the honest.He is a shield to those who walk with integrity .

ID:	3951
INPUT:	Berehala ekarriko dizuet ura , oinak garbitzeko . Hartzazue atseden bitartean , zuhaitzaren itzalpean .
PRED:	I will give you water for your feet , and you will enjoy the fruit of your feet .
GOLD:	Rest in the shade of this tree while water is brought to wash your feet .

ID:	3952
INPUT:	Ondoren , Davidek kontsulta egin zion Jaunari : — <unk> al naiz Judako hiriren batera ? — Bai , igo — erantzun zion Jaunak . — <unk> igoko naiz ? — Davidek , berriro . — Hebronera — esan zion Jaunak .
PRED:	Then David asked the Lord , “ Why do I know that I am going to meet you ? ” “ Yes , ” David asked the Lord , “ I will give you victory over to Egypt . ”
GOLD:	After this , David asked the Lord , “ Should I move back to one of the towns of Judah ? ” “ Yes , ” the Lord replied.Then David asked , “ Which town should I go to ? ” “ To Hebron , ” the Lord answered .

ID:	3953
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunari dei egin <unk> da . Jerusalemen , Sion mendian , izango da <unk> , Jaunak esan bezala . Jaunak <unk> dira bizirik .
PRED:	And when they call on the name of the Lord , they will call down to the mountain of Jerusalem , and they will know that the Lord has spoken !
GOLD:	You have taken my silver and gold and all my precious treasures , and have carried them off to your pagan temples .

ID:	3954
INPUT:	<unk> ez ote dago <unk> esku , honek lur beretik ontzi baliotsuak nahiz ontzi arruntak egiteko ?
PRED:	Who is able to be able to be able to be able to be able to punish with such precious than other gods ?
GOLD:	When a potter makes jars out of clay , does n't he have a right to use the same lump of clay to make one jar for decoration and another to throw garbage into ?

ID:	3955
INPUT:	Ez dezatela pentsa : « A zer gozamena ! » Ez dezatela esan : « <unk> egin ditugu ! »
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid , ” says the Lord . “ We do n't know what they are saying , ‘ We have done ! '
GOLD:	Do n't let them say , “ Look , we got what we wanted ! Now we will eat him alive ! ”

ID:	3956
INPUT:	Honek bere ama <unk> izandako oihal-etxolara eraman zuen Rebeka . <unk> hartu eta maite izan zuen . Honela poztu zuen Isaakek bere burua , ama hil ondoren .
PRED:	Then she brought her to her mother , and she brought Rebekah to her , and she loved Rebekah . When Isaac loved her , Isaac became pregnant and killed her .
GOLD:	And Isaac brought Rebekah into his mother Sarah 's tent , and she became his wife . He loved her deeply , and she was a special comfort to him after the death of his mother .

ID:	3957
INPUT:	harrikatu egin zituzten , zerraz ebaki , ezpataz hil ; noraezean ibili ziren , <unk> nahiz ardi-larruz jantzirik , premia gorrian , erasopean eta tratu txarrak hartuz .
PRED:	They were kind of idols , and they killed them . They were killed , and they were hungry , and they were forced to kill them . They were dressed in burlap , and they cut off their heads .
GOLD:	Some died by stoning , some were sawed in half , and others were killed with the sword . Some went about wearing skins of sheep and goats , destitute and oppressed and mistreated .

ID:	3958
INPUT:	Kanpora zeramatela , Tamarrek bere aitaginarrebari mandatu hau bidali zion : « Gauza hauen jabe <unk> nago haurdun . Ikus <unk> diren zigilua , honen lokarria eta makila » .
PRED:	When they arrived at him , he sent his officials to meet him . “ I will give birth to this man who was pregnant , and I will give birth to a banquet . ”
GOLD:	But as they were taking her out to kill her , she sent this message to her father-in-law : “ The man who owns these things made me pregnant . Look closely . Whose seal and cord and walking stick are these ? ”

ID:	3959
INPUT:	Gaua zelarik altxatu ziren ohetik faraoia , funtzionarioak eta egiptoar guztiak . Garrasi latzak izan ziren Egipto osoan , ez baitzen <unk> gabeko etxerik .
PRED:	When Pharaoh arrived at the night , the officials of Egypt came out of Egypt , the officials of Egypt came out of Egypt and saw all the people of Egypt .
GOLD:	Pharaoh and all his officials and all the people of Egypt woke up during the night , and loud wailing was heard throughout the land of Egypt . There was not a single house where someone had not died .

ID:	3960
INPUT:	Apaiz nagusiak galdetu zion <unk> : « Egia al da hori guztia ? »
PRED:	The high priest asked him , “ Who is this ? ”
GOLD:	Then the high priest asked Stephen , “ Are these accusations true ? ”

ID:	3961
INPUT:	Esdras apaiza Jerusalemen
PRED:	Ezra 's Call to Jerusalem
GOLD:	Artaxerxes ' Letter to Ezra

ID:	3962
INPUT:	Eta hori , nire erabakiak mespretxatu zituztelako , ez zutelako nire legeen arabera jokatu eta bai nire larunbatak hautsi ; izan ere , haien bihotzak idoloei atxikiak zeuden guztiz .
PRED:	I am determined to obey my decrees , and they would not obey my decrees . They have rejected my decrees and regulations .
GOLD:	For they had rejected my regulations , refused to follow my decrees , and violated my Sabbath days . Their hearts were given to their idols .

ID:	3963
INPUT:	izuaren erasotik ihes egin <unk> jausiko da ; <unk> ihes egin <unk> harrapatua geldituko . Zigorra bidaliko diot <unk> hartzeko egunean . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	For those who were attacked by the sword , and they will be killed by the sword of my sword , and I will send them down on the day of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Those who flee in terror will fall into a trap , and those who escape the trap will step into a snare.I will see to it that you do not get away , for the time of your judgment has come , ” says the Lord .

ID:	3964
INPUT:	Bere begi-bistan <unk> zituen Baalen aldareak , berauen gainean zeuden intsentsu-ontziak hautsiz ; zutoin sakratu eta zurezko nahiz metalezko idoloak xehatu eta puskak halakoei sakrifizioak eskaintzen <unk> hilobi gainean barreiatu zituen .
PRED:	At that time the people of Baal had destroyed all the idols of Baal and idols idols were made of Baal , idols , idols , idols , idols , and stone that had been destroyed by worshiping idols .
GOLD:	He ordered that the altars of Baal be demolished and that the incense altars which stood above them be broken down . He also made sure that the Asherah poles , the carved idols , and the cast images were smashed and scattered over the graves of those who had sacrificed to them .

ID:	3965
INPUT:	Haiek , berriz , alde guztietara joan ziren berri ona hots egitera . Eta Jauna bera ari zen haiekin , egiten zituzten mirarien bidez mezua <unk> .
PRED:	But they went out to the other lands and preached the Good News to the Lord . And when they saw the Lord 's message , he was with them . And when he saw that the message of the Lord had given him .
GOLD:	And the disciples went everywhere and preached , and the Lord worked through them , confirming what they said by many miraculous signs .

ID:	3966
INPUT:	Molok <unk> zinen , olioa eta lurrinak ugari eramanez ; urrutiraino bidali <unk> , Hildakoen <unk> jaitsarazi .
PRED:	When I saw the olive oil , I sent you into the garden of olive oil , and the spirit of the earth will be filled with great power .
GOLD:	You have gone to Molechwith olive oil and many perfumes , sending your agents far and wide , even to the world of the dead .

ID:	3967
INPUT:	« Bete arretaz nire lege eta erabaki guztiak . Neu naiz Jauna » .
PRED:	“ You must obey my decrees and decrees . I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ You must be careful to keep all of my decrees and regulations by putting them into practice . I am the Lord . ”

ID:	3968
INPUT:	Jaunak galdetu zion : — Ohartu al haiz Job ene zerbitzariaz ? Ez dik parekorik munduan : gizon zintzo eta zuzena duk , Jainkoa errespetatu eta gaiztakeriatik urruti dabilena . Arrazoirik gabe berari kalte egitera bultzatu <unk> arren , bere zintzotasunean tinko irauten dik .
PRED:	Then the Lord asked him , “ You are my lord the king of Israel , my lord the king of all the earth . He has been faithful to me , but he has been able to be angry with such a man , but he has not been able to kill him .
GOLD:	Then the Lord asked Satan , “ Have you noticed my servant Job ? He is the finest man in all the earth . He is blameless — a man of complete integrity . He fears God and stays away from evil . And he has maintained his integrity , even though you urged me to harm him without cause . ”

ID:	3969
INPUT:	Izan ere , benetako judua ez da kanpotik hala dena ; eta benetako erdainkuntza ez da kanpotik gorputzean egiten dena .
PRED:	For it is not a person who does not be circumcised to be circumcised . It is not circumcised to be circumcised .
GOLD:	For you are not a true Jew just because you were born of Jewish parents or because you have gone through the ceremony of circumcision .

ID:	3970
INPUT:	Hain zuzen , honetarako ere idatzi nizuen : zuek probatzeko , gauza guztietan esaneko zareten ala ez jakiteko , alegia .
PRED:	I told you that I am giving you whatever you do . Do n't obey the same thing you do . Do not know that you do .
GOLD:	I wrote to you as I did to test you and see if you would fully comply with my instructions .

ID:	3971
INPUT:	« Bai , gauza ona da gatza ; baina gatza <unk> bada , nola gazitu berriro ?
PRED:	“ How can it be good , but it is good with salt ?
GOLD:	“ Salt is good for seasoning . But if it loses its flavor , how do you make it salty again ?

ID:	3972
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Zoaz etxera , dei egiozu zeure senarrari eta itzuli hona .
PRED:	Jesus said to her , “ Go home , and go home to your husband . ”
GOLD:	“ Go and get your husband , ” Jesus told her .

ID:	3973
INPUT:	gauza guztiengatik Jainko Aitari etengabe eskerrak emanez , Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren izenean .
PRED:	For God has given him the Father in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	And give thanks for everything to God the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ .

ID:	3974
INPUT:	« Artaxerxes erregeen erregeak , Esdras apaizari , zeruetako Jainkoaren legean maisu denari , osasuna !
PRED:	“ Therefore , Ezra , the priest of the Temple of God , who made the law of the law of God .
GOLD:	“ From Artaxerxes , the king of kings , to Ezra the priest , the teacher of the law of the God of heaven . Greetings .

ID:	3975
INPUT:	Ondoren , herri osoari , israeldar jendetza guztiari , gizaseme nahiz emakume , opil bana , <unk> bana eta <unk> bana eman zizkien . Orduan , jende guztiak nork bere etxera alde egin zuen .
PRED:	Then he summoned all the people of Israel and all the people of Israel and all the people of Israel and all the people of Israel , along with each of them .
GOLD:	Then he gave to every Israelite man and woman in the crowd a loaf of bread , a cake of dates , and a cake of raisins . Then all the people returned to their homes .

ID:	3976
INPUT:	baita erregeen eta agintea duten guztien alde ere , bizitza bare eta <unk> bizi gaitezen , jainkozaletasunez eta gizabidez .
PRED:	For the king of all the kings of the kings of all the kings of all the world , and we have given you as slaves of all the world .
GOLD:	Pray this way for kings and all who are in authority so that we can live peaceful and quiet lives marked by godliness and dignity .

ID:	3977
INPUT:	Bedeinkatua izan bedi Jaunaren izena orain eta beti !
PRED:	Praise the name of the Lord ! Let the name of the Lord !
GOLD:	Blessed be the name of the Lordnow and forever .

ID:	3978
INPUT:	Berriro ere errukituko zara gutaz , lurperatuko <unk> gaiztakeriak , eta itsas hondora <unk> bekatu guztiak .
PRED:	Then you will see that your people will be destroyed , and they will know that they have sinned against you .
GOLD:	Once again you will have compassion on us.You will trample our sins under your feetand throw them into the depths of the ocean !

ID:	3979
INPUT:	Horrela , bekatuak ez du zuen gain aginterik izango , ez <unk> legepean , Jainkoaren onginahiaren eraginpean baizik .
PRED:	In this way , he will not be able to be made by the law of God . He will be able to know that the law of God has been able to know that the law of God .
GOLD:	Sin is no longer your master , for you no longer live under the requirements of the law . Instead , you live under the freedom of God 's grace .

ID:	3980
INPUT:	<unk> dute , baina ez dira aseko ; emagaldu <unk> dira , baina ez dute haurrik izango ; Jauna bazter utzi baitute , beste jainkoei jarraitzeko .
PRED:	But when they have seen , they will have no pleasure in your prostitution , and they will have children , but they will have forgotten the Lord .
GOLD:	They will eat and still be hungry.They will play the prostitute and gain nothing from it , for they have deserted the Lord

ID:	3981
INPUT:	Baina desagertu da , ez da jadanik , bila ibili eta ezin izan dut aurkitu .
PRED:	But there is no more old , and I can not find it .
GOLD:	But when I looked again , they were gone ! Though I searched for them , I could not find them !

ID:	3982
INPUT:	Moisesek eta Aaronek Jaunak agindu bezala egin zuten zehatz-mehatz .
PRED:	So Moses did as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	So Moses and Aaron did just as the Lord had commanded them .

ID:	3983
INPUT:	<unk> egin eta <unk> <unk> dabilen <unk> bezalakoa <unk> eta berriz ergelkeria berera itzultzen den zentzugabea .
PRED:	For if they were weak and human spirit , they will be like a human spirit , and they will be able to escape .
GOLD:	As a dog returns to its vomit , so a fool repeats his foolishness .

ID:	3984
INPUT:	Ur sakratua hartuko du buztinezko ontzi batean eta egoitzako zorutik hartutako <unk> <unk> du .
PRED:	For the altar will be made with an iron offering , and the birds of the Tabernacle will be filled with all the kingdoms of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	He must take some holy water in a clay jar and pour into it dust he has taken from the Tabernacle floor .

ID:	3985
INPUT:	Orduan , emakumeak : — Jauna , emadazu ur horretatik , berriro egarri ez nadin , eta hona uretara etorri beharrik izan ez dezadan .
PRED:	“ Sir , ” the woman said , “ I will give you food to you again , and I will give you food . ”
GOLD:	“ Please , sir , ” the woman said , “ give me this water ! Then I 'll never be thirsty again , and I wo n't have to come here to get water . ”

ID:	3986
INPUT:	Zerbitzariek erregea bere guda-gurditik hartu , beste guda-gurdi batera igo eta Jerusalemera eraman zuten . Han hil zen , eta bere arbasoen hilobian ehortzi zuten . Juda eta Jerusalem osoak egin zuen dolu <unk> .
PRED:	So the king of his army went to Jerusalem with chariots and chariots , chariots , horses , and he killed his ancestors in Jerusalem . They buried him in Jerusalem and buried him in Jerusalem with his ancestors in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	So they lifted Josiah out of his chariot and placed him in another chariot . Then they brought him back to Jerusalem , where he died . He was buried there in the royal cemetery . And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for him .

ID:	3987
INPUT:	Azkenik , <unk> gelditzen dena — larrua eta haragia , burua , hankak eta hesteak —
PRED:	“ At that time the animal will be slaughtered , and the legs will be covered with water , and the internal organs ,
GOLD:	But he must take whatever is left of the bull — its hide , meat , head , legs , internal organs , and dung —

ID:	3988
INPUT:	« Bere erregealdiaren lehen urtean , Ziro erregeak agindu hau eman du Jerusalemgo Jainkoaren etxeari buruz : eraiki bedi berriro Jerusalemen Jainkoaren etxea , opariak eskaintzen diren eta lehengo zimentarrien toki berean ; hogeita zazpi metro izango da gora eta beste horrenbeste zabal .
PRED:	“ In the first year of King Darius 's reign , the king of Jerusalem must build this Temple of King Darius of the Temple of the Temple of God and the Temple of God , and he must build the Temple of the Temple of God .
GOLD:	“ In the first year of King Cyrus 's reign , a decree was sent out concerning the Temple of God at Jerusalem . “ Let the Temple be rebuilt on the site where Jews used to offer their sacrifices , using the original foundations . Its height will be ninety feet , and its width will be ninety feet .

ID:	3989
INPUT:	<unk> duzuena zuek zentzarazteko da ; Jainkoak seme-alaba bezala <unk> zaituzte . Izan ere , zein seme-alaba ez du aitak zentzarazten ?
PRED:	But when you see that God has given you his children , how can you think of your children ? For when he loves you ?
GOLD:	As you endure this divine discipline , remember that God is treating you as his own children . Who ever heard of a child who is never disciplined by its father ?

ID:	3990
INPUT:	Jonatanek Davidi ihes egiten lagundu
PRED:	Jonathan Defeats the Amalekites
GOLD:	Jonathan Helps David

ID:	3991
INPUT:	Ez badakizu , oi emakumerik ederren , zoaz ardien <unk> <unk> <unk> zeure <unk> <unk> ondoan .
PRED:	You have been very beautiful ; you have been very beautiful and fig trees that you have been filled with your own flesh and fig tree .
GOLD:	If you do n't know , O most beautiful woman , follow the trail of my flock , and graze your young goats by the shepherds ' tents .

ID:	3992
INPUT:	eta , ondoren , nire aurrera zatozte , niri sagaratua dagoen tenplu honetara , “ Seguru gaude ” esaten duzuela , <unk> egintza higuingarri guztiok egiten jarraitzeko .
PRED:	And when I live there , you will live in my Temple and live there . And now you will know that the Lord has given me everything I have done .
GOLD:	and then come here and stand before me in my Temple and chant , “ We are safe ! ” — only to go right back to all those evils again ?

ID:	3993
INPUT:	Kanaandar kultuen aurkako oharpena
PRED:	A Message for me
GOLD:	's Chosen Place for Worship

ID:	3994
INPUT:	Josiasen seme Joiakim Judako erregearen bosgarren urtean , bederatzigarren hilean , barau-eguna aldarrikatu zuten Jaunaren ohorez , eta Jerusalemen bildu ziren bertako jendea eta Judako hirietatik etorriak .
PRED:	On the fourteenth year of Josiah 's reign , in the eighteenth year of Josiah 's reign , the people of Judah , the people of Judah , and all the people of Judah and the people of Judah came to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	He did this on a day of sacred fasting held in late autumn , during the fifth year of the reign of Jehoiakim son of Josiah . People from all over Judah had come to Jerusalem to attend the services at the Temple on that day .

ID:	3995
INPUT:	Gero , Kana errekaraino jaisten zen muga . <unk> hegoaldeko hiriak Efraimen leinuak Manasesen lurraldean zituenak ziren . Manasesen muga errekaren iparraldeko ertzetik zihoan eta Mediterraneo itsasoan bukatzen zen .
PRED:	Then the boundary ran out to the Mediterranean Sea , and the territory of the Mediterranean Sea to the Mediterranean Sea . Then the territory of Manasseh went to the Mediterranean Sea and the Mediterranean Sea of the Mediterranean Sea , and the Mediterranean Sea of the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	From the spring of Tappuah , the boundary of Manasseh followed the Kanah Ravine to the Mediterranean Sea . Several towns south of the ravine were inside Manasseh 's territory , but they actually belonged to the tribe of Ephraim .

ID:	3996
INPUT:	Jaunak gauza berriak iragarri
PRED:	The
GOLD:	God 's Stubborn People

ID:	3997
INPUT:	Larri zeuden egun hartan israeldarrak , Saulek honelako zin-hitzez mehatxatu baitzuen jendea : « Madarikatua ilunabarra baino lehen , neure etsaiez mendeka nadin arte , zerbait jan dezana ! » Hala , inork ez zuen deus ere jan .
PRED:	At that day the people of Israel heard about what they had written in the valley of Israel : “ Not one of the people of Israel who were slaughtered in the valley of Egypt until the people of Israel did not eat . ”
GOLD:	Now the men of Israel were pressed to exhaustion that day , because Saul had placed them under an oath , saying , “ Let a curse fall on anyone who eats before evening — before I have full revenge on my enemies . ” So no one ate anything all day ,

ID:	3998
INPUT:	eta barkatu gure bekatuak , guk ere zor diguten <unk> <unk> , eta ez utzi gu tentaldian erortzen » .
PRED:	For we have punished our sins , and we will know that they will be able to kill us and kill us . ”
GOLD:	and forgive us our sins , as we forgive those who sin against us.And do n't let us yield to temptation . ”

ID:	3999
INPUT:	David , aldi hartan , bere babeslekuan zegoen ; filistearrek , berriz , gudari-toki bat zuten Belenen .
PRED:	In that day the Philistines returned to the land of the Philistines , but the Philistines will be called for the Philistines .
GOLD:	David was staying in the stronghold at the time , and a Philistine detachment had occupied the town of Bethlehem .

ID:	4000
INPUT:	Gainera , bere janari eta edari beretik emateko agindu zuen erregeak . Hiru urtez horrela hezi ondoren , erregearen zerbitzari izango ziren .
PRED:	For the king had given them food , and he gave them two quarts of choice flour as the king had commanded him .
GOLD:	The king assigned them a daily ration of food and wine from his own kitchens . They were to be trained for three years , and then they would enter the royal service .

ID:	4001
INPUT:	<unk> zenbait jarraitzaile aldendu egin baita <unk> . Jainkoaren grazia zuekin .
PRED:	And some of you will turn away from the power of God .
GOLD:	Some people have wandered from the faith by following such foolishness.May God 's grace be with you all .

ID:	4002
INPUT:	Egiptoarren jakintza guztia ikasi zuen Moisesek , eta hizketan eta ekintzan trebea izan zen .
PRED:	When Moses learned all these things , he learned that the words of the Lord had given you .
GOLD:	Moses was taught all the wisdom of the Egyptians , and he was powerful in both speech and action .

ID:	4003
INPUT:	buruzagiei sena kentzen dieeta biderik gabeko <unk> galbideratzen ;
PRED:	They will turn away from the power of the wicked , and they will be able to fall .
GOLD:	He strips kings of understandingand leaves them wandering in a pathless wasteland .

ID:	4004
INPUT:	Jobek erantzun zuen :
PRED:	Then Job spoke again :
GOLD:	Then Job spoke again :

ID:	4005
INPUT:	<unk> altxaturik , ez da arduratzen : « Ez da Jainkorik » , pentsatzen du .
PRED:	And when they saw him , they say , “ There is no human . ”
GOLD:	The wicked are too proud to seek God.They seem to think that God is dead .

ID:	4006
INPUT:	Ehun eta hirurogeita hamabost urtez bizi izan zen Abraham .
PRED:	Lamech lived for forty years .
GOLD:	Abraham lived for 175 years ,

ID:	4007
INPUT:	Jafeten semeak Gomer , Magog , <unk> , <unk> , Tubal , Mexek eta <unk> izan ziren .
PRED:	This is the account of the descendants of Elam , who were surrounded by the hordes of Elam , and all the kingdoms of the trees of Samaria .
GOLD:	The descendants of Japheth were Gomer , Magog , Madai , Javan , Tubal , Meshech , and Tiras .

ID:	4008
INPUT:	Jaunak justizia egiten du , zapalduen eskubideak defendatzen .
PRED:	The Lord gives justice to the wicked ; he gives justice to the wicked .
GOLD:	The Lord gives righteousnessand justice to all who are treated unfairly .

ID:	4009
INPUT:	Jaunak beste behin ere hitz egin zion Jeremiasi . Sedekias erregeak esklaboak askatzeko hitzarmena egin zuen Jerusalemgo jendearekin :
PRED:	Then the Lord gave this message to Jeremiah :
GOLD:	This message came to Jeremiah from the Lord after King Zedekiah made a covenant with the people , proclaiming freedom for the slaves .

ID:	4010
INPUT:	Baina handik berehala , <unk> deitzen zuten <unk> batek eraso zion <unk> <unk> ;
PRED:	But when they grabbed him , a man named him , a man who was killed with him .
GOLD:	But the weather changed abruptly , and a wind of typhoon strength ( called a “ northeaster ” ) burst across the island and blew us out to sea .

ID:	4011
INPUT:	Gobernariak gutuna irakurri eta Paulo zein <unk> zen galdetu zuen . <unk> zela jakinik ,
PRED:	This letter was read from the letter to Paul , and he asked him what he had happened .
GOLD:	He read it and then asked Paul what province he was from . “ Cilicia , ” Paul answered .

ID:	4012
INPUT:	Jaunari oparitzat aurkezturiko brontzea , bi mila hirurehun eta hogeita hamasei kilo izan zen ;
PRED:	He made silver and gold to the Lord . He also had two quarts of silver and gold .
GOLD:	The people also brought as special offerings 5,310 pounds of bronze ,

ID:	4013
INPUT:	Moises eta Aaron faraoiagana
PRED:	Moses and Aaron
GOLD:	Moses and Aaron Speak to Pharaoh

ID:	4014
INPUT:	Baina luzatu eskua eta uki iezaiozu daukan guztia ; baietz madarikatu aurpegira !
PRED:	But then he has poured out his hand over you and bless you .
GOLD:	But reach out and take away everything he has , and he will surely curse you to your face ! ”

ID:	4015
INPUT:	Joan zen , bada , Tamar bere anaia Amnonen etxera ; hau ohean zetzan . Tamarrek ogi-irina hartu , orea egin , anaiaren aurrean opilak prestatu eta erre zituen .
PRED:	So Tamar went back to his brother 's house , and she took him back into his house . She took him into his bed , and he took him into blood .
GOLD:	When Tamar arrived at Amnon 's house , she went to the place where he was lying down so he could watch her mix some dough . Then she baked his favorite dish for him .

ID:	4016
INPUT:	« Madarikatua arrebaordearekin , aitaren nahiz amaren alabarekin , oheratzen dena ! » Eta herri osoak erantzungo du : « Amen » .
PRED:	“ Cursed is anyone who has been married or daughter or daughter or daughter , or the daughter of his father will reply , ‘ Amen . '
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who has sexual intercourse with his sister , whether she is the daughter of his father or his mother . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	4017
INPUT:	Gorets bezate Jauna bere maitasunagatik , gizakien alde egiten dituen gauza harrigarriengatik .
PRED:	Let them praise the Lord for his wonderful deeds , for he has given them his wonderful deeds .
GOLD:	Let them praise the Lord for his great loveand for the wonderful things he has done for them .

ID:	4018
INPUT:	Egitasmo handiak dituzu eta huts egin gabe burutzen . Gizakien jokabide guztiak begi-bistan dituzu , nori bere jokaeraren ordaina , bere egiteen merezia , emateko .
PRED:	You are proud and wicked , but they are not able to obey all the wicked , for they are punished for their sins .
GOLD:	You have all wisdom and do great and mighty miracles . You see the conduct of all people , and you give them what they deserve .

ID:	4019
INPUT:	Jaunak , ordea , esan zion : « Jeroboamen emaztea datorkizu , gaixorik duen semeari zer gertatuko zaion galdetzera . Hau eta hau erantzun behar diozu . Beste baten itxurak eginez etorriko zaizu » .
PRED:	But the Lord said to him , “ The child of Jeroboam and his sons are born , and his wife will be able to see you . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord had told Ahijah , “ Jeroboam 's wife will come here , pretending to be someone else . She will ask you about her son , for he is very sick . Give her the answer I give you . ”

ID:	4020
INPUT:	Jaunak mezu hau eman zion Jeremias profetari <unk> , faraoiak <unk> eraso baino lehen .
PRED:	Then this message came to Jeremiah from the Lord : At that time the time of Pharaoh , king of Babylon , and when he became very angry .
GOLD:	This is the Lord 's message to the prophet Jeremiah concerning the Philistines of Gaza , before it was captured by the Egyptian army .

ID:	4021
INPUT:	Jainko Ahaltsu bezala agertu nintzaien Abrahami , Isaaki eta Jakobi ; baina ez nintzaien nire egiazko izenaz , Jauna bezala alegia , ezagutzera eman .
PRED:	For the waters of God appeared to Abraham , though he had not been born to Abraham , he was not the Lord .
GOLD:	I appeared to Abraham , to Isaac , and to Jacob as El-Shaddai — ‘ God Almighty ' — but I did not reveal my name , Yahweh , to them .

ID:	4022
INPUT:	Eta mutila atzetik joaten zaio berehala , hiltegira doan idia bezala , lakioan jausten den oreina legez ,
PRED:	But if the boy is left , it is like a donkey , the ox or the ox or deer ,
GOLD:	He followed her at once , like an ox going to the slaughter.He was like a stag caught in a trap ,

ID:	4023
INPUT:	Zuek ere , emazteok , izan zaitezte zeuen senarren menpeko ; horrela , horietakoren batzuek <unk> onartzen ez badute ere , <unk> jokabideak , eta ez hitzek , salbamenerako irabaz ditzan ,
PRED:	You are wise and sisters , who are wise to be kind to your husbands , so that some of your husbands will be able to be able to be able to be able to be saved .
GOLD:	In the same way , you wives must accept the authority of your husbands . Then , even if some refuse to obey the Good News , your godly lives will speak to them without any words . They will be won over

ID:	4024
INPUT:	Bera da batzuk apostolu egin zituena , beste batzuk profeta , beste batzuk berri onaren <unk> , beste batzuk artzain eta irakasle .
PRED:	For some of the apostles were chosen by the apostle of the Gentiles , some of the Gentiles , and some of the other people of the world and other people of the world .
GOLD:	Now these are the gifts Christ gave to the church : the apostles , the prophets , the evangelists , and the pastors and teachers .

ID:	4025
INPUT:	Gero , mahasti artean , <unk> bi harresi zituen bide estu batean gelditu zen Jaunaren aingerua .
PRED:	Then he saw two men with a great vineyard , and he became very great .
GOLD:	Then the angel of the Lord stood at a place where the road narrowed between two vineyard walls .

ID:	4026
INPUT:	Josuek agindu zuen : « Eraman <unk> harri handi batzuk <unk> eta ezarri bertan zaintzaileak .
PRED:	So Joshua commanded him , “ At that time , some of the huge stone that had been killed . ”
GOLD:	he issued this command : “ Cover the opening of the cave with large rocks , and place guards at the entrance to keep the kings inside .

ID:	4027
INPUT:	Baina ekialdera joan , eta ez dago han ; mendebaldera jo , eta ez dut sumatzen .
PRED:	But I go to the east and west , and there is no west .
GOLD:	I go east , but he is not there.I go west , but I can not find him .

ID:	4028
INPUT:	<unk> heldurik , juduen sinagogetan Jainkoaren mezua hots egiten hasi ziren ; Joan ere berekin zuten laguntzaile .
PRED:	When they arrived in the synagogues , they began to preach the word of God in the synagogues and John .
GOLD:	There , in the town of Salamis , they went to the Jewish synagogues and preached the word of God . John Mark went with them as their assistant .

ID:	4029
INPUT:	Jauna , ez ukatu niri zeure errukia ! Zure maitasun eta leialtasunak gorde nazatela beti !
PRED:	Do not let me rescue me from your unfailing love and faithfulness .
GOLD:	For troubles surround me — too many to count ! My sins pile up so highI ca n't see my way out.They outnumber the hairs on my head.I have lost all courage .

ID:	4030
INPUT:	Kibrot-Taabatik Hatzerotera joan zen herria eta han gelditu .
PRED:	They left Hazeroth and camped there .
GOLD:	From Kibroth-hattaavah the Israelites traveled to Hazeroth , where they stayed for some time .

ID:	4031
INPUT:	Hara , zure aurka noa , haranaren gainaldean , harkaitza bezain <unk> gainaldean <unk> horren aurka . “ Nork guri eraso ? — diozue — . Nor iritsi gure <unk> ? ”
PRED:	“ Look , I am like a snake that I am like a snake that fell on it ? ” they shouted , “ Who are you going to kill us ? ” “ Who are you ? ”
GOLD:	I will personally fight against the people in Jerusalem , that mighty fortress — the people who boast , “ No one can touch us here.No one can break in here . ”

ID:	4032
INPUT:	urre askoren jabe izandako <unk> , jauregiak zilarrez beteak <unk> batera .
PRED:	He has filled with great nationsand filled with gold , bronze , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	I would rest with princes , rich in gold , whose palaces were filled with silver .

ID:	4033
INPUT:	Baina juduek kontra egiten baitzioten eta irainka erantzuten , Paulok , jantziak astinduz , esan zien : « Zeuek zarete gerta <unk> erantzule bakar ; nik ez dut errurik . Aurrerantzean jentilengana joango naiz » .
PRED:	But when the Jews heard him , they cried out to him and said , “ You are the commander of the Jews , because you have been defeated by the Jewish leaders , and I will not be punished by the Jewish leaders . ”
GOLD:	But when they opposed and insulted him , Paul shook the dust from his clothes and said , “ Your blood is upon your own heads — I am innocent . From now on I will go preach to the Gentiles . ”

ID:	4034
INPUT:	Joan ziren , bada , eta hilobia <unk> zuten , harria <unk> eta guardia ipiniz .
PRED:	So the people and officials came forward and saw that they were sitting on the throne , and they were filled with servants .
GOLD:	So they sealed the tomb and posted guards to protect it .

ID:	4035
INPUT:	Ikusi dut mundu <unk> <unk> ordez , eta <unk> ordez .
PRED:	I saw that I have seen under the world , and when I saw that everyone who had been able to kill him .
GOLD:	I also noticed that under the sun there is evil in the courtroom . Yes , even the courts of law are corrupt !

ID:	4036
INPUT:	Orduan , Joan <unk> ari zitzaiela jabetu ziren ikasleak .
PRED:	Then the disciples realized that the disciples had been baptized .
GOLD:	Then the disciples realized he was talking about John the Baptist .

ID:	4037
INPUT:	Behinola , Judaren leinuko batzuk Josuerengana etorri ziren , Gilgalera , eta haietariko batek , Jefuneren seme Kaleb keniztarrak , esan zion : « Badakizu zer esan zion Jaunak Moisesi , Jainkoaren gizonari , zuri eta niri buruz <unk> .
PRED:	One day some of the tribe of Judah came to Joshua and camped at Gilgal . He said to Joshua son of Nun , “ The Lord has given me victory over all the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	A delegation from the tribe of Judah , led by Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite , came to Joshua at Gilgal . Caleb said to Joshua , “ Remember what the Lord said to Moses , the man of God , about you and me when we were at Kadesh-barnea .

ID:	4038
INPUT:	eta han ere berri ona zabaltzen jardun zuten .
PRED:	They preached the Good News to everyone .
GOLD:	And there they preached the Good News .

ID:	4039
INPUT:	Jaiki zaitez eta agindu herriari garbikuntza egiteko . Esaiozu : « Egin garbikuntza biharko . Hau dio Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak : Erabat suntsitu behar zenuten zerbait duzue zeuen artean , israeldarrok ; hori desagerrarazi arte , ezin izango diezue aurre egin etsaiei .
PRED:	Get up and purify the people of Israel , ” says the people of Israel . “ This is what the Lord says : If you have done , you must not destroy all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Get up ! Command the people to purify themselves in preparation for tomorrow . For this is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : Hidden among you , O Israel , are things set apart for the Lord . You will never defeat your enemies until you remove these things from among you .

ID:	4040
INPUT:	berak du jende <unk> artetik jasotzen , behartsua <unk> ateratzen , handikiekin eser <unk> aulki <unk> jarri . Jaunarenak dira lurraren zutoinak , mundua haien gainean du kokatua .
PRED:	For the poor who are poor , and those who have been able to kill you , and they will see what they have done , and they will worship your god .
GOLD:	He lifts the poor from the dustand the needy from the garbage dump.He sets them among princes , placing them in seats of honor.For all the earth is the Lord 's , and he has set the world in order .

ID:	4041
INPUT:	Adierazi nire , Jainko Jaun honen , mezua : Gog , zure kontra nator , Mexek eta Tubalgo buruzagi nagusi horren kontra .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ I am the God of Heaven 's Armies , and I will stand against you . ”
GOLD:	Give him this message from the Sovereign Lord : Gog , I am your enemy !

ID:	4042
INPUT:	Horrela jokatuz , beren buruak kutsatueta Jainkoari desleial izan zitzaizkion .
PRED:	So they were kind to God by sin , and they were unfaithful to God .
GOLD:	They defiled themselves by their evil deeds , and their love of idols was adultery in the Lord 's sight .

ID:	4043
INPUT:	Izan ere , honela agintzen du Jaunaren legeak : <unk> guztiak Jaunari sagaratuko zaizkio .
PRED:	For the commands of the Lord has commanded him to obey all the commands of the Lord .
GOLD:	The law of the Lord says , “ If a woman 's first child is a boy , he must be dedicated to the Lord . ”

ID:	4044
INPUT:	Eta Bet-Xemexeko jendeak honela zioen : « Nork iraun dezake zutik Jainko Jaun santu honen aurrean ? Nori eramango genioke kutxa gure artetik bidaltzeko ? »
PRED:	“ Who can come to us ? ” they asked . “ Who can go to us ? Who can bring us out to us ? ”
GOLD:	“ Who is able to stand in the presence of the Lord , this holy God ? ” they cried out . “ Where can we send the Ark from here ? ”

ID:	4045
INPUT:	Moisesek israeldarrak abiarazi zituen Itsaso Gorritik . Xur basamortura jo zuten eta hiru eguneko bidea egin basamortuan barrena , urik aurkitu gabe .
PRED:	So Moses left the Red Sea and the people of Israel in the wilderness for three days . They left the wilderness for three days .
GOLD:	Then Moses led the people of Israel away from the Red Sea , and they moved out into the desert of Shur . They traveled in this desert for three days without finding any water .

ID:	4046
INPUT:	Honela , galarazi egin zion Edom herriak Israeli bere lurraldetik igarotzea , eta israeldarrak urrundu egin ziren , <unk> hartuz .
PRED:	This is why the people of Edom says , “ The people of Israel have turned away from the land of Edom and all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Because Edom refused to allow Israel to pass through their country , Israel was forced to turn around .

ID:	4047
INPUT:	Zuk kendu duzu zentzu ona horiengandik , ez utzi garaile atera daitezen .
PRED:	But you have not turned away from following following following following following them .
GOLD:	You have closed their minds to understanding , but do not let them triumph .

ID:	4048
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak Jerubaal , <unk> , Jefte eta Samuel bidali eta askatu egin zintuzten inguruan zenituzten etsaien eskuetatik , eta lasai bizi izan zarete .
PRED:	But when the Lord heard him , he sent him out of his enemies , and Samuel , and he rescued you from their enemies .
GOLD:	Then the Lord sent Gideon , Bedan , Jephthah , and Samuel to save you , and you lived in safety .

ID:	4049
INPUT:	Israelgo errege Joaxek , aldiz , beste erantzun hau bidali zion Judako errege Amatziasi : « Behin batez , garduak esan omen zion Libanoko <unk> : “ <unk> alaba nire semeari emaztetzat ” . Baina Libanoko basabere batek hankazpian hartu zuen <unk> .
PRED:	Then King Joash of Israel sent another message to King Jehoash of Israel , and he asked him , “ One of the people of Israel , who had been killed with me , my daughter , who had taken from Lebanon .
GOLD:	But King Jehoash of Israel replied to King Amaziah of Judah with this story : “ Out in the Lebanon mountains , a thistle sent a message to a mighty cedar tree : ‘ Give your daughter in marriage to my son . ' But just then a wild animal of Lebanon came by and stepped on the thistle , crushing it !

ID:	4050
INPUT:	bizi bagara , Jaunarentzat gara bizi ; eta hiltzen bagara , Jaunarentzat gara hiltzen . Beraz , nahiz bizi nahiz hil , Jaunarenak gara .
PRED:	We have lived in the Lord 's presence , and we may die in the presence of the Lord . So we will die , and we will die . ”
GOLD:	If we live , it 's to honor the Lord . And if we die , it 's to honor the Lord . So whether we live or die , we belong to the Lord .

ID:	4051
INPUT:	Jainkoak esan zion : « Jakob duzu izena . Baina ez zara <unk> deituko : Israel izango duzu izen » . Eta Israel izena eman ondoren ,
PRED:	Then God said to Jacob , “ You are the name of Jacob , because you are my name , because you are my name . ” And when he said , “ You will be my name . ”
GOLD:	saying , “ Your name is Jacob , but you will not be called Jacob any longer . From now on your name will be Israel . ” So God renamed him Israel .

ID:	4052
INPUT:	« Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak emango dizuen lurraldeko hiriren batean zuen herritarren bat behartsu bada , ez izan bihozgabe , ez laguntzarik ukatu senide behartsuari ;
PRED:	“ When the Lord your God will give you a ruler in the land of the land of the land of the Amorites , he will not be able to save you .
GOLD:	“ But if there are any poor Israelites in your towns when you arrive in the land the Lord your God is giving you , do not be hard-hearted or tightfisted toward them .

ID:	4053
INPUT:	Zerahengandik zerahtarrak eta Saulengandik <unk> .
PRED:	When we heard that we were in Saul and how could we see him ?
GOLD:	The Zoharite clan , named after their ancestor Zohar.The Shaulite clan , named after their ancestor Shaul .

ID:	4054
INPUT:	Nola urrezko eraztuna <unk> muturrean , hala da zentzugabeko emakume ederra .
PRED:	How lovely is your mouth like a gold molding around him .
GOLD:	A beautiful woman who lacks discretionis like a gold ring in a pig 's snout .

ID:	4055
INPUT:	<unk> badira , berriz , ezin izango dituzue desegin . Ez dakizuela gerta Jainkoarekin borrokan aritzea ! » Haren iritzia onartu zuten .
PRED:	But if they are afraid of these things , you will not destroy God 's wrong . ”
GOLD:	But if it is from God , you will not be able to overthrow them . You may even find yourselves fighting against God ! ”

ID:	4056
INPUT:	<unk> semeak , Axkenaz , <unk> eta <unk> .
PRED:	Then the sons of Korah , and when they were filled with him , and all who were filled with him .
GOLD:	The descendants of Gomer were Ashkenaz , Riphath , and Togarmah .

ID:	4057
INPUT:	Jesusek , ikustean , esan zien : — Joan eta azaldu <unk> . Bidean zihoazela , garbi gelditu ziren .
PRED:	When Jesus saw them , he said to them , “ As they were healed , ” they were healed .
GOLD:	He looked at them and said , “ Go show yourselves to the priests . ” And as they went , they were cleansed of their leprosy .

ID:	4058
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Zoaz etxera , semea onik duzu eta . Gizonak sinetsi egin zuen Jesusek esandakoa eta joan egin zen .
PRED:	Jesus said to him , “ Go home and do n't believe . ” So Jesus told him , “ Go and believe it . ” So Jesus told him .
GOLD:	Then Jesus told him , “ Go back home . Your son will live ! ” And the man believed what Jesus said and started home .

ID:	4059
INPUT:	Bai ugariak , Jauna , zuk eginak ! Denak jakinduriaz egin dituzu , zure <unk> betea da lurra .
PRED:	O Lord , how you have done ! You have made your power , and all the earth have filled with great power .
GOLD:	O Lord , what a variety of things you have made ! In wisdom you have made them all.The earth is full of your creatures .

ID:	4060
INPUT:	Han zeuen jokabideaz oroituko zarete , zeuen buruak kutsatu zituzten egintza txar guztiez ; orduan , zeuen buruaren nazka sentituko duzue egindako gaiztakeria guztiengatik .
PRED:	You must remember all the evil things you have done , for you have done for all the things you have done for you .
GOLD:	You will look back on all the ways you defiled yourselves and will hate yourselves because of the evil you have done .

ID:	4061
INPUT:	Nik , Jainko Jaunak , zin dagit neure biziarengatik , ahalmen handiz , esku indartsuz eta neure sumina isuriz <unk> dudala zuen gain .
PRED:	As surely as the Sovereign Lord says , ‘ As surely as I promised , I will hand you with a strong hand and powerful hand against my fury . '
GOLD:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , I will rule over you with an iron fist in great anger and with awesome power .

ID:	4062
INPUT:	<unk> puska bat eta bi <unk> ere eman zizkioten . Jan zituen eta indarrak hartu , hiru gau eta hiru egun ogirik jan gabe eta urik edan gabe baitzegoen .
PRED:	One day when they were sick , they ate and ate as much as much as they were eating and drinking , and they ate for three days .
GOLD:	They also gave him part of a fig cake and two clusters of raisins , for he had n't had anything to eat or drink for three days and nights . Before long his strength returned .

ID:	4063
INPUT:	Joramek mugaz beste aldera jo zuen bere buruzagiekin eta guda-gurdi guztiekin . Gauez jaiki eta garaitu egin zituen setiatua zeukaten edomdarrak eta hauen guda-gurdien buruzagiak .
PRED:	Then King Hazael of Aram attacked the king of Aram and his army against Aram and his army . He attacked the king of Aram and his army against them .
GOLD:	So Jehoram went out with his full army and all his chariots . The Edomites surrounded him and his chariot commanders , but he went out at night and attacked them under cover of darkness .

ID:	4064
INPUT:	Hauek dira Esauren , hots , Edomen ondorengoak .
PRED:	These are the names of Esau 's family : The descendants of Esau 's family are the clans of Esau .
GOLD:	This is the account of the descendants of Esau ( also known as Edom ) .

ID:	4065
INPUT:	Itzul zaitez , Israel , zeure Jainko Jaunarengana , bekatuan estropezu egin baituzu .
PRED:	Arise , O God of Israel , for they have sinned against the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Bring your confessions , and return to the Lord.Say to him , “ Forgive all our sins and graciously receive us , so that we may offer you our praises .

ID:	4066
INPUT:	Amaitu ote erabat haren maitasuna ? Bukatu ote betiko haren agintzaria ?
PRED:	How can he disappear ? Can he love his love endures forever ?
GOLD:	Has God forgotten to be gracious ? Has he slammed the door on his compassion ? Interlude

ID:	4067
INPUT:	« Abia zaitez hemendik , zoaz ekialderantz eta gorde zaitez Jordan ibaiaz beste aldera dagoen Kerit erreka inguruan .
PRED:	“ Get up from the east side of the Jordan River , and go south to the east side of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	“ Go to the east and hide by Kerith Brook , near where it enters the Jordan River .

ID:	4068
INPUT:	Eutsi niri , zeuk hitzeman bezala , eta biziko naiz ; ez dakidala neure esperantza huts gerta .
PRED:	Get out of my enemies , as my enemies have promised me .
GOLD:	Lord , sustain me as you promised , that I may live ! Do not let my hope be crushed .

ID:	4069
INPUT:	« Bidal itzazu gizaseme batzuk israeldarrei ematen diedan Kanaan lurraldea ikertzera . Bidali leinu bakoitzetik gizaseme bana , israeldarren arduradunen artetik aukeraturik » .
PRED:	“ Give these instructions to the people of Israel . Let them go out to the tribes of Canaan and the tribes of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ Send out men to explore the land of Canaan , the land I am giving to the Israelites . Send one leader from each of the twelve ancestral tribes . ”

ID:	4070
INPUT:	Gau hartan Jauna agertu zitzaion Salomoni eta esan zion : — Eskatu nahi duzuna ; emango dizut .
PRED:	That night the Lord appeared to Solomon , and he asked him , “ What do you do ? ”
GOLD:	That night God appeared to Solomon and said , “ What do you want ? Ask , and I will give it to you ! ”

ID:	4071
INPUT:	Moabeko lautadan , Jordan ondoan etxolatu ziren , <unk> <unk> bitartean .
PRED:	When they were camped beside the Jordan Valley of Moab , they were buried in the valley of Moab .
GOLD:	Along the Jordan River they camped from Beth-jeshimoth as far as the meadows of Acacia on the plains of Moab .

ID:	4072
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> iritsi zirenean , <unk> jo nahi izan zuten , baina Jesusen Espirituak ez zien utzi .
PRED:	When they arrived , when they saw that they were afraid of Jesus , they refused to kill Jesus .
GOLD:	Then coming to the borders of Mysia , they headed north for the province of Bithynia , but again the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them to go there .

ID:	4073
INPUT:	Honela esan zion Boozek : — Ekarri zeure soingainekoa eta zabaldu . Hala egin zuen Rutek , eta Boozek hogeiren bat kilo garagar bota zizkion eta bizkarrean hartzen lagundu . Honela , herrira itzuli zen Rut bere <unk> .
PRED:	Boaz said to her , “ Get up and prepare your robe . ” So Boaz told her , “ I have brought you back to the top of barley . ” So Boaz went back to her home and threw her back to her home .
GOLD:	Then Boaz said to her , “ Bring your cloak and spread it out . ” He measured six scoops of barley into the cloak and placed it on her back . Then he returned to the town .

ID:	4074
INPUT:	Hiramek emanak zizkion Salomoni lau tona inguru urre .
PRED:	Solomon also received the silver of gold and gold .
GOLD:	Nevertheless , Hiram paid Solomon 9,000 pounds of gold .

ID:	4075
INPUT:	<unk>
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Recovery
GOLD:	Procedures for the Guilt Offering

ID:	4076
INPUT:	Herria begira zegoen . Agintariek , berriz , Jesusi burla egiten zioten , esanez : « Besteak salbatu ditik ; salba dezala bere burua , Jainkoaren Mesias , hautatua , baldin bada » .
PRED:	The people of Israel saw him , but they shouted to Jesus , “ He saved us ! He saved us ! ” “ He saved saved those who are saved ! ”
GOLD:	The crowd watched and the leaders scoffed . “ He saved others , ” they said , “ let him save himself if he is really God 's Messiah , the Chosen One . ”

ID:	4077
INPUT:	<unk> , Amon eta <unk> , filistear eta tiroarrek .
PRED:	Then the king of the Philistine rulers , and the Philistines were at least of the Philistines .
GOLD:	Assyria has joined them , too , and is allied with the descendants of Lot.Interlude

ID:	4078
INPUT:	Jaiki zaitez , irten eta <unk> zeure gudariak . Hara , Jaunarengatik zin degizut : ateratzen ez bazara , ez da inor ere geldituko zurekin gaur gauean ; orduan , zeure bizitza osoan ikusi izan dituzunak baino <unk> ikusi beharko dituzu .
PRED:	Get up and see that the men of the Lord will see you , and you will not see me . You will not see you , too , and you will know that you have seen your life . ”
GOLD:	So the king went out and took his seat at the town gate , and as the news spread throughout the town that he was there , everyone went to him.Meanwhile , the Israelites who had supported Absalom fled to their homes .

ID:	4079
INPUT:	« Beren fruituetatik antzemango diezue »
PRED:	“ These are the sins of their sins , ” says the wicked .
GOLD:	Building on a Solid Foundation

ID:	4080
INPUT:	Salomonek Roboam ; Roboamek Abia ; <unk> Asaf ;
PRED:	Rehoboam was the father of Solomon , who was filled with the apostles .
GOLD:	Solomon was the father of Rehoboam.Rehoboam was the father of Abijah.Abijah was the father of Asa .

ID:	4081
INPUT:	Ez dute Jaunaren <unk> izango : Efraim Egiptora itzuliko da , eta janari <unk> dituzte Asirian .
PRED:	They will be sure that the Lord will return to Egypt , and they will return to Egypt , along with all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	You may no longer stay here in the Lord 's land.Instead , you will return to Egypt , and in Assyria you will eat foodthat is ceremonially unclean .

ID:	4082
INPUT:	Gero , Saul kendu eta David jarri zuen errege , eta aitorpen hau egin zuen honetaz : “ David , Jeseren semea , aurkitu dut neure gogoko gizon ; nik nahi guztia egingo du honek ” .
PRED:	Then Saul took him away from the king and asked him , ‘ This is the son of Jesse , the son of Jesse . '
GOLD:	But God removed Saul and replaced him with David , a man about whom God said , ‘ I have found David son of Jesse , a man after my own heart . He will do everything I want him to do . '

ID:	4083
INPUT:	Zerua Jaunarena da ; lurra , berriz , gizakien esku utzi du .
PRED:	The earth is crushed by the earth ; the earth gives them victory .
GOLD:	The heavens belong to the Lord , but he has given the earth to all humanity .

ID:	4084
INPUT:	eta bi litro ardo isur-oparitzat , eta Jaunak atseginez onartuko du oparia .
PRED:	You must offer two quarts of the Lord as a burnt offering and a burnt offering .
GOLD:	and give a third of a gallon of wine as a liquid offering . This will be a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	4085
INPUT:	<unk> , betierean , ezarriko dituzte Jaunaren aurrean . Betiko <unk> izango dute hau israeldarrek .
PRED:	All the people of Israel will bow before the Lord , and the people of Israel will be burned before him .
GOLD:	Every Sabbath day this bread must be laid out before the Lord as a gift from the Israelites ; it is an ongoing expression of the eternal covenant .

ID:	4086
INPUT:	Fededunen aldeko <unk> buruz ez duzue nik gehiago idatzi beharrik .
PRED:	And when you learned that the power of the world , you do not need .
GOLD:	I really do n't need to write to you about this ministry of giving for the believers in Jerusalem .

ID:	4087
INPUT:	Ahoa bai , eta hitzik ez dute ; begiak bai , eta ikusten ez ;
PRED:	They ca n't speak , and they ca n't see .
GOLD:	They have mouths but can not speak , and eyes but can not see .

ID:	4088
INPUT:	Gainerako hilak ez ziren bizira itzuli , harik eta mila urteak bete arte . Hau lehen piztuera da .
PRED:	The rest of the dead will not return to life until they were dead . This is the resurrection of the dead .
GOLD:	This is the first resurrection . ( The rest of the dead did not come back to life until the thousand years had ended . )

ID:	4089
INPUT:	Orduan , honela hitz egin zion Jaunak Jeremiasi :
PRED:	Then the Lord gave this message to Jeremiah :
GOLD:	So the Lord gave them this message through Jeremiah :

ID:	4090
INPUT:	Herriaren buruzagiak : <unk> , <unk> , Elam , <unk> , Bani ,
PRED:	Then the king of Elam , Elam , Elam , Elam , Elam , Elam ,
GOLD:	Bunni , Azgad , Bebai ,

ID:	4091
INPUT:	Esan duzuen hori ez dizue inork ere onartuko , zeren eta , « nolako zatia borrokara <unk> , halakoa tresneria zaindu duenak . Berdin hartuko dute denek » .
PRED:	You must not tell you that no one will be able to carry out your own desires , ‘ Those who carry out their own desires . '
GOLD:	Who will listen when you talk like this ? We share and share alike — those who go to battle and those who guard the equipment . ”

ID:	4092
INPUT:	Oi Jainko , eraberri gaitzazu , erakutsi guri aurpegi argia , salba gaitezen !
PRED:	O God , rescue us from the sea , and we have brought us into the sea .
GOLD:	O Lord God of Heaven 's Armies , how long will you be angry with our prayers ?

ID:	4093
INPUT:	izan ere , <unk> egingo dituzte gaizkileak ; herrialdeaz jabetuko dira , ordea , Jaunaz fio direnak .
PRED:	They will destroy all the wicked , but they will destroy the land of the Lord .
GOLD:	For the wicked will be destroyed , but those who trust in the Lord will possess the land .

ID:	4094
INPUT:	Labore-oparia
PRED:	Instructions for the Priests
GOLD:	Procedures for the Grain Offering

ID:	4095
INPUT:	Gauza bera gertatzen da musika-tresnekin ere , txirula edota zitararekin , adibidez : <unk> argi eta garbi ematen ez badituzte , nola jakin zer jotzen duten ?
PRED:	For the Lord has made the foundation of the earth , so he can not be angry with such a god , or if he has been clean , how can I do such a god ?
GOLD:	Even lifeless instruments like the flute or the harp must play the notes clearly , or no one will recognize the melody .

ID:	4096
INPUT:	Faraoiak , orduan : — Bai , eta Jauna izan dezazuela lagun ! Baina zuen haur eta guzti joaten utziko dizuedala uste al duzue ? Ez horixe ! Argi dago asmo txarretan zabiltzatela .
PRED:	Then Pharaoh said , “ That 's why do you think that the Lord has given you a little child ? But when you want to come to come , you can know that he is going to come . ”
GOLD:	Pharaoh retorted , “ The Lord will certainly need to be with you if I let you take your little ones ! I can see through your evil plan .

ID:	4097
INPUT:	Danielen lagunak Jainkoarekiko leial
PRED:	The Sign of God 's Power
GOLD:	The Blazing Furnace

ID:	4098
INPUT:	Horiek dira Sinai mendian Jaunak Moisesen bidez israeldarrei eman zizkien lege , erabaki eta irakaspenak , beraren eta israeldarren arteko harremanak <unk> .
PRED:	These are the people of Israel , the Lord gave Moses to Moses as the people of Israel . He gave them the people of Israel as well as the Lord had commanded .
GOLD:	These are the decrees , regulations , and instructions that the Lord gave through Moses on Mount Sinai as evidence of the relationship between himself and the Israelites .

ID:	4099
INPUT:	Ardoak iluntzen ditu haren begiak , <unk> zuritzen haren hortzak !
PRED:	Can they see their eyes , and their eyes are surrounded by their eyes ?
GOLD:	His eyes are darker than wine , and his teeth are whiter than milk .

ID:	4100
INPUT:	Baina Egiptoko aztiek , beren <unk> baliaturik , gauza bera egin ahal izan zutenez gero , faraoiak bere teman jarraitu zuen eta ez zien Moisesi eta Aaroni jaramonik egin , Jaunak esan bezala .
PRED:	But when the wild animals of Egypt , the young women of Egypt will be filled with all the women of Egypt , and Pharaoh did not listen to Moses .
GOLD:	But again the magicians of Egypt used their magic , and they , too , turned water into blood . So Pharaoh 's heart remained hard . He refused to listen to Moses and Aaron , just as the Lord had predicted .

ID:	4101
INPUT:	Egunero esan eta esan ari zitzaion arren , Josek ez zion onartu berarekin oheratzea .
PRED:	So Joseph told him that Joseph had not been ready , but he would not listen to him .
GOLD:	She kept putting pressure on Joseph day after day , but he refused to sleep with her , and he kept out of her way as much as possible .

ID:	4102
INPUT:	Hizketa arrotzez mintzatzea , beraz , <unk> da seinale , ez sinestedunentzat ; profeta bezala hitz egitea , berriz , ez da <unk> , sinestedunentzat baizik .
PRED:	For in tongues are in tongues , so that the prophets would not be able to be able to be able to speak the words of the prophets . But when they were afraid of the prophets , they will be able to be able to be able to know that you .
GOLD:	So you see that speaking in tongues is a sign , not for believers , but for unbelievers . Prophecy , however , is for the benefit of believers , not unbelievers .

ID:	4103
INPUT:	Judako errege Joaxek , ordea , bere aurretik Judan errege izaniko Josafat , Joram eta Akaziasek Jaunari sagaraturiko eskaintza guztiak Siriako errege <unk> igorri zizkion , baita Joaxek berak egindakoak eta Jaunaren etxeko nahiz erregearen jauregiko altxortegian zegoen urre guztia ere . Orduan , Hazaelek alde egin zuen Jerusalemdik .
PRED:	But King Jehoash of Judah , King Hazael of Judah , who was king of Judah , along with King Ahab of Judah , along with King Hazael of Aram , and he sent him to rule over the Temple of King Hazael of Judah .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Joash 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .

ID:	4104
INPUT:	Akabek Jezabeli adierazi zion Eliasek egin zuen guztia eta Baalen profetak oro ezpataz hilarazi zituela .
PRED:	So Ahab said to Joshua , “ The prophet of Baal and all the prophets of Baal .
GOLD:	When Ahab got home , he told Jezebel everything Elijah had done , including the way he had killed all the prophets of Baal .

ID:	4105
INPUT:	Tenpluaren behea ere , nahiz barnean nahiz kanpoan , urrez estali zuen .
PRED:	The grave of the Temple was covered with gold and overlaid them with gold .
GOLD:	He overlaid the floor in both rooms with gold .

ID:	4106
INPUT:	<unk> jentilen artean
PRED:	A Message about the Gentiles
GOLD:	Respecting People in Authority

ID:	4107
INPUT:	<unk> bedeinkatua izango <unk> ogia behartsuarekin <unk> .
PRED:	And when the people of Israel will be cut off from human society .
GOLD:	Blessed are those who are generous , because they feed the poor .

ID:	4108
INPUT:	Gerora , beste gatazka bat izan zen God hirian filistearren kontra . <unk> <unk> hil egin zuen <unk> , refatarren ondorengoa hau ere .
PRED:	At that time , one of the Philistines came out of the Philistines against the Philistines , who had been killed in the land of the Philistines , who had been killed in the land of the Philistines .
GOLD:	After this , there was another battle against the Philistines at Gob . As they fought , Sibbecai from Hushah killed Saph , another descendant of the giants .

ID:	4109
INPUT:	<unk> Jaunaren izenean zin egingo dio jabeari , berari utzitakoa ez duela ukitu aitortuz . Jabeak haren zin-hitza onartuko du , eta hark ez du ordaindu beharrik izango .
PRED:	And if you swear by the name of the Lord will be able to be able to be able to be able to do it , and it will be able to do whatever you do .
GOLD:	“ Now suppose someone leaves a donkey , ox , sheep , or any other animal with a neighbor for safekeeping , but it dies or is injured or is taken away , and no one sees what happened .

ID:	4110
INPUT:	eta bere senarra utzi eta beste bat hartzen duen emakumeak adulterio egiten du era berean .
PRED:	She has committed adultery with her husband and commits adultery with her husband .
GOLD:	And if a woman divorces her husband and marries someone else , she commits adultery . ”

ID:	4111
INPUT:	Horrela zaintzen du hilobian eror ez dadin , heriotzaren muga pasa ez dezan .
PRED:	No one can enter the grave ; they will not enter the border of death .
GOLD:	He protects them from the grave , from crossing over the river of death .

ID:	4112
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jainkoa Moisesi : « Neu naiz Jauna !
PRED:	Then God said to Moses , “ I am the Lord ! ”
GOLD:	And God said to Moses , “ I am Yahweh — ‘ the Lord . '

ID:	4113
INPUT:	<unk> makurtuz , esan zion : « Neurea , bai , neurea dut errua , jauna ! Uztazu , otoi , mintzatzen eta entzun zeure mirabe honen hitzak .
PRED:	“ Come , my lord , ” she said . “ Please let me be my lord , my lord , my lord the Lord .
GOLD:	She fell at his feet and said , “ I accept all blame in this matter , my lord . Please listen to what I have to say .

ID:	4114
INPUT:	Zintzoa <unk> atera duteeta gaiztoa sartu da haren lekura .
PRED:	The wicked will fall into the sea , and they will fall into the place where they are going .
GOLD:	The godly are rescued from trouble , and it falls on the wicked instead .

ID:	4115
INPUT:	Jefte , Efraimen leinuaren kontra
PRED:	Jephthah Defeats the tribe of Ephraim
GOLD:	Ephraim Fights with Jephthah

ID:	4116
INPUT:	« Badut oraindik hamaika gauza esateko , baina <unk> ez zarete gauza ondo ulertzeko .
PRED:	“ I have heard these things , but you would n't know what I have done .
GOLD:	“ There is so much more I want to tell you , but you ca n't bear it now .

ID:	4117
INPUT:	<unk> parabola
PRED:	Parable of the Great Feast
GOLD:	Parable of the Three Servants

ID:	4118
INPUT:	Gosea bidaliko dut zuen aurka , eta seme-alabarik gabe utziko zaituzteten basapiztiak ; izurria eta hilketak izango dituzue , eta gerra sorraraziko dut zuen aurka . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	I will send disaster against every nation , and I will turn against you and destroy those who commit adultery . I will destroy you and destroy you , and I will destroy you . ”
GOLD:	And along with the famine , wild animals will attack you and rob you of your children . Disease and war will stalk your land , and I will bring the sword of the enemy against you . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	4119
INPUT:	Eta , esan ere , esan nien handiki , agintari eta herriko gainerako jendeari : « Lana handia eta zabala dugulako , harresi gainean <unk> gabiltza , bata bestearengandik urrun .
PRED:	Then I said to them , “ All the rulers of the rulers of the rulers of the Euphrates River , the leaders of the people of the people of Israel , ‘ We have given us the rest of our family . '
GOLD:	So I placed armed guards behind the lowest parts of the wall in the exposed areas . I stationed the people to stand guard by families , armed with swords , spears , and bows .

ID:	4120
INPUT:	Inola ere ez ! Hala balitz , nola epai lezake Jainkoak mundua ?
PRED:	Do n't we know how can we know God 's judge ? ”
GOLD:	Of course not ! If God were not entirely fair , how would he be qualified to judge the world ?

ID:	4121
INPUT:	« Ez eraman urrerik , ez <unk> , ez dirurik gerrikoan ,
PRED:	“ Do not take any silver or gold or gold .
GOLD:	“ Do n't take any money in your money belts — no gold , silver , or even copper coins .

ID:	4122
INPUT:	Hogeita hamar urte zituen Davidek errege izaten hasi zenean , eta berrogei urtez izan zen errege .
PRED:	David was twenty-two years old when he became king , and he reigned in forty years .
GOLD:	David was thirty years old when he began to reign , and he reigned forty years in all .

ID:	4123
INPUT:	Orduan , berarekin zintzo <unk> behin betiko irabaziko nuke auzia .
PRED:	Then I will be with you , and I will be able to kill you .
GOLD:	Honest people can reason with him , so I would be forever acquitted by my judge .

ID:	4124
INPUT:	Burdina <unk> bezalakoa da harentzat , brontzea egur ustela .
PRED:	It is as weak as iron as iron , and they give it to their own branches .
GOLD:	Lightning leaps from its mouth ; flames of fire flash out .

ID:	4125
INPUT:	Abner eta beronen gizonak gau osoz ibili ziren Araba ibarrean barna ; Jordan ibaia igaro eta , <unk> osoa <unk> , Mahanaimera heldu ziren .
PRED:	One day Abner and his men traveled through the Jordan Valley of the Jordan River to the Jordan Valley of the Jordan River , where they were in the Jordan River .
GOLD:	All that night Abner and his men retreated through the Jordan Valley . They crossed the Jordan River , traveling all through the morning , and did n't stop until they arrived at Mahanaim .

ID:	4126
INPUT:	Lebik , dena utzirik , zutitu eta jarraitu egin zion .
PRED:	Then the following instructions to them , and they followed him .
GOLD:	So Levi got up , left everything , and followed him .

ID:	4127
INPUT:	<unk> sagarapen-jaia
PRED:	Paul 's Religious Reforms
GOLD:	Dedication of Jerusalem 's Wall

ID:	4128
INPUT:	Erakutsi guri , Jauna , zeure maitasuna , eman zeure salbamena !
PRED:	Show us your unfailing love , O Lord , for your unfailing love .
GOLD:	I listen carefully to what God the Lord is saying , for he speaks peace to his faithful people.But let them not return to their foolish ways .

ID:	4129
INPUT:	Profeta guztiek testigantza hau egiten dute hartaz : harengan sinets dezaten guztiek bekatuen barkamena hartuko dutela beraren bitartez » .
PRED:	And all who believe in him will believe in him and believe in him . And they will believe in him . ”
GOLD:	He is the one all the prophets testified about , saying that everyone who believes in him will have their sins forgiven through his name . ”

ID:	4130
INPUT:	Apaizen lurrak bakarrik utzi zituen erosi gabe , haien alde lege bat baitzuen faraoiak emana ; honek ematen zien jateko behar zutena . Honengatik , ez zuten beren lurrak saldu beharrik izan .
PRED:	Then Pharaoh gave them the earth for all the earth , for he had given them food for them . He had not given them the people to eat the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	The only land he did not buy was the land belonging to the priests . They received an allotment of food directly from Pharaoh , so they did n't need to sell their land .

ID:	4131
INPUT:	Judas irten zenean , esan zien Jesusek : « Oraintxe azaltzen da Gizonaren Semearen aintza , eta haren bidez Jainkoarena .
PRED:	As Jesus approached , he said , “ Son of Man is the Son of Man , the Son of Man , and the Son of Man is the Son of Man .
GOLD:	As soon as Judas left the room , Jesus said , “ The time has come for the Son of Man to enter into his glory , and God will be glorified because of him .

ID:	4132
INPUT:	Berriro <unk> eta amets egin zuen . <unk> beretik , zazpi galburu aletsu eta mardul sortu ziren ;
PRED:	At that time the beast had appeared and saw seven heads of grain , and the seven heads of grain were born .
GOLD:	But he fell asleep again and had a second dream . This time he saw seven heads of grain , plump and beautiful , growing on a single stalk .

ID:	4133
INPUT:	Hala , Loten bi alabak haurdun gelditu ziren beren aitarengandik .
PRED:	So the next king became pregnant and gave birth to a son of Bicri .
GOLD:	As a result , both of Lot 's daughters became pregnant by their own father .

ID:	4134
INPUT:	gaizkileak , berriz , jo eta garbitu egingo dituzte mundutik , eta maltzurrak desagerrarazi bertatik .
PRED:	But the wicked will destroy them , and they will destroy all their faces .
GOLD:	But the wicked will be removed from the land , and the treacherous will be uprooted .

ID:	4135
INPUT:	« Ozeanoa edo Itsas <unk> ote <unk> jar diezadazun ?
PRED:	“ Can you know how can you know ?
GOLD:	Am I a sea monster or a dragonthat you must place me under guard ?

ID:	4136
INPUT:	<unk> inguruan , Jesusek oihu handiz esan zuen : « Eli , Eli , lema sabaktani ? » ( Hau da : « Ene Jainko , ene Jainko , zergatik utzi nauzu ? » ) .
PRED:	When he heard what had happened , he shouted , “ Why do you know me ? ” “ My God , my God , my God , why have you abandoned me ? ”
GOLD:	At about three o'clock , Jesus called out with a loud voice , which means “ My God , my God , why have you abandoned me ? ”

ID:	4137
INPUT:	Asak eta beronen gudarosteak aurrean eraman zituzten <unk> . Ez zen bizirik bat ere gelditu ; denak erori ziren eta hondatu Jaunaren eta beronen gudarostearen aurrean . Asaren gizonek harrapakin asko eskuratu zuten .
PRED:	So Asa led his army against the army of Samaria and his army . There was no one of the army of Judah and his army , and his men were defeated by King Asa 's army .
GOLD:	So the Lord defeated the Ethiopians in the presence of Asa and the army of Judah , and the enemy fled .

ID:	4138
INPUT:	« Ba al dakizu noiz erditzen diren <unk> ? Ikusi al dituzu <unk> umea egiten ?
PRED:	“ Do you know how long will you see ? Why do you know that when you see ?
GOLD:	“ Do you know when the wild goats give birth ? Have you watched as deer are born in the wild ?

ID:	4139
INPUT:	« <unk> , txarra » esaten du erosleak ; baina hor doa gero , pozik asko egindako <unk> .
PRED:	“ They are weak and fig tree , but they will be filled with joy . ” And when they were filled with joy , they will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	The buyer haggles over the price , saying , “ It 's worthless , ” then brags about getting a bargain !

ID:	4140
INPUT:	ez gogortu bihotzak , errebelde izan zinetenean bezala , <unk> basamortuan bezala .
PRED:	For when these things were rebels , as well as they were in the wilderness , just as they were in the wilderness .
GOLD:	do n't harden your heartsas Israel did when they rebelled , when they tested me in the wilderness .

ID:	4141
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	4142
INPUT:	Jaunak lasaitasuna eman zien beren lur-muga osoan , beraien arbasoei zin egin bezala . <unk> batek ere ezin izan zien aurre egin , Jaunak eskura eman <unk> guztiak .
PRED:	The Lord gave them all the pagan shrines , as they had given them to their ancestors , as though they had given them to their ancestors . He had given them all the kingdoms of the earth .
GOLD:	And the Lord gave them rest on every side , just as he had solemnly promised their ancestors . None of their enemies could stand against them , for the Lord helped them conquer all their enemies .

ID:	4143
INPUT:	<unk> ura ahitu zitzaionean , zuhaitz baten azpian utzi zuen haurra
PRED:	When I saw that the baby was filled with a tree under the tree .
GOLD:	When the water was gone , she put the boy in the shade of a bush .

ID:	4144
INPUT:	Eta ase zirenean , esan zien Jesusek ikasleei : « Bil itzazue hondarrak , ezer gal ez dadin » .
PRED:	When they were hungry , Jesus said to his disciples , “ Let them go with them , for they have no food . ”
GOLD:	After everyone was full , Jesus told his disciples , “ Now gather the leftovers , so that nothing is wasted . ”

ID:	4145
INPUT:	« Hartzazu , beraz , onez zeure zerbitzari honen eskaria eta zeure herri Israelen otoitza ; entzun iezaiezu dei eginen dizuten bakoitzean .
PRED:	“ Get out of your servant , and go out to the name of your God and pray to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	“ May your eyes be open to my requests and to the requests of your people Israel . May you hear and answer them whenever they cry out to you .

ID:	4146
INPUT:	Hona hemen Jainkoaren tenplua eraikitzeko Salomonek erabaki zituen neurriak : hogeita hamar metro luze eta hamar metro zabal .
PRED:	This is the Temple of God to build the Temple of God . He was 30 feet long and 30 feet long .
GOLD:	These are the dimensions Solomon used for the foundation of the Temple of God ( using the old standard of measurement ) . It was 90 feet long and 30 feet wide .

ID:	4147
INPUT:	Bildotsak hirugarren zigilua ireki zuenean , hirugarren izakiak hau esaten zuela entzun nuen : « Zatoz » . Begiratu eta zaldi beltz bat ikusi nuen . Haren gainekoak balantza bat zuen eskuan ,
PRED:	When the Lamb broke the third seal , I heard that the third was written on the third side of the earth , and I saw a white horse and white horse .
GOLD:	When the Lamb broke the third seal , I heard the third living being say , “ Come ! ” I looked up and saw a black horse , and its rider was holding a pair of scales in his hand .

ID:	4148
INPUT:	eta morroia bidaliko dut , esanez : “ Hoa eta bila itzak geziak ” . Morroiari “ Hi baino <unk> dituk geziak , har itzak ” esango banio , orduan etor zaitezke , dena bakean izango baita . Ez da <unk> izango , ala Jauna !
PRED:	I will send the servant to the king , saying , ‘ Go ahead and kill the arrows and kill the arrows . ' But if the boy is right , let the Lord be able to kill you . ”
GOLD:	Then I will send a boy to bring the arrows back . If you hear me tell him , ‘ They 're on this side , ' then you will know , as surely as the Lord lives , that all is well , and there is no trouble .

ID:	4149
INPUT:	Jainkoak bedeinkatu eta erruz ugaltzen dira , haien <unk> ez die <unk> uzten .
PRED:	For God will bless those who worship idols , and they will know that they do not know how they do .
GOLD:	How he blesses them ! They raise large families there , and their herds of livestock increase .

ID:	4150
INPUT:	Hemendik ere lotsaz irtengo zara , eskuak buruan dituzula . Izan ere , nik , Jaunak , mespretxatu egiten ditutzure <unk> ; ez duzu horiekin ezer onik lortuko » .
PRED:	But you will enter your hands , and you will not abandon your hands . For you have rejected my hands , and I will punish you , and I will destroy you . ”
GOLD:	In despair , you will be led into exilewith your hands on your heads , for the Lord has rejected the nations you trust.They will not help you at all .

ID:	4151
INPUT:	Zazpi egunez , aldarearen garbikuntza-ohikunea egingo da , garbi eta sagaratua geldi dadin .
PRED:	On the seventh day the altar will be ceremonially clean , and the Most Holy Place will be ceremonially clean .
GOLD:	Do this each day for seven days to cleanse and make atonement for the altar , thus setting it apart for holy use .

ID:	4152
INPUT:	Nori egiten diozue barre ? Noren kontra zabaltzen duzue <unk> luzatzen mihia ? Ez zarete , bada , zeuek <unk> eta <unk> ?
PRED:	“ Who are you trying to kill me ? Why are you ? Why are you afraid ? Why are you afraid ? Why are you afraid ? ”
GOLD:	Whom do you mock , making faces and sticking out your tongues ? You children of sinners and liars !

ID:	4153
INPUT:	Alabaina , hango jendea indartsua da , hango hiriak gotorrak eta izugarri handiak . Gainera , Anak erraldoiaren ondorengoak ere ikusi ditugu .
PRED:	But the people of the land of the sea are strong and tall and tall , and the towns of the land of the sea were also known as far as well as the land of the sea .
GOLD:	But the people living there are powerful , and their towns are large and fortified . We even saw giants there , the descendants of Anak !

ID:	4154
INPUT:	Hau dio Jaunak , Jakoben herriaren erregeak : « Aurkeztu zeuen auzia , <unk> , ekarri frogak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ When you saw the people of Israel , when you brought him back to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Present the case for your idols , ” says the Lord . “ Let them show what they can do , ” says the King of Israel .

ID:	4155
INPUT:	<unk> faltsuak , neurgailu faltsuak : biak ditu higuingarri Jaunak .
PRED:	The Lord detests dishonest scales and scales , and he does not understand .
GOLD:	False weights and unequal measures — the Lord detests double standards of every kind .

ID:	4156
INPUT:	Jaunak jakinduriaz oinarritu zuen lurraeta zentzuz ezarri zerua ;
PRED:	The Lord created the heavens in the heavens , who laid the heavens in the heavens .
GOLD:	By wisdom the Lord founded the earth ; by understanding he created the heavens .

ID:	4157
INPUT:	Egiptoko lehen-semeak jo zituen , haren maitasuna betikoa baita .
PRED:	He struck them with the firstborn sons of Egypt , and faithful love endures forever .
GOLD:	Give thanks to him who killed the firstborn of Egypt.His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	4158
INPUT:	Bertan <unk> batzuek esan zieten : « Zer ari zarete hor astakumea askatzen ? »
PRED:	Then some of the Pharisees asked , “ What are you going to escape ? ”
GOLD:	As they were untying it , some bystanders demanded , “ What are you doing , untying that colt ? ”

ID:	4159
INPUT:	Absalomen mutilek , etxe hartara heldurik , galdetu zioten etxekoandreari : — Non dira Ahimaatz eta Jonatan ? Etxekoandreak erantzun : — Alde egin dute hemendik uretara . Ibili ziren bila , baina aurkitzen ez eta Jerusalemera itzuli ziren .
PRED:	When Absalom arrived at Hebron , he asked him , “ Where are you looking for me ? ” So Jonathan asked . “ Why are we going to go to Jerusalem ? ” So they asked .
GOLD:	When Absalom 's men arrived , they asked her , “ Have you seen Ahimaaz and Jonathan ? ” The woman replied , “ They were here , but they crossed over the brook . ” Absalom 's men looked for them without success and returned to Jerusalem .

ID:	4160
INPUT:	Beste hau ere erakutsi zidan Jaunak : horma baten ondoan zegoen bera , eskuan <unk> zuela .
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord : At that time , the Lord saw that he was with his hand .
GOLD:	Then he showed me another vision . I saw the Lord standing beside a wall that had been built using a plumb line . He was using a plumb line to see if it was still straight .

ID:	4161
INPUT:	Ondoren , Salomon jarri zen bere aita Daviden errege-aulkian eta sendotu egin zuen haren erregetza .
PRED:	Then King Solomon set up his father , and he became king 's throne .
GOLD:	Solomon became king and sat on the throne of David his father , and his kingdom was firmly established .

ID:	4162
INPUT:	Ordutik , apostoluekin batera ibili ohi zen Saulo Jerusalemen , Jaunari buruz ausardiaz hitz eginez .
PRED:	At that time a Jew came to the Lord in Jerusalem , a Jew to the Lord in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	So Saul stayed with the apostles and went all around Jerusalem with them , preaching boldly in the name of the Lord .

ID:	4163
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> ;
PRED:	They were buried with flesh and fig tree .
GOLD:	The family of Bani648

ID:	4164
INPUT:	Lebitarren familiaburuen izenak Kronika liburuetan idatzita daude Eliaxiben seme Johananen garaia arte .
PRED:	The names of the clans of the Kohathite clans are recorded in The Book of the Kings of Levi .
GOLD:	A record of the heads of the Levite families was kept in The Book of History down to the days of Johanan , the grandson of Eliashib .

ID:	4165
INPUT:	Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : <unk> egon deneko herrien artetik Israel bilduko dudanean , neure santutasuna agertuko dut nazioen aurrean , eta israeldarrak neure zerbitzari Jakobi eman nion lurraldean biziko dira berriro .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ I will gather you from the nations of Israel , and I will gather you from the nations of Israel , and I will bring my holiness to the nations of Israel .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The people of Israel will again live in their own land , the land I gave my servant Jacob . For I will gather them from the distant lands where I have scattered them . I will reveal to the nations of the world my holiness among my people .

ID:	4166
INPUT:	guregan irauten duen eta betiko gurekin izango den <unk> .
PRED:	For we will continue to live with us , and we will be filled with us .
GOLD:	because the truth lives in us and will be with us forever .

ID:	4167
INPUT:	Behinola , Zerah etiopiarra Asaren kontra abiatu zen , milioi bat gudari eta hirurehun <unk> , eta <unk> heldu zen .
PRED:	One of Asa 's sons were born against Aram , which was two of Aram , two chariots , and Maacah , which was Samaria .
GOLD:	King Asa had an army of 300,000 warriors from the tribe of Judah , armed with large shields and spears . He also had an army of 280,000 warriors from the tribe of Benjamin , armed with small shields and bows . Both armies were composed of well-trained fighting men .

ID:	4168
INPUT:	Sar zaitez gero etxean zeure semeekin eta itxi atea . Isuri olioa ontzi guztietara eta , bete ahala , eraman denak bazterrera .
PRED:	When you enter the house and enter your house , go to the door and lead them to the door , and lead them into the courtyard .
GOLD:	Then go into your house with your sons and shut the door behind you . Pour olive oil from your flask into the jars , setting each one aside when it is filled . ”

ID:	4169
INPUT:	eta su-labera botako . Negarra eta hortz-karraska izango da han » .
PRED:	And the angels will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . ”
GOLD:	throwing the wicked into the fiery furnace , where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth .

ID:	4170
INPUT:	« Horrela ere obeditzen ez badidazue , zazpi bider gogorrago zigortuko zaituztet zeuen bekatuengatik .
PRED:	“ And if you refuse to obey me , I will punish you seven times .
GOLD:	“ And if , in spite of all this , you still disobey me , I will punish you seven times over for your sins .

ID:	4171
INPUT:	ez ditu begiak <unk> kentzen , <unk> ezartzen ditueta hantxe betiko goraipatzen .
PRED:	For he has thrown down all the power of the earth , and he has given them victory .
GOLD:	He never takes his eyes off the innocent , but he sets them on thrones with kingsand exalts them forever .

ID:	4172
INPUT:	Eta Jesusek , <unk> erantzun ziola ikusirik , esan zion : — Ez zaude Jainkoaren erreinutik urruti . Eta harrezkero , ez zen inor galderarik egitera ausartzen .
PRED:	When Jesus saw him , he told him , “ Do n't be sure that some of these things , do n't listen to God . ” So he asked him .
GOLD:	Realizing how much the man understood , Jesus said to him , “ You are not far from the Kingdom of God . ” And after that , no one dared to ask him any more questions .

ID:	4173
INPUT:	Atsekabetu egin zen David , Jaunak Uza jo eta ebaki zuelako , eta toki hari <unk> esan zion , hau da , « Uzaren <unk> » , eta horrela deritza egundaino .
PRED:	But the Lord was very angry , and the Lord was very angry with him . He was very angry with him , and he said , “ That is why we have been very angry with us ? ”
GOLD:	David was angry because the Lord 's anger had burst out against Uzzah . He named that place Perez-uzzah ( which means “ to burst out against Uzzah ” ) , as it is still called today .

ID:	4174
INPUT:	Kristo , betiko salbamenaren iturri ( 10 , <unk> )
PRED:	Christ Is God 's grace to rule with an apostle of Christ .
GOLD:	Christ 's Sacrifice Once for All

ID:	4175
INPUT:	Orduan , adierazpenak egiten zizkidan aingerua aurreratu zen eta bidera zetorkion beste aingeru bati
PRED:	Then the angel came to me from the mountain , and the angel came to me from the mountain .
GOLD:	Come away , people of Zion , you who are exiled in Babylon ! ”

ID:	4176
INPUT:	Esauren seme Reuelen semeak , berriz , hauek izan ziren : Nahat , Zerah , Xama eta Miza . Hauek izan ziren Esauren emazte Basmaten ondorengoak .
PRED:	The descendants of Esau 's sons were the clans of Esau : The descendants of Eliphaz were the clans of Esau 's sons , named after their wives . These were the descendants of Esau 's wife . These were the descendants of Esau .
GOLD:	The descendants of Reuel were Nahath , Zerah , Shammah , and Mizzah . These are the descendants of Esau 's wife Basemath .

ID:	4177
INPUT:	Zein ederrak zure maite-laztanak , ene arreba , ene emaztegaia ! Ardoa baino gozoago dira ! Zure <unk> usaina lurrin guztiak baino gozoago !
PRED:	How beautiful are my sister , my sister , my sister , my sister ! Your love are stronger than your fruit , and your fruit are stronger than your fruit .
GOLD:	Your love delights me , my treasure , my bride.Your love is better than wine , your perfume more fragrant than spices .

ID:	4178
INPUT:	Egin promesak Jaunari , zeuen Jainkoari , eta bete ; haren inguruan <unk> , ekarri emaitzak Jainko <unk> ,
PRED:	You must obey the Lord your God , and all the people of the Lord your God , and when they saw that they were in mind , and they will give glory to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	For he breaks the pride of princes , and the kings of the earth fear him .

ID:	4179
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jesu Kristori esker , bizia ematen duen Espirituaren legeak askatu egin zaitu bekatuaren eta heriotzaren legetik .
PRED:	For Christ has given you the Spirit of Christ Jesus Christ , the Spirit of God has given you the law of God .
GOLD:	And because you belong to him , the power of the life-giving Spirit has freed you from the power of sin that leads to death .

ID:	4180
INPUT:	Hori izan zen Judaren leinuko senitarteek hartu zuten ondarea .
PRED:	These were the clans of Judah .
GOLD:	This was the homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Judah .

ID:	4181
INPUT:	Mendiak argizaria bezala urtzen diraJaunaren aurrean , lur osoaren Jabearen aurrean .
PRED:	The people of Israel stood in the dust in the dust of the Lord .
GOLD:	The mountains melt like wax before the Lord , before the Lord of all the earth .

ID:	4182
INPUT:	Neuk bilduko ditut bizirik geldituriko neure ardiak , sakabanatu nituen herrialde guztietatik . Beren larreetara ekarriko ditut berriro , hazi egingo dira eta erruz ugalduko .
PRED:	I will gather you from the distant lands of the Euphrates River , and I will gather your sheep and goats for their own land .
GOLD:	But I will gather together the remnant of my flock from the countries where I have driven them . I will bring them back to their own sheepfold , and they will be fruitful and increase in number .

ID:	4183
INPUT:	Horrela , senideok , gure atsekabe eta estualdi guztien artean , adorez beterik utzi gaituzue zeuen sinesmenagatik .
PRED:	So dear brothers and sisters , dear brothers and sisters , remember that I have given you great confidence in all of you .
GOLD:	So we have been greatly encouraged in the midst of our troubles and suffering , dear brothers and sisters , because you have remained strong in your faith .

ID:	4184
INPUT:	Zuei , Jainkoaren Semearengan sinetsi duzuenoi , idatzi dizkizuet gauza hauek , betiko bizia duzuela jakin dezazuen .
PRED:	For I have given you the Son of God , so that you will know that you have given me eternal life .
GOLD:	I have written this to you who believe in the name of the Son of God , so that you may know you have eternal life .

ID:	4185
INPUT:	<unk> ondoren <unk> , <unk> <unk> ( <unk> izan zuen emazte , <unk> alaba , eta hau <unk> ) .
PRED:	At that time , when they saw that some of these things , he became pregnant and Samaria . And when he saw that he was very very very sick , and he became the daughter of Egypt .
GOLD:	When Baal-hanan son of Acbor died , Hadad became king in his place and ruled from the city of Pau . His wife was Mehetabel , the daughter of Matred and granddaughter of Me-zahab .

ID:	4186
INPUT:	<unk> bat ekarri zioten , ohatilan etzana . Jesusek , lagun haien sinesmena ikusirik , esan zion elbarriari : — Izan bihotz , seme ! Barkatuak dituzu bekatuak .
PRED:	When they saw him , Jesus looked up and saw a little child , he said to him , “ Be healed . ” And he said , “ You are your sins . ”
GOLD:	Some people brought to him a paralyzed man on a mat . Seeing their faith , Jesus said to the paralyzed man , “ Be encouraged , my child ! Your sins are forgiven . ”

ID:	4187
INPUT:	jakinik , Jesus Jauna piztu duenak piztu egingo gaituela gu ere Jesusekin eta beronen ondoan ipiniko gaituela zuekin batera .
PRED:	For the Lord raised Jesus from the dead , and he will be raised from the dead with you .
GOLD:	We know that God , who raised the Lord Jesus , will also raise us with Jesus and present us to himself together with you .

ID:	4188
INPUT:	Eufrates ibaiaz mendebaldera , <unk> Gazaraino , Salomonek agintzen zuen ; ibaiaz mendebaldeko errege guztiak haren menpeko ziren , eta bakean bizi zen inguruetako lurralde <unk> .
PRED:	Then King Solomon sent all the kingdoms of the Euphrates River , along with all the kingdoms of the Euphrates River , and all the kingdoms of the Euphrates River , and all the kingdoms of the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	But now the Lord my God has given me peace on every side ; I have no enemies , and all is well .

ID:	4189
INPUT:	Joan ziren , orduan , morroiak etxeko nagusiari esatera : “ Jauna , ez al zenuen hazi ona erein soroan ? Nondik du , bada , olo gaiztoa ? ”
PRED:	Then the servants came to him and told him , ‘ The Lord has given you the master of the household of the field , but you did n't plant the fruit of the field ? '
GOLD:	“ The farmer 's workers went to him and said , ‘ Sir , the field where you planted that good seed is full of weeds ! Where did they come from ? '

ID:	4190
INPUT:	Eta emaginei beraiei , Jainkoari begirune izan <unk> gero , ondorengoak eman zizkien .
PRED:	So the Lord gave the following instructions to the Lord , and they gave birth to God .
GOLD:	And because the midwives feared God , he gave them families of their own .

ID:	4191
INPUT:	ohol bakoitza bost metro luze eta hirurogeita hamabost zentimetro zabal izango da ;
PRED:	Each of the Tabernacle will be 45 feet long and 27 inches long .
GOLD:	Each frame must be 15 feet high and 27 inches wide ,

ID:	4192
INPUT:	Beste <unk> ez nuen ikusi , Jaunaren anaia Santiago izan ezik .
PRED:	But when I saw that I saw the Lord 's brother , James , and John .
GOLD:	The only other apostle I met at that time was James , the Lord 's brother .

ID:	4193
INPUT:	Basamortuan ere eraiki zituen dorreak , putzu ugari zulatu zuen , abere-talde asko baitzuen Xefela lautadan eta goi-lautadan ; baita nekazariak eta <unk> ere mendietan eta <unk> , <unk> gogoko baitzuen .
PRED:	He built them in the wilderness in the wilderness , and he brought them into the desert of the sea , so many of the Canaanites , and those who were baptized in the valley . And when they saw that they were filled with great things , and they were filled with him .
GOLD:	He also constructed forts in the wilderness and dug many water cisterns , because he kept great herds of livestock in the foothills of Judah and on the plains . He was also a man who loved the soil . He had many workers who cared for his farms and vineyards , both on the hillsides and in the fertile valleys .

ID:	4194
INPUT:	eta haren gorpua simaur bihurtuko zela alorrean , Izreelgo landan ; inork ere ezin izango zuela « Hau Jezabel da » esan .
PRED:	“ I will make you going into the field of Jezreel , ” he said , “ that no one would be in Jezreel . ”
GOLD:	Her remains will be scattered like dung on the plot of land in Jezreel , so that no one will be able to recognize her . ' ”

ID:	4195
INPUT:	Utz beza gaiztoak bere bidea , gaizkileak bere asmo txarrak . Bihur dadila Jaunarengana , gupidaz hartuko baitu ; bihurtu gure Jainkoarengana , guztiz barkabera baita .
PRED:	Let them go back to the way , for they have turned to the way of the Lord , for he has turned to me , for he has given me a way to the Lord our God .
GOLD:	Let the wicked change their waysand banish the very thought of doing wrong.Let them turn to the Lord that he may have mercy on them.Yes , turn to our God , for he will forgive generously .

ID:	4196
INPUT:	Erregeak , epaimahaian esertzean , begiratu hutsez haizatzen du gaiztakeria guztia .
PRED:	For the king of the world are all their wickedness , and all their sins are destroyed .
GOLD:	When a king sits in judgment , he weighs all the evidence , distinguishing the bad from the good .

ID:	4197
INPUT:	Ondoren , <unk> handia ezarri zioten gainean Akani . Han dago oraindik harri-piloa . Horregatik deritza toki hari gaurdaino « Akor ibarra » , hau da , « <unk> » . Orduan baretu zen Jaunaren haserrea .
PRED:	Then they took a huge man with a powerful hand , and he will bring an army into a field . That is why the Lord says : “ That is why the anger of the Lord is why the Lord says . ”
GOLD:	They piled a great heap of stones over Achan , which remains to this day . That is why the place has been called the Valley of Trouble ever since . So the Lord was no longer angry .

ID:	4198
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaun ahalguztidunak , Israelgo Jainkoak : « Eskaini nahi adina erre-opari eta sakrifizio eta jan berorien haragia .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ With your burnt offering and burnt offerings , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : “ Take your burnt offerings and your other sacrifices and eat them yourselves !

ID:	4199
INPUT:	« Jauna dela Jainkoa jakin dezazuen ikusarazi zaizue hori guztia : ez da bera besterik .
PRED:	“ But if you know the Lord your God , you will see everything you do .
GOLD:	“ He showed you these things so you would know that the Lord is God and there is no other .

ID:	4200
INPUT:	Ez zekiten Josek ulertzen ziela , <unk> baten bitartez mintzatzen baitzitzaien .
PRED:	And when Joseph did n't understand what they were talking about , they would happen to them .
GOLD:	Of course , they did n't know that Joseph understood them , for he had been speaking to them through an interpreter .

ID:	4201
INPUT:	<unk> , Jauna , horien mihi maltzurra . <unk> eta haserrea besterik ez baitut ikusten hirian ,
PRED:	At last the Lord will strike me and fig tree , and I have seen my anger .
GOLD:	Its walls are patrolled day and night against invaders , but the real danger is wickedness within the city .

ID:	4202
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jaunarenak zeuen Jainkoarenak dira zeru zabalak , lurra eta bertako guztia .
PRED:	For the Lord your God is the heavens , and all the earth are the earth .
GOLD:	“ Look , the highest heavens and the earth and everything in it all belong to the Lord your God .

ID:	4203
INPUT:	Jaunari honako hauek aurkeztuko zaizkio , beraren ohorez erretzeko opari gisa : heste inguru eta gaineko gantza ,
PRED:	This is the following instructions to the Lord : The priest must present them to the fat of the fat of the fat , just as the fat of the fat ,
GOLD:	The priest must present part of this offering as a special gift to the Lord . This includes all the fat around the internal organs ,

ID:	4204
INPUT:	Eraiki , bada , hiriak zeuen familientzat eta artegiak artaldeentzat . Baina eutsi emandako hitzari .
PRED:	“ Why are your towns and fortified towns , but you have given us success .
GOLD:	Go ahead and build towns for your families and pens for your flocks , but do everything you have promised . ”

ID:	4205
INPUT:	« Gizonaren Semea , aingeru guztiak lagun dituela , aintzaz beterik etortzean , bere errege-aulkian eseriko da .
PRED:	“ Son of Man is the Son of Man , the angels of Man will stand on his throne , and his throne will be on his throne .
GOLD:	“ But when the Son of Man comes in his glory , and all the angels with him , then he will sit upon his glorious throne .

ID:	4206
INPUT:	Haiekin batera , <unk> <unk> zihoan , baita abere-talde handiak ere .
PRED:	He knew how much they were able to know how much they were able to know how much they were ?
GOLD:	A rabble of non-Israelites went with them , along with great flocks and herds of livestock .

ID:	4207
INPUT:	Hala egin zuten . Aaronek eskuan zeraman makila luzatu eta lurra jo zuen , eta Egiptoko hauts guztia gizaki eta abereentzat gogaikarri zen <unk> bihurtu zen .
PRED:	So Moses threw the staff into the hand of Egypt and threw it into the hand of Egypt , and he saw all the crops of Egypt , and he became very angry with them .
GOLD:	And the Lord did just what Moses had predicted . The frogs in the houses , the courtyards , and the fields all died .

ID:	4208
INPUT:	<unk> ditzala : errugabeak jantziko ditu , eta dirua zintzoak bereganatuko .
PRED:	He will give glory to those who are poor , and those who are poor .
GOLD:	But the righteous will wear that clothing , and the innocent will divide that money .

ID:	4209
INPUT:	Ez ziren izango beren gurasoen antzeko : jende <unk> eta errebeldea , gizaldi <unk> , Jainkoarekiko barru <unk> .
PRED:	They will not be like their ancestors , and they will be like those who were afraid of their ancestors . In that time , they will be like those who were afraid of their ancestors .
GOLD:	Then they will not be like their ancestors — stubborn , rebellious , and unfaithful , refusing to give their hearts to God .

ID:	4210
INPUT:	Ezin zen jakin zenbat pisatzen zuen Salomonek Jaunaren etxerako eginak ziren bi zutabeen , uraskaren eta orgen brontzeak .
PRED:	It was not able to make the weight of the Temple of the Lord 's Temple , where he was placed on the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	The weight of the bronze from the two pillars , the Sea , and the water carts was too great to be measured . These things had been made for the Lord 's Temple in the days of Solomon .

ID:	4211
INPUT:	Badut zuri kalte egiteko ahalbiderik , baina zuen arbasoen Jainkoak esan dit bart : « Ez , gero , esan ezertxo ere Jakobi » .
PRED:	I want you to bring you to you , but God said to you , “ Do n't want you to bring you back to your ancestors . ”
GOLD:	I could destroy you , but the God of your father appeared to me last night and warned me , ‘ Leave Jacob alone ! '

ID:	4212
INPUT:	Jendea entzuten ari zitzaiola , Jesusek beste parabola bat kontatu zien , Jerusalemdik hurbil baitzen eta jendeak Jainkoaren erregetza une batetik bestera azalduko zela uste baitzuen :
PRED:	When the people heard this , Jesus told them about the other parables , and the people of Jerusalem was going to see the Kingdom of God .
GOLD:	The crowd was listening to everything Jesus said . And because he was nearing Jerusalem , he told them a story to correct the impression that the Kingdom of God would begin right away .

ID:	4213
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Ez beronek , ez beronen gurasoek , ez zuten bekatu egin , baizik eta Jainkoaren egintzak honengan ager daitezen jaio zen itsu .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't be afraid of his ancestors , but his ancestors did not obey God 's commands , but they did not be able to be born .
GOLD:	“ It was not because of his sins or his parents ' sins , ” Jesus answered . “ This happened so the power of God could be seen in him .

ID:	4214
INPUT:	Zilarra labearen erdian urtzen den bezala , hala urtuko zaituztet Jerusalemen erdian ; orduan jakingo duzue ni naizela Jauna , zuen kontra bere sumina isurtzen duena » .
PRED:	Your life will be cut off from the middle of silver , but you will know that I am the Lord , and you will know that I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	and you will melt like silver in fierce heat . Then you will know that I , the Lord , have poured out my fury on you . ' ”

ID:	4215
INPUT:	Kanta bezate nazioek pozaren pozez , herriak justiziaz gobernatzen baitituzu , nazioak munduan zuk gidatzen .
PRED:	Let the nations rejoice in your name , for the nations of the earth are filled with joy .
GOLD:	May the nations praise you , O God.Yes , may all the nations praise you .

ID:	4216
INPUT:	Ez nau gehiago ikusiko so egiten zidanak ; zuk begiratzean , ez naiz jadanik munduan izango .
PRED:	I will never see those who are filled with joy . I will never be glad in the world .
GOLD:	You see me now , but not for long.You will look for me , but I will be gone .

ID:	4217
INPUT:	<unk> handiak egin ditu , haren maitasuna betikoa baita ;
PRED:	He has made great power , and his faithful love endures forever .
GOLD:	Give thanks to him who made the heavenly lights — His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	4218
INPUT:	Aditu zuen Jainkoak haien <unk> , Abraham , Isaak eta Jakobekin egindako ituna gogora ekarriz .
PRED:	When they heard that God had heard their covenant , Abraham , Abraham , and Jacob , and Jacob had given him his covenant with Abraham .
GOLD:	God heard their groaning , and he remembered his covenant promise to Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob .

ID:	4219
INPUT:	Orduan , jaiki , bere jantzia urratu eta ilea zeharo moztu zuen Jobek . Gero , lurreraino ahuspeztuz , otoitz egin zuen ,
PRED:	Then Job got up and tore his hair on his head , and he worshiped the ground . Then Job left the ground and worshiped him .
GOLD:	Job stood up and tore his robe in grief . Then he shaved his head and fell to the ground to worship .

ID:	4220
INPUT:	Eta begiraleak erantzun : « Egunsentia badator , baina gaua ere bai berriro . Oraindik galdetu nahi baduzue , etorri berriz ere , eta galdetu » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to the young women , “ When you go back to the night , if you go back again and find it . ”
GOLD:	The watchman replies , “ Morning is coming , but night will soon return.If you wish to ask again , then come back and ask . ”

ID:	4221
INPUT:	Jaun ahalguztidunak hau azaldu dit : « Bekatu hau ez dizuet <unk> bizialdi guztian » . Jainko Jaun ahalguztidunakesan du .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ I have sinned against you because of my people , and I will destroy them . ”
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has revealed this to me : “ Till the day you die , you will never be forgiven for this sin . ” That is the judgment of the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	4222
INPUT:	Hitz egin nuen Jaunaren izenean berak agindu bezala , eta hitz egin bitartean hots bat izan zen : lurrak dardara egin zuen eta hezurrak bata bestearekin elkartzen hasi .
PRED:	As I heard the name of the Lord 's name , I told them the people of the Lord as he had commanded him , and the earth fell among them .
GOLD:	So I spoke this message , just as he told me . Suddenly as I spoke , there was a rattling noise all across the valley . The bones of each body came together and attached themselves as complete skeletons .

ID:	4223
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Itzuli niregana , herri fedegabe hori , neu bakarrik nauzu zeure nagusia eta . Banan-banan bilduko zaituztet hiri eta familia bakoitzetik eta Sion mendira eramango .
PRED:	“ The Lord says to me , ‘ I am a god of every nation , those who have been cut off from all the people of Jerusalem , and I will bring you a house on the mountain of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	“ Return home , you wayward children , ” says the Lord , “ for I am your master.I will bring you back to the land of Israel — one from this town and two from that family — from wherever you are scattered .

ID:	4224
INPUT:	Orduan , Salomon erregeak Joiadaren seme Benaias bidali , eta honek Adonias hil egin zuen .
PRED:	Then King Solomon sent Benaiah son of Jehoiada , and he killed him .
GOLD:	So King Solomon ordered Benaiah son of Jehoiada to execute him , and Adonijah was put to death .

ID:	4225
INPUT:	Emagaldu batengana bezala zihoazen beraiengana , Ohola eta <unk> , emakume <unk> haiengana .
PRED:	And if she was sick , I saw a woman named him . And when he saw that she was sick and sick .
GOLD:	And that is what they did . They had sex with Oholah and Oholibah , these shameless prostitutes .

ID:	4226
INPUT:	Saulo , ordea , gero eta kementsuago agertzen zen eta nahasturik uzten zituen Damaskoko juduak , argi frogatzen baitzuen Jesus Mesias zela .
PRED:	But Saul was very angry with me , O God of Heaven 's Armies , for he was a witness to the Gentiles .
GOLD:	Saul 's preaching became more and more powerful , and the Jews in Damascus could n't refute his proofs that Jesus was indeed the Messiah .

ID:	4227
INPUT:	Esan zidan Jaunak : « Gizaseme , jarri arreta , begira erne eta entzun adi tenpluari buruz emango dizkizudan lege eta arau guztiak ; hartu gogoan , batez ere , tenpluan sartzeko eskubideari buruzkoak .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Son of man , here on the Sabbath and pray that you must listen to the Temple of the Temple and obey all the people of the Temple .
GOLD:	And the Lord said to me , “ Son of man , take careful notice . Use your eyes and ears , and listen to everything I tell you about the regulations concerning the Lord 's Temple . Take careful note of the procedures for using the Temple 's entrances and exits .

ID:	4228
INPUT:	Betiko lege izango duzue hau belaunez belaun ; horrela , zer den sakratu eta zer <unk> , zer garbi eta zer kutsatu bereizi ahal izango duzue ,
PRED:	This will be made of Aaron as a permanent law , and you must serve as well as well as you have been clean . And if you have been clean , you will be clean and make sure that you have been clean .
GOLD:	You must distinguish between what is sacred and what is common , between what is ceremonially unclean and what is clean .

ID:	4229
INPUT:	Asiria neure lurralde <unk> dut , neure mendietan zapalduko . Kenduko zaio haren <unk> herriari , eroriko haren zama bizkarretik .
PRED:	I will destroy my land , and my people will fall into battle , and they will fall into battle , and they will fall into battle .
GOLD:	I will break the Assyrians when they are in Israel ; I will trample them on my mountains.My people will no longer be their slavesnor bow down under their heavy loads .

ID:	4230
INPUT:	Izan ere , duenari eman egingo zaio , eta gainezka izango du ; ez duenari , ordea , daukan apurra ere kendu egingo zaio .
PRED:	For they will be given to those who have given him , but they will not be destroyed .
GOLD:	To those who listen to my teaching , more understanding will be given , and they will have an abundance of knowledge . But for those who are not listening , even what little understanding they have will be taken away from them .

ID:	4231
INPUT:	Bizi zelarik , eraikia zuen beretzat Absalomek Errege Haranean dagoen oroitarria , berekiko esanez : « Ez dut ene izena oroitaraziko duen semerik » . Eta bere izena ezarri zion <unk> . Horregatik deritza gaurdaino « Absalomen oroitarria » .
PRED:	So Absalom became very angry with him . He said to him , “ I have been beaten ! ” And he said , “ I have not been a descendant of man who was a descendant of David . ”
GOLD:	During his lifetime , Absalom had built a monument to himself in the King 's Valley , for he said , “ I have no son to carry on my name . ” He named the monument after himself , and it is known as Absalom 's Monument to this day .

ID:	4232
INPUT:	hau <unk> , hau <unk> , hau <unk> , hau <unk> , hau Kainamena ,
PRED:	At that time , this man who was very sad , and when he was very very old , he was very very very old when he became king .
GOLD:	Lamech was the son of Methuselah.Methuselah was the son of Enoch.Enoch was the son of Jared.Jared was the son of Mahalalel.Mahalalel was the son of Kenan .

ID:	4233
INPUT:	Zuen arbasoak ahaztu egin ziren , ordea , Jaunaz , beren Jainkoaz , eta Jaunak Hatzorko gudarostearen buruzagi zen <unk> eskuetara eman zituen , baita filistearren eta Moabeko erregearen eskuetara ere , eta hauek <unk> egin zituzten zuen arbasoak .
PRED:	But when your ancestors refused to obey the Lord 's commands , the God of Israel , the king of Israel and his army was given to the king of Israel . He was the king of Moab and his ancestors , and he became the king of Israel .
GOLD:	But the people soon forgot about the Lord their God , so he handed them over to Sisera , the commander of Hazor 's army , and also to the Philistines and to the king of Moab , who fought against them .

ID:	4234
INPUT:	Joiakimen gainerako jarduerak , egin zituen gauza higuingarriak eta gertatu zitzaiona « Israelgo eta Judako Erregeen Liburuan » daude idatziak . Hurrengo erregea haren seme Joiakin izan zen .
PRED:	The rest of the events in the reign of the events in the reign of King Jehoiachin 's reign , and his sons were recorded in The Book of the Kings of Judah .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Jehoiakim 's reign , including all the evil things he did and everything found against him , are recorded in The Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah . Then his son Jehoiachin became the next king .

ID:	4235
INPUT:	Gauerdian jaikitzen naiz zu gorestera , zure erabakiak zuzenak direlako .
PRED:	I am overwhelmed by your regulations , and they sing your regulations .
GOLD:	I rise at midnight to thank youfor your just regulations .

ID:	4236
INPUT:	Handik bi egunera , Pazko-jaia eta Legamia gabeko Ogien Jaia ospatzen ziren . Apaizburu eta lege-maisuak Jesus maltzurkeriaz nola atxilotuko zebiltzan , hiltzeko .
PRED:	Three days later the Festival of Unleavened Bread , the Festival of Unleavened Bread , the leading priests , and the teachers of religious law .
GOLD:	It was now two days before Passover and the Festival of Unleavened Bread . The leading priests and the teachers of religious law were still looking for an opportunity to capture Jesus secretly and kill him .

ID:	4237
INPUT:	Izu-ikara bidaliko dizut , bada , alde guztietatik . Nork bere <unk> dio ihesari , eta inor ez sakabanatuak biltzeko . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak .
PRED:	And now I will send you out of all the nations , and they will know that they are all afraid of them , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	But look ! I will bring terror upon you , ” says the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . “ Your neighbors will chase you from your land , and no one will help your exiles as they flee .

ID:	4238
INPUT:	bi alboetatik sei beso ateratzen zitzaizkion , hiruna beso albo bakoitzetik .
PRED:	There were two rows around each side of the center stem , each side of the center stem .
GOLD:	The lampstand had six branches going out from the center stem , three on each side .

ID:	4239
INPUT:	« Aita , nahi baduzu , urrun ezazu niregandik edari samin hau . Hala ere , egin bedi zure nahia , ez nirea » .
PRED:	“ Father , if you want me from me , take away from me , then let me be free . ”
GOLD:	“ Father , if you are willing , please take this cup of suffering away from me . Yet I want your will to be done , not mine . ”

ID:	4240
INPUT:	Bide okerretara makurtzen direnak , berriz , <unk> bitza Jaunak gaizkileekin batera ! Bakea Israeli !
PRED:	May the Lord be able to be sure that those who are under it .
GOLD:	But banish those who turn to crooked ways , O Lord.Take them away with those who do evil.May Israel have peace !

ID:	4241
INPUT:	Gutxi al deritzozue Israelgo Jainkoak herri osoaren artetik zuek <unk> izateari , harengana hurbildu , Jaunaren egoitzako zerbitzuaren ardura izan eta herri osoaren izenean jarduteko ?
PRED:	Do you realize that God of Israel has brought him to the people of Israel ? Will you kill him in the presence of the Lord and the people of Israel ? Who has put it in charge of the Lord 's name ?
GOLD:	Does it seem insignificant to you that the God of Israel has chosen you from among all the community of Israel to be near him so you can serve in the Lord 's Tabernacle and stand before the people to minister to them ?

ID:	4242
INPUT:	Garaia baino lehen eraman zituzten , ibaiak ura bezala , haien oinarriak <unk> .
PRED:	When the waters grew up , the water flowed from the waters of the sea , and when they saw their foundations .
GOLD:	They were snatched away in the prime of life , the foundations of their lives washed away .

ID:	4243
INPUT:	Hala egin zuen Josuek .
PRED:	So Joshua did as he did .
GOLD:	So Joshua gave the command .

ID:	4244
INPUT:	Kalebek , jendeak Moisesen aurka ziharduen zurrumurrua <unk> , esan zuen : « Ea , goazen ! Igo eta jabe gaitezen lurralde hartaz , bagara horretarako gauza eta » .
PRED:	When the people of Israel saw that they had been told , “ Go and tell us , ‘ Come , ' he said , ‘ We have given us everything in the land . ”
GOLD:	But Caleb tried to quiet the people as they stood before Moses . “ Let 's go at once to take the land , ” he said . “ We can certainly conquer it ! ”

ID:	4245
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> da , albiste txarrak albiste txarren gain ; ikuskaria eskatuko diote profetari ; apaizak ez du irakaspenik emango , ezta kontseilariek ere aholkurik .
PRED:	And when the prophet heard about him , he will be able to do what the prophet says : “ I will give you a gift to you , and I will give you a gift to you .
GOLD:	Calamity will follow calamity ; rumor will follow rumor.They will look in vainfor a vision from the prophets.They will receive no teaching from the priestsand no counsel from the leaders .

ID:	4246
INPUT:	Dohain hutsez zarete salbatuak sinesmenaren bidez ; eta hau ez dator zuengandik , baizik eta Jainkoaren emaitza da ;
PRED:	For you have been given in God 's presence , but it is not part of you . This is the spiritual gift of God and you have not given you .
GOLD:	God saved you by his grace when you believed . And you ca n't take credit for this ; it is a gift from God .

ID:	4247
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun : — Benetan diotsut : Gaur gauean , oilarrak jo baino lehen , hiru aldiz ukatuko nauzu .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I tell you the truth , when you know three times , you will deny three times . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ I tell you the truth , Peter — this very night , before the rooster crows , you will deny three times that you even know me . ”

ID:	4248
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , zure begien pozgarri dena kenduko dizut bat-batean . Baina zuk ez egin dolu , ez hasi aieneka edo negarrez .
PRED:	“ Son of man , turn away from your own eyes , and I will not touch you .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , with one blow I will take away your dearest treasure . Yet you must not show any sorrow at her death . Do not weep ; let there be no tears .

ID:	4249
INPUT:	Jesusek agindu bezala egin zuten ikasleek , eta Pazko-afaria prestatu zuten .
PRED:	Jesus commanded them to prepare the Passover meal , and they prepared a Passover meal .
GOLD:	So the disciples did as Jesus told them and prepared the Passover meal there .

ID:	4250
INPUT:	« Espiritu gaiztoa , norbaitengandik irten ondoren , leku idorretan barrena ibili ohi da atseden bila ; baina , aurkitzen ez duelarik ,
PRED:	“ When the evil person falls on a person , it is a place for a place , but it is no rest .
GOLD:	“ When an evil spirit leaves a person , it goes into the desert , seeking rest but finding none .

ID:	4251
INPUT:	Lagundu , gure Jainko salbatzaile horrek ; zeure izenaren ohoreagatik , libra gaitzazu , barkatu gure bekatuak .
PRED:	Give us victory over our God ; rescue us from your name .
GOLD:	Help us , O God of our salvation ! Help us for the glory of your name.Save us and forgive our sinsfor the honor of your name .

ID:	4252
INPUT:	bizi dadila Kristo zuen bihotzetan sinesmenaren bidez eta izan dadila maitasuna zuen bizitzaren <unk> eta oinarri .
PRED:	For Christ lives in Christ , so that Christ will be filled with all who love God 's grace and power .
GOLD:	Then Christ will make his home in your hearts as you trust in him . Your roots will grow down into God 's love and keep you strong .

ID:	4253
INPUT:	Hau nioen neurekiko : « <unk> igoko naizharen fruituak hartzera » . <unk> gozoa dute niretzat zure bularrek , <unk> eztia zure arnasak .
PRED:	I thought , “ I am sending you out the fig tree that you are my own desires , and my wages are as sweet as sweet as sweet as I wish . ”
GOLD:	May your kisses be as exciting as the best wine — Yes , wine that goes down smoothly for my lover , flowing gently over lips and teeth .

ID:	4254
INPUT:	Joiadaren berrikuntzak
PRED:	Solomon 's Second Message about King
GOLD:	Jehoiada 's Religious Reforms

ID:	4255
INPUT:	Eta badakizue bekatuak kentzeko agertu zela Kristo , eta harengan ez da bekaturik .
PRED:	And when you know that God has been forgiven , and we have not been forgiven .
GOLD:	And you know that Jesus came to take away our sins , and there is no sin in him .

ID:	4256
INPUT:	Neure baitan diot : « Ai <unk> banitu ! Hegan egingo nuke , beste nonbait <unk> .
PRED:	I thought , “ If I would have a dream , I would have been my lord , I would have been with my own people .
GOLD:	I would fly far awayto the quiet of the wilderness.Interlude

ID:	4257
INPUT:	Orduan , Sedekias erregeak Jeremias kartzela-atarian zainpean jartzeko agindu zuen eta egunero opil bat emateko okinen <unk> , hirian ogia ahitu arte . Hala , kartzelako atarian gelditu zen Jeremias .
PRED:	Then Zedekiah sent Jeremiah to the wall of the guard , and he ordered the wall to make a basket of grain and new moon celebrations , and he was very angry with the chief baker .
GOLD:	So King Zedekiah commanded that Jeremiah not be returned to the dungeon . Instead , he was imprisoned in the courtyard of the guard in the royal palace . The king also commanded that Jeremiah be given a loaf of fresh bread every day as long as there was any left in the city . So Jeremiah was put in the palace prison .

ID:	4258
INPUT:	Nork ezagutu bere hutsegiteak ? Aska nazazu oharkabeko <unk> .
PRED:	Who can save us from the power of the dead ?
GOLD:	Keep your servant from deliberate sins ! Do n't let them control me.Then I will be free of guiltand innocent of great sin .

ID:	4259
INPUT:	Sedekias , Judako errege
PRED:	Zedekiah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	The Fall of Jerusalem

ID:	4260
INPUT:	Seme-alabatxook , zuek Jainkoarenak zarete , eta <unk> dituzue sasiprofeta horiek , zuengan dagoena munduan dagoena baino handiagoa baita .
PRED:	Dear children , dear brothers and sisters , those who have been baptized in the world and prophets will be baptized in the world .
GOLD:	But you belong to God , my dear children . You have already won a victory over those people , because the Spirit who lives in you is greater than the spirit who lives in the world .

ID:	4261
INPUT:	Zuzena baitzara , libra nazazu , askatu , makur belarria niregana eta salba nazazu .
PRED:	Please let me save me ; let me be saved .
GOLD:	Save me and rescue me , for you do what is right.Turn your ear to listen to me , and set me free .

ID:	4262
INPUT:	Davidek , orduan : — Dei egin Tzadok apaizari , Natan profetari eta <unk> seme <unk> . Hauek sartu zirenean ,
PRED:	Then David said to Zadok , “ Zadok the priest , Nathan the priest , the priest , and the leaders of the prophets who had been killed with him . ”
GOLD:	Then King David ordered , “ Call Zadok the priest , Nathan the prophet , and Benaiah son of Jehoiada . ” When they came into the king 's presence ,

ID:	4263
INPUT:	eta Jainkoak apaiz nagusi izendatu zuen Melkisedeken antzera .
PRED:	God made Melchizedek as high priest , and he chose him as king of Melchizedek .
GOLD:	And God designated him to be a High Priest in the order of Melchizedek .

ID:	4264
INPUT:	Artean gizona nire ondoan zegoela , norbaitek tenplu barrutik hitz egiten zidala ohartu nintzen .
PRED:	While I was in the Temple , I realized that I was talking with me .
GOLD:	And I heard someone speaking to me from within the Temple , while the man who had been measuring stood beside me .

ID:	4265
INPUT:	Hala ere , Jainkoak ezarritako oinarri sendoak tinko dirau eta idazkun hau darama : Ezagutzen ditu Jaunak bereak dituenak , eta « Ihes egin beza gaiztakeriatik Jainkoaren izenari dei egiten dionak » .
PRED:	For God has given you the glory of the earth , and he is given to all his heart . He is the Lord , who keeps you from all who fear God , and he has spoken ! ”
GOLD:	But God 's truth stands firm like a foundation stone with this inscription : “ The Lord knows those who are his , ” and “ All who belong to the Lord must turn away from evil . ”

ID:	4266
INPUT:	Itsasoan <unk> lehor-bidetik igaro ziren israeldarrak , urak ezker-eskuin zituztela harresi gisa .
PRED:	When the people of Israel saw that the people of Israel were walking on the road , they crossed over to the Sea .
GOLD:	So the people of Israel walked through the middle of the sea on dry ground , with walls of water on each side !

ID:	4267
INPUT:	Ordain-opariko ahariaren bidez , bekatuaren barkamen-ohikunea egingo du apaizak Jaunaren aurrean eta barkatua izango du gizonak bekatua .
PRED:	The priest will be forgiven , and the priest will be forgiven .
GOLD:	The priest will then purify him before the Lord with the ram of the guilt offering , and the man 's sin will be forgiven .

ID:	4268
INPUT:	Eta honela bukatu zuen Josuek : « Jaunak , zuen Jainkoak , Jordango urak lehortu ditu zuen aurrean zuek igaro ahal izateko , lehen Itsaso Gorria gure aurrean gu igarotzeko lehortu zuen bezala .
PRED:	Then Joshua said to Joshua , “ The Lord our God has planted us in the Red Sea in the Red Sea . And when the water grew up in the Red Sea .
GOLD:	For the Lord your God dried up the river right before your eyes , and he kept it dry until you were all across , just as he did at the Red Sea when he dried it up until we had all crossed over .

ID:	4269
INPUT:	« Nik , Jaunak , lau <unk> bidaliko dizkiet : gerra , hiltzeko ; <unk> , <unk> egiteko ; hegazti harrapariak eta basapiztiak , irentsi eta <unk> egiteko .
PRED:	“ I will send four things that the Lord will send four prophets to kill them , and they will kill those who were slaughtered by the birds of the sky , and they will kill you .
GOLD:	“ I will send four kinds of destroyers against them , ” says the Lord . “ I will send the sword to kill , the dogs to drag away , the vultures to devour , and the wild animals to finish up what is left .

ID:	4270
INPUT:	Gero , parabola hau kontatu zien : « Gizon aberats bati lurrak uzta handia eman zion .
PRED:	Then he told his story : “ A rich man has given a great harvest .
GOLD:	Then he told them a story : “ A rich man had a fertile farm that produced fine crops .

ID:	4271
INPUT:	Zure ondotik berriro pasatu eta <unk> zeundela ikusi nuen . Zure gorputz biluzia estali eta zutaz arduratu nintzen ; <unk> egin nuen zurekin eta nirea izan zinen . Honela diot nik , Jainko Jaunak .
PRED:	Then I saw that I could be able to be able to be very old and old . I saw your body , and I saw you as I had done . I was with you , and I was your God .
GOLD:	And when I passed by again , I saw that you were old enough for love . So I wrapped my cloak around you to cover your nakedness and declared my marriage vows . I made a covenant with you , says the Sovereign Lord , and you became mine .

ID:	4272
INPUT:	baina nire partea <unk> gabeko egunak dira , eta gau nekagarriak <unk> .
PRED:	But when they are very old , they will be able to serve me .
GOLD:	I , too , have been assigned months of futility , long and weary nights of misery .

ID:	4273
INPUT:	Izan ere , gezurrezko <unk> eta sasiprofetak agertuko dira eta aukeratuak berak ere , ahal balitz , engainatzeko moduko mirariak eta egintza harrigarriak egingo dituzte .
PRED:	For those who have been false prophets and prophets will be sure that some of you are not a few of the miraculous signs or wonders or a miraculous signs or wonders .
GOLD:	For false messiahs and false prophets will rise up and perform signs and wonders so as to deceive , if possible , even God 's chosen ones .

ID:	4274
INPUT:	Gaiztakeria sortzen du , zoritxarra ematen argitara , <unk> bete-betea du barrua » .
PRED:	The light of evil will be filled with light , and the light will be filled with joy . ”
GOLD:	They conceive trouble and give birth to evil.Their womb produces deceit . ”

ID:	4275
INPUT:	Zazpi egun eta zazpi gau eman zituzten berarekin lurrean eserita , hitzik ere esan gabe , ikusten baitzuten zein handia zen haren samina .
PRED:	On seven days the seven days , he gave him seven more than seven days . But when she saw her , she was filled with her , and she was very bitter .
GOLD:	Then they sat on the ground with him for seven days and nights . No one said a word to Job , for they saw that his suffering was too great for words .

ID:	4276
INPUT:	Laugarren egunean <unk> haranean , hau da , « <unk> » , bildu eta Jauna bedeinkatu zuten ; horregatik du toki horrek izen hori gaurdaino .
PRED:	On that day the fourth beast was buried in the valley of the valley , and when they saw that the Lord has blessed him and blessed him . ”
GOLD:	On the fourth day they gathered in the Valley of Blessing , which got its name that day because the people praised and thanked the Lord there . It is still called the Valley of Blessing today .

ID:	4277
INPUT:	Israeldarrek gatibu hartu zituzten madiandar emakume eta haurrak , eta abere , <unk> eta ondasunak harrapatu .
PRED:	So the people of Israel took their wives and goats , cattle , sheep , goats , and goats , and goats , and goats , and all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Then the Israelite army captured the Midianite women and children and seized their cattle and flocks and all their wealth as plunder .

ID:	4278
INPUT:	Jonatanek eman zizkion mutikoari bere iskiluak eta esan zion : — Hoa , eraman hirira .
PRED:	Then Jonathan gave the boy to the boy and said to him , “ Go back to the city . ”
GOLD:	Then Jonathan gave his bow and arrows to the boy and told him to take them back to town .

ID:	4279
INPUT:	Han izango nauzu ni , Horeb mendiko harkaitzean . Harkaitza jo eta ura sortuko da , herriak edan dezan . Hala egin zuen Moisesek , Israelgo arduradunen aurrean .
PRED:	There will be a place where I was in the place where the rock was a rock of water , and the people of Israel will drink the water of Israel .
GOLD:	I will stand before you on the rock at Mount Sinai . Strike the rock , and water will come gushing out . Then the people will be able to drink . ” So Moses struck the rock as he was told , and water gushed out as the elders looked on .

ID:	4280
INPUT:	esanez : “ Gure arbasoen garaian bizi izan bagina , ez genukeen profeten <unk> haiekin parterik izango ” .
PRED:	“ Our ancestors said to us , ‘ Since we have been here in the land of our ancestors , we will do n't know that the prophets of our ancestors have been in the land of our ancestors . '
GOLD:	Then you say , ‘ If we had lived in the days of our ancestors , we would never have joined them in killing the prophets . '

ID:	4281
INPUT:	Baina iparraldetik eta ekialdetik etorriko zaizkion <unk> asaldatu egingo dute ; orduan , amorru bizian irtengo da jende asko suntsitzeko asmoz .
PRED:	But the east of the north will come from the north , and they will come out against many nations . Then many people will turn against me .
GOLD:	“ But then news from the east and the north will alarm him , and he will set out in great anger to destroy and obliterate many .

ID:	4282
INPUT:	Samsonek egarri handia sumatu zuen ; Jaunari dei egin eta esan zion : « Garaipen handi hau eman ondoren , egarriak hiltzen utziko ote nauzu eta jentil arrotz horien esku erortzen ? »
PRED:	Samson called out to the Lord , and he called him to the Lord , “ Why have you sent me to kill me ? ”
GOLD:	Samson was now very thirsty , and he cried out to the Lord , “ You have accomplished this great victory by the strength of your servant . Must I now die of thirst and fall into the hands of these pagans ? ”

ID:	4283
INPUT:	Begira : neuk , Jaun honek , eman dizuet larunbata , atseden hartzeko ; horregatik , seigarren egunean bi egunerako janaria ematen dizuet . Beraz , zazpigarren egunean zaudete nor bere tokian , kanpora atera gabe » .
PRED:	Look , I am the day of the Lord , for I have given you the Sabbath day of the Lord , for I have given you rest on the seventh day of the festival . ”
GOLD:	They must realize that the Sabbath is the Lord 's gift to you . That is why he gives you a two-day supply on the sixth day , so there will be enough for two days . On the Sabbath day you must each stay in your place . Do not go out to pick up food on the seventh day . ”

ID:	4284
INPUT:	Ez nien ukatu neure <unk> <unk> deus ere , ezta neure <unk> batere . Nire lan <unk> hartu nuen ; hauxe izan zennire lan guztien saria .
PRED:	I did n't know that I had been able to know that I had been able to kill my life . I was very glad because they have heard my life .
GOLD:	Anything I wanted , I would take . I denied myself no pleasure . I even found great pleasure in hard work , a reward for all my labors .

ID:	4285
INPUT:	Moab , zeure indar eta <unk> zara : hara orain zu ere konkistatua ! Zure jainko Kemox erbestera doa , bere apaiz eta buruzagiekin .
PRED:	Now you will know that your great power will be disgraced , and now you will serve the god of Israel , and the king of Israel , and the king of Israel will rule over the king of Israel .
GOLD:	Because you have trusted in your wealth and skill , you will be taken captive.Your god Chemosh , with his priests and officials , will be hauled off to distant lands !

ID:	4286
INPUT:	Bere hirietan ezpatak erasoko dio , <unk> hauts bihurtuko dizkio , beraien burutazioengatik .
PRED:	I will destroy you in the towns of Babylon , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	War will swirl through their cities ; their enemies will crash through their gates.They will destroy them , trapping them in their own evil plans .

ID:	4287
INPUT:	Baina nik Jaunarengan ditut begiak , salbatzen nauen <unk> ; entzungo dit , bai , Jainkoak .
PRED:	But I have heard my eyes , O Lord , that my enemies have heard me .
GOLD:	As for me , I look to the Lord for help.I wait confidently for God to save me , and my God will certainly hear me .

ID:	4288
INPUT:	zedrozko oholez estali zituen tenplu barneko hormak , <unk> hasi eta goiko habeetaraino , barne osoa zurez jantziz . Tenpluaren behea <unk> estali zuen .
PRED:	He overlaid the Temple with bronze walls , and all the Temple of every kind of cedar , along with bronze , bronze , and scarlet thread . Then he covered the Temple of the Temple of the Temple .
GOLD:	The entire inside , from floor to ceiling , was paneled with wood . He paneled the walls and ceilings with cedar , and he used planks of cypress for the floors .

ID:	4289
INPUT:	<unk> amaitzean , sua itzali ; <unk> gabe , kito liskarra !
PRED:	They will break down their wickedness , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Fire goes out without wood , and quarrels disappear when gossip stops .

ID:	4290
INPUT:	Jauna biziki haserretu zitzaion <unk> ; bertan zauritu zuen eta han hil zen , Jainkoaren kutxa ondoan .
PRED:	The Lord was very angry with him , and he died .
GOLD:	Then the Lord 's anger was aroused against Uzzah , and God struck him dead because of this . So Uzzah died right there beside the Ark of God .

ID:	4291
INPUT:	Batzuk egun osoan irrikaz bila , zintzoak ezer gorde gabe eman .
PRED:	The godly search for those days , but the priests are not allowed to find it .
GOLD:	Some people are always greedy for more , but the godly love to give !

ID:	4292
INPUT:	Jainkoak esan du — behin eta berriro entzun diot — berari <unk> ahalmena .
PRED:	Then God said , “ I have heard that the power of God has heard him , and I have seen him . ”
GOLD:	unfailing love , O Lord , is yours.Surely you repay all peopleaccording to what they have done .

ID:	4293
INPUT:	Barneko ataria eta tenplua
PRED:	The courtyard of the Temple
GOLD:	The South Gateway

ID:	4294
INPUT:	Beraz , guztira bederatziehun eta hamabi urtez bizi izan ondoren , hil egin zen .
PRED:	Mahalalel lived , and then he died .
GOLD:	Seth lived 912 years , and then he died .

ID:	4295
INPUT:	Beste hamarrak , hori entzutean , Santiago eta Joanen aurka haserre jarri ziren .
PRED:	When they heard this , James and John the other officials of John , James , and John .
GOLD:	When the ten other disciples heard what James and John had asked , they were indignant .

ID:	4296
INPUT:	Kendu nire bekatua , eta ur bizia baino <unk> izango naiz ; garbi nazazu , eta elurra baino zuriago izango .
PRED:	Take your blood , and my life will be clean . I will make you clean , and I will make you clean as weak as snow .
GOLD:	Do n't keep looking at my sins.Remove the stain of my guilt .

ID:	4297
INPUT:	Bere biziaren jabe izan nahian dabilenak galdu egingo du ; bere bizia niregatik galtzen duenak , ordea , eskuratu egingo du .
PRED:	Those who try to live in your life , but if you are my life , then you will have my life .
GOLD:	If you cling to your life , you will lose it ; but if you give up your life for me , you will find it .

ID:	4298
INPUT:	eta , <unk> iparraldeko <unk> igaroz , Itsaso Hilera heltzen zen , Jordan ibaia <unk> den lekuan . Hau zen Benjaminen leinuaren hegoaldeko muga .
PRED:	When you heard what was happening , you will be at the eastern border of the Mediterranean Sea and the Jordan River . This was the boundaries of the Jordan River , which was the tribe of Benjamin .
GOLD:	ran past the north slope of Beth-hoglah , and ended at the north bay of the Dead Sea , which is the southern end of the Jordan River . This was the southern boundary .

ID:	4299
INPUT:	Izan ere , duenari eman egingo zaio ; ez duenari , ordea , daukan apurra ere kendu egingo » .
PRED:	For those who have given them , but they will not be taken away . ”
GOLD:	To those who listen to my teaching , more understanding will be given . But for those who are not listening , even what little understanding they have will be taken away from them . ”

ID:	4300
INPUT:	<unk> bera <unk> egingo dugu . Jende xehea dirutan erosiko dugu , eta <unk> pare baten truke » .
PRED:	And when we have heard that the beast will be able to be able , we will give glory to the ground , and we will give glory to the ground . ”
GOLD:	And you mix the grain you sellwith chaff swept from the floor.Then you enslave poor peoplefor one piece of silver or a pair of sandals .

ID:	4301
INPUT:	Hari lotuak zeuden , bada , bere aztikeriaz txunditurik baitzeuzkan aspaldidanik .
PRED:	For they were filled with joy , and those who are wise will make their chains .
GOLD:	They listened closely to him because for a long time he had astounded them with his magic .

ID:	4302
INPUT:	Ez bedi zure bihotza horrelako emakumearen atzetik abia , ez zaitez berarengatik galbidean jar ,
PRED:	Do not be a virgin , for I have not known to punish you , for you have not punished them .
GOLD:	Do n't let your hearts stray away toward her.Do n't wander down her wayward path .

ID:	4303
INPUT:	Erregeagana hurbildu zirenen artean zeuden <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> eta <unk> , Pertsia eta Mediako zazpi buruzagiak ; hauek sar zitezkeen erregearen aurrera , erreinuko <unk> <unk> zirelako .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits the people of religious law , and when they saw that when they saw that they were sitting on the throne of Damascus , and when they saw that the king of Persia , the king of Persia , and when they were buried at the king of Egypt .
GOLD:	The names of these men were Carshena , Shethar , Admatha , Tarshish , Meres , Marsena , and Memucan — seven nobles of Persia and Media . They met with the king regularly and held the highest positions in the empire .

ID:	4304
INPUT:	Moisesen gorazarrea
PRED:	The Death of Moses
GOLD:	A Song of Deliverance

ID:	4305
INPUT:	Josuek Ruben eta Gaden leinuetakoei eta Manasesen leinu erdikoei dei egin
PRED:	Then Joshua called out of the tribes of Gad and Gad .
GOLD:	Then Joshua called together the tribes of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh .

ID:	4306
INPUT:	Horra Salomonen esku-aulkia . Hirurogei gudari ditu inguruan , Israelgo ausartenak ;
PRED:	There is a total of Solomon 's silver , armed men of Israel .
GOLD:	Look , it is Solomon 's carriage , surrounded by sixty heroic men , the best of Israel 's soldiers .

ID:	4307
INPUT:	Orduan , aurreratu zen espirituetariko bat , Jaunaren aitzinean gelditu eta esan zuen : « Neuk konbentzituko dut » . Jaunak galdetu zion : « Nola ? »
PRED:	Then the Lord spoke to him and asked him , “ How can I say , ‘ How can I say , ‘ How can I be ? '
GOLD:	and finally a spirit approached the Lord and said , ‘ I can do it ! '

ID:	4308
INPUT:	Urte hartan bertan , Sedekiasen erregealdiko laugarren urtean , bosgarren hilean , Hananias profetak , jatorriz <unk> zen Azurren semeak , <unk> topo egin zuen tenpluan , eta apaizen eta jende guztiaren aurrean esan zion :
PRED:	At that time during the fourth year of the fourth year of the fourth year of King Artaxerxes 's reign , Hananiah , the prophet of Judah , who was in the Temple of the priests , and the priests of Judah .
GOLD:	One day in late summer of that same year — the fourth year of the reign of Zedekiah , king of Judah — Hananiah son of Azzur , a prophet from Gibeon , addressed me publicly in the Temple while all the priests and people listened . He said ,

ID:	4309
INPUT:	Baina <unk> seme Jonatan eta Tikbaren seme <unk> erabaki honen kontra atera ziren , Mexulam eta Xabtai lebitarrak ere alde zituztela .
PRED:	But Jonathan , the leaders of the leaders of the officials , who were eager to kill him , along with Azariah son of Jehozadak , and Azariah son of Nun .
GOLD:	Only Jonathan son of Asahel and Jahzeiah son of Tikvah opposed this course of action , and they were supported by Meshullam and Shabbethai the Levite .

ID:	4310
INPUT:	Gogoan izan zuen bere agintzari sakratua , Abraham bere zerbitzariari egina .
PRED:	Remember that you have made a covenant with your descendants forever .
GOLD:	For he remembered his sacred promiseto his servant Abraham .

ID:	4311
INPUT:	Menfis eta <unk> <unk> apurtu diote .
PRED:	They will break down its foundations , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Egyptians , marching from their cities of Memphis and Tahpanhes , have destroyed Israel 's glory and power .

ID:	4312
INPUT:	« Hona hemen labore-opariei buruzko ohikunea : Aaronen ondorengoei dagokie Jaunaren aurrean , aldarearen aitzinean , <unk> .
PRED:	“ This is the fat of the grain offering to the Lord as a special offering to the altar of the Lord .
GOLD:	Through this process , the priest will purify you before the Lord , making you right with him , and you will be forgiven for any of these sins you have committed . ”

ID:	4313
INPUT:	Hodias , Haxum , <unk> ,
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you , when they saw that they have seen ,
GOLD:	Hariph , Anathoth , Nebai ,

ID:	4314
INPUT:	<unk> horretan <unk> bada , sareak ez du jasaten , heldu egiten badio , ez dio eusten .
PRED:	But when they see that they are dead , they do n't know what they do , and they do n't know it .
GOLD:	They cling to their home for security , but it wo n't last.They try to hold it tight , but it will not endure .

ID:	4315
INPUT:	Jesusek ihardetsi zien : — Ez al zaituztet neuk aukeratu Hamabiok ? Halere , zuetariko bat deabru da .
PRED:	Jesus asked them , “ Did n't I call you a teacher of the Pharisees ? ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus said , “ I chose the twelve of you , but one is a devil . ”

ID:	4316
INPUT:	Israeldarrekin bake-hitzarmena egin zuen hiri bakarra hibiarrak bizi zireneko Gabaon izan zen . Beste guztiak armen indarrez hartu zituzten .
PRED:	The people of Israel made these towns with their surrounding villages , and all the people of Israel followed them .
GOLD:	No one in this region made peace with the Israelites except the Hivites of Gibeon . All the others were defeated .

ID:	4317
INPUT:	<unk> ETA ELKARTEAREN <unk> ( 7 , <unk> )
PRED:	As soon as we live among you , we will be able to know that we are in Egypt .
GOLD:	Ezra Arrives in Jerusalem

ID:	4318
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	4319
INPUT:	Atalondoaren luzera hamar metrokoa zen , eta zabalera <unk> ; hamar harmaila igo behar ziren hara iristeko . <unk> bi aldeetara zutabe bana zegoen .
PRED:	The entry room was 30 feet long , and the entry room of the gateway to the entrance of the gateway . The wall was 71/2 feet long , and they were placed on each side .
GOLD:	The entry room was 35 feet wide and 21 feet deep . There were ten steps leading up to it , with a column on each side .

ID:	4320
INPUT:	« Ez dute emaztetzat hartuko emagaldu edo desohoratua izandako emakumerik , ezta senarrak <unk> ere , apaizak Jainkoari sagaratuak baitaude .
PRED:	“ The priest must not marry her , or if she is unfaithful to the person who has been unfaithful to God 's wife , the priest must not be holy .
GOLD:	“ Priests may not marry a woman defiled by prostitution , and they may not marry a woman who is divorced from her husband , for the priests are set apart as holy to their God .

ID:	4321
INPUT:	Herri horien <unk> pareko : horien <unk> <unk> <unk> dira , <unk> eskuak zizelez landuak ,
PRED:	And when they were as weak as they serve , they will be able to be able to serve idols — gods of their hands , and they will make their hands on them .
GOLD:	Their ways are futile and foolish.They cut down a tree , and a craftsman carves an idol .

ID:	4322
INPUT:	Nork eman dizkie jakinduria eta <unk> <unk> eta <unk> ?
PRED:	Who has given me wisdom and power ? Who has been able to kill me and fig tree ?
GOLD:	Who gives intuition to the heartand instinct to the mind ?

ID:	4323
INPUT:	Eta zuek ez egon hor geldirik . Zoazte etsaien ondoren eta moztu <unk> ; ez utzi beren hirietan sartzen , Jaunak , zeuen Jainkoak , eskura eman dizkizue eta » .
PRED:	Now go out to you , and let them be cut off from the towns of the Lord your enemies , and let them be cut off from the towns of your enemies . ”
GOLD:	The rest of you continue chasing the enemy and cut them down from the rear . Do n't give them a chance to get back to their towns , for the Lord your God has given you victory over them . ”

ID:	4324
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Gedeoni : « Gudaroste handiegia <unk> , madiandarrak zuri eskura nik emateko . Harrotu egingo <unk> Israel , garaipena bere eskuz lortu duela pentsatuz .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Gideon , “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ I will give you victory over all the people of Israel , and they will give you victory over Israel . '
GOLD:	The Lord said to Gideon , “ You have too many warriors with you . If I let all of you fight the Midianites , the Israelites will boast to me that they saved themselves by their own strength .

ID:	4325
INPUT:	Ez du giza adimenik izango , abereen sena baizik . Zazpi urtez biziko da horrela !
PRED:	No wonder he does not live by human hands , but they will live in any years .
GOLD:	“ ‘ Then as I lay there dreaming , I saw a messenger , a holy one , coming down from heaven .

ID:	4326
INPUT:	hiri batekoak <unk> joango dira eta esango diete : “ Goazen Jaunaren bila , berari mesede eske ” . Eta erantzungo diete : “ Bai , bagoaz gu ere ” .
PRED:	They will say , ‘ Let 's go to the city of the Lord , ' they will ask him , ‘ Let 's go to him , and we will ask him , ‘ Let us be saved . '
GOLD:	The people of one city will say to the people of another , ‘ Come with us to Jerusalem to ask the Lord to bless us . Let 's worship the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . I 'm determined to go . '

ID:	4327
INPUT:	<unk> zebilen Tzeruiaren seme <unk> eta Abiatar <unk> ; bere alde zituen hauek .
PRED:	Now Abishai son of Zeruiah was the son of Zeruiah , and he was the son of Zeruiah .
GOLD:	Adonijah took Joab son of Zeruiah and Abiathar the priest into his confidence , and they agreed to help him become king .

ID:	4328
INPUT:	Erantzun ezinik gelditu ziren .
PRED:	They replied , “ Do n't be afraid . ”
GOLD:	Again they could not answer .

ID:	4329
INPUT:	<unk> guztiak kendu nahi nizkizueke . <unk> Jaunaren gauzez kezkatzen da , Jaunari atsegin nola emango ;
PRED:	And if they were able to see the Lord , they will be able to see what was evil in the Lord 's presence .
GOLD:	I want you to be free from the concerns of this life . An unmarried man can spend his time doing the Lord 's work and thinking how to please him .

ID:	4330
INPUT:	eta zeuen behi eta arkumeak , zilar eta urreak eta era guztietako ondasunak <unk> ,
PRED:	Your clothes and gold , cattle , and gold , and gold , and gold , and all kinds of silver and gold .
GOLD:	and when your flocks and herds have become very large and your silver and gold have multiplied along with everything else , be careful !

ID:	4331
INPUT:	Eta nik hau diotsut : Pedro zara zu , eta harkaitz horren gainean eraikiko dut nik neure <unk> ; eta herioaren indarrak ere ez du menderatuko .
PRED:	I said , ‘ You are my rock , my rock , and I will give you victory over my rock , and I will give you victory over my enemies . '
GOLD:	Now I say to you that you are Peter ( which means ‘ rock ' ) , and upon this rock I will build my church , and all the powers of hell will not conquer it .

ID:	4332
INPUT:	« Esan beste hau ere : Niretzat zatirik hoberena bereizi ondoren , hartu gainerakoa zeuentzat , beste israeldarrek garia eta <unk> berentzat hartzen dituzten bezala .
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel : If you have been sold , you must have the best of the people of Israel as well as well as the people of Israel had promised .
GOLD:	“ Also , give these instructions to the Levites : When you present the best part as your offering , it will be considered as though it came from your own threshing floor or winepress .

ID:	4333
INPUT:	Prezioa ezartzeko , honako <unk> hauek erabiliko dira : « Pertsona hogei urtetik hirurogei artekoa bada , gizonezkoarentzat berrogeita hamar zilarrezko txanpon , santutegiko dirutan ,
PRED:	The number of these events in the name of the Lord will be able to be able to be able to be twenty shekels of silver and silver .
GOLD:	here is the scale of values to be used . A man between the ages of twenty and sixty is valued at fifty shekels of silver , as measured by the sanctuary shekel .

ID:	4334
INPUT:	« Hori da <unk> diren <unk> eta <unk> buruzko legea ,
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits those who know that the law will be healed .
GOLD:	These are the instructions for dealing with anyone who has a bodily discharge — a man who is unclean because of an emission of semen

ID:	4335
INPUT:	zeure eskulan guztien buru egin duzu , denak haren menpean jarri :
PRED:	How can you destroy all these things under your authority .
GOLD:	the flocks and the herdsand all the wild animals ,

ID:	4336
INPUT:	Bakea eta errukia arau horri lotuak bizi direnei , baita Jainkoaren Israel herriari ere .
PRED:	peace and peace , love God , and all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	May God 's peace and mercy be upon all who live by this principle ; they are the new people of God .

ID:	4337
INPUT:	( Mt 10 , 1-4 ; Mk 3 , <unk> )
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Blind Man
GOLD:	Love for Enemies

ID:	4338
INPUT:	Orain arte hor ibili gara goseak , egarriak , larrugorri eta gaizki <unk> ; ez daukagu non bildurik ,
PRED:	Now why are you hungry and hungry ? Why do n't you turn away from evil ? We do n't know that we were afraid of you ?
GOLD:	Even now we go hungry and thirsty , and we do n't have enough clothes to keep warm . We are often beaten and have no home .

ID:	4339
INPUT:	Eta lebitarren ondoren , Jauna , Israelen Jainkoa , benetan gurtu nahi zuten guztiak ere Jerusalemera etorri ziren Israelgo leinu guztietatik , Jaunari , beren arbasoen Jainkoari , opariak eskaintzera .
PRED:	Then the Levites worshiped the Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , and all the people of Israel came to Jerusalem and worship the God of Israel .
GOLD:	From all the tribes of Israel , those who sincerely wanted to worship the Lord , the God of Israel , followed the Levites to Jerusalem , where they could offer sacrifices to the Lord , the God of their ancestors .

ID:	4340
INPUT:	eta gauza bera ilunabarrean , kriseiluak piztean ; etengabe erreko duzue intsentsua Jaunaren aurrean belaunez belaun .
PRED:	Then you must sacrifice the lamps on the evening , and you must burn incense before the Lord .
GOLD:	And each evening when he lights the lamps , he must again burn incense in the Lord 's presence . This must be done from generation to generation .

ID:	4341
INPUT:	Zergatik esaten ote du “ Nire bila ibiliko zarete , baina ez nauzue aurkituko ; zeren eta , ni egongo naizen tokira , zuek ezin baitzarete joan ” ? »
PRED:	“ Why are you looking for me ? You will not find me , but you wo n't find me ? ”
GOLD:	What does he mean when he says , ‘ You will search for me but not find me , ' and ‘ You can not go where I am going ' ? ”

ID:	4342
INPUT:	Jainkoak idatziriko epaia <unk> da haren fededun guztientzat ! Aleluia ! Gora Jauna !
PRED:	That is why the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says , “ Praise him ! Praise the Lord ! ”
GOLD:	to execute the judgment written against them.This is the glorious privilege of his faithful ones.Praise the Lord !

ID:	4343
INPUT:	Bizirako bidea erakutsiko didazu : alaitasun betea zure aurrean , betiko zoriona zure ondoan .
PRED:	Your life is filled with joy , and those who are filled with joy .
GOLD:	You will show me the way of life , granting me the joy of your presenceand the pleasures of living with you forever .

ID:	4344
INPUT:	zeuekin eramango dituzue , Damaskotik harantz atzerrira bidaliko zaituztedanean » . Jainko Jaun ahalguztiduna , hori du izena .
PRED:	“ I will send an army against you , ” says the Lord . “ This is what the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	So I will send you into exile , to a land east of Damascus , ” says the Lord , whose name is the God of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	4345
INPUT:	Gogoratu esan nizuena : morroia ez da nagusia baino handiago . Ni pertsegitu banaute , zuek ere pertsegituko zaituztete ; nire mezua nola hartu , hala hartuko dute zuena ere .
PRED:	Remember , I am not greater than you . I am not greater than you , but I am the one who rescued you from me .
GOLD:	Do you remember what I told you ? ‘ A slave is not greater than the master . ' Since they persecuted me , naturally they will persecute you . And if they had listened to me , they would listen to you .

ID:	4346
INPUT:	Orduan , Daniel purpuraz janzteko eta lepoan urrezko katea jartzeko agindu zuen <unk> , eta agintez hirugarren zela erreinuan aldarrikatu zuen .
PRED:	Then Daniel gave me a gold hand of gold and gold , and he ordered him to be dressed in Nebuchadnezzar 's royal robes . He ordered that he was placed on the third throne of the throne of the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	Then at Belshazzar 's command , Daniel was dressed in purple robes , a gold chain was hung around his neck , and he was proclaimed the third highest ruler in the kingdom .

ID:	4347
INPUT:	Zenbait apaiz ere egoera berean zeuden : Hobaias , Hakotz eta Barzilairen ondorengoak ziren . Azken honek Galaadeko Barzilairen alaba batekin ezkondu zelako zeraman izen hori .
PRED:	The high priest also also also also returned from exile — also returned from Bethlehem , and he also returned from Bethlehem . ( This is the daughter of Gilead , who had married her husband . )
GOLD:	Three families of priests — Hobaiah , Hakkoz , and Barzillai — also returned . ( This Barzillai had married a woman who was a descendant of Barzillai of Gilead , and he had taken her family name . )

ID:	4348
INPUT:	Baina zuzen <unk> sufritu beharrean gertatzen bazarete , zorionekoak zuek ! Ez izan inoren beldur , ez ikaratu !
PRED:	But when you know that God has given you victory over you , they do n't fear you .
GOLD:	But even if you suffer for doing what is right , God will reward you for it . So do n't worry or be afraid of their threats .

ID:	4349
INPUT:	eta beste bi atzealdeko kantoietarako .
PRED:	and two frames for the rear of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	along with two additional frames to reinforce the rear corners of the Tabernacle .

ID:	4350
INPUT:	Egun hartan , Jaunari sagaraturiko aldare bat egongo da Egiptoren erdian , eta Jaunaren ohorezko oroitarri bat muga ondoan .
PRED:	On that day the Lord will be a sacred offering to the Lord , a place of Egypt will be a place of Egypt .
GOLD:	In that day there will be an altar to the Lord in the heart of Egypt , and there will be a monument to the Lord at its border .

ID:	4351
INPUT:	( 38 , 8 )
PRED:	Teaching about Prayer
GOLD:	The Incense

ID:	4352
INPUT:	gizakia etzan eta ez da berriro jaikiko , ortzia desagertu eta gero ere , ez da itzartuko , ez da bere loalditik esnatuko .
PRED:	The eyes of the earth will not see the heavens , and the heavens will not rise again , and the heavens will not fall .
GOLD:	people are laid to rest and do not rise again.Until the heavens are no more , they will not wake upnor be roused from their sleep .

ID:	4353
INPUT:	Ikusi zuen Jaunak handituz zihoala munduan gizakiaren gaiztakeria eta honen burubide guztiek <unk> jotzen zutela beti .
PRED:	When the Lord saw that he was on the earth , he saw that all the evil of the earth had seen in the world .
GOLD:	The Lord observed the extent of human wickedness on the earth , and he saw that everything they thought or imagined was consistently and totally evil .

ID:	4354
INPUT:	<unk> baino ere <unk> bedeinkatu zuen Jaunak Job bere ondorengo urteetan : hamalau mila ardi , sei mila gamelu , mila idi-pare eta mila asteme izan zituen .
PRED:	At that time the Lord blessed Job , and he blessed his men . He also blessed them as much as much as much as he had commanded .
GOLD:	So the Lord blessed Job in the second half of his life even more than in the beginning . For now he had 14,000 sheep , 6,000 camels , 1,000 teams of oxen , and 1,000 female donkeys .

ID:	4355
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Jehuri : « Niri atsegin zaidana eginez ongi jokatu duzulako , eta Akaben errege-etxeari nik nahi nuena egin diozulako , zure ondorengoak jarriko dira , laugarren belaunaldiraino , Israelgo errege-aulkian » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Jehu , “ I have given you everything in the land of King Ahab of Ahab 's family . You have given me the fourth year of King Ahab of Ahab of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Nonetheless the Lord said to Jehu , “ You have done well in following my instructions to destroy the family of Ahab . Therefore , your descendants will be kings of Israel down to the fourth generation . ”

ID:	4356
INPUT:	Eta Jaunaren aldarea berriztaturik , <unk> eta esker oneko opariak eskaini zituen bertan , eta Jauna , Israelen Jainkoa , gurtzeko agindu zion Judari .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : He made a covenant between the altar and the altar of the Lord and the God of Israel , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , and Judah , and Judah .
GOLD:	Then he restored the altar of the Lord and sacrificed peace offerings and thanksgiving offerings on it . He also encouraged the people of Judah to worship the Lord , the God of Israel .

ID:	4357
INPUT:	Etorri den bidetik itzuliko da ; ez da sartuko hiri honetan . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	“ Go and return to the road , ” says the Lord . “ This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	The king will return to his own countryby the same road on which he came.He will not enter this city , 'says the Lord .

ID:	4358
INPUT:	Ni mendian nintzen , Jaunak zuekin eginiko itunaren harlauzak jasotzera <unk> . Berrogei egun eta berrogei gau egin nituen mendian ezer jan eta edan gabe .
PRED:	I was with you that the Lord had made you a covenant with the covenant of the covenant I made with you , and I ate it on the mountain of the mountain .
GOLD:	This happened when I was on the mountain receiving the tablets of stone inscribed with the words of the covenant that the Lord had made with you . I was there for forty days and forty nights , and all that time I ate no food and drank no water .

ID:	4359
INPUT:	Jerusalem mendeku eske
PRED:	Jesus Blesses Jerusalem
GOLD:	's Vengeance on Babylon

ID:	4360
INPUT:	Judak Jaunaren ituna hautsi
PRED:	Judah 's Judgment against Judah
GOLD:	A Call to Faithfulness

ID:	4361
INPUT:	Pertsona <unk> bezala mintzo natzaizue ; juzgatu zeuek diodana .
PRED:	For I speak to you , like those who hate me .
GOLD:	You are reasonable people . Decide for yourselves if what I am saying is true .

ID:	4362
INPUT:	<unk> handia
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Message about Egypt
GOLD:	Judah 's Terrible Drought

ID:	4363
INPUT:	« Joani entzun zion herri osoak , baita zergalariek ere , Jainkoak arrazoi zuela aitortu zuten , haren bataioa hartuz .
PRED:	“ When the people heard this , the people of the people of the people of the world , and they also followed him .
GOLD:	When they heard this , all the people — even the tax collectors — agreed that God 's way was right , for they had been baptized by John .

ID:	4364
INPUT:	Delaias , Tobias eta Nekodaren ondorengoak ziren , 652 lagun .
PRED:	This is the list of the family of Elam , the leader of the family of Asher .
GOLD:	This group included the families of Delaiah , Tobiah , and Nekoda — a total of 652 people .

ID:	4365
INPUT:	Lebana , Hagaba eta <unk> ;
PRED:	Eltolad , Mehida , Harsha ,
GOLD:	Lebanah , Hagabah , Shalmai ,

ID:	4366
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> <unk> hiriko arduradunek <unk> bat hartuko dute , behin ere lanean jardun edo uztarrian lotu gabea .
PRED:	At that time the men of the city will be able to be able to be able to be able to take it with a bird , and it will be able to take it into a snake .
GOLD:	When the nearest town has been determined , that town 's elders must select from the herd a heifer that has never been trained or yoked to a plow .

ID:	4367
INPUT:	Jaunak Jeremiasi beste mezu hau eman zion :
PRED:	This message came to Jeremiah from the Lord :
GOLD:	The Lord gave another message to Jeremiah . He said ,

ID:	4368
INPUT:	« <unk> dagokienez , abelgorria nahiz abere xehea izan , <unk> bat Jaunari sagaratuko zaio , <unk> bidez <unk> .
PRED:	“ If you have a covenant with the Lord , if you will be able to be able to serve the Lord , and if you have been able to obey the Lord .
GOLD:	Count off every tenth animal from your herds and flocks and set them apart for the Lord as holy .

ID:	4369
INPUT:	hasieran <unk> testigu eta gero berri onaren <unk> <unk> jakinarazi <unk> arabera .
PRED:	At that time the Festival of Shelters , and when I told you that the Good News about Christ .
GOLD:	They used the eyewitness reports circulating among us from the early disciples .

ID:	4370
INPUT:	Horrela , erosi nion Anatoteko alorra neure lehengusu <unk> . Zilarrezko hamazazpi txanpon ordaindu nizkion .
PRED:	I have bought this message from my dear friend , and I have been given to you .
GOLD:	So I bought the field at Anathoth , paying Hanamel seventeen pieces of silver for it .

ID:	4371
INPUT:	Beraz , jendea bildu zenean , Pilatok galdetu zien : — Zein nahi duzue askatzea , Barrabas ala Jesus , Mesias delakoa ?
PRED:	When Pilate arrived , he asked them , “ Why do you want me to release me ? ”
GOLD:	As the crowds gathered before Pilate 's house that morning , he asked them , “ Which one do you want me to release to you — Barabbas , or Jesus who is called the Messiah ? ”

ID:	4372
INPUT:	baina oihuka eta deiadarka hasi naizenean , bere soinekoa utzi eta ihes egin du kanpora » .
PRED:	But when I look on them , while he comes out , and he comes away . ”
GOLD:	“ But when I screamed , he ran outside , leaving his cloak with me ! ”

ID:	4373
INPUT:	Dena dela , zuetariko bakoitzak maita beza emaztea bere burua bezala , eta emazteak izan biezaio begirune senarrari .
PRED:	If you are each other , let 's be married to each other , let the wife be his wife .
GOLD:	So again I say , each man must love his wife as he loves himself , and the wife must respect her husband .

ID:	4374
INPUT:	Leak zioen : « Jainkoak <unk> egin nau senarrari neskamea eman <unk> » . Eta Isakar eman zion izen .
PRED:	Leah said to him , “ God has given me a message to me . ” So she named me , which was named after their ancestor Jacob .
GOLD:	She named him Issachar , for she said , “ God has rewarded me for giving my servant to my husband as a wife . ”

ID:	4375
INPUT:	« Nola ausartzen zarete , moabdarrok , adoretsu , borrokan <unk> zaretela esaten ?
PRED:	“ Why are you trying to kill you ? Who are you ? What sorrow awaits you ?
GOLD:	“ You used to boast , ‘ We are heroes , mighty men of war . '

ID:	4376
INPUT:	Hori guztia gertatuko zaie nire hitzak aditu nahi izan ez dituztelako eta behin eta berriro , etengabe , bidali dizkiedan profetei jaramonik egin ez <unk> . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will not listen to all the prophets , and I will not listen to my prophets , and I will not listen to my prophets .
GOLD:	For they refuse to listen to me , though I have spoken to them repeatedly through the prophets I sent . And you who are in exile have not listened either , ” says the Lord .

ID:	4377
INPUT:	esaten : « Gizaseme , israeldarrengana bidaltzen zaitut , jende errebelde horrengana ; horiek eta horien arbasoak nire aurka altxatu dira gaur arte .
PRED:	“ Son of man , ” says the people of Israel . “ I am sending you to honor my people , and they have rebelled against my ancestors .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , ” he said , “ I am sending you to the nation of Israel , a rebellious nation that has rebelled against me . They and their ancestors have been rebelling against me to this very day .

ID:	4378
INPUT:	Kristo Melkisedeken antzera apaiz ( 7 , <unk> )
PRED:	Christ , who is like an apostle of the high priest , who was with an apostle of Melchizedek .
GOLD:	Melchizedek Is Greater Than Abraham

ID:	4379
INPUT:	Ez fidatu , “ Jaunaren tenplua , Jaunaren tenplua ” <unk> engainatzen zaituzteten horietaz .
PRED:	Do not listen to the Temple of the Lord , for he has heard the Temple of the Lord . '
GOLD:	But do n't be fooled by those who promise you safety simply because the Lord 's Temple is here . They chant , “ The Lord 's Temple is here ! The Lord 's Temple is here ! ”

ID:	4380
INPUT:	eta ez ziren leial izan <unk> senitartekoekin , hark israeldarrei hainbeste on egin zien arren .
PRED:	And when they were unfaithful to the people of Israel , they were all able to know that God had done .
GOLD:	Nor did they show any loyalty to the family of Jerub-baal ( that is , Gideon ) , despite all the good he had done for Israel .

ID:	4381
INPUT:	ez dute ezagutzen bake-bidea .
PRED:	They do n't know what they do .
GOLD:	They do n't know where to find peace . ”

ID:	4382
INPUT:	Zahagi zaharretan ere ez da ardo berririk sartzen ; bestela , zahagiak lehertu egingo lirateke , eta ardoa isuri eta zahagiak galdu . Ez ! Ardo berria zahagi berrietan sartzen da , eta batak eta besteak irauten dute » .
PRED:	“ If the new new new new new new new new new wine , the new wine will be thrown into the new wine , and the new wine will not be lost . ”
GOLD:	“ And no one puts new wine into old wineskins . For the old skins would burst from the pressure , spilling the wine and ruining the skins . New wine is stored in new wineskins so that both are preserved . ”

ID:	4383
INPUT:	<unk> batean , zaldizko bat ikusi nuen zaldi gorri baten gainean , <unk> batean geldirik , sastraka artean ; haren atzean , zenbait zaldi gorri , nabar eta zuri .
PRED:	I saw a great army with chariots , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	In a vision during the night , I saw a man sitting on a red horse that was standing among some myrtle trees in a small valley . Behind him were riders on red , brown , and white horses .

ID:	4384
INPUT:	Paulok honela esan zien ehuntari eta soldaduei : « Horiek ontzian gelditzen ez badira , zuek ez zarete bizirik aterako » .
PRED:	Then Paul said to them , “ You must not be a large crowd in the boat , and you wo n't be saved . ”
GOLD:	But Paul said to the commanding officer and the soldiers , “ You will all die unless the sailors stay aboard . ”

ID:	4385
INPUT:	Zu hari begira zeundela , harri bat atera zen menditik , inork ere bultzatu gabe , eta irudiaren burdinazko eta buztinezko oinak jo eta txiki-txiki egin zituen .
PRED:	You must see that I have come out to the Mount Sinai , and no one was able to break them with iron , bronze , bronze , or iron , bronze , or iron , or iron .
GOLD:	As you watched , a rock was cut from a mountain , but not by human hands . It struck the feet of iron and clay , smashing them to bits .

ID:	4386
INPUT:	<unk> dolua
PRED:	Young Man
GOLD:	Joseph Reassures His Brothers

ID:	4387
INPUT:	Heriotza-zigorra merezi duen hiltzailearen bizia ezin izango da ordaindu diruaren truke ; heriotzara emango dute .
PRED:	The king 's life will not pay life for money . He must pay the money to death .
GOLD:	Also , you must never accept a ransom payment for the life of someone judged guilty of murder and subject to execution ; murderers must always be put to death .

ID:	4388
INPUT:	Benjaminen leinutik , Gideoniren seme Abidan ;
PRED:	From the family of Benjamin
GOLD:	BenjaminAbidan son of Gideoni

ID:	4389
INPUT:	Itsasoak ditu <unk> , hondora jaitsi <unk> antzera .
PRED:	The clouds of the earth will bow down , and the waves of the earth will be like an eagle .
GOLD:	The deep waters gushed over them ; they sank to the bottom like a stone .

ID:	4390
INPUT:	Ona denak ona ateratzen du bere barneko ontasun-altxorretik ; eta gaiztoak gaitza bere gaiztakeri altxorretik . Ahoak esan , bihotzari gainezka <unk> esaten baitu .
PRED:	This is good and good in the inner courtyard that is evil in the inner life of the Lord 's heart . For the evil words of the evil words that is evil .
GOLD:	A good person produces good things from the treasury of a good heart , and an evil person produces evil things from the treasury of an evil heart . What you say flows from what is in your heart .

ID:	4391
INPUT:	Ohartu , bada , Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak lurralde eder horren jabetza ez dizuela zeuen <unk> ematen ; izan ere , herri burugogor baitzarete .
PRED:	But now the Lord your God is the one who is the one who gives you victory over your land .
GOLD:	You must recognize that the Lord your God is not giving you this good land because you are good , for you are not — you are a stubborn people .

ID:	4392
INPUT:	« Esan Aaroni , beronen semeei eta israeldar guztiei : Norbaitek , israeldarra nahiz Israelen bizi den etorkina izan , botoren bat betetzeko edo norberaren borondatez egin ohi diren <unk> bat Jaunari eskaini nahi badio ,
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to Aaron and his sons and his sons and all the people of Israel . If any of the people of Israel are to obey the Lord , if you do as a sin offering or a sin offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Give Aaron and his sons and all the Israelites these instructions , which apply both to native Israelites and to the foreigners living among you . “ If you present a gift as a burnt offering to the Lord , whether it is to fulfill a vow or is a voluntary offering ,

ID:	4393
INPUT:	Ken iezaiozue , bada , talentua eta eman hamar dituenari .
PRED:	May anyone be taken away from the dead , and he has given them ten pieces of silver .
GOLD:	“ Then he ordered , ‘ Take the money from this servant , and give it to the one with the ten bags of silver .

ID:	4394
INPUT:	« Nire <unk> , gizaseme antzeko bat ikusi nuen zeruetako hodeietan etortzen . Gizon <unk> hurbildu zenean , honi aurkeztu zioten .
PRED:	“ Son of man , who saw a man like a man sitting on the throne of heaven , and when I saw this happen to him .
GOLD:	As my vision continued that night , I saw someone like a son of man coming with the clouds of heaven . He approached the Ancient One and was led into his presence .

ID:	4395
INPUT:	Hurbil zakizkit , defenda nazazu , askatu etsaien eskutik .
PRED:	Come , O God , rescue me from my enemies ; rescue me from their enemies .
GOLD:	You know of my shame , scorn , and disgrace.You see all that my enemies are doing .

ID:	4396
INPUT:	<unk> emakumearen <unk> bukatu
PRED:	When Athaliah heard that the woman had seen , she was very angry with Gehazi .
GOLD:	The Woman from Shunem Returns Home

ID:	4397
INPUT:	urrezko bi katetxoak bularreko <unk> eraztunetan katigatu zituzten ,
PRED:	There were two gold rings at the entrance to the four corners of the Most Holy Place .
GOLD:	They tied the two gold cords to the rings on the chestpiece .

ID:	4398
INPUT:	( 2 Erg 23 , <unk> — 24 , 17 )
PRED:	Ahaziah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Jehoiakim Rules in Judah

ID:	4399
INPUT:	Egin lurraldearen planoa , zazpi zatitan banatuz , eta ekarri niri . Nik hemen , Jaunaren , gure Jainkoaren , aurrean , zotz egingo dut .
PRED:	Make these instructions to the land of the Lord . I brought them out of the land of the Lord our God , and I will give you a sacred covenant between us .
GOLD:	And when you record the seven divisions of the land and bring them to me , I will cast sacred lots in the presence of the Lord our God to assign land to each tribe .

ID:	4400
INPUT:	Laugarren egunean , esan zioten Samsonen emazteari : — Atera iezaiozu azpikeriaz senarrari <unk> zer esan nahi duen ; bestela , su emango dizugu , baita zuen aitaren etxeari ere . Guri <unk> asmoz gonbidatu al gaituzue ?
PRED:	On the fourth day the fourth year of his wife came to his wife , and he said to his wife , “ What do you want ? ” So he demanded . “ If we want you to give you a great banquet , he will give you to his father . ”
GOLD:	On the fourth day they said to Samson 's wife , “ Entice your husband to explain the riddle for us , or we will burn down your father 's house with you in it . Did you invite us to this party just to make us poor ? ”

ID:	4401
INPUT:	Izan ere , zuenetik zabaldu da Mazedonia eta <unk> Jaunaren mezua ; eta eskualde horietara ez ezik , bazter guztietara ere heldu da Jainkoarengan duzuen sinesmenaren entzutea , guk ezer esan beharrik gabe .
PRED:	After this , the message came to visit the Lord 's message , when they learned that all the kingdoms of the land of the Lord , we have not been given to all the believers in the land of the Lord .
GOLD:	And now the word of the Lord is ringing out from you to people everywhere , even beyond Macedonia and Achaia , for wherever we go we find people telling us about your faith in God . We do n't need to tell them about it ,

ID:	4402
INPUT:	kanpalekura bertara erorarazi zituen , <unk> ingurura .
PRED:	He brought them to the camp , so he could bring them to the camp .
GOLD:	He caused the birds to fall within their campand all around their tents .

ID:	4403
INPUT:	baina apaizak ikusten badu lizuna ez dela zabaldu esandako gauza horietako batean ,
PRED:	But if the priest finds that the priest has not told you ,
GOLD:	“ But if the priest examines it and finds that the contaminated area has not spread in the clothing , the fabric , or the leather ,

ID:	4404
INPUT:	Jaunak , ordea , erantzun zion : — Marta , Marta , gauza askorengatik zabiltza kezkaz eta larri ;
PRED:	But the Lord said to her , “ My child is very sick , and when you were very sick . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord said to her , “ My dear Martha , you are worried and upset over all these details !

ID:	4405
INPUT:	Orduan , Saulek esan zien berekin zituenei : — Begiratu eta ikusi nor joan den gure artetik . Begiratu zuten , bada , eta Jonatan eta ezkutaria falta ziren .
PRED:	Then Saul saw him with him and said to him , “ Who saw us ? ” So Saul saw that he was his armor and his armor bearer .
GOLD:	“ Call the roll and find out who 's missing , ” Saul ordered . And when they checked , they found that Jonathan and his armor bearer were gone .

ID:	4406
INPUT:	<unk> buruzagia Helonen seme Eliab izango da ,
PRED:	Azariah son of Harim will be born , and the son of Ammihud .
GOLD:	ZebulunEliab son of Helon57,400

ID:	4407
INPUT:	Baina ikusten ez duguna itxaro badugu , iraupenez behar dugu zain egon .
PRED:	But we can see that we ca n't be saved .
GOLD:	But if we look forward to something we do n't yet have , we must wait patiently and confidently . )

ID:	4408
INPUT:	Handik , biharamunean , <unk> <unk> iritsi ginen itsasoz ; hurrengo egunean <unk> heldu ginen , eta <unk> Miletora .
PRED:	At that time we came to the island of Cyprus , where we came from the island of Cyprus and near the island of Cyprus , where we were baptized .
GOLD:	The next day we sailed past the island of Kios . The following day we crossed to the island of Samos , and a day later we arrived at Miletus .

ID:	4409
INPUT:	egoitzaren beste aldera , iparraldera , beste hogei ohol ,
PRED:	The north side of the Tabernacle
GOLD:	For the north side of the Tabernacle , he made another twenty frames ,

ID:	4410
INPUT:	eta guk erantzun genion ez <unk> etor geure anaia gazteena geurekin ez <unk> , hura gabe ezin ginela zure aurrera agertu .
PRED:	But we know that we are dead , so we can not know that we are here in your own land . We ca n't know that we are here in your own land .
GOLD:	we replied , ‘ We ca n't go unless you let our youngest brother go with us . We 'll never get to see the man 's face unless our youngest brother is with us . '

ID:	4411
INPUT:	Behin batean , Joabi dei egin zion , erregeagana bidaltzeko asmoz ; Joabek , ordea , ez zuen Absalomengana joan nahi izan . Bigarrenez egin zion dei ; baina etorri nahi izan ez zuenez ,
PRED:	One day Joab called out to Joab , but Joab sent him to fight against the king . But Joab refused to go to Joab , but he refused to come to fight the prophet .
GOLD:	Then Absalom sent for Joab to ask him to intercede for him , but Joab refused to come . Absalom sent for him a second time , but again Joab refused to come .

ID:	4412
INPUT:	Eta esan zien : — Zoazte mendira , zuen bila dabiltzanek harrapa ez zaitzaten . Egon bertan hiru egun ezkutaturik , zuen pertsegitzaileak hirira itzuli arte . Gero , jarraitu zeuen bideari .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Go back into the hills , and do n't let him go back to the city until you have left the city . ” So he left the city and left the city until he left them .
GOLD:	“ Escape to the hill country , ” she told them . “ Hide there for three days from the men searching for you . Then , when they have returned , you can go on your way . ”

ID:	4413
INPUT:	Uziasen erregealdia
PRED:	Jotham Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Uzziah Rules in Judah

ID:	4414
INPUT:	<unk> hau bete eta bildutako dirua haien esku jarri ondoren , <unk> abiatuko naiz , zuen hiritik igaroz .
PRED:	Now I have obeyed your money and burned them on the side of the town that had been cut off from the town of the town .
GOLD:	As soon as I have delivered this money and completed this good deed of theirs , I will come to see you on my way to Spain .

ID:	4415
INPUT:	Baina <unk> batean hondoa jo zuten ; <unk> <unk> sartua gelditu zen , mugitu ezinik ; <unk> , berriz , <unk> zihoan olatuen <unk> .
PRED:	But when they saw that the Lord was able to kill him , they were sitting at the place where they were buried . But when they saw that they were afraid of the dead , they were buried at that time .
GOLD:	But they hit a shoal and ran the ship aground too soon . The bow of the ship stuck fast , while the stern was repeatedly smashed by the force of the waves and began to break apart .

ID:	4416
INPUT:	Nik ere biluztu egingo zaitut , zure lotsariak bistan jarriko .
PRED:	I will scatter you away from your mouth , and you will wear them away .
GOLD:	I myself will strip youand expose you to shame .

ID:	4417
INPUT:	Gaiztoak harrokeriaz erasotzen dio <unk> , asmatzen dituen azpikeriez dauka harrapatua .
PRED:	The wicked plot against the wicked , and they plot against him .
GOLD:	The wicked arrogantly hunt down the poor.Let them be caught in the evil they plan for others .

ID:	4418
INPUT:	Jainkoak zuen aurretik bidali nau , zuentzat behar adina janari gordetzeko eta zuek harrigarriro salbatzeko .
PRED:	God sent me ahead of you before you , and you have given me food .
GOLD:	God has sent me ahead of you to keep you and your families alive and to preserve many survivors .

ID:	4419
INPUT:	Sasoi bikaina izango duzu hilobia arte , gari-balak uztaroan bezala .
PRED:	For you will be like a little while a little while you grow in a field .
GOLD:	You will go to the grave at a ripe old age , like a sheaf of grain harvested at the proper time !

ID:	4420
INPUT:	Davidek , orduan , Akixi : — Zer egin dut , baina ? Ikusi al duzu zeure zerbitzari honengan deus txarrik zuregana heldu <unk> geroztik ? Zergatik ezin naiz , bada , joan ene errege jaunaren etsaiak borrokatzera ?
PRED:	One day David asked him , “ What do you have done ? Why do you realize that you have seen ? ” So David asked him , “ Why do you realize that I am going to kill you ? ”
GOLD:	“ What have I done to deserve this treatment ? ” David demanded . “ What have you ever found in your servant , that I ca n't go and fight the enemies of my lord the king ? ”

ID:	4421
INPUT:	Liztortzarrak bidaliko ditu Jaunak zuen Jainkoak haien kontra , ezkutuan gordeta bizirik gelditutako azkenak ere garbitu arte .
PRED:	For the Lord your God will send you away , and you will have destroyed them until you have destroyed them .
GOLD:	And then the Lord your God will send terror to drive out the few survivors still hiding from you !

ID:	4422
INPUT:	Bukatzean , esan zioten : — Non da Sara zure emaztea ? — <unk> — erantzun zuen Abrahamek .
PRED:	“ Where are your wife ? ” they asked . “ Where are your wife ? ” Abraham replied , “ Abraham 's wife , ” Abraham replied .
GOLD:	“ Where is Sarah , your wife ? ” the visitors asked . “ She 's inside the tent , ” Abraham replied .

ID:	4423
INPUT:	Bai , egia da <unk> , higuingarri zait maltzurki hitz egitea .
PRED:	For they have rebelled against me , and they would speak against me .
GOLD:	for I speak the truthand detest every kind of deception .

ID:	4424
INPUT:	Esna zaitez , Sion , esnatu , jantzi indarrez ! Jantzi soinekorik ederrenak , Jerusalem , hiri santu horrek ! Atzerritar sinesgaberik , kutsaturiko <unk> baita berriro zuregan sartuko .
PRED:	Wake up , wake up ! Get up , and put your clothes on your head , and put on your head to you . I will bring you back to you , and I will bring you back to your own name .
GOLD:	Wake up , wake up , O Zion ! Clothe yourself with strength.Put on your beautiful clothes , O holy city of Jerusalem , for unclean and godless people will enter your gates no longer .

ID:	4425
INPUT:	Bazen Samarian Jaunaren profeta bat , <unk> izenekoa . Samariara itzulian zetorren gudarosteari bidera atera eta esan zien : « Jaunak , gure arbasoen Jainkoak , zuen esku utzi ditu Judakoak , berauen kontra haserre zegoelako . Baina zuek halako amorruz hil dituzue , ezen zeruraino heldu baita zuen egintzaren oihartzuna .
PRED:	There was a prophet who had been a prophet from the Lord , who had sent him to meet him , and he told him , “ The Lord has sent me out of the people of Israel to kill me . ”
GOLD:	But a prophet of the Lord named Oded was there in Samaria when the army of Israel returned home . He went out to meet them and said , “ The Lord , the God of your ancestors , was angry with Judah and let you defeat them . But you have gone too far , killing them without mercy , and all heaven is disturbed .

ID:	4426
INPUT:	Eguna zabaltzean , zenbait <unk> elkar hartu zuten eta zin egin , ez zutela ez jango eta ez edango Paulori bizia kendu arte .
PRED:	At that time the next morning , some of them would not eat or drink or drink or drink .
GOLD:	The next morning a group of Jews got together and bound themselves with an oath not to eat or drink until they had killed Paul .

ID:	4427
INPUT:	Hona hemen israeldarren arbasoen familiaburuak : Israelen lehen-seme Rubenen semeak Henok , Palu , Hetzron eta Karmi izan ziren . Hauek dira Rubenen jatorriko familiak .
PRED:	These are the names of the clans of the tribes of Israel : The sons of Reuben , Gad , named after their ancestor Perez . The sons of Reuben , named after their ancestor Perez .
GOLD:	These are the ancestors of some of the clans of Israel : The sons of Reuben , Israel 's oldest son , were Hanoch , Pallu , Hezron , and Carmi . Their descendants became the clans of Reuben .

ID:	4428
INPUT:	Zuei , <unk> , diotsuet : Ezagutzen duzue Aita . Zuei , gurasooi , diotsuet : Ezagutzen duzue hasieratik zen hura . Zuei , gazteoi , diotsuet : Indartsu zarete eta Jainkoaren mezua zuengan tinko dago eta garaitu duzue gaiztoa .
PRED:	I tell you , ‘ Father , the Father of you who are in the world of your Father . I am writing to you in the world of God , and you are bringing me to me . '
GOLD:	I have written to you who are God 's childrenbecause you know the Father.I have written to you who are mature in the faithbecause you know Christ , who existed from the beginning.I have written to you who are young in the faithbecause you are strong.God 's word lives in your hearts , and you have won your battle with the evil one .

ID:	4429
INPUT:	Eta eskatu eta hartzen ez baduzue , gaizki eskatzen duzuelako da , zeuen grina txarrak asetzeko .
PRED:	And if you ask , you wo n't be afraid of your own desires , and you wo n't get rid of evil desires .
GOLD:	And even when you ask , you do n't get it because your motives are all wrong — you want only what will give you pleasure .

ID:	4430
INPUT:	Marfilezko errege-aulki bikain bat ere eginarazi zuen erregeak , eta urre hutsez jantzi .
PRED:	Then the king made a great king , along with gold , gold , gold , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	Then the king made a huge throne , decorated with ivory and overlaid with pure gold .

ID:	4431
INPUT:	Denak harriturik gelditu ziren ikusten zutenaz : mutuak hizketan , elbarriak sendaturik , herrenak ibiltzen eta itsuak ikusten . Eta Israelen Jainkoa goresten hasi ziren .
PRED:	The crowd were amazed , and those who were blind . The lame are blind and lame , lame , lame , lame , and the lame came to the blind .
GOLD:	The crowd was amazed ! Those who had n't been able to speak were talking , the crippled were made well , the lame were walking , and the blind could see again ! And they praised the God of Israel .

ID:	4432
INPUT:	Ai ni errespetatzeko eta nire aginduak betetzeko jarrera hori izango balute beti ! Zoriontsu izango lirateke beti , bai beraiek , bai ondorengoak .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits my people , who have been given to my commands , their children , and their children will be filled with their own children .
GOLD:	Oh , that they would always have hearts like this , that they might fear me and obey all my commands ! If they did , they and their descendants would prosper forever .

ID:	4433
INPUT:	Izen bat darama bere jantzian eta bere <unk> idatzia : « erregeen Errege eta jaunen Jaun » .
PRED:	Instead , give back his clothing and sealed with the scroll : “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : The king of the kings of the kings of the Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	On his robe at his thigh was written this title : King of all kings and Lord of all lords .

ID:	4434
INPUT:	Gero , batzar osoak mandatariak igorri zizkien Rimon harkaitzean gorderik zeuden benjamindarrei , bakea eskainiz .
PRED:	Then all the men of Benjamin sent a message to the men of Benjamin :
GOLD:	The Israelite assembly sent a peace delegation to the remaining people of Benjamin who were living at the rock of Rimmon .

ID:	4435
INPUT:	Jakoben ondorengoen artean , bakar batzuk besterikez dira <unk> indartsuagana .
PRED:	The descendants of Jacob will not be a few of his descendants , for they have no fear .
GOLD:	A remnant will return ; yes , the remnant of Jacob will return to the Mighty God .

ID:	4436
INPUT:	Balaamek erantzun zion : — Orain hemen nauzu ! Baina , zer esan dezaket ? Jainkoak ahoan jarriko dizkidan hitzak bakarrik esan <unk> .
PRED:	Then Balaam replied , “ I am here here here here ! ” But when God said , “ I will give you my words . ”
GOLD:	Balaam replied , “ Look , now I have come , but I have no power to say whatever I want . I will speak only the message that God puts in my mouth . ”

ID:	4437
INPUT:	nire legeen arabera joka eta nire erabakiak betetzen saia zaitezten . Zuek nire herri izango zarete eta ni zuen Jainko .
PRED:	If you obey my decrees and regulations , you must obey my decrees and obey my decrees .
GOLD:	so they will obey my decrees and regulations . Then they will truly be my people , and I will be their God .

ID:	4438
INPUT:	Eta hauxe da Jainkoaren asmo ezkutua : Kristo Jesusen bitartez eta berri onari esker , <unk> <unk> izatea , Kristorekin gorputz bat bera <unk> eta agintzari beraren partaide izatea .
PRED:	For God 's message is revealed to Christ , so that we will be able to obey God 's Good News . And when we know that Christ has been filled with Christ , and so that we will be able to be filled with Christ .
GOLD:	And this is God 's plan : Both Gentiles and Jews who believe the Good News share equally in the riches inherited by God 's children . Both are part of the same body , and both enjoy the promise of blessings because they belong to Christ Jesus .

ID:	4439
INPUT:	<unk> zure emazteak ! <unk> zure jakinduria entzunez beti zure aurrean dauden zerbitzari hauek !
PRED:	What sorrow awaits your wife , your servant , so that your servant should be on your behalf .
GOLD:	How happy your people must be ! What a privilege for your officials to stand here day after day , listening to your wisdom !

ID:	4440
INPUT:	Salomonek otoitza bukatzean , zerutik jaitsitako suak kiskali egin zituen erre-opariak eta eskaintzak , eta Jaunaren aintzak bete zuen tenplua .
PRED:	Then King Solomon brought fire from heaven and burned incense on the altar of the Lord . He made a burnt offering to the Temple of the Lord and the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	When Solomon finished praying , fire flashed down from heaven and burned up the burnt offerings and sacrifices , and the glorious presence of the Lord filled the Temple .

ID:	4441
INPUT:	Bi eskuak aker biziaren buruan ezarriz , israeldarren gaiztakeria , errebeldia eta bekatu guztien aitormena egingo du . Honela , akerraren burura botako ditu guztiak , eta horren kargu duenaren eskuz basamortura bidaliko du .
PRED:	He will put his hands on the head of the sin of the people of Israel and your sins , and he will do everything in the wilderness of all the people of Israel , and he will send them into the wilderness of the wilderness .
GOLD:	He will lay both of his hands on the goat 's head and confess over it all the wickedness , rebellion , and sins of the people of Israel . In this way , he will transfer the people 's sins to the head of the goat . Then a man specially chosen for the task will drive the goat into the wilderness .

ID:	4442
INPUT:	Orduan , marmarka hasi ziren entzuleak , « Neu naiz zerutik <unk> ogia » esan zuelako ,
PRED:	Then they began to know that I am the Good News of the world , and when they heard that the bread of God had been healed .
GOLD:	Then the people began to murmur in disagreement because he had said , “ I am the bread that came down from heaven . ”

ID:	4443
INPUT:	Felipe <unk> esatera joan zen , eta biek , Andresek eta Felipek , Jesusi jakinarazi zioten .
PRED:	Philip sent this message to Philip , and Philip came to Philip and told him what he had happened .
GOLD:	Philip told Andrew about it , and they went together to ask Jesus .

ID:	4444
INPUT:	Jaunaren izen ahaltsua iragarriko dute Sionen , haren gorespena Jerusalemen ,
PRED:	The nations of the Lord is in Jerusalem , all the nations of Jerusalem ,
GOLD:	when multitudes gather togetherand kingdoms come to worship the Lord .

ID:	4445
INPUT:	baita geroago ere , Josiasen seme Joiakim Judako errege izan zen garaitik Josiasen beste seme baten , Sedekiasen , erregealdiko hamaikagarren urtearen azkena arte . Urte horretako bosgarren hilean Jerusalemgo bizilagunak erbesteratu zituzten .
PRED:	This was the next year of Josiah son of Josiah , the reign of Josiah son of Josiah , the reign of Josiah son of Josiah son of Josiah , who lived in Jerusalem during the fourth year of King Zedekiah of Judah .
GOLD:	The Lord 's messages continued throughout the reign of King Jehoiakim , Josiah 's son , until the eleventh year of the reign of King Zedekiah , another of Josiah 's sons . In August of that eleventh year the people of Jerusalem were taken away as captives .

ID:	4446
INPUT:	Apaizek eta lebitarrek , beren buruaren garbikuntza egin ondoren , herriaren , harresiaren eta ateen garbikuntza egin zuten .
PRED:	The priests and Levites were purified by the Levites and purified themselves . Then they left the Tabernacle and burned it on the sides of the altar .
GOLD:	The priests and Levites first purified themselves ; then they purified the people , the gates , and the wall .

ID:	4447
INPUT:	Madarikatua , artaldeko abere osasuntsu bat eskainiko didala agindu eta gero gaixoa eskaintzen didan gezurtia ! Errege handia naiz ni , eta begirune didate herriek . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak .
PRED:	‘ Cursed is a sheep and goats for the sheep and goats , but I have given you a banquet . I have given you a great banquet for the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken !
GOLD:	“ Cursed is the cheat who promises to give a fine ram from his flock but then sacrifices a defective one to the Lord . For I am a great king , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , “ and my name is feared among the nations !

ID:	4448
INPUT:	Emazte asko zuenez , hirurogeita hamar seme-alaba izan zituen .
PRED:	One of the people of Israel had two sons and daughters .
GOLD:	He had seventy sons born to him , for he had many wives .

ID:	4449
INPUT:	Eta nik erregetza ematen dizuet , Aitak neuri eman zidan bezala :
PRED:	Then I gave me the Kingdom of God , just as I had given me .
GOLD:	And just as my Father has granted me a Kingdom , I now grant you the right

ID:	4450
INPUT:	Moisesek , Jaunaren zerbitzariak , eta israeldarrek menderatu egin zituzten bi errege haiek . Moisesek , Jaunaren zerbitzariak , Ruben eta Gaden leinuei eta Manasesen leinu erdiari eman zizkien jabetzan haien lurraldeak .
PRED:	So Moses and the people of the Lord gave them two kings of the tribes of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh , and the half-tribe of Manasseh . He gave them the land of the tribes of Manasseh .
GOLD:	Moses , the servant of the Lord , and the Israelites had destroyed the people of King Sihon and King Og . And Moses gave their land as a possession to the tribes of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh .

ID:	4451
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin ez zaiona egin zuen , Joiakimek bezalaxe .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as Jehoiakim had done .
GOLD:	But Zedekiah did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as Jehoiakim had done .

ID:	4452
INPUT:	Hau dio Jaunak , zuen askatzaileak , Israelen Jainko santuak : « Zuen onerako , gudarostea bidaliko dut <unk> denak ihesi aterako dira , ihesi babiloniarrak , beren ontzietan babesturik .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Your Redeemer , the Holy One of Israel , the Holy One of Israel , says : I will send them to the city , and they will send them to the city .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says — your Redeemer , the Holy One of Israel : “ For your sakes I will send an army against Babylon , forcing the Babylonians to flee in those ships they are so proud of .

ID:	4453
INPUT:	Begiratu eta zaldi <unk> bat ikusi nuen . <unk> Herio zuen izena , eta bere <unk> jarraitzen zioten . Lurraren <unk> gain ahalmena eman zion Jainkoak , ezpata , gosete , heriotza eta lurreko piztien bitartez jendea hiltzeko .
PRED:	When I saw a huge horse , I saw that the spirit of the dead , and when they saw that the power of the dead and the dead , the people of the world saw that the power of the world , and the people of the world was killed .
GOLD:	I looked up and saw a horse whose color was pale green . Its rider was named Death , and his companion was the Grave . These two were given authority over one-fourth of the earth , to kill with the sword and famine and disease and wild animals .

ID:	4454
INPUT:	« Horrekin guztiarekin gantzuketa-olioa egingo duzu , lurringileak egiten duen bezala usainkiak nahasiz . Hori izango da sagarapenetarako gantzuketa-olioa .
PRED:	“ Bring the anointing oil for the anointing oil , and the anointing oil for the anointing oil for the anointing oil .
GOLD:	Like a skilled incense maker , blend these ingredients to make a holy anointing oil .

ID:	4455
INPUT:	Amaitu ziren Egipton <unk> zazpi urteak ,
PRED:	They were seven years old when they saw seven years old ,
GOLD:	At last the seven years of bumper crops throughout the land of Egypt came to an end .

ID:	4456
INPUT:	<unk> eta negar-zotinka nago , garrasi bizian Moabengatik , Kir-Heresko jendearengatik .
PRED:	I am filled with sorrow and sorrow for all who mourn for him .
GOLD:	So now I wail for Moab ; yes , I will mourn for Moab.My heart is broken for the men of Kir-hareseth .

ID:	4457
INPUT:	<unk> zaitezte , beraz , zeruok ! <unk> zaitezte eta ikaratu ! Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	Therefore , hear , O Lord , and you will be disgraced , and I will punish you .
GOLD:	The heavens are shocked at such a thingand shrink back in horror and dismay , ” says the Lord .

ID:	4458
INPUT:	Egun hartan garaipena dolu bihurtu zen gudaroste osoarentzat , entzun baitzuten gudariek erregea atsekabetua zegoela bere semearengatik .
PRED:	On that day the battle was crushed by the army of Judah , for the king of Israel had heard that he was the king of Judah .
GOLD:	They crept back into the town that day as though they were ashamed and had deserted in battle .

ID:	4459
INPUT:	Orduan , Jainko Jauna laino batean jaitsi eta Moisesekin egon zen , eta bere izena hots egin zuen : « Jauna » .
PRED:	Then the Lord appeared to Moses , and the voice of the Lord appeared to Moses and said , “ Lord , the God of Israel , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord came down in a cloud and stood there with him ; and he called out his own name , Yahweh .

ID:	4460
INPUT:	Eta emakumeari esan zion : « Barkatuak dituzu zeure bekatuak » .
PRED:	Then he said to her , “ You are your sins . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus said to the woman , “ Your sins are forgiven . ”

ID:	4461
INPUT:	Jesusek , bere hamabi ikasleei dei eginik , ahalmena eman zien espiritu gaiztoak botatzeko eta gaitz eta eritasun guztiak sendatzeko .
PRED:	Jesus called his disciples to his disciples , and he chose them to cast out demons by the evil spirits and diseases .
GOLD:	Jesus called his twelve disciples together and gave them authority to cast out evil spirits and to heal every kind of disease and illness .

ID:	4462
INPUT:	Ez ekialdetik eta ez mendebaldetik , ez basamortutik ere , ez dator <unk> :
PRED:	Do not go out from the east side of the Jordan River , and they will know that the Lord is able to kill me .
GOLD:	It is God alone who judges ; he decides who will rise and who will fall .

ID:	4463
INPUT:	Besteek erantzun zioten : — Zu ere galilearra ote zaitugu ? Aztertu Liburu Santuak , eta ikusiko duzu Galileatik ez dela inoiz profetarik sortu .
PRED:	“ We have , ” they replied . “ We have the Scriptures say , ‘ You wo n't know what you have done . ' ”
GOLD:	They replied , “ Are you from Galilee , too ? Search the Scriptures and see for yourself — no prophet ever comes from Galilee ! ” -- -- -- -- -- [ The most ancient Greek manuscripts do not include John 7:53–8:11 . ]

ID:	4464
INPUT:	Egin lau adar lau ertzetarako , aldarearekin gorputz bat bera eginez ; estali brontzez aldarea .
PRED:	Make four horns on each side of the altar with four corners of the altar .
GOLD:	Make horns for each of its four corners so that the horns and altar are all one piece . Overlay the altar with bronze .

ID:	4465
INPUT:	Zeuen <unk> biltzen zaretenean , egiten duzuena ez da Jaunaren afaria ,
PRED:	When you see that you do n't know the Lord your visit you ,
GOLD:	When you meet together , you are not really interested in the Lord 's Supper .

ID:	4466
INPUT:	Ez duzu nahi izan sakrifizio eta eskaintzarik , ez erre-opari , ez bekatuen barkamen-oparirik ; baizik eta belarriak ireki dizkidazu , zuri entzuteko .
PRED:	You must not offer sacrifices to the burnt offering and burnt offerings , for they have not been unfaithful to me . You must not listen to the word of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then I said , “ Look , I have come.As is written about me in the Scriptures :

ID:	4467
INPUT:	« Horregatik , nik , Jainko Jaunak , zin dagit neure biziarengatik , zeure idolatria eta jokaera higuingarriaz nire santutegia kutsatu duzulako , nik ere baztertu egingo zaitudala ; ez dizut batere errukirik izango , ezta barkatuko ere .
PRED:	“ Therefore , says the Sovereign Lord , ‘ As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord your God , I will punish you by worshiping my gods .
GOLD:	“ As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , I will cut you off completely . I will show you no pity at all because you have defiled my Temple with your vile images and detestable sins .

ID:	4468
INPUT:	baina Abimelekek pertsegitu egin zuen eta Gaal ihesi joan zen . <unk> izan ziren hiriko sarrera bitartean eroriak .
PRED:	But Abimelech attacked Abimelech and attacked him , and when they arrived at the entrance of the city of Samaria , they were terrified at the entrance of the city .
GOLD:	But Abimelech chased him , and many of Shechem 's men were wounded and fell along the road as they retreated to the city gate .

ID:	4469
INPUT:	Horregatik , beharrezko da agintarien menpeko izatea , baina zigorraren beldurrez ez ezik , baita <unk> eraginez ere .
PRED:	That is why you should be able to be able to be afraid of the Jews , though they were afraid of the men who were afraid of God .
GOLD:	So you must submit to them , not only to avoid punishment , but also to keep a clear conscience .

ID:	4470
INPUT:	Lekuko faltsua galdu egingo da ; entzuten dakiena ez da hitzik gabe geldituko .
PRED:	A person will not hear a liar ; a liar will not hear .
GOLD:	A false witness will be cut off , but a credible witness will be allowed to speak .

ID:	4471
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaun ahalguztidunak : « Ebaki zuhaitzak , egin betelana Jerusalemi erasotzeko . Hiria zigortzea erabaki dut , zapalkuntza baita nagusi bertan .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ I am going to destroy the city of Jerusalem , and I will destroy the people of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ Cut down the trees for battering rams.Build siege ramps against the walls of Jerusalem.This is the city to be punished , for she is wicked through and through .

ID:	4472
INPUT:	« Ba ote da zuen artean aitarik , semeak arraina eskatu eta arrainaren ordez sugea emango dionik ?
PRED:	“ Are you the one of the fish in the sky ? ” he asked .
GOLD:	“ You fathers — if your children ask for a fish , do you give them a snake instead ?

ID:	4473
INPUT:	Badakit Jaunak dohakabeari justizia egiteneta behartsuen eskubideak defendatzen dituela .
PRED:	Yes , what the Lord says to the poor , and the poor will save the poor .
GOLD:	Surely righteous people are praising your name ; the godly will live in your presence .

ID:	4474
INPUT:	« Eskatu , eta emango dizue Jainkoak ; bilatu , eta aurkituko duzue ; jo atea , eta zabalduko zaizue .
PRED:	“ When you ask you , and you will find you , and you will find it , and you will find you .
GOLD:	“ Keep on asking , and you will receive what you ask for . Keep on seeking , and you will find . Keep on knocking , and the door will be opened to you .

ID:	4475
INPUT:	Bertako <unk> artean , gotorleku seguru ageri da Jainkoa .
PRED:	They are those who live among their enemies , and those who trust in the grave .
GOLD:	The kings of the earth joined forcesand advanced against the city .

ID:	4476
INPUT:	Baina faraoiak erantzun zien : — Eta nor da Jaun hori , nik haren esana bete eta israeldarrei joaten uzteko ? Ez dut halako <unk> ezagutzen , eta israeldarrei ez diet joaten utziko .
PRED:	But Pharaoh replied , “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ The Lord has told you about his people of Israel , and I will let them go into the land of the people of Israel . '
GOLD:	“ Is that so ? ” retorted Pharaoh . “ And who is the Lord ? Why should I listen to him and let Israel go ? I do n't know the Lord , and I will not let Israel go . ”

ID:	4477
INPUT:	Liburu Santuaren arabera , hauxe da lege nagusia : Maitatulagun hurkoa zeure burua bezala ; eta hori benetan betetzen baduzue , ondo baino hobeto .
PRED:	For the Scriptures say , ‘ This is the law of your instructions : If you do n't obey your commandments , it is better than you . '
GOLD:	Yes indeed , it is good when you obey the royal law as found in the Scriptures : “ Love your neighbor as yourself . ”

ID:	4478
INPUT:	Danen leinutik , <unk> seme <unk> ;
PRED:	Joab son of Zeruiah , from Dan ;
GOLD:	DanBukki son of Jogli

ID:	4479
INPUT:	ahotik ahora hitz egiten diot , aurrez aurre eta ez <unk> . Hark nire irudia ikusten du , Jaun honena . « Nola ausartzen zarete , beraz , <unk> gaizki-esaka <unk> ? »
PRED:	I speak against her , and I speak against you . But when he saw that I saw that the Lord has seen my head , and you have seen my head . How can you know that I have done ? ”
GOLD:	I speak to him face to face , clearly , and not in riddles ! He sees the Lord as he is.So why were you not afraidto criticize my servant Moses ? ”

ID:	4480
INPUT:	Zabulonen leinutik hamabi mila ; Joseren leinutik hamabi mila ; Benjaminen leinutik hamabi mila zigilatu .
PRED:	Greetings from Sidon .
GOLD:	from Zebulun12,000from Joseph12,000from Benjamin12,000

ID:	4481
INPUT:	SALBAMEN MEZUAK : <unk> <unk> ( 30 , 1 — 33 , 26 )
PRED:	Then the Lord of Heaven 's Armies said to Abram ,
GOLD:	Promises of Deliverance

ID:	4482
INPUT:	<unk> , Ben-Hadad , bere laguntzaile zituen hogeita hamabi erregeekin batera , <unk> arte oihal-etxoletan edaten ari zen bitartean , irtenaldi bat egin zuten israeldarrek ,
PRED:	At that time the army of Samaria was twelve kings of Samaria , and when they had been filled with all the people of Israel , they ate as usual before the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	About noontime , as Ben-hadad and the thirty-two allied kings were still in their tents drinking themselves into a stupor ,

ID:	4483
INPUT:	Halaxe izan zen . Biharamun goizean jaiki , ardi-larrua hartu eta , ihintza ateratzeko <unk> zuenean , <unk> bat bete zuen urez .
PRED:	So the next morning the next morning as the next morning , he took some of them into the morning and saw that the water was filled with water .
GOLD:	And that is just what happened . When Gideon got up early the next morning , he squeezed the fleece and wrung out a whole bowlful of water .

ID:	4484
INPUT:	( Mt 4 , 1-11 ; Lk 4 , 1-13 )
PRED:	The Sign of the Dead Sea
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Man with Leprosy

ID:	4485
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> ( 4 , 1 — 22 , 21 )
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Declaration about Assyria
GOLD:	Worship in Heaven

ID:	4486
INPUT:	<unk> inguratzen dute alde guztietatik , <unk> urrats jarraitzen diote .
PRED:	They will know that they will know that they will know that they are under every side .
GOLD:	“ Terrors surround the wickedand trouble them at every step .

ID:	4487
INPUT:	Horrela egingo dugu , beraz , Jainkoa lagun .
PRED:	So we will be your God , and we will be your God .
GOLD:	And so , God willing , we will move forward to further understanding .

ID:	4488
INPUT:	Honela ezarri zuen Josek Egiptoko lurretan bildutako <unk> bat faraoiari emateko legea . Lege honek gaurdaino dirau . Apaizen lurrak bakarrik gelditu ziren faraoiarenak bihurtu gabe .
PRED:	So Joseph placed them in the fields with the servants of Egypt and the people of Egypt , which were given to Pharaoh . That is why the people of Egypt had been made for Egypt .
GOLD:	Joseph then issued a decree still in effect in the land of Egypt , that Pharaoh should receive one-fifth of all the crops grown on his land . Only the land belonging to the priests was not given to Pharaoh .

ID:	4489
INPUT:	Zoaz bizkor , ez <unk> ezer egin zu hara iritsi arte . Honengatik , herri hari <unk> — hau da , « Txiki » — deritza .
PRED:	“ Go and kill you , ” they said . “ Let 's be sure that the people of Israel have been beaten , ” they said . “ There is the greatest of the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	But hurry ! Escape to it , for I can do nothing until you arrive there . ” ( This explains why that village was known as Zoar , which means “ little place . ” )

ID:	4490
INPUT:	Honela , agindutako ondasun baliotsu eta bikainak ere eman dizkigu , grina txarrek munduan eragiten duten <unk> ihes eginez , jainkozko izaeraren partaide izan zaitezten .
PRED:	He has given us the poor and gold ; he has given us the wealth of our sinful desires , so that we have been given to God by all who live in Christ .
GOLD:	And because of his glory and excellence , he has given us great and precious promises . These are the promises that enable you to share his divine nature and escape the world 's corruption caused by human desires .

ID:	4491
INPUT:	Jabeak langile bat bezala hartuko du berekin emango dituen urteetan ; ez diozue utziko herritarrari tratu txarra ematen .
PRED:	You will be wise and prosper as long as you live . You will not abandon those who live in years . You must pay attention to foreigners .
GOLD:	The foreigner must treat them as workers hired on a yearly basis . You must not allow a foreigner to treat any of your fellow Israelites harshly .

ID:	4492
INPUT:	— Ez ote zen , bada , Jauna ohartzen , zuek eta zuen guraso , errege eta buruzagiek , herritarrok oro , Judako hirietan eta Jerusalemgo kaleetan intsentsua erretzen zenutela ? Horixe zuen gogoan , hain zuzen ,
PRED:	“ Do n't you realize that the Lord had done , when you have done in the towns of Judah and your officials , the officials of Judah , the people of Judah , and everything you have done in the streets .
GOLD:	“ Do you think the Lord did not know that you and your ancestors , your kings and officials , and all the people were burning incense to idols in the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem ?

ID:	4493
INPUT:	Baina ihesleku duen <unk> mugetatik irteten bada ,
PRED:	But the greatest is the greatest that is the greatest of the greatest .
GOLD:	“ But if the slayer ever leaves the limits of the city of refuge ,

ID:	4494
INPUT:	Abereak eta konkistatu genituen hirietako ondasunak bakarrik gorde genituen guda-harrapakin gisa .
PRED:	We must take the same food from the livestock , and we left the town of the Levites .
GOLD:	We took all the livestock as plunder for ourselves , along with anything of value from the towns we ransacked .

ID:	4495
INPUT:	Eta , otoitzean ari zela , <unk> itxura aldatu egin zitzaion , eta jantziak zuri distiratsu bihurtu .
PRED:	And when he was praying , when he was very angry with you , and when he became very clothes .
GOLD:	And as he was praying , the appearance of his face was transformed , and his clothes became dazzling white .

ID:	4496
INPUT:	Zazpigarren hilean , ordea , Netaniasen seme eta Elixamaren biloba Ismael , <unk> bera , Mitzpara joan zen hamar gizonekin eta hil egin zuen bertan Godalias , baita honekin ziren judatarrak eta babiloniarrak ere .
PRED:	But during the seventh year of King Darius 's reign , Johanan son of Kareah and grandson of Gedaliah son of Kareah and his men went to meet him .
GOLD:	But in midautumn of that year , Ishmael son of Nethaniah and grandson of Elishama , who was a member of the royal family , went to Mizpah with ten men and killed Gedaliah . He also killed all the Judeans and Babylonians who were with him at Mizpah .

ID:	4497
INPUT:	Paulok bere konbertsioa kontatu
PRED:	Paul 's Religious Reforms
GOLD:	Paul Reveals His Roman Citizenship

ID:	4498
INPUT:	harribitxiak eta zura lantzeko nahiz beste edozein <unk> .
PRED:	onyx stones , and Zalmunna , as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well .
GOLD:	He is skilled in engraving and mounting gemstones and in carving wood . He is a master at every craft !

ID:	4499
INPUT:	Horrelako parabola askoren bidez , Jesusek mezua iragartzen zien , beraiek ulertzeko eran .
PRED:	Jesus told them the words of many things , but they understand the meaning of the wicked .
GOLD:	Jesus used many similar stories and illustrations to teach the people as much as they could understand .

ID:	4500
INPUT:	Gaiztoentzat oinaze ugari ; Jaunarengan konfiantza duena , berriz , haren maitasunak inguratzen .
PRED:	There are no more valuable to the Lord , but you are my lover .
GOLD:	Many sorrows come to the wicked , but unfailing love surrounds those who trust the Lord .

ID:	4501
INPUT:	Tenpluaren <unk> azken hamar <unk> , berriz , zedrozko oholez estali zituen , <unk> hasi eta goiko habeetaraino , eta toki hori santutegia , hots , toki santu-santua , izateko antolatu zuen .
PRED:	At that time he saw thirty of the Temple of the Temple , and he covered with great quantities of silver and bronze , and scarlet thread . He was given to the Most Holy Place , and he was given to the Most Holy Place .
GOLD:	He partitioned off an inner sanctuary — the Most Holy Place — at the far end of the Temple . It was 30 feet deep and was paneled with cedar from floor to ceiling .

ID:	4502
INPUT:	Erre-oparia ere eskaini zuen , arautua zegoen eran .
PRED:	It was a burnt offering to be taken , and he was an offering .
GOLD:	Then he presented the burnt offering and sacrificed it in the prescribed way .

ID:	4503
INPUT:	Davidekin zeuden gizonek , ordea , esaten zioten : — Hemen Judan beldurrez bagaude , zer izango ote da Keilara filistear taldeen kontra borrokara joaten bagara ?
PRED:	But the men of Benjamin said to David , “ There are no longer afraid of the Philistines ? ” “ There will we go to war against the Philistines ? ”
GOLD:	But David 's men said , “ We 're afraid even here in Judah . We certainly do n't want to go to Keilah to fight the whole Philistine army ! ”

ID:	4504
INPUT:	Baina Jesusek esan zuen : « Utzi ! Aski da ! » Eta , belarria <unk> , sendatu egin zion .
PRED:	But Jesus said , “ Let 's go ! Let 's kill us ! ” And when he saw that they were healed .
GOLD:	But Jesus said , “ No more of this . ” And he touched the man 's ear and healed him .

ID:	4505
INPUT:	Beraz , Jainkoak hala nahirik sufritzen dutenek jar dezatela beren burua leiala den Egilearen eskuetan , on egiteari utzi gabe .
PRED:	So do n't let those who do whatever they do , for they are ready to obey God 's favor .
GOLD:	So if you are suffering in a manner that pleases God , keep on doing what is right , and trust your lives to the God who created you , for he will never fail you .

ID:	4506
INPUT:	Hala , Akab jatera eta edatera joan zen ; bitartean , Karmel mendiaren gailurrera igo zen Elias eta ahuspeztu , aurpegia belaun artean jarriz .
PRED:	So Ahab left Elisha and camped at Mount Carmel . Then Elijah left Mount Carmel and went up to the tents of Mount Carmel . Then Elijah bowed low and bowed low before him .
GOLD:	So Ahab went to eat and drink . But Elijah climbed to the top of Mount Carmel and bowed low to the ground and prayed with his face between his knees .

ID:	4507
INPUT:	« Une berean , adimena eman zitzaidan berriro , eta neure erregetzaren aintzarako , neure ohore eta ospe guztiaz jabetu nintzen . Bila etorri zitzaizkidan kontseilari eta handikiak . Errege-aulkian jarri ninduten berriro eta lehen baino ohore handiagoa izan nuen .
PRED:	“ In this way , I gave birth to me the Kingdom of the city , and my glory will be given to me , and I have given him success .
GOLD:	“ That same hour the judgment was fulfilled , and Nebuchadnezzar was driven from human society . He ate grass like a cow , and he was drenched with the dew of heaven . He lived this way until his hair was as long as eagles ' feathers and his nails were like birds ' claws .

ID:	4508
INPUT:	<unk> <unk>
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Zalmunna
GOLD:	Conclusion

ID:	4509
INPUT:	basamortuan ere ikusi ahal izan duzue nola Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak , aitak bere haurra bezala , ekarri zaituzten honaino bide guztian zehar .
PRED:	When you saw the Lord your God in the wilderness , the Lord your God has brought them to you , just as the child has commanded you to forgive them .
GOLD:	And you saw how the Lord your God cared for you all along the way as you traveled through the wilderness , just as a father cares for his child . Now he has brought you to this place . '

ID:	4510
INPUT:	Nik , Paulok , ez giza aginduz edo <unk> , Jesu Kristoren eta hau hildakoen artetik piztu zuen Jainko Aitaren <unk> baizik apostolu naizen honek ,
PRED:	This is what Paul says : “ I am writing to be from the power of Christ , who was from the dead , and I am the one who raised from the dead .
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , an apostle . I was not appointed by any group of people or any human authority , but by Jesus Christ himself and by God the Father , who raised Jesus from the dead .

ID:	4511
INPUT:	<unk> eseria zegoen <unk> izeneko mutil gazte bat ; Paulok hitzaldia amaitzen ez zuenez , <unk> egin zen mutila ; azkenean , loak harturik , hirugarren <unk> behera erori zen , eta hilda jaso zuten .
PRED:	At that time , when Paul was young , a young man came to meet him , and when he saw him , he was sitting on the third day . When he saw that he was dead , he fell on the third day .
GOLD:	As Paul spoke on and on , a young man named Eutychus , sitting on the windowsill , became very drowsy . Finally , he fell sound asleep and dropped three stories to his death below .

ID:	4512
INPUT:	Beraz , Jainkoak sinesmenaren bidez onartu gaituelarik , bakean gaude berarekin , Jesu Kristo gure Jaunari esker .
PRED:	So God has given us peace in peace , through Christ Christ Christ Christ Jesus Christ Christ Christ .
GOLD:	Therefore , since we have been made right in God 's sight by faith , we have peace with God because of what Jesus Christ our Lord has done for us .

ID:	4513
INPUT:	Zer gelditzen zaio <unk> egin <unk> lan eta <unk> ?
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who were sick , and how can they know that they were very weak ?
GOLD:	So what do people get in this life for all their hard work and anxiety ?

ID:	4514
INPUT:	Daviden salmoa . Jauna , deika naukazu , zatozkit bizkor ! Entzun nire ahotsa , nik dei egitean .
PRED:	May the Lord be merciful to you , and let me go out to my voice .
GOLD:	O Lord , I am calling to you . Please hurry ! Listen when I cry to you for help !

ID:	4515
INPUT:	Horregatik , nahiago dut alarguntsa gazteak ezkontzea , seme-alabak sortu eta etxeaz arduratzea , etsaiari inolako hizpiderik eman ez diezaioten .
PRED:	Therefore , I have a young young young young young young young women who had been given to a few of the wise men who lived in prison .
GOLD:	So I advise these younger widows to marry again , have children , and take care of their own homes . Then the enemy will not be able to say anything against them .

ID:	4516
INPUT:	gauez Jesusengana etorri eta esan zion : — Maisu , ziur gaude Jainkoak guri irakasteko bidali zaituena , inork ez <unk> egin zuk egiten dituzun mirarizko seinaleak , Jainkoa berekin ez badu .
PRED:	At night the night Jesus said to Jesus , “ Teacher , we know that God has sent you to give you a miraculous sign that you have not given us a miraculous sign . ”
GOLD:	After dark one evening , he came to speak with Jesus . “ Rabbi , ” he said , “ we all know that God has sent you to teach us . Your miraculous signs are evidence that God is with you . ”

ID:	4517
INPUT:	Nagusiak ihardetsi zion : — Ez gara israeldarrik bizi ez den hiri arrotz batera joango ; <unk> joango gara .
PRED:	“ No , ” the king replied . “ We will not be a foreigner who are still living among you , and we will know that they will be with you . ”
GOLD:	“ No , ” his master said , “ we ca n't stay in this foreign town where there are no Israelites . Instead , we will go on to Gibeah .

ID:	4518
INPUT:	Eta egun asko egin baitzituzten han , Festok Pauloren arazoaren berri eman zion erregeari , esanez : « Badut hemen Felixek preso utzi zuen gizon bat .
PRED:	Then Festus went to the king and asked the king , “ I have given Paul a message to the king , ” he told him , “ I 'm here in prison .
GOLD:	During their stay of several days , Festus discussed Paul 's case with the king . “ There is a prisoner here , ” he told him , “ whose case was left for me by Felix .

ID:	4519
INPUT:	Lebitarrak arduratuko dira elkarketa-etxolako zerbitzuaz , eta beren <unk> erantzule izanen dira . Betiko lege izango duzue hau belaunez belaun . Lebitarrek , beraz , ez dute Israelen lursailik izango ondare .
PRED:	The Levites must serve in the Tabernacle , and they will serve in the Tabernacle with their own sons and daughters . They will never be given to the Levites who will be given to the Levites of Israel .
GOLD:	Only the Levites may serve at the Tabernacle , and they will be held responsible for any offenses against it . This is a permanent law for you , to be observed from generation to generation . The Levites will receive no allotment of land among the Israelites ,

ID:	4520
INPUT:	Esklaboak nagusien menpeko izan daitezela gauza guztietan : bete dezatela beraien gogoa , <unk> esan gabe
PRED:	In all the kings of Judah will be careful to obey all these things , and they will be able to obey all their evil things .
GOLD:	Slaves must always obey their masters and do their best to please them . They must not talk back

ID:	4521
INPUT:	Izan bedi nagusi itsasotik itsasora , lurraren bazter batetik bestera .
PRED:	Let them go into the sea , and let them go into the sea .
GOLD:	May he reign from sea to sea , and from the Euphrates River to the ends of the earth .

ID:	4522
INPUT:	Janari sendoa , berriz , pertsona <unk> da , ona eta txarra bereizteko eskarmentua dutenentzat .
PRED:	But this is what the Lord says : If you are righteous , it will be punished .
GOLD:	Solid food is for those who are mature , who through training have the skill to recognize the difference between right and wrong .

ID:	4523
INPUT:	Ez zen han herriarentzat urik , eta Moisesen eta Aaronen aurka bildu ziren israeldarrak .
PRED:	So the Israelites stayed there in the land of Moses and Aaron and the people of Israel .
GOLD:	There was no water for the people to drink at that place , so they rebelled against Moses and Aaron .

ID:	4524
INPUT:	hiru hiri aukeratuko dituzue Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak jabetzan emandako lurraldean .
PRED:	For the Lord your God has given you as a place of land .
GOLD:	Then you must set apart three cities of refuge in the land the Lord your God is giving you .

ID:	4525
INPUT:	Baina <unk> ez zion Israel herriari lurraldea zeharkatzen utzi ; aitzitik , bere herria bildu eta bidera atera zitzaion basamortuan eta , <unk> <unk> , eraso egin zion .
PRED:	But when the people of Israel saw that the people of Israel had not able to meet the land of Israel , the people of Israel came out to meet him and saw that they were in the wilderness .
GOLD:	But King Sihon refused to let them cross his territory . Instead , he mobilized his entire army and attacked Israel in the wilderness , engaging them in battle at Jahaz .

ID:	4526
INPUT:	Badakit , Jauna , zuzena zarela zeure erabakietan , leiala zarelako atsekabetu nauzula .
PRED:	I know that you are righteous , O Lord , you are your own .
GOLD:	I know , O Lord , that your regulations are fair ; you disciplined me because I needed it .

ID:	4527
INPUT:	Hara , misterio bat adierazten dizuet : ez gara denok hilko , baina izatez aldatuak izango gara denok
PRED:	Look , I am not one of you , but we are one who is able to die , but we will die .
GOLD:	But let me reveal to you a wonderful secret . We will not all die , but we will all be transformed !

ID:	4528
INPUT:	Ez da lotsagabea , ez <unk> , ez <unk> ; kaltea ez du gogoan hartzen .
PRED:	You have not heard that you have never seen , and they have no power .
GOLD:	or rude . It does not demand its own way . It is not irritable , and it keeps no record of being wronged .

ID:	4529
INPUT:	Egun batez , Jesus irakasten ari zen , eta han zeuden eserita fariseu eta lege-maisu batzuk , Galileako auzo guztietatik , Judeatik eta Jerusalemdik etorriak . Jaunaren indarra berekin zuen eta sendatzera eragiten zion .
PRED:	One day Jesus was teaching in Galilee , and some of the teachers of religious law of religious law came from Judea and from Judea to come from Jerusalem .
GOLD:	One day while Jesus was teaching , some Pharisees and teachers of religious law were sitting nearby . ( It seemed that these men showed up from every village in all Galilee and Judea , as well as from Jerusalem . ) And the Lord 's healing power was strongly with Jesus .

ID:	4530
INPUT:	Hain zuzen , behin eta berriz lotua zuten girgiluz eta katez , baina hark beti kateak eten eta <unk> puskatu egiten zituen , eta ez zen inor ere hura menderatzeko gauza .
PRED:	But when they saw him , he was thrown into prison , and he saw that he was able to kill him . But when he saw that he had thrown into a huge tree , and he was able to pour out a large horse .
GOLD:	Whenever he was put into chains and shackles — as he often was — he snapped the chains from his wrists and smashed the shackles . No one was strong enough to subdue him .

ID:	4531
INPUT:	Orduan , Moises eta Aaron elkarketa-etxolaren aurrera joan ziren ,
PRED:	Then Moses went to the Tabernacle and camped at the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	When he went into the Tabernacle of the Covenant the next day , he found that Aaron 's staff , representing the tribe of Levi , had sprouted , budded , blossomed , and produced ripe almonds !

ID:	4532
INPUT:	Isaakek <unk> eman zion izen ; horregatik , gaurdaino Beer-Xeba — hau da , « <unk> » — deitzen zaio hiri hari .
PRED:	When Isaac was named after Isaac , Isaac , Isaac , said , “ That is why I am going to kill you , ” Isaac said , “ that very very very very very city will happen . ”
GOLD:	So Isaac named the well Shibah ( which means “ oath ” ) . And to this day the town that grew up there is called Beersheba ( which means “ well of the oath ” ) .

ID:	4533
INPUT:	Pedrok , berriro : — Jauna , zergatik ezin dizut jarraitu orain ? Neure burua emango dut zuregatik .
PRED:	Peter asked him , “ Why do n't I want you to obey me ? ”
GOLD:	“ But why ca n't I come now , Lord ? ” he asked . “ I 'm ready to die for you . ”

ID:	4534
INPUT:	eta gelditutako <unk> eta <unk> hamabi saski bete zituzten .
PRED:	And when they saw that they were baptized with twelve baskets of leftovers they were baptized .
GOLD:	and afterward , the disciples picked up twelve baskets of leftover bread and fish .

ID:	4535
INPUT:	Erregeak galdegin zion : — Onik al da Absalom gaztea ? Ahimaatzek erantzun : — <unk> handia ikusi nuen , Joabek ni , zure zerbitzari hau , zuregana bidali ninduenean ; baina ez dakit zer gertatuko zen .
PRED:	“ Well , ” the king asked him . “ He 's better me to kill me ? ” So Joab replied , “ I know that I am going to meet you . ” So Joab sent me to my servant .
GOLD:	“ What about young Absalom ? ” the king demanded . “ Is he all right ? ” Ahimaaz replied , “ When Joab told me to come , there was a lot of commotion . But I did n't know what was happening . ”

ID:	4536
INPUT:	Lege hau entzutean , atzerritarrak oro <unk> botatzea erabaki zuten .
PRED:	Those who heard these instructions were detestable to the clans of the community .
GOLD:	When this passage of the Law was read , all those of foreign descent were immediately excluded from the assembly .

ID:	4537
INPUT:	Izan bedi gari ugari lurraldean , mendi gainetan <unk> ; sor beza fruitua Libanok bezala , zelaiko belarra bezain ugari !
PRED:	Let them grow in the land , and let them grow in the land of the hills .
GOLD:	May there be abundant grain throughout the land , flourishing even on the hilltops.May the fruit trees flourish like the trees of Lebanon , and may the people thrive like grass in a field .

ID:	4538
INPUT:	ez itzazu gal ontasuna eta leialtasuna , eramatzazu beti zeurekin , ezarri barru-barruan .
PRED:	May the Lord be with you , and let me be in your presence .
GOLD:	Never let loyalty and kindness leave you ! Tie them around your neck as a reminder.Write them deep within your heart .

ID:	4539
INPUT:	Jauna da nire haitza , nire geriza , bera nire askatzailea ; ene Jainko , nire harkaitz <unk> , nire babeski eta indar salbatzailea , nire gotorlekua .
PRED:	The Lord is my God , and he is my fortress ; he is my fortress . He is my fortress , my God , who is my strength and my strength .
GOLD:	I called on the Lord , who is worthy of praise , and he saved me from my enemies .

ID:	4540
INPUT:	eta Jehuk Israel osora <unk> zuen . Baalen adoratzaile guztiak etorri ziren , ez zen bat ere gelditu etorri gabe . Sartu zirenean , Baalen jauretxea erabat bete zen .
PRED:	When Jehu heard all the people of Israel , they came out of Baal and saw all the people of Baal . When they came to Baal , they stopped , they stopped in the hill country of Baal .
GOLD:	He sent messengers throughout all Israel summoning those who worshiped Baal . They all came — not a single one remained behind — and they filled the temple of Baal from one end to the other .

ID:	4541
INPUT:	Neure ahotsez iragartzen ditut zuk emaniko erabaki guztiak .
PRED:	I have heard the voice of my prayer , and I have given all my decrees .
GOLD:	I have recited aloudall the regulations you have given us .

ID:	4542
INPUT:	Maitasuna <unk>
PRED:	Young Woman
GOLD:	Young Woman

ID:	4543
INPUT:	beraren mezu hau Judako eta Jerusalemgo jendeari adieraztera joateko agindu zion : « Nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak , Israelen Jainkoak , galdetzen dizuet : Ez al duzue <unk> ikasbidea jaso behar eta nire esanak aditu ?
PRED:	This message came to the people of Judah and Jerusalem : “ This is what the Lord of Judah says : ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : What do you think I have done ? '
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : Go and say to the people in Judah and Jerusalem , ‘ Come and learn a lesson about how to obey me .

ID:	4544
INPUT:	eta , berak ezarritako garaia iristean , bere mezua agerrarazi du Jainko gure Salbatzailearen aginduz gomendatu zaidan <unk> bitartez .
PRED:	For the time he has revealed his message to us , and he will send us into the presence of our God .
GOLD:	And now at just the right time he has revealed this message , which we announce to everyone . It is by the command of God our Savior that I have been entrusted with this work for him .

ID:	4545
INPUT:	« Ikasi pikondoaren irudi honetatik : kimua berritzen eta hostoa zabaltzen zaioneko , badakizue uda hurbil dela .
PRED:	“ This is what the fig tree says : When the branches that comes from its branches , you know that summer is near , and you know that summer is near .
GOLD:	“ Now learn a lesson from the fig tree . When its branches bud and its leaves begin to sprout , you know that summer is near .

ID:	4546
INPUT:	Lebitarrak , berriz , itunaren egoitzaren inguruan etxolatuko dira ; honela libratuko dute israeldarren elkartea Jaunaren haserretik . Itunaren egoitzako zerbitzuaz arduratuko dira » .
PRED:	The Levites of the Tabernacle will be assigned to the Tabernacle of the Tabernacle . The whole community of Israel will enter the sanctuary of the Lord 's Covenant , and they will remain in the Tabernacle . ”
GOLD:	But the Levites will camp around the Tabernacle of the Covenant to protect the community of Israel from the Lord 's anger . The Levites are responsible to stand guard around the Tabernacle . ”

ID:	4547
INPUT:	Hura etzanda edo eserita egondako lekuan dagoen edozer gauza kutsaturik geldituko da arratsa arte .
PRED:	And when he looked at it , he will be ceremonially unclean until you remain unclean until evening .
GOLD:	This includes her bed or any other object she has sat on ; you will be unclean until evening if you touch it .

ID:	4548
INPUT:	Gizon horiek urik gabeko iturri dira , ekaitzak eramaten duen laino . <unk> beltzak <unk> zain .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you , and I will bring disaster on the mountain of darkness , and when they were filled with anguish .
GOLD:	These people are as useless as dried-up springs or as mist blown away by the wind . They are doomed to blackest darkness .

ID:	4549
INPUT:	Urrutitik ikusi zutenean , ia ezin zuten ezagutu ere , eta aiene bizian egin zuten negar . Jantziak urratu eta hautsa bota zuten beren buru gainera .
PRED:	When the people of Israel saw this , they could not see a great army of mourning and sorrow , they tore their clothes in mourning .
GOLD:	When they saw Job from a distance , they scarcely recognized him . Wailing loudly , they tore their robes and threw dust into the air over their heads to show their grief .

ID:	4550
INPUT:	Poztu egin zen Egipto haiek <unk> , haienganako beldur-ikarak hartuak baitzituen .
PRED:	But those who were wise , and when they were in Egypt , they know that all things in Egypt .
GOLD:	Egypt was glad when they were gone , for they feared them greatly .

ID:	4551
INPUT:	Baina Jainkoak haiek hiltzea erabakitzen zuen orduko , harengana jotzen zuten , damutu eta hura bilatzen saiatzen ziren ,
PRED:	But God gave them this message from the Lord :
GOLD:	When God began killing them , they finally sought him.They repented and took God seriously .

ID:	4552
INPUT:	Moisesek esan zion herriari : « Gogoan izan egun honetan irten zaretela Egiptotik , esklabotzatik , ahalmen handiz atera baitzaituzte bertatik Jaunak . Beraz , ez duzue legamiadun ogirik jango .
PRED:	So Moses said to the people of Israel , “ You are your slavery in this place of slavery in this land of Egypt . You must not eat your slavery in the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	So Moses said to the people , “ This is a day to remember forever — the day you left Egypt , the place of your slavery . Today the Lord has brought you out by the power of his mighty hand . ( Remember , eat no food containing yeast . )

ID:	4553
INPUT:	Adam berriro batu zitzaion bere emazteari ; honek semea sortu eta <unk> eman zion izen . Orduan , esan zuen : « Jainkoak sorrarazi dit beste seme hau , Kainek hil zigun Abelen ordez » .
PRED:	One of the family of Adam came to his wife , and he gave birth to his wife . Then he said , “ God has given me a son of man to be saved . ”
GOLD:	Adam had sexual relations with his wife again , and she gave birth to another son . She named him Seth , for she said , “ God has granted me another son in place of Abel , whom Cain killed . ”

ID:	4554
INPUT:	Artisauak urtzen du idoloa , zilarginak estaltzen <unk> apaintzen zilarrezko katez .
PRED:	He will destroy the idol with an idol , and he will put in bronze chains and bronze chains .
GOLD:	Can he be compared to an idol formed in a mold , overlaid with gold , and decorated with silver chains ?

ID:	4555
INPUT:	Aitzitik , Jeremias profeta eta Baruk idazkaria atxilotzeko agindu zien erregeak <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> seme Seraiasi eta <unk> seme <unk> . Baina Jaunak ezkutuan jarriak zituen .
PRED:	But Jeremiah sent this message to the king and his officials , and the officials of the city officials , and when they saw that the Lord had commanded him , and when he became very angry with them , and he became very angry .
GOLD:	Then the king commanded his son Jerahmeel , Seraiah son of Azriel , and Shelemiah son of Abdeel to arrest Baruch and Jeremiah . But the Lord had hidden them .

ID:	4556
INPUT:	Nabot harrikatu eta hil zutela jakitean , Jezabelek esan zion Akabi : — Jaiki eta egin zaitez Izreelgo Nabotek diruaren truke ere eman nahi izan ez zizun mahastiaren jabe . Ez da bizi Nabot , hil da .
PRED:	When the man had died , he said to him , “ Get up and kill Naboth ! Get up and put it into the vineyard of Naboth . ”
GOLD:	When Jezebel heard the news , she said to Ahab , “ You know the vineyard Naboth would n't sell you ? Well , you can have it now ! He 's dead ! ”

ID:	4557
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak esan zion : <unk> , zu zauden lekua lur santua baita .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to him , “ You must sit on the throne of the earth . ”
GOLD:	“ Then the Lord said to him , ‘ Take off your sandals , for you are standing on holy ground .

ID:	4558
INPUT:	Justiziak bakea ekarriko du , <unk> eta konfiantza betiko .
PRED:	He will be able to be very powerful , and he will be very powerful .
GOLD:	And this righteousness will bring peace.Yes , it will bring quietness and confidence forever .

ID:	4559
INPUT:	Hori izango duzue zeuen eskaintza Jaunarentzat , beste israeldarrek beren <unk> nahiz olio eta ardo berritik egin ohi <unk> parekoa .
PRED:	This will be the Lord your God , and you must serve as well as the Lord your God . You must give the new moon celebrations and new moon celebrations and new moon celebrations , and all the kingdoms of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	The Lord will consider this offering to be your harvest offering , as though it were the first grain from your own threshing floor or wine from your own winepress .

ID:	4560
INPUT:	Ez dagokit niri kanpokoak <unk> ; horiek Jainkoak epaituko ditu . Zuek <unk> epaitu behar dituzue . Liburu Santuak dio : Bota gaiztoa zeuen artetik .
PRED:	They will be sure that God will judge you , and they will judge you . ” For the Scriptures say , “ You will be sure that you will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	It is n't my responsibility to judge outsiders , but it certainly is your responsibility to judge those inside the church who are sinning .

ID:	4561
INPUT:	Horra zergatik agindu dien Jaunak israeldarrei , ez dezala inork odolik jan , ezta haien artean bizi den etorkinak ere .
PRED:	That is why the Lord has commanded the people of Israel to eat any of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	That is why I have said to the people of Israel , ‘ You must never eat or drink blood — neither you nor the foreigners living among you . '

ID:	4562
INPUT:	Era <unk> azaltzen da <unk> Jainkoak ematen duen Espiritua , baina beti denen onerako .
PRED:	And when they know that God has been kind of power , and those who have given you authority to sin .
GOLD:	A spiritual gift is given to each of us so we can help each other .

ID:	4563
INPUT:	<unk> eta leialtasunak zaintzen dute erregea , zintzotasunean dago sendo errege-aulkia .
PRED:	Your name will be filled with joy and honor , and his throne will be exalted .
GOLD:	Unfailing love and faithfulness protect the king ; his throne is made secure through love .

ID:	4564
INPUT:	<unk> pertsonak bereiz ezarri
PRED:	The Death of Egypt
GOLD:	Purity in Israel 's Camp

ID:	4565
INPUT:	Kutxa filistearren esku
PRED:	Victory over the Philistines
GOLD:	The Ark in Philistia

ID:	4566
INPUT:	Joax , Israelgo errege
PRED:	Joash Rules in Israel
GOLD:	Jehoash Rules in Israel

ID:	4567
INPUT:	Gizakiak egitasmoak , Jaunak azken hitza .
PRED:	People may live in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	We can make our own plans , but the Lord gives the right answer .

ID:	4568
INPUT:	Orduan , zentzugabeek <unk> esan zieten : “ <unk> olio pixka bat , kriseiluak <unk> <unk> eta ” .
PRED:	Then they said , ‘ Who will be able to kill those who were filled with the lamps of bronze , and when they saw that they were filled with glory and honor . '
GOLD:	Then the five foolish ones asked the others , ‘ Please give us some of your oil because our lamps are going out . '

ID:	4569
INPUT:	Gauza bera egin zuen iparralde , <unk> eta mendebaldeko <unk> , eta denek luzera bera zuten : berrehun eta berrogeita hamar metro .
PRED:	Then he became very old and old , and all the nobles of the Temple , and they were also 175 feet long and 433/4 feet long .
GOLD:	Then he measured the north side , and it was also 875 feet .

ID:	4570
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Ikusi , bada ; zeure sinesmenak sendatu zaitu .
PRED:	Jesus told him , “ Your faith has healed your faith . ”
GOLD:	And Jesus said , “ All right , receive your sight ! Your faith has healed you . ”

ID:	4571
INPUT:	Zaindu eta gorde , Jerusalemera iritsi eta Jaunaren etxeko <unk> , apaiz , lebitar eta Israelgo familiaburuen aurrean <unk> dituzuen arte » .
PRED:	When you arrived at Jerusalem , the Temple of the Lord came to Jerusalem and worship the Temple of the Lord , the priests , and women of Israel , women of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Guard these treasures well until you present them to the leading priests , the Levites , and the leaders of Israel , who will weigh them at the storerooms of the Lord 's Temple in Jerusalem . ”

ID:	4572
INPUT:	Babiloniaren <unk> dardararaziko du , garrasiak nazio guztietan entzungo » .
PRED:	The earth will hear all the nations of Babylon , and the nations of Babylon will hear the earth . ”
GOLD:	The earth will shake with the shout , “ Babylon has been taken ! ” and its cry of despair will be heard around the world .

ID:	4573
INPUT:	Horrela , zuek ere harri biziaz <unk> espirituzko tenplu egingo zaituzte Jainkoak eta apaiz sagaratuko , Jainkoari atsegin zaizkion espirituzko opariak Jesu Kristoren bitartez eskaintzeko .
PRED:	In this way , the same way you will be made with the blood of the Temple of God , and you will be able to sacrifice you as a sacrifice of God .
GOLD:	And you are living stones that God is building into his spiritual temple . What 's more , you are his holy priests . Through the mediation of Jesus Christ , you offer spiritual sacrifices that please God .

ID:	4574
INPUT:	Igarotzen zituen lurraldeetan senideak <unk> askoren bidez <unk> zituen . <unk> iritsi
PRED:	Then he went out to many believers , and when they saw that they had been baptized by the power of many believers .
GOLD:	While there , he encouraged the believers in all the towns he passed through . Then he traveled down to Greece ,

ID:	4575
INPUT:	Judako errege Josiasen seme Sedekias errege izaten hasi zen garaian , Jaunak agindu hau eman zion Jeremiasi :
PRED:	Then King Zedekiah of Judah began to rule over Judah in the reign of Josiah son of Josiah .
GOLD:	This message came to Jeremiah from the Lord early in the reign of Zedekiah son of Josiah , king of Judah .

ID:	4576
INPUT:	Erregeak galdetu zion : — Ez al dabil Joaben eskua zurekin arazo honetan guztian ? Emakumeak erantzun : — Ala ene errege jauna ! <unk> asmatu duzu esan duzun guztian . Bai , zure zerbitzari Joabek agindu dit , ene errege jauna , zer esan behar nizun .
PRED:	“ Do n't you know ? ” the king asked . “ If you are here in this place of Joab , my lord the king of Joab , my lord the king . ” So Joab replied , “ I am your lord the king of my lord the king . ”
GOLD:	“ Did Joab put you up to this ? ” And the woman replied , “ My lord the king , how can I deny it ? Nobody can hide anything from you . Yes , Joab sent me and told me what to say .

ID:	4577
INPUT:	Salu , <unk> , Hilkias eta Jedaias . Horiek ziren <unk> eta ahaideen buru Josueren garaian .
PRED:	These were the men who had been given to Hilkiah , Jehiel , and Micaiah . These are the terms of Jeshua and grandson of Joshua son of Nun .
GOLD:	Sallu , Amok , Hilkiah , and Jedaiah.These were the leaders of the priests and their associates in the days of Jeshua .

ID:	4578
INPUT:	« Ituna egiten dut zuekin eta zuen ondorengoekin ,
PRED:	“ I am giving you a covenant with you and your descendants .
GOLD:	“ I hereby confirm my covenant with you and your descendants ,

ID:	4579
INPUT:	Zaingelek , hormek eta atalondoak besteen neurri berberak zituzten . Sarrerak , atalondoa barne , leihoak zituen inguru guztian , eta hogeita bost metro zen luze eta hamabi eta erdi zabal . (
PRED:	The entry room of the guard , and the same size of the same size . The entry room were also 175 feet long and 433/4 feet wide . The entry room was 30 feet long and 433/4 feet wide .
GOLD:	Its guard alcoves , dividing walls , and entry room were the same size as those in the others . It also had windows along its walls and in the entry room . And like the others , the gateway passage was 871/2 feet long and 433/4 feet wide .

ID:	4580
INPUT:	Xemaias , Joiarib , Jedaias ,
PRED:	The following towns of Elam : Shemaiah ,
GOLD:	Shemaiah , Joiarib , Jedaiah ,

ID:	4581
INPUT:	Ez al dakizue , senideok — legeen berri <unk> mintzo natzaizue — , gizakia bizi den bitartean bakarrik behartzen duela legeak ?
PRED:	Do n't you realize that I am talking about you , my brothers and sisters , that I am the law of God ? ”
GOLD:	Now , dear brothers and sisters — you who are familiar with the law — do n't you know that the law applies only while a person is living ?

ID:	4582
INPUT:	Horregatik , hildakoen artetik piztu zenean , esandako hori gogoratu zitzaien haren ikasleei , eta sinetsi egin zuten Liburu Santuko eta Jesusek esandako hitza .
PRED:	So when he was raised from the dead , he told his disciples about his disciples to obey him .
GOLD:	After he was raised from the dead , his disciples remembered he had said this , and they believed both the Scriptures and what Jesus had said .

ID:	4583
INPUT:	Jainkoak ez zien barkatu bekatu egin zuten aingeruei , eta , infernuko <unk> <unk> jaurtiz , han utzi zituen <unk> gordeta .
PRED:	But God did not forgive the power of God , so that the power of heaven will be able to kill you , and when he saw that he was able to kill you .
GOLD:	For God did not spare even the angels who sinned . He threw them into hell , in gloomy pits of darkness , where they are being held until the day of judgment .

ID:	4584
INPUT:	Ondoren , ikasleei esan zien : — <unk> izan al zenuten ezer , poltsarik eta zakutorik eta oinetakorik gabe bidali <unk> ? Haiek erantzun : — Ezer ere ez .
PRED:	Then he said to his disciples , “ Did you realize that some of you were sick and sick ? Do n't you realize that you have been sick ? ” And they replied , “ Do n't you think of your money ? ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus asked them , “ When I sent you out to preach the Good News and you did not have money , a traveler 's bag , or an extra pair of sandals , did you need anything ? ” “ No , ” they replied .

ID:	4585
INPUT:	Orduan , zaldien <unk> zen , lurra joz , zaldiak bizkor lauoinka .
PRED:	Then the earth fell on horses and horses , and they cried out to the hills .
GOLD:	Then the horses ' hooves hammered the ground , the galloping , galloping of Sisera 's mighty steeds .

ID:	4586
INPUT:	« Agindua nion neure <unk> niela irrikaz begiratuko <unk> .
PRED:	“ I will look favorably on my side , ” I said .
GOLD:	“ I made a covenant with my eyesnot to look with lust at a young woman .

ID:	4587
INPUT:	Ez dugu , beraz , beldurrik , nahiz eta lurrak dardara <unk> mendiak itsas hondora amildu ,
PRED:	We do n't know that we have done , and the earth have covered the mountains and hills .
GOLD:	Let the oceans roar and foam.Let the mountains tremble as the waters surge ! Interlude

ID:	4588
INPUT:	<unk> izateko nire agindua gorde duzulako , nik ere gordeko zaitut , lurreko bizilagunak probatzeko mundu osora iristear dagoen <unk> .
PRED:	And if you obey my command and obey my commands , I will put you in the land of the earth and the people of the earth .
GOLD:	“ Because you have obeyed my command to persevere , I will protect you from the great time of testing that will come upon the whole world to test those who belong to this world .

ID:	4589
INPUT:	<unk> erortzetik libratu nau , argiz beterik biziko naiz ” .
PRED:	For I have heard that I have heard that I will live with you , and I will live with you . '
GOLD:	God rescued me from the grave , and now my life is filled with light . '

ID:	4590
INPUT:	Jesusen Jaiotza
PRED:	The Birth of Jesus
GOLD:	The Birth of Jesus

ID:	4591
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Bene-benetan diotsuet : Nire bila zabiltzate , ez ikusi dituzuen mirarizko <unk> , ogia asetzeraino jan duzuelako baizik .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I tell you the truth , you know that you are looking for you , but you do n't know that we have seen . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ I tell you the truth , you want to be with me because I fed you , not because you understood the miraculous signs .

ID:	4592
INPUT:	Saulek Davidi : — Bedeinkatua zu , ene seme David ! Handiak eginen dituzu eta garaile izango egintza guztietan ! David bere bidetik joan zen , eta Saul etxera itzuli .
PRED:	“ Praise you , my son ! ” Saul asked David . “ May the king of all the things you have done in all his way ! ” So David returned home and returned home .
GOLD:	And Saul said to David , “ Blessings on you , my son David . You will do many heroic deeds , and you will surely succeed . ” Then David went away , and Saul returned home .

ID:	4593
INPUT:	Gero , esan nien : « Ondo <unk> , ordaindu lansaria ; bestela , utzi » . Haiek zilarrezko hogeita hamar txanpon ordaindu zizkidaten .
PRED:	Then I said to them , “ I have given you as well as well as if you were trying to kill me . ”
GOLD:	And I said to them , “ If you like , give me my wages , whatever I am worth ; but only if you want to . ” So they counted out for my wages thirty pieces of silver .

ID:	4594
INPUT:	Orduan , gizaki guztiek ikusiko dute Jainkoak ematen duen salbamena .
PRED:	And all who see God will see God 's life .
GOLD:	And then all people will seethe salvation sent from God . ' ”

ID:	4595
INPUT:	Nork ez du maite bizia ? Nork ez du nahi luzaroan bizi eta zoriontsu izan ?
PRED:	Who does n't love the life of life ? Who gives you life to those who fear you ?
GOLD:	Then keep your tongue from speaking eviland your lips from telling lies !

ID:	4596
INPUT:	Hurbildu zitzaion , orduan , <unk> eta esan zion : — Jainkoaren Semea zarenez , agindu harri hauek ogi bihurtzeko .
PRED:	Then the man came and said to him , “ If you have been healed , ” he said . “ If you have been healed , ” he said .
GOLD:	During that time the devil came and said to him , “ If you are the Son of God , tell these stones to become loaves of bread . ”

ID:	4597
INPUT:	Nire ondasunak <unk> , aurkitu al duzu ezer zeure etxeko <unk> ? Hala bada , ekarri hona , nire eta zure ahaideen aurrera , eta erabaki dezatela hauek nork duen arrazoi !
PRED:	But why should you see that you have seen my household ? Why do you know that your master has brought you back to your household ? But if you want your master and give you what you have done .
GOLD:	You have rummaged through everything I own . Now show me what you found that belongs to you ! Set it out here in front of us , before our relatives , for all to see . Let them judge between us !

ID:	4598
INPUT:	mendietako zaparradak blai egiten ditu , non babesturik ez , eta harkaitzaren kontra jartzen dira .
PRED:	The wild animals that scurry along the ground , and the fish in the sky , they do not crush them .
GOLD:	They are soaked by mountain showers , and they huddle against the rocks for want of a home .

ID:	4599
INPUT:	« <unk> sortutako <unk> gutxi eta kezkak ugari ;
PRED:	“ And when they were very sick , and they were very sick .
GOLD:	“ How frail is humanity ! How short is life , how full of trouble !

ID:	4600
INPUT:	Damaskon nengoela , <unk> erregearen gobernariak zaintzaileak ezarri zituen hirian ni harrapatzeko ;
PRED:	When I was in Damascus , the captain of the guard , he called out to the city of Damascus .
GOLD:	When I was in Damascus , the governor under King Aretas kept guards at the city gates to catch me .

ID:	4601
INPUT:	Orobat , berarekin gurutzean josiak zeuden lapurrek ere irain egiten zioten .
PRED:	Do n't realize that they were crucified with him , and they would not be crucified .
GOLD:	Even the revolutionaries who were crucified with him ridiculed him in the same way .

ID:	4602
INPUT:	Ogia <unk> , <unk> bakoitzeko opil bat eskainiko diozue <unk> gisa , <unk> lehen fruituak eskaintzen dituzuen bezala .
PRED:	And if you were sick , you must offer one piece of bread as well as if you were offering , you will eat as weak as if you were offering .
GOLD:	Present a cake from the first of the flour you grind , and set it aside as a sacred offering , as you do with the first grain from the threshing floor .

ID:	4603
INPUT:	Joan ziren ikasleak eta , hirira iristean , dena Jesusek esan bezala gertatu zitzaien , eta Pazko-afaria prestatu zuten .
PRED:	So the disciples came to the city , and Jesus told them everything he had happened , just as Jesus had prepared .
GOLD:	So the two disciples went into the city and found everything just as Jesus had said , and they prepared the Passover meal there .

ID:	4604
INPUT:	Hildakoen Egoitzan oinazez zegoela , begiak jaso eta Abraham ikusi zuen urruti , eta Lazaro haren ondoan .
PRED:	He saw the grave of the grave , and he saw Lazarus Lazarus , and he saw Lazarus .
GOLD:	and he went to the place of the dead . There , in torment , he saw Abraham in the far distance with Lazarus at his side .

ID:	4605
INPUT:	Nik Kixon errekara ekarriko dizut Sisera , Jabinen gudarostearen buruzagia , bere guda-gurdi eta <unk> , eta eskura emango » .
PRED:	I will gather you with a great army , chariots , chariots , chariots , chariots , and chariots , and chariots , and chariots , and chariots , and chariots . ”
GOLD:	And I will call out Sisera , commander of Jabin 's army , along with his chariots and warriors , to the Kishon River . There I will give you victory over him . ”

ID:	4606
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaun ahalguztidunak : « Oi zu , Sionen bizi zaren nire herria ! Ez izan Asiriaren beldurrik , zigorrez jotzen bazaitu <unk> zure <unk> jasotzen badu ere , behinola egiptoarrek bezala .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ O Lord of Heaven 's Armies , you will live in Jerusalem , and I will punish you in the land of your enemies , like that you will be destroyed by the Egyptians .
GOLD:	So this is what the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , says : “ O my people in Zion , do not be afraid of the Assyrians when they oppress you with rod and club as the Egyptians did long ago .

ID:	4607
INPUT:	Barak <unk> ondoren zebilen . Jaelek , bidera irtenik , esan zion : « Zatoz , neuk erakutsiko dizut bila zabiltzan gizona » . Sartu zen Barak oihal-etxolara eta Sisera hila aurkitu zuen , ziria buruan sartua zuela .
PRED:	When he saw him , he went to meet him , he said to him , “ Come , I am going to meet you , and I 'll find him in the City of Abinoam . ” So he went to the tent of Barak , and she was dead .
GOLD:	When Barak came looking for Sisera , Jael went out to meet him . She said , “ Come , and I will show you the man you are looking for . ” So he followed her into the tent and found Sisera lying there dead , with the tent peg through his temple .

ID:	4608
INPUT:	Elkartu zirenean , beste ikasleek esan zioten : — Jauna ikusi dugu . Tomasek erantzun zien : — Haren eskuetan <unk> seinalea ikusten ez badut , eta nire <unk> <unk> eta nire eskua haren <unk> sartzen ez badut , ez dut inola ere sinetsiko .
PRED:	When the disciples saw him , they said , “ We have seen the Lord , ” they said , “ we have seen my hand , my lord the Lord 's hand , and I know that I am going to see my hand . ”
GOLD:	They told him , “ We have seen the Lord ! ” But he replied , “ I wo n't believe it unless I see the nail wounds in his hands , put my fingers into them , and place my hand into the wound in his side . ”

ID:	4609
INPUT:	gaizki-esaka ari zaizkigu eta guk gozoki erantzun . Orain artean , munduko simaurra bezala gara , guztien hondakin .
PRED:	I speak against you and your people , and we are on your side . We will be like all the other parts of all the earth .
GOLD:	We appeal gently when evil things are said about us . Yet we are treated like the world 's garbage , like everybody 's trash — right up to the present moment .

ID:	4610
INPUT:	« Landan dabilela , hila izan den nahiz berez hildako norbaiten gorpua edota giza hezurrak nahiz hilobia ukitzen dituena kutsaturik geldituko da zazpi egunez .
PRED:	“ Yes , the man who has been dead , or the dead or the dead body or the dead body or the dead body must be ceremonially unclean for seven days .
GOLD:	And if someone in an open field touches the corpse of someone who was killed with a sword or who died a natural death , or if someone touches a human bone or a grave , that person will be defiled for seven days .

ID:	4611
INPUT:	eta , seme-alaba bagara , baita oinordeko ere , Jainkoaren oinordeko eta Kristoren <unk> ; zeren , nekeetan Kristoren kideko garenez gero , aintzan ere beraren kideko izango baikara .
PRED:	For we are the children of God , and we are the children of Christ , because we are the faith of Christ . For we have been saved by the faith of Christ , which is near to be saved .
GOLD:	And since we are his children , we are his heirs . In fact , together with Christ we are heirs of God 's glory . But if we are to share his glory , we must also share his suffering .

ID:	4612
INPUT:	<unk> tximistak , danbatekoak eta trumoiak ateratzen ziren ; aulkiaren aurrean zazpi argi-zuzi zeuden sutan , Jainkoaren zazpi espirituak adierazten zituztenak ,
PRED:	I saw that the lightning was like a flood of the earth , and it was an angel of God 's anger , and the Spirit of God saw seven times as the Spirit of God .
GOLD:	From the throne came flashes of lightning and the rumble of thunder . And in front of the throne were seven torches with burning flames . This is the sevenfold Spirit of God .

ID:	4613
INPUT:	Naamanek Israelgo erregeari eman zion gutunak hau zioen : « Gutun hau eramanez Naaman neure gudalburua bidaltzen dizut , legena senda diezaiozun » .
PRED:	But the king of Israel sent this message to the king of Israel : “ I am giving you this message , ” he said . “ I am sending you into the land of Israel . ”
GOLD:	The letter to the king of Israel said : “ With this letter I present my servant Naaman . I want you to heal him of his leprosy . ”

ID:	4614
INPUT:	Egun hartan , <unk> aterako dizkizuete , eta eresi hau kantatuko : « <unk> <unk> gaude ! Jaunaren herriaren <unk> eskuetara joan da ; nolatan kendu diote gero ? <unk> <unk> dituzte gure soroak » .
PRED:	On that day they will come to you , and they will come with you , and they will know that the Lord has given you victory over all the people of Israel , and they will kill him . ”
GOLD:	In that day your enemies will make fun of youby singing this song of despair about you : “ We are finished , completely ruined ! God has confiscated our land , taking it from us.He has given our fieldsto those who betrayed us . ”

ID:	4615
INPUT:	« <unk> kantatuko dizute : « “ Nola dagoen hondatua , <unk> erregina , hiri ospetsua ! Bera eta bertako <unk> ziren <unk> izua sorrarazten <unk> guztietan ” .
PRED:	“ They will shout , ‘ How great will the great city of the great city ? ' And when the great city was filled with great city , and when they were filled with great power . '
GOLD:	Then they will wail for you , singing this funeral song : “ O famous island city , once ruler of the sea , how you have been destroyed ! Your people , with their naval power , once spread fear around the world .

ID:	4616
INPUT:	Eta basoan geldituko <unk> gutxi izango dira , ezen ume batek <unk> ahal izango baititu .
PRED:	And when they are wise , they will be able to be afraid of those who are wise , and those who are wise will be able to kill him .
GOLD:	Of all that glorious forest , only a few trees will survive — so few that a child could count them !

ID:	4617
INPUT:	Agripak esan zion Paulori : — Beste pixka bat , eta kristau bihurtuko nauzu .
PRED:	Then Paul said to Paul , “ I will make you a blessing from God . ”
GOLD:	Agrippa interrupted him . “ Do you think you can persuade me to become a Christian so quickly ? ”

ID:	4618
INPUT:	Jesus Jerusalemen Mesias bezala sartu
PRED:	Jesus Clears the Temple
GOLD:	Jesus Clears the Temple

ID:	4619
INPUT:	Artalde eta abere-taldeak ere eskuratu zituen . Jendeak abereak hartu eta Daviden aitzinera eraman zituen , esanez : « Hona <unk> harrapakinak » .
PRED:	He brought them to the people and livestock , along with all the livestock , and the people of David . “ The people of David , ” he said , “ and the people of David and the land of David will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	He also recovered all the flocks and herds , and his men drove them ahead of the other livestock . “ This plunder belongs to David ! ” they said .

ID:	4620
INPUT:	« <unk> liho finez bordatua egingo duzu , eta buruzapia ere liho finezkoa izango da ; gerrikoa apain bordatua egingo duzu .
PRED:	“ I will make a blue cloth , purple , purple , purple , and scarlet thread . They will make a blue cloth with fine linen cloth , purple , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	“ Weave Aaron 's patterned tunic from fine linen cloth . Fashion the turban from this linen as well . Also make a sash , and decorate it with colorful embroidery .

ID:	4621
INPUT:	Batek garrantzi berezia ematen dio egun bati ; beste batentzat , berriz , egun guztiak berdinak dira . Joka dezala bakoitzak bere <unk> arabera .
PRED:	There is a good meal for each day , for it had been given to the other . There they have been a single one who had been given to his own family .
GOLD:	In the same way , some think one day is more holy than another day , while others think every day is alike . You should each be fully convinced that whichever day you choose is acceptable .

ID:	4622
INPUT:	Oi nire anaia bazina , nire amaren bularrean hazia ! <unk> emango nizuke kalean aurkitzean , inoren <unk> gabe .
PRED:	“ My brother , my brother , I would give you my mother , my mother , my mother , and I will give you sick .
GOLD:	Oh , I wish you were my brother , who nursed at my mother 's breasts.Then I could kiss you no matter who was watching , and no one would criticize me .

ID:	4623
INPUT:	Tenpluari buruz hitzaldia
PRED:	A Message about the Council
GOLD:	Jeremiah Speaks at the Temple

ID:	4624
INPUT:	Herri guztiak zuk eginak : <unk> etorriko zaizkizu , zuri , Jauna , ohore ematera .
PRED:	And all the nations will know that the Lord will come to you , and he will bring you glory to you .
GOLD:	All the nations you madewill come and bow before you , Lord ; they will praise your holy name .

ID:	4625
INPUT:	Manasesen leinukoek ezin izan zituzten hartu Bet-Xan , Taanak , Dor , Ibleam eta <unk> hiriak , ezta haien inguruak , ez bizilagunak ere ; kanaandarrek jarraitu zuten bertan bizitzen .
PRED:	The men of the tribe of Manasseh had no idea that they had been given to the towns of Manasseh , their towns , and their towns were not able to live in the towns of Manasseh .
GOLD:	The tribe of Manasseh failed to drive out the people living in Beth-shan , Taanach , Dor , Ibleam , Megiddo , and all their surrounding settlements , because the Canaanites were determined to stay in that region .

ID:	4626
INPUT:	( Mk 14 , <unk> ; Jn 12 , 1-8 )
PRED:	The First Disciples
GOLD:	Jesus Predicts Peter 's Denial

ID:	4627
INPUT:	<unk> Jesusen garaipenaren partaide
PRED:	The Descendants of Jesus
GOLD:	Suffering for Doing Good

ID:	4628
INPUT:	Juduak Pazko-jaia ospatu
PRED:	The Festival of Shelters
GOLD:	Celebration of Passover

ID:	4629
INPUT:	Jaunak bedeinkazioa agindu
PRED:	The
GOLD:	Promises for Zerubbabel

ID:	4630
INPUT:	Jesusek berriro jendeari dei egin eta esan zion : « Entzun niri denok eta ulertu ongi !
PRED:	Then Jesus called out to the people and said , “ Listen to me , and all who hear me .
GOLD:	Then Jesus called to the crowd to come and hear . “ All of you listen , ” he said , “ and try to understand .

ID:	4631
INPUT:	Gosea erakarri zuen lurraldera , <unk> oro kendu .
PRED:	When you were able to take away all these things , you will destroy all the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	He called for a famine on the land of Canaan , cutting off its food supply .

ID:	4632
INPUT:	edo irakurtzen ez dakien bati eman eta « <unk> hau » esaten diote , eta hark « Ez dakit irakurtzen » erantzuten .
PRED:	Do n't be kind to a person , and they say to him , “ Do n't know what they do . ”
GOLD:	When you give it to those who can not read , they will say , “ We do n't know how to read . ”

ID:	4633
INPUT:	Senarrok , maitatu emazteak eta ez izan horiekin zakar .
PRED:	For this is the Lord , and he delights in them .
GOLD:	Husbands , love your wives and never treat them harshly .

ID:	4634
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Koreren semeen salmoa .
PRED:	O God , hear my fortunes , for I have given you victory over the earth .
GOLD:	Listen to this , all you people ! Pay attention , everyone in the world !

ID:	4635
INPUT:	Baina orain ez oroitu antzinakoez , ez gogoratu lehenago <unk> .
PRED:	But now the king did not remember what he had done .
GOLD:	“ But forget all that — it is nothing compared to what I am going to do .

ID:	4636
INPUT:	« Esan israeldarrei : <unk> , sexu-jarioa duenean , kutsatu bihurtzen da .
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel : If he has been circumcised , he is ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel . “ Any man who has a bodily discharge is ceremonially unclean .

ID:	4637
INPUT:	Joanek noren aginduz bataiatzen zuen , Jainkoaren aginduz ala giza aginduz ? Haiek honela zioten beren artean : « Jainkoaren aginduz ari zela esaten badiogu , zergatik ez genion sinetsi erantzungo digu .
PRED:	John was going to say , “ Did n't we know that the authority of God ? ” they said , “ We do n't know what we say , ‘ We do n't know that we do . '
GOLD:	“ Did John 's authority to baptize come from heaven , or was it merely human ? ” They talked it over among themselves . “ If we say it was from heaven , he will ask us why we did n't believe John .

ID:	4638
INPUT:	Ez gehiago harropuzkeriarik , beraz , kateak <unk> ez dakizkizuen . Izan ere , zuen lurralde <unk> erabakia hartua <unk> dit Jainko Jaunak .
PRED:	Therefore , I am not able to obey the chains that I am giving you very proud . For the Lord has given me a covenant that I had given you .
GOLD:	For the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , has plainly said that he is determined to crush the whole land.So scoff no more , or your punishment will be even greater .

ID:	4639
INPUT:	Baziren han emakume asko ere , urrutitik begira ; Jesusi jarraituz Galileatik etorriak ziren , beraren zerbitzari ;
PRED:	There were there there at a distance from the distance , and they followed Jesus .
GOLD:	And many women who had come from Galilee with Jesus to care for him were watching from a distance .

ID:	4640
INPUT:	Ene seme , ez baztertu Jaunaren heziketa , ez haserretu zentzarazten bazaitu ,
PRED:	Instead , listen to the commands of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	My child , do n't reject the Lord 's discipline , and do n't be upset when he corrects you .

ID:	4641
INPUT:	Harri gaineko hazia bezalakoak , hauek dira : mezua entzutean , pozik onartzen dutenak ; baina , sustrairik gabeak izanik , denboraldi batean sinesten dute , baina <unk> huts egiten .
PRED:	When the seed fell on the ground , the words of the earth will be filled with joy , but those who believe in their hearts are filled with joy .
GOLD:	The seeds on the rocky soil represent those who hear the message and receive it with joy . But since they do n't have deep roots , they believe for a while , then they fall away when they face temptation .

ID:	4642
INPUT:	gogoko dute plazetan jendeak agur egitea eta guztiek “ maisu ” <unk> .
PRED:	Those who love each other and other will say to others , ‘ Great and prophets and prophets who were filled with such confidence . '
GOLD:	They love to receive respectful greetings as they walk in the marketplaces , and to be called ‘ Rabbi . '

ID:	4643
INPUT:	« Norbaitek bere abereak sorora nahiz mahastira larratzera atera eta beste baten soroan larratzen uzten baditu , bere soro nahiz <unk> emaitzarik hoberenez ordainduko du .
PRED:	“ If you go out to the land of the field and took them into the field , he must pay them into a field , and he must pay them into the field .
GOLD:	If someone steals an ox or a donkey or a sheep and it is found in the thief 's possession , then the thief must pay double the value of the stolen animal .

ID:	4644
INPUT:	entzuiozu zerutik , bizi zaren toki horretatik , eta barkatu . Egizu nork bere jokaeraren ordaina har dezan , ongi baitakizu halakoaren barruaren berri ; jakin ere , zuk bakarrik dakizu gizon-emakume guztien barruaren berri .
PRED:	then hear from heaven from heaven and curse you from heaven and curse them , for they will know that they are trying to know that God has come . But when you know that the Good News has come , you know that you know the Good News .
GOLD:	then hear from heaven where you live , and forgive . Give your people what their actions deserve , for you alone know each human heart .

ID:	4645
INPUT:	Haren aginduz eguzkia ez da ateratzen , izarrak ezkutuan uzten ditu .
PRED:	The sun is not in the sky , and the stars in the sky .
GOLD:	If he commands it , the sun wo n't riseand the stars wo n't shine .

ID:	4646
INPUT:	esku hartuko duzu zeuk ere irabazietan , gordailu bakarra izango dugu eta » .
PRED:	You will give you the gifts of the Lord as you have given us . ”
GOLD:	Come , throw in your lot with us ; we 'll all share the loot . ”

ID:	4647
INPUT:	<unk> erdian lau izaki bizidun zeuden , <unk> .
PRED:	There were four living beings in the middle of the four living beings , and those who were filled with four faces .
GOLD:	From the center of the cloud came four living beings that looked human ,

ID:	4648
INPUT:	Seigarren ikuskaria : liburua
PRED:	A Message about the Vision
GOLD:	A Flying Scroll

ID:	4649
INPUT:	Ala ni , Jainko Jauna ! Nire artaldea larrutua eta basapiztia guztien harrapakin izan da artzainik ez zuelako , eta artzainak ez dira nire artaldeaz arduratu ; aitzitik , artzainek beren buruak zaindu dituzte eta ez nire artaldea ;
PRED:	As surely as the Sovereign Lord lives , I am sending you into your flock and wild animals to devour all the animals , and they will not leave their flocks and herds , and they will give them food to their flocks .
GOLD:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , you abandoned my flock and left them to be attacked by every wild animal . And though you were my shepherds , you did n't search for my sheep when they were lost . You took care of yourselves and left the sheep to starve .

ID:	4650
INPUT:	Eraman egin zioten . Jesus ikusteaz batera , espirituak gogor astindu zuen mutikoa , eta lurrean <unk> eta lerdea zeriola utzi .
PRED:	Then Jesus left the synagogue with him , and the Spirit begged him to kill him with him and threw him into the ground .
GOLD:	So they brought the boy . But when the evil spirit saw Jesus , it threw the child into a violent convulsion , and he fell to the ground , writhing and foaming at the mouth .

ID:	4651
INPUT:	Josuek agindu bezala egin zuten israeldarrek : Jordan erditik hamabi harri , israeldar leinuak hainbat harri , hartu , gaua igaroko zuten lekura eraman eta bertan ezarri zituzten , Jaunak Josueri agindu bezala .
PRED:	So Joshua did as the people of Israel had promised . The Israelites took one of the Jordan River on the Jordan River , as the Lord had commanded Joshua .
GOLD:	So the men did as Joshua had commanded them . They took twelve stones from the middle of the Jordan River , one for each tribe , just as the Lord had told Joshua . They carried them to the place where they camped for the night and constructed the memorial there .

ID:	4652
INPUT:	Hori esatean , ahaztu egiten dute aspaldi <unk> zeruak , eta baita lurra ere , Jainkoaren hitzak uretatik <unk> eta uren erdian finkatua ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I have seen the heavens and the earth , and the earth will be thrown into the depths of the earth , and the earth will be thrown into the waters of God .
GOLD:	They deliberately forget that God made the heavens long ago by the word of his command , and he brought the earth out from the water and surrounded it with water .

ID:	4653
INPUT:	Hirira heltzean , oihu egin zieten atezainei eta berri eman , esanez : — Siriarren kanpalekuan izan gara , eta han ez dago inor ; ez da giza hotsik aditzen . Zaldiak eta astoak lotuak eta oihal-etxolak zeuden zeudenean utziak besterik ez dago han .
PRED:	When the Sea arrived near the hill country , they gave the messenger to the camp and said , “ We have not been beaten and beaten in the camp . There are no better than a few of them , and they were thrown into the wilderness .
GOLD:	So they went back to the city and told the gatekeepers what had happened . “ We went out to the Aramean camp , ” they said , “ and no one was there ! The horses and donkeys were tethered and the tents were all in order , but there was n't a single person around ! ”

ID:	4654
INPUT:	Hortan , honela mintzatu zitzaion Elkana bere senarra : — Ana , zergatik ari zara negarrez eta ez duzu jaten ? Zergatik zaude goibel ? Ez al naiz , bada , ni zuretzat hamar seme baino hobe ?
PRED:	One day Eli said to her husband , “ Why are you hungry ? Why are you hungry ? Why do you want me to eat ? ”
GOLD:	“ Why are you crying , Hannah ? ” Elkanah would ask . “ Why are n't you eating ? Why be downhearted just because you have no children ? You have me — is n't that better than having ten sons ? ”

ID:	4655
INPUT:	<unk> dut janari , malkoak edari .
PRED:	I have seen the fruit of my life , and I have been thirsty .
GOLD:	because of your anger and wrath.For you have picked me up and thrown me out .

ID:	4656
INPUT:	Baina Sanbalat horondarrak eta Tobias amondar funtzionarioak , zertara <unk> jakitean , oso gaizki hartu zuten israeldarren egoera <unk> norbait etortzea .
PRED:	But when I realized that the leaders of Israel and the officials of Israel , some of the men of Israel and the people of Israel had killed , and they were afraid of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	But when Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the Ammonite official heard of my arrival , they were very displeased that someone had come to help the people of Israel .

ID:	4657
INPUT:	Zeren , egia esan , niregan bete beharra baita Liburu Santuak dioena : <unk> kidekotzat jo zuten . Izan ere , nireak laster egingo du .
PRED:	That is why the Scriptures say that the Scriptures say , “ As surely as the Scriptures say , ‘ We will come and kill me . ”
GOLD:	For the time has come for this prophecy about me to be fulfilled : ‘ He was counted among the rebels . ' Yes , everything written about me by the prophets will come true . ”

ID:	4658
INPUT:	Roboamek , Jerusalemen kokatu zenean , Judako zenbait hiri gotortu egin zuen .
PRED:	Rehoboam continued to rule over Judah in Jerusalem , including all the towns of Judah .
GOLD:	Rehoboam remained in Jerusalem and fortified various towns for the defense of Judah .

ID:	4659
INPUT:	<unk> beste aldera iritsi ziren , <unk> lurraldera .
PRED:	As soon as they arrived , they arrived at the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	So they arrived at the other side of the lake , in the region of the Gerasenes .

ID:	4660
INPUT:	« Zaude tenpluko atarian zutik , eta hitz egin Judako hirietatik Jauna gurtzera tenplura datozen guztiei . Hots egin zehatz-mehatz haiei esateko agindu dizkizudan hitzak , bakar bat ere utzi gabe .
PRED:	“ Stand up in the Temple of the Lord , and go to the people of Judah to worship the Lord , for they have told all the people of Judah to worship the Lord .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord says : Stand in the courtyard in front of the Temple of the Lord , and make an announcement to the people who have come there to worship from all over Judah . Give them my entire message ; include every word .

ID:	4661
INPUT:	eta ezarri Jaunaren aurrean , urre garbizko mahai gainean , seina <unk> bi lerrotan .
PRED:	He placed them on the altar of the Lord 's presence , along with two rows of gold , along with each other .
GOLD:	Place the bread before the Lord on the pure gold table , and arrange the loaves in two stacks , with six loaves in each stack .

ID:	4662
INPUT:	Begira , zeurekin nauzu ! Noranahi zoazela , zainduko zaituteta lurralde honetara itzularaziko . Ez , ez zaitut eskutik utziko , esan dizudana bete arte » .
PRED:	I am sending you to you , and you will bring you back to your land . I will give you back to you until I have given you . ”
GOLD:	What 's more , I am with you , and I will protect you wherever you go . One day I will bring you back to this land . I will not leave you until I have finished giving you everything I have promised you . ”

ID:	4663
INPUT:	Deabruei eskaini <unk> , ezagutzen ez zituzten sasijainkoei , <unk> etorritako jainko <unk> , arbasoek inoiz gurtu ez zituztenei .
PRED:	And when they saw that they had been unfaithful to idols , they would not worship idols that had been killed by worshiping idols .
GOLD:	They offered sacrifices to demons , which are not God , to gods they had not known before , to new gods only recently arrived , to gods their ancestors had never feared .

ID:	4664
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jainko Jauna , handia zara , ez baita zu adinakorik . Ez da jainkorik zu baizik , geure belarriz entzun izan dugun bezala .
PRED:	That is why the Sovereign Lord says , “ You have no pleasure in the sea , but you have not heard our god , but we have heard our god .
GOLD:	“ How great you are , O Sovereign Lord ! There is no one like you . We have never even heard of another God like you !

ID:	4665
INPUT:	Omri erregearen aginduaketa Akaben familiaren <unk> dituzu : haien esanetara zabiltza . Horregatik , zuen hiria hondatua utziko duteta bizilagunak lotsa gorrian . Nire herriaren <unk> beharko duzue » .
PRED:	In that time the Babylonian leaders were killed by the sword , and they were killed by the king of Ahab . That is why I will make you strong , and your people will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	You keep only the laws of evil King Omri ; you follow only the example of wicked King Ahab ! Therefore , I will make an example of you , bringing you to complete ruin.You will be treated with contempt , mocked by all who see you . ”

ID:	4666
INPUT:	Ene maiteok , ihes egiozue , beraz , idolatriari .
PRED:	Dear friends , listen to this message from the wicked .
GOLD:	So , my dear friends , flee from the worship of idols .

ID:	4667
INPUT:	esan zion emazteari : — Seguru hilko garela , Jainkoa ikusi baitugu .
PRED:	Then he said to his wife , “ We will be afraid of God . ”
GOLD:	and he said to his wife , “ We will certainly die , for we have seen God ! ”

ID:	4668
INPUT:	Nork ezagutzen du zure haserrearen indarra ? Nork dio aski beldur zure suminari ?
PRED:	Who can save you from your power ? Who will be able to save you from your faithfulness ?
GOLD:	Who can comprehend the power of your anger ? Your wrath is as awesome as the fear you deserve .

ID:	4669
INPUT:	Hogei urte zituen Akazek errege izaten hastean , eta hamasei urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen . Ez zuen Jaunari atsegin zaiona egin , bere arbaso Davidek ez bezala jokatuz .
PRED:	When Ahaz was 30 years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem in Jerusalem in Jerusalem . He did not fear the Lord 's sight , just as David had done .
GOLD:	Ahaz was twenty years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years . He did not do what was pleasing in the sight of the Lord , as his ancestor David had done .

ID:	4670
INPUT:	Ez egin jaramonik Babiloniako erregeak ez zaituztela menderatuko esaten dizueten profetei , gezurra esaten baitizuete .
PRED:	The king of Babylon will not listen to your prophets , and those who say , ‘ The kings of Babylon will be destroyed ! '
GOLD:	Do not listen to the false prophets who keep telling you , ‘ The king of Babylon will not conquer you . ' They are liars .

ID:	4671
INPUT:	Ez izan zeure baitan beste jainkorik , ez dezazula adora jainko arrotzik .
PRED:	Do not worship other gods , for they have no more than any other gods .
GOLD:	For it was I , the Lord your God , who rescued you from the land of Egypt.Open your mouth wide , and I will fill it with good things .

ID:	4672
INPUT:	Sei urtez egon zen Joax bi emakumeekin Jainkoaren etxean gorderik , Atalia lurralde hartan erregina izan zen bitarte guztian .
PRED:	For he was six years old when he became very old , and she became the next king .
GOLD:	Joash remained hidden in the Temple of God for six years while Athaliah ruled over the land .

ID:	4673
INPUT:	<unk> bezala , ez nintzatekeen izan ere egingo , argirik ikusi ez duten <unk> pareko .
PRED:	But when I saw that I would not be able to see if I saw that I had seen , they will be like that they will be like an eagle .
GOLD:	Why was n't I buried like a stillborn child , like a baby who never lives to see the light ?

ID:	4674
INPUT:	Jeroboamek kultu-lekuak egin zituen muinoetan eta , <unk> , Lebiren ondorengoak ez ziren apaizak izendatu zituen jende artetik .
PRED:	He made the pagan shrines and the people of Israel in the hill country of the tribe of Levi , the priests , and the priests who had not been given to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Jeroboam also erected buildings at the pagan shrines and ordained priests from the common people — those who were not from the priestly tribe of Levi .

ID:	4675
INPUT:	Jehuk gora , leihora , begiratu eta esan zuen : — Nor dut neure aldeko ? Bizpahiru zerbitzari atera ziren orduan leihora eta Jehuri begira jarri .
PRED:	When Jehu looked up and saw him , he said , “ Who is my servant ? ” So Jehu shouted , “ I saw that she had come and saw him .
GOLD:	Jehu looked up and saw her at the window and shouted , “ Who is on my side ? ” And two or three eunuchs looked out at him .

ID:	4676
INPUT:	ostera , <unk> behar du izan , ongia maite duena , zentzuduna , zuzena , jainkozalea , bere buruaren jabea ;
PRED:	Better to be kind of wisdom , and wisdom is better to be innocent .
GOLD:	Rather , he must enjoy having guests in his home , and he must love what is good . He must live wisely and be just . He must live a devout and disciplined life .

ID:	4677
INPUT:	Apaizak miatu egingo du eta aparte edukiko zazpi egunez .
PRED:	The priest must examine the person ceremonially unclean for seven days .
GOLD:	After examining the affected spot , the priest will put the article in quarantine for seven days .

ID:	4678
INPUT:	Behin batez , ordea , hiru urteren buruan , Ximeiren bi <unk> ihes egin eta Gateko errege Akixengana , Maakaren semearengana , jo zuten . Morroiak Gaten zirela salatu ziotenean ,
PRED:	One day when he was born , he was very old when he learned that he was in Damascus , who had fled to Jerusalem , and when they were afraid of Gath , they were afraid to attack Jerusalem .
GOLD:	But three years later two of Shimei 's slaves ran away to King Achish son of Maacah of Gath . When Shimei learned where they were ,

ID:	4679
INPUT:	bata ertz batean eta bestea bestean , <unk> gorputz bat bera egiten zutelarik .
PRED:	One of the one of the one of the one will be cut off from one end .
GOLD:	He molded the cherubim on each end of the atonement cover , making it all of one piece of gold .

ID:	4680
INPUT:	Ez du gezurrik esaten Israelen ospea denak , eta ez da damutuko , bera ez baita <unk> , damutzen ibiltzeko .
PRED:	He does not listen to his power , and he will not turn against every evil thing . He will turn away and turn against me and destroy it .
GOLD:	And he who is the Glory of Israel will not lie , nor will he change his mind , for he is not human that he should change his mind ! ”

ID:	4681
INPUT:	Sedekiasen semeei lepoa moztu zieten aitaren aurrean , Riblan bertan , baita Judako buruzagiei ere .
PRED:	Then the king of Babylon cut off Zedekiah 's sons , and the officials of Judah and the officials of Judah .
GOLD:	The king of Babylon made Zedekiah watch as he slaughtered his sons . He also slaughtered all the officials of Judah at Riblah .

ID:	4682
INPUT:	Orduan , faraoiak Moisesi eta Aaroni dei egin eta esan zien : — Eskaini , bai , sakrifizioak zeuen Jainkoari , baina lurralde honetan bertan .
PRED:	Then Pharaoh summoned Moses and Aaron , and he said to Moses , “ Please give us a land and your God . ”
GOLD:	If you refuse , then I will send swarms of flies on you , your officials , your people , and all the houses . The Egyptian homes will be filled with flies , and the ground will be covered with them .

ID:	4683
INPUT:	Hona hemen lagunduko dizueten familiaburuak : Rubenen leinutik , Xedeurren seme <unk> ;
PRED:	These are the leaders of the tribe of Gad :
GOLD:	“ These are the tribes and the names of the leaders who will assist you : ReubenElizur son of Shedeur

ID:	4684
INPUT:	<unk> ateak itxi zituzten eta argiak itzali ; ez zuten intsentsurik erre , ez erre-oparirik eskaini Israelen Jainkoaren tenpluan .
PRED:	At that time the gates of the Temple was not able to burn incense on the altar of the Temple of God , and they never burned incense on the altar of the Temple of God .
GOLD:	They also shut the doors to the Temple 's entry room , and they snuffed out the lamps . They stopped burning incense and presenting burnt offerings at the sanctuary of the God of Israel .

ID:	4685
INPUT:	Zekorraren okela , larrua eta hondakinak kanpalekutik aparte erreko dituzu , bekatuaren barkamenerako sakrifizioa da eta .
PRED:	Then the priest must remove the blood of the bull , and the priest must burn it on the camp .
GOLD:	Then take the rest of the bull , including its hide , meat , and dung , and burn it outside the camp as a sin offering .

ID:	4686
INPUT:	Goretsi Jauna , munduko herriok , goretsi Jaunaren ospea eta indarra ,
PRED:	Praise the Lord , all the kings of the earth , and all the glory of the Lord .
GOLD:	O nations of the world , recognize the Lord ; recognize that the Lord is glorious and strong .

ID:	4687
INPUT:	Goxen , Holon , <unk> : hamaika hiri eta beraien herrixkak .
PRED:	They were written in the region of the region of Goshen , and they were all their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	Goshen , Holon , and Giloh — eleven towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	4688
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Entzun ! Aieneak eta negar samina Raman ! Rakel ari <unk> haurrengatik negarrez : ez du kontsolatu nahi , ez baitira bizi » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Listen to Jerusalem , those who mourn in Jerusalem , weeping and women , women who were in Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ A cry is heard in Ramah — deep anguish and bitter weeping.Rachel weeps for her children , refusing to be comforted — for her children are gone . ”

ID:	4689
INPUT:	« Nola ikusten duzu senidearen begiko lasto-izpia eta zeure begiko hagaz ohartzen ez ?
PRED:	“ How can you see that your friend 's friend is a friend 's friend ?
GOLD:	“ And why worry about a speck in your friend 's eye when you have a log in your own ?

ID:	4690
INPUT:	Jaun <unk> batzukbizirik utzi ez balitu , Sodoma eta Gomorraren <unk> genukeen guk ere .
PRED:	But when the Lord saw that they were afraid of Egypt , when they were afraid of Egypt , as though we were afraid of Egypt .
GOLD:	If the Lord of Heaven 's Armieshad not spared a few of us , we would have been wiped out like Sodom , destroyed like Gomorrah .

ID:	4691
INPUT:	Tziklag , <unk> , <unk> ,
PRED:	When they heard that they were betrayed , they know how they have seen .
GOLD:	Ziklag , Madmannah , Sansannah ,

ID:	4692
INPUT:	Urte hartan janaria ahitu zen hirian eta jendearen gosea izugarria zen . Laugarren hilaren bederatzian ,
PRED:	On that day the fourth year of the fourth year of the fourth year of the fourth year of the fourth year of the fourth year of the fourth year of the fourth year .
GOLD:	By July 18 in the eleventh year of Zedekiah 's reign , the famine in the city had become very severe , and the last of the food was entirely gone .

ID:	4693
INPUT:	Apaizek ez dute galdetu : “ Non da Jauna ? ” Lege-maisuek ez naute aintzat hartu , buruzagiak kontra jaiki zaizkit , profetek Baalen <unk> egin dute , ezertarako ez diren idoloen <unk> dira .
PRED:	“ Where are the priests ? ” the priests asked , “ Where are the Lord of God ? Why are you the god of Baal ? They have no god of Baal ? They have heard that they have been unfaithful to idols of Baal .
GOLD:	The priests did not ask , ‘ Where is the Lord ? 'Those who taught my word ignored me , the rulers turned against me , and the prophets spoke in the name of Baal , wasting their time on worthless idols .

ID:	4694
INPUT:	Hondatuak izango <unk> sasikultu-lekuak , Israeli huts egitera eragin ziotenak . <unk> eta <unk> ditu aldareak . Orduan , honela esango diete mendiei : « Ezkuta gaitzazue » , eta muinoei : « Eror zaitezte gure gainera » .
PRED:	The nations of the earth will be filled with the pagan shrines , and those who were filled with idols . Then they will say , ‘ The mountains of Israel , hills , and hills , hills , and hills , and hills , and hills . '
GOLD:	And the pagan shrines of Aven , the place of Israel 's sin , will crumble.Thorns and thistles will grow up around their altars.They will beg the mountains , “ Bury us ! ” and plead with the hills , “ Fall on us ! ”

ID:	4695
INPUT:	“ Herrialde honetan bizitzen gelditzen bazarete , eraitsi ordez eraiki egingo zaituztet eta erauzi ordez landatu , damutu egin bainaiz egin dizuedan kalteaz .
PRED:	‘ If you live in this land , I will rebuild you in this land , and I will make you a burden to you , and I am giving you today .
GOLD:	‘ Stay here in this land . If you do , I will build you up and not tear you down ; I will plant you and not uproot you . For I am sorry about all the punishment I have had to bring upon you .

ID:	4696
INPUT:	eta esan zien : « Zoazte Jaunaren , zeuen Jainkoaren , itun-kutxaren aurrera Jordan erdiraino eta hartu harri bana sorbaldan , israeldar leinuak hainbat harri .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Go and cross the Ark of the Lord your God , and make it stones on the plains of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	He told them , “ Go into the middle of the Jordan , in front of the Ark of the Lord your God . Each of you must pick up one stone and carry it out on your shoulder — twelve stones in all , one for each of the twelve tribes of Israel .

ID:	4697
INPUT:	<unk> gisa eraiki dudan harri <unk> etxe izango da . Jaunari , ematen didan <unk> bihurtuko diot » .
PRED:	And when I have built my Temple , I will build my Temple to honor the Lord , and I will make my covenant with my name . ”
GOLD:	And this memorial pillar I have set up will become a place for worshiping God , and I will present to God a tenth of everything he gives me . ”

ID:	4698
INPUT:	aski ezaguna baita Judaren leinutik datorrela gure Jauna , eta Moisesek aipatu ere ez zuen egin leinu hori apaizei buruz hitz egitean .
PRED:	We know the Lord our God , and we have spoken from the tribe of Judah and the people of Judah .
GOLD:	What I mean is , our Lord came from the tribe of Judah , and Moses never mentioned priests coming from that tribe .

ID:	4699
INPUT:	« Bazen hiri batean epaile bat , ez Jainkoari beldurrik , ez gizakiari begirunerik ez ziona .
PRED:	“ But a man who could n't be able to fear God , for they do n't fear God .
GOLD:	“ There was a judge in a certain city , ” he said , “ who neither feared God nor cared about people .

ID:	4700
INPUT:	« <unk> amak , leihotik begira , <unk> oihuka , zioen : “ Zergatik dator hain <unk> guda-gurdia ? Zergatik hain <unk> zaldiak ? ”
PRED:	“ When the woman saw what was happening ? ” she shouted , “ Why are you afraid ? Why are you afraid ? Why are you afraid of horses ? Why are your horses ? ”
GOLD:	“ From the window Sisera 's mother looked out.Through the window she watched for his return , saying , ‘ Why is his chariot so long in coming ? Why do n't we hear the sound of chariot wheels ? '

ID:	4701
INPUT:	« Guk ere berri on hau iragartzen dizuegu : gure arbasoei egindako agintzaria ,
PRED:	“ We tell you the Good News , ‘ We have given this promise to our ancestors . '
GOLD:	“ And now we are here to bring you this Good News . The promise was made to our ancestors ,

ID:	4702
INPUT:	Hauek bertan kokatu eta santutegia eraiki zizuten , esanez :
PRED:	They had built a Temple and built it to a place of worship .
GOLD:	Your people settled here and built this Temple to honor your name .

ID:	4703
INPUT:	Hona hemen Aaronen eta Moisesen ondorengoak , Sinai mendian Jauna Moisesi mintzatu zitzaionean .
PRED:	This is the following instructions to Moses , the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	This is the family line of Aaron and Moses as it was recorded when the Lord spoke to Moses on Mount Sinai :

ID:	4704
INPUT:	Zortzi urte zituen Josiasek errege izaten hastean , eta hogeita hamaika urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen . Haren amak <unk> zuen izena eta <unk> <unk> alaba zen .
PRED:	Josiah was twenty-two years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem three years . His mother was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he became the daughter of Samaria .
GOLD:	Josiah was eight years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem thirty-one years . His mother was Jedidah , the daughter of Adaiah from Bozkath .

ID:	4705
INPUT:	Herioarekin zenuten <unk> egingo da , Hildakoen <unk> <unk> du iraungo . Ezbehar <unk> joeta zapalduko zaituzte .
PRED:	You will be able to fall into the grave , and when they will be able to kill you , and when they will fall into battle .
GOLD:	I will cancel the bargain you made to cheat death , and I will overturn your deal to dodge the grave.When the terrible enemy sweeps through , you will be trampled into the ground .

ID:	4706
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	This message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	4707
INPUT:	« Halaber , ospatu <unk> , soroan erein <unk> lehen <unk> ; baita <unk> <unk> ere , zeuen soroetako lanaren fruituak biltzen <unk> .
PRED:	“ At that time the first month when they saw that the first time of the field , when they saw that some of you were very old , and when they were filled with fruit .
GOLD:	“ Second , celebrate the Festival of Harvest , when you bring me the first crops of your harvest . “ Finally , celebrate the Festival of the Final Harvest at the end of the harvest season , when you have harvested all the crops from your fields .

ID:	4708
INPUT:	Honela jango duzue : gerrikoa loturik , oinetakoak jantzirik eta makila eskuan , abiatzeko prest ; presaka jango duzue , Jaunaren Pazkoa baita .
PRED:	Then you must eat the sacred garments of the sacred garments and put it on the head of the Lord 's robe . You must be ready to eat the sacred garments of the Lord 's Covenant .
GOLD:	“ These are your instructions for eating this meal : Be fully dressed , wear your sandals , and carry your walking stick in your hand . Eat the meal with urgency , for this is the Lord 's Passover .

ID:	4709
INPUT:	<unk> zerion <unk> , su kiskalgarria , ikatz goriak ahotik .
PRED:	At that time they were like a fire , and when they were covered with fire .
GOLD:	Smoke poured from his nostrils ; fierce flames leaped from his mouth.Glowing coals blazed forth from him .

ID:	4710
INPUT:	Arren , Jainko , izan zeu nire <unk> ; nor jarriko , bestela , nire alde ?
PRED:	But if I am the Sovereign Lord , how will you know that I am going to help you ?
GOLD:	“ You must defend my innocence , O God , since no one else will stand up for me .

ID:	4711
INPUT:	Hasi ziren berriro borrokan filistearrak israeldarren aurka . Jaitsi zen David bere gizonekin filistearren kontra <unk> , baina nekatu egin zen .
PRED:	When the Philistines attacked the Philistines , he mobilized his men against the Philistines and his men . But when he was very angry with him , he became very angry with him .
GOLD:	Once again the Philistines were at war with Israel . And when David and his men were in the thick of battle , David became weak and exhausted .

ID:	4712
INPUT:	Zuregan ditut begiak , ene Jaun eta Jainko , zuregan naiz babesten , ez ni hiltzen utzi .
PRED:	I have put my eyes in your eyes , and I have not abandoned my enemies .
GOLD:	I look to you for help , O Sovereign Lord.You are my refuge ; do n't let them kill me .

ID:	4713
INPUT:	Zuei , jaiotzaz jentil zaretenoi , juduek , gorputzean egina duten erdainkuntzagatik « erdainduak » direneko horiek , « erdaingabe » deitzen zizueten . Ez ahaztu
PRED:	I am writing to the Jews who are in the synagogue , who are circumcised for those who are not circumcised , for they are not circumcised . For you are not guilty of the law of you are not guilty . ”
GOLD:	Do n't forget that you Gentiles used to be outsiders . You were called “ uncircumcised heathens ” by the Jews , who were proud of their circumcision , even though it affected only their bodies and not their hearts .

ID:	4714
INPUT:	Orduan , Judako herri osoak Azarias , hamasei urteko gaztea , izendatu zuen errege , bere aita Amatziasen ordez .
PRED:	Then all the people of Judah , son of Uzziah , became king of Judah .
GOLD:	All the people of Judah had crowned Amaziah 's sixteen-year-old son , Uzziah , as king in place of his father , Amaziah .

ID:	4715
INPUT:	Jerusalemen jendeak dio : « Horren berri jakitean , indarge gaude , estu eta larri , emakumea erdiminetan bezala .
PRED:	The people of Jerusalem heard about him , “ We are afraid of those who are in trouble , and we are in trouble .
GOLD:	We have heard reports about the enemy , and we wring our hands in fright.Pangs of anguish have gripped us , like those of a woman in labor .

ID:	4716
INPUT:	Jainko Jaun ahalguztidunak lurra joeta lurrak dardara , bizilagun guztiek dolu ; Egiptoko Nilo ibaiaren <unk> guztia <unk> eta hustu ;
PRED:	The earth of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the earth of Egypt , and all the nations of Egypt — the land of Egypt — the land of Egypt , and all the trees of Egypt .
GOLD:	The Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , touches the land and it melts , and all its people mourn.The ground rises like the Nile River at floodtime , and then it sinks again .

ID:	4717
INPUT:	Josuek ikertzaileak bidali Jerikora
PRED:	Joshua sent out to Jericho
GOLD:	Rahab Protects the Spies

ID:	4718
INPUT:	Baina , oraindik pozaren pozez sinetsi ezinik eta guztiz harriturik zeudenez , Jesusek esan zien : « Ba al duzue hemen jatekorik ? »
PRED:	But when Jesus heard this , he said , “ How can you see ? ” he asked them , “ Is it the one who is here ? ”
GOLD:	Still they stood there in disbelief , filled with joy and wonder . Then he asked them , “ Do you have anything here to eat ? ”

ID:	4719
INPUT:	<unk> , Meunim eta <unk> ;
PRED:	They were very angry and fig tree , and they became very angry .
GOLD:	Asnah , Meunim , Nephusim ,

ID:	4720
INPUT:	Egunero bedeinkatuko zaitut , zure izena beti goretsiko .
PRED:	I will praise you , O God ; I will praise you in your name .
GOLD:	I will praise you every day ; yes , I will praise you forever .

ID:	4721
INPUT:	ez <unk> edo besoa <unk> duena ,
PRED:	But if they have heard that he is able to kill him ,
GOLD:	or has a broken foot or arm ,

ID:	4722
INPUT:	nire ondoren datorrena , eta ni ez naiz inor hari oinetako lokarriak askatzeko ere .
PRED:	I am not sending you into my chains , and I will not take away from the chains of my chains .
GOLD:	Though his ministry follows mine , I 'm not even worthy to be his slave and untie the straps of his sandal . ”

ID:	4723
INPUT:	Uko egin diegu isilpeko <unk> <unk> ; ez dugu azpikeriaz jokatzen , ezta Jainkoaren mezua <unk> ere . Aitzitik , egia argi eta garbi azalduz , geure buruak sinesgarri bihurtzen dizkiegu gizon-emakume guztiei Jainkoaren aurrean .
PRED:	We have heard the evil things we have done , so that we have been able to know that the word of God has given us , and we have been given to all the things we have done .
GOLD:	We reject all shameful deeds and underhanded methods . We do n't try to trick anyone or distort the word of God . We tell the truth before God , and all who are honest know this .

ID:	4724
INPUT:	Ongi ezagutzen dugu hau esan zuena : Niri dagokit mendekua , neuk emango dut ordaina . Eta beste hau ere esan zuen : Jaunak epaituko du bere herria .
PRED:	For we know that the Lord will judge me , and I will punish them . ” And he said , “ I will judge the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	For we know the one who said , “ I will take revenge.I will pay them back . ” He also said , “ The Lord will judge his own people . ”

ID:	4725
INPUT:	Arabiaren aurka
PRED:	A Message about False Prophets
GOLD:	A Message about Arabia

ID:	4726
INPUT:	Zein ugari , Jauna , nire etsaiak ! Zein ugari aurka altxa <unk> !
PRED:	O Lord , how can you think of your enemies ! How can you think of your enemies ?
GOLD:	So many are saying , “ God will never rescue him ! ” Interlude

ID:	4727
INPUT:	Ez lurreko erregeek , ezta munduko inork ere , ez zuen uste etsaia Jerusalemgo ateetan sekula sartuko zenik .
PRED:	Do not be afraid of the earth or the kings of the earth , or even though they were in Jerusalem , they would not enter the Temple of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Not a king in all the earth — no one in all the world — would have believed that an enemycould march through the gates of Jerusalem .

ID:	4728
INPUT:	Haren eskuak urretan <unk> , topazioz tarteka apainduak . Haren <unk> landua , zafiroz estalia .
PRED:	For the king of Assyria will make the annual festivals of stones , which is as well as well as a god , which would be made of wood .
GOLD:	His arms are like rounded bars of gold , set with beryl.His body is like bright ivory , glowing with lapis lazuli .

ID:	4729
INPUT:	Honen guztiaren ondoren , Jerusalemera joatea erabaki zuen Paulok Mazedonia eta <unk> igaroz . Eta han izan ondoren , Erromara ere joan behar zuela pentsatu zuen .
PRED:	When Paul learned that he was going to Jerusalem , he decided to visit you . And when he learned that he was there , he was so severe that he could go to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Afterward Paul felt compelled by the Spirit to go over to Macedonia and Achaia before going to Jerusalem . “ And after that , ” he said , “ I must go on to Rome ! ”

ID:	4730
INPUT:	Zuek zerbitzatu ahal izateko , beste eliz elkarteei kendu behar izan nien neuretzako behar nuena .
PRED:	I have given you to the churches and to bring them back to the churches . I will bring you back to the churches .
GOLD:	I “ robbed ” other churches by accepting their contributions so I could serve you at no cost .

ID:	4731
INPUT:	<unk> eta lihoa eskuratzen ditu , gogotsu lan egiten haren eskuek .
PRED:	For if they were wise , they will make their own hands .
GOLD:	She finds wool and flaxand busily spins it .

ID:	4732
INPUT:	Gedeonek Israelgo gizon gehienak bidali zituen nor bere etxera , hirurehun haiekin bakarrik geldituz ; hauek beren lagunen jakiak eta adarrak hartu zituzten . Madiandarren kanpalekua <unk> baino beherago zegoen , lautadan .
PRED:	Gideon sent one of the men of Israel , one of the tribe of Levi , one of the tribe of Levi , one of the tribe of Israel , and they took them off from the plains of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	So Gideon collected the provisions and rams ' horns of the other warriors and sent them home . But he kept the 300 men with him.The Midianite camp was in the valley just below Gideon .

ID:	4733
INPUT:	Pilatok galdetu zion : — Zu al zara juduen erregea ? Jesusek erantzun zion : — Zeuk diozu .
PRED:	Then Pilate asked him , “ Are you the King of the Jews ? ”
GOLD:	Pilate asked Jesus , “ Are you the king of the Jews ? ” Jesus replied , “ You have said it . ”

ID:	4734
INPUT:	Baina , gau hartan , Jainkoa agertu zitzaion Abimeleki ametsetan , esanez : « Hil egingo zara , hartu duzun emakumea ezkondua baita » .
PRED:	But before the night God appeared to Abimelech in a dream , he said to Abimelech , “ You must be put to death . ”
GOLD:	But that night God came to Abimelech in a dream and told him , “ You are a dead man , for that woman you have taken is already married ! ”

ID:	4735
INPUT:	Emakumeak
PRED:	Young Women of Jerusalem
GOLD:	Young Man

ID:	4736
INPUT:	Jaunak Moisesek eskatua egin zuen : etxe , atari eta landetan zeuden igelak hil egin ziren .
PRED:	Then Moses made the gold rings from the south side of the Euphrates River , and they killed the Ark of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ You set the time ! ” Moses replied . “ Tell me when you want me to pray for you , your officials , and your people . Then you and your houses will be rid of the frogs . They will remain only in the Nile River . ”

ID:	4737
INPUT:	Amasari , berriz , esan : « Ez al zaitut neure <unk> ? Zigor nazala Jainkoak gogor , baldin eta gudalburu egiten ez bazaitut betiko , Joaben ordez ! »
PRED:	“ Well , ” he said , “ I will do you know that God has killed me and kill me , and if you do n't even kill me and kill me . ”
GOLD:	Then Amasa convinced all the men of Judah , and they responded unanimously . They sent word to the king , “ Return to us , and bring back all who are with you . ”

ID:	4738
INPUT:	neska gazteei beren senarrak eta haurrak maitatzen irakats diezaieten ,
PRED:	Some of the women who were wise , and children will hear their children .
GOLD:	These older women must train the younger women to love their husbands and their children ,

ID:	4739
INPUT:	<unk> handia bazara , eutsi zeure <unk> .
PRED:	If you are very sick , you will know that your power will be healed .
GOLD:	If you are a big eater , put a knife to your throat ;

ID:	4740
INPUT:	Asiriar ordezkari nagusiak esan zien : — Eramaiozue Ezekias erregeari errege handiaren , Asiriako erregearen , mezu hau : « Zer dela-eta zaude hain ziur ?
PRED:	Then the king of Assyria said to the king of Assyria , “ This is what the king of Assyria says : What do you think of the great king of Assyria ? ”
GOLD:	Then the Assyrian king 's chief of staff told them to give this message to Hezekiah : “ This is what the great king of Assyria says : What are you trusting in that makes you so confident ?

ID:	4741
INPUT:	Egun hartan bertan , ezaugarri bat eman zuen Jainkoaren gizonak , esanez : « Honetan igarriko duzue Jaunak hitz egin duela : <unk> egingo da aldarea eta lurrera isuriko gainean duen errautsa » .
PRED:	In that day the man of God will be given by the man of God , ” he said , “ you will know that the Lord will pour out the altar and pour out the altar on the altar . ”
GOLD:	That same day the man of God gave a sign to prove his message . He said , “ The Lord has promised to give this sign : This altar will split apart , and its ashes will be poured out on the ground . ”

ID:	4742
INPUT:	Zer egin , bada , senideok ? <unk> zaretenean , batek kantua egin dezala , besteak irakatsi edota goi-agerpen bat eman , hizketa arrotzez mintzatu edota mintzaira hori argitu ; baina guztia elkarteari hazten laguntzeko izan dadila .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you , dear brothers and sisters , if you were in the name of the church , I have given you all the words of the church in tongues .
GOLD:	Well , my brothers and sisters , let 's summarize . When you meet together , one will sing , another will teach , another will tell some special revelation God has given , one will speak in tongues , and another will interpret what is said . But everything that is done must strengthen all of you .

ID:	4743
INPUT:	Joan ziren , bada , haiek Jesusengana eta esan zioten : — Joan Bataiatzaileak bidali gaitu zuri galdetzera : « Zu al zara “ Etortzekoa ” ala besteren baten zain egon behar dugu ? »
PRED:	So the disciples went to Jesus and asked him , “ Are we afraid of God ? ” “ Are you looking for us ? ” they asked . “ We are looking for you , ” they asked .
GOLD:	John 's two disciples found Jesus and said to him , “ John the Baptist sent us to ask , ‘ Are you the Messiah we 've been expecting , or should we keep looking for someone else ? ' ”

ID:	4744
INPUT:	Turuta , txirula , zitara , alboka , harpa eta beste musika-tresnen hotsa entzun orduko , lurreraino ahuspeztuz , Nabukodonosor erregeak eraiki duen urrezko irudia gurtuko duzue .
PRED:	Blow the sound of the ram in the streets , and all the people who hear the sound of the statue of the sky , and the king of the sky , and you must worship the statue of King Nebuchadnezzar .
GOLD:	When you hear the sound of the horn , flute , zither , lyre , harp , pipes , and other musical instruments , bow to the ground to worship King Nebuchadnezzar 's gold statue .

ID:	4745
INPUT:	Eskerrak ematen dizkiot Jainkoari , Kristoren bidez lortu duen garaipenaren partaide egiten gaituelako beti , eta , gure bitartez , Kristoren ezagutza usain gozoa bezala leku guztietan zabaltzen duelako .
PRED:	I thank God by the power of Christ , the power of Christ , who gives us glory to Christ , just as we have been revealed to our Savior .
GOLD:	But thank God ! He has made us his captives and continues to lead us along in Christ 's triumphal procession . Now he uses us to spread the knowledge of Christ everywhere , like a sweet perfume .

ID:	4746
INPUT:	Beraz , hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Zeuek salatu duzue zeuen errua eta agerian jarri zeuen hobenak ; zeuek nabarmendu dituzue zeuen bekatu eta egintza txarrak ; zeuen buruak salatu dituzue ; horregatik , preso hartuko zaituztete bortxaz .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : You have sinned against the sins of your sins , and you have put them on the sins of your sins , and you have committed .
GOLD:	Your prophets have given false visions , and your fortune-tellers have told lies.The sword will fall on the necks of the wickedfor whom the day of final reckoning has come .

ID:	4747
INPUT:	zuen arbasoak bezalaxe , nire aginduetatik aldendu egin zarete , ez dituzue bete . Itzuli , beraz , zuek niregana , eta itzuliko naiz ni zuengana . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak . Baina hau diozue : “ Zergatik behar dugu zuregana itzuli ? ”
PRED:	You have left my ancestors , just as I did . You have refused to listen to me , and I have told you , ‘ I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . '
GOLD:	Ever since the days of your ancestors , you have scorned my decrees and failed to obey them . Now return to me , and I will return to you , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . “ But you ask , ‘ How can we return when we have never gone away ? '

ID:	4748
INPUT:	« Zoaz Davidengana eta esaiozu : “ Hau dio Jaunak : Hiru zigor ipiniko dizkizut aukeran ; hautatu bat eta huraxe ezarriko dizut ” » .
PRED:	“ Go to David and tell him , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I am the one of you , and I am the one who has chosen . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Go and say to David , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will give you three choices . Choose one of these punishments , and I will inflict it on you . ' ”

ID:	4749
INPUT:	eta Zesarean lehorreratu zen ; handik Jerusalemgo eliz elkartea agurtzera igo zen eta gero Antiokiara jaitsi .
PRED:	When he arrived at Jerusalem , he went to Antioch to Antioch of the church and preached to Antioch .
GOLD:	The next stop was at the port of Caesarea . From there he went up and visited the church at Jerusalem and then went back to Antioch .

ID:	4750
INPUT:	Davidek galdetu zion berria <unk> gazteari : — Nola dakizu hilak direla Saul eta beronen seme Jonatan ?
PRED:	Then David asked him , “ How can we know that Saul 's son ? ”
GOLD:	“ How do you know Saul and Jonathan are dead ? ” David demanded of the young man .

ID:	4751
INPUT:	Berrogei egunen buruan , Noek , berak egindako ontziko <unk> irekiz ,
PRED:	After the forty days , Noah was very old when he became king , and when he was given to you .
GOLD:	After another forty days , Noah opened the window he had made in the boat

ID:	4752
INPUT:	« Orduan , zuen etsaien artean <unk> emango duzuen denboraldi guztian , lurrak , bertan behera utzia egongo delarik , atseden hartu ahal izango du : zor zitzaizkion atsedenaldiak izango ditu .
PRED:	“ Then you will be sure that the nations will be filled with their enemies , and they will be filled with their enemies , and they will rest in the streets .
GOLD:	Then at last the land will enjoy its neglected Sabbath years as it lies desolate while you are in exile in the land of your enemies . Then the land will finally rest and enjoy the Sabbaths it missed .

ID:	4753
INPUT:	« Jerusalemera itzuli nintzen eta , tenpluan otoitzean ari nintzela , goi-ikuskari bat izan nuen .
PRED:	“ When I returned to Jerusalem , I was praying to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	“ After I returned to Jerusalem , I was praying in the Temple and fell into a trance .

ID:	4754
INPUT:	Aldarea zartatu egin zen eta errautsa aldaretik behera isuri , Jainkoaren gizonak , Jaunaren aginduz , emaniko <unk> arabera .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ If the guilt offering of the altar , the people of the Lord , the God of the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of the Lord , have spoken !
GOLD:	At the same time a wide crack appeared in the altar , and the ashes poured out , just as the man of God had predicted in his message from the Lord .

ID:	4755
INPUT:	Deboraren kantua
PRED:	Young Woman
GOLD:	The Song of Deborah

ID:	4756
INPUT:	Orduan , Abrahamek , ahuspezturik , irri egin zuen . Pentsatu zuen bere baitan : « Ehun urteko <unk> sortu al <unk> semerik ? Edota , izan ote dezake semerik Sarak bere laurogeita hamarrekin ? »
PRED:	Then Abraham bowed low and worshiped him . “ But if you have done this , how can he be very old ? ” he asked . “ Is it that God 's son , who has been born to you ? ”
GOLD:	Then Abraham bowed down to the ground , but he laughed to himself in disbelief . “ How could I become a father at the age of 100 ? ” he thought . “ And how can Sarah have a baby when she is ninety years old ? ”

ID:	4757
INPUT:	Ate ondora irten zen , eta beste neskame batek ikusi eta han zeudenei esan zien : — Jesus <unk> ibilia da hau .
PRED:	Then one of the palace came outside and saw another , one of the servant of the guard , and he said to the other , “ This is the one who was here . ”
GOLD:	Later , out by the gate , another servant girl noticed him and said to those standing around , “ This man was with Jesus of Nazareth . ”

ID:	4758
INPUT:	Berehala zutitu eta ibiltzen hasi zen , hamabi urte bazituen eta . Jende guztia harri eta zur gelditu zen .
PRED:	When he stood up , he began talking about twelve years . He was twelve years old , and all the people had been circumcised .
GOLD:	And the girl , who was twelve years old , immediately stood up and walked around ! They were overwhelmed and totally amazed .

ID:	4759
INPUT:	Apaizari eramaten zaizkion opari sakratuak apaizarentzat dira » .
PRED:	You may take the sacred offerings to the priest . ”
GOLD:	Each priest may keep all the sacred donations that he receives . ”

ID:	4760
INPUT:	Eta deabrua , haiek liluratu zituena , su eta <unk> aintzirara jaurtia izan zen ; hantxe daude piztia eta sasiprofeta ere . Gau eta egun <unk> dituzte han menderen mendetan .
PRED:	And when the devil saw that the devil was able to be able to be able to be thrown into the boat , and those who were slaughtered by the power of the dead will be thrown into the dead .
GOLD:	Then the devil , who had deceived them , was thrown into the fiery lake of burning sulfur , joining the beast and the false prophet . There they will be tormented day and night forever and ever .

ID:	4761
INPUT:	Josuek Ai hiria erre eta zeharo hondatua utzi zuen , <unk> bihurtua betiko ; eta horrela dirau gaur arte .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you , and the city will be destroyed , and it will become stronger than the city .
GOLD:	So Joshua burned the town of Ai , and it became a permanent mound of ruins , desolate to this very day .

ID:	4762
INPUT:	Zelatan egoten da lapurra bezalaeta desleialtasun asko sorrarazten gizonen artean .
PRED:	They were at the entrance to the city , where they were a large crowd .
GOLD:	She hides and waits like a robber , eager to make more men unfaithful .

ID:	4763
INPUT:	Mesede bat eskatu nahi dizut , ez ukatu . Betsabek , orduan : — <unk> .
PRED:	I asked you to ask you , “ I ca n't give you a wild animal , and I will give you authority . ”
GOLD:	So now I have just one favor to ask of you . Please do n't turn me down . ” “ What is it ? ” she asked .

ID:	4764
INPUT:	Gizon hura <unk> zuen profeta zaharrak , berri hori jakitean , esan zuen : « Jainkoaren gizona da ! Ez du bete Jaunaren agindua , eta Jaunak lehoiaren <unk> eman du ; lehoiak zatikatu eta hil egin du , Jaunak aurrez esana zion bezala » .
PRED:	When the prophet heard what had happened , he told him , “ The man of God has told him , ‘ The man of God has killed me , and the Lord has given him a sword . '
GOLD:	When the prophet heard the report , he said , “ It is the man of God who disobeyed the Lord 's command . The Lord has fulfilled his word by causing the lion to attack and kill him . ”

ID:	4765
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . « Ez suntsitu » doinuan . Davidena . Miktam . Davidek Saulengandik <unk> ihes egin zuenekoa .
PRED:	You have destroyed me , O God , and I have rescued you from all my troubles .
GOLD:	Have mercy on me , O God , have mercy ! I look to you for protection.I will hide beneath the shadow of your wingsuntil the danger passes by .

ID:	4766
INPUT:	ohoratzen gaituztela nahiz iraintzen , gutaz ongi hitz egiten dutela nahiz gaizki . <unk> jotzen gaituzte , egia esaten dugun arren ;
PRED:	Those who say to us , ‘ We are righteous , ' they say , ‘ We know that we are righteous , but we know that we are righteous .
GOLD:	We serve God whether people honor us or despise us , whether they slander us or praise us . We are honest , but they call us impostors .

ID:	4767
INPUT:	Haren esanera , haizea altxatu zen , olatu handiak harrotu zituen ekaitza .
PRED:	He kept the wind like a storm ; he was like a mighty storm .
GOLD:	He spoke , and the winds rose , stirring up the waves .

ID:	4768
INPUT:	Eta hemen bilduak diren guztiek jakinen dute , Jaunak ez duela behar ezpatarik , ez lantzarik gu salbatzeko , Jaunak baitu gudua erabakitzen . Gure esku jarriko zaituzte berak .
PRED:	And all the people of Israel will know that the Lord will be able to save us from the land of Moab , for we will give you victory over the land of Israel .
GOLD:	And everyone assembled here will know that the Lord rescues his people , but not with sword and spear . This is the Lord 's battle , and he will give you to us ! ”

ID:	4769
INPUT:	lizun eta <unk> , <unk> , gezurti eta <unk> , eta irakaspen <unk> kontra jartzen den <unk> ;
PRED:	And if they are weak and human , they will be able to be able to know that they are weak and prophets , and that they will be able to be healed .
GOLD:	The law is for people who are sexually immoral , or who practice homosexuality , or are slave traders , liars , promise breakers , or who do anything else that contradicts the wholesome teaching

ID:	4770
INPUT:	Gure herria Egipton egon zenetik gaur arte , mirariak eta egintza harrigarriak burutu dituzu , eta izen ospetsua zeureganatu bai Israelen , bai gizaki guztien artean .
PRED:	For the Lord has given us a great nation of Egypt , for he has performed many wonders in the land of Egypt , and you will be strong and peace .
GOLD:	You performed miraculous signs and wonders in the land of Egypt — things still remembered to this day ! And you have continued to do great miracles in Israel and all around the world . You have made your name famous to this day .

ID:	4771
INPUT:	Harria bezain gogorra dute bihotza ; nik zure irakaspena dut gozamen .
PRED:	I ca n't stop your instructions ; they are your instructions .
GOLD:	Their hearts are dull and stupid , but I delight in your instructions .

ID:	4772
INPUT:	Jobek bere burua errugabetzat zuenez gero , hiru gizonek ez zioten gehiago erantzun .
PRED:	Then Job spoke again , and the men of Israel did not know about three men .
GOLD:	Job 's three friends refused to reply further to him because he kept insisting on his innocence .

ID:	4773
INPUT:	Eta ereiten duzuna ez da gero haziko den landarea , hazi hutsa baizik , <unk> nahiz beste edozein hazi izan .
PRED:	And those who plant little children will not grow in your harvest , but the seed that fell on the ground .
GOLD:	And what you put in the ground is not the plant that will grow , but only a bare seed of wheat or whatever you are planting .

ID:	4774
INPUT:	<unk> ondasunak oka egingo ditu , Jainkoak <unk> egingo dizkio sabeletik .
PRED:	But when I will punish you , and the power of God will be able to kill me .
GOLD:	They will vomit the wealth they swallowed.God wo n't let them keep it down .

ID:	4775
INPUT:	Orain ikusiko duzue , bada , Gizonaren Semeak baduela mundu honetan bekatuak barkatzeko ahalmena . Eta esan zion elbarriari :
PRED:	Now you will see the Son of Man and the Son of Man , and the Son of Man said to him ,
GOLD:	So I will prove to you that the Son of Man has the authority on earth to forgive sins . ” Then Jesus turned to the paralyzed man and said ,

ID:	4776
INPUT:	Handik alde egin eta Adulamgo leizean ezkutatu zen David . Anaiak eta aitaren senitarte osoa , hori entzun zutelarik , hara jaitsi zitzaizkion .
PRED:	Then the sailors and the sailors returned to David , where he had been sent by his father , and he heard all his father 's men .
GOLD:	So David left Gath and escaped to the cave of Adullam . Soon his brothers and all his other relatives joined him there .

ID:	4777
INPUT:	eta soroan dena ez bedi itzul soingaineko bila .
PRED:	The field may not go back to the field .
GOLD:	A person out in the field must not return even to get a coat .

ID:	4778
INPUT:	« Zorionekoak errukitsu direnak , haiek baititu Jainkoak erruki izango .
PRED:	God blesses those who fear God , for he will be mercy .
GOLD:	God blesses those who are merciful , for they will be shown mercy .

ID:	4779
INPUT:	Ez dut gogoratuko egindako gaiztakeriarik , baizik eta bere egintza zuzenengatik biziko da .
PRED:	I will never again remember his miraculous signs and wonders .
GOLD:	All their past sins will be forgotten , and they will live because of the righteous things they have done .

ID:	4780
INPUT:	Hil zenean , bere arbaso Daviden Hirian ehortzi zuten . Ondorengo erregea haren seme Josafat izan zen .
PRED:	When he died , he was buried in the City of David . Then his son Jehoshaphat became the next king .
GOLD:	When Asa died , he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David.Then Jehoshaphat , Asa 's son , became the next king .

ID:	4781
INPUT:	Igo mendi garai batera , Sion , albiste pozgarria hots egitera ; goratu indarrez ahotsa , Jerusalem , goratu <unk> ahotsa , esan Judako hiriei : « Hemen da zuen Jainkoa !
PRED:	Now come to the city of Jerusalem and Jerusalem to come to the city of Jerusalem . He is a great city , and he said , “ Look , the God of Judah ! The Lord is the God of Judah ! ”
GOLD:	O Zion , messenger of good news , shout from the mountaintops ! Shout it louder , O Jerusalem.Shout , and do not be afraid.Tell the towns of Judah , “ Your God is coming ! ”

ID:	4782
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Aaroni :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Aaron ,

ID:	4783
INPUT:	Herri honen buru egingo baninduzue , berehala <unk> nuke Abimelek hori . Bere gudarostea indartu eta borrokara ateratzeko esango nioke » .
PRED:	But when he would kill him , he would kill him and kill him and kill him . ”
GOLD:	If I were in charge here , I would get rid of Abimelech . I would say to him , ‘ Get some soldiers , and come out and fight ! ' ”

ID:	4784
INPUT:	Horrelakoak egiten dituen oro higuingarri zaio Jaunari ; hain zuzen , higuingarritasun horiengatik botatzen ditu Jaunak zuen Jainkoak herri horiek zuen aurretik .
PRED:	All who are detestable to the Lord their God , and the detestable sins of the detestable sins of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Anyone who does these things is detestable to the Lord . It is because the other nations have done these detestable things that the Lord your God will drive them out ahead of you .

ID:	4785
INPUT:	Azkenik , <unk> gantza aldarean erreko du .
PRED:	“ In all , the fat of the fat will be burned on the altar .
GOLD:	He must then burn all the fat of the sin offering on the altar .

ID:	4786
INPUT:	Hona hemen Davidi Hebronen jaio zitzaizkion semeak : zaharrena Amnon , Izreelgo <unk> ;
PRED:	This is the account of King David 's sons , who were born in Hebron , and his sons were born in Hebron .
GOLD:	These are the sons who were born to David in Hebron : The oldest was Amnon , whose mother was Ahinoam from Jezreel .

ID:	4787
INPUT:	( Dt 5 , <unk> )
PRED:	Sovereign Lord , why should we ask for you ?
GOLD:	Proper Use of Altars

ID:	4788
INPUT:	Nahiago Jaunak gizakiak justiziaz eta zuzenbidez jokatzea , sakrifizioak eskaintzea baino .
PRED:	For the Lord is better to do what is right .
GOLD:	The Lord is more pleased when we do what is right and justthan when we offer him sacrifices .

ID:	4789
INPUT:	bizi-bizirik irentsiko gintuzketen : hain <unk> zeuden gure kontra ;
PRED:	For the Lord has redeemed us , and they have rebelled against us .
GOLD:	They would have swallowed us alivein their burning anger .

ID:	4790
INPUT:	Beste hau ere badio : Jainkoarengan jarriko dut nik konfiantza . Baita ere : Hona ni eta hona Jainkoak eman dizkidan haurrak .
PRED:	But I will tell you , “ I will put my hands on God , and I will give you my children . ”
GOLD:	He also said , “ I will put my trust in him , ” that is , “ I and the children God has given me . ”

ID:	4791
INPUT:	Tira ! Ekardazue <unk> bat . Eta <unk> jotzen ari zela , Jaunaren indarrak hartu zuen Eliseo ,
PRED:	Then let me kill him and threw him out of the Lord . ” So Elisha threw him into the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	Now bring me someone who can play the harp . ” While the harp was being played , the power of the Lord came upon Elisha ,

ID:	4792
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : — Nire garaia ez da oraino iritsi ; zuentzat , aldiz , edozein garai da ona .
PRED:	Jesus told them , “ This time you have not yet yet yet yet yet yet yet yet yet been given to you . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ Now is not the right time for me to go , but you can go anytime .

ID:	4793
INPUT:	Biderako <unk> eta <unk> bat ere eman zidan . Eufrates ibaiaren mendebaldeko <unk> iritsi nintzenean , erregearen agiriak aurkeztu nizkien .
PRED:	And when I saw that I had been able to see the king of the province west of the Euphrates River , I had given them to the province of the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	When I came to the governors of the province west of the Euphrates River , I delivered the king 's letters to them . The king , I should add , had sent along army officers and horsemen to protect me .

ID:	4794
INPUT:	eta mailegua lukurreriaz egin eta interesak kobratzen ditu . Zin dagit neure biziarengatik hori ez dela biziko ; gauza higuingarri horiek guztiak egin dituenez , hil egingo da , eta bera izango da bere heriotzaren errudun .
PRED:	You must not commit adultery . You must not commit adultery , and I would not live any of these things , for they have been punished .
GOLD:	and lends money at excessive interest . Should such a sinful person live ? No ! He must die and must take full blame .

ID:	4795
INPUT:	ikara bizian barrua . Eta zu , Jauna , noiz arte geldi ?
PRED:	How can we see the Lord 's heart ? How long will you see ?
GOLD:	Return , O Lord , and rescue me.Save me because of your unfailing love .

ID:	4796
INPUT:	mendebaldetik , hogeita bost metro luzeko oihalak , hamar zutabe eta hamar oin zituztelarik ; zutabeen kakoak eta ziriak zilarrezkoak ziren ;
PRED:	The curtain of the Tabernacle was 30 feet long and 30 feet long . He overlaid the curtains with silver hooks and bronze bases .
GOLD:	The curtains on the west end of the courtyard were 75 feet long , hung with silver hooks and rings and supported by ten posts set into ten bases .

ID:	4797
INPUT:	Hala ere , alai nago ni Jaunarekin , pozaren <unk> dudan Jainkoarekin .
PRED:	But I am glad when I rejoice , I rejoice in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	yet I will rejoice in the Lord ! I will be joyful in the God of my salvation !

ID:	4798
INPUT:	guztiek , bera ohoratzen duten bezala , Semea ere ohora dezaten . Semea ohoratzen ez duenak , hura bidali duen Aita ere ez du ohoratzen .
PRED:	All who fear the Son will be saved , just as the Son of God , and they will not give glory to the Father who sent the Father .
GOLD:	so that everyone will honor the Son , just as they honor the Father . Anyone who does not honor the Son is certainly not honoring the Father who sent him .

ID:	4799
INPUT:	Elamenak 1 . 254 ;
PRED:	The family of Elam1,254
GOLD:	The family of Elam1,254

ID:	4800
INPUT:	« Zerbait kutsatua ukitzen duena , hala nola basabere nahiz etxabere kutsatu baten edo piztiaren baten sarraskia , konturatu gabe izanda ere , kutsatu bihurtzen da eta errudun .
PRED:	“ If you touch it , if you are ceremonially unclean or wild animals or wild animals or wild animals , you must not commit adultery . If you touch it , you must not commit adultery , you must not commit adultery .
GOLD:	“ Or suppose you unknowingly touch something that is ceremonially unclean , such as the carcass of an unclean animal . When you realize what you have done , you must admit your defilement and your guilt . This is true whether it is a wild animal , a domestic animal , or an animal that scurries along the ground .

ID:	4801
INPUT:	Judas Iskariotek , salduko zuen ikasleak , esan zuen :
PRED:	Meanwhile , Judas , the other disciples , said ,
GOLD:	But Judas Iscariot , the disciple who would soon betray him , said ,

ID:	4802
INPUT:	Moisesek esan zien Aaroni eta beronen semeei : « <unk> haragia elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran ; han bertan jango duzue sagarapenerako prestaturiko saskian dagoen <unk> batera , nik jaso nuen aginduaren arabera : “ Aaronek eta beronen semeek jango dute ” .
PRED:	Then Moses said to Aaron and his sons and his sons , “ I will eat the flesh of the Tabernacle at the entrance of the Tabernacle and the Tabernacle that I had given you to eat . ”
GOLD:	Then Moses said to Aaron and his sons , “ Boil the remaining meat of the offerings at the Tabernacle entrance , and eat it there , along with the bread that is in the basket of offerings for the ordination , just as I commanded when I said , ‘ Aaron and his sons will eat it . '

ID:	4803
INPUT:	Esadazu , ene bihotzeko kutuna , non duzun larratzen artaldea , non <unk> uzten eguerdian . Ez nadin <unk> ibil , zure lagunen artaldeen atzetik .
PRED:	“ I have given you my own flock , and I will give you my sheep and goats , and you will know that you would have enough to kill you .
GOLD:	Tell me , my love , where are you leading your flock today ? Where will you rest your sheep at noon ? For why should I wander like a prostituteamong your friends and their flocks ?

ID:	4804
INPUT:	« Klaudio <unk> Felix gobernari agurgarri horri , agur !
PRED:	“ Long ago , King Nebuchadnezzar of Persia , who sent him to be with his brothers .
GOLD:	“ From Claudius Lysias , to his Excellency , Governor Felix : Greetings !

ID:	4805
INPUT:	baina , sasi eta <unk> ematen baditu , ez du ezertarako balio , Jainkoak madarikatu egingo du eta , azkenik , erre egingo dute .
PRED:	But if they are thrown into a bird , they will never be thrown into the grave . For God will be burned , and they will be burned up .
GOLD:	But if a field bears thorns and thistles , it is useless . The farmer will soon condemn that field and burn it .

ID:	4806
INPUT:	Erregeak <unk> esan zien , orduan : “ Lot ezazue hanka eta esku , eta bota kanpora , ilunpetara . Negarra eta hortz-karraska izango da han ” .
PRED:	Then the king said to them , ‘ Let Lot be thrown into the wheels and thrown into a furnace , where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . '
GOLD:	Then the king said to his aides , ‘ Bind his hands and feet and throw him into the outer darkness , where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . '

ID:	4807
INPUT:	Erregeak erantzun zion : — Babiloniarren aldera igaro diren judatarren beldur naiz ; haien eskuetan eroriz gero , tratu txarra emango baitidate .
PRED:	Then the king said to him , “ I am afraid of you , for I am ready to be angry with those who hated me . ”
GOLD:	“ But I am afraid to surrender , ” the king said , “ for the Babylonians may hand me over to the Judeans who have defected to them . And who knows what they will do to me ! ”

ID:	4808
INPUT:	« Behin batez , zuhaitzek erregea izendatu nahi zuten berentzat . Eta esan zioten <unk> : “ Izan hadi gure errege ! ”
PRED:	“ At one time the king and the king of the other men of the Hittites said to him , ‘ Let us be your king ! '
GOLD:	Once upon a time the trees decided to choose a king.First they said to the olive tree , ‘ Be our king ! '

ID:	4809
INPUT:	Judaren leinutik hamabi mila zigilatu ; Rubenen leinutik hamabi mila ; Gaden leinutik hamabi mila ;
PRED:	From the tribe of Judah and Benjamin .
GOLD:	from Judah12,000from Reuben12,000from Gad12,000

ID:	4810
INPUT:	Nik , ordea , zure indarra dut kantatuko , goizean zure maitasuna poz-oihuz ospatuko ; zu izan zaitut gotorleku , larrialdian ihesleku .
PRED:	But I will sing for joy , O Lord , and I will sing your unfailing love to you .
GOLD:	O my Strength , to you I sing praises , for you , O God , are my refuge , the God who shows me unfailing love .

ID:	4811
INPUT:	« Orduan , <unk> idatzi eta <unk> ur <unk> garbituko du apaizak .
PRED:	“ Then I will write down the fig tree on that day , and when the priest will be healed .
GOLD:	And the priest will write these curses on a piece of leather and wash them off into the bitter water .

ID:	4812
INPUT:	Erbestetik etorritako guztiek egin zituzten etxolak eta horietan jarri ziren bizitzen . Nunen seme Josueren <unk> ez zuten halako <unk> egin israeldarrek ! Hango poza guztiena !
PRED:	So all the men of Judah were given to the men of Judah , who lived there with Joshua son of Nun and all the people of Israel . They were filled with their hearts , and they were filled with joy .
GOLD:	So everyone who had returned from captivity lived in these shelters during the festival , and they were all filled with great joy ! The Israelites had not celebrated like this since the days of Joshua son of Nun .

ID:	4813
INPUT:	Eta zerbait gaizki egina badizu edota zerbait zor , utzi hori nire gain .
PRED:	Do n't let anyone be unfaithful to you , or if you have not been unfaithful to me .
GOLD:	If he has wronged you in any way or owes you anything , charge it to me .

ID:	4814
INPUT:	Jaiki eta Jainkoaren mendira igo zen Moises , Josue bere <unk> .
PRED:	So Moses went up to the mountain of God and worshiped him .
GOLD:	So Moses and his assistant Joshua set out , and Moses climbed up the mountain of God .

ID:	4815
INPUT:	Haiekin hitz egiten jardun zuen erregeak , eta Daniel , Hananias , Mixael eta Azarias adinakorik ez zuen aurkitu . Harrezkero , beraz , bere zerbitzurako hartu zituen .
PRED:	He sent another message to the king , along with Azariah , Azariah , Azariah , Azariah , and Azariah , and Azariah , and Azariah .
GOLD:	The king talked with them , and no one impressed him as much as Daniel , Hananiah , Mishael , and Azariah . So they entered the royal service .

ID:	4816
INPUT:	Ez duzue zeuen baitan esaten : “ Errespeta dezagun Jauna , geure Jainkoa ! Berak bidaltzen <unk> garaiko euriak , berak zaintzen uzta biltzeko <unk> ” .
PRED:	Do n't say to you , ‘ Let 's be the Lord your God , for we have brought you into the sea , and we will harvest the water of the Lord your God . '
GOLD:	They do not say from the heart , ‘ Let us live in awe of the Lord our God , for he gives us rain each spring and fall , assuring us of a harvest when the time is right . '

ID:	4817
INPUT:	Eta guardiaburuarekin batera zetorren babiloniar gudarosteak Jerusalemgo harresi guztia bota egin zuen .
PRED:	Then he led them out to the walls of Jerusalem and all the towns of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Then he supervised the entire Babylonian army as they tore down the walls of Jerusalem on every side .

ID:	4818
INPUT:	Alde batera utzi baitu <unk> aurkako epaia , uxatu ditu zure etsaiak . Jauna , Israelgo erregea , zurekin dago : ez zara <unk> beldur izango .
PRED:	For the Lord has given me victory over your enemies , and he will destroy you with your enemies . You will be angry with you , and you will be afraid .
GOLD:	For the Lord will remove his hand of judgmentand will disperse the armies of your enemy.And the Lord himself , the King of Israel , will live among you ! At last your troubles will be over , and you will never again fear disaster .

ID:	4819
INPUT:	Hiria Babiloniako erregearen eskuetan eroriko da erremediorik gabe , eta konkistatu egingo du . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	The city of Babylon will fall into the city , and it will be a great city . The Lord says , ‘ This is what the Lord says : ' ”
GOLD:	The Lord also says : ‘ The city of Jerusalem will certainly be handed over to the army of the king of Babylon , who will capture it . ' ”

ID:	4820
INPUT:	Ene laztana , <unk> daraman <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you with an immoral woman , and when they saw that they were filled with an eagle .
GOLD:	You are as exciting , my darling , as a mare among Pharaoh 's stallions .

ID:	4821
INPUT:	Azkena ezereztuko den etsaia heriotza izango da .
PRED:	The wicked will be destroyed , and the wicked will be destroyed .
GOLD:	And the last enemy to be destroyed is death .

ID:	4822
INPUT:	Salomonek lau mila zalditegi zituen bere <unk> zaldientzat eta hamabi mila zaldizko .
PRED:	King Solomon was with his chariots and chariots .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , please command that cedars from Lebanon be cut for me . Let my men work alongside yours , and I will pay your men whatever wages you ask . As you know , there is no one among us who can cut timber like you Sidonians ! ”

ID:	4823
INPUT:	« Jaunari elkartasun-opariak egitean , eskaini hark atseginez onartzeko eran :
PRED:	“ If they offer sacrifices to the Lord , they must be a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ When you sacrifice a peace offering to the Lord , offer it properly so you will be accepted by God .

ID:	4824
INPUT:	baina <unk> esan zien : « Berriz ere etorriko natzaizue , Jainkoa lagun » . <unk> ontziz atera
PRED:	But when I heard that I am afraid of you , I will come out to see that you were very sick . ”
GOLD:	As he left , however , he said , “ I will come back later , God willing . ” Then he set sail from Ephesus .

ID:	4825
INPUT:	<unk> Simeonen leinuko beren senideekin joan eta <unk> hirian bizi ziren kanaandarrak garaitu zituzten eta hiria erabat suntsitu . Horma deitu zioten hiriari , hau da , « <unk> » .
PRED:	At that time the tribe of Simeon came to the clans of the tribe of Simeon , who lived in the city , and they destroyed them , and they destroyed them .
GOLD:	Then Judah joined with Simeon to fight against the Canaanites living in Zephath , and they completely destroyed the town . So the town was named Hormah .

ID:	4826
INPUT:	<unk> esan zion : — Ez al nauzu , bada , zeure astemea , betidanik gainean eraman zaituena ? Eta inoiz <unk> al naiz honela zurekin ? — Ez ! — erantzun zion Balaamek .
PRED:	“ Do n't you think you are my lord ? ” the angel asked . “ I have brought you to you , and I will give you victory over your name ? ” But Balaam replied , “ I am not with you ! ”
GOLD:	“ But I am the same donkey you have ridden all your life , ” the donkey answered . “ Have I ever done anything like this before ? ” “ No , ” Balaam admitted .

ID:	4827
INPUT:	Eskutik heldu eta esan zion : « <unk> <unk> » ( hau da : « Neskatxa , zuri diotsut : Jaiki zaitez » ) .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to him , “ What happened ? ” “ Yes , ” he said , “ I am afraid of you ! ”
GOLD:	Holding her hand , he said to her , which means “ Little girl , get up ! ”

ID:	4828
INPUT:	Jaunaren ezpata odolez betea , <unk> bustia dago : sakrifizioetako bildotseta akerren <unk> <unk> <unk> . Izan ere , sakrifizioa burutu behar du <unk> hirian , hilketa izugarria Edom herrian .
PRED:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has made a covenant with all the people of Israel , who were filled with idols of Egypt , and when they were slaughtered by the people of Edom , the people of Edom will be filled with all the people of Edom .
GOLD:	The sword of the Lord is drenched with bloodand covered with fat — with the blood of lambs and goats , with the fat of rams prepared for sacrifice.Yes , the Lord will offer a sacrifice in the city of Bozrah.He will make a mighty slaughter in Edom .

ID:	4829
INPUT:	mundu guztia epaitzera eta gaizkile guztiak <unk> , egin dituzten gaiztakeria guztiengatik eta bekatari <unk> Jainkoaren kontra esan dituzten irain guztiengatik » .
PRED:	He has made all the kingdoms of the earth , and all the power of God , who has been destroyed by all the power of God , and they have been destroyed by the power of God . ”
GOLD:	to execute judgment on the people of the world . He will convict every person of all the ungodly things they have done and for all the insults that ungodly sinners have spoken against him . ”

ID:	4830
INPUT:	Eta zuek ere egingo duzue testigantza , hasieratik nirekin egon baitzarete .
PRED:	And you must also be the testimony of the world .
GOLD:	And you must also testify about me because you have been with me from the beginning of my ministry .

ID:	4831
INPUT:	Zu zaitut ene gordeleku eta babes , zure hitza ene itxaropen .
PRED:	O Lord , my life is my song ; my hope is my hope .
GOLD:	You are my refuge and my shield ; your word is my source of hope .

ID:	4832
INPUT:	Oi Jainko , geure belarriz entzuna dugu , gurasoek <unk> , zuk haien garaian , aspaldi hartan , eginaren berri .
PRED:	O God , our ancestors , and we have heard that they have seen their ancestors , and they know that they have seen their ancestors .
GOLD:	You drove out the pagan nations by your powerand gave all the land to our ancestors.You crushed their enemiesand set our ancestors free .

ID:	4833
INPUT:	Jaitsi zen hura , zeru <unk> dena betetzera igo dena bera da .
PRED:	Then he sat down down down down on the hills .
GOLD:	And the same one who descended is the one who ascended higher than all the heavens , so that he might fill the entire universe with himself .

ID:	4834
INPUT:	Orduan , Daniel ekarri eta lehoien zulora jaurtitzeko agindu zuen . Erregeak esan zion : « Halako iraupen handiz zerbitzatzen duzun Jainkoak bakarrik salba zaitzake ! »
PRED:	Then Daniel brought a young man to him and said to him , “ Be sure to kill you ! You are those who have loved me ! ”
GOLD:	A stone was brought and placed over the mouth of the den . The king sealed the stone with his own royal seal and the seals of his nobles , so that no one could rescue Daniel .

ID:	4835
INPUT:	Badakigu Jainkoak bera maite dutenen onerako <unk> dituela gauza guztiak , bere <unk> deitu <unk> onerako , alegia .
PRED:	We know that God loves those who love him , who love him , who love him , and that all who love him .
GOLD:	And we know that God causes everything to work together for the good of those who love God and are called according to his purpose for them .

ID:	4836
INPUT:	Pedrok berriro ukatu zuen . Geroxeago , <unk> ere esan zioten : — Bai , haietakoa haiz , noski , galilearra haiz eta .
PRED:	Then Peter spoke again again and said , “ You will have some of you , ” he said . “ Yes , ” he said .
GOLD:	But Peter denied it again.A little later some of the other bystanders confronted Peter and said , “ You must be one of them , because you are a Galilean . ”

ID:	4837
INPUT:	<unk> ihes egin <unk> jausiko da ; <unk> ihes egin <unk> harrapatua geldituko . Zeru goitik uholdeak eraso , lurraren <unk> dardara .
PRED:	But when they were attacked by the sword , they will be able to kill him , and when they saw that the earth will be filled with great power , and the earth will fall into the earth .
GOLD:	Those who flee in terror will fall into a trap , and those who escape the trap will be caught in a snare.Destruction falls like rain from the heavens ; the foundations of the earth shake .

ID:	4838
INPUT:	Santutegirako zerga
PRED:	Job 's Final Instructions
GOLD:	Plans for the Washbasin

ID:	4839
INPUT:	Heriotzatik libratu zaretenok , alde egin luzatzeke ! Oroitu Jaunaz urrutitik , ekarri gogora Jerusalem .
PRED:	Those who have been able to rescue me from a distance from the Lord .
GOLD:	Get out , all you who have escaped the sword ! Do not stand and watch — flee while you can ! Remember the Lord , though you are in a far-off land , and think about your home in Jerusalem . ”

ID:	4840
INPUT:	zerez ordaindurik ez baduzu , etzateko duzun ohea ere kenduko baitizute .
PRED:	If you do n't realize that you wo n't be hungry , and you will be free .
GOLD:	If you ca n't pay it , even your bed will be snatched from under you .

ID:	4841
INPUT:	Efraimen leinuko gizonak bildu , Jordan ibaia igaro eta Tzafon hirira joan ziren . Eta esan zioten Jefteri : — Zergatik joan zara amondarren kontra borrokara guri dei egin gabe ? Su emango diogu zure etxeari , zu barrenean zarela !
PRED:	The men of the tribe of Ephraim and the Jordan River came to the town of Ephraim and the people of Israel . “ Why do you want you to go on the Jordan ? ” they asked . “ We will give you to you as you as you do . ”
GOLD:	Then the people of Ephraim mobilized an army and crossed over the Jordan River to Zaphon . They sent this message to Jephthah : “ Why did n't you call for us to help you fight against the Ammonites ? We are going to burn down your house with you in it ! ”

ID:	4842
INPUT:	Espiritu gaiztoa zeukala ziotenei erantzun zien hau .
PRED:	Then the devil replied , “ This man was the same . ”
GOLD:	He told them this because they were saying , “ He 's possessed by an evil spirit . ”

ID:	4843
INPUT:	Hara , ahalmen osoz <unk> Jauna , bere nagusigoa indartsu ezarriz . Hara , berekin dakar garaipen-agiria , berak askaturiko herria .
PRED:	For the Lord has filled with great power , and he has given his authority to his people . He has given him his own people , and he brings his own people to his people .
GOLD:	Yes , the Sovereign Lord is coming in power.He will rule with a powerful arm.See , he brings his reward with him as he comes .

ID:	4844
INPUT:	Janaria ematen die <unk> <unk> ari zaizkion <unk> .
PRED:	That is why we know that they are very weak and powerful .
GOLD:	He gives food to the wild animalsand feeds the young ravens when they cry .

ID:	4845
INPUT:	Ondoren , Jaunak lau errementari erakutsi zizkidan .
PRED:	Then the Lord gave me all the work of the young men of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Then the angel who was with me went to meet a second angel who was coming toward him .

ID:	4846
INPUT:	Nire erreinuko jende hau opariak eskaintzeko Jerusalemera , Jaunaren etxera , igotzen bada , Judako errege Roboamengana , lehengo bere jaunarengana , itzuli egingo da jende honen bihotza . Orduan , hil egingo naute eta Judako errege Roboamengana itzuliko dira » .
PRED:	“ Therefore , the people of Judah , go to Jerusalem to Jerusalem to Jerusalem , to Jerusalem , as the king of Judah , king of Judah , king of Judah , and all the people of Judah will return to Judah . ”
GOLD:	When these people go to Jerusalem to offer sacrifices at the Temple of the Lord , they will again give their allegiance to King Rehoboam of Judah . They will kill me and make him their king instead . ”

ID:	4847
INPUT:	Lehen , Jainkoa ezagutzen ez <unk> , izatez jainko ez direnen menpeko zineten ;
PRED:	You know that God has not been a god of all the kings of the world , and you have not been unfaithful to all other gods .
GOLD:	Before you Gentiles knew God , you were slaves to so-called gods that do not even exist .

ID:	4848
INPUT:	Liburu Santuak dioenez : Hitz egingo diet zutaz neure senideei , goretsiko zaitut batzarraren erdian .
PRED:	For the Scriptures say , “ I will praise you ! May you praise you from all the nations of the earth ! ”
GOLD:	For he said to God , “ I will proclaim your name to my brothers and sisters.I will praise you among your assembled people . ”

ID:	4849
INPUT:	Ez du oihu egingo , ez ahotsa goratuko , ez kaleetan bere <unk> .
PRED:	“ Do not shout to the voice of the Lord , for they have heard his voice in the streets of the streets .
GOLD:	He will not shoutor raise his voice in public .

ID:	4850
INPUT:	« Jose , ubide <unk> emankor , honen adarrak harresian gora .
PRED:	“ In this way , I will give an eagle to the city .
GOLD:	“ Joseph is the foal of a wild donkey , the foal of a wild donkey at a spring — one of the wild donkeys on the ridge .

ID:	4851
INPUT:	lurrean arrastaka dabiltzan <unk> nahiz lur azpiko uretan dabiltzan <unk> .
PRED:	When they were in the ground , they were filled with water , and those who were filled with water .
GOLD:	a small animal that scurries along the ground , or a fish in the deepest sea .

ID:	4852
INPUT:	Goraintziak <unk> , kristau zintzo dela erakutsi duen horri ; baita <unk> <unk> ere .
PRED:	Greet by the church that person who has been given to me by the church , and that everyone who had been filled with power .
GOLD:	Greet Apelles , a good man whom Christ approves . And give my greetings to the believers from the household of Aristobulus .

ID:	4853
INPUT:	Bukatu zutenean , Santiagok hitza hartu eta esan zuen : « Entzun , anaiok :
PRED:	At this time , some of this message came to them : “ Listen to my brothers and sisters ,
GOLD:	When they had finished , James stood and said , “ Brothers , listen to me .

ID:	4854
INPUT:	Pedro eta Joan sartzen ikusirik , limosna eskatu zien .
PRED:	When Peter saw Peter and John , he begged them to go .
GOLD:	When he saw Peter and John about to enter , he asked them for some money .

ID:	4855
INPUT:	Bernaberi <unk> deitzen zioten eta Paulori <unk> , hau baitzen hitz egiten zuena .
PRED:	And when they heard that Paul was talking with him , he was very angry with him .
GOLD:	They decided that Barnabas was the Greek god Zeus and that Paul was Hermes , since he was the chief speaker .

ID:	4856
INPUT:	Baina Jesusek erantzun : — Ez eragotzi , zeren zuen kontra ez dagoena zuen alde baitago .
PRED:	But Jesus replied , “ Do n't let anyone be afraid of it . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus said , “ Do n't stop him ! Anyone who is not against you is for you . ”

ID:	4857
INPUT:	Sukoteko gazte bat atzeman eta galdeketa egin zion . Gazteak idatziz eman zizkion Sukoteko buruzagi eta arduradunen izenak , orotara hirurogeita hamazazpi gizonen izenak .
PRED:	From the men of Gad , Gad , and thirty men were given to the king . He gave them the names of the officials of the tribes of Reuben , and all the names of the tribes of Gad .
GOLD:	There he captured a young man from Succoth and demanded that he write down the names of all the seventy-seven officials and elders in the town .

ID:	4858
INPUT:	Baina herriek iseka egingo dioteeta koplak aterako , denek batera . Hara zer esango duten : « Zoritxarrekoa zu , besteren <unk> zaren hori — noiz arte ? — , zeure zorra gero eta <unk> ari baitzara !
PRED:	But the nations of the world will be saved , and they will say , “ What sorrow awaits you ? What sorrow awaits you ? ” “ What sorrow awaits you ? ” they demanded . “ You know that you know that you have done ? ”
GOLD:	“ But soon their captives will taunt them.They will mock them , saying , ‘ What sorrow awaits you thieves ! Now you will get what you deserve ! You 've become rich by extortion , but how much longer can this go on ? '

ID:	4859
INPUT:	Egunez gordeta egoten dira , ez dute argia maite .
PRED:	Those who trust in the Kingdom of every light .
GOLD:	Thieves break into houses at nightand sleep in the daytime.They are not acquainted with the light .

ID:	4860
INPUT:	Ez , baizik eta Joel profetak esan zuena ari da hemen gertatzen :
PRED:	But the prophet 's officials did not say , “ This is what the prophet 's happening .
GOLD:	No , what you see was predicted long ago by the prophet Joel :

ID:	4861
INPUT:	Jakoben semeek aitak agindu bezala egin zuten .
PRED:	The sons of Jacob did as he had commanded .
GOLD:	So Jacob 's sons did as he had commanded them .

ID:	4862
INPUT:	gainera nire seme-alabak lepo egin eta haien ohorez erretzeko ?
PRED:	How can I make their children with their own children ?
GOLD:	Must you also slaughter my children by sacrificing them to idols ?

ID:	4863
INPUT:	Zorionekoa zuzenbidea <unk> etengabe justizia egiten duena !
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who fear you ?
GOLD:	There is joy for those who deal justly with othersand always do what is right .

ID:	4864
INPUT:	Izan ere , horrela hitz egiten dutenek garbi adierazten dute <unk> bila dabiltzala .
PRED:	For those who are clean will be clean , and those who are clean will be clean .
GOLD:	Obviously people who say such things are looking forward to a country they can call their own .

ID:	4865
INPUT:	Horregatik , lebitarrek ez dute ondare-zatirik beste israeldarrek bezala , Jauna baitute beren ondare , Jaunak gure Jainkoak hitzeman dien bezala .
PRED:	That is why the Lord our God has promised us , just as the Lord our God has promised us .
GOLD:	That is why the Levites have no share of property or possession of land among the other Israelite tribes . The Lord himself is their special possession , as the Lord your God told them . )

ID:	4866
INPUT:	Bazen , aldi hartan , Kix zeritzan gizon handiki bat , Abielen semea , <unk> , <unk> eta <unk> <unk> . Benjaminen leinukoa zen .
PRED:	One day some of the men of the army , commander of the army , commander of the army of Benjamin , and some of the men of the tribe of Benjamin , and they were afraid of the tribe of Benjamin .
GOLD:	There was a wealthy , influential man named Kish from the tribe of Benjamin . He was the son of Abiel , son of Zeror , son of Becorath , son of Aphiah , of the tribe of Benjamin .

ID:	4867
INPUT:	Baina Joanek aurpegira botatzen zizkion Herodes agintariari bere anaiaren emazte <unk> elkartu izana eta gainerako gaiztakeria guztiak .
PRED:	But Herod was very angry with his brothers and sisters , because he was very very angry with all the other believers .
GOLD:	John also publicly criticized Herod Antipas , the ruler of Galilee , for marrying Herodias , his brother 's wife , and for many other wrongs he had done .

ID:	4868
INPUT:	« Juda , zeure <unk> zaituzte , etsaiei eskua erantsiko diezu lepoan , zeure aitaren <unk> zaizkizu .
PRED:	“ When you see your enemies , you will put your hands on your enemies , and you will put your hands on your own hands .
GOLD:	“ Judah , your brothers will praise you.You will grasp your enemies by the neck.All your relatives will bow before you .

ID:	4869
INPUT:	« Seme zaharrena soroan zen . <unk> , hurbildu ahala , soinua eta dantzak sumatu zituen .
PRED:	“ My son , ” the field came and shouted , “ as well as well as well as the hills were hiding .
GOLD:	“ Meanwhile , the older son was in the fields working . When he returned home , he heard music and dancing in the house ,

ID:	4870
INPUT:	Hona zer dioen Davidek berak Espiritu Santuaren argiz : « Hona Jaunak ene Jaunari esana : “ Eseri nire eskuinean , zure etsaiak oinazpian jartzen dizkizudan bitartean ” .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : ‘ This is what the Holy Spirit says : I am the Lord , the God of my right hand on your right hand . '
GOLD:	For David himself , speaking under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit , said , ‘ The said to my Lord , Sit in the place of honor at my right handuntil I humble your enemies beneath your feet . '

ID:	4871
INPUT:	Israeldarren ondaretik lebitarrei hiriak ematerakoan , leinu bakoitzak egokitu zaion <unk> arabera emango dizkie : ondare handiagoa jaso duenak hiri gehiago , txikiagoa jaso duenak gutxiago » .
PRED:	The Levites must give the following towns to the Levites : The Levites must bring their pasturelands to the tribe of Levi , and they will be given to the tribe of Levi , and those who are given to the tribe of Levi . ”
GOLD:	These towns will come from the property of the people of Israel . The larger tribes will give more towns to the Levites , while the smaller tribes will give fewer . Each tribe will give property in proportion to the size of its land . ”

ID:	4872
INPUT:	Jerikoko bizilagunak honela mintzatu zitzaizkion Eliseori : — Zeuk , gure jaun horrek , ikus dezakezunez , gure hiri hau toki ederrean egina dago ; baina ura txarra dugu eta lurraldea agorra .
PRED:	Then the people of Jericho came to the town of Jericho and said , “ You have seen the Lord our God , but I have given you a great city .
GOLD:	One day the leaders of the town of Jericho visited Elisha . “ We have a problem , my lord , ” they told him . “ This town is located in pleasant surroundings , as you can see . But the water is bad , and the land is unproductive . ”

ID:	4873
INPUT:	Baina Jainkoaren <unk> esker , handi eta txikien aurrean testigantza egiten jarraitu dut gaurdaino ; nik ez dut profetek eta Moisesek aurrez iragarria besterik esaten , hau da ,
PRED:	But when I know that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has given you the prophets and the prophets of the earth , the prophets of the earth will not be here in the land of God .
GOLD:	But God has protected me right up to this present time so I can testify to everyone , from the least to the greatest . I teach nothing except what the prophets and Moses said would happen —

ID:	4874
INPUT:	« Madarikatua lege honen xedapenak gogoan hartzen eta betetzen ez dituena ! » Eta herri osoak erantzungo du : « Amen » .
PRED:	“ Cursed are those who obey God 's laws and obey the laws of Moses . And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who does not affirm and obey the terms of these instructions . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	4875
INPUT:	zure kontra eta Niloren kontra nator . Basamortu eta hondamendi bihurtuko dut Egipto , <unk> Asuaneraino eta Etiopiako mugaraino .
PRED:	I am very angry with you , and I will destroy you because I am giving you great army against Egypt . I will send war against the hill country of Egypt .
GOLD:	I am now the enemy of both you and your river . I will make the land of Egypt a totally desolate wasteland , from Migdol to Aswan , as far south as the border of Ethiopia .

ID:	4876
INPUT:	Nire <unk> bihurtzen dute , nire pikondoa <unk> ; dena karraskatzen eta zuritzen , abarrak <unk> .
PRED:	My fig tree , and my fig tree are mine , and they have rebelled against the fig tree .
GOLD:	It has destroyed my grapevinesand ruined my fig trees , stripping their bark and destroying it , leaving the branches white and bare .

ID:	4877
INPUT:	Epai latzak ematen dituzu ene aurka , gaztaroko erruak egotziz ;
PRED:	You have given me a song of my servant ; you have given me a son .
GOLD:	“ You write bitter accusations against meand bring up all the sins of my youth .

ID:	4878
INPUT:	Eta hau da Kristok egin zigun agintzaria : betiko bizia .
PRED:	For Christ has promised us , “ He has given us eternal life . ”
GOLD:	And in this fellowship we enjoy the eternal life he promised us .

ID:	4879
INPUT:	Hara , suak irensten <unk> antzeko izango dira ; ezin izango dituzte beren <unk> libratu . Ez da , ez , <unk> izango , ondoan eseri eta <unk> .
PRED:	But the fire will be like fire , and they will be like that they will be able to kill them , and they will never be able to kill him .
GOLD:	But they are like straw burning in a fire ; they can not save themselves from the flame.You will get no help from them at all ; their hearth is no place to sit for warmth .

ID:	4880
INPUT:	18
PRED:	Sennacherib Threatens Jerusalem
GOLD:	Resh

ID:	4881
INPUT:	Jakin zuen , ordea , Davidek bera hondatzeko prestatzen ari zela Saul , eta esan zion Abiatar apaizari : — <unk> efod apaiz-jantzia .
PRED:	But David was very angry with the king , and he told him that Saul was the priest was the priest , “ The priest of the ephod , the priest , and the priest , the priest of the priest . ”
GOLD:	But David learned of Saul 's plan and told Abiathar the priest to bring the ephod and ask the Lord what he should do .

ID:	4882
INPUT:	Erregeak , aldiz , erantzun zion <unk> : — Ez , balio duena ordainduz erosi nahi dizut . Jaunari , ene Jainkoari , ez diot eskainiko <unk> ez zaidan erre-oparirik . Horrela bada , zilarrezko berrogeita hamar txanponetan erosi zizkion Davidek <unk> eta idiak .
PRED:	Then the king said to him , “ I have given you a great banquet , which you have given me , and I will give you a burnt offering to the Lord . ” So David asked the Lord .
GOLD:	But the king replied to Araunah , “ No , I insist on buying it , for I will not present burnt offerings to the Lord my God that have cost me nothing . ” So David paid him fifty pieces of silver for the threshing floor and the oxen .

ID:	4883
INPUT:	Etxeko <unk> <unk> zeure <unk> . Ni alde batera utzirik , biluzik jarri , zeure ohe zabalean <unk> maitaleez <unk> zinen . Atsegin zenuen haiekin oheratzea .
PRED:	But when I saw that you were very sad , and when I saw that you were sick , and when I saw that you were very sick , and you were very angry with them .
GOLD:	You have put pagan symbolson your doorposts and behind your doors.You have left meand climbed into bed with these detestable gods.You have committed yourselves to them.You love to look at their naked bodies .

ID:	4884
INPUT:	SARRERA : <unk> PROFETA <unk> ( 1 , 1 — 3 , 27 )
PRED:	Then he said to Elijah , “ Paul ,
GOLD:	A Vision of Living Beings

ID:	4885
INPUT:	Gelditu zen Jesus , dei egin eta esan zien : — Zer nahi duzue niregandik ?
PRED:	Jesus called out to them and said , “ What do you want me ? ”
GOLD:	When Jesus heard them , he stopped and called , “ What do you want me to do for you ? ”

ID:	4886
INPUT:	Orduan , israeldarrek , Jaunak agindu bezala , beren ondaretik hiriak , beren herri-lur eta guzti , eman zizkieten lebitarrei .
PRED:	Then the Lord gave the following instructions to the Levites :
GOLD:	So by the command of the Lord the people of Israel gave the Levites the following towns and pasturelands out of their own grants of land .

ID:	4887
INPUT:	eta honela egin zion oihu Judatik etorritako Jainkoaren gizonari : — Hona zer dioen Jaunak : « Ez duzu egin Jaunaren esana ; ez duzu bete Jaunak , zeure Jainkoak , eman zizun agindua .
PRED:	Then he shouted to the man of God and said , “ This is what the Lord says : You must not have given you a message from the Lord your God .
GOLD:	He cried out to the man of God from Judah , “ This is what the Lord says : You have defied the word of the Lord and have disobeyed the command the Lord your God gave you .

ID:	4888
INPUT:	Jaunak ezarri du <unk> argitzeko , ilargia eta <unk> argitzeko ; hark itsasoa astindueta <unk> orro dagite . Jaun ahalguztiduna , hori du izena !
PRED:	For the Lord has poured out the sun , and the earth will be filled with great power , and the earth will be filled with joy . He is his name , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who is his name .
GOLD:	It is the Lord who provides the sun to light the dayand the moon and stars to light the night , and who stirs the sea into roaring waves.His name is the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and this is what he says :

ID:	4889
INPUT:	Orduan , Pilatok haien esku utzi zuen gurutziltza zezaten . Hartu zuten , beraz , Jesus ,
PRED:	So Pilate led them to the Roman soldiers to be crucified .
GOLD:	Then Pilate turned Jesus over to them to be crucified.So they took Jesus away .

ID:	4890
INPUT:	Behin betiko egin dut zin neure buruarengatik , eta ez natzaio sekula Davidi desleial izango .
PRED:	One day I have sworn an oath to my own family , and I would not listen to my name .
GOLD:	His dynasty will go on forever ; his kingdom will endure as the sun .

ID:	4891
INPUT:	Sei egunez egingo duzu lan eta zeure eginbehar guztiak burutuko ;
PRED:	You must six days for six days , and the work of your work .
GOLD:	You have six days each week for your ordinary work ,

ID:	4892
INPUT:	Buruko ileak baino gehiago <unk> gabe gorroto didatenak , nire <unk> baino ugariago nire erasotzaileak , nire etsai gezurtiak . <unk> ez dudana itzuli behar ote dut ?
PRED:	But if I love you , please kill me and kill me , I will punish those who hate me and kill me , and I will not kill my enemies .
GOLD:	O God , you know how foolish I am ; my sins can not be hidden from you .

ID:	4893
INPUT:	<unk> belarra bezain mardul hazarazi zintudan ; hazi , handia egin eta <unk> iritsi zinen : bularrak hazi <unk> eta <unk> atera ; baina jantzirik gabe zeunden , larrugorrian .
PRED:	I came down from the water of water , and when you were filled with milk and fig trees , when I saw that you were as weak as weak as weak as weak as snow .
GOLD:	And I helped you to thrive like a plant in the field . You grew up and became a beautiful jewel . Your breasts became full , and your body hair grew , but you were still naked .

ID:	4894
INPUT:	Jesusen ezagun guztiak , baita Galileatik jarraitu zioten emakumeak ere , <unk> zeuden begira .
PRED:	At that time they saw Jesus , and all the women were terrified by the women who had seen him .
GOLD:	But Jesus ' friends , including the women who had followed him from Galilee , stood at a distance watching .

ID:	4895
INPUT:	Sedekiasen hamaikagarren urtean , laugarren hilaren bederatzian , babiloniarrek zuloa ireki zuten hiriko harresian .
PRED:	On the fourth year of Zedekiah 's reign , during the fourth year of King Zedekiah 's reign , the city of Babylon .
GOLD:	Two and a half years later , on July 18 in the eleventh year of Zedekiah 's reign , a section of the city wall was broken down .

ID:	4896
INPUT:	Ez irten landara , ez ibili bideetan ! Hor dago etsaia armaturik , nonahi beldurra nagusi ! »
PRED:	Do not go out into the fields , and we will go out into the fields . ”
GOLD:	Do n't go out to the fields ! Do n't travel on the roads ! The enemy 's sword is everywhereand terrorizes us at every turn !

ID:	4897
INPUT:	Ez bedi <unk> itxura <unk> , horixe izango du <unk> eta .
PRED:	And if they are afraid of what they have seen , they will be able to know that they will be healed .
GOLD:	Let them no longer fool themselves by trusting in empty riches , for emptiness will be their only reward .

ID:	4898
INPUT:	Jauna hartu baituzu babesleku , Goi-goikoa bizileku .
PRED:	Praise the Lord , for he is the place of his throne .
GOLD:	If you make the Lord your refuge , if you make the Most High your shelter ,

ID:	4899
INPUT:	Eskua buruan ezarri ondoren , hil egingo du erre-oparietako abereak hiltzen diren tokian .
PRED:	On the head of the burnt offering , the burnt offering will be slaughtered by the burnt offering and the burnt offering .
GOLD:	They must lay a hand on the head of the sin offering and slaughter it at the place where burnt offerings are slaughtered .

ID:	4900
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak etsaiak xaxatu dizkioeta aurka altxarazi :
PRED:	But the Lord said to Jeremiah ,
GOLD:	They said , “ We will replace the broken bricks of our ruins with finished stone , and replant the felled sycamore-fig trees with cedars . ”

ID:	4901
INPUT:	<unk> prestua duena , justiziaren arabera ari dena , bihotz barrutik egia dioena ;
PRED:	Those who are righteous in the truth will be filled with joy , and those who trust in the truth .
GOLD:	Those who lead blameless lives and do what is right , speaking the truth from sincere hearts .

ID:	4902
INPUT:	Israeldar gudariak onik itzuli ziren Josuerengana , Makedako kanpalekura . Inor ez zen israeldarren kontra hitzik ere egitera ausartu .
PRED:	When the Israelite army returned to Joshua , the Israelite Israelite men would n't listen to the camp .
GOLD:	Then the Israelites returned safely to Joshua in the camp at Makkedah . After that , no one dared to speak even a word against Israel .

ID:	4903
INPUT:	Beraz , nirekin Zesareara etorri ziren haiek eta , hurrengo egunean , batere luzapenik gabe , auzi-mahaian eseri nintzen eta gizon hori ekartzeko agindu nuen .
PRED:	So I came to Caesarea and the believers came to meet me with me and put them in the place of atonement until I had given him to you .
GOLD:	“ When his accusers came here for the trial , I did n't delay . I called the case the very next day and ordered Paul brought in .

ID:	4904
INPUT:	Ibili beti Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak erakutsitako bidetik , bizirik iraun eta zoriontsu izan zaitezten , eta luzaro biziko zarete jabetzan hartuko duzuen lurraldean .
PRED:	“ For the Lord your God has made you right in his presence , and you will live in the land you will live in the land you will live in the land of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Stay on the path that the Lord your God has commanded you to follow . Then you will live long and prosperous lives in the land you are about to enter and occupy .

ID:	4905
INPUT:	Jakin zuten Moab , Amon , Edom eta beste <unk> ihesi joanak ziren judatarrek ere , Babiloniako erregeak judatar batzuk beren herrialdean utzi zituela , eta Gedalias , Ahikamen seme eta Xafanen biloba , ezarri zuela gobernari .
PRED:	But when the king of Moab heard this , the king of Edom , the king of Edom , the king of Judah , heard what the king of Babylon had happened to Gedaliah son of Shaphan .
GOLD:	When the Judeans in Moab , Ammon , Edom , and the other nearby countries heard that the king of Babylon had left a few people in Judah and that Gedaliah was the governor ,

ID:	4906
INPUT:	Israeldarrak , ordea , itsas erditik oinik busti gabe igaro ziren , urak ezker-eskuin zituztela harresi gisa .
PRED:	But the people of Israel did not drive out the sea on the road through the sea .
GOLD:	But the people of Israel had walked through the middle of the sea on dry ground , as the water stood up like a wall on both sides .

ID:	4907
INPUT:	Zeukan guztia Isaaki utzi zion Abrahamek .
PRED:	Then Abraham left Isaac and gave him everything .
GOLD:	Abraham gave everything he owned to his son Isaac .

ID:	4908
INPUT:	Gerora , Absalomen alaba Maaka ere hartu zuen emazte , eta honek Abias , <unk> , <unk> eta Xelomit ekarri zizkion .
PRED:	At last Absalom loved Absalom , and he had married his wife and his wife and his wife and his wife and all his men .
GOLD:	Later Rehoboam married another cousin , Maacah , the granddaughter of Absalom . Maacah gave birth to Abijah , Attai , Ziza , and Shelomith .

ID:	4909
INPUT:	<unk> , bereiz itzazu herri osoaren artetik gizon <unk> , Jainkoari begirune diotenak , fidagarriak eta eskupeko-zale ez direnak , eta ezarri mila , ehun , berrogeita hamar eta hamarreko taldeen buru .
PRED:	For if you are my people who serve God by the authority of my people , who fear God and those who fear him , and those who fear God will be able to be kind of silver , and one of them .
GOLD:	But select from all the people some capable , honest men who fear God and hate bribes . Appoint them as leaders over groups of one thousand , one hundred , fifty , and ten .

ID:	4910
INPUT:	Hau da zuk eta zure ondorengoek nirekiko duzuen konpromisoa : zuetako gizaseme oro <unk> .
PRED:	Your descendants will be your descendants and your descendants , and your descendants will be filled with you .
GOLD:	This is the covenant that you and your descendants must keep : Each male among you must be circumcised .

ID:	4911
INPUT:	Hauek ere Babiloniara eramango dituzte eta hantxe geldituko dira , toki honetara berriro <unk> neuk erabakiko dudan arte . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	They will bring this message to Babylon , and they will be able to rebuild the place where I have heard that the Lord says , ‘ This is what the Lord says . '
GOLD:	‘ They will all be carried away to Babylon and will stay there until I send for them , ' says the Lord . ‘ Then I will bring them back to Jerusalem again . ' ”

ID:	4912
INPUT:	Eremu horretatik , zati bat , karratua — berrehun eta berrogeita hamar metrokoa luze-zabalean — , <unk> izango da , eta hogeita bost metro zabaleko <unk> izango du inguru guztian .
PRED:	This is an illustration of these instructions : “ Each piece of silver and 27 feet wide , which was 71/2 feet long . It will be 71/2 feet tall and 433/4 feet wide , which was 71/2 feet tall .
GOLD:	A section of this land , measuring 875 feet by 875 feet , will be set aside for the Temple . An additional strip of land 871/2 feet wide is to be left empty all around it .

ID:	4913
INPUT:	Erantzun laster , Jauna , arnasarik gabe bainago . Ez ezkutatu niri zeure aurpegia , zulora <unk> bat egin ez dezadan .
PRED:	Do n't let me see the Lord , for I am not able to see if I am dead , I will not be able to kill me .
GOLD:	Come quickly , Lord , and answer me , for my depression deepens.Do n't turn away from me , or I will die .

ID:	4914
INPUT:	Hauek dira edomdarren arbaso Esauren ondorengoak Seir mendialdean .
PRED:	These are the names of Esau 's descendants , who lived in the hill country of Seir .
GOLD:	This is the account of Esau 's descendants , the Edomites , who lived in the hill country of Seir .

ID:	4915
INPUT:	Baina ezin du inork mihia hezi , gaiztoa eta menderagaitza baita , pozoi <unk> betea .
PRED:	“ But no one of the wicked , the wicked of the wicked , the wicked of the wicked of the wicked , and the words of the wicked have destroyed .
GOLD:	but no one can tame the tongue . It is restless and evil , full of deadly poison .

ID:	4916
INPUT:	Hondamen Leizeak eta Herioak esaten dute : « Hari buruz zer edo zer entzun dugu , bai » .
PRED:	The lying face face face and said , “ We have heard what you have done . ”
GOLD:	Destruction and Death say , ‘ We 've heard only rumors of where wisdom can be found . '

ID:	4917
INPUT:	« <unk> eta buruzagien eta agintarien aurrera eramango zaituztetenean , ez egon kezkatan nola egin edo zer esan zeuen alde ,
PRED:	“ When the people of Samaria and the elders of the people of Samaria , when the elders of Samaria were ready to do what he meant .
GOLD:	“ And when you are brought to trial in the synagogues and before rulers and authorities , do n't worry about how to defend yourself or what to say ,

ID:	4918
INPUT:	Gurekin ez doala ohartu orduko , hilko litzateke ; geure aita zaharra atsekabez hilobiratuko genuke .
PRED:	If we have not found it , we would not die . If we have a master , how can we have a slave ?
GOLD:	If he sees that the boy is not with us , our father will die . We , your servants , will indeed be responsible for sending that grieving , white-haired man to his grave .

ID:	4919
INPUT:	Jesus Jaunari eta fededun guztiei dizkiezun maitasun eta leialtasunaren berri izan baitut .
PRED:	May the grace of the Lord Jesus be with all the words of the earth .
GOLD:	because I keep hearing about your faith in the Lord Jesus and your love for all of God 's people .

ID:	4920
INPUT:	Eta Jaunak esan zion Oseasi : « Jarriozu izena “ <unk> ” , zuek ez baitzarete jadanik nire herria eta ni ez bainaiz zuen Jainkoa » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ I am afraid of your name , and if you were afraid of my people , I wo n't know that I am the Lord your God . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord said , “ Name him Lo-ammi — ‘ Not my people ' — for Israel is not my people , and I am not their God .

ID:	4921
INPUT:	Jaunaren eskua ez da , ez , <unk> zuek salbatzeko , ezta haren belarria <unk> zuei entzuteko :
PRED:	For the Lord has led his hand against you , and if they are able to kill you , and if they have heard his voice , and you have not heard that he is able to hear the word of the Lord .
GOLD:	Listen ! The Lord 's arm is not too weak to save you , nor is his ear too deaf to hear you call .

ID:	4922
INPUT:	Eta nik erantzun : “ Iruzur egin ote diezaioke gizakiak Jainkoari , zuek niri egiten didazuen bezala ? ” “ Zertan egiten dizugu , bada , iruzur ? ” , galdetzen duzue oraindik . <unk> eta dohainak ematerakoan egiten didazue iruzur .
PRED:	“ How can you say , ‘ Why are you going ? Why are you going ? Why do you mean ? Why are you ? Why do you know that I am going to give you ? '
GOLD:	“ Should people cheat God ? Yet you have cheated me ! “ But you ask , ‘ What do you mean ? When did we ever cheat you ? ' “ You have cheated me of the tithes and offerings due to me .

ID:	4923
INPUT:	Pauloren mintzaira , <unk> ez bezalakoa
PRED:	Paul 's words were like a while they were not like the mouth of Paul .
GOLD:	Paul 's Message of Wisdom

ID:	4924
INPUT:	( 1 Erg 22 , 1-3 )
PRED:	The family of Uzziah
GOLD:	Micaiah Prophesies against Ahab

ID:	4925
INPUT:	<unk> , Rama , Hatzor ,
PRED:	Mizpah , Hazor , Hazor ,
GOLD:	Adamah , Ramah , Hazor ,

ID:	4926
INPUT:	Senideok , hauxe da nire bihotzeko irrikarik handiena eta israeldarren alde Jainkoari eskatzen diodana : salbamenera hel daitezela .
PRED:	For I am writing to God 's message , dear brothers and sisters , so that all the way of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , the longing of my heart and my prayer to God is for the people of Israel to be saved .

ID:	4927
INPUT:	Eta dirua Aaroni eta beronen semeei eman zien , Jaunak agindu bezala .
PRED:	Then the Lord gave the money to Aaron and his sons , just as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	And Moses gave the silver for the redemption to Aaron and his sons , just as the Lord had commanded .

ID:	4928
INPUT:	Orobat , bik , batera <unk> , elkar dute berotuko ; bakarrik dagoena nola berotu ?
PRED:	Do n't you realize how can we be like a horse , and all who hear it ?
GOLD:	Likewise , two people lying close together can keep each other warm . But how can one be warm alone ?

ID:	4929
INPUT:	Hala ere , ez diet zuen <unk> eskatuko , emagaldu bihurtu direlako ; ezta zuen <unk> ere , adulteriogile bihurtu direlako . Apaizak berak <unk> , tenpluko <unk> <unk> eskaintzeko . Eta hala , zentzugabeko <unk> doa .
PRED:	But I will not punish you because they have been unfaithful , because they have been unfaithful to the Temple of the Lord . And when she saw that she had been unfaithful to the Temple of the Lord 's Temple , he will punish you . ”
GOLD:	But why should I punish themfor their prostitution and adultery ? For your men are doing the same thing , sinning with whores and shrine prostitutes.O foolish people ! You refuse to understand , so you will be destroyed .

ID:	4930
INPUT:	eta esan zion : — Ireki ekialdeko <unk> . Erregeak <unk> irekitzean , Eliseok agindu zion : — Jaurti ! Eta erregeak gezia jaurti zuenean , Eliseok esan zuen : — Jaunaren <unk> ! Siriarren kontrako <unk> ! <unk> hondatuko dituzu siriarrak Afeken .
PRED:	Then the king said to him , “ Get out of the sea ! ” But the king told him , “ Let 's kill you ! ” So the king told him , “ You 're afraid of the Lord 's anger ! ”
GOLD:	Then he commanded , “ Open that eastern window , ” and he opened it . Then he said , “ Shoot ! ” So he shot an arrow . Elisha proclaimed , “ This is the Lord 's arrow , an arrow of victory over Aram , for you will completely conquer the Arameans at Aphek . ”

ID:	4931
INPUT:	<unk> zergatia
PRED:	A Message about Philistia
GOLD:	The Letter for Gentile Believers

ID:	4932
INPUT:	Begira , Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak eskura ematen dizue lurraldea . Joan eta jabetu hartaz , Jaunak zuen arbasoen Jainkoak hitzeman bezala . Ez izan beldur ! Ez kikildu !
PRED:	Look , the land the Lord your God has given you victory over you , and he has given you victory over the land of the Lord your ancestors .
GOLD:	Look ! He has placed the land in front of you . Go and occupy it as the Lord , the God of your ancestors , has promised you . Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be discouraged ! '

ID:	4933
INPUT:	Hanani , neure <unk> bat , etorri zitzaidan Judatik , <unk> batekin . Erbestealditik libre gelditu ziren juduen eta Jerusalem hiriko berriak eskatu nizkien .
PRED:	At that time I came to the king of the city , one of the people of Jerusalem came to the city of Jerusalem , and the people of Jerusalem came to see the city of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Hanani , one of my brothers , came to visit me with some other men who had just arrived from Judah . I asked them about the Jews who had returned there from captivity and about how things were going in Jerusalem .

ID:	4934
INPUT:	Orduan , Joabek , erregeagana joan eta halaxe jakinarazi zion . Orduan , erregeak dei egin zion Absalomi ; hau erregeagana etorri eta lurreraino ahuspeztu zitzaion . Erregeak besarkatu egin zuen Absalom .
PRED:	Then Joab went to the king and told him what he had happened . So Joab called him to the king and called him to the king and threw him into the ground .
GOLD:	So Joab told the king what Absalom had said . Then at last David summoned Absalom , who came and bowed low before the king , and the king kissed him .

ID:	4935
INPUT:	<unk> igo zirenean , haizea baretu egin zen .
PRED:	When they arrived , the wind rose up and saw the wind .
GOLD:	When they climbed back into the boat , the wind stopped .

ID:	4936
INPUT:	Jesusek jendetzari bigarrenez jaten eman
PRED:	Jesus Feeds Five Thousand
GOLD:	Jesus Feeds Four Thousand

ID:	4937
INPUT:	Orduan , eman zizkion Jakobek anaiari ogia eta <unk> dilista . Hark jan , edan , mahaitik altxa eta alde egin zuen . Honela gutxietsi zuen Esauk bere lehen-semetzaren eskubidea .
PRED:	Then Jacob said to his brother , “ Let 's eat some bread and wine , eat , and eat your best food . Let 's eat the best food , Esau 's servants , and Jacob 's share . ”
GOLD:	Then Jacob gave Esau some bread and lentil stew . Esau ate the meal , then got up and left . He showed contempt for his rights as the firstborn .

ID:	4938
INPUT:	« <unk> eginkizunak <unk> nire egun <unk> jarduten ez baduzu , <unk> zeure atsegin <unk> Jaunaren egun <unk> hartzen baduzu , zeure eginkizun , negozio eta arazoak baztertuz ,
PRED:	“ If you were sick by human power , when they are able to kill you , if you are ashamed of the Lord your God , you will be able to be ashamed of your sinful nature , and if you are under your sins .
GOLD:	“ Keep the Sabbath day holy.Do n't pursue your own interests on that day , but enjoy the Sabbathand speak of it with delight as the Lord 's holy day.Honor the Sabbath in everything you do on that day , and do n't follow your own desires or talk idly .

ID:	4939
INPUT:	« Eta zuk , gizaseme , egin negar eta intziri beraien aurrean , bihotza hautsia eta <unk> bazenu bezala .
PRED:	“ Son of man , weep for those who weep and weep for their hearts , as they have heard their hearts , and they will know that they are my hearts .
GOLD:	Yes , the sword is now being sharpened and polished ; it is being prepared for the executioner .

ID:	4940
INPUT:	Ekialdetik mendebaldera , herri guztiek aitortzen dute nire izen handia , eta nonahi erretzen didate intsentsua eta behar bezalako oparia eskaintzen . Herri guztiek aitortzen dute nire izen handia — dio Jaun ahalguztidunak — .
PRED:	In the east , all the nations of the earth will worship me as my name , and all my people will burn incense on earth . For all the people of Israel have prepared , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	But my name is honored by people of other nations from morning till night . All around the world they offer sweet incense and pure offerings in honor of my name . For my name is great among the nations , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	4941
INPUT:	Esan zidan : « Gizaseme , zulatu horma hortxe bertan » . Zulatu nuen horma eta <unk> bat egin zen .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Son of man , and the water flowed along with water . ” So I saw that it was a wall .
GOLD:	He said to me , “ Now , son of man , dig into the wall . ” So I dug into the wall and found a hidden doorway .

ID:	4942
INPUT:	Benetan diotsuet : Gizaldi honetakoak hil baino lehen gertatuko dira gauza guztiok .
PRED:	I tell you the truth , this generation will rise from generation to generation .
GOLD:	I tell you the truth , this generation will not pass from the scene until all these things have taken place .

ID:	4943
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion hau : — Erregeak ongi baderitzo eta ni begiko baldin banau , eskari hau erregeari egoki iruditzen bazaio eta ni atsegin baldin banau , agindu beza idatziz , Hamedataren seme eta Agagen jatorriko Hamanek , asmo maltzurrez , erreinuko eskualde guztietan bizi diren juduak oro <unk> , emaniko gutunak baliogabe ditzaten .
PRED:	Then the king said to him , “ If you want me to be found , if I want you to be the king of the world to be found in the province of the king 's reign , then let me be sure that the king of the empire of the Jews . ”
GOLD:	Esther said , “ If it please the king , and if I have found favor with him , and if he thinks it is right , and if I am pleasing to him , let there be a decree that reverses the orders of Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite , who ordered that Jews throughout all the king 's provinces should be destroyed .

ID:	4944
INPUT:	« Ondoren , neure espirituaisuriko diet gizaki guztiei . Zuen <unk> egingo dute , zuen <unk> egingo dituzte , zuen gazteek ikuskariak izango .
PRED:	“ Then I will give you a little place that you will know that you will know that they will be filled with shame , and they will be filled with shame .
GOLD:	“ At the time of those events , ” says the Lord , “ when I restore the prosperity of Judah and Jerusalem ,

ID:	4945
INPUT:	Orduan , Israelgo erregeak agindu zuen : — Heldu Mikeasi ! Eraman <unk> Amonengana eta Joax printzearengana .
PRED:	Then the king of Israel told him , “ Get up and kill him , my lord the king of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ Arrest him ! ” the king of Israel ordered . “ Take him back to Amon , the governor of the city , and to my son Joash .

ID:	4946
INPUT:	Jordan ibaiaz beste aldera , Jerikotik ekialdera , Betzer aukeratu zuten , basamortuan , Rubenen leinuaren lautadan ; Ramot , Galaaden , Gaden leinuaren lurraldean , eta Golan , Baxanen , Manasesen leinuaren lurraldean .
PRED:	The following towns came to the Jordan River , east of the Jordan River , the following towns of the tribe of Gad , Gad , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh .
GOLD:	On the east side of the Jordan River , across from Jericho , the following cities were designated : Bezer , in the wilderness plain of the tribe of Reuben ; Ramoth in Gilead , in the territory of the tribe of Gad ; and Golan in Bashan , in the land of the tribe of Manasseh .

ID:	4947
INPUT:	Maaseias , <unk> semea — hau <unk> , hau <unk> , hau <unk> , hau <unk> , hau Zakariasena , hau <unk> — .
PRED:	Then Azariah son of Maaseiah , son of Maaseiah , son of Maaseiah , who was very very very very old , son of Maaseiah , son of Maaseiah , son of Maaseiah , son of Maaseiah , and disease .
GOLD:	Also Maaseiah son of Baruch , son of Col-hozeh , son of Hazaiah , son of Adaiah , son of Joiarib , son of Zechariah , of the family of Shelah .

ID:	4948
INPUT:	<unk> izan zen berrogei egun eta berrogei gauez .
PRED:	That was forty years old and forty days .
GOLD:	The rain continued to fall for forty days and forty nights .

ID:	4949
INPUT:	Eta morroiek belarrira esan zizkioten hitz horiek Davidi . Baina honek erantzun zien : — Gauza hutsa iruditzen al zaizue erregearen suhi izatea ? Gizon behartsu eta <unk> nauzue ni horretarako .
PRED:	Then the servants said to David , “ What are you doing such things ? ” “ What do you think that the king is right ? ”
GOLD:	When Saul 's men said these things to David , he replied , “ How can a poor man from a humble family afford the bride price for the daughter of a king ? ”

ID:	4950
INPUT:	Libanoko zedro handi eta <unk> Baxango haritz guztiak ,
PRED:	I have made great power of Lebanon , bronze , and all the kingdoms of King Og of Lebanon .
GOLD:	He will cut down the tall cedars of Lebanonand all the mighty oaks of Bashan .

ID:	4951
INPUT:	Horrelakoak ez beza uste Jaunarengandik ezer iritsiko duenik ,
PRED:	The Lord detests all these things , and they will not be destroyed .
GOLD:	Such people should not expect to receive anything from the Lord .

ID:	4952
INPUT:	elkarketa-etxolako sarrerara eramango du aberea , Jaunari eskaintzeko ; bestela , herritik bota egingo dute .
PRED:	If the animal falls on the entrance to the entrance of the Tabernacle , they will be cut off from the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	but does not bring it to the entrance of the Tabernacle to offer it to the Lord , that person will be cut off from the community .

ID:	4953
INPUT:	Jerusalemgo neskatxok , basoetako orein eta gazelen izenean , otoi , ez iratzarri ene maitea , utzi lo egiten , nahi duen arte .
PRED:	O women of Jerusalem , O women of Jerusalem , you love me , and now let me grow in the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	Promise me , O women of Jerusalem , by the gazelles and wild deer , not to awaken love until the time is right .

ID:	4954
INPUT:	Zu Seirtik ateratzean , Jauna , Edomgo zelaietan <unk> egitean , lurra ikaratu egin zen , ortzia dardaratu ; hodeiek euria isuri zuten ,
PRED:	When you came from Edom , the Lord of Edom , when the earth saw the heavens , the earth fell on the heavens , and the heavens fell on the heavens .
GOLD:	“ Lord , when you set out from Seirand marched across the fields of Edom , the earth trembled , and the cloudy skies poured down rain .

ID:	4955
INPUT:	« Zeruko izarrak bezain ugari izan ondoren , banaka batzuk besterik ez zarete bizirik geldituko , Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren esana ez egiteagatik .
PRED:	“ And when the stars of the sky will be like a few of the sky , you will not be like a few of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Though you become as numerous as the stars in the sky , few of you will be left because you would not listen to the Lord your God .

ID:	4956
INPUT:	Babilonia behin betiko gaitzetsia
PRED:	Judgment against Babylon 's People
GOLD:	A Hymn of Praise to the

ID:	4957
INPUT:	« Izan gogoan zeuek ere esklabo izan zinetela Egipton ; horregatik agintzen dizuet xedapen horiek betetzeko .
PRED:	“ Remember that I am slaves in Egypt , so that you must obey your commands in Egypt .
GOLD:	Remember that you were slaves in the land of Egypt . That is why I am giving you this command .

ID:	4958
INPUT:	Gero , Jakobek otoitz hau egin zuen : « Jauna , gure guraso Abrahamen eta Isaaken Jainkoa , zuk esan didazu : “ Itzul zaitez zeure lurraldera eta zeure ahaideengana , eta bedeinkatuko zaitut ” .
PRED:	Then Jacob prayed to him , “ O Lord , the God of Abraham , the God of Abraham , Abraham , Abraham , and Abraham , Abraham , and Jacob . I will bless you and bless you . ”
GOLD:	I am not worthy of all the unfailing love and faithfulness you have shown to me , your servant . When I left home and crossed the Jordan River , I owned nothing except a walking stick . Now my household fills two large camps !

ID:	4959
INPUT:	Jesus Hamaikei eta ikasleei agertu
PRED:	The First Disciples
GOLD:	Jesus Appears to the Disciples

ID:	4960
INPUT:	Ez dugu inola ere Jaunaren kontra errebelatu nahi izan , ez Jaunarengandik aldendu , ezta Jaunaren , gure Jainkoaren , egoitza aurrean dagoen <unk> gainera , erre-opariak , labore-opariak eta gainerako sakrifizioak eskaintzeko beste bat eraiki ere » .
PRED:	We have not sinned against the Lord , and we would not turn against the Lord our God . We must not sacrifice a burnt offering to worship the Lord our God , and he must build a burnt offering to sacrifice . ”
GOLD:	Far be it from us to rebel against the Lord or turn away from him by building our own altar for burnt offerings , grain offerings , or sacrifices . Only the altar of the Lord our God that stands in front of the Tabernacle may be used for that purpose . ”

ID:	4961
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	4962
INPUT:	zezenen eta akerren odolak ez <unk> bekatuak desegin .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you and a human spirit , and the human human human hands .
GOLD:	For it is not possible for the blood of bulls and goats to take away sins .

ID:	4963
INPUT:	Zeren indar gaizto eta <unk> hori lanean ari da dagoeneko ; baina orain erabat agertzea galarazten dion hura desagertu bezain laster ,
PRED:	For the wicked are weak and powerful , but now they have seen him , but now now he has come to see him .
GOLD:	For this lawlessness is already at work secretly , and it will remain secret until the one who is holding it back steps out of the way .

ID:	4964
INPUT:	Entzun , <unk> ! Honela mintzo da Jauna : « Haurrak sortu ditut eta hazi , baina aurka altxatu zaizkit .
PRED:	But when they heard this , they said , “ Lord , but I have rebelled against me .
GOLD:	Listen , O heavens ! Pay attention , earth ! This is what the Lord says : “ The children I raised and cared forhave rebelled against me .

ID:	4965
INPUT:	Zeuk utzi nauzu , zeuk bizkarra eman . Hala , zure aurka luzatu dut eskua , zu suntsitzeko , zutaz erruki izateaz <unk> .
PRED:	You have turned away and turned me away , and I have turned your hand against you , and I have given you victory over you .
GOLD:	You have abandoned meand turned your back on me , ” says the Lord . “ Therefore , I will raise my fist to destroy you.I am tired of always giving you another chance .

ID:	4966
INPUT:	Izugarrizko eskarmentu izango dira munduko erreinu guztientzat ; <unk> eta iseka-gai izango dira , koplak aterako dizkiete eta madarikatu egingo jaurtiko ditudan toki guztietan .
PRED:	I will be an object of the world , and all the kingdoms of the world will be heard , and they will be filled with shame . They will be filled with shame , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	I will make them an object of horror and a symbol of evil to every nation on earth . They will be disgraced and mocked , taunted and cursed , wherever I scatter them .

ID:	4967
INPUT:	« Zuei , nire <unk> , hau diotsuet nik , Jainko Jaunak : Nik erabakiko dut ardien arteko auzia , ahari eta akerren artekoa .
PRED:	“ I am writing to you , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will bring you a male goat and goats and goats . '
GOLD:	“ And as for you , my flock , this is what the Sovereign Lord says to his people : I will judge between one animal of the flock and another , separating the sheep from the goats .

ID:	4968
INPUT:	baina Nekok mezulariak bidali zizkion esatera : « Ez dugu deus ere elkarren kontra , Judako errege . Ez nator zure kontra , gerra egiten ari zaidan beste <unk> baten kontra baizik . Bizkor ibiltzeko esan dit Jainkoak . Ez jarri zuk eragozpenik Jainkoari , neure alde baitut ; bestela , hondatu egingo zaitu » .
PRED:	“ We have sent messengers to tell him , ‘ We have not rebelled against you . I am not sending you to fight against you , but I am afraid of my people . ”
GOLD:	But King Neco sent messengers to Josiah with this message : “ What do you want with me , king of Judah ? I have no quarrel with you today ! I am on my way to fight another nation , and God has told me to hurry ! Do not interfere with God , who is with me , or he will destroy you . ”

ID:	4969
INPUT:	ardoa kopa handitan edaten duzue , olio usaintsu <unk> zarete . Eta ez zaizue <unk> herriaren hondamendia !
PRED:	You have made your cup of wine , and you have filled your heads , and you have broken my fury . ”
GOLD:	You drink wine by the bowlfuland perfume yourselves with fragrant lotions.You care nothing about the ruin of your nation .

ID:	4970
INPUT:	<unk> Eleazar ; <unk> <unk> ; <unk> Jakob ,
PRED:	And when they saw that they were slaughtered by the sword , Jacob , and Jacob became very angry with his power .
GOLD:	Eliud was the father of Eleazar.Eleazar was the father of Matthan.Matthan was the father of Jacob .

ID:	4971
INPUT:	Orduan , israeldar elkarte osoa oihu batean hasi zen eta gau osoa negarrez eman zuen .
PRED:	Then the whole community of Israel cried out to him , and all the people of Israel cried out .
GOLD:	Then the whole community began weeping aloud , and they cried all night .

ID:	4972
INPUT:	<unk> zen Pilato ordurako hila izateaz , eta ehuntariari dei egin eta galdetu zion ea egia zen hilda zegoela .
PRED:	But if they were dead , the Roman officer asked him to be dead , and he asked him what he was dead .
GOLD:	Pilate could n't believe that Jesus was already dead , so he called for the Roman officer and asked if he had died yet .

ID:	4973
INPUT:	Dorreak eraiki zituen Jerusalemen , Kantoiko ate gainean , <unk> gainean eta <unk> , eta sendotu egin zituen .
PRED:	He built up Jerusalem and built it on the gates of Jerusalem . He built an open city , and he destroyed every kind of wood .
GOLD:	Uzziah built fortified towers in Jerusalem at the Corner Gate , at the Valley Gate , and at the angle in the wall .

ID:	4974
INPUT:	Aaronek erantzun zien : — Kendu zeuen emazte eta seme-alabei urrezko belarritakoak eta <unk> .
PRED:	Then Aaron replied , “ Take your wives and gold and gold and gold , and scarlet thread . ”
GOLD:	So Aaron said , “ Take the gold rings from the ears of your wives and sons and daughters , and bring them to me . ”

ID:	4975
INPUT:	Kontuz lagun gaiztoekin
PRED:	Do n't be sure to rule over your people .
GOLD:	Wisdom Shouts in the Streets

ID:	4976
INPUT:	Beldurtu ziren Joseren senideak haren etxera eraman zituztenean . Pentsatu zuten : « <unk> aurreko txandan itzulitako <unk> eramaten gaituzte . Orain , gainera <unk> zaizkigu , esklabotzat hartzeko , geure asto eta guzti » .
PRED:	But when the brothers arrived , they took him into the house of Joseph 's brothers and sisters , as they were told , “ We know that we are going to be with us , and we are slaves . ”
GOLD:	The brothers were terrified when they saw that they were being taken into Joseph 's house . “ It 's because of the money someone put in our sacks last time we were here , ” they said . “ He plans to pretend that we stole it . Then he will seize us , make us slaves , and take our donkeys . ”

ID:	4977
INPUT:	biziaren <unk> hil zenuten , baina Jainkoak piztu egin du hildakoen artetik ; gu gara horren testigu .
PRED:	But when we have died , God raised us from the dead , we have raised from the dead . And we have been raised from the dead .
GOLD:	You killed the author of life , but God raised him from the dead . And we are witnesses of this fact !

ID:	4978
INPUT:	Joan zitzaien hirugarren aldiz eta esan zien : « Egin lo eta hartu atseden ! Kito ! Iritsi da ordua : hona Gizonaren Semea bekatarien eskuetara emana .
PRED:	Then the third day Jesus told them , “ Get up and drink , for the day of the Son of Man has come to be baptized . ”
GOLD:	When he returned to them the third time , he said , “ Go ahead and sleep . Have your rest . But no — the time has come . The Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners .

ID:	4979
INPUT:	Beren ahaide <unk> eta <unk> laguntzen zieten betebehar horretan .
PRED:	They were with their brothers and sisters , who were baptized with their own brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	Their associates , Bakbukiah and Unni , stood opposite them during the service .

ID:	4980
INPUT:	Baina jabe izateko bertara sartu zirenean , ez ziren zure esaneko izan , ez zituzten zure legeak bete , ez zuten zuk aginduaren arabera jokatu . Horregatik bidali diezu zoritxar handi hau .
PRED:	But when they brought them to you , they refused to obey your commandments , so they did not obey your commandments .
GOLD:	Our ancestors came and conquered it and lived in it , but they refused to obey you or follow your word . They have not done anything you commanded . That is why you have sent this terrible disaster upon them .

ID:	4981
INPUT:	<unk> egina daukazue Jauna zeuen <unk> . « Zertan <unk> dugu , bada ? » , galdetzen duzue hala ere . Hona , gaizki egiten duena Jainkoari begiko eta atsegin zaiola esaten duzuelako , eta Jainkoa zuzena ote den galdezka ari zaretelako .
PRED:	But if the Lord your God has done , how can we know that the Lord your God has done ? What do you think you think you think you are doing ? What do you think we do ? ”
GOLD:	You have wearied the Lord with your words . “ How have we wearied him ? ” you ask.You have wearied him by saying that all who do evil are good in the Lord 's sight , and he is pleased with them . You have wearied him by asking , “ Where is the God of justice ? ”

ID:	4982
INPUT:	Hiltzeko moduko zurezko tresna jaurtiz norbait jo eta hiltzen duena , <unk> da : heriotzara emango dute .
PRED:	The stone that falls on a stone , and it will be stoned to death . They will be stoned to death , and they will die .
GOLD:	Or if someone strikes and kills another person with a wooden object , it is murder , and the murderer must be put to death .

ID:	4983
INPUT:	Horrez gain , legamiadun ogia eskainiko da , esker onez eskaintzen den <unk> batera .
PRED:	This is the bread you must sacrifice as a sacrifice of bread , along with which you have been poured out from Egypt .
GOLD:	This peace offering of thanksgiving must also be accompanied by loaves of bread made with yeast .

ID:	4984
INPUT:	Beste aingeru bat ikusi nuen ekialdetik igotzen , Jainko biziaren zigilua zuelarik , eta ozenki egin zien deiadar lurra eta itsasoa hondatzeko ahalmena eman zitzaien lau aingeruei ,
PRED:	Then I saw another angel coming down from the east of the earth , the Lamb of the earth , and the earth fell on the earth .
GOLD:	And I saw another angel coming up from the east , carrying the seal of the living God . And he shouted to those four angels , who had been given power to harm land and sea ,

ID:	4985
INPUT:	« Zure baitan Israelgo printzeek odola isurtzen dute , nor bere indarraz baliatuz .
PRED:	“ If you turn away from your blood , the Sovereign Lord is giving you the Holy One of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Every leader in Israel who lives within your walls is bent on murder .

ID:	4986
INPUT:	esanez : « Ez ekarri hona preso horiek , Jaunaren aurrean bekatu egingo <unk> . Bekatu eta oker gehiago egin nahi al duzue , gure errua aski handia ez delakoan eta Jauna Israelen kontra aski haserre eta sumindua ez dagoelakoan ? »
PRED:	“ Do n't let them go in prison , ” he said , “ when they have sinned against the Lord , you have sinned against the people of Israel , and you have no fear of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ You must not bring the prisoners here ! ” they declared . “ We can not afford to add to our sins and guilt . Our guilt is already great , and the Lord 's fierce anger is already turned against Israel . ”

ID:	4987
INPUT:	Teofilo agurgarria , askok ekin diote gure artean izan diren <unk> historia <unk> ,
PRED:	And many of the church will turn away from this message from the time of the church , and they will know that they have seen the message of the Lord .
GOLD:	Many people have set out to write accounts about the events that have been fulfilled among us .

ID:	4988
INPUT:	Horregatik , hala diot nik , Jaunak : Neure haserrea eta sumina hustuko ditut toki honen gain , gizaki eta abere , landako zuhaitz eta lurreko fruituen gain : itzaliko ez den sua izango da » .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says : I will cut off your anger against you , and I will cut off your fury on every green tree .
GOLD:	So this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ I will pour out my terrible fury on this place . Its people , animals , trees , and crops will be consumed by the unquenchable fire of my anger . ”

ID:	4989
INPUT:	Kristorengan uste on izan eta bizi
PRED:	Paul and in Christ Jesus Christ
GOLD:	Pressing toward the Goal

ID:	4990
INPUT:	Zuzena zarelako , Jauna , urrundu Jerusalemdik , zeure hiri eta mendi santutik , zeure haserrea eta sumina . Gure hoben eta gurasoen egintza gaiztoengatik irainez betetzen dituzte Jerusalem eta zure herria inguruan bizi diren guztiek .
PRED:	O Lord , give me your life ; you have been filled with your anger . Your anger are filled with your anger , and your anger are very angry with your ancestors .
GOLD:	In view of all your faithful mercies , Lord , please turn your furious anger away from your city Jerusalem , your holy mountain . All the neighboring nations mock Jerusalem and your people because of our sins and the sins of our ancestors .

ID:	4991
INPUT:	« Orduan , <unk> gaizki-esaka hasi ziren ; eta esan zioten berari :
PRED:	“ Then when they heard that he began talking about him and said ,
GOLD:	When they received their pay , they protested to the owner ,

ID:	4992
INPUT:	Eta zuri , <unk> , Sion hiriko gotorleku horri , berriro itzuliko <unk> agintea , zuri , Jerusalem hiriburu , lehen zenuen erregetza » .
PRED:	And when they see that the city of Jerusalem will return to you , O city of Jerusalem , you will know that you are in the city of Jerusalem , O God of Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	As for you , Jerusalem , the citadel of God 's people , your royal might and powerwill come back to you again.The kingship will be restoredto my precious Jerusalem .

ID:	4993
INPUT:	Hauei guztiei bidali zizkieten emaitzak : Betelen , Negeveko <unk> , <unk> ,
PRED:	They sent all the people to worship in the Negev , along with the coast of the Negev , and those who came to the Negev .
GOLD:	The gifts were sent to the people of the following towns David had visited : Bethel , Ramoth-negev , Jattir ,

ID:	4994
INPUT:	Zuen artetik ere aterako dira batzuk irakaspen okerrak zabalduz , ikasleak beren atzetik eramateko .
PRED:	But some of your disciples will be taken away from the same way .
GOLD:	Even some men from your own group will rise up and distort the truth in order to draw a following .

ID:	4995
INPUT:	Apaizburuek eta zaharrek salaketa asko egiten zuten haren aurka , baina hark ez zuen ezer erantzuten .
PRED:	Then the leading priests and the leading priests did n't understand what he meant .
GOLD:	But when the leading priests and the elders made their accusations against him , Jesus remained silent .

ID:	4996
INPUT:	zeren Jaunaren gorputza dela kontuan izan gabe <unk> duenak , bere gaitzespena baitu jaten eta edaten .
PRED:	For those who are parts of the Lord 's life will be filled with human hands .
GOLD:	For if you eat the bread or drink the cup without honoring the body of Christ , you are eating and drinking God 's judgment upon yourself .

ID:	4997
INPUT:	Jauna zuen Jainkoa zuekin doa , etsaien aurka borrokatzeko eta garaipena zuei emateko ” .
PRED:	The Lord your God is with you ; he will rescue you from your enemies . '
GOLD:	For the Lord your God is going with you ! He will fight for you against your enemies , and he will give you victory ! '

ID:	4998
INPUT:	Egin diezaiogun goian <unk> bat , horma batzuk jasoz ; ohea , mahaia , aulkia eta <unk> ipiniko dizkiogu bertan . Horrela , etxera etortzean , geldi dadila bertan .
PRED:	Let them be sure that some of the city will be able to honor those who have been filled with them . And we will put on the table and honor of all the table .
GOLD:	Let 's build a small room for him on the roof and furnish it with a bed , a table , a chair , and a lamp . Then he will have a place to stay whenever he comes by . ”

ID:	4999
INPUT:	Maita ezazue , bada , etorkina , zeuek ere etorkin izan baitzineten Egipton .
PRED:	So be careful to obey all the commands of the Lord .
GOLD:	So you , too , must show love to foreigners , for you yourselves were once foreigners in the land of Egypt .

ID:	5000
INPUT:	Honela <unk> zegoen , beraz , santutegia . Lehenengo aldean edozein garaitan sartzen dira apaizak beren kultu-zerbitzua betetzeko ;
PRED:	So when they saw that some of these things were near , they are ready to enter the Temple of the Lord 's Covenant .
GOLD:	When these things were all in place , the priests regularly entered the first room as they performed their religious duties .

ID:	5001
INPUT:	Salomonek , orduan : — <unk> jokatzen badu , ez zaio ile bat ere eroriko lurrera ; baina <unk> gaiztakeriarik aurkitzen badiogu , heriotza izango du .
PRED:	Then King Solomon said , “ If a man dies , it will be able to fall into the dust , it will fall into the dust . But we will be able to kill him . ”
GOLD:	Solomon replied , “ If he proves himself to be loyal , not a hair on his head will be touched . But if he makes trouble , he will die . ”

ID:	5002
INPUT:	Lurrak , zabaldurik , irentsi egin zituen <unk> batera , honen taldea hil eta suak berrehun eta berrogeita hamar gizon suntsitu zituenean ; herriaren eskarmenturako izan zen hori .
PRED:	The earth saw that the Lord had burned up with them , and he killed some of them . He killed twenty of them , and he destroyed them . He destroyed them as he had commanded .
GOLD:	But the earth opened up its mouth and swallowed them with Korah , and fire devoured 250 of their followers . This served as a warning to the entire nation of Israel .

ID:	5003
INPUT:	Lursaila Jubileu <unk> bertatik sagaratzen bada , ezarritako prezioa ordainduko da ;
PRED:	If the field gives birth to the field , the field will pay it to the field of the field .
GOLD:	If the field is dedicated to the Lord in the Year of Jubilee , then the entire assessment will apply .

ID:	5004
INPUT:	Hartu arkume ederrena ; gero , pilatu azpian egurra , <unk> dezala borbor , hezurrak ere ongi <unk> .
PRED:	I will make you seven gold , and I will make your bones with gold , and all kinds of wood . Then make sure that are mine , and all kinds of animals .
GOLD:	Use only the best sheep from the flock , and heap fuel on the fire beneath the pot.Bring the pot to a boil , and cook the bones along with the meat .

ID:	5005
INPUT:	« Eleazar apaiza eta Nunen seme Josue izango dira lurraldearen banaketa egingo dutenak ;
PRED:	“ Then Eleazar son of Nun , and the Levites will possess the land of Nun .
GOLD:	“ Eleazar the priest and Joshua son of Nun are the men designated to divide the grants of land among the people .

ID:	5006
INPUT:	Hogeita hamasei mila gudari zenbatu zituzten egun hartan hirietatik etorriak , Gibeako bertako bizilagunak sartu gabe .
PRED:	In that day the troops of Benjamin had been defeated by the towns of Gibeah , and the people of Gibeah were camped at Gibeah .
GOLD:	In all , 26,000 of their warriors armed with swords arrived in Gibeah to join the 700 elite troops who lived there .

ID:	5007
INPUT:	<unk> menpean hartzen nau , haizea bezala desagertzen nire duintasuna , <unk> bezala ezerezten nire ongizatea .
PRED:	For I am under my hand , as though they are as weak as weak as weak as I have done , and all my troubles are as weak as weak as I have done .
GOLD:	I live in terror now.My honor has blown away in the wind , and my prosperity has vanished like a cloud .

ID:	5008
INPUT:	Eta zuek gure eta Jaunaren <unk> jarraitu zenioten , atsekabe askoren artean izanik ere , Espiritu Santuaren pozez onartu <unk> Jainkoaren mezua .
PRED:	And since we have heard that the Lord has given you great power of all who have been filled with great power , and those who were filled with joy .
GOLD:	So you received the message with joy from the Holy Spirit in spite of the severe suffering it brought you . In this way , you imitated both us and the Lord .

ID:	5009
INPUT:	Bazen Efraimgo mendialdean Elkana zeritzan Ramako gizaseme bat , <unk> ondorengoetakoa . Jerohamen semea zen , eta hau <unk> , eta hau <unk> , eta hau <unk> . Elkana efratar leinukoa zen .
PRED:	One of the tribe of Ephraim went to Ramah to Ramah , who was sitting in the hill country of Ephraim , son of Shechem , who was very very angry with him , and he was very angry with the tribe of Benjamin .
GOLD:	There was a man named Elkanah who lived in Ramah in the region of Zuph in the hill country of Ephraim . He was the son of Jeroham , son of Elihu , son of Tohu , son of Zuph , of Ephraim .

ID:	5010
INPUT:	Amaitu dira <unk> isur-opariak Jaunaren etxean . Dolu dagite apaizek , Jaunaren zerbitzariek .
PRED:	The priests of the Lord has poured out his Temple , and the priests — the priests of the Lord 's servants — the officials of the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	For there is no grain or wineto offer at the Temple of the Lord.So the priests are in mourning.The ministers of the Lord are weeping .

ID:	5011
INPUT:	faraoia eta honen gudarostea Itsaso Gorrian amildu zituen , haren maitasuna betikoa baita .
PRED:	Pharaoh 's army went into the Red Sea , and his faithful love endures forever .
GOLD:	but he hurled Pharaoh and his army into the Red Sea.His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	5012
INPUT:	Nik eman diot landa zabala bizitoki , lurralde gazia , egoitza izan dezan .
PRED:	I will give glory to the olive trees , and it will be filled with water .
GOLD:	I have placed it in the wilderness ; its home is the wasteland .

ID:	5013
INPUT:	Eta honela esan zuen : « Hara , zerua zabalik ikusten dut eta Gizonaren Semea zutik Jainkoaren eskuinaldean » .
PRED:	Then he said to him , “ Look , I see the Son of Man , and I see the Son of Man . ”
GOLD:	And he told them , “ Look , I see the heavens opened and the Son of Man standing in the place of honor at God 's right hand ! ”

ID:	5014
INPUT:	Orduan , ikasleetako batzuk honela ari ziren beren artean : « Zer ote da esaten digun hau : “ Gutxi barru ez nauzue gehiago ikusiko , baina pixka bat geroago , berriro ikusiko nauzue ” eta “ Aitarengana noa ” ?
PRED:	Then some of them were talking about Jesus : “ What should I see you ? ” they asked . “ How long will you find a little while I will see you will see the Spirit of the dead ? ”
GOLD:	Some of the disciples asked each other , “ What does he mean when he says , ‘ In a little while you wo n't see me , but then you will see me , ' and ‘ I am going to the Father ' ?

ID:	5015
INPUT:	Pedro , Santiago eta Joan eraman zituen berekin . Ikara eta larria sentitzen hasi zen ,
PRED:	James and John , James , John , and John , and John began to visit them .
GOLD:	He took Peter , James , and John with him , and he became deeply troubled and distressed .

ID:	5016
INPUT:	Hala , lehertu egin da nire haserre-sumina , eta erre egin ditu Judako hiriak eta Jerusalemgo kaleak : hondamendi eta eremu bihurtu dira , eta halaxe daude orain .
PRED:	But my anger has broken my anger , and my fury has destroyed me . They have destroyed my people of Judah and Jerusalem , and they have destroyed them .
GOLD:	And so my fury boiled over and fell like fire on the towns of Judah and into the streets of Jerusalem , and they are still a desolate ruin today .

ID:	5017
INPUT:	Indar handia izango du eta izugarrizko hondamena egingo . Ongi aterako da bere egintza guztietan , jende ahaltsua eta herri santua bera ere suntsitu arte .
PRED:	Yes , the great city will be filled with great destruction , and the Lord will destroy all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	He will become very strong , but not by his own power . He will cause a shocking amount of destruction and succeed in everything he does . He will destroy powerful leaders and devastate the holy people .

ID:	5018
INPUT:	Huts eragiten diet aztien <unk> , zentzugabe bihurtzen igarleak ; jakintsuak hankaz gora botatzeneta haien <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	I have given the wealth of the wicked , and the wicked have destroyed those who are wise , and those who are weak in the streets .
GOLD:	I expose the false prophets as liarsand make fools of fortune-tellers.I cause the wise to give bad advice , thus proving them to be fools .

ID:	5019
INPUT:	Zeren eta judu-elkartetik bota egingo baitzaituztete ; are gehiago , badator ordua , zuek hilko zaituztenak Jainkoari kultu ematen diola uste izango duena .
PRED:	But if you do not listen to the time of the time , you will die , and the time you will die in the presence of God .
GOLD:	For you will be expelled from the synagogues , and the time is coming when those who kill you will think they are doing a holy service for God .

ID:	5020
INPUT:	Jakobek erantzun zion bere ama Rebekari : — Baina Esau <unk> da , eta ni azal <unk> .
PRED:	Jacob replied to her father , “ My mother , my father , Esau , and my mother , and I know that I have been very weak . ”
GOLD:	“ But look , ” Jacob replied to Rebekah , “ my brother , Esau , is a hairy man , and my skin is smooth .

ID:	5021
INPUT:	Idatzia Danielek azaldu
PRED:	Daniel 's Vision of Daniel
GOLD:	Daniel Explains the Writing

ID:	5022
INPUT:	Giza indarra baizik ez du horrek ; guk , ordea , Jauna , geure Jainkoa , dugu geurekin , laguntzeko eta gurekin borrokatzeko » . Judako errege Ezekiasen hitz hauek bizkortu egin zuten herria .
PRED:	For we are merely human , but we have no fear the Lord our God , but we have given us victory over us to save us . We have heard our people in the land of Judah . ”
GOLD:	He may have a great army , but they are merely men . We have the Lord our God to help us and to fight our battles for us ! ” Hezekiah 's words greatly encouraged the people .

ID:	5023
INPUT:	Egun osoan <unk> zen Abimelek hiriaren kontra , hartu eta hango bizilagun guztiak hil zituen arte . Gero , hiria desegin eta gatzez estali zuen .
PRED:	At that time Abimelech attacked Abimelech , and he killed all the people of the town of Nineveh and killed everyone until he died .
GOLD:	The battle went on all day before Abimelech finally captured the city . He killed the people , leveled the city , and scattered salt all over the ground .

ID:	5024
INPUT:	Esan zidan Jaunak : « Ikusten al duzu , gizaseme ? Bada , ikusiko duzu oraindik hau baino higuingarritasun handiagorik » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Son of man , you will see that you are greater than any of these detestable sins . ”
GOLD:	“ Have you seen this ? ” he asked . “ But I will show you even more detestable sins than these ! ”

ID:	5025
INPUT:	Zenbatu zituen Saulek <unk> : hirurehun mila israeldar ziren eta hogeita hamar mila Judako seme .
PRED:	One day the Israelite army came to kill Saul and twenty of Israel .
GOLD:	When Saul mobilized them at Bezek , he found that there were 300,000 men from Israel and 30,000 men from Judah .

ID:	5026
INPUT:	Oroitu zen Pedro , eta Jesusi esan zion : — Maisu , begira , zuk <unk> pikondoa dena ihartu da .
PRED:	When Peter 's disciples saw him , he said , “ Teacher , you have seen the fig tree in the fig tree . ”
GOLD:	Peter remembered what Jesus had said to the tree on the previous day and exclaimed , “ Look , Rabbi ! The fig tree you cursed has withered and died ! ”

ID:	5027
INPUT:	Salba nazazu lehoiaren ahotik , <unk> adarretatik . Erantzun didazu !
PRED:	Do n't be angry with me ? Do n't let me be angry with me ?
GOLD:	I will proclaim your name to my brothers and sisters.I will praise you among your assembled people .

ID:	5028
INPUT:	Jonasek <unk> mezua aldarrikatu . <unk> konbertsioa
PRED:	Then the words of the earth will be filled with victory .
GOLD:	Jonah Goes to Nineveh

ID:	5029
INPUT:	Ez dute gogoeta egiten , ez dute zentzurik , ez <unk> , esateko : « <unk> erdia sutara bota dut , ogia eta okela <unk> erre eta jan egin dut . Eta <unk> , jainko-irudi higuingarria egin ? Egur-puska baten aurrean ahuspeztu ? »
PRED:	They do n't think about what they say , ‘ I am going to say , ‘ I have heard that some of these things , ' says , “ I have thrown into the fire , and I will pour out the tree on it . ”
GOLD:	The person who made the idol never stops to reflect , “ Why , it 's just a block of wood ! I burned half of it for heatand used it to bake my bread and roast my meat.How can the rest of it be a god ? Should I bow down to worship a piece of wood ? ”

ID:	5030
INPUT:	Mikeasek erantzun : — Zeuk ikusiko duzu , gelaz gela gordeka joan beharko duzun egunean .
PRED:	Then Micaiah replied , “ You will see some of you trying to find enough enough food ! ”
GOLD:	And Micaiah replied , “ You will find out soon enough when you are trying to hide in some secret room ! ”

ID:	5031
INPUT:	Honela esan zion , bada , Seraiasi : « Babiloniara iristean , irakurri hitz horiek denen aurrean .
PRED:	So he said to him , “ When you read this to Babylon , bring a message to Babylon ,
GOLD:	He said to Seraiah , “ When you get to Babylon , read aloud everything on this scroll .

ID:	5032
INPUT:	<unk> eta <unk> jarraituko duzue , ez duzue dolu egingo , ezta negarrik ere , baizik eta zeuen erruengatik galduko zarete eta elkarren artean jardungo negar-zotinka .
PRED:	And when you see that I will be afraid , and you will not weep and mourning for your sins , and you will be put to shame . You will be put to shame among your people .
GOLD:	Your heads will remain covered , and your sandals will not be taken off . You will not mourn or weep , but you will waste away because of your sins . You will groan among yourselves for all the evil you have done .

ID:	5033
INPUT:	Jendeak oihu dagi : « Geure <unk> bagaituzte ere , ekin , Jauna , zeu zarena zarelako ! Asko dira gure errebeldiak , zure aurka egin dugu bekatu .
PRED:	The people shouted , “ Even if they were ready to know the Lord , you know how hard you have done , for we have sinned against you .
GOLD:	The people say , “ Our wickedness has caught up with us , Lord , but help us for the sake of your own reputation.We have turned away from youand sinned against you again and again .

ID:	5034
INPUT:	Hark epaituko ditu nazioak , erabakiko herrialde askoren auziak . Ezpatak golde bihurtuko dituzteeta lantzak igitai . Ez da nazioriknazioren aurka altxatuko , ez dira gehiagogudurako prestatuko .
PRED:	He will judge the nations against many nations , against distant lands of Assyria . They will not fall against war against war against distant lands . They will not fight against war against war .
GOLD:	The Lord will mediate between nationsand will settle international disputes.They will hammer their swords into plowsharesand their spears into pruning hooks.Nation will no longer fight against nation , nor train for war anymore .

ID:	5035
INPUT:	Hala ere , jende arrotz hark , bizi zen hiri guztietan , nork bere jainkoen irudiak egin eta samariarrek muinoetan eraikitako jauretxeetan ezarri zituen .
PRED:	However , the people of Israel , who lived in every town of worship — the gods of the god of every god of Baal , and he built them in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	But these various groups of foreigners also continued to worship their own gods . In town after town where they lived , they placed their idols at the pagan shrines that the people of Samaria had built .

ID:	5036
INPUT:	<unk> da xarma , hutsala edertasuna ; <unk> , ordea , Jauna errespetatzen duen emakumea .
PRED:	Yes , wisdom , wisdom , and wisdom will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	Charm is deceptive , and beauty does not last ; but a woman who fears the Lord will be greatly praised .

ID:	5037
INPUT:	Gaizki tratatu zuten , eta bera apaldu egin zen , ahorik zabaldu gabe ; hiltzera <unk> bezala , moztaileen aurrean isilik <unk> bezala , ez zuen ahorik zabaldu .
PRED:	So they were terrified and threw him into the air . But when they saw him , they saw that they were thrown into the hands of the sun , and they were thrown into the mouth of the sun .
GOLD:	He was oppressed and treated harshly , yet he never said a word.He was led like a lamb to the slaughter.And as a sheep is silent before the shearers , he did not open his mouth .

ID:	5038
INPUT:	Gaiztakeria ez da oinarri sendoa inorentzat ; zintzoaren sustraia , ordea , iraunkorra .
PRED:	Those who do not live in the light of the godly will be saved .
GOLD:	Wickedness never brings stability , but the godly have deep roots .

ID:	5039
INPUT:	eta beteko dut zuen gurasoei zin egindakoa , alegia , esnea eta eztia darizkion lurraldea emango niela ” . Lurralde hori orain daukazuena da , hain zuzen » . Nik erantzun nion : « Bai , Jauna » .
PRED:	I will give you the covenant I swore to give you as your ancestors , Isaac , honey , honey , honey , honey , honey , and honey , and honey , says the Lord , ‘ This is what the Lord says : ' ”
GOLD:	I said this so I could keep my promise to your ancestors to give you a land flowing with milk and honey — the land you live in today . ' ” Then I replied , “ Amen , Lord ! May it be so . ”

ID:	5040
INPUT:	kanta haren omenez , eman ohore hari <unk> .
PRED:	He has given him great honor , and he has given him great power .
GOLD:	Sing about the glory of his name ! Tell the world how glorious he is .

ID:	5041
INPUT:	sasi eta laharrak haziko <unk> herriaren lurraldean ; dolu egin , bai , alaitasunez beterik <unk> , hiri <unk> .
PRED:	The wild animals will be filled with joy , and the hills will be filled with joy when they were filled with joy , and when they were filled with joy .
GOLD:	For your land will be overgrown with thorns and briers.Your joyful homes and happy towns will be gone .

ID:	5042
INPUT:	« Honela agintzen du Pertsiako errege Zirok : Lurreko erreinu guztiak eman dizkit Jaunak , zeruetako Jainkoak , eta Judako Jerusalemen berari tenplua eraikitzeko agindu dit .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : He has given me all the kingdoms of the kingdoms of the earth , the God of Persia , and he has given me this Temple to build me .
GOLD:	“ This is what King Cyrus of Persia says : “ The Lord , the God of heaven , has given me all the kingdoms of the earth . He has appointed me to build him a Temple at Jerusalem , which is in Judah .

ID:	5043
INPUT:	Ez nahasi zuen inguruan gelditzen diren arrotzekin , ez aipatu ere egin horien jainkoen izenak , ez egin zinik beraien izenean , ez gurtu eta ez ahuspeztu beraien aurrean .
PRED:	Do n't let them destroy these things that they say , ‘ This is what they have done : Do not worship their gods , or they worship their gods . '
GOLD:	Make sure you do not associate with the other people still remaining in the land . Do not even mention the names of their gods , much less swear by them or serve them or worship them .

ID:	5044
INPUT:	Ondoren , esan zion Xafan idazkariak erregeari : — Hilkias apaizak liburu hau eman dit . Eta Xafanek irakurri egin zuen liburua erregearen aitzinean .
PRED:	Then Shaphan said to the king , “ This is what the priest had written in the scroll . ” So Shaphan read it to the scroll and read it to the scroll .
GOLD:	Shaphan also told the king , “ Hilkiah the priest has given me a scroll . ” So Shaphan read it to the king .

ID:	5045
INPUT:	<unk> amaitu zirenean , honela mintzatu zitzaien Jose faraoiaren jauregikoei : « <unk> banauzue , esaiozue , arren , faraoiari :
PRED:	When they saw him , they said to Pharaoh , “ I will punish Pharaoh 's officials , and I will bring him back to Pharaoh .
GOLD:	When the period of mourning was over , Joseph approached Pharaoh 's advisers and said , “ Please do me this favor and speak to Pharaoh on my behalf .

ID:	5046
INPUT:	Hiriaren lau aldeetan ehun eta hogeita bost metro zabaleko <unk> izango dira .
PRED:	There will be twenty years old , and they will be 150 feet long .
GOLD:	Open lands will surround the city for 150 yards in every direction .

ID:	5047
INPUT:	Zeren , egia ezagutu ondoren , nahita bekatu egiten jarraitzen badugu , ez dago gehiago bekatuen barkamenerako <unk> :
PRED:	For we know that we have been able to sin by sin , so that we have been able to sin by sin .
GOLD:	Dear friends , if we deliberately continue sinning after we have received knowledge of the truth , there is no longer any sacrifice that will cover these sins .

ID:	5048
INPUT:	Jaunak Moisesen bidez aginduriko guztia egin zuten Aaronek eta beronen semeek .
PRED:	So Moses did everything just as the Lord had commanded Moses and his sons .
GOLD:	So Aaron and his sons did everything the Lord had commanded through Moses .

ID:	5049
INPUT:	Ondoren , Hiramek brontzea urtu eta « Itsaso » deitu zuen uraska biribil bat egin zuen ; ertz batetik bestera bost metroko diametroa zuen , bi metro eta erdiko sakona eta hamabost metroko ingurua .
PRED:	Then he made a bronze basin on the Sea , and he called out the Sea of the Sea . He was 71/2 feet long and was 71/2 feet long .
GOLD:	Then Huram cast a great round basin , 15 feet across from rim to rim , called the Sea . It was 71/2 feet deep and about 45 feet in circumference .

ID:	5050
INPUT:	Eta gauzok idatzi , gure poza bete-betea izan dadin idazten ditugu .
PRED:	I am writing to write these words to you as hard as I have given you .
GOLD:	We are writing these things so that you may fully share our joy .

ID:	5051
INPUT:	Oi Jainko , hautsi horiei hortzak ahoan ! Jauna , puskatu lehoien haginak !
PRED:	O Sovereign Lord , they are their enemies ; they cut down their feet .
GOLD:	May they disappear like water into thirsty ground.Make their weapons useless in their hands .

ID:	5052
INPUT:	Jokatu argiaren partaide zaretenez
PRED:	The light of Life
GOLD:	Living in the Light

ID:	5053
INPUT:	Hobe eroapena adorea baino , nor bere buruaren jabe izatea hiriak menderatzea baino .
PRED:	It is better to comfort you ; love is better than your towns .
GOLD:	Better to be patient than powerful ; better to have self-control than to conquer a city .

ID:	5054
INPUT:	Purim Jaiaren sorrera
PRED:	Hope for the Festival of Shelters
GOLD:	The Festival of Purim

ID:	5055
INPUT:	Neuk jasoko dut eskua haien aurka , beren <unk> dituzte larrutuko » . Orduan jakingo duzueJaun ahalguztidunak bidali nauela .
PRED:	I will hand your hand against you , and they will know that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has sent me to know that I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will know that I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	Be silent before the Lord , all humanity , for he is springing into action from his holy dwelling . ”

ID:	5056
INPUT:	<unk> , Datan eta Abiramen aita . Datan eta Abiram hauek Moises eta Aaronen aurka <unk> <unk> ziren ; Koreren taldearekin bat egin zuten , hau Jaunaren aurka altxatu zenean .
PRED:	Yes , Korah , Korah , Dathan , and Abiram , Abiram and Abiram . Then the people of Aaron and Abiram came against him , and Moses and all the people of Israel came against him .
GOLD:	and Eliab was the father of Nemuel , Dathan , and Abiram . This Dathan and Abiram are the same community leaders who conspired with Korah against Moses and Aaron , rebelling against the Lord .

ID:	5057
INPUT:	Erakustazu , Jauna , zeure bidea , eraman nazazu bide zuzenetik , etsaiak ugari baititut .
PRED:	Give me your way to the Lord , so I can lead them away .
GOLD:	Teach me how to live , O Lord.Lead me along the right path , for my enemies are waiting for me .

ID:	5058
INPUT:	Baina nor zara zu , gizagaixo hori , Jainkoari kontuak eskatzeko ? <unk> ontziak esango ote dio buztinlariari : « Zergatik egin nauzu honelakoa ? »
PRED:	But why should you ask God that you bring the gifts of the Most High ? What should you say ? Why should you say , “ Why do you realize that I have done ? ”
GOLD:	No , do n't say that . Who are you , a mere human being , to argue with God ? Should the thing that was created say to the one who created it , “ Why have you made me like this ? ”

ID:	5059
INPUT:	oinak zepoan sartzen dizkit , nire ibilbide guztiak zelatatzen ” .
PRED:	My feet can not hide the path of my feet . '
GOLD:	He puts my feet in the stocksand watches my every move . '

ID:	5060
INPUT:	<unk> zuhurra <unk> du bihurtzen , eta eskupekoak bihotza usteltzen .
PRED:	For those who are wise , and the earth will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Extortion turns wise people into fools , and bribes corrupt the heart .

ID:	5061
INPUT:	Hala egingo dute apaiz nagusi sagaratuak izango diren Aaronen ondorengo guztiek ere . Betiko legea da . Jaunarentzat erreko dute oso-osorik oparia ;
PRED:	But the priest will be holy , and all the priests will be holy to the Lord . In this way , they will burn up the special offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	The priest on duty will take from the grain offering a handful of the choice flour moistened with olive oil , together with all the frankincense . He will burn this representative portion on the altar as a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	5062
INPUT:	Moabeko bizilagunok , utzi hiriak , joan harkaitzetara bizitzera , koba-zuloetan habia egiten <unk> antzera .
PRED:	Listen to the towns of Moab , to the towns of Moab in the land of Moab , like those who take refuge in the land of Moab .
GOLD:	“ You people of Moab , flee from your towns and live in the caves.Hide like doves that nestin the clefts of the rocks .

ID:	5063
INPUT:	David Jerusalemera itzularazi nahi
PRED:	David 's Return to Jerusalem
GOLD:	David 's Return to Jerusalem

ID:	5064
INPUT:	Bestela , lehoiak bezala harrapatueta <unk> egingo naute , eta ezin izango nau inork libratu .
PRED:	But if I have struck down and kill me , they will never be able to kill me .
GOLD:	O Lord my God , if I have done wrongor am guilty of injustice ,

ID:	5065
INPUT:	Ene maitearen ahotsa ! Horra , hor dator bera , mendiz mendi <unk> , <unk> muino jauzika ;
PRED:	Look , my voice is like shepherds , and they will see that they will see that they will be able to fall into the hills .
GOLD:	Ah , I hear my lover coming ! He is leaping over the mountains , bounding over the hills .

ID:	5066
INPUT:	Agurtu Priska eta Akila , baita <unk> etxekoak ere .
PRED:	Greet all the brothers and sisters , so that everyone else could be very rich .
GOLD:	Give my greetings to Priscilla and Aquila and those living in the household of Onesiphorus .

ID:	5067
INPUT:	Harengan <unk> eta oinarrituak , iraun sendo sinesmenean , irakatsi zaizuen bezala , eta eman eskerrak etengabe .
PRED:	In fact , you can be able to live in the faith of God , so that you can continue to obey him .
GOLD:	Let your roots grow down into him , and let your lives be built on him . Then your faith will grow strong in the truth you were taught , and you will overflow with thankfulness .

ID:	5068
INPUT:	Ezarri bertan itun-kutxa eta estali errezelaz .
PRED:	Place the Ark of the Covenant , and the Ark of the Covenant with the Ark of the Covenant .
GOLD:	Place the Ark of the Covenant inside , and install the inner curtain to enclose the Ark within the Most Holy Place .

ID:	5069
INPUT:	<unk> <unk>
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Zalmunna
GOLD:	Tribe

ID:	5070
INPUT:	Bere egintzen <unk> zor zaio aintza Jainkoari , arazoak aztertu eta <unk> erregeari .
PRED:	He has given authority to those who are wise , and they are able to obey God 's power .
GOLD:	It is God 's privilege to conceal thingsand the king 's privilege to discover them .

ID:	5071
INPUT:	( 10 , 12-16 )
PRED:	Jesus Is Betrayed and Arrested
GOLD:	Babylon 's Great Punishment

ID:	5072
INPUT:	Egin dituzten gaiztakeriengatik gertatu zaie hori : iraindu egin naute , ez zuek , ez zuen gurasoek , ez beraiek ezagutzen ez zenituzten jainkoei intsentsua errez eta kultua emanez .
PRED:	Because of the sins of their sins , I have sinned against you . You have not made my ancestors , and you have not abandoned me and burning incense .
GOLD:	They provoked my anger with all their wickedness . They burned incense and worshiped other gods — gods that neither they nor you nor any of your ancestors had ever even known .

ID:	5073
INPUT:	Gaiztoen hitzak heriotzako tranpa dira ; zintzoenak , berriz , <unk> bide .
PRED:	The tongue of the earth will be able to see that the wicked will be filled with power .
GOLD:	The words of the wicked are like a murderous ambush , but the words of the godly save lives .

ID:	5074
INPUT:	Ekialdeko jakintsu batzuek Jesus gurtu
PRED:	Parable of the Dead Sea
GOLD:	Visitors from the East

ID:	5075
INPUT:	Jainkoak bere eskuinaldera altxatu du , buru eta salbatzaile eginez , Israeli bihozberritzea eta bekatuen barkamena emateko .
PRED:	God has given him victory over all his people , and he has given them to their sins .
GOLD:	Then God put him in the place of honor at his right hand as Prince and Savior . He did this so the people of Israel would repent of their sins and be forgiven .

ID:	5076
INPUT:	ez baitira Jainkoaren aurrean zuzen legea entzun bakarrik egiten dutenak , bete ere egiten dutenak baizik .
PRED:	For God does not listen to the law of God , but those who obey God .
GOLD:	For merely listening to the law does n't make us right with God . It is obeying the law that makes us right in his sight .

ID:	5077
INPUT:	Bere <unk> zeruko izarren herena <unk> hartu eta lurrera jaurti zuen . Herensugea , haurra izateko zegoen emakumearen aitzinean gelditu zen , jaio bezain laster semea irensteko .
PRED:	At that time he threw down from heaven and threw them into the sky , and he fell on the ground . She was born to the ground , and she became very beautiful .
GOLD:	His tail swept away one-third of the stars in the sky , and he threw them to the earth . He stood in front of the woman as she was about to give birth , ready to devour her baby as soon as it was born .

ID:	5078
INPUT:	Davidek Ximeiri barkatu
PRED:	David 's Final Words
GOLD:	David 's Mercy to Shimei

ID:	5079
INPUT:	Joab eta beronekin ziren mutil guztiak heldu zirenean , honela esan zioten batzuek Joabi : « Ner-en seme Abner etorri zaio erregeari eta , honek agur eginik , bakean joan da hura » .
PRED:	Then Joab and his men went to Joab and told him , “ Peter 's son , ” he told Joab . “ He was a commander of his army , and he went in peace . ”
GOLD:	When Joab arrived , he was told that Abner had just been there visiting the king and had been sent away in safety .

ID:	5080
INPUT:	Anaiek bekaitzez begiratzen zioten ; aitak , ordea , gauza hauek sarritan hausnartzen zituen .
PRED:	But when his father was born , he became very angry with them .
GOLD:	But while his brothers were jealous of Joseph , his father wondered what the dreams meant .

ID:	5081
INPUT:	Lotsaz eta laidoz beterik , bai , laidoz <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	They will be filled with joy and filled with shame .
GOLD:	All craftsmen who make idols will be humiliated.They will all be disgraced together .

ID:	5082
INPUT:	zuek bildu gabeko <unk> guztiz beteriko etxeak , zuek zulatu gabeko putzuak , zuek landatu gabeko mahasti eta olibadiak . Asetzeraino jan ahal izango duzue .
PRED:	And if you were poor , you must have enough enough food to eat , and you will grow in the fields , and you will eat as much as much as you wanted .
GOLD:	The houses will be richly stocked with goods you did not produce . You will draw water from cisterns you did not dig , and you will eat from vineyards and olive trees you did not plant . When you have eaten your fill in this land ,

ID:	5083
INPUT:	Ikus nire atsekabea eta pena , barka nire bekatu guztiak .
PRED:	I have seen my heart , and I have sinned against all my sins .
GOLD:	Feel my pain and see my trouble.Forgive all my sins .

ID:	5084
INPUT:	Askatu gizagaixo eta behartsuak , libratu gaizkileen eskutik ! »
PRED:	You rescue the poor and the poor ; rescue the poor from the Almighty . ”
GOLD:	Rescue the poor and helpless ; deliver them from the grasp of evil people .

ID:	5085
INPUT:	Zabulonen leinukoek ezin izan zituzten bota <unk> eta <unk> hirietako bizilagunak . Kanaandarrak zabulondarren artean bizi izan ziren , baina lanera <unk> .
PRED:	The men of Zebulun could not drive out the town of Zebulun and those who had been killed by the towns of Zebulun . But when they saw that they had been able to work among the people of Israel .
GOLD:	The tribe of Zebulun failed to drive out the residents of Kitron and Nahalol , so the Canaanites continued to live among them . But the Canaanites were forced to work as slaves for the people of Zebulun .

ID:	5086
INPUT:	Ondoren , <unk> eta <unk> joan zen Salomon . Hiri hauek Itsaso Gorriaren ertzean daude , Edom lurraldean .
PRED:	Then when they came and saw that the city of Edom were in the Red Sea .
GOLD:	Later Solomon went to Ezion-geber and Elath , ports along the shore of the Red Sea in the land of Edom .

ID:	5087
INPUT:	Jehu hiriko atetik sartzean , Jezabelek esan zuen : — Ongi al zara , Zimri zeure jaunaren hiltzaile hori ?
PRED:	When Jehu was going into the city , he told him , “ Why are you doing this ? ”
GOLD:	When Jehu entered the gate of the palace , she shouted at him , “ Have you come in peace , you murderer ? You 're just like Zimri , who murdered his master ! ”

ID:	5088
INPUT:	Mendiak <unk> izan aurretik , muinoak baino lehen izan nintzen sortua ;
PRED:	When I was in the place of worship , I was born before the mountains .
GOLD:	Before the mountains were formed , before the hills , I was born —

ID:	5089
INPUT:	Esterrek ihardetsi zion : — Erregeak ongi baderitzo , utz diezaiela Susako juduei bihar ere gaurko aginduaren arabera egiten , eta <unk> ditzatela urkabean Hamanen hamar semeen gorpuak .
PRED:	But Esther replied , “ If you do whatever the Jews do , we must do , ” the king told him . “ If the Jews have been killed , we must serve as well as the king had commanded . ”
GOLD:	Esther responded , “ If it please the king , give the Jews in Susa permission to do again tomorrow as they have done today , and let the bodies of Haman 's ten sons be impaled on a pole . ”

ID:	5090
INPUT:	Ez al dakizue harresi gainetik <unk> egiten dutela ? Ez al zarete oroitzen nola hil zuen emakume batek <unk> hirian <unk> seme Abimelek , harresi gainetik errotarri bat jaurtiz ? Zergatik hurbildu zarete harresiraino ? ” Orduan , zuk erantzun : “ Zure zerbitzari Urias hitita ere hila da ” » .
PRED:	Do n't you realize that some of the city will be able to kill you ? Or when he was killed , a man who was killed in the city , he asked him , ‘ Why are you dead ? '
GOLD:	Was n't Abimelech son of Gideon killed at Thebez by a woman who threw a millstone down on him from the wall ? Why would you get so close to the wall ? ' Then tell him , ‘ Uriah the Hittite was killed , too . ' ”

ID:	5091
INPUT:	Eta hori , nik ere <unk> giza mailako gauzetan uste ona jartzeko arrazoia . Norbaitek gauza horietan uste ona jar dezakeela pentsatzen badu , nik gehiago :
PRED:	And if I have been unfaithful to the human beings , they can be able to be greater than any other than any other than any other .
GOLD:	though I could have confidence in my own effort if anyone could . Indeed , if others have reason for confidence in their own efforts , I have even more !

ID:	5092
INPUT:	Egin zuen , beraz , Samuelek Jaunak esandakoa , eta Belenera joan zen . Hiri hartako zaharrak bidera irten zitzaizkion arduratsu , eta galdetu zioten : — Bake onean al zatoz ?
PRED:	So Samuel told Samuel what the Lord had told him , “ When the people of Israel , the city of the city came to meet him , and he could see him . ”
GOLD:	So Samuel did as the Lord instructed . When he arrived at Bethlehem , the elders of the town came trembling to meet him . “ What 's wrong ? ” they asked . “ Do you come in peace ? ”

ID:	5093
INPUT:	Orroka ari den lehoia eta hartz <unk> <unk> gaiztoa herri <unk> .
PRED:	A lion will be like a lion , and his people will be filled with great power .
GOLD:	A wicked ruler is as dangerous to the pooras a roaring lion or an attacking bear .

ID:	5094
INPUT:	Moisesek lehengoak bezalako bi harlauza ebaki zituen . Eta biharamunean , goizean goiz , harlauza biak harturik , Sinai mendira igo zen , Jaunak agindu bezala .
PRED:	So Moses made two stone tablets as the next morning . Then he took them on the next morning , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	So Moses chiseled out two tablets of stone like the first ones . Early in the morning he climbed Mount Sinai as the Lord had commanded him , and he carried the two stone tablets in his hands .

ID:	5095
INPUT:	Herri honetako gorpuak hegazti harraparien eta basapiztien janari izango dira , eta haiek uxatzeko inor ez da izango .
PRED:	All the birds of the earth will eat the birds of the earth , and they will not eat their bodies , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	The bodies of my people will be food for the vultures and wild animals , and no one will be left to scare them away .

ID:	5096
INPUT:	<unk> badut , berriz , lehoiak bezala harrapatuko nauzu , zure <unk> nire kontra <unk> ,
PRED:	But if I have seen , I will kill you like a lion , and I will kill you .
GOLD:	And if I hold my head high , you hunt me like a lionand display your awesome power against me .

ID:	5097
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> sua egiten du , eta gainean okela erre eta asetzeraino jaten . Ondoren , su ondoan berotzen da eta esaten : « Ederki ! Bero-bero nago ! A zer <unk> ! »
PRED:	And if they are slaughtered by fire , they will eat the meat and eat it on the ground , they eat the meat that are eating and burned , and they say , “ I am going to eat ! ”
GOLD:	He burns part of the tree to roast his meatand to keep himself warm.He says , “ Ah , that fire feels good . ”

ID:	5098
INPUT:	« Madarikatua errugabea <unk> eskupekoa onartzen duena ! » Eta herri osoak erantzungo du : « Amen » .
PRED:	“ Cursed is those who are those who hear the innocent will say , ‘ Amen . ' ”
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who accepts payment to kill an innocent person . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	5099
INPUT:	Efraimgo mendialdean gorderik zeuden israeldar guztiak ere , filistearrak ihesi zihoazela ohartzean , <unk> bildu ziren , filistearren ondoren erasoka joateko .
PRED:	All the people of Israel came from the hill country of Ephraim , and all the people of Ephraim , who were terrified by their enemies .
GOLD:	Likewise , the men of Israel who were hiding in the hill country of Ephraim joined the chase when they saw the Philistines running away .

ID:	5100
INPUT:	Deitu zien honek Kareahen seme <unk> , gudalburuei eta beraiekin zen jende guztiari , txiki nahiz handiei ,
PRED:	Then he called out the other military leaders and all the women who were wise and women and women who were wise .
GOLD:	So he called for Johanan son of Kareah and the other military leaders , and for all the people , from the least to the greatest .

ID:	5101
INPUT:	Jesus mendira igo eta han eseri zen bere ikasleekin .
PRED:	Jesus left the mountain and sat down on the mountain .
GOLD:	Then Jesus climbed a hill and sat down with his disciples around him .

ID:	5102
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Daviden salmoa . Kanta .
PRED:	Let me be glad , O God , for all who fear me .
GOLD:	Rise up , O God , and scatter your enemies.Let those who hate God run for their lives .

ID:	5103
INPUT:	Honek , lagun haien sinesmena ikusirik , esan zuen : — Gizona , barkatuak dituzu bekatuak .
PRED:	But when he saw these things , he said , “ Your sins are forgiven , and your sins are forgiven . ”
GOLD:	Seeing their faith , Jesus said to the man , “ Young man , your sins are forgiven . ”

ID:	5104
INPUT:	« Kedemot basamortutik mezulariak bidali nizkion Hexbongo Sihon erregeari bakezko mezu honekin :
PRED:	“ You sent this message to King Sihon of the Amorites :
GOLD:	Moses continued , “ From the wilderness of Kedemoth I sent ambassadors to King Sihon of Heshbon with this proposal of peace :

ID:	5105
INPUT:	Kutxa abiatzerakoan , Moisesek zioen : « Jaiki , Jauna , eta sakabana daitezela zure etsaiak , bihoaz ihesi gorroto <unk> ! »
PRED:	Then Moses left the Ark of the Lord and told them , “ Get up , your enemies , and those who hate your enemies , and those who hate you . ”
GOLD:	And whenever the Ark set out , Moses would shout , “ Arise , O Lord , and let your enemies be scattered ! Let them flee before you ! ”

ID:	5106
INPUT:	<unk> putzuak egin dituteta bertako ura edan ; oinpean zapalduz lehortu egin <unk> ubide guztiak ” .
PRED:	I have filled with all the trees that were filled with water , and I fed all the trees that were filled with water . '
GOLD:	I have dug wells in many foreign landsand refreshed myself with their water.With the sole of my footI stopped up all the rivers of Egypt ! '

ID:	5107
INPUT:	Orduan , esan zien ikasleei : — Non da zuen sinesmena ? Haiek , beldurrez eta harriturik , elkarri ziotsaten : « Nor ote dugu hau , haizeari eta urari ere agindu eta esana egiten baitiote ? »
PRED:	Then he said to his disciples , “ Where are the faith ? ” “ Who were afraid ? ” they asked . “ Who is the saying , ‘ Who is this ? '
GOLD:	Then he asked them , “ Where is your faith ? ” The disciples were terrified and amazed . “ Who is this man ? ” they asked each other . “ When he gives a command , even the wind and waves obey him ! ”

ID:	5108
INPUT:	<unk> egingo zaituzte , koroak burua eta <unk> lepoa bezala .
PRED:	And when the spirit will be handed over to you , and they will serve you as weak as weak as a flood .
GOLD:	What you learn from them will crown you with graceand be a chain of honor around your neck .

ID:	5109
INPUT:	Igaro zirenean , esan zion Eliasek Eliseori : — Esadazu zer nahi duzun nik zure alde egitea , Jaunak zure ondotik eraman nazan baino lehen . Eliseok erantzun : — Izan nadila , otoi , zure <unk> oinordeko .
PRED:	When the people of Israel arrived at Gilgal , Elijah said to Elisha , “ Tell me what the Lord has promised me to me . ” But the Lord said , “ I have given you the cup of my lord the Lord . ”
GOLD:	When they came to the other side , Elijah said to Elisha , “ Tell me what I can do for you before I am taken away . ” And Elisha replied , “ Please let me inherit a double share of your spirit and become your successor . ”

ID:	5110
INPUT:	« Ez naiz aurrerantzean munduan egongo ; hauek , ordea , bai , munduan jarraituko dute . Ni zuregana noa . Aita santu horrek , zaindu zeure ahalmenaz zuk eman <unk> , bat izan daitezen gu geu bat garen bezala .
PRED:	“ I will not be sure that I will be your Father , but they will live in the world . But now I am the Father who gives you to you , and we will know that we have given you as our Father .
GOLD:	Now I am departing from the world ; they are staying in this world , but I am coming to you . Holy Father , you have given me your name ; now protect them by the power of your name so that they will be united just as we are .

ID:	5111
INPUT:	Kristoren zerbitzariak direla ? Ni gehiago , nahiz zorakeria izan hori esatea . Haiek baino neke gehiago jasan dut , kartzela gehiago , <unk> zer esanik ez ; hilzorian ere egona naiz hamaika aldiz .
PRED:	And why are you ashamed of Christ ? Even though I have been unfaithful to God 's officials , we have been better than some of us . I have been beaten , and we have no more than some of them .
GOLD:	Are they servants of Christ ? I know I sound like a madman , but I have served him far more ! I have worked harder , been put in prison more often , been whipped times without number , and faced death again and again .

ID:	5112
INPUT:	Efraimen leinuko senitarteak : <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ,
PRED:	These were the clans of Ephraim , the clans of the clans of the tribe of Ephraim , who were filled with great power .
GOLD:	These were the clans descended from the sons of Ephraim : The Shuthelahite clan , named after their ancestor Shuthelah.The Bekerite clan , named after their ancestor Beker.The Tahanite clan , named after their ancestor Tahan .

ID:	5113
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « <unk> bestearen <unk> ditut egiptoarrak , eta elkarren <unk> dira : senidea <unk> adiskidea adiskidearen aurka , hiria <unk> erresuma erresumaren aurka .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will see that that the Egyptians and prophets and prophets and prophets and prophets have been unfaithful to me , and I will be very angry with you . ”
GOLD:	“ I will make Egyptian fight against Egyptian — brother against brother , neighbor against neighbor , city against city , province against province .

ID:	5114
INPUT:	Aldi txarren ondoren , lasai biziarazten duzu , gaiztoentzat hilobia zulatzen duten bitartean .
PRED:	At that time you have given the wise life , and the wicked care of the wicked .
GOLD:	You give them relief from troubled timesuntil a pit is dug to capture the wicked .

ID:	5115
INPUT:	berrogeita zortzi hiri , beraz , guztira , bakoitza bere herri-lurrekin .
PRED:	So all around each other towns with each other towns with each other .
GOLD:	In all , forty-eight towns with the surrounding pastureland will be given to the Levites .

ID:	5116
INPUT:	« Gaden eta Rubenen ondorengoei , Jaunaren agindura borrokatzeko armaturik zuekin batera Jordan ibaia igarotzen badute , lurraldea menderatu ondoren , Galaad eskualdea emango diezue ondare .
PRED:	“ The people of Reuben and Gad will cross to fight the Jordan River , and they will cross the Jordan River to fight the Jordan River .
GOLD:	He said , “ The men of Gad and Reuben who are armed for battle must cross the Jordan with you to fight for the Lord . If they do , give them the land of Gilead as their property when the land is conquered .

ID:	5117
INPUT:	Beste anaia bat ere bidaltzen dizuet berarekin , berri onaren zerbitzuan egin duen lanarengatik eliz elkarte guztiek goraipatzen dutena .
PRED:	I am sending you into the church , and I have given you the Good News for all the believers in the church .
GOLD:	We are also sending another brother with Titus . All the churches praise him as a preacher of the Good News .

ID:	5118
INPUT:	Bidea zabalagotu <unk> nire oinak ez dira oztopatu .
PRED:	I saw that they were afraid of my enemies , and they would not stop them .
GOLD:	You have made a wide path for my feetto keep them from slipping .

ID:	5119
INPUT:	Haizea bezala , batera nahiz bestera , aurrera doaz . Indarra dute beren jainko » .
PRED:	Instead , be careful to keep your idols , and they will be forgiven . ”
GOLD:	They sweep past like the windand are gone.But they are deeply guilty , for their own strength is their god . ”

ID:	5120
INPUT:	Ondoren , ikuskari bat izan nuen . <unk> ate bat ikusi nuen zeruan , eta lehen <unk> zitzaidan turuta-hotsa bezalako ahotsak esan zuen : « Igo hona , eta ondoren <unk> direnak erakutsiko dizkizut » .
PRED:	Then I saw a man who saw me , and I saw that I saw a man in heaven , and I saw that I had seen , and I said , “ I am the Lord , and I know that I am going to know that I am with you . ”
GOLD:	Then as I looked , I saw a door standing open in heaven , and the same voice I had heard before spoke to me like a trumpet blast . The voice said , “ Come up here , and I will show you what must happen after this . ”

ID:	5121
INPUT:	Moisesek zenbait gizon bidali zituen Jazer hiria ikertzera , eta israeldarrek Jazer eta inguruko hiriak eskuratu zituzten , beraietako amortarrak jaurtiz .
PRED:	So Moses sent them out of the towns of the Jordan River , along with the towns of the Canaanites , and the people of the Amorites , along with them .
GOLD:	After Moses sent men to explore the Jazer area , they captured all the towns in the region and drove out the Amorites who lived there .

ID:	5122
INPUT:	Jauna , ene Jainkoa , zu nire indar salbatzailea , guduan burua babesten didazuna .
PRED:	O Lord , listen to my enemies ; you have heard my voice .
GOLD:	Lord , do not let evil people have their way.Do not let their evil schemes succeed , or they will become proud.Interlude

ID:	5123
INPUT:	Rubenen ondorengoek Hexbon , Elale , Kiriataim , Nebo , <unk> eta <unk> berreraiki zituzten , eta <unk> hiriei izena aldatu zieten .
PRED:	The descendants of Reuben , Gad , and Elijah , and Elijah , and Elijah , and all the towns of Midian , and Samaria , who had been defeated by the name of the tribe of Gad .
GOLD:	The descendants of Reuben built the towns of Heshbon , Elealeh , Kiriathaim ,

ID:	5124
INPUT:	Mirariak eta egintza <unk> zenituen faraoiaren kontra , honen <unk> Egiptoko herriaren kontra ; <unk> , bai , harrokeriaz jokatu <unk> . Horrela zeureganatu <unk> duzun izen ospetsua .
PRED:	I will punish you with all the power of Egypt , and when they were against Egypt , I will punish you with your people of Egypt , and they will be ashamed of your power .
GOLD:	You displayed miraculous signs and wonders against Pharaoh , his officials , and all his people , for you knew how arrogantly they were treating our ancestors . You have a glorious reputation that has never been forgotten .

ID:	5125
INPUT:	Neftali , Efraim eta <unk> , Judaren lurralde guztia Mediterraneo itsasoraino ,
PRED:	I will give you the boundaries of the Mediterranean Sea , and all the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	all the land of Naphtali ; the land of Ephraim and Manasseh ; all the land of Judah , extending to the Mediterranean Sea ;

ID:	5126
INPUT:	Hori ikustean , harritu egingo dira <unk> barre egingo diote , esanez :
PRED:	When they see what they are going , they will be able to kill him .
GOLD:	But I am like an olive tree , thriving in the house of God.I will always trust in God 's unfailing love .

ID:	5127
INPUT:	<unk> arkume edo <unk> trukatuko duzue ; trukatzen ez baduzue , hil egingo duzue , lepoa hautsiz . Zuen lehen-semeak oro berreskuratu egingo dituzue , ordezko eskaintza eginez . Ez da inor nire aurrera esku-hutsik agertuko .
PRED:	And if you have been unfaithful to the Lord , you must not destroy your firstborn sons and if you do not destroy your firstborn sons , you must not cut off your firstborn firstborn sons , and you must not eat it with my firstborn sons .
GOLD:	A firstborn donkey may be bought back from the Lord by presenting a lamb or young goat in its place . But if you do not buy it back , you must break its neck . However , you must buy back every firstborn son . “ No one may appear before me without an offering .

ID:	5128
INPUT:	Haragia egosi deneko ontzia <unk> bada , hautsi egingo da ; brontzezkoa bada , berriz , gogor igurtzi eta uretan garbituko .
PRED:	“ Suppose a bird falls into the boat , it will be cut down to pieces of bronze , and he will pour out the water into the water .
GOLD:	It must be carefully mixed with olive oil and cooked on a griddle . Then slice this grain offering and present it as a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	5129
INPUT:	Gu , berriz , <unk> ondoren atera ginen itsasoz <unk> , eta bost egunen buruan bildu ginen haiekin Troaden , eta astebete egin genuen bertan .
PRED:	But we came out to know where we had come from Macedonia , and we came to the island of Cyprus and some of us . We went to Macedonia and stayed with them .
GOLD:	After the Passover ended , we boarded a ship at Philippi in Macedonia and five days later joined them in Troas , where we stayed a week .

ID:	5130
INPUT:	Aldi hartan , <unk> zeritzan Jerusalemgo erregeak jakin zuen Josuek Ai hiria hartu eta erabat suntsitu zuela , Ai hiriari eta bertako erregeari , lehen <unk> eta bertako erregeari egindakoa bera eginez . Jakin zuen , orobat , Gabaongo bizilagunek bake-hitzarmena egin zutela israeldarrekin eta beraiekin elkartu zirela .
PRED:	At that time the king of Jerusalem heard that the city of Jerusalem had been killed , and when Joshua destroyed all the people of Israel and all the people of Israel , he destroyed all the people of Israel and the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Adoni-zedek , king of Jerusalem , heard that Joshua had captured and completely destroyed Ai and killed its king , just as he had destroyed the town of Jericho and killed its king . He also learned that the Gibeonites had made peace with Israel and were now their allies .

ID:	5131
INPUT:	Jaunak agindu zion Jeremiasi : « Zoaz eta erosi buztinezko pitxer bat . Eraman zeurekin <unk> eta <unk> batzuk .
PRED:	Then the Lord gave this message to Jeremiah : “ Go and give them a clay clay clay clay clay clay pot , and some of them . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord said to me : “ Go and buy a clay jar . Then ask some of the leaders of the people and of the priests to follow you .

ID:	5132
INPUT:	Baina gudari batek gezia itsu-itsuan jaurti eta Israelgo erregea zauritu zuen bular-oskolaren juntura artetik . Orduan , erregeak esan zion gurdi-gidariari : — Itzuli eta atera nazazu guda-zelaitik . Zauritu egin naute .
PRED:	But one of the Israelite troops cut off his feet , and the king of Israel 's army against the king of Israel . “ Come out ! ” he shouted . “ I am sending me out of the chariots and charioteers . ”
GOLD:	An Aramean soldier , however , randomly shot an arrow at the Israelite troops and hit the king of Israel between the joints of his armor . “ Turn the horses and get me out of here ! ” Ahab groaned to the driver of the chariot . “ I 'm badly wounded ! ”

ID:	5133
INPUT:	Nork aurpegi eman haren <unk> ? Nork zutik iraun hura agertzean ? <unk> <unk> sua bezala , arropa garbitzeko <unk> bezala izango da .
PRED:	Who will be able to kill him ? Who will be able ? Who will be able to be filled with fire ? For when they were filled with blood , and they will be filled with blood .
GOLD:	“ But who will be able to endure it when he comes ? Who will be able to stand and face him when he appears ? For he will be like a blazing fire that refines metal , or like a strong soap that bleaches clothes .

ID:	5134
INPUT:	Nik , Jaunarengatik preso nagoen honek , hartu duzuen deiari dagokionez bizi zaiteztela eskatzen dizuet .
PRED:	I am the Lord with you in prison , for you must live in prison .
GOLD:	Therefore I , a prisoner for serving the Lord , beg you to lead a life worthy of your calling , for you have been called by God .

ID:	5135
INPUT:	« Gora Jauna , bedeinkatua ene harkaitza ! Goretsia Jainkoa , salbatzen nauen haitza !
PRED:	“ Praise the Lord , the God of my God ; he has rejected me .
GOLD:	“ The Lord lives ! Praise to my Rock ! May God , the Rock of my salvation , be exalted !

ID:	5136
INPUT:	Davidek bizia barkatu Sauli
PRED:	David Becomes Israel 's Judge
GOLD:	David Spares Saul 's Life

ID:	5137
INPUT:	Israelgo erregeak erantzun zion Josafati . — Bai , bada beste gizon bat : Mikeas , Imlaren semea . Galdegin diezaiokegu Jaunari horren bidez ; baina nik gorroto dut , gauza txarrak bakarrik iragartzen baitizkit , onak iragarri beharrean . Josafatek esan zion : — Ez zaitez horrela mintza , errege jauna .
PRED:	The king of Israel replied to Jehoshaphat , “ How can we be a man of Israel ? ” But Ahab said , “ Ahab 's son ! ” But Jehoshaphat said , “ I am going to save you . ”
GOLD:	The king of Israel replied to Jehoshaphat , “ There is one more man who could consult the Lord for us , but I hate him . He never prophesies anything but trouble for me ! His name is Micaiah son of Imlah . ” Jehoshaphat replied , “ That 's not the way a king should talk ! Let 's hear what he has to say . ”

ID:	5138
INPUT:	<unk> barkamen-oparitzat eta bestea erre-oparitzat eskainiko ditu apaizak , eta haren alde barkamen-ohikunea egingo du , gorpua ukitzean eginiko <unk> . Egun horretan berriro sagaratuko dio nazireuak bere burua Jaunari .
PRED:	For the priest will offer one of the young goat as a sin offering , and he will bring them to the Lord 's body . He will bring an offering to the Lord 's body .
GOLD:	The priest will offer one of the birds for a sin offering and the other for a burnt offering . In this way , he will purify them from the guilt they incurred through contact with the dead body . Then they must reaffirm their commitment and let their hair begin to grow again .

ID:	5139
INPUT:	Emazte jatorra senarraren koroa , emazte lotsagabea <unk> parekoa .
PRED:	My wife , a crown of honor , your wife , and when you harvest with your wife .
GOLD:	A worthy wife is a crown for her husband , but a disgraceful woman is like cancer in his bones .

ID:	5140
INPUT:	<unk> hitzek liskarra sortzen , beraren mintzoak kolpeak erakartzen .
PRED:	But those who were wise , and he replied , “ Your Majesty . ”
GOLD:	Fools ' words get them into constant quarrels ; they are asking for a beating .

ID:	5141
INPUT:	Zuregatik jasan ditut irainak , zuregatik estali dit lotsak aurpegia .
PRED:	My enemies are filled with pain ; they are filled with pain .
GOLD:	Even my own brothers pretend they do n't know me ; they treat me like a stranger .

ID:	5142
INPUT:	« Jerusalemgo hiriak hamabi ate izango ditu , eta bakoitzak Israelgo leinu baten izena izango du . Iparraldeko harresiak , bi kilometro eta laurden luze , hiru ate izango ditu : Ruben , Juda eta <unk> .
PRED:	“ The city will be the city of Jerusalem , and the tribes of Israel will be called to the north , and the tribe of Israel will be my name , and the city of Judah will be called to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	“ These will be the exits to the city : On the north wall , which is 11/2 miles long ,

ID:	5143
INPUT:	Etorriko zaie , bai , senar berria kenduko dieten eguna ; orduan , egun hartan , egingo dute barau .
PRED:	But now the groom will be taken away , and they will fast and fast .
GOLD:	But someday the groom will be taken away from them , and then they will fast .

ID:	5144
INPUT:	atxilotu eta ekartzeko aginduko dute beraren hiriko arduradunek eta mendeku-eskubidea duenaren esku utziko , hil dezan .
PRED:	He will take some of the prisoners to take the case of the city , and they will die in the city .
GOLD:	In that case , the elders of the murderer 's hometown must send agents to the city of refuge to bring him back and hand him over to the dead person 's avenger to be put to death .

ID:	5145
INPUT:	Isaiasek Jesusi buruz esan zuen hau , ikusia baitzuen beraren Jainko-aintza .
PRED:	This message came to Jesus in the book of his glory .
GOLD:	Isaiah was referring to Jesus when he said this , because he saw the future and spoke of the Messiah 's glory .

ID:	5146
INPUT:	Horra ! Gizakiak ezin du bere burua salbatu , ezta Jainkoari bere biziaren erospen-saria ordaindu ere .
PRED:	No one can ever be saved ; he can not save his life .
GOLD:	Redemption does not come so easily , for no one can ever pay enough

ID:	5147
INPUT:	Horregatik ziotson Abrahamek Jainkoari : — Ai , Ismaeli bederen bizirik eutsiko <unk> !
PRED:	So Abraham said to God , “ What are you doing ? ”
GOLD:	So Abraham said to God , “ May Ishmael live under your special blessing ! ”

ID:	5148
INPUT:	Jaunak zabaltzen itsuen begiak , Jaunak altxatzen lur jota daudenak . Jaunak maitatzen zintzoak ,
PRED:	The Lord is coming from the eyes of the wicked , and those who see the wicked will be destroyed .
GOLD:	The Lord opens the eyes of the blind.The Lord lifts up those who are weighed down.The Lord loves the godly .

ID:	5149
INPUT:	Bitartean , aukerako hamar mila gudari , Israel <unk> , Gibearen aurrez aurre jarri ziren . <unk> latza izan zen eta benjamindarrak ez ziren ohartu gainera zetorkien <unk> .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the men of Israel mobilized the men of Israel , men of Benjamin , who were men of Israel against the army of Benjamin , and they were afraid of Benjamin , and they were afraid of Benjamin .
GOLD:	There were 10,000 elite Israelite troops who advanced against Gibeah . The fighting was so heavy that Benjamin did n't realize the impending disaster .

ID:	5150
INPUT:	Etsaiak gaizki-esaka ari zaizkit : « Noiz hil behar ote du ? Noiz galduko ote honen izena ? »
PRED:	“ How long will I die ? ” they shouted . “ How long will you die ? ”
GOLD:	They visit me as if they were my friends , but all the while they gather gossip , and when they leave , they spread it everywhere .

ID:	5151
INPUT:	Goratu Jauna , gure Jainkoa , ahuspeztu haren oin-aulki aurrean ! Santua da bera !
PRED:	May the Lord our God forever and worship him ; he is the Holy One of his sanctuary .
GOLD:	Exalt the Lord our God ! Bow low before his feet , for he is holy !

ID:	5152
INPUT:	Gedeonek jendea errekara jaitsarazi zuenean , Jaunak esan zion : « Bereiz itzazu ura eskuan hartu eta zakurrek bezala <unk> edango dutenak , edateko belauniko jarriko <unk> » .
PRED:	When Gideon realized that the Lord had spoken to them , he said to the people of Israel , “ Let them drink with water , as they were filled with water . ”
GOLD:	When Gideon took his warriors down to the water , the Lord told him , “ Divide the men into two groups . In one group put all those who cup water in their hands and lap it up with their tongues like dogs . In the other group put all those who kneel down and drink with their mouths in the stream . ”

ID:	5153
INPUT:	Etiopia , Put , Lud eta <unk> osoa , <unk> eta herrialde aliatu <unk> gerran eroriko <unk> batera .
PRED:	Come , Ethiopia , Elam , and all the people of Tyre and Samaria — those who were surrounded by the sword of Samaria and Samaria .
GOLD:	Ethiopia , Libya , Lydia , all Arabia , and all their other allieswill be destroyed in that war .

ID:	5154
INPUT:	Orduan , apaiz nagusiak zutitu eta galdetu zion : — Ez al diezu deus erantzun behar zure kontra ateratzen dituztenei ?
PRED:	Then the high priest stood up and asked him , “ Do n't you realize that you do n't let them fall against you ? ”
GOLD:	Then the high priest stood up and said to Jesus , “ Well , are n't you going to answer these charges ? What do you have to say for yourself ? ”

ID:	5155
INPUT:	Bihotz-bihotzez bilatzen dut zure mesedea : erruki nitaz , hitzemana duzunez !
PRED:	I have heard your unfailing love , O Lord , for I have heard your unfailing love .
GOLD:	With all my heart I want your blessings.Be merciful as you promised .

ID:	5156
INPUT:	Hots handiko hitzaldi hutsak egiten dituzte eta grina <unk> bitartez okerbidetik aldendu berriak liluratzen .
PRED:	When the people of the Lord heard about their desires , they turn away from their own desires .
GOLD:	They brag about themselves with empty , foolish boasting . With an appeal to twisted sexual desires , they lure back into sin those who have barely escaped from a lifestyle of deception .

ID:	5157
INPUT:	Eta Jainkoak aldi hori laburtuko ez balu , ez litzateke inortxo ere bizirik aterako ; baina , aukeratuak direla eta , laburtu egingo ditu egun horiek .
PRED:	In that time God will not be punished for a few days , but no one will be saved .
GOLD:	In fact , unless that time of calamity is shortened , not a single person will survive . But it will be shortened for the sake of God 's chosen ones .

ID:	5158
INPUT:	hurrengo sailean , aldiz , Xelemiasen seme Hananiasek eta <unk> seigarren seme Hanunek bere <unk> aurrean .
PRED:	Nevertheless , Micaiah son of Amoz , sent this message from the sixth year of King Cyrus and grandson of Babylon .
GOLD:	Next Hananiah son of Shelemiah and Hanun , the sixth son of Zalaph , repaired another section , while Meshullam son of Berekiah rebuilt the wall across from where he lived .

ID:	5159
INPUT:	herri ankerra , <unk> errespeturik eta haurrentzat errukirik izango ez duena .
PRED:	It will be a great nation , and those who have no mercy will be saved .
GOLD:	a fierce and heartless nation that shows no respect for the old and no pity for the young .

ID:	5160
INPUT:	esan zien : « Gogoan hartu nik gaur agindu dizuedan guztia , eta agindu zeuen seme-alabei lege honen xedapen guztiak betetzen <unk> ,
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ I have given you everything I have commanded you to obey all these decrees and commands that I am giving you today .
GOLD:	he added : “ Take to heart all the words of warning I have given you today . Pass them on as a command to your children so they will obey every word of these instructions .

ID:	5161
INPUT:	Hautsi da indartsuen uztaia ; ahulak , berriz , indarrez jantzi dira .
PRED:	Your arrows are filled with strength ; the finest gold are filled with strength .
GOLD:	The bow of the mighty is now broken , and those who stumbled are now strong .

ID:	5162
INPUT:	Benetan gizon apala zen Moises , munduko gizonik <unk> .
PRED:	Do n't let the truth know that the Lord was with all the power of the earth .
GOLD:	( Now Moses was very humble — more humble than any other person on earth . )

ID:	5163
INPUT:	<unk>
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Recovery
GOLD:	Plans for the Incense Altar

ID:	5164
INPUT:	Hark profezi dohaina zuten lau alaba ezkongabe zituen .
PRED:	Then the other of the other prophets were talking about four faces .
GOLD:	He had four unmarried daughters who had the gift of prophecy .

ID:	5165
INPUT:	Bere ikasleek erantzun zioten : — Hainbeste <unk> estutzen zaituela ikusi eta nork ukitu zaituen galdetzen duzu ?
PRED:	His disciples asked him , “ If you see how can you see ? What do you see ? ”
GOLD:	His disciples said to him , “ Look at this crowd pressing around you . How can you ask , ‘ Who touched me ? ' ”

ID:	5166
INPUT:	Non dira zure kontseilari jakintsuak , faraoi ? Jaun <unk> aurka dituen <unk> <unk> , bada , gauza badira !
PRED:	“ Where are your wisdom ? ” says the Lord . “ What will I know that the Lord will destroy you ? ”
GOLD:	Where are your wise counselors , Pharaoh ? Let them tell you what God plans , what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies is going to do to Egypt .

ID:	5167
INPUT:	Goizero berritzen dira . Bai handia , Jauna , zure leialtasuna !
PRED:	For the Lord has made them great ; they have heard your voice .
GOLD:	Great is his faithfulness ; his mercies begin afresh each morning .

ID:	5168
INPUT:	Efratan entzun genuen kutxaren berrieta <unk> aldean aurkitu .
PRED:	When we heard the Ark of the Covenant , we found the Ark of the Covenant .
GOLD:	We heard that the Ark was in Ephrathah ; then we found it in the distant countryside of Jaar .

ID:	5169
INPUT:	Ez zaiteztela marmarrean ari ere , haietako batzuk ari izan ziren bezala , gero aingeru <unk> esku hil zirelarik .
PRED:	So they did not want them to kill them as some of them . They killed some of them , just as they were killed .
GOLD:	And do n't grumble as some of them did , and then were destroyed by the angel of death .

ID:	5170
INPUT:	Nolanahi ere , gorputzean nahiz gorputzetik kanpo , Jaunari atsegingarri izaten ahalegintzen gara ,
PRED:	So we must have a body in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	So whether we are here in this body or away from this body , our goal is to please him .

ID:	5171
INPUT:	<unk> guztiak geure egintza gaizto eta erru <unk> gertatu zaizkigu . Hala ere , zuk , gure Jainko horrek , gure bekatuek merezi baino gutxiago zigortu gaituzu , eta bizirik atera gaituzu hemen gaudenok .
PRED:	But if we have done evil things , we will know that God has done to us . But if we have sinned against us , we have brought us into sin , we have brought us into sin .
GOLD:	“ Now we are being punished because of our wickedness and our great guilt . But we have actually been punished far less than we deserve , for you , our God , have allowed some of us to survive as a remnant .

ID:	5172
INPUT:	Jaunak emandako lurraldeak ekarritako emaitza guztien lehen fruituak saski batean hartu eta Jaunak zure Jainkoak bizileku eta kultu-lekutzat aukeratuko duen tokira joango zara .
PRED:	For the Lord has given you a harvest from the first harvest of all the crops of the harvest of the harvest , the Lord your God has given you as a grain offering to the designated place of your name .
GOLD:	put some of the first produce from each crop you harvest into a basket and bring it to the designated place of worship — the place the Lord your God chooses for his name to be honored .

ID:	5173
INPUT:	Fariseu batzuek hurbildu eta , zertan harrapatuko , gizonak bere emaztea uztea zilegi ote zuen galdetu zioten .
PRED:	But some of the Pharisees came to meet him and asked him , “ Is it right ? ” So the man asked .
GOLD:	Some Pharisees came and tried to trap him with this question : “ Should a man be allowed to divorce his wife ? ”

ID:	5174
INPUT:	Ester , erregina izendatu
PRED:	Queen Esther , Queen Esther ,
GOLD:	Esther Becomes Queen

ID:	5175
INPUT:	Adoniasen gonbidatu guztiak , izuturik , jaiki eta nor bere aldetik joan ziren .
PRED:	Then he got up and began talking about him , and they came to him .
GOLD:	Then all of Adonijah 's guests jumped up in panic from the banquet table and quickly scattered .

ID:	5176
INPUT:	Bebairenak <unk> ;
PRED:	The family of Shephatiah372
GOLD:	The family of Bebai623

ID:	5177
INPUT:	Eta honela egin zion otoitz Jaunari : « Ai ene , Jauna ! Neure herrian nengoenean , iruditu zitzaidan , bai , horrela gertatuko zela ! Horregatik , hain zuzen , nahi izan nuen <unk> ihes egin . Banekien nik Jainko bihozbera eta errukiorra zarena , haserregaitza eta onginahiz betea , bere mehatxuez damutzen dena .
PRED:	Then he prayed to the Lord , “ What sorrow awaits me from my people , ” he said to me , “ I know that I am a great nation , but I was angry with unfailing love .
GOLD:	So he complained to the Lord about it : “ Did n't I say before I left home that you would do this , Lord ? That is why I ran away to Tarshish ! I knew that you are a merciful and compassionate God , slow to get angry and filled with unfailing love . You are eager to turn back from destroying people .

ID:	5178
INPUT:	Baina beste behin ere bere teman jarraitu zuen faraoiak eta ez zien israeldarrei joaten utzi .
PRED:	But Pharaoh 's heart was very angry with your heart , and he refused to leave them .
GOLD:	“ All right , go ahead , ” Pharaoh replied . “ I will let you go into the wilderness to offer sacrifices to the Lord your God . But do n't go too far away . Now hurry and pray for me . ”

ID:	5179
INPUT:	Oraindik Pedro eta Joan herriari mintzatzen ari zitzaizkiola , apaizak , tenpluko guardiaburua eta saduzearrak agertu zitzaizkien .
PRED:	Then Peter spoke to the people of the people and the people of the Temple , the priests , the priests , and the leaders of the Temple of the Temple .
GOLD:	While Peter and John were speaking to the people , they were confronted by the priests , the captain of the Temple guard , and some of the Sadducees .

ID:	5180
INPUT:	jendeak ohi duen bezala ; gorde dut zure hitza ,
PRED:	I have heard your word , like a word of your word .
GOLD:	I have followed your commands , which keep me from following cruel and evil people .

ID:	5181
INPUT:	Onar ezazu , bada , nire aholkua , eta izan dezazula lagun Jainkoa ! Zu herriaren ordezkari zara Jainkoaren aurrean eta herriaren arazoak aurkeztu behar dizkiozu berari ;
PRED:	Therefore , listen to my advice and my advice and my people . You are better to serve God as hard as hard as hard as you want to take them to God 's people .
GOLD:	Now listen to me , and let me give you a word of advice , and may God be with you . You should continue to be the people 's representative before God , bringing their disputes to him .

ID:	5182
INPUT:	Izan zaitezte , beraz , Jainkoaren antzekoak , beraren seme-alaba maite zaretenez .
PRED:	So be careful to obey God and your children .
GOLD:	Imitate God , therefore , in everything you do , because you are his dear children .

ID:	5183
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> , <unk> gorien antzeko zaren hori !
PRED:	They are as weak as trees , and I will be like trees .
GOLD:	You will be pierced with sharp arrowsand burned with glowing coals .

ID:	5184
INPUT:	Niri , berriz , egia <unk> , ez didazue sinesten .
PRED:	But those who believe in me will be sure that you have seen me .
GOLD:	So when I tell the truth , you just naturally do n't believe me !

ID:	5185
INPUT:	Abraham , Sara eta Abimelek
PRED:	Abraham and Sarah , Sarah ,
GOLD:	Abraham Deceives Abimelech

ID:	5186
INPUT:	Badaki Jaunak giza asmoak hutsak direla .
PRED:	The Lord knows how they are merely human .
GOLD:	The Lord knows people 's thoughts ; he knows they are worthless !

ID:	5187
INPUT:	Nik esan nuen : — Ene Jainko Jauna , zaude geldi ! Nola eutsiko dio , bada , Israel herriak bere biziari , hain txikia izanik ?
PRED:	“ O Lord , my God , ” I said . “ How can I be punished for people of Israel ? How can we do such a sin ?
GOLD:	Then I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , please stop or we will not survive , for Israel is so small . ”

ID:	5188
INPUT:	Arratsean , Jesusen ikasleak aintzirara jaitsi
PRED:	That evening the disciples went into the lake ,
GOLD:	That evening Jesus ' disciples went down to the shore to wait for him .

ID:	5189
INPUT:	Jaunak bere haserrea hustu du , bere sumina isuri . Sioni su eman dio eta oinarrietaraino kiskali .
PRED:	The anger of the Lord has poured out his anger against the earth , and he has poured out fire on fire .
GOLD:	But now the anger of the Lord is satisfied.His fierce anger has been poured out.He started a fire in Jerusalemthat burned the city to its foundations .

ID:	5190
INPUT:	Errege izaten hastean , Baxak Jeroboamen etxeko guztiak hilarazi zituen . Ez zuen Jeroboamen etxeko bat ere utzi hil gabe , halaxe esana baitzuen Jaunak Xiloko Ahias bere zerbitzariaren bidez .
PRED:	When Jeroboam became king , he did not kill all the family of Jeroboam 's household . He did not kill Jeroboam 's household , for the Lord had given this message to him .
GOLD:	He immediately slaughtered all the descendants of King Jeroboam , so that not one of the royal family was left , just as the Lord had promised concerning Jeroboam by the prophet Ahijah from Shiloh .

ID:	5191
INPUT:	Paulok jasandako nekeak
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Paul 's Many Trials

ID:	5192
INPUT:	Ateratzean , honela ziotsaten elkarren artean : — Gizon honek ez du ez heriotza , ez kartzela merezi duenik ezer egin .
PRED:	They said to each other , “ This man has not been circumcised or death . ”
GOLD:	As they went out , they talked it over and agreed , “ This man has n't done anything to deserve death or imprisonment . ”

ID:	5193
INPUT:	Orduan , erregeak deitu eta esan zien : — Zer dela-eta uzten dituzue mutikoak bizirik ?
PRED:	Then the king called the king and asked them , “ Why do you go ? ”
GOLD:	So the king of Egypt called for the midwives . “ Why have you done this ? ” he demanded . “ Why have you allowed the boys to live ? ”

ID:	5194
INPUT:	« Ez uste izan Moisesen legea edo profeten esanak huts <unk> etorria naizenik ; ez naiz huts <unk> etorri , beren betera eramatera baizik .
PRED:	“ Do n't know that the law of Moses had been able to kill the prophets , or when they came to kill him , they would have come to kill him .
GOLD:	“ Do n't misunderstand why I have come . I did not come to abolish the law of Moses or the writings of the prophets . No , I came to accomplish their purpose .

ID:	5195
INPUT:	Sarraskia egiteko <unk> , distira botatzeko leundua .
PRED:	In this way , the clouds of Samaria and Samaria .
GOLD:	Let their hearts melt with terror , for the sword glitters at every gate.It flashes like lightningand is polished for slaughter !

ID:	5196
INPUT:	— Gogora ezazue Moisesek , Jaunaren zerbitzariak , agindu zizuena : « Jaunak , zeuen Jainkoak , atseden harrarazi dizue lurralde hau zuei emanez .
PRED:	I have given you this message from the Lord : “ This is what the Lord your God has commanded you to give you the land of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Remember what Moses , the servant of the Lord , commanded you : ‘ The Lord your God is giving you a place of rest . He has given you this land . '

ID:	5197
INPUT:	eta bere gutizia aseezina izan zuenez , ondasun guztiak galduko ditu .
PRED:	They have all their sins , and they will have everything in him .
GOLD:	They were always greedy and never satisfied.Nothing remains of all the things they dreamed about .

ID:	5198
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak honela dio : « Zer egin dezaket zuretzat , Efraim ? Eta zer zuretzat , Juda ? Zuen <unk> bezala doa , berehala kentzen <unk> bezala .
PRED:	But the Lord says , “ What do I have done ? What do I want you to destroy you ? Why are you so angry with you ? ”
GOLD:	“ O Israel and Judah , what should I do with you ? ” asks the Lord . “ For your love vanishes like the morning mistand disappears like dew in the sunlight .

ID:	5199
INPUT:	Nork egin eta burutu <unk> guztia ? Ni , Jauna , neu naiz lehena , hasieratik <unk> <unk> dituena , eta <unk> iristean <unk> betiko berbera .
PRED:	Who did you know that I am the Lord , and how can I know that I am the Lord , and when I know that the angels of the world will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	Who has done such mighty deeds , summoning each new generation from the beginning of time ? It is I , the Lord , the First and the Last.I alone am he . ”

ID:	5200
INPUT:	Labanek <unk> <unk> deitu zuen harri-pila hura ; Jakobek , berriz , Galed .
PRED:	At last Laban called out a huge storm , but Jacob chose as well as I promised .
GOLD:	To commemorate the event , Laban called the place Jegar-sahadutha ( which means “ witness pile ” in Aramaic ) , and Jacob called it Galeed ( which means “ witness pile ” in Hebrew ) .

ID:	5201
INPUT:	Orduan , bi gizonek menditik jaitsi eta ibaia igaro zuten . Eta , Nunen seme Josuerengana itzulirik , gertatu zitzaien guztiaren berri eman zioten ,
PRED:	Then the other men went up into the mountain and crossed to Joshua . Then they returned to Joshua son of Nun and told them what had happened .
GOLD:	Then the two spies came down from the hill country , crossed the Jordan River , and reported to Joshua all that had happened to them .

ID:	5202
INPUT:	Horrela bete zen Liburu Santuak dioena : <unk> egin zion Jainkoari eta , horregatik , Jainkoak zuzenetsi egin zuen , eta « Jainkoaren adiskide » deitu zitzaion .
PRED:	That is why the Scriptures say , “ As surely as the Scriptures say , ‘ God loves us , and God loved him as righteous as righteous as righteous as God had promised . ”
GOLD:	And so it happened just as the Scriptures say : “ Abraham believed God , and God counted him as righteous because of his faith . ” He was even called the friend of God .

ID:	5203
INPUT:	Josue Jordan igarotzeko prestatu
PRED:	The Israelites prepared for the Jordan
GOLD:	's Charge to Joshua

ID:	5204
INPUT:	Nondik sortzen dira zeuen artean dituzuen borroka eta haserreak ? Ez ote zuen baitan borrokan dabiltzan grina txarretatik ?
PRED:	Why are you going to fight against your anger ? Why do n't you turn away from their own desires ?
GOLD:	What is causing the quarrels and fights among you ? Do n't they come from the evil desires at war within you ?

ID:	5205
INPUT:	Gero , Israel lurraldeko hazia hartueta soroan erein zuen , ur ugariren ondoan .
PRED:	Then the seed on the land of Israel grew up to grow in the field .
GOLD:	He also took a seedling from the landand planted it in fertile soil.He placed it beside a broad river , where it could grow like a willow tree .

ID:	5206
INPUT:	<unk> iritsi zirenean , soldaduek airean eraman behar izan zuten Paulo jendearen <unk> ,
PRED:	When they arrived at that time , they brought Paul to the synagogue , Paul and the people of Samaria .
GOLD:	As Paul reached the stairs , the mob grew so violent the soldiers had to lift him to their shoulders to protect him .

ID:	5207
INPUT:	Abrahamekin mintzatzen amaitu ondoren , alde egin zuen Jaunak . Eta Abraham bere oihal-etxolara itzuli zen .
PRED:	When the Lord had finished speaking , he returned to the Lord 's presence , Abraham returned and returned home .
GOLD:	When the Lord had finished his conversation with Abraham , he went on his way , and Abraham returned to his tent .

ID:	5208
INPUT:	ez , ordea , hegal eta ezkata gabeak : kutsatutzat edukiko dituzue .
PRED:	But you must not eat the right path of the Lord .
GOLD:	You may not , however , eat marine animals that do not have both fins and scales . They are ceremonially unclean for you .

ID:	5209
INPUT:	Senideok , neure aldetik , ziur dakit zuek onginahiz beterik eta jakite guztiz horniturik <unk> , eta elkarri argi egiteko gai zaretena .
PRED:	Dear brothers , dear brothers and sisters , I know that you were very angry with me , and I know that you are so sure that you can be able to be sure to be sure to be sure to be sure .
GOLD:	I am fully convinced , my dear brothers and sisters , that you are full of goodness . You know these things so well you can teach each other all about them .

ID:	5210
INPUT:	Eta zoritxar eta atsekabe izugarri horiek gertatzean , kantika hau lekuko izango dute beren kontra , ondorengoek ere gogoan eta ahoan izango baitute . Izan ere , <unk> dakit zer asmo <unk> gogoan herri honek , zin eginez agindutako lurraldera eraman baino lehenagotik ere » .
PRED:	And when the people of Israel come upon us , they will obey him . They will be sure that they have been unfaithful to me , and they will know that they have been able to obey the land of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	And when great disasters come down on them , this song will stand as evidence against them , for it will never be forgotten by their descendants . I know the intentions of these people , even now before they have entered the land I swore to give them . ”

ID:	5211
INPUT:	Ene maiteok , geure kontzientziak kondenatzen ez bagaitu , berriz , uste osoz jo dezakegu Jainkoarengana ,
PRED:	Dear friends , if we are being circumcised , we ca n't know how much we 're looking for God .
GOLD:	Dear friends , if we do n't feel guilty , we can come to God with bold confidence .

ID:	5212
INPUT:	Idoloei <unk>
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Zalmunna
GOLD:	Restoration for Jerusalem

ID:	5213
INPUT:	Baina hemendik aurrera Gizonaren Semea Jainko ahalguztidunaren eskuinean eserita egongo da .
PRED:	But when the Son of Man comes on the right hand of God , he will be on his right hand .
GOLD:	But from now on the Son of Man will be seated in the place of power at God 's right hand . ”

ID:	5214
INPUT:	<unk> bakarrik ezagutzen zintudan ; orain , neure begiz ikusi zaitut !
PRED:	I know that I have seen , and I saw you all my troubles .
GOLD:	I had only heard about you before , but now I have seen you with my own eyes .

ID:	5215
INPUT:	Bet-Hogla aldetik igotzen zen eta , <unk> iparraldetik igaroz , Rubenen seme <unk> <unk> zihoan .
PRED:	Then you turned away from the north , and then I saw that the people of the north and the people of Israel had been very angry .
GOLD:	went up from there to Beth-hoglah , then proceeded north of Beth-arabah to the Stone of Bohan . ( Bohan was Reuben 's son . )

ID:	5216
INPUT:	mespretxua botatzen du handikien <unk> ahaltsuak indarge uzten ;
PRED:	They are surrounded by their power , and they have broken my power .
GOLD:	He pours disgrace upon princesand disarms the strong .

ID:	5217
INPUT:	Emadazu eskua eta salbatuko naiz , begi aurrean izango ditut beti zure arauak .
PRED:	I will be your hand to you , and I will be your decrees .
GOLD:	Sustain me , and I will be rescued ; then I will meditate continually on your decrees .

ID:	5218
INPUT:	Tenpluan sartzeko eskubidea
PRED:	The Priests of the Temple
GOLD:	The Prince , Levites , and Priests

ID:	5219
INPUT:	Gizon hari Elimelek zeritzan , emazteari Noemi eta semeei Mahlon eta Kilion . <unk> leinukoak ziren , Judako <unk> . Moaben bizi zirelarik ,
PRED:	The wife of Naomi and her sons were married to her sons and women , women , women , women , and women of Judah . The people of Judah saw that the people of Judah had come to Egypt .
GOLD:	The man 's name was Elimelech , and his wife was Naomi . Their two sons were Mahlon and Kilion . They were Ephrathites from Bethlehem in the land of Judah . And when they reached Moab , they settled there .

ID:	5220
INPUT:	Israelen argi den <unk> bihurtuko da , Israelen Santua sugar , eta bat-batean erreko ditu , sasia eta <unk> bailiran .
PRED:	For I will make an idol that the Holy One of Israel , and the Holy One of Israel will burn up like a fire .
GOLD:	The Lord , the Light of Israel , will be a fire ; the Holy One will be a flame.He will devour the thorns and briers with fire , burning up the enemy in a single night .

ID:	5221
INPUT:	« Era berean , zuetako inor ez daiteke izan nire ikasle , dituen guztiei uko egiten ez badie .
PRED:	“ In the same way , you must not be the same way , or if you do not be a fellow believer or on my behalf .
GOLD:	So you can not become my disciple without giving up everything you own .

ID:	5222
INPUT:	Bera ere biluztu eta beste guztiekin batera sartu zen profeta-trantzean Samuelen aitzinean . Han egon zen etzana , larrugorri , egun eta gau osoan . Hortik dator esaera : « Saul ere profeta artean ? »
PRED:	So he went back to Elijah and all the other men of Israel and said to Samuel , “ There is no better than you , and you can see the Lord . ” So Saul said , “ I am the one of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	He tore off his clothes and lay naked on the ground all day and all night , prophesying in the presence of Samuel . The people who were watching exclaimed , “ What ? Is even Saul a prophet ? ”

ID:	5223
INPUT:	neuk adieraziko dizuet zer eta nola esan , eta zuen <unk> inork ez du zuei aurre <unk> edo erantzuterik izango .
PRED:	I will tell you what I say , and I will give you authority to be able to be able to kill you , and no one will be able to kill you .
GOLD:	for I will give you the right words and such wisdom that none of your opponents will be able to reply or refute you !

ID:	5224
INPUT:	David eta Betsabe ( 11 , 1 — 12 , 25 )
PRED:	David 's Prayer for the Council
GOLD:	David and Bathsheba

ID:	5225
INPUT:	« Halere , badaki hark zein den nire jokabidea ; proba nazala , urrea bezain garbi aterako naiz .
PRED:	“ But I know how hard I do , for I am pure .
GOLD:	“ But he knows where I am going.And when he tests me , I will come out as pure as gold .

ID:	5226
INPUT:	Beraz , bi gauza ditugu Jainkoaren asmoa aldaezina dela adierazten digutenak : agintzaria eta zin-hitza — eta horietan Jainkoak ez dezake gezurrik esan — ; horietan oinarriturik , adorez beteak sentitzen gara aurrean dugun itxaropenari eusteko .
PRED:	So we know that God is not able to keep you from the beginning of God , for he is not able to obey God 's favor . He said , “ We do n't know God 's kindness . ”
GOLD:	So God has given both his promise and his oath . These two things are unchangeable because it is impossible for God to lie . Therefore , we who have fled to him for refuge can have great confidence as we hold to the hope that lies before us .

ID:	5227
INPUT:	Gizon-emakume berrien jokabidea
PRED:	Paul 's Final Instructions to the hills
GOLD:	Living the New Life

ID:	5228
INPUT:	Baina ez dute guztiek hau behar bezala ulertzen . Batzuek , oraintsu arte <unk> ibiliak , haragi hori sasijainkoei eskainia balitz bezala jaten dute eta , beraien kontzientzia ongi <unk> denez , errudun bihurtzen dira .
PRED:	But all who do n't understand what they say , ‘ Do n't know that some of these things have done in such things , or if they have been forgiven , they have been forgiven . They are guilty because they are guilty of their sin . '
GOLD:	However , not all believers know this . Some are accustomed to thinking of idols as being real , so when they eat food that has been offered to idols , they think of it as the worship of real gods , and their weak consciences are violated .

ID:	5229
INPUT:	Sakrifizioa eskaini zuen Jakobek mendian , eta bere ahaideak otordura gonbidatu . Otordua egin ondoren , mendian igaro zuten gaua .
PRED:	So Jacob offered a burnt offering to the mountain , and they prepared a banquet for a banquet . So they went on the mountain to the mountain .
GOLD:	Then Jacob offered a sacrifice to God there on the mountain and invited everyone to a covenant feast . After they had eaten , they spent the night on the mountain .

ID:	5230
INPUT:	Kiriat-Arban hil zen , Hebronen alegia , Kanaan lurraldean . Abrahamek dolu egin zuen haren <unk> .
PRED:	When Abimelech died , he died in Hebron , Abraham was buried in Egypt with his land of Canaan , and he was buried with his brothers .
GOLD:	she died at Kiriath-arba ( now called Hebron ) in the land of Canaan . There Abraham mourned and wept for her .

ID:	5231
INPUT:	Egizu negar , neskatxa <unk> zaion senar <unk> <unk> <unk> bezala .
PRED:	So I will punish you , and those who are young and old will be filled with contempt .
GOLD:	Weep like a bride dressed in black , mourning the death of her husband .

ID:	5232
INPUT:	<unk> hartu zituen ilunpeak , etxola gisa bere inguruan <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	At that time the Tabernacle was filled with darkness , and when they saw that they were filled with power .
GOLD:	Thick clouds shielded the brightness around himand rained down hail and burning coals .

ID:	5233
INPUT:	Noeren hiru seme hauetatik sorturiko ondorengoak munduan barrena hedatu ziren .
PRED:	The descendants of Noah was from the east side of the earth .
GOLD:	From these three sons of Noah came all the people who now populate the earth .

ID:	5234
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Babiloniako <unk> <unk> <unk> harropuzkeria .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon and fig tree , and those who have seen what I have done .
GOLD:	“ For this is what the Sovereign Lord says : By the power of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon , I will destroy the hordes of Egypt .

ID:	5235
INPUT:	<unk> Jainkoaren zigorra
PRED:	Judgment against False Prophets
GOLD:	The Certainty of the

ID:	5236
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Zoaz , zeure sinesmenak sendatu zaitu . Une berean ikusmena etorri zitzaion berriro , eta Jesusen ondoren zihoan bidean .
PRED:	Jesus said to him , “ Go and see your faith , and your faith was healed . ” And when he was healed , he was healed .
GOLD:	And Jesus said to him , “ Go , for your faith has healed you . ” Instantly the man could see , and he followed Jesus down the road .

ID:	5237
INPUT:	baita haren <unk> Santiago eta Joan Zebedeoren semeak ere . Baina Jesusek esan zion Simoni : — Ez beldurtu , hemendik aurrera giza arrantzale izango zara .
PRED:	John , James , and John , James , and John , and John said to him , “ Do n't be afraid . Do n't be afraid , for you do n't be afraid . ”
GOLD:	His partners , James and John , the sons of Zebedee , were also amazed.Jesus replied to Simon , “ Do n't be afraid ! From now on you 'll be fishing for people ! ”

ID:	5238
INPUT:	Alai zaitezte egun horretan eta egin pozez jauzi , handia izango baita zuen saria zeruan ; gauza bera egin zieten profetei jende horren gurasoek .
PRED:	The people of this world will be a great nation , and your ancestors will be filled with joy and joy in heaven .
GOLD:	When that happens , be happy ! Yes , leap for joy ! For a great reward awaits you in heaven . And remember , their ancestors treated the ancient prophets that same way .

ID:	5239
INPUT:	Moisesek , beraz , Kanaan lurraldea ikertzera bidali zituen , esanez : — Zoazte Negevetik eta igo mendialdera .
PRED:	So Moses sent them out to the land of Canaan , and they sent them back to the hill country of Canaan .
GOLD:	Moses gave the men these instructions as he sent them out to explore the land : “ Go north through the Negev into the hill country .

ID:	5240
INPUT:	Israelgo Jainkoaren aintza , euskarritzat zituen kerubinen gainetik altxaturik , tenpluko <unk> joan zen . Orduan , lihozko jantzia eta gerrian idazteko tresnak zeuzkan gizonari dei egin
PRED:	Then the glory of the Lord God of Israel came down from the cherubim , and when he saw him , he bowed low to the Temple of the Lord . Then he called the man of Israel , and he called him to the man of Israel .
GOLD:	Then the glory of the God of Israel rose up from between the cherubim , where it had rested , and moved to the entrance of the Temple . And the Lord called to the man dressed in linen who was carrying the writer 's case .

ID:	5241
INPUT:	Baina arropak eta gorputza garbitzen ez baditu , bere hobenaren ondorenak jasan beharko ditu » .
PRED:	But you must not wash your body and bathe yourself with your body , for you will be punished . ”
GOLD:	But if they do not wash their clothes and bathe themselves , they will be punished for their sin . ”

ID:	5242
INPUT:	<unk> da dagoeneko <unk> eskua altxatzen du <unk> mendiaren aurka , Jerusalemgo muinoaren aurka .
PRED:	But when they see that the Lord has poured out my hand against Mount Carmel , the army of Jerusalem , the army of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	The enemy stops at Nob for the rest of that day.He shakes his fist at beautiful Mount Zion , the mountain of Jerusalem .

ID:	5243
INPUT:	Nik emandako ogia , <unk> ematen nizkizun irin garbia , olioa eta eztia eskaini zenizkien opari atsegingarri gisa . Honela diot nik , Jainko Jaunak .
PRED:	I have given you bread with olive oil , olive oil , and you have given me a grain offering . This is what the Sovereign Lord says :
GOLD:	Imagine it ! You set before them as a sacrifice the choice flour , olive oil , and honey I had given you , says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	5244
INPUT:	Printzea sarrerako atalondotik sartu/irtengo da beti .
PRED:	The entrance to the door and the door on the edge of the gateway .
GOLD:	“ The prince must enter the gateway through the entry room , and he must leave the same way .

ID:	5245
INPUT:	<unk> gordea uzten <unk> eta aitorpen <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	But when they saw that they were very sick , and when they were very very angry with him .
GOLD:	Preserve the teaching of God ; entrust his instructions to those who follow me .

ID:	5246
INPUT:	« Ez al dakizu , betidanik , gizakia lurrean jarria izan denetik ,
PRED:	“ Do n't you know that God is not able to enter the ground .
GOLD:	“ Do n't you realize that from the beginning of time , ever since people were first placed on the earth ,

ID:	5247
INPUT:	Jaunarengandik hartu nuen nik , neure aldetik zuei eskualdatu dizuedan hau : Jesus Jaunak , saldu zuten gauean , ogia hartu zuela
PRED:	Then I took my message from the Lord to you from the Temple of the Lord Jesus , which was given to you .
GOLD:	For I pass on to you what I received from the Lord himself . On the night when he was betrayed , the Lord Jesus took some bread

ID:	5248
INPUT:	esanez : « Horra ! Filistearrak , Samson ! » Esnatu zen Samson eta aurrekoetan bezala libratuko zela uste izan zuen ; baina ez zekien Jaunak zapuztua zuela .
PRED:	The Philistines said to Samson , “ Samson ! ” But when the Philistines realized that the Philistines had not been killed , he was not a single man who was from the Lord .
GOLD:	Then she cried out , “ Samson ! The Philistines have come to capture you ! ” When he woke up , he thought , “ I will do as before and shake myself free . ” But he did n't realize the Lord had left him .

ID:	5249
INPUT:	Egun hartan Jaunaren beldur izan zen David . Honela zioen : « Nola ekarriko dut , bada , <unk> Jaunaren kutxa ? »
PRED:	On that day David was afraid of the Lord . “ How can I be afraid ? ” he asked . “ How can I see that the Ark of the Lord ? ”
GOLD:	David was now afraid of the Lord , and he asked , “ How can I ever bring the Ark of the Lord back into my care ? ”

ID:	5250
INPUT:	Salomon erregeak erantzun zion bere amari : — Zergatik eskatzen didazu Abixag xunemdarra <unk> ? Nire anaia <unk> dela eta , Abiatar apaiza eta Tzeruiaren seme Joab bere alde dituela eta , horrentzat erregetza <unk> besterik ez zaizu falta .
PRED:	“ Why are you my mother ? ” the king asked . “ Why are you my lord the king of Zeruiah ? ” Joab replied , “ I am the king of Zeruiah , my lord the king of Zeruiah . ”
GOLD:	“ How can you possibly ask me to give Abishag to Adonijah ? ” King Solomon demanded . “ You might as well ask me to give him the kingdom ! You know that he is my older brother , and that he has Abiathar the priest and Joab son of Zeruiah on his side . ”

ID:	5251
INPUT:	Orduan , apostoluek eta arduradunek , eliz elkarte osoarekin bat , beren arteko batzuk hautatu eta Paulo eta Bernaberekin Antiokiara bidaltzea erabaki zuten . Judas Barsaba eta Silas hautatu zituzten , senideen artean itzal handiko gizonak biak ,
PRED:	So the apostles and the apostles met together together together together with the church and Barnabas and Barnabas to Antioch of the church . One of the apostles and Barnabas sent Paul to Antioch .
GOLD:	Then the apostles and elders together with the whole church in Jerusalem chose delegates , and they sent them to Antioch of Syria with Paul and Barnabas to report on this decision . The men chosen were two of the church leaders — Judas ( also called Barsabbas ) and Silas .

ID:	5252
INPUT:	Utzi egin beharko <unk> nizun ondarea . Zeure etsaien esklabo egingo <unk> ez duzun lurralde batean , nire haserrearen sua harrotu <unk> sugarretan » .
PRED:	I will give you an inheritance from your enemies , and I will bring you out of your enemies , and I will give you a great land of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	The wonderful possession I have reserved for youwill slip from your hands.I will tell your enemies to take youas captives to a foreign land.For my anger blazes like a firethat will burn forever . ”

ID:	5253
INPUT:	Hegoaldeko gelen azpian , pasabidearen muturrean , sarrera bat zegoen , <unk> aurrez aurre ; ekialdetik sartzen zen .
PRED:	In the south side of the south side of the south , which was sitting on the east side of the east side of the north .
GOLD:	So there was an entrance in the wall facing the doors of the inner block of rooms , and another on the east at the end of the interior walkway .

ID:	5254
INPUT:	eta Jakobek Jose , Mariaren senarra ; eta <unk> jaio zen Jesus , Mesias deritzana .
PRED:	So Jacob 's wife came to her husband , and when he was born , he was the Messiah .
GOLD:	Jacob was the father of Joseph , the husband of Mary.Mary gave birth to Jesus , who is called the Messiah .

ID:	5255
INPUT:	Lurreko lehen emaitza eta fruituen eta niretzat bereizitako opari guztien zatirik onena apaizentzat izango da . <unk> bakoitzeko ogirik onenak emango dizkiete israeldarrek , berauen etxeak bedeinka ditzadan .
PRED:	On the first day you must present the first offerings of the first offerings of the first offerings of the Lord , which you have been given to the people of Israel , and the people of Israel will be given to their homes .
GOLD:	The first of the ripe fruits and all the gifts brought to the Lord will go to the priests . The first batch of dough must also be given to the priests so the Lord will bless your homes .

ID:	5256
INPUT:	Zoritxarrekoa zu , Moab ! Galdua zara , Kemox jainkoaren herri hori ! Bizirik geldituriko zure seme-alabakgatibu eraman <unk> errege amortarrak .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you of Moab , O Lord , the god of Israel , the god of the god of the god of the Amorites , who destroyed the god of Israel .
GOLD:	What sorrow awaits you , O people of Moab ! You are finished , O worshipers of Chemosh ! Chemosh has left his sons as refugees , his daughters as captives of Sihon , the Amorite king .

ID:	5257
INPUT:	baina jendaurrean ukatzen nauena ukatu egingo dute Jainkoaren aingeruen aurrean .
PRED:	But those who hate me , and they will stand before God 's angels .
GOLD:	But anyone who denies me here on earth will be denied before God 's angels .

ID:	5258
INPUT:	Etxegileek bazterturiko harria giltzarri gertatu da .
PRED:	The builders rejectedhas the builders rejectedhas now become the cornerstone .
GOLD:	The stone that the builders rejectedhas now become the cornerstone .

ID:	5259
INPUT:	Haren aginduak oro aurrean izan ditut beti , ez naiz saihestu haren arauetatik .
PRED:	I have obeyed all his commands , and I have not turned away from his commands .
GOLD:	I am blameless before God ; I have kept myself from sin .

ID:	5260
INPUT:	Seir lurraldean , berriz , hortarrak bizi izan ziren lehenago ; baina Esauren ondorengoek lurralde hartatik bota eta suntsitu egin zituzten eta bertan jarri ziren bizitzen , israeldarrek Jaunak jabetzan eman dien lurraldean egin duten bezala ) .
PRED:	But the people of Israel lived in the land of Seir , but the descendants of Esau left the land of Egypt . But the Lord gave them to the land of Canaan , just as the Lord had commanded .
GOLD:	In earlier times the Horites had lived in Seir , but they were driven out and displaced by the descendants of Esau , just as Israel drove out the people of Canaan when the Lord gave Israel their land . )

ID:	5261
INPUT:	Honela dio Judako herriak : « Ezaguna <unk> gehiegizko harrokeria , haren oilarkeria eta handiustea , haren <unk> hutsalak .
PRED:	This is what the people of Judah says : “ I have a great nation , and when I have heard the power of the people of Judah .
GOLD:	We have heard about proud Moab — about its pride and arrogance and rage.But all that boasting has disappeared .

ID:	5262
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak herri honi buruz : « Maite du honek harat-honat ibiltzea , ez ditu oinak lotzen . Ez dut gogoko . Gogora dakart honen jokaera gaiztoa , eta zigortu egingo dut bere bekatuengatik » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The Lord has given me a ransom for the people of Israel , for I have given them to the wicked , and I will punish them . ”
GOLD:	So this is what the Lord says to his people : “ You love to wander far from meand do not restrain yourselves.Therefore , I will no longer accept you as my people.Now I will remember all your wickednessand will punish you for your sins . ”

ID:	5263
INPUT:	Lurrean eserita , isilik daude Sion hiri ederreko zaharrak , beren <unk> hautsa bota eta <unk> estalirik . Jerusalemgo neskatxak burumakur dabiltza .
PRED:	For the people of Jerusalem were silent , and the people of Jerusalem were very beautiful as beautiful as beautiful as beautiful as they were in Jerusalem , and they were terrified by their heads .
GOLD:	The leaders of beautiful Jerusalemsit on the ground in silence.They are clothed in burlapand throw dust on their heads.The young women of Jerusalemhang their heads in shame .

ID:	5264
INPUT:	Norbaitek galde dezake : Eta hilak nola pizten dira ? Nolako gorputzez itzuliko dira bizira ?
PRED:	If anyone asks you , how can you die ? Even if you do n't die ?
GOLD:	But someone may ask , “ How will the dead be raised ? What kind of bodies will they have ? ”

ID:	5265
INPUT:	Geure bekatuak aitortzen baditugu , ordea , leiala eta zuzena den Jainkoak bekatuak barkatu eta gaiztakeria orotatik garbituko gaitu .
PRED:	But we know that we are righteous , but God has forgiven us , and he has forgiven us .
GOLD:	But if we confess our sins to him , he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all wickedness .

ID:	5266
INPUT:	Zedro , <unk> , <unk> eta <unk> ditut basamortuan ; zipres , zumar eta <unk> eremuan .
PRED:	I know that the tree of Samaria were filled with old , and I know that Tobiah , who were filled with idols of Lebanon .
GOLD:	I will plant trees in the barren desert — cedar , acacia , myrtle , olive , cypress , fir , and pine .

ID:	5267
INPUT:	dakidana hauxe da : hiriz hiri , Espiritu Santuak garbi esaten didala kateak eta nekeak ditudala zain .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The Holy One of the world will be given to the Most High . ”
GOLD:	except that the Holy Spirit tells me in city after city that jail and suffering lie ahead .

ID:	5268
INPUT:	Hau da abestuko duten eresia : nazio orotako <unk> dute , Egipto eta <unk> guztiarengatik abestuko . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	The nations will be filled with joy , for they will be filled with all the nations of Egypt , and they will know that the Sovereign Lord has spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Yes , this is the funeral songthey will sing for Egypt.Let all the nations mourn.Let them mourn for Egypt and its hordes.I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	5269
INPUT:	<unk> zuen Davidek oihal-etxola Jaunarentzat , eta han sartu zuten Jaunaren kutxa , eta erdian ezarri , bere tokian . Orduan , erre-opariak eskaini zizkion Davidek Jaunari , baita elkartasun-opariak ere .
PRED:	Then David and his tent came to the Lord , where the Ark of the Lord had prepared a burnt offering and burnt offering to the Lord . Then David sacrificed burnt offerings and burnt offerings and burnt offerings to the Lord .
GOLD:	They brought the Ark of the Lord and set it in its place inside the special tent David had prepared for it . And David sacrificed burnt offerings and peace offerings to the Lord .

ID:	5270
INPUT:	<unk> zegoela , emaginak esan zion : « Ez izan beldur ; mutikoa duzu berriro ! »
PRED:	When he was in charge of the guard , he said , “ Do n't be afraid . ”
GOLD:	After a very hard delivery , the midwife finally exclaimed , “ Do n't be afraid — you have another son ! ”

ID:	5271
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , hitz egin nire izenean nire , Jainko Jaun honen , mezua adieraziz : « Ezpata ! Ezpata <unk> ongi leundua !
PRED:	“ Son of man , prophesy against my name , says the Sovereign Lord , “ This is what the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel !
GOLD:	“ Son of man , prophesy to themand clap your hands.Then take the sword and brandish it twice , even three times , to symbolize the great massacre , the great massacre facing them on every side .

ID:	5272
INPUT:	« Esan Aaronen seme Eleazarri ateratzeko errautsontziak sutatik urrutira , sagaratuak baitaude , eta <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to Aaron , who has been made by anointing oil , blood , and blood , and all who were made of blood .
GOLD:	“ Tell the people of Israel to bring you twelve wooden staffs , one from each leader of Israel 's ancestral tribes , and inscribe each leader 's name on his staff .

ID:	5273
INPUT:	« Egokiera hartan , honela erregutu nion Jaunari :
PRED:	I prayed to the Lord ,
GOLD:	“ At that time I pleaded with the Lord and said ,

ID:	5274
INPUT:	Bestela , ene errege jauna , zu hiltzean , neure seme Salomon eta biok hil egin nahi izango gaituzte .
PRED:	But if my lord , my lord , my lord the king and my lord , my lord , are my lord the king .
GOLD:	If you do not act , my son Solomon and I will be treated as criminals as soon as my lord the king has died . ”

ID:	5275
INPUT:	Lurrera erori nintzen , eta mintzo hau entzun nuen : “ Saulo , Saulo , zergatik pertsegitzen nauzu ? ”
PRED:	I fell on the ground and heard the voice of Saul , saying , ‘ Why are you Saul ? '
GOLD:	I fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to me , ‘ Saul , Saul , why are you persecuting me ? '

ID:	5276
INPUT:	Ezin izan zuten ezertan ere herriaren aurrean harrapatu eta , haren <unk> harriturik , hitzik gabe gelditu ziren .
PRED:	They were not afraid of them , and they were afraid to be able to see what they had happened .
GOLD:	So they failed to trap him by what he said in front of the people . Instead , they were amazed by his answer , and they became silent .

ID:	5277
INPUT:	Zuek sortu umeak , ugaldu , zabaldu <unk> bete ezazue jendez ” » .
PRED:	But now you will be filled with great power and fig trees ! ”
GOLD:	Now be fruitful and multiply , and repopulate the earth . ”

ID:	5278
INPUT:	Etorri da Gizonaren Semea , jaten eta edaten duela , eta esaten duzue : “ A zer tripazain eta mozkorra , zergalari eta bekatarien laguna ! ”
PRED:	“ Son of Man and the Son of Man is eating with the Son of Man and the Son of Man , and you say , ‘ The Son of Man and a tax collector . '
GOLD:	The Son of Man , on the other hand , feasts and drinks , and you say , ‘ He 's a glutton and a drunkard , and a friend of tax collectors and other sinners ! '

ID:	5279
INPUT:	Jaunaren etxea , bere jauregia , Milo-ko <unk> , Jerusalemgo harresia , Hatzor , <unk> eta Gezer egiteko , lan <unk> antolatu zituen Salomon erregeak .
PRED:	At the Temple of the Lord , the king of Jerusalem — the palace of the Temple of the Lord , where he had built , and he became the city of King Solomon .
GOLD:	This is the account of the forced labor that King Solomon conscripted to build the Lord 's Temple , the royal palace , the supporting terraces , the wall of Jerusalem , and the cities of Hazor , Megiddo , and Gezer .

ID:	5280
INPUT:	Hark baimena eman zien . Espiritu gaiztoak gizonarengandik atera eta txerrietan sartu ziren ; eta txerri-taldea ezpondan behera aintzirara amildu zen ; bi milaren bat txerri ito ziren .
PRED:	The man gave him the man to the man and the demons . The man brought the demons into the demons and the demons into the lake , and they entered the lake of the lake and the lake of the lake .
GOLD:	So Jesus gave them permission . The evil spirits came out of the man and entered the pigs , and the entire herd of about 2,000 pigs plunged down the steep hillside into the lake and drowned in the water .

ID:	5281
INPUT:	Errukitu zen Jainko Jauna , eta esan zuen : — Hau ere ez da gertatuko !
PRED:	Then the Lord said to them , “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says :
GOLD:	Then the Lord relented from this plan , too . “ I will not do that either , ” said the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	5282
INPUT:	aita semearen aurka eta semea aitaren aurka , ama alabaren kontra eta alaba amaren kontra , amaginarreba <unk> kontra eta erraina amaginarrebaren kontra » .
PRED:	His father and mother against her son , daughter , and her daughter against her husband . She has rebelled against her husband and mother 's daughter against her . ”
GOLD:	‘ Father will be divided against sonand son against father ; mother against daughterand daughter against mother ; and mother-in-law against daughter-in-lawand daughter-in-law against mother-in-law . ' ”

ID:	5283
INPUT:	honela , Baal-Peorren kultuetara makurtu zen herria eta Jaunaren haserre-sua piztu zen Israelen aurka .
PRED:	When you were afraid of the Lord , he became angry with all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	In this way , Israel joined in the worship of Baal of Peor , causing the Lord 's anger to blaze against his people .

ID:	5284
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunaren eraginez , mendebaldeko haizeak jo zuen indartsu ; honek larrapoteak aurrean eraman eta Itsaso Gorrira jaurti zituen . Ez zen <unk> bat bera ere Egipto osoan gelditu .
PRED:	Then the armies of the Lord came to the heavens and the armies of the Euphrates River , and the armies of the Euphrates River , and when they saw that they were in Egypt .
GOLD:	The Lord responded by shifting the wind , and the strong west wind blew the locusts into the Red Sea . Not a single locust remained in all the land of Egypt .

ID:	5285
INPUT:	« Niri sagaraturiko pertsonak behar duzue izan . « Ez jan piztiek <unk> sarraskituriko abereen okelarik ; <unk> botako diezue .
PRED:	“ The people of Israel will be sure that you have been in the sight of the world , though you have been destroyed , you must be cut off from the dead .
GOLD:	“ You must also give me the firstborn of your cattle , sheep , and goats . But leave the newborn animal with its mother for seven days ; then give it to me on the eighth day .

ID:	5286
INPUT:	Jaunaren aurrean dagoen aldareko ikatz goriz errautsontzia betez eta bi eskutada <unk> usaintsu hartuz , errezelaz barrualdera eramango ditu .
PRED:	Then the Lord poured out the altar of the altar on the altar of the altar of the Lord 's presence , and he will be filled with his throne .
GOLD:	he will fill an incense burner with burning coals from the altar that stands before the Lord . Then he will take two handfuls of fragrant powdered incense and will carry the burner and the incense behind the inner curtain .

ID:	5287
INPUT:	buruz gain ustetsuen <unk> , <unk> mespretxuz .
PRED:	For I know that all the things had seen , and when I learned that all the things he had done .
GOLD:	We have had more than our fill of the scoffing of the proudand the contempt of the arrogant .

ID:	5288
INPUT:	Horrelaxe eratu zen egun hartan Jaunaren zerbitzua Pazkoa ospatzeko eta Jaunaren aldarean erre-opariak eskaintzeko , Josias erregeak agindu bezala .
PRED:	This is the instructions that the Lord had commanded Moses to celebrate the burnt offerings of the Lord , just as King Josiah had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	The entire ceremony for the Lord 's Passover was completed that day . All the burnt offerings were sacrificed on the altar of the Lord , as King Josiah had commanded .

ID:	5289
INPUT:	Amorru biziz zapaldu ditut herriak , neure <unk> <unk> haien odola lurrean isuri .
PRED:	“ At last my anger I will pour out my fury on the earth , and I will pour out your blood on the ground .
GOLD:	I crushed the nations in my angerand made them stagger and fall to the ground , spilling their blood upon the earth . ”

ID:	5290
INPUT:	Jakina da gaiztakeria eta <unk> direla berez sortzen lurrean :
PRED:	We have seen the human race , and the human spirit are under the ground .
GOLD:	But evil does not spring from the soil , and trouble does not sprout from the earth .

ID:	5291
INPUT:	Tenpluko tresnak
PRED:	The Temple of the Temple
GOLD:	Furnishings for the Temple

ID:	5292
INPUT:	Ismaelek gatibu zeraman jendea , Johanan eta beronen gudalburuak ikustean , pozez bete zen .
PRED:	When the people saw Gedaliah , they saw that the men of Benjamin had been filled with joy .
GOLD:	The people Ishmael had captured shouted for joy when they saw Johanan and the other military leaders .

ID:	5293
INPUT:	Eufrates ibaiaz beste aldetik hartu eta Kanaan lurraldean barrena ibilarazi nuen zuen aita Abraham . Semea eman nion , Isaak , eta ondorengotza ugaldu .
PRED:	Then I took one of the east of the Euphrates River and traveled through the east of the Euphrates River to the Euphrates River , Isaac , and Jacob had given him the Son of Abraham .
GOLD:	But I took your ancestor Abraham from the land beyond the Euphrates and led him into the land of Canaan . I gave him many descendants through his son Isaac .

ID:	5294
INPUT:	Entzun mezu hau : Badator herri <unk> istilu handiz , Judako <unk> eta <unk> .
PRED:	This message came from the city of Judah , and when they saw that the great army of Judah and all the people of Judah were filled with great power .
GOLD:	Listen ! Hear the terrifying roar of great armiesas they roll down from the north.The towns of Judah will be destroyedand become a haunt for jackals .

ID:	5295
INPUT:	<unk> baino <unk> du Sionek haurra , oinazeak baino <unk> du umea .
PRED:	But when the child is weak , I will see how weak I will see how weak I see .
GOLD:	“ Before the birth pains even begin , Jerusalem gives birth to a son .

ID:	5296
INPUT:	alde bakoitzetik bi mila berrehun eta berrogeita hamar metro dituen karratua izango da .
PRED:	each side must be 71/2 feet long and 27 feet long .
GOLD:	The city will measure 11/2 miles on each side — north , south , east , and west .

ID:	5297
INPUT:	Sararen heriotza eta <unk>
PRED:	Othniel 's Wife and Lazarus
GOLD:	The Burial of Sarah

ID:	5298
INPUT:	<unk> arroztzat naukate , <unk> hartzen naute .
PRED:	My friends are my friends , and my friends are my friends .
GOLD:	My servants and maids consider me a stranger.I am like a foreigner to them .

ID:	5299
INPUT:	Baina orain , lotuak gintuen <unk> hilak gaudelarik , legetik aske gaude ; horrela , Espirituaren bizi berriaren arabera zerbitza dezakegu Jauna , eta ez lege idatziaren arau zaharraren arabera .
PRED:	But we know that we have been slaughtered by the Spirit . We have given us the Holy Spirit to live with us , and we will live in the Holy Spirit . And we will know that the Lord has given us .
GOLD:	But now we have been released from the law , for we died to it and are no longer captive to its power . Now we can serve God , not in the old way of obeying the letter of the law , but in the new way of living in the Spirit .

ID:	5300
INPUT:	Nire bitartez esan zuena bete du Jaunak : zure eskuetatik erregetza kendu eta beste bati eman dio , Davidi .
PRED:	For the Lord has given me the Kingdom of David , and he has given me a Kingdom of David .
GOLD:	The Lord has done just as he said he would . He has torn the kingdom from you and given it to your rival , David .

ID:	5301
INPUT:	3
PRED:	The Death of Simeon
GOLD:	He

ID:	5302
INPUT:	Hain zuzen , faraoia , gertatuaren berri jakin zuelarik , Moises hil nahian zebilen , baina honek faraoiagandik ihes egin zuen eta Madian eskualdera joan zen bizitzera . Han , putzu baten ondoan eseri zen .
PRED:	When Moses heard the news of Pharaoh 's arrival , he would kill him . But when the people of Egypt came to meet him , he fled to Egypt , and he went to the fortress of Susa .
GOLD:	And sure enough , Pharaoh heard what had happened , and he tried to kill Moses . But Moses fled from Pharaoh and went to live in the land of Midian.When Moses arrived in Midian , he sat down beside a well .

ID:	5303
INPUT:	lurrikara handiak izango dira , eta izurrite eta goseteak han eta hemen ; gauza ikaragarriak gertatuko dira , eta ortzian seinale handiak azalduko .
PRED:	There will be a great nation that will be destroyed , and there will be a great nation that will happen to you .
GOLD:	There will be great earthquakes , and there will be famines and plagues in many lands , and there will be terrifying things and great miraculous signs from heaven .

ID:	5304
INPUT:	Hau dio Jainko Jaunak : « Egin txalo eta dantza ! <unk> Israel herria bere jokabide guztiz higuingarriagatik ! <unk> , gosez eta izurriz eroriko dira .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ I am the God of Israel , the people of Israel , and I will punish those who are slaughtered by worshiping idols .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Clap your hands in horror , and stamp your feet . Cry out because of all the detestable sins the people of Israel have committed . Now they are going to die from war and famine and disease .

ID:	5305
INPUT:	Gero , leinuen ordezkari bezala izen-bilketa egiten jardun zuten familiaburuek
PRED:	Then the names of the tribes of the tribes of the tribes of the tribes of Israel followed him .
GOLD:	Then the leaders of Israel — the tribal leaders who had registered the troops — came and brought their offerings .

ID:	5306
INPUT:	Jaunak zigortu egin zituen <unk> ere , Jaunaren kutxari <unk> begira egon zirelako ; herri hartako hirurogeita hamar gizaseme zigortu zituen Jaunak . <unk> handia izan zuen herriak , Jaunak oso gogor zigortu zuelako .
PRED:	When the Lord saw him , he saw that the people of the Lord saw that the people of the people of Israel were very angry with him , and he was very very angry with them .
GOLD:	But the Lord killed seventy men from Beth-shemesh because they looked into the Ark of the Lord . And the people mourned greatly because of what the Lord had done .

ID:	5307
INPUT:	Jesus nola atxilotuko
PRED:	The Last Supper
GOLD:	Jesus Anointed at Bethany

ID:	5308
INPUT:	<unk> bati bezala erantsi diet <unk> <unk> . <unk> utzitako <unk> diren <unk> dut neuretzat lur guztia , eta ez zuen inork <unk> mugitu , ez txio egiteko <unk> zabaldu » .
PRED:	And when I saw that some of these things that had seen , I will see that that that some of the beast will be able to kill you , and they will be able to see what they had happened . ” And when they saw that they saw that they were afraid of them , they could see that they were afraid .
GOLD:	I have robbed their nests of richesand gathered up kingdoms as a farmer gathers eggs.No one can even flap a wing against meor utter a peep of protest . ”

ID:	5309
INPUT:	Zu zara , oi Jainko , zu betidanik nire errege . Zuk lortu zenuen lurrean garaipena :
PRED:	You are the God of Israel , O God , the nations of Israel ; you have made your victory over the earth .
GOLD:	You , O God , are my king from ages past , bringing salvation to the earth .

ID:	5310
INPUT:	Nork bere biziaren ordain Jaunarentzat zerga ematean , ez du aberatsak bost gramo baino gehiago ordainduko , ezta <unk> ere gutxiago .
PRED:	Who has given you a ransom for the Lord , for he has given me a rich person to pay the rich person who is greater than the Lord .
GOLD:	When this offering is given to the Lord to purify your lives , making you right with him , the rich must not give more than the specified amount , and the poor must not give less .

ID:	5311
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun zion : — Itxurazaleok ! Zuetako nork ez du larunbatez ere idia nahiz astoa <unk> askatu eta ura edatera eramaten ?
PRED:	The Lord replied to him , “ Do n't you realize that you have a donkey or a donkey or a donkey or a donkey or a donkey ? ”
GOLD:	But the Lord replied , “ You hypocrites ! Each of you works on the Sabbath day ! Do n't you untie your ox or your donkey from its stall on the Sabbath and lead it out for water ?

ID:	5312
INPUT:	Ohoratu aita-amak : hori da berekin agintzari bat daraman lehen <unk> , hau da :
PRED:	She has given him a son of Jephunneh with him , and he will give him a new tomb .
GOLD:	“ Honor your father and mother . ” This is the first commandment with a promise :

ID:	5313
INPUT:	Bildu zituen Saulek bere gizonak <unk> eta zenbatu : berrehun mila oinezko eta Judaren leinuko hamar mila gizon .
PRED:	One day Saul and his men came out of the tribe of Judah , and 200 men of Judah .
GOLD:	So Saul mobilized his army at Telaim . There were 200,000 soldiers from Israel and 10,000 men from Judah .

ID:	5314
INPUT:	Judako jende guztia pozik zegoen zin eginarengatik , bihotz-bihotzez egin baitzuten . Eta Jaunaren bila gogo osoz ibili zirenez , aurkitu ahal izan zuten eta hark bakea eman zien alde guztietatik .
PRED:	For all the people of Judah had sworn a solemn oath in the presence of the Lord , for they were filled with joy and filled with all the people of Judah .
GOLD:	All in Judah were happy about this covenant , for they had entered into it with all their heart . They earnestly sought after God , and they found him . And the Lord gave them rest from their enemies on every side .

ID:	5315
INPUT:	Eta errege nahi ez ninduten etsai horiek , berriz , ekarri hona eta hil itzazue nire aurrean ” » .
PRED:	“ Do n't let me kill me , ” they said . “ Get up and kill me and kill me . ”
GOLD:	And as for these enemies of mine who did n't want me to be their king — bring them in and execute them right here in front of me . ' ”

ID:	5316
INPUT:	Egun hartan , nire eraginez , Judako buruzagiek aldameneko herri guztiak irentsiko dituzte , ezker-eskuin , <unk> sasia bezala , zuziak <unk> bezala ; Jerusalemgo bizilagunek , ordea , beren hirian jarraituko dute bizitzen .
PRED:	On that day I will give you an oath of the people of Judah . All the leaders of Judah will be able to kill me as they live in Jerusalem , and they will live in Jerusalem as they live in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	“ On that day I will make the clans of Judah like a flame that sets a woodpile ablaze or like a burning torch among sheaves of grain . They will burn up all the neighboring nations right and left , while the people living in Jerusalem remain secure .

ID:	5317
INPUT:	eta , Jaunak zuen Jainkoak hura zuen esku jartzean , bertako gizonezko guztiak ezpataz hilko dituzue .
PRED:	And the Lord your God will kill you , and all the men of Israel will die .
GOLD:	When the Lord your God hands the town over to you , use your swords to kill every man in the town .

ID:	5318
INPUT:	« Hauxe da nik , Nabukodonosor erregeak , izan dudan ametsa . Orain zuk , Beltxatzar , azaldu ametsaren esanahia . <unk> jakitun guztiak ez dira gai izan hori azaltzeko ; zuk , ordea , egin dezakezu , jainko santuen espirituak gidatzen baitzaitu » .
PRED:	“ This is what the king says : I have given you a dream , and I have told you that you what you have done . But now you will know that you will know that you have done . ”
GOLD:	But leave the stump and the roots in the ground , bound with a band of iron and bronzeand surrounded by tender grass.Now let him be drenched with the dew of heaven , and let him live with the wild animals among the plants of the field .

ID:	5319
INPUT:	Aurrerantzean , ez <unk> izango izen , Abraham baizik , herri askoren <unk> baitzaitut .
PRED:	For I will not be afraid of many nations , but now they will know that many nations will be filled with many nations .
GOLD:	What 's more , I am changing your name . It will no longer be Abram . Instead , you will be called Abraham , for you will be the father of many nations .

ID:	5320
INPUT:	Orobat , Baalat eta <unk> ziren <unk> berreraiki zituen , baita guda-gurdi eta zaldiak <unk> ere . Nahi izan zuen guztia eraiki zuen Salomonek , nola Jerusalemen hala <unk> eta bere menpeko lurralde osoan .
PRED:	He had built all the countries to the Amalekites , and when he saw that he had been with chariots and chariots and chariots and horses . He also built everything in Jerusalem , and he had built in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	He also rebuilt Baalath and other supply centers and constructed towns where his chariots and horses could be stationed . He built everything he desired in Jerusalem and Lebanon and throughout his entire realm .

ID:	5321
INPUT:	Jaunak Daviden erreinua berregin
PRED:	The Land Given to David
GOLD:	A Promise of Restoration

ID:	5322
INPUT:	Orduan , erregeak eraztuna bere behatzetik atera eta juduen etsai zen Hamani , Hamedataren seme eta Agagen <unk> , eman zion ,
PRED:	Then King Zedekiah of Babylon came out of his hand and placed him on the wall of the Jews . He was the king of the Jews and the Jews of the Jews .
GOLD:	The king agreed , confirming his decision by removing his signet ring from his finger and giving it to Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite , the enemy of the Jews .

ID:	5323
INPUT:	Hauek dira Moisesek Israel herri osoari zuzenduriko hitzaldiak , Jordanez beste aldean , basamortuan , <unk> aurrez aurre dagoen haranean , hau da , Paran eta <unk> , Laban , <unk> eta <unk> arteko haranean .
PRED:	These are the people of Israel , who made the people of Israel in the valley of Egypt , when they saw that they were in the valley of Egypt , and when they saw that they were in the valley of Egypt .
GOLD:	These are the words that Moses spoke to all the people of Israel while they were in the wilderness east of the Jordan River . They were camped in the Jordan Valley near Suph , between Paran on one side and Tophel , Laban , Hazeroth , and Di-zahab on the other .

ID:	5324
INPUT:	Bai , badator eguna , Efraimgo <unk> oihu egingo dutena : “ Ea , igo gaitezen Sionera , goazen Jaunarengana , geure Jainkoarengana ” » .
PRED:	That day the day is coming , the day of Ephraim , the city of Ephraim , and they will shout to the Lord our God , and let us go to the Lord our God . ”
GOLD:	The day will come when watchmen will shoutfrom the hill country of Ephraim , ‘ Come , let us go up to Jerusalemto worship the Lord our God . ' ”

ID:	5325
INPUT:	Judako Asaren erregealdiko hogeita hemezortzigarren urtean hasi zen Omriren seme Akab Israelgo errege izaten . Hogeita bi urtez izan zen errege Samarian .
PRED:	Asa began to rule over Judah in the eighteenth year of King Asa 's reign in Judah . He reigned in Samaria two years .
GOLD:	Ahab son of Omri began to rule over Israel in the thirty-eighth year of King Asa 's reign in Judah . He reigned in Samaria twenty-two years .

ID:	5326
INPUT:	Emaiezu beren egintzen ordaina , beren gaiztakerien ordaina . Emaiezu egin <unk> saria , itzuli merezi dutena .
PRED:	Oh , what they have done , for I have done for those who have done for their own desires .
GOLD:	Give them the punishment they so richly deserve ! Measure it out in proportion to their wickedness.Pay them back for all their evil deeds ! Give them a taste of what they have done to others .

ID:	5327
INPUT:	eta berorien <unk> : Xebanias , Hodias , Kelita , Pelaias , Hanan ,
PRED:	They were filled with their surrounding villages , and encourage everyone to live .
GOLD:	Mica , Rehob , Hashabiah ,

ID:	5328
INPUT:	Ez jo auzitara zeure zerbitzari honekin , ez baita bizidunik zure aurrean errugabe .
PRED:	Do not be angry with your servant , for you have not seen your word .
GOLD:	Do n't put your servant on trial , for no one is innocent before you .

ID:	5329
INPUT:	<unk> batera Simeon eta Gaden leinuak etxolatuko dira . <unk> buruzagia Tzurixadairen seme Xelumiel izango da ,
PRED:	Bezalel son of Gad and Gad will be a descendant of Gad . One of Gad will be a descendant of Gad .
GOLD:	SimeonShelumiel son of Zurishaddai59,300

ID:	5330
INPUT:	Hark erantzun zien : — Zer agindu zizuen horretaz Moisesek ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ What do you mean ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus answered them with a question : “ What did Moses say in the law about divorce ? ”

ID:	5331
INPUT:	« Ezertarako ez diren gezurrezko <unk> sinesten duzue .
PRED:	“ I do n't believe that those who do n't believe in me .
GOLD:	“ ‘ Do n't be fooled into thinking that you will never suffer because the Temple is here . It 's a lie !

ID:	5332
INPUT:	Ene Jainko Jauna , gure aita Daviden ordez ni , zeure zerbitzari hau , egin nauzu errege . Ni , berriz , mutil gaztea nauzu eta gobernatzen ikasi gabea .
PRED:	O Lord , you have rejected me from your father , my father , and you have not been faithful to me .
GOLD:	“ Now , O Lord my God , you have made me king instead of my father , David , but I am like a little child who does n't know his way around .

ID:	5333
INPUT:	Zoaz zeu hurrengo <unk> eta irakurri tenpluan , herriaren aurrean , nik esanik <unk> idatzi duzun Jaunaren mezua ; irakurri Judako hirietatik etorriko diren guztiei ere .
PRED:	Go and read it to the people of Judah and read it in the Temple of the Lord , along with all the people of Judah and all the people of Judah .
GOLD:	So you go to the Temple on the next day of fasting , and read the messages from the Lord that I have had you write on this scroll . Read them so the people who are there from all over Judah will hear them .

ID:	5334
INPUT:	<unk> seme <unk> , Simeonen leinukoa ;
PRED:	They were leader of the tribe of Asher , who were leader of the tribe of Issachar .
GOLD:	SimeonShaphat son of Hori

ID:	5335
INPUT:	Ni , Paulo , Jainkoaren zerbitzari eta Jesu Kristoren apostolu naiz , Jainkoak <unk> <unk> ekartzeko eta betiko biziaren itxaropenean oinarritzen den egiazko erlijioaren egia ezagutarazteko . <unk> ez dioen Jainkoak mundua izaten hasi baino lehen agindua zuen betiko bizi hori ,
PRED:	I am writing to Paul , the apostle of Christ Jesus Christ , the apostle of Christ Jesus Christ , so that that God has been able to be able to be able to be able to obey the law of God .
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , a slave of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ . I have been sent to proclaim faith to those God has chosen and to teach them to know the truth that shows them how to live godly lives .

ID:	5336
INPUT:	( Lk 11 , 2-4 )
PRED:	Jesus before the Council
GOLD:	Teaching about Money and Possessions

ID:	5337
INPUT:	Goretsazue <unk> , goretsi harpa eta zitaraz .
PRED:	Praise him with all who call on the harp , and praise him with joy .
GOLD:	Praise him with a blast of the ram 's horn ; praise him with the lyre and harp !

ID:	5338
INPUT:	Sarrera eta <unk> nagusia
PRED:	The Faith of the Great Feast
GOLD:	Everything Is Meaningless

ID:	5339
INPUT:	Jainkoaren <unk> edan beharko du , haren <unk> <unk> garbi prestatua dagoena . <unk> eta sufrez <unk> dute aingeru santuen eta Bildotsaren aurrean .
PRED:	And when they have been clean , they will know that they are clean and old , and when they have been clean , and the angels of God will be filled with him .
GOLD:	must drink the wine of God 's anger . It has been poured full strength into God 's cup of wrath . And they will be tormented with fire and burning sulfur in the presence of the holy angels and the Lamb .

ID:	5340
INPUT:	Hona hemen seme-alaba <unk> seinalea : Jainkoak bere Semearen Espiritua bidali du gure bihotzetara , eta Espirituak « Abba ! » , hau da , « Aita ! » dio oihuka .
PRED:	For the Spirit of his children will know that God has sent his children to be his children , and he sent us to know that he is the Son of God . ”
GOLD:	And because we are his children , God has sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts , prompting us to call out , “ Abba , Father . ”

ID:	5341
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> <unk> seme Eliasaf zen .
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's son became very angry with him , and he became very angry .
GOLD:	The leader of the Gershonite clans was Eliasaph son of Lael .

ID:	5342
INPUT:	eta esan zion : — Etor <unk> , bai . Zeruko hegaztiei eta lurreko piztiei emango <unk> hire haragia .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” he said , “ I will know that I will give you the birds of heaven and all the birds of heaven . ”
GOLD:	“ Come over here , and I 'll give your flesh to the birds and wild animals ! ” Goliath yelled .

ID:	5343
INPUT:	Begira , ni basamortuko lautadetan geldituko naiz , zuen berririk izan dezadan arte .
PRED:	Look at the wilderness , I will search for the wilderness until I died .
GOLD:	I will stop at the shallows of the Jordan River and wait there for a report from you . ”

ID:	5344
INPUT:	Maltzurra , berriz , <unk> ari daeta <unk> baliatzen , dohakabe eta <unk> gezurrez deuseztatzeko .
PRED:	But those who have been furious with evil and evil spirits , and they have turned over to the sun and evil spirits .
GOLD:	The smooth tricks of scoundrels are evil.They plot crooked schemes.They lie to convict the poor , even when the cause of the poor is just .

ID:	5345
INPUT:	Horregatik , prestatu zeuen gogoa zerbitzurako eta bizi neurritasunez . Jar ezazue zeuen itxaropen osoa Jesu Kristoren agerpenak ekarriko dizuen dohainean .
PRED:	Therefore , prepare your service for your service and honor and honor you with your love . Stay in the name of Christ Jesus Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	So prepare your minds for action and exercise self-control . Put all your hope in the gracious salvation that will come to you when Jesus Christ is revealed to the world .

ID:	5346
INPUT:	Geldi bekit mihia <unk> itsatsirik , beti gogoan ez bazaitut , zu , Jerusalem , neure pozik handiena ez bazaitut .
PRED:	Do n't let me be glad in my heart , for you will not be glad in my heart . Do not be glad because you do not be glad in your heart .
GOLD:	May my tongue stick to the roof of my mouthif I fail to remember you , if I do n't make Jerusalem my greatest joy .

ID:	5347
INPUT:	Itzuli zen Balaam Balakengana eta erre-oparien ondoan aurkitu zuen moabdar buruzagi guztiekin .
PRED:	Then Balaam returned to Gilgal , and the king of Israel arrived at Gilgal .
GOLD:	So Balaam returned and found the king standing beside his burnt offerings with all the officials of Moab .

ID:	5348
INPUT:	Belztu eta erori egiten zait larruazala , hezurrak ere bai sukarraz .
PRED:	My eyes and eyes are filled with skin and skin .
GOLD:	My skin has turned dark , and my bones burn with fever .

ID:	5349
INPUT:	Daviden hirian beretzat eginarazia zuen hilobian ehortzi zuten . Lurrin eta usainki gozoak nahasiz eginiko ukenduz <unk> <unk> ezarri ondoren , su handia egin zuten haren ohorez .
PRED:	He was buried by the city of David , who was buried in the City of David , who was buried with his mother , and he was buried with his waist .
GOLD:	He was buried in the tomb he had carved out for himself in the City of David . He was laid on a bed perfumed with sweet spices and fragrant ointments , and the people built a huge funeral fire in his honor .

ID:	5350
INPUT:	Hori gertatzean , jakingo dute egiptoarrek ni naizela Jauna » .
PRED:	For the Egyptians will know that I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	When my glory is displayed through them , all Egypt will see my glory and know that I am the Lord ! ”

ID:	5351
INPUT:	<unk> baino ugariago nuen esnea , <unk> ere <unk> isurtzen <unk> .
PRED:	And when I saw that I was weak , and when I saw that when they were weak , and when I saw with you .
GOLD:	My steps were awash in cream , and the rocks gushed olive oil for me .

ID:	5352
INPUT:	<unk> buruzagia Reuelen seme Eliasaf izango da ,
PRED:	“ Son of man will be my son , and there will be a son of Beor .
GOLD:	GadEliasaph son of Deuel45,650

ID:	5353
INPUT:	hodei guztien gainetik igoko <unk> Goi-goikoaren antzeko izango ” .
PRED:	He will be like all the kingdoms of the Most High will be like the Most High . '
GOLD:	I will climb to the highest heavensand be like the Most High . '

ID:	5354
INPUT:	Hark , orduan : — Maisu , gazte-gaztetandik bete izan dut hori guztia .
PRED:	“ Teacher , ” he said , “ I have told you everything I had done . ”
GOLD:	“ Teacher , ” the man replied , “ I 've obeyed all these commandments since I was young . ”

ID:	5355
INPUT:	Hau esaten duzue eta ez dakizue zuen bizitza bihar zer izango den . Une batez agertu eta berehala desagertzen den lainoa besterik ez zarete eta !
PRED:	You say , ‘ Do n't know that your life will be a long life , and when you do n't know that you have come , and you will not return to the ground . '
GOLD:	How do you know what your life will be like tomorrow ? Your life is like the morning fog — it 's here a little while , then it 's gone .

ID:	5356
INPUT:	Jeremiasen esanera Barukek idatzitako <unk> erregeak erre ondoren , Jaunak agindu hau eman zion Jeremiasi :
PRED:	When Jeremiah had finished speaking , the Lord gave this message to Jeremiah .
GOLD:	After the king had burned the scroll on which Baruch had written Jeremiah 's words , the Lord gave Jeremiah another message . He said ,

ID:	5357
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Moisesi : « Egizu israeldarren lehen-semeen izen-bilketa , hilabetez gorako gizonezkoak erroldatuz .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ May all the firstborn sons of Israel be older or older among the men of Israel .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Now count all the firstborn sons in Israel who are one month old or older , and make a list of their names .

ID:	5358
INPUT:	Israelen leinu <unk> zuen aita hautatu nuen <unk> , nire aldarera igo zedin , intsentsua erre <unk> eta nire santutegian efod delakoa jantzi zezan . Era berean , israeldarrek egindako eskaintza <unk> beren zatia hartzeko eskubidea eman nien zuen aitaren ondorengoei .
PRED:	I had chosen that the tribes of Israel had chosen , and he brought his father to the altar of Israel and his father , and he brought them to the altar of my father , and he brought them into the sanctuary of the Lord .
GOLD:	I chose your ancestor Aaron from among all the tribes of Israel to be my priest , to offer sacrifices on my altar , to burn incense , and to wear the priestly vest as he served me . And I assigned the sacrificial offerings to you priests .

ID:	5359
INPUT:	Zuen abereek eta <unk> , berriz , lurrak berez ematen duena izango dute janari .
PRED:	But all the animals that scurry along the ground will eat the ground and eat it .
GOLD:	Your livestock and the wild animals in your land will also be allowed to eat what the land produces .

ID:	5360
INPUT:	<unk> , moabdarrei , amondarrei , filistearrei , amalektarrei eta Tzobako errege Hadadezerri , Rehoben semeari , harrapatua zen hura guztia .
PRED:	At that time , the Philistines , the Philistines , the army of Midian , the army of Midian , and the army of Midian .
GOLD:	from Edom , Moab , Ammon , Philistia , and Amalek — and from Hadadezer son of Rehob , king of Zobah .

ID:	5361
INPUT:	Zatozte , <unk> poz-oihu Jaunari , poz-irrintzi salbatzen gaituen harkaitzari !
PRED:	Come , O Lord , hear my cry out to him !
GOLD:	Come , let us sing to the Lord ! Let us shout joyfully to the Rock of our salvation .

ID:	5362
INPUT:	baina elkarte <unk> eta Jaunaren aldarerako , Jaunak aukeratuko zuen tokian , egurgile eta ur-ekarle izatera behartu zituen . Eta eginkizun hori bera dute gaur egun ere .
PRED:	But when the whole community of the Lord , the God of all the people of Israel and the people of the land of the Lord has given you today , and he has given you today .
GOLD:	But that day he made the Gibeonites the woodcutters and water carriers for the community of Israel and for the altar of the Lord — wherever the Lord would choose to build it . And that is what they do to this day .

ID:	5363
INPUT:	Xalum , Amarias eta Jose .
PRED:	Shallum , and Shimei .
GOLD:	Shallum , Amariah , and Joseph .

ID:	5364
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Filistearrek <unk> jokatu dute , gogor eta mespretxu biziz mendekatu dira , beren betidaniko etsaiak suntsitzeraino ;
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Because the Philistines have done , they have broken my anger , and they have punished their sins .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The people of Philistia have acted against Judah out of bitter revenge and long-standing contempt .

ID:	5365
INPUT:	Bai handi eta sakonak Jainkoaren <unk> , jakinduria eta ezaguera ! Bai aztergaitzak beraren erabakiak eta <unk> haren bideak !
PRED:	I have a great nation , and the wisdom of God has given me wisdom and understanding , and all the things he has done .
GOLD:	Oh , how great are God 's riches and wisdom and knowledge ! How impossible it is for us to understand his decisions and his ways !

ID:	5366
INPUT:	lurralde lehorrean sargoria bezala . Zuk mututu <unk> <unk> ; <unk> itzalak beroa bezala , hala ito <unk> ankerraren oihuak .
PRED:	At the time you will be filled with the power of the sea , like that the spirit of the earth will be filled with joy . For the sound of the sea will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	or like the relentless heat of the desert.But you silence the roar of foreign nations.As the shade of a cloud cools relentless heat , so the boastful songs of ruthless people are stilled .

ID:	5367
INPUT:	Biziki haserretu ziren biak , eta nor bere aldetik joan zen . Bernabek Markos hartu zuen eta Ziprera atera zen itsasoz ;
PRED:	Some of them were angry with them , and Paul went to Antioch of the island of Cyprus and Silas .
GOLD:	Their disagreement was so sharp that they separated . Barnabas took John Mark with him and sailed for Cyprus .

ID:	5368
INPUT:	Moisesen eta Aaronen arbasoak
PRED:	Moses and Aaron
GOLD:	The Ancestors of Moses and Aaron

ID:	5369
INPUT:	Hau entzutean , bertan zeuden batzuek esan zuten : « Eliasi deika ari da » .
PRED:	When they heard this , some of them said to Elijah , “ Elijah is Elijah ! ”
GOLD:	Some of the bystanders misunderstood and thought he was calling for the prophet Elijah .

ID:	5370
INPUT:	Itsas herrietako printze guztiak beren <unk> jaitsiko dira , beren soingainekoak kendu eta jantzi bordatuak erantziko dituzte ; ikaraz beteko dira eta , lurrean eseririk , dardara egingo dute etengabe , zuregatik <unk> .
PRED:	Then the Lord will strike all the nations and fig trees , and they will cover their clothes and purple , purple , purple , and scarlet thread . They will be filled with swords and purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	All the seaport rulers will step down from their thrones and take off their royal robes and beautiful clothing . They will sit on the ground trembling with horror at your destruction .

ID:	5371
INPUT:	Ez duzue elkarketa-etxolaren sarreratik alde egingo zazpi egunez , <unk> burutu arte ; zazpi egun iraungo baitu apaizgoa hartzeko ohikuneak .
PRED:	You must not leave the sanctuary of the Lord for seven days . In that day you will be sure that day for seven days , for seven days will be purified .
GOLD:	You must not leave the Tabernacle entrance for seven days , for that is when the ordination ceremony will be completed .

ID:	5372
INPUT:	Davidek honela zioen bere baitan : « <unk> batean , Saulen eskuak galdu behar nau ! Filistearren lurraldera ihes egin eta neure burua salbatzea izanen dut hoberena . Horrela , etsiko du Saulek eta ez da nire bila ibiliko Israel lurraldean , eta ni libre izango naiz haren eskuetatik » .
PRED:	Then David said to his people , “ I am sending my hands against you , and my hands will fall into the land of Saul , and I will turn away from the land of Israel . ”
GOLD:	But David kept thinking to himself , “ Someday Saul is going to get me . The best thing I can do is escape to the Philistines . Then Saul will stop hunting for me in Israelite territory , and I will finally be safe . ”

ID:	5373
INPUT:	Eguzkia ateratzen ari zuen Lot <unk> iritsi zenean .
PRED:	When the sun arrived at the sun , he learned that he was sitting on them .
GOLD:	Lot reached the village just as the sun was rising over the horizon .

ID:	5374
INPUT:	Baina barkatuko al dit hauxe Jaunak : nire nagusia , niri besotik heldurik , Rimon jainkoa bere jauretxean gurtzera sartzean , nik ere harekin batera ahuspeztu beharra izatea . <unk> al dit Jaunak ekintza hori !
PRED:	But the Lord has given me this message from the Lord : Have you brought me from the god of the god of the god of the god of the god of the god of the god of the god of his god , and he has worshiped me .
GOLD:	However , may the Lord pardon me in this one thing : When my master the king goes into the temple of the god Rimmon to worship there and leans on my arm , may the Lord pardon me when I bow , too . ”

ID:	5375
INPUT:	Jaunaren aginduak ez dira <unk>
PRED:	They are not able to obey the commands of the Lord 's commands .
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	5376
INPUT:	Jauna , senda <unk> sendatua geldituko naiz , salba <unk> salbatua izango . Zu zaitut goresten !
PRED:	For the Lord will be healed , and he will be saved by the dead . I will be saved .
GOLD:	O Lord , if you heal me , I will be truly healed ; if you save me , I will be truly saved.My praises are for you alone !

ID:	5377
INPUT:	Gurpil haien tankera <unk> <unk> zen . Haien ardatzak , uztaiak , <unk> eta <unk> ere brontzezkoak ziren denak .
PRED:	There were many of these things , and they were weak and bronze , and they were filled with bronze and bronze .
GOLD:	and were similar to chariot wheels . The axles , spokes , rims , and hubs were all cast from molten bronze .

ID:	5378
INPUT:	Tenpluan irakasten ari zela , galdera hau egin zuen Jesusek : « Nola esan dezakete lege-maisuek Mesias Daviden ondorengo dela ?
PRED:	Then Jesus went to the Temple and asked , “ How can he be the Messiah ? Who is the Messiah ? Who is the Messiah ?
GOLD:	Later , as Jesus was teaching the people in the Temple , he asked , “ Why do the teachers of religious law claim that the Messiah is the son of David ?

ID:	5379
INPUT:	Israeldarrek esan zioten : — Bai , emango dizkizugu . Eta , soingaineko bat zabaldurik , bertara bota zuen nork bere harrapakinetarik eraztun bana .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” the people of Israel said , “ we will give you a gold robe of choice flour and gold , one of the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ Gladly ! ” they replied . They spread out a cloak , and each one threw in a gold earring he had gathered from the plunder .

ID:	5380
INPUT:	<unk> gazte batzuen <unk> bat zegoela ohartu nintzen .
PRED:	When I heard that I was a young man , I saw that he was a young man .
GOLD:	I saw some naive young men , and one in particular who lacked common sense .

ID:	5381
INPUT:	Herriko jende xehea baizik ez zuen utzi , alorrak eta mahastiak landu zitzaten .
PRED:	A few who were not allowed to plant or plant or plant or plant crops .
GOLD:	But Nebuzaradan allowed some of the poorest people to stay behind to care for the vineyards and fields .

ID:	5382
INPUT:	<unk> bazarete ere , ez heldu bekatu egiteraino ; zuen haserreak ez beza eguzkia sartu arte iraun .
PRED:	But if you have sinned , you ca n't fall into the sun , let 's fall into the sun .
GOLD:	And “ do n't sin by letting anger control you . ” Do n't let the sun go down while you are still angry ,

ID:	5383
INPUT:	Dar-dar egingo du zeruaketa lurrak <unk> ikara , Jaun ahalguztidun <unk> haserrea eta sumin <unk> dudan egunean .
PRED:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will send down the earth , and when they saw that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken !
GOLD:	For I will shake the heavens.The earth will move from its placewhen the Lord of Heaven 's Armies displays his wrathin the day of his fierce anger . ”

ID:	5384
INPUT:	Honekin , hau adierazi nahi digu Espiritu Santuak : lehenengo santutegiak irauten zuen bitartean , benetako santutegirako bidea ez zegoela zabalik .
PRED:	That is why the Sovereign Lord gave us the Holy Spirit to make us holy . ” For the Most Holy Place did not enter the sanctuary of the sanctuary .
GOLD:	By these regulations the Holy Spirit revealed that the entrance to the Most Holy Place was not freely open as long as the Tabernacle and the system it represented were still in use .

ID:	5385
INPUT:	Larunbatean , hiritik kanpora atera eta ibai ondora joan ginen , han juduen <unk> bat zegoela uste baikenuen . Bertan eseri eta bilduak ziren emakumeei hitz egiten hasi ginen .
PRED:	Do n't go out to the city of the city of the city , where we saw that some of the Jews were sitting on the island of the Jews and sat on the island .
GOLD:	On the Sabbath we went a little way outside the city to a riverbank , where we thought people would be meeting for prayer , and we sat down to speak with some women who had gathered there .

ID:	5386
INPUT:	Jaunaren aingerua aurreratu eta inori <unk> egiten ez uzteko moduko <unk> batean gelditu zen .
PRED:	The angel of the Lord came to be able to kill anyone who was able to kill him .
GOLD:	Then the angel of the Lord moved farther down the road and stood in a place too narrow for the donkey to get by at all .

ID:	5387
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : « <unk> horiek gainerakoak baino bekatariago zirela uste al duzue , heriotza hori izan zutelako ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do you know that those who were born ? Do you know that they were afraid of the dead ?
GOLD:	“ Do you think those Galileans were worse sinners than all the other people from Galilee ? ” Jesus asked . “ Is that why they suffered ?

ID:	5388
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Kanta . Salmoa . Egin irrintzi Jainkoari , lurtar guztiok ,
PRED:	Sing to the earth , O God , all the earth !
GOLD:	Shout joyful praises to God , all the earth !

ID:	5389
INPUT:	Jeremias preso
PRED:	Jeremiah and Jeremiah
GOLD:	Jeremiah Is Imprisoned

ID:	5390
INPUT:	mespretxu eta irainak direla eta , mendeku bila dabilen etsaia dela eta .
PRED:	When he is sick , he brings judgment on judgment , and he brings judgment on judgment .
GOLD:	All this has happened though we have not forgotten you.We have not violated your covenant .

ID:	5391
INPUT:	Izendatu zioten , beraz , egun bat , eta asko joan zitzaizkion bera zegoen etxera . Paulo Jainkoaren erregetzaren azalpena eta testigantza egiten jardun zitzaien goizetik <unk> eta , Moisesen legea eta profetak oinarri hartuz , Jesusen mezua sinestarazten ahalegindu zen .
PRED:	Meanwhile , some of the other men went to Jerusalem and went to the Kingdom of God . One of the Jews were preaching to the Kingdom of God and the Gentiles , and they were preaching in the Book of Jesus .
GOLD:	So a time was set , and on that day a large number of people came to Paul 's lodging . He explained and testified about the Kingdom of God and tried to persuade them about Jesus from the Scriptures . Using the law of Moses and the books of the prophets , he spoke to them from morning until evening .

ID:	5392
INPUT:	egun batean galtzen <unk> <unk> izan baino lehen , Jaunaren <unk> gainera jausi baino lehen , bai , Jaunaren <unk> gainera jausi baino lehen .
PRED:	At that day when they saw that some of the Lord , when they were afraid of the Lord 's prophets , the prophets of the Lord 's presence , and when they were afraid of the Lord .
GOLD:	Gather before judgment begins , before your time to repent is blown away like chaff.Act now , before the fierce fury of the Lord fallsand the terrible day of the Lord 's anger begins .

ID:	5393
INPUT:	David eta Absalom adiskidetu
PRED:	Joab and Joab
GOLD:	Absalom Reconciled to David

ID:	5394
INPUT:	Aitak ez zion sekula haserrerik egin , ezta galdetu ere zergatik jokatzen zuen horrela . Bestalde , Adonias oso liraina zen ; Absalomen ondoren jaioa Davidi .
PRED:	But the Father was not angry with him , and he was not angry with David . He was very angry with David , and he was very angry with David .
GOLD:	Now his father , King David , had never disciplined him at any time , even by asking , “ Why are you doing that ? ” Adonijah had been born next after Absalom , and he was very handsome .

ID:	5395
INPUT:	« Agor egingo zaituzte Jaunak , bai zeuek , bai zuen lur eta abereak , eta antzu zuen behi eta ardiak .
PRED:	“ Then the Lord will bless you with you and your sheep and goats , and your sheep and goats will be filled with sheep and goats .
GOLD:	Your children and your cropswill be cursed.The offspring of your herds and flockswill be cursed .

ID:	5396
INPUT:	ez du sasikultu-lekuetako otorduetan parte hartzen , ezta uste ona jartzen ere Israelgo idoloetan ; ez du lagun hurkoaren emaztea desohoratzen , ez da hurbiltzen ere hilerokoa duen emakumeagana ;
PRED:	The people of Israel must not bow down and worship idols of Baal . He does not commit adultery , or she has sexual relations with her husband .
GOLD:	He does not feast in the mountains before Israel 's idols or worship them . He does not commit adultery or have intercourse with a woman during her menstrual period .

ID:	5397
INPUT:	Alderantziz , amaigabeko poza eta alaitasunaizango duzuenik sortuko <unk> , <unk> bihurtuko baitut Jerusalem , <unk> bertako jendea .
PRED:	Instead , they will be filled with joy , and they will be filled with shame , and they will be filled with shame .
GOLD:	Be glad ; rejoice forever in my creation ! And look ! I will create Jerusalem as a place of happiness.Her people will be a source of joy .

ID:	5398
INPUT:	Horregatik , basoko lehoiek <unk> dituzte , basamortuko <unk> txikituko ; <unk> zelatan <unk> hiri inguruan , handik irteten diren <unk> . Izan ere , asko baitira haien errebeldiak , izugarri larriak haien desleialkeriak .
PRED:	That 's why should we be able to kill him , and when they saw that they were in the wilderness , they will see that they will be destroyed , and they will be destroyed , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	So now a lion from the forest will attack them ; a wolf from the desert will pounce on them.A leopard will lurk near their towns , tearing apart any who dare to venture out.For their rebellion is great , and their sins are many .

ID:	5399
INPUT:	Israeldar <unk> batera ibili izan naizen bitarte osoan , esan al diet inoiz ene herri Israel zaintzeko agindu nien buruzagiei , niretzat zedrozko etxerik egiteko ? »
PRED:	And when I died , I told you about that all the people of Israel would be able to kill me and all the people of Israel and all the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Yet no matter where I have gone with the Israelites , I have never once complained to Israel 's tribal leaders , the shepherds of my people Israel . I have never asked them , “ Why have n't you built me a beautiful cedar house ? ” '

ID:	5400
INPUT:	Aita , azaldu zeure aintza ! » Ahots bat entzun zen orduan zerutik : « Azaldu dut , eta berriro ere azalduko dut » .
PRED:	Then the Father said , “ I have heard a voice from heaven ! ” So the voice said , “ I will tell the truth , and I will tell you the truth . ”
GOLD:	Father , bring glory to your name . ” Then a voice spoke from heaven , saying , “ I have already brought glory to my name , and I will do so again . ”

ID:	5401
INPUT:	Filistearren kontra abiaturik , Gat , <unk> eta Axdodeko harresiak eraitsi zituen , eta gero hiriak eraiki Axdod eskualdean eta filistearren lurraldean .
PRED:	When the Philistines attacked the Philistines , the Philistine rulers of the Philistines attacked him and had built it in the land of the Philistines , and he built it in the land of the Philistines .
GOLD:	Uzziah declared war on the Philistines and broke down the walls of Gath , Jabneh , and Ashdod . Then he built new towns in the Ashdod area and in other parts of Philistia .

ID:	5402
INPUT:	Arduratu <unk> <unk> herrialdearen ongizateaz eta egin otoitz Jaunari haren alde , haren ongizatea zeuen onerako izango baita .
PRED:	Give me this message to the Lord , and I will pray for the Lord your God .
GOLD:	And work for the peace and prosperity of the city where I sent you into exile . Pray to the Lord for it , for its welfare will determine your welfare . ”

ID:	5403
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then another message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	5404
INPUT:	Eta horretarako bidaltzen dizuet Timoteo , neure seme maite eta kristau zintzoa . Berak gogoratuko dizkizue <unk> nire burubideak , eliz elkarte guztiei han eta hemen irakasten dizkiedan bezala .
PRED:	I am sending you to you , and I love you to obey the law of God . And when I love you , I love you and all the believers in the church that I have given you to all the churches .
GOLD:	That 's why I have sent Timothy , my beloved and faithful child in the Lord . He will remind you of how I follow Christ Jesus , just as I teach in all the churches wherever I go .

ID:	5405
INPUT:	« Norbaiti larruazalean handitua , zornea edota orbaina ateratzen bazaio , legenarena bezalako zauria sortuz , Aaron apaizarengana edo beronen ondorengoetariko apaiz batengana eramango dute .
PRED:	“ But if the person has been ceremonially clean or a skin disease or a skin disease or a skin disease or a skin disease ,
GOLD:	“ If anyone has a swelling or a rash or discolored skin that might develop into a serious skin disease , that person must be brought to Aaron the priest or to one of his sons .

ID:	5406
INPUT:	<unk> muinoak , ez ihintzik , ez euririk zuen gainera ! Ez bedi <unk> <unk> izan ! <unk> horretan gelditu <unk> ezkutua , olioz ez , hildakoen odolez baizik ,
PRED:	For when they have been destroyed by the sun , that the sun will be able to be destroyed , and when they saw that they were slaughtered by the power of the dead .
GOLD:	O mountains of Gilboa , let there be no dew or rain upon you , nor fruitful fields producing offerings of grain.For there the shield of the mighty heroes was defiled ; the shield of Saul will no longer be anointed with oil .

ID:	5407
INPUT:	Begira zeruko zeure egoitza santu horretatik eta bedeinka itzazu Israel zeure herria eta , arbasoei zin egin bezala , eman diguzun lurraldea , esnea eta eztia darizkion lurraldea ” .
PRED:	Look , all your people will be holy , and bless you as your people , as your ancestors have promised to give you a land flowing with milk and honey . '
GOLD:	Now look down from your holy dwelling place in heaven and bless your people Israel and the land you swore to our ancestors to give us — a land flowing with milk and honey . '

ID:	5408
INPUT:	Berarekin <unk> bizi garela esan eta ilunpetan baldin bagabiltza , gezurra diogu eta ez gara egiaren arabera ari .
PRED:	And if we have heard that I am living in darkness , we will do n't know your truth , and we do n't know that I am the truth .
GOLD:	So we are lying if we say we have fellowship with God but go on living in spiritual darkness ; we are not practicing the truth .

ID:	5409
INPUT:	abere arra eta akats gabea aurkeztuko du , Jaunak atseginez onar diezaion : zekorra , aharia nahiz akerra .
PRED:	The Lord must present a burnt offering and the goat as a burnt offering , and he may bring it to the goat as a burnt offering .
GOLD:	you will be accepted only if your offering is a male animal with no defects . It may be a bull , a ram , or a male goat .

ID:	5410
INPUT:	Une honetan , zuek sobera duzuenak haien <unk> konponduko du , eta egunen batean haien <unk> zuen <unk> . Honela , berdintasuna izango da nagusi ,
PRED:	In this time you will be sure that some of these things will come and kill you , and when they saw that some of them , they will know that some of them . ”
GOLD:	Right now you have plenty and can help those who are in need . Later , they will have plenty and can share with you when you need it . In this way , things will be equal .

ID:	5411
INPUT:	Aurrez aurre hitz egin zizuen Jaunak mendian , suaren erditik .
PRED:	Then the Lord spoke to you from the mountain of the Lord .
GOLD:	At the mountain the Lord spoke to you face to face from the heart of the fire .

ID:	5412
INPUT:	Davidek Ahimeleken seme Abiatar apaizari dei egin eta esan zion : — <unk> , mesedez , efod hori . Ekarri zion Abiatarrek Davidi efoda .
PRED:	Then David called the priest to Eleazar the priest , and he said to him , “ Please give me a sacred ephod , the priest , the priest , the priest , the priest , and the priest of David . ”
GOLD:	Then he said to Abiathar the priest , “ Bring me the ephod ! ” So Abiathar brought it .

ID:	5413
INPUT:	<unk> askatzen ari zirela , <unk> galdetu zieten : — Zergatik askatzen duzue astakumea ?
PRED:	When the people of Assyria arrived , they asked , “ Why have you come to Assyria ? ”
GOLD:	And sure enough , as they were untying it , the owners asked them , “ Why are you untying that colt ? ”

ID:	5414
INPUT:	Baduzu <unk> eta niregatik nekeak jasan dituzu , etsi gabe .
PRED:	“ ‘ I know that you have filled with me , and you have filled my decrees . '
GOLD:	You have patiently suffered for me without quitting .

ID:	5415
INPUT:	Idatz iezaiozu Tiatirako eliz elkartearen aingeruari : Hona zer dioen Jainkoaren Semeak , begiak sugarra bezalako eta oinak brontze goriaren antzeko dituenak :
PRED:	This message came to the angel of the church in the church : This is what the angel of God says :
GOLD:	“ Write this letter to the angel of the church in Thyatira . This is the message from the Son of God , whose eyes are like flames of fire , whose feet are like polished bronze :

ID:	5416
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> gara gu , ez dakigu ezer , gure egunak ez baitira itzala baizik munduan .
PRED:	We know that we have seen , but we have many days , but we have no hope in the world .
GOLD:	For we were born but yesterday and know nothing.Our days on earth are as fleeting as a shadow .

ID:	5417
INPUT:	<unk> Urtea ( Jubileu Urtea )
PRED:	A Message about the Year of Jubilee
GOLD:	Redemption of the Poor and Enslaved

ID:	5418
INPUT:	Orduan , Jehuk agindu zion jantzi sakratuen arduradunari : — Atera jantzi sakratuak Baalen adoratzaile guztientzat . Eta atera zituen .
PRED:	Then Jehu told him , “ Get rid of Baal and put them on the sacred garments of Baal . ” So Jehu brought them to Baal .
GOLD:	And Jehu instructed the keeper of the wardrobe , “ Be sure that every worshiper of Baal wears one of these robes . ” So robes were given to them .

ID:	5419
INPUT:	Aita gaizki hartu eta ama etxetik bidaltzen <unk> lotsabako eta <unk> da .
PRED:	But the Father and mother of my mother , and his mother will be with flesh and fig tree .
GOLD:	Children who mistreat their father or chase away their motherare an embarrassment and a public disgrace .

ID:	5420
INPUT:	Egun horretatik aurrera , jakingo dute israeldarrek ni naizela Jauna , beraien Jainkoa .
PRED:	On that day the people of Israel will know that I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	And from that time on the people of Israel will know that I am the Lord their God .

ID:	5421
INPUT:	Ater , <unk> , <unk> ,
PRED:	The leaders of the officials of the city , who were filled with power ,
GOLD:	Hodiah , Hashum , Bezai ,

ID:	5422
INPUT:	<unk> , erregearen aurrean zeuden <unk> batek , esan zuen : — Hamanek prestatua du , hain zuzen , urkabea Mardokeorentzat , bizia salbatu <unk> . Hamanen etxean dago eraikia , hogeita bost metro ditu . — <unk> bezate Haman bertan ! — esan zuen erregeak .
PRED:	At that time some of the king had been furious , and he said , “ The king has given me authority to Queen Esther , and he has given him success . ” So the king said , “ The king is very angry with the king . ”
GOLD:	Then Harbona , one of the king 's eunuchs , said , “ Haman has set up a sharpened pole that stands seventy-five feet tall in his own courtyard . He intended to use it to impale Mordecai , the man who saved the king from assassination . ” “ Then impale Haman on it ! ” the king ordered .

ID:	5423
INPUT:	Xaaraim , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> : hamalau hiri eta beraien herrixkak .
PRED:	Some of these towns — along with their surrounding villages , and they were surrounding villages .
GOLD:	Shaaraim , Adithaim , Gederah , and Gederothaim — fourteen towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	5424
INPUT:	Baduzu itxaropenik etorkizunerako : zure <unk> itzuliko dira . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	“ I will tell you what the Lord says : I will give you glory to your people .
GOLD:	There is hope for your future , ” says the Lord . “ Your children will come again to their own land .

ID:	5425
INPUT:	Eta une berean , ireki egin zitzaizkion belarriak , mihia askatu eta garbi hitz egiten hasi zen .
PRED:	Then the man healed him , and they began talking about him .
GOLD:	Instantly the man could hear perfectly , and his tongue was freed so he could speak plainly !

ID:	5426
INPUT:	Zeure haserreaz inguratu zara , eta pertsegitu egin gaituzu , erruki gabe sarraskitu .
PRED:	You have overwhelmed me with pain ; you have no mercy on your enemies .
GOLD:	“ You have engulfed us with your anger , chased us down , and slaughtered us without mercy .

ID:	5427
INPUT:	« <unk> hiltzen duenak , aberea itzuliko du ; gizakia hiltzen duena heriotzara emango dute .
PRED:	“ Anyone who eats the animal will be stoned to death , and they will die .
GOLD:	“ Whoever kills an animal must pay for it in full , but whoever kills another person must be put to death .

ID:	5428
INPUT:	Herri jendetsua erregearen ohore , jende gutxiko herria <unk> hondamendi .
PRED:	They have become strong and strong , and those who have been filled with great power .
GOLD:	A growing population is a king 's glory ; a prince without subjects has nothing .

ID:	5429
INPUT:	« Jubileu Urtean zuetako bakoitzak bere lurren jabetza berreskuratuko du .
PRED:	“ Each year you must return to the Year of Jubilee .
GOLD:	In the Year of Jubilee each of you may return to the land that belonged to your ancestors .

ID:	5430
INPUT:	Baina zu zara , Jauna , nire babeski , zu nire ohore . Zuk didazu burua jasotzen .
PRED:	O Lord , you are my fortress ; you are my refuge .
GOLD:	I cried out to the Lord , and he answered me from his holy mountain.Interlude

ID:	5431
INPUT:	Babiloniaren zigorra
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Message about Babylon
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	5432
INPUT:	Ez arbuiatu erregearen nagusigoa , eta ez jardun gaiztakerian , nahi duen <unk> baitu erregeak .
PRED:	Do not be angry with the king , and I will not punish you by the king 's anger .
GOLD:	Do n't try to avoid doing your duty , and do n't stand with those who plot evil , for the king can do whatever he wants .

ID:	5433
INPUT:	Aurkitu ez zituztelarik , Jason eta beste zenbait senide hiriko agintarien aurrera eraman zituzten arrastaka , eta oihuka zioten : « Mundu guztia nahastu duten horiek bertaraino iritsi zaizkigu ,
PRED:	Then he did n't let the other believers go to the city of the city and all the people of Jerusalem . They shouted , “ We have done everything you have done .
GOLD:	Not finding them there , they dragged out Jason and some of the other believers instead and took them before the city council . “ Paul and Silas have caused trouble all over the world , ” they shouted , “ and now they are here disturbing our city , too .

ID:	5434
INPUT:	Erbestetik etorritakoen <unk> izugarria zela eta , Israelen Jainkoaren hitzari begirune zioten guztiak nire ondoan bildu ziren . Ni , lur jota , eserita egon nintzen arratsaldeko oparia arte .
PRED:	At that time , the king of Israel became pregnant , and all the people of Israel were sitting on my behalf . I was deeply troubled , for I was deeply troubled .
GOLD:	Then all who trembled at the words of the God of Israel came and sat with me because of this outrage committed by the returned exiles . And I sat there utterly appalled until the time of the evening sacrifice .

ID:	5435
INPUT:	Bildu zituen Israelgo erregeak profetak , laurehun inguru , eta galdegin zien : — Joango al naiz Galaadeko Ramoti erasotzera , ala utzi egingo dut ? Profetek erantzun zioten : — Eraso ! Zeure eskuetara emango dizu Jaunak .
PRED:	Then the king of Israel asked them , “ Should I go to war against Ramoth-gilead ? ” “ Should I go to war against Ramoth-gilead ? ” “ Yes , ” the Lord replied , “ I will give you victory over you ! ”
GOLD:	So the king of Israel summoned the prophets , about 400 of them , and asked them , “ Should I go to war against Ramoth-gilead , or should I hold back ? ” They all replied , “ Yes , go right ahead ! The Lord will give the king victory . ”

ID:	5436
INPUT:	<unk> aitak emaztetzat eman nahi ez badio , berriz , neska <unk> dagokien dotea eman beharko du .
PRED:	But if my father has given birth to her , he would not be married . But if the woman has given herself to her , it will be the daughter of her .
GOLD:	“ If a man seduces a virgin who is not engaged to anyone and has sex with her , he must pay the customary bride price and marry her .

ID:	5437
INPUT:	« Gizakia Jainkoarentzat izaten ote onuragarri ? Zentzu onekoa bere buruarentzat da onuragarri !
PRED:	“ Will you compare with dishonest scales ? How can you compare with dishonest scales ?
GOLD:	“ Can a person do anything to help God ? Can even a wise person be helpful to him ?

ID:	5438
INPUT:	<unk> bota egin beharko duzueta zure hitz atseginak alferrikakoak izango lirateke .
PRED:	I will make you very angry with your mouth , and your words will be very hard .
GOLD:	You will throw up what little you 've eaten , and your compliments will be wasted .

ID:	5439
INPUT:	Jesus eta haurrak
PRED:	Jesus and Children
GOLD:	The Rich Man

ID:	5440
INPUT:	baizik eta lurrera isuriko duzue , ura bezala .
PRED:	You will pour out the water and pour out the water .
GOLD:	Instead , pour out the blood on the ground like water .

ID:	5441
INPUT:	Larrialdi eta atsekabe <unk> beharko baduzue ere , irakasle duzuen <unk> zaizue gehiago ezkutatuko ; zeuen begiz ikusiko duzue .
PRED:	But if you have seen , you will know that you have seen me , and you will see that you will see that you will see you .
GOLD:	Though the Lord gave you adversity for foodand suffering for drink , he will still be with you to teach you.You will see your teacher with your own eyes .

ID:	5442
INPUT:	Zatozte eta entzun , ene semeok ; entzun arretaz zeuen aita Israeli :
PRED:	Come and listen to my father , listen to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Come and listen , you sons of Jacob ; listen to Israel , your father .

ID:	5443
INPUT:	Abram Kanaan lurraldean jarri zen bizitzen , eta Lot ibarreko hirietan . Honen oihal-etxolak Sodoma bertaraino hedatzen ziren .
PRED:	Abram lived in Canaan and settled in the land of Canaan , where Abram lived in the towns of Canaan .
GOLD:	So Abram settled in the land of Canaan , and Lot moved his tents to a place near Sodom and settled among the cities of the plain .

ID:	5444
INPUT:	Josiasen gainerako jarduerak , Jaunaren legea betetzeko izan zuen leialtasuna
PRED:	The rest of the events in the Lord 's reign , in the Book of the Law of Josiah .
GOLD:	The rest of the events of Josiah 's reign and his acts of devotion ( carried out according to what was written in the Law of the Lord ) ,

ID:	5445
INPUT:	Lebiri deia . Jesus bekatariekin bazkaltzen
PRED:	Jesus Heals Many People
GOLD:	A Discussion about the Sabbath

ID:	5446
INPUT:	Berriro ezarri nituen epe jakinetan egin behar ziren <unk> , baita lurraren lehen fruituen eskaintzak ere . « Oi ene Jainko , gogora zaitez nitaz , eta har nazazu onez ! »
PRED:	Then I gave you this message to you , and I will give you a grain offering of your grain offering and new wine , O Sovereign Lord , and you have given me a blessing . ”
GOLD:	I also made sure that the supply of wood for the altar and the first portions of the harvest were brought at the proper times.Remember this in my favor , O my God .

ID:	5447
INPUT:	NEKALDIA ETA PIZTUERA ( 26 , 1 — 28 , 15 )
PRED:	Jesus Anointed at Bethany
GOLD:	The Plot to Kill Jesus

ID:	5448
INPUT:	<unk> semea , itxaropena dagoen bitartean ; baina ez hartu <unk> , hiltzeraino zigortuz .
PRED:	But when I heard that my son , I would not listen to you because of my prayer .
GOLD:	Discipline your children while there is hope.Otherwise you will ruin their lives .

ID:	5449
INPUT:	« Adi , zeruok , eta mintzatuko naiz , entzun , lurra , nire ahoko esanak ;
PRED:	Arise , and listen to me , and I will hear my words .
GOLD:	“ Listen , O heavens , and I will speak ! Hear , O earth , the words that I say !

ID:	5450
INPUT:	Beraz , senideok , Jesu Kristoren odolari esker konfiantza dugu santutegian sartzeko ,
PRED:	Therefore , dear brothers and sisters , we will be ashamed of Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	And so , dear brothers and sisters , we can boldly enter heaven 's Most Holy Place because of the blood of Jesus .

ID:	5451
INPUT:	<unk> zen , eta jendeak baztertua , <unk> , sufritzen ikasia . <unk> ere nazka ematen <unk> bezalaxe , mespretxatu egin genuen , eta aintzakotzat hartu ez .
PRED:	At that time , when they saw that when they were afraid of what they had happened , and when they were afraid of them , they knew that they were afraid of them .
GOLD:	He was despised and rejected — a man of sorrows , acquainted with deepest grief.We turned our backs on him and looked the other way.He was despised , and we did not care .

ID:	5452
INPUT:	Orobat bi talentu hartu zituenak : <unk> eta beste bi irabazi zituen .
PRED:	Solomon had given two silver and gold , along with bronze , and he had two bronze .
GOLD:	The servant with two bags of silver also went to work and earned two more .

ID:	5453
INPUT:	Eta apaizei esan zien : « Hartu itun-kutxa eta jar zaitezte herriaren aurrean » . Apaizak itun-kutxa hartu eta herriaren aurretik abiatu ziren .
PRED:	Then the priests said to them , “ Take the Ark of the Covenant and make the Ark of the Covenant in front of the Ark of the Covenant . ” So they left the Ark of the Covenant .
GOLD:	In the morning Joshua said to the priests , “ Lift up the Ark of the Covenant and lead the people across the river . ” And so they started out and went ahead of the people .

ID:	5454
INPUT:	Eta niregatik Jainkoa goresten zuten .
PRED:	And they sang this song to God , for they were my prayer .
GOLD:	And they praised God because of me .

ID:	5455
INPUT:	Ez naiz atsegin bila ari <unk> eta <unk> batera ; bakarrik <unk> behartu nauzu , zeure suminaz betea nauzu eta .
PRED:	I do n't know that I am very angry with you , and when I know that I am very very angry with you , and I will make you very angry with you .
GOLD:	I never joined the people in their merry feasts.I sat alone because your hand was on me.I was filled with indignation at their sins .

ID:	5456
INPUT:	Jaunak itsasoaren <unk> du eskua , erreinuak <unk> ditu ; Kanaango <unk> agindu du .
PRED:	For the Lord has destroyed all the kingdoms of the nations , and he has given them victory over all the nations .
GOLD:	The Lord held out his hand over the seaand shook the kingdoms of the earth.He has spoken out against Phoenicia , ordering that her fortresses be destroyed .

ID:	5457
INPUT:	Eta luze hitz egin zien parabola bidez . Honela mintzatu zitzaien : « Atera zen behin ereilea hazia ereitera .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ This is how the farmer told them , “ A farmer is going into a field . ” So the seed fell on the road .
GOLD:	He told many stories in the form of parables , such as this one : “ Listen ! A farmer went out to plant some seeds .

ID:	5458
INPUT:	hau <unk> , hau <unk> , hau <unk> ,
PRED:	And when they heard this , they became very sad , and when they saw that they were filled with him .
GOLD:	son of Zerahiah , son of Uzzi , son of Bukki ,

ID:	5459
INPUT:	Hemezortzi mila gudari benjamindar ausart erori ziren .
PRED:	The men of Benjamin were defeated by Benjamin .
GOLD:	That day 18,000 of Benjamin 's strongest warriors died in battle .

ID:	5460
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun : — Ez dakizue zer eskatzen ari zareten . Gauza al zarete nik edan behar dudan edari saminetik edateko ? — Bai , gauza gara — esan zioten .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't you realize that you do n't want me to drink the cup of suffering of suffering ? ” And they replied , “ Yes , we have given me a cup of suffering . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus answered by saying to them , “ You do n't know what you are asking ! Are you able to drink from the bitter cup of suffering I am about to drink ? ” “ Oh yes , ” they replied , “ we are able ! ”

ID:	5461
INPUT:	Benetan ikasbide ona da nik emandakoa , ez baztertu nire irakaspena .
PRED:	This is good to the truth , for I have not rejected my instructions .
GOLD:	for I am giving you good guidance.Do n't turn away from my instructions .

ID:	5462
INPUT:	Israelgo buruzagien aurkako mezua
PRED:	A Message for the people of Israel
GOLD:	The Shepherds of Israel

ID:	5463
INPUT:	Akab erregea hil zenean , Israelen kontra jaiki ziren moabdarrak .
PRED:	When Ahab died , the king of Israel killed Moab .
GOLD:	After King Ahab 's death , the land of Moab rebelled against Israel .

ID:	5464
INPUT:	Jesusek eskua hartu zion eta <unk> alde egin ; orduan , emakumea jaiki eta zerbitzatzen hasi zitzaion .
PRED:	Then Jesus took his hand and healed him , and she began to sit on her head .
GOLD:	But when Jesus touched her hand , the fever left her . Then she got up and prepared a meal for him .

ID:	5465
INPUT:	Hitz hauekin , nekez bada ere , kendu zioten jendeari oparia eskaintzeko asmoa .
PRED:	That is why they wanted to offer their gifts to the people .
GOLD:	But even with these words , Paul and Barnabas could scarcely restrain the people from sacrificing to them .

ID:	5466
INPUT:	ez dezan etsaiak esan : « Garaitu dut » . Ez bedi nire arerioa nire hondamendiaz poztu !
PRED:	For I have not defeated the enemy from the enemy , for I have heard the enemy of the enemy .
GOLD:	But I trust in your unfailing love.I will rejoice because you have rescued me .

ID:	5467
INPUT:	Mihia zaintzen duenak bizia babesten du ; <unk> sobera darama <unk> .
PRED:	And those who plant your life will be filled with pain .
GOLD:	Those who control their tongue will have a long life ; opening your mouth can ruin everything .

ID:	5468
INPUT:	Morroiak galdetu zion : — Nola banatuko dut hau ehun gizonen artean ? Eliseok erantzun : — Banatu jendeari , eta jan dezatela . Hau baitio Jaunak : « <unk> dute eta sobera geldituko da » .
PRED:	“ How can I find a hundred times ? ” Elisha asked . “ I will give you a great feast among the people , ” Elisha replied . “ There will be a few who are left , and they will die . ”
GOLD:	“ What ? ” his servant exclaimed . “ Feed a hundred people with only this ? ” But Elisha repeated , “ Give it to the people so they can eat , for this is what the Lord says : Everyone will eat , and there will even be some left over ! ”

ID:	5469
INPUT:	<unk> bat eroriko balitz , besteak jasoko luke ; baina <unk> bakarrik dagoena ; eroriko balitz , ez bailuke izango nork jaso .
PRED:	If they were killed , they will be able to be able to be able to be able to kill him . If they were killed , they would n't be able to be able to kill you .
GOLD:	If one person falls , the other can reach out and help . But someone who falls alone is in real trouble .

ID:	5470
INPUT:	Gaiztoak zelatan egoten zaizkio zintzoari , nola hilko asmatzen .
PRED:	The wicked die in ambush , and they will die in their mouths .
GOLD:	The wicked wait in ambush for the godly , looking for an excuse to kill them .

ID:	5471
INPUT:	Biharamunean , Santiagoren etxera joan ginen Paulo eta <unk> ; han zeuden bilduak arduradun guztiak ere .
PRED:	The next day we went to the house of Cyprus and Silas , where they were there .
GOLD:	The next day Paul went with us to meet with James , and all the elders of the Jerusalem church were present .

ID:	5472
INPUT:	« Zortzigarren egunean , <unk> batzarra izango duzue eta ez da ohiko lan arruntik egingo .
PRED:	“ On that day the eighth day , you must be sure that the eighth day , and you must not be a Sabbath day .
GOLD:	“ On the eighth day of the festival , proclaim another holy day . You must do no ordinary work on that day .

ID:	5473
INPUT:	Etsaiak atzetik harrapatu eta jo egin zitueneta behin betiko porrokatu .
PRED:	My enemies surround me and crushed them with their strength .
GOLD:	He routed his enemiesand sent them to eternal shame .

ID:	5474
INPUT:	begi harroak , mihi gezurtia , errugabearen odola isurtzen duten eskuak ,
PRED:	The tongue of my life is full of life , and the blood of death will be cut off .
GOLD:	haughty eyes , a lying tongue , hands that kill the innocent ,

ID:	5475
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Apaiz eta profetak <unk> bihurtu dira , neure tenpluan bertan <unk> <unk> gaiztakerien <unk> .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : Because of my prophets , the prophets and prophets and prophets who were buried in the Temple of the Temple , and they will know that they were buried in the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Even the priests and prophetsare ungodly , wicked men.I have seen their despicable actsright here in my own Temple , ” says the Lord .

ID:	5476
INPUT:	Eguna zabaldu zuenean , oso urduri zegoen faraoia eta , Egiptoko azti eta jakintsu guztiei deiturik , ametsa kontatu zien . Baina inor ez zen gauza izan faraoiaren ametsak argitzeko .
PRED:	At the next morning I saw that Pharaoh was very angry with Pharaoh and his chief baker , and he told all the wise men of Egypt . But when he was in Pharaoh 's heart , he was with all his heart .
GOLD:	The next morning Pharaoh was very disturbed by the dreams . So he called for all the magicians and wise men of Egypt . When Pharaoh told them his dreams , not one of them could tell him what they meant .

ID:	5477
INPUT:	Jarri ziren , beraz , eta jan eta edan zuten biek elkarrekin . Gero , neskaren aitak esan zion : — Igaro ezazu , arren , beste gau bat hemen eta alai zaitez .
PRED:	So they ate as they were eating and drink . Then they said to him , “ Let 's be a few of the men of Israel , ” they said . “ Get ready for the day of Israel . ”
GOLD:	So the two men sat down together and had something to eat and drink . Then the woman 's father said , “ Please stay another night and enjoy yourself . ”

ID:	5478
INPUT:	Orduan , Ehudek <unk> luzatu , eskuineko <unk> zekarren ezpata hartu eta sabelean sartu zion erregeari
PRED:	When the men saw what had happened , he tore his hands on his right hand , and his right hand came to the king .
GOLD:	Ehud reached with his left hand , pulled out the dagger strapped to his right thigh , and plunged it into the king 's belly .

ID:	5479
INPUT:	Mikmasekoak 122 ;
PRED:	The people of Anathoth128
GOLD:	The people of Micmash122

ID:	5480
INPUT:	Barneko atariak ere bazuen sarrera bat hegoaldera . Bi <unk> arteko <unk> neurtu zuen gizonak : berrogeita hamar metro .
PRED:	The king also had given him one of the guard , which was also 175 feet high . He was 30 feet tall .
GOLD:	And here again , directly opposite the outer gateway , was another gateway that led into the inner courtyard . The distance between the two gateways was 175 feet .

ID:	5481
INPUT:	Horretarako , lurraldea hiru zatitan banatuko duzue eta hiri <unk> bideak <unk> , edozein <unk> nora ihes egin izan dezan .
PRED:	You must be assigned the land to each of these cities and under your own cities . In fact , you will be sure that they will be able to kill you .
GOLD:	Survey the territory , and divide the land the Lord your God is giving you into three districts , with one of these cities in each district . Then anyone who has killed someone can flee to one of the cities of refuge for safety .

ID:	5482
INPUT:	Horrela , beraz , aurrera egin zuten bidean . Benjaminen dagoen Gibea herritik hurbil zirelarik , gorde egin zen eguzkia .
PRED:	So they went out to the town of Benjamin , for the people of Benjamin went out to attack the town of Benjamin .
GOLD:	So they went on . The sun was setting as they came to Gibeah , a town in the land of Benjamin ,

ID:	5483
INPUT:	Tenpluaren eta hiriaren aurkako zigorra
PRED:	The Temple of the Temple
GOLD:	The Slaughter of Idolaters

ID:	5484
INPUT:	( Mt 15 , <unk> )
PRED:	Jesus Heals Many People
GOLD:	Pharisees Demand a Miraculous Sign

ID:	5485
INPUT:	Hik ez duk honetan eskurik , ez parterik , hire kontzientzia ez baita zuzena Jainkoaren aurrean .
PRED:	But do n't be afraid of the dead , for you do not be right with God .
GOLD:	You can have no part in this , for your heart is not right with God .

ID:	5486
INPUT:	Haiek erantzun : — Egiptoar batek defendatu gaitu artzainen kontra . Gainera , berak atera digu putzutik ura eta ardiei edaten eman .
PRED:	They replied , “ He has given us the descendants of the Amorites with us from the land of Canaan , and he brought us into the olive oil . ”
GOLD:	“ An Egyptian rescued us from the shepherds , ” they answered . “ And then he drew water for us and watered our flocks . ”

ID:	5487
INPUT:	« Jainkoaren erregetzarekin , landan ezkutatua dagoen <unk> bezala gertatzen da . Norbaitek aurkitzen duelarik , berriro ezkutatu egiten du , eta pozaren pozez joan , dituen guztiak saldu eta landa hura erosten du .
PRED:	“ This is the Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies says : If the rich person who finds that the rich person who finds that a person has been given to everyone who has given the fields , and everyone who has been given to the fields .
GOLD:	“ The Kingdom of Heaven is like a treasure that a man discovered hidden in a field . In his excitement , he hid it again and sold everything he owned to get enough money to buy the field .

ID:	5488
INPUT:	Norbaitek , heriotzara ez daraman <unk> bat egiten ikusten badu bere senidea , egin beza otoitz eta Jainkoak bizia emango dio ; heriotzara ez daraman bekatua egiten dutenei buruz diot hau . Izan ere , bada heriotzara daraman bekatua ere , eta ez dut esaten horren alde eskatzeko .
PRED:	If someone has been able to kill him , he will be able to turn to death and pray to death . He will not be put to death , and I will give you a sin to death .
GOLD:	If you see a fellow believer sinning in a way that does not lead to death , you should pray , and God will give that person life . But there is a sin that leads to death , and I am not saying you should pray for those who commit it .

ID:	5489
INPUT:	Hurrengo urtean , siriar gudarosteak eraso egin zion Joaxi . Judan eta Jerusalemen sartu , herriko agintariak hil eta harrapakin guztiak Damaskoko erregeari igorri zizkioten .
PRED:	On the third year of King Darius 's reign , the army of Judah sent him back to Jerusalem . He sent all the people of Judah to attack Jerusalem and killed all the people of Judah .
GOLD:	In the spring of the year the Aramean army marched against Joash . They invaded Judah and Jerusalem and killed all the leaders of the nation . Then they sent all the plunder back to their king in Damascus .

ID:	5490
INPUT:	<unk> doan ibaiaren ondoan bildu nituen gizon horiek , eta han gelditu ginen hiru egunez . Herriko jendea eta apaizak han zeudela ohartu nintzen , baina ez nuen <unk> aurkitu .
PRED:	As soon as they arrived at the east side of the Jordan River , they were there there there three days and three days . But when they saw that they were there , I saw that they were there .
GOLD:	I assembled the exiles at the Ahava Canal , and we camped there for three days while I went over the lists of the people and the priests who had arrived . I found that not one Levite had volunteered to come along .

ID:	5491
INPUT:	<unk> dago erregea zure edertasunaz . Bera da zure jaun ; egiozu agur .
PRED:	Your lord the king is very angry , and he is very very very angry .
GOLD:	The princess of Tyre will shower you with gifts.The wealthy will beg your favor .

ID:	5492
INPUT:	<unk> , mahastirik eta <unk> ederrenak kenduko dizkizue , bere zerbitzariei emateko .
PRED:	She will remove some of wild animals and fig trees , and he will give you a wild animal .
GOLD:	He will take away the best of your fields and vineyards and olive groves and give them to his own officials .

ID:	5493
INPUT:	Horregatik , estali dolu-jantziz , egin negar eta intziri ; ez , ez da Jaunaren <unk> aldendu .
PRED:	Therefore , weep for burlap and weep , for they have not heard that they were afraid of the Lord , and they would not listen to the Lord .
GOLD:	So put on clothes of mourningand weep with broken hearts , for the fierce anger of the Lordis still upon us .

ID:	5494
INPUT:	Orduan , mezu hau igorri zion Salomonek Tiroko errege <unk> : « <unk> bidali zenion gure aita Davidi , bere jauregia eraikitzeko .
PRED:	Then King Solomon sent this message to King Solomon : “ At that time of Tyre , the king of Tyre , have sent me to build my palace .
GOLD:	He enlisted a force of 70,000 laborers , 80,000 men to quarry stone in the hill country , and 3,600 foremen .

ID:	5495
INPUT:	<unk> zuzenak ezarri dituzu , zeharo fidagarriak .
PRED:	All who obey your commandments will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	Your laws are perfectand completely trustworthy .

ID:	5496
INPUT:	Orduan , <unk> egingo dute <unk> gorrek entzun .
PRED:	And when they heard that the blind will be heard , and the blind will hear that the blind will be heard .
GOLD:	And when he comes , he will open the eyes of the blindand unplug the ears of the deaf .

ID:	5497
INPUT:	Nagusiak , errukiturik , dena barkatu eta libre utzi zuen zerbitzaria .
PRED:	“ My servant , forgive her , and forgive her .
GOLD:	Then his master was filled with pity for him , and he released him and forgave his debt .

ID:	5498
INPUT:	« Erantzun , ahal baduzu , presta zaitez aurre egiteko .
PRED:	“ Do n't go up to you ? Do you go up and attack you ?
GOLD:	Answer me , if you can ; make your case and take your stand .

ID:	5499
INPUT:	Libratuko zaituztet zu eta Jerusalem Asiriako erregearen eskuetatik eta babestuko dut hiri hau » .
PRED:	I will rescue you from your power and rescue you from Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	and I will rescue you and this city from the king of Assyria . Yes , I will defend this city .

ID:	5500
INPUT:	Eta Judako Baalatik abiatu zen , bere jende guztiarekin , Jaunaren kutxa handik ekartzeko asmoz . Kutxa hau Jaunaren izenari eskainia dago , izaki hegaldunen gainean jarria dagoen Jaun ahalguztidunaren izenari .
PRED:	Then the Ark of Judah went to the Ark of the Lord and all the people of Judah and the Ark of the Lord , which is an altar of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	He led them to Baalah of Judah to bring back the Ark of God , which bears the name of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who is enthroned between the cherubim .

ID:	5501
INPUT:	haserre bizitan jarriko naiz eta gerraz hilko zaituztet ; orduan , zuen emazteak bihurtuko dira alargun eta zuen seme-alabak umezurtz .
PRED:	Then I will destroy you and destroy you . Then I will destroy you and mother 's sons and daughters , orphans , and widows .
GOLD:	If you exploit them in any way and they cry out to me , then I will certainly hear their cry .

ID:	5502
INPUT:	Esauk begitan hartu zuen Jakob , honek aitarengandik lortutako <unk> . Honela zioen berekiko : « Hurbil duk gure aitaren <unk> ; orduan , Jakob nire anaia hilko diat » .
PRED:	Esau was very angry with his own family , because he had been given to his father . He said , “ He has been very very angry with me . ” So Jacob said , “ I will kill me . ”
GOLD:	From that time on , Esau hated Jacob because their father had given Jacob the blessing . And Esau began to scheme : “ I will soon be mourning my father 's death . Then I will kill my brother , Jacob . ”

ID:	5503
INPUT:	Erregeak oso zakar erantzun zion herriari , kontseilariek emana zioten aholkua aintzat hartu gabe ,
PRED:	But the king replied to the people of Israel , “ I have not given you my advice . ”
GOLD:	But Rehoboam spoke harshly to the people , for he rejected the advice of the older counselors

ID:	5504
INPUT:	Samuelek esan zuen : « Bil ezazue herri osoa Mitzpan eta nik otoitz eginen diot Jaunari zuen alde » .
PRED:	Samuel said to him , “ Let us go to the people of Israel and pray to the Lord at Mizpah . ”
GOLD:	Then Samuel told them , “ Gather all of Israel to Mizpah , and I will pray to the Lord for you . ”

ID:	5505
INPUT:	<unk> giza <unk> hutsez jaio zen ; emazte <unk> , berriz , Jainkoaren agintzariaren indarrez .
PRED:	And when they were born , the wife of God was born to be very old , and when he became very weak .
GOLD:	The son of the slave wife was born in a human attempt to bring about the fulfillment of God 's promise . But the son of the freeborn wife was born as God 's own fulfillment of his promise .

ID:	5506
INPUT:	Azkenik , bertso hauek abestu zituen : « Ai ene ! Nor aterako da <unk> ekingo dionean ?
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits me , ” he asked . “ Who will be my people ? Who will be my people ?
GOLD:	Balaam concluded his messages by saying : “ Alas , who can surviveunless God has willed it ?

ID:	5507
INPUT:	Ez ugaritu hitzaldi handizaleak , ez izan <unk> zeuen ahoan ; dena dakien Jainkoa baitugu Jauna , berak epaitzen ditu egintzak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Do n't be kind to all who fear him , for we have done wrong .
GOLD:	“ Stop acting so proud and haughty ! Do n't speak with such arrogance ! For the Lord is a God who knows what you have done ; he will judge your actions .

ID:	5508
INPUT:	Labanek Zilpa bere neskamea eman zion bere alaba Leari neskametzat .
PRED:	Laban gave Jacob a second message to Laban .
GOLD:	( Laban had given Leah a servant , Zilpah , to be her maid . )

ID:	5509
INPUT:	Izan Jaunari begirune zuek , hari <unk> , ez baitzaie ezer faltako begirune diotenei .
PRED:	For those who fear the Lord will punish you , for they will be disgraced .
GOLD:	Even strong young lions sometimes go hungry , but those who trust in the Lord will lack no good thing .

ID:	5510
INPUT:	Berehala aurkeztu zitzaizkion apaizburuak eta judu handikiak , Paulo salatzera .
PRED:	So the leading priests and the leading priests and the leading priests and the leading priests to the Jews .
GOLD:	where the leading priests and other Jewish leaders met with him and made their accusations against Paul .

ID:	5511
INPUT:	« Egin itzazu <unk> eta uztarria , eta hartu lepoan .
PRED:	“ Let them be kind of yoke , and let them put on your shoulders .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord said to me : “ Make a yoke , and fasten it on your neck with leather straps .

ID:	5512
INPUT:	Gaiztoen <unk> ez du <unk> zintzoei emandako lurraldean , zintzoak ere has ez daitezen bidegabekeria egiten .
PRED:	For if they have seen the Lord , they will know that they are righteous , and those who are righteous .
GOLD:	The wicked will not rule the land of the godly , for then the godly might be tempted to do wrong .

ID:	5513
INPUT:	Nola gorde dezake gazteak bere burua garbi ? Bere bizimodua zure <unk> egokituz .
PRED:	How can your young men be clean ? How can your young men be clean ?
GOLD:	How can a young person stay pure ? By obeying your word .

ID:	5514
INPUT:	<unk> ezereztu egiten ditu , munduko <unk> pareko bihurtzen .
PRED:	And when they are weak , they will see that they will be weak with power .
GOLD:	He judges the great people of the worldand brings them all to nothing .

ID:	5515
INPUT:	<unk> da <unk> , bereak ez balitu bezala ; ez zaio axola bere nekeak alferrikako gertatzea .
PRED:	For when they know that they are , they do n't know that they do n't realize that the things we had done .
GOLD:	She is harsh toward her young , as if they were not her own.She does n't care if they die .

ID:	5516
INPUT:	entzun zuk zerutik , bizi zaren toki horretatik , eta barkatu . Egizu har dezala nork bere jokaeraren ordaina , ongi baitakizu halakoaren barruaren berri ; izan ere , zuk bakarrik dakizu gizon-emakume guztien barruaren berri .
PRED:	May you hear from heaven from heaven and curse you from heaven and curse you , for you are trying to know that God has come , for they are trying to know the way of all the world .
GOLD:	then hear from heaven where you live , and forgive . Give your people what their actions deserve , for you alone know each human heart .

ID:	5517
INPUT:	Sasijainkoei eskainitako <unk> , denok dakigu , noski , jakin behar dena . Baina jakiteak harrotu egiten du ; maitasunak bakarrik hazarazten du fedean .
PRED:	We know that some of these things were baptized , but we know that I am not able to know that God 's wife is a liar . But when I know that God 's kindness is true .
GOLD:	Now regarding your question about food that has been offered to idols . Yes , we know that “ we all have knowledge ” about this issue . But while knowledge makes us feel important , it is love that strengthens the church .

ID:	5518
INPUT:	Ni , Kohelet , Israel herriaren errege izana <unk> .
PRED:	But when the army of Israel heard this , the king of Israel was commander of his army .
GOLD:	I , the Teacher , was king of Israel , and I lived in Jerusalem .

ID:	5519
INPUT:	Ez izan beldurrik gorputza hil bai , baina bizia hondatu ezin dutenei ; izan beldur , gorputza ez ezik , pertsona osoa <unk> honda <unk> .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of your body , but those who are dead will not be afraid to be afraid of those who are dead . But if they were afraid , they will be afraid to be afraid .
GOLD:	“ Do n't be afraid of those who want to kill your body ; they can not touch your soul . Fear only God , who can destroy both soul and body in hell .

ID:	5520
INPUT:	Jainko salbatzaile dugu Jainkoa , Jainko Jaunari esker libratu gara heriotzatik .
PRED:	We have heard the Lord our God ; we have rescued us from the power of the Lord .
GOLD:	But God will smash the heads of his enemies , crushing the skulls of those who love their guilty ways .

ID:	5521
INPUT:	Joiakimen gainerako jarduerak eta egintzak « Judako Erregeen Kronika » liburuan daude idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Amon 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the Kings of Judah .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Jehoiakim 's reign and all his deeds are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .

ID:	5522
INPUT:	Ez egin jaramonik <unk> guztiei ; horrela , ez diozu entzungo zeure <unk> gaizki-esaka .
PRED:	Do n't listen to all these things that you would not listen to me . You have heard that you would not hear your evil desires .
GOLD:	Do n't eavesdrop on others — you may hear your servant curse you .

ID:	5523
INPUT:	Ez gara zuregandik inoiz aldenduko ; bizia emango diguzu eta guk zuri dei egingo .
PRED:	We will not abandon you , and we will call you to you .
GOLD:	Turn us again to yourself , O Lord God of Heaven 's Armies.Make your face shine down upon us.Only then will we be saved .

ID:	5524
INPUT:	Emakumeak , orduan , Eliseori : — Eskatu al nizun nik semerik ? Ez al nizun esan ez engainatzeko ?
PRED:	“ Why do you ask me ? ” she asked the woman . “ Do n't I do n't you ? ”
GOLD:	Then she said , “ Did I ask you for a son , my lord ? And did n't I say , ‘ Do n't deceive me and get my hopes up ' ? ”

ID:	5525
INPUT:	Berrogei urte zituen Saulen seme Ix-Boxetek Israelen errege izaten hasi zenean , eta bi urtez izan zen errege . Judak , aldiz , David onartu zuen errege .
PRED:	When Saul was forty years old , he began to rule over Israel for forty years . When he was king of Israel , he became king .
GOLD:	Ishbosheth , Saul 's son , was forty years old when he became king , and he ruled from Mahanaim for two years . Meanwhile , the people of Judah remained loyal to David .

ID:	5526
INPUT:	Ipini mahaia errezelaren aurrealdean , egoitzaren iparraldera , eta argimutila mahaiaren parean , hegoaldera .
PRED:	Put on the side of the Tabernacle , on the side of the Tabernacle , on the south side of the south side of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Place the table outside the inner curtain on the north side of the Tabernacle , and place the lampstand across the room on the south side .

ID:	5527
INPUT:	Emakumeak
PRED:	Young Women of Jerusalem
GOLD:	1:1

ID:	5528
INPUT:	Gogora ezazu zeure ituna , beteak baitaude herrialdeko bazterrak gogorkeriaz .
PRED:	May you be your covenant with all the nations of your land .
GOLD:	Remember your covenant promises , for the land is full of darkness and violence !

ID:	5529
INPUT:	Handik Gibeara zihoazelarik , hara non datorkien profeta-taldea . Hartu zuen Saul Jaunaren espirituak eta , besteekin batera , profeta-trantzean jarri zen bera ere .
PRED:	Then some of the men of the tribe of Benjamin came to meet some of the people of the Lord . Then the Spirit came out of the Lord came with them , and they came to meet him .
GOLD:	When Saul and his servant arrived at Gibeah , they saw a group of prophets coming toward them . Then the Spirit of God came powerfully upon Saul , and he , too , began to prophesy .

ID:	5530
INPUT:	emaguzu egunean eguneko ogia ,
PRED:	On the seventh day the first day of the festival ,
GOLD:	Give us each day the food we need ,

ID:	5531
INPUT:	Baina , egun hartatik aurrera , nire gizonen erdiak lan egiten zuen bitartean , beste erdia lantzaz , <unk> , <unk> eta <unk> armaturik egon ohi zen . Buruzagiek judu guztien ardura zuten .
PRED:	But when they went out to the roof of my people , they took off and took him into the control of all the people of all the people of the provinces and all the people of the world , and they began to know that they were very very very very much .
GOLD:	Then the people of Judah began to complain , “ The workers are getting tired , and there is so much rubble to be moved . We will never be able to build the wall by ourselves . ”

ID:	5532
INPUT:	Eramatzazu beti zeurekin , ezarri barru-barruan .
PRED:	Do n't let me keep on your feet , for I put them on your feet .
GOLD:	Tie them on your fingers as a reminder.Write them deep within your heart .

ID:	5533
INPUT:	Ez ahaztu zuekin egin duen ituna . Ez duzue beste jainkorik gurtuko .
PRED:	You must not forget your covenant with you . You must not worship other gods .
GOLD:	Do not forget the covenant I made with you , and do not worship other gods .

ID:	5534
INPUT:	Haiek , ordea , ez zuten entzun ; burugogor izan ziren , beraien gurasoak bezalaxe , ez baitzuten uste onik izan Jaunarengan , beren Jainkoarengan .
PRED:	But they did not listen to their own ways , just as they did , for they are their own children .
GOLD:	But the Israelites would not listen . They were as stubborn as their ancestors who had refused to believe in the Lord their God .

ID:	5535
INPUT:	Hauek ez dira giza odolekoak , ezta gizakiaren <unk> ere , Jainkoarengandik jaioak baizik .
PRED:	These are the men who were not able to kill him , but the man of God had been circumcised .
GOLD:	They are reborn — not with a physical birth resulting from human passion or plan , but a birth that comes from God .

ID:	5536
INPUT:	ERREGE ETA <unk> <unk> MEZUAK ( 21 , 1 — 24 , 10 )
PRED:	When we heard that we were king of Assyria ,
GOLD:	No Deliverance from Babylon

ID:	5537
INPUT:	Eta elkarteari esan zion : « Alde gizon gaizto horien etxola ingurutik eta ez ukitu <unk> ezer , horien bekatuengatik zeuek ere gal ez zaitezten » .
PRED:	Then the man said to the man , “ Get out of these instructions , and you must not touch their sins , and they will have stolen their sins . ”
GOLD:	“ Quick ! ” he told the people . “ Get away from the tents of these wicked men , and do n't touch anything that belongs to them . If you do , you will be destroyed for their sins . ”

ID:	5538
INPUT:	Jaunak bere <unk> duenean , Siongo bizilagunen <unk> ditueta Jerusalemen <unk> garbituko .
PRED:	For the Lord will punish those who are in Jerusalem , who have seen the power of those who have seen in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	The Lord will wash the filth from beautiful Zionand cleanse Jerusalem of its bloodstainswith the hot breath of fiery judgment .

ID:	5539
INPUT:	Bide zuzena utzirik , galdu egin dira , <unk> seme Balaam profetaren jokabideari jarraituz . Honek bidegabeko irabazia irrikatu zuen ;
PRED:	I will turn away from the right hand , and when Balaam son of Beor against you , he turned away from your own desires .
GOLD:	They have wandered off the right road and followed the footsteps of Balaam son of Beor , who loved to earn money by doing wrong .

ID:	5540
INPUT:	Beraz , ez zaie zilegi israeldarrei landan abererik hiltzea , baizik eta apaizari eraman behar diote elkarketa-etxolaren sarrerara , eta Jaunari eskaini elkartasun-oparitzat .
PRED:	So the people of Israel must not eat any of the sacred offerings , but the priest must take the sacred offerings to the Lord . They must take it to the Tabernacle and present it to the Lord .
GOLD:	The purpose of this rule is to stop the Israelites from sacrificing animals in the open fields . It will ensure that they bring their sacrifices to the priest at the entrance of the Tabernacle , so he can present them to the Lord as peace offerings .

ID:	5541
INPUT:	ez die inork esaten , ondotik pasatzean : « Bedeinka zaitzatela Jaunak ! Jaunaren izenean bedeinkatzen zaituztegu » .
PRED:	He will not tell you , “ May you bless you from the name of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	And may those who pass byrefuse to give them this blessing : “ The Lord bless you ; we bless you in the Lord 's name . ”

ID:	5542
INPUT:	Jakobek aitari : — Esau zure seme nagusia . Bete dut eskatu didazuna . Jaiki , mesedez , eseri eta jan nik <unk> , bedeinka nazazun .
PRED:	Jacob replied , “ I have given you your father , your servant , and I have given you your father , and I 'll eat you with you . ”
GOLD:	Jacob replied , “ It 's Esau , your firstborn son . I 've done as you told me . Here is the wild game . Now sit up and eat it so you can give me your blessing . ”

ID:	5543
INPUT:	Zure balentria ikaragarriak aipatzen dituzte , eta nik zure egintza handiak kontatzen .
PRED:	If you have been unfaithful to your own deeds , you have given me your wonderful deeds .
GOLD:	Your awe-inspiring deeds will be on every tongue ; I will proclaim your greatness .

ID:	5544
INPUT:	« Lehorrean dituzun <unk> dizkizu gerraz ; gerlariek <unk> dituzte zure kontra , lubetak eraikiko zuri <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	“ In that time you will be destroyed , and when your armies will be destroyed , they will be able to destroy you and Samaria .
GOLD:	First he will destroy your mainland villages . Then he will attack you by building a siege wall , constructing a ramp , and raising a roof of shields against you .

ID:	5545
INPUT:	« Zuek , Jainkoaren agindua bazterrera utzi eta giza ohiturari eusten diozue » .
PRED:	“ You must obey the commands of God , just as our God has commanded . ”
GOLD:	For you ignore God 's law and substitute your own tradition . ”

ID:	5546
INPUT:	<unk> , lurra <unk> datorren Jaunaren aurrean . <unk> gobernatuko du mundua eta leialtasunez herriak .
PRED:	And when the earth comes from the earth , the earth will be filled with great power .
GOLD:	before the Lord , for he is coming ! He is coming to judge the earth.He will judge the world with justice , and the nations with his truth .

ID:	5547
INPUT:	beste erresumak baino <unk> , eta ez da berriro nazioen gain jarriko . Txiki egingo dut , nazioak mendera ez ditzan .
PRED:	I will destroy the earth and the nations of the earth , and I will not be able to destroy the nations .
GOLD:	It will be the lowliest of all the nations , never again great enough to rise above its neighbors .

ID:	5548
INPUT:	Entzun , Jauna , errukarrien <unk> , <unk> adore , adi izan belarria haiengana ,
PRED:	O Lord , listen to you , and let me be glad .
GOLD:	Lord , you know the hopes of the helpless.Surely you will hear their cries and comfort them .

ID:	5549
INPUT:	Jaun ahalguztidunak erantzun hau eman zidan ,
PRED:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies said to me ,
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies sent me this message in reply :

ID:	5550
INPUT:	<unk> hurbildu zen Ehud . Erregea beretzat bakarrik zuen goiko gela freskoan zegoen eseria . Ehudek esan zion : — Jainkoaren mandatua dut zuretzat . Erregea jaiki egin zen aulkitik .
PRED:	When he arrived , he was only one of the king , he was one sitting on the room of the king . He said to him , “ I am the king of God . ”
GOLD:	Ehud walked over to Eglon , who was sitting alone in a cool upstairs room . And Ehud said , “ I have a message from God for you ! ” As King Eglon rose from his seat ,

ID:	5551
INPUT:	Ez duzu , hil eta gero , beste erregeen zoria izango , zeure lurraldea hondatu <unk> zeure herriko jendea hil . Zure , gaizkile horren , <unk> du luzaroan iraungo .
PRED:	You must not kill the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the earth , and you will be destroyed , and your people will be destroyed .
GOLD:	You will not be given a proper burial , for you have destroyed your nationand slaughtered your people.The descendants of such an evil personwill never again receive honor .

ID:	5552
INPUT:	( 2 Erg 18 , 2-3 )
PRED:	Ahaz Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Hezekiah Reopens the Temple

ID:	5553
INPUT:	Zure <unk> <unk> berri zabaltzen duteeta zure salbamena pozik oihukatzen .
PRED:	When they have heard your joy , they have filled with joy .
GOLD:	Everyone will share the story of your wonderful goodness ; they will sing with joy about your righteousness .

ID:	5554
INPUT:	Azkenean , Juda eta Jerusalemgo gizon guztiak , Josafat aurretik zutela , Jerusalemera itzuli ziren bozkarioz beterik , Jaunak poztu egin baitzituen beraien etsaiengandik libratuz .
PRED:	In all the people of Judah , King Jehoshaphat of Judah , and all the people of Judah returned to Jerusalem . The Lord was with them , and he rescued them .
GOLD:	Then all the men returned to Jerusalem , with Jehoshaphat leading them , overjoyed that the Lord had given them victory over their enemies .

ID:	5555
INPUT:	« Madarikatua abereekin haragizko bekatua egiten duena ! » Eta herri osoak erantzungo du : « Amen » .
PRED:	“ Cursed is anyone who has been unfaithful to himself , ” they said . “ Amen . ”
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who has sexual intercourse with an animal . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	5556
INPUT:	Beldurgarri gertatuko zaie Jauna : lurreko jainko <unk> ditu , eta herri guztiek gurtuko dute , baita <unk> ere , nork bere lurraldean .
PRED:	O Lord , you have seen the gods of the earth , and all the nations of the earth will know that all the people of the earth will worship you .
GOLD:	The Lord will terrify themas he destroys all the gods in the land.Then nations around the world will worship the Lord , each in their own land .

ID:	5557
INPUT:	Ez dut neure barnean <unk> aurkitzen , ez dut inolako laguntzarik .
PRED:	I ca n't know that they are dead , and I can not be broken .
GOLD:	No , I am utterly helpless , without any chance of success .

ID:	5558
INPUT:	Emakumeak erantzun zien : — Ongi . Hala bedi ! Eta agur egin zien . Alde egin zutenean , emakumeak lokarri gorria lotu zuen leihoan .
PRED:	“ All right , ” she replied . “ Let 's go into the inner courtyard . ” So the woman went into the inner courtyard . So the woman went into the inner courtyard .
GOLD:	“ I accept your terms , ” she replied . And she sent them on their way , leaving the scarlet rope hanging from the window .

ID:	5559
INPUT:	Babesle izan genituen , gau eta egun , beraien artean artzain ibili ginen bitarte guztian .
PRED:	Meanwhile , we left that day and camped at night .
GOLD:	In fact , day and night they were like a wall of protection to us and the sheep .

ID:	5560
INPUT:	Hain bihotzeko <unk> , prest geunden , Jainkoaren berri ona ez ezik , baita geure bizia ere zuei emateko . <unk> maite <unk> !
PRED:	For we know that we have been ready to know God 's Good News , and we have given you authority to know that we have seen God 's power .
GOLD:	We loved you so much that we shared with you not only God 's Good News but our own lives , too .

ID:	5561
INPUT:	<unk> dagokien heriotza lotsagarria izango duzu atzerritarren eskutik . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	For I will punish you , and you will be able to rescue you from the Lord . ”
GOLD:	You will die like an outcastat the hands of foreigners.I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	5562
INPUT:	Bere bidean zihoala , Jainkoaren aingeru batzuekin egin zuen topo Jakobek .
PRED:	As Jesus was going to meet him , the angel of God came to meet him .
GOLD:	When Jacob saw them , he exclaimed , “ This is God 's camp ! ” So he named the place Mahanaim .

ID:	5563
INPUT:	Aldi hartan Heber kendarra beste <unk> , hau da , Moisesen aitaginarreba zen <unk> ondorengoengandik banandu eta Kedex ondoan zegoen etxolatua , <unk> artearen inguruan .
PRED:	At that time the message came from the messengers : When they saw that the father-in-law of Moses , the father-in-law of Moses , who was sitting on that day .
GOLD:	Now Heber the Kenite , a descendant of Moses ' brother-in-law Hobab , had moved away from the other members of his tribe and pitched his tent by the oak of Zaanannim near Kedesh .

ID:	5564
INPUT:	Baditut , dagoeneko , laurogei urte . Uste al duzu badudala ahalmenik ona eta txarra bereizteko ? Edota <unk> gozatzeko ? Edota kantariei entzuteko ? Zuretzat oztopo baizik ez nintzateke izango , ene errege jauna .
PRED:	When the king heard this , he sent me back to me , and he has given me a thousand years . Do you think of me ? Has n't you come to me ?
GOLD:	Just to go across the Jordan River with the king is all the honor I need !

ID:	5565
INPUT:	benjamindarrak , eta inguratu , pertsegitu eta Gibearen <unk> atsedenik eman gabe oinperatu zituzten .
PRED:	They attacked Benjamin and camped at Gibeah , though they were killed .
GOLD:	The Israelites surrounded the men of Benjamin and chased them relentlessly , finally overtaking them east of Gibeah .

ID:	5566
INPUT:	Zuen alde otoitz egitean , eskerrak ematen dizkiogu etengabe Jainkoari , Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren Aitari ,
PRED:	We pray for our Lord Jesus Christ , for we pray for our Father Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	We always pray for you , and we give thanks to God , the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ .

ID:	5567
INPUT:	Eta Aaroni esan zion : « Hartu zekor bat barkamen-oparirako eta ahari bat erre-oparirako , akats gabeak biak , eta aurkez itzazu Jaunaren aurrean .
PRED:	Then Moses said to Aaron , “ Take a burnt offering and a burnt offering for a burnt offering and a burnt offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	He said to Aaron , “ Take a young bull for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering , both without defects , and present them to the Lord .

ID:	5568
INPUT:	Hogeita hamabi urte zituen errege izaten hastean eta zortzi urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen .
PRED:	Jehoahaz was twenty-two years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years .
GOLD:	Jehoram was thirty-two years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years .

ID:	5569
INPUT:	<unk> zuenganako izua eta beldurra sartuko diet munduko herri guztiei : zuen berri jakitean , ikara larriak hartuko ditu .
PRED:	And when they were afraid of the world , I will see all the nations of the world , and they will see all the nations of the world .
GOLD:	Beginning today I will make people throughout the earth terrified because of you . When they hear reports about you , they will tremble with dread and fear . ' ”

ID:	5570
INPUT:	Ez aldatu lekuz antzinako mugarririk , zure arbasoek <unk> dira eta .
PRED:	Do n't make your anger against your ancestors , your ancestors , and your ancestors are under your ancestors .
GOLD:	Do n't cheat your neighbor by moving the ancient boundary markersset up by previous generations .

ID:	5571
INPUT:	Bilarazi zituzten , orduan , filistearren buruzagi guztiak eta esan zieten : « Bidal ezazue Israelen Jainkoaren kutxa . Itzul bedi bere tokira ; bestela , hil egingo gaitu geu eta geure herria » . Hiri osoa guztiz izutua zegoen , oso gogor jo baitzituen Jainkoak .
PRED:	So the men of the Philistines went to the Philistines and said to them , “ Get up and go to the Ark of the Philistines , for we have killed us , and we will die in the place of our God . ”
GOLD:	The people summoned the Philistine rulers again and begged them , “ Please send the Ark of the God of Israel back to its own country , or it will kill us all . ” For the deadly plague from God had already begun , and great fear was sweeping across the town .

ID:	5572
INPUT:	( 2 Kro 7 , <unk> )
PRED:	Ahaziah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	5573
INPUT:	Jehuren gainerako jarduerak , egin zuen guztia eta egintza bizkorrak « Israelgo Erregeen Kronika » liburuan daude idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Pekahiah 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the History of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Jehu 's reign — everything he did and all his achievements — are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	5574
INPUT:	Judako errege Sedekias eta bere funtzionarioak , beraiek galdu nahian dabiltzan etsaien esku utziko ditut , orain hiriari erasotzeari utzi dion Babiloniako erregearen gudarostearen menpe eroriko dira .
PRED:	Then King Zedekiah of Judah and the officials of Judah and the people of Judah tried to attack the king of Judah , though they have destroyed all the army of Babylon , they will fall into the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	“ I will hand over King Zedekiah of Judah and his officials to the army of the king of Babylon . And although they have left Jerusalem for a while ,

ID:	5575
INPUT:	Morroiak kanpora bota zuen neska eta atea <unk> itxi . Soineko luze ederrez jantzia zegoen neska , halaxe janzten baitziren errege-alaba <unk> .
PRED:	The woman came out and threw him into the door , and she was very beautiful . His young woman was filled with her head , and the woman was sitting on her head .
GOLD:	So the servant put her out and locked the door behind her . She was wearing a long , beautiful robe , as was the custom in those days for the king 's virgin daughters .

ID:	5576
INPUT:	Eta ezin du inork apaiz nagusigoaren ohorea beretzat hartu , Jainkoak dei eginik ez bada , Aaronek bezala .
PRED:	And he can not call his high priest , for he has called himself to himself .
GOLD:	And no one can become a high priest simply because he wants such an honor . He must be called by God for this work , just as Aaron was .

ID:	5577
INPUT:	Josek bere burua ezagutzera eman anaiei
PRED:	Joseph gave his brothers to his brothers and sisters ,
GOLD:	Joseph Reveals His Identity

ID:	5578
INPUT:	Nor bere zentzu onaren arabera <unk> dute , bihotz okerrekoak mespretxua izango du .
PRED:	Who gives glory to you , and those who are wise , and they will be patient with integrity .
GOLD:	A sensible person wins admiration , but a warped mind is despised .

ID:	5579
INPUT:	Tinko ezarriak ditut oinak ; Jauna bedeinkatuko dut batzarrean .
PRED:	I will bless you with your feet ; I will sing for joy .
GOLD:	Now I stand on solid ground , and I will publicly praise the Lord .

ID:	5580
INPUT:	Bidean zihoala , putzu bat begiztatu zuen landan eta hiru artalde putzu ondoan etzanak , handik edaten baitzuten <unk> . Harri handi batek estaltzen zuen putzuko ahoa .
PRED:	As Jesus was walking along with him , he took some of them into the fields and some of the men who were standing along with him . One of them were standing beside the road and some of them .
GOLD:	He saw a well in the distance . Three flocks of sheep and goats lay in an open field beside it , waiting to be watered . But a heavy stone covered the mouth of the well .

ID:	5581
INPUT:	<unk> ministro , eskualdeburu , kontseilari eta gobernariek aho batez eskatzen dizute <unk> hau eman eta aldarrika dezazun : Errege jauna , hogeita hamar egun hauetan , zuri ez beste jainko nahiz gizonen bati otoitz egingo diona , jaurti dezatela lehoien zulora .
PRED:	Daniel , the commander of the king , and the king of Persia , and some of the nobles of the king gave him a great king , and all the nobles of the other nobles of the world will be able to help you .
GOLD:	And now , Your Majesty , issue and sign this law so it can not be changed , an official law of the Medes and Persians that can not be revoked . ”

ID:	5582
INPUT:	Esan zuen , gainera : « Bedeinkatua Jauna , Semen Jainkoa ! Izan bedi Kanaan Semen esklabo !
PRED:	He said , “ Praise the Lord , the God of Canaan , the God of Canaan , for he is the God of Canaan .
GOLD:	Then Noah said , “ May the Lord , the God of Shem , be blessed , and may Canaan be his servant !

ID:	5583
INPUT:	Joseren leinukoak Betel hiriaren kontra abiatu ziren , Jauna lagun zutela ,
PRED:	The people of Manasseh went to Bethel and the people of Ephraim .
GOLD:	The descendants of Joseph attacked the town of Bethel , and the Lord was with them .

ID:	5584
INPUT:	<unk> , <unk> , <unk> ,
PRED:	At that time , when they saw that they were filled with power ,
GOLD:	Also included were Zenan , Hadashah , Migdal-gad ,

ID:	5585
INPUT:	Antola zaitezte senitarteka zeuen <unk> arabera , Israelgo errege Daviden eta beronen seme Salomonen <unk> agindua dagoenez .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of the tribe of Levi , and all the people of Israel have been given to King Solomon and his commands .
GOLD:	Report for duty according to the family divisions of your ancestors , following the directions of King David of Israel and the directions of his son Solomon .

ID:	5586
INPUT:	Eta <unk> ere ez badu , gainerako ahaideetatik <unk> emango zaio ondarea eta bera izango da jabe . Lege izango dute hau israeldarrek , nik , Jaunak , Moisesi agindutakoaren arabera » .
PRED:	And if they are living , they will be able to give the rest of the people of Israel . They will be given to the Lord , the people of Israel , the people of Israel , says the Lord . ”
GOLD:	But if his father has no brothers , give his inheritance to the nearest relative in his clan . This is a legal requirement for the people of Israel , just as the Lord commanded Moses . ”

ID:	5587
INPUT:	Oraindik haragia hagin artean <unk> , biziki haserretu zen Jauna israeldarren aurka , eta izurri ikaragarriz zigortu zituen .
PRED:	When the meat had been unfaithful to the Lord , he was very angry with a plague , and he had a plague against the people of Israel .
GOLD:	But while they were gorging themselves on the meat — while it was still in their mouths — the anger of the Lord blazed against the people , and he struck them with a severe plague .

ID:	5588
INPUT:	Lukas bakarrik dago nirekin . Har ezazu Markos eta ekarri zeurekin , lanerako oso ona baitut .
PRED:	My love is not with me , and take care for me . So I want you to take care for you , and I have a good man with me .
GOLD:	Only Luke is with me . Bring Mark with you when you come , for he will be helpful to me in my ministry .

ID:	5589
INPUT:	Ondoren , kanpoko atarira eraman eta hango lau <unk> aurretik pasarazi ninduen : <unk> bakoitzean patio txiki bat zegoen .
PRED:	Then he led me into the outer courtyard to the outer courtyard of the outer courtyard to the outer courtyard of the outer courtyard .
GOLD:	Then he brought me back to the outer courtyard and led me to each of its four corners . In each corner I saw an enclosure .

ID:	5590
INPUT:	« Seme nahiz <unk> garbikuntza-egunak betetzean , apaizarengana joango da , elkarketa-etxolaren sarrerara , eta urteko bildotsa eramango dio erre-oparirako eta <unk> edo usapala barkamen-oparirako .
PRED:	“ Son of man , if a man has been unfaithful to the priest , the priest will be brought to the entrance of the Tabernacle , and he will bring the sin offering to the altar of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ When the time of purification is completed for either a son or a daughter , the woman must bring a one-year-old lamb for a burnt offering and a young pigeon or turtledove for a purification offering . She must bring her offerings to the priest at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	5591
INPUT:	Adiskide maite , espirituz ongi <unk> bezala , beste gauza guztietan ere ongi joan dakizula eta osasuna izan dezazula .
PRED:	My friend , dear friend , as I love with you , as though I love you with all the way you are with you .
GOLD:	Dear friend , I hope all is well with you and that you are as healthy in body as you are strong in spirit .

ID:	5592
INPUT:	Akabek hirurogeita hamar ondorengo zituen Samarian . Jehuk gutunak igorri zizkien Samariara Izreelgo buruzagi , arduradun eta Akaben ondorengo haien <unk> , esanez :
PRED:	But Ahab sent ten of the entire family of Ahab , who sent them into Samaria to Samaria . He sent them to Samaria in Samaria , and he was the leader of Ahab .
GOLD:	Ahab had seventy sons living in the city of Samaria . So Jehu wrote letters and sent them to Samaria , to the elders and officials of the city , and to the guardians of King Ahab 's sons . He said ,

ID:	5593
INPUT:	Leial izango natzaio betiko , harekin dudan itunari sendo eutsiko .
PRED:	You will be my covenant with integrity , and they will obey my covenant .
GOLD:	I will preserve an heir for him ; his throne will be as endless as the days of heaven .

ID:	5594
INPUT:	<unk> , bere eskuetan soinekoa utzita kanpora ihes egin ziola ikusirik ,
PRED:	And when they saw him , he was very strong .
GOLD:	When she saw that she was holding his cloak and he had fled ,

ID:	5595
INPUT:	Utz itzazu berriketa hutsalak , horietara emanak gero eta gehiago aldentzen baitira benetako <unk> .
PRED:	Instead , let them fall into the streets , and let them fall into the streets and if they are afraid of what they have done .
GOLD:	Avoid worthless , foolish talk that only leads to more godless behavior .

ID:	5596
INPUT:	Rakelek , orduan : — Hor duzu nire neskame Bilha . Elkar zaitez berarekin eta emango dizu semerik nire ordez ; honela , nik ere izango dut semerik , hura bitarteko .
PRED:	Rachel replied , “ Go with my servant , my servant , and I will give you my servant . I will give you my daughters to the one who is the one who is the one who loves me . ”
GOLD:	Then Rachel told him , “ Take my maid , Bilhah , and sleep with her . She will bear children for me , and through her I can have a family , too . ”

ID:	5597
INPUT:	Itzharren semeak : Kore , <unk> eta Zikri .
PRED:	One day the sons of Korah , and the sons of Korah .
GOLD:	The sons of Izhar were Korah , Nepheg , and Zicri .

ID:	5598
INPUT:	Bada , nire herria ahaztu egin da nitaz , intsentsua erretzen die sasijainkoei . <unk> egin <unk> bidetik , sekula ibili <unk> ibiltzeko .
PRED:	That is why my people have done to me , and they have brought me down to idols of Baal , and they worshiped idols .
GOLD:	But my people are not so reliable , for they have deserted me ; they burn incense to worthless idols.They have stumbled off the ancient highwaysand walk in muddy paths .

ID:	5599
INPUT:	PROFETAREN <unk> <unk> ( 34 , 1 — 45 , 5 )
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Second Message about Philistia
GOLD:	A Warning for Zedekiah

ID:	5600
INPUT:	<unk> zure agintzari <unk> goresten dute , Jauna , aingeruen batzarrean zure leialtasuna .
PRED:	All who have filled your covenant with joy , and all your prophets will rejoice in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	For who in all of heaven can compare with the Lord ? What mightiest angel is anything like the Lord ?

ID:	5601
INPUT:	( Is 38 , 1-8 ; 2 Kro 32 , 24 )
PRED:	Judah Is Betrayed and Arrested
GOLD:	Envoys from Babylon

ID:	5602
INPUT:	eta biak bat izango dira . Beraz , aurrerantzean ez dira bi , bat baino .
PRED:	There will be two sons and daughters .
GOLD:	and the two are united into one . ' Since they are no longer two but one ,

ID:	5603
INPUT:	Jaunaren aintza tenplura sartu zen ekialdeko atetik .
PRED:	Then the glory of the Lord went into the inner courtyard .
GOLD:	And the glory of the Lord came into the Temple through the east gateway .

ID:	5604
INPUT:	Izan ere , beste horiek guztiek sobera <unk> egin dute limosna ; honek , ordea , bere eskasian , bizitzeko zeukan guztia eman du » .
PRED:	For all these things have come , and those who have been broken . But when they have been given to life , it is meaningless , and it is meaningless . ”
GOLD:	For they have given a tiny part of their surplus , but she , poor as she is , has given everything she has . ”

ID:	5605
INPUT:	Davidek galdetu zuen : « Gelditzen ote da bizirik Saulen senitartekoren bat ? Neure onginahia agertu nahi nioke Jonatanengatik » .
PRED:	David asked , “ Why have you no longer die ? Why did I want you to kill me if I wanted to kill you ? ”
GOLD:	One day David asked , “ Is anyone in Saul 's family still alive — anyone to whom I can show kindness for Jonathan 's sake ? ”

ID:	5606
INPUT:	aurrez aurre <unk> nauen herriarengana : baratze <unk> eskaintzen dituzteeta <unk> <unk> erretzen ,
PRED:	Then I will send you into the garden of wild animals , and they will see that they were slaughtered .
GOLD:	All day long they insult me to my faceby worshiping idols in their sacred gardens.They burn incense on pagan altars .

ID:	5607
INPUT:	Filistearra ere bazetorren eta Davidengana hurbiltzen ari zen , ezkutaria aurretik zuela .
PRED:	As soon as you came out to me , the armor of his armor bearer came to me before him .
GOLD:	Goliath walked out toward David with his shield bearer ahead of him ,

ID:	5608
INPUT:	jakintzaz janzten dira <unk> guztietako ondasun baliotsu eta atseginez .
PRED:	They are filled with gold , and all kinds of expensive perfume .
GOLD:	Through knowledge its rooms are filledwith all sorts of precious riches and valuables .

ID:	5609
INPUT:	Izaki haiek aurrera egitean , gurpilek ere aurrera egiten zuten ondoan , eta izakiak lurretik altxatzean , gurpilak ere altxatu .
PRED:	When the wheels rose up , the wheels rose up in the wheels .
GOLD:	When the living beings moved , the wheels moved with them . When they flew upward , the wheels went up , too .

ID:	5610
INPUT:	Hizketa ugari , huts egitea sarri ; mihiari eusten dakiena , hori bai zuhurra !
PRED:	Wisdom makes no desire to be wise ; a shield for a fool .
GOLD:	Too much talk leads to sin.Be sensible and keep your mouth shut .

ID:	5611
INPUT:	<unk> bi seme izan zituen : batak <unk> , hau da , « <unk> » , zuen izena , bere garaian zatitu baitzen mundua ; anaiak , berriz , <unk> .
PRED:	At that time he became king , and he became one of them . He said , “ This man who was very very sick , and he was buried in his own name . ” But when he became very very very very very sick .
GOLD:	Eber had two sons . The first was named Peleg ( which means “ division ” ) , for during his lifetime the people of the world were divided into different language groups . His brother 's name was Joktan .

ID:	5612
INPUT:	Goretsazue bere egite <unk> , goretsi bere neurrigabeko handitasunagatik .
PRED:	Praise him with all his mighty power , and he rescued you from his mighty power .
GOLD:	Praise him for his mighty works ; praise his unequaled greatness !

ID:	5613
INPUT:	Jesusen gorpua bien artean hartu eta oihal-zerrendaz lotu zuten , tartean <unk> ezarriz , juduek <unk> zuten ohiturari jarraituz .
PRED:	Then they took Jesus into the body of his body , and when they saw that they were walking along with him , they were terrified by the Jewish leaders .
GOLD:	Following Jewish burial custom , they wrapped Jesus ' body with the spices in long sheets of linen cloth .

ID:	5614
INPUT:	Jesusek , ikasleei begira , honela esan zuen : « Zorionekoak behartsuok , zuek baituzue Jainkoa errege .
PRED:	When Jesus saw his disciples , he said to his disciples , “ Blessed are God of you .
GOLD:	Then Jesus turned to his disciples and said , “ God blesses you who are poor , for the Kingdom of God is yours .

ID:	5615
INPUT:	Neure lurraldearen jagole izango <unk> <unk> aurka ; zapaltzailea ez da <unk> honetan sartuko , orain neure begiz zaintzen dut eta » .
PRED:	I will give my life to my land , and my people will be able to enter my land , and I will put my fury on my head . ”
GOLD:	I will guard my Templeand protect it from invading armies.I am watching closely to ensurethat no more foreign oppressors overrun my people 's land .

ID:	5616
INPUT:	Bestela , zuek lurralde hartako biztanleekin hitzarmena egingo bazenute , haiek , beren sasikultuak egitean eta beren jainkoei opariak eskaintzean , zuek ere gonbidatuko <unk> eta haien oparietatik jango zenukete ;
PRED:	But if you present an oath to the people of Israel , they will bring them to the people of the land of their sin , they will eat their gifts as their sin . If they are guilty , they will eat their offerings , and they will eat their gifts to you .
GOLD:	“ You must not make a treaty of any kind with the people living in the land . They lust after their gods , offering sacrifices to them . They will invite you to join them in their sacrificial meals , and you will go with them .

ID:	5617
INPUT:	eta dei egin zioten erregeari . Hilkiasen seme Eliakim jauregizaina , Xebna idazkaria eta Asafen seme Joah , erregearen bozeramailea , atera ziren haiengana .
PRED:	They called the king of Hilkiah , the palace , and the palace secretary , the court secretary , the court secretary , and the court secretary , and the officials of the king of Judah .
GOLD:	They summoned King Hezekiah , but the king sent these officials to meet with them : Eliakim son of Hilkiah , the palace administrator ; Shebna the court secretary ; and Joah son of Asaph , the royal historian .

ID:	5618
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> <unk> bada , lehenengo <unk> ekialdean <unk> kanpamenduak abiatuko dira ;
PRED:	And when they saw that the leader of the east side of the east side of the east side of the Jordan River , they will know that the people of Israel .
GOLD:	“ When you sound the signal to move on , the tribes camped on the east side of the Tabernacle must break camp and move forward .

ID:	5619
INPUT:	<unk> zeurea zenuen <unk> moztu eta zeurea ez zenuen <unk> txertatu <unk> , askoz errazago izango du <unk> <unk> beren berezko <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	And when you saw that you were slaughtered by your own power , you will know that you have been slaughtered by the power of the beast , and when they were able to see how weak they were able to kill him .
GOLD:	You , by nature , were a branch cut from a wild olive tree . So if God was willing to do something contrary to nature by grafting you into his cultivated tree , he will be far more eager to graft the original branches back into the tree where they belong .

ID:	5620
INPUT:	Gertatua ikusi zutenek deabruduna nola sendatua izan zen kontatu zioten jendeari .
PRED:	The man who saw a man named him , and he was healed .
GOLD:	Then those who had seen what happened told the others how the demon-possessed man had been healed .

ID:	5621
INPUT:	Jaunak onez begiratu zion Anari , eta honek sabelean sortu eta hiru seme eta bi alaba izan zituen . Bitartean , Samuel mutikoa hazten ari zen <unk> .
PRED:	Then the Lord spoke to Job , and he became pregnant and gave birth to the child . He became the daughter of Eli , and Samuel became very angry with him .
GOLD:	And the Lord blessed Hannah , and she conceived and gave birth to three sons and two daughters . Meanwhile , Samuel grew up in the presence of the Lord .

ID:	5622
INPUT:	Danen leinuko seiehun gizon haiek , berriz , atarian gelditu ziren .
PRED:	The men of Dan was the tribe of Dan , but the tribe of Dan was the place of Dan .
GOLD:	As the 600 armed warriors from the tribe of Dan stood at the entrance of the gate ,

ID:	5623
INPUT:	Horretatik guztitik , bereizi zati bat Jaunarentzat : gudura borrokatzera joan direnei dagokienetik , <unk> bat , bai gizakietatik , bai behi , asto nahiz ardietatik ;
PRED:	On the second year of the Lord will bring another message to the people of Assyria , along with all the weapons of the plunder , along with all kinds of wealth , sheep , sheep , goats , goats , and goats , and everything that is true .
GOLD:	From the army 's portion , first give the Lord his share of the plunder — one of every 500 of the prisoners and of the cattle , donkeys , sheep , and goats .

ID:	5624
INPUT:	Abram , Egiptotik Negev aldera abiatu zen bere emazte eta ondasun guztiekin . Lot ere berarekin zihoan .
PRED:	Abram moved from Egypt , Abram 's wife , where Abram lived in Egypt . He also owned Abram 's wife , along with Abram , and Abram 's wife .
GOLD:	So Abram left Egypt and traveled north into the Negev , along with his wife and Lot and all that they owned .

ID:	5625
INPUT:	Beraz , hau diotsuet : Ez ditut jende horiek botako zuen aurretik ; ondoan izanen dituzue eta beraien jainkoak tranpa gertatuko dira zuentzat » .
PRED:	I tell you , ‘ Do n't let them go ahead of them , and they will be able to destroy them as they do . ' ”
GOLD:	So now I declare that I will no longer drive out the people living in your land . They will be thorns in your sides , and their gods will be a constant temptation to you . ”

ID:	5626
INPUT:	Gure izate ustelkorra bizi ustelezinez jantziko denean , eta izate <unk> hilezkortasunez , orduan beteko da Liburu Santuak dioena : Behin betiko galdua gertatu da heriotza .
PRED:	Our bodies will be buried in blood , and we will be buried in blood . ” And the Scriptures say , “ that the Scriptures will be dead . ”
GOLD:	Then , when our dying bodies have been transformed into bodies that will never die , this Scripture will be fulfilled : “ Death is swallowed up in victory .

ID:	5627
INPUT:	<unk> atera eta <unk> heldu ziren ; Parango gizon batzuek berekin hartu eta Egiptora jo zuten , hango errege faraoiagana . Honek etxebizitza eman zion <unk> , baita janaria eta <unk> bat ere .
PRED:	When they saw him and threw him into the air , some of them into Egypt . And when some of them were buried in Egypt , he became very angry with Pharaoh and his officials .
GOLD:	They set out from Midian and went to Paran , where others joined them . Then they traveled to Egypt and went to Pharaoh , who gave them a home , food , and some land .

ID:	5628
INPUT:	Apaizburu eta lege-maisuak Jesus nola hilko zebiltzan , baina herriaren beldur ziren .
PRED:	The leading priests and teachers of religious law were afraid , but they were afraid to die .
GOLD:	The leading priests and teachers of religious law were plotting how to kill Jesus , but they were afraid of the people 's reaction .

ID:	5629
INPUT:	Hau ikustean , herri osoa lurreraino ahuspeztu zen , esanez : « Jauna da Jainkoa ! Jauna da Jainkoa ! »
PRED:	When the people saw the ground , he fell down on the ground and said , “ The Lord is God ! ”
GOLD:	And when all the people saw it , they fell face down on the ground and cried out , “ The Lord — he is God ! Yes , the Lord is God ! ”

ID:	5630
INPUT:	Handik bi urtera , Absalomek <unk> guztiak gonbidatu zituen Efraim ondoko <unk> egiten ari zen ardi-mozketako <unk> .
PRED:	At that time , when Absalom had been taken from Egypt , he was sitting on the throne of Ephraim and the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Two years later , when Absalom 's sheep were being sheared at Baal-hazor near Ephraim , Absalom invited all the king 's sons to come to a feast .

ID:	5631
INPUT:	Guk goresten dugu Jauna , orain eta beti . Aleluia ! Gora Jauna !
PRED:	For we praise the Lord , and we praise the Lord !
GOLD:	But we can praise the Lordboth now and forever ! Praise the Lord !

ID:	5632
INPUT:	Mesias etorriko denean , ez du inork jakingo nongoa den ; hau , ordea , badakigu nongoa den » .
PRED:	But when the Messiah returns , no one can know that the Messiah is the Messiah ? ”
GOLD:	But how could he be ? For we know where this man comes from . When the Messiah comes , he will simply appear ; no one will know where he comes from . ”

ID:	5633
INPUT:	Zein ederki <unk> etxerako bidea ! Zein maisu <unk> bidean !
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who are so wise ? What sorrow awaits those who have been so frightened by the way ?
GOLD:	“ How you plot and scheme to win your lovers.Even an experienced prostitute could learn from you !

ID:	5634
INPUT:	« <unk> ditut ogi , urak bezala gainezka egiten nire <unk> .
PRED:	“ I know how much I have seen , as though I have seen my heart .
GOLD:	I can not eat for sighing ; my groans pour out like water .

ID:	5635
INPUT:	Hona hemen , Jerusalemen sortu zitzaizkion semeen izenak : Xamua , <unk> , Natan , Salomon ,
PRED:	This is the names of the people of Jerusalem : Zadok and his sons , who were the names of King Solomon 's officials ,
GOLD:	These are the names of David 's sons who were born in Jerusalem : Shammua , Shobab , Nathan , Solomon ,

ID:	5636
INPUT:	« Nik , Danielek , begiratu eta beste bi gizon ikusi nituen zutik ibaiaren alde banatan .
PRED:	“ I saw two men , and I saw two men standing on each side of the south side of the Sea .
GOLD:	Then I , Daniel , looked and saw two others standing on opposite banks of the river .

ID:	5637
INPUT:	Satanasen esku utziko duzue hori , ea horrela , beraren bekatuzko izaera suntsiturik , Jaunaren egunean salbatzen den .
PRED:	But those who do not obey the law of the dead will be saved by the power of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then you must throw this man out and hand him over to Satan so that his sinful nature will be destroyed and he himself will be saved on the day the Lord returns .

ID:	5638
INPUT:	Horrela bada , Espirituaren dohainak irrikatzen dituzuenez gero , saia zaitezte <unk> ugari izaten , baina eliz elkarteari hazten laguntzeko .
PRED:	Therefore , let all the Spirit be given to all the Spirit as much as you are in the Spirit . But if you are in the church , you should live in the church .
GOLD:	And the same is true for you . Since you are so eager to have the special abilities the Spirit gives , seek those that will strengthen the whole church .

ID:	5639
INPUT:	<unk> eta aurre , estu bildua naukazu , zeure eskua nire gain ezarrita .
PRED:	I will be able to crush you , and I will put your hand on your head .
GOLD:	You go before me and follow me.You place your hand of blessing on my head .

ID:	5640
INPUT:	Gu ere , noizbait , <unk> , errebelde , bide-galdu , edozein grina eta <unk> menpeko izanak gara , gaiztakerian eta <unk> bizi izanak , gorrotagarri eta elkarren <unk> .
PRED:	We know that we have been able to know that God had been able to be able to be able , and we have been able to know that they have been able to know that they were very weak , and they will know that they were very weak .
GOLD:	Once we , too , were foolish and disobedient . We were misled and became slaves to many lusts and pleasures . Our lives were full of evil and envy , and we hated each other .

ID:	5641
INPUT:	ez ilunpetan zabaltzen den <unk> , ez egun-argitan jotzen duen gaitzari .
PRED:	For if they do n't know what is evil in darkness , they will not be able to be seen in darkness .
GOLD:	Do not dread the disease that stalks in darkness , nor the disaster that strikes at midday .

ID:	5642
INPUT:	Harroputzek zuloak egin dizkidate bidean , zure legea aintzat hartu gabe .
PRED:	He has thrown me into the path of your law .
GOLD:	These arrogant people who hate your instructionshave dug deep pits to trap me .

ID:	5643
INPUT:	Jaunarengana bidali zituen galdetzera : « Zu al zara “ Etortzekoa ” , ala besteren baten zain egon behar dugu ? »
PRED:	He sent them to the Lord , “ Are you looking for us ? ”
GOLD:	and he sent them to the Lord to ask him , “ Are you the Messiah we 've been expecting , or should we keep looking for someone else ? ”

ID:	5644
INPUT:	Hirurogeita hamar urte zituela , <unk> Mahalalel izan zuen .
PRED:	When he was thirty years old , he became pregnant .
GOLD:	When Kenan was 70 years old , he became the father of Mahalalel .

ID:	5645
INPUT:	Nire erabakiak <unk> , Jerusalemgo Jainkoaren etxea hondatzeko eskua luzatzen duen edozein errege edo herri eraitsi dezala bertan bizi den Jainkoak . Neuk , Dariok , ematen dut agindu hau ; bete bedi zehatz-mehatz » .
PRED:	But if they obey the Temple of God , I will destroy the Temple of God in Jerusalem , and I will destroy it as a god of the king of Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	May the God who has chosen the city of Jerusalem as the place to honor his name destroy any king or nation that violates this command and destroys this Temple . “ I , Darius , have issued this decree . Let it be obeyed with all diligence . ”

ID:	5646
INPUT:	Brontzezko berrogeita hamar katigailu ere egin zituzten , oihal-etxola osoa lotu eta bat eginik geldi zedin .
PRED:	Then the bronze curtain for the Tabernacle and attached them to the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	He also made fifty bronze clasps to fasten the long curtains together . In this way , the tent covering was made of one continuous piece .

ID:	5647
INPUT:	Josafatek aginduok eman zizkien : « Jaunarekiko begirunez , leial eta jator jardun behar duzue .
PRED:	Jehoshaphat gave the instructions to the Lord , and he gave them to the Lord .
GOLD:	These were his instructions to them : “ You must always act in the fear of the Lord , with faithfulness and an undivided heart .

ID:	5648
INPUT:	« Emaztea utzi eta beste batekin ezkontzen denak adulterio egiten du ; eta senarrak utzitako emakume batekin ezkontzen denak adulterio egiten du .
PRED:	“ Suppose a man marries his wife , he commits adultery with a man who commits adultery and commits adultery .
GOLD:	“ For example , a man who divorces his wife and marries someone else commits adultery . And anyone who marries a woman divorced from her husband commits adultery . ”

ID:	5649
INPUT:	<unk> eta Pertsiako Erregeen Kronika Liburuan daude idatzirik erregearen egintza indartsu eta bizkor hauek , baita erregeak Mardokeo nola altxatu eta handi egin zuen ere .
PRED:	The king of Persia and the reign of the reign of the reign of the reign of the reign of the reign of the reign of the reign of King Darius 's reign and everything he had done .
GOLD:	His great achievements and the full account of the greatness of Mordecai , whom the king had promoted , are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Media and Persia .

ID:	5650
INPUT:	Trebatzen dizkit eskuak gudurako , eta besoak brontzezko uztaia tenkatzeko .
PRED:	He has made my hands with bronze ; he wore a bronze bow with bronze bow .
GOLD:	You have given me your shield of victory.Your right hand supports me ; your help has made me great .

ID:	5651
INPUT:	Honek esan zien : « Zuei eman zaizue Jainkoaren erregetzaren <unk> ezagutzea ; <unk> , ordea , parabola bidez hitz egiten diet . Horrela , ikusten dute , bai , baina ohartzen ez ; entzuten dute , bai , baina ulertzen ez .
PRED:	“ But I have given you the Kingdom of God , ” he said . “ But when they know that they know that they do n't know what they do , but they do n't know what they do . ”
GOLD:	He replied , “ You are permitted to understand the secrets of the Kingdom of God . But I use parables to teach the others so that the Scriptures might be fulfilled : ‘ When they look , they wo n't really see.When they hear , they wo n't understand . '

ID:	5652
INPUT:	<unk> janaritzen da , gezurrezko burutapen <unk> okerbidetik daramate ; idoloak ez du salbatuko , baina ez du , hala ere , aitortuko gezur huts dela eskuetan duena .
PRED:	For those who are able to be able to be thrown into the pit . But those who are not able to save them , but they will not be saved .
GOLD:	The poor , deluded fool feeds on ashes.He trusts something that ca n't help him at all.Yet he can not bring himself to ask , “ Is this idol that I 'm holding in my hand a lie ? ”

ID:	5653
INPUT:	Orduan , erregeak <unk> egin zuen , herrien nagusiak giltzapetik libre utzi .
PRED:	Then King Nebuchadnezzar sent him away from the power of the world , and he rescued you from the power of the world .
GOLD:	Then Pharaoh sent for him and set him free ; the ruler of the nation opened his prison door .

ID:	5654
INPUT:	Harroputza zigortzean , zuhur bihurtzen da heldugabea , eta zuhurrari dagokion <unk> lortzen du jakintza .
PRED:	Pride leads to a person , but those who are wise , and those who are wise .
GOLD:	If you punish a mocker , the simpleminded become wise ; if you instruct the wise , they will be all the wiser .

ID:	5655
INPUT:	Horiek ziren Manasesen senitarteak : 52 . <unk> gizonezko guztira .
PRED:	These were the clans of Manasseh : Their registered troops numbered .
GOLD:	These were the clans of Manasseh . Their registered troops numbered 52,700 .

ID:	5656
INPUT:	Han , giza eskuz eginiko zurezko eta harrizko jainkoak gurtu beharko dituzue , ez ikusi eta ez entzun , ez jan eta ez usaindu egiten ez dutenak .
PRED:	You have worshiped idols and worshiped idols , and you have worshiped idols . You must not eat any god of wood or stone or drink or drink or drink or drink .
GOLD:	There , in a foreign land , you will worship idols made from wood and stone — gods that neither see nor hear nor eat nor smell .

ID:	5657
INPUT:	<unk> ametsa bezala , gutxietsi egingo dituzu , Jauna , <unk> erreinuan .
PRED:	I will hear my dream , as the Lord says , “ I will punish you in the Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	When you arise , O Lord , you will laugh at their silly ideasas a person laughs at dreams in the morning .

ID:	5658
INPUT:	Etsaiak ateetan
PRED:	Judgment against the Priests
GOLD:	Jerusalem 's Last Warning

ID:	5659
INPUT:	Jaunaren aingeruak <unk> : — Zure emazteak bete dezala esan nion guztia .
PRED:	Then the angel of the Lord said , “ I have obeyed all your wives . ”
GOLD:	The angel of the Lord replied , “ Be sure your wife follows the instructions I gave her .

ID:	5660
INPUT:	Filistearrak , hara heltzean , Refaim haranean zabaldu ziren .
PRED:	When the Philistines arrived at the valley of Zin .
GOLD:	The Philistines arrived and spread out across the valley of Rephaim .

ID:	5661
INPUT:	baina Lot <unk> atera zen egunean , su eta <unk> euria egin zuen zerutik eta denak galdu zituen .
PRED:	At that time Abram came down from the sun , and when he saw the rain , he fell down down down down from heaven and forth from heaven .
GOLD:	until the morning Lot left Sodom . Then fire and burning sulfur rained down from heaven and destroyed them all .

ID:	5662
INPUT:	esan zion Noeri : « Izaki oro suntsitzea erabaki dut , gizakien erruz indarkeriaz betea baitago mundua ; gizakia eta mundua , biak suntsituko ditut .
PRED:	Then he said to Noah , “ I will destroy all these things , and I will destroy them . I will destroy them , and I will destroy them .
GOLD:	So God said to Noah , “ I have decided to destroy all living creatures , for they have filled the earth with violence . Yes , I will wipe them all out along with the earth !

ID:	5663
INPUT:	Aldareak ezarri zituen Jaunaren etxean jainko <unk> , tenplu hartaz Jaunak hau esana zuen arren : « Jerusalem dut neure egoitza » .
PRED:	At last the Lord had commanded him to worship the Temple of the Temple of the Lord . He said , “ I have given my Temple to Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	He built pagan altars in the Temple of the Lord , the place where the Lord had said , “ My name will remain in Jerusalem forever . ”

ID:	5664
INPUT:	neure zerbitzari Davidi emandakoa ere hautsezina da : ez zaio faltako inoiz ere bere tronuan eseriko den ondorengorik . Ez da inoiz hautsiko ere apaiz eta lebitarrei , nire zerbitzariei , emandako hitza .
PRED:	This is the one who has given my servant to David : “ There is no one who has given to David and the Levites who have been given to the Levites . He has given me the Levites to the Levites who have given me the Levites .
GOLD:	only then will my covenant with my servant David be broken . Only then will he no longer have a descendant to reign on his throne . The same is true for my covenant with the Levitical priests who minister before me .

ID:	5665
INPUT:	Beraz , bete Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren aginduak , ibili berak erakutsitako bidetik eta bizi berarenganako begirunean .
PRED:	So obey the Lord your God , and he has obeyed all his commands .
GOLD:	“ So obey the commands of the Lord your God by walking in his ways and fearing him .

ID:	5666
INPUT:	Israel ere filistearren eskuetara emango du Jaunak zurekin batera . Bihar zure semea eta biok nirekin izanen zarete , eta Israelen gudarostea ere filistearren eskuetara emango du Jaunak .
PRED:	The Lord will give you victory over the Philistines , and he will give you victory over the Philistines and the Philistines . You will be handed over to the Philistines , and he will give you victory over the Philistines .
GOLD:	What 's more , the Lord will hand you and the army of Israel over to the Philistines tomorrow , and you and your sons will be here with me . The Lord will bring down the entire army of Israel in defeat . ”

ID:	5667
INPUT:	Haiek ikusi orduko , Jakobek esan zuen : « Jainkoaren kanpalekua da hau ! » Eta leku hari <unk> — hau da , « <unk> » — eman zion izen .
PRED:	When Jacob saw them , he said , “ This is what the people of Israel says : ‘ There is the place of God who was buried , ” Jacob said .
GOLD:	Then Jacob sent messengers ahead to his brother , Esau , who was living in the region of Seir in the land of Edom .

ID:	5668
INPUT:	Xiloko <unk> eman nion tratu bera emango diot tenplu honi ; hiri hau , berriz , nire madarikazioaren adierazgarri izango da munduko nazio guztientzat » .
PRED:	I have given you great city , and I will give you this Temple to all the nations of the earth . Then I will bless you with all the nations . ”
GOLD:	then I will destroy this Temple as I destroyed Shiloh , the place where the Tabernacle was located . And I will make Jerusalem an object of cursing in every nation on earth . ' ”

ID:	5669
INPUT:	Eta ohar hau egin zien Jesusek : « Ulertzeko gauza denak uler beza » .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to them , “ Anyone with ears to hear and understand . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ Anyone with ears to hear should listen and understand . ”

ID:	5670
INPUT:	Ezekias , Judako errege
PRED:	Hezekiah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Assyria Invades Judah

ID:	5671
INPUT:	Jezabel emaztea etorri zitzaion , esanez : — Zer duzu goibel egoteko ? Zergatik ez duzu ezer ere jan nahi ?
PRED:	When Jezebel arrived , he asked her , “ Why do you want to eat ? ”
GOLD:	“ What 's the matter ? ” his wife Jezebel asked him . “ What 's made you so upset that you 're not eating ? ”

ID:	5672
INPUT:	Zilarra arragoan , urrea labean , gizakia goratzen duenaren ahoan .
PRED:	They keep the strength of silver , and the chest to keep it on the cart .
GOLD:	Fire tests the purity of silver and gold , but a person is tested by being praised .

ID:	5673
INPUT:	hau <unk> , hau <unk> , hau <unk> , hau <unk> , hau Davidena ,
PRED:	And when I heard this , this man , who was very very sad , and I know that I was very very very powerful .
GOLD:	Eliakim was the son of Melea.Melea was the son of Menna.Menna was the son of Mattatha.Mattatha was the son of Nathan.Nathan was the son of David .

ID:	5674
INPUT:	Jehuren erregealdiko zazpigarren urtea zen , eta berrogei urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen . Haren amak Tzibia zuen izena eta Beer-Xebakoa zen .
PRED:	It was 30 years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem forty years . His mother became the father of Eber .
GOLD:	All his life Joash did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight because Jehoiada the priest instructed him .

ID:	5675
INPUT:	Honela , Josue lurralde osoaz jabetu zen : mendialdeaz , Negev <unk> , Xefela <unk> eta alderdi <unk> , eta errege guztiak hil zituzten . Erabat suntsitu zituen bizidun guztiak , bat ere utzi gabe , Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak , agindu bezala .
PRED:	Then Joshua took possession of the land of Joshua , who had been sent by the hill country of Judah , who had been killed in the city of the city , and the Lord had destroyed all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	So Joshua conquered the whole region — the kings and people of the hill country , the Negev , the western foothills , and the mountain slopes . He completely destroyed everyone in the land , leaving no survivors , just as the Lord , the God of Israel , had commanded .

ID:	5676
INPUT:	Hau bai gaitz negargarria : etorri bezalaxe joan behar . Eta zein fruitu atera <unk> duen lanari ?
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : What should we have been able to break down the fruit of the dead ? ”
GOLD:	We all come to the end of our lives as naked and empty-handed as on the day we were born . We ca n't take our riches with us .

ID:	5677
INPUT:	Gero , <unk> aterarazi zuen <unk> hego-haizea bidali bere <unk> .
PRED:	Then when they saw that they were filled with power , and when they saw that they were filled with power .
GOLD:	He released the east wind in the heavensand guided the south wind by his mighty power .

ID:	5678
INPUT:	Ez zaitez <unk> inbidiaz bizi , ezta haren biderik hartu ere .
PRED:	Do n't be surprised when I live among them , and they will not be able to live .
GOLD:	Do n't envy violent peopleor copy their ways .

ID:	5679
INPUT:	<unk> genuen , beraz , nire semea eta jan . Biharamunean , berea emateko esan nion , jan egin behar genuela eta . Baina gorde egin du .
PRED:	When we were eating and drinking , I 'll eat the next day of my family . But when the next day , I 'll eat it and eat it .
GOLD:	So we cooked my son and ate him . Then the next day I said to her , ‘ Kill your son so we can eat him , ' but she has hidden her son . ”

ID:	5680
INPUT:	dardara egin zuen lurrak , urtu egin zen Jainkoaren aurrean zerua , <unk> Jainkoaren , Israelen Jainkoaren aurrean .
PRED:	The earth broke down his earth , and when he saw that he was in the heavens , the heavens of God of Israel , who was in Israel .
GOLD:	You sent abundant rain , O God , to refresh the weary land .

ID:	5681
INPUT:	Baina hau zioten : « Ez gero jaiegunean , herrian iskanbilarik sor ez dadin » .
PRED:	But the people said to them , “ Do n't eat the food for the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ But not during the Passover celebration , ” they agreed , “ or the people may riot . ”

ID:	5682
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	5683
INPUT:	erre-oparien aldarea bere tresnekin , uraska bere oinarekin ,
PRED:	the altar of burnt offering and the altar ; the washbasin with all its utensils ,
GOLD:	the altar of burnt offering with all its utensils ; the washbasin with its stand ;

ID:	5684
INPUT:	Horrela , Zakariasen aita Joiadak <unk> izan zuen onginahia ahazturik , haren semea hilarazi zuen Joax erregeak . Baina hiltzeko zorian zegoela , Zakariasek esan zuen : « Ikus beza hau Jaunak eta eska <unk> kontuak » .
PRED:	This was the father of Zechariah , the father of Zechariah , who was very angry with him . But the king of Zechariah became king , and he said , “ May the Lord be sure to kill him and kill him . ”
GOLD:	That was how King Joash repaid Jehoiada for his loyalty — by killing his son . Zechariah 's last words as he died were , “ May the Lord see what they are doing and avenge my death ! ”

ID:	5685
INPUT:	« Haien zoria aldatuko dut , Sodoma eta hirien zoria , Samaria eta hirien zoria ( zure zoria ere aldatuko dut haiena bezala ) ,
PRED:	“ I will restore the fortunes of the earth , and I will praise you as the north as the north , and I will praise you .
GOLD:	“ But someday I will restore the fortunes of Sodom and Samaria , and I will restore you , too .

ID:	5686
INPUT:	« Elkartasun-opariko aberetik , Jaunari honako hauek aurkeztuko zaizkio , beraren ohorez erretzeko opari gisa : heste inguru eta gaineko gantza ,
PRED:	“ Then the priest must present this offering to the Lord : The priest will bring the fat of the fat of the fat , just as the fat of the fat , and the fat of the fat .
GOLD:	The priest must present part of this peace offering as a special gift to the Lord . This includes all the fat around the internal organs ,

ID:	5687
INPUT:	Zeure etxeko janari <unk> asetzen dituzu , zeure atseginen ibaian <unk> .
PRED:	With your household , you will enjoy your household , and if you have filled with all your household , you will know that you have been filled with your household .
GOLD:	For you are the fountain of life , the light by which we see .

ID:	5688
INPUT:	Ez zen aurrerantzean gerrarik izan Asaren erregealdiko hogeita hamabosgarren urtea arte .
PRED:	There was no rest on the fifteenth year of King Asa 's reign until the first month of King Asa 's reign .
GOLD:	So there was no more war until the thirty-fifth year of Asa 's reign .

ID:	5689
INPUT:	Ikusi duzue zer egin diedan egiptoarrei , eta nola , arranoak bere kumeak <unk> bezala hartuz , niregana ekarri zaituztedan .
PRED:	I saw the Egyptians that the Egyptians had done in the land of the Egyptians , and I brought you into the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	‘ You have seen what I did to the Egyptians . You know how I carried you on eagles ' wings and brought you to myself .

ID:	5690
INPUT:	Sion hiri , Jaunak zu maiteago Israelgo herri guztiak baino .
PRED:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies is more than all the nations of Israel .
GOLD:	He loves the city of Jerusalemmore than any other city in Israel .

ID:	5691
INPUT:	<unk> nire bidea neure <unk> aitorpena da ; kontzientziak esaten dit Jainkoak emandako xalotasun eta zintzotasunez jokatu dudala edonon , eta gehiago zuen artean ; eta hori , ez giza jakintzak eraginda , Jainkoaren onginahiak baizik .
PRED:	For when they see him , they are the way of the Lord , who gives me power to save me by the power of God , who gives me authority to me , and I am not able to repent of God .
GOLD:	We can say with confidence and a clear conscience that we have lived with a God-given holiness and sincerity in all our dealings . We have depended on God 's grace , not on our own human wisdom . That is how we have conducted ourselves before the world , and especially toward you .

ID:	5692
INPUT:	« Horregatik diotsuet : Ez kezkatu bizitzeko zer jan edo edango , edota gorputza zerez jantziko . Ez ote da bizia janaria baino gehiago , eta gorputza jantzia baino gehiago ?
PRED:	So I tell you , ‘ Do n't eat or drink or drink . ' Do n't you eat any food or clothing or clothing or clothing ?
GOLD:	“ That is why I tell you not to worry about everyday life — whether you have enough food and drink , or enough clothes to wear . Is n't life more than food , and your body more than clothing ?

ID:	5693
INPUT:	Bazen Jerusalemen Simeon izeneko bat , gizon zintzo eta jainkozalea , Jainkoak Israel noiz kontsolatuko zain zegoena . Espiritu Santua berekin zuen
PRED:	There was a man named Levi , who lived in Jerusalem , for God was waiting for those who fear him .
GOLD:	At that time there was a man in Jerusalem named Simeon . He was righteous and devout and was eagerly waiting for the Messiah to come and rescue Israel . The Holy Spirit was upon him

ID:	5694
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak : « Zoaz Judako hirietara eta Jerusalemgo <unk> eta hots egin nire mezu hau : Onartu nire aginduak eta bete .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to them , “ Go and tell me the message of the people of Judah and Jerusalem . This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	Then the Lord said , “ Broadcast this message in the streets of Jerusalem . Go from town to town throughout the land and say , ‘ Remember the ancient covenant , and do everything it requires .

ID:	5695
INPUT:	<unk> aurkako gudua
PRED:	Egypt 's Message about Assyria
GOLD:	Israel Defeats the Amalekites

ID:	5696
INPUT:	eta , <unk> jarraituz , <unk> amaituko da . Hori izango da iparraldeko muga .
PRED:	And when they know that they will be betrayed , and the waters of the north will be destroyed .
GOLD:	and Ziphron to Hazar-enan . This will be your northern boundary .

ID:	5697
INPUT:	« Era askotan hitz egiten du Jainkoak , baina jendea ez da ohartzen :
PRED:	“ In the same way , God has spoken to them , but they do n't understand what they do .
GOLD:	For God speaks again and again , though people do not recognize it .

ID:	5698
INPUT:	Eta horien guztien gainetik , eguneroko nire <unk> : eliz elkarte guztien ardura .
PRED:	And I will put my body on all the church in all the church in all the church .
GOLD:	Then , besides all this , I have the daily burden of my concern for all the churches .

ID:	5699
INPUT:	Egun hartan zigortuko ditut , baita , <unk> gainetik salto <unk> sartzen <unk> beren Jaunaren <unk> eta <unk> dutenak » .
PRED:	In that day I will punish you and fig trees , and when they saw that that that they are under the name of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Yes , I will punish those who participate in pagan worship ceremonies , and those who fill their masters ' houses with violence and deceit .

ID:	5700
INPUT:	Ez dezatela gauza sakraturik ikus , ezta begirada bizkor batez ere , hil nahi ez badute » .
PRED:	“ Do n't let any of these things , ” he warned them . “ If they do n't kill him , ” they would not die . ”
GOLD:	The Kohathites must never enter the sanctuary to look at the sacred objects for even a moment , or they will die . ”

ID:	5701
INPUT:	Zoaz , bada , eta hots egin mezu hau <unk> : « Itzul niregana , Israel fedegabe hori ! Ez dizut ipiniko aurpegi ilunik , <unk> bainaiz ; nire haserrea ez da betiko . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	Go and tell me , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am writing to you , my people of Israel , and I will destroy you , and I will not forgive my anger . '
GOLD:	Therefore , go and give this message to Israel . This is what the Lord says : “ O Israel , my faithless people , come home to me again , for I am merciful.I will not be angry with you forever .

ID:	5702
INPUT:	Abramek ihardetsi zion : — Jaunarengatik , zeru-lurren egile den Goi-goiko Jainkoarengatik , dagit zin
PRED:	Then Abram said to him , “ This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	Abram replied to the king of Sodom , “ I solemnly swear to the Lord , God Most High , Creator of heaven and earth ,

ID:	5703
INPUT:	Saldu egin baikaituzte ni eta nire herritarrak , hondatu , hil eta suntsi gaitzaten . Gizonak eta emakumeak esklabo saldu izan bagintuzte ere , isilduko nintzatekeen , ez <unk> horrek erregea nekaraztea merezi izango .
PRED:	Instead , they have been careful to kill my people , and if you have been killed , then we have been killed by the man of Egypt and the man of Egypt , then I will be sure that you would not be afraid . ”
GOLD:	For my people and I have been sold to those who would kill , slaughter , and annihilate us . If we had merely been sold as slaves , I could remain quiet , for that would be too trivial a matter to warrant disturbing the king . ”

ID:	5704
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Luzaro egon naiz geldi , ezer esan eta egin gabe ; baina orain garrasika ari naiz , intzirika eta <unk> , emakumea erdiminetan bezala .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I have done , but I have done nothing in sorrow , but now I have put on a beautiful woman in anguish , like a woman in labor .
GOLD:	He will say , “ I have long been silent ; yes , I have restrained myself.But now , like a woman in labor , I will cry and groan and pant .

ID:	5705
INPUT:	Sem eta <unk> , soingaineko bat hartu , sorbaldan bien artean ipini eta , atzeraka joanez , aita biluzia estali egin zuten . Beste aldera begiratzen zutenez , ez zuten aita biluzik ikusi .
PRED:	She had a huge robe that had been sitting on his waist , and he placed his father 's waist . His father saw her , and he had never slept with her , and he was naked .
GOLD:	Then Shem and Japheth took a robe , held it over their shoulders , and backed into the tent to cover their father . As they did this , they looked the other way so they would not see him naked .

ID:	5706
INPUT:	Bihotz zuhurrekoak hitzak ere egokiak ; are <unk> halakoaren esanak .
PRED:	Those who are wise will be wise , but the words of the wicked are weak .
GOLD:	From a wise mind comes wise speech ; the words of the wise are persuasive .

ID:	5707
INPUT:	Salomonek Jaunaren etxe aurreko atariaren <unk> sagaratu egin zuen , erre-opariak eta elkartasun-oparietako gantzak bertan eskaintzeko . Izan ere , Salomonek eginiko brontzezko aldarea <unk> gertatu zen hainbeste erre-opari , labore-opari eta gantz hartzeko .
PRED:	King Solomon made an altar of the Lord that had been given to the Temple of the Lord , and he made a burnt offering for a burnt offering and a burnt offering . For Solomon had been made with a burnt offering and bronze altar .
GOLD:	Solomon then consecrated the central area of the courtyard in front of the Lord 's Temple . He offered burnt offerings and the fat of peace offerings there , because the bronze altar he had built could not hold all the burnt offerings , grain offerings , and sacrificial fat .

ID:	5708
INPUT:	zu , oi Jainko , epaia ematera jaikitzean , munduko dohakabeak salbatzera .
PRED:	You are the nations of the earth , the king of the world to save the poor .
GOLD:	Human defiance only enhances your glory , for you use it as a weapon .

ID:	5709
INPUT:	eta , zuen egintza gaizto eta higuingarriak jasanezinak zitzaizkiolako , zuen lurraldea hondamendi eta eremu bihurtu zuen Jaunak , gaitzetsi eta bizilagunik gabe utzi . Eta halaxe dago gaur ere .
PRED:	I will destroy you and destroy the land that I have destroyed them and destroyed them , and I have destroyed them . The Lord has destroyed those who have not destroyed them .
GOLD:	It was because the Lord could no longer bear all the disgusting things you were doing that he made your land an object of cursing — a desolate ruin without inhabitants — as it is today .

ID:	5710
INPUT:	Izan zen beste profeta bat ere Jaunaren izenean hitz egin zuena : Urias , Xemaiasen semea , <unk> . Jeremiasek bezala , Jerusalemen eta Judaren aurka hitz egin zuen .
PRED:	The prophet of the Lord had sent another message to Jeremiah from the name of the Lord , who had given him a message against Jeremiah .
GOLD:	At this time Uriah son of Shemaiah from Kiriath-jearim was also prophesying for the Lord . And he predicted the same terrible disaster against the city and nation as Jeremiah did .

ID:	5711
INPUT:	Bestela , hil ere askotan hil behar izango zuen mundua mundu denetik gaur arte . Baina ez , Kristo behin bakarrik agertu da orain , azkenak diren garai hauetan , bere buruaren opariaz bekatua <unk> .
PRED:	But if I have killed all the world , we will die until now until now we have been slaughtered by the world . But now we have been revealed by the power of God . But now that is why we have been a god of sin .
GOLD:	If that had been necessary , Christ would have had to die again and again , ever since the world began . But now , once for all time , he has appeared at the end of the age to remove sin by his own death as a sacrifice .

ID:	5712
INPUT:	Esauren ezkontza
PRED:	The Land Given to Esau
GOLD:	Isaac 's Covenant with Abimelech

ID:	5713
INPUT:	eta egite txarrez salatu eta izen txarra jartzen diola , esanez : “ Emakume honekin ezkondu eta , <unk> , ez dela birjina konturatu naiz ” .
PRED:	They thought to her , ‘ I am innocent , ' he said to her , ‘ I do n't know how I have done . '
GOLD:	and publicly accuses her of shameful conduct , saying , ‘ When I married this woman , I discovered she was not a virgin . '

ID:	5714
INPUT:	Haserre baitago Jauna nazioekin , sumindua haien gudarosteekin : erabat suntsitzea erabaki du , <unk> eman ditu .
PRED:	At last the Lord has given you victory over them , and he has given them to destroy them .
GOLD:	For the Lord is enraged against the nations.His fury is against all their armies.He will completely destroy them , dooming them to slaughter .

ID:	5715
INPUT:	Hauxe agindu nien bakar-bakarrik : “ Aditu nire mintzoa , eta ni izango nauzue zeuen Jainko eta zuek izango zaituztet neure herri . Ibili beti nik agindutako bidean , eta <unk> izango zarete ” .
PRED:	But I told you , ‘ You have heard my voice and heard my voice , and you will live in my presence , and you will be my people , and you will know that I am the Lord your God . '
GOLD:	This is what I told them : ‘ Obey me , and I will be your God , and you will be my people . Do everything as I say , and all will be well ! '

ID:	5716
INPUT:	Egoitzaren gainean egun bi , hilabete edo urtebete geldituz gero , israeldarrak geldi egoten ziren eta ez ziren abiatzen . Baina lainoa aldendu orduko , abiatu egiten ziren .
PRED:	On the Tabernacle , two of the tribe of Israel must be taken from one month . But when they were watching , they would not return to the Tabernacle , they would not leave them .
GOLD:	Whether the cloud stayed above the Tabernacle for two days , a month , or a year , the people of Israel stayed in camp and did not move on . But as soon as it lifted , they broke camp and moved on .

ID:	5717
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun zion Samueli : « Onar iezaiezu eskaria eta eman erregea » . Orduan , Samuelek esan zien israeldarrei : « Zoazte nor bere herrira » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Samuel , “ Go and sleep with my people . ” So Samuel said to Samuel , “ Go back to the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	and the Lord replied , “ Do as they say , and give them a king . ” Then Samuel agreed and sent the people home .

ID:	5718
INPUT:	Baina nagusiak : “ Ez , ez dadila gerta olo gaiztoa biltzean garia ere ateratzea .
PRED:	But the master says , ‘ Do n't let the weeds in the fields and harvest the harvest of grain .
GOLD:	“ ‘ No , ' he replied , ‘ you 'll uproot the wheat if you do .

ID:	5719
INPUT:	Paulo Antiokiara itzuli
PRED:	Paul and Barnabas returned to Antioch
GOLD:	Paul Returns to Antioch of Syria

ID:	5720
INPUT:	Zotz eginez amaitzen dira eztabaidak , <unk> arteko auzia erabakiz .
PRED:	I am very proud with your friends , and they are very angry with me .
GOLD:	Flipping a coin can end arguments ; it settles disputes between powerful opponents .

ID:	5721
INPUT:	zeuen erruek ezarri dute <unk> eta Jainkoaren artean ; zeuen <unk> diote aurpegia , zuen otoitzik ez entzuteko .
PRED:	Then they will make sure that they will be afraid of God , and they will hear your face . They will not hear the word of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	It 's your sins that have cut you off from God.Because of your sins , he has turned awayand will not listen anymore .

ID:	5722
INPUT:	bere <unk> jotzen eta <unk> jan-edanean hasten bada ,
PRED:	And when they saw that they were sick , and when they learned that they were healed .
GOLD:	and he begins beating the other servants , partying , and getting drunk ?

ID:	5723
INPUT:	Horrela , bada , ahalik lasterren bidali dizuet , hura berriro ikustean poz zaitezten eta ni <unk> senti nadin .
PRED:	So I will come back to you , for I am sure that you will be sure that I will be sure to be sure that I will be with you , and I will be sure that I will be with you .
GOLD:	So I am all the more anxious to send him back to you , for I know you will be glad to see him , and then I will not be so worried about you .

ID:	5724
INPUT:	Oraindik <unk> dagoela , eta inork atera gabe , beste edozein belar baino lehen ihartzen da ” .
PRED:	And if they have seen that no other , no one will fall into the sun . '
GOLD:	While they are still flowering , not ready to be cut , they begin to wither more quickly than grass .

ID:	5725
INPUT:	Joabek Absalom hil
PRED:	Joab Defeats Joab
GOLD:	David Mourns Absalom 's Death

ID:	5726
INPUT:	ISRAELEN AURKA MEZUAK ( 3 , 1 — 6 , 14 )
PRED:	The
GOLD:	Witnesses against Guilty Israel

ID:	5727
INPUT:	Gero , beste aingeru bat irten zen zeruko tenplutik , hura ere eskuan igitai zorrotza zuela .
PRED:	Then one of the angels came out from the Temple of the Temple of the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	After that , another angel came from the Temple in heaven , and he also had a sharp sickle .

ID:	5728
INPUT:	« Eska , bila , jo atea »
PRED:	How can you find looking for ? ”
GOLD:	The Golden Rule

ID:	5729
INPUT:	Josuek erantzun zien : — Hain herri ugaria bazarete eta Efraimgo mendialdea estuegia iruditzen bazaizue , igo zaitezte oihanera eta soildu periztarren eta refatarren lurraldea .
PRED:	Then Joshua replied , “ If you want to go to the hill country of Ephraim , you will live in the hill country of Ephraim and the Amorites , the land of Ephraim , the Amorites , and the land of the Amorites . ”
GOLD:	Joshua replied , “ If there are so many of you , and if the hill country of Ephraim is not large enough for you , clear out land for yourselves in the forest where the Perizzites and Rephaites live . ”

ID:	5730
INPUT:	Hadad , ordea , mutiko gazte zelarik , ihesi joan zen Egiptora , bere aitaren zerbitzari ziren edomdar batzuekin .
PRED:	When Uzziah 's young men arrived in Egypt , the young men of Judah came to Egypt ,
GOLD:	But Hadad and a few of his father 's royal officials escaped and headed for Egypt . ( Hadad was just a boy at the time . )

ID:	5731
INPUT:	Abiasen gainerako jarduerak , ibilerak eta egintzak « Ido Profetaren Azalpenak » izeneko liburuan daude idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events of the events in The Book of the events in The Book of the events of the events of the events in The Book of the Law .
GOLD:	The rest of the events of Abijah 's reign , including his words and deeds , are recorded in The Commentary of Iddo the Prophet .

ID:	5732
INPUT:	Ruben eta Gaden leinuetakoei eta Manasesen leinu erdikoei esan zien Josuek :
PRED:	Then Joshua said to Gad and Gad ,
GOLD:	Then Joshua called together the tribes of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh . He told them ,

ID:	5733
INPUT:	<unk> zigorra , astoari <unk> , zentzugabearen <unk> egurra .
PRED:	Even if they are weak , that person is broken by human hands .
GOLD:	Guide a horse with a whip , a donkey with a bridle , and a fool with a rod to his back !

ID:	5734
INPUT:	Bildotsa Sion mendian
PRED:	The People of Jerusalem
GOLD:	The Lamb and the 144,000

ID:	5735
INPUT:	<unk> ere <unk> ditut , etsaiek iseka egiten didate , etengabe ari <unk> : « Non duk Jainkoa ? »
PRED:	I have seen my enemies , and when they have heard my enemies , they were terrified by the power of God . “ Where is God ? ”
GOLD:	Why am I discouraged ? Why is my heart so sad ? I will put my hope in God ! I will praise him again — my Savior and my God !

ID:	5736
INPUT:	Eta , eroapenez itxaron ondoren , eskuratu egin zuen Abrahamek Jainkoaren agintzaria .
PRED:	And now you will wait for God , and Abraham blessed him .
GOLD:	Then Abraham waited patiently , and he received what God had promised .

ID:	5737
INPUT:	<unk> nire herria
PRED:	The people of Israel and my people ,
GOLD:	The

ID:	5738
INPUT:	Josiasek Pazkoa ospatu zuen Jerusalemen , Jaunaren ohoretan . Lehen hilabeteko hamalauan Pazko-bildotsa hil zuten .
PRED:	Josiah was Passover celebration to celebrate the Passover celebration , for the Lord had killed the Passover celebration .
GOLD:	Then Josiah announced that the Passover of the Lord would be celebrated in Jerusalem , and so the Passover lamb was slaughtered on the fourteenth day of the first month .

ID:	5739
INPUT:	« Borroka da gizakiaren bizitza lurrean , lanera <unk> bezalakoak haren egunak .
PRED:	“ That is why the time of judgment falls on the earth and under his life .
GOLD:	“ Is not all human life a struggle ? Our lives are like that of a hired hand ,

ID:	5740
INPUT:	Lau urteren buruan , behin batean , esan zion Absalomek erregeari : — Joan al naiteke Hebronera , Jaunari hitzeman nion eskaintza egitera ?
PRED:	There were six years old when Absalom arrived , he said to the king , “ Is I want to bring you to the Lord ? ”
GOLD:	After four years , Absalom said to the king , “ Let me go to Hebron to offer a sacrifice to the Lord and fulfill a vow I made to him .

ID:	5741
INPUT:	<unk> inguratu nau , <unk> erdian hartu , esku-oinak zulatu dizkidate .
PRED:	For when I have surrounded me and threw me into my hands , and I am filled with water .
GOLD:	I can count all my bones.My enemies stare at me and gloat .

ID:	5742
INPUT:	Zuk ez nauzu musu emanez agurtu ; hau , berriz , sartu denetik ez da gelditu nire <unk> musuka .
PRED:	You have not given me a kiss , and then I 'll leave it . But if you were here in my place , and they would not kill me .
GOLD:	You did n't greet me with a kiss , but from the time I first came in , she has not stopped kissing my feet .

ID:	5743
INPUT:	Legamia gabeko ogien <unk> buruzko legeak
PRED:	Instructions for the Priests of the Covenant
GOLD:	Dedication of the Firstborn

ID:	5744
INPUT:	Jendeak gogor egiten zien , isilarazteko ; baina haiek areago oihu : — Erruki zakizkigu , Jauna , Daviden Semea !
PRED:	But the people of the people of the people of the people assembled before him , “ Lord , have mercy on us ! ”
GOLD:	“ Be quiet ! ” the crowd yelled at them.But they only shouted louder , “ Lord , Son of David , have mercy on us ! ”

ID:	5745
INPUT:	Egun hartan , zilarrezko mila txanpon balio zituen mila <unk> mahastia sasi- eta lahar-toki bihurtuko da .
PRED:	In that day a single day of silver and gold that had been broken into a single piece of wood .
GOLD:	In that day the lush vineyards , now worth 1,000 pieces of silver , will become patches of briers and thorns .

ID:	5746
INPUT:	ez duela arbasoei hitzemandako lurraldea ikusiko mespretxatu nauten horietako inork , Egipton eta basamortuan nire aintza eta mirariak ikusi arren , behin eta berriro ni auzitan jarri eta desobeditu egin baitidate .
PRED:	I will not see the land I have seen my ancestors in Egypt , and no one can see me in the wilderness . I have seen my covenant with my people , and I have seen my strength .
GOLD:	not one of these people will ever enter that land . They have all seen my glorious presence and the miraculous signs I performed both in Egypt and in the wilderness , but again and again they have tested me by refusing to listen to my voice .

ID:	5747
INPUT:	Zuen lurraldea hegoaldeko basamortutik iparraldean dagoen Libanoraino eta ekialdeko ibai handitik , <unk> , hititen lurraldean zehar , mendebaldean dagoen Mediterraneo itsasoraino hedatuko da .
PRED:	In the south side of the north and the south side of the north to the south side of the Mediterranean Sea . This is the Mediterranean Sea and the Mediterranean Sea to the Mediterranean Sea of the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	from the Negev wilderness in the south to the Lebanon mountains in the north , from the Euphrates River in the east to the Mediterranean Sea in the west , including all the land of the Hittites . '

ID:	5748
INPUT:	<unk> egiten didate etsaiek ; areago , neure <unk> . Beldurra ematen diet adiskideei : ni kalean ikustean , ihesi doaz .
PRED:	My enemies have struck my enemies with my enemies , and I have put my chains on my head . I saw that they are weak and weak .
GOLD:	I am ignored as if I were dead , as if I were a broken pot .

ID:	5749
INPUT:	« Zuek , ordea , ez zenuten igo nahi izan , baizik eta Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren esana desobeditu
PRED:	“ But you have not brought you into the presence of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ But you rebelled against the command of the Lord your God and refused to go in .

ID:	5750
INPUT:	Ruben eta Gaden leinuetako gizonak utzirik , Pinhas , Eleazar apaizaren semea , eta <unk> Galaadetik Kanaanera itzuli ziren , mendebaldeko israeldarrengana , eta gertatuaren berri eman zieten .
PRED:	Then the men of Gad left the tribes of Reuben , Eleazar , Eleazar , Eleazar , and Ithamar son of Nun , and Ithamar son of Nun , and the people of Israel returned to the Law of the tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	Then Phinehas son of Eleazar , the priest , and the other leaders left the tribes of Reuben and Gad in Gilead and returned to the land of Canaan to tell the Israelites what had happened .

ID:	5751
INPUT:	Baina niregana itzultzen bazarete eta nire aginduak gorde eta betetzen badituzue , zeruko azken <unk> jaurtiko bazintuztete ere , bildu egingo zintuzketet eta bizileku eta kultu-lekutzat aukeratu dudan tokira ekarriko ” .
PRED:	But if you return to me , you must obey my commands and obey my commands and obey my commands , and if you are at the place where my name is near . '
GOLD:	But if you return to me and obey my commands and live by them , then even if you are exiled to the ends of the earth , I will bring you back to the place I have chosen for my name to be honored . '

ID:	5752
INPUT:	Elkarketa-etxolan sartzean , esku-oinak garbituko dituzte , hil nahi ez badute ; orobat , beren zerbitzua betetzeko , Jaunari opariak erretzeko , aldarera hurbiltzean .
PRED:	“ When you touch your hands , they will die in the hands of the Lord 's presence , they will not die . They must not serve the altar of the Lord .
GOLD:	They must wash with water whenever they go into the Tabernacle to appear before the Lord and when they approach the altar to burn up their special gifts to the Lord — or they will die !

ID:	5753
INPUT:	epaiari buruz , mundu honetako buruzagia jadanik gaitzetsia dagoelako .
PRED:	In this way , the city of this world will be taken from the city of the wicked .
GOLD:	Judgment will come because the ruler of this world has already been judged .

ID:	5754
INPUT:	Ez dut harkaitzaren <unk> , ez da brontzezkoa nire haragia .
PRED:	I am not able to break my flesh , and my bones are under my feet .
GOLD:	Do I have the strength of a stone ? Is my body made of bronze ?

ID:	5755
INPUT:	« Errege horien garaian , erreinu bat ezarriko du zeruko Jainkoak : ez dute inoiz ere hondatuko eta haren agintea ez da beste herri baten eskuetara aldatuko . Beste guztiak suntsitu eta <unk> ere , erreinu horrek betiko iraungo du .
PRED:	“ In this time the king will rule over the kingdoms of the kingdoms of the earth , and God will not destroy them . He will not destroy them , and he will destroy all the kingdoms of the earth .
GOLD:	“ During the reigns of those kings , the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed or conquered . It will crush all these kingdoms into nothingness , and it will stand forever .

ID:	5756
INPUT:	Moises Jaunari <unk> eske
PRED:	Moses and the people of Israel
GOLD:	Moses Intercedes for the People

ID:	5757
INPUT:	« Jaun ahalguztidunak badu beste zerbait ere esateko , <unk> , brontzezko <unk> , <unk> eta hiri honetan oraindik gelditzen diren gainerako tresnei buruz :
PRED:	“ But if the Lord of Heaven 's Armies is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : If they were in this city , they will know that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and all the other towns of the world will be in this world .
GOLD:	“ For the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has spoken about the pillars in front of the Temple , the great bronze basin called the Sea , the water carts , and all the other ceremonial articles .

ID:	5758
INPUT:	baina zazpigarrena atseden-eguna duzu , Jaunari , zeure Jainkoari , sagaratua . Ez egin inolako lanik egun horretan , ez zuk , ez zure seme-alabek , ez zure morroi-mirabeek , ez zure abereek , ezta zure herrian bizi den etorkinak ere .
PRED:	On the seventh day you must be a Sabbath day of the Lord your God , for there is no ordinary work on the Sabbath day of your people , your children , and your children will not live in your land .
GOLD:	but the seventh day is a Sabbath day of rest dedicated to the Lord your God . On that day no one in your household may do any work . This includes you , your sons and daughters , your male and female servants , your livestock , and any foreigners living among you .

ID:	5759
INPUT:	Espiritua , ura eta odola , eta hirurok bat datoz .
PRED:	The Spirit of the Spirit and the Spirit will come .
GOLD:	the Spirit , the water , and the blood — and all three agree .

ID:	5760
INPUT:	Lau gurpilak <unk> azpialdean zeuden eta haien ardatzak <unk> atxikiak . Gurpil bakoitzak hirurogeita hamabost zentimetroko altuera zuen .
PRED:	There were the wheels of the wheels , and the wheels were all kinds of wheels .
GOLD:	Under the panels were four wheels that were connected to axles that had been cast as one unit with the cart . The wheels were 21/4 feet in diameter

ID:	5761
INPUT:	« Ene herri , zer egin dizut nik zuri , zertan izan natzaizu nekagarri ? Erantzun , mesedez !
PRED:	“ What do you have done to me ? ” I asked you .
GOLD:	“ O my people , what have I done to you ? What have I done to make you tired of me ? Answer me !

ID:	5762
INPUT:	giltzurrunak gaineko gantzarekin , saihetsei itsatsia dagoen gantza eta gibela estaltzen duena ; hori guztia kendurik ,
PRED:	the two kidneys and the fat around them , the fat around them , and the long lobe of the liver .
GOLD:	the two kidneys and the fat around them near the loins , and the long lobe of the liver . These must be removed with the kidneys ,

ID:	5763
INPUT:	astoak 30 . 500 ,
PRED:	donkeys , and donkeys .
GOLD:	30,500 donkeys ,

ID:	5764
INPUT:	Nik lurreko gauzak esatean sinesten ez badidazue , nola sinetsiko didazue zerukoak esatean ?
PRED:	But if I do n't believe in the earth , I believe that you would n't believe me ?
GOLD:	But if you do n't believe me when I tell you about earthly things , how can you possibly believe if I tell you about heavenly things ?

ID:	5765
INPUT:	Faraoiak entzungor egin Moisesi eta Aaroni
PRED:	Pharaoh 's Journey to Moses and Aaron
GOLD:	A Plague of Blood

ID:	5766
INPUT:	« Guztiarekin ere nire zentzarazpena onartu ez eta aurka egiten badidazue ,
PRED:	“ If you refuse to listen to me , you must not listen to me .
GOLD:	“ And if you fail to learn the lesson and continue your hostility toward me ,

ID:	5767
INPUT:	<unk> batean , Jainkoak dei egin zion Jakobi : — Jakob ! Jakob ! Jakobek erantzun : — Hemen nauzu .
PRED:	At that time God called Jacob , “ Look ! ” Jacob exclaimed . “ Yes , I am here ! ” Jacob replied , “ I am here ! ”
GOLD:	During the night God spoke to him in a vision . “ Jacob ! Jacob ! ” he called . “ Here I am , ” Jacob replied .

ID:	5768
INPUT:	Uztazu , otoi , Jordanez beste aldera igarotzen , hango lurralde ederra , hango mendialdea eta Libano ikus ahal ditzadan .
PRED:	Give me the Jordan River to the east of the Jordan River , and let me see the hill country of Lebanon .
GOLD:	Please let me cross the Jordan to see the wonderful land on the other side , the beautiful hill country and the Lebanon mountains . '

ID:	5769
INPUT:	Zure egunak eta urteak gizakiarenak bezain <unk> ote ,
PRED:	How long will your eyes be like old , and when they are as weak as snow ?
GOLD:	Is your lifetime only as long as ours ? Is your life so short

ID:	5770
INPUT:	Emakumeak joan ondoren , <unk> batzuk hirira etorri ziren gertaturiko guztiaren berri <unk> ematera .
PRED:	At that time some of the women came and saw that some of them had happened in prison .
GOLD:	As the women were on their way , some of the guards went into the city and told the leading priests what had happened .

ID:	5771
INPUT:	Zuen arbasoei eman nien lurraldean biziko zarete ; nire herri izango zarete eta ni zuen Jainko .
PRED:	I gave you to your ancestors , and you will live in your land .
GOLD:	“ And you will live in Israel , the land I gave your ancestors long ago . You will be my people , and I will be your God .

ID:	5772
INPUT:	Juduen apaizburuek esan zioten Pilatori : — Ez idatzi « juduen erregea » , « juduen erregea dela dioena » baizik .
PRED:	The leading priests asked the leading priests , “ Do n't tell the Jews , ‘ This is the King of the Jews . ”
GOLD:	Then the leading priests objected and said to Pilate , “ Change it from ‘ The King of the Jews ' to ‘ He said , I am King of the Jews . ' ”

ID:	5773
INPUT:	Baina Benjaminen atera iritsi zenean , han zegoen <unk> guardiaburua , Xelemiasen seme eta Hananiasen biloba , eta Jeremias profetari <unk> eman eta esan zion : — <unk> igarotzeko asmotan zabiltza zu .
PRED:	But when King Agrippa of Benjamin arrived , the captain of the guard of the guard , Joab son of Kareah and grandson of the guard , the prophet of Benjamin , had told him , “ You have come and kill you . ”
GOLD:	But as he was walking through the Benjamin Gate , a sentry arrested him and said , “ You are defecting to the Babylonians ! ” The sentry making the arrest was Irijah son of Shelemiah , grandson of Hananiah .

ID:	5774
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	5775
INPUT:	ez zakutorik biderako , ez soinekorik aldatzeko , ez oinetakorik , ezta makilarik ere , zor baitzaio langileari behar duen janaria .
PRED:	Do not wear a basket of grain or a traveler 's bag , or a traveler 's bag . Do n't take it with a traveler 's food .
GOLD:	Do n't carry a traveler 's bag with a change of clothes and sandals or even a walking stick . Do n't hesitate to accept hospitality , because those who work deserve to be fed .

ID:	5776
INPUT:	Han zeuden juduek esan zuten : — Bai maite zuela !
PRED:	There were the Jews who had been told , “ Yes ! ”
GOLD:	The people who were standing nearby said , “ See how much he loved him ! ”

ID:	5777
INPUT:	Josafat , <unk> semea , Isakarren ;
PRED:	Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was the son of Ahab .
GOLD:	Jehoshaphat son of Paruah , in Issachar .

ID:	5778
INPUT:	“ Nor zaitut , Jauna ? ” galdetu nion nik . Eta Jaunak erantzun : “ Jesus naiz , zuk pertsegitzen duzuna .
PRED:	“ Who is you ? ” I asked . “ I am the Lord , the voice of the Lord , the voice of you are saying , ‘ I am the Lord . '
GOLD:	“ ‘ Who are you , lord ? ' I asked . “ And the Lord replied , ‘ I am Jesus , the one you are persecuting .

ID:	5779
INPUT:	<unk>
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Recovery
GOLD:	Offerings for the Festival of Harvest

ID:	5780
INPUT:	Zentzugabeari harrokeria dario ahotik , zuhurra bere hitzek babesten dute .
PRED:	Their mouths are wise ; the mouth of a fool takes refuge in his mouth .
GOLD:	A fool 's proud talk becomes a rod that beats him , but the words of the wise keep them safe .

ID:	5781
INPUT:	Presta zaitez , presta zeu eta inguruan duzun gudarostea , eduki ezazu erne .
PRED:	Get up , and prepare your troops on your side .
GOLD:	“ Get ready ; be prepared ! Keep all the armies around you mobilized , and take command of them .

ID:	5782
INPUT:	Adierazi zion , beraz , Samuelek errege eske ari zitzaion herriari Jaunak esandako guztia ,
PRED:	So Samuel said to the people , “ This is what the Lord had commanded him . ”
GOLD:	So Samuel passed on the Lord 's warning to the people who were asking him for a king .

ID:	5783
INPUT:	Jesusen berri entzunik , <unk> batzuk bidali zizkion , morroia sendatzera etortzeko <unk> .
PRED:	When they heard about Jesus , some of the believers sent him to kill him .
GOLD:	When the officer heard about Jesus , he sent some respected Jewish elders to ask him to come and heal his slave .

ID:	5784
INPUT:	Hiri santua ikusi nuen , Jerusalem berria , zerutik , Jainkoarengandik , jaisten , emaztegaia bere <unk> bezala apaindua .
PRED:	When I saw the holy city , I saw the holy city of God , I saw a great city of God , as well as an angel of God .
GOLD:	And I saw the holy city , the new Jerusalem , coming down from God out of heaven like a bride beautifully dressed for her husband .

ID:	5785
INPUT:	Israelgo errege hark , Remaliasen seme Pekahek , Judako ehun eta hogei mila gudari ausart hil zituen egun berean , Judakoek Jauna , beren arbasoen Jainkoa , baztertua zutelako .
PRED:	So the king of Israel , commander of the tribe of Judah , and twenty of Judah . He killed twenty days of Judah , and they killed their ancestors in Judah .
GOLD:	In a single day Pekah son of Remaliah , Israel 's king , killed 120,000 of Judah 's troops , all of them experienced warriors , because they had abandoned the Lord , the God of their ancestors .

ID:	5786
INPUT:	Profeta batek Akab gaitzetsi
PRED:	Ahab 's Second Message about Moab
GOLD:	A Prophet Condemns Ahab

ID:	5787
INPUT:	Ez dago hemen , piztua baita , esan zuen bezala . Zatozte eta ikusi ezarria egon zeneko tokia .
PRED:	He has risen from the dead , and he said , “ Come ! Come ! Come ! Come ! Come ! ”
GOLD:	He is n't here ! He is risen from the dead , just as he said would happen . Come , see where his body was lying .

ID:	5788
INPUT:	Espiritua duenak , berriz , dena juzgatzen du ; bera , ordea , ez dezake inork juzga .
PRED:	But if the Spirit is good , the Spirit is a good man who does n't understand it .
GOLD:	Those who are spiritual can evaluate all things , but they themselves can not be evaluated by others .

ID:	5789
INPUT:	<unk>
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Recovery
GOLD:	Approaching God with Care

ID:	5790
INPUT:	Lau eraztun egin zituen brontzezko sarearen lau <unk> , haietatik hagak pasarazteko .
PRED:	He made four bronze rings and attached them to the carrying poles .
GOLD:	He cast four rings and attached them to the corners of the bronze grating to hold the carrying poles .

ID:	5791
INPUT:	Ezekiasek eta agintariek , hainbeste multzo ikustean , Jauna eta beronen herri Israel bedeinkatu zituzten .
PRED:	When Hezekiah saw this , the leaders of Israel and the leaders of Israel saw that the Lord has blessed them .
GOLD:	When Hezekiah and his officials came and saw these huge piles , they thanked the Lord and his people Israel !

ID:	5792
INPUT:	Bete zerbitzari honi zeure promesa , begirune dizutenei egina .
PRED:	Give thanks to your servant , O Lord , for I have heard your unfailing love .
GOLD:	Reassure me of your promise , made to those who fear you .

ID:	5793
INPUT:	Honek esan zion Amasari : — Ongi al zara , ene anaia ? Eta eskuineko eskuaz bizarretik heldu zion musu emateko .
PRED:	“ What do you know ? ” he asked . “ You have been my brother , my brother , and my right hand would betray me . ”
GOLD:	“ How are you , my cousin ? ” Joab said and took him by the beard with his right hand as though to kiss him .

ID:	5794
INPUT:	Arabiako errege guztiei ; basamortuan bizi diren populazio <unk> erregeei ;
PRED:	In this way , the king of Assyria will be filled with all the kings who lived in the wilderness .
GOLD:	I gave it to the kings of Arabia , the kings of the nomadic tribes of the desert ,

ID:	5795
INPUT:	baina orain nola ikusten duen edo begiak nork ireki dizkion , hori ez dakigu . Galdegin berari , badu <unk> bere buruaren berri emateko .
PRED:	But if we see , we can see a blind man or does n't see him . But if we are looking for him , then we can give him success .
GOLD:	but we do n't know how he can see or who healed him . Ask him . He is old enough to speak for himself . ”

ID:	5796
INPUT:	« Esaiozu Aaroni , zazpi kriseiluak <unk> , argimutilaren aurrealdea argitzeko eran <unk> » .
PRED:	“ Give Aaron seven lamps on the head of Aaron , which makes the lamps on the head of the sun . ”
GOLD:	“ Give Aaron the following instructions : When you set up the seven lamps in the lampstand , place them so their light shines forward in front of the lampstand . ”

ID:	5797
INPUT:	eta zu hil nahian dabiltzan eta beldurrik handiena diezun etsaien esku utziko , Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosor eta beraren gudarostearen esku , alegia .
PRED:	Then you would kill you and kill them , and you will be afraid of the army of Babylon and King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon .
GOLD:	I will hand you over to those who seek to kill you , those you so desperately fear — to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon and the mighty Babylonian army .

ID:	5798
INPUT:	Gero , irakasten hasi zitzaien , esanez : « Ez al dio Liburu Santuak : Nire etxea otoitz-etxe izango da herri guztientzat ? Zuek , berriz , lapur-zulo egina duzue » .
PRED:	Then he began to teach them , “ Do n't you listen to my house ? ” he said , “ You must not listen to my house ? ”
GOLD:	He said to them , “ The Scriptures declare , ‘ My Temple will be called a house of prayer for all nations , ' but you have turned it into a den of thieves . ”

ID:	5799
INPUT:	<unk> , Kiriat-Arba — hau da , Hebron — , <unk> : bederatzi hiri eta beraien herrixkak .
PRED:	( which means “ Gilead , ” ) , which means “ Lazarus , and Samaria — all their surrounding surrounding villages .
GOLD:	Humtah , Kiriath-arba ( that is , Hebron ) , and Zior — nine towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	5800
INPUT:	aurreko biztanleak lurraldetik garbituz . Sustraiak bota zituen eta lurraldea bete .
PRED:	That is why the people of the land will be punished for you .
GOLD:	Our shade covered the mountains ; our branches covered the mighty cedars .

ID:	5801
INPUT:	balio gabeko <unk> <unk> , alferrikakoa dena esanez ?
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you ? ” they demanded .
GOLD:	The wise do n't engage in empty chatter.What good are such words ?

ID:	5802
INPUT:	Orduan jakingo dute egiptoarrek ni naizela Jauna , Egipto zigortu eta bertatik israeldarrak aterako ditudanean .
PRED:	Then the Egyptians will know that I am the Lord , and I will bring them out of Egypt .
GOLD:	When I raise my powerful hand and bring out the Israelites , the Egyptians will know that I am the Lord . ”

ID:	5803
INPUT:	Jendetza handia bildu zitzaion , herren , itsu , <unk> , mutu eta bestelako gaixo asko berekin zituztela . Ondoan ipintzen zizkioten eta Jesusek sendatu egiten zituen .
PRED:	One day when the blind man was blind , the blind man was blind , and when he was blind , he was sick with great power , and he healed them , and he healed them .
GOLD:	A vast crowd brought to him people who were lame , blind , crippled , those who could n't speak , and many others . They laid them before Jesus , and he healed them all .

ID:	5804
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	5805
INPUT:	Eta gizonari esan zion : « Emaztearen esanari jaramon egineta galarazi nizun <unk> duzunez gero , madarikatua lurra zure erruz ! <unk> <unk> diozu <unk> bizitzako egun guztietan .
PRED:	Then the man said to him , “ I want you to kill you ! For when I have heard that you were filled with your power , and when they are filled with power . You know that your life will be filled with great power .
GOLD:	And to the man he said , “ Since you listened to your wife and ate from the treewhose fruit I commanded you not to eat , the ground is cursed because of you.All your life you will struggle to scratch a living from it .

ID:	5806
INPUT:	Jainkoa , ez gelditu niregandik urrun , ene Jainko , zatoz laster laguntzera !
PRED:	Do n't let me turn away from me , O God of my God !
GOLD:	O God , do n't stay away.My God , please hurry to help me .

ID:	5807
INPUT:	Denek nahi zuten Salomon ikusi , Jainkoak eman zion jakinduriaren berri izateko .
PRED:	All of them were wise , and God gave him wisdom to wisdom .
GOLD:	Kings from every nation came to consult him and to hear the wisdom God had given him .

ID:	5808
INPUT:	Alaba Merab Davidi emateko garaia heltzean , ordea , Saulek Meholako Adrieli eman zion emazte .
PRED:	When Saul arrived at the time of the age , Saul 's wife was given to David 's wife .
GOLD:	So when the time came for Saul to give his daughter Merab in marriage to David , he gave her instead to Adriel , a man from Meholah .

ID:	5809
INPUT:	Gero , haurraren gainean etzan zen , bere ahoa haurraren aho gainean , begiak begi gainean eta eskuak esku gainean ezarriz . Horrela , haurraren gainean etzana zegoelarik , berotzen hasi zen haurraren gorputza .
PRED:	Then the boy went on the head of the child , and the child fell on the head of the child on the head of the child 's head , and the child fell on his head .
GOLD:	Then he lay down on the child 's body , placing his mouth on the child 's mouth , his eyes on the child 's eyes , and his hands on the child 's hands . And as he stretched out on him , the child 's body began to grow warm again !

ID:	5810
INPUT:	Egin poz-oihu Jainkoari , gure indarrari , egin irrintzi Jakoben Jainkoari !
PRED:	Sing to God of Israel , O God of Israel !
GOLD:	Sing ! Beat the tambourine.Play the sweet lyre and the harp .

ID:	5811
INPUT:	Beste hirurehun babeski txiki ere egin zituen urre garbiz , babeski bakoitza egiteko ia bi kilo urre behar izan zelarik . Eta « Libanoko Oihana » zeritzan jauregian ipini zituen .
PRED:	He also made ten gold shields of hammered gold , hammered gold . The weight of silver was 71/2 pounds of gold , which was 71/2 pounds of silver .
GOLD:	He also made 300 smaller shields of hammered gold , each weighing nearly four pounds . The king placed these shields in the Palace of the Forest of Lebanon .

ID:	5812
INPUT:	zentzugabeko eta barregarri ; Jaunak hondatuko ditukontuak hartzeko egunean .
PRED:	The Lord is worthless ; they are completely destroyed ; they are completely destroyed .
GOLD:	Idols are worthless ; they are ridiculous lies ! On the day of reckoning they will all be destroyed .

ID:	5813
INPUT:	<unk> bezalakoa da zintzoaren fruitua ; zuhurrak jendearen onespena bereganatzen du .
PRED:	The wise are like a fool , but the wise are those who are wise .
GOLD:	The seeds of good deeds become a tree of life ; a wise person wins friends .

ID:	5814
INPUT:	Ez dago , ordea , beste berri onik ; baina badabiltza hor <unk> zuek nahasten eta Kristoren berri ona goitik behera irauli nahian .
PRED:	But do n't know the Good News about the Good News of God , but when you are trying to kill you , they want to know that the Good News of Christ .
GOLD:	but is not the Good News at all . You are being fooled by those who deliberately twist the truth concerning Christ .

ID:	5815
INPUT:	Animalia gehiago naiz gizon baino , ez dut giza adimenik ;
PRED:	I am overwhelmed by a distance ; I ca n't stop human body .
GOLD:	I am too stupid to be human , and I lack common sense .

ID:	5816
INPUT:	Hona hemen gotortu zituen hiriak : Belen , Etam , Tekoa ,
PRED:	This is the following towns from Babylon :
GOLD:	He built up Bethlehem , Etam , Tekoa ,

ID:	5817
INPUT:	Goraintziak <unk> deritzan Jesusen izenean ere . <unk> hauek dira Jainkoaren erregetza zabaltzen nirekin lanean ari diren bakarrak , eta oso <unk> gertatu zaizkit .
PRED:	Greet , dear brothers and sisters , how they have been baptized by the Kingdom of God . They have been filled with me , so that they could see me .
GOLD:	Jesus ( the one we call Justus ) also sends his greetings . These are the only Jewish believers among my co-workers ; they are working with me here for the Kingdom of God . And what a comfort they have been !

ID:	5818
INPUT:	Eta <unk> abiatu ziren . Iristean , herri osoa asaldatu zen eta emakumeek hau zioten : — Noemi bera ote da hau ?
PRED:	When the man came and saw him , he became pregnant and asked her , “ What happened ? ” So she asked her , “ Is this man ? ”
GOLD:	So the two of them continued on their journey . When they came to Bethlehem , the entire town was excited by their arrival . “ Is it really Naomi ? ” the women asked .

ID:	5819
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Moisesi : « Igo Abarim mendiaren gailur horretara eta israeldarrei emango diedan lurraldea ikusi ahal izango duzu bertatik .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Go up to the hills of Mount Hermon to bring you back to the mountains of Israel .
GOLD:	One day the Lord said to Moses , “ Climb one of the mountains east of the river , and look out over the land I have given the people of Israel .

ID:	5820
INPUT:	Jaunaren indarrak eraginik , Elias jantzia gerrian lotu eta lasterka joan zen Akaben aurretik <unk> .
PRED:	One of the Lord came down from his feet , and Elijah came to meet him with his feet .
GOLD:	Then the Lord gave special strength to Elijah . He tucked his cloak into his belt and ran ahead of Ahab 's chariot all the way to the entrance of Jezreel .

ID:	5821
INPUT:	edo ehunean , larruan nahiz edozein <unk> mantxa agertzen bada ,
PRED:	If the mildew or the contaminated area or the mildew , the contaminated area must be ceremonially clean ,
GOLD:	woolen or linen fabric , the hide of an animal , or anything made of leather .

ID:	5822
INPUT:	Ez horixe ! Uste dugu Jesus Jaunaren onginahiari esker salbatzen gaituela Jainkoak , bai gu eta bai jentilak » .
PRED:	For we have not given the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ , and we have given us grace and the Gentiles . ”
GOLD:	We believe that we are all saved the same way , by the undeserved grace of the Lord Jesus . ”

ID:	5823
INPUT:	Eta esaiozu : Jaunak , hebrearren Jainkoak , zuregana bidali nau bere herriari joaten uzteko esatera , basamortuan gurtza eman diezaioten . Zuk muzin egin duzu orain arte ,
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : ‘ God has sent me to you , ' he sent me into the wilderness of the wilderness , and you will know the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Then announce to him , ‘ The Lord , the God of the Hebrews , has sent me to tell you , “ Let my people go , so they can worship me in the wilderness . ” Until now , you have refused to listen to him .

ID:	5824
INPUT:	Igo Pisga mendiaren gailurrera eta begira bertatik iparralde zein hegoaldera , ekialde zein mendebaldera ; zabaldu ongi begiak eta begiratu , ez baituzu Jordan hori zeharkatuko .
PRED:	Go up to Mount Nebo and camped at Mount Hermon , along with the east side of the north and west , and all the way to the Jordan River .
GOLD:	But go up to Pisgah Peak , and look over the land in every direction . Take a good look , but you may not cross the Jordan River .

ID:	5825
INPUT:	Baina horren ondoren , errukitu egingo natzaie , eta herri bakoitza , nor bere ondarera eta lurraldera itzuliko dut .
PRED:	But after this , I will have mercy on their own land . I will return to their own land , and I will return to their own land .
GOLD:	But afterward I will return and have compassion on all of them . I will bring them home to their own lands again , each nation to its own possession .

ID:	5826
INPUT:	Galdu egin da haren oroitzapena herrialdean , izena ere ez dute gogoratzen inguruetan .
PRED:	But the Lord has rejected his name , and his name will not break his name .
GOLD:	All memory of their existence will fade from the earth ; no one will remember their names .

ID:	5827
INPUT:	Zure hildakoak bai , berpiztuko dira , haien gorpuak altxatuko ! Lurpean etzanak esnatuko diraeta pozez oihuka ekingo . Izan ere , zuk , Jauna , argia bidaltzen duzu ihintza bezala , eta lurpetik <unk> hildakoak .
PRED:	May the dead be dead , and the dead will be thrown into the dead bodies of the dead , for they were terrified when they were filled with joy . For the Lord has poured out the earth on the ground , and you have poured out the dead .
GOLD:	But those who die in the Lord will live ; their bodies will rise again ! Those who sleep in the earthwill rise up and sing for joy ! For your life-giving light will fall like dewon your people in the place of the dead !

ID:	5828
INPUT:	Ondoren , jendeak Baalen jauretxera joan eta lurrera bota zuen ; xehe-xehe egin zituen hango aldare eta irudiak , eta Baalen apaiza zen <unk> hil egin zuten aldarearen aitzinean . Joiada apaizak zaintzaileak ipini zituen Jaunaren etxean .
PRED:	Then the people of Israel went to the altar of Baal and worshiped the altar of Baal and burned it with the altar of Baal and worshiped the altar of Baal . He killed the altar of Baal and worshiped the Lord .
GOLD:	And all the people of the land went over to the temple of Baal and tore it down . They demolished the altars and smashed the idols to pieces , and they killed Mattan the priest of Baal in front of the altars.Jehoiada the priest stationed guards at the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	5829
INPUT:	Ez izan , beraz , burugogor , zeuen gurasoen antzera . Hurbil zaitezte Jaunarengana , eta zatozte berak betiko sagaratu duen santutegira . Obeditu Jaunari , zeuen Jainkoari , eta berak aldenduko du zuengandik bere haserre-sumina .
PRED:	So do not listen to the Lord your ancestors , just as you have promised to the Lord your ancestors , and you will live forever .
GOLD:	Do not be stubborn , as they were , but submit yourselves to the Lord . Come to his Temple , which he has set apart as holy forever . Worship the Lord your God so that his fierce anger will turn away from you .

ID:	5830
INPUT:	Baina hark esan zien : « Ez izutu ! Nazareteko Jesus gurutziltzatuaren bila zabiltzate . Piztua da , ez dago hemen . Ikusi jarri zuteneko tokia .
PRED:	But he said to them , “ Do n't be afraid of your enemies , for you are looking for me .
GOLD:	but the angel said , “ Do n't be alarmed . You are looking for Jesus of Nazareth , who was crucified . He is n't here ! He is risen from the dead ! Look , this is where they laid his body .

ID:	5831
INPUT:	Neriasen seme Barukek zirikatu zaitu gure kontra : babiloniarren esku jarri nahi gaitu , hil edo Babiloniara gatibu eraman gaitzaten » .
PRED:	When the governor of Babylon heard about you , he sent us to send us to Babylon as captives from Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Baruch son of Neriah has convinced you to say this , because he wants us to stay here and be killed by the Babylonians or be carried off into exile . ”

ID:	5832
INPUT:	<unk> jaitsi zen Rut eta <unk> <unk> zehatz-mehatz egin zuen .
PRED:	When he saw that he was sick , he became very sick .
GOLD:	So she went down to the threshing floor that night and followed the instructions of her mother-in-law .

ID:	5833
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Badator , gorputzean bakarrik erdainduak direnak zigortuko ditudan eguna :
PRED:	“ The day of the Lord will come , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	But those who wish to boastshould boast in this alone : that they truly know me and understand that I am the Lordwho demonstrates unfailing loveand who brings justice and righteousness to the earth , and that I delight in these things.I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	5834
INPUT:	harriak jaurtitzeko garaiaeta harriak biltzeko garaia , <unk> garaiaeta <unk> garaia ,
PRED:	A time to come and a time to come and a time to sleep with a time .
GOLD:	A time to scatter stones and a time to gather stones.A time to embrace and a time to turn away .

ID:	5835
INPUT:	eta Jordanen ekialdeko Araba haran guztian zehar Pisga mendiaren <unk> Itsaso Hileraino .
PRED:	and the east of the Jordan River came through the Jordan Valley of Mount Hermon to the Red Sea .
GOLD:	And they conquered the eastern bank of the Jordan River as far south as the Dead Sea , below the slopes of Pisgah . )

ID:	5836
INPUT:	Landatzen dituzun egun <unk> dira , ereiten dituzun egun <unk> , baina , azkenean , bertan behera galduko da fruitua , zoritxarrak , <unk> gaitzak jota .
PRED:	For the few who have little things that will be filled with power , but they will see that the sun will be destroyed , and they will see that they are weak and fig trees .
GOLD:	They may sprout on the day you set them out ; yes , they may blossom on the very morning you plant them , but you will never pick any grapes from them.Your only harvest will be a load of grief and unrelieved pain .

ID:	5837
INPUT:	Israeldarrentzat oroigarri zen hori , Aaronen ondorengo ez zen inor Jaunaren aurrean intsentsua erretzera hurbil ez zedin ohartarazteko ; horrela , ez zitzaien gertatuko Koreri eta beronen <unk> gertaturiko ezbeharra , Jaunak Moisesen bitartez aldez aurretik adierazitakoa .
PRED:	He was given to his sons , for he had not been given to them before the Lord . He refused to bring them back to the people of Israel , and they were afraid of the Lord .
GOLD:	Buds will sprout on the staff belonging to the man I choose . Then I will finally put an end to the people 's murmuring and complaining against you . ”

ID:	5838
INPUT:	Danen leinuko Ahisamaken seme Oholiab eman diot lankide . Gainera , artisau guztiak <unk> egiten ditut , agindu dizudan guztia egin dezaten :
PRED:	The troops of the tribe of Dan was given by the tribe of Dan , who had been given by all the people of Dan , and I have given you everything I had commanded .
GOLD:	“ And I have personally appointed Oholiab son of Ahisamach , of the tribe of Dan , to be his assistant . Moreover , I have given special skill to all the gifted craftsmen so they can make all the things I have commanded you to make :

ID:	5839
INPUT:	Judaren leinua aukeratu zuen , Sion mendia , bere maitea .
PRED:	For the tribe of Judah chose to rule over Jerusalem , and his unfailing love .
GOLD:	He chose instead the tribe of Judah , and Mount Zion , which he loved .

ID:	5840
INPUT:	Jaunarengan jarria nuen itxaropen guztia : makurtu eta entzun du nire deiadarra .
PRED:	I have heard everything in the Lord , and they have heard my voice .
GOLD:	He lifted me out of the pit of despair , out of the mud and the mire.He set my feet on solid groundand steadied me as I walked along .

ID:	5841
INPUT:	Bizirik gelditu diren eta itzuli nahi duten israeldarrei lagun biezaie inguruko jendeak ; eman <unk> zilarra , urrea , ondasunak , abereak eta nork bere borondatezko opariak , Jerusalemen dagoen Jainkoaren etxerako » .
PRED:	The people of Israel have come back to the people of Israel , for they have given them all the people of Israel and women who were given to the Temple of God and the Temple of God . ”
GOLD:	Wherever this Jewish remnant is found , let their neighbors contribute toward their expenses by giving them silver and gold , supplies for the journey , and livestock , as well as a voluntary offering for the Temple of God in Jerusalem . ”

ID:	5842
INPUT:	Jesusen piztueraren berria
PRED:	Jesus Sends Out the Twelve Apostles
GOLD:	The Resurrection

ID:	5843
INPUT:	« Ez joan festa-otordua egiten ari diren etxera , <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	“ You must not be sure that they would be sure that they would be able to kill you .
GOLD:	“ And do not go to their feasts and parties . Do not eat and drink with them at all .

ID:	5844
INPUT:	Egin otoitz gure alde ere , Jainkoak mezua hots egiteko eta Kristoren misterioa adierazteko aukera eman diezagun , misterio horrengatik bainago kartzelan .
PRED:	Pray that God has given us a message from the message of Christ Jesus . This is what God has given you , and I am in prison .
GOLD:	Pray for us , too , that God will give us many opportunities to speak about his mysterious plan concerning Christ . That is why I am here in chains .

ID:	5845
INPUT:	Hau dago idatzia , hain zuzen , Salmoen liburuan : « Bihur bedi haren bizilekua basamortu , geldi bedi inor gabe . « Eta beste hau ere bai : « Har beza beste batek haren kargua .
PRED:	This is what the written in the book of the book of the book of God : “ Let them be cut off , and let no one on you . ”
GOLD:	Peter continued , “ This was written in the book of Psalms , where it says , ‘ Let his home become desolate , with no one living in it . ' It also says , ‘ Let someone else take his position . '

ID:	5846
INPUT:	Presta zaitezte , bada , haren seme-alabak hiltzeko ; gurasoek <unk> dute hil , sekula berriz <unk> lurraldeaz jabe ez daitezen , mundua berriro <unk> ez dezaten » .
PRED:	Therefore , let your children die , and if they have killed him , they will kill him and kill him , and they will be sure that they will be able to kill you , and they will know that they will be able to kill you . ”
GOLD:	Kill this man 's children ! Let them die because of their father 's sins ! They must not rise and conquer the earth , filling the world with their cities . ”

ID:	5847
INPUT:	Paulori entzuten zegoen batean , Paulo begira-begira jarri zitzaion eta , sendatzeko adinako fedea <unk> ikusirik ,
PRED:	When Paul heard that Paul had come and saw Paul , he could see that Paul had been able to see him .
GOLD:	and listening as Paul preached . Looking straight at him , Paul realized he had faith to be healed .

ID:	5848
INPUT:	Izan ere , bekatuak , <unk> bide hartuta , liluratu egin ninduen eta aginduaren bidez hil .
PRED:	For when I was under my sin , the man who had been killed by my sin , and they killed me .
GOLD:	Sin took advantage of those commands and deceived me ; it used the commands to kill me .

ID:	5849
INPUT:	Emakume zaharrei , amari bezala . Eta <unk> , arrebei bezala , <unk> osoz .
PRED:	One of the women who were born in the palace , and when they saw that he was in the palace , he became very angry with him .
GOLD:	Treat older women as you would your mother , and treat younger women with all purity as you would your own sisters .

ID:	5850
INPUT:	« Esan israeldarrei : Norbaitek , israeldarra nahiz Israelen bizi den etorkina izan , <unk> bat Molok jainkoari oparitan eskaintzen badio , heriotza-zigorra izango du : harrika hilko du herriko jendeak .
PRED:	“ Give me the following instructions to the people of Israel : If you are living in the land of Israel , I will be able to be put to death , and they will be put to death .
GOLD:	“ Give the people of Israel these instructions , which apply both to native Israelites and to the foreigners living in Israel . “ If any of them offer their children as a sacrifice to Molech , they must be put to death . The people of the community must stone them to death .

ID:	5851
INPUT:	Jaunaren aintzak tenplutik alde egin
PRED:	The Temple of the Lord 's Temple
GOLD:	The

ID:	5852
INPUT:	Jesusek jarraitu zuen : — Zuek <unk> zarete , ni goikoa naiz ; zuek mundu honetakoak zarete , ni ez naiz mundu honetakoa .
PRED:	Jesus told him , “ You are my lord , my lord the king of my people , and you will not take away from the land of the earth .
GOLD:	Jesus continued , “ You are from below ; I am from above . You belong to this world ; I do not .

ID:	5853
INPUT:	Daviden zahartzaroa
PRED:	The Futility of David
GOLD:	Adonijah Claims the Throne

ID:	5854
INPUT:	itsasoko hondarrak baino gehiago egingo lukete ; horregatik dira hain <unk> ene hitzak .
PRED:	Even though they have gone , they would have no idea how they have seen my words .
GOLD:	they would outweigh all the sands of the sea.That is why I spoke impulsively .

ID:	5855
INPUT:	« Jainkoaren erregetzarekin , uretara botatzen den eta mota guztietako arrainak biltzen dituen sarearekin bezala gertatzen da .
PRED:	“ The Kingdom of Heaven is like the fish in all the fish , and the fish in all the fish in all the fish .
GOLD:	“ Again , the Kingdom of Heaven is like a fishing net that was thrown into the water and caught fish of every kind .

ID:	5856
INPUT:	Kantu berria ipini dit ezpainetan , gure Jainkoarentzat gorespen-kanta . Askok ikusiko dute hau eta , ikaraturik , Jaunarengan konfiantza izango .
PRED:	He has given me a new song to me from the presence of God . He will see me in the presence of the Lord our God .
GOLD:	Oh , the joys of those who trust the Lord , who have no confidence in the proudor in those who worship idols .

ID:	5857
INPUT:	<unk> kultua eta <unk> <unk>
PRED:	And when they saw that the beast and Samaria and how they were under the authority of Samaria and Samaria .
GOLD:	Judah 's Persistent Idolatry

ID:	5858
INPUT:	Gizonak , garaitu ezin zuela ikusirik , borrokaldian <unk> ukitu zion Jakobi eta koloka jarri .
PRED:	When the man saw him , he could n't heal him and saw him .
GOLD:	Then the man said , “ Let me go , for the dawn is breaking ! ” But Jacob said , “ I will not let you go unless you bless me . ”

ID:	5859
INPUT:	Nire zintzoa fedeari esker biziko da , baina atzera egiten badu , ez dut atsegin izango .
PRED:	But if I have a righteous person to live , then I will not live .
GOLD:	And my righteous ones will live by faith.But I will take no pleasure in anyone who turns away . ”

ID:	5860
INPUT:	entzuten zidaten eta esana betetzen , arrotzek lausengatzen ninduten .
PRED:	I heard my commands , and I tried to obey me .
GOLD:	They all lose their courageand come trembling from their strongholds .

ID:	5861
INPUT:	Baina ez harrotu adar <unk> lepotik . Eta harrotzeko <unk> baduzu , izan gogoan ez diozula zuk eusten <unk> , sustraiak zuri baizik .
PRED:	But if you were proud of stones , you must be sure that they have been filled with roots . But if you have been unfaithful to what you have done .
GOLD:	But you must not brag about being grafted in to replace the branches that were broken off . You are just a branch , not the root .

ID:	5862
INPUT:	Bitartean , faraoiaren gudarostea Egiptotik atera zen . Hori jakitean , Jerusalem inguraturik zeukaten gudari babiloniarrak , erasoari utzirik , urrundu egin ziren hiritik .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the army of Egypt came out of Egypt and attacked him in the land of Egypt , as the city of Egypt had lived in the city of Egypt .
GOLD:	At this time the army of Pharaoh Hophra of Egypt appeared at the southern border of Judah . When the Babylonian army heard about it , they withdrew from their siege of Jerusalem .

ID:	5863
INPUT:	Garailea neurekin eseraraziko dut neure tronuan , neu ere garaile izan eta neure Aitarekin beronen tronuan eseri naizen bezala .
PRED:	All who belong to me must serve me as my rule over my throne , just as my Father and his Father is in the world .
GOLD:	Those who are victorious will sit with me on my throne , just as I was victorious and sat with my Father on his throne .

ID:	5864
INPUT:	Ez egin zinik zeure buruarengatik ere , ez <unk> zeure ile bakar bat ere zuri edo beltz bihur .
PRED:	You must not commit adultery by your own mouth , and your hair will be filled with you , and you will crush you .
GOLD:	Do not even say , ‘ By my head ! ' for you ca n't turn one hair white or black .

ID:	5865
INPUT:	Erru guztiak barkatzen dizkit , gaitz guztiak sendatzen ;
PRED:	You hate all their sins , and he hates me .
GOLD:	He forgives all my sinsand heals all my diseases .

ID:	5866
INPUT:	esaiezu <unk> eta amaigabeko <unk> arretarik ez jartzeko ; izan ere , <unk> <unk> dira eztabaidak sortzeko , sinesmenez onartzen den Jainkoaren <unk> hezteko baino .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you and fig trees , so that they will be able to be able to kill me , and they will know that they are ashamed of God .
GOLD:	Do n't let them waste their time in endless discussion of myths and spiritual pedigrees . These things only lead to meaningless speculations , which do n't help people live a life of faith in God .

ID:	5867
INPUT:	baliogabetu egin du legea bere agindu eta <unk> , eta bi herriekin gizadi berri bakarra sortu du bere baitan , bakeak eginez .
PRED:	For those who fear God has commanded him , and those who serve him .
GOLD:	He did this by ending the system of law with its commandments and regulations . He made peace between Jews and Gentiles by creating in himself one new people from the two groups .

ID:	5868
INPUT:	Entzun hau , Jakoben herriaren buruzagiok , Israelgo agintariok , zuzentasuna <unk> zuzenbidea okertzen duzuenok :
PRED:	Listen to the people of Israel , you leaders of Israel , the people of Israel , who fear you .
GOLD:	Listen to me , you leaders of Israel ! You hate justice and twist all that is right .

ID:	5869
INPUT:	<unk> bezala jartzen du irakiten ur <unk> , <unk> bezala <unk> gaineko ura .
PRED:	And when they were filled with water , and when they saw that they were filled with water , and when they were filled with water .
GOLD:	Its flesh is hard and firmand can not be penetrated .

ID:	5870
INPUT:	Entzun hau , herri guztiok , egon adi , munduko biztanleok ,
PRED:	Listen to this message from the Lord ; listen to all the words of the earth .
GOLD:	High and low , rich and poor — listen !

ID:	5871
INPUT:	Gau horretan Egipto osoan zehar igaroko naiz , eta hil egingo ditut Egiptoko lehen-seme eta lehen abere-kumeak oro eta neure epaia emango diet Egiptoko jainkoei . Ala ni Jauna !
PRED:	That is why I am going through Egypt , and I will die in the land of Egypt and the firstborn sons of Egypt , the firstborn of Egypt , and I will punish you as the Lord lives of Egypt .
GOLD:	On that night I will pass through the land of Egypt and strike down every firstborn son and firstborn male animal in the land of Egypt . I will execute judgment against all the gods of Egypt , for I am the Lord !

ID:	5872
INPUT:	erruduna salatzen duena onetsia izaten da , jendeak <unk> egingo du .
PRED:	The wicked know that the wicked are being caught , and they will be able to know what they have done .
GOLD:	But it will go well for those who convict the guilty ; rich blessings will be showered on them .

ID:	5873
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , artean beren herrialdean bizi zirenean , israeldarrek kutsatu egin zuten lurraldea beren jokabide eta egintza txarrez ; kutsatua zen haien portaera , hilerokoan botatako odola bezain kutsatua .
PRED:	“ Son of man , when the people of Israel arrived among the land of the land of the land of the land of Israel were defiled by touching themselves , and they were defiled by the blood of the Lord 's blood .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , when the people of Israel were living in their own land , they defiled it by the evil way they lived . To me their conduct was as unclean as a woman 's menstrual cloth .

ID:	5874
INPUT:	Sinesgarria eta guztiok onartzekoa da doktrina hau : Kristo Jesus bekatariak salbatzera etorri zela mundura . Eta inor ez ni baino <unk> ;
PRED:	This is the trustworthy saying , ‘ As surely as I want you to save us from the world , I have come to save you from the world . '
GOLD:	This is a trustworthy saying , and everyone should accept it : “ Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners ” — and I am the worst of them all .

ID:	5875
INPUT:	eta bertan ezarri dut Jaunak israeldarrekin eginiko itunaren agiria daukan kutxa » .
PRED:	I will put it on the altar of the covenant with the covenant of the Lord , the God of Israel . ”
GOLD:	There I have placed the Ark , which contains the covenant that the Lord made with the people of Israel . ”

ID:	5876
INPUT:	Siria guztian zabaldu zen Jesusen entzutea . Edozein gaitz edo <unk> jotakoak — deabrudun , <unk> nahiz elbarriak — eramaten zizkioten , eta hark sendatu egiten zituen .
PRED:	At that time he spread throughout the provinces of the entire world and that everyone was healed by the authority of Jesus , who was healed by the authority of Jesus , and he healed the sick man .
GOLD:	News about him spread as far as Syria , and people soon began bringing to him all who were sick . And whatever their sickness or disease , or if they were demon possessed or epileptic or paralyzed — he healed them all .

ID:	5877
INPUT:	Neuk , Jaunak , ikertzen eta aztertzen <unk> buru-bihotzak , nori bere jokaeraren ordaina , bere egiteen merezia emateko .
PRED:	I am the Lord who made these things , and those who follow their own eyes .
GOLD:	But I , the Lord , search all heartsand examine secret motives.I give all people their due rewards , according to what their actions deserve . ”

ID:	5878
INPUT:	Lehen fruituen eskaintza eta <unk>
PRED:	Your homeland included the first offering of your homeland , the first of your homeland , the first of your ancestors , and that were filled with the terms of the Lord .
GOLD:	Harvest Offerings and Tithes

ID:	5879
INPUT:	Ezereztuko ditutzure lurraldeko hiriak , eta zure gotorleku <unk> .
PRED:	I will bring you all the towns of the land of the land , and they will be able to see your enemies .
GOLD:	“ In that day , ” says the Lord , “ I will slaughter your horsesand destroy your chariots .

ID:	5880
INPUT:	<unk> « lur » eman zion izen eta <unk> « itsaso » . Eta Jainkoak ona zela ikusi zuen .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” he told him , “ God was very great power . ” And when he saw that God saw that he was good . ”
GOLD:	God called the dry ground “ land ” and the waters “ seas . ” And God saw that it was good .

ID:	5881
INPUT:	Betiko izu-ikaraz eta lotsaz beterik , gal bitez desohorez !
PRED:	Let me be filled with shame , and let your life be disgraced .
GOLD:	Then they will learn that you alone are called the Lord , that you alone are the Most High , supreme over all the earth .

ID:	5882
INPUT:	« Burdinazko tresnaz norbait jo eta hiltzen duena , <unk> da : heriotzara emango dute .
PRED:	“ Anyone who kills another person must be killed , and they will die . They will be put to death .
GOLD:	“ But if someone strikes and kills another person with a piece of iron , it is murder , and the murderer must be executed .

ID:	5883
INPUT:	Zeure behatzez eratu duzun <unk> ezarri dituzun <unk> ikusita ,
PRED:	He will pour out his finger in power of your power , and you will see your power .
GOLD:	what are mere mortals that you should think about them , human beings that you should care for them ?

ID:	5884
INPUT:	Jordan ibaia igarotzean , beraz , gaur agindu dizuedanez , Garizim mendian harriak tente ipini eta <unk> zurituko dituzue .
PRED:	So you must cross the Jordan River to the Jordan River on the mountain of the Jordan River , and you must sit on the mountain of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	When you cross the Jordan , set up these stones at Mount Ebal and coat them with plaster , as I am commanding you today .

ID:	5885
INPUT:	« Etxe batean sartzean , esan : « Bakea zuekin » ;
PRED:	“ Peace live in a house , ” he said . “ Peace be with you . ”
GOLD:	When you enter the home , give it your blessing .

ID:	5886
INPUT:	Baina bai estua dela bizirako atea eta <unk> bidea , eta gutxi dira aurkitzen dutenak .
PRED:	But a person is like a person , and those who are weak , and those who are weak .
GOLD:	But the gateway to life is very narrow and the road is difficult , and only a few ever find it .

ID:	5887
INPUT:	Ez dezagun tenta Jauna , haietako batzuek egin zuten bezala , eta sugeek zizta eginda hil ziren .
PRED:	But if we were afraid of the Lord , some of you would die in the place of the dead .
GOLD:	Nor should we put Christ to the test , as some of them did and then died from snakebites .

ID:	5888
INPUT:	Jesusen jatorriaz eztabaida
PRED:	A Message about Jesus
GOLD:	Is Jesus the Messiah ?

ID:	5889
INPUT:	Israeldarrek , segika atera zitzaizkien Aiko gizonak landa zabalean azkeneraino garbitu ondoren , <unk> itzuli eta hiriko bizilagun guztiak hil zituzten .
PRED:	But the people of Israel came out from the town of Ai , and they left the land of Ai , and they left all the towns of the city .
GOLD:	When the Israelite army finished chasing and killing all the men of Ai in the open fields , they went back and finished off everyone inside .

ID:	5890
INPUT:	Jesusek , <unk> , begiak ukitu zizkien , eta une berean ikusmena etorri zitzaien berriro . Eta Jesusen ondoren joan ziren .
PRED:	When Jesus saw that he was healed , he saw that his eyes were healed . And when he was healed again , they came back again and left Jesus .
GOLD:	Jesus felt sorry for them and touched their eyes . Instantly they could see ! Then they followed him .

ID:	5891
INPUT:	Zure <unk> eta ekintza <unk> nuen ahoa egun osoan .
PRED:	When I heard that I had seen the power of your power , and when I saw that all the things I had seen .
GOLD:	That is why I can never stop praising you ; I declare your glory all day long .

ID:	5892
INPUT:	izaki ororen bizia odolean baitago . Horregatik agindu die Jaunak israeldarrei inolako izakiren odolik ez jateko , izaki ororen bizia odolean dagoelako ; jaten duena herritik bota egingo dute .
PRED:	That is why the Lord has commanded the people of Israel to eat the blood of all the people of the people of the people of the earth , and there will be cut off from the community of the community .
GOLD:	The life of every creature is in its blood . That is why I have said to the people of Israel , ‘ You must never eat or drink blood , for the life of any creature is in its blood . ' So whoever consumes blood will be cut off from the community .

ID:	5893
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , ohartarazi Jerusalem bere jokabide higuingarriaz .
PRED:	“ Son of man , listen to the proud of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , confront Jerusalem with her detestable sins .

ID:	5894
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> ;
PRED:	They were buried with flesh and fig tree .
GOLD:	They left Mithcah and camped at Hashmonah .

ID:	5895
INPUT:	Amondarrek Daviden mandatariak iraindu
PRED:	Judgment against the Philistines
GOLD:	David Defeats the Ammonites

ID:	5896
INPUT:	Hala ere , <unk> bederen , Jaunak , haren Jainkoak , ez zuen errege-etxearen argia itzaltzen utzi Jerusalemen ; seme bat eman zion , beraren ondoren errege izan zedin eta Jerusalemen iraun zezan .
PRED:	But as the Lord had commanded him to kill him , and the Lord has given him a great hand for a great king . He had given him to his throne in Jerusalem , and he became king in Jerusalem and in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	But for David 's sake , the Lord his God allowed his descendants to continue ruling , shining like a lamp , and he gave Abijam a son to rule after him in Jerusalem .

ID:	5897
INPUT:	<unk> hitz egiten zuen Paulok sinagogan , eta bai juduak , bai <unk> , <unk> ekartzen saiatzen zen .
PRED:	When Paul heard that the synagogue was in the synagogue , he was in the synagogue of the synagogue , and when he saw that they were very sick .
GOLD:	Each Sabbath found Paul at the synagogue , trying to convince the Jews and Greeks alike .

ID:	5898
INPUT:	Efraim , Benjamin eta Manases leinuei ! <unk> zeure ahalmena eta <unk> salbatzera !
PRED:	“ O people of Israel , Ephraim , and your people of Israel have defeated by name .
GOLD:	Turn us again to yourself , O God.Make your face shine down upon us.Only then will we be saved .

ID:	5899
INPUT:	Hexbongo deiadarrak Elale eta <unk> iristen dira ; garrasiak entzuten Tzoartik <unk> , <unk> , Nimrimgo urak ere agortu egin baitira .
PRED:	The people of Heshbon and the land of Heshbon are coming from Heshbon , and the waters of Heshbon are very glad when the waters of the sea were filled with joy .
GOLD:	“ Instead , their awful cries of terror can be heard from Heshbon clear across to Elealeh and Jahaz ; from Zoar all the way to Horonaim and Eglath-shelishiyah . Even the waters of Nimrim are dried up now .

ID:	5900
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> <unk> dira edozein <unk> , eta bidegabekeriaz <unk> edaten duteberen Jainkoaren etxean .
PRED:	And when they have been able to be kind , and those who have been filled with idols , and those who have been able to drink .
GOLD:	At their religious festivals , they lounge in clothing their debtors put up as security.In the house of their gods , they drink wine bought with unjust fines .

ID:	5901
INPUT:	Orduan , Davidek mandatariak bidali zituen , emakume hura ekar ziezaioten . Etortzean , David berarekin etzan zen ; <unk> garbikuntza egin berria zen emakumea . Ondoren , bere etxera itzuli zen Betsabe .
PRED:	Then King David sent messengers to search for him , and he sent him to kill him . When he saw that she had been healed , she returned to her , and she returned home .
GOLD:	Then David sent messengers to get her ; and when she came to the palace , he slept with her . She had just completed the purification rites after having her menstrual period . Then she returned home .

ID:	5902
INPUT:	Labanek , etxean sartu , gameluei zamak kendu eta lastoa eta belarra eman zizkien . Ondoren , ura ekarri zien morroiari eta honen <unk> , oinak garbitzeko .
PRED:	Laban left his house and threw him into pieces of water , and he gave them water . Then he gave them water to feed them , and they brought them to their feet .
GOLD:	So the man went home with Laban , and Laban unloaded the camels , gave him straw for their bedding , fed them , and provided water for the man and the camel drivers to wash their feet .

ID:	5903
INPUT:	argiz inguratua soinekoz bezala . Oihal-etxola bezala zabaltzen duzu zerua ,
PRED:	As a loud voice poured out his hand , he makes them up like a snake .
GOLD:	You are dressed in a robe of light.You stretch out the starry curtain of the heavens ;

ID:	5904
INPUT:	<unk> jokaera makurra <unk> . Jainkoak , mundua hain gaiztotua ikustean ,
PRED:	And when they saw that God 's people saw that they are full of wickedness .
GOLD:	God observed all this corruption in the world , for everyone on earth was corrupt .

ID:	5905
INPUT:	Bost errege amortarrak , ihes egin eta <unk> , leize-zulo batean , gorde ziren .
PRED:	Then the five of the Amorites attacked King Sihon of the Amorites , and the king of Assyria attacked him .
GOLD:	During the battle the five kings escaped and hid in a cave at Makkedah .

ID:	5906
INPUT:	<unk> gorroto dio <unk> , <unk> hondamendira darama .
PRED:	For when I hate you , I will punish those who hate him .
GOLD:	A lying tongue hates its victims , and flattering words cause ruin .

ID:	5907
INPUT:	Baina Jehuk uztaia eskuetan hartu , gezia jaurti eta <unk> erdian jo zuen Joram , bihotza zauritu eta aurretik ateraz . <unk> erori zen bere guda-gurdian .
PRED:	But Jehu threw his hand over them , and they struck him in the middle of the middle of the battle . But Jehu struck him in the middle of his hand , and he fell on them .
GOLD:	But Jehu drew his bow and shot Joram between the shoulders . The arrow pierced his heart , and he sank down dead in his chariot .

ID:	5908
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak esan zion : — Luzatu eskua eta heldu <unk> ! Eskua luzatu eta heldu egin zion , eta sugea makila bihurtu zen berriro eskuan .
PRED:	But the Lord said to him , “ Hold out the hand of your hand . ” So the Lord threw him into the hand and threw him into a hand .
GOLD:	Then the Lord told him , “ Reach out and grab its tail . ” So Moses reached out and grabbed it , and it turned back into a shepherd 's staff in his hand .

ID:	5909
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> ordain , begia begiaren ordain , hortza hortzaren ordain ; egin duen zauria egingo diote .
PRED:	“ My life will be like a lion , and an eye will be an eye for an eye .
GOLD:	a fracture for a fracture , an eye for an eye , a tooth for a tooth . Whatever anyone does to injure another person must be paid back in kind .

ID:	5910
INPUT:	<unk>
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Recovery
GOLD:	Punishments for Disobedience

ID:	5911
INPUT:	Bakea ekarriko dien ituna egingo dut neure <unk> : basapiztiak desagerraraziko ditut herrialdetik , seguru biziko dira landa zabalean eta lasai lo egingo basoetan .
PRED:	I will give you covenant with my covenant , and I will bring you into the land of Egypt , and the wild animals will live in their fields , and the wild animals will be destroyed .
GOLD:	“ I will make a covenant of peace with my people and drive away the dangerous animals from the land . Then they will be able to camp safely in the wildest places and sleep in the woods without fear .

ID:	5912
INPUT:	Emagaldu handiaren gaitzespena
PRED:	The Descendants of Adam
GOLD:	The Great Prostitute

ID:	5913
INPUT:	Egiaz zuk agindurik egin al dute hori ? Guri , zeure zerbitzarioi , ez diguzu esan nor izanen den zure hurrengo erregea .
PRED:	What do you think you have done ? What do you think you have done ? We have done to us , and you will be your king .
GOLD:	Has my lord the king really done this without letting any of his officials know who should be the next king ? ”

ID:	5914
INPUT:	Ni eta gainerako <unk> hirira hurbilduko gara eta , aurrekoan bezala , hirikoak guri erasotzera ateratzean , guk ihesari emango diogu .
PRED:	For the rest of the events in the city , and we will come to the city of the city , but we will ask us , ‘ We will give us the rest of us . '
GOLD:	When our main army attacks , the men of Ai will come out to fight as they did before , and we will run away from them .

ID:	5915
INPUT:	« <unk> baino bizkorrago doaz nire egunak : zoriona ikusi gabe doaz ihesi ,
PRED:	“ If they see their days , they have no more than they are gone .
GOLD:	“ My life passes more swiftly than a runner.It flees away without a glimpse of happiness .

ID:	5916
INPUT:	Berrogeita hamarnaka eta <unk> eseri ziren .
PRED:	He sat down and sat down on each side .
GOLD:	So they sat down in groups of fifty or a hundred .

ID:	5917
INPUT:	Izan itzazue zeuen artean Kristo Jesusek izan zituen sentipen berak .
PRED:	For Jesus chose you to be with Christ , and he reigned in his grace .
GOLD:	You must have the same attitude that Christ Jesus had .

ID:	5918
INPUT:	Haiek galdu nahian dabiltzan etsaien esku utziko ditut , eta haien gorpuak hegazti harraparien eta basapiztien janari izango dira .
PRED:	They will kill them , and they will feed them on the birds of the birds of the earth , and the wild animals will eat their bodies .
GOLD:	I will give you to your enemies , and they will kill you . Your bodies will be food for the vultures and wild animals .

ID:	5919
INPUT:	Erantzun zion Simon Pedrok : — Jauna , norengana joango gara ? Betiko bizia dute zure irakatsiek .
PRED:	Simon Peter asked him , “ No , I will take care of you for you . ”
GOLD:	Simon Peter replied , “ Lord , to whom would we go ? You have the words that give eternal life .

ID:	5920
INPUT:	« Beraz , honela diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Nik sorraraziko dut gerra zure kontra , eta gizakiak eta abereak <unk> ditu .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will destroy you and your people , and I will destroy your livestock and animals .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will bring an army against you , O Egypt , and destroy both people and animals .

ID:	5921
INPUT:	Artzain gabe , ardiak sakabanatu egin dira eta basapiztien harrapakin bihurtu .
PRED:	They will lie down on sheep and goats , and wild animals will be destroyed .
GOLD:	So my sheep have been scattered without a shepherd , and they are easy prey for any wild animal .

ID:	5922
INPUT:	A bai , Estebanen etxekoak ere nik bataiatu nituen , baina ez dut uste beste inor bataiatu dudanik .
PRED:	When you see the fruit of the household , I am baptized with you , but they do n't realize that the same thing I am baptized .
GOLD:	( Oh yes , I also baptized the household of Stephanas , but I do n't remember baptizing anyone else . )

ID:	5923
INPUT:	Gogora ezazue , bada , bekatarien aldetik halako eraso gogorra jasan zuen hura , adorea galdu eta etsi ez dezazuen .
PRED:	May God strike you by the power of the power of the world , so that you will lose your prostitution and your prostitution .
GOLD:	Think of all the hostility he endured from sinful people ; then you wo n't become weary and give up .

ID:	5924
INPUT:	Abrahamen beste ondorengo batzuk
PRED:	The Descendants of Abraham
GOLD:	The Death of Abraham

ID:	5925
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin zaiona egin zuen , beraren aita Amatziasek bezalaxe .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as he had done .
GOLD:	He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , just as his father , Amaziah , had done .

ID:	5926
INPUT:	Gero , apaizak Jaunari aurkeztuko dio hori guztia : gauza sakratua da eta apaizari dagokio , aurkezturiko bularra eta aparte utzitako izterra bezala . Horren guztiaren ondoren , ardoa edan ahal izango du nazireu-botoa zuenak .
PRED:	Then the priest must present this offering to the Lord : This is what the priest says : This is a special offering to the Lord , just as a special offering and a special gift presented to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the priest will lift them up as a special offering before the Lord . These are holy portions for the priest , along with the breast of the special offering and the thigh of the sacred offering that are lifted up before the Lord . After this ceremony the Nazirites may again drink wine .

ID:	5927
INPUT:	Aaronen seme Eleazar <unk> alabetariko batekin ezkondu zen . Honek Pinhas sortu zion . Hauek guztiak lebitar familiaburuak dira beren jatorriko familiekin .
PRED:	Eleazar son of Aaron , the priest of Aaron , who were born from the tribe of Aaron . These were the descendants of Aaron , who were the descendants of Aaron , who were descendants of Aaron .
GOLD:	Eleazar son of Aaron married one of the daughters of Putiel , and she gave birth to his son , Phinehas.These are the ancestors of the Levite families , listed according to their clans .

ID:	5928
INPUT:	Judan Salomonen seme Roboam zen errege . Berrogeita bat urte zituen Roboamek errege izaten hastean , eta hamazazpi urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen , Jaunak Israelgo leinu guztien artetik bere egoitza jartzeko hautatu zuen hirian . Roboam erregearen amak Naama zuen izena eta amondarra zen .
PRED:	Rehoboam was twenty-two years old when he became king of Judah , and he reigned in Jerusalem twenty-nine years . He reigned in Jerusalem to rule over all the towns of Judah , and he became king of Israel .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Rehoboam son of Solomon was king in Judah . He was forty-one years old when he became king , and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem , the city the Lord had chosen from among all the tribes of Israel as the place to honor his name . Rehoboam 's mother was Naamah , an Ammonite woman .

ID:	5929
INPUT:	Libra nazazu , arren , neure anaia Esauren eskutik , ni eta <unk> hiltzeko etorriko den beldur bainaiz .
PRED:	My brother , please kill me , my brother , and I will be afraid of my brother , and I will kill you .
GOLD:	But you promised me , ‘ I will surely treat you kindly , and I will multiply your descendants until they become as numerous as the sands along the seashore — too many to count . ' ”

ID:	5930
INPUT:	Etsai <unk> ninduen , ni baino indartsuago ziren arerioengandik .
PRED:	But when I heard that I was very powerful , the Lord was very powerful .
GOLD:	He rescued me from my powerful enemies , from those who hated me and were too strong for me .

ID:	5931
INPUT:	Alde gaitzetik , egin on dena , bila bakea eta jarrai haren bidetik .
PRED:	Turn from evil and do good ; do n't let them live in peace .
GOLD:	The eyes of the Lord watch over those who do right ; his ears are open to their cries for help .

ID:	5932
INPUT:	« Judako errege Manasesek bere <unk> amortarrek baino egintza higuingarriagoak egin dituenez eta , sasijainkoak direla eta , judatarrei bekatu eginarazi dienez ,
PRED:	“ But you will be angry with the kings of Judah and your detestable sins , and you will not abandon you . You will turn away from your sins and you , and you will turn from your sins .
GOLD:	“ King Manasseh of Judah has done many detestable things . He is even more wicked than the Amorites , who lived in this land before Israel . He has caused the people of Judah to sin with his idols .

ID:	5933
INPUT:	Ez du inork bere gorputza gorrotatzen , baizik eta jaten eman eta zaindu egiten du , Kristok <unk> egiten duen bezala ;
PRED:	For no one who eats its body , but he has given birth to his body , just as Christ has given .
GOLD:	No one hates his own body but feeds and cares for it , just as Christ cares for the church .

ID:	5934
INPUT:	Ix-Boxet israeldarren errege izendatua
PRED:	Jair Becomes Israel 's Judge
GOLD:	Ishbosheth Proclaimed King of Israel

ID:	5935
INPUT:	Jauna , barkatzeko prest
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Blessings for the

ID:	5936
INPUT:	Etxera bidean , morroiak atera zitzaizkion bere semea onik zuela esatera .
PRED:	His servants came out to him and told him , “ Come home ! ”
GOLD:	While the man was on his way , some of his servants met him with the news that his son was alive and well .

ID:	5937
INPUT:	Argimutilaren gerritik ateratzen diren sei besoetariko bakoitzak almendra-lore gisako hiru kopa izango ditu , beren kukulu , lore-hosto eta guzti ;
PRED:	There will be six branches like almond blossoms , lamp cups shaped like almond blossoms , buds and petals .
GOLD:	Each of the six branches will have three lamp cups shaped like almond blossoms , complete with buds and petals .

ID:	5938
INPUT:	Halaber , emaztetzat hartzen dut Rut <unk> , <unk> alarguntsa ; honela , <unk> familian iraungo du <unk> eta Elimeleken izenak bere senideen artean eta herri honetan jarraituko du . Zuek zarete , gaur , honen guztiaren lekuko .
PRED:	I will give the rest of the land of the land of the land of the beast , which means that the number of his brothers and sisters and sisters , as well as well as well as the family of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	And with the land I have acquired Ruth , the Moabite widow of Mahlon , to be my wife . This way she can have a son to carry on the family name of her dead husband and to inherit the family property here in his hometown . You are all witnesses today . ”

ID:	5939
INPUT:	Zeure etsaien esklabo egingo zaitut , ezagutzen ez duzun lurraldean ; piztu baita nire haserrea , sutan dago zure aurka ) .
PRED:	For you are slaves of your enemies , for you have no longer raised me into the land of your enemies .
GOLD:	I will tell your enemies to take youas captives to a foreign land.For my anger blazes like a firethat will burn forever . ”

ID:	5940
INPUT:	Behin batean , baziren zazpi anaia . Zaharrena ezkondu eta seme-alabarik gabe hil zen .
PRED:	There were seven more brothers and sisters , but the other children died .
GOLD:	Well , suppose there were seven brothers . The oldest one married and then died without children .

ID:	5941
INPUT:	hegoek elkar ukitzen zuten . <unk> zuzen zihoazen aurrera , inoiz itzuli gabe .
PRED:	Then the man touched his robe , and they could see what was happening .
GOLD:	The wings of each living being touched the wings of the beings beside it . Each one moved straight forward in any direction without turning around .

ID:	5942
INPUT:	<unk> batzuek Gibeara igo eta esan zioten Sauli : — Ez al dakizu David gure artean gordetzen dela , <unk> haitzarteetan , basamortuaren hegoalderantz dagoen Hakila mendixkan ?
PRED:	When they arrived at Gibeah , they said to Saul , “ Did n't you know that we know that you know that we 're going into the wilderness of Egypt ? ”
GOLD:	But now the men of Ziph went to Saul in Gibeah and betrayed David to him . “ We know where David is hiding , ” they said . “ He is in the strongholds of Horesh on the hill of Hakilah , which is in the southern part of Jeshimon .

ID:	5943
INPUT:	« Eta urrutiko lurraldetik , zure izen handiaren eta zure egintza <unk> berri aditurik , zure herri Israelgoa ez den arrotzen bat
PRED:	“ I will send you out to distant lands of your people , who were in the land of your great power , and I have given you a great nation to all the nations of your people .
GOLD:	“ In the future , foreigners who do not belong to your people Israel will hear of you . They will come from distant lands because of your name ,

ID:	5944
INPUT:	Eta Kristo honela zerbitzatzen duena Jainkoari atsegin zaio eta gizon-emakumeek onartua da .
PRED:	And those who love God and love God .
GOLD:	If you serve Christ with this attitude , you will please God , and others will approve of you , too .

ID:	5945
INPUT:	« Geure lehen-semeak eta abereen <unk> gure Jainkoaren etxean zerbitzua betetzen duten apaizei aurkeztuko dizkiegu , legeak agintzen duenez .
PRED:	“ But if we are the firstborn sons of God and the people of the Temple of our God , we must obey the law of God and the law of God .
GOLD:	We will store the produce in the storerooms of the Temple of our God . We will bring the best of our flour and other grain offerings , the best of our fruit , and the best of our new wine and olive oil . And we promise to bring to the Levites a tenth of everything our land produces , for it is the Levites who collect the tithes in all our rural towns .

ID:	5946
INPUT:	Zenbait <unk> <unk> eta <unk> ere jardun ohi zuen harekin eztabaidan . Batzuek zioten : « Zer ote dio berritsu honek ? » Beste batzuek , berriz : « Jainko arrotzen <unk> dirudi » . Izan ere , Jesusen eta piztueraren berri ematen zien Paulok .
PRED:	At that time , when they saw that some of you were afraid , they asked him , “ What do you think about ? ” And when some of them were saying , “ Why are you afraid of us ? ”
GOLD:	He also had a debate with some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers . When he told them about Jesus and his resurrection , they said , “ What 's this babbler trying to say with these strange ideas he 's picked up ? ” Others said , “ He seems to be preaching about some foreign gods . ”

ID:	5947
INPUT:	Hauxe da Jainkoaren agindua : sinets dezagula beraren Seme Jesu Kristogan eta maita dezagula elkar , berak agindu bezala .
PRED:	This is the command of God 's command , for he has given us his own name . He has given us his command , just as he has promised .
GOLD:	And this is his commandment : We must believe in the name of his Son , Jesus Christ , and love one another , just as he commanded us .

ID:	5948
INPUT:	Esnez hazi zintuztedan , ez janari <unk> , hau hartzeko ez baitzineten oraindik gauza . Orain ere ez zarete gauza ,
PRED:	For I am sending you into your faith , and you have not yet given you everything I had done .
GOLD:	I had to feed you with milk , not with solid food , because you were n't ready for anything stronger . And you still are n't ready ,

ID:	5949
INPUT:	Jesusek Jainko Aitarengandik hartu zituen ohorea eta aintza , honela esan baitzion Jainkoaren ospe <unk> etorritako mintzoak : « Hauxe dut neure Seme maitea , hauxe dut nik atsegin » .
PRED:	Jesus took him from the Father , and he said , “ I have heard the glory of God , the glory of God , and he said , “ My child is my love . ”
GOLD:	when he received honor and glory from God the Father . The voice from the majestic glory of God said to him , “ This is my dearly loved Son , who brings me great joy . ”

ID:	5950
INPUT:	Faraoia hurbil zen . Israeldarrak , egiptoarrak atzean zituztela ohartzean , izutu eta oihuka hasi zitzaizkion Jaunari .
PRED:	At that time the Egyptians saw the Egyptians , and they cried out to the Lord , and they began praising the Lord .
GOLD:	As Pharaoh approached , the people of Israel looked up and panicked when they saw the Egyptians overtaking them . They cried out to the Lord ,

ID:	5951
INPUT:	gaizki-esale , Jainkoaren etsai , <unk> , harro handiputz , <unk> trebe eta gurasoekin <unk> dira ;
PRED:	They will be afraid of God , and they will be able to be filled with their ancestors . They will know that they were filled with their ancestors , and they will be filled with fear .
GOLD:	They are backstabbers , haters of God , insolent , proud , and boastful . They invent new ways of sinning , and they disobey their parents .

ID:	5952
INPUT:	Etsaiek Danieli tranpa jarri
PRED:	Judgment against you
GOLD:	Daniel in the Lions ' Den

ID:	5953
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> parabola
PRED:	Parable of the Great Feast
GOLD:	Parable of the Ten Servants

ID:	5954
INPUT:	Kontu izan zuk ere horrekin , gogor jarri baitzen gure <unk> kontra .
PRED:	Listen to what you have done , so that you could see how to kill us .
GOLD:	Be careful of him , for he fought against everything we said .

ID:	5955
INPUT:	Lagundu fededunei beren beharretan ; eman gogoz ostatu <unk> .
PRED:	Give thanks to the believers who were in charge of the believers .
GOLD:	When God 's people are in need , be ready to help them . Always be eager to practice hospitality .

ID:	5956
INPUT:	Gero , berrogeita hamar lokarri ipini zituzten elkarrekin jositako sail bakoitzaren ertzean .
PRED:	Then they took one of them along with the edge of the edge of the ephod .
GOLD:	He made fifty loops for the edge of each large curtain .

ID:	5957
INPUT:	Han ehortzi zituzten Abraham eta honen emazte Sara ; han Isaak eta honen emazte Rebeka ere . Eta hantxe ehortzi nuen Lea .
PRED:	There he was buried with Abraham and his wife , Isaac , and she was buried with Rachel .
GOLD:	There Abraham and his wife Sarah are buried . There Isaac and his wife , Rebekah , are buried . And there I buried Leah .

ID:	5958
INPUT:	Eta ahotsa sortu zen izakien buru gainean zegoen <unk> gainetik .
PRED:	Suddenly , the voice was sitting on his head , and when he was sitting on his head .
GOLD:	As they stood with wings lowered , a voice spoke from beyond the crystal surface above them .

ID:	5959
INPUT:	Esan zidan gizonak : « Gizaseme , begira erne , entzun adi eta jarri arreta erakutsiko dizudan guztiari , erakuts <unk> ekarri baitzaituzte hona . Gero , kontatu israeldarrei ikusiko duzun guztia » .
PRED:	Then the man said to me , “ Son of man , see that you must listen to me , and you must know that you have given me all the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	He said to me , “ Son of man , watch and listen . Pay close attention to everything I show you . You have been brought here so I can show you many things . Then you will return to the people of Israel and tell them everything you have seen . ”

ID:	5960
INPUT:	Erregeak ongi baderitzo , eman bedi berorren izenean eta ezarri Pertsia eta Mediako legeen artean aldaezineko agindu hau : “ Ez dadila Baxti aurrerantzean Asuero erregeagana inoiz agertu eta hura baino hobea izanen denari eman diezaiola <unk> erregina izatea ” .
PRED:	If the king has given him the king of Persia , he must put him in charge of you and put him in charge of the honor of the king . He has given him the king of the king , and he has given him the king to honor of the king .
GOLD:	“ So if it please the king , we suggest that you issue a written decree , a law of the Persians and Medes that can not be revoked . It should order that Queen Vashti be forever banished from the presence of King Xerxes , and that the king should choose another queen more worthy than she .

ID:	5961
INPUT:	Zergatik ahaztu nahi gaituzu betiko ? Zergatik utzi nahi bertan behera bizi guztirako ?
PRED:	Why do you want to obey me ? Why do you want me to live forever ?
GOLD:	Why do you continue to forget us ? Why have you abandoned us for so long ?

ID:	5962
INPUT:	<unk> nagoela uste dudanean , zure maitasunak eusten dit , Jauna .
PRED:	I know that I am the Lord , who is my love me .
GOLD:	I cried out , “ I am slipping ! ” but your unfailing love , O Lord , supported me .

ID:	5963
INPUT:	Kadex-Barneatik atera eta Zered erreka igaro arteko bidean hogeita hemezortzi urte eman genituen . Ordurako desagertua zen kanpalekutik , Jaunak zin egin zien bezala , gerra-gizonen belaunaldi hura guztia .
PRED:	So we brought out the Jordan River to the east of the Jordan River and twenty years old or twenty years old or twenty years old or older or older or three years .
GOLD:	“ Thirty-eight years passed from the time we first left Kadesh-barnea until we finally crossed the Zered Brook ! By then , all the men old enough to fight in battle had died in the wilderness , as the Lord had vowed would happen .

ID:	5964
INPUT:	Horregatik , beraien bidea <unk> egingo dut : <unk> <unk> , bertan eroriko dira . Zoritxarra bidaliko diet <unk> hartzeko egunean . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	That is why I will send my hand against them , and I will send disaster on my side , ” says the Lord . “ At that time I will send my fury on this day . ”
GOLD:	“ Therefore , the paths they takewill become slippery.They will be chased through the dark , and there they will fall.For I will bring disaster upon themat the time fixed for their punishment.I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	5965
INPUT:	<unk> , beraz , Antiokiara jaitsi ziren eta , biltzarra bildurik , gutuna eman zieten .
PRED:	So when they returned to Antioch , they sent this letter to Antioch of the church and read this message :
GOLD:	The messengers went at once to Antioch , where they called a general meeting of the believers and delivered the letter .

ID:	5966
INPUT:	alargun gelditu zen , eta bazituen laurogeita lau urte . Ez zen tenplutik ateratzen , eta gau eta egun Jainkoa zerbitzatzen zuen bertan , barau eta otoitz .
PRED:	There was eight years old , and there was three years old or three years old , and God fell on the Temple .
GOLD:	Then she lived as a widow to the age of eighty-four . She never left the Temple but stayed there day and night , worshiping God with fasting and prayer .

ID:	5967
INPUT:	<unk> zeritzan gizon batek , fariseuen taldekoa eta juduen <unk> bera ,
PRED:	One of the Pharisees , who had been called by the Jewish leaders .
GOLD:	There was a man named Nicodemus , a Jewish religious leader who was a Pharisee .

ID:	5968
INPUT:	Orduan , nazio artean sakabanatu eta herrialde artean barreiatuko ditudanean , jakingo dute ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	Then I will scatter them among the nations , and they will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And when I scatter them among the nations , they will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	5969
INPUT:	Liburu Santuetan , hain zuzen , hauxe esana du norbaitek : Zer da gizona , zu hartaz oroitzeko , zer gizakia , zu hartaz arduratzeko ?
PRED:	For the Scriptures say , “ This is what the Scriptures say : What are you made of honor and honor and honor you ?
GOLD:	For in one place the Scriptures say , “ What are mere mortals that you should think about them , or a son of man that you should care for him ?

ID:	5970
INPUT:	Bakea ekarriko dien ituna egingo dut beraiekin , betiko balioko duena . Herrialdean ezarri eta ugaldu egingo ditut . Neure santutegia beraien artean jarriko dut betiko .
PRED:	Therefore , I will give you a covenant with the people who live forever and will live forever . I will make them holy and shame among my people .
GOLD:	And I will make a covenant of peace with them , an everlasting covenant . I will give them their land and increase their numbers , and I will put my Temple among them forever .

ID:	5971
INPUT:	Hogeita <unk> bat israeldar hil zituzten <unk> eta hiriko ateetatik <unk> pertsegitu zituzten , maldan behera denak <unk> . Israeldarrak adoregabeturik gelditu ziren ; hauen kemena urtu eta ura bezala isuri zen .
PRED:	At that time the people of Israel saw that they were killed by the city of the city , and they were buried in the hill country of Israel , and they were filled with fear .
GOLD:	chased the Israelites from the town gate as far as the quarries , and they killed about thirty-six who were retreating down the slope . The Israelites were paralyzed with fear at this turn of events , and their courage melted away .

ID:	5972
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , begira Israelgo <unk> eta hitz egin nire izenean berorien aurka .
PRED:	“ Son of man , prophesy against all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , turn and face the mountains of Israel and prophesy against them .

ID:	5973
INPUT:	Ez izan horrelakoaz gupidarik ! Horrela ezabatuko duzue errugabearen hilketa Israeldik , eta zoriontsu izango zarete .
PRED:	You must not have mercy on the name of the Lord , for you have anointed one of the community of Israel .
GOLD:	Do not feel sorry for that murderer ! Purge from Israel the guilt of murdering innocent people ; then all will go well with you .

ID:	5974
INPUT:	Lege bera izango duzue oharkabean huts egin duenarentzat , bertakoa nahiz zuen artean bizi den etorkina izan .
PRED:	The foreigners living among you must be circumcised among those who remain living among the foreigners living among you .
GOLD:	These same instructions apply both to native-born Israelites and to the foreigners living among you .

ID:	5975
INPUT:	Samsonek esan zien : — Hori egin al duzue ? Ba , nik ez dut etsiko zuei mendeku egin arte .
PRED:	Samson asked them , “ Do you realize that I will punish you until I will punish you until I will punish you . ”
GOLD:	“ Because you did this , ” Samson vowed , “ I wo n't rest until I take my revenge on you ! ”

ID:	5976
INPUT:	Egiptora ihesi
PRED:	Judgment against Egypt
GOLD:	The Escape to Egypt

ID:	5977
INPUT:	Bazen entzuleen artean <unk> izeneko emakume bat , izatez <unk> , purpurazko <unk> <unk> ; Israelen Jainkoa gurtzen zuen . Jaunak barrutik eragin zion , Pauloren hitzak gogoz onar zitzan .
PRED:	There was a man who had a man named him , who was a man who had been sitting on the throne of Israel , who had been able to obey God 's words . And when he saw Paul 's words .
GOLD:	One of them was Lydia from Thyatira , a merchant of expensive purple cloth , who worshiped God . As she listened to us , the Lord opened her heart , and she accepted what Paul was saying .

ID:	5978
INPUT:	« Lizuna ikertzera sartu baino lehen , etxea <unk> aginduko du apaizak , etxean dagoen guztia kutsa ez dadin ; ondoren , etxea miatzera sartuko da .
PRED:	“ But if the priests enter the house , the priest will be able to enter the house of the priest 's house , the priest will not enter the house of the house .
GOLD:	Before the priest goes in to inspect the house , he must have the house emptied so nothing inside will be pronounced ceremonially unclean .

ID:	5979
INPUT:	Ondoren , berrehun eta zazpi urtez bizi izan zen , eta seme-alabak izan zituen .
PRED:	Then he lived another years and had other sons and daughters .
GOLD:	After the birth of Serug , Reu lived another 207 years and had other sons and daughters .

ID:	5980
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> <unk> ( 8 , 1 — 11 , 1 )
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Zalmunna
GOLD:	Food Sacrificed to Idols

ID:	5981
INPUT:	Gu , berriz , Jainkoak , Espirituaren egitez eta sinesmenari esker , salbamena emango digun itxaropenez bizi gara .
PRED:	But we are God 's Spirit , and we have given us the Spirit of God by faith .
GOLD:	But we who live by the Spirit eagerly wait to receive by faith the righteousness God has promised to us .

ID:	5982
INPUT:	Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosorrek Babiloniara gatibu eramandako judu asko Jerusalemera eta Judako beste herrietara , nor bere herrira , itzuli zen .
PRED:	When King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon arrived in Jerusalem , he returned to Jerusalem to Jerusalem to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Here is the list of the Jewish exiles of the provinces who returned from their captivity . King Nebuchadnezzar had deported them to Babylon , but now they returned to Jerusalem and the other towns in Judah where they originally lived .

ID:	5983
INPUT:	Juduak mirarizko seinale eske dabiltza , eta jentilak jakinduria bila ;
PRED:	God 's miraculous signs and calamity for you , and the Gentiles are wise .
GOLD:	It is foolish to the Jews , who ask for signs from heaven . And it is foolish to the Greeks , who seek human wisdom .

ID:	5984
INPUT:	Ulertzeko gauza denak uler beza » .
PRED:	“ Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the truth . ”
GOLD:	Anyone with ears to hear should listen and understand . ”

ID:	5985
INPUT:	Jauna , zuri dei egitean , ez dakidala neure ustea huts gerta ! Huts egin biezaie , ordea , beren usteak gaiztoei , gal bitez Herio Leizeko isilpean !
PRED:	For the Lord is my fortress ; I have not punished my enemies , for they have rejected my anger . But they have rejected my anger , for they have spoken to me , O Lord , for they have spoken !
GOLD:	Silence their lying lips — those proud and arrogant lips that accuse the godly .

ID:	5986
INPUT:	Netziah eta Hatifarenak .
PRED:	They left forever and camped at once .
GOLD:	Neziah , and Hatipha .

ID:	5987
INPUT:	« Zuen lehen-semeak oro nireak dira , baita lehen abere-kume arrak ere , zekor nahiz arkume .
PRED:	“ If you are my firstborn sons and firstborn sons , both animals and animals , and animals must sacrifice for the burnt offerings .
GOLD:	“ The firstborn of every animal belongs to me , including the firstborn males from your herds of cattle and your flocks of sheep and goats .

ID:	5988
INPUT:	( Mk 15 , 1 ; Lk 23 , 1-2 ; Jn 18 , 28 )
PRED:	The First Disciples
GOLD:	Jesus ' Trial before Pilate

ID:	5989
INPUT:	<unk> , herri ahula izan arren , udan beren ogia ziurtatzen dutenak ;
PRED:	They are weak , but they are weak , but those whose hearts are weak .
GOLD:	Ants — they are n't strong , but they store up food all summer .

ID:	5990
INPUT:	<unk> geratzen ez
PRED:	The Descendants of the Priests
GOLD:	Misery Turned to Hope

ID:	5991
INPUT:	« Ez duzue bahituran hartuko , ez <unk> , ez errotarria , bahituran bizia bera hartzea izango bailitzateke hori .
PRED:	“ Do not let any of you if you do not be able to be able to be able to obey the law of God , and he must not be put to death .
GOLD:	“ It is wrong to take a set of millstones , or even just the upper millstone , as security for a loan , for the owner uses it to make a living .

ID:	5992
INPUT:	Simon Zelote eta Judas Iskariote , Jesus saldu zuena .
PRED:	One of Simon , Judas , named Simon ( also betray Jesus . )
GOLD:	Simon ( the zealot ) , Judas Iscariot ( who later betrayed him ) .

ID:	5993
INPUT:	<unk> itzazue , beraz , zeuen baitan mundu honen araberako jarrerak : lizunkeria , zikinkeria , <unk> eta grina txarrak eta idolatria den diru-gosea .
PRED:	Now encourage those who have been poor , and those who have been poor , those who have been filled with idols , and those who have been filled with idols .
GOLD:	So put to death the sinful , earthly things lurking within you . Have nothing to do with sexual immorality , impurity , lust , and evil desires . Do n't be greedy , for a greedy person is an idolater , worshiping the things of this world .

ID:	5994
INPUT:	Gainera , aker bat eskainiko zaio Jaunari barkamen-oparitzat , eguneroko erre-opari eta isur-opariez gain .
PRED:	And he will offer one male goat as a sin offering to the Lord , and he must present a burnt offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ On the first day of each month , you must also offer one male goat for a sin offering to the Lord . This is in addition to the regular burnt offering and its accompanying liquid offering .

ID:	5995
INPUT:	Hogeita hiru urte predikatzen
PRED:	Jehoahaz was twenty-two years old when
GOLD:	The Cup of the

ID:	5996
INPUT:	<unk> Jerusalemgo kristauen alde
PRED:	Paul 's People from Jerusalem
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Instructions

ID:	5997
INPUT:	Arnon erreka ondoan dagoen Aroer hiritik eta lautadaren erdian dagoen hiritik , Madaba lautada osoa <unk>
PRED:	The Arnon River on the Arnon Gorge to the Arnon Gorge in the middle of the Arnon Gorge to the Arnon River , along with all the towns of the Arnon River .
GOLD:	Their territory extended from Aroer on the edge of the Arnon Gorge ( including the town in the middle of the gorge ) to the plain beyond Medeba , as far as Dibon .

ID:	5998
INPUT:	Alargun gelditu eta benetan bakarrik dagoenak Jainkoarengan jarria du itxaropena , eta etengabe ari zaio eskean , gau eta egun otoitzean .
PRED:	Anyone who does not love him and love him . Anyone who calls on his way to pray and night and night .
GOLD:	Now a true widow , a woman who is truly alone in this world , has placed her hope in God . She prays night and day , asking God for his help .

ID:	5999
INPUT:	Hamateko sarreratik Araba <unk> lurraldea berreskuratu zuen Israelentzat , <unk> Amitairen seme Jonas bere zerbitzari profetaren bidez Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak , esana zuen bezala .
PRED:	In the south side of the Jordan River , King Cyrus of Persia , which was the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , just as the God of Israel had promised .
GOLD:	Jeroboam II recovered the territories of Israel between Lebo-hamath and the Dead Sea , just as the Lord , the God of Israel , had promised through Jonah son of Amittai , the prophet from Gath-hepher .

ID:	6000
INPUT:	Bizirik geldituriko israeldarrak , herri askotan sakabanatuak , lehoia basapiztien artean bezala , <unk> ardien artean bezalaizango dira : edonon sartzen direlarik , harrapatu eta txikitu egiten dute , eta ez da <unk> eskutik libratuko .
PRED:	But the Philistines of Israel will fall into the streets of Egypt , like trees that the wild animals of Egypt will fall into the sea , and those who are slaughtered by the sword . They will fall into the sea , and they will destroy those who are slaughtered by the sword .
GOLD:	Then the remnant left in Israelwill take their place among the nations.They will be like dew sent by the Lordor like rain falling on the grass , which no one can hold backand no one can restrain .

ID:	6001
INPUT:	« Simeon eta Lebi <unk> erabiltzeko bat datoz .
PRED:	“ These are the names of Simeon , who was a man named after their ancestor Abraham .
GOLD:	“ Simeon and Levi are two of a kind ; their weapons are instruments of violence .

ID:	6002
INPUT:	Nola <unk> <unk> uzta-garaian , hala mezulari fidagarria <unk> : <unk> indarberritu egiten du .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who are wise in the harvest , and when they know that everyone who were poor .
GOLD:	Trustworthy messengers refresh like snow in summer.They revive the spirit of their employer .

ID:	6003
INPUT:	batzarrak harrikatu eta ezpataz hilko ditu ; seme-alabak hilko dizkie eta etxeak erreko .
PRED:	The leaders of the vineyard will die , and the other sons will die .
GOLD:	For their enemies will stone them and kill them with swords . They will butcher their sons and daughters and burn their homes .

ID:	6004
INPUT:	Aberatsek ur <unk> dituzte morroiak : badoaz <unk> , baina urik ez , eta ontziak hutsik itzuli behar , lotsaz gorri eta burumakur .
PRED:	Come and kill me , my servant , and kill those who are weak and wine , but they have no fruit .
GOLD:	The nobles send servants to get water , but all the wells are dry.The servants return with empty pitchers , confused and desperate , covering their heads in grief .

ID:	6005
INPUT:	Etsaien aurrean ihes eragin diguzu , eta gorroto <unk> larrutu egiten gaituzte .
PRED:	You have led us away , and those who hate you .
GOLD:	You have butchered us like sheepand scattered us among the nations .

ID:	6006
INPUT:	Daviden mutilak eta Joab irtenaldi bat egitetik zetozen , harrapakin ugari zekartela . Abner ez zegoen Hebronen Davidekin , ordurako joana baitzen bakean .
PRED:	Joab and his young men were brought to the Philistine army , and he had no more enough to help him .
GOLD:	But just after David had sent Abner away in safety , Joab and some of David 's troops returned from a raid , bringing much plunder with them .

ID:	6007
INPUT:	<unk> mirari eta egintza harrigarri gertatzen ziren herrian apostoluen eskuz . Fededun guztiak Salomonen aterpean bildu ohi ziren gogo batez ;
PRED:	And when they saw that the miraculous signs and wonders in the beginning of Solomon had all the believers in the beginning of Solomon .
GOLD:	The apostles were performing many miraculous signs and wonders among the people . And all the believers were meeting regularly at the Temple in the area known as Solomon 's Colonnade .

ID:	6008
INPUT:	Neuk ere ez nuen ezagutzen ; baina ni urez bataiatzera etorri banaiz , bera Israel herriari agerrarazteko izan da » .
PRED:	For I did n't know that I have come with water , but when I have come with water . ”
GOLD:	I did not recognize him as the Messiah , but I have been baptizing with water so that he might be revealed to Israel . ”

ID:	6009
INPUT:	Zure <unk> egiten naute ulertzeko gai ; horregatik , gorroto dut jokabide maltzur oro .
PRED:	I know that your actions are righteous , and I hate what I hate .
GOLD:	Your commandments give me understanding ; no wonder I hate every false way of life .

ID:	6010
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , hitz egin nire izenean eta adierazi nire , Jainko Jaun honen , mezua : « Egin <unk> <unk> !
PRED:	“ Son of man , prophesy against me and tell me what the Sovereign Lord says : ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : What sorrow awaits me ? '
GOLD:	“ Son of man , prophesy and give this message from the Sovereign Lord : “ Weep and wailfor that day ,

ID:	6011
INPUT:	Jeroboamek , gainera , Judan egin ohi zenaren antzeko jai bat egin zuen zortzigarren hilabeteko hamabosgarren egunean . Betelen ere bera igo zen aldarera , berak egindako zekor-irudiei opariak eskaintzera , eta bertan izendatu zituen berak eginiko kultu-lekuetako apaizak .
PRED:	When Jeroboam had finished speaking , he made a solemn oath on the eighth day of King Jeroboam 's reign , he also built an altar on the altar of Judah and his people — the priests , the priests , and the priests , and the priests , and the priests , and the priests , and the priests , and the priests , and the priests , and the priests , and the people of Judah had dedicated to worship of Judah .
GOLD:	And Jeroboam instituted a religious festival in Bethel , held on the fifteenth day of the eighth month , in imitation of the annual Festival of Shelters in Judah . There at Bethel he himself offered sacrifices to the calves he had made , and he appointed priests for the pagan shrines he had made .

ID:	6012
INPUT:	Orduan , <unk> batek esan zidan : « Ez egin negarrik ; hara , Judaren leinuko lehoiak , Daviden kimuak eskuratu du garaipena , eta beronek irekiko ditu liburua eta zazpi zigiluak » .
PRED:	Then one of the men said to me , “ Do n't weep for you , and you must not mourn for the sword of the tribe of Judah and the tribe of Judah , and the king of Judah will burn the Lord 's Temple . ”
GOLD:	But one of the twenty-four elders said to me , “ Stop weeping ! Look , the Lion of the tribe of Judah , the heir to David 's throne , has won the victory . He is worthy to open the scroll and its seven seals . ”

ID:	6013
INPUT:	ezagut dezan munduak zure nagusitza , jentil-herriek zure garaipena .
PRED:	They will know your power , and the nations will be destroyed .
GOLD:	May the nations praise you , O God.Yes , may all the nations praise you .

ID:	6014
INPUT:	Zoritxarrekoa aitari esaten diona : « Zergatik sortu ninduzun ? » , eta amari : « <unk> ninduzun mundura ? »
PRED:	“ Why have you heard my father ? ” he asked . “ Why have you been my mother ? ” “ Why have you been my father ? ”
GOLD:	How terrible it would be if a newborn baby said to its father , ‘ Why was I born ? 'or if it said to its mother , ‘ Why did you make me this way ? ' ”

ID:	6015
INPUT:	eta pozten naiz han ez izanaz , zeuen onerako izango baita , horrela sinets dezazuen . Goazen , bada , haren etxera .
PRED:	I rejoice in your presence , for they do n't believe it . If they do n't believe it , they will believe in his own home .
GOLD:	And for your sakes , I 'm glad I was n't there , for now you will really believe . Come , let 's go see him . ”

ID:	6016
INPUT:	Hogeita hamabost kilo urre garbi erabili zituen argimutila eta hornigaiak egiteko .
PRED:	He made you pure gold and gold for the lampstand and its accessories .
GOLD:	The entire lampstand , along with its accessories , was made from 75 pounds of pure gold .

ID:	6017
INPUT:	Bai , zuek , israeldarrok , nire mendi <unk> edan zenuten bezala , hala beharko dute <unk> guztiek etengabe , azken <unk> edan ere . Eta aztarnarik utzi <unk> dira .
PRED:	Yes , you are my people of Israel , and when you have heard that you have been filled with me , and they will know that they have been very very very very very very weak . ”
GOLD:	Just as you swallowed up my peopleon my holy mountain , so you and the surrounding nationswill swallow the punishment I pour out on you.Yes , all you nations will drink and staggerand disappear from history .

ID:	6018
INPUT:	Non duk , Herio , heure garaipena ? Non heure eztena ?
PRED:	Where are you from the grave ? Who gives you victory over me ?
GOLD:	O death , where is your victory ? O death , where is your sting ? ”

ID:	6019
INPUT:	Ez naiz inoiz ere etxe batean bizi izan , israeldarrak Egiptotik atera nituenetik egundaino ; <unk> oihal-etxola nuela ibilia naiz .
PRED:	I have never been able to live in a house of Egypt , because I have brought you out of Egypt . I am sure that I am the god of Egypt .
GOLD:	I have never lived in a house , from the day I brought the Israelites out of Egypt until this very day . I have always moved from one place to another with a tent and a Tabernacle as my dwelling .

ID:	6020
INPUT:	Orduan , Judak esan zion <unk> : « Ezkon zaitez zeure anaiaren emaztearekin , eta bete <unk> dagokion <unk> , anaiari ondorengoa emateko » .
PRED:	Then Judah said to him , “ Go and tell you what you have done to your wife and your brother , your brother , and I will give birth to your brother . ”
GOLD:	Then Judah said to Er 's brother Onan , “ Go and marry Tamar , as our law requires of the brother of a man who has died . You must produce an heir for your brother . ”

ID:	6021
INPUT:	Eta zuek Jaunarengandik aldentzen zarete gaur ! Zuek gaur beraren kontra <unk> , Jauna bihar haserretu egingo da Israel herri osoarekin .
PRED:	And if you turn away from the presence of the Lord , you will know that the Lord has destroyed all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	And yet today you are turning away from following the Lord . If you rebel against the Lord today , he will be angry with all of us tomorrow .

ID:	6022
INPUT:	<unk>
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Recovery
GOLD:	The Truths of Our Faith

ID:	6023
INPUT:	Ez nuen hartu janari <unk> , ez haragirik , ez ardorik , eta ez nuen erabili usain gozoko lurrinik ere , hiru <unk> amaitu arte .
PRED:	I did n't know that I have been able to eat the wine of wine , though I had not heard the wine of the Lord , the god of the Lord , have spoken !
GOLD:	All that time I had eaten no rich food . No meat or wine crossed my lips , and I used no fragrant lotions until those three weeks had passed .

ID:	6024
INPUT:	( Mt 4 , 1-11 ; Mk 1 , 12-13 )
PRED:	The Sign of the Dead Sea
GOLD:	Jesus Rejected at Nazareth

ID:	6025
INPUT:	Hona , bada , Jaunak Ageo profetaren bidez eman zuen mezua :
PRED:	This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	Then the Lord sent this message through the prophet Haggai :

ID:	6026
INPUT:	Hezur guztiak zaintzen dizkio , bat bakarra ere ez diote hautsiko .
PRED:	They must remove all kinds of Aaron 's household ; they must not commit .
GOLD:	Calamity will surely destroy the wicked , and those who hate the righteous will be punished .

ID:	6027
INPUT:	Saia zaitez Jainkoaren aurrean <unk> agertzen , zertan lotsaturik ez duen langilea bezala , egiaren mezua zuzen irakasten duena bezala .
PRED:	Do n't be sure to obey God in your hearts , like those who do n't obey God 's word .
GOLD:	Work hard so you can present yourself to God and receive his approval . Be a good worker , one who does not need to be ashamed and who correctly explains the word of truth .

ID:	6028
INPUT:	Bularreko <unk> <unk> da , <unk> sartuko du eskua .
PRED:	For when they see that they will enter the city , they will enter and see that they will be filled with power .
GOLD:	The baby will play safely near the hole of a cobra.Yes , a little child will put its hand in a nest of deadly snakes without harm .

ID:	6029
INPUT:	Neure <unk> jaitsi naiz , ibarretako <unk> ikustera , mahastiak kimuberritzen , granadondoak loratzen ikustera .
PRED:	I am going down to see that I am under the sun , and I will send you grain to see how sweet as sweet as sweet as sweet as sweet as sweet as I had promised .
GOLD:	I went down to the grove of walnut treesand out to the valley to see the new spring growth , to see whether the grapevines had buddedor the pomegranates were in bloom .

ID:	6030
INPUT:	garbitzeko aginduko du , eta beste zazpi egunez aparte edukiko .
PRED:	The priest will be made for seven days , and he must be ceremonially clean .
GOLD:	the priest will order the object to be washed and then quarantined for seven more days .

ID:	6031
INPUT:	Kristorengan jarria dugun itxaropenak bizitza honetarako bakarrik balio badu , gizaki guztietan <unk> gara .
PRED:	For we know that we have seen the power of Christ , for we have seen God 's life .
GOLD:	And if our hope in Christ is only for this life , we are more to be pitied than anyone in the world .

ID:	6032
INPUT:	Zeruek Jainkoaren aintza kontatzen dute , ortziak haren eskuen lana adierazten .
PRED:	These are the glory of God , and they are trying to keep his own hands .
GOLD:	Day after day they continue to speak ; night after night they make him known .

ID:	6033
INPUT:	« Hilabete beraren hamabostean Legamia gabeko Ogien Jaia ospatuko duzue Jaunaren ohorez . Zazpi egunez legamia gabeko ogia jango duzue .
PRED:	“ From the Festival of Unleavened Bread , you must celebrate the Festival of Unleavened Bread for the Festival of Shelters .
GOLD:	On the next day , the fifteenth day of the month , you must begin celebrating the Festival of Unleavened Bread . This festival to the Lord continues for seven days , and during that time the bread you eat must be made without yeast .

ID:	6034
INPUT:	Lurra <unk> zapaltzen <unk> odolez <unk> <unk> erreko ditu eta irentsiko .
PRED:	And when the earth saw that the earth will be destroyed , and when they will be destroyed , and the wild animals will be destroyed .
GOLD:	For you will break the yoke of their slaveryand lift the heavy burden from their shoulders.You will break the oppressor 's rod , just as you did when you destroyed the army of Midian .

ID:	6035
INPUT:	ez <unk> , haren oin-aulkia baita ; ezta Jerusalemengatik ere , Errege handiaren hiria baita .
PRED:	And when they are an idol , they will not be afraid of your great power , for they will not be destroyed .
GOLD:	And do not say , ‘ By the earth ! ' because the earth is his footstool . And do not say , ‘ By Jerusalem ! ' for Jerusalem is the city of the great King .

ID:	6036
INPUT:	Orduan , parabola hau esan zion Jesusek herriari : « Gizon batek mahastia landatu zuen eta , nekazari batzuei errentan utzirik , urrutira joan zen aldi baterako .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to the people , “ A man planted a vineyard and sent a vineyard to a vineyard , and he sent a vineyard to a vineyard .
GOLD:	Now Jesus turned to the people again and told them this story : “ A man planted a vineyard , leased it to tenant farmers , and moved to another country to live for several years .

ID:	6037
INPUT:	Hil , denok hil behar dugu ; lurrera isuri eta berriro bildu ezin den ura bezala gara . Jainkoak , aldiz , ez du bizia kentzen ; aitzitik , erabaki du zuk <unk> berak ez <unk> .
PRED:	For we must kill him and put it into the ground , just as God has poured out the water . But we will not kill you , and we will know that God has sent you to kill you .
GOLD:	All of us must die eventually . Our lives are like water spilled out on the ground , which can not be gathered up again . But God does not just sweep life away ; instead , he devises ways to bring us back when we have been separated from him .

ID:	6038
INPUT:	salbatuko <unk> etsaien menpetik , gorroto gaituzten guztien eskutik ;
PRED:	Those who hate their enemies , and those who hate them .
GOLD:	Now we will be saved from our enemiesand from all who hate us .

ID:	6039
INPUT:	ilargi betearen aurpegia iluntzen du , haren gain bere <unk> hedatuz ;
PRED:	In that way , it will be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to carry out his face .
GOLD:	He covers the face of the moon , shrouding it with his clouds .

ID:	6040
INPUT:	Israeldarrok , ez gero profanatu nire izen santua , baizik eta aitortu santua naizela . Neu naiz Jauna , neuretzat sagaratzen <unk> ,
PRED:	You must not forgive my holy name , but I am the name of my holy name . I am the Lord . I am the Holy One of Israel , and I am the Lord .
GOLD:	Do not bring shame on my holy name , for I will display my holiness among the people of Israel . I am the Lord who makes you holy .

ID:	6041
INPUT:	Orduan jabetu ziren ez ziela esan <unk> kontuz ibiltzeko , fariseu eta saduzearren <unk> baizik .
PRED:	Then some of the Pharisees could n't know that some of the Pharisees and teachers of religious law of religious law and Sadducees were afraid of the Pharisees .
GOLD:	Then at last they understood that he was n't speaking about the yeast in bread , but about the deceptive teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees .

ID:	6042
INPUT:	« Ez da israeldarren artean prostituzio sakratura emaniko inor izango , ez gizonezkorik , ez <unk> .
PRED:	“ There will not be a covenant among the people of Israel , for no one will be destroyed .
GOLD:	When you are bringing an offering to fulfill a vow , you must not bring to the house of the Lord your God any offering from the earnings of a prostitute , whether a man or a woman , for both are detestable to the Lord your God .

ID:	6043
INPUT:	<unk> Jaunari sagaratzeko Jerusalemera eramaten diren ardiak bezain ugari izango dira hiri hondatuak beteko dituzten gizataldeak ; orduan jakingo dute denek ni naizela Jauna » .
PRED:	If they are at the entrance of the Lord 's presence , they will be like a great city , and they will know that I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	They will be as numerous as the sacred flocks that fill Jerusalem 's streets at the time of her festivals . The ruined cities will be crowded with people once more , and everyone will know that I am the Lord . ”

ID:	6044
INPUT:	Itzul belarria niregana , Jauna , eta entzun . Zabaldu begiak , Jauna , eta ikusi . Entzun nolako irainak zuzendu dizkizun Senakeribek zuri , Jainko bizi horri .
PRED:	Come and listen to me , O Lord , and see the eyes of your eyes ! Listen to me , O Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	Bend down , O Lord , and listen ! Open your eyes , O Lord , and see ! Listen to Sennacherib 's words of defiance against the living God .

ID:	6045
INPUT:	Eman dezagun , ordea , emazteak , artean senarraren etxean bizi dela , botoz nahiz edozein zin-hitzez bere burua lotzen duela .
PRED:	But let 's wife be a wife among his wife , and let her live in a place of worship .
GOLD:	If her husband hears of it and does not object to it , her vow or pledge will stand .

ID:	6046
INPUT:	Jesusen senideek sinetsi ez
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus and His Brothers

ID:	6047
INPUT:	Egun batez esan zion Noemik Ruti : — Ez ote dizut egokitu behar bizitzan <unk> egingo zaituen etxerik ?
PRED:	Then she said to her , “ Do n't let me be afraid of your relatives and your prostitution ? ”
GOLD:	One day Naomi said to Ruth , “ My daughter , it 's time that I found a permanent home for you , so that you will be provided for .

ID:	6048
INPUT:	Ez ! Ardo berria zahagi berrietan sartu behar da .
PRED:	No , it must not enter the house .
GOLD:	New wine must be stored in new wineskins .

ID:	6049
INPUT:	hau esango diozu : “ Jakob zure zerbitzariarena ; Esauri bidaltzen dion oparia da ; eta bera dator atzetik ” » .
PRED:	I will say to you , ‘ I will give you a special gift to you . ' ”
GOLD:	Jacob gave the same instructions to the second and third herdsmen and to all who followed behind the herds : “ You must say the same thing to Esau when you meet him .

ID:	6050
INPUT:	Horra hor , bada , Eleazar apaizak , Nunen seme Josuek eta israeldar leinuetako senitarteburuek Xilon , Jaunaren aurrean , elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran zotz eginez , izendatu zituzten <unk> . Horrela burutu zuten lurraldearen banaketa .
PRED:	That is why Joshua son of Nun , Eleazar son of Nun , the leaders of Israel , the leaders of Israel , the people of Israel , and the people of Israel left the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	These are the territories that Eleazar the priest , Joshua son of Nun , and the tribal leaders allocated as grants of land to the tribes of Israel by casting sacred lots in the presence of the Lord at the entrance of the Tabernacle at Shiloh . So the division of the land was completed .

ID:	6051
INPUT:	Ebaki beza Jaunak ezpain lausengari oro , <unk> mintzo diren mihiak .
PRED:	Let them be exalted by the Lord 's Armies , and those who speak evil words will speak .
GOLD:	They say , “ We will lie to our hearts ' content.Our lips are our own — who can stop us ? ”

ID:	6052
INPUT:	Aita-amak harriturik zeuden Simeonek haurraz esaten zuenarengatik .
PRED:	Their parents were terrified by the thought , but they were terrified by the meaning of the wicked .
GOLD:	Jesus ' parents were amazed at what was being said about him .

ID:	6053
INPUT:	« Egin akazia-zurezko kutxa : metro bat eta hogeita bost zentimetro luze , hirurogeita hamabost zentimetro zabal eta beste hainbeste gora izango da .
PRED:	“ Make the Ark of acacia wood , and 45 inches long and 27 inches long . It will be 45 inches long and 27 inches long .
GOLD:	“ Have the people make an Ark of acacia wood — a sacred chest 45 inches long , 27 inches wide , and 27 inches high .

ID:	6054
INPUT:	Zeukan guztia ere errekaz beste aldera igaroarazi zuen .
PRED:	In all the other way , he also crossed the shore of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	This left Jacob all alone in the camp , and a man came and wrestled with him until the dawn began to break .

ID:	6055
INPUT:	Jendea hiri <unk> aldarazi zuen lurraldearen ertz batetik bestera .
PRED:	Then the people of the city came out from one town , and there were one of the earth .
GOLD:	As for the people , he made them all slaves , from one end of Egypt to the other .

ID:	6056
INPUT:	Efraimdarrek menderatu <unk> ; haien atzetik benjamindarrak datoz , beraien gudari artean . Makirren senitartetik <unk> <unk> <unk> dutenak .
PRED:	The people of Ephraim , men of Benjamin , Benjamin , and all the men of Benjamin , who had been captured by name of the tribe of Levi .
GOLD:	They came down from Ephraim — a land that once belonged to the Amalekites ; they followed you , Benjamin , with your troops.From Makir the commanders marched down ; from Zebulun came those who carry a commander 's staff .

ID:	6057
INPUT:	Ondoren , begiak jasorik , lau adar ikusi nituen .
PRED:	Then I looked up and saw four horns .
GOLD:	When I looked again , I saw a man with a measuring line in his hand .

ID:	6058
INPUT:	Geroago , Artaxerxesen garaian , <unk> , Mitridates , <unk> eta beste funtzionarioek Pertsiako errege <unk> idatzi zioten ; gutuna <unk> eta <unk> idatzia zegoen .
PRED:	At that time , King Cyrus of Persia , prophets , prophets , prophets , prophets , prophets , and officials , and prophets , had written in the book of King Cyrus of Persia , and the officials of Persia .
GOLD:	Even later , during the reign of King Artaxerxes of Persia , the enemies of Judah , led by Bishlam , Mithredath , and Tabeel , sent a letter to Artaxerxes in the Aramaic language , and it was translated for the king .

ID:	6059
INPUT:	Badator garaia , bertan da eguna ! <unk> ez dadila poz , saltzailea ez dadila atsekabe , guztiak harrapatuko baititu nire suminak .
PRED:	For the time is coming , for the day of judgment will come , and when they are afraid of my enemies , they will fall upon me .
GOLD:	Yes , the time has come ; the day is here ! Buyers should not rejoice over bargains , nor sellers grieve over losses , for all of them will fallunder my terrible anger .

ID:	6060
INPUT:	Eskaintzaileak , eskua buruan ezarri ondoren , elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran hilko du ; gero , apaizek , Aaronen ondorengoek , haren odolaz aldarea zipriztinduko dute alde guztietatik .
PRED:	On the head of the goat 's head , the priest must slaughter it at the entrance of the Tabernacle , and the sons of Aaron 's sons will slaughter it on all sides of the altar .
GOLD:	Lay your hand on the animal 's head , and slaughter it at the entrance of the Tabernacle . Then Aaron 's sons , the priests , will splatter its blood against all sides of the altar .

ID:	6061
INPUT:	Kanta Jaunari , gauza harrigarriak egin baititu ; mundu osoan jakin <unk> berri .
PRED:	For the Lord has given you great wonders in all the world . He has heard that all the world will know how great things he has done .
GOLD:	Sing to the Lord , for he has done wonderful things.Make known his praise around the world .

ID:	6062
INPUT:	Izan ere , zer axola zaizkio etxekoak , hil eta gero , bere <unk> amaitu ondoren ?
PRED:	For if you do n't realize that your household are dead , how can we die ?
GOLD:	For they will not care what happens to their familyafter they are dead .

ID:	6063
INPUT:	Jesusek , berriz , erantzun zion : — Nor da nire ama eta zein nire anai-arrebak ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Who is my mother ? Who are my brothers ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus asked , “ Who is my mother ? Who are my brothers ? ”

ID:	6064
INPUT:	« Zuk , Israel , Jakoben herri horrek , ez didazu dei egin , nitaz <unk> .
PRED:	“ O Israel , my people of Israel , listen to my people of Israel , my people , and I have heard that they have heard me .
GOLD:	“ But , dear family of Jacob , you refuse to ask for my help.You have grown tired of me , O Israel !

ID:	6065
INPUT:	Zazpi mila handiki ere eraman zituen Babiloniako erregeak , baita mila errementari eta <unk> ere , denak gudari izateko gai . Babiloniara eraman zituen denak gatibu .
PRED:	The king of Babylon brought them seven kings of Babylon to Babylon , and all the kings of Babylon — all the kings of Babylon , and they were given to Babylon .
GOLD:	He also exiled 7,000 of the best troops and 1,000 craftsmen and artisans , all of whom were strong and fit for war .

ID:	6066
INPUT:	erreinuaren oinordeko zirenak , berriz , kanpora , ilunpetara , botako ditu Jainkoak . Negarra eta hortz-karraska izango dira han » .
PRED:	But the children of God will stay away , where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . ”
GOLD:	But many Israelites — those for whom the Kingdom was prepared — will be thrown into outer darkness , where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . ”

ID:	6067
INPUT:	Ez egin jaramonik ! Jarri Babiloniako erregearen menpe , eta biziko zarete . Zertan bihurtu herri hau hondakin-pila ?
PRED:	Do not listen to the king of Babylon , and you must live in the king of Babylon . How long will you live in ruins ?
GOLD:	Do not listen to them . Surrender to the king of Babylon , and you will live . Why should this whole city be destroyed ?

ID:	6068
INPUT:	Gertakari <unk> mintzo ziren elkarrekin .
PRED:	At that time they were talking about this , and they were talking with him .
GOLD:	As they walked along they were talking about everything that had happened .

ID:	6069
INPUT:	Jainkoaren hitzak eta gure otoitzak sakratu bihurtzen baitu .
PRED:	For we have been forgiven by our sins .
GOLD:	For we know it is made acceptable by the word of God and prayer .

ID:	6070
INPUT:	Hiria eta bertan den guztia erabat suntsitu behar da Jaunaren ohorez . Rahab emagaldua eta beronen etxean direnak bakarrik geldituko dira bizirik , guk bidalitako mandatariak gorde zituelako .
PRED:	The city has completely destroyed all the city , and she has given her back to the Lord 's Temple , for she has given her back to the Lord 's house .
GOLD:	Jericho and everything in it must be completely destroyed as an offering to the Lord . Only Rahab the prostitute and the others in her house will be spared , for she protected our spies .

ID:	6071
INPUT:	Bigarren ikuskaria : adarrak eta errementariak
PRED:	A Vision of a ram and a ram 's horn :
GOLD:	Future Prosperity of Jerusalem

ID:	6072
INPUT:	Dalila , egunero , nazkatzeraino galdezka ari zitzaionez , bizitzaz ere <unk> ,
PRED:	In the end of the first month , you must pay attention to all the animals of animals .
GOLD:	She tormented him with her nagging day after day until he was sick to death of it .

ID:	6073
INPUT:	Pilato barrura sartu zen berriro eta , Jesusi deituz , galdegin zion : — Zu al zara juduen erregea ?
PRED:	So Pilate went back to Jesus and asked him , “ Is you going to go to the Jews ? ”
GOLD:	Then Pilate went back into his headquarters and called for Jesus to be brought to him . “ Are you the king of the Jews ? ” he asked him .

ID:	6074
INPUT:	David Saulengana joaten zen eta Belenera etortzen , aitaren artaldea zaintzera .
PRED:	So David went to Bethlehem and stayed at the entrance of his father 's flock .
GOLD:	but David went back and forth so he could help his father with the sheep in Bethlehem .

ID:	6075
INPUT:	Eliren semeek oker jokatu
PRED:	The sons of Eli 's sons
GOLD:	Eli 's Wicked Sons

ID:	6076
INPUT:	Haien <unk> bezain zital : <unk> jaten <unk> egiten da , <unk> <unk> ateratzen . Haien <unk> antzeko : hauekin inor ezin jantzi , ez estali . Egintza guztiak gaiztoak dituzte , gogorkeria besterik ez dute egiten .
PRED:	They are as weak as they were slaughtered , and when they saw that they were as weak as weak as if they were , they are so weak , and they do n't know what they have done .
GOLD:	They hatch deadly snakesand weave spiders ' webs.Whoever eats their eggs will die ; whoever cracks them will hatch a viper .

ID:	6077
INPUT:	Hitzok entzutean , ikasleek , erabat nahasturik , honela zioten : — Nor salba daiteke , orduan ?
PRED:	When the disciples heard this , they asked him , “ Who can be saved ? ”
GOLD:	The disciples were astounded . “ Then who in the world can be saved ? ” they asked .

ID:	6078
INPUT:	Halaxe gu ere : <unk> ginen bitartean , munduan agintzen duten indarren menpe geunden .
PRED:	So we know that we have been slaughtered by the power of God , who gives us victory over the world .
GOLD:	And that 's the way it was with us before Christ came . We were like children ; we were slaves to the basic spiritual principles of this world .

ID:	6079
INPUT:	Oraindik fariseuak bildurik zeudela , Jesusek galdera hau egin zien :
PRED:	Then the Pharisees asked them ,
GOLD:	Then , surrounded by the Pharisees , Jesus asked them a question :

ID:	6080
INPUT:	Eliasek erantzun : — Bere zerbitzari nauen Jaun ahalguztiduna bizi dela bezain egia da , ni gaur bertan agertuko naizela Akaben aurrera .
PRED:	Elijah replied , “ I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , that I am as the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	But Elijah said , “ I swear by the Lord Almighty , in whose presence I stand , that I will present myself to Ahab this very day . ”

ID:	6081
INPUT:	Israeldarrak , Hor menditik abiaturik , <unk> iritsi ziren ;
PRED:	When the people of Israel arrived at Mount Sinai , they came into the wilderness .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the Israelites left Mount Hor and camped at Zalmonah .

ID:	6082
INPUT:	Bai , nola urak itsasoa , hala beteko du <unk> aintzaren ezagupenak .
PRED:	For the waters of the sea will be filled with the sea , and the waters of the earth will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	For as the waters fill the sea , the earth will be filled with an awarenessof the glory of the Lord .

ID:	6083
INPUT:	<unk> bedi Jaunaren , gure Jainkoaren , gozoa ! <unk> bitza ongi gure eginbeharrak , burutu ongi gure eginbehar guztiak !
PRED:	May the glory of the Lord our God be filled with all his heart , and that all the good things we have done .
GOLD:	And may the Lord our God show us his approvaland make our efforts successful.Yes , make our efforts successful !

ID:	6084
INPUT:	« Baina kontuz ! Ez gero engainatu zeuen buruak , ez saihestu Jaunarengandik , jainko arrotzak gurtuz eta haien aurrean ahuspeztuz ;
PRED:	“ Do n't let any of you die in any other gods . You must not bow before the Lord your God and worshiped them .
GOLD:	“ But be careful . Do n't let your heart be deceived so that you turn away from the Lord and serve and worship other gods .

ID:	6085
INPUT:	Jesusek entzun eta esan zien : — Ez dute osasundunek behar sendagilea , gaixoek baizik .
PRED:	Jesus told them , “ They do n't need a sick people , but people do n't need such sick .
GOLD:	When Jesus heard this , he said , “ Healthy people do n't need a doctor — sick people do . ”

ID:	6086
INPUT:	Nolanahi ere , sekula ez da berrogei zigorrada baino gehiago emango , <unk> <unk> gerta eta herritarra denen aurrean <unk> geldi ez dadin .
PRED:	So do n't be sure that they would be able to be able to be able to be sure that they would be able to kill him . And when they were afraid , they will be sure that they will be able to kill him .
GOLD:	But never give more than forty lashes ; more than forty lashes would publicly humiliate your neighbor .

ID:	6087
INPUT:	Zatozkit zeure gupidaz , biziberri nadin , zure irakaspena baitut gozamen !
PRED:	Please let me live in your heart , for I am your instructions .
GOLD:	Surround me with your tender mercies so I may live , for your instructions are my delight .

ID:	6088
INPUT:	Lege-maisu eta fariseuak beren onetik aterata gelditu ziren , eta Jesusi zer egingo ari ziren beren artean .
PRED:	The teachers of religious law was sent by this message to Jesus .
GOLD:	At this , the enemies of Jesus were wild with rage and began to discuss what to do with him .

ID:	6089
INPUT:	Zuek bertan bizi zinetela izan ez zituen atsedenaldiak , bertan behera utzia egongo den aldian beteko ditu .
PRED:	Remember that you should not live in the streets in the streets and in the streets , for the Lord has given them rest in the province of Judah .
GOLD:	As long as the land lies in ruins , it will enjoy the rest you never allowed it to take every seventh year while you lived in it .

ID:	6090
INPUT:	Eta loturik , beren jantzi eta guzti , <unk> , soingaineko eta <unk> , labeko su bizira jaurti zituzten .
PRED:	Then they put their robe on a blue cloth , purple , and scarlet yarn , and scarlet yarn , and scarlet yarn .
GOLD:	So they tied them up and threw them into the furnace , fully dressed in their pants , turbans , robes , and other garments .

ID:	6091
INPUT:	<unk> <unk>
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar 's Sickness and Zalmunna
GOLD:	A Song about the

ID:	6092
INPUT:	Hau dio Jainko Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak : « Geldi eta lasai <unk> zuen <unk> ; <unk> eta konfiantza , zuen indarra » . Ez duzue , ordea , hala nahi izan ,
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ Come and kill you , ” the Lord said , “ when I know that you are in my power , and you will know that you are my power . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord , the Holy One of Israel , says : “ Only in returning to meand resting in me will you be saved.In quietness and confidence is your strength.But you would have none of it .

ID:	6093
INPUT:	Elihuren hirugarren hitzaldia ( 35 , <unk> )
PRED:	Elihu Rules in the Tabernacle
GOLD:	Elihu Reminds Job of God 's Justice

ID:	6094
INPUT:	« Hori guztia lege izango duzue belaunez belaun , biziko zareten edonon .
PRED:	“ This is the instructions you must live in generation to generation , and you will live in generation .
GOLD:	These are legal requirements for you to observe from generation to generation , wherever you may live .

ID:	6095
INPUT:	Izan ere , honela dio Jaunak Judako errege Josiasen seme eta ondorengo Xalum erregeari buruz : « Joan da hemendik eta ez da berriro itzuliko .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : The Lord of Josiah son of Josiah son of Josiah , son of Josiah , son of Josiah , and the king of Judah .
GOLD:	For this is what the Lord says about Jehoahaz , who succeeded his father , King Josiah , and was taken away as a captive : “ He will never return .

ID:	6096
INPUT:	dorre <unk> harresi <unk> ,
PRED:	At that time , the city of Samaria , and those who were filled with swords .
GOLD:	He will break down every high towerand every fortified wall .

ID:	6097
INPUT:	Morroiak onartu zuen proposamena , eta hamar eguneko proba egin zuen haiekin .
PRED:	This is the account of the people of Israel 's family .
GOLD:	The attendant agreed to Daniel 's suggestion and tested them for ten days .

ID:	6098
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	6099
INPUT:	Lur eman ondoren , esan zien bere semeei : — Ni hil nadinean , <unk> nazazue Jainkoaren gizona <unk> dagoeneko hilobian . Ezarri nire hezurrak haren hezurren ondoan .
PRED:	At last the Lord gave them his sons and said to them , “ If you have killed me , please kill me and kill me and kill me . ”
GOLD:	Afterward the prophet said to his sons , “ When I die , bury me in the grave where the man of God is buried . Lay my bones beside his bones .

ID:	6100
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Daviden salmoa .
PRED:	O God , listen to me , for I have given you victory over you .
GOLD:	The heavens proclaim the glory of God.The skies display his craftsmanship .

ID:	6101
INPUT:	Ondoren , santutegia , itunaren egoitza , ikusi nuen zeruan irekitzen ,
PRED:	Then I saw the covenant with the Tabernacle , and I saw it in heaven .
GOLD:	Then I looked and saw that the Temple in heaven , God 's Tabernacle , was thrown wide open .

ID:	6102
INPUT:	utzi oparia han , aldare aurrean , eta zoaz lehenbizi senidearekin bakeak egitera ; itzuli gero zeure oparia eskaintzera .
PRED:	Take care of the altar before you , and go back to offer one of your burnt offering .
GOLD:	leave your sacrifice there at the altar . Go and be reconciled to that person . Then come and offer your sacrifice to God .

ID:	6103
INPUT:	Ez izan beldur , ene <unk> hori , atsegin izan baitu zuen Aitak zuen alde errege izatea .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid of my lord the Father , because he was very angry with you .
GOLD:	“ So do n't be afraid , little flock . For it gives your Father great happiness to give you the Kingdom .

ID:	6104
INPUT:	Tanisko buruzagiak erotuak daude , <unk> buruzagiak engainatuak . Oker daramate <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	In fact , my lord , my lord , my lord the king of Assyria , and my lord the power of Samaria .
GOLD:	The officials of Zoan are fools , and the officials of Memphis are deluded.The leaders of the peoplehave led Egypt astray .

ID:	6105
INPUT:	Labore-opariak , nahiz labean erreak nahiz eltzean edo zartaginean prestatuak , eskaintzen dituen apaizari <unk> .
PRED:	There is no bird that is a bird , whether the animal or the animal or the person is covered with the priest , and the priest will be cut off from the altar .
GOLD:	Any grain offering that has been baked in an oven , prepared in a pan , or cooked on a griddle belongs to the priest who presents it .

ID:	6106
INPUT:	Zeure mehatxuaz , Jakoben Jainkoa , <unk> utzi dituzu gurdi eta zaldiak .
PRED:	Your God has poured out his hand against you , and he has blessed you with horses and horses .
GOLD:	No wonder you are greatly feared ! Who can stand before you when your anger explodes ?

ID:	6107
INPUT:	Baina Jainkoaren gizon batek etorri eta esan zion : — Errege jauna , ez eraman zeurekin Israelgo gizon horiek , Jauna ez baitago israeldarrekin , Efraimen ondorengo horiekin .
PRED:	But one of the man of God came to him and said , “ My lord the king of Israel , the king of Israel , are not with the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	But a man of God came to him and said , “ Your Majesty , do not hire troops from Israel , for the Lord is not with Israel . He will not help those people of Ephraim !

ID:	6108
INPUT:	Horregatik , gizasemeak bere aita-amak utziko ditu eta emazteari elkartuko zaio , eta biak <unk> dira .
PRED:	That is why you must take your father and mother and mother and mother and mother and mother , and they will be very old .
GOLD:	As the Scriptures say , “ A man leaves his father and mother and is joined to his wife , and the two are united into one . ”

ID:	6109
INPUT:	<unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Jafia ,
PRED:	At that time , when they were filled with great power ,
GOLD:	Ibhar , Elishua , Nepheg , Japhia ,

ID:	6110
INPUT:	Hiru urteren buruan hartu zuten asiriarrek Samaria . Ezekiasen erregealdiko seigarren urtea eta Israelgo Oseasen erregealdiko bederatzigarren urtea zen Samaria hartu zutenean .
PRED:	The next year of King Hezekiah 's reign , became the second year of King Hezekiah 's reign , and the second year of King Hezekiah 's reign .
GOLD:	Three years later , during the sixth year of King Hezekiah 's reign and the ninth year of King Hoshea 's reign in Israel , Samaria fell .

ID:	6111
INPUT:	Kutsaturik egon eta garbikuntza egiten ez duena bota egingo dute elkartetik , Jaunaren santutegia profanatu baitu . Garbikuntzako urez <unk> izan ez denez , kutsaturik jarraitzen du .
PRED:	You must not commit adultery , and they must not touch the Temple of the Lord . For they have defiled the Temple of the Lord 's Temple , for they have been defiled by the dead .
GOLD:	“ But those who become defiled and do not purify themselves will be cut off from the community , for they have defiled the sanctuary of the Lord . Since the water of purification has not been sprinkled on them , they remain defiled .

ID:	6112
INPUT:	Nire ahaideengana joan ondoren , zin-hitzetik aske geldituko zara . Emaztea eman nahi ez badizute ere , zin-hitzetik aske geldituko zara » .
PRED:	If you go to the house of my relatives , then you will not return to my wife , then you will not take away from this land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Then you will have fulfilled your obligation . But if you go to my relatives and they refuse to let her go with you , you will be free from my oath . '

ID:	6113
INPUT:	Josue , beronen seme eta ahaide Kadmiel , Binui eta <unk> elkarrekin zuzentzen zituzten Jaunaren etxeko lanak ; orobat Henadaden seme eta ahaide lebitarrek ere .
PRED:	The leaders of the Levites , who were descendants of Jeshua son of Jehozadak , who were in charge of the Temple of the Lord 's household , and the Levites , and all of their families .
GOLD:	The workers at the Temple of God were supervised by Jeshua with his sons and relatives , and Kadmiel and his sons , all descendants of Hodaviah . They were helped in this task by the Levites of the family of Henadad .

ID:	6114
INPUT:	Zuzena naizelako eta salbatzailea , askatu egingo dut Sion , askatu niregana itzul <unk> .
PRED:	I am the one who has redeemed me , and I have redeemed you from Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Zion will be restored by justice ; those who repent will be revived by righteousness .

ID:	6115
INPUT:	<unk> dabiltza kalean ; aieneka eta negarrez urtzen denak , etxe gain eta plazetan .
PRED:	They lie in sorrow and sorrow , and anguish and sorrow . They lie in sorrow and sorrow .
GOLD:	They will wear burlap as they wander the streets.From every home and public square will come the sound of wailing .

ID:	6116
INPUT:	Nahiz eta alearekin batera burugabea <unk> xehatu , ez diozu ergelkeria kenduko .
PRED:	“ But if you are under the sun , you will not be punished .
GOLD:	You can not separate fools from their foolishness , even though you grind them like grain with mortar and pestle .

ID:	6117
INPUT:	<unk> . ( <unk> . ) SALMOA
PRED:	One day when they were terrified , they became very glad .
GOLD:	Aleph

ID:	6118
INPUT:	bost anaia ditut eta ; jar ditzala jakinaren gainean , beraiek ere <unk> honetara etor ez daitezen ” .
PRED:	I will rescue you from among the other brother , and they will be able to kill those who do n't know that they will be saved . '
GOLD:	For I have five brothers , and I want him to warn them so they do n't end up in this place of torment . '

ID:	6119
INPUT:	Horregatik , hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Zure aurka nator , Tiro . Nazio ugari altxaraziko dutzure kontra , itsasoak <unk> dituen bezala .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will bring you many nations against you , and I will give you many nations to you .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am your enemy , O Tyre , and I will bring many nations against you , like the waves of the sea crashing against your shoreline .

ID:	6120
INPUT:	ekialdeko haizeak ur handietako <unk> dituenean bezala .
PRED:	When the wind grew up , he became as hard as snow .
GOLD:	We had heard of the city 's glory , but now we have seen it ourselves — the city of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies.It is the city of our God ; he will make it safe forever.Interlude

ID:	6121
INPUT:	« Herriak zure kontra bekatu egin duelako zerua itxi eta euririk egin ez dezanean , toki honetarantz begira otoitz egin eta zure izena goresten badute , eta zuk emaniko zigorrarengatik beren bekatuaz damutzen badira ,
PRED:	“ If the people of your people have sinned against you , you have no rain and pray for your people , and if they do not forgive their sins and forgive their sins and forgive their sins and forgive their sins .
GOLD:	“ If the skies are shut up and there is no rain because your people have sinned against you , and if they pray toward this Temple and acknowledge your name and turn from their sins because you have punished them ,

ID:	6122
INPUT:	Hara — erantsi zuen Abramek — , semerik ez didazu eman eta neure etxeko morroia izango dut oinordeko !
PRED:	But Abram said , “ I have not given my children , and I will not have the slave of my master . ”
GOLD:	You have given me no descendants of my own , so one of my servants will be my heir . ”

ID:	6123
INPUT:	Urte eta erdi egin zuen han Paulok , Jainkoaren mezua irakasten .
PRED:	This was the message from Paul , and Paul traveled through the word of God .
GOLD:	So Paul stayed there for the next year and a half , teaching the word of God .

ID:	6124
INPUT:	Beraz , arrats hartan ihesi joanak ziren , beren oihal-etxola , zaldi , asto eta kanpalekua bera ere zegoen zegoenean utziz . Ihes egin zuten , bizia <unk> .
PRED:	At that time the morning when they arrived , they took their horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , and goats , and they were very very very very angry .
GOLD:	So they panicked and ran into the night , abandoning their tents , horses , donkeys , and everything else , as they fled for their lives .

ID:	6125
INPUT:	bere zerbitzari Israeli eman zion ondare , haren maitasuna betikoa baita .
PRED:	He gave Jacob his servant to Israel , and his faithful love endures forever .
GOLD:	a special possession to his servant Israel.His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	6126
INPUT:	Josueri jakinarazi zioten : — <unk> aurkitu ditugu bost erregeak , leize-zulo batean gordeta .
PRED:	Then the king told Joshua , “ We have found some of these things that you were here . ”
GOLD:	When Joshua heard that they had been found ,

ID:	6127
INPUT:	Kiriat-Arba — hau da , Hebron — eta beraren herri-lurrak , Judako mendialdean ( Arba Anaken aita zen ) ;
PRED:	The territory of Gilead was named after the tribe of Judah , which was named by the hill country of Judah .
GOLD:	Kiriath-arba ( that is , Hebron ) , in the hill country of Judah , along with its surrounding pasturelands . ( Arba was an ancestor of Anak . )

ID:	6128
INPUT:	Guk geuk entzun genuen zerutik etorritako mintzo hori , mendi santuan Jesusekin geundela .
PRED:	We heard our voice from heaven from heaven and from the holy mountain .
GOLD:	We ourselves heard that voice from heaven when we were with him on the holy mountain .

ID:	6129
INPUT:	Euri-jasak izan ziren , uholdeak etorri , mendebalak jo , eta etxeari eraso zioten ; baina ez zen erori , oinarriak harkaitzean zituelako .
PRED:	When the floods of the earth come , the earth will be broken , and it will be thrown into the grave . But the foundations of the earth was covered with a foundation .
GOLD:	Though the rain comes in torrents and the floodwaters rise and the winds beat against that house , it wo n't collapse because it is built on bedrock .

ID:	6130
INPUT:	Kanpoko atarira herriarengana irtetean , <unk> erabilitako jantziak kendu eta santutegiko <unk> utziko dituzte . Beste jantzi batzuk jarriko dituzte , bestela beren jantzi sakratuez herria sagaratuko bailukete .
PRED:	Then the people of the Lord will send them into the inner courtyard , and they will serve some of them . They will put their garments on the sanctuary , and they will give them to their own people .
GOLD:	When they return to the outer courtyard where the people are , they must take off the clothes they wear while ministering to me . They must leave them in the sacred rooms and put on other clothes so they do not endanger anyone by transmitting holiness to them through this clothing .

ID:	6131
INPUT:	Orduan , <unk> esan zion : “ Begira , badira hiru urte pikondo honetara piku bila <unk> , eta ez dut aurkitzen . Moztu ezazu . Zertarako egongo da hor lurra alferrik jaten ? ”
PRED:	Then the angel said to him , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will give you three years and fig trees , and I will give you food to eat . '
GOLD:	Finally , he said to his gardener , ‘ I 've waited three years , and there has n't been a single fig ! Cut it down . It 's just taking up space in the garden . '

ID:	6132
INPUT:	« Gaur nik ematen dizuedan agindua ez da zuen indarrez gaindikoa , ezta eskuraezina ere .
PRED:	“ That is why you have not given me a command for us . This is not the meaning of the Temple of the Euphrates River , for you have not given me .
GOLD:	“ This command I am giving you today is not too difficult for you , and it is not beyond your reach .

ID:	6133
INPUT:	<unk> ahotik ezpata zorrotza ateratzen zen , herriak <unk> : burdinazko makilaz gobernatuko ditu . Hark dolarea zapaldu eta Jainko ahalguztidunaren haserre biziaren <unk> aterako du .
PRED:	At that time the power of the beast saw that the people of Israel had been able to kill him with an iron iron army . He will be able to kill the enemy of the enemy , and he will destroy those who were slaughtered by the sword .
GOLD:	From his mouth came a sharp sword to strike down the nations . He will rule them with an iron rod . He will release the fierce wrath of God , the Almighty , like juice flowing from a winepress .

ID:	6134
INPUT:	Aaronek eta semeek eskainitako lehen sakrifizioak
PRED:	Moses and Aaron 's sons
GOLD:	The Priests Begin Their Work

ID:	6135
INPUT:	Ez erantzun gaiztakeriari gaiztakeriaz , ezta <unk> <unk> ere , <unk> baizik , Jainkoak bere bedeinkazioa jasotzeko deitu zaituzte eta .
PRED:	“ Do not know that God has been able to be able to prove that he will punish you , and when he loves you , and he will bless you .
GOLD:	Do n't repay evil for evil . Do n't retaliate with insults when people insult you . Instead , pay them back with a blessing . That is what God has called you to do , and he will grant you his blessing .

ID:	6136
INPUT:	Absalomek Joabi : — Hara , etortzeko eskatu nizun , erregeari hau esan <unk> : « Zertarako etorri nintzen <unk> ? <unk> nengoen han . Erregea ikusi nahi nuke . Errudun banaiz , hil nazala » .
PRED:	“ Come , ” Absalom asked the king . “ I want you to kill you , ” I told you , “ I have seen my lord the king , and I have seen my lord the king . ”
GOLD:	And Absalom replied , “ Because I wanted you to ask the king why he brought me back from Geshur if he did n't intend to see me . I might as well have stayed there . Let me see the king ; if he finds me guilty of anything , then let him kill me . ”

ID:	6137
INPUT:	Eta eltzegilearen soroa erosteko erabili zituzten , Jaunak agindu zidan bezala .
PRED:	The water carts had given me the water that the Lord had commanded me .
GOLD:	and purchased the potter 's field , as the Lord directed . ”

ID:	6138
INPUT:	eta jende asko joaten zitzaion . Honela zioten : « Joanek , egia esan , ez zuen mirarizko seinalerik batere egin , baina honetaz esan zuen guztia egia zen » .
PRED:	And many people went out to him and said , “ This miraculous sign I did not know the miraculous sign of the miraculous signs I had done . ” But he did not know the miraculous sign of the world .
GOLD:	And many followed him . “ John did n't perform miraculous signs , ” they remarked to one another , “ but everything he said about this man has come true . ”

ID:	6139
INPUT:	Joax Jainkoarengandik aldendu
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	The End of Joash 's Reign

ID:	6140
INPUT:	Urre-harizko apaingarriak eginen dituzu
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Make the settings of gold filigree ,

ID:	6141
INPUT:	Horrela , janari hori gorderik geldituko da Egipto lurraldean izango diren zazpi <unk> , eta goseteak ez du lurralde hau hondatuko » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ All these things will be filled with all the people of Egypt , and I will destroy all the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	That way there will be enough to eat when the seven years of famine come to the land of Egypt . Otherwise this famine will destroy the land . ”

ID:	6142
INPUT:	« Orduan jabetzan hartu genuen lurraldea honela banatu genuen : Arnon erreka ondoan dagoen Aroertik hasita Galaadeko <unk> erdia bertako hiriekin Ruben eta Gaden leinuei eman nien .
PRED:	“ Then we took possession of the territory of the Arnon River to the Arnon River , which we had been given to the Arnon River , which was given to the border of Gilead .
GOLD:	“ When we took possession of this land , I gave to the tribes of Reuben and Gad the territory beyond Aroer along the Arnon Gorge , plus half of the hill country of Gilead with its towns .

ID:	6143
INPUT:	Sinai basamortuan , lehen hilaren hamalauko ilunabarrean ospatu zuten . Israeldarrek zehatz-mehatz bete zuten Jaunak Moisesi agindurikoa .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day the first month of the fourteenth day the Lord had commanded Moses to celebrate the Passover celebration .
GOLD:	in the wilderness of Sinai as twilight fell on the fourteenth day of the month . And they celebrated the festival there , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	6144
INPUT:	Isaias , bere aldetik , hau esatera ausartzen da : Nire bila ez <unk> atera nintzaien bidera ; nitaz galdetzen ez zutenei agertu nintzaien .
PRED:	This message came to Isaiah from the message from the king of Babylon : “ My message was not trying to meet me , because he had not been with me .
GOLD:	And later Isaiah spoke boldly for God , saying , “ I was found by people who were not looking for me.I showed myself to those who were not asking for me . ”

ID:	6145
INPUT:	Eta , gainera , esan zien : — <unk> nagusi da Gizonaren Semea .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ The Son of Man will know that the Son of Man is the Son of Man . ”
GOLD:	And Jesus added , “ The Son of Man is Lord , even over the Sabbath . ”

ID:	6146
INPUT:	Orduan , berriro galdetu zioten itsuari : — Eta zuk , zer diozu begiak ireki <unk> ? Hark erantzun : — Profeta dela .
PRED:	Then the blind man asked the man , “ What do you know ? ” And the man replied , “ What do you know ? ”
GOLD:	Then the Pharisees again questioned the man who had been blind and demanded , “ What 's your opinion about this man who healed you ? ” The man replied , “ I think he must be a prophet . ”

ID:	6147
INPUT:	« Ez naiz zuek <unk> ari ; badakit , bai , zein aukeratu ditudan , baina bete beharra du Liburu Santuak dioen honek : Neure mahaikide nuena kontra altxatu zait .
PRED:	“ I am sure that you are my lord , and I have chosen my people , but I have chosen you to kill me . ”
GOLD:	“ I am not saying these things to all of you ; I know the ones I have chosen . But this fulfills the Scripture that says , ‘ The one who eats my food has turned against me . '

ID:	6148
INPUT:	eta honek bertan hilarazi , Hamat eskualdean . Horrela erbesteratu zuten Judako jendea bere lurraldetik urruti .
PRED:	In this way , the region of Hamath and the people of Hamath as far as far as the land of Hamath .
GOLD:	And there at Riblah , in the land of Hamath , the king of Babylon had them all put to death . So the people of Judah were sent into exile from their land .

ID:	6149
INPUT:	« Sar zaitezte ate estutik ; zabala baita hondamenerako atea eta lasaia bidea , eta asko dira hortik doazenak .
PRED:	“ The house of the family of the godly are leading to the door of the house of the Most High , and they are watching for a house .
GOLD:	“ You can enter God 's Kingdom only through the narrow gate . The highway to hell is broad , and its gate is wide for the many who choose that way .

ID:	6150
INPUT:	<unk> Moabeko <unk> dagoen <unk> ;
PRED:	And when they saw that they were in Moab , they will know that they were buried in Moab .
GOLD:	They left Oboth and camped at Iye-abarim on the border of Moab .

ID:	6151
INPUT:	Joab eta Abixai Abnerren atzetik joan ziren . Eguzkia sartzen ari zen Gabaon basamorturako bidean , <unk> ekialdera dagoen <unk> <unk> heldu zirenean .
PRED:	Joab and his men went out to the night , where they were camped at the entrance of the night . When they saw that they were sitting on the road , they saw that they were on the road .
GOLD:	When Joab and Abishai found out what had happened , they set out after Abner . The sun was just going down as they arrived at the hill of Ammah near Giah , along the road to the wilderness of Gibeon .

ID:	6152
INPUT:	Jakin nuen , gainera , lebitarrei ez zitzaiela ematen zegokien partea eta , horregatik , lebitarrek eta kantariek , beren zerbitzua bete beharrean , beren herrietara alde egin zutela .
PRED:	I told the Levites that the Levites had not been given to the Levites who had been given to the Levites and the Levites who had been given to the Levites .
GOLD:	I also discovered that the Levites had not been given their prescribed portions of food , so they and the singers who were to conduct the worship services had all returned to work their fields .

ID:	6153
INPUT:	Zilegi al zaigu Zesarri zerga ordaintzea , bai ala ez ?
PRED:	Does n't he pay attention to their taxes ? Do n't he pay attention to their taxes ?
GOLD:	Now tell us — is it right for us to pay taxes to Caesar or not ? ”

ID:	6154
INPUT:	Bere hilobian ehortzi zuen gorpua eta negar egin zion , esanez : « Ai , ene anaia ! »
PRED:	He was buried in his body in his body , and he said , “ Oh , my brother ! ”
GOLD:	He laid the body in his own grave , crying out in grief , “ Oh , my brother ! ”

ID:	6155
INPUT:	badakizu noiz esertzen naizen eta noiz jaikitzen . Urrutitik sumatzen dituzu nire <unk> .
PRED:	“ As soon as I am sending you out of my army , and you will know that I am sending my army against you .
GOLD:	You know when I sit down or stand up.You know my thoughts even when I 'm far away .

ID:	6156
INPUT:	<unk> dira haren bideak , <unk> eramaten dute .
PRED:	For they are under his mouth , and they are under his feet .
GOLD:	She will guide you down delightful paths ; all her ways are satisfying .

ID:	6157
INPUT:	Horra non datozen urrutitik : ipar eta mendebaldetik datoz , Egipto aldetik ere bai .
PRED:	Look , there is far from the east of the world and all the kingdoms of Egypt .
GOLD:	See , my people will return from far away , from lands to the north and west , and from as far south as Egypt . ”

ID:	6158
INPUT:	<unk> dituzu inguruan , zure eskuinean erregina , urre finez apaindurik .
PRED:	Your head are filled with gold , and your head are gold .
GOLD:	Listen to me , O royal daughter ; take to heart what I say.Forget your people and your family far away .

ID:	6159
INPUT:	Jaunak honela hitz egin zion Eliasi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Elijah ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Elijah ,

ID:	6160
INPUT:	Zaude erne , eta indarberri ezazu oraindik bizirik daukazuna , erabat hil baino lehen . Zure jokabidea nire Jainkoaren aurrean behar bezain ona ez dela ikusi dut .
PRED:	Let me be sure that you have been born before God , for I have been given to you before my God , and I have never seen my God .
GOLD:	Wake up ! Strengthen what little remains , for even what is left is almost dead . I find that your actions do not meet the requirements of my God .

ID:	6161
INPUT:	Ez dira <unk> gaiztakeria <unk> ditudala . Beren okerretan sartuak <unk> , eta begi aurrean ditut nik guztiak .
PRED:	For I have heard that they were very old , and they were filled with their chains . I have seen all their faces , and I have seen all their faces .
GOLD:	Its people do n't realizethat I am watching them.Their sinful deeds are all around them , and I see them all .

ID:	6162
INPUT:	Berriz ere oihu egin zion Jonatanek atzetik mutikoari : — Bizkor ! <unk> agudo ! Ez hadi geldi ! Hartu zuen Jonatanen morroiak gezia eta bere nagusiagana itzuli zen .
PRED:	“ Get out of the boy ! ” Jonathan shouted . “ Get out of the boy and kill him ! ” So Jonathan shouted . “ Get out of Jonathan and kill him ! ” So Jonathan returned home .
GOLD:	Hurry , hurry , do n't wait . ” So the boy quickly gathered up the arrows and ran back to his master .

ID:	6163
INPUT:	Erregea ez du gudaroste handiak salbatzen , ezta gudaria ere indar handiak libratzen .
PRED:	The king is not a mighty army , and the mighty power of the sea can not be saved .
GOLD:	The best-equipped army can not save a king , nor is great strength enough to save a warrior .

ID:	6164
INPUT:	Izugarrizko iskanbila sortu zen . Fariseuen alderdiko lege-maisu batzuek altxatu eta gogor esan zuten : « Ez dugu honengan errurik aurkitzen . Eta espiritu edo aingeruren batek hitz egin badio , zer ? »
PRED:	At that time some of the teachers of religious law came and asked him , “ We ca n't know that the Son of teachers of religious law has been sent by the power of religious law . ”
GOLD:	So there was a great uproar . Some of the teachers of religious law who were Pharisees jumped up and began to argue forcefully . “ We see nothing wrong with him , ” they shouted . “ Perhaps a spirit or an angel spoke to him . ”

ID:	6165
INPUT:	Bai handia niretzat duzun maitasuna : Herio Leize sakonetik libratu nauzu !
PRED:	For I have given you great joy to the Lord ; you have given me great joy .
GOLD:	for your love for me is very great.You have rescued me from the depths of death .

ID:	6166
INPUT:	« Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak mezu bat eman dit zuretzat , Baruk .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord of Israel , the God of Israel , says :
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says to you , Baruch :

ID:	6167
INPUT:	ezaugarri handiak , mirari eta egintza ikaragarriak .
PRED:	At that time the miraculous signs and wonders ,
GOLD:	Moses summoned all the Israelites and said to them , “ You have seen with your own eyes everything the Lord did in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh and to all his servants and to his whole country —

ID:	6168
INPUT:	<unk> abiaturik Edom lurraldeko mugan dagoen Hor mendian etxolatu ziren hurrengo .
PRED:	They left the border of Edom and camped beside the border of Edom .
GOLD:	They left Kadesh and camped at Mount Hor , at the border of Edom .

ID:	6169
INPUT:	<unk> pilatu zituzten eta <unk> bete zen lurralde osoa .
PRED:	At that time they became very angry and filled with all the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	“ Do it tomorrow , ” Pharaoh said . “ All right , ” Moses replied , “ it will be as you have said . Then you will know that there is no one like the Lord our God .

ID:	6170
INPUT:	Neure <unk> egin diet dei , baina zapuztu egin naute . Nire apaizak eta zaharrak hirian hil dira , biziari eusteko janari bila zebiltzan bitartean .
PRED:	I called out my people , but they would kill me and kill my people , but they are trying to kill me .
GOLD:	“ I begged my allies for help , but they betrayed me.My priests and leadersstarved to death in the city , even as they searched for foodto save their lives .

ID:	6171
INPUT:	Seme zuhurrak aitari poz ematen , seme zentzugabeak ama mespretxatzen .
PRED:	A wise child gives birth to my father , but fools are wise .
GOLD:	Sensible children bring joy to their father ; foolish children despise their mother .

ID:	6172
INPUT:	Beste guztiei agertu ondoren , neuri ere agertu zitzaidan , garaiz kanpo jaiotako haurra bezalakoa naizen honi ;
PRED:	When I had seen all this , I saw me in the presence of the Lord 's womb , as I was in the desert .
GOLD:	Last of all , as though I had been born at the wrong time , I also saw him .

ID:	6173
INPUT:	Isaiasek , orduan , Ezekiasi : — Entzun Jaun ahalguztidunak dioena :
PRED:	Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah , “ Listen to Hezekiah , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies ,
GOLD:	Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah , “ Listen to this message from the Lord of Heaven 's Armies :

ID:	6174
INPUT:	Ben-Hadadek esan zuen : — <unk> atera baldin badira , atzeman itzazue bizirik ; <unk> atera badira ere , atzeman itzazue bizirik .
PRED:	But Ben-hadad said , “ If you have come out and kill some of them , let them die , and you have killed some of them . ”
GOLD:	“ Take them alive , ” Ben-hadad commanded , “ whether they have come for peace or for war . ”

ID:	6175
INPUT:	Nire aurrekoek hondatu zituzten nazio horietako <unk> batek ere libratu ahal izan ote du bere herria nire eskuetatik ? Eta zeuen Jainkoak libratuko zaituztela nire eskuetan erortzetik ?
PRED:	For I have heard that all the nations of my ancestors have been able to rescue you from my power ? Who will rescue you from my power ?
GOLD:	Which of their gods was able to rescue its people from the destructive power of my predecessors ? What makes you think your God can rescue you from me ?

ID:	6176
INPUT:	Gose banintz , ez nizuke zuri eskatuko , neurea baitut mundua eta bertako guztia .
PRED:	I would not ask you , and I will give you everything I have done .
GOLD:	If I were hungry , I would not tell you , for all the world is mine and everything in it .

ID:	6177
INPUT:	Nik , Jainko Jaunak , zin dagit neure biziarengatik , ez duzuela berriro esango esaera hau Israelen !
PRED:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : '
GOLD:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , you will not quote this proverb anymore in Israel .

ID:	6178
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	6179
INPUT:	Santutegia eta tenpluko gotorlekua profanatu egingo dituzte haren gudariek , eguneroko oparia kendu eta idolo higuingarria ezarriko aldare gainean .
PRED:	This is the Temple of the Temple and the Lord will destroy the Temple of the Lord 's Temple , and it will be cut off on the altar .
GOLD:	“ His army will take over the Temple fortress , pollute the sanctuary , put a stop to the daily sacrifices , and set up the sacrilegious object that causes desecration .

ID:	6180
INPUT:	<unk> sartuko diren apaizak ezin izango dira kanpoko atarira irten , Jaunaren zerbitzuan erabilitako jantziak aurrez gela horietan utzi gabe , sakratuak baitira jantzi horiek . <unk> aldatuko dira herriari dagokion <unk> ateratzeko » .
PRED:	The priest will not enter the outer courtyard of the outer courtyard of the Temple of the Lord . They must not enter the inner courtyard of the Temple of the Lord 's Temple , and they will be given to the people of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	When the priests leave the sanctuary , they must not go directly to the outer courtyard . They must first take off the clothes they wore while ministering , because these clothes are holy . They must put on other clothes before entering the parts of the building complex open to the public . ”

ID:	6181
INPUT:	Eta honela hasi zen berekiko pentsatzen : “ Zer egin , ez baitut uzta non jasorik ? ”
PRED:	Then he began to say , ‘ What do you have done ? '
GOLD:	He said to himself , ‘ What should I do ? I do n't have room for all my crops . '

ID:	6182
INPUT:	Zelatan dago ezkutuan , lehoia bere zuloan bezala , zelatan , dohakabea harrapatzeko : bere sarera erakarriz harrapatzen du .
PRED:	It is a lion in the streets , like a lion in the streets , so they can go out to his own hometown .
GOLD:	Like lions crouched in hiding , they wait to pounce on the helpless.Like hunters they capture the helplessand drag them away in nets .

ID:	6183
INPUT:	Ikasleetako bat , Jesusek gehien maite zuen hura , beraren ondoan zegoen mahaian .
PRED:	Jesus loved them , and he loved them .
GOLD:	The disciple Jesus loved was sitting next to Jesus at the table .

ID:	6184
INPUT:	Bazen <unk> Manoah izeneko gizon bat , Danen leinukoa . Haren emazteak ez zuen haurrik izan , agorra baitzen .
PRED:	Suddenly , a man named Micah , a man named Micah 's wife . His wife had not been married to her .
GOLD:	In those days a man named Manoah from the tribe of Dan lived in the town of Zorah . His wife was unable to become pregnant , and they had no children .

ID:	6185
INPUT:	Errugabea al naiz ? Neuk ere ez dakit . Nazkatua nago bizitzaz !
PRED:	Why do I know that I am not my father ?
GOLD:	“ I am innocent , but it makes no difference to me — I despise my life .

ID:	6186
INPUT:	Joabek erregeagana joan eta esan zion : « Zer egin duzu ? Abner etorri omen zaizu . Zergatik utzi diozu joaten ?
PRED:	Joab went to the king and asked him , “ Why are you going to go ? Why do you go ? ”
GOLD:	Joab rushed to the king and demanded , “ What have you done ? What do you mean by letting Abner get away ?

ID:	6187
INPUT:	Hau idatzi zuen gutunetan : « Agindu ezazue baraualdia egiteko . Eserarazi Nabot biltzarraren aurrean ;
PRED:	This is the following instructions : “ Get some of the horns of the horns of the altar and put it on it . ”
GOLD:	In her letters she commanded : “ Call the citizens together for a time of fasting , and give Naboth a place of honor .

ID:	6188
INPUT:	Adar sendoak zituen , aginte-makila bihurtu zirenak ; hodeietaraino hazi zen : nabarmena zen bere <unk> <unk> .
PRED:	For we were very angry with them , and they were covered with the ground and saw that the tree were filled with great power .
GOLD:	Its branches became strong — strong enough to be a ruler 's scepter.It grew very tall , towering above all others.It stood out because of its heightand its many lush branches .

ID:	6189
INPUT:	Lege-liburua irakurtzeko biltzarra
PRED:	The Message about the Priests
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	6190
INPUT:	Zerura <unk> ere , zu hantxe ! Hildakoen Egoitzara jaitsita ere , zu bertan !
PRED:	Do n't know how to be able to go to the grave ?
GOLD:	If I go up to heaven , you are there ; if I go down to the grave , you are there .

ID:	6191
INPUT:	Egun hartan , gizakiak bere <unk> dioeta Israelgo <unk> ditu begiak .
PRED:	In that day , people of Israel will be destroyed by their eyes .
GOLD:	Then at last the people will look to their Creatorand turn their eyes to the Holy One of Israel .

ID:	6192
INPUT:	Hiru mila inguru gizon joan ziren Ai hiriari erasotzera , baina ihes egin behar izan zuten Ai <unk> .
PRED:	There were three men coming to fight against the town , but they fled to the town where they were attacked .
GOLD:	So approximately 3,000 warriors were sent , but they were soundly defeated . The men of Ai

ID:	6193
INPUT:	neureak baititut israeldar lehen-semeak oro , baita lehen abere-kumeak ere . Egiptoko lehen-seme guztiak hil nituenean , neuretzat sagaratu nituen .
PRED:	For all the firstborn sons of Israel are the firstborn sons of the firstborn sons of Egypt , for I have killed all the firstborn sons of Egypt .
GOLD:	For all the firstborn males among the people of Israel are mine , both of people and of animals . I set them apart for myself on the day I struck down all the firstborn sons of the Egyptians .

ID:	6194
INPUT:	Izan zaitezte neurritsu eta egon erne . Zuen etsaia , deabrua , zuen inguruan dabil , goseak dagoen lehoia bezala , nor irentsiko .
PRED:	Do n't be poor and courageous , for the devil is able to save you , like the demon in the grave .
GOLD:	Stay alert ! Watch out for your great enemy , the devil . He prowls around like a roaring lion , looking for someone to devour .

ID:	6195
INPUT:	<unk> hauek behealdean bereiz jarriko dituzu eta gainaldean , lehenengo <unk> parean , ongi lotuak . Egin honela bi kantoietarako bi oholak ere .
PRED:	I will make these words under the center stem , along with each side of the Lamb , along with all the kingdoms of the Tabernacle , along with two rows of the frames .
GOLD:	These corner frames will be matched at the bottom and firmly attached at the top with a single ring , forming a single corner unit . Make both of these corner units the same way .

ID:	6196
INPUT:	Orduan , erregeak esan zuen : — Ez hil haurra . Emaiozue lehenengoari ; horixe da haurraren ama .
PRED:	Then the king said to him , “ Do not be married to her , for the child is married . ”
GOLD:	Then the king said , “ Do not kill the child , but give him to the woman who wants him to live , for she is his mother ! ”

ID:	6197
INPUT:	Zerbitzariek esan zioten : — Zertan ari zara ? Haurra bizi zela barau eta negar egiten zenuen . Hil da haurra , eta zu jaiki eta jaten ?
PRED:	So the king asked him , “ Why do you fast for your child ? Why did you fast ? Why did you die ? ”
GOLD:	His advisers were amazed . “ We do n't understand you , ” they told him . “ While the child was still living , you wept and refused to eat . But now that the child is dead , you have stopped your mourning and are eating again . ”

ID:	6198
INPUT:	« Israeldarren izen-bilketa egitean , ez duzu <unk> Lebiren leinua .
PRED:	“ When the names of the tribe of Levi , the tribe of Levi , the tribe of Levi , the tribe of Levi , and the tribe of Levi .
GOLD:	“ Do not include the tribe of Levi in the registration ; do not count them with the rest of the Israelites .

ID:	6199
INPUT:	Zeren eskatzen duenak hartu egiten baitu , bilatzen duenak aurkitu , eta atea jotzen duenari zabaldu egiten baitzaio .
PRED:	If anyone asks , everyone who finds that the door is found , everyone who finds that the door is shut , and everyone who finds that the door is lost .
GOLD:	For everyone who asks , receives . Everyone who seeks , finds . And to everyone who knocks , the door will be opened .

ID:	6200
INPUT:	Aingeruak Jaun ahalguztidunaren hitzok <unk> adierazteko agindu zidan : « Zeure eginkizuna ez duzu <unk> , ez indarrez beteko , nire espirituaz baizik .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ You are the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who has given me the power of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	Then he said to me , “ This is what the Lord says to Zerubbabel : It is not by force nor by strength , but by my Spirit , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	6201
INPUT:	Heziketa maite duenak maite du jakinduria ; <unk> gorrotatzen duena , <unk> galanta !
PRED:	Those who love me will love me , and those who love me will be kind to those who love me .
GOLD:	To learn , you must love discipline ; it is stupid to hate correction .

ID:	6202
INPUT:	« <unk> , ez zait denbora asko gelditzen zuekin egoteko . Nire bila ibiliko zarete , baina juduei esan niena bera diotsuet zuei ere : ni noan tokira zuek ezin zarete joan .
PRED:	“ I am afraid of your people , and I will find you to find you . But when I am going to find you , but you can not go to the Jews .
GOLD:	Dear children , I will be with you only a little longer . And as I told the Jewish leaders , you will search for me , but you ca n't come where I am going .

ID:	6203
INPUT:	Haiek erantzun : — Ikusi dugu lurralde hori eta oso ederra da . Jaiki ! Eraso diezaiogun ! Zertan zaudete hor ezer egin gabe ? Ez egon geldi eta abia zaitezte lurralde horretaz jabetzera .
PRED:	“ We have seen this , ” they replied . “ Get up , and give us a good land ! ” “ Get up , and do n't you have enough ! ”
GOLD:	The men replied , “ Come on , let 's attack them ! We have seen the land , and it is very good . What are you waiting for ? Do n't hesitate to go and take possession of it .

ID:	6204
INPUT:	« Arrazoia dute Tzelofhaden alabek ; lur-ondarea emango diezu jabetzan , beraien aitaren anaiei bezala : aitaren ondarea emango diezu .
PRED:	“ The sons of daughters will be given to the daughters of your father , as you have promised .
GOLD:	“ The claim of the daughters of Zelophehad is legitimate . You must give them a grant of land along with their father 's relatives . Assign them the property that would have been given to their father .

ID:	6205
INPUT:	Joan ziren Moises eta Aaron faraoiagana eta Jaunak agindua egin zuten : Aaronek lurrera jaurti zuen makila faraoiaren eta funtzionarioen aurrean , eta makila suge bihurtu zen .
PRED:	So Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and Aaron and Aaron and Aaron and threw him to the staff of Pharaoh . Then he threw the staff on Pharaoh 's staff , and he threw it to Pharaoh 's staff .
GOLD:	So Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and did what the Lord had commanded them . Aaron threw down his staff before Pharaoh and his officials , and it became a serpent !

ID:	6206
INPUT:	Izan ere , kanpoko atari aldera jotzen zuten gela haien luzera ere hogeita bost metrokoa zen ; tenplura jotzen zuten <unk> , berriz , berrogeita <unk> .
PRED:	The inner courtyard was also 175 feet wide , and the inner courtyard was 175 feet long . The wall was 71/2 feet long , and the wall of the Temple was furious .
GOLD:	This wall added length to the outer block of rooms , which extended for only 871/2 feet , while the inner block — the rooms toward the Temple — extended for 175 feet .

ID:	6207
INPUT:	mundu osoan guduak geldiarazi , uztaiak puskatu , lantzak apurtu , babeskiak sutan erre .
PRED:	They will break their shields , and they cut down their shields .
GOLD:	“ Be still , and know that I am God ! I will be honored by every nation.I will be honored throughout the world . ”

ID:	6208
INPUT:	Arin ! Egin ihes , Babilonian bizi <unk> seme-alabok ! »
PRED:	Do n't let your enemies die in Babylon ! ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Many nations will join themselves to the Lord on that day , and they , too , will be my people . I will live among you , and you will know that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies sent me to you .

ID:	6209
INPUT:	Hain zuzen , Satanas ere bere baitan zatiturik badago , nola iraun dezake haren erreinuak ? Nik deabruak Beeltzebulen indarrez botatzen ditudala <unk> zuek .
PRED:	But Satan is divided by Satan , and Satan can not be able to be saved by the power of God , who is able to save us by the power of God .
GOLD:	You say I am empowered by Satan . But if Satan is divided and fighting against himself , how can his kingdom survive ?

ID:	6210
INPUT:	<unk> ikusi eta hiru bider saihestu nau . Bestela , hila zintudan dagoeneko , bera bizirik utziko nuelarik .
PRED:	And when I saw three times , I saw that you were dead , and I would have died . ”
GOLD:	Three times the donkey saw me and shied away ; otherwise , I would certainly have killed you by now and spared the donkey . ”

ID:	6211
INPUT:	Gero , ikasleei esan zien : « <unk> zaizue Gizonaren Semearen <unk> egun bat bederen ikusi nahi izango duzuen garaia , baina ez duzue ikusiko .
PRED:	Then he said to his disciples , “ If you see that the Son of Man will see that the Son of Man will be able to see you , but you will see that the Son of Man will see you .
GOLD:	Then he said to his disciples , “ The time is coming when you will long to see the day when the Son of Man returns , but you wo n't see it .

ID:	6212
INPUT:	horrela jakingo <unk> bizilagun <unk> naizela Jauna , kanabera bezain euskarri <unk> baitzara Israel herriarentzat ;
PRED:	And when I know that the Lord will know that I am as weak as the Lord , who rescued you from all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	All the people of Egypt will know that I am the Lord , for to Israel you were just a staff made of reeds .

ID:	6213
INPUT:	Berriro diotsuet : Orratzaren begitik gamelua igarotzea errazago , aberatsa Jainkoaren erreinuan sartzea baino .
PRED:	I tell you the truth , but it is better for a camel to enter the eye of God 's eye .
GOLD:	I 'll say it again — it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich person to enter the Kingdom of God ! ”

ID:	6214
INPUT:	Izan ere , Gizonaren Semea galdua zegoena <unk> eta salbatzera etorri da .
PRED:	For the Son of Man comes from the dead , and the Son of Man comes to save us .
GOLD:	For the Son of Man came to seek and save those who are lost . ”

ID:	6215
INPUT:	<unk> adar zirenekin Jainkoak <unk> izan ez bazuen , beharbada zurekin ere ez du izango .
PRED:	But when he was still alive , he would n't be angry with you , so he would not be able to be with you .
GOLD:	For if God did not spare the original branches , he wo n't spare you either .

ID:	6216
INPUT:	Emakumeak , orduan : — Antzina esan ohi zuten : « <unk> , galdetu Abel hirian , eta kito » .
PRED:	But the woman said , “ What should we sit in the city ? ” And the woman asked . “ Your Majesty , ” they asked .
GOLD:	Then she continued , “ There used to be a saying , ‘ If you want to settle an argument , ask advice at the town of Abel . '

ID:	6217
INPUT:	Une hartan , erregea altxatu egin zen , baita gobernaria , Berenize eta haiekin zeudenak ere .
PRED:	At that time the king rose up with them , and they were filled with them with them .
GOLD:	Then the king , the governor , Bernice , and all the others stood and left .

ID:	6218
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin ez zaiona egin zuen Salomonek , eta ez zen bere aita David bezain zintzo izan Jaunarentzat .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , and he was faithful to the Lord .
GOLD:	In this way , Solomon did what was evil in the Lord 's sight ; he refused to follow the Lord completely , as his father , David , had done .

ID:	6219
INPUT:	Orduan , oihu egin zioten Jaunari , esanez : « Bekatu egin dugu , baztertu egin dugu Jauna , Baalen eta Astarteren irudiak gurtzeko . Aska gaitzazu orain geure etsaien eskuetatik eta zerbitzatuko zaitugu » .
PRED:	Then they shouted to the Lord , “ We have sinned against the Lord , and we have sinned against the gods of Baal . We have sinned against the gods of Baal , and we will worship our gods . ”
GOLD:	“ Then they cried to the Lord again and confessed , ‘ We have sinned by turning away from the Lord and worshiping the images of Baal and Ashtoreth . But we will worship you and you alone if you will rescue us from our enemies . '

ID:	6220
INPUT:	Morroiak jarraitu zuen : — Abrahamen morroia nauzu .
PRED:	The servant said , “ I am the servant of Abraham . ”
GOLD:	“ I am Abraham 's servant , ” he explained .

ID:	6221
INPUT:	<unk> behar da hemen . Zazpi buruak , emakumea gainean eseria dagoen zazpi muinoak dira ; zazpi errege ere esan nahi dute :
PRED:	And if the woman is here on earth , the woman who is sitting on the throne of the earth will be sitting on seven times .
GOLD:	“ This calls for a mind with understanding : The seven heads of the beast represent the seven hills where the woman rules . They also represent seven kings .

ID:	6222
INPUT:	Egun hartan , etxe gainean dagoena eta bere gauzak etxean dituena ez bedi hartzera jaits ; era berean , soroan dena ez bedi atzera itzul .
PRED:	In that day , those who live in the house of the house is ready to go , and do n't let them go into the field . Let them go to the field , and go back to the field .
GOLD:	On that day a person out on the deck of a roof must not go down into the house to pack . A person out in the field must not return home .

ID:	6223
INPUT:	Orduan , Manoahek : — Zuk hitzemana betetzean , zein arau eta zein jokabide hartu beharko du haurrak ?
PRED:	Then he said to him , “ This is what you do ? ”
GOLD:	So Manoah asked him , “ When your words come true , what kind of rules should govern the boy 's life and work ? ”

ID:	6224
INPUT:	Bigarren egunean , akats gabeko ahuntz bat eskainiko duzu barkamen-oparitzat , eta aldarearen garbikuntza-ohikunea egingo duzu , <unk> bezalaxe .
PRED:	On the second day you must present a young goat as a burnt offering , as a burnt offering , the priest will purify you as a sin offering .
GOLD:	“ On the second day , sacrifice as a sin offering a young male goat that has no physical defects . Then cleanse and make atonement for the altar again , just as you did with the young bull .

ID:	6225
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . « Jedutun » en doinuaz . Asafen salmoa .
PRED:	Come , O God , my God ! ”
GOLD:	I cry out to God ; yes , I shout.Oh , that God would listen to me !

ID:	6226
INPUT:	Zortzigarren egunean , guztiok apaizari eramango dizkio bere garbikuntzarako , elkarketa-etxolaren sarrerara , Jaunaren aurrera .
PRED:	On the eighth day the priest must bring the priest to the entrance of the Tabernacle . On the entrance of the Tabernacle , he must be set apart for the entrance of the Lord .
GOLD:	On the eighth day of the purification ceremony , the person being purified must bring the offerings to the priest in the Lord 's presence at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	6227
INPUT:	« Madarikatua lagun hurkoa azpikeriaz hiltzen duena ! » Eta herri osoak erantzungo du : « Amen » .
PRED:	‘ Cursed is anyone who commits adultery , ' they ask , ‘ Amen . '
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who attacks a neighbor in secret . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	6228
INPUT:	<unk> buruzagiak ere <unk> daitezke , mihi <unk> hezurrak ere hautsi .
PRED:	They will know that they are weak , and those who are weak will be broken .
GOLD:	Patience can persuade a prince , and soft speech can break bones .

ID:	6229
INPUT:	Biharamunean , alaba zaharrenak gazteenari esan zion : « <unk> ni egon <unk> aitarekin . Mozkor dezagun berriro eta gaur gauean hi joango haiz harekin etzatera ; horrela , biok izango <unk> semeak geure aitarengandik » .
PRED:	The next day the older daughter said to her , “ Let 's kill me , ” he told her , “ we have been very angry with you , and we will know that we are going to see . ”
GOLD:	The next morning the older daughter said to her younger sister , “ I had sex with our father last night . Let 's get him drunk with wine again tonight , and you go in and have sex with him . That way we will preserve our family line through our father . ”

ID:	6230
INPUT:	<unk> bitez haien begiak , ez dezaten ikus , makur bekie bizkarra betiko .
PRED:	Let them see their eyes , and they will never see him .
GOLD:	Let their eyes go blind so they can not see , and let their backs be bent forever . ”

ID:	6231
INPUT:	Bizidun guztiak hil ziren : narrastiak , hegaztiak , abereak eta piztiak , eta lurrazalean mugitzen den oro , eta gizaki guztiak .
PRED:	All of the small animals that were slaughtered , birds , birds , birds , and birds , and birds , every kind of animals .
GOLD:	All the living things on earth died — birds , domestic animals , wild animals , small animals that scurry along the ground , and all the people .

ID:	6232
INPUT:	gizonak , emakumeak , haurrak , erregearen alabak eta Nebuzaradan guardiaburuak Ahikamen seme eta Xafanen biloba Gedaliasi utzitako denak ; baita Jeremias profeta eta Neriasen seme Baruk ere .
PRED:	Now the woman , the captain of the guard , the captain of the guard , son of Shaphan , son of Shaphan , son of Shaphan , son of Shaphan , and Jeremiah .
GOLD:	In the crowd were men , women , and children , the king 's daughters , and all those whom Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , had left with Gedaliah . The prophet Jeremiah and Baruch were also included .

ID:	6233
INPUT:	Nik , berriro : — Ez dago ondo egiten ari zaretena . Ez al duzue gure Jainkoaren <unk> bizi nahi , atzerriko gure etsaien aurrean barregarri gerta ez gaitezen ?
PRED:	“ No , ” says the Lord . “ Do n't you know how can we be afraid of us ? Do n't we know that we would not be afraid of our enemies ? ”
GOLD:	Then I pressed further , “ What you are doing is not right ! Should you not walk in the fear of our God in order to avoid being mocked by enemy nations ?

ID:	6234
INPUT:	Hogei zutabe eta hogei oinak brontzezkoak izango dira ; zutabeen kako eta ziriak , berriz , zilarrezkoak .
PRED:	It will be twenty bronze bases for twenty bronze bases , and the curtains with bronze bases .
GOLD:	They will be held up by twenty posts set securely in twenty bronze bases . Hang the curtains with silver hooks and rings .

ID:	6235
INPUT:	Ikusi eta entzun duguna dizuegu zuei ere iragartzen , zuek ere gurekin <unk> bizi zaitezten . Eta gure elkartasuna Aitarekin eta honen seme Jesu Kristorekin da .
PRED:	We have heard that we have heard this , and we have heard that you have been baptized with Christ . And now you will know that the Father in Christ Jesus Christ Jesus Christ , the Father of Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	We proclaim to you what we ourselves have actually seen and heard so that you may have fellowship with us . And our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son , Jesus Christ .

ID:	6236
INPUT:	Beraz , hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Egiptoko errege faraoiaren kontra nator . Bi besoak hautsiko dizkiot , ongi duena eta jadanik hautsia duena , eta ezpata eroraraziko diot eskutik .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am the God of Egypt , and I am sending you into the hands of Egypt , and I will not abandon them .
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am the enemy of Pharaoh , the king of Egypt ! I will break both of his arms — the good arm along with the broken one — and I will make his sword clatter to the ground .

ID:	6237
INPUT:	Garaipen handiak eman <unk> erregeari , maitasunez jokatu dubere <unk> , <unk> beraren ondorengoekin betiko » .
PRED:	We have given him great power to honor the king , and he has given his covenant with his descendants . ”
GOLD:	You give great victories to your king ; you show unfailing love to your anointed , to David and all his descendants forever . ”

ID:	6238
INPUT:	Nor biziko da heriotzarik ikusi gabe ? Nork ihes egin Herio Leizearen atzaparretatik ?
PRED:	Who will rise from the dead ? Can anyone escape from the grave ?
GOLD:	Lord , where is your unfailing love ? You promised it to David with a faithful pledge .

ID:	6239
INPUT:	Jaunaren espiritua nire gainean dago , berak bainau sagaratu behartsuei berri ona adierazteko ; berak nau bidali gatibuei askatasuna eta <unk> ikusmena hots egitera eta zapalduak askatzera ,
PRED:	For the Spirit of the Lord has given me the Spirit of the Lord . He has sent me to give me a message to the poor person who sent me , and he has sent me to live .
GOLD:	“ The Spirit of the is upon me , for he has anointed me to bring Good News to the poor.He has sent me to proclaim that captives will be released , that the blind will see , that the oppressed will be set free ,

ID:	6240
INPUT:	eta esan zien : « Baditut dagoeneko ehun eta hogei urte eta ez naiz gauza daukadan <unk> ; gainera , Jaunak esan dit : “ Ez duzu horko Jordan hori igaroko ” .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ I am twenty years old and twenty years old when I had been killed , I have told you , ‘ This is what the Lord has commanded me . '
GOLD:	he said , “ I am now 120 years old , and I am no longer able to lead you . The Lord has told me , ‘ You will not cross the Jordan River . '

ID:	6241
INPUT:	Beren egunak gozo-gozo <unk> lasai asko jaisten dira lurpera .
PRED:	Their days will be thrown into sin , and many will come down from them .
GOLD:	They spend their days in prosperity , then go down to the grave in peace .

ID:	6242
INPUT:	Hitzaurrea
PRED:	The Faith of Simeon
GOLD:	Prologue

ID:	6243
INPUT:	bi zutabe , zutabe horien buruetan zeuden <unk> <unk> bana , <unk> <unk> zeuden <unk> haiek apaintzeko sare bana ,
PRED:	For two posts were decorated with each of them , and they were able to be able to be able to be decorated with four posts .
GOLD:	the two pillars ; the two bowl-shaped capitals on top of the pillars ; the two networks of interwoven chains that decorated the capitals ;

ID:	6244
INPUT:	Eta Saulek agindu zien bere morroiei : « Esaiozue <unk> Davidi : “ Erregearen begiko zara eta maite zaituzte beraren zerbitzari guztiek . Egin zaitez erregearen suhi ” » .
PRED:	Then Saul said to his servants , “ May you be with the king of his servant David be with him , and you love the king 's servant . ”
GOLD:	Then Saul told his men to say to David , “ The king really likes you , and so do we . Why do n't you accept the king 's offer and become his son-in-law ? ”

ID:	6245
INPUT:	Ez dut hau esaten giza <unk> beharrik dudalako , zuek salba zaitezten baizik .
PRED:	I do n't want you to do what I have done , but I will bring you to you .
GOLD:	Of course , I have no need of human witnesses , but I say these things so you might be saved .

ID:	6246
INPUT:	<unk> hiru seme ekarri zizkion : Jeux , Xemarias eta <unk> .
PRED:	At that time he brought some of these men , along with Azariah son , and Korah .
GOLD:	Mahalath had three sons — Jeush , Shemariah , and Zaham .

ID:	6247
INPUT:	Orain itsasoak suntsiturik zaude , <unk> galdurik , zure <unk> tripulazio guztia <unk> .
PRED:	You know how the sailors and fig tree are filled with power , and when the power of your power will be filled with power .
GOLD:	Now you are a wrecked ship , broken at the bottom of the sea.All your merchandise and crewhave gone down with you .

ID:	6248
INPUT:	itsasoan jaun eta jabe zinen , ontzi eder bat <unk> zintuzten zeure <unk> :
PRED:	Your lord the king was very angry with you , and when you saw that you were very sick .
GOLD:	You extended your boundaries into the sea.Your builders made your beauty perfect .

ID:	6249
INPUT:	Geure begiak ez ditugu ipintzen ikusten diren gauzetan , ikusten ez <unk> baizik ; ikusten direnak <unk> baitira ; ikusten ez direnak , berriz , behin betikoak .
PRED:	We have not seen this because we have seen the dead , but we have seen in my eyes . But those who see that they have seen God 's eyes , and they will never see him .
GOLD:	So we do n't look at the troubles we can see now ; rather , we fix our gaze on things that can not be seen . For the things we see now will soon be gone , but the things we can not see will last forever .

ID:	6250
INPUT:	<unk> gabeak izan behar zuten , itxura ederrekoak , jakinduriaz , adimenez eta zuhurtasunez beteak , erregearen jauregian zerbitzatzeko <unk> . Babiloniarren hizkera eta <unk> irakatsiko zizkieten .
PRED:	At that time , when I will give you wisdom of wisdom , wisdom , wisdom , wisdom , wisdom , and knowledge , and knowledge of the kings of the Euphrates River . They will know that the king of Assyria , and the king of the king of Assyria .
GOLD:	“ Select only strong , healthy , and good-looking young men , ” he said . “ Make sure they are well versed in every branch of learning , are gifted with knowledge and good judgment , and are suited to serve in the royal palace . Train these young men in the language and literature of Babylon . ”

ID:	6251
INPUT:	« Zuek , bidean <unk> , begira eta ikus : ba ote da nirea bezainbateko <unk> ? Bai mingarria <unk> bere haserre-suminean eman didan oinazea !
PRED:	“ But if you see how can I see how can I see , how can I see how can I see my fury ? How can I see my fury ? ”
GOLD:	“ Does it mean nothing to you , all you who pass by ? Look around and see if there is any suffering like mine , which the Lord brought on mewhen he erupted in fierce anger .

ID:	6252
INPUT:	Ospatu Jauna zitaraz , zitaraz eta kantu ederrez !
PRED:	Sing praises to the Lord , the Holy Place ; praise you with a harp .
GOLD:	Sing your praise to the Lord with the harp , with the harp and melodious song ,

ID:	6253
INPUT:	Ez eduki <unk> inorekin , elkar <unk> baizik , zeren lagun hurkoa maite duenak betea baitu legea .
PRED:	But if they were very sick , they will be able to be very angry . For those who love him will be filled with a law .
GOLD:	Owe nothing to anyone — except for your obligation to love one another . If you love your neighbor , you will fulfill the requirements of God 's law .

ID:	6254
INPUT:	harri hutsez eraikiko duzue aldarea . Ondoren , erre-opariak eskainiko dizkiozue bertan Jaunari zeuen Jainkoari ;
PRED:	And you must also sacrifice a burnt offering to the Lord your God . You must sacrifice a burnt offering to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Build the altar of uncut stones , and use it to offer burnt offerings to the Lord your God .

ID:	6255
INPUT:	Samsonen heriotza
PRED:	Samson 's Death
GOLD:	Samson 's Final Victory

ID:	6256
INPUT:	Eta honek aitortzen du ikusitako guztia Jainkoaren mezua dela , Jesu Kristok <unk> .
PRED:	For this is what I am saying , ‘ This is the message of Christ Jesus Christ Jesus Christ , who has been baptized by the power of God . '
GOLD:	who faithfully reported everything he saw . This is his report of the word of God and the testimony of Jesus Christ .

ID:	6257
INPUT:	Gertakari honen ondoren , Jeroboamek , bere jokabide okerretik aldendu ordez , kultu-lekuetako apaizak herriko jende xehearen artetik hartzen jarraitu zuen . <unk> hori gogoko zuen edonor sagaratu ohi zuen kultu-lekuetako apaiz izateko .
PRED:	At that time the people of Judah left the evil of the wicked , the people of Judah and the people of Israel , who were living in the Temple of the Lord 's Temple . In fact , he was given to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	But even after this , Jeroboam did not turn from his evil ways . He continued to choose priests from the common people . He appointed anyone who wanted to become a priest for the pagan shrines .

ID:	6258
INPUT:	Jaunaren epaia : <unk> zigorra , zintzoarentzat zoriona
PRED:	For the Lord will punish those who are righteous , and those who love him .
GOLD:	Judgment and Final Salvation

ID:	6259
INPUT:	Orduan , Pedrok , hamaika apostoluen artean zutik , honela hitz egin zien : « Juduok eta Jerusalemen zaudeten guztiok : entzun arretaz nire hitzak , otoi , hemen gertatzen denaz ongi jabe zaitezten .
PRED:	Then Peter and Peter stood among the apostles . He said to them , “ This is what you have done to me and people of Jerusalem . If you hear my words , I want to do whatever you do .
GOLD:	Then Peter stepped forward with the eleven other apostles and shouted to the crowd , “ Listen carefully , all of you , fellow Jews and residents of Jerusalem ! Make no mistake about this .

ID:	6260
INPUT:	« Norbait emakumeekin ohi bezala <unk> oheratzen bada , higuingarritasuna egiten dute biek : heriotza-zigorra izango dute . Berena izango dute heriotzaren errua .
PRED:	“ If a man has sex with a woman , they must be put to death , they must be put to death . They must be put to death . They must be put to death .
GOLD:	“ If a man practices homosexuality , having sex with another man as with a woman , both men have committed a detestable act . They must both be put to death , for they are guilty of a capital offense .

ID:	6261
INPUT:	Ez utzi zeure <unk> eginarazten , ez esan gero <unk> gabe egin duzula . Ea haserretzen zaizun <unk> <unk> zeure lanak <unk> dizkizun !
PRED:	Do n't let your mind under your mind , and if you do n't know what you have done , you will know that you are under your anger . ”
GOLD:	It is better to say nothing than to make a promise and not keep it .

ID:	6262
INPUT:	<unk> elkartu zitzaigunean , ontzian hartu genuen geurekin eta <unk> joan ginen .
PRED:	We brought us into the boat with us , and we were with us .
GOLD:	He joined us there , and we sailed together to Mitylene .

ID:	6263
INPUT:	Jaunak , aldiz , esan zion Samueli : — Ez begiratu horren itxura eta <unk> . Alde batera utzia dut hori . <unk> ez da gizakiak zeri begiratzen dion , gizakiak itxurari begiratzen baitio ; Jaunak , berriz , bihotzari .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Samuel , “ I do n't know what the Lord had done . ” But when he saw that he had done , he was very angry with all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	But the Lord said to Samuel , “ Do n't judge by his appearance or height , for I have rejected him . The Lord does n't see things the way you see them . People judge by outward appearance , but the Lord looks at the heart . ”

ID:	6264
INPUT:	<unk> ditutzure zutoin sakratuak , eta zure hiriak erraustuko .
PRED:	I will destroy your pagan shrines and your towns .
GOLD:	I will destroy all your idols and sacred pillars , so you will never again worship the work of your own hands .

ID:	6265
INPUT:	Jainkoak Horeb menditik abiatzeko agindu
PRED:	God 's Covenant to Sinai
GOLD:	Moses Appoints Leaders from Each Tribe

ID:	6266
INPUT:	Jauna errespetatzea da zuhurtziaren ikasbidea ; apaltasuna lehenengo , ohorea gero .
PRED:	The Lord is the foundation of the foundation of the reign of honor .
GOLD:	Fear of the Lord teaches wisdom ; humility precedes honor .

ID:	6267
INPUT:	Ene maiteok , honelako agintzariak <unk> gero , garbi gaitezen gorputzeko eta <unk> zikin guztietatik , eta eraman dezagun bere betera geure sagarapena , Jainkoarenganako begirunean biziz .
PRED:	Dear friends , if we have been clean , we have been clean , we have been clean and filled with all of their sins , so that we will be filled with all their sins .
GOLD:	Because we have these promises , dear friends , let us cleanse ourselves from everything that can defile our body or spirit . And let us work toward complete holiness because we fear God .

ID:	6268
INPUT:	« Geroago , morroiak esan zion : “ Egin dut , jauna , zuk agindua , eta oraindik badago tokia ” .
PRED:	“ But now , ” she said , “ I have told you , ‘ I have now now now now ! '
GOLD:	After the servant had done this , he reported , ‘ There is still room for more . '

ID:	6269
INPUT:	Bekaturik ez dugula esaten badugu , geure burua engainatzen dugu , eta egia ez dago gure baitan .
PRED:	If we say , ‘ Let us be saved by the truth , we do n't know our truth . '
GOLD:	If we claim we have no sin , we are only fooling ourselves and not living in the truth .

ID:	6270
INPUT:	Baina Jainkoak entzun egin zidan , nire <unk> aditu .
PRED:	But God heard me , and my people have heard me .
GOLD:	But God did listen ! He paid attention to my prayer .

ID:	6271
INPUT:	Zeren eta , etsai ginelarik , Jainkoak bere Semearen heriotzari esker berekin <unk> <unk> , behin <unk> gero , zenbatez gehiago ez ote gaitu salbatuko beraren biziaz !
PRED:	For God has led you away from his power , so that God has brought us into his power , so that he will save us , and he will save us .
GOLD:	For since our friendship with God was restored by the death of his Son while we were still his enemies , we will certainly be saved through the life of his Son .

ID:	6272
INPUT:	Pedrok esan zion : — Zergatik hartu duzue elkar Jaunaren Espiritua <unk> ? Hara , atean dira dagoeneko zure senarrari lur eman diotenak ; zu eramango zaituzte orain .
PRED:	Peter asked him , “ Why are you the Spirit of the Lord ? ” Then Peter asked the angel of the Lord , “ I have given you here on your behalf . ”
GOLD:	And Peter said , “ How could the two of you even think of conspiring to test the Spirit of the Lord like this ? The young men who buried your husband are just outside the door , and they will carry you out , too . ”

ID:	6273
INPUT:	<unk> nauzu , ene arreba , ene emaztegaia ! <unk> nauzu zeure begirada bakar batez , <unk> zeure lepoko <unk> batez .
PRED:	I am my sister , my sister , my sister , my lord , my lord , my dear friend , and when I saw that you were very weak .
GOLD:	You have captured my heart , my treasure , my bride.You hold it hostage with one glance of your eyes , with a single jewel of your necklace .

ID:	6274
INPUT:	« Bigarren egunetik <unk> , eguneroko erre-opari eta berauei dagozkien labore- eta isur-opariez gain , akats gabeko abereak eskainiko dituzue erre-oparitzat , dagozkien labore- eta isur-opariekin , eta aker bat barkamen-oparitarako . Hona erre-oparitzat eskaini beharreko abereak : « Bigarren egunean , hamabi zekor , bi ahari eta urtebeteko hamalau arkume ; hirugarren egunean , hamaika zekor , bi ahari eta urtebeteko hamalau arkume ; laugarren egunean , hamar zekor , bi ahari eta urtebeteko hamalau arkume ; bosgarren egunean , bederatzi zekor , bi ahari eta urtebeteko hamalau arkume ; seigarren egunean , zortzi zekor , bi ahari eta urtebeteko hamalau arkume ; zazpigarren egunean , zazpi zekor , bi ahari eta urtebeteko hamalau arkume .
PRED:	“ On the seventh day you must present a burnt offering and liquid offering . On the eighth day of burnt offering , two quarts of burnt offering , two one-year-old male lambs , a burnt offering , and two one-year-old male goat , and two one-year-old male lambs .
GOLD:	“ On the second day of this seven-day festival , sacrifice twelve young bulls , two rams , and fourteen one-year-old male lambs , all with no defects .

ID:	6275
INPUT:	Beraz , Semeak askatzen bazaituzte , benetan aske izango zarete .
PRED:	So you must return to the Lord , and you will return to you .
GOLD:	So if the Son sets you free , you are truly free .

ID:	6276
INPUT:	Baina bihotza idolatria eta jokaera <unk> makurtzen dutenei beren jokabidearen ordaina emango diet . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	But I will punish those who obey their evil deeds , and they will repay their evil deeds . ”
GOLD:	But as for those who long for vile images and detestable idols , I will repay them fully for their sins . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	6277
INPUT:	Neure morroi eta <unk> ere neure espiritua isuriko diet egun <unk> profetizatu egingo dute .
PRED:	I will pour out my spirit on you , and I will pour out of war against you .
GOLD:	In those days I will pour out my Spiriteven on my servants — men and women alike — and they will prophesy .

ID:	6278
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jesus Jaunarengan nola sinesten duzuen eta fededun guztiak nola maite dituzuen jakinik ,
PRED:	That is why you love in the Lord Jesus Christ , who loves all the things you love you .
GOLD:	Ever since I first heard of your strong faith in the Lord Jesus and your love for God 's people everywhere ,

ID:	6279
INPUT:	Jesus <unk> beste bazterrera itzuli zenean , jende-talde handia bildu zitzaion ondora . Oraindik aintzira ondoan zegoela ,
PRED:	When Jesus returned , he returned from the boat to see , he came to see the crowds with a large crowd .
GOLD:	Jesus got into the boat again and went back to the other side of the lake , where a large crowd gathered around him on the shore .

ID:	6280
INPUT:	Simonek , apostoluek jendeari eskuak ezartzean Espiritua etortzen zitzaiela ikusirik , dirua eskaini zien ,
PRED:	When the apostles saw the sick people coming from the world , the Spirit saw the sick man who had brought them to them .
GOLD:	When Simon saw that the Spirit was given when the apostles laid their hands on people , he offered them money to buy this power .

ID:	6281
INPUT:	Ilunabarrean siriarren kanpalekura abiatu ziren . <unk> heltzean , inor ere ez zegoela ikusi zuten .
PRED:	That evening they saw that the Israelite men had been able to kill him .
GOLD:	So at twilight they set out for the camp of the Arameans . But when they came to the edge of the camp , no one was there !

ID:	6282
INPUT:	berak emango dio lurrari sasoian sasoiko euria , eta garia , ardoa eta olioa izango dituzue ;
PRED:	For the earth will bring rain on the earth , and olive oil will produce food for food .
GOLD:	then he will send the rains in their proper seasons — the early and late rains — so you can bring in your harvests of grain , new wine , and olive oil .

ID:	6283
INPUT:	Utzi zuten , bada , Jaunaren mendia eta hiru eguneko bidean joan ziren . Jaunaren itun-kutxa aurretik joan zitzaien hiru egunetan , kanpatu behar zuten tokia jakinarazteko .
PRED:	So they went out to the Lord 's presence , and the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant went to the Ark of the Covenant . So the Ark of the Covenant went to the Lord 's Covenant .
GOLD:	They marched for three days after leaving the mountain of the Lord , with the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant moving ahead of them to show them where to stop and rest .

ID:	6284
INPUT:	Aspalditik ezagutzen zutenek , <unk> batera profeta-trantzean ikusi zutenean , honela ziotsoten elkarri : — Zer gertatzen ote zaio Kixen semeari ? Saul ere profeta artean ?
PRED:	Then those who heard this , they saw that they were able to kill each other . “ What are you ? ” they asked . “ How can you see ? ”
GOLD:	When those who knew Saul heard about it , they exclaimed , “ What ? Is even Saul a prophet ? How did the son of Kish become a prophet ? ”

ID:	6285
INPUT:	Hori guztia etortzeko ziren gauzen itzala besterik ez da ; <unk> Kristo da .
PRED:	“ Now I am going to eat the fruit of the world , and it was only by Christ .
GOLD:	For these rules are only shadows of the reality yet to come . And Christ himself is that reality .

ID:	6286
INPUT:	Nire esana beti egin duzuenez gero , ene maiteok , egizue orain ere , hor ez nagoelarik ; ez hor <unk> bezala bakarrik , askoz gehiago baizik . Saia zaitezte zeuen salbamena begirune santuz burutzen ;
PRED:	Dear friends , dear brothers and sisters , be sure that you have not been here on me , so now now now now I am sure that you are righteous .
GOLD:	Dear friends , you always followed my instructions when I was with you . And now that I am away , it is even more important . Work hard to show the results of your salvation , obeying God with deep reverence and fear .

ID:	6287
INPUT:	Jauna , ez ni zigortu haserre , ez ni zentzatu sumindurik .
PRED:	The Lord is angry with your enemies ; they are angry with contempt .
GOLD:	Have compassion on me , Lord , for I am weak.Heal me , Lord , for my bones are in agony .

ID:	6288
INPUT:	Jainkoa goresten zuten , eta herri osoaren <unk> zuten . Eta Jaunak egunetik egunera gehitzen zizkion elkarteari salbatzen zirenak .
PRED:	In that day the Lord was a great crowd , and when the people of Israel saw that the first day , the Lord , who was on the Sabbath .
GOLD:	all the while praising God and enjoying the goodwill of all the people . And each day the Lord added to their fellowship those who were being saved .

ID:	6289
INPUT:	Neu bainaiz Jauna , zure Jainkoa , Israelen Jainko santua dazure salbatzailea . Egipto eman dut zure askapen-sari , Etiopia eta Seba , zure ordainetan
PRED:	I am the Lord your God , the God of Israel ; I have given you victory over the nations of Egypt , O God of Egypt .
GOLD:	For I am the Lord , your God , the Holy One of Israel , your Savior.I gave Egypt as a ransom for your freedom ; I gave Ethiopia and Seba in your place .

ID:	6290
INPUT:	Jaiki zen , bada , Jakob eta bere seme-alabak eta emazteak gamelu gainera igoarazi zituen .
PRED:	So Jacob got up and camels with them , and Jacob had two sons and daughters .
GOLD:	So Jacob put his wives and children on camels ,

ID:	6291
INPUT:	Aberastasunak zuhurren koroa , zentzugabeen ergelkeria beti ergelkeria .
PRED:	My strength is a fool ; the mouth of a fool is a fool .
GOLD:	Wealth is a crown for the wise ; the effort of fools yields only foolishness .

ID:	6292
INPUT:	Denak negarrez eta aieneka ari ziren <unk> . Jesusek esan zien : « Ez egin negarrik ; ez dago hilda , lo dago » .
PRED:	When they saw that they were terrified , Jesus told them , “ Do n't weep or weep , for they have died . ”
GOLD:	The house was filled with people weeping and wailing , but he said , “ Stop the weeping ! She is n't dead ; she 's only asleep . ”

ID:	6293
INPUT:	Bai , zuregandik urrun doazenak galduak dira , desleial <unk> suntsitu egingo dituzu .
PRED:	For you have destroyed those who have destroyed them , and they have destroyed them .
GOLD:	Those who desert him will perish , for you destroy those who abandon you .

ID:	6294
INPUT:	( 38 , 1-7 )
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Plans for the Courtyard

ID:	6295
INPUT:	<unk> gelditzen ziren lurraldeak
PRED:	The Egyptians saw that they were buried in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	The Land Yet to Be Conquered

ID:	6296
INPUT:	Joan zen , beraz , Naaman bere zaldi , guda-gurdi eta guzti , eta Eliseoren etxeko ate aurrean gelditu zen .
PRED:	So Naaman 's army went to his palace and chariots , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , and chariots .
GOLD:	So Naaman went with his horses and chariots and waited at the door of Elisha 's house .

ID:	6297
INPUT:	Bai , zu izan zaitut laguntzaile ; kantuz ariko naiz pozik zure hegalen itzalean .
PRED:	For I have given you his unfailing love , O God of your unfailing love , and I will protect you .
GOLD:	I cling to you ; your strong right hand holds me securely .

ID:	6298
INPUT:	Erre-oparitarako abereak ere hara eramango dituzue eta , haragi eta odol , oso-osorik erreko Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren aldarean . Beste sakrifizioetako odola Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren aldare gainean isuriko duzue ; haragia , berriz , jan egingo .
PRED:	There will be some of the animal that are ceremonially unclean , and blood will be cut off from the altar of the Lord your God . Then you will pour out the blood of the altar of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	You must offer the meat and blood of your burnt offerings on the altar of the Lord your God . The blood of your other sacrifices must be poured out on the altar of the Lord your God , but you may eat the meat .

ID:	6299
INPUT:	ikusi hango harresiak , ikertu jauregiak , hurrengo <unk> esateko :
PRED:	When I saw the walls of its walls , she tore down the walls of the city .
GOLD:	For that is what God is like.He is our God forever and ever , and he will guide us until we die .

ID:	6300
INPUT:	Egun hartan , Jaun <unk> ekarriko <unk> lerden eta <unk> , edonon <unk> duen jendeak , ibaiz ureztaturiko lurraldeanbizi denherri gogor eta <unk> . Opariak ekarriko ditu Sion mendira , Jaun ahalguztidunaren bizilekura .
PRED:	That day the Lord says , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : What sorrow awaits those who think of this will happen to me , and those who are slaughtered by name of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . '
GOLD:	At that time the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will receive giftsfrom this land divided by rivers , from this tall , smooth-skinned people , who are feared far and wide for their conquests and destruction.They will bring the gifts to Jerusalem , where the Lord of Heaven 's Armies dwells .

ID:	6301
INPUT:	Zazpigarren hilean , Netaniasen seme eta Elixamaren biloba Ismael , <unk> bera , Mitzpara joan zen hamar gizonekin , Gedalias ikustera . Elkarrekin otordua egiten ari zirela ,
PRED:	On the seventh year of King Darius 's reign , Johanan son of Kareah and his men went to meet Gedaliah . When they heard about Gedaliah , the men of Judea , they began to see him .
GOLD:	But in midautumn of that year , Ishmael son of Nethaniah and grandson of Elishama , who was a member of the royal family and had been one of the king 's high officials , went to Mizpah with ten men to meet Gedaliah . While they were eating together ,

ID:	6302
INPUT:	Jaunaren menpean jarri
PRED:	Judgment against the
GOLD:	Drawing Close to God

ID:	6303
INPUT:	Baina gaiztoaren gaiztoz oker jokatzen baduzue , galdu egingo zarete bai zuek , bai zuen erregea .
PRED:	But if you turn away from evil , you will crush you .
GOLD:	But if you continue to sin , you and your king will be swept away . ”

ID:	6304
INPUT:	errugabea zarela diozu , Jauna ez dagoela inola <unk> haserre . Hara , epaitu egingo zaitut , huts egin ez duzula esaka ari zarelako .
PRED:	You must know that the Lord will be angry with you , and you will know that you have sinned against me , and you will be angry with you .
GOLD:	And yet you say , ‘ I have done nothing wrong.Surely God is n't angry with me ! 'But now I will punish you severelybecause you claim you have not sinned .

ID:	6305
INPUT:	Jesus fariseuekin eztabaidan ( 5 , 17 — 6 , 11 )
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Man
GOLD:	A Discussion about Fasting

ID:	6306
INPUT:	Israeldarrak Sinai basamortuan zeudelarik , Jauna mintzatu zitzaion Moisesi elkarketa-etxolan . Egiptotik irten eta hurrengo urtea zen , bigarren hilaren lehen eguna . Hau esan zion :
PRED:	Then the Lord gave the following instructions to Moses , and the people of Israel came to the Tabernacle of the Tabernacle . This was the first day of the first month :
GOLD:	A year after Israel 's departure from Egypt , the Lord spoke to Moses in the Tabernacle in the wilderness of Sinai . On the first day of the second month of that year he said ,

ID:	6307
INPUT:	Biharamun goizean , berriro hirira zetorrela , Jesus gosetu egin zen .
PRED:	When the next morning Jesus was hungry , he became very hungry .
GOLD:	In the morning , as Jesus was returning to Jerusalem , he was hungry ,

ID:	6308
INPUT:	<unk> eskua zabaltzen dioeta behartsuari laguntza ematen .
PRED:	He makes them sick for human hands ; he makes them free .
GOLD:	She extends a helping hand to the poorand opens her arms to the needy .

ID:	6309
INPUT:	<unk> ondorengoetatik Zebadias , Mikaelen semea , beste laurogei gizonekin ;
PRED:	From the family of Elam : Zechariah son of Kareah and other men .
GOLD:	From the family of Shephatiah : Zebadiah son of Michael and 80 other men .

ID:	6310
INPUT:	Moisesek legean <unk> harrika hiltzeko agindu zigun ; zuk zer diozu ?
PRED:	When Moses heard that Moses had commanded us to kill us , what you have done ?
GOLD:	The law of Moses says to stone her . What do you say ? ”

ID:	6311
INPUT:	Poz bitez basamortuaeta bertako kanpalekuak , Kedar leinuaren bizilekuak . Sela hiriko <unk> bezate poz-oihu , mendi-gailurretan irrintzi .
PRED:	Let those who weep for joy , for those who have been called out to the towns of the city , for they have heard their cries for joy .
GOLD:	Join in the chorus , you desert towns ; let the villages of Kedar rejoice ! Let the people of Sela sing for joy ; shout praises from the mountaintops !

ID:	6312
INPUT:	Ea , sal diezaiegun ismaeldarrei , kalterik egin gabe , anaia hau geure <unk> dugu eta » . <unk> eman zuten anaiek .
PRED:	Get out of the servants , and let them be sold . We have killed by my brothers and sisters , because we have given him his brothers and sisters . ”
GOLD:	Instead of hurting him , let 's sell him to those Ishmaelite traders . After all , he is our brother — our own flesh and blood ! ” And his brothers agreed .

ID:	6313
INPUT:	Orduan , esan zien Jesusek sinetsi zioten juduei : — Nire mezuan tinko irauten baduzue , zinez nire ikasle izango zarete ;
PRED:	Then Jesus said to the Jews , “ If you believe in my teaching , you must listen to me ,
GOLD:	Jesus said to the people who believed in him , “ You are truly my disciples if you remain faithful to my teachings .

ID:	6314
INPUT:	Nahiz eta zeure <unk> eta lixibaz garbitu , ez da nire begi aurretik <unk> bekatuaren zikina . Hala diot nik , Jainko Jaunak .
PRED:	Even if I were weak with you , I have put my hands on my head , and I have worshiped idols , and I have given you as my God .
GOLD:	No amount of soap or lye can make you clean.I still see the stain of your guilt.I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !

ID:	6315
INPUT:	( Mt 9 , 1-8 ; Lk 5 , 17-26 )
PRED:	Jesus Calms the Storm
GOLD:	A Discussion about Fasting

ID:	6316
INPUT:	eta azkengabeko otoitzen aitzakiaz , emakume alargunen ondasunak irensten dituzte . Epairik zorrotzena izango dute horrelako horiek » .
PRED:	Instead , they will turn away from foreigners and be put to death . In this way , they will be ashamed to be punished . ”
GOLD:	Yet they shamelessly cheat widows out of their property and then pretend to be pious by making long prayers in public . Because of this , they will be severely punished . ”

ID:	6317
INPUT:	<unk> , Uza eta <unk> ;
PRED:	Zebah and Zalmunna , Zalmunna ,
GOLD:	Gazzam , Uzza , Paseah ,

ID:	6318
INPUT:	Zeure jaunaren etxea eman dizut , eta altzoan jarri dizkizut zeure jaunaren emazteak . Israel eta Juda erreinuak eman dizkizut . Eta hori gutxi balitz , askoz handiagoak emanen dizkizut .
PRED:	Now I have given you his master , and I have given you a royal palace , and I have given you his wife , and I have given you a few of Judah . ”
GOLD:	I gave you your master 's house and his wives and the kingdoms of Israel and Judah . And if that had not been enough , I would have given you much , much more .

ID:	6319
INPUT:	Alferrik zigortu ditutzuen seme-alabak , ez baituzue <unk> hartu . Zeuek hil dituzue profetak ezpataz , lehoi amorratuak bezala .
PRED:	I will punish your children and your children , for you have killed your prophets . You will not kill you like a lion among you , like a lion among you .
GOLD:	“ I have punished your children , but they did not respond to my discipline.You yourselves have killed your prophetsas a lion kills its prey .

ID:	6320
INPUT:	Begira Jainkoak <unk> : nork zuzen ote <unk> okertua ?
PRED:	How can we know that God is able to be able ?
GOLD:	Accept the way God does things , for who can straighten what he has made crooked ?

ID:	6321
INPUT:	Jainkoak Moisesi esan zion , gainera : — Esan israeldarrei : Jaunak , zuen arbaso Abraham , Isaak eta Jakoben Jainkoak , zuengana bidali nau . Horixe izango da nire izena betiko ; hala deituko naute belaunez belaun .
PRED:	Then God said to Moses , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Jacob , the God of Jacob , the God of Jacob , and he has sent me to live forever .
GOLD:	God also said to Moses , “ Say this to the people of Israel : Yahweh , the God of your ancestors — the God of Abraham , the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob — has sent me to you.This is my eternal name , my name to remember for all generations .

ID:	6322
INPUT:	Apaizburuek eta herriak ere okerkeria <unk> gainean egiten zuten , arrotzen ohitura higuingarriak hartuz . Jaunak Jerusalemen beretzat sagaratua zuen tenplua ere kutsatu egin zuten .
PRED:	Then the leading priests and the people who had been unfaithful to the Lord as they had commanded by worshiping other gods of the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	Likewise , all the leaders of the priests and the people became more and more unfaithful . They followed all the pagan practices of the surrounding nations , desecrating the Temple of the Lord that had been consecrated in Jerusalem .

ID:	6323
INPUT:	Eta zeu , Paxhur , eta zure familia osoa gatibu eramango zaituztete Babiloniara . Han hilko zara eta han hilobiratuko zaituzte , gezurrezko <unk> ematen zenien adiskide guztiekin batera » .
PRED:	Then you will die in your land , along with your relatives , and all the people of Judah will be exiled to Babylon , and you will die with your friends . ”
GOLD:	As for you , Pashhur , you and all your household will go as captives to Babylon . There you will die and be buried , you and all your friends to whom you prophesied that everything would be all right . ' ”

ID:	6324
INPUT:	Eta eroapenak lortuko du bere helburua , heldutasun beteko pertsonak izan zaitezten , ezertan akatsik gabeak .
PRED:	Then God will be able to be able to be able to be able to obey God 's grace .
GOLD:	So let it grow , for when your endurance is fully developed , you will be perfect and complete , needing nothing .

ID:	6325
INPUT:	Eta hori ere <unk> jota , Jainko Jauna , zure morroi honen etxeari <unk> hitza eman diozu . Hori ez da maiz gertatzen , Jainko Jauna .
PRED:	And when I have heard that the Sovereign Lord says , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I have given you everything I have given you , the Lord , the God of heaven . '
GOLD:	And now , Sovereign Lord , in addition to everything else , you speak of giving your servant a lasting dynasty ! Do you deal with everyone this way , O Sovereign Lord ?

ID:	6326
INPUT:	Ondoren , beste zazpi behi itxura txarreko eta <unk> atera ziren . Haiek bezain <unk> ez zen inoiz ordu arte ikusi Egipto lurraldean .
PRED:	Then when they saw seven things , they came into the land of Egypt and saw that they were as weak as well as they had seen .
GOLD:	But then I saw seven sick-looking cows , scrawny and thin , come up after them . I 've never seen such sorry-looking animals in all the land of Egypt .

ID:	6327
INPUT:	Simonek erantzun zion : — <unk> barkatu <unk> , nik uste . Jesusek esan zion : — Zuzen diozu .
PRED:	“ Well , ” Peter replied , “ when I know that you 've healed me , ” he said . “ You 're willing , ” he said .
GOLD:	Simon answered , “ I suppose the one for whom he canceled the larger debt . ” “ That 's right , ” Jesus said .

ID:	6328
INPUT:	Orduan , bisitariek heldu eta etxe barrura erakarri zuten Lot , eta atea itxi .
PRED:	Then they looked at the night and threw them into the palace where they were hungry .
GOLD:	But the two angels reached out , pulled Lot into the house , and bolted the door .

ID:	6329
INPUT:	Haren ondoren , erroldatzea egin zen garaian , Judas galilearra * atera zen , eta hainbat jende bereganatu zuen ; baina hil egin zuten hura ere , eta jarraitzaile guztiak sakabanatu ziren .
PRED:	The king of Jerusalem was called for him , “ Judas , ” he went out to the city of the Jews , and he killed many people in the field . But they left him and found him in the road .
GOLD:	After him , at the time of the census , there was Judas of Galilee . He got people to follow him , but he was killed , too , and all his followers were scattered .

ID:	6330
INPUT:	<unk> egurra biltzen dute , gurasoek sua pizten eta emakumeek orea egiten , <unk> , zeruko erregina deitzen <unk> , opilak eskaintzeko ; gainera , jainko arrotzei isur-opariak eskaintzen dizkiete , ni iraintzeko .
PRED:	Even if the old man has been taken from the dead , the fire of your ancestors have been taken from the fire , the fire of heaven will burn incense on fire , and they will burn incense on my behalf .
GOLD:	No wonder I am so angry ! Watch how the children gather wood and the fathers build sacrificial fires . See how the women knead dough and make cakes to offer to the Queen of Heaven . And they pour out liquid offerings to their other idol gods !

ID:	6331
INPUT:	Lege eta ohikune bat bera izango duzue , bai zuek , bai zuen artean bizi den etorkinak » .
PRED:	You must be a foreigners living among you , and you must live among the foreigners living among you . ”
GOLD:	The same instructions and regulations will apply both to you and to the foreigners living among you . ”

ID:	6332
INPUT:	« <unk> arreta guztiaz itxia aurkitu dugu eta zaintzaileak ateetan erne , baina irekitzean barruan ez dugu inor aurkitu » .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you in the streets , and we can see it in the south , but we found it in the south . ”
GOLD:	“ The jail was securely locked , with the guards standing outside , but when we opened the gates , no one was there ! ”

ID:	6333
INPUT:	Irents beza gau hura <unk> , ez beza inork urteko egunen artean sar , ezta zenbatu ere <unk> artean !
PRED:	Let the night be sure that if they have been able to enter , let no longer be able to be sure that one will be able to kill him .
GOLD:	Let that night be blotted off the calendar , never again to be counted among the days of the year , never again to appear among the months .

ID:	6334
INPUT:	Hauek ziren Lebiren semeak : Gerxon , Kehat eta Merari .
PRED:	These were the clans of Levi : The sons of Levi , named after their ancestor Merari .
GOLD:	Levi had three sons , whose names were Gershon , Kohath , and Merari .

ID:	6335
INPUT:	Ez diegu jaramonik egin zure zerbitzari profetei , zure izenean gure errege eta buruzagiei , gure arbaso eta herri osoari hitz egin <unk> .
PRED:	We have refused to listen to your servants , your servant , the prophets , the prophets , the prophets , and the people of Israel , and the people of Israel .
GOLD:	We have refused to listen to your servants the prophets , who spoke on your authority to our kings and princes and ancestors and to all the people of the land .

ID:	6336
INPUT:	ez du haurrik , ez ondorengorik herrian , ez da inor bizirik gelditzen haren <unk> .
PRED:	The woman who has not been unfaithful to her husband , or the people of Israel will be punished by his own people .
GOLD:	They will have neither children nor grandchildren , nor any survivor in the place where they lived .

ID:	6337
INPUT:	etengabeko sesioak ; horietan aritzen direnak burua galdutako jendea da , egiaren axolarik gabea ; horiek erlijioa irabazpide bihurtzen dute .
PRED:	It is a fool to be wise , though they are proud , they despise the truth . They are not proud , though they despise the truth .
GOLD:	These people always cause trouble . Their minds are corrupt , and they have turned their backs on the truth . To them , a show of godliness is just a way to become wealthy .

ID:	6338
INPUT:	ez dute legamiarekin erreko , neure ohorez erretako oparietatik ematen diedan partea baita . Guztiz sakratua da , barkamen-oparia eta ordain-oparia <unk> .
PRED:	They must not make them a special gift , for I have given them a special gift to the Lord . It is a special gift to the people , and they will be forgiven .
GOLD:	In the morning , after the priest on duty has put on his official linen clothing and linen undergarments , he must clean out the ashes of the burnt offering and put them beside the altar .

ID:	6339
INPUT:	santutegiko liturgi zerbitzurako jantziak , Aaron apaizaren jantzi sakratuak eta beronen semeen apaiz-zerbitzurako jantziak » .
PRED:	On the sacred garments of the sanctuary , the sacred garments for Aaron and his sons and his sons . ”
GOLD:	the beautifully stitched garments for the priests to wear while ministering in the Holy Place — the sacred garments for Aaron the priest , and the garments for his sons to wear as they minister as priests . ”

ID:	6340
INPUT:	Betea dago lurraldea idoloz : beren eskuz eginaren <unk> ahuspezten , beren behatzez <unk> aurrean .
PRED:	“ At last the land of the earth will be filled with his hands , and they will bow before their own power .
GOLD:	Their land is full of idols ; the people worship things they have madewith their own hands .

ID:	6341
INPUT:	Jerusalem berriaren distira
PRED:	The Temple of Jerusalem
GOLD:	Future Glory for Jerusalem

ID:	6342
INPUT:	Handik hiru urtera Jerusalemera igo nintzen Pedro ezagutzera , eta hamabost egun egin nituen berarekin .
PRED:	This was the fourth year of the fourth year I was born to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Then three years later I went to Jerusalem to get to know Peter , and I stayed with him for fifteen days .

ID:	6343
INPUT:	Haren barruan izango dute <unk> eta mota <unk> . Hango <unk> dute <unk> eta <unk> . <unk> eta <unk> egingo du beleak . <unk> <unk> agertuko da .
PRED:	For the tree will be filled with great power , and when they saw that that they will be able to kill him , and they will know that they will be very weak and fig tree , and they will know that they will be able to know that they will know that they will know that they will know that they will know that they will know that they have seen .
GOLD:	The proud city will become a pasture for flocks and herds , and all sorts of wild animals will settle there.The desert owl and screech owl will roost on its ruined columns , their calls echoing through the gaping windows.Rubble will block all the doorways , and the cedar paneling will be exposed to the weather .

ID:	6344
INPUT:	Zintzoak , ongi pentsatu eta gero erantzun ; gaiztoak , gaiztakeria botatzen ahotik .
PRED:	The godly are full of evil , and the wicked are broken .
GOLD:	The heart of the godly thinks carefully before speaking ; the mouth of the wicked overflows with evil words .

ID:	6345
INPUT:	<unk> eta hartz <unk> larratuko diraeta haien umeak batera etzango . Lehoiak lastoa jango du , idiaren antzera .
PRED:	They will be filled with an eagle , and the young lion will be filled with a lion , like a lion among the young lion .
GOLD:	The cow will graze near the bear.The cub and the calf will lie down together.The lion will eat hay like a cow .

ID:	6346
INPUT:	eta , hilobitik itzulirik , gertatutako guztiaren berri eman zieten Hamaikei eta gainerako ikasleei .
PRED:	Then they returned to the tomb that had been given to the other disciples , and they had given the rest of the other disciples .
GOLD:	So they rushed back from the tomb to tell his eleven disciples — and everyone else — what had happened .

ID:	6347
INPUT:	( Ir 21 , 1-6 )
PRED:	The Land Given to Israel
GOLD:	Sacrificing Firstborn Male Animals

ID:	6348
INPUT:	<unk> Nimrod izan zuen . Hau izan zen lehenengo gizon <unk> munduan ;
PRED:	And when the man had lived in the city , he was very very very powerful .
GOLD:	Cush was also the ancestor of Nimrod , who was the first heroic warrior on earth .

ID:	6349
INPUT:	Bat bakarra epailea
PRED:	The Faith of God
GOLD:	Warning against Judging Others

ID:	6350
INPUT:	Eta ongi egiten <unk> bakarrik egiten badiezue ongi , zer esker on zor zaizue ? Bekatariek ere egiten dute beste horrenbeste .
PRED:	And if they are righteous , if they will die , and if they will ask you , they will know that they will die , too , and if they will die .
GOLD:	And if you do good only to those who do good to you , why should you get credit ? Even sinners do that much !

ID:	6351
INPUT:	<unk> egunsentia gau iluna da , ohituak baitaude <unk> <unk> » .
PRED:	For when I have heard that its troubles will be broken , and they will know that they have seen my power . ”
GOLD:	The black night is their morning.They ally themselves with the terrors of the darkness .

ID:	6352
INPUT:	Baina hark erantzun zion aitari : “ Hainbeste urte da zure agindu bat ere sekula huts egin gabe zerbitzatzen zaitudala , eta ez didazu egundaino antxume bat ere eman , lagunekin festa egiteko ;
PRED:	But he replied to his father , ‘ There 's no more than your father , for we have given you a young goat as a young goat for you . If you have been circumcised , we would have a young goat for you .
GOLD:	but he replied , ‘ All these years I 've slaved for you and never once refused to do a single thing you told me to . And in all that time you never gave me even one young goat for a feast with my friends .

ID:	6353
INPUT:	« Eman dezagun norbaitek okela sagaratua <unk> bere jantzian eta <unk> ogia , <unk> , ardoa , olioa nahiz bestelako janariren bat ukitzen duela ; janari hauek sagaratu bihurtzen ote dira ? » Apaizek ezetz erantzun zuten .
PRED:	“ Suppose you eat the meat that is ceremonially clean , and if the meat of the meat that had been poured out , and if they have been given to this man , the priests , and the priests , and the priests of this will be given to you . ”
GOLD:	‘ If one of you is carrying some meat from a holy sacrifice in his robes and his robe happens to brush against some bread or stew , wine or olive oil , or any other kind of food , will it also become holy ? ' ” The priests replied , “ No . ”

ID:	6354
INPUT:	Beraz , adieraz iezaiezu nire , Jainko Jaun honen , mezua : Zuek haragia odolarekin jaten duzue , idoloetan uste ona jarri eta hilketak egiten dituzue . Nola nahi duzue , bada , lurralde honen jabetza izan ?
PRED:	Then the Sovereign Lord says to them , “ You have rejected my flesh and detestable idols , and you have stolen from idols . Why are you stolen from their own land ?
GOLD:	So tell these people , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : You eat meat with blood in it , you worship idols , and you murder the innocent . Do you really think the land should be yours ?

ID:	6355
INPUT:	Israeldarrei zegokien <unk> , gizaki eta <unk> bakoitzetik berrogeita hamarreko bat bereizi zuen , eta Jaunaren egoitzako zerbitzuaz arduratzen ziren lebitarrei eman zien , Jaunak agindu bezala .
PRED:	At that time the number of women who were young and women who had been given to the Lord , which was given to the Levites and the Levites who were given to the Levites , as the Lord had commanded .
GOLD:	From the half-share given to the people , Moses took one of every fifty prisoners and animals and gave them to the Levites , who maintained the Lord 's Tabernacle . All this was done as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	6356
INPUT:	Haren aurreko distiraz , tximista eta <unk> ikatz <unk> ziren hodeiak .
PRED:	His lightning were like lightning , and they were filled with lightning .
GOLD:	The Lord thundered from heaven ; the voice of the Most High resoundedamid the hail and burning coals .

ID:	6357
INPUT:	Jesus Espiritu Santuaz betea itzuli zen Jordandik . Espirituak eramanik , basamortuan barrena ibili zen
PRED:	As Jesus returned to the Holy Spirit , the Holy Spirit came through through the wilderness .
GOLD:	Then Jesus , full of the Holy Spirit , returned from the Jordan River . He was led by the Spirit in the wilderness ,

ID:	6358
INPUT:	baina munduak jakin behar du nik Aita maite dudala eta hark agindua zintzo betetzen dudala . Jaiki , goazen hemendik !
PRED:	But when I know that I am the Father loves you , and let me be faithful . ”
GOLD:	but I will do what the Father requires of me , so that the world will know that I love the Father . Come , let 's be going .

ID:	6359
INPUT:	bere nagusiaren etxean <unk> zeuden faraoiaren funtzionarioak eta galdegin zien : — Zergatik zaudete hain <unk> ?
PRED:	At that time the officials of Pharaoh and officials asked him , “ Why are you afraid of Egypt ? Why are you very angry ? ”
GOLD:	“ Why do you look so worried today ? ” he asked them .

ID:	6360
INPUT:	Esterrek otordura deitu erregea eta Haman
PRED:	Esther and Esther 's banquet
GOLD:	Esther 's Request to the King

ID:	6361
INPUT:	Hogeita hamabost urte zituen Josafatek Judako errege izaten hastean , eta hogeita bost urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen . Beraren amak Azuba zuen izena eta Xilhiren alaba zen .
PRED:	Jehoshaphat was twenty-two years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem twenty-nine years . His mother was the daughter of Judah , and he was the daughter of Judah .
GOLD:	So Jehoshaphat ruled over the land of Judah . He was thirty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem twenty-five years . His mother was Azubah , the daughter of Shilhi .

ID:	6362
INPUT:	Joan zen , bada , agindutakoa hartzera , eta <unk> itzuli zen . Honek jaki goxoa prestatu zuen , aitak atsegin zuen bezalakoa .
PRED:	So he took some of the covenant with him , and he took some of his father and his father 's father .
GOLD:	So Jacob went out and got the young goats for his mother . Rebekah took them and prepared a delicious meal , just the way Isaac liked it .

ID:	6363
INPUT:	goizero <unk> , uneoro aztertzen jarduteko ?
PRED:	How could I know how hard I thank you ?
GOLD:	For you examine us every morningand test us every moment .

ID:	6364
INPUT:	Lemuel erregearen esanak , bere amak <unk> .
PRED:	Your mother is confident in the king , and his mother is under his mother .
GOLD:	The sayings of King Lemuel contain this message , which his mother taught him .

ID:	6365
INPUT:	zeure desohorea har dezazun eta lotsa zaitezen egin duzun guztiaz ; horrela , kontsolatu egingo dira haiek .
PRED:	And you will be your strength and your power .
GOLD:	Then you will be truly ashamed of everything you have done , for your sins make them feel good in comparison .

ID:	6366
INPUT:	Senideok , guri <unk> , aldi batez zuengandik urruti aurkitu ginelarik — gorputzez , ez bihotzez — , eginahalak eta gehiago egin genituen zuek aurrez aurre ikustera joateko . Hain baitzen <unk> gure gogoa ,
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , dear brothers and sisters , when you saw you some of you , some of you would n't know that you were in your heart , and when we were afraid to see him .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , after we were separated from you for a little while ( though our hearts never left you ) , we tried very hard to come back because of our intense longing to see you again .

ID:	6367
INPUT:	Gero , esan zuen filistearrak : — Erronka hau botatzen dizuet gaur , israeldar <unk> ! Bidal iezadazue gizon bat , eta ekin diezaiogun borrokari !
PRED:	Then he said to the Philistines , “ I am sending you to destroy every man of Israel and all the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	I defy the armies of Israel today ! Send me a man who will fight me ! ”

ID:	6368
INPUT:	Han zihoan ura aldare inguru guztian , erretena betetzeraino .
PRED:	There were there on the altar of the Tabernacle , and they were filled with water .
GOLD:	and the water ran around the altar and even filled the trench .

ID:	6369
INPUT:	Jainkoaren alde jarri nahi al duzueeta haren defendatzaile bihurtu ?
PRED:	Can you stand before God ? Will you wander before him ?
GOLD:	Will you slant your testimony in his favor ? Will you argue God 's case for him ?

ID:	6370
INPUT:	Saulek , orduan , esan zion Jaunari : — Israelen Jainko , ager iezaguzu egia osoa . Zotz egin eta Jonatan eta Saul izendatu zituen Jainkoak ; herria , aldiz , libre atera zen .
PRED:	Then Saul said to the Lord , “ This is what the Sovereign Lord of Israel , the God of Israel , the people of Israel , the people of Israel , and the people of Israel brought him back to us .
GOLD:	Then Saul prayed , “ O Lord , God of Israel , please show us who is guilty and who is innocent . ” Then they cast sacred lots , and Jonathan and Saul were chosen as the guilty ones , and the people were declared innocent .

ID:	6371
INPUT:	Ez dago han zeruan , zuek honela esan behar izateko : “ Nor joango zaigu zerura , agindua ekarri eta guri jakinarazteko , bete ahal izan dezagun ? ”
PRED:	No , there is no place in heaven and say to us , ‘ Who can go to us ? Who can give us to us ? '
GOLD:	It is not kept in heaven , so distant that you must ask , ‘ Who will go up to heaven and bring it down so we can hear it and obey ? '

ID:	6372
INPUT:	Agindu maitagarri horiek ditut besarkatzen , zure arauak <unk> gogoan .
PRED:	I have asked your decrees , and your decrees have filled with your decrees .
GOLD:	I honor and love your commands.I meditate on your decrees .

ID:	6373
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « <unk> <unk> <unk> dute Judako buruzagiek . Ura bezala isuriko <unk> haserrea .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ At that time I will pour out my anger against you , and I will pour out my fury on my fury .
GOLD:	“ The leaders of Judah have become like thieves.So I will pour my anger on them like a waterfall .

ID:	6374
INPUT:	ez dago ilunperik , ez itzal edo <unk> , gaizkileen gordeleku izan <unk> .
PRED:	There is no joy to see that those who are able to be able to be able to see the power of God .
GOLD:	No darkness is thick enoughto hide the wicked from his eyes .

ID:	6375
INPUT:	Horrelako horiek <unk> dira , gezurrezko langile , Kristoren <unk> baino ez dutenak .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who are wise , and those who do n't believe in Christ .
GOLD:	These people are false apostles . They are deceitful workers who disguise themselves as apostles of Christ .

ID:	6376
INPUT:	Hartzazue Jaunaren izenean poz handiz , eta ohoratu beti hori bezalakoak direnak .
PRED:	Take your joy in the name of the Lord , and those who love him .
GOLD:	Welcome him in the Lord 's love and with great joy , and give him the honor that people like him deserve .

ID:	6377
INPUT:	Ezar nazazu bihotzean zigilu bezala , besoan zigilu bezala . Herioa bezain gogorra maitasuna , Hildakoen Egoitza bezain iraunkorra <unk> . Su eta gar da maitasuna , Jaunarengandiko sugar .
PRED:	I will make you strong with gold , and I will give you strength as gold as bronze as bronze as bronze as bronze as bronze as bronze as bronze as a flood .
GOLD:	Place me like a seal over your heart , like a seal on your arm.For love is as strong as death , its jealousy as enduring as the grave.Love flashes like fire , the brightest kind of flame .

ID:	6378
INPUT:	Jauna , zer da gizakia , zu hartaz arduratzeko , zer gizasemea , zuk harengan <unk> ?
PRED:	For the Lord has given us a gift to all his brothers and sisters , how can we know that they were in him ?
GOLD:	O Lord , what are human beings that you should notice them , mere mortals that you should think about them ?

ID:	6379
INPUT:	“ Sortzen al da kanabera <unk> kanpo , hazten ote <unk> urik gabe ?
PRED:	“ Can the sun be surprised when the sun falls into the sky ? Can they grow in the water ?
GOLD:	“ Can papyrus reeds grow tall without a marsh ? Can marsh grass flourish without water ?

ID:	6380
INPUT:	Israeldarrak berriro abiatu eta Moabeko lautadan ezarri zuten kanpalekua , Jordanez ekialdera , Jerikoren parean .
PRED:	Then the Israelites left Moab and camped beside the plains of Moab , east of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	Then the people of Israel traveled to the plains of Moab and camped east of the Jordan River , across from Jericho .

ID:	6381
INPUT:	Gaiztoari hil egingo dela esaten badiot , eta hark bekatutik aldendu eta zuzenbidez eta justiziaz jokatzen badu ,
PRED:	But if I do n't die , I will turn away from God and turn away from God .
GOLD:	And suppose I tell some wicked people that they will surely die , but then they turn from their sins and do what is just and right .

