BLEU:	0.10904404864199317
ID:	0
INPUT:	▁Jau na ri ▁a tse gin ▁ez ▁zai o na ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁, ▁Ne ba ten ▁se me ▁Je ro bo a mek ▁Is ra e li ▁e gi na ra zi ▁ziz ki on ▁be ka tu e ta tik ▁al den du ▁ga be ▁.
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight and followed the example of Jeroboam son of Nebat .
GOLD:	But he did what was evil in the Lord 's sight . He followed the example of Jeroboam son of Nebat , continuing the sins that Jeroboam had led Israel to commit .

ID:	1
INPUT:	▁Za pi ak ▁el kar re kin ▁jo si ▁zi tuz ten ▁, ▁bost ▁al de ▁ba te tik ▁e ta ▁sei ▁bes te tik ▁.
PRED:	Then the five of the church went with them , and five were joined to one of them .
GOLD:	Bezalel joined five of these curtains together to make one long curtain , and the other six were joined to make a second long curtain .

ID:	2
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren ▁e gin tza ▁go res gar ri ak ▁, ▁ha ren ▁ga rai pe na ▁e ta ▁e gin ▁di tu en ▁mi ra ri a kez ▁diz ki e gu ▁ez ku ta tu ko ▁geu re ▁haur rei ▁, ▁bai zik ▁e ta ▁da tor ren ▁be lau nal di a ri ▁kon ta tu ko ▁.
PRED:	Let us praise the name of the Lord , and we will remember his miraculous signs and wonders , and we will never again remember our children .
GOLD:	We will not hide these truths from our children ; we will tell the next generationabout the glorious deeds of the Lord , about his power and his mighty wonders .

ID:	3
INPUT:	▁A pai zak ▁: ▁Je dai a sen ▁on do ren go ak ▁, ▁hots ▁, ▁Jo su e ren ▁ja tor ri ko ak ▁, <unk> ▁;
PRED:	From the priests : Jeshua son of Jehozadak , the gates of Jeshua ,
GOLD:	These are the priests who returned from exile : The family of Jedaiah ( through the line of Jeshua ) 973

ID:	4
INPUT:	▁Sun tsi tu ▁e gin go ▁di tut
PRED:	I will praise you , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Jeremiah Weeps for Sinful Judah

ID:	5
INPUT:	▁Zo ri txar ▁bi ok ▁ger ta tu ko ▁zaiz ki zu ▁, ▁bat - ba te an ▁, ▁e gun ▁be re an ▁: ▁haur rik ▁ga be ▁e ta ▁a lar gun gel di tu ko ▁za ra ▁— ▁zo ri txar ra ren ▁zo ri txar ra ▁! ▁— ▁; ▁ez ▁di zu te ▁ba li o ko zeu re ▁sor gin ke ri a ▁u ga ri e ke ta ▁az ti ke ri en ▁a hal men ▁han di ak ▁.
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you who are like a little child , ” says the Lord. “ You will be like a little child , but you will be destroyed , and you will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	Well , both these things will come upon you in a moment : widowhood and the loss of your children.Yes , these calamities will come upon you , despite all your witchcraft and magic .

ID:	6
INPUT:	▁Den bo ral di a ▁ze ra man ▁I sa a kek ▁Ge rar - en ▁. ▁Be hin ▁ba tez ▁, ▁fi lis te ar ren ▁er re ge ▁A bi me lek ▁lei ho ra ▁a te ra ▁zen ▁. ▁E ta ▁ho na ▁non ▁i kus ten ▁di tu en ▁I sa ak ▁e ta ▁Re be ka ▁e maz te a ▁har re man ▁go xo an ▁.
PRED:	One day Isaac was buried in the north of Gerar . One day he was buried in the valley of Gerar . He was buried with his wife , and he was buried in the valley of Lebanon .
GOLD:	But some time later , Abimelech , king of the Philistines , looked out his window and saw Isaac caressing Rebekah .

ID:	7
INPUT:	▁Lur re an ▁ez ti a ▁bar rei a tu a ▁ze go en ▁oi han ▁ba te ra ▁hel du ▁zen ▁gi za tal de ▁o so a ▁.
PRED:	It was not a human spirit , and the wings of the earth was like a human being .
GOLD:	even though they had all found honeycomb on the ground in the forest .

ID:	8
INPUT:	▁Tenplu a ren ▁bar ne ne ko ▁az ken ▁ha mar ▁me tro ak ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁zed roz ko ▁o ho lez ▁es ta li ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁be he tik ▁ha si ▁e ta ▁goi ko ▁ha be e ta rai no ▁, ▁e ta ▁to ki ▁ho ri ▁san tu te gi a ▁, ▁hots ▁, ▁to ki ▁san tu - san tu a ▁, ▁i za te ko ▁an to la tu ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	He also measured the inner room of the inner courtyard . He also measured the inner room of the Most Holy Place . He also measured the top of the inner room , just as the Most Holy Place .
GOLD:	He partitioned off an inner sanctuary — the Most Holy Place — at the far end of the Temple . It was 30 feet deep and was paneled with cedar from floor to ceiling .

ID:	9
INPUT:	▁bai ta ▁es pi ri tu ▁gaiz to e ta tik ▁e ta ▁gai tze ta tik ▁sen da tu ak ▁zi tu en ▁zen bait ▁e ma ku me ▁e re ▁: ▁Mag da la ko ▁Ma ri a ▁— ▁ho nen gan dik ▁zaz pi ▁de ab ru ▁bo ta ▁zi tu en ▁— ▁,
PRED:	But the spirit of the evil spirits came from the evil spirit and said to them , “ My mother has been healed of the devil . ”
GOLD:	along with some women who had been cured of evil spirits and diseases . Among them were Mary Magdalene , from whom he had cast out seven demons ;

ID:	10
INPUT:	▁« ▁E gun ▁hau ▁go go an gar ri ▁i zan go ▁du zu e ▁e ta ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁o ho rez ▁, ▁fes ta ▁na gu siz ▁os pa tu ko ▁. ▁Fes ta ▁hau ▁le ge - in dar rez ▁e zar ri ko ▁du zu e ▁be lau nez ▁be laun ▁.
PRED:	“ On that day you must celebrate the Festival of Unleavened Bread . This is a permanent law for the Lord . This is a permanent law for generation .
GOLD:	“ This is a day to remember . Each year , from generation to generation , you must celebrate it as a special festival to the Lord . This is a law for all time .

ID:	11
INPUT:	▁a lar gun tsak ▁es ku - hu tsik ▁bi dal tzen ▁ze ni tu en ▁, ▁u me zur tzak ▁gaiz ki ▁har tzen ▁.
PRED:	“ You sent the widows to kill the orphans , and the orphans .
GOLD:	You must have sent widows away empty-handedand crushed the hopes of orphans .

ID:	12
INPUT:	▁Zin tzi li ka tu ▁er re ze la ▁za pi en ▁ka ti gai lu en ▁pe an ▁, ▁e ta ▁sar tu ▁ha ren ▁a tze an ▁i tun - ku txa ▁. ▁Er re ze lak ▁be rei zi ko ▁di tu ▁to ki ▁san tu a ▁e ta ▁to ki ▁san tu - san tu a ▁.
PRED:	He will dip his finger into the middle of the Ark of the Covenant and placed it on the south side of the Most Holy Place . He will move the Ark of the Most Holy Place .
GOLD:	Hang the inner curtain from clasps , and put the Ark of the Covenant in the room behind it . This curtain will separate the Holy Place from the Most Holy Place .

ID:	13
INPUT:	▁Gaur ▁ja kin go ▁du zu e ▁Jau na ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko a ▁aur re tik ▁i ga ro ko ▁zai zu e la ▁Jor dan ▁ze har ka tze an ▁, ▁su ▁kis kal gar ri a ▁be za la ▁: ▁be rak ▁sun tsi tu ▁e ta ▁ma kur ra ra zi ko ▁di tu ▁her ri ▁ho ri ek ▁zu en ▁aur re an ▁, ▁e ta ▁zu ek ▁be ren ▁lur ral de tik ▁bo ta ▁e ta ▁deu sez ta tu ▁e gin go ▁di tu zu e ▁be re ha la ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁hi tze man ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	You may know that the Lord your God is with you when you cross the Jordan River , just as he has destroyed you . He will destroy all the nations and destroy you as he did . He will destroy you as he promised .
GOLD:	But recognize today that the Lord your God is the one who will cross over ahead of you like a devouring fire to destroy them . He will subdue them so that you will quickly conquer them and drive them out , just as the Lord has promised .

ID:	14
INPUT:	▁si tsak ▁jan da ko ▁jan tzi a ▁be za la ▁, ▁har rak ▁jo ta ko ▁ar ti le a ▁be za la gal du ko ▁bai ti ra.Bai na ▁ni re ▁ga rai pe nak be ti ▁i raun go ▁du ▁, ▁ni re ▁sal ba me nak ▁gi zal diz ▁gi zal di ▁» ▁.
PRED:	My heart is like a prostitute , and my heart is like a prostitute , my rock is my rock , and my rock is my rock . ”
GOLD:	For the moth will devour them as it devours clothing.The worm will eat at them as it eats wool.But my righteousness will last forever.My salvation will continue from generation to generation . ”

ID:	15
INPUT:	▁« ▁“ ▁Jain ko ▁a hal tsu ak be dein ka ▁zai tza la ▁, ▁e man kor ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁u gal du ▁zai tza la ▁, ▁her ri ▁as ko ren ▁sor tzai le bi hur ▁zai te zen ▁!
PRED:	“ Then God will bless you , and he will bless you and make you great and multiply .
GOLD:	May God Almighty bless you and give you many children . And may your descendants multiply and become many nations !

ID:	16
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁du zu ▁her ri ▁za pal du a ▁sal ba tzen ▁, ▁e ta ▁har ro pu tzen ▁han di ke ri a ▁ma kur ra raz ten ▁.
PRED:	You crush the nations with favor of the Lord , and I trust in him .
GOLD:	You rescue the humble , but your eyes watch the proud and humiliate them .

ID:	17
INPUT:	▁« ▁Jau nak ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko ak ▁ja be tzan ▁e man go ▁di zu en ▁lur ral de an ▁nor bait ▁lan dan ▁lur re an ▁hil da ▁a zal du ▁e ta ▁nork ▁hil ▁du en ▁ez ▁ba da ki zu e ▁,
PRED:	“ When you enter the land the Lord your God has given you , you will die in the land I am giving you .
GOLD:	“ When you are in the land the Lord your God is giving you , someone may be found murdered in a field , and you do n't know who committed the murder .

ID:	18
INPUT:	▁Ez kon tza ▁e ta ▁di bor tzi o a
PRED:	Teaching about the Messiah
GOLD:	Discussion about Divorce and Marriage

ID:	19
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ho ri ek ▁di ra ▁Jau na ren ▁fes ta bu ru ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁ho ri e tan ▁ba tzar ▁sak ra tu a ▁os pa tu ko ▁du zu e ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁o ho rez ▁o pa ri ak ▁es kain tze ko ▁: ▁er re - o pa ri ak ▁e ta ▁la bo re - o pa ri ak ▁, ▁el kar ta sun - o pa ri ak ▁e ta ▁i sur - o pa ri ak ▁, ▁jai ▁ba koi tza ri ▁da go ki on ▁a ra be ra ▁;
PRED:	“ These are the instructions of the Lord and the offerings of the Lord . This is a permanent law for the Lord , a burnt offering , grain offerings , and peace offerings , and peace offerings , liquid offerings , and peace offerings , and peace offerings , and peace offerings .
GOLD:	( “ These are the Lord 's appointed festivals . Celebrate them each year as official days for holy assembly by presenting special gifts to the Lord — burnt offerings , grain offerings , sacrifices , and liquid offerings — each on its proper day .

ID:	20
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁as mo en ▁a ra be ra ko ▁na hi ga be ak ▁sal ba me ne ra ▁ga ra ma tzan ▁bi zi - al da ke ta ▁da kar ▁on do ri o ▁, ▁e ta ▁hor re taz ▁da mu tu ▁be har rik ▁ez ▁da go ▁. ▁Mun du ▁ho ne ta tik ▁da tor ki gun ▁na hi ga be ak ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁he ri o tza ra ▁e ra ma ten ▁gai tu ▁.
PRED:	For we wanted to listen to God 's mysterious plan , which is going to save us from the east of the world . And we know that we are not going to bring us back to the world .
GOLD:	For the kind of sorrow God wants us to experience leads us away from sin and results in salvation . There 's no regret for that kind of sorrow . But worldly sorrow , which lacks repentance , results in spiritual death .

ID:	21
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁gal de gin ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Zer ▁na hi ▁du zu ▁ni re gan dik ▁? ▁I tsu ak ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁Ber ri ro ▁i kus te a ▁, ▁Jau na ▁.
PRED:	“ What do you want to do ? ” Jesus asked . “ What do you want to see ? ” “ Lord , ” he said .
GOLD:	“ What do you want me to do for you ? ” Jesus asked. “ My Rabbi , ” the blind man said , “ I want to see ! ”

ID:	22
INPUT:	▁« ▁Zi lar ra ▁ka le ra ▁bo ta ko ▁du te ▁, ▁ur re a ▁za bor tzat ▁har tu ko.Ez ▁ur re ak ▁, ▁ez ▁zi lar rak ▁, ▁ez ▁di tu ▁lib ra tu koJau na ren ▁su min - e gu ne an ▁, ▁ur re ak ▁e ta ▁zi lar ra ke ra gin ▁bai tzi e ten ▁be ka tu.Ez ▁di e te ▁go se a ▁a se ko ▁, ▁ez ta ▁sa be lak ▁e re ▁be te ko ▁.
PRED:	“ You will be thrown into silver and gold , silver , silver , and gold , and no one will be able to save them from the Lord ; the Lord will help them ; he will help them ; he will not help them .
GOLD:	“ They will throw their money in the streets , tossing it out like worthless trash.Their silver and gold wo n't save themon that day of the Lord 's anger.It will neither satisfy nor feed them , for their greed can only trip them up .

ID:	23
INPUT:	▁E ma ku me ak ▁, ▁or du an ▁: ▁— ▁An tzi na ▁e san ▁o hi ▁zu ten ▁: ▁« ▁Gal de tze ko tan ▁, ▁gal de tu ▁A bel ▁hi ri an ▁, ▁e ta ▁ki to ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ Well , ” the woman said to them , “ we 're going to ask you , ‘ What are you doing ? '
GOLD:	Then she continued , “ There used to be a saying , ‘ If you want to settle an argument , ask advice at the town of Abel . '

ID:	24
INPUT:	▁En tzun ▁ze nu ten ▁i ra gar pe na ▁: ▁den - de na ▁be te ▁de la ▁i ku si rik ▁, ▁ez ▁o te ▁du zu e ▁i ra gar ri ko ▁? ▁E ta ▁o rain ▁gau za ▁ber ri a ka di e ra zi ko ▁diz ki zu et ▁, ▁ez ▁da kiz ki zu en ▁ger ta ▁gau za ▁ez ku tu ak ▁;
PRED:	You heard that you were saying , ‘ Do n't you see what is right ? Do n't you see what we have seen ? Do n't you know what we have seen ? '
GOLD:	You have heard my predictions and seen them fulfilled , but you refuse to admit it.Now I will tell you new things , secrets you have not yet heard .

ID:	25
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zai tza te la ▁i nork ▁ar gu di o ▁hu tsa lez ▁li lu ra ▁, ▁hor re xe ga tik ▁piz ten ▁bai ta ▁Jain ko a ren ▁ha ser re a ▁er re bel de en ▁aur ka ▁.
PRED:	Do n't let anyone be ashamed of these things so that no one will suffer for God 's fierce anger .
GOLD:	Do n't be fooled by those who try to excuse these sins , for the anger of God will fall on all who disobey him .

ID:	26
INPUT:	▁Za ka ri as ▁, ▁haur ra ren ▁ai ta ▁, ▁Es pi ri tu ▁San tu az ▁be te rik ▁, ▁pro fe ta ▁be za la ▁min tza tu ▁zen ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁:
PRED:	Zechariah 's child was full of the Holy Spirit , just as he said .
GOLD:	Then his father , Zechariah , was filled with the Holy Spirit and gave this prophecy :

ID:	27
INPUT:	▁E ma ku me ak ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁E li a si ▁: ▁— ▁O rain ▁ba da kit ▁Jain ko a ren ▁gi zo na ▁za re na ▁, ▁e ta ▁zuk ▁di o zu na ▁e gi az ▁Jau na ren ▁hi tza ▁de na ▁.
PRED:	She said to Elijah , “ Now I am the man of God , and you are lying in the Lord 's presence . ”
GOLD:	Then the woman told Elijah , “ Now I know for sure that you are a man of God , and that the Lord truly speaks through you . ”

ID:	28
INPUT:	▁Ju dak ▁e re ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁, ▁be re ▁Jain ko a ren ▁, ▁a gin du ak ▁be te ▁or dez ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁e ra ra ▁jo ka tu ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	But Judah did not obey the commands of the Lord , the God of Israel , just as he had done .
GOLD:	But even the people of Judah refused to obey the commands of the Lord their God , for they followed the evil practices that Israel had introduced .

ID:	29
INPUT:	▁Gaiz ta ke ri ak ▁hil ko ▁du ▁gaiz to a ▁, ▁zin tzo a ri ▁gor ro to ▁di o te nek ▁zi gor ra ▁i zan go ▁.
PRED:	The wicked will die , but those who hate the wicked will be punished .
GOLD:	But the Lord will redeem those who serve him.No one who takes refuge in him will be condemned .

ID:	30
INPUT:	▁Sa mu e lek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁Sau li ▁: ▁— ▁Neu ▁nau zu ▁i kus le a ▁. ▁I go ▁ni re ▁aur re tik ▁mui no ra ▁e ta ▁ni re kin ▁jan go ▁du zu e ▁gaur ▁. ▁Bi har ▁goi ze an ▁u tzi ko ▁di zut ▁jo a ten ▁, ▁ja kin ▁na hi ▁du zun ▁guz ti a ▁e san ▁on do ren ▁.
PRED:	“ Yes , ” Samuel replied . “ I am going to see you , and you will know that I am going on on the top of the mountain . You will know that I am going to eat it . ”
GOLD:	“ I am the seer ! ” Samuel replied . “ Go up to the place of worship ahead of me . We will eat there together , and in the morning I 'll tell you what you want to know and send you on your way .

ID:	31
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁pen tsa ▁: ▁Moi se sek ▁er dain kun tza ren ▁le ge a ▁e zar ri ▁zi zu en ▁( ▁e gi a ▁e san ▁, ▁o hi tu ra ▁hau ▁ez ▁zen ▁Moi se se kin ▁ha si ▁, ▁ar ba so e kin ▁bai no ▁) ▁, ▁e ta ▁la run ba tez ▁e re ▁er dain du ▁o hi ▁du zu e ▁gi zo na ▁.
PRED:	But Moses said to them , “ This is what the law of Moses says : If you do n't want to obey the law of Moses and the people , you must pay attention to the Sabbath .
GOLD:	But you work on the Sabbath , too , when you obey Moses ' law of circumcision . ( Actually , this tradition of circumcision began with the patriarchs , long before the law of Moses . )

ID:	32
INPUT:	▁Goi - goi ko a ren ▁aur ka ▁bi ra o ka ▁a ri tu ko ▁da ▁e ta ▁her ri ▁san tu a ▁gaiz ki ▁e ra bi li ko ▁du ▁: ▁jai ak ▁e ta ▁le ge a ▁al da tu ▁na hi ▁i zan go ▁di tu ▁. ▁Hi ru ▁ur te ▁e ta ▁er diz ▁e gon go ▁da ▁her ri ▁san tu a ▁ha ren ▁men pe an ▁.
PRED:	The Most High will stand against the Most High in the Most Holy Place and the people of the Most High . He will rule over the earth , and there will be three years old .
GOLD:	He will defy the Most High and oppress the holy people of the Most High . He will try to change their sacred festivals and laws , and they will be placed under his control for a time , times , and half a time .

ID:	33
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁e ran tsi ▁zi dan ▁: ▁« ▁Gi za se me ▁, ▁o gi - hor ni du ra ▁ken du ko ▁di ot ▁Je ru sa le mi ▁; ▁mu ga tu a ▁e ta ▁lar ri ▁jan go ▁du te ▁o gi a ▁, ▁u ra ▁e re ▁neur tu a ▁e ta ▁i ka raz ▁e dan go ▁.
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Son of man , go over to Jerusalem and bury them with food . Then I will eat the water and drink it .
GOLD:	Then he told me , “ Son of man , I will make food very scarce in Jerusalem . It will be weighed out with great care and eaten fearfully . The water will be rationed out drop by drop , and the people will drink it with dismay .

ID:	34
INPUT:	▁Sa mu e lek ▁, ▁za har tu ▁ze ne an ▁, ▁be re ▁se me ak ▁jar ri ▁zi tu en ▁Is ra e len ▁bu ru za gi ▁.
PRED:	When Samuel learned what Samuel had done , he followed the example of Israel .
GOLD:	As Samuel grew old , he appointed his sons to be judges over Israel .

ID:	35
INPUT:	▁Be gi ra ▁, ▁Jain ko ak ▁be re ▁ja kin du ri a ▁a ger tu ▁du e ne an ▁, ▁gi za ki ak ▁ez ▁di ra ▁gau za ▁i zan ▁be ren ▁ja kin du ri az ▁Jain ko a ▁e za gu tze ko ▁; ▁hor re ga tik ▁, ▁Jain ko ak ▁, ▁guk ▁hots ▁e gi ten ▁du gun ▁zo ra ke ri a ren ▁bi tar tez ▁sal ba tu ▁na hi ▁i zan ▁di tu ▁fe de du nak ▁.
PRED:	For we know that God has revealed to us , but we do n't know what we are doing . We know that we are following the Good News of God . And we know that we can be saved .
GOLD:	Since God in his wisdom saw to it that the world would never know him through human wisdom , he has used our foolish preaching to save those who believe .

ID:	36
INPUT:	▁Is ra el dar rek ▁gal de tzen ▁zu ten ▁: ▁« ▁Is ra el go ▁lei nu e ta tik ▁zein ▁da ▁Jau na ren ▁ai tzi ne an ▁e gi ten ▁a ri ▁ga ren ▁bil tzar re ra ▁e tor ri ▁ez ▁de na ▁? ▁» ▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁zin ▁han di a ▁e gi na ▁zu ten ▁, ▁hil ▁e gin go ▁zu te la ▁Mitz pa ra ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁aur re ko ▁bil tzar re ra ▁, ▁jo an ▁ez ▁ze di na ▁.
PRED:	The Israelites asked , “ Who is the tribes of Israel ? The people of Israel will come to fight against the Lord , and they will be killed by the sword of the Lord 's people , and they will be killed in Mizpah . ”
GOLD:	Then they said , “ Who among the tribes of Israel did not join us at Mizpah when we held our assembly in the presence of the Lord ? ” At that time they had taken a solemn oath in the Lord 's presence , vowing that anyone who refused to come would be put to death .

ID:	37
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁di o ▁: ▁« ▁Ba sa mor tu ko ▁hai ze ak ▁da ra man las to a ▁be za la sa ka ba na tu ko ▁zai tuz tet ▁.
PRED:	“ The Lord says , “ I will scatter you like chaff in the desert .
GOLD:	“ I will scatter you like chaffthat is blown away by the desert winds .

ID:	38
INPUT:	▁« ▁Kon tuz ▁le ge - mai su e kin ▁! ▁Go go ko ▁bai tu te ▁har ro - har ro ▁jan tzi ta ▁i bil tze a ▁e ta ▁pla ze tan ▁jen de ak ▁be rai ei ▁a gur ▁e gi te a ▁; ▁go go ko ▁di tuz te ▁si na go ge tan ▁le he nen go ▁aul ki ak ▁e ta ▁jai - o tor du e tan ▁ma hai bu ru ak ▁;
PRED:	“ Beware of the teachers of religious law ! Let them walk in the synagogues and walk in the marketplaces . They sit in the synagogues and sit on the seats of honor in the synagogues and in the synagogues and in the synagogues .
GOLD:	“ Beware of these teachers of religious law ! For they like to parade around in flowing robes and love to receive respectful greetings as they walk in the marketplaces . And how they love the seats of honor in the synagogues and the head table at banquets .

ID:	39
INPUT:	▁Zeu re ▁mai ta le en ▁es ku ▁u tzi ko ▁zai tut ▁; ▁zu re ▁pros ti tu zi o - le ku ak ▁sun tsi tu ▁e ta ▁e rai tsi ko ▁di tuz te ▁; ▁soi ne ko ak ▁e ran tzi ▁, ▁bi txi ▁zo ra gar ri ak ▁ken du ▁e ta ▁jan tzi rik ▁ga be ▁u tzi ko ▁zai tuz te ▁, ▁lar ru gor ri an ▁.
PRED:	I will hand you over your lovers , and you will abandon you . You will abandon you and rob you of your clothing , and you will be stripped away .
GOLD:	Then I will give you to these many nations who are your lovers , and they will destroy you . They will knock down your pagan shrines and the altars to your idols . They will strip you and take your beautiful jewels , leaving you stark naked .

ID:	40
INPUT:	▁i zan ▁e re ▁, ▁Jain ko ak ▁zer bait ▁ho be a ▁pres ta tu ▁zu en ▁gu re tzat ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁zu en ▁na hi ▁i zan ▁hai ek ▁hel mu ga ra ▁gu ▁ga be ▁i ris te rik ▁.
PRED:	For God chose some of you to prepare a meal for you , and he was n't ready for us .
GOLD:	For God had something better in mind for us , so that they would not reach perfection without us .

ID:	41
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁di o ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁« ▁Kei nu ▁e gin go ▁di et ▁na zi o ei ▁, ▁neu re ▁ban de ra ▁ja so ko ▁her ri en tzat ▁: ▁be so e tan ▁e kar ri ko ▁di tuz te zu re ▁se me ak ▁, ▁le po an ▁zu re ▁a la bak ▁.
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will bring my people out of Keilah , and I will give you their children as their inheritance .
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ See , I will give a signal to the godless nations.They will carry your little sons back to you in their arms ; they will bring your daughters on their shoulders .

ID:	42
INPUT:	▁O gi - o pa ri a
PRED:	Procedures for the Burnt Offering
GOLD:	Penalty for Breaking the Sabbath

ID:	43
INPUT:	▁E ma ku me ak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Jau na ▁, ▁pro fe ta ▁za re la ▁i kus ten ▁dut ▁.
PRED:	“ Lord , ” she said to her , “ you are a prophet . ”
GOLD:	“ Sir , ” the woman said , “ you must be a prophet .

ID:	44
INPUT:	▁Bi hoz ber ri ▁zai tez te ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁e ta ▁i tzu li ▁Jain ko a ren ga na ▁, ▁be ka tu ak ▁ken ▁da kiz ki zu en ▁;
PRED:	Repent of your sins and turn away from God , and turn away from God .
GOLD:	Now repent of your sins and turn to God , so that your sins may be wiped away .

ID:	45
INPUT:	▁Jain ko ak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁« ▁Ni ▁Jain ko ▁A hal tsu a <unk> do ren go ▁u ga ri ▁i zan go ▁du <unk> re ▁ge hi a go ▁, ▁na zi o ▁as ko ▁sor tu ko ▁di tu zu ▁, ▁e ta ▁er re ge ak ▁a te ra ko ▁di ra zu re gan dik ▁.
PRED:	Then God said to him , “ As surely as the Almighty lives , your master will become a wild donkey , and you will be your master .
GOLD:	Then God said , “ I am El-Shaddai — ‘ God Almighty . ' Be fruitful and multiply . You will become a great nation , even many nations . Kings will be among your descendants !

ID:	46
INPUT:	▁Ja ko bek ▁, ▁zu <unk> ▁, ▁hur <unk> ▁e ta ▁pla ta no - zi ri ▁he ze ▁ba tzuk ▁har tu rik ▁, ▁zu ri tu ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁.
PRED:	When Jacob heard what had happened , he took some of his men and put them on a wall .
GOLD:	Then Jacob took some fresh branches from poplar , almond , and plane trees and peeled off strips of bark , making white streaks on them .

ID:	47
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁ez ▁du gu ▁par te rik ▁i zan go ▁Jor da nez ▁bes te ▁al de ko ▁lur - ba na ke tan ▁, ▁gu ri ▁da go ki gun ▁on da re a ▁Jor da nez ▁al de ▁ho ne tan ▁, ▁e ki al de an ▁, ▁bai tau ka gu ▁.
PRED:	But we will never cross the Jordan River into the land of the Jordan River , for we are in the east side of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	But we do not claim any of the land on the other side of the Jordan . We would rather live here on the east side and accept this as our grant of land . ”

ID:	48
INPUT:	▁kar ra tu a ▁: ▁me tro ▁er di ▁bat ▁lu ze - za bal ▁e ta ▁me tro ▁bat ▁go ra ▁. ▁Al da re - er tze ko ▁a dar rek ▁gor putz ▁bat ▁be ra ▁e gin go ▁du te ▁al da re a re kin ▁.
PRED:	The top of the altar will be a square , measuring feet long . There will be an altar with each piece of blue cloth .
GOLD:	Make it 18 inches square and 36 inches high , with horns at the corners carved from the same piece of wood as the altar itself .

ID:	49
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁le ge - mai su ak ▁sa la tu
PRED:	The True Family of Jesus
GOLD:	The Widow 's Offering

ID:	50
INPUT:	▁Zu ▁nor ▁za ren ▁ja ki na ra zi ▁di et ▁, ▁e ta ▁aur re ran tze an ▁e re ▁ja ki na ra zi ko ▁, ▁zuk ▁di da zun ▁mai ta su na ▁hau en gan ▁i zan ▁da din ▁, ▁e ta ▁ni ▁neu ▁e re ▁hau en gan ▁i zan ▁na din ▁» ▁.
PRED:	I know that you have found favor with you , and I will show you your love and love . And I am the one who loves you . ”
GOLD:	I have revealed you to them , and I will continue to do so . Then your love for me will be in them , and I will be in them . ”

ID:	51
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁be gi ra tze an ▁, ▁er re ge a ▁i ku si ▁zu en ▁o hol tza ren ▁gai ne an ▁zu tik ▁, ▁tenplu a ren ▁sar re ran ▁. ▁Bu ru za gi ak ▁e ta ▁tu ru ta - jo tzai le ak ▁er re ge a ren ▁on do an ▁zeu den ▁; ▁her ri ko ▁jen de a ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁po zez ▁be te rik ▁ze bi len ▁, ▁tu ru ta ren ▁soi nu ra ▁. ▁Kan ta ri ek ▁, ▁be ren ▁mu si ka - tres nak ▁joz ▁, ▁go res pen - kan tu ak ▁zu zen tzen ▁zi tuz ten ▁. ▁Or du an ▁, ▁A ta li ak ▁, ▁be re ▁soi ne ko ak ▁ur ra tuz ▁, ▁gar ra si ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁: ▁— ▁Trai zi o a ▁! ▁Trai zi o a ▁!
PRED:	When he saw the king sitting on the Temple 's head , he saw the crown of the Temple standing on the head of the king 's Temple . And when he saw the sound of the trumpets , the trumpets , trumpets , trumpets , trumpets , and joy of the Lord .
GOLD:	When she arrived , she saw the newly crowned king standing in his place of authority by the pillar at the Temple entrance . The commanders and trumpeters were surrounding him , and people from all over the land were rejoicing and blowing trumpets . Singers with musical instruments were leading the people in a great celebration . When Athaliah saw all this , she tore her clothes in despair and shouted , “ Treason ! Treason ! ”

ID:	52
INPUT:	▁Jain ko ▁gu re ▁Ai tak ▁e man ▁bi e zaz ki zu e ▁gra zi a ▁e ta ▁ba ke a ▁.
PRED:	May God our Father give you grace and peace .
GOLD:	We are writing to God 's holy people in the city of Colosse , who are faithful brothers and sisters in Christ.May God our Father give you grace and peace .

ID:	53
INPUT:	▁Ke na zen ▁se me ▁e ta ▁Ka le ben ▁a nai a ▁gaz te e nak ▁, ▁Ot ni e lek ▁, ▁har tu ▁zu en ▁hi ri a ▁, ▁e ta ▁Ka le bek ▁be re ▁a la ba ▁Ak sa ▁e man ▁zi on ▁e maz te tzat ▁.
PRED:	Caleb son of Jephunneh and gave him his brother 's wife , and he took her to Caleb 's wife . He gave her daughter to Caleb gave her daughter as his wife .
GOLD:	Othniel , the son of Caleb 's younger brother , Kenaz , was the one who conquered it , so Acsah became Othniel 's wife .

ID:	54
INPUT:	▁Ped ro ▁e ta ▁Kor ne li o
PRED:	Peter and Cornelius .
GOLD:	Cornelius Calls for Peter

ID:	55
INPUT:	▁hau ▁Jo a na ne na ▁, ▁hau ▁Re sa re na ▁, ▁hau ▁Zo ro ba be le na ▁, ▁hau ▁Sa la ti e le na ▁, ▁hau ▁Ne ri re na ▁,
PRED:	Zerubbabel was the son of Shelah , who was the son of Shelah , son of Jehoiada , son of Joiarib .
GOLD:	Joda was the son of Joanan.Joanan was the son of Rhesa.Rhesa was the son of Zerubbabel.Zerubbabel was the son of Shealtiel.Shealtiel was the son of Neri .

ID:	56
INPUT:	▁Sa mu e len ▁az ken ▁hi tzal di a
PRED:	Samuel Predicts His Death
GOLD:	Samuel 's Farewell Address

ID:	57
INPUT:	▁Mor roi ek ▁a di e ra zi ▁zi o ten ▁Sau li ▁: ▁— ▁Ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zai gu ▁Da vid ▁.
PRED:	Then the brothers said to Saul , “ We have brought you back to Saul . ”
GOLD:	When Saul 's men reported this back to the king ,

ID:	58
INPUT:	▁Sol da du ek ▁e re ▁gal de tu ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁— ▁E ta ▁guk ▁, ▁zer ▁e gin ▁be har ▁du gu ▁? ▁Jo a nek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁Ez ▁a te ra ▁i no ri ▁di ru rik ▁go gor ke ri az ▁, ▁ez ta ▁ge zur rez ko ▁sa la kun tzaz ▁e re ▁; ▁kon for ma ▁zai tez te ▁dau ka zu en ▁sol da ta re kin ▁.
PRED:	The soldiers asked him , “ What should we do ? ” “ We do n't need to do ? ” Joshua replied . “ We do n't tell you what is going to do . ”
GOLD:	“ What should we do ? ” asked some soldiers.John replied , “ Do n't extort money or make false accusations . And be content with your pay . ”

ID:	59
INPUT:	▁mun du ak ▁ba li o ga be tzat ▁e ta ▁mes pre txa gar ri tzat ▁du e na ▁, ▁mun du a ren ▁be gi tan ▁e ze rez ▁de na ▁, ▁au ke ra tu ▁du ▁Jain ko ak ▁, ▁zer bait ▁di re la ▁us te ▁du te nak ▁e ze rez te ko ▁;
PRED:	Those who despise the world and despise those who despise the name of the Lord , who are despised by the world .
GOLD:	God chose things despised by the world , things counted as nothing at all , and used them to bring to nothing what the world considers important .

ID:	60
INPUT:	▁« ▁Hau ▁di ot ▁nik ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁Hon da tu ri ko ▁hi ri ▁bi hur tu ko ▁zai tu da ne an ▁— ▁jen de rik ▁ga be ko ▁hi ri ak ▁be za la ▁— ▁, ▁i tsas ▁lei ze a ▁zu re ▁aur ka ▁al txa ra zi ▁e ta ▁ur ▁han di ek ▁es ta li ko ▁zai tuz te ne an ▁,
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Because you have become desolate , you will be destroyed in the sea , like the sea , the sea , the sea , and the sea will be scattered .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will make Tyre an uninhabited ruin , like many others . I will bury you beneath the terrible waves of enemy attack . Great seas will swallow you .

ID:	61
INPUT:	▁Me si as ▁e tor ri ko ▁de ne an ▁, ▁ez ▁du ▁i nork ▁ja kin go ▁non go a ▁den ▁; ▁hau ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁ba da ki gu ▁non go a ▁den ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But when no one comes from the time , no one will know where he is coming , where he is coming . ”
GOLD:	But how could he be ? For we know where this man comes from . When the Messiah comes , he will simply appear ; no one will know where he comes from . ”

ID:	62
INPUT:	▁Bes te ▁ba te an ▁, ▁Si ri a ko ▁er re ge ▁Ben - Ha da dek ▁, ▁be re ▁gu da ros te ▁o so a ▁bil du rik ▁, ▁se ti a tu ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁Sa ma ri a ▁.
PRED:	One day King Hazael of Aram mobilized his entire army , and he mobilized his entire army .
GOLD:	Some time later , however , King Ben-hadad of Aram mustered his entire army and besieged Samaria .

ID:	63
INPUT:	▁Ho na ko ▁hau ek ▁zi ren ▁Ju da ren ▁lei nu ko ek ▁he go al de ko ▁er tze an ▁, ▁E dom go ▁mu ga ▁in gu ru an ▁, ▁zi tuz ten ▁hi ri ak ▁: ▁Kab tze el ▁, ▁E der ▁, ▁Ja gur ▁,
PRED:	These were the clans of Judah . Their territory included all the towns of Judah : Moab , Moab ,
GOLD:	The towns of Judah situated along the borders of Edom in the extreme south were Kabzeel , Eder , Jagur ,

ID:	64
INPUT:	▁Zu ek ▁ez ▁jo ka tu ▁hor re la ▁. ▁Zu en ▁ar te an ▁na gu si e na ▁i zan ▁be di ▁gaz te e na ren ▁pa re ko ▁, ▁e ta ▁a gin ta ri a ▁zer bi tza ri a ren ▁pa re ko ▁.
PRED:	You have no respect for yourself . You have no respect for your servant .
GOLD:	But among you it will be different . Those who are the greatest among you should take the lowest rank , and the leader should be like a servant .

ID:	65
INPUT:	▁A me tsa ▁e ta ▁e sa na hi a ▁en tzun ▁zi tu e ne an ▁, ▁Ge de o nek ▁, ▁ma kur tuz ▁, ▁Jain ko a ▁gur tu ▁zu en ▁. ▁Ge ro ▁, ▁is ra el dar ren ▁kan pa le ku ra ▁i tzu li ▁zen ▁oi hu ka ▁: ▁— ▁Jai ki ▁! ▁Gu re ▁es ku ▁u tzi ▁du ▁Jau nak ▁ma di an dar ren ▁kan pa le ku a ▁!
PRED:	When Gideon heard what was happening , he bowed down to the ground and bowed low to the camp . “ Come , ” he said . “ Come back to the camp ! ” So the people of Israel left the camp .
GOLD:	When Gideon heard the dream and its interpretation , he bowed in worship before the Lord . Then he returned to the Israelite camp and shouted , “ Get up ! For the Lord has given you victory over the Midianite hordes ! ”

ID:	66
INPUT:	▁Lur ral de a ▁es tal tzen ▁du en ▁ho dei ▁bel tzak ▁be za la ▁, ▁ni re ▁her ri ▁Is ra e li ▁e ra so ko ▁di o zu ▁. ▁Az ken ▁ga rai a ▁i ris te an ▁, ▁neu re ▁her ri a ren ▁kon tra ▁e tor ra ra zi ko ▁zai tut ▁, ▁neu re ▁san tu ta su na ▁zu re ▁bi tar tez ▁, ▁oi ▁Gog ▁, ▁be rai en ▁aur re an ▁a ger tu ko ▁du da ne an ▁, ▁na zi o ek ▁ai tor ▁na za ten ▁.
PRED:	The land of Israel will be like a cloud of the sea , like a warrior in the face of the sea , and I will bring you back to the ends of the earth . Then you will live in the land of the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	and you will attack my people Israel , covering their land like a cloud . At that time in the distant future , I will bring you against my land as everyone watches , and my holiness will be displayed by what happens to you , Gog . Then all the nations will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	67
INPUT:	▁Jau na ▁na zi o ▁guz ti en ▁gai ne an ▁ga rai ▁, ▁ha ren ▁os pe a ▁ze ru ak ▁bai no ▁go ra go ▁.
PRED:	He has thrown us into the sea , higher than the heavens .
GOLD:	For the Lord is high above the nations ; his glory is higher than the heavens .

ID:	68
INPUT:	▁Be rai ek ▁kon ta tzen ▁du te ▁, ▁hain ▁zu zen ▁, ▁no la ko ▁har re ra ▁e gin ▁ze ni gu ten ▁zu en ga na ▁jo an ▁gi ne ne an ▁e ta ▁no la ▁, ▁sa si jain ko ak ▁u tzi rik ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁bi zi ▁e ta ▁e gi az ko a ga na ▁i tzu li ▁zi ne ten ▁, ▁be rau ▁zer bi tza tze ko
PRED:	You know how he was going to happen to you , so that you would follow the example of the idols you had made . He made them gods , so they would serve God .
GOLD:	for they keep talking about the wonderful welcome you gave us and how you turned away from idols to serve the living and true God .

ID:	69
INPUT:	▁La bo re - o pa ri ▁e ta ▁i sur - o pa ri ▁ber di na ▁e gin go ▁du zu ▁i lu na bar re an ▁bes te ▁ar ku me a re kin ▁, ▁e ta ▁Jau nak ▁a tse gi nez ▁o nar tu ko ▁du ▁be re ▁o ho rez ▁er re ta ko ▁o pa ri a ▁.
PRED:	If you present a liquid offering to the Lord , you will be a pleasing aroma to the Lord . It will be a pleasing aroma to the Lord , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	Offer the other lamb in the evening , along with the same offerings of flour and wine as in the morning . It will be a pleasing aroma , a special gift presented to the Lord .

ID:	70
INPUT:	▁geu re ▁be ka tu en ga tik ▁hi lik ▁geun de la rik ▁, ▁bi zi a ▁e man ▁zi gun ▁Kris to re kin ▁ba te ra ▁— ▁on gi na hi ▁hu tsez ▁sal ba tu ▁zai tuz te ▁! ▁— ▁;
PRED:	For we were dead because we were dead because we were with Christ . And we have been saved by the grace of Christ .
GOLD:	that even though we were dead because of our sins , he gave us life when he raised Christ from the dead . ( It is only by God 's grace that you have been saved ! )

ID:	71
INPUT:	▁Gaz te ▁i zan ▁nin tzen ▁, ▁o rain ▁za har tu rik ▁na go ▁: ▁ez ▁dut ▁se ku la ▁i ku si ▁zin tzo a ▁ber tan ▁be he ra ▁u tzi a ▁, ▁ez ta ▁ha ren ▁on do ren go rik ▁e re ▁o gi ▁es ke an ▁.
PRED:	I was now old when I saw that I was dead , no longer I saw that I was dead . I would n't have seen it .
GOLD:	Once I was young , and now I am old.Yet I have never seen the godly abandonedor their children begging for bread .

ID:	72
INPUT:	▁E ra man go ▁di tut ▁, ▁os te ra ▁, ▁zu en ▁se me - a la bak ▁, ▁ga ti bu ▁e ro ri ko ▁zi re la ▁ze ni o te nak ▁, ▁zu ek ▁gu txi e tsi ▁du zu en ▁lur ral de ra ▁, ▁har taz ▁go za tze ko ▁.
PRED:	Yes , I will give you victory over your children and daughters . You will remember that your children did not obey the land you promised .
GOLD:	“ ‘ You said your children would be carried off as plunder . Well , I will bring them safely into the land , and they will enjoy what you have despised .

ID:	73
INPUT:	▁Is ma e lek ▁er ro mes - tal de a ▁hil
PRED:	The Death of Israel
GOLD:	The Murder of Gedaliah

ID:	74
INPUT:	▁E san da ko ▁on ▁guz ti ak ▁e man go ▁diz ki zu ▁Jau nak ▁e ta ▁zu ▁, ▁e ne ▁jau na ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁bu ru za gi ▁e gi nen ▁zai tu ▁.
PRED:	He will tell you everything the Lord has promised , and he will make you king of Israel , just as he has promised .
GOLD:	When the Lord has done all he promised and has made you leader of Israel ,

ID:	75
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren ▁ha ser re a ▁. ▁Ur ru ti ko ▁her ri ▁ba ti ▁dei
PRED:	The Lord 's anger will call on Israel 's name .
GOLD:	Judah 's Guilt and Judgment

ID:	76
INPUT:	▁Guk ▁ba da ki gu ▁he ri o tza tik ▁bi zi ra ▁i ra gan ▁ga re na ▁, ▁e ta ▁hau ▁ja kin ▁, ▁se ni de ak ▁mai te ▁di tu gu la ko ▁da ki gu ▁. ▁Mai te ▁ez ▁du e na ▁he ri o tza ren ▁men pe ▁da go ▁.
PRED:	We know that we are going to live , and we know that we are alive . We know that we love the one who loves us . ”
GOLD:	If we love our brothers and sisters who are believers , it proves that we have passed from death to life . But a person who has no love is still dead .

ID:	77
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁neuk ▁bu ru tu ko ▁dut ▁i tu na ▁zu re kin ▁, ▁e ta ▁or du an ▁ja kin go ▁du zu ▁ni ▁nai ze la ▁Jau na ▁.
PRED:	Then I will raise my head and raise it up , and you will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And I will reaffirm my covenant with you , and you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	78
INPUT:	▁Zer tan ▁e kar ri ▁gai tu ▁Jau nak ▁lur ral de ▁ho ne ta ra ▁: ▁gu ▁ger ran ▁e ror tze ko ▁e ta ▁gu re ▁e maz te ▁e ta ▁se me - a la bak ▁ga ti bu ▁bi hur tze ko ▁? ▁Ez ▁o te ▁ge nu ke ▁ho be ▁E gip to ra ▁i tzu li ▁? ▁»
PRED:	So the Lord said to us , “ Why did we fall into the land of Egypt ? Why did n't we let our children go back to Egypt ? Why did n't we return to Egypt ? ”
GOLD:	“ Why is the Lord taking us to this country only to have us die in battle ? Our wives and our little ones will be carried off as plunder ! Would n't it be better for us to return to Egypt ? ”

ID:	79
INPUT:	▁No e mik ▁e san ▁zi on ▁Ru ti ▁: ▁— ▁Bai ▁, ▁a la ba ▁, ▁as koz ▁ho be ▁du zu ▁Bo o zen ▁so ro an ▁be ra ren ▁mor roi e kin ▁lan ▁e gin ▁, ▁bes te ▁i no ren ▁so ro tan ▁go gai ta raz ▁ez ▁zai tza ten ▁.
PRED:	Naomi said to Naomi , “ Look , your daughter is the heir to your master 's servant , your servant , and do n't work with your fields . ”
GOLD:	“ Good ! ” Naomi exclaimed . “ Do as he said , my daughter . Stay with his young women right through the whole harvest . You might be harassed in other fields , but you 'll be safe with him . ”

ID:	80
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁, ▁Pau lok ▁, ▁ez ▁gi za ▁a gin duz ▁e do ▁i zen da pe nez ▁, ▁Je su ▁Kris to ren ▁e ta ▁hau ▁hil da ko en ▁ar te tik ▁piz tu ▁zu en ▁Jain ko ▁Ai ta ren ▁i zen da pe nez ▁bai zik ▁a pos to lu ▁nai zen ▁ho nek ▁,
PRED:	This letter is from Paul , chosen by the authority of Christ Jesus , who was chosen by the resurrection of the dead . This is the Good News that I am the Father of God .
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , an apostle . I was not appointed by any group of people or any human authority , but by Jesus Christ himself and by God the Father , who raised Jesus from the dead .

ID:	81
INPUT:	▁Ho gei ▁gi zo ne kin ▁jo an ▁zen ▁Heb ro ne ra ▁, ▁Da vi den ga na ▁. ▁Ho nek ▁o tor du a ▁e man ▁zi en ▁Ab ner ri ▁e ta ▁be ro ne kin ▁jo an ▁zi re nei ▁.
PRED:	So David and his men went to Hebron to Hebron .
GOLD:	When Abner and twenty of his men came to Hebron , David entertained them with a great feast .

ID:	82
INPUT:	▁Aur ki tzen ▁zi tu en ▁e do nor ki rensten ▁zi tu en ▁; ▁e tsai ek ▁ho ne la ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁“ ▁Guk ▁ez ▁du gu ▁er ru rik ▁, ▁be ro ri ek ▁e gin ▁bai tu te ▁be ka <unk> na ren ▁aur ka ▁” ▁» ▁.Jau na ▁da ▁jus ti zi a ren ▁bar ru ti ▁, ▁gu ra so en ▁i txa ro pen ▁!
PRED:	Not one of them attacked them , and they said , ‘ We have sinned against you , but we have not sinned against the Lord , have spoken ! '
GOLD:	All who found them devoured them.Their enemies said , ‘ We did nothing wrong in attacking them , for they sinned against the Lord , their true place of rest , and the hope of their ancestors . '

ID:	83
INPUT:	▁Ga ba o nen ▁da go en ▁har ri ▁han di a ren ▁in gu ru ra ▁hel tze an ▁, ▁han ▁non ▁da tor ki en ▁A ma sa ▁. ▁Jo a bek ▁gu da - jan tzi a ▁ze ra man ▁soi ne an ▁, ▁ger ri koz ▁lo tu rik ▁e ta ▁ger ri ko tik ▁zin tzi lik ▁ez pa ta ▁be re ▁zor ro an ▁. ▁A ma sa ren ga na ▁aur re ra tze an ▁, ▁ez pa ta ▁e ro ri ▁zi tzai on ▁Jo a bi ▁.
PRED:	When Ahab 's army arrived in Galilee , he saw that he was sitting on the wall of Samaria . He was dressed in burlap , and he was thrown into the royal robes . He was thrown into the boat with his sword .
GOLD:	As they arrived at the great stone in Gibeon , Amasa met them . Joab was wearing his military tunic with a dagger strapped to his belt . As he stepped forward to greet Amasa , he slipped the dagger from its sheath .

ID:	84
INPUT:	▁Big bai re nak <unk> ▁;
PRED:	The family of Zaccai760
GOLD:	The family of Bigvai2,067

ID:	85
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁e san ▁: ▁— ▁Jar ri ▁tra pu ▁za har ▁ho ri ek ▁be sa pe an ▁, ▁so ka ren ▁az pi tik.Ha la ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁Je re mi a sek ▁,
PRED:	“ Follow me , ” they said . “ I want you to go down to the valley of ruins , ” Jeremiah said .
GOLD:	Ebed-melech called down to Jeremiah , “ Put these rags under your armpits to protect you from the ropes. ” Then when Jeremiah was ready ,

ID:	86
INPUT:	▁« ▁Zu re ▁es kui na ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁i zu gar ri ▁in dar tsu ▁! ▁E tsai a ▁de se gin ▁du ▁.
PRED:	“ O Lord , you have rescued me from the power of the sea .
GOLD:	“ Your right hand , O Lord , is glorious in power.Your right hand , O Lord , smashes the enemy .

ID:	87
INPUT:	▁Ai ▁zu ek ▁, ▁e txe a ▁e txe a ri e ta ▁so ro a ▁so ro a ri e ransten ▁di o zu e nok ▁, ▁bes te ak ▁bi zi to ki rik ▁ga be ▁u tziz ▁, ▁lur ral de ▁o so a ren <unk> ▁e ta ▁ja be ▁ba kar ▁i za te ko ▁!
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who say , ‘ Let 's go out into the field , ' but do n't let 's share . ”
GOLD:	What sorrow for you who buy up house after house and field after field , until everyone is evicted and you live alone in the land .

ID:	88
INPUT:	▁Ho ri ek ▁di ra ▁Le ak ▁Ja ko bi ▁Me so po ta mi an ▁sor tu ▁ziz ki on ▁se me ak ▁, ▁Di na ▁be re ▁a la baz ▁gai ne ra ▁; ▁ho gei ta ▁ha ma hi ru ▁guz ti ra ▁, ▁se me - a la ba ▁e ta ▁bi lo ben ▁ar te an ▁.
PRED:	These are the names of the clans descended from the clans of the tribe of Levi — the sons of Jacob — the sons of Jacob . They were both in the boat with their father 's daughters .
GOLD:	These were the sons of Leah and Jacob who were born in Paddan-aram , in addition to their daughter , Dinah . The number of Jacob 's descendants ( male and female ) through Leah was thirty-three .

ID:	89
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁a pal ▁e ta ▁e gon ▁er ne
PRED:	Procedures for the Peace Offering
GOLD:	Peter 's Final Greetings

ID:	90
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ez ▁du zu ▁se xu - har re ma nik ▁i zan go ▁zeu re ▁ar re ba or de a re kin ▁, ▁ai ta ren ▁na hiz ▁a ma ren ▁a la ba re kin ▁, ▁ez ta ▁e txe ▁be re an ▁ha zi ak ▁ez ▁ba za re te ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your sister 's sister , whether she is your mother or mother or mother or mother or mother or sister , or your mother 's sister .
GOLD:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your sister or half sister , whether she is your father 's daughter or your mother 's daughter , whether she was born into your household or someone else 's .

ID:	91
INPUT:	▁E a ▁ba da ▁, ▁sen do tu ▁be so ▁a hul du ak ▁e ta ▁be laun ▁ma kal du ak ▁,
PRED:	And if a strong hand has weak and weak knees ,
GOLD:	So take a new grip with your tired hands and strengthen your weak knees .

ID:	92
INPUT:	▁« ▁He go al de rantz ▁, ▁on do ren go ▁bes te ▁lei nu ▁hau en ▁za ti ak ▁dau de ▁, ▁e ki al de ko ▁mu ga tik ▁Me di ter ra ne o ▁i tsa so rai no ▁he da tuz ▁, ▁or de na ▁ho ne tan ▁: ▁Ben ja min ▁, ▁Si me on ▁, ▁I sa kar ▁, ▁Za bu lon ▁e ta ▁Gad ▁.
PRED:	“ These are the names of the tribes of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Benjamin . But the boundary of Simeon said , “ Zebulun , Zebulun , Issachar , and Simeon .
GOLD:	“ These are the territories allotted to the rest of the tribes . Benjamin 's territory lies just south of the prince 's lands , and it extends across the entire land of Israel from east to west .

ID:	93
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁ha ren ▁gor pu a ▁si maur ▁bi hur tu ko ▁ze la ▁a lor re an ▁, ▁Iz re el go ▁lan dan ▁; ▁i nork ▁e re ▁e zin ▁i zan go ▁zu e la ▁« ▁Hau ▁Je za bel ▁da ▁» ▁e san ▁.
PRED:	and his body was buried in the garden of Jezreel , so no one can say , “ This is what the Lord says : I am the One of Israel ! ”
GOLD:	Her remains will be scattered like dung on the plot of land in Jezreel , so that no one will be able to recognize her . ' ”

ID:	94
INPUT:	▁Go re tsi ko ▁dut ▁Jau na ▁bi zi ▁nai zen ▁ar te an ▁, ▁soi nu a ▁jo ko ▁neu re ▁Jain ko a ri ▁nai zen ▁ar te an ▁.
PRED:	I will praise the Lord , the God of my God , who delights in my evening .
GOLD:	I will praise the Lord as long as I live.I will sing praises to my God with my dying breath .

ID:	95
INPUT:	▁Ne gar ▁e ta ▁ne gar ▁a ri ▁da ▁gau e an ▁, ▁ma sai lak ▁mal koz ▁be te ta.Be re ▁mai ta le en ▁ar te an ▁, ▁ez ▁du ▁nork ▁kon tso la tu rik.A dis ki de ▁guz ti ek ▁za puz tu ▁e gin ▁du te ▁, ▁e tsai ▁bi hur tu ▁zaiz ki o ▁.
PRED:	They weep and weep for their friends , but they lie in their feet , but they wo n't rise up , but their friends will rise up .
GOLD:	She sobs through the night ; tears stream down her cheeks.Among all her lovers , there is no one left to comfort her.All her friends have betrayed herand become her enemies .

ID:	96
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁« ▁E man ▁de za gun ▁zu e ta ko ▁ba tek ▁a dis ki de ▁bat ▁du e la ▁e ta ▁gau er di an ▁da tor ki o la ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁“ ▁A dis ki de a ▁, ▁e maz ki dak ▁hi ru ▁o gi ▁, ▁bi hur tu ko ▁di ti at ▁e ta ▁;
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ One of your friends is coming to tell you , ‘ A man is coming , ' he said , “ I tell you the truth , ‘ My friend is coming .
GOLD:	Then , teaching them more about prayer , he used this story : “ Suppose you went to a friend 's house at midnight , wanting to borrow three loaves of bread . You say to him ,

ID:	97
INPUT:	▁zu ek ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁Jau na ri ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko a ri ▁a txi ki rik ▁i raun ▁ze nu te nok ▁, ▁bi zi rik ▁zau de te ▁o rain dik ▁.
PRED:	But you , O Lord your God , you who have been honest .
GOLD:	But all of you who were faithful to the Lord your God are still alive today — every one of you .

ID:	98
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁be lau ni ko ▁jar tzen ▁naiz ▁Ai ta ren ▁aur re an ▁,
PRED:	Therefore , I will set up on my Father 's presence .
GOLD:	When I think of all this , I fall to my knees and pray to the Father ,

ID:	99
INPUT:	▁Jai tsi ▁e ta ▁han ▁min tza tu ko ▁na tzai zu ▁e ta ▁, ▁zuk ▁du zun ▁es pi ri tu tik ▁har tu rik ▁, ▁hai en gan ▁i su ri ko ▁dut ▁, ▁her ri a ▁gi da tzen ▁la gun ▁di e za zu ten ▁. ▁Hor re la ▁ez ▁za ra ▁ba kar rik ▁i zan go ▁.
PRED:	Then I will speak to you , and you will prophesy from the Spirit of your people . And you will know that I am not one of them .
GOLD:	I will come down and talk to you there . I will take some of the Spirit that is upon you , and I will put the Spirit upon them also . They will bear the burden of the people along with you , so you will not have to carry it alone .

ID:	100
INPUT:	▁Gu da ri ▁au sart ▁hai en ▁o fi zi a lak ▁bi ▁mi la ▁e ta ▁sei e hun ▁fa mi li a bu ru ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	The total of the troops of the tribe of Issachar were registered troops .
GOLD:	These regiments of mighty warriors were commanded by 2,600 clan leaders .

ID:	101
INPUT:	▁Is ra el dar rek ▁kon tsul ta ▁e gin ▁zi o ten ▁Jau na ri ▁; ▁i zan ▁e re ▁, ▁e gun ▁hai e tan ▁Be te len ▁ze go en ▁Jain ko a ren ▁i tun - ku txa
PRED:	The Israelites asked the Ark of the Lord and the Covenant of Bethel .
GOLD:	The Israelites went up seeking direction from the Lord . ( In those days the Ark of the Covenant of God was in Bethel ,

ID:	102
INPUT:	▁zer ga tik ▁zau de te ▁, ▁gai lur ▁ga rai ok ▁, ▁in bi di az ▁be gi <unk> ko ak ▁bi zi tze ko ▁de si ra tu ▁du en ▁men di a ri ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁be ti ko ▁bi zi le ku ▁e gin ▁du e na ri ▁?
PRED:	Why are you so proud ? Who are you going to live ? Who will live in the mountains ? Who will live forever ?
GOLD:	Surrounded by unnumbered thousands of chariots , the Lord came from Mount Sinai into his sanctuary .

ID:	103
INPUT:	▁I kus ten ▁nau te nek ▁bur la ▁e gi ten ▁di da te ▁, ▁kei nu ka ▁e ta ▁zei nu ka ▁.
PRED:	See how I am going to see , and how can I stand ? Who can show me your greatness ?
GOLD:	“ Is this the one who relies on the Lord ? Then let the Lord save him ! If the Lord loves him so much , let the Lord rescue him ! ”

ID:	104
INPUT:	▁Bi ▁her ri ak ▁Jain ko a re kin ▁a dis ki de tu ▁di tu ▁e ta ▁gu ru tze ko ▁he ri o tza ren ▁bi dez ▁gor putz ▁ba kar ▁ba te an ▁el kar tu ▁, ▁be rai en ▁ar te ko ▁e tsai go a ▁sun tsi tuz ▁.
PRED:	For God has sent his people into battle , and he will destroy each other . He will destroy each other , just as he lives .
GOLD:	Together as one body , Christ reconciled both groups to God by means of his death on the cross , and our hostility toward each other was put to death .

ID:	105
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Ja kob ▁E gip to ra ▁jo an ▁ze ne ta ▁Ka men ▁lur ral de an ▁a tzer ri tar ▁gi sa ▁bi zi ▁i zan ▁.
PRED:	Then Jacob went to Egypt and lived in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	Then Israel arrived in Egypt ; Jacob lived as a foreigner in the land of Ham .

ID:	106
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ez - mai te a ▁» ▁bu lar re tik ▁ken du ▁on do ren ▁, ▁Go mer - ek ▁ber ri ro ▁haur dun ▁gel di tu ▁e ta ▁se me a ▁i zan ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	“ Do not have children from the family of Boaz 's family , ” she said . “ You must not have a son . ”
GOLD:	After Gomer had weaned Lo-ruhamah , she again became pregnant and gave birth to a second son .

ID:	107
INPUT:	▁Ja ko bek ▁, ▁za har da dez ▁be gi ak ▁lau so tu rik ▁, ▁e zin ▁zu en ▁i ku si ▁. ▁Jo sek ▁be re ▁se me ak ▁aur re ra ▁e ra man ▁ziz ki o ne an ▁, ▁laz tan du ▁e ta ▁be sar ka tu ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁.
PRED:	When Jacob saw what had happened , he could n't see two sons and daughters , he gave them their firstborn sons . He embraced him and kissed him .
GOLD:	Jacob was half blind because of his age and could hardly see . So Joseph brought the boys close to him , and Jacob kissed and embraced them .

ID:	108
INPUT:	▁Bai ▁ze ra ▁! ▁Bi hotz ▁ma kur rez ▁jo ka tzen ▁du zu e ▁, ▁zeu en ▁e gi te ez ▁lur ral de an ▁bi de ga be ke ri ak ▁za bal tzen ▁.
PRED:	But you look down with those who do evil , for the land is filled with violence .
GOLD:	These wicked people are born sinners ; even from birth they have lied and gone their own way .

ID:	109
INPUT:	▁Je ro bo a men ▁gai ne ra ko ▁jar du e rak ▁, ▁e gin tza ▁guz ti ak ▁, ▁e kin tza ▁biz kor rak ▁e ta ▁Ju da re nak ▁i zan da ko ▁Da mas ko ▁e ta ▁Ha mat ▁hi ri ak ▁Is ra e len tzat ▁ber res ku ra tze ko ▁e gi ni ko ▁gu du ak ▁« ▁Is ra el go ▁Er re ge en ▁Kro ni ka ▁» ▁li bu ru an ▁dau de ▁i da tzi ak ▁.
PRED:	The rest of the events in Jeroboam 's reign and everything he did , including all the wars of Judah and Judah , and the rest of the events of Rehoboam 's reign , are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in the reign of Jeroboam II and everything he did — including the extent of his power , his wars , and how he recovered for Israel both Damascus and Hamath , which had belonged to Judah — are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	110
INPUT:	▁A tzer ri e tan ▁pu tzu ak ▁zu la tu ▁di tu te ta ▁ber ta ko ▁u ra ▁e dan ▁; ▁han ka pe an ▁za pal duz le hor tu ▁e gin ▁di tu tE gip to ko ▁u bi de ▁guz ti ak ▁” ▁.
PRED:	I will bring you into a foreign pit , and I will bring you out of Egypt . I will bring you out of Egypt . '
GOLD:	I have dug wells in many foreign landsand refreshed myself with their water.With the sole of my foot , I stopped up all the rivers of Egypt ! '

ID:	111
INPUT:	▁Jain ko a ren ▁er rei nu ko ▁gil tzak ▁e man go ▁diz ki zut ▁; ▁zuk ▁mun du ▁ho ne tan ▁lo tu a ▁ze ru an ▁e re ▁lo tu rik ▁gel di tu ko ▁da ▁, ▁e ta ▁zuk ▁mun du ▁ho ne tan ▁as ka tu a ▁ze ru an ▁e re ▁as ka tu rik ▁gel di tu ko ▁da ▁.
PRED:	I will give you the Kingdom of God , and you will be thrown into the bottomless pit , and you will be thrown into the heavens . You will be thrown into the world .
GOLD:	And I will give you the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven . Whatever you forbid on earth will be forbidden in heaven , and whatever you permit on earth will be permitted in heaven . ”

ID:	112
INPUT:	▁Ha ren ▁gantz ▁guz ti ak ▁aur kez tu ko ▁di ra ▁: ▁buz ta na ▁, ▁hes te ▁in gu ru ko ▁gan tza ▁,
PRED:	All the fat around the internal organs , and the fat around the internal organs ,
GOLD:	The priest will then offer all its fat on the altar , including the fat of the broad tail , the fat around the internal organs ,

ID:	113
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁o rain ▁, ▁Si <unk> ▁zu en ▁jain ko - er re ge a ren ▁e ta ▁Ki i on ▁zu en ▁jain ko - i zar ra ren ▁i ru di ak ▁e gin ▁di tu zu e nez ▁,
PRED:	“ But now the god of the god of the god of the god of the god of the god of the god of the sea .
GOLD:	No , you served your pagan gods — Sakkuth your king god and Kaiwan your star god — the images you made for yourselves .

ID:	114
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁ze ra ▁e san ▁ni on ▁: ▁« ▁Ni re kin ▁e gon go ▁za ra ▁lu za ro ▁, ▁pros ti tu zi o an ▁i bi li ▁ga be ▁e ta ▁zeu re ▁bu ru a ▁i non go ▁gi zo ni ▁e man ▁ga be ▁. ▁Nik ▁e re ▁ez ▁di zut ▁neu re ▁bu ru a ▁e man go ▁» ▁.
PRED:	And I said to him , “ You must stay with me without a long time , and you will be your prostitution . I will give you your prostitution . ”
GOLD:	Then I said to her , “ You must live in my house for many days and stop your prostitution . During this time , you will not have sexual relations with anyone , not even with me . ”

ID:	115
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁Pau lo ▁e ta ▁Si las ▁Fri gi a ▁e ta ▁Ga la zi a ▁es ku al de e tan ▁bar re na ▁jo an ▁zi ren ▁, ▁Es pi ri tu ▁San tu ak ▁e ra go tzi ▁e gin ▁bai tzi en ▁A si a ▁pro bin tzi an ▁me zu a ▁za bal tze a ▁.
PRED:	Paul and Barnabas went to Antioch of Syria and Paul and Silas in Judea , preaching the Holy Spirit in the province of Asia .
GOLD:	Next Paul and Silas traveled through the area of Phrygia and Galatia , because the Holy Spirit had prevented them from preaching the word in the province of Asia at that time .

ID:	116
INPUT:	▁Lar ri al di- ▁e ta ▁piz tu e ra - ga rai a
PRED:	The Resurrection
GOLD:	The Time of the End

ID:	117
INPUT:	▁Be hin ▁, ▁Je sus ▁her ri ▁ba te an ▁ze la ▁, ▁le ge naz ▁jo si ta ko ▁gi zon ▁bat ▁a zal du ▁zen ▁; ▁Je sus ▁i kus te an ▁, ▁a hus pez ▁lur re ra ▁e ro ri ▁e ta ▁er re gu tu ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Jau na ▁, ▁na hi ▁ba du zu ▁, ▁gar bi ▁na za ke zu ▁.
PRED:	One day some of the teachers of religious law arrived with Jesus and saw a man sitting on the ground . Then Jesus sat down to the ground and said , “ Lord , if you want to be pure . ”
GOLD:	In one of the villages , Jesus met a man with an advanced case of leprosy . When the man saw Jesus , he bowed with his face to the ground , begging to be healed . “ Lord , ” he said , “ if you are willing , you can heal me and make me clean . ”

ID:	118
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ga ri a ▁ja so ▁e ta ▁ar do a ▁u pe le ra tu ▁on do ren ▁, ▁E txo la ▁Jai a ▁os pa tu ko ▁du zu e ▁zaz pi ▁e gu nez ▁.
PRED:	“ At the end of the festival , you must celebrate the Festival of Shelters . You must celebrate the Festival of Shelters .
GOLD:	“ You must observe the Festival of Shelters for seven days at the end of the harvest season , after the grain has been threshed and the grapes have been pressed .

ID:	119
INPUT:	▁« ▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁hau ▁di o ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du nak ▁: ▁Ni re ▁hi tzak ▁a di tu ▁na hi ▁i zan ▁ez ▁di tu zu e la ko ▁,
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : If you refuse to listen to me , you will not listen to me .
GOLD:	And now the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Because you have not listened to me ,

ID:	120
INPUT:	▁e ran tzun ▁ni on ▁: ▁— ▁Er re ge ▁jau na ▁, ▁on gi ▁ba de ri tzo zu ▁e ta ▁be gi ko ▁bal din ▁ba nau zu ▁, ▁bi dal ▁na za zu ▁Ju da ra ▁, ▁ni re ▁gu ra so ak ▁hi lo bi ra tu ak ▁dau den ▁hi ri ra ▁, ▁ber ri ro ▁e rai ki ▁de za dan ▁.
PRED:	“ Yes , my lord the king , ” I replied . “ If you want me to send me back to the city of Judah , then I will destroy the city of Judah . ”
GOLD:	I replied , “ If it please the king , and if you are pleased with me , your servant , send me to Judah to rebuild the city where my ancestors are buried . ”

ID:	121
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁ho ne la ▁jar rai tu ▁zu en ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁« ▁Ju da ko ▁jen de a ▁e ta ▁Je ru sa lem go ▁bi zi la gu nak ▁az pi jo ko an ▁a ri ▁di ra ▁ni re ▁aur ka ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord said to the people of Judah , “ The people of Judah will live in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Again the Lord spoke to me and said , “ I have discovered a conspiracy against me among the people of Judah and Jerusalem .

ID:	122
INPUT:	▁« ▁Hor re ga tik ▁mai te ▁nau ▁Ai tak ▁, ▁neu re ▁bi zi a ▁e ma ten ▁du da la ko ▁e ta ▁hor re la ▁es ku ra tzen ▁ber ri ro ▁.
PRED:	“ That is why I love my Father 's Father , who gives me eternal life .
GOLD:	“ The Father loves me because I sacrifice my life so I may take it back again .

ID:	123
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁Moi se si ▁: ▁« ▁E gun ▁ba koi tze an ▁fa mi li a bu ru ▁des ber di nak ▁e ra man go ▁du ▁o pa ri a ▁al da re a ren ▁i nau gu ra zi o ra ko ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ If the family of Aaron 's family is unfaithful to the family of Aaron , he will give it to the family of Aaron . ”
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses , “ Let one leader bring his gift each day for the dedication of the altar . ”

ID:	124
INPUT:	▁hi la raz te ko ▁ga rai a e ta ▁sen da tze ko ▁ga rai a ▁, ▁hon da tze ko ▁ga rai a e ta ▁e rai ki tze ko ▁ga rai a ▁,
PRED:	A time is coming to destroy the city and a time to destroy it .
GOLD:	A time to kill and a time to heal.A time to tear down and a time to build up .

ID:	125
INPUT:	▁Be ren ▁a be re ak ▁e ta ▁Ka na an ▁lur ral de an ▁pi la tu ta ko ▁on da su nak ▁e re ▁e ra man ▁zi tuz ten ▁.
PRED:	So the land of Ham , which were given to the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	They also took all their livestock and all the personal belongings they had acquired in the land of Canaan . So Jacob and his entire family went to Egypt —

ID:	126
INPUT:	▁Jau na ▁a ger tu ▁zi tzai on ▁Ab ra mi ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁« ▁Hau ▁da ▁zu re ▁on do ren go ei ▁e man go ▁di e dan ▁lur ral de a ▁» ▁.E ta ▁al da re a ▁e rai ki ▁zi on ▁ber tan ▁Ab ra mek ▁a ger tu ▁zi tzai on ▁Jau na ri ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord appeared to Abraham and said , “ This is what the Lord says : I will give it to Abraham and his descendants , Isaac , and Jacob . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord appeared to Abram and said , “ I will give this land to your descendants. ” And Abram built an altar there and dedicated it to the Lord , who had appeared to him .

ID:	127
INPUT:	▁« ▁As ko ▁di ra ▁e ma ku me ▁ja tor rak ▁, ▁bai na ▁zuk ▁ez ▁du zu ▁pa re ko rik ▁! ▁»
PRED:	“ You will know that a woman is coming , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ There are many virtuous and capable women in the world , but you surpass them all ! ”

ID:	128
INPUT:	▁Ai ▁, ▁ba sa mor tu an ▁e gon le ku a aur ki tu ko ▁ba nu ▁, ▁neu re ▁her ri a ▁u tzi e ta ▁ha ren gan dik ▁ur ru ti ▁bi zi tze ko ▁! ▁Des lei a lak ▁bai ti ra ▁guz ti ak ▁, ▁trai do re ▁hu tsak ▁de nak ▁.
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who have lived in the desert , for they have lived in the desert , but they are like those who have lived in the desert .
GOLD:	If only my head were a pool of waterand my eyes a fountain of tears , I would weep day and nightfor all my people who have been slaughtered .

ID:	129
INPUT:	▁Za bal du ▁zu en ▁Esdra sek ▁li bu ru a ▁her ri ▁o so a ren ▁aur re an ▁, ▁de nak ▁be gi ra ▁zi tu e la ▁; ▁li bu ru a ▁za bal tze a re kin ▁ba te ra ▁, ▁her ri ▁o so a ▁zu ti tu ▁e gin ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	When Zechariah was in charge of the people , he found everything he had done , and all the people were in the land .
GOLD:	Ezra stood on the platform in full view of all the people . When they saw him open the book , they all rose to their feet .

ID:	130
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁er re ge a ri ▁ja ki na ra zi ▁zi on ▁oi hu ka ▁. ▁Er re ge ak ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁— ▁Ba kar rik ▁bal din ▁ba da tor ▁, ▁ber ri ▁o nak ▁da kar <unk> ter ka ri a ▁hur bil du ▁a ha la ▁, ▁or de a ▁,
PRED:	Then the king said to the king , “ If the king is coming , let 's get out ! ” But the king told him , “ The messenger is coming , ” the king said .
GOLD:	He shouted the news down to David , and the king replied , “ If he is alone , he has news. ” As the messenger came closer ,

ID:	131
INPUT:	▁“ ▁Zo ri txar ren ▁bat ▁, ▁ger ra ▁na hiz ▁zi gor ra ▁, ▁i zur ri te a ▁na hiz ▁go se te a ▁, ▁ger ta tze an ▁, ▁zu ▁zau de ne ko ▁tenplu ▁ho ne ta ra ▁zu re ▁ai tzi ne ra ▁e tor ri ▁e ta ▁geu re ▁a tse ka be an ▁zu ri ▁oi hu ▁e gi nez ▁ge ro ▁, ▁zuk ▁en tzun ▁e ta ▁sal ba tu ▁e gin go ▁gai tu zu ▁” ▁.
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you who have been killed by the sword , famine , and disease , and disease . You have come to the Temple of the Lord , and you will be saved . '
GOLD:	They said , ‘ Whenever we are faced with any calamity such as war , plague , or famine , we can come to stand in your presence before this Temple where your name is honored . We can cry out to you to save us , and you will hear us and rescue us . '

ID:	132
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁a gin du ▁hau ▁e man ▁zi en ▁Jo su ek ▁her ri ko ▁fun tzi o na ri o ei ▁:
PRED:	Then Joshua gave these instructions to Joshua and his officials :
GOLD:	Joshua then commanded the officers of Israel ,

ID:	133
INPUT:	▁Ped rok ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Zer ga tik ▁har tu ▁du zu e ▁el kar ▁Jau na ren ▁Es pi ri tu a ▁ten ta tze ko ▁? ▁Ha ra ▁, ▁a te an ▁di ra ▁da go e ne ko ▁zu re ▁se nar ra ri ▁lur ▁e man ▁di o te nak ▁; ▁zu ▁e ra man go ▁zai tuz te ▁o rain ▁.
PRED:	Peter said to him , “ Why are you going to test the Spirit of the Lord ? But you are the one who is the one who is the one who has given you . ”
GOLD:	And Peter said , “ How could the two of you even think of conspiring to test the Spirit of the Lord like this ? The young men who buried your husband are just outside the door , and they will carry you out , too . ”

ID:	134
INPUT:	▁bai na ▁Jain ko ak ▁, ▁han di ki ak ▁mes pre txa tze ne ta ▁bi de rik ▁ga be ko ▁ba sa mor tu an ▁no ra ga bei bi la raz ten ▁di tu e nak ▁,
PRED:	But God does not despise those who refuse to obey the commands of the Lord .
GOLD:	the Lord pours contempt on their princes , causing them to wander in trackless wastelands .

ID:	135
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁i ka ra ▁, ▁ar du ra ga be ok ▁! ▁E gin ▁dar da ra ▁, ▁a xo la ga be ok ▁! ▁E ran tzi ▁, ▁ken du ▁soi ne ko ▁ho ri ek ▁, ▁e ta ▁es ta li ▁do lu - jan tziz ▁.
PRED:	Do n't be discouraged , you shepherds ! Get away ! Get away from them ! Get away from clothes and dress them in mourning .
GOLD:	Tremble , you women of ease ; throw off your complacency.Strip off your pretty clothes , and put on burlap to show your grief .

ID:	136
INPUT:	▁Le hen ▁a se ▁zi re nek ▁, ▁o rain ▁o gi ▁or de ▁e gin ▁be har ▁lan ▁; ▁go se tu ek ▁, ▁al diz ▁, ▁a tse den ▁har ▁de za ke <unk> gor ▁ze na ▁, ▁haur ▁as koz ▁er di ▁da ▁; ▁as ko ren ▁a ma ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁a gor tu ▁.
PRED:	Before the first time , the older daughter became very hungry . But when the young women grew up , a little child is a little child , a little child will be a little child .
GOLD:	Those who were well fed are now starving , and those who were starving are now full.The childless woman now has seven children , and the woman with many children wastes away .

ID:	137
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁Jain ko ak ▁ez ▁gai tu ▁be re ▁ha ser re - zi gor ra ▁ja sa te ko ▁na hi ▁, ▁Je su ▁Kris to ▁gu re ▁Jau na ren ▁bi tar tez ▁sal ba me na ▁i ris te ko ▁bai zik ▁.
PRED:	For we have not sinned against the Lord Jesus , for we have rebelled against the Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	For God chose to save us through our Lord Jesus Christ , not to pour out his anger on us .

ID:	138
INPUT:	▁har ro pu tzei ▁i se ka ▁e gi ten ▁di e e ta ▁a pal ▁di re nei ▁ba be sa ▁e ma ten ▁.
PRED:	He gives justice to those who fear him , and he gives justice to those who fear him .
GOLD:	The Lord mocks the mockersbut is gracious to the humble .

ID:	139
INPUT:	▁Mun du a ren tzat ▁gatz ▁e ta ▁ar gi
PRED:	A Message about the world
GOLD:	Teaching about Salt and Light

ID:	140
INPUT:	▁Da vi dek ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Zeu re ▁er ruz ▁hil tzen ▁za ra ▁! ▁Zeu re ▁a ho ak ▁sa la tu ▁zai tu ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁gan tzu tu a ▁hil ▁du zu la ▁e sa te an ▁.
PRED:	“ All right , ” David said , “ you will die ! You will die in the presence of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ You have condemned yourself , ” David said , “ for you yourself confessed that you killed the Lord 's anointed one . ”

ID:	141
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁kon tu ▁! ▁E ra bat ▁sun tsi tu ▁be har ▁da ▁guz ti a ▁. ▁Zeu en tzat ▁zer bait ▁har tu ko ▁ba ze nu te ▁, ▁sun tsi pe na ▁e ta ▁ez be har ra ▁e kar ri ko ▁ze ni tuz ke te ▁is ra el dar ron ▁kan pa le ku ra ▁.
PRED:	But you must completely destroy all the people of Israel . You must completely destroy all the people of Israel , and you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	“ Do not take any of the things set apart for destruction , or you yourselves will be completely destroyed , and you will bring trouble on the camp of Israel .

ID:	142
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁zu en ▁si nes me na ren ▁kul tu - zer bi tzu a ▁bu ru tze ko ▁ni re ▁bi zi a ▁o pa ri ▁es kai ni ▁be har ▁ba dut ▁e re ▁, ▁po zik ▁na go ▁e ta ▁a lai tu ▁e gi ten ▁naiz ▁zu e kin ▁guz ti o kin ▁.
PRED:	And if I had finished speaking to you , I will make a sacrifice of worship in the worship of the Lord . I am with you , and I am with you .
GOLD:	But I will rejoice even if I lose my life , pouring it out like a liquid offering to God , just like your faithful service is an offering to God . And I want all of you to share that joy .

ID:	143
INPUT:	▁A pai zen ▁lur rak ▁ba kar rik ▁u tzi ▁zi tu en ▁e ro si ▁ga be ▁, ▁hai en ▁al de ▁le ge ▁bat ▁bai tzu en ▁fa ra oi ak ▁e ma na ▁; ▁ho nek ▁e ma ten ▁zi en ▁ja te ko ▁be har ▁zu te na ▁. ▁Ho nen ga tik ▁, ▁ez ▁zu ten ▁be ren ▁lur rak ▁sal du ▁be har rik ▁i zan ▁.
PRED:	But when the priests left the land , he refused to let them return to Pharaoh , but they would n't give him food . They would n't be saved from their land .
GOLD:	The only land he did not buy was the land belonging to the priests . They received an allotment of food directly from Pharaoh , so they did n't need to sell their land .

ID:	144
INPUT:	▁za puz tu ▁e gin ▁dut ▁e ta ▁mun du ko ▁er re ge rik ▁a hal tsu e na ren ▁es ku ▁u tzi ▁, ▁be ra ren ▁gaiz ta ke ri ak ▁me re zi ▁be za la ▁e ra bil ▁de zan ▁.
PRED:	I will turn away from the kings of the earth , and I will turn away from their evil deeds .
GOLD:	I will hand it over to a mighty nation that will destroy it as its wickedness deserves . I have already discarded it .

ID:	145
INPUT:	▁Den bo ral di ▁lu ze ▁ba ten ▁on do ren ▁, ▁hil ▁zen ▁Ju da ren ▁e maz te a ▁, ▁Xu a ren ▁a la ba ▁. ▁Do lu al di a ▁bu ka tu ▁zu e ne an ▁, ▁Tim na ra ▁i go ▁zen ▁Ju da ▁ar di - moz te ra ▁A du lam go ▁be re ▁a dis ki de ▁Hi ra re kin ▁.
PRED:	They lived for a long time for a long time , with her sister , she was buried with her sister named Tamar . She was buried with her sister named Timnah for a long time to Timnah .
GOLD:	Some years later Judah 's wife died . After the time of mourning was over , Judah and his friend Hirah the Adullamite went up to Timnah to supervise the shearing of his sheep .

ID:	146
INPUT:	▁Jau na ▁, ▁i kus ▁ni re ▁lar ri al di a ▁! ▁I ra ki ten ▁dau kat ▁bar ru a.I rau li a ▁dut ▁bi ho tza ▁bar ne an ▁, ▁er re bel de ▁i zan ▁bai naiz ▁, ▁er re bel <unk> le an ▁ez pa tak ▁hil ▁diz kit ▁haur rak ▁, ▁e txe an ▁he ri o a ▁ja be ▁.
PRED:	My heart is troubled , O Lord , and my heart is full of pain . My heart is full of pain , but I have no pity on my house .
GOLD:	“ Lord , see my anguish ! My heart is brokenand my soul despairs , for I have rebelled against you.In the streets the sword kills , and at home there is only death .

ID:	147
INPUT:	▁zu re ▁aur re an ▁a lai tzen ▁da ▁e gu ne ro ▁, ▁zu re ▁jus ti zi a ▁du ▁boz ka ri o ▁.
PRED:	For your unfailing love is full of joy , O Lord , endures forever .
GOLD:	You are their glorious strength.It pleases you to make us strong .

ID:	148
INPUT:	▁ez ▁zan go a ▁e do ▁be so a ▁hau tsi rik ▁du e na ▁,
PRED:	He must not cut off the head of the sea ,
GOLD:	or has a broken foot or arm ,

ID:	149
INPUT:	▁Kor ne li o ▁be gi ra ▁gel di tu ▁zi tzai on ▁e ta ▁, ▁bel dur rak ▁har tu rik ▁, ▁gal de tu ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Zer ▁du zu ▁, ▁Jau na ▁? ▁Ain ge ru ak ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Zu re ▁o toitz ▁e ta ▁li mos nak ▁a tse gin ▁i zan ▁zaiz ki o ▁Jain ko a ri ▁e ta ▁go go an ▁di tu ▁.
PRED:	Cornelius stood at his feet and asked him , “ What do you mean ? ” “ What is your angel ? ” “ Yes , ” he said . “ The Lord is pleased with you , and he will help you . ”
GOLD:	Cornelius stared at him in terror . “ What is it , sir ? ” he asked the angel.And the angel replied , “ Your prayers and gifts to the poor have been received by God as an offering !

ID:	150
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁ain ge ru ak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁« ▁Lo tu ▁ger ri ko a ▁e ta ▁jan tzi ▁oi ne ta ko ak ▁» ▁. ▁Ha la ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁, ▁e ta ▁ain ge ru ak ▁, ▁ber ri ro ▁: ▁« ▁Jan tzi ▁soin gai ne ko a ▁e ta ▁jar rai tu ▁ni ri ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then the angel said to Lot , “ What happened ? ” So Lot tore his feet and put his clothes on his feet , and put his robe on my head .
GOLD:	Then the angel told him , “ Get dressed and put on your sandals. ” And he did . “ Now put on your coat and follow me , ” the angel ordered .

ID:	151
INPUT:	▁I rain du ▁zu e na ren tzat ▁bar ka me na
PRED:	The Call to Holy Place
GOLD:	Forgiveness for the Sinner

ID:	152
INPUT:	▁Xu nem go ▁e ma ku me a ren ▁is to ri o a ▁bu ka tu
PRED:	Miracles during the Famine
GOLD:	The Woman from Shunem Returns Home

ID:	153
INPUT:	▁Bu ru a ▁gal du ko ▁du te e ta ▁be ren ▁as mo ak ▁hau tsi ko ▁diz ki <unk> du an ▁, ▁i do lo ▁e ta ▁zo ri la ri en ga na ▁, ▁hil da ko en ▁es pi ri tu ▁e ta ▁az ti en ga na jo ko ▁du te ▁kon tsei lu ▁es ke ▁.
PRED:	The leaders of the wise will be destroyed , and they will die . They will die in terror , and they will die in terror .
GOLD:	The Egyptians will lose heart , and I will confuse their plans.They will plead with their idols for wisdomand call on spirits , mediums , and those who consult the spirits of the dead .

ID:	154
INPUT:	▁Za toz kit ▁le hen bai le hen ▁,
PRED:	Come , let 's find me first , first let me live .
GOLD:	Timothy , please come as soon as you can .

ID:	155
INPUT:	▁On do ren ▁, ▁Da ni el ▁, ▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁ja ki tu nak ▁hil tze ko ▁er re ge a ren ▁a gin du a ▁har tu a ▁zu en ▁A ri o ken ga na ▁jo an ▁zen ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁« ▁Ez ▁hil ▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁ja ki tu nik ▁! ▁Aur kez ▁na za zu ▁er re ge a ga na ▁, ▁neuk ▁ar gi tu ko ▁bai ti ot ▁a me tsa ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then Daniel went to the king of Babylon and killed the king of Babylon . “ Do n't kill him , ” he said . “ I will not kill you , but I will not kill you . ”
GOLD:	Then Daniel went in to see Arioch , whom the king had ordered to execute the wise men of Babylon . Daniel said to him , “ Do n't kill the wise men . Take me to the king , and I will tell him the meaning of his dream . ”

ID:	156
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁her ri ak ▁a ho ▁ba tez ▁e ran tzun ▁zu en ▁: ▁« ▁Jau nak ▁a gin du ▁guz ti a ▁be te ko ▁du gu ▁» <unk> ri a ren ▁e ran tzu na ▁Jau na ri ▁e ra ma te ra ▁jo an ▁zen ▁Moi ses ▁.
PRED:	Then the people said to Moses , “ Let 's tell us everything the Lord has commanded us . ” So Moses went out to the Lord .
GOLD:	And all the people responded together , “ We will do everything the Lord has commanded. ” So Moses brought the people 's answer back to the Lord .

ID:	157
INPUT:	▁Er re ge ▁hau ek ▁gu du ▁e gin ▁zi e ten ▁So do ma ko ▁Be ra ▁, ▁Go mor ra ko <unk> xa ▁, ▁Ad ma ko ▁Xi nab ▁, ▁Tze boim go ▁Xe me ber ▁er re ge ei ▁e ta ▁Be la ko ▁, ▁hau ▁da ▁, ▁Tzo ar ko ▁, ▁er re ge a ri ▁.
PRED:	The king of Sodom and Gomorrah became king of Sodom and Gomorrah , near the border of Sodom and Gomorrah , near the border of Sodom and Gomorrah .
GOLD:	fought against King Bera of Sodom , King Birsha of Gomorrah , King Shinab of Admah , King Shemeber of Zeboiim , and the king of Bela ( also called Zoar ) .

ID:	158
INPUT:	▁Gai ne ra ▁, ▁nik ▁, ▁zu re ▁zer bi tza ri ▁ho nek ▁, ▁neu re ▁gain ▁har tu a ▁dut ▁mu ti ko a ren ▁e ran tzu ki zu na ▁; ▁hi tza ▁e man ▁ni on ▁ai ta ri ▁; ▁be re ki ko ▁er ru dun ▁i zan go ▁nin tza te ke ▁be ti ko ▁, ▁i tzu li ko ▁ez ▁ba ni o ▁.
PRED:	But since I have given you this servant , I will give you an inheritance of my father 's servant , and you would have no pity on me . I would not return to you .
GOLD:	My lord , I guaranteed to my father that I would take care of the boy . I told him , ‘ If I do n't bring him back to you , I will bear the blame forever . '

ID:	159
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁be re ▁bi zi a ▁gor de ▁na hi ▁du e nak ▁gal du ▁e gin go ▁du ▁; ▁be re ▁bi zi a ▁ni re ga tik ▁gal tzen ▁du e nak ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁es ku ra tu ▁e gin go ▁du ▁.
PRED:	Those who hate their lives will be saved , but those who hate them will be saved . But anyone who touches them will be saved .
GOLD:	If you try to hang on to your life , you will lose it . But if you give up your life for my sake , you will save it .

ID:	160
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁di o ▁: ▁« ▁Ha ra ▁, ▁las ter ▁na tor ▁. ▁Zo ri o ne ko a ▁li bu ru ▁ho ne tan ▁e ma ten ▁den ▁Jain ko a ren ▁me zu a ▁kon tu an ▁har tzen ▁du e na ▁! ▁»
PRED:	“ Yes , ” Jesus said , “ I am coming soon coming to this book of God ! ”
GOLD:	“ Look , I am coming soon ! Blessed are those who obey the words of prophecy written in this book . ”

ID:	161
INPUT:	▁Jo ▁bu lar ra ▁e ta ▁e gin ▁do lu ▁: ▁lan da ▁zo ra gar ri e ta ▁ma has ti ▁e man kor ra ka mai tu ▁di ra ▁e ta ▁;
PRED:	He has made the silver and gold ; he has brought them into the vineyards and vineyards .
GOLD:	Beat your breasts in sorrow for your bountiful farmsand your fruitful grapevines .

ID:	162
INPUT:	▁Jain ko ak ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁« ▁I zan ▁be di ▁sa bai a ▁u ren ▁ar te an ▁, ▁goi ko ▁e ta ▁be he ko ▁u rak ▁be reiz ▁di tzan ▁» ▁.E ta ▁ha la ▁i zan ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	Then God said to them , “ Let the waters of the river be divided into the water , and it was dry . ”
GOLD:	Then God said , “ Let there be a space between the waters , to separate the waters of the heavens from the waters of the earth . ”

ID:	163
INPUT:	▁o toi tza ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁: ▁« ▁Jau na ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁Jain ko a ▁, ▁ez ▁da ▁zu ▁be za la ko ▁bes te ▁jain ko rik ▁, ▁ez ▁goi an ▁ze ru an ▁, ▁ez ▁be he an ▁lur re an ▁. ▁Be te tzen ▁du zu ▁i tu na ▁e ta ▁on be ra ▁za ra ▁zu re ▁aur re an ▁bi ho tzez ▁zin tzo ▁da bil tzan ▁zeu re ▁mi ra be en tzat ▁.
PRED:	He prayed , “ O Lord , the God of Israel , you are not gods in the heavens , and you are not gods in the heavens . You are not a gift from the Lord your God .
GOLD:	and he prayed , “ O Lord , God of Israel , there is no God like you in all of heaven above or on the earth below . You keep your covenant and show unfailing love to all who walk before you in wholehearted devotion .

ID:	164
INPUT:	▁Ki mu ak ▁bo ta ko ▁di tu ▁; ▁ha ren ▁e der ra ▁o li bon do a re na be za la ko a ▁i zan go ▁da ▁, ▁ha ren ▁u sai na Li ba no ko a ▁be zain ▁go zo a ▁.
PRED:	They will be cut off like olive trees , olive trees , and the cedars of Lebanon will be as snow .
GOLD:	My people will again live under my shade.They will flourish like grain and blossom like grapevines.They will be as fragrant as the wines of Lebanon .

ID:	165
INPUT:	▁A bi me le kek ▁be re ▁tal de a re kin ▁aur re ra tu ▁e ta ▁hi ri ko ▁sar re ra ▁har tu ▁zu en ▁; ▁bi tar te an ▁, ▁bes te ▁bi ▁tal de ek ▁lan da ra ▁a te ra ▁zi re nei ▁e ra so ▁e ta ▁xe ha tu ▁e gin ▁zi tuz ten ▁.
PRED:	Abimelech and his men went out to meet them in the towns of Abimelech . They took two of them into the fields and attacked them .
GOLD:	Abimelech and his group stormed the city gate to keep the men of Shechem from getting back in , while Abimelech 's other two groups cut them down in the fields .

ID:	166
INPUT:	▁A te ra tze an ▁, ▁Zi re ne ko ▁gi zon ▁bat ▁aur ki tu ▁zu ten ▁, ▁Si mon ▁ze ri tza na ▁, ▁e ta ▁Je su sen ▁gu ru tze a ▁e ra ma te ra ▁be har tu ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	So they found a man named Simon , who was going to go to Jerusalem , where he was going .
GOLD:	Along the way , they came across a man named Simon , who was from Cyrene , and the soldiers forced him to carry Jesus ' cross .

ID:	167
INPUT:	▁O toi tze an ▁si nes me nez ▁es ka tzen ▁du zu en ▁e do zer ▁gau za ▁lor tu ko ▁du zu e ▁.
PRED:	And if you pray for faith , you will be made right with God .
GOLD:	You can pray for anything , and if you have faith , you will receive it . ”

ID:	168
INPUT:	▁« ▁Zeu en ▁her ri tar ra ri ▁zer bait ▁— ▁di ru a ▁, ▁ja na ri a ▁na hiz ▁bes te ▁e do zer ▁gau za ▁— ▁mai le guz ▁e ma te an ▁, ▁ez ▁di o zu e ▁es ka tu ko ▁in te re sik ▁.
PRED:	“ If you refuse to buy any of your neighbor 's money , you must not buy advantage of any other alcoholic drink .
GOLD:	You may charge interest to foreigners , but you may not charge interest to Israelites , so that the Lord your God may bless you in everything you do in the land you are about to enter and occupy .

ID:	169
INPUT:	▁Da vid ▁er re ge ▁i zen da tu ▁Heb ro nen
PRED:	David Defeats the Land
GOLD:	David Anointed King of Judah

ID:	170
INPUT:	▁Ha ren ▁hitz - ho tsa ▁en tzu te an ▁, ▁ko nor te ▁ga be ▁gel di tu ▁nin tzen ▁e ta ▁a hus pez ▁lur re ra ▁e ro ri ▁.
PRED:	When no one heard me , no one fell face down on the ground .
GOLD:	Then I heard the man speak , and when I heard the sound of his voice , I fainted and lay there with my face to the ground .

ID:	171
INPUT:	▁Goi ze an ▁goiz ▁jai ki ▁e ta ▁hi ri - sar re ra ko ▁a te ▁on do an ▁jar ri ▁o hi ▁zen ▁. ▁Nor bai tek ▁a ra zo ren ▁ba ten ga tik ▁er re ge a ga na ▁zu zen bi de ▁es ke ▁e tor ri ▁be har ra ▁zu e ne an ▁, ▁Ab sa lo mek ▁dei ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁gal de tu ▁o hi ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Zein ▁hi ri ta ko a ▁za ra ▁? ▁E ta ▁bes te ak ▁e ran tzu ten ▁: ▁— ▁Is ra el go ▁ha la ko ▁lei nu ko a ▁.
PRED:	Early the next morning they got up early the next morning and went to the king . “ Who is the king of the town ? ” they asked . “ Are you the king of Israel ? ”
GOLD:	He got up early every morning and went out to the gate of the city . When people brought a case to the king for judgment , Absalom would ask where in Israel they were from , and they would tell him their tribe .

ID:	172
INPUT:	▁Ho na ▁non ▁da toz ki gun ▁e ra so an ▁o rain ▁a mon dar rak ▁, ▁mo ab dar rak ▁e ta ▁Seir ▁men di e ta ko ak ▁. ▁Gu re ▁ar ba so ei ▁, ▁E gip to tik ▁e tor tze an ▁, ▁ez ▁ze ni en ▁hai en ▁lur ral de e tan ▁sar tzen ▁u tzi ▁; ▁is ra el dar rek ▁i tzu lin gu ru a ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁e ta ▁ez ▁zi tuz ten ▁hon da tu ▁.
PRED:	That is why the people of Moab who lived in the land of Moab , Ammon , Ammon , and Ammon , and Israelite army came out from the land of Egypt . They left the land of Egypt , and they did not abandon them .
GOLD:	“ And now see what the armies of Ammon , Moab , and Mount Seir are doing . You would not let our ancestors invade those nations when Israel left Egypt , so they went around them and did not destroy them .

ID:	173
INPUT:	▁Ain ge ru ak ▁a di e ra zi ▁zi dan ▁: ▁— ▁Gaiz ta ke ri a <unk> tzi ▁bar ru ra ▁bul tza ▁e gin ▁zi on ▁e ma ku me a ri ▁e ta ▁be ru nez ko ▁es tal ki a ▁e zar ri ▁gai ne an ▁.
PRED:	Then the angel said to me , “ Let 's get out of the evil things you 've done . ”
GOLD:	The angel said , “ The woman 's name is Wickedness , ” and he pushed her back into the basket and closed the heavy lid again .

ID:	174
INPUT:	▁Zin tzo a ▁za ra ▁zu ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁zu ze na ▁zeu re ▁e ra ba ki e tan ▁.
PRED:	The godly are righteous , O Lord , but you show yourself your regulations .
GOLD:	O Lord , you are righteous , and your regulations are fair .

ID:	175
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁ez ▁dut ▁a tse gin ▁i no ren ▁he ri o tza ▁; ▁i tzu li ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁e ta ▁bi zi ▁zai tez te ▁! ▁Nik ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁e sa na ▁» ▁.
PRED:	I will not return to life , but I will send you back to life , ” says the Sovereign Lord .
GOLD:	I do n't want you to die , says the Sovereign Lord . Turn back and live !

ID:	176
INPUT:	▁Is ra e li ▁bu ruz ko ▁Jau na ren ▁me zu a ▁. ▁Jau nak ▁za bal du ▁du ▁ze ru a ▁, ▁be rak ▁oi nar ri tu ▁lur ra ▁, ▁be rak ▁e man ▁di o ▁gi za ki a ri ▁bi zi - ar na sa ▁.
PRED:	This message came to the Lord , the God of Israel , just as he had promised . He has given the heavens , and he lives in the heavens .
GOLD:	This message concerning the fate of Israel came from the Lord : “ This message is from the Lord , who stretched out the heavens , laid the foundations of the earth , and formed the human spirit .

ID:	177
INPUT:	▁her ri ▁guz ti en ▁aur re an ▁zuk ▁aur kez tu a ▁:
PRED:	Then all the people assembled before him .
GOLD:	which you have prepared for all people .

ID:	178
INPUT:	▁A kab ▁, ▁Is ra el go ▁er re ge
PRED:	Ahab Rules in Israel
GOLD:	Ahab Rules in Israel

ID:	179
INPUT:	▁ai tak ▁ez ▁be za la ▁: ▁sa si kul tu - le ku e ta ko ▁o tor du e tan ▁par te ▁har tzen ▁du ▁, ▁la gun ▁hur ko a ren ▁e maz te a ▁de so ho ra tzen ▁;
PRED:	He does not commit adultery . He does not commit adultery .
GOLD:	And that son does all the evil things his father would never do — he worships idols on the mountains , commits adultery ,

ID:	180
INPUT:	▁ez ▁i lun pe tan ▁za bal tzen ▁den ▁i zur ri a ri ▁, ▁ez ▁e gun - ar gi tan ▁jo tzen ▁du en ▁gai tza ri ▁.
PRED:	They lie in darkness without harm , but they lie in darkness .
GOLD:	Do not dread the disease that stalks in darkness , nor the disaster that strikes at midday .

ID:	181
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁, ▁Je sus ▁be ra ▁ez ▁zen ▁fi da tzen ▁hai e taz ▁, ▁guz ti ak ▁e za gu tzen ▁bai tzi tu en ▁,
PRED:	But Jesus did n't believe what he meant .
GOLD:	But Jesus did n't trust them , because he knew all about people .

ID:	182
INPUT:	▁Ai ▁jai tsi ko ▁ba zi na ▁, ▁sas tra ka ▁er re tze ne do ▁u ra ri ▁i ra ki na raz ten ▁di on su a ▁be za la ▁! ▁Hor re la ▁, ▁zu re ▁e tsai ek nor ▁za ren ▁ja kin go ▁lu ke te ▁, ▁na zi o ek ▁zu re ▁aur re an ▁dar - dar ▁e gin go ▁,
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who live in the valley of the field , like a large crop of grapes that scurry along the ground , and your enemies will tremble before you .
GOLD:	Oh , that you would burst from the heavens and come down ! How the mountains would quake in your presence !

ID:	183
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁Je ru sa le me ra ▁bi da li ko ▁du dan ▁hon da men ▁ho ri ▁i ku si ▁bai no ▁le hen ▁zeu re ▁gu ra so en ga na ▁bil du ko ▁zai tut ▁, ▁e ta ▁ba ke an ▁e hor tzi ko ▁zai tuz te ▁zeu re ▁hi lo bi an ▁” ▁» ▁.Ha la ▁, ▁man da ta ri ek ▁e ra man ▁zi o ten ▁er re ge a ri ▁e ran tzu na ▁.
PRED:	“ So I will send disaster on you , ” says the Lord. “ When you see , I will bring you back to the land of Jerusalem , I will send you back to the king . ”
GOLD:	So I will not send the promised disaster until after you have died and been buried in peace . You will not see the disaster I am going to bring on this city . ' ” So they took her message back to the king .

ID:	184
INPUT:	▁Be tsa be ▁a hus pez tu ▁e gin ▁zen ▁er re ge a ren ▁aur re an ▁. ▁Ho nek ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Zer ▁du zu ▁?
PRED:	Then the king bowed low before the king and said , “ What do you mean ? ”
GOLD:	Bathsheba bowed down before the king. “ What can I do for you ? ” he asked her .

ID:	185
INPUT:	▁Ber ri ro ▁e re ▁bi da li ▁zi tu en ▁Sau lek ▁man da ta ri ak ▁, ▁Da vid ▁i kus ▁ze za ten ▁. ▁E san ▁zi en ▁: ▁« ▁E kar da zu e ▁o he an ▁ba da ▁e re ▁, ▁hil ▁e gin ▁be har ▁dut ▁e ta ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then Saul sent messengers to Saul and told them , “ If you have killed me , I 'll kill you . ”
GOLD:	But Saul sent the troops back to get David . He ordered , “ Bring him to me in his bed so I can kill him ! ”

ID:	186
INPUT:	▁Jain ko ▁gu re ▁Ai tak ▁e ta ▁Je su ▁Kris to ▁Jau nak ▁e man ▁bi e zaz ki zu e te ▁gra zi a ▁e ta ▁ba ke a ▁.
PRED:	May God our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace .
GOLD:	May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace .

ID:	187
INPUT:	▁Jen de a ▁mar mar re an ▁ha si ▁zen ▁Moi se sen ▁aur ka ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁« ▁Zer ▁e dan ▁be har ▁du gu ▁? ▁»
PRED:	So the people stood at the door of Moses and said , “ What should we do ? ”
GOLD:	Then the people complained and turned against Moses . “ What are we going to drink ? ” they demanded .

ID:	188
INPUT:	▁Is ra el ▁han dik ▁ir te na ra zi ▁zu en ▁, ▁ha ren ▁mai ta su na ▁be ti ko a ▁bai ta ▁;
PRED:	He loved the people of Israel , His faithful love endures forever .
GOLD:	He brought Israel out of Egypt.His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	189
INPUT:	▁Zen tza ▁gai tza zu ▁neur riz ▁, ▁ez ▁ha ser rez ▁, ▁ez ▁gai tza zun ▁e ze rez tu ▁.
PRED:	Do n't be angry with evil schemes , or you will not be shaken .
GOLD:	So correct me , Lord , but please be gentle.Do not correct me in anger , for I would die .

ID:	190
INPUT:	▁Ni re ▁i ze ne an ▁es ka tu ko ▁du zu en ▁guz ti a ▁e man go ▁di zu et ▁nik ▁.
PRED:	I will ask you whatever you ask .
GOLD:	Yes , ask me for anything in my name , and I will do it !

ID:	191
INPUT:	▁Hus tu ▁zu en ▁pe gar ra ▁as kan ▁, ▁e ta ▁las ter ka ▁jo an ▁zen ▁pu tzu ra ▁ur ▁ge hi a go ▁har tze ra ▁, ▁ga me lu ▁guz ti ei ▁e man ▁zi en ▁ar te ▁.
PRED:	So he got up and got up early the cistern and took it to the cistern and gave it to all the camels .
GOLD:	So she quickly emptied her jug into the watering trough and ran back to the well to draw water for all his camels .

ID:	192
INPUT:	▁Batz lit ▁, ▁Me hi da ▁e ta ▁Har xa re nak ▁;
PRED:	Reaiah , Reaiah , Reaiah ,
GOLD:	Bazluth , Mehida , Harsha ,

ID:	193
INPUT:	▁Pax hur ▁, ▁A ma ri as ▁, ▁Mal ki as ▁,
PRED:	Pashhur , Pashhur , Malkijah ,
GOLD:	Hattush , Shebaniah , Malluch ,

ID:	194
INPUT:	▁Za ba le an ▁so be ra ▁du te na ▁bi ▁al bo e ta tik ▁zin tzi lik ▁gel di tu ko ▁da ▁— ▁me tro ▁er di a ▁al de ▁ba koi tze tik ▁— ▁, ▁e goi tza ▁es tal tze ko ▁.
PRED:	There will be a list of land that stands at the entrance of the Tabernacle , which equals twenty feet long .
GOLD:	Allow 18 inches of remaining material to hang down over each side , so the Tabernacle is completely covered .

ID:	195
INPUT:	▁Lib na tik ▁La ki xe ra ▁jo ▁zu en ▁Jo su ek ▁is ra el dar ▁guz ti e kin ▁; ▁hi ri a ▁in gu ra tu ▁e ta ▁e ra so ▁e gin ▁zi on ▁.
PRED:	So Joshua and the Israelite army went to Libnah and attacked it .
GOLD:	From Libnah , Joshua and the Israelites went to Lachish and attacked it .

ID:	196
INPUT:	▁Moi se sek ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁Ka na an ▁lur ral de a ▁i ker tze ra ▁bi da li ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁— ▁Zo az te ▁Ne ge ve tik ▁e ta ▁i go ▁men di al de ra ▁.
PRED:	So Moses sent them back to the land of Canaan , where they sent them back to the Negev . “ Go back to the hill country of the Negev , ” he said .
GOLD:	Moses gave the men these instructions as he sent them out to explore the land : “ Go north through the Negev into the hill country .

ID:	197
INPUT:	▁A gur ▁e za zu e ▁el kar ▁be sar ka da ▁san tu az ▁. ▁Kris to ren ▁e liz ▁el kar te ▁guz ti ek ▁a gur tzen ▁zai tuz te te ▁.
PRED:	Greet each other as a kiss of the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	Greet each other with a sacred kiss . All the churches of Christ send you their greetings .

ID:	198
INPUT:	▁Dar - dar ▁e gin go ▁du ▁ze ru a ke ta ▁lur rak ▁oi nar ri tik ▁i ka ra ▁, ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti dun ▁ho nek neu re ▁ha ser re a ▁e ta ▁su min ▁go ri a a zal du ko ▁du dan ▁e gu ne an ▁.
PRED:	The heavens and the earth tremble ; the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has poured out the heavens from the heavens .
GOLD:	For I will shake the heavens.The earth will move from its placewhen the Lord of Heaven 's Armies displays his wrathin the day of his fierce anger . ”

ID:	199
INPUT:	▁« ▁Nor bai tek ▁be re ▁eskla bo a ▁, ▁gi za se me a ▁na hiz ▁e ma ku me a ▁, ▁be gi an ▁jo tzen ▁ba du ▁e ta ▁be gi a ▁hon da tzen ▁, ▁lib re ▁u tzi ko ▁du ▁hon da tu ta ko ▁be gi a ren ▁or dain ▁.
PRED:	“ If a man leaves his male and female slave and female slave and female slave , she must be put to death .
GOLD:	“ If a man hits his male or female slave in the eye and the eye is blinded , he must let the slave go free to compensate for the eye .

ID:	200
INPUT:	▁U sai nez ▁go za tze ko ▁an tze ko ▁in tsen tsu rik ▁e gi ten ▁du e na ▁, ▁her ri tik ▁bo ta ▁e gin go ▁du te ▁» ▁.
PRED:	He will cut off the frankincense , and he will drive out the nations from the community . ”
GOLD:	Anyone who makes incense like this for personal use will be cut off from the community . ”

ID:	201
INPUT:	▁A ho a ▁bai ▁, ▁e ta ▁hi tzik ▁ez ▁du te ▁; ▁be gi ak ▁bai ▁, ▁e ta ▁i kus ten ▁ez ▁;
PRED:	They have mouths but can not speak , but they do n't see .
GOLD:	They have mouths but can not speak , and eyes but can not see .

ID:	202
INPUT:	▁Ho ri ek ▁di ra ▁Is ma e len ▁se me en ▁i ze nak ▁; ▁ha ma bi ▁bu ru za gi ▁bes te ▁hain bes te ▁lei nu ren tzat ▁; ▁i zen ▁ho ri ek ▁e man ▁zi tzaiz ki en ▁hai en ▁bi zi le ku ▁e ta ▁kan pa le ku ei ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	These are the names of the tribes of Israel . Their names were given to the tribes of Israel , and they lived in the camp .
GOLD:	These twelve sons of Ishmael became the founders of twelve tribes named after them , listed according to the places they settled and camped .

ID:	203
INPUT:	▁Bi ho a ▁e ne ▁jau na ▁be re ▁zer bi tza ri ▁ho nen ▁aur re tik ▁, ▁e ta ▁nik ▁po li ki - po li ki ▁e gin go ▁dut ▁bi de a ▁, ▁aur re an ▁do a zen ▁a be re en ▁e ta ▁haur ren ▁mar txan ▁, ▁Seir re ra ▁, ▁e ne ▁jau na ren ga na ▁, ▁i ri tsi ▁ar te ▁.
PRED:	I will find out my lord the king 's palace , and I will search for him . I will find him in the valley of Seir , and I will find him .
GOLD:	Please , my lord , go ahead of your servant . We will follow slowly , at a pace that is comfortable for the livestock and the children . I will meet you at Seir . ”

ID:	204
INPUT:	▁Bo oz ▁, ▁jan ▁e ta ▁e dan ▁on do ren ▁, ▁u mo re tsu ▁jar ri ▁zen ▁, ▁e ta ▁jar rai an ▁ga ra gar - pi la ▁ba ten ▁on do an ▁e tzan ▁zen ▁lo ta ra ko ▁. ▁Rut ▁i sil ka ▁hur bil du ▁, ▁ha ren ▁es tal ki a ▁al txa tu ▁e ta ▁ha ren ▁oi ne tan ▁e tzan ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	So Boaz got up and touched his robe and sat on the threshing floor . So Ruth got up early in the middle of the door . So Ruth went out to the door of the door .
GOLD:	After Boaz had finished eating and drinking and was in good spirits , he lay down at the far end of the pile of grain and went to sleep . Then Ruth came quietly , uncovered his feet , and lay down .

ID:	205
INPUT:	▁geuk ▁en tzun ▁di o gu ▁e sa ten ▁, ▁Je sus ▁Na za re tar ra ▁de la ko ▁hor rek ▁tenplu a ▁sun tsi tu ko ▁du e la ▁e ta ▁Moi se sek ▁e man ▁ziz ki gun ▁o hi tu rak ▁al da tu ko ▁di tu e la ▁» ▁.
PRED:	We hear that Jesus was saying , ‘ We will destroy the Temple of the Lord , just as Moses had promised . ' ”
GOLD:	We have heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth will destroy the Temple and change the customs Moses handed down to us . ”

ID:	206
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁di o ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁« ▁Ga za ▁her ri ak gaiz ta ke ri a rik ▁as ko ▁e gin ▁du ▁, ▁zein ▁bai no ▁zein ▁han di a go.E ta ▁be raz ▁, ▁zi gor tu ▁e gin go ▁dut ▁! ▁Her ri ▁o so ak ▁er bes te ra tu ▁bai ti tu ▁, ▁e dom dar ren ▁es ku ▁uz te ko ▁;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Gilead have sinned again and again , but I will not let them go unpunished ! They will not let them go unpunished !
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Gaza have sinned again and again , and I will not let them go unpunished ! They sent whole villages into exile , selling them as slaves to Edom .

ID:	207
INPUT:	▁Li bu ru ▁San tu ak ▁di o en ▁be za la ▁: ▁Jain ko ak ▁a di me na ▁i tsu tu ▁e gin ▁zi en ▁. ▁Be gi ak ▁e man ▁ziz ki en ▁, ▁bai na ▁ez ▁i kus te ko ▁, ▁be lar ri ak ▁e re ▁bai ▁, ▁bai na ▁ez ▁en tzu te ko ▁E ta ▁hor re la ▁gaur ▁ar te ▁.
PRED:	As the Scriptures say , “ This is what God has done . He did n't know what he did , but he would n't listen to me . But he did n't listen to me . ”
GOLD:	As the Scriptures say , “ God has put them into a deep sleep.To this day he has shut their eyes so they do not see , and closed their ears so they do not hear . ”

ID:	208
INPUT:	▁Al txor ▁bi kain ▁e ta ▁o pa ro a ▁zu hur ra ren ▁e txe an ▁; ▁zen tzu ga be ak ▁de na ▁e ral gi tzen ▁du ▁.
PRED:	A wise person is a good person 's home ; a house is filled with understanding .
GOLD:	The wise have wealth and luxury , but fools spend whatever they get .

ID:	209
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁guz ti en ▁gai ne tik ▁, ▁jantz ▁zai tez te ▁mai ta su nez ▁, ▁hau ▁bai ta ▁el kar ta sun ▁be te a ren ▁lo kar ri a ▁.
PRED:	Love each other with each other . Love each other with each other .
GOLD:	Above all , clothe yourselves with love , which binds us all together in perfect harmony .

ID:	210
INPUT:	▁Go re tsi a ▁Zu ▁! ▁Dei ▁e gin ▁ni on ▁Jau na ri ▁, ▁e ta ▁e tsai en gan dik ▁sal ba tu ▁nin du en ▁.
PRED:	But I cried out to the Lord , “ O Lord , rescue me from my enemies .
GOLD:	I called on the Lord , who is worthy of praise , and he saved me from my enemies .

ID:	211
INPUT:	▁« ▁Is ra el ▁, ▁Ja ko ben ▁her ri ▁hor rek ▁, ▁go go an ▁i zan ▁ni re ▁zer bi tza ri ▁za re <unk> ▁e ra tu ▁zai tut ▁, ▁e ta ▁ni re ▁zer bi tza ri ▁za <unk> ra el ▁, ▁ez ▁zai tut ▁a haz tu ko ▁.
PRED:	“ When you are my people , Jacob will be your servant , and your servants will be forgotten , and your servants will be forgotten .
GOLD:	“ Pay attention , O Jacob , for you are my servant , O Israel.I , the Lord , made you , and I will not forget you .

ID:	212
INPUT:	▁Se ni de ok ▁, ▁e pe a ▁la bur tu ▁e gin ▁de la ▁di o tsu et ▁. ▁Be raz ▁, ▁gel di tzen ▁zai gun ▁den bo ran ▁, ▁ez kon du ak ▁bi zi ▁bi tez ▁ez kon du rik ▁ez ▁ba leu de ▁be za la ▁;
PRED:	So , dear brothers and sisters , I tell you the truth , that no one lives in the desert .
GOLD:	But let me say this , dear brothers and sisters : The time that remains is very short . So from now on , those with wives should not focus only on their marriage .

ID:	213
INPUT:	▁« ▁Or tzi tik ▁tru moi a jo a ra zi ▁zu en ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁dei a dar ▁e gin ▁Goi - goi ko ak ▁.
PRED:	“ At that time the Lord called out of the Most High , the Most High called out the Most High .
GOLD:	The Lord thundered from heaven ; the voice of the Most High resounded .

ID:	214
INPUT:	▁Hor ra ▁non ▁da to zen ▁ur ru ti tik ▁: ▁i par ▁e ta ▁men de bal de tik ▁da toz ▁, ▁E gip to ▁al de tik ▁e re ▁bai ▁.
PRED:	That is why the north will come from the north , and the north will come from Egypt .
GOLD:	See , my people will return from far away , from lands to the north and west , and from as far south as Egypt . ”

ID:	215
INPUT:	▁Gantz ▁guz ti ak ▁al da re an ▁er re ko ▁di tu ▁, ▁el kar ta sun - o pa ri gai en ▁gan tzak ▁be za la ▁. ▁E ra ▁ho ne tan ▁e gin go ▁du ▁a pai zak ▁be ka tu a ren ▁bar ka men - o hi ku ne a ▁e ta ▁bar ka tu a ▁i zan go ▁du ▁bu ru za gi ak ▁be ka tu a ▁.
PRED:	He will burn the fat of the fat on the altar and burn it on the altar . He will purify the fat of the sin offering and the sin offering . He will purify the sin offering and the sin offering .
GOLD:	Then he must burn all the goat 's fat on the altar , just as he does with the peace offering . Through this process , the priest will purify the leader from his sin , making him right with the Lord , and he will be forgiven .

ID:	216
INPUT:	▁Lei nu en ▁ko ka gu ne a ▁kan pa le ku an
PRED:	Paul 's Final Words
GOLD:	Organization for Israel 's Camp

ID:	217
INPUT:	▁Ze ren ▁, ▁goi an ge ru a ren ▁a ho tsez ▁e ta ▁Jain ko a ren ▁tu ru ta - ho tsez ▁sei na le a ▁e ma nik ▁, ▁Jau na ▁be ra ▁jai tsi ko ▁bai ta ▁ze ru tik ▁, ▁e ta ▁aur re na ▁Kris to re kin ▁bat ▁e gi nik ▁hil da ko ak ▁piz tu ko ▁di ra ▁;
PRED:	In the morning , the voice of God and the trumpet blast of the trumpets and the trumpets , but the voice of the Lord will be raised from heaven . He will die with the resurrection of the dead .
GOLD:	For the Lord himself will come down from heaven with a commanding shout , with the voice of the archangel , and with the trumpet call of God . First , the believers who have died will rise from their graves .

ID:	218
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁su a ▁bi da li ▁zu en ▁e ta ▁de na ▁kis ka li ▁: ▁er re - o pa ri gai a ▁, ▁e gur ra ▁, ▁bai ta ▁har ri ak ▁e ta ▁er rau tsa ▁e re ▁, ▁e ta ▁er re te ne ko ▁u ra ▁i dor tu ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord sent a fire into the fire and burned it on dry ground . He burned it into the dry ground and burned it in the dry ground .
GOLD:	Immediately the fire of the Lord flashed down from heaven and burned up the young bull , the wood , the stones , and the dust . It even licked up all the water in the trench !

ID:	219
INPUT:	▁zu re ▁go ral pe nak ▁kon ta tu ▁a hal ▁di tza dan Si on ▁hi ri ▁e der re ko ▁sar re ran ▁, ▁a lai tu ▁a hal ▁na din ▁zuk ▁e ma ni ko ▁ga rai pe naz ▁.
PRED:	Your unfailing love is as beautiful as Mount Zion , beautiful as you promised .
GOLD:	The nations have fallen into the pit they dug for others.Their own feet have been caught in the trap they set .

ID:	220
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁e re ▁e san ▁zi dan ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁« ▁Ez ▁jo an ▁hi le tak ▁e gi ten ▁a ri ▁di ren ▁e txe ra ▁, ▁do lu an ▁par te ▁har tze ko ▁e ta ▁a tse ka be an ▁la gun ▁e gi te ko ▁: ▁u ka tu ▁e gin ▁bai tiz ki ot ▁her ri ▁ho ni ▁neu re ▁ba ke a ▁, ▁mai ta su na ▁e ta ▁er ru ki a ▁.
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord : “ Do not go into the city of the city and give them rest of the people 's property , but I will show mercy to those who love them .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Do not go to funerals to mourn and show sympathy for these people , for I have removed my protection and peace from them . I have taken away my unfailing love and my mercy .

ID:	221
INPUT:	▁Ne he mi a sek ▁Je ru sa le me ra ▁i tzul tze ko ▁bai me na ▁lor tu
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Return to Jerusalem
GOLD:	Nehemiah Goes to Jerusalem

ID:	222
INPUT:	▁Si nes ten ▁e ta ▁ba tai a tzen ▁den ▁o ro ▁sal ba tu a ▁i zan go ▁da ▁; ▁si nes ten ▁ez ▁du e na ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁kon de na tu a ▁.
PRED:	For the one who believes in Christ will be saved . But anyone who believes in him will be saved .
GOLD:	Anyone who believes and is baptized will be saved . But anyone who refuses to believe will be condemned .

ID:	223
INPUT:	▁De si ra tzen ▁zu e na ▁e man ▁di o zu e ta ▁es ka tu a ▁ez ▁di o zu ▁u ka tu ▁.
PRED:	You give him whatever you ask . Do n't let him ask for you .
GOLD:	You welcomed him back with success and prosperity.You placed a crown of finest gold on his head .

ID:	224
INPUT:	▁Ha tzar - Xu al ▁, ▁Be er - Xe ba ▁e ta ▁in gu ru ak ▁,
PRED:	Hazar-shual , Beersheba , Beersheba ,
GOLD:	Hazar-shual , Beersheba , Biziothiah ,

ID:	225
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁zu ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁ez ▁e gon ▁ur run ▁! ▁E ne ▁in dar ▁, ▁la gun du ▁! ▁Ez ▁lu za tu ▁!
PRED:	O Lord , do n't let my enemies triumph over me ! Do n't let them triumph over them !
GOLD:	Save me from the sword ; spare my precious life from these dogs .

ID:	226
INPUT:	▁Bi hur ri tu ▁zai tez ▁, ▁bai ▁, ▁e gin ▁ai e ne ▁, ▁Si on go ▁her ri ▁, ▁e ma ku me ak ▁er di mi ne tan ▁be za la ▁; ▁o rain ▁hi ri tik ▁a te ra ko ▁bai tza re te e ta ▁lan dan ▁bi zi <unk> bi lo ni a ra ▁jo an go ▁za re te ▁, ▁bai na ▁han ▁sal ba tu ko ▁zai tuz teJau nak ▁, ▁zeu en ▁e tsai en ▁es ku e ta tik ▁as ka tu ko ▁.
PRED:	For the women of Jerusalem will be destroyed , like women who live in the towns of Jerusalem . They will live in the towns of the Lord , and you will live in the land of the Lord .
GOLD:	Writhe and groan like a woman in labor , you people of Jerusalem , for now you must leave this cityto live in the open country.You will soon be sent in exileto distant Babylon.But the Lord will rescue you there ; he will redeem you from the grip of your enemies .

ID:	227
INPUT:	▁Gai ne ra ko ▁gu da ri ak ▁be re ▁a nai a ▁A bi xai ren ▁gi da ri tza pe an ▁u tzi ▁zi tu en ▁ler ro tan ▁.
PRED:	So Abishai and Abishai , the commander of the army of Judah .
GOLD:	He left the rest of the army under the command of his brother Abishai , who was to attack the Ammonites .

ID:	228
INPUT:	▁Hur bil ▁zai tez te ▁Jau na ren ga na ▁. ▁Be ra ▁da ▁har ri ▁bi zi a ▁, ▁gi zo nek ▁baz ter tu a ▁, ▁bai na ▁Jain ko a ren ▁be gi e tan ▁au ke ra tu a ▁e ta ▁bi kai na ▁.
PRED:	Come , get ready to worship the Lord , for he has chosen you to go to the place of worship him .
GOLD:	You are coming to Christ , who is the living cornerstone of God 's temple . He was rejected by people , but he was chosen by God for great honor .

ID:	229
INPUT:	▁Ja kin du ri a ▁, ▁al txor ▁pre zi a tu a
PRED:	Wisdom Calls for a Hearing
GOLD:	The Benefits of Wisdom

ID:	230
INPUT:	▁Ma na se sen ▁bes te ▁sei ▁se me en ▁on do ren go ei ▁e re ▁, ▁A bi e zer ▁, ▁He lek ▁, ▁As ri el ▁, ▁Si kem ▁, ▁He fer ▁e ta ▁Xe mi da ren ▁on do ren go ei ▁, ▁a le gi a ▁, ▁be ren ▁on da re a ▁i zen da tu ▁zi e ten ▁, ▁se ni tar te ka ▁ba na tu a ▁. ▁Ho ri ek ▁zi ren ▁Jo se ren ▁se me ▁Ma na se sen ▁se me ak ▁.
PRED:	The descendants of Gershon were given to the clans of Manasseh , Simeon , Gad , and Uzziel . Their descendants became the clans of Shechem . Their descendants became the clans of Manasseh . Their descendants became the clans of Manasseh .
GOLD:	So the allotment on the west side of the Jordan was for the remaining families within the clans of the tribe of Manasseh : Abiezer , Helek , Asriel , Shechem , Hepher , and Shemida . These clans represent the male descendants of Manasseh son of Joseph .

ID:	231
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ▁, ▁er re ge ak ▁har tu ri ko ▁e ra ba ki a ▁, ▁hain ▁za ba la ▁den ▁in pe ri o ▁o so ra ▁he da tu ko ▁da ▁. ▁Or du an ▁, ▁e maz te ▁guz ti ek ▁be ren ▁se nar rei ▁, ▁no la ▁han di e nei ▁ha la ▁a pa le nei ▁, ▁be gi ru ne ▁i za nen ▁di e te ▁» ▁.
PRED:	That is why the king of Assyria 's daughter , says the Lord , “ The king of the south will be his wife , just as he has promised . ”
GOLD:	When this decree is published throughout the king 's vast empire , husbands everywhere , whatever their rank , will receive proper respect from their wives ! ”

ID:	232
INPUT:	▁Ja ki na ra zi ▁zi e ten ▁is ra el dar rei ▁Ru ben ▁e ta ▁Ga den ▁lei nu e ta ko ▁e ta ▁Ma na se sen ▁lei nu ▁er di ko ▁gi zo nek ▁al da re a ▁e rai ki ▁zu te la ▁Jor dan ▁i bai ▁in gu ru an ▁, ▁Ka na a nen ▁aur rez ▁aur re ▁, ▁is ra el dar ▁lur ral de az ▁bes te ▁al de ra ▁;
PRED:	But the people of Israel received the following towns from the tribes of Reuben and Gad , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh . They crossed the Jordan River to the Jordan River in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	The rest of Israel heard that the people of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh had built an altar at Geliloth at the edge of the land of Canaan , on the west side of the Jordan River .

ID:	233
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁a hus pez tu ▁hai en ▁aur re an ▁, ▁ez ta ▁gur tza rik ▁e man ▁e re ▁, ▁ni ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁zu re ▁Jain ko a ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁je los kor ra ▁bai naiz ▁: ▁gor ro to ▁di da ten ▁gu ra so en ▁gaiz ta ke ri a ▁on do ren go en gan ▁zi gor tzen ▁dut ▁hi ru gar ren ▁e ta ▁lau gar ren ▁be lau nal di rai no ▁e re ▁;
PRED:	Do not bow down on them or worship other gods , for I am the Lord your God , who is a jealous God . I am the Lord , the God of Israel , and I will forgive their sins .
GOLD:	You must not bow down to them or worship them , for I , the Lord your God , am a jealous God who will not tolerate your affection for any other gods . I lay the sins of the parents upon their children ; the entire family is affected — even children in the third and fourth generations of those who reject me .

ID:	234
INPUT:	▁Az ken ▁a gur ra
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Greetings

ID:	235
INPUT:	▁Ba tzu ek ▁a txi lo tu ▁e gin ▁na hi ▁zu ten ▁, ▁bai na ▁i nork ▁ez ▁zi on ▁es ku rik ▁e zar ri ▁.
PRED:	Some of the men who wanted to arrest him , but no one gave him victory .
GOLD:	Some even wanted him arrested , but no one laid a hand on him .

ID:	236
INPUT:	▁Ba bi lo ni a ▁ho ri ▁, ▁bi ▁i bai ▁han di ren ▁ar te an ▁zau de ▁, ▁a be ras ta sun ▁han di ak ▁di tu zu ▁! ▁I ri tsi ▁zai zu ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁az ke na ▁, ▁a ka bo ▁zu re ▁i ra ba zi ak ▁!
PRED:	You have become very rich in Babylon , and you have become very great . You have struck you with great joy , but you have destroyed .
GOLD:	You are a city by a great river , a great center of commerce , but your end has come.The thread of your life is cut .

ID:	237
INPUT:	▁Gi zon ▁ba kar ra ren ▁be ka tu a ga tik ▁he ri o tza ▁na gu si ▁ger ta tu ▁ba zen ▁, ▁zen ba tez ▁ge hi a go ▁ez ▁o te ▁di ra ▁ba kar ▁ba ten ga tik ▁, ▁Je su ▁Kris to ga tik ▁, ▁na gu si ▁i zan go ▁be ti ko ▁bi zi tzan ▁Jain ko a ren ▁sal ba zi o a ren ▁do hain ▁o pa ro a ▁har tzen ▁du te nak ▁!
PRED:	For we have been united by the death of the Son of Man . And if we do n't be saved , we will be saved by the grace of God , we will be saved .
GOLD:	For the sin of this one man , Adam , caused death to rule over many . But even greater is God 's wonderful grace and his gift of righteousness , for all who receive it will live in triumph over sin and death through this one man , Jesus Christ .

ID:	238
INPUT:	▁Da vi dek ▁men di - gai lur ra ▁i ga ro ▁zu e ne ko ▁, ▁Tzi ba ▁, ▁Me fi - Bo xe ten ▁mor roi a ▁, ▁a te ra ▁zi tzai on ▁bi de ra ▁. ▁Be re kin ▁ze kar tzan ▁bi ▁as to ▁txal ma tu rik ▁e ta ▁ber re hun ▁o giz ▁, ▁e hun ▁ma has pa sa - mor doz ▁, ▁ga rai ko ▁e hun ▁frui tu - mul tzoz ▁e ta ▁ar do - za ha gi ▁ba tez ▁za ma tu rik ▁.
PRED:	David and his servant David went to the top of the mountain of the hill country . He also took his servants and sent him to his servants , along with large amounts of wine , new wine , and olive oil .
GOLD:	When David had gone a little beyond the summit of the Mount of Olives , Ziba , the servant of Mephibosheth , was waiting there for him . He had two donkeys loaded with 200 loaves of bread , 100 clusters of raisins , 100 bunches of summer fruit , and a wineskin full of wine .

ID:	239
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁Moi se si ▁:
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	This was the Lord 's reply to Moses .

ID:	240
INPUT:	▁Ai ta ren ▁tes ti gan tza ▁e ta ▁Jo an ▁Ba tai a tzai le a re na
PRED:	John the Baptist and John
GOLD:	Witnesses to Jesus

ID:	241
INPUT:	▁go re tsi ▁Jau na ren ▁i zen ▁os pe tsu a ▁! ▁A hus pez tu ▁Jau na ren ▁aur re an ▁, ▁be re ▁san tu ta su nez ▁a ger tze an ▁!
PRED:	Let the glory of the Lord praise his name ; praise his holy name .
GOLD:	Honor the Lord for the glory of his name.Worship the Lord in the splendor of his holiness .

ID:	242
INPUT:	▁Ho gei ta ▁ha mar ▁ur te ▁zi tu e la ▁, ▁Pe le gek ▁Reu ▁i zan ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	He was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he became the father of Reuel .
GOLD:	When Peleg was 30 years old , he became the father of Reu .

ID:	243
INPUT:	▁Ro bo a mek ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁ez ▁zu en ▁ain tzat ▁har tu ▁kon tsei la ri en ▁a hol ku a ▁; ▁bai zik ▁e ta ▁be ra re kin ▁ba te ra ▁ha zi ▁zi ren ▁e ta ▁be re ▁zer bi tzu ra ▁zi tu en ▁gaz te ei ▁gal de gin ▁zi en ▁:
PRED:	But Rehoboam did n't understand what he meant . He was going to happen to his advisers and his advisers , and he asked them what he meant .
GOLD:	But Rehoboam rejected the advice of the older men and instead asked the opinion of the young men who had grown up with him and were now his advisers .

ID:	244
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁ez ▁ba kar rik ▁ha ren ▁e tor re ra re kin ▁, ▁bai ta ▁zu en gan dik ▁e kar ri ▁ziz ki dan ▁ber ri ▁poz gar ri e kin ▁e re ▁: ▁be rak ▁ja ki na ra zi ▁ziz ki dan ▁ni ▁i kus te ko ▁du zu en ▁ir ri ka ▁, ▁zu en ▁da mu - ne gar ra ▁e ta ▁ni re ki ko ▁mai ta su na ▁. ▁Hor rek ▁o rain dik ▁ge hi a go ▁poz tu ▁nin du en ▁.
PRED:	He did n't know where he was with you , but he brought them back to me . He told them , “ I am the one who loves you , and I loved you . I loved you , and I was delighted with joy . ”
GOLD:	His presence was a joy , but so was the news he brought of the encouragement he received from you . When he told us how much you long to see me , and how sorry you are for what happened , and how loyal you are to me , I was filled with joy !

ID:	245
INPUT:	▁As to ▁zu ri ▁ba ten ▁gai ne an ▁, ▁ta piz ▁gai ne an ▁e se ri ak ▁zo az te no ke ta ▁oi nez ▁zo az te nok ▁, ▁en tzun
PRED:	When the wild animals falls on the ground , the wild animals fell down on the ground .
GOLD:	“ Consider this , you who ride on fine donkeys , you who sit on fancy saddle blankets , and you who walk along the road .

ID:	246
INPUT:	▁Neu re ▁ar te an ▁di ot ▁: ▁Jau na ▁da ▁ni re ▁on ▁guz ti a ▁! ▁Ha ren gan ▁dut ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁i txa ro pen ▁.
PRED:	I am the Lord , and he is my fortress ; I will put my hope in him .
GOLD:	I say to myself , “ The Lord is my inheritance ; therefore , I will hope in him ! ”

ID:	247
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ba rau ▁e gi te an ▁, ▁ez ▁zai tez te ▁a ger ▁ko pe ti lun ▁, ▁i txu ra za le ek ▁o hi ▁du ten ▁be za la ▁: ▁aur pe gi a ▁i tsus ten ▁du te ▁, ▁ba rau ▁e gi ten ▁du te la ▁jen de a ri ▁a zal tze ko ▁. ▁Be ne tan ▁di o tsu et ▁: ▁Har tu a ▁du te ▁be ren ▁or dai na ▁.
PRED:	“ Do n't be surprised ! Do n't be surprised ! Do n't be rid of all the evil things you have done . They are doing what is right , and I tell you the truth . But I tell you what they do .
GOLD:	“ And when you fast , do n't make it obvious , as the hypocrites do , for they try to look miserable and disheveled so people will admire them for their fasting . I tell you the truth , that is the only reward they will ever get .

ID:	248
INPUT:	▁Ar ro tzen ▁es ku ▁u tzi ko ▁dut ▁lur ral de a ▁, ▁soil ▁de za ten ▁; ▁her ri al de ko ▁gaiz ki le en ▁es ku ▁, ▁har ra pa kin ▁ger ta ▁da <unk> ta ▁pro fa na tu ▁e gin go ▁du te ▁.
PRED:	I will hand them over to the land , but I will hand them over to the land of the Babylonians , and they will be killed .
GOLD:	I will give it as plunder to foreigners , to the most wicked of nations , and they will defile it .

ID:	249
INPUT:	▁Zu en ▁i ze na ▁ai pa tu ko ▁du te ni re ▁au ke ra tu ek nor bait ▁ma da ri ka tze an ▁, ▁e ta ▁e san go ▁: ▁“ ▁Ha la xe ▁hil ko ▁a hal ▁zai tuJain ko ▁Jau nak ▁! ▁” ▁Ni re ▁zer bi tza ri en ▁gain ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁bes te ▁i zen ▁bat ▁ai pa tu ko ▁da ▁, ▁guz tiz ▁bes te la ko a ▁.
PRED:	The Lord has chosen some of your relatives , who has chosen you to kill you and say , ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . '
GOLD:	Your name will be a curse word among my people , for the Sovereign Lord will destroy youand will call his true servants by another name .

ID:	250
INPUT:	▁Ja tun ▁han di a ▁ba za ra ▁, ▁eu tsi ▁zeu re ▁jan gu ra ri ▁.
PRED:	Make sure that the Ark of the Covenant be revealed to you .
GOLD:	If you are a big eater , put a knife to your throat ;

ID:	251
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁Ju da ko ▁her ri ak ▁hil ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁A mon ▁er re ge a ren ▁aur ka ▁jai ki ▁zi ren ▁guz ti ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁be ra ren ▁se me ▁Jo si as ▁i zen da tu ▁zu ten ▁er re ge ▁, ▁be re ▁ai ta ren ▁or dez ▁.
PRED:	But the people of Judah conspired against King Amon of Judah and assassinated him . But Josiah son of Amon became the next king .
GOLD:	But the people of the land killed all those who had conspired against King Amon , and they made his son Josiah the next king .

ID:	252
INPUT:	▁hai ze - oi ha lak ▁, ▁zu re ▁e zau gar ri zi re nak ▁, ▁E gip to ko ▁li ho ▁bor da tuz ▁; ▁zu re ▁gai nes tal ki a kE li xa ▁u har te e ta ko ▁pur pu ra e ta ▁gor ri mi nez ko ▁oi ha lez ▁.
PRED:	The wind of Egypt will be a second time , just as God had commanded him . He will let him go to Egypt with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	Your sails were made of Egypt 's finest linen , and they flew as a banner above you.You stood beneath blue and purple awningsmade bright with dyes from the coasts of Elishah .

ID:	253
INPUT:	▁Zin tzo a ren ▁na hi a ▁be te ▁e gi ten ▁da ▁, ▁gaiz to a ren ▁i txa ro pe nak ▁huts ▁e gi ten ▁.
PRED:	The godly care for the godly , but the hopes of the wicked succeed .
GOLD:	The godly can look forward to a reward , while the wicked can expect only judgment .

ID:	254
INPUT:	▁Se de ki as ▁er re ge a ri
PRED:	Zedekiah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	No Deliverance from Babylon

ID:	255
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁ez ▁du te ▁ber res ku ra tu ko ▁be hi ▁, ▁ar di ▁na hiz ▁a hun tzen ▁le hen - ku me rik ▁: ▁ni re tzat ▁sa ga ra tu ak ▁di ra ▁. ▁Hil ▁e gin go ▁di tu zu ▁, ▁o do la ▁al da re ▁gai ne an ▁i su ri ▁e ta ▁gan tza ▁ni re ▁o ho rez ▁er re ▁. ▁Nik ▁a tse gi nez ▁o nar tu ko ▁dut ▁o pa ri a ▁.
PRED:	But if the animal has no defects , it must be sacrificed to the firstborn sons of cattle , sheep , sheep , and goats , and burn it on the altar . I will burn it on the altar of burnt offering .
GOLD:	“ However , you may not redeem the firstborn of cattle , sheep , or goats . They are holy and have been set apart for the Lord . Sprinkle their blood on the altar , and burn their fat as a special gift , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	256
INPUT:	▁« ▁O toitz ▁e gi te an ▁, ▁ez ▁a ri ▁e san ▁e ta ▁e san ▁, ▁jen ti lek ▁o hi ▁du ten ▁be za la ▁, ▁us te ▁bai tu te ▁be ren ▁hitz - ja ri o a ri ▁es ker ▁en tzun go ▁di e la ▁Jain ko ak ▁.
PRED:	“ Do n't pray that the people are not saying , ‘ Do n't listen to the truth , for they have heard God 's word . '
GOLD:	“ When you pray , do n't babble on and on as the Gentiles do . They think their prayers are answered merely by repeating their words again and again .

ID:	257
INPUT:	▁Is ra el dar rak ▁e ta ▁jen ti lak
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	God 's Mercy Is for Everyone

ID:	258
INPUT:	▁A pur tu a ▁bai tu zu ▁le po an ▁ze ra ma te nuz tar ri ▁as tu na ▁, ▁za pal tzai le a ren ▁a gin te - ma ki la ▁, ▁Ma di an go ▁gu da ros te a a pur tu ▁ze nu en ▁be za la xe ▁.
PRED:	But when the Roman officer heard that the Roman army was crushed , he was crushed by the army of Midian .
GOLD:	You will enlarge the nation of Israel , and its people will rejoice.They will rejoice before youas people rejoice at the harvestand like warriors dividing the plunder .

ID:	259
INPUT:	▁Ai tak ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁e san ▁zi en ▁mor roi ei ▁: ▁“ ▁E kar ri ▁biz kor ▁jan tzi rik ▁o ne na ▁e ta ▁jan tzi o zu e ▁, ▁i pi ni o zu e ▁e raz tu na ▁e ta ▁jan tzi ▁oi ne ta ko ak ▁;
PRED:	But the father said to his servants , ‘ Take off your clothes and put on your clothes , and put your clothes on your head .
GOLD:	“ But his father said to the servants , ‘ Quick ! Bring the finest robe in the house and put it on him . Get a ring for his finger and sandals for his feet .

ID:	260
INPUT:	▁Be toz ▁o pa ri ▁bi kai nak ▁E gip to tik ▁, ▁da karzki o la ▁a rin ▁E ti o pi ak ▁es ku - e ra ku tsi ak ▁Jain ko a ri ▁.
PRED:	Come , bring them out of the land of Egypt , and bring them into the hands of God .
GOLD:	Sing to God , you kingdoms of the earth.Sing praises to the Lord.Interlude

ID:	261
INPUT:	▁Be re ▁e maz te ▁Ze re xi ▁e ta ▁a dis ki de ▁guz ti ei ▁a di e ra zi ▁zi en ▁ger ta tu ▁zi tzai o na ▁. ▁Be re ▁a dis ki de ▁ja kin tsu ▁hai ek ▁e ta ▁e maz te ak ▁e san ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁— ▁Mar do ke o ▁ju du ▁i za nik ▁, ▁be ra ren ▁aur re an ▁a tze ra ka ▁ha si ▁bal din ▁ba za ra ▁, ▁e zin ▁i zan go ▁du zu ▁deus ▁e re ▁hor ren ▁aur ka ▁. ▁Ai tzi tik ▁, ▁hon do rai no ▁e ro ri ko ▁za ra ▁hor ren ▁aur re an ▁.
PRED:	So his wife , his brothers , brothers , and all his friends , told them , “ Let 's go ahead and tell him what you have done . If you do , let 's go , let 's go ahead . ”
GOLD:	When Haman told his wife , Zeresh , and all his friends what had happened , his wise advisers and his wife said , “ Since Mordecai — this man who has humiliated you — is of Jewish birth , you will never succeed in your plans against him . It will be fatal to continue opposing him . ”

ID:	262
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁gar bi tzat ▁ai tor tu a ▁i zan ▁on do ren ▁, ▁ez ka bi a ▁lar ru a za le an ▁za bal tzen ▁ba zai o ▁,
PRED:	But if you have a serious skin , you must not be purified .
GOLD:	But if the scabby sore begins to spread after the person is pronounced clean ,

ID:	263
INPUT:	▁Ab ra ha me kin ▁min tza tu ▁on do ren ▁, ▁al de ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁Jain ko ak ▁.
PRED:	After Abraham heard what had happened , God sent him back to Abraham .
GOLD:	When God had finished speaking , he left Abraham .

ID:	264
INPUT:	▁Zu tar ri ▁e ta ▁zu toin ▁sak ra tu ak ▁e zar ri ▁zi tuz ten ▁mui no ▁guz ti e tan ▁e ta ▁zu haitz ▁han di ▁guz ti en ▁az pi an ▁;
PRED:	He set up the Asherah poles and smashed the Asherah poles and under every green tree .
GOLD:	They set up sacred pillars and Asherah poles at the top of every hill and under every green tree .

ID:	265
INPUT:	▁— ▁Zer ga tik ▁haus ten ▁du te ▁zu re ▁i kas le ek ▁za har ren ▁o hi tu ra ▁? ▁Ez ▁du te ▁o tor du ▁aur re tik ▁es ku en ▁gar bi kun tza ▁e gi ten ▁.
PRED:	“ Why have you rejected the law of Moses ? Do n't you purify yourselves before the Lord ? Of course not !
GOLD:	“ Why do your disciples disobey our age-old tradition ? For they ignore our tradition of ceremonial hand washing before they eat . ”

ID:	266
INPUT:	▁Hur ren go ▁goi ze an ▁, ▁jai ki tze an ▁, ▁Da gon ▁aur pe giz ▁aur re ra ▁lur re an ▁e ro ri a ▁aur ki tu ▁zu ten ▁ber ri ro ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁ku txa ren ▁ai tzi ne an ▁. ▁Da go nen ▁bu ru a ▁e ta ▁bi ▁be so ak ▁hau tsi ak ▁zeu den ▁a ta ri an ▁; ▁soin - en bor ra ▁bai no ▁ez ▁zu en ▁o so rik ▁Da go nek ▁.
PRED:	Early the next morning they found the Ark of the Lord standing in front of the Ark of the Lord . They found the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant , and they tore their feet in their feet .
GOLD:	But the next morning the same thing happened — Dagon had fallen face down before the Ark of the Lord again . This time his head and hands had broken off and were lying in the doorway . Only the trunk of his body was left intact .

ID:	267
INPUT:	▁E gi zu e ▁o toitz ▁gu re ga tik ▁. ▁Gu re ▁us tez ▁, ▁gar bi ▁dau ka gu ▁kon tzi en tzi a ▁, ▁gau za ▁guz ti e tan ▁zin tzo ▁jo ka tu ▁na hi an ▁bai ka bil tza ▁.
PRED:	Do n't pray for us , for we are pure in our sins . Be sure that we do n't turn away from God .
GOLD:	Pray for us , for our conscience is clear and we want to live honorably in everything we do .

ID:	268
INPUT:	▁Jo a nek ▁ez ▁zi on ▁u tzi ▁na hi ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: <unk> ▁naiz ▁zuk ▁ba tai a tu ▁be har re ko a ▁, ▁e ta ▁zu ▁za toz ▁ni re ga na ▁?
PRED:	But Jonathan refused to let him tell him what you said , “ I 'm going to be your heir to you ? ”
GOLD:	But John tried to talk him out of it . “ I am the one who needs to be baptized by you , ” he said , “ so why are you coming to me ? ”

ID:	269
INPUT:	▁De nak ▁hil ko ▁zi re la ko a ren ▁bel dur rez ▁, ▁pre sa ▁e man ▁zi e ten ▁e gip to ar rek ▁is ra el dar rei ▁, ▁a ha lik ▁e ta ▁las ter ren ▁a bi a ▁zi te zen ▁be ren ▁lur ral de tik ▁.
PRED:	The Egyptians were afraid of the Egyptians , but they were afraid of the Egyptians . They were eager to drive out the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	All the Egyptians urged the people of Israel to get out of the land as quickly as possible , for they thought , “ We will all die ! ”

ID:	270
INPUT:	▁Hi ri ok ▁hau ek ▁zi ren ▁: ▁Be tzer ▁, ▁ba sa mor tu an ▁, ▁lau ta dan ▁, ▁Ru be nen ▁lei nu ko en tzat ▁; ▁Ra mot ▁, ▁Ga la a den ▁, ▁Ga den ▁lei nu ko en tzat ▁, ▁e ta ▁Go lan ▁, ▁Ba xa nen ▁, ▁Ma na se sen ▁lei nu - er di ko en tzat ▁.
PRED:	These were the towns with their pasturelands : Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh , in the wilderness of refuge in the tribe of Gad .
GOLD:	These were the cities : Bezer on the wilderness plateau for the tribe of Reuben ; Ramoth in Gilead for the tribe of Gad ; Golan in Bashan for the tribe of Manasseh .

ID:	271
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁A ge ok ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁man da ta ri ak ▁, ▁hau ▁a di e ra zi ▁zi on ▁her ri a ri ▁Jau na ren ▁i ze ne an ▁: ▁« ▁Jau nak ▁di o ▁: ▁Zu e kin ▁naiz ▁ni ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then the king sent this message to the Lord : “ I am the Lord , ” he said , “ I am with you . ”
GOLD:	Then Haggai , the Lord 's messenger , gave the people this message from the Lord : “ I am with you , says the Lord ! ”

ID:	272
INPUT:	▁Al de ran tziz ▁bai zik ▁, ▁mai ta su ne an ▁be ne ta ko ak ▁i za nez ▁, ▁ha zi ▁gai te zen ▁gau za ▁guz ti e tan ▁, ▁Kris to ri ▁ge ro ▁e ta ▁ge hi a go ▁e go ki tuz ▁. ▁Be ra ▁da ▁bu ru a
PRED:	Dear friends , be careful to keep on loving each other so that we can continue to obey Christ . And we will be fully fully fully fully confident in Christ .
GOLD:	Instead , we will speak the truth in love , growing in every way more and more like Christ , who is the head of his body , the church .

ID:	273
INPUT:	▁ho nek ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁— ▁A di zu ▁, ▁A hi tu ben ▁se me ▁! ▁Ho nek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁He men ▁nau zu ▁, ▁jau na ▁.
PRED:	“ Well , ” Aaron said , “ you are my son , my lord , my lord ! ”
GOLD:	When they arrived , Saul shouted at him , “ Listen to me , you son of Ahitub ! ” “ What is it , my king ? ” Ahimelech asked .

ID:	274
INPUT:	▁oi ne ta ko ▁za har ▁e ta ▁bir jo si ak ▁jan tzi ▁zi tuz ten ▁oi ne tan ▁e ta ▁zar pa ▁za har rak ▁soi ne an ▁; ▁ze ra ma ten ▁o gi a ▁go gor ra ▁e ta ▁a pur ▁e gi na ▁ze go en ▁.
PRED:	They were so old when they were old , they tore their feet in burlap and saw that he was sleeping , and he tore his clothes in anguish .
GOLD:	They put on worn-out , patched sandals and ragged clothes . And the bread they took with them was dry and moldy .

ID:	275
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁ba dut ▁kon fi an tza ▁, ▁Jau na ▁la gun ▁, ▁neu ▁e re ▁zu en ga na ▁las ter ▁jo an go ▁nai ze la ▁.
PRED:	But I know that I am the Lord ; I will praise you for help .
GOLD:	And I have confidence from the Lord that I myself will come to see you soon .

ID:	276
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁er re ge a ▁ha ser re ▁gor ri tan ▁jar ri ▁zen ▁, ▁e ta ▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁ja ki tun ▁guz ti ak ▁hil tze ko ▁a gin du ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	Then the king became angry with them , and he took off everything he had said .
GOLD:	The king was furious when he heard this , and he ordered that all the wise men of Babylon be executed .

ID:	277
INPUT:	▁er re - o pa ri ak ▁, ▁la bo re- ▁e ta ▁i sur - o pa ri ak ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁e ta ▁el kar ta sun - o pa ri en ▁o do laz ▁zir ta tu ▁zu en ▁al da re a ▁.
PRED:	He also made the blood of the grain offering and sacrificed it to the Lord . He also made it with the blood of the blood of the altar .
GOLD:	He presented a burnt offering and a grain offering , he poured out a liquid offering , and he sprinkled the blood of peace offerings on the altar .

ID:	278
INPUT:	▁ez ▁naiz ▁zin tzo ei ▁dei ▁e gi te ra ▁e tor ri ▁, ▁be ka ta ri ei ▁bai zik ▁, ▁bi hoz ber ri ▁dai te zen ▁.
PRED:	I 'm not looking for the godly , but they do n't repent of sins .
GOLD:	I have come to call not those who think they are righteous , but those who know they are sinners and need to repent . ”

ID:	279
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁i har de tsi ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁Ez ▁a ri ▁mar mar ka ▁zeu en ▁ar te an ▁.
PRED:	But Jesus told them , “ Do n't let your complaining . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus replied , “ Stop complaining about what I said .

ID:	280
INPUT:	▁Sa lo mon ▁er re ge ak ▁e re ▁, ▁Sa ba ko ▁er re gi nak ▁na hi ▁zu en ▁e ta ▁es ka tu ▁zi on ▁guz ti a ▁e man ▁zi on ▁; ▁gai ne ra ▁, ▁er re ge ak ▁o hi ▁zu en ▁es ku za bal ta su nez ▁, ▁er re ga li ▁u ga ri ▁e gin ▁. ▁On do ren ▁, ▁er re gi na ▁be re ▁lur ral de ra ▁i tzu li ▁zen ▁be re ▁zer bi tza ri e kin ▁.
PRED:	King Solomon asked the king , “ He has given justice to the king , and he showed him everything he wanted . He wanted to go back to the king and let him return to his servant Solomon . Then he returned to the land .
GOLD:	King Solomon gave the queen of Sheba whatever she asked for , besides all the customary gifts he had so generously given . Then she and all her attendants returned to their own land .

ID:	281
INPUT:	▁Sai a ▁gai te zen ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁a tse den ▁hor re tan ▁sar tzen ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁da di la ▁i nor ▁si nes go gor ke ri an ▁e ror ▁, ▁gu re ▁aur re ko en ▁e <unk> a ri ▁jar rai tuz ▁.
PRED:	Come , let us stay in trouble , and let us go into the night . But if you do n't believe your lives , let us be put to death .
GOLD:	So let us do our best to enter that rest . But if we disobey God , as the people of Israel did , we will fall .

ID:	282
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁gu ra so ak ▁e re ▁a lai ▁dai te ze la ▁zu re ga tik ▁, ▁e ta ▁poz ▁da di la ▁mun du ra ▁e kar ri ▁zin tu en ▁a ma ▁!
PRED:	For your ancestors are glad , and your mother is glad .
GOLD:	So give your father and mother joy ! May she who gave you birth be happy .

ID:	283
INPUT:	▁E ra man ▁zu en ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁e hun ta ri ak ▁gu dal bu ru a ga na ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Pau lo ▁pre so ak ▁dei tu ▁dit ▁e ta ▁gaz te ▁hau ▁zu re ga na ▁e kar tze ko ▁es ka tu ▁; ▁zer bait ▁o men ▁du ▁zu ri ▁e sa te ko ▁.
PRED:	Then the commander took the commander of the guard and said to Paul , “ This is what Paul says : I am a young man who has been called to you . ”
GOLD:	So the officer did , explaining , “ Paul , the prisoner , called me over and asked me to bring this young man to you because he has something to tell you . ”

ID:	284
INPUT:	▁ez ▁ze go en ▁o rain dik ▁lan da re rik ▁lur re an ▁, ▁ez ta ▁be lar rik ▁e re ▁er ne ta ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁ez ▁bai tzi on ▁o rain dik ▁lur ra ri ▁eu ri rik ▁e man ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁bai tzen ▁lur ra ▁lan tze ko ▁gi za ki rik ▁.
PRED:	He did not plant anything in the fields or in the fields , for the Lord our God has given them no rain and rain .
GOLD:	neither wild plants nor grains were growing on the earth . For the Lord God had not yet sent rain to water the earth , and there were no people to cultivate the soil .

ID:	285
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁ja be tza ▁zeu en ▁on do ren go ei ▁be ti ko ▁u tzi ▁. ▁Ho ri ek ▁, ▁bai ▁, ▁eskla bo tzat ▁e du ki ▁di tza ke zu e ▁, ▁bai na ▁her ri tar ren ▁ar te an ▁, ▁is ra el dar ren ▁ar te an ▁, ▁ez ▁du zu e ▁ba tak ▁bes te a ▁go gor ▁har tu ko ▁.
PRED:	Instead , you may not abandon the people of Israel . Instead , you may not abandon the people of Israel , but you may not obey the Lord 's commands .
GOLD:	passing them on to your children as a permanent inheritance . You may treat them as slaves , but you must never treat your fellow Israelites this way .

ID:	286
INPUT:	▁Jen de a ▁i ga ro tzen ▁su ma tu rik ▁, ▁zer ▁ger ta tzen ▁zen ▁gal de tu ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	The crowds walked through the crowd , and he asked them what had happened .
GOLD:	When he heard the noise of a crowd going past , he asked what was happening .

ID:	287
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁Ez ▁al ▁du zu e ▁i noiz ▁i ra kur ri ▁zer ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁Da vi dek ▁be har ral di ▁ba te an ▁, ▁be ra ▁e ta ▁be re ▁la gu nak ▁go se ak ▁aur ki tu ▁zi re ne an ▁?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't you read what you 've done to David and his men ? ” So David asked them .
GOLD:	Jesus said to them , “ Have n't you ever read in the Scriptures what David did when he and his companions were hungry ?

ID:	288
INPUT:	▁Mu ti la ▁ze tor re la ▁, ▁de ab ru ak ▁lur re ra ▁bo ta ▁e ta ▁go gor ▁as tin du ▁zu en ▁. ▁Je su sek ▁me ha txu ▁e gin ▁zi on ▁es pi ri tu ▁gaiz to a ri ▁, ▁mu ti ko a ▁sen da tu ▁zu en ▁e ta ▁ai ta ri ▁i tzu li ▁zi on ▁.
PRED:	When the boy came to the ground , he threw the demon from heaven and struck down the ground . Then Jesus turned to the ground and restored it to the boy .
GOLD:	As the boy came forward , the demon knocked him to the ground and threw him into a violent convulsion . But Jesus rebuked the evil spirit and healed the boy . Then he gave him back to his father .

ID:	289
INPUT:	▁Ab ner rek ▁Ix - Bo xet ▁u tzi
PRED:	Abner 's Kindness to Mephibosheth
GOLD:	Abner Joins Forces with David

ID:	290
INPUT:	▁jan ▁er re ge ▁, ▁gu dal bu ru ▁e ta ▁gu da ri ▁in dar tsu en ▁ha ra gi a ▁, ▁zal di ▁e ta ▁zal diz ko en ▁ha ra gi a ▁, ▁e ra ▁guz ti e ta ko ▁jen de a ren ▁, ▁lib re ▁na hiz ▁eskla bo en ▁, ▁txi ki ▁na hiz ▁han di en ▁, ▁ha ra gi a ▁» ▁.
PRED:	The king 's chief baker and his chariots and chariots and charioteers , his chariots , and charioteers , and charioteers , and charioteers — all the horses , donkeys , donkeys , and charioteers . ”
GOLD:	Come and eat the flesh of kings , generals , and strong warriors ; of horses and their riders ; and of all humanity , both free and slave , small and great . ”

ID:	291
INPUT:	▁Zu ▁o toi tze an ▁ha si ▁be zain ▁las ter ▁, ▁me zu ▁bat ▁e man ▁du ▁Jain ko ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁hor ren ▁ber ri ▁e ma te ra ▁na tor ki zu ▁, ▁be re zi ki ▁mai te ▁bai tzai tu ▁Jain ko ak ▁. ▁A ha le gin ▁zai tez ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁me zu a ▁e ta ▁i kus ka ri a ren ▁e sa na hi a ▁u ler tzen ▁.
PRED:	At that time the message of God has given you a message from God . He has given you this message from God , and he has given you the privilege of doing what he tells you .
GOLD:	The moment you began praying , a command was given . And now I am here to tell you what it was , for you are very precious to God . Listen carefully so that you can understand the meaning of your vision .

ID:	292
INPUT:	▁Ai tak ▁Se me a ▁mai te ▁du ▁, ▁e ta ▁ha ren ▁es ku ▁jar ri ▁du ▁de na ▁.
PRED:	Anyone who loves the Son of Man must love him .
GOLD:	The Father loves his Son and has put everything into his hands .

ID:	293
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁kez ka ▁ge hi e gi ka mes gaiz to a ▁da kar ▁, ▁e ta ▁hitz - ja ri o ak zo ro - ber ri ke tak ▁e gi te a ▁.
PRED:	For we are saying , “ This is what the Lord says : The farmer is a liar ! ”
GOLD:	Do n't make rash promises , and do n't be hasty in bringing matters before God . After all , God is in heaven , and you are here on earth . So let your words be few .

ID:	294
INPUT:	▁Ab ner ▁Heb ro ne ra ▁i tzu li ▁ze ne an ▁, ▁Jo a bek ▁a par te ▁har tu ▁zu en ▁, ▁hi ri - sar re ran ▁ber tan ▁, ▁i sil pe an ▁hitz ▁e gi te ko ▁be za la ▁. ▁Or du an ▁, ▁sa be le an ▁jo ▁e ta ▁hil ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁, ▁be re ▁a nai a ▁A sa he len ▁o do la ▁men de ka tuz ▁.
PRED:	When Abner returned to Hebron , he went back to the town of Hebron , just as he had said , “ Let 's kill him and kill him . ” So Abner 's brother Ahab 's brother , just as he had done .
GOLD:	When Abner arrived back at Hebron , Joab took him aside at the gateway as if to speak with him privately . But then he stabbed Abner in the stomach and killed him in revenge for killing his brother Asahel .

ID:	295
INPUT:	▁Go gor tu ▁hai en ▁bar re na ▁: ▁ma da ri ka ▁i tza zu ▁!
PRED:	Let them curse them ; let them curse them .
GOLD:	Give them hard and stubborn hearts , and then let your curse fall on them !

ID:	296
INPUT:	▁« ▁E gin ▁zi lar ▁lan duz ko ▁bi ▁tu ru ta ▁: ▁el kar te a ▁bil tze ko ▁e ta ▁kan pa le ku a ▁u tzi ▁e ta ▁a bi a tze ko ▁sei na le a ▁e ma te ko ▁i zan go ▁di ra ▁.
PRED:	“ Then make the trumpets and the trumpets and the trumpets and the trumpets . They will be given to the Lord , and they will be given to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Make two trumpets of hammered silver for calling the community to assemble and for signaling the breaking of camp .

ID:	297
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁fa ri seu ak ▁e ta ▁le ge - mai su ak ▁mar mar re an ▁a ri ▁zi ren ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁« ▁Hor rek ▁har re ra ▁o na ▁e gi ten ▁di e ▁be ka ta ri ei ▁, ▁bai ta ▁be rai e kin ▁jan ▁e re ▁! ▁»
PRED:	Then the Pharisees and teachers of religious law said to themselves , “ That 's why should we eat and eat with them ? ”
GOLD:	This made the Pharisees and teachers of religious law complain that he was associating with such sinful people — even eating with them !

ID:	298
INPUT:	▁E gin ▁kon tu ▁zeu re ▁bu ru a ri ▁e ta ▁i ra kas ten ▁du zu na ri ▁; ▁eu tsi ▁tin ko ▁, ▁ho ri ▁e gi nez ▁, ▁bai ▁zeu re ▁bu ru a ▁, ▁bai ▁en tzu le ak ▁sal ba tu ko ▁bai ti tu zu ▁.
PRED:	Be careful to teach your instructions and understanding , for it is wonderful to save you . For you have heard your teaching , for you have saved yourself .
GOLD:	Keep a close watch on how you live and on your teaching . Stay true to what is right for the sake of your own salvation and the salvation of those who hear you .

ID:	299
INPUT:	▁De ne tan ▁a be rats ▁za re te ▁, ▁de ne tan ▁es ku za bal ▁i za te ko ▁; ▁hor re la ▁, ▁ni re ▁bi tar tez ▁, ▁zu en ▁es ku za bal ta su nak ▁Jain ko a ren tzat ▁es ker ▁o na ▁sor tu ko ▁du ▁.
PRED:	In all , all the rich people are poor in their hands , and let them be encouraged by the power of God .
GOLD:	Yes , you will be enriched in every way so that you can always be generous . And when we take your gifts to those who need them , they will thank God .

ID:	300
INPUT:	▁Zen bat ▁e gu nez ▁bi zi ▁nai te ke ▁o rain dik ▁? ▁Noiz ▁zi gor tu ko ▁di tu zu ▁ni re ▁per tse gi tzai le ak ▁?
PRED:	How long will you live ? How long will you come ? How long will you come ?
GOLD:	How long must I wait ? When will you punish those who persecute me ?

ID:	301
INPUT:	▁Az ken ▁au zi a
PRED:	The Last Supper
GOLD:	The Final Judgment

ID:	302
INPUT:	▁Da nen ▁lei nu ko ▁A hi sa ma ken ▁se me ▁O ho li ab ▁e man ▁di ot ▁lan ki de ▁. ▁Gai ne ra ▁, ▁ar ti sau ▁guz ti ak ▁tre be a go ▁e gi ten ▁di tut ▁, ▁a gin du ▁di zu dan ▁guz ti a ▁e gin ▁de za ten ▁:
PRED:	I will send my greetings to the tribe of Dan , the tribe of Dan , and I will give you everything I have done .
GOLD:	“ And I have personally appointed Oholiab son of Ahisamach , of the tribe of Dan , to be his assistant . Moreover , I have given special skill to all the gifted craftsmen so they can make all the things I have commanded you to make :

ID:	303
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁a zal du ko ▁Jau na ren ▁e gin tza ▁han di ak ▁? ▁Nork ▁as ki ▁go re tsi ko ▁hu ra ▁?
PRED:	Who is able to teach the wonderful things he has done ?
GOLD:	Who can list the glorious miracles of the Lord ? Who can ever praise him enough ?

ID:	304
INPUT:	▁E tsai ak ▁bi da li ko ▁di tut Ba bi lo ni a ren ▁aur ka ▁: ▁ga ri a ▁be za la ▁hai ze ra tu ko ▁du te e ta ▁her ri al de ▁o so a ▁hus tu <unk> ri txar - e gu ne an ▁, ▁al de ▁guz ti e ta tik ▁e ra so ko ▁di o te ▁.
PRED:	I will send out a terrible army against Babylon , like a young wind coming out from the land of the north . They will run away from their ruined land .
GOLD:	Foreigners will come and winnow her , blowing her away as chaff.They will come from every sideto rise against her in her day of trouble .

ID:	305
INPUT:	▁Zu en ga tik ▁e san ▁di tut ▁gau za ▁hau ek ▁, ▁A po lo ren ▁e ta ▁neu re ▁a di bi de a ▁jar riz ▁, ▁gu re gan dik ▁i kas ▁de za zu en ▁i da tzi rik ▁da go e na ▁bai no ▁ha ran tza go ▁ez ▁jo a ten ▁, ▁e ta ▁i nor ▁ez ▁da din ▁ba ten ga tik ▁har ro ▁bes te ren ▁biz kar ▁.
PRED:	I say to you , ‘ This is what the Lord says : My teaching is far greater than we have taught you , but we are not going to follow him . '
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , I have used Apollos and myself to illustrate what I 've been saying . If you pay attention to what I have quoted from the Scriptures , you wo n't be proud of one of your leaders at the expense of another .

ID:	306
INPUT:	▁Bo to rik ▁e gi ten ▁ez ▁ba du zu e ▁, ▁ez ▁za re te ▁i zan go ▁er ru dun ▁.
PRED:	If you do n't have any pity on them , you will be guilty .
GOLD:	But once you have voluntarily made a vow , be careful to fulfill your promise to the Lord your God .

ID:	307
INPUT:	▁Es pi ri tu ▁ba tek ▁har tzen ▁du ▁men pe an ▁, ▁e ta ▁bat - ba te an ▁gar ra si ka ▁has ten ▁da ▁; ▁go gor ▁as tin tzen ▁du ▁e ta ▁ler de a ▁da ri o la ▁jar tzen ▁, ▁e ta ▁o so ▁ne kez ▁al de ▁e gi ten ▁du ▁be ra ren gan dik ▁, ▁hauts ▁e gin da ▁uz ten ▁du e la rik ▁.
PRED:	A spirit goes down on the top of the mountain , and a wall falls on it , and it is full of pain . It is full of pain , so it will be stripped away .
GOLD:	An evil spirit keeps seizing him , making him scream . It throws him into convulsions so that he foams at the mouth . It batters him and hardly ever leaves him alone .

ID:	308
INPUT:	▁Ba tzu e tan ▁, ▁na zi o ▁e do ▁er rei nu ▁bat ▁lur re tik ▁e rau zi ▁, ▁i rau li ▁e do ▁hon da tze ko ▁e ra ba ki a ▁har tzen ▁dut ▁.
PRED:	At that time I will destroy the kingdoms of the earth , and I will destroy it .
GOLD:	If I announce that a certain nation or kingdom is to be uprooted , torn down , and destroyed ,

ID:	309
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁ka le e ta nin tzi ri a ▁e ta ▁do lu a ▁i zan go ▁di ra ▁, ▁e ta ▁zu ▁, ▁a tse ka be a ren ▁a tse ka bez ▁, ▁lur re an ▁e se ri ko ▁.
PRED:	I would feed you with grief , and I will mourn for your grief .
GOLD:	The gates of Zion will weep and mourn.The city will be like a ravaged woman , huddled on the ground .

ID:	310
INPUT:	▁Om ri ▁er re ge a ren ▁a gin du a ke ta ▁A ka ben ▁fa mi li a ren ▁o hi tu rak gor de tzen ▁di tu zu ▁: ▁hai en ▁e sa ne ta ra ▁za bil <unk> re ga tik ▁, ▁zu en ▁hi ri a ▁hon da tu a ▁u tzi ko ▁du te ta ▁bi zi la gu nak ▁lo tsa ▁gor ri an.Ni re ▁her ri a ren ▁lo tsai zu na ja san ▁be har ko ▁du zu e ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But Omri did what was evil in the king 's sight , the king of Ahab 's family , says , “ You are like a piece of grapes , and you will be thrown into the land of Benjamin . ”
GOLD:	You keep only the laws of evil King Omri ; you follow only the example of wicked King Ahab ! Therefore , I will make an example of you , bringing you to complete ruin.You will be treated with contempt , mocked by all who see you . ”

ID:	311
INPUT:	▁Ja so ▁zeu re ▁her ri a ▁az ke nik ▁ga be ko ▁hon da kin ▁hau e ta tik ▁: ▁e tsai ak ▁den - de na ▁er raus tu ▁du ▁san tu te gi an ▁.
PRED:	You will know that your people will be destroyed , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Walk through the awful ruins of the city ; see how the enemy has destroyed your sanctuary .

ID:	312
INPUT:	▁Ain ge ru ei ▁bu ruz ▁hau ▁di o ▁Jain ko ak ▁: ▁Hai ze a ren ▁an tze ko ▁e gi ten ▁di tu ▁be re ▁ain ge ru ak ▁, ▁su gar ra ren ▁an tze ko ▁be re ▁zer bi tza ri ak ▁.
PRED:	This is what the angel of God says : “ The glory of the Lord is like fire ; his servants are like fire .
GOLD:	Regarding the angels , he says , “ He sends his angels like the winds , his servants like flames of fire . ”

ID:	313
INPUT:	▁A rau nak ▁Da vi di ▁: ▁— ▁Har ▁be za ▁e ne ▁er re ge ▁jau nak ▁na hi ▁du en ▁guz ti a ▁er re - o pa ri a ▁es kain tze ko ▁. ▁Hor ra ▁, ▁hor ▁di tu zu ▁i di ak ▁er re - o pa ri ta ra ko ▁, ▁eul tzi a ▁e ta ▁i di en ▁uz tar ri a ▁e gur re ta ra ko ▁.
PRED:	“ Take my lord the king , my lord the king , ” David said . “ Take your threshing floor and put it on the threshing floor and put it on the wood of the palace . ”
GOLD:	“ Take it , my lord the king , and use it as you wish , ” Araunah said to David . “ Here are oxen for the burnt offering , and you can use the threshing boards and ox yokes for wood to build a fire on the altar .

ID:	314
INPUT:	▁Gu re ▁gu ra so ak ▁zu re kin ▁fi da tu ▁zi ren ▁; ▁fi da tu ▁zi ren ▁, ▁e ta ▁zuk ▁lib ra tu ▁.
PRED:	Our ancestors did not trust in you ; they trust in you .
GOLD:	They cried out to you and were saved.They trusted in you and were never disgraced .

ID:	315
INPUT:	▁Ha mar gar ren ▁ur te an ▁, ▁ha mar gar ren ▁hi la ren ▁ha ma bi an ▁, ▁ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai dan ▁Jau na ▁:
PRED:	On January 15 , during the ninth year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	On January 7 , during the tenth year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	316
INPUT:	▁nork ▁be re ▁ma ki la ▁jaur ti ▁e ta ▁su ge ▁bi hur tu ▁zen ▁. ▁Bai na ▁A a ro nen ▁ma ki lak ▁i ren tsi ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁ja ki tun ▁e ta ▁az ti e nak ▁.
PRED:	He threw his staff into a snake and threw it into pieces of fire . But he broke it into pieces , and he ate it .
GOLD:	They threw down their staffs , which also became serpents ! But then Aaron 's staff swallowed up their staffs .

ID:	317
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁ez ▁o te ▁zai tuz te ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁bi ok ▁gor putz ▁ba kar ▁bat ▁e ta ▁es pi ri tu ▁ba kar ▁bat ▁e gin ▁? ▁E ta ▁zer ta ra ko ▁bat ▁? ▁Jain ko a ren gan dik ▁haur rak ▁i za te ko ▁. ▁Ar gi ▁i bi li ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁i zan ▁des lei al ▁gaz te tan ▁au ke ra tu ta ko ▁e maz te a ri ▁.
PRED:	And if you are not part of this body , how can you be one of the Spirit of God ? And if you do n't turn away from the child of God , do n't be married .
GOLD:	Did n't the Lord make you one with your wife ? In body and spirit you are his . And what does he want ? Godly children from your union . So guard your heart ; remain loyal to the wife of your youth .

ID:	318
INPUT:	▁hor re la ▁, ▁on da re tzat ▁zu ek ▁be za la ▁lur sai lik ▁har tu ▁ez ▁du en ▁le bi tar rak ▁e ta ▁zu e kin ▁bi zi ▁di ren ▁e tor kin ▁, ▁u me zurtz ▁e ta ▁a lar gu nek ▁zer ▁ja na ▁i zan go ▁du te ▁; ▁e ta ▁Jau nak ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko ak ▁e gin ki zun ▁guz ti ak ▁on gi ▁bu ru tze ko ▁bi de a ▁e man go ▁di zu e ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : Do not neglect the Levites who live in your land and foreigners living among you , orphans , and widows living in the land the Lord your God is giving you .
GOLD:	Give it to the Levites , who will receive no allotment of land among you , as well as to the foreigners living among you , the orphans , and the widows in your towns , so they can eat and be satisfied . Then the Lord your God will bless you in all your work .

ID:	319
INPUT:	▁Den bo ra ▁be re an ▁, ▁Jau na ▁e re ▁gur tu ▁o hi ▁zu ten ▁. ▁Kul tu - le ku e ta ko ▁a pai zak ▁i zen da tu ▁zi tuz ten ▁be ren ▁ar te tik ▁, ▁mui no e ta ko ▁jau re txe e tan ▁a paiz - zer bi tzu a ▁e gin ▁ze za ten ▁.
PRED:	They offered sacrifices and burned incense to the Lord at the Temple of the Lord . They offered sacrifices and burned incense to the Temple of the Lord , just as he had done .
GOLD:	These new residents worshiped the Lord , but they also appointed from among themselves all sorts of people as priests to offer sacrifices at their places of worship .

ID:	320
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁her ri a ▁hai en ga na ▁bi hur tzen ▁da ▁, ▁hai en ▁hitz ▁guz ti ak ▁u ra ▁be za la ▁i ren tsiz ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says : All the people of their own special knowledge .
GOLD:	And so the people are dismayed and confused , drinking in all their words .

ID:	321
INPUT:	▁Jus ti zi a ren ▁bi de tik ▁na bil ▁ni ▁, ▁zu zen bi de a ren ▁er di - er di tik ▁.
PRED:	He is like a sacrifice of justice , like a stone of justice .
GOLD:	I walk in righteousness , in paths of justice .

ID:	322
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁jo ka tzen ▁du ▁e ma ku me ▁a dul te ri o gi le ak ▁: ▁jan ▁, ▁a ho a ▁gar bi tu ▁e ta ▁« ▁Ez ▁dut ▁e zer ▁txar rik ▁e gin ▁» ▁e sa ten ▁du ▁.
PRED:	This is what the woman says , “ I have something to eat and say , ‘ I am not doing wrong . ' ”
GOLD:	An adulterous woman consumes a man , then wipes her mouth and says , “ What 's wrong with that ? ”

ID:	323
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren ▁ain ge ru ak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁Sa ta ni ▁: ▁« ▁I si la raz ▁ha za la ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁Sa tan ▁, ▁i si la raz ▁ha za la ▁Je ru sa lem ▁au ke ra tu ▁du en ▁Jau nak ▁. ▁Jo su e ▁su ta tik ▁a te ra ta ko ▁i lin ti a ▁be za la ▁da ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then the angel of the Lord said to Solomon , “ This is what the Lord says : He will pour out his anger against Jerusalem , just as the Lord has commanded him . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Satan , “ I , the Lord , reject your accusations , Satan . Yes , the Lord , who has chosen Jerusalem , rebukes you . This man is like a burning stick that has been snatched from the fire . ”

ID:	324
INPUT:	▁El kar ri ▁la gun tzen ▁di o te ▁i do lo gi le e ke ta ▁a do re - hi tzak ▁e sa ten ▁el kar ri ▁.
PRED:	He gives help to the poor , and he gives the common sense .
GOLD:	The idol makers encourage one another , saying to each other , “ Be strong ! ”

ID:	325
INPUT:	▁Be rak ▁lib ra tu ko ▁zai tu ▁e hiz ta ri a ren ▁sa re ti ke ta ▁i zur ri ▁gal gar ri tik ▁.
PRED:	He will rescue you from evil ; he will rescue you from the power of the wicked .
GOLD:	For he will rescue you from every trapand protect you from deadly disease .

ID:	326
INPUT:	▁Gor putz - a ri ke tek ▁e zer ▁gu txi ra ko ▁ba li o ▁du te ▁; ▁jain ko za le ta su nak ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁guz ti ra ko ▁ba li o ▁du ▁, ▁o rain go ▁e ta ▁ge ro ko ▁bi zi a ren ▁a gin tza ri a ▁bai tu ▁be re kin ▁.
PRED:	If you have many parts of every kind of wood , you will live wisely . But if you do n't have any other way , you will live .
GOLD:	“ Physical training is good , but training for godliness is much better , promising benefits in this life and in the life to come . ”

ID:	327
INPUT:	▁Sa lo mo nek ▁, ▁or du an ▁: ▁— ▁Ja tor ▁jo ka tzen ▁ba du ▁, ▁ez ▁zai o ▁i le ▁bat ▁e re ▁e ro ri ko ▁lur re ra ▁; ▁bai na ▁no la bai te ko ▁gaiz ta ke ri a rik ▁aur ki tzen ▁ba di o gu ▁, ▁he ri o tza ▁i zan go ▁du ▁.
PRED:	“ If I tell you the truth , ” Solomon replied . “ If you do n't go to the ground , you will find no longer . ”
GOLD:	Solomon replied , “ If he proves himself to be loyal , not a hair on his head will be touched . But if he makes trouble , he will die . ”

ID:	328
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁be di ▁fi da ▁i txu ra ▁en gai na gar ri az ▁, ▁ho ri xe ▁i zan go ▁du ▁or dain sa ri ▁e ta ▁.
PRED:	Do n't let anyone deceive you , and you will be paid no attention to what you say .
GOLD:	Let them no longer fool themselves by trusting in empty riches , for emptiness will be their only reward .

ID:	329
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁ez ▁, ▁a ta lak ▁as ko ▁di ra ▁; ▁gor pu tza ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁bat ▁ba kar ra ▁.
PRED:	But the body is not part of the body ; it is only a body .
GOLD:	Yes , there are many parts , but only one body .

ID:	330
INPUT:	▁Moi se sek ▁e san ▁zi en ▁A a ro ni ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁se me ei ▁: ▁« ▁E go si ▁ha ra gi a ▁el kar ke ta - e txo la ren ▁sar re ran ▁; ▁han ▁ber tan ▁jan go ▁du zu e ▁sa ga ra pe ne ra ko ▁pres ta tu ri ko ▁sas ki an ▁da go en ▁o gi a re kin ▁ba te ra ▁, ▁nik ▁ja so ▁nu en ▁a gin du a ren ▁a ra be ra ▁: ▁“ ▁A a ro nek ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁se me ek ▁jan go ▁du te ▁” ▁.
PRED:	Then Moses said to Aaron , “ Give Aaron and his sons to eat the meat of the Tabernacle , and eat it in the basket of bread . Then you will eat the basket of bread and eat it . Then I will eat it .
GOLD:	Then Moses said to Aaron and his sons , “ Boil the remaining meat of the offerings at the Tabernacle entrance , and eat it there , along with the bread that is in the basket of offerings for the ordination , just as I commanded when I said , ‘ Aaron and his sons will eat it . '

ID:	331
INPUT:	▁Jain ko ak ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁gri na ▁lo tsa gar ri e ta ra ▁e man ▁di tu ▁: ▁e ma ku mez ko ek ▁be rez ko ▁se xu - har re ma nak ▁u tzi ▁e ta ▁na tu ra ren ▁kon tra ko e ta ra ▁jo ▁du te ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : He will abandon the women and women who have sexual relations with their husbands and their wives .
GOLD:	That is why God abandoned them to their shameful desires . Even the women turned against the natural way to have sex and instead indulged in sex with each other .

ID:	332
INPUT:	▁« ▁Be ka tu a ren ▁bar ka men - o pa ri tzat ▁ar ku me a ▁ba da kar ▁, ▁a kats ▁ga be a ▁e ta ▁e me a ▁i zan go ▁da ▁.
PRED:	“ If you present a male goat as a sin offering to the Lord , you must be a male and female .
GOLD:	“ If the people bring a sheep as their sin offering , it must be a female with no defects .

ID:	333
INPUT:	▁« ▁E gin ▁a ta ri a ▁e goi tza ri ▁. ▁He go al de tik ▁, ▁li ho - ha ri ▁bi hur ri tuz ko ▁oi ha lak ▁i zan go ▁di tu ▁, ▁ber ro gei ta ▁ha mar ▁me tro ▁lu ze ko ak ▁.
PRED:	“ Make the curtains on the north side of the Tabernacle . Make the curtains on the north side of the Tabernacle , which will be 75 feet long .
GOLD:	“ Then make the courtyard for the Tabernacle , enclosed with curtains made of finely woven linen . On the south side , make the curtains 150 feet long .

ID:	334
INPUT:	▁Le bi tar - hi ri e ta ko ▁her ri - lur rak ▁ez ▁dai tez ke ▁sal ▁, ▁le bi tar ren ▁be hin ▁be ti ko ▁ja be tza ▁bai ti ra ▁.
PRED:	The Levites may not be allowed to serve the Levites , for the Levites can possess it .
GOLD:	The open pastureland around the Levitical towns may never be sold . It is their permanent possession .

ID:	335
INPUT:	▁E gun ▁be re an ▁, ▁Jo su ek ▁Ma ke da ▁hi ri a ▁har tu ▁zu en ▁. ▁E ra bat ▁sun tsi tu ▁zu ten ▁hi ri a ▁, ▁e ta ▁er re ge a ▁e ta ▁bi zi la gu nak ▁ez pa taz ▁hil ▁zi tuz ten ▁; ▁ez ▁zu ten ▁bat ▁e re ▁bi zi rik ▁u tzi ▁, ▁e ta ▁Ma ke da ko a ri ▁Je ri ko ko ▁er re ge a ri ▁e gin da ko a ▁be ra ▁e gin ▁zi o ten ▁.
PRED:	So Joshua completely destroyed the town of Jericho , leaving it completely completely destroyed . They killed the king of Midian , leaving no survivors . They killed the king of Jericho , leaving no survivors .
GOLD:	That same day Joshua captured and destroyed the town of Makkedah . He killed everyone in it , including the king , leaving no survivors . He destroyed them all , and he killed the king of Makkedah as he had killed the king of Jericho .

ID:	336
INPUT:	▁Jen de - tal de ▁han di ek ▁jar rai tu ▁zi o ten ▁al de ▁guz ti e ta tik ▁: ▁Ga li le a ▁, ▁De ka po lis ▁, ▁Je ru sa lem ▁e ta ▁Ju de a tik ▁e ta ▁Jor da nez ▁bes te ▁al de tik ▁.
PRED:	The crowd followed him , and all the people of Judea were traveling from Galilee . They left Jerusalem and crossed the Jordan River .
GOLD:	Large crowds followed him wherever he went — people from Galilee , the Ten Towns , Jerusalem , from all over Judea , and from east of the Jordan River .

ID:	337
INPUT:	▁hau ek ▁be ren ▁e maz te ak ▁bi dal tze ko ▁hi tza ▁e man ▁e ta ▁be ren ▁er ru a ren ▁or dai ne tan ▁a ha ri ▁ba na ▁es kai ni ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	So the wife of his wife was given to him , and they gave him a regular burnt offering .
GOLD:	They vowed to divorce their wives , and they each acknowledged their guilt by offering a ram as a guilt offering .

ID:	338
INPUT:	▁or gak ▁e ta ▁hau e tan ▁ur - on tzi ak ▁;
PRED:	carrying poles from the rings on the carrying poles .
GOLD:	the water carts holding the basins ;

ID:	339
INPUT:	▁Su sa ko ▁ju du ak ▁, ▁al diz ▁, ▁ha ma hi ru an ▁e ta ▁ha ma lau an ▁bil du ▁zi ren ▁e tsai ak ▁hil tze ko ▁, ▁e ta ▁ha ma bos te an ▁a tse den ▁har tu ▁zu ten ▁, ▁o tor du- ▁e ta ▁jai e gun ▁bi hur tuz ▁.
PRED:	At the end of the Jews in Susa celebrated the annual festival on March 8 they sat down on the fifteenth day of the festival and celebrate the Festival of Unleavened Bread .
GOLD:	( The Jews at Susa killed their enemies on March 7 and again on March 8 , then rested on March 9 , making that their day of feasting and gladness . )

ID:	340
INPUT:	▁Je su ▁Kris to ▁ba tai o ko ▁u raz ▁e ta ▁he ri o tza ko ▁o do laz ▁e tor ri ▁zen ▁; ▁ez ▁zen ▁u raz ▁ba kar rik ▁e tor ri ▁, ▁u raz ▁e ta ▁o do laz ▁bai zik ▁. ▁E ta ▁Es pi ri tu a ▁da ▁hor ren ▁tes ti gan tza ▁e gi ten ▁du e na ▁, ▁Es pi ri tu a ▁e gi a ▁bai ta ▁.
PRED:	For Christ Jesus , the blood of the blood of the blood of the blood of the blood of Christ , and the blood of the blood of the Holy Spirit . It is the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	And Jesus Christ was revealed as God 's Son by his baptism in water and by shedding his blood on the cross — not by water only , but by water and blood . And the Spirit , who is truth , confirms it with his testimony .

ID:	341
INPUT:	▁Ben ja min ▁e ta ▁Ha xu bek ▁be ren ▁e txe ▁aur re ko ▁sai le an ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁lan ▁, ▁e ta ▁A na ni a sen ▁i lo ba ▁e ta ▁Ma a sei a sen ▁se me ▁A za ri a sek ▁, ▁al diz ▁, ▁be re ▁e txe ▁on do an ▁.
PRED:	They went to the house of Benjamin , and they found him in the palace of the Lord 's Temple . He also built a house in his house , and he built a house in his house .
GOLD:	After them , Benjamin and Hasshub repaired the section across from their house , and Azariah son of Maaseiah and grandson of Ananiah repaired the section across from his house .

ID:	342
INPUT:	▁Go ra zar re ak ▁kan ta tu ▁on do ren ▁, ▁O li a men di ra ▁a bi a tu ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	Then they sang this song to the Mount of Olives .
GOLD:	Then they sang a hymn and went out to the Mount of Olives .

ID:	343
INPUT:	▁Hex bon ▁zen ▁a mor tar ren ▁er re ge ▁Si ho nen ▁hi ri bu ru a ▁; ▁ho nek ▁, ▁Mo a be ko ▁le hen go ▁er re ge a ri ▁e ra so ▁e ta ▁lur ral de a ▁ken du a ▁zi on ▁Ar non ▁er re ka rai no ▁.
PRED:	King Sihon of Heshbon , the Amorites , king of Moab , and the land of Moab , and the land of the Arnon Gorge to the Arnon Gorge .
GOLD:	Heshbon had been the capital of King Sihon of the Amorites . He had defeated a former Moabite king and seized all his land as far as the Arnon River .

ID:	344
INPUT:	▁Al fer rak ▁di o ▁: ▁« ▁Le hoi ▁bat ▁da go ▁bi de an ▁, ▁ba sa piz ti a ▁ka le an ▁» ▁.
PRED:	They are like a lion , saying , “ There is a lion in the desert . ”
GOLD:	The lazy person claims , “ There 's a lion on the road ! Yes , I 'm sure there 's a lion out there ! ”

ID:	345
INPUT:	▁Mun du ▁guz ti ak ▁gor ro to ▁i zan go ▁di zu e ▁ni re ga tik ▁;
PRED:	And all the world will hate you .
GOLD:	And everyone will hate you because you are my followers .

ID:	346
INPUT:	▁Ho ri ▁i kus te an ▁, ▁i kas le ek ▁, ▁ha ser re ▁, ▁ho ne la ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁— ▁Zer ga tik ▁al fer rik ▁gal du ▁hor re la ▁?
PRED:	When they saw that they were indignant , they asked him , “ Why do you waste away ? ”
GOLD:	The disciples were indignant when they saw this . “ What a waste ! ” they said .

ID:	347
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren ▁ain ge ru ak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁I tzu li ▁zeu re ▁e txe ko andre a ga na ▁, ▁e ta ▁i zan ▁za kiz ki o ▁men pe ko ▁.
PRED:	Then the angel of the Lord said to him , “ Go back to your house , and you will be your kingdom . ”
GOLD:	The angel of the Lord said to her , “ Return to your mistress , and submit to her authority . ”

ID:	348
INPUT:	▁Bi gar ren ▁i kus ka ri a ▁: ▁a dar rak ▁e ta ▁er re men ta ri ak
PRED:	A Vision of Fire
GOLD:	Future Prosperity of Jerusalem

ID:	349
INPUT:	▁Lur ral de ▁o so ak ▁e gin go ▁du ▁hi le ta - ne gar ra ▁, ▁se ni tar te ek ▁se ni tar te ka ▁, ▁gi zo nez ko ek ▁ba te tik ▁e ta ▁e ma ku me ek ▁bes te tik ▁: ▁Da vi den ▁se ni tar te ak ▁e ta ▁Na ta ne nak ▁,
PRED:	These towns will be the clans of the earth and their clan , and their clan , and wives , and all the families of David .
GOLD:	“ All Israel will mourn , each clan by itself , and with the husbands separate from their wives . The clan of David will mourn alone , as will the clan of Nathan ,

ID:	350
INPUT:	▁Fi da gar ri a ▁da ▁be ne tan ▁e gin ki zun ▁hor re ta ra ko ▁i zen da tu ▁du en ▁Jain ko a ren ▁aur re an ▁, ▁Moi ses ▁e re ▁ha ren ▁e txe ko ▁zi ren ▁is ra el dar ▁guz ti en tzat ▁fi da gar ri a ▁i zan ▁zen ▁be za la xe ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : Because of all the people of Israel , Moses , the Holy One of Israel , just as Moses had predicted .
GOLD:	For he was faithful to God , who appointed him , just as Moses served faithfully when he was entrusted with God 's entire house .

ID:	351
INPUT:	▁Je sus ▁jen de tza ▁a gur tu ▁e ta ▁e txe ra tu ▁e gin ▁zen ▁. ▁Hur bil du ▁zi tzaiz ki on ▁, ▁or du an ▁, ▁i kas le ak ▁e ta ▁es ka tu ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁« ▁Ar gi ▁i e za gu zu ▁so ro ko ▁o lo ▁gaiz to a ren ▁pa ra bo la ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then Jesus went out to meet him and said , “ Come , let 's go out into the fields and tell us what is evil . ”
GOLD:	Then , leaving the crowds outside , Jesus went into the house . His disciples said , “ Please explain to us the story of the weeds in the field . ”

ID:	352
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁go res pe nez ▁e ta ▁e kin tza ▁os pe tsu ez be te a ▁nu en ▁a ho a ▁e gun ▁o so an ▁.
PRED:	I rejoiced in your righteousness , and I sing praises to your name .
GOLD:	That is why I can never stop praising you ; I declare your glory all day long .

ID:	353
INPUT:	▁Lur re ko ▁hau tsa ▁be za la xe ha tu ▁ni tu en ▁, ▁ka le ko ▁lo ka tza ▁be za la oin pe an ▁za pal du ▁.
PRED:	As surely as I lifted up the dust , then serve me as my knees .
GOLD:	I ground them as fine as the dust of the earth ; I trampled them in the gutter like dirt .

ID:	354
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁, ▁gai ne ra ▁: ▁— ▁On gi ▁i ku si a ▁dut ▁ni re ▁her ri a ren ▁a tse ka be a ▁E gip ton ▁e ta ▁en tzu na ▁hai en ▁oi hu a ▁za pal tzai le en ▁zi gor pe an ▁; ▁bai ▁, ▁o har tu ▁naiz ▁hai en ▁oi na ze az ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ I saw the people of Egypt , and I saw the people of Egypt , but I cried out , “ I am the one who rescued them from the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord told him , “ I have certainly seen the oppression of my people in Egypt . I have heard their cries of distress because of their harsh slave drivers . Yes , I am aware of their suffering .

ID:	355
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁a gin duz ▁i go tzen ▁al ▁da ▁ar ra no a ▁go ra e ta ▁be re ▁ha bi a ▁gai lur re tan ▁e gi ten ▁?
PRED:	Is it easier for your innocence ? Can you make us angry with the earth ?
GOLD:	Is it at your command that the eagle risesto the heights to make its nest ?

ID:	356
INPUT:	▁Go go an ▁har ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁zeu re ▁zer bi tza ri ▁i rain du a ▁, ▁her ri en gan dik ▁ja san ▁be har ▁di tu dan ▁hain bat ▁ez ten ka da ▁!
PRED:	Remember that I am the Lord your servant , that I am not giving you today .
GOLD:	Your enemies have mocked me , O Lord ; they mock your anointed king wherever he goes .

ID:	357
INPUT:	▁As kok ▁hitz ▁e gi ten ▁du te ▁on gi ▁han di ki az ▁, ▁mun du ▁guz ti a ▁es ku za ba la ren ▁la gun ▁.
PRED:	Many people have heard their plans , just as they speak with them .
GOLD:	Many seek favors from a ruler ; everyone is the friend of a person who gives gifts !

ID:	358
INPUT:	▁Gu ▁gai tzes ten ▁gin tu en ▁e pai - a gi ri a ▁sun tsi tu ▁e gin ▁du ▁e ta ▁gu ru tze an ▁jo siz ▁deu sez ta tu ▁.
PRED:	For our sins have destroyed us , and our sins have destroyed us .
GOLD:	He canceled the record of the charges against us and took it away by nailing it to the cross .

ID:	359
INPUT:	▁E gip to tik ▁a te ra ▁e ta ▁hi ru gar ren ▁hi la ▁be te ▁zen ▁e gu ne an ▁i ri tsi ▁zi ren ▁is ra el dar rak ▁Si nai ▁ba sa mor tu ra ▁.
PRED:	So Moses left Egypt and went out to the wilderness of Sinai . Then the Israelites traveled through the wilderness of Sinai .
GOLD:	Exactly two months after the Israelites left Egypt , they arrived in the wilderness of Sinai .

ID:	360
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁zu ek ▁e re ▁be rei zi ▁e gin go ▁di tu zu e ▁a be re ▁gar bi ak ▁ku tsa tu e ta tik ▁, ▁he gaz ti ▁gar bi ak ▁ku tsa tu e ta tik ▁. ▁Ez ▁de za zu e la ▁bi hur ▁zeu en ▁bu ru a ▁hi guin gar ri ▁, ▁a be re ak ▁, ▁he gaz ti ak ▁e ta ▁nar ras ka ▁da bil tzan ▁piz ti ak ▁di re la ▁e ta ▁; ▁neuk ▁e gin ▁dut ▁be reiz ke ta ▁, ▁ku tsa tu ak ▁zein ▁di ren ▁ja kin ▁de za zu en ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , you may eat any of the animal that is ceremonially clean , and you must not defile yourselves . You must not defile yourselves and make yourselves ceremonially unclean because you are ceremonially unclean for yourselves . You are ceremonially unclean for yourselves , and you are ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	“ You must therefore make a distinction between ceremonially clean and unclean animals , and between clean and unclean birds . You must not defile yourselves by eating any unclean animal or bird or creature that scurries along the ground . I have identified them as being unclean for you .

ID:	361
INPUT:	▁ho ne la ▁e gin ▁zi on ▁o toitz ▁:
PRED:	Then Jesus said to him ,
GOLD:	And Hezekiah prayed this prayer before the Lord :

ID:	362
INPUT:	▁Be ra ren ▁ai ta ▁E ze ki a sek ▁de se gi nak ▁zi tu en ▁mui no e ta ko ▁kul tu - le ku ak ▁ber re rai ki ▁zi tu en ▁e ta ▁al da re ak ▁e gin ▁Ba a len ▁kul tu ra ko ▁. ▁Zu toin ▁sak ra tu a ▁e re ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁, ▁Is ra el go ▁er re ge ▁A ka bek ▁ga rai ▁ba te an ▁be za la ▁e ta ▁i zar ▁guz ti ei ▁kul tu ▁e man ▁zi en ▁, ▁hai en ▁aur re an ▁a hus pez tuz ▁.
PRED:	So Hezekiah destroyed all the pagan shrines and burned incense on the Asherah poles . He built up the Asherah poles and Asherah poles and Asherah poles . He also bowed down to the Asherah pole and worshiped the Asherah pole .
GOLD:	He rebuilt the pagan shrines his father , Hezekiah , had destroyed . He constructed altars for Baal and set up an Asherah pole , just as King Ahab of Israel had done . He also bowed before all the powers of the heavens and worshiped them .

ID:	363
INPUT:	▁Han ▁i zan go ▁nau zu ▁ni ▁, ▁Ho reb ▁men di ko ▁har kai tze an ▁. ▁Har kai tza ▁jo ▁e ta ▁u ra ▁sor tu ko ▁da ▁, ▁her ri ak ▁e dan ▁de <unk> la ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁Moi se sek ▁, ▁Is ra el go ▁ar du ra du nen ▁aur re an ▁.
PRED:	There will be a rock that is a rock in Mount Sinai . Then you will know that I am the one who sent me to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	I will stand before you on the rock at Mount Sinai . Strike the rock , and water will come gushing out . Then the people will be able to drink. ” So Moses struck the rock as he was told , and water gushed out as the elders looked on .

ID:	364
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁e san go ▁du te ▁: ▁“ ▁Hon da tu a ▁ze go en ▁lur ral de ▁hau ▁E den go ▁ba ra tze a ▁be za la ▁da go ▁o rain ▁. ▁Hon da tu ak ▁, ▁er raus tu ak ▁e ta ▁e ro ri ak ▁zeu den ▁hi ri ak ▁go tor tu rik ▁dau de ▁e ta ▁jen dez ▁be te rik ▁” ▁.
PRED:	Then they will say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : The land of Israel will be destroyed , and its towns will be destroyed , and their cities will be destroyed . '
GOLD:	And when I bring you back , people will say , ‘ This former wasteland is now like the Garden of Eden ! The abandoned and ruined cities now have strong walls and are filled with people ! '

ID:	365
INPUT:	▁Ha ma bi gar ren ▁ur te an ▁, ▁ha ma bi gar ren ▁hi la ren ▁ba te an ▁, ▁ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai dan ▁Jau na ▁:
PRED:	On January 15 , during the twelfth year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	On March 3 , during the twelfth year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	366
INPUT:	▁Gaiz to ak ▁a gin te an ▁, ▁bi de ga be ke ri a ▁u ga ri ▁; ▁hai en ▁e ror ke ta ren ▁le ku ko ▁i zan go ▁zin tzo ak ▁.
PRED:	Evil people turn away from their own eyes , but the godly will be crushed .
GOLD:	When the wicked are in authority , sin flourishes , but the godly will live to see their downfall .

ID:	367
INPUT:	▁« ▁Be ti ko ▁le ge ▁i zan go ▁du zu e ▁hau ▁: ▁zaz pi gar ren ▁hi la ren ▁ha mar re an ▁ba rau ▁e gin go ▁du zu e ▁; ▁ez ▁du zu e ▁i no la ko ▁la nik ▁e gin go ▁, ▁ez ▁ber ta ko ek ▁, ▁ez ▁zu en ▁ar te an ▁bi zi ▁di ren ▁e tor ki nek ▁,
PRED:	“ This is what the law says : If you do not obey the terms of the covenant , you must not make a permanent law for the foreigners living among you .
GOLD:	“ On the tenth day of the appointed month in early autumn , you must deny yourselves . Neither native-born Israelites nor foreigners living among you may do any kind of work . This is a permanent law for you .

ID:	368
INPUT:	▁Zo ri o ne ko a ▁be ti ▁be gi ru nez ▁jo ka tzen ▁du e na ▁; ▁bi hotz ▁go gor re ko a ▁zo ri txar re an ▁jau si ko ▁da ▁.
PRED:	Blessed are those who fear the king , but those who fear him will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Blessed are those who fear to do wrong , but the stubborn are headed for serious trouble .

ID:	369
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁ai pa tu ▁du gun ▁pa sar te an ▁, ▁Ez ▁di ra ▁ni re ▁a tse de ne an ▁sar tu ko ▁e san ▁zai gu ▁.
PRED:	But when I tell you what is saying , ‘ We will never enter my heart . '
GOLD:	But in the other passage God said , “ They will never enter my place of rest . ”

ID:	370
INPUT:	▁har kaitz ▁ar te an ▁bi zi ▁zi ren ▁, ▁ko ba ▁e ta ▁hai tzu lo e tan ▁,
PRED:	They settled in the rock , and they settled in the rocks .
GOLD:	So now they live in frightening ravines , in caves and among the rocks .

ID:	371
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁du zu e ▁zeu en ▁hi ri ▁fes ta za le a ▁, ▁as pal di da nik ▁e rai ki a ▁? ▁Hau ▁, ▁ur ru ti an ▁ko lo ni ak jar tzen ▁zi tu e na ▁?
PRED:	You have made this promise to me , and you have mercy on me ? You have made a crown of gold , a place of honor .
GOLD:	Is this silent ruin all that is left of your once joyous city ? What a long history was yours ! Think of all the colonists you sent to distant places .

ID:	372
INPUT:	▁I zu gar riz ko ▁es kar men tu ▁i zan go ▁di ra ▁mun du ko ▁er rei nu ▁guz ti en tzat ▁; ▁lo tsai zun ▁e ta ▁i se ka - gai ▁i zan go ▁di ra ▁, ▁kop lak ▁a te ra ko ▁diz ki e te ▁e ta ▁ma da ri ka tu ▁e gin go ▁jaur ti ko ▁di tu dan ▁to ki ▁guz ti e tan ▁.
PRED:	You will be handed over to the kingdoms of the earth , and you will be devoured by the nations of the earth . They will be thrown into the bottomless pit , and they will throw them into the dust .
GOLD:	I will make them an object of horror and a symbol of evil to every nation on earth . They will be disgraced and mocked , taunted and cursed , wherever I scatter them .

ID:	373
INPUT:	▁Se me ▁zen tzu ga be a ▁ai ta ren ▁zo ri txar ra ▁, ▁e maz te ▁lis kar ti a ▁e ten ga be ko ▁i to gi na ▁.
PRED:	A wise child brings grief to a son ; a sensible person is a life-giving fountain .
GOLD:	A foolish child is a calamity to a father ; a quarrelsome wife is as annoying as constant dripping .

ID:	374
INPUT:	▁Ha la ▁, ▁Re ka ben ▁se me ▁Jo na dab ▁gu re ▁ar ba so a ri ▁o be di tuz ▁, ▁ez ▁du gu ▁ar do rik ▁i noiz ▁e re ▁e da ten ▁, ▁ez ▁guk ▁, ▁ez ▁gu re ▁e maz te ▁e ta ▁se me - a la bek ▁e re ▁;
PRED:	But Rebekah , his daughter , Nadab , Abihu , Abihu , and our sons have never yet fallen among us .
GOLD:	So we have obeyed him in all these things . We have never had a drink of wine to this day , nor have our wives , our sons , or our daughters .

ID:	375
INPUT:	▁Ma da ri ka zi o pe an ▁e ro ri ak ▁zau de te ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁den - de nok ▁i ru zur ▁e gi ten ▁di da zu e ▁e ta ▁.
PRED:	Cursed is anyone who kills another person who hates you , and you are lying .
GOLD:	You are under a curse , for your whole nation has been cheating me .

ID:	376
INPUT:	▁He ro de sek ▁be gi ru ne ▁bai tzi on ▁; ▁gi zon ▁zu zen ▁e ta ▁san tu tzat ▁zeu kan ▁, ▁e ta ▁ba bes tu ▁e gi ten ▁zu en ▁. ▁Jo a nen ▁hi tzek ▁bu ru haus te rik ▁sor tzen ▁ba zi o ten ▁e re ▁, ▁go goz ▁en tzu ten ▁zi on ▁.
PRED:	But Herod was very angry , and he was chosen by lot . He gave up everything he did , so he could hear the word of John .
GOLD:	for Herod respected John ; and knowing that he was a good and holy man , he protected him . Herod was greatly disturbed whenever he talked with John , but even so , he liked to listen to him .

ID:	377
INPUT:	▁Je ru sa lem ▁, ▁es ta li ▁do lu - jan tziz ▁, ▁i rau li ▁hau tse tan ▁, ▁e gin ▁do lu ▁se me ▁ba kar ra ren he ri o tza ko an ▁be za la ▁, ▁e gin ▁ne gar ▁sa min ki ▁, ▁bat - ba te an ▁e tor ri ko ▁bai ta hon da tzai le a ▁zu re ▁gai ne ra ▁.
PRED:	They will wear burlap and olive oil in mourning , and they will weep for them . They will weep for them , just as the Lord had promised .
GOLD:	Oh , my people , dress yourselves in burlapand sit among the ashes.Mourn and weep bitterly , as for the loss of an only son.For suddenly the destroying armies will be upon you !

ID:	378
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁pre so ak ▁hil tze a ▁pen tsa tu ▁zu ten ▁sol da du ek ▁, ▁i nork ▁e re ▁i ge ri an ▁i hes ▁e gin ▁ez ▁ze zan ▁.
PRED:	So the soldiers tried to kill him , but no one could escape .
GOLD:	The soldiers wanted to kill the prisoners to make sure they did n't swim ashore and escape .

ID:	379
INPUT:	▁Hiz ke ta ▁ar ro tzez ▁min tzo ▁de na ▁, ▁be re ▁bu ru a ri ▁ba kar rik ▁zai o ▁la gun gar ri ▁; ▁pro fe ta ▁be za la ▁min tzo ▁de nak ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁e liz ▁el kar te a ▁ha za raz ten ▁du ▁.
PRED:	And if you speak with tongues , you will be speaking in tongues , and you will say , ‘ This is a liar . '
GOLD:	A person who speaks in tongues is strengthened personally , but one who speaks a word of prophecy strengthens the entire church .

ID:	380
INPUT:	▁« ▁El kar ta sun - o pa ri a ▁bo to ren ▁bat ▁be te tze ko ▁e do ▁nor be ra ren ▁bo ron da tez ▁e gi na ▁ba da ▁, ▁o pa ri gai a ▁o pal du a ▁i zan ▁den ▁e gu ne an ▁jan go ▁da ▁; ▁so be ra ▁gel di tu a ▁hur ren go ▁e gu ne an ▁jan ▁dai te ke ▁;
PRED:	“ If you present a grain offering to the Lord , you must be cut off . If you eat it , you may eat it . If you eat it , you may eat it .
GOLD:	“ If you bring an offering to fulfill a vow or as a voluntary offering , the meat must be eaten on the same day the sacrifice is offered , but whatever is left over may be eaten on the second day .

ID:	381
INPUT:	▁eskla bo tza ▁e ta ▁hon da men di tik ▁as ka tu a ▁i zan ▁e ta ▁Jain ko a ren ▁se me - a la ben ▁ain tzaz ko ▁as ka ta su ne an ▁par te ▁i za te ko ▁.
PRED:	They will be slaves from many lands , and many children will be blessed by the glorious glory of God .
GOLD:	the creation looks forward to the day when it will join God 's children in glorious freedom from death and decay .

ID:	382
INPUT:	▁On do ren ▁, ▁men di ▁hor re tan ▁hil ko ▁za ra ▁e ta ▁zu re ▁ar ba so e kin ▁bil du ko ▁, ▁zu re ▁a nai a ▁A a ron ▁Hor ▁men di an ▁hil ▁e ta ▁ar ba so e kin ▁bil du ▁zen ▁be za la ▁;
PRED:	Then you will die in the hills , and you will die with your ancestors in the hill country of Aaron and his ancestors .
GOLD:	Then you will die there on the mountain . You will join your ancestors , just as Aaron , your brother , died on Mount Hor and joined his ancestors .

ID:	383
INPUT:	▁Hau ei ▁ja ki na ra zi ▁na hi ▁i zan ▁di e ▁Jain ko ak ▁zein ▁a be rats ▁e ta ▁ain tza tsu ▁den ▁jen ti len tzat ▁as mo ▁ez ku tu ▁ho ri ▁; ▁zu en gan ▁den ▁e ta ▁ain tza ra ko ▁i txa ro pen ▁du zu en ▁Kris to ri ▁bu ruz ▁a ri ▁na tzai zu e ▁.
PRED:	This is what God wants to do , and he will give you great riches . He will not be able to teach you the glorious glory of Christ , and you will be revealed to Christ .
GOLD:	For God wanted them to know that the riches and glory of Christ are for you Gentiles , too . And this is the secret : Christ lives in you . This gives you assurance of sharing his glory .

ID:	384
INPUT:	▁Zu re ak ▁di ra ▁gau - e gu nak ▁, ▁zuk ▁e ra tu ak ▁e guz ki - i lar gi ak ▁;
PRED:	You have made us known as the sun , moon , and widows .
GOLD:	Both day and night belong to you ; you made the starlight and the sun .

ID:	385
INPUT:	▁A su e ro ren ▁er re ge al di a ren ▁zaz pi gar ren ▁ur te ko ▁ha mar gar ren ▁hi le an ▁, ▁hots ▁, ▁Te bet ▁hi le an ▁, ▁e ra man ▁zu ten ▁Es ter ▁er re ge a ren ▁aur re ra ▁.
PRED:	At the end of the ninth year of King Xerxes 's reign , who was buried in the third year of his reign .
GOLD:	Esther was taken to King Xerxes at the royal palace in early winter of the seventh year of his reign .

ID:	386
INPUT:	▁Zu lo ra ▁do a ze ne kin ▁bat ▁e gi na ▁nau ka te ▁, ▁hain ▁na go ▁in dar ga be tu a ▁.
PRED:	I am a heap of ruins , and I am overwhelmed with violence .
GOLD:	They have left me among the dead , and I lie like a corpse in a grave.I am forgotten , cut off from your care .

ID:	387
INPUT:	▁Jain ko ak ▁bes te ▁bu ru za gi ▁bat ▁hau ta tu ▁: ▁Jo su e
PRED:	Then God said to Joshua ,
GOLD:	The Lord 's Charge to Joshua

ID:	388
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁noiz ▁o nar tu ▁zu en ▁? ▁Er dain du ▁aur re tik ▁a la ▁on do tik ▁? ▁Aur re tik ▁, ▁nos ki ▁, ▁ez ▁on do tik ▁.
PRED:	But you must pay attention to what you have done ? Do n't you realize that I am not guilty of a free woman .
GOLD:	But how did this happen ? Was he counted as righteous only after he was circumcised , or was it before he was circumcised ? Clearly , God accepted Abraham before he was circumcised !

ID:	389
INPUT:	▁Ja ki na raz ten ▁di zu et ▁, ▁gai ne ra ▁, ▁ez ▁de la ▁zi le gi ▁Jain ko a ren ▁e txe ▁ho ne ta ko ▁a paiz ▁, ▁le bi tar ▁, ▁a te zain ▁, ▁la gun tzai le ▁e ta ▁zer bi tza ri ei ▁zer ga rik ▁, ▁pe txa rik ▁e ta ▁bi de sa ri rik ▁ken tze a ▁.
PRED:	I know that you are not going to do n't know the priesthood , the priests , Levites , and the Levites , serve as priests and Levites .
GOLD:	I also decree that no priest , Levite , singer , gatekeeper , Temple servant , or other worker in this Temple of God will be required to pay tribute , customs , or tolls of any kind . '

ID:	390
INPUT:	▁E gin ▁ai e ne ▁, ▁Hi ri ▁bar re ne ko ▁bi zi la gu nak ▁, ▁mer ka ta ri e nak ▁e gin ▁bai tu ▁, ▁di ru du nak ▁gal du ak ▁bai ti ra ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : The merchants of the city are destroyed , for the merchants of the city are destroyed .
GOLD:	Wail in sorrow , all you who live in the market area , for all the merchants and traders will be destroyed .

ID:	391
INPUT:	▁Ze ren ▁e ta ▁jen de ▁zin tzo a ▁a tse ka be tu ▁bai tu zu e ▁ge zur re kin ▁, ▁nik ▁neuk ▁a tse ka be tu ▁na hi ▁ez ▁nu e ne an ▁, ▁e ta ▁gaiz to a ▁be re ▁as mo e tan ▁sen do tu ▁bai tu zu e ▁, ▁be re ▁jo ka bi de ▁gaiz to tik ▁i tzul ▁ez ▁ze din ▁e ta ▁, ▁hor re la ▁, ▁bi zi rik ▁i raun ▁ez ▁ze zan ▁;
PRED:	For I am suffering with you , for I am suffering with those who sin . I did n't realize that I would turn away from their evil ways and turn away from the wicked ways of sin .
GOLD:	You have discouraged the righteous with your lies , but I did n't want them to be sad . And you have encouraged the wicked by promising them life , even though they continue in their sins .

ID:	392
INPUT:	▁U ne ▁har tan ▁, ▁suz ko ak ▁be za la ko ▁i za ki ▁hai e ta ko ▁bat ▁ni re ga na ▁e tor ri ▁zen ▁he gan ▁, ▁su - ha tzez ▁al da re tik ▁har tu ri ko ▁txin gar ▁bat ▁es ku an ▁ze kar re la ▁,
PRED:	At that time I looked like fire and burning coals from the fire of fire , like a piece of fire , and I will pour out a handful of fire .
GOLD:	Then one of the seraphim flew to me with a burning coal he had taken from the altar with a pair of tongs .

ID:	393
INPUT:	▁« ▁En tzun ▁Jau na ren ▁tru moi - a ho tsa ▁, ▁en tzun ▁ha ren ▁a ho tik ▁ir te ten ▁den ▁du run di a ▁;
PRED:	“ Listen to the voice of the Lord , hear his voice from heaven .
GOLD:	Listen carefully to the thunder of God 's voiceas it rolls from his mouth .

ID:	394
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁bar ka tu ▁gu re ▁be ka tu ak ▁, ▁guk ▁e re ▁zor ▁di gu ten ▁guz ti ei bar ka tzen ▁bai ti e gu ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁u tzi ▁gu ▁ten tal di an ▁e ror tzen ▁» ▁.
PRED:	We forgive our sins and forgive our sins , and we do n't let us fall into sin . ”
GOLD:	and forgive us our sins , as we forgive those who sin against us.And do n't let us yield to temptation . ”

ID:	395
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁, ▁be re ▁Jain ko ak ▁, ▁si ri ar ren ▁er re ge a ren ▁es ku ▁u tzi ▁zu en ▁A kaz ▁; ▁hai ek ▁men de ra tu ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁e ta ▁, ▁bes te ▁ga ti bu ▁as ko re kin ▁ba te ra ▁, ▁Da mas ko ra ▁e ra man ▁zu ten ▁. ▁Is ra el go ▁er re ge a ren ▁es ku ▁e re ▁u tzi ▁zu en ▁, ▁e ta ▁ho nek ▁e re ▁hon da men ▁i ka ra gar ri a ▁e gin ▁zi on ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord God handed them over to the Assyrian king , and he handed them over to the top of the hill country of Damascus , and he handed them over to the king of Damascus . So he handed them over to the king of Aram .
GOLD:	Because of all this , the Lord his God allowed the king of Aram to defeat Ahaz and to exile large numbers of his people to Damascus . The armies of the king of Israel also defeated Ahaz and inflicted many casualties on his army .

ID:	396
INPUT:	▁Ha la ▁e re ▁, ▁A sa he lek ▁ez ▁zu en ▁al de ▁e gin ▁na hi ▁i zan ▁. ▁Or du an ▁, ▁Ab ner rek ▁lan tza ren ▁a tze ko ▁mu tur ra ▁sa be le an ▁sar tu ▁e ta ▁a tze al de tik ▁a te ra ▁zi on ▁. ▁Ber tan ▁e ro ri ▁zen ▁hi la ▁A sa hel ▁. ▁On do ren ▁ze to zen ▁guz ti ak ▁, ▁A sa hel ▁hi la ▁e ro ri ▁zen ▁to ki ra ▁hel tze an ▁, ▁gel di tu ▁e gi ten ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	So Abimelech went out to fight against Abimelech 's men , and he went out to the spring of the spring of the spring . Then Abner went out to the town of Elath and attacked it . Then he went out to the town of the town .
GOLD:	But Asahel refused to turn back , so Abner thrust the butt end of his spear through Asahel 's stomach , and the spear came out through his back . He stumbled to the ground and died there . And everyone who came by that spot stopped and stood still when they saw Asahel lying there .

ID:	397
INPUT:	▁Mi ra ri ▁bat ▁be za la ▁ger ta tu ▁nin tzen ▁as ko ren tzat ▁, ▁zu ▁zin tu dan ▁neu re ▁ba bes le ku ▁se gu ru ▁.
PRED:	As a result , I was a thousand of you , a strong fortress where I lived .
GOLD:	My life is an example to many , because you have been my strength and protection .

ID:	398
INPUT:	▁Jor dan ▁in gu ru ra ▁hel du ▁zi re ne an ▁, ▁ar te an ▁Ka na a nen ▁zi re la ▁, ▁al da re ▁han di ▁e ta ▁i kus gar ri a ▁e rai ki ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	When they arrived at the Jordan River , they saw that there was a great distance from the Jordan River .
GOLD:	But while they were still in Canaan , and when they came to a place called Geliloth near the Jordan River , the men of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh stopped to build a large and imposing altar .

ID:	399
INPUT:	▁Zu en ▁ai tak ▁ni re ▁gal de ra ▁e gi ten ▁ba du ▁, ▁e sai o zu ▁: ▁« ▁Be re ▁sor ter ri ▁Be le ne ra ▁al bait ▁le hen ▁jo a ten ▁uz te ko ▁es ka tu ▁zi dan ▁Da vi dek ▁, ▁ur te ro ko ▁o pa ri a ▁be re ▁a hai de ▁guz ti e kin ▁e gi te ko ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ If your father 's father asks , ‘ This is what the Lord says : If you want me to pay attention to my family , please let anyone go with you . ' ”
GOLD:	If your father asks where I am , tell him I asked permission to go home to Bethlehem for an annual family sacrifice .

ID:	400
INPUT:	▁Lur sai la ▁Ju bi leu ▁Ur te tik ▁ber ta tik ▁sa ga ra tzen ▁ba da ▁, ▁e zar ri ta ko ▁pre zi o a ▁or dain du ko ▁da ▁;
PRED:	If the Year of Jubilee comes from the Year of Jubilee , it will be set free from the Year of Jubilee .
GOLD:	If the field is dedicated to the Lord in the Year of Jubilee , then the entire assessment will apply .

ID:	401
INPUT:	▁On tzi ▁hai ek ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁Je ru sa lem go ▁tenplu ra ▁e ra ma te ko ▁e san ▁zi on ▁e ta ▁Jain ko a ren ▁e txe a ▁le hen go ▁to ki ▁be re an ▁e rai ki tze ko ▁.
PRED:	Then they took the Temple of the Lord and said to him , ‘ May the Temple of God be built . '
GOLD:	The king instructed him to return the cups to their place in Jerusalem and to rebuild the Temple of God there on its original site .

ID:	402
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ez ▁jo ▁nek ro man te en ga na ▁, ▁ez ▁i bi li ▁i gar le ak ▁kon tsul ta tzen ▁, ▁ku tsa tu rik ▁gel di ▁ez ▁zai tez ten ▁. ▁Neu ▁naiz ▁Jau na ▁, ▁zu en ▁Jain ko a ▁.
PRED:	“ Do not defile yourself by the mediums and those who consult you . I am the Lord your God . I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Do not defile yourselves by turning to mediums or to those who consult the spirits of the dead . I am the Lord your God .

ID:	403
INPUT:	▁E ne ▁u so ▁, ▁gor de le ku ▁hai tzu lo ak ▁, ▁la bar re ko ▁zir ri ki tu ak ▁, ▁di tu zun ▁ho ri ▁, ▁i kus ▁de za da la ▁zu re ▁i ru di a ▁, ▁en tzun ▁de za da la ▁zu re ▁a ho tsa ▁! ▁Go zo a ▁bai ta ▁zu re ▁a ho tsa ▁, ▁e der ra ▁zu re ▁i ru di a ▁!
PRED:	When the sailors heard that they shake their heads , they shake their heads in their eyes , they shout , “ O Lord , you have heard your voice , O Lord !
GOLD:	My dove is hiding behind the rocks , behind an outcrop on the cliff.Let me see your face ; let me hear your voice.For your voice is pleasant , and your face is lovely .

ID:	404
INPUT:	▁« ▁E a ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁i tzu li ▁a rin ▁ai ta ren ga na ▁e ta ▁e sai o zu e ▁: ▁Hau ▁di o ▁zu re ▁se me ▁Jo sek ▁: ▁Jain ko ak ▁E gip to ▁o so ko ▁bu ru ▁jar ri ▁nau ▁. ▁Za toz ▁ni re ga na ▁! ▁Ez ▁lu za tu ▁!
PRED:	“ So tell me , ‘ This is what the Lord says : This is what the God of your father , Joseph , says : Come , let me go down to Egypt ! Come , let me live ! '
GOLD:	“ Now hurry back to my father and tell him , ‘ This is what your son Joseph says : God has made me master over all the land of Egypt . So come down to me immediately !

ID:	405
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁e man ▁me zu ▁hau ▁: ▁“ ▁Ho ne la ▁di o ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du nak ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁Jain ko ak ▁: ▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁er re ge ▁Na bu ko do no sor ▁neu re ▁zer bi tza ri a ▁e kar ra ra zi ko ▁dut ▁, ▁e ta ▁Je re mi a sek ▁lur re an ▁sar tu ▁di tu en ▁har ri ▁ho ri en ▁gai ne an ▁e zar ri ko ▁di tut ▁ha ren ▁tro nu a ▁e ta ▁gai ne ko ▁oi hal - es tal du ra ▁.
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : ‘ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : I will bring them into exile , and I will put them on the throne of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . '
GOLD:	Then say to the people of Judah , ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : I will certainly bring my servant Nebuchadnezzar , king of Babylon , here to Egypt . I will set his throne over these stones that I have hidden . He will spread his royal canopy over them .

ID:	406
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai dan ▁Jau na ▁:
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Again a message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	407
INPUT:	▁Xu fa men gan dik ▁xu <unk> dar rak ▁, ▁Hu fa men gan dik ▁hu <unk> dar rak ▁,
PRED:	The named after their ancestor Eri , named after their ancestor Hepher .
GOLD:	The Shuphamite clan , named after their ancestor Shupham.The Huphamite clan , named after their ancestor Hupham .

ID:	408
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁« ▁Her ri e ta ko ▁er re ge ek ▁men pe an ▁har tzen ▁di tuz te ▁her ri ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁a gin te du nek ▁“ ▁On gi le ▁” ▁i ze na ▁na hi ▁i za ten ▁du te ▁be ren tzat ▁.
PRED:	Then Jesus said to them , “ The kings of the nations have gathered their swords and authority over the nations . They are doing what they do .
GOLD:	Jesus told them , “ In this world the kings and great men lord it over their people , yet they are called ‘ friends of the people . '

ID:	409
INPUT:	▁O rain ▁, ▁Ai ta ▁, ▁e ma da zu ▁ain tza ▁zeu re ▁on do an ▁, ▁e man ▁mun du a ▁mun du ▁i zan ▁bai no ▁le hen ▁zu re ▁on do an ▁nu en ▁ain tza ▁.
PRED:	“ Oh , my Father , please give me the inheritance I gave you to the world .
GOLD:	Now , Father , bring me into the glory we shared before the world began .

ID:	410
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁zu ▁, ▁Da ni el ▁, ▁i zan ▁lei al ▁az ke na ▁ar te ▁. ▁Or du an ▁har tu ko ▁du zu ▁a tse den ▁, ▁e ta ▁ga rai a ren ▁az ke ne an ▁al txa tu ko ▁za ra ▁sa ri a ▁ja so tze ko ▁” ▁» ▁.
PRED:	And when Daniel , Daniel , will set up the doors of the Most High , and you will know that you are building . ' ”
GOLD:	“ As for you , go your way until the end . You will rest , and then at the end of the days , you will rise again to receive the inheritance set aside for you . ”

ID:	411
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁, ▁Jor da nen ▁ze har ▁be he rantz ▁jar rai tuz ▁, ▁I tsa so ▁Hi le an ▁a mai tu ko. ▁« ▁Ho ri ▁i zan go ▁du zu e ▁zeu en ▁lur ral de a ▁, ▁e ta ▁ho ri ek ▁be rau ▁in gu ra tzen ▁du ten ▁mu gak ▁» ▁.
PRED:	When you cross the Jordan to the Mediterranean Sea , you will live in the Dead Sea . This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	and then along the Jordan River to the Dead Sea . These are the boundaries of your land . ”

ID:	412
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁hau ▁guz ti a ▁, ▁Jain ko a ▁bi la ▁ze za ten ▁, ▁e a ▁i tsu mus tu ka ▁be de ren ▁aur ki tzen ▁zu ten ▁; ▁i zan ▁e re ▁, ▁ez ▁da go ▁gu re ta ko ▁ba koi tza ren gan dik ▁ur ru ti ▁,
PRED:	And this is the way of God , who lives like the one who lives in the garden of our God , who lives in him .
GOLD:	“ His purpose was for the nations to seek after God and perhaps feel their way toward him and find him — though he is not far from any one of us .

ID:	413
INPUT:	▁zeu re ▁mai ta su na ga tik ▁, ▁sun tsi ▁i tza zu ▁ni re ▁e tsai ak ▁, ▁hon da tu ▁ni re ▁e ra so tzai le ak ▁, ▁zeu re ▁zer bi tza ri ▁nau zu nez ▁ge ro ▁.
PRED:	Save me from your unfailing love , for I am your servant , and I am your servant .
GOLD:	In your unfailing love , silence all my enemiesand destroy all my foes , for I am your servant .

ID:	414
INPUT:	▁Tre ba tzen ▁diz kit ▁es ku ak ▁gu du ra ko ▁, ▁e ta ▁be so <unk> tzez ko ▁uz tai a ▁ten ka tze ko ▁.
PRED:	You have rescued me from your power ; you have given me your power .
GOLD:	He trains my hands for battle ; he strengthens my arm to draw a bronze bow .

ID:	415
INPUT:	▁Te sa lo ni kar rak ▁sal ba me ne ra ko ▁au ke ra tu ak
PRED:	Paul 's Return to Thessalonica
GOLD:	Believers Should Stand Firm

ID:	416
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁dei ▁e gi ne ta ▁hark ▁e ran tzun ▁e gin go ▁di zu ▁, ▁zuk ▁la gun tza ▁es ka tu e ta ▁hark ▁e san go ▁: ▁« ▁He men ▁nau zu ▁! ▁» ▁Uz tar ri ▁o ro ▁baz ter tze ne ta ▁sa la ke tak ▁e ta ▁gaiz ki - e sa te a ku xa tzen ▁ba di tu zu ▁,
PRED:	“ But you will answer , ” he replied . “ You will know that I am the one who sent me to pay attention to the rights of the firstborn . ”
GOLD:	Then when you call , the Lord will answer. ‘ Yes , I am here , ' he will quickly reply. “ Remove the heavy yoke of oppression.Stop pointing your finger and spreading vicious rumors !

ID:	417
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁na gu si ak ▁: ▁“ ▁Ez ▁, ▁ez ▁da di la ▁ger ta ▁o lo ▁gaiz to a ▁bil tze an ▁ga ri a ▁e re ▁a te ra tze a ▁.
PRED:	“ But the day is n't gone , ” says the Lord , “ I do n't gather the wheat and the weeds among the wicked .
GOLD:	“ ‘ No , ' he replied , ‘ you 'll uproot the wheat if you do .

ID:	418
INPUT:	▁A tse gi ne ta ra ▁e ma nak ▁be har tsu ▁bu ka tu ko ▁, ▁ar do za le a ▁e ta ▁lur rin za le a ▁ez ▁da ▁a be ras tu ko ▁.
PRED:	The poor and the needy will be scattered , and the rich will be gone .
GOLD:	Those who love pleasure become poor ; those who love wine and luxury will never be rich .

ID:	419
INPUT:	▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du nak ▁, ▁Is ra el go ▁Jain ko ak ▁, ▁me zu a ▁zu zen du ▁zi on ▁Je re mi a si <unk> lam go ▁Xe mai a sen tzat ▁. ▁Ho nek ▁gu tun ▁bat ▁bi da li a ▁zi en ▁Je ru sa le men ▁gel di tu ta ko ▁jen de a ri ▁, ▁Ma a sei a sen ▁se me ▁So fo ni as ▁a pai za ri ▁e ta ▁bes te ▁a paiz ▁guz ti ei ▁. ▁Ho ne la ▁i daz ten ▁zi on ▁So fo ni a si ▁:
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says to Shemaiah son of Shemaiah , a descendant of Judah , who had been sent to Judah . He said to them , “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says :
GOLD:	The Lord sent this message to Shemaiah the Nehelamite in Babylon :

ID:	420
INPUT:	▁Ho na ▁zer ▁i ku si ▁nu en ▁: ▁E lam ▁es ku al de an ▁da go en ▁Su sa ▁go tor le ku an ▁aur ki tzen ▁nin tzen ▁, ▁U lai ▁i bai ▁on do an ▁.
PRED:	This is what I saw : Daniel was standing in the fortress of Susa . I saw that I was in the valley of Susa .
GOLD:	In this vision I was at the fortress of Susa , in the province of Elam , standing beside the Ulai River .

ID:	421
INPUT:	▁« ▁I kus ka ri a ▁neuk ▁ba kar rik ▁i ku si ▁nu en ▁. ▁Ni re kin ▁zeu de nek ▁ez ▁zu ten ▁e zer ▁i ku si ▁; ▁bai zik ▁e ta ▁, ▁i ka ra ▁han di ak ▁har tu rik ▁, ▁i he si ▁jo an ▁zi ren ▁e ta ▁ez ku ta tu ▁.
PRED:	“ When I saw that I was with you , I saw that you were not standing there . But I saw that there were no other .
GOLD:	Only I , Daniel , saw this vision . The men with me saw nothing , but they were suddenly terrified and ran away to hide .

ID:	422
INPUT:	▁Ju da ko ▁her ri ▁o so ak ▁U zi as ▁, ▁ha ma sei ▁ur te ko ▁gaz te a ▁, ▁er re ge ▁i zen da tu ▁zu en ▁, ▁be re ▁ai ta ▁A ma tzi a sen ▁or dez ▁.
PRED:	Uzziah was sixteen years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years .
GOLD:	All the people of Judah had crowned Amaziah 's sixteen-year-old son , Uzziah , as king in place of his father .

ID:	423
INPUT:	▁Hots ▁han diz ▁zi o en ▁: ▁« ▁I zan ▁be gi ru ne ▁Jain ko a ri ▁e ta ▁e man ▁ain tza ▁be ra ri ▁, ▁e tor ri ▁bai ta ▁be rak ▁mun du a ▁e pai tu ko ▁du en ▁or du a ▁; ▁a do ra ▁e za zu e ▁, ▁ze ru a ▁e ta ▁lur ra ▁, ▁i tsa so a ▁e ta ▁ur - i tur ri ak ▁e gin ▁zi tu e na ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ This is what the Lord , the God of the earth , and he will judge the earth and the earth . He will judge the earth and the earth and the sea . ”
GOLD:	“ Fear God , ” he shouted . “ Give glory to him . For the time has come when he will sit as judge . Worship him who made the heavens , the earth , the sea , and all the springs of water . ”

ID:	424
INPUT:	▁Si ri a ▁guz ti an ▁za bal du ▁zen ▁Je su sen ▁en tzu te a ▁. ▁E do zein ▁gaitz ▁e do ▁oi na zek ▁jo ta ko ak ▁— ▁de ab ru dun ▁, ▁e pi lep ti ko ▁na hiz ▁el bar ri ak ▁— ▁e ra ma ten ▁ziz ki o ten ▁, ▁e ta ▁hark ▁sen da tu ▁e gi ten ▁zi tu en ▁.
PRED:	When Jesus heard what had happened , he was healed of every kind . His feet were healed , and the legs were healed of the devil .
GOLD:	News about him spread as far as Syria , and people soon began bringing to him all who were sick . And whatever their sickness or disease , or if they were demon possessed or epileptic or paralyzed — he healed them all .

ID:	425
INPUT:	▁Ho na ▁zer ▁oi hu ka tzen ▁du en ▁Jau nak lur - baz ter re ta rai no ▁: ▁« ▁E san ▁Si on ▁hi ri ▁e der ra ri ▁: ▁Ha ra ▁, ▁ba da tor ▁zu re ▁sal ba tzai le a ▁! ▁Be re kin ▁da kar ▁ga rai pen - a gi ri a ▁, ▁be rak ▁as ka tu ri ko ▁her ri a ▁» ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The city of Zion is coming to Mount Zion , the city of Sidon , and the city of Jerusalem will be saved . ”
GOLD:	The Lord has sent this message to every land : “ Tell the people of Israel , ‘ Look , your Savior is coming.See , he brings his reward with him as he comes . ' ”

ID:	426
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ▁, ▁i no ri ▁ez ▁di ot ▁hiz pi de rik ▁e man go ▁hor ren bes te ko ▁di ru tza ▁neu re ▁es ku ▁dau ka da la rik ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , I will not speak to them , nor will anyone who calls on my behalf .
GOLD:	We are traveling together to guard against any criticism for the way we are handling this generous gift .

ID:	427
INPUT:	<unk> ▁ba koi tze an ▁ge lak ▁za ba la go ak ▁zi ren ▁, ▁e ta ▁tenplu ko ▁hor ma ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁es tu a go a ▁. ▁Bar re ne ko ▁oi ne tik ▁bi tar te ko ra ▁i ga ro tzen ▁zen ▁, ▁e ta ▁ho ne ta tik ▁go re ne ko ra ▁.
PRED:	On each side of the Temple 's walls , the walls of the Temple was also measured by the walls of the Temple . It was a permanent law for the entrance of the Temple , and it was too wonderful for it .
GOLD:	Each level was wider than the one below it , corresponding to the narrowing of the Temple wall as it rose higher . A stairway led up from the bottom level through the middle level to the top level .

ID:	428
INPUT:	▁ur re ▁e ta ▁zi lar rez ▁a pain du a ke ta ▁il tzez ▁e ta ▁mai luz ▁jo si ak ▁, ▁e ror ▁ez ▁dai te zen ▁.
PRED:	They will be clothed with silver and gold , moon , and widows .
GOLD:	They decorate it with gold and silverand then fasten it securely with hammer and nailsso it wo n't fall over .

ID:	429
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁Moi se si ▁: ▁« ▁Al txa ▁e za zu ▁es ku a ▁ze ru rantz ▁e ta ▁u ki tze ko ▁mo du ko ▁i lun pe ak ▁i zan go ▁di ra ▁E gip ton ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Get up the Ark of the Lord , and take it into the darkness of darkness . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Lift your hand toward heaven , and the land of Egypt will be covered with a darkness so thick you can feel it . ”

ID:	430
INPUT:	▁I tsa so a ▁er di bi ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁hai ek ▁pa sa tze ko ▁, ▁hor ma ▁bat ▁be za la ▁u rei ▁tin ko ▁eu tsiz ▁.
PRED:	He measured the waters of the sea , like a flood covered the water .
GOLD:	For he divided the sea and led them through , making the water stand up like walls !

ID:	431
INPUT:	▁Ho ri en tzat ▁e gun sen ti a ▁gau ▁i lu na ▁da ▁, ▁o hi tu ak ▁bai tau de ▁i lun ta su ne ko ▁i zu e ta ra ▁» ▁.
PRED:	This is the same thing we do , but the light of the darkness is light . ”
GOLD:	The black night is their morning.They ally themselves with the terrors of the darkness .

ID:	432
INPUT:	▁Han dik ▁e ki al de rantz ▁jar rai tuz ▁, ▁Gat - He fer ▁e ta ▁I ta - Ka zin dik ▁i ga ro tzen ▁zen ▁e ta ▁Ri mon ▁al de ra ▁har tzen ▁zu en ▁, ▁Ne a ▁al de ra ▁o ker tze ko ▁.
PRED:	From there they left Kadesh and camped at Kadesh and camped at Kadesh and camped at Kadesh .
GOLD:	Then it continued east to Gath-hepher , Eth-kazin , and Rimmon and turned toward Neah .

ID:	433
INPUT:	▁Gi zo na ▁sar tu ▁ze ne an ▁, ▁ke ru bi nak ▁tenplu a ren ▁es kui nal de ra ▁zeu den ▁, ▁e ta ▁lai no ak ▁bar ru ko ▁a ta ri a ▁be te tzen ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	When the cloud entered the Temple , the cloud lifted up from the middle of the cloud , and the cloud lifted up the middle of the cherubim .
GOLD:	The cherubim were standing at the south end of the Temple when the man went in , and the cloud of glory filled the inner courtyard .

ID:	434
INPUT:	▁Ho gei ta ▁ha ma lau ▁ur te ▁zi tu e la ▁, ▁E ber rek ▁Pe leg ▁i zan ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	He was twenty-five years old when he became the father of Eber .
GOLD:	When Eber was 34 years old , he became the father of Peleg .

ID:	435
INPUT:	▁Jain ko ▁dei tu ak ▁ze ru an ▁na hiz ▁lur re an ▁as ko ▁i zan ▁ar ren ▁— ▁e ta ▁be ne tan ▁hor re la ko ▁jain ko ▁e ta ▁jaun ▁as ko ▁da go ▁— ▁,
PRED:	In the same way , when God called out to heaven and on earth , he will be called the gods of the earth .
GOLD:	There may be so-called gods both in heaven and on earth , and some people actually worship many gods and many lords .

ID:	436
INPUT:	▁E do men ▁aur ka ko ▁men de ku a ▁neu re ▁her ri ▁Is ra e len ▁bi dez ▁bu ru tu ko ▁dut ▁: ▁ni re ▁ha ser re - su mi na ren ▁a ra be ra ▁e ra bi li ko ▁dut ▁E dom ▁; ▁or du an ▁e za gu tu ko ▁du te ▁ni re ▁men de ku a ▁. ▁Nik ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁e sa na ▁.
PRED:	In this way , I will pour out my anger against the people of Israel . I will pour out my fury on them , ” says the Sovereign Lord . “ I will hand them over to the land of Edom .
GOLD:	I will accomplish this by the hand of my people of Israel . They will carry out my vengeance with anger , and Edom will know that this vengeance is from me . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !

ID:	437
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁ez ▁dei tu ▁lur re an ▁i no ri ▁“ ▁ai ta ▁” ▁, ▁bat ▁ba kar ra ▁bai ta ▁zu en ▁ai ta ▁, ▁ze ru ko a ▁.
PRED:	And do n't call on the earth , ‘ One of heaven ' and ‘ He is the one who calls on heaven . '
GOLD:	And do n't address anyone here on earth as ‘ Father , ' for only God in heaven is your Father .

ID:	438
INPUT:	▁Jau na ri ▁es ker ▁, ▁is ra el dar rek ▁e gip to ar ren ▁a be gi ▁o na ▁i ra ba zi ▁zu ten ▁. ▁A re ▁ge hi a go ▁, ▁Moi ses ▁be ra ▁a par te ko ▁gi zon tzat ▁zeu ka ten ▁, ▁bai ▁fa ra oi a ren ▁fun tzi o na ri o ek ▁, ▁bai ▁E gip to ko ▁her ri ▁o so ak ▁.
PRED:	So the people of Israel went out to the Lord and Aaron 's officials , Aaron , and his officials , and all the people of Egypt . But Pharaoh and all the people of Egypt , but all the people of Egypt .
GOLD:	( Now the Lord had caused the Egyptians to look favorably on the people of Israel . And Moses was considered a very great man in the land of Egypt , respected by Pharaoh 's officials and the Egyptian people alike . )

ID:	439
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁po za ren ▁po zez ▁, ▁Sam son ▁a te ra tze ko ▁es ka tu a ▁zu ten ▁, ▁be ra ren ▁kon tu ra ▁bar re ▁e gi te ko ▁go goz ▁. ▁A te ra ▁zu ten ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁Sam son ▁es pe txe tik ▁e ta ▁be ra ren ▁biz kar ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁bar re ▁. ▁Ge ro ▁, ▁bi ▁zu ta be ren ▁er di an ▁u tzi ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	When they were glad , Samson woke up and asked him , “ Samson ! ” So they brought him back to Samson 's house . So Samson put his hand on his feet and put him into the bed of the dead .
GOLD:	Half drunk by now , the people demanded , “ Bring out Samson so he can amuse us ! ” So he was brought from the prison to amuse them , and they had him stand between the pillars supporting the roof .

ID:	440
INPUT:	▁Mi ra ri ak ▁e gi nak ▁zi tu en ▁hai en ▁gu ra so en ▁be gi ▁aur re a nE gip ton ▁, ▁Ta nis ko ▁lur ral de an ▁.
PRED:	He looked at them , and he found them in the regions of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	the miracles he did for their ancestorson the plain of Zoan in the land of Egypt .

ID:	441
INPUT:	▁Be re ▁zer bi tza ri e ta ko ▁ha mar ri ▁dei ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁ha mar ▁on tza ko ▁ur re ▁ba na tu ▁ziz ki en ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁“ ▁Jar ri ▁i ra ba zi an ▁, ▁ni ▁i tzu li ▁bi tar te an ▁” ▁.
PRED:	He called ten servants and called ten groups of ten years . He said to them , ‘ Follow me , and return to me . '
GOLD:	Before he left , he called together ten of his servants and divided among them ten pounds of silver , saying , ‘ Invest this for me while I am gone . '

ID:	442
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren ▁e txe a ren ▁i par ral de ko ▁a te ▁on do ra ▁e ra man ▁nin du en ▁; ▁han ▁e ma ku me ak ▁zeu den ▁e se ri ta ▁Ta muz ▁jain ko a ren ga tik ▁do lu ▁e gi ten ▁.
PRED:	The Temple of the Lord was given me , and he brought me to the Temple of the Lord at the entrance of the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	He brought me to the north gate of the Lord 's Temple , and some women were sitting there , weeping for the god Tammuz .

ID:	443
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁di o ▁: ▁« ▁A tzer ri tar ▁jen de ak ber re rai ki ko ▁di tu ▁zu re ▁har re si ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁hai en ▁er re ge ak zer bi tza ri ▁i zan go ▁di tu zu ▁; ▁i zan ▁e re ▁, ▁neu re ▁ha ser re an zi gor tu ▁zin tu dan ▁ar ren ▁, ▁neu re ▁on gi na hi an gu pi da tu ▁e gin ▁naiz ▁zu taz ▁.
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : The kings of the nations will be destroyed , and you will be very angry with them , and I will punish you . I will make you angry with you , and I am the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Foreigners will come to rebuild your towns , and their kings will serve you.For though I have destroyed you in my anger , I will now have mercy on you through my grace .

ID:	444
INPUT:	▁ez ▁du ▁e gi ten ▁ha re kin ▁i gi ta ri ak ▁es ku ta da rik ▁, ▁ez ▁bil tzai le ak ▁be sa ka da rik ▁;
PRED:	He has no power to see his eyes ; he has no need to open his eyes .
GOLD:	ignored by the harvester , despised by the binder .

ID:	445
INPUT:	▁ai ta ▁na hiz ▁a ma ▁, ▁a nai a ▁na hiz ▁ar re ba ▁hil tzen ▁ba zai o ▁e re ▁, ▁ez ▁da ▁ku tsa tu ko ▁, ▁Jau na ri ▁sa ga ra tu a ▁bai tu ▁be re ▁bu ru a ▁.
PRED:	If a man has sexual relations with his mother or sister , she must not be defiled by the Lord .
GOLD:	Even if the dead person is their own father , mother , brother , or sister , they must not defile themselves , for the hair on their head is the symbol of their separation to God .

ID:	446
INPUT:	▁Hi ru ▁se me ▁i zan ▁zi tu en ▁Sau lek ▁: ▁Jo na tan ▁, ▁Ix bi ▁e ta ▁Mal ki - Xu a ▁; ▁bai ta ▁bi ▁a la ba ▁e re ▁: ▁Me rab ▁za har re na ▁e ta ▁Mi kal ▁gaz te e na ▁.
PRED:	When Saul had three sons , Saul 's sons were in the wilderness of Benjamin . He said to them , “ My lord , you are my fair . ”
GOLD:	Saul 's sons included Jonathan , Ishbosheth , and Malkishua . He also had two daughters : Merab , who was older , and Michal .

ID:	447
INPUT:	▁Be ne - be ne tan ▁di o tsut ▁: ▁Gaz te a go ▁zi ne ne an ▁, ▁zeuk ▁lo tzen ▁ze nu en ▁ger ri ko a ▁e ta ▁no ra ▁jo an ▁e ra ba ki tzen ▁; ▁za har tze an ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁zuk ▁be so ak ▁lu za tu ▁e ta ▁bes te ▁ba tek ▁lo tu ko ▁di zu ▁ger ri ko a ▁e ta ▁na hi ▁i zan go ▁ez ▁du zun ▁le ku ra ▁e ra man go ▁zai tu ▁.
PRED:	“ I tell you the truth , I tell you what you said , ‘ This is what the man says : If you ca n't go back to bed , you wo n't be tied up , and you wo n't be tied up . But if you wo n't be tied up , you will be tied up . '
GOLD:	“ I tell you the truth , when you were young , you were able to do as you liked ; you dressed yourself and went wherever you wanted to go . But when you are old , you will stretch out your hands , and others will dress you and take you where you do n't want to go . ”

ID:	448
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai on ▁Jau na ▁Moi se si ▁Mo a be ko ▁lau ta dan ▁, ▁Jor dan ▁on do an ▁, ▁Je ri ko ▁pa re an ▁:
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	While Israel was camped beside the Jordan on the plains of Moab across from Jericho , the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	449
INPUT:	▁be lar ri ak ▁bai ▁, ▁e ta ▁en tzu ten ▁ez ▁; ▁ez ▁du te ▁ar na sa rik ▁a ho an ▁.
PRED:	They listen to their ears , but they do n't listen .
GOLD:	They have ears but can not hear , and mouths but can not breathe .

ID:	450
INPUT:	▁Zain ▁e ta ▁zain ▁e gon ▁on do ren ▁, ▁kez ka tzen ▁ha si ▁zi ren ▁, ▁goi ko ▁ge la ko ▁a te ak ▁i re ki tzen ▁ez ▁zi re la ko ▁. ▁Gil tza ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁a te a ▁i re ki tze an ▁, ▁han ▁aur ki tu ▁zu ten ▁be ren ▁na gu si a ▁lur re an ▁zer ral do ▁, ▁hi la ▁.
PRED:	They kept watch as they were waiting for him , so they could n't find him . They found him there at Gilgal , and they found him there in the town of Gilgal .
GOLD:	so they waited . But when the king did n't come out after a long delay , they became concerned and got a key . And when they opened the doors , they found their master dead on the floor .

ID:	451
INPUT:	▁Ne ge ve tik ▁i go ▁e ta ▁Heb ro ne ra ▁i ri tsi ▁zi ren ▁— ▁Heb ron ▁E gip to ko ▁Ta nis ▁bai no ▁zaz pi ▁ur te ▁le he na go ▁e rai ki a ▁zen ▁— ▁. ▁Han ▁bi zi ▁zi ren ▁A na ken ▁on do ren go ▁A hi man ▁, ▁Xe xai ▁e ta ▁Tal mai ▁.
PRED:	From the Negev , the Negev , and Talmai , the descendants of Anak . Their descendants became the ancestor of Talmai , and Talmai , the descendants of Anak .
GOLD:	Going north , they passed through the Negev and arrived at Hebron , where Ahiman , Sheshai , and Talmai — all descendants of Anak — lived . ( The ancient town of Hebron was founded seven years before the Egyptian city of Zoan . )

ID:	452
INPUT:	▁Lu za ro e gi ▁bi zi ▁i zan ▁naiz ▁he men ▁ba ke a ▁gor ro to ▁du te ne kin ▁!
PRED:	I hate those who hate me , and I hate those who hate me .
GOLD:	I am tired of livingamong people who hate peace .

ID:	453
INPUT:	▁Er re - o pa ri a ren ▁es kain tza ▁bu ka tu ▁zu e ne an ▁, ▁Je huk ▁gu da ri ▁e ta ▁bu ru za gi ei ▁a gin du ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁Aur re ra ▁! ▁Hil ▁i tza zu e ▁! ▁Ez ▁de za la ▁i nork ▁e re ▁i hes ▁e gin ▁! ▁Ez pa taz ▁hil ▁e ta ▁kan po ra ▁bo ta ▁zi tuz ten ▁. ▁Ge ro ▁, ▁gu da ri ▁e ta ▁bu ru za gi ek ▁, ▁Ba a len ▁jau re txe ko ▁bar ne - ge la ra ▁sar tu ▁,
PRED:	When Jehu burned the burnt offering , Jehu ordered the commanders of the army of Israel , “ Kill them ! ” Jehu shouted . “ Do n't kill them ! Do n't kill them ! Do n't let them go into the camp ! ”
GOLD:	As soon as Jehu had finished sacrificing the burnt offering , he commanded his guards and officers , “ Go in and kill all of them . Do n't let a single one escape ! ” So they killed them all with their swords , and the guards and officers dragged their bodies outside . Then Jehu 's men went into the innermost fortress of the temple of Baal .

ID:	454
INPUT:	▁E gin ▁ur rez ko ▁lau ▁e raz tun ▁e ta ▁e ran tsi ▁lau ▁oi nen ▁er tze tan ▁,
PRED:	Then make four gold rings and attach them to the four corners of the Covenant .
GOLD:	Make four gold rings for the table and attach them at the four corners next to the four legs .

ID:	455
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁hur bi le tik ▁jar rai tu ▁di e zu ▁ni re ▁i ra kas pen ▁e ta ▁bi zi e ra ri ▁; ▁zeu re ▁e gin ▁di tu zu ▁ni re ▁as mo ▁, ▁si nes men ▁e ta ▁pa zi en tzi a ▁, ▁ni re ▁mai ta sun ▁e ta ▁e ro a pe na ▁,
PRED:	But you must follow my instructions and obey my instructions . You must obey my decrees and regulations .
GOLD:	But you , Timothy , certainly know what I teach , and how I live , and what my purpose in life is . You know my faith , my patience , my love , and my endurance .

ID:	456
INPUT:	▁Az ke nik ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁e san ▁zi dan ▁:
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me ,
GOLD:	“ Then at last the Lord said to me ,

ID:	457
INPUT:	▁O na ▁e ta ▁zu ze na ▁da ▁Jau na ▁, ▁e ta ▁bi de a ▁ja ki na raz ten ▁di e ▁be ka ta ri ei ▁.
PRED:	The Lord is good and good ; he does n't know what he is right .
GOLD:	The Lord is good and does what is right ; he shows the proper path to those who go astray .

ID:	458
INPUT:	▁Be har tsu a ri ▁i se ka ▁e gi ten ▁di o nak ▁i rain ▁e gi ten ▁di o ▁E gi le a ri ▁, ▁ha ren ▁zo ri txar raz ▁poz ten ▁de na ▁ez ▁da ▁zi gor ▁ga be ▁ge ra tu ko ▁.
PRED:	The poor despise the poor , but those who fear him will not be punished .
GOLD:	Those who mock the poor insult their Maker ; those who rejoice at the misfortune of others will be punished .

ID:	459
INPUT:	▁hai en ▁a be ras ta sun ▁guz ti ak ▁; ▁hai en ▁haur ▁e ta ▁e maz te ak ▁ba hi tu ▁zi tuz ten ▁, ▁e ta ▁e txe e ta ko ▁gau za ▁guz ti ak ▁os tu ▁.
PRED:	Their children were very rich and their children , and their wives were stored in their homes .
GOLD:	They looted all their wealth and plundered their houses . They also took all their little children and wives and led them away as captives .

ID:	460
INPUT:	▁u me zurtz ▁e ta ▁za pal du a ren ▁es ku bi de ak ▁ba bes te ko.Ez ▁be za ▁ge hi a go ▁bel dur rik ▁e man buz ti nez ▁e gi ni ko ▁gi za ki ak ▁!
PRED:	They will oppress widows and orphans , but they will not be afraid of them .
GOLD:	You will bring justice to the orphans and the oppressed , so mere people can no longer terrify them .

ID:	461
INPUT:	▁Noiz ▁ar te ▁a ho be ro ak ▁lo tsa ga be ▁er ron kan ▁, ▁gaiz ki le ▁guz ti ak ▁har ro puz tu rik ▁?
PRED:	How long will the wicked be silent ? How long will the wicked be disgraced ?
GOLD:	How long will they speak with arrogance ? How long will these evil people boast ?

ID:	462
INPUT:	▁Ha ren ▁mu ga ▁, ▁i par ral de tik ▁, ▁Jor da nen ▁has ten ▁zen ▁, ▁Je ri ko ren ▁i par ral de ko ▁sai he tse tik ▁i go ▁e ta ▁, ▁men di al de tik ▁men de bal de rantz ▁jar rai tuz ▁, ▁Bet - A ben ▁ba sa mor tu ra ▁hel tzen ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	So the boundary went north to the north of the Jordan River , east of the Jordan River , east of the hill country of Beth-shemesh .
GOLD:	The northern boundary of Benjamin 's land began at the Jordan River , went north of the slope of Jericho , then west through the hill country and the wilderness of Beth-aven .

ID:	463
INPUT:	▁I do lo ei ▁de sa fi o a
PRED:	The Fall of Jerusalem
GOLD:	Restoration for Jerusalem

ID:	464
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁e san ▁zi o ten ▁Sau li ▁: ▁« ▁Ha ra ▁, ▁Da vid ▁Ra ma ko ▁Nai o ten ▁da go ▁! ▁»
PRED:	They said to him , “ Look , David is going to Naioth in Ramah ! ”
GOLD:	When the report reached Saul that David was at Naioth in Ramah ,

ID:	465
INPUT:	▁« ▁Be dein ka tu a kon fi an tza ▁ni re gan ▁du e na ▁, ▁eus kar ri ▁ni ▁nau e na ▁!
PRED:	“ God blesses those who trust me ; he delights in those who trust me .
GOLD:	“ But blessed are those who trust in the Lordand have made the Lord their hope and confidence .

ID:	466
INPUT:	▁bai na ▁Je su sek ▁es ku tik ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁al txa ra zi ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁, ▁e ta ▁mu ti ko a ▁zu ti tu ▁e gin ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	But Jesus took the stone from the hand and broke it up .
GOLD:	But Jesus took him by the hand and helped him to his feet , and he stood up .

ID:	467
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ni re ▁bi ho tza ▁e re ▁dar dar ka ▁da go be re ▁le ku tik ▁ir ten ▁na hi an ▁.
PRED:	“ My heart is full of my heart ; my heart is filled with violence .
GOLD:	“ My heart pounds as I think of this.It trembles within me .

ID:	468
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zen ▁ja na ri rik ▁lur ral de ▁o so an ▁go se te ▁lar ri a ren ga tik ▁. ▁Go se ak ▁jo ta ▁u tzi ▁zi tu en ▁E gip to ▁e ta ▁Ka na an ▁lur ral de ak ▁.
PRED:	It was not good throughout the land of Canaan , for he rescued them from the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the famine became so severe that all the food was used up , and people were starving throughout the lands of Egypt and Canaan .

ID:	469
INPUT:	▁Le hen da nik ▁, ▁Saul ▁gu re ▁er re ge ▁ze ne an ▁e re ▁, ▁zuk ▁ze ni tu en ▁Is ra e len ▁jo an - e tor ri ak ▁gi da tzen ▁. ▁Jau nak ▁e sa na ▁di zu ▁: ▁“ ▁Zuk ▁gi da tu ko ▁du zu ▁e ne ▁her ri ▁Is ra el ▁e ta ▁zu ▁i za nen ▁za ra ▁is ra el dar ren ▁a gin ta ri ▁” ▁» ▁.
PRED:	When Saul arrived at the time , he said to Saul , ‘ You are the Lord , the God of Israel , says : You have said , ‘ You are the people of Israel . ' ”
GOLD:	In the past , when Saul was our king , you were the one who really led the forces of Israel . And the Lord told you , ‘ You will be the shepherd of my people Israel . You will be Israel 's leader . ' ”

ID:	470
INPUT:	▁Gi zo nak ▁e ra ku tsi ▁e gin ▁zi en ▁non dik ▁sar tzen ▁zen ▁hi ri ra ▁. ▁Or du an ▁, ▁hi ri ko ▁guz ti ak ▁hil ▁zi tuz ten ▁ez pa taz ▁, ▁gi zon ▁hu ra ▁e ta ▁be ra ren ▁se ni tar te ko ak ▁i zan ▁e zik ▁.
PRED:	When the men went out to the town , they killed all the men who had died . Then they killed all their families and their families .
GOLD:	So he showed them a way in , and they killed everyone in the town except that man and his family .

ID:	471
INPUT:	▁A hots ▁bat ▁oi hu ka ▁a ri ▁da ▁ba sa mor tu an ▁: ▁Pres ta tu ▁bi de a ▁Jau na ri ▁, ▁zu zen du ▁bi dex kak ▁ha ri ▁.
PRED:	A voice shouting , “ Prepare a voice from the wilderness , for the Lord is coming into the wilderness . ”
GOLD:	He is a voice shouting in the wilderness , ‘ Prepare the way for the Lord 's coming ! Clear the road for him ! ' ”

ID:	472
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren tzat ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko a ren tzat ▁sa ga ra tu ri ko ▁her ri ▁za re te ▁: ▁be rak ▁hau ta tu ▁zai tuz te ▁mun du ko ▁her ri ▁guz ti en ▁ar te an ▁be re ▁her ri ▁, ▁be re ▁ja be go ▁be re zi ▁, ▁i za te ko ▁.
PRED:	You must be holy by the Lord your God , the God of the earth , and you will possess all the nations of the earth .
GOLD:	For you are a holy people , who belong to the Lord your God . Of all the people on earth , the Lord your God has chosen you to be his own special treasure .

ID:	473
INPUT:	▁Ha za e lek ▁gal de tu ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Zer ga tik ▁a ri ▁za ra ▁ne gar rez ▁, ▁e ne ▁jau na ▁? ▁E li se ok ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁Ba da ki da la ko ▁no la ko ▁kal te a ▁e gi nen ▁di e zun ▁is ra el dar rei ▁: ▁su ▁e man go ▁di e zu ▁hai en ▁go tor le ku ei ▁, ▁ez pa taz ▁hil ko ▁di tu zu ▁hai en ▁gaz te ak ▁, ▁har ri en ▁kon tra ▁bo ta ko ▁hai en ▁haur txo ak ▁, ▁sa be la ▁i re ki ko ▁di e zu ▁han go ▁e ma ku me ▁haur du nei ▁.
PRED:	“ Why are you crying ? ” Gideon asked . “ Are you crying out , you people of Israel ? ” Elisha replied . “ Do n't you realize that you are going to kill the young men of Israel ? ”
GOLD:	“ What 's the matter , my lord ? ” Hazael asked him.Elisha replied , “ I know the terrible things you will do to the people of Israel . You will burn their fortified cities , kill their young men with the sword , dash their little children to the ground , and rip open their pregnant women ! ”

ID:	474
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Jo a bek ▁, ▁er re ge a ga na ▁jo an ▁e ta ▁ha la xe ▁ja ki na ra zi ▁zi on ▁. ▁Or du an ▁, ▁er re ge ak ▁dei ▁e gin ▁zi on ▁Ab sa lo mi ▁; ▁hau ▁er re ge a ga na ▁e tor ri ▁e ta ▁lur re rai no ▁a hus pez tu ▁zi tzai on ▁. ▁Er re ge ak ▁be sar ka tu ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁Ab sa lom ▁.
PRED:	Then Joab went to the king and gave him this message . Then Absalom shouted to Absalom . Then Absalom bowed down to the ground before the king , and Absalom bowed down to the ground before him .
GOLD:	So Joab told the king what Absalom had said . Then at last David summoned Absalom , who came and bowed low before the king , and the king kissed him .

ID:	475
INPUT:	▁E txe ko ▁ar du ra du nak ▁ho ne la ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁« ▁Zau de te ▁la sai ▁! ▁Ez ▁kez ka tu ▁! ▁Zeu en ▁Jain ko ak ▁, ▁zeu en ▁ai ta ren ▁Jain ko ak ▁, ▁e zar ri ko ▁zi zu en ▁al txor ▁ho ri ▁ga ri - za ku e tan ▁, ▁nik ▁ja so a ▁bai tut ▁zu en ▁di ru a ▁» <unk> me on ▁as ke ▁u tzi ▁e ta
PRED:	Then the manager said to them , “ Stay here ! Do n't go back to your father ! Do n't let your father tell you what you have done , for I will give you your money . ”
GOLD:	“ Relax . Do n't be afraid , ” the household manager told them . “ Your God , the God of your father , must have put this treasure into your sacks . I know I received your payment. ” Then he released Simeon and brought him out to them .

ID:	476
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁gal de tu ▁zi dan ▁: ▁« ▁Nor ▁za ra ▁? ▁» ▁Nik ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁« ▁A ma lek tar ra ▁nau zu ▁» ▁.
PRED:	He asked me , “ Who are you ? Who are you ? ”
GOLD:	“ He responded , ‘ Who are you ? ' “ ‘ I am an Amalekite , ' I told him .

ID:	477
INPUT:	▁Mor roi ak ▁o nar tu ▁zu en ▁pro po sa me na ▁, ▁e ta ▁ha mar ▁e gu ne ko ▁pro ba ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁hai e kin ▁.
PRED:	So the servant took the servant 's servant , and he told them everything he had done .
GOLD:	The attendant agreed to Daniel 's suggestion and tested them for ten days .

ID:	478
INPUT:	▁Go rain tzi ak ▁Jau na ren gan ▁o so ▁mai te ▁du dan <unk> a to ri ▁.
PRED:	Greet the Lord , all who love me , for he loves me .
GOLD:	Greet Ampliatus , my dear friend in the Lord .

ID:	479
INPUT:	▁Pau lo ▁zain pe an ▁e du ki tze ko ▁a gin du ▁zi on ▁e hun ta ri a ri ▁, ▁bai na ▁la sai ▁sa mar ▁u tziz ▁, ▁be ra ri ▁la gun tze ra ▁jo a te a ▁a dis ki de ei ▁de be ka tu ▁ga be ▁.
PRED:	Paul ordered Paul to pay for the debt of the Roman officer , but he got up early in the boat .
GOLD:	He ordered an officer to keep Paul in custody but to give him some freedom and allow his friends to visit him and take care of his needs .

ID:	480
INPUT:	▁sal tze ko ▁ni ri ▁be re ▁so ro a ren ▁on do an ▁da go en ▁Mak pe la ko ▁har pe a ▁. ▁E man ▁di e za da la ▁ba li o ▁du en ▁di ru a ren ▁tru ke ▁, ▁zu en ▁lur ral de an ▁hi lo bi a ren ▁ja be tza ▁u kan ▁de za dan ▁.
PRED:	They will be sold in the field of Machpelah , near the cave of Machpelah , near the field of Machpelah , near the rock of Canaan , where they can possess it .
GOLD:	to let me buy his cave at Machpelah , down at the end of his field . I will pay the full price in the presence of witnesses , so I will have a permanent burial place for my family . ”

ID:	481
INPUT:	▁Se na ke rib ▁ber ri ro ▁me ha txu ka
PRED:	Isaiah 's Prayer for Wisdom
GOLD:	Hezekiah Seeks the Lord 's Help

ID:	482
INPUT:	▁Ped rok ▁de nak ▁ir te na ra zi ▁zi tu en ▁e ta ▁, ▁be lau ni ka tu rik ▁, ▁o toitz ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁; ▁ge ro ▁, ▁gor pu ra ▁bi hur tu rik ▁, ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁« ▁Ta bi ta ▁, ▁jai ki ▁! ▁» ▁Hark ▁be gi ak ▁i re ki ▁zi tu en ▁e ta ▁, ▁Ped ro ▁i kus te an ▁, ▁e se ri ▁e gin ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	Peter left them and went out to the place where he had been asleep . He prayed , “ My body is full of pain , ” he said . “ I am going to see , and Peter was dead . ”
GOLD:	But Peter asked them all to leave the room ; then he knelt and prayed . Turning to the body he said , “ Get up , Tabitha. ” And she opened her eyes ! When she saw Peter , she sat up !

ID:	483
INPUT:	▁Je su sen ▁hi tzok ▁en tzu te an ▁, ▁ba tzu ek ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁« ▁Be ne tan ▁hau xe ▁da ▁i txa ron ▁du gun ▁pro fe ta ▁» ▁.
PRED:	When Jesus heard this , he said to him , “ This is the account of the prophets . ”
GOLD:	When the crowds heard him say this , some of them declared , “ Surely this man is the Prophet we 've been expecting . ”

ID:	484
INPUT:	▁A pai zak ▁al da re an ▁aur kez tu ko ▁du ▁e ta ▁, ▁bu ru a ▁moz tu ▁e ta ▁o do la ▁al da re a ren ▁al bo ▁ba te an ▁i su ri ▁on do ren ▁, ▁al da re an ▁er re ko ▁.
PRED:	The priest will burn the animal on the altar and burn it on the altar . Then the priest will burn it on top of the altar .
GOLD:	The priest will take the bird to the altar , wring off its head , and burn it on the altar . But first he must drain its blood against the side of the altar .

ID:	485
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁e ran tzun ▁hau ▁ja so ko ▁du te ▁: ▁“ ▁Jau na ren ▁, ▁be ren ▁Jain ko a ren ▁, ▁i tu na ▁baz ter ▁u tzi ▁e ta ▁jain ko ▁ar ro tzak ▁gur tu ▁e ta ▁zer bi tza tu ▁di tuz te la ko ▁” ▁» ▁.
PRED:	They will reply , ‘ This is what the Lord says : He will abandon the gods of the Lord your God and worship other gods . ' ”
GOLD:	And the answer will be , ‘ Because they violated their covenant with the Lord their God by worshiping other gods . ' ”

ID:	486
INPUT:	▁Sar tu ▁zen ▁Jo ab ▁er re ge a ren ▁e txe ra ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Lo tsa ra zi ▁e gin ▁di tu zu ▁gaur ▁, ▁zu ri ▁e ta ▁zu re ▁se me - a la bei ▁, ▁zu re ▁e maz te ▁e ta ▁o hai de ei ▁bi zi a ▁sal ba tu ▁di zu e ten ▁gu da ri ▁guz ti ak ▁.
PRED:	So Joab went to the king and said to Lot , “ Look , you are the children of your children and children , and you have saved your children and saved them .
GOLD:	You seem to love those who hate you and hate those who love you . You have made it clear today that your commanders and troops mean nothing to you . It seems that if Absalom had lived and all of us had died , you would be pleased .

ID:	487
INPUT:	▁Zu ei ▁da go ki zu e nez ▁, ▁e gin ▁bi ra ▁e ta ▁jo ▁ba sa mor tu rantz ▁, ▁I tsa so ▁Gor ri rantz ▁.
PRED:	You will go to the Red Sea and run toward the Red Sea .
GOLD:	As for you , turn around now and go on back through the wilderness toward the Red Sea . '

ID:	488
INPUT:	▁O toiz le ku ra ▁gin do a zen ▁ba te an ▁, ▁nes ka txa ▁bat ▁a te ra ▁zi tzai gun ▁bi de ra ▁: ▁ge ro a ▁i gar tze ko ▁a hal me na ▁e ma ten ▁zi on ▁es pi ri tu ▁ba tek ▁har tu a ▁zen ▁, ▁e ta ▁be re ▁i gar pe nen ▁bi dez ▁i ra ba zi ▁e der ra ▁e ma ten ▁zi en ▁na gu si ei ▁.
PRED:	A few days later a little girl named him . He said to him , “ There is a woman who was a woman who had been a gift to the spirits of life and gave birth to a gift . ”
GOLD:	One day as we were going down to the place of prayer , we met a slave girl who had a spirit that enabled her to tell the future . She earned a lot of money for her masters by telling fortunes .

ID:	489
INPUT:	▁« ▁Har tu ▁bes te ▁er roi lu ▁bat ▁e ta ▁i da tzi ▁ber tan ▁Ju da ko ▁er re ge ▁Joi a ki mek ▁er re ta ko an ▁ze tor ren ▁me zu ▁be ra ▁.
PRED:	“ At that time the king of Judah came to Jerusalem and told him , ‘ This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	“ Get another scroll , and write everything again just as you did on the scroll King Jehoiakim burned .

ID:	490
INPUT:	▁« ▁Bi zi ▁be di ▁Ru ben ▁, ▁ez ▁be di ▁hil ▁, ▁gu txi ▁i zan ▁ar ren ▁be ra ren ▁gi zo nak ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ But you must not die , ” says the Lord . “ You must not die . ”
GOLD:	Moses said this about the tribe of Reuben : “ Let the tribe of Reuben live and not die out , though they are few in number . ”

ID:	491
INPUT:	▁I tzu li ▁zen ▁Ba la am ▁Ba la ken ga na ▁e ta ▁er re - o pa ri en ▁on do an ▁aur ki tu ▁zu en ▁mo ab dar ▁bu ru za gi ▁guz ti e kin ▁.
PRED:	Then Balaam returned to Balaam and presented it to the king of Moab .
GOLD:	So Balaam returned and found the king standing beside his burnt offerings with all the officials of Moab .

ID:	492
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁Heb ron ▁, ▁Je fu ne ren ▁se me ▁Ka leb ▁ke niz tar ra ren ▁on do ren go e na ▁da ▁gaur dai no ▁, ▁hau ▁Jau na re ki ko ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁Jain ko a re ki ko ▁, ▁lei al ▁i zan ▁ze la ko ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , you are the tribes of Jephunneh and Joshua son of Nun , the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	Hebron still belongs to the descendants of Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite because he wholeheartedly followed the Lord , the God of Israel .

ID:	493
INPUT:	▁Jo su ek ▁bost ▁mi la ▁in gu ru ▁gu da ri ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁ze la tan ▁i pi ni ▁zi tu en ▁Be tel ▁e ta ▁Ai ▁ar te an ▁, ▁hi ri a ren ▁men de bal de ra ▁.
PRED:	Then Joshua took five warriors from Ai , and he placed them on the hill country of Ai .
GOLD:	That night Joshua sent about 5,000 men to lie in ambush between Bethel and Ai , on the west side of the town .

ID:	494
INPUT:	▁« ▁Per tsi a ▁, <unk> ▁e ta ▁Put ▁her ri al de e ta ko ▁ger la ri ak ▁ze neuz kan ▁zeu re ▁ar ma dan ▁, ▁ba bes ki ▁e ta ▁bu ru - os ko lak ▁zin tzi li ka tuz ▁a pain tzen ▁zin tuz ten ▁.
PRED:	“ Persia , Ethiopia , and Libya will attack you . They will attack you , too , will attack you !
GOLD:	“ Men from distant Persia , Lydia , and Libya served in your great army . They hung their shields and helmets on your walls , giving you great honor .

ID:	495
INPUT:	▁Mu ti ko ak ▁jar ri ko ▁diz ki e ▁na gu si ▁, ▁be ren ▁na hi e ra ra ▁go ber na ▁di tza ten ▁.
PRED:	The prince will rule over the nations , and he will rule over the nations .
GOLD:	I will make boys their leaders , and toddlers their rulers .

ID:	496
INPUT:	▁Jau na ▁E ze ki a sen ▁al de ▁e gon ▁ze nez ▁, ▁o nik ▁a te ra ▁zen ▁hau ▁be re ▁e gin tza ▁guz ti e tan ▁. ▁A si ri a ko ▁er re ge a ren ▁kon tra ▁jai ki ▁e ta ▁ha ren ▁men pe ko ▁i za te a ri ▁u tzi ▁zi on ▁.
PRED:	But Hezekiah remained in the Lord 's presence until all the years of King Hezekiah 's reign , and he rebelled against the king of Assyria .
GOLD:	So the Lord was with him , and Hezekiah was successful in everything he did . He revolted against the king of Assyria and refused to pay him tribute .

ID:	497
INPUT:	▁I nork ▁, ▁ten tal di rik ▁du e ne an ▁, ▁ez ▁be za ▁e san ▁Jain ko ak ▁ten ta tzen ▁du e nik ▁. ▁Jain ko ak ▁ez ▁du ▁gaiz ki ra ko ▁ten ta zi o rik ▁e ta ▁ez ▁du ▁i nor ▁gaiz ki ra ko ▁ten ta tzen ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	No one can tell you what is right , and God does not obey God 's commandments .
GOLD:	And remember , when you are being tempted , do not say , “ God is tempting me. ” God is never tempted to do wrong , and he never tempts anyone else .

ID:	498
INPUT:	▁Hai ek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁— ▁Ju de a ko ▁Be le nen ▁, ▁ho ne la ▁i da tzi ▁bai tzu en ▁pro fe tak ▁:
PRED:	They replied , “ The prophets of Judah have heard that the prophets had said ,
GOLD:	“ In Bethlehem in Judea , ” they said , “ for this is what the prophet wrote :

ID:	499
INPUT:	▁E guz ki a ▁sar tze an ▁, ▁gar bi ▁gel di tu ko ▁da ▁e ta ▁jan ▁a hal ▁i zan go ▁di tu ▁o pa ri ▁sak ra tu ak ▁, ▁be ra ren tza ko ▁ja na ri ▁bai ti ra ▁.
PRED:	The sun will be eaten by the sun , and it will be eaten . It will be eaten by the same way , for it is most holy .
GOLD:	When the sun goes down , he will be ceremonially clean again and may eat from the sacred offerings , for this is his food .

ID:	500
INPUT:	▁Al di ka ▁lo zor ro an ▁, ▁al di ka ▁er di ▁lo ▁, ▁al di ka ▁be so ak ▁uz tar tu ▁e ta ▁a tse de ne an ▁:
PRED:	A little extra sleep , a little sleep with ropes , and a little sleep .
GOLD:	A little extra sleep , a little more slumber , a little folding of the hands to rest —

ID:	501
INPUT:	▁e gun do ko ▁al txor rak ▁es ku ra tu e ta ▁har ra pa ki nez ▁be te ko ▁du gu ▁e txe a ▁;
PRED:	On that day the priest will take his hand and capture it .
GOLD:	Think of the great things we 'll get ! We 'll fill our houses with all the stuff we take .

ID:	502
INPUT:	▁Jaun ▁ho ri ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁Es pi ri tu a ▁da ▁, ▁e ta ▁Jau na ren ▁Es pi ri tu a ▁non ▁, ▁as ka ta su na ▁han ▁.
PRED:	But this is what the Spirit of the Lord , the Holy Spirit , and the Spirit of the Lord is filled with great power .
GOLD:	For the Lord is the Spirit , and wherever the Spirit of the Lord is , there is freedom .

ID:	503
INPUT:	▁Hil ▁bi tez ▁ez pa taz ▁, ▁bi hur ▁a ze ri en ▁ja na ri ▁!
PRED:	Let them be slaughtered by the sword , and let them die .
GOLD:	But the king will rejoice in God.All who swear to tell the truth will praise him , while liars will be silenced .

ID:	504
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁mor roi ▁ho nek ▁hai e tan ▁du ▁ar gi a ▁, ▁be ne tan ▁o nu ra gar ri ▁hai ek ▁be te tze a ▁.
PRED:	Your servants have been filled with fear , and they remembered their lives .
GOLD:	How can I know all the sins lurking in my heart ? Cleanse me from these hidden faults .

ID:	505
INPUT:	▁Se de ki a sen ▁er re ge al di ko ▁ha mar gar ren ▁ur te an ▁, ▁Na bu ko do no sor ren ▁er re ge al di ko ▁he me zor tzi gar re ne an ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁be re ▁me zu a ▁a di e ra zi ▁zi on ▁Je re mi a si ▁.
PRED:	In the eighteenth year of King Zedekiah 's reign , during the eighteenth year of King Zedekiah 's reign , the Lord gave this message to Jeremiah :
GOLD:	The following message came to Jeremiah from the Lord in the tenth year of the reign of Zedekiah , king of Judah . This was also the eighteenth year of the reign of King Nebuchadnezzar .

ID:	506
INPUT:	▁ez ▁di ra ▁ne ka tzen ▁, ▁ez ▁es tro pe zu ▁e gi ten ▁; ▁ez ▁di tu ▁lo ak ▁, ▁ez ▁lo ga le ak ▁gel di a raz ten ▁; ▁ez ▁zai e ▁ger ri ko a ▁as ka tzen ▁, ▁ez ▁e ta ▁oi ne ta ko ▁lo kar ri a ▁e te ten ▁.
PRED:	Do n't weep for those who sleep , but they will not weep or shame . They will be ashamed , and their feet will not be shame .
GOLD:	They will not get tired or stumble.They will not stop for rest or sleep.Not a belt will be loose , not a sandal strap broken .

ID:	507
INPUT:	▁I bai ko ▁u ra ▁jo ▁zu e ne tik ▁zaz pi ▁e gu ne ra ▁, ▁Jau nak
PRED:	For seven days you must go to the water of the Lord .
GOLD:	Seven days passed from the time the Lord struck the Nile .

ID:	508
INPUT:	▁Ja zer ga tik ▁e gin ▁nu en ▁bai no ne gar ▁ge hi a go ▁da git ▁zu re ga tik ▁, ▁Sib ma ko ▁ma has ti ▁hor ren ga <unk> re ▁ai he na kI tsa so ▁Gor ri rai no ▁lu za tzen ▁zi ren ▁, ▁Ja ze re rai no ▁i ris ten ▁: ▁zu re ▁gain ▁e re ol dar tu ▁da ▁sun tsi tzai le a ▁, ▁uz ta ▁e ta ▁ma hats - bil ke ta ▁hon da tuz ▁.
PRED:	So I said to myself , ‘ My lord , ' says the Lord. “ This is what 's happening to the Red Sea , the land of Edom , which is almost dried up , and the grapes of the sea .
GOLD:	“ You people of Sibmah , rich in vineyards , I will weep for you even more than I did for Jazer.Your spreading vines once reached as far as the Dead Sea , but the destroyer has stripped you bare ! He has harvested your grapes and summer fruits .

ID:	509
INPUT:	▁Is ra el dar ren ▁el kar te ▁o so a ▁E lim dik ▁ir ten ▁e ta ▁E lim ▁e ta ▁Si nai ▁ar te an ▁da go en ▁Sin ▁ba sa mor tu ra ▁hel du ▁zen ▁. ▁Bi gar ren ▁hi la ren ▁ha ma bos ta ▁zen ▁E gip to tik ▁ir te nez ▁ge ro ▁.
PRED:	So the entire community of Israel left Egypt and camped in the wilderness of Egypt . They went out to the wilderness of Egypt and stayed in the wilderness of Egypt .
GOLD:	Then the whole community of Israel set out from Elim and journeyed into the wilderness of Sin , between Elim and Mount Sinai . They arrived there on the fifteenth day of the second month , one month after leaving the land of Egypt .

ID:	510
INPUT:	▁Ja ki zu e ▁Jau nak ▁har ri gar ri ro ▁jo ka tzen ▁du e la be re ▁fe de du na ren ▁al de ▁, ▁en tzun ▁e gi ten ▁di da la ▁dei tzen ▁di o da ne an ▁.
PRED:	When you listen to the Lord , you will pray that those who refuse to listen to me .
GOLD:	Do n't sin by letting anger control you.Think about it overnight and remain silent.Interlude

ID:	511
INPUT:	▁« ▁A di tu ▁zi tu en ▁Jau nak ▁zu en ▁mar ma ri o ak ▁e ta ▁, ▁su min du rik ▁, ▁ho ne la ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁zin ▁:
PRED:	“ The Lord said to Moses , ‘ Your mother was filled with grief . '
GOLD:	“ When the Lord heard your complaining , he became very angry . So he solemnly swore ,

ID:	512
INPUT:	▁Ja ri o du nak ▁zal diz ▁i bil tze an ▁e ra bi li ta ko ▁ze la ▁ku tsa tu a ▁gel di tu ko ▁da ▁.
PRED:	When she sits on the road , she will remain unclean for her .
GOLD:	Any saddle blanket on which the man rides will be ceremonially unclean .

ID:	513
INPUT:	▁gu re ▁sal ba tzai le ▁den ▁Jain ko ▁ba kar ra ri ▁, ▁Je su ▁Kris to ▁gu re ▁Jau na ren ▁bi tar tez ▁, ▁ain tza ▁, ▁han di ta su na ▁, ▁a hal me na ▁e ta ▁a gin te a ▁be ti da nik ▁, ▁o rain ▁e ta ▁be ti ▁! ▁A men ▁.
PRED:	For we have been saved by the glorious glory of our Lord Jesus Christ , who brought us into the power of our Lord Jesus Christ . Amen . Amen . Amen .
GOLD:	All glory to him who alone is God , our Savior through Jesus Christ our Lord . All glory , majesty , power , and authority are his before all time , and in the present , and beyond all time ! Amen .

ID:	514
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁ba li o tsu tzat ▁ni tu en ▁gau za ▁guz ti ok ▁, ▁ba li o ga be tzat ▁jo ▁ni tu en ▁Kris to ren ga tik ▁.
PRED:	But I said to you , “ If you are wise , I will go to Christ . ”
GOLD:	I once thought these things were valuable , but now I consider them worthless because of what Christ has done .

ID:	515
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁ba kar ▁ba tzuk bi zi rik ▁gel di tu ko ▁di ra ▁Je ru sa le men ▁, ▁o nik ▁a te ra ko ▁Si on ▁men di <unk> ▁a hal guz ti du na ren mai te min ▁su tsu ak ▁e gin go ▁du ▁ho ri ▁!
PRED:	For some of them will survive , and some will survive the fire of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	For a remnant of my people will spread out from Jerusalem , a group of survivors from Mount Zion.The passionate commitment of the Lord of Heaven 's Armieswill make this happen !

ID:	516
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁jar rai tu ▁zu en ▁: ▁— ▁La sai ▁zo ko ra tzen ▁du zu e ▁Jain ko a ren ▁a gin du a ▁zeu en ▁u sa di o ak ▁e zar tze ko ▁!
PRED:	“ Be sure to obey the commands of the Lord your God . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ You skillfully sidestep God 's law in order to hold on to your own tradition .

ID:	517
INPUT:	▁« ▁Zuk ▁e ta ▁zu re ▁se me ek ▁, ▁el kar ke ta - e txo lan ▁sar tu ▁be har ▁du zu e ne an ▁, ▁ez ▁du zu e ▁ar do rik ▁, ▁ez ▁al ko hol - e da ri rik ▁e dan go ▁, ▁hil ▁na hi ▁ez ▁ba du zu e ▁.
PRED:	“ You and your sons must not enter the Tabernacle , and you will never die . If you do n't want to kill you , you will not die .
GOLD:	“ You and your descendants must never drink wine or any other alcoholic drink before going into the Tabernacle . If you do , you will die . This is a permanent law for you , and it must be observed from generation to generation .

ID:	518
INPUT:	▁Ne gar - kan ta
PRED:	Nehemiah 's Final Words
GOLD:	A Call to Repentance

ID:	519
INPUT:	▁bes te ▁E lam ▁ba te ko ak ▁1.254 ▁;
PRED:	The people of Elam
GOLD:	The citizens of West Elam1,254

ID:	520
INPUT:	▁Sa ma ri an ▁bi zi tzen ▁has te an ▁, ▁ar rotz ▁hai ek ▁ez ▁zu ten ▁Jau na ▁gur tzen ▁; ▁or du an ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁le hoi ak ▁bi da li ▁ziz ki en ▁, ▁jen de a ▁hil tze ko ▁.
PRED:	When the Lord 's life was in Samaria , they refused to worship the Lord . But the people of Israel sent a lion to kill them .
GOLD:	But since these foreign settlers did not worship the Lord when they first arrived , the Lord sent lions among them , which killed some of them .

ID:	521
INPUT:	▁On ▁e gi o zu ▁zeu re ▁zer bi tza ri ▁ho ni ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁zeu re ▁pro me sa ren ▁a ra be ra ▁!
PRED:	You are your servant , O Lord , and you have fulfill your vows .
GOLD:	You have done many good things for me , Lord , just as you promised .

ID:	522
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁zen bat ▁e ta ▁ja kin du ri a ▁u ga ri a go ▁, ▁a tse ka be a ▁han di a go ▁, ▁zen bat ▁e ta ▁e za gu e ra ▁sa ko na go ▁, ▁na hi ga be a ▁lar ri a go ▁.
PRED:	For wisdom is more valuable to the wisdom of wisdom and knowledge .
GOLD:	The greater my wisdom , the greater my grief.To increase knowledge only increases sorrow .

ID:	523
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁, ▁or du an ▁, ▁es ku a ▁ja so ▁e ta ▁zin ▁e gin ▁zu en ba sa mor tu an ▁hil ko ▁zi tu e la ▁,
PRED:	He swore an oath to give an oath in the wilderness and killed it in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Therefore , he solemnly sworethat he would kill them in the wilderness ,

ID:	524
INPUT:	▁Ben - Hi nom ▁de ri tzan ▁ha ra ne an ▁ze go en ▁To fe te ko ▁er re te gi a ▁e re ▁pro fa na tu ▁zu en ▁; ▁hor re la ▁, ▁e zin ▁i zan go ▁zi on ▁i nork ▁e re ▁su a ri ▁e man ▁be re ▁se me ▁na hiz ▁a la ba rik ▁, ▁Mo lok ▁sa si jain ko a ri ▁es kain tze ko ▁.
PRED:	They left the valley of Ben-Hinnom , where no one could touch the valley of Ben-Hinnom , where no one could be able to offer sacrifices to the gods of Moab .
GOLD:	Then the king defiled the altar of Topheth in the valley of Ben-Hinnom , so no one could ever again use it to sacrifice a son or daughter in the fire as an offering to Molech .

ID:	525
INPUT:	▁Bet - A be ne rai no ▁za bal du ▁zen ▁ga taz ka ▁. ▁E gun ▁har tan ▁Is ra e li ▁e man ▁zi on ▁Jau nak ▁ga rai pe na ▁.
PRED:	On that day the town of Beth-arabah , the Lord gave him victory over Israel .
GOLD:	So the Lord saved Israel that day , and the battle continued to rage even beyond Beth-aven .

ID:	526
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁be gi ra tze an ▁, ▁er re ge a ▁i ku si ▁zu en ▁o hol tza ▁gai ne an ▁zu tik ▁, ▁o hi ▁zen ▁be za la ▁. ▁Bu ru za gi ak ▁e ta ▁tu ru ta - jo tzai le ak ▁er re ge a ren ▁on do an ▁zeu den ▁; ▁her ri ko ▁jen de a ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁po zez ▁be te rik ▁ze bi len ▁, ▁tu ru ten ▁soi nu ra ▁. ▁A ta li ak ▁, ▁be re ▁soi ne ko ak ▁ur ra tuz ▁, ▁gar ra si ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁: ▁— ▁Trai zi o a ▁! ▁Trai zi o a ▁!
PRED:	When the king saw that he was standing on the throne , he became very happy . His heart was full of joy , and his heart was full of joy . But when he heard the sound of the trumpets , he cried out , “ Oh , my people ! ” they cried . “ Yes , “ Be pure ! ”
GOLD:	When she arrived , she saw the newly crowned king standing in his place of authority by the pillar , as was the custom at times of coronation . The commanders and trumpeters were surrounding him , and people from all over the land were rejoicing and blowing trumpets . When Athaliah saw all this , she tore her clothes in despair and shouted , “ Treason ! Treason ! ”

ID:	527
INPUT:	▁Hi ru gar ren ▁i kus ka ri a ▁: ▁li hoz ▁jan tzi ta ko ▁gi zo na
PRED:	A Vision of John the Baptist
GOLD:	Daniel 's Vision of a Messenger

ID:	528
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁ho ne la ▁be dein ka tu ▁zu en ▁Jo se ▁: ▁« ▁Ni re ▁gu ra so ▁Ab ra ha mek ▁e ta ▁I sa a kek zer bi tza tu ▁du ten ▁Jain ko ak ▁, ▁jai o ▁nin tze ne tik ▁gaur dai no ar tzain ▁gi sa ▁gi da tu ▁nau en ▁Jain ko ak ▁,
PRED:	Then Abraham blessed him and said , “ I am the God of Abraham , Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob , and Jacob .
GOLD:	Then he blessed Joseph and said , “ May the God before whom my grandfather Abrahamand my father , Isaac , walked — the God who has been my shepherdall my life , to this very day ,

ID:	529
INPUT:	▁Gi zo na ren ▁Se me a ren ▁kon tra ▁zer bait ▁e sa ten ▁du e na ri ▁bar ka tu ko ▁di o ▁Jain ko ak ▁; ▁bai na ▁Es pi ri tu ▁San tu a ren ▁kon tra ▁bi ra o ▁e gi ten ▁du e na ri ▁, ▁ez ▁di o ▁bar ka tu ko ▁.
PRED:	Anyone who sins against the Son of Man will be forgiven , but those who sin against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven .
GOLD:	Anyone who speaks against the Son of Man can be forgiven , but anyone who blasphemes the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven .

ID:	530
INPUT:	▁Ju da ko ▁A sa ren ▁er re ge al di ko ▁ho gei ta ▁ha mai ka gar ren ▁ur te a ▁zen ▁Om ri ▁Is ra el go ▁er re ge ▁i za ten ▁ha si ▁ze ne an ▁. ▁Ha ma bi ▁ur tez ▁i zan ▁zen ▁er re ge ▁e ta ▁ho ri e ta tik ▁sei ▁Tir tzan ▁.
PRED:	Ahaziah son of Omri began to rule over Israel in the third year of King Asa 's reign in Judah . He reigned in Tirzah for twenty-two years .
GOLD:	Omri began to rule over Israel in the thirty-first year of King Asa 's reign in Judah . He reigned twelve years in all , six of them in Tirzah .

ID:	531
INPUT:	▁Kan po ko ▁a ta ri ▁e ta ▁sar re rak
PRED:	The Lord 's Glory Returns
GOLD:	The East Gateway

ID:	532
INPUT:	▁« ▁Be raz ▁, ▁ur te an ▁hi ru ▁al diz ▁aur kez tu ko ▁di ra ▁gi za se me ▁guz ti ak ▁Jain ko ▁Jau na ren ▁aur re ra ▁.
PRED:	“ Therefore , you must celebrate three years before the Lord your God .
GOLD:	At these three times each year , every man in Israel must appear before the Sovereign , the Lord .

ID:	533
INPUT:	▁E gu nez ▁dei ka ▁a ri ▁na tzai zu ▁, ▁e ne ▁Jain ko ▁, ▁e ta ▁zuk ▁e ran tzu nik ▁ez ▁; ▁bai ta ▁gau ez ▁e re ▁, ▁e ta ▁ba ke rik ▁ez ▁dut ▁.
PRED:	I cry out to you , O Lord my God , for I have no night , and I have no night .
GOLD:	Yet you are holy , enthroned on the praises of Israel .

ID:	534
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁du ▁i no la ko ▁or dai nik ▁o nar tu ko ▁, ▁ez ta ▁zeu re ▁es kain tza ▁bi der ka tu ta ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	You must not accept any of your oil , and you will never accept it .
GOLD:	He will accept no compensation , nor be satisfied with a payoff of any size .

ID:	535
INPUT:	▁Fa ra oi ak ▁, ▁zu re ▁i ze ne an ▁min tza tze ra ▁e tor ri ▁na tzai o ne tik ▁, ▁a re ▁gaiz ki a go ▁e ra bi li ▁du ▁zu re ▁her ri a ▁e ta ▁zuk ▁ez ▁du zu ▁deus ▁e re ▁e gin ▁lib ra tze ko ▁.
PRED:	When Pharaoh 's officials came to Pharaoh , he will tell you what you 've done . He will rescue you from your own land .
GOLD:	Ever since I came to Pharaoh as your spokesman , he has been even more brutal to your people . And you have done nothing to rescue them ! ”

ID:	536
INPUT:	▁Ar ra tse an ▁, ▁de ab ru dun ▁as ko ▁e ra man ▁ziz ki o ten ▁Je su si ▁. ▁Ho nek ▁de ab ru ak ▁be re ▁hi tzez ▁bo ta ▁e ta ▁gai xo ▁guz ti ak ▁sen da tu ▁zi tu en ▁.
PRED:	The demons gave him a report of the devil , and he healed the demons . He healed all the sick and sick .
GOLD:	That evening many demon-possessed people were brought to Jesus . He cast out the evil spirits with a simple command , and he healed all the sick .

ID:	537
INPUT:	▁A re ▁ge hi a go ▁, ▁Re be kak ▁bi ki ak ▁i zan ▁zi tu en ▁I sa ak ▁gu re ▁ar ba so a gan dik ▁.
PRED:	Rebekah had two sons named Rebekah , Rebekah , and she named Rebekah .
GOLD:	This son was our ancestor Isaac . When he married Rebekah , she gave birth to twins .

ID:	538
INPUT:	▁Be so ▁e ta ▁ko pek ▁gor putz ▁bat ▁be ra ▁e gi ten ▁zu ten ▁ar gi mu ti la re kin ▁. ▁Guz ti a ▁ur re ▁gar biz ▁lan du a ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	Two branches were all filled with pure gold and pure gold . They were all made of pure gold .
GOLD:	The almond buds and branches were all of one piece with the center stem , and they were hammered from pure gold .

ID:	539
INPUT:	▁Zu ek ▁guz ti ok ▁i ku si ▁a hal ▁i zan ▁ba du zu e ▁, ▁zer ga tik ▁hain bes te ▁jar dun ▁hu tsal ▁?
PRED:	You have seen all these things , so why have you seen ?
GOLD:	But you have seen all this , yet you say all these useless things to me .

ID:	540
INPUT:	▁Zu en gan ▁es pi ri tuz ko ▁on da su nak ▁e rein ▁ba di tu gu ▁, ▁ge hi e gi ▁o te ▁da ▁zu en gan dik ▁lur re ko ▁on da su nak ▁ja so tze a ▁?
PRED:	If you think of your unfailing love , how can you think of your wealth ?
GOLD:	Since we have planted spiritual seed among you , are n't we entitled to a harvest of physical food and drink ?

ID:	541
INPUT:	▁Han dik ▁las ter ▁, ▁ba bi lo ni ar ▁ba tzuk ▁ju du ak ▁sa la tze ra ▁jo an ▁zi ren ▁Na bu ko do no sor ▁er re ge a ga na ▁.
PRED:	Some time later some Jews returned to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon , who had been exiled to Babylon .
GOLD:	But some of the astrologers went to the king and informed on the Jews .

ID:	542
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁, ▁Pau lok ▁, ▁Jain ko ak ▁ha la ▁na hi rik ▁e ta ▁be rak ▁dei tu rik ▁, ▁Je su ▁Kris to ren ▁a pos to lu ▁nai zen ▁ho nek ▁, ▁e ta <unk> te nes ▁a nai ak
PRED:	This letter is from Paul , chosen by the name of God , chosen by the apostle of Christ Jesus and his brothers .
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , chosen by the will of God to be an apostle of Christ Jesus , and from our brother Sosthenes .

ID:	543
INPUT:	▁As pal di ko ▁ga rai ez ▁go go ra tzen ▁naiz ▁, ▁an tzi na ko ▁ur te ez ▁o roi tzen ▁;
PRED:	O Lord , I will remember my enemies ; I will sing praises to the Most High .
GOLD:	when my nights were filled with joyful songs.I search my soul and ponder the difference now .

ID:	544
INPUT:	▁« ▁E ta ▁o rain ▁, ▁gu re ▁Jain ko ▁, ▁zer ▁e san ▁ho ri ▁guz ti a ▁i ku si ta ▁? ▁Baz ter ▁u tzi ▁di tu gu ▁zu re ▁a gin du ak ▁,
PRED:	“ And now , what is our God ? ” they asked . “ Why did we abandon you ?
GOLD:	“ And now , O our God , what can we say after all of this ? For once again we have abandoned your commands !

ID:	545
INPUT:	▁Zu ek ▁ni ▁hil ▁na hi an ▁za bil tza te ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren gan dik ▁i ka si ▁nu en ▁e gi a ▁e san ▁di zu e da la ko ▁; ▁Ab ra ha mek ▁ez ▁zu en ▁hor re la ko rik ▁e gin ▁.
PRED:	You are trying to kill me because you have seen God 's promise . And Abraham did n't say that Abraham would n't do this .
GOLD:	Instead , you are trying to kill me because I told you the truth , which I heard from God . Abraham never did such a thing .

ID:	546
INPUT:	▁A na ni as ▁e ta ▁Sa fi ra
PRED:	Adonijah 's Many Children
GOLD:	Ananias and Sapphira

ID:	547
INPUT:	▁I ku si ▁or du ko ▁e za gu tu ▁zi tu en ▁Jo sek ▁be re ▁se ni de ak ▁. ▁Bai na ▁ez ▁zi en ▁be re ▁bu ru a ▁e za gu ta ra zi ▁; ▁gai ne ra ▁, ▁za kar ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai en ▁: ▁— ▁Non dik ▁za toz te ▁? ▁Hai ek ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁Ka na an ▁lur ral de tik ▁, ▁ga ri a ▁e ros te ra ▁.
PRED:	But Joseph saw his brothers , and his brothers were gone . But he said to them , “ Where are you going ? Where are you going ? Where are you going ? Where are you going ? ”
GOLD:	Joseph recognized his brothers instantly , but he pretended to be a stranger and spoke harshly to them . “ Where are you from ? ” he demanded. “ From the land of Canaan , ” they replied . “ We have come to buy food . ”

ID:	548
INPUT:	▁U ri as ▁a pai zak ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁A kaz ▁er re ge ak ▁Da mas ko tik ▁bi da li ▁zi on ▁e re du a ren ▁a ra be ra ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁al da re a ▁, ▁A kaz ▁er re ge a ▁i tzu li ▁bai no ▁le hen ▁.
PRED:	So Uriah the priest sent a message to King Ahaz of Damascus , and he went back to Jerusalem before the king .
GOLD:	Uriah followed the king 's instructions and built an altar just like it , and it was ready before the king returned from Damascus .

ID:	549
INPUT:	▁Ha ma sei ▁ur te ▁zi tu en ▁er re ge ▁i za ten ▁has te an ▁, ▁e ta ▁ber ro gei ta ▁bi ▁ur tez ▁i zan ▁zen ▁er re ge ▁Je ru sa le men ▁. ▁A mak ▁Je ko li as ▁zu en ▁i ze na ▁e ta ▁Je ru sa lem go a ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	He was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem forty years . His mother was Abijah 's mother .
GOLD:	Uzziah was sixteen years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem fifty-two years . His mother was Jecoliah from Jerusalem .

ID:	550
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ez ▁go gor tu ▁bi ho tzak ▁zu en ▁gu ra so ek ▁Me ri ban ▁be za la ▁, ▁Ma sa ko ▁e gun ▁har tan ▁ba sa mor tu an ▁be za la ▁,
PRED:	“ Do n't let your daughters marry you in the wilderness of Paran .
GOLD:	The Lord says , “ Do n't harden your hearts as Israel did at Meribah , as they did at Massah in the wilderness .

ID:	551
INPUT:	▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Jain ko a ren ▁Se me a ▁za re nez ▁, ▁bo ta ▁zeu re ▁bu ru a ▁be he ra ▁, ▁i da tzi a ▁bai ta go ▁: ▁Be re ▁ain ge ru ei ▁a gin du ko ▁di e ▁zu ▁zain tze ko ▁. ▁E ta ▁be so e tan ▁e ra man go ▁zai tuz te ▁, ▁har ri e kin ▁es tro pe zu ▁e gin ▁ez ▁de za zun ▁.
PRED:	“ You are the Son of God , ” the angel said . “ You will be thrown into the sea , but you will guard your feet and guard your feet . Then you will guard your feet . ”
GOLD:	and said , “ If you are the Son of God , jump off ! For the Scriptures say , ‘ He will order his angels to protect you.And they will hold you up with their handsso you wo n't even hurt your foot on a stone . ' ”

ID:	552
INPUT:	▁No la ▁ze ru a ▁lur ra ren ▁gai ne tik ▁ga rai ▁, ▁ha la xe ▁ni re ▁jo ka bi de a zu e na ren ▁gai ne ti ke ta ▁ni re ▁e gi tas mo ak ▁zu e nen ▁gai ne tik ▁.
PRED:	Why did you turn away from the earth ? Why are you going on earth ? Why are you going on earth ?
GOLD:	For just as the heavens are higher than the earth , so my ways are higher than your waysand my thoughts higher than your thoughts .

ID:	553
INPUT:	▁bai ▁, ▁bi zi tza ▁guz ti an ▁be dein ka tu ko ▁zai tut ▁, ▁zu ri ▁dei ▁e gi nez ▁al txa tu ko ▁es ku ak ▁.
PRED:	Yes , I will bless you , and I will praise you .
GOLD:	You satisfy me more than the richest feast.I will praise you with songs of joy .

ID:	554
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁zein ▁e gu ne tan ▁e do ▁or du tan ▁ger ta tu ko ▁den ▁, ▁ez ▁da ki ▁i nork ▁, ▁ez ▁ze ru ko ▁ain ge ru ek ▁, ▁ez ▁Se me ak ▁, ▁Ai tak ▁bai zik ▁.
PRED:	But when the day of judgment will happen , no one will appear in heaven or hour . No one will appear in heaven except the Son of Man .
GOLD:	“ However , no one knows the day or hour when these things will happen , not even the angels in heaven or the Son himself . Only the Father knows .

ID:	555
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁i ra ka tsi ▁dok tri na ▁o sa sun gar ri a ▁.
PRED:	But now we preach the Good News about the Good News .
GOLD:	As for you , Titus , promote the kind of living that reflects wholesome teaching .

ID:	556
INPUT:	▁Go re tsa zu e ▁, ▁e guz ki ▁e ta ▁i lar gi ▁, ▁go re tsi ▁, ▁i zar ▁ar gi tsu ▁!
PRED:	Praise the sun , moon , and stars ; praise him !
GOLD:	Praise him , sun and moon ! Praise him , all you twinkling stars !

ID:	557
INPUT:	▁Bi ▁ze kor ▁, ▁a ha ri ▁bat ▁e ta ▁ur te be te ko ▁zaz pi ▁ar ku me ▁es kai ni ko ▁di tu zu e ▁er re - o pa ri tzat ▁, ▁e ta ▁Jau nak ▁a tse gi nez ▁o nar tu ko ▁di tu ▁.
PRED:	You must present seven one-year-old male lambs and seven one-year-old male lambs as a pleasing aroma to the Lord . This is a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	Present a special burnt offering on that day as a pleasing aroma to the Lord . It will consist of two young bulls , one ram , and seven one-year-old male lambs .

ID:	558
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁lar ri al di an ▁Jau na ri ▁oi hu ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁sal ba tu ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁es tu al di tik ▁.
PRED:	But when they cried out to the Lord , he saved them from their distress .
GOLD:	“ Lord , help ! ” they cried in their trouble , and he saved them from their distress .

ID:	559
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁ho ne tan ▁e re ▁ez ▁ze to zen ▁bat ▁be ren ▁e sa ne tan ▁.
PRED:	But one of them did n't tell anyone about this .
GOLD:	But even then they did n't get their stories straight !

ID:	560
INPUT:	▁Zu ek ▁in dar tsu ▁i za nez ▁ge ro ▁, ▁ni ▁po zik ▁na go ▁, ▁a hu la ▁i zan ▁ar ren ▁. ▁Hau ▁da ▁Jain ko a ri ▁es ka tzen ▁di o da na ▁: ▁zu ek ▁be te - be te ko ▁i za te a ▁.
PRED:	My strength is filled with joy , and I will praise God .
GOLD:	We are glad to seem weak if it helps show that you are actually strong . We pray that you will become mature .

ID:	561
INPUT:	▁Bai ▁ze ra ▁! ▁Se ni de a ▁se ni de a re kin ▁au zi tan ▁za bil tza te ▁, ▁e ta ▁e pai le ▁jen ti len ▁aur re an ▁gai ne ra ▁!
PRED:	But now , dear brothers and sisters , you are standing in the presence of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	But instead , one believer sues another — right in front of unbelievers !

ID:	562
INPUT:	▁e san ▁zi on ▁Am no nek ▁Ta mar ri ▁: ▁— ▁E kar ▁i e za da zu ▁ja na ri a ▁ge la ra ▁. ▁Zu re ▁es ku tik ▁na hi ▁dut ▁jan ▁e <unk> mar rek ▁e gi ni ko ▁o pi lak ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁ge la ra ▁e ra man ▁ziz ki on ▁be re ▁a nai a ▁Am no ni ▁.
PRED:	But Amnon said to Tamar , “ My lord , I will give you some food . My lord , ” Amnon said . “ My brother Amnon gave Tamar to Amnon . ”
GOLD:	Then he said to Tamar , “ Now bring the food into my bedroom and feed it to me here. ” So Tamar took his favorite dish to him .

ID:	563
INPUT:	▁Jo ▁de za dan ▁han di ki en ga na ▁, ▁be rai ei ▁hitz ▁e gi te ko ▁; ▁hai ek ▁bai ▁e za gu tu ko ▁du te <unk> na ren ▁bi de a ▁, ▁be ren ▁Jain ko a ren ▁a gin du a.Bai na ▁e ra ▁be re an ▁hau tsi ▁du te ▁de <unk> na ren ▁uz tar ri a ▁, ▁e ten ▁ha re ki ko ▁lo kar ri ak ▁.
PRED:	Let 's speak to me , but they will give up everything they say . They will be like a moment , but they will be saved . They will break up like a piece of wood , but they will break their feet .
GOLD:	So I will go and speak to their leaders.Surely they know the ways of the Lordand understand God 's laws. ” But the leaders , too , as one man , had thrown off God 's yokeand broken his chains .

ID:	564
INPUT:	▁Jo se ren ▁a me tsak
PRED:	Joseph 's Last Words
GOLD:	Joseph 's Dreams

ID:	565
INPUT:	▁Pe ni nak ▁, ▁a re ri o ak ▁, ▁go gor ki ▁i rain du ▁e ta ▁na hi ga be tu ▁o hi ▁zu en ▁A na ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁haur rik ▁e ma ten ▁ez ▁zi o la ko ▁.
PRED:	Hannah was determined to kill her , and she refused to listen to the Lord 's children .
GOLD:	So Peninnah would taunt Hannah and make fun of her because the Lord had kept her from having children .

ID:	566
INPUT:	▁Jain ko ▁A hal tsu ▁be za la ▁a ger tu ▁nin tzai en ▁Ab ra ha mi ▁, ▁I sa a ki ▁e ta ▁Ja ko bi ▁; ▁bai na ▁ez ▁nin tzai en ▁ni re ▁e gi az ko ▁i ze naz ▁, ▁Jau na ▁be za la ▁a le gi a ▁, ▁e za gu tze ra ▁e man ▁.
PRED:	As surely as I was , Abraham appeared to Abraham , and he did n't know that I am the Lord , the God of Isaac , just as he had predicted .
GOLD:	I appeared to Abraham , to Isaac , and to Jacob as El-Shaddai — ‘ God Almighty ' — but I did not reveal my name , Yahweh , to them .

ID:	567
INPUT:	▁« ▁Gau za ▁txi ki e tan ▁fi da gar ri a ▁, ▁han di e tan ▁e re ▁fi da gar ri ▁da ▁, ▁e ta ▁gau za ▁txi ki e tan ▁zu zen ga be a ▁, ▁han di e tan ▁e re ▁zu zen ga be ▁.
PRED:	“ In the night , there is no greater than the greatest in the darkness . It is foolish and foolish , foolish and foolish and foolish .
GOLD:	“ If you are faithful in little things , you will be faithful in large ones . But if you are dishonest in little things , you wo n't be honest with greater responsibilities .

ID:	568
INPUT:	▁Zen ba tu ▁on do ren ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁e txe an ▁e gi ten ▁a ri ▁zi ren ▁la nen ▁ar du ra du nei ▁e ma ten ▁zi e ten ▁di ru a ▁, ▁e ta ▁hau ek ▁Jau na ren ▁e txe a ▁kon pon tzen ▁a ri ▁zi ren ▁lan gi le ei ▁or dain tzen ▁: ▁zur gin ▁, ▁e txe gi le ▁,
PRED:	After this , the leaders of the Temple of the Lord came to the Temple of the Lord , they dedicated to the Temple of the Lord . They hired workers to pay the money to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	the masons , and the stonecutters . They also used the money to buy the timber and the finished stone needed for repairing the Lord 's Temple , and they paid any other expenses related to the Temple 's restoration .

ID:	569
INPUT:	▁Be rak ▁as ka tu ko ▁du ▁Is ra el ▁er ru ▁guz ti e ta tik ▁.
PRED:	He will wipe all the sins of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	He himself will redeem Israelfrom every kind of sin .

ID:	570
INPUT:	▁Har tan ▁, ▁zi re ne ar ▁e ta ▁a le xandri ar rez ▁o sa tu a ▁ze go en ▁e ta ▁« ▁As ka tu e na ▁» ▁ze ri tzan ▁si na go ga ko ak ▁, ▁zi li zi ar ▁e ta ▁a si ar ▁ba tzu e kin ▁ba te ra ▁, ▁Es te ba ne kin ▁ez ta bai dan ▁ha si ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	At that time the Aramean raiders returned to Egypt and told them , “ Let 's go with you , ” they said . “ If the Arameans return to the province of Asia , they would n't return with me .
GOLD:	But one day some men from the Synagogue of Freed Slaves , as it was called , started to debate with him . They were Jews from Cyrene , Alexandria , Cilicia , and the province of Asia .

ID:	571
INPUT:	▁Han dik ▁sei ▁e gu ne ra ▁, ▁Je su sek ▁Ped ro ▁, ▁San ti a go ▁e ta ▁Jo an ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁men di ▁ga rai ▁ba te ra ▁e ra man ▁zi tu en ▁a par te ▁. ▁E ta ▁an tzal da tu ▁e gin ▁zen ▁hai en ▁aur re an ▁:
PRED:	After this , Jesus took Peter and went to the top of the mountain . He took them to the top of the mountain and built them on the mountain .
GOLD:	Six days later Jesus took Peter , James , and John , and led them up a high mountain to be alone . As the men watched , Jesus ' appearance was transformed ,

ID:	572
INPUT:	▁Bi ▁gu da - gur di ▁be ren ▁zal di e kin ▁pres ta tu ▁e ta ▁si ri ar ▁gu da ros te a ren ▁az tar na ▁bi la ▁bi da li ▁zi tu en ▁er re ge ak ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁— ▁Zo az te ▁e ta ▁i kus ▁!
PRED:	He sent his chariot commanders and all the chariots and charioteers of the Arameans . “ Go and see the king ! ” he said . “ Go and see him ! ”
GOLD:	So two chariots with horses were prepared , and the king sent scouts to see what had happened to the Aramean army .

ID:	573
INPUT:	▁Jo ram ▁, ▁Ju da ko ▁er re ge
PRED:	Ahaziah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Jehoram Rules in Judah

ID:	574
INPUT:	▁Ha si e ra tik ▁sen do ▁e zar ri ▁ze nu en ▁lur ra ▁, ▁zu re ▁es ku ek ▁e gi na ▁da ▁ze ru a ▁:
PRED:	You placed the heavenly beings in heaven and on earth , and the heavenly beings is in heaven .
GOLD:	They will perish , but you remain forever ; they will wear out like old clothing.You will change them like a garmentand discard them .

ID:	575
INPUT:	▁Sei ▁gau za ▁gor ro ta tzen ▁di tu ▁Jau na ke ta ▁zaz pi gar ren ▁bat ▁e ra bat ▁du ▁hi guin gar ri ▁:
PRED:	People who hate the Lord detests double standards of the detestable things .
GOLD:	There are six things the Lord hates — no , seven things he detests :

ID:	576
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁is ra el dar rak ▁i tzu li ▁zi ren ▁e ta ▁ben ja min dar rak ▁i zu tu rik ▁gel di tu ▁, ▁i ku si ▁bai tzu ten ▁no la ko ▁hon da me na ▁ze tor ki en ▁.
PRED:	Then the people of Benjamin returned to Benjamin and told them what they had seen .
GOLD:	the men of Israel turned and attacked . At this point the men of Benjamin became terrified , because they realized disaster was close at hand .

ID:	577
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁ze ru a ▁i txi ▁e ta ▁eu ri rik ▁ez ▁e gi te an ▁, ▁lar ra po te ei ▁lur ral de ▁hau ▁i renste ko ▁a gin tze an ▁e do ta ▁ni re ▁her ri a ri ▁i zur ri te a ▁bi dal tze an ▁,
PRED:	I looked like a whirlwind in the sky , and I sent them to kill them . They sent them to kill their gods and sent them to the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	At times I might shut up the heavens so that no rain falls , or command grasshoppers to devour your crops , or send plagues among you .

ID:	578
INPUT:	▁En tzun ▁sor ra ra zi ▁zin tu en ▁ai ta ri ▁, ▁ez ▁mes pre txa tu ▁a ma ▁, ▁za har tu ▁e gin ▁de la ▁e ta ▁.
PRED:	Do n't listen to the children of the Lord , and do n't let them marry them .
GOLD:	Listen to your father , who gave you life , and do n't despise your mother when she is old .

ID:	579
INPUT:	▁Bes te ▁jan tzi ▁sak ra tu ak
PRED:	The Year of Jubilee
GOLD:	Additional Clothing for the Priests

ID:	580
INPUT:	▁Bat - ba te an ▁, ▁gi za ▁es ku ▁bat ▁a ger tu ▁zen ▁e ta ▁a re to ko ▁pa re tan ▁, ▁ar gi mu ti la ren ▁a tze an ▁, ▁be ha tzez ▁i daz ten ▁ha si ▁zen ▁. ▁I daz ten ▁a ri ▁zen ▁es ku a ▁i kus te an ▁,
PRED:	Suddenly , a man appeared to a man in his hand and opened his eyes in his eyes . When he saw the scroll , he opened his eyes .
GOLD:	Suddenly , they saw the fingers of a human hand writing on the plaster wall of the king 's palace , near the lampstand . The king himself saw the hand as it wrote ,

ID:	581
INPUT:	▁Ai ▁, ▁Jain ko ak ▁sun tsi tu ko ▁ba nin du e ta ▁be re ▁es ku az ▁de se gin ▁!
PRED:	What sorrow awaits me , for God has destroyed me .
GOLD:	I wish he would crush me.I wish he would reach out his hand and kill me .

ID:	582
INPUT:	▁Hi ri ko ▁gi zo nak ▁oi hu ka ▁a te ra ▁zi ren ▁is ra el dar ren ▁on do ren ▁e ta ▁Jo su e ri ▁se gi ka ▁hi ri tik ▁ur ru ti ra tu ▁e gin ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	So Joshua and the Israelite army went out to fight for three months .
GOLD:	Then all the men in the town were called out to chase after them . In this way , they were lured away from the town .

ID:	583
INPUT:	▁Han ▁bil du ta ko ▁gu ar di en ▁e ta ▁jen de a ren ▁za ra ta - ho tsa ▁en tzu te an ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁e txe ra ▁jo ▁zu en ▁A ta li ak ▁, ▁jen de a ren ga na ▁.
PRED:	At that time the captain of the guard and all the people returned to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	When Athaliah heard the noise made by the palace guards and the people , she hurried to the Lord 's Temple to see what was happening .

ID:	584
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁gal de tu ▁zi on ▁fa ra oi ak ▁: ▁— ▁Zen bat ▁ur te ▁di tu zu ▁?
PRED:	“ How much more will you be ? ” Pharaoh asked .
GOLD:	“ How old are you ? ” Pharaoh asked him .

ID:	585
INPUT:	▁E goi tza ren ▁bes te ▁al de ra ▁, ▁i par ral de ra ▁, ▁bes te ▁ho gei ▁o hol ▁jar ri ko ▁di tu zu ▁,
PRED:	Make twenty frames to support the north side of the Tabernacle ,
GOLD:	For the north side of the Tabernacle , make another twenty frames ,

ID:	586
INPUT:	▁Ju dak ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁Ar tal de ko ▁an txu me ▁bat ▁bi da li ko ▁di <unk> mar rek ▁, ▁or du an ▁: ▁— ▁Bai na ▁bes te ▁zer bait ▁u tzi ▁be har ko ▁di da zu ▁ba hi tu ran ▁, ▁an txu me a ▁bi da li ▁bi tar te an ▁.
PRED:	Judah replied , “ A young goat is like a donkey , ” Judah replied . “ But if you are like a young donkey , you will have two young men . ”
GOLD:	“ I 'll send you a young goat from my flock , ” Judah promised. “ But what will you give me to guarantee that you will send the goat ? ” she asked .

ID:	587
INPUT:	▁Sa ra ▁e hun ▁e ta ▁ho gei ta ▁zaz pi ▁ur tez ▁bi zi ▁i zan ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	Solomon lived for twenty-two years .
GOLD:	When Sarah was 127 years old ,

ID:	588
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁huts ▁e gin ▁di zu te ho dei - za par ra dek ▁, ▁ez ▁da ▁u da ber ri ko ▁eu ri rik ▁i zan.Bai na ▁zu ke ma gal du a ren ▁ko pe ta ▁ze nu en ▁, ▁e ta ▁zeu re ▁i zen ▁txar rak ▁a xo la rik ▁ez ▁.
PRED:	That is why the cloud of the cloud will come from the clouds of smoke , and it will be no harm .
GOLD:	That 's why even the spring rains have failed.For you are a brazen prostitute and completely shameless .

ID:	589
INPUT:	▁Ha la ▁e re ▁, ▁el kar te a ▁bil du rik ▁da go e ne an ▁, ▁na hi a go ▁dut ▁bes te en tzat ▁i ra kas gar ri ▁i zan go ▁di ren ▁bost ▁hitz ▁u ler gar ri ▁e san ▁, ▁hiz ke ra ▁u ler te zi ne an ▁ha mar ▁mi la ▁bai no ▁.
PRED:	But I will gather together to the church in the church , and I will talk to the people who are saying , ‘ This is what the Lord says : '
GOLD:	But in a church meeting I would rather speak five understandable words to help others than ten thousand words in an unknown language .

ID:	590
INPUT:	▁Goi bel ▁jar ri ▁zen ▁er re ge a ▁, ▁bai na ▁, ▁ma hai ki de en ▁aur re an ▁e gin da ko ▁zi na ren ga tik ▁, ▁es ka tu a ▁e ma te ko ▁a gin du ▁zu en ▁,
PRED:	But when the king was hungry , he begged the king to pay the banquet hall for the king 's officials .
GOLD:	Then the king regretted what he had said ; but because of the vow he had made in front of his guests , he issued the necessary orders .

ID:	591
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁ger ta tzen ▁zen ▁be ti ▁: ▁e gu nez ▁lai no ak ▁es tal tzen ▁zu en ▁e goi tza ▁e ta ▁gau ez ▁su - i txu ra ▁har tzen ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	The cloud covered the Tabernacle , and the cloud covered the pillar of fire .
GOLD:	This was the regular pattern — at night the cloud that covered the Tabernacle had the appearance of fire .

ID:	592
INPUT:	▁E lon
PRED:	Joseph 's Final Words
GOLD:	Elon Becomes Israel 's Judge

ID:	593
INPUT:	▁Jo pe ▁o so ak ▁i zan ▁zu en ▁ger ta tu a ren ▁ber ri ▁, ▁e ta ▁as kok ▁si ne tsi ▁zu ten ▁Jau na ren gan ▁.
PRED:	But all the people believed what had happened and believed in the Lord 's sight .
GOLD:	The news spread through the whole town , and many believed in the Lord .

ID:	594
INPUT:	▁Be te ▁hai en ▁aur pe gi a ▁lo tsa ▁gor riz ▁, ▁zeu re ▁bu ru a ▁men de ka tuz ▁, ▁Jau na ▁.
PRED:	Fear of the Lord , you will be disgraced ; yes , you will be disgraced !
GOLD:	Let them be ashamed and terrified forever.Let them die in disgrace .

ID:	595
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁bes te ▁hi ru ▁li tro ▁ar do ▁i sur - o pa ri ta ra ko ▁. ▁E ta ▁Jau nak ▁a tse gi nez ▁o nar tu ko ▁du ▁be re ▁o ho rez ▁er re ta ko ▁o pa ri a ▁.
PRED:	He must also offer two quarts of choice flour mixed with olive oil . This is a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	and give two quarts of wine as a liquid offering . This will be a special gift , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	596
INPUT:	▁Ho nen gan ▁ba kar rik ▁du gu ▁sal ba me na ▁, ▁ez ▁bai ti gu ▁Jain ko ak ▁gi zon - e ma ku me oi ▁bes te ▁i nor ▁e man ▁e guz ki a ren ▁az pi an ▁, ▁sal ba ▁gai tza ke e nik ▁» ▁.
PRED:	We have no power to save us , but God has given us the Son of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	There is salvation in no one else ! God has given no other name under heaven by which we must be saved . ”

ID:	597
INPUT:	▁E san ▁zi dan ▁: ▁« ▁Gi za se me ▁, ▁zu la tu ▁hor ma ▁hor txe ▁ber tan ▁» ▁. ▁Zu la tu ▁nu en ▁hor ma ▁e ta ▁i re ki du ra ▁bat ▁e gin ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Son of man , I have a woman who was here in this house . ”
GOLD:	He said to me , “ Now , son of man , dig into the wall. ” So I dug into the wall and found a hidden doorway .

ID:	598
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁e san ▁dit ▁: ▁“ ▁Sa be le an ▁sor tu ▁e ta ▁se me a ▁i za nen ▁du zu ▁. ▁Ez ▁e dan ▁ar do rik ▁, ▁ez ▁bes te ▁e da ri ▁moz kor gar ri rik ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁jan ▁e zer ▁ku tsa tu rik ▁; ▁a ma ren ▁sa be le an ▁sor tu ▁e ta ▁hil ▁ar te ▁, ▁“ ▁na zi reu ▁” ▁i zan ▁be har ▁bai tu ▁haur rak ▁, ▁hau ▁da ▁, ▁Jau na ren tzat ▁sa ga ra tu a ▁” ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But he said to me , ‘ You must not have sexual relations with a son . You must not eat any of wine or eat any other alcoholic drink . ' But you must not eat or drink from the children of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	But he told me , ‘ You will become pregnant and give birth to a son . You must not drink wine or any other alcoholic drink nor eat any forbidden food . For your son will be dedicated to God as a Nazirite from the moment of his birth until the day of his death . ' ”

ID:	599
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁e gin ▁hi tzar me nik ▁hai e kin ▁, ▁ez ta ▁hai en ▁jain ko e kin ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	Do not make their treaty with them .
GOLD:	“ Make no treaties with them or their gods .

ID:	600
INPUT:	▁Hai ek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁“ ▁Jau na ▁, ▁le hen dik ▁ha mar ▁on tza ko ▁ez ▁di tu ▁, ▁ba da ▁? ▁”
PRED:	They replied , “ Lord , if you do n't have ten times ? '
GOLD:	“ ‘ But , master , ' they said , ‘ he already has ten pounds ! '

ID:	601
INPUT:	▁i le a ▁moz te ko ▁a gin du ko ▁di o ▁gai xo a ri ▁, ▁ez ka bi a ▁du en ▁le ku an ▁i zan ▁e zik ▁, ▁e ta ▁a par te ▁e du ki ko ▁bes te ▁zaz pi ▁e gu nez ▁.
PRED:	The priest must cut off the hair of the skin , and the priest must quarantine the person for seven days . He must quarantine the person for seven days .
GOLD:	the person must shave off all hair except the hair on the affected area . Then the priest must quarantine the person for another seven days .

ID:	602
INPUT:	▁Or du an txe ▁ken du ▁be har ▁i zan ▁zi tu en ▁Ju da ko ▁er re ge ▁E ze ki a sek ▁, ▁be rak ▁le hen ▁ur rez ▁jan tzi ak ▁zi tu en ▁Jau na ren ▁tenplu ko ▁a te ak ▁e ta ▁a te - eus kar ri ak ▁, ▁A si ri a ko ▁er re ge a ri ▁e ma te ko ▁.
PRED:	At that time Hezekiah removed the royal palace from the Temple of the Lord , the royal palace , and the rest of the people of Judah .
GOLD:	Hezekiah even stripped the gold from the doors of the Lord 's Temple and from the doorposts he had overlaid with gold , and he gave it all to the Assyrian king .

ID:	603
INPUT:	▁Er ru ▁as ko ▁e ta ▁bi de ga be ko ▁mer ka ta ri tzaz ▁pro fa na tu ▁du zu ▁zeu re ▁san tu te gi a ▁. ▁Zeu re ▁bai ta tik ▁su a ▁sor ra ra zi ▁dut ▁e ta ▁i ren tsi ▁e gin ▁zai tu ▁; ▁er rauts ▁bi hur tu ▁zai tut ▁, ▁guz ti en ▁be gi ▁aur re an ▁.
PRED:	You will be very rich , and you will be very angry . I will make you very angry . I will make you very angry , and I will make you very angry .
GOLD:	You defiled your sanctuarieswith your many sins and your dishonest trade.So I brought fire out from within you , and it consumed you.I reduced you to ashes on the groundin the sight of all who were watching .

ID:	604
INPUT:	▁Den bo ra ▁as ko ▁gal du a ▁ge nu en ▁, ▁e ta ▁ar ris ku ▁han di a ▁zu en ▁or du tik ▁aur re ra ▁bi de ak ▁, ▁ne gu a ▁gai ne an ▁bai tzen ▁. ▁Pau lok ▁o har ▁hau ▁e gin ▁zi en ▁:
PRED:	But we asked for a long time , but Paul stayed for the rest of the believers . But Paul stayed there until Paul said , “ We must pay attention . ”
GOLD:	We had lost a lot of time . The weather was becoming dangerous for sea travel because it was so late in the fall , and Paul spoke to the ship 's officers about it .

ID:	605
INPUT:	▁Zaz pi gar ren ▁e gu ne an ▁ba tzar ▁sak ra tu a ▁i zan go ▁du zu e ▁ber ri ro ▁e ta ▁ez ▁da ▁o hi ko ▁lan ▁ar run tik ▁e gin go ▁.
PRED:	On the seventh day you must celebrate the Festival of Unleavened Bread , and you must never leave the ordinary work .
GOLD:	The seventh day of the festival will be another official day for holy assembly , and no ordinary work may be done on that day .

ID:	606
INPUT:	▁Moi se sek ▁i har de tsi ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Ni re ga tik ▁je los kor ▁? ▁Na hi a go ▁nu ke ▁her ri ▁o so a ▁pro fe ta ▁bi hur tze a ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁be re ▁es pi ri tu a ▁de nei ▁e ma te a ▁!
PRED:	Then Moses said to Moses , “ How can I be jealous ? For the Lord is a prophet , who is a prophet who is a prophet ? ”
GOLD:	But Moses replied , “ Are you jealous for my sake ? I wish that all the Lord 's people were prophets and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them all ! ”

ID:	607
INPUT:	▁e sa nez ▁: ▁— ▁Zi lar ra ▁zu re tzat ▁. ▁Her ri ▁hor ri ▁bu ruz ▁, ▁e gi zu ▁na hi ▁du zu na ▁.
PRED:	“ Yes , ” Paul said , “ you are a prince . ”
GOLD:	The king said , “ The money and the people are both yours to do with as you see fit . ”

ID:	608
INPUT:	▁i zu a ren ▁e ra so tik ▁i hes ▁e gin ▁de za na zu lo an ▁jau si ko ▁da ▁; ▁zu lo tik ▁i hes ▁e gin ▁de za na ze po an ▁har ra pa tu a ▁gel di tu <unk> gor ra ▁bi da li ko ▁di ot ▁Mo a bi kon tu ak ▁har tze ko ▁e gu ne an.Ha la ▁di ot ▁nik ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁.
PRED:	You will run away from Babylon , and you will run away from your palace . I will send them out of the palace , ” says the Lord . “ I will send them back to Moab . ”
GOLD:	“ Those who flee in terror will fall into a trap , and those who escape the trap will step into a snare.I will see to it that you do not get away , for the time of your judgment has come , ” says the Lord .

ID:	609
INPUT:	▁Al bis ta ri ak ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁Is ra el dar rek ▁i hes ▁e gin ▁be har ▁i zan ▁du te ▁fi lis te ar ren ▁aur re an ▁, ▁e ta ▁hon da me na ▁i zu gar ri a ▁i zan ▁da ▁gu re ▁gu da ros te an ▁. ▁Zu re ▁bi ▁se me ▁Hof ni ▁e ta ▁Pin has ▁e re ▁hi lak ▁di ra ▁, ▁e ta ▁har ra pa tu ▁e gin ▁di gu te ▁Jain ko a ren ▁ku txa ▁.
PRED:	Then the men of Israel said , “ The Philistines have fled to the Philistines , for you have killed the sword of the Philistines , and you have killed the sword of the Philistines . You have killed the Ark of the Lord your God . ”
GOLD:	“ Israel has been defeated by the Philistines , ” the messenger replied . “ The people have been slaughtered , and your two sons , Hophni and Phinehas , were also killed . And the Ark of God has been captured . ”

ID:	610
INPUT:	▁Zu en ▁lur ral de a ▁he go al de ko ▁ba sa mor tu tik ▁i par ral de an ▁da go en ▁Li ba no rai no ▁e ta ▁e ki al de ko ▁i bai ▁han di tik ▁, ▁Euf ra te se tik ▁, ▁hi ti ten ▁lur ral de an ▁ze har ▁, ▁men de bal de an ▁da go en ▁Me di ter ra ne o ▁i tsa so rai no ▁he da tu ko ▁da ▁.
PRED:	Your territory extended from the south to the north , from the north to the north of the north . It extended from the south to the west of the Euphrates River in the south to the Mediterranean Sea . It is the east to the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	from the Negev wilderness in the south to the Lebanon mountains in the north , from the Euphrates River in the east to the Mediterranean Sea in the west , including all the land of the Hittites . '

ID:	611
INPUT:	▁Na gu si ak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁“ ▁E der ki ▁, ▁mor roi ▁on ▁e ta ▁lei a la ▁! ▁Gau za ▁gu txi an ▁lei al ▁i zan ▁za ra ▁, ▁as ko ren ▁bu ru ▁i pi ni ko ▁zai tut ▁; ▁sar tu ▁zeu re ▁jau na ren ▁fes ta ▁os pa tze ra ▁” ▁.
PRED:	“ ‘ Well , my servant , ' the king said . “ You are very hard , and now you will be a descendant of your master . You must celebrate the Festival of Shelters . '
GOLD:	“ The master was full of praise . ‘ Well done , my good and faithful servant . You have been faithful in handling this small amount , so now I will give you many more responsibilities . Let 's celebrate together ! '

ID:	612
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁en tzun go ▁di zu et ▁ni ri ▁dei ▁e gi te ra ▁e ta ▁o toitz ▁e gi te ra ▁e tor ri ko ▁za re te ne an ▁.
PRED:	Then I will pray to you , and you will pray for me .
GOLD:	In those days when you pray , I will listen .

ID:	613
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁hai ek ▁er re ge a ri ▁: ▁— ▁Ba ▁, ▁er re ge ▁jau na ▁, ▁Ju da tik ▁ga ti bu ▁e kar ri ta ko ▁Da ni el ▁hor rek ▁ez ▁di zu e ▁ba te re ▁be gi ru ne rik ▁, ▁ez ▁zu ri ▁, ▁ez ▁zu re ▁a gin du ei ▁: ▁be re ▁Jain ko a ri ▁hi ru ▁al diz ▁e gi ten ▁di o ▁o toitz ▁e gu ne an ▁.
PRED:	“ All right , ” they said , “ the king of Judah will be brought to the king of Judah and all the people of Judah . But if you refuse to listen , we will pray to you . We will pray for you . ”
GOLD:	Hearing this , the king was deeply troubled , and he tried to think of a way to save Daniel . He spent the rest of the day looking for a way to get Daniel out of this predicament .

ID:	614
INPUT:	▁Be re ▁e gin tzen ▁mis te ri o a ga tik ▁zor ▁zai o ▁ain tza ▁Jain ko a ri ▁, ▁a ra zo ak ▁az ter tu ▁e ta ▁ar gi tze a ga tik ▁er re ge a ri ▁.
PRED:	He has made you an understanding account of the Most High , and he has made you an end of the Most High .
GOLD:	It is God 's privilege to conceal thingsand the king 's privilege to discover them .

ID:	615
INPUT:	▁Ju da ko ▁er re ge ▁Joi a kin ▁, ▁ho gei ta ▁ha ma zaz pi ▁ur tez ▁ga ti bu ▁e gon ▁on do ren ▁, ▁E bil - Me ro da kek ▁as ka tu ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁gil tza pe tik ▁, ▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁er re ge ▁e gin ▁zen ▁ur te ▁be re an ▁, ▁ha ma bi gar ren ▁hi la ren ▁ho gei ta ▁bos te an ▁.
PRED:	Jehoiachin was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he took care of them from the Babylonian exile . He went to the king of Babylon , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years .
GOLD:	In the thirty-seventh year of the exile of King Jehoiachin of Judah , Evil-merodach ascended to the Babylonian throne . He was kind to Jehoiachin and released him from prison on March 31 of that year .

ID:	616
INPUT:	▁« ▁Zin tzo a ▁pal mon do a ▁be za la ▁ga ra tu ko ▁da ▁, ▁Li ba no ko ▁zed ro a ▁be za la ▁ha zi ko ▁;
PRED:	“ The godly will be like trees , like trees of Lebanon , like cedars of Lebanon .
GOLD:	For they are transplanted to the Lord 's own house.They flourish in the courts of our God .

ID:	617
INPUT:	▁Fa ri seu ak ▁e tor ri ▁e ta ▁Je su se kin ▁ez ta bai dan ▁ha si ▁zi ren ▁: ▁Jain ko a ren gan di ko ▁sei na le ▁bat ▁es ka tzen ▁zi o ten ▁az pi ke ri az ▁, ▁be ra ▁no la ▁har ra pa tu ko ▁.
PRED:	The Pharisees and teachers of religious law came with Jesus , and they begged him to trap him with the authority of God .
GOLD:	When the Pharisees heard that Jesus had arrived , they came and started to argue with him . Testing him , they demanded that he show them a miraculous sign from heaven to prove his authority .

ID:	618
INPUT:	▁Da vi den ▁a nai a ▁Xi ma ren ▁se me ▁zen ▁Jo na da bek ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁— ▁Ez ▁us te ▁i zan ▁, ▁e ne ▁jau na ▁, ▁er re ge a ren ▁se me ▁guz ti ak ▁hi lak ▁di re nik ▁. ▁Am non ▁ba kar rik ▁hil ▁da ▁. ▁E ra ba ki a ▁zu en ▁ho ri ▁Ab sa lo mek ▁, ▁hark ▁be re ▁ar re ba ▁Ta mar ▁bor txa tu ▁zu e nez ▁ge roz tik ▁.
PRED:	But David 's brothers said to Shimei , “ My lord , my lord the king , my lord the king . But Amnon was killed , and Amnon died .
GOLD:	But just then Jonadab , the son of David 's brother Shimea , arrived and said , “ No , do n't believe that all the king 's sons have been killed ! It was only Amnon ! Absalom has been plotting this ever since Amnon raped his sister Tamar .

ID:	619
INPUT:	▁Ka ko ak ▁jar ri ko ▁diz ki zut ▁mu tur re tan ▁, ▁Ni lo ko ▁ar rai nak zu re ▁ez ka te tan ▁e ran tsa ra zi ko ▁di tut ▁; ▁i bai a ren ▁er di tik ▁kan po ra a te ra ko ▁zai tut ▁, ▁Ni lo ko ▁ar rain ▁guz ti a kez ka te tan ▁e ran tsi ak ▁di tu zu la ▁.
PRED:	I will send you out of the land of Canaan , but you will not allow them to live in the middle of the Nile River . I will send you out of the river .
GOLD:	I will put hooks in your jawsand drag you out on the landwith fish sticking to your scales .

ID:	620
INPUT:	▁O de den ▁se me ▁A za ri a sek ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁es pi ri tu a ren ▁e ra gi nez ▁,
PRED:	Azariah son of Hilkiah , the Spirit of God .
GOLD:	Then the Spirit of God came upon Azariah son of Oded ,

ID:	621
INPUT:	▁Ge le ta tik ▁bi ▁a te ▁zeu den ▁hu tsar te ▁har ta ra ▁: ▁ba ta ▁i par ral de ra ▁e ta ▁bes te a ▁he go al de ra ▁. ▁Hu tsar te a ren ▁in gu ru ko ▁hor ma ren ▁lo di e ra ▁bi ▁me tro ▁e ta ▁er di ko a ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	The outer courtyard of the outer block of rooms were outer courtyard . The outer courtyard of the outer courtyard of the outer courtyard around the outer courtyard . The block of rooms were 101/2 feet wide .
GOLD:	Two doors opened from the side rooms into the terrace yard , which was 83/4 feet wide . One door faced north and the other south .

ID:	622
INPUT:	▁gi zon ▁ba tzuk ▁e ro si ▁zi tuz ten ▁, ▁zur ru mur ru ▁hau ▁za bal ▁ze za ten ▁: ▁Es te ba ni ▁Moi se sen ▁e ta ▁Jain ko a ren ▁kon tra ▁hitz ▁e gi ten ▁en tzun ▁zi o te la ▁, ▁a le gi a ▁.
PRED:	Some of the men who were talking with this message came to Moses and said , “ This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	So they persuaded some men to lie about Stephen , saying , “ We heard him blaspheme Moses , and even God . ”

ID:	623
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁aur re tik ▁su a ▁a te ra ▁e ta ▁kis ka li ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁; ▁han txe ▁ber tan ▁hil ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	So the Lord burned them out of the fire and burned them out of the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	So fire blazed forth from the Lord 's presence and burned them up , and they died there before the Lord .

ID:	624
INPUT:	▁e ra ▁be re an ▁, ▁na zi o ▁as ko ▁har ri tu ko ▁di ra ▁, ▁er re ge ak ▁ha ren ▁aur re an mu tu ▁gel di tu ko ▁, ▁i noiz ▁e san ▁ga be ko ▁zer bait ▁i kus te an ▁, ▁i noiz ▁en tzun ▁ga be ko a ▁a di tze an ▁» ▁.
PRED:	In the same way , many nations will be brought before the king , and no one will hear what he tells you . ”
GOLD:	And he will startle many nations.Kings will stand speechless in his presence.For they will see what they had not been told ; they will understand what they had not heard about .

ID:	625
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁zu ▁za ra ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁ni re ▁ba bes ki ▁, ▁zu ▁ni re ▁o ho <unk> ▁di da zu ▁bu ru a ▁ja so tzen ▁.
PRED:	But you are my fortress , O Lord , and I will sing your praises to you .
GOLD:	I cried out to the Lord , and he answered me from his holy mountain.Interlude

ID:	626
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁zu ek ▁, ▁nor bait ▁hil ▁e do ▁gor pu ren ▁bat ▁u ki tu ▁du zu e nok ▁, ▁zaz pi ▁e gu nez ▁kan pa le ku tik ▁a par te ▁e gon go ▁za re te ▁e txo la tu rik ▁. ▁Bai ▁zu ek ▁, ▁bai ▁ga ti bu ek ▁, ▁gar bi kun tza ▁e gin go ▁du zu e ▁hi ru gar ren ▁e ta ▁zaz pi gar ren ▁e gu ne tan ▁.
PRED:	You must slaughter some of the blood of the dead bodies , but you must be slaughtered by seven days and seven days . But you must not be purified , but you must be purified .
GOLD:	And all of you who have killed anyone or touched a dead body must stay outside the camp for seven days . You must purify yourselves and your captives on the third and seventh days .

ID:	627
INPUT:	▁Ni ▁e re ▁ha la ▁a ri tzen ▁naiz ▁; ▁ez ▁las ter ka ▁i tsu - i tsu an ▁e gi ten ▁du e na ▁e do ▁u ka bil ka dak ▁hu tse an ▁jo tzen ▁di tu en ▁bor ro ka la ri a ▁be za la ▁;
PRED:	I am very hard , but I 'm too hard to fight against them . They are too hard to fight against them , like chasing the wind .
GOLD:	So I run with purpose in every step . I am not just shadowboxing .

ID:	628
INPUT:	▁Ha ren ▁hos to ak ▁e der rak ▁zi ren ▁, ▁e ta ▁frui tu ak ▁u ga ri ▁, ▁sor ka ri ▁guz ti ak ▁a se tze ko ▁a di na.Ba sa piz ti ek ▁ha ren ▁i tza le a ne gi ten ▁zu ten ▁a ba ro e ta ▁he gaz ti ek ▁ha ren ▁a dar re tan ▁ha bi <unk> zi dun ▁o ro ren ▁ja na ri ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	The fruit of the trees were once beautiful , and the fruit of the trees were given to your ruler , your mother , your mother , your mother , your mother , your mother , your mother , and your mother .
GOLD:	“ I said to him , ‘ Belteshazzar , chief of the magicians , I know that the spirit of the holy gods is in you and that no mystery is too great for you to solve . Now tell me what my dream means .

ID:	629
INPUT:	▁« ▁E gi zu ▁le bi tar ren ▁i zen - bil ke ta ▁, ▁se ni tar te ka ▁e ta ▁fa mi li a ka ▁, ▁hi la be tez ▁go ra ko ▁gi zo nez ko ak ▁er rol da tuz ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ Give the Levites the clans of the clans of the tribe of Levi , and the clans of the tribe of Levi . ”
GOLD:	“ Record the names of the members of the tribe of Levi by their families and clans . List every male who is one month old or older . ”

ID:	630
INPUT:	▁Be re ▁ai ta ▁A sa ren ▁jo ka bi de a ▁har tu ▁zu en ▁, ▁e zer tan ▁e re ▁o ker tu ▁ga be ▁. ▁Jau na ren ▁be gi e tan ▁zu zen ▁de na ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	He followed the example of his father 's father , Asa , and he did not do what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight .
GOLD:	Jehoshaphat was a good king , following the ways of his father , Asa . He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight .

ID:	631
INPUT:	▁me tro ▁ba te ko a ▁zen ▁zo ru an ▁ze go en ▁oi nar ri tik ▁le hen ▁pla ta for ma rai no ▁; ▁hau ▁me tro ▁er di ▁bat ▁zen ▁za bal ▁. ▁Bi ▁me tro ko ▁al tu e ra ▁ze go en ▁pla ta for ma ▁har ta tik ▁hur ren go ra ▁, ▁hu ra ▁e re ▁me tro ▁er di ▁bat ▁za bal ▁ze la rik ▁.
PRED:	The gateway passage was 101/2 feet tall and 433/4 feet wide . The gateway passage was 101/2 feet wide . The gateway passage was 101/2 feet wide . The gateway passage was 101/2 feet long and 433/4 feet wide .
GOLD:	From the gutter the altar rises 31/2 feet to a lower ledge that surrounds the altar and is 21 inches wide . From the lower ledge the altar rises 7 feet to the upper ledge that is also 21 inches wide .

ID:	632
INPUT:	▁Er re ge ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁Is ra el ▁o so ak ▁ha re kin ▁ba te ra ▁, ▁sak ri fi zi o ak ▁es kai ni ▁ziz ki on ▁Jau na ri ▁.
PRED:	Then the king brought all the people of Israel to offer sacrifices to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the king and all Israel with him offered sacrifices to the Lord .

ID:	633
INPUT:	▁bai zik ▁e ta ▁neu re ▁gor pu tza ▁he zi ▁e ta ▁men pe an ▁jar tzen ▁dut ▁, ▁bes te ei ▁i ra ka tsi ▁on do ren ▁neu ▁baz ter tu a ▁ger ta ▁ez ▁na din ▁.
PRED:	For I have put my body on the skin of my body , and I do n't need it to follow my example .
GOLD:	I discipline my body like an athlete , training it to do what it should . Otherwise , I fear that after preaching to others I myself might be disqualified .

ID:	634
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁be rez ▁o ho ra gar ri ▁di re nek ▁ez ▁du te ▁ar re ta ▁ho ri en ▁be har rik ▁. ▁Jain ko ak ▁be rak ▁, ▁gor pu tza ▁e ra tze an ▁, ▁be rez ▁o ho re ▁ga be ko ▁zi ren ▁a ta lei ▁o ho re rik ▁han di e na ▁e man ▁zi en ▁.
PRED:	For their hearts are full of food , and they do n't need their bodies . And God gave them everything he did , and he gave them no bread .
GOLD:	while the more honorable parts do not require this special care . So God has put the body together such that extra honor and care are given to those parts that have less dignity .

ID:	635
INPUT:	▁« ▁Nik ▁, ▁Ar ta xer xes ▁er re ge ak ▁, ▁Euf ra tes ▁i bai a ren ▁men de bal de ko ▁di ru zain ▁guz ti ei ▁a gin tzen ▁di zu et ▁e man ▁di e zai o zu e la ▁ze hatz - me hatz ▁Esdras ▁a pai za ri ▁, ▁ze ru e ta ko ▁Jain ko a ren ▁le ge - mai su a ri ▁, ▁es ka tu ta ko ▁guz ti a ▁:
PRED:	“ Therefore , King Artaxerxes of Persia , I will give you everything in the province west of the Euphrates River , just as I have commanded you to obey the Law of God .
GOLD:	“ I , Artaxerxes the king , hereby send this decree to all the treasurers in the province west of the Euphrates River : ‘ You are to give Ezra , the priest and teacher of the law of the God of heaven , whatever he requests of you .

ID:	636
INPUT:	▁ez ▁da go ▁i lun pe rik ▁, ▁ez ▁i tzal ▁e do ▁ge riz pe rik ▁, ▁gaiz ki le en ▁gor de le ku ▁i zan ▁dai te ke e nik ▁.
PRED:	There is no light in darkness , no one who hates them .
GOLD:	No darkness is thick enoughto hide the wicked from his eyes .

ID:	637
INPUT:	▁Ur ru ti ko ▁her ri ▁ba ti e gin go ▁di o ▁dei ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁ban de ra ▁ja soz ▁e ta ▁txis tu ka ▁, ▁e ta ▁lur ra ren ▁az ken ▁baz ter re ta ti ke tor ra ra zi ko <unk> ▁non ▁da to zen ▁a rin ▁e ta ▁biz kor ▁:
PRED:	The Lord will send his people out of Jerusalem , and he will shout , “ The earth will be coming , and its home will be stripped ! ”
GOLD:	He will send a signal to distant nations far awayand whistle to those at the ends of the earth.They will come racing toward Jerusalem .

ID:	638
INPUT:	▁Ju das ▁Is ka ri o te ▁, ▁Ha ma bi e ta ko ▁bat ▁, ▁a paiz bu ru en ga na ▁jo an ▁zen ▁, ▁Je sus ▁be rai ei ▁es ku e ta ra ▁e ma te ko ▁as mo tan ▁.
PRED:	Judas Iscariot , one of the twelve disciples , went to the leading priests , and to the high priest .
GOLD:	Then Judas Iscariot , one of the twelve disciples , went to the leading priests to arrange to betray Jesus to them .

ID:	639
INPUT:	▁Ar do - za ha gi ▁hau ek ▁ber ri ak ▁zi ren ▁be te ▁ge ni tu e ne an ▁, ▁e ta ▁o rain ▁ur ra tu ak ▁dau de ▁. ▁Gu re ▁jan tzi ▁e ta ▁oi ne ta ko ak ▁e re ▁zar <unk> du ▁e gin ▁zaiz ki gu ▁hain ▁bi de ▁lu ze an ▁.
PRED:	The wine of the new wineskins , and the doors of the lampstand has been broken , and our feet are empty . They are so long , and their feet are empty .
GOLD:	These wineskins were new when we filled them , but now they are old and split open . And our clothing and sandals are worn out from our very long journey . ”

ID:	640
INPUT:	▁Jau na ri ▁bi zi le ku a ▁, ▁Ja ko ben ▁Jain ko ▁in dar tsu a ri ▁e goi tza ▁aur ki tu ▁bi tar te an ▁» ▁.
PRED:	The Lord , the God of Jacob , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	until I find a place to build a house for the Lord , a sanctuary for the Mighty One of Israel . ”

ID:	641
INPUT:	▁ha rik ▁e ta ▁Jau nak ▁ze ru tik ▁be gi ra tu ▁e ta ▁i ku si ▁ar te ▁.
PRED:	The Lord looked away from heaven and saw his eyes .
GOLD:	until the Lord looks downfrom heaven and sees .

ID:	642
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁ar rats ▁har tan ▁i he si ▁jo a nak ▁zi ren ▁, ▁be ren ▁oi hal - e txo la ▁, ▁zal di ▁, ▁as to ▁e ta ▁kan pa le ku a ▁be ra ▁e re ▁ze go en ▁ze go e ne an ▁u tziz ▁. ▁I hes ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁, ▁bi zi a ▁sal ba tze ar ren ▁.
PRED:	So they saw that the rich man was very wealthy , with large horses , weapons , horses , charioteers , and chariots , and charioteers escaped and fled .
GOLD:	So they panicked and ran into the night , abandoning their tents , horses , donkeys , and everything else , as they fled for their lives .

ID:	643
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁an tzal da tu ▁e gin ▁zen ▁hai en ▁aur re an ▁: ▁aur pe gi a ▁e guz ki a ▁be zain ▁dis ti ra tsu ▁bi hur tu ▁zi tzai on ▁e ta ▁jan tzi ak ▁ar gi a ▁be zain ▁zu ri ▁.
PRED:	He looked like the sun , and he became as brilliant as brilliant as the sun shone like the sun .
GOLD:	As the men watched , Jesus ' appearance was transformed so that his face shone like the sun , and his clothes became as white as light .

ID:	644
INPUT:	▁Ur re ▁ha re kin ▁i ru di ▁bat ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁Of ran ▁, ▁be re ▁her ri an ▁, ▁i pi ni ▁zu en ▁Ge de o nek ▁; ▁is ra el dar ▁guz ti ek ▁i ru di ▁hu ra ▁a do ra tu ▁zu ten ▁, ▁Jain ko a re kin ▁des lei al ▁jo ka tuz ▁. ▁I ru di ▁hu ra ▁gal bi de ▁ger ta tu ▁zi tzai en ▁Ge de o ni ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁se ni tar te ko ei ▁.
PRED:	He made a covenant with his people , and he placed them in the land of Ephraim . He led them into the land of Ephraim , and he led them to the land of Ephraim . Then he asked them , “ Why did you turn away from the land of Ephraim ? ”
GOLD:	Gideon made a sacred ephod from the gold and put it in Ophrah , his hometown . But soon all the Israelites prostituted themselves by worshiping it , and it became a trap for Gideon and his family .

ID:	645
INPUT:	▁Be hin ▁ba te an ▁, ▁Jo a nen ▁i kas le ek ▁e ta ▁fa ri seu ek ▁ba rau - e gu na ▁zu ten ▁. ▁Je su sen ga na ▁jo an ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁— ▁No la ▁e gi ten ▁du gu ▁ba rau ▁Jo a nen ▁i kas le ok ▁e ta ▁fa ri seu ok ▁, ▁e ta ▁zu re ▁i kas le ek ▁ez ▁?
PRED:	One day some Pharisees and teachers of religious law asked Jesus , “ Are you the Pharisees and teachers of religious law ? Of course not ! ”
GOLD:	Once when John 's disciples and the Pharisees were fasting , some people came to Jesus and asked , “ Why do n't your disciples fast like John 's disciples and the Pharisees do ? ”

ID:	646
INPUT:	▁Gai ne ra ▁, ▁a ker ▁bat ▁bar ka men - o pa ri ta ra ko ▁, ▁Bar ka men ▁E gun ▁han di ko ▁bar ka men - o pa ri az ▁e ta ▁e gu ne ro ko ▁er re - o pa ri ez ▁gain ▁, ▁be rau ei ▁da goz ki en ▁la bo re- ▁e ta ▁i sur - o pa ri e kin ▁.
PRED:	This is a permanent law for the regular burnt offering and liquid offering . This is a permanent law for the regular burnt offering and liquid offering . It is a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	You must also sacrifice one male goat for a sin offering . This is in addition to the sin offering of atonement and the regular daily burnt offering with its grain offering , and their accompanying liquid offerings .

ID:	647
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁, ▁a pos to lu ak ▁dei tu ▁e ta ▁zi gor ka tu ▁on do ren ▁, ▁Je su si ▁bu ruz ▁hi tzik ▁e sa te a ▁zor rotz ▁de be ka tu ▁zi e ten ▁. ▁On do ren ▁, ▁as ka tu ▁e gin ▁zi tuz ten ▁.
PRED:	Then the apostles called together and sent them flogged with a whip , so they could n't stop him .
GOLD:	The others accepted his advice . They called in the apostles and had them flogged . Then they ordered them never again to speak in the name of Jesus , and they let them go .

ID:	648
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁txa lu pa ▁prest ▁e du ki tze ko ▁a gin du ▁zi en ▁i kas le ei ▁, ▁hain bes te ▁jen de ren ▁ar te an ▁za pal ▁ez ▁ze za ten ▁.
PRED:	He commanded them to let them go into the boat , so they would n't let them trample them into the crowd .
GOLD:	Jesus instructed his disciples to have a boat ready so the crowd would not crush him .

ID:	649
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁Je ru sa le men ▁e ta ▁bes te ▁hi ri ▁guz ti e tan ▁hau xe ▁i ra gar ri ▁be har ▁zu te la ▁: ▁« ▁A te ra ▁men di ra ▁e ta ▁e kar ri ▁han dik ▁o li bon do ▁, ▁pi nu ▁, ▁mir to ▁, ▁pal mon do ▁e ta ▁or ri dun ▁zu hai tzen ▁a dar rak ▁, ▁e txo lak ▁e gi te ko ▁» ▁.
PRED:	On that same way , all the other towns were also filled with olive trees and said , “ These trees , trees , palm trees , palm trees , and trees , trees , trees , and trees . ”
GOLD:	He had said that a proclamation should be made throughout their towns and in Jerusalem , telling the people to go to the hills to get branches from olive , wild olive , myrtle , palm , and other leafy trees . They were to use these branches to make shelters in which they would live during the festival , as prescribed in the Law .

ID:	650
INPUT:	▁A te na sen ▁: ▁hi tzal di a ▁A re o pa gon
PRED:	Jesus Speaks to the Crowd
GOLD:	Paul Preaches in Athens

ID:	651
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁e txo le tan ▁mar mar re an ▁ha si ▁zi ne ten ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁Gor ro to a ▁di gu la ko ▁a te ra ▁gai tu ▁Jau nak ▁E gip to tik ▁, ▁a mor tar ren ▁es ku ▁u tzi ▁e ta ▁sun tsi tze ko ▁.
PRED:	They did not break their tents and said , “ We are going out of the land of Egypt , just as the Lord had commanded us . ”
GOLD:	You complained in your tents and said , ‘ The Lord must hate us . That 's why he has brought us here from Egypt — to hand us over to the Amorites to be slaughtered .

ID:	652
INPUT:	▁E zin ▁zen ▁ja kin ▁zen bat ▁pi sa tzen ▁zu en ▁Sa lo mo nek ▁Jau na ren ▁e txe ra ko ▁e gi nak ▁zi ren ▁bi ▁zu ta be en ▁, ▁u ras ka ren ▁e ta ▁or gen ▁bron tze ak ▁.
PRED:	The weight of the Temple of the Lord could not touch the Temple of the Lord 's Temple , and the water of the Lord remained there .
GOLD:	The weight of the bronze from the two pillars , the Sea , and the water carts was too great to be measured . These things had been made for the Lord 's Temple in the days of Solomon .

ID:	653
INPUT:	▁E gur - pus ka ▁ba ti ▁e sa ten ▁di o te ▁: ▁“ ▁Zeu ▁za ra ▁ni re ▁ai ta ▁” ▁; ▁har ri a ri ▁: ▁“ ▁Zeuk ▁nau zu ▁sor tu ▁” <unk> kar ra ▁e ma ten ▁di da te ▁, ▁ez ▁aur pe gi a ▁; ▁zo ri txar - e gu ne an ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁“ ▁Za toz ki gu ▁sal ba tze ra ▁” ▁di o te ▁.
PRED:	They say , ‘ You are my disciple , ' they said , ‘ You have said , ‘ My lord , ' you have said , ‘ My lord , ' but you have n't brought me back to us .
GOLD:	To an image carved from a piece of wood they say , ‘ You are my father . 'To an idol chiseled from a block of stone they say , ‘ You are my mother . 'They turn their backs on me , but in times of trouble they cry out to me , ‘ Come and save us ! '

ID:	654
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁du te ▁bu ru a ▁ze ha ro ▁soil du ko ▁, ▁ez ta ▁i le a ▁ge hi e gi ▁lu za tzen ▁u tzi ko ▁e re ▁; ▁txu kun ▁moz tu ko ▁du te ▁.
PRED:	They must not shave their heads in their heads , but they must not return to him .
GOLD:	“ They must neither shave their heads nor let their hair grow too long . Instead , they must trim it regularly .

ID:	655
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁a gin ta ri ek ▁e ra ba ki ta ko ▁hi ru ▁e gu ne ko ▁e pe an ▁e tor tzen ▁ez ▁ze na ri ▁, ▁zi gor ▁gi sa ▁, ▁on da sun ▁guz ti ak ▁ken du ko ▁zi tzaiz ki on ▁Jau na ri ▁sa ga ra tze ko ▁, ▁e ta ▁er bes te tik ▁i tzu li ta ko en ▁el kar te tik ▁bo ta ▁e gin go ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	When all the people of Israel heard what had happened , they would not turn away from the Lord 's presence and punish the people who had been exiled to the Lord , and they took them away from the community .
GOLD:	Those who failed to come within three days would , if the leaders and elders so decided , forfeit all their property and be expelled from the assembly of the exiles .

ID:	656
INPUT:	▁hi ri a ren ▁sar re ra ko ▁pla zan ▁, ▁pa sa gu ne e tan ▁, ▁al dar ri ka tzen ▁du ▁:
PRED:	The words of the city will be rebuilt , and its gates will be rebuilt .
GOLD:	By the gates at the entrance to the town , on the road leading in , she cries aloud ,

ID:	657
INPUT:	▁Er re ge a ren ▁ha ser re ak ▁he ri o tza ▁i ra gar tzen ▁du ▁, ▁bai na ▁zu hur rak ▁ba re tze a ▁lor tzen ▁du ▁.
PRED:	A wise person leads to death , but a wise person seeks God .
GOLD:	The anger of the king is a deadly threat ; the wise will try to appease it .

ID:	658
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁e san ▁zu ten ▁: ▁« ▁O do la ▁da ▁ho ri ▁! ▁Er re ge ▁ho ri ek ▁bor ro ka ▁e gin ▁du te ▁e ta ▁el kar ▁hil ▁. ▁E a ▁, ▁mo ab dar rok ▁, ▁har ra pa ki ne ta ra ▁! ▁»
PRED:	And they said , “ It is the King of Israel ! The king of Moab has fought against the Moabites and killed each other . ”
GOLD:	“ It 's blood ! ” the Moabites exclaimed . “ The three armies must have attacked and killed each other ! Let 's go , men of Moab , and collect the plunder ! ”

ID:	659
INPUT:	▁Be ka tu ▁e gin ▁du te ▁is ra el dar rek ▁, ▁nik ▁e zar ri ▁di e dan ▁kon pro mi so a ▁hau tsiz ▁. ▁Sun tsi tu ▁be har ▁zu te ne tik ▁har tu ▁du te ▁, ▁la pur tu ▁e ta ▁be ren ▁gau zen ▁ar te an ▁gor de ▁.
PRED:	The people of Israel have sinned against me , and I will break my covenant with you . They will not abandon you .
GOLD:	Israel has sinned and broken my covenant ! They have stolen some of the things that I commanded must be set apart for me . And they have not only stolen them but have lied about it and hidden the things among their own belongings .

ID:	660
INPUT:	▁Gu tun ▁txi ki ▁bat ▁i da tzi a ▁di ot ▁e liz ▁el kar te a ri ▁, ▁bai na ▁Di o tre fe sek ▁, ▁de na ▁be re ▁es ku ▁i zan ▁na hi ▁du en ▁hor rek ▁, ▁ez ▁du ▁gu re ▁a gin pi de a ▁o nar tzen ▁.
PRED:	I am writing this letter to the church , but I am not a witness to the church , but it is a permanent law for us .
GOLD:	I wrote to the church about this , but Diotrephes , who loves to be the leader , refuses to have anything to do with us .

ID:	661
INPUT:	▁Ba da ▁a be ra tsa re na ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁e zer ▁ez ▁du e nik ▁, ▁bai ta ▁be har tsu - i txu rak ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁as ko ▁du e nik ▁.
PRED:	A person who is poor and does n't mean , but a person who is poor .
GOLD:	Some who are poor pretend to be rich ; others who are rich pretend to be poor .

ID:	662
INPUT:	▁Ez kon ▁zai tez te ▁e ta ▁sor tu ▁se me - a la bak ▁; ▁ez kon du ▁se me - a la bak ▁e re ▁, ▁u me ak ▁sor ▁di tza ten ▁. ▁U gal ▁zai tez te ▁bi zi ▁za re ten ▁to ki an ▁, ▁ez ▁gu txi tu ▁.
PRED:	Do not have children or daughters or daughters , daughters , and children , daughters , and children of your children will live there . You will live there .
GOLD:	Marry and have children . Then find spouses for them so that you may have many grandchildren . Multiply ! Do not dwindle away !

ID:	663
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ha ra ▁, ▁au ke ran ▁jar tzen ▁diz ki zu et ▁gaur ▁bi zi a ▁e ta ▁zo ri o na ▁, ▁he ri o tza ▁e ta ▁zo ri txar ra ▁.
PRED:	“ Look , today I am giving you today , and I will bring disaster upon you .
GOLD:	“ Now listen ! Today I am giving you a choice between life and death , between prosperity and disaster .

ID:	664
INPUT:	▁Ar ra zoi rik ▁ga be gau zak ▁ba hi tu ran ▁har tzen ▁ze niz ki en ▁a nai ei ▁, ▁jan tzi ak ▁ken tzen ▁bi lu zik ▁uz te rai no ▁.
PRED:	You did n't know what is evil in the Lord 's sight , and you tore their clothes in clothes .
GOLD:	“ For example , you must have lent money to your friendand demanded clothing as security.Yes , you stripped him to the bone .

ID:	665
INPUT:	▁La ba nek ▁bi ▁a la ba ▁zi tu en ▁: ▁na gu si e na ri ▁Le a ▁ze ri tzon ▁e ta ▁gaz te e na ri ▁Ra kel ▁.
PRED:	He named the daughter of Laban , who was the first servant . He was the oldest son , the daughter of Rachel .
GOLD:	Now Laban had two daughters . The older daughter was named Leah , and the younger one was Rachel .

ID:	666
INPUT:	▁E ki al de tik ▁men de bal de ra ▁, ▁her ri ▁guz ti ek ▁ai tor tzen ▁du te ▁ni re ▁i zen ▁han di a ▁, ▁e ta ▁no na hi ▁er re tzen ▁di da te ▁in tsen tsu a ▁e ta ▁be har ▁be za la ko ▁o pa ri a ▁es kain tzen ▁. ▁Her ri ▁guz ti ek ▁ai tor tzen ▁du te ▁ni re ▁i zen ▁han di a ▁— ▁di o ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du nak ▁— ▁.
PRED:	He has come from the west to the west of the hill country , just as I am going on the west of the hill country and burn incense to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	But my name is honored by people of other nations from morning till night . All around the world they offer sweet incense and pure offerings in honor of my name . For my name is great among the nations , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	667
INPUT:	▁« ▁E gin ▁de za gun ▁i tu na ▁bi on ▁ar te an ▁, ▁zu en ▁ai tak ▁e ta ▁gu re ak ▁be ren ▁ar te an ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁be za la ▁. ▁Ho na ▁, ▁zi lar ra ▁e ta ▁ur re a ▁i gor tzen ▁diz ki zut ▁es ku - e ra ku tsi ▁. ▁Hauts ▁e za zu ▁Is ra el go ▁er re ge ▁Ba xa re kin ▁e gi na ▁du zun ▁i tu na ▁; ▁hor re la ▁, ▁u tzi ▁e gin ▁be har ko ▁di o ▁ni re ▁aur ka ko ▁bor ro ka ri ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ Let us go out to fight against you and your father and mother . Instead , I will hand you over to your father and mother , and I will hand you over to the king of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ Let there be a treaty between you and me like the one between your father and my father . See , I am sending you a gift of silver and gold . Break your treaty with King Baasha of Israel so that he will leave me alone . ”

ID:	668
INPUT:	▁Nor bai tek ▁hon da tu ▁na hi ▁ba di tu ▁, ▁su a ▁a te ra ko ▁da ▁hai en ▁a ho tik ▁e ta ▁e tsai ak ▁kis ka li ko ▁di tu ▁; ▁hor re la xe ▁hil ko ▁da ▁be ro ri ek ▁hon da tu ▁na hi ▁di tu en ▁o ro ▁.
PRED:	Anyone who wants to destroy them will be burned down from the fire , and their enemies will be destroyed .
GOLD:	If anyone tries to harm them , fire flashes from their mouths and consumes their enemies . This is how anyone who tries to harm them must die .

ID:	669
INPUT:	▁Han dik ▁I tur ri ko ▁a te ▁al de ra ▁e ta ▁Er re ge a ren ▁ur te gi rantz ▁jo ▁nu en ▁, ▁bai na ▁gai ne an ▁nin de ra man ▁a be re ak ▁ez ▁zu en ▁han dik ▁i ga ro tze ko ▁le ku rik ▁.
PRED:	After I went out to the spring of water , I took it back to the spring of the river , but I could n't see it .
GOLD:	Then I went to the Fountain Gate and to the King 's Pool , but my donkey could n't get through the rubble .

ID:	670
INPUT:	▁Neu re ▁her ri a ▁jo ▁du en hon da me naz ▁na go ▁jo ta ▁, ▁goi bel ▁e ta ▁i zu ak ▁har tu ta ▁.
PRED:	I will destroy my people , and they will ruin you .
GOLD:	I hurt with the hurt of my people.I mourn and am overcome with grief .

ID:	671
INPUT:	▁U ga ri ▁bai no ▁u ga ri a go ▁nu en ▁es ne a ▁, ▁har kai tzek ▁e re ▁o li o - er re kak ▁i sur tzen ▁zi tuz ten ni re tzat ▁.
PRED:	I could not allow the water to pour out the rivers of olive oil to pour out liquid offerings .
GOLD:	My steps were awash in cream , and the rocks gushed olive oil for me .

ID:	672
INPUT:	▁E gun ▁ba tzu en ▁bu ru an ▁, ▁hon da tu ▁e gi nen ▁dut ▁zu re ▁e ta ▁zu re ▁ai ta ren ▁se ni tar te a ren ▁a gin te a ▁. ▁Zu re ▁e txe an ▁ez ▁da ▁i nor ▁za har tza ro ra ▁hel du ko ▁.
PRED:	In that day I will destroy your family and your family and your family , and no one will return to your family .
GOLD:	The time is coming when I will put an end to your family , so it will no longer serve as my priests . All the members of your family will die before their time . None will reach old age .

ID:	673
INPUT:	▁Bes te ▁sei na le ▁bat ▁a ger tu ▁zen ▁ze ru an ▁: ▁he ren su ge ▁gor ri ▁han di ▁bat ▁, ▁zaz pi ▁bu ru ▁e ta ▁ha mar ▁a dar ▁zi tu e na ▁, ▁e ta ▁bu ru e tan ▁ko ro a ▁ba na ▁.
PRED:	Then one of the six angels appeared to the four corners of the beast , and the ten horns were placed on the head .
GOLD:	Then I witnessed in heaven another significant event . I saw a large red dragon with seven heads and ten horns , with seven crowns on his heads .

ID:	674
INPUT:	▁« ▁E ma zu e ▁zu e ta ko ▁ba tek ▁mor roi ▁bat ▁du e la ▁so ro - lan ▁e do ▁ar tzain tza ra ko ▁. ▁Mor roi a ▁e txe ra tze an ▁, ▁“ ▁Ha tor ▁be re ha la ▁ma hai ra ▁” ▁e sa ten ▁o te ▁di o ▁?
PRED:	“ Do you think a servant who is a master of your master 's household and your master 's household ? He is the heir to his master 's family .
GOLD:	“ When a servant comes in from plowing or taking care of sheep , does his master say , ‘ Come in and eat with me ' ?

ID:	675
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai on ▁Jau na ▁Moi se si ▁:
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	The Lord also said to Moses ,

ID:	676
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁poz ten ▁naiz ▁han ▁ez ▁i za naz ▁, ▁zeu en ▁o ne ra ko ▁i zan go ▁bai ta ▁, ▁hor re la ▁si nets ▁de za zu en ▁. ▁Go a zen ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁ha ren ▁e txe ra ▁.
PRED:	I will remember that you do n't believe in your name , for you will believe in him .
GOLD:	And for your sakes , I 'm glad I was n't there , for now you will really believe . Come , let 's go see him . ”

ID:	677
INPUT:	▁Aiz ko ra ▁gal du ▁e ta ▁aur ki tu
PRED:	Jesus Is Betrayed and Arrested
GOLD:	The Floating Ax Head

ID:	678
INPUT:	▁Hor ra ▁hor ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁E le a zar ▁a pai zak ▁, ▁Nu nen ▁se me ▁Jo su ek ▁e ta ▁is ra el dar ▁lei nu e ta ko ▁se ni tar te bu ru ek ▁Xi lon ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁aur re an ▁, ▁el kar ke ta - e txo la ren ▁sar re ran ▁zotz ▁e gi nez ▁, ▁i zen da tu ▁zi tuz ten ▁on da re ak ▁. ▁Hor re la ▁bu ru tu ▁zu ten ▁lur ral de a ren ▁ba na ke ta ▁.
PRED:	So Joshua son of Nun , the priest , and Joshua son of Nun , and the leaders of the tribes of Israel went into the camp at the entrance of the Tabernacle . They set up camp at the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	These are the territories that Eleazar the priest , Joshua son of Nun , and the tribal leaders allocated as grants of land to the tribes of Israel by casting sacred lots in the presence of the Lord at the entrance of the Tabernacle at Shiloh . So the division of the land was completed .

ID:	679
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁bes te ▁go ra be he ra rik ▁bal din ▁ba du zu e ▁, ▁le gez ko ▁ba tzar ▁ba te an ▁e ra ba ki ko ▁da ▁.
PRED:	If you do n't need to obey the Law of the Lord , you must present it to him .
GOLD:	And if there are complaints about other matters , they can be settled in a legal assembly .

ID:	680
INPUT:	▁Ba ta ▁, ▁Hex bo nen ▁bi zi ▁zen ▁Si hon ▁er re ge ▁a mor tar ra ▁i zan ▁zen ▁; ▁ho nen ▁men pe ko ▁er rei nu a ▁Ar non ▁er re ka ▁on do an ▁da go en ▁A ro er ▁hi ri tik ▁a mon dar ren ▁lur - mu ga ▁den ▁Ja bok ▁er re ka rai no ▁he da tzen ▁zen ▁, ▁Ar no nen ▁i bar ra ▁e ta ▁Ga la ad ▁lur ral de ▁er di a ▁har tzen ▁zi tu e la rik ▁;
PRED:	It lived in Heshbon , King Sihon of the Amorites , who lived in the south of the Arnon Gorge to the Arnon Gorge to the Arnon Gorge to the Arnon Gorge to the Jabbok River . It was also included in the towns of Gilead .
GOLD:	King Sihon of the Amorites , who lived in Heshbon , was defeated . His kingdom included Aroer , on the edge of the Arnon Gorge , and extended from the middle of the Arnon Gorge to the Jabbok River , which serves as a border for the Ammonites . This territory included the southern half of the territory of Gilead .

ID:	681
INPUT:	▁Su ge a ▁zen ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁e gin da ko ▁piz ti a rik ▁mal tzur re na.Su ge ak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁e ma ku me a ri ▁: ▁— ▁Jain ko ak ▁de be ka tu ▁e gin ▁di zu e ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁ba ra tze ko ▁ar bo la ▁guz ti e ta ko ▁frui tu e ta rik ▁ja te a ▁?
PRED:	Then the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of the sea , said to him , “ Why did you pick up its crops ? Why did you produce fruit ? ”
GOLD:	The serpent was the shrewdest of all the wild animals the Lord God had made . One day he asked the woman , “ Did God really say you must not eat the fruit from any of the trees in the garden ? ”

ID:	682
INPUT:	▁No e mik ▁e ran tzu ten ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁Ez ▁dei tu ▁ni ri ▁ge hi a go ▁No e mi ▁— ▁zo ri o ne ko ▁— ▁, ▁Ma ra ▁— ▁zo ri txar re ko ▁— ▁bai zik ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁A hal tsu ak ▁zo ri txar rez ▁be te ▁bai nau ▁.
PRED:	But Naomi said to Naomi , “ Do n't let me go back to Macedonia , for I am the God of Midian . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't call me Naomi , ” she responded . “ Instead , call me Mara , for the Almighty has made life very bitter for me .

ID:	683
INPUT:	▁Ho na ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁e san ▁: ▁“ ▁Ez ▁za ra ▁jai ki ko ▁e tza na ▁zau den ▁o he tik ▁; ▁hil ▁e gi nen ▁za ra ▁” ▁» ▁. ▁E ta ▁jo an ▁e gin ▁zen ▁E li as ▁.
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : ‘ You must not die . You will die , and you will die . ' So Elijah went and killed Elijah .
GOLD:	Now , therefore , this is what the Lord says : You will never leave the bed you are lying on ; you will surely die . ' ” So Elijah went to deliver the message .

ID:	684
INPUT:	▁Bil tzar ▁Na gu si a ren ▁aur re ra ▁e ra man ▁zi tuz ten ▁e ta ▁a paiz ▁na gu si ak ▁e san ▁zi en ▁:
PRED:	Then the high priest brought them to the high priest and said ,
GOLD:	Then they brought the apostles before the high council , where the high priest confronted them .

ID:	685
INPUT:	▁Ar na sa ▁gal tzen ▁a ri ▁naiz ▁, ▁bi ho tza ▁bar ru an ▁le hor ▁.
PRED:	I cry out to my heart ; I cry out in deep darkness .
GOLD:	I am losing all hope ; I am paralyzed with fear .

ID:	686
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁du ▁mai te ▁zal di a ren ▁in dar ra ▁, ▁ez ▁du ▁es ti ma tzen ▁gi za ki a ren ▁biz kor ta su na ▁.
PRED:	He does not love the strength of the horse , nor gives his sword .
GOLD:	He takes no pleasure in the strength of a horseor in human might .

ID:	687
INPUT:	▁O pa ri tik ▁i rin - es ku ta da ▁har tu ko ▁du ▁o roi gar ri ▁gi sa ▁e ta ▁al da re ▁gai ne an ▁er re ko ▁. ▁On do ren ▁, ▁u ra ▁e da na ra zi ko ▁di o ▁e ma ku me a ri ▁.
PRED:	The priest will take the grain offering on the altar and burn it on the altar . Then he will burn it on the altar .
GOLD:	He will take a handful of the flour as a token portion and burn it on the altar , and he will require the woman to drink the water .

ID:	688
INPUT:	▁o rain ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁bar ka tu ▁e ta ▁a do re a ▁e man ▁be har ▁di o zu e ▁, ▁ge hi e giz ko ▁na hi ga be ak ▁lur ▁jo a ▁utz ▁ez ▁de zan ▁.
PRED:	But now , you must forgive the blood of the blood of the earth , and you will not be crushed .
GOLD:	Now , however , it is time to forgive and comfort him . Otherwise he may be overcome by discouragement .

ID:	689
INPUT:	▁E man ▁de za gun ▁, ▁“ ▁Ar do a ▁e ta ▁pat tar rau ga ri ▁e man go ▁di zut ▁” ▁e sa ka ▁a ri ▁de la ▁nor bait ▁; ▁hor re la ko ▁me zu ▁hu tsa le ta ▁ge zur rez ko a ▁le kar ke e nai zan go ▁li tza te ke her ri ▁ho nek ▁me re zi ▁du en ▁pro fe ta ▁!
PRED:	“ Let me drink wine and drink wine , and give it to anyone who wants to say , ‘ This is a false prophet who is a liar ! '
GOLD:	Suppose a prophet full of lies would say to you , “ I 'll preach to you the joys of wine and alcohol ! ” That 's just the kind of prophet you would like !

ID:	690
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ▁, ▁i nork ▁ez ▁de za ke ▁e san ▁ni re ▁i ze ne an ▁ba tai a tu a ▁i zan ▁de nik ▁.
PRED:	That is why no one can say that anyone has ever been baptized .
GOLD:	for now no one can say they were baptized in my name .

ID:	691
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁bar ka tu ▁gu re ▁er ru en ▁zor ra ▁, ▁guk ▁e re ▁geu re ▁zor du nei bar ka tu ▁di e gu nez ▁ge ro ▁;
PRED:	We have mercy on our sins and forgave our sins .
GOLD:	and forgive us our sins , as we have forgiven those who sin against us .

ID:	692
INPUT:	▁E gin ▁zi on ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁dei ▁Sa mu e lek ▁Jau na ri ▁e ta ▁ho nek ▁tru moi ak ▁e ta ▁eu ri a ▁bi da li ▁zi tu en ▁e gun ▁har tan ▁. ▁Her ri ▁o so ak ▁Jau na ri ▁e ta ▁Sa mu e li ▁bel dur ▁i ka ra gar ri a ▁har tu ▁zi en ▁.
PRED:	So Samuel called out to the Lord , and Samuel called out to thunder and thunder and thunder . At that time Samuel sent the people to fear the Lord .
GOLD:	So Samuel called to the Lord , and the Lord sent thunder and rain that day . And all the people were terrified of the Lord and of Samuel .

ID:	693
INPUT:	▁Be re ha la ▁, ▁a tze ra ▁be gi ra tu ▁e ta ▁Je sus ▁i ku si ▁zu en ▁zu tik ▁, ▁bai na ▁ez ▁zen ▁kon tu ra tu ▁Je sus ▁ze la ▁.
PRED:	When Jesus saw that he was going to see him , he was n't going to see him .
GOLD:	She turned to leave and saw someone standing there . It was Jesus , but she did n't recognize him .

ID:	694
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁es kain tzai le ak ▁er re - o pa ri gai a ▁lar ru tu ▁e ta ▁za ti tu ▁e gin go ▁du ▁;
PRED:	Then the priest will offer the grain offering to the Lord , and he will burn it .
GOLD:	Then skin the animal and cut it into pieces .

ID:	695
INPUT:	▁Ai ▁, ▁ni re ▁hi tzak ▁i da tzi ak ▁gel di tu ko ▁ba li ra ▁, ▁li bu ru an ▁e zar ri ak ▁!
PRED:	What sorrow awaits me , my words are written in the book of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Oh , that my words could be recorded.Oh , that they could be inscribed on a monument ,

ID:	696
INPUT:	▁Zor re tan ▁na go ▁, ▁i zan ▁e re ▁, ▁gre zi ar ▁her ri a re kin ▁na hiz ▁gre zi ar ▁ez ▁di re ne kin ▁, ▁i ka si e kin ▁na hiz ▁e zi ka si e kin ▁.
PRED:	On that day the Egyptians will be brought to the Greeks alike , both Jews and Greeks alike .
GOLD:	For I have a great sense of obligation to people in both the civilized world and the rest of the world , to the educated and uneducated alike .

ID:	697
INPUT:	▁Neu re ▁gain ▁har tzen ▁dut ▁zu re ▁se me a ren ▁e ran tzu ki zu na ▁; ▁neu ri ▁es ka tu ▁kon tu ak ▁. ▁I tzul tzen ▁ez ▁ba di zut ▁e ta ▁aur re ra ▁e kar tzen ▁ez ▁, ▁er ru dun ▁i zan go ▁nau zu ▁be ti ko ▁!
PRED:	I will give you your son , and I will give you your own children . I will bring you back to you , and you will not be guilty .
GOLD:	I personally guarantee his safety . You may hold me responsible if I do n't bring him back to you . Then let me bear the blame forever .

ID:	698
INPUT:	▁Ha ma bi ▁ur te ▁zi tu en ▁Ma na se sek ▁er re ge ▁i za ten ▁has te an ▁e ta ▁ber ro gei ta ▁ha ma bost ▁ur tez ▁i zan ▁zen ▁er re ge ▁Je ru sa le men ▁. ▁Ha ren ▁a mak <unk> tzi - Ba ▁zu en ▁i ze na ▁.
PRED:	Manasseh was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem forty years . His mother was 70 years old .
GOLD:	Manasseh was twelve years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem fifty-five years . His mother was Hephzibah .

ID:	699
INPUT:	▁bai na ▁bes te ei ▁bar ka tzen ▁ez ▁ba diz ki e zu e ▁, ▁zu ei ▁e re ▁ez ▁diz ki zu e ▁bar ka tu ko ▁zeu en ▁hu tse gi te ak ▁ze ru ko ▁Ai tak ▁.
PRED:	But if you forgive your sins , you will not forgive the sins of your Father .
GOLD:	But if you refuse to forgive others , your Father will not forgive your sins .

ID:	700
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁as ka ta su na ▁e ma ten ▁du en ▁le ge ▁bi kai na ▁haus nar tu ▁e ta ▁hor ri ▁tin ko ▁eus ten ▁di o na ▁— ▁ez ▁er raz ▁a haz ten ▁du en ▁en tzu le ▁be za la ▁, ▁be ne ta ko ▁be te tzai le ▁be za la ▁bai zik ▁— ▁, ▁ho ri ▁zo ri on tsu ▁i zan go ▁da ▁le ge a ▁be tez ▁.
PRED:	But you must continue to obey the law of Moses and cling to the law , just as you do , you must be careful to obey the law of God .
GOLD:	But if you look carefully into the perfect law that sets you free , and if you do what it says and do n't forget what you heard , then God will bless you for doing it .

ID:	701
INPUT:	▁Ju da ko ▁her ri a ren ▁be ka tu a
PRED:	Judgment against Judah
GOLD:	Judah 's Sin and Punishment

ID:	702
INPUT:	▁Az ke nik ▁, ▁se ni de ok ▁, ▁poz ▁zai tez te ▁, ▁sai a tu ▁be te - be te ak ▁i za ten ▁e ta ▁i zan ▁a do re ▁. ▁Bi zi ▁zai tez te ▁el kar ▁on gi ▁har tuz ▁e ta ▁ba ke an ▁. ▁E ta ▁mai ta su na ren ▁e ta ▁ba ke a ren ▁Jain ko a ▁zu e kin ▁i zan go ▁da ▁.
PRED:	And so , dear brothers and sisters , be glad . Be patient with other believers , and encourage each other . Love each other . Love each other . Love each other .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , I close my letter with these last words : Be joyful . Grow to maturity . Encourage each other . Live in harmony and peace . Then the God of love and peace will be with you .

ID:	703
INPUT:	▁e gip to ar ▁, ▁ju da tar ▁, ▁e dom dar ▁, ▁a mon dar ▁, ▁mo ab dar ▁e ta ▁be dui no ▁guz ti ak ▁. ▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁her ri ▁ho ri ek ▁, ▁e ta ▁Is ra e lek ▁be rak ▁, ▁ez ▁du te ▁e zar ri ▁bi ho tze an ▁i tu na ren ▁sei na le ▁den ▁er dain kun tza ▁» ▁.
PRED:	The Egyptians , the Egyptians , and all the people of Moab , Moab , and all the people of Moab , and the people of Israel have not been circumcised . They have not been circumcised on their behalf . ”
GOLD:	“ A time is coming , ” says the Lord , “ when I will punish all those who are circumcised in body but not in spirit —

ID:	704
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁di o ▁: ▁« ▁En tzun ▁ni ri ▁, ▁Jaun ▁ho ni ▁, ▁zu zen bi de a ren ▁a tze tik ▁le hi a tze ne ta ▁ni re ▁bi la ▁za bil tza te <unk> gi ra ▁zein ▁har kai tze tan ▁e ba ki ak ▁, ▁non go ▁har ro bi ti ka te ra ta ko ak ▁za re ten ▁:
PRED:	“ Listen to this message from the Lord : Hear my voice , you who are coming out to meet you , and you will find out your nest .
GOLD:	“ Listen to me , all who hope for deliverance — all who seek the Lord ! Consider the rock from which you were cut , the quarry from which you were mined .

ID:	705
INPUT:	▁I ka ra ▁zai tez te ▁e ta ▁ez ▁e gin ▁be ka tu rik ▁, ▁az ter tu ▁zeu en ▁bar ru ak ▁, ▁e gin ▁ne gar ▁o he ▁gai ne an ▁.
PRED:	Do n't weep for yourselves , and do n't weep for yourselves .
GOLD:	Offer sacrifices in the right spirit , and trust the Lord .

ID:	706
INPUT:	▁Saul ▁, ▁er re ge ▁i zen da tu a ▁her ri a ren ▁aur re an
PRED:	Saul Rules in Israel
GOLD:	Samuel Anoints Saul as King

ID:	707
INPUT:	▁Sol da du ek ▁, ▁Je sus ▁gu ru tzil tza tu ▁on do ren ▁, ▁ha ren ▁jan tzi ak ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁lau ▁za ti ▁e gin ▁zi tuz ten ▁, ▁ba koi tza ren tzat ▁ba na ▁; ▁ge ro ▁tu ni ka ▁har tu ▁zu ten ▁, ▁bai na ▁jos tu ra rik ▁ga be a ▁ze nez ▁, ▁goi tik ▁be he ra ▁e hun du a ▁,
PRED:	The soldiers took Jesus and tore his clothes on the cross , and they took him on each side . They trampled each other as much as they did , but they did n't know him .
GOLD:	When the soldiers had crucified Jesus , they divided his clothes among the four of them . They also took his robe , but it was seamless , woven in one piece from top to bottom .

ID:	708
INPUT:	▁Er re ge a ren ▁la gun tzai le ▁na gu si ak ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁e san ▁zi on ▁Jain ko a ren ▁gi zo na ri ▁: ▁— ▁Jau nak ▁ze ru ko ▁a tex kak ▁i re ki ko ▁ba li tu ▁e re ▁, ▁ger ta tu ko ▁o te ▁li tza te ke ▁hor re la ko rik ▁? ▁E li se ok ▁i har de tsi ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Zeuk ▁i ku si ko ▁du zu ▁zeu re ▁be giz ▁, ▁bai na ▁ez ▁du zu ▁har ta tik ▁jan go ▁.
PRED:	But when the king saw the man of God , the man of God said to him , “ Do n't you see what the Lord says ? Do you think you are saying , ‘ You will never eat it ! ' But you will eat it ! ”
GOLD:	The officer assisting the king said to the man of God , “ That could n't happen even if the Lord opened the windows of heaven ! ” But Elisha replied , “ You will see it happen with your own eyes , but you wo n't be able to eat any of it ! ”

ID:	709
INPUT:	▁Ai a te ra ▁i ri tsi ▁da ▁e ra so tzai le a ▁, ▁Mig ro nen ▁bar re na ▁da tor ▁, ▁Mik ma sen ▁e gin ▁du ar men ▁i kus ka pe na ▁,
PRED:	The Lord is coming , and he is coming to the place of atonement ; he has seen it ; he has seen it .
GOLD:	Look , the Assyrians are now at Aiath.They are passing through Migronand are storing their equipment at Micmash .

ID:	710
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁, ▁bai zik ▁e ta ▁Jo el ▁pro fe tak ▁e san ▁zu e na ▁a ri ▁da ▁he men ▁ger ta tzen ▁:
PRED:	But do n't say , ‘ This is what the prophets tells you . '
GOLD:	No , what you see was predicted long ago by the prophet Joel :

ID:	711
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁ha ma bi ▁a pos to lu ak ▁i zen da tu
PRED:	Jesus Appears to the apostles
GOLD:	Jesus Sends Out the Twelve Apostles

ID:	712
INPUT:	▁De ab ru a ren ▁men pe ▁ze go en ▁gi zon ▁bat ▁e ra man ▁zi o ten ▁Je su si ▁, ▁i tsu a ▁e ta ▁mu tu a ▁. ▁Hark ▁sen da tu ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁e ta ▁gi zo na ▁hitz ▁e gi ten ▁e ta ▁i kus ten ▁ha si ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	So the devil brought a man to the man who was possessed by the demon , and he was healed . He was healed , and he was healed .
GOLD:	Then a demon-possessed man , who was blind and could n't speak , was brought to Jesus . He healed the man so that he could both speak and see .

ID:	713
INPUT:	▁Kris tau ▁ez ▁de na ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁ba nan du ▁na hi ▁ba lu ▁, ▁ba nan du ▁be di ▁; ▁hor re la ko e tan ▁kris tau a ▁— ▁gi zon ▁na hiz ▁e ma ku me ▁— ▁as ke ▁gel di tzen ▁da ▁, ▁Jain ko ak ▁ba ke an ▁bi zi tze ra ▁dei tu ▁bai tzai tuz te ▁.
PRED:	But if you do n't need to be a believer , you must be a believer . But if you do n't be a believer , you will be called by God .
GOLD:	( But if the husband or wife who is n't a believer insists on leaving , let them go . In such cases the believing husband or wife is no longer bound to the other , for God has called you to live in peace . )

ID:	714
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁zu ei ▁zer ▁a xo la ▁? ▁Ni re ▁her ri a ▁za pal tzen ▁du zu e e ta ▁han ka pe an ▁har tzen be har tsu en ▁duin ta su na ▁» ▁.Jain ko ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du na ke san ▁du ▁.
PRED:	But you are sick and helpless , O Lord of Heaven 's Armies , for I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	How dare you crush my people , grinding the faces of the poor into the dust ? ” demands the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	715
INPUT:	▁Bu ka tze ko ▁, ▁sen do ▁zai tza te la ▁Jau nak ▁be re ▁in dar ▁a hal tsu az ▁.
PRED:	The Lord will strengthen you with strength , and he will heal you .
GOLD:	A final word : Be strong in the Lord and in his mighty power .

ID:	716
INPUT:	▁E ra ▁be re an ▁, ▁a paiz bu ru ▁, ▁le ge - mai su ▁e ta ▁za har rek ▁e re ▁ir ri ▁e gi ten ▁zi o ten ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁:
PRED:	So the leading priests and teachers of religious law and the teachers of religious law said to him ,
GOLD:	The leading priests , the teachers of religious law , and the elders also mocked Jesus .

ID:	717
INPUT:	▁Sak ri fi zi o ▁ho ri ek ▁es kain tzen ▁di tu e nak ▁li tro ▁e ta ▁er di ren ▁bat ▁o li o tan ▁o ra tu ri ko ▁lau ▁ki lo ▁o gi - i rin ▁gar bi ▁e ran tsi ko ▁diz ki e
PRED:	These are the instructions of the Lord — two quarts of choice flour mixed with olive oil , four quarts of choice flour mixed with olive oil .
GOLD:	When you present these offerings , you must also give the Lord a grain offering of two quarts of choice flour mixed with one quart of olive oil .

ID:	718
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁di o ▁, ▁i zan ▁e re ▁, ▁Li bu ru ▁San tu ak ▁: ▁Ho na ▁nik ▁Si o nen ▁har ri ▁bat ▁i pi ni ▁, ▁gil tzar ri ▁au ke ra tu ▁e ta ▁bi kai na ▁. ▁Hor re tan ▁si nes ten ▁du e nak ▁ez ▁du ▁huts ▁e gin go ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Scriptures say , “ This is what the Scriptures say : ‘ Take a stone from the cornerstone . This is the one who believes in him . '
GOLD:	As the Scriptures say , “ I am placing a cornerstone in Jerusalem , chosen for great honor , and anyone who trusts in himwill never be disgraced . ”

ID:	719
INPUT:	▁A kaz ▁Da mas ko ra ▁jo an ▁zen ▁A si ri a ko ▁er re ge ▁Tig lat - Pi le ser ▁i kus ta tze ra ▁. ▁Or du an ▁, ▁i ku si ▁zu en ▁Da mas ko ko ▁al da re a ▁, ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁neur ri - e gi tu rak ▁bi da li ▁ziz ki on ▁U ri as ▁a pai za ri ▁, ▁no la ko a ▁e gin ▁ja ki te ko ▁.
PRED:	So King Hazael of Damascus went to Damascus to meet King Hazael of Damascus . Then he went to meet King Achish of Damascus , just as he had commanded him . He told him what he had done .
GOLD:	King Ahaz then went to Damascus to meet with King Tiglath-pileser of Assyria . While he was there , he took special note of the altar . Then he sent a model of the altar to Uriah the priest , along with its design in full detail .

ID:	720
INPUT:	▁Da ni e lek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Er re ge ▁jau na ▁, ▁ez ▁dut ▁er re ga lu ▁e do ▁sa ri ▁be har rik ▁, ▁gor de ▁zeu re tzat ▁e do ▁e man ▁bes te ren ▁ba ti ▁. ▁Bai na ▁hor ▁i da tzi a ▁i ra kur ri ko ▁di zut ▁e ta ▁e sa na hi a ▁a zal du ko ▁.
PRED:	Daniel replied , “ I will not listen to my lord the king , but I will give you food . But if you do n't need to read it , I will read it to you . ”
GOLD:	Daniel answered the king , “ Keep your gifts or give them to someone else , but I will tell you what the writing means .

ID:	721
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁gu re ▁Jain ko a ren tza ter re ge - her ri ▁e ta ▁a paiz ▁e gin ▁di tu zu ▁, ▁e ta ▁lur ▁o so an ▁er re ge ▁i zan go ▁di ra ▁» ▁.
PRED:	And we will obey the law of our God and the kings of the earth , and the kings of the earth will succeed . ”
GOLD:	And you have caused them to becomea Kingdom of priests for our God.And they will reign on the earth . ”

ID:	722
INPUT:	▁E san ▁zu en ▁: ▁Ez ku ta tu ▁e gin go ▁di et ▁aur pe gi a ▁, ▁e ta ▁i ku si ko ▁dut ▁zer ▁a mai e ra ▁du ten ▁, ▁jen de ▁gaiz to tu a ▁bai ta ▁, ▁lei al ta su nik ▁ga be ko ▁se me - a la bak ▁.
PRED:	Then he told them , “ I will never see what they see , and I will see what they do . They will see their children , and they will never see their children .
GOLD:	He said , ‘ I will abandon them ; then see what becomes of them.For they are a twisted generation , children without integrity .

ID:	723
INPUT:	▁Zeu re ▁es ku az ▁kan po ra ▁bo ta ▁ze ni tu en ▁bes te ▁na zi o ak ▁, ▁gu re ▁gu ra so ak ▁ber tan ▁lan da tze ko ▁; ▁bes te ▁her ri ak ▁go gor ▁jo ▁ze ni tu en ▁, ▁gu re ▁gu ra so ak ▁ber tan ▁ha za raz te ko ▁.
PRED:	You drove out your pagan nations into the land of our ancestors . You restored our ancestors to our ancestors , and he fought against us .
GOLD:	They did not conquer the land with their swords ; it was not their own strong arm that gave them victory.It was your right hand and strong armand the blinding light from your face that helped them , for you loved them .

ID:	724
INPUT:	▁« ▁No laz ▁au sar tzen ▁za ra ▁e sa ten ▁: ▁“ ▁Ez ▁naiz ▁ku tsa tu ▁, ▁ez ▁naiz ▁Ba a len ▁i do lo e non do ren ▁i bi li ▁” ▁? ▁I kus ▁zeu re ▁ur ra tsak ▁ha ra ne a ne ta ▁ai tor tu ▁zeu re ▁jo ka bi de a ▁; ▁ha rat - ho nat ▁da bi len ga me lu ku me ▁kas ka ri na re nan tze ko ▁za ra ▁,
PRED:	“ You say to yourself , ‘ Do n't you realize that I am not defiled by the idols of Baal ? I have seen your very eyes , O Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and you have turned away from distant lands .
GOLD:	“ You say , ‘ That 's not true ! I have n't worshiped the images of Baal ! 'But how can you say that ? Go and look in any valley in the land ! Face the awful sins you have done.You are like a restless female cameldesperately searching for a mate .

ID:	725
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁zu zen ▁jo ka tze a ga tik ▁suf ri tu ▁be har re an ▁ger ta tzen ▁ba za re te ▁, ▁zo ri o ne ko ak ▁zu ek ▁! ▁Ez ▁i zan ▁i no ren ▁bel dur ▁, ▁ez ▁i ka ra tu ▁!
PRED:	But if you suffer for suffering , do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid !
GOLD:	But even if you suffer for doing what is right , God will reward you for it . So do n't worry or be afraid of their threats .

ID:	726
INPUT:	▁Ze ru ko ▁i zar rak ▁be zain ba tu ga ri tu ▁ze niz ki en ▁se me - a la bak ▁, ▁hai en ▁gu ra so ei ▁a gin du ▁lur ral de ra e kar ri ▁ze ni tu en ▁.
PRED:	You made them as holy as the stars of stars . You gave them the land you gave to their ancestors .
GOLD:	You made their descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and brought them into the land you had promised to their ancestors .

ID:	727
INPUT:	▁Pro be txu ▁ga be ko ▁hi tzar me na
PRED:	The People Confess Their Sins
GOLD:	Judah 's Worthless Treaty with Egypt

ID:	728
INPUT:	▁Gu ▁ga ra ▁ho nen ▁guz ti a ren ▁le ku ko ▁, ▁gu ▁e ta ▁e sa ne ko ▁zaiz ki o nei ▁Jain ko ak ▁e ma ten ▁di en ▁Es pi ri tu ▁San tu a ▁.
PRED:	For we are witnesses of our witnesses , and we obey the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	We are witnesses of these things and so is the Holy Spirit , who is given by God to those who obey him . ”

ID:	729
INPUT:	▁Ju da ko ▁bes te ▁hi ri e ta ko ek ▁, ▁bai ta ▁hai e tan ▁bi zi ▁zi ren ▁is ra el dar rek ▁e re ▁, ▁be ren ▁be hi ▁, ▁ar di ▁e ta ▁be ren ▁Jain ko ▁Jau na ri ▁sa ga ra tu ri ko ▁bes te ▁es kain tzen ▁ha mar re nak ▁e man ▁zi tuz ten ▁. ▁Hor re la ▁, ▁on da sun - mul tzo ▁han di ak ▁e gin ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	But the people of Judah lived in the towns of Judah and Benjamin , and the people of Israel had been dedicated to the Lord their God . So the people of Israel abandoned the Lord their God .
GOLD:	The people who had moved to Judah from Israel , and the people of Judah themselves , brought in the tithes of their cattle , sheep , and goats and a tithe of the things that had been dedicated to the Lord their God , and they piled them up in great heaps .

ID:	730
INPUT:	▁Jo an ▁zen ▁Ge de on ▁e ta ▁an txu me ▁bat ▁pres ta tu ▁zu en ▁e ta ▁, ▁ho gei ▁ki lo - e do ▁i ri nez ▁, ▁le ga mi a ▁ga be ko ▁o gi ak ▁e gin ▁. ▁Ge ro ▁, ▁o ke la ▁o tar re an ▁e ta ▁sal da ▁el tze an ▁har tu rik ▁, ▁ar te on do ▁az pi ra ▁e ra man ▁e ta ▁Jau na ri ▁es kai ni ▁zi on ▁de na ▁.
PRED:	He also made a male goat for a sin offering and 200 male lambs . He also sacrificed it to the Lord , and he gave it to the Levites as a sacrifice . Then he presented it to the Lord and gave it to the Lord .
GOLD:	Gideon hurried home . He cooked a young goat , and with a basket of flour he baked some bread without yeast . Then , carrying the meat in a basket and the broth in a pot , he brought them out and presented them to the angel , who was under the great tree .

ID:	731
INPUT:	▁E ma ku me ak ▁e ran tzun ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁On gi ▁. ▁Ha la ▁be di ▁! ▁E ta ▁a gur ▁e gin ▁zi en ▁. ▁Al de ▁e gin ▁zu te ne an ▁, ▁e ma ku me ak ▁lo kar ri ▁gor ri a ▁lo tu ▁zu en ▁lei ho an ▁.
PRED:	“ Yes , ” she said . “ Look , my mother ! ” So she got up and bound him in disgrace . So she put his feet in disgrace .
GOLD:	“ I accept your terms , ” she replied . And she sent them on their way , leaving the scarlet rope hanging from the window .

ID:	732
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁or du tik ▁aur re ra ▁, ▁Je sus ▁no la ▁hil ko ▁pen tsa tzen ▁ha si ▁zi ren ▁;
PRED:	So they began to tell him what Jesus meant .
GOLD:	So from that time on , the Jewish leaders began to plot Jesus ' death .

ID:	733
INPUT:	▁Ja kin ▁zu ten ▁a pos to lu ek ▁e ta ▁Ju de a ko ▁se ni de ek ▁, ▁jen ti lek ▁e re ▁Jain ko a ren ▁hi tza ▁o nar tu ▁zu te la ▁.
PRED:	When the apostles heard that Paul and Barnabas and Barnabas had accepted God 's word , they accepted God 's word .
GOLD:	Soon the news reached the apostles and other believers in Judea that the Gentiles had received the word of God .

ID:	734
INPUT:	▁Li txar re ri az ▁jan ▁o hi ▁zu te nak ▁a hi tu rik ▁e ror tzen ▁di ra ▁ka le e <unk> xu ▁ar te an ▁ha zi ek ▁za bor te gi an ▁du te ▁bi zi le ku ▁.
PRED:	The land of Moab lies in ruins , and the young men who live among you will live among them .
GOLD:	The people who once ate the richest foodsnow beg in the streets for anything they can get.Those who once wore the finest clothesnow search the garbage dumps for food .

ID:	735
INPUT:	▁Ab ra ham ▁za har ra ▁i zan ▁ar ren ▁, ▁Sa ra ▁haur dun ▁ger ta tu ▁zen ▁, ▁e ta ▁se me a ▁e man ▁zi on ▁, ▁Jain ko ak ▁i ra gar ri ta ko ▁ga rai an ▁.
PRED:	Abraham was pregnant and gave birth to a son of Abraham . He was pregnant and gave birth to a son in Samaria .
GOLD:	She became pregnant , and she gave birth to a son for Abraham in his old age . This happened at just the time God had said it would .

ID:	736
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁di o te ▁: ▁« ▁E a ▁, ▁go a zen ▁ar do ta ra.Moz kor ▁gai te zen ▁pat tar rez ▁! ▁E ta ▁bi har ▁bes te ▁hor ren bes te ▁, ▁na hi ko a ▁bai ta go ▁! ▁»
PRED:	They say , “ Beware of wine , drink wine , wine , wine , and wine , and wine . ”
GOLD:	“ Come , ” they say , “ let 's get some wine and have a party.Let 's all get drunk.Then tomorrow we 'll do it againand have an even bigger party ! ”

ID:	737
INPUT:	▁kon tu an ▁har tu ▁be har ▁da ▁le ge a ▁ez ▁de la ▁e zar ri ▁zin tzo en tzat ▁, ▁bes te ▁hau en tzat ▁bai zik ▁: ▁gaiz to ▁, ▁er re bel de ▁, ▁er li ji o ga be ▁e ta ▁be ka ta ri en tzat ▁, ▁sak ri le go ▁e ta ▁pro fa na tzai le en tzat ▁, ▁ai ta - a men ▁hil tzai le ▁e ta ▁gi za ▁hil tzai le en tzat ▁,
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ You must not commit adultery , but you must not commit adultery . You must not murder the wicked people who live in the land of the Lord , and you will die in the land of the Lord .
GOLD:	For the law was not intended for people who do what is right . It is for people who are lawless and rebellious , who are ungodly and sinful , who consider nothing sacred and defile what is holy , who kill their father or mother or commit other murders .

ID:	738
INPUT:	▁A mon dar rak ▁ir ten ▁e ta ▁hi ri ko ▁a te ▁aur re an ▁pres ta tu ▁zi ren ▁bor ro ka ra ko ▁ler ro tan ▁. ▁Bai ▁Tzo ba ▁e ta ▁Re ho be ko ▁a ra me ar rak ▁, ▁bai ▁Tob ▁e ta ▁Ma a ka ko ▁gi zo nak ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁bes te ▁to ki ▁ba te an ▁zi ren ▁, ▁lan dan ▁.
PRED:	So the Ammonites went out to fight against the Ammonites and sent them out of the town of Zobah , but he sent them away from the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	The Ammonite troops came out and drew up their battle lines at the entrance of the city gate , while the Arameans from Zobah and Rehob and the men from Tob and Maacah positioned themselves to fight in the open fields .

ID:	739
INPUT:	▁I sai a sek ▁Je su si ▁bu ruz ▁e san ▁zu en ▁hau ▁, ▁i ku si a ▁bai tzu en ▁be ra ren ▁Jain ko - ain tza ▁.
PRED:	Then Jesus told them , “ This is the sign of God , for he saw the Messiah . ”
GOLD:	Isaiah was referring to Jesus when he said this , because he saw the future and spoke of the Messiah 's glory .

ID:	740
INPUT:	▁Se me ▁, ▁en tzun ▁ai ta ren ▁o har ra ke ta ▁ez ▁baz ter tu ▁a ma ren ▁i ra kas pe nak ▁;
PRED:	My child , listen to my father 's children ; pay attention to their understanding .
GOLD:	My child , listen when your father corrects you.Do n't neglect your mother 's instruction .

ID:	741
INPUT:	▁E san ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁nik ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁di o dan ▁hau ▁: ▁Ez ▁da ▁ni re ▁hi tzik ▁a tze ra tu ko ▁, ▁be te ▁e gin go ▁da ▁e sa ten ▁du da na ▁. ▁Nik ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁e sa na ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : The people of Israel will not listen to me , says the Sovereign Lord , “ The Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Therefore , tell them , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : No more delay ! I will now do everything I have threatened . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ' ”

ID:	742
INPUT:	▁Er ro mes - kan ta.Be gi ak ▁men di e ta ra ▁di tut ▁ja so tzen ▁: ▁non dik ▁e tor ri ko ▁o te ▁zait ▁la gun tza ▁?
PRED:	I lift my hands to the mountains , and I will praise you .
GOLD:	I look up to the mountains — does my help come from there ?

ID:	743
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ko ak ▁ez ▁be za ▁us te ▁Jau na ren gan dik ▁e zer ▁i ri tsi ko ▁du e nik ▁,
PRED:	That is why we do n't think of the Lord 's glory .
GOLD:	Such people should not expect to receive anything from the Lord .

ID:	744
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁nik ▁e ran tzun go ▁di et ▁: ▁“ ▁Ez ▁zai tuz tet ▁i noiz ▁e za gu tu ▁; ▁al de ▁ni re gan dik ▁, ▁gaiz ki le ok ▁! ▁”
PRED:	But I will answer you , saying , ‘ I will never rescue you from evil . '
GOLD:	But I will reply , ‘ I never knew you . Get away from me , you who break God 's laws . '

ID:	745
INPUT:	▁Ben ja mi nen ▁lei nu a ▁ber piz tu
PRED:	The Land Given to Benjamin
GOLD:	Israel Provides Wives for Benjamin

ID:	746
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁e ti o pi ar rak ▁a ger tu ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁— ▁Ber ri ▁o nak ▁da karzki zut ▁, ▁e ne ▁er re ge ▁jau na ▁. ▁Al de ▁a te ra ▁zai zu ▁gaur ▁Jau na ▁e ta ▁lib ra tu ▁zai tu ▁aur ka ▁jai ki ta ko ▁guz ti en ▁es ku e ta tik ▁.
PRED:	Then the captain of the guard appeared to him and said , “ This is what the Lord says : I have brought you out of the palace , and I will hand you over to you . ”
GOLD:	Then the man from Ethiopia arrived and said , “ I have good news for my lord the king . Today the Lord has rescued you from all those who rebelled against you . ”

ID:	747
INPUT:	▁( ▁Zu ek ▁, ▁o rain ▁bi zi ▁za re te nok ▁, ▁en tzun ▁ar du raz ▁Jau na ren ▁hi tza ▁) <unk> ra el ▁, ▁e re mu ▁soil bi hur tu ▁o te ▁naiz ▁zu re tzat ▁? ▁A la ▁be ti ▁i lun pe ▁bel tze an da go en ▁lur ral de ▁? ▁Zer ga tik ▁di o te ▁ni re ▁her ri tar rek ▁: ▁“ ▁Na hi ▁du gu na ▁e gin go ▁du gu ▁, ▁ez ▁ga tzaiz ki zu ▁i noiz ▁e re ▁i tzu li ko ▁? ▁”
PRED:	“ Now you who live in the land of the Lord , ” says the Lord. “ Why are you so angry ? Why do you think , ‘ Why do you turn away from the land ? Why do n't you return to me ? '
GOLD:	“ O my people , listen to the words of the Lord ! Have I been like a desert to Israel ? Have I been to them a land of darkness ? Why then do my people say , ‘ At last we are free from God ! We do n't need him anymore ! '

ID:	748
INPUT:	▁Bi en ▁bi tar te an ▁, ▁A ma tzi a sek ▁be re kin ▁gu du ra ▁e ra man ▁or dez ▁e txe ra ▁bi da li ▁zu en ▁gu da ri - tal de a ▁Ju da ko ▁hi ri e tan ▁bar re na ▁i bi li ▁zen ▁, ▁Sa ma ri a tik ▁Bet - Ho ro ne rai no ▁, ▁hi ru ▁mi la ▁per tso na ▁hi lez ▁e ta ▁har ra pa kin ▁u ga ri ▁os tuz ▁.
PRED:	But Amaziah sent them out to the city of Judah . He sent them to the towns of Judah and Benjamin , along with the towns of Samaria , leaving the towns of Samaria with the towns of Samaria .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the hired troops that Amaziah had sent home raided several of the towns of Judah between Samaria and Beth-horon . They killed 3,000 people and carried off great quantities of plunder .

ID:	749
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren gan dik ▁da tor kit ▁la gun tza ▁, ▁ze ru - lur rak ▁e gin ▁zi tu e na gan dik ▁.
PRED:	He has come from the heavens , and he rescued me from heaven .
GOLD:	My help comes from the Lord , who made heaven and earth !

ID:	750
INPUT:	▁« ▁Zo ri o ne ko a ▁Jain ko ak ▁zen tza raz ten ▁du en ▁gi za ki a ▁! ▁Ez ▁mes pre txa tu ▁A hal tsu a ren ▁he zi ke ta ▁.
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits those who trust God ! Do not ignore the Almighty .
GOLD:	“ But consider the joy of those corrected by God ! Do not despise the discipline of the Almighty when you sin .

ID:	751
INPUT:	▁Jau na ▁ar du ra tzen ▁da ▁pres tu en ▁bi zi tza ze ta ▁be ren ▁on da re a ren ▁ja be ▁i zan go ▁di ra ▁be ti ko ▁.
PRED:	The Lord is good to those who fear him , and he will possess it .
GOLD:	Day by day the Lord takes care of the innocent , and they will receive an inheritance that lasts forever .

ID:	752
INPUT:	▁Or du a ▁e tor ri ▁ze ne an ▁, ▁Je sus ▁ma hai an ▁jar ri ▁zen ▁a pos to lu e kin ▁.
PRED:	Then Jesus sat down with the table with the apostles .
GOLD:	When the time came , Jesus and the apostles sat down together at the table .

ID:	753
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁hor re ta ra ko ▁bi dal tzen ▁di zu et ▁Ti mo te o ▁, ▁neu re ▁se me ▁mai te ▁e ta ▁kris tau ▁zin tzo a ▁. ▁Be rak ▁go go ra tu ko ▁diz ki zu e ▁kris tau - bi zi tza ra ko ▁ni re ▁bu ru bi de ak ▁, ▁e liz ▁el kar te ▁guz ti ei ▁han ▁e ta ▁he men ▁i ra kas ten ▁diz ki e dan ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	I am sending you this letter to Titus , my dear brothers and sisters , who loves you . This is my beloved brothers and sisters , that I am writing to you as my own brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	That 's why I have sent Timothy , my beloved and faithful child in the Lord . He will remind you of how I follow Christ Jesus , just as I teach in all the churches wherever I go .

ID:	754
INPUT:	▁Zu en ▁mai ta su na ▁i zan ▁be di ▁i txu ra ke ri a rik ▁ga be a ▁; ▁gor ro ta tu ▁gaiz ki a ▁e ta ▁i tsa tsi ▁on gi a ri ▁.
PRED:	Your love is full of love ; do n't hate those who hate evil .
GOLD:	Do n't just pretend to love others . Really love them . Hate what is wrong . Hold tightly to what is good .

ID:	755
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁Je su sek ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁« ▁I kus ten ▁du zu e ▁ho ri ▁guz ti a ▁, ▁ez ta ▁? ▁Ba ▁, ▁be ne tan ▁di o tsu et ▁: ▁Ez ▁da ▁he men ▁har ri rik ▁har ri ▁gai ne an ▁gel di tu ko ▁: ▁de na ▁sun tsi tu ko ▁du te ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But Jesus said to them , “ Do n't you see these things ? Do n't I tell you the truth , I will destroy them . ”
GOLD:	But he responded , “ Do you see all these buildings ? I tell you the truth , they will be completely demolished . Not one stone will be left on top of another ! ”

ID:	756
INPUT:	▁Ga rai ▁har tan ▁, ▁pro fe zi ▁do hai na ▁zu ten ▁se ni de ▁ba tzuk ▁jai tsi ▁zi ren ▁Je ru sa lem dik ▁An ti o ki a ra ▁.
PRED:	Some of the teachers of prophets arrived in Jerusalem , where some of the believers came to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	During this time some prophets traveled from Jerusalem to Antioch .

ID:	757
INPUT:	▁O rain ▁den ▁guz ti ai zen da tu a ▁zu en ▁ja da nik ▁Jain ko a ke ta ▁ba ze ki en ▁zer ▁den ▁gi zo na.E zin ▁di o ▁gi zo nak ▁au zi an ▁aur re ▁e gin be ra ▁bai no ▁in dar tsu a go a ▁de na ri ▁.
PRED:	And now , the Lord is coming to destroy everything he has done . He is more powerful than the man who is powerful than he is powerful .
GOLD:	Everything has already been decided . It was known long ago what each person would be . So there 's no use arguing with God about your destiny .

ID:	758
INPUT:	▁Is ra e len ▁i tsus ke ri ak ▁e gin ▁di tuz te la ko ▁ger ta tu ko ▁zai e ▁ho ri ▁: ▁la gun ▁hur ko a ren ▁e maz te a re kin ▁a dul te ri o ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁nik ▁a gin du ▁ga be ko ▁ge zur rez ko ▁me zu a ▁ni re ▁i ze ne an ▁i ra gar ri ▁du te la ko ▁. ▁Neuk ▁da kit ▁ho ri ▁e ta ▁neu ▁naiz ▁hor ren ▁tes ti gu ▁. ▁Nik ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁e sa na ▁» ▁.
PRED:	This is what the people of Israel says : ‘ This is what the Lord says : Do not commit adultery with your neighbor 's wife , ' says the Lord , “ I am the one who says : I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	For these men have done terrible things among my people . They have committed adultery with their neighbors ' wives and have lied in my name , saying things I did not command . I am a witness to this . I , the Lord , have spoken . ”

ID:	759
INPUT:	▁Ab sa lo mek ▁a gin du ▁be za la ▁, ▁mor roi ek ▁hil ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁Am non ▁. ▁Er re ge - se me ▁guz ti ek ▁jai ki ▁e ta ▁nork ▁be re ▁man doz ▁i hes ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	Absalom 's servants killed him , just as Amnon had done . They killed all the king 's sons and all his possessions .
GOLD:	So at Absalom 's signal they murdered Amnon . Then the other sons of the king jumped on their mules and fled .

ID:	760
INPUT:	▁Zu zen bi dez ▁e ta ▁jus ti zi az ▁jo ka tu ▁dut ▁: ▁ez ▁u tzi ▁ni ▁za pal tzai le en ▁es ku ▁.
PRED:	I will praise you , O Lord , for I will never let my enemies triumph over me .
GOLD:	Do n't leave me to the mercy of my enemies , for I have done what is just and right .

ID:	761
INPUT:	▁« ▁Dan - ek ▁be re ▁her ri a du ▁go ber na tu ko ▁, ▁Is ra el go ▁bes te ▁lei nu ek ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	“ These are the tribes of Dan , Dan , and the half-tribe of Dan .
GOLD:	“ Dan will govern his people , like any other tribe in Israel .

ID:	762
INPUT:	▁Oi ▁Jain ko ▁, ▁i ker ▁na za zu ▁e ta ▁e za gu tu ▁ni re ▁bi ho tza ▁, ▁pro ba ▁na za zu ▁e ta ▁e za gu tu ▁ni re ▁ar du rak ▁.
PRED:	O Lord my God , I cry out to you , and I will fulfill my vows to you .
GOLD:	Search me , O God , and know my heart ; test me and know my anxious thoughts .

ID:	763
INPUT:	▁Han ▁, ▁ba sa mor tu an ▁, ▁el kar te ▁o so a ▁mar mar re an ▁ha si ▁zen ▁Moi ses ▁e ta ▁A a ro nen ▁aur ka ▁,
PRED:	So Moses ' body was finished in the wilderness , and Moses rebelled against Moses .
GOLD:	There , too , the whole community of Israel complained about Moses and Aaron .

ID:	764
INPUT:	▁i gel tse ro ▁e ta ▁har gi nei ▁. ▁O ro bat ▁e ro si ▁a hal ▁i zan ▁zi tuz ten ▁Jau na ren ▁e txe ko ▁hon da ke tak ▁kon pon tze ko ▁be har ▁zi ren ▁o hol ▁e ta ▁har lan du ak ▁, ▁bai ta ▁or dain du ▁e re ▁tenplu a ren ▁kon pon ke ta ko ▁gas tu ▁guz ti ak ▁.
PRED:	The people of Israel were determined to stay at the Temple of the Lord . They wanted to repair the Temple of the Temple of the Lord and the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	The money brought to the Temple was not used for making silver bowls , lamp snuffers , basins , trumpets , or other articles of gold or silver for the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	765
INPUT:	▁E hun ta ri ak ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Jau na ▁, ▁ni ▁ez ▁naiz ▁i nor ▁zu ▁ni re ▁e txe an ▁sar tze ko ▁; ▁as ki ▁du zu ▁hitz ▁bat ▁e sa te a ▁, ▁ni re ▁mor roi a ▁sen da tze ko ▁.
PRED:	“ No , Lord , ” the officer said . “ I am not a servant , but I will speak to you . ”
GOLD:	But the officer said , “ Lord , I am not worthy to have you come into my home . Just say the word from where you are , and my servant will be healed .

ID:	766
INPUT:	▁Ab ram ▁Ka na an ▁lur ral de an ▁jar ri ▁zen ▁bi zi tzen ▁, ▁e ta ▁Lot ▁i bar re ko ▁hi ri e tan ▁. ▁Ho nen ▁oi hal - e txo lak ▁So do ma ▁ber ta rai no ▁he da tzen ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	Abram lived in Canaan , where Abram lived in the land of Canaan , and Lot 's territory was rising from Sodom and Gomorrah .
GOLD:	So Abram settled in the land of Canaan , and Lot moved his tents to a place near Sodom and settled among the cities of the plain .

ID:	767
INPUT:	▁Ar gi tzen ▁e ta ▁a zal tzen ▁ba diz ki da zu e ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁e mai tzez ▁, ▁er re ga luz ▁e ta ▁o ho rez ▁be te ko ▁zai tuz tet ▁. ▁A zal du ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁a me tsa ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁e sa na hi a ▁.
PRED:	But if I tell you the truth , I will make you an object of mockery . But I will tell you what is written in the future .
GOLD:	But if you tell me what I dreamed and what the dream means , I will give you many wonderful gifts and honors . Just tell me the dream and what it means ! ”

ID:	768
INPUT:	▁Uz ta ro a ▁zen ▁, ▁e ta ▁ur te - sa soi ▁hor re tan ▁Jor dan ▁i bai a ▁gai nez ka ▁e tor ri ▁o hi ▁da ▁. ▁Ku txa ▁ze ra ma ten ▁a pai zak ▁Jor da ne ra ▁hel du ▁e ta ▁hai en ▁oi nek ▁ur - er tza ▁u ki tu ▁be zain ▁las ter ▁,
PRED:	So the priest arrived at the threshing floor of bread and water beside the Jordan River . The priests blew the ram 's horn 's horn in the middle of the Jordan River , as far as the east wind .
GOLD:	It was the harvest season , and the Jordan was overflowing its banks . But as soon as the feet of the priests who were carrying the Ark touched the water at the river 's edge ,

ID:	769
INPUT:	▁o rain ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁Jain ko a ▁e za gu tu ▁du zu e la rik ▁e do ta ▁, ▁ho be ki ▁e san ▁, ▁Jain ko ak ▁e za gu tu ▁zai tuz te la rik ▁, ▁no la tan ▁i tzul tzen ▁za re te ▁ber ri ro ▁fun tsik ▁e ta ▁in dar rik ▁ga be ko ▁mun du tar ▁er re a li ta te e ta ra ▁? ▁Ber ri ro ▁e re ▁be rau en ▁men pe ko ▁i zan ▁na hi ▁o te ▁du zu e ▁?
PRED:	But now we have heard that God has said , “ We have heard that God has said to us , ‘ Why are you doing this ? Why do you think of us ? Why do you think we are all around us ? '
GOLD:	So now that you know God ( or should I say , now that God knows you ) , why do you want to go back again and become slaves once more to the weak and useless spiritual principles of this world ?

ID:	770
INPUT:	▁Ba zu en ▁Sau lek ▁Ritz pa ▁i ze ne ko ▁o hai de ▁bat ▁, ▁Ai a - ren ▁a la ba ▁. ▁Ix - Bo xe tek ▁e san ▁zi on ▁Ab ner ri ▁: ▁— ▁Zer ga tik ▁o he ra tu ▁za ra ▁gu re ▁ai ta ren ▁o hai de a re kin ▁?
PRED:	When Saul 's concubine , heard that Saul 's concubine 's concubine , he said to Abner , “ Why are you crying ? Why are you here with me ? ”
GOLD:	One day Ishbosheth , Saul 's son , accused Abner of sleeping with one of his father 's concubines , a woman named Rizpah , daughter of Aiah .

ID:	771
INPUT:	▁I tur ri a ren ▁aur re ra ▁hel tze an ▁, ▁Da vi den ▁Hi ri ko ▁har mai le tan ▁go ra ▁i go ▁zi ren ▁, ▁har re si ko ▁al da pan ▁go ra ▁, ▁Da vi den ▁e txe a ren ▁gai nal de tik ▁, ▁e ki al de rantz ▁, ▁Ur - a te rai no ▁hel du ▁ar te ▁.
PRED:	When they arrived at the spring of the City of David , they went out to the City of David , in the City of David .
GOLD:	At the Fountain Gate they went straight up the steps on the ascent of the city wall toward the City of David . They passed the house of David and then proceeded to the Water Gate on the east .

ID:	772
INPUT:	▁He nok ▁i zan ▁zu e ne tik ▁, ▁bes te ▁zor tzi e hun ▁ur tez ▁bi zi ▁i zan ▁zen ▁, ▁e ta ▁se me - a la bak ▁i zan ▁zi tu en ▁.
PRED:	After the birth of Arphaxad , Arphaxad lived another 500 years and had other sons and daughters .
GOLD:	After the birth of Enoch , Jared lived another 800 years , and he had other sons and daughters .

ID:	773
INPUT:	▁O pa ▁bi e zai o te ▁ba ke a ▁Je ru sa le mi ▁: ▁« ▁La sai ▁bi zi ▁bi tez ▁mai te ▁zai tuz te nak ▁!
PRED:	Let them live in peace , saying , “ May the Lord bless you !
GOLD:	Pray for peace in Jerusalem.May all who love this city prosper .

ID:	774
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁e ra tu ▁di da zu ▁gor pu tza ▁, ▁zuk ▁zain du ▁nau zu ▁a ma ren ▁sa be le tik ▁.
PRED:	You guide me with my body ; you restored me from the power of my body .
GOLD:	You made all the delicate , inner parts of my bodyand knit me together in my mother 's womb .

ID:	775
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁i kas le ei ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁« ▁I ri tsi ko ▁zai zu e ▁Gi zo na ren ▁Se me a ren ▁e tor re ra ko ▁e gun ▁bat ▁be de ren ▁i ku si ▁na hi ▁i zan go ▁du zu en ▁ga rai a ▁, ▁bai na ▁ez ▁du zu e ▁i ku si ko ▁.
PRED:	Then he said to his disciples , “ You will see a Son of Man coming from the Son of Man , but you will never see him .
GOLD:	Then he said to his disciples , “ The time is coming when you will long to see the day when the Son of Man returns , but you wo n't see it .

ID:	776
INPUT:	▁« ▁E ta ▁gaiz ta ke ri a ▁hau en ▁guz ti en ▁on do ren ▁— ▁Ai ▁e ne ▁, ▁zo ri txar re ko a ▁zu ▁! ▁, ▁di ot ▁nik ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁—
PRED:	“ In all this way , ” says the Lord . “ Yes , I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you , says the Sovereign Lord . In addition to all your other wickedness ,

ID:	777
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁di o ▁zu en ▁Jain ko ak ▁: ▁« ▁Kon tso la ▁e za zu e ▁, ▁kon tso la tu ▁ni re ▁her ri a ▁!
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ Do n't let my people comfort me .
GOLD:	“ Comfort , comfort my people , ” says your God .

ID:	778
INPUT:	▁Si nets ▁i e za da zu e ▁: ▁ni ▁Ai ta re kin ▁bat ▁e gin da ▁na go ▁e ta ▁Ai ta ▁ni re kin ▁. ▁Bes te rik ▁ez ▁ba da ▁, ▁si ne tsi ▁e gi ten ▁di tu dan ▁e gin tzen ga tik ▁.
PRED:	I say , ‘ Father , I am with you , and I am not with you . If you believe me , I am not with you .
GOLD:	Just believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me . Or at least believe because of the work you have seen me do .

ID:	779
INPUT:	▁I tzu li ▁zen ▁bi gar ren ▁al diz ▁Jau na ren ▁ain ge ru a ▁, ▁u ki tu ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁« ▁Jai ki ▁e ta ▁jan ▁, ▁o so ▁bi de ▁lu ze a ▁bai tu zu ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then the angel of the Lord returned to the angel of the Lord and said to him , “ Get up and eat it . ”
GOLD:	Then the angel of the Lord came again and touched him and said , “ Get up and eat some more , or the journey ahead will be too much for you . ”

ID:	780
INPUT:	▁« ▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁nik ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁zin ▁da git ▁neu re ▁bi zi a ren ga tik ▁, ▁zeu re ▁i do la tri a ▁e ta ▁jo ka e ra ▁hi guin gar ri az ▁ni re ▁san tu te gi a ▁ku tsa tu ▁du zu la ko ▁, ▁nik ▁e re ▁baz ter tu ▁e gin go ▁zai tu da la ▁; ▁ez ▁di zut ▁ba te re ▁er ru ki rik ▁i zan go ▁, ▁ez ta ▁bar ka tu ko ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : As surely as I live , I will cause you to worship other gods , and I will not forgive you . I will not forgive you .
GOLD:	“ As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , I will cut you off completely . I will show you no pity at all because you have defiled my Temple with your vile images and detestable sins .

ID:	781
INPUT:	▁Mui no ▁e der ▁, ▁lur ▁o so a ren ▁poz gar ri ▁! ▁Si on ▁men di ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁e goi tza ▁, ▁er re ge ▁han di a ren ▁hi ri ▁!
PRED:	Look at Mount Zion ! Let the earth shout of the Most High , the great city of Jerusalem !
GOLD:	God himself is in Jerusalem 's towers , revealing himself as its defender .

ID:	782
INPUT:	▁Ba la a mek ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁Jau nak ▁a di e ra zi ta ko a ▁be har ▁dut ▁e san ▁.
PRED:	Balaam replied , “ I will tell you what the Lord says . ”
GOLD:	But Balaam replied , “ I will speak only the message that the Lord puts in my mouth . ”

ID:	783
INPUT:	▁Ga taz kak ▁fi lis te ar ren ▁aur ka
PRED:	The Philistines Defeats the Philistines
GOLD:	Battles against Philistine Giants

ID:	784
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁da ▁ha ren tzat ▁mun du an ▁e zer ▁gor de rik ▁; ▁de na ▁da go ▁a ge ri an ▁e ta ▁za ba lik ▁, ▁kon tu ak ▁e man ▁be har ko ▁diz ki o gun ▁ha ren tzat ▁.
PRED:	It is not a permanent law for the world . It is written in the world , and it is written to us .
GOLD:	Nothing in all creation is hidden from God . Everything is naked and exposed before his eyes , and he is the one to whom we are accountable .

ID:	785
INPUT:	▁Je sus ▁Pi la to ren ▁aur re an
PRED:	Jesus ' Trial before Pilate
GOLD:	The Soldiers Mock Jesus

ID:	786
INPUT:	▁mai te ▁du e na ri ▁e gi ten ▁bai ti o ▁Jau nak ▁a gi ra ka ▁, ▁ai tak ▁se me ▁ku tu na ri ▁be za la xe ▁.
PRED:	The Lord detests the truth , but he loves the child as his father .
GOLD:	For the Lord corrects those he loves , just as a father corrects a child in whom he delights .

ID:	787
INPUT:	▁E ne ▁se me ▁, ▁gor de ▁zen tzu ta su na ▁e ta ▁o har me na ▁, ▁ez ▁i tza zu ▁ken ▁zeu re ▁aur re tik ▁;
PRED:	My child , pay attention to what you have .
GOLD:	My child , do n't lose sight of common sense and discernment.Hang on to them ,

ID:	788
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁mor roi a ri ▁gal de gin ▁: ▁— ▁Nor ▁da ▁lan dan ▁ze har ▁bi de ra ▁da tor ki gun ▁gi zon ▁ho ri ▁? ▁Mor roi ak ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁E ne ▁na gu si a.Or du an ▁, ▁Re be kak ▁be re ▁aur pe gi a ▁es ta li ▁zu en ▁za pi ▁ba tez ▁.
PRED:	“ Who is this ? ” he asked . “ Who is this man ? ” “ Yes , ” she replied . “ We have found him , ” Elisha replied .
GOLD:	“ Who is that man walking through the fields to meet us ? ” she asked the servant.And he replied , “ It is my master. ” So Rebekah covered her face with her veil .

ID:	789
INPUT:	▁A gin du ▁gu ri ▁, ▁jau na ▁, ▁zeu re ▁e sa ne ta ra ▁gai tu zu ▁zeu re ▁zer bi tza ri ok ▁; ▁bi la tu ko ▁du gu ▁zi ta ra ▁jo tzen ▁da ki en ▁nor bait ▁. ▁Hor re la ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁bi da li ta ko ▁es pi ri tu ▁gaiz to ak ▁e ra so ▁di e za zu ne an ▁, ▁hark ▁zi ta ra ▁jo ▁e ta ▁on ▁e gin go ▁di zu ▁.
PRED:	“ But you are your lord , ” says the Lord . “ We are your servants , your servants , and we are looking for someone who sent us to the Lord , and you will know that the evil spirits of the Lord .
GOLD:	Let us find a good musician to play the harp whenever the tormenting spirit troubles you . He will play soothing music , and you will soon be well again . ”

ID:	790
INPUT:	▁as to ak ▁30.500 ▁,
PRED:	donkeys , donkeys , and donkeys .
GOLD:	30,500 donkeys ,

ID:	791
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁gaiz ki - e sa ka ▁ha si ▁zi ren ▁Jain ko a ren ▁e ta ▁Moi se sen ▁aur ka ▁: ▁« ▁Zer ta ra ko ▁a te ra ▁gin tu zu en ▁E gip to tik ▁? ▁Ba sa mor tu an ▁hi la raz te ko ▁? ▁Ez ▁du gu ▁u rik ▁, ▁ez ▁ja ki rik ▁, ▁e ta ▁ma na ▁de la ko ▁ja na ri ▁kas kar ▁ho ne taz ▁as per - as per ▁e gi nak ▁gau de ▁! ▁»
PRED:	“ Why did n't you realize that Moses was angry with us ? ” they asked . “ Why did n't you hide us from the wilderness of Egypt ? Why did n't you eat any bread from the wilderness ? ”
GOLD:	and they began to speak against God and Moses . “ Why have you brought us out of Egypt to die here in the wilderness ? ” they complained . “ There is nothing to eat here and nothing to drink . And we hate this horrible manna ! ”

ID:	792
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁Jo sek ▁, ▁a ma ▁be ra ren gan di ko ▁se ni de ▁zu en ▁Ben ja mi nen gan ▁be gi ak ▁jar ri rik ▁, ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁— ▁Ho ri ▁al ▁da ▁zu ek ▁ai pa tu ▁ze ni da ten ▁a nai a ▁gaz te e na ▁? ▁Be jon dai a la ▁, ▁se me ▁!
PRED:	Then Joseph took his brothers and said to Joseph , “ This is the son of Joseph , who is the son of Joseph , who is the son of Joseph ? ”
GOLD:	Then Joseph looked at his brother Benjamin , the son of his own mother . “ Is this your youngest brother , the one you told me about ? ” Joseph asked . “ May God be gracious to you , my son . ”

ID:	793
INPUT:	▁Ez ti a ▁es ku an ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁bi de an ▁ja nez ▁jo an ▁zen ▁ai ta - a men ga na ▁; ▁e man ▁zi en ▁ez ti a ▁e ta ▁jan ▁zu ten ▁hai ek ▁e re ▁. ▁Bai na ▁ez ▁zi en ▁e san ▁ez ti ▁hu ra ▁le hoi a ren ▁he zur ▁ar te tik ▁har tu a ▁zu e nik ▁.
PRED:	They left their hand and went to the place where they had eaten . But they ate the honey and gave it to the lion . But the lion 's bones , but they were not eaten .
GOLD:	He scooped some of the honey into his hands and ate it along the way . He also gave some to his father and mother , and they ate it . But he did n't tell them he had taken the honey from the carcass of the lion .

ID:	794
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁e zar ri ▁zu e ne ko ▁lur sai la ▁Si kem go ▁bu ru za gi ▁zen ▁Ha mor ren ▁se me ei ▁e ro si ▁zi en ▁, ▁zi lar rez ko ▁e hun ▁txan pon ▁or dain duz ▁.
PRED:	He gave this command to Abimelech son of Shechem , the commander of the Amorites , and he paid a ransom for the price of silver .
GOLD:	Jacob bought the plot of land where he camped from the family of Hamor , the father of Shechem , for 100 pieces of silver .

ID:	795
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁Da ni e len ▁sa la tzai le ak ▁e kar tze ko ▁a gin du ▁zu en ▁er re ge ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁le hoi - zu lo ra ▁jaur ti ▁zi tuz ten ▁be ren ▁e maz te ▁e ta ▁se me - a la be kin ▁ba te ra ▁. ▁E ta ▁zu lo ▁bar re ne ra ▁hel du ▁bai no ▁le hen ▁, ▁le hoi ek ▁be ren ▁a tza par re tan ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁txi ki - txi ki ▁e gin ▁zi tuz ten ▁.
PRED:	Then the king summoned Daniel and led them into a lion . He threw them into the lions and threw them into a lion 's arms and killed them in a lion . They attacked the lion and captured it .
GOLD:	Then King Darius sent this message to the people of every race and nation and language throughout the world : “ Peace and prosperity to you !

ID:	796
INPUT:	▁ha la ko a ri ▁eus te a ▁hai ze a ri ▁eus te a e ta ▁es ku az ▁o li o a ▁har tze a ▁be za la ▁da ▁.
PRED:	He will hold back the right path of the Lord , just as he chooses .
GOLD:	Stopping her complaints is like trying to stop the windor trying to hold something with greased hands .

ID:	797
INPUT:	▁Her ri a ▁er bes te tik ▁i tzu li
PRED:	The Land Given to Judah
GOLD:	A Taunt for Babylon 's King

ID:	798
INPUT:	▁Fe de a ren ▁a hal me na ▁: ▁e pi lep ti ko a ren ▁sen da ke ta
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Man
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Boy

ID:	799
INPUT:	▁jan tzi ▁do to re ▁, ▁man tu ▁, ▁le po ko ▁za pi ▁e ta ▁pol tsak ▁, ▁go na ▁fin ▁, ▁dur ban te ▁e ta ▁man ti lak ▁.
PRED:	You will dress yourself in your robe , putting them on your heads , putting on your heads .
GOLD:	party clothes , gowns , capes , and purses ;

ID:	800
INPUT:	▁e gun ▁hor re tan ▁e gin go ▁bai ta ▁zu en ▁al de ko ▁bar ka men - o hi ku ne a ▁, ▁gar bi ▁zai tez ten ▁; ▁be ka tu ▁guz ti e ta tik ▁gar bi ▁gel di tu ko ▁za re te ▁Jau na ren ▁aur re an ▁.
PRED:	On that day you will be forgiven , and you will be forgiven . Through this process , you will purify yourselves before the Lord .
GOLD:	On that day offerings of purification will be made for you , and you will be purified in the Lord 's presence from all your sins .

ID:	801
INPUT:	▁Jen de - mul tzo ▁han di ek ▁jar rai tu ▁zi o ten ▁e ta ▁Je su sek ▁gai xo ak ▁sen da tu ▁ziz ki en ▁.
PRED:	But the crowd followed him , and he healed them .
GOLD:	Large crowds followed him there , and he healed their sick .

ID:	802
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁neu re ▁o sa su na ▁ze la - e ta ▁ne ka gar ri ▁i zan ▁ba nin tzai zu en ▁e re ▁, ▁zu ek ▁ez ▁nin du zu en ▁mes pre txa tu ▁, ▁ez ▁gai tze tsi ▁; ▁bes te la ▁bai zik ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁me zu la ri tzat ▁har tu ▁nin du zu en ▁, ▁Je su ▁Kris to ▁be ra ▁ba nintz ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	But I was very happy when I heard that you were ashamed of me , and you did n't obey my word . But I did n't know that I am the only God of our Savior .
GOLD:	But even though my condition tempted you to reject me , you did not despise me or turn me away . No , you took me in and cared for me as though I were an angel from God or even Christ Jesus himself .

ID:	803
INPUT:	▁Ax dod ▁e ta ▁Ga za ▁e ta ▁be rai en ▁her ri ▁e ta ▁her rix kak ▁, ▁E gip to ko ▁er re ka rai no ▁. ▁Me di ter ra ne o ▁i tsa so a ▁zen ▁mu ga ▁.
PRED:	He also built up the towns of Gaza and the surrounding villages in the Mediterranean Sea . He also became the Mediterranean Sea of the Dead Sea .
GOLD:	It also included Ashdod with its surrounding settlements and villages and Gaza with its settlements and villages , as far as the Brook of Egypt and along the coast of the Mediterranean Sea .

ID:	804
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁ar ku me ▁ba koi tze ko ▁lau ▁ki lo ▁.
PRED:	and two quarts with each of the seven lambs .
GOLD:	and two quarts with each of the seven lambs .

ID:	805
INPUT:	▁Is ra el <unk> ▁a hal guz ti du na ren ▁ma has ti a ▁; ▁Ju da ko ▁her ri a ▁, ▁ha ren ▁lan da re - sail ▁ku tu na.Zu zen bi de a ▁es pe ro ▁zu en ha ren gan dik ▁, ▁e ta ▁hor ra ▁: ▁zu zen ga be ke ri a ▁! ▁Jus ti zi a ▁es pe ro ▁zu en ▁, ▁e ta ▁hor ra ▁: ▁ai e ne ak ▁!
PRED:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies says , “ The people of Judah have treated you with your own eyes , and you have treated him with your own eyes .
GOLD:	The nation of Israel is the vineyard of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies.The people of Judah are his pleasant garden.He expected a crop of justice , but instead he found oppression.He expected to find righteousness , but instead he heard cries of violence .

ID:	806
INPUT:	▁zeu re ▁goi - ge le tan ▁pi la tzen ▁u ra ▁; ▁ho dei ▁gai ne an ▁ko ka tzen ▁du zu ▁zeu re ▁kar ro za ▁, ▁hai ze - he ga le tan ▁za bil tza ▁.
PRED:	You sit in the morning , O Lord , in the sea , in the sea .
GOLD:	you lay out the rafters of your home in the rain clouds.You make the clouds your chariot ; you ride upon the wings of the wind .

ID:	807
INPUT:	▁Neuk ▁a ger tu ko ▁di ot ▁zen bat ▁suf ri tu ▁be har ko ▁du en ▁ni re ga tik ▁.
PRED:	I will be utterly rejected because of all the things I have done .
GOLD:	And I will show him how much he must suffer for my name 's sake . ”

ID:	808
INPUT:	▁pro fe ta ▁bat ▁bi da li ▁zi en ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁e sa te ra ▁: ▁« ▁Hau ▁di o ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁Jain ko ak ▁: ▁Nik ▁e kar ri ▁zai tuz tet ▁E gip to tik ▁e ta ▁nik ▁a te ra ▁eskla bo tza tik ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord sent this message to them : “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : I will bring you out of Egypt .
GOLD:	the Lord sent a prophet to the Israelites . He said , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : I brought you up out of slavery in Egypt .

ID:	809
INPUT:	▁Je ru sa lem ▁, ▁gar bi tu ▁zeu re ▁bar ru ko ▁gaiz ta ke ri a ▁, ▁bi zi rik ▁a te ra ▁na hi ▁ba du <unk> ▁ar tei zan go ▁o te ▁di tu zu ▁zeu re ▁bai tan bu ru bi de ▁gaiz to ▁ho ri ek ▁?
PRED:	O Jerusalem , you will be pure , and your lives will be saved .
GOLD:	O Jerusalem , cleanse your heartthat you may be saved.How long will you harboryour evil thoughts ?

ID:	810
INPUT:	▁Bi zi ra ko ▁bi de a ▁e ra ku tsi ko ▁di da zu ▁: ▁a lai ta sun ▁be te a ▁zu re ▁aur re an ▁, ▁be ti ko ▁zo ri o na ▁zu re ▁on do an ▁.
PRED:	Your life will be full of joy , and you will find joy in your presence .
GOLD:	You will show me the way of life , granting me the joy of your presenceand the pleasures of living with you forever .

ID:	811
INPUT:	▁U rez ▁a se ▁di ra ▁Jau na ren ▁zu hai tzak ▁, ▁hark ▁lan da tu ri ko ▁Li ba no ko ▁zed ro ak ▁;
PRED:	The trees of the Lord are like cypress trees ; the cedars of Lebanon .
GOLD:	The trees of the Lord are well cared for — the cedars of Lebanon that he planted .

ID:	812
INPUT:	▁« ▁E a ▁, ▁jan ▁ni re ▁o gi a ▁e ta ▁e dan ▁nik ▁na has tu ri ko ▁ar do a ▁.
PRED:	“ So I will eat food and drink wine , and drink wine .
GOLD:	“ Come , eat my food , and drink the wine I have mixed .

ID:	813
INPUT:	▁Lei nu ▁ba kar ra re kin ▁gel di tu ko ▁da ▁hu ra ▁, ▁e ta ▁ho ri ▁e re ▁Da vid ▁e ne ▁zer bi tza ri a ga tik ▁e ta ▁Is ra el go ▁hi ri ▁guz ti en ▁ar te tik ▁hau ta tu ▁du dan ▁Je ru sa lem ▁hi ri a ren ga tik ▁.
PRED:	David will become a faithful man , and he will be faithful to David and his servant David . He will take this city from the city of Israel and Jerusalem .
GOLD:	But I will leave him one tribe for the sake of my servant David and for the sake of Jerusalem , which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel .

ID:	814
INPUT:	▁« ▁E txe ▁ba te an ▁sar tze an ▁, ▁e san ▁: ▁« ▁Ba ke a ▁zu e kin ▁» ▁;
PRED:	“ If you enter the house , ” they said , “ you can find peace with you . ”
GOLD:	When you enter the home , give it your blessing .

ID:	815
INPUT:	▁Me ra ri tar ren ▁ar du ra pe an ▁zeu den ▁e goi tza ko ▁o ho lak ▁, ▁ze har - e gur rak ▁, ▁zu ta be ak ▁, ▁oi nak ▁e ta ▁bes te ▁o sa gai ▁guz ti ak ▁;
PRED:	the curtains on the Tabernacle , the Tabernacle , the posts , and all the furnishings of the Tabernacle ; the posts ;
GOLD:	These two clans were responsible for the care of the frames supporting the Tabernacle , the crossbars , the pillars , the bases , and all the equipment related to their use .

ID:	816
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁ez ▁zu en ▁i no ren ▁ai tor pen - be har rik ▁, ▁on gi ▁e za gu tzen ▁bai tzu en ▁be rak ▁gi za ki a ren ▁bai tan ▁da go e na ▁.
PRED:	And if we have no attention to what we have done , we will have knowledge .
GOLD:	No one needed to tell him about human nature , for he knew what was in each person 's heart .

ID:	817
INPUT:	▁« ▁Nor bai tek ▁be re ▁a la ba ▁eskla bo tzat ▁sal tzen ▁ba du ▁, ▁ez ▁da ▁lib re ▁gel di tu ko ▁bes te ▁eskla bo en ▁e ra ra ▁.
PRED:	“ If a man is free , he may be free from the slave of the slave , he must be free .
GOLD:	“ When a man sells his daughter as a slave , she will not be freed at the end of six years as the men are .

ID:	818
INPUT:	▁Ni ko de mok ▁gal de tu ▁: ▁— ▁No la ▁jai o ▁dai te ke ▁nor bait ▁, ▁ja da nik ▁za har ra ▁i za nik ▁? ▁Sar ▁o te ▁dai te ke ▁a ma ren ▁sa be le an ▁e ta ▁ber ri ro ▁jai o ▁?
PRED:	“ How are you going to eat ? ” Nicodemus asked . “ How are you going to eat ? ”
GOLD:	“ What do you mean ? ” exclaimed Nicodemus . “ How can an old man go back into his mother 's womb and be born again ? ”

ID:	819
INPUT:	▁La ne an ▁a ra zo ak
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	The Ironies of Life

ID:	820
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁du ▁la pur rak ▁mes pre txu rik ▁me re zi ▁, ▁go se a ▁ken tze ko ▁os ten ▁ba du ▁.
PRED:	He does not reject the wicked , but he does not take revenge on them .
GOLD:	Excuses might be found for a thiefwho steals because he is starving .

ID:	821
INPUT:	▁I zen da tu ▁zi o ten ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁e gun ▁bat ▁, ▁e ta ▁as ko ▁jo an ▁zi tzaiz ki on ▁be ra ▁ze go en ▁e txe ra ▁. ▁Pau lo ▁Jain ko a ren ▁er re ge tza ren ▁a zal pe na ▁e ta ▁tes ti gan tza ▁e gi ten ▁jar dun ▁zi tzai en ▁goi ze tik ▁ar ra tsal de ra ▁e ta ▁, ▁Moi se sen ▁le ge a ▁e ta ▁pro fe tak ▁oi nar ri ▁har tuz ▁, ▁Je su sen ▁me zu a ▁si nes ta raz ten ▁a ha le gin du ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	So they went to the Temple of God and went to the house of God . Paul went out to the Temple of God , and he was teaching by the law of God . This is the law of Moses , the law of Moses , the Law of God .
GOLD:	So a time was set , and on that day a large number of people came to Paul 's lodging . He explained and testified about the Kingdom of God and tried to persuade them about Jesus from the Scriptures . Using the law of Moses and the books of the prophets , he spoke to them from morning until evening .

ID:	822
INPUT:	▁« ▁Kar tze la ▁ar re ta ▁guz ti az ▁i txi a ▁aur ki tu ▁du gu ▁e ta ▁zain tzai le ak ▁a te e tan ▁er ne ▁, ▁bai na ▁i re ki tze an ▁bar ru an ▁ez ▁du gu ▁i nor ▁aur ki tu ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ When we find out everything we 've found , we 'll find out everything we 've found . We have found no mercy on our behalf . ”
GOLD:	“ The jail was securely locked , with the guards standing outside , but when we opened the gates , no one was there ! ”

ID:	823
INPUT:	▁No la ▁mor roi en ▁be gi ak ▁na gu si en ▁es ku e ta ra ▁, ▁no la ▁nes ka me a ren ▁be gi ak ▁e txe ko andre a ren ▁es ku e ta ra ▁, ▁ha la xe ▁dau de ▁gu re ▁be gi akJau na ren ga na ▁, ▁gu re ▁Jain ko a ren ga na ▁, ▁ha ren ▁er ru ki a ▁i ri tsi ▁zain ▁.
PRED:	The servant 's servants saw that she was watching for her servant 's household , and she saw her mistress , Sarai , Sarai , Sarai , the servant of God , was waiting for us .
GOLD:	We keep looking to the Lord our God for his mercy , just as servants keep their eyes on their master , as a slave girl watches her mistress for the slightest signal .

ID:	824
INPUT:	▁Nes ka ▁hel du ▁ze ne an ▁, ▁be re ▁ai ta ri ▁lur sail ▁bat ▁es ka tze ra ▁bul tza tu ▁zu en ▁Ot ni e lek ▁. ▁Nes ka ▁as to ▁gai ne tik ▁jai tsi ▁ze ne an ▁, ▁gal de tu ▁zi on ▁ai tak ▁: ▁— ▁Zer ▁na hi ▁dun ▁?
PRED:	When she saw her father 's father , she urged her to ask her to ask her , “ What 's the matter ? ” she asked her , “ What 's the matter ? What 's the matter ? ”
GOLD:	When Acsah married Othniel , she urged him to ask her father for a field . As she got down off her donkey , Caleb asked her , “ What 's the matter ? ”

ID:	825
INPUT:	▁Zen ba te zi nak ▁di ra ▁ha ren ▁gu da ros te ak ▁, ▁guz ti en ▁gain ▁al txa tzen ▁ha ren ▁ar gi a ▁.
PRED:	He gives his life to all his troops ; he gives them his light .
GOLD:	Who is able to count his heavenly army ? Does n't his light shine on all the earth ?

ID:	826
INPUT:	▁As pal di tik ▁i ra gar ri ak ▁ni tu en ger ta tu ▁di re nak ▁, ▁neuk ▁hi tze man ▁ni tu en ▁e ta ▁a di e ra zi ▁; ▁bat - ba te an ▁e kin ▁ni o ne ta ▁de nak ▁ger ta tu ▁.
PRED:	I gave them this message from the Lord : I gave them a message to them , and I gave them a covenant with them .
GOLD:	Long ago I told you what was going to happen.Then suddenly I took action , and all my predictions came true .

ID:	827
INPUT:	▁Hi tzal di a ▁bu ka tu rik ▁, ▁be lau ni ko ▁jar ri ▁e ta ▁o toitz ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁bes te ▁guz ti e kin ▁ba te ra ▁.
PRED:	Then he went down to the third time and prayed to the other .
GOLD:	When he had finished speaking , he knelt and prayed with them .

ID:	828
INPUT:	▁aur rez ▁aur re ▁e ten ga bei rain tzen ▁nau en ▁her ri a ren ga na ▁: ▁ba ra tze ▁sak ra tu e tan sak ri fi zi o ak ▁es kain tzen ▁di tuz te e ta ▁ad rei luz ko ▁al da re e ta nin tsen tsu a ▁er re tzen ▁,
PRED:	I am in front of my people , and I have put them in charge of them in front of them . They put them in charge of the incense to the Lord .
GOLD:	All day long they insult me to my faceby worshiping idols in their sacred gardens.They burn incense on pagan altars .

ID:	829
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁moz tu ▁i le - a da tsa ren ▁er tzak ▁in gu ru ▁guz ti an ▁, ▁ez ta ▁bi zar ra ren ▁er tzak ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	Do not cut off the blood of the wicked , or do not burn their bodies .
GOLD:	“ Do not trim off the hair on your temples or trim your beards .

ID:	830
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai on ▁Jau na ▁Moi se si ▁:
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	831
INPUT:	▁Gu tu nak ▁i gor ri ▁zi tu en ▁er rei nu ko ▁es ku al de ▁guz ti e ta ra ▁, ▁es ku al de ▁ba koi tze ko ▁i daz ke ran ▁e ta ▁her ri ▁ba koi tze ko ▁hiz ke ran ▁e ma nak ▁, ▁gi za se me ▁guz ti ak ▁nor ▁be re ▁e txe ko ▁na gu si ▁i zan ▁zi te zen ▁a gin duz ▁.
PRED:	He sent a message to the king of the provinces and all the kingdoms of the provinces and all the kingdoms of the earth , and everyone in the province west .
GOLD:	He sent letters to all parts of the empire , to each province in its own script and language , proclaiming that every man should be the ruler of his own home and should say whatever he pleases .

ID:	832
INPUT:	▁Lu za tu ▁zu en ▁Moi se sek ▁es ku a ▁i tsa so ▁gai ne ra ▁e ta ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁e ra gin da ▁, ▁e ki al de ko ▁hai ze ▁in dar tsu ak ▁jo ▁zu en ▁gau ▁o so an ▁. ▁Hai ze ak ▁i tsa so a ▁le hor tu ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁, ▁u rak ▁bi ▁mul tzo tan ▁ba na tuz ▁.
PRED:	Then Moses lifted up the sea over the sea , and the sea covered the sea . The sea blew the sea , and the sea covered the sea .
GOLD:	Then Moses raised his hand over the sea , and the Lord opened up a path through the water with a strong east wind . The wind blew all that night , turning the seabed into dry land .

ID:	833
INPUT:	▁Ha la ▁e re ▁, ▁a lai ▁na go ▁ni ▁Jau na re kin ▁, ▁po za ren ▁po zez sal ba tzai le ▁du dan ▁Jain ko a re kin ▁.
PRED:	Yes , I am glad , and I will sing praises to the Lord my God .
GOLD:	yet I will rejoice in the Lord ! I will be joyful in the God of my salvation !

ID:	834
INPUT:	▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du nak ▁har tu ▁du e ne ra ba ki a ▁nork ▁ga la ra zi ▁? ▁Jau nak ▁lu za tu a ▁du en ▁es ku a ri nork ▁a tze ra ▁e ra gin ▁? ▁»
PRED:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has said , ‘ Who has done such a long time ? ' ”
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has spoken — who can change his plans ? When his hand is raised , who can stop him ? ”

ID:	835
INPUT:	▁Ze ren ▁, ▁bi ho tzez ▁si nes ten ▁du e na ▁o nar tu ▁e gi ten ▁bai tu ▁Jain ko ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁a hoz ▁ai tor tzen ▁du e na ▁sal ba tu ▁e gi ten ▁da ▁.
PRED:	For everyone who believes in God 's hearts , but those who believe in him will be saved .
GOLD:	For it is by believing in your heart that you are made right with God , and it is by openly declaring your faith that you are saved .

ID:	836
INPUT:	▁Gi za ki a ren ▁e kin tzak ▁gi za ki a gan ▁e ra gi na
PRED:	A Call to Listen to God
GOLD:	Elihu Reminds Job of God 's Justice

ID:	837
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁i ze na ▁kan tuz ▁go re tsi ko ▁dut ▁, ▁es ker ▁o nez ▁han di e tsi ko ▁.
PRED:	Then I will praise the name of the Lord , for I will praise him .
GOLD:	For this will please the Lord more than sacrificing cattle , more than presenting a bull with its horns and hooves .

ID:	838
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ez ▁du zu ▁se xu - har re ma nik ▁i zan go ▁zeu re ▁er rai na re kin ▁, ▁zu re ▁se me a ren ▁e maz te a ▁bai ta ▁.
PRED:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your son , for you have sexual relations with your wife .
GOLD:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your daughter-in-law ; she is your son 's wife , so you must not have sexual relations with her .

ID:	839
INPUT:	▁On do ren ▁, ▁her ri a ren ▁bar ka men - o pa ri ra ko ▁a ker ra ▁hil ko ▁du ▁; ▁ho nen ▁o do la ▁er re ze laz ▁bar ru al de ra ▁e ra man go ▁du ▁e ta ▁ze kor ra ren ▁o do laz ▁e gi ni ko a ▁be ra ▁e gin go ▁: ▁es tal ki a ▁zi priz tin du ko ▁du ▁e ta ▁es tal ki ▁aur re an ▁zir ta tu ko ▁.
PRED:	Then he will slaughter the blood of the blood of the community . He will slaughter the blood of the blood of the blood of the community , and he will splatter its blood against the blood of the blood .
GOLD:	“ Then Aaron must slaughter the first goat as a sin offering for the people and carry its blood behind the inner curtain . There he will sprinkle the goat 's blood over the atonement cover and in front of it , just as he did with the bull 's blood .

ID:	840
INPUT:	▁Ha mai ka ▁lar ri al di ▁e ta ▁zo ri txar ▁pa sa ra zi ▁di da <unk> na ▁ber ri ro ▁bi zi a ra zi ko ▁nau zu ▁, ▁He ri o ▁Lei ze ▁sa ko ne tik ▁al txa tu ko ▁.
PRED:	My breath will strike me , and you will live in terror , and you will live in terror .
GOLD:	You have allowed me to suffer much hardship , but you will restore me to life againand lift me up from the depths of the earth .

ID:	841
INPUT:	▁On do ren ▁, ▁tu ni ka ▁jan tzi ▁zi on ▁A a ro ni ▁, ▁ger ri ko az ▁lo tu ▁e ta ▁man tu a ▁jar ri ▁; ▁gai ne tik ▁e fo da ▁e zar ri ▁zi on ▁e ta ▁xin go laz ▁lo tu ▁.
PRED:	Then the trumpets broke down the rings and attached them on the chestpiece . Then he placed the chestpiece on top of the chestpiece .
GOLD:	He put the official tunic on Aaron and tied the sash around his waist . He dressed him in the robe , placed the ephod on him , and attached the ephod securely with its decorative sash .

ID:	842
INPUT:	▁Be gi ra ▁, ▁Jain ko a ▁du gu ▁geu re ▁bu ru za gi ▁, ▁e ta ▁geu re kin ▁di tu gu ▁ha ren ▁a pai zak ▁, ▁bai ta ▁tu ru ta ▁o ze nak ▁e re ▁zu en ▁kon tra ▁jo tze ko ▁. ▁Is ra el dar rok ▁, ▁ez ▁bor ro ka tu ▁Jau na ren ▁, ▁zeu en ▁ar ba so en ▁Jain ko a ren ▁, ▁kon tra ▁, ▁ez ▁bai tu zu e ▁ga rai pe nik ▁i zan go ▁» ▁.
PRED:	We worship the Lord our God , the God of Israel , and we will fight against you . For we have sinned against you , and we will not fight against you , but we will not fight against you . ”
GOLD:	So you see , God is with us . He is our leader . His priests blow their trumpets and lead us into battle against you . O people of Israel , do not fight against the Lord , the God of your ancestors , for you will not succeed ! ”

ID:	843
INPUT:	▁Haur ra ▁ha ziz ▁e ta ▁sen do tuz ▁zi ho an ▁; ▁ja kin du ri az ▁be te a ▁ze go en ▁e ta ▁Jain ko a ren ▁on gi na hi a ▁be re kin ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	He became pregnant and gave birth to a little child , and he was very angry with God .
GOLD:	There the child grew up healthy and strong . He was filled with wisdom , and God 's favor was on him .

ID:	844
INPUT:	▁de nek ▁e gin ▁bai tzu ten ▁be ka tu ▁e ta ▁de nak ▁aur ki tzen ▁di ra ▁ge roz tik ▁Jain ko a ren ▁ain tza rik ▁ga be ▁.
PRED:	For everyone who seeks God , and everyone who seeks God .
GOLD:	For everyone has sinned ; we all fall short of God 's glorious standard .

ID:	845
INPUT:	▁Hau e xek ▁di ra ▁Ar ta xer xe sen ▁er re ge al di an ▁Ba bi lo ni a tik ▁ni re kin ▁e tor ri ▁zi ren ▁fa mi li a bu ru ak ▁, ▁be ren ▁ja tor ri e kin ▁:
PRED:	In the days of Asher , during the reign of King Zedekiah 's reign , King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came with them .
GOLD:	Here is a list of the family leaders and the genealogies of those who came with me from Babylon during the reign of King Artaxerxes :

ID:	846
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ▁ma kur ra ra zi ▁zu en ▁Jain ko ak ▁is ra el dar ren ▁aur re an ▁Ka na an go ▁er re ge ▁Ja bin ▁.
PRED:	So the people of Israel bowed low before the king of Canaan .
GOLD:	So on that day Israel saw God defeat Jabin , the Canaanite king .

ID:	847
INPUT:	▁Nes ka me ▁ba tek ▁, ▁Ped ro ▁su ton do an ▁e se ri a ▁i kus te an ▁, ▁be gi ra ▁jar ri ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁— ▁Hau ▁e re ▁Je su se kin ▁ze bi len ▁.
PRED:	When she saw a woman in a fire , she said to him , “ This is the account of Jesus , the man who was with Jesus . ”
GOLD:	A servant girl noticed him in the firelight and began staring at him . Finally she said , “ This man was one of Jesus ' followers ! ”

ID:	848
INPUT:	▁Er re ge ak ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Ez ▁i zan ▁bel dur ▁. ▁Zer ▁i kus ten ▁du zu ▁? ▁E ma ku me ak ▁Sau li ▁: ▁— ▁Es pi ri tu ▁bat ▁da ku sat ▁lur pe tik ▁i go tzen ▁.
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid ? ” the king asked . “ What do you have a request ? ” “ I have a spirit from the Spirit of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't be afraid ! ” the king told her . “ What do you see ? ” “ I see a god coming up out of the earth , ” she said .

ID:	849
INPUT:	▁Jen de ak ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Bu ru tik ▁zau de ▁! ▁Nor ▁da bil ▁zu ▁hil ▁na hi an ▁?
PRED:	The crowd replied , “ Who is you looking for ? Who is you going to die ? ”
GOLD:	The crowd replied , “ You 're demon possessed ! Who 's trying to kill you ? ”

ID:	850
INPUT:	▁E ne ▁Jain ko ▁Jau na ▁, ▁gu re ▁ai ta ▁Da vi den ▁or dez ▁ni ▁, ▁zeu re ▁zer bi tza ri ▁hau ▁, ▁e gin ▁nau zu ▁er re ge ▁. ▁Ni ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁mu til ▁gaz te a ▁nau zu ▁e ta ▁go ber na tzen ▁i ka si ▁ga be a ▁.
PRED:	O Lord our God , you have done what is right , and you have done to me , O Lord my servant , my lord the king .
GOLD:	“ Now , O Lord my God , you have made me king instead of my father , David , but I am like a little child who does n't know his way around .

ID:	851
INPUT:	▁Ga res ti ▁or dain duz ▁es ku ra tu ▁zai tuz te ▁Jain ko ak ▁: ▁ez ▁bi hur tu ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁gi za ki en ▁eskla bo ▁.
PRED:	Do n't let God rescue you from the power of God . Do n't let them be slaves .
GOLD:	God paid a high price for you , so do n't be enslaved by the world .

ID:	852
INPUT:	▁Ni re ▁aur re ko ek ▁hon da tu ▁zi tuz ten ▁na zi o ▁ho ri e ta ko ▁jain ko e ta rik ▁ba tek ▁e re ▁lib ra tu ▁a hal ▁i zan ▁o te ▁du ▁be re ▁her ri a ▁ni re ▁es ku e ta tik ▁? ▁E ta ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko ak ▁lib ra tu ko ▁zai tuz te la ▁ni re ▁es ku e tan ▁e ror tze tik ▁?
PRED:	Do n't you realize that I am the gods of the nations who rescued you from the power of my people ? Why did you rescue me from the power of my God ?
GOLD:	Which of their gods was able to rescue its people from the destructive power of my predecessors ? What makes you think your God can rescue you from me ?

ID:	853
INPUT:	▁Zi gor - e gu na
PRED:	A Call to Holy Living
GOLD:	The Desolation of Israel

ID:	854
INPUT:	▁A di e ra zi ▁ni re ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jaun ▁ho nen ▁, ▁me zu a ▁: ▁Zu re ▁aur ka ▁na tor ▁, ▁Si don ▁, ▁zu re ▁kon tu ra ▁jan tzi ko ▁naiz ▁os pez ▁. ▁Zu re ▁aur ka ▁e pai a ▁be te ▁e ta ▁neu re ▁san tu ta su na ▁a ger tze an ▁, ▁de nek ▁ja kin go ▁du te ▁ni ▁nai ze la ▁Jau na ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ I am coming to you , O Sidon , O Sidon , and I will punish you for your holy name . I am the Lord , who is worthy of your holy name .
GOLD:	Give the people of Sidon this message from the Sovereign Lord : “ I am your enemy , O Sidon , and I will reveal my glory by what I do to you.When I bring judgment against youand reveal my holiness among you , everyone watching will knowthat I am the Lord .

ID:	855
INPUT:	▁Ja ki zu e ▁, ▁ba tez ▁e re ▁, ▁az ken ▁ga rai e tan ▁gi zon ▁i se ka ri ak ▁, ▁be ren ▁gri na ▁txar rei ▁jar rai tuz ▁bi zi ko ▁di re nak ▁, ▁e tor ri ko ▁di re la ▁. ▁E ta ▁ir riz
PRED:	So you know that we are planning to live in the past of our sinful nature , just as we live in the past .
GOLD:	Most importantly , I want to remind you that in the last days scoffers will come , mocking the truth and following their own desires .

ID:	856
INPUT:	▁O hol ▁hau ek ▁be he al de an ▁be reiz ▁jar ri ko ▁di tu zu ▁e ta ▁gai nal de an ▁, ▁le he nen go ▁e raz tu na ren ▁pa re an ▁, ▁on gi ▁lo tu ak ▁. ▁E gin ▁ho ne la ▁bi ▁kan toi e ta ra ko ▁bi ▁o ho lak ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	The eastern boundary will run on the east side of the Jordan River , and you will stand on the east side of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	These corner frames will be matched at the bottom and firmly attached at the top with a single ring , forming a single corner unit . Make both of these corner units the same way .

ID:	857
INPUT:	▁A ka ben ▁er re ge - e txe a ▁sun tsi tu ▁Je huk
PRED:	Jehu Kills the Priests
GOLD:	The Death of Jehu

ID:	858
INPUT:	▁hor re ga tik ▁, ▁su ▁e man go ▁di et Ti ro ko ▁har re si ei ▁, ▁e ta ▁ber ta ko ▁jau re gi a ki ren tsi ▁e gin go ▁di tu ▁» ▁.
PRED:	So I will send disaster on it , and there will be great panic . ”
GOLD:	So I will send down fire on the walls of Tyre , and all its fortresses will be destroyed . ”

ID:	859
INPUT:	▁Jau na ▁be ra ▁jo an go ▁zai zu ▁aur re tik ▁e ta ▁zeu re kin ▁i zan go ▁du zu ▁; ▁ez ▁zai tu ▁i no la ▁e re ▁u tzi ko ▁. ▁Ez ▁i zan ▁bel dur ▁! ▁Ez ▁ki kil du ▁! ▁»
PRED:	You will go out to the presence of the Lord , and you will not be afraid . Do not be afraid ! ”
GOLD:	Do not be afraid or discouraged , for the Lord will personally go ahead of you . He will be with you ; he will neither fail you nor abandon you . ”

ID:	860
INPUT:	▁Ho ri ek ▁i zan ▁zi ren ▁No e ren ▁se me en ▁lei nu ak ▁, ▁nor ▁be re ▁on do ren go ▁e ta ▁her ri en ▁a ra be ra ▁. ▁Ho ri en gan dik ▁sor tu ▁zi ren ▁her ri ak ▁u hol de a ren ▁on do ren ▁e ta ▁he da tu ▁mun du an ▁ze har ▁.
PRED:	These were the clans of Noah and the descendants of Noah , who lived in the land of Noah . Their descendants became the father of Noah .
GOLD:	These are the clans that descended from Noah 's sons , arranged by nation according to their lines of descent . All the nations of the earth descended from these clans after the great flood .

ID:	861
INPUT:	▁Le ge az ▁har ro tzen ▁za ren ▁hor rek ▁, ▁no la ▁de so ho ra tzen ▁du zu ▁Jain ko a ▁, ▁le ge a ▁hau tsiz ▁?
PRED:	The law of the law says , “ Do you obey the law of God ?
GOLD:	You are so proud of knowing the law , but you dishonor God by breaking it .

ID:	862
INPUT:	▁Be re ▁al de ▁i zan ▁zu en ▁Jau na ▁Jo sa fa tek ▁, ▁be re ▁ar ba so ▁Da vi den ▁le he nen go ▁jo ka e ra ▁be ra ▁i zan ▁zu e la ko ▁, ▁Ba a len ▁i do lo e ta ra ▁jo ▁ga be ▁.
PRED:	But Jehoshaphat did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , just as his ancestor David had done .
GOLD:	The Lord was with Jehoshaphat because he followed the example of his father 's early years and did not worship the images of Baal .

ID:	863
INPUT:	▁Nor ▁gai xo tzen ▁da ▁, ▁ni ▁gai xo tu ▁ga be ▁? ▁Nor ▁e ror tzen ▁, ▁ni ▁er re min du ▁ga be ▁?
PRED:	Who is sick ? Who is sick ? Who is sick ?
GOLD:	Who is weak without my feeling that weakness ? Who is led astray , and I do not burn with anger ?

ID:	864
INPUT:	▁Dei tu ▁zu en ▁Es ter rek ▁Ha tak ▁, ▁be re ▁zer bi tzu ra ▁er re ge ak ▁jar ri ▁ziz ki on ▁i re ne ta ri ko ▁bat ▁, ▁e ta ▁Mar do ke o ga na ▁i gor ri ▁zu en ▁, ▁zer ▁ger ta tzen ▁e ta ▁zer ga tik ▁zen ▁ja ki te ra ▁.
PRED:	When Esther heard what Esther had happened , he sent messengers to the king 's officials and sent Mordecai to pay him to the banquet hall .
GOLD:	Then Esther sent for Hathach , one of the king 's eunuchs who had been appointed as her attendant . She ordered him to go to Mordecai and find out what was troubling him and why he was in mourning .

ID:	865
INPUT:	▁Be hin ▁, ▁ba rau - e gu nez ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁kul tu - os pa ki zun ▁ba te an ▁zeu de la ▁, ▁Es pi ri tu ▁San tu ak ▁ho ne la ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁« ▁Be rei zi ▁ni re tzat ▁Ber na be ▁e ta ▁Sau lo ▁, ▁nik ▁dei ▁e gin ▁di e dan ▁e gi te ko ra ko ▁» ▁.
PRED:	On the day of the Lord remained in the days of the Lord . He said to them , “ I am the Holy Spirit , and I will call you the name of Saul . ”
GOLD:	One day as these men were worshiping the Lord and fasting , the Holy Spirit said , “ Appoint Barnabas and Saul for the special work to which I have called them . ”

ID:	866
INPUT:	▁Be ne tan ▁di o tsu et ▁: ▁Ez ▁dut ▁ge hi a go ▁ar do rik ▁e dan go ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁er rei nu an ▁ar do ▁ber ri a ▁e dan ▁ar te ▁» ▁.
PRED:	I tell you the truth , I will never drink wine from the Kingdom of God . ”
GOLD:	I tell you the truth , I will not drink wine again until the day I drink it new in the Kingdom of God . ”

ID:	867
INPUT:	▁Jo na ta nek ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁Hon da me na ▁e kar ri ▁di o ▁her ri ▁o so a ri ▁gu re ▁ai tak ▁! ▁I ku si ▁no la ▁ar gi tu ▁zaiz ki dan ▁be gi ak ▁ez ti ▁pit tin ▁bat ▁jan ▁du da la ko ▁.
PRED:	“ All right , ” Jonathan said . “ I will take some of the people 's eyes , and I will see a little little honey . ”
GOLD:	“ My father has made trouble for us all ! ” Jonathan exclaimed . “ A command like that only hurts us . See how refreshed I am now that I have eaten this little bit of honey .

ID:	868
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren ▁a ho tsak ▁ur ▁gai ne an ▁du run da ▁: ▁Jain ko ▁ain tza tsu ak ▁tru moi a ▁jo <unk> na ▁ur ▁han di en ▁gai ne an ▁ga rai ▁.
PRED:	The voice of the Lord says , “ The voice of the Lord is coming ; the voice of the Almighty sends rain .
GOLD:	The voice of the Lord echoes above the sea.The God of glory thunders.The Lord thunders over the mighty sea .

ID:	869
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁li tro ▁e ta ▁er di ren ▁bat ▁ar do ▁i sur - o pa ri tzat ▁ar ku me ▁ba koi tze ko ▁.
PRED:	and two quarts with each of the seven lambs .
GOLD:	For each lamb offered as a burnt offering or a special sacrifice , you must also present one quart of wine as a liquid offering .

ID:	870
INPUT:	▁Zu ek ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁lo tsaz ▁be te tzen ▁du zu e ▁pob re a ▁. ▁Ez ▁o te ▁di ra ▁a be ra tsak ▁zu ek ▁za pal tzen ▁e ta ▁au zi te gi ra ▁e ra ma ten ▁zai tuz te te nak ▁?
PRED:	Do n't you think about your poverty ? Do n't you think of your poverty ? Do n't you think you are rich ?
GOLD:	But you dishonor the poor ! Is n't it the rich who oppress you and drag you into court ?

ID:	871
INPUT:	▁Nor ▁be re ▁ma hats - par ra pe a ne se ri ko ▁da ▁, ▁be re ▁pi kon do pe an ▁, ▁i no ren ▁bel dur rik ▁ga <unk> ne la ▁a gin du ▁duJaun ▁a hal guz ti du nak ▁.
PRED:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says , “ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has spoken ! The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Everyone will live in peace and prosperity , enjoying their own grapevines and fig trees , for there will be nothing to fear.The Lord of Heaven 's Armieshas made this promise !

ID:	872
INPUT:	▁Es na tu ▁zen ▁kar tze la zai na ▁e ta ▁, ▁es pe txe ko ▁a te ak ▁za ba lik ▁i kus te an ▁, ▁ez pa ta ▁a te ra ▁zu en ▁be re ▁bu ru a ▁hil tze ko ▁, ▁pre so ek ▁i hes ▁e gin ▁zu te la ko an ▁.
PRED:	When the palace guards saw that the palace was opened , he was killed in the palace , and his head was killed in the prison .
GOLD:	The jailer woke up to see the prison doors wide open . He assumed the prisoners had escaped , so he drew his sword to kill himself .

ID:	873
INPUT:	▁Ha la ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁Ba la kek ▁, ▁e ta ▁bi en ▁ar te an ▁ze kor ▁e ta ▁a ha ri ▁ba na ▁es kai ni ▁zi tuz ten ▁al da re ▁ba koi tze an ▁.
PRED:	So Balak did as Balaam commanded him , and they offered a bull and a ram on each altar .
GOLD:	Balak followed his instructions , and the two of them sacrificed a young bull and a ram on each altar .

ID:	874
INPUT:	▁« ▁Es pi ri tu ▁gaiz to a ▁, ▁nor bai ten gan dik ▁ir ten ▁on do ren ▁, ▁le ku ▁i dor re tan ▁bar re na ▁i bi li ▁o hi ▁da ▁a tse den ▁bi la ▁; ▁bai na ▁, ▁aur ki tzen ▁ez ▁du e la rik ▁, ▁be re ▁bu ru a ri ▁e sa ten ▁di o ▁: ▁“ ▁No an ▁ber ri ro ▁, ▁a te ra ▁nin tze ne ko ▁neu re ▁e txe ra ▁” ▁.
PRED:	“ When the Spirit of the wicked fall into the desert , it will fall into the desert , but it is no rest . But when I said , ‘ Why did n't I return to my house ? '
GOLD:	“ When an evil spirit leaves a person , it goes into the desert , searching for rest . But when it finds none , it says , ‘ I will return to the person I came from . '

ID:	875
INPUT:	▁Ba rau a ri ▁bu ruz ▁. ▁Za har ra ▁e ta ▁ber ri a
PRED:	A Discussion about Fasting
GOLD:	A Discussion about Fasting

ID:	876
INPUT:	▁« ▁Be raz ▁— ▁e san ▁zi en ▁— ▁, ▁zu en ▁ar te an ▁a gin te rik ▁du te nak ▁be toz ▁ni re kin ▁Ze sa re a ra ▁e ta ▁, ▁gi zon ▁ho nek ▁er ru rik ▁ba du ▁, ▁sa la ▁be za te ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ All right , ” he said , “ come with me and follow my covenant with you , just as you have done . ”
GOLD:	So he said , “ Those of you in authority can return with me . If Paul has done anything wrong , you can make your accusations . ”

ID:	877
INPUT:	▁Za no ah ▁, ▁En - Ga nim ▁, ▁Ta pu ah ▁, ▁E nam ▁,
PRED:	Kishion , Kishion , Kishion ,
GOLD:	Zanoah , En-gannim , Tappuah , Enam ,

ID:	878
INPUT:	▁« ▁Hau tsi a ▁u tzi ▁du te ▁Mo ab ▁, ▁haur ren ▁gar ra si ak ▁en tzu ten ▁di ra ▁.
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : The child who hears the cries of Moab .
GOLD:	All Moab is destroyed.Her little ones will cry out .

ID:	879
INPUT:	▁Zer ta ra ko ▁du ▁gi za ki ak lur ▁ho ne tan ▁le her ▁e gi te a ▁?
PRED:	Why do people make the earth tremble ?
GOLD:	What do people get for all their hard work under the sun ?

ID:	880
INPUT:	▁Men di ak ▁lan da tu ak ▁i zan ▁aur re tik ▁, ▁mui no ak ▁bai no ▁le hen ▁i zan ▁nin tzen ▁sor tu a ▁;
PRED:	Before the mountains rose from the mountains , the mountains covered me .
GOLD:	Before the mountains were formed , before the hills , I was born —

ID:	881
INPUT:	▁Ja ko bek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁On gi ▁da ki zu ▁zen bat ▁lan ▁e gin ▁du dan ▁zu re tzat ▁e ta ▁zen ba te rai no ▁ha zi ▁zai zun ▁a be re - tal de a ▁ni ri ▁es ker ▁.
PRED:	Jacob replied , “ You know everything you have done , and you have given me everything I have done . ”
GOLD:	Jacob replied , “ You know how hard I 've worked for you , and how your flocks and herds have grown under my care .

ID:	882
INPUT:	▁bai ta ▁ge ro a go ▁e re ▁, ▁Jo si a sen ▁se me ▁Joi a kim ▁Ju da ko ▁er re ge ▁i zan ▁zen ▁ga rai tik ▁Jo si a sen ▁bes te ▁se me ▁ba ten ▁, ▁Se de ki a sen ▁, ▁er re ge al di ko ▁ha mai ka gar ren ▁ur te a ren ▁az ke na ▁ar te ▁. ▁Ur te ▁hor re ta ko ▁bos gar ren ▁hi le an ▁Je ru sa lem go ▁bi zi la gu nak ▁er bes te ra tu ▁zi tuz ten ▁.
PRED:	But Jehoiakim son of Josiah began to rule over Judah in the third year of King Jehoiakim 's reign in Judah . He was buried in the third year of King Josiah 's reign in the third year of Jehoiakim 's reign .
GOLD:	The Lord 's messages continued throughout the reign of King Jehoiakim , Josiah 's son , until the eleventh year of the reign of King Zedekiah , another of Josiah 's sons . In August of that eleventh year the people of Jerusalem were taken away as captives .

ID:	883
INPUT:	▁Hi ra mek ▁e ma nak ▁ziz ki on ▁Sa lo mo ni ▁lau ▁to na ▁in gu ru ▁ur re ▁.
PRED:	King Solomon also built three days for three days .
GOLD:	Nevertheless , Hiram paid Solomon 9,000 pounds of gold .

ID:	884
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁Moi se sen ▁bi tar tez ▁a gin du ▁be za la ▁, ▁is ra el dar rek ▁zotz ▁e gi nez ▁i zen da tu ▁ziz ki e ten ▁le bi tar rei ▁hi ri ak ▁, ▁her ri - lur ▁e ta ▁guz ti ▁.
PRED:	So the people of Israel followed the Lord 's instructions , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	So the Israelites obeyed the Lord 's command to Moses and assigned these towns and pasturelands to the Levites by casting sacred lots .

ID:	885
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁Li bu ru ▁San tu ak ▁u me tan dik ▁e za gu nak ▁di tu zu la ▁. ▁Li bu ru ▁San tu ek ▁e man go ▁di zu te ▁Kris to ▁Je su sen ga na ko ▁si nes me na ren ▁bi dez ▁sal ba me ne ra ▁da ra man ▁ja kin du ri a ▁.
PRED:	And you will know that the Scriptures have taken away from the Scriptures . And you will know that the Scriptures of Christ Jesus will be saved .
GOLD:	You have been taught the holy Scriptures from childhood , and they have given you the wisdom to receive the salvation that comes by trusting in Christ Jesus .

ID:	886
INPUT:	▁« ▁Sar ▁zai tez te ▁a te ▁es tu tik ▁»
PRED:	The Song of Jesus
GOLD:	Parable of the Yeast

ID:	887
INPUT:	▁Bi gar ren ▁i kus ka ri a ren ▁a zal pe na
PRED:	A Vision of Coming Judgment
GOLD:	Gabriel Explains the Vision

ID:	888
INPUT:	▁Is ra e li ▁bu ruz ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁hau ▁di o ▁: ▁E gun ▁o so an ▁lu za tu ak ▁ni tu en ▁es ku ak ▁, ▁her ri ▁si nes go gor ▁e ta ▁er re bel de a ga na ▁.
PRED:	Then Elijah said to Elijah , “ I will hand over all the people of Israel , and I will punish them for their sins .
GOLD:	But regarding Israel , God said , “ All day long I opened my arms to them , but they were disobedient and rebellious . ”

ID:	889
INPUT:	▁Jain koz ko ▁i kus ka ri tan ▁Is ra el ▁lur ral de ra ▁e ra man ▁e ta ▁men di ▁ga rai ▁ba ten ▁gai ne an ▁u tzi ▁nin du en ▁, ▁e ta ▁ha ren ▁gai lur re an ▁, ▁he go al de ra ▁, ▁e rai kin - mul tzo ▁bat ▁ze go en ▁, ▁hi ri ▁ba ten ▁an tze ko a ▁.
PRED:	When I saw that the land of Israel was in the hill country of the hill country , the rock of the Lord , the God of Israel , was living in the hill country .
GOLD:	In a vision from God he took me to the land of Israel and set me down on a very high mountain . From there I could see toward the south what appeared to be a city .

ID:	890
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁min tzo ▁bat ▁en tzun ▁nu en ▁, ▁ni ri ▁e sa ten ▁: ▁“ ▁E a ▁, ▁Ped ro ▁, ▁hil ▁e ta ▁jan ▁” ▁.
PRED:	Then I heard a voice saying to them , ‘ Peter , eat and eat it . '
GOLD:	And I heard a voice say , ‘ Get up , Peter ; kill and eat them . '

ID:	891
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁a paiz ▁e do ▁pro fe ta ▁na hiz ▁her ri ko ren ▁ba tek ▁“ ▁Jau na ren ▁me zu a ▁( ▁za ma ▁) ▁” ▁e sa ten ▁ba du ▁, ▁zi gor tu ▁e gin go ▁di tut ▁be ra ▁e ta ▁be re ▁e txe ko ak ▁.
PRED:	And one of the leading priests and prophets , say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will punish the Temple of the Lord , and I will punish them . '
GOLD:	“ If any prophet , priest , or anyone else says , ‘ I have a prophecy from the Lord , ' I will punish that person along with his entire family .

ID:	892
INPUT:	▁« ▁Hau ▁di ot ▁nik ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁Zuk ▁jo ka tu ▁du zun ▁be za la xe ▁jo ka tu ko ▁dut ▁nik ▁e re ▁zu re kin ▁, ▁zi na ▁mes pre txa tu ▁e ta ▁i tu na ▁hau tsi ▁bai tu zu ▁.
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Because you have broken my covenant with you , I will break my covenant with you .
GOLD:	“ Now this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will give you what you deserve , for you have taken your solemn vows lightly by breaking your covenant .

ID:	893
INPUT:	▁Lan ▁e gi ten ▁du e na ri ▁, ▁sa ri a ▁ez ▁zai o ▁do hain ▁huts ▁be za la ▁e ma ten ▁, ▁zor ▁zai on ▁zer bait ▁be za la ▁bai zik ▁.
PRED:	It is like a tree that makes you think of a person who does n't have a reward .
GOLD:	When people work , their wages are not a gift , but something they have earned .

ID:	894
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁al txor ▁ba li o tsu ▁hau ▁buz ti nez ko ▁on tzi tan ▁da ra ma gu ▁, ▁gar bi ▁a ger ▁da din ▁ho nen bes te ko ▁in dar ra ▁Jain ko a ren gan dik ▁da tor re la ▁e ta ▁ez ▁gu re gan dik ▁.
PRED:	But as a clay pot of clay , it will be a clay pot . It will be a strong spirit that comes from the power of God .
GOLD:	We now have this light shining in our hearts , but we ourselves are like fragile clay jars containing this great treasure . This makes it clear that our great power is from God , not from ourselves .

ID:	895
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁gon bi da tu ▁zu e na ri ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁« ▁Baz ka ri ▁e do ▁a fa ri ren ▁bat ▁e ma te an ▁, ▁ez ▁gon bi da tu ▁zeu re ▁a dis ki de ak ▁, ▁ez ta ▁se ni de ▁, ▁a hai de ▁e do ▁au zo ko ▁a be ra tsak ▁e re ▁; ▁ze ren ▁be rai ek ▁e re ▁gon bi da tu ▁e gin go ▁zin tuz ke te ▁, ▁e ta ▁, ▁hor re la ▁, ▁or dai na ▁har tu ko ▁ze nu ke ▁.
PRED:	She invited her to the guests and said , “ If you have a gift , do n't invite your brothers or sisters , your brothers and sisters , or your relatives , do n't invite your relatives or your relatives , or you will be free .
GOLD:	Then he turned to his host . “ When you put on a luncheon or a banquet , ” he said , “ do n't invite your friends , brothers , relatives , and rich neighbors . For they will invite you back , and that will be your only reward .

ID:	896
INPUT:	▁zu en ▁le hen - se me ak ▁o ro ▁e ta ▁le hen ▁a be re - ku me ▁ar rak ▁Jau na ri ▁es kai ni ko ▁diz ki o zu e ▁, ▁be ra re nak ▁bai ti ra ▁:
PRED:	You must present all the firstborn sons and firstborn sons as a pleasing aroma to the Lord . This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	you must present all firstborn sons and firstborn male animals to the Lord , for they belong to him .

ID:	897
INPUT:	▁Zen tzu du nak ▁men de ra tu ▁e gi ten ▁du ▁ha ser re a ▁, ▁o ho ra gar ri ▁zai o ▁i rai na ▁kon tu an ▁ez ▁har tze a ▁.
PRED:	A person who builds a foundation on the head of a fool , but it is not secret .
GOLD:	Sensible people control their temper ; they earn respect by overlooking wrongs .

ID:	898
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁« ▁Da ki zu en ▁be za la ▁, ▁ju du ▁ba tek ▁de be ka tu a ▁dau ka ▁a tzer ri tar re kin ▁i no la ko ▁har re ma nik ▁i za te a ▁na hiz ▁hai en ▁e txe an ▁sar tze a ▁. ▁Bai na ▁ni ri ▁Jain ko ak ▁e ra ku tsi ▁dit ▁ez ▁du da la ▁i nor ▁lo hi ▁e do ▁ku tsa tu tzat ▁har tu ▁be har ▁.
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ If anyone knew that the Jews are not guilty of any foreigners living in the house of God , they will be defiled by the idols of the Jews . But anyone who eats their idols , they will be defiled by my disgrace .
GOLD:	Peter told them , “ You know it is against our laws for a Jewish man to enter a Gentile home like this or to associate with you . But God has shown me that I should no longer think of anyone as impure or unclean .

ID:	899
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁i tu na ▁i ra gar ri ▁zi zu en ▁, ▁be te ▁be har ▁ze ni tuz ten ▁ha mar ▁a gin du ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁bi ▁har lau za tan ▁i da tzi ▁zi tu en ▁.
PRED:	The Lord gave them these instructions to you , and he gave them ten pieces of gold .
GOLD:	He proclaimed his covenant — the Ten Commandments — which he commanded you to keep , and which he wrote on two stone tablets .

ID:	900
INPUT:	▁Sa mu e len ▁jai o tza ▁e ta ▁haur tza ro a
PRED:	The Birth of Samuel
GOLD:	Hannah 's Prayer for a Son

ID:	901
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ▁pro ba tu ko ▁zi tu en ▁Jau nak ▁is ra el dar rak ▁e ta ▁ja kin go ▁be rai en ▁gu ra so ei ▁Moi se sen ▁bi tar tez ▁e ma ni ko ▁a gin du ak ▁be te tzen ▁zi tuz ten ▁a la ▁ez ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord had commanded through Moses and Aaron and his ancestors , and they did not obey all the commands of Moses .
GOLD:	These people were left to test the Israelites — to see whether they would obey the commands the Lord had given to their ancestors through Moses .

ID:	902
INPUT:	▁Dan ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁se me a ▁: ▁Hu <unk> ▁.
PRED:	The sons of Dan were Dan and Naphtali .
GOLD:	The son of Dan was Hushim .

ID:	903
INPUT:	▁On do ren ▁, ▁Da vi dek ▁o toitz ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁: ▁— ▁Jau na ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁Jain ko a ▁, ▁Saul ▁Kei la ra ▁da tor re la ▁e ta ▁ni re ga tik ▁hi ri a ▁hon da tze ko ▁as mo tan ▁de la ▁en tzun ▁dut ▁nik ▁, ▁zu re ▁mor roi ▁ho nek ▁.
PRED:	Then David prayed , “ O Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , will come to Keilah , and I will listen to you . ”
GOLD:	Then David prayed , “ O Lord , God of Israel , I have heard that Saul is planning to come and destroy Keilah because I am here .

ID:	904
INPUT:	▁Haur ▁bat ▁jai o ▁zai gu ▁, ▁Jain ko ak ▁se me ▁bat ▁e man ▁di <unk> ro ni ▁e zar ri ▁zai o ▁a gin pi de a ▁, ▁e ta ▁ho ne la ▁dei tzen ▁di o te ▁: ▁« ▁Kon tsei la ri ▁mi ra gar ri ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁in dar tsu ▁, ▁Ai ta ▁be ti e re ko ▁, ▁Er re ge ▁ba ke - e mai le ▁» ▁.
PRED:	A child is born to him , and he will give you a son . He will shout , “ He will call you the Son of God , and he will give you the strength of the Father . ”
GOLD:	The boots of the warriorand the uniforms bloodstained by warwill all be burned.They will be fuel for the fire .

ID:	905
INPUT:	▁E pai le ek ▁ze hatz - me hatz ▁i ker tu ko ▁du te ▁au zi a ▁; ▁i kus ten ▁ba da ▁le ku ko a ▁fal tsu a ▁de la ▁e ta ▁her ri tar ra ▁ge zur rez ▁sa la tu ▁du e la ▁,
PRED:	The priest must examine the entire community of Israel . If he finds that a person is a liar , he must pronounce the person ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	The judges must investigate the case thoroughly . If the accuser has brought false charges against his fellow Israelite ,

ID:	906
INPUT:	▁Ma da ri ka tu a ▁Jau na ▁mai te ▁ez ▁du e na ▁! ▁Ma ra na <unk> ▁! ▁( ▁Za toz ▁, ▁Jau na ▁! ▁) ▁.
PRED:	O Lord , I cry out to you , O Lord ! Come out ! Come out ! ”
GOLD:	If anyone does not love the Lord , that person is cursed . Our Lord , come !

ID:	907
INPUT:	▁A se tze rai no ▁jan ▁zu ten ▁de nek ▁, ▁e ta ▁gel di tu ta ko ▁hon dar rez ▁ha ma bi ▁sas ki ▁be te ▁zi tuz ten ▁.
PRED:	They ate as much as they sat down , and the large baskets of leftover food .
GOLD:	They all ate as much as they wanted , and afterward , the disciples picked up twelve baskets of leftovers .

ID:	908
INPUT:	▁Big bai re nak <unk> ▁;
PRED:	The family of Zaccai760
GOLD:	The family of Bigvai2,056

ID:	909
INPUT:	▁A mon dar ren ▁er re ge a ri ▁e ra so ▁e ta ▁na gu si tu ▁e gin ▁zi tzai on ▁; ▁ur te ▁har tan ▁e ta ▁hur ren go ▁bi e tan ▁a mon dar rek ▁zer ga ▁han di a ▁or dain du ▁be har ▁i zan ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁hi ru ▁to na ▁zi lar ▁, ▁hi ru ▁mi la ▁to na ▁ga ri ▁e ta ▁bes te ▁hor ren bes te ▁ga ra gar ▁.
PRED:	At that time the Ammonites began to attack the king of Ammon . He went to the threshing floor of Ammon and paid a ransom for three years . He said to the Ammonites , “ Let 's attack the city of Ammon . ”
GOLD:	Jotham went to war against the Ammonites and conquered them . Over the next three years he received from them an annual tribute of 7,500 pounds of silver , 50,000 bushels of wheat , and 50,000 bushels of barley .

ID:	910
INPUT:	▁Ha fa raim ▁, ▁Xi on ▁, ▁A na ha rat ▁,
PRED:	Dan left Shiloh , Shiloh ,
GOLD:	Hapharaim , Shion , Anaharath ,

ID:	911
INPUT:	▁E sai o zu ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁ba ke - i tu na ▁e gi ten ▁du da la ▁be ra re kin ▁:
PRED:	Tell them , ‘ This is what is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	Now tell him that I am making my special covenant of peace with him .

ID:	912
INPUT:	▁bai ta ▁a ta ri ▁in gu ru ko ▁zu ta be ak ▁be ren ▁oi ne kin ▁, ▁he so lak ▁e ta ▁so kak ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	For the pegs of the courtyard were all around , and their bases .
GOLD:	They were also responsible for the posts of the courtyard and all their bases , pegs , and ropes .

ID:	913
INPUT:	▁Pro fe ta ▁bat ▁pro fe ta ▁de la ko ▁o nar tzen ▁du e nak ▁pro fe ta ri ▁zor ▁zai on ▁sa ri a ▁ja so ko ▁du ▁; ▁e ta ▁gi zon ▁zu zen ▁bat ▁zu ze na ▁de la ko ▁o nar tzen ▁du e nak ▁gi zon ▁zu ze na ri ▁zor ▁zai on ▁sa ri a ▁ja so ko ▁du ▁;
PRED:	But anyone who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a liar . He is a liar . He is a reward for those who are honest person .
GOLD:	If you receive a prophet as one who speaks for God , you will be given the same reward as a prophet . And if you receive righteous people because of their righteousness , you will be given a reward like theirs .

ID:	914
INPUT:	▁Her ri ko ▁jen de ▁xe he a ▁bai zik ▁ez ▁zu en ▁u tzi ▁, ▁a lor rak ▁e ta ▁ma has ti ak ▁lan du ▁zi tza ten ▁.
PRED:	But the people were not poor , but they did n't plant vineyards and vineyards .
GOLD:	But Nebuzaradan allowed some of the poorest people to stay behind to care for the vineyards and fields .

ID:	915
INPUT:	▁O dol ja ri o a ▁zu en ▁e ma ku me a ▁e ta ▁bu ru za gi a ren ▁a la ba
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Man
GOLD:	Jesus Heals in Response to Faith

ID:	916
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁piz tu ▁on do ren ▁, ▁aur re tik ▁jo an go ▁na tzai zu e ▁Ga li le a ra ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But you will be raised from the dead , and you will go to Galilee . ”
GOLD:	But after I am raised from the dead , I will go ahead of you to Galilee and meet you there . ”

ID:	917
INPUT:	▁E ra ba ki ta ko ▁e gu ne an ▁, ▁He ro de sek ▁, ▁er re ge - jan tzi tan ▁e ta ▁be re ▁aul ki an ▁e se ri rik ▁, ▁hi tzal di a ▁e gin ▁zi en ▁.
PRED:	When Herod was sitting on the king 's throne , he sat down on the throne and sat on the throne of the king .
GOLD:	and an appointment with Herod was granted . When the day arrived , Herod put on his royal robes , sat on his throne , and made a speech to them .

ID:	918
INPUT:	▁E gi a ▁e san ▁, ▁ez ▁dut ▁au sar di a rik ▁be ren ▁bu ru ak ▁go rai pa tzen ▁di tuz ten ▁ho ri en ▁pa re ko ▁e do ▁ki de ko tzat ▁neu re ▁bu ru a ▁e ma te ko ▁. ▁Hor re la ko ▁ho ri ek ▁zen tzu ▁o na ▁gal du ▁du te ▁: ▁le he nen go ▁be ren ▁bu ru a ▁har tzen ▁du te ▁neur ri tzat ▁e ta ▁, ▁ge ro ▁, ▁neur ri ▁hor re kin ▁ba li oz ta tzen ▁di tuz te ▁be ren ▁bu ru ak ▁.
PRED:	I tell you the truth , I do n't need to pay attention to these words . This is the most important of these things , and it is too wonderful for those who have enough to pay attention to their heads .
GOLD:	Oh , do n't worry ; we would n't dare say that we are as wonderful as these other men who tell you how important they are ! But they are only comparing themselves with each other , using themselves as the standard of measurement . How ignorant !

ID:	919
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁bes te rik ▁fro ga tu ▁na hi ▁ba du zu e ▁, ▁e ka tzu e ▁ho na ▁zeu en ▁a nai a ▁gaz te e na ▁. ▁Bi en ▁bi tar te an ▁, ▁a la ▁fa ra oi a ▁! ▁, ▁ez ▁za re te ▁he men dik ▁a te ra ko ▁.
PRED:	And if you refuse to listen to me , do n't let your brother go out to Pharaoh 's brother , you must not leave him . ”
GOLD:	This is how I will test your story . I swear by the life of Pharaoh that you will never leave Egypt unless your youngest brother comes here !

ID:	920
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁hai en ▁he zur rak ▁Ja be xe ko ▁ta ma rin do a ren ▁pe an ▁e hor tzi ▁zi tuz ten ▁, ▁e ta ▁zaz pi ▁e gu nez ▁ba rau ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	Then Jacob picked up the bones of Jacob 's neck and gave it to him seven pieces .
GOLD:	Then they took their bones and buried them beneath the tamarisk tree at Jabesh , and they fasted for seven days .

ID:	921
INPUT:	▁Jau na ▁er res pe ta tze ak ▁kon fi an tza ▁o so a ▁sor tzen ▁du ▁, ▁e ta ▁on do ren go ak ▁e re ▁hor re tan ▁ba bes tu ko ▁di ra ▁.
PRED:	Fear of the Lord is a fortress of honor , and he destroys the nations .
GOLD:	Those who fear the Lord are secure ; he will be a refuge for their children .

ID:	922
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁se me ak ▁ai ta ▁i rain tzen ▁du ▁, ▁a la ba ▁a ma ren ▁aur ka ▁a te ra tzen ▁da e ta ▁er rai na ▁a ma gi nar re ba ren ▁aur <unk> ▁be re ▁e txe ko ak ▁di tu ▁e tsai ▁.
PRED:	For now your father 's daughter is like a woman who gets out against her , and she is very beautiful .
GOLD:	For the son despises his father.The daughter defies her mother.The daughter-in-law defies her mother-in-law.Your enemies are right in your own household !

ID:	923
INPUT:	▁i tsas ▁hon dar ra ▁be zain ▁u ga ri i zan go ▁li ra te ke ▁zu re ▁on do ren go ak ▁, ▁hon dar - a le ak ▁be zain ba tzu re ▁se me - a la bak ▁; ▁hai en ▁i ze na ▁ez ▁li tza te ke ▁sun tsi tu ko ▁, ▁i noiz ▁e re ▁ez ni re ▁aur re tik ▁e za ba tu ko ▁» ▁.
PRED:	They will be as numerous as the sand on the seashore , and their children will be as numerous as the sand on the seashore . ”
GOLD:	Your descendants would have been like the sands along the seashore — too many to count ! There would have been no need for your destruction , or for cutting off your family name . ”

ID:	924
INPUT:	▁Sar des ko ▁e liz ▁el kar te a ri
PRED:	Paul Preaches in Antioch of Syria
GOLD:	The Message to the Church in Sardis

ID:	925
INPUT:	▁« ▁Zu re ▁se ni de ▁ba tek ▁be ka tu ▁e gi ten ▁ba du ▁, ▁zo az ▁be ra ren ga na ▁e ta ▁zen tza ra zi ▁ba kar re an ▁. ▁Ja ra mon ▁e gi ten ▁ba di zu ▁, ▁i ra ba zi a ▁du zu ▁se ni de a ▁.
PRED:	“ If you refuse to obey your fellow brothers and sisters , go to the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	“ If another believer sins against you , go privately and point out the offense . If the other person listens and confesses it , you have won that person back .

ID:	926
INPUT:	▁Jo ra mek <unk> re ra ▁jo ▁zu en ▁be re ▁gu da - gur di ▁guz ti e kin ▁. ▁Gau ez ▁jai ki ▁e ta ▁se ti a tzen ▁a ri ▁zi tzaiz ki on ▁e dom dar rak ▁e ta ▁hau en ▁gu da - gur di e tan ▁zeu den ▁bu ru za gi ak ▁ga rai tu ▁zi tu en ▁ar ren ▁, ▁Ju da ko ▁gu da ri ek ▁i hes ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁nork ▁be re ▁e txo la ra ▁.
PRED:	So Jehoram went out to his palace with his brothers and all his men . His troops went out to fight against Judah and Benjamin . His troops chased them into battle , and they fled to Judah .
GOLD:	So Jehoram went with all his chariots to attack the town of Zair . The Edomites surrounded him and his chariot commanders , but he went out at night and attacked them under cover of darkness . But Jehoram 's army deserted him and fled to their homes .

ID:	927
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁O rain dik ▁pix ka ▁ba te an ▁ar gi a ▁zeu en ▁ar te an ▁du zu e ▁; ▁i bi li ▁ar gi a ▁du zu en ▁bi tar te an ▁, ▁i lun pe ak ▁har ra pa ▁ez ▁zai tza ten ▁, ▁i lun pe tan ▁da bi le nak ▁ez ▁bai ta ki ▁no ra ▁do an ▁.
PRED:	Jesus told them , “ If you have enough food for yourself , you will go out into darkness , but you can not hide in darkness .
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ My light will shine for you just a little longer . Walk in the light while you can , so the darkness will not overtake you . Those who walk in the darkness can not see where they are going .

ID:	928
INPUT:	▁Hor ▁du zu ▁Ge ra - ren ▁se me ▁Xi mei ▁e re ▁, ▁Ba hu rim go ▁ben ja min dar ra ▁; ▁i zu gar riz ko ▁ma da ri ka zi o ak ▁bo ta ▁ziz ki dan ▁Ma ha nai me ra ▁nin do a la rik ▁. ▁A la bai na ▁, ▁be ra ▁e re ▁e tor ri ▁zi tzai dan ▁ge ro ▁bi la ▁Jor da ne ra ▁, ▁e ta ▁nik ▁Jau na ren ga tik ▁zin ▁e gin ▁ni on ▁ez ▁nu e la ▁ez pa taz ▁hil ko ▁.
PRED:	Then you sent a message to the tribe of Benjamin , who was killed by the Israelites who were left in the land of Benjamin . I threw them down from the Jordan River to the land of Benjamin , and I would not kill you .
GOLD:	“ And remember Shimei son of Gera , the man from Bahurim in Benjamin . He cursed me with a terrible curse as I was fleeing to Mahanaim . When he came down to meet me at the Jordan River , I swore by the Lord that I would not kill him .

ID:	929
INPUT:	▁Ho ri ▁i ku si ▁zu en ▁gi zon ▁ba tek ▁a di e ra zi ▁zi on ▁Jo a bi ▁: ▁— ▁Ab sa lom ▁ar te on do ▁ba te tik ▁zin tzi lik ▁i ku si ▁dut ▁.
PRED:	When Absalom saw a man coming , Absalom said to Absalom , “ Absalom is Absalom ! ”
GOLD:	One of David 's men saw what had happened and told Joab , “ I saw Absalom dangling from a great tree . ”

ID:	930
INPUT:	▁Ha mar ▁e gun ▁in gu ru ren ▁bu ru an ▁, ▁he ri o tzaz ▁jo ▁zu en ▁Jau nak ▁Na bal ▁e ta ▁hil ▁e gin ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	At that time the Lord went to the place where he died .
GOLD:	About ten days later , the Lord struck him , and he died .

ID:	931
INPUT:	▁« ▁Er res pe ta tu ▁nik ▁a gin du ri ko ▁a tse den - e gu na ▁e ta ▁i zan ▁be gi ru ne ▁ni re ▁san tu te gi a ri ▁. ▁Neu ▁naiz ▁Jau na ▁.
PRED:	“ Be careful to obey my regulations and keep my Sabbath days . I am the Lord . I am the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Keep my Sabbath days of rest , and show reverence toward my sanctuary . I am the Lord .

ID:	932
INPUT:	▁Je ro bo a men ▁se me a ren ▁he ri o tza
PRED:	The Death of Jeroboam
GOLD:	Ahijah 's Prophecy against Jeroboam

ID:	933
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁be rai en ▁men pe ▁jar tzen ▁ez ▁ba za ra ▁, ▁hi ri a ▁ba bi lo ni ar ren ▁es ku ▁e ro ri ko ▁da ▁e ta ▁er re ▁e gin go ▁du te ▁, ▁e ta ▁zeu ▁e re ▁ez ▁za ra ▁lib ra tu ko ▁hai en ▁es ku e ta tik ▁.
PRED:	But if you refuse to submit to Babylon , you will be defeated by the Babylonians , and you will be free from your power .
GOLD:	But if you refuse to surrender , you will not escape ! This city will be handed over to the Babylonians , and they will burn it to the ground . ' ”

ID:	934
INPUT:	▁Bor ro ka ▁has te an ▁, ▁Ga la a de ko ▁ar du ra du nak ▁To be ra ▁jo an ▁zi ren ▁Jef te ren ▁bi la ▁,
PRED:	When they arrived at Gilead , they went out to meet him in the towns of Gilead .
GOLD:	When the Ammonites attacked , the elders of Gilead sent for Jephthah in the land of Tob .

ID:	935
INPUT:	▁Ze ru ko ▁gu da ros te ek ▁, ▁li ho ▁zu ri ▁gar biz ▁jan tzi rik ▁, ▁zal di ▁gai ne an ▁jar rai tzen ▁zi o ten ▁.
PRED:	Then the captain of the guard was pure and put on his robe .
GOLD:	The armies of heaven , dressed in the finest of pure white linen , followed him on white horses .

ID:	936
INPUT:	▁Da vi dek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁Na ta ni ▁: ▁— ▁Be ka tu ▁e gin ▁dut ▁Jau na ren ▁aur <unk> ta nek ▁Da vi di ▁: ▁— ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁ha la ▁e re ▁, ▁bar ka tzen ▁di zu ▁be ka tu a ▁. ▁Ez ▁za ra ▁hil ko ▁.
PRED:	“ My lord , ” David replied , “ I will tell you what the Lord says to David , ‘ I will kill you . ' ”
GOLD:	Then David confessed to Nathan , “ I have sinned against the Lord. ” Nathan replied , “ Yes , but the Lord has forgiven you , and you wo n't die for this sin .

ID:	937
INPUT:	▁Is ra el dar re kin ▁ba ke - hi tzar me na ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁hi ri ▁ba kar ra ▁hi bi ar rak ▁bi zi ▁zi re ne ko ▁Ga ba on ▁i zan ▁zen ▁. ▁Bes te ▁guz ti ak ▁ar men ▁in dar rez ▁har tu ▁zi tuz ten ▁.
PRED:	He also made a covenant with the people of Israel . He also made a covenant with him , and he also gave them all the towns of Gilead .
GOLD:	No one in this region made peace with the Israelites except the Hivites of Gibeon . All the others were defeated .

ID:	938
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Moi se sek ▁oi hu ▁e gin ▁zi on ▁Jau na ri ▁. ▁E ta ▁Jau nak ▁zu haix ka ▁bat ▁e ra ku tsi ▁zi on ▁. ▁Moi se sek ▁zu haix ka ▁u re ta ra ▁jaur ti ▁e ta ▁u ra ▁ge za tu ▁e gin <unk> ki ▁har tan ▁pro ba tu ▁zi tu en ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁e ta ▁a rau ▁e ta ▁u sa di o ak ▁e zar ri ▁ziz ki en ▁.
PRED:	So Moses cried out to Moses , “ As surely as the Lord lives , the Lord , the people of the tribe of Levi , as the Lord had commanded Moses . He threw them into the water , and the Lord gave them victory over them .
GOLD:	So Moses cried out to the Lord for help , and the Lord showed him a piece of wood . Moses threw it into the water , and this made the water good to drink.It was there at Marah that the Lord set before them the following decree as a standard to test their faithfulness to him .

ID:	939
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁zu ▁hil ▁na hi an ▁da bil tzan ▁e ta ▁bel dur rik ▁han di e na ▁di e zun ▁e tsai en ▁es ku ▁u tzi ko ▁, ▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁er re ge ▁Na bu ko do no sor ▁e ta ▁be ra ren ▁gu da ros te a ren ▁es ku ▁, ▁a le gi a ▁.
PRED:	And when you want to kill you , you will be afraid of the enemy of the king of Babylon , king of Babylon , king of Babylon , will hand over the army of Babylon .
GOLD:	I will hand you over to those who seek to kill you , those you so desperately fear — to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon and the mighty Babylonian army .

ID:	940
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁Zi li zi a ko ▁e ta ▁Pan fi li a ko ▁i tsa so e tan ▁bar re na ▁, ▁Li zi a ko ▁Mi ra ▁hi ri ra ▁i ri tsi ▁gi nen ▁.
PRED:	They traveled through the Red Sea and camped in the Dead Sea .
GOLD:	Keeping to the open sea , we passed along the coast of Cilicia and Pamphylia , landing at Myra , in the province of Lycia .

ID:	941
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Moi se sek ▁, ▁be re ▁Jain ko ▁Jau na ren ▁su mi na ▁ba re tu ▁na hiz ▁, ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁« ▁Jau na ▁, ▁no la ▁jar ri ko ▁za ra ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁ha ser re - su tan ▁, ▁hain ▁a hal men ▁han diz ▁E gip to tik ▁a te ra ▁du zun ▁zeu re ▁her ri ▁ho nen ▁aur ka ▁?
PRED:	Then Moses said to the Lord , “ If you are angry with the fire , why are you angry with you ? Why do you think you are so angry ?
GOLD:	But Moses tried to pacify the Lord his God . “ O Lord ! ” he said . “ Why are you so angry with your own people whom you brought from the land of Egypt with such great power and such a strong hand ?

ID:	942
INPUT:	▁Mai te ▁du zu e ▁Je su ▁Kris to ▁, ▁gaur dai no ▁i ku si ▁ez ▁du zu en ▁ar ren ▁. ▁E ta ▁, ▁i ku si ▁ga be ▁be ra ren gan ▁si ne tsiz ▁, ▁e sa ne zin ▁a ha la ko ▁po zez ▁, ▁poz ▁dis ti ra tsuz ▁, ▁be te ak ▁zau de te ▁ja da nik ▁,
PRED:	You have seen faith in Christ Jesus , and you have never seen him . Do n't believe in him , so that you can not be clothed with joy .
GOLD:	You love him even though you have never seen him . Though you do not see him now , you trust him ; and you rejoice with a glorious , inexpressible joy .

ID:	943
INPUT:	▁Gaiz to ak ▁har ro ke ri az ▁e ra so tzen ▁di o ▁er ru kar ri a ri ▁, ▁as ma tzen ▁di tu en ▁az pi ke ri ez ▁dau ka ▁har ra pa tu a ▁.
PRED:	The wicked are trapped by their evil schemes , but they are trapped by their own schemes .
GOLD:	The wicked arrogantly hunt down the poor.Let them be caught in the evil they plan for others .

ID:	944
INPUT:	▁Bi de tik ▁o ker tzen ▁de na ▁go gor ▁zen tza ra zi ko ▁du te ▁; ▁zen tza raz pe na ▁gor ro ta tzen ▁du e na ▁hil ▁e gin go ▁da ▁.
PRED:	Those who hate evil will discipline them ; those who hate them will die .
GOLD:	Whoever abandons the right path will be severely disciplined ; whoever hates correction will die .

ID:	945
INPUT:	▁Ez pa tak ▁jo ▁e ta ▁ez ▁di o ▁e zer ▁e gi ten ▁, ▁ez ta ▁lan tzak ▁, ▁az ko nak ▁e ta ▁ge zi ak ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	They do n't plant nothing but do n't even know what they do .
GOLD:	“ When it sneezes , it flashes light ! Its eyes are like the red of dawn .

ID:	946
INPUT:	▁Bi zi ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁Jain ko a ▁e tor ri ko ▁den ▁e gu na ren ▁zain ▁e ta ▁lan ▁e gin ▁le hen bai le hen ▁i rits ▁da din ▁. ▁E gun ▁har tan ▁, ▁su tan ▁de se gin go ▁di ra ▁ze ru ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁mun du a ren ▁o sa gai ak ▁kis ka li ta ▁e ze rez tu ko ▁di ra ▁.
PRED:	And if we are coming to life , we will be ready to do what is good and today . That is why it will be thrown into the fire of the heavens and thrown into the fire .
GOLD:	looking forward to the day of God and hurrying it along . On that day , he will set the heavens on fire , and the elements will melt away in the flames .

ID:	947
INPUT:	▁Be re ▁be gi - bis tan ▁bo ta ra zi ▁zi tu en ▁Ba a len ▁al da re ak ▁, ▁be rau en ▁gai ne an ▁zeu den ▁in tsen tsu - on tzi ak ▁hau tsiz ▁; ▁zu toin ▁sak ra tu ▁e ta ▁zu rez ko ▁na hiz ▁me ta lez ko ▁i do lo ak ▁xe ha tu ▁e ta ▁pus kak ▁ha la ko ei ▁sak ri fi zi o ak ▁es kain tzen ▁ziz ki e te nen ▁hi lo bi ▁gai ne an ▁bar rei a tu ▁zi tu en ▁.
PRED:	He removed the Asherah poles from the pagan shrines and burned incense on the Asherah poles . He placed them on the Asherah poles and placed them on the Asherah poles of Baal . He placed them on the Asherah pole and placed them on the Asherah pole .
GOLD:	He ordered that the altars of Baal be demolished and that the incense altars which stood above them be broken down . He also made sure that the Asherah poles , the carved idols , and the cast images were smashed and scattered over the graves of those who had sacrificed to them .

ID:	948
INPUT:	▁Nor bai tek ▁zer ga tik ▁as ka tzen ▁du zu en ▁gal de tu ko ▁ba li zu e ▁, ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁“ ▁Jau nak ▁be har ▁du ▁” ▁» ▁.
PRED:	If someone asks you , ‘ Who is you ? ' And the Lord replied , ‘ The Lord is saying , '
GOLD:	If anyone asks , ‘ Why are you untying that colt ? ' just say , ‘ The Lord needs it . ' ”

ID:	949
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁Pau lok ▁, ▁Pan fi li an ▁al de ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁la ne an ▁la gun du ▁ez ▁zi en ▁gi zo na ▁ber ri ro ▁be re kin ▁har tze a ▁ez ▁zu en ▁on gi ▁i kus ten ▁.
PRED:	But Paul left Beersheba and traveled with them , and he went with them .
GOLD:	But Paul disagreed strongly , since John Mark had deserted them in Pamphylia and had not continued with them in their work .

ID:	950
INPUT:	▁Jo sek ▁e ta ▁be re ▁ai ta ren ▁fa mi li a ko ek ▁E gip ton ▁bi zi tzen ▁jar rai tu ▁zu ten ▁. ▁E hun ▁e ta ▁ha mar ▁ur te ▁bi zi ▁i zan ▁zen ▁Jo se ▁,
PRED:	Joseph lived in Egypt , and he lived in Egypt . He lived in Egypt , and he lived in Egypt .
GOLD:	So Joseph and his brothers and their families continued to live in Egypt . Joseph lived to the age of 110 .

ID:	951
INPUT:	▁Kan ta ▁Jau na ri ▁, ▁gau za ▁har ri gar ri ak ▁e gin ▁bai ti tu ▁; ▁mun du ▁o so an ▁ja kin ▁be za te ha ren ▁ber ri ▁.
PRED:	Sing a new song to the Lord ; it is good to all the earth .
GOLD:	Sing to the Lord , for he has done wonderful things.Make known his praise around the world .

ID:	952
INPUT:	▁Be ka tu ▁e gi ten ▁du e na ▁, ▁ho ri ▁hil ko ▁da ▁; ▁se me ak ▁ez ▁di tu ▁ai ta ren ▁er ru a ren ▁on do re nak ▁ja san ▁be har ko ▁, ▁ez ta ▁ai tak ▁e re ▁se me a re nak ▁. ▁Gi zon ▁zin tzo a ri ▁be re ▁zin tzo ta su na ren ▁or dai na ▁e man go ▁zai o ▁, ▁gaiz to a ri ▁be re ▁gaiz ta ke ri a re na ▁.
PRED:	The righteous will die , and their children will not die . They will die , but their father will not be punished . But the Son of Man is full of the righteous , but the righteous will be punished .
GOLD:	The person who sins is the one who will die . The child will not be punished for the parent 's sins , and the parent will not be punished for the child 's sins . Righteous people will be rewarded for their own righteous behavior , and wicked people will be punished for their own wickedness .

ID:	953
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁es pi ri tu ▁gaiz to ak ▁e ran tzun ▁zi en ▁: ▁« ▁E za gu tzen ▁dut ▁Je sus ▁e ta ▁ba da kit ▁Pau lo ▁nor ▁den ▁. ▁Bai na ▁nor ▁za re te ▁zu ek ▁? ▁»
PRED:	But the evil spirit replied , “ If I do n't know Paul , I am the one who is you ? ”
GOLD:	But one time when they tried it , the evil spirit replied , “ I know Jesus , and I know Paul , but who are you ? ”

ID:	954
INPUT:	▁Dei ▁de gi zut ▁: ▁sal ba ▁na za zu ▁, ▁e ta ▁be te ko ▁di tut ▁zu re ▁xe da pe nak ▁.
PRED:	I pray to you , O Lord , and I will obey your laws .
GOLD:	I cry out to you ; rescue me , that I may obey your laws .

ID:	955
INPUT:	▁Or duz ▁ge roz tik ▁, ▁la run bat - bez pe ran ▁, ▁i lun tzen ▁ha si ▁be zain ▁las ter ▁, ▁Je ru sa lem go ▁a te ak ▁ix te ko ▁a gin du ▁nu en ▁, ▁e ta ▁la run bat - bi ha ra mu na ▁ar te ▁ez ▁i re ki tze ko ▁. ▁E ta ▁ni re ▁gi zo ne ta ko ▁ba tzuk ▁jar ri ▁ni tu en ▁a te an ▁, ▁la run ba te an ▁i no la ko ▁za ma rik ▁sar ▁ez ▁ze din ▁.
PRED:	At that time I saw that the sun had shut up the doors of Jerusalem , and the people of Jerusalem had shut the doors of the Lord 's Temple . I had no ordinary work on the Sabbath day , and I would not leave them alone .
GOLD:	Then I commanded that the gates of Jerusalem should be shut as darkness fell every Friday evening , not to be opened until the Sabbath ended . I sent some of my own servants to guard the gates so that no merchandise could be brought in on the Sabbath day .

ID:	956
INPUT:	▁Da vi dek ▁, ▁or du an ▁, ▁U ri a si ▁: ▁— ▁Gel di ▁zai tez ▁gaur ▁he men ▁. ▁Bi har ▁u tzi ko ▁di zut ▁jo a <unk> gun ▁har tan ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁Je ru sa le men ▁gel di tu ▁zen ▁U ri as ▁; ▁bi ha ra mu ne an ▁,
PRED:	“ Stay here today , ” David said . “ Stay here ! Stay here in Jerusalem ! ” So David went out to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	“ Well , stay here today , ” David told him , “ and tomorrow you may return to the army. ” So Uriah stayed in Jerusalem that day and the next .

ID:	957
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁di o ▁: ▁« ▁Ga rai ▁ber ri a ▁da tor ▁. ▁Ga rai ▁hor re tan ▁, ▁jen de ak ▁ez ▁du ▁ho ne la ▁zin ▁e gin go ▁: ▁“ ▁A la ▁Jau na ▁, ▁is ra el dar rak ▁E gip to tik ▁a te ra ▁zi tu e na ▁! ▁” ▁;
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : The people of Israel will say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : The people of Israel rescued them from the land of Egypt . '
GOLD:	“ In that day , ” says the Lord , “ when people are taking an oath , they will no longer say , ‘ As surely as the Lord lives , who rescued the people of Israel from the land of Egypt . '

ID:	958
INPUT:	▁Ber din ▁fe de a ▁e re ▁: ▁be ra ▁ba kar rik ▁, ▁e gin tze tan ▁ez ▁ba da ▁a zal tzen ▁, ▁hi la ▁da go ▁.
PRED:	And there is no faith in God 's holy people .
GOLD:	So you see , faith by itself is n't enough . Unless it produces good deeds , it is dead and useless .

ID:	959
INPUT:	▁Moi ses ▁men di tik ▁jai tsi ▁zen ▁, ▁le ge a ren ▁har lau zak ▁es ku e tan ▁zi tu e la ▁. ▁Har lau zak ▁bi ▁al de e ta tik ▁i da tzi ak ▁zeu den ▁:
PRED:	So Moses went down on Mount Sinai and the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant .
GOLD:	Then Moses turned and went down the mountain . He held in his hands the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant . They were inscribed on both sides , front and back .

ID:	960
INPUT:	▁Ho ri en ▁al da me ne an ▁Ga ba on go ▁Me la ti a sek ▁e ta ▁Me ro no te ko ▁Ja do nek ▁jar dun ▁zu ten ▁la ne an ▁, ▁Ga ba on go ▁e ta ▁Mitz pa ko ▁bes te ▁gi zon ▁ba tzu e kin ▁ba te ra ▁, ▁Euf ra tes ▁i bai a ren ▁men de bal de ko ▁go ber na ri a ren ▁kon tu ra ▁.
PRED:	After this , he decided to go to Gilead to the Euphrates River , he mobilized his forces at Mizpah . He went to the Euphrates River to the Euphrates River in the province west of Gilead and the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	Next to them were Melatiah from Gibeon , Jadon from Meronoth , people from Gibeon , and people from Mizpah , the headquarters of the governor of the province west of the Euphrates River .

ID:	961
INPUT:	▁Gu tu na ren ▁ar ra zoi a ▁: ▁Sa si mai su ak
PRED:	The True Family of Jesus
GOLD:	The Danger of False Teachers

ID:	962
INPUT:	▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁Na bu ko do no sor ren ▁er re ge al di ko ▁he me re tzi gar ren ▁ur te an ▁, ▁bos gar ren ▁hi la ren ▁ha mar re an ▁, ▁Ne bu za ra dan ▁, ▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁er re ge a ren ▁fun tzi o na ri o ▁e ta ▁gu ar di a bu ru a ▁, ▁e tor ri ▁zen ▁Je ru sa le me ra ▁.
PRED:	In the third year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon , king of Babylon , king of Babylon , king of Babylon , king of Babylon .
GOLD:	On August 17 of that year , which was the nineteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard and an official of the Babylonian king , arrived in Jerusalem .

ID:	963
INPUT:	▁Bes te ▁zen bait ▁a le ▁sa si ▁ar te an ▁e ro ri ▁zen ▁, ▁e ta ▁sa si ek ▁, ▁ha re kin ▁ba te ra ▁er ne rik ▁, ▁i to ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	Then some of the believers scattered themselves in the wall , and some of them were scattered .
GOLD:	Other seed fell among thorns that grew up with it and choked out the tender plants .

ID:	964
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Na a ma ko ▁Tzo far rek ▁hitz ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁:
PRED:	Then Zophar the Temanite replied :
GOLD:	Then Zophar the Naamathite replied to Job :

ID:	965
INPUT:	▁Hai e ta ko ▁ba tzuk ▁ez ▁zi re la ▁lei al ▁i zan ▁? ▁E ta ▁zer ▁? ▁Hai en ▁lei al ta sun - e zak ▁huts ▁bi hur tu ko ▁o te ▁du ▁Jain ko a ren ▁lei al ta su na ▁?
PRED:	Some of the tribe of Dan were lost , and they were all filled with fear of God .
GOLD:	True , some of them were unfaithful ; but just because they were unfaithful , does that mean God will be unfaithful ?

ID:	966
INPUT:	▁Nor bai tek ▁gal de ▁de za ke ▁: ▁E ta ▁hi lak ▁no la ▁piz ten ▁di ra ▁? ▁No la ko ▁gor pu tzez ▁i tzu li ko ▁di ra ▁bi zi ra ▁?
PRED:	Who can tell you the dead ? Who is the dead ? Who can return to life ?
GOLD:	But someone may ask , “ How will the dead be raised ? What kind of bodies will they have ? ”

ID:	967
INPUT:	▁Be gi ra ▁e txe ▁ho ni ▁gau ▁e ta ▁e gun ▁, ▁zu re ▁bi zi le ku a ▁hau ▁i za nen ▁de la ▁e san ▁bai tu zu ▁. ▁En tzun ▁, ▁zu re ▁zer bi tza ri ak ▁to ki ▁ho ne ta rantz ▁be gi ra ▁e gi ni ko ▁o toi tza ▁.
PRED:	May your house be honored , and may your servant be honored , for you have heard that your servant is coming toward this place .
GOLD:	May you watch over this Temple day and night , this place where you have said you would put your name . May you always hear the prayers I make toward this place .

ID:	968
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ez ▁e ra bi li ▁gaiz ki ▁a lar gun tsak ▁e ta ▁u me zur tzak ▁;
PRED:	“ Do not defile the orphans and orphans .
GOLD:	“ You must not mistreat or oppress foreigners in any way . Remember , you yourselves were once foreigners in the land of Egypt .

ID:	969
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁Ber na be ▁e ta ▁Sau lo ▁, ▁Es pi ri tu ▁San tu ak ▁bi da li rik ▁, ▁Se leu zi a ra ▁jai tsi ▁zi ren ▁, ▁e ta ▁han dik ▁Zi pre ra ▁jo ▁zu ten ▁i tsa soz ▁.
PRED:	So Saul and Barnabas went down to the Holy Place , and the Holy Spirit went down into the desert .
GOLD:	So Barnabas and Saul were sent out by the Holy Spirit . They went down to the seaport of Seleucia and then sailed for the island of Cyprus .

ID:	970
INPUT:	▁Am non ▁e ta ▁Ta mar
PRED:	Amnon and Tamar
GOLD:	The Rape of Tamar

ID:	971
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁di o ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁« ▁Ho na ▁he men ▁, ▁Is ra el go ▁ha ma bi ▁lei nu en ▁ar te an ▁ba na tu ko ▁du zu en ▁lur ral de a ren ▁mu gak ▁( ▁Jo se ren ▁on do ren go ek ▁bi ▁za ti ▁har tu ko ▁di tuz te ▁) ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ These are the tribes of Israel , which are the tribes of Israel . These are the names of the tribes of Joseph .
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ Divide the land in this way for the twelve tribes of Israel : The descendants of Joseph will be given two shares of land .

ID:	972
INPUT:	▁Moi se sek ▁e san ▁zi on ▁Jau na ri ▁: ▁— ▁Her ri a ▁ez ▁da ▁au sar tu ko ▁Si nai ▁men di ra ▁i go tze ra ▁, ▁zuk ▁zeuk ▁o har ta ra zi ▁bai ti gu zu ▁e ta ▁a gin du ▁men di a ri ▁mu gak ▁e zar tze ko ▁e ta ▁sak ra tu tzat ▁har tze ko ▁.
PRED:	Then Moses said to the Lord , “ Do n't go down to Mount Sinai , for you have chosen us to carry the sacred pillars and carry them on the top of Mount Sinai .
GOLD:	“ But Lord , ” Moses protested , “ the people can not come up to Mount Sinai . You already warned us . You told me , ‘ Mark off a boundary all around the mountain to set it apart as holy . ' ”

ID:	973
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du nak ma kur ra ra zi ko ▁di tu har ro ▁, ▁han di pu tze ta ▁bu ru - ten te ▁guz ti ak ▁:
PRED:	Then this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , says :
GOLD:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armieshas a day of reckoning.He will punish the proud and mightyand bring down everything that is exalted .

ID:	974
INPUT:	▁Ja kob ▁La ba nen ▁e txe an ▁. ▁Le a ▁e ta ▁Ra kel
PRED:	Jacob 's house was Leah and Leah .
GOLD:	Jacob Arrives at Paddan-Aram

ID:	975
INPUT:	▁He men ▁a di e raz ten ▁de na ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁Je sus ▁gu re ▁Jau na ▁a le gi a ▁, ▁bes te ▁lei nu ▁ba te ko a ▁da ▁, ▁i noiz ▁al da re - gi zo nik ▁i zan ▁ez ▁du en ▁lei nu ko a ▁,
PRED:	Therefore , this is the command of the Lord Jesus , the one who calls out the name of our Lord Jesus .
GOLD:	For the priest we are talking about belongs to a different tribe , whose members have never served at the altar as priests .

ID:	976
INPUT:	▁E li huk ▁jar rai tu ▁zu en ▁:
PRED:	Then Elihu said to Job ,
GOLD:	Then Elihu said :

ID:	977
INPUT:	▁Oi nor de - es ku bi de a ▁du ten ▁e ma ku me en ▁ez kon tza ra ko ▁a rau ak
PRED:	A Call to Listen to Jerusalem
GOLD:	Women Who Inherit Property

ID:	978
INPUT:	▁E ma ku me ak ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁ba sa mor tu ra ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁i hes ▁; ▁han ▁baz ter ▁bat ▁pres ta tu a ▁zi on ▁Jain ko ak ▁, ▁mi la ▁ber re hun ▁e ta ▁hi ru ro gei ▁e gu nez ▁ber tan ▁bi zi ▁ze din ▁.
PRED:	At that time the woman left the wilderness , for God had abandoned him and stayed there for forty days .
GOLD:	And the woman fled into the wilderness , where God had prepared a place to care for her for 1,260 days .

ID:	979
INPUT:	▁e za gut ▁de zan ▁mun du ak ▁zu re ▁na gu si tza ▁, ▁jen til - her ri ek ▁zu re ▁ga rai pe na ▁.
PRED:	Let all the nations flourish in the world be filled with joy .
GOLD:	May the nations praise you , O God.Yes , may all the nations praise you .

ID:	980
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁nik ▁e re ▁mes pre txa gar ri ▁e ta ▁kas kar ▁e gin go ▁zai tuz tet ▁her ri ▁guz ti a ren tzat ▁, ▁ni re ▁bi de ak ▁jar rai tu ▁ez ▁di tu zu e la ko ▁e ta ▁e ra ba ki ak ▁zein ▁nor ▁den ▁be gi ra tuz ▁har tu ▁di tu zu e la ko ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , I will despise you , and you will obey all the commands of the Lord your God , and you will know that he is the one who loves you . ”
GOLD:	“ So I have made you despised and humiliated in the eyes of all the people . For you have not obeyed me but have shown favoritism in the way you carry out my instructions . ”

ID:	981
INPUT:	▁A a ron ▁be ra ▁e re ▁sun tsi tu ▁na hi ▁i za te rai no ▁ze go en ▁Jau na ▁ha ser re ▁, ▁e ta ▁A a ro nen ▁al de ▁e re ▁er re gu tu ▁nu en ▁.
PRED:	So Aaron destroyed Aaron 's anger , just as the Lord had predicted . Then I turned his anger against Aaron and his people .
GOLD:	The Lord was so angry with Aaron that he wanted to destroy him , too . But I prayed for Aaron , and the Lord spared him .

ID:	982
INPUT:	▁« ▁Zu en ▁ar te an ▁jar ri ko ▁dut ▁neu re ▁e gon le ku a ▁e ta ▁ez ▁zai tuz tet ▁za puz tu ko ▁.
PRED:	“ I will put your trust in you , and I will not reject you .
GOLD:	I will live among you , and I will not despise you .

ID:	983
INPUT:	▁Ju da ko ▁er re ge ek ▁e zar ri ak ▁zi tuz ten ▁sa si a pai zak ▁Ju da ko ▁hi rix ka ▁e ta ▁Je ru sa lem ▁in gu ru e ta ko ▁kul tu - le ku e tan ▁, ▁to ki ▁ho ri e tan ▁in tsen tsu a ▁er re ▁ze za ten ▁; ▁Jo si a sek ▁ken du ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁ha la ko ak ▁; ▁bai ta ▁Ba a li ▁, ▁e guz ki ▁na hiz ▁i lar gi a ri ▁na hiz ▁i zar - mul tzo ▁e ta ▁i zar ▁guz ti ei ▁in tsen tsu a ▁er re tzen ▁zi e te nak ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	The kings of Judah and all the surrounding towns of Judah , including all the surrounding towns of Judah and Jerusalem . They also burned incense to the pagan shrines and burned incense on the altar . They also burned incense to the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies , and he burned incense .
GOLD:	He did away with the idolatrous priests , who had been appointed by the previous kings of Judah , for they had offered sacrifices at the pagan shrines throughout Judah and even in the vicinity of Jerusalem . They had also offered sacrifices to Baal , and to the sun , the moon , the constellations , and to all the powers of the heavens .

ID:	984
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁er re ge ak ▁es kui ne ko ei ▁e san go ▁di e ▁: ▁“ ▁Za toz te ▁, ▁ni re ▁Ai ta ren ▁be dein ka tu ok ▁; ▁har tza zu e ▁mun du a ren ▁sor tze tik ▁zu en tzat ▁pres ta tu a ▁da go en ▁er rei nu a ▁.
PRED:	Then the king of the king will say to his left , ‘ Come , let 's bless the world and bless you from the world . Blessed are those who are the kingdoms of the world .
GOLD:	“ Then the King will say to those on his right , ‘ Come , you who are blessed by my Father , inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the creation of the world .

ID:	985
INPUT:	▁Ai ▁e ne ▁! ▁Lei a la ▁zen ▁hi ri a e ma gal du ▁bi hur tu a ▁! ▁Be hi no la ▁jus ti zi az ▁be te a ▁, ▁zu zen bi de - le ku ▁ze na ▁, ▁o rain ▁hil tzai le en ▁bi zi le ku ▁.
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who are poor ! He tried to kill those who do what is right , just as he promised .
GOLD:	See how Jerusalem , once so faithful , has become a prostitute.Once the home of justice and righteousness , she is now filled with murderers .

ID:	986
INPUT:	▁Ku tsa tu ri ko ▁per tso nak ▁be reiz ▁e zar ri
PRED:	The Ark of the Lord
GOLD:	Purity in Israel 's Camp

ID:	987
INPUT:	▁gi za ki a ren ▁jar du e ra ▁ge ra raz ten ▁du ▁, ▁be rak ▁e gin da ko az ▁guz ti ak ▁o har ▁dai te zen ▁.
PRED:	So everyone must follow the authority of the human race , and everyone will succeed .
GOLD:	Then everyone stops workingso they can watch his power .

ID:	988
INPUT:	▁a hun tzak ▁, ▁es ne az ▁zeu ▁e ta ▁fa mi li a ▁e li ka tu e ta ▁zer bi tza ri ak ▁man ten tze ko ▁.
PRED:	“ Take care of your families and your families , and pay them back .
GOLD:	And you will have enough goats ' milk for yourself , your family , and your servant girls .

ID:	989
INPUT:	▁Hor ▁bi da li ko ▁diz ki zu et ▁nik ▁pro fe tak ▁, ▁ja kin tsu ak ▁e ta ▁le ge - mai su ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁zu ek ▁ba tzuk ▁hil ▁e ta ▁gu ru tzil tza tu ▁, ▁bes te ak ▁si na go ge tan ▁zi gor tu ▁e ta ▁her ri rik ▁her ri ▁e ra so ka ▁e ra bi li ko ▁di tu zu e ▁.
PRED:	I sent you to tell you the truth , some prophets , and prophets , and prophets , and prophets , and prophets , and the people of Israel will repent of their sins .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , I am sending you prophets and wise men and teachers of religious law . But you will kill some by crucifixion , and you will flog others with whips in your synagogues , chasing them from city to city .

ID:	990
INPUT:	▁O nak ▁Jau na ren ▁o nes pe na ▁lor tzen ▁du ▁, ▁as mo ▁txar re ko ak ▁gai tzes pe na ▁.
PRED:	The Lord detests the good things of the Lord , but he examines it .
GOLD:	The Lord approves of those who are good , but he condemns those who plan wickedness .

ID:	991
INPUT:	▁hor re ga tik ▁, ▁nik ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁zin ▁da git ▁neu re ▁bi zi a ren ga tik ▁, ▁zuk ▁gor ro to a ren ▁e ra gi nez ▁is ra el dar ren ▁kon tra ▁a zal du ▁du zun ▁a mor ru ▁e ta ▁gri na ▁ber be raz ▁jo ka tu ko ▁du da la ▁. ▁Zi gor tu ko ▁zai tu da ne an ▁, ▁or du an ▁ai tor tu ko ▁nau te ▁is ra el dar rek ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : Because you have rejected my decrees and regulations that I am giving you today , I will turn away from the land of Israel . I am the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	Therefore , as surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , I will pay back your angry deeds with my own . I will punish you for all your acts of anger , envy , and hatred . And I will make myself known to Israel by what I do to you .

ID:	992
INPUT:	▁Sa lo mo nen ▁jau re gi a
PRED:	Solomon 's palace
GOLD:	Solomon Builds His Palace

ID:	993
INPUT:	▁ber tan ▁be he ra ▁u tzi ▁zu en ▁Xi lo ko ▁e goi tza ▁, ▁gi zar te an ▁bi zi tze ko ▁e rai ki ▁zu en ▁e txo la ▁.
PRED:	He left Shiloh and camped at Shiloh in the Tabernacle of Shiloh .
GOLD:	Then he abandoned his dwelling at Shiloh , the Tabernacle where he had lived among the people .

ID:	994
INPUT:	▁Mai te ▁i zan go ▁zai tuz te ▁, ▁be dein ka tu ▁e ta ▁u gal du ko ▁, ▁e man kor ▁e gin go ▁zai tuz te ▁zeu ek ▁, ▁zu en ▁a be re ak ▁e ta ▁lur rak ▁: ▁ga ri a ▁, ▁ar do a ▁e ta ▁o li o a ▁o pa ro ▁e man go ▁diz ki zu e ▁, ▁e ta ▁ze kor ▁e ta ▁ar ku me ak ▁u gal du ko ▁, ▁zu en ▁ar ba so ei ▁zin ▁e gin da ko a ren ▁a ra be ra ▁e man go ▁di zu en ▁lur ral de an ▁.
PRED:	You will be blessed and multiply , and you will be blessed . You will be blessed and multiply , and you will have abundant grain , and you will have abundant water . Then you will eat from the land you swore to give to your ancestors , Isaac , and Jacob .
GOLD:	He will love you and bless you , and he will give you many children . He will give fertility to your land and your animals . When you arrive in the land he swore to give your ancestors , you will have large harvests of grain , new wine , and olive oil , and great herds of cattle , sheep , and goats .

ID:	995
INPUT:	▁Jo se ren ▁a nai en ▁men de ku a
PRED:	Joseph 's Brothers and Ephraim
GOLD:	Joseph Sold into Slavery

ID:	996
INPUT:	▁Bes te ▁ain ge ru ak ▁i har de tsi ▁zi on ▁: ▁“ ▁Bi ▁mi la ▁e ta ▁hi ru re hun ▁ar ra tsal de ▁e ta ▁goiz ▁i ga ro ▁be har ko ▁di ra ▁. ▁Ge ro ▁, ▁san tu te gi a ▁ber ri ro ▁sa ga ra tu a ▁i zan go ▁da ▁” ▁.
PRED:	Then the angel said to him , ‘ There will be three days for three days . ' And the third day will be holy . Then the holy mountain will be holy . '
GOLD:	The other replied , “ It will take 2,300 evenings and mornings ; then the Temple will be made right again . ”

ID:	997
INPUT:	▁Jen de tza ga tik ▁ez ▁bai tzu ten ▁non dik ▁sar tu ▁aur ki tzen ▁, ▁tei la tu ra ▁i go ▁e ta ▁, ▁tei lak ▁ken du rik ▁, ▁o ha ti la ▁e ta ▁guz ti ▁jai tsi ▁zu ten ▁er di - er di ra ▁, ▁Je su sen ▁aur re ra ▁.
PRED:	They tried to kill me and kill me , and they cut off my head and cut off my head and cut off my head .
GOLD:	but they could n't reach him because of the crowd . So they went up to the roof and took off some tiles . Then they lowered the sick man on his mat down into the crowd , right in front of Jesus .

ID:	998
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai en ▁Ha mor ▁: ▁« ▁Si kem ▁ni re ▁se me a ▁zu en ▁ar re baz ▁mai te min du a ▁da go ▁; ▁e mai o zu e ▁, ▁ar ren ▁, ▁e maz te tzat ▁.
PRED:	He said to Abimelech , “ Look , my son , my son , you are my beloved wife .
GOLD:	Hamor tried to speak with Jacob and his sons . “ My son Shechem is truly in love with your daughter , ” he said . “ Please let him marry her .

ID:	999
INPUT:	▁Ko ru - zu zen da ri a ren tzat ▁. ▁Ko re ren ▁se me e na ▁. ▁O bo ez ▁. ▁Kan ta ▁.
PRED:	O God , you are your children , O God of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	God is our refuge and strength , always ready to help in times of trouble .

ID:	1000
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁da ▁e sa ten ▁a ri ▁ga re na ren ▁gai lur ra ▁: ▁hain ▁han di a ▁da ▁gu re ▁a paiz ▁na gu si a ▁, ▁e zen ▁Jain ko ▁han di a ren ▁es kui nal de an ▁e se ri a ▁bai ta go ▁ze ru an ▁,
PRED:	This is the account of the high priest : The high priest is greater than the high priest , sitting on the throne of God 's right hand .
GOLD:	Here is the main point : We have a High Priest who sat down in the place of honor beside the throne of the majestic God in heaven .

ID:	1001
INPUT:	▁E ma ten ▁al ▁du ▁e gur rik ▁e zer ▁e gi te ko ▁? ▁E gi ten ▁al ▁da ▁be ra ren ▁zu raz ▁ka ko ri ke zer ▁zin tzi li ka tze ko ▁?
PRED:	Do n't you realize that the one who calls on you ? Do you give it to the truth ?
GOLD:	Can its wood be used for making things , like pegs to hang up pots and pans ?

ID:	1002
INPUT:	▁Zu hur tzi a ▁es ku ra e zi na ▁da ▁bu ru ga be a ren tzat ▁, ▁ez ▁da ▁gau za ▁jen daur re an ▁a ho a ▁za bal tze ko ▁.
PRED:	The lips of the wise give wise advice ; the mouth of the wise are not wise .
GOLD:	Wisdom is too lofty for fools.Among leaders at the city gate , they have nothing to say .

ID:	1003
INPUT:	▁Jau na ri ▁a tse gin ▁ez ▁zai o na ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁; ▁ez ▁zen ▁al den du ▁Ne ba ten ▁se me ▁Je ro bo a mek ▁Is ra e li ▁e gi na ra zi ▁ziz ki on ▁be ka tu e ta tik ▁.
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , but Jeroboam son of Nebat followed the example of Jeroboam son of Nebat .
GOLD:	But Pekahiah did what was evil in the Lord 's sight . He refused to turn from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel to commit .

ID:	1004
INPUT:	▁Na hi ▁du dan ▁on gi a ▁ez ▁dut ▁e gi ten ▁, ▁e ta ▁na hi ▁ez ▁du dan ▁gaiz ki a ▁e gi ten ▁dut ▁.
PRED:	I do n't want to do good , and I do n't know what I do .
GOLD:	I want to do what is good , but I do n't . I do n't want to do what is wrong , but I do it anyway .

ID:	1005
INPUT:	▁Ma ki la ▁bat ▁har tu ko ▁du zu e ▁zeu e kin ▁e ta ▁, ▁sa be la ▁hus te ra ▁ir te te an ▁, ▁be ra re kin ▁zu lo a ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁go ro tza ▁lur rez ▁es ta li ko ▁du zu e ▁.
PRED:	Do n't let anyone go with you and buy it back . Instead , you will buy it back and buy it back to the ground .
GOLD:	The camp must be holy , for the Lord your God moves around in your camp to protect you and to defeat your enemies . He must not see any shameful thing among you , or he will turn away from you .

ID:	1006
INPUT:	▁E rai kun tza ▁hau ek ▁guz ti ak ▁, ▁no la ▁bar ne tik ▁ha la ▁kan po tik ▁, ▁neur ri ra ▁lan du ▁e ta ▁zer ra tu ri ko ▁har ri ▁bi kai nez ▁e gin ▁zi tuz ten ▁oi nar ri e ta tik ▁ha be e ta rai no ▁, ▁e txe a ren ▁kan po al de tik ▁a re to ▁na gu si rai no ▁.
PRED:	In the same way , all the rooms ran out from the outer courtyard of the Temple , which were built on the east side of the Temple .
GOLD:	From foundation to eaves , all these buildings were built from huge blocks of high-quality stone , cut with saws and trimmed to exact measure on all sides .

ID:	1007
INPUT:	▁Ba sa mor tu ra ▁jo an ▁be har ▁du gu ▁hi ru ▁e gu ne ko ▁bi de an ▁, ▁geu re ▁Jain ko ▁Jau na ri ▁sak ri fi zi o ak ▁es kain tze ko ▁, ▁be rak ▁a gin du ▁di gun ▁e ran ▁.
PRED:	We must go to the wilderness of Sinai and offer sacrifices to the Lord our God . We offer sacrifices to the Lord our God .
GOLD:	I will make a clear distinction between my people and your people . This miraculous sign will happen tomorrow . ' ”

ID:	1008
INPUT:	▁Be ti ▁i zan ▁naiz ▁Jain ko a ren ▁zi gor ra ren ▁bel dur ▁, ▁e zin ▁nu en ▁e zer ▁ha ren ▁han di ta su na ren ▁aur re an ▁.
PRED:	I am afraid of God , and I could not fear him .
GOLD:	That would be better than facing God 's judgment.For if the majesty of God opposes me , what hope is there ?

ID:	1009
INPUT:	▁Ha la ber ▁, ▁e kar tzen ▁diz ki da ten ▁uz ta ▁guz ti en ▁le hen ▁e mai tzak ▁zu re ak ▁i zan go ▁di ra ▁. ▁Zu re ▁se ni tar te tik ▁gar bi ▁da go en ▁e do nork ▁jan ▁de za ke ▁ho ri e ta tik ▁.
PRED:	But all your crops will be cut off from your neck and your sons will be ceremonially clean . No one may eat from your family .
GOLD:	All the first crops of their land that the people present to the Lord belong to you . Any member of your family who is ceremonially clean may eat this food .

ID:	1010
INPUT:	▁Bes te ▁hi ru re hun ▁ba bes ki ▁txi ki ▁e re ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁ur re ▁gar biz ▁, ▁ba bes ki ▁ba koi tza ▁e gi te ko ▁hi ru ▁ki lo ▁e ta ▁er di ▁ur re ▁be har ▁i zan ▁ze la rik ▁. ▁E ta ▁« ▁Li ba no ko ▁Oi ha na ▁» ▁ze ri tzan ▁jau re gi an ▁i pi ni ▁zi tu en ▁.
PRED:	He also made fifty gold clasps , hammered gold , each piece of pure gold , and each piece of pure gold . He measured the doors of the royal palace . He also measured it in the royal palace .
GOLD:	He also made 300 smaller shields of hammered gold , each weighing more than 71/2 pounds . The king placed these shields in the Palace of the Forest of Lebanon .

ID:	1011
INPUT:	▁Ha tux ▁, ▁Xe ba ni as ▁, ▁Ma luk ▁,
PRED:	Malluch , Malluch , Malluch ,
GOLD:	Harim , Meremoth , Obadiah ,

ID:	1012
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁ja kin tsu a ▁bu ru ar gi ▁; ▁er ge la ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁i lun pe tan ▁da <unk> da kit ▁, ▁ha la ▁e re ▁, ▁bi ek ▁e tor ki zun ▁be ra ▁du te la ▁.
PRED:	For you know that the wise men are wise , but the king is coming . But when you are looking for me , you are looking for me .
GOLD:	For the wise can see where they are going , but fools walk in the dark. ” Yet I saw that the wise and the foolish share the same fate .

ID:	1013
INPUT:	▁Se nar rak ▁, ▁hor ren ▁ber ri ▁ja ki te an ▁, ▁deus ▁e re ▁e sa ten ▁ez ▁ba di o ▁, ▁o ni ri tzi a ▁e ma ten ▁di o ▁, ▁e ta ▁bo to ak ▁zein ▁kon pro mi so ak ▁ba li oz ko ak ▁i zan go ▁di ra ▁.
PRED:	But if he does not listen to her husband , he will fulfill her vows and pledges will fulfill her vows and pledges .
GOLD:	But if her husband refuses to accept it on the day he hears of it , her vow or pledge will be nullified , and the Lord will forgive her .

ID:	1014
INPUT:	▁Ho be ▁zu ek ▁na has ten ▁a ri ▁di ren ▁ho ri ek ▁e ra bat ▁i ren du ko ▁ba li ra ▁!
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who plant common sense .
GOLD:	I just wish that those troublemakers who want to mutilate you by circumcision would mutilate themselves .

ID:	1015
INPUT:	▁Ai ta ri ▁i se kaz ▁be gi ra tu ▁e ta ▁a ma ri ▁e sa na ▁e gi ten ▁ez ▁di o na ri be le ek ▁be gi ak ▁a te ra ko ▁diz ki o te ▁e ta ▁ar ra no ek ▁i ren tsi ko ▁.
PRED:	The children of the Father will give birth to the mother of his father and mother . They will not listen to him and tell him what they do .
GOLD:	The eye that mocks a fatherand despises a mother 's instructionswill be plucked out by ravens of the valleyand eaten by vultures .

ID:	1016
INPUT:	▁Sa lo mo nen ▁ja kin du ri a ▁e ki al de ko e na ▁e ta ▁e gip to ar re na ▁bai no ▁han di a go a ▁i zan ▁zen ▁,
PRED:	Solomon became more powerful than Solomon , and he became more powerful than the Egyptian than the Egyptians .
GOLD:	So Hiram supplied as much cedar and cypress timber as Solomon desired .

ID:	1017
INPUT:	▁Jain ko ak ▁ez ▁du ▁baz ter tu ▁be re tzat ▁au ke ra tu ▁zu en ▁her ri a ▁. ▁Go go an ▁du zu e ▁, ▁nos ki ▁, ▁Li bu ru ▁San tu ak ▁E li a si ▁bu ruz ▁di o e na ▁, ▁no la ▁hitz ▁e gi ten ▁zi on ▁Jain ko a ri ▁Is ra e len ▁aur ka ▁:
PRED:	For God has not rejected the people of Israel , for he has chosen you to speak to the Gentiles . He said , “ This is what the Holy One of Israel says :
GOLD:	No , God has not rejected his own people , whom he chose from the very beginning . Do you realize what the Scriptures say about this ? Elijah the prophet complained to God about the people of Israel and said ,

ID:	1018
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren ▁, ▁lur ▁o so ko ▁ja be a ren ▁, ▁i tun - ku txa ▁da ra ma ten ▁a pai zen ▁oi nek ▁Jor dan ▁i bai ko ▁u rak ▁u ki tu ▁be zain ▁las ter ▁, ▁ur - kor ron te a ▁e ten ▁e ta ▁u rak ▁gel di tu ▁e gin go ▁di ra ▁, ▁har re si a ▁bai li ran ▁» ▁.
PRED:	The whole earth will be as numerous as the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant , for the east wind of the Jordan River will be as water , and the water will be stripped away . ”
GOLD:	The priests will carry the Ark of the Lord , the Lord of all the earth . As soon as their feet touch the water , the flow of water will be cut off upstream , and the river will stand up like a wall . ”

ID:	1019
INPUT:	▁Oi ▁Si o nen ▁zau den ▁Jain ko a ▁, ▁zu ri ▁zor ▁zai zu ▁go res pe na ▁, ▁zu ri ▁be te ▁be har ▁pro me sak ▁,
PRED:	O Zion , O God , give thanks to those who trust you .
GOLD:	for you answer our prayers.All of us must come to you .

ID:	1020
INPUT:	▁Je sus ▁Je ru sa le men ga tik ▁ai e ne ka
PRED:	Jesus ' Prayer of Thanksgiving
GOLD:	Jesus Grieves over Jerusalem

ID:	1021
INPUT:	▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁er re ge ▁Na bu ko do no sor rek ▁Jo si a sen ▁se me ▁Se de ki as ▁Ju da ko ▁er re ge ▁e zar ri ▁zu en ▁, ▁Joi a ki men ▁se me ▁Je ko ni a sen ▁or dez ▁.
PRED:	Then King Zedekiah of Babylon came to Jeremiah from the reign of Jehoiakim son of Josiah , king of Judah , king of Judah .
GOLD:	Zedekiah son of Josiah succeeded Jehoiachin son of Jehoiakim as the king of Judah . He was appointed by King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon .

ID:	1022
INPUT:	▁Jau na ri ▁, ▁be re ▁Jain ko a ri ▁, ▁a tse gin ▁ez ▁zai o na ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁. ▁E ta ▁Je re mi as ▁pro fe tak ▁Jau na ren ▁i ze ne an ▁hitz ▁e gin ▁zi on ▁ar ren ▁, ▁Se de ki as ▁ez ▁zen ▁a pal du ▁.
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight . He did not listen to Jeremiah the prophet Isaiah the prophet of the Lord .
GOLD:	But Zedekiah did what was evil in the sight of the Lord his God , and he refused to humble himself when the prophet Jeremiah spoke to him directly from the Lord .

ID:	1023
INPUT:	▁« ▁Be te ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁gaur ▁e ma ten ▁diz ki zu e dan ▁a gin du ▁guz ti ak ▁, ▁a do re tsu ▁i zan ▁e ta ▁har tze ra ▁zo az ten ▁lur ral de az ▁ja be tze ko ▁gau za ▁i zan ▁zai tez ten
PRED:	“ Therefore , today , obey all the commands I am giving you today , and may you enter the land I am giving you today .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , be careful to obey every command I am giving you today , so you may have strength to go in and take over the land you are about to enter .

ID:	1024
INPUT:	▁Ho na ▁he men ▁ni ▁, ▁ge zur rez ko ▁a me tsen ▁za le ▁di ren ▁pro fe ten ▁kon tra ▁; ▁a me tsak ▁kon ta tuz ▁, ▁des bi de ra tu ▁e gi ten ▁du te ▁ni re ▁her ri a ▁be ren ▁ge zur ▁e ta ▁neur ri ga be ke ri ez ▁. ▁Ez ▁di tut ▁nik ▁bi da li ▁, ▁ez ▁di et ▁nik ▁e zer ▁a gin du ▁. ▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁ez ▁di o te ▁i no la ko ▁o nik ▁e gi ten ▁her ri ▁ho ni ▁. ▁Nik ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁e sa na ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : Because you are false prophets , I will turn against them and refuse to listen to my people . They will not listen to me , ” says the Lord . “ I will not let them go unpunished ! ”
GOLD:	I am against these false prophets . Their imaginary dreams are flagrant lies that lead my people into sin . I did not send or appoint them , and they have no message at all for my people . I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	1025
INPUT:	▁Ju da ▁e ta ▁Si me o nen ▁lei nu ek ▁ka na an dar rei ▁e ra so
PRED:	The Land Given to Simeon
GOLD:	Judah and Simeon Conquer the Land

ID:	1026
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ▁, ▁ja na ri ▁ho ri ▁gor de rik ▁gel di tu ko ▁da ▁E gip to ▁lur ral de an ▁i zan go ▁di ren ▁zaz pi ▁go se - ur te e ta ra ko ▁, ▁e ta ▁go se te ak ▁ez ▁du ▁lur ral de ▁hau ▁hon da tu ko ▁» ▁.
PRED:	That is why the land of Egypt will be destroyed in the land of Egypt , and they will be destroyed in the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	That way there will be enough to eat when the seven years of famine come to the land of Egypt . Otherwise this famine will destroy the land . ”

ID:	1027
INPUT:	▁Har tan ▁, ▁in gu ru ▁hai e tan ▁bi zi ▁zen ▁e ma ku me ▁ka na an dar ▁bat ▁dei a dar ka ▁ha si ▁zi tzai on ▁: ▁— ▁Er ru ki ▁za kiz kit ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁Da vi den ▁Se me a ▁! ▁Oi na ze ▁gor ri tan ▁dau ka ▁de ab ru ak ▁ni re ▁a la ba ▁.
PRED:	When she saw a woman sitting on the wall , she cried out to him , “ Lord , have mercy on me ! The Lord has mercy on me ! ”
GOLD:	A Gentile woman who lived there came to him , pleading , “ Have mercy on me , O Lord , Son of David ! For my daughter is possessed by a demon that torments her severely . ”

ID:	1028
INPUT:	▁Ju da ko ▁A sa ren ▁er re ge al di ko ▁ho gei ta ▁ha ma sei gar ren ▁ur te an ▁, ▁Is ra el go ▁er re ge ▁Ba xa ▁Ju da ren ▁kon tra ▁bor ro ka tze ra ▁a bi a tu ▁zen ▁. ▁Ra ma ▁hi ri a ▁go tor tu ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁, ▁A sa ren ▁jo an - e tor ri ak ▁e ra goz te ko ▁.
PRED:	During the reign of Asa 's reign , King Asa of Judah began to fight against Israel . He reigned in Judah and fortified towns of Judah . He reigned in Samaria and fortified towns of Judah .
GOLD:	In the thirty-sixth year of Asa 's reign , King Baasha of Israel invaded Judah and fortified Ramah in order to prevent anyone from entering or leaving King Asa 's territory in Judah .

ID:	1029
INPUT:	▁Na gu si ak ▁, ▁be re ▁as mo a ren ▁kon tra ▁, ▁e maz te tzat ▁har tzen ▁ez ▁ba du ▁, ▁a tse gin ▁ez ▁du e la ko ▁, ▁ez ▁du ▁ha ren ▁ber re ros pe na ▁ga la ra zi ko ▁; ▁de na ▁den ▁, ▁ez ▁du ▁a tzer ri tar rei ▁sal tze ko ▁es ku bi de rik ▁, ▁i ru zur ▁e gin go ▁li o ke ▁e ta ▁.
PRED:	If we have rebelled against him , we will not listen to his wife . But if we do n't buy it back , we will buy it back to the foreigners living in the land .
GOLD:	If she does not satisfy her owner , he must allow her to be bought back again . But he is not allowed to sell her to foreigners , since he is the one who broke the contract with her .

ID:	1030
INPUT:	▁Fe de a ri ▁es ker ▁, ▁I sa a kek ▁e tor ki zu ne ra ko ▁be dein ka zi o a ▁e man ▁zi en ▁Ja ko bi ▁e ta ▁E sau ri ▁.
PRED:	It was by faith that Isaac was blessed , and Jacob blessed him .
GOLD:	It was by faith that Isaac promised blessings for the future to his sons , Jacob and Esau .

ID:	1031
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁e san ▁zi dan ▁: ▁« ▁Gi za se me ▁, ▁i kus ten ▁du zu ▁zer tan ▁a ri ▁di ren ▁? ▁I kus ten ▁Is ra el ▁her ri ak ▁he men ▁e gi ten ▁di tu en ▁hi guin gar ri ta su nak ▁, ▁ni ▁neu re ▁san tu te gi tik ▁al de ▁e gi te ra ▁be har tuz ▁? ▁Bai na ▁hi guin gar ri ta sun ▁han di a go ak ▁e re ▁i ku si ko ▁di tu zu ▁o rain dik ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Son of man , do you see what are doing ? Why do you see that my people are detestable to me ? They are detestable to me , but they are detestable to me . ”
GOLD:	“ Son of man , ” he said , “ do you see what they are doing ? Do you see the detestable sins the people of Israel are committing to drive me from my Temple ? But come , and you will see even more detestable sins than these ! ”

ID:	1032
INPUT:	▁Ma ri ak ▁hi ru ren ▁bat ▁hi la be te ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁E li sa be te kin ▁; ▁ge ro ▁, ▁e txe ra ▁i tzu li ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	After saying this , Elisha returned to Caesarea and returned home .
GOLD:	Mary stayed with Elizabeth about three months and then went back to her own home .

ID:	1033
INPUT:	▁Zu ek ▁e re ▁, ▁na gu si ok ▁, ▁jo ka ▁e za zu e ▁e ra ▁be re an ▁eskla bo e kin ▁, ▁me ha txu rik ▁e gin ▁ga be ▁; ▁har tu ▁kon tu an ▁hai en ▁e ta ▁zu en ▁na gu si a ▁ze ru an ▁da go e la ▁, ▁e ta ▁hark ▁ez ▁du e la ▁be reiz ke ri a rik ▁e gi ten ▁.
PRED:	I am very careful , dear friends , and you are slaves to sin . We have discovered that we were slaves without sin . We did n't know that he is free from heaven .
GOLD:	Masters , treat your slaves in the same way . Do n't threaten them ; remember , you both have the same Master in heaven , and he has no favorites .

ID:	1034
INPUT:	▁Li bu ru ▁San tu e tan ▁, ▁hain ▁zu zen ▁, ▁hau xe ▁e sa na ▁du ▁nor bai tek ▁: ▁Zer ▁da ▁gi zo na ▁, ▁zu ▁har taz ▁o roi tze ko ▁, ▁zer ▁gi za ki a ▁, ▁zu ▁har taz ▁ar du ra tze ko ▁?
PRED:	As the Scriptures say , “ What do you mean ? What do you mean ? What do you mean ? What do you mean ? ”
GOLD:	For in one place the Scriptures say , “ What are mere mortals that you should think about them , or a son of man that you should care for him ?

ID:	1035
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁or du an ▁, ▁E ze ki e lek ▁e gin ▁du e na ▁e gin go ▁du zu e ▁: ▁ez ▁du zu e ▁aur pe gi a ▁es ta li ko ▁, ▁ez ta ▁hi le ta - o gi rik ▁jan go ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	Then Hezekiah will raise his fist against you , and you will never eat it . You will never eat it .
GOLD:	Then you will do as Ezekiel has done . You will not mourn in public or console yourselves by eating the food brought by friends .

ID:	1036
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ho ne la ▁di o tsu et ▁nik ▁, ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti dun ▁ho nek ▁: ▁I zan ▁bi hotz ▁, ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du na re ne txe a ▁ja so tze ko oi nar ri ak ▁jar ri ▁zi ren ▁e gun ▁hai e tan pro fe ten ▁a ho tik hitz ▁hau ek ▁en tzun ▁ze ni tuz te nok ▁.
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : The Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , says : Do n't listen to this message from the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Be strong and finish the task ! Ever since the laying of the foundation of the Temple of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , you have heard what the prophets have been saying about completing the building .

ID:	1037
INPUT:	▁hel du ▁e ta ▁pu tzu ▁ba te ra ▁jaur ti ▁zu ten ▁. ▁Hu tsik ▁ze go en ▁pu tzu a ▁, ▁u rik ▁ga be ▁.
PRED:	They threw him into a cistern and dug a hole in the cistern .
GOLD:	Then they grabbed him and threw him into the cistern . Now the cistern was empty ; there was no water in it .

ID:	1038
INPUT:	▁Hil ▁ze ne an ▁, ▁be re ▁ar ba so en ▁on do an ▁e hor tzi ▁zu ten ▁Jo tam ▁, ▁Da vid ▁be re ▁ar ba so a ren ▁Hi ri an ▁. ▁On do ren go ▁er re ge a ▁ha ren ▁se me ▁A kaz ▁i zan ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	When Jotham died , he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David . Then his son Ahaz became the next king .
GOLD:	When Jotham died , he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David . And his son Ahaz became the next king .

ID:	1039
INPUT:	▁az pi an ▁zi lar rez ko ▁ber ro gei ▁oin ▁di tuz te la ▁, ▁o hol ▁ba koi tze ko ▁bi ▁oin ▁.
PRED:	He will make forty silver bases — two bases — two bases under each frame .
GOLD:	with their forty silver bases , two bases under each frame .

ID:	1040
INPUT:	▁Har ri ▁bat ▁e kar riz ▁, ▁le hoi - zu lo a ren ▁sar re ran ▁jar ri ▁zu ten ▁, ▁e ta ▁er re ge ak ▁be re ▁er re ge - zi gi luz ▁e ta ▁fun tzi o na ri o en ▁zi gi luz ▁zi gi la tu ▁zu en ▁, ▁Da ni e li ▁bu ruz ▁e ra ba ki ta ko a ▁i nork ▁al da ▁ez ▁ze zan ▁.
PRED:	Then the king sent a lion and placed them in the gate of the king 's officials , and he placed them in the king 's presence . He also made them king 's officials , and no one could hold them back .
GOLD:	Then the king returned to his palace and spent the night fasting . He refused his usual entertainment and could n't sleep at all that night .

ID:	1041
INPUT:	▁Hitz ▁hu tsez ▁ez ▁da ▁mor roi a ▁zen tza raz ten ▁; ▁u ler tu ▁e gin ▁ar ren ▁, ▁ez ▁du ▁e sa nik ▁e gin go ▁.
PRED:	This is a result , no one can hear the meaning of the word .
GOLD:	Words alone will not discipline a servant ; the words may be understood , but they are not heeded .

ID:	1042
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁, ▁u re ta tik ▁a te ra tze ra ko an ▁, ▁ze ru a ▁ur ra tzen ▁i ku si ▁zu en ▁e ta ▁Es pi ri tu a ▁, ▁u so - tan ke ran ▁, ▁be re ga na ▁jais ten ▁.
PRED:	When Jesus saw that the water had come down from heaven , he saw the Holy Spirit coming down from heaven .
GOLD:	As Jesus came up out of the water , he saw the heavens splitting apart and the Holy Spirit descending on him like a dove .

ID:	1043
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Jef tek ▁, ▁Ga la a de ko ▁gi zo nak ▁bil du rik ▁, ▁ef raim dar rei ▁e ra so ▁e ta ▁men de ra tu ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁. ▁Ef raim dar rek ▁e san ▁o hi ▁zu ten ▁, ▁Ef raim ▁e ta ▁Ma na se sen ▁lur ral de ▁ar te an ▁bi zi ▁zi ren ▁ga la ad tar rak ▁ef raim dar ren ▁ar te tik ▁al de ▁e gi nak ▁zi re la ▁.
PRED:	Then Jephthah summoned the men of Gad and led them to the hill country of Ephraim . He said to them , “ The land of Ephraim and Ephraim , the tribe of Ephraim , the tribe of Ephraim , the tribe of Ephraim , and the tribe of Ephraim .
GOLD:	The people of Ephraim responded , “ You men of Gilead are nothing more than fugitives from Ephraim and Manasseh. ” So Jephthah gathered all the men of Gilead and attacked the men of Ephraim and defeated them .

ID:	1044
INPUT:	▁gau za ▁guz ti e tan ▁zeu ▁e gin tza ▁o nen ▁e re du ▁a ger tuz ▁: ▁i ra kas pen ▁gar bi ko ▁e ta ▁gi za bi de tsu ▁;
PRED:	You must make all these things right in the sight of the Lord and make them pure .
GOLD:	And you yourself must be an example to them by doing good works of every kind . Let everything you do reflect the integrity and seriousness of your teaching .

ID:	1045
INPUT:	▁Hau xe ▁ja ki na raz ten ▁di o gu ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁er re ge a ri ▁: ▁ju du ek ▁hi ri a ▁ber ri ro ▁e rai ki ▁e ta ▁har re si ak ▁ja so tzen ▁ba di tuz te ▁, ▁las ter ▁gal du ko ▁di tu e la ▁er re ge ak ▁Euf ra tes ▁i bai a ren ▁men de bal de ko ▁lur ral de ak ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Jews says : “ We will rebuild the walls of the province west of the Euphrates River , the king of the Euphrates River , and the province west of the Euphrates River . ”
GOLD:	We declare to the king that if this city is rebuilt and its walls are completed , the province west of the Euphrates River will be lost to you . ”

ID:	1046
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁hi ri ak ▁hon da tu rik ▁u tzi ko ▁di tut ▁, ▁e ta ▁zu ▁zeu ▁ba sa mor tu ▁bi hur tu ko ▁; ▁or du an ▁ja kin go ▁du zu ni ▁nai ze la ▁Jau na ▁.
PRED:	I will destroy your cities , and you will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	I will demolish your citiesand make you desolate.Then you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	1047
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁di ru a re kin ▁ba te ra ▁ni re ▁e da lon tzi a ▁, ▁zi lar rez ko a ▁, ▁gaz te e na ren ▁za ku - mu tur re an ▁» <unk> ▁Jo se ren ▁e sa na ▁be te ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	And I will send out the cup of my guard , and you will know that Joseph was young . ”
GOLD:	Then put my personal silver cup at the top of the youngest brother 's sack , along with the money for his grain. ” So the manager did as Joseph instructed him .

ID:	1048
INPUT:	▁He ro de sek ▁hu ra ▁a te ra ▁be har ▁zu en ▁aur re ko ▁gau e an ▁, ▁Ped ro ▁lo ▁ze go en ▁bi ▁sol da du ren ▁ar te an ▁, ▁bi ▁ka tez ▁lo tu rik ▁, ▁e ta ▁gu ar di ak ▁a te an ▁kar tze la ▁zain tzen ▁.
PRED:	When Herod was in the prison , he found Peter in the prison until he was bound with two chains .
GOLD:	The night before Peter was to be placed on trial , he was asleep , fastened with two chains between two soldiers . Others stood guard at the prison gate .

ID:	1049
INPUT:	▁Ze ren ▁Jain ko a ren gan ▁zo ra ke ri a ▁di ru di e na ▁gi za ki ak ▁bai no ▁ja kin tsu a go ▁bai ta ▁, ▁e ta ▁Jain ko a ren gan ▁a hu le zi a ▁di ru di e na ▁gi za ki ak ▁bai no ▁in dar tsu a go ▁.
PRED:	For God is more powerful than human wisdom , and wisdom is more powerful than people . He is more powerful than people .
GOLD:	This foolish plan of God is wiser than the wisest of human plans , and God 's weakness is stronger than the greatest of human strength .

ID:	1050
INPUT:	▁Zeu re ▁gaiz ta ke ri an ▁se gu ru ▁zeun den ▁, ▁pen tsa tuz ▁: ▁“ ▁Ez ▁nau ▁i nork ▁i kus ten ▁” <unk> re ▁ja kin du ri ak ▁e ta ▁zi en tzi ak des bi de ra tu ▁zai tuz te ▁, ▁e ta ▁pen tsa ra zi ▁: ▁“ ▁Neu ▁, ▁e ta ▁bes te ▁i nor ▁ez ▁! ▁”
PRED:	When you saw your wickedness , you said , ‘ Do n't tell me the truth , ' they said , ‘ Do n't tell me , ‘ You are too wise . '
GOLD:	“ You felt secure in your wickedness. ‘ No one sees me , ' you said.But your ‘ wisdom ' and ‘ knowledge ' have led you astray , and you said , ‘ I am the only one , and there is no other . '

ID:	1051
INPUT:	▁Ja kin ▁zu en ▁He ro des ▁a gin ta ri ak ▁ger ta tzen ▁zen ▁guz ti a ▁, ▁e ta ▁zer ▁pen tsa ▁ez ▁ze ki e la ▁ze go en ▁. ▁Ba tzu ek ▁Jo an ▁hil da ko en ▁ar te tik ▁piz tu ▁ze la ▁zi o ten ▁;
PRED:	When Herod heard that John was talking about all the things he had done , he was n't dead . But when John was dead , he was raised from the dead .
GOLD:	When Herod Antipas , the ruler of Galilee , heard about everything Jesus was doing , he was puzzled . Some were saying that John the Baptist had been raised from the dead .

ID:	1052
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁e san ▁zi en ▁Moi se si ▁e ta ▁A a ro ni ▁:
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,
GOLD:	and the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,

ID:	1053
INPUT:	▁aur rez ▁be ti da nik ▁be rak ▁zu en ▁e ta ▁Kris to ▁Je sus ▁gu re ▁Jau na ren gan ▁be te ▁du en ▁as mo a ren ▁ja kin du ri a ▁.
PRED:	He himself himself himself himself himself himself himself himself himself has heard his message .
GOLD:	This was his eternal plan , which he carried out through Christ Jesus our Lord .

ID:	1054
INPUT:	▁« ▁Han ▁da tza ▁E lam go ▁er re ge a ▁be re ▁ger la ri ▁guz ti en ▁hi lo bi ez ▁in gu ra tu a ▁; ▁ger ran ▁hi lak ▁di ra ▁de nak ▁. ▁Si nes ga be ▁ho ri ek ▁, ▁bi zi en ▁ar te an ▁i zu - i ka ra ▁e zar tzen ▁zu te nak ▁, ▁lur ▁az pi ko ▁mun du ra ▁jai tsi ▁di ra ▁, ▁de so ho rez ▁be te rik ▁, ▁hil da ko e kin ▁el kar tze ra ▁.
PRED:	“ There is a great army of Elam , surrounded by the graves of all the hordes of the hordes . They are slaughtered by the sword of the dead . They are buried with the sword of the earth , and they will die with you .
GOLD:	“ Elam lies there surrounded by the graves of all its hordes , those who were slaughtered by the sword . They struck terror in the hearts of people everywhere , but now they have descended as outcasts to the world below . Now they lie in the pit and share the shame of those who have gone before them .

ID:	1055
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ez ▁o te ▁di ra ▁bi ▁txo ri ▁sos ▁ba te an ▁sal tzen ▁? ▁Ha la ▁e re ▁, ▁ez ▁da ▁bat ▁ba kar ra ▁e re ▁lur re ra ▁e ror tzen ▁zu en ▁Ai ta ren ▁bai me nik ▁ga be ▁.
PRED:	“ Do n't you live in a single moment ? If a bird falls into its home , it is not yours .
GOLD:	What is the price of two sparrows — one copper coin ? But not a single sparrow can fall to the ground without your Father knowing it .

ID:	1056
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁i tzu li ▁e ta ▁u sain ▁go zo ko ▁u ken du ak ▁pres ta tu ▁zi tuz <unk> run ba te an ▁a tse den ▁har tu ▁zu ten ▁, ▁a gin du a ▁ze go en ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	Then they returned to the room and shut the doors of the Most High , just as he had done .
GOLD:	Then they went home and prepared spices and ointments to anoint his body . But by the time they were finished the Sabbath had begun , so they rested as required by the law .

ID:	1057
INPUT:	▁Jain ko a ren ▁on gi na hi a ▁ez ▁dut ▁al fer ri ka ko ▁bi hur tu ▁na hi ▁. ▁Bai na ▁Jain ko ak ▁le ge a ▁be te tze a ga tik ▁o nar tzen ▁gai tu e la ▁e gi a ▁ba litz ▁, ▁al fer rik ▁hi la ▁i zan go ▁zen ▁Kris to ▁.
PRED:	I do n't know that God wants us to do what is right . But if God wants us to obey God 's law , he would not be counted .
GOLD:	I do not treat the grace of God as meaningless . For if keeping the law could make us right with God , then there was no need for Christ to die .

ID:	1058
INPUT:	▁Zaz pi ▁e gun ▁ho ri en ▁bu ru an ▁ber ri ro ▁mi a tu ko ▁du ▁, ▁e ta ▁zau ri a ▁, ▁a za le an ▁za bal du ▁ga be ▁, ▁zur bil duz ▁do a la ▁i kus ten ▁ba du ▁, ▁gar bi tzat ▁ai tor tu ko ▁du ▁; ▁zor ne ▁hu tsa ▁da ▁. ▁Gai xo ak ▁ar ro pak ▁gar bi tu ko ▁di tu ▁e ta ▁gar bi ▁gel di tu ko ▁da ▁.
PRED:	On the seventh day the priest must examine the affected area and finds that the affected area is ceremonially clean . If he finds that the contaminated area is ceremonially clean , he must pronounce the person ceremonially clean .
GOLD:	On the seventh day the priest will make another examination . If he finds the affected area has faded and has not spread , the priest will pronounce the person ceremonially clean . It was only a rash . The person 's clothing must be washed , and the person will be ceremonially clean .

ID:	1059
INPUT:	▁I su ri ▁o li o a ▁er re - o pa ri en ▁al da re a ren ▁e ta ▁ber ta ko ▁tres na ▁guz ti en ▁gai ne ra ▁. ▁Ho ne la ▁sa ga ra tu ko ▁du zu ▁, ▁e ta ▁guz tiz ▁sak ra tu a ▁i zan go ▁da ▁al da re a ▁.
PRED:	The altar of burnt offering , the altar , and all its utensils will be holy . It will be holy , and it will be holy .
GOLD:	Anoint the altar of burnt offering and its utensils to consecrate them . Then the altar will become absolutely holy .

ID:	1060
INPUT:	▁ze ru - sa bai a ▁lur re an ▁oi nar ri tzen ▁du ▁, ▁e ta ▁hor ren ▁gai ne an ▁e rai ki tzen be re ▁jau re gi a ▁; ▁i tsas ▁u rak ▁bil du e ta ▁lur ▁gai ne ra ▁i sur tzen ▁di tu.Jau na ▁du ▁i ze na ▁.
PRED:	When the heavens fall on the earth , it is the foundations of the heavens and the earth , the Lord , the God of the earth , have spoken !
GOLD:	The Lord 's home reaches up to the heavens , while its foundation is on the earth.He draws up water from the oceansand pours it down as rain on the land.The Lord is his name !

ID:	1061
INPUT:	▁en tzun ▁zuk ▁ze ru tik ▁, ▁bi zi ▁za ren ▁to ki ▁hor re ta tik ▁, ▁e ta ▁bar ka tu ▁. ▁E gi zu ▁har ▁de za la ▁nork ▁be re ▁jo ka e ra ren ▁or dai na ▁, ▁on gi ▁bai ta ki zu ▁ha la ko a ren ▁bar ru a ren ▁ber ri ▁; ▁i zan ▁e re ▁, ▁zuk ▁ba kar rik ▁da ki zu ▁gi zon - e ma ku me ▁guz ti en ▁bar ru a ren ▁ber ri ▁.
PRED:	then hear from heaven and forgive the sins of the heavens . But you have heard that our sins are forgiven . But you have heard that we have been cleansed from heaven . But you have heard that we were safe from heaven .
GOLD:	then hear from heaven where you live , and forgive . Give your people what their actions deserve , for you alone know each human heart .

ID:	1062
INPUT:	▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁er re ge a ren ▁be so ak ▁in dar tu ko ▁di tut ▁, ▁fa ra oi a re nak ▁a hul du ta ▁e ro ri ko ▁di ren ▁bi tar te an ▁. ▁Ni re ▁ez pa ta ▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁er re ge a ren ▁es ku an ▁jar ri ▁e ta ▁hark ▁E gip to ren ▁kon tra ▁as tin du ko ▁du e ne an ▁, ▁or du an ▁ja kin go ▁du te ▁ni ▁nai ze la ▁Jau na ▁.
PRED:	I will hand them over to Pharaoh , king of Babylon , and I will hand them over to Pharaoh , king of Babylon , and I will hand them over to the land of Egypt . They will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon , while the arms of Pharaoh fall useless to his sides . And when I put my sword in the hand of Babylon 's king and he brings it against the land of Egypt , Egypt will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	1063
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁di ot ▁nik ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du nak ▁: ▁Ho na ▁he men ▁ni ▁zu re ▁aur ka ▁, ▁lo tsa ga be ▁ha la ko a ▁! ▁Hel du ▁da ▁zu re ▁e gu na ▁, ▁kon tu ak ▁e ma te ko ▁or du a ▁!
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : ‘ What sorrow awaits you , O Lord of Heaven 's Armies , you will be disgraced !
GOLD:	“ See , I am your enemy , you arrogant people , ” says the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies. “ Your day of reckoning has arrived — the day when I will punish you .

ID:	1064
INPUT:	▁Gau ▁e ta ▁e gun ▁gai ne an ▁nu en ▁zu re ▁es ku ▁go gor ra ▁, ▁in dar rak ▁ma kal tzen ▁a ri ▁zi tzaiz ki dan ▁, ▁u da ko ▁sar go ri tan ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	I lay on the night on the day of my hand , and I could drink it again .
GOLD:	Day and night your hand of discipline was heavy on me.My strength evaporated like water in the summer heat.Interlude

ID:	1065
INPUT:	▁O sa sun tsu ▁i rau na ra zi ko ▁nau zu ▁, ▁zu tik ▁eu tsi ko ▁zeu re ▁aur re an ▁be ti ko ▁.
PRED:	You will keep me safe from your presence , and you will stand before me .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , who lives from everlasting to everlasting.Amen and amen !

ID:	1066
INPUT:	▁Hor ren bes te ▁a be re ▁i za nik ▁, ▁lur ral de ▁hark ▁ez ▁zi en ▁de nak ▁ba te ra ▁bi zi tze ko ▁e go ki e ra rik ▁es kain tzen ▁;
PRED:	Not a single person who lives in the land he had given to them .
GOLD:	But the land could not support both Abram and Lot with all their flocks and herds living so close together .

ID:	1067
INPUT:	▁I par ral de ko ▁e ra so a ▁i ra gar ri
PRED:	The Coming Destruction
GOLD:	Coming Judgment against Judah

ID:	1068
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁bai ti ot ▁nik ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁Gor ro ta gar ri ▁e ta ▁naz ka gar ri ▁e gin ▁zaiz ki zun ▁hai en ▁es ku ▁u tzi ko ▁zai tut ▁;
PRED:	“ For this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will abandon you and hate you .
GOLD:	“ For this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will surely hand you over to your enemies , to those you loathe , those you rejected .

ID:	1069
INPUT:	▁lur ra ri ▁be re ▁er tze ta tik ▁hel du rik gaiz to ak ▁ber ta tik ▁as tin ▁di tzan ▁?
PRED:	Why do you turn away from the earth ? Do you turn away from the face of the earth ?
GOLD:	Have you made daylight spread to the ends of the earth , to bring an end to the night 's wickedness ?

ID:	1070
INPUT:	▁Ha ren ▁bu ru ko ▁i le a ▁zu ri a ▁zen ▁, ▁ar ti le a ▁e ta ▁e lur ra ▁be za la ko a ▁, ▁be gi ak ▁su gar ra ▁be za la ko ak ▁,
PRED:	The head of the hair of the earth was like a fire , like a fire .
GOLD:	His head and his hair were white like wool , as white as snow . And his eyes were like flames of fire .

ID:	1071
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ho ne la ▁di o ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du nak ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁Jain ko ak ▁: ▁I ku si ak ▁di tu zu e ▁Je ru sa le men ▁e ta ▁Ju da ko ▁hi ri en ▁aur ka ▁bi da li ▁di tu dan ▁zo ri gai tzak ▁: ▁hon da tu rik ▁e ta ▁bi zi la gu nik ▁ga be ▁dau de ▁.
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : The people of Judah and Jerusalem will live there . They will be no survivors .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : You saw the calamity I brought on Jerusalem and all the towns of Judah . They now lie deserted and in ruins .

ID:	1072
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁al den du ko ▁gai tu ▁Kris tok ▁di gun ▁mai ta su ne tik ▁? ▁A tse ka be ak ▁, ▁lar ri ak ▁, ▁e ra so al di ak ▁, ▁go se ak ▁, ▁jan tzi rik ▁e zak ▁, ▁ar ris ku ak ▁, ▁ez pa tak ▁?
PRED:	Who has chosen us from Christ ? Who is our Savior and sorrow ? Who is troubled ? He has no mercy on us ?
GOLD:	Can anything ever separate us from Christ 's love ? Does it mean he no longer loves us if we have trouble or calamity , or are persecuted , or hungry , or destitute , or in danger , or threatened with death ?

ID:	1073
INPUT:	▁Ha la ▁e re ▁, ▁ez ▁zi on ▁on da re tzat ▁lur rik ▁e man ▁, ▁ez ta ▁oin ▁bat ▁e re ▁; ▁bai na ▁be ra ri ▁e ta ▁be ra ren ▁on do ren go ei ▁e man go ▁zi e la ▁a gin du ▁zi on ▁, ▁o rain dik ▁Ab ra ha mek ▁se me - a la ba rik ▁ez ▁zu en ▁ar ren ▁.
PRED:	But Abraham gave no inheritance to his descendants , and he gave it to his sons , Isaac , and Jacob , and Jacob . But Abraham did not allow his sons to follow Abraham .
GOLD:	“ But God gave him no inheritance here , not even one square foot of land . God did promise , however , that eventually the whole land would belong to Abraham and his descendants — even though he had no children yet .

ID:	1074
INPUT:	▁A gi an ▁a di tu ko ▁di zu te ▁e ta ▁be ren ▁jo ka bi de ▁o ker re tik ▁bi hur tu ko ▁di ra ▁. ▁Hor re la ▁bal din ▁ba da ▁, ▁da mu tu ▁e gin go ▁naiz ▁e ta ▁ez ▁dut ▁be te ko ▁be rai en ▁e gi te ▁gaiz to en ga tik ▁e ma te a ▁pen tsa tu a ▁du dan ▁zi gor ra ▁.
PRED:	I will turn away from them , and they will turn away from their sins . But if they do n't turn away from them , I will punish them for doing wrong .
GOLD:	Perhaps they will listen and turn from their evil ways . Then I will change my mind about the disaster I am ready to pour out on them because of their sins .

ID:	1075
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁be dein ka tu ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁zaz pi gar ren ▁e gu na ▁e ta ▁sa ga ra tu ▁, ▁e gun ▁hor re tan ▁har tu ▁bai tzu en ▁a tse den ▁kre a zi o - la ne tik ▁.
PRED:	Then he blessed them seven days and blessed them in the seventh day , and in the seventh day he took them in the boat .
GOLD:	And God blessed the seventh day and declared it holy , because it was the day when he rested from all his work of creation .

ID:	1076
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ha la ▁ger ta tu ko ▁da ▁Gi zo na ren ▁Se me a ▁a ger tu ko ▁den ▁e gu ne an ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	“ This is what the Son of Man will appear before the Son of Man .
GOLD:	Yes , it will be ‘ business as usual ' right up to the day when the Son of Man is revealed .

ID:	1077
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren ▁es pi ri tu ak ▁e ra gi nik ▁, ▁Ga la ad ▁e ta ▁Ma na se sen ▁lur ral de ak ▁i ga ro ▁e ta ▁Ga la a de ko ▁Mitz pa ra ▁hel du ▁zen ▁Jef te ▁, ▁e ta ▁he men dik ▁a mon dar ren ▁lur ral de ra ▁jo ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	Then the Spirit of the Lord came out to Gilead and Gilead , and the half-tribe of Manasseh came to Gilead and returned to Gilead .
GOLD:	At that time the Spirit of the Lord came upon Jephthah , and he went throughout the land of Gilead and Manasseh , including Mizpah in Gilead , and from there he led an army against the Ammonites .

ID:	1078
INPUT:	▁Tenplu a ren ▁men de bal de an ▁, ▁e rai kin ▁bat ▁ze go en ▁hu tsar te a ren ▁az ke ne an ▁: ▁ber ro gei ta ▁bost ▁me tro ▁zen ▁lu ze ▁e ta ▁ho gei ta ▁ha ma bost ▁za bal ▁; ▁hor mak ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁bi ▁me tro ▁e ta ▁er di ▁lo di ▁.
PRED:	On the north side of the Temple of the Temple , the outer block of rooms were 83/4 feet long and 45 feet wide . The entire area was 101/2 feet long and 45 feet wide .
GOLD:	A large building stood on the west , facing the Temple courtyard . It was 1221/2 feet wide and 1571/2 feet long , and its walls were 83/4 feet thick .

ID:	1079
INPUT:	▁Ga den ▁e ta ▁Ru be nen ▁on do ren go ek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi o ten ▁Moi se si ▁: ▁— ▁Prest ▁gau de ▁zu re ▁a gin du a ▁be te tze ko ▁, ▁jau na ▁.
PRED:	But the tribes of Reuben and Gad replied , “ We must be ready to work with you . ”
GOLD:	Then the men of Gad and Reuben replied , “ We , your servants , will follow your instructions exactly .

ID:	1080
INPUT:	▁Fa ri seu ek ▁, ▁ho ri ▁i kus te an ▁, ▁e san ▁zi e ten ▁i kas le ei ▁: ▁— ▁No la tan ▁ja ten ▁du ▁zu en ▁mai su ak ▁zer ga la ri ▁e ta ▁be ka ta ri e kin ▁?
PRED:	When the Pharisees saw this , they asked the disciples , “ What do you know ? ”
GOLD:	But when the Pharisees saw this , they asked his disciples , “ Why does your teacher eat with such scum ? ”

ID:	1081
INPUT:	▁« ▁E tor ri ▁zi ren ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁ar ra tsal de ko ▁bos te ta ko ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁zi lar rez ko ▁txan pon ▁ba na ▁ja so ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	“ The following day they came to me , and they paid no silver for the Bread of the Presence .
GOLD:	When those hired at five o'clock were paid , each received a full day 's wage .

ID:	1082
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁e zar ri ▁sas ki ▁ba te an ▁; ▁ge ro ▁, ▁aur kez tu ▁sas ki a ▁ze kor ra re kin ▁e ta ▁bi ▁a ha ri e kin ▁ba te ra ▁.
PRED:	Then take some of the basket and set it in the basket . Then he took some of the basket with the basket with the basket .
GOLD:	Place them all in a single basket , and present them at the entrance of the Tabernacle , along with the young bull and the two rams .

ID:	1083
INPUT:	▁« ▁Zu ▁, ▁Is ra el ▁, ▁ni re ▁zer bi tza ri a ▁; ▁zu ▁, ▁Ja kob ▁, ▁nik ▁au ke ra tu ri ko ▁her ri a ▁, ▁ni re ▁a dis ki de ▁Ab ra ha me non do ren go a ▁.
PRED:	“ You are my servant , Jacob , my servant , Jacob , my servant , Jacob , and Jacob .
GOLD:	“ But as for you , Israel my servant , Jacob my chosen one , descended from Abraham my friend ,

ID:	1084
INPUT:	▁“ ▁Aur ki tu ta ko ▁har ra pa ki nak ba na tzen ▁a ri ▁di ra ▁, ▁nos ki ▁! ▁Ba na ▁, ▁bi na ▁nes ka txa gu da ri ▁ba koi tza ri ▁, ▁ko lo rez ko ▁e hu nak ▁Si se ra ren tzat ▁, ▁ko lo rez ko ▁oi ha lak ▁: ▁ko lo re tan ▁bor da tu ri ko ▁oi ha lak ha ren ▁le po ra ko ▁” ▁.
PRED:	“ They will attack the walls of the city , ” says the Lord. “ The young women of Jerusalem will be brought to the king of Babylon , but they will shout , ‘ The virgin daughter of Babylon . '
GOLD:	‘ They must be dividing the captured plunder — with a woman or two for every man.There will be colorful robes for Sisera , and colorful , embroidered robes for me.Yes , the plunder will includecolorful robes embroidered on both sides . '

ID:	1085
INPUT:	▁— ▁Zer ▁da ▁? ▁— ▁gal de tu ▁ni <unk> ▁e ran tzun ▁zi dan ▁: ▁— ▁On tzi ▁han di ▁bat ▁da ▁: ▁lur ral de ▁guz ti a ren ▁be ka tu a ▁a di e raz ten ▁du ▁.
PRED:	“ What do you think about me ? ” I asked . “ There is a large land flowing with milk and honey . ”
GOLD:	“ What is it ? ” I asked.He replied , “ It is a basket for measuring grain , and it 's filled with the sins of everyone throughout the land . ”

ID:	1086
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai dan ▁Jau na ▁:
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	1087
INPUT:	▁Tre be ak ▁e ta ▁la gun tze ko ▁go go tsu ▁zi ren ▁e ma ku me ek ▁a huntz - i le a ▁e hun du ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	You are your helper and your mother ; your mother was your shield .
GOLD:	All the women who were willing used their skills to spin the goat hair into yarn .

ID:	1088
INPUT:	▁« ▁Zu re ▁e maz te ak ▁e ta ▁se me - a la bak ▁ba bi lo ni ar rei ▁e man go ▁diz ki e te ▁e ta ▁zeu ▁e re ▁ez ▁za ra ▁lib ra tu ko ▁: ▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁er re ge ak ▁pre so ▁har tu ko ▁zai tu ▁, ▁e ta ▁hi ri a ▁er re ▁e gin go ▁du ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ Your children and your wives will be taken into exile , and your children will be taken into exile . You will be led away into exile , and you will be led into exile . ”
GOLD:	All your wives and children will be led out to the Babylonians , and you will not escape . You will be seized by the king of Babylon , and this city will be burned down . ”

ID:	1089
INPUT:	▁Prin tze en ▁es ku bi de ak ▁e ta ▁be te be har rak
PRED:	The Priests and Levites
GOLD:	Rules for the Princes

ID:	1090
INPUT:	▁Sei ▁ur tez ▁e rein go ▁du zu e ▁zeu en ▁so ro e tan ▁, ▁sei ▁ur tez ▁i nau si ko ▁ma has ti ak ▁e ta ▁bil du ko ▁uz tak ▁;
PRED:	You will plant six years old , and you will plant your vineyards .
GOLD:	For six years you may plant your fields and prune your vineyards and harvest your crops ,

ID:	1091
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁sal ba tu ▁zi tu en ▁ar ren ▁, ▁be re ▁i ze na ren ▁o ho re a ga tik ▁e ta ▁be re ▁a hal me na ▁a zal tze ko ▁.
PRED:	He saved them from the power of the Lord , and he gave them the power of the Lord .
GOLD:	Even so , he saved them — to defend the honor of his nameand to demonstrate his mighty power .

ID:	1092
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁Ba da kit ▁Jau nak ▁lur ral de ▁hau ▁e man ▁di zu e la ▁. ▁He men ▁, ▁hi ri an ▁, ▁i zu tu rik ▁gau de ▁e ta ▁her ri al de ko ▁jen de ▁guz ti a ▁e re ▁i ka raz ▁da go ▁zu en ▁aur re an ▁,
PRED:	“ Yes , ” he said , “ I have given you this land flowing with milk and honey . You have given it to all the people of the land .
GOLD:	“ I know the Lord has given you this land , ” she told them . “ We are all afraid of you . Everyone in the land is living in terror .

ID:	1093
INPUT:	▁Goi bel ▁jar ri ▁zen ▁er re ge a ▁, ▁bai na ▁ma hai ki de en ▁aur re an ▁e gin da ko ▁zi na ren ga tik ▁, ▁ez ▁zi on ▁u ka tu ▁na hi ▁i zan ▁.
PRED:	But the next morning he got up early the next morning , but he refused to turn away from the king 's table .
GOLD:	Then the king deeply regretted what he had said ; but because of the vows he had made in front of his guests , he could n't refuse her .

ID:	1094
INPUT:	▁No la ▁oz pi na ▁a ho ra ko ▁e ta ▁ke a ▁be gi e ta ra ko ▁, ▁ha la ▁al fer ra ▁la ne an ▁har tzen ▁du e na ren tza ko ▁.
PRED:	People who boast about their hearts , and they will boast about their hearts .
GOLD:	Lazy people irritate their employers , like vinegar to the teeth or smoke in the eyes .

ID:	1095
INPUT:	▁A ta lon do ak ▁kan po ko ▁a ta ri rantz ▁jo tzen ▁zu en ▁; ▁hor mek ▁pal mon do ak ▁zi tuz ten ▁al de ▁ba na tan ▁zi zel ka tu ta ▁. ▁Zor tzi ▁har mai la ▁i go ▁be har ▁zi ren ▁sar re ra ra ▁i ris te ko ▁.
PRED:	The entry room faced into the entry room , and there were eight steps leading into the entry room . There were eight steps leading into the entry room .
GOLD:	Its entry room faced into the outer courtyard , and it had palm tree decorations on the columns . There were eight steps leading to its entrance .

ID:	1096
INPUT:	▁e ra so pe an ▁bai ▁, ▁bai na ▁es ku tik ▁u tzi ta ▁ez ▁; ▁lur re ra ▁bo ta tzen ▁gai tuz te ▁, ▁bai na ▁sun tsi tzen ▁ez ▁;
PRED:	They thrown away from the sea , but no one can drive us out of the land .
GOLD:	We are hunted down , but never abandoned by God . We get knocked down , but we are not destroyed .

ID:	1097
INPUT:	▁El kar ke ta - e txo la ren ▁aur re ra ▁e ra man ▁zu ten ▁Moi se sek ▁a gin du ▁zi e na ▁; ▁el kar te ▁o so a ▁hur bil du ▁zen ▁e ta ▁zu tik ▁ze go en ▁Jau na ren ▁aur re an ▁.
PRED:	So Moses brought them out of the Tabernacle and brought them out of the Tabernacle before the Lord .
GOLD:	So the people presented all these things at the entrance of the Tabernacle , just as Moses had commanded . Then the whole community came forward and stood before the Lord .

ID:	1098
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁or du an ▁e ta ▁ge hi a go ▁ez ku ta tu ko ▁di et ▁aur pe gi a ▁, ▁jain ko ▁ar ro tzen ga na ▁bi hur tuz ▁e gin go ▁du ten ▁gaiz ta ke ri a ga tik ▁.
PRED:	But I will show no more than any other god , and they will be deceived by worshiping other gods .
GOLD:	At that time I will hide my face from them on account of all the evil they commit by worshiping other gods .

ID:	1099
INPUT:	▁zi mur rez ▁be te ▁e ta ▁he zur ▁e ta ▁a zal ▁u tzi ▁nau zu ▁: ▁hor rek ▁sa la tzen ▁e ta ▁a ku sa tzen ▁nau ▁.
PRED:	They told me , ‘ I am going to tell you the truth , and you will see me . '
GOLD:	As if to prove I have sinned , you 've reduced me to skin and bones.My gaunt flesh testifies against me .

ID:	1100
INPUT:	▁Da mas ko ko ▁si na go ge ta ra ko ▁gu tu nak ▁es ka tu ▁ziz ki on ▁, ▁aur ki tzen ▁zi tu en ▁kris tau - bi de a ren ▁jar rai tzai le ak ▁, ▁gi za se me ▁na hiz ▁e ma ku me ▁, ▁Je ru sa le me ra ▁pre so ▁e ra man ▁a hal ▁i za te ko ▁.
PRED:	When the king of Damascus found favor with the believers in Damascus , he turned over to Jerusalem and took them to Jerusalem . He led them to Jerusalem to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	He requested letters addressed to the synagogues in Damascus , asking for their cooperation in the arrest of any followers of the Way he found there . He wanted to bring them — both men and women — back to Jerusalem in chains .

ID:	1101
INPUT:	▁Hur bil ▁da ▁Jau na ren ▁e tor re ra
PRED:	The Coming Day of the Lord
GOLD:	Jesus Is Coming

ID:	1102
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁hitz ▁e gin ▁zi dan
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then I received this message from the Lord :

ID:	1103
INPUT:	▁Gai ne ra ▁, ▁er ri tuz ko ▁aur kez pen - kei nu a ▁e gi nez ▁es kain tzen ▁diz ki da zun ▁bes te ▁o pa ri gai en ▁za ti ▁bat ▁e ma ten ▁di zu et ▁, ▁zu ri ▁e ta ▁zu re ▁on do ren go ei ▁, ▁gi zo nez ko ▁na hiz ▁e ma ku mez ko ▁: ▁gar bi ▁da go en ▁e do nork ▁jan ▁de za ke ▁ho ri e ta tik ▁. ▁Be ti ko ▁le ge ▁i zan go ▁du zu e ▁hau ▁.
PRED:	This is a permanent law for you and offer sacrifices to the Lord . It is a permanent law for you , and you may eat it from the guilt offering . It is a permanent law for you . It is a permanent law for you , a man who is ceremonially clean .
GOLD:	“ All the sacred offerings and special offerings presented to me when the Israelites lift them up before the altar also belong to you . I have given them to you and to your sons and daughters as your permanent share . Any member of your family who is ceremonially clean may eat of these offerings .

ID:	1104
INPUT:	▁E tsai ▁in dar tsu a gan dik ▁sal ba tu ▁nin du en ▁, ▁ni ▁bai no ▁in dar tsu a go ▁zi ren ▁a re ri o en gan dik ▁.
PRED:	He rescued me from the power of my enemies ; he rescued me from the power of my enemies .
GOLD:	They attacked me at a moment when I was in distress , but the Lord supported me .

ID:	1105
INPUT:	▁Moi se sek ▁Jo su e ▁be re ▁on do ren go ▁i zen da tu
PRED:	The Land Given to Joshua
GOLD:	Joshua Becomes Israel 's Leader

ID:	1106
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zai tza te la ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁i nork ▁gai tzets ▁jan - e da nak ▁e do ▁jai e gun ▁, ▁il ber ri ▁na hiz ▁la run ba tak ▁di re la ▁e ta ▁.
PRED:	You must not eat or drink the annual festivals of the festival .
GOLD:	So do n't let anyone condemn you for what you eat or drink , or for not celebrating certain holy days or new moon ceremonies or Sabbaths .

ID:	1107
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁Ja ko bek ▁o toitz ▁hau ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁: ▁« ▁Jau na ▁, ▁gu re ▁gu ra so ▁Ab ra ha men ▁e ta ▁I sa a ken ▁Jain ko a ▁, ▁zuk ▁e san ▁di da zu ▁: ▁“ ▁I tzul ▁zai tez ▁zeu re ▁lur ral de ra ▁e ta ▁zeu re ▁a hai de en ga na ▁, ▁e ta ▁be dein ka tu ko ▁zai tut ▁” ▁.
PRED:	Then Jacob prayed , “ O Lord , God of our ancestors , Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob , and Jacob , have said , ‘ Return to the land of your grandfather Abraham , and I will bless you and bless you . '
GOLD:	I am not worthy of all the unfailing love and faithfulness you have shown to me , your servant . When I left home and crossed the Jordan River , I owned nothing except a walking stick . Now my household fills two large camps !

ID:	1108
INPUT:	▁Az ter ▁de za gun ▁ar re taz ▁geu re ▁jo ka bi de a ▁, ▁e ta ▁i tzul ▁gai te zen ▁Jau na ren ga na ▁.
PRED:	Let us go to the Lord , and let us return to the Lord .
GOLD:	Instead , let us test and examine our ways.Let us turn back to the Lord .

ID:	1109
INPUT:	▁Be te rik ▁beu de ▁gu re ▁bi hi te gi ak ▁, ▁de ne ta ri ko ▁frui tuz ▁hor ni tu ak ▁; ▁u gal ▁bi tez ▁ar tal de ak ▁mi la ka ▁e ta ▁mi la ka ▁gu re ▁ze lai e tan ▁;
PRED:	Let them be filled with joy , and they will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	May our barns be filledwith crops of every kind.May the flocks in our fields multiply by the thousands , even tens of thousands ,

ID:	1110
INPUT:	▁Piz ti ak ▁e ta ▁i ku si ▁di tu zun ▁ha mar ▁a dar rek ▁gor ro to ▁i zan go ▁di o te ▁e ma gal du a ri ▁, ▁bi lu zik ▁e ta ▁e zer ▁ga be ▁u tzi ko ▁du te ▁; ▁ha ren ▁ha ra gi a ▁i ren tsi ▁e gin go ▁du te ▁e ta ▁hon dar rak ▁su tan ▁er re ko ▁;
PRED:	Then you will see the affected area , and you will be able to touch the land . You will have a prostitute , but you will be burned into the sea .
GOLD:	The scarlet beast and his ten horns all hate the prostitute . They will strip her naked , eat her flesh , and burn her remains with fire .

ID:	1111
INPUT:	<unk> dar rok ▁zer ga ▁or dain du ▁zi o ten ▁U zi a <unk> nen ▁i ze na ▁E gip to ko ▁mu ge ta rai no ▁za bal du ▁zen ▁, ▁o so ▁in dar tsu ▁i za te ra ▁hel du ▁bai tzen ▁.
PRED:	But the young men of Moab gave birth to the king of Egypt , and the king 's fame spread out over the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	The Meunites paid annual tribute to him , and his fame spread even to Egypt , for he had become very powerful .

ID:	1112
INPUT:	▁Be gi ra ▁, ▁se ni de ok ▁: ▁hiz ke ta ▁ar ro tzez ▁hitz ▁e gi nez ▁aur kez tu ko ▁ba nin tzai zu e ▁, ▁zer ▁on ▁e kar ri ko ▁li zu e ke ▁hor rek ▁, ▁ni re ▁hi tzak ▁ez ▁ba li zu e ▁e man go ▁a ger pe nik ▁, ▁ez ▁e za gu e ra rik ▁, ▁ez ▁Jain ko a ren gan di ko ▁me zu rik ▁, ▁ez ta ▁i ra kas pe nik ▁e re ▁?
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , I am talking with you . If you were speaking with me , you would n't listen to me , you would not listen to me . Do n't you understand what I am saying ? Do n't tell you the word of God .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , if I should come to you speaking in an unknown language , how would that help you ? But if I bring you a revelation or some special knowledge or prophecy or teaching , that will be helpful .

ID:	1113
INPUT:	▁— ▁Mai su ▁, ▁zein ▁da ▁le ge ko ▁a gin du rik ▁na gu si e na ▁?
PRED:	“ Teacher , do you teachers of religious law ?
GOLD:	“ Teacher , which is the most important commandment in the law of Moses ? ”

ID:	1114
INPUT:	▁Da mu tu ▁zen ▁Jau na ▁gi za ki a ▁e gin ▁i za naz ▁e ta ▁, ▁bi hoz min du rik ▁,
PRED:	The Lord was very angry , and he became very angry .
GOLD:	So the Lord was sorry he had ever made them and put them on the earth . It broke his heart .

ID:	1115
INPUT:	▁Zo ra tu rik ▁da go ▁er re ge a ▁zu re ▁e der ta su <unk> ra ▁da ▁zu re ▁jaun ▁; ▁e gi o zu ▁a gur ▁.
PRED:	You are the King of the king , and you are your lord the king .
GOLD:	The princess of Tyre will shower you with gifts.The wealthy will beg your favor .

ID:	1116
INPUT:	▁Zo ro ▁i tsu ok ▁ha la ko ok ▁! ▁Zer ▁da ▁han di a go ▁, ▁ur re a ▁a la ▁ur re a ▁sa ga ra tzen ▁du en ▁tenplu a ▁?
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who are wise ? What sorrow awaits the Temple of the Lord ?
GOLD:	Blind fools ! Which is more important — the gold or the Temple that makes the gold sacred ?

ID:	1117
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁di o ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁Jo ka ▁e za zu e ▁zu zen bi dez ▁e ta ▁jus ti zi az ▁, ▁as ka tu ▁za pal du a ▁za pal tzai le a ren ▁es ku tik ▁, ▁ez ▁e man ▁tra tu ▁txar rik ▁e tor kin ▁, ▁u me zurtz ▁e ta ▁a lar gu nei ▁, ▁ez ▁e gin ▁in dar ke ri a rik ▁, ▁ez ▁hil ▁er ru ga be rik ▁to ki ▁ho ne tan ▁.
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : Because you are righteous and righteous , you are righteous and righteous , but you have not oppressed the orphans , orphans , orphans , and widows .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : Be fair-minded and just . Do what is right ! Help those who have been robbed ; rescue them from their oppressors . Quit your evil deeds ! Do not mistreat foreigners , orphans , and widows . Stop murdering the innocent !

ID:	1118
INPUT:	▁Gar bi kun tza - o hi ku ne ▁hau ▁e ra bi li ko ▁du zu ▁: ▁gar bi kun tza ko ▁u rez ▁zi priz tin du ko ▁di tu zu ▁; ▁on do ren ▁, ▁gor pu tze ko ▁i le ▁guz ti a ▁moz tu ko ▁du te ▁e ta ▁ar ro pak ▁gar bi tu ko ▁. ▁Hor ren bes tez ▁, ▁gar bi ▁gel di tu ko ▁di ra ▁.
PRED:	Then you must wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water . Then you will wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water . Then you will wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water , and you will remain clean .
GOLD:	Do this by sprinkling them with the water of purification , and have them shave their entire body and wash their clothing . Then they will be ceremonially clean .

ID:	1119
INPUT:	▁Au zo ko ▁guz ti ak ▁bel dur rak ▁har tu ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁e ta ▁Ju de a ko ▁men di al de ▁guz ti an ▁za bal du ▁zen ▁ger ta tu a ren ▁ber ri ▁.
PRED:	The men of Judah were terrified , and all the people of Judah arrived in the hill country of Judah .
GOLD:	Awe fell upon the whole neighborhood , and the news of what had happened spread throughout the Judean hills .

ID:	1120
INPUT:	▁A di - a di ▁en tzun ▁di et ▁, ▁bai na ▁ez ▁di ra ▁hi tze ko ▁jen de a ▁, ▁ez ▁da ▁i nor be re ▁gaiz ta ke ri az ▁da mu tzen ▁, ▁be re ▁hu tse gi te ak ▁ai tor <unk> nak ▁be ren ▁bi de an ▁zu zen ▁aur re ra ▁, ▁ziz tu ▁bi zi an ▁bor ro ka ra ol dar tzen ▁den ▁zal di a ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	I tell you the truth , no one is coming to hear the destruction of the wicked . The enemy is coming , like a person who lives in the land , like a warrior who lives in the sea .
GOLD:	I listen to their conversationsand do n't hear a word of truth.Is anyone sorry for doing wrong ? Does anyone say , “ What a terrible thing I have done ” ? No ! All are running down the path of sinas swiftly as a horse galloping into battle !

ID:	1121
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai dan ▁Jau na ▁:
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	The Lord gave me this message :

ID:	1122
INPUT:	▁Le her ▁e gin da ▁na go ▁, ▁guz tiz ▁lur ▁jo ta ▁, ▁gar ra si ka ▁e ta ▁ai e ne ka ▁bar ru - bar ru tik ▁.
PRED:	Yes , I am making the foundations of the earth ; I will forgive the sins of the earth .
GOLD:	You know what I long for , Lord ; you hear my every sigh .

ID:	1123
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁be re ▁bi zi a ▁gor de ▁na hi ▁du e nak ▁gal du ▁e gin go ▁du ▁; ▁be re ▁bi zi a ▁ni re ga tik ▁e ta ▁ber ri ▁o na ga tik ▁gal tzen ▁du e nak ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁gor de ▁e gin go ▁du ▁.
PRED:	For those who love their lives will perish , and those who hate me will be lost . But those who hated them will be saved .
GOLD:	If you try to hang on to your life , you will lose it . But if you give up your life for my sake and for the sake of the Good News , you will save it .

ID:	1124
INPUT:	▁E ran tzun ▁ni on ▁: ▁« ▁Ai ▁e ne ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau na ▁! ▁Bai na ▁ez ▁du e la ▁ez ▁ger ra rik ▁, ▁ez ▁go se rik ▁i zan go ▁a ri ▁zaiz ki o ▁e sa ten ▁pro fe tak ▁, ▁e ta ▁to ki ▁ho ne tan ▁e gi az ko ▁ba ke a ▁e man go ▁di o zu la ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you ! ” I replied . “ Yes , I will never be hungry or famine or famine , but you will never be seen in this place . ”
GOLD:	Then I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , their prophets are telling them , ‘ All is well — no war or famine will come . The Lord will surely send you peace . ' ”

ID:	1125
INPUT:	▁Je sus ▁Je ru sa le men ▁Me si as ▁be za la ▁sar tu
PRED:	Jesus ' Triumphant Entry
GOLD:	Jesus ' Triumphant Entry

ID:	1126
INPUT:	▁E gip to tik ▁i go tze an ▁, ▁is ra el dar rak ▁ba sa mor tu an ▁bar re na ▁I tsa so ▁Gor ri ra ▁jo ▁e ta ▁Ka dex ▁o a si rai no ▁hel du ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	When the Israelites left Egypt , they traveled through the Red Sea and camped at the Red Sea .
GOLD:	When the people of Israel arrived at Kadesh on their journey from Egypt after crossing the Red Sea ,

ID:	1127
INPUT:	▁Jar ▁zai tez te ▁hor re la ko ▁per tso nen ▁gi da ri tza pe an ▁e ta ▁ho ri e na ▁be za la ko ▁la ne an ▁sai a tzen ▁di ren ▁guz ti e ne an ▁.
PRED:	Instead , submit to those who are eager to be eager to do what is right .
GOLD:	to submit to them and others like them who serve with such devotion .

ID:	1128
INPUT:	▁A pai zak ▁se ni tar te ka ▁sar tu ▁o hi ▁zi tuz ten ▁er rol dan ▁; ▁le bi tar rak ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁ho gei ▁ur tez ▁goi ko ak ▁, ▁be ren ▁e gin ki zun ▁e ta ▁mai len ▁a ra be ra ▁.
PRED:	Then the priests and Levites went into the middle of the Kohathite clan , who was twenty-five years old when they came to meet them .
GOLD:	They distributed gifts to the priests who were listed by their families in the genealogical records , and to the Levites twenty years old or older who were listed according to their jobs and their divisions .

ID:	1129
INPUT:	▁« ▁Her ri tar ▁bi ▁el kar re kin ▁bor ro kan ▁a ri ▁ba di ra ▁e ta ▁hai e ta ko ▁ba ten ▁e maz te ak ▁, ▁se nar ra ▁ji poi tik ▁lib ra tze ko ▁, ▁es ku a ▁lu za tu ▁e ta ▁bes te a ri ▁lo tsa ri e ta tik ▁hel tzen ▁ba di o ▁,
PRED:	“ If a man has two wives , let them go with them , and if a man jumped up and save them , he will save them from one who loves them and save them .
GOLD:	“ If two Israelite men get into a fight and the wife of one tries to rescue her husband by grabbing the testicles of the other man ,

ID:	1130
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁mu ti la ren ▁ai ta ri ▁gal de tu ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Noiz tik ▁da go ▁hor re la ▁? ▁Hark ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁U me tan dik ▁.
PRED:	Then Jesus asked his father , “ How did you leave ? ” “ Yes , ” he replied . “ Leave her alone . ”
GOLD:	“ How long has this been happening ? ” Jesus asked the boy 's father.He replied , “ Since he was a little boy .

ID:	1131
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁be re ▁zer bi tza ri ei ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁« ▁Jo an ▁Ba tai a tzai le a ▁da ▁! ▁Hil da ko en ▁ar te tik ▁piz tu ▁da ▁, ▁e ta ▁hor re ga tik ▁dau ka ▁mi ra ri ak ▁e gi te ko ▁a hal men ▁ho ri ▁» ▁.
PRED:	He said to his servants , “ John is John the Baptist , the Baptist , who is raised from the dead . He will be raised from the dead . ”
GOLD:	he said to his advisers , “ This must be John the Baptist raised from the dead ! That is why he can do such miracles . ”

ID:	1132
INPUT:	▁Jen de ▁guz ti a ▁boz ka ri oz ▁be te ▁zen ▁e ta ▁hi ri a ▁ba re tu ▁, ▁A ta li a ▁hi la ▁bai tzu ten ▁jau re gi an ▁ez pa taz ▁.
PRED:	So all the people of the city rejoiced , and they returned to the palace of the palace .
GOLD:	So all the people of the land rejoiced , and the city was peaceful because Athaliah had been killed at the king 's palace .

ID:	1133
INPUT:	▁Kon tu ra ▁zai tez te ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁er ge lok ▁! ▁Zen tzu ga be ok ▁, ▁noiz ▁u ler tu ▁be har ▁du zu e ▁?
PRED:	Do n't you realize that the king is coming ? Do you understand that he is coming ?
GOLD:	Think again , you fools ! When will you finally catch on ?

ID:	1134
INPUT:	▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du na ▁E gip to ko ▁lur ral de an ▁da go e na ren ▁e zau gar ri ▁i zan go ▁di ra ▁. ▁Za pal tzen ▁di tuz te nen ▁aur ka ▁Jau na ri ▁la gun tza ▁es ke ▁dei ▁e gin go ▁di o te ne an ▁, ▁hark ▁sal ba tzai le a ▁bi da li ko ▁di e ▁de fen da tze ra ▁e ta ▁as ka tze ra ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will be able to bless the land of Egypt . They will cry out to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and he will save them .
GOLD:	It will be a sign and a witness that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies is worshiped in the land of Egypt . When the people cry to the Lord for help against those who oppress them , he will send them a savior who will rescue them .

ID:	1135
INPUT:	▁Be gi ra ▁, ▁jen ti lek ▁, ▁Moi se sen ▁le ge a ▁e za gu tu ▁ga be ▁e re ▁, ▁le ge a ri ▁da go ki o na ▁be rez ▁e gi ten ▁du te ne an ▁, ▁na hiz ▁le ge a ▁ez ▁e za gu tu ▁, ▁be rai ek ▁bi hur tzen ▁di ra ▁be ren ▁bu ru a ren tzat ▁le ge ▁.
PRED:	This is the law of Moses , whether we obey the law of Moses or does not obey the law of Moses or does not obey the law of Moses .
GOLD:	Even Gentiles , who do not have God 's written law , show that they know his law when they instinctively obey it , even without having heard it .

ID:	1136
INPUT:	▁hil tze ko ▁tres nak ▁ger ta tzen ▁di tu ▁, ▁suz ko ▁ge zi ak ▁piz ten ▁.
PRED:	They will die , surrounded by fire , and fire will be consumed by fire .
GOLD:	The wicked conceive evil ; they are pregnant with troubleand give birth to lies .

ID:	1137
INPUT:	▁E gun ▁ba tez ▁, ▁Ka re a hen ▁se me ▁Jo ha nan ▁e ta ▁lan de tan ▁ze bil tzan ▁gu da ri en ▁bu ru za gi ak ▁Ge da li a sen ga na ▁jo an ▁zi ren ▁Mitz pa ra ▁,
PRED:	One day Joseph 's oldest son , the leader of the tribe of Benjamin , and he went to Mizpah to Mizpah .
GOLD:	Soon after this , Johanan son of Kareah and the other military leaders came to Gedaliah at Mizpah .

ID:	1138
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁pres ta tu ri ko ▁o ke la ▁e ta ▁o gi a ▁be re ▁se me ▁Ja ko ben ▁es ku e tan ▁jar ri ▁zi tu en ▁.
PRED:	So Jacob prepared the bread to prepare for Jacob 's sons .
GOLD:	Then she gave Jacob the delicious meal , including freshly baked bread .

ID:	1139
INPUT:	▁O roit ▁zai tez te ▁Jain ko a ren ▁hi tza ▁hots ▁e gin ▁zi zu e ten ▁zeu en ▁zu zen da ri ez ▁, ▁e ta ▁jar rai tu ▁be ro ri en ▁fe de a ri ▁, ▁no la ▁bi zi ▁e ta ▁no la ▁hil ▁di ren ▁kon tu an ▁har tuz ▁.
PRED:	Remember that you must continue to preach the Good News of God . And remember that I am coming to visit you and believe that he will die in his faith .
GOLD:	Remember your leaders who taught you the word of God . Think of all the good that has come from their lives , and follow the example of their faith .

ID:	1140
INPUT:	▁Ha la ▁e re ▁, ▁se nar rak ▁sus mo ▁txar ra ▁har tu ▁di o ▁e maz te a ri ▁, ▁hau ▁e gi az ▁er ru dun ▁de la rik ▁. ▁Bai na ▁ger ta ▁dai te ke ▁e maz te a ▁er ru ga be a ▁i za nik ▁e re ▁se nar rak ▁sus mo ▁txar ra ▁har tze a ▁.
PRED:	However , the husband who divorces his husband 's wife and is guilty of sin . But anyone who marries a husband 's wife . But the husband 's wife is guilty .
GOLD:	If her husband becomes jealous and is suspicious of his wife and needs to know whether or not she has defiled herself ,

ID:	1141
INPUT:	▁E li a sek ▁le hor te a ▁i ra gar ri
PRED:	Elijah Prays for His People
GOLD:	Elijah Fed by Ravens

ID:	1142
INPUT:	▁Zer bai ten ga tik ▁e san ▁zu en ▁Jain ko ak ▁be re ▁ja kin du ri an ▁: ▁“ ▁Pro fe tak ▁e ta ▁a pos to lu ak ▁bi da li ko ▁diz ki et ▁e ta ▁ba tzuk ▁hil ▁e ta ▁bes te ak ▁e ra so ka ▁e ra bi li ko ▁di tuz te ▁” ▁.
PRED:	So God said to them , ‘ I tell you the apostles and prophets , ‘ I am sending some of the apostles and other apostles to die . '
GOLD:	This is what God in his wisdom said about you : ‘ I will send prophets and apostles to them , but they will kill some and persecute the others . '

ID:	1143
INPUT:	▁Is ra el dar rak ▁Si nai ▁ba sa mor tu an ▁zeu de la rik ▁, ▁Jau na ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai on ▁Moi se si ▁el kar ke ta - e txo lan ▁. ▁E gip to tik ▁ir ten ▁e ta ▁hur ren go ▁ur te a ▁zen ▁, ▁bi gar ren ▁hi la ren ▁le hen ▁e gu na ▁. ▁Hau ▁e san ▁zi on ▁:
PRED:	So the Israelites traveled through the wilderness of Sinai and said to Moses , “ This is what the Lord said to Moses , ‘ This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	A year after Israel 's departure from Egypt , the Lord spoke to Moses in the Tabernacle in the wilderness of Sinai . On the first day of the second month of that year he said ,

ID:	1144
INPUT:	▁« ▁On do ren ▁, ▁neu re ▁es pi ri tu ai su ri ko ▁di et ▁gi za ki ▁guz ti <unk> en ▁se me - a la bek pro fe ti za tu ▁e gin go ▁du te ▁, ▁zu en ▁za har re ka me tsak ▁e gin go ▁di tuz te ▁, ▁zu en ▁gaz te ek ▁i kus ka ri ak ▁i zan go ▁.
PRED:	“ Then I will pour out my Spirit upon you , ” says the Lord. “ Your young men will be like a dream , and your young men will see you again .
GOLD:	“ At the time of those events , ” says the Lord , “ when I restore the prosperity of Judah and Jerusalem ,

ID:	1145
INPUT:	▁E rai ki ▁e goi tza ▁, ▁men di an ▁e ra ku tsi ▁zai zun ▁e re du a ren ▁a ra be ra ▁.
PRED:	When you arrive in the Tabernacle , you will go down to the top of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ Set up this Tabernacle according to the pattern you were shown on the mountain .

ID:	1146
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁e ro si ▁zi tu en ▁Jo sek ▁E gip to ko ▁lur ▁guz ti ak ▁fa ra oi a ren tzat ▁. ▁E gip to ar rek ▁nork ▁be re ▁lur ra ▁sal du ▁zu ten ▁, ▁gai ne an ▁zu ten ▁go se te ▁la tza ren ga tik ▁; ▁ha la ▁, ▁lur ral de ▁o so a ren ▁ja be ▁bi la ka tu ▁zen ▁fa ra oi a ▁.
PRED:	So Joseph brought all the Egyptians to Pharaoh , who rescued them from the land of Egypt . But he rescued them from the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	So Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh . All the Egyptians sold him their fields because the famine was so severe , and soon all the land belonged to Pharaoh .

ID:	1147
INPUT:	▁« ▁Al de ▁tal de ▁hor re ta tik ▁, ▁hor ▁ber tan ▁gal du ko ▁bai ti tut ▁! ▁»
PRED:	“ Get away from this time , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Get away from all these people so that I may instantly destroy them ! ”

ID:	1148
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁le he nen go ▁i tu na ▁e re ▁ez ▁zen ▁o dol - i sur ke ta rik ▁ga be ▁e gin ▁.
PRED:	That is why the first of these things were not used to commit adultery .
GOLD:	That is why even the first covenant was put into effect with the blood of an animal .

ID:	1149
INPUT:	▁Ar ren ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁a ger ▁i e zai o zu e ▁ber ri ro ▁e re ▁zeu en ▁mai ta su na ▁.
PRED:	So do n't let anyone tell you what is written in your love .
GOLD:	So I urge you now to reaffirm your love for him .

ID:	1150
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁o pa ri a ▁aur re tik ▁bi da li ▁zu en ▁, ▁e ta ▁be ra ▁kan pa le ku an ▁gel di tu ▁zen ▁gau ▁har tan ▁.
PRED:	So Jacob left the camp and camped outside the camp .
GOLD:	During the night Jacob got up and took his two wives , his two servant wives , and his eleven sons and crossed the Jabbok River with them .

ID:	1151
INPUT:	▁On do ren ▁, ▁bes te ▁zaz pi ▁be hi ▁ir ten ▁zi ren ▁Ni lo tik ▁, ▁i txu ra ▁txar re ko ak ▁e ta ▁ar ga lak ▁, ▁e ta ▁bes te ▁be hi en ▁on do an ▁jar ri ▁zi ren ▁, ▁i bai er tze an ▁.
PRED:	Then the seven others who were eager to get out of the seven steps of the river , and they moved to the east side of the river .
GOLD:	Then he saw seven more cows come up behind them from the Nile , but these were scrawny and thin . These cows stood beside the fat cows on the riverbank .

ID:	1152
INPUT:	▁O rain ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁Je ru sa lem ▁hau ta tu ▁dut ▁neu re ▁bi zi le ku ▁e ta ▁Da vid ▁neu re ▁her ri ▁Is ra e len ▁bu ru za gi ▁” ▁.
PRED:	But now I will make this happen to my people Israel , and I will make my own people Israel . '
GOLD:	But now I have chosen Jerusalem as the place for my name to be honored , and I have chosen David to be king over my people Israel . ' ”

ID:	1153
INPUT:	▁ar ti zar ra ▁be re ▁ga rai an ▁a te ra ra zi e do <unk> ▁E me ▁Han di a ▁e ta ▁Txi ki a ▁gi da tu ▁?
PRED:	Is it the morning when the night has ended , how can the night be born ?
GOLD:	Can you direct the constellations through the seasonsor guide the Bear with her cubs across the heavens ?

ID:	1154
INPUT:	▁Oi ▁e ma ku me rik ▁e der ren ▁, ▁no ra ▁jo an ▁zai zu ▁mai te a ▁? ▁No rantz ▁a bi a tu ▁da ▁? ▁Zu re kin ▁na hi ▁du gu ▁bi la ▁jo an ▁.
PRED:	O woman , how long will you go ? Who is your love ? Who is your love ?
GOLD:	Where has your lover gone , O woman of rare beauty ? Which way did he turnso we can help you find him ?

ID:	1155
INPUT:	▁Hi ri tik ▁kan po ra ▁za pal du ▁zu ten ▁ma ha tsa ▁e ta ▁, ▁do la re tik ▁hain bes te ▁o dol ▁a te ra ▁ze nez ▁, ▁zal di en ▁mu tur re ko e ta rai no ▁i ri tsi ▁zen ▁, ▁hi ru re hun ▁ki lo me tro ko ▁za ba le ran ▁.
PRED:	He led them out of the sea , from the center of the Dead Sea . He measured the walls of the city on the north side of the Dead Sea .
GOLD:	The grapes were trampled in the winepress outside the city , and blood flowed from the winepress in a stream about 180 miles long and as high as a horse 's bridle .

ID:	1156
INPUT:	▁Hau tsi ▁ze ni tu en ▁har lau ze tan ▁i da tzi ak ▁zeu den ▁hitz ▁ber be rak ▁i da tzi ko ▁di tut ▁; ▁ge ro ▁, ▁ku txan ▁sar tu ko ▁di tu zu ▁.
PRED:	In that same way , I will write down the names of the covenant between you . I will write down the Ark of the Covenant .
GOLD:	and I will write on the tablets the same words that were on the ones you smashed . Then place the tablets in the Ark . '

ID:	1157
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ▁ar du ra tzen ▁da ▁her ri ez ▁, ▁zer ▁ja na ▁e ma ten ▁u ga ri ▁.
PRED:	That is why the people eat the food they drink .
GOLD:	By these mighty acts he nourishes the people , giving them food in abundance .

ID:	1158
INPUT:	▁Har ▁i tza zu ▁jar rai bi de tzat ▁Kris to ▁Je su sen gan ▁oi nar ri tzen ▁di ren ▁si nes men ▁e ta ▁mai ta su na ri ▁bu ruz ▁ni re gan dik ▁en tzun ▁di tu zun ▁hitz ▁o sa sun gar ri ak ▁.
PRED:	This is the example of Christ Jesus and your faith in Christ Jesus , who has heard about me and heard about me .
GOLD:	Hold on to the pattern of wholesome teaching you learned from me — a pattern shaped by the faith and love that you have in Christ Jesus .

ID:	1159
INPUT:	▁Kez ka rik ▁ga be ▁hai e kin ▁jo a te ko ▁a gin du ▁zi dan ▁Es pi ri tu ak ▁. ▁Sei ▁se ni de ▁hau ek ▁jo an ▁zi ren ▁ni re kin ▁, ▁e ta ▁gi zon ▁ha ren ▁e txe an ▁sar tu ▁gi nen ▁.
PRED:	As a result , they arrived with me from the Holy Spirit . They went into the house of the brothers and sisters , where they entered my house .
GOLD:	The Holy Spirit told me to go with them and not to worry that they were Gentiles . These six brothers here accompanied me , and we soon entered the home of the man who had sent for us .

ID:	1160
INPUT:	▁Az ti ek ▁, ▁ber ri ro ▁e re ▁, ▁er re ge a ri ▁: ▁— ▁Er re ge ▁jau na ▁, ▁kon ta gu zu ▁zer ▁a mets ▁e gin ▁du zun ▁e ta ▁a zal du ko ▁di zu gu ▁e sa na hi a ▁.
PRED:	Finally , the king said to the king , “ We 've told you what is right , and we will tell you what you do . ”
GOLD:	They said again , “ Please , Your Majesty . Tell us the dream , and we will tell you what it means . ”

ID:	1161
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁er re ge a ren ▁uz tar pe an ▁jar tze a ▁e ta ▁ha ren ▁men pe ko ▁i za te a ▁o nar tzen ▁du en ▁na zi o a ▁, ▁la sai ▁u tzi ko ▁dut ▁be re ▁lur ral de an ▁, ▁lan du ▁de zan ▁e ta ▁ber tan ▁bi zi ▁da din ▁. ▁Nik ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁e sa na ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But the Lord will break the yoke of the king of Babylon , and he will rule over the land of Babylon . I will live in safety , ” says the Lord. “ I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	But the people of any nation that submits to the king of Babylon will be allowed to stay in their own country to farm the land as usual . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ' ”

ID:	1162
INPUT:	▁De ab ru a ▁ga rai tu a
PRED:	A Message about Moab
GOLD:	The Defeat of Satan

ID:	1163
INPUT:	▁A ni ma li a ▁gar bi ak ▁e ta ▁ku tsa tu ak
PRED:	The Ark of the Covenant
GOLD:	The Giving of Tithes

ID:	1164
INPUT:	▁Hil ▁zen ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁A kab ▁e ta ▁on do ren go ▁er re ge a ▁ha ren ▁se me ▁A ka zi as ▁i zan ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	Ahaziah died , and Ahaziah son of Ahaziah became the next king .
GOLD:	So Ahab died , and his son Ahaziah became the next king .

ID:	1165
INPUT:	▁Bes te ▁hau ▁e re ▁bu ru ra tu ▁zi tzai dan ▁: ▁« ▁Jain ko ak ▁pro ba tu ▁e gin ▁na hi ▁di tu gi zon - e ma ku me ak ▁, ▁a be re ak ▁be za la ko ak ▁di re lai ku sa raz te ko ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ This is what the Lord says : I want you to do what is right , just like women . ”
GOLD:	I also thought about the human condition — how God proves to people that they are like animals .

ID:	1166
INPUT:	▁Lur sai lik ▁, ▁ma has ti rik ▁e ta ▁o li ba di rik ▁e der re nak ▁ken du ko ▁diz ki zu e ▁, ▁be re ▁zer bi tza ri ei ▁e ma te ko ▁.
PRED:	You will plant your vineyards and vineyards and vineyards , and your servants will feed them .
GOLD:	He will take away the best of your fields and vineyards and olive groves and give them to his own officials .

ID:	1167
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁e tsai ak ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁lo tsaz ▁be te ko ▁di ra ▁, ▁gaiz to en ▁e goi tza ▁de sa ger tu ▁e gin go ▁da ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But your enemies will be humiliated , and their enemies will be gone . ”
GOLD:	Those who hate you will be clothed with shame , and the home of the wicked will be destroyed . ”

ID:	1168
INPUT:	▁hi ri ▁ba te ko ak ▁bes te ko en ga na ▁jo an go ▁di ra ▁e ta ▁e san go ▁di e te ▁: ▁“ ▁Go a zen ▁Jau na ren ▁bi la ▁, ▁be ra ri ▁me se de ▁es ke ▁” ▁. ▁E ta ▁e ran tzun go ▁di e te ▁: ▁“ ▁Bai ▁, ▁ba go az ▁gu ▁e re ▁” ▁.
PRED:	One of the other towns will go to the city and tell them , ‘ Let 's go to the city of the Lord , ' they will reply , ‘ Yes , we will reply , ‘ Let 's go . '
GOLD:	The people of one city will say to the people of another , ‘ Come with us to Jerusalem to ask the Lord to bless us . Let 's worship the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . I 'm determined to go . '

ID:	1169
INPUT:	▁On do ren ▁, ▁men di ra ▁i go ▁zen ▁Moi ses ▁. ▁Lai no ak ▁men di a ▁es ta li ▁zu en ▁,
PRED:	Then Moses climbed up Mount Sinai and moved to the mountain .
GOLD:	Then Moses climbed up the mountain , and the cloud covered it .

ID:	1170
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁zu ek ▁, ▁e ne ▁mai te ok ▁, ▁jar rai ▁e za zu e ▁zeu en ▁bi zi tza ▁si nes men ▁txit ▁san tu a ren ▁oi nar ri ▁gai ne an ▁e rai ki tzen ▁. ▁E gin ▁o toitz ▁Es pi ri tu ▁San tu a ren ▁e ra gi nez ▁;
PRED:	But now , dear brothers and sisters , you will live in the streets of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	But you , dear friends , must build each other up in your most holy faith , pray in the power of the Holy Spirit ,

ID:	1171
INPUT:	▁ha ren ▁le ku an ▁han di tu ▁zu ri a ▁e do ▁man txa ▁zu ri - gor rix ka ▁a te ra tzen ▁ba zai o ▁nor bai ti ▁, ▁a pai za ren ga na ▁jo an go ▁da ▁.
PRED:	When the priest finds that the area has been healed , the priest must go to the area where the priest goes to the area .
GOLD:	but a white swelling or a reddish white spot develops in its place , that person must go to the priest to be examined .

ID:	1172
INPUT:	▁Zo az te ▁es ne a ▁e ta ▁ez ti a ▁da riz ki on ▁lur ral de ra ▁; ▁bai na ▁ni ▁ez ▁naiz ▁zu e kin ▁jo an go ▁, ▁bu ru go gor ▁bai tza re te ▁; ▁bes te la ▁, ▁bi de an ▁hon da tu ko ▁zin tuz ke tet ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Now go out to the land of Egypt , but I am not with you . I will not go with you , but I will destroy you . ”
GOLD:	Go up to this land that flows with milk and honey . But I will not travel among you , for you are a stubborn and rebellious people . If I did , I would surely destroy you along the way . ”

ID:	1173
INPUT:	▁Kris to ▁be hin ▁be ti ko ▁sar tu ▁da ▁san tu te gi an ▁, ▁ez ▁a ker ▁e ta ▁ze kor ren ▁o do la ▁es kai niz ▁, ▁be re a ▁bai zik ▁, ▁hor re la ▁be ti ko ▁sal ba me na ▁lor tu ▁di gu la rik ▁.
PRED:	For Christ has entered the Holy Place and made it holy . He has not been made right with God , for we have been saved .
GOLD:	With his own blood — not the blood of goats and calves — he entered the Most Holy Place once for all time and secured our redemption forever .

ID:	1174
INPUT:	▁Da vi dek ▁e ta ▁be re ▁gi zo nek ▁, ▁hel du ▁zi re ne an ▁, ▁hi ri a ▁su tan ▁e ta ▁be ren ▁e maz te ▁e ta ▁se me - a la bak ▁ga ti bu ▁e ra man ▁zi tuz te la ▁aur ki tu ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	When David and his men arrived , David 's wife became very angry with them and gave them his sons and daughters .
GOLD:	When David and his men saw the ruins and realized what had happened to their families ,

ID:	1175
INPUT:	▁Haur ▁hau xe ▁es ka tzen ▁ni on ▁Jau na ri ▁e ta ▁e man ▁dit ▁es ka tzen ▁ni o na ▁.
PRED:	And she begged me to ask the Lord , “ Lord , please give me this message . ”
GOLD:	I asked the Lord to give me this boy , and he has granted my request .

ID:	1176
INPUT:	▁A tze man ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁or du an ▁, ▁Ha nu nek ▁Da vi den ▁man da ta ri ak ▁e ta ▁al der di ▁ba te ko ▁bi zar ra ▁moz tu ▁zi en ▁, ▁bai ta ▁jan tzi ak ▁e re ▁er di tik ▁be he ra ▁, ▁i pur ma sai le ta tik ▁be he ra ▁. ▁E ta ▁jo a ten ▁u tzi ▁zi en ▁.
PRED:	So David took off his robe and tore it on a beautiful robe . He tore his clothes on his head , and he tore his clothing on his head .
GOLD:	So Hanun seized David 's ambassadors and shaved off half of each man 's beard , cut off their robes at the buttocks , and sent them back to David in shame .

ID:	1177
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai on ▁Jau na ▁Moi se si ▁:
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1178
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁or du ▁ar te ▁ez ▁zu ten ▁i kas le ek ▁u ler tu ▁Li bu ru ▁San tu ak ▁di o e na ▁, ▁Je su sek ▁hil da ko en ▁ar te tik ▁piz tu ▁be har ▁zu e la ▁, ▁a le gi a ▁.
PRED:	But the disciples did n't understand that Jesus was raised from the dead , so he will be raised from the dead .
GOLD:	for until then they still had n't understood the Scriptures that said Jesus must rise from the dead .

ID:	1179
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁e man ▁ze ni dan ▁ain tza ▁be ra ▁e man ▁di et ▁nik ▁, ▁bat ▁i zan ▁dai te zen ▁, ▁gu ▁bi ok ▁bat ▁ga ren ▁be za la ▁:
PRED:	I gave you a glory to you , and I will give you a new life .
GOLD:	“ I have given them the glory you gave me , so they may be one as we are one .

ID:	1180
INPUT:	▁Bes te ▁hau ▁e ra man ▁e ta ▁zo ri txar ren ▁bat ▁ger ta tu ko ▁ba li tzai o ▁, ▁ni ▁, ▁a gu re ▁hau ▁, ▁a tse ka bez ▁hil ko ▁nin tza te ke ▁» ▁.
PRED:	After this , another man brought another message to me from the grave , he would die . ”
GOLD:	Now if you take his brother away from me , and any harm comes to him , you will send this grieving , white-haired man to his grave . '

ID:	1181
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁sal ba zi o a ▁ez ▁dut ▁kol ko ra ko ▁gor de ▁, ▁zu re ▁lei al ta sun ▁e ta ▁sal ba me na ren ▁ber ri ▁e man ▁dut ▁, ▁zu re ▁mai ta sun ▁e ta ▁fin ta su na ▁ez ▁di tut ba tzar ▁na gu si an ▁i sil du ▁.
PRED:	I will not save your salvation , O Lord , and I will give you great joy and understanding . I will not stop your word .
GOLD:	Lord , do n't hold back your tender mercies from me.Let your unfailing love and faithfulness always protect me .

ID:	1182
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai on ▁Jau na ▁Moi se si ▁:
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1183
INPUT:	▁E ma zu e ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁lan ▁ho ri ▁gel di a raz te ko ▁a gin du a ▁; ▁ez ▁de za te la ▁e rai ki ▁hi ri a ▁, ▁bes te ▁a gin du rik ▁e ma ten ▁ez ▁du dan ▁bi tar te an ▁.
PRED:	So you must stay here in this field . If you do n't obey the word of the Lord , you must not build a house .
GOLD:	Therefore , issue orders to have these men stop their work . That city must not be rebuilt except at my express command .

ID:	1184
INPUT:	▁zeu en ▁jo ka e ra ren ▁frui tu ak ▁jan go ▁di tu zu e ▁, ▁zeu en ▁e gi tas mo ▁gaiz to ez ▁a se be te ko ▁.
PRED:	You will eat the fruit of your wickedness , and the wicked will die .
GOLD:	Therefore , they must eat the bitter fruit of living their own way , choking on their own schemes .

ID:	1185
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁, ▁e txe ra tze an ▁, ▁a dis ki de ak ▁e ta ▁au zo ko ak ▁bil du ▁e ta ▁e sa ten ▁di e ▁: ▁“ ▁E gin ▁fes ta ▁ni re kin ▁, ▁aur ki tu ▁bai tut ▁gal du ta ko ▁ar di a ▁! ▁”
PRED:	When they gather together , they called together together together together and say , ‘ Come , let 's celebrate with me ! '
GOLD:	When he arrives , he will call together his friends and neighbors , saying , ‘ Rejoice with me because I have found my lost sheep . '

ID:	1186
INPUT:	▁A gi an ▁, ▁a tze ra ▁e gi ne ta ▁da mu tu ko ▁da ▁, ▁e ta ▁on da su nez ▁be dein ka tu ko zai tuz te ▁os te <unk> du an ▁, ▁la bo re - o pa ri a ke ta ▁i sur - o pa ri a ke gin ▁a hal ▁i zan go ▁diz ki o zu eJau na ri ▁, ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko a ri ▁.
PRED:	The Lord is coming when he will bless you , and he will bless you . Then he will bless you with his sword , and he will send terrible power to you .
GOLD:	Who knows ? Perhaps he will give you a reprieve , sending you a blessing instead of this curse.Perhaps you will be able to offer grain and wineto the Lord your God as before .

ID:	1187
INPUT:	▁E man ▁o ho re ▁Jau na ri ▁, ▁i ra gar ri ▁ur ru ti ko ▁her ri e tan go res gar ri ▁de la ▁.
PRED:	All the glory of the Lord will praise the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	Let the whole world glorify the Lord ; let it sing his praise .

ID:	1188
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁ber ri ro ▁gal de tu ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁E ta ▁zu ek ▁, ▁nor ▁nai ze la ▁di o zu e ▁? ▁Ped rok ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁Zu ▁Me si as ▁za ra ▁.
PRED:	Then Jesus asked them , “ Who are you ? ” “ Yes , ” Peter replied . “ You are the Messiah . ”
GOLD:	Then he asked them , “ But who do you say I am ? ” Peter replied , “ You are the Messiah . ”

ID:	1189
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁di o ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁« ▁Bai na ▁ni ▁, ▁Jaun ▁hau ▁, ▁zu re ▁Jain ko a ▁nai zE gip ton ▁zeun de ne tik.Ez ▁du zu ▁ni ▁bes te ▁jain ko ri kai tor tu ▁be har ▁, ▁ez ▁bai ta ▁ni taz ▁kan po bes te ▁sal ba tzai le rik ▁.
PRED:	“ But this is what the Sovereign Lord says : The people of Egypt have spoken against you , ” says the Sovereign Lord , “ I will bring disaster upon you .
GOLD:	“ I have been the Lord your Godever since I brought you out of Egypt.You must acknowledge no God but me , for there is no other savior .

ID:	1190
INPUT:	▁gu re ▁e ta ▁zu en ▁ar te an ▁e ta ▁gu re ▁on do ren go ▁be lau nal di en ▁ar te an ▁e zau gar ri ▁i za te ko ▁bai zik ▁; ▁hau ▁da ▁, ▁be ra ren ▁tenplu an ▁geu re ▁er re - o pa ri ▁e ta ▁el kar ta sun - o pa ri ak ▁es kai niz ▁Jau na ri ▁kul tu ▁e man ▁na hi ▁di o gu la ▁a di e raz te ko ▁e zau gar ri ▁. ▁Hor re la ▁, ▁zu en ▁se me - a la bek ▁e zin ▁e san go ▁di e te ▁gu re ei ▁Jau na re kin ▁ze ri ku si rik ▁ez ▁du te la ▁.
PRED:	In the same way , we will continue to celebrate the Festival of Unleavened Bread . This is what the Lord says : “ Let us offer sacrifices to the Lord our God , and let us offer sacrifices to the Lord our God . ”
GOLD:	but as a memorial . It will remind our descendants and your descendants that we , too , have the right to worship the Lord at his sanctuary with our burnt offerings , sacrifices , and peace offerings . Then your descendants will not be able to say to ours , ‘ You have no claim to the Lord . '

ID:	1191
INPUT:	▁Ha xa bi as ▁e ta ▁I sai as ▁e re ▁, ▁Me ra ri ren ▁se me ak ▁, ▁bi da li ▁ziz ki gu ten ▁, ▁be ren ▁se me ▁e ta ▁a nai e kin ▁; ▁guz ti ra ▁ho gei ▁la gun ▁;
PRED:	From the tribe of Issachar , Hananiah son of Bani , and he sent his brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	They also sent Hashabiah , together with Jeshaiah from the descendants of Merari , and twenty of his sons and brothers ,

ID:	1192
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁zu ▁, ▁zer ▁za bil tza ▁pur pu raz ▁jan tzi a ▁, ▁ur rez ko ▁bi txiz ▁a pain du a ▁, ▁be gi ak ▁bel tzez ▁pin ta tu rik ▁? ▁Al fer rik ▁a pain tzen ▁za ra ▁, ▁mai ta le ek ▁za puz tu ▁e gin ▁zai tuz te ▁, ▁bi zi a ▁ken du ▁na hi ▁di zu te ▁.
PRED:	Then you will be clothed with gold , beautiful , beautiful , beautiful , beautiful , beautiful , beautiful , and beautiful , beautiful , and spotted .
GOLD:	What are you doing , you who have been plundered ? Why do you dress up in beautiful clothingand put on gold jewelry ? Why do you brighten your eyes with mascara ? Your primping will do you no good ! The allies who were your loversdespise you and seek to kill you .

ID:	1193
INPUT:	▁Gai ne ra ko ▁i kas le ak ▁txa lu paz ▁jo an ▁zi ren ▁, ▁sa re a ▁ar rai ne kin ▁ti ra ka ▁ze kar te la ▁, ▁le hor re tik ▁hur bil ▁bai tzi ren ▁, ▁e hu nen ▁bat ▁me tro ra ▁.
PRED:	The disciples got up early in the boat with their disciples , and they went out to the room where they were staying .
GOLD:	The others stayed with the boat and pulled the loaded net to the shore , for they were only about a hundred yards from shore .

ID:	1194
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁o rain ▁, ▁jo an ▁e ta ▁ni re ▁na gu si a ri ▁« ▁He men ▁da ▁E li as ▁» ▁a di e raz te ko ▁e san go ▁di da zu ▁, ▁ba da ▁? ▁Hil ▁e gin go ▁nau ▁!
PRED:	And now I went to Herod and told him , “ Elijah is the one who sent me to say , ‘ You will die ! '
GOLD:	And now you say , ‘ Go and tell your master , “ Elijah is here. ” ' Sir , if I do that , Ahab will certainly kill me . ”

ID:	1195
INPUT:	▁Jo sa fa ten ▁ber ri kun tzak
PRED:	Jehoahaz Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Jehoshaphat Appoints Judges

ID:	1196
INPUT:	▁I ra kas pen ▁hau ek ▁guz ti ak ▁pa ra bo la ▁bi dez ▁e man ▁ziz ki on ▁Je su sek ▁jen de a ri ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁zi en ▁e zer ▁i ra kas ten ▁pa ra bo laz ▁i zan ▁e zik ▁.
PRED:	So Jesus gave these instructions to the people , and he gave them this story . He did n't teach them or teach them .
GOLD:	Jesus always used stories and illustrations like these when speaking to the crowds . In fact , he never spoke to them without using such parables .

ID:	1197
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁Si ri a ▁e ta ▁Zi li zi a ▁es ku al de e ta ra ▁jo an ▁nin tzen ▁.
PRED:	Then I returned to Jerusalem and went to the east of the hill country .
GOLD:	After that visit I went north into the provinces of Syria and Cilicia .

ID:	1198
INPUT:	▁Be reiz ▁gai te zen ▁, ▁be raz ▁. ▁Hor ▁du zu ▁aur re an ▁es ku al de ▁guz ti a ▁; ▁zuk ▁ez ker re ra ▁jo tzen ▁ba du zu ▁, ▁ni ▁es kui ne ra ▁jo an go ▁naiz ▁; ▁zuk ▁es kui ne ra ▁jo tzen ▁ba du zu ▁, ▁ni ▁ez ker re ra ▁jo an go ▁naiz ▁» ▁.
PRED:	So you will be sure that you are right on the east side of the Jordan River . If you go , I will hand you over to my right hand , and I will go on your right hand . ”
GOLD:	The whole countryside is open to you . Take your choice of any section of the land you want , and we will separate . If you want the land to the left , then I 'll take the land on the right . If you prefer the land on the right , then I 'll go to the left . ”

ID:	1199
INPUT:	▁Guz ti ak ▁pro fe ta ▁be za la ▁min tzo ▁ba di ra ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁e ta ▁en tzu le ▁huts ▁den ▁e do ta ▁kris tau ▁ez ▁den ▁bat ▁sar tzen ▁ba da ▁, ▁be re ▁er ru ak ▁ai tor tze ra ▁e ra man go ▁du te ▁de nen ▁ar te an ▁,
PRED:	But if a prophet is speaking , a prophet must listen to him and be put to shame . But if a person is guilty , he will be put to death .
GOLD:	But if all of you are prophesying , and unbelievers or people who do n't understand these things come into your meeting , they will be convicted of sin and judged by what you say .

ID:	1200
INPUT:	▁Ti rok ▁go tor le ku a ▁ja so ▁du ▁, ▁hau tsa ▁a di na ▁zi lar ▁pi la tu ▁du ▁, ▁ka le e ta ko ▁lo ka tza ▁a di na ▁ur re ▁;
PRED:	Listen , you women who live in the sea , will be bound by silver and gold .
GOLD:	Tyre has built a strong fortressand has made silver and goldas plentiful as dust in the streets !

ID:	1201
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁i tza zu e ▁go gor ▁e ra bil ▁; ▁hor re la ▁e ra ku tsi ko ▁du zu e ▁be gi ru ne ▁di o zu e la ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko a ri ▁.
PRED:	Do n't let them go unpunished ! Do n't let those who fear God .
GOLD:	Show your fear of God by not treating them harshly .

ID:	1202
INPUT:	▁Ko rin ton ▁da go en ▁Jain ko a ren ▁e liz ▁el kar te a ri ▁i daz ten ▁di o gu ▁. ▁Je su ▁Kris tok ▁sa ga ra tu ▁zai tuz te ▁e ta ▁Jain ko ak ▁be re ▁her ri ▁san tu ▁i za te ko ▁dei tu ▁, ▁e do zein ▁le ku tan ▁Je su ▁Kris to ▁gu re ▁Jau na ri ▁dei ▁e gi ten ▁di o ten ▁guz ti e kin ▁ba te ra ▁, ▁hau ek ▁e ta ▁guk ▁Jaun ▁bat ▁be ra ▁o nar tzen ▁bai tu gu ▁.
PRED:	This is the letter of Christ Jesus , the church in Corinth has chosen you to be holy by the Lord Jesus Christ . He calls you into his holy people , and we call on God 's holy name . This is the name of our Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	I am writing to God 's church in Corinth , to you who have been called by God to be his own holy people . He made you holy by means of Christ Jesus , just as he did for all people everywhere who call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ , their Lord and ours .

ID:	1203
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ko en ▁az ke na ▁hon da me na ▁da ▁; ▁sa be la ▁du te ▁jain ko ▁, ▁be ren ▁lo tsa ri e tan ▁har ro tzen ▁di ra ▁e ta ▁lur re ko ▁gau ze tan ▁ba kar rik ▁pen tsa tzen ▁du te ▁.
PRED:	But the land of the sea will be thrown into the sea , and they will fade away in the dust .
GOLD:	They are headed for destruction . Their god is their appetite , they brag about shameful things , and they think only about this life here on earth .

ID:	1204
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁i zan ▁zal di ▁e ta ▁man do ▁a di men ga be en ▁an tze ko ▁: ▁gal gaz ▁e ta ▁a ho koz ▁eu tsi ▁be har ▁zai o ▁hai en ▁in dar ra ri ▁; ▁bes te la ▁, ▁e zin ▁za ra ▁hur bil du ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Do n't be like horses and charioteers , and their horses are as numerous as the sand on the seashore . ”
GOLD:	Do not be like a senseless horse or mulethat needs a bit and bridle to keep it under control . ”

ID:	1205
INPUT:	▁I ra tzar ▁, ▁i par - hai ze ▁! ▁Ha tor ▁, ▁he go - hai ze ▁! ▁Za bal du ▁ai re an ▁ni re ▁ba ra tze ko ▁lur ri nak.E ta ▁zu ▁, ▁e ne ▁mai te a ▁, ▁sar ▁zeu re ▁ba ra tze an ▁, ▁jan ▁ber ta ko ▁frui tu ▁zo ra gar ri ak ▁.
PRED:	The king of the north is coming , coming down to the room of the Lamb , and he is coming to meet him . He is the one who loves you , and he is the harvest .
GOLD:	Awake , north wind ! Rise up , south wind ! Blow on my gardenand spread its fragrance all around.Come into your garden , my love ; taste its finest fruits .

ID:	1206
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁al de ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁Ta mar rek ▁. ▁Es tal tzen ▁zu en ▁za pi a ▁ken du ▁e ta ▁a lar gun - soi ne ko ak ▁jan tzi ▁zi tu en ▁ber ri ro ▁.
PRED:	So Tamar went out to the top of the guard , and he tore his clothes in mourning .
GOLD:	Afterward she went back home , took off her veil , and put on her widow 's clothing as usual .

ID:	1207
INPUT:	▁Me zu la ri ak ▁hi riz ▁hi ri ▁i bi li ▁zi ren ▁Ef raim ▁e ta ▁Ma na se sen ▁lur ral de e tan ▁ze har ▁, ▁e ta ▁Za bu lon ▁lur ral de rai no ▁e re ▁hel du ▁zi ren ▁; ▁bai na ▁bur la ▁e ta ▁bar re ▁e gin ▁zi e ten ▁.
PRED:	They were buried in the towns of Ephraim and Ephraim , the land of Ephraim , and the land of Ephraim , and the land of Ephraim was filled with iron .
GOLD:	The runners went from town to town throughout Ephraim and Manasseh and as far as the territory of Zebulun . But most of the people just laughed at the runners and made fun of them .

ID:	1208
INPUT:	▁Moi se sen ▁le ge an ▁i da tzi rik ▁da go en ▁be za la xe ▁, ▁hain ▁zu zen ▁, ▁e tor ri ▁zai gu ▁gai ne ra ▁hain bes te ko ▁zo ri txar ▁hau ▁; ▁ha la ▁e re ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁ez ▁ga ra ▁zu re ▁ha ser re a ▁ba re tzen ▁a ha le gin du ▁, ▁gu re ▁be ka tu e ta tik ▁ur run duz ▁e ta ▁zu re ▁lei al ta su na ▁ai tor tuz ▁.
PRED:	This is what the law of Moses says : If we have come to you , we will be very angry with you . This is what the Lord says : If we have sinned against you , we will be angry with you .
GOLD:	Every curse written against us in the Law of Moses has come true . Yet we have refused to seek mercy from the Lord our God by turning from our sins and recognizing his truth .

ID:	1209
INPUT:	▁Gau e an ▁, ▁Jain ko a ▁Ba la a mi ▁a ger tu ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁« ▁Gi zon ▁ho ri ek ▁zu re ▁bi la ▁e tor ri ▁ba di ra ▁, ▁zo az ▁be rai e kin ▁; ▁bai na ▁nik ▁e san go ▁di zu da na ▁ba kar rik ▁e gin go ▁du zu ▁» ▁.
PRED:	That night the man of God appeared to Balaam and said , “ As surely as you go , you will go with you , but you will have peace with me . ”
GOLD:	That night God came to Balaam and told him , “ Since these men have come for you , get up and go with them . But do only what I tell you to do . ”

ID:	1210
INPUT:	▁Is ra el go ▁gu da ros te a ▁o sa tze ko ▁gai ▁zi ren ▁ho gei ▁ur te tik ▁go ra ko ▁is ra el dar ren ▁i zen - bil ke tak
PRED:	The Israelites chose forty years old when they cried out ,
GOLD:	They were registered by families — all the men of Israel who were twenty years old or older and able to go to war .

ID:	1211
INPUT:	▁Da vid ▁Ma ha nai me ra ▁hel du ▁zen ▁. ▁Bi tar te an ▁, ▁Ab sa lom ▁Jor da nez ▁bes te ▁al de ra ▁i ga ro ▁zen ▁, ▁be re kin ▁zi tu en ▁is ra el dar ▁guz ti e kin ▁.
PRED:	So David 's brothers arrived with him , and all the men of Israel returned to the Jordan River with him .
GOLD:	David soon arrived at Mahanaim . By now , Absalom had mobilized the entire army of Israel and was leading his troops across the Jordan River .

ID:	1212
INPUT:	▁e gi a ▁e za gut ▁de za zu ne ta ▁har tu ▁du zun ▁man da tu a ri ▁lei al ki ▁e ran tzun ▁.
PRED:	I know that you are the one who guarantees a wonderful teacher , and they replied .
GOLD:	In this way , you may know the truthand take an accurate report to those who sent you .

ID:	1213
INPUT:	▁Hi ri a ▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁er re ge a ren ▁es ku e tan ▁e ro ri ko ▁da ▁er re me di o rik ▁ga be ▁, ▁e ta ▁kon kis ta tu ▁e gin go ▁du ▁. ▁Nik ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁e sa na ▁» ▁.
PRED:	The king of Babylon will be captured in the town of Babylon , and no one will be left in the town of Babylon . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	The Lord also says : ‘ The city of Jerusalem will certainly be handed over to the army of the king of Babylon , who will capture it . ' ”

ID:	1214
INPUT:	▁« ▁A be re ▁xe he a ▁es kai ni ▁be har ▁du e nak ▁, ▁a kats ▁ga be a ▁es kai ni ko ▁du ▁, ▁ar ra ▁na hiz ▁e me a ▁.
PRED:	“ If you present a animal with no defects , you must offer a male animal with no defects .
GOLD:	“ If you present an animal from the flock as a peace offering to the Lord , it may be a male or a female , but it must have no defects .

ID:	1215
INPUT:	▁Fa ra oi a ren ▁a me tsa ▁ar gi tu ▁Jo sek
PRED:	Joseph 's Family Arrives in Goshen
GOLD:	Pharaoh 's Dreams

ID:	1216
INPUT:	▁E tor ki zu ne ko ▁tenplu a
PRED:	The Lord 's Future Reign
GOLD:	The New Temple Area

ID:	1217
INPUT:	▁Ar tzai nen ▁kon tra ▁e kin go ▁di ot ▁: ▁neu re ▁ar tal de a ▁i tzul tze ra ▁be har tu ko ▁di tut ▁e ta ▁ar tzain - kar gu tik ▁bo ta ko ▁, ▁ez ▁di tuz te ▁aur re ran tze an ▁be ren ▁bu ru ak ▁baz ka tu ko ▁; ▁ho ri en ▁hortz ▁ar te tik ▁a te ra ko ▁di tut ▁ar di ak ▁e ta ▁ez ▁di tuz te ▁ber ri ro ▁e li ka gai ▁i zan go ▁.
PRED:	“ I will send my sheep with my sheep and goats , and I will throw them away from the shepherd 's shepherd . I will drive them away from the flock of sheep and goats , and they will be scattered .
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I now consider these shepherds my enemies , and I will hold them responsible for what has happened to my flock . I will take away their right to feed the flock , and I will stop them from feeding themselves . I will rescue my flock from their mouths ; the sheep will no longer be their prey .

ID:	1218
INPUT:	▁« ▁Har tu ▁le bi tar rak ▁is ra el dar ren ▁le hen - se me ▁guz ti en ▁or dez ▁e ta ▁le bi tar ren ▁a be re ak ▁is ra el dar re nen ▁or dez ▁: ▁neu re ak ▁di tut ▁le bi tar rak ▁. ▁Neu ▁naiz ▁Jau na ▁.
PRED:	“ Take all the firstborn sons of Israel and all the firstborn sons of Israel . I am the Lord . I am the Levites , the Levites , and I am the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Take the Levites as substitutes for the firstborn sons of the people of Israel . And take the livestock of the Levites as substitutes for the firstborn livestock of the people of Israel . The Levites belong to me ; I am the Lord .

ID:	1219
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁di ot ▁: ▁« ▁Oi ▁Jau na ▁, ▁zu ▁zai tut ▁e ne ▁Jaun ▁, ▁zu re gan ▁bai zik ▁ez ▁dut ▁zo ri o nik ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : I will not harm you . ”
GOLD:	I said to the Lord , “ You are my Master ! Every good thing I have comes from you . ”

ID:	1220
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁a hiz pa ▁za har re na ▁Sa ma ri a ▁da ▁, ▁be re ▁hi ri e kin ▁zu re ▁i par ral de ra ▁bi zi ▁de na ▁. ▁Zu re ▁a hiz pa ▁txi ki e na ▁So do ma ▁, ▁be re ▁hi ri e kin ▁zu re ▁he go al de ra ▁bi zi ▁de na ▁.
PRED:	Your sister , your mother , your mother , lies in the north , and all the towns of Sodom and Gomorrah will live in the land of Sodom .
GOLD:	“ Your older sister was Samaria , who lived with her daughters in the north . Your younger sister was Sodom , who lived with her daughters in the south .

ID:	1221
INPUT:	▁Bi ▁a te - or ri ak ▁o li bon do - zu rez ko ak ▁zi ren ▁; ▁hai e tan ▁e re ▁he gal dun ▁i za ki - i ru di ak ▁, ▁pal mon <unk> ▁e ta ▁lo re - sor ten ▁i ru di ak ▁zi zel ka tu ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁guz ti ak ▁ur rez ▁es ta liz ▁.
PRED:	The two cherubim were decorated with two rows of cherubim , and each of them were decorated with carvings of palm trees . The panels were decorated with carvings of cherubim .
GOLD:	These double doors were decorated with carvings of cherubim , palm trees , and open flowers . The doors , including the decorations of cherubim and palm trees , were overlaid with gold .

ID:	1222
INPUT:	▁E za gu tzen ▁ez ▁du ten ▁bi de ti ke ra man go ▁di tut ▁i tsu ak ▁, ▁i bil bi de ▁e ze za gu ne tan ▁bar re <unk> lun pe a ▁ar gi ▁bi hur tu ko ▁di et ▁, ▁pa ra je ▁mal kar rak ▁bi de <unk> ra ▁zer ▁e gi te ko ▁as mo tan ▁nai zen ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁dut ▁e tsi ko ▁.
PRED:	I will tell you the truth , but I will send out a rope through the night of a moment . But I will send out demons , and I will send them out .
GOLD:	I will lead blind Israel down a new path , guiding them along an unfamiliar way.I will brighten the darkness before themand smooth out the road ahead of them.Yes , I will indeed do these things ; I will not forsake them .

ID:	1223
INPUT:	▁Go da li as ▁, ▁Ju da ko ▁go ber na ri
PRED:	Ahaziah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Hope for Israel 's Royal Line

ID:	1224
INPUT:	▁On do ren ▁, ▁sa du ze ar ▁ba tzuk ▁e tor ri ▁zi tzaiz ki on ▁Je su si ▁. ▁Hau ek ▁ez ▁du te ▁si nes ten ▁hil da ko ak ▁piz ten ▁di re nik ▁. ▁E ta ▁ho ne la ▁gal de gin ▁zi o ten ▁:
PRED:	Then some Sadducees came to Jesus , but some of the Sadducees say , “ This is the resurrection from the dead . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus was approached by some Sadducees — religious leaders who say there is no resurrection from the dead . They posed this question :

ID:	1225
INPUT:	▁men de ka tu ▁e ta ▁me re zi a e man go ▁di e dan ▁ar te ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁e tsai ek ▁lur ▁jo ▁de za ten ▁ar <unk> bil ▁da go ▁hai en ▁hon da men di a ▁, ▁be ran du ▁ga be ▁e tor ri ko ▁da hai en tzat ▁pres ta tu rik ▁da go e na ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The enemy is coming when the enemy is coming , the enemy of Israel will be destroyed , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	I will take revenge ; I will pay them back.In due time their feet will slip.Their day of disaster will arrive , and their destiny will overtake them . '

ID:	1226
INPUT:	▁Ba la a men ▁as te me a
PRED:	The Death of Balaam
GOLD:	Balaam and His Donkey

ID:	1227
INPUT:	▁Jain ko ak ▁ez ▁du ▁be re ▁su mi ne an ▁a mo re ▁e ma ten ▁, ▁be re ▁oin pe an ▁har tzen ▁di tu ▁Ra hab - en ▁in dar rak ▁.
PRED:	God does not burn them on the paths of the Lord , for he makes them strong .
GOLD:	And God does not restrain his anger.Even the monsters of the sea are crushed beneath his feet .

ID:	1228
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁sa la tzen ▁ba gai tu zu ▁, ▁as ke ▁gel di tu ko ▁ga ra ▁e gi na ra zi ▁di gu zun ▁zi ne tik ▁.
PRED:	But if you were not able to stay away , we will live in peace .
GOLD:	If you betray us , however , we are not bound by this oath in any way . ”

ID:	1229
INPUT:	▁O rain dik ▁kar tze la ko ▁a ta ri an ▁a txi lo tu a ▁ze go e la ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁Je re mi a si ▁hitz ▁e gin ▁zi on ▁,
PRED:	When Jeremiah was in prison , the Lord gave this message to Jeremiah .
GOLD:	The Lord had given the following message to Jeremiah while he was still in prison :

ID:	1230
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁bai nau zu ▁He ri o ▁Lei ze ra ▁bo ta ko ▁, ▁zu re ▁fe de du na ▁ez ▁du zu ▁hi lo bi an ▁gal tzen ▁u tzi ko ▁.
PRED:	Do n't let me be disgraced ; do n't let me be disgraced in the grave .
GOLD:	For you will not leave my soul among the deador allow your Holy One to rot in the grave .

ID:	1231
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁aur ki tu ko ▁e txe ko andre ▁ja tor ra ▁? ▁Ko ra lek ▁bai no ▁as koz ▁ge hi a go ▁ba li o ▁du ▁.
PRED:	Who will return to Job 's house ? Who will return to him ?
GOLD:	Who can find a virtuous and capable wife ? She is more precious than rubies .

ID:	1232
INPUT:	▁Si nes me na ▁sal ba me na ren ▁i tur ri
PRED:	Living by the Spirit
GOLD:	Christ Took Our Punishment

ID:	1233
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ha ren ▁gor pu tzak har ri bi txi a ▁zi ru di en ▁, ▁aur pe gi ak ▁txi mis ta ren ▁dis ti ra ▁zu en ▁; ▁be gi ak ▁suz ko ▁zu zi ak be za la ko ak ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁be so ▁e ta ▁zan go <unk> tze ▁leun du a ▁be zain ▁dis ti ra tsu ak.Ha ren ▁a ho tsak ▁jen de tza ▁han di ▁ba ten za ra ta - ho tsa ▁zi ru di en ▁.
PRED:	“ His body was covered with fire , and the lightning flashes like lightning . The fire of fire looked like fire , and his voice were like fire . His voice was like fire , and his voice were like fire .
GOLD:	His body looked like a precious gem . His face flashed like lightning , and his eyes flamed like torches . His arms and feet shone like polished bronze , and his voice roared like a vast multitude of people .

ID:	1234
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁o roi tzen ▁naiz ▁i txa ro pe na ▁sus per ra raz ten ▁di dan ▁zer bai tez ▁:
PRED:	But I think I am in the morning , so why should I face face down ?
GOLD:	Yet I still dare to hopewhen I remember this :

ID:	1235
INPUT:	▁Hor ▁da toz ▁ma txin sal to ak ▁pi lo ka ▁, ▁her ri ▁in dar tsu ▁e ta ▁kon ta e zin ba ten ▁an tze ko ▁, ▁ni re ▁lur ral de a ren ▁aur <unk> hoi ak ▁be za la ko ▁hor tzak ▁di tuz te ▁, ▁de na ▁tris ka tzen ▁du te ▁.
PRED:	They will disappear like trees , and they will disappear like a roaring lion . They will fade like a lion , like a leopard will devour its hordes .
GOLD:	A vast army of locusts has invaded my land , a terrible army too numerous to count.Its teeth are like lions ' teeth , its fangs like those of a lioness .

ID:	1236
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁prin tze ak ▁e mai tza ▁be re ▁men pe ko ren ▁ba ti ▁e gi ten ▁ba di o ▁, ▁on da re - za ti ▁ho ri ▁as ka pen - ur te ra ▁ar te ▁ba kar rik ▁i zan go ▁da ▁men pe ko a re na ▁; ▁ge ro ▁, ▁prin tze a ri ▁i tzu li ko ▁zai o ▁. ▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁be ro nen ▁se me ei ▁ba kar rik ▁da go ki e ▁he ren tzi an ▁on da re ▁ho ri ▁.
PRED:	But if the prince 's rule is under the control of the siege , he will be put to death . But if he is free , then he will return to his son , his son will be put to death .
GOLD:	But if the prince gives a gift of land from his inheritance to one of his servants , the servant may keep it only until the Year of Jubilee , which comes every fiftieth year . At that time the land will return to the prince . But when the prince gives gifts to his sons , those gifts will be permanent .

ID:	1237
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ba ▁al ▁da ▁i nor ▁zu en ▁ar te an ▁ni re ▁tenplu a ▁be re ▁le hen go ▁e der - han di an ▁i ku si ▁zu e nik ▁? ▁E ta ▁o rain ▁no la ▁da go e la ▁i ru di tzen ▁zai zu e ▁? ▁Ez ▁al ▁du zu e ▁i kus ten ▁e ze rez tu a ▁da go e la ▁?
PRED:	“ There is no one in my Temple in the Temple of the Lord ? Did you see that you have seen me ? Did n't you see that you have seen the foundation of heaven ?
GOLD:	‘ Does anyone remember this house — this Temple — in its former splendor ? How , in comparison , does it look to you now ? It must seem like nothing at all !

ID:	1238
INPUT:	▁Ju da ko ▁hi ri ▁go tor tu ez ▁ja be tu ▁on do ren ▁, ▁Je ru sa le me rai no ▁hel du ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	When Judah heard what had happened , he returned to Jerusalem to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Shishak conquered Judah 's fortified towns and then advanced to attack Jerusalem .

ID:	1239
INPUT:	▁jo ka bi de ▁txar re tik ▁al de na ra zi ko ▁zai tuz te e ta ▁hitz ▁mal tzur re ko en gan dik ▁,
PRED:	The teaching of the wicked will be led away from their lips .
GOLD:	Wisdom will save you from evil people , from those whose words are twisted .

ID:	1240
INPUT:	▁Sar ▁be di ▁e tsai a ▁ma has ti a ne ta ▁hon da tu ▁, ▁bai na ▁e ra bat ▁deu sez ta tu ▁ez ▁! ▁E rauz ▁bi tza ▁ma hats - ai he nak ▁, ▁ez ▁bai ti ra ▁ni re ak ▁!
PRED:	Let my enemies fall into a vineyard , but they will not kill me . They will devour my vineyard , but they will not kill me .
GOLD:	“ Go down the rows of the vineyards and destroy the grapevines , leaving a scattered few alive.Strip the branches from the vines , for these people do not belong to the Lord .

ID:	1241
INPUT:	▁gu ri ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁zu zen ▁de na ▁be reiz te a e ta ▁on gi ▁zer ▁da go en ▁az ter tze a ▁.
PRED:	But we know that the difference between right and wrong and wrong .
GOLD:	So let us discern for ourselves what is right ; let us learn together what is good .

ID:	1242
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁e gun ▁be re a ne tor ri ko ▁zaiz ki o ▁gai ne ra me re zi ta ko ▁zi gor rak ▁: ▁he ri o tza ▁, ▁do lu a ▁e ta ▁go se a ▁, ▁e ta ▁kis ka li ▁e gin go ▁da ▁su tan ▁; ▁a hal tsu a ▁bai ta be ra ▁e pai tu ▁du en ▁Jain ko ▁Jau na ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says : He will strike down the wild animals and wild animals and wild animals and wild animals . He will burn down on fire and burning sulfur in the fire . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , these plagues will overtake her in a single day — death and mourning and famine.She will be completely consumed by fire , for the Lord God who judges her is mighty . ”

ID:	1243
INPUT:	▁Jus ti zi an ▁sen do ▁e zar ri a ▁e gon go ▁za <unk> pal kun tza tik ▁lib re ▁i zan go ▁za ra e ta ▁ez ▁du zu ▁e ze ren ▁bel dur rik ▁i zan go ▁, ▁i ka ra ▁ez ▁zai zu ▁i noiz ▁hur bil du ko ▁.
PRED:	Your throne will be like a gazelle , and you will be crushed . You will never be crushed , and you will never be crushed .
GOLD:	You will be secure under a government that is just and fair.Your enemies will stay far away.You will live in peace , and terror will not come near .

ID:	1244
INPUT:	▁hau ▁a gin du ▁zi en ▁Hil ki as ▁a pai za ri ▁, ▁Xa fa nen ▁se me ▁A hi ka mi ▁, ▁Mi ke a sen ▁se me ▁Ak bor ri ▁, ▁Xa fan ▁i daz ka ri a ri ▁e ta ▁er re ge a ren ▁mi nis tro ▁zen ▁A sai a si ▁:
PRED:	So Hilkiah , Ahikam son of Hilkiah , grandson of Shaphan , grandson of Shaphan , and Shaphan son of Hilkiah , the court secretary .
GOLD:	Then he gave these orders to Hilkiah the priest , Ahikam son of Shaphan , Acbor son of Micaiah , Shaphan the court secretary , and Asaiah the king 's personal adviser :

ID:	1245
INPUT:	▁Ho dei ek ▁, ▁a se ak ▁dau de la rik ▁, ▁eu ri a ▁e gin ▁o hi ▁du te ▁lur ▁gai ne ra.Zu hai tza ▁, ▁he go rantz ▁na hiz ▁i par re rantz ▁e ro ri ▁, ▁han ▁gel di tu ko ▁da ▁, ▁e ro ri ▁den ▁to ki an ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : He is the one who sits on the top of the sea , in the garden of the garden , which lies in the garden .
GOLD:	When clouds are heavy , the rains come down.Whether a tree falls north or south , it stays where it falls .

ID:	1246
INPUT:	▁Eskla bo ok ▁, ▁i zan ▁be ti ▁mun du ▁ho ne tan ▁na gu si ▁di tu zu e nen ▁e sa ne ko ▁; ▁ez ▁ja go le a ren ▁be gi ra da pe an ▁e do ▁gi za ki ei ▁a tse gin ▁i za te ko ▁ba kar rik ▁, ▁bi hotz - bi ho tzez ▁bai zik ▁, ▁Jau na ren ga na ko ▁be gi ru ne a ga tik ▁.
PRED:	Be careful to obey all the commands of the Lord . Be careful to obey all the commands of the Lord . Be careful to obey all the commands of the Lord .
GOLD:	Slaves , obey your earthly masters in everything you do . Try to please them all the time , not just when they are watching you . Serve them sincerely because of your reverent fear of the Lord .

ID:	1247
INPUT:	▁« ▁Bai na ▁zeu en ▁jo ka bi de a ▁e ta ▁e gin tzak ▁be ne tan ▁zu zen tzen ▁ba di tu zu e ▁, ▁gi zar te - har re ma ne tan ▁jus ti zi a ▁de fen da tzen ▁ba du zu e ▁,
PRED:	“ But if you refuse to obey what is right and right , do what is right and right ,
GOLD:	But I will be merciful only if you stop your evil thoughts and deeds and start treating each other with justice ;

ID:	1248
INPUT:	▁Hil tze ko ▁mo du ko ▁zu rez ko ▁tres na ▁jaur tiz ▁nor bait ▁jo ▁e ta ▁hil tzen ▁du e na ▁, ▁hil ke ta - er ru dun ▁da ▁: ▁he ri o tza ra ▁e man go ▁du te ▁.
PRED:	If someone hates another person and kills another person , he will be put to death . He will be put to death , and he will die .
GOLD:	Or if someone strikes and kills another person with a wooden object , it is murder , and the murderer must be put to death .

ID:	1249
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁zen tzu ga be ak ▁zo ra ke ri a ▁a ho an ▁, ▁e ta ▁as mo ▁txar rak ▁bes te rik ▁ez bar ru an ▁; ▁Jau naz ▁ar du ra tu ▁ga be ▁bi zi ▁da e ta ▁ha ri ▁i rain ka ▁min tzo ▁; ▁go se ▁de na ▁hu tsik ▁bi dal tzen ▁du e ta ▁e gar ri ▁de na ri ez ▁di o ▁e da ten ▁e ma ten ▁.
PRED:	For their hearts are full of wickedness , and their hearts are full of evil . They are not doing wrong , but the Lord is speaking to those who say , “ The Lord is coming ! ”
GOLD:	For fools speak foolishnessand make evil plans.They practice ungodlinessand spread false teachings about the Lord.They deprive the hungry of foodand give no water to the thirsty .

ID:	1250
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁Jau nak ▁e ran tzun ▁:
PRED:	Then the Lord said to them ,
GOLD:	And the Lord replied to Moses ,

ID:	1251
INPUT:	▁Au zo ko ▁her ri ak ▁zi gor tu ak ▁e ta ▁sal ba tu ak
PRED:	Judgment against Israel
GOLD:	The Lord 's Reply to Jeremiah

ID:	1252
INPUT:	▁Ne ka za ri ▁hil tzai le en ▁pa ra bo la
PRED:	Parable of the Evil Farmers
GOLD:	Parable of the Evil Farmers

ID:	1253
INPUT:	▁Ju da ko ▁er re ge a ri ▁, ▁e sa te ra ▁: ▁« ▁Us te a ▁be ra ren gan ▁du zun ▁ar ren ▁, ▁ez ▁zai tza la ▁en gai na ▁zeu re ▁Jain ko ▁hor rek ▁, ▁Je ru sa lem ▁ni re ▁es ku e tan ▁ez ▁de la ▁e ro ri ko ▁e sa ten ▁ba di zu ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	For the king of Judah said , “ You are the God of Assyria , but you do n't listen to me . If you refuse to listen to me , you will not listen to me .
GOLD:	“ This message is for King Hezekiah of Judah . Do n't let your God , in whom you trust , deceive you with promises that Jerusalem will not be captured by the king of Assyria .

ID:	1254
INPUT:	▁Ja kin ▁be za te ▁zu re ▁es ku a ▁de la ▁, ▁zu ▁zeu ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁ni re ▁al de ▁a ri ▁de na ▁.
PRED:	Let me know that I am the Lord , and I will praise you .
GOLD:	Let them see that this is your doing , that you yourself have done it , Lord .

ID:	1255
INPUT:	▁ja be a ▁ber tan ▁ba zen ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁ez ▁du ▁or dain du ▁be har rik ▁i zan go ▁. ▁Bal din ▁a be re a ▁a lo ka tu a ▁ba du ▁, ▁a lo kai ru - sa ri a ▁ba kar rik ▁e man go ▁di o ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But if the field is required , it will be required in the field . If the field is required , there will be no peace . ”
GOLD:	“ If someone borrows an animal from a neighbor and it is injured or dies when the owner is absent , the person who borrowed it must pay full compensation .

ID:	1256
INPUT:	▁Kon ber tsi o ra ko ▁dei a
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	A Call to Repentance

ID:	1257
INPUT:	▁« ▁Bi har ▁e do ▁e tzi ▁zu en ▁se me - a la bek ▁gal de tze an ▁: ▁“ ▁Zer ▁e san ▁na hi ▁du te ▁Jau nak ▁geu re ▁Jain ko ak ▁a gin du ▁diz ki gun ▁le ge ▁, ▁xe da pen ▁e ta ▁e ra ba ki ▁ho ri ek ▁? ▁” ▁,
PRED:	“ But if your children ask , ‘ What do we want to obey the commands the Lord our God has given us ? '
GOLD:	“ In the future your children will ask you , ‘ What is the meaning of these laws , decrees , and regulations that the Lord our God has commanded us to obey ? '

ID:	1258
INPUT:	▁I sa kar ren ▁lei nu tik ▁, ▁Tzu ar ren ▁se me ▁Ne ta nel ▁;
PRED:	They left the tribe of Issachar and camped at the tribe of Issachar .
GOLD:	IssacharNethanel son of Zuar

ID:	1259
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren ▁ha ser re a ja san ▁be har ra ▁dut ▁, ▁ha ren ▁aur ka ▁e gin ▁bai tut ▁be ka tu ▁; ▁bai na ▁las ter ▁e ra ba ki ko ▁du ▁Jau nak ni re ▁au zi a ▁e ta ▁ni re ▁al de ▁a te ra ko ▁da ▁; ▁ar gi ta ra ▁e ra man go ▁nau ▁, ▁e ta ▁i ku si ▁a hal ▁i zan go ▁dut ha ren ▁sal ba me na ▁.
PRED:	For I am furious with the Lord 's anger , but he has turned against his people , but he will return to the Lord . He will rescue me and rescue me from the power of the Lord .
GOLD:	I will be patient as the Lord punishes me , for I have sinned against him.But after that , he will take up my caseand give me justice for all I have suffered from my enemies.The Lord will bring me into the light , and I will see his righteousness .

ID:	1260
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁Moi se si ▁: ▁« ▁E san ▁A a ron ▁zeu re ▁a nai a ri ▁ez ▁da di la ▁noiz na hi ▁sar ▁san tu te gi an ▁er re ze laz ▁bar ru al de ra ▁, ▁ku txa ▁gai ne ko ▁es tal ki a ren ▁aur re ra ▁; ▁hil ▁e gin go ▁li tza te ke ▁bes te la ▁, ▁ze ren ▁ku txa ren ▁es tal ki ▁gai ne an ▁a ger tzen ▁bai naiz ▁ni ▁lai no an ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Aaron , you must not enter the inner courtyard of the inner sanctuary . If you enter the inner sanctuary , you will die before the Ark of the Most Holy Place .
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses , “ Warn your brother , Aaron , not to enter the Most Holy Place behind the inner curtain whenever he chooses ; if he does , he will die . For the Ark 's cover — the place of atonement — is there , and I myself am present in the cloud above the atonement cover .

ID:	1261
INPUT:	▁A pai zak ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁He men txe ▁dut ▁, ▁zeuk ▁Te re bin to ▁ha ra ne an ▁hil ▁ze nu en ▁Go li at ▁fi lis te ar ra ren ▁ez pa ta ▁, ▁oi hal ▁ba te an ▁bil du a ▁, ▁e fod ▁de la ko ▁a paiz - jan tzi a ren ▁a tze an ▁. ▁Har tza zu ▁, ▁na hi ▁ba du zu ▁, ▁ez ▁bai ta go ▁bes te <unk> vi dek ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁— ▁Ez ▁da ▁ho ri ▁bai no ▁ho be rik ▁. ▁E ma da zu ▁!
PRED:	“ Yes , ” the priest replied , “ I will die in the valley of Goliath of Goliath the Philistine camp , and you will not eat it . If you do n't want to eat it , you may not eat it . ”
GOLD:	So David escaped from Saul and went to King Achish of Gath .

ID:	1262
INPUT:	▁A te zai nak ▁: ▁Xa lum ▁, ▁A ter ▁, ▁Tal mon ▁, ▁A kub ▁, ▁Ha ti ta ▁e ta ▁Xo bai ren ▁on do ren go ak ▁, ▁guz ti ra ▁, <unk> ▁.
PRED:	The gatekeepers of Shallum , Talmon , Akkub , Talmon , and Akkub , Talmon , Talmon , and Uzziel .
GOLD:	The gatekeepers of the families of Shallum , Ater , Talmon , Akkub , Hatita , and Shobai139

ID:	1263
INPUT:	▁na zi o ak ▁ar gi tze ko ▁ar gi e ta ▁zu re ▁her ri ▁Is ra e len ▁os pe ▁» ▁.
PRED:	The nations of Israel is a light to see your glory . ”
GOLD:	He is a light to reveal God to the nations , and he is the glory of your people Israel ! ”

ID:	1264
INPUT:	▁Go gor ke ri a ▁go gor ke ri a ren ▁gain ▁, ▁fal tsu ke ri a ▁fal tsu ke ri a ren ▁gain ▁, ▁e ta ▁ni ▁ez ▁nau te ▁ain tzat ▁har tu ▁na hi ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Give thanks to those who hate me , for I am not worthy of healing . ”
GOLD:	They all fool and defraud each other ; no one tells the truth.With practiced tongues they tell lies ; they wear themselves out with all their sinning .

ID:	1265
INPUT:	▁E goi tzan ▁e ra bi li ta ko ▁me ta lak
PRED:	Plans for the Tabernacle
GOLD:	Building the Courtyard

ID:	1266
INPUT:	▁O rein - e me ▁mai ta gar ri ▁, ▁ga ze la ▁e der ▁du <unk> se ▁zai tza te la ▁u ne ▁o roz ▁be ra ren ▁bu lar rek ▁, ▁li lu ra ▁zai tza la ▁be ti ▁be ra ren ▁a mo di o ak ▁!
PRED:	Your breasts are as beautiful as beautiful as a weaver 's donkey , and your breasts are like grass .
GOLD:	She is a loving deer , a graceful doe.Let her breasts satisfy you always.May you always be captivated by her love .

ID:	1267
INPUT:	▁Fa ra oi ak ▁Jo se ri ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Ai ta ▁e ta ▁se ni de ak ▁e tor ri ▁zaiz ki zu ▁.
PRED:	Pharaoh said to Joseph , “ Your brothers and brothers are your brothers . ”
GOLD:	Then Pharaoh said to Joseph , “ Now that your father and brothers have joined you here ,

ID:	1268
INPUT:	▁Hai ek ▁, ▁or du an ▁: ▁— ▁Ez ▁dau ka gu ▁he men ▁bost ▁o gi ▁e ta ▁bi ▁ar rain ▁bes te rik ▁.
PRED:	“ No , ” they said , “ we have five loaves of bread and five loaves of bread . ”
GOLD:	“ But we have only five loaves of bread and two fish ! ” they answered .

ID:	1269
INPUT:	▁« ▁Lot ▁al ▁di tza ke zu ▁zuk ▁i zar - mul tzo a ke do ▁konste la zi o en ▁lo tu rak ▁as ka ▁,
PRED:	“ You placed the sea in the sea , in the sea , in the sea ,
GOLD:	“ Can you direct the movement of the stars — binding the cluster of the Pleiadesor loosening the cords of Orion ?

ID:	1270
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁No e mik ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁O rain ▁, ▁Rut ▁, ▁zau de ▁la sai ▁a ra zo a ▁zer - no la ▁bu ka tu ko ▁den ▁ja kin ▁ar te ▁. ▁Bo o zek ▁ez ▁du ▁e tsi ko ▁gaur ▁ber tan ▁au zi a ▁e ra ba ki ▁ar te ▁.
PRED:	Naomi replied , “ Ruth , Ruth , Naomi , ‘ You are the Ruth , ' Ruth replied . “ You must not eat anything until the time has been told today . ”
GOLD:	Then Naomi said to her , “ Just be patient , my daughter , until we hear what happens . The man wo n't rest until he has settled things today . ”

ID:	1271
INPUT:	▁Lau gar ren ▁e gu ne an ▁, ▁e san ▁zi o ten ▁Sam so nen ▁e maz te a ri ▁: ▁— ▁A te ra ▁i e zai o zu ▁az pi ke ri az ▁se nar ra ri ▁i gar ki zu nak ▁zer ▁e san ▁na hi ▁du en ▁; ▁bes te la ▁, ▁su ▁e man go ▁di zu gu ▁, ▁bai ta ▁zu en ▁ai ta ren ▁e txe a ri ▁e re ▁. ▁Gu ri ▁la pur tze ko ▁as moz ▁gon bi da tu ▁al ▁gai tu zu e ▁?
PRED:	On the fourth day Samson said to Samson , “ If you have a wife , please let her marry her , why should you let her marry her as well as you have done ? ”
GOLD:	On the fourth day they said to Samson 's wife , “ Entice your husband to explain the riddle for us , or we will burn down your father 's house with you in it . Did you invite us to this party just to make us poor ? ”

ID:	1272
INPUT:	▁Jau na ▁gu re ▁al de ▁i zan ▁ez ▁ba litz ▁, ▁e tsai ek ▁e ra so ▁zi gu te ne an ▁,
PRED:	But if our enemies were not in the Lord 's sight , they would not be defeated .
GOLD:	What if the Lord had not been on our sidewhen people attacked us ?

ID:	1273
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ko rik ▁sa la tzen ▁ba di zu e te ▁e do ▁, ▁zeu en ▁ka buz ▁, ▁hor re la ko ▁zer bai ten ▁ber ri ▁ja ki ten ▁ba du zu e ▁, ▁i ker tu ▁ze hatz - me hatz ▁a ra zo a ▁; ▁Is ra e len ▁hor re la ko ▁gaiz ta ke ri a ▁e gi az ▁ger ta tu ▁de la ▁i kus ten ▁ba du zu e ▁,
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : If you have done this , you will know that your neighbor has done this , you will know that this is what you have done .
GOLD:	When you hear about it , investigate the matter thoroughly . If it is true that this detestable thing has been done in Israel ,

ID:	1274
INPUT:	▁Ai pa tu ri ko ▁ka su az ▁a par te ▁, ▁jar rai ▁be za ▁ba koi tzak ▁Jau nak ▁e zar ri ▁di on ▁bi zi - e go e ran ▁, ▁hots ▁, ▁Jain ko ak ▁fe de ra ▁dei ▁e gi te an ▁zu en ▁e go e ran ▁. ▁Hau ▁da ▁e liz ▁el kar te ▁guz ti e tan ▁e ma ten ▁du dan ▁a rau a ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : Each of you must build a vow to the one who calls on the name of the Lord your God . This is the message that I am giving you .
GOLD:	Each of you should continue to live in whatever situation the Lord has placed you , and remain as you were when God first called you . This is my rule for all the churches .

ID:	1275
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁be ren ▁gar bi kun tza ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁a te ak ▁zain tze ra ▁jo a te ko ▁a gin du ▁ni en ▁le bi tar rei ▁, ▁la run ba ta ren ▁san tu ta su na ▁er res pe ta tu a ▁i zan ▁ze <unk> ▁« ▁I zan ▁go go an ▁hau ▁e re ▁, ▁e ne ▁Jain ko ▁; ▁er ru ki ▁ni taz ▁, ▁hain ▁on be ra ▁bai tza ra ▁! ▁»
PRED:	Then he purified them and put them on the Sabbath day of purification . He went out to the Temple of the Lord , and he said , “ This is a permanent law for me ! ”
GOLD:	Then I commanded the Levites to purify themselves and to guard the gates in order to preserve the holiness of the Sabbath.Remember this good deed also , O my God ! Have compassion on me according to your great and unfailing love .

ID:	1276
INPUT:	▁Ai tzi tik ▁, ▁har re si ▁ga be ko ▁her ri ▁i re ki e ta ko ▁e txe ak ▁ba ser ri - lur ren ▁a ra be ra ▁har tu ko ▁di ra ▁: ▁ber res ku ra tze - es ku bi de a ▁noiz na hi ko a ▁da ▁e ta ▁, ▁de na ▁de la ▁, ▁Ju bi leu ▁Ur te an ▁e txe a ▁be re ▁ja tor riz ko ▁ja be a ri ▁i tzu li ko ▁zai o ▁.
PRED:	However , if you see that the houses of the wicked will not return to the house of the Lord 's house , you will return to the Year of Jubilee . It will return to the Year of Jubilee . It will return to the Year of Jubilee .
GOLD:	But a house in a village — a settlement without fortified walls — will be treated like property in the countryside . Such a house may be bought back at any time , and it must be returned to the original owner in the Year of Jubilee .

ID:	1277
INPUT:	▁Zu hur ra ▁ba za ra ▁, ▁zeu re ▁o ne ra ko ▁da ▁; ▁har ro pu tza ▁ba za ra ▁, ▁zeu re ▁kal te ra ko ▁.
PRED:	A wise person is a life-giving fountain ; a body is full of food .
GOLD:	If you become wise , you will be the one to benefit.If you scorn wisdom , you will be the one to suffer .

ID:	1278
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁i sil tze ko ▁kei nu ▁e gin ▁zi en ▁es ku az ▁, ▁e ta ▁Jau nak ▁kar tze la tik ▁no la ▁a te ra ▁zu en ▁kon ta tu ▁zi en ▁. ▁Az ke ne an ▁, ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁« ▁Ja ki na ra zi ▁hau ▁San ti a go ri ▁e ta ▁bes te ▁se ni de ei ▁» ▁. ▁On do ren ▁, ▁a te ra ▁e ta ▁bes te ▁to ki ▁ba te ra ▁jo an ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	He put his hand on his head and put them in prison . He said to them , “ This is what the Lord says : I am the Holy Place , and he went to the other side of the Holy Place . ”
GOLD:	He motioned for them to quiet down and told them how the Lord had led him out of prison . “ Tell James and the other brothers what happened , ” he said . And then he went to another place .

ID:	1279
INPUT:	▁Za toz te ▁, ▁i kus ▁Jau na ren ▁e gin tzak ▁, ▁lur re an ▁e gin ▁du en ▁i raul ke ta ▁:
PRED:	Come , let us see the Lord 's face shine down on the ground .
GOLD:	He causes wars to end throughout the earth.He breaks the bow and snaps the spear ; he burns the shields with fire .

ID:	1280
INPUT:	▁Da vi dek ▁e san da ko ▁hi tzak ▁a di tu ▁zi tuz te la rik ▁, ▁Sau li ▁ja ki na ra zi ▁zi o ten ▁. ▁Sau lek ▁e tor ra ra zi
PRED:	When David heard what had happened , he told Saul what Saul had said to Saul .
GOLD:	Then David 's question was reported to King Saul , and the king sent for him .

ID:	1281
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁ain ge ru a ▁Je ru sa lem ▁hon da tze ko ▁es ku a ▁lu za tzen ▁a ri ▁ze la rik ▁, ▁a tze ra ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁Jau nak ▁kal te ▁hu ra ▁bi dal tze tik ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi on ▁her ri a ▁xe ha tzen ▁a ri ▁zen ▁ain ge ru a ri ▁: ▁— ▁A tze ra ▁es ku ▁ho ri ▁! ▁As ki ▁da ▁! ▁U ne ▁har tan ▁Jau na ren ▁ain ge ru a ▁A rau na ▁je bus tar ra ren ▁lar rain ▁on do an ▁ze go en ▁.
PRED:	Then the angel of the Lord said to him , “ Let 's go out to Jerusalem and kill the people of Jerusalem . The angel of the Lord said to him , ‘ Leave him alone ! ' But the angel of the Lord ! ” So the angel of the Lord said .
GOLD:	But as the angel was preparing to destroy Jerusalem , the Lord relented and said to the death angel , “ Stop ! That is enough ! ” At that moment the angel of the Lord was by the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite .

ID:	1282
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁Saul ▁baz ter tu
PRED:	Saul 's Love for Israel
GOLD:	The Lord Rejects Saul

ID:	1283
INPUT:	▁Jo sek ▁fa ra oi a ri ▁ber ri ▁e ma te ra ▁jo an ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁« ▁Ni re ▁ai ta ▁e ta ▁se ni de ak ▁e tor ri ▁di ra ▁Ka na an dik ▁ar di ▁e ta ▁be hi e kin ▁e ta ▁dau ka ten ▁guz ti a re kin ▁. ▁O rain ▁Go xen ▁es ku al de an ▁aur ki tzen ▁di ra ▁» ▁.
PRED:	So Joseph went back to Pharaoh and told him , “ Your brothers have come from the land of Canaan , where they are going to live in the land of Canaan . ”
GOLD:	Then Joseph went to see Pharaoh and told him , “ My father and my brothers have arrived from the land of Canaan . They have come with all their flocks and herds and possessions , and they are now in the region of Goshen . ”

ID:	1284
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi on ▁Jau nak ▁Moi se si ▁:
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	and the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1285
INPUT:	▁Suz ko ak ▁be za la ko ▁i za ki ▁ba tzuk ▁zi tu en ▁gai ne an ▁. ▁Sei na ▁he gal ▁zi tuz ten ▁: ▁bi ▁he ga lez ▁aur pe gi a ▁es tal tzen ▁zu ten ▁, ▁bes te ▁biz ▁gor pu tza ▁, ▁e ta ▁bes te ▁biz ▁he gaz ▁e gi ten ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	He looked like a cherubim , and he placed them beneath the wings of the wings of the cherubim . They put their wings on their wings and put their wings on their wings .
GOLD:	Attending him were mighty seraphim , each having six wings . With two wings they covered their faces , with two they covered their feet , and with two they flew .

ID:	1286
INPUT:	▁Er re ge ak ▁a gin du ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁E gon ▁hor ▁a tze an ▁! ▁Jo an ▁zen ▁a tze ra ▁e ta ▁han ▁gel di tu ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	“ Well , ” the king said , “ stay here ! ” So the king stayed there .
GOLD:	“ Wait here , ” the king told him . So Ahimaaz stepped aside .

ID:	1287
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁Jau nak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Jai tsi ▁e ta ▁o har ta ra zi ▁her ri a ri ▁, ▁ez ▁da di la ▁ni ▁i kus ten ▁a ha le gin du ▁, ▁as ko ▁e ta ▁as ko ▁hi lik ▁e ror ▁ez ▁dai te zen ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Get up and go out to the town and see it , and do n't let it fall . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord told Moses , “ Go back down and warn the people not to break through the boundaries to see the Lord , or they will die .

ID:	1288
INPUT:	▁Ai tak ▁hi lak ▁piz tu ▁e ta ▁bi zi a ▁e ma ten ▁di en ▁be za la ▁, ▁Se me ak ▁e re ▁bi zi a ▁e ma ten ▁di e ▁be rak ▁na hi ▁du e nei ▁.
PRED:	Anyone who eats the dead will live in the dead , just as the Father lives .
GOLD:	For just as the Father gives life to those he raises from the dead , so the Son gives life to anyone he wants .

ID:	1289
INPUT:	▁Ho ri en ▁a ho an ▁e zer ▁ez ▁fi da gar ri rik ▁, ▁ho ri en ▁bar re na ▁lei ze - zu lo a ▁, ▁ez tar ri a ▁hi lo bi ▁za bal du a ▁, ▁mi hi a ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁leun ▁e ta ▁la bai na ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : Do n't let the enemy fall into the city , and all the people are filled with fear .
GOLD:	O God , declare them guilty.Let them be caught in their own traps.Drive them away because of their many sins , for they have rebelled against you .

ID:	1290
INPUT:	▁Jen de ak ▁su - e gur re ta ra ko ▁e ra bi li ▁o hi ▁di tu ▁: ▁na hiz ▁su ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁be ro tze ko ▁, ▁na hiz ▁o gi a ▁er re tze ko ▁. ▁Bai na ▁be rak ▁jain ko - i ru di ▁bat ▁e gi te ko ▁e ra bil tzen ▁du ▁. ▁E ta ▁gur tu ▁e gi ten ▁, ▁a hus pez tu rik ▁.
PRED:	They will burn their wood and wood and wood and wood . They will worship their gods and worship other gods . But they worship other gods and worship other gods . But they worship their gods .
GOLD:	Then he uses part of the wood to make a fire.With it he warms himself and bakes his bread.Then — yes , it 's true — he takes the rest of itand makes himself a god to worship ! He makes an idoland bows down in front of it !

ID:	1291
INPUT:	▁Be ra ▁da ▁gu re ▁Jain ko a ▁, ▁e ta ▁gu ▁hark ▁lar ra tu ri ko ▁her ri a ▁, ▁ha ren ▁gi da ri tza pe ko ▁ar tal de a.E gin go ▁al ▁di o zu e ▁gaur ▁ka su ▁ha ren ▁e sa na ri ▁:
PRED:	He is the God of our God , and he has made you tremble in his own hometown . He has given you this command :
GOLD:	for he is our God.We are the people he watches over , the flock under his care.If only you would listen to his voice today !

ID:	1292
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁ha ren ▁a ho tsak ▁or ro ▁e gi ten ▁du tru moi ak ▁o zen ki ▁jo tze an ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁di tu ▁oi naz tar ri ak ▁ge hi a go ▁lo tzen tru moi ak ▁jo tzen ▁du en ▁bi tar te an ▁.
PRED:	But they will turn their cries against himand let their thunder like lightning flashed over the thunder of the thunder and the thunder of the north .
GOLD:	Then comes the roaring of the thunder — the tremendous voice of his majesty.He does not restrain it when he speaks .

ID:	1293
INPUT:	▁El kar ke ta - e txo la ▁e ta ▁al da re a ▁sa ga ra tu ko ▁di tut ▁; ▁bai ta ▁A a ron ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁se me ak ▁e re ▁, ▁ni re ▁a paiz - zer bi tzu ra ko ▁.
PRED:	I will present Aaron and his sons to Aaron and his sons , and they will serve as priests .
GOLD:	Yes , I will consecrate the Tabernacle and the altar , and I will consecrate Aaron and his sons to serve me as priests .

ID:	1294
INPUT:	▁a le gi a ▁, ▁Na bu ko do no sor ▁er re ge ak ▁— ▁Joi a ki men ▁se me ▁Je ko ni as ▁Ju da ko ▁er re ge a ▁, ▁Ju da ko ▁e ta ▁Je ru sa lem go ▁han di ki e kin ▁ba te ra ▁, ▁Ba bi lo ni a ra ▁er bes te ra tu ▁zu e ne an ▁— ▁e ra man ▁ez ▁zi tu en ▁tres nei ▁bu ruz ▁.
PRED:	King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon , king of Judah , king of Judah , king of Judah , and all the people of Judah , took them to Jerusalem . They left all alone in the towns of Judah and Jerusalem .
GOLD:	King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon left them here when he exiled Jehoiachin son of Jehoiakim , king of Judah , to Babylon , along with all the other nobles of Judah and Jerusalem .

ID:	1295
INPUT:	▁— ▁Zer ▁i kus ten ▁du zu ▁, ▁A mos ▁? ▁— ▁gal de tu ▁zi dan ▁. ▁— ▁Sas ki a ▁be te ▁frui tu ▁hel du ▁— ▁e ran tzun ▁ni <unk> nak ▁e san ▁zi dan ▁: ▁— ▁Bai ▁, ▁hel du a ▁da ▁a mai e ra ▁ni re ▁her ri ▁Is ra e len tzat ▁. ▁Ez ▁dut ▁ge hi a go ▁ez ▁i ku si a re nik ▁e gin go ▁.
PRED:	“ What do you see ? ” they asked . “ Your fruit is good , ” they replied , “ I will give you a harvest . But I will not see the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ What do you see , Amos ? ” he asked.I replied , “ A basket full of ripe fruit. ” Then the Lord said , “ Like this fruit , Israel is ripe for punishment ! I will not delay their punishment again .

ID:	1296
INPUT:	▁« ▁Si me on ▁e ta ▁Le bi ▁a nai a kin dar ke ri a ▁e ra bil tze ko ▁bat ▁da toz ▁.
PRED:	“ From the tribe of Simeon , Levi , and Levi , will come with him .
GOLD:	“ Simeon and Levi are two of a kind ; their weapons are instruments of violence .

ID:	1297
INPUT:	▁I tzul ▁zai tez ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁e ta ▁zo az ▁ba ke an ▁. ▁Hor re la ▁, ▁ez ▁di ra ▁su min du ko ▁fi lis te ar ren ▁bu ru za gi ak ▁.
PRED:	Go back to the Philistines , and do n't be angry with the Philistines .
GOLD:	Please do n't upset them , but go back quietly . ”

ID:	1298
INPUT:	▁Tenplu ko ▁a ta lon do ra ▁e ra man ▁nin du en ▁gi zo nak ▁e ta ▁neur tu ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁: ▁sar re ra ko ▁hor mek ▁, ▁a te a ren ▁bi ▁al de e ta ko ek ▁, ▁bi ▁me tro ▁e ta ▁er di ko ▁lo di e ra ▁zu ten ▁, ▁a te ak ▁zaz pi ▁me tro ko ▁za ba le ra ▁e ta ▁a te a ren ▁mun ta gek ▁me tro ▁e ta ▁er di ko ▁za ba le ra ▁ba koi tzak ▁.
PRED:	Then the man measured the gateway to the entry room of the gateway . He measured the gateway on the east side of the gateway , and the other feet of the gateway passage was 101/2 feet long and 433/4 feet wide .
GOLD:	Then he brought me to the entry room of the Temple . He measured the walls on either side of the opening to the entry room , and they were 83/4 feet thick . The entrance itself was 241/2 feet wide , and the walls on each side of the entrance were an additional 51/4 feet long .

ID:	1299
INPUT:	▁Be gi ra ▁ze go e la ▁, ▁a be rats ▁ba tzuk ▁i ku si ▁zi tu en ▁Je su sek ▁tenplu ko ▁di ru te gi an ▁li mos na ▁bo ta tzen ▁.
PRED:	When Jesus saw that some of the people had gone to the Temple , he asked them to throw them into the Temple .
GOLD:	While Jesus was in the Temple , he watched the rich people dropping their gifts in the collection box .

ID:	1300
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁Kris to re nak ▁bal din ▁ba za re te ▁, ▁Ab ra ha men ▁on do ren go ▁za re te ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁a gin tza ri a ren ▁oi nor de ko ▁.
PRED:	And if we are united with Christ , we are members of Christ , Abraham 's promise to God .
GOLD:	And now that you belong to Christ , you are the true children of Abraham . You are his heirs , and God 's promise to Abraham belongs to you .

ID:	1301
INPUT:	<unk> ▁bi tez ▁zu re ▁a pai zak ▁sal ba men - in dar rez ▁, ▁e kin ▁bi e zai o te ▁poz - oi hu ka ▁zu re ▁fe de du nek ▁.
PRED:	With your strong hand , the priest will sing for joy and sing for joy .
GOLD:	May your priests be clothed in godliness ; may your loyal servants sing for joy .

ID:	1302
INPUT:	▁E liz ▁el kar te ak ▁fe de an ▁sen do tuz ▁e ta ▁e gu ne tik ▁e gu ne ra ▁u gal duz ▁zi ho a zen ▁.
PRED:	At that time the believers went out to the church and touched the believers .
GOLD:	So the churches were strengthened in their faith and grew larger every day .

ID:	1303
INPUT:	▁Zu ri ▁es ker ▁jo ▁di tu gu ▁e tsai ak ▁, ▁zu re ▁bi dez ▁za pal du ▁e ra so tzai le ak ▁.
PRED:	Your enemies have saved us from your enemiesand allow us to live in your presence .
GOLD:	I do not trust in my bow ; I do not count on my sword to save me .

ID:	1304
INPUT:	▁« ▁Si na go ge ta ra ▁e ta ▁bu ru za gi en ▁e ta ▁a gin ta ri en ▁aur re ra ▁e ra man go ▁zai tuz te te ne an ▁, ▁ez ▁e gon ▁kez ka tan ▁no la ▁e gin ▁e do ▁zer ▁e san ▁zeu en ▁al de ▁,
PRED:	“ When you go to the king of Aram and tell you what is going to do , do n't worry about your officials and tell them what you have done .
GOLD:	“ And when you are brought to trial in the synagogues and before rulers and authorities , do n't worry about how to defend yourself or what to say ,

ID:	1305
INPUT:	▁Ba koi tza ri ▁me re zi ▁du e na e man go ▁di o ▁or dai ne tan ▁, ▁bai ta ▁ur ru ti ko ▁her ri e ta ko ei ▁e re ▁; ▁men de ku a ▁e ta ▁ha ser re - zi gor ra e man go ▁di e ▁e tsai ei ▁.
PRED:	He will give them this message , but he will rule over the nations . He will rule over the nations , and he will rule over the nations .
GOLD:	He will repay his enemies for their evil deeds.His fury will fall on his foes.He will pay them back even to the ends of the earth .

ID:	1306
INPUT:	▁a ka bo ▁Mo a ben ▁har ro ta sun ▁ze na ▁! ▁Hex bo nen ▁pres ta tu ▁di tuz te Mo ab ▁gal tze ko ▁bi de ak ▁: ▁“ ▁Sun tsi ▁de za gun ▁na zi o a ▁! ▁” ▁, ▁zi o <unk> ▁e re ▁bai ▁, ▁Mad men ▁, ▁mu tu ▁gel di tu ▁za ra ▁: ▁gai ne an ▁du zu ▁ez pa ta ▁.
PRED:	“ The people of Moab will be destroyed , ” says the Lord. “ The people of Moab will be destroyed , ” they said . “ Get out of peace , for you are a sword ! ”
GOLD:	No one will ever brag about Moab again , for in Heshbon there is a plot to destroy her. ‘ Come , ' they say , ‘ we will cut her off from being a nation . 'The town of Madmen , too , will be silenced ; the sword will follow you there .

ID:	1307
INPUT:	▁E ma ku me ak ▁e liz ▁ba tzar re tan
PRED:	Paul Preaches in the Church in Ephesus
GOLD:	Instructions for Public Worship

ID:	1308
INPUT:	▁Zu ▁zai tut ▁e ne ▁gor de le ku ▁e ta ▁ba bes ▁, ▁zu re ▁hi tza ▁e ne ▁i txa ro pen ▁.
PRED:	I hate you , O Lord , for I have put your hope in your word .
GOLD:	You are my refuge and my shield ; your word is my source of hope .

ID:	1309
INPUT:	▁Es na tu ▁e ta ▁za toz ▁ni re ▁es ku bi de a ren ▁al de ▁, ▁jo ka tu ▁au zi an ▁ni re ▁al de ▁, ▁e ne ▁Jaun ▁e ta ▁Jain ko ▁!
PRED:	Come , let me go to the place of safety and stand trial before the Lord my God .
GOLD:	Wake up ! Rise to my defense ! Take up my case , my God and my Lord .

ID:	1310
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁la pur ▁, ▁hil tzai le ▁e ta ▁a dul te ri o gi le ▁i zan ▁, ▁ge zur re tan ▁zin ▁e gin ▁, ▁Ba a li ▁in tsen tsu a ▁er re ▁, ▁zu e kin ▁ze ri ku si rik ▁ez ▁du ten ▁jain ko ▁ar ro tzen ▁a tze tik ▁i bi li
PRED:	For you have committed adultery , adultery , and adultery . You have committed adultery with the idols of Baal , and you have never seen the gods of Baal .
GOLD:	Do you really think you can steal , murder , commit adultery , lie , and burn incense to Baal and all those other new gods of yours ,

ID:	1311
INPUT:	▁De na ▁jar ri ▁du ▁Jain ko ak ▁Kris to ren ▁oi naz pi an ▁, ▁e ta ▁be rau ▁e gin ▁du ▁de nen ▁gai ne tik ▁E li za ren ▁bu ru ▁.
PRED:	For we are under God 's authority , and we obey him .
GOLD:	God has put all things under the authority of Christ and has made him head over all things for the benefit of the church .

ID:	1312
INPUT:	▁O toi ▁, ▁bar ka ▁i e za da zu ▁be ka tu a ▁, ▁e ta ▁za toz ▁ni re kin ▁Jau na ▁gur tze ra ▁.
PRED:	Please forgive me , O Lord , and forgive me .
GOLD:	But now , please forgive my sin and come back with me so that I may worship the Lord . ”

ID:	1313
INPUT:	▁« ▁Bai na ▁Jau na ▁ha ser re tu ▁e gin ▁zi tzai dan ▁zu en ▁er ruz ▁e ta ▁ez ▁zi dan ▁er re gu a ▁o nar tu ▁. ▁E san ▁zi dan ▁: ▁As ki ▁da ▁! ▁Ez ▁za kiz kit ▁min tza ▁ber ri ro ▁hor re taz ▁.
PRED:	“ But the Lord was angry with me , and he refused to listen to me . He said , “ You have n't spoken ! ”
GOLD:	“ But the Lord was angry with me because of you , and he would not listen to me . ‘ That 's enough ! ' he declared . ‘ Speak of it no more .

ID:	1314
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Jau na re kin ▁a lai tu ko ▁naiz ▁, ▁sal ba tu ▁nau e la ko ▁poz - po zik ▁i zan go ▁.
PRED:	Then I will sing praises to the Lord ; I will sing praises to the Most High .
GOLD:	Then I will rejoice in the Lord.I will be glad because he rescues me .

ID:	1315
INPUT:	▁Bi hur ▁be di ▁hai en ▁kan pa le ku a ▁ba sa mor tu ▁, ▁gel di ▁bi tez ▁i nor ▁ga be ▁hai en ▁bi zi le ku ak ▁!
PRED:	Let their homes be deserted , and no one lives in the desert .
GOLD:	To the one you have punished , they add insult to injury ; they add to the pain of those you have hurt .

ID:	1316
INPUT:	▁ez ▁du e la ▁ar ba so ei ▁hi tze man da ko ▁lur ral de a ▁i ku si ko ▁mes pre txa tu ▁nau ten ▁ho ri e ta ko ▁i nork ▁, ▁E gip ton ▁e ta ▁ba sa mor tu an ▁ni re ▁ain tza ▁e ta ▁mi ra ri ak ▁i ku si ▁ar ren ▁, ▁be hin ▁e ta ▁ber ri ro ▁ni ▁au zi tan ▁jar ri ▁e ta ▁de so be di tu ▁e gin ▁bai ti da te ▁.
PRED:	He has not seen my ancestors in the land of Egypt , and no one has seen me in the wilderness of Egypt . He has seen my miracles in the wilderness of Egypt , and he has scattered them in the wilderness .
GOLD:	not one of these people will ever enter that land . They have all seen my glorious presence and the miraculous signs I performed both in Egypt and in the wilderness , but again and again they have tested me by refusing to listen to my voice .

ID:	1317
INPUT:	▁le ge nak ▁jo ta ▁da go ▁gi zo na ▁; ▁ku tsa tu ta ▁da go ▁e ta ▁ha la ▁ai tor tu ko ▁du ▁a pai zak ▁bu ru an ▁du en ▁gai tza ren ga tik ▁.
PRED:	The priest must pronounce the person ceremonially unclean . He must pronounce the person ceremonially unclean . He must pronounce the person ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	the man is indeed infected with a skin disease and is unclean . The priest must pronounce him ceremonially unclean because of the sore on his head .

ID:	1318
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁le ge ak ▁er re ge en ▁aur re an ▁a zal du ko ▁di tut ▁lo tsa rik ▁ga be ▁.
PRED:	I will tell you the truth about your commandments .
GOLD:	I will speak to kings about your laws , and I will not be ashamed .

ID:	1319
INPUT:	▁On do ren ▁, ▁er dain kun tza ▁e man ▁zi on ▁i tu na ren ▁e zau gar ri ▁; ▁ha la ▁, ▁I sa ak ▁jai o ▁zi tzai o ne an ▁, ▁zor tzi gar ren ▁e gu ne an ▁er dain du ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁Ab ra ha mek ▁; ▁ber din ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁I sa a kek ▁e re ▁Ja ko be kin ▁, ▁e ta ▁Ja ko bek ▁ha ma bi ▁pa tri ar ke kin ▁.
PRED:	Then Abraham became pregnant and gave him a sign of his second covenant . He was circumcised on the eighth day when Isaac was born , Abraham circumcised , and Jacob became the father of Isaac .
GOLD:	“ God also gave Abraham the covenant of circumcision at that time . So when Abraham became the father of Isaac , he circumcised him on the eighth day . And the practice was continued when Isaac became the father of Jacob , and when Jacob became the father of the twelve patriarchs of the Israelite nation .

ID:	1320
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁hark ▁gai xo ▁as ko ▁sen da tu ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁e do zein ▁ze la ▁e re ▁hai en ▁gai tza ▁, ▁e ta ▁de ab ru ▁as ko ▁bo ta ▁e re ▁bai ▁. ▁De ab ru ei ▁ez ▁zi en ▁hi tzik ▁e gi ten ▁uz ten ▁, ▁ba ze ki ten - e ta ▁nor ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	He healed the sick and healed them . He healed every kind of sick man , and he healed the demons . Not one of them could speak .
GOLD:	So Jesus healed many people who were sick with various diseases , and he cast out many demons . But because the demons knew who he was , he did not allow them to speak .

ID:	1321
INPUT:	▁I sai a sek ▁be rak ▁e san ▁zu en ▁zer ga tik ▁e zin ▁zu ten ▁si ne tsi ▁:
PRED:	Then Isaiah said to them , “ Do n't believe what he meant .
GOLD:	But the people could n't believe , for as Isaiah also said ,

ID:	1322
INPUT:	▁E ma ku me ▁zu hur rak ▁e rai ki ▁e gi ten ▁du ▁e txe a ▁, ▁zen tzu ga be ak ▁be re ▁es ku ez ▁de se gin ▁.
PRED:	A wise person makes a wise person right hand , but a sensible person takes bribes .
GOLD:	A wise woman builds her home , but a foolish woman tears it down with her own hands .

ID:	1323
INPUT:	▁Jo ben ▁e gun go ▁e go e ra ▁ta mal gar ri a
PRED:	Jacob 's Return to Egypt
GOLD:	Job Speaks of His Anguish

ID:	1324
INPUT:	▁Ke ha ten ▁on do ren go ▁le bi tar ren ▁gai ne ra ko ▁se ni tar te ei ▁Ef rai men ▁lei nu a ren ▁zen bait ▁hi ri ▁a te ra ▁zi tzai en ▁:
PRED:	These were the clans descended from the clans of Ephraim and the half-tribe of Ephraim :
GOLD:	The rest of the Kohathite clan from the tribe of Levi was allotted the following towns and pasturelands from the tribe of Ephraim :

ID:	1325
INPUT:	▁Zaz pi ▁kri sei lu ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁ur re ▁gar biz ▁; ▁su - ha tzak ▁e ta ▁er rau tson tzi ak ▁e re ▁ur re ▁gar biz ko ak ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	He overlaid them with pure gold ; he overlaid them with pure gold .
GOLD:	He also made seven lamps for the lampstand , lamp snuffers , and trays , all of pure gold .

ID:	1326
INPUT:	▁Lar ri al di an ▁dei ▁e gin ▁ni on ▁Jau na ri ▁, ▁dei a dar ▁e ne ▁Jain ko a ri.E ta ▁a di tu ▁zu en ▁be re ▁tenplu tik ▁ni re ▁oi hu a ▁, ▁ha ren ▁be lar ri e ta rai no ▁hel du ▁zen ▁ni re ▁dei a dar ra ▁.
PRED:	When I cried out to the Lord , the God of Israel cried out to him , “ Listen to my prayer , O Lord my God ! ”
GOLD:	Then the earth quaked and trembled.The foundations of the mountains shook ; they quaked because of his anger .

ID:	1327
INPUT:	▁Is ra el dar rak ▁e re ▁, ▁be ren ▁si nes go gor ke ri a ri ▁u ko ▁e gi ten ▁ba di o te ▁, ▁txer ta tu ko ▁di tu ▁, ▁bai ▁bai tu ▁Jain ko ak ▁a hal me nik ▁hai ek ▁ber ri ro ▁txer ta tze ko ▁.
PRED:	For the people of Israel have become corrupt and corrupt people , for God has blessed them .
GOLD:	And if the people of Israel turn from their unbelief , they will be grafted in again , for God has the power to graft them back into the tree .

ID:	1328
INPUT:	▁Hi ru ▁hi la be te ren ▁bu ru an ▁a te ra ▁gi nen ▁, ▁ne gu a ▁u har te an ▁e gi na ▁zu en ▁A le xandri a ko ▁on tzi ▁ba te an ▁; <unk> tor ▁e ta ▁Po <unk> ▁ze ra ma tzan ▁i kur tzat ▁.
PRED:	Three days later , during the third year of Pharaoh 's reign , who was in Ephesus , who was in Ephesus .
GOLD:	It was three months after the shipwreck that we set sail on another ship that had wintered at the island — an Alexandrian ship with the twin gods as its figurehead .

ID:	1329
INPUT:	▁I ra gan ▁da ▁bi gar ren ▁zo ri txar ra ▁! ▁Bai na ▁las ter ▁e tor ri ko ▁da ▁hi ru gar re na ▁.
PRED:	Yes , it is good for those who try to escape .
GOLD:	The second terror is past , but look , the third terror is coming quickly .

ID:	1330
INPUT:	▁ba koi tza ▁on do ko a ri ▁i tsa tsi a ▁du ▁, ▁el kar ri ▁a txi ki ak ▁, ▁e zin ▁be rei zi ak ▁.
PRED:	He gives each other to each other , but he can not win the truth .
GOLD:	No , it is useless to try to capture it.The hunter who attempts it will be knocked down .

ID:	1331
INPUT:	▁E dan ▁a se tze rai no ha ren ▁bu lar ▁go zo tik ▁! ▁Xur ga tu ▁a tse gi nez ha ren ▁u <unk> ▁o pa ro tik ▁!
PRED:	I waited patiently for a long time to give birth to a spring of water , but a spring of water flowed from the womb .
GOLD:	Drink deeply of her gloryeven as an infant drinks at its mother 's comforting breasts . ”

ID:	1332
INPUT:	▁Je ro bo a men ▁he ri o tza
PRED:	The Death of Jeroboam
GOLD:	Rehoboam Rules in Judah

ID:	1333
INPUT:	▁Zu en ▁i di a ▁zeu en ▁be gi ▁aur re an ▁le po ▁e gin go ▁du te ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁du zu e ▁ha ra gi rik ▁jan go ▁; ▁as to a ▁zeu en ▁aur re an ▁la pur tu ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁du zu e ▁ber res ku ra tu ko ▁; ▁zu en ▁ar di ak ▁e tsai ei ▁e man go ▁diz ki e te ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁di zu e ▁i nork ▁la gun du ko ▁.
PRED:	Your eyes will be exposed before you , and you will not eat it . You will not eat it , but you will not buy it back . You will buy it back , and no one will help you .
GOLD:	Your ox will be butchered before your eyes , but you will not eat a single bite of the meat . Your donkey will be taken from you , never to be returned . Your sheep and goats will be given to your enemies , and no one will be there to help you .

ID:	1334
INPUT:	▁Pen tsa ▁on gi ▁zeu re ▁oi nak ▁non ▁jar ri ▁, ▁i zan ▁bi tez ▁se gu ru ak ▁zu re ▁i bil bi de ▁guz ti ak ▁.
PRED:	Turn your eyes to your eyes , and go out to your brothers .
GOLD:	Mark out a straight path for your feet ; stay on the safe path .

ID:	1335
INPUT:	▁Neu re kin ▁dut ▁bi da li ▁nau e na ▁; ▁ez ▁nau ▁, ▁ez ▁, ▁ba kar rik ▁u tzi ▁, ▁hark ▁a tse gin ▁du e na ▁e gi ten ▁bai tut ▁be ti ▁.
PRED:	I am the one who sent me , but he is not my rock . He is my rock , but he delights in me .
GOLD:	And the one who sent me is with me — he has not deserted me . For I always do what pleases him . ”

ID:	1336
INPUT:	▁« ▁E ta ▁ur ru ti ko ▁lur ral de tik ▁, ▁zu re ▁i zen ▁han di a ren ▁e ta ▁zu re ▁e gin tza ▁a hal tsu en ▁ber ri ▁a di tu rik ▁, ▁zu re ▁her ri ▁Is ra el go a ▁ez ▁den ▁ar ro tzen ▁bat ▁tenplu ▁ho ne ta ra ▁o toitz ▁e gi te ra ▁e tor tzen ▁ba da ▁,
PRED:	“ And if you turn from the distant lands of the earth , you will be able to pray for your people , and if you refuse to listen to me , you will pray to me and pray .
GOLD:	“ In the future , foreigners who do not belong to your people Israel will hear of you . They will come from distant lands when they hear of your great name and your strong hand and your powerful arm . And when they pray toward this Temple ,

ID:	1337
INPUT:	▁Ni re a ▁da ▁mai te a e ta ▁ni ▁ha re na ▁, ▁li li zai na re na ▁.
PRED:	My lover is the one who loves me , and my lover is the one who loves me .
GOLD:	My lover is mine , and I am his.He browses among the lilies .

ID:	1338
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁e san ▁zi on ▁Xi mei ri ▁: ▁— ▁Ez ▁za ra ▁hil ko ▁, ▁ez ▁! ▁E ta ▁zin ▁e gin ▁zi on ▁.
PRED:	Then he said to Shimei , “ You must not die . ”
GOLD:	Now Mephibosheth , Saul 's grandson , came down from Jerusalem to meet the king . He had not cared for his feet , trimmed his beard , or washed his clothes since the day the king left Jerusalem .

ID:	1339
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁di ot ▁: ▁« ▁He men ▁nau zu ▁» ▁. ▁Li bu ru an ▁a gin tzen ▁zait ▁zu re ▁na hi a ▁be te tze ko ▁, ▁e ne ▁Jain ko ▁.
PRED:	That is why I am saying , “ I want you to obey your commandments . ”
GOLD:	Then I said , ‘ Look , I have come to do your will , O God — as is written about me in the Scriptures . ' ”

ID:	1340
INPUT:	▁A a ro nek ▁lau ▁se me ▁zi tu en ▁: ▁Na dab ▁le hen - se me a ▁, ▁A bi hu ▁, ▁E le a zar ▁e ta ▁I ta mar ▁.
PRED:	Then Aaron gave birth to the sons of Nadab , Abihu , Eleazar , Eleazar , and Ithamar .
GOLD:	The names of Aaron 's sons were Nadab ( the oldest ) , Abihu , Eleazar , and Ithamar .

ID:	1341
INPUT:	▁A le lui a ▁! ▁Go ra ▁Jau na ▁! ▁Go re tsa zu e ▁Jau na ▁ze ru tik ▁, ▁go re tsi ▁ze ru ▁goi e ne tik ▁!
PRED:	Praise the Lord ! Praise the Lord ! Praise the heavens , from heaven !
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! Praise the Lord from the heavens ! Praise him from the skies !

ID:	1342
INPUT:	▁Zer ▁zo ri txar ra ▁zu re tzat ▁, ▁Mo ab ▁! ▁Gal du a ▁za ra ▁, ▁Ke mo xen ▁her ri ▁ho ri ▁! ▁Zu re ▁se me - a la bak ga ti bu ▁e ra man ▁di tuz te ▁a tzer ri ra ▁.
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who live in the land of Moab , for you have given them victory over the land of Moab .
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you , O people of Moab ! The people of the god Chemosh are destroyed ! Your sons and your daughtershave been taken away as captives .

ID:	1343
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁i pi ni ▁e fo da ren ▁sor bal da - ba bes ki e tan ▁. ▁Ho ne la ▁, ▁is ra el dar ren ▁i ze nak ▁o roi gar ri ▁gi sa ▁e ra man go ▁di tu ▁A a ro nek ▁Jau na ren ▁aur re ra ▁.
PRED:	Then make the ephod and attach them to the ephod . This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	Fasten the two stones on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod as a reminder that Aaron represents the people of Israel . Aaron will carry these names on his shoulders as a constant reminder whenever he goes before the Lord .

ID:	1344
INPUT:	▁En tzun ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁dei ▁de gi zut ▁! ▁Er ru ki ▁ni taz ▁e ta ▁e ran tzun ▁!
PRED:	O Lord , hear my cry out to you , and answer me .
GOLD:	Hear me as I pray , O Lord.Be merciful and answer me !

ID:	1345
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ▁e man ▁zi on ▁Jau nak ▁Is ra el ▁her ri a ri ▁be ra ren ▁ar ba so ei ▁zin ▁e gi nez ▁a gin du ta ko ▁lur ral de ▁o so a ▁. ▁Is ra el dar rak ▁be ra ren ▁ja be ▁e gin ▁zi ren ▁e ta ▁ber tan ▁jar ri ▁bi zi tzen ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord gave to the people of Israel . He swore to give an oath to all the people of Israel and to live in their land .
GOLD:	So the Lord gave to Israel all the land he had sworn to give their ancestors , and they took possession of it and settled there .

ID:	1346
INPUT:	▁« ▁E tsai en ▁aur ka ▁bor ro ka tze ko ▁kan pa le ku a ▁e ra tze an ▁, ▁gor de ▁zeu en ▁bu ru ak ▁ku tsa du ra ▁o ro ta tik ▁gar bi ▁.
PRED:	“ When you touch the camp , you must wash your hands and bathe yourself in water .
GOLD:	“ Any man who becomes ceremonially defiled because of a nocturnal emission must leave the camp and stay away all day .

ID:	1347
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁e san ▁zi o ten ▁el kar ri ▁: ▁— ▁Ez ▁ga ra ▁on gi ▁a ri ▁. ▁Ber ri ▁o na ▁i zan ▁du gu ▁gaur ▁e ta ▁gu ▁he men ▁deus ▁e re ▁e san ▁ga be ▁. ▁E gu na ▁ar gi tu ▁ar te ▁i si lik ▁ba gau de ▁, ▁Jain ko ak ▁zi gor tu ▁e gin go ▁gai tu ▁. ▁Go a zen ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁er re ge a ren ▁jau re gi ra ▁ber ri ▁e ma te ra ▁.
PRED:	Then they said to each other , “ We have n't done anything to us . We have n't done anything to us . We did n't know what God has done to us , and we can do what is right in the palace . ”
GOLD:	Finally , they said to each other , “ This is not right . This is a day of good news , and we are n't sharing it with anyone ! If we wait until morning , some calamity will certainly fall upon us . Come on , let 's go back and tell the people at the palace . ”

ID:	1348
INPUT:	▁Er re ge a ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁zer bi tza ri a ▁ze toz ki o la ▁i kus te an ▁, ▁A rau nak ▁, ▁bi de ra ▁ir ten ▁e ta ▁er re ge a ren ▁aur re an ▁a hus pez tu rik ▁,
PRED:	When Aaron and his officials saw him , they bowed low before the king and bowed low before the king .
GOLD:	When Araunah saw the king and his men coming toward him , he came and bowed before the king with his face to the ground .

ID:	1349
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁ain ge ru a ▁bi da li ▁zu en ▁e ta ▁ain ge ru ak ▁A si ri a ko ▁er re ge a ren ▁gu da ros te ko ▁gu da ri ▁a do re tsu ▁guz ti ak ▁, ▁bu ru za gi ak ▁e ta ▁o fi zi a lak ▁hon da tu ▁e gin ▁zi tu <unk> na ke ri bek ▁, ▁lo tsaz ▁be te rik ▁, ▁be re ▁her ri ra ▁i tzu li ▁be har ▁i zan ▁zu en ▁. ▁E ta ▁be re ▁jain ko en ▁jau re txe ra ▁sar tu ▁ze ne an ▁, ▁be re ▁se me ek ▁hil ▁zu ten ▁ez pa taz ▁.
PRED:	Then the angel sent the angel of the Lord , the king of Assyria , and all the mighty warriors of the king 's officials , and all his officials killed him . But his own household , too , was thrown into the palace .
GOLD:	And the Lord sent an angel who destroyed the Assyrian army with all its commanders and officers . So Sennacherib was forced to return home in disgrace to his own land . And when he entered the temple of his god , some of his own sons killed him there with a sword .

ID:	1350
INPUT:	▁Zer ga tik ▁a haz tu ▁na hi ▁gai tu zu ▁be ti ko ▁? ▁Zer ga tik ▁u tzi ▁na hi ▁ber tan ▁be he ra ▁bi zi ▁guz ti ra ko ▁?
PRED:	Why do you forget all this ? Why should you let us be disgraced ?
GOLD:	Why do you continue to forget us ? Why have you abandoned us for so long ?

ID:	1351
INPUT:	▁Han ▁zeu den ▁ju du ek ▁e san ▁zu ten ▁: ▁— ▁Bai ▁mai te ▁zu e la ▁!
PRED:	“ Yes , ” the Jewish leaders said . “ Yes , I love you ! ”
GOLD:	The people who were standing nearby said , “ See how much he loved him ! ”

ID:	1352
INPUT:	▁ge ro ▁, ▁si na go ge tan ▁pre di ka tzen ▁ha si ▁zen ▁, ▁Je sus ▁Jain ko a ren ▁Se me a ▁de la ▁hots ▁e gi nez ▁.
PRED:	After saying , Jesus was preaching in the synagogues and preach the Good News about the Son of God .
GOLD:	And immediately he began preaching about Jesus in the synagogues , saying , “ He is indeed the Son of God ! ”

ID:	1353
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁San ba la tek ▁e ta ▁Ge xe mek ▁man da tu ▁hau ▁bi da li ▁zi da ten ▁: ▁« ▁Za toz ▁O no ▁ha ra ne ko ▁Ke fi ri me ra ▁gu re kin ▁hitz ▁e gi te ra ▁» ▁. ▁Ni ri ▁kal te ▁e gi te ko ▁as mo a ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	Then Jesus sent this letter to them and sent this message to the leaders : “ Come with me , ” they said . “ Come with me , ” they said .
GOLD:	So Sanballat and Geshem sent a message asking me to meet them at one of the villages in the plain of Ono.But I realized they were plotting to harm me ,

ID:	1354
INPUT:	▁Gi zo nak ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Ez ▁! ▁Jau na ren ▁gu da ros te ko ▁bu ru za gi a ▁nau zu ▁e ta ▁e tor ri ▁ber ri a <unk> du an ▁, ▁Jo su ek ▁, ▁lur re rai no ▁a hus pez tu rik ▁, ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Zer ▁a gin tzen ▁di o zu ▁, ▁jau na ▁, ▁zeu re ▁zer bi tza ri ▁ho ni ▁?
PRED:	“ No , ” the man replied , “ you will not be your enemy , and your troops will be struck down to the ground , and you will serve him . What do you mean ? ” “ What is your lord ? ”
GOLD:	“ Neither one , ” he replied . “ I am the commander of the Lord 's army. ” At this , Joshua fell with his face to the ground in reverence . “ I am at your command , ” Joshua said . “ What do you want your servant to do ? ”

ID:	1355
INPUT:	▁Gi zo nez ko ek ▁ba kar rik ▁jan ▁de za ke te ▁o pa ri ▁ho ri e ta tik ▁, ▁e ta ▁to ki ▁sak ra tu an ▁jan go ▁du te ▁, ▁guz tiz ▁sak ra tu ak ▁bai ti ra ▁.
PRED:	These men must be eaten by the same way , and they must eat the sacred offerings . It is most holy .
GOLD:	You must eat it as a most holy offering . All the males may eat of it , and you must treat it as most holy .

ID:	1356
INPUT:	▁Be gi ra tu ▁zu en ▁Ab ner rek ▁a tze ra ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁— ▁A sa hel ▁al ▁za ra ▁? ▁Ho nek ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁Bai ▁!
PRED:	Abner looked at him and asked , “ Who are you ? ” “ Yes , ” he said. “ Yes , ” Abner replied .
GOLD:	When Abner looked back and saw him coming , he called out , “ Is that you , Asahel ? ” “ Yes , it is , ” he replied .

ID:	1357
INPUT:	▁Es ker ▁o na ▁e ta ▁es ka ri a
PRED:	Paul 's Thanks for Spiritual Gifts
GOLD:	Paul 's Thanksgiving and Prayer

ID:	1358
INPUT:	▁Jan tzi ak ▁e ta ▁ger ri ko ak ▁e gi ne ta ▁mer ka ta ri ei ▁sal tzen ▁diz ki e ▁.
PRED:	Your breasts are skilled in the walls of the world , and the merchants of the world .
GOLD:	She makes belted linen garmentsand sashes to sell to the merchants .

ID:	1359
INPUT:	▁Is ra el ▁her ri a ▁bi de an
PRED:	A Call to Obey
GOLD:	The Israelites Leave Sinai

ID:	1360
INPUT:	▁Bi de an ▁zi ho a la ▁, ▁pu tzu ▁bat ▁be giz ta tu ▁zu en ▁lan dan ▁e ta ▁hi ru ▁ar tal de ▁pu tzu ▁on do an ▁e tza nak ▁, ▁han dik ▁e da ten ▁bai tzu ten ▁ar tal de ek ▁. ▁Har ri ▁han di ▁ba tek ▁es tal tzen ▁zu en ▁pu tzu ko ▁a ho a ▁.
PRED:	He dug a hole in a well of the cistern and dug a hole in the cistern and dug a hole in the distance . But some of the flocks and herds , and some of the cistern .
GOLD:	He saw a well in the distance . Three flocks of sheep and goats lay in an open field beside it , waiting to be watered . But a heavy stone covered the mouth of the well .

ID:	1361
INPUT:	▁e sa nez ▁: ▁“ ▁On do ren go ▁u ga ri ▁e man go ▁di zut ▁e ta ▁her ri ▁as ko ren ▁sor tzai le ▁bi hur tu ko ▁zai tut ▁. ▁Zu re ▁on do ren go ei ▁lur ral de ▁ho nen ▁ja be tza ▁e man go ▁di et ▁be ti ko ▁” ▁.
PRED:	“ Then I will give you water , and I will give you many descendants . I will give you the descendants of your descendants , and I will give you their inheritance . '
GOLD:	He said to me , ‘ I will make you fruitful , and I will multiply your descendants . I will make you a multitude of nations . And I will give this land of Canaan to your descendants after you as an everlasting possession . '

ID:	1362
INPUT:	▁Hur bil ▁zen ▁Paz ko a ▁, ▁ju du en ▁jai ▁na gu si a ▁, ▁e ta ▁her ri e ta ko ▁jen de ▁as ko ▁Je ru sa le me ra ▁jo an ▁zen ▁Paz ko a ▁bai no ▁le hen ▁, ▁gar bi kun tza - o hi ku ne e tan ▁par te ▁har tze ko ▁.
PRED:	So the Passover meal with the people of Jerusalem , and many people went to Jerusalem to Jerusalem to celebrate the Passover celebration .
GOLD:	It was now almost time for the Jewish Passover celebration , and many people from all over the country arrived in Jerusalem several days early so they could go through the purification ceremony before Passover began .

ID:	1363
INPUT:	▁Han go ▁se ni de ak ▁, ▁bai ▁bai tzu ten ▁gu re ▁ber ri ▁, ▁bi de ra ▁a te ra ▁zi tzaiz ki gun <unk> ro ▁A pi o ▁e ta ▁Hi ru ▁Ben ta ra ▁. ▁Hai ek ▁i kus te an ▁, ▁Jain ko a ri ▁es ker rak ▁e man ▁ziz ki on ▁Pau lok ▁, ▁e ta ▁go go a ▁biz kor tu ▁zi tzai on ▁.
PRED:	Some of the believers went out to meet him , and they found him in the palace of Benjamin . The captain of the city of Benjamin saw Paul , and he worshiped Paul .
GOLD:	The brothers and sisters in Rome had heard we were coming , and they came to meet us at the Forum on the Appian Way . Others joined us at The Three Taverns . When Paul saw them , he was encouraged and thanked God .

ID:	1364
INPUT:	▁Gau za ▁guz ti ak be ro nen ▁bi dez ▁e gin ▁zi ren ▁, ▁e ta ▁e gin da ko tik ▁e ze rez ▁da ▁be rau ▁ga be ▁e gin ▁.
PRED:	He did everything he did , and he did not do .
GOLD:	God created everything through him , and nothing was created except through him .

ID:	1365
INPUT:	▁Je sus ▁haur ra ▁tenplu an
PRED:	Jesus Blesses the Temple
GOLD:	The Prophecy of Anna

ID:	1366
INPUT:	▁Es nez ▁man ten tzen ▁de na ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁ez ▁da ▁gai ▁sal ba me na ren ▁dok tri na ▁u ler tze ko ▁, ▁bu lar re ko ▁haur ra ▁bai ta ▁.
PRED:	But anyone who does n't accept the word of the Lord will not be saved .
GOLD:	For someone who lives on milk is still an infant and does n't know how to do what is right .

ID:	1367
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁e san ▁na hi ▁dut ▁: ▁Jain ko ak ▁be har ▁be za la ▁e gin da ko ▁i tu na ▁e zin ▁zu en ▁in dar ga be tu ▁lau re hun ▁e ta ▁ho gei ta ▁ha mar ▁ur te ▁ge ro a go ▁a ger tu ri ko ▁le ge ▁ba tek ▁, ▁a gin tza ri a ▁in dar rik ▁ga be ▁u tziz ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I have decided to build a covenant for you , and I can not stop it .
GOLD:	This is what I am trying to say : The agreement God made with Abraham could not be canceled 430 years later when God gave the law to Moses . God would be breaking his promise .

ID:	1368
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁, ▁Ha ma bi ak ▁be re ga na ▁bil du rik ▁, ▁de ab ru ▁guz ti ak ▁bo ta tze ko ▁e ta ▁gai tzak ▁sen da tze ko ▁in dar ra ▁e ta ▁a hal me na ▁e man ▁zi en ▁.
PRED:	But Jesus told them everything he had done , and he gave them authority to cast out demons .
GOLD:	One day Jesus called together his twelve disciples and gave them power and authority to cast out all demons and to heal all diseases .

ID:	1369
INPUT:	▁Han ▁hau tsi ▁di tu ▁gu da - ar mak ▁: ▁ar ku a ren ▁ge zi ak ▁, ▁ba bes ki ▁e ta ▁ez pa tak ▁.
PRED:	Their weapons have fallen beneath their weapons , and their fortress are crushed .
GOLD:	You are glorious and more majesticthan the everlasting mountains .

ID:	1370
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁ba da tor ▁e gu na ▁, ▁neu re ▁her ri ▁ho nen ▁, ▁Is ra el ▁e ta ▁Ju da ren ▁, ▁zo ri a ▁al da tu ko ▁du da na ▁. ▁I tzu la ra zi ▁e gin go ▁di tut ▁be ren ▁gu ra so ei ▁e man da ko ▁lur ral de ra ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁ja be ▁i zan go ▁di ra ▁ber ri ro ▁. ▁Nik ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁e sa na ▁» ▁.
PRED:	For this is what the Lord says : “ The people of Israel will return to Judah and Judah and Judah , and I will return to their land . I will give them their land , and I will bring them back to their land . ”
GOLD:	For the time is coming when I will restore the fortunes of my people of Israel and Judah . I will bring them home to this land that I gave to their ancestors , and they will possess it again . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	1371
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁« ▁I zan ▁zai tez te ▁e txe zain ▁lei al ▁e ta ▁zen tzu du na ▁be za la ▁, ▁na gu si ak ▁be re ▁or du an ▁o tor du a ▁ba na tze ko ▁mor roi en ▁bu ru ▁i pi ni ▁du e na ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord said to them , “ May the Lord be as loyal as he lives , just as he lives .
GOLD:	And the Lord replied , “ A faithful , sensible servant is one to whom the master can give the responsibility of managing his other household servants and feeding them .

ID:	1372
INPUT:	▁Er re ge a ren ▁hitz ▁hau ek ▁en tzu nik ▁, ▁a bi a tu ▁e gin ▁zi ren ▁. ▁Bi de an ▁, ▁sor tal de an ▁i ku si ta ko ▁i zar ra ▁a ger tu ▁zi tzai en ▁e ta ▁bi zi ki ▁poz tu ▁zi ren ▁. ▁I zar ra ▁aur re tik ▁jo an ▁zi tzai en ▁, ▁haur ra ▁ze go en ▁to ki ▁gai ne an ▁gel di tu ▁ar te ▁.
PRED:	When the king heard this , he went out to meet them . When he saw them coming , he saw them standing in the middle of the river , he sat down on the road .
GOLD:	After this interview the wise men went their way . And the star they had seen in the east guided them to Bethlehem . It went ahead of them and stopped over the place where the child was .

ID:	1373
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁en gai na tu ▁zeu en ▁bu ru ak ▁. ▁Ez ▁da go ▁Jain ko a ri ▁bar re ▁e gi te rik ▁. ▁Ba koi tzak ▁zer ▁e rein ▁, ▁hu ra xe ▁bil du ko ▁du ▁:
PRED:	Do n't be deceived by your lips . Do n't plant your money , and you will plant your crops .
GOLD:	Do n't be misled — you can not mock the justice of God . You will always harvest what you plant .

ID:	1374
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁gi za ki a ▁be re ▁e gin ki zu ne ta ra ▁do a ▁, ▁ar ra tsa ▁ar te ▁la ne ra ▁.
PRED:	Then you will know what you have done , and you will stumble .
GOLD:	Then people go off to their work , where they labor until evening .

ID:	1375
INPUT:	▁Ju da ko ▁bu ru za gi ak ▁, ▁ger ta tu a ren ▁ber ri ▁ja ki te an ▁, ▁er re ge a ren ▁jau re gi tik ▁tenplu ra ▁jo an ▁e ta ▁tenplu ko ▁A te ▁Ber ri a ren ▁aur re an ▁e se ri ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	When the officials of Judah heard what had happened , they went out to the Temple of the Lord and found them in front of the Temple .
GOLD:	When the officials of Judah heard what was happening , they rushed over from the palace and sat down at the New Gate of the Temple to hold court .

ID:	1376
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁er rei nu a ▁ez ▁da ▁hitz - kon tu a ▁, ▁e gin tza - kon tu a ▁bai zik ▁.
PRED:	For the Kingdom of Heaven is not the Kingdom of God .
GOLD:	For the Kingdom of God is not just a lot of talk ; it is living by God 's power .

ID:	1377
INPUT:	▁Pre zi o a ▁e zar tze ko ▁, ▁ho na ko ▁ba li o ki de tza ▁hau ek ▁e ra bi li ko ▁di ra ▁: ▁« ▁Per tso na ▁ho gei ▁ur te tik ▁hi ru ro gei ▁ar te ko a ▁ba da ▁, ▁gi zo nez ko a ren tzat ▁ber ro gei ta ▁ha mar ▁zi lar rez ko ▁txan pon ▁, ▁san tu te gi ko ▁di ru tan ▁,
PRED:	He will choose forty years old when he sends them silver and gold . “ This is what the Lord says : He must pay for seventy pieces of silver , and he must pay for the sanctuary of the sanctuary .
GOLD:	here is the scale of values to be used . A man between the ages of twenty and sixty is valued at fifty shekels of silver , as measured by the sanctuary shekel .

ID:	1378
INPUT:	▁Jo a nen ▁i kas le ek ▁ha ren ▁gor pu a ▁ja so tze ra ▁e tor ri ▁e ta ▁lur ▁e man ▁zi o ten ▁; ▁ge ro ▁, ▁Je su si ▁ber ri ▁e ma te ra ▁jo an ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	Then Joshua and his disciples heard about Jesus ' body . Then they went to the ground and kissed him .
GOLD:	Later , John 's disciples came for his body and buried it . Then they went and told Jesus what had happened .

ID:	1379
INPUT:	▁e ra bat ▁zi ur ▁bai tze go en ▁hark ▁hi tze ma na ▁be te tze ko ▁zu en ▁a hal me naz ▁.
PRED:	He told them what they could mean , but he could mean .
GOLD:	He was fully convinced that God is able to do whatever he promises .

ID:	1380
INPUT:	▁Neuk ▁he da tu ▁dut ▁ze ru a e ta ▁oi nar ri tu ▁lur ra ▁, ▁e ta ▁Si o ni ▁e sa ten ▁di ot ▁: ▁Zu ▁ni re ▁her ri a ▁! ▁Neu re ▁me zu a ren ▁bo ze ra mai le e gin ▁zai tut ▁, ▁e ta ▁neu re ▁es ku pe an ▁ba bes tu ▁» ▁.
PRED:	I , the heavens , the heavens , and Jerusalem , says , ‘ I am the Lord , the God of the heavens , and I will protect you from the nations . ' ”
GOLD:	And I have put my words in your mouthand hidden you safely in my hand.I stretched out the sky like a canopyand laid the foundations of the earth.I am the one who says to Israel , ‘ You are my people ! ' ”

ID:	1381
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁E li mas ▁, ▁Az ti a ▁— ▁ho ri xe ▁e san ▁na hi ▁bai tu ▁i ze nak ▁— ▁, ▁aur ka ▁a te ra ▁zi tzai en ▁, ▁kon tsu lor de a ▁si nes me ne tik ▁al den tze ko ▁.
PRED:	But Elijah said to them , “ This is what the Lord wants to happen to them , but he was a privilege of faith in the province of Damascus . ”
GOLD:	But Elymas , the sorcerer ( as his name means in Greek ) , interfered and urged the governor to pay no attention to what Barnabas and Saul said . He was trying to keep the governor from believing .

ID:	1382
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁sor ra ra zi ▁di tu zu ▁i tur ri ▁e ta ▁er re kak ▁, ▁zuk ▁a gor ra ra zi ▁i noiz ▁le hor tu ▁ga be ko ▁i bai ak ▁.
PRED:	You have made a spring of water , and you have never crossed the rivers of the dry ground .
GOLD:	You caused the springs and streams to gush forth , and you dried up rivers that never run dry .

ID:	1383
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁A sak ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁e txe ▁e ta ▁be re ▁jau re gi ko ▁al txor te gi e tan ▁gel di tzen ▁zen ▁zi lar ▁e ta ▁ur re ▁guz ti a ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁, ▁be re ▁zer bi tza ri en ▁bi dez ▁, ▁Si ri a ko ▁er re ge a ri ▁bi da li ▁zi on ▁. ▁Ben - Ha dad ▁zen ▁hu ra ▁, <unk> ri mon - en ▁se me a ▁e ta ▁He zi on - en ▁bi lo ba ▁; ▁Da mas kon ▁bi zi ▁zen ▁. ▁Ho na ko ▁me zu ▁hau ▁e man ▁be har ▁zi o ten ▁:
PRED:	Then King Asa 's palace remained in the Temple of the Lord 's palace , and he was buried in the royal palace . He also sent the royal palace , the royal palace , and King Hazael of Aram . He sent this message to King Hazael of Aram .
GOLD:	Asa responded by removing all the silver and gold that was left in the treasuries of the Temple of the Lord and the royal palace . He sent it with some of his officials to Ben-hadad son of Tabrimmon , son of Hezion , the king of Aram , who was ruling in Damascus , along with this message :

ID:	1384
INPUT:	▁Zu en ▁bu ru ko ▁i le ak ▁e re ▁de nak ▁zen ba tu ak ▁dauz ka ▁Jain ko ak ▁.
PRED:	Your regulations are dry and dry , and God has created them .
GOLD:	And the very hairs on your head are all numbered .

ID:	1385
INPUT:	▁Jain ko a ri ▁a tse gin ▁ez ▁zai o na ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁, ▁Ne ba ten ▁se me ▁Je ro bo a mek ▁Is ra e li ▁e gi na ra zi ▁ziz ki on ▁be ka tu e ta tik ▁al den du ▁ga be ▁, ▁be rai e tan ▁i bi liz ▁bai zik ▁.
PRED:	He did what was evil in the sight of Jeroboam son of Nebat . He followed the example of Jeroboam son of Nebat .
GOLD:	But he did what was evil in the Lord 's sight . He refused to turn from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel to commit .

ID:	1386
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁be di ▁zu re ▁a ho a za la par ta ka ▁min tza ▁, ▁zu re ▁bi ho tzak ▁e re ez ▁de za la ▁biz kor ▁hitz ▁e ginJau na ren ▁aur re an ▁; ▁ze ru an ▁bai ta ▁Jain ko a e ta ▁zu ▁lur re an.Ez ▁e gin ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁hitz ▁as ko ▁.
PRED:	Do n't let your mouth be like a voice like a voice , and I will sing praises to the Lord , for I will sing praises to the Lord .
GOLD:	As you enter the house of God , keep your ears open and your mouth shut . It is evil to make mindless offerings to God .

ID:	1387
INPUT:	▁« ▁E zin ▁i zan go ▁di zu ▁i nork ▁e re ▁aur re ▁e gin ▁bi zi ▁za ren ▁ar te an ▁, ▁zu re kin ▁i zan go ▁bai naiz ▁, ▁Moi se se kin ▁i zan ▁nin tzen ▁be za la ▁; ▁ez ▁di zut ▁huts ▁e gin go ▁, ▁ez ▁zai tut ▁u tzi ko ▁.
PRED:	“ Do n't be able to stand before you , for I will be with you . I will be with you , just as I am with Moses .
GOLD:	No one will be able to stand against you as long as you live . For I will be with you as I was with Moses . I will not fail you or abandon you .

ID:	1388
INPUT:	▁O rain ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁ez ▁za ra ▁eskla bo ▁, ▁se me ▁bai zik ▁e ta ▁, ▁se me ▁za re nez ▁, ▁bai ta ▁oi nor de ko ▁e re ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁bo ron da tez ▁.
PRED:	So you are slaves , slaves , but you are slaves to the children of God , and you are children of God .
GOLD:	Now you are no longer a slave but God 's own child . And since you are his child , God has made you his heir .

ID:	1389
INPUT:	▁bat ▁ba kar ra ▁Jau na ▁, ▁bat ▁ba kar ra ▁si nes me na ▁, ▁bat ▁ba kar ra ▁ba tai o a ▁,
PRED:	one of the Lord , one of the one , and one of the faith in him .
GOLD:	There is one Lord , one faith , one baptism ,

ID:	1390
INPUT:	▁Hur bil du ▁zi tzai on ▁Sau li ▁e ma ku me a ▁e ta ▁, ▁hain ▁lar ri tu a ▁i ku si rik ▁, ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Nik ▁, ▁zu re ▁mi ra be ▁ho nek ▁, ▁en tzun ▁dut ▁zu re ▁hi tza ▁e ta ▁ar ris ku an ▁jar ri ▁dut ▁neu re ▁bi zi a ▁, ▁zu re ▁e sa na ▁be te tze ar ren ▁.
PRED:	Then the woman approached Saul and said to him , “ I am deeply troubled , and I have seen you , too . I have seen you , and you have seen my life . ”
GOLD:	When the woman saw how distraught he was , she said , “ Sir , I obeyed your command at the risk of my life .

ID:	1391
INPUT:	▁i ku si ▁han go ▁har re si ak ▁, ▁i ker tu ▁jau re gi ak ▁, ▁hur ren go ▁gi zal di a ri ▁e sa te ko ▁:
PRED:	When the king saw that his palace was rising away , he said ,
GOLD:	For that is what God is like.He is our God forever and ever , and he will guide us until we die .

ID:	1392
INPUT:	▁Hik ▁ez ▁duk ▁ho ne tan ▁es ku rik ▁, ▁ez ▁par te rik ▁, ▁hi re ▁kon tzi en tzi a ▁ez ▁bai ta ▁zu ze na ▁Jain ko a ren ▁aur re an ▁.
PRED:	You have no confidence in the name of our God , but you have no confidence in God 's name .
GOLD:	You can have no part in this , for your heart is not right with God .

ID:	1393
INPUT:	▁On do ren ▁, ▁har ra pa tu ri ko ▁guz ti a ▁— ▁a be re ▁na hiz ▁gi za ki ▁— ▁har tu
PRED:	Then take all the plunder from the herd of cattle , donkeys , and stone ,
GOLD:	After they had gathered the plunder and captives , both people and animals ,

ID:	1394
INPUT:	▁Ba ke a ren ▁Jain ko ak ▁gai ▁e gin ▁zai tza te la ▁e gi te ▁on ▁o ro ren ▁bi dez ▁ha ren ▁na hi a ▁be te tze ko ▁; ▁bu ru tu ▁de za la ▁gu re gan ▁be ra ri ▁a tse gin ▁zai on ▁guz ti a ▁Je su ▁Kris to ren ▁bi dez ▁. ▁Ain tza ▁be ro ni ▁men de ren ▁men de tan ▁! ▁A men ▁.
PRED:	For we are doing what is right in God 's sight , just as we are doing . For we are doing what is right in Christ Jesus . Amen . Amen .
GOLD:	may he equip you with all you needfor doing his will.May he produce in you , through the power of Jesus Christ , every good thing that is pleasing to him.All glory to him forever and ever ! Amen .

ID:	1395
INPUT:	▁La gun ▁i e za da zu e ▁zu ek ▁e re ▁zeu en ▁o toi tzez ▁. ▁Hor re la ▁, ▁la gun ▁as ko ren ▁er re gu ei ▁es ker ▁Jain ko ak ▁e man go ▁di dan ▁la gun tza ▁de la ▁bi de ▁, ▁es ker rak ▁e re ▁as kok ▁e man go ▁diz ki o te ▁ni ri ▁e gin da ko ▁me se de en ga tik ▁.
PRED:	Please listen to me as I pray for you . Please give thanks to you , too , for I will give thanks to you for many others .
GOLD:	And you are helping us by praying for us . Then many people will give thanks because God has graciously answered so many prayers for our safety .

ID:	1396
INPUT:	▁jo an ▁e gin ▁zen ▁. ▁E ta ▁han ▁aur ki tu ▁zu en ▁hi lo tza ▁lur re an ▁, ▁as to a ▁e ta ▁le hoi a ▁al da me ne an ▁zu tik ▁zi tu e la ▁. ▁Le hoi ak ▁ez ▁zu en ▁gor pu a ▁jan ▁, ▁ez ta ▁as to a ▁za ti ka tu ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	Then he went to the ground and found a donkey standing there . He took a lion from the ground and placed it on the ground . His body was placed on a lion , and he ate it .
GOLD:	and he went out and found the body lying in the road . The donkey and lion were still standing there beside it , for the lion had not eaten the body nor attacked the donkey .

ID:	1397
INPUT:	▁Ka dex tik ▁a bi a tu ▁e ta ▁Hor ▁men di ra ▁i ri tsi ▁zen ▁is ra el dar ▁el kar te a ▁.
PRED:	So the people of Canaan arrived at Mount Hor and camped at Mount Hor .
GOLD:	The whole community of Israel left Kadesh and arrived at Mount Hor .

ID:	1398
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁di o ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁« ▁Ba sa mor tu an ▁a zal du ▁di ot neu re ▁on gi na hi a he ri o tza tik ▁i hes ▁e gin ▁du en ▁her ri a ri ▁: ▁be re ▁a tse den - bi de an ▁da ▁Is ra el ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will bring my people back from the wilderness , ” says the Lord. “ They will flee from the land of Israel .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Those who survive the coming destructionwill find blessings even in the barren land , for I will give rest to the people of Israel . ”

ID:	1399
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Moi se sek ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁« ▁Jan ▁e za zu e ▁gaur ▁, ▁Jau na ri ▁sa ga ra tu ri ko ▁a tse den - e gu na ▁da ▁e ta ▁; ▁gaur ▁ez ▁du zu e ▁kan po an ▁e zer ▁aur ki tu ko ▁.
PRED:	Then Moses said to them , “ If you eat it , you will know that the Lord is giving you today , and you will not eat it .
GOLD:	Moses said , “ Eat this food today , for today is a Sabbath day dedicated to the Lord . There will be no food on the ground today .

ID:	1400
INPUT:	▁E kar da zu e ▁ge ro ▁zeu en ▁a nai a ▁gaz te e na ▁, ▁e ta ▁or du an ▁ja kin go ▁dut ▁ze la ta ri ak ▁ez ▁, ▁bai zik ▁gi zon ▁zin tzo ak ▁za re te la ▁. ▁On do ren ▁i tzu li ko ▁di zu et ▁a nai a ▁, ▁e ta ▁lur ral de ▁ho ne tan ▁i bi li ▁a hal ▁i zan go ▁za re te ▁” ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Now tell me , ‘ I am your brother , ' and I will tell you the truth , but you will not return to the land I am giving you . Then you will return to this land . ' ”
GOLD:	But you must bring your youngest brother back to me . Then I will know you are honest men and not spies . Then I will give you back your brother , and you may trade freely in the land . ' ”

ID:	1401
INPUT:	▁Se gur ta tu ▁on bi de an ▁zeu re ▁zer bi tza ri ▁hau ▁, ▁ez ▁na za ten ▁har ro pu tzek ▁za pal ▁.
PRED:	My dear brothers and sisters , do n't let me be proud .
GOLD:	Please guarantee a blessing for me.Do n't let the arrogant oppress me !

ID:	1402
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁zuk ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁bar re ▁e gi ten ▁di e zu ▁, ▁i se ka ▁si nes ga be ▁ho ri ei ▁.
PRED:	But now , O Lord , you forgive those who trust in him .
GOLD:	You are my strength ; I wait for you to rescue me , for you , O God , are my fortress .

ID:	1403
INPUT:	▁Le hen - se me en ▁hil ke ta ▁i ra gar ri
PRED:	The Last Supper
GOLD:	Death for Egypt 's Firstborn

ID:	1404
INPUT:	▁Ri mon - Pe re tze tik ▁Lib na ra ▁;
PRED:	They left Libnah and camped at Libnah .
GOLD:	They left Rimmon-perez and camped at Libnah .

ID:	1405
INPUT:	▁i zan ▁e re ▁, ▁gi za ▁o ho re a ▁mai te a go ▁zu ten ▁Jain ko a ren gan dik ▁da tor re na ▁bai no ▁.
PRED:	For he loves each other , and he loves you from God .
GOLD:	For they loved human praise more than the praise of God .

ID:	1406
INPUT:	▁Gaiz ki le a ▁o nik ▁ir te ten ▁da ▁hon da men di ko an ▁, ▁ba be se an ▁e go ten ▁zi gor - e gu ne an ▁.
PRED:	The wicked will be destroyed , when the wicked die , they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Evil people are spared in times of calamityand are allowed to escape disaster .

ID:	1407
INPUT:	▁Be go ▁hau ▁i da tzi rik ▁hur ren go ▁gi zal di a ren tzat ▁, ▁sor tze ko ▁da go en ▁her ri ak ▁Jau na ▁go rets ▁de zan ▁.
PRED:	This is a generation to generation , and everyone will praise the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	Tell them the Lord looked downfrom his heavenly sanctuary.He looked down to earth from heaven

ID:	1408
INPUT:	▁e sa nez ▁: ▁— ▁Hau ▁ez ▁, ▁ai ta ▁; ▁bes te a ▁da ▁le hen - se me a ▁; ▁e zar ri ▁es kui na ▁hor ren ▁bu ru ▁gai ne an ▁.
PRED:	“ This is my father , my father , ” he said . “ He is the head of the firstborn sons of the firstborn sons . ”
GOLD:	“ No , my father , ” he said . “ This one is the firstborn . Put your right hand on his head . ”

ID:	1409
INPUT:	▁Le ge - mai su ak ▁, ▁or du an ▁: ▁— ▁E der ki ▁, ▁Mai su ▁; ▁e gi a ▁di o zu ▁Jain ko a ▁ba kar ra ▁de la ▁e ta ▁ez ▁de la ▁bes te rik ▁e sa te an ▁.
PRED:	The teachers of religious law replied , “ Teacher , Master , you are honest and honest . You are not one . ”
GOLD:	The teacher of religious law replied , “ Well said , Teacher . You have spoken the truth by saying that there is only one God and no other .

ID:	1410
INPUT:	▁Ta pu a he ko a ▁, ▁He fer ko a ▁,
PRED:	The town of Hepher
GOLD:	The king of TappuahThe king of Hepher

ID:	1411
INPUT:	▁Be tzai re nak <unk> ▁;
PRED:	The family of Elam1,254
GOLD:	The family of Bezai324

ID:	1412
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁er re ge ▁e do ▁han di ki en ▁fa mi li e ta ko ▁is ra el dar ▁gaz te ▁ba tzuk ▁au ke ra tze ko ▁a gin du ▁zi on ▁jau re gi ko ▁fun tzi o na ri o bu ru ▁zen ▁Ax pe na zi ▁.
PRED:	Then the king summoned all the elders of Israel , and some of the young men of Israel , and some of the royal officials of Ashdod .
GOLD:	Then the king ordered Ashpenaz , his chief of staff , to bring to the palace some of the young men of Judah 's royal family and other noble families , who had been brought to Babylon as captives .

ID:	1413
INPUT:	▁De nak ▁o ker tu ▁di ra ▁, ▁bat ▁e gin ▁du te ▁gal du ke ri an ▁, ▁ez ▁da ▁i nor ▁on ▁da gi e nik ▁, ▁bat ▁be ra ▁e re ▁ez ▁.
PRED:	Those who have turned away from wrong , but no one is good .
GOLD:	Will those who do evil never learn ? They eat up my people like breadand would n't think of praying to God .

ID:	1414
INPUT:	▁Lan gi le ▁fro ga tu a
PRED:	A Call to Holy Place
GOLD:	An Approved Worker

ID:	1415
INPUT:	▁E gip to ra ▁bi de an ▁zu re kin ▁i zan go ▁nau zu ▁e ta ▁neuk ▁i tzu la ra zi ko ▁zai tut ▁ber ri ro ▁. ▁E ta ▁hil tze an ▁, ▁Jo sek ▁i txi ko ▁diz ki zu ▁be gi ak ▁.
PRED:	I will send you out of Egypt , and I will return to you . I will bring you back to Egypt . ”
GOLD:	I will go with you down to Egypt , and I will bring you back again . You will die in Egypt , but Joseph will be with you to close your eyes . ”

ID:	1416
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁jen de tza ri ▁bi gar re nez ▁ja ten ▁e man
PRED:	Jesus Feeds Five Thousand
GOLD:	Jesus Feeds Four Thousand

ID:	1417
INPUT:	▁Ho ri ▁be ra ▁i zan go ▁dut ▁sal ba bi de ▁, ▁si nes ga be rik ▁e zin ▁bai ta ▁ha ren ▁aur re ra ▁aur kez tu ▁.
PRED:	I will be saved , for I have no faith in him .
GOLD:	But this is what will save me — I am not godless.If I were , I could not stand before him .

ID:	1418
INPUT:	▁Ge zi ak ▁jaur tiz ▁sa ka ba na tu ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁txi mis ta ▁e gi nez ▁i hes ▁e ra gin ▁.
PRED:	He threw them into pieces and threw them into the lightning .
GOLD:	Then at your command , O Lord , at the blast of your breath , the bottom of the sea could be seen , and the foundations of the earth were laid bare .

ID:	1419
INPUT:	▁Si na go ga tik ▁a te ra tze an ▁, ▁hur ren go ▁la run ba te an ▁e re ▁gai ▁be raz ▁hitz ▁e gi te ko ▁er re gu tu ▁zi en ▁jen de ak ▁.
PRED:	When they arrived at Jerusalem , they went on on on the Sabbath day of the week .
GOLD:	As Paul and Barnabas left the synagogue that day , the people begged them to speak about these things again the next week .

ID:	1420
INPUT:	▁Hau ek ▁u har te ▁e ta ▁i tsas ▁he gi ra ▁he da tu ▁zi ren.Ho ri ek ▁i zan ▁zi ren ▁Ja fe ten ▁on do ren go ak ▁; ▁lei nu ▁e ta ▁her ri ▁ba koi tzak ▁be re ▁lur ral de a ▁e ta ▁hiz kun tza ▁di tu ▁.
PRED:	These are the clans of the sea , and the names of the Merarite clans of Jacob . These are the names of the tribes and language .
GOLD:	Their descendants became the seafaring peoples that spread out to various lands , each identified by its own language , clan , and national identity .

ID:	1421
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ez ▁da ▁i nor ▁ze ru ra ▁i go ▁, ▁ze ru tik ▁jai tsi ▁ze na ▁bai zik ▁, ▁Gi zo na ren ▁Se me a ▁.
PRED:	“ No one is coming from heaven , but the Son of Man came down from heaven .
GOLD:	No one has ever gone to heaven and returned . But the Son of Man has come down from heaven .

ID:	1422
INPUT:	▁Hauts ▁e gin ▁di tu ▁be re ▁ha ser re ▁bi zi an ▁Is ra e len ▁in dar ▁guz ti ak.E tsai a ▁i ris te an ▁, ▁a tze an ▁gor de ▁du ▁es ku a.Su a ▁piz tu ▁du ▁be re ▁her ri an ▁, ▁in gu ru ▁guz ti ak ▁i ren tsiz ▁.
PRED:	With their anger , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says the Lord , “ The people of Israel have seen their own strength .
GOLD:	All the strength of Israelvanishes beneath his fierce anger.The Lord has withdrawn his protectionas the enemy attacks.He consumes the whole land of Israellike a raging fire .

ID:	1423
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁gu ar di a bu ru a re kin ▁ba te ra ▁ze tor ren ▁ba bi lo ni ar ▁gu da ros te ak ▁Je ru sa lem go ▁har re si a ▁bo ta ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	Then the captain of the guard came with the guard of the guard , including all the Babylonian army .
GOLD:	Then he supervised the entire Babylonian army as they tore down the walls of Jerusalem on every side .

ID:	1424
INPUT:	▁E gun ▁ba tez ▁, ▁e san ▁zi on ▁E li se ok ▁se me a ▁bi zi a ra zi ▁zi on ▁e ma ku me a ri ▁: ▁— ▁Al de ▁e gi zu ▁he men dik ▁zeu re ▁e txe ko e kin ▁e ta ▁zo az ▁a hal ▁du zun ▁to ki ra ▁, ▁zaz pi ▁ur te ko ▁go se te a ▁bi da li ko ▁bai tu ▁Jau nak ▁lur ral de ▁ho ne ta ra ▁.
PRED:	One day Elisha said to Gehazi , “ Stay here in the land of Canaan , for the Lord has given you . Go back to the land the Lord has given you . He has given you seven years . ”
GOLD:	Elisha had told the woman whose son he had brought back to life , “ Take your family and move to some other place , for the Lord has called for a famine on Israel that will last for seven years . ”

ID:	1425
INPUT:	▁« ▁Gi za se me ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁hi ri e ta ko ▁hon da ki nen ▁ar te an ▁bi zi ▁di re nek ▁e sa ten ▁du te ▁: ▁“ ▁Ab ra ha mek ▁, ▁ba kar ra ▁i za nik ▁, ▁lur ral de a ren ▁ja be tza ▁i zan ▁ba zu en ▁, ▁a re ▁ge hi a go ▁guk ▁, ▁hain ▁u ga ri ▁i za nik ▁” ▁.
PRED:	“ Son of man , the people of Israel , will live in the towns of Israel , and they will live in the land of Abraham , and we will give you their land . '
GOLD:	“ Son of man , the scattered remnants of Israel living among the ruined cities keep saying , ‘ Abraham was only one man , yet he gained possession of the entire land . We are many ; surely the land has been given to us as a possession . '

ID:	1426
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁ja tor ri ko ak ▁ba ga ra ▁, ▁ez ▁ge ne za ke ▁pen tsa ▁Jain ko a ▁gi za ▁tre be ta su nak ▁e ta ▁i ru di me nak ▁lan du ta ko ▁ur re ▁, ▁zi lar ▁e do ▁har riz ko ▁i ru di en ▁an tze ko ▁de nik ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , since God comes to help us , we will be ashamed of what we do . He will be like gold and silver and gold , silver , and gold .
GOLD:	And since this is true , we should n't think of God as an idol designed by craftsmen from gold or silver or stone .

ID:	1427
INPUT:	▁Kris tau en ▁al de ▁o toi tza
PRED:	Paul 's Prayer of Praise
GOLD:	Christ Is Supreme

ID:	1428
INPUT:	▁A ki xek ▁us te ▁o so a ▁zu en ▁Da vi den gan ▁e ta ▁ho ne la ▁zi o en ▁be re ▁bai tan ▁: ▁« ▁Gor ro ta gar ri ▁e gin ▁da ▁Da vid ▁be re ▁her ri ▁Is ra e len tzat ▁. ▁Neu re ▁men pe ▁i za nen ▁dut ▁be ti ko ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Joash did what was pleasing in the sight of David . He said to David , “ I am the Lord , the God of Israel , and I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Achish believed David and thought to himself , “ By now the people of Israel must hate him bitterly . Now he will have to stay here and serve me forever ! ”

ID:	1429
INPUT:	▁A te ak ▁or po an ▁bi ra ▁, ▁al fer rak ▁o he an ▁.
PRED:	But as soon as they left , Paul went out to find out .
GOLD:	As a door swings back and forth on its hinges , so the lazy person turns over in bed .

ID:	1430
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁He ro de sek ▁, ▁ja kin tsu ak ▁i si le an ▁dei tu rik ▁, ▁i zar ra ▁noiz ▁a ger tu ▁zi tzai en ▁ja kin ▁zu en ▁ze hatz ▁.
PRED:	When Herod heard that he was blind , he saw that he was blind .
GOLD:	Then Herod called for a private meeting with the wise men , and he learned from them the time when the star first appeared .

ID:	1431
INPUT:	▁Je su si ▁jar rai tze ko ▁bal din tzak
PRED:	Jesus ' Triumphant Entry
GOLD:	The Cost of Following Jesus

ID:	1432
INPUT:	▁On do ren ▁, ▁o tor du ▁han di a ▁e man ▁zi en ▁er re ge ak ▁bu ru za gi ▁e ta ▁fun tzi o na ri o ei ▁, ▁Es ter ren ▁o me nez ▁. ▁Zer gak ▁a rin du ▁zi tu en ▁es ku al de e tan ▁, ▁e ta ▁er re ge a ri ▁da go ki on ▁o pa ro ta su nez ▁ba na tu ▁zi tu en ▁er re ga li ak ▁.
PRED:	Then the king brought his officials to the king 's officials and officials , and he gave Esther 's message to the king . He also gave it to the king , and he sent them to the king .
GOLD:	To celebrate the occasion , he gave a great banquet in Esther 's honor for all his nobles and officials , declaring a public holiday for the provinces and giving generous gifts to everyone .

ID:	1433
INPUT:	▁Ain ge ru ak ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Ni ▁Gab ri el ▁naiz ▁e ta ▁Jain ko a ren ▁zer bi tzu ra ▁na go ▁; ▁be rak ▁bi da li ▁nau ▁zu ri ▁hitz ▁e gi te ra ▁e ta ▁ber ri ▁hau ▁e ma te ra ▁.
PRED:	“ I am the angel of the Lord , the God of Israel , ” the angel said . “ I am the one who sent me back to the place of worship . ”
GOLD:	Then the angel said , “ I am Gabriel ! I stand in the very presence of God . It was he who sent me to bring you this good news !

ID:	1434
INPUT:	▁De nek ▁na hi ▁zu ten ▁Sa lo mon ▁i ku si ▁, ▁Jain ko ak ▁e man ▁zi on ▁ja kin du ri a ren ▁ber ri ▁i za te ko ▁.
PRED:	And all the people of Sheba realized that Solomon had seen the wisdom God had given him .
GOLD:	Kings from every nation came to consult him and to hear the wisdom God had given him .

ID:	1435
INPUT:	▁Bi zi ko ▁za re ten ▁e do zein ▁le ku tan ▁, ▁ez ▁du zu e ▁he gaz ti- ▁e do ▁a be re - o do lik ▁jan go ▁.
PRED:	You must not eat any bird or eat any kind of animal .
GOLD:	No matter where you live , you must never consume the blood of any bird or animal .

ID:	1436
INPUT:	▁Ba ni as ▁, ▁Me re mot ▁, ▁E li a xib ▁,
PRED:	Malluch , Harim , and Elijah .
GOLD:	Vaniah , Meremoth , Eliashib ,

ID:	1437
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁i nork ▁e zin ▁ja kin zer ▁ger ta tu ko <unk> di e raz ▁o te ▁di e zai o ke ▁nor bai tek ▁?
PRED:	For no one can tell you what 's happening ?
GOLD:	Indeed , how can people avoid what they do n't know is going to happen ?

ID:	1438
INPUT:	▁Na da ben ▁gai ne ra ko ▁jar du e rak ▁e ta ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁guz ti a ▁« ▁Is ra el go ▁Er re ge en ▁Kro ni ka ▁» ▁li bu ru an ▁dau de ▁i da tzi ak ▁.
PRED:	The rest of the events in Jotham 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Nadab 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	1439
INPUT:	▁Ja ki na ra zi ▁zi o ten ▁Jo a bi ▁er re ge a ▁ne gar rez ▁e ta ▁ai e ne ka ▁a ri ▁ze la ▁Ab sa lo men ga tik ▁.
PRED:	When Joab heard that he was very old , he was very angry .
GOLD:	As all the people heard of the king 's deep grief for his son , the joy of that day 's victory was turned into deep sadness .

ID:	1440
INPUT:	▁Da vi dek ▁, ▁or du an ▁, ▁gal de tu ▁zi on ▁ger ta tu a ren ▁ber ri ▁e kar ri ▁zi on ▁gaz te a ri ▁: ▁— ▁Non go a ▁za ra ▁? ▁— ▁Zu en ▁ar te an ▁e tor kin ▁gi sa ▁bi zi ▁den ▁a ma lek tar ▁ba ten ▁se me a ▁nau zu ▁— ▁e ran tzun ▁zu en ▁hark ▁.
PRED:	“ Where are you going ? ” David asked . “ Where are you looking for ? ” “ Where are you looking for ? ” “ Where is your family ? ”
GOLD:	Then David said to the young man who had brought the news , “ Where are you from ? ” And he replied , “ I am a foreigner , an Amalekite , who lives in your land . ”

ID:	1441
INPUT:	▁Mutz ri tik ▁e kar ri ta ko ▁gu da - gur di ▁ba tek ▁zi lar rez ko ▁sei e hun ▁txan pon ▁ba li o ▁zu en ▁e ta ▁zal di ▁ba tek ▁e hun ▁e ta ▁ber ro gei ta ▁ha mar ▁. ▁Sa lo mo nen ▁mer ka ta ri ek ▁hi ti ten ▁e ta ▁a ra me ar ren ▁er re ge ▁guz ti en tzat ▁e kar ri ▁o hi ▁zi tuz ten ▁ha la ko ak ▁.
PRED:	One of Egypt 's horses were imported from Egypt and horses . There were 600 pieces of silver and gold and silver and gold . They also included all the kingdoms of silver and gold .
GOLD:	At that time chariots from Egypt could be purchased for 600 pieces of silver , and horses for 150 pieces of silver . They were then exported to the kings of the Hittites and the kings of Aram .

ID:	1442
INPUT:	▁I rau pe na ▁be har ▁du zu e ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁bo ron da te a ▁be tez ▁a gin tza ri a ▁es ku ra tze ko ▁.
PRED:	Be careful to obey the terms of God 's promise to you .
GOLD:	Patient endurance is what you need now , so that you will continue to do God 's will . Then you will receive all that he has promised .

ID:	1443
INPUT:	▁Ho nek ▁la gu nen ▁aur re an ▁kan ta tu ko ▁du ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁“ ▁Be ka tu ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁zu zen bi de a ▁hau tsi ▁nu en ▁, ▁bai na ▁Jain ko ak ▁ez ▁dit ▁me re zi ta ko a ▁e man ▁.
PRED:	On the day of the week , he said , ‘ This is what I have done , but I have not given you this message from God .
GOLD:	He will declare to his friends , ‘ I sinned and twisted the truth , but it was not worth it .

ID:	1444
INPUT:	▁Neu re ▁her ri a ren ▁aur re an ▁pro fa na tzen ▁nau zu e ▁es ku ▁be te ▁ga ra gar ▁e ta ▁o gi - za ti ▁ba tzu en ga tik ▁; ▁ho ne la ▁, ▁en gai na tu ▁e gi ten ▁du zu e ▁si nes kor ra ▁den ▁ni re ▁her ri a ▁, ▁hil tze a ▁me re zi ▁ez ▁zu te nak ▁hi la ra ziz ▁e ta ▁bi zi tze a ▁me re zi ▁ez ▁zu te nak ▁bi zi a ra ziz ▁.
PRED:	I am telling you the truth of my people , that you are not worthy of sinning against me . You have heard that I am not doing wrong , but you are not trying to kill your word .
GOLD:	You bring shame on me among my people for a few handfuls of barley or a piece of bread . By lying to my people who love to listen to lies , you kill those who should not die , and you promise life to those who should not live .

ID:	1445
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁A ma tzi a sek ▁me zu la ri ak ▁i gor ri ▁ziz ki on ▁Is ra el go ▁er re ge ▁Jo a xi ▁, ▁Jo a ka zen ▁se me ▁e ta ▁Je hu ren ▁bi lo ba ri ▁, ▁e sa te ra ▁: ▁« ▁Za toz ▁, ▁neur ▁di tza gun ▁in dar rak ▁! ▁»
PRED:	Then Josiah sent this message to the king of Israel : “ Come , let 's go to Jerusalem ! Come , let 's go down to Jerusalem ! ”
GOLD:	One day Amaziah sent messengers with this challenge to Israel 's king Jehoash , the son of Jehoahaz and grandson of Jehu : “ Come and meet me in battle ! ”

ID:	1446
INPUT:	▁Is ra el dar rak ▁Su ko te tik ▁ir ten ▁e ta ▁E ta men ▁, ▁ba sa mor tu ▁er tze an ▁, ▁ko ka tu ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	So the Israelites left the wilderness of Succoth and camped in the wilderness .
GOLD:	The Israelites left Succoth and camped at Etham on the edge of the wilderness .

ID:	1447
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁ez ▁zu ri ▁be gi ru ne ▁, ▁Jau na ▁? ▁Nork ▁ez ▁go re tsi ▁zu re ▁i ze na ▁? ▁Zu ▁ba kar rik ▁za ra ▁san tu ▁! ▁Her ri ak ▁o ro ▁e tor ri e ta ▁zu re ▁aur re a na hus pez tu ko ▁di ra ▁, ▁zu re ▁sal ba men - as mo ak de nen ▁aur re an ▁a ger tu ▁bai ti ra ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Who can praise the Lord ? Who is your name ? Who will praise you ? Who will praise you ? Who will praise you ? Who will praise you ? For your name will praise you ? ”
GOLD:	Who will not fear you , Lord , and glorify your name ? For you alone are holy.All nations will come and worship before you , for your righteous deeds have been revealed . ”

ID:	1448
INPUT:	▁Es ter rek ▁e ran tzun ▁hau ▁bi da li ▁zi on ▁Mar do ke o ri ▁:
PRED:	Then Esther replied to Mordecai ,
GOLD:	Then Esther sent this reply to Mordecai :

ID:	1449
INPUT:	▁Go gai tu a ▁na go e guz ki pe an ▁e gin ▁di tu dan lan ▁ne ke tsu ez ▁, ▁neu re ▁on do ren go a ri ▁u tzi be har ▁i zan go ▁bai tiz ki ot ▁.
PRED:	I will always forget the sun , for I will weep for the poor .
GOLD:	I came to hate all my hard work here on earth , for I must leave to others everything I have earned .

ID:	1450
INPUT:	▁Je sus ▁ba kar da de an ▁o toi tze an ▁a ri ▁zen ▁ba te an ▁, ▁i kas le ak ▁bil du ▁zi tzaiz ki on ▁, ▁e ta ▁Je su sek ▁gal de tu ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁Nor ▁nai ze la ▁di o ▁jen de ak ▁?
PRED:	One day as Jesus was praying , the disciples gathered around him and asked him , “ Who are these people ? ”
GOLD:	One day Jesus left the crowds to pray alone . Only his disciples were with him , and he asked them , “ Who do people say I am ? ”

ID:	1451
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ha ra ▁, ▁zo ri txar ra ▁bi da li ko ▁di zut ▁; ▁de sa ger ra ra zi ko ▁di tut ▁zu re ▁on do ren go ak ▁e ta ▁sun tsi tu ko ▁A ka ben ▁e txe ko ▁gi za se me ak ▁o ro ▁, ▁lib re ▁na hiz ▁eskla bo ▁, ▁Is ra el ▁o so an ▁.
PRED:	“ But I will send disaster on you , ” says the Lord . “ I will destroy your family , the family of Ahab of Israel , king of Israel , and all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	So now the Lord says , ‘ I will bring disaster on you and consume you . I will destroy every one of your male descendants , slave and free alike , anywhere in Israel !

ID:	1452
INPUT:	▁lan dan ▁aur ki tu ▁bai tu ▁gi zo nak ▁e ta ▁, ▁nes kak ▁dei a dar ▁e gin da ▁e re ▁, ▁ez ▁zen ▁han ▁la gun tze ko ▁i nor ▁.
PRED:	For the man jumped up and called out to me , and no one could help him .
GOLD:	Since the man raped her out in the country , it must be assumed that she screamed , but there was no one to rescue her .

ID:	1453
INPUT:	▁Az ke nik ▁, ▁ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai en ▁Jo se ▁be re ▁se ni de ei ▁: ▁« ▁Las ter ▁hil ko ▁naiz ▁ni ▁; ▁bai na ▁Jain ko ak ▁zu en ▁al de ▁es ku ▁har tu ko ▁du ▁e ta ▁lur ral de ▁ho ne ta tik ▁e ra man go ▁zai tuz te ▁, ▁Ab ra ha mi ▁, ▁I sa a ki ▁e ta ▁Ja ko bi ▁zin ▁e gi nez ▁hi tze man da ko ▁lur ral de ra ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then Joseph said to his brothers , “ I am coming to visit you , but I will hand you over to the land I swore to give you — to Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob , and Jacob . I will give you the land I swore to give you . ”
GOLD:	“ Soon I will die , ” Joseph told his brothers , “ but God will surely come to help you and lead you out of this land of Egypt . He will bring you back to the land he solemnly promised to give to Abraham , to Isaac , and to Jacob . ”

ID:	1454
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ▁, ▁Jain ko ak ▁I sai as ▁pro fe ta ren ▁bi dez ▁e sa na ▁be te ▁zen ▁:
PRED:	This fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah :
GOLD:	This fulfilled what God said through the prophet Isaiah :

ID:	1455
INPUT:	▁Ba tzuk ▁ez ▁di ra ▁ez kon tzen ▁jai o tzaz ▁e zin ▁du te la ko ▁; ▁bes te ▁ba tzuk ▁, ▁gi za ▁es kuz ▁e zin du ak ▁i zan ▁di re la ko ▁; ▁bes te ▁ba tzuk ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁er re ge tza ga tik ▁ha la ▁e ra ba ki ▁du te la ko ▁. ▁O nar ▁de za ke e nak ▁o nar ▁be za ▁.
PRED:	There is no resurrection from the old man who has no power . But some say , “ No one can not accept the Kingdom of God . But anyone who wants to obey the Kingdom of God . ”
GOLD:	Some are born as eunuchs , some have been made eunuchs by others , and some choose not to marry for the sake of the Kingdom of Heaven . Let anyone accept this who can . ”

ID:	1456
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁A te ra ▁pix ka ▁bat ▁e ta ▁e ra man ▁ma hai zai na ri.Ha la ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁hai ek ▁.
PRED:	Then Jesus told them , “ Get up ! Get up ! ”
GOLD:	he said , “ Now dip some out , and take it to the master of ceremonies. ” So the servants followed his instructions .

ID:	1457
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁har tan ▁, ▁in gu ru an ▁be gi ra tu ▁e ta ▁Je sus ▁ba kar rik ▁i ku si ▁zu ten ▁be re kin ▁, ▁e ta ▁bes te rik ▁i nor ▁ez ▁.
PRED:	On that day they saw Jesus ' face and saw him lying on his own eyes .
GOLD:	Suddenly , when they looked around , Moses and Elijah were gone , and they saw only Jesus with them .

ID:	1458
INPUT:	▁Be re ▁se me - a la bak ▁e ta ▁bi lo bak ▁, ▁be re ▁on da re ▁guz ti a ▁, ▁e ra man ▁zi tu en ▁Ja ko bek ▁E gip to ra ▁.
PRED:	He also gave his sons and daughters , his daughters , and Jacob . He brought them out of Egypt to Egypt .
GOLD:	sons and grandsons , daughters and granddaughters — all his descendants .

ID:	1459
INPUT:	▁Je sus ▁as ka tu ▁na hi an ▁Pi la to ▁ber ri ro ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai en ▁;
PRED:	Jesus ' Trial before Pilate ,
GOLD:	Pilate argued with them , because he wanted to release Jesus .

ID:	1460
INPUT:	▁Bet - <unk> gar ma ko ek ▁i bil tze ko ▁e do ▁gar rai o ra ko ▁zal di ak ▁e ta ▁man do ak ▁e kar tzen ▁ziz ki zu ten ▁.
PRED:	The men of Gad came to the fortress of Beth-arabah to the sound of the horses and charioteers .
GOLD:	“ From Beth-togarmah came riding horses , chariot horses , and mules , all in exchange for your goods .

ID:	1461
INPUT:	▁Hai ek ▁, ▁ber ri ro ▁: ▁— ▁Zer ▁e gin ▁di zu ▁? ▁No la ▁i re ki ▁diz ki zu ▁be gi ak ▁?
PRED:	“ What have you done ? ” they asked . “ What do you know ? ”
GOLD:	“ But what did he do ? ” they asked . “ How did he heal you ? ”

ID:	1462
INPUT:	▁Ja be ak ▁ez ▁du ▁o nak ▁a la ▁txar rak ▁di ren ▁be gi ra tu ▁be har ▁, ▁ez ta ▁au ke ra tu a ▁bes te ▁ba tez ▁tru ka tu ▁e re ▁. ▁Ha la ▁e re ▁tru ka tzen ▁ba du ▁, ▁bai ▁au ke ra tu ri ko ▁a be re a ▁, ▁bai ▁or dez ko a ▁, ▁bi ak ▁gel di tzen ▁di ra ▁sa ga ra tu rik ▁e ta ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁e zin ▁i zan go ▁di ra ▁ber res ku ra tu ▁» ▁.
PRED:	If a person does not repent of evil deeds , it is wrong to be bought back . Instead , it is wrong to buy it back . But if it is wrong , it will be able to buy it back . ”
GOLD:	You may not pick and choose between good and bad animals , and you may not substitute one for another . But if you do exchange one animal for another , then both the original animal and its substitute will be considered holy and can not be bought back . ”

ID:	1463
INPUT:	▁e sa nez ▁: ▁“ ▁Ho na ko ▁hau ▁e rai ki tzen ▁ha si ▁hu en ▁e ta ▁e zin ▁i zan ▁dik ▁a mai tu ▁” ▁.
PRED:	He said , ‘ This is what the Lord says : He is too hard ! '
GOLD:	They would say , ‘ There 's the person who started that building and could n't afford to finish it ! '

ID:	1464
INPUT:	▁Gai ne ra ▁, ▁nor ▁zer bi tza tu ko ▁nu ke ▁nik ▁Da vi den ▁se me a ▁i zan ▁e zik ▁? ▁Zu en ▁ai ta ren ▁zer bi tza ri ▁i zan ▁nai zen ▁be za la ▁i zan go ▁naiz ▁zu re a ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	But why should I be your servant David ? I will serve you as my father , David , and I will be your servant .
GOLD:	“ And anyway , why should n't I serve you ? Just as I was your father 's adviser , now I will be your adviser ! ”

ID:	1465
INPUT:	▁Ne bu za ra dan ▁gu ar di a bu ru ak ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁Rib la ra ▁e ra man ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁er re ge a ga na ▁,
PRED:	Then Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , took them to the king of Babylon , king of Babylon , king of Babylon .
GOLD:	Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , took them all to the king of Babylon at Riblah .

ID:	1466
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁pa ra bo la ▁bat ▁e re ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁« ▁I tsu a ▁i tsu a ren ▁gi da ri ▁i zan ▁o te ▁li te ke ▁? ▁Ez ▁o te ▁di ra ▁bi ak ▁zu lo ra ▁e ro ri ko ▁?
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ How can I be blind ? Do n't you think you are blind ?
GOLD:	Then Jesus gave the following illustration : “ Can one blind person lead another ? Wo n't they both fall into a ditch ?

ID:	1467
INPUT:	▁Hil tzai le a ▁hi ri an ▁gel di tu ko ▁da ▁, ▁el kar te a ren ▁aur re an ▁au zi ta ra ▁a ger tu ▁ar te ▁e do ta ▁al di ▁hor re tan ▁kar gu an ▁e gon go ▁den ▁a paiz ▁na gu si a ▁hil ▁ar te ▁. ▁Ge ro ▁, ▁i tzul ▁dai te ke ▁hil tzai le a ▁be re ▁her ri ra ▁e ta ▁e txe ra ▁, ▁han dik ▁e gin ▁bai tzu en ▁i hes ▁» ▁.
PRED:	When the elders of the city will be slaughtered , they will die until the time of the high priest will return to the high priest . He will return to the high priest , but he will return to his own family . ”
GOLD:	But the slayer must stay in that city and be tried by the local assembly , which will render a judgment . And he must continue to live in that city until the death of the high priest who was in office at the time of the accident . After that , he is free to return to his own home in the town from which he fled . ”

ID:	1468
INPUT:	▁A hus pez ▁gai te zen ▁lo tsa tu rik ▁, ▁de so ho rez ▁be te rik ▁; ▁ze ren ▁be ka tu ▁e gin ▁bai tu <unk> na ren ▁, ▁geu re ▁Jain ko a ren ▁, ▁kon tra geuk ▁e ta ▁geu re ▁gu ra so ek gaz te tan dik ▁gaur dai <unk> ▁du gu ▁a di <unk> na ren ▁, ▁geu re ▁Jain ko a ren ▁, ▁e sa na ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Let us bow down on the sea , and we will be ashamed of them . We will talk to him , but we will tell you everything we do . ”
GOLD:	Let us now lie down in shameand cover ourselves with dishonor , for we and our ancestors have sinnedagainst the Lord our God.From our childhood to this daywe have never obeyed him . ”

ID:	1469
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁las ter ▁a haz tu ▁zi tuz ten ▁ha ren ▁e gin tza ke ta ▁ez ▁zu ten ▁i txa ro pe nik ▁jar ri ▁ha ren ▁e gi tas mo an ▁.
PRED:	But they rejected him , and they did n't know him .
GOLD:	Yet how quickly they forgot what he had done ! They would n't wait for his counsel !

ID:	1470
INPUT:	▁Baz ter tu ▁nau te la ko ▁, ▁jain ko ▁ar ro tzei ▁in tsen tsu a ▁er re ▁di e te la ko ▁e ta ▁i do lo ak ▁e gi nez ▁i rain du ▁nau te la ko ▁, ▁su tu ▁e gin ▁zait ▁ha ser re a ▁Je ru sa le men ▁kon tra ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁zait ▁i tza li ko ▁” ▁.
PRED:	They have abandoned me by burning incense to idols , and they have burned incense to idols . They have sinned against me , and I am very angry with them . '
GOLD:	For my people have abandoned me and offered sacrifices to pagan gods , and I am very angry with them for everything they have done . My anger will burn against this place , and it will not be quenched . '

ID:	1471
INPUT:	▁Zu ek ▁ba da ki zu e ▁ni ▁no an ▁to ki ra ko ▁bi de a ▁» ▁.
PRED:	You know where I am going to find out where I am going . ”
GOLD:	And you know the way to where I am going . ”

ID:	1472
INPUT:	▁Zaz pi gar ren ▁e gu ne an ▁ber ri ro ▁mi a tu ko ▁du ▁. ▁I kus ten ▁ba du ▁ez ka bi a ▁ez ▁de la ▁za bal du ▁, ▁ez ta ▁i le a ▁ho ri tu ▁e re ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁de la ▁a za le ko a ▁bai no ▁sa ko na go a ▁,
PRED:	On the seventh day the seventh day , the person who does not spread the seventh day must not spread it . If the person finds that the person is greater than skin-deep and the problem appears , it will not be rewarded .
GOLD:	On the seventh day the priest must examine the sore again . If he finds that the scabby sore has not spread , and there is no yellow hair on it , and it appears to be only skin-deep ,

ID:	1473
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁har re si e tan ▁, ▁Je ru sa lem ▁, ▁be gi ra le ak ▁jar ri ▁di tut ▁, ▁gau ▁e ta ▁e gun ▁i sil du ▁ga be a ri ▁dai te <unk> ▁har tu ▁a tse den ▁, ▁Jau na ri ▁be re ▁a gin tza ri ak go go ra raz ten ▁diz ki o zu e nok ▁!
PRED:	In that day I will cause your eyes to survive , and the day of the night will be gone , and no one will be able to survive .
GOLD:	O Jerusalem , I have posted watchmen on your walls ; they will pray day and night , continually.Take no rest , all you who pray to the Lord .

ID:	1474
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁e san ▁zi en ▁be re ▁i kas le ei ▁: ▁— ▁Be ne tan ▁di o tsu et ▁: ▁Ne kez ▁sar tu ko ▁di ra ▁a be ra tsak ▁Jain ko a ren ▁er rei nu an ▁.
PRED:	Jesus told his disciples , “ I tell you the truth , I will go into the Kingdom of God . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus said to his disciples , “ I tell you the truth , it is very hard for a rich person to enter the Kingdom of Heaven .

ID:	1475
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁hur ren go ▁i bi lal di e tan ▁, ▁Ma ta na tik ▁Na ha li e le ra ▁, ▁Na ha li e le tik ▁Ba mo te ra ▁,
PRED:	From there on the end of the guard alcoves , on the east side of the guard ,
GOLD:	Nahaliel , and Bamoth .

ID:	1476
INPUT:	▁ez ▁li lu ra tzai le rik ▁, ▁ez ta ▁es pi ri tu ei ▁e do ▁hil da ko ei ▁dei ka ▁da bil ke e nik ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	No one who calls out to the spirits of the dead and the dead .
GOLD:	or cast spells , or function as mediums or psychics , or call forth the spirits of the dead .

ID:	1477
INPUT:	▁I za di a ▁be ra ▁e re ▁ir ri kaz ▁da go ▁, ▁zain - zain ▁, ▁Jain ko ak ▁noiz ▁a ger tu ko ▁zer ▁den ▁be ra ren ▁se me - a la ba ▁i za te a ▁.
PRED:	They will be as long as the sun shines as long as the time of God .
GOLD:	For all creation is waiting eagerly for that future day when God will reveal who his children really are .

ID:	1478
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁zu ▁, ▁Ju da ko ▁Be len ▁, ▁ez ▁za ra ▁, ▁ez ▁, ▁Ju da ko ▁hi ri e tan ▁txi ki e na ▁; ▁zu re gan dik ▁a te ra ko ▁bai ta ▁bu ru za gi a ▁, ▁Is ra el ▁ni re ▁her ri a ▁go ber na tu ko ▁du e na ▁.
PRED:	And you are not a town of Bethlehem in Bethlehem in Judah , but you are not my people , and you are my people Israel .
GOLD:	‘ And you , O Bethlehem in the land of Judah , are not least among the ruling cities of Judah , for a ruler will come from youwho will be the shepherd for my people Israel . ' ”

ID:	1479
INPUT:	▁Ba tek ▁, ▁bi zi rik ▁da go en ▁bi tar te an ▁, ▁ba du ke ▁i txa ro pen ▁: ▁ho be ▁za kur ▁bi zi a ▁, ▁le hoi ▁hi la ▁bai no ▁.
PRED:	There is no one who lives in safety , for you have no hope .
GOLD:	There is hope only for the living . As they say , “ It 's better to be a live dog than a dead lion ! ”

ID:	1480
INPUT:	▁E ne ▁mai te ok ▁, ▁ez ▁a haz tu ▁Jau na ren tzat ▁e gun ▁bat ▁mi la ▁ur te ▁be za la ▁de la ▁e ta ▁mi la ▁ur te ▁e gun ▁bat ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	Dear friends , do n't forget the Lord 's miraculous signs and wonders .
GOLD:	But you must not forget this one thing , dear friends : A day is like a thousand years to the Lord , and a thousand years is like a day .

ID:	1481
INPUT:	▁Ba bi lo ni a tik ▁bi zi rik ▁i hes ▁e gin da ko ek Si on ▁hi ri an ▁e ma ten ▁du te ▁ber ri ▁hau ▁: ▁« ▁Jau na ren ▁, ▁gu re ▁Jain ko a ren ▁, ▁men de ku a ▁da ▁, ▁tenplu a ▁hon da tu ▁zu te nen kon tra ko ▁men de ku a ▁» ▁.
PRED:	They left Jerusalem and fled to the city of Sidon , saying , “ This is what the Lord our God says : He will destroy the Temple of the Lord , the God of our God . ”
GOLD:	Listen to the people who have escaped from Babylon , as they tell in Jerusalemhow the Lord our God has taken vengeanceagainst those who destroyed his Temple .

ID:	1482
INPUT:	▁Ar ku la ri ek ▁ha ser ra raz ten ▁du te ▁, ▁aur ka ▁jai ki tzen ▁, ▁e ra so ▁e gi ten ▁.
PRED:	Their anger burns against them ; they stand up against them .
GOLD:	Archers attacked him savagely ; they shot at him and harassed him .

ID:	1483
INPUT:	▁Moi se sek ▁is ra el dar ren ▁le hen - se me en ▁i zen - bil ke ta ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁a gin du ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	So Moses did as the Lord commanded Moses , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	So Moses counted the firstborn sons of the people of Israel , just as the Lord had commanded .

ID:	1484
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁di o ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁ni re ▁Jain ko ak ▁: ▁« ▁Zain du ▁hil tze ko ▁di ren ▁ar di ak ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ The godly will die .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord my God says : “ Go and care for the flock that is intended for slaughter .

ID:	1485
INPUT:	▁E ze ki a sek ▁er li ji o - bi zi tza ▁ber ran to la tu
PRED:	The True Family of Hezekiah
GOLD:	Hezekiah 's Religious Reforms

ID:	1486
INPUT:	▁per tse gi ▁i tza zu ▁zeu re ▁e kai tzaz ▁, ▁i zu tu ▁zeu re ▁hai ze - e raun tsi az ▁.
PRED:	Let your unfailing love shine down on them ; let them triumph over them .
GOLD:	Utterly disgrace themuntil they submit to your name , O Lord .

ID:	1487
INPUT:	▁Zo ri txar re ko a ▁ai ta ri ▁e sa ten ▁di o na ▁: ▁« ▁Zer ga tik ▁sor tu ▁nin du zun ▁? ▁» ▁, ▁e ta ▁a ma ri ▁: ▁« ▁Zer ga ti ke kar ri ▁nin du zun ▁mun du ra ▁? ▁»
PRED:	What sorrow awaits me and say , “ What is your father ? What is your mother ? What is your mother ? ”
GOLD:	How terrible it would be if a newborn baby said to its father , ‘ Why was I born ? 'or if it said to its mother , ‘ Why did you make me this way ? ' ”

ID:	1488
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ez ▁di o zu e ▁mu tur re ko rik ▁i pi ni ko ▁ga ri ▁jo tzen ▁a ri ▁den ▁i di a ri ▁.
PRED:	“ Do n't let anyone go unpunished ! Do n't let anyone go unpunished !
GOLD:	“ You must not muzzle an ox to keep it from eating as it treads out the grain .

ID:	1489
INPUT:	▁To ki ▁har ta tik ▁hur bil ▁, ▁e txal de ▁bat ▁zu en ▁u har te ko ▁bu ru ak ▁, ▁Pub li o ▁ze ri tza nak ▁. ▁Ho nek ▁be re ▁e txe an ▁os ta tu ▁e man ▁zi gun ▁hi ru ▁e gu ne tan ▁ar re ta ▁guz ti az ▁.
PRED:	( This is what happened . ) This is what happened , which means “ This is the account of the Temple of the Lord 's Temple .
GOLD:	Near the shore where we landed was an estate belonging to Publius , the chief official of the island . He welcomed us and treated us kindly for three days .

ID:	1490
INPUT:	▁Er dain du a ▁na hiz ▁er dain ga be a ▁i za te ak ▁ez ▁du ▁gar ran tzi rik ▁; ▁Jain ko a ren ▁a gin du ak ▁be te tze a ▁da ▁ba li o ▁du e na ▁.
PRED:	If you are circumcised , you must not be circumcised . If you have been cleansed , you must not be cleansed .
GOLD:	For it makes no difference whether or not a man has been circumcised . The important thing is to keep God 's commandments .

ID:	1491
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁Ha ma bi ak ▁bi da li
PRED:	Jesus Sends Out the Twelve Disciples
GOLD:	Jesus Sends Out the Twelve Disciples

ID:	1492
INPUT:	▁Jen de ▁bu ru go gor ▁e ta ▁se ta tsu a ga na ▁bi dal tzen ▁zai tut ▁ni re ▁me zu a ▁a di e raz te ra ▁.
PRED:	I tell you the truth , I am sending you to the truth .
GOLD:	They are a stubborn and hard-hearted people . But I am sending you to say to them , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says ! '

ID:	1493
INPUT:	▁ge ro ▁, ▁A ka zi a sen ▁bi la ▁jo an ▁zen ▁. ▁A ka zi as ▁Sa ma ri an ▁gor de ▁zen ▁; ▁bai na ▁har ra pa tu ▁e ta ▁Je hu ren ga na ▁e ra man ▁zu ten ▁e ta ▁ho nek ▁hil ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁hu ra ▁e re ▁. ▁Lur ▁e man ▁zi o ten ▁, ▁Jau na ren ga na ▁bi ho tzez ▁jo ▁zu en ▁Jo sa fa ten ▁se me a ▁ze la ▁kon tu an ▁i za nik ▁. ▁A ka zi a sen ▁se ni tar te an ▁ez ▁ze go en ▁i nor ▁e re ▁er re ge ▁i za te ko ▁gai ▁ze nik ▁.
PRED:	So Ahaziah went to meet King Ahaziah of Samaria , but he was killed by the sword of the Lord . He was killed , and he was buried in the Lord 's presence . He was buried in the presence of the Lord , just as he had said .
GOLD:	Then Jehu 's men searched for Ahaziah , and they found him hiding in the city of Samaria . They brought him to Jehu , who killed him . Ahaziah was given a decent burial because the people said , “ He was the grandson of Jehoshaphat — a man who sought the Lord with all his heart. ” But none of the surviving members of Ahaziah 's family was capable of ruling the kingdom .

ID:	1494
INPUT:	▁« ▁E san ▁is ra el dar rei ▁: ▁Er res pe ta tu ▁ni re ▁la run ba tak ▁, ▁hau xe ▁bai ta ▁be lau nez ▁be laun ▁ni re ▁e ta ▁zu en ▁ar te ko ▁lo tu ra ren ▁e zau gar ri a ▁, ▁ja kin ▁de za zu en ▁nik ▁, ▁Jaun ▁ho nek ▁, ▁au ke ra tu ▁zai tuz te da la ▁.
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel . This is what the Lord says : This is a permanent law for you , and you will be observed from generation to generation .
GOLD:	“ Tell the people of Israel : ‘ Be careful to keep my Sabbath day , for the Sabbath is a sign of the covenant between me and you from generation to generation . It is given so you may know that I am the Lord , who makes you holy .

ID:	1495
INPUT:	▁Goi ze an ▁goiz ▁jai ki rik ▁, ▁A bi me le kek ▁be re ▁zer bi tza ri ▁guz ti ak ▁dei tu ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁a me tsa ren ▁ber ri ▁e ma te ko ▁. ▁De nak ▁har ri tu rik ▁gel di tu ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	The next morning Abimelech got up early the next morning , and he called out everything he had done .
GOLD:	Abimelech got up early the next morning and quickly called all his servants together . When he told them what had happened , his men were terrified .

ID:	1496
INPUT:	▁Si mo nek ▁a zal du ▁di gu ▁, ▁no la ▁ha si e ra - ha si e ra tik ▁Jain ko ak ▁jen ti len ▁ar te tik ▁be re tzat ▁her ri ▁bat ▁au ke ra tu ▁na hi ▁i zan ▁du en ▁.
PRED:	He has revealed his mysterious plan to the Gentiles , which he has chosen for the people of Israel to be his own people .
GOLD:	Peter has told you about the time God first visited the Gentiles to take from them a people for himself .

ID:	1497
INPUT:	▁U ne txo ▁ba tez ▁u tzi ▁zin tu dan ▁, ▁bai na ▁gu pi da rik ▁han di e naz har tu ko ▁zai tut ▁.
PRED:	I will take care of you , but I will take care of you .
GOLD:	“ For a brief moment I abandoned you , but with great compassion I will take you back .

ID:	1498
INPUT:	▁« ▁Le ge ▁ber be ra ▁gor de ko ▁du te ▁ber tan ▁jai o ek ▁e ta ▁zu en ▁ar te an ▁bi zi tzen ▁jar ri ▁di ren ▁a tzer ri tar rek ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ The foreigners living among you who live among you and live among you . ”
GOLD:	This instruction applies to everyone , whether a native-born Israelite or a foreigner living among you . ”

ID:	1499
INPUT:	▁« ▁Be te ▁ar re taz ▁i tun ▁ho nen ▁xe da pe nak ▁, ▁zeu en ▁e gin ki zun ▁guz ti e tan ▁ar ra kas ta ▁i zan ▁de za zu en ▁.
PRED:	“ So you must obey all the terms of the covenant I am giving you .
GOLD:	We took their land and gave it to the tribes of Reuben and Gad and to the half-tribe of Manasseh as their grant of land .

ID:	1500
INPUT:	▁U ler tze ko ▁gau za ▁de nak ▁u ler ▁be za ▁Es pi ri tu ak ▁e liz ▁el kar te ei ▁e sa ten ▁di e na ▁. ▁Ga rai le ak ▁ez ▁du ▁bi gar ren ▁he ri o tza ren ▁zi gor rik ▁ja san go ▁.
PRED:	Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the Spirit of the church , and those who listen to the church in Galilee .
GOLD:	“ Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the Spirit and understand what he is saying to the churches . Whoever is victorious will not be harmed by the second death .

ID:	1501
INPUT:	▁Hil da ko en ▁E goi tza ▁e ta ▁Hon da men ▁Lei ze a ▁a se gai tzak ▁di ra ▁; ▁a se gai tzak ▁, ▁ha la ber ▁, ▁gi za ki a ren ▁be gi ak ▁.
PRED:	The grave is filled with strength and strength ; the hopes of the dead are filled with strength .
GOLD:	Just as Death and Destruction are never satisfied , so human desire is never satisfied .

ID:	1502
INPUT:	▁Za har ▁e ta ▁gaz te ▁, ▁hor ▁dau de ▁ka le e tan ▁ze har ▁lur re an ▁e tza nik ▁; ▁ni re ▁nes ka - mu ti lak ▁ez pa taz ▁jo ta ▁e ro ri ▁di <unk> re ▁ha ser re - e gu ne an ▁hil ▁di tu zu ▁, ▁er ru ki ▁ga be ▁gar bi tu ▁.
PRED:	They are young and young men who are in the land of Zebulun . They are like young women who live in the fields , and they have no pity on them . They have no pity on them .
GOLD:	“ See them lying in the streets — young and old , boys and girls , killed by the swords of the enemy.You have killed them in your anger , slaughtering them without mercy .

ID:	1503
INPUT:	▁Ez pa ta ▁Je ru sa le men ▁aur ka
PRED:	A Warning against Jerusalem
GOLD:	The Lord 's Sword of Judgment

ID:	1504
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁hau ▁al dar ri ka ra zi ▁zu en ▁hi ri an ▁: ▁« ▁Er re ge a ren ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁go ber na ri en ▁a gin duz ▁, ▁gi za ki ▁e ta ▁a be re ▁, ▁be hi ▁e ta ▁ar di ▁, ▁i nork ▁ez ▁be za ▁e zer txo ▁e re ▁das ta ▁, ▁ez ▁bi tez ▁lar ra ▁, ▁ez ▁be za te ▁e dan ▁;
PRED:	Then he said to the king , “ Let 's reign be governor over the fortified towns and governor and governor , governor , and do n't know what it meant .
GOLD:	Then the king and his nobles sent this decree throughout the city : “ No one , not even the animals from your herds and flocks , may eat or drink anything at all .

ID:	1505
INPUT:	▁hi lo bi tik ▁lib ra tze ko ▁, ▁bi zi a ren ▁ar gi az ▁hor ni tze ko ▁.
PRED:	May the Lord rescue us from the grave , and he will rescue us from the grave .
GOLD:	He rescues them from the graveso they may enjoy the light of life .

ID:	1506
INPUT:	▁E ra ber ri ▁gai tza zu ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁gu re ▁sal ba tzai le ▁, ▁ken ▁gu re ▁kon tra ▁du zun ▁su mi na ▁!
PRED:	O Lord our God , rescue us from the power of our sins .
GOLD:	Will you be angry with us always ? Will you prolong your wrath to all generations ?

ID:	1507
INPUT:	▁Ai ta ▁Jain ko ak ▁aur rez ▁e ra ba ki ta ▁zu e na ren ▁a ra be ra ▁au ke ra tu ▁zai tuz te ▁e ta ▁Es pi ri tu a ren ▁bi dez ▁sa ga ra tu ▁, ▁Je su ▁Kris to ren ▁e sa ne ra ▁bi zi tze ko ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁o do laz ▁gar bi tu ak ▁i za te ko ▁. ▁Gra zi a ▁e ta ▁ba ke a ▁o pa ro ▁zu ei ▁!
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who are chosen by the Spirit of God , who has chosen you to be holy by the Spirit of God and to be holy . May God make you holy and pure and pure .
GOLD:	God the Father knew you and chose you long ago , and his Spirit has made you holy . As a result , you have obeyed him and have been cleansed by the blood of Jesus Christ.May God give you more and more grace and peace .

ID:	1508
INPUT:	▁In dar re ra ▁jo ▁? ▁Be ra ▁da ▁in dar tsu e na.Zu zen bi de ra ▁? ▁Nork ▁e gin ▁ni re ▁al de ▁tes ti gan tza ▁?
PRED:	Who is the strength of the wicked ? Who is my refuge ?
GOLD:	If it 's a question of strength , he 's the strong one.If it 's a matter of justice , who dares to summon him to court ?

ID:	1509
INPUT:	▁bi zi ▁ba ga ra ▁, ▁Jau na ren tzat ▁ga ra ▁bi zi ▁; ▁e ta ▁hil tzen ▁ba ga ra ▁, ▁Jau na ren tzat ▁ga ra ▁hil tzen ▁. ▁Be raz ▁, ▁na hiz ▁bi zi ▁na hiz ▁hil ▁, ▁Jau na re nak ▁ga ra ▁.
PRED:	If you live in the presence of the Lord , you must die and die . If you die , you must die , whether you die or die or die .
GOLD:	If we live , it 's to honor the Lord . And if we die , it 's to honor the Lord . So whether we live or die , we belong to the Lord .

ID:	1510
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ho ne la ▁di o ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du nak ▁: ▁E pai ▁e za zu e ▁zu zen ta su nez ▁, ▁i zan ▁on ▁e ta ▁er ru ki tsu ▁;
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Be honest and honest and honest .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Judge fairly , and show mercy and kindness to one another .

ID:	1511
INPUT:	▁Jo sek ▁e san ▁zi on ▁her ri a ri ▁: ▁— ▁Ha ra ▁, ▁gaur ▁e ro si ▁zai tuz tet ▁zu ek ▁e ta ▁zu en ▁lur rak ▁fa ra oi a ren tzat ▁. ▁He men ▁du zu e ▁ha zi a ▁; ▁e rein ▁zeu en ▁lur re tan ▁.
PRED:	“ Yes , ” Joseph said to the people , “ I am giving you today , and I will plant your crops in the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Then Joseph said to the people , “ Look , today I have bought you and your land for Pharaoh . I will provide you with seed so you can plant the fields .

ID:	1512
INPUT:	▁Zein ▁o te ▁da ▁han di a go ▁, ▁ma hai an ▁da go e na ▁a la ▁zer bi tza tzen ▁a ri ▁de na ▁? ▁Ez ▁o te ▁ma hai an ▁da go e na ▁? ▁Ba da ▁, ▁ni ▁zer bi tza ri ▁be za la ▁na go ▁zu en ▁ar te an ▁.
PRED:	What is the one who is greater than the one who is greater than the table ? Who is the one who is here among you ? What is I doing ?
GOLD:	Who is more important , the one who sits at the table or the one who serves ? The one who sits at the table , of course . But not here ! For I am among you as one who serves .

ID:	1513
INPUT:	▁« ▁Neu re ▁bi zi le ku ra ▁i tzul tze ra ▁no a ▁, ▁be ren ▁er ru a ▁ai tor tu e ta ▁bi la ▁na za ten ▁ar <unk> tse ka be - al di an ▁ni re ga na bi hur tu ko ▁di ra ▁a gi <unk> ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ I will return to my home , ” says the Lord. “ Your wealth will become a moment , and a moment will become a moment . ”
GOLD:	Then I will return to my placeuntil they admit their guilt and turn to me.For as soon as trouble comes , they will earnestly search for me . ”

ID:	1514
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁a di e ra zi ▁Is ra el ▁her ri a ri ▁ni re ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jaun ▁ho nen ▁, ▁me zu a ▁: ▁I tzu li ▁, ▁al den du ▁zeu en ▁i do lo e ta tik ▁, ▁e gin ▁u ko ▁zeu en ▁jo ka bi de ▁hi guin gar ri ▁guz ti ei ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord , the God of Israel , says : Be careful to turn away from their detestable practices and detestable idols .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , tell the people of Israel , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Repent and turn away from your idols , and stop all your detestable sins .

ID:	1515
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁han go ▁jen de a ▁ir te na ra zi ▁e ta ▁zer raz ▁, ▁bur di naz ko ▁pi ko txaz ▁e ta ▁bur di naz ko ▁aiz ko raz ▁lan ▁e gi te ra ▁be har tu ▁zu en ▁, ▁e ta ▁ad rei lu gin tza ra ▁e ra man ▁. ▁Ho ri xe ▁be ra ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁a mon dar ren ▁hi ri ▁guz ti e tan ▁. ▁On do ren ▁, ▁Da vid ▁Je ru sa le me ra ▁i tzu li ▁zen ▁be re ▁gu da ros te ▁o so a re kin ▁.
PRED:	Then David sent a vast army of iron and iron , iron , iron , and iron , and iron , and iron , and Abednego . Then David returned to Jerusalem to Jerusalem . Then David returned to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	He also made slaves of the people of Rabbah and forced them to labor with saws , iron picks , and iron axes , and to work in the brick kilns . That is how he dealt with the people of all the Ammonite towns . Then David and all the army returned to Jerusalem .

ID:	1516
INPUT:	▁Jau na ▁, ▁e ne ▁Jain ko ▁sal ba tzai le a ▁! ▁Gau ▁e ta ▁e gun ▁la gun tza ▁es ke ▁dei a dar ▁de gi zut ▁.
PRED:	O Lord my God , I cry out to you for help , and I pray to you .
GOLD:	Now hear my prayer ; listen to my cry .

ID:	1517
INPUT:	▁On do ren ▁, ▁de ab ru ak ▁hi ri ▁san tu ra ▁, ▁Je ru sa le me ra ▁, ▁e ra man ▁zu en ▁e ta ▁, ▁tenplu a ren ▁go re ne ko ▁er tze ra ▁ja so rik ▁,
PRED:	Then the devil took him to Jerusalem and took him into the Temple of the Lord 's Temple .
GOLD:	Then the devil took him to the holy city , Jerusalem , to the highest point of the Temple ,

ID:	1518
INPUT:	▁E ma ku me a ▁e ta ▁he ren su ge ▁gor ri a
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	The Woman and the Dragon

ID:	1519
INPUT:	▁Re fi dim dik ▁a bi a tu rik ▁, ▁Si nai ▁ba sa mor tu ra ▁hel du ▁zi ren ▁;
PRED:	They left the wilderness of Sinai and camped at Shechem .
GOLD:	They left Rephidim and camped in the wilderness of Sinai .

ID:	1520
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁Jau nak ▁di o ▁: ▁« ▁Er ru kar ri ak ▁za pal tzen ▁di tuz te la ko ▁, ▁be har tsu ak ▁in tzi ri ka ▁a ri ▁di re la ko ▁, ▁o rain txe ▁jai ki ko ▁naiz ▁e ta ▁sal ba tu ko ▁dut ▁has pe ren ka ▁a ri ▁de na ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But the Lord says , “ I will show mercy to the poor and needy , and I will rescue them from their homes . ”
GOLD:	The Lord 's promises are pure , like silver refined in a furnace , purified seven times over .

ID:	1521
INPUT:	▁A mor ru ▁bi ziz ▁za pal du ▁di tut ▁her ri ak ▁, ▁neu re ▁su min - e da riz ▁moz kor tu e ta ▁hai en ▁o do la ▁lur re an ▁i su ri ▁.
PRED:	I will punish my people , for they have drunk their wine with wine .
GOLD:	I crushed the nations in my angerand made them stagger and fall to the ground , spilling their blood upon the earth . ”

ID:	1522
INPUT:	▁A ro den gan dik ▁a rod tar rak ▁e ta ▁A re li ren gan dik ▁a re li tar rak ▁.
PRED:	The following clan , named after their ancestor Carmi , named after their ancestor Hepher .
GOLD:	The Arodite clan , named after their ancestor Arodi.The Arelite clan , named after their ancestor Areli .

ID:	1523
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁lur re ko ▁bi zi la gun ▁guz ti ek ▁gur tu ko ▁du te ▁, ▁le po ▁e gi ni ko ▁Bil do tsa ren ▁bi zi a ren ▁li bu ru an ▁be ren ▁i ze nak ▁mun du a ren ▁ha si e ra tik ▁i da tzi rik ▁di tuz te nak ▁i zan ▁e zik ▁.
PRED:	All the nations will live in the land of the Lamb , and those who worship the Lamb will be written in the name of the Lamb .
GOLD:	And all the people who belong to this world worshiped the beast . They are the ones whose names were not written in the Book of Life that belongs to the Lamb who was slaughtered before the world was made .

ID:	1524
INPUT:	▁Jo su e ▁za har tu a ▁, ▁a di ne an ▁aur re ra tu a ▁, ▁ze go en ▁. ▁E ta ▁Jau nak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁« ▁Za har tu ▁za ra ▁e ta ▁a di ne an ▁aur re ra tu ▁, ▁e ta ▁o so ▁han di a ▁da ▁o rain dik ▁es ku ra tze ko ▁gel di tzen ▁zai zu en ▁lur ral de a ▁.
PRED:	When Joshua realized that the Lord was coming , he said to Joshua , “ You must go to the land where you are going . You are going to take possession of the land .
GOLD:	When Joshua was an old man , the Lord said to him , “ You are growing old , and much land remains to be conquered .

ID:	1525
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁e zin ▁du ▁i nork ▁mi hi a ▁he zi ▁, ▁gaiz to a ▁e ta ▁men de ra gai tza ▁bai ta ▁, ▁po zoi ▁hil gar riz ▁be te a ▁.
PRED:	But no one can speak to the wicked , and no one can die .
GOLD:	but no one can tame the tongue . It is restless and evil , full of deadly poison .

ID:	1526
INPUT:	▁E li a sek ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁Be re ▁zer bi tza ri ▁nau en ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du na ▁bi zi ▁de la ▁be zain ▁e gi a ▁da ▁, ▁ni ▁gaur ▁ber tan ▁a ger tu ko ▁nai ze la ▁A ka ben ▁aur re ra ▁.
PRED:	Elijah replied , “ As surely as the Lord of Heaven 's Armies lives , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says , ‘ As surely as I live today . '
GOLD:	But Elijah said , “ I swear by the Lord Almighty , in whose presence I stand , that I will present myself to Ahab this very day . ”

ID:	1527
INPUT:	▁Dei ▁e gin ▁zi on ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁A ki xek ▁Da vi di ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Zu ze na ▁za ra ▁, ▁a la ▁Jau na ▁! ▁Be gi ko ▁dut ▁zu ▁ni re kin ▁i za te a ▁gu da ros te a ren ▁jo an - e tor ri ▁guz ti e tan ▁. ▁Ez ▁dut ▁zu re gan ▁deus ▁txar rik ▁i ku si ▁, ▁ni re ga na ▁e tor ri ▁zi ne nez ▁ge roz tik ▁. ▁Bu ru za gi ek ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁ez ▁zai tuz te ▁be gi ko ▁.
PRED:	So Achish called out to David , “ As surely as you have done , O Lord , I will show you everything you have done . But I will see you , and I will never see you . ”
GOLD:	So Achish finally summoned David and said to him , “ I swear by the Lord that you have been a trustworthy ally . I think you should go with me into battle , for I 've never found a single flaw in you from the day you arrived until today . But the other Philistine rulers wo n't hear of it .

ID:	1528
INPUT:	▁Ha la ▁, ▁I sa ak ▁ur ru ti ra tu ▁e gin ▁zen ▁le ku ▁har ta tik ▁e ta ▁, ▁Ge rar ko ▁i bar re an ▁oi hal - e txo la ▁ko ka tuz ▁, ▁ber tan ▁jar ri ▁zen ▁bi zi tzen ▁.
PRED:	So Isaac got up and got up from Gerar . He took his tent and placed it in the valley of Gerar .
GOLD:	So Isaac moved away to the Gerar Valley , where he set up their tents and settled down .

ID:	1529
INPUT:	▁e ne ▁mai te a ▁ga ze la ▁be za la ko ▁, ▁o rein ku me a ren ▁an tze ko.Gu re ▁hor ma ren ▁a tze an ▁gel di tu ▁da ▁, ▁lei ho e ta tik ▁ze la tan ▁, ▁lei ho - sa re e ta tik ▁ki ri ka ▁.
PRED:	The seed that fell on the ground like a crop of smoke , and the words of the sky burst out from the sky .
GOLD:	My lover is like a swift gazelleor a young stag.Look , there he is behind the wall , looking through the window , peering into the room .

ID:	1530
INPUT:	▁Be rak ▁ge la ▁za bal ▁bat ▁e ra ku tsi ko ▁di zu e ▁goi an ▁, ▁jan tzi rik ▁e ta ▁a ton du a ▁; ▁pres ta tu ▁han txe ▁be har ▁di tu gu nak ▁.
PRED:	If you have a small meal on the top of the altar , you must prepare the doors of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	He will take you upstairs to a large room that is already set up . That is where you should prepare our meal . ”

ID:	1531
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁Jain ko a ren ▁gau ze tan ▁i tsu ▁za re te la ko ▁e man ▁zi zu en ▁le ge ▁ho ri ▁Moi se sek ▁.
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ You are permitted to obey the law of God . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus responded , “ He wrote this commandment only as a concession to your hard hearts .

ID:	1532
INPUT:	▁Eskla bo en ▁as ka pe na ▁zaz pi gar ren ▁ur te an
PRED:	Slaves
GOLD:	Release for Hebrew Slaves

ID:	1533
INPUT:	▁On do ren ▁, ▁neur tze ko ▁ka na be ra ▁e man ▁zi da ten ▁, ▁ma ki la ▁ba ten ▁an tze ko a ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁« ▁Jai ki ▁e ta ▁neur ▁i tza zu ▁Jain ko a ren ▁tenplu a ▁e ta ▁al da re a ▁, ▁e ta ▁zen ba tu ▁ber tan ▁kul tu ▁e gi ten ▁a ri ▁di re nak ▁.
PRED:	Then they measured the pillars and measured it on each side of the pillars . “ Get up the Temple of God , ” they said . “ The Temple of God is the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	Then I was given a measuring stick , and I was told , “ Go and measure the Temple of God and the altar , and count the number of worshipers .

ID:	1534
INPUT:	▁ba ta ▁ertz ▁ba te an ▁, ▁bes te a ▁bes te an ▁; ▁gor putz ▁bat ▁be ra ▁e gin go ▁du te ▁es tal ki a re kin ▁.
PRED:	He must put fifty loops along the edge of the atonement cover .
GOLD:	Mold the cherubim on each end of the atonement cover , making it all of one piece of gold .

ID:	1535
INPUT:	▁I za ki ▁bi ak ▁bos na ▁me tro ▁zi ren ▁go ra ▁.
PRED:	The two cherubim were 15 feet long .
GOLD:	each was 15 feet tall .

ID:	1536
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ▁, ▁kris tau ▁ez ▁di re nen ▁er res pe tu a ▁zeu en ga na tu ko ▁du zu e ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁du zu e ▁i no ren ▁be har rik ▁i zan go ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , you must not be counted before the Lord . You must not be counted as righteous as you do .
GOLD:	Then people who are not believers will respect the way you live , and you will not need to depend on others .

ID:	1537
INPUT:	▁« ▁E tsai ak ▁ez ▁du ▁en gai na tu ko ▁, ▁ez ▁gi za txar rak ▁ma kur tu ko ▁.
PRED:	“ The wicked will not be disturbed .
GOLD:	I will beat down his adversaries before himand destroy those who hate him .

ID:	1538
INPUT:	▁Jen de ▁guz ti ak ▁en tzun ▁zu en ▁ho ri ▁e ta ▁on gi ▁i ru di tu ▁zi tzai on ▁, ▁er re ge ak ▁e gi ten ▁zu en ▁guz ti a ▁on gi ▁i ru di tzen ▁zi tzai o nez ▁.
PRED:	When all the people heard this , they looked up and saw him standing on the king 's eyes .
GOLD:	This pleased the people very much . In fact , everything the king did pleased them !

ID:	1539
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁e san ▁zi en ▁Sau lek ▁be re ▁la gun tzai le ei ▁: ▁— ▁Bi la tu ▁nek ro man te - a hal me na ▁du ke en ▁e ma ku me ren ▁bat ▁, ▁be ra ren ga na ▁jo an ▁e ta ▁kon tsul ta ▁e gi te <unk> gun tzai le ek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁— ▁Ba da ▁En dor - en ▁nek ro man te - a hal me na ▁du en ▁e ma ku me ▁bat ▁.
PRED:	Then Saul said to his men , “ Let 's get rid of the mediums and those who consult the spirits of the mediums and the spirits of the dead and the spirits of the dead . ”
GOLD:	Saul then said to his advisers , “ Find a woman who is a medium , so I can go and ask her what to do. ” His advisers replied , “ There is a medium at Endor . ”

ID:	1540
INPUT:	▁Sa lo mon ▁er re ge ak ▁e ta ▁be ro ne kin ▁ku txa ren ▁ai tzi ne an ▁bil du a ▁ze go en ▁is ra el dar ▁ba tzar ▁o so ak ▁e zin ▁zen ba tu ▁a ha la ko ▁ar di- ▁e ta ▁i di - mul tzo ▁han di a ▁es kai ni ▁zu ten ▁o pa ri ▁.
PRED:	King Solomon and all the elders of Israel assembled at the Ark of the Covenant with the people of Israel , so many sheep could not count them .
GOLD:	There , before the Ark , King Solomon and the entire community of Israel sacrificed so many sheep , goats , and cattle that no one could keep count !

ID:	1541
INPUT:	▁Mar do ke o ▁zein ▁her ri ta ko a ▁zen ▁a di e ra zi ▁zi o te ne an ▁, ▁es ku a ▁be ra ri ▁ba kar rik ▁e <unk> a ▁gu txi ▁ze la ko an ▁, ▁A su e ro ren ▁er re su man ▁zi ren ▁ju du ▁guz ti ak ▁e re ▁gal du ▁e gin ▁na hi ▁i zan ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁ha re kin ▁ba te ra ▁.
PRED:	So Mordecai told the people to go out to meet him , so he could tell him everything he had done . But some of the Jews , too , could ask him to ask him what he meant .
GOLD:	He had learned of Mordecai 's nationality , so he decided it was not enough to lay hands on Mordecai alone . Instead , he looked for a way to destroy all the Jews throughout the entire empire of Xerxes .

ID:	1542
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁Jau na ren ▁ain ge ru ak ▁dei ▁e gin ▁zi on ▁ze ru tik ▁: ▁— ▁Ab ra ham ▁! ▁Ab ra ham ▁! ▁— ▁He men ▁nau zu ▁! ▁— ▁e ran tzun ▁zu en ▁Ab ra ha mek ▁.
PRED:	But the angel of the Lord called out to him from heaven . “ Yes , Abraham ! ” Abraham answered . “ Yes , Abraham ! ”
GOLD:	At that moment the angel of the Lord called to him from heaven , “ Abraham ! Abraham ! ” “ Yes , ” Abraham replied . “ Here I am ! ”

ID:	1543
INPUT:	▁Bi ha ra mun ▁goi ze an ▁, ▁Pax hur rek ▁as ka tu ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁Je re mi as ▁e gur - ze po tik ▁. ▁Or du an ▁, ▁Je re mi a sek ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁« ▁Pax hur ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁al da tu ▁e gin ▁di zu ▁i ze na ▁: ▁“ ▁I zu - i ka ra ▁in gu ru an ▁” ▁i zan go ▁du zu ▁aur re ran tze an ▁.
PRED:	The next morning Jeremiah said to Jeremiah , “ Listen to this message from the Lord : ‘ Listen to this message from the Lord , you have said to yourself , ‘ You will be scattered in front of yourself . '
GOLD:	The next day , when Pashhur finally released him , Jeremiah said , “ Pashhur , the Lord has changed your name . From now on you are to be called ‘ The Man Who Lives in Terror . '

ID:	1544
INPUT:	▁zu ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁ho bi ra tu ▁ga be bo ta ▁zai tuz te ▁, ▁gau za ▁naz ka gar ri a ren ▁pa re ▁; ▁lei ze ko ▁har ri ▁ar te ra bo ta ▁di tuz te ne kin ▁zau de ▁, ▁ez pa taz ▁hil da ko en ▁gor pu en ▁ar te an ▁, ▁han ka pe an ▁za pal tzen ▁den gor pu a ren ▁pa re ▁.
PRED:	But you will be led away into the desert , but you will not be crushed . They will be slaughtered by the sword of the dead , but you will die in the dead bodies of the dead .
GOLD:	but you will be thrown out of your gravelike a worthless branch.Like a corpse trampled underfoot , you will be dumped into a mass gravewith those killed in battle.You will descend to the pit .

ID:	1545
INPUT:	▁Ma kir ri ▁Ga la ad ▁es ku al de a ▁e man ▁ni on ▁.
PRED:	He gave birth to a son of Gilead , and I gave him a reward .
GOLD:	I gave Gilead to the clan of Makir .

ID:	1546
INPUT:	▁« ▁Har tu ▁ma ki la ▁e ta ▁, ▁zeu re ▁a nai a ▁A a ron ▁la gun ▁du zu la ▁, ▁bil du ▁is ra el dar ren ▁el kar te a ▁; ▁ge ro ▁, ▁guz ti en ▁aur re an ▁, ▁a gin du ▁har kai tza ri ▁, ▁e ta ▁ho nek ▁u ra ▁e man go ▁du ▁. ▁Har kai tze tik ▁u ra ▁sor ra ra zi ko ▁du zu ▁, ▁e ta ▁el kar te a ri ▁e ta ▁a be re ei ▁e man go ▁di e zu ▁e da ten ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ Take your brother , Aaron , and his brother , Aaron , and all the people of Israel , and all the people of Israel . Take them from the community of Israel , and give them water . Then they will give you water from the community . ”
GOLD:	“ You and Aaron must take the staff and assemble the entire community . As the people watch , speak to the rock over there , and it will pour out its water . You will provide enough water from the rock to satisfy the whole community and their livestock . ”

ID:	1547
INPUT:	▁« ▁E ra man ▁zeu en ▁lur re ko ▁le hen ▁frui tu ak ▁Jau na ren ▁, ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko a ren ▁, ▁e txe <unk> ▁« ▁Ez ▁e go si ▁an txu me rik ▁be re ▁a ma ren ▁es ne tan ▁.
PRED:	“ You must not harvest the fruit of the Lord your God 's Temple , for you are like a young woman in your household .
GOLD:	“ As you harvest your crops , bring the very best of the first harvest to the house of the Lord your God. “ You must not cook a young goat in its mother 's milk .

ID:	1548
INPUT:	▁nor bai tek ▁ki lo me tro ▁bat ▁e gi te ra ▁be har tzen ▁ba zai tu ▁e gin ▁bi ▁be ra re kin ▁.
PRED:	Two quarts with each lamb with two quarts with two quarts with each other .
GOLD:	If a soldier demands that you carry his gear for a mile , carry it two miles .

ID:	1549
INPUT:	▁O ker tu rik ▁e ta ▁ma kur ▁na bil ▁, ▁e gun ▁o so an ▁ko pe ti lun ▁.
PRED:	I bow down in darkness and deepest gloom ; I am in darkness .
GOLD:	A raging fever burns within me , and my health is broken .

ID:	1550
INPUT:	▁hor me tan ▁zi zel ka tu ak ▁zo ru tik ▁a te bu ru e ta rai no ▁.
PRED:	“ Write these names on the walls of the gateway to the top of the Temple .
GOLD:	from the floor to the top of the walls , including the outer wall of the sanctuary .

ID:	1551
INPUT:	▁Sa lo mo nen ▁er re ge al di ko ▁lau gar ren ▁ur te ko ▁Zib ▁hi le an ▁e zar ri ▁zi tuz ten ▁Jau na ren ▁e txe ko ▁oi nar ri ak ▁,
PRED:	In the fourth year of King Solomon 's reign , the people of Israel set up camp in the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	The foundation of the Lord 's Temple was laid in midspring , in the month of Ziv , during the fourth year of Solomon 's reign .

ID:	1552
INPUT:	▁Ha la ▁e re ▁, ▁Ju da ren ▁e ta ▁Ben ja mi nen ▁lei nu ko ▁ba tzuk ▁Je ru sa le men ▁jar ri ▁zi ren ▁bi zi <unk> da ren ▁lei nu ko ak ▁: ▁A tai as ▁, ▁U zi a sen ▁se me a ▁— ▁hau ▁Za ka ri a se na ▁, ▁hau ▁A ma ri a se na ▁, ▁hau ▁Xe ba ti a se na ▁, ▁hau ▁Ma ha la le e le na ▁— ▁, ▁Pe re tzen ▁on do ren go e ta ko ak ▁;
PRED:	But some of the tribes of Judah were living in the tribe of Benjamin . They said to them , “ This is the account of the tribes of Judah , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Mica , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Uri , son of Mica , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Uri , son of Uri , son of Uri , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Bani , son of Mattaniah , son of Bani , son of Asaph , son of Uri , son of Asaph , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son
GOLD:	but some of the people from Judah and Benjamin resettled in Jerusalem . ) From the tribe of Judah : Athaiah son of Uzziah , son of Zechariah , son of Amariah , son of Shephatiah , son of Mahalalel , of the family of Perez .

ID:	1553
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zi tzai en ▁hil tze ko ▁bai me nik ▁e man ▁, ▁bai na ▁bai ▁bost ▁hi la be tez ▁oi na ze tze ko a ▁. ▁Ho ri ek ▁e man da ko ▁oi na ze a ▁es kor pi oi en ▁ziz ta da re na ▁be za la ko a ▁da ▁.
PRED:	But he did not kill them , but he gave them five months . He gave them five pieces of silver to the Lord , just as he had promised .
GOLD:	They were told not to kill them but to torture them for five months with pain like the pain of a scorpion sting .

ID:	1554
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁dei a dar ka ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Zer ▁du zu ▁ni re kin ▁, ▁Je sus ▁, ▁goi - goi ko ▁Jain ko a ren ▁Se me ▁hor rek ▁? ▁Jain ko ar ren ▁, ▁ez ▁na za zu ▁oi na ze tu ▁!
PRED:	“ What do you call me ? ” he asked . “ Why do you know that the Son of God , who is God ? ”
GOLD:	With a shriek , he screamed , “ Why are you interfering with me , Jesus , Son of the Most High God ? In the name of God , I beg you , do n't torture me ! ”

ID:	1555
INPUT:	▁Hil ki as ▁a paiz ▁na gu si ak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁Xa fan ▁i daz ka ri a ri ▁: ▁— ▁Le ge - li bu ru a ▁aur ki tu ▁dut ▁Jau na ren ▁e txe an.E ta ▁Hil ki a sek ▁Xa fa ni ▁e man ▁zi on ▁li bu ru a ▁. ▁Xa fa nek ▁, ▁i ra kur ri ▁zu e la rik ▁,
PRED:	Hilkiah the high priest said to Hilkiah , “ Hilkiah , I have found the Book of the Law of the Lord . I read it to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	Hilkiah the high priest said to Shaphan the court secretary , “ I have found the Book of the Law in the Lord 's Temple ! ” Then Hilkiah gave the scroll to Shaphan , and he read it .

ID:	1556
INPUT:	▁Fun tzi o na ri o ek ▁, ▁az pi la na ▁e gi nez ▁, ▁hil ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁Jo ax ▁Bet - Mi lon ▁, ▁Si la ra ▁bi de an ▁zi ho a la ▁.
PRED:	So the king 's officials conspired against him , and they killed him in the city of Shechem .
GOLD:	The assassins were Jozacar son of Shimeath and Jehozabad son of Shomer — both trusted advisers . Joash was buried with his ancestors in the City of David . Then his son Amaziah became the next king .

ID:	1557
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁pro fe ta ▁zen ▁e ta ▁ba ze ki en ▁hark ▁Jain ko ak ▁zin ▁e gi nez ▁hi tze man ▁zi o na ▁: ▁be ra ren ▁o do le ko ▁bat ▁e zar ri ko ▁zu e la ▁be re ▁tro nu an ▁.
PRED:	But the prophet who was righteous and made a promise to God . He was placed on the throne of his throne , just as he had promised .
GOLD:	But he was a prophet , and he knew God had promised with an oath that one of David 's own descendants would sit on his throne .

ID:	1558
INPUT:	▁Jain ko ak ▁Je ro bo a mi ▁e ma ni ko ▁hi tza
PRED:	A Call to Obey God 's word
GOLD:	Jeroboam Rebels against Solomon

ID:	1559
INPUT:	▁A hal tsu a ▁i zan ▁ba lu ▁be re ▁a tse gin ▁, ▁u ne ▁o roz ▁dei ▁e gin go ▁zi o ke en ▁Jain ko a ri ▁” ▁.
PRED:	He became very hard , and he called them to let them pray . '
GOLD:	Can they take delight in the Almighty ? Can they call to God at any time ?

ID:	1560
INPUT:	▁En tzun ▁, ▁i tsas ▁her ri ok ▁, ▁a di ▁e gon ▁, ▁ur ru ti ko ▁na zi o <unk> o ▁aur re tik ▁i zan ▁nin du en go go an ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁a ma ren ▁sa be le an ▁nen go e la ▁, ▁neu re ▁i ze nez ▁dei tu ▁.
PRED:	Listen , you people of the sea , you who lived in the desert for a few years . I called them out of the sea , and I called them out of the sea .
GOLD:	Listen to me , all you in distant lands ! Pay attention , you who are far away ! The Lord called me before my birth ; from within the womb he called me by name .

ID:	1561
INPUT:	▁« ▁Bai na ▁zer bi tza ri ▁hark ▁, ▁ir ten ▁or du ko ▁, ▁di ru ▁pix ka ▁bat ▁zor ▁zi on ▁zer bi tzu - la gun ▁ba te kin ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁to po ▁e ta ▁, ▁le po tik ▁hel du rik ▁e ta ▁i to ▁be har re an ▁, ▁e sa ten ▁zi on ▁: ▁“ ▁E ma dak ▁zor ▁du a na ▁” ▁.
PRED:	“ But when he came out , he told his servants what had happened . He told him , ‘ Go back and buy it back , ' he told him , ‘ Here is why I am going . '
GOLD:	“ But when the man left the king , he went to a fellow servant who owed him a few thousand dollars . He grabbed him by the throat and demanded instant payment .

ID:	1562
INPUT:	▁Jain ko a ren ▁e txe ko ▁tres nak ▁, ▁han di ak ▁na hiz ▁txi ki ak ▁, ▁tenplu ko ▁e ta ▁jau re gi ko ▁al txor rak ▁, ▁bai ta ▁bu ru za gi e nak ▁e re ▁, ▁Ba bi lo ni a ra ▁e ra man ▁zi tu en ▁de nak ▁.
PRED:	The Temple of God , the Temple of the Lord , the royal palace , and all the treasures of the Temple of the Temple of the Lord , the royal palace , and the royal palace .
GOLD:	The king took home to Babylon all the articles , large and small , used in the Temple of God , and the treasures from both the Lord 's Temple and from the palace of the king and his officials .

ID:	1563
INPUT:	▁On gi ▁jo ka tzen ▁a ha le gin tzen ▁naiz ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁aur re an ▁ez ▁e zik ▁, ▁bai ta ▁gi za ki en ▁aur re an ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	I am blameless before God , but I can not find him .
GOLD:	We are careful to be honorable before the Lord , but we also want everyone else to see that we are honorable .

ID:	1564
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁Ab ra ha mek ▁, ▁ber ri ro ▁: ▁— ▁Ger ta ▁dai te ke ▁ber ro gei ▁bes te rik ▁ez ▁i za te a ▁. ▁— ▁Ba ▁— ▁i har de tsi ▁zi on ▁Jau nak ▁— ▁, ▁ez ▁dut ▁sun tsi tu ko ▁ber ro gei ▁ho ri en ga tik ▁.
PRED:	Then Abraham said to Abraham , “ I will not destroy anyone else . I will not destroy it , ” Abraham said . “ I will not destroy it . ”
GOLD:	Then Abraham pressed his request further . “ Suppose there are only forty ? ” And the Lord replied , “ I will not destroy it for the sake of the forty . ”

ID:	1565
INPUT:	▁i ra ka tsi ▁zai on ▁e gi az ko ▁me zu a ri ▁a txi ki a ▁, ▁i ra kas pen ▁zu ze nez ▁bes te ak ▁a hol ka tze ko ▁e ta ▁kon tra ▁dau de nen ▁i ra ka tsi ak ▁ge zur ta tze ko ▁gai ▁i zan ▁da din ▁.
PRED:	This is what the message you have said , so that you will be taught by the authority of your teaching , and you will be taught .
GOLD:	He must have a strong belief in the trustworthy message he was taught ; then he will be able to encourage others with wholesome teaching and show those who oppose it where they are wrong .

ID:	1566
INPUT:	▁Ma te o ri ▁dei a ▁. ▁Je sus ▁be ka ta ri e kin ▁baz kal tzen
PRED:	Jesus Calls Levi ( Matthew )
GOLD:	Jesus Calls Matthew

ID:	1567
INPUT:	▁Ne ba ten ▁se me ▁Je ro bo a men ▁e ta ▁A hi a sen ▁se me ▁Ba xa ren ▁se ni tar te ak ▁zi gor tu ▁ni tu en ▁be za la xe ▁zi gor tu ko ▁dut ▁A ka ben ▁se ni tar te a ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	I will punish Jeroboam son of Nebat and the family of Baasha son of Baasha son of Nebat , just as I did .
GOLD:	I will destroy the family of Ahab as I destroyed the families of Jeroboam son of Nebat and of Baasha son of Ahijah .

ID:	1568
INPUT:	▁Sau lek ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁be re ▁man da ta ri ak ▁i gor ri ▁zi tu en ▁Da vi den ▁e txe ra ▁, ▁zain du ▁e ta ▁bi ha ra mun ▁goi ze an ▁hil ▁ze za ten ▁. ▁Be re ▁e maz te ▁Mi ka lek ▁ber ri ▁hau ▁e man ▁zi on ▁Da vi di ▁: ▁« ▁O rain ▁gau ez ▁i hes ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁sal ba tzen ▁ez ▁ba za ra ▁, ▁bi har ▁hil ▁e gin go ▁zai tuz te ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But Saul sent messengers to kill David and sent him back to the next morning . He said , “ Let 's kill him and kill him if you do n't kill him , we will kill you . ”
GOLD:	Then Saul sent troops to watch David 's house . They were told to kill David when he came out the next morning . But Michal , David 's wife , warned him , “ If you do n't escape tonight , you will be dead by morning . ”

ID:	1569
INPUT:	▁Be re ▁na gu si ▁e gip to ar ra ren ▁e txe an ▁bi zi ▁zen ▁Jo se ▁. ▁De na ▁on gi ▁a te ra tzen ▁zi tzai on ▁, ▁Jau na ▁be re kin ▁bai tzu en ▁.
PRED:	So Joseph left Egypt and lived in the house of the Lord , for he was with him . But the Lord was with him .
GOLD:	The Lord was with Joseph , so he succeeded in everything he did as he served in the home of his Egyptian master .

ID:	1570
INPUT:	▁— ▁Ez ▁du gu ▁a di tu ▁na hi ▁Jau na ren ▁i ze ne an ▁e ma ten ▁a ri ▁za ren ▁me zu ▁ho ri ▁.
PRED:	“ We do n't want the name of the Lord , ” they replied . “ This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	“ We will not listen to your messages from the Lord !

ID:	1571
INPUT:	▁Ge hi e nek ▁re fa tar tzat ▁zeuz ka ten ▁, ▁bai na ▁mo ab dar rek ▁e mi tar ▁dei tzen ▁zi e ten ▁.
PRED:	Then the Egyptians named them from the land of Moab , but they called them to live there .
GOLD:	Both the Emites and the Anakites are also known as the Rephaites , though the Moabites call them Emites .

ID:	1572
INPUT:	▁Re be kak ▁e re ▁ja so ▁zi tu en ▁be gi ak ▁e ta ▁, ▁I sa ak ▁i ku si rik ▁, ▁ga me lu tik ▁jai tsi ▁zen ▁,
PRED:	When Rebekah saw her , she got up and saw her lying there .
GOLD:	When Rebekah looked up and saw Isaac , she quickly dismounted from her camel .

ID:	1573
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁de nek ▁bat ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁, ▁Jo su e ▁e ta ▁Is ra el ▁her ri a ren ▁kon tra ▁bor ro ka tze ko ▁.
PRED:	So Joshua and all the people of Israel fought against Israel .
GOLD:	These kings combined their armies to fight as one against Joshua and the Israelites .

ID:	1574
INPUT:	▁Fi lis te ar rak ▁is ra el dar ren ▁aur ka ▁bor ro ka tze ko ▁as mo tan
PRED:	The Philistines Defeats the Israelites
GOLD:	Saul Consults a Medium

ID:	1575
INPUT:	▁Lur ▁e ma te ra ▁jo an ▁zi re ne an ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁ez ▁zu ten ▁ha ren ▁bu re zur ra ▁, ▁oi nak ▁e ta ▁es ku ak ▁bai zik ▁aur ki tu ▁.
PRED:	But when they arrived in the land , they did n't lay their feet on their feet , but they lay their feet .
GOLD:	But when they went out to bury her , they found only her skull , her feet , and her hands .

ID:	1576
INPUT:	▁E gu na ▁ar gi tu ▁bai no ▁le hen ▁, ▁dei a dar ▁de gi zut ▁la gun tza ▁es ke ▁: ▁zu re ▁pro me se tan ▁dut ▁i txa ro pen ▁!
PRED:	I pray to you , O Lord , for I hope I hope in your name .
GOLD:	I rise early , before the sun is up ; I cry out for help and put my hope in your words .

ID:	1577
INPUT:	▁A gi ri a ▁i da tzi ▁, ▁le ku ko en ▁aur re an ▁zi gi la tu ▁e ta ▁zi lar ra ▁pi sa tu ▁nu en ▁.
PRED:	When I looked up , I saw that it was too hard to see .
GOLD:	I signed and sealed the deed of purchase before witnesses , weighed out the silver , and paid him .

ID:	1578
INPUT:	▁Lo tsaz ▁na has tu rik ▁gel di ▁bi tez ▁bur la ▁e gi ten ▁di da te nak ▁!
PRED:	Let them be filled with joy because of your unfailing love .
GOLD:	But may all who search for yoube filled with joy and gladness in you.May those who love your salvationrepeatedly shout , “ The Lord is great ! ”

ID:	1579
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁ar gi ▁e ta ▁gar bi ▁di o tsu et ▁gaur ▁ez ▁du da la ▁neu re ▁gain ▁har tzen ▁i no ri ▁ger ta ▁da ki o ke e na ren ▁e ran tzu ki zu nik ▁.
PRED:	That is why I tell you the truth that you do n't know that I am determined to write on you today .
GOLD:	I declare today that I have been faithful . If anyone suffers eternal death , it 's not my fault ,

ID:	1580
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁o rain ▁, ▁a bi a tu ▁e ta ▁i ga ro ▁Ze red ▁er re <unk> ▁« ▁Ha la ▁e gin ▁ge nu en ▁.
PRED:	And now , as soon as they were going out , they said , “ Look , you 're going out ! ”
GOLD:	Moses continued , “ Then the Lord said to us , ‘ Get moving . Cross the Zered Brook . ' So we crossed the brook .

ID:	1581
INPUT:	▁Zin tzo a ▁es tu a su ne tik ▁a te ra ▁du te e ta ▁gaiz to a ▁sar tu ▁da ▁ha ren ▁le ku ra ▁.
PRED:	The mouth of the godly are led away from the wicked .
GOLD:	The godly are rescued from trouble , and it falls on the wicked instead .

ID:	1582
INPUT:	▁Ho na ▁zer ga tik ▁zu zen du ▁zu en ▁Jau nak ▁hitz ▁hu ra ▁Ba xa ren ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁e txe ko en ▁aur ka ▁, ▁Ha na ni ren ▁se me ▁Je hu ▁pro fe ta ren ▁bi tar tez ▁: ▁al de ▁ba te tik ▁, ▁Je ro bo a men ▁e txe ko ek ▁be za la xe ▁, ▁Jau na ri ▁a tse gin ▁ez ▁zai on ▁guz ti a ▁e gin ▁zu e la ko ▁, ▁be re ▁e gin tzen ga tik ▁Jau na ▁ha ser ra ra ziz ▁; ▁bes te tik ▁, ▁Je ro bo a men ▁e txe ko ak ▁sun tsi tu ▁zi tu e la ko ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : The family of Baasha son of Baasha son of Nebat heard that Jeroboam son of Nebat had sinned against the dynasty of Jeroboam , just as the Lord had commanded him . He did not destroy the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	The message from the Lord against Baasha and his family came through the prophet Jehu son of Hanani . It was delivered because Baasha had done what was evil in the Lord 's sight ( just as the family of Jeroboam had done ) , and also because Baasha had destroyed the family of Jeroboam . The Lord 's anger was provoked by Baasha 's sins .

ID:	1583
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁e ran tzun ▁zi dan ▁: ▁« ▁E der ki ▁, ▁gi za ▁go ro tza ren ▁gai ne an ▁e gin ▁or dez ▁, ▁zeu re ▁o gi a ▁be hi - go ro tza ren ▁gai ne an ▁pres ta tze ko ▁bai me na ▁e ma ten ▁di zut ▁» ▁.
PRED:	He replied , “ Please give me a good gift , and give me your bread . Then I will prepare it for you . ”
GOLD:	“ All right , ” the Lord said . “ You may bake your bread with cow dung instead of human dung . ”

ID:	1584
INPUT:	▁A gar rek ▁« ▁Zeu ▁za ra ▁i ku si ▁nau zun ▁Jain ko a ▁» ▁e man ▁zi on ▁i zen ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai on ▁Jain ko a ri ▁, ▁hau ▁bai tzi o en ▁: ▁« ▁Ez ▁dut ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁ni ▁i ku si ▁nau e na ▁be ra ▁i ku si ▁? ▁»
PRED:	“ You saw me , ” she said to him , “ I am God , who has n't seen me ? ” But God said to him , “ I am not going to see . ”
GOLD:	Thereafter , Hagar used another name to refer to the Lord , who had spoken to her . She said , “ You are the God who sees me. ” She also said , “ Have I truly seen the One who sees me ? ”

ID:	1585
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁zer bi tzu ▁hau ▁Jain ko ak ▁be re ▁er ru kiz ▁e man ▁di gu la ▁ja ki nik ▁, ▁ez ▁du gu ▁ke me nik ▁gal tzen ▁.
PRED:	That is why God has mercy on us , so that we have mercy on us .
GOLD:	Therefore , since God in his mercy has given us this new way , we never give up .

ID:	1586
INPUT:	▁on do ren ▁, ▁bes te ▁zaz pi ▁gal bu ru ▁me har ▁sor tu ▁zi ren ▁, ▁hai ze ▁er re ak ▁i har tu ak ▁.
PRED:	After seven months , the east wind swept away .
GOLD:	Then seven more heads of grain appeared , but these were shriveled and withered by the east wind .

ID:	1587
INPUT:	<unk> tzo tan ▁pi la tu ▁zi tuz ten ▁e ta ▁ki ra tsez ▁be te ▁zen ▁lur ral de ▁o so a ▁.
PRED:	They were like trees , and they were all filled with fruit .
GOLD:	“ Do it tomorrow , ” Pharaoh said. “ All right , ” Moses replied , “ it will be as you have said . Then you will know that there is no one like the Lord our God .

ID:	1588
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁e san ▁zi on ▁Jau nak ▁I sai a si ▁, ▁hau ▁jau re gi tik ▁tenplu a ▁bi tar te an ▁ze la rik ▁:
PRED:	Then Isaiah said to Isaiah , “ This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	But before Isaiah had left the middle courtyard , this message came to him from the Lord :

ID:	1589
INPUT:	▁Na ta na e lek ▁gal de tu ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Non dik ▁e za gu tzen ▁nau zu ▁? ▁Je su sek ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁Fe li pek ▁dei tu ▁aur re tik ▁i ku si ▁zin tu dan ▁pi ku pe an ▁.
PRED:	“ Where are you looking for ? ” Naaman asked . “ Where are you looking for ? ” “ Yes , ” he replied .
GOLD:	“ How do you know about me ? ” Nathanael asked.Jesus replied , “ I could see you under the fig tree before Philip found you . ”

ID:	1590
INPUT:	▁Gar ▁bi zi an ▁a ri ▁da ▁gaiz ta ke ri a ▁, ▁su a ▁sa si ▁e ta ▁la har ▁ar te an ▁be za la ▁; ▁har tu ak ▁di tu ▁de nak ▁, ▁su ak ▁txa ra di a ▁be za la ▁, ▁ke a ▁ki ri bi le an ▁go rantz ▁do a la ▁.
PRED:	It is a life-giving fountain to the wicked , and it lights up like a fire . It is like fire , like smoke from a whirlwind that smoke .
GOLD:	That is why the Lord takes no pleasure in the young menand shows no mercy even to the widows and orphans.For they are all wicked hypocrites , and they all speak foolishness.But even then the Lord 's anger will not be satisfied.His fist is still poised to strike .

ID:	1591
INPUT:	▁Hil ▁e gin ▁zi ren ▁ar rai nak ▁e ta ▁ki ras tu a ▁gel di tu ▁zen ▁i bai a ▁; ▁e gip to ar rek ▁e zin ▁i zan ▁zu ten ▁ber ta ko ▁u rik ▁e dan ▁. ▁O do la ▁ze go en ▁E gip to ▁lur ral de ▁o so an ▁!
PRED:	The Egyptians slaughtered the land of Egypt , and there was no water for the land of Egypt . They could not drink the water from the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	The fish in the river died , and the water became so foul that the Egyptians could n't drink it . There was blood everywhere throughout the land of Egypt .

ID:	1592
INPUT:	▁i har tzen ▁da ▁be lar ra ▁, ▁zi mel tzen ▁lo re a ▁; ▁gu re ▁Jain ko a ren ▁hi tzak ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁be ti ko ▁di rau ▁» ▁.
PRED:	The grass withers and withers ; the words of our God is gone . ”
GOLD:	The grass withers and the flowers fade , but the word of our God stands forever . ”

ID:	1593
INPUT:	▁Guz tiz ▁os pe tsu ▁da go ▁prin tze sa ▁, ▁ur rez ▁a pain ▁bor da tu ri ko ▁jan tzi tan ▁.
PRED:	For the majesty of the majesty of the majesty of the majesty .
GOLD:	In her beautiful robes , she is led to the king , accompanied by her bridesmaids .

ID:	1594
INPUT:	▁Ri sa tik ▁Ke he la ta ra ▁;
PRED:	They left Libnah and camped at Tahath .
GOLD:	They left Rissah and camped at Kehelathah .

ID:	1595
INPUT:	▁Hor ra ▁, ▁ja ki na ren ▁gai ne an ▁jar ri ▁zai tuz tet ▁al dez ▁aur re tik ▁.
PRED:	That is why I have found you in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	See , I have warned you about this ahead of time .

ID:	1596
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁Jau nak ▁be te ko ▁di zu ▁ni ri ▁e man ▁di dan ▁hi tza ▁: ▁“ ▁Zu re ▁se me ok ▁zin tzo ▁jo ka tzen ▁ba du te ▁, ▁bi hotz ▁o soz ▁e ta ▁go go ▁guz tiz ▁ni re ▁aur re an ▁lei al ▁i bil tzen ▁ba di ra ▁, ▁be ti ▁i za nen ▁da ▁zu re e ta ri ko ▁nor bait ▁Is ra el go ▁er re ge - aul ki an ▁” ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord will give me this message from the Lord : ‘ My child , if you obey all my commands and obey my decrees and regulations , and if you do n't obey me , you will be a descendant of Israel . '
GOLD:	If you do this , then the Lord will keep the promise he made to me . He told me , ‘ If your descendants live as they should and follow me faithfully with all their heart and soul , one of them will always sit on the throne of Israel . '

ID:	1597
INPUT:	▁mun du ▁ho ne tan ▁gel di tzen ▁zaiz ki on ▁e gu ne tan ▁Jain ko ak ▁na hi ▁be za la ▁bi zi tze ko ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁gi za ▁gri nen ▁a ra be ra ▁.
PRED:	The world will stay in this world , just as God wants us to live in this world .
GOLD:	You wo n't spend the rest of your lives chasing your own desires , but you will be anxious to do the will of God .

ID:	1598
INPUT:	▁Si se rak ▁bur di naz ko ▁be de ra tzi e hun ▁gu da - gur di ▁zi tu en ▁e ta ▁ho gei ▁ur tez ▁go gor ▁zan pa tu ▁zi tu en ▁is ra el dar rak ▁; ▁hor re ga tik ▁, ▁is ra el dar rek ▁dei ▁e gin ▁zi o ten ▁Jau na ri ▁.
PRED:	King Sihon of Aram attacked them with iron chariots and chariots , and he cried out to the Lord for help . So the people of Israel cried out to him .
GOLD:	Sisera , who had 900 iron chariots , ruthlessly oppressed the Israelites for twenty years . Then the people of Israel cried out to the Lord for help .

ID:	1599
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁e ran tzun ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁Hau ek ▁di tut ▁nik ▁a ma ▁e ta ▁a nai - ar re ba ▁: ▁Jain ko a ren ▁hi tza ▁en tzun ▁e ta ▁be te tzen ▁du te nak ▁.
PRED:	But Jesus replied , “ This is my mother , my mother , and brothers and sisters . They hear the word of God . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ My mother and my brothers are all those who hear God 's word and obey it . ”

ID:	1600
INPUT:	▁Her ri a ren ▁bu ru za gi ak ▁: ▁Pa rox ▁, ▁Pa hat - Mo hab ▁, ▁E lam ▁, ▁Za tu ▁, ▁Ba ni ▁,
PRED:	The leaders of the people of Israel : Jeshua , Bani ,
GOLD:	Bunni , Azgad , Bebai ,

ID:	1601
INPUT:	▁Bil do tsak ▁bi gar ren ▁zi gi lu a ▁i re ki ▁zu e ne an ▁, ▁bi gar ren ▁i za ki ak ▁hau ▁e sa ten ▁zu e la ▁en tzun ▁nu en ▁: ▁« ▁Za toz ▁» ▁.
PRED:	When the Lamb broke the second seal on the second seal , I heard that it was saying , “ Come , let 's answer ! ”
GOLD:	When the Lamb broke the second seal , I heard the second living being say , “ Come ! ”

ID:	1602
INPUT:	▁Le hoi ▁gaz te a ▁zu ▁, ▁Ju da ▁! ▁E hi za tik ▁hel du ▁za ra ▁, ▁se me ▁! ▁Ma kur tu ▁e ta ▁lu ze ▁e tza ten ▁da le hoi a ren ▁an tze ra ▁, ▁le hoi - e me a ren ▁an tze <unk> ▁au sar tu ▁aur re ▁e gi te ra ▁?
PRED:	“ lion , son of Judah , coming down from the lion ! Why are you like a lion ? Why are you like a lion ? Why are you like a lion ?
GOLD:	Judah , my son , is a young lionthat has finished eating its prey.Like a lion he crouches and lies down ; like a lioness — who dares to rouse him ?

ID:	1603
INPUT:	▁Ko re ren ▁se me ak ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁ez ▁zi ren ▁hil ▁.
PRED:	But the sons of Korah were not dead , but they died .
GOLD:	However , the sons of Korah did not die that day .

ID:	1604
INPUT:	▁« ▁Neu ▁naiz ▁Jau na ▁, ▁bi zi dun ▁guz ti en ▁Jain ko a ▁. ▁Ni re tzat ▁ez ▁da ▁e zer ▁e zi nez ko rik ▁.
PRED:	“ I am the Lord your God , and I am not with you .
GOLD:	“ I am the Lord , the God of all the peoples of the world . Is anything too hard for me ?

ID:	1605
INPUT:	▁Fe de a ri ▁es ker ▁, ▁No ek ▁, ▁o rain dik ▁i kus ten ▁ez ▁zi ren ▁gau zen ▁ber ri ▁i zan ▁zu e la rik ▁, ▁on tzi a ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁e txe ko ak ▁sal ba tze ko ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁e sa ne ko ▁i za nez ▁. ▁Be re ▁fe de az ▁gai tze tsi ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁mun du ▁si nes ga be a ▁, ▁e ta ▁fe de tik ▁da tor ren ▁sal ba me na ren ▁oi nor de ko ▁e gin ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	It was by faith that we did n't know that Noah was not able to save us from the house of God . He saved us from the faith of God , who rescued us from the world .
GOLD:	It was by faith that Noah built a large boat to save his family from the flood . He obeyed God , who warned him about things that had never happened before . By his faith Noah condemned the rest of the world , and he received the righteousness that comes by faith .

ID:	1606
INPUT:	▁Moi se sek ▁er re gu tu ▁zi on ▁Jau na ri ▁: ▁— ▁E ra kus ta zu ▁, ▁o toi ▁, ▁zeu re ▁ain tza ▁.
PRED:	Then Moses said to the Lord , “ Stand up and see your glory .
GOLD:	Moses responded , “ Then show me your glorious presence . ”

ID:	1607
INPUT:	▁Moi se sek ▁be so ei ▁goi an ▁eus ten ▁zi e ne an ▁, ▁is ra el dar rak ▁zi ren ▁ga rai le ▁; ▁be he ra ▁e ror tzen ▁zi tzaiz ki o ne an ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁a ma lek tar rak ▁.
PRED:	So Moses and the Israelite army set up camp at the top of the altar . But the people of Israel blew their rams ' horns .
GOLD:	As long as Moses held up the staff in his hand , the Israelites had the advantage . But whenever he dropped his hand , the Amalekites gained the advantage .

ID:	1608
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁ez ▁di zut ▁i no la ko ▁o ker rik ▁e gin ▁; ▁zu ▁a ri ▁za tzaiz kit ▁e ra so ka ▁. ▁Jau na ▁da ▁e pai le ▁. ▁E ra ba ki ▁be za ▁be rak ▁is ra el dar ▁e ta ▁a mon dar ren ▁ar te an ▁» ▁.
PRED:	I have not done wrong to you , but you are not going to judge the people of Israel , just as the Lord had commanded me . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , I have not sinned against you . Rather , you have wronged me by attacking me . Let the Lord , who is judge , decide today which of us is right — Israel or Ammon . ”

ID:	1609
INPUT:	▁Ha la ▁, ▁le her tu ▁e gin ▁da ▁ni re ▁ha ser re - su mi na ▁, ▁e ta ▁er re ▁e gin ▁di tu ▁Ju da ko ▁hi ri ak ▁e ta ▁Je ru sa lem go ▁ka le ak ▁: ▁hon da men di ▁e ta ▁e re mu ▁bi hur tu ▁di ra ▁, ▁e ta ▁ha la xe ▁dau de ▁o rain ▁.
PRED:	But my anger will burn down on them , and the towns of Judah will become desolate and desolate . They will become desolate and desolate , and they will be desolate .
GOLD:	And so my fury boiled over and fell like fire on the towns of Judah and into the streets of Jerusalem , and they are still a desolate ruin today .

ID:	1610
INPUT:	▁Bai ▁, ▁ho ne la ▁di ot ▁nik ▁, ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du nak ▁: ▁Den bo ra ▁gu txi ▁bar ru ▁, ▁ze ru - lur rei ▁e ta ▁i tsa so - le hor rei ▁dar da ra ▁e ra gin go ▁di et ▁.
PRED:	“ But now , this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : I will bring disaster upon the earth and the earth .
GOLD:	“ For this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : In just a little while I will again shake the heavens and the earth , the oceans and the dry land .

ID:	1611
INPUT:	▁aur ki tzen ▁ez ▁ba du te ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁e txe ko ▁na gu si a ▁Jain ko a ren ▁aur re ra ▁aur kez tu ko ▁da ▁, ▁e ta ▁be re ▁la gu na ren ▁on da su nik ▁ez ▁du e la ▁u ki tu ▁ai tor tu ko ▁.
PRED:	But if you refuse to find out the house of God 's house , you will not find it .
GOLD:	“ Suppose someone leaves money or goods with a neighbor for safekeeping , and they are stolen from the neighbor 's house . If the thief is caught , the compensation is double the value of what was stolen .

ID:	1612
INPUT:	▁Ko ru - zu zen da ri a ren tzat ▁. ▁Da vi de na.Jau na ren gan ▁ba bes ten ▁naiz ▁. ▁No la tan ▁e sa ten ▁di da zu e ▁: ▁« ▁Al de ▁men di ra ▁, ▁he gaz ti ak ▁be za la ▁!
PRED:	O Lord , you are my fortress , O Lord , my fortress , O Lord , my fortress !
GOLD:	I trust in the Lord for protection.So why do you say to me , “ Fly like a bird to the mountains for safety !

ID:	1613
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁er re - o pa ri a ▁bu ka tze an ▁, ▁er re ge a ▁e ta ▁be ro ne kin ▁zi ren ▁guz ti ak ▁a hus pez tu ▁e gin ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	When they arrived at the king , they bowed low before the king and bowed low before him .
GOLD:	Then the king and everyone with him bowed down in worship .

ID:	1614
INPUT:	▁Be ra ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁ba sa mor tu an ▁aur re ra ▁jo an ▁zen ▁e ta ▁e gun ▁o so an ▁i bi li ▁. ▁Az ke ne an ▁, ▁i pu ru ▁ba ten ▁az pi an ▁e se ri ▁zen ▁. ▁He ri o tza ▁o pa ▁zi on ▁be re ▁bu ru a ri ▁. ▁Hau ▁zi o en ▁: ▁« ▁As ki ▁da ▁! ▁O rain ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁har tza zu ▁e ne ▁bi zi a ▁, ▁ez ▁bai naiz ▁ni ▁neu re ▁gu ra so ak ▁bai no ▁ho be a ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But when he went out to the wilderness , he went out to the wilderness and sat down in the wilderness . He said to him , “ This is what the Lord says : Now I am here , but now I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Then he went on alone into the wilderness , traveling all day . He sat down under a solitary broom tree and prayed that he might die . “ I have had enough , Lord , ” he said . “ Take my life , for I am no better than my ancestors who have already died . ”

ID:	1615
INPUT:	▁e du ki ▁ar di ak ▁ar ti le az ▁jan tzi ak ▁e gi te ko ▁, ▁an txu me ak ▁, ▁a lor ▁bat ▁e ros te ko ▁bes te ▁a te ra tze ko ▁,
PRED:	the ox and the ox , the ox , the ox , the other servants , and the other servants , and the other military officers .
GOLD:	your sheep will provide wool for clothing , and your goats will provide the price of a field .

ID:	1616
INPUT:	▁Ar na sa ▁i zan go ▁du dan ▁bi tar te an ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁ha tsa ▁ni re ▁su dur re tan ▁,
PRED:	Then they will know that I am in the fire of God , and they will be thrown into the fire .
GOLD:	As long as I live , while I have breath from God ,

ID:	1617
INPUT:	▁Pau lo ▁Ze sa re a ra ▁e ra ma na
PRED:	Paul Preaches in Caesarea
GOLD:	Paul Is Sent to Caesarea

ID:	1618
INPUT:	▁Moi se sek ▁, ▁ber ri ro ▁: ▁— ▁Ez ▁gai tza zu ▁utz ▁! ▁Zuk ▁on gi ▁e za gu tzen ▁di tu zu ▁ba sa mor tu an ▁e txo la tze ko ▁pa ra je ak ▁e ta ▁gi da ri ▁i zan ▁zai tza ke gu ▁.
PRED:	But Moses replied , “ We are not spies , but we are going to live in the wilderness . ”
GOLD:	“ Please do n't leave us , ” Moses pleaded . “ You know the places in the wilderness where we should camp . Come , be our guide .

ID:	1619
INPUT:	▁San tu a ▁e ta ▁zu ze na ▁zen ▁, ▁bai na ▁zu ek ▁u ka tu ▁e gin ▁ze nu ten ▁, ▁e ta ▁hil tzai le ▁bat ▁as ka tze ko ▁es ka tu ▁;
PRED:	But when the Holy Spirit woke up , you begged him to kill him and kill him .
GOLD:	You rejected this holy , righteous one and instead demanded the release of a murderer .

ID:	1620
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zai tza te la ▁en gai na ▁E ze ki a sek ▁; ▁ez ▁di e za zu e la ▁i ru zur rik ▁e gin ▁. ▁Ez ▁si ne tsi ▁! ▁I non go ▁jain kok ▁be re ▁na zi o a ▁na hiz ▁er rei nu a ▁e zin ▁i zan ▁ba du ▁ez ▁ni re ▁, ▁ez ▁ni re ▁aur re ko en ▁es ku e ta tik ▁lib ra tu ▁, ▁a re ▁gu txi a go ▁lib ra tu ko ▁zai tuz te ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko ak ▁” ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Do n't let Hezekiah deceive you . Do n't let anyone deceive you . Do n't believe that Hezekiah is the god of the gods of the gods of the world . He will rescue you from the power of our God . ' ”
GOLD:	Do n't let Hezekiah deceive you ! Do n't let him fool you like this ! I say it again — no god of any nation or kingdom has ever yet been able to rescue his people from me or my ancestors . How much less will your God rescue you from my power ! ”

ID:	1621
INPUT:	▁Aiz ko ra ▁ka mu tsa re kin ▁, ▁zor roz ten ▁ez ▁ba du zu ▁, ▁lan ▁han di a go a ▁e gin ▁be har <unk> ka ▁e za zu ▁bu ruz ▁, ▁a ha le gi na ri ▁o nu ra ▁a te ra tze ko ▁.
PRED:	If you do n't have a single piece of blue cloth , you will be a virgin . You will find out the door of your own harvest .
GOLD:	Using a dull ax requires great strength , so sharpen the blade.That 's the value of wisdom ; it helps you succeed .

ID:	1622
INPUT:	▁E li se o ▁hiz ke tan ▁a ri ▁ze la rik ▁, ▁hel du ▁zen ▁me zu la ri a ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Be gi ra ▁, ▁hon da men di ▁hau ▁Jau nak ▁bi da li a ▁da ▁. ▁Zer ▁i txa ron ▁de za ket ▁Jau na ren gan dik ▁?
PRED:	When Elisha arrived , Elisha said to him , “ This is what the Lord says : What is the Lord says ? What can I do ? What can I do ? ”
GOLD:	While Elisha was still saying this , the messenger arrived . And the king said , “ All this misery is from the Lord ! Why should I wait for the Lord any longer ? ”

ID:	1623
INPUT:	▁gaitz ▁go gor rez ▁jo ko ▁zai tuz te ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁bai ▁zeu ek ▁, ▁bai ▁zu en ▁on do ren go ak ▁: ▁zau ri ▁i zu gar riz ▁, ▁zau ri ▁latz ▁e ta ▁i raun kor rez ▁, ▁gai xo ta sun ▁gaiz to ▁e ta ▁sen da e zi nez ▁.
PRED:	For the Lord will strike you with all your good deeds , and you will be filled with deepest thoughts .
GOLD:	then the Lord will overwhelm you and your children with indescribable plagues . These plagues will be intense and without relief , making you miserable and unbearably sick .

ID:	1624
INPUT:	▁Gaz te ▁gri na tsu ▁ba tek ▁be re ▁nes ka txa re kin ▁ez ▁de la ▁on gi ▁jo ka tzen ▁a ri ▁e ta ▁ez kon du ▁e gin ▁be har ▁du e la ▁us te ▁ba du ▁, ▁be te ▁de za la ▁be re ▁as mo a ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez kon ▁dai te ze la ▁; ▁ez ▁du ▁be ka tu rik ▁e gi ten ▁.
PRED:	If a young woman marries a virgin , she does n't marry her , she must not marry her . She must not marry her , and she must not marry her .
GOLD:	But if a man thinks that he 's treating his fiancée improperly and will inevitably give in to his passion , let him marry her as he wishes . It is not a sin .

ID:	1625
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁zu ek her ri ▁he zi kai tza ▁e ta ▁des lei a la ▁za re te ▁; ▁ni re gan dik ▁ur ru ti ▁jo an ▁za re te ▁.
PRED:	But you are my rock , and you are led away from me .
GOLD:	But my people have stubborn and rebellious hearts.They have turned away and abandoned me .

ID:	1626
INPUT:	▁Ne kez ▁hil ko ▁li tza te ke ▁nor bait ▁per tso na ▁zu zen ▁ba ten ▁al de ▁; ▁a gi an ▁bai ▁, ▁ba dai te ke ▁nor bait ▁per tso na ▁on ▁ba ten ▁al de ▁hil tze ko ▁prest ▁e go te a ▁.
PRED:	If they were eager to kill someone , they would be ready to kill someone . But if they were eager to kill someone , they would be ready to kill him .
GOLD:	Now , most people would not be willing to die for an upright person , though someone might perhaps be willing to die for a person who is especially good .

ID:	1627
INPUT:	▁E do ▁de ma gun ▁i zur ri a ▁bi dal tzen ▁du da la ▁her ri al de a ren ▁aur ka ▁e ta ▁he ri o tza ▁za bal tzen ▁du da la ▁neu re ▁su mi nez ▁, ▁gi za ki ak ▁e ta ▁a be re ak ▁sun tsi tuz ▁;
PRED:	In that day I will send a plague against the nations , and I will destroy the nations and destroy them .
GOLD:	“ Or suppose I were to pour out my fury by sending an epidemic into the land , and the disease killed people and animals alike .

ID:	1628
INPUT:	▁Gu ar di a bu ru ak ▁Jo se ren ▁ar du ra pe an ▁u tzi ▁zi tu <unk> bo ral di ▁bat ▁pre so ▁e gon ▁on do ren ▁,
PRED:	So the captain of the guard 's guard , led by a section of the guard .
GOLD:	They remained in prison for quite some time , and the captain of the guard assigned them to Joseph , who looked after them .

ID:	1629
INPUT:	▁Ba sas to a
PRED:	The Last Supper
GOLD:	The Lord 's Challenge Continues

ID:	1630
INPUT:	▁En tzun ▁Jau na ren ▁hi tza ▁, ▁Ja ko ben ▁on do ren go ok ▁, ▁Is ra el go ▁lei nu ▁guz ti ok ▁.
PRED:	Listen to the word of the Lord , all the tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	Listen to the word of the Lord , people of Jacob — all you families of Israel !

ID:	1631
INPUT:	▁Ir ten ▁Ba bi lo ni a tik ▁, ▁i hes ▁e gin ▁ba bi lo ni ar ren ▁ar te tik ▁! ▁A di e ra zi ▁me zu a ▁, ▁i ra gar ri ▁poz - oi huz ▁, ▁he la ra zi ▁lur ra ren ▁baz ter re ta rai no ▁: ▁« ▁Jau nak ▁as ka tu ▁du ▁Is ra el be re ▁zer bi tza ri a ▁! ▁»
PRED:	They left Babylon and escaped from Babylon , and they fled to Babylon ! They shout , “ O Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Yet even now , be free from your captivity ! Leave Babylon and the Babylonians.Sing out this message ! Shout it to the ends of the earth ! The Lord has redeemed his servants , the people of Israel .

ID:	1632
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁hau ▁di o tsut ▁: ▁Be ka tu ▁as ko ▁di tu ▁, ▁bai na ▁hain bes te ko ▁mai ta su na ▁a ge ri ▁ba du ▁, ▁Jain ko ak ▁bar ka tu ▁diz ki on ▁sei na le a ▁da ▁; ▁gu txi ▁bar ka tzen ▁zai o nak ▁mai ta sun ▁gu txi ▁a ger tzen ▁du ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says : I am writing to those who love him , but I love you with unfailing love and faithfulness .
GOLD:	“ I tell you , her sins — and they are many — have been forgiven , so she has shown me much love . But a person who is forgiven little shows only little love . ”

ID:	1633
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁be re ▁na gu si ta su na ▁a zal du ▁si na go gan
PRED:	The True Family of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Preaches in Galilee

ID:	1634
INPUT:	▁Mi hi a ▁e re ▁su a ▁da ▁, ▁gaiz ta ke ri az ko ▁mun du a ▁: ▁gu re ▁bes te ▁gor putz - a ta len ▁ar te an ▁jar ri ta ▁, ▁gor putz ▁o so a ▁ku tsa tzen ▁du ▁e ta ▁, ▁in fer nu ko ▁su az ▁piz tu rik ▁, ▁su tan ▁jar tzen ▁du ▁bi zi tza ren ▁gur pi la ▁.
PRED:	The sinful nature is like a fire , and the spirit of the world is filled with fire . It is the same kind of fire , and the spirit of the body is thrown into the fire .
GOLD:	And among all the parts of the body , the tongue is a flame of fire . It is a whole world of wickedness , corrupting your entire body . It can set your whole life on fire , for it is set on fire by hell itself .

ID:	1635
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁e ran tzun ▁zi da ten ▁: ▁« ▁Er bes te al di tik ▁lib re ▁gel di tu ▁di re nak ▁zo ri txar ▁han di an ▁e ta ▁e go e ra ▁lo tsa gar ri an ▁dau de ▁Ju da ▁es ku al de an ▁; ▁Je ru sa lem go ▁har re si ak ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁zu loz ▁be te ak ▁dau de ▁, ▁e ta ▁hi ri ko ▁a te ak ▁su ak ▁kis ka li ak ▁» ▁.
PRED:	He told them , “ The towns of Judah will be destroyed in the fortified towns of Judah , and all the towns of Judah will be destroyed . The towns of Judah will be filled with fire . ”
GOLD:	They said to me , “ Things are not going well for those who returned to the province of Judah . They are in great trouble and disgrace . The wall of Jerusalem has been torn down , and the gates have been destroyed by fire . ”

ID:	1636
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁di o zu e ▁: ▁« ▁I tu na ▁e gi na ▁du gu ▁He ri o a re kin ▁, ▁tra tu a ▁Hil da ko en ▁E goi tza re kin ▁: ▁ez be har ▁sun tsi gar ri a ▁da tor re ne an ▁, ▁ez ▁gai tu ▁har ra pa tu ko ▁, ▁ge zur ra ▁har tu ▁bai tu gu ▁ba bes ▁, ▁mal tzur ke ri a ▁gor de le ku ▁» ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ We will die with those who die in the grave , and we will die in the grave , but we will be killed . ”
GOLD:	You boast , “ We have struck a bargain to cheat deathand have made a deal to dodge the grave.The coming destruction can never touch us , for we have built a strong refuge made of lies and deception . ”

ID:	1637
INPUT:	▁Jo su ek ▁a gin du ▁be za la ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁is ra el dar rek ▁: ▁Jor dan ▁er di tik ▁ha ma bi ▁har ri ▁, ▁is ra el dar ▁lei nu ak ▁hain bat ▁har ri ▁, ▁har tu ▁, ▁gau a ▁i ga ro ko ▁zu ten ▁le ku ra ▁e ra man ▁e ta ▁ber tan ▁e zar ri ▁zi tuz ten ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁Jo su e ri ▁a gin du ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	So Joshua commanded the Israelites to cross the Jordan River , just as the Lord had commanded . So Joshua and the Israelites set apart as the Lord had commanded Joshua , just as the Lord had commanded Joshua .
GOLD:	So the men did as Joshua had commanded them . They took twelve stones from the middle of the Jordan River , one for each tribe , just as the Lord had told Joshua . They carried them to the place where they camped for the night and constructed the memorial there .

ID:	1638
INPUT:	▁Jain ko a ri ▁es ker rak
PRED:	Paul Gives Thanks to God
GOLD:	Encouragement to Be Faithful

ID:	1639
INPUT:	▁Zu re tzat ▁e re ▁a mai e ra ▁da ▁o rain ▁: ▁neu re ▁ha ser re a ▁i su ri ko ▁dut ▁zu re ▁kon tra ▁, ▁zeu re ▁jo ka bi de a ren ▁a ra be ra ▁e pai tu ko ▁zai tut ▁e ta ▁e gin tza ▁hi guin gar ri ▁guz ti en ▁kon tu ▁es ka tu ko ▁.
PRED:	You have become very angry with me , and I will punish you for your detestable sins . I will punish you for all your detestable sins .
GOLD:	No hope remains , for I will unleash my anger against you.I will call you to accountfor all your detestable sins .

ID:	1640
INPUT:	▁Bar ne ko ▁a ta ri ak ▁e re ▁ba zu en ▁sar re ra ▁bat ▁he go al de ra ▁. ▁Bi ▁sar re ren ▁ar te ko ▁dis tan tzi a ▁neur tu ▁zu en ▁gi zo nak ▁: ▁ber ro gei ta ▁ha mar ▁me tro ▁.
PRED:	He measured the inside of the gateway to the inner courtyard , which was 101/2 feet long . He measured the gateway passage was 101/2 feet long .
GOLD:	And here again , directly opposite the outer gateway , was another gateway that led into the inner courtyard . The distance between the two gateways was 175 feet .

ID:	1641
INPUT:	▁Ha ra ▁i ris te ar ▁ze go e la ▁, ▁Sa rai ▁be re ▁e maz te a ri ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁« ▁A di zu ▁, ▁ba da kit ▁e ma ku me ▁e der ra ▁za re la ▁.
PRED:	When the Arameans arrived at Samaria , she said to her , “ If you have a woman , please give me a beautiful woman .
GOLD:	As he was approaching the border of Egypt , Abram said to his wife , Sarai , “ Look , you are a very beautiful woman .

ID:	1642
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁a rau ak ▁na hi ▁di tut ▁gor de ▁: ▁ez ▁na za zu ▁i noiz ▁es ku tik ▁utz ▁!
PRED:	I hate those who hate me ; rescue me from your power .
GOLD:	I will obey your decrees.Please do n't give up on me !

ID:	1643
INPUT:	▁Hor tan ▁, ▁ma hai an ▁zeu de la rik ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁hi tza ▁e tor ri ▁zi tzai on ▁i tzu la ra zi ▁zu en ▁pro fe ta ▁za har ra ri ▁,
PRED:	At that time the table of God came to the city of God and said to him , “ You are the prophets of the prophets . ”
GOLD:	Then while they were sitting at the table , a command from the Lord came to the old prophet .

ID:	1644
INPUT:	▁Bi dal ▁di e za zu la ▁la gun tza ▁be re ▁san tu te gi tik ▁, ▁eu tsi ▁zu ri ▁Si on ▁men di tik ▁!
PRED:	Send them out from the holy mountain , for they are coming from Mount Zion .
GOLD:	May he remember all your giftsand look favorably on your burnt offerings.Interlude

ID:	1645
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁, ▁ko pa ▁har tu rik ▁, ▁es ker ▁o ne ko ▁o toi tza ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁« ▁Har tza zu e ▁e ta ▁e man ▁el kar ri ▁.
PRED:	Then he took a cup of wine and gave it to the loaves of bread and said , “ Take it to each other .
GOLD:	Then he took a cup of wine and gave thanks to God for it . Then he said , “ Take this and share it among yourselves .

ID:	1646
INPUT:	▁Le ku ▁ha ri ▁Ta be ra ▁— ▁hau ▁da ▁, ▁« ▁Su te ▁» ▁— ▁e zar ri ▁zi o ten ▁i ze na ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁su a ▁is ra el dar ren ▁aur ka ▁ber tan ▁le her tu ▁ze la ko ▁.
PRED:	The first allotment of land ( which means “ This is what the Lord says : The people of Israel have sinned against the Lord . )
GOLD:	After that , the area was known as Taberah ( which means “ the place of burning ” ) , because fire from the Lord had burned among them there .

ID:	1647
INPUT:	▁Sei ▁e gu nez ▁lan ▁e gin go ▁du zu e ▁, ▁bai na ▁zaz pi gar re na ▁la run ba ta ▁da ▁, ▁Jau na ri ▁sa ga ra tu ri ko ▁a tse den - e gu na ▁. ▁La run ba tez ▁lan ▁e gi ten ▁du e nak ▁he ri o tza - zi gor ra ▁i zan go ▁du ▁.
PRED:	You have six days each week for your ordinary work , but the Sabbath day of the Lord will be a Sabbath day for six days .
GOLD:	You have six days each week for your ordinary work , but the seventh day must be a Sabbath day of complete rest , a holy day dedicated to the Lord . Anyone who works on that day must be put to death .

ID:	1648
INPUT:	▁le ge - mai su ▁i zan ▁na hi an ▁, ▁e sa ten ▁e ta ▁a ho ▁be te an ▁i ra kas ten ▁du te na ▁u ler tzen ▁ez ▁ba du te ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	They cling to their teachers , and they do n't understand what they meant .
GOLD:	They want to be known as teachers of the law of Moses , but they do n't know what they are talking about , even though they speak so confidently .

ID:	1649
INPUT:	▁A ker rak ▁be re kin ▁e ra man go ▁di tu ▁is ra el dar ren ▁er ru ▁guz ti ak ▁e re mu ▁el kor re ra ▁. ▁A ker ra ▁ba sa mor tu ra ▁bi da li ▁on do ren ▁,
PRED:	All the people of Israel will join themselves in the wilderness of Elah , and they will send them into the wilderness of Paran .
GOLD:	As the goat goes into the wilderness , it will carry all the people 's sins upon itself into a desolate land .

ID:	1650
INPUT:	▁Lur ral de ak ▁bes te ▁hau ek ▁e re ▁har tzen ▁zi tu en ▁: ▁Ka tat ▁, ▁Na ha lal ▁, ▁Xim ron ▁, ▁I da la ▁e ta ▁Be len ▁; ▁guz ti ra ▁ha ma bi ▁hi ri ▁zi ren ▁, ▁be ren ▁her rix ke kin ▁.
PRED:	These were the clans descended from the land of Canaan : The following towns with their pasturelands : The following towns with their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	The towns in these areas included Kattath , Nahalal , Shimron , Idalah , and Bethlehem — twelve towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	1651
INPUT:	▁Zu ei ▁, ▁gu ra so oi ▁, ▁di o tsu et ▁: ▁E za gu tzen ▁du zu e ▁ha si e ra tik ▁zen ▁hu ra.Zu ei ▁, ▁gaz te oi ▁, ▁di o tsu et ▁: ▁Ga rai tu ▁du zu e ▁gaiz to a ▁.
PRED:	“ I tell you the truth , I tell you the truth , you who are in the streets of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	I am writing to you who are mature in the faithbecause you know Christ , who existed from the beginning.I am writing to you who are young in the faithbecause you have won your battle with the evil one .

ID:	1652
INPUT:	▁Az ke ne an ▁, ▁har lan duz ko ▁hi ru ▁ler ro ko ▁e ta ▁zed roz ko ▁ha be - ler ro ▁ba te ko ▁hor ma ▁e rai kiz ▁, ▁bar ne ko ▁a ta ri a ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	He also made a cedar beams , with cedar beams , and cedar beams . He also made a cedar cedar beams , and a stone with cedar beams .
GOLD:	The walls of the inner courtyard were built so that there was one layer of cedar beams between every three layers of finished stone .

ID:	1653
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁Sa raik ▁e san ▁zi on ▁Ab ra mi ▁: ▁« ▁Be gi ra ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁a gor ▁e gin ▁nau ▁. ▁El kar ▁zai tez ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁ni re ▁mi ra be a re kin ▁. ▁Be har ba da ▁, ▁i zan go ▁dut ▁se me rik ▁ha ren ▁bi tar tez ▁» ▁.Ab ra mek ▁o nar tu ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁Sa rai ren ▁pro po sa me na ▁,
PRED:	Then Sarai said to Abram , “ Look , I am the Lord , and I am your servant , and I am your servant , and I will give you a covenant with Abraham . ”
GOLD:	So Sarai said to Abram , “ The Lord has prevented me from having children . Go and sleep with my servant . Perhaps I can have children through her. ” And Abram agreed with Sarai 's proposal .

ID:	1654
INPUT:	▁gal dez ka ▁: ▁— ▁Zein ▁a gin pi dez ▁jo ka tzen ▁du zu ▁hor re la ▁? ▁Nork ▁e man ▁di zu ▁hor re ta ra ko ▁a gin pi de a ▁?
PRED:	“ What do you mean ? Who can show you authority ? Who can do such authority ? ”
GOLD:	They demanded , “ By what authority are you doing all these things ? Who gave you the right to do them ? ”

ID:	1655
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁gau za ▁hau ek ▁e sa ten ▁zi har du e la ▁, ▁e ma ku me ▁ba tek ▁jen dar te tik ▁dei a dar ka ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Zo ri o ne ko a ▁sa be le an ▁e ra man ▁zin tu en ▁e ta ▁bu lar ra ▁e man ▁zi zun ▁e ma ku me a ▁!
PRED:	But as Jesus was saying , a woman named him , a woman from the crowd said to him , “ Go over to Jerusalem and give it to the woman . ”
GOLD:	As he was speaking , a woman in the crowd called out , “ God bless your mother — the womb from which you came , and the breasts that nursed you ! ”

ID:	1656
INPUT:	▁Ur ri ▁bi tez ▁ha ren ▁e gu nak ▁, ▁har ▁be za ▁bes te ▁ba tek ▁ha ren ▁kar gu a ▁.
PRED:	One day two years later , one of them had two more than twelve years .
GOLD:	Let his years be few ; let someone else take his position .

ID:	1657
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁da ki ▁be ra ren ▁gon bi da tu ak ▁hi lik ▁dau de la ▁, ▁Hil da ko en ▁E goi tzan ▁dau de la ▁ja da nik ▁.
PRED:	Do n't invite the dead to sit on the dead , for the dead is dead .
GOLD:	But little do they know that the dead are there.Her guests are in the depths of the grave .

ID:	1658
INPUT:	▁Zu en ▁es ku ▁u tzi ▁di tu ▁Jau nak ▁O reb ▁e ta ▁Ze eb ▁, ▁ma di an dar ren ▁bu ru za gi ak ▁. ▁E gin tza ▁hor ren ▁al de an ▁, ▁nik ▁ez ▁dut ▁deus ▁e re ▁e <unk> ▁e sa te ak ▁ba re tu ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁ef raim dar rak ▁.
PRED:	For the Lord has handed them over to the Midianites , saying , “ Let 's destroy them ! ” So the Lord said , “ I will destroy them in the land of Ephraim .
GOLD:	God gave you victory over Oreb and Zeeb , the commanders of the Midianite army . What have I accomplished compared to that ? ” When the men of Ephraim heard Gideon 's answer , their anger subsided .

ID:	1659
INPUT:	▁Gai ne ra ▁, ▁Ju da ko ▁er re ge ek ▁A ka zen ▁goi - ge la ren ▁gai ne an ▁e rai ki ak ▁zi tuz ten ▁al da re ak ▁de se gin ▁zi tu en ▁; ▁o ro bat ▁Jau na ren ▁e txe ko ▁bi ▁a ta ri e tan ▁Ma na se sek ▁e rai ki ak ▁zi tu e nak ▁e re ▁. ▁Ber tan ▁hau tsi ▁e ta ▁Zed ron ▁er re ka ra ▁jaur ti ▁zi tu en ▁pus kak ▁.
PRED:	The rest of the events in Judah 's reign , including all the kings of Judah , and he tore down the ashes of the Temple of the Lord . He threw it into the Kidron Valley and threw it into the Kidron Valley .
GOLD:	Josiah tore down the altars that the kings of Judah had built on the palace roof above the upper room of Ahaz . The king destroyed the altars that Manasseh had built in the two courtyards of the Lord 's Temple . He smashed them to bits and scattered the pieces in the Kidron Valley .

ID:	1660
INPUT:	▁Da vi dek ▁ku txa ▁Je ru sa le me ra ▁e ra man
PRED:	David 's Return to Jerusalem
GOLD:	Moving the Ark to Jerusalem

ID:	1661
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁e ta ▁u ga ri a go a ▁zen ▁fe de a ren ▁bi dez ▁Jau na ri ▁el kar tzen ▁zi tzaiz ki o nen ▁tal de a ▁, ▁gi zon ▁e ta ▁e ma ku me ▁.
PRED:	Then they left the Temple of the Lord , and they brought the twelve men to the Lord .
GOLD:	Yet more and more people believed and were brought to the Lord — crowds of both men and women .

ID:	1662
INPUT:	▁Joi a kim ▁er re ge a ri
PRED:	Jehoiakim Rules in Judah
GOLD:	A Message about Jehoahaz

ID:	1663
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁i zan ▁bel dur ▁gaz te a ▁zi gor tze ko ▁, ▁ma ki la ka da ▁ba tzu en ga tik ▁ez ▁da ▁hil ko ▁e ta ▁;
PRED:	Do n't be afraid to kill those who do n't kill them , and they will die .
GOLD:	Do n't fail to discipline your children.The rod of punishment wo n't kill them .

ID:	1664
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁e dom dar rek ▁ber ri ro ▁e ra so tu a ▁zu ten ▁Ju da ▁, ▁e ta ▁pre so ▁as ko ▁har tu ak ▁zi tuz ten ▁.
PRED:	The people of Edom attacked Judah and captured it .
GOLD:	The armies of Edom had again invaded Judah and taken captives .

ID:	1665
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁di ot ▁: ▁« ▁He men ▁nau zu ▁» <unk> bu ru an ▁a gin tzen ▁zait
PRED:	So I said to myself , “ I 've done a good thing ! ”
GOLD:	I take joy in doing your will , my God , for your instructions are written on my heart . ”

ID:	1666
INPUT:	▁Go rain tzi ak ▁Ur ba no ri ▁, ▁Je su ▁Kris to ren ▁zer bi tzu an ▁la gun tzai le ▁i zan ▁du gu na ri ▁, ▁e ta ▁ni re ▁Es ta kis ▁mai te a ri ▁.
PRED:	Give thanks to the Lord Jesus Christ , who has chosen us to be my servant .
GOLD:	Greet Urbanus , our co-worker in Christ , and my dear friend Stachys .

ID:	1667
INPUT:	▁Jo an ▁zen ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁Gad ▁Da vi den ga na ▁e ta ▁hor ren ▁ber ri ▁e man ▁zi on ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁— ▁Zer ▁na hi ▁du zu ▁: ▁zaz pi ▁ur te ko ▁go se al di a ▁zeu re ▁lur ral de an ▁, ▁hi ru ▁hi la be te ko ▁i he sal di a ▁e tsai a ▁on do ren ▁du zu la rik ▁, ▁a la ▁hi ru ▁e gu ne ko ▁i zur ri te a ▁zeu re ▁lur ral de an ▁? <unk> nar ▁e za zu ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁e a ▁zer ▁e ran tzun ▁be har ▁di o dan ▁bi da li ▁nau e na ri ▁.
PRED:	But the tribe of Gad said to David , “ Why have you given me seven years ? ” “ What is your land ? ” “ Why did you think you are saying , ‘ Why did you think I am going to die ? '
GOLD:	So Gad came to David and asked him , “ Will you choose three years of famine throughout your land , three months of fleeing from your enemies , or three days of severe plague throughout your land ? Think this over and decide what answer I should give the Lord who sent me . ”

ID:	1668
INPUT:	▁Ja kob ▁ni re ▁zer bi tza ri a ri ▁e man ▁ni on ▁lur ral de an ▁bi zi ko ▁di ra ▁, ▁non ▁bi zi ▁i zan ▁bai tzi ren ▁hai en ▁gu ra so ak ▁e re ▁. ▁Han ▁bi zi ko ▁di ra ▁be rai ek ▁e ta ▁be rai en ▁on do ren go ak ▁be ti ko ▁, ▁e ta ▁Da vid ▁ni re ▁zer bi tza ri a ▁i zan go ▁du te ▁bu ru za gi ▁be ti ko ▁.
PRED:	Then Jacob gave his servant , and he will live in the land where he lived . He will live there , and his descendants will be his servant David . He will be his servant David , and his officials will serve him .
GOLD:	They will live in the land I gave my servant Jacob , the land where their ancestors lived . They and their children and their grandchildren after them will live there forever , generation after generation . And my servant David will be their prince forever .

ID:	1669
INPUT:	▁er ru du na ri ▁di ru - tru ke ar ra zoi ▁e ma te ne ta ▁er ru ga be a ri ▁zu zen bi de au ka tzen ▁di o zu e nok ▁!
PRED:	Those who oppress the poor and needy , orphans , and widows .
GOLD:	They take bribes to let the wicked go free , and they punish the innocent .

ID:	1670
INPUT:	▁Be gi ra ▁Si o ni ▁, ▁geu re ▁jai a kos pa tzen ▁di tu gu ne ko ▁hi ri a ri.I kus ▁Je ru sa lem ▁, ▁bi zi to ki ▁la sai a ▁, ▁e goi tza ▁fin ko a ▁, ▁i nork ▁zi ri rik ▁a te ra ko ▁ez ▁di o ne ta ▁so ka rik ▁e ten go ▁ez ▁di o noi hal - e txo la ren ▁pa re ko ▁.
PRED:	For we are coming from Jerusalem , a city of refuge for those who are coming from Jerusalem , will come to Jerusalem , and no one will help him .
GOLD:	Instead , you will see Zion as a place of holy festivals.You will see Jerusalem , a city quiet and secure.It will be like a tent whose ropes are tautand whose stakes are firmly fixed .

ID:	1671
INPUT:	▁Ber ri ro ▁e re ▁haur dun ▁gel di tu ▁e ta ▁e maz te ak ▁bes te ▁se me ▁bat ▁i zan ▁zu en ▁, ▁e ta ▁O nan ▁e man ▁zi on ▁i zen ▁.
PRED:	Then Leah became pregnant and gave birth to another son . She named him another son , and she named him .
GOLD:	Then she became pregnant again and gave birth to another son , and she named him Onan .

ID:	1672
INPUT:	▁Ha ren ▁i ra kas pe naz ▁txun di tu rik ▁ze go en ▁jen de ▁guz ti a ▁, ▁na gu si ta su nez ▁i ra kas ten ▁bai tzi en ▁e ta ▁ez ▁le ge - mai su ek ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	The crowds were amazed at his teaching , and they did n't obey his teaching .
GOLD:	The people were amazed at his teaching , for he taught with real authority — quite unlike the teachers of religious law .

ID:	1673
INPUT:	▁Je re mi as ▁e ta ▁Ha na ni as ▁pro fe tak ▁aur rez ▁aur re
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Message
GOLD:	Jeremiah Condemns Hananiah

ID:	1674
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la xe ▁di o ▁Li bu ru ▁San tu ak ▁e re ▁: ▁Gi za ki ▁o ro ▁be lar ra ren ▁pa re ko ▁da ▁, ▁ha ren ▁e der ta su na ▁lan da ko ▁lo re a re na ▁be za la ko a ▁: ▁i har tzen ▁da ▁be lar ra ▁, ▁e ror tzen ▁lo re a ▁;
PRED:	This is what the Scriptures mean : “ Our own eyes are like grass , and it is like grass , and it is like grass .
GOLD:	As the Scriptures say , “ People are like grass ; their beauty is like a flower in the field.The grass withers and the flower fades .

ID:	1675
INPUT:	▁zu zen bi de a ri ▁jar rai tzen ▁di o te nak ▁ba bes ten ▁di tu e ta ▁be ra re kin ▁lei al ▁di re nak ▁zain tzen ▁.
PRED:	Those who follow the right path , but those who trust in him .
GOLD:	He guards the paths of the justand protects those who are faithful to him .

ID:	1676
INPUT:	▁Bes te ▁zaz pi ▁e gun ▁i txa ron ▁e ta ▁ber ri ro ▁bi da li ▁zu en ▁u so a ▁on tzi tik ▁.
PRED:	After seven days , the man sent Job back again and left the boat .
GOLD:	After waiting another seven days , Noah released the dove again .

ID:	1677
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁be di ▁han di e tsi a ▁zu re ▁i ze na ▁be ti ▁! ▁E san ▁be za te ▁: ▁“ ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du na ▁Is ra e len ▁Jain ko a ▁! ▁” ▁E ta ▁i raun ▁be za ▁zu re ▁aur re an ▁, ▁mor roi ▁du zun ▁Da vid ▁ho nen ▁on do ren go tzak ▁.
PRED:	Let there be great joy in the name of the Lord , just as the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : ‘ May your servant David be your servant , the God of Israel . '
GOLD:	And may your name be honored forever so that everyone will say , ‘ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies is God over Israel ! ' And may the house of your servant David continue before you forever .

ID:	1678
INPUT:	▁Gu dal bu ru ak ▁bi da li ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁mu ti la ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁— ▁Ez ▁e san ▁i no ri ▁ho nen ▁ber ri ▁e man ▁di da zu nik ▁.
PRED:	So the commander sent his commander to the commander and said , “ Do n't tell anyone about this . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't let anyone know you told me this , ” the commander warned the young man .

ID:	1679
INPUT:	▁« ▁E gin ▁e goi tza ▁li ho - ha ri ▁bi hur ri tuz ▁e ta ▁pur pu ra ▁mo re ▁, ▁gor ri ▁e ta ▁gor ri mi nez ▁e gi ni ko ▁ha mar ▁za piz ▁, ▁e ta ▁bor da tu ▁ho ri e tan ▁a pain ▁i za ki ▁he gal du nak ▁.
PRED:	“ Make the curtain of finely woven linen and embroidered with blue , purple , and scarlet thread , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	“ Make the Tabernacle from ten curtains of finely woven linen . Decorate the curtains with blue , purple , and scarlet thread and with skillfully embroidered cherubim .

ID:	1680
INPUT:	▁Je sus ▁a pos to lu ei ▁a ger tu ▁zi tzai en ▁be re ▁he ri o tza ren ▁on do ren ▁e ta ▁bi zi rik ▁ze go e ne ko ▁fro ga ▁as ko ▁e man ▁ziz ki en ▁, ▁ber ro gei ▁e gu nez ▁be re ▁bu ru a ▁i kus te ra ▁e ma nez ▁e ta ▁Jain ko a ren ▁er re ge tzaz ▁hitz ▁e gi nez ▁.
PRED:	Then Jesus appeared to his apostles and told them what was written in the death of the dead , and he gave them the message of God . He said , “ Let us see the Kingdom of God . ”
GOLD:	During the forty days after he suffered and died , he appeared to the apostles from time to time , and he proved to them in many ways that he was actually alive . And he talked to them about the Kingdom of God .

ID:	1681
INPUT:	▁Je ru sa le me ra ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁e txe ra ▁, ▁i tzu li ▁on do ko ▁bi gar ren ▁ur te ko ▁bi gar ren ▁hi le an ▁e kin ▁zi o ten ▁la na ri ▁Xe al ti e len ▁se me ▁Zo ro ba be lek ▁e ta ▁Jo tza da ken ▁se me ▁Jo su ek ▁, ▁be ren ▁a paiz - a hai de e kin ▁, ▁le bi tar re kin ▁e ta ▁ga ti bu al di tik ▁Je ru sa le me ra ▁e tor ri e kin ▁; ▁Jau na ren ▁e txe ko ▁la nen ▁ar du ra dun ▁ho gei ▁ur tez ▁go ra ko ▁le bi tar rak ▁jar ri ▁zi tuz ten ▁.
PRED:	Then the Temple of God returned to Jerusalem and sent them back to the second year of Jeshua son of Jehozadak , the priest , the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites , who lived in Jerusalem with him .
GOLD:	The construction of the Temple of God began in midspring , during the second year after they arrived in Jerusalem . The work force was made up of everyone who had returned from exile , including Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel , Jeshua son of Jehozadak and his fellow priests , and all the Levites . The Levites who were twenty years old or older were put in charge of rebuilding the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	1682
INPUT:	▁Ha la ▁e re ▁, ▁ez ▁dut ▁neu re ▁on gi na hi a ▁ha ren gan dik ▁baz ter tu ko ▁, ▁Sau len gan dik ▁baz ter tu ▁nu en ▁be za la ▁, ▁baz ter tu ▁e gin ▁bai nu en ▁neu re ▁aur re tik ▁be ra ▁.
PRED:	But I did n't need to do what I wanted to do , just as Saul had done , just as he had done .
GOLD:	But my favor will not be taken from him as I took it from Saul , whom I removed from your sight .

ID:	1683
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁e hun ta ri ak ▁fe de ▁ge hi a go ▁zu en ▁le ma zain ▁e ta ▁pa troi a ren gan ▁Pau lo ren ▁e sa ne tan ▁bai no ▁.
PRED:	But our faith was like a Gentile believers , but it is like a Gentile believers in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	But the officer in charge of the prisoners listened more to the ship 's captain and the owner than to Paul .

ID:	1684
INPUT:	▁Ni re ▁lar ru a zal ▁hau ▁de se gin ▁on do ren ▁, ▁gor pu tzik ▁ga be ▁, ▁Jain ko a ▁i ku si ko ▁dut ▁.
PRED:	I am deeply troubled because of my body , but I will never see it .
GOLD:	And after my body has decayed , yet in my body I will see God !

ID:	1685
INPUT:	▁Be re ha la ▁e gin go ▁di e la ▁jus ti zi a ▁di o tsu et ▁. ▁Bai na ▁Gi zo na ren ▁Se me a ▁da tor re ne an ▁, ▁aur ki tu ko ▁o te ▁du ▁hor re la ko ▁si nes me nik ▁mun du an ▁? ▁»
PRED:	And I tell you the truth , that the Son of Man is coming . But who is the Son of Man , who is here in the world ? ”
GOLD:	I tell you , he will grant justice to them quickly ! But when the Son of Man returns , how many will he find on the earth who have faith ? ”

ID:	1686
INPUT:	▁Bi ▁or ri ko ▁a te ▁ba te tik ▁sa la ▁han di ra ▁sar tzen ▁zen ▁, ▁e ta ▁bes te ▁a te ▁ba te tik ▁to ki ▁san tu - san tu ra ▁.
PRED:	But one of the two rooms ran out from one end of the inner curtain , and the other on the other side .
GOLD:	Both the sanctuary and the Most Holy Place had double doorways ,

ID:	1687
INPUT:	▁Je su ▁Kris to ▁gu re ▁Jau na ren ga tik ▁e ta ▁Es pi ri tu ak ▁e ma ten ▁di gun ▁mai ta su na ga tik ▁, ▁es ka bi de ▁hau ▁e gi ten ▁di zu et ▁, ▁se ni de ok ▁: ▁la gun ▁di e za da zu e la ▁e gi na ha le an ▁, ▁Jain ko a ri ▁ni re ▁al de ▁o toitz ▁e gi nez ▁,
PRED:	For the Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ has freed us from the power of our Lord and pray to you , dear brothers and sisters , that I pray for you .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , I urge you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to join in my struggle by praying to God for me . Do this because of your love for me , given to you by the Holy Spirit .

ID:	1688
INPUT:	▁Ha la ▁, ▁jo an ▁zen ▁zal diz ko a ▁gu da ri - tal de a ren ga na ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁— ▁Er re ge ak ▁ba kez ▁za toz ten ▁gal de tzen ▁du.Je huk ▁, ▁or du an ▁: ▁— ▁Zer ▁a xo la ▁di zu ▁ba ke ak ▁? ▁Za toz ▁ni re ▁a tze <unk> la ta ri ak ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁— ▁Hel du ▁da ▁hai en ga na ▁me zu la ri a ▁, ▁bai na ▁ez ▁da tor ▁i tzu li an ▁.
PRED:	But Jehu went to fight the king 's horses and said , “ Come , let 's go back to meet you , ” Jehu said . “ Come , let 's go back to Jericho , but you are going back to me . ”
GOLD:	So a horseman went out to meet Jehu and said , “ The king wants to know if you are coming in peace. ” Jehu replied , “ What do you know about peace ? Fall in behind me ! ” The watchman called out to the king , “ The messenger has met them , but he 's not returning . ”

ID:	1689
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁e gun ▁bat ▁e do ▁bi ▁bi zi rik ▁i rau ten ▁ba du ▁, ▁ez ▁du te ▁kon de na tu ko ▁, ▁be re a ▁bai tzu en ▁eskla bo a ▁.
PRED:	But if a few days after this , they will live forever , but they will not be slaves .
GOLD:	But if the slave recovers within a day or two , then the owner shall not be punished , since the slave is his property .

ID:	1690
INPUT:	▁A di e ra zi ▁ni re ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jaun ▁ho nen ▁, ▁me zu a ▁: ▁Gog ▁, ▁zu re ▁kon tra ▁na tor ▁, ▁Me xek ▁e ta ▁Tu bal go ▁bu ru za gi ▁na gu si ▁hor ren ▁kon tra ▁.
PRED:	Say to them , “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : O Gog of Meshech and Tubal , Tubal , Tubal , and Meshech and Tubal .
GOLD:	Give him this message from the Sovereign Lord : Gog , I am your enemy !

ID:	1691
INPUT:	▁A pai zak ▁ba ta ▁bar ka men - o pa ri tzat ▁e ta ▁bes te a ▁er re - o pa ri tzat ▁es kai ni ko ▁di tu ▁. ▁Ho ne la ▁, ▁ja ri o du na ren ▁al de ko ▁gar bi kun tza - o hi ku ne a ▁e gin go ▁du ▁Jau na ren ▁aur re an ▁.
PRED:	Then the priest must present the grain offering to the Lord and present it to the Lord . Through this process , the priest will purify the person before the Lord .
GOLD:	The priest will offer one bird for a sin offering and the other for a burnt offering . Through this process , the priest will purify the man before the Lord for his discharge .

ID:	1692
INPUT:	▁A ma sa ▁, ▁o do le tan ▁blai ▁, ▁bi de a ren ▁er di an ▁ze tzan ▁. ▁Jen de ▁guz ti a ▁gor pu a ren ▁on do an ▁gel di tzen ▁ze la ▁i kus te an ▁, ▁gu da ri ▁hark ▁bi de tik ▁ze lai ra ▁e ra man ▁e ta ▁oi ha lez ▁es ta li ▁zu en ▁A ma sa ▁; ▁bes te la ▁, ▁ha ren ▁on do ra ▁hel tzen ▁zi ren ▁guz ti ak ▁gel di tu ▁e gi ten ▁bai tzi ren ▁.
PRED:	When the crowd saw that they were sitting on the road , they were sitting on the road . But when they saw him , they were sitting on the road , they slipped away from the garden .
GOLD:	But Amasa lay in his blood in the middle of the road , and Joab 's man saw that everyone was stopping to stare at him . So he pulled him off the road into a field and threw a cloak over him .

ID:	1693
INPUT:	▁Hain ▁zen ▁i zu gar ri a ▁i kus ka ri a ▁, ▁non ▁Moi se sek ▁be rak ▁e re ▁ho ne la ▁bai tzi o en ▁: ▁Bel dur - i ka raz ▁na go ▁.
PRED:	When Moses saw this , he was afraid to see what he meant . He said , “ I 'm afraid ! ”
GOLD:	Moses himself was so frightened at the sight that he said , “ I am terrified and trembling . ”

ID:	1694
INPUT:	▁Be re a ▁du ▁i tsa so a ▁, ▁be rak ▁e gi na ▁, ▁e ta ▁le hor ra ▁, ▁be re ▁es kuz ▁mol da tu a ▁.
PRED:	He made the sea , and he covered the sea with his hand .
GOLD:	The sea belongs to him , for he made it.His hands formed the dry land , too .

ID:	1695
INPUT:	▁Jain ko ak ▁No e ri ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁se me ei ▁e san ▁zi en ▁, ▁gai ne ra ▁:
PRED:	Then Noah said to Noah and his sons ,
GOLD:	Then God told Noah and his sons ,

ID:	1696
INPUT:	▁Gi zon ▁hark ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁hi ti ten ▁lur ral de ra ▁jo an ▁e ta ▁hi ri ▁bat ▁e rai ki ▁zu en ▁; ▁Luz ▁i ze na ▁e man ▁zi on ▁e ta ▁ha la ▁de ri tza ▁gaur dai no ▁.
PRED:	But he went to the town of Bethel and called it to town of Jericho , which means “ town ” ) , and it is today .
GOLD:	Later the man moved to the land of the Hittites , where he built a town . He named it Luz , which is its name to this day .

ID:	1697
INPUT:	▁Je sus ▁zaz pi ▁i kas le ri ▁a ger tu
PRED:	Jesus Appears to His Disciples
GOLD:	Epilogue : Jesus Appears to Seven Disciples

ID:	1698
INPUT:	▁Ur re ▁gar biz ▁ur rez ta tu ▁zi tu en ▁bar ne ▁e ta ▁kan po al de ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁ur rez ko ▁he ga la ▁e zar ri ▁zi on ▁in gu ru ▁guz ti an ▁.
PRED:	He overlaid them with pure gold and overlaid them with gold . He placed them all around the edge of the altar .
GOLD:	He overlaid it inside and outside with pure gold , and he ran a molding of gold all around it .

ID:	1699
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁jen de tza ri ▁ja ten ▁e man
PRED:	Jesus Feeds Five Thousand
GOLD:	Jesus Feeds Five Thousand

ID:	1700
INPUT:	▁Ho ri ▁guz ti a ▁ja ki te an ▁, ▁a do re ga be tu rik ▁, ▁ar na sa ▁e re ▁gal du ta ▁gel di tu ▁ga ra ▁zu en ▁aur re an ▁. ▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁zu en ▁Jain ko a ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁da ▁goi an ▁ze ru an ▁e ta ▁be he an ▁lur re an ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ You must not eat or drink anything in the presence of the Lord your God , and you will remain in the heavens .
GOLD:	No wonder our hearts have melted in fear ! No one has the courage to fight after hearing such things . For the Lord your God is the supreme God of the heavens above and the earth below .

ID:	1701
INPUT:	▁A gur ▁be za te ▁a hus pez tu rik ▁er re ge ▁guz ti ek ▁, ▁jar ▁be kiz ki o ▁men pe an ▁na zi o ▁guz ti ak ▁!
PRED:	Let all the kings bowed low before him , and all who fear him .
GOLD:	All kings will bow before him , and all nations will serve him .

ID:	1702
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁Jo su e ren ga na ▁e ra man ▁zi tuz ten ▁. ▁Jo su ek ▁is ra el dar ▁guz ti ei ▁dei ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁gu du an ▁be ra re kin ▁i bi li ta ko ▁gu dal bu ru ei ▁a gin du ▁hau ▁e man ▁zi en ▁: ▁« ▁Hur bil ▁zai tez te ▁e ta ▁za pal du ▁er re ge ▁hau ei ▁le po a ▁» ▁. ▁Ha la xe ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	Then Joshua gave all the people to Joshua and all the people of Israel . He called them to the elders of Israel and told them , “ This is what the Lord has commanded us . ”
GOLD:	When they brought them out , Joshua told the commanders of his army , “ Come and put your feet on the kings ' necks. ” And they did as they were told .

ID:	1703
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁, ▁Ho reb ▁men di tik ▁aur re ra ▁, ▁ez ▁zu ten ▁is ra el dar rek ▁fes ta - jan tzi rik ▁e ra bi li ▁.
PRED:	So the people of Israel left Mount Sinai and camped at Mount Sinai .
GOLD:	So from the time they left Mount Sinai , the Israelites wore no more jewelry or fine clothes .

ID:	1704
INPUT:	▁Hi ru <unk> ta re a ko ▁ma has ti ak za ha gi ▁er di ▁bat ▁ar do ▁bes te ri kez ▁du ▁e man go ▁; ▁ha mar ▁a ne ga ▁ha zi ka ne ga ▁bat ▁a le ▁bes te rik ▁ez ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ A third of the vineyard will be brought to the vineyard . If a man has a vineyard , he must pay it back . ”
GOLD:	Ten acres of vineyard will not produce even six gallons of wine.Ten baskets of seed will yield only one basket of grain . ”

ID:	1705
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁, ▁a re a go ▁, ▁zu ▁ju du en ▁o hi tu ra ▁e ta ▁ez ta bai dak ▁on gi ▁e za gu tzen ▁di tu zu na ▁i za nik ▁. ▁En tzun ▁i e za da zu ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁o toi ▁, ▁e ro a pe nez ▁.
PRED:	And if you refuse to listen to me and refuse to listen to me and do n't listen to me . Do n't listen to me .
GOLD:	for I know you are an expert on all Jewish customs and controversies . Now please listen to me patiently !

ID:	1706
INPUT:	▁Zu lo a ▁da gi e na ▁ber tan ▁da ▁e ro ri ko ▁, ▁hor ma ▁bo ta tzen ▁du e na ri su ge ak ▁ziz ta ▁e gin go ▁.
PRED:	The seed that fell among you , and the kings of the world will be destroyed .
GOLD:	When you dig a well , you might fall in.When you demolish an old wall , you could be bitten by a snake .

ID:	1707
INPUT:	▁e ma gu zu ▁e gu ne an ▁e gu ne ko ▁o gi a ▁,
PRED:	Give us the bread we need .
GOLD:	Give us each day the food we need ,

ID:	1708
INPUT:	▁Man da tu ▁bat ▁e man ▁zi on ▁Je re mi as ▁pro fe tak ▁Ne ri a sen ▁se me ▁e ta ▁Mah sei a sen ▁bi lo ba ▁Se rai a si ▁, ▁Ju da ko ▁er re ge ▁Se de ki a sen ▁la gun tzai le a ri ▁, ▁er re ge a re kin ▁ba te ra ▁Ba bi lo ni a ra ▁jo an ▁ze ne an ▁. ▁Se de ki a sen ▁er re ge al di ko ▁lau gar ren ▁ur te a ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	So Jeremiah sent a message to Jeremiah from the prophet Jeremiah and his son Jeremiah . He went to the king of Judah and sent him back to King Zedekiah of Judah . He went to the second year of King Zedekiah 's reign .
GOLD:	The prophet Jeremiah gave this message to Seraiah son of Neriah and grandson of Mahseiah , a staff officer , when Seraiah went to Babylon with King Zedekiah of Judah . This was during the fourth year of Zedekiah 's reign .

ID:	1709
INPUT:	▁Jau na ri ▁a txi ki ▁zai on ▁a tzer ri tar ra kez ▁de za la ▁i no la ▁e re ▁e san ▁: ▁« ▁Be re ▁her ri tik ▁baz ter tu e gin ▁nau ▁Jau nak ▁» ▁.I ren du ak ▁e re ▁ez ▁de za la ▁e san ▁: ▁« ▁Zu haitz ▁i har tu a ▁bes te rik ▁ez ▁naiz ▁» ▁.
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses , “ Because you have abandoned me , I have abandoned you , ” says the Lord . “ You have not abandoned me , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Do n't let foreigners who commit themselves to the Lord say , ‘ The Lord will never let me be part of his people . 'And do n't let the eunuchs say , ‘ I 'm a dried-up tree with no children and no future . '

ID:	1710
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁al ▁da ki zu e ▁bi de ga be ek ▁ez ▁du te la ▁Jain ko a ren ▁er rei nu a ▁i ri tsi ko ▁? ▁Ez ▁en gai na ▁zeu en ▁bu ru ak ▁! ▁Li zu nek ▁, ▁sa si jain ko za le ek ▁, ▁a dul te ri o gi le ek ▁, ▁e ma ke ri a - za le ek ▁, ▁so do mi tek ▁,
PRED:	Do n't you realize that the Kingdom of Heaven is not the Kingdom of God ? Do n't you realize that you have deceived yourself by worshiping idols ? Do n't you worship idols ?
GOLD:	Do n't you realize that those who do wrong will not inherit the Kingdom of God ? Do n't fool yourselves . Those who indulge in sexual sin , or who worship idols , or commit adultery , or are male prostitutes , or practice homosexuality ,

ID:	1711
INPUT:	▁Bar ra bas ▁hau ▁, ▁hi ri an ▁ger ta tu ri ko ▁ma txi na da ▁e ta ▁gi za ▁hil ke ta ▁ba ten ga tik ▁kar tze lan ▁sar tu a ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	( This was a revolutionary , a man who had been arrested and murder . )
GOLD:	( Barabbas was in prison for taking part in an insurrection in Jerusalem against the government , and for murder . )

ID:	1712
INPUT:	▁Ni ri ▁gor ro to ▁di da nak ▁, ▁gor ro to ▁di o ▁ni re ▁Ai ta ri ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	My enemies hate me , and my Father is mine .
GOLD:	Anyone who hates me also hates my Father .

ID:	1713
INPUT:	▁Fes ta ra ko ▁pres ta ke tak ▁e gi te ko ▁e gu na ▁zen ▁e ta ▁la run ba ta ▁has te ra ▁zi ho an ▁.
PRED:	The rest of the events in Joash 's reign , and he was on duty on the Sabbath .
GOLD:	This was done late on Friday afternoon , the day of preparation , as the Sabbath was about to begin .

ID:	1714
INPUT:	▁Ge zi ek ▁ez ▁di o te ▁i hes ▁e ra gi ten ▁, ▁ha bai la - har ri ak ▁las to ▁bi hur tzen ▁zaiz ki o ▁.
PRED:	The nations flee from the Nile , but they are trapped by the wind .
GOLD:	Smoke streams from its nostrilslike steam from a pot heated over burning rushes .

ID:	1715
INPUT:	▁« ▁E pai le ak ▁e ta ▁fun tzi o na ri o ak ▁e zar ri ko ▁di tu zu e ▁lei nu e tan ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko ak ▁e man go ▁diz ki zu en ▁hi ri ▁ba koi tze an ▁, ▁her ri tar ren ▁au zi ak ▁zu zen bi dez ▁e ra ba ki ▁di tza ten ▁.
PRED:	“ Take your officials and your officials and all the tribes of Israel , and bring them to the towns the Lord your God is giving you .
GOLD:	“ Appoint judges and officials for yourselves from each of your tribes in all the towns the Lord your God is giving you . They must judge the people fairly .

ID:	1716
INPUT:	▁Zu ek ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁bes te ▁hau ▁di o zu e ▁: ▁Nor bai tek ▁ai ta ri ▁e do ▁a ma ri ▁e sa ten ▁ba di o ▁« ▁Zu ri ▁e man ▁be har ▁ni zu ke e na ▁“ ▁Kor ban ▁” ▁da ▁( ▁hau ▁da ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren tzat ▁o pa ri ▁) ▁» ▁,
PRED:	But you say , ‘ If your father is your mother , ' you say , ‘ Leave me alone , ' you must say , ‘ This is my God . ' ”
GOLD:	But you say it is all right for people to say to their parents , ‘ Sorry , I ca n't help you . For I have vowed to give to God what I would have given to you . '

ID:	1717
INPUT:	▁Go go an ▁har ▁, ▁Jau na ▁: ▁e tsai ak ▁i rain ▁e gi ten ▁di zu ▁, ▁her ri ▁bu ru ga be ak ▁zu re ▁i ze na ri ▁mes pre txu ▁.
PRED:	Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , for he has struck you with unfailing love .
GOLD:	See how these enemies insult you , Lord.A foolish nation has dishonored your name .

ID:	1718
INPUT:	▁ben ja min dar rak ▁, ▁e ta ▁in gu ra tu ▁, ▁per tse gi tu ▁e ta ▁Gi be a ren ▁e ki al de rai no ▁a tse de nik ▁e man ▁ga be ▁oin pe ra tu ▁zi tuz ten ▁.
PRED:	The men of Benjamin were very angry , and they were all filled with their feet .
GOLD:	The Israelites surrounded the men of Benjamin and chased them relentlessly , finally overtaking them east of Gibeah .

ID:	1719
INPUT:	▁Na tan ▁e ta ▁Be tsa be ▁Sa lo mo nen ▁al de
PRED:	Solomon 's Many Wives
GOLD:	David Makes Solomon King

ID:	1720
INPUT:	▁Li bu ru a ▁har tu ▁zu e ne an ▁, ▁lau ▁i za ki ak ▁e ta ▁ho gei ta ▁lau ▁za har rak ▁Bil do tsa ren ▁aur re an ▁a hus pez tu ▁zi ren ▁. ▁Zi ta ra ▁ba na ▁zu ten ▁e ta ▁in tsen tsuz ▁be te ri ko ▁ur rez ko ▁on tzi ak ▁, ▁Jain ko a re nak ▁di re nen ▁o toi tzen ▁a di e raz gar ri ▁.
PRED:	At that time the captain of the guard , the Lamb broke up the seven heads of the Lamb and the twenty-four elders , and they worshiped God .
GOLD:	And when he took the scroll , the four living beings and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb . Each one had a harp , and they held gold bowls filled with incense , which are the prayers of God 's people .

ID:	1721
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁ku tsa tu a ▁ze go e la ▁i ku si ▁nu en ▁, ▁bi ak ▁bi de ▁be re tik ▁ze bil tza la ▁.
PRED:	When I saw that the Ark was defiled , I saw that he was walking along the road .
GOLD:	I saw the way she was going , defiling herself just like her older sister .

ID:	1722
INPUT:	▁Jain ko ak ▁Le a ren ▁es ka ri a ▁a di tu ▁zu en ▁: ▁haur dun ▁ger ta tu ▁e ta ▁bos gar ren ▁se me a ▁e man ▁zi on ▁Ja ko bi ▁.
PRED:	Then Leah gave birth to a son , and she gave birth to a son . She named him Jacob .
GOLD:	And God answered Leah 's prayers . She became pregnant again and gave birth to a fifth son for Jacob .

ID:	1723
INPUT:	▁Hi tzal di ▁ho ne ta tik ▁zor tzi ren ▁bat ▁e gu ne ra ▁, ▁Ped ro ▁, ▁Jo an ▁e ta ▁San ti a go ▁be re kin ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁men di ra ▁i go ▁zen ▁Je sus ▁, ▁o toi tze ra ▁.
PRED:	On the third day Jesus was on the third day , James and John went up to the mountain .
GOLD:	About eight days later Jesus took Peter , John , and James up on a mountain to pray .

ID:	1724
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁e san ▁zi dan ▁: ▁« ▁Sar tu ▁e ta ▁i ku si ▁hau ek ▁he men ▁e gi ten ▁a ri ▁di ren ▁hi guin gar ri ta sun ▁i zu gar ri ak ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ When you see these things , you will see these detestable things and detestable sins . ”
GOLD:	“ Go in , ” he said , “ and see the wicked and detestable sins they are committing in there ! ”

ID:	1725
INPUT:	▁koi na tak ▁, ▁hur bil duz ▁, ▁san da li a ▁e ran tzi ko ▁di o ▁e ta ▁aur pe gi ra ▁lis tu a ▁bo ta ko ▁her ri - ar du ra du nen ▁aur re an ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁“ ▁Ha ra ▁zer ▁e gi ten ▁zai on ▁be re ▁a nai a ri ▁fa mi li a ▁e man ▁na hi ▁ez ▁di on ▁gi zo na ri ▁” ▁.
PRED:	He went to the sanctuary of the Holy Place and threw it into the Holy Place . He said to the elders , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will not allow you to do . '
GOLD:	the widow must walk over to him in the presence of the elders , pull his sandal from his foot , and spit in his face . Then she must declare , ‘ This is what happens to a man who refuses to provide his brother with children . '

ID:	1726
INPUT:	▁Bi ek ▁el kar ▁har tu rik ▁, ▁men de bal de ko ▁fi lis te ar rei a tze tik ▁e ra so ko ▁di e te ▁, ▁sor tal de ko ▁her ri ei a be ras ta su nak ▁ken du ko.E dom ▁e ta ▁Mo a ben ▁ja be ▁e gin go ▁di ra ▁, ▁e ta ▁a mon dar rak men pe ko ▁i zan go ▁di tuz te ▁.
PRED:	The whole community of Moab will rise up from the west of the sea , and the people of Moab will be destroyed . They will be destroyed by Edom , Edom , and Edom will be destroyed .
GOLD:	They will join forces to swoop down on Philistia to the west.Together they will attack and plunder the nations to the east.They will occupy the lands of Edom and Moab , and Ammon will obey them .

ID:	1727
INPUT:	▁ar giz ▁in gu ra tu a ▁soi ne koz ▁be za <unk> hal - e txo la ▁be za la ▁za bal tzen ▁du zu ▁ze ru a ▁,
PRED:	You spread out like a little yeast , like the Most High has spread out the heavens .
GOLD:	You are dressed in a robe of light.You stretch out the starry curtain of the heavens ;

ID:	1728
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁, ▁be re ▁a ma ▁e ta ▁ho nen ▁on do an ▁mai te ▁zu en ▁i kas le a ▁i ku si rik ▁, ▁e san ▁zi on ▁a ma ri ▁: ▁« ▁E ma ku me ▁, ▁hor ra ▁hor ▁zu re ▁se me a ▁» ▁.
PRED:	When Jesus saw this , he loved his disciples and said to him , “ She is my son , my mother . ”
GOLD:	When Jesus saw his mother standing there beside the disciple he loved , he said to her , “ Dear woman , here is your son . ”

ID:	1729
INPUT:	▁Ho na ▁Ja ko ben ▁se ni tar te a ren ▁his to ri a.Jo se ▁, ▁ha ma zaz pi ▁ur te ko ▁gaz te a ▁ze la rik ▁, ▁ar tzain tzan ▁ze bi len ▁be re ▁a nai e kin ▁, ▁be re ▁ai ta ren ▁e maz te ▁Bil ha ▁e ta ▁Zil pa ren ▁se me e kin ▁. ▁Jo sek ▁be re ▁a nai en ▁gaiz ta ke ri a ren ▁ber ri ▁e ma ten ▁zi on ▁ai ta ri ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ May your brother be born , O Lord , please give birth to his brother , Joseph , and his wife , Joseph , and his brother Joseph 's wife , the wife of Joseph .
GOLD:	This is the account of Jacob and his family . When Joseph was seventeen years old , he often tended his father 's flocks . He worked for his half brothers , the sons of his father 's wives Bilhah and Zilpah . But Joseph reported to his father some of the bad things his brothers were doing .

ID:	1730
INPUT:	▁Je ru sa le me ra ▁hur bil du ▁zi re ne an ▁, ▁O li a men di ▁in gu ru ko ▁Bet fa ge ▁e ta ▁Be ta ni a ▁her rix ke ta ra ▁i ri tsi rik ▁, ▁be re ▁i kas le e ta ko ▁bi ▁bi da li ▁zi tu en ▁Je su sek ▁,
PRED:	When they arrived at Jerusalem , Jesus went down to the villages of Galilee and villages near the town of Olives . He sent two disciples to the villages of Galilee and sent them away .
GOLD:	As Jesus and his disciples approached Jerusalem , they came to the towns of Bethphage and Bethany on the Mount of Olives . Jesus sent two of them on ahead .

ID:	1731
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁a di e ra zi ▁ni re ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jaun ▁ho nen ▁, ▁me zu a ▁: ▁E gon ▁di re ne ko ▁na zi o en ▁ar te tik ▁ba tu ko ▁di tut ▁is ra el dar rak ▁; ▁al de ▁guz ti e ta tik ▁bil du ▁e ta ▁be ren ▁lur ral de ra ▁e ra man go ▁di tut ▁.
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Sovereign Lord : I will bring them out of the land where I am going to bring them back to the land of Israel .
GOLD:	And give them this message from the Sovereign Lord : I will gather the people of Israel from among the nations . I will bring them home to their own land from the places where they have been scattered .

ID:	1732
INPUT:	▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du na Si on ▁men di an ▁, ▁Je ru sa le men ▁, ▁er re ge ▁i zan go ▁de ne an ▁, ▁i lar gi a ▁e ta ▁e guz ki a ez ku ta tu ▁e gin go ▁di ra ▁lo tsaz ▁, ▁hain ▁a zal du ko ▁bai ta ▁os pe tsu ▁, ▁be re ▁zer bi tza ri ez ▁in gu ra tu rik ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , says : The Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , will see his servants and his servants .
GOLD:	Then the glory of the moon will wane , and the brightness of the sun will fade , for the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will rule on Mount Zion.He will rule in great glory in Jerusalem , in the sight of all the leaders of his people .

ID:	1733
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁Je sus ▁mal tzur ke ri az ▁a txi lo tze a ▁e ta ▁hil tze a ▁e ra ba ki ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	They arrested Jesus and tried to kill him .
GOLD:	plotting how to capture Jesus secretly and kill him .

ID:	1734
INPUT:	▁E tor ri ▁den ▁bi de tik ▁i tzu li ko ▁da ▁; ▁ez ▁da ▁sar tu ko ▁hi ri ▁ho ne tan.Ha la ▁di ot ▁nik ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁.
PRED:	The Lord will return to his own country , but he will not enter this city .
GOLD:	The king will return to his own countryby the same road on which he came.He will not enter this city , says the Lord .

ID:	1735
INPUT:	▁ez kon du a ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁mun du ko ▁gau zez ▁, ▁be re ▁e maz te a ri ▁a tse gin ▁no la ▁e man go ▁,
PRED:	But if the world is married to the world , he will give his wife to the world .
GOLD:	But a married man has to think about his earthly responsibilities and how to please his wife .

ID:	1736
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁lur ral de ▁har tan ▁guz ti an ▁bar re na ▁jo an ▁zi ren ▁; ▁e ta ▁Je sus ▁non ▁, ▁ha ra xe ▁e ra ma ten ▁ziz ki o ten ▁gai xo ak ▁o ha ti le tan ▁.
PRED:	When they arrived in the land , they went to the village where they were staying . They were sick and sick .
GOLD:	and they ran throughout the whole area , carrying sick people on mats to wherever they heard he was .

ID:	1737
INPUT:	▁e do ▁e hu ne an ▁, ▁lar ru an ▁na hiz ▁e do zein ▁lar ru ki tan ▁man txa ▁a ger tzen ▁ba da ▁,
PRED:	So if the mildew has spread , clothing , or fabric or leather , or leather , or fabric , or leather , or leather .
GOLD:	woolen or linen fabric , the hide of an animal , or anything made of leather .

ID:	1738
INPUT:	▁I par ral de a ren ▁aur ka lu za tu ko ▁du ▁es ku a ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁A si ri a ▁e ra bat ▁gal du ko ▁du e ta ▁Ni ni ve ▁hon da men di ▁bi hur tu ko ▁, ▁ba sa mor tu a ▁be zain ▁gor ri ▁.
PRED:	The Lord will hand over the north side of the north , and the people of Assyria will become as numerous as the desert .
GOLD:	And the Lord will strike the lands of the north with his fist , destroying the land of Assyria.He will make its great capital , Nineveh , a desolate wasteland , parched like a desert .

ID:	1739
INPUT:	▁E li me lek ▁e ta ▁be re ▁fa mi li a ▁Mo a ben
PRED:	Elisha 's Family Arrives in Moab
GOLD:	Elimelech Moves His Family to Moab

ID:	1740
INPUT:	▁I kus ten ▁a ri ▁ga ra ▁Jain ko ak ▁be re ▁ha ser re a ▁a ger tzen ▁du e la ▁gi zon - e ma ku me ▁guz ti en ▁gain ▁ze ru tik ▁, ▁si nes ga be ▁e ta ▁zu zen ga be ▁di re la ko ▁, ▁e ta ▁be ren ▁zu zen ga be ke ri az ▁e gi a ▁i to ▁e gin ▁du te la ko ▁.
PRED:	For he is very angry with God 's fierce anger . He sits on every human race , and he does n't believe it . He has done what is right , and he has done .
GOLD:	But God shows his anger from heaven against all sinful , wicked people who suppress the truth by their wickedness .

ID:	1741
INPUT:	▁Bat - ba te an ▁, ▁lur ri ka ra ▁go gor ra ▁ger ta tu ▁zen ▁: ▁Jau na ren ▁ain ge ru a ▁jai tsi ▁zen ▁ze ru tik ▁e ta ▁, ▁hur bil du rik ▁, ▁har ri a ▁bi ra tu ▁zu en ▁e ta ▁gai ne an ▁e se ri ▁.
PRED:	Suddenly , the angel of the Lord struck down the earth and struck down the angel of the Lord 's presence , and he sat down on the ground .
GOLD:	Suddenly there was a great earthquake ! For an angel of the Lord came down from heaven , rolled aside the stone , and sat on it .

ID:	1742
INPUT:	▁E lik ▁El ka na ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁e maz te a ▁be dein ka tu ▁e ta ▁e san ▁o hi ▁zu en ▁: ▁« ▁E man ▁bi e za zu ▁Jau nak ▁se me - a la ba rik ▁e ma ku me ▁ho nen gan dik ▁, ▁Jau na ri ▁es kai ni ta ko a ren ▁or dez ▁» ▁.On do ren ▁, ▁be ren ▁her ri ra ▁i tzu li ▁o hi ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	Then cut off his wife and said to his wife , “ May the Lord give you the inheritance he has promised to give to the children of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Before they returned home , Eli would bless Elkanah and his wife and say , “ May the Lord give you other children to take the place of this one she gave to the Lord . ”

ID:	1743
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁ez ▁: ▁on gi a ▁gor ro to e ta ▁gaiz ki a ▁mai te ▁du zu <unk> ru a ▁ken tzen ▁di o zu e ▁jen de a ri ▁, ▁e ta ▁he zur ▁hu tse tan ▁uz ten ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But do n't hate those who hate you , but do n't let those who hate you . ”
GOLD:	but you are the very oneswho hate good and love evil.You skin my people aliveand tear the flesh from their bones .

ID:	1744
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Sau lek ▁e san ▁zi en ▁be re kin ▁zi tu e nei ▁: ▁— ▁Be gi ra tu ▁e ta ▁i ku si ▁nor ▁jo an ▁den ▁gu re ▁ar te <unk> gi ra tu ▁zu ten ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁e ta ▁Jo na tan ▁e ta ▁ez ku ta ri a ▁fal ta ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	Then Saul told his men , “ Let 's go with those who see him ! ” So Saul told them , “ Let 's get out ! ”
GOLD:	“ Call the roll and find out who 's missing , ” Saul ordered . And when they checked , they found that Jonathan and his armor bearer were gone .

ID:	1745
INPUT:	▁Jau na ▁, ▁zuk ▁sar ra raz ten ▁du zu ▁zeu re ▁her ri a e ta ▁zeu re ▁men di an ▁lan da tzen ▁, ▁zeu re ▁on da re an ▁, ▁zeu re ▁e goi tza ▁e gin ▁du zun ▁le ku an ▁, ▁zeu re ▁es kuz ▁e rai ki ▁du zun san tu te gi an ▁.
PRED:	You enter the presence of the Lord your God and your people , your special possession , and build your hand on top of the mountain .
GOLD:	You will bring them in and plant them on your own mountain — the place , O Lord , reserved for your own dwelling , the sanctuary , O Lord , that your hands have established .

ID:	1746
INPUT:	▁Is ra el dar rak ▁kan pa le ku ▁in gu ru an ▁nor ▁be re ▁to ki an ▁zeu de la rik ▁, ▁kan pa le ku ko ak ▁las ter ka ▁, ▁gar ra si ka ▁e ta ▁i hes ka ▁ha si ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	When the Israelite army saw that the camp were camped outside the camp , they fled to the camp .
GOLD:	Each man stood at his position around the camp and watched as all the Midianites rushed around in a panic , shouting as they ran to escape .

ID:	1747
INPUT:	▁Lan ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁o gi a ▁i ra ba zi
PRED:	A Song of Deliverance
GOLD:	An Exhortation to Proper Living

ID:	1748
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁za bal du ko ▁diz ki o ▁mu tur re ko ▁bi ▁a te ak ▁, ▁ha gin ▁bel dur gar riz ▁in gu ra tu rik ▁di tu e nak ▁?
PRED:	Who will praise him ? Who will sing his praises to him ?
GOLD:	Will merchants try to buy itto sell it in their shops ?

ID:	1749
INPUT:	▁Ba ru kek ▁Jau na ren ▁me zu ak ▁tenplu an ▁i ra kur ri
PRED:	The Lord 's Glory Returns
GOLD:	Baruch Reads the Lord 's Messages

ID:	1750
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ▁ba da ▁, ▁e ne ▁se ni de ok ▁, ▁zu ek ▁e re ▁hil ▁zen ▁Kris to ren ▁gor pu tze ko ▁e gi nak ▁i zan ▁za re te nez ▁ge ro ▁, ▁le ge a ren tzat ▁hil da ▁zau de te ▁, ▁e ta ▁bes te ▁ba te nak ▁za re te ▁ja da nik ▁— ▁hil da ko en ▁ar te tik ▁piz tu ▁ze na re nak ▁, ▁a le gi a ▁— ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren tzat ▁frui tu ▁o nak ▁e ma te ko ▁.
PRED:	So now , dear brothers and sisters , we will die in the body of Christ . If you have died , you will die for the dead if you have been raised from the dead , you will eat the fruit of the dead .
GOLD:	So , my dear brothers and sisters , this is the point : You died to the power of the law when you died with Christ . And now you are united with the one who was raised from the dead . As a result , we can produce a harvest of good deeds for God .

ID:	1751
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁o rain ▁zer ▁? ▁E tsai ▁bi hur tu ▁o te ▁na tzai zu e ▁e gi a ▁e san ▁di zu e da la ko ▁?
PRED:	And now , what can I tell you about your enemy ?
GOLD:	Have I now become your enemy because I am telling you the truth ?

ID:	1752
INPUT:	▁E ma ku me a ri ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁« ▁Haur dun ▁gel di tze an ▁, ▁oi na ze ak ▁u gal du ko ▁diz ki zu te ta ▁sa mi nez ▁i zan go ▁di tu zu ▁haur rak ▁; ▁ir ri tsak ▁se nar ra ren ga na bul tza tu ko ▁zai tu ▁, ▁e ta ▁hu ra ▁i zan go ▁du zu ▁na gu si ▁» ▁.
PRED:	She said to her , “ Your name will be a prostitute , and you will be a prostitute , and you will be rejected by the name of the prince . ”
GOLD:	Then he said to the woman , “ I will sharpen the pain of your pregnancy , and in pain you will give birth.And you will desire to control your husband , but he will rule over you . ”

ID:	1753
INPUT:	▁Txa lu pa ra ▁i go ▁zi tzai en ▁, ▁e ta ▁hai ze a ▁ba re tu ▁e gin ▁zen ▁. ▁A re ▁har ri tu a go ▁gel di tu ▁zi ren ▁,
PRED:	When they climbed into the boat , they stopped , and the wind stopped .
GOLD:	Then he climbed into the boat , and the wind stopped . They were totally amazed ,

ID:	1754
INPUT:	▁Han dik ▁, ▁Atz mon dik ▁i ga roz ▁, ▁E gip to ko ▁er re ka ra ▁hel tzen ▁zen ▁e ta ▁Me di ter ra ne o ▁i tsa so an ▁a mai tzen ▁. ▁Hau ▁zen ▁Ju da ren ▁lei nu a ren ▁he go al de ko ▁mu ga ▁.
PRED:	From From the boundary extended from the Brook of Egypt to the Mediterranean Sea . This is the homeland allocated to the clans of Judah .
GOLD:	From there it passed to Azmon until it finally reached the Brook of Egypt , which it followed to the Mediterranean Sea . This was their southern boundary .

ID:	1755
INPUT:	▁He gaz ti e ta ko ▁bat ▁i tur bu ru ko ▁u ra ▁dau kan ▁buz ti nez ko ▁on tzi ▁ba ten ▁gai ne an ▁hi la ra zi ko ▁du ▁.
PRED:	He will take some of the birds of the clay pot on clay side .
GOLD:	The priest will order that one bird be slaughtered over a clay pot filled with fresh water .

ID:	1756
INPUT:	▁Bron tzez ko ▁a te ak ▁pus ka tu ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁bur di naz ko ▁mor roi lo ak ▁a pur tu ▁.
PRED:	He made two bronze bronze basins , and the bolts of iron .
GOLD:	For he broke down their prison gates of bronze ; he cut apart their bars of iron .

ID:	1757
INPUT:	▁Sa lo mo nek ▁be re ▁jau re gi a ▁e re ▁e rai ki ▁zu en ▁. ▁Ha ma hi ru ▁ur te ▁be har ▁i zan ▁zi tu en ▁e ra bat ▁bu ka tze ko ▁.
PRED:	Solomon built an idol for the king 's palace . He also tore his head in sorrow .
GOLD:	Solomon also built a palace for himself , and it took him thirteen years to complete the construction .

ID:	1758
INPUT:	▁Ab ram ▁E gip to ra ▁hel du ▁be zain ▁las ter ▁, ▁i ku si ▁zu ten ▁e gip to ar rek ▁o so ▁e der ra ▁ze la ▁ha ren ▁e maz te a ▁.
PRED:	When Abram saw that Abram was coming out of Egypt , he saw that his wife was very beautiful .
GOLD:	And sure enough , when Abram arrived in Egypt , everyone noticed Sarai 's beauty .

ID:	1759
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁ha mai ka gar ren ▁ur te ko <unk> ▁hi le an ▁, ▁hots ▁, ▁zor tzi gar ren ▁hi la be te an ▁bu ka tu ▁zu ten ▁o so - o so rik ▁, ▁e gi ta mu ▁guz ti en ▁a ra be ra ▁. ▁Be raz ▁, ▁zaz pi ▁ur te tan ▁e rai ki ▁zu en ▁tenplu a ▁Sa lo mo nek ▁.
PRED:	At the end of the ninth year of King Solomon 's reign , King Solomon 's reign , and everything he had done . He was dedicated to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	The entire building was completed in every detail by midautumn , in the month of Bul , during the eleventh year of his reign . So it took seven years to build the Temple .

ID:	1760
INPUT:	▁Je ri kon ▁ze go en ▁pro fe ta - tal de a ▁E li se o ren ga na ▁hur bil du ▁e ta ▁ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai on ▁: ▁— ▁Ba ▁al ▁da ki zu ▁gaur ▁mai su a ▁ai re an ▁e ra man go ▁di zu la ▁Jau nak ▁? ▁E li se ok ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁Bai ▁, ▁ba da kit ▁, ▁bai na ▁e gon ▁i si lik ▁!
PRED:	When Jehu arrived at the time of Elijah , Elisha said to Elijah , “ Do you know that I am the Lord ? ” “ Yes , ” he said . “ I am the Lord , but you are still alive ! ”
GOLD:	Then the group of prophets from Jericho came to Elisha and asked him , “ Did you know that the Lord is going to take your master away from you today ? ” “ Of course I know , ” Elisha answered . “ But be quiet about it . ”

ID:	1761
INPUT:	▁Mor roi ak ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁Ez ▁na za zu e ▁a tze ra ra zi ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁ni re ▁bi dai a ri ▁bu ka e ra ▁o na ▁e man ▁di o nez ▁ge ro ▁. ▁Uz ta zu e ▁neu re ▁na gu si a ga na ▁i tzul tzen ▁.
PRED:	But the servant said , “ Do n't let me return to me , for the Lord has given me your master . He has given me your master , and I will return to you . ”
GOLD:	But he said , “ Do n't delay me . The Lord has made my mission successful ; now send me back so I can return to my master . ”

ID:	1762
INPUT:	▁Bai ▁zo ra gar ri a ▁zu re ▁mai ta su na ▁, ▁oi ▁Jain ko ▁! ▁Zu re ▁he gal pe ra ▁bil tzen ▁di ra ▁gi za ki ak ▁.
PRED:	Your unfailing love is full of joy , O God , and the wings of your wings .
GOLD:	You feed them from the abundance of your own house , letting them drink from your river of delights .

ID:	1763
INPUT:	▁San tu te gi ra ko ▁o li bon do - zu rez ko ▁he gal dun ▁i za ki ▁bi ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁bos na ▁me tro ▁lu ze ko ak ▁.
PRED:	He also made two olive wood for the Most Holy Place . He overlaid them with pure gold .
GOLD:	He made two cherubim of wild olive wood , each 15 feet tall , and placed them in the inner sanctuary .

ID:	1764
INPUT:	▁Gaiz to ak ▁ez ▁du ▁o nik ▁i zan go e ta ▁ez ▁du ▁be re ▁bi zi a ▁lu za tu koi tzal ▁bat ▁a di na ▁, ▁ez ▁bai ti o ▁be gi ru ne rik ▁Jain ko a ri ▁» ▁.
PRED:	The wicked will never be allowed to live in their own eyes , but they will have no relief . ”
GOLD:	The wicked will not prosper , for they do not fear God . Their days will never grow long like the evening shadows .

ID:	1765
INPUT:	▁Zin tzo ak ▁bi zi tza ▁poz gar ri a ▁es pe ro ▁du ▁, ▁gaiz to a ren ▁i txa ro pe nak ▁por rot ▁e gi ten ▁.
PRED:	The godly are full of joy , but the hopes of the wicked are crushed .
GOLD:	The hopes of the godly result in happiness , but the expectations of the wicked come to nothing .

ID:	1766
INPUT:	▁I tsu ok ▁ha la ko ok ▁! ▁Zer ▁da ▁han di a go ▁: ▁o pa ri a ▁a la ▁o pa ri a ▁sa ga ra tzen ▁du en ▁al da re a ▁?
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you ! What sorrow awaits those who offer sacrifices to the altar ?
GOLD:	How blind ! For which is more important — the gift on the altar or the altar that makes the gift sacred ?

ID:	1767
INPUT:	▁An tzal da ke ta ▁: ▁ne kal di ▁os te ko ▁ain tza ▁aur rez ▁a ger tu
PRED:	Jesus Appears to Antioch of Syria
GOLD:	The Transfiguration

ID:	1768
INPUT:	▁na hi a go ▁i zan ▁zu en ▁Jain ko a ren ▁her ri a re kin ▁ba te ra ▁tra tu ▁txar rak ▁ja san ▁, ▁be ka tu a ren ▁a tse gin ▁i ra gan kor rak ▁go za tu ▁bai no ▁.
PRED:	If you think of God 's people , you will be better than to suffer for the sins of their sins .
GOLD:	He chose to share the oppression of God 's people instead of enjoying the fleeting pleasures of sin .

ID:	1769
INPUT:	▁Zaz pi gar ren ▁ain ge ru ak ▁ai re an ▁i su ri ▁zu en ▁be re ▁on tzi a ▁, ▁e ta ▁ze ru ko ▁tenplu ko ▁tro nu tik ▁a hots ▁han di a ▁a te ra ▁zen ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁« ▁E gi na ▁da go ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then the angel of the second angel poured out his bowl on his throne , and he said , “ The glory of the Lord is coming ! ”
GOLD:	Then the seventh angel poured out his bowl into the air . And a mighty shout came from the throne in the Temple , saying , “ It is finished ! ”

ID:	1770
INPUT:	▁zeu re ▁e tsai ak ▁oi naz pi an ▁jar tzen ▁diz ki zu dan ▁bi tar te an ▁” ▁.
PRED:	Your enemies surround me with your unfailing love . '
GOLD:	until I humble your enemies , making them a footstool under your feet . '

ID:	1771
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁Es pi ri tu ▁San tu a ▁jai tsi ▁zi tzai on ▁gai ne ra ▁, ▁u so - tan ke ran ▁a ger tuz ▁. ▁E ta ▁min tzo ▁hau ▁e tor ri ▁zen ▁ze ru tik ▁: ▁« ▁Zu ▁zai tut ▁neu re ▁Se me a ▁, ▁neu re ▁mai te a ▁, ▁zu ▁zai tut ▁a tse gin ▁» ▁.
PRED:	When the Holy Spirit came down on him , the Holy Spirit appeared to him . “ This is my dearly loved Son , ” he said , “ I have loved you , my dear Son . ”
GOLD:	and the Holy Spirit , in bodily form , descended on him like a dove . And a voice from heaven said , “ You are my dearly loved Son , and you bring me great joy . ”

ID:	1772
INPUT:	▁O so ▁za har ra ▁zen ▁E li ▁. ▁Ja kin ▁zu en ▁be re ▁se me ek ▁is ra el dar ▁guz ti ei ▁e gin ▁o hi ▁zi e te na ▁, ▁bai ta ▁Jau na ren ▁el kar ke ta - e txo la ren ▁sar re ran ▁zer bi tzu a ▁e gi ten ▁zu ten ▁e ma ku me e kin ▁e tzan ▁o hi ▁zi re la ▁e re ▁,
PRED:	So Jacob and his sons and all the people of Israel went out to the Tabernacle . They were eager to enter the Tabernacle of the Lord 's Tabernacle , and they served the Lord .
GOLD:	Now Eli was very old , but he was aware of what his sons were doing to the people of Israel . He knew , for instance , that his sons were seducing the young women who assisted at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	1773
INPUT:	▁Ar ro pa ▁sak ra tuz ▁jan tzi ko ▁du zu ▁A a ron ▁e ta ▁, ▁gai ne ra ▁o li o a ▁i su riz ▁, ▁ni re ▁a paiz - zer bi tzu ra ko ▁sa ga ra tu ko ▁.
PRED:	You must present the sacred garments for Aaron and his sons , and present them to Aaron .
GOLD:	Dress Aaron with the sacred garments and anoint him , consecrating him to serve me as a priest .

ID:	1774
INPUT:	▁E ma gu zu ▁la gun tza ▁e tsai en ▁kon tra ▁, ▁gi za ▁la gun tza ▁al fer rik ▁bai ta ▁.
PRED:	Let us fight against us , for we are our enemies .
GOLD:	With God 's help we will do mighty things , for he will trample down our foes .

ID:	1775
INPUT:	▁bes te la ▁, ▁en tzun ▁ni ri ▁; ▁zu ▁i si lik ▁e gon ▁, ▁e ta ▁ja kin du ri a ▁i ra ka tsi ko ▁di zut ▁» ▁.
PRED:	When I heard that you were silent , I 'll tell you the truth . ”
GOLD:	But if not , then listen to me.Keep silent and I will teach you wisdom ! ”

ID:	1776
INPUT:	▁Na hiz ▁ar gi a ren ▁sor le ku rantz ▁he gal da tu ▁, ▁na hiz ▁men de bal de ko ▁i tsas ▁mu ge tan ▁ko ka tu ▁,
PRED:	“ If you turn toward the sea , the boundary of the sea , the boundary of the sea ,
GOLD:	If I ride the wings of the morning , if I dwell by the farthest oceans ,

ID:	1777
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁hai ek ▁e re ▁jo an ▁e gin ▁zi <unk> ▁« ▁A te ra ▁zen ▁ber ri ro ▁ha ma bi ak ▁al de ra ▁e ta ▁hi ru rak ▁al de ra ▁, ▁e ta ▁gau za ▁be ra ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	Then the men went out and told them , “ Your mother is going out to spend the night .
GOLD:	So they went to work in the vineyard . At noon and again at three o'clock he did the same thing .

ID:	1778
INPUT:	▁Da vid ▁hi ri - sar re ra ko ▁bi ▁a te en ▁ar te an ▁ze go en ▁e se ri a ▁. ▁A te ▁gai ne ko ▁so lai ru ra ▁i go a ▁ze go en ▁zain tzai le ak ▁be gi ak ▁ja so ▁e ta ▁gi zon ▁bat ▁ba kar rik ▁las ter ka ▁ze tor re la ▁i ku si ▁zu en ▁,
PRED:	David went out to meet David , and he was sitting on the gate of the field . He saw that a man was coming to meet him , and he saw a man coming to see him .
GOLD:	While David was sitting between the inner and outer gates of the town , the watchman climbed to the roof of the gateway by the wall . As he looked , he saw a lone man running toward them .

ID:	1779
INPUT:	▁Je sus ▁E <unk> ko ▁i kas le ei ▁a ger tu
PRED:	The True Family of Jesus
GOLD:	The Resurrection

ID:	1780
INPUT:	▁Zu ek ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁ja tor ri ▁au ke ra tu za re te ▁, ▁er re ge - a paiz go ▁, ▁na zi o ▁sa ga ra tu ▁, ▁Jain ko ak ▁be re tzat ▁i ra ba zi ta ko ▁her ri ▁, ▁i lun pe ta tik ▁be re ▁ar gi ▁zo ra gar ri ra ▁dei tu ▁zai tuz ten ▁Jain ko a ren ▁e gin tza ▁bi kai nak ▁i ra gar ▁di tza zu en ▁.
PRED:	But you will know that the priesthood is a high priest , the high priest , who is holy by the Lord , the God of Israel , has chosen you to live in darkness .
GOLD:	But you are not like that , for you are a chosen people . You are royal priests , a holy nation , God 's very own possession . As a result , you can show others the goodness of God , for he called you out of the darkness into his wonderful light .

ID:	1781
INPUT:	▁Ho nen ▁bi tar tez ga ra ▁oi nor de ko ▁gu ▁e re ▁, ▁le hen dik ▁Me si a sen ga ni txa ro pen ▁ge nu e nok ▁, ▁gau za ▁guz ti ak ▁be rak ▁na hi ▁be za la e gi ten ▁di tu en ▁Jain ko a kaur rez ▁au ke ra tu ▁bai kai tu be re ▁as mo a ren ▁a ra be ra ▁, ▁be re ▁ain tza ren ▁go res pen - kan tui zan ▁gai te zen ▁.
PRED:	This is the inheritance of our brothers and sisters , who gives us the inheritance of our master . May God be our inheritance , who gives us grace of our God .
GOLD:	Furthermore , because we are united with Christ , we have received an inheritance from God , for he chose us in advance , and he makes everything work out according to his plan .

ID:	1782
INPUT:	▁La ba nek ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁En tzun ▁, ▁me se dez ▁. ▁Goi - ar giz ▁ja kin ▁dut ▁zu ri ▁es ker ▁be dein ka tu ▁nau e la ▁Jau nak ▁.
PRED:	“ Listen to me , ” Laban told him . “ I 've heard that I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ Please listen to me , ” Laban replied . “ I have become wealthy , for the Lord has blessed me because of you .

ID:	1783
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁a pai za ▁sei e hun ▁gi zon ▁ar ma tu ▁hai e kin ▁e txe - a ta ri an ▁ze go en ▁bi tar te an ▁, ▁lur ral de a ▁i ker tu a ▁zu ten ▁bost ▁gi zon ▁hai ek ▁e txe an ▁sar tu ▁e ta ▁i do lo a ▁, ▁e fo da ▁, ▁e txe - jain ko en ▁i ru di ak ▁e ta ▁me tal ▁ur tuz ko ▁i ru di a ▁har tu ▁zi tuz ten ▁.
PRED:	Then he took 600 men from the Temple of the Lord , who was with them . He took five men into two groups of silver and gold . Then he took them into the ephod and placed them in the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	the five scouts entered the shrine and removed the carved image , the sacred ephod , the household idols , and the cast idol . Meanwhile , the priest was standing at the gate with the 600 armed warriors .

ID:	1784
INPUT:	▁Lai no a ▁e goi tza ren ▁gai ne an
PRED:	The cloud of the Tabernacle
GOLD:	The Fiery Cloud

ID:	1785
INPUT:	▁E ki al de tik ▁dei ▁e gin ▁di ot ▁gi zon ▁ba ti ▁, ▁ur ru ti ko ▁her ri al de tik ▁: ▁he gaz ti ▁har ra pa ri a ren ▁an tze ra ▁e tor ri e ta ▁ni re ▁e gi tas mo a ▁be te ko <unk> la ▁e san ▁dut ▁e ta ▁ha la ▁ger ta ra zi ko ▁, ▁ha la ▁e ra ba ki ▁e ta ▁ha la ▁e gin go ▁.
PRED:	So I called them out of the east gateway to the south , and they will be like a bird . They will fade away like a bird , and they will tell him what it means .
GOLD:	I will call a swift bird of prey from the east — a leader from a distant land to come and do my bidding.I have said what I would do , and I will do it .

ID:	1786
INPUT:	▁Bai ▁den bo ra ▁gu txi ko ▁i zan ▁de la zu re ▁her ri ▁san tu a ▁lur ral de a ren ▁ja be ▁! ▁Pro fa na tu a ▁du te ▁e tsai ek zu re ▁san tu te gi a ▁.
PRED:	But you will be your own people , and you will possess the holy land .
GOLD:	How briefly your holy people possessed your holy place , and now our enemies have destroyed it .

ID:	1787
INPUT:	▁Ju da ko ▁er rei nu an ▁bi zi rik ▁gel di tu ak ▁, ▁lur re an ▁sus trai ak ▁bo ta tze ne ta ▁a dar re tan ▁frui tu a ke ma ten ▁di tuz ten zu haitz ▁i zan go ▁di ra ▁ber ri ro ▁.
PRED:	You will live in the towns of Judah , and its roots will grow down on the trees of the trees .
GOLD:	And you who are left in Judah , who have escaped the ravages of the siege , will put roots down in your own soiland grow up and flourish .

ID:	1788
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁be har tsu ak ▁be ti ▁di tu zu e ▁zeu en ▁ar te an ▁, ▁e ta ▁na hi ▁du zu e ne an ▁e gin ▁di e zai e ke zu e ▁on ▁. ▁Bai na ▁ni ▁ez ▁nau zu e ▁be ti ko ▁zu e kin ▁.
PRED:	You must always be poor and needy among you . But you must always do whatever you do . But you do n't know me .
GOLD:	You will always have the poor among you , and you can help them whenever you want to . But you will not always have me .

ID:	1789
INPUT:	▁Ha la ▁e re ▁, ▁ba du zu ▁gau za ▁o nik ▁: ▁gu re ▁lur ral de an ▁zeu den ▁zu toin ▁sak ra tu ak ▁er re ▁e ta ▁Jau na ren ga na ▁jo tzen ▁sai a tu ▁i za na ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But if you do not obey the commands of the Lord your God and turn to the Asherah pole . ”
GOLD:	Even so , there is some good in you , for you have removed the Asherah poles throughout the land , and you have committed yourself to seeking God . ”

ID:	1790
INPUT:	▁Er re ge - a la bak ▁di tu zu ▁in gu ru an ▁, ▁zu re ▁es kui ne an ▁er re gi na ▁, ▁ur re ▁fi nez ▁a pain du rik ▁.
PRED:	Your children are as secure as the king ; your right hand is clothed in gold .
GOLD:	Listen to me , O royal daughter ; take to heart what I say.Forget your people and your family far away .

ID:	1791
INPUT:	▁Ma hai a ▁e ra ma te ko ▁ha gak ▁a ka zi a - zu rez ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁e ta ▁ur rez ta tu ▁.
PRED:	He made poles from acacia wood and overlaid them with gold .
GOLD:	He made these poles from acacia wood and overlaid them with gold .

ID:	1792
INPUT:	▁Ba kez ko ▁ga rai a
PRED:	The Lord 's Love for Israel
GOLD:	A Branch from David 's Line

ID:	1793
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁a te ra ▁zen ▁gu da ros te a ▁ze lai ra ▁, ▁is ra el dar rei ▁aur re ▁e gi te ra ▁. ▁Ef raim go ▁oi ha ne an ▁e kin ▁zi o ten ▁gu du a ri ▁.
PRED:	So the army of Israel went out to fight against Israel , and they camped at Ephraim .
GOLD:	So the battle began in the forest of Ephraim ,

ID:	1794
INPUT:	▁Moi se sen ▁le ge a ▁e za gu tzen ▁ez ▁du te ne kin ▁, ▁le ge a ▁kon tu an ▁har tu ▁ga be ▁bi zi ▁i zan ▁naiz ▁, ▁le ge a ▁e za gu tzen ▁ez ▁du te nak ▁i ra baz te ko ▁; ▁ez ▁, ▁nos ki ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁le ge rik ▁o nar tzen ▁ez ▁du da la ko ▁, ▁ni re ▁le ge a ▁Kris to ▁bai ta ▁.
PRED:	We do not obey the law of Moses . If we obey the law of Moses , I am not with the law of God , I am not with the law of God . It is not the law of Christ .
GOLD:	When I am with the Gentiles who do not follow the Jewish law , I too live apart from that law so I can bring them to Christ . But I do not ignore the law of God ; I obey the law of Christ .

ID:	1795
INPUT:	▁ur ▁gai ne an ▁i bil tzen ▁i ku si ▁zu ten ▁e ta ▁, ▁ma mu a ▁ze la ko an ▁, ▁oi hu ka ▁ha si ▁zi ren ▁;
PRED:	When they saw that they were walking on the water , they cried out to him .
GOLD:	but when they saw him walking on the water , they cried out in terror , thinking he was a ghost .

ID:	1796
INPUT:	▁ho ne la ▁, ▁Ba al - Pe or ren ▁kul tu e ta ra ▁ma kur tu ▁zen ▁her ri a ▁e ta ▁Jau na ren ▁ha ser re - su a ▁piz tu ▁zen ▁Is ra e len ▁aur ka ▁.
PRED:	As they arrived , they worshiped the Lord , and he was very angry with the people of Israel .
GOLD:	In this way , Israel joined in the worship of Baal of Peor , causing the Lord 's anger to blaze against his people .

ID:	1797
INPUT:	▁Gaiz to a ren ▁pa tu ▁i ka ra gar ri a
PRED:	Parable of the Righteous God
GOLD:	Bildad 's Second Response to Job

ID:	1798
INPUT:	▁Da vid ▁Je ru sa lem dik ▁i he si
PRED:	David 's Rebellion
GOLD:	David Escapes from Jerusalem

ID:	1799
INPUT:	▁E li a sek ▁, ▁ber ri ro ▁, ▁E li se o ri ▁: ▁— ▁Gel di tu ▁he men ▁; ▁Jau nak ▁ni ▁Jor da ne ra ▁bi dal tzen <unk> li se ok ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁A la ▁Jau na ▁, ▁a la ▁zu ▁! ▁Ez ▁zai tut ▁ba kar rik ▁u tzi ko.E ta ▁bi ak ▁jo an ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	Elisha said to Elijah , “ Stay here ! Stay here , ” Elijah replied . “ The Lord has sent you out of the Jordan River , but you are not going . ”
GOLD:	Then Elijah said to Elisha , “ Stay here , for the Lord has told me to go to the Jordan River. ” But again Elisha replied , “ As surely as the Lord lives and you yourself live , I will never leave you. ” So they went on together .

ID:	1800
INPUT:	▁Jau na ▁u tzi ▁e ta ▁jain ko ▁ar ro tzak ▁zer bi tza tzen ▁ba di tu zu e ▁, ▁kon tra ▁jar ri ko ▁zai zu e ▁e ta ▁, ▁hain bes te ▁on ▁e gin ▁on do ren ▁, ▁gaiz ki ▁e ra bi li ko ▁zai tuz te ▁e ta ▁sun tsi tu ko ▁.
PRED:	If you turn away from the Lord your God and serve you , you will be careful to obey all the evil things you have done .
GOLD:	If you abandon the Lord and serve other gods , he will turn against you and destroy you , even though he has been so good to you . ”

ID:	1801
INPUT:	▁Jain ko a ▁gi za di ▁o so a ren ▁sal ba tzai le
PRED:	God 's Anger at Sin
GOLD:	Salvation Is for Everyone

ID:	1802
INPUT:	▁Ai tzi tik ▁, ▁dei ▁e gin ▁di zu en ▁Jain ko a ▁san tu ▁den ▁be za la ▁, ▁i zan ▁zu ek ▁e re ▁san tu ▁zeu en ▁bi zi e ra ▁guz ti an ▁.
PRED:	Instead , you are calling out of your holy sanctuary , just as you live .
GOLD:	But now you must be holy in everything you do , just as God who chose you is holy .

ID:	1803
INPUT:	▁Ni ni ve tar rek ▁e re ▁au zi - e gu ne an ▁gi zal di ▁ho nen ▁kon tra ▁al txa tu ▁e ta ▁kon de na tu ▁e gin go ▁du te ▁, ▁be rai ek ▁bi hoz ber ri tu ▁e gin ▁bai tzi ren ▁Jo na sen ▁pre di ku az ▁, ▁e ta ▁ba du zu e ▁he men ▁Jo nas ▁bai no ▁han di a go a ▁den ▁bat ▁.
PRED:	Then the people of Nineveh will stand against this generation and condemn them . They will turn against Jonah , but they will be preaching to Jonah , but they will be preaching in the name of Jonah .
GOLD:	The people of Nineveh will also stand up against this generation on judgment day and condemn it , for they repented of their sins at the preaching of Jonah . Now someone greater than Jonah is here — but you refuse to repent .

ID:	1804
INPUT:	▁« ▁Zeu re ▁se ni de ak ▁, ▁Ja ko ben ▁on do ren go ak ▁, ▁go gor ki ▁e ra bi li ▁bai ti tu zu ▁e ta ▁hil ▁, ▁lo tsak ▁es ta li ko ▁zai tu ▁, ▁be hin ▁be ti ko ▁e gin go ▁du ▁zu re ak ▁.
PRED:	“ Your brothers and sisters , your relatives , will die , and you will die . Then you will die , and you will die .
GOLD:	“ Because of the violence you didto your close relatives in Israel , you will be filled with shameand destroyed forever .

ID:	1805
INPUT:	▁ga ri ▁, ▁ga ra gar ▁, ▁ma has ti ▁, ▁pi kon do ▁, ▁gra na don do ▁, ▁o li bon do ▁e ta ▁ez tiz ▁hor ni tu a ▁;
PRED:	It is a fig tree , and the olive trees , new wine , olive oil , and olive oil , and olive oil .
GOLD:	It is a land of wheat and barley ; of grapevines , fig trees , and pomegranates ; of olive oil and honey .

ID:	1806
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Na bu ko do no sor ▁er re ge ak ▁, ▁lur re rai no ▁a hus pez tu rik ▁, ▁o ho re ▁e man ▁zi on ▁Da ni e li ▁, ▁e ta ▁o pa ri ak ▁e ta ▁in tsen tsu a ▁es kain tze ko ▁a gin du ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	Then King Nebuchadnezzar bowed down to the ground and bowed low to the ground before the ground and presented it to the ground .
GOLD:	Then King Nebuchadnezzar threw himself down before Daniel and worshiped him , and he commanded his people to offer sacrifices and burn sweet incense before him .

ID:	1807
INPUT:	▁Bes te ▁hau ▁e re ▁e san ▁zi dan ▁Jau nak ▁:
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	1808
INPUT:	▁Al fer rik ▁zi gor tu ▁di tu tzu en ▁se me - a la bak ▁, ▁ez ▁bai tu zu e ▁es kar men tu rik ▁har <unk> ek ▁hil ▁di tu zu e ▁pro fe tak ▁ez pa taz ▁, ▁le hoi ▁a mor ra tu ak ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	Do n't let your children go unpunished , for your children are killed . They are killed by the sword of the prophets who killed you .
GOLD:	“ I have punished your children , but they did not respond to my discipline.You yourselves have killed your prophetsas a lion kills its prey .

ID:	1809
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Ez ▁di zut ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁e san ▁, ▁si nes ten ▁ba du zu ▁Jain ko a ren ▁ain tza ▁i ku si ko ▁du zu la ▁?
PRED:	“ Did n't I tell you the truth ? ” Jesus asked . “ Do n't you believe the glory of God ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus responded , “ Did n't I tell you that you would see God 's glory if you believe ? ”

ID:	1810
INPUT:	▁Je re mi as ▁be re ▁her ri a ren ga tik ▁na hi ga be tu a
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Prayer
GOLD:	Jeremiah Weeps for His People

ID:	1811
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ▁, ▁is ra el dar ren ▁ar te an ▁ez ▁da ▁on da re - za ti rik ▁lei nu ▁ba te tik ▁bes te ra ▁al da tu ko ▁; ▁is ra el dar rek ▁nork ▁be re ▁ai ta ren ▁on da re a ri ▁a txi ki rik ▁jar rai tu ko ▁du te ▁.
PRED:	This is a list of the tribes of Israel who belong to the tribe of Israel , and they will follow their names .
GOLD:	None of the territorial land may pass from tribe to tribe , for all the land given to each tribe must remain within the tribe to which it was first allotted .

ID:	1812
INPUT:	▁Aur ki tu ▁du zu ▁be re ▁bu ru a ▁zu hur tzat ▁du en ▁nor bait ▁? ▁Ba ▁, ▁ge hi a go ▁es pe ro ▁dai te ke ▁zen tzu ga be a gan dik ▁.
PRED:	Do you think you are wise ? Do n't you think you are wise ?
GOLD:	There is more hope for foolsthan for people who think they are wise .

ID:	1813
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁naiz ▁e tsai a ren ▁hon da men di az ▁poz tu ▁, ▁ez ta ▁a lai ▁jar ri ▁e re ▁zo ri txar rak ▁jo ▁du e ne an ▁;
PRED:	Do n't let my enemies gloat over them , and I will sing for joy .
GOLD:	“ Have I ever rejoiced when disaster struck my enemies , or become excited when harm came their way ?

ID:	1814
INPUT:	▁Zeuk ▁, ▁er re ge ▁, ▁a gin du ▁du zu ▁, ▁tu ru ta ▁, ▁txi ru la ▁, ▁zi ta ra ▁, ▁al bo ka ▁, ▁har pa ▁e ta ▁bes te ▁mu si ka - tres nen ▁ho tsa ▁en tzun ▁or du ko ▁, ▁de nek ▁, ▁lur re rai no ▁a hus pez tuz ▁, ▁i ru di a ▁gur tze ko ▁,
PRED:	“ You have made a trumpet , a small blast , the trumpets , and the other instruments , the king of Assyria , and all the other nobles , bowed low to the ground and worship other gods .
GOLD:	You issued a decree requiring all the people to bow down and worship the gold statue when they hear the sound of the horn , flute , zither , lyre , harp , pipes , and other musical instruments .

ID:	1815
INPUT:	▁e hiz ta ri ▁a par ta ▁i zan ▁zen ▁, ▁e ta ▁hor tik ▁da tor ▁e sa e ra ▁: ▁« ▁Nim rod ▁a di na ko ▁e hiz ta ri ▁a par ta ▁» ▁.
PRED:	From the north of the north , Moab , and Uzziel . He said , “ It is the King of Israel , the king of the north . ”
GOLD:	Since he was the greatest hunter in the world , his name became proverbial . People would say , “ This man is like Nimrod , the greatest hunter in the world . ”

ID:	1816
INPUT:	▁An tzal da ke ta ▁: ▁ne kal di ▁on do ko ▁ain tza ▁aur rez ▁a ger tu
PRED:	Jesus Appears to Antioch of Syria
GOLD:	The Transfiguration

ID:	1817
INPUT:	▁Lur re an ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁bes te ▁zen tzu ga be ke ri a ▁hau ger ta tu ▁o hi ▁da ▁: ▁zen bait ▁gi za ki ▁zu ze nek gaiz ki le ei ▁da go ki en ▁zo ri a ▁du te ▁, ▁e ta ▁zen bait ▁gi za ki ▁gaiz to kon gi le ei ▁da go ki e <unk> re ▁us tez ▁, ▁hau guz tiz ▁zen tzu ga be ko a ▁da ▁.
PRED:	But the earth is foolish and foolish , and it is wrong to be destroyed . It is like a person who is wrong , and it is a fool . It is a fool , and it is a fool .
GOLD:	And this is not all that is meaningless in our world . In this life , good people are often treated as though they were wicked , and wicked people are often treated as though they were good . This is so meaningless !

ID:	1818
INPUT:	▁« ▁Har tza zu ▁zeu re ▁ar du ra pe an ▁e ta ▁ez ▁e gin ▁gai tzik ▁; ▁ai tzi tik ▁, ▁e gi o zu ▁be rak ▁e san da ko ▁guz ti a ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ Take no attention to what is right , and do n't tell me what is right . ”
GOLD:	“ See that he is n't hurt , ” he said . “ Look after him well , and give him anything he wants . ”

ID:	1819
INPUT:	▁Be gi ra tu ▁zor rotz ▁e ta ▁gal ▁i tza zu ma has ti a ▁moz tu ▁e ta ▁su ▁e man ▁di o te nak ▁.
PRED:	If you do n't turn away from your vineyard , you will be drunk .
GOLD:	Strengthen the man you love , the son of your choice .

ID:	1820
INPUT:	▁Ar ba so ek ▁go res ten ▁zin tuz te ne ko gu re ▁tenplu ▁san tu ▁dis ti ra tsu a su ak ▁kis ka li <unk> te en ▁ge nu e na ▁hon da tu rik ▁da go ▁!
PRED:	Our ancestors will rejoice in the Temple of the Most High , surrounded by fire , and your gates will be consumed by fire .
GOLD:	Your holy cities are destroyed.Zion is a wilderness ; yes , Jerusalem is a desolate ruin .

ID:	1821
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁har tu ▁ze kor ra ren ▁o do le tik ▁, ▁e ta ▁be ha tzez ▁al da re - er tze ko ▁a dar rak ▁i gur tzi ko ▁di tu zu ▁. ▁Gai ne ra ko ▁o do la ▁al da re - oi ne an ▁i su ri ko ▁du zu ▁.
PRED:	He will take some of the bull 's blood from the horns of the altar and smear it on the horns of the altar . He will pour out the blood of the base of the altar .
GOLD:	Put some of its blood on the horns of the altar with your finger , and pour out the rest at the base of the altar .

ID:	1822
INPUT:	▁« ▁Nor bait ▁e ma ku me e kin ▁o hi ▁be za la ▁gi zo nez ko a re kin ▁o he ra tzen ▁ba da ▁, ▁hi guin gar ri ta su na ▁e gi ten ▁du te ▁bi ek ▁: ▁he ri o tza - zi gor ra ▁i zan go ▁du te ▁. ▁Be re na ▁i zan go ▁du te ▁he ri o tza ren ▁er ru a ▁.
PRED:	“ If a man marries a woman , he must be cut off from the community , and he must be put to death . He must be put to death . He must be put to death .
GOLD:	“ If a man practices homosexuality , having sex with another man as with a woman , both men have committed a detestable act . They must both be put to death , for they are guilty of a capital offense .

ID:	1823
INPUT:	▁Har tu ▁zu en ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁Sa mu e lek ▁o li on tzi a ▁e ta ▁a nai en ▁aur re an ▁gan tzu tu ▁zu en ▁. ▁Jau na ren ▁es pi ri tu ak ▁har tu ▁zu en ▁Da vid ▁e gun ▁har taz ▁ge roz tik ▁. ▁Bu ka tze an ▁, ▁Sa mu el ▁Ra ma ra ▁i tzu li ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	So Samuel took some of his brothers and presented him to the Lord , and he anointed him before the Lord . So Samuel went to meet him .
GOLD:	So as David stood there among his brothers , Samuel took the flask of olive oil he had brought and anointed David with the oil . And the Spirit of the Lord came powerfully upon David from that day on . Then Samuel returned to Ramah .

ID:	1824
INPUT:	▁be ren ▁er ru ak ▁e ta ▁gu ra so e nak ba te an ▁or dain du ko ▁di tuz <unk> di e ta nin tsen tsu a ▁er re tzen ▁bai tzu te ne ta ▁mui no e tan ▁ni ri ▁i rain ▁e gi ten ▁, ▁o rain ▁ar te ko ▁jo ka bi de en kon tu a ▁a te ra e ta ▁or dain ▁be te - be te a ▁e man go ▁di et ▁» ▁.Jau nak ▁e san ▁du ▁.
PRED:	I will repay them for their sins , and they will be too hard for them . They will burn up their altars and burn them on the hills , ” says the Lord . “ I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	both for their own sinsand for those of their ancestors , ” says the Lord. “ For they also burned incense on the mountainsand insulted me on the hills.I will pay them back in full !

ID:	1825
INPUT:	▁Sal ba tzai le ▁in dar tsu a ▁sor tu ▁di gu be re ▁zer bi tza ri ▁Da vi de non do ren go en ▁ar te an ▁.
PRED:	O Lord , the strength of the Lord , the strength of the Lord , is the strength of David .
GOLD:	He has sent us a mighty Saviorfrom the royal line of his servant David ,

ID:	1826
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁A a ro ni ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁« ▁Hur bil du ▁al da re ra ▁e ta ▁es kai ni ▁zeu re ▁bar ka men - o pa ri a ▁e ta ▁er re - o pa ri a ▁, ▁zeu re ▁al de ko ▁bar ka men - o hi ku ne a ▁e gi te ko ▁; ▁es kai ni ▁her ri a ren ▁o pa ri a ▁e re ▁, ▁be ra ren ▁al de ko ▁bar ka men - o hi ku ne a ▁e gi te ko ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁a gin du ▁be za la ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then Aaron said to Aaron , “ Call your sin offering to purify yourself and offer them right with the Lord . Through this process , purify the people , the people , making them right with the Lord , just as the Lord had promised . ”
GOLD:	Then Moses said to Aaron , “ Come to the altar and sacrifice your sin offering and your burnt offering to purify yourself and the people . Then present the offerings of the people to purify them , making them right with the Lord , just as he has commanded . ”

ID:	1827
INPUT:	▁Tro a den ▁on tzi a ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁Sa mo tra zi a ra ▁jo an ▁gi nen ▁zu ze ne an ▁. ▁Bi ha ra mu ne an ▁Ne a po li se ra ▁i ri tsi ▁gi nen ▁,
PRED:	So they went out to the throne of Zadok and John . They went to meet him , and they went to meet him .
GOLD:	We boarded a boat at Troas and sailed straight across to the island of Samothrace , and the next day we landed at Neapolis .

ID:	1828
INPUT:	▁A sa fek ▁Jo sa fat ▁; ▁Jo sa fa tek ▁Jo ram ▁; ▁Jo ra mek ▁O zi as ▁;
PRED:	Ahaziah was the father of Joash . He was the father of Jotham .
GOLD:	Asa was the father of Jehoshaphat.Jehoshaphat was the father of Jehoram.Jehoram was the father of Uzziah .

ID:	1829
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁hain bes te ▁me se de ▁zor ▁di o gu nez ▁ge ro ▁, ▁ez ▁zai gu ▁bi dez ko a ▁i ru di tzen ▁er re ge a ri ▁e gi ten ▁zai on ▁i rai na ▁; ▁hor re ga tik ▁bi dal tzen ▁diz ki o gu ▁er re ge a ri ▁ar gi bi de ▁hau ek ▁,
PRED:	So we will tell you the truth that we wo n't send you back from the king 's presence , but we are sending you back from the king 's presence .
GOLD:	“ Since we are your loyal subjects and do not want to see the king dishonored in this way , we have sent the king this information .

ID:	1830
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁e san ▁: ▁« ▁Go a zen ▁Jau na ren ▁e goi tza ra ▁, ▁a hus pez ▁gai te zen ▁ha ren ▁oin - aul ki ▁aur re an ▁!
PRED:	“ Let us worship the Lord , ” he said . “ Let 's go down to the place of honor .
GOLD:	Let us go to the sanctuary of the Lord ; let us worship at the footstool of his throne .

ID:	1831
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁hau xe ▁di o tsu et ▁: ▁Bi zi ▁zai tez te ▁Es pi ri tu a ri ▁da go ki o nez ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁gi za ▁gri nei ▁jar rai tuz ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , I tell you the truth , this is the Holy Spirit , and you must not follow their desires .
GOLD:	So I say , let the Holy Spirit guide your lives . Then you wo n't be doing what your sinful nature craves .

ID:	1832
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren ▁ain tza ▁hi ri a ren ▁er di tik ▁al txa tu ▁e ta ▁e ki al de ra ▁da go en ▁men di ▁gai ne an ▁gel di tu ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	The glory of the Lord stood up from Mount Sinai and stayed on the hill country .
GOLD:	Then the glory of the Lord went up from the city and stopped above the mountain to the east .

ID:	1833
INPUT:	▁Za ti ke tak ▁sor tzen ▁di tuz te nak ▁di ra ▁ho ri ek ▁, ▁gi za ▁mai lan ▁ba kar rik ▁bi zi ▁den ▁jen de a ▁, ▁Es pi ri tu ak ▁gi da tu ▁ga be a ▁.
PRED:	Those who love their lives are dead , and we live in the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	These people are the ones who are creating divisions among you . They follow their natural instincts because they do not have God 's Spirit in them .

ID:	1834
INPUT:	▁Moi ses ▁be re ▁ai ta gi nar re ba ri ▁bi de ra ▁a te ra ▁zi tzai on ▁, ▁e ta ▁, ▁a hus pez tu rik ▁, ▁be sar ka tu ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁; ▁el kar ▁a gur tu ▁on do ren ▁, ▁oi hal - e txo lan ▁sar tu ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	When Moses heard his father 's ways , he bowed down to his feet and bowed low to the Tabernacle . Then he bowed low to the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	So Moses went out to meet his father-in-law . He bowed low and kissed him . They asked about each other 's welfare and then went into Moses ' tent .

ID:	1835
INPUT:	▁« ▁Be raz ▁, ▁sai a tu ▁Jau nak ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko ak ▁a gin du ▁di zu en ▁guz ti a ▁be te tzen ▁, ▁e zer tan ▁e re ▁sai hes tu ▁ga be ▁.
PRED:	“ Be careful to obey all the commands the Lord your God has commanded you .
GOLD:	So Moses told the people , “ You must be careful to obey all the commands of the Lord your God , following his instructions in every detail .

ID:	1836
INPUT:	▁Moi se sek ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁« ▁O rain ▁i zan go ▁du zu e ▁fro ga ▁e ta ▁ja kin go ▁Jau nak ▁bi da li ▁nau e la ▁e gi te ko ▁hau ▁bu ru tze ra ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁nai ze la ▁neu re ▁ka buz ▁a ri ▁.
PRED:	Then Moses said to them , “ This is what the Lord says : You will know that I am the one who sent me to do .
GOLD:	And Moses said , “ This is how you will know that the Lord has sent me to do all these things that I have done — for I have not done them on my own .

ID:	1837
INPUT:	▁Ni re ▁mi hi ak ▁zu re ▁sal ba men - as mo ai ra gar ri ko ▁du ▁e gun ▁o so an ▁, ▁lo tsaz ▁e ta ▁i rai nez ▁gel di tu ▁bai ti ra ni re ▁zo ri txar ra ren ▁bi la ▁ze bil tza nak ▁.
PRED:	O Lord , the God of Israel , will praise you , for he will be humiliated and humiliated .
GOLD:	I will tell about your righteous deedsall day long , for everyone who tried to hurt mehas been shamed and humiliated .

ID:	1838
INPUT:	▁Bi tar te an ▁, ▁han ▁a ri ▁zi ren ▁a paiz bu ru ▁e ta ▁le ge - mai su ak ▁sa la tu ▁e ta ▁sa la tu ▁.
PRED:	Meanwhile , the leading priests and the teachers of religious law were divided .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the leading priests and the teachers of religious law stood there shouting their accusations .

ID:	1839
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁is ra el dar ▁gu da ri ek ▁, ▁or du an ▁, ▁aur re ▁e gin go ▁zi e te la ▁ben ja min dar rei ▁. ▁Hau ek ▁, ▁or du ra ko ▁, ▁hi lak ▁zi tuz ten ▁ho gei ta ▁ha mar ren ▁bat ▁gi zon ▁is ra el dar ▁e ta ▁pen tsa tzen ▁a ri ▁zi ren ▁, ▁aur re ko ▁gu du ka tze e tan ▁be za la ▁, ▁men de ra tu ak ▁zi tuz te la ▁is ra el dar rak ▁.
PRED:	But the people of Benjamin went out to fight against Gibeah . But the men of Benjamin did n't realize that they were fighting against them , and they were twenty men of Israel . They were planning to fight against them , just as they had done .
GOLD:	When the Israelites saw the smoke , they turned and attacked Benjamin 's warriors.By that time Benjamin 's warriors had killed about thirty Israelites , and they shouted , “ We 're defeating them as we did in the first battle ! ”

ID:	1840
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁« ▁Hil ▁na di la ▁fi lis te ar re kin ▁ba te ra ▁! ▁» ▁E gin ▁zu en ▁bul tza ▁in dar rez ▁, ▁e ta ▁ber tan ▁zeu den ▁bu ru za gi ▁e ta ▁jen de a ren ▁gai ne ra ▁e tor ri ▁zen ▁jau re txe a ▁. ▁Hor re la ▁, ▁be re ▁bi zi tza ▁o so an ▁bai no ▁jen de ▁ge hi a go ▁hi lez ▁hil ▁zen ▁Sam son ▁.
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Let 's kill the Philistines ! Let them kill the Philistine rulers and the Philistine rulers of the Philistine rulers and the town of the town . So Samson died in the palace of the town .
GOLD:	he prayed , “ Let me die with the Philistines. ” And the temple crashed down on the Philistine rulers and all the people . So he killed more people when he died than he had during his entire lifetime .

ID:	1841
INPUT:	▁Hor ra ▁hor ▁Jau na ren ▁o ho rez ▁er re ta ko ▁o pa ri e ta tik ▁A a ro ni ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁on do ren go ei ▁da go ki en ▁par te a ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁a paiz ▁i za te ko ▁i zen da tu ko ▁di tuz ten ▁e gu ne tik ▁.
PRED:	This is a permanent law for Aaron and his sons and Aaron and his descendants , who belong to Aaron and his descendants .
GOLD:	This is their rightful share . The special gifts presented to the Lord have been reserved for Aaron and his descendants from the time they were set apart to serve the Lord as priests .

ID:	1842
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁bes te ▁e gin tzak ▁, ▁le he nen go tik ▁az ke ne ko ra ▁, ▁« ▁Is ra el go ▁e ta ▁Ju da ko ▁Er re ge en ▁Li bu ru an ▁» ▁dau de ▁i da tzi ak ▁.
PRED:	The rest of the events of Asa 's reign , from beginning to end , are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .
GOLD:	from beginning to end — all are recorded in The Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah .

ID:	1843
INPUT:	▁Bi zi rik ▁eu tsi ▁bai tzi gu ne ta ▁gu re ▁oi nei ▁e ror tzen ▁u tzi ▁ez ▁.
PRED:	Let us fall into the dust , and let us fall into the dust .
GOLD:	Our lives are in his hands , and he keeps our feet from stumbling .

ID:	1844
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁, ▁o rain ▁, ▁Jain ko ak ▁e tsai ak ▁oin - aul ki tzat ▁noiz ▁jar ri ko ▁diz ki on ▁i txa ro ten ▁da go ▁.
PRED:	And now , God will raise up his feet long .
GOLD:	There he waits until his enemies are humbled and made a footstool under his feet .

ID:	1845
INPUT:	▁Ho gei ta ▁hi ru ▁ur tez ▁go ber na tu ▁zu en ▁Is ra el ▁. ▁Hil ▁ze ne an ▁, ▁Xa mir ren ▁e hor tzi ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	He was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he died .
GOLD:	He judged Israel for twenty-three years . When he died , he was buried in Shamir .

ID:	1846
INPUT:	▁Fe li pe ▁las ter ka ▁hur bil du ▁zi tzai on ▁e ta ▁, ▁I sai as ▁pro fe ta ▁i ra kur tzen ▁en tzu nik ▁, ▁gal de tu ▁zi on ▁i re na ri ▁: ▁— ▁U ler tzen ▁al ▁du zu ▁i ra kur tzen ▁a ri ▁za re na ▁?
PRED:	When they came to Philip , Isaiah said to Isaiah , “ What is you read ? What do you mean ? ”
GOLD:	Philip ran over and heard the man reading from the prophet Isaiah . Philip asked , “ Do you understand what you are reading ? ”

ID:	1847
INPUT:	▁« ▁E gun ▁har tan ▁, ▁Je ru sa le mi ▁e ra so ka ▁e tor ▁da kiz ki on ▁guz ti ak ▁hon da tu ko ▁di tut ▁.
PRED:	“ In that day I will destroy Jerusalem , ” says the Lord . “ I will destroy all your enemies .
GOLD:	For on that day I will begin to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem .

ID:	1848
INPUT:	▁A ho ▁be re tik ▁a te ra tzen ▁di ra ▁be dein ka zi o a ▁e ta ▁ma da ri ka zi o a ▁. ▁Se ni de ok ▁, ▁hor rek ▁ez ▁du ▁hor re la ▁i zan ▁be har ▁.
PRED:	They curse their children and curse them , and they curse them . But they do n't need it .
GOLD:	And so blessing and cursing come pouring out of the same mouth . Surely , my brothers and sisters , this is not right !

ID:	1849
INPUT:	▁zi o te la ▁: ▁« ▁Jau na ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁Jain ko a ▁, ▁zer ga tik ▁ger ta tu ▁da ▁ho ri ▁Is ra e len ▁? ▁Zer ga tik ▁gal du ▁da ▁lei nu ▁bat ▁? ▁»
PRED:	“ What is the Lord , the God of Israel ? Why are you doing this ? ” they asked . “ Why do you turn away from the tribes of Israel ? ”
GOLD:	“ O Lord , God of Israel , ” they cried out , “ why has this happened in Israel ? Now one of our tribes is missing from Israel ! ”

ID:	1850
INPUT:	▁har ri ka tu ▁e gin ▁zi tuz ten ▁, ▁zer raz ▁e ba ki ▁, ▁ez pa taz ▁hil ▁; ▁no ra e ze an ▁i bi li ▁zi ren ▁, ▁a <unk> ▁na hiz ▁ar di - lar ruz ▁jan tzi rik ▁, ▁pre mi a ▁gor ri an ▁, ▁e ra so pe an ▁e ta ▁tra tu ▁txar rak ▁har tuz ▁.
PRED:	They took their swords and killed them , but they were killed by the sword . They were about to get enough clothes , but they were in burlap .
GOLD:	Some died by stoning , some were sawed in half , and others were killed with the sword . Some went about wearing skins of sheep and goats , destitute and oppressed and mistreated .

ID:	1851
INPUT:	▁I tzul ▁be lar ri a ▁ni re ga na ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁e ta ▁en tzun ▁. ▁Za bal du ▁be gi ak ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁e ta ▁i ku si ▁. ▁En tzun ▁no la ko ▁i rai nak ▁zu zen du ▁diz ki zun ▁Se na ke ri bek ▁zu ri ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁bi zi ▁hor ri ▁.
PRED:	Go back to the ears of the Lord , and hear the message of the Lord . Listen to me , O Lord , hear what you have seen .
GOLD:	Bend down , O Lord , and listen ! Open your eyes , O Lord , and see ! Listen to Sennacherib 's words of defiance against the living God .

ID:	1852
INPUT:	▁A nas ▁e ta ▁Kai fas ▁zi ren ▁a paiz ▁na gu si ▁. ▁Ga rai ▁har tan ▁, ▁Jo a nek ▁, ▁Za ka ri a sen ▁se me ak ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁me zu a ▁har tu ▁zu en ▁ba sa mor tu an ▁.
PRED:	Then Caiaphas , the high priest , the high priest , the high priest , who was in the wilderness of Edom .
GOLD:	Annas and Caiaphas were the high priests . At this time a message from God came to John son of Zechariah , who was living in the wilderness .

ID:	1853
INPUT:	▁E kin ▁si nes me na ren ▁bor ro ka ▁ja tor ra ri ▁e ta ▁es ku ra tu ▁be ti ko ▁bi zi a ▁, ▁har ta ra ko ▁dei tu ▁bai tzai tu ▁Jain ko ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁fe de - ai tor men ▁bi kai na ▁e gin ▁bai tu zu ▁, ▁tes ti gu ▁as ko ren ▁aur re an ▁.
PRED:	And we have heard that the faith of faith is coming , and we will receive eternal life . And we will be called by God 's holy people , and we will testify against him .
GOLD:	Fight the good fight for the true faith . Hold tightly to the eternal life to which God has called you , which you have declared so well before many witnesses .

ID:	1854
INPUT:	▁Xa lum ▁, ▁Is ra el go ▁er re ge
PRED:	Shallum Rules in Israel
GOLD:	Shallum Rules in Israel

ID:	1855
INPUT:	▁« ▁Guk ▁e re ▁ber ri ▁on ▁hau ▁i ra gar tzen ▁di zu e gu ▁: ▁gu re ▁ar ba so ei ▁e gin da ko ▁a gin tza ri a ▁,
PRED:	“ We are following instructions to our ancestors : We have obeyed our ancestor David .
GOLD:	“ And now we are here to bring you this Good News . The promise was made to our ancestors ,

ID:	1856
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁ni ri ▁da go ki da nez ▁, ▁ir ri kaz ▁na go ▁zu ei ▁e re ▁, ▁er ro ma tar roi ▁, ▁ber ri ▁o na ▁hots ▁e gi te ko ▁.
PRED:	That is why I am going to preach the Good News that I am going to preach the Good News .
GOLD:	So I am eager to come to you in Rome , too , to preach the Good News .

ID:	1857
INPUT:	▁Ho na ▁he men ▁e tor ki zu ne an ▁hai e kin ▁e gin go ▁du dan ▁i tu na ▁: ▁Bi ho tze an ▁e zar ri ko ▁diz ki et ▁neu re ▁le ge ak ▁, ▁bu ru an ▁i da tzi ko ▁. ▁Ha la ▁di ot ▁nik ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : I will raise my covenant with you , and I will raise my covenant with you . I will break my covenant with you , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ This is the new covenant I will makewith my people on that day , says the Lord : I will put my laws in their hearts , and I will write them on their minds . ”

ID:	1858
INPUT:	▁A ta lon do a ren ▁lu ze ra ▁ha mar ▁me tro ko a ▁zen ▁, ▁e ta ▁za ba le ra ▁sei ko a ▁; ▁ha mar ▁har mai la ▁i go ▁be har ▁zi ren ▁ha ra ▁i ris te ko ▁. ▁A te a ren ▁bi ▁al de e ta ra ▁zu ta be ▁ba na ▁ze go en ▁.
PRED:	The entry room of the gateway to the entry room of the gateway . It was 871/2 feet long , and it was 101/2 feet long .
GOLD:	The entry room was 35 feet wide and 21 feet deep . There were ten steps leading up to it , with a column on each side .

ID:	1859
INPUT:	▁Er re ge ak ▁gal de tu ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Non ▁da ▁? ▁Tzi bak ▁er re ge a ri ▁: ▁— ▁A mi e len ▁se me ▁Ma kir ren ▁e txe an ▁, ▁Lo - De bar ren ▁.
PRED:	“ Where is the king ? ” the king asked . “ What is the king of Moab ? ” And the king of Moab said .
GOLD:	“ Where is he ? ” the king asked. “ In Lo-debar , ” Ziba told him , “ at the home of Makir son of Ammiel . ”

ID:	1860
INPUT:	▁Baz ter ▁i tza zu ▁fe de a ren ▁kon tra ko ▁i puin ▁zen tzu ga be ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁sai a ▁zai tez ▁jain ko za le ta su ne an ▁.
PRED:	Do n't let your faith grow hard , and let them live in the shadow of the godly .
GOLD:	Do not waste time arguing over godless ideas and old wives ' tales . Instead , train yourself to be godly .

ID:	1861
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁di e zai e te la ▁es ka ▁lan - ar du ra du nei ▁be ren ▁es ku ▁u tzi ri ko ▁di ru a ren ▁kon tu rik ▁, ▁zin tzo ▁jo ka tzen ▁bai tu te ▁.
PRED:	If you refuse to pay attention to those who work , do n't let those who work hard to help you .
GOLD:	But do n't require the construction supervisors to keep account of the money they receive , for they are honest and trustworthy men . ”

ID:	1862
INPUT:	▁Ho na ▁Da ni e len ▁kon ta ki zu na ▁: ▁« ▁I kus ka ri ▁bat ▁i zan ▁nu en ▁gau ez ▁: ▁Or tzi ko ▁lau ▁er tze ta tik ▁hai ze ▁in dar tsu ▁ba tek ▁i tsa so ▁han di a ▁har ro tzen ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	Then Daniel said to Daniel , “ I saw a vision in the middle of the sea , and there was a great sea .
GOLD:	In my vision that night , I , Daniel , saw a great storm churning the surface of a great sea , with strong winds blowing from every direction .

ID:	1863
INPUT:	▁bai na ▁her ri ▁lar ru tu ▁e ta ▁pi pil du a ▁da ▁, ▁de nak ▁pre son de gi an ▁sar tu e ta ▁kar tze lan ▁lo tu rik ▁dau de ▁; ▁lar ru tu ▁e gin ▁di tuz te ▁, ▁e ta ▁i nork ▁as ka tzen ▁ez ▁; ▁pi pil du ▁, ▁e ta ▁i nork ▁ez hai en ▁e go e ra ▁al da tze ko ▁ar du ra rik ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But all the people are in prison , and they are left in the square . They are all left in the wilderness , and no one has enough money to buy grain . ”
GOLD:	But his own people have been robbed and plundered , enslaved , imprisoned , and trapped.They are fair game for anyoneand have no one to protect them , no one to take them back home .

ID:	1864
INPUT:	▁Er ru ki ▁gu taz ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁zu re gan ▁bai tu gu ▁i txa ro pen ▁! ▁I zan ▁gu re ▁in dar ▁e gu ne ro ▁, ▁gu re ▁sal ba men ▁es tu al di an ▁.
PRED:	O Lord , we have mercy on us , but we have mercy on our behalf .
GOLD:	But Lord , be merciful to us , for we have waited for you.Be our strong arm each dayand our salvation in times of trouble .

ID:	1865
INPUT:	▁Ba la a mek ▁e san ▁zi on ▁Ba la ki ▁: ▁« ▁E rai ki ▁he men ▁zaz pi ▁al da re ▁e ta ▁pres ta tu ▁zaz pi ▁ze kor ▁e ta ▁zaz pi ▁a ha ri ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Balaam said to Balaam , “ Get ready for seven days , and prepare seven rams for seven days . ”
GOLD:	Then Balaam said to King Balak , “ Build me seven altars here , and prepare seven young bulls and seven rams for me to sacrifice . ”

ID:	1866
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁ar ku me ▁ba koi tze ko ▁lau ▁ki lo ▁.
PRED:	and two quarts with each of the seven lambs .
GOLD:	and two quarts of choice flour with each of the seven lambs .

ID:	1867
INPUT:	▁Be gi ak ▁ja so ▁e ta ▁bi ▁e ma ku me ▁i ku si ▁ni tu en ▁, ▁ai re an ▁he gaz ▁. ▁He go ak ▁zi koi na ren ▁gi sa ko ak ▁zi tuz ten ▁. ▁On tzi a ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁ze ru rantz ▁ja so ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	When the woman saw that she was dead , she looked up and saw two wings toward heaven . Then they took their eyes toward heaven . Then they turned toward heaven and attacked them .
GOLD:	Then I looked up and saw two women flying toward us , gliding on the wind . They had wings like a stork , and they picked up the basket and flew into the sky .

ID:	1868
INPUT:	▁I mer ren ▁se me ▁Pax hur ▁a pai zak ▁, ▁tenplu ko ▁ar du ra dun ▁na gu si ak ▁, ▁Je re mi a sen ▁hi tzok ▁en tzu te an ▁,
PRED:	Then Jeremiah son of Pashhur , the priest , heard this message from Jeremiah :
GOLD:	Now Pashhur son of Immer , the priest in charge of the Temple of the Lord , heard what Jeremiah was prophesying .

ID:	1869
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Je ru sa le men ▁aur ka ▁bor ro ka na ri ▁di ren ▁na zi o ▁guz ti ak ▁, ▁se ti a tzen ▁du ten ▁gu da ri - tal de e ta ▁e ra so - tres na ▁guz ti ak ▁, ▁a me tsa ▁be za la ▁, ▁gau e ko ▁i ru di pe na ▁be za la de sa ger tu ko ▁di ra ▁.
PRED:	“ Then everyone will fight against Jerusalem , ” says the Lord . “ He will destroy all the sheep and goats , the sea , and the sea will fade away like the sea .
GOLD:	All the nations fighting against Jerusalemwill vanish like a dream ! Those who are attacking her wallswill vanish like a vision in the night .

ID:	1870
INPUT:	▁Bai ▁, ▁zu re gan dik ▁ur run ▁do a ze nak ▁gal du ak ▁di ra ▁, ▁des lei al ▁zaiz ki zu nak ▁sun tsi tu ▁e gin go ▁di tu zu ▁.
PRED:	“ But those who turn away from you will turn away from your land .
GOLD:	Those who desert him will perish , for you destroy those who abandon you .

ID:	1871
INPUT:	▁A pai zak ▁sal ba men - in dar rez ▁jan tzi ko ▁di tu te ta ▁fe de du nek ▁poz - oi hu ka ▁e kin go ▁di o te ▁.
PRED:	Then the priest will dress them in their tunics . They will shout with joy and sing for joy .
GOLD:	I will clothe its priests with godliness ; its faithful servants will sing for joy .

ID:	1872
INPUT:	▁A dar rak ▁jo tzen ▁zi tuz ten ▁a pai zen ▁aur re an ▁gi zon ▁ar ma tu ak ▁jar ri ▁zi ren ▁e ta ▁ku txa ren ▁a tze an ▁gai ne ra ko ▁gu da ri ak ▁. ▁A dar - ho tse ra ▁zi ho a zen ▁de nak ▁aur re ra ▁.
PRED:	The men who were carrying the Ark of the Covenant went out to meet the Ark of the Covenant , and all the men who were carrying the Ark of the Covenant .
GOLD:	Some of the armed men marched in front of the priests with the horns and some behind the Ark , with the priests continually blowing the horns .

ID:	1873
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁ez pa ta ▁es ku an ▁bi de ▁er di an ▁ze go en ▁ain ge ru a ▁e man ▁zi on ▁i kus te ra ▁Jau nak ▁Ba la a mi ▁. ▁Lur re rai no ▁a hus pez tu ▁zen ▁Ba la am ▁,
PRED:	When Balaam saw that the angel of the Lord was standing on the road , the angel of the Lord fell face down on the ground .
GOLD:	Then the Lord opened Balaam 's eyes , and he saw the angel of the Lord standing in the roadway with a drawn sword in his hand . Balaam bowed his head and fell face down on the ground before him .

ID:	1874
INPUT:	▁i tzul ▁ni re ga na ▁, ▁er ru ki ▁za kiz kit ▁, ▁e man ▁in dar ▁zeu re ▁zer bi tza ri ▁ho ni ▁, ▁sal ba ▁zeu re ▁zer bi tza ri ▁a pa la ▁.
PRED:	Turn back to me , O Lord , for I have given me your servant .
GOLD:	Look down and have mercy on me.Give your strength to your servant ; save me , the son of your servant .

ID:	1875
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁Go a zen ▁bes te ▁no ra bait ▁, ▁in gu ru ko ▁au zo e ta ra ▁, ▁ho ri e tan ▁e re ▁ber ri ▁o na ▁hots ▁e gi te ra ▁, ▁hor re ta ra ko ▁a te ra ▁bai naiz ▁.
PRED:	But Jesus replied , “ Let 's go and preach the Good News , for I am going to preach the Good News and preach the Good News . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus replied , “ We must go on to other towns as well , and I will preach to them , too . That is why I came . ”

ID:	1876
INPUT:	▁Ken du ▁ziz ki zu ten ▁se me - a la bek hur bil du ▁e ta ▁e san go ▁di zu te ▁: ▁“ ▁Es tu e gi a ▁du gu ▁to ki ▁hau ▁: ▁e ma gu zu ▁le ku a ▁bi zi tze ko ▁” ▁.
PRED:	Then Jacob sent his sons and daughters to say , ‘ We will live in this place where we are going to live . '
GOLD:	The generations born in exile will return and say , ‘ We need more room ! It 's crowded here ! '

ID:	1877
INPUT:	▁Zi gor tze a ▁e ra ba ki ▁dut ▁: ▁her ri ak ▁hai en ▁aur ka ▁bil du ko ▁di ra ▁, ▁be hin ▁e ta ▁ber riz ko ▁be ka tu e nor dai na ▁e ma te ko ▁.
PRED:	I will bring judgment against them , and I will bring them back to the Gentiles .
GOLD:	Now whenever it fits my plan , I will attack you , too.I will call out the armies of the nationsto punish you for your multiplied sins .

ID:	1878
INPUT:	▁Hau ek ▁gal de tu ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁— ▁Be raz ▁, ▁Me si as ▁ez ▁ba za ra ▁, ▁ez ▁E li as ▁, ▁ez ta ▁e tor tze ko a ▁den ▁pro fe ta ▁e re ▁, ▁no la ▁a ri ▁za ra ▁ba tai a tzen ▁?
PRED:	“ Well , ” they said , “ Elijah is not the Messiah , or Elijah , or Elijah , or should you be baptized ? ”
GOLD:	asked him , “ If you are n't the Messiah or Elijah or the Prophet , what right do you have to baptize ? ”

ID:	1879
INPUT:	▁« ▁Bai na ▁e gi a ▁o te ▁, ▁Jain ko a ▁lur re an ▁bi zi ko ▁de la ▁gi zon - e ma ku me e kin ▁? ▁Ze ru ▁e ta ▁or tzi a ren ▁za ba lak ▁e zin ▁zai tu ▁e du ki ▁, ▁e ta ▁nik ▁e rai ki ▁di zu dan ▁tenplu ▁ho nek ▁e du ki ▁o te ▁zai tza ke ▁, ▁ba da ▁?
PRED:	“ But why are you living in the earth ? Why are you living in the heavens ? How can you build up the Temple of God ? How can you build this Temple ?
GOLD:	“ But will God really live on earth among people ? Why , even the highest heavens can not contain you . How much less this Temple I have built !

ID:	1880
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁e tor ri ▁zi ren ▁ber ri ro ▁e re ▁gi zon ▁hai ek ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁— ▁Er re ge ▁jau na ▁, ▁on do ▁da ki zu ▁, ▁me di ar ren ▁e ta ▁per tsi ar ren ▁le ge en ▁a ra be ra ▁, ▁er re ge ak ▁si na tu ri ko ▁de be ku ak ▁na hiz ▁a gin du ak ▁al da e zi nak ▁di re la ▁.
PRED:	But the men came to the king and said to them , “ This is what the Medes and Persians that the Medes and Persians that the Medes and Persians that the Arameans are destroyed .
GOLD:	So at last the king gave orders for Daniel to be arrested and thrown into the den of lions . The king said to him , “ May your God , whom you serve so faithfully , rescue you . ”

ID:	1881
INPUT:	▁E ra so - tres naz ▁jo ko ▁di tuz te zu re ▁har re si a ke ta ▁pi ko txez ▁e rai tsi ko ▁dor re ak ▁.
PRED:	Listen to my prayer , O Lord , hear your prayer !
GOLD:	He will pound your walls with battering rams and demolish your towers with sledgehammers .

ID:	1882
INPUT:	▁Ja so ▁be gi ak ▁go rantz ▁e ta ▁i kus ▁: ▁Nork ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁ho ri ▁guz ti a ▁? ▁Ba nan - ba nan ▁a te ra raz ten ▁di tu ze ru ko ▁as tro ak ▁, ▁ba koi tza ri ▁be re ▁i ze nez ▁dei tzen ▁di o ▁; ▁hain ▁bai ta ▁a hal tsu ▁, ▁hain ▁bi zi ki ▁in dar tsu ▁, ▁ba tek ▁e re ▁ez ▁di o ha ren ▁dei a ri ▁huts ▁e gi ten ▁.
PRED:	Who can see this ? Who is the one who calls out to him ? Who is the one who calls on the name of the one who calls on him ? He calls out his name , and he gives them strength .
GOLD:	Look up into the heavens.Who created all the stars ? He brings them out like an army , one after another , calling each by its name.Because of his great power and incomparable strength , not a single one is missing .

ID:	1883
INPUT:	▁e sa nez ▁: ▁« ▁Be dein ka tu a ▁Jau na ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁Jain ko a ▁, ▁be te ▁bai tu ▁gu re ▁ai ta ▁Da vi di ▁hi tze ma ni ko a ▁:
PRED:	“ Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , for he said to David ,
GOLD:	“ Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , who has kept the promise he made to my father , David . For he told my father ,

ID:	1884
INPUT:	▁Ma ri ak ▁E li sa be ti ▁i kus tal di a
PRED:	Mary 's Visit to Mary Magdalene
GOLD:	Mary Visits Elizabeth

ID:	1885
INPUT:	▁E gip to ko ▁Ne ko ▁er re ge ak ▁Je ru sa lem go ▁er re ge ▁i za te a ▁Jo a ka zi ▁ken du ▁e ta ▁zer ga ▁e zar ri ▁zi on ▁her ri a ri ▁: ▁hi ru ▁mi la ▁ki lo ▁zi lar ▁e ta ▁ho gei ta ▁ha ma bost ▁ki lo ▁ur re ▁or dain du ▁be har ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	So the king of Egypt took off the entire population of Egypt , and he gave it to the people of Egypt . He gave it to the king of Egypt , and he was 75 pounds of silver .
GOLD:	Then he was deposed by the king of Egypt , who demanded that Judah pay 7,500 pounds of silver and 75 pounds of gold as tribute .

ID:	1886
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁guk ▁e za gu tu ▁du gu ▁e ta ▁si ne tsi ▁Jain ko ak ▁di gun ▁mai ta su na ▁. ▁Jain ko a ▁mai ta su na ▁da ▁, ▁e ta ▁mai ta su ne an ▁di rau e na ▁Jain ko a re kin ▁bat ▁e gi nik ▁da go ▁e ta ▁Jain ko a ▁ha re kin ▁.
PRED:	And we love God and love us . And we love God and love him . And we love God and love him with love and love God and love him .
GOLD:	We know how much God loves us , and we have put our trust in his love.God is love , and all who live in love live in God , and God lives in them .

ID:	1887
INPUT:	▁Ma ha la tek ▁hi ru ▁se me ▁e kar ri ▁ziz ki on ▁: ▁Jeux ▁, ▁Xe ma ri as ▁e ta ▁Za ham ▁.
PRED:	Oholibamah gave birth to three sons : Zechariah son of Shelah , and Shelah .
GOLD:	Mahalath had three sons — Jeush , Shemariah , and Zaham .

ID:	1888
INPUT:	▁Gal de ra ▁e gi ten ▁dut ▁: ▁Jain ko ak ▁baz ter tu ▁e gin ▁o te ▁du ▁be re ▁her ri a ▁? ▁I no la ▁e re ▁ez ▁! ▁Neu ▁e re ▁is ra el dar ra ▁naiz ▁, ▁Ab ra ha men ▁ja tor ri ko a ▁, ▁Ben ja mi nen ▁lei nu ko a ▁.
PRED:	What can I say to God ? Should I do not ignore the people of Israel ? I am the Lord , the God of Israel , and I am the tribe of Jacob .
GOLD:	I ask , then , has God rejected his own people , the nation of Israel ? Of course not ! I myself am an Israelite , a descendant of Abraham and a member of the tribe of Benjamin .

ID:	1889
INPUT:	▁« ▁E gin ▁a huntz - i lez ko ▁bes te ▁ha mai ka ▁za pi ▁, ▁e goi tza ▁es ta li ko ▁du en ▁oi hal - e txo la ▁e ra tze ko ▁.
PRED:	“ Then make another curtain for the entrance of the Tabernacle and cover it with the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ Make eleven curtains of goat-hair cloth to serve as a tent covering for the Tabernacle .

ID:	1890
INPUT:	▁Zo ro ▁ho ri ▁, ▁zuk ▁e rein da ko a ▁ez ▁da ▁er ne tzen ▁aur rez ▁hil tzen ▁ez ▁ba da ▁.
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who do n't kill me ? If you eat it , you will not die .
GOLD:	What a foolish question ! When you put a seed into the ground , it does n't grow into a plant unless it dies first .

ID:	1891
INPUT:	▁e ze za gu nak ▁di tu zu en ▁jain ko ▁ar ro tzen ▁a tze tik ▁jo an ▁e ta ▁gur tze ko ▁es ka tze a ▁. ▁I ra gar ri ta ko a ▁e gi az ▁ger ta tu ko ▁ba litz ▁e re ▁,
PRED:	You must worship other gods and worship other gods and worship other gods . If you do what is saying , you will be able to worship other gods .
GOLD:	do not listen to them . The Lord your God is testing you to see if you truly love him with all your heart and soul .

ID:	1892
INPUT:	▁Jo si a sen ▁er re ge al di a
PRED:	Josiah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Josiah Rules in Judah

ID:	1893
INPUT:	▁Xa ron ▁ze lai ko ▁lo re ▁naiz ▁ni ▁, ▁i bar re ta ko ▁li li ▁.
PRED:	I will climb up to the top of my robe , and I will sing praises to the Lord .
GOLD:	I am the spring crocus blooming on the Sharon Plain , the lily of the valley .

ID:	1894
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁di o ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁« ▁A mon dar rek gaiz ta ke ri a rik ▁as ko ▁e gin ▁du te ▁, ▁zein ▁bai no ▁zein ▁han di a go.E ta ▁be raz ▁, ▁zi gor tu ▁e gin go ▁di tut ▁! ▁Ga la a de ko ▁e ma ku me ▁haur du nei sa be la ▁ur ra tu ▁bai tzi e ten ▁, ▁be ren ▁lur ral de a za bal du ▁a hal ▁i za te ko ▁;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Ammon have sinned again and again , but I will not let them go unpunished ! They will turn their children to their children , just as they had promised .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Ammon have sinned again and again , and I will not let them go unpunished ! When they attacked Gilead to extend their borders , they ripped open pregnant women with their swords .

ID:	1895
INPUT:	▁Sei gar ren ▁i zur ri a ▁: ▁zau ri ak
PRED:	A Message about the Church
GOLD:	A Plague of Festering Boils

ID:	1896
INPUT:	▁Li lu ra tu ▁e gin ▁nau zu ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁e ta ▁ni ▁zu re ▁li lu ra pe an ▁e ro ri ▁; ▁bor txa tu ▁e gin ▁nau zu ▁e ta ▁men de ra <unk> re gar ri ▁ger ta tu ▁naiz ▁e gun ▁o so an ▁, ▁bur la ka ▁a ri ▁zaiz kit ▁de nak ▁.
PRED:	You have rejected me , O Lord , and you have made me an object of horror and horror . I am your enemy , and I am your enemy .
GOLD:	O Lord , you misled me , and I allowed myself to be misled.You are stronger than I am , and you overpowered me.Now I am mocked every day ; everyone laughs at me .

ID:	1897
INPUT:	▁Har tu ▁zi tu en ▁ge ro ▁buz ta ne ko ▁gan tza ▁, ▁hes te ▁gai ne ko a ▁e ta ▁gi be la ▁es tal tzen ▁zu e na ▁, ▁gil tzur ru nak ▁be rau en ▁gan tza re kin ▁e ta ▁es kui ne ko ▁iz ter ra ▁.
PRED:	Then he burned the fat of the internal organs and the fat around the internal organs , and the fat around the internal organs , and the fat on the altar .
GOLD:	Next Moses took the fat , including the fat of the broad tail , the fat around the internal organs , the long lobe of the liver , and the two kidneys and the fat around them , along with the right thigh .

ID:	1898
INPUT:	▁Bo ta ▁bi e zai o ▁be ra ri ▁Jau nak ▁hil ke ta ▁ho ri en ▁er ru a ▁, ▁be ra ▁bai no ▁ho be ak ▁zi ren ▁bi ▁gi zon ▁ja tor ▁e ta ▁zu zen ▁hil ▁bai tzi tu en ▁ez pa taz ▁, ▁Da vid ▁gu re ▁ai tak ▁ja kin ▁ga be ▁: ▁Ner - en ▁se me ▁Ab ner ▁, ▁Is ra el go ▁gu da ros te en ▁bu ru za gi a ▁, ▁e ta ▁Je ter - en ▁se me ▁A ma sa ▁, ▁Ju da ko a ren ▁bu ru za gi a ▁.
PRED:	The Lord sent a sword to kill him , and he killed all his men . He killed Abner son of Ner , king of Judah , and Abner son of Ner , king of Judah , and Abner son of Ner .
GOLD:	The Lord will repay him for the murders of two men who were more righteous and better than he . For my father knew nothing about the deaths of Abner son of Ner , commander of the army of Israel , and of Amasa son of Jether , commander of the army of Judah .

ID:	1899
INPUT:	▁Goi tik ▁es ku a ▁lu za tuz ▁har tu ▁nin du e ne ta ▁u hol de tik ▁a te ra ▁.
PRED:	He rescued me from deep waters , and he rescued me from deep waters .
GOLD:	He rescued me from my powerful enemies , from those who hated me and were too strong for me .

ID:	1900
INPUT:	▁i tzu le ra rik ▁ga be ▁jo an ▁aur re ti ki lun pe ▁e ta ▁he ri o - i tza len ▁her ri al de ra ▁,
PRED:	They go without fear without fear , and they lie in darkness .
GOLD:	before I leave — never to return — for the land of darkness and utter gloom .

ID:	1901
INPUT:	▁Ru be nen ▁on do ren go ek ▁Hex bon ▁, ▁E la le ▁, ▁Ki ri a taim ▁, ▁Ne bo ▁, ▁Ba al - Me on ▁e ta ▁Sib ma ▁ber re rai ki ▁zi tuz ten ▁, ▁e ta ▁ber re rai ki ta ko ▁hi ri ei ▁i ze na ▁al da tu ▁zi e ten ▁.
PRED:	From the towns of Reuben , Heshbon , Nebo , Sibmah , Sibmah , Sibmah , Nebo , and Jahaz .
GOLD:	The descendants of Reuben built the towns of Heshbon , Elealeh , Kiriathaim ,

ID:	1902
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁e ta ▁ain ge ru en ga na ko ▁be gi ru ne a ga tik ▁, ▁e ma ku me ak ▁men de ta su na ren ▁e zau gar ri a ▁e ra man ▁be har ▁du ▁bu ru an ▁.
PRED:	That is why the angel of the Lord will give his glory to the one who sits on the head of the beast and his head .
GOLD:	For this reason , and because the angels are watching , a woman should wear a covering on her head to show she is under authority .

ID:	1903
INPUT:	▁bai ta ▁er re ge en ▁e ta ▁a gin te a ▁du ten ▁guz ti en ▁al de ▁e re ▁, ▁bi zi tza ▁ba re ▁e ta ▁ba ke tsu an ▁bi zi ▁gai te zen ▁, ▁jain ko za le ta su nez ▁e ta ▁gi za bi dez ▁.
PRED:	For the king has made us live in peace and peace and peace . He has made us live in peace and peace .
GOLD:	Pray this way for kings and all who are in authority so that we can live peaceful and quiet lives marked by godliness and dignity .

ID:	1904
INPUT:	▁E a ▁sal ba tzen ▁zai tu en zeu re ▁i do lo - mul tzo ak ▁, ▁zuk ▁la gun tza ▁es ke ▁dei a dar ▁e gi te an ▁! ▁Hai ze ak ▁e ra man go ▁di tu ▁de nak ▁, ▁pu tzal di ▁ba tek ▁de sa ger ra ra zi <unk> re gan ▁ba bes ten ▁de nak ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁lur ral de a ▁es ku ra tu ko ▁du ▁, ▁ni re ▁men di ▁san tu a har tu ko ▁ja be tzan ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But the godly are as strong as strong as the sand on the seashore , they will be called by the wind , but they will be saved . They will live in the mountains , but they will know that I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Let 's see if your idols can save youwhen you cry to them for help.Why , a puff of wind can knock them down ! If you just breathe on them , they fall over ! But whoever trusts in me will inherit the landand possess my holy mountain . ”

ID:	1905
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁da go ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁bes te ▁ber ri ▁o nik ▁; ▁bai na ▁ba da bil tza ▁hor ▁nor bai tzuk ▁zu ek ▁na has ten ▁e ta ▁Kris to ren ▁ber ri ▁o na ▁goi tik ▁be he ra ▁i rau li ▁na hi an ▁.
PRED:	But no one else is wrong , but others preach the Good News about Christ . But some of you preach the Good News of Christ .
GOLD:	but is not the Good News at all . You are being fooled by those who deliberately twist the truth concerning Christ .

ID:	1906
INPUT:	▁Be te a ▁du te ▁a ho a ▁ma da ri ka zi oz ▁e ta ▁min gos ta su nez ▁.
PRED:	Anyone who eats the bread and drink the blood of the meat .
GOLD:	“ Their mouths are full of cursing and bitterness . ”

ID:	1907
INPUT:	▁Pro fe ta ▁guz ti ek ▁tes ti gan tza ▁hau ▁e gi ten ▁du te ▁har taz ▁: ▁ha ren gan ▁si nets ▁de za ten ▁guz ti ek ▁be ka tu en ▁bar ka me na ▁har tu ko ▁du te la ▁be ra ren ▁bi tar tez ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Everyone who believes in him will believe that everyone who believes in him will believe in him . ”
GOLD:	He is the one all the prophets testified about , saying that everyone who believes in him will have their sins forgiven through his name . ”

ID:	1908
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁hai ze - bo la da ▁ba te ke ra man go ▁di tu ▁, ▁e ta ▁lo tsa ▁i zan go ▁di ra be ren ▁sak ri fi zi o ez ▁.
PRED:	But they will be ashamed of their names , and they will be ashamed of their sacred pillars .
GOLD:	So a mighty wind will sweep them away.Their sacrifices to idols will bring them shame .

ID:	1909
INPUT:	▁I ku si ▁i zan ▁di tut mor roi ak ▁zal di ▁gai ne a ne ta ▁na gu si ak ▁oi nez ▁, ▁mor roi ▁bai li ran ▁.
PRED:	I saw the vast flocks of sheep and goats , for I saw their chariots and charioteers .
GOLD:	I have even seen servants riding horseback like princes — and princes walking like servants !

ID:	1910
INPUT:	▁Zaz pi ▁se me - a la ben ▁a ma ▁be ra ▁e re a ki tu a ▁da go ▁, ▁ar na sa ▁e zin ▁har tu rik ▁, ▁lo tsaz ▁e ta ▁de so ho rez ▁be te a ▁; ▁e gun - ar gi a ▁i lun pe ▁bi hur tu ▁zai <unk> ta ▁gel di tzen ▁zaiz ki on ▁se me a ke tsai en ▁ez pa taz ▁hil ko ▁di ra.Nik ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁e sa na ▁» ▁.
PRED:	The seven sons of Israel will be devoured by their children , and they will no longer be ashamed . They will be devoured by the sword of the sea , and their enemies will be crushed . They will be killed , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	The mother of seven grows faint and gasps for breath ; her sun has gone down while it is still day.She sits childless now , disgraced and humiliated.And I will hand over those who are leftto be killed by the enemy.I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	1911
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁bar ka men - o pa ri ko ▁ze ze na ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁er re ▁e gin go ▁du zu ▁hor re ta ra ko ▁e zar ri ta ko ▁le ku an ▁, ▁san tu te gi tik ▁kan po ▁.
PRED:	Then you must present the goat as a sin offering to the Lord and present it to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then take the young bull for the sin offering and burn it at the appointed place outside the Temple area .

ID:	1912
INPUT:	▁Jain ko a ren ▁se me ek ▁gi za ki en ▁a la be kin ▁ba tu ▁e ta ▁haur rak ▁i zan ▁zi tuz te ne an ▁, ▁bai ta ▁ge ro a go ▁e re ▁, ▁ba zi ren ▁er ral doi ak ▁mun du an ▁: ▁an tzi na ko ▁he roi ak ▁di ra ▁hau ek ▁, ▁i zen ▁han di ko ak ▁.
PRED:	Their children were like children , and their children were born in the land of God . They were like children of the world , and their children were as large as the world .
GOLD:	In those days , and for some time after , giant Nephilites lived on the earth , for whenever the sons of God had intercourse with women , they gave birth to children who became the heroes and famous warriors of ancient times .

ID:	1913
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁e du ki ▁zor rik ▁i no re kin ▁, ▁el kar ▁mai ta tze ko a ▁bai zik ▁, ▁ze ren ▁la gun ▁hur ko a ▁mai te ▁du e nak ▁be te a ▁bai tu ▁le ge a ▁.
PRED:	Do n't let anyone go with you , but do n't love each other . Instead , you must love each other .
GOLD:	Owe nothing to anyone — except for your obligation to love one another . If you love your neighbor , you will fulfill the requirements of God 's law .

ID:	1914
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁zuk ▁, ▁Je re mi as ▁, ▁ez ▁es ka tu ▁her ri ▁ho nen ▁al de ▁, ▁ez ▁e gin ▁er re gu rik ▁, ▁ez ▁o toi tzik ▁, ▁ez ▁bai ti zut ▁en tzun go ▁zo ri txar re an ▁la gun tza ▁es ke ▁dei ▁e gi te an ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But you have not refused to listen to me , for I have no mercy to you . ”
GOLD:	“ Pray no more for these people , Jeremiah . Do not weep or pray for them , for I will not listen to them when they cry out to me in distress .

ID:	1915
INPUT:	▁A pai zak ▁, ▁er ri tuz ko ▁kei nu a ▁e gi nez ▁aur kez tu ko ▁di o ▁Jau na ri ▁, ▁a tse gi nez ▁o nar ▁de zan ▁. ▁La run bat ▁bi ha ra mu ne an ▁aur kez tu ko ▁du ▁.
PRED:	The priest must present these instructions to the Lord as a special gift to the Lord . Through this process , the priest will present it to the Lord .
GOLD:	On the day after the Sabbath , the priest will lift it up before the Lord so it may be accepted on your behalf .

ID:	1916
INPUT:	▁Sau lek ▁se me a ri ▁: ▁— ▁Zi gor ▁na za la ▁Jau nak ▁go gor ▁, ▁hi la raz ten ▁ez ▁ba zai tut ▁, ▁Jo na tan ▁.
PRED:	“ My child , ” Saul said , “ if I do n't try to kill him , I 'm not going to kill him . ”
GOLD:	“ Yes , Jonathan , ” Saul said , “ you must die ! May God strike me and even kill me if you do not die for this . ”

ID:	1917
INPUT:	▁Sei ▁ur tez ▁e gon ▁zi ren ▁i nu de a ▁e ta ▁bi ak ▁Jau na ren ▁e txe an ▁gor de rik ▁, ▁A ta li a ▁lur ral de ▁har tan ▁er re gi na ▁i zan ▁zen ▁bi tar te an ▁.
PRED:	There were six years old when the Temple of the Lord , and he reigned in the land of Assyria .
GOLD:	Joash remained hidden in the Temple of the Lord for six years while Athaliah ruled over the land .

ID:	1918
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁us tez ▁, ▁hi ru ro tan ▁zei nek ▁jo ka tu ▁zu en ▁la gun ▁hur ko ▁be za la ▁la pur ren ▁es ku ▁e ro ri ta ko ▁gi zo na re kin ▁?
PRED:	Are you three witnesses ? Are you going to attack us like a man ?
GOLD:	“ Now which of these three would you say was a neighbor to the man who was attacked by bandits ? ” Jesus asked .

ID:	1919
INPUT:	▁Ho ri ek ▁di ra ▁, ▁La ba nek ▁be re ▁a la ba ▁Le a ri ▁e man ▁zi on ▁Zil pa ▁nes ka me ak ▁Ja ko bi ▁sor tu ▁ziz ki on ▁se me ak ▁; ▁ha ma sei ▁guz ti ra ▁, ▁se me ▁e ta ▁bi lo ben ▁ar te an ▁.
PRED:	These are the regulations given to Laban , Laban , and Jacob gave birth to Jacob as a wife . He gave birth to Jacob 's children , and Jacob 's sons .
GOLD:	These were the sons of Zilpah , the servant given to Leah by her father , Laban . The number of Jacob 's descendants through Zilpah was sixteen .

ID:	1920
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁kon fi an tza ▁Jau na ren gan ▁e ta ▁e gin ▁on ▁de na ▁, ▁zeu re ▁her ri al de an ▁bi zi e ta ▁ber ta ko ▁a be ras ta su naz ▁go za tze ko ▁.
PRED:	Trust in the Lord with all your unfailing love and faithfulness .
GOLD:	Trust in the Lord and do good.Then you will live safely in the land and prosper .

ID:	1921
INPUT:	▁Ma di an go ▁bi ▁er re ge ek ▁, ▁Ze ba hek ▁e ta ▁Tzal mu nak ▁, ▁i hes ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁; ▁bai na ▁Ge de o nek ▁per tse gi tu ▁e ta ▁har ra pa tu ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁e ta ▁i zu tu a ▁u tzi ▁zu en ▁gu da ros te ▁o so a ▁.
PRED:	Then Manoah sent his men back and chased them away , but they chased them away . They chased them down and attacked them .
GOLD:	Zebah and Zalmunna , the two Midianite kings , fled , but Gideon chased them down and captured all their warriors .

ID:	1922
INPUT:	▁Es ku - an tze ko ▁zer bait ▁lu za tu ▁e ta ▁i le tik ▁hel du ▁zi dan ▁; ▁Jau na ren ▁es pi ri tu ak ▁ai re an ▁al txa tu ▁nin du en ▁e ta ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren gan di ko ▁i kus ka ri tan ▁, ▁Je ru sa lem go ▁tenplu ra ▁e ra man ▁, ▁i par ral de ra ▁jo tzen ▁du en ▁bar ne ko ▁a te a ren ▁on do ra ▁; ▁ber tan ▁ze go en ▁Jau na ri ▁i rain gar ri ▁e ta ▁ja sa ne zin ▁zi tzai on ▁i do lo a ▁.
PRED:	When I saw a vision , the Spirit of the Lord appeared to me from the inner Spirit of the Lord , the God of heaven , and the Ark of the Lord appeared to Jerusalem . He could see that he could not return to Jerusalem , but he could not return to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	He reached out what seemed to be a hand and took me by the hair . Then the Spirit lifted me up into the sky and transported me to Jerusalem in a vision from God . I was taken to the north gate of the inner courtyard of the Temple , where there is a large idol that has made the Lord very jealous .

ID:	1923
INPUT:	▁Las ter ka ▁da toz ▁me zu la ri ak ba ta ▁bes te a ren ▁on do - on do tik ▁, ▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁er re ge a ri ber ri ▁e ma te ra ▁: ▁“ ▁E tsai ek ▁al de rik ▁al de kon kis ta tu ▁du te ▁hi ri a ▁” ▁,
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : ‘ Go back to Babylon , king of Babylon , king of Babylon , king of Babylon , king of Babylon , king of Babylon . '
GOLD:	The news is passed from one runner to the nextas the messengers hurry to tell the kingthat his city has been captured .

ID:	1924
INPUT:	▁Hau ek ▁e san ▁zi o ten ▁Da vi di ▁: ▁— ▁Gaur ▁be te ▁da ▁Jau nak ▁e san ▁zi zun ▁hu ra ▁: ▁« ▁Zu re ▁es ku ▁uz ten ▁dut ▁zu re ▁e tsai a ▁; ▁e gi o zu ▁e go ki en ▁i ru di tzen ▁zai zu na ▁» ▁.Jai ki ▁zen ▁Da vid ▁e ta ▁, ▁i sil - i si lik ▁, ▁Sau len ▁soin gai ne ko a ren ▁er tza ▁e ba ki ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says to David , “ Today I will hand you over to your enemies , ” they said . “ I will be angry with you , and you will be angry with me . ”
GOLD:	But then David 's conscience began bothering him because he had cut Saul 's robe .

ID:	1925
INPUT:	▁Be re ▁es kuz ▁lur ral de a ▁neur tu ▁du e ta ▁ba koi tza ri ▁be re ▁sai la ▁i zen da tu.Be ti ko ▁i zan go ▁di ra ▁ha ren ▁ja be ▁, ▁men de rik ▁men de ▁bi zi ko ▁ber tan ▁.
PRED:	He has chosen each tribe to live in the land of Israel , and it is not a permanent law for us .
GOLD:	He has surveyed and divided the landand deeded it over to those creatures.They will possess it forever , from generation to generation .

ID:	1926
INPUT:	▁Er dain tze ra ▁be har tzen ▁zai tuz te ten ▁ho ri ek ▁bes te en ▁aur re an ▁on gi ▁gel di tze ar ren ▁bul tza tzen ▁zai tuz te te ▁hor re ta ra ▁, ▁e ta ▁Kris to ren ▁gu ru tze a ▁de la - e ta ▁i nork ▁per tse gi ▁ez ▁di tzan ▁.
PRED:	If you do n't need to stay away , you will be free from the trials of Christ . Instead , you will be free from the power of Christ .
GOLD:	Those who are trying to force you to be circumcised want to look good to others . They do n't want to be persecuted for teaching that the cross of Christ alone can save .

ID:	1927
INPUT:	▁Na hiz ▁ha zi a ▁kan po ra ▁i su ri ▁na hiz ▁bar ru an ▁ge ra tu ▁, ▁se xu - ja ri o a ▁be ti ▁da ▁ku tsa gar ri a ▁, ▁e ta ▁gi zo na ▁ku tsa tu ▁bi hur tzen ▁du ▁.
PRED:	Any person who is ceremonially unclean , or anyone who is ceremonially unclean . Any person who is unclean .
GOLD:	This defilement is caused by his discharge , whether the discharge continues or stops . In either case the man is unclean .

ID:	1928
INPUT:	▁hau ▁Je se re na ▁, ▁hau ▁Jo be de na ▁, ▁hau ▁Bo o ze na ▁, ▁hau ▁Sa la re na ▁, ▁hau ▁Na a so ne na ▁,
PRED:	son of Joseph was the son of Shelah , son of Shelah , son of Shelah , son of Shelah .
GOLD:	David was the son of Jesse.Jesse was the son of Obed.Obed was the son of Boaz.Boaz was the son of Salmon.Salmon was the son of Nahshon .

ID:	1929
INPUT:	▁Hai e ta rik ▁hi ru ro gei ta ▁ha mar ▁mi la ▁za ma ke ta ri ▁i zen da tu ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁lau ro gei ▁mi la ▁har gin ▁men di an ▁e ta ▁hi ru ▁mi la ▁e ta ▁sei e hun ▁lan - ar du ra dun ▁, ▁jen de a ri ▁lan ▁e ra gi te ko ▁.
PRED:	He made fifty oxen and 7,000 others who were in the hill country of the Lord . He made a spear and a hundred times a hundred times of working for the people .
GOLD:	Solomon took a census of all foreigners in the land of Israel , like the census his father had taken , and he counted 153,600 .

ID:	1930
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁nik ▁e re ▁zi gor rez ▁jo tzen ▁zai tut ▁, ▁zu re ▁be ka tu en ga tik ▁hon da tu ▁e gi ten ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , I will punish you because of your sins , I will punish you .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , I will wound you ! I will bring you to ruin for all your sins .

ID:	1931
INPUT:	▁Zer bait ▁da ki e la ko an ▁da go e nak ▁, ▁o rain dik ▁ez ▁du ▁be har ▁be za la ko ▁e za gu tza rik ▁;
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who do n't know what we 've done .
GOLD:	Anyone who claims to know all the answers does n't really know very much .

ID:	1932
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁e gip to ar ▁gu da ros te a ri ▁, ▁zal di ▁e ta ▁gu da - gur di ei ▁, ▁e gin da ko a ▁: ▁no la ▁, ▁zu ei ▁e ra so ka ▁I tsa so ▁Gor ri an ▁sar tu ▁zi re la rik ▁, ▁u rak ▁hai en ▁gai ne ra ▁a mil du ▁e ta ▁Jau nak ▁be ti ko ▁gal du ▁zi tu en ▁.
PRED:	He led his chariots and charioteers , chariots , and charioteers , and chariots , and charioteers . He struck them into the Red Sea , and the sea covered them in the sea .
GOLD:	They did n't see what the Lord did to the armies of Egypt and to their horses and chariots — how he drowned them in the Red Sea as they were chasing you . He destroyed them , and they have not recovered to this very day !

ID:	1933
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁Jau na ▁dut ▁la gun tzai le ▁: ▁hor re ga tik ▁ez ▁di da tei rai nek ▁e tsi a raz ten ▁; ▁hor re ga tik ▁go gor tu ▁dut ▁aur pe gi a har kai tza ▁be za la ▁, ▁bai ▁bai ta kit ▁ez ▁di da laus te ak ▁huts ▁e gin go ▁.
PRED:	But this is what the Lord says : “ I will punish those who trust in him , but I will never be disgraced , but those who trust in him .
GOLD:	Because the Sovereign Lord helps me , I will not be disgraced.Therefore , I have set my face like a stone , determined to do his will.And I know that I will not be put to shame .

ID:	1934
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁er re ge ak ▁: ▁— ▁Ba ▁, ▁nik ▁lau ▁gi zon ▁i kus ten ▁di tut ▁, ▁su a ren ▁er di an ▁lib re ▁da bil tza la ▁; ▁ez ▁di e ▁su ak ▁kal te rik ▁e gin ▁, ▁e ta ▁lau gar re nak ▁ain ge ru a ▁di ru di ▁.
PRED:	“ All right , ” the king said , “ I see a man who is able to rescue you from heaven , but I have no power . ”
GOLD:	“ Look ! ” Nebuchadnezzar shouted . “ I see four men , unbound , walking around in the fire unharmed ! And the fourth looks like a god ! ”

ID:	1935
INPUT:	▁Ba sa mor tu an ▁har kai tza ▁zu la tu ▁zu en ▁, ▁lur pe ko ▁u re ta tik ▁e da na raz te ko ▁.
PRED:	He took the rock from the wilderness of Sinai and water from the wilderness .
GOLD:	He split open the rocks in the wildernessto give them water , as from a gushing spring .

ID:	1936
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁Jain ko a ▁, ▁be te ▁e za zu ▁zeu re ▁zer bi tza ri ▁Da vi di ▁, ▁gu re ▁ai ta ri ▁, ▁hi tze man ▁ze ni on ▁bes te ▁hau ▁e re ▁: ▁“ ▁Ez ▁zai zu ▁fal ta ko ▁ni re ▁la gun tzaz ▁Is ra el go ▁er re ge - aul ki an ▁e se ri ko ▁den ▁on do ren go rik ▁, ▁bal din ▁e ta ▁zu re ▁se me ak ▁ni re ▁aur re an ▁bi de ▁zu ze ne an ▁i bil tzen ▁ba di ra ▁, ▁zu ▁i bi li ▁za ren ▁be za la ▁” ▁.
PRED:	“ So now , O Lord , God of Israel , will be your servant David , your servant , and your father , David , says , ‘ You will not sit on the throne of Israel , and you will sit on the throne of Israel . '
GOLD:	“ And now , O Lord , God of Israel , carry out the additional promise you made to your servant David , my father . For you said to him , ‘ If your descendants guard their behavior and faithfully follow me as you have done , one of them will always sit on the throne of Israel . '

ID:	1937
INPUT:	▁Ju da ko en ▁bil tzar ▁o so a ▁guz tiz ▁a lai ▁ze go en ▁, ▁bai ta ▁a pai zak ▁e ta ▁le bi tar rak ▁e re ▁, ▁e ta ▁o ro bat ▁Is ra el dik ▁e tor ri ta ko ▁jen de ▁guz ti a ▁, ▁na hiz ▁pe leg ri na je an ▁e tor ri ak ▁na hiz ▁Ju dan ▁ber tan ▁bi zi ▁zi re nak ▁.
PRED:	He gathered all the people of Judah and all the people of Judah and all the people of Israel , including all the people of Israel , and the people of Judah , and all the people of Judah .
GOLD:	The entire assembly of Judah rejoiced , including the priests , the Levites , all who came from the land of Israel , the foreigners who came to the festival , and all those who lived in Judah .

ID:	1938
INPUT:	▁Ja ki zu e ▁, ▁li zun ▁, ▁zi kin ▁e ta ▁gu ti zi a tsu ▁ba kar ▁ba tek ▁e re ▁— ▁ha la ko a ▁sa si jain ko za le a ▁bai ta ▁— ▁ez ▁du e la ▁Kris to ren ▁e ta ▁Jain ko a ren ▁er rei nu ko ▁on da re an ▁par te rik ▁i zan go ▁.
PRED:	So you know that some of you were wise and wise , and you are worthless in the Kingdom of God . And if you do n't have the Kingdom of God , we will share in the Kingdom of Christ .
GOLD:	You can be sure that no immoral , impure , or greedy person will inherit the Kingdom of Christ and of God . For a greedy person is an idolater , worshiping the things of this world .

ID:	1939
INPUT:	▁u ra ▁ho dei e tan ▁pi la tu e ta ▁ho dei ak ▁ez ▁di ra ▁pi su az ▁le her tzen ▁;
PRED:	He sends rain on the clouds of gloom ; he does not shine down on the clouds .
GOLD:	He wraps the rain in his thick clouds , and the clouds do n't burst with the weight .

ID:	1940
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁be di ▁gi zon ▁ho riJau nak ▁gu pi da ga be ▁er raus tu ▁zi tu en hi ri en ▁an tze ko ▁! ▁En tzun ▁bi tza ▁goi ze an ▁gar ra si ▁lar ri ak ▁, ▁e gu er di an ▁ger ra - ir rin tzi ak ▁!
PRED:	He rescued me from death , and he rescued me from the ends of the sea .
GOLD:	Let him be destroyed like the cities of oldthat the Lord overthrew without mercy.Terrify him all day long with battle shouts ,

ID:	1941
INPUT:	▁Zen bat ▁al diz ▁al txa tu ▁zi tzaiz ki on ▁kon tra ▁ba sa mor tu an ▁, ▁zen bat ▁al diz ▁a tse ka be tu ▁zu ten ▁ba kar le ku an ▁!
PRED:	But many times before him , so he became very angry with them in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Oh , how often they rebelled against him in the wildernessand grieved his heart in that dry wasteland .

ID:	1942
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁e ma ku me a ▁, ▁hur bil du rik ▁, ▁a hus pez ▁jar ri ▁zi tzai on ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁— ▁La gun ▁na za zu ▁, ▁Jau na ▁.
PRED:	But the woman approached him and bowed low before him . “ Lord , help me ! ” she said .
GOLD:	But she came and worshiped him , pleading again , “ Lord , help me ! ”

ID:	1943
INPUT:	▁E rein ▁goi ze an ▁zeu re ▁ha zi a ▁, ▁e ta ▁ar ra tsal de an ▁e re ▁ez ▁e gin ▁o por ▁, ▁ez ▁bai ta ki zu ▁e rei nal di ▁bi e tan zein ▁i za nen ▁du zun ▁ho be re na ▁, ▁ez ta ▁ba ta ▁bes te a ▁be zain ▁o nai zan go ▁den ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	In the morning you will live in the morning and you will be gone , and you will have no need to live in this land . And if you do n't have any of your brothers or daughters , you will be like this .
GOLD:	Plant your seed in the morning and keep busy all afternoon , for you do n't know if profit will come from one activity or another — or maybe both .

ID:	1944
INPUT:	▁E ma da zu ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁e gun ▁har tan ▁hi tze man da ko ▁men di al de ▁ho ri ▁. ▁Zeuk ▁e re ▁or du an ▁ja kin ▁ze nu en ▁A nak ▁er ral doi a ren ▁on do ren go ak ▁bi zi ▁di re la ▁ber tan ▁e ta ▁hi ri ▁han di ▁e ta ▁go tor tu ak ▁di tuz te la ▁. ▁Jau na ▁ni re kin ▁i za te a ▁es pe ro ▁dut ▁e ta ▁ho ri ek ▁be ren ▁lur ral de tik ▁bo ta tze a ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁hi tze man ▁be za la ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ At that time the Lord gave this message to the people of the east of the hill country . But you were living in the land I had given to you , just as the Lord had promised , and I will give you victory over the land . ”
GOLD:	So give me the hill country that the Lord promised me . You will remember that as scouts we found the descendants of Anak living there in great , walled towns . But if the Lord is with me , I will drive them out of the land , just as the Lord said . ”

ID:	1945
INPUT:	▁i zan ▁e re ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁i tu na ▁ez ▁zu ten ▁gor de ▁, ▁ez ▁zi o ten ▁ha ren ▁le ge a ri ▁jar rai tu ▁na hi ▁i zan ▁;
PRED:	For they refused to obey God 's law , but they refused to obey him .
GOLD:	They did not keep God 's covenantand refused to live by his instructions .

ID:	1946
INPUT:	▁Hor re ta ra ko ▁hil ▁e ta ▁piz tu ▁zen ▁Kris to ▁: ▁hil da ko en ▁e ta ▁bi zi en ▁Jau na ▁i za te ko ▁.
PRED:	That is why Christ died , and he died in the resurrection of the dead .
GOLD:	Christ died and rose again for this very purpose — to be Lord both of the living and of the dead .

ID:	1947
INPUT:	▁De na ▁den ▁, ▁e gin ▁guz ti a ▁duin ta su nez ▁e ta ▁or de naz ▁.
PRED:	So do everything is good and beautiful .
GOLD:	But be sure that everything is done properly and in order .

ID:	1948
INPUT:	▁Ez ku tu ko ▁o pa ri ak ▁su mi na ▁ba re tzen ▁du ▁, ▁i sil ka ko ▁er re ga lu ak ▁ha ser re rik ▁bi zi e na ▁.
PRED:	If a person does not burn a burn on a fire , it will be burned on fire .
GOLD:	A secret gift calms anger ; a bribe under the table pacifies fury .

ID:	1949
INPUT:	▁Hi ru gar ren ▁i zur ri a ▁: ▁el txo ak
PRED:	A Plague of Locusts
GOLD:	A Plague of Frogs

ID:	1950
INPUT:	<unk> ber ri - e gu ne tan ▁ze zen ▁bat ▁, ▁sei ▁ar ku me ▁e ta ▁a ha ri ▁bat ▁, ▁de nak ▁a kats ▁ga be ak ▁, ▁es kai ni ko ▁diz kit ▁.
PRED:	On the day of your young men will be a young bull , a young bull , a ram , and a young bull , a ram , and a male lambs .
GOLD:	At the new moon celebrations , he will bring one young bull , six lambs , and one ram , all with no defects .

ID:	1951
INPUT:	▁Er ru ki ▁ni taz ▁, ▁Jau na ▁: ▁zu ri ▁dei ka ▁a ri ▁naiz ▁e gun ▁o so an ▁.
PRED:	O Lord , I cry out to you ; I cry out to you .
GOLD:	Be merciful to me , O Lord , for I am calling on you constantly .

ID:	1952
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁al ▁da ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁a ro tza ▁, ▁Ma ri a ren ▁se me a ▁e ta ▁San ti a go ▁, ▁Jo se ▁, ▁Ju das ▁e ta ▁Si mo nen ▁a nai a ▁? ▁E ta ▁ho nen ▁ar re bak ▁e re ▁ez ▁o te ▁di ra ▁he men ▁gu re ▁ar te an ▁bi zi ▁? ▁» ▁E ta ▁ho nen ga tik ▁, ▁e zin ▁zu ten ▁si ne tsi ▁ha ren gan ▁.
PRED:	Do n't you realize that Jesus is dead ? He is the son of Joseph , who is his brothers , Joseph , and his brothers , and his brothers , are still alive . ”
GOLD:	Then they scoffed , “ He 's just a carpenter , the son of Mary and the brother of James , Joseph , Judas , and Simon . And his sisters live right here among us. ” They were deeply offended and refused to believe in him .

ID:	1953
INPUT:	▁ar lo te a ▁be za la ▁i ri tsi ko ▁zai zu ▁ga be zi a ▁, ▁es ka le a ▁be za la ▁e tor ri ko ▁mi se ri a ▁.
PRED:	You will fall like a robber , like a thousand nations that refuse to fall .
GOLD:	then poverty will pounce on you like a bandit ; scarcity will attack you like an armed robber .

ID:	1954
INPUT:	▁E san ▁zi en ▁: ▁« ▁Ni re ▁, ▁zu en ▁Jain ko ▁Jaun ▁ho nen ▁, ▁min tzo a ▁ar re taz ▁en tzu ten ▁ba du zu e ▁, ▁e ta ▁ni ri ▁a tse gin ▁zai da na ▁e gi ten ▁, ▁ni re ▁a gin du ak ▁a di tzen ▁ba di tu zu e ▁e ta ▁ni re ▁a rau ak ▁be te tzen ▁, ▁ez ▁di zu et ▁zu ei ▁e gip to ar rei ▁bi da li ▁ni en ▁gai tzik ▁i gor ri ko ▁, ▁ni ▁, ▁Jaun ▁hau ▁, ▁sen da gi le ▁bai nau zu e ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : If you listen to me , listen to me and obey my commands , and if you do n't listen to me , I will punish you , for I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	He said , “ If you will listen carefully to the voice of the Lord your God and do what is right in his sight , obeying his commands and keeping all his decrees , then I will not make you suffer any of the diseases I sent on the Egyptians ; for I am the Lord who heals you . ”

ID:	1955
INPUT:	▁A xer ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁se me ok ▁: ▁Im na ▁, ▁Ix ba ▁, ▁Ix bi ▁, ▁Be ri a ▁e ta ▁hau en ▁ar re ba ▁Se rah ▁. ▁Be ri a ren ▁se me ak ▁He ber ▁e ta ▁Mal ki el ▁i zan ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	The sons of Asher were Asher , Asher , and Uzziel . Their descendants became the ancestor of Zerah . Their descendants became the ancestor of the clans of Israel .
GOLD:	The sons of Asher were Imnah , Ishvah , Ishvi , and Beriah . Their sister was Serah . Beriah 's sons were Heber and Malkiel .

ID:	1956
INPUT:	▁« ▁E ta ▁jan tzi az ▁, ▁zer tan ▁kez ka tu ▁? ▁Be gi ra ▁no la ▁haz ten ▁di ren ▁lo re ak ▁ze lai e tan ▁: ▁ez ▁di ra ▁la ne an ▁pe na tzen ▁, ▁ez ▁du te ▁i ru ten ▁;
PRED:	“ What do you think about this ? Who is the one who is in the heavens ? Why do n't you look at the lilies ?
GOLD:	“ And why worry about your clothing ? Look at the lilies of the field and how they grow . They do n't work or make their clothing ,

ID:	1957
INPUT:	▁Aur re ra tu ▁zen ▁ta len tu ▁ba kar ra ▁har tu ▁zu e na ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁“ ▁Ba ne ki en ▁gi zon ▁zor ro tza ▁za re na ▁, ▁e rein ▁ez ▁du zun ▁to ki an ▁har tzen ▁e ta ▁za bal du ▁ez ▁du zun ▁to ki an ▁bil tzen ▁du zu na ▁;
PRED:	Then the servant took the bags of silver and said to him , ‘ If you plant your crops , you wo n't plant your crops , you wo n't plant it .
GOLD:	“ Then the servant with the one bag of silver came and said , ‘ Master , I knew you were a harsh man , harvesting crops you did n't plant and gathering crops you did n't cultivate .

ID:	1958
INPUT:	▁Ze bah ▁e ta ▁Tzal mu na ▁Kar kor ▁hi ri an ▁zi ren ▁be ren ▁gu da ros te a re kin ▁. ▁Ha ma bost ▁mi la ▁gi zon ▁bes te rik ▁ez ▁zu ten ▁; ▁i zan ▁e re ▁, ▁e ki al de ko ▁jen de a ren ▁gu da ros te ko ▁e hun ▁e ta ▁ho gei ▁mi la ▁gu da ri ▁gal du ak ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	Then Gideon and his army went with his army , and they killed 10,000 warriors .
GOLD:	By this time Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor with about 15,000 warriors — all that remained of the allied armies of the east , for 120,000 had already been killed .

ID:	1959
INPUT:	▁E li ren ▁he ri o tza
PRED:	The Death of Eli
GOLD:	The Death of Eli

ID:	1960
INPUT:	▁I go a ra zi ▁ni tu en ▁Ju da ko ▁bu ru za gi ak ▁har re si a ren ▁gai ne ra ▁e ta ▁bi ▁a bes tal de ▁e gin ▁ni tu en ▁. ▁Le he nen go ▁a bes tal de a ▁es kui ne ra ▁jo an ▁zen ▁har re si ▁gai ne an ▁, ▁Za bor te gi ko ▁a te ▁al de ra ▁.
PRED:	Then I took my head to the wall of Judah and tore it on the wall of Judah 's head . He went to the top of the hill country of Zebulun and on the top of the hill .
GOLD:	I led the leaders of Judah to the top of the wall and organized two large choirs to give thanks . One of the choirs proceeded southward along the top of the wall to the Dung Gate .

ID:	1961
INPUT:	▁I tzul tze an ▁, ▁er re ka ren ▁al de ▁bi e tan ▁zu haitz ▁as ko ▁ze go e la ▁o har tu ▁nin tzen ▁.
PRED:	When I returned to the end of the two trees , I discovered that the trees had been dried up .
GOLD:	When I returned , I was surprised by the sight of many trees growing on both sides of the river .

ID:	1962
INPUT:	▁Be ren ▁lur ral de an ▁lan da tu ko ▁di tut ▁, ▁e ta ▁nik ▁e man ▁lur re ti kez ▁di tuz te ▁i noiz ▁a te ra ko ▁» ▁.Zu re ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁e san ▁du ▁.
PRED:	I will send you into the land of the Lord your God , and you will say , ‘ The Lord , the God of Israel ! ' ”
GOLD:	I will firmly plant them therein their own land.They will never again be uprootedfrom the land I have given them , ” says the Lord your God .

ID:	1963
INPUT:	▁Be re a ko ▁ju du ek ▁, ▁Te sa lo ni ka ko ak ▁bai no ▁ja tor ra go ak ▁i za ki ▁e ta ▁, ▁go go ▁bi ziz ▁har tu ▁zu ten ▁me zu a ▁; ▁e gu ne ro ▁az ter tu ▁o hi ▁zi tuz ten ▁Li bu ru ▁San tu ak ▁, ▁gau zak ▁ha la ▁o te ▁zi ren ▁i kus te ko ▁.
PRED:	Some Jews from Tekoa , who knew what Paul had happened . They tried to hear the word of the province of Tekoa , who knew what the Scriptures meant .
GOLD:	And the people of Berea were more open-minded than those in Thessalonica , and they listened eagerly to Paul 's message . They searched the Scriptures day after day to see if Paul and Silas were teaching the truth .

ID:	1964
INPUT:	▁Se men ▁on do ren go ak ▁Ab ra ha men ga nai no
PRED:	Descendants of Abraham
GOLD:	The Line of Descent from Shem to Abram

ID:	1965
INPUT:	▁bai zik ▁e ta ▁lur re ra ▁i su ri ko ▁du zu e ▁, ▁u ra ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	But you will be the same kind of water , just as you do .
GOLD:	Instead , pour out the blood on the ground like water .

ID:	1966
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren ▁e gin tzak ▁is ra el dar ren ▁be gi - bis tan
PRED:	A Song of the Lord 's Covenant
GOLD:	The Blessings of Obedience

ID:	1967
INPUT:	▁Bi ho tza ▁u ki tu ko ▁di et ▁is ra el dar ▁guz ti ei ▁, ▁be ren ▁i do lo en ga tik ▁ni re gan dik ▁ur run du ▁di ren ▁ho ri ei ▁.
PRED:	I will turn away from all the people of Israel , and they will turn away from their idols .
GOLD:	I will do this to capture the minds and hearts of all my people who have turned from me to worship their detestable idols . '

ID:	1968
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁ho gei ta ▁ha mar ren ▁bat ▁ur te ▁zi tu en ▁be re ▁e gi te ko a ri ▁e kin ▁zi o ne an ▁, ▁e ta ▁jen de a ren ▁us te tan ▁Jo se ren ▁se me a ▁zen ▁; ▁Jo se ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁E li re na ▁,
PRED:	He was thirty years old when he became king , and he became the next king 's son . He was Joseph 's son .
GOLD:	Jesus was about thirty years old when he began his public ministry.Jesus was known as the son of Joseph.Joseph was the son of Heli .

ID:	1969
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁da go ▁ba te re ▁on gi ▁e gin ▁du zu na ▁. ▁A la ▁Jain ko a ▁! ▁He ri o tza ▁me re zi ▁du zu e ▁de nok ▁, ▁zeu en ▁na gu si a ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁gan tzu tu a ▁, ▁zain du ▁ez ▁du zu e la ko ▁. ▁Be gi ra ▁non ▁dau den ▁er re ge ak ▁be re ▁on do an ▁zi tu en ▁lan tza ▁e ta ▁ur - an to xi na ▁.
PRED:	You must not do what is right , for you have done to the word of the Lord your God . You have anointed the king 's anointed one of the king of Assyria , and you have placed them in the fields .
GOLD:	This is n't good at all ! I swear by the Lord that you and your men deserve to die , because you failed to protect your master , the Lord 's anointed ! Look around ! Where are the king 's spear and the jug of water that were beside his head ? ”

ID:	1970
INPUT:	▁Le hoi ▁gaz te ▁bi hur tu rik ▁, ▁le hoi ▁ar te an ▁i bil tzen ▁zen ▁; ▁har ra pa ki na ▁sar ras ki tzen ▁i ka si e ta ▁gi za ki ak ▁i rensten ▁zi tu en ▁;
PRED:	When the young lion looked like a lion , he looked like a lion , and he mobilized them into pieces .
GOLD:	He prowled among the other lionsand stood out among them in his strength.He learned to hunt and devour prey , and he , too , became a man-eater .

ID:	1971
INPUT:	▁Sar re ra ren ▁kan po al de tik ▁a ta lon do a ren ▁bar ne al de rai no ▁, ▁guz ti ra ▁, ▁ho gei ta ▁bost ▁me tro ▁zeu den ▁.
PRED:	The entry room of the entry room was 101/2 feet long and 433/4 feet wide .
GOLD:	The full length of the gateway passage was 871/2 feet from one end to the other .

ID:	1972
INPUT:	▁Bes te ▁guz ti ei ▁a ger tu ▁on do ren ▁, ▁neu ri ▁e re ▁a ger tu ▁zi tzai dan ▁, ▁ga raiz ▁kan po ▁jai o ta ko ▁haur ra ▁be za la ko a ▁nai zen ▁ho ni ▁;
PRED:	Then all the other believers appeared to me and said , “ I am coming to this time , just as I am coming . ”
GOLD:	Last of all , as though I had been born at the wrong time , I also saw him .

ID:	1973
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁do lu ▁e gin go ▁du ▁lur rak ▁, ▁i lun du ▁e gin go ▁goi an ▁or tzi a ▁, ▁har tu a ▁bai tut ▁e ra ba ki a ▁; ▁ez ▁naiz ▁da mu tu ko ▁, ▁ez ▁a tze ra ▁e gin go ▁» ▁.
PRED:	That is why the land will be gone , and the earth will be gone . But I will not allow it to change . ”
GOLD:	The earth will mournand the heavens will be draped in blackbecause of my decree against my people.I have made up my mind and will not change it . ”

ID:	1974
INPUT:	▁Hai ek ▁e san ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁— ▁Jau na ▁, ▁ba di tu gu ▁he men ▁bi ▁ez pa <unk> na ▁Je su sek ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁As ki ▁da ▁!
PRED:	“ Lord , ” they said , “ we 're going to drown ! ” But Jesus said , “ we 're going out ! ”
GOLD:	“ Look , Lord , ” they replied , “ we have two swords among us. ” “ That 's enough , ” he said .

ID:	1975
INPUT:	▁De nak ▁Ga ten ▁jar ri ▁zi ren ▁bi zi tzen ▁, ▁A ki xen ▁in gu ru an ▁: ▁Da vi den ▁gi zo nak ▁nor ▁be re ▁fa mi li a re kin ▁e ta ▁Da vid ▁be ra ▁be re ▁bi ▁e maz te e kin ▁, ▁Iz re el go ▁A hi no a me kin ▁e ta ▁Kar mel go ▁Na ba len ▁e maz te ▁i za na ▁zen ▁A bi gai le kin ▁.
PRED:	So all the men of Gad and his men were living in the villages of Jezreel . David 's wife was Ahinoam from Jezreel and his wife , the widow of Nabal from Jezreel .
GOLD:	David and his men and their families settled there with Achish at Gath . David brought his two wives along with him — Ahinoam from Jezreel and Abigail , Nabal 's widow from Carmel .

ID:	1976
INPUT:	▁Sa lo mo nek ▁, ▁be re ▁e maz te e ta rik ▁bat ▁, ▁fa ra oi a ren ▁a la ba ▁, ▁Da vi den ▁Hi ri tik ▁be ra ren tzat ▁e rai ki ta ko ▁jau re gi ra ▁i go a ra zi ▁zu en ▁, ▁be re ▁bai tan ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁« ▁Ni re ▁e maz te ▁ho nek ▁ez ▁du ▁zi le gi ▁Is ra el go ▁er re ge ▁Da vi den ▁jau re gi an ▁bi zi tze a ▁, ▁san tu ak ▁bai ti ra ▁Jau na ren ▁ku txa ▁e gon ▁de ne ko ▁to ki ak ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Solomon 's wife was a descendant of Pharaoh 's wife , and he was buried in the City of David . He said , “ He will not allow my people to live in the City of David , for I am the Lord , the God of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Solomon moved his wife , Pharaoh 's daughter , from the City of David to the new palace he had built for her . He said , “ My wife must not live in King David 's palace , for the Ark of the Lord has been there , and it is holy ground . ”

ID:	1977
INPUT:	▁bi zi a ▁e ma ten ▁du en ▁me zu a ri ▁tin ko ▁eu tsiz ▁. ▁Ho ri xe ▁i zan go ▁dut ▁nik ▁har ro tze ko ▁bi de ▁Kris to ▁a ger tu ko ▁den ▁e gu ne an ▁, ▁ni re ▁le hi a ▁e ta ▁ne ke ak ▁ez ▁bai ti tut ▁al fer rik ▁e ma nak ▁i zan go ▁.
PRED:	This is what I have written to you . This is what I have written in Christ , which I will be revealed to Christ , and I will never be able to teach .
GOLD:	Hold firmly to the word of life ; then , on the day of Christ 's return , I will be proud that I did not run the race in vain and that my work was not useless .

ID:	1978
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Bo o zek ▁her ri ko ▁na gu si ei ▁e ta ▁han ▁zeu den ▁guz ti ei ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁Gaur ▁le ku ko ▁zai tuz tet ▁, ▁no la ▁e ros ten ▁di o dan ▁No e mi ri ▁E li me le ke na ▁e ta ▁Ki li on ▁e ta ▁Mah lo ne na ▁zen ▁guz ti a ▁.
PRED:	Then Boaz said to his people , “ Today I am going to bring you back to the land of Canaan , and I am giving you the family of Naomi . ”
GOLD:	Then Boaz said to the elders and to the crowd standing around , “ You are witnesses that today I have bought from Naomi all the property of Elimelech , Kilion , and Mahlon .

ID:	1979
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁O gi - pus ka ▁bus ti a ▁e man go ▁di o da na ▁, ▁hu ra xe <unk> ta ▁o gi - pus ka ▁bat ▁bus tiz ▁, ▁Si mon ▁Is ka ri o te ren ▁se me ▁Ju da si ▁e man ▁zi on ▁.
PRED:	Jesus told him , “ Look , ” Jesus told him . “ Your son will be a piece of bread , and your son will be healed . ”
GOLD:	Jesus responded , “ It is the one to whom I give the bread I dip in the bowl. ” And when he had dipped it , he gave it to Judas , son of Simon Iscariot .

ID:	1980
INPUT:	▁« ▁Men di ak ▁, ▁o har tu ▁ga be ▁, ▁le kuz ▁al da tzen ▁di tu ▁be rak ▁, ▁i rau li ▁e gi ten ▁di tu ▁be re ▁ha ser re an ▁;
PRED:	“ mountains fall on the mountains , without their homes , and they burn their homes .
GOLD:	“ Without warning , he moves the mountains , overturning them in his anger .

ID:	1981
INPUT:	▁Hi ru ▁se me ▁i zan ▁zi tu en ▁: ▁Sem ▁, ▁Kam ▁e ta ▁Ja fet ▁.
PRED:	The three sons of Japheth were Shem , Ham , and Japheth .
GOLD:	Noah was the father of three sons : Shem , Ham , and Japheth .

ID:	1982
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁zed ro - zu ra ▁, ▁i si pu a ▁, ▁pur pu ra ▁gor ri mi na ▁e ta ▁he gaz ti ▁bi zi a ▁har tu rik ▁, ▁he gaz ti ▁hi la ren ▁o do le tan ▁e ta ▁i tur bu ru ko ▁u re tan ▁bus ti ko ▁di tu ▁, ▁e ta ▁zaz pi ▁bi der ▁zi priz tin du ko ▁du ▁e txe a ▁.
PRED:	He will make a single piece of blue cloth , purple , and scarlet piece of blue cloth , purple , and scarlet thread . He will dip his finger into two pieces . He will dip his finger in a single piece of blue cloth .
GOLD:	He will take the cedar stick , the hyssop branch , the scarlet yarn , and the live bird , and dip them into the blood of the slaughtered bird and into the fresh water . Then he will sprinkle the house seven times .

ID:	1983
INPUT:	▁A ka zi a - zu rez ko ▁in tsen tsu - al da re a ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁, ▁kar ra tu a ▁: ▁me tro ▁er di ▁bat ▁lu ze - za bal ▁e ta ▁me tro ▁bat ▁go ra ▁. ▁Al da re - er tze ko ▁a dar rek ▁gor putz ▁bat ▁be ra ▁e gi ten ▁zu ten ▁al da re a re kin ▁.
PRED:	Then Bezalel made the incense altar of acacia wood , measuring feet high . It was 71/2 feet long and 41/2 feet high .
GOLD:	Then Bezalel made the incense altar of acacia wood . It was 18 inches square and 36 inches high , with horns at the corners carved from the same piece of wood as the altar itself .

ID:	1984
INPUT:	▁Je sus ▁he ri o tza ra ▁kon de na tu a
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	The Crucifixion

ID:	1985
INPUT:	▁E zer ta ra ko ▁ez ▁ni tu en ▁hai en ▁be so ak ▁, ▁ze ha ro ▁a hul du ak ▁bai tzeu den ▁.
PRED:	And I will not be afraid of them , for they were weak .
GOLD:	A lot of good they are to me — those worn-out wretches !

ID:	1986
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁fa ra oi ak ▁Moi se si ▁e ta ▁A a ro ni ▁dei ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁Er re gu tu ▁Jau na ri ▁i ge lak ▁ni ri ▁e ta ▁ni re ▁her ri a ri ▁ken tze ko ▁, ▁e ta ▁u tzi ko ▁di ot ▁zu en ▁her ri a ri ▁Jau na ri ▁sak ri fi zi o ak ▁es kain tze ra ▁jo a ten ▁.
PRED:	Then Pharaoh summoned Moses and Aaron and said , “ We have taken away my people and brought them back to the Lord , and I will take away my people and offer sacrifices to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Frogs will jump on you , your people , and all your officials . ' ”

ID:	1987
INPUT:	▁Ha ma te ko ▁er re ge ▁Toi - k ▁ja kin ▁zu en ▁hon da tu a ▁zu e la ▁Da vi dek ▁Ha da de zer ren ▁gu da ros te ▁o so a ▁.
PRED:	The king of Sheba heard that David had deserted his entire army .
GOLD:	When King Toi of Hamath heard that David had destroyed the entire army of Hadadezer ,

ID:	1988
INPUT:	▁Jain ko a ren ▁ma ki la ▁ken du ko ▁li da ke ▁gai ne ti ke ta ▁ha ren ga na ko ▁i zu ak ▁ez ▁nin du ke ▁i ka ra tu ko ▁.
PRED:	I would take my staff from God 's presence , and I would not forgive my sins .
GOLD:	The mediator could make God stop beating me , and I would no longer live in terror of his punishment .

ID:	1989
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁be so - el bar ri a ri ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Jai ki ▁e ta ▁za toz ▁ho na ▁er di ra ▁.
PRED:	Then Jesus said to the disciples , “ Come down , let 's go down to the brook . ”
GOLD:	Jesus said to the man with the deformed hand , “ Come and stand in front of everyone . ”

ID:	1990
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁e tor ri ▁zi tzai zu en ▁Jo an ▁Ba tai a tzai le a ▁Jain ko a ren ▁na hi a ri ▁da go ki on ▁jo ka bi de a ▁a zal duz ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁ze ni o ten ▁si ne tsi ▁; ▁zer ga la ri ek ▁e ta ▁e ma gal du ek ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁si ne tsi ▁zi o ten ▁. ▁E ta ▁zu ek ▁, ▁ho ri ▁i ku si ta ▁e re ▁, ▁ez ▁za re te ▁al da tu ▁: ▁o rain dik ▁ez ▁di o zu e ▁si ne tsi ▁.
PRED:	For John was coming when John was preaching about John , he was preaching the Good News . He did n't believe what he meant . He said , “ You have seen the prostitute , but you did n't believe it . But you did n't believe it . ”
GOLD:	For John the Baptist came and showed you the right way to live , but you did n't believe him , while tax collectors and prostitutes did . And even when you saw this happening , you refused to believe him and repent of your sins .

ID:	1991
INPUT:	▁Bes te ▁jan tzi ▁sak ra tu ak
PRED:	The Year of Jubilee
GOLD:	Additional Clothing for the Priests

ID:	1992
INPUT:	▁E ze ki as ▁e ta ▁jen de ▁guz ti a ▁po zik ▁ze go en ▁, ▁Jain ko ak ▁her ri ▁o so a ri ▁hor re la ▁e ra gin ▁zi o la ko ▁; ▁de na ▁bat - ba te an ▁e ra tu a ▁bai tzu ten ▁.
PRED:	When Hezekiah heard that Hezekiah was very glad , he was filled with joy because he was speaking to all the people .
GOLD:	And Hezekiah and all the people rejoiced because of what God had done for the people , for everything had been accomplished so quickly .

ID:	1993
INPUT:	▁Txa lo ▁e ta ▁txis tu ▁jo tzen ▁di o te ▁be re ▁e txe tik ▁al de ▁e gi te an ▁» ▁.
PRED:	They will go home and tell him what they say . ”
GOLD:	But everyone jeers at themand mocks them .

ID:	1994
INPUT:	▁I sa kar ren ▁lei nu ko ▁se ni tar te ak ▁: ▁To la ren gan dik ▁to la tar rak ▁, ▁Pu ba ren gan dik ▁pu ba tar rak ▁,
PRED:	These were the clans descended from the sons of Issachar : The clan , named after their ancestor Hepher .
GOLD:	These were the clans descended from the sons of Issachar : The Tolaite clan , named after their ancestor Tola.The Puite clan , named after their ancestor Puah .

ID:	1995
INPUT:	▁Se ni de ok ▁, ▁ez ▁i bi li ▁ba ta ▁bes te a ren ga tik ▁gaiz ki - e sa ka ▁. ▁Be re ▁se ni de az ▁gaiz ki ▁e sa ten ▁e do ▁hu ra ▁e pai tzen ▁du e nak ▁Jain ko a ren ▁le ge az ▁e sa ten ▁du ▁gaiz ki ▁e ta ▁le ge a ▁e pai tzen ▁du ▁. ▁E ta ▁le ge a ▁e pai tzen ▁ba du zu ▁, ▁ez ▁za ra ▁le ge a ren ▁be te tzai le ▁, ▁e pai le ▁bai zik ▁.
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , do n't be careful to obey the law of God . And if you do n't obey the law of God 's law , you are subject to the law of God . But if you do n't obey God 's law , you are not subject to the law .
GOLD:	Do n't speak evil against each other , dear brothers and sisters . If you criticize and judge each other , then you are criticizing and judging God 's law . But your job is to obey the law , not to judge whether it applies to you .

ID:	1996
INPUT:	▁Sau lek ▁Da vi di ▁: ▁— ▁Be dein ka tu a ▁zu ▁, ▁e ne ▁se me ▁Da vid ▁! ▁Han di ak ▁e gi nen ▁di tu zu ▁e ta ▁ga rai le ▁i zan go ▁e gin tza ▁guz ti e tan ▁! ▁Da vid ▁be re ▁bi de tik ▁jo an ▁zen ▁, ▁e ta ▁Saul ▁e txe ra ▁i tzu li ▁.
PRED:	“ All right , ” Saul said . “ Be strong , my son , David , and David 's sons will go home and go home home .
GOLD:	And Saul said to David , “ Blessings on you , my son David . You will do many heroic deeds , and you will surely succeed. ” Then David went away , and Saul returned home .

ID:	1997
INPUT:	▁Is ra e len ▁ar gi ▁den ▁Jain ko a su ▁bi hur tu ko ▁da ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁San tu a ▁su gar ▁, ▁e ta ▁bat - ba te an ▁er re ko ▁di tu ▁, ▁sa si a ▁e ta ▁la har ra ▁bai li ran ▁.
PRED:	This is the Holy One of Israel , the Holy One of Israel , who is a devouring fire .
GOLD:	The Lord , the Light of Israel , will be a fire ; the Holy One will be a flame.He will devour the thorns and briers with fire , burning up the enemy in a single night .

ID:	1998
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁di o ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁« ▁Ha ra ▁, ▁ba da toz ▁e gu nak ▁: ▁lur re ra ▁go se a ▁bi da li ko ▁dut ▁; ▁ez ▁o gi - go se a ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁ur - e gar ri a ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁hi tza ▁en tzu te ko go se - e gar ri a ▁bai zik ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ Look , I will send disaster on the earth and famine , but I will not listen to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ The time is surely coming , ” says the Sovereign Lord , “ when I will send a famine on the land — not a famine of bread or waterbut of hearing the words of the Lord .

ID:	1999
INPUT:	▁E rai kin - mul tzo ▁hark ▁, ▁i par ral de tik ▁, ▁ber ro gei ta ▁ha mar ▁me tro ko ▁lu ze ra ▁zu en ▁, ▁e ta ▁ho gei ta ▁bos te ko ▁za ba le ra ▁.
PRED:	He measured the north side of the north side of the north . He measured the north side of the north .
GOLD:	This structure , whose entrance opened toward the north , was 175 feet long and 871/2 feet wide .

ID:	2000
INPUT:	▁Ju bi leu ▁Ur te a ren ▁on do ren ▁sa ga ra tzen ▁ba da ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁a pai zak ▁a te ra ko ▁du ▁pre zi o a ren ▁kon tu a ▁, ▁hur ren go ▁Ju bi leu ▁Ur te a ▁ar te ▁fal ta ▁di ren ▁ur te ei ▁da go ki e na ▁pre zi o ▁o ro kor re tik ▁ken duz ▁.
PRED:	But if the Year of Jubilee , the priests must return to the Year of Jubilee , the Year of Jubilee , the Year of Jubilee will be bought from the Year of Jubilee .
GOLD:	But if the field is dedicated after the Year of Jubilee , the priest will assess the land 's value in proportion to the number of years left until the next Year of Jubilee . Its assessed value is reduced each year .

ID:	2001
INPUT:	▁Ga ba on ▁hi ri ko ▁bi zi la gun ▁hi bi ar rek ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁Jo su ek ▁Je ri ko ▁e ta ▁Ai ▁hi ri ei ▁e gi na ▁ja ki te an ▁,
PRED:	But Joshua continued to live in the city of Ai , but Joshua and the people of Ai .
GOLD:	But when the people of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done to Jericho and Ai ,

ID:	2002
INPUT:	▁Zeu re ▁Jain ko a ren ▁e txe ra ko ▁be har ▁i za nen ▁du zun ▁guz ti a ▁, ▁er re ge a ren ▁al txor te gi tik ▁e man go ▁di zu te ▁.
PRED:	You will be like the Temple of God , and you will give you everything you need .
GOLD:	If you need anything else for your God 's Temple or for any similar needs , you may take it from the royal treasury .

ID:	2003
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁ez ▁di et ▁er ru ki rik ▁i zan go ▁, ▁ez ta ▁bar ka tu ko ▁e re ▁. ▁Be ren ▁jo ka bi de a ren ▁or dai na ▁e man go ▁di et ▁» ▁.
PRED:	So I will not forgive their sins , but I will not forgive their sins . ”
GOLD:	So I will not spare them or have any pity on them . I will fully repay them for all they have done . ”

ID:	2004
INPUT:	▁Ba ru kek ▁li bu ru an ▁i da tzi ta ko ▁Je re mi a sen ▁me zu a ▁i ra kur ri ▁zu en ▁her ri ▁guz ti a ren ▁aur re an ▁. ▁Xa fa nen ▁se me ▁Ge ma ri as ▁gor te ko ▁i daz ka ri a ren ▁ge lan ▁ko ka tu ▁zen ▁hor re ta ra ko ▁, ▁A te ▁Ber ri a ren ▁sar re ran ▁ze go en ▁goi ko ▁a ta ri an ▁.
PRED:	So Baruch wrote this message to Jeremiah and read it to the people . He wrote this message to Shaphan son of Ahikam and grandson of Shaphan son of Shaphan in the court secretary .
GOLD:	Baruch read Jeremiah 's words on the scroll to all the people . He stood in front of the Temple room of Gemariah , son of Shaphan the secretary . This room was just off the upper courtyard of the Temple , near the New Gate entrance .

ID:	2005
INPUT:	▁Ba koi tza ri ▁al da tze ko ▁jan tzi ak ▁e man ▁ziz ki on ▁. ▁Ben ja mi ni ▁, ▁gai ne ra ▁, ▁bost ▁jan tzi ▁e ta ▁zi lar rez ko ▁hi ru re hun ▁txan pon ▁.
PRED:	He gave two pieces of silver to the Lord , and he gave them five pieces of silver . He also gave them five pieces of silver , and five pieces of silver .
GOLD:	And he gave each of them new clothes — but to Benjamin he gave five changes of clothes and 300 pieces of silver .

ID:	2006
INPUT:	▁gil tzur ru nak ▁gai ne ko ▁gan tza re kin ▁, ▁sai he tsei ▁i tsa tsi a ▁da go en ▁gan tza ▁e ta ▁gi be la ▁es tal tzen ▁du e na ▁; ▁ho ri ▁guz ti a ▁ken du rik ▁,
PRED:	the two kidneys and the fat around the internal organs , the long lobe of the liver , and the two kidneys and the fat around them .
GOLD:	the two kidneys and the fat around them near the loins , and the long lobe of the liver . These must be removed with the kidneys ,

ID:	2007
INPUT:	▁Neu re ▁zu zen ta su na ri ▁a tze ra ▁e gin ▁ga be ▁eu tsi ko ▁di ot ▁! ▁Ez ▁dut ▁da mu rik ▁bi zi tza ko ▁e gun ▁ba kar ▁ba tez ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	I will show no rain for you ; no one will inhabit it .
GOLD:	I will maintain my innocence without wavering.My conscience is clear for as long as I live .

ID:	2008
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁Je huk ▁Is ra el ▁o so ra ▁za ba la ra zi ▁zu en ▁. ▁Ba a len ▁a do ra tzai le ▁guz ti ak ▁e tor ri ▁zi ren ▁, ▁ez ▁zen ▁bat ▁e re ▁gel di tu ▁e tor ri ▁ga be ▁. ▁Sar tu ▁zi re ne an ▁, ▁Ba a len ▁jau re txe a ▁e ra bat ▁be te ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	So Jehu followed all the rest of Israel , and some of the people of Israel arrived at the palace gate . There was no survivors in the palace of Baal .
GOLD:	He sent messengers throughout all Israel summoning those who worshiped Baal . They all came — not a single one remained behind — and they filled the temple of Baal from one end to the other .

ID:	2009
INPUT:	▁ha le re ▁, ▁e gi a ▁di o tsu et ▁: ▁Ho be ▁da ▁zu en tzat ▁ni ▁jo a te a ▁; ▁i zan ▁e re ▁, ▁jo a ten ▁ez ▁ba naiz ▁, ▁ez ▁zai zu e ▁e tor ri ko ▁La gun tzai le a ▁; ▁jo a ten ▁ba naiz ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁bi da li ▁e gin go ▁di zu et ▁.
PRED:	I tell you the truth , you are not going to help you . But if you do n't go , I will not go unpunished ! But if you do n't go , I will send you back .
GOLD:	But in fact , it is best for you that I go away , because if I do n't , the Advocate wo n't come . If I do go away , then I will send him to you .

ID:	2010
INPUT:	▁I par ral de ko ▁sar re ra ren ▁aur rez ▁aur re ▁, ▁bar ne ko ▁a ta ri ra ko ▁sar re ra ▁ze go en ▁, ▁e ki al de tik ▁be za la xe ▁; ▁sar re ra ▁ba te tik ▁bes te ra ko ▁tar te a ▁neur tu ▁zu en ▁gi zo nak ▁: ▁ber ro gei ta ▁ha mar ▁me tro ▁.
PRED:	The east gateway leading into the inner courtyard , which was also measured by the inner courtyard . The gateway passage was 101/2 feet long , and each was 101/2 feet long .
GOLD:	Here on the north side , just as on the east , there was another gateway leading to the Temple 's inner courtyard directly opposite this outer gateway . The distance between the two gateways was 175 feet .

ID:	2011
INPUT:	▁« ▁A dis ki de tu ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁e ta ▁e gin ▁ba ke ak ▁Jain ko a re kin ▁; ▁hor re la ▁i tzu li ko ▁zai zu ▁zo ri o na ▁.
PRED:	“ So please , my friend , be with God , and you will return to him .
GOLD:	“ Submit to God , and you will have peace ; then things will go well for you .

ID:	2012
INPUT:	▁Hur bil du ▁zi tzai en ▁Je sus ▁, ▁u ki tu ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁« ▁Zu ti ▁zai tez te ▁. ▁Ez ▁bel dur tu ▁! ▁»
PRED:	Then Jesus came and touched them and said , “ Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus came over and touched them . “ Get up , ” he said . “ Do n't be afraid . ”

ID:	2013
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁de nek ▁e san ▁zu ten ▁: ▁— ▁Zu ▁za ra ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁Se me a ▁? ▁Hark ▁e ran tzun ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁Zeu ek ▁di o zu e ▁, ▁neu ▁naiz ▁.
PRED:	“ Are you the Son of God ? ” they asked . “ You are the Son of God , ” Jesus replied .
GOLD:	They all shouted , “ So , are you claiming to be the Son of God ? ” And he replied , “ You say that I am . ”

ID:	2014
INPUT:	▁Her ri ▁ba te an ▁per tse gi tzen ▁ba zai tuz te te ▁, ▁e gin ▁i hes ▁bes te ▁ba te ra ▁. ▁Be ne tan ▁di o tsu et ▁: ▁Gi zo na ren ▁Se me a ▁e tor ri ▁aur re tik ▁, ▁ez ▁di tu zu e ▁Is ra el go ▁her ri ▁guz ti ak ▁i ga ro ko ▁.
PRED:	If you go out to the other nations , I will escape from the Son of Man . I tell you the truth , the Son of Man will not pass away .
GOLD:	When you are persecuted in one town , flee to the next . I tell you the truth , the Son of Man will return before you have reached all the towns of Israel .

ID:	2015
INPUT:	▁gil tzur ru nak ▁gai ne ko ▁gan tza re kin ▁, ▁sai he tsei ▁i tsa tsi a ▁da go en ▁gan tza ▁e ta ▁gi be la ▁es tal tzen ▁du e na ▁; ▁ho ri ▁guz ti a ▁ken du rik ▁,
PRED:	the two kidneys and the fat around the internal organs , the long lobe of the liver , and the two kidneys and the fat around them .
GOLD:	the two kidneys and the fat around them near the loins , and the long lobe of the liver . These must be removed with the kidneys ,

ID:	2016
INPUT:	▁Ar te mas ▁na hiz ▁Ti ki ko ▁zu re ga na ▁bi da li ko ▁di tu da ne an ▁, ▁za toz kit ▁le hen bai le hen ▁Ni ko po li se ra ▁, ▁ne gu a ▁ber tan ▁i ga ro tze ko ▁as mo a ▁bai tut ▁.
PRED:	“ When I am sending Titus to Titus , I will send you back to the island of Damascus , for I will send you grief .
GOLD:	I am planning to send either Artemas or Tychicus to you . As soon as one of them arrives , do your best to meet me at Nicopolis , for I have decided to stay there for the winter .

ID:	2017
INPUT:	▁Pro fe ta ▁be za la ▁min tzo ▁di re nei ▁da go ki e nez ▁, ▁min tza ▁dai te ze la ▁bi ▁e do ▁hi ru ▁, ▁e ta ▁gai ne ra ko ek ▁e man ▁de za te la ▁be ren ▁i ri tzi a ▁.
PRED:	As a prophet is speaking to those who say , “ As surely as the Scriptures say , ‘ The city will be fulfilled . '
GOLD:	Let two or three people prophesy , and let the others evaluate what is said .

ID:	2018
INPUT:	▁Er re ge ak ▁be re ▁la gun tzai le ▁na gu si ▁hu ra ▁bi da li ▁zu en ▁hi ri - sar re ra ▁zain tze ra ▁; ▁bai na ▁jen de ak ▁zan pa tu ▁e ta ▁hil ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁ber tan ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁gi zo nak ▁, ▁er re ge a ▁e tor tze an ▁, ▁e san ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	But the king sent his friends to kill him , but he sent him to kill him . But the man of God struck him with his sword , just as the man of God had said .
GOLD:	The king appointed his officer to control the traffic at the gate , but he was knocked down and trampled to death as the people rushed out.So everything happened exactly as the man of God had predicted when the king came to his house .

ID:	2019
INPUT:	▁ni re ▁zer bi tza ri ek poz - oi hu ▁e gin go ▁du te bi ho tza ▁be te ▁zo ri o nez ▁; ▁zu ek ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁gar ra si ▁e gin go ▁bi ho tze ko ▁na hi ga bez ▁, ▁ai e ne ▁bar ru ko ▁sa mi nez ▁.
PRED:	Even the trees of the trees , the trees of the trees , and the trees of the earth will be filled with grief .
GOLD:	My servants will sing for joy , but you will cry in sorrow and despair .

ID:	2020
INPUT:	▁A paiz ▁ber ri a ▁e ta ▁i tun ▁ber ri a
PRED:	Christ Is Our High Priest
GOLD:	A Call to Persevere

ID:	2021
INPUT:	▁Je ru sa lem go ▁jen de a ▁, ▁moz tu ▁i le a ▁, ▁soil du ▁bu ru a hain ▁mai te ▁di tu zun zeu re ▁se me - a la ben ga tik ▁; ▁soil du ▁e za zu ▁kas ko a ▁sai a re na ▁be za la ▁, ▁er bes te ra tu ▁e gin go ▁bai ti tuz te zu re gan dik ▁ur ru ti ▁.
PRED:	For the people of Jerusalem are cut off by their heads , your children , and your children are abandoned . They have abandoned you , just as you have abandoned .
GOLD:	Oh , people of Judah , shave your heads in sorrow , for the children you love will be snatched away.Make yourselves as bald as a vulture , for your little ones will be exiled to distant lands .

ID:	2022
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁e san da ko a ren ▁aur re an ▁, ▁i ri tzi ▁kon tra jar ri ak ▁zeu den ▁jen de a ren ▁ar te an ▁.
PRED:	When Jesus told them what had happened , they found him in front of the crowd .
GOLD:	When he said these things , the people were again divided in their opinions about him .

ID:	2023
INPUT:	▁Le bi tar rok ▁, ▁be dein ka tu ▁Jau na ▁! ▁Jau na ri ▁be gi ru ne ▁di o zu e nok ▁, ▁be dein ka tu ▁Jau na ▁!
PRED:	Praise the Lord , you who fear him ! May the Lord bless you !
GOLD:	O Levites , praise the Lord ! All you who fear the Lord , praise the Lord !

ID:	2024
INPUT:	▁As kok ▁e gin go ▁du te ▁ber tan ▁es tro pe zu ▁, ▁e ro ri ▁e ta ▁hil ▁e gin go ▁di ra ▁; ▁sa re an ▁bil du ak ▁e ta ▁har ra pa tu ak ▁gel di tu ko ▁di ra ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But many will be dragged off , and many will be slaughtered . They will be slaughtered , and they will be scattered . ”
GOLD:	Many will stumble and fall , never to rise again.They will be snared and captured . ”

ID:	2025
INPUT:	▁Jo an ▁zen ▁gi zo na ▁, ▁e ta ▁a gin ta ri ei ▁a di e ra zi ▁zi en ▁Je sus ▁ze la ▁sen da tu ▁zu e na ▁.
PRED:	So Jesus went out and told his disciples what he meant .
GOLD:	Then the man went and told the Jewish leaders that it was Jesus who had healed him .

ID:	2026
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁hau en ▁or dez ▁, ▁Ro bo am ▁er re ge ak ▁bron tzez ko ▁ba bes ki ak ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁jau re gi ko ▁sar re ra ▁zain tzen ▁zu en ▁tal de a ren ▁bu ru ▁zi re nei ▁u tzi ▁ziz ki en ▁.
PRED:	But Rehoboam also made all the bronze shields of bronze , and he put them in charge of the guard .
GOLD:	King Rehoboam later replaced them with bronze shields as substitutes , and he entrusted them to the care of the commanders of the guard who protected the entrance to the royal palace .

ID:	2027
INPUT:	▁Da vi de na.Es ker rak ▁e ma ten ▁diz ki zut ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁bi hotz - bi ho tzez ▁, ▁bes te ▁jain ko en ▁aur re an ▁zu ▁kan tuz ▁os pa tzen ▁.
PRED:	I thank you , O Lord , for I will sing praises to your name .
GOLD:	I give you thanks , O Lord , with all my heart ; I will sing your praises before the gods .

ID:	2028
INPUT:	▁Es ka tu ▁ni ri ▁, ▁e ta ▁na zi o ak ▁e man go ▁diz ki zut ▁on da re ▁, ▁lur ▁o so a ren ▁ja be ▁e gin go ▁zai tut ▁.
PRED:	I will thank you , and I will give you the inheritance I promised to you .
GOLD:	Only ask , and I will give you the nations as your inheritance , the whole earth as your possession .

ID:	2029
INPUT:	▁E za ri - e za ri an ▁bo ta ko ▁di tut ▁zu en ▁aur re tik ▁, ▁lur ral de ▁har taz ▁ja be tze ko ▁a di na ▁zu ek ▁u gal du ▁ar te ▁.
PRED:	I will drive you out of the land I will drive you out of the land I am giving you .
GOLD:	I will drive them out a little at a time until your population has increased enough to take possession of the land .

ID:	2030
INPUT:	▁Mi kak ▁, ▁or du an ▁: ▁— ▁Gel di ▁zai tez ▁ni re kin ▁; ▁kon tsei la ri tzat ▁har tu ko ▁zai tut ▁, ▁ni re ▁a paiz ▁i za nen ▁za ra ▁. ▁Or dai nez ▁, ▁ur te an ▁zi lar rez ko ▁ha mar ▁txan pon ▁, ▁jan tzi - mul tzo a ▁e ta ▁ja te ko a ▁e man go ▁diz ki zut ▁.
PRED:	“ Stay here with me , ” Micah said . “ I will give you the rest of my followers , and I will give you twelve pieces of silver . Then I will give you twelve pieces of silver and gold . ”
GOLD:	“ Stay here with me , ” Micah said , “ and you can be a father and priest to me . I will give you ten pieces of silver a year , plus a change of clothes and your food . ”

ID:	2031
INPUT:	▁Bi hotz - e ro ri ta ▁dau de ▁ne ka za ri ak ▁, ▁gar ra si ka ▁ma has ti zai nak ▁; ▁gal du ak ▁bai ti ra ▁ga ri a ▁e ta ▁ga ra gar ra ▁, ▁hon da tu a ▁so ro e ta ko ▁uz ta ▁.
PRED:	A person with good news , but a vineyard is full of food . A harvest is full of food , wheat , wheat , wheat , wheat , wheat , and winter .
GOLD:	Despair , all you farmers ! Wail , all you vine growers ! Weep , because the wheat and barley — all the crops of the field — are ruined .

ID:	2032
INPUT:	▁A gu do ▁as ko ▁aur pe gi ra tu ko ▁di zu e ▁, ▁ez ku tu an ▁al der di ke ri az ▁jo ka tzen ▁ba du zu e ▁.
PRED:	You will remember your wonderful deeds , but you wo n't find it !
GOLD:	No , you will be in trouble with himif you secretly slant your testimony in his favor .

ID:	2033
INPUT:	▁Jain ko ak ▁No e ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁se me ak ▁be dein ka tu ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁« ▁Sor tu ▁u me ak ▁, ▁u gal du ▁e ta ▁be te ▁lur ra ▁.
PRED:	God blessed Noah and his sons . He blessed them and said , “ Noah , the waters of the earth , and the waters of the earth .
GOLD:	Then God blessed Noah and his sons and told them , “ Be fruitful and multiply . Fill the earth .

ID:	2034
INPUT:	▁Har ro tu ▁na hi ▁du e na ▁, ▁har ro ▁be di ▁ho ne taz ▁: ▁ni ▁e za gu tze ko ▁as ki ▁ar gi ▁i za te az ▁, ▁ni ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁so li da ri ta te a ▁, ▁jus ti zi a ▁e ta ▁zu zen bi de a mun du an ▁e zar tzen ▁di tu e na.Ho ri ek ▁di tut ▁a tse <unk> ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁e sa na ▁» ▁.
PRED:	When I want to boast about this : If I want you to know what I am going to do , I will turn back to the Lord , ” says the Lord . “ I will turn back to the Lord , ” says the Lord , “ I will turn back to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Do n't let the wise boast in their wisdom , or the powerful boast in their power , or the rich boast in their riches .

ID:	2035
INPUT:	▁Jo an ▁zen ▁han dik ▁E li as ▁e ta ▁Xa fa ten ▁se me ▁E li se o ▁aur ki tu ▁zu en ▁gol de an ▁; ▁ha ma bi ▁i di - pa re ▁zi tu en ▁aur re tik ▁, ▁E li se ok ▁ha ma bi gar re na ▁ze ra ma la rik ▁. ▁On do tik ▁i ga ro tze an ▁, ▁E li a sek ▁be re ▁soin gai ne ko a ▁bo ta ▁zi on ▁E li se o ri ▁gai ne ra ▁.
PRED:	Then Elijah son of Hilkiah went to meet Gedaliah , and he tore his hair on his shoulder . Then Elisha put his cloak in his cloak , and he tore his cloak in his cloak . Then Elijah threw his cloak and threw his cloak on his cloak .
GOLD:	So Elijah went and found Elisha son of Shaphat plowing a field . There were twelve teams of oxen in the field , and Elisha was plowing with the twelfth team . Elijah went over to him and threw his cloak across his shoulders and then walked away .

ID:	2036
INPUT:	▁« ▁I zan ▁go go an ▁zeu ek ▁e re ▁eskla bo ▁i zan ▁zi ne te la ▁E gip ton ▁; ▁hor re ga tik ▁a gin tzen ▁di zu et ▁xe da pen ▁ho ri ek ▁be te tze ko ▁.
PRED:	“ Be careful to obey the commands of your slavery in Egypt . This is why I am giving you today .
GOLD:	Remember that you were slaves in the land of Egypt . That is why I am giving you this command .

ID:	2037
INPUT:	▁I zu a ▁e ta ▁zu lo a ▁e ta ▁ze po a ▁zu re tzat ▁, ▁lur ral de an ▁bi zi ▁za ren ▁hor ren tzat ▁.
PRED:	You gave it to yourself as a foreigner , a land flowing with milk and honey .
GOLD:	Terror and traps and snares will be your lot , you people of the earth .

ID:	2038
INPUT:	▁Da vi den ▁e ta ▁Be tsa be ren ▁se me txo a ▁hil
PRED:	David 's Last Words
GOLD:	David Confesses His Guilt

ID:	2039
INPUT:	▁On do ren ▁, ▁hes te ▁gai ne ko ▁gan tza ▁, ▁gi be la ▁es tal tzen ▁zu e na ▁e ta ▁gil tzur ru nak ▁be rau en ▁gan tza re kin ▁har tu rik ▁, ▁al da re an ▁er re ▁zi tu en ▁.
PRED:	Then he burned the fat of the internal organs , the long lobe of the liver , and the two kidneys and the fat around them .
GOLD:	Then Moses took all the fat around the internal organs , the long lobe of the liver , and the two kidneys and the fat around them , and he burned it all on the altar .

ID:	2040
INPUT:	▁Ma has ti a ▁e ta ▁pi kon do a hon da tu ▁e gin go ▁diz ki ot ▁, ▁hai e taz ▁bai tzi o en ▁: ▁“ ▁Mai ta le ek ▁e man da ko ▁sa ri ▁di tut ▁” <unk> tra ka ▁bi hur tu ko ▁di tu te ta ▁ba sa piz ti ek ▁jan go ▁di tuz te ▁.
PRED:	I will strip off the fig trees and destroyed them , for they will be destroyed , and they will be ruined , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	“ But then I will win her back once again.I will lead her into the desertand speak tenderly to her there .

ID:	2041
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁lan da re ▁bat ▁ha za ra zi ▁zu en ▁, ▁Jo nas ▁bai no ▁han di a go a ▁, ▁bu ru an ▁i tza la ▁e man ▁zi e zai on ▁e ta ▁be re ▁su kar re tik ▁lib ra ▁ze zan ▁. ▁Jo nas ▁bi zi ro ▁poz tu ▁zen ▁lan da re a re kin ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord God sent a spear to Jonah , and he gave it to Jonah 's proud . He was able to save him from the fire .
GOLD:	And the Lord God arranged for a leafy plant to grow there , and soon it spread its broad leaves over Jonah 's head , shading him from the sun . This eased his discomfort , and Jonah was very grateful for the plant .

ID:	2042
INPUT:	▁Ai ko ▁gu du a
PRED:	The Father 's Love for Israel
GOLD:	The Lord 's Covenant Renewed

ID:	2043
INPUT:	▁mun du ko ▁az ken ▁mu tur re rai no ▁bo ta ▁ba zin tuz ten ▁e re ▁, ▁ber ta ra ▁jo an ▁e ta ▁bil du ▁e gin go ▁zai tuz te ▁Jau nak ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko ak ▁;
PRED:	You can not drive out the waters of the earth , but the Lord your God will gather you into a spring .
GOLD:	Even though you are banished to the ends of the earth , the Lord your God will gather you from there and bring you back again .

ID:	2044
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁di o ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁« ▁Ka na an dar ▁ho nek ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁pi su ▁fal tsu a ▁da ra bil ▁, ▁en gai nu a ▁du ▁mai te ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The land of Canaan is full of dishonest and scales .
GOLD:	Israel boasts , “ I am rich ! I 've made a fortune all by myself ! No one has caught me cheating ! My record is spotless ! ”

ID:	2045
INPUT:	▁« ▁No la na hi ko ▁a be re ren ▁ba ten ▁o do la ▁ja ten ▁du e na ri ▁— ▁is ra el dar ra ▁na hiz ▁is ra el dar ren ▁ar te an ▁bi zi ▁den ▁e tor ki na ▁i zan ▁— ▁aur pe gi ▁e man go ▁di o ▁Jau nak ▁e ta ▁her ri tik ▁bo ta ko ▁.
PRED:	“ Anyone who eats the blood of the people of Israel must be cut off from the community of Israel . This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	“ And if any native Israelite or foreigner living among you eats or drinks blood in any form , I will turn against that person and cut him off from the community of your people ,

ID:	2046
INPUT:	▁E gin ▁pro me sak ▁Jau na ri ▁, ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko a ri ▁, ▁e ta ▁be te ▁; ▁ha ren ▁in gu ru an ▁bil du ok ▁, ▁e kar ri ▁e mai tzak ▁Jain ko ▁bel dur gar ri a ri ▁,
PRED:	O Lord your God , do not be afraid ; do n't be afraid or afraid .
GOLD:	For he breaks the pride of princes , and the kings of the earth fear him .

ID:	2047
INPUT:	▁Ar men ▁in dar ke ri a - za le ▁za re te ▁, ▁e gin tza ▁hi guin gar ri ak ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁la gun ▁hur ko a ren ▁e maz te a ▁de so ho ra tzen ▁du zu e ▁. ▁No la ▁na hi ▁du zu e ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁lur ral de ▁ho nen ▁ja be tza ▁i zan ▁?
PRED:	Why have you done such wonderful deeds ? Do you realize that your wife is a man 's wife ? Why do you treat it as your property ?
GOLD:	Murderers ! Idolaters ! Adulterers ! Should the land belong to you ? '

ID:	2048
INPUT:	▁Pur pu ra ▁mo re ▁, ▁gor ri ▁e ta ▁gor ri mi nez ▁e gin ▁zi tuz ten ▁san tu te gi ko ▁li tur gi ▁zer bi tzu ra ko ▁jan tzi ak ▁. ▁A a ro nen ▁jan tzi ▁sak ra tu ak ▁e re ▁e gin ▁zi tuz ten ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁Moi se si ▁a gin du ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	They took the sacred garments and placed them in the Holy Place and put them in the Holy Place . They smashed the sacred pillars , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	The craftsmen made beautiful sacred garments of blue , purple , and scarlet cloth — clothing for Aaron to wear while ministering in the Holy Place , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	2049
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁Ge rar ko ▁ar tzai nek ▁se si o a ▁i zan ▁zu ten ▁I sa a ken ▁ar tzai ne kin ▁. ▁E sa ten ▁zu ten ▁: ▁« ▁Geu re a ▁di a gu ▁u ra ▁! ▁» ▁E sek ▁— ▁hau ▁da ▁, ▁« ▁Lis kar ▁» ▁— ▁i ze na ▁e zar ri ▁zi on ▁I sa a kek ▁pu tzu ▁ha ri ▁, ▁be ro nen ga tik ▁lis kar tu ▁zi re la ko ▁.
PRED:	But Abimelech 's son Isaac was with Abimelech , and his son Isaac said , “ We 've been with us ! We have brought him back into the pool of Machpelah , ” Isaac said . “ We 've brought him out of the well . ”
GOLD:	But then the shepherds from Gerar came and claimed the spring . “ This is our water , ” they said , and they argued over it with Isaac 's herdsmen . So Isaac named the well Esek ( which means “ argument ” ) .

ID:	2050
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁si ne tsi ▁du ▁gu re ▁me zu a ▁? ▁No ri ▁a ger tu ▁di o ▁Jau nak be re ▁a hal me na ▁?
PRED:	Who has spoken to us ? Who has seen the power of our Lord ?
GOLD:	Who has believed our message ? To whom has the Lord revealed his powerful arm ?

ID:	2051
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁Pau lok ▁gu ar di ei ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁Gu ▁, ▁Er ro ma ko ▁hi ri tar ▁i za nik ▁, ▁e pai tu ▁ga be ▁de nen ▁aur re an ▁zi gor ka tu ▁e ta ▁kar tze lan ▁sar tu ▁gai tuz te ▁, ▁e ta ▁o rain ▁ez ku tu an ▁na hi ▁gai tuz te la ▁a te ra ▁? ▁Ez ▁ho ri xe ▁! ▁Da to ze la ▁be rai ek ▁gu ▁a te ra tze ra ▁!
PRED:	But Paul said to them , “ We 've been a Roman citizen in our city , and we are not going into prison . Why do n't we want to enter the prison ? Why did n't we want to enter the city ? ”
GOLD:	But Paul replied , “ They have publicly beaten us without a trial and put us in prison — and we are Roman citizens . So now they want us to leave secretly ? Certainly not ! Let them come themselves to release us ! ”

ID:	2052
INPUT:	▁« ▁Hi ru ro gei ▁ur te tik ▁go ra ko a ▁ba da ▁, ▁gi zo nez ko a ren tzat ▁ha ma bost ▁txan pon ▁, ▁e ta ▁e ma ku me a ren tzat ▁ha mar ▁.
PRED:	“ After the age of forty years , the man must pay the amount of silver for the Lord .
GOLD:	A man older than sixty is valued at fifteen shekels of silver ; a woman of that age is valued at ten shekels of silver .

ID:	2053
INPUT:	▁Zo az ▁o rain ▁lur ral de ▁hau ▁be re ▁lu ze - za ba le an ▁ze har ka tze ra ▁, ▁zeu ri ▁e man go ▁bai ti zut ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Now go back to the land I gave to you , for I will give you this land . ”
GOLD:	Go and walk through the land in every direction , for I am giving it to you . ”

ID:	2054
INPUT:	▁Gi za ki a ren tzat ▁ho be re na ja te a ▁, ▁e da te a e ta ▁be re ▁la na ren ▁frui tu az ▁go za tze a.Nik ▁us te ▁dut ▁, ▁hau ▁e <unk> ko a ren ▁es ku tik ▁da tor re la ▁;
PRED:	It is a reward for those who do n't know what the Lord says , “ I will bring disaster on the sword of the Lord 's judgment . ”
GOLD:	So I decided there is nothing better than to enjoy food and drink and to find satisfaction in work . Then I realized that these pleasures are from the hand of God .

ID:	2055
INPUT:	▁Be hin ▁gar bi kun tza - o hi ku ne a ▁a mai tu ta ▁, ▁har tu ▁a kats ▁ga be ko ▁ze zen ▁bat ▁e ta ▁a ha ri ▁bat
PRED:	On the seventh day the priest must present one of the grain offering and two quarts with no defects .
GOLD:	When you have finished the cleansing ceremony , offer another young bull that has no defects and a perfect ram from the flock .

ID:	2056
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁hau ▁di ot ▁nik ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁E gip to ko ▁er re ge ▁fa ra oi a ren ▁kon tra ▁na tor ▁. ▁Bi ▁be so ak ▁hau tsi ko ▁diz ki ot ▁, ▁on gi ▁du e na ▁e ta ▁ja da nik ▁hau tsi a ▁du e na ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez pa ta ▁e ro ra ra zi ko ▁di ot ▁es ku tik ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will punish Pharaoh , king of Egypt , king of Egypt , king of Egypt , and I will hand them over to the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am the enemy of Pharaoh , the king of Egypt ! I will break both of his arms — the good arm along with the broken one — and I will make his sword clatter to the ground .

ID:	2057
INPUT:	▁Ez kon du ei ▁a gin tzen ▁di et ▁— ▁ez ▁nik ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁bai zik ▁— ▁e maz te a ▁ez ▁da di la ▁ba nan du ▁se nar ra ren gan dik ▁;
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : Do n't let anyone marry her , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	But for those who are married , I have a command that comes not from me , but from the Lord . A wife must not leave her husband .

ID:	2058
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁Zu ei ▁e man ▁zai zu e ▁Jain ko a ren ▁er re ge tza ren ▁mis te ri o ak ▁e za gu tze a ▁; ▁ho ri ei ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁ez ▁.
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ You are permitted to understand the secret of the Kingdom of God . But you do n't know what it meant . ”
GOLD:	He replied , “ You are permitted to understand the secrets of the Kingdom of Heaven , but others are not .

ID:	2059
INPUT:	▁A zo ka tik ▁e txe ra tze an ▁e re ▁, ▁ez ▁du te ▁ja ten ▁gar bi kun tza ▁e gin ▁ga be ▁; ▁e ta ▁ba du te ▁bes te ▁ha mai ka ▁o hi tu raz ko ▁be te be har ▁: ▁ha la ▁no la ▁e da lon tzi ▁, ▁pi txer ▁e ta ▁sui len ▁gar bi ke ta ▁.
PRED:	A person who is left outside the house must not be purified . He must remove the grain from the person 's house and bathe himself in water . He must remove the cup of water from the cup of water .
GOLD:	Similarly , they do n't eat anything from the market until they immerse their hands in water . This is but one of many traditions they have clung to — such as their ceremonial washing of cups , pitchers , and kettles . )

ID:	2060
INPUT:	▁Gar ra si ▁la tzak ▁i zan go ▁di ra ▁E gip to ▁o so an ▁, ▁i noiz ▁e re ▁i zan ▁ez ▁di ren ▁e ta ▁ber ri ro ▁i zan go ▁ez ▁di ren ▁be za la ko ak ▁.
PRED:	They will be cleansed from the entire land of Egypt , just as they did . They will never again return to Egypt .
GOLD:	Then a loud wail will rise throughout the land of Egypt , a wail like no one has heard before or will ever hear again .

ID:	2061
INPUT:	▁so ro ak ▁e rein ▁, ▁ma has ti ak ▁lan da tu ▁e ta ▁uz ta ▁o pa ro ak ▁bil tzen ▁.
PRED:	A plant vineyards and vineyard , and harvest it produce good crops .
GOLD:	They sow their fields , plant their vineyards , and harvest their bumper crops .

ID:	2062
INPUT:	▁E goi tza ko ▁a ta ri a
PRED:	Plans for the Tabernacle
GOLD:	Building the Washbasin

ID:	2063
INPUT:	▁Jar ri ▁, ▁ge ro ▁, ▁er re - o pa ri en ▁al da re a ▁el kar ke ta - e txo la ko ▁e goi tza ren ▁sar re ran ▁.
PRED:	Next at the entrance of the Tabernacle , the Tabernacle , and the curtain for the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Place the altar of burnt offering in front of the Tabernacle entrance .

ID:	2064
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ga rau te gi ak ▁gai nez ka ▁be te ko ▁diz ki zu e ▁e ta ▁e gin ki zun ▁guz ti e tan ▁ar ra kas ta ▁e man go ▁Jau nak ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko ak ▁: ▁be dein ka tu ▁e gin go ▁zai tuz te ▁be rak ▁e man go ▁di zu en ▁lur ral de an ▁.
PRED:	“ You must obey all these commands and regulations that the Lord your God is giving you . He will bless you and bless you in the land the Lord your God is giving you .
GOLD:	“ The Lord will guarantee a blessing on everything you do and will fill your storehouses with grain . The Lord your God will bless you in the land he is giving you .

ID:	2065
INPUT:	▁U ler ta ra zi ▁zeu re ▁le ge a ▁, ▁e ta ▁gor de ko ▁dut ▁, ▁bi hotz - bi ho tzez ▁be te ko ▁.
PRED:	I will obey your commandments , and I will obey your heart .
GOLD:	Give me understanding and I will obey your instructions ; I will put them into practice with all my heart .

ID:	2066
INPUT:	▁Ha ren ▁gaz ta ro ko ▁ur te ak ▁la bur tu ▁e ta ▁lo tsa ▁gor riz ▁be te ▁du zu ▁.
PRED:	Your young men are full of shame , and your name is full of shame .
GOLD:	O Lord , how long will this go on ? Will you hide yourself forever ? How long will your anger burn like fire ?

ID:	2067
INPUT:	▁bai na ▁gu re ▁a paiz bu ru ▁e ta ▁a gin ta ri ek ▁he ri o tza ra ▁kon de na tu ▁du te ▁e ta ▁gu ru tzil tza tu ▁.
PRED:	But the leading priests and the leading priests , the leading priests , and crucified .
GOLD:	But our leading priests and other religious leaders handed him over to be condemned to death , and they crucified him .

ID:	2068
INPUT:	▁Be hi no la ▁, ▁E li se o ▁Da mas ko ra ▁jo an ▁zen ▁. ▁Si ri a ko ▁er re ge ▁Ben - Ha dad ▁gai xo ▁ze go en ▁. ▁Jain ko a ren ▁gi zo na ▁e tor ri a ▁ze la ▁ja ki na ra zi ▁zi o te ne an ▁,
PRED:	So King Hazael of Aram went to meet King Hazael of Aram . He went to meet King Hazael of Aram .
GOLD:	Elisha went to Damascus , the capital of Aram , where King Ben-hadad lay sick . When someone told the king that the man of God had come ,

ID:	2069
INPUT:	▁O ba di a sek ▁jo an ▁e ta ▁de na ▁ja ki na ra zi ▁zi on ▁A ka bi ▁. ▁Or du an ▁, ▁A kab ▁E li a sen ga na ▁jo an ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	When Ahab heard what had happened , he went to Ahab and went to Ahab .
GOLD:	So Obadiah went to tell Ahab that Elijah had come , and Ahab went out to meet Elijah .

ID:	2070
INPUT:	▁U har te an ▁go ber na tzen ▁zu en <unk> gi o ▁Pau lo ▁kon tsu lor de a ren ▁in gu ru ko a ▁zen ▁. ▁Kon tsu lor de a ▁zen tzuz ko ▁gi zo na ▁zen ▁, ▁e ta ▁Ber na be ri ▁e ta ▁Sau lo ri ▁dei tu ▁zi en ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁me zu a ▁en tzun ▁na hi rik ▁.
PRED:	So the governor 's message was very hard , and he was very hard . He was a hard man , and he was speaking in the province of Asia . He heard what he was saying .
GOLD:	He had attached himself to the governor , Sergius Paulus , who was an intelligent man . The governor invited Barnabas and Saul to visit him , for he wanted to hear the word of God .

ID:	2071
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁bai nau zu ▁He ri o ▁Lei ze ra ▁bo ta ko ▁, ▁zu re ▁fe de du na ▁ez ▁du zu ▁hi lo bi an ▁gal tzen ▁u tzi ko ▁.
PRED:	Do n't let me be disgraced ; do n't let me be disgraced in the grave .
GOLD:	For you will not leave my soul among the deador allow your holy one to rot in the grave .

ID:	2072
INPUT:	▁Le bi tar rak ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁Ho ne la ▁e ta ▁ho ne la ▁har tu ▁nau ▁Mi kak ▁; ▁or dain du ▁e gi ten ▁dit ▁, ▁be ra ren ▁a paiz ▁i za te ko ▁.
PRED:	“ Yes , ” the Levites replied , “ I am the priests , and the Levites have been circumcised . ”
GOLD:	He told them about his agreement with Micah and that he had been hired as Micah 's personal priest .

ID:	2073
INPUT:	▁Ar ro tza ri ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁ez ▁di o te ▁jar rai tu ko ▁; ▁ai tzi tik ▁, ▁i hes ▁e gin go ▁di o te ▁, ▁ar ro tza ren ▁a ho tsa ▁e za gu na ▁ez ▁du te la ko ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But they will turn away from their masters ; they will run away from their own heart . ”
GOLD:	They wo n't follow a stranger ; they will run from him because they do n't know his voice . ”

ID:	2074
INPUT:	▁Jau na ri ▁a tse gin ▁zai o na ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁, ▁be ra ren ▁ai ta ▁A ma tzi a sek ▁be za la xe ▁.
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as he had done .
GOLD:	He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , just as his father , Amaziah , had done .

ID:	2075
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁« ▁Ja ki zu ▁zu re ▁on do ren go ak ▁a tzer ri tar ▁gi sa ▁bi zi ko ▁di re la ▁be re na ▁ez ▁du ten ▁lur ral de an ▁. ▁Eskla bo ▁bi hur tu ko ▁di tuz te ▁e ta ▁za pal du rik ▁e du ki ko ▁lau re hun ▁ur tez ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Jacob , “ Stay away from the foreigners living among you . They will live among you .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Abram , “ You can be sure that your descendants will be strangers in a foreign land , where they will be oppressed as slaves for 400 years .

ID:	2076
INPUT:	▁E san ▁zi dan ▁: ▁« ▁Gi za se me ▁, ▁ni re ▁tro nu a ren ▁le ku a ▁da ▁hau ▁, ▁oi nak ▁jar tzen ▁di tu dan ▁le ku a ▁; ▁he men ▁bi zi ko ▁naiz ▁is ra el dar ren ▁er di an ▁be ti ko ▁. ▁Ez ▁her ri ak ▁, ▁ez ▁er re ge ek ▁, ▁ez ▁du te ▁ber ri ro ▁ni re ▁i ze na ▁de so ho ra tu ko ▁, ▁i do la tri a ▁e gi nez ▁e do ▁be ren ▁er re ge en ▁gor pu ak ▁he men ▁hi lo bi ra tuz ▁.
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Son of man , I sit on the throne of the king of Israel . I am not going to live in the place of worship the king of Israel . I will not worship the idols of their idols .
GOLD:	The Lord said to me , “ Son of man , this is the place of my throne and the place where I will rest my feet . I will live here forever among the people of Israel . They and their kings will not defile my holy name any longer by their adulterous worship of other gods or by honoring the relics of their kings who have died .

ID:	2077
INPUT:	▁Bes te la ▁, ▁le hoi ak ▁be za la ▁har ra pa tu e ta ▁za ti - za ti ▁e gin go ▁nau te ▁, ▁e ta ▁e zin ▁i zan go ▁nau ▁i nork ▁lib ra tu ▁.
PRED:	They will attack me like a lion , and no one will rescue me .
GOLD:	O Lord my God , if I have done wrongor am guilty of injustice ,

ID:	2078
INPUT:	▁Neu re ▁su mi na ren ▁su mi nez ▁zin ▁da git ▁lur ri ka ra ▁han di a ▁i zan go ▁de la ▁Is ra e len ▁.
PRED:	I am very angry with the earth , and my fury will be filled with fire .
GOLD:	In my jealousy and blazing anger , I promise a mighty shaking in the land of Israel on that day .

ID:	2079
INPUT:	▁Zer ga tik ▁zo az ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁o rain ▁E gip to ra ▁, ▁Ni lo ko ▁u rak ▁e da te ra ▁? ▁Zer ga tik ▁A si ri a ra ▁, ▁Euf ra tes ko ▁u rak ▁e da te ra ▁?
PRED:	Why should I go out to Egypt ? Why should I leave Egypt ? Why should I leave Egypt to the Euphrates River ?
GOLD:	“ What have you gained by your alliances with Egyptand your covenants with Assyria ? What good to you are the streams of the Nileor the waters of the Euphrates River ?

ID:	2080
INPUT:	▁« ▁Bel xa tzar ▁er re ge a ren ▁hi ru gar ren ▁ur te an ▁, ▁nik ▁, ▁Da ni e lek ▁, ▁bes te ▁i kus ka ri ▁bat ▁i zan ▁nu en ▁, ▁le hen ▁i zan da ko az ▁gai ne ra ▁.
PRED:	“ Daniel , during the third year of King Darius 's reign , Daniel , had a chief of staff .
GOLD:	During the third year of King Belshazzar 's reign , I , Daniel , saw another vision , following the one that had already appeared to me .

ID:	2081
INPUT:	▁E liz ▁el kar te ko ▁ar du ra du nak
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Titus 's Work in Crete

ID:	2082
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁, ▁gi za se me ▁, ▁e gin ▁er bes te ra tu a re na ▁: ▁har tu ▁be har - be har rez ko a ▁e ta ▁zo az ▁er bes te ra ▁e gun - ar giz ▁be rai en ▁aur re an ▁. ▁Zau den ▁le ku tik ▁bes te ▁ba te rantz ▁jo an go ▁za ra ▁be rai en ▁aur re an ▁. ▁A gi an ▁, ▁or du an ▁o har tu ko ▁di ra ▁her ri ▁er re bel de a ▁de la ▁.
PRED:	“ Son of man , give them this message from the Lord : When you arrive in the morning , you will go out to the place where you are going . But when you go to the land of Assyria , you will be rebels .
GOLD:	“ So now , son of man , pretend you are being sent into exile . Pack the few items an exile could carry , and leave your home to go somewhere else . Do this right in front of the people so they can see you . For perhaps they will pay attention to this , even though they are such rebels .

ID:	2083
INPUT:	▁E ne ▁se ni de ▁mai te ok ▁, ▁ir ri ka ▁bi ziz ▁na go ▁zu ek ▁i kus te ko ▁. ▁Zu ek ▁, ▁mai te ok ▁, ▁e ne ▁poz ▁e ta ▁ko ro a ▁za re te nok ▁, ▁i raun ▁e za zu e ▁Jau na ri ▁tin ko ▁a txi ki ak ▁.
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , my dear brothers and sisters , I will see you , dear brothers and sisters . Be strong and courageous ! Be strong and courageous !
GOLD:	Therefore , my dear brothers and sisters , stay true to the Lord . I love you and long to see you , dear friends , for you are my joy and the crown I receive for my work .

ID:	2084
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁al ▁gau de ▁o rain ▁ga ri - uz ta ro an ▁? ▁Dei ▁e gi nen ▁di ot ▁Jau na ri ▁, ▁e ta ▁be rak ▁tru moi ak ▁e ta ▁eu ri a ▁bi da li ko ▁diz ki gu ▁. ▁Hor re la ▁i ku si ▁e ta ▁ja kin go ▁du zu e ▁zein ▁gaiz ta ke ri a ▁han di a ▁e gin ▁du zu en ▁Jau na ren ▁ai tzi ne an ▁, ▁zeu en tzat ▁er re ge a ▁es ka tuz ▁.
PRED:	Do n't you realize that I am coming when I call on the altar of the Lord , the God of heaven and the thunder and the thunder of the wicked , and the wicked will know that you have done wrong .
GOLD:	You know that it does not rain at this time of the year during the wheat harvest . I will ask the Lord to send thunder and rain today . Then you will realize how wicked you have been in asking the Lord for a king ! ”

ID:	2085
INPUT:	▁Ha ma bi ei ▁dei ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁bi na ka ▁bi dal tzen ▁ha si ▁zen ▁, ▁es pi ri tu ▁gaiz to ak ▁bo ta tze ko ▁a hal me na ▁e ma ten ▁zi e la ▁.
PRED:	He sent two men to send them out of the evil spirits , and they cast out demons .
GOLD:	And he called his twelve disciples together and began sending them out two by two , giving them authority to cast out evil spirits .

ID:	2086
INPUT:	▁E kar ri ▁go go ra ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁zeu re ▁er ru ki a ▁e ta ▁mai ta su na ▁: ▁be ti da ni ko ak ▁di tu zu ▁.
PRED:	Give thanks to the Lord , for he loves you and your unfailing love .
GOLD:	Remember , O Lord , your compassion and unfailing love , which you have shown from long ages past .

ID:	2087
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁hor ra ▁, ▁san tu te gi ko ▁oi ha la ▁er diz ▁er di ▁ur ra tu ▁zen ▁, ▁goi tik ▁be he rai no ▁; ▁lur ri ka ra ▁i zan ▁zen ▁e ta ▁har kai tzak ▁zar ta tu ▁e gin ▁zi ren ▁;
PRED:	Then the curtain from the sanctuary of the Most Holy Place , and the water gushed out from the earth .
GOLD:	At that moment the curtain in the sanctuary of the Temple was torn in two , from top to bottom . The earth shook , rocks split apart ,

ID:	2088
INPUT:	▁Ger tu ▁da go ▁, ▁be gi ru ne ▁di o te nak ▁sal ba tze ko ▁; ▁bai ▁, ▁ha ren ▁os pe a ▁gu re ▁lur ral de an ▁ko ka tu ko ▁da ▁.
PRED:	Those who fear him will be saved ; they will be saved .
GOLD:	Unfailing love and truth have met together.Righteousness and peace have kissed !

ID:	2089
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁hau ▁a gin du ▁zi on ▁me zu la ri a ri ▁: ▁« ▁Gu du a ri ▁bu ruz ko ▁ber ri ▁guz ti ak ▁e man ▁on do ren ▁,
PRED:	Then the governor said to him , “ This is the account of all the men of our family .
GOLD:	He told his messenger , “ Report all the news of the battle to the king .

ID:	2090
INPUT:	▁Be he ko ▁so lai ru a ▁bi ▁me tro ▁e ta ▁er di ▁za bal ▁zen ▁, ▁er di ko a ▁hi ru ▁me tro ▁e ta ▁hi ru gar re na ▁hi ru ▁me tro ▁e ta ▁er di ▁. ▁So lai ru ▁ba koi tze an ▁tenplu ko ▁hor ma ▁kan po al de tik ▁me he a go a ▁zen ▁, ▁mai la ▁mo du ko ▁ba tzuk ▁e gi nez ▁, ▁e ta ▁mai la ▁hau en ▁gai ne an ▁e zar ri ▁zi tuz ten ▁ha be ak ▁, ▁tenplu ko ▁hor mak ▁zu la tu ▁be har rik ▁ga be ▁.
PRED:	He measured the inside the upper room of the gateway passage was 101/2 feet long and 101/2 feet wide . He measured the inside of the Temple and measured it on the east side of the Temple . He measured it on the east side of the Temple .
GOLD:	The complex was three stories high , the bottom floor being 71/2 feet wide , the second floor 9 feet wide , and the top floor 101/2 feet wide . The rooms were connected to the walls of the Temple by beams resting on ledges built out from the wall . So the beams were not inserted into the walls themselves .

ID:	2091
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁di o ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁zu en ▁as ka tzai le ak ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁Jain ko ▁san tu ak ▁: ▁« ▁Zu en ▁o ne ra ko ▁, ▁gu da ros te a ▁bi da li ko ▁dut ▁Ba bi lo ni a ra e ta ▁de nak ▁i he si ▁a te ra ko ▁di ra ▁, ▁i he si ▁ba bi lo ni ar rak ▁, ▁be ren ▁on tzi e tan ▁ba bes tu rik ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord , the Holy One of Israel , says : “ I will send out the land of Israel , and I will send them home in safety .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says — your Redeemer , the Holy One of Israel : “ For your sakes I will send an army against Babylon , forcing the Babylonians to flee in those ships they are so proud of .

ID:	2092
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁ha ser re ak ▁a ki tu rik ▁gauz ka ▁, ▁zu re ▁su mi nak ▁i ka ra ▁bi zi an ▁.
PRED:	Your anger burns against me ; fierce anger burns against me .
GOLD:	We wither beneath your anger ; we are overwhelmed by your fury .

ID:	2093
INPUT:	▁Jain ko a ren ▁sal ba men - in dar ▁hau ▁Je su ▁Kris to ga na ko ▁si nes me na ren ▁bi dez ▁hel tzen ▁da ▁, ▁fe de dun ▁guz ti en ga na ▁hel du ▁e re ▁. ▁Jain ko ak ▁ez ▁du ▁be reiz ke ri a rik ▁e gi ten ▁,
PRED:	This is a result of faith in Christ Jesus , who does n't believe in the faith of God , who does n't believe it .
GOLD:	We are made right with God by placing our faith in Jesus Christ . And this is true for everyone who believes , no matter who we are .

ID:	2094
INPUT:	▁Her ri ▁o so ak ▁ne gar ra ri ▁e man ▁zi on ▁le ge a ren ▁hi tzak ▁en tzu te an ▁. ▁Or du an ▁, ▁Ne he mi as ▁go ber na ri ak ▁, ▁Esdras ▁le ge - mai su ak ▁e ta ▁i ra kas ten ▁a ri ▁zi ren ▁le bi tar rek ▁e san ▁zi o ten ▁her ri a ri ▁: ▁« ▁Gaur ko ▁e gu na ▁Jau na ri ▁, ▁gu re ▁Jain ko a ri ▁, ▁sa ga ra tu a ▁du gu ▁. ▁Be raz ▁, ▁ez ▁e gon ▁tris te ▁, ▁ez ▁e gin ▁ne gar rik ▁» ▁.
PRED:	When all the people heard about him , they went to Jerusalem to hear Ezra the scribe . Then Ezra the scribe said to Ezra the scribe , “ Let us go to the Temple of the Lord , do n't weep at the Temple of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Then Nehemiah the governor , Ezra the priest and scribe , and the Levites who were interpreting for the people said to them , “ Do n't mourn or weep on such a day as this ! For today is a sacred day before the Lord your God. ” For the people had all been weeping as they listened to the words of the Law .

ID:	2095
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁, ▁ze ru tik ▁be gi ra ▁, ▁gi za ki ▁guz ti ak ▁i kus ten ▁di tu ▁;
PRED:	The Lord is watching from heaven , and he sees everything he has done .
GOLD:	The Lord looks down from heavenand sees the whole human race .

ID:	2096
INPUT:	▁E gin ▁e ra so ra ko ▁sei na le a Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁har re si en ▁aur ka ▁; ▁sen do tu ▁gu ar di a - pos tu ak ▁, ▁u ga ri tu ▁zain tzai le ak ▁, ▁jar ri ▁gu da ri ak ▁ze la <unk> zan ▁e re ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁ba du ▁as mo ▁bat ▁, ▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁bi zi la gu nen ▁aur kai ra gar ri a ▁, ▁e ta ▁bu ru tu ▁e gin go ▁du ▁o rain ▁.
PRED:	Then the king of Babylon will attack the city of Babylon , and he will be called out to fight against the Babylonians . He will be killed , and he will be killed , too . But the Lord has spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Raise the battle flag against Babylon ! Reinforce the guard and station the watchmen.Prepare an ambush , for the Lord will fulfill all his plans against Babylon .

ID:	2097
INPUT:	▁Jen de ak ▁gau za ▁be ra ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Hau ▁e ta ▁hau ▁e gin go ▁di o te ▁ho ri ▁hil ko ▁du e na ri ▁.
PRED:	But the crowd said to him , “ This is what the Lord says : He will die . ”
GOLD:	And these men gave David the same reply . They said , “ Yes , that is the reward for killing him . ”

ID:	2098
INPUT:	▁A hots ▁ho nen ▁oi hu az ▁, ▁tenplu ko ▁a te - or po ek ▁dar - dar ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁, ▁e ta ▁tenplu a ▁kez ▁be te ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	The voice of the Temple was shouting , “ Praise the Lord ! ” And the voice of the Temple was filled with great shout .
GOLD:	Their voices shook the Temple to its foundations , and the entire building was filled with smoke .

ID:	2099
INPUT:	▁Han dik ▁den bo ral di ▁ba te ra ▁, ▁ju du ek ▁Sau lo ▁hil tze a ▁e ra ba ki ▁zu ten ▁;
PRED:	After this , the Jewish leaders tried to kill Saul ,
GOLD:	After a while some of the Jews plotted together to kill him .

ID:	2100
INPUT:	▁Ez ku ta tu ▁zen ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁Da vid ▁lan dan ▁. <unk> ber ri - jai a ▁hel tze an ▁, ▁jar ri ▁zen ▁er re ge a ▁o tor du ra ko ▁, ▁baz kal tze ko ▁.
PRED:	But David did n't invite me to prepare the doors of the palace . He went out to meet King David , and he went to meet King David .
GOLD:	So David hid himself in the field , and when the new moon festival began , the king sat down to eat .

ID:	2101
INPUT:	▁“ ▁Ai ta ▁” ▁dei tzen ▁di ot ▁ho bi an ▁us tel du ta ko a ri ▁, ▁“ ▁a ma ▁, ▁ar re ba ▁” ▁jan go ▁nau ten ▁har rei ▁.
PRED:	“ I called ‘ Father , ' I say , ‘ He is my mother 's sister . '
GOLD:	What if I call the grave my father , and the maggot my mother or my sister ?

ID:	2102
INPUT:	▁Mun du ▁ho ne ta ko ▁a gin ta ri e ta tik ▁ba tek ▁e re ▁ez ▁du ▁ja kin du ri a ▁ho ri ▁e za gu tu ▁, ▁ze ren ▁, ▁e za gu tu ▁i zan ▁ba lu te ▁, ▁ez ▁bai tzu ke ten ▁gu ru tzil tza tu ko ▁Jain ko a ren ▁ain tza ▁be re kin ▁zu en ▁Jau na ▁.
PRED:	One of this world will be raised from the world , and no one will know that we were crucified with him . But if we were crucified with the glory of the Lord our God .
GOLD:	But the rulers of this world have not understood it ; if they had , they would not have crucified our glorious Lord .

ID:	2103
INPUT:	▁Har tu ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁al diz ▁, ▁Ai a ren ▁a la ba ▁Ritz pak ▁Sau li ▁e man ▁ziz ki on ▁bi ▁se me ak ▁, ▁Ar mo ni ▁e ta ▁Me fi - Bo xet ▁, ▁e ta ▁Sau len ▁a la ba ▁Mi ka lek ▁Ad ri e li ▁, ▁Me ho la ko ▁Bar tzi lai ren ▁se me a ri ▁, ▁e man ▁ziz ki on ▁bost ▁se me ak ▁,
PRED:	So Saul sent messengers to Saul and his sons , Michal , and Saul 's sons . He gave them the son of Saul 's son Michal , Saul , and Saul . He gave him five sons of Saul 's son , and he became the father of Saul .
GOLD:	But he gave them Saul 's two sons Armoni and Mephibosheth , whose mother was Rizpah daughter of Aiah . He also gave them the five sons of Saul 's daughter Merab , the wife of Adriel son of Barzillai from Meholah .

ID:	2104
INPUT:	▁Ja ko bek ▁E sau re kin ▁to po ▁e gin
PRED:	Jacob 's Covenant with Esau
GOLD:	Jacob and Esau Make Peace

ID:	2105
INPUT:	▁Bi tar te an ▁, ▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁er re ge a ren ▁gu da ros te a ▁Je ru sa le mi ▁e ta ▁ar te an ▁Ju dan ▁tin ko ▁i rau ten ▁zu ten ▁bi ▁hi ri ▁go tor rei ▁, ▁La kix ▁e ta ▁A ze ka ri ▁, ▁e ra so tzen ▁a ri ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	The king of Babylon sent a army to fight against Judah and Jerusalem . He went out to Lachish with Joash , and he went to Lachish .
GOLD:	At this time the Babylonian army was besieging Jerusalem , Lachish , and Azekah — the only fortified cities of Judah not yet captured .

ID:	2106
INPUT:	▁Hai ek ▁u tzi rik ▁, ▁ber riz ▁e re ▁al den du ▁e ta ▁hi ru gar ren ▁al diz ▁o toitz ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁, ▁le hen go ▁hi tzak ▁ber ri ro ▁e sa nez ▁.
PRED:	But they left him and wept again , and he prayed for three times .
GOLD:	So he went to pray a third time , saying the same things again .

ID:	2107
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁jen de ▁lei a la ▁na hi ▁du zu.Jo ▁ze ni tu en ▁, ▁bai na ▁ez ▁zu ten ▁da mu rik ▁i zan ▁; ▁i a ▁a ka ba tu ▁, ▁bai na ▁ez ▁zi ren ▁zen tza tu.Har kai tza ▁be zain ▁go gor ▁aur pe gi a ▁, ▁ez ▁zu ten ▁on bi de ra tu ▁na hi ▁i zan ▁.
PRED:	O Lord , you are my rock , but you have not turned away from me , but you have not been loyal to what you have done .
GOLD:	Lord , you are searching for honesty.You struck your people , but they paid no attention.You crushed them , but they refused to be corrected.They are determined , with faces set like stone ; they have refused to repent .

ID:	2108
INPUT:	▁« ▁On do ren ▁, ▁e ra man ▁ze kor ra ▁el kar ke ta - e txo la ren ▁aur re ra ▁. ▁A a ro nek ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁se me ek ▁bu ru an ▁es ku ak ▁e zar ri ko ▁diz ki o te ▁.
PRED:	“ Then Aaron presented Aaron and his sons to Aaron and his sons . He must lay their hands on the head of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ Bring the young bull to the entrance of the Tabernacle , where Aaron and his sons will lay their hands on its head .

ID:	2109
INPUT:	▁I lun pe tan ▁zau de ▁e zer ▁i ku si ▁e zin da ▁, ▁u hol de ek ▁az pi ra tu a ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	There is no evil in darkness , like the waters of the sea .
GOLD:	That is why you can not see in the darkness , and waves of water cover you .

ID:	2110
INPUT:	▁Ha la ▁, ▁ir ten ▁zen ▁Ha tak ▁Mar do ke o ren ▁bi la ▁, ▁jau re gi ▁aur re an ▁ze go en ▁pla za ra ▁.
PRED:	So Mordecai went out to meet him in the palace gate of the palace .
GOLD:	So Hathach went out to Mordecai in the square in front of the palace gate .

ID:	2111
INPUT:	▁Moi se sek ▁, ▁le ge ▁ho nen ▁xe da pen ▁guz ti ak ▁li bu ru an ▁i da tzi ▁zi tu e ne an ▁,
PRED:	So Moses wrote all these instructions in the Book of Instruction ,
GOLD:	When Moses had finished writing this entire body of instruction in a book ,

ID:	2112
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁be re ga na tu ▁zi tu en ▁Ju da ko ▁gi zon ▁o ro ren ▁bi ho tzak ▁ba te an ▁, ▁e ta ▁es ka ri ▁hau ▁bi da li ▁zi o ten ▁er re ge a ri ▁: ▁« ▁I tzul ▁za kiz ki gu ▁, ▁zeu re ▁zer bi tza ri ▁guz ti e kin ▁» ▁.
PRED:	When the people of Judah heard what had happened , they begged him , “ Go back to the king of Judah and let us return to the king of Judah . ”
GOLD:	So the king started back to Jerusalem . And when he arrived at the Jordan River , the people of Judah came to Gilgal to meet him and escort him across the river .

ID:	2113
INPUT:	▁Ni re ▁zi ta ra ▁do lu mi nez ▁da go ▁, ▁txi ru la ▁ne gar rez ▁.
PRED:	My heart is filled with grief , and my heart is filled with grief .
GOLD:	My harp plays sad music , and my flute accompanies those who weep .

ID:	2114
INPUT:	▁Ze ren ▁, ▁e gi a ▁e san ▁, ▁ni re gan ▁be te ▁be har ra ▁bai ta ▁Li bu ru ▁San tu ak ▁di o e na ▁: ▁Be ka ta ri en ▁ki de ko tzat ▁jo ▁zu ten ▁. ▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁ni re ak ▁las ter ▁e gin go ▁du ▁.
PRED:	For the Scriptures say , “ The Scriptures say , ‘ The Scriptures say , ‘ You will prosper , but you will prosper . ' ”
GOLD:	For the time has come for this prophecy about me to be fulfilled : ‘ He was counted among the rebels . ' Yes , everything written about me by the prophets will come true . ”

ID:	2115
INPUT:	▁Ha ra gi ▁gu riz ja na ri tu ko ▁di tut ▁a pai zak ▁, ▁ni re ▁on da su nez ▁a se ko ▁da ▁her ri a.Nik ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁e sa na ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But I will punish the priests , ” says the Lord , “ the Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	The priests will enjoy abundance , and my people will feast on my good gifts.I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	2116
INPUT:	▁Al di ▁har tan ▁ez ▁zen ▁er re ge rik ▁Is ra e len ▁. ▁Da nen ▁lei nu ko ak ▁lur ral de ▁ba ten ▁bi la ▁ze bil tzan ▁, ▁ber tan ▁bi zi tze ko ▁, ▁or du ▁ar te ▁zoz ke tan ▁ez ▁bai tzi tzai en ▁a te ra ▁be ren tza ko ▁lur ral de rik ▁is ra el dar ren ▁ar te an ▁.
PRED:	There was no allotment of land among the tribes of Israel who lived in the land of Dan in the land of Dan in the land of Dan . But the Israelites continued to live among them .
GOLD:	Now in those days Israel had no king . And the tribe of Dan was trying to find a place where they could settle , for they had not yet moved into the land assigned to them when the land was divided among the tribes of Israel .

ID:	2117
INPUT:	▁U hol de ak ▁mai ta su na ▁e zin ▁i tza li ▁, ▁ez ta ▁i bai ek ▁e re ▁i <unk> bai tek ▁mai ta su na ▁e ro si ▁na hi ▁ba lu ▁, ▁be re ▁on da sun ▁guz ti ak ▁e ma nik ▁e re ▁, ▁mes pre txu a ▁bai zik ▁ez ▁lu ke ▁a te ra ko ▁.
PRED:	Give thanks to the poor and no one else , but only a single moment is missing , but only a stranger 's wealth is full of love .
GOLD:	Many waters can not quench love , nor can rivers drown it.If a man tried to buy lovewith all his wealth , his offer would be utterly scorned .

ID:	2118
INPUT:	▁Zi gi luz ▁mar ka tu ak ▁zen bat ▁zi ren ▁en tzun ▁nu en ▁: ▁e hun ▁e ta ▁ber ro gei ta ▁lau ▁mi la ▁, ▁is ra el dar ▁lei nu ▁guz ti e ta rik ▁har tu ak ▁:
PRED:	Then I heard the sound of the people of Israel : “ I heard that all the tribes of Israel and all the tribes of Israel . ”
GOLD:	And I heard how many were marked with the seal of God — 144,000 were sealed from all the tribes of Israel :

ID:	2119
INPUT:	▁Bes te ▁hor ren bes te ▁e gin go ▁du zu e ▁her ri tar rak ▁gal du ▁e ta ▁zu ek ▁aur ki tu ta ko ▁as to ▁, ▁soin gai ne ko ▁na hiz ▁bes te ▁e do zer ▁gau za re kin ▁e re ▁; ▁ez ▁e gin ▁ez ▁i ku si a re na ▁.
PRED:	They will attack you and condemn you , and you will not find anyone else . You must not find any of your neighbor .
GOLD:	Do the same if you find your neighbor 's donkey , clothing , or anything else your neighbor loses . Do n't ignore your responsibility .

ID:	2120
INPUT:	▁Su a ▁do a ki o ▁aur re tik ▁, ▁in gu ru ko ▁e tsai ak ▁kis ka liz ▁.
PRED:	The enemy army of the enemy runs against the enemy .
GOLD:	Fire spreads ahead of himand burns up all his foes .

ID:	2121
INPUT:	▁Ef ron ▁be ra ▁e se ri a ▁ze go en ▁bes te ▁hi ti ta ▁guz ti en ▁ar te an ▁, ▁hi ri - sar re ra ko ▁pla zan ▁. ▁De nen ▁aur re an ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁:
PRED:	He also went to the town of Ephraim and all the other towns of Ephraim . He said to him ,
GOLD:	Ephron was sitting there among the others , and he answered Abraham as the others listened , speaking publicly before all the Hittite elders of the town .

ID:	2122
INPUT:	▁Sa ma ri a ra ▁hel tze an ▁, ▁E li se ok ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁— ▁I re ki ▁i e zaz ki e zu ▁be gi ak ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁e ta ▁i kus ▁de za te la.I re ki ▁ziz ki en ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁be gi ak ▁e ta ▁Sa ma ri a ▁er di an ▁zeu de la ▁i ku si ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	When Jehu arrived at Samaria , Elisha said to the Lord , “ May the Lord see how you see the kings of Samaria , just as the Lord had predicted . ”
GOLD:	As soon as they had entered Samaria , Elisha prayed , “ O Lord , now open their eyes and let them see. ” So the Lord opened their eyes , and they discovered that they were in the middle of Samaria .

ID:	2123
INPUT:	▁e sa nez ▁: ▁O dol ▁hau ▁Jain ko ak ▁zu e kin ▁e gi ten ▁du en ▁i tu na ren ▁e zau gar ri ▁da ▁.
PRED:	You say , “ Anyone who eats this covenant with you will be with you . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ This blood confirms the covenant God has made with you . ”

ID:	2124
INPUT:	▁E gin ▁o te ▁le za ke te ▁lau oin ka hai tze tan ▁zal di ek ▁? ▁Gol da ▁o te ▁le za ke te ▁i tsa so a ▁i di ek ▁? ▁Zu ek ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁zu zen bi de a ▁po zoi bi hur tu ▁du zu e ▁, ▁jus ti zi a ▁sa min du ra ▁.
PRED:	Do you listen to me ? Hear my prayer ! Hear my prayer ! Hear my cries , for you have acted like a pleasing aroma to the Lord , but you have made right with the Lord .
GOLD:	Can horses gallop over boulders ? Can oxen be used to plow them ? But that 's how foolish you are when you turn justice into poisonand the sweet fruit of righteousness into bitterness .

ID:	2125
INPUT:	▁« ▁Zu ek ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁a gin du a ▁baz ter re ra ▁u tzi ▁e ta ▁gi za ▁o hi tu ra ri ▁eus ten ▁di o zu e ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ You must obey the commands of the Lord your God . ”
GOLD:	For you ignore God 's law and substitute your own tradition . ”

ID:	2126
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁e san ▁ni on ▁: ▁“ ▁Ho nai no ▁i ri tsi ko ▁za ra ▁, ▁ez ▁aur re ra go ▁, ▁he men ▁a mai tzen ▁da ▁zu re ▁u hi nen ▁har ro ke ri a ▁” ▁.
PRED:	He said to me , ‘ You are not going to die , but you are n't going to boast about yourself . '
GOLD:	I said , ‘ This far and no farther will you come.Here your proud waves must stop ! '

ID:	2127
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁ho ne la ▁di o ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁« ▁Neuk ▁de fen da tu ko ▁dut ▁zu re ▁au zi a ▁, ▁neu re ▁gain ▁har tu ko ▁zu re ▁men de ku a ▁: ▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁i bai ak ▁hus tu ko ▁di tut ▁, ▁i tur bu ru ak ▁a gor tu ko ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says : “ I will bring my case against you , ” says the Lord. “ I will tear them away from the springs of Babylonia .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says to Jerusalem : “ I will be your lawyer to plead your case , and I will avenge you.I will dry up her river , as well as her springs ,

ID:	2128
INPUT:	▁Go rain tzi ak ▁Pris ka ▁e ta ▁A ki la ri ▁, ▁Je su ▁Kris to ren ▁zer bi tzu an ▁la gun tzai le ▁i zan ▁di tu da nei ▁.
PRED:	Give my greetings to Priscilla and Aquila in Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	Give my greetings to Priscilla and Aquila , my co-workers in the ministry of Christ Jesus .

ID:	2129
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁bai tan ▁ai ta - a mak ▁de so ho ra tzen ▁di tuz te ▁, ▁e tor ki na ▁go gor ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁u me zur tza ▁e ta ▁a lar gu na ▁us ti a tzen ▁.
PRED:	But your father 's mother is a liar and a liar .
GOLD:	Fathers and mothers are treated with contempt . Foreigners are forced to pay for protection . Orphans and widows are wronged and oppressed among you .

ID:	2130
INPUT:	▁Eskla bo ak ▁as ka tu ▁e ta ▁ber ri ro ▁eskla bo ▁e gin
PRED:	Slaves
GOLD:	Freedom for Hebrew Slaves

ID:	2131
INPUT:	▁Neuk ▁e gin ▁dut ▁lur ra e ta ▁lur ▁gai ne an ▁gi za ki a ▁sor tu ▁; ▁neuk ▁he da tu ▁di tut ▁neu re ▁es kuz ▁ze ru ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁neuk ▁a gin tzen ber ta ko ▁as tro ▁guz ti ei ▁.
PRED:	I am the one who created the earth and the earth , ” says the Lord. “ I lifted up the heavens and everything I did .
GOLD:	I am the one who made the earthand created people to live on it.With my hands I stretched out the heavens.All the stars are at my command .

ID:	2132
INPUT:	▁Gol go ta ▁i ze ne ko ▁to ki ra ▁e ra man ▁zu ten ▁Je sus ▁( ▁Gol go tak ▁« ▁Bu re zur ▁» ▁e san ▁na hi ▁du ▁) ▁.
PRED:	When Jesus reached the place , he told him , “ My skin is broken , ” he said .
GOLD:	And they brought Jesus to a place called Golgotha ( which means “ Place of the Skull ” ) .

ID:	2133
INPUT:	▁A se tze rai no ▁jan ▁zu ten ▁de nek ▁, ▁e ta ▁gel di tu ta ko ▁hon dar rez ▁ha ma bi ▁sas ki ▁be te ▁zi tuz ten ▁.
PRED:	They ate as much as they sat down , and the large baskets of leftover food .
GOLD:	They all ate as much as they wanted , and afterward , the disciples picked up twelve baskets of leftovers !

ID:	2134
INPUT:	▁Be har tsu ▁i zan ▁e ta ▁, ▁ge ro ▁, ▁jen de ▁xe he a ▁za pal tzen ▁du e nau hol de ▁sun tsi gar ri a ▁da ▁: ▁zer ▁ja nik ▁e re ▁ez ▁du ▁uz ten ▁!
PRED:	Even though they are poor and crushed , they have broken off their pay attention to the whole earth .
GOLD:	A poor person who oppresses the pooris like a pounding rain that destroys the crops .

ID:	2135
INPUT:	▁E ra ba te ko ▁ba ta su na
PRED:	Jesus ' Prayer of Life
GOLD:	Unity in the Body

ID:	2136
INPUT:	▁Is ra el dar ren ▁ar te tik ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁ez ▁zu en ▁i nor ▁e re ▁eskla bo ▁i za te ra ▁be har tu ▁; ▁bai zik ▁e ta ▁be re ▁gu da ri ▁, ▁o fi zi al ▁, ▁gu dal bu ru ▁, ▁ez ku ta ri ▁e ta ▁be re ▁gur di te ri a ▁e ta ▁zal di te ri a ren ▁ar du ra dun ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁.
PRED:	But no one left the land of Israel , but no one was with his slave . Instead , Pharaoh 's chief baker and his army , the commander of his army , and his chariots and charioteers .
GOLD:	But Solomon did not conscript any of the Israelites for forced labor . Instead , he assigned them to serve as fighting men , government officials , officers and captains in his army , commanders of his chariots , and charioteers .

ID:	2137
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zen ▁o har tu ▁be re ▁er rai na ▁ze la ▁. ▁Ha la ▁, ▁hur bil du ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Uz ta zu ▁zu re kin ▁o he ra <unk> ▁gal de tu ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Zer ▁e man go ▁di da zu ▁or dai ne tan ▁?
PRED:	But when he was very old , he got up and said to him , “ Look ! What are you doing ? What are you doing ? ” “ What have you done ? ”
GOLD:	So he stopped and propositioned her . “ Let me have sex with you , ” he said , not realizing that she was his own daughter-in-law. “ How much will you pay to have sex with me ? ” Tamar asked .

ID:	2138
INPUT:	▁er ge lak ▁ber ri ke ta ▁u ga <unk> zo nak ▁ez ▁da ki ▁zer ▁da tor ki on.E ta ▁nork ▁a di e raz ▁di e zai o ke be ra ren ▁on do ren ▁zer ▁ger ta tu ko ▁den ▁?
PRED:	Who is the King of the Almighty ? Who is your servant ? Who is your servant ?
GOLD:	they chatter on and on.No one really knows what is going to happen ; no one can predict the future .

ID:	2139
INPUT:	▁pa ra di su an ▁bi zi ▁zi nen ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁ba ra tze an ▁, ▁mo ta ▁guz ti e ta ko ▁har ri bi txiz ▁a pain du a ▁, ▁kor na li na ▁, ▁to pa zi o ▁e ta ▁be ri loz ▁, ▁kri so li to ▁, ▁o ni ze ▁e ta ▁jas pez ▁, ▁za fi ro ▁, ▁er ru bi ▁e ta ▁es me ral daz ▁a pain du a ▁; ▁ur rez ▁lan du ak ▁zi ren ▁zu re ▁bi txi ▁e ta ▁a pain gai lu ak ▁, ▁sor tu ▁zin tuz ten ▁e gun ▁be re an ▁pres ta tu ak ▁.
PRED:	The top of the main street was made of finely woven linen . It was also made of finely woven linen clothing , with gold , purple , and scarlet clothing , and scarlet thread . It was decorated with gold .
GOLD:	You were in Eden , the garden of God.Your clothing was adorned with every precious stone — red carnelian , pale-green peridot , white moonstone , blue-green beryl , onyx , green jasper , blue lapis lazuli , turquoise , and emerald — all beautifully crafted for youand set in the finest gold.They were given to youon the day you were created .

ID:	2140
INPUT:	▁Ar du ra du nak ▁a kats ▁ga be a ▁i zan ▁be har ▁du ▁, ▁be hin ▁ba kar rik ▁ez kon du a ▁; ▁ha ren ▁se me - a la bek ▁si nes te du nak ▁i zan ▁be har ▁du te ▁, ▁jo ka e ra ▁gaiz toz ▁na hiz ▁er re bel di az ▁sa la tu ▁ga be ak ▁.
PRED:	If you have no children , you must have no children . But if you do not have children , you must have no excuse others .
GOLD:	An elder must live a blameless life . He must be faithful to his wife , and his children must be believers who do n't have a reputation for being wild or rebellious .

ID:	2141
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁as ko ▁zi tu en ▁sen da tu ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁gai tzen ▁bat ▁zu ten ▁guz ti ak ▁gai ne ra ▁ze toz ki on ▁u ki tu ▁na hiz ▁.
PRED:	For he healed all the sick and sick and sick and sick .
GOLD:	He had healed many people that day , so all the sick people eagerly pushed forward to touch him .

ID:	2142
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁her ri tar rak zin tzo ▁i zan go ▁di ra ▁de na ke ta ▁lur ral de a ren ▁ja be bi hur tu ko ▁be ti ko ▁: ▁nik ▁e zar ri ta ko ▁lan da re ▁ber ri ▁, ▁neu re ▁os pe a ▁a ger tze ko e gi ni ko ▁ob ra ▁.
PRED:	The people of Israel will no longer be their own land , and they will be his own special possession . They will be his own people , and they will be my God .
GOLD:	All your people will be righteous.They will possess their land forever , for I will plant them there with my own handsin order to bring myself glory .

ID:	2143
INPUT:	▁Kris to ▁zu en gan ▁bal din ▁ba da go ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁gor pu tza ▁be ka tu a ga tik ▁hil ▁e gin go ▁den ▁ar ren ▁, ▁Es pi ri tu ak ▁ba du ▁bi zi a ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁sal ba men - in dar ra ri ▁es ker ▁.
PRED:	For if we are united with Christ , we will die by the Spirit of God . And if we live in the power of God , we will be saved .
GOLD:	And Christ lives within you , so even though your body will die because of sin , the Spirit gives you life because you have been made right with God .

ID:	2144
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁ke - sei na le a ▁hi ri tik ▁go ra ▁a te ra tzen ▁ha si ▁ze ne an ▁, ▁ben ja min dar rek ▁a tze ra ▁be gi ra tu ▁e ta ▁hi ri ▁o so a ▁ze ru rai no ko ▁su gar re tan ▁ze go e la ▁i ku si ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	But when the men of Benjamin saw this , they saw that the men of Benjamin was rising from the town of Benjamin , and they saw that he was very angry .
GOLD:	But when the warriors of Benjamin looked behind them and saw the smoke rising into the sky from every part of the town ,

ID:	2145
INPUT:	▁U ne ▁har tan ▁, ▁Mel ki se dek ▁Xa lem go ▁er re ge ak ▁o gi - ar do ak ▁a te ra ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁Goi - goi ko ▁Jain ko a ren ▁a pai za ▁bai tzen ▁,
PRED:	At that time King Sihon of the city of refuge in the Most High Priest , who was the Most High in the Most High .
GOLD:	And Melchizedek , the king of Salem and a priest of God Most High , brought Abram some bread and wine .

ID:	2146
INPUT:	▁Zin tzo en ▁sal ba me na ▁Jau na ren gan dik ▁da tor ▁: ▁hu ra ▁du te ▁go tor le ku ▁ar ris ku - ga rai an ▁.
PRED:	The godly are coming from the Lord ; the salvation of the godly are coming .
GOLD:	The Lord rescues the godly ; he is their fortress in times of trouble .

ID:	2147
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁go go ra raz ten ▁di zut ▁in dar ber ri ▁de za zu la ▁nik ▁es ku ak ▁e zar tze an ▁Jain ko ak ▁e man ▁zi zun ▁do hai na ▁,
PRED:	That is why I give you strength to give you the strength of the Almighty .
GOLD:	This is why I remind you to fan into flames the spiritual gift God gave you when I laid my hands on you .

ID:	2148
INPUT:	▁Li hoz ko ▁tu ni ka ▁sak ra tu a ▁jan tzi ta ▁sar tu ko ▁da ▁, ▁li hoz ko ▁gal tzaz ▁es ta li ta ▁e ta ▁li hoz ko ▁ger ri ko a ▁e ta ▁bu ru za pi a ▁jar ri ta ▁; ▁jan tzi ▁sak ra tu ak ▁di re nez ▁ge ro ▁, ▁bai nu a ▁har tu ▁on do ren ▁jan tzi ko ▁di tu ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : He will strip off his clothes and linen clothing and linen clothing and linen clothing and linen clothing . He will wear it into the priestly garments .
GOLD:	He must put on his linen tunic and the linen undergarments worn next to his body . He must tie the linen sash around his waist and put the linen turban on his head . These are sacred garments , so he must bathe himself in water before he puts them on .

ID:	2149
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁e sa ten ▁zi on ▁Jo a nek ▁ba tai a tze ra ▁ze tor ki on ▁jen de a ri ▁: ▁« ▁Su ge ku me ok ▁! ▁Nork ▁e san ▁di zu e ▁gai ne an ▁du zu en ▁ha ser re - zi gor ra ri ▁i hes ▁e gin go ▁di o zu e la ▁?
PRED:	John was John the Baptist , who was healed of the crowd said to him , “ Who are you going to escape ? Who did you escape ? ”
GOLD:	When the crowds came to John for baptism , he said , “ You brood of snakes ! Who warned you to flee the coming wrath ?

ID:	2150
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁ni re ▁ar di ek ▁zu ek ▁zan pa tu ta ko a ▁jan ▁be har ▁du te ▁e ta ▁zu ek ▁zi kin du ta ko a ▁e dan ▁.
PRED:	And you will trample my sheep and wild animals , and you will eat it .
GOLD:	Why must my flock eat what you have trampled down and drink water you have fouled ?

ID:	2151
INPUT:	▁Da vi dek ▁al da re a ▁e gin ▁Jau na ri
PRED:	David altar for the Lord
GOLD:	David Builds an Altar

ID:	2152
INPUT:	▁Ha ma bi ▁hau ek ▁i zen da tu ▁zi tu en ▁: ▁Si mon ▁— ▁ho ni ▁Ped ro ▁i ze na ▁jar ri ▁zi on ▁— ▁,
PRED:	Then Simon Peter said to Peter , “ Simon , the name of Simon Peter . ”
GOLD:	These are the twelve he chose : Simon ( whom he named Peter ) ,

ID:	2153
INPUT:	▁i nork ▁ez ▁de za la ▁gai ▁ho ne tan ▁be re ▁se ni de a ▁i rain ▁e do ▁en gai na ▁, ▁Jau na ▁be ra ▁bai ta ▁ho ri ez ▁guz ti ez ▁men de ka tzen ▁de na ▁, ▁le hen ▁e re ▁be hin ▁e ta ▁ber ri ro ▁zi nez ▁e san ▁ge ni zu en ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	Do n't let anyone mislead you or refuse to obey the Lord 's command , just as he had done . He said , “ That 's why we told you everything we have done . ”
GOLD:	Never harm or cheat a fellow believer in this matter by violating his wife , for the Lord avenges all such sins , as we have solemnly warned you before .

ID:	2154
INPUT:	▁Ge zi ak ▁jaur tiz ▁sa ka ba na tu ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁txi mis ta ▁e gi nez ▁i hes ▁e ra gin ▁.
PRED:	He threw them into pieces and threw them into the lightning .
GOLD:	He shot arrows and scattered his enemies ; his lightning flashed , and they were confused .

ID:	2155
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁de za zu la ▁or du an ▁, ▁ez ▁kez ka tu ▁, ▁ez ▁da mu tu ▁be har rik ▁i zan ▁, ▁o dol ▁er ru ga be a ▁i su ri ▁e ta ▁men de ku a ▁zeu re ▁es kuz ▁e gi na ▁du zu la ko ▁. ▁Jau nak ▁on da su nez ▁be te ▁zai tza ne an ▁, ▁o roit ▁zai tez ▁zeu re ▁mi ra be ▁ho ne taz ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But do n't worry about it . Do n't be sure that you have not sinned or turn away from the sins of your own hands and turn away from the Lord . ”
GOLD:	do n't let this be a blemish on your record . Then your conscience wo n't have to bear the staggering burden of needless bloodshed and vengeance . And when the Lord has done these great things for you , please remember me , your servant ! ”

ID:	2156
INPUT:	▁Ho ri ▁ger ta tu ko ▁den ▁e gu ne an ▁, ▁i hes la ri ▁bat ▁i ri tsi ko ▁zai zu ▁ber ri ▁e ma te ra ▁.
PRED:	When we tell you about this , we will run to you .
GOLD:	And on that day a survivor from Jerusalem will come to you in Babylon and tell you what has happened .

ID:	2157
INPUT:	▁Se ni de ok ▁, ▁zer ta ra ko ▁du ▁ba tek ▁« ▁Nik ▁ba dut ▁fe de a ▁» ▁e sa te a ▁, ▁e gin tze tan ▁ez ▁ba du ▁a zal tzen ▁? ▁Hor re la ko ▁fe de ak ▁sal ba ▁o te ▁de za ke ▁?
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , how can I tell you the truth ? ”
GOLD:	What good is it , dear brothers and sisters , if you say you have faith but do n't show it by your actions ? Can that kind of faith save anyone ?

ID:	2158
INPUT:	▁Jen de ak ▁e sa e ra ▁ho ri ▁aur pe gi ra tzen ▁dit ▁, ▁de nek ▁lis tu a ▁bo ta tzen ▁aur pe gi ra ▁.
PRED:	The crowds scoff at me ; every face grows up against me .
GOLD:	“ God has made a mockery of me among the people ; they spit in my face .

ID:	2159
INPUT:	▁Be hin ▁ba te an ▁, ▁ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai on ▁Jau na ▁Sa mu e li ▁: ▁— ▁Noiz ▁ar te ▁a ri ▁be har ▁du zu ▁ne gar rez ▁Sau len ga tik ▁? ▁Baz ter tu ▁e gin ▁dut ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁er re ge ▁i zan ▁ez ▁da din ▁. ▁Be te ▁e za zu ▁o li oz ▁a dar ra ▁e ta ▁zo az ▁, ▁Be len go ▁Je se ren ga na ▁bi dal tzen ▁zai tut ▁. ▁Ho nen ▁se me en ▁ar te an ▁be giz ta tu ▁dut ▁er re ge ▁e gi nen ▁du da na ▁.
PRED:	One day the Lord said to Samuel , “ How long will you go ? ” Samuel asked . “ How long will you go to the king of Israel ? Why should I be with you ? ” But Samuel said , “ I am the Lord , the God of Israel ! ”
GOLD:	Now the Lord said to Samuel , “ You have mourned long enough for Saul . I have rejected him as king of Israel , so fill your flask with olive oil and go to Bethlehem . Find a man named Jesse who lives there , for I have selected one of his sons to be my king . ”

ID:	2160
INPUT:	▁Ho dei ak ▁ze ru mu gan ▁go ra ▁i go a raz ten ▁di tu ▁, ▁e raun tsi ak ▁txi mis ta ka ▁le her ra raz ten ▁, ▁hai ze a ▁be re ▁gor de le ku e ta tik ▁a te ra raz ten ▁.
PRED:	The clouds above the clouds , and the lightning flashes against the lightning .
GOLD:	He causes the clouds to rise over the whole earth.He sends the lightning with the rainand releases the wind from his storehouses .

ID:	2161
INPUT:	▁Gai ne ra ▁, ▁a ker ▁bat ▁bar ka men - o pa ri ta ra ko ▁, ▁e gu ne ro ko ▁er re - o pa ri ▁e ta ▁be rau ei ▁da goz ki en ▁la bo re- ▁e ta ▁i sur - o pa ri e kin ▁.
PRED:	This is a permanent law for the regular burnt offering and liquid offering . It is a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	You must also sacrifice a male goat as a sin offering , in addition to the regular burnt offering with its accompanying grain offering and liquid offering .

ID:	2162
INPUT:	▁« ▁Jau na ▁, ▁gu re ▁Jain ko a ▁, ▁a hal men ▁han diz ▁a te ra ▁ze nu en ▁her ri a ▁E gip to tik ▁e ta ▁i zen ▁han di a ▁zeu re ga na tu ▁du zu ▁gaur dai no ▁; ▁guk ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁be ka tu ▁e gin ▁du gu ▁e ta ▁gaiz ki ▁jo ka tu ▁.
PRED:	“ O Lord our God , who rescued us from slavery in the land of Egypt , for you have done wrong . You have done wrong , and we have sinned against you .
GOLD:	“ O Lord our God , you brought lasting honor to your name by rescuing your people from Egypt in a great display of power . But we have sinned and are full of wickedness .

ID:	2163
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁ja kin ▁on gi ▁, ▁ni ▁hil tzen ▁ba nau zu e ▁, ▁er ru ga be ▁ba ten ▁he ri o tza ren ▁e ran tzu le ▁i zan go ▁za re te la ▁zu ek ▁, ▁hi ri ▁hau ▁e ta ▁ber ta ko ▁bi zi la gu nak ▁, ▁be ne tan ▁Jain ko ak ▁bi da li ▁bai nau ▁zu en ga na ▁, ▁e san ▁di zu e dan ▁guz ti a ▁i ra gar tze ra ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But if you do n't know that I am innocent , you will die , and if you have been circumcised , you will live in this city , and you will live in the towns of your God . ”
GOLD:	But if you kill me , rest assured that you will be killing an innocent man ! The responsibility for such a deed will lie on you , on this city , and on every person living in it . For it is absolutely true that the Lord sent me to speak every word you have heard . ”

ID:	2164
INPUT:	▁Hai e ta ko ▁ba koi tza hai ze te an ▁ba bes ▁i zan go ▁da ▁, ▁e kai tze an ▁a ter pe ▁; ▁lur ral de ▁le hor re an ▁u bi de a ▁be za la ▁, ▁ba sa mor tu an ▁har kaitz ▁han di ▁ba ten ge ri za ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	Its branches will be a refuge in the landand will run like a river in the desert , like a rock in the desert .
GOLD:	Each one will be like a shelter from the windand a refuge from the storm , like streams of water in the desertand the shadow of a great rock in a parched land .

ID:	2165
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁u tzi ▁zeu re ▁a ho a ri be ka tu ▁e gi na raz ten ▁, ▁ez ▁e san ▁ge ro ▁Jain ko a ri o har tu ▁ga be ▁e gin ▁du zu la.E a ▁ha ser re tzen ▁zai zun ▁Jain ko a zeu re ▁hi tzen ga ti ke ta ▁zeu re ▁la nak ▁o ro de se gi ten ▁diz ki zun ▁!
PRED:	Do n't let your heart be deceived by saying , ‘ Do n't be angry , for God is angry with you . It 's better for you .
GOLD:	It is better to say nothing than to make a promise and not keep it .

ID:	2166
INPUT:	▁E gun ▁har tan ▁— ▁ha la ▁di ot ▁nik ▁, ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du nak ▁— ▁neu re kin ▁har tu ko ▁zai tut ▁, ▁Xe al ti e len ▁se me ▁Zo ro ba bel ▁e ne ▁zer bi tza ri ▁ho ri ▁, ▁e ta ▁neu re ▁zi gi lu ▁e gin go ▁zai tut ▁, ▁neuk ▁au ke ra tu ▁bai tzai tut ▁. ▁Ha la ▁di ot ▁nik ▁, ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du nak ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ In that day , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , “ I will destroy you and your servant Zerubbabel son , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	“ But when this happens , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , I will honor you , Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel , my servant . I will make you like a signet ring on my finger , says the Lord , for I have chosen you . I , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken ! ”

ID:	2167
INPUT:	▁« ▁Hi la ren ▁ha si e ran ▁, ▁bi ▁ze kor ▁, ▁a ha ri ▁bat ▁e ta ▁ur te be te ko ▁zaz pi ▁ar ku me ▁— ▁de nak ▁a kats ▁ga be ak ▁— ▁aur kez tu ko ▁diz ki o zu e ▁Jau na ri ▁er re - o pa ri tzat ▁.
PRED:	“ On the fourteenth day of the festival , you must present a one-year-old male lambs with no defects , and seven one-year-old male lambs with no defects .
GOLD:	“ On the first day of each month , present an extra burnt offering to the Lord of two young bulls , one ram , and seven one-year-old male lambs , all with no defects .

ID:	2168
INPUT:	▁Lur rak ▁gu ti zi a tzen ▁di tuz te la ▁? ▁La pur tu ▁e gi ten ▁di tuz te.E txe ak ▁ir ri ka tzen ▁di tuz te la ▁? ▁Har tu ▁e gi ten ▁di tuz <unk> dar rez ▁har tzen ▁du te ▁na gu si a ▁, ▁be re ▁fa mi li a ▁e ta ▁e txal de a re kin ▁.
PRED:	The earth will be destroyed , and the houses of the earth will be destroyed . They will be destroyed , and their homes will be saved .
GOLD:	When you want a piece of land , you find a way to seize it.When you want someone 's house , you take it by fraud and violence.You cheat a man of his property , stealing his family 's inheritance .

ID:	2169
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁aur pe gi ra ▁bo ta ▁ni en ▁ho ri ▁e ta ▁ma da ri ka tu ▁e gin ▁ni tu en ▁; ▁jo ▁e re ▁e gin ▁ni tu en ▁ba tzuk ▁e ta ▁i le ak ▁a te ra ▁niz ki en ▁; ▁ge ro ▁, ▁her ri ▁hai e ta ko ▁jen de a re kin ▁ez ▁zi re la ▁ez kon du ko ▁zin ▁e ra gin ▁ni en ▁Jain ko a ren ▁i ze ne an ▁.
PRED:	I threw them into pieces and threw them into pieces , and I took some of them to pieces . I took some of them , and I would not let them marry them .
GOLD:	So I confronted them and called down curses on them . I beat some of them and pulled out their hair . I made them swear in the name of God that they would not let their children intermarry with the pagan people of the land .

ID:	2170
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁zu e ne tik ▁za bal du ▁da ▁Ma ze do ni a ▁e ta ▁A kai a ra ▁Jau na ren ▁me zu a ▁; ▁e ta ▁es ku al de ▁ho ri e ta ra ▁ez ▁e zik ▁, ▁baz ter ▁guz ti e ta ra ▁e re ▁hel du ▁da ▁Jain ko a ren gan ▁du zu en ▁si nes me na ren ▁en tzu te a ▁, ▁guk ▁e zer ▁e san ▁be har rik ▁ga be ▁.
PRED:	For you have already heard the word of the Lord , the God of Macedonia and Achaia , and you have not abandoned the word of the Lord . Do n't listen to what is saying , and we do n't believe it .
GOLD:	And now the word of the Lord is ringing out from you to people everywhere , even beyond Macedonia and Achaia , for wherever we go we find people telling us about your faith in God . We do n't need to tell them about it ,

ID:	2171
INPUT:	▁I gor ri ▁zi tuz ten ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁gi zon ▁ba tzuk ▁Xi lo ra ▁e ta ▁e kar ri ▁zu ten ▁han dik ▁i za ki ▁he gal du nen ▁gai ne an ▁e se ri a ▁da go en ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du na ren ▁i tun - ku txa ▁. ▁Jain ko a ren ▁i tun - ku txa ri ▁la gun ▁e gi nez ▁, ▁Hof ni ▁e ta ▁Pin has ▁, ▁E li ren ▁bi ▁se me ak ▁, ▁e tor ri ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	So they sent some men to kill Shiloh and put them on the Ark of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who carried the Ark of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	So they sent men to Shiloh to bring the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who is enthroned between the cherubim . Hophni and Phinehas , the sons of Eli , were also there with the Ark of the Covenant of God .

ID:	2172
INPUT:	▁Zu hur re kin ▁i bil tzen ▁de na ▁zu hur ▁bi hur tzen ▁da ▁, ▁zen tzu ga be e kin ▁el kar tzen ▁de na ▁gal bi de an ▁jar tzen ▁.
PRED:	A wise person seeks wisdom , but a wise person takes understanding .
GOLD:	Walk with the wise and become wise ; associate with fools and get in trouble .

ID:	2173
INPUT:	▁O rain ▁bai ▁, ▁ba da kit ▁jain ko ▁guz ti en ▁al de an ▁han di a ▁de la ▁Jau na ▁, ▁e gip to ar rek ▁her ri a ▁har ro ke ri az ▁e ra bi li ▁zu te la rik ▁, ▁hai en ▁men pe tik ▁lib ra tu ▁bai tu ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But now I know that the Lord has rescued me from the Egyptians , for he rescued them from the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	I know now that the Lord is greater than all other gods , because he rescued his people from the oppression of the proud Egyptians . ”

ID:	2174
INPUT:	▁Be rak ▁a te ra ko ▁du ▁o nik ▁er ru ga be a ▁, ▁e ta ▁zu ▁e re ▁bai ▁, ▁zu re ▁jar du e ra ▁gar bi a ▁ba da ▁» ▁.
PRED:	If the animal has been burned , it will be washed , for you are pure . ”
GOLD:	Even sinners will be rescued ; they will be rescued because your hands are pure . ”

ID:	2175
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁e san ▁zi o ten ▁en tzu le ek ▁: ▁— ▁Ez ▁di tu zu ▁o rain dik ▁ber ro gei ta ▁ha mar ▁ur te ▁, ▁e ta ▁Ab ra ham ▁i ku si ▁du zu la ▁?
PRED:	“ Do n't you hear ? ” they asked . “ Do n't you see ten years ? ”
GOLD:	The people said , “ You are n't even fifty years old . How can you say you have seen Abraham ? ”

ID:	2176
INPUT:	▁I tzu la ra zi ▁e gin go ▁zai tut ▁, ▁mu tur re ta ko a ▁i pi ni ▁e ta ▁zeu re ▁gu da ros te ▁o so a re kin ▁ir te na ra zi ko ▁zai tut ▁: ▁zal di ▁e ta ▁do to re ▁jan tzi ta ko ▁zal diz ko e kin ▁, ▁ba bes kiz ▁e ta ▁bu lar - os ko lez ▁hor ni tu ri ko ▁gu da ros te ▁han di a re kin ▁, ▁de nak ▁ez pa ta ▁es ku e tan ▁du te la ▁.
PRED:	I will send you an army of Israel into battle , and I will send you all your chariots and charioteers . I will give you their chariots and charioteers , charioteers , charioteers , and charioteers , and charioteers .
GOLD:	I will turn you around and put hooks in your jaws to lead you out with your whole army — your horses and charioteers in full armor and a great horde armed with shields and swords .

ID:	2177
INPUT:	▁Ma ri ak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁ain ge ru a ri ▁: ▁— ▁Bai na ▁no la ▁ger ta ▁dai te ke ▁ho ri ▁, ▁ez ▁bai naiz ▁gi zon ▁ba te kin ▁bi zi ▁?
PRED:	Then Mary said to the angel , “ But who can I be with this man ? ” But the angel said .
GOLD:	Mary asked the angel , “ But how can this happen ? I am a virgin . ”

ID:	2178
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ur run du ▁el kar te ▁ho ne ta tik ▁, ▁bat - ba te an ▁bir rin du ko ▁bai tut ▁» ▁.Moi ses ▁e ta ▁A a ron ▁lur re rai no ▁a hus pez tu ▁zi ren ▁,
PRED:	“ At the end of the Sabbath , ” they said . “ I will take some of them on the seventh day , and I will bow down on the ground . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Moses : “ Place Aaron 's staff permanently before the Ark of the Covenant to serve as a warning to rebels . This should put an end to their complaints against me and prevent any further deaths . ”

ID:	2179
INPUT:	▁Bai ▁, ▁zu re ▁mai ta su na ▁ze ru ▁za ba la ▁bai no ▁han di a go a ▁, ▁zu re ▁lei al ta su na ▁ho dei e ta rai no ko a ▁.
PRED:	But your unfailing love is higher than the clouds above the clouds .
GOLD:	Be exalted , O God , above the highest heavens.May your glory shine over all the earth .

ID:	2180
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁a gin du ▁zi en ▁: ▁« ▁Ku tsa tu ▁tenplu a ▁, ▁a ta ri ak ▁hil da koz ▁be <unk> ▁Zo az te ▁! ▁» ▁Ir ten ▁e ta ▁e kin ▁zi o ten ▁tris kan tza ri ▁hi ri an ▁.
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Get out of the Temple , and go out to the city . ”
GOLD:	“ Defile the Temple ! ” the Lord commanded . “ Fill its courtyards with corpses . Go ! ” So they went and began killing throughout the city .

ID:	2181
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁« ▁Li bu ru ▁San tu ak ▁di o ▁: ▁Ni re ▁e txe a ▁o toitz - e txe ▁i zan go ▁da ▁; ▁zu ek ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁la pur - zu lo ▁e gi na ▁du zu e ▁» ▁.
PRED:	And he said , “ The Scriptures say , ‘ My house will be taken from my house , and you will be saved . ' ”
GOLD:	He said to them , “ The Scriptures declare , ‘ My Temple will be called a house of prayer , ' but you have turned it into a den of thieves ! ”

ID:	2182
INPUT:	▁On do ren ▁, ▁Moi ses ▁e ta ▁A a ron ▁fa ra oi a ga na ▁jo an ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁— ▁Hau ▁e san ▁du ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁Is ra el go ▁Jain ko ak ▁: ▁U tzi o zu ▁ni re ▁her ri a ri ▁ba sa mor tu ra ▁jo a ten ▁, ▁e ne ▁o ho rez ▁fes ta ▁os pa tze ra ▁.
PRED:	Then Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and said , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : You must celebrate the Festival of Shelters . You must celebrate the Festival of Shelters .
GOLD:	After this presentation to Israel 's leaders , Moses and Aaron went and spoke to Pharaoh . They told him , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : Let my people go so they may hold a festival in my honor in the wilderness . ”

ID:	2183
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁hi ri ra ▁sar tu ▁be zain ▁las ter ▁, ▁Is ma el ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁gi zo nek ▁hil ▁e gin ▁zi tuz ten ▁e ta ▁pu tzu ▁ba te ra ▁bo ta ▁.
PRED:	But as soon as they entered the town , they killed all the men of Israel and killed them .
GOLD:	But as soon as they were all inside the town , Ishmael and his men killed all but ten of them and threw their bodies into a cistern .

ID:	2184
INPUT:	▁« ▁I tsa so ▁» ▁ze ri tzan ▁u ras ka ▁han di a ▁, ▁e ta ▁be ro ni ▁eus te ko ▁ha ma bi ▁ze zen ▁;
PRED:	“ The waters of the sea , ” he said . “ His faithful love endures forever .
GOLD:	the Sea and the twelve oxen under it ;

ID:	2185
INPUT:	▁Neu re ▁e maz te ▁e gin go ▁zai tut lei al ta sun ▁i raun kor <unk> du an ▁e za gu tu ko ▁du zu zeu re ▁Jaun ▁hau ▁.
PRED:	I will give you your wife 's wife , and you will know that the Lord has spoken !
GOLD:	Then the earth will answer the thirsty criesof the grain , the grapevines , and the olive trees.And they in turn will answer , ‘ Jezreel ' — ‘ God plants ! '

ID:	2186
INPUT:	▁Er ru dun ▁i za nez ▁ge ro ▁, ▁ai ▁e ne ▁! ▁Er ru ga be ▁i za nik ▁e re ▁, ▁e zin ▁i zan go ▁dut ▁bu ru rik ▁al txa tu ▁, ▁lo tsaz ▁be te a ▁bai na go ▁, ▁mi se ri a ▁be ti ▁be gi ▁aur re an ▁.
PRED:	O Lord , I have mercy on you , so I can not be disgraced , but I will not be able to trust in him .
GOLD:	If I am guilty , too bad for me ; and even if I 'm innocent , I ca n't hold my head high , because I am filled with shame and misery .

ID:	2187
INPUT:	▁Oi hu ▁e gin ▁, ▁bai na ▁Jain ko ak ▁ez ▁di e ▁e ran tzu ten ▁, ▁gaiz to ak ▁e ta ▁har ro ak ▁di re la ko ▁;
PRED:	But the wicked are gone , and the wicked are trapped by the wicked .
GOLD:	And when they cry out , God does not answerbecause of their pride .

ID:	2188
INPUT:	▁Bi da li ▁zi tu en ▁mor roi ak ▁gon bi da tu ei ▁dei ▁e gi te ra ▁. ▁Bai na ▁hai ek ▁ez ▁zu ten ▁e tor ri ▁na hi ▁i zan ▁.
PRED:	He sent messengers to his servants , but they were not ready to invite them to come .
GOLD:	When the banquet was ready , he sent his servants to notify those who were invited . But they all refused to come !

ID:	2189
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁e san ▁zi dan ▁: ▁“ ▁Gu re ▁ar ba so en ▁Jain ko ak ▁hau ta tu ▁zai tu ▁, ▁be ra ren ▁na hi a ▁e za gu tu ▁, ▁Zin tzo a ▁i ku si ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁a ho tsa ▁zu zen - zu ze ne an ▁en tzun ▁de za zun ▁.
PRED:	He said to me , ‘ This is the God of our ancestors , the God of our ancestors , says : When you see what is right , you will see .
GOLD:	“ Then he told me , ‘ The God of our ancestors has chosen you to know his will and to see the Righteous One and hear him speak .

ID:	2190
INPUT:	▁Al txa ▁, ▁Jain ko a ▁, ▁e ta ▁go ber na ▁mun du a ▁, ▁zu ▁bai tza ra ▁her ri ▁guz ti en ▁ja be ▁!
PRED:	Arise , O God , for all the world is God , for he has given you everything he has done .
GOLD:	Rise up , O God , and judge the earth , for all the nations belong to you .

ID:	2191
INPUT:	▁Hau tsa ▁mi az ka tu ko ▁du te ▁, ▁su ge ek ▁e ta ▁nar ras ti ek ▁be za <unk> da raz ▁a te ra ko ▁di ra gor de le ku e ta tik ▁, ▁i ka raz ▁jo ko ▁du te ▁Jau na ren ga na ▁, ▁gu re ▁Jain ko a ren ga na ▁, ▁e ta ▁be gi ru ne ▁i zan go ▁di o te ▁.
PRED:	All the nations will be destroyed , and the wild animals will be consumed by the fire of the Lord , and they will be destroyed by the Lord our God , and they will be filled with fear .
GOLD:	Like snakes crawling from their holes , they will come out to meet the Lord our God.They will fear him greatly , trembling in terror at his presence .

ID:	2192
INPUT:	▁se ni de ek ▁e san ▁zi o ten ▁Je su si ▁: ▁— ▁Ir ten ▁he men dik ▁e ta ▁zo az ▁Ju de a ra ▁, ▁e gi ten ▁di tu zun ▁e gin tzak ▁han ▁e re ▁zu re ▁i kas le ek ▁i kus ▁di tza ten ▁.
PRED:	His brothers said to Jesus , “ Get out of Judea and go out to the village of Judea , where you see . ”
GOLD:	and Jesus ' brothers said to him , “ Leave here and go to Judea , where your followers can see your miracles !

ID:	2193
INPUT:	▁« ▁I ku si ▁di tu zun ▁ha mar ▁a dar rak ▁, ▁o rain dik ▁er re ge tza ▁har tu ▁ez ▁du ten ▁ha mar ▁er re ge ▁di ra ▁; ▁piz ti a re kin ▁ba te ra ▁har tu ko ▁du te ▁er re ge - a gin te a ▁, ▁bai na ▁or du ▁ba te ra ko ▁ba kar rik ▁.
PRED:	“ When the king sees ten horns of the king 's ten horns , he will draw his finger into the middle of the river . But if he finds that the king is not the next king .
GOLD:	The ten horns of the beast are ten kings who have not yet risen to power . They will be appointed to their kingdoms for one brief moment to reign with the beast .

ID:	2194
INPUT:	▁Be gi ra ▁gu re ▁o gi a ri ▁: ▁zu en ga na ▁e tor tze ko ▁e txe tik ▁a te ra ▁gi ne ne an ▁, ▁be ro - be ro a ▁ze go en ▁; ▁o rain ▁, ▁go gor ra ▁e ta ▁a pur ▁e gi na ▁da go ▁.
PRED:	He said to us , “ Let 's go home to the house of our home , and now he will be punished . ”
GOLD:	“ This bread was hot from the ovens when we left our homes . But now , as you can see , it is dry and moldy .

ID:	2195
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁o so ▁bes te la ko ▁as mo ak di tu ▁A si ri ak ▁bu ru an ▁: ▁sun tsi tze a ▁du ▁as mo ▁, ▁her ri ▁as ko ▁bir rin tze a ▁.
PRED:	But many of the people will be destroyed , and many will be destroyed .
GOLD:	But the king of Assyria will not understand that he is my tool ; his mind does not work that way.His plan is simply to destroy , to cut down nation after nation .

ID:	2196
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁ez ▁al ▁da ki zu ▁, ▁Se na ke rib ▁, ▁as pal di tik ▁neuk ▁pres ta tu a ▁nu e la ▁, ▁an tzi na tik ▁neuk ▁e ra ba ki a o rain ▁bu ru tzen ▁a ri ▁nai zen ▁hau ▁? ▁Hor re ga tik ▁bi hur tu ▁di tu zu hi ri ▁go tor rak ▁za bor - pi la ▁.
PRED:	But now , O Lord , do n't you remember what I have done to you ? But now I will make you as strong as the sand on the seashore .
GOLD:	“ But have you not heard ? I decided this long ago.Long ago I planned it , and now I am making it happen.I planned for you to crush fortified citiesinto heaps of rubble .

ID:	2197
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁zu en ▁Jain ko ak ▁bi zi le ku ▁e ta ▁kul tu - le ku tzat ▁au ke ra tu ko ▁du en ▁to ki a ▁bi zi ▁za re ten ▁hi ri tik ▁ur ru ti ▁ba da go ▁, ▁be rak ▁e man da ko ▁a be re ▁han di ▁na hiz ▁txi ki e ta tik ▁hil ▁de za ke zu e ▁ha ra gi ta ra ko ▁, ▁nik ▁zu ei ▁a gin du ta ko a ren ▁a ra be ra ▁, ▁e ta ▁na hi ▁a di na ▁jan ▁.
PRED:	The Lord your God has chosen you to live in the place of worship the Lord your God chooses to be honored , and you will die from the herd of cattle , sheep , sheep , and goats , and goats .
GOLD:	It might happen that the designated place of worship — the place the Lord your God chooses for his name to be honored — is a long way from your home . If so , you may butcher any of the cattle , sheep , or goats the Lord has given you , and you may freely eat the meat in your hometown , as I have commanded you .

ID:	2198
INPUT:	▁E sai e zu ▁, ▁ba da ▁: ▁Hau ▁di o ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁A la ▁ni ▁Jau na ▁! ▁Zeu ei ▁en tzu na ren ▁a ra be ra ▁tra ta tu ko ▁zai tuz tet ▁.
PRED:	Say to them , ‘ This is what the Lord says : The Lord says : I will listen to you !
GOLD:	Now tell them this : ‘ As surely as I live , declares the Lord , I will do to you the very things I heard you say .

ID:	2199
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren ▁on ta su na ▁Is ra e le kin
PRED:	The Lord 's Case against Israel
GOLD:	Judgment against the Lord 's Enemies

ID:	2200
INPUT:	<unk> ▁gal gar riz ▁, ▁su kar rez ▁e ta ▁han pa du raz ▁jo ko ▁zai tuz te ▁; ▁le hor tez ▁, ▁hai ze ▁er rez ▁e ta ▁gor ri nez ▁hon da tu ko ▁diz ki zu e ▁uz tak ▁: ▁ez ▁du ▁e tsi ko ▁zu ek ▁de sa ger ra ra zi ▁ar te ▁.
PRED:	Your fierce anger will consume you , and you will be thrown into the sea , and you will be thrown into the sea . You will be destroyed .
GOLD:	The Lord will strike you with wasting diseases , fever , and inflammation , with scorching heat and drought , and with blight and mildew . These disasters will pursue you until you die .

ID:	2201
INPUT:	▁Ru be ne kin ▁ba te ra ▁Si me on ▁e ta ▁Ga den ▁lei nu ak ▁e txo la tu ko ▁di ra ▁. ▁Si me on dar ren ▁bu ru za gi a ▁Tzu ri xa dai ren ▁se me ▁Xe lu mi el ▁i zan go ▁da ▁,
PRED:	The tribes of Reuben and Gad will be captured , and the leader of the tribe of Simeon will become a leader of the tribe of Simeon .
GOLD:	SimeonShelumiel son of Zurishaddai59,300

ID:	2202
INPUT:	▁Gu re ▁Jain ko a ren bar ru ▁er ru ki tsu a ri ▁es ker ▁, ▁goiz - ar gi a ▁a ger tu ko ▁zai gu ze ru ▁goi tik ▁,
PRED:	Our God is merciful to us , and our prayers will rise up from heaven .
GOLD:	Because of God 's tender mercy , the morning light from heaven is about to break upon us ,

ID:	2203
INPUT:	▁as tin du ko ▁du ▁Jau nak ▁Is ra el ▁! ▁U re tan ▁dar da ra tzen ▁den ▁ka na be ra ▁be za la ▁i zan go ▁da ▁. ▁Be rai en ▁gu ra so ei ▁e man ▁zi en ▁lur ral de ▁e der ▁ho ne ta tik ▁bo ta ▁e gin go ▁di tu ▁is ra el dar rak ▁e ta ▁Euf ra tes ▁i bai az ▁bes te ▁al de an ▁bar rei a tu ko ▁. ▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁is ra el dar rek ▁zu toin ▁sak ra tu ak ▁e gin ▁di tuz te ▁e ta ▁Jau na ▁ha ser ra ra zi ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord will destroy the land of Israel , just as he lives in the land of Israel . He will drive them out of the Euphrates River , and he will drive them out of the Euphrates River . He will set them apart from the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	Then the Lord will shake Israel like a reed whipped about in a stream . He will uproot the people of Israel from this good land that he gave their ancestors and will scatter them beyond the Euphrates River , for they have angered the Lord with the Asherah poles they have set up for worship .

ID:	2204
INPUT:	▁E san ▁zi dan ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁« ▁Gi za se me ▁, ▁har tu ▁aiz to ▁zor rotz ▁bat ▁e ta ▁e ra bi li ▁bi zar ra ▁moz te ko ▁la ba na ▁be za la ▁: ▁moz tu ▁i le a ▁e ta ▁bi zar ra ▁, ▁pi sa tu ▁e ta ▁ba na tu ▁hi ru ▁me ta txo tan ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Son of man , take a knife and cut it off like a knife and put it on a pole and put it on a pole .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , take a sharp sword and use it as a razor to shave your head and beard . Use a scale to weigh the hair into three equal parts .

ID:	2205
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁e san ▁zi en ▁, ▁or du an ▁: ▁— ▁Gal de ra ▁bat ▁: ▁La run ba tez ▁zer ▁du gu ▁le gez ko ▁, ▁on ▁e gi te a ▁a la ▁gaitz ▁e gi te a ▁, ▁bi zi a ▁sal ba tze a ▁a la ▁ken tze a ▁?
PRED:	“ Well , ” Jesus said to them , “ we are honest men who are breaking the law by harvesting grain on the Sabbath ? ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus said to his critics , “ I have a question for you . Does the law permit good deeds on the Sabbath , or is it a day for doing evil ? Is this a day to save life or to destroy it ? ”

ID:	2206
INPUT:	▁E ze ki a sek ▁tenplu a ▁gar bi tu ▁e ta ▁kon pon du
PRED:	Hezekiah asked the Temple
GOLD:	Hezekiah Reopens the Temple

ID:	2207
INPUT:	▁Sei ▁mai la ▁zi tu en ▁er re ge - aul ki ak ▁e ta ▁, ▁be ra ri ▁a txi ki ak ▁, ▁oin - aul ki a ▁e ta ▁jar le ku a ren ▁al de ▁ba na tan ▁, ▁be so ak ▁. ▁Be so en ▁on do an ▁bi ▁le hoi ▁zeu den ▁zu tik ▁,
PRED:	His throne was six feet old and beautiful , and his feet were placed on his feet . His feet were standing on the south side of the lion .
GOLD:	The throne had six steps , with a footstool of gold . There were armrests on both sides of the seat , and the figure of a lion stood on each side of the throne .

ID:	2208
INPUT:	▁Be dein ka tzen ▁zai tu e na be dein ka tu ▁e gin go ▁dut ▁; ▁ma da ri ka tzen ▁zai tu e na ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁ma da ri ka <unk> re ▁bi tar tez ▁be dein ka tu ko ▁di tut lur re ko ▁her ri ▁guz ti ak ▁» ▁.
PRED:	When I bless you , I will bless you ; I will bless you , ” says the Lord. “ Your young men will bless you , and I will bless you . ”
GOLD:	I will bless those who bless you and curse those who treat you with contempt . All the families on earth will be blessed through you . ”

ID:	2209
INPUT:	▁Al da re a ▁zar ta tu ▁e gin ▁zen ▁e ta ▁er rau tsa ▁al da re tik ▁be he ra ▁i su ri ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁gi zo nak ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁a gin duz ▁, ▁e ma ni ko ▁e zau gar ri a ren ▁a ra be ra ▁.
PRED:	Then the man of God left the altar and burned it on the altar of the Lord , the God of Israel , just as the Lord had predicted .
GOLD:	At the same time a wide crack appeared in the altar , and the ashes poured out , just as the man of God had predicted in his message from the Lord .

ID:	2210
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁e go ki tu ▁mun du ▁ho nen ▁i ri tzi e ta ra ▁, ▁e ra ber ri ▁zai tez te ▁bai zik ▁, ▁zeu en ▁pen tsa e ra ▁al da tuz ▁; ▁hor re la ▁be rei zi ▁a hal ▁i zan go ▁du zu e ▁zer ▁den ▁Jain ko ak ▁na hi ▁du e na ▁, ▁zer ▁den ▁o na ▁, ▁a tse gin gar ri ▁zai o na ▁e ta ▁bi kai na ▁.
PRED:	Do n't realize that you are led to the world . Instead , you will know that you are doing what is right , and you will know what God is doing .
GOLD:	Do n't copy the behavior and customs of this world , but let God transform you into a new person by changing the way you think . Then you will learn to know God 's will for you , which is good and pleasing and perfect .

ID:	2211
INPUT:	▁En tzun ▁her ri - a gin ta ri en ▁dei a dar rak ▁, ▁ar tal de - gi da ri en ▁gar ra si ak ▁: ▁hon da tu ▁di tu ▁Jau nak be rai en ▁lar re ak ▁!
PRED:	Listen ! Hear the cries of the shepherds ! The shepherds have heard their cries of destruction .
GOLD:	Listen to the frantic cries of the shepherds.The leaders of the flock are wailing in despair , for the Lord is ruining their pastures .

ID:	2212
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁Mar do ke o ren tzat ▁pres ta tu a ▁zu en ▁ur ka be an ▁zin tzi li ka tu ▁zu ten ▁Ha man ▁. ▁Or du an ▁ba re tu ▁zen ▁er re ge a ren ▁ha ser re a ▁.
PRED:	So Mordecai prepared a banquet for the king 's reign , and Haman became very angry .
GOLD:	So they impaled Haman on the pole he had set up for Mordecai , and the king 's anger subsided .

ID:	2213
INPUT:	▁On gi ▁i kus ten ▁dut ▁ez ▁da go e la ▁ni re gan ▁— ▁ni re ▁gi za ▁gri ne tan ▁, ▁a le gi a ▁— ▁e zer ▁o nik ▁, ▁ni re ▁es ku ▁bai ta go ▁on ▁e gin ▁na hi ▁i za te a ▁, ▁bai na ▁ez ▁on ▁e gi te a ▁.
PRED:	I am not trying to see that I have never seen it . Instead , I have no desires to follow my desires , but I have nothing to do what is right .
GOLD:	And I know that nothing good lives in me , that is , in my sinful nature . I want to do what is right , but I ca n't .

ID:	2214
INPUT:	<unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> E RA ▁( ▁12,1 ▁— <unk> ▁)
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	A Living Sacrifice to God

ID:	2215
INPUT:	▁Ho ri ek ▁i zan ▁zi ren ▁is ra el dar ▁el kar te ko ▁or dez ka ri tzat ▁au ke ra tu ri ko ▁lei nu bu ru ak ▁, ▁ho ri ek ▁is ra el dar ▁gu da ri - tal de en ▁bu ru za gi ak ▁.
PRED:	These were the tribes of Israel , chosen by tribes of Israel , and the leaders of Israel .
GOLD:	These are the chosen leaders of the community , the leaders of their ancestral tribes , the heads of the clans of Israel . ”

ID:	2216
INPUT:	▁Ze ru - lur rak ▁i ga ro ko ▁di ra ▁, ▁bai na ▁ni re ▁hi tzak ▁ez ▁di ra ▁be te ▁ga be ▁i ga ro ko ▁.
PRED:	For the heavens will disappear , but my words will never disappear .
GOLD:	Heaven and earth will disappear , but my words will never disappear .

ID:	2217
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁Jain ko ak ▁no la ▁la gun du ▁zi dan ▁e ta ▁er re ge ak ▁zer ▁e san ▁zi dan ▁a ger tu ▁ni en ▁. ▁Or du an ▁, ▁e san ▁zu ten ▁: ▁« ▁Go a zen ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁e ta ▁e rai ki ▁de za gun ▁! ▁» ▁E ta ▁ke men tsu ▁pres ta tu ▁zi ren ▁lan ▁e der ▁ho ri ▁e gi te ko ▁.
PRED:	Then the king went to me and said to me , “ Let 's get up ! Let 's go , let 's get up ! ” So they said . “ Let 's get up ! ”
GOLD:	Then I told them about how the gracious hand of God had been on me , and about my conversation with the king.They replied at once , “ Yes , let 's rebuild the wall ! ” So they began the good work .

ID:	2218
INPUT:	▁Zu zen ▁e ta ▁zin tzo ▁i za ten ▁sai a tzen ▁de na lu za ro ▁e ta ▁o ho rez ▁be te a ▁bi zi ko ▁da ▁.
PRED:	It is a righteous person who is righteous , and a fool is life .
GOLD:	Whoever pursues righteousness and unfailing lovewill find life , righteousness , and honor .

ID:	2219
INPUT:	▁Er re - o pa ri ta ra ko ▁a be re ak ▁hil tze ko ▁lau ▁ma hai ak ▁har lan duz ko ak ▁zi ren ▁: ▁hi ru ro gei ta ▁ha ma bost ▁zen ti me tro ▁zi ren ▁lu ze - za bal ▁e ta ▁ber ro gei ta ▁ha mar ▁go ra ▁; ▁ma hai ▁gai ne an ▁o pa ri gai ak ▁i pin tzen ▁zi ren ▁. ▁Ge la ren ▁bi ra ▁guz ti an ▁sei ▁zen ti me tro ko ▁a pal txo ▁bat ▁ze go en ▁, ▁e ta ▁ber tan ▁i pin tzen ▁zen ▁o pa ri ta ra ko ▁a be re ak ▁hil tze ko ▁tres ne ri a ▁.
PRED:	It was the dedication offering to the Temple of the Lord . It was 45 feet long and 27 inches high , and he placed it on the south side of the Tabernacle . He also built it on the north side of the Tabernacle . It was placed on the base of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	There were also four tables of finished stone for preparation of the burnt offerings , each 311/2 inches square and 21 inches high . On these tables were placed the butchering knives and other implements for slaughtering the sacrificial animals .

ID:	2220
INPUT:	▁« ▁Or du an ▁, ▁e txe a ren ▁gar bi kun tza ▁e gi te ko ▁, ▁bi ▁he gaz ti ▁, ▁zed ro - zu ra ▁, ▁pur pu ra ▁gor ri mi na ▁e ta ▁i si pu a ▁har tu ko ▁di tu ▁a pai zak ▁.
PRED:	“ Then make the Ark of the Lord 's house , which is ceremonially clean , and cedar , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	To purify the house the priest must take two birds , a stick of cedar , some scarlet yarn , and a hyssop branch .

ID:	2221
INPUT:	▁Bi dal ▁de za la ▁txin gar ra ▁e ta ▁suf re - eu ri a ▁ho ri en ▁gai ne ra ▁! ▁I zan ▁be di ▁hai ze ▁kis kal gar ri a ▁ho ri en ▁zo ri a ▁!
PRED:	Let them be humiliated and burning sulfur ; let their terrible storm fall upon them .
GOLD:	He will rain down blazing coals and burning sulfur on the wicked , punishing them with scorching winds .

ID:	2222
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ▁a gin du ko ▁di o zu ▁is ra el dar ren ▁el kar te a ri ▁: ▁Hil ▁ho nen ▁ha mar re an ▁har ▁be za ▁ba koi tzak ▁fa mi li a ▁e ta ▁e txe ▁ba koi tze ko ▁a be re ▁xe he ▁ba na ▁.
PRED:	Give the following instructions to the people of Israel : Present each of their families and put their families on each side .
GOLD:	Announce to the whole community of Israel that on the tenth day of this month each family must choose a lamb or a young goat for a sacrifice , one animal for each household .

ID:	2223
INPUT:	▁Hor ▁a ger tu ko ▁di gu ▁Jau nak be re ▁os pe ▁han di a.I bai ▁e ta ▁u bi de ▁za ba le ko lur ral de a ▁i zan go ▁da ▁; ▁bai na ▁e tsai en ▁ar raun - txa lu pa ri kez ▁da ▁han dik ▁i ga ro ko ▁, ▁ez ▁on tzi ▁han di rik ▁ber tan ▁i bi li ko ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says to us , “ You will be our Savior and our enemies , but you will have no longer deserted us .
GOLD:	The Lord will be our Mighty One.He will be like a wide river of protectionthat no enemy can cross , that no enemy ship can sail upon .

ID:	2224
INPUT:	▁Ba da ▁, ▁Jau na re nak ▁di ra ▁ja kin du ri a ▁e ta ▁a hal me na ▁, ▁be ra re nak ▁tre be zi a ▁e ta ▁zu hur tzi a ▁.
PRED:	The Lord gives wisdom to those who are wise , and wisdom is wise .
GOLD:	“ But true wisdom and power are found in God ; counsel and understanding are his .

ID:	2225
INPUT:	▁Je su se kin ▁zeu den ▁fa ri seu e ta ko ▁ba tzu ek ▁, ▁ho ri ▁en tzu nik ▁, ▁e san ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁— ▁Gu ▁e re ▁i tsu ▁o te ▁ga ra ▁?
PRED:	Some Pharisees and teachers of religious law heard about Jesus . “ Is we blind ? ” they asked .
GOLD:	Some Pharisees who were standing nearby heard him and asked , “ Are you saying we 're blind ? ”

ID:	2226
INPUT:	▁Mi ka ▁, ▁Re hob ▁, ▁Ha xa bi as ▁,
PRED:	Abdon , Rehob , Rehob ,
GOLD:	Zaccur , Sherebiah , Shebaniah ,

ID:	2227
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁gal de tu ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁— ▁Zer ▁e gin ▁be har ▁du gu ▁Jain ko ak ▁na hi ▁du e na ▁e gi te ko ▁?
PRED:	“ What should we do ? ” they asked . “ What do we want to do ? ”
GOLD:	They replied , “ We want to perform God 's works , too . What should we do ? ”

ID:	2228
INPUT:	▁Gaiz to en ▁sak ri fi zi o ak ▁hi guin gar ri ak ▁di ra ▁, ▁a re ▁ge hi a go ▁as mo ▁txar rez ▁es kai ni ak ▁ba di ra ▁.
PRED:	The wicked are filled with pleasant words , but the words of the wicked will be sacrificed .
GOLD:	The sacrifice of an evil person is detestable , especially when it is offered with wrong motives .

ID:	2229
INPUT:	▁Ber na bek ▁be re kin ▁e ra man ▁na hi ▁zu en ▁Jo an ▁Mar kos ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	So Job took John 's court with him .
GOLD:	Barnabas agreed and wanted to take along John Mark .

ID:	2230
INPUT:	▁Je sus ▁pa ra bo la ▁bi dez ▁hitz ▁e gi ten ▁ha si ▁zi tzai en ▁: ▁« ▁Gi zon ▁ba tek ▁ma has ti a ▁lan da tu ▁zu en ▁e ta ▁har re siz ▁in gu ra tu ▁; ▁lur re an ▁do la re a ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁ma has ti zai na ren ▁dor re a ▁e rai ki ▁zu en ▁. ▁Ge ro ▁, ▁ne ka za ri ▁ba tzu ei ▁er ren tan ▁u tzi rik ▁, ▁ur ru ti ra ▁jo an ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	One of them said to them , “ A man planted a vineyard in the vineyard . He measured the wall of the vineyard and built a wall on the wall of the vineyard and built it on the wall . He measured it on the walls of the garden .
GOLD:	Then Jesus began teaching them with stories : “ A man planted a vineyard . He built a wall around it , dug a pit for pressing out the grape juice , and built a lookout tower . Then he leased the vineyard to tenant farmers and moved to another country .

ID:	2231
INPUT:	▁A nai ek ▁be kai tzez ▁be gi ra tzen ▁zi o ten ▁; ▁ai tak ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁gau za ▁hau ek ▁sar ri tan ▁haus nar tzen ▁zi tu en ▁.
PRED:	His brothers were filled with joy because of their father 's ways , but they did n't enter the night .
GOLD:	But while his brothers were jealous of Joseph , his father wondered what the dreams meant .

ID:	2232
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁, ▁aur ki tze an ▁, ▁a dis ki de ak ▁e ta ▁au zo ko ak ▁bil du ▁e ta ▁e sa ten ▁di e ▁: ▁“ ▁E gin ▁fes ta ▁ni re kin ▁, ▁aur ki tu ▁bai tut ▁gal du a ▁nu en ▁txan po na ▁! ▁”
PRED:	When they found him , they gathered together and told him , ‘ Come , let 's celebrate with me ! '
GOLD:	And when she finds it , she will call in her friends and neighbors and say , ‘ Rejoice with me because I have found my lost coin . '

ID:	2233
INPUT:	▁ez ta ▁gaur ▁a di e raz ten ▁di zu e dan ▁i ra kas pen ▁hau ▁be zain ▁le ge ▁e ta ▁e ra ba ki ▁zu ze nak ▁di tu e nik ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	Do not obey all these instructions and regulations that I am giving you today .
GOLD:	And what great nation has decrees and regulations as righteous and fair as this body of instructions that I am giving you today ?

ID:	2234
INPUT:	▁Ho na ▁he men ▁i tu na ren ▁e goi tza ▁e rai ki tze ko ▁e ra bi li ta ko ▁me ta len ▁kon tu a ▁, ▁Moi se sen ▁a gin duz ▁e ta ▁A a ron ▁a pai za ren ▁se me ▁I ta mar ren ▁gi da ri tza pe an ▁le bi tar rek ▁ja so ri ko a ▁.
PRED:	These are the names of the Tabernacle and the Levites : Aaron and Eleazar the priest , Eleazar the priest , and Ithamar son of Aaron the priest .
GOLD:	This is an inventory of the materials used in building the Tabernacle of the Covenant . The Levites compiled the figures , as Moses directed , and Ithamar son of Aaron the priest served as recorder .

ID:	2235
INPUT:	▁To ma sek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁E ne ▁Jau na ▁e ta ▁e ne ▁Jain ko a ▁!
PRED:	“ Lord , my God , ” Thomas replied . “ I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ My Lord and my God ! ” Thomas exclaimed .

ID:	2236
INPUT:	▁Er re ge ▁jau na ▁, ▁zeu ▁za ra ▁zu haitz ▁ho ri ▁! ▁Han di ▁e ta ▁sen do ▁e gin ▁za ra ▁zeu ▁e re ▁; ▁ze ru rai no ▁i ri tsi ▁da ▁zu re ▁han di ta su na ▁, ▁lur ra ren ▁er tze rai no ▁za bal du ▁zu re ▁bo te re a ▁.
PRED:	Your Majesty , you are standing firm in the garden , and you are great and powerful . You have thrown down the heavens and thrown down the earth .
GOLD:	“ Upon hearing this , Daniel ( also known as Belteshazzar ) was overcome for a time , frightened by the meaning of the dream . Then the king said to him , ‘ Belteshazzar , do n't be alarmed by the dream and what it means . ' “ Belteshazzar replied , ‘ I wish the events foreshadowed in this dream would happen to your enemies , my lord , and not to you !

ID:	2237
INPUT:	▁Er re - o pa ri tzat ▁es kai ni ▁be har re ko a ▁a bel gor ri a ▁ba da ▁, ▁ze kor ▁a kats ▁ga be a ▁es kai ni ko ▁da ▁e ta ▁el kar ke ta - e txo la ren ▁sar re ra ra ▁e ra man go ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁a tse gi nez ▁o nar ▁de zan ▁.
PRED:	“ If you present a burnt offering to the Lord , you must present a burnt offering to the Lord , and you will be a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ If the animal you present as a burnt offering is from the herd , it must be a male with no defects . Bring it to the entrance of the Tabernacle so you may be accepted by the Lord .

ID:	2238
INPUT:	▁O rain ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁zo az ▁, ▁xe ha ▁i tza zu ▁a ma lek tar rak ▁e ta ▁sun tsi tu ▁hai en ▁on da sun ▁guz ti ak ▁; ▁hil ▁, ▁gu pi da rik ▁ga be ▁, ▁gi za se me ▁e ta ▁e ma ku me ak ▁, ▁haur ▁e ta ▁bu lar re ko ak ▁, ▁i di ▁e ta ▁ar di ak ▁, ▁ga me lu ▁e ta ▁as to ak ▁” ▁» ▁.
PRED:	So now , dear women , livestock , and all the livestock , and all the livestock , and all the livestock of the camels , and all the women . ' ”
GOLD:	Now go and completely destroy the entire Amalekite nation — men , women , children , babies , cattle , sheep , goats , camels , and donkeys . ”

ID:	2239
INPUT:	▁be ra ren ▁har kai tzak ▁za fi ro - to ki ▁di ra ▁, ▁be ra ren ▁hau tse tan ▁ur re a ▁aur ki tzen ▁da ▁.
PRED:	There is a blue lapis lazuli , and his unfailing love is filled with grief .
GOLD:	Here the rocks contain precious lapis lazuli , and the dust contains gold .

ID:	2240
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁e gun ▁ho ri e tan ▁i ri tsi ▁bai tzu ten ▁ju du ek ▁ba ke a ▁be ren ▁e tsai en ▁aur re an ▁; ▁hil ▁hor re tan ▁al da tu ▁zi tzai en ▁e go e ra ▁, ▁a tse ka be a ▁a tse gin ▁e ta ▁ne gar ra ▁boz ka ri o ▁bi hur tuz ▁. ▁E gun ▁ho ri e tan ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁jai ▁a lai ak ▁e ta ▁o tor du ak ▁be har ▁zi tuz ten ▁e gin ▁, ▁el kar ri ▁er re ga lu ak ▁bi da liz ▁e ta ▁be har tsu ei ▁es ku - e ra ku tsi ak ▁e gi nez ▁.
PRED:	When they arrived in Jerusalem , they found the Jews who had lived in their own towns . They were feasting and gladness in their towns , and they remembered their lives . They were rich in their hearts , and they became poor and needy .
GOLD:	He told them to celebrate these days with feasting and gladness and by giving gifts of food to each other and presents to the poor . This would commemorate a time when the Jews gained relief from their enemies , when their sorrow was turned into gladness and their mourning into joy .

ID:	2241
INPUT:	▁Hain ▁zu zen ▁, ▁fa ra oi a ▁, ▁ger ta tu a ren ▁ber ri ▁ja kin ▁zu e la rik ▁, ▁Moi ses ▁hil ▁na hi an ▁ze bi len ▁, ▁bai na ▁ho nek ▁fa ra oi a gan dik ▁i hes ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁e ta ▁Ma di an ▁es ku al de ra ▁jo an ▁zen ▁bi zi tze ra ▁. ▁Han ▁, ▁pu tzu ▁ba ten ▁on do an ▁e se ri ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	So Pharaoh 's officials tried to kill Pharaoh , but he was dead . But when he left Pharaoh 's court , he fled to the land of Egypt . So he left the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	And sure enough , Pharaoh heard what had happened , and he tried to kill Moses . But Moses fled from Pharaoh and went to live in the land of Midian.When Moses arrived in Midian , he sat down beside a well .

ID:	2242
INPUT:	▁A bi me lek ▁, ▁dor re rai no ▁hel du rik ▁, ▁e ra so ▁e ta ▁su ▁e ma te ko ▁as moz ▁a te rai no ▁hur bil du ▁ze ne an ▁,
PRED:	When Abimelech arrived at the tower of Amalek , he came to attack the town and set it up to the town .
GOLD:	Abimelech followed them to attack the tower . But as he prepared to set fire to the entrance ,

ID:	2243
INPUT:	▁Ge de o nek ▁Is ra el go ▁gi zon ▁ge hi e nak ▁bi da li ▁zi tu en ▁nor ▁be re ▁e txe ra ▁, ▁hi ru re hun ▁hai e kin ▁ba kar rik ▁gel di tuz ▁; ▁hau ek ▁be ren ▁la gu nen ▁ja ki ak ▁e ta ▁a dar rak ▁har tu ▁zi tuz ten ▁. ▁Ma di an dar ren ▁kan pa le ku a ▁is ra el dar re na ▁bai no ▁be he ra go ▁ze go en ▁, ▁lau ta dan ▁.
PRED:	Then Gideon sent the men of Israel back to their homes , and they found 400 men who were in their homes . But the people of Israel received their report from Midian . So they went out to the plains of Midian .
GOLD:	So Gideon collected the provisions and rams ' horns of the other warriors and sent them home . But he kept the 300 men with him.The Midianite camp was in the valley just below Gideon .

ID:	2244
INPUT:	▁Har ra pa ▁bi tza ▁az pi an ▁be ren ▁har ro ke ri ak ▁, ▁be ren ▁a ho ko ▁be ka tu ▁e ta ▁e sa me sek ▁, ▁za bal du ▁di tuz ten ▁ma da ri ka zi o ▁e ta ▁ge zur rek ▁.
PRED:	At that time they will strike down their heads and say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : Because you have spoken ! '
GOLD:	Destroy them in your anger ! Wipe them out completely ! Then the whole world will knowthat God reigns in Israel.Interlude

ID:	2245
INPUT:	▁Zu zen ga be a ri ▁ma trai le zur ra ▁a pur tzen ▁ni on ha gi ne ta tik ▁har ra pa ki na ▁ken tze ko ▁.
PRED:	You have broken my yoke from its mouth ; you have broken my sword .
GOLD:	I broke the jaws of godless oppressorsand plucked their victims from their teeth .

ID:	2246
INPUT:	▁Aur re ran tze an ▁, ▁ez ▁du zu Ab ram ▁i zan go ▁i zen ▁, ▁Ab ra ham ▁bai zik ▁, ▁her ri ▁as ko ren ▁sor bu ru e gin go ▁bai tzai tut ▁.
PRED:	Your descendants will not be like a foreigner in the land of Abram , for I am the God of Abraham .
GOLD:	What 's more , I am changing your name . It will no longer be Abram . Instead , you will be called Abraham , for you will be the father of many nations .

ID:	2247
INPUT:	▁De dan go ek ▁zal di ▁gai ne an ▁i bil tze ko ▁tres nak ▁sa le ros ten ▁ziz ki zu ten ▁.
PRED:	The rest of the events in me were repaired by the ledge .
GOLD:	“ Dedan sent merchants to trade their expensive saddle blankets with you .

ID:	2248
INPUT:	▁Ho ne tan ▁e za gu tu ko ▁du te ▁guz ti ek ▁zu ek ▁ni re ▁i kas le ▁za re te la ▁: ▁zu ek ▁el kar ▁mai te ▁i za te an ▁» ▁.
PRED:	I will teach you everything you do , and you will love each other . ”
GOLD:	Your love for one another will prove to the world that you are my disciples . ”

ID:	2249
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁is ra el dar rek ▁jain ko ▁ar ro tzen ▁i ru di ak ▁bo ta ▁e ta ▁Jau na ▁gur tu ▁zu ten ▁. ▁E ta ▁Jau nak ▁e zin ▁i zan ▁zu en ▁ge hi a go ▁ja san ▁is ra el dar ren ▁suf ri men du a ▁.
PRED:	Then the people of Israel failed to drive out the gods of the Lord and the people of Israel , and they would not listen to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the Israelites put aside their foreign gods and served the Lord . And he was grieved by their misery .

ID:	2250
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁i lun du ▁e gin ▁zi tzai en ▁a di me na ▁is ra el dar rei ▁, ▁e ta ▁gaur ▁ber tan ▁e re ▁, ▁i tun ▁za har re ko ▁i daz ti ak ▁i ra kur tzen ▁di tuz te ne an ▁, ▁hor ▁i rau ten ▁du ▁hai en tzat ▁es tal ki ▁hor rek ▁, ▁Kris tok ▁ba kar rik ▁ken ▁bai te za ke ▁.
PRED:	But the people of Israel did not listen to the words of the Lord and read it to the elders of Israel . This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	But the people 's minds were hardened , and to this day whenever the old covenant is being read , the same veil covers their minds so they can not understand the truth . And this veil can be removed only by believing in Christ .

ID:	2251
INPUT:	▁Sa lo mo nek ▁Jau na ren ▁e txe a ▁, ▁er re ge - jau re gi a ▁e ta ▁be rak ▁na hi ▁i zan ▁zu en ▁guz ti a ▁e rai ki ▁zu e ne an ▁,
PRED:	In the end of the Temple of the Lord , the king of the royal palace , and all who work in the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	So Solomon finished building the Temple of the Lord , as well as the royal palace . He completed everything he had planned to do .

ID:	2252
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁di o tsu et ▁nik ▁, ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti dun ▁ho nek ▁: ▁I tzu li ko ▁naiz ▁Si o ne ra ▁, ▁Je ru sa le men ▁naiz ▁bi zi ko ▁, ▁Je ru sa lem ▁“ ▁Hi ri ▁Zin tzo ▁” ▁dei tu ko ▁da ▁; ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du na ren ▁Si on ▁men di a ▁“ ▁Men di ▁San tu ▁” ▁.
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : I will return to Jerusalem , the city of Jerusalem , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	“ And now the Lord says : I am returning to Mount Zion , and I will live in Jerusalem . Then Jerusalem will be called the Faithful City ; the mountain of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will be called the Holy Mountain .

ID:	2253
INPUT:	▁Zu en ▁lur ra ren ▁e mai tza ▁e ta ▁zu en ▁ne ke ▁guz ti en ▁frui tu a ▁her ri ▁e ze za gu nak ▁i ren tsi ko ▁di tu ▁. ▁Jen de ▁za pal du ▁e ta ▁lar ru tu a ▁i zan go ▁za re te ▁bi zi tza ▁o so an ▁.
PRED:	You will enjoy all the fruit of your land and your land . You will be destroyed , and you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	A foreign nation you have never heard about will eat the crops you worked so hard to grow . You will suffer under constant oppression and harsh treatment .

ID:	2254
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁Sa ra ren ▁gor pu a ▁ze tzan ▁le ku a ▁u tzi rik ▁, ▁hi ti ten ga na ▁jo an ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi en ▁:
PRED:	Then Jesus touched the body of his body and said to them ,
GOLD:	Then , leaving her body , he said to the Hittite elders ,

ID:	2255
INPUT:	▁Ko ru - zu zen da ri a ren tzat ▁. ▁Da vi den ▁sal mo a ▁.
PRED:	O Lord , hear my cry out to you , O God , for you have mercy on me .
GOLD:	O God , listen to my complaint.Protect my life from my enemies ' threats .

ID:	2256
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁« ▁Zo az ▁Ju da ko ▁hi ri e ta ra ▁e ta ▁Je ru sa lem go ▁ka le e ta ra ▁e ta ▁hots ▁e gin ▁ni re ▁me zu ▁hau ▁: ▁O nar tu ▁ni re ▁a gin du ak ▁e ta ▁be te ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord said to them , “ Go back to Jerusalem and preach the word of the Lord and say , ‘ Go back to Jerusalem . '
GOLD:	Then the Lord said , “ Broadcast this message in the streets of Jerusalem . Go from town to town throughout the land and say , ‘ Remember the ancient covenant , and do everything it requires .

ID:	2257
INPUT:	▁Jo an ▁zen ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁a gin du ta ko a ▁har tze ra ▁, ▁e ta ▁a ma ren ga na ▁i tzu li ▁zen ▁. ▁Ho nek ▁ja ki ▁go xo a ▁pres ta tu ▁zu en ▁, ▁ai tak ▁a tse gin ▁zu en ▁be za la ko a ▁.
PRED:	So Joseph went to the banquet hall and gave it to the mother 's mother . He was very hungry , just as he had done .
GOLD:	So Jacob went out and got the young goats for his mother . Rebekah took them and prepared a delicious meal , just the way Isaac liked it .

ID:	2258
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁du zu ▁i ku si ko ▁ge hi a go her ri ▁har ro a ▁, ▁hiz kun tza ▁i lu na ▁, ▁hiz ke ta ▁ar rotz ▁u ler te zi na du en ▁her ri a ▁.
PRED:	You will never see the face of the nations , nor will the language of the nations .
GOLD:	You will no longer see these fierce , violent peoplewith their strange , unknown language .

ID:	2259
INPUT:	▁Ho ri ek ▁i zan ▁zi ren ▁Moi se sek ▁lur ral de a ▁i ker tze ra ▁bi da li ▁zi tu en ▁gi zo nak ▁. ▁Nu nen ▁se me ▁O se a si ▁Jo su e ▁i ze na ▁e zar ri ▁zi on ▁.
PRED:	So Moses sent the spies to explore the land of Canaan , and the half-tribe of Nun was the son of Nun .
GOLD:	These are the names of the men Moses sent out to explore the land . ( Moses called Hoshea son of Nun by the name Joshua . )

ID:	2260
INPUT:	▁“ ▁Ez ▁al ▁di ra ▁a mai tu ko ▁hitz ▁hu tsal ▁ho ri ek ▁? ▁” ▁e do ▁“ ▁Zerk ▁zi ri ka tzen ▁zai tu ▁e ran tzu te ko ▁? ▁” ▁di os ta zu e ▁.
PRED:	“ Do n't you think , ‘ What is you doing ? ' they asked . ‘ What do you mean ? '
GOLD:	Wo n't you ever stop blowing hot air ? What makes you keep on talking ?

ID:	2261
INPUT:	▁Hu ra ▁da ▁as ka tzai le ▁, ▁hu ra ▁sal ba tzai le ▁; ▁e gin tza ▁har ri gar ri ak ▁e ta ▁mi ra ri a ke gi ten ▁di tu ▁ze ru - lur re <unk> ▁as ka tu ▁du ▁Da ni el le hoi en ▁a tza par re ta tik ▁» ▁.
PRED:	The Savior of the world will be saved , and the young men of Israel will become a young lion , and the noise of the earth will disappear . ”
GOLD:	So Daniel prospered during the reign of Darius and the reign of Cyrus the Persian .

ID:	2262
INPUT:	▁Jain ko ak ▁a pa la ra zi ▁e gi ten ▁di tu ▁har ro ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁a pal tzen ▁di re nak ▁sal ba tu ▁.
PRED:	He makes them humble , and he makes them strong .
GOLD:	If people are in trouble and you say , ‘ Help them , 'God will save them .

ID:	2263
INPUT:	▁Kris tau ▁be za la ▁ba du zu e ▁i ra kas le ▁fran ko ▁, ▁ez ▁or de a ▁ai ta rik ▁as ko ▁; ▁kris tau ▁be za la ▁nik ▁sor tu ▁zin tuz te dan ▁ber ri ▁o na ren ▁bi dez ▁.
PRED:	If you do n't have a few of you , you must not be a believer . But I am the Father who sent you into the world .
GOLD:	For even if you had ten thousand others to teach you about Christ , you have only one spiritual father . For I became your father in Christ Jesus when I preached the Good News to you .

ID:	2264
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁be ti ko ▁be dein ka zi o a ▁e ma ten ▁di o zu ▁, ▁zeu re ▁pre sen tzi az ▁po zar ren ▁jar tzen ▁.
PRED:	For you are blessed , and you give thanks to him your name .
GOLD:	For the king trusts in the Lord.The unfailing love of the Most High will keep him from stumbling .

ID:	2265
INPUT:	▁Za puz tu ▁e za zu e ▁Mo re xet - <unk> ▁hi ri <unk> zib ▁hi ri a ren ▁la gun <unk> tel ▁a te ra ko ▁zai e ▁Is ra el go ▁er re ge ei ▁.
PRED:	The towns of Moab will be heard , and the young men of Moab will become king of Moab .
GOLD:	Send farewell gifts to Moresheth-gath ; there is no hope of saving it.The town of Aczibhas deceived the kings of Israel .

ID:	2266
INPUT:	▁Gar bi ▁i tza zu ▁zeu re ▁es kuz ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁gar bi tu ▁mun du tik ▁! ▁Gal ▁bi tez ▁bi zi du nen ▁ar te tik ▁! ▁Zuk ▁zain tzen ▁di tu zu nei ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁be te ▁sa be la ▁; ▁a se ▁i tza zu ▁ho ri en ▁se me - a la bak ▁, ▁e ta ▁utz ▁be za te ▁so be ra ▁du te na ▁be ren ▁haur ren tzat ▁.
PRED:	O Lord , hear your own hands ! Get out of the earth ! Get up from the earth ! Do n't let the children stay away from their children , for they are full of their children .
GOLD:	By the power of your hand , O Lord , destroy those who look to this world for their reward.But satisfy the hunger of your treasured ones.May their children have plenty , leaving an inheritance for their descendants .

ID:	2267
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁di o ▁Li bu ru ▁San tu ak ▁: ▁Ha ren gan ▁si nes ten ▁du e nak ▁ez ▁du ▁huts ▁e gin go ▁.
PRED:	This is the Scriptures : “ Anyone who believes in him will never be disgraced . ”
GOLD:	As the Scriptures tell us , “ Anyone who trusts in him will never be disgraced . ”

ID:	2268
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁gaiz ta ke ri a ▁e gi ten ▁du zu e e ta ▁es ku ak ▁o do lez ▁zi kin ▁dauz ka zu e ▁; ▁ge zur ra ▁da ri zu e ▁ez pai ne ta tik ▁, ▁hitz ▁kal te gar ri ak ▁a ho tik ▁.
PRED:	For you are wrong with evil people , and you are lying with lies . Do n't cheat gods , or cheat people .
GOLD:	Your hands are the hands of murderers , and your fingers are filthy with sin.Your lips are full of lies , and your mouth spews corruption .

ID:	2269
INPUT:	▁Be rak ▁al da tzen ▁di tu ur ta ro ak ▁e ta ▁ga rai ak ▁; ▁be rak ▁jar tzen ▁e ta ▁ken tzen ▁er re ge ak ▁; ▁be rak ▁e ma ten ▁ja kin du ri a ▁ja kin tsu ei e ta ▁e za gu e ra ▁bu ru tsu ei ▁.
PRED:	A wise person gets wisdom and understanding , but knowledge is stripped away . He rescues the wise from wisdom and understanding .
GOLD:	He controls the course of world events ; he removes kings and sets up other kings.He gives wisdom to the wiseand knowledge to the scholars .

ID:	2270
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁e san ▁zi on ▁Jo su e ri ▁: ▁« ▁Ez ▁i zan ▁ho ri en ▁bel dur ▁! ▁Bi har ▁, ▁or du ▁ho ne tan ▁, ▁hil da ▁u tzi ko ▁di tut ▁is ra el dar ren ▁aur re an ▁; ▁zuk ▁e ba ki ▁ho ri en ▁zal di en ▁han ka - zai nak ▁e ta ▁er re ▁gu da - gur di ak ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But the Lord said to Joshua , “ Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid , for I will kill the people of Israel . But I will send their chariots and charioteers . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Joshua , “ Do not be afraid of them . By this time tomorrow I will hand all of them over to Israel as dead men . Then you must cripple their horses and burn their chariots . ”

ID:	2271
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁ho ne la ▁di o ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁« ▁Ho na ▁nik ▁Si o nen har ri ▁au ke ra tu a ▁i pi ni ▁, ▁gil tzar ri ▁bi kain ▁e ta ▁oi nar ri ▁sen <unk> ra ▁eus kar ri ▁du e nak ko lo ka rik ▁ez ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : ‘ Take your swords and the swords of the builders rejectedhas now become a cornerstone .
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ Look ! I am placing a foundation stone in Jerusalem , a firm and tested stone.It is a precious cornerstone that is safe to build on.Whoever believes need never be shaken .

ID:	2272
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ▁e gin go ▁du gu ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁Jain ko a ▁la gun ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , we will be our friends , and we will help us .
GOLD:	And so , God willing , we will move forward to further understanding .

ID:	2273
INPUT:	▁« ▁Jain ko a ren ▁bar ren - bar re na ▁i ker tu ▁na hi ▁al ▁du zu e ta ▁A hal tsu a ren ▁han di ta su na ▁be sar ka tu ▁?
PRED:	“ Do you think of God 's mighty power ? Do you think of his mighty power ?
GOLD:	“ Can you solve the mysteries of God ? Can you discover everything about the Almighty ?

ID:	2274
INPUT:	▁Er re ge ak ▁, ▁her ri ▁o so a re kin ▁, ▁sak ri fi zi o ak ▁es kai ni ▁ziz ki on ▁Jau na ri ▁.
PRED:	Then the king gave all the people to offer sacrifices to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices to the Lord .

ID:	2275
INPUT:	▁Gi za ▁in dar ra ▁bai zik ▁ez ▁du ▁hor rek ▁; ▁guk ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁geu re ▁Jain ko a ▁, ▁du gu ▁geu re kin ▁, ▁la gun tze ko ▁e ta ▁gu re kin ▁bor ro ka tze ko ▁» <unk> da ko ▁er re ge ▁E ze ki a sen ▁hitz ▁hau ek ▁biz kor tu ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁her ri a ▁.
PRED:	We have no power to fight the Lord our God , but we are our God . We will fight against us , and we will fight against us . ”
GOLD:	He may have a great army , but they are merely men . We have the Lord our God to help us and to fight our battles for us ! ” Hezekiah 's words greatly encouraged the people .

ID:	2276
INPUT:	▁Bes te ▁hi ru re hun ▁ba bes ki ▁txi ki ▁e re ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁ur re ▁gar biz ▁, ▁ba bes ki ▁ba koi tza ▁e gi te ko ▁i a ▁bi ▁ki lo ▁ur re ▁be har ▁i zan ▁ze la rik ▁. ▁E ta ▁« ▁Li ba no ko ▁Oi ha na ▁» ▁ze ri tzan ▁jau re gi an ▁i pi ni ▁zi tu en ▁.
PRED:	He also made fifty gold clasps , hammered gold , each piece of pure gold . He also made two quarts of pure gold , and each piece of gold . He also measured the royal palace .
GOLD:	He also made 300 smaller shields of hammered gold , each weighing nearly four pounds . The king placed these shields in the Palace of the Forest of Lebanon .

ID:	2277
INPUT:	▁Ba da ki gu ▁Jain ko a ren ▁Se me a ▁e tor ri ▁de na ▁e ta ▁a di me na ▁e man ▁di gu na ▁e gi az ko ▁Jain ko a ▁e za gu tze ko ▁. ▁E gi az ko ▁Jain ko a re kin ▁bat ▁e gi nik ▁gau de ▁, ▁be ra ren ▁Se me ▁Je su ▁Kris to re kin ▁bat ▁e gin da ▁e go nik ▁. ▁Hau xe ▁du gu ▁e gi az ko ▁Jain ko a ▁e ta ▁be ti ko ▁bi zi a ▁.
PRED:	We know that we are coming to receive the Son of God . And we know that we are the Son of God . And we will be with God 's Son , and we will live in Christ . And we will live with him , and we will live in Christ .
GOLD:	And we know that the Son of God has come , and he has given us understanding so that we can know the true God . And now we live in fellowship with the true God because we live in fellowship with his Son , Jesus Christ . He is the only true God , and he is eternal life .

ID:	2278
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁E gip to ▁zi gor tu ko
PRED:	A Message about Egypt
GOLD:	A Sad Day for Egypt

ID:	2279
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ur te ro ▁, ▁zeu en ▁lur re ko ▁uz ta ren ▁e mai tzen ▁ha mar re na ▁be rei zi ko ▁du zu e ▁.
PRED:	“ You must harvest the crops of your land and give it to your crops .
GOLD:	“ You must set aside a tithe of your crops — one-tenth of all the crops you harvest each year .

ID:	2280
INPUT:	▁a dar - pun ta ▁e ba ki ▁, ▁mer ka ta ri - her ri al de ra ▁e ra ma ne ta ▁tra tu la ri en ▁hi ri ▁ba te an lan da tu ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	The eastern boundary also built up the walls of the outer courtyard and built it on the walls of the south side of the courtyard .
GOLD:	and plucked off its highest branch.He carried it away to a city filled with merchants.He planted it in a city of traders .

ID:	2281
INPUT:	▁E gin ▁gar ra si ▁, ▁gai ne an ▁bai ta ▁Jau na ren ▁e gu na ▁! ▁Hor ▁da tor ▁Jain ko ▁a hal tsu a ren hon da men - in dar rez ▁.
PRED:	That is why we have been cleansed from the presence of the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	Scream in terror , for the day of the Lord has arrived — the time for the Almighty to destroy .

ID:	2282
INPUT:	▁Be hi no la ▁, ▁pro fe ta - tal de ak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁E li se o ri ▁: ▁— ▁Zu re kin ▁bil tze ko ▁du gun ▁bil tzar - to ki ▁hau ▁es tu e gi a ▁da ▁gu re tzat ▁.
PRED:	Then the group of prophets said to Elijah , “ We have gathered here with you , too , for we have gathered here with you . ”
GOLD:	One day the group of prophets came to Elisha and told him , “ As you can see , this place where we meet with you is too small .

ID:	2283
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁zaz pi ▁on tzi ak ▁az ken ▁zaz pi ▁i zur ri ez ▁be te rik ▁zeuz ka ten ▁zaz pi ▁ain ge ru e ta ko ▁ba tek ▁e tor ri ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi dan ▁: ▁« ▁Za toz ▁, ▁e maz te gai a ▁e ra ku tsi ▁be har ▁di zut ▁, ▁Bil do tsa ren ▁e maz te a ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then the seven of the seven angels who were in the boat with leprosy . One of them said to me , “ Come , let me sit on the throne of the Lamb ! Come , let me sit on the Lamb ! ”
GOLD:	Then one of the seven angels who held the seven bowls containing the seven last plagues came and said to me , “ Come with me ! I will show you the bride , the wife of the Lamb . ”

ID:	2284
INPUT:	▁be re ▁ha ser re a ri ▁bi de a ▁lib re ▁uz te ko.Ez ▁zi tu en ▁he ri o tza tik ▁gor de ▁, ▁hai en ▁bi zi a ▁i zur ri a ren ▁men pe ▁u tzi ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	He rescued them from their fierce anger , and he rescued them from death .
GOLD:	He turned his anger against them ; he did not spare the Egyptians ' livesbut ravaged them with the plague .

ID:	2285
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ni ▁per tse gi tze ko ▁as mo a ▁ba du zu e ▁, ▁gai tza ren ▁sus trai a ▁ni re gan ▁da go e la ko an ▁,
PRED:	“ If you refuse to listen to me , you will think you are my own .
GOLD:	“ How dare you go on persecuting me , saying , ‘ It 's his own fault ' ?

ID:	2286
INPUT:	▁Er ro mes - kan ta <unk> ri al di an ▁Jau na ri ▁e gin ▁ni on ▁dei ▁e ta ▁hark ▁e ran tzun ▁.
PRED:	When I woke up , the Lord called out to him , and he called out to him .
GOLD:	I took my troubles to the Lord ; I cried out to him , and he answered my prayer .

ID:	2287
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁jen de a ▁, ▁ai ta ▁ma da ri ka tu e ta ▁a ma ▁be dein ka tzen ▁ez ▁du e na ▁!
PRED:	They curse me , and they bless those who curse me .
GOLD:	Some people curse their fatherand do not thank their mother .

ID:	2288
INPUT:	▁Az ken ▁e gu nak ▁hur bil tzen ▁a ri ▁zi tzaiz ki o la rik ▁, ▁a gin du ▁hau ek ▁e man ▁ziz ki on ▁Da vi dek ▁be re ▁se me ▁Sa lo mo ni ▁:
PRED:	The next day David told his sons , “ David gave this message to David :
GOLD:	As the time of King David 's death approached , he gave this charge to his son Solomon :

ID:	2289
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁er re ge ak ▁, ▁po za ren ▁po zez ▁, ▁Da ni el ▁zu lo tik ▁a te ra tze ko ▁a gin du ▁zu en ▁. ▁A te ra ▁zu te ne an ▁, ▁ez ▁zu en ▁ur ra tu ▁bat ▁e re ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren gan ▁jar ri ▁bai tzu en ▁be re ▁us te ▁o na ▁.
PRED:	Then the king was glad when he heard that Daniel was very old when he became very old , and he did n't trust him .
GOLD:	Then the king gave orders to arrest the men who had maliciously accused Daniel . He had them thrown into the lions ' den , along with their wives and children . The lions leaped on them and tore them apart before they even hit the floor of the den .

ID:	2290
INPUT:	▁A bi a tu ▁zi ren ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁e ta ▁Jain ko a re ki ko ▁i zu ak ▁har tu ▁zu en ▁hi ri e ta ko ▁jen de a ▁: ▁i nork ▁ez ▁zi en ▁e ra so ▁Ja ko ben ▁se me ei ▁.
PRED:	So he sent messengers to the town of God and the people of Israel , and no one was left to attack them .
GOLD:	As they set out , a terror from God spread over the people in all the towns of that area , so no one attacked Jacob 's family .

ID:	2291
INPUT:	▁« ▁Je ru sa lem ▁, ▁Je ru sa lem ▁, ▁pro fe tak ▁hil tzen ▁e ta ▁Jain ko ak ▁zu ri ▁bi da li ak ▁har ri ka tzen ▁di tu zu na ▁! ▁Zen bat ▁al diz ▁ez ▁di tut ▁bil du ▁na hi ▁i zan ▁zu re ▁se me - a la bak ▁, ▁oi lo ak ▁be re ▁txi ta - tal de a ▁he gal pe an ▁be za la ▁, ▁e ta ▁zu ek ▁ez ▁du zu e ▁na hi ▁i zan ▁.
PRED:	“ Therefore , Jerusalem , the prophets of Jerusalem , the prophets of Jerusalem , says the Sovereign Lord , “ I will gather together your children , and your children , and your children will be scattered .
GOLD:	“ O Jerusalem , Jerusalem , the city that kills the prophets and stones God 's messengers ! How often I have wanted to gather your children together as a hen protects her chicks beneath her wings , but you would n't let me .

ID:	2292
INPUT:	▁Ha la ▁, ▁Da vi den ▁on do ren ▁i bil tze a ri ▁u tzi ▁e ta ▁fi lis te ar rei ▁aur re ▁e gi te ra ▁i tzu li ▁zen ▁Saul ▁. ▁Hor re ga tik ▁de ri tza ▁to ki ▁ha ri ▁Se la - Ha <unk> le kot ▁, ▁hau ▁da ▁, ▁« ▁Be reiz te - har kai tza ▁» ▁.
PRED:	So David and his men went out to meet Saul , and he went out to meet Saul . He was very beautiful , and he became very beautiful .
GOLD:	So Saul quit chasing David and returned to fight the Philistines . Ever since that time , the place where David was camped has been called the Rock of Escape .

ID:	2293
INPUT:	▁I ku si ▁her ri ▁kos kor ▁hu ra ▁. ▁Na hi ko ▁hur bil ▁da go ▁, ▁ber tan ▁ba bes te ko ▁. ▁Ar ren ▁, ▁uz ta zu ▁her ri ▁txi ki ▁hor re ta rai no ▁jo a ten ▁, ▁e ta ▁bi zi rik ▁a te ra ko ▁naiz ▁.
PRED:	The nations will see the sound of the nearby nations , and you will live in a distant land . I will live in safety , and I will live there .
GOLD:	See , there is a small village nearby . Please let me go there instead ; do n't you see how small it is ? Then my life will be saved . ”

ID:	2294
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁Jain ko ak ▁ai tza ki ak ▁as ma tzen ▁di tu ▁ni re ▁aur ka ▁, ▁e tsai tzat ▁har tzen ▁nau ▁;
PRED:	But God has rescued me from my enemies ; he rescues me from my enemies .
GOLD:	God is picking a quarrel with me , and he considers me his enemy .

ID:	2295
INPUT:	▁Bi tar te ▁hor re tan ▁, ▁is kan bi la ▁go gor ra ▁sor tu ▁zen ▁E fe son ▁, ▁kris tau - bi de a ▁ze la ▁e ta ▁.
PRED:	There was a man who was a prophet who was a prophet who was a prophet in Ephesus .
GOLD:	About that time , serious trouble developed in Ephesus concerning the Way .

ID:	2296
INPUT:	▁Ko ru - zu zen da ri a ren tzat ▁. ▁Da vi den ▁sal mo a.E ne ▁Jain ko ▁, ▁ez ▁e gin ▁en tzun gor ▁ni re ▁go res pe na ri ▁!
PRED:	O Lord , listen to me , O God ! Do n't let me listen to my prayer !
GOLD:	O God , whom I praise , do n't stand silent and aloof

ID:	2297
INPUT:	▁Be ra ri ▁a di e ra zi ko ▁di o zu ▁zer ▁e san ▁be har ▁du en ▁; ▁ni ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁zeu e kin ▁bi o kin ▁i zan go ▁nau zu e ▁, ▁hitz ▁e gin ▁be har ▁du zu en ▁ba koi tze an ▁. ▁E ta ▁zer ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁zer ▁e san ▁e re ▁i ra ka tsi ko ▁di zu et ▁.
PRED:	You must tell him what you say . You must tell me what you say to me , and you will be speaking with me . Then I will tell you what you say . Then I will tell you what you say .
GOLD:	Talk to him , and put the words in his mouth . I will be with both of you as you speak , and I will instruct you both in what to do .

ID:	2298
INPUT:	▁Be rak ▁bai nau ▁e kai tzaz ▁zan pa tu ▁, ▁be rak ▁diz kit ▁ar ra zoi rik ▁ga be ▁zau ri ak ▁u gal du ▁,
PRED:	He has rejected me , and he has rejected me without reason .
GOLD:	For he attacks me with a stormand repeatedly wounds me without cause .

ID:	2299
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁i ra kas ten ▁ha si ▁zi tzai en ▁, ▁Gi zo na ren ▁Se me ak ▁as ko ▁suf ri tu ▁be har ▁zu e la ▁; ▁za har ▁, ▁a paiz bu ru ▁e ta ▁le ge - mai su ek ▁gai tze tsi ▁e gin go ▁zu te la ▁e ta ▁hil ▁; ▁e ta ▁hi ru ▁e gu nen ▁bu ru an ▁piz tu ▁e gin go ▁ze la ▁.
PRED:	Then the disciples began to suffer , and the Son of Man must suffer and be rejected by the leading priests and teachers of religious law . And the leading priests and teachers of religious law and the leading priests to the dead .
GOLD:	Then Jesus began to tell them that the Son of Man must suffer many terrible things and be rejected by the elders , the leading priests , and the teachers of religious law . He would be killed , but three days later he would rise from the dead .

ID:	2300
INPUT:	▁Lur re ko ▁be lar ra ▁, ▁ba raz ki ak ▁e ta ▁zu hai tzak ▁ez ▁hon da tze ko ▁a gin du a ▁e man ▁zi tzai en ▁, ▁bai zik ▁e ta ▁zi gi lu a ren ▁mar ka ▁be ko ki an ▁ez ▁ze ra ma ten ▁gi za ki ak ▁ba kar rik ▁.
PRED:	So the land was given to the field and everything he had done . He did not destroy the land , but he was deceived by his own people .
GOLD:	They were told not to harm the grass or plants or trees , but only the people who did not have the seal of God on their foreheads .

ID:	2301
INPUT:	▁« ▁Gal ▁bi tez ▁hor re la zu re ▁e tsai ak ▁, ▁Jau na.Zu re ▁a dis ki de ak ▁, ▁al diz ▁, ▁i zan ▁bi tez ▁e guz ki a e gun sen ti an ▁be zain ▁bi zi ▁! ▁» ▁Hau en ▁guz ti en ▁on do ren ▁, ▁ba ke an ▁bi zi ▁i zan ▁zi ren ▁is ra el dar ren ▁her ri al de an ▁ber ro gei ▁ur tez ▁.
PRED:	“ O Lord , forgive the sins of your enemies , and let them live in the land of Israel . Let them live in their own land . ”
GOLD:	“ Lord , may all your enemies die like Sisera ! But may those who love you rise like the sun in all its power ! ” Then there was peace in the land for forty years .

ID:	2302
INPUT:	▁Jo su e ▁hil ▁ze ne an ▁, ▁is ra el dar rek ▁kon tsul ta ▁e gin ▁zi o ten ▁Jau na ri ▁: ▁— ▁Gu re ▁lei nu e ta rik ▁zein ▁i go ko ▁da ▁le he na ▁ka na an dar rei ▁e ra so tze ra ▁?
PRED:	When Joshua died , the Israelites asked the Lord , “ Why are you going to fight against us ? ”
GOLD:	After the death of Joshua , the Israelites asked the Lord , “ Which tribe should go first to attack the Canaanites ? ”

ID:	2303
INPUT:	▁Be re ▁hi tza ▁bi da li ▁zi en ▁sen da gar ri e ta ▁hon da men di tik ▁a te ra ▁.
PRED:	He sent them away from their cities , and he sent them home .
GOLD:	He sent out his word and healed them , snatching them from the door of death .

ID:	2304
INPUT:	▁ni re ▁le ge en ▁a ra be ra ▁i bil tzen ▁da ▁e ta ▁ni re ▁e ra ba ki ak ▁be te tzen ▁, ▁lei al ▁jo ka tuz ▁. ▁Ho ne la ko a ▁gi zon ▁zin tzo a ▁da ▁; ▁be raz ▁, ▁bi zi ▁e gin go ▁da ▁. ▁Ho ne la ▁di ot ▁nik ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁.
PRED:	They follow my decrees and regulations and regulations , says the Sovereign Lord , “ This is what the Lord says : This is what the Lord says : The Lord , have spoken !
GOLD:	and faithfully obeys my decrees and regulations . Anyone who does these things is just and will surely live , says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	2305
INPUT:	▁E liz ▁el kar te ▁ba koi tze an ▁ar du ra du nak ▁i zen da tu ▁zi tuz ten ▁e ta ▁, ▁o toitz ▁e ta ▁ba rau ▁e gin ▁on do ren ▁, ▁Jau na ri ▁go men da tu ▁ziz ki o ten ▁, ▁ha ren gan ▁si ne tsi ▁bai tzu ten ▁.
PRED:	So some of the church went to the church and pray for them and pray for them , for they believed in the Lord .
GOLD:	Paul and Barnabas also appointed elders in every church . With prayer and fasting , they turned the elders over to the care of the Lord , in whom they had put their trust .

ID:	2306
INPUT:	▁Bost ▁or ga ▁tenplu a ren ▁es kui nal de an ▁jar ri ▁zi tu en ▁e ta ▁bes te ▁bos tak ▁ez ker ral de an ▁; ▁« ▁I tsa so ▁» ▁ze ri tzan ▁u ras ka ▁han di a ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁tenplu a ren ▁es kui nal de an ▁jar ri ▁zu en ▁, ▁he go - e ki al de ra ▁.
PRED:	But the five of the Temple was placed on the south side of the Temple , and the south side of the Temple was placed on the south side of the Temple .
GOLD:	He set five water carts on the south side of the Temple and five on the north side . The great bronze basin called the Sea was placed near the southeast corner of the Temple .

ID:	2307
INPUT:	▁Per tse gi tu ▁e gi ten ▁di tu e ta ▁aur re ra ▁do a ▁se gu ru ▁, ▁be re ▁oi nez ▁lur rik ▁i a ▁u ki tu ▁ga be ▁.
PRED:	Our eyes are filled with fear , and we have never seen our feet .
GOLD:	He chases them away and goes on safely , though he is walking over unfamiliar ground .

ID:	2308
INPUT:	▁E li se ok ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁Zo az ▁ba ke <unk> a man ▁E li se o gan dik ▁pus ka ▁bat ▁ur run du ▁ze la rik ▁,
PRED:	Elisha replied , “ Go out of the palace , ” Elisha said . “ Go out and get a piece of water . ”
GOLD:	“ Go in peace , ” Elisha said . So Naaman started home again .

ID:	2309
INPUT:	▁Her ri ▁ho ri en ▁er li ji o a hu tsa ren ▁pa re ko ▁: ▁ho ri en ▁i do lo ak ba so an ▁e ba ki ta ko ▁e gur - pus kak ▁di ra ▁, ▁ar ti sau a ren ▁es ku ak ▁zi ze lez ▁lan du ak ▁,
PRED:	All the people of Israel were defiled by the weight of the Tabernacle , and they spread their hands on the ground .
GOLD:	Their ways are futile and foolish.They cut down a tree , and a craftsman carves an idol .

ID:	2310
INPUT:	▁Hai en ▁o do la ▁pa las ta ka ▁i su ri ▁du te ▁Je ru sa lem ▁in gu ru an ▁, ▁e ta ▁lur ▁e ma te ko ▁i nor ▁ez ▁.
PRED:	They shout for joy and sing for joy , and no one can help them .
GOLD:	Blood has flowed like water all around Jerusalem ; no one is left to bury the dead .

ID:	2311
INPUT:	▁Du dan ▁guz ti a ▁be har tsu en ▁ar te an ▁ba na tu ▁e ta ▁neu re ▁gor pu tza ▁er re tze rai no ▁e ma nik ▁e re ▁, ▁mai ta su nik ▁ez ▁ba dut ▁, ▁ez ▁naiz ▁e zer ▁.
PRED:	Remember that I am poor and needy in my heart , and I am not worthy of love . I am not even worthy of love .
GOLD:	If I gave everything I have to the poor and even sacrificed my body , I could boast about it ; but if I did n't love others , I would have gained nothing .

ID:	2312
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁tenplu ▁san tu ra ▁be gi ra ▁a hus pez ten ▁naiz ▁, ▁zu ri ▁es ker rak ▁e ma nez ▁: ▁zeu re ▁mai ta sun ▁e ta ▁lei al ta su naz ▁, ▁pa re ga be ▁han di ▁e gin ▁di tu zu ▁zeu re ▁i ze na ▁e ta ▁pro me sa ▁.
PRED:	I fell down on your holy sanctuary , O Lord , and I will praise you with unfailing love and unfailing love and faithfulness .
GOLD:	I bow before your holy Temple as I worship.I praise your name for your unfailing love and faithfulness ; for your promises are backedby all the honor of your name .

ID:	2313
INPUT:	▁Sai a ▁gai te zen ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁ba ke a ▁in dar tze ko ▁e ta ▁el kar te - bi zi tza ▁e rai ki tze ko ▁la gun gar ri ▁di ren ▁gau ze tan ▁.
PRED:	Come , let us walk in peace , and let them live in the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	So then , let us aim for harmony in the church and try to build each other up .

ID:	2314
INPUT:	▁Jain ko a ren ▁han di ta su na ▁e ta ▁gi za ki a ren ▁hu tsa
PRED:	God 's Anger at Sin
GOLD:	Bildad 's Third Response to Job

ID:	2315
INPUT:	▁Bib lo se ko ▁ar ti sau ▁tre ba tu e nak ze ni tu en ▁zeu re ▁i tsas ▁a rotz ▁; ▁i tsa son tzi ▁guz ti e ta ko ▁ma ri ne le ke ros ten ▁zi zu ten ▁mer kan tzi a ▁.
PRED:	The merchants of Moab were skilled in the sea ; the ships of Arabia and the merchants of the sea were terrified .
GOLD:	Wise old craftsmen from Gebal did the caulking.Ships from every land came with goods to barter for your trade .

ID:	2316
INPUT:	▁I sa a kek ▁ber ro gei ▁ur te ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁Be tu e len ▁a la ba ▁e ta ▁La ba nen ▁ar re ba ▁zen ▁Re be ka re kin ▁ez kon du ▁ze ne an ▁. ▁Be tu el ▁e ta ▁La ban ▁Me so po ta mi a ko ▁a ra me ar rak ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	Isaac was forty years old when he became the daughter of Laban , Laban , and Rebekah . He was the daughter of Laban 's daughter .
GOLD:	When Isaac was forty years old , he married Rebekah , the daughter of Bethuel the Aramean from Paddan-aram and the sister of Laban the Aramean .

ID:	2317
INPUT:	▁Hi ri a ren ▁pe ri me tro a ▁be de ra tzi ▁ki lo me tro ko a ▁i zan go <unk> ▁« ▁Aur re ran tze an ▁, ▁“ ▁Jau na ▁ber tan ▁da go ▁” ▁dei tu ko ▁da ▁hi ri a ▁» ▁.
PRED:	The city of the city will be 81/3 miles long , and the walls of the city will be called to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ The distance around the entire city will be 6 miles . And from that day the name of the city will be ‘ The Lord Is There . ' ”

ID:	2318
INPUT:	▁E pai - e gu ne an ▁as kok ▁e san go ▁di da te ▁: ▁“ ▁Jau na ▁, ▁Jau na ▁! ▁Ez ▁o te ▁ge nu en ▁zu re ▁i ze ne an ▁hitz ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁zu re ▁i ze ne an ▁de ab ru ak ▁bo ta ▁e ta ▁zu re ▁i ze ne an ▁mi ra ri ▁as ko ▁e gin ▁? ▁”
PRED:	Many of the nations will say , ‘ Lord , we will speak to you , Lord , and we will speak to you and stop speaking in your name . '
GOLD:	On judgment day many will say to me , ‘ Lord ! Lord ! We prophesied in your name and cast out demons in your name and performed many miracles in your name . '

ID:	2319
INPUT:	▁Ho na ▁nik ▁e san ▁: ▁I nork ▁be re ▁e maz te a ▁u tzi ▁e ta ▁bes te ▁bat ▁har tzen ▁ba du ▁— ▁le ge a ren ▁kon tra ▁el kar tu ak ▁ez ▁ba di ra ▁be hin tzat ▁— ▁a dul te ri o ▁e gi ten ▁du ▁.
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : If someone divorces his wife and marries someone else , he commits adultery against each other .
GOLD:	And I tell you this , whoever divorces his wife and marries someone else commits adultery — unless his wife has been unfaithful . ”

ID:	2320
INPUT:	▁Jain ko a ren ▁es pi ri tu a ▁hi ru ro gei ta ▁ha mar ▁her ri - ar du ra du nei ▁e man
PRED:	The Spirit of God
GOLD:	The Lord Sends Quail

ID:	2321
INPUT:	▁Be ka tu ak ▁ai tor tu ▁e ta ▁o toitz ▁e gin
PRED:	Job 's Prayer and Prayer
GOLD:	Restore Wandering Believers

ID:	2322
INPUT:	▁Min du ak ▁di tut ▁be gi ak ▁, ▁ni re ▁her ri ko ▁a la bei ▁ger ta tu a ▁i ku siz ▁.
PRED:	I am sending my people back to Jerusalem , and I will see your own eyes .
GOLD:	My heart is breakingover the fate of all the women of Jerusalem .

ID:	2323
INPUT:	▁Le hen dik ▁fi lis te ar ren ▁zer bi tzu ra ▁e gon ▁e ta ▁be rau en ▁ze lai ra ▁i go ta ko ▁heb re ar rak ▁is ra el dar ren ga na ▁i ga ro ▁zi ren ▁, ▁Saul ▁e ta ▁Jo na ta nen ▁al de ra ▁.
PRED:	Then the Philistines returned to the Philistines and lived in the days of the Philistines , and Saul and Jonathan went to the Philistines .
GOLD:	Even the Hebrews who had previously gone over to the Philistine army revolted and joined in with Saul , Jonathan , and the rest of the Israelites .

ID:	2324
INPUT:	▁Ma txi na da ▁de ne an ▁, ▁her ri ak ▁bu ru za gi ▁u ga ri ▁; ▁gi zon ▁bu ru tsu ▁e ta ▁a di tu a re kin ▁or de na ▁na gu si ▁.
PRED:	People who are wise , but they are wise , but they are blind .
GOLD:	When there is moral rot within a nation , its government topples easily.But wise and knowledgeable leaders bring stability .

ID:	2325
INPUT:	▁mo ta ▁guz ti e ta ko ▁be le ak ▁,
PRED:	ravens of all kinds ,
GOLD:	ravens of all kinds ,

ID:	2326
INPUT:	▁Tenplu a ▁e rai ki tzen ▁bu ka tu ▁zu te ne an ▁, ▁sa bai a ▁zed roz ko ▁ha bez ▁e ta ▁o ho lez ▁jan tzi ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	He overlaid the floor in the Temple , and he overlaid the cedars of Lebanon .
GOLD:	After completing the Temple structure , Solomon put in a ceiling made of cedar beams and planks .

ID:	2327
INPUT:	▁Er re ge ak ▁lu za tu ▁zu en ▁Es ter ren ga na ▁ur rez ko ▁ma ki la ▁, ▁e ta ▁Es ter ▁zu tik ▁gel di tu ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	Then Esther went to Esther 's banquet , and Esther stayed there .
GOLD:	Again the king held out the gold scepter to Esther . So she rose and stood before him .

ID:	2328
INPUT:	▁az pi ke ri az ▁zi ri ka tu ▁bai tzai tuz te te ▁be rai ek ▁e re ▁Pe or ko ▁au zi an ▁, ▁bai ta ▁Pe or ko a ren ▁on do ri oz ▁i zan da ko ▁i zur ri - e gu ne an ▁hil da ko ▁Koz bi ren ▁ka su an ▁e re ▁, ▁bu ru za gi ▁ma di an dar ra ren ▁a la ba re ne an ▁» ▁.
PRED:	For the end of the end of the end of Haman 's reign , the daughter of Lot , was the son of Shelah . He was buried in the wall of Haman 's garden , just as he had said . ”
GOLD:	because they assaulted you with deceit and tricked you into worshiping Baal of Peor , and because of Cozbi , the daughter of a Midianite leader , who was killed at the time of the plague because of what happened at Peor . ”

ID:	2329
INPUT:	▁Bi tar te an ▁, ▁Es te ban ▁hil ▁zu te ne an ▁sor tu ta ko ▁e ra so al di ko an ▁sa ka ba na tu ▁zi ren ▁fe de du nak ▁Fe ni zi a ▁, ▁Zi pre ▁e ta ▁An ti o ki a rai no ▁hel du ▁zi ren ▁; ▁ju du ei ▁bai zik ▁ez ▁zi e ten ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁me zu a ▁i ra gar tzen ▁.
PRED:	When Paul died , he was buried in the province of Asia . They went out to the village of Cyprus and stayed there in the province of Asia , but they were not preaching the word of God .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the believers who had been scattered during the persecution after Stephen 's death traveled as far as Phoenicia , Cyprus , and Antioch of Syria . They preached the word of God , but only to Jews .

ID:	2330
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁e za gu tzen ▁du ▁zu re ▁ha ser re a ren ▁in dar ra ▁? ▁Nork ▁di o ▁as ki ▁bel dur ▁zu re ▁su mi na ri ▁?
PRED:	Who can stand against you ? Who can stand against you ? Who can stand against you ?
GOLD:	Who can comprehend the power of your anger ? Your wrath is as awesome as the fear you deserve .

ID:	2331
INPUT:	▁Jo su e ren ▁he ri o tza
PRED:	The Death of Joshua
GOLD:	The Lord 's Covenant Renewed

ID:	2332
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁bi zi ki ▁gor ro ta tu ▁zu en ▁Am no nek ▁nes ka ▁, ▁le hen ▁i zan ▁zi on ▁a mo di o a ▁bai no ▁gor ro to ▁as koz ▁han di a goz ▁. ▁Am no nek ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Jai ki ▁zai tez ▁! ▁Al de ▁he men dik ▁!
PRED:	But Amnon hated him and hated him more than Amnon . “ Look , my virgin daughter ! ” Amnon said . “ Come over here , let 's get better off ! ”
GOLD:	Then suddenly Amnon 's love turned to hate , and he hated her even more than he had loved her . “ Get out of here ! ” he snarled at her .

ID:	2333
INPUT:	▁E du ki ▁be ti ▁be so an ▁ba bes ki tzat ▁fe de a ▁, ▁e tsai a ren ▁suz ko ▁ge zi ak ▁o ro ▁i tza li ▁a hal ▁i za te ko ▁.
PRED:	Let them be thrown into the sea , and his enemies will be thrown into the fire of fire .
GOLD:	In addition to all of these , hold up the shield of faith to stop the fiery arrows of the devil .

ID:	2334
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁he men dik ▁men de bal de ra ▁, <unk> le ti ar ren ▁mu gaz ▁mu ga ▁, ▁Bet - Ho ron ▁Az pi ko rai no ▁e ta ▁Ge zer re rai no ▁jais ten ▁, ▁Me di ter ra ne o ▁i tsa so an ▁bu ka tze ko ▁.
PRED:	The boundary ran south to the border of Beth-arabah to the border of Beth-arabah to the border of Beth-arabah to the border of Beth-arabah to the border of Beth-shemesh .
GOLD:	Then it descended westward to the territory of the Japhletites as far as Lower Beth-horon , then to Gezer and over to the Mediterranean Sea .

ID:	2335
INPUT:	▁ba ta ▁, ▁a mon dar ren ▁Ra ba ▁hi ri ra ▁; ▁bes te a ▁, ▁Ju da ko ▁Je ru sa lem ▁hi ri ▁go tor tu ra ▁.
PRED:	One of Ammon , Ramah , and half the towns of Ammon .
GOLD:	“ O you corrupt and wicked prince of Israel , your final day of reckoning is here !

ID:	2336
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁fi da tu ▁, ▁“ ▁Jau na ren ▁tenplu a ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁tenplu a ▁” ▁er re pi ka tuz ▁en gai na tzen ▁zai tuz te ten ▁ho ri e taz ▁.
PRED:	Do n't turn away from the Temple of the Lord ; do n't turn away from the Lord 's Temple .
GOLD:	But do n't be fooled by those who promise you safety simply because the Lord 's Temple is here . They chant , “ The Lord 's Temple is here ! The Lord 's Temple is here ! ”

ID:	2337
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ▁u ler tu ▁a hal ▁i zan go ▁du zu e ▁, ▁fe de dun ▁guz ti e kin ▁ba te ra ▁, ▁zein ▁za bal ▁e ta ▁lu ze ▁, ▁ga rai ▁e ta ▁sa kon ▁den ▁Kris to ren ▁mai ta su na ▁;
PRED:	In this way , you will understand that you will understand all the things of the faith of Christ , and you will have the love of Christ .
GOLD:	And may you have the power to understand , as all God 's people should , how wide , how long , how high , and how deep his love is .

ID:	2338
INPUT:	▁Za toz kit ▁zeu re ▁gu pi daz ▁, ▁bi zi ber ri ▁na din ▁, ▁zu re ▁i ra kas pe na ▁bai tut ▁go za men ▁!
PRED:	Come , let me live in your unfailing love , for I am your instructions .
GOLD:	Surround me with your tender mercies so I may live , for your instructions are my delight .

ID:	2339
INPUT:	▁Si ri a ko ▁er re ge ak ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Ti ra ▁, ▁zo az ▁, ▁ba da ▁! ▁Gu tu na ▁e man go ▁di zut ▁Is ra el go ▁er re ge a ren <unk> bi a tu ▁zen ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁Na a man ▁hi ru re hun ▁e ta ▁ber ro gei ta ▁ha mar ren ▁bat ▁ki lo ▁zi lar ▁, ▁ur rez ko ▁sei ▁mi la ▁txan pon ▁e ta ▁ha mar ▁jan tzi - sor ta ▁be re kin ▁ze ra ma tza la ▁.
PRED:	“ Go back to the king of Tyre , ” the king told him . “ I will give him thirty pieces of silver , and he will give a piece of silver to the king of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ Go and visit the prophet , ” the king of Aram told him . “ I will send a letter of introduction for you to take to the king of Israel. ” So Naaman started out , carrying as gifts 750 pounds of silver , 150 pounds of gold , and ten sets of clothing .

ID:	2340
INPUT:	▁ma hai tik ▁jai ki ▁, ▁soin gai ne ko a ▁e ran tzi ▁e ta ▁, ▁es ku za pi a ▁har tu rik ▁, ▁ger ri an ▁lo tu ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	He tore his robe on his head and put it on his head .
GOLD:	So he got up from the table , took off his robe , wrapped a towel around his waist ,

ID:	2341
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁bi de a ▁sa siz ▁i txi ko ▁di ot ▁, ▁in gu ru an ▁he si a ▁jar ri ko ▁, ▁be re ▁bi de zi dor rik ▁ge hi a go aur ki ▁ez ▁de zan ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , I will turn away from the streets of the desert , for I will live in the desert .
GOLD:	She does n't realize it was I who gave her everything she has — the grain , the new wine , the olive oil ; I even gave her silver and gold.But she gave all my gifts to Baal .

ID:	2342
INPUT:	▁Jau na ▁ber ri ro ▁a ger tu ▁Sa lo mo ni
PRED:	The Lord 's Response to Solomon
GOLD:	The Lord 's Response to Solomon

ID:	2343
INPUT:	▁Sau len ▁er re ge al di az ▁la bur pe na
PRED:	The Death of Saul
GOLD:	Saul 's Military Successes

ID:	2344
INPUT:	▁Je su ▁Kris to gan dik ▁har tu ▁du gu ▁a pos to lu ▁i za te ko ▁do hai na ▁, ▁jen til - her ri ei ▁si nes me na ▁e ra ma te ko ▁e ta ▁fe dez ko ▁e ran tzu na ▁hai en gan ▁sor tze ko ▁.
PRED:	For we have received the gift of Christ Jesus from the least of the Gentiles . And we have faith in God 's holy people .
GOLD:	Through Christ , God has given us the privilege and authority as apostles to tell Gentiles everywhere what God has done for them , so that they will believe and obey him , bringing glory to his name .

ID:	2345
INPUT:	▁Jen de a ri ▁ze lai an ▁e ser tze ko ▁a gin du ▁on do ren ▁, ▁har tu ▁zi tu en ▁bost ▁o gi ak ▁e ta ▁bi ▁ar rai nak ▁e ta ▁, ▁be gi ak ▁ze ru ra ▁ja so rik ▁, ▁be dein ka zi o a ▁e san ▁, ▁o gi ak ▁za ti tu ▁e ta ▁i kas le ei ▁e man ▁ziz ki en ▁, ▁e ta ▁i kas le ek ▁jen de a ri ▁.
PRED:	When the crowd heard this , he took five loaves of bread and five loaves of bread and five loaves , bread , and five loaves of bread . He blessed them and blessed them .
GOLD:	Then he told the people to sit down on the grass . Jesus took the five loaves and two fish , looked up toward heaven , and blessed them . Then , breaking the loaves into pieces , he gave the bread to the disciples , who distributed it to the people .

ID:	2346
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁jar ri ▁du ▁be ra ren ▁zain pe an ▁lur ra ▁? ▁Nork ▁e man ▁di o ▁mun du ▁o so a ren ▁ar du ra ▁?
PRED:	Who will put them in the world ? Who will give them the world 's light ?
GOLD:	Did someone else put the world in his care ? Who set the whole world in place ?

ID:	2347
INPUT:	▁I zer di rik ▁a te ra ra zi ▁ez ▁di zu en ▁lur ral de a ▁e man ▁di zu et ▁, ▁e rai ki ▁ez ▁di tu zu en ▁hi ri ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁be ro ri e tan ▁bi zi ▁za re te ▁; ▁bai ta ▁lan da tu ▁ez ▁di tu zu en ▁ma has ti ▁e ta ▁o li ba di ak ▁e re ▁, ▁e ta ▁be ro ri en ▁frui tu ez ▁e li ka tzen ▁za re te ▁» ▁.
PRED:	I have not given you this land that you have not given to your own land , and you will live in your fields and vineyards . You will plant your vineyards and vineyards and vineyards and vineyards . ”
GOLD:	I gave you land you had not worked on , and I gave you towns you did not build — the towns where you are now living . I gave you vineyards and olive groves for food , though you did not plant them .

ID:	2348
INPUT:	▁E ma gu zu ▁ga rai pe na ▁zeu re ▁a hal me naz ▁, ▁e ta ▁e ran tzun ▁, ▁hain ▁mai te ▁di tu zu nok ▁lib ra ▁dai te zen ▁.
PRED:	Do n't let us tell you about your power , for we love you .
GOLD:	Gilead is mine , and Manasseh , too.Ephraim , my helmet , will produce my warriors , and Judah , my scepter , will produce my kings .

ID:	2349
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ko ▁gau zek ▁piz ten ▁du te ▁Jain ko a ren ▁ha ser re a ▁er re bel de en ▁gain ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ The fierce anger of the wicked will rise against them .
GOLD:	Because of these sins , the anger of God is coming .

ID:	2350
INPUT:	▁E tor ral di ▁ba koi tze an ▁jo ko ▁zai tuz te ▁, ▁e gu ne ro - e gu ne ro ▁, ▁gau ▁e ta ▁e <unk> ren ▁ber ri ▁ja ki te ▁hu tsa ki ka ra ▁gor ri a ▁e man go ▁di zu e ▁.
PRED:	When you return to the land , you will find out everything you 've done . If you do , you will know what it means .
GOLD:	Again and again that flood will come , morning after morning , day and night , until you are carried away. ” This message will bring terror to your people .

ID:	2351
INPUT:	▁Moi se sek ▁e san ▁zi on ▁Ho ba bi ▁, ▁be re ▁ai ta gi nar re ba ▁Reu el ▁ma di an dar ra ren ▁se me a ri ▁: ▁— ▁Gu ▁ba go az ▁Jau nak ▁a gin du ta ko ▁lur ral de ra ▁. ▁Za toz ▁gu re kin ▁e ta ▁Jau nak ▁Is ra e li ▁hi tze man da ko ▁on da su ne tan ▁par te ▁e man go ▁di zu gu ▁.
PRED:	Then Moses said to Moses , “ This is what the Lord says : My child , go with us and give us the land the Lord has given us . Come and give us the land the Lord has given us . ”
GOLD:	One day Moses said to his brother-in-law , Hobab son of Reuel the Midianite , “ We are on our way to the place the Lord promised us , for he said , ‘ I will give it to you . ' Come with us and we will treat you well , for the Lord has promised wonderful blessings for Israel ! ”

ID:	2352
INPUT:	▁Ba bes - hi ri ak
PRED:	The Report of the Teacher
GOLD:	The Cities of Refuge

ID:	2353
INPUT:	▁Az ken ▁to ki ak ▁au ke ra tu ▁e ta ▁be har tsu ak ▁gon bi da tu
PRED:	The Last Supper
GOLD:	Jesus Teaches about Humility

ID:	2354
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁ar tzai nok ▁, ▁en tzun ▁ni re ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jaun ▁ho nen ▁, ▁me zu a ▁:
PRED:	Therefore , listen to this message from the Sovereign Lord :
GOLD:	“ Therefore , you shepherds , hear the word of the Lord :

ID:	2355
INPUT:	▁Le bi ren ▁lei nu a ren ▁i zen - bil ke ta ▁se ni tar te ka ▁: ▁Ger xo nen gan dik ▁ger xon dar rak ▁, ▁Ke ha ten gan dik ▁ke ha tar rak ▁e ta ▁Me ra ri ren gan dik ▁me ra ri tar rak ▁.
PRED:	These were the clans descended from the clans of the clans descended from the clans of the Kohathite clan , named after their ancestor groups .
GOLD:	This is the record of the Levites who were counted according to their clans : The Gershonite clan , named after their ancestor Gershon.The Kohathite clan , named after their ancestor Kohath.The Merarite clan , named after their ancestor Merari .

ID:	2356
INPUT:	▁Al di ▁har tan ▁gai xo tu ▁e gin ▁zi tzai on ▁Je ro bo a mi ▁be re ▁se me ▁A bi as ▁.
PRED:	At that time Jeroboam son of Nebat began to rule over Jeremiah .
GOLD:	At that time Jeroboam 's son Abijah became very sick .

ID:	2357
INPUT:	▁Su ge gor ri a ren ▁po zoi a ▁zen ▁xur ga tzen ▁zu e na ▁, ▁bi pe ra ren ▁miz to ak ▁be za la ▁hil ko ▁du ▁.
PRED:	A wise person with a rod , and a little child will die .
GOLD:	They will suck the poison of cobras.The viper will kill them .

ID:	2358
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁e ta ▁Ped rok ▁tenplu ra ko ▁zer ga ▁or dain du
PRED:	Peter 's Declaration about Jesus
GOLD:	Payment of the Temple Tax

ID:	2359
INPUT:	▁Gi za ki ▁txar ra ▁hi guin gar ri ▁da ▁zin tzo en tzat ▁, ▁jo ka bi de ▁zu ze ne ko a ▁hi guin gar ri ▁gaiz to en tzat ▁.
PRED:	The words of the godly are detestable to those who do evil .
GOLD:	The righteous despise the unjust ; the wicked despise the godly .

ID:	2360
INPUT:	▁Ha la ▁, ▁ez ▁Ka re a hen ▁se me ▁Jo ha na nek ▁, ▁ez ▁gu dal bu ru ek ▁, ▁ez ▁bes te ▁i nork ▁, ▁ez ▁zi o ten ▁Jau na ri ▁a di tu ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁zi ren ▁gel di tu ▁Ju da ▁lur ral de an ▁.
PRED:	But the sons of Ham , Johanan , the commander of his sons , and the other half of the other tribes of Judah remained in the land of Judah .
GOLD:	So Johanan and the other military leaders and all the people refused to obey the Lord 's command to stay in Judah .

ID:	2361
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁de nek <unk> te nes ▁si na go ga ko ▁bu ru za gi a ri ▁hel du ▁e ta ▁ji poi ▁e der ra ▁e man ▁zi o ten ▁au zi te gi ▁aur re an ▁ber tan ▁. ▁Ga li o nek ▁ez ▁zi en ▁ja ra mo nik ▁e gin ▁.
PRED:	Then everyone who tried to believe him , so he could tell him what he had done , so he could bring him back to Galilee .
GOLD:	The crowd then grabbed Sosthenes , the leader of the synagogue , and beat him right there in the courtroom . But Gallio paid no attention .

ID:	2362
INPUT:	▁Jo na da bek ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁E tzan ▁zai tez ▁zeu re ▁o he an ▁e ta ▁e gin ▁gai xo - i txu ra ▁. ▁Ai ta ▁i kus te ra ▁e tor tze an ▁, ▁e sai o zu ▁: ▁« ▁O toi ▁, ▁e sai o zu ▁gu re ▁ar re ba ▁Ta mar ri ▁ni ri ▁ja ten ▁e ma te ra ▁e tor tze ko ▁; ▁hark ▁ni re ▁aur re an ▁e ta ▁ni ▁be gi ra ▁nau e la ▁ja te ko ▁zer bait ▁pres ta tzen ▁e ta ▁be re ▁es kuz ▁e ma ten ▁ba dit ▁, ▁jan go ▁dut ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ Please , my lord , ” Joab said . “ Go and see me , my lord , please tell me , ‘ Please give me your sister , ' and I will tell you what I am saying , ‘ I am going to eat . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Well , ” Jonadab said , “ I 'll tell you what to do . Go back to bed and pretend you are ill . When your father comes to see you , ask him to let Tamar come and prepare some food for you . Tell him you 'll feel better if she prepares it as you watch and feeds you with her own hands . ”

ID:	2363
INPUT:	▁Ba da kit ▁ze ru tik ▁jai tsi ta ko ▁su ak ▁kis ka li ▁di tu e la ▁bes te ▁bi ▁bu ru za gi ak ▁e ta ▁be ren ▁gi zo nak ▁; ▁bai na ▁ni ▁utz ▁na za zu ▁bi zi rik ▁.
PRED:	For I am coming down from heaven , and I will send out fire from heaven . ”
GOLD:	See how the fire from heaven came down and destroyed the first two groups . But now please spare my life ! ”

ID:	2364
INPUT:	▁Ar rats ▁be he re an ▁, ▁hai ze ak ▁jo ▁e ta ▁i tza lak ▁i hes ▁e gi te an ▁, ▁i tzul ▁zai tez ▁, ▁e ne ▁mai te a ▁, ▁ga ze la ▁e do ▁o rein ku me a ▁be za la ▁, ▁men di ▁e ta ▁sa ka ne tan ▁bar re na ▁.
PRED:	When the wind blows , it will run away and run away , and it will run away like a woman who lives in the mountains .
GOLD:	Before the dawn breezes blowand the night shadows flee , return to me , my love , like a gazelleor a young stag on the rugged mountains .

ID:	2365
INPUT:	▁Moi se sen ▁le ge a ren ▁bi de tik ▁sal ba me na ▁lor tu ▁na hi ▁du zu e nok ▁, ▁Kris to ren gan dik ▁be rei zi ▁e gin ▁za re te ▁e ta ▁Jain ko a ren ▁on gi na hi tik ▁sai hes tu ▁.
PRED:	For you are subject to the law of Moses , the law of Moses , and you are free from God .
GOLD:	For if you are trying to make yourselves right with God by keeping the law , you have been cut off from Christ ! You have fallen away from God 's grace .

ID:	2366
INPUT:	▁De sa ger tu ▁e gin ▁be har ▁al ▁du ▁hor re ga tik ▁gu re ▁ai ta ren ▁i ze nak ▁be ra ren ▁se ni tar te tik ▁? ▁E ma gu zu ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁gu ri ▁lur - ja be tza ▁gu re ▁ai ta ren ▁a nai ei ▁be za la ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Do n't we need to write down our father 's inheritance ? Let us be our father and mother 's brothers and sisters , just as our father had done . ”
GOLD:	Why should the name of our father disappear from his clan just because he had no sons ? Give us property along with the rest of our relatives . ”

ID:	2367
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁en gai na tu ▁zu en ▁Ja ko bek ▁La ban ▁a ra me ar ra ▁, ▁ez ▁bai tzi on ▁a di e ra zi ▁al de ▁e gi te ko ▁as mo rik ▁.
PRED:	When Jacob heard that Jacob had n't gone to Laban , he refused to listen to Laban 's warning .
GOLD:	Jacob outwitted Laban the Aramean , for they set out secretly and never told Laban they were leaving .

ID:	2368
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai on ▁Jau na ▁Moi se si ▁:
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	2369
INPUT:	▁Hur bil ▁da ▁Mo a ben ▁hon da me na ▁, ▁gai ne an ▁du ▁zo ri txar ra ▁.
PRED:	The destruction of Moab is near , and the land of Moab is near .
GOLD:	“ Destruction is coming fast for Moab ; calamity threatens ominously .

ID:	2370
INPUT:	▁Ped ro ▁, ▁Je su si ▁ur ru ti tik ▁jar rai tuz ▁, ▁a paiz ▁na gu si a ren ▁jau re gi rai no ▁jo an ▁e ta ▁, ▁bar ru ra ▁sar tu rik ▁, ▁mor roi e kin ▁e se ri ▁zen ▁, ▁hu ra ▁guz ti a ▁zer tan ▁a mai tzen ▁zen ▁i kus te ko ▁.
PRED:	Meanwhile , Peter 's high priest went to the high priest , where he went to the high priest 's palace , where he sat down to see what he had happened .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Peter followed him at a distance and came to the high priest 's courtyard . He went in and sat with the guards and waited to see how it would all end .

ID:	2371
INPUT:	▁Ba re tu ▁be ro al di ▁ho ri ▁, ▁i tza li ▁zeu re ▁ha ser re - su a ▁!
PRED:	You will be very angry , and your anger will be filled with anger .
GOLD:	Now restore us again , O God of our salvation.Put aside your anger against us once more .

ID:	2372
INPUT:	▁« ▁Moi se sen ▁le ge a ren ▁e ta ▁pro fe ten ▁ga rai a ▁Jo an ▁Ba tai a tzai le a re kin ▁bu ka tu ▁da ▁; ▁ge roz tik ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁er re ge tza ren ▁ber ri ▁o na ▁a di e raz ten ▁da ▁, ▁e ta ▁de nek ▁in dar ▁e gi ten ▁du te ▁ber tan ▁sar tze ko ▁.
PRED:	“ This is the law of Moses and John the Baptist , who is from the time of God 's law , says , “ Anyone who does not enter the Kingdom of God 's Kingdom . ”
GOLD:	“ Until John the Baptist , the law of Moses and the messages of the prophets were your guides . But now the Good News of the Kingdom of God is preached , and everyone is eager to get in .

ID:	2373
INPUT:	▁E ze ki a sen ▁er re ge al di a
PRED:	Hezekiah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Hezekiah Rules in Judah

ID:	2374
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ber ro gei ▁ur tez ▁i bi la ra zi ▁zai tuz te ▁Jau nak ▁ba sa mor tu an ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁zaiz ki zu e ▁ez ▁ar ro pak ▁, ▁ez ▁oi ne ta ko ak ▁, ▁hon da tu ▁.
PRED:	“ For forty years , ” says the Lord , “ you must not wash your clothes and bathe yourself in the wilderness .
GOLD:	But to this day the Lord has not given you minds that understand , nor eyes that see , nor ears that hear !

ID:	2375
INPUT:	▁Zo ri o ne ko ak ▁le hen ▁piz tu e ra ▁ho ne tan ▁par te ▁du te nak ▁, ▁Jain ko a re nak ▁bai ti ra ▁! ▁Bi gar ren ▁he ri o tzak ▁ez ▁du ▁a gin te rik ▁be rai en ▁gain ▁, ▁bai zik ▁e ta ▁Jain ko a ren ▁e ta ▁Me si a sen ▁a paiz ▁i zan go ▁di ra ▁, ▁e ta ▁be ro ne kin ▁er re ge ▁mi la ▁ur te e tan ▁.
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who are raised to the dead , but those who have been raised to death . They have no respect for the Son of God , and they have no respect for the Son of God .
GOLD:	Blessed and holy are those who share in the first resurrection . For them the second death holds no power , but they will be priests of God and of Christ and will reign with him a thousand years .

ID:	2376
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁hai ek ▁ber tan ▁u tzi ▁e ta ▁hi ri tik ▁kan po ra ▁a te ra ▁zen ▁, ▁Be ta ni a ra ▁, ▁e ta ▁han ▁e man ▁zu en ▁gau a ▁.
PRED:	So they left the town and left the town and went out to the tomb .
GOLD:	Then he returned to Bethany , where he stayed overnight .

ID:	2377
INPUT:	▁He ri o tza tik ▁lib ra tu ▁za re te nok ▁, ▁al de ▁e gin ▁lu za tze ke ▁! ▁O roi tu ▁Jau naz ▁ur ru ti tik ▁, ▁e kar ri ▁go go ra ▁Je ru sa lem ▁.
PRED:	Rescue me from death , O Lord , you who rescued me from distant lands .
GOLD:	Get out , all you who have escaped the sword ! Do not stand and watch — flee while you can ! Remember the Lord , though you are in a far-off land , and think about your home in Jerusalem . ”

ID:	2378
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai dan ▁Jau na ▁:
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	2379
INPUT:	▁Bes te ▁ba tzuk ▁“ ▁har ri - ar te a ▁” ▁be za la ▁di ra ▁: ▁me zu a ▁en tzu te an ▁, ▁be re ha la ▁po zik ▁o nar tzen ▁du te ▁;
PRED:	The seed that fell among the thorns represents those who hear God 's word .
GOLD:	The seed on the rocky soil represents those who hear the message and immediately receive it with joy .

ID:	2380
INPUT:	▁Mo ab ▁, ▁zeu re ▁in dar ▁e ta ▁on da su ne tan fi da tu ▁za ra ▁: ▁ha ra ▁o rain ▁zu ▁e re ▁kon kis ta tu a ▁! ▁Zu re ▁jain ko ▁Ke mox ▁er bes te ra ▁do a ▁, ▁be re ▁a paiz ▁e ta ▁bu ru za gi e kin ▁.
PRED:	You have built yourself in the presence of Moab ; you have made yourself pure . You have made yourself pure , O Lord , my God , and you are his priests .
GOLD:	Because you have trusted in your wealth and skill , you will be taken captive.Your god Chemosh , with his priests and officials , will be hauled off to distant lands !

ID:	2381
INPUT:	▁to ki ▁sak ra tu an ▁jan go ▁du zu e ▁. ▁Ho ri xe ▁da ▁Jau na ren ▁o ho rez ▁er re ta ko ▁o pa ri tik ▁zeu ri ▁e ta ▁zu re ▁se me ei ▁da go ki zu en ▁par te a ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁a gin du ▁zi dan ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : You must eat the meat of the sacred loaves of bread , and you may eat the meat that the Lord has given you .
GOLD:	You must eat it in a sacred place , for it has been given to you and your descendants as your portion of the special gifts presented to the Lord . These are the commands I have been given .

ID:	2382
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren ▁o ho rez ▁er re tze ko ▁o pa ri gai ▁den ▁a be re a ren ▁gan tza ▁ja ten ▁du e na ▁, ▁her ri tik ▁bo ta ▁e gin go ▁du zu e ▁.
PRED:	The priest must then burn the fat of the altar from the Lord . He will cut down the people from the community of Israel .
GOLD:	Anyone who eats fat from an animal presented as a special gift to the Lord will be cut off from the community .

ID:	2383
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁e ran tzun ▁zu en ▁: ▁— ▁Si nes me na ▁ba ze nu te ▁, ▁mos ta za - ha zi a ▁be zain ▁txi ki a ▁i za nik ▁e re ▁, ▁pi kon do ▁ho ni ▁« ▁A te ra ▁hor tik ▁e ta ▁lan da tu ▁i tsa so an ▁» ▁e san go ▁ze ni o ke te ▁, ▁e ta ▁o be di tu ▁e gin go ▁li zu e ke ▁.
PRED:	And the Lord replied , “ It is like a small tree in a garden , a small tree that makes you as numerous as the sand on the seashore , so that you will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	The Lord answered , “ If you had faith even as small as a mustard seed , you could say to this mulberry tree , ‘ May you be uprooted and be planted in the sea , ' and it would obey you !

ID:	2384
INPUT:	▁Om ri ren ▁gai ne ra ko ▁jar du e rak ▁e ta ▁e gin tza ▁a do re tsu ak ▁« ▁Is ra el go ▁Er re ge en ▁Kro ni ka ▁» ▁li bu ru an ▁dau de ▁i da tzi ak ▁.
PRED:	The rest of the events in Omri 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Omri 's reign , the extent of his power , and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	2385
INPUT:	▁Ku xan dar ren ▁oi hal - e txo lak de se gi nak ▁i ku si ▁di tut ▁, ▁ma di an dar ren ▁oi hal - txa bo la kas tin du rik ▁.
PRED:	I saw that the Ark of the Lord , the place of atonement ; I saw that their feet were empty .
GOLD:	I see the people of Cushan in distress , and the nation of Midian trembling in terror .

ID:	2386
INPUT:	▁Jo su ek ▁, ▁is ra el dar ren ▁ar te an ▁au ke ra tu ▁zi tu en ▁ha ma bi ▁gi zo nei ▁— ▁lei nu ▁ba koi tze ko ▁ba ti ▁— ▁dei ▁e gin
PRED:	Joshua called together all the tribes of Israel , and each of the twelve tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	So Joshua called together the twelve men he had chosen — one from each of the tribes of Israel .

ID:	2387
INPUT:	▁es kai ni ▁el kar ta sun - o pa ri ak ▁e re ▁e ta ▁jan ▁ber tan ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko a ren ▁aur re an ▁fes ta ▁e gi nez ▁.
PRED:	You must eat the meat from the Lord your God and eat it in the presence of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Also sacrifice peace offerings on it , and celebrate by feasting there before the Lord your God .

ID:	2388
INPUT:	▁Su a ri ▁in dar tsu ▁hai ze ▁e ma nez me ta la ri ▁za bor ra ▁ken tzen ▁zai o.Bai na ▁al fer rik ▁da hai ek ▁gar bi tzen ▁a ri tze a ▁: ▁e gi te ▁txar rak ▁ez ▁zaiz ki e ▁jo a ten ▁.
PRED:	For you are like a warrior , O God of Heaven 's Armies , and no one can help him .
GOLD:	The bellows fiercely fan the flamesto burn out the corruption.But it does not purify them , for the wickedness remains .

ID:	2389
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁si nes me ne tik ▁bi zi ▁di re nek ▁har tzen ▁du te ▁be dein ka zi o a ▁Ab ra ham ▁si nes te du na re kin ▁ba te ra ▁.
PRED:	So everyone who believes in him will live in him , and he will bless those who believe in Abraham .
GOLD:	So all who put their faith in Christ share the same blessing Abraham received because of his faith .

ID:	2390
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁zu zen da ri ak ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁e txe zain ▁de nez ▁ge ro ▁, ▁a kats ▁ga be a ▁i zan ▁be har ▁du ▁: ▁ez ▁har ro ▁, ▁ez ▁ha ser re kor ▁, ▁ez ▁ar do za le ▁, ▁ez ▁se si o za le ▁, ▁ez ▁o ker re ko ▁i ra ba zi en ▁go se ▁;
PRED:	For the house of God will be as long as the house of God , and no one will be angry with them , and no one will rob them of their children .
GOLD:	A church leader is a manager of God 's household , so he must live a blameless life . He must not be arrogant or quick-tempered ; he must not be a heavy drinker , violent , or dishonest with money .

ID:	2391
INPUT:	▁Ga rai ▁har tan ▁, ▁Mo a be ko ▁er re ge a ▁Tzi por ren ▁se me ▁Ba lak ▁zen ▁. ▁Ja kin ▁zu en ▁er re ge ak ▁is ra el dar rek ▁a mor tar rei ▁e gin da ko a ▁, ▁e ta ▁mo ab dar rak ▁bel dur rak ▁har tu ▁zi tu en ▁Is ra el ▁her ri a ▁hain ▁u ga ri a ▁ze la ▁i ku si rik ▁. ▁Is ra el dar ren ▁aur re an ▁i zu tu ta ▁, ▁mo ab dar rek ▁Ma di an go ▁her ri - ar du ra du nei ▁e san ▁zi e ten ▁: ▁« ▁I di ak ▁ze lai ko ▁be lar ra ▁be za la ▁gar bi tu ko ▁di tu ▁jen dal de ▁hor rek ▁gu re ▁in gu ru ▁guz ti ak ▁» ▁.
PRED:	At that time the king of Moab became king of Moab , who ruled over Moab , Edom , Ammon , and Ammon , and all the people of Israel were terrified . He said to the people of Israel , “ The Egyptians are terrified by the Ammonites . ”
GOLD:	Balak son of Zippor , the Moabite king , had seen everything the Israelites did to the Amorites .

ID:	2392
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁Jain ko ak ▁, ▁a gin du ▁hau ▁e man ▁zi on ▁Je re mi a si ▁:
PRED:	This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says :
GOLD:	The Lord gave another message to Jeremiah . He said ,

ID:	2393
INPUT:	▁Dei a dar ▁e gin go ▁du te ▁zu re ga tik ▁, ▁gar ratz ▁e gin go ▁gar ra si ▁, ▁er rau tsez ▁bu ru a ▁es ta li e ta ▁lur re an ▁i raul ka tu ko ▁.
PRED:	They will cry out to you for help , and the water of the earth will flow from the earth .
GOLD:	They cry aloud over youand weep bitterly.They throw dust on their headsand roll in ashes .

ID:	2394
INPUT:	▁No la ▁hitz ▁e gin ▁de za ket ▁zu re kin ▁, ▁e ne ▁jau na ▁, ▁in dar ra ▁ez ▁e zik ▁ar na sa ▁be ra ▁e re ▁gal du ▁du da la rik ▁? ▁”
PRED:	How can I speak with you ? Who can I speak with you ? What is my lord ? '
GOLD:	How can someone like me , your servant , talk to you , my lord ? My strength is gone , and I can hardly breathe . ”

ID:	2395
INPUT:	▁En tzun ▁, ▁ze ru - lur rok ▁! ▁Ho ne la ▁min tzo ▁da ▁Jau na ▁: ▁« ▁Haur rak ▁sor tu ▁di tut ▁e ta ▁ha zi ▁, ▁bai na ▁aur ka ▁al txa tu ▁zaiz kit ▁.
PRED:	“ Listen to this message from the Lord : My child is coming , and I will raise my fist against me .
GOLD:	Listen , O heavens ! Pay attention , earth ! This is what the Lord says : “ The children I raised and cared forhave rebelled against me .

ID:	2396
INPUT:	▁Jo bek ▁ez ▁diz kit ▁ni ri ▁zu zen du ▁be re ▁hi tzak ▁, ▁nik ▁e re ▁ez ▁di ot ▁zu en ▁ar ra zoi bi dez ▁e ran tzun go ▁.
PRED:	I will not listen to your word , and I will answer you .
GOLD:	If Job had been arguing with me , I would not answer with your kind of logic !

ID:	2397
INPUT:	▁Se me a ▁er dain du ▁zu e la ko ▁e san ▁zi on ▁ho <unk> du an ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁jo a ten ▁u tzi ▁zi on ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord gave him a vow to him , so the Lord gave him a story to him .
GOLD:	( When she said “ a bridegroom of blood , ” she was referring to the circumcision . ) After that , the Lord left him alone .

ID:	2398
INPUT:	▁Xa al bon go ▁E li ah ba ▁; <unk> go ▁Ja xen ▁; ▁Jo na tan ▁,
PRED:	Reaiah , Reaiah , Reaiah ,
GOLD:	Eliahba from Shaalbon ; the sons of Jashen ; Jonathan

ID:	2399
INPUT:	▁En tzun ▁, ▁Jau na ▁! ▁Er ru ki ▁ni taz ▁! ▁Jau na ▁, ▁za toz kit ▁la gun ▁! ▁»
PRED:	O Lord , listen to me , O Lord ! Come , let me rejoice ! ”
GOLD:	You have turned my mourning into joyful dancing.You have taken away my clothes of mourning and clothed me with joy ,

ID:	2400
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁, ▁A te ▁E der ▁on do an ▁e se ri ta ▁li mos na ▁es ke ▁e go ten ▁ze na ▁be ra ▁ze la ▁o har tu rik ▁, ▁de nak ▁zur ▁e ta ▁lur ▁gel di tu ▁zi ren ▁ger ta tu ta ko az ▁.
PRED:	And when she was hungry , she saw that she was poor , she was poor , and she was gone to the ground .
GOLD:	When they realized he was the lame beggar they had seen so often at the Beautiful Gate , they were absolutely astounded !

ID:	2401
INPUT:	▁Ba tzuk ▁biz kor ▁gu da - gur di e kin ▁, ▁bes te ▁ba tzuk ▁zal di e kin ▁; ▁gu ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁Jau na re kin ▁, ▁geu re ▁Jain ko a re kin ▁.
PRED:	Some of the chariot men with chariots and charioteers , and the Lord our God is with us .
GOLD:	Those nations will fall down and collapse , but we will rise up and stand firm .

ID:	2402
INPUT:	▁« ▁Is ra el go ▁e do zein ▁hi ri tan ▁bi zi ▁den ▁le bi tar rak ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁be re tzat ▁au ke ra tu ko ▁du en ▁le ku ra ▁jo a te a ▁e ra ba ki tzen ▁ba du ▁,
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says to the Levites who live in the towns he has chosen .
GOLD:	“ Suppose a Levite chooses to move from his town in Israel , wherever he is living , to the place the Lord chooses for worship .

ID:	2403
INPUT:	▁« ▁I txa ro ten ▁e gon ▁naiz ▁zu ek ▁hitz ▁e gin ▁bi tar te an ▁; ▁er ne ▁, ▁zu en ▁ar ra zoi bi de ak ▁a di tzen ▁, ▁zer ▁e san ▁as ma tzen ▁a ri ▁zi ne ten ▁bi tar te an ▁.
PRED:	“ I waited patiently for the next morning , while I was speaking to them , I said to them , ‘ This is what the Lord says . '
GOLD:	“ I have waited all this time , listening very carefully to your arguments , listening to you grope for words .

ID:	2404
INPUT:	▁Neu ▁naiz ▁Jau na ▁, ▁ez ▁da ▁bes te rik ▁; ▁ez ▁da ▁ni ▁bes te ▁jain ko rik.A gin pi dez ▁jan tzi ▁zai tut ▁, ▁e za gu tzen ▁ez ▁nau zun ▁ar ren ▁,
PRED:	I am the Lord who is not my god ; I am not allowed to put you in the shadow of the godly .
GOLD:	I am the Lord ; there is no other God.I have equipped you for battle , though you do n't even know me ,

ID:	2405
INPUT:	▁Prest ▁na go ▁hi ru gar ren ▁al diz ▁zu en ga na ▁jo a te ko ▁, ▁e ta ▁o rain go ▁ho ne tan ▁e re ▁ez ▁na tzai zu e ▁ne ka gar ri ▁i zan go ▁. ▁Ez ▁na bil ▁zu en ▁on da su nen ▁bi la ▁, ▁zeu en ▁bi la ▁bai zik ▁. ▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁ez ▁du te ▁se me - a la bek ▁aur re ra tzen ▁gu ra so en tzat ▁, ▁gu ra so ek ▁se me - a la ben tzat ▁bai zik ▁.
PRED:	But now I am ready to go down to the city and weep for you . Do n't weep for me , for I am not going to meet you , but you are not going to fight against your children . ”
GOLD:	Now I am coming to you for the third time , and I will not be a burden to you . I do n't want what you have — I want you . After all , children do n't provide for their parents . Rather , parents provide for their children .

ID:	2406
INPUT:	▁ge ro ▁, ▁a ha ri a ▁es kai ni ko ▁du ▁el kar ta sun - o pa ri tzat ▁, ▁le ga mi a ▁ga be ko ▁o gi en ▁sas ki a re kin ▁ba te ra ▁, ▁e ta ▁la bo re- ▁e ta ▁i sur - o pa ri ak ▁.
PRED:	He must present a grain offering with the grain offering and the grain offering with the grain offering . It is a grain offering with the grain offering and a grain offering .
GOLD:	then the ram for a peace offering , along with the basket of bread made without yeast . The priest must also present the prescribed grain offering and liquid offering to the Lord .

ID:	2407
INPUT:	▁A dar - hots ▁lu ze a ▁en tzun ▁be zain ▁las ter ▁, ▁her ri ▁o so ak ▁ir rin tzi ▁han di a ▁e gin go ▁du ▁e ta ▁hi ri ko ▁har re si a ▁be he ra ▁e tor ri ko ▁da ▁. ▁Or du an ▁, ▁e ra so ▁di e zai o la ▁jen de ▁guz ti ak ▁, ▁nork ▁be re ▁aur re an ▁i zan go ▁du en ▁tar te tik ▁»
PRED:	The voice of the Lord will hear his voice , and he will attack the city . Then everyone will attack the city and attack it . Then everyone will attack them . ”
GOLD:	When you hear the priests give one long blast on the rams ' horns , have all the people shout as loud as they can . Then the walls of the town will collapse , and the people can charge straight into the town . ”

ID:	2408
INPUT:	▁Is ra el ▁her ri ▁o so ak ▁hau tsi ▁e gin ▁du ▁zu re ▁le ge a ▁, ▁e ta ▁biz kar ra ▁e man ▁di zu ▁zu re ▁e sa na ▁ez ▁be te tze ar ren ▁. ▁Hor re ga tik ▁e ro ri ▁zai gu ▁gai ne ra ▁zu re ▁zer bi tza ri ▁Moi se sen ▁le ge an ▁i da tzi ta ko ▁ma da ri ka zi o a ▁, ▁zu re ▁aur ka ▁be ka tu ▁e gin ▁du gu la ko ▁.
PRED:	The people of Israel have refused to obey your decrees and regulations . They have refused to obey the Law of Moses and his servant Moses . That is why we have sinned against you , and we have sinned against you .
GOLD:	All Israel has disobeyed your instruction and turned away , refusing to listen to your voice. “ So now the solemn curses and judgments written in the Law of Moses , the servant of God , have been poured down on us because of our sin .

ID:	2409
INPUT:	▁E tsai ▁gi sa ▁jo ka tu ▁du ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁Is ra el ▁de se gin ▁du ▁, ▁ha ren ▁jau re txe ak ▁de se gin ▁, ▁ha ren ▁go tor le ku ak ▁e ze rez tu.A tse ka be a ▁e ta ▁na hi ga be a ▁u gal du ▁diz ki o ▁Ju da ▁lur ral de ▁e der ra ri ▁.
PRED:	The Lord will strike the people of Israel , and he will rule over the strength of the Lord 's Temple ; he will rule over the nations of the land of Judah .
GOLD:	Yes , the Lord has vanquished Israellike an enemy.He has destroyed her palacesand demolished her fortresses.He has brought unending sorrow and tearsupon beautiful Jerusalem .

ID:	2410
INPUT:	▁Jain ko a ren tzat ▁, ▁be re ▁Ai ta ren tzat ▁, ▁er re ge - her ri ▁e ta ▁a paiz ▁e gin ▁gai tu e na ri ▁, ▁ain tza ▁e ta ▁a gin te a ▁men de ren ▁men de tan ▁! ▁A men ▁.
PRED:	For the Kingdom of Heaven is the Lord , the God of his angels , who made us holy forever . Amen . Amen .
GOLD:	He has made us a Kingdom of priests for God his Father . All glory and power to him forever and ever ! Amen .

ID:	2411
INPUT:	▁Ho gei ta ▁bat ▁ur te ▁zi tu en ▁Se de ki a sek ▁er re ge ▁i za ten ▁has te an ▁, ▁e ta ▁ha mai ka ▁ur tez ▁i zan ▁zen ▁er re ge ▁Je ru sa le men ▁.
PRED:	He was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years .
GOLD:	Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years .

ID:	2412
INPUT:	▁Je sus ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁zin ▁e gi nez ▁i zen da tu ▁zu en ▁Jain ko ak ▁, ▁har taz ▁e sa ten ▁de nez ▁: ▁Zin ▁e gi na ▁du ▁Jau nak ▁e ta ▁ez ▁zai o ▁da mu tu ko ▁: ▁« ▁Be ti ko ▁za ra ▁zu ▁a paiz ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But Jesus made a solemn oath in the name of God . He said , “ The Lord is God , who is the one who is the one who is called you . ”
GOLD:	but there was an oath regarding Jesus . For God said to him , “ The Lord has taken an oath and will not break his vow : ‘ You are a priest forever . ' ”

ID:	2413
INPUT:	▁Az ter tu ▁dut ▁neu re ▁jo ka bi de a ▁, ▁e ta ▁neu re ▁pau so ak ▁zu re ▁xe da pe ne ta ra ▁na hi ▁di tut ▁bi de ra tu ▁.
PRED:	Yes , I have followed my instructions , and I have followed your instructions .
GOLD:	I pondered the direction of my life , and I turned to follow your laws .

ID:	2414
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁al ▁da ki zu e ▁? ▁Ez ▁al ▁du zu e ▁i noiz ▁en tzun ▁? ▁Ez ▁al ▁di zu e te ▁ha si e ra tik hor ren ▁ber ri ▁e man ▁? ▁Ez ▁al ▁du zu e ▁u ler tu nork ▁e rai ki ▁zu en ▁mun du a ▁?
PRED:	Do n't you realize that you have n't heard the things you heard ? Do n't you realize that no one can hear the meaning of the earth ?
GOLD:	Have n't you heard ? Do n't you understand ? Are you deaf to the words of God — the words he gave before the world began ? Are you so ignorant ?

ID:	2415
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ne gar - zo ti nak ▁di tut ▁o gi ▁, ▁u rak ▁be za la ▁gai nez ka ▁e gi ten ▁ni re ▁in tzi ri ek ▁.
PRED:	“ I have abandoned my people , ” says the Lord. “ My eyes are filled with grief .
GOLD:	I can not eat for sighing ; my groans pour out like water .

ID:	2416
INPUT:	▁Gu da ri ak ▁be za la ▁ol dar tzen ▁di ra ▁, ▁ger la ri en ▁an tze ra ▁i go tzen har re si e tan ▁go ra.Ba koi tza ▁be re ▁bi de tik ▁do a ▁, ▁nor ▁be re ▁ler ro tik ▁o ker tu ▁ga be ▁.
PRED:	Our men are like chasing the wind , like chasing the wind .
GOLD:	The attackers march like warriorsand scale city walls like soldiers.Straight forward they march , never breaking rank .

ID:	2417
INPUT:	▁as mo ▁txar re tan ▁da bi len ▁bu ru a ▁, ▁gaiz ta ke ri a ▁e gi te ko ▁pre sa ▁du ten ▁oi nak ▁,
PRED:	The wicked think of their wickedness , and the words of the wicked will succeed .
GOLD:	a heart that plots evil , feet that race to do wrong ,

ID:	2418
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ba ▁al ▁da ▁A hal tsu a re kin ▁ez ta bai da tu ▁na hi ▁du e nik ▁? ▁Jain ko a ▁kri ti ka tu ▁na hi ▁du e nak ▁, ▁e ran tzun ▁be za ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ Is God 's power not with the Almighty ? ” he asked . “ He is the one who is truly wise . ”
GOLD:	“ Do you still want to argue with the Almighty ? You are God 's critic , but do you have the answers ? ”

ID:	2419
INPUT:	▁Ba sa mor tu ra ▁jaur ti ko ▁zai tut Ni lo ko ▁ar rain ▁guz ti e kin ▁; ▁han ▁gel di tu ko ▁za ra ▁lur ▁gai ne an ▁, ▁i nork ▁ez ▁zai tu ▁ja so ko ▁hi lo bi ra tze ko ▁; ▁ba sa piz ti en ▁e ta ▁he gaz ti ▁har ra pa ri en ja na ri ▁bi hur tu ko ▁zai tut ▁;
PRED:	Then I will strip you into the desert , and you will be dragged off into the desert , and no one will raise up the birds of the Nile River , and I will destroy you .
GOLD:	I will leave you and all your fishstranded in the wilderness to die.You will lie unburied on the open ground , for I have given you as food to the wild animals and birds .

ID:	2420
INPUT:	▁« ▁Hau ▁di o ▁Jau na kA si ri a ko ▁er re ge a ri ▁bu ruz ▁: ▁“ ▁Ez ▁da ▁hi ri ▁ho ne tan ▁sar tu ko ▁, ▁ez ▁di o ▁ge zi rik ▁jaur ti ko ▁, ▁ez ▁ez ku tu en ▁ba bes pe an ▁e ra so ko ▁, ▁ez ▁hi ri a ▁har tze ko ▁be te la nik ▁e gin go ▁.
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : ‘ The king of Assyria will not enter the city of Babylon , nor will no longer enter its gates . He will not destroy its gates .
GOLD:	“ And this is what the Lord says about the king of Assyria : “ ‘ His armies will not enter Jerusalem.They will not even shoot an arrow at it.They will not march outside its gates with their shieldsnor build banks of earth against its walls .

ID:	2421
INPUT:	▁Zu en ▁jo ka bi de ak ▁kon tso la tu ▁e gin <unk> ta ▁o rain dik ▁ge hi a go ▁poz tu ▁nau ▁Ti to ren ▁zo ri o na ▁i kus te ak ▁, ▁zu ek ▁guz ti ok ▁bi zi ber ri tu a ▁u tzi ▁bai tu zu e ▁be ror ren ▁bi ho tza ▁.
PRED:	I am very happy to tell you what you said . Just as soon as we live , we will live in your lives , but you will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	We have been greatly encouraged by this.In addition to our own encouragement , we were especially delighted to see how happy Titus was about the way all of you welcomed him and set his mind at ease .

ID:	2422
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁aur re ra xe a go ▁jo a nik ▁, ▁a hus pez ▁e ro ri ▁zen ▁e ta ▁o toitz ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁« ▁E ne ▁Ai ta ▁, ▁a hal ▁ba da ▁, ▁ur run ▁e za zu ▁ni re gan dik ▁e da ri ▁sa min ▁hau ▁. ▁Ha la ▁e re ▁, ▁e gin ▁be di ▁zuk ▁na hi ▁be za la ▁, ▁ez ▁nik ▁na hi ▁be za la ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then he fell face down and fell face down on the ground and prayed , “ Oh , my Father , please let me turn away from me , just as I did . ”
GOLD:	He went on a little farther and bowed with his face to the ground , praying , “ My Father ! If it is possible , let this cup of suffering be taken away from me . Yet I want your will to be done , not mine . ”

ID:	2423
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁da ▁ja da nik ▁i kus ka ri ▁hu tsa lik ▁e ta ▁i ra gar pen ▁ge zur ti rik ▁i zan go ▁Is ra el ▁her ri an ▁.
PRED:	It is not an object of mockery and ridicule among the people of Israel .
GOLD:	“ There will be no more false visions and flattering predictions in Israel .

ID:	2424
INPUT:	▁On do ren ▁, ▁E tzi on - Ge ber ▁e ta ▁E la te ra ▁jo an ▁zen ▁Sa lo mon ▁. ▁Hi ri ▁hau ek ▁I tsa so ▁Gor ri a ren ▁er tze an ▁dau de ▁, ▁E dom ▁lur ral de an ▁.
PRED:	Then Solomon went out to the Red Sea of Edom and the Dead Sea of Edom .
GOLD:	Later Solomon went to Ezion-geber and Elath , ports along the shore of the Red Sea in the land of Edom .

ID:	2425
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai en ▁Jau na ▁Moi se si ▁e ta ▁A a ro ni ▁:
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,

ID:	2426
INPUT:	▁Noiz ▁ar te ▁e gon ▁be har ▁dut ▁kez ka tu rik ▁, ▁bi ho tza ▁e ten ga be ▁pe na tu rik ▁? ▁Noiz ▁ar te ▁e tsai a ren ▁men pe ▁?
PRED:	How long will I be with you ? How long will my enemies sleep with anguish ?
GOLD:	Turn and answer me , O Lord my God ! Restore the sparkle to my eyes , or I will die .

ID:	2427
INPUT:	▁er re ge ▁bi la ka tzen ▁den ▁eskla bo a ▁, ▁ja ki a ▁so be ra ▁du en ▁txo ro a ▁,
PRED:	It is like a fool , a fool , a fool , and a fool is a fool .
GOLD:	a slave who becomes a king , an overbearing fool who prospers ,

ID:	2428
INPUT:	▁So do man ▁bi zi ▁zen ▁Ab ra men ▁i lo ba ▁Lot ▁e re ▁a txi lo tu ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁, ▁be re ▁on da sun ▁e ta ▁guz ti ▁. ▁E ta ▁al de ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	Lot lived in Haran , and Lot drove out everything he had done . So Lot got up and left his possessions .
GOLD:	They also captured Lot — Abram 's nephew who lived in Sodom — and carried off everything he owned .

ID:	2429
INPUT:	▁Al txa tu ▁e ta ▁ha ra ne rantz ▁ir ten ▁nin tzen ▁; ▁e ta ▁han txe ▁ze go en ▁Jau na ren ▁ain tza ▁, ▁Ke bar ▁i bai ▁on do an ▁i ku si a ▁nu e na ▁be ra ▁. ▁A hus pez ▁e ro ri ▁nin tzen ▁;
PRED:	When I went out to the house of the Lord , I saw the angel of the Lord standing beside the Jordan River . Then I fell face down on the ground .
GOLD:	So I got up and went , and there I saw the glory of the Lord , just as I had seen in my first vision by the Kebar River . And I fell face down on the ground .

ID:	2430
INPUT:	▁Ha ser re ▁min tzo ▁zai e ▁, ▁be re ▁su mi naz ▁i ka ra ▁e ma ten ▁di e ▁:
PRED:	He is very angry with them , and he is very angry with them .
GOLD:	Then in anger he rebukes them , terrifying them with his fierce fury .

ID:	2431
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Jau nak be re ▁os pe a ▁a ger tu ko ▁du e ta ▁gi za ki ▁guz ti ek ▁ba te rai ku si ko ▁du <unk> nak ▁be rak ▁e san ▁du ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord will see the glorious glory of the Lord , and everyone will see him . ”
GOLD:	Then the glory of the Lord will be revealed , and all people will see it together.The Lord has spoken ! ”

ID:	2432
INPUT:	▁Hur bil ▁da ▁Jau na ▁dei ▁e gi ten ▁di o te nen gan dik ▁, ▁be ne tan ▁dei ▁e gi ten ▁di o te nen gan dik ▁.
PRED:	The Lord is coming when he calls out to those who call on him .
GOLD:	The Lord is close to all who call on him , yes , to all who call on him in truth .

ID:	2433
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁on do ren go en ▁bi dez ▁lur re ko ▁her ri ▁guz ti ak ▁be dein ka tu ko ▁di tut ▁, ▁ni re ▁e sa na ▁be te ▁du zu la ko ▁» ▁.
PRED:	I will bless you from your own land , and I will bless you . ”
GOLD:	And through your descendants all the nations of the earth will be blessed — all because you have obeyed me . ”

ID:	2434
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁kul tu - le ku ak ▁ez ▁zi ren ▁de sa ger tu ▁Is ra e len ▁; ▁ha la ▁e re ▁, ▁A sak ▁zin tzo ▁jo ka tu ▁zu en ▁be re ▁bi zi tza ▁o so an ▁.
PRED:	But the people of Israel did not worship the pagan shrines . He did not turn away from their sins .
GOLD:	Although the pagan shrines were not removed from Israel , Asa 's heart remained completely faithful throughout his life .

ID:	2435
INPUT:	▁Mun du ko ▁er re su mok ▁, ▁kan ta ▁Jain ko a ri ▁, ▁jo ▁soi nu a ▁Jau na ri ▁.
PRED:	Then Nicodemus , the Lord , the God of the earth , came to him .
GOLD:	Sing to the one who rides across the ancient heavens , his mighty voice thundering from the sky .

ID:	2436
INPUT:	▁Jain ko ak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁E ta ▁nork ▁ja ki na ra zi ▁di zu ▁bi lu zik ▁zau de la ▁? ▁Ga la ra zi ▁ni zun ▁ar bo la ko ▁frui tu a ▁jan ▁al ▁du zu ▁?
PRED:	God said to him , “ What are you doing ? What are you trying to eat ? What are you doing ? ”
GOLD:	“ Who told you that you were naked ? ” the Lord God asked . “ Have you eaten from the tree whose fruit I commanded you not to eat ? ”

ID:	2437
INPUT:	▁Ger xo nen ▁on do ren go ▁se ni tar te ei ▁, ▁guz ti ra ▁, ▁ha ma hi ru ▁hi ri ▁e man ▁ziz ki e ten ▁, ▁be rai en ▁her ri - lur ▁e ta ▁guz ti ▁.
PRED:	The descendants of Gershon included all the families of the Kohathite clan , including all the surrounding nations .
GOLD:	So in all , thirteen towns with their pasturelands were allotted to the clan of Gershon .

ID:	2438
INPUT:	▁Zen bai tek ▁di o ▁: ▁« ▁Gu tu nak ▁go gor rak ▁e ta ▁zor ro tzak ▁di ra ▁; ▁bai na ▁be ra ▁i txu ra ▁kas kar re ko ▁gi zo na ▁da ▁e ta ▁hiz la ri ▁es ka sa ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ His family is full of war , ” says the Lord . “ He is good and good . ”
GOLD:	For some say , “ Paul 's letters are demanding and forceful , but in person he is weak , and his speeches are worthless ! ”

ID:	2439
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁jen de ak ▁, ▁ber riz ▁: ▁« ▁Zer ▁e gi ten ▁du gu ▁he men ▁gel di ▁? ▁Bil ▁gai te zen ▁, ▁go a zen ▁go tor le ku e ta ra ▁, ▁ber tan ▁hil tze ra ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁gu re ▁Jain ko ak ▁, ▁he ri o tza ra ▁e ma ten ▁bai kai tu ▁; ▁ur ▁po zoi tu a ▁es kain tzen ▁di gu ▁, ▁be ra ren ▁aur ka ▁be ka tu ▁e gin ▁du gu la ko ▁.
PRED:	Then the people asked , “ What is we going to stay here ? Let 's go to war and famine , for the Lord our God has blessed us . He has blessed us for our sins .
GOLD:	“ Then the people will say , ‘ Why should we wait here to die ? Come , let 's go to the fortified towns and die there.For the Lord our God has decreed our destructionand has given us a cup of poison to drinkbecause we sinned against the Lord .

ID:	2440
INPUT:	▁Gaiz to a ▁au sar ti ▁a ger tzen ▁da ▁; ▁zin tzo ak ▁be re ▁jo ka bi de a ▁sen do tzen ▁du ▁.
PRED:	The wicked think of the wicked , but the godly are safe .
GOLD:	The wicked bluff their way through , but the virtuous think before they act .

ID:	2441
INPUT:	▁bai na ▁sus trai rik ▁ga be ak ▁e ta ▁i rau pen ▁gu txi ko ak ▁i za nik ▁, ▁me zu a ▁de la - e ta ▁es tu a sun ▁e do ▁e ra so al di ren ▁bat ▁sor tu ▁or du ko ▁, ▁e ro ri ▁e gi ten ▁di ra ▁.
PRED:	But though they have fallen down , they will have no hope . They will have a single piece of cloth , and they will have a single moment .
GOLD:	But since they do n't have deep roots , they do n't last long . They fall away as soon as they have problems or are persecuted for believing God 's word .

ID:	2442
INPUT:	▁Ga rai ▁har tan ▁de se gin ▁zi tu en ▁Jo su ek ▁Heb ron ▁, ▁De bir ▁e ta ▁A na be ko ▁, ▁Ju da ko ▁na hiz ▁Is ra el go ▁men di al de e ta ko ▁, ▁A na ken ▁on do ren go ak ▁e re ▁: ▁e ra bat ▁sun tsi tu ▁zi tu en ▁be rai en ▁hi ri e kin ▁ba te ra ▁.
PRED:	So Joshua conquered the territory of Joshua and the descendants of Aaron , including the tribes of Israel , and the half-tribe of Manasseh . He destroyed them in the hill country of Ephraim .
GOLD:	During this period Joshua destroyed all the descendants of Anak , who lived in the hill country of Hebron , Debir , Anab , and the entire hill country of Judah and Israel . He killed them all and completely destroyed their towns .

ID:	2443
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁a gin tzen ▁di zu et ▁hi ru ▁hi ri ▁ho ri ek ▁au ke ra tze ko ▁.
PRED:	That is why I say to you about three cities .
GOLD:	That is why I am commanding you to set aside three cities of refuge .

ID:	2444
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai dan ▁Jau na ▁:
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	2445
INPUT:	▁No ri ▁i zan ▁bel dur ▁?
PRED:	The fear of the Lord
GOLD:	Parable of the Rich Fool

ID:	2446
INPUT:	▁Ai tak ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁za pal kun tzak ▁e ta ▁la pur re tak ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁be re ▁her ri tar rak ▁gaiz ki ▁e ra bi li ▁zi tu en ▁; ▁be raz ▁, ▁be re ▁er ru a ren ga tik ▁hil ko ▁da ▁.
PRED:	But the father of Ai , however , the people of the land , and the people of the land will be destroyed .
GOLD:	But the father will die for his many sins — for being cruel , robbing people , and doing what was clearly wrong among his people .

ID:	2447
INPUT:	▁Je re mi a sen ▁gu tu na ▁er bes te ra tu ei
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Prayer of Victory
GOLD:	A Letter to the Exiles

ID:	2448
INPUT:	▁« ▁Jau nak ▁a paiz ▁i zen da tu ▁zai tu ▁Joi a da ren ▁or dez ▁, ▁e ta ▁zeu ▁za ra ▁o rain ▁tenplu ko ▁ar du ra dun ▁na gu si ▁. ▁Zeu ri ▁da go ki zu ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁a ho be ro ren ▁bat ▁pro fe ta gin tzan ▁has ten ▁ba da ▁, ▁ze po an ▁e ta ▁ka tez ▁lo tu rik ▁e zar tze a ▁.
PRED:	“ But now , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has appointed you to build a Temple to honor the name of the Lord . If you do , you will be tied up in the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ The Lord has appointed you to replace Jehoiada as the priest in charge of the house of the Lord . You are responsible to put into stocks and neck irons any crazy man who claims to be a prophet .

ID:	2449
INPUT:	▁A di e ra zi ▁ni re ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jaun ▁ho nen ▁, ▁me zu a ▁: ▁Zu re ▁biz tan le ek ▁hil ke tak ▁e gi ten ▁di tuz te ▁, ▁hor re la ▁zu re ▁or du a ▁hur bi la ra ziz ▁; ▁i do lo ak ▁e gi ten ▁di tuz te ▁, ▁hor re la ▁zu ▁ku tsa tuz ▁.
PRED:	Say to them , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Because you die , you are trying to kill your idols . But you are defiled by worshiping idols .
GOLD:	and give her this message from the Sovereign Lord : O city of murderers , doomed and damned — city of idols , filthy and foul —

ID:	2450
INPUT:	▁Zu en ▁ar ba so ek ▁oi hu ▁e gin ▁zi da ten ▁, ▁e ta ▁nik ▁i lun pe a ▁jar ri ▁nu en ▁hai en ▁e ta ▁e gip to ar ren ▁ar te an ▁, ▁e ta ▁i tsa so a ▁hau en ▁gai ne ra ▁e ro ra ra zi ▁, ▁de nak ▁es ta li ▁zi tu e la rik ▁. ▁Zeu en ▁be giz ▁i ku si ▁ze nu ten ▁e gip to ar rei ▁e gin ▁ni e na ▁. ▁Ge ro ▁, ▁ba sa mor tu an ▁bi zi ▁i zan ▁zi ne ten ▁lu za ro ▁.
PRED:	Then I cried out to them , “ I was dark and darkness and darkness . I saw that you were dark and darkness and darkness and darkness and darkness , and you saw that the Egyptians had lived in the sea . Then you could see that I had lived in Egypt . ”
GOLD:	When your ancestors cried out to the Lord , I put darkness between you and the Egyptians . I brought the sea crashing down on the Egyptians , drowning them . With your very own eyes you saw what I did . Then you lived in the wilderness for many years .

ID:	2451
INPUT:	▁« ▁Za toz te ▁ni re ga na ▁, ▁ne ka tu ▁e ta ▁za ma tu ▁guz ti ok ▁, ▁e ta ▁neuk ▁e man go ▁di zu et ▁a tse den ▁.
PRED:	“ Come and sleep with me , my mother , and I will give you rest .
GOLD:	Then Jesus said , “ Come to me , all of you who are weary and carry heavy burdens , and I will give you rest .

ID:	2452
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁na zi o a ▁na zi o a ren ▁kon tra ▁e ta ▁er rei nu a ▁er rei nu a ren ▁kon tra ▁al txa tu ko ▁di ra ▁; ▁han ▁e ta ▁he men ▁lur ri ka rak ▁e ta ▁go se te ak ▁i zan go ▁di ra ▁. ▁Ho ri ▁guz ti a ▁er di mi nen ▁ha si e ra ▁da ▁.
PRED:	For the Kingdom of Heaven is against nation , and the kingdom of kingdom will rule over the kingdoms of the earth . They will rule over all the kingdoms of the earth .
GOLD:	Nation will go to war against nation , and kingdom against kingdom . There will be earthquakes in many parts of the world , as well as famines . But this is only the first of the birth pains , with more to come .

ID:	2453
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁o sa ba rik ▁e re ▁ez ▁ba du ▁, ▁gai ne ra ko ▁a hai de e ta tik ▁hur bi le ne ko a ri ▁e man go ▁zai o ▁on da re a ▁e ta ▁be ra ▁i zan go ▁da ▁ja be ▁. ▁Le ge ▁i zan go ▁du te ▁hau ▁is ra el dar rek ▁, ▁nik ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁Moi se si ▁a gin du ta ko a ren ▁a ra be ra ▁» ▁.
PRED:	And if you refuse to obey the terms of the trees , you will be careful to obey all the commands of Moses and the people of Israel . This is what the Lord has commanded Moses . ”
GOLD:	But if his father has no brothers , give his inheritance to the nearest relative in his clan . This is a legal requirement for the people of Israel , just as the Lord commanded Moses . ”

ID:	2454
INPUT:	▁Jau na ri ▁a tse gin ▁ez ▁zai o na ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁, ▁Joi a ki mek ▁be za la xe ▁.
PRED:	Jehoiakim did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as Jehoiakim had done .
GOLD:	But Zedekiah did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as Jehoiakim had done .

ID:	2455
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁o te ▁sen da gai rik ▁Ga la a den ▁, ▁ez ▁o te ▁me di ku rik ▁? ▁Zer ga tik ▁ez ▁da ▁sen da tzen ni re ▁her ri a ▁?
PRED:	Do n't you heal the nations ? Why do n't you heal the nations ?
GOLD:	Is there no medicine in Gilead ? Is there no physician there ? Why is there no healingfor the wounds of my people ?

ID:	2456
INPUT:	▁Zin tzo ak ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁po zik ▁di ra ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁aur re an ▁dan tzan ▁, ▁boz ka ri oz ▁gai nez ka ▁.
PRED:	But the godly will sing praises to God ; they will sing praises to him .
GOLD:	Sing praises to God and to his name ! Sing loud praises to him who rides the clouds.His name is the Lord — rejoice in his presence !

ID:	2457
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁ja be ▁i za te ko ▁ber ta ra ▁sar tu ▁zi re ne an ▁, ▁ez ▁zi ren ▁zu re ▁e sa ne ko ▁i zan ▁, ▁ez ▁zi tuz ten ▁zu re ▁le ge ak ▁be te ▁, ▁ez ▁zu ten ▁zuk ▁a gin du a ren ▁a ra be ra ▁jo ka tu ▁. ▁Hor re ga tik ▁bi da li ▁di e zu ▁zo ri txar ▁han di ▁hau ▁.
PRED:	But when they heard what had happened , they refused to obey the Law of God . They did not obey the commands of the Lord . They did not repent of their sins and turn away from their evil ways .
GOLD:	Our ancestors came and conquered it and lived in it , but they refused to obey you or follow your word . They have not done anything you commanded . That is why you have sent this terrible disaster upon them .

ID:	2458
INPUT:	▁a me tsez ▁bel dur tzen ▁nau zu e ta ▁i kus ka ri ▁gaiz toz ▁i zu - i ka ra tzen ▁.
PRED:	I am afraid of you , O Lord , watching me from the wicked .
GOLD:	but then you shatter me with dreamsand terrify me with visions .

ID:	2459
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁gal bi de ra tu ▁e do no la ko ▁i do lo ▁e do ▁jain ko - i ru di ak ▁e gi nez ▁: ▁gi zo nez ko na hiz ▁e ma ku mez ko - i ru di ak ▁,
PRED:	Do not make idols idols made of wood or any god or women or women or women or women or women .
GOLD:	So do not corrupt yourselves by making an idol in any form — whether of a man or a woman ,

ID:	2460
INPUT:	▁Jo bek ▁e ran tzun ▁zu en ▁:
PRED:	Then Job spoke again :
GOLD:	Then Job spoke again :

ID:	2461
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁Ez ▁du te ▁o sa sun du nek ▁sen da gi le a ▁be har ▁, ▁gai xo ek ▁bai zik ▁;
PRED:	Jesus told them , “ It is n't right , ” Jesus told them . “ He healed the sick . ”
GOLD:	Jesus answered them , “ Healthy people do n't need a doctor — sick people do .

ID:	2462
INPUT:	▁A hiz pa ren ▁bi de a ▁har tu ▁du zu ▁e ta ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁ha ren ▁ko pa ▁jar ri ko ▁dut ▁zu re ▁es ku an ▁.
PRED:	You have captured the sword of your enemies , and I will hand you over to your right hand .
GOLD:	Because you have followed in your sister 's footsteps , I will force you to drink the same cup of terror she drank .

ID:	2463
INPUT:	▁A ni ma li a ▁gar bi ak ▁e ta ▁ku tsa tu ak
PRED:	The Ark of the Covenant
GOLD:	Ceremonially Clean and Unclean Animals

ID:	2464
INPUT:	▁Se de ki a sen ▁er re ge al di ko ▁be de ra tzi gar ren ▁ur te an ▁, ▁ha mar gar ren ▁hi la ren ▁ha mar re an ▁, ▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁er re ge ▁Na bu ko do no sor ▁Je ru sa le men ▁kon tra ▁e tor ri ▁zen ▁gu da ros te ▁o so a re kin ▁e ta ▁se ti a tu ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁, ▁in gu ru ▁guz ti an ▁har re si a ▁e rai kiz ▁.
PRED:	During the ninth year of King Zedekiah 's reign , King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came to Jerusalem and besieged it .
GOLD:	So on January 15 , during the ninth year of Zedekiah 's reign , King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon led his entire army against Jerusalem . They surrounded the city and built siege ramps against its walls .

ID:	2465
INPUT:	▁Pau lok ▁, ▁al diz ▁, ▁Si las ▁au ke ra tu ▁zu en ▁e ta ▁, ▁se ni de ek ▁Jau na ren ▁on gi na hi a ri ▁go men da tu ▁zi o te la rik ▁, ▁a te ra ▁e gin ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	Paul was very angry with his brothers and sisters , who was very angry with the believers .
GOLD:	Paul chose Silas , and as he left , the believers entrusted him to the Lord 's gracious care .

ID:	2466
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁e gin go ▁di zu e ▁kal te ▁, ▁zu ek ▁be ti ▁on ▁e gi ten ▁sai a tzen ▁ba za re te ▁?
PRED:	Who is faithful to those who do evil ? Who can do what is right ?
GOLD:	Now , who will want to harm you if you are eager to do good ?

ID:	2467
INPUT:	▁Gau ▁hor re tan ▁ja go le ▁e gon ▁zen ▁Jau na ▁hai ek ▁E gip to tik ▁a te ra tze ko ▁. ▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁o me nez ▁, ▁is ra el dar rek ▁er ne ▁e gon ▁be har ▁du te ▁gau ▁hor re tan ▁, ▁bei la ▁e gi nez ▁, ▁be lau nez ▁be laun ▁.
PRED:	That night the people of Egypt stayed in the night of the Lord 's presence . This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Israel will be like a little while .
GOLD:	On this night the Lord kept his promise to bring his people out of the land of Egypt . So this night belongs to him , and it must be commemorated every year by all the Israelites , from generation to generation .

ID:	2468
INPUT:	▁Ba ke a ▁e ma ten ▁di gun ▁Jain ko ak ▁lu za ro ▁ga be ▁za pal du ko ▁du ▁Sa ta nas ▁zu en ▁oin pe an ▁. ▁Je su ▁Kris to ▁gu re ▁Jau na ren ▁gra zi a ▁i zan ▁be di ▁zu e kin ▁.
PRED:	May God give us grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be our Savior .
GOLD:	The God of peace will soon crush Satan under your feet . May the grace of our Lord Jesus be with you .

ID:	2469
INPUT:	▁Ba zi ren ▁han ▁e ma ku me ▁as ko ▁e re ▁, ▁ur ru ti tik ▁be gi ra ▁; ▁Je su si ▁jar rai tuz ▁Ga li le a tik ▁e tor ri ak ▁zi ren ▁, ▁be ra ren ▁zer bi tza ri ▁;
PRED:	Many years later , Jesus left Galilee and followed the example of Galilee .
GOLD:	And many women who had come from Galilee with Jesus to care for him were watching from a distance .

ID:	2470
INPUT:	▁Be hin ▁ba te an ▁, ▁Je sus ▁ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zen ▁: ▁« ▁Go res ten ▁zai tut ▁, ▁Ai ta ▁, ▁ze ru - lur ren ▁Jau na ▁, ▁gau za ▁hau ek ▁ja kin tsu ▁e ta ▁i ka si ei ▁ez ku ta tu ▁diz ki e zu la ko ▁e ta ▁jen de ▁xu me a ri ▁a ger tu ▁.
PRED:	One day Jesus said to them , “ Praise the Lord , the Father of heaven and earth , who has seen the heavens and earth .
GOLD:	At that time Jesus prayed this prayer : “ O Father , Lord of heaven and earth , thank you for hiding these things from those who think themselves wise and clever , and for revealing them to the childlike .

ID:	2471
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁e re ▁ez ▁dut ▁er ru ki rik ▁i zan go ▁lur ral de ko ▁bi zi la gu ne kin ▁. ▁Ha la ▁di ot ▁nik ▁, ▁Jaun ▁ho nek ▁. ▁Gi za ki a ▁, ▁nor ▁be re ▁ar tzai na ren ▁e ta ▁er re ge a ren ▁es ku ▁u tzi ko ▁dut ▁; ▁er re ge ek ▁lur ral de a ▁er raus tu ko ▁du te ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁dut ▁i nor ▁a te ra ko ▁hai en ▁es ku e ta tik ▁» ▁.
PRED:	I will not spare my covenant with them , ” says the Lord. “ I will hand them over to the king of the south , and I will hand them over to the king of the south . I will destroy them , and no one will destroy them . ”
GOLD:	Likewise , I will no longer have pity on the people of the land , ” says the Lord . “ I will let them fall into each other 's hands and into the hands of their king . They will turn the land into a wilderness , and I will not rescue them . ”

ID:	2472
INPUT:	▁Zu ek ▁hi ri a ▁in gu ra tu ko ▁du zu e ▁: ▁sei ▁e gu nez ▁, ▁e gu ne ro ▁i tzu li ▁bat ▁e gi nen ▁du zu e ▁ger ra - gi zon ▁guz ti ok ▁hi ri a ren ▁in gu ru an ▁.
PRED:	You will have six days each week for six days , and you will return to the city .
GOLD:	You and your fighting men should march around the town once a day for six days .

ID:	2473
INPUT:	▁Ax dod ▁hi ri tik ken du ▁e gin go ▁dut ▁bu ru za gi a ▁, ▁Ax ke lon dik ▁a gin te - ma ki la ▁du e na ▁; ▁Ek ron ▁hi ri a ren ▁aur ka ja so ko ▁dut ▁es ku a ▁, ▁e ta ▁gai ne ra ko ▁fi lis te ar ▁a pur rak gal du ▁e gin go ▁di ra ▁» ▁.Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁e san ▁du ▁.
PRED:	The city of Ashkelon will be dragged off from the city of Ashkelon , and the people of Ashdod will be dragged off from the town of Ekron , and the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will destroy the Philistines . ”
GOLD:	I will slaughter the people of Ashdodand destroy the king of Ashkelon.Then I will turn to attack Ekron , and the few Philistines still left will be killed , ” says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	2474
INPUT:	▁« ▁A be re a ▁hil tzen ▁du e nak ▁, ▁a be re a ▁i tzu li ko ▁du ▁; ▁gi za ki a ▁hil tzen ▁du e na ▁he ri o tza ra ▁e man go ▁du te ▁.
PRED:	“ Anyone who kills another person must be put to death . The animal must be put to death .
GOLD:	“ Whoever kills an animal must pay for it in full , but whoever kills another person must be put to death .

ID:	2475
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁be har tsu ak ▁be ti ▁di tu zu e ▁zeu en ▁ar te an ▁, ▁bai na ▁ni ▁ez ▁nau zu e ▁be ti ko ▁zu e kin ▁.
PRED:	For you are poor and needy , but you do n't know me .
GOLD:	You will always have the poor among you , but you will not always have me .

ID:	2476
INPUT:	▁Bar ne ko ▁a ta ri a ▁e ta ▁tenplu a
PRED:	Jesus Is Betrayed and Arrested
GOLD:	The North Gateway

ID:	2477
INPUT:	▁« ▁E ra man ▁zeu en ▁lur re ko ▁le hen ▁frui tu ak ▁Jau na ren ▁, ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko a ren ▁, ▁e txe <unk> ▁« ▁Ez ▁e go si ▁an txu me rik ▁be re ▁a ma ren ▁es ne tan ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ You must not harvest the fruit of the Lord your God 's Temple . You will be like a woman in the palace of the Lord your God . ”
GOLD:	“ As you harvest your crops , bring the very best of the first harvest to the house of the Lord your God. “ You must not cook a young goat in its mother 's milk . ”

ID:	2478
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ni re gan ▁si nes ten ▁du ten ▁txi ki ▁hau e ta ko ren ▁bat ▁gal bi de an ▁jar tzen ▁du e nak ▁, ▁, ▁ho be ▁lu ke ▁er ro tar ri ▁bat ▁le po tik ▁e ran tsi ▁e ta ▁i tsas ▁hon do ra ▁a mil du ko ▁ba lu te ▁.
PRED:	“ Anyone who believes in me will be thrown into the sea , and anyone who believes in it will be thrown into the depths of the sea .
GOLD:	But if you cause one of these little ones who trusts in me to fall into sin , it would be better for you to have a large millstone tied around your neck and be drowned in the depths of the sea .

ID:	2479
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁ba ten ▁be ka tu ak ▁gi zon - e ma ku me ▁guz ti ei ▁gai tzes pe na ▁e kar ri ▁zi en ▁be za la ▁, ▁ba ten ▁lei al ta su nak ▁gi zon - e ma ku me ▁guz ti ei ▁sal ba zi o a ▁e ta ▁bi zi a ▁e kar tzen ▁diz ki e ▁.
PRED:	So all the men of the world began to save themselves , just as they had lived . They were given to all the women and women who live in safety .
GOLD:	Yes , Adam 's one sin brings condemnation for everyone , but Christ 's one act of righteousness brings a right relationship with God and new life for everyone .

ID:	2480
INPUT:	▁er re ge tza ▁Sau len ▁e txe a ri ▁ken du ▁e ta ▁Is ra e len ▁e ta ▁Ju dan ▁, ▁Dan dik ▁ha si ▁e ta ▁Be er - Xe ba rai no ▁, ▁Da vi den ▁er re ge - aul ki a ▁sen do tu ko ▁zu e la ▁e gin ▁bai tzu en ▁zin ▁.
PRED:	He removed the royal palace from Judah and Judah , and he placed it in the north of Dan in the north of Beersheba in the north of Beersheba .
GOLD:	I 'm going to take Saul 's kingdom and give it to David . I will establish the throne of David over Israel as well as Judah , all the way from Dan in the north to Beersheba in the south . ”

ID:	2481
INPUT:	▁Da vi den ▁hi le ta - kan tu a ▁Sau len ▁e ta ▁Jo na ta nen ▁he ri o tza ga tik
PRED:	Saul 's War with Saul
GOLD:	David 's Song for Saul and Jonathan

ID:	2482
INPUT:	▁Ar ra tse an ▁, ▁Je su sen ▁i kas le ak ▁ain tzi ra ra ▁jai tsi
PRED:	The Sabbath day Jesus went down to the lake
GOLD:	That evening Jesus ' disciples went down to the shore to wait for him .

ID:	2483
INPUT:	▁Zu ▁i zan ▁zai tut ▁eus kar ri ▁a ma ren ▁sa be le tik ▁, ▁zuk ▁a te ra ▁nau zu ▁a ma ren ▁er rai e ta <unk> ri ▁e ten ga be ▁ni re ▁go res pe na ▁!
PRED:	I will praise you , O Lord , for you have spoken out of your mouth .
GOLD:	Yes , you have been with me from birth ; from my mother 's womb you have cared for me.No wonder I am always praising you !

ID:	2484
INPUT:	▁De lai as ▁, ▁To bi as ▁e ta ▁Ne ko da ren ▁on do ren go ak ▁zi ren ▁, <unk> ▁la gun ▁.
PRED:	From the families of Tobiah , Tobiah , Tobiah , and report .
GOLD:	This group included the families of Delaiah , Tobiah , and Nekoda — a total of 652 people .

ID:	2485
INPUT:	▁E ran tzi a ▁dut ▁soi ne ko a ▁; ▁no la tan ▁jan tzi ▁ber ri ro ▁? ▁Gar bi tu ak ▁di tut ▁oi nak ▁; ▁no la tan ▁zi kin du ▁ber ri ro ▁?
PRED:	And how can I wear my clothing ? And how can I wash my feet ? How can I walk along ?
GOLD:	But I responded , “ I have taken off my robe.Should I get dressed again ? I have washed my feet.Should I get them soiled ? ”

ID:	2486
INPUT:	▁Ar ma te gi a ▁za bal du e ta ▁ar mak ▁a te ra ▁di tut ▁, ▁neu re ▁ha ser re - zi gor ra ▁bu ru tze ko ▁: ▁nik ▁, ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du nak ▁, ▁e gin be har ▁bat ▁dut ba bi lo ni ar ren ▁her ri al de an ▁.
PRED:	“ I will cause my mother and mother and mother to be angry , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken !
GOLD:	The Lord has opened his armoryand brought out weapons to vent his fury.The terror that falls upon the Babylonianswill be the work of the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	2487
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai on ▁Jau na ▁Moi se si ▁:
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord gave these instructions to Moses :

ID:	2488
INPUT:	▁Jef tek ▁, ▁or du an ▁: ▁— ▁A mon dar ren ▁kon tra ▁bor ro ka tze ra ▁jo a te a ▁na hi ▁ba du zu e ▁e ta ▁Jau nak ▁es ku ra ▁e ma ten ▁bal din ▁ba diz kit ▁, ▁neu ▁i zan go ▁nau zu e ▁bu ru za gi ▁.
PRED:	But Jephthah said , “ If you refuse to fight against the Ammonites , I will hand you over to the Ammonites . If you do , you will be my head . ”
GOLD:	Jephthah said to the elders , “ Let me get this straight . If I come with you and if the Lord gives me victory over the Ammonites , will you really make me ruler over all the people ? ”

ID:	2489
INPUT:	▁Ber ri ro ▁Jor da nez ▁bes te ▁al de ra ▁jo an ▁zen ▁Je sus ▁, ▁ga rai ▁ba te an ▁Jo an ▁ba tai a tzen ▁a ri ▁i zan ▁zen ▁le ku ra ▁. ▁Han ▁gel di tu ▁zen ▁al di ▁ba tez ▁,
PRED:	After John went to the Jordan River , Jesus stayed there on the east side of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	He went beyond the Jordan River near the place where John was first baptizing and stayed there awhile .

ID:	2490
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁lei ho tik ▁be he ra ▁e rai tsi ▁zu en ▁. ▁Or du an ▁, ▁Da vi dek ▁i hes ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁e ta ▁be re ▁bu ru a ▁sal ba tu ▁.
PRED:	Then David went down from the window of his mouth , and David escaped and fled .
GOLD:	So she helped him climb out through a window , and he fled and escaped .

ID:	2491
INPUT:	▁Ja ko bek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁La ba ni ▁: ▁— ▁Bel dur ▁nin tze la ko ▁e gin ▁dut ▁i hes ▁, ▁zeu re ▁a la bak ▁ken du ▁e gin go ▁ze niz ki da la ▁us te ▁nu en ▁e ta ▁.
PRED:	Then Jacob said to Laban , “ I 'm afraid of your daughters , and I will take away your daughters . ”
GOLD:	“ I rushed away because I was afraid , ” Jacob answered . “ I thought you would take your daughters from me by force .

ID:	2492
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁e man ▁di o ▁ha ri ▁le he nen go ▁, ▁ge ro ▁hark ▁i tzu li ▁be har ▁i za te ko ▁?
PRED:	Who will return to him ? Who will return to him ?
GOLD:	And who has given him so muchthat he needs to pay it back ?

ID:	2493
INPUT:	▁Men de ku - es ku bi de a ▁du e na ▁a tze tik ▁ba da tor ki o ▁e re ▁, ▁e zin ▁i zan go ▁du te ▁hil tzai le a ▁be ra ren ▁es ku ▁u tzi ▁, ▁na hi ▁ga be ▁hil ▁bai tu ▁be re ▁la gun ▁hur ko a ▁e ta ▁ez ▁le hen dik ▁gor ro to ▁zu e la ko ▁.
PRED:	If you refuse to take revenge on the mountains , you will not die . But if you do n't let your neighbor die , you will die .
GOLD:	If the relatives of the victim come to avenge the killing , the leaders must not release the slayer to them , for he killed the other person unintentionally and without previous hostility .

ID:	2494
INPUT:	▁Se me - a la ba txo ok ▁, ▁i bi li ▁kon tuz ▁i do lo e kin ▁.
PRED:	Parable of the covenant with the sons of the Covenant .
GOLD:	Dear children , keep away from anything that might take God 's place in your hearts .

ID:	2495
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁man da ta ri ak ▁bi da li ▁niz ki en ▁e ran tzun ▁ho ne kin ▁: ▁« ▁Lan ▁han di e tan ▁na bil ▁e ta ▁ez ▁nai te ke ▁jo an ▁. ▁Zu en ga na ▁jo a te a ga tik ▁ba kar rik ▁la nak ▁ez ▁ni tuz ke ▁u tzi ▁na hi ▁» ▁.
PRED:	So I sent messengers to them and told them , “ If I do n't want to go with you , I would n't let you go unpunished ! ”
GOLD:	so I replied by sending this message to them : “ I am engaged in a great work , so I ca n't come . Why should I stop working to come and meet with you ? ”

ID:	2496
INPUT:	▁Be re ▁zu ri ke ri az ▁men de ra tu ▁e gi ten ▁du ▁, ▁be re ▁hitz ▁go xo ez ▁e ra kar ri ▁.
PRED:	He rescues them from their lips ; he delights in their words .
GOLD:	So she seduced him with her pretty speechand enticed him with her flattery .

ID:	2497
INPUT:	▁Huts ▁e gi e zu ▁e ta ▁lo tsa ra zi ▁ni ▁hil tze ko ▁da bil tza nak.A tze ra ▁e gin ▁be za te ▁, ▁lo tsa ▁gor ri an ▁, ▁ni ▁non dik ▁hon da tu ko ▁da bil tza nek ▁.
PRED:	Do n't let those who hate me , and those who hate me will be ashamed of those who hate me .
GOLD:	Bring shame and disgrace on those trying to kill me ; turn them back and humiliate those who want to harm me .

ID:	2498
INPUT:	▁Da vi dek ▁i har de tsi ▁zu en ▁: ▁— ▁Ez ▁de za zu e la ▁hor re la ko rik ▁e gin ▁, ▁e ne ▁a nai ok ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁e man ▁di gu na re kin ▁! ▁Zain du ▁e gin ▁gai tu ▁; ▁e ra so ▁zi gun ▁la pur - tal de ▁hu ra ▁es ku ra ▁e man ▁di gu ▁.
PRED:	“ No , ” David replied . “ Do n't realize that the Lord has commanded us , ‘ Take care of you and your brothers and friends ! '
GOLD:	But David said , “ No , my brothers ! Do n't be selfish with what the Lord has given us . He has kept us safe and helped us defeat the band of raiders that attacked us .

ID:	2499
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁kon tra ▁bi da li ko ▁diz ki zu en ▁e tsai ak ▁bal din tza ▁go gor re tan ▁zer bi tza tu ▁be har ko ▁di tu zu e ▁: ▁go se - e gar riz ▁, ▁bi lu zik ▁e ta ▁be har ▁gor ri an ▁. ▁Le po an ▁bur di naz ko ▁uz tar ri a ▁e zar ri ko ▁di zu e te ▁, ▁sun tsi tu ▁ar te ▁.
PRED:	For the Lord has sent you out to fight against your enemies . He will strike you with unfailing love and unfailing love . He will destroy them with iron chains , and he will destroy them .
GOLD:	you will serve your enemies whom the Lord will send against you . You will be left hungry , thirsty , naked , and lacking in everything . The Lord will put an iron yoke on your neck , oppressing you harshly until he has destroyed you .

ID:	2500
INPUT:	▁Be ra ▁da ▁Jau na ren ▁tenplu a ja so ko ▁du e na ▁; ▁o ho rez ▁be te a ▁i zan go ▁da e ta ▁er re ge - aul ki an ▁je sar ri ko go ber na tze ko ▁; ▁a pai za ▁e re ▁be re ▁aul ki an ▁je sar ri ko ▁da ▁, ▁e ta ▁ze ha ro ▁bat ▁e tor ri ko ▁di ra ▁bi ak ▁.
PRED:	The king of the Temple of the Lord will be honored forever and ever . He will sit on the throne of the Lord 's throne , and he will sit on the throne of the Lord .
GOLD:	Yes , he will build the Temple of the Lord . Then he will receive royal honor and will rule as king from his throne . He will also serve as priest from his throne , and there will be perfect harmony between his two roles . '

ID:	2501
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁Se me ak ▁as ka tzen ▁ba zai tuz te ▁, ▁be ne tan ▁as ke ▁i zan go ▁za re te ▁.
PRED:	So if you are many children , let them be free .
GOLD:	So if the Son sets you free , you are truly free .

ID:	2502
INPUT:	▁A sak ▁Jau na ren ▁, ▁be re ▁Jain ko a ren ▁, ▁be gi e tan ▁on ▁e ta ▁zu zen ▁de na ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	Asa did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , and he made it right .
GOLD:	When Abijah died , he was buried in the City of David . Then his son Asa became the next king . There was peace in the land for ten years .

ID:	2503
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren ▁es pe ro an ▁na go ▁, ▁gau ▁o so an ▁es na ▁, ▁goi za ▁ar te ▁bei la ri ▁.
PRED:	My heart is pure in the heart of the Lord ; it is pure .
GOLD:	I long for the Lordmore than sentries long for the dawn , yes , more than sentries long for the dawn .

ID:	2504
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁ez ▁ba di o te ▁en tzu ten ▁, ▁he ri o tza ren ▁mu ga ▁pa sa tu ko ▁du te ▁, ▁kon tu ra tu ▁ga be ▁hil ko ▁.
PRED:	But if they listen to him , they will die and die .
GOLD:	But if they refuse to listen to him , they will cross over the river of death , dying from lack of understanding .

ID:	2505
INPUT:	▁« ▁Is ra el ▁ez ▁da ▁i za tez ▁eskla bo ▁, ▁ez ta ▁eskla bo - se me ▁e <unk> ga tik ▁bi hur tu ▁da ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁bes te ren ▁har ra pa kin ▁?
PRED:	“ Is it not a slave to be a slave ? Who is a slave ? Who is your slave ?
GOLD:	“ Why has Israel become a slave ? Why has he been carried away as plunder ?

ID:	2506
INPUT:	▁Lau ▁ke ru bi nek ▁lau na ▁aur pe gi ▁e ta ▁lau na ▁he go ▁zi tuz ten ▁e ta ▁, ▁he gal pe an ▁, ▁gi za ▁be so en ▁i txu ra ko ak ▁.
PRED:	Each of the four cherubim looked like four cherubim , and each of them looked like human hands .
GOLD:	for each had four faces and four wings and what looked like human hands under their wings .

ID:	2507
INPUT:	▁Zu en ▁ar te tik ▁e re ▁a te ra ko ▁di ra ▁ba tzuk ▁i ra kas pen ▁o ker rak ▁za bal duz ▁, ▁i kas le ak ▁be ren ▁a tze tik ▁e ra ma te ko ▁.
PRED:	The teaching of your disciples will be led away from the teaching of Jesus .
GOLD:	Even some men from your own group will rise up and distort the truth in order to draw a following .

ID:	2508
INPUT:	▁Ka na be ra ▁prin tza tu a ▁ez ▁du ▁hau tsi ko ▁, ▁a hul du ri ko ▁ar gi - me txa ▁ez ▁du ▁i tza li ko ▁, ▁jus ti zi a ▁na gu si ▁e zar ▁de zan ▁ar te ▁.
PRED:	They will not be crushed by the power of the Lord , nor will he be able to rule over the nations .
GOLD:	He will not crush the weakest reedor put out a flickering candle.Finally he will cause justice to be victorious .

ID:	2509
INPUT:	▁Jain ko ak ▁Paz ko a ▁os pa tze ko ▁a gin du
PRED:	The Passover
GOLD:	The First Passover

ID:	2510
INPUT:	▁Bi ha ra mu ne an ▁, ▁goi ze an ▁goiz ▁jai ki ▁zen ▁Jo su e ▁. ▁A pai zek ▁ku txa ▁har tu ▁zu ten ▁,
PRED:	Early the next morning Joshua got up early the next morning .
GOLD:	Joshua got up early the next morning , and the priests again carried the Ark of the Lord .

ID:	2511
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁i nork ▁e zer ▁e sa ten ▁ba di zu e ▁, ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁“ ▁Jau nak ▁be har ▁di tu ▁, ▁bai na ▁be re ha la ▁i tzu li ko ▁di tu ▁” ▁» ▁.
PRED:	And no one will say , ‘ The Lord needs it , ' but he will reply , ‘ The Lord has spoken ! ' ”
GOLD:	If anyone asks what you are doing , just say , ‘ The Lord needs them , ' and he will immediately let you take them . ”

ID:	2512
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁e ta ▁ni re ▁tal de ak ▁a dar rak ▁jo tze an ▁, ▁jo ▁zu ek ▁e re ▁kan pa le ku a ren ▁in gu ru ▁guz ti an ▁e ta ▁e gin ▁oi hu ▁: ▁« ▁Jau na ren ga tik ▁! ▁Ge de o nen ga tik ▁! ▁»
PRED:	When I went out to fight against you , all the armies of the camp and all around me , they cried out , “ Amen ! ”
GOLD:	As soon as I and those with me blow the rams ' horns , blow your horns , too , all around the entire camp , and shout , ‘ For the Lord and for Gideon ! ' ”

ID:	2513
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁har lau za ▁bi ak ▁jaur ti ▁e ta ▁pus ka tu ▁e gin ▁ni tu en ▁zu en ▁aur re an ▁.
PRED:	Then he threw them into pieces and threw them into pieces .
GOLD:	So I took the stone tablets and threw them to the ground , smashing them before your eyes .

ID:	2514
INPUT:	▁Es mir na ko ▁e liz ▁el kar te a ri
PRED:	The Message to the Church in Ephesus
GOLD:	The Message to the Church in Smyrna

ID:	2515
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁di ra ▁ha ren ▁bel dur ▁gi za ki ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁be rak ▁ez ▁di tu ▁ja kin tsu ▁us te ko ak ▁kon tu an ▁har tzen ▁» ▁.
PRED:	That is why people are afraid , and they do n't realize that they are wise . ”
GOLD:	No wonder people everywhere fear him.All who are wise show him reverence . ”

ID:	2516
INPUT:	▁A le lui a ▁! ▁Go ra ▁Jau na ▁! ▁Bai ▁e der ▁, ▁gu re ▁Jain ko a ▁kan tuz ▁os pa tze a ▁, ▁bai ▁go zo ▁, ▁be ra ▁doi nu ▁ez tiz ▁go res te a ▁!
PRED:	Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , for he delights in us .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! How good to sing praises to our God ! How delightful and how fitting !

ID:	2517
INPUT:	▁E ma ku me ▁ho nen gan dik ▁Jau nak ▁e man go ▁diz ki zun ▁se me - a la bek ▁e gin ▁be za te ▁zu re ▁fa mi li a ▁, ▁Ju da ▁e ta ▁Ta mar ren ▁se me ▁Pe re tzen ▁fa mi li a ▁be zain ▁han di ▁.
PRED:	The Lord will give you this message from the tribe of Judah , just as he had promised through Judah , Judah , and Uzziel .
GOLD:	And may the Lord give you descendants by this young woman who will be like those of our ancestor Perez , the son of Tamar and Judah . ”

ID:	2518
INPUT:	▁Sau lek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁Sa mu e li ▁: ▁— ▁Ez ▁al ▁dut ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁e gin ▁Jau na ren ▁e sa na ▁? ▁Be rak ▁bi da li ▁nin du en ▁bi de tik ▁i bi li ▁naiz ▁. ▁E kar ri ▁dut ▁A gag ▁, ▁a ma lek tar ren ▁er re ge a ▁, ▁e ta ▁sun tsi tu ▁di tut ▁a ma lek tar rak ▁.
PRED:	But Samuel replied , “ Did n't I do n't know what the Lord has done ? I sent him to the king who sent him to the king of Ammon , and I have killed him . ”
GOLD:	“ But I did obey the Lord , ” Saul insisted . “ I carried out the mission he gave me . I brought back King Agag , but I destroyed everyone else .

ID:	2519
INPUT:	▁Ni re ▁mai su la na ▁da ▁; ▁neuk ▁ba kar rik ▁, ▁be re ▁e gi le ak ▁, ▁men de ra ▁le za ke ▁ez pa taz ▁.
PRED:	My love is my rock ; my love is no longer going .
GOLD:	It is a prime example of God 's handiwork , and only its Creator can threaten it .

ID:	2520
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Je ru sa le men ▁bi zi ▁zi ren ▁ba tzuk ▁gal dez ka ▁ha si ▁zi ren ▁: ▁« ▁Ez ▁al ▁da ▁hau ▁hil ▁na hi ▁du te na ▁?
PRED:	Then some of the people of Jerusalem asked , “ Is this the one who wants to die ?
GOLD:	Some of the people who lived in Jerusalem started to ask each other , “ Is n't this the man they are trying to kill ?

ID:	2521
INPUT:	▁San tu a ▁da ▁, ▁oi ▁Jain ko ▁, ▁zu re ▁jar du e ra ▁! ▁Zein ▁jain ko ▁zu ▁be zain ▁han di ▁?
PRED:	You are my rock , O God ! Who is your god ?
GOLD:	You are the God of great wonders ! You demonstrate your awesome power among the nations .

ID:	2522
INPUT:	▁Man da ta ri ak ▁bi dal tzen ▁di tu Ni lon ▁bar re na ▁, ▁i hiz ko ▁txa lu pe tan ▁, ▁u re tan ▁ze <unk> az te ▁, ▁man da ta ri ▁biz kor rak ▁, ▁i tzu li her ri ▁ler den ▁e ta ▁bel tza ran ▁hor re ta ra ▁, ▁e do non ▁bel dur ra ▁sor tzen ▁du en jen de a ren ga na ▁, ▁i baiz ▁u rez ta tu ri ko ▁lur ral de an bi zi ▁den her ri ▁go gor ▁e ta ▁men de ra tzai le ra ▁!
PRED:	They will send messengers into the entry room of the gateway into the fields , but they will return to the fields of the fields . They will return to the land of the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies , and the people of Israel will be filled with fear .
GOLD:	that sends ambassadorsin swift boats down the river.Go , swift messengers ! Take a message to a tall , smooth-skinned people , who are feared far and widefor their conquests and destruction , and whose land is divided by rivers .

ID:	2523
INPUT:	▁e san ▁zi en ▁Jo su ek ▁: ▁« ▁A be ras ta sun ▁han di ak ▁har tu rik ▁zo az te ▁e txe ra ▁: ▁a be re - tal de ▁u ga ri ▁, ▁zi lar ra ▁e ta ▁ur re a ▁, ▁bron tze a ▁, ▁bur di na ▁e ta ▁janzki ▁as ko ▁. ▁Ba na ▁i tza zu e ▁se ni de en ▁ar te an ▁e tsai ei ▁ken du ta ko ▁har ra pa ki nok ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then Joshua said to them , “ Be rich and rich , rich and rich and gold , silver , gold , and gold , silver , and gold , and gold . Let them be taken away from them . ”
GOLD:	he said to them , “ Go back to your homes with the great wealth you have taken from your enemies — the vast herds of livestock , the silver , gold , bronze , and iron , and the large supply of clothing . Share the plunder with your relatives . ”

ID:	2524
INPUT:	▁« ▁A ka zi a - zu rez ko ▁ku txa ▁e gin ▁, ▁le hen go ak ▁be za la ko ▁bi ▁har lau za ▁e ba ki ▁e ta ▁, ▁har lau zak ▁es ku e tan ▁ni tu e la ▁, ▁men di ra ▁i go ▁nin tzen ▁.
PRED:	“ Then make the Ark of the Covenant — the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant I had made with the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant .
GOLD:	“ So I made an Ark of acacia wood and cut two stone tablets like the first two . Then I went up the mountain with the tablets in my hand .

ID:	2525
INPUT:	▁Ab ra ha mek ▁Jain ko a ri ▁o toitz ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁Jain ko ak ▁sen da tu ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁A bi me lek ▁, ▁ho nen ▁e maz te a ▁e ta ▁mi ra be ak ▁, ▁ber ri ro ▁se me - a la bak ▁i zan ▁a hal ▁zi tza ten ▁.
PRED:	Abraham prayed to God , and he healed the male and female servants and female servants and female children . He had many wives and children .
GOLD:	Then Abraham prayed to God , and God healed Abimelech , his wife , and his female servants , so they could have children .

ID:	2526
INPUT:	▁Ju da ren ▁lei nu a ▁au ke ra tu ▁zu en ▁, ▁Si on ▁men di a ▁, ▁be re ▁mai te a ▁.
PRED:	He chose Levi , the tribe of Judah , and his faithful love endures forever .
GOLD:	He chose instead the tribe of Judah , and Mount Zion , which he loved .

ID:	2527
INPUT:	▁E kai tza ▁pa sa ▁, ▁e ta ▁ki to ▁gaiz to a ▁! ▁Bai na ▁be ti ko ▁oi nar ri ak ▁di tu ▁zin tzo ak ▁.
PRED:	The seeds of the wicked are full of the wicked , but the right path of the wicked will be broken .
GOLD:	When the storms of life come , the wicked are whirled away , but the godly have a lasting foundation .

ID:	2528
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁Je su sek ▁ez ▁bai tzi on ▁ge hi a go ▁e ran tzun ▁, ▁har ri tu rik ▁gel di tu ▁zen ▁Pi la to ▁.
PRED:	But Jesus replied , “ Do n't let anyone go , ” Pilate replied .
GOLD:	But Jesus said nothing , much to Pilate 's surprise .

ID:	2529
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁ho ne la ▁di ot ▁nik ▁, ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du nak ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁Jain ko ak ▁: ▁I ra gar ri ak ▁di tu dan ▁zo ri txar ▁guz ti ak ▁bi da li ko ▁di tut ▁Ju da ko ▁e ta ▁Je ru sa lem go ▁bi zi la gu non ▁gai ne ra ▁, ▁hitz ▁e gin da ko an ▁a di tu ▁ez ▁e ta ▁dei ▁e gin da ko an ▁e ran tzun ▁ez ▁di da zu e la ko ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : I will send disaster upon all the people of Judah and Jerusalem . I will send disaster on them on the land of Judah and Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : ‘ Because you refuse to listen or answer when I call , I will send upon Judah and Jerusalem all the disasters I have threatened . ' ”

ID:	2530
INPUT:	▁Pau lo ▁, ▁Ag ri pa ren ▁e ta ▁Be re ni ze ren ▁aur re an
PRED:	Paul and Silas in Corinth
GOLD:	Paul Speaks to Agrippa

ID:	2531
INPUT:	▁O rei na re nak ▁be zain ▁a rin ▁diz kit ▁oi nak ▁e gin ▁, ▁e ta ▁neu re ▁ton tor re tan ▁sen do ▁nau ▁e zar ri ▁.
PRED:	He has made me as beautiful as the hills , and he has built me on high mountain .
GOLD:	He trains my hands for battle ; he strengthens my arm to draw a bronze bow .

ID:	2532
INPUT:	▁Be e ro tar rak ▁i he si ▁jo a nak ▁zi ren ▁Gi tai me ra ▁, ▁e ta ▁han ▁bi zi ▁di ra ▁e tor kin ▁gi sa ▁gaur dai no ▁.
PRED:	When the Ammonites saw that the Arameans were coming , they were coming to this day .
GOLD:	because the original people of Beeroth fled to Gittaim , where they still live as foreigners .

ID:	2533
INPUT:	▁Gi za ki ak ▁e gi tas mo ak ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁az ken ▁hi tza ▁.
PRED:	The Lord 's plans knows what is right ; he knows where he is .
GOLD:	We can make our own plans , but the Lord gives the right answer .

ID:	2534
INPUT:	▁E gun ▁har tan txe ▁, ▁hain ▁zu zen ▁, ▁a te ra ▁zi tu en ▁Jau nak ▁E gip to tik ▁is ra el dar rak ▁, ▁gu da ros te ▁ba ten ▁gi sa ▁ler ro tu rik ▁.
PRED:	At that time the men of Israel marched out from Egypt to fight the Lord 's help .
GOLD:	On that very day the Lord brought the people of Israel out of the land of Egypt like an army .

ID:	2535
INPUT:	▁A tze man ▁zu ten ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁A ta li a ▁e ta ▁jau re gi ra ▁, ▁zal di en ▁a te ra ▁, ▁hel du ▁ze ne an ▁, ▁ber tan ▁hil ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	So they brought him back to the palace , and he was buried in the palace .
GOLD:	So they seized her and led her out to the entrance of the Horse Gate on the palace grounds , and they killed her there .

ID:	2536
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ja so ▁be gi ak ▁mui no e ta ra ▁: ▁zei ne tan ▁ez ▁za ra mai ta ke ri a tan ▁i bi li a ▁? ▁Bi de - baz ter re tan ▁e go ten ▁zi nen ▁, ▁a ra bi ar ▁la pur rak ba sa mor tu an ▁be za la ▁, ▁zer ▁har ra pa tu ko <unk> tsa tu ▁e gin ▁du zu ▁lur ral de a zeu re ▁pros ti tu zi o ▁e ta ▁gaiz ta ke ri az ▁.
PRED:	“ Who are you going to attack the mountains ? Who are you going to live in the direction ? Why are you doing such a thing ? Why did you think you are such a thing ?
GOLD:	“ Look at the shrines on every hilltop.Is there any place you have not been defiledby your adultery with other gods ? You sit like a prostitute beside the road waiting for a customer.You sit alone like a nomad in the desert.You have polluted the land with your prostitutionand your wickedness .

ID:	2537
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁jen de a ▁txu txu - mu txu ka ▁a ri ▁zen ▁har taz ▁; ▁ba tzu ek ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁« ▁Gi zon ▁o na ▁da ▁» ▁. ▁Bes te ▁ba tzu ek ▁, ▁or de a ▁: ▁« ▁Ez ▁, ▁her ri a ▁en gai na tzen ▁a ri ▁da ▁» ▁.
PRED:	When the crowd saw him , they asked him , “ The man is n't saying , ‘ He is n't a man ! ' But the people say , “ He is n't deceived ! ”
GOLD:	There was a lot of grumbling about him among the crowds . Some argued , “ He 's a good man , ” but others said , “ He 's nothing but a fraud who deceives the people . ”

ID:	2538
INPUT:	▁Bi ok ▁el kar ri ▁e man ▁di o gun ▁hi tzaz ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁i zan ▁be di ▁Jau na ▁gu ▁bi on ▁ar te an ▁tes ti gu ▁be ti e re an ▁» ▁.
PRED:	And now , dear brothers and sisters , the Lord gave us this message to our Lord . ”
GOLD:	And may the Lord make us keep our promises to each other , for he has witnessed them . ”

ID:	2539
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁« ▁Ba di tut ▁da go e ne ko ▁e hun ▁e ta ▁ho gei ▁ur te ▁e ta ▁ez ▁naiz ▁gau za ▁dau ka dan ▁kar gu ra ko ▁; ▁gai ne ra ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁e san ▁dit ▁: ▁“ ▁Ez ▁du zu ▁hor ko ▁Jor dan ▁ho ri ▁i ga ro ko ▁” ▁.
PRED:	He told them , “ I will give you silver and gold , and you will know that I am the Lord , and you will not be disturbed . '
GOLD:	he said , “ I am now 120 years old , and I am no longer able to lead you . The Lord has told me , ‘ You will not cross the Jordan River . '

ID:	2540
INPUT:	▁Jau na ▁ez ▁du te ▁hil da ko ek ▁go res ten ▁, ▁he ri o - i sil pe ra ▁jai tsi ▁di re nek ▁.
PRED:	Those who die in the Lord will not die ; those who fear him will die .
GOLD:	The dead can not sing praises to the Lord , for they have gone into the silence of the grave .

ID:	2541
INPUT:	▁E dom ▁kon kis ta tu ko ▁du ▁, ▁be ro nen ▁Seir ▁lur ral de az ▁ja be tu ko ▁: ▁Is ra e lek ▁ga rai pe na ▁lor tu ko ▁du ▁.
PRED:	He will destroy Edom , and he will possess the land of Edom .
GOLD:	Edom will be taken over , and Seir , its enemy , will be conquered , while Israel marches on in triumph .

ID:	2542
INPUT:	▁« ▁Zeu en ▁be giz ▁i ku si ▁di tu zu e ▁Jau nak ▁bu ru tu ▁di tu en ▁e gin tza ▁han di ▁guz ti ok ▁.
PRED:	“ The Lord has seen all your eyes , and he has seen everything he did .
GOLD:	But you have seen the Lord perform all these mighty deeds with your own eyes !

ID:	2543
INPUT:	▁E san ▁zi on ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁Ab ra ha mi ▁: ▁« ▁I zu gar ri a ▁da ▁So do ma ▁e ta ▁Go mor ra ren ▁aur ka ko ▁sa la kun tza ▁. ▁Lar ri e gi a ▁da ▁hi ri ▁ho ri en ▁be ka tu a ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Abram , “ Look , Sodom and Gomorrah will be destroyed like Sodom and Gomorrah .
GOLD:	So the Lord told Abraham , “ I have heard a great outcry from Sodom and Gomorrah , because their sin is so flagrant .

ID:	2544
INPUT:	▁hur bil ▁ga kiz ki on ▁bi hotz ▁zin tzoz ▁e ta ▁si nes men ▁o soz ▁, ▁bar ru a ▁be ka tu - kon tzi en tzi a ▁guz ti tik ▁gar bi tu rik ▁e ta ▁gor pu tza ▁ur ▁gar biz ▁txu kun du rik ▁.
PRED:	Be careful with all your faith , and keep your pure and pure gold . Do n't let anyone be pure and pure gold .
GOLD:	let us go right into the presence of God with sincere hearts fully trusting him . For our guilty consciences have been sprinkled with Christ 's blood to make us clean , and our bodies have been washed with pure water .

ID:	2545
INPUT:	▁« ▁U tzi ▁ar mak ▁! ▁Ai tor ▁e za zu e ▁Jain ko a ▁nai ze la ▁, ▁her ri en ▁gain ▁e ta ▁lur ra ren ▁gain ▁na go e la ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you who are coming , O God of Heaven 's Armies , and I will give you victory over the earth . ”
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies is here among us ; the God of Israel is our fortress.Interlude

ID:	2546
INPUT:	▁A gin te ke ri a
PRED:	The Sin of Aaron
GOLD:	Approaching God with Care

ID:	2547
INPUT:	▁ez ▁zai tez te la ▁na gi ▁bi hur ▁, ▁bai zik ▁e ta ▁jar rai tu ▁fe dez ▁e ta ▁e ro a pe nez ▁Jain ko a ren ▁a gin tza ri ak ▁ja so tzen ▁a ri ▁di re nen ▁e <unk> a ri ▁.
PRED:	Do n't let me become proud and become proud and quiet and quiet , so that your faith will be opened . ”
GOLD:	Then you will not become spiritually dull and indifferent . Instead , you will follow the example of those who are going to inherit God 's promises because of their faith and endurance .

ID:	2548
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁ez ▁o men ▁du te ▁gor pu a ▁aur ki tu ▁; ▁gai ne ra ▁, ▁Je sus ▁bi zi ▁de la ▁e san ▁di e ten ▁ain ge ru ▁ba tzuk ▁a ger tu ▁zaiz ki e la ▁e sa nez ▁e tor ri ▁zaiz ki gu ▁.
PRED:	He has hidden us in the blood of the body , but he will tell us that some of the angels are standing on the throne .
GOLD:	They said his body was missing , and they had seen angels who told them Jesus is alive !

ID:	2549
INPUT:	▁Is ra el dar ▁lei nu ▁ba te ko ▁on da re - za ti ▁bat ▁he ren tzi an ▁har tzen ▁du en ▁e ma ku me a ▁ez ▁dai te ke ▁ez kon ▁be re ▁ai ta ren ▁lei nu ko ▁ez ▁den ▁gi zo na re kin ▁; ▁hor re la ▁, ▁is ra el dar rek ▁nork ▁be re ▁ai ta ren ▁on da re a ri ▁eu tsi ko ▁di o te ▁,
PRED:	The tribe of Israel is a list of the tribes of Israel , and they are not a man who is not a descendant of the tribe of Israel . This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	The daughters throughout the tribes of Israel who are in line to inherit property must marry within their tribe , so that all the Israelites will keep their ancestral property .

ID:	2550
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁i kas le ak ▁ba kar re an ▁har tu rik ▁, ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁« ▁Zo ri o ne ko ak ▁zu ek ▁i kus ten ▁du zu e na ▁i kus ten ▁du ten ▁be gi ak ▁!
PRED:	When the disciples saw him , he said to them , “ Go and see what you see .
GOLD:	Then when they were alone , he turned to the disciples and said , “ Blessed are the eyes that see what you have seen .

ID:	2551
INPUT:	▁E rei te ko ▁ga rai an ▁, ▁ne ka za ri ak be ti ▁gol da ke tan ▁e ta ▁lur ra ▁ur ra tze ne ta ▁a re a tzen ▁jar dun ▁o hi ▁o te ▁du ▁?
PRED:	Can a farmer forget a farmer planting seeds ? Can a farmer take it into labor ?
GOLD:	Does a farmer always plow and never sow ? Is he forever cultivating the soil and never planting ?

ID:	2552
INPUT:	▁Al de ▁bi e ta tik ▁na go ▁e ra kar ri a ▁: ▁al de ▁ba te tik ▁, ▁hil ▁e gin ▁na hi ▁nu ke ▁, ▁Kris to re kin ▁e go te ko ▁, ▁hau ▁as ko ga tik ▁o ne na ▁de la rik ▁;
PRED:	And I am going to take away from the presence of Christ . If I want to die , I would rather die with Christ .
GOLD:	I 'm torn between two desires : I long to go and be with Christ , which would be far better for me .

ID:	2553
INPUT:	▁Ho ri ek ▁zi ren ▁ru ben dar ▁se ni tar te ak ▁: <unk> ▁gi zo nez ko ▁guz ti ra ▁.
PRED:	These were the clans of Reuben . Their registered troops numbered .
GOLD:	These were the clans of Reuben . Their registered troops numbered 43,730 .

ID:	2554
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁di o ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁« ▁Ba da toz ▁e gu nak ▁: ▁ha zi a ▁e rein ▁or du ko uz ta ▁bil tze ko ▁ga rai a ▁i zan go ▁da ▁, ▁ma ha tsa ▁za pal du ▁or du ko ber riz ▁bil tze ko ▁ga rai a ▁i zan go <unk> di ek ▁e ta ▁mui no e kar do a ▁i su ri ko ▁du te ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Come and harvest your crops and harvest your crops , and you will harvest a crop of grapes from the top of the top of the mountain .
GOLD:	“ The time will come , ” says the Lord , “ when the grain and grapes will grow fasterthan they can be harvested.Then the terraced vineyards on the hills of Israelwill drip with sweet wine !

ID:	2555
INPUT:	▁Moi se sek ▁e san ▁zu en ▁, ▁or du an ▁: ▁« ▁Gaur ▁Jau na ri ▁sa ga ra tu ak ▁i zan ▁za re te ▁, ▁ez bai rik ▁ga be ▁se me a ▁na hiz ▁se ni de a ▁hil ▁du zu e la ko ▁. ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁be dein ka tu ▁e gin ▁zai tuz te ▁gaur ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then Moses said to them , “ Today you are the Lord 's children , and you must not be blessed . You must not be blessed . This is what the Lord has blessed you today . ”
GOLD:	Then Moses told the Levites , “ Today you have ordained yourselves for the service of the Lord , for you obeyed him even though it meant killing your own sons and brothers . Today you have earned a blessing . ”

ID:	2556
INPUT:	▁Ha <unk> ▁, ▁Sal mai ▁e ta ▁Ha na ne nak ▁;
PRED:	The family of Zaccai760
GOLD:	Hagab , Shalmai , Hanan ,

ID:	2557
INPUT:	▁e goi tza ko ▁za pi ak ▁, ▁el kar ke ta - e txo la ▁, ▁ho nen ▁gai ne ko ▁lar ru ▁fi nez ko ▁es tal du ra ▁, ▁el kar ke ta - e txo la ren ▁sar re ra ko ▁oi ha la ▁,
PRED:	the Tabernacle , the Tabernacle , and all the furnishings of the Tabernacle ; the Tabernacle ; the Tabernacle ;
GOLD:	They must carry the curtains of the Tabernacle , the Tabernacle itself with its coverings , the outer covering of fine goatskin leather , and the curtain for the Tabernacle entrance .

ID:	2558
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Be ne tan ▁di o tsut ▁: ▁Gaur ▁ni re kin ▁i zan go ▁za ra ▁pa ra di su an ▁.
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I tell you the truth , here will be with you . ”
GOLD:	And Jesus replied , “ I assure you , today you will be with me in paradise . ”

ID:	2559
INPUT:	▁A za ri as ▁, ▁Ju da ko ▁er re ge
PRED:	Ahaziah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Uzziah Rules in Judah

ID:	2560
INPUT:	▁be re ▁es kuz ▁e ra man go ▁du ▁Jau na ri ▁sa ga ra tu ▁be har re ko a ▁: ▁gan tzak ▁e ta ▁bu lar ra ▁. ▁Bu lar ra ▁Jau na ri ▁es kai ni ko ▁di o ▁, ▁er ri tuz ko ▁aur kez pen - kei nu a ▁e gi nez ▁.
PRED:	The priest will then present his hand to the Lord , and the fat of the breasts of the Lord will be presented to the Lord .
GOLD:	Present it to the Lord with your own hands as a special gift to the Lord . Bring the fat of the animal , together with the breast , and lift up the breast as a special offering to the Lord .

ID:	2561
INPUT:	▁u bi de ek ▁ki ra tsa ▁bo ta ko ▁du te ▁, ▁Ni lo ren ▁a dar rak ▁a gor tze rai no jai tsi ko ▁di ra ▁, ▁ka na be ra ▁e ta ▁i hi ak ▁zi mel du ko ▁.
PRED:	They will be thrown into the sea , but they will be stripped away . They will be cut off , but they will be stripped away .
GOLD:	The canals of the Nile will dry up , and the streams of Egypt will stinkwith rotting reeds and rushes .

ID:	2562
INPUT:	▁ar do a ▁ko pa ▁han di tan ▁e da ten ▁du zu e ▁, ▁o li o ▁u sain tsu ▁o ne ne zi <unk> ▁za re te.E ta ▁ez ▁zai zu e ▁a xo la Is ra el ▁her ri a ren ▁hon da men di a ▁!
PRED:	You have made a cup of wine and a cup of wine , and you have no relief from the land of Israel .
GOLD:	You drink wine by the bowlfuland perfume yourselves with fragrant lotions.You care nothing about the ruin of your nation .

ID:	2563
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁e san ▁zi en ▁Moi se si ▁e ta ▁A a ro ni ▁: ▁« ▁Hau ▁da ▁Paz ko - jai a ren ▁a rau di a ▁: ▁« ▁I non go ▁a tzer ri tar rak ▁e zin ▁i zan go ▁du ▁o pa ri gai rik ▁jan ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron , “ This is what the Lord says : This is a permanent law for the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron , “ These are the instructions for the festival of Passover . No outsiders are allowed to eat the Passover meal .

ID:	2564
INPUT:	▁Ha ren ▁i kas le ak ▁ez ▁zi ren ▁or du an ▁pro fe zi a ▁ho ne taz ▁ja be tu ▁, ▁bai na ▁ge ro ▁, ▁Je su sen ▁Jain ko - ain tza ▁a zal du ▁ze ne an ▁, ▁kon tu ra tu ▁zi ren ▁Li bu ru ▁San tu ak ▁zi o en ▁hu ra xe ▁e gin ▁zi o te la ▁Je su si ▁.
PRED:	But the disciples did n't believe that Jesus was dead , but he did n't believe that he was the Son of Jesus , who was the Messiah .
GOLD:	His disciples did n't understand at the time that this was a fulfillment of prophecy . But after Jesus entered into his glory , they remembered what had happened and realized that these things had been written about him .

ID:	2565
INPUT:	▁Ar gi ▁e gin ▁di gu ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁e gi <unk> gin ▁pro ze si o a ▁, ▁a bar rak ▁es ku e tan ▁, ▁al da re a ren ▁er tze ta rai no ▁.
PRED:	For the Lord our God has made us a vision . He has opened the door of the enemy 's hand and burn it on the top of the altar .
GOLD:	The Lord is God , shining upon us.Take the sacrifice and bind it with cords on the altar .

ID:	2566
INPUT:	▁Ga li le a tik ▁Je su se kin ▁e tor ri ta ko ▁e ma ku me ek ▁, ▁Jo se ren ▁a tze tik ▁jo a nik ▁, ▁hi lo bi a ▁i ku si ▁zu ten ▁e ta ▁Je su sen ▁gor pu a ▁no la ▁e zar tzen ▁zu ten ▁be gi ra tu ▁.
PRED:	Then Joshua and his mother came from Galilee to meet Jesus , who was buried in the tomb of Jesus ' body . And they laid his body on his body .
GOLD:	As his body was taken away , the women from Galilee followed and saw the tomb where his body was placed .

ID:	2567
INPUT:	▁No ren ▁bi la ▁za bil tza ▁, ▁zu ▁, ▁Is ra el go ▁er re ge ▁ho ri ▁? ▁No ren ▁a tze tik ▁zo az ▁? ▁Za kur ▁a ka ba tu a ren ▁a tze tik ▁? ▁Ar ka ku so ren ▁ba ten ▁a tze tik ▁?
PRED:	Why are you looking for the king of Israel ? Why are you waiting for the king of Israel ? Why are you waiting for him ?
GOLD:	May the Lord therefore judge which of us is right and punish the guilty one . He is my advocate , and he will rescue me from your power ! ”

ID:	2568
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁Jau nak ▁Moi se sen ▁bi dez ▁e man ▁zu en ▁le ge an ▁a gin du ▁hau ▁aur ki tu ▁zu ten ▁: ▁is ra el dar rek ▁e txo le tan ▁bi zi ▁be har ▁zu te la ▁zaz pi gar ren ▁hi le ko ▁jai e tan ▁,
PRED:	Then the Lord gave this instructions to Moses : “ When the people of Israel set up for seven days , they must celebrate the Festival of Shelters .
GOLD:	As they studied the Law , they discovered that the Lord had commanded through Moses that the Israelites should live in shelters during the festival to be held that month .

ID:	2569
INPUT:	▁Zaz pi gar ren ▁e gu ne an ▁, ▁gor pu tze ko ▁i le ▁guz ti a ▁moz tu ko ▁du ▁— ▁bu ru ko a ▁, ▁aur pe gi ko a ▁, ▁be kai ne ko a ▁e ta ▁gai ne ra ko ▁guz ti a ▁— ▁, ▁ar ro pak ▁e ta ▁gor pu tza ▁gar bi tu ko ▁di tu ▁e ta ▁gar bi ▁gel di tu ko ▁da ▁.
PRED:	On the seventh day , the priest must cut off his head and cut it off . He must wash his clothes and bathe himself in water , and he will wash his clothes .
GOLD:	On the seventh day they must again shave all the hair from their heads , including the hair of the beard and eyebrows . They must also wash their clothes and bathe themselves in water . Then they will be ceremonially clean .

ID:	2570
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁A si ri a ▁sun tsi tu ko
PRED:	Blessings for the Lord
GOLD:	A Message about Philistia

ID:	2571
INPUT:	▁Bai ▁, ▁zo ri o nak ▁e ta ▁lei al ta su nak ▁in gu ra tu ko ▁nau te bi zi tza ko ▁e gun ▁guz ti e tan ▁; ▁Jau na ren ▁e txe an ▁bi zi ko ▁naiz ▁a mai ga be ko ▁e gu ne tan ▁.
PRED:	Yes , I will sing praises to the Lord , for he will live in safety . I will live in the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	Surely your goodness and unfailing love will pursue meall the days of my life , and I will live in the house of the Lordforever .

ID:	2572
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁e gin ▁du <unk> ▁a hal guz ti du nak ▁: ▁« ▁Ni re ▁e gi tas mo ak bu ru tu ▁e gin go ▁di ra ▁, ▁ni re ▁e ra ba ki ak ▁be te ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies says , ‘ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has spoken ! '
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has sworn this oath : “ It will all happen as I have planned.It will be as I have decided .

ID:	2573
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁ba ke - bal din tzak ▁o nar tu ▁ez ▁e ta ▁ger ra ▁dek la ra tzen ▁ba di zu e te ▁, ▁se ti a tu ▁e gin go ▁du zu e ▁hi ri a ▁,
PRED:	But if you do n't realize that the things you have done , it will happen to you .
GOLD:	But if they refuse to make peace and prepare to fight , you must attack the town .

ID:	2574
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁er re ge ak ▁e raz tu na ▁be re ▁be ha tze tik ▁a te ra ▁e ta ▁ju du en ▁e tsai ▁zen ▁Ha ma ni ▁, ▁Ha me da ta ren ▁se me ▁e ta ▁A ga gen ▁ja tor ri ko a ri ▁, ▁e man ▁zi on ▁,
PRED:	So the king ordered that Haman son of Ahikam and grandson of Hammedatha the Agagite over the Jews and Haman 's son .
GOLD:	The king agreed , confirming his decision by removing his signet ring from his finger and giving it to Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite , the enemy of the Jews .

ID:	2575
INPUT:	▁Zer ga tik ▁ez ▁du zu ▁e ne ▁er re bel di a ▁bar ka tze ne ta ▁ni re ▁er ru a ▁a haz ten ▁? ▁Be re ha la ▁nau zu ▁hau tse tan ▁e tzan <unk> ne ▁bi la ▁i bi li ko ▁za ra ▁, ▁bai na ▁or du ra ko ▁ez ▁naiz ▁mun du an ▁i zan go ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Why do n't you turn away from me ? Why are you angry with me ? ” I said . “ You are looking for me , but you will have no pleasure in this world . ”
GOLD:	Why not just forgive my sinand take away my guilt ? For soon I will lie down in the dust and die.When you look for me , I will be gone . ”

ID:	2576
INPUT:	▁Hai ek ▁i rai nez ▁be te ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁— ▁Zeu ▁za ra ▁, ▁zu ▁, ▁ha ren ▁i kas le ▁; ▁gu ▁Moi se sen ▁i kas le ▁ga ra ▁.
PRED:	They followed him and said , “ You are your instructions , but you have not taught us . ”
GOLD:	Then they cursed him and said , “ You are his disciple , but we are disciples of Moses !

ID:	2577
INPUT:	▁Jo ben ▁hi ru ▁la gu nek ▁— ▁Te man go ▁E li fa zek ▁, ▁Xu a he ko ▁Bil da dek ▁e ta ▁Na a ma ko ▁Tzo far rek ▁— ▁, ▁Jo ben ▁zo ri txar ra ren ▁ber ri ▁i zan ▁zu te la rik ▁, ▁bi si ta ▁e gi te a ▁e ra ba ki ▁zu ten ▁a tse ka be an ▁la gun du ▁e ta ▁kon tso la tze ko ▁.
PRED:	Then Eliphaz the Temanite replied , “ Zophar the Temanite , Zophar , and Zophar the Naamathite did n't realize that it was evil in the land of Zorah and Eshtaol .
GOLD:	When three of Job 's friends heard of the tragedy he had suffered , they got together and traveled from their homes to comfort and console him . Their names were Eliphaz the Temanite , Bildad the Shuhite , and Zophar the Naamathite .

ID:	2578
INPUT:	▁Er re ge ak ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁E ra ba ki ▁hau ▁har tu ▁dut ▁: ▁a me tsa ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁e sa na hi a ▁ar gi tzen ▁e ta ▁a zal tzen ▁ez ▁ba diz ki da zu e ▁, ▁txi ki - txi ki ▁e gin go ▁zai tuz tet ▁e ta ▁zu en ▁e txe ak ▁za bor te gi ▁bi hur tu ko ▁.
PRED:	“ Yes , ” the king said , “ I will tell you the truth , ‘ I will do n't know what I am going to do . I will destroy you and completely destroy you . '
GOLD:	But the king said to the astrologers , “ I am serious about this . If you do n't tell me what my dream was and what it means , you will be torn limb from limb , and your houses will be turned into heaps of rubble !

ID:	2579
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ez tei e ta ra ▁gon bi da tzen ▁zai tuz te ne an ▁, ▁ez ▁jar ri ▁ma hai bu ru an ▁, ▁zu ▁bai no ▁gon bi da tu ▁os pe tsu a go ren ▁bat ▁i zan ▁dai te ke ▁e ta ▁;
PRED:	“ Do not invite you to invite you to sit on the head of the table , and you will be a glorious table .
GOLD:	“ When you are invited to a wedding feast , do n't sit in the seat of honor . What if someone who is more distinguished than you has also been invited ?

ID:	2580
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁e san ▁zi o ten ▁el kar ri ▁: ▁« ▁E a ▁, ▁ad rei lu ak ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁su tan ▁er re ▁di tza gun ▁» ▁. ▁Ho ne la ▁, ▁har ri a ren ▁or dez ▁ad rei lu a ▁e ra bi li ▁zu ten ▁e ta ▁ka re - o re a ren ▁or dez ▁bi ke a ▁.
PRED:	Then they said to each other , “ Let them be put in charge of the seven days . ” So they put them in proportion to their pay .
GOLD:	They began saying to each other , “ Let 's make bricks and harden them with fire. ” ( In this region bricks were used instead of stone , and tar was used for mortar . )

ID:	2581
INPUT:	▁A pai zak ▁Jau na ren ▁aur re an ▁es kai ni ko ▁di tu ▁, ▁a ma ren ▁al de ko ▁gar bi kun tza - o hi ku ne a ▁e gi nez ▁, ▁e ta ▁hu ra ▁gar bi ▁gel di tu ko ▁da ▁be re ▁o dol ja ri o <unk> ▁« ▁Hor ra ▁hor ▁se me a ▁na hiz ▁a la ba ▁i za ten ▁du en ▁e ma ku me a ri ▁bu ruz ko ▁le ge a ▁.
PRED:	Then the priest will purify the woman in the presence of the Lord , and the woman who is ceremonially clean . The priest will pronounce the person ceremonially clean . “ This is a serious skin disease .
GOLD:	The priest will then present them to the Lord to purify her . Then she will be ceremonially clean again after her bleeding at childbirth . These are the instructions for a woman after the birth of a son or a daughter .

ID:	2582
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁o rain ▁, ▁jo an ▁e ta ▁ni re ▁na gu si a ri ▁: ▁« ▁He men ▁da ▁E li as ▁» ▁a di e raz te ko ▁e san go ▁di da zu ▁, ▁ba da ▁?
PRED:	And now I went and told him , “ Herod is the Messiah ? ”
GOLD:	And now you say , ‘ Go and tell your master , “ Elijah is here . ” '

ID:	2583
INPUT:	▁Hau xe ▁da ▁la pur re tan ▁da bi le na ri ▁ger ta tzen ▁zai o na ▁: ▁la pur ra ri ▁be ra ri ▁ken tzen ▁di o ▁bi zi a ▁.
PRED:	This is a thief 's trap ; a person who takes it away .
GOLD:	Such is the fate of all who are greedy for money ; it robs them of life .

ID:	2584
INPUT:	▁na gu si ak ▁Jain ko a ren ▁ai tzi ne ra ▁e ra man go ▁du ▁, ▁a te ra ▁e do ▁a te - uz tai ra ▁hur bi la ra zi ko ▁e ta ▁zi ri ▁ba tez ▁be lar ri a ▁zu la tu ko ▁di o ▁. ▁E ta ▁eskla bo ▁i zan go ▁du ▁be ti ko ▁.
PRED:	If God wants us to listen to his father , he will bow down and bow down and bow before him . He will be a slave , and he will be free .
GOLD:	If he does this , his master must present him before God . Then his master must take him to the door or doorpost and publicly pierce his ear with an awl . After that , the slave will serve his master for life .

ID:	2585
INPUT:	▁O rain ▁ai pa tzen ▁a ri ▁ga ren ▁e tor ki zu ne ko ▁mun du ▁hau ▁ez ▁zu en ▁Jain ko ak ▁ain ge ru en ▁men pe ▁jar ri ▁.
PRED:	And now you know that the glory of the Lord your God has revealed this world to you .
GOLD:	And furthermore , it is not angels who will control the future world we are talking about .

ID:	2586
INPUT:	▁Be dein ka tu a ▁Jau na ▁, ▁ni re ▁er re gu - oi hu a ▁en tzun ▁du ▁e ta ▁!
PRED:	Praise the Lord , for he has heard my plea !
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! For he has heard my cry for mercy .

ID:	2587
INPUT:	▁bi gar ren ▁hi la ren ▁ha ma lau ko ▁i lu na bar re an ▁os pa tu ko ▁du ▁. ▁Be lar ▁min go tsez ▁e ta ▁le ga mi a ▁ga be ko ▁o giz ▁la gun du rik ▁jan go ▁du ▁bil do tsa ▁;
PRED:	On the third day of the second month , the third of the second month will be eaten on the third day of the second month .
GOLD:	They must offer the Passover sacrifice one month later , at twilight on the fourteenth day of the second month . They must eat the Passover lamb at that time with bitter salad greens and bread made without yeast .

ID:	2588
INPUT:	▁gi za ▁gri nen ▁men pe ko ▁i za ten ▁jar rai tzen ▁bai tu zu e ▁. ▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁be kaiz ke ri ak ▁e ta ▁ez ta bai dak ▁di tu zu en ▁bi tar te an ▁, ▁ez ▁o te ▁za re te ▁gi za ▁gri nen ▁men pe ko ▁? ▁Ez ▁o te ▁du zu e ▁gi za ▁i riz pi de ▁hu tsez ▁jo ka tzen ▁?
PRED:	You are controlled by the sinful nature , and you are controlled by the sinful nature . Do n't you realize that your sinful nature is not part of the sinful nature ? Do n't you realize that you are controlled by human desires ?
GOLD:	for you are still controlled by your sinful nature . You are jealous of one another and quarrel with each other . Does n't that prove you are controlled by your sinful nature ? Are n't you living like people of the world ?

ID:	2589
INPUT:	▁Bes te ▁baz kal ti ar rak ▁be ren ▁ar te an ▁ha si ▁zi ren ▁e sa ten ▁: ▁« ▁Nor ▁o te ▁du gu ▁be ka tu ak ▁bar ka tu ▁e re ▁e gi ten ▁di tu en ▁hau ▁? ▁»
PRED:	Then he sat down and asked , “ Who is this sin ? Who does he forgive us ? ”
GOLD:	The men at the table said among themselves , “ Who is this man , that he goes around forgiving sins ? ”

ID:	2590
INPUT:	▁Zu ze nak ▁bi de ▁txar re tik ▁e ra ma ten ▁di tu e na ▁, ▁be rak ▁pres ta tu ta ko ▁tran pan ▁jau si ko ▁da ▁; ▁bai na ▁pres tu ek ▁zo ri o na ▁i zan go ▁du te ▁sa ri ▁.
PRED:	The path of the wicked will be caught , for they will be prepared . But the king of the palace will be prepared .
GOLD:	Those who lead good people along an evil pathwill fall into their own trap , but the honest will inherit good things .

ID:	2591
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ▁, ▁Kris to ▁Je su sen gan ▁gu re ki ko ▁hain ▁o na ▁i za nez ▁a ger tu ▁na hi ▁i zan ▁di e ▁da to zen ▁gi zal di ei ▁zein ▁u ga ri a ▁e ta ▁es ku za ba la ▁den ▁be re ▁on gi na hi a ▁.
PRED:	That is why we have faith in Christ Jesus , who has been revealed to all who do what is right in Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	So God can point to us in all future ages as examples of the incredible wealth of his grace and kindness toward us , as shown in all he has done for us who are united with Christ Jesus .

ID:	2592
INPUT:	▁gar bi ke ta ra ko ▁on tzi a ▁Mo ab ▁; ▁oi na ▁e zar ri ko ▁di ot ▁gai ne an ▁E do mi ▁, ▁ga rai pen - oi hu ▁e gin go ▁Fi lis te a ri ▁» ▁.
PRED:	I will shout for Moab ; I will sing praises to the Philistines for battle . ”
GOLD:	Who will bring me into the fortified city ? Who will bring me victory over Edom ?

ID:	2593
INPUT:	▁Be re ▁e tor re ra re kin ▁ba ke a ren ▁ber ri ▁o na ▁hots ▁e gin ▁zi gun ▁: ▁ba ke a ▁zu ei ▁, ▁ur ru ti ▁zi ne te noi ▁, ▁e ta ▁ba ke a ▁hur bil ▁zi re nei ▁.
PRED:	So they went with them to preach the Good News of the Good News of the Good News .
GOLD:	He brought this Good News of peace to you Gentiles who were far away from him , and peace to the Jews who were near .

ID:	2594
INPUT:	▁A la bai na ▁, ▁e ma ku me a ▁haur dun ▁ger ta tu ▁zen ▁e ta ▁hur ren go ▁ur te an ▁, ▁ga rai ▁be re an ▁, ▁se me a ▁i zan ▁zu en ▁, ▁E li se ok ▁e sa na ▁zi o nez ▁.
PRED:	When she was pregnant and was pregnant , she became pregnant and gave birth to a son . She named him Elisha .
GOLD:	But sure enough , the woman soon became pregnant . And at that time the following year she had a son , just as Elisha had said .

ID:	2595
INPUT:	▁I da tzi ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁ez ▁ni zu en ▁i da tzi ▁i rai na ▁e gin ▁zu e na ren ga tik ▁, ▁ez ta ▁har tu ▁zu e na ren ga tik ▁e re ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁aur re an ▁ni taz ▁du zu en ▁ar du ra ▁a ger tze ko ▁au ke ra ▁zu ei ▁e ma te ko ▁bai zik ▁.
PRED:	So do n't let me be careful to obey my decrees and regulations . Instead , you must not stand trial before the Lord your God .
GOLD:	My purpose , then , was not to write about who did the wrong or who was wronged . I wrote to you so that in the sight of God you could see for yourselves how loyal you are to us .

ID:	2596
INPUT:	▁A ra he nak <unk> ▁;
PRED:	The family of Immer1,052
GOLD:	The family of Arah652

ID:	2597
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ▁, ▁ma di an dar ren ga tik ▁, ▁e ra bat ▁pob re tu ▁zi ren ▁is ra el dar rak ▁; ▁or du an ▁, ▁dei ▁e gin ▁zi o ten ▁Jau na ri ▁.
PRED:	So the people of Israel followed the Lord 's instructions . But the people of Israel cried out to him , “ The Lord ! ”
GOLD:	So Israel was reduced to starvation by the Midianites . Then the Israelites cried out to the Lord for help .

ID:	2598
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁la gun du ▁e gin ▁be har ▁di e gu ▁hor re la ko ei ▁, ▁e gi a ren ▁zer bi tzu an ▁be ro ri en ▁lan ki de ▁bi hur ▁gai te zen ▁.
PRED:	So we must pay back to their neighbors , for we have worked hard to work hard .
GOLD:	So we ourselves should support them so that we can be their partners as they teach the truth .

ID:	2599
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁pres ta tzen ▁di o ▁be le a ri ▁ja te ko a ▁, ▁be ra ren ▁ku me ek ▁, ▁go se ak ▁no ra e ze an ▁da bil tza la rik ▁, ▁Jain ko a ri ▁txi o ▁e gi ten ▁di o te ne an ▁?
PRED:	Who gives wisdom to those who are ceremonially unclean ? Who is the greatest to those who are rich ?
GOLD:	Who provides food for the ravenswhen their young cry out to Godand wander about in hunger ?

ID:	2600
INPUT:	▁Gu ri ▁e re ▁ber ri ▁o na ▁e man ▁zai gu ▁gu re ▁ar ba so ei ▁be za la ▁; ▁bai na ▁hau ei ▁ez ▁zi en ▁e zer ta ra ko ▁ba li o ▁i zan ▁me zu a ▁en tzu te ak ▁, ▁en tzun ▁si ne tsi ▁ga be ▁en tzun ▁zu ten ▁e ta ▁.
PRED:	We have heard that our ancestors would not listen to our ancestors . But we did n't listen to the word of our ancestors .
GOLD:	For this good news — that God has prepared this rest — has been announced to us just as it was to them . But it did them no good because they did n't share the faith of those who listened to God .

ID:	2601
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁na za zu ▁e gin ▁be ka ta ri en ▁zo ri ▁be re ko ▁, ▁ez ▁na za zu ▁bi hur ▁hil tzai le en ▁ki de ko ▁,
PRED:	Do n't let me be like a fool , and you will die .
GOLD:	Do n't let me suffer the fate of sinners.Do n't condemn me along with murderers .

ID:	2602
INPUT:	▁Zo ri on ta su nak ▁e ta ▁ma da ri ka zi o ak
PRED:	Curses for Disobedience
GOLD:	The Beatitudes

ID:	2603
INPUT:	▁Ped rok ▁e san ▁zi on ▁Je su si ▁: ▁« ▁Mai su ▁, ▁zein ▁e der ki ▁gau den ▁he men ▁! ▁Zer ga tik ▁ez ▁e gin ▁hi ru ▁e txo la ▁: ▁ba ta ▁zu re tzat ▁, ▁bes te a ▁Moi se sen tzat ▁e ta ▁bes te a ▁E li a sen tzat ▁? ▁»
PRED:	Peter said to him , “ Teacher , are you good ? What do you mean ? What do you mean ? ”
GOLD:	Peter exclaimed , “ Rabbi , it 's wonderful for us to be here ! Let 's make three shelters as memorials — one for you , one for Moses , and one for Elijah . ”

ID:	2604
INPUT:	▁Hur bil du ▁e ta ▁zau ri ak ▁lo tu ▁ziz ki on ▁, ▁o li oz ▁e ta ▁ar doz ▁i gur tzi ▁on do ren ▁; ▁ge ro ▁, ▁be re ▁as to ▁gai ne an ▁e zar ri ▁, ▁os ta tu ra ▁e ra man ▁e ta ▁be re ▁ar du ra pe an ▁har tu ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	Then he came and spread his robe on his head , and he placed it on his head . He placed it on his head and placed it on his head .
GOLD:	Going over to him , the Samaritan soothed his wounds with olive oil and wine and bandaged them . Then he put the man on his own donkey and took him to an inn , where he took care of him .

ID:	2605
INPUT:	▁San ti a go ▁e ta ▁Jo a nek ▁, ▁Ze be de o ren ▁se me ek ▁, ▁Je su sen ga na ▁hur bil du ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁— ▁Mai su ▁, ▁es ka tu ko ▁di zu gu na ▁zuk ▁e ma te a ▁na hi ▁ge nu ke ▁.
PRED:	Then John 's sons came to Jesus and said , “ Teacher , we want to ask you what you want to do . ”
GOLD:	Then James and John , the sons of Zebedee , came over and spoke to him . “ Teacher , ” they said , “ we want you to do us a favor . ”

ID:	2606
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁E tor ri ▁e ta ▁i ku <unk> an ▁, ▁non ▁bi zi ▁zen ▁i ku si ▁e ta ▁be ra re kin ▁gel di tu ▁zi ren ▁e gun ▁har tan ▁. ▁Ar ra tsal de ko ▁lau rak ▁al de a ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	Then Jesus told them , “ Where are you going to see ? ” So he got up and stayed with two days .
GOLD:	“ Come and see , ” he said . It was about four o'clock in the afternoon when they went with him to the place where he was staying , and they remained with him the rest of the day .

ID:	2607
INPUT:	▁Le bi tar ren ▁hi ri ak ▁# <unk> ▁Le bi tar ren ▁hi ri ak ▁: ▁Ik ▁. <unk> <unk> ▁oh ▁.
PRED:	Parable of the Mustard Seed
GOLD:	Towns for the Levites

ID:	2608
INPUT:	▁Es kain tza ren ▁gai ne ra ko a ▁A a ron ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁on do ren go en tzat ▁i zan go ▁da ▁; ▁guz tiz ▁sak ra tu a ▁da ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁o ho rez ▁er re ta ko ▁o pa ri a ren ▁par te ▁bai ta ▁.
PRED:	Aaron and his sons must be a special gift to Aaron and his sons . It is a special gift to the Lord . It is a special gift to the Lord .
GOLD:	The rest of the grain offering will then be given to Aaron and his sons as their food . This offering will be considered a most holy part of the special gifts presented to the Lord .

ID:	2609
INPUT:	▁Her ri a ▁be gi ra ▁ze go en ▁. ▁A gin ta ri ek ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁Je su si ▁bur la ▁e gi ten ▁zi o ten ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁« ▁Bes te ak ▁sal ba tu ▁di tik ▁; ▁sal ba ▁de za la ▁be re ▁bu ru a ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁Me si as ▁, ▁hau ta tu a ▁, ▁bal din ▁ba da ▁» ▁.
PRED:	But the people of Israel looked at him and said , “ He is the one who saved us from the one who saved us from the beginning of the Messiah , who is the Messiah . ”
GOLD:	The crowd watched and the leaders scoffed . “ He saved others , ” they said , “ let him save himself if he is really God 's Messiah , the Chosen One . ”

ID:	2610
INPUT:	▁Jo sek ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Ho na ▁ar gi bi de a ▁. ▁Hi ru ▁sas ki ok ▁hi ru ▁e gun ▁a di e raz ten ▁du te ▁.
PRED:	“ This is what Joseph said , “ Let 's see three months . ”
GOLD:	“ This is what the dream means , ” Joseph told him . “ The three baskets also represent three days .

ID:	2611
INPUT:	▁Zer ga tik ▁u tzi ▁be har ▁gai tu zu ▁hil tzen ▁geu re ▁lur ▁e ta ▁guz ti ▁? ▁E ros ▁gai tza zu ▁gu ▁geu ▁e ta ▁gu re ▁lur rak ▁ja na ri ▁tru ke ▁, ▁e ta ▁fa ra oi a ren ▁eskla bo ▁bi hur tu ko ▁ga ra ▁, ▁geu re ▁lur re kin ▁ba te ra ▁. ▁E ma gu zu ▁ha zi a ▁bi zi rik ▁i raun ▁de za gun ▁e ta ▁gu re ▁lur rak ▁e re mu ▁bi hur ▁ez ▁dai te zen ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Why do you let us kill us ? Let us be our livestock and herds and livestock , and let us live in the land of Egypt , and let us live in peace with us . Let us live in the land of Egypt , and let us live forever . ”
GOLD:	Why should we die before your very eyes ? Buy us and our land in exchange for food ; we offer our land and ourselves as slaves for Pharaoh . Just give us grain so we may live and not die , and so the land does not become empty and desolate . ”

ID:	2612
INPUT:	▁Gau za ▁be ra ▁ger ta tzen ▁da ▁mu si ka - tres ne kin ▁e re ▁, ▁txi ru la ▁e do ta ▁zi ta ra re kin ▁, ▁a di bi dez ▁: ▁no tak ▁ar gi ▁e ta ▁gar bi ▁e ma ten ▁ez ▁ba di tuz te ▁, ▁no la ▁ja kin ▁zer ▁jo tzen ▁du ten ▁?
PRED:	“ It is like a man who is coming to hear the sound of a fool , and how can he be pure ? How can he be pure ?
GOLD:	Even lifeless instruments like the flute or the harp must play the notes clearly , or no one will recognize the melody .

ID:	2613
INPUT:	▁Ju da ko ▁her ri ak ▁Paz ko a ▁os pa tu
PRED:	Passover and the Passover
GOLD:	Jehoiakim Rules in Judah

ID:	2614
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁Jor da nez ▁e ki al de ko ▁bi ▁er re ge ▁a mor tar rei ▁— ▁Hex bon go ▁er re ge ▁Si ho ni ▁e ta ▁Ax ta ro ten ▁bi zi ▁zen ▁Ba xan go ▁er re ge ▁O gi ▁— ▁e gin ▁di e na ▁.
PRED:	It was also living in the land of the Amorites living in the land of King Sihon of Heshbon and King Og of Bashan .
GOLD:	We have also heard what he did to the two Amorite kings east of the Jordan River — King Sihon of Heshbon and King Og of Bashan ( who lived in Ashtaroth ) .

ID:	2615
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁e gin ▁zi on ▁kon tsul ta ▁Da vi dek ▁Jau na ri ▁: ▁— ▁Jo an go ▁al ▁naiz ▁la pur - tal de ▁hor ren ▁on do ren ▁? ▁Har ra pa tu ko ▁o te ▁di tut ▁? ▁Jau nak ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁Zo az ▁on do ren ▁! ▁Ho ri xe ▁har ra pa tu ko ▁di tu zu la ▁e ta ▁as ka tu ko ▁zu tar rak ▁!
PRED:	Then David asked the Lord , “ Should I go to war against you ? ” “ Yes , ” the Lord replied . “ Yes , I will destroy you ! ”
GOLD:	Then David asked the Lord , “ Should I chase after this band of raiders ? Will I catch them ? ” And the Lord told him , “ Yes , go after them . You will surely recover everything that was taken from you ! ”

ID:	2616
INPUT:	▁be ren ▁jain ko en ▁o ho rez ▁e gi ten ▁di tuz ten ▁hi guin gar ri ta su nak ▁i ra kats ▁ez ▁di e zaz ki zu e ten ▁e ta ▁, ▁hor re la ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko a ren ▁aur ka ▁be ka tu ▁e gin ▁ez ▁de za zu en ▁.
PRED:	You must not commit any of these detestable idols . You must not sin against the Lord your God , just as you do .
GOLD:	This will prevent the people of the land from teaching you to imitate their detestable customs in the worship of their gods , which would cause you to sin deeply against the Lord your God .

ID:	2617
INPUT:	▁A pai zen ▁sa ga ra pe na
PRED:	The Dedication of the Priests
GOLD:	Dedication of the Priests

ID:	2618
INPUT:	▁De dan go ak ▁e re ▁be ze ro ▁ze ni tu en ▁; ▁i tsas ▁her ri ▁as kok ▁zu re kin ▁e gi ten ▁zi tu en ▁tra tu ak ▁, ▁bo liz ▁e ta ▁e ba noz ▁or dain duz ▁.
PRED:	All the people of Judah were terrified , and many of them gave them their wealth . Then he gave them the Canaanites to pay for their journey .
GOLD:	Merchants came to you from Dedan . Numerous coastlands were your captive markets ; they brought payment in ivory tusks and ebony wood .

ID:	2619
INPUT:	▁O pa ri a ▁bo ron da tez ko a ▁ba da ▁, ▁zi le gi ▁da ▁gor putz - a ta lak ▁o ker ▁di tu en ▁ze kor ra ▁na hiz ▁a ha ri a ▁es kain tze a ▁; ▁bai na ▁bo to a ▁be te tze ko ▁e gi na ▁ba da ▁, ▁ez ▁di zu e ▁Jau nak ▁hor re la ko rik ▁o nar tu ko ▁.
PRED:	If you present a grain offering to the Lord , you must be cut off from the herd of cattle , or goats , or goats , but you may not accept it . This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	If a bull or lamb has a leg that is too long or too short , it may be offered as a voluntary offering , but it may not be offered to fulfill a vow .

ID:	2620
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁her ri a ▁har ri gar ri ro ▁hau ta tu
PRED:	The Lord 's Second Reply
GOLD:	Eastern Cities of Refuge

ID:	2621
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁e san ▁zi en ▁Moi se si ▁e ta ▁A a ro ni ▁:
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,

ID:	2622
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ha la ▁e re ▁o be di tu ▁ez ▁e ta ▁aur ka ▁e gi ten ▁ba di da zu e ▁,
PRED:	“ If you refuse to listen to me and do not commit adultery .
GOLD:	“ If in spite of all this you still refuse to listen and still remain hostile toward me ,

ID:	2623
INPUT:	▁Es kain tzai le ak ▁es ku a ▁e zar ri ko ▁di o ▁bu ru an ▁, ▁e ta ▁Jau nak ▁be re ▁be ka tu en ▁or dain tzat ▁o nar tu ko ▁di o ▁.
PRED:	The priest will lay their hands on the head of the flour and the pieces of the offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	Lay your hand on the animal 's head , and the Lord will accept its death in your place to purify you , making you right with him .

ID:	2624
INPUT:	▁Es pi ri tu ak ▁mi ra ri ak ▁e gi ten ▁zi tuz ten ▁de ab ru ak ▁zi ren ▁, ▁e ta ▁mun du ▁o so ko ▁er re ge en ga na ▁jo ▁zu ten ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁a hal guz ti du na ren ▁e gun ▁han di ko ▁bor ro ka ra ▁bil tze ko ▁.
PRED:	Then the Spirit of the devil went out to fight against the devil and all the kingdoms of the earth . They gathered together to fight against the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	They are demonic spirits who work miracles and go out to all the rulers of the world to gather them for battle against the Lord on that great judgment day of God the Almighty .

ID:	2625
INPUT:	▁« ▁On do ren ▁, ▁ho ne la ▁hitz ▁e gin ▁zi dan ▁: ▁Lau gar ren ▁piz ti a ▁lur ▁gai ne an ▁i zan go ▁den ▁lau gar ren ▁er rei nu a ▁da ▁, ▁bes te ▁hi ru rak ▁ez ▁be za la ko a ▁. ▁Mun du ▁o so a ▁i ren tsi ko ▁du ▁, ▁han ka ▁az pi an ▁har tu ko ▁e ta ▁txi ki tu ko ▁.
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the fourth generation : “ This is what the Lord says : The whole earth will be like the other kingdoms of the earth , and the earth will be scattered .
GOLD:	Then he said to me , “ This fourth beast is the fourth world power that will rule the earth . It will be different from all the others . It will devour the whole world , trampling and crushing everything in its path .

ID:	2626
INPUT:	▁Zaz pi ▁za ti tan ▁ba na tu ko ▁du te ▁lur ral de a ▁, ▁Ju da ren ▁lei nu ak ▁be re ▁lur ral de an ▁, ▁he go al de an ▁, ▁jar rai tu ko ▁du e la rik ▁, ▁e ta ▁Jo se ren ▁on do ren go ek ▁be re ne an ▁, ▁i par ral de an ▁.
PRED:	The seven tribes of Judah will be divided into the land of Judah , and they will remain in the south side of the south .
GOLD:	Let them divide the land into seven sections , excluding Judah 's territory in the south and Joseph 's territory in the north .

ID:	2627
INPUT:	▁« ▁Jau nak ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko ak ▁e man go ▁di zu en ▁lur ral de ko ▁hi ri ren ▁ba te an ▁zu en ▁her ri tar ren ▁bat ▁be har tsu ▁ba da ▁, ▁ez ▁i zan ▁bi hoz ga be ▁, ▁ez ▁la gun tza rik ▁u ka tu ▁se ni de ▁be har tsu a ri ▁;
PRED:	“ If the Lord your God is giving you the land he is giving you — if you do not repent of your relatives , do not repent of their sins .
GOLD:	“ But if there are any poor Israelites in your towns when you arrive in the land the Lord your God is giving you , do not be hard-hearted or tightfisted toward them .

ID:	2628
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁be te ko ▁dut ▁zu en ▁gu ra so ei ▁zin ▁e gin da ko a ▁, ▁a le gi a ▁, ▁es ne a ▁e ta ▁ez ti a ▁da riz ki on ▁lur ral de a ▁e man go ▁ni e la ▁” ▁. ▁Lur ral de ▁ho ri ▁o rain ▁dau ka zu e na ▁da ▁, ▁hain ▁zu zen ▁» <unk> ▁e ran tzun ▁ni on ▁: ▁« ▁Bai ▁, ▁Jau na ▁» ▁.
PRED:	I will give you a vow to your ancestors , and I will give you a land flowing with milk and honey . But I will give you a land flowing with milk and honey , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	I said this so I could keep my promise to your ancestors to give you a land flowing with milk and honey — the land you live in today . ' ” Then I replied , “ Amen , Lord ! May it be so . ”

ID:	2629
INPUT:	▁Be re ▁zer bi tza ri ek ▁gur di ▁ba te an ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁Je ru sa le me ra ▁e ra man ▁zu ten ▁, ▁be re ▁hi lo bi an ▁, ▁ar ba so en ▁on do an ▁, ▁lur ▁e ma te ko ▁.
PRED:	So the people worshiped idols and moved to Jerusalem , where they worshiped him .
GOLD:	His servants took him by chariot to Jerusalem , where they buried him with his ancestors in the City of David .

ID:	2630
INPUT:	▁Jef tek ▁me zu la ri ak ▁bi da li ▁a mon dar ren ▁er re ge a ri
PRED:	Jephthah sent this message to the Ammonites
GOLD:	Jephthah 's Vow

ID:	2631
INPUT:	▁Zu en ▁i tsa sal de a lar re - to ki ▁bi hur tu ko ▁da ▁, ▁ar tzai nen ▁pu <unk> ▁e ta ▁es kor ta - le ku ▁.
PRED:	Your breasts are as worthless as a block of wood , and your wells are dug for a pit .
GOLD:	The Philistine coast will become a wilderness pasture , a place of shepherd campsand enclosures for sheep and goats .

ID:	2632
INPUT:	▁Ne ri a sen ▁se me ▁Ba ru kek ▁Je re mi as ▁pro fe tak ▁a gin du ta ko ▁guz ti a ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁: ▁tenplu ra ▁jo an ▁e ta ▁Jau na ren ▁me zu a ▁i ra kur ri ▁zu en ▁li bu ru tik ▁.
PRED:	So Baruch son of Baruch did everything Jeremiah had commanded . He went to the Temple of the Lord and read it to them .
GOLD:	Baruch did as Jeremiah told him and read these messages from the Lord to the people at the Temple .

ID:	2633
INPUT:	▁La be ▁go ri ra ▁bo ta ko ▁di tu zu ▁, ▁zu re ▁ha ser re a ▁a ger tze an ▁; ▁be re ▁su mi naz ▁i ren tsi ko ▁di tu ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁su az ▁kis ka li ko ▁.
PRED:	You will be thrown into the fire of your wrath , and you will be burned with fire .
GOLD:	You will wipe their children from the face of the earth ; they will never have descendants .

ID:	2634
INPUT:	▁Be dein ka tu a ▁zu ▁, ▁Jau na ▁! ▁I ra kats ▁ni ri ▁zeu re ▁a rau ak ▁.
PRED:	May the Lord be blessed and be careful to obey my decrees .
GOLD:	I praise you , O Lord ; teach me your decrees .

ID:	2635
INPUT:	▁Bi hotz ▁zu hur re ko ak ▁o nar tzen ▁di tu ▁a gin du ak ▁, ▁mi hi ▁txo ro ko a ▁hon da men di rantz ▁a bi a tzen ▁.
PRED:	A wise person is a life-giving fountain ; a fool destroys a fool .
GOLD:	The wise are glad to be instructed , but babbling fools fall flat on their faces .

ID:	2636
INPUT:	▁Hi ru ro gei ta ▁ha ma bi ak ▁bi da li
PRED:	The Most Important Commandment
GOLD:	Jesus Sends Out His Disciples

ID:	2637
INPUT:	▁Be ro ri en ▁jo ka bi de a ▁e ta ▁e gin tzak ▁i ku si ▁on do ren ▁, ▁gu txi a go ▁suf ri tu ko ▁du zu e ▁, ▁kon tu ra tu ko ▁bai tza re te ▁ez ▁nu e la ▁hi ri an ▁e gin da ko ▁guz ti a ▁ar ra zoi rik ▁ga be ▁e gin ▁. ▁Nik ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁e sa na ▁» ▁.
PRED:	When you see what is evil , I will show you the consequences of their sins . I will not forgive their sins . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	When you meet them and see their behavior , you will understand that these things are not being done to Israel without cause . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	2638
INPUT:	▁moz tu ▁e gin go ▁di o te ▁es ku a ▁. ▁Ez ▁i zan ▁gu pi da rik ▁!
PRED:	They will cut off their hands and cut off their hands .
GOLD:	you must cut off her hand . Show her no pity .

ID:	2639
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁be rai en ▁aur re tik ▁bo ta ▁zi tu en ▁her ri en ▁o hi tu rak ▁e ta ▁Is ra el go ▁er re ge ek ▁e zar ri ta ko ▁a rau ak ▁har tu ▁zi tuz ten ▁is ra el dar rek ▁.
PRED:	For the Lord handed them over to the people of Israel , and they took possession of the kings of Israel .
GOLD:	They had followed the practices of the pagan nations the Lord had driven from the land ahead of them , as well as the practices the kings of Israel had introduced .

ID:	2640
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁Mo a be ko ▁lau ta dan ▁, ▁Jor dan ▁on do an ▁, ▁Je ri ko ▁pa re an ▁, ▁e txo la tu rik ▁zeu den ▁Moi se si ▁, ▁E le a zar ▁a pai za ri ▁e ta ▁is ra el dar ren ▁el kar te ▁o so a ri ▁e ra man ▁zi e ten ▁.
PRED:	When Moses and Eleazar the priest set up the plains of Moab beside the Jordan River , they brought all the people of Israel out of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	they brought them all to Moses and Eleazar the priest , and to the whole community of Israel , which was camped on the plains of Moab beside the Jordan River , across from Jericho .

ID:	2641
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁sai a ▁zai tez te ▁go goz ▁zeu en ▁fe de a re kin ▁ba te ra ▁ber tu te a ▁i za ten ▁, ▁ber tu te a re kin ▁e za gu tza ▁,
PRED:	Therefore , be careful to be careful to be faithful to those who obey God 's instructions .
GOLD:	In view of all this , make every effort to respond to God 's promises . Supplement your faith with a generous provision of moral excellence , and moral excellence with knowledge ,

ID:	2642
INPUT:	▁« ▁A gin du ▁, ▁le ge ▁e ta ▁e ra ba ki ok ▁zu en ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁zu ei ▁i ra kas te ko ▁e ma nak ▁di ra ▁, ▁ja be tzan ▁har tze ra ▁zo az ten ▁lur ral de an ▁be te ▁di tza zu en ▁.
PRED:	“ You must obey all the decrees the Lord your God has commanded you to enter the land the Lord your God is giving you .
GOLD:	“ These are the commands , decrees , and regulations that the Lord your God commanded me to teach you . You must obey them in the land you are about to enter and occupy ,

ID:	2643
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁o dol ▁hor re kin ▁el kar ke ta - e txo lan ▁da go en ▁al da re - er tze ko ▁a dar rak ▁i gur tzi ko ▁di tu ▁Jau na ren ▁aur re an ▁, ▁e ta ▁ze kor ra ren ▁gai ne ra ko ▁o do la ▁el kar ke ta - e txo la ren ▁sar re ran ▁da go en ▁er re - o pa ri en ▁al da re - oi ne an ▁i su ri ko ▁.
PRED:	Then the priest will dip his blood on the horns of the Tabernacle and put it on the horns of the altar of the Lord . He will pour out the blood of the Tabernacle on the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	He will then put some of the blood on the horns of the altar for fragrant incense that stands in the Lord 's presence inside the Tabernacle . He will pour out the rest of the blood at the base of the altar for burnt offerings at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	2644
INPUT:	▁Bat ▁ba kar ra ▁e pai le a
PRED:	A Warning against the Priests
GOLD:	Warning against Judging Others

ID:	2645
INPUT:	▁I tzu li ta ko ▁guz ti ak ▁42.360 ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	So all the people returned to Judah .
GOLD:	So a total of 42,360 people returned to Judah ,

ID:	2646
INPUT:	▁Bi de bu ru ▁e ta ▁pla za ▁guz ti e tan ▁pros ti tu zi o - le ku ak ▁e rai ki ▁ze ni tu en ▁; ▁bai na ▁ez ▁ze nu en ▁e ma gal du ek ▁o hi ▁be za la ▁jo ka tu ▁, ▁baz ter tu ▁e gi ten ▁bai tze nu en ▁lan sa ri a ▁.
PRED:	You used all the things you used to live in the streets and saw that you were rich in the streets . You did not commit adultery .
GOLD:	You build your pagan shrines on every street corner and your altars to idols in every square . In fact , you have been worse than a prostitute , so eager for sin that you have not even demanded payment .

ID:	2647
INPUT:	▁Al txa tu ▁zu en ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁Moi se sek ▁es ku a ▁ze ru rantz ▁e ta ▁E gip to ▁o so a ▁i lun du ▁zen ▁; ▁hain ▁zen ▁i txi a ▁i lun pe a ▁,
PRED:	So Moses lifted up the Ark of Egypt and darkness , and darkness fell into darkness .
GOLD:	So Moses lifted his hand to the sky , and a deep darkness covered the entire land of Egypt for three days .

ID:	2648
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁gi zo nez ko ek ▁to ki ▁guz ti e tan ▁o toitz ▁e gin ▁de za ten ▁na hi ▁dut ▁, ▁ze ru rantz ▁es ku ▁gar bi ak ▁ja soz ▁, ▁ha ser re rik ▁e ta ▁ez ta bai da rik ▁ga be ▁.
PRED:	So I will pray for everyone in heaven , and I will pray for you , and I will not be angry .
GOLD:	In every place of worship , I want men to pray with holy hands lifted up to God , free from anger and controversy .

ID:	2649
INPUT:	▁« ▁Jo se ▁, ▁u bi de ▁on do an lan da re ▁e man kor ▁, ▁ho nen ▁a dar rak ▁har re si an ▁go ra ▁.
PRED:	“ When Joseph leaves his flocks , he became very hungry .
GOLD:	“ Joseph is the foal of a wild donkey , the foal of a wild donkey at a spring — one of the wild donkeys on the ridge .

ID:	2650
INPUT:	▁Is ra el go ▁er re ge en ▁jo ka bi de a ri ▁bai zik ▁: ▁Ju da ▁e ta ▁Je ru sa lem go ▁jen de a ri ▁sa si jain ko ak ▁gur tze ra ▁e ra gin ▁di o zu ▁, ▁A ka ben ▁se ni tar te ko ek ▁be za la ▁. ▁Gai ne ra ▁, ▁zu ▁bai no ▁ho be ak ▁zi ren ▁zeu re ▁a nai ak ▁, ▁zeu re ▁ai ta ren ▁e txe ko ak ▁, ▁hi la ra zi ▁di tu zu ▁.
PRED:	But the people of Israel followed the example of the kings of Judah and Judah . They are detestable to the gods of Judah , just as you have done . You are saying , ‘ You are your brothers and sisters , your sons , daughters , and daughters . '
GOLD:	Instead , you have been as evil as the kings of Israel . You have led the people of Jerusalem and Judah to worship idols , just as King Ahab did in Israel . And you have even killed your own brothers , men who were better than you .

ID:	2651
INPUT:	▁Ab ra ha mek ▁, ▁I sa ak ▁e zar ri ▁zi on ▁i ze na ▁Sa ra ren gan dik ▁i zan da ko ▁se me a ri ▁.
PRED:	Abraham named the son of Isaac , who was the name of Isaac .
GOLD:	And Abraham named their son Isaac .

ID:	2652
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai dan ▁Jau na ▁:
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	It will put them all to the test.What chance do they have ? says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	2653
INPUT:	▁A ta ba kan ▁di ru ▁as ko ▁ze go e la ▁i kus te an ▁, ▁er re ge a ren ▁i daz ka ri a ▁e ta ▁a paiz ▁na gu si a ▁e tor ri ▁o hi ▁zi ren ▁Jau na ren ▁e txe an ▁bil du ri ko ▁di ru a ▁zen ba tze ra ▁.
PRED:	In the same way , the king of heaven will see that the high priest will come to the Temple of the Lord . He will bring the money to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then they gave the money to the construction supervisors , who used it to pay the people working on the Lord 's Temple — the carpenters , the builders ,

ID:	2654
INPUT:	▁E ra ma ten ▁ba di tu zu ▁, ▁zeu ▁bor ro ka tu ▁e ta ▁a ha le gin du ▁ar ren ▁, ▁Jain ko ak ▁es tro pe zu ▁e gi na ra zi ko ▁di zu ▁e tsai en ▁aur re an ▁; ▁la gun ▁bai te za ke ▁Jain ko ak ▁, ▁bai na ▁hon da tu ▁e re ▁bai ▁.
PRED:	You will fight against your enemies and fight against them , and you will be defeated by your enemies . You will be thrown into battle , but God will destroy them .
GOLD:	If you let them go with your troops into battle , you will be defeated by the enemy no matter how well you fight . God will overthrow you , for he has the power to help you or to trip you up . ”

ID:	2655
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁hos to ak ▁i har tu ri ko ha ri tza ren ▁an tze koi zan go ▁za re te ▁, ▁u rik ▁ga be ko ▁ba ra tze a ren ▁pa re ko ▁.
PRED:	For seven branches will be like trees , and each of the trees will be like trees .
GOLD:	You will be like a great tree with withered leaves , like a garden without water .

ID:	2656
INPUT:	▁« ▁Har tu ▁har ri tzar ▁ba tzuk ▁e ta ▁sar tu ▁fa ra oi a ren ▁Taf nes ko ▁jau re gi ▁aur re an ▁da go en ▁buz ti nez ko ▁zo ru an ▁; ▁e gin ▁ho ri ▁ju da tar ren ▁aur re an ▁,
PRED:	“ Take some stone and put it in the presence of Pharaoh , the prince of Pharaoh , king of Egypt , as well as the people of Judah .
GOLD:	“ While the people of Judah are watching , take some large rocks and bury them under the pavement stones at the entrance of Pharaoh 's palace here in Tahpanhes .

ID:	2657
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁pres ta tzen ▁diz ki o ▁i bil bi de ak ▁eu ri - ja sa ri ▁, ▁nork ▁e gi ten ▁bi de a ▁txi mis ta ▁e ta ▁tru moi a ri ▁,
PRED:	Who gives justice to the lightning ; the lightning flashes for lightning .
GOLD:	“ Who created a channel for the torrents of rain ? Who laid out the path for the lightning ?

ID:	2658
INPUT:	▁Ga ra gar - ta lo a ren ▁an tze ko ▁o pi lak ▁e gin ▁e ta ▁jen daur re an ▁gi za ▁go ro tza ren ▁gai ne an ▁er re ko ▁di tu zu ▁» ▁.
PRED:	They are like signs and wonders in the heavens , and they do whatever you do . ”
GOLD:	Prepare and eat this food as you would barley cakes . While all the people are watching , bake it over a fire using dried human dung as fuel and then eat the bread . ”

ID:	2659
INPUT:	▁Je su si ▁jen de - tal de a ▁bil du
PRED:	The True Family of Jesus
GOLD:	Crowds Follow Jesus

ID:	2660
INPUT:	▁Zi ur ta tu ▁zeu re ▁o gi bi de a ▁, ▁lor tu ▁e ta ▁ha si ▁lan tzen ▁zeu re ▁so ro ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁ge ro ▁e rai ki ko ▁du zu ▁e txe a ▁.
PRED:	For you are confident in your presence , and your homes will be rebuilt .
GOLD:	Do your planning and prepare your fieldsbefore building your house .

ID:	2661
INPUT:	▁ez ▁dut ▁be gi rik ▁i txi ko ▁, ▁ez ▁lo ak ▁har tzen ▁u tzi ko ▁,
PRED:	I will not let anyone go unpunished , nor will my disgrace .
GOLD:	I will not let my eyes sleepnor close my eyelids in slumber

ID:	2662
INPUT:	▁Gu du an ▁har ra pa tu ▁zu te ne tik ▁gel di tzen ▁ze na ▁hau xe ▁zen ▁: ▁ar di ak <unk> ▁,
PRED:	At that time the battle came out of the camp , and the young goat 's sister said ,
GOLD:	The plunder remaining from everything the fighting men had taken totaled 675,000 sheep and goats ,

ID:	2663
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁Pi la tok ▁: ▁— ▁Zer ▁o ker ▁e gin ▁du ▁, ▁ba da ▁? ▁Hai ek ▁, ▁a re ▁e ta ▁oi hu ▁han di a goz ▁: ▁— ▁Gu ru tze ra ▁ho ri ▁!
PRED:	“ What do you mean ? ” Pilate demanded . “ Crucify him ! ” “ Crucify him ! ”
GOLD:	“ Why ? ” Pilate demanded . “ What crime has he committed ? ” But the mob roared even louder , “ Crucify him ! ”

ID:	2664
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁gal de tu ko ▁di o te ▁: ▁“ ▁Zer ▁di tuk ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁soi ne an ▁da ra ma tza an ▁zau ri ▁ho ri ek ▁? ▁” ▁E ta ▁hark ▁e ran tzun go ▁: ▁“ ▁Neu re ▁mai ta le en ▁e txe an ▁zau ri tu ▁nau te ▁” ▁» ▁.
PRED:	And if you ask , ‘ What is your cloak ? ' And you will reply , ‘ This is what the Lord says , ‘ I am the one who loves you . '
GOLD:	And if someone asks , ‘ Then what about those wounds on your chest ? ' he will say , ‘ I was wounded at my friends ' house ! '

ID:	2665
INPUT:	▁A ka zen ▁er re ge al di a
PRED:	Ahaziah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Ahaz Rules in Judah

ID:	2666
INPUT:	▁bes te la ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁ha ser re a ▁piz tu ko ▁da ▁zu en ▁aur ka ▁, ▁ze ru a ▁i txi ko ▁du ▁e ta ▁ez ▁du zu e ▁eu ri rik ▁ge hi a go ▁i zan go ▁; ▁lur rak ▁ez ▁du ▁uz ta rik ▁e man go ▁e ta ▁be re ha la ▁de sa ger tu ko ▁za re te ▁Jau nak ▁e ma ten ▁di zu en ▁lur ral de ▁e der ▁hor re ta tik ▁.
PRED:	You will be very angry with the Lord , and you will be very angry with the heavens . You will not be able to bear the land the Lord has given you .
GOLD:	If you do , the Lord 's anger will burn against you . He will shut up the sky and hold back the rain , and the ground will fail to produce its harvests . Then you will quickly die in that good land the Lord is giving you .

ID:	2667
INPUT:	▁Er re ge ak ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁— ▁E tor ra ra zi ▁biz kor ▁Ha man ▁, ▁Es ter ren ▁na hi a ▁be te ▁da <unk> re la ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁Es ter rek ▁pres ta tu a ▁zi en ▁o tor du ra ▁jo an ▁zi ren ▁Ha man ▁e ta ▁bi ak ▁.
PRED:	“ Well , ” the king said , “ give me a young girl who is coming ! ” So Esther told her . So Esther went back to the banquet hall .
GOLD:	The king turned to his attendants and said , “ Tell Haman to come quickly to a banquet , as Esther has requested. ” So the king and Haman went to Esther 's banquet .

ID:	2668
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁i zan ▁zen ▁Moi se sek ▁Mo a be ko ▁lau ta dan ▁, ▁Jor da nez ▁bes te ▁al de ra ▁, ▁Je ri ko tik ▁e ki al de ra ▁, ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁on da re - ba na ke ta ▁.
PRED:	This was the same instructions that Moses gave to the people of Moab , east of the Jordan River , from east of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	These are the allotments Moses had made while he was on the plains of Moab , across the Jordan River , east of Jericho .

ID:	2669
INPUT:	▁Si mo nen ▁a ma gi nar re ba ▁o he ra tu a ▁ze go en ▁su kar rez ▁; ▁be re ha la ▁, ▁har taz ▁hitz ▁e gin ▁zi o ten ▁Je su si ▁.
PRED:	The woman named Simon , who was very angry with him , so he spoke to him .
GOLD:	Now Simon 's mother-in-law was sick in bed with a high fever . They told Jesus about her right away .

ID:	2670
INPUT:	▁Gra zi a ▁Je su ▁Kris to ▁gu re ▁Jau na ▁mai ta sun ▁i raun kor rez ▁mai te ▁du ten ▁guz ti e kin ▁.
PRED:	May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with all who love us .
GOLD:	May God 's grace be eternally upon all who love our Lord Jesus Christ .

ID:	2671
INPUT:	▁Har ri ▁gai ne ko ▁ha zi a ▁be za la ko ak ▁, ▁hau ek ▁di ra ▁: ▁me zu a ▁en tzu te an ▁, ▁po zik ▁o nar tzen ▁du te nak ▁; ▁bai na ▁, ▁sus trai rik ▁ga be ak ▁i za nik ▁, ▁den bo ral di ▁ba te an ▁si nes ten ▁du te ▁, ▁bai na ▁ten tal di - ga rai an ▁huts ▁e gi ten ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : Those who hear the word of God will be cut off , but those who obey it is foolish . Those who trust in him , but they do n't believe it .
GOLD:	The seeds on the rocky soil represent those who hear the message and receive it with joy . But since they do n't have deep roots , they believe for a while , then they fall away when they face temptation .

ID:	2672
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁gri na ri ▁eu tsi ▁e zin ▁ba di o te ▁, ▁ez kon ▁dai te ze la ▁; ▁ho be ▁da ▁ez kon tze a ▁su tan ▁e go te a ▁bai no ▁.
PRED:	But if the old nature is better than the old , it is better than the fire , it is better than the fire .
GOLD:	But if they ca n't control themselves , they should go ahead and marry . It 's better to marry than to burn with lust .

ID:	2673
INPUT:	▁Ho reb ▁men di ko ▁i tu na ren ▁o roi tza pe na
PRED:	The Lord 's Chosen Place
GOLD:	Ten Commandments for the Covenant Community

ID:	2674
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁hau ▁di ot ▁nik ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁Neu re ▁ha ser re - su mi ne an ▁e kaitz - hai ze a ▁sor ra ra zi ko ▁dut ▁, ▁u hol de - eu ri ak ▁e ta ▁har ri ▁sun tsi tzai le a ▁bi da li ko ▁.
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will pour out my fury on them , and I will pour down rain on them .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will sweep away your whitewashed wall with a storm of indignation , with a great flood of anger , and with hailstones of fury .

ID:	2675
INPUT:	▁Txo ri ak ▁, ▁he go ak ▁za bal du rik ▁, ▁ha bi a ▁zain du ▁o hi ▁du en ▁be za la ▁, ▁ha la xe ▁zain du ko ▁du ▁Je ru sa <unk> ▁a hal guz ti du nak ▁; ▁zain du ko ▁du ▁e ta ▁as ka tu ko ▁, ▁bar ka tu ▁e ta ▁sal ba tu ko ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Like a bird falls on its shade , it will be like a bird 's nest , like the door of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and it will be saved . ”
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies will hover over Jerusalemand protect it like a bird protecting its nest.He will defend and save the city ; he will pass over it and rescue it . ”

ID:	2676
INPUT:	▁Jo sa fat ▁ge ro ▁e ta ▁in dar tsu a go ▁e gi ten ▁a ri ▁zen ▁. ▁Go tor le ku ak ▁e ta ▁ja na ri - bil te gi ▁i za te ko ▁hi ri ak ▁e rai ki ▁zi tu en ▁Ju dan ▁.
PRED:	So Jehoshaphat and his powerful army went out to fight the fortified towns of Judah and fortified towns .
GOLD:	So Jehoshaphat became more and more powerful and built fortresses and storage cities throughout Judah .

ID:	2677
INPUT:	▁Ja kin du ri az ▁e do ▁in dar raz ▁hor ni tu a ▁i zan da ▁e re ▁, ▁nork ▁e gin go ▁di o ▁aur re ▁e ta ▁kal te ga be ▁gel di tu ▁?
PRED:	Do n't you realize that the power of the Lord will be able to stand against him ?
GOLD:	For God is so wise and so mighty.Who has ever challenged him successfully ?

ID:	2678
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁e san ▁zi on ▁Bo o zek ▁Ru ti ▁: ▁— ▁A di zu ▁! ▁Ez ▁zai tez ▁jo an ▁so ro ▁ho ne ta tik ▁bes te ▁i no ra ▁ga ra gar bu ru ak ▁bil tze ra ▁. ▁Jar rai ▁he men ▁la ne an ▁ni re ▁mor roi e kin ▁.
PRED:	Then Boaz said to Boaz , “ Leave your servant alone ! Do n't go back to the field where you are going to meet me . ”
GOLD:	Boaz went over and said to Ruth , “ Listen , my daughter . Stay right here with us when you gather grain ; do n't go to any other fields . Stay right behind the young women working in my field .

ID:	2679
INPUT:	▁Jain ko ak ▁be re ▁le hen - se me a ▁mun du an ▁sar ra raz te an ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁ho ne la ▁e sa ten ▁du ▁: ▁A do ra ▁de za te la ▁be ra ▁Jain ko a ren ▁ain ge ru ▁guz ti ek ▁.
PRED:	And when God sits in the world , he will enter the world , just as he said , “ The glory of God is the angels of the world . ”
GOLD:	And when he brought his supreme Son into the world , God said , “ Let all of God 's angels worship him . ”

ID:	2680
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁naiz ▁i no ren ▁al de ▁jar ri ko ▁, ▁ez ▁dut ▁i nor ▁lau sen ga tu ko ▁.
PRED:	I will not walk on the four corners of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	I wo n't play favoritesor try to flatter anyone .

ID:	2681
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁on do ren ▁, ▁bes te ▁er rei nu ▁bat ▁sor tu ko ▁da ▁, ▁zu re a ▁bai no ▁txi ki a go a ▁. ▁Ge ro ▁hi ru gar ren ▁bat ▁, ▁bron tzez ko a ▁, ▁mun du ▁o so a ▁men de ra tu ko ▁du e na ▁.
PRED:	From the end of your kingdom will be greater than all the kingdoms of the earth . It will be greater than all the kingdoms of the earth .
GOLD:	“ But after your kingdom comes to an end , another kingdom , inferior to yours , will rise to take your place . After that kingdom has fallen , yet a third kingdom , represented by bronze , will rise to rule the world .

ID:	2682
INPUT:	▁E li se ok ▁, ▁i tzu li rik ▁, ▁be gi ra tu ▁e ta ▁ma da ri ka tu ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁Jau na ren ▁i ze ne an ▁. ▁Or du an ▁, ▁bi ▁har tzek ▁oi ha ne tik ▁a te ra ▁e ta ▁mu ti ko ▁hai e ta rik ▁ber ro gei ta ▁bi ▁txi ki tu rik ▁u tzi ▁zi tuz ten ▁.
PRED:	When Elisha returned to the ground , he sent them out and sent them out of the Lord 's feet , and they ran out to the water of the Lord 's feet .
GOLD:	Elisha turned around and looked at them , and he cursed them in the name of the Lord . Then two bears came out of the woods and mauled forty-two of them .

ID:	2683
INPUT:	▁Da vi dek ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁Haur ra ▁bi zi ▁zen ▁bi tar te an ▁, ▁be ra ren ga tik ▁e gi ten ▁nu en ▁ba rau ▁e ta ▁ne gar ▁. ▁Neu re ▁bai tan ▁ni o en ▁: ▁« ▁E a ▁er ru ki tzen ▁zai dan ▁Jau na ▁e ta ▁bi zi rik ▁gel di tzen ▁den ▁haur ra ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ My child , ” David said . “ I am the Lord. ” So David said , “ I am the Lord , but I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	David replied , “ I fasted and wept while the child was alive , for I said , ‘ Perhaps the Lord will be gracious to me and let the child live . '

ID:	2684
INPUT:	▁Ai ▁e ne ▁, ▁de se gi na ▁da ▁Mo ab ▁! ▁E gin ▁in tzi ri ▁! ▁Lo tsa ren ▁lo tsaz ▁biz kar ra ▁e man ▁du ▁! ▁Au zo ko en ▁i zu ▁e ta ▁i se ka - gai ▁bi hur tu ▁da ▁.
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who live in the land of Moab , ” says the Lord . “ What sorrow awaits you ! ”
GOLD:	How it is shattered ! Hear the wailing ! See the shame of Moab ! It has become an object of ridicule , an example of ruin to all its neighbors . ”

ID:	2685
INPUT:	▁Is ra el ▁her ri ak ▁ber ri ro ▁de so be di tu
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Prayer of Thanksgiving
GOLD:	The Lord Punishes the Israelites

ID:	2686
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁, ▁in gu ru ko ▁guz ti ei ▁ha ser re ▁be gi ra tu rik ▁e ta ▁be rai en ▁se ta ke ri az ▁min du rik ▁, ▁ho ne la ▁e san ▁zi on ▁gi zo na ri ▁: ▁— ▁Lu za tu ▁be so ▁ho <unk> ▁lu za tu ▁, ▁e ta ▁sen da tu ▁e gin ▁zi tzai on ▁.
PRED:	Jesus became very angry with them , and he said to them , “ My lord , you 're going to find out everything you 've done . ”
GOLD:	He looked around at them angrily and was deeply saddened by their hard hearts . Then he said to the man , “ Hold out your hand. ” So the man held out his hand , and it was restored !

ID:	2687
INPUT:	▁Gi za ki ak ▁ez ▁du ▁ja kin du ri a ren ▁ber ri rik
PRED:	A New Copy of the Covenant
GOLD:	Job Speaks of Wisdom and Understanding

ID:	2688
INPUT:	▁Be ra ▁e re ▁ne ke e tan ▁pro ba tu a ▁i zan ▁de la ko ▁, ▁gau za ▁da ▁o rain ▁pro bal di an ▁dau de nei ▁la gun tze ko ▁.
PRED:	In the same way , everyone will be comforted , just as the time is coming .
GOLD:	Since he himself has gone through suffering and testing , he is able to help us when we are being tested .

ID:	2689
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁ga rai ▁ba te an ▁i lun pe tan ▁bi zi ▁zi ne ten ▁; ▁o rain ▁, ▁al diz ▁, ▁ar gi tan ▁bi zi ▁za re te ▁, ▁Jau na re kin ▁bat ▁e gi nik ▁. ▁Jo ka tu ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁ar gi a ren ▁par tai de ▁za re te nez ▁;
PRED:	For when they were in darkness , they were still alive in darkness , but they were buried in the Lord 's presence .
GOLD:	For once you were full of darkness , but now you have light from the Lord . So live as people of light !

ID:	2690
INPUT:	▁Zu ek ▁be te ko ▁du zu e ▁san tu te gi ko ▁e ta ▁al da re ko ▁zer bi tzu ▁sak ra tu a ▁; ▁ho ne la ▁, ▁ez ▁da ▁ni re ▁ha ser re a ▁is ra el dar ren ▁aur ka ▁piz tu ko ▁.
PRED:	You will be holy because of your holy sanctuary , and you will not sin against the people of Israel . You must not sin against me .
GOLD:	“ You yourselves must perform the sacred duties inside the sanctuary and at the altar . If you follow these instructions , the Lord 's anger will never again blaze against the people of Israel .

ID:	2691
INPUT:	▁Da vi de na ▁. ▁A bi me le ken ▁aur re an ▁e ro a re na ▁e gin ▁zu e la rik ▁, ▁hark ▁Da vid ▁bo ta ▁e ta ▁ho nek ▁al de ▁e gin ▁zu e ne ko a ▁.
PRED:	When David heard that David was gone , he became very old , and David took him away and chased him away .
GOLD:	I will praise the Lord at all times.I will constantly speak his praises .

ID:	2692
INPUT:	▁Fa ri seu ▁e ta ▁sa du ze ar rak ▁mi ra riz ko ▁sei na le ▁es ke
PRED:	The True Family of Jesus
GOLD:	Leaders Demand a Miraculous Sign

ID:	2693
INPUT:	▁Aur pe gi a ▁u re tan ▁is la tzen ▁da ▁, ▁gi za ki a ▁gi za ki a ren ▁bi ho tze an ▁.
PRED:	People are like a human beings ; their hearts are like a human heart .
GOLD:	As a face is reflected in water , so the heart reflects the real person .

ID:	2694
INPUT:	▁Bu ka ▁e za zu ▁Le a ren ▁ez tei - as te a ▁e ta ▁, ▁ge ro ▁, ▁Ra kel ▁e re ▁e man go ▁di zut ▁bes te ▁zaz pi ▁ur te ko ▁la na ren ▁tru ke ▁.
PRED:	Now I will give you seven more sons and Leah , but I will give them seven more than seven years .
GOLD:	“ But wait until the bridal week is over ; then we 'll give you Rachel , too — provided you promise to work another seven years for me . ”

ID:	2695
INPUT:	▁hor re ga tik ▁piz tu ▁zen ▁Jau na ren ▁ha ser re a ▁her ri al de ▁hor ren ▁kon tra ▁, ▁hor re ga tik ▁bi da li ▁ziz ki on ▁li bu ru ▁ho ne tan ▁i da tzi ta ko ▁ma da ri ka zi o ▁guz ti ak ▁.
PRED:	That is why the anger of the Lord burned against the people of the earth , and he sent them to curse them .
GOLD:	Instead , they turned away to serve and worship gods they had not known before , gods that were not from the Lord .

ID:	2696
INPUT:	▁De ab ru ei ▁es kai ni ▁ziz ki e ten sak ri fi zi o ak ▁, ▁e za gu tzen ▁ez ▁zi tuz ten ▁sa si jain ko ei ▁, ▁a res ti an ▁e tor ri ta ko ▁jain ko ▁ber ri ei ▁, ▁ar ba so ek ▁i noiz ▁gur tu ▁ez ▁zi tuz te nei ▁.
PRED:	They offered sacrifices to the gods of demons , and they worshiped idols and worshiped other gods . They did not worship other gods .
GOLD:	They offered sacrifices to demons , which are not God , to gods they had not known before , to new gods only recently arrived , to gods their ancestors had never feared .

ID:	2697
INPUT:	▁I tzul ▁be lar ri a ▁ni re ga na ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁e ta ▁en tzun ▁. ▁Za bal ▁be gi ak ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁e ta ▁i ku si ▁. ▁En tzun ▁no la ko ▁i rai nak ▁zu zen du ▁diz ki zun ▁Se na ke ri bek ▁zu ri ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁bi zi ▁hor ri ▁.
PRED:	Listen to me , O Lord , hear my prayer ! Listen to what the Lord your God says : Listen to me , O Lord , you have seen your ways .
GOLD:	Bend down , O Lord , and listen ! Open your eyes , O Lord , and see ! Listen to Sennacherib 's words of defiance against the living God .

ID:	2698
INPUT:	▁Jo su e ▁e ta ▁ez pa ta dun ▁gi zo na
PRED:	Joshua and John
GOLD:	The Lord 's Commander Confronts Joshua

ID:	2699
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁Zu e ta ko ▁zei nek ▁, ▁ar di ▁ba kar ra ▁e du ki ▁e ta ▁la run ba tez ▁zu lo ra ▁e ror tzen ▁ba zai o ▁, ▁ez ▁du ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁a te ra ko ▁?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Who are you going to take one of you and put them on the Sabbath ? If you cross the Sabbath , why are you going to stone ? ”
GOLD:	And he answered , “ If you had a sheep that fell into a well on the Sabbath , would n't you work to pull it out ? Of course you would .

ID:	2700
INPUT:	▁Je su sen ▁ge ne a lo gi a
PRED:	The True Family of Jesus
GOLD:	The Ancestors of Jesus the Messiah

ID:	2701
INPUT:	▁lei nu ▁ba koi tze tik ▁fa mi li a bu ru ▁bat ▁la gun ▁du zu e la rik ▁.
PRED:	From the tribe of Levi , you are one of the tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	and you will be assisted by one family leader from each tribe .

ID:	2702
INPUT:	▁Zin tzo a ren ▁bi de a ▁zu ze na ▁da ▁: ▁zuk ▁e gi ten ▁du zu ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁zin tzo a ren ▁bi de a ▁zu zen ▁.
PRED:	The godly walk in the name of the Lord , but you show integrity to the godly .
GOLD:	But for those who are righteous , the way is not steep and rough.You are a God who does what is right , and you smooth out the path ahead of them .

ID:	2703
INPUT:	▁Ze la ta ri ek ▁e ra so ▁zi o ten ▁ol dar ka ▁Gi be a ri ▁, ▁za bal du ▁zi ren ▁e ta ▁hi ri ko ▁jen de ▁guz ti a ▁hil ▁zu ten ▁ez pa taz ▁.
PRED:	So they fought against the town and fought against everyone , including the town , and all the people slaughtered them .
GOLD:	Then those who were hiding rushed in from all sides and killed everyone in the town .

ID:	2704
INPUT:	▁A na ni as ▁i ze ne ko ▁gi zon ▁ba tek ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁e maz te ▁Sa fi rak ▁so ro ▁bat ▁sal du ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	Azariah 's wife was one of the family of Joab and his wife , who was sold in the field .
GOLD:	But there was a certain man named Ananias who , with his wife , Sapphira , sold some property .

ID:	2705
INPUT:	▁Her ri al de ▁hor re ta ko ▁i gar le ▁ba tek ▁, ▁hain ▁zu zen ▁, ▁hau xe ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁Kre tar rak ▁be ti ▁ge zur ti ▁, ▁piz ti a ▁txar ▁e ta ▁tri pa zain ▁al fer ▁.
PRED:	One of the people of Crete said , “ A false man is like a man , a man of a man who was raised from the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	Even one of their own men , a prophet from Crete , has said about them , “ The people of Crete are all liars , cruel animals , and lazy gluttons . ”

ID:	2706
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁naiz ▁i no la ko ▁bi de ▁txar re ta tik ▁a bi a tzen ▁, ▁zu re ▁hi tza ▁gor de tze ar ren ▁.
PRED:	Do n't let me live in your word , for I hate your word .
GOLD:	I have refused to walk on any evil path , so that I may remain obedient to your word .

ID:	2707
INPUT:	▁Jo sa fat ▁, ▁Pa ru a hen ▁se me a ▁, ▁I sa kar ren ▁;
PRED:	Jehoshaphat son of Iddo , during the family of Jehoshaphat .
GOLD:	Jehoshaphat son of Paruah , in Issachar .

ID:	2708
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁da ▁lur ral de ▁ho ne tan gi zon ▁lei a lik ▁gel di tzen ▁, ▁ez ta ▁gi zar te an ▁gi zon ▁zu ze nik ▁e re ▁: ▁de nak ▁o dol - e gar riz ▁dau de ▁, ▁sa re a ▁jar tzen ▁di o ▁ba tak ▁bes te a ri ▁;
PRED:	It is not like a man who sits in the land , but only a person who sits on the head of a murderer 's head is scattered .
GOLD:	The godly people have all disappeared ; not one honest person is left on the earth.They are all murderers , setting traps even for their own brothers .

ID:	2709
INPUT:	▁« ▁O nar tu ▁e ta ▁be te ▁e ma ten ▁diz ki zu e dan ▁a gin du ▁guz ti ok ▁, ▁be ti ▁zo ri on tsu ▁i zan ▁zai tez ten ▁, ▁bai ▁zeu ek ▁, ▁bai ▁on do ren go ak ▁, ▁Jau na ri ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko a ri ▁on ▁e ta ▁zu zen ▁i ru di tzen ▁zai o na ▁e gi te a ga tik ▁.
PRED:	“ Be careful to obey all the commands of the Lord your God . Be strong and courageous ! Be strong and courageous ! Be strong and courageous !
GOLD:	Be careful to obey all my commands , so that all will go well with you and your children after you , because you will be doing what is good and pleasing to the Lord your God .

ID:	2710
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Bai na ▁e ma da zu ▁ho na ko ▁hau ▁: ▁bi ▁hi la be tez ▁men diz ▁men di ▁neu re ▁la gu ne kin ▁ne gar rez ▁i bil tze a ▁, ▁ez kon du ▁bai no ▁le hen ▁hil ▁be har ▁du da la ko ▁.
PRED:	“ Yes , ” she said to her , “ I will go down to the mountain of two months with me , for I will not die . ”
GOLD:	But first let me do this one thing : Let me go up and roam in the hills and weep with my friends for two months , because I will die a virgin . ”

ID:	2711
INPUT:	▁E ra ▁be re an ▁, ▁se nar rek ▁e re ▁be ren ▁gor pu tza ▁be za la xe ▁mai ta tu ▁be har ▁di tuz te ▁e maz te ak ▁. ▁E maz te a ▁mai te ▁du e nak ▁be re ▁bu ru a ▁mai te ▁du ▁.
PRED:	And so , his wife must love his own body as he loves his wife and love .
GOLD:	In the same way , husbands ought to love their wives as they love their own bodies . For a man who loves his wife actually shows love for himself .

ID:	2712
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁be rak ▁jo ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁kan pa le ku tik ▁e ra bat ▁de sa ger ra ra zi ▁ar te ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord struck them down from the camp until he disappeared .
GOLD:	The Lord struck them down until they had all been eliminated from the community .

ID:	2713
INPUT:	▁zu hur tzi a ri ▁ka su ▁e gi ne ta ▁zen tzu ▁o na ri ▁ja ra mon ▁e gi ten ▁ba di o zu ▁,
PRED:	If you listen to wisdom wisdom and knowledge , listen to your wisdom .
GOLD:	Tune your ears to wisdom , and concentrate on understanding .

ID:	2714
INPUT:	▁Jain ko a ren ▁se me ek ▁, ▁gi za ki en ▁a la bak ▁e der rak ▁zi re la ▁i ku si rik ▁, ▁hai en ▁ar te tik ▁hau ta tu ▁e ta ▁e maz te tzat ▁har tu ▁zi tuz ten ▁.
PRED:	He saw two sons who were born in the land of God , and they took their wives from their wives and women .
GOLD:	The sons of God saw the beautiful women and took any they wanted as their wives .

ID:	2715
INPUT:	▁Kris to ▁Je su sen gan ▁sor ka ri ▁ber ri
PRED:	The Prayer of Christ Jesus
GOLD:	New Bodies

ID:	2716
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁ken du ko ▁di o ▁be re ▁lar ru - jan tzi a ▁, ▁zu la e zi ne ko ▁os kol ▁bi koi tza ▁be za la ko a ▁de na ▁?
PRED:	Who will take away his robe ? Who will put his robe on him ?
GOLD:	Can you make it a pet like a bird , or give it to your little girls to play with ?

ID:	2717
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁nor bai tek ▁, ▁txi ki ▁na hiz ▁han di ▁, ▁gi za se me ▁na hiz ▁e ma ku me ▁, ▁Jau na ren ga na ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁Jain ko a ren ga na ▁, ▁jo tzen ▁ez ▁ba zu en ▁, ▁hil ▁e gin go ▁zu te la ▁.
PRED:	And if a man or a man or woman , or woman , or a man of the Lord , you must not murder the Lord your God .
GOLD:	They agreed that anyone who refused to seek the Lord , the God of Israel , would be put to death — whether young or old , man or woman .

ID:	2718
INPUT:	▁Su sa ▁hi ri an ▁bos te hun ▁gi za se me ▁hil ▁e ta ▁gar bi tu ▁zi tuz ten ▁,
PRED:	They killed 300 men in the fortress of Susa , and they purified themselves .
GOLD:	In the fortress of Susa itself , the Jews killed 500 men .

ID:	2719
INPUT:	▁Bi ho tza ▁kez kaz ▁be te a ▁i zan ▁ar ren ▁, ▁zeu re ▁kon tso la men du az ▁go za tzen ▁nau zu ▁.
PRED:	My heart is confident in your heart , and I will comfort you .
GOLD:	When doubts filled my mind , your comfort gave me renewed hope and cheer .

ID:	2720
INPUT:	▁E ra ▁be re an ▁, ▁e ma ku me a ▁a be re ▁ba te kin ▁el kar ▁ba tzen ▁ba da ▁, ▁he ri o tza ra ▁e man go ▁di tuz te ▁e ma ku me a ▁e ta ▁a be re a ▁. ▁Be re na ▁i zan go ▁du te ▁he ri o tza ren ▁er ru a ▁.
PRED:	If a woman has sex with her , she must be put to death , and she must be put to death . She must be put to death .
GOLD:	“ If a woman presents herself to a male animal to have intercourse with it , she and the animal must both be put to death . You must kill both , for they are guilty of a capital offense .

ID:	2721
INPUT:	▁Ha re kin ▁i bil tze ak ▁he ri o tza rantz ▁e ra ma ten ▁zai tu ▁, ▁Hil da ko en ▁E goi tza ra ▁do az ▁ha ren ▁ur ra tsak ▁.
PRED:	He calls out to the grave , and he will die in the grave .
GOLD:	Her feet go down to death ; her steps lead straight to the grave .

ID:	2722
INPUT:	▁« ▁Zu ek ▁ni re ga na ▁e tor ri ▁e ta ▁e san ▁ze ni da ten ▁: ▁Bi dal ▁di tza gun ▁aur re tik ▁zen bait ▁gi zon ▁lur ral de a ▁i ker tze ra ▁, ▁zein ▁bi de ta tik ▁jo an ▁e ta ▁zein ▁hi ri ta ra ▁sar tu ▁ja ki na raz ▁di e za gu ten ▁.
PRED:	“ You came to me and said to me , ‘ Send some men from the land where they are going . We are going to take some of them into the land .
GOLD:	“ But you all came to me and said , ‘ First , let 's send out scouts to explore the land for us . They will advise us on the best route to take and which towns we should enter . '

ID:	2723
INPUT:	▁Nor ▁i go ▁Jau na ren ▁men di ra ▁? ▁Nor ▁e gon ▁hark ▁sa ga ra tu ri ko ▁to ki an ▁?
PRED:	Who will go to the mountain of the Lord ? Who will stand on the mountain ?
GOLD:	Who may climb the mountain of the Lord ? Who may stand in his holy place ?

ID:	2724
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁hor ren ▁on do ren ▁, ▁er ru ki tu ▁e gin go ▁na tzai e ▁, ▁e ta ▁her ri ▁ba koi tza ▁, ▁nor ▁be re ▁on da re ra ▁e ta ▁lur ral de ra ▁i tzu li ko ▁dut ▁.
PRED:	But I will show mercy to those nations , and I will return to their own land .
GOLD:	But afterward I will return and have compassion on all of them . I will bring them home to their own lands again , each nation to its own possession .

ID:	2725
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁fi lis te ar rek ▁gal de tu ▁zu ten ▁: ▁— ▁Nork ▁e gin ▁du ▁ho ri ▁? ▁E ran tzun ▁zi e ten ▁: ▁— ▁Sam so nek ▁, <unk> nar ra ren ▁su hi ak ▁, ▁ze ren ▁e ta ▁hark ▁Sam so nen ▁e maz te a ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁be ra ren ▁la gu na ri ▁e man ▁bai ti o.Or du an ▁, ▁fi lis te ar rek ▁jo an ▁e ta ▁er re ▁e gin ▁zi tuz ten ▁ai ta - a la bak ▁.
PRED:	“ Who did this ? ” the Philistines asked . “ Who is this ? ” Samson replied , “ Samson 's daughter , the daughter of Samson , the daughter of Samson , and his wife , and his wife was killed . ”
GOLD:	“ Who did this ? ” the Philistines demanded. “ Samson , ” was the reply , “ because his father-in-law from Timnah gave Samson 's wife to be married to his best man. ” So the Philistines went and got the woman and her father and burned them to death .

ID:	2726
INPUT:	▁Ab sa lo mek ▁, ▁be re ▁a nai ak ▁, ▁gal de tu ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Am non ▁e gon ▁al ▁dun ▁hi re kin ▁? ▁I sil ▁ha di ▁, ▁e ne ▁ar re ba ▁, ▁heu re ▁a nai a ▁dun ▁e ta ▁. ▁Ez ▁kez ka tu ▁hor re ga <unk> mar ▁, ▁ha la ▁e re ▁, ▁a tse ka be tu a ▁gel di tu ▁zen ▁be re ▁a nai a ▁Ab sa lo men ▁e txe an ▁.
PRED:	But Absalom 's brothers asked him , “ Is n't it enough to get up ? ” So Amnon said , “ Absalom 's daughter 's daughter 's daughter , and Rebekah 's brother , Isaac , and his brother Absalom 's wife , and his brother Absalom stayed there .
GOLD:	Her brother Absalom saw her and asked , “ Is it true that Amnon has been with you ? Well , my sister , keep quiet for now , since he 's your brother . Do n't you worry about it. ” So Tamar lived as a desolate woman in her brother Absalom 's house .

ID:	2727
INPUT:	▁En tzun ▁hau ▁, ▁zu ek ▁, ▁be har tsu ak ▁za pal du e ta ▁jen de ▁er ru kar ri a hon da tzen ▁du zu e nok ▁.
PRED:	“ Listen , you poor , you kings of the poor ! You are the poor !
GOLD:	Listen to this , you who rob the poorand trample down the needy !

ID:	2728
INPUT:	▁lur re an ▁ar ras ta ka ▁da bil tzan ▁nar ras ti- ▁na hiz ▁lur ▁az pi ko ▁u re tan ▁da bil tzan ▁ar rain - i ru di ak ▁.
PRED:	All the small animals that scurry along the ground , and every kind of small animal on the ground .
GOLD:	a small animal that scurries along the ground , or a fish in the deepest sea .

ID:	2729
INPUT:	▁I bar ▁le hor ra ▁i ga ro tze an ▁, ▁i tur bu ru tik ▁e da ten ▁du te ▁: ▁le hen ▁eu ri ek ▁ur - be giz ▁bai tu te ▁es tal tzen ▁.
PRED:	He springs from deep water in water , but springs deep water flowed from the rock .
GOLD:	They will continue to grow stronger , and each of them will appear before God in Jerusalem .

ID:	2730
INPUT:	▁ma hai a ▁be re ▁tres ne kin ▁, ▁ar gi mu ti la ▁be re ▁tres ne kin ▁, ▁in tsen tsu - al da re a ▁,
PRED:	the table ; the Bread of the Presence ; the incense ; the incense altar ;
GOLD:	the table and all its utensils , the lampstand and all its accessories , the incense altar ,

ID:	2731
INPUT:	▁Ger ta tu a ▁i ku si ▁zu te nek ▁de ab ru du na ▁no la ▁sen da tu a ▁i zan ▁zen ▁kon ta tu ▁zi o ten ▁jen de a ri ▁.
PRED:	When the devil saw that he was healed , he healed the sick man who had been healed .
GOLD:	Then those who had seen what happened told the others how the demon-possessed man had been healed .

ID:	2732
INPUT:	▁Is ra e len ▁be gi ra le ak ▁i tsu ▁dau de ▁, ▁ez ▁da ▁i nor ▁e zer taz ▁o har <unk> ka rik ▁e gin ▁e zin ▁du ten txa kur ▁mu tu ak ▁di ra ▁; ▁hor ▁dau de ▁e tzan da ▁, ▁a me tse tan ▁, ▁be ti ▁lo gu ra ▁.
PRED:	The people of Israel are too strong for their eyes , and no one can tell them what they are saying . They are so little , and they lie in trouble .
GOLD:	For the leaders of my people — the Lord 's watchmen , his shepherds — are blind and ignorant.They are like silent watchdogsthat give no warning when danger comes.They love to lie around , sleeping and dreaming .

ID:	2733
INPUT:	▁Gre ko - hiz kun tza ko ▁ju du e kin ▁e re ▁hiz ke tan ▁e ta ▁ez ta bai dan ▁jar du ten ▁zu en ▁; ▁bai na ▁hai ek ▁Sau lo ▁hil tze ko ▁as mo tan ▁ze bil tzan ▁.
PRED:	Some Jews from Greece were not talking with them , and they tried to kill Saul . But Saul tried to kill him .
GOLD:	He debated with some Greek-speaking Jews , but they tried to murder him .

ID:	2734
INPUT:	▁Sai a ▁zai tez te ▁guz ti e kin ▁ba ke an ▁bi zi tzen ▁, ▁e ta ▁i zan ▁san tu ▁; ▁bes te la ▁, ▁ez ▁bai tu ▁i nork ▁Jau na ▁i ku si ko ▁.
PRED:	Be careful to obey all the commands of the Lord . Do n't let anyone see the holy things you have seen .
GOLD:	Work at living in peace with everyone , and work at living a holy life , for those who are not holy will not see the Lord .

ID:	2735
INPUT:	▁Sa mu e lek ▁Sau li ▁: ▁— ▁As ki ▁da ▁! ▁Gaur ▁gau e an ▁Jau nak ▁a di e ra zi ▁di da na ▁ja ki na ra zi ▁be har ▁di zut.E ta ▁Sau lek ▁: ▁— ▁Min tza ▁zai tez ▁.
PRED:	Samuel replied , “ Today the Lord is here ! ” Samuel replied . “ You 've told me , ‘ Today I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Then Samuel said to Saul , “ Stop ! Listen to what the Lord told me last night ! ” “ What did he tell you ? ” Saul asked .

ID:	2736
INPUT:	▁He li o po lis ▁e ta ▁Bu bas ti se ko ▁gaz te ak ▁ger ran ▁hil ko ▁di tuz te ▁e ta ▁e ma ku me ak ▁ga ti bu ▁e ra man go ▁.
PRED:	The young men of Moab will be killed , and the young men will be killed by the sword .
GOLD:	The young men of Heliopolis and Bubastis will die in battle , and the women will be taken away as slaves .

ID:	2737
INPUT:	▁No la ▁bar ru ko ▁ha la ▁kan po ko ▁hor me tan ▁, ▁in gu ru ▁guz ti an ▁, ▁he gal dun ▁i za ki - i ru di ak ▁, ▁pal mon do ▁e ta ▁lo re - sor ten ▁i ru di ak ▁zi zel ka tu ▁zi tu en ▁.
PRED:	All the cherubim were decorated with carvings of cherubim , palm trees , and palm trees were decorated with carvings of cherubim .
GOLD:	He decorated all the walls of the inner sanctuary and the main room with carvings of cherubim , palm trees , and open flowers .

ID:	2738
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁e ra ba ki ak ▁i ra kas ten ▁diz ki o te Is ra e li ▁, ▁zu re ▁le ge a ▁Ja ko ben ▁her ri a ri ▁; ▁in tsen tsu a ▁aur kez ten ▁du te zu re ▁aur re an ▁, ▁er re - o pa ri ak ▁zu re ▁al da re an ▁.
PRED:	The nations of your wonderful deeds have seen your instructions , O Jacob , the people of Israel , making incense before your altar .
GOLD:	They teach your regulations to Jacob ; they give your instructions to Israel.They present incense before youand offer whole burnt offerings on the altar .

ID:	2739
INPUT:	▁Bel dur - i ka rak ▁jo ko ▁di tu ▁, ▁e ta ▁hain ▁es tu a ▁e ta ▁lar ri ai zan go ▁da ▁e go e ra ▁, ▁e zen ▁er di mi ne tan ▁da go e ne ma ku me a ▁be za la bi hur ri tu ko ▁bai ti <unk> ri ▁e ta ▁zur ▁e gi nik be gi ra tu ko ▁di o te ▁el kar ri ▁, ▁aur pe gi ak ▁lo tsaz ▁gor ri ▁di tuz te la ▁.
PRED:	The fire will strike the sea , and the fire will strike the sea , and it will be destroyed . It will become a virgin , like a woman in a trap .
GOLD:	and people are terrified.Pangs of anguish grip them , like those of a woman in labor.They look helplessly at one another , their faces aflame with fear .

ID:	2740
INPUT:	▁A la bai na ▁, ▁e ne ▁her ri ▁ho ri ▁, ▁zu ri ▁bi de a ▁za bal tze ko nik ▁sun tsi tu ▁nu en ▁a mor tar ra ▁, ▁zed ro a ▁be zain ▁tan tai e ta ▁ar te a ▁be zain ▁sen do ▁ze na ▁; ▁bo ta ▁niz ki on ▁frui tu ak ▁gai ne tik ▁, ▁e ta ▁a te ra ▁sus trai ak ▁az pi tik ▁.
PRED:	I also destroyed all the trees of the Jordan River , just as I had destroyed the trees of the desert , as clear as the cedars of Lebanon . And I cut down the cedars of Lebanon .
GOLD:	“ But as my people watched , I destroyed the Amorites , though they were as tall as cedarsand as strong as oaks.I destroyed the fruit on their branchesand dug out their roots .

ID:	2741
INPUT:	▁Fa ri seu ▁e ta ▁le ge - mai su ek ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁huts ▁e ra gin ▁zi o ten ▁Jain ko ak ▁be rai en tzat ▁zeu kan ▁as mo a ri ▁, ▁ez ▁bai tzu ten ▁Jo a nen ▁ba tai o a ▁har tu ▁.
PRED:	But the Pharisees and teachers of religious law heard about Jesus , but they did n't believe John .
GOLD:	But the Pharisees and experts in religious law rejected God 's plan for them , for they had refused John 's baptism .

ID:	2742
INPUT:	▁Fi lis te ar rek ▁Ge ban ▁zu ten ▁gu da ri - tal de a ▁hil ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁Jo na ta nek ▁, ▁e ta ▁ja kin ▁zu ten ▁ho ri ▁fi lis te ar rek ▁. ▁Sau lek ▁, ▁or du an ▁, ▁a dar rak ▁jo a ra zi ▁zi tu en ▁lur ral de ▁o so an ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁« ▁A di ▁, ▁heb re ar rak ▁! ▁»
PRED:	Then the Philistines killed Jonathan and his army , and Jonathan killed the Philistines . But Saul 's troops went out to fight the Philistines , and he told them , “ Let 's go on the border of Israel ! ”
GOLD:	Soon after this , Jonathan attacked and defeated the garrison of Philistines at Geba . The news spread quickly among the Philistines . So Saul blew the ram 's horn throughout the land , saying , “ Hebrews , hear this ! Rise up in revolt ! ”

ID:	2743
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁gu da ri ek ▁bu ru za gi en ▁e ta ▁ba tzar ra ren ▁es ku ▁u tzi ▁zi tuz ten ▁pre so ak ▁e ta ▁har ra pa ki nak ▁.
PRED:	Then the soldiers took their swords and handed them over to the high council .
GOLD:	So the warriors released the prisoners and handed over the plunder in the sight of the leaders and all the people .

ID:	2744
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁Si ho nek ▁ez ▁zi on ▁Is ra el ▁her ri a ri ▁lur ral de a ▁ze har ka tzen ▁u tzi ▁; ▁ai tzi tik ▁, ▁be re ▁her ri a ▁bil du ▁e ta ▁bi de ra ▁a te ra ▁zi tzai on ▁ba sa mor tu an ▁e ta ▁, ▁Jah tza ra ▁e tor ri rik ▁, ▁e ra so ▁e gin ▁zi on ▁.
PRED:	But Simon did not allow Israel to abandon the people of Israel and cut off their journey and Jahaz and Jahaz and Jahaz .
GOLD:	But King Sihon refused to let them cross his territory . Instead , he mobilized his entire army and attacked Israel in the wilderness , engaging them in battle at Jahaz .

ID:	2745
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁han di a ▁, ▁go re tsi ▁zu en ▁Esdra sek ▁, ▁e ta ▁her ri ak ▁« ▁A men ▁! ▁A men ▁! ▁» ▁e ran tzun ▁zu en ▁, ▁es ku ak ▁ja so rik ▁; ▁on do ren ▁, ▁ma kur tu ▁e ta ▁lur re rai no ▁a hus pez tu ▁zi ren ▁Jau na ▁gur tze ko ▁.
PRED:	Then Azariah , the Lord , the God of Israel , who was there . He bowed low to the ground and bowed low to the ground .
GOLD:	Then Ezra praised the Lord , the great God , and all the people chanted , “ Amen ! Amen ! ” as they lifted their hands . Then they bowed down and worshiped the Lord with their faces to the ground .

ID:	2746
INPUT:	▁O rain ▁, ▁o toi ▁, ▁en tzun ▁zuk ▁e re ▁mi ra be ▁ho nen ▁hi tza ▁. ▁O gi - pus ka ▁bat ▁e kar ri ko ▁di zut ▁; ▁jan ▁e za zu ▁, ▁in dar rak ▁har tze ko ▁e ta ▁bi de a ri ▁e kin ▁a hal ▁i za te ko ▁.
PRED:	Now listen to me , O Lord , and give me a new message . And I will give you bread and drink from your power .
GOLD:	Now do what I say , and let me give you a little something to eat so you can regain your strength for the trip back . ”

ID:	2747
INPUT:	▁Es tal ▁be za ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁soi ne ko ak ▁be za la ▁, ▁lot ▁be za ▁e ten ga be ▁ger ri ko ak ▁be za la ▁!
PRED:	Wake up , let them be dressed as clothes , and let them be disgraced .
GOLD:	Now may his curses return and cling to him like clothing ; may they be tied around him like a belt . ”

ID:	2748
INPUT:	▁Zo ri o ne ko ak ▁, ▁ha ren ▁xe da pe nak ▁be tez ▁, ▁bi hotz - bi ho tzez ▁ha ren ga na ▁jo tzen ▁du te nak ▁!
PRED:	Oh , my heart , my heart , whose hearts are filled with joy .
GOLD:	Joyful are those who obey his lawsand search for him with all their hearts .

ID:	2749
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁bi da li ▁nin du en ▁Je ru sa lem go ▁jen de a ri ▁be re ▁me zu ▁hau ▁hots ▁e gi te ra ▁: ▁« ▁Go go an ▁dut ▁, ▁Is ra el ▁, ▁no la ▁mai te ▁nin du zun ▁gaz te ▁zi ne ne an ▁, ▁go go an ▁zu re ▁ez kon gai e ta ko mai te - laz ta na ▁: ▁no la ▁i bi li ▁zi nen ▁ni re ▁on do ren ba sa mor tu an ▁, ▁e rein ▁ga be ko ▁lur re an ▁.
PRED:	This message came to me from the Lord : “ This is what the Lord says : I am coming to meet you in the land of Israel and said , ‘ I did n't plant your daughters in the wilderness . '
GOLD:	The Lord gave me another message . He said ,

ID:	2750
INPUT:	<unk> tor tzar rak ▁bi da li ko ▁di tu ▁Jau nak ▁zu en ▁Jain ko ak ▁hai en ▁kon tra ▁, ▁ez ku tu an ▁gor de ta ▁bi zi rik ▁gel di tu ta ko ▁az ke nak ▁e re ▁gar bi tu ▁ar te ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord your God will send them out , and they will be purified . They will be purified , and they will be purified .
GOLD:	And then the Lord your God will send terror to drive out the few survivors still hiding from you !

ID:	2751
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁gu da - gur di a ▁bi ra tu ▁e ta ▁i he si ▁a bi a tu ▁zen ▁Jo ram ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁— ▁Trai zi o a ▁, ▁A ka zi as ▁!
PRED:	So he went out to his chariot and ran out to Jezreel , “ Joseph ! ” he said . “ He is still angry ! ”
GOLD:	Then King Joram turned the horses around and fled , shouting to King Ahaziah , “ Treason , Ahaziah ! ”

ID:	2752
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁e guz ki a ez ▁da ▁be hin ▁e re ▁jai tsi ko ▁, ▁ez ta ▁zu re ▁i lar gi a ▁gor de ko ▁e re ▁, ▁ni ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁i zan go ▁bai nau zu zeu re ▁ar gi ▁be ti ko ▁, ▁e ta ▁a mai tu ak ▁i zan go ▁di ra zu re ▁ne gar - e gu nak ▁.
PRED:	Your sun will be gone , and your ears will be gone . You will not abandon me , for the Lord will be your God , and you will be honored .
GOLD:	Your sun will never set ; your moon will not go down.For the Lord will be your everlasting light.Your days of mourning will come to an end .

ID:	2753
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁nu en ▁har tu ▁ja na ri ▁go xo rik ▁, ▁ez ▁ha ra gi rik ▁, ▁ez ▁ar do rik ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁nu en ▁e ra bi li ▁u sain ▁go zo ko ▁lur ri nik ▁e re ▁, ▁hi ru ▁as te ak ▁a mai tu ▁ar te ▁.
PRED:	I did n't realize that I was sick or older or older , my mother , my mother , was not honored among the nations .
GOLD:	All that time I had eaten no rich food . No meat or wine crossed my lips , and I used no fragrant lotions until those three weeks had passed .

ID:	2754
INPUT:	▁Sei gar ren ▁e gu ne an ▁bi ▁ha la ko ▁bil du ▁o hi ▁zu ten ▁, ▁be de ra tzi ▁bat ▁li tro ▁la gun ▁ba koi tze ko ▁; ▁or du an ▁, ▁el kar te - ar du ra du nak ▁hor ren ▁ber ri ▁e ma te ra ▁jo an ▁zi tzaiz ki on ▁Moi se si ▁.
PRED:	On each day the entire crop was completed , each day , each of the six feet of each week . But the entire community gathered at the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	On the sixth day , they gathered twice as much as usual — four quarts for each person instead of two . Then all the leaders of the community came and asked Moses for an explanation .

ID:	2755
INPUT:	▁Ho dei ▁beltz - i lu nak ▁ha ren ▁in gu ru an ▁, ▁jus ti zi a ▁e ta ▁zu zen bi de a ▁ha ren ▁tro nu - oi nar ri ▁.
PRED:	The cloud of the cloud covered with fear , and the throne of the Lord is his throne .
GOLD:	Dark clouds surround him.Righteousness and justice are the foundation of his throne .

ID:	2756
INPUT:	▁Ju da ren ▁e ta ▁Is ra e len ▁zo ri a ▁al da tu ko ▁dut ▁, ▁e ta ▁be hi no la ko ▁e go e ran ▁e zar ri ko ▁di tut ▁ber ri ro ▁;
PRED:	I will restore the fortunes of Judah , and I will restore the fortunes of Israel .
GOLD:	I will restore the fortunes of Judah and Israel and rebuild their towns .

ID:	2757
INPUT:	▁« ▁Or du an ▁, ▁her ri en ▁ez pai nak gar bi ▁bi hur tu ko ▁di tut ▁, ▁de nek ▁ni ri ▁, ▁Jaun ▁ho ni ▁, ▁dei ▁e gin ▁di e za da te ne ta ▁de nek ▁bat ▁e gi nik zer bi tza ▁na za ten ▁.
PRED:	“ Then I will punish those who do not listen to me , ” says the Lord . “ I will call anyone who calls out . ”
GOLD:	“ Then I will purify the speech of all people , so that everyone can worship the Lord together .

ID:	2758
INPUT:	▁E txe gin tzan ▁a ri ▁di re nen ▁i ze nak ▁e man ▁be har ▁diz ki gu zu e ▁» ▁.
PRED:	He has given us his own name , and we have given you the name of our governor . ”
GOLD:	They also asked for the names of all the men working on the Temple .

ID:	2759
INPUT:	▁« ▁Zein ▁al de ta tik ▁bar rei a tzen ▁da ▁ar gi a ▁? ▁Non dik ▁sar tzen ▁e ki al de ko ▁hai ze a ▁lur re ra ▁?
PRED:	“ Where is the one who calls out from the east ? Where is the wind ?
GOLD:	Where is the path to the source of light ? Where is the home of the east wind ?

ID:	2760
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁er re ge ak ▁, ▁bu ru za gi ek ▁e ta ▁Je ru sa lem go ▁jen de ak ▁, ▁ba tzar tu rik ▁, ▁Paz ko a ▁bi gar ren ▁hi la be te an ▁os pa tze a ▁e ra ba ki a ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	For the king and all the people of Jerusalem were celebrated in Jerusalem , just as they had been slaughtered by the Passover celebration .
GOLD:	The king , his officials , and all the community of Jerusalem decided to celebrate Passover a month later than usual .

ID:	2761
INPUT:	▁Ni ri ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁e gi a ▁di o da la ko ▁, ▁ez ▁di da zu e ▁si nes ten ▁.
PRED:	But I say that you do n't believe that I do n't believe it .
GOLD:	So when I tell the truth , you just naturally do n't believe me !

ID:	2762
INPUT:	▁Ni re tzat ▁za ti rik ▁ho be re na ▁be rei ziz ▁ge ro ▁, ▁ez ▁za re te ▁er ru dun ▁bi hur tu ko ▁, ▁ez ▁di tu zu e ▁is ra el dar ren ▁o pa ri ▁sak ra tu ak ▁pro fa na tu ko ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁za re te ▁hil ko ▁» ▁.
PRED:	You must not cut off my guilt upon the people of Israel . You must not offer sacrifices to the Lord , and you will die . ”
GOLD:	You will not be considered guilty for accepting the Lord 's tithes if you give the best portion to the priests . But be careful not to treat the holy gifts of the people of Israel as though they were common . If you do , you will die . ”

ID:	2763
INPUT:	▁o rain ▁poz tu ▁e gi ten ▁naiz ▁; ▁ez ▁, ▁nos ki ▁, ▁e man ▁ni zu en ▁na hi ga be a ga tik ▁, ▁na hi ga be ▁hor rek ▁zeu en ▁jar re ra ▁al da tze ra ▁e ra man ▁zin tuz te la ko ▁bai zik ▁. ▁Zu en ▁na hi ga be a ▁Jain ko ak ▁na hi ▁be za la ko a ▁i zan ▁zen ▁; ▁be raz ▁, ▁ez ▁ni zu en ▁i no la ko ▁kal te rik ▁e gin ▁.
PRED:	Yes , I am glad , but I am not ashamed of you . I am not ashamed of you that I am not with you , but I am not going to do what I am saying .
GOLD:	Now I am glad I sent it , not because it hurt you , but because the pain caused you to repent and change your ways . It was the kind of sorrow God wants his people to have , so you were not harmed by us in any way .

ID:	2764
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁se nar ra ri ▁des lei al ▁i zan ▁ba za tzaiz ki o ▁e ta ▁, ▁zeu re a ▁ez ▁den ▁bes te ▁gi zon ▁ba te kin ▁har re ma nak ▁i za nik ▁, ▁de so ho ra tu ▁ba za ra
PRED:	But if you refuse to listen to your husbands and say , ‘ A man is truly a man who is with you . '
GOLD:	But if you have gone astray by being unfaithful to your husband , and have defiled yourself by having sex with another man — '

ID:	2765
INPUT:	▁Moi se sek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Hi ri tik ▁a te ra ▁be zain ▁las ter ▁, ▁es ku ak ▁al txa tu ko ▁diz ki ot ▁Jau na ri ▁o toitz ▁e gi te ko ▁. ▁Or du an ▁a ter tu ko ▁du ▁kaz ka bar - e raun tsi a ▁e ta ▁ez ▁da ▁ge hi a go ▁tru moi rik ▁i zan go ▁, ▁ja kin ▁de za zun ▁Jau na re na ▁de la ▁mun du a ▁.
PRED:	“ Yes , ” Moses said to Moses , “ I will hand over the town and pray to the Lord . Then I will send disaster upon the hail and hail , and the earth will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	“ All right , ” Moses replied . “ As soon as I leave the city , I will lift my hands and pray to the Lord . Then the thunder and hail will stop , and you will know that the earth belongs to the Lord .

ID:	2766
INPUT:	▁— ▁Zo az ▁Hil ki as ▁a paiz ▁na gu si a ga na ▁. ▁Zen ba tu ▁de za la ▁, ▁her ri ak ▁Jau na ren ▁e txe ra ▁e ra man ▁e ta ▁a te zai nek ▁bil du ▁du ten ▁di ru a ▁.
PRED:	“ Yes , go to the high priest , ” he said . “ He is the Lord 's judge , and he will bring the people home of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ Go to Hilkiah the high priest and have him count the money the gatekeepers have collected from the people at the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	2767
INPUT:	▁A po lo ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁si na go gan ▁au sar ki ▁hitz ▁e gi ten ▁ha si ▁zen ▁. ▁Pris zi lak ▁e ta ▁A ki lak ▁en tzun ▁zi o te ne an ▁, ▁be re kin ▁har tu ▁zu ten ▁e ta ▁a re ▁xe he ki a go ▁a zal du ▁zi o ten ▁Jain ko a ren ▁bi de a ▁.
PRED:	Some of the believers who spoke to him , so they could speak with him . They began to speak with him , so they could tell him what they meant .
GOLD:	When Priscilla and Aquila heard him preaching boldly in the synagogue , they took him aside and explained the way of God even more accurately .

ID:	2768
INPUT:	▁Pau lo ▁e ta ▁sa si a pos to lu ak
PRED:	Paul and Barnabas in Ephesus
GOLD:	Paul and the False Apostles

ID:	2769
INPUT:	▁Jo bek ▁be re ▁bu ru a ▁er ru ga be ▁ai tor tu
PRED:	Job 's First Response to Job
GOLD:	Job 's Final Protest of Innocence

ID:	2770
INPUT:	▁Sa lo mo nen ▁gai ne ra ko ▁jar du e rak ▁, ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁guz ti a ▁e ta ▁ha ren ▁ja kin du ri a ▁« ▁Sa lo mo nen ▁Kro ni ka ▁» ▁li bu ru an ▁dau de ▁i da tzi ak ▁.
PRED:	The rest of the events in Solomon 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the History of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Solomon 's reign , including all his deeds and his wisdom , are recorded in The Book of the Acts of Solomon .

ID:	2771
INPUT:	▁Ba da ▁, ▁ho ri ▁be zain ▁e gi a ▁da ▁ez ▁di tu da la ▁baz ter tu ko ▁Ja ko ben ▁on do ren go ak ▁e ta ▁Da vid ▁neu re ▁zer bi tza ri a ▁. ▁No la ▁ez ▁di tut ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁ho ri en ▁ja tor ri tik ▁au ke ra tu ko ▁Ab ra ham ▁, ▁I sa ak ▁e ta ▁Ja ko ben ▁on do ren go en ▁bu ru za gi ak ▁? ▁Bai ▁, ▁al da tu ▁e gin go ▁dut ▁hai en ▁zo ri a ▁, ▁er ru ki tu ▁e gin ▁naiz ▁e ta ▁» ▁.
PRED:	As surely as I am not like this , I will not accept Jacob 's descendants , Jacob , and Jacob , and his servant Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob , and Jacob , and Jacob , and Jacob 's descendants will know that I am the next king . ”
GOLD:	I will never abandon the descendants of Jacob or David , my servant , or change the plan that David 's descendants will rule the descendants of Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob . Instead , I will restore them to their land and have mercy on them . ”

ID:	2772
INPUT:	▁Ho ri ek ▁Jau na ren ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko a ren ▁aur re an ▁, ▁be rak ▁au ke ra tu ko ▁du en ▁le ku an ▁jan go ▁di tu zu e ▁, ▁bai ▁zeu ek ▁, ▁bai ▁zu en ▁se me - a la bek ▁e ta ▁mor roi - mi ra be ek ▁, ▁bai ta ▁zu e kin ▁hi ri ▁be re an ▁bi zi ▁den ▁le bi tar rak ▁e re ▁. ▁Fes ta ▁os pa tu ko ▁du zu e ▁Jau na ren ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko a ren ▁aur re an ▁, ▁zeu en ▁la na ren ▁e mai tzen ga tik ▁es ker rak ▁e ma nez ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord your God says : “ You must eat your meal with your sons and your sons and daughters , and your sons , your sons , and daughters , and your livestock . You must live in the towns of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	You must eat these in the presence of the Lord your God at the place he will choose . Eat them there with your children , your servants , and the Levites who live in your towns , celebrating in the presence of the Lord your God in all you do .

ID:	2773
INPUT:	▁Gaiz to ▁ho ri en ▁ar te tik ▁bi zi rik ▁gel di tu ko ▁di re nek ▁na hi a go ▁i zan go ▁du te ▁he ri o tza ▁bi zi a ▁bai no ▁, ▁nik ▁sa ka ba na tu ko ▁di tu dan ▁e do non ▁. ▁Ha la ▁di ot ▁nik ▁, ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du nak ▁.
PRED:	The wicked will stay away from their own lands , for I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken !
GOLD:	And the people of this evil nation who survive will wish to die rather than live where I will send them . I , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken !

ID:	2774
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁aur rez ▁aur re ▁e gi ten ▁zu en ▁hitz ▁Moi se se kin ▁, ▁la gu nak ▁la gu na re kin ▁hitz ▁e gi ten ▁du en ▁be za la ▁. ▁On do ren ▁, ▁Moi ses ▁kan pa le ku ra ▁i tzul tzen ▁zen ▁; ▁bai na ▁ha ren ▁la gun tzai le ▁Jo su e ▁, ▁Nu nen ▁se me a ▁, ▁ez ▁zen ▁e txo la ▁bar ru tik ▁al den tzen ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord spoke with Moses , just as the Lord spoke with Moses . He spoke to Moses , just as the Lord had commanded Moses . He went out to meet Moses , but Moses and his assistant .
GOLD:	Inside the Tent of Meeting , the Lord would speak to Moses face to face , as one speaks to a friend . Afterward Moses would return to the camp , but the young man who assisted him , Joshua son of Nun , would remain behind in the Tent of Meeting .

ID:	2775
INPUT:	▁Han dik ▁, ▁kos ta rik ▁kos ta ▁Re gi o ra ▁hel du ▁gi nen ▁. ▁Bi ha ra mu ne an ▁he go - hai ze ak ▁jo ▁zu en ▁e ta ▁bi ▁e gu ne tan ▁Po tzu o li ra ▁i ri tsi ▁gi nen ▁.
PRED:	There was a small man named Rebekah . The next morning he went to meet him , and he sent him home with joy .
GOLD:	From there we sailed across to Rhegium . A day later a south wind began blowing , so the following day we sailed up the coast to Puteoli .

ID:	2776
INPUT:	▁Gau er di ▁al de ra ▁, ▁Pau lo ▁e ta ▁Si las ▁o toi tze an ▁a ri ▁zi ren ▁, ▁Jain ko a ri ▁go res pe nak ▁kan ta tzen ▁; ▁bes te ▁pre so ak ▁en tzu ten ▁zeu den ▁.
PRED:	Paul and Silas in the night , teaching the word of God , and all the other believers in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Around midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God , and the other prisoners were listening .

ID:	2777
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁i si le an ▁me zu la ri ak ▁i gor ri ▁ziz ki on ▁A bi me le ki ▁, ▁e sa te ra ▁: ▁« ▁E be den ▁se me ▁Ga al ▁be re ▁se ni de e kin ▁Si ke me ra ▁e tor ri ▁e ta ▁hi ri ▁hau ▁zu re ▁kon tra ▁a sal da tzen ▁a ri ▁da ▁.
PRED:	Then he sent messengers to Isaiah son of Amoz to meet him , saying , “ This is what the Lord says : Because you have come to Jerusalem , you are going to attack Jerusalem .
GOLD:	He sent messengers to Abimelech in Arumah , telling him , “ Gaal son of Ebed and his brothers have come to live in Shechem , and now they are inciting the city to rebel against you .

ID:	2778
INPUT:	▁Ha nan ▁, ▁Gi del ▁e ta ▁Ga har re nak ▁;
PRED:	Reaiah , Giddel , Giddel ,
GOLD:	Hanan , Giddel , Gahar ,

ID:	2779
INPUT:	▁Zer ga tik ▁gel di tu ▁za ra ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁es kor te tan ▁, ▁Ru ben ▁, ▁ar tzain - <unk> tu ak ▁en tzu ten ▁? ▁Ru ben dar ren ▁fa mi li e tan han di ak ▁e ra ba ki ak ▁!
PRED:	Why are you crying out , “ Why are you crying out ? Why are you crying out ? Hear the cries of the shepherds ?
GOLD:	Why did you sit at home among the sheepfolds — to hear the shepherds whistle for their flocks ? Yes , in the tribe of Reubenthere was great indecision .

ID:	2780
INPUT:	▁O nar tu ▁zu en ▁Ben - Ha da dek ▁A sa ▁er re ge ak ▁e sa na ▁, ▁e ta ▁be re ▁gu da ros te ko ▁o fi zi a lak ▁Is ra el go ▁hi ri ei ▁e ra so tze ra ▁bi da li ▁zi tu en ▁; ▁I i on ▁, ▁Dan ▁, ▁A bel - Maim ▁e ta ▁Nef ta li ▁es ku al de ko ▁bil te gi ▁zi ren ▁hi ri ▁guz ti ak ▁hon da tu ▁zi tuz ten ▁.
PRED:	Ben-hadad sent messengers to the king of Aram and all the troops of Israel . So King Hazael of Aram sent his army out to fight the valley of Rephaim .
GOLD:	Ben-hadad agreed to King Asa 's request and sent the commanders of his army to attack the towns of Israel . They conquered the towns of Ijon , Dan , Abel-beth-maacah , and all the store cities in Naphtali .

ID:	2781
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁Je su sek ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁« ▁U tzi ▁! ▁As ki ▁da ▁! ▁» ▁E ta ▁, ▁be lar ri a ▁u ki tu rik ▁, ▁sen da tu ▁e gin ▁zi on ▁.
PRED:	But Jesus said , “ Leave her alone ! ” And immediately the rooster crowed .
GOLD:	But Jesus said , “ No more of this. ” And he touched the man 's ear and healed him .

ID:	2782
INPUT:	▁« ▁Zo ro ba be lek ▁be re ▁es kuz ▁jar ri ▁zi tu en ▁e txe ▁ho nen ▁oi nar ri ak ▁e ta ▁be re ▁es kuz ▁bu ru tu ko ▁du ▁e txe a ▁» ▁. ▁Or du an ▁ja ki nen ▁du zu e ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du nak ▁bi da li ▁nau e la ▁zu en ga na ▁.
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits Zerubbabel and his own family , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . Then you will know that I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	“ Zerubbabel is the one who laid the foundation of this Temple , and he will complete it . Then you will know that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has sent me .

ID:	2783
INPUT:	▁Zor tzi gar ren ▁i kus ka ri a ▁: ▁lau ▁gur di ak
PRED:	A Vision of the Coming Offering
GOLD:	Four Chariots

ID:	2784
INPUT:	▁Hor re la ▁i tzu li ▁zi on ▁Jain ko ak ▁A bi me le ki ▁, ▁be re ▁hi ru ro gei ta ▁ha mar ▁a nai ak ▁hil ▁zi tu e ne an ▁ai ta ri ▁e gi ni ko ▁kal te a ▁.
PRED:	So God returned to him and gave him seventy sons , and he was dead .
GOLD:	In this way , God punished Abimelech for the evil he had done against his father by murdering his seventy brothers .

ID:	2785
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e ro a pe na ▁hitz ▁e gi ten ▁du dan ▁bi tar te an ▁, ▁e ta ▁a mai tze an ▁, ▁e gin ▁i se ka ▁, ▁na hi ▁ba du zu e ▁.
PRED:	For when you speak to me , you will speak with words and speak in tongues .
GOLD:	Bear with me , and let me speak.After I have spoken , you may resume mocking me .

ID:	2786
INPUT:	▁A po lok ▁E fe son ▁ber ri ▁o na ▁hots ▁e gin
PRED:	Paul Preaches in Ephesus
GOLD:	Apollos Instructed at Ephesus

ID:	2787
INPUT:	▁On gi ▁i ku si a ▁dut neu re ▁her ri a ren ▁a tse ka be a ▁E gip ton ▁e ta ▁en tzu nak ▁di tut ▁ha ren ▁in tzi ri ak ▁. ▁Hai ek ▁sal ba tze ra ▁e tor ri ▁naiz ▁. ▁O rain ▁, ▁za toz ▁ho na ▁, ▁E gip to ra ▁bi da li ▁be har ▁zai tut ▁e ta ▁.
PRED:	I saw all the things of Egypt , and I will see the land of Egypt , and they will return to Egypt . Now I am sending you back to Egypt , and I am sending you back to Egypt .
GOLD:	I have certainly seen the oppression of my people in Egypt . I have heard their groans and have come down to rescue them . Now go , for I am sending you back to Egypt . '

ID:	2788
INPUT:	▁Bil tzar ▁o so ak ▁on tzat ▁e man ▁zu en ▁pro po sa me na ▁, ▁e ta ▁Es te ban ▁— ▁fe dez ▁e ta ▁Es pi ri tu ▁San tu az ▁be te a ▁ze go en ▁gi zo na ▁— ▁, ▁Fe li pe ▁, ▁Pro ko ro ▁, ▁Ni ka nor ▁, ▁Ti mon ▁, ▁Par me nas ▁e ta ▁Ni ko las ▁, ▁An ti o ki a ko ▁ju du ber ri a ▁, ▁hau ta tu ▁zi tuz ten ▁;
PRED:	Then the high council gave Paul this message to the Holy Spirit . He said to them , “ I am the Holy Spirit , the Holy Spirit . ”
GOLD:	Everyone liked this idea , and they chose the following : Stephen ( a man full of faith and the Holy Spirit ) , Philip , Procorus , Nicanor , Timon , Parmenas , and Nicolas of Antioch ( an earlier convert to the Jewish faith ) .

ID:	2789
INPUT:	▁Ro bo am ▁er re ge ak ▁o so ▁za kar ▁e ran tzun ▁zi en ▁, ▁kon tsei la ri ek ▁e ma na ▁zi o ten ▁a hol ku a ▁ain tzat ▁har tu ▁ga be
PRED:	When Rehoboam heard that he was very wise , he told the wise men to give him advice .
GOLD:	But Rehoboam spoke harshly to them , for he rejected the advice of the older counselors

ID:	2790
INPUT:	▁E gi ten ▁al ▁du ▁ba sas to ak ▁ar ran tza ▁be lar ra ren ▁aur re a ne do ▁i di ak ▁mar ru ma ▁zer ▁ja nik ▁bal din ▁ba du ▁?
PRED:	What if the wild ox gores a donkey 's ox or the ox or the ox or the ox or the ox or the ox or the ox or the ox or the wild ox ?
GOLD:	Do n't I have a right to complain ? Do n't wild donkeys bray when they find no grass , and oxen bellow when they have no food ?

ID:	2791
INPUT:	▁Gantz ▁guz ti a ▁ken du ko ▁di o ▁ze kor ra ri ▁e ta ▁al da re an ▁er re ko ▁,
PRED:	He will remove all the fat of the sheep and goats at the altar .
GOLD:	Then the priest must remove all the animal 's fat and burn it on the altar ,

ID:	2792
INPUT:	▁Ha ren gan ▁si ne tsi ko ▁zu te nek ▁har tu ko ▁zu ten ▁Es pi ri tu az ▁e san ▁zu en ▁ho ri ▁; ▁i zan ▁e re ▁, ▁ez ▁zen ▁ar te an ▁Es pi ri tu rik ▁, ▁Je su sen ▁jain koz ko ▁ain tza ▁ez ▁ze la ko ▁o rain dik ▁a zal du ▁.
PRED:	When John believed in the Holy Spirit , he was amazed by the Holy Spirit . He did n't tell anyone what he meant .
GOLD:	( When he said “ living water , ” he was speaking of the Spirit , who would be given to everyone believing in him . But the Spirit had not yet been given , because Jesus had not yet entered into his glory . )

ID:	2793
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁lib re ▁e gi nak ▁; ▁poz - oi hu ka ▁e tor ri ko ▁di ra ▁Si o ne ra ▁: ▁a mai ga be ko ▁a lai ta su na hai en ▁aur pe gi an ▁! ▁Zo ri o na ▁e ta ▁a lai ta su nai zan go ▁di tuz te ▁la gun ▁; ▁na hi ga be ak ▁e ta ▁ne gar ra ▁ki to ▁!
PRED:	May the Lord be glad when he brings joy to Jerusalem , for he will be filled with joy and gladness . What sorrow awaits those who are filled with joy and gladness .
GOLD:	Those who have been ransomed by the Lord will return.They will enter Jerusalem singing , crowned with everlasting joy.Sorrow and mourning will disappear , and they will be filled with joy and gladness .

ID:	2794
INPUT:	▁Hon da kin ▁ar te an ▁da bil tzan ▁a ze ri ak ▁di ra ▁zu re ▁pro fe tak ▁, ▁Is ra el ▁.
PRED:	Their hearts are safe in the land of Israel , and their prophets are scattered .
GOLD:	“ O people of Israel , these prophets of yours are like jackals digging in the ruins .

ID:	2795
INPUT:	▁Be la ▁Be or ren ▁se me a ▁, <unk> ha ba ▁hi ri ko a ▁;
PRED:	We are like a little child , and we are like a little child .
GOLD:	Bela son of Beor , who ruled in Edom from his city of Dinhabah .

ID:	2796
INPUT:	▁Bai ▁os pe tsu a ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁hi ri ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁zu taz ▁di o e na ▁:
PRED:	But the Lord your God is glorious ; he is your God .
GOLD:	O city of God , what glorious things are said of you ! Interlude

ID:	2797
INPUT:	▁Es ku al de e ta ko ▁bu ru za gi ak ▁, ▁er re ge or de ak ▁, ▁go ber na ri ak ▁e ta ▁er re ge - fun tzi o na ri o ak ▁ju du en ▁al de ▁jar ri ▁zi ren ▁, ▁Mar do ke o ga na ko ▁bel dur - i ka raz ▁.
PRED:	The king 's officials were terrified , and the king 's officials were terrified . They were afraid of all the Jews , and they were afraid to fear him .
GOLD:	And all the nobles of the provinces , the highest officers , the governors , and the royal officials helped the Jews for fear of Mordecai .

ID:	2798
INPUT:	▁Gi zon ▁hor rek ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren gan dik ▁ez ▁ba le tor ▁, ▁e zin ▁i zan go ▁lu ke ▁e zer ▁e re ▁e gin ▁.
PRED:	This is a man who comes from God , not a long time .
GOLD:	If this man were not from God , he could n't have done it . ”

ID:	2799
INPUT:	▁— ▁Mai su ▁, ▁Moi se sek ▁i da tzi ▁zi gun ▁: ▁Nor bai ti ▁a nai a ▁ez kon du ▁bat ▁se me - a la ba rik ▁ga be ▁hil tzen ▁ba zai o ▁, ▁ez kon ▁be di ▁a lar gun tsa re kin ▁, ▁a nai a ri ▁on do ren go a ▁e ma te ko ▁.
PRED:	“ Teacher , Moses said to Moses , ‘ If a man dies and has no children to marry her , he must not marry her . '
GOLD:	They posed this question : “ Teacher , Moses gave us a law that if a man dies , leaving a wife but no children , his brother should marry the widow and have a child who will carry on the brother 's name .

ID:	2800
INPUT:	▁Moi ses ▁e ta ▁A a ron ▁hau ek ▁di ra ▁E gip to ko ▁er re ge ▁fa ra oi a ri ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzaiz ki o nak ▁, ▁is ra el dar rei ▁lur ral de ▁har ta tik ▁ir te ten ▁uz te ko ▁e sa nez ▁.
PRED:	Then Moses and Aaron said to Pharaoh , “ This is what the Lord said to Pharaoh and the people of Israel , who brought them out of Egypt .
GOLD:	It was Moses and Aaron who spoke to Pharaoh , the king of Egypt , about leading the people of Israel out of Egypt .

ID:	2801
INPUT:	▁A hi ka mek ▁, ▁Xa fa nen ▁se me ak ▁, ▁be re ▁ba bes pe an ▁har tu a ▁zu en ▁Je re mi as ▁e ta ▁, ▁hor ri ▁es ker ▁, ▁ez ▁zen ▁e ro ri ▁hil ▁na hi ▁zu en ▁jen de a ren ▁es ku e tan ▁.
PRED:	Shallum son of Ahikam , grandson of Shaphan , went to the town of Ahikam and killed it .
GOLD:	Nevertheless , Ahikam son of Shaphan stood up for Jeremiah and persuaded the court not to turn him over to the mob to be killed .

ID:	2802
INPUT:	▁Le ge - mai su ▁e ta ▁fa ri seu ak ▁ze la tan ▁ze goz ki on ▁e a ▁la run ba tez ▁sen da tzen ▁o te ▁zu en ▁, ▁zer tan ▁sa la tu ▁i za te ko ▁.
PRED:	The teachers of religious law realized that Jesus was healed of the law , so he could be healed .
GOLD:	The teachers of religious law and the Pharisees watched Jesus closely . If he healed the man 's hand , they planned to accuse him of working on the Sabbath .

ID:	2803
INPUT:	▁tenplu a ren ga tik ▁zin ▁e gi ten ▁du e nak ▁, ▁tenplu a ren ga tik ▁e ta ▁ber tan ▁bi zi ▁den ▁Jain ko a ren ga tik ▁e gi ten ▁du ▁zin ▁;
PRED:	For the Temple of the Lord is a foundation of the Temple of the Lord , who lives in the Temple of God .
GOLD:	And when you swear ‘ by the Temple , ' you are swearing by it and by God , who lives in it .

ID:	2804
INPUT:	▁« ▁Me zu ▁bat ▁e tor ri ▁zait ▁i sil pe an ▁, ▁ha ren ▁zur ru mur ru a ▁en tzun ▁dut ▁.
PRED:	“ I have a word to you , and I have heard a voice speaking in my face .
GOLD:	“ This truth was given to me in secret , as though whispered in my ear .

ID:	2805
INPUT:	▁Is ra el go ▁er re ge ak ▁, ▁be giz ta tu ▁zi tu e ne an ▁, ▁e san ▁zi on ▁E li se o ri ▁: ▁— ▁E ne ▁ai ta ▁, ▁hil ko ▁al ▁di tut ▁?
PRED:	When the king of Israel heard what was happening , Elisha said to Elisha , “ Will I die ? ”
GOLD:	When the king of Israel saw them , he shouted to Elisha , “ My father , should I kill them ? Should I kill them ? ”

ID:	2806
INPUT:	▁Da vi dek ▁be re ▁gi zo ne kin ▁e ra so al di ak ▁e gin ▁o hi ▁ziz ki en ▁ge xur tar rei ▁, ▁ge rez tar rei ▁e ta ▁a ma lek tar rei ▁; ▁as pal di da nik ▁Xur ▁al de ra ▁e ta ▁E gip to ▁lur ral de rai no ▁bi zi ▁zi ren ▁her ri ei ▁, ▁a le gi a ▁.
PRED:	David made a covenant with all the people who lived in Egypt to Shur , east of Egypt , and moved to Egypt to Egypt .
GOLD:	David and his men spent their time raiding the Geshurites , the Girzites , and the Amalekites — people who had lived near Shur , toward the land of Egypt , since ancient times .

ID:	2807
INPUT:	▁Sa si - i ra kas pe nen ▁kon tra ko ▁o har pe na
PRED:	Paul 's Final Instructions
GOLD:	Warnings against False Teachings

ID:	2808
INPUT:	▁A ker ra ren ▁o do la ▁san tu te gi ▁bar ru ra ▁e ra ma na ▁i zan ▁de nez ▁ge ro ▁, ▁to ki ▁sak ra tu an ▁jan ▁be har ▁ze nu ten ▁, ▁a gin du ▁ni zu en ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	You must wear out the blood of the Most Holy Place , just as I had commanded you .
GOLD:	Since the animal 's blood was not brought into the Holy Place , you should have eaten the meat in the sacred area as I ordered you . ”

ID:	2809
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁Moi se si ▁: ▁« ▁Bi har ▁goi ze an ▁goiz ▁jai ki ▁e ta ▁zo az ▁fa ra oi a ri ▁e sa te ra ▁: ▁Ha la ▁di o ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁heb re ar ren ▁Jain ko ak ▁: ▁U tzi o zu ▁e ne ▁her ri a ri ▁ni ▁gur tze ra ▁jo a ten ▁;
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Get up early in the morning ! Go up to the land of Egypt , for the Lord your God has commanded you to worship me .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Get up early in the morning and stand before Pharaoh . Tell him , ‘ This is what the Lord , the God of the Hebrews , says : Let my people go , so they can worship me .

ID:	2810
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren ▁es ku a ▁bi kain ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁es ku a ▁ga rai le ▁» ▁.
PRED:	A Call to sacrifice the Lord 's right hand to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	The strong right arm of the Lord is raised in triumph.The strong right arm of the Lord has done glorious things !

ID:	2811
INPUT:	▁E ran tzun ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁— ▁Gu ▁Ab ra ha men ▁ha zi ko ak ▁ga ra ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁ga ra ▁i noiz ▁i no ren ▁eskla bo ▁i zan ▁. ▁No la ▁di o zu ▁as ke ▁i zan go ▁ga re la ▁?
PRED:	“ We have never been born , ” Abraham replied . “ Why did n't we have never been free from our masters ? ”
GOLD:	“ But we are descendants of Abraham , ” they said . “ We have never been slaves to anyone . What do you mean , ‘ You will be set free ' ? ”

ID:	2812
INPUT:	▁Ha ra ▁, ▁er re ge ek ▁el kar ▁har tu ▁zu te ne ta ▁de nak ▁ba te ra ▁ha ren ▁aur ka ▁ol dar tu ▁.
PRED:	But the kings of the earth fought against him ; they fought against him .
GOLD:	But when they saw it , they were stunned ; they were terrified and ran away .

ID:	2813
INPUT:	▁Le hen bi zi ko ▁gi za ki a ▁lur re ko ▁hau tse tik ▁har tu a ▁i zan ▁zen ▁; ▁bi gar re na ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁ze ru tik ▁da tor ▁.
PRED:	The first allotment of land came from the beginning of the first year . It was a second time from heaven .
GOLD:	Adam , the first man , was made from the dust of the earth , while Christ , the second man , came from heaven .

ID:	2814
INPUT:	▁Hor ra ▁i go ▁be har ▁du te ▁lei nu ek ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁lei nu ek ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁le ge ▁de nez ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁i ze na ▁go res te ra ▁;
PRED:	These are the names of the tribes of Israel , and the tribe of Israel , to be praised by the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	All the tribes of Israel — the Lord 's people — make their pilgrimage here.They come to give thanks to the name of the Lord , as the law requires of Israel .

ID:	2815
INPUT:	▁I tsu ak ▁a te ra ▁or du ko ▁, ▁de ab ru a ren ▁men pe ▁ze go en ▁mu tu ▁bat ▁e kar ri ▁zi o ten ▁Je su si ▁.
PRED:	But the demon from the devil , who was possessed by the demon from heaven .
GOLD:	When they left , a demon-possessed man who could n't speak was brought to Jesus .

ID:	2816
INPUT:	▁Ma ze do ni a ▁al de ra ▁jo an ▁nin tze ne an ▁, ▁E fe son ▁gel di tze ko ▁es ka tu ▁ni zun ▁; ▁jar rai tu ▁, ▁o toi ▁, ▁ber tan ▁, ▁e ta ▁zen tza tu ▁dok tri na ▁ar ro tzak ▁i ra kas ten ▁a ri ▁di re nak ▁;
PRED:	When I went to Macedonia , I begged you to stay in Ephesus until I was teaching in the province of Asia .
GOLD:	When I left for Macedonia , I urged you to stay there in Ephesus and stop those whose teaching is contrary to the truth .

ID:	2817
INPUT:	▁On ▁du ▁gi za ki ak ▁gaz te tan dik ▁uz tar pe an ▁o hi tze a ▁.
PRED:	Their young men are as healthy as their lives .
GOLD:	And it is good for people to submit at an early ageto the yoke of his discipline :

ID:	2818
INPUT:	▁A ho ▁be te an ▁e man go ▁diz ki ot ▁es ker rak ▁Jau na ri ▁, ▁jen de tza ren ▁er di an ▁go re tsi ko ▁dut ▁,
PRED:	I will thank the Lord for mercy , and I will praise the Lord .
GOLD:	But I will give repeated thanks to the Lord , praising him to everyone .

ID:	2819
INPUT:	▁ar ra no a ren ▁bi de a ▁or tzi an ▁, ▁su ge a ren ▁bi de a ▁hai tze an ▁, ▁on tzi a ren ▁bi de a ▁i tsa so ▁za ba le a ne ta ▁gi zo na ren ▁bi de a ▁e ma ku me a ren ▁bai tan ▁.
PRED:	But when they were on the way of the sea , they were divided into the sea . But the woman 's way , the woman who lives in the sea .
GOLD:	how an eagle glides through the sky , how a snake slithers on a rock , how a ship navigates the ocean , how a man loves a woman .

ID:	2820
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Is ra el go ▁er re ge ak ▁a gin du ▁zu en ▁: ▁— ▁Hel du ▁Mi ke a si ▁! ▁E ra man ▁hi ri - go ber na ri ▁A mo nen ga na ▁e ta ▁Jo ax ▁prin tze a ren ga na ▁.
PRED:	Then the king of Israel said to him , “ Take her back to the city of Joash , the governor of the city , and the king of Assyria . ”
GOLD:	“ Arrest him ! ” the king of Israel ordered . “ Take him back to Amon , the governor of the city , and to my son Joash .

ID:	2821
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ur run du a ▁dut ▁hai en gan dik ▁ha ser re a ▁»
PRED:	“ I will pour out my fury on them , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Healing for the Repentant

ID:	2822
INPUT:	▁« ▁Bai na ▁ja ki na ren ▁gai ne an ▁be ka tu ▁e gi ten ▁du e nak ▁— ▁ber ta ko a ▁i zan ▁na hiz ▁e tor ki na ▁— ▁i rain du ▁e gi ten ▁nau ▁. ▁Hor re la ko ▁ho ri ▁bo ta ▁e gin go ▁du te ▁her ri tik ▁.
PRED:	“ But anyone who finds that anyone who sins will be cursed . But anyone who eats this covenant will be cut off from the community .
GOLD:	“ But those who brazenly violate the Lord 's will , whether native-born Israelites or foreigners , have blasphemed the Lord , and they must be cut off from the community .

ID:	2823
INPUT:	▁Hex bo nen ▁bi zi ▁zen ▁a mor tar ren ▁er re ge ▁Si hon ▁e ta ▁Ax ta rot - en ▁e ta ▁Ed rei - n ▁bi zi ▁zen ▁Ba xan go ▁er re ge ▁Og ▁ga rai tu ▁e ta ▁ge ro ▁.
PRED:	It lived in Heshbon and King Og of Bashan , and King Og of Bashan and King Og of Bashan .
GOLD:	This took place after he had defeated King Sihon of the Amorites , who ruled in Heshbon , and at Edrei had defeated King Og of Bashan , who ruled in Ashtaroth .

ID:	2824
INPUT:	▁« ▁Gi za se me ▁, ▁Is ra el ▁her ri a ren ▁ja go le ▁i zen da tzen ▁zai tut ▁; ▁nik ▁e san da ko a ▁en tzu te an ▁, ▁o har ta ra zi ▁e gin ▁be har ▁di tu zu ▁ni re ▁i ze ne an ▁.
PRED:	“ Son of man , give you the people of Israel this message from the Lord : When you listen to me , I will tell you what I say .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , I have appointed you as a watchman for Israel . Whenever you receive a message from me , warn people immediately .

ID:	2825
INPUT:	▁Hur ren go ▁, ▁mer ka ta ri en ▁her ri al de an ▁, ▁Ba bi lo ni an ▁, ▁sai a tu ▁zi nen ▁pros ti tu zi o an ▁; ▁ha le re ▁, ▁ez ▁zi nen ▁a se ▁.
PRED:	The merchants of Tarshish were in the land of Babylonia , who lived in the land of Babylonia . They were not gods in the land of Babylonia .
GOLD:	You added to your lovers by embracing Babylonia , the land of merchants , but you still were n't satisfied .

ID:	2826
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁di o ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁« ▁Gor ro to ▁e ta ▁hi guin ▁di tu tzu en ▁jai ak ▁, ▁ez ▁di tut ▁a tse gin zu en ▁kul tu - ba tzar rak ▁.
PRED:	“ Yes , ” says the Lord , “ I have not followed all their detestable practices .
GOLD:	“ I hate all your show and pretense — the hypocrisy of your religious festivals and solemn assemblies .

ID:	2827
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁es ku a ▁ken du ko ▁dut ▁, ▁e ta ▁biz kar ral de a ▁i ku si ▁a hal ▁i zan go ▁di da zu ▁; ▁bai na ▁e ne ▁aur pe gi a ▁ez ▁dai te ke ▁i kus ▁.
PRED:	Then I will take away your hand and hand it over to the land . But I will see it , but you will not see it .
GOLD:	Then I will remove my hand and let you see me from behind . But my face will not be seen . ”

ID:	2828
INPUT:	▁Har tu ▁go go an ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁non dik ▁e ro ri ▁za ren ▁; ▁da mu ▁zai tez ▁e ta ▁i tzu li ▁le hen go ▁jo ka bi de ra ▁. ▁Bes te la ▁, ▁zu re ga na ▁jo an ▁e ta ▁be re ▁le ku tik ▁ken du ▁e gin go ▁dut ▁zu re ▁ar gi mu ti la ▁.
PRED:	Take courage and return to you , and return to the next day . Stay away from the first time and return to you . I will take away your eyes , and I will take it away .
GOLD:	Look how far you have fallen ! Turn back to me and do the works you did at first . If you do n't repent , I will come and remove your lampstand from its place among the churches .

ID:	2829
INPUT:	▁Bi zi ki ▁poz tu ▁zen ▁He ro des ▁Je sus ▁i kus te az ▁, ▁as pal di an ▁bai tzu en ▁hu ra ▁e za gu tze ko ▁go go a ▁, ▁har taz ▁en tzu ten ▁zi tu e nen ga tik ▁; ▁mi ra ri ren ▁bat ▁e gi ten ▁i ku si ko ▁zu e la ▁e re ▁es pe ro ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	When Herod heard about Jesus , he was very glad when he heard that he was speaking to him , for he saw a miraculous sign of his miracles .
GOLD:	Herod was delighted at the opportunity to see Jesus , because he had heard about him and had been hoping for a long time to see him perform a miracle .

ID:	2830
INPUT:	▁Ba rau ▁e gi nez ▁pe na tzen ▁ba naiz ▁, ▁i rai na ▁bes te rik ▁ez ▁dut ▁ja so tzen ▁;
PRED:	For I have given me a crown of wine , but I have not turned away from me .
GOLD:	When I dress in burlap to show sorrow , they make fun of me .

ID:	2831
INPUT:	▁A nai ek ▁e san ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁— ▁Geu re ▁er re ge ▁e do ▁men de ra tzai le ▁i zan ▁be har ▁o te ▁zai tu gu ▁? ▁E ta ▁a re ▁ge hi a go ▁gor ro ta tu ▁zu ten ▁be re ▁a mets ▁e ta ▁e sa nen ga tik ▁.
PRED:	“ We have a dream , ” they said . “ We wo n't be our king , and we 'll tell you what we do . ”
GOLD:	His brothers responded , “ So you think you will be our king , do you ? Do you actually think you will reign over us ? ” And they hated him all the more because of his dreams and the way he talked about them .

ID:	2832
INPUT:	▁Zor tzi ▁zen ti me tro ▁za ba le ko ▁uz tai ▁ba tez ▁hor ni tu ▁zu en ▁, ▁e ta ▁ur rez ko ▁er tza ▁e gin ▁uz tai a ri ▁.
PRED:	He measured the seven years old when he became king , and he cast a gold molding around the border .
GOLD:	He decorated it with a 3-inch border all around , and he ran a gold molding along the border .

ID:	2833
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁ho ne la ▁e san go ▁du te ▁kos tal de ▁ho ne ta ko ▁guz ti ek ▁: ▁“ ▁Hor ra ▁hor ▁geu re ▁i txa ro bi de ▁ge nu e na ren ▁a tar ra men tu a ▁! ▁Hor ra ▁hor ▁no ren ga na ▁jo ▁du gun ▁, ▁A si ri a ko ▁er re ge a gan dik ▁as ka tze ko ▁la gun tza ▁es ke ▁! ▁No la ▁o nik ▁a te ra ▁gu ▁o rain ▁? ▁” ▁»
PRED:	Then we will tell you , ‘ This is what the Lord says : We will go to the south side of the Euphrates River , and we will go out to the king of Assyria ! ' ”
GOLD:	They will say , ‘ If this can happen to Egypt , what chance do we have ? We were counting on Egypt to protect us from the king of Assyria . ' ”

ID:	2834
INPUT:	▁Be rez ▁haz ten ▁den ▁ha zi a ren ▁pa ra bo la
PRED:	Parable of the Mustard Seed
GOLD:	Jesus Calms the Storm

ID:	2835
INPUT:	▁Ez ta bai da ▁sor tu ▁zen ▁i kas le en ▁ar te an ▁, ▁nor ▁o te ▁zen ▁be rai e tan ▁han di e na ▁.
PRED:	It was not a farmer who created the world , and he was there among them .
GOLD:	Then his disciples began arguing about which of them was the greatest .

ID:	2836
INPUT:	▁Ha la ▁e re ▁, ▁ez ▁zi ren ▁mui no e ta ko ▁kul tu - le ku ak ▁de sa ger tu ▁; ▁jen de ak ▁jar rai tu ▁e gi ten ▁zu en ▁ha la ko ▁mui no e tan ▁o pa ri ak ▁es kain tzen ▁e ta ▁in tsen tsu a ▁er re tzen ▁.
PRED:	But he did not destroy the pagan shrines and burned incense on the pagan shrines . He burned incense to the pagan shrines and burned incense on the hills .
GOLD:	One day King Joash said to the priests , “ Collect all the money brought as a sacred offering to the Lord 's Temple , whether it is a regular assessment , a payment of vows , or a voluntary gift .

ID:	2837
INPUT:	▁A le lui a ▁! ▁Go ra ▁Jau na ▁! ▁Go re tsa zu e ▁Jau na ren ▁i ze na ▁, ▁go re tsa zu e ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁zer bi tza ri ok ▁,
PRED:	Praise the Lord ! Praise the Lord ! Praise the name of the Lord !
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! Praise the name of the Lord ! Praise him , you who serve the Lord ,

ID:	2838
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁gal de tu ▁zi on ▁er re ge ak ▁Da ni e li ▁, ▁Bel txa tzar ▁e re ▁dei tu a ri ▁: ▁— ▁E gi a ▁al ▁da ▁a me tsa ▁ar gi tu ▁e ta ▁e sa na hi a ▁a zal du ko ▁di da zu la ▁?
PRED:	Then the king asked Daniel , “ Daniel , what should you do ? ” And the king asked . “ What do you mean ? ”
GOLD:	The king said to Daniel ( also known as Belteshazzar ) , “ Is this true ? Can you tell me what my dream was and what it means ? ”

ID:	2839
INPUT:	▁Ta mar ri ▁e san ▁zi o ten ▁ai ta gi nar re ba ▁ar di - moz te ra ▁zi ho a la ▁Tim na ra ▁.
PRED:	They said to Tamar to Amnon , “ Go back to Timnah for a long time .
GOLD:	Someone told Tamar , “ Look , your father-in-law is going up to Timnah to shear his sheep . ”

ID:	2840
INPUT:	▁Jo si a sek ▁le ge - li bu ru a ▁aur ki tu
PRED:	Jehoahaz Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Hilkiah Discovers God 's Law

ID:	2841
INPUT:	▁aur kez tu ▁ziz ki e ten ▁a pos to lu ei ▁, ▁e ta ▁hau ek ▁, ▁o toitz ▁e gi nez ▁, ▁es ku ak ▁bu ru an ▁e zar ri ▁ziz ki e ten ▁.
PRED:	When they found the apostles , they brought their hands to the apostles and hands of their hands .
GOLD:	These seven were presented to the apostles , who prayed for them as they laid their hands on them .

ID:	2842
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁e san ▁nu en ▁: ▁— ▁E ne ▁Jain ko ▁Jau na ▁, ▁zau de ▁gel di ▁! ▁No la ▁eu tsi ko ▁di o ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁Is ra el ▁her ri ak ▁be re ▁bi zi a ri ▁, ▁hain ▁txi ki a ▁i za nik ▁?
PRED:	Then I said to them , “ O Sovereign Lord , you are standing in the sky ! How can the people of Israel live ?
GOLD:	Then I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , please stop or we will not survive , for Israel is so small . ”

ID:	2843
INPUT:	▁Ju dan ▁gel di tu ▁zi ren ▁gu dal bu ru ak ▁, ▁Ba bi lo ni a ko ▁er re ge ak ▁Go da li as ▁go ber na ri ▁e zar ri ▁zu e la ▁ja ki te an ▁, ▁ho nen ga na ▁jo an ▁zi ren ▁Mitz pa ra ▁be ren ▁gi zon ▁guz ti e kin ▁. ▁Hau ek ▁zi ren ▁gu dal bu ru ak ▁: ▁Ne ta ni a sen ▁se me ▁Is ma el ▁, ▁Ka re a hen ▁se me ▁Jo ha nan ▁, ▁Ne to fa ko ▁Tan hu me ten ▁se me ▁Se rai as ▁, ▁e ta ▁Ja a za ni as ▁, ▁ma a kar ra ▁.
PRED:	Then Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , took Gedaliah , the commander of the army of Judah , the commander of the army of Mizpah , and all the men of Judah , and all the men of Judah . They were killed , and all the men of Judah .
GOLD:	When all the army commanders and their men learned that the king of Babylon had appointed Gedaliah as governor , they went to see him at Mizpah . These included Ishmael son of Nethaniah , Johanan son of Kareah , Seraiah son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite , Jezaniah son of the Maacathite , and all their men .

ID:	2844
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Jo sa fat ▁lur re rai no ▁a hus pez tu ▁zen ▁; ▁Ju da ko ▁e ta ▁Je ru sa lem go ▁jen de ▁guz ti a ▁e re ▁ma kur tu ▁e gin ▁zen ▁Jau na ▁gur tze ko ▁.
PRED:	Then Jehoshaphat bowed low to the ground and worshiped the Lord . He bowed low to the ground and worshiped the Lord .
GOLD:	Then King Jehoshaphat bowed low with his face to the ground . And all the people of Judah and Jerusalem did the same , worshiping the Lord .

ID:	2845
INPUT:	▁hor re la ▁ba da ▁, ▁e ta ▁Jau na ren ▁la gun tzaz ▁lur ral de a ▁men de ra tu ▁bai no ▁le hen ▁i tzul tzen ▁ez ▁ba za re te ▁, ▁ez ▁du zu e ▁i no la ko ▁er ru rik ▁i zan go ▁, ▁ez ▁Jau na ren ▁, ▁ez ▁Is ra e len ▁aur re an ▁, ▁e ta ▁lur ral de ▁hau ▁zeu en ▁ja be tza ▁i zan go ▁du zu e ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁o ni ri tzi az ▁.
PRED:	If you return to the Lord , you will not return to the land of Israel . If you return to the Lord , you will not return to the Lord , and you will not return to the land of Israel .
GOLD:	then you may return when the Lord has conquered the land . You will have fulfilled your duty to the Lord and to the rest of the people of Israel . And the land on the east side of the Jordan will be your property from the Lord .

ID:	2846
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁a gin ta ri ek ▁in gu ra tu ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁— ▁Noiz ▁ar te ▁e du ki ▁be har ▁gai tu zu ▁za lan tzan ▁? ▁Zu ▁ba za ra ▁Me si as ▁, ▁e sa gu zu ▁ar gi ▁e ta ▁gar bi ▁.
PRED:	“ How long will you come ? ” they asked . “ How long will you be pure ? ”
GOLD:	The people surrounded him and asked , “ How long are you going to keep us in suspense ? If you are the Messiah , tell us plainly . ”

ID:	2847
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁Moi se sek ▁e san ▁zi on ▁A a ro ni ▁: ▁« ▁Har tu ▁zeu re ▁er rau tson tzi a ▁, ▁i pi ni ▁ber tan ▁al da re ko ▁txin gar rak ▁e ta ▁bo ta ▁gai ne an ▁in tsen tsu a ▁; ▁zo az ▁a rin ▁el kar te ra ▁e ta ▁e gi zu ▁hai en ▁al de ko ▁bar ka men - o hi ku ne a ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁ha ser re a ▁piz tu ▁bai ta ▁e ta ▁ha si a ▁da ▁i zur ri a ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then Moses said to Aaron , “ Take a piece of wood and pour out it on the altar , and pour out blood on the altar . This is what the Lord says : I will pour out the fury of the Lord 's anger . ”
GOLD:	So Moses did as the Lord commanded him .

ID:	2848
INPUT:	▁O ro tan ▁e ra ku tsi ▁i zan ▁di zu et ▁, ▁hor re la ▁be har ▁de la ▁la ne an ▁sai a tu ▁gau za ▁ez ▁di re nei ▁la gun tze ko ▁, ▁Je sus ▁Jau na ren ▁hitz ▁hai ek ▁go go ra tuz ▁: ▁“ ▁Zo ri on ▁ge hi a go ▁du ▁e ma te ak ▁har tze ak ▁bai no ▁” ▁» ▁.
PRED:	I will show you the truth that those who do n't need to go on on on on the day of the Lord Jesus will say , ‘ Come , let 's go . ' ”
GOLD:	And I have been a constant example of how you can help those in need by working hard . You should remember the words of the Lord Jesus : ‘ It is more blessed to give than to receive . ' ”

ID:	2849
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁haur txo ak ▁ma ga le an ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁be dein ka tu ▁e gi ten ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁es ku ak ▁e zar riz ▁.
PRED:	Then he blessed them and blessed them and blessed them .
GOLD:	Then he took the children in his arms and placed his hands on their heads and blessed them .

ID:	2850
INPUT:	▁Be har tsu a ren ▁dei a dar rei ▁ez ▁en tzu na re na ▁e gi ten ▁di e na ri ▁, ▁ez ▁di o te ▁be ra ri ▁e re ▁en tzun go ▁, ▁la gun tza ▁es ke ▁dei ▁e gi te an ▁.
PRED:	The poor will not listen to the poor , nor will their ears to their ears . They will cry out to their ears .
GOLD:	Those who shut their ears to the cries of the poorwill be ignored in their own time of need .

ID:	2851
INPUT:	▁Mik tam ▁. ▁Da vi de na <unk> de ▁na za zu ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁zu re gan ▁bai tut ▁ba be sa ▁.
PRED:	Help me , O Lord , for I have seen your word .
GOLD:	Keep me safe , O God , for I have come to you for refuge .

ID:	2852
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁guz ti a ▁gu re tzat ▁i kas bi de ▁i za te ko ▁ger ta tu ▁zen ▁, ▁gaiz ta ke ri a rik ▁ir ri ka ▁ez ▁de za gun ▁, ▁hai ek ▁ir ri ka tu ▁zu ten ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	This is a permanent law for us . It was like a sin , and it was n't like those who sin .
GOLD:	These things happened as a warning to us , so that we would not crave evil things as they did ,

ID:	2853
INPUT:	▁« ▁Zo ri o ne ko a ▁ni ▁, ▁Ag ri pa ▁er re ge a ▁, ▁ju du ek ▁le po ra tzen ▁diz ki da ten ▁er ru ▁guz ti ez ▁gaur ▁neu re ▁bu ru a ▁zu re ▁aur re an ▁zu ri tze ko ▁au ke ra ▁du da la ko ▁;
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits King Agrippa , King Agrippa , king of Judah , king of Babylon , king of Babylon , will stand trial before you .
GOLD:	“ I am fortunate , King Agrippa , that you are the one hearing my defense today against all these accusations made by the Jewish leaders ,

ID:	2854
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁zu en ▁Jain ko ak ▁au ke ra tu ko ▁du en ▁le ku an ▁e go si ▁e ta ▁jan go ▁du zu e ▁o pa ri gai a ▁, ▁e ta ▁bi ha ra mun ▁goi ze an ▁e txe ra ▁i tzu li ko ▁za re te ▁.
PRED:	When you see what the Lord your God has chosen you to eat and drinking the next morning , you will return to the next morning .
GOLD:	Roast the lamb and eat it in the place the Lord your God chooses . Then you may go back to your tents the next morning .

ID:	2855
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁na hi ▁nu ke ▁zu ek ▁ja ki te a ▁, ▁gi zon ▁o ro ren ▁bu ru ▁Kris to ▁de la ▁, ▁e ma ku me a ren ▁bu ru ▁gi zo na ▁, ▁e ta ▁Kris to ren ▁bu ru ▁Jain ko a ▁.
PRED:	But I want you to know that Christ has already been a human woman , and Christ is the head of Christ .
GOLD:	But there is one thing I want you to know : The head of every man is Christ , the head of woman is man , and the head of Christ is God .

ID:	2856
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ai ▁zu ek ▁, ▁le ge - mai su ▁e ta ▁fa ri seu ▁i txu ra za le ok ▁! ▁Nor bait ▁ju du ber ri ▁e gi te a ga tik ▁i tsa so ▁e ta ▁le hor ▁za bil tza te ▁e ta ▁, ▁e gin ▁du zu e ne an ▁, ▁zeu ek ▁bai no ▁gai a go ▁bi hur tzen ▁du zu e ▁in fer nu ra ko ▁!
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law and Pharisees and Pharisees , who are Pharisees and teachers of religious law . You are trying to trap yourself in the sea , but you ca n't find it .
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law and you Pharisees . Hypocrites ! For you cross land and sea to make one convert , and then you turn that person into twice the child of hell you yourselves are !

ID:	2857
INPUT:	▁Be hi ▁ar gal ▁e ta ▁es kas ▁hau ek ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁le hen go ▁zaz pi ▁be hi ▁gu ri ak ▁i ren tsi ▁zi tuz ten ▁.
PRED:	But the seven disciples who had been faithful to our teachers , but they had seven days .
GOLD:	These thin , scrawny cows ate the seven fat cows .

ID:	2858
INPUT:	▁a le gi a ▁, ▁bes te ak ▁ge zur rez ▁sa la tzen ▁, ▁au zi te gi an ▁de fen tsa ▁e ra goz te ne ta ▁er ru ga be a ▁hon da men di ra e ra ma ten ▁du te nak ▁.
PRED:	A person who hates a person ; a person is put to shame .
GOLD:	Those who convict the innocentby their false testimony will disappear.A similar fate awaits those who use trickery to pervert justiceand who tell lies to destroy the innocent .

ID:	2859
INPUT:	▁E lam dar ren tzat
PRED:	A Message about Kedar and Adullam
GOLD:	A Message about Elam

ID:	2860
INPUT:	▁e zi ka si en ▁he zi tzai le ▁e ta ▁ez ja ki nen ▁i ra kas le tzat ▁, ▁e ta ▁ho ri ▁, ▁e za gu tza ren ▁e ta ▁e gi a ren ▁a di e raz pe na ▁le ge an ▁du zu la ko ▁.
PRED:	Do n't let anyone tell you the truth of these teachers of religious law , and do n't obey it .
GOLD:	You think you can instruct the ignorant and teach children the ways of God . For you are certain that God 's law gives you complete knowledge and truth .

ID:	2861
INPUT:	▁Bi da li ak ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁An ti o ki a ra ▁jai tsi ▁zi ren ▁e ta ▁, ▁bil tzar ra ▁bil du rik ▁, ▁gu tu na ▁e man ▁zi e ten ▁.
PRED:	So they went down to Antioch of Syria and read it to them .
GOLD:	The messengers went at once to Antioch , where they called a general meeting of the believers and delivered the letter .

ID:	2862
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ge ro ▁, ▁a te a ren ▁on do ko ▁sar re ra tik ▁, ▁i par ral de rantz ▁dau den ▁a pai zen ▁ge la ▁sak ra tu e ta ra ▁e ra man ▁nin du en ▁gi zo nak ▁. ▁Bar ren - bar re ne an ▁men de bal de ra ▁ze go en ▁le ku ▁bat ▁e ra ku tsiz ▁,
PRED:	“ Then I went out to the north gateway to the north side of the north gateway on the north side of the north gateway on the north side of the north .
GOLD:	In my vision , the man brought me through the entrance beside the gateway and led me to the sacred rooms assigned to the priests , which faced toward the north . He showed me a place at the extreme west end of these rooms .

ID:	2863
INPUT:	▁Ho na ▁he men zer taz ▁o har tu ▁nai zen ▁ni ▁, ▁Ko he let ▁, ▁ar gi bi de ▁bi la ▁, ▁de nak ▁ba nan - ba na naz ter tu ▁di tu da ne an ▁:
PRED:	Here is my message from the Teacher , who is my refuge , who is my refuge .
GOLD:	“ This is my conclusion , ” says the Teacher . “ I discovered this after looking at the matter from every possible angle .

ID:	2864
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁« ▁Be dein ka tu a ▁Jau na ren ▁i ze ne an ▁da tor ren ▁er re ge a ▁! ▁Ba ke a ▁ze ru an ▁e ta ▁ain tza ▁Jain ko ▁go re na ri ▁! ▁»
PRED:	They said to him , “ Praise the name of the Lord , the God of heaven , who is honored in heaven ! ”
GOLD:	“ Blessings on the King who comes in the name of the Lord ! Peace in heaven , and glory in highest heaven ! ”

ID:	2865
INPUT:	▁Je sus ▁txa lu pa ra ▁i go ▁, ▁ain tzi raz ▁bes te ▁al de ra ▁i ga ro ▁e ta ▁be re ▁her ri ra ▁e tor ri ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	Then Jesus got into the boat and went to the lake with his people .
GOLD:	Jesus climbed into a boat and went back across the lake to his own town .

ID:	2866
INPUT:	▁Be te a ▁du ▁a ho a ▁ma da ri ka zi oz ▁, ▁mal tzur ke ri az ▁e ta ▁go gor ke ri az ▁; ▁o ker ra ▁e ta ▁gaiz ta ke ri a ▁di tu ▁mi hi an ▁gor de ak ▁.
PRED:	They hate evil and refuse to hate evil , and they hate evil .
GOLD:	Their mouths are full of cursing , lies , and threats.Trouble and evil are on the tips of their tongues .

ID:	2867
INPUT:	▁A dis ki de ▁mai te ▁, ▁es pi ri tuz ▁on gi ▁do a ki zun ▁be za la ▁, ▁bes te ▁gau za ▁guz ti e tan ▁e re ▁on gi ▁jo an ▁da ki zu la ▁e ta ▁o sa su na ▁i zan ▁de za zu la ▁.
PRED:	Love each other as brothers and sisters . Love each other as you do , just as you do .
GOLD:	Dear friend , I hope all is well with you and that you are as healthy in body as you are strong in spirit .

ID:	2868
INPUT:	▁Jain ko a ▁Moi se si ▁e ta ▁Jo su e ri ▁a ger tu
PRED:	Moses and Aaron
GOLD:	Israel 's Disobedience Predicted

ID:	2869
INPUT:	▁« ▁Nor bai tek ▁be re ▁e txe a ▁sa ga ra tzen ▁ba di o ▁Jau na ri ▁, ▁a pai zak ▁e ra ba ki ko ▁du ▁e txe a ren ga tik ▁or dain du ▁be har re ko a ▁, ▁zer - no la ko a ▁den ▁kon tu an ▁har tu rik ▁. ▁A pai za ren ▁e ra ba ki a ▁a tze ra e zi na ▁da ▁.
PRED:	“ If a priest is required in the house of the Lord 's house , the priest must pronounce the person ceremonially clean . He must pronounce the person ceremonially clean .
GOLD:	“ If someone dedicates a house to the Lord , the priest will come to assess its value . The priest 's assessment will be final , whether high or low .

ID:	2870
INPUT:	▁De na ▁de la ▁, ▁zeu en ▁ar te an ▁au zi tan ▁i bil tze a ▁be ra ▁na hi ko ▁pe na gar ri a ▁da ▁. ▁Zer ga tik ▁ez ▁bi de ga be ke ri a ▁ja san ▁e ta ▁zeu en ▁bu ru ak ▁lar ru tzen ▁u tzi ▁?
PRED:	So why do n't you think about your sister ? Why do n't you think of yourself ? Why are you so angry ? Why are you so angry ?
GOLD:	Even to have such lawsuits with one another is a defeat for you . Why not just accept the injustice and leave it at that ? Why not let yourselves be cheated ?

ID:	2871
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁A bi me le kek ▁e san ▁zi on ▁be re ▁ez ku ta ri a ri ▁: ▁« ▁A te ra ▁ez pa ta ▁e ta ▁hil ▁na zak ▁! ▁Ez ▁de za te la ▁e san ▁e ma ku me ▁ba tek ▁hil ▁nau e la ▁» ▁. ▁Ez ku ta ri ak ▁ez pa ta ▁sar tu ▁e ta ▁hil ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	Then Abimelech said to Abimelech , “ Let 's kill him and kill him , ” Abimelech said . “ Let me kill me and kill me and kill me . ”
GOLD:	He quickly said to his young armor bearer , “ Draw your sword and kill me ! Do n't let it be said that a woman killed Abimelech ! ” So the young man ran him through with his sword , and he died .

ID:	2872
INPUT:	▁Ho ri ek ▁be ren ▁on da su ne tan ▁oi nar ri tzen ▁di ra e ta ▁be ren ▁a be ras ta sun ▁han di az ▁har ro tzen ▁.
PRED:	These are the thoughts of the wise , and their riches are filled with grief .
GOLD:	Yet they can not redeem themselves from deathby paying a ransom to God .

ID:	2873
INPUT:	▁Be ren ▁a hai de ▁Bak bu ki a sek ▁e ta ▁U nik ▁la gun tzen ▁zi e ten ▁be te be har ▁hor re tan ▁.
PRED:	This was the account of the family of Eber , who lived in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	Their associates , Bakbukiah and Unni , stood opposite them during the service .

ID:	2874
INPUT:	▁A ka bek ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁— ▁No ren ▁bi dez ▁? ▁Pro fe tak ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁Hau ▁di o ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁« ▁Es ku al de bu ru en ▁la gun tzai le ▁di ren ▁gaz te en ▁bi dez ▁» ▁.A ka bek ▁, ▁ber ri ro ▁: ▁— ▁Nork ▁e kin go ▁di o ▁bor ro ka ri ▁? ▁Pro fe tak ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁Zuk ▁.
PRED:	Then Ahab asked , “ What is the prophet ? ” “ This is what the Lord says : He is the one who is with his wife , ” Ahab replied . “ He is with me , ” he replied . “ You are lying . ”
GOLD:	Ahab asked , “ How will he do it ? ” And the prophet replied , “ This is what the Lord says : The troops of the provincial commanders will do it. ” “ Should we attack first ? ” Ahab asked. “ Yes , ” the prophet answered .

ID:	2875
INPUT:	▁« ▁Txar ra ▁, ▁txar ra ▁» ▁e sa ten ▁du ▁e ros le ak ▁; ▁bai na ▁hor ▁do a ▁ge ro ▁, ▁po zik ▁as ko ▁e gin da ko ▁e ros ke taz ▁.
PRED:	“ All good people are good , ” says the Lord . “ They will look like hungry , but they will be hungry . ”
GOLD:	The buyer haggles over the price , saying , “ It 's worthless , ” then brags about getting a bargain !

ID:	2876
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁Jau nak ▁pro fe ta ▁ba ten ▁bi de za te ra ▁zu en ▁Is ra el ▁E gip to ti ke ta ▁pro fe ta ▁ba ten ▁bi dez zu en ▁zain du ▁.
PRED:	But the Lord sent you out of Egypt , just as he promised through the prophets of Israel .
GOLD:	But the people of Israelhave bitterly provoked the Lord , so their Lord will now sentence them to deathin payment for their sins .

ID:	2877
INPUT:	▁Hau tsi ▁gaiz to a ren ▁in dar ra ▁, ▁es ka tu ▁ha ri ▁gaiz ta ke ri a ren ▁kon tu ▁, ▁ez ▁u tzi ▁e zer ▁az ter tze ke ▁.
PRED:	They turn away from their evil deeds , but they did n't turn away from their evil deeds .
GOLD:	Break the arms of these wicked , evil people ! Go after them until the last one is destroyed .

ID:	2878
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁e gin ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁i no la ko ▁la nik ▁. ▁Be ti ko ▁le ge ▁i zan go ▁du zu e ▁hau ▁be lau nez ▁be laun ▁, ▁bi zi ko ▁za re ten ▁e do non ▁.
PRED:	Do n't be careful to obey all these instructions . This is a permanent law for you , and you must live forever .
GOLD:	You must not do any work at all ! This is a permanent law for you , and it must be observed from generation to generation wherever you live .

ID:	2879
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren ▁on gi na hi a ▁ez ▁de la ▁a mai tu ▁, ▁ha ren ▁er ru ki a ▁ez ▁de la ▁a gor tu ▁.
PRED:	The Lord detests the good things of the Lord , but he delights in his heart .
GOLD:	The faithful love of the Lord never ends ! His mercies never cease .

ID:	2880
INPUT:	▁De na ▁Jo se ren ▁gain ▁u tzi ▁zu en ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁Po ti far rek ▁e ta ▁aur re ran tze an ▁ez ▁zen ▁e zer taz ▁ar du ra tu ▁, ▁be rak ▁ja ten ▁zu e naz ▁i zan ▁e <unk> txu ra ▁e der re ko a ▁zen ▁Jo se ▁.
PRED:	So Joseph left in prison , and he was in prison . He was very hard to see what he meant . He was very beautiful , and he was very beautiful .
GOLD:	So Potiphar gave Joseph complete administrative responsibility over everything he owned . With Joseph there , he did n't worry about a thing — except what kind of food to eat ! Joseph was a very handsome and well-built young man ,

ID:	2881
INPUT:	▁« ▁Han ▁, ▁bur di naz ko ▁tres naz ▁lan du ▁ga be ko ▁har riz ▁e gi ni ko ▁al da re a ▁e rai ki ko ▁di o zu e ▁Jau na ri ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko a ri ▁;
PRED:	“ You must build an iron altar for the Lord your God . You must build an altar to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Then build an altar there to the Lord your God , using natural , uncut stones . You must not shape the stones with an iron tool .

ID:	2882
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁i kas le ek ▁gal de tu ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁— ▁Zer ga tik ▁di o te ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁le ge - mai su ek ▁le hen bi zi ▁E li a sek ▁e tor ri ▁be har ▁du e la ▁?
PRED:	Then the disciples asked him , “ Why did the teachers of religious law mean ? ”
GOLD:	Then his disciples asked him , “ Why do the teachers of religious law insist that Elijah must return before the Messiah comes ? ”

ID:	2883
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁hai ze - zur run bi lo an ▁e ra man ▁zu en ▁E li as ▁ze ru ra ▁. ▁Ho na ▁no la ▁ger ta tu ▁zen ▁: ▁E li as ▁e ta ▁E li se o ▁Gil gal dik ▁a bi a tu ak ▁zi re la rik ▁,
PRED:	Then the Lord sent a plague to Elijah , and Elijah went out to Gilgal . He said , “ Elijah and Elijah has left Gilgal . ”
GOLD:	When the Lord was about to take Elijah up to heaven in a whirlwind , Elijah and Elisha were traveling from Gilgal .

ID:	2884
INPUT:	▁E gun ▁txar re tan ▁, ▁zer ga tik ▁i zan ▁bel du rin gu ra tzen ▁nau ten ▁mal tzur ren ▁ma le zi a ri ▁?
PRED:	My enemies surround me , and they slander me .
GOLD:	They trust in their wealthand boast of great riches .

ID:	2885
INPUT:	▁Ho be ▁du zu ▁« ▁I go ▁ho na ▁! ▁» ▁en tzun ▁, ▁han di a go ▁ba ten ▁aur re an ▁a pa la ra zi a ▁i zan ▁bai <unk> re ▁be gi ez ▁i ku si ▁ba du zu ▁e re ▁,
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Look , ” says the Lord. “ You will see a little while your own wealth will be opened .
GOLD:	It 's better to wait for an invitation to the head tablethan to be sent away in public disgrace.Just because you 've seen something ,

ID:	2886
INPUT:	▁Bor txa tu ▁e gin ▁di tuz te ▁Si on go ▁e ma ku me a ke ta ▁Ju da ko ▁hi ri e ta ko ▁nes ka txak ▁.
PRED:	The women will shout for battle , and the women of Judah will be captured .
GOLD:	Our enemies rape the women in Jerusalemand the young girls in all the towns of Judah .

ID:	2887
INPUT:	▁Bi zi ▁e ta ▁mu gi tzen ▁den ▁guz ti tik ▁jan ▁de za ke zu e ▁; ▁le he na go ▁lan da re ak ▁be za la ▁, ▁den - de na ▁e ma ten ▁di zu et ▁.
PRED:	You may eat anything that is ceremonially clean , just as you eat .
GOLD:	I have given them to you for food , just as I have given you grain and vegetables .

ID:	2888
INPUT:	▁« ▁On do ren ▁, ▁har tu ▁bes te ▁a ha ri a ▁. ▁A a ro nek ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁se me ek ▁bu ru an ▁es ku ak ▁e zar ri ko ▁diz ki o te ▁.
PRED:	“ Next Aaron and his sons must lay their hands on the head of Aaron 's sons .
GOLD:	“ Now take the other ram , and have Aaron and his sons lay their hands on its head .

ID:	2889
INPUT:	▁Bi zi ▁ga ren ▁bi tar te an ▁, ▁be ti ▁he ri o tza ra ▁ga ra ma tza te ▁Je su sen ga tik ▁, ▁gu re ▁i za te ▁hil kor ▁ho ne tan ▁Je su sen ▁bi zi a ▁e re ▁a ger ▁da din ▁.
PRED:	Let us live in the death of Jesus , as we live in the death of Jesus . He will die in the death of Jesus .
GOLD:	Yes , we live under constant danger of death because we serve Jesus , so that the life of Jesus will be evident in our dying bodies .

ID:	2890
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁zu en ▁Jain ko ak ▁ni ▁be za la ko ▁pro fe ta ▁sor tu ko ▁du ▁zu en ▁ar te tik ▁, ▁her ri tar ren ▁ar te tik ▁. ▁En tzun ▁be ra ri ▁!
PRED:	As surely as the Lord lives , I will raise my prophet from among you .
GOLD:	Moses continued , “ The Lord your God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your fellow Israelites . You must listen to him .

ID:	2891
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁ar te an ▁hai e ta ko ▁i no ren ga na ▁jai tsi ▁ga be ▁ze go en ▁Es pi ri tu a ▁; ▁Je sus ▁Jau na ren ▁i ze ne an ▁ba tai a tu rik ▁ba kar rik ▁zeu den ▁.
PRED:	For when the Spirit of the Lord Jesus came down to them , he was baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus .
GOLD:	The Holy Spirit had not yet come upon any of them , for they had only been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus .

ID:	2892
INPUT:	▁Be re ▁i sa tsez ▁ze ru ko ▁i zar ren ▁he re na ▁her res tan ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁lur re ra ▁jaur ti ▁zu en.He ren su ge a ▁, ▁haur ra ▁i za te ko ▁ze go en ▁e ma ku me a ren ▁ai tzi ne an ▁gel di tu ▁zen ▁, ▁jai o ▁be zain ▁las ter ▁se me a ▁i renste ko ▁.
PRED:	They carried the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant into the sky and threw it into the sky , just as the children of the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	His tail swept away one-third of the stars in the sky , and he threw them to the earth . He stood in front of the woman as she was about to give birth , ready to devour her baby as soon as it was born .

ID:	2893
INPUT:	▁A dis ki de ak ▁ber ta ko ▁jen de a ri ▁gal de gin ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Non ▁da ▁E nai men ▁, ▁bi de - baz ter re an ▁, ▁e gon ▁o hi ▁zen ▁e ma gal du a ▁? ▁Hai ek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi o ten ▁: ▁— ▁He men ▁ez ▁da ▁i noiz ▁e ma gal du rik ▁e gon ▁.
PRED:	“ Where is your brother ? ” the crowd asked . “ Where is your brother ? ” They replied , “ There is no prostitute ? ” They replied .
GOLD:	So he asked the men who lived there , “ Where can I find the shrine prostitute who was sitting beside the road at the entrance to Enaim ? ” “ We 've never had a shrine prostitute here , ” they replied .

ID:	2894
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁e ran tzun ▁ni on ▁: ▁— ▁E ne ▁Jau na ▁, ▁zeuk ▁ja kin go ▁du zu.Hark ▁e san ▁zi dan ▁: ▁— ▁Lar ri al di ▁han di tik ▁da to ze nak ▁di ra ▁ho ri ek ▁; ▁be ren ▁soi ne ko ak ▁Bil do tsa ren ▁o do le an ▁gar bi tu ▁di tuz te ▁e ta ▁zu ri tu ▁.
PRED:	“ Where are you ? ” I asked . “ Who is the Lord ? ” “ He is the threshing floor of the sea , ” he said . “ He is washed by the blood of the Lamb . ”
GOLD:	And I said to him , “ Sir , you are the one who knows. ” Then he said to me , “ These are the ones who died in the great tribulation . They have washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb and made them white .

ID:	2895
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zai tez ▁poz tu ▁, ▁Is ra el ▁, ▁ez ▁a lai tu ▁, ▁bes te ▁her ri ak ▁be za la ▁, ▁pros ti tu zi o an ▁i bi li ▁bai tza ra ▁, ▁zeu re ▁Jain ko a ▁u tzi rik.A tse gin ▁du zu zeu re ▁pros ti tu zi o a ren ▁sa ri a ga ri - lar rain ▁guz ti e tan ▁ja so tze a ▁.
PRED:	Do not rejoice , O Israel , O Israel ! Do n't be happy ! For you have made yourself yourself an object of mockery .
GOLD:	O people of Israel , do not rejoice as other nations do.For you have been unfaithful to your God , hiring yourselves out like prostitutes , worshiping other gods on every threshing floor .

ID:	2896
INPUT:	▁Je sus ▁, ▁ho ri ▁ja ki te an ▁, ▁Ju de a ▁u tzi ▁e ta ▁Ga li le a ra ▁jo an ▁zen ▁ber ri ro ▁.
PRED:	When Jesus heard this , he left Judea and returned to Galilee .
GOLD:	So he left Judea and returned to Galilee .

ID:	2897
INPUT:	▁“ ▁En tzun ▁, ▁is ra el dar rok ▁! ▁Gaur ▁e tsai en ▁aur ka ▁bor ro ka tu ko ▁za re te ▁. ▁Ez ▁ki kil du ▁, ▁ez ▁i zan ▁bel dur ▁! ▁Ez ▁a sal da tu ▁, ▁ez ▁i ka ra tu ▁e tsai en ▁aur re an ▁!
PRED:	“ Listen , you people of Israel ! Do n't attack them ! Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid !
GOLD:	He will say to them , ‘ Listen to me , all you men of Israel ! Do not be afraid as you go out to fight your enemies today ! Do not lose heart or panic or tremble before them .

ID:	2898
INPUT:	▁Ni re kin ▁au zi tan ▁ze bi le la ▁, ▁mor roi ▁na hiz ▁nes ka me ren ▁ba ti ▁es ku bi de a ▁u ka tu ▁ba di ot ▁,
PRED:	If I take my servant 's servant 's servant , I will ask for a servant ,
GOLD:	“ If I have been unfair to my male or female servantswhen they brought their complaints to me ,

ID:	2899
INPUT:	▁Han ▁ze go en ▁Ja ko ben ▁pu tzu a ▁de la ko a ▁. ▁Je sus ▁, ▁bi de az ▁ne ka tu rik ▁, ▁pu tzu - er tze an ▁e se ri ▁zen ▁. ▁E gu er di ▁in gu ru a ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	Meanwhile , Jacob was there in the cistern , where he was staying . He sat beside the edge of the well where he was staying .
GOLD:	Jacob 's well was there ; and Jesus , tired from the long walk , sat wearily beside the well about noontime .

ID:	2900
INPUT:	▁Si kem go ▁ba tzar ra
PRED:	The Covenant Renewed
GOLD:	The Northern Tribes Revolt

ID:	2901
INPUT:	▁Ez ta bai da ▁lu ze a ren ▁on do ren ▁, ▁zu ti tu ▁zen ▁Ped ro ▁e ta ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁« ▁A nai ok ▁, ▁da ki zu e nez ▁, ▁as pal di ▁au ke ra tu ▁nin du en ▁Jain ko ak ▁zu en ▁ar te tik ▁, ▁jen ti lek ▁ni re ▁a ho tik ▁ber ri ▁o na ren ▁me zu a ▁en tzun ▁ze za ten ▁e ta ▁si ne tsi ▁.
PRED:	Then Peter went back to the Euphrates River and said , “ Brothers , you are deeply troubled , and you are preaching the word of God . This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	At the meeting , after a long discussion , Peter stood and addressed them as follows : “ Brothers , you all know that God chose me from among you some time ago to preach to the Gentiles so that they could hear the Good News and believe .

ID:	2902
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren ▁hi tza ▁e zin ▁ho be a ▁: ▁gi za ki a ▁ar nas ber ri tzen ▁du ▁; ▁Jau na ren ▁ma na men du a ▁fi da gar ri a ▁: ▁hel du ga be a ▁zu hur ra raz ten ▁du ▁;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ He is a liar ; he is a liar ; it is a liar ; a person who makes a person tremble .
GOLD:	The commandments of the Lord are right , bringing joy to the heart.The commands of the Lord are clear , giving insight for living .

ID:	2903
INPUT:	▁Er re ge ak ▁i se kaz ▁da ra bil tza te ▁, ▁han di ki ei ▁ir ri ▁e gi <unk> tor le ku ek ▁bar re gu ra e ma ten ▁di e te ▁, ▁on do an ▁lur - pi lak ▁e gi nez har tzen ▁bai ti tuz te ▁.
PRED:	The king is coming when the king sits in the palace , and the young men are coming out to meet them .
GOLD:	They scoff at kings and princesand scorn all their fortresses.They simply pile ramps of earthagainst their walls and capture them !

ID:	2904
INPUT:	▁Bu ka tu ▁zi ren ▁ja da nik ▁hai en tza ta mo di o a ▁, ▁gor ro to a ▁e ta ▁gri nak.Ez ▁du te ▁aur re ra ko an ▁es ku - har tze rik mun du ▁ho ne ta ne gi ten ▁di ren ▁la ne tan ▁.
PRED:	Their leaders are led to exile , and the pride of the wicked will be brought to the end of the world .
GOLD:	Whatever they did in their lifetime — loving , hating , envying — is all long gone . They no longer play a part in anything here on earth .

ID:	2905
INPUT:	▁Be lar ri a ▁za bal tzen ▁di e ▁zen tza ▁dai te zen ▁, ▁gaiz ta ke ri a tik ▁i tzul tze ko ▁a gin tzen ▁.
PRED:	A person leads to disgrace , but a sensible person brings understanding .
GOLD:	He gets their attentionand commands that they turn from evil .

ID:	2906
INPUT:	▁Ja kob ▁E gip to ra ▁jo an ▁e ta ▁zu en ▁ar ba so ek ▁Jau na ri ▁oi hu ▁e gin ▁zi o te ne an ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁Moi ses ▁e ta ▁A a ron ▁i gor ri ▁ziz ki en ▁; ▁hau ek ▁a te ra ▁zi tuz ten ▁zu en ▁ar ba so ak ▁E gip to tik ▁e ta ▁lur ral de ▁ho ne tan ▁ko ka ra zi ▁.
PRED:	So Jacob went out to Egypt and cried out to the Lord , “ Moses , Aaron , and Aaron , who brought them out of the land of Egypt . He brought them out of the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	“ When the Israelites were in Egypt and cried out to the Lord , he sent Moses and Aaron to rescue them from Egypt and to bring them into this land .

ID:	2907
INPUT:	▁« ▁Bes te ▁ba tzu e tan ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁na zi o ▁e do ▁er rei nu ▁bat ▁e rai ki ▁e ta ▁lan da tze a ▁e ra ba ki tzen ▁dut ▁.
PRED:	“ If anyone asks the truth , I have something to plant it , I want it to work .
GOLD:	And if I announce that I will plant and build up a certain nation or kingdom ,

ID:	2908
INPUT:	▁Moi se sek ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁E gi zu e ▁a gin du ▁du zu e na ▁: ▁har tu ▁ar mak ▁Jau na ren ▁a gin du ra ▁bor ro ka tze ko ▁;
PRED:	Then Moses said to them , “ You have obeyed the commands of the Lord your God . ”
GOLD:	Then Moses said , “ If you keep your word and arm yourselves for the Lord 's battles ,

ID:	2909
INPUT:	▁Bes te ▁o hai de en ▁se me ei ▁o pa ri ak ▁e man ▁ziz ki en ▁, ▁e ta ▁I sa a ken gan dik ▁ur ru ti ▁bi da li ▁zi tu en ▁e ki al de rantz ▁, ▁be ra ▁o rain dik ▁bi zi ▁ze la ▁.
PRED:	He gave some bread to his sons and daughters , and he sent them back to the east of the Negev .
GOLD:	But before he died , he gave gifts to the sons of his concubines and sent them off to a land in the east , away from Isaac .

ID:	2910
INPUT:	▁« ▁Al di ▁har tan ▁, ▁ni ▁, ▁Da ni el ▁, ▁a tse ka be tu rik ▁e gon ▁nin tzen ▁hi ru ▁as tez ▁.
PRED:	“ At that time I was in my heart , Daniel , stayed three years .
GOLD:	When this vision came to me , I , Daniel , had been in mourning for three whole weeks .

ID:	2911
INPUT:	▁e sa te ra ▁: ▁— ▁Za har tu a ▁zau de ▁, ▁e ta ▁zu re ▁se me ak ▁ez ▁da bil tza ▁zu re ▁bi de tik ▁. ▁I zen da ▁i e za gu zu ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁er re ge ▁bat ▁, ▁gi da ▁gai tzan ▁; ▁ho ri xe ▁e gi ten ▁du te ▁her ri al de ▁guz ti e tan ▁.
PRED:	“ You are not your son , ” they said . “ You are not a son of man , but we are one of you , and we are one of you . And we are in all the land . ”
GOLD:	“ Look , ” they told him , “ you are now old , and your sons are not like you . Give us a king to judge us like all the other nations have . ”

ID:	2912
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁in dar ▁li lu ra gar ri a ▁bi dal tzen ▁di e ▁ho ri ei ▁Jain ko ak ▁, ▁ge zur ra ri ▁si nets ▁di e zai o ten ▁,
PRED:	Therefore , they say to those who say , “ We believe that God is the one who sent him . ”
GOLD:	So God will cause them to be greatly deceived , and they will believe these lies .

ID:	2913
INPUT:	▁He ro des ▁hil ▁on do ren ▁, ▁Jo se ri ▁Jau na ren ▁ain ge ru a ▁a ger tu ▁zi tzai on ▁a me tse tan ▁E gip ton ▁,
PRED:	After Herod 's death , Herod was revealed to the angel of the Lord in Egypt .
GOLD:	When Herod died , an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt .

ID:	2914
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁al ▁ge nu en ▁as ki ▁Pe or - ko ▁be ka tu az ▁? ▁O rain dik ▁e re ▁be ka tu ▁ha ren ▁on do ri o ak ▁ja sa ten ▁a ri ▁ga ra ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁el kar te ak ▁i zur ri a ▁ja san ▁be har ▁i zan ▁zu en ▁ar ren ▁.
PRED:	Do n't we realize that we have rebelled against the Lord ? We have heard that we had said to each other , ‘ The Lord has spoken ! '
GOLD:	Was our sin at Peor not enough ? To this day we are not fully cleansed of it , even after the plague that struck the entire community of the Lord .

ID:	2915
INPUT:	▁« ▁E zin ▁i zan go ▁du zu e ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁jan ▁bi zi ko ▁za re ten ▁hi ri e tan ▁Jau na ri ▁es kai ni ▁be har re ko a ▁: ▁ga ri ▁, ▁ar do ▁e ta ▁o li o a ren ▁ha mar re nak ▁, ▁a be re ▁han di ▁e ta ▁txi ki en ▁le hen - ku me ak ▁, ▁bo to a ▁be te tze ko ▁na hiz ▁bo ron da tez ▁e gi ni ko ▁o pa ri ak ▁e ta ▁gai ne ra ko ▁e mai tzak ▁.
PRED:	“ But you may not eat or drink the meat of the Lord . This is a permanent law for you , and you may eat it from the herd of cattle , sheep , sheep , sheep , and goats , and goats , sheep , and goats , and goats .
GOLD:	“ But you may not eat your offerings in your hometown — neither the tithe of your grain and new wine and olive oil , nor the firstborn of your flocks and herds , nor any offering to fulfill a vow , nor your voluntary offerings , nor your sacred offerings .

ID:	2916
INPUT:	▁i bar re ra ▁jais ten ▁de na be re - tal de a ren ▁an tze ra.Jau na ren ▁es pi ri tu ak ▁a tse de ne ra e ra man ▁zi tu en ▁» ▁.Ha la xe ▁e ra man ▁ze nu en ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁zeu re ▁her ri a ▁, ▁i zen ▁bi kai na ▁zeu re ga na tuz ▁hor re la ▁.
PRED:	As soon as the Lord had commanded , he led them out of the land of the Lord , just as he had promised . ”
GOLD:	As with cattle going down into a peaceful valley , the Spirit of the Lord gave them rest.You led your people , Lord , and gained a magnificent reputation . ”

ID:	2917
INPUT:	▁Jain ko ak ▁la gun du ▁e gin ▁zi en ▁e ma gi nei ▁be ren ▁la ne an ▁: ▁her ri a ▁u gal du ▁e gin ▁zen ▁e ta ▁bi zi ki ▁in dar tu ▁.
PRED:	So God gave his people the privilege of wisdom and understanding . He became strong and powerful .
GOLD:	So God was good to the midwives , and the Israelites continued to multiply , growing more and more powerful .

ID:	2918
INPUT:	▁« ▁Be hin ▁ba tez ▁, ▁zu hai tzek ▁er re ge a ▁i zen da tu ▁na hi ▁zu ten ▁be ren tzat ▁. ▁E ta ▁e san ▁zi o ten ▁o li bon do a ri ▁: ▁“ ▁I zan ▁ha di ▁gu re ▁er re ge ▁! ▁”
PRED:	“ One day the king 's eunuchs said to him , ‘ Let 's reign be our king ! Let us be our king ! '
GOLD:	Once upon a time the trees decided to choose a king.First they said to the olive tree , ‘ Be our king ! '

ID:	2919
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁: ▁« ▁Gi zon ▁bat ▁a fa ri ▁han di ▁bat ▁e ma te ko a ▁zen ▁e ta ▁jen de ▁as ko ▁gon bi da tu ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	Jesus told him , “ A man with a large crowd , a large crowd , and a large crowd followed him .
GOLD:	Jesus replied with this story : “ A man prepared a great feast and sent out many invitations .

ID:	2920
INPUT:	▁ez ▁e ra bi li ▁as mo ▁txar ri kel kar ren ▁aur ka ▁, ▁ez ▁e gin ▁ge zur rez ko ▁zi nik ▁, ▁gor ro to ▁bai tut ▁ho ri ▁guz ti a.Nik ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁e sa na ▁» ▁.
PRED:	I will not send disaster upon the wicked , but I will not bring disaster upon the sword , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Do n't scheme against each other . Stop your love of telling lies that you swear are the truth . I hate all these things , says the Lord . ”

ID:	2921
INPUT:	▁Sa ra ren ▁he ri o tza ▁e ta ▁e <unk> ta
PRED:	The Death of Satan
GOLD:	The Burial of Sarah

ID:	2922
INPUT:	▁« ▁Be ren ▁frui tu e ta tik ▁an tze man go ▁di e zu e ▁»
PRED:	“ Anyone who eats the Kingdom of Heaven
GOLD:	The Narrow Gate

ID:	2923
INPUT:	▁Ha la ▁e re ▁, ▁Ped ro ▁jai ki ▁e ta ▁hi lo bi ra ▁jo an ▁zen ▁las ter ka ▁; ▁ma kur tu rik ▁, ▁bar ru ra ▁be gi ra tu ▁e ta ▁oi hal - zer ren dak ▁ba kar rik ▁i ku si ▁zi tu en ▁, ▁e ta ▁e txe ra ▁i tzu li ▁zen ▁ger ta tu az ▁har ri tu rik ▁.
PRED:	When Peter got up and went to the tomb , he looked up and looked at his feet and looked at his feet . He welcomed them , and he welcomed them .
GOLD:	However , Peter jumped up and ran to the tomb to look . Stooping , he peered in and saw the empty linen wrappings ; then he went home again , wondering what had happened .

ID:	2924
INPUT:	▁Ni re ▁in dar rak ▁a pal du ▁di tu ▁be re ▁a hal me naz ▁, ▁ni re ▁e gu nak ▁ur ri tu ▁.
PRED:	He has rejected my strength ; he has rejected my decrees .
GOLD:	But I cried to him , “ O my God , who lives forever , do n't take my life while I am so young !

ID:	2925
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁ez ▁o te ▁du ten ▁i hes ▁e gin go ▁be re ▁na hi ra ▁ma kur tu ak ▁di tu en ▁de ab ru a ren ▁sa re e ta tik ▁?
PRED:	Do n't you escape from those who refuse to listen to the devil ?
GOLD:	Then they will come to their senses and escape from the devil 's trap . For they have been held captive by him to do whatever he wants .

ID:	2926
INPUT:	▁Hon tza ▁e ta ▁ki ri ki no a ja be tu ko ▁di ra ▁har taz ▁, ▁hontz ▁zu ri a ▁e ta ▁be le a jar ri ko ▁han ▁bi zi <unk> has - ma has ▁e ta ▁huts bi hur tu ko ▁du ▁Jau nak ▁.
PRED:	Their walls are crushed , and their walls are crushed , and the walls of the sea will become strong and young .
GOLD:	It will be haunted by the desert owl and the screech owl , the great owl and the raven.For God will measure that land carefully ; he will measure it for chaos and destruction .

ID:	2927
INPUT:	▁e txe ko ▁na gu si ak ▁, ▁a pai za ren ga na ▁jo a nik ▁, ▁be re ▁e txe ko ▁hor me tan ▁li zu na ▁a ger tu ▁de la ▁a di e ra zi ko ▁di o ▁.
PRED:	The priest will return to the house of the priest 's house , just as you have shown him .
GOLD:	The owner of such a house must then go to the priest and say , ‘ It appears that my house has some kind of mildew . '

ID:	2928
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁di o ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁« ▁O rain ▁e kin go ▁di ot ▁, ▁o rain ▁al txa tu ko ▁naiz ▁, ▁o rain ▁a ger tu ko ▁han di ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Now I will display my glory , and now I will appear before you .
GOLD:	But the Lord says : “ Now I will stand up.Now I will show my power and might .

ID:	2929
INPUT:	▁ba hi tu ran ▁har tu ta ko a ▁bu el ta tu ▁, ▁os tu ta ko a ▁i tzu li ▁e ta ▁, ▁bi de ga be ke ri a ▁e gi te a ri ▁u tziz ▁, ▁bi zi a ▁e ma ten ▁du ten ▁a gin du e tan ▁ba da bil ▁, ▁bi zi ▁e gin go ▁da ▁, ▁bai ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁da ▁hil ko ▁.
PRED:	If they are proud and refuse to return , they will return to life and enjoy their lives , they will live in peace . They will live in peace , but they will live in peace .
GOLD:	For instance , they might give back a debtor 's security , return what they have stolen , and obey my life-giving laws , no longer doing what is evil . If they do this , then they will surely live and not die .

ID:	2930
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁Ju das ▁Is ka ri o te ▁, ▁Je sus ▁sal du ▁zu e na ▁.
PRED:	Judas Iscariot , Judas , the Messiah , was the zealot .
GOLD:	Judas Iscariot ( who later betrayed him ) .

ID:	2931
INPUT:	▁Txi ki tu ▁di tut ▁zu re kin gi zon ▁e ta ▁e ma ku me ak ▁, ▁txi ki tu ▁za har ▁e ta ▁gaz te ak ▁, ▁txi ki tu ▁mu til ▁e ta ▁nes kak ▁.
PRED:	I will shatter young women and young men and young men , young , and young men .
GOLD:	With you I will shatter men and women , old people and children , young men and young women .

ID:	2932
INPUT:	▁bi zi ▁de na ▁; ▁hi lik ▁e gon ▁nin tzen ▁, ▁bai na ▁o rain ▁bi zi rik ▁na go ▁men de ren ▁men de tan ▁, ▁e ta ▁neu re ▁men pe ▁di tut ▁He ri o a ▁e ta ▁Hil da ko en ▁E goi tza ▁.
PRED:	I was alive , but now I was alive , but now I could live in death . And now I will die in the grave , and I will die in death .
GOLD:	I am the living one . I died , but look — I am alive forever and ever ! And I hold the keys of death and the grave .

ID:	2933
INPUT:	▁kri mi na lak ▁be za la ▁jen daur re an ▁zi gor tzen ▁;
PRED:	They are always greedy , but do n't let them be stubborn .
GOLD:	He strikes them down because they are wicked , doing it openly for all to see .

ID:	2934
INPUT:	▁E go e ra ▁hor re tan ▁, ▁E ze ki as ▁er re ge ak ▁e ta ▁A mo tzen ▁se me ▁I sai as ▁pro fe tak ▁o toitz ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁, ▁ze ru ra ▁dei tuz ▁.
PRED:	At that time King Hezekiah 's reign , the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz stood up and prayed to him .
GOLD:	Then King Hezekiah and the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz cried out in prayer to God in heaven .

ID:	2935
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁hai ek ▁: ▁— ▁Moi se sek ▁, ▁di bor tzi o - a gi ri a ▁i da tzi ▁e ta ▁e maz te a ▁uz te ko ▁bai me na ▁e man ▁zi gun ▁.
PRED:	“ Yes , ” they said , “ let 's get rid of the harvest , but we will give it to the wife of Moses . ”
GOLD:	“ Well , he permitted it , ” they replied . “ He said a man can give his wife a written notice of divorce and send her away . ”

ID:	2936
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁ber ri ro ▁gal de tzen ▁dut ▁: ▁Is ra e lek ▁ez ▁o te ▁du ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁u ler tu ▁? ▁Le he nen go ▁, ▁ho na ▁Moi se sek ▁di o e na ▁: ▁Her ri ▁ez ▁den ▁ba te kin ▁min du ko ▁zai tuz tet ▁, ▁na zi o ▁er gel ▁ba ten ▁bi dez ▁ha ser ra ra zi ko ▁.
PRED:	Then I will tell you the people of Israel , ‘ Do n't you understand all these things ? ' Moses replied , “ I am not with you , and I will make you angry with them .
GOLD:	But I ask , did the people of Israel really understand ? Yes , they did , for even in the time of Moses , God said , “ I will rouse your jealousy through people who are not even a nation.I will provoke your anger through the foolish Gentiles . ”

ID:	2937
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren ▁, ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko a ren ▁, ▁e sa na be ne tan ▁be te tzen ▁ba du zu e ▁, ▁ur ru ti ▁dau de nak ▁e re ▁e tor ri ko ▁di raJau na ren ▁tenplu a ▁ja so tze ra ▁» ▁.Or du an ▁ja kin go ▁du zu eJaun ▁a hal guz ti du nak bi da li ▁nau e la ▁zu en ga na ▁.
PRED:	May the Lord of Heaven 's Armies be honored in his holy dwelling in his holy Temple , for he is holy in the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	People will come from distant lands to rebuild the Temple of the Lord . And when this happens , you will know that my messages have been from the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . All this will happen if you carefully obey what the Lord your God says .

ID:	2938
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Ju da ko ▁bu ru za gi ek ▁e san go ▁du te ▁be ren ▁bai tan ▁: ▁“ ▁Be ren ▁Jain ko ▁Jaun ▁a hal guz ti du na ri ▁es ker ▁, ▁in dar ▁ber ri ak ▁har tu ▁di tuz te ▁Je ru sa lem go ▁bi zi la gu nek ▁” ▁.
PRED:	Then the leaders of Judah will say , ‘ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , will live in Jerusalem . '
GOLD:	And the clans of Judah will say to themselves , ‘ The people of Jerusalem have found strength in the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , their God . '

ID:	2939
INPUT:	▁I do lo ak ▁baz ter tu
PRED:	The weight of the Temple
GOLD:	A Warning against Idolatry

ID:	2940
INPUT:	▁Or po tik ▁bu ru ra ▁, ▁ez ▁du zu e ▁a tal ▁bat ▁e re ▁o so rik ▁: ▁de na ▁zau ri ▁, ▁u bel du ra ▁e ta ▁e ba ki ▁bi zi ▁, ▁ba te re ▁gar bi tu ▁, ▁lo tu e ta ▁o li oz ▁go za tu ▁ga be ▁.
PRED:	Then you must not cut off your head , and you are not cut off . You must not wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water .
GOLD:	You are battered from head to foot — covered with bruises , welts , and infected wounds — without any soothing ointments or bandages .

ID:	2941
INPUT:	▁Ge ro ▁, ▁Zil pak ▁, ▁Le a ren ▁nes ka me ak ▁, ▁bi gar ren ▁se me ▁bat ▁e man ▁zi on ▁Ja ko bi ▁.
PRED:	Then Leah gave birth to a son , who gave birth to a son .
GOLD:	Then Zilpah gave Jacob a second son .

ID:	2942
INPUT:	▁san tu ta sun ▁e ta ▁jus ti zi az ▁, ▁be ra ren ▁aur re an geu re ▁bi zi tza ▁guz ti an ▁.
PRED:	May all who live in your holy name , O Lord , and may you live forever .
GOLD:	in holiness and righteousnessfor as long as we live .

ID:	2943
INPUT:	▁Gol go ta ▁i ze ne ko ▁to ki ra ▁i ri tsi ▁zi re ne an ▁( ▁Gol go tak ▁« ▁Bu re zur ▁» ▁e san ▁na hi ▁du ▁) ▁,
PRED:	He went to the place where he was put to his neck , and he said , “ My skin is broken . ”
GOLD:	And they went out to a place called Golgotha ( which means “ Place of the Skull ” ) .

ID:	2944
INPUT:	▁bi la tze ko ▁ga rai a e ta ▁gal tze ko ▁ga rai a ▁, ▁gor de tze ko ▁ga rai a e ta ▁bo ta tze ko ▁ga rai a ▁,
PRED:	A time for a time to save them , and a time to save them .
GOLD:	A time to search and a time to quit searching.A time to keep and a time to throw away .

ID:	2945
INPUT:	▁Hor re ga tik ▁, ▁be har rez ko ▁da ▁a gin ta ri en ▁men pe ko ▁i za te a ▁, ▁bai na ▁zi gor ra ren ▁bel dur rez ▁ez ▁e zik ▁, ▁bai ta ▁kon tzi en tzi a ren ▁e ra gi nez ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says : He will punish those who fear him and do n't fear him .
GOLD:	So you must submit to them , not only to avoid punishment , but also to keep a clear conscience .

ID:	2946
INPUT:	▁Zu ta be en ▁gai ne ko ▁ha be ▁hai ek ▁ber ro gei ta ▁bost ▁zi ren ▁, ▁ler ro ▁ba koi tze an ▁ha ma bost ▁, ▁e ta ▁ha be ▁hai en ▁gai nal de an ▁zed roz ko ▁o hol tza ▁.
PRED:	The capitals on each side of the two pillars were 150 feet long and 27 feet wide .
GOLD:	The hall had a cedar roof . Above the beams on the pillars were forty-five side rooms , arranged in three tiers of fifteen each .

ID:	2947
INPUT:	▁« ▁Mun du ra ▁jai o ta ko ▁le hen ▁gi za ki a ▁o te ▁za ra ▁, ▁ba da ▁? ▁Mui no ak ▁bai no ▁le hen ▁sor tu ▁o te ▁zin tuz ten ▁?
PRED:	“ And since you are born in the world , why are you going to offer sacrifices to God ?
GOLD:	“ Were you the first person ever born ? Were you born before the hills were made ?

ID:	2948
INPUT:	▁« ▁Is ra el dar rak ▁, ▁Be ne-Ja a kan go ▁pu tzu e ta tik ▁a bi a tu rik ▁, ▁Mo se ra ra ▁i ri tsi ▁zi ren ▁. ▁Han ▁hil ▁zen ▁A a ron ▁, ▁e ta ▁ber tan ▁e hor tzi ▁zu ten ▁. ▁A a ro nen ▁or dez ▁, ▁be ra ren ▁se me ▁E le a zar ▁i zan ▁zen ▁hur ren go ▁a paiz ▁.
PRED:	“ When the Israelites returned to the land of Moab , they went out and died . Then Aaron and his sons died , and he died in the wilderness . Then Aaron and his sons went to the priest .
GOLD:	( The people of Israel set out from the wells of the people of Jaakan and traveled to Moserah , where Aaron died and was buried . His son Eleazar ministered as high priest in his place .

ID:	2949
INPUT:	▁Aur rez ▁aur re ▁hitz ▁e gin ▁zi zu en ▁Jau nak ▁men di an ▁, ▁su a ren ▁er di tik ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord spoke to them on Mount Sinai and burning them on fire .
GOLD:	At the mountain the Lord spoke to you face to face from the heart of the fire .

ID:	2950
INPUT:	▁Gau zok ▁e san ▁zi tu e ne an ▁, ▁as kok ▁si ne tsi ▁zu ten ▁ha ren gan ▁.
PRED:	After telling them what had happened , they believed in him .
GOLD:	Then many who heard him say these things believed in him .

ID:	2951
INPUT:	▁Zu ek ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁e gon ▁a di i ra kas pe na ri ▁e ta ▁ai tor pe na ri ▁! ▁Hau e ta ra ▁jo tzen ▁ez ▁du e na kez ▁du ▁e gun sen ti rik ▁i ku si ko ▁.
PRED:	But you , too , must be ready to be taught . This is what the Lord says : ‘ This is the one who comes from the beginning . '
GOLD:	Look to God 's instructions and teachings ! People who contradict his word are completely in the dark .

ID:	2952
INPUT:	▁Bel dur - i ka raz ▁gel di tu ▁zi ren ▁, ▁el kar ri ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁« ▁Nor ▁o te ▁du gu ▁hau ▁, ▁e sa na ▁e gi ten ▁bai ti o te ▁hai ze ak ▁e ta ▁ain tzi rak ▁e re ▁? ▁»
PRED:	They were terrified when they were terrified , “ Who is this ? ” they asked . “ Who is the one who is ? ”
GOLD:	The disciples were absolutely terrified . “ Who is this man ? ” they asked each other . “ Even the wind and waves obey him ! ”

ID:	2953
INPUT:	▁Han dik ▁a te ra ▁ze ne an ▁, ▁gu pi da rik ▁ga be ▁e ra so ▁zi o ten ▁le ge - mai su ek ▁e ta ▁fa ri seu ek ▁, ▁han dik ▁e ta ▁he men dik ▁gal dez ka ▁,
PRED:	After this , some of the teachers of religious law and the Pharisees asked Jesus , “ Why did n't you turn from here ? ”
GOLD:	As Jesus was leaving , the teachers of religious law and the Pharisees became hostile and tried to provoke him with many questions .

ID:	2954
INPUT:	▁Jus ti zi a ▁e ta ▁zu zen bi de a ▁mai te ▁di tu ▁; ▁Jau na ren ▁mai ta su naz ▁be te a ▁da ▁lur ra ▁.
PRED:	The Lord is like a sacrifice of justice , but he loves the earth .
GOLD:	He loves whatever is just and good ; the unfailing love of the Lord fills the earth .

ID:	2955
INPUT:	▁Zo ro ba bel ▁, ▁Jo su e ▁, ▁Ne he mi as ▁, ▁Se rai as ▁, ▁Re e lai as ▁, ▁Mar do ke o ▁, ▁Bil xan ▁, ▁Mis par ▁, ▁Big bai ▁, ▁Re hum ▁e ta ▁Ba a na ▁zi tuz ten ▁gi da ri.Ho na ▁is ra el dar ▁hau en ▁zer ren da ▁:
PRED:	Zerubbabel , Nehemiah , Nehemiah , Nehemiah , Nehemiah , Nehemiah , and Benaiah . These are the names of the people of Israel : Seraiah , Rehum , and Benaiah .
GOLD:	Their leaders were Zerubbabel , Jeshua , Nehemiah , Seraiah , Reelaiah , Mordecai , Bilshan , Mispar , Bigvai , Rehum , and Baanah.This is the number of the men of Israel who returned from exile :

ID:	2956
INPUT:	▁Lei a la ▁ez ▁de naz ▁ar ris ku al di e tan ▁fi da tze a ▁, ▁hortz ▁hau tsi az ▁ja te a ▁e ta ▁zan go ▁bi hur ri tu az ▁i bil tze a ▁be za la ▁da ▁.
PRED:	I am not a shepherd who has hidden me in the darkness , where it is already concerned about it .
GOLD:	Putting confidence in an unreliable person in times of troubleis like chewing with a broken tooth or walking on a lame foot .

ID:	2957
INPUT:	▁ni re ▁i ze ne an ▁e gi ten ▁ba du zu ▁zi ne gi az ▁, ▁jus ti zi az ▁e ta ▁zu zen bi dez ▁, ▁be dein ka tu ko ▁di tut ▁bes te ▁her ri ak ▁e re ▁, ▁e ta ▁ni taz ▁har ro ▁a ger tu ko ▁di ra ▁» ▁.
PRED:	When you see me , you will see what is right and right , and I will praise your name , and you will be honored . ”
GOLD:	Then when you swear by my name , saying , ‘ As surely as the Lord lives , 'you could do sowith truth , justice , and righteousness.Then you would be a blessing to the nations of the world , and all people would come and praise my name . ”

ID:	2958
INPUT:	▁Bi de ga be ke ri a ▁hor ren ▁aur ka ▁e gin ▁dut ▁oi hu ▁, ▁e ta ▁i nork ▁e ran tzun ▁ez ▁; ▁la gun tza ▁es ka tu ▁, ▁e ta ▁jus ti zi a rik ▁ez ▁.
PRED:	I cry out to the wicked , and no one can answer me .
GOLD:	“ I cry out , ‘ Help ! ' but no one answers me.I protest , but there is no justice .

ID:	2959
INPUT:	▁Gai ne ra ko ek ▁A fek ▁hi ri ra ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁i hes ▁; ▁bai na ▁har re si a ▁ho gei ta ▁zaz pi ▁mi la ▁gi zon ▁hai en ▁gai ne ra ▁e ro ri ▁zen ▁. ▁Ben - Ha da dek ▁be rak ▁e re ▁hi ri ▁har ta ra ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁i hes ▁e ta ▁ge laz ▁ge la ▁ez ku ta tzen ▁i bi li ▁be har ▁i zan ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	The fortified towns with their surrounding villages , leaving their towns with their surrounding villages . But Ben-hadad and his men fled to the city of Benjamin , just as Ben-hadad had fled .
GOLD:	The rest fled into the town of Aphek , but the wall fell on them and killed another 27,000 . Ben-hadad fled into the town and hid in a secret room .

ID:	2960
INPUT:	▁Mun du a ▁mun du ▁de ne tik ▁, ▁be rez ▁i ku se zi na ▁de na ▁, ▁hau ▁da ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁be ti e re ko ▁a hal me na ▁e ta ▁jain ko ta su na ▁, ▁i kus gar ri ▁ger ta tzen ▁zai o ▁ha ren ▁e gin tzak ▁az ter tzen ▁di tu e na ri ▁. ▁Ez ▁du te ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁ai tza ki a rik ▁,
PRED:	He is the one who created the world , who is the power of the world . He is the power of God , and he does n't know what he has done . He does n't know what he has done .
GOLD:	For ever since the world was created , people have seen the earth and sky . Through everything God made , they can clearly see his invisible qualities — his eternal power and divine nature . So they have no excuse for not knowing God .

ID:	2961
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁lo tu rik ▁, ▁be ren ▁jan tzi ▁e ta ▁guz ti ▁, <unk> ka ▁, ▁soin gai ne ko ▁e ta ▁bu ru ko e kin ▁, ▁la be ko ▁su ▁bi zi ra ▁jaur ti ▁zi tuz ten ▁.
PRED:	They tied up their clothes and threw them into pieces , and they threw them into the fire .
GOLD:	So they tied them up and threw them into the furnace , fully dressed in their pants , turbans , robes , and other garments .

ID:	2962
INPUT:	▁Sa lo mo nek ▁el kar ke ta - e txo la ren ▁on do an ▁ze go en ▁al da re ra ▁i go ▁e ta ▁mi la ▁er re - o pa ri ▁es kai ni ▁zi tu en ▁Jau na ren ▁aur re an ▁.
PRED:	Then Solomon brought the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant to the Tabernacle and sacrificed it to the Lord .
GOLD:	There in front of the Tabernacle , Solomon went up to the bronze altar in the Lord 's presence and sacrificed 1,000 burnt offerings on it .

ID:	2963
INPUT:	▁« ▁E gin ▁lu za tu ▁ga be ▁uz ta ▁guz ti en ▁e ta ▁ar do a ren ▁es kain <unk> ▁« ▁Sa ga ra tu ▁ni ri ▁zeu en ▁le hen - se me a ▁,
PRED:	“ You must not harvest any of your crops , ” says the Lord . “ Take your firstborn sons , your firstborn sons , your firstborn sons , and your firstborn sons .
GOLD:	“ You must not dishonor God or curse any of your rulers .

ID:	2964
INPUT:	▁A nai az ▁bi hotz - hun ki tu rik ▁, ▁ne gar gu rak ▁e man ▁zi on ▁e ta ▁, ▁pre sa ka ▁be re ▁ge la ra ▁jo a nez ▁, ▁ne gar ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁.
PRED:	Joseph was very old when he became very angry , and he kissed him .
GOLD:	Then Joseph hurried from the room because he was overcome with emotion for his brother . He went into his private room , where he broke down and wept .

ID:	2965
INPUT:	▁Mar tak ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Bai ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁si nes ten ▁dut ▁zeu ▁za re la ▁Me si as ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁Se me a ▁, ▁mun du ra ▁e tor tze ko a ▁ze na ▁.
PRED:	But Martha replied , “ Lord , I believe that you are the Messiah , the Messiah , the Messiah , is coming into the world . ”
GOLD:	“ Yes , Lord , ” she told him . “ I have always believed you are the Messiah , the Son of God , the one who has come into the world from God . ”

ID:	2966
INPUT:	▁Gu da ros te ▁ba tek ▁in gu ra tu rik ▁e re ▁, ▁ni re ▁bi ho tzak ▁i ka ra rik ▁ez ▁; ▁ni re ▁aur ka ▁bor ro kan ▁ha si ta ▁e re ▁, ▁nik ▁kon fi an tza ▁gal tzen ▁ez ▁.
PRED:	I looked at him and fought against him ; there is no war against me . I lay his face on him , and I will punish him .
GOLD:	Though a mighty army surrounds me , my heart will not be afraid.Even if I am attacked , I will remain confident .

ID:	2967
INPUT:	▁Er re be la tu ▁e gin ▁ga tzaiz ki zu ▁, ▁kon tra ▁al txa tu ▁, ▁e ta ▁zuk ▁ez ▁di gu zu ▁bar ka tu ▁, ▁Jau na ▁.
PRED:	You have rebelled against me , O Lord , and we have sinned against you .
GOLD:	“ We have sinned and rebelled , and you have not forgiven us .

ID:	2968
INPUT:	▁E ror ▁be di ▁hil ke ta ▁ho nen ▁er ru a ▁Jo a ben ▁e ta ▁be ro nen ▁e txe ko en ▁gain ▁! ▁I zan ▁be di ▁be ti ▁Jo a ben ▁e txe an ▁o dol ja ri o du nik ▁, ▁le gen du nik ▁, ▁e me - i txu ra ko ▁gi zo nik ▁, ▁ez pa taz ▁e do ta ▁go se ak ▁hil ko ▁de nik ▁! ▁»
PRED:	May the sins of Joab and his family be punished . May he be put to death in his house , and he will be killed in the blood of Joab 's family . ”
GOLD:	Joab and his family are the guilty ones . May the family of Joab be cursed in every generation with a man who has open sores or leprosy or who walks on crutches or dies by the sword or begs for food ! ”

ID:	2969
INPUT:	▁Ha la ▁e re ▁, ▁ez ▁di et ▁zu en ▁a la bei kon tu rik ▁es ka tu ko ▁, ▁e ma gal du ▁bi hur tu ▁di re la ko ▁; ▁ez ta ▁zu en ▁er rai nei ▁e re ▁, ▁a dul te ri o gi le ▁bi hur tu ▁di re la ko.A pai zak ▁be rak ▁bai to a ze ma gal du e kin ▁, ▁tenplu ko ▁e ma gal du e ki nel kar tzen ▁bai ti ra sak ri fi zi o ak ▁es kain tze ko.E ta ▁ha la ▁, ▁zen tzu ga be ko ▁her ri a hon da men di ra ▁do a ▁.
PRED:	But I will give her daughters to your daughters , and she will give her children a prostitute . She will not be a prostitute , a prostitute , a prostitute , a prostitute , a prostitute , a prostitute , a prostitute , a prostitute , a prostitute .
GOLD:	But why should I punish themfor their prostitution and adultery ? For your men are doing the same thing , sinning with whores and shrine prostitutes.O foolish people ! You refuse to understand , so you will be destroyed .

ID:	2970
INPUT:	▁Ju da re kin ▁ba te ra ▁I sa kar ▁e ta ▁Za bu lo nen ▁lei nu ak ▁e txo la tu ko ▁di ra ▁. ▁I sa kar tar ren ▁bu ru za gi a ▁Tzu ar ren ▁se me ▁Ne ta nel ▁i zan go ▁da ▁,
PRED:	They were joined by the tribes of Judah , and they were joined by Nethanel son of Issachar .
GOLD:	IssacharNethanel son of Zuar54,400

ID:	2971
INPUT:	▁Is ra el ▁hai zez ▁man ten tzen ▁da ▁, ▁he go - hai ze a ren ▁on do ren ▁da bi le gun ▁o so <unk> zur ra ▁ge zur ra ren ▁gain ▁, ▁go gor ke ri a ▁go gor ke ri a ren <unk> si ri a re kin ▁i tu na ▁e gi ten ▁du ▁, ▁E gip to re kin ▁sa le ros ke tan ▁da bil ▁» ▁.
PRED:	The people of Israel are like trees , and they are like a young man who lives in the land of Egypt . They are like a deadly snakes in Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Now the Lord is bringing charges against Judah.He is about to punish Jacob for all his deceitful ways , and pay him back for all he has done .

ID:	2972
INPUT:	▁bel dur ▁nin tzen ▁, ▁e ta ▁zu re ▁ta len tu a ▁lur re an ▁ez ku ta tu ▁nu en ▁. ▁Ho na ▁zeu re ▁di ru a ▁! ▁”
PRED:	I was afraid of your servant , and I was not afraid of you . '
GOLD:	I was afraid I would lose your money , so I hid it in the earth . Look , here is your money back . '

ID:	2973
INPUT:	▁E ror tzen ▁a ri ▁naiz ▁na hi ga bez ▁a hul du rik ▁: ▁ja so ▁na za zu ▁, ▁zeu re ▁pro me sa ren ▁a ra be ra ▁!
PRED:	I am overwhelmed with fear , for I have heard your word .
GOLD:	I weep with sorrow ; encourage me by your word .

ID:	2974
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁go go an ▁zeu ▁e re ▁eskla bo ▁i zan ▁zi ne la ▁E gip ton ▁, ▁e ta ▁Jau nak ▁zeu re ▁Jain ko ak ▁a te ra ▁zin tu e la ▁han dik ▁a hal men ▁han diz ▁e ta ▁es ku ▁in dar tsuz ▁. ▁Hor re ga tik ▁a gin du ▁di zu ▁Jau nak ▁zeu re ▁Jain ko ak ▁a tse den - e gu na ▁gor de tze ko ▁.
PRED:	Remember that the Lord your God rescued you from slavery in Egypt . That is why the Lord your God rescued you from slavery in Egypt . That is why the Lord your God has given you great strength .
GOLD:	Remember that you were once slaves in Egypt , but the Lord your God brought you out with his strong hand and powerful arm . That is why the Lord your God has commanded you to rest on the Sabbath day .

ID:	2975
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁al ▁di zu e ▁na tu rak ▁be rak ▁e ra kus ten ▁gi za se me a ren tzat ▁lo tsa gar ri ▁de la ▁i le a ▁lu ze ▁e ra ma te a ▁,
PRED:	Do n't let them see that they are disgraced by the wind that makes them stumble .
GOLD:	Is n't it obvious that it 's disgraceful for a man to have long hair ?

ID:	2976
INPUT:	▁pur pu raz ▁jan tzi ta ko ▁go ber na ri ▁e ta ▁a gin ta ri ak ▁, ▁gaz te ▁bi kain ▁e ta ▁zal dun ▁tre be ak ▁.
PRED:	blue , purple , and scarlet thread and fine linen .
GOLD:	They were all attractive young men , captains and commanders dressed in handsome blue , charioteers driving their horses .

ID:	2977
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁e gin ▁be har re ko ▁o har pe na ren ▁hel bu ru a ▁hau xe ▁da ▁: ▁bi hotz ▁gar bi tik ▁, ▁kon tzi en tzi a ▁o ne tik ▁e ta ▁i txu ra ke ri a rik ▁ga be ko ▁si nes me ne tik ▁da tor ren ▁mai ta su na ▁in dar tze a ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Scriptures say : “ This is what the Scriptures say : A person who keeps his mind from the beginning of faith and does n't love the power of faith .
GOLD:	The purpose of my instruction is that all believers would be filled with love that comes from a pure heart , a clear conscience , and genuine faith .

ID:	2978
INPUT:	▁Gaiz to ak ▁be re ▁gaiz ta ke ri an ▁e gi ten ▁du ▁es tro pe zu ▁, ▁zin tzo ak ▁be re ▁pres tu ta su ne an ▁du ▁kon fi an tza ▁.
PRED:	The wicked are trapped by their own schemes , and the godly are safe .
GOLD:	The wicked are crushed by disaster , but the godly have a refuge when they die .

ID:	2979
INPUT:	▁Ef rai men ▁i ku se zi na ▁gal du ▁e gin go ▁da e ta ▁Ju da ren ▁e tsai go a ▁a mai <unk> rai mek ▁ez ▁du ▁Ju da ren tza ti ku se zi nik ▁i zan go ▁, ▁ez ta ▁Ju dak ▁e re Ef rai men tzat ▁e tsai go rik ▁.
PRED:	The land of Ephraim will be destroyed , and Judah will be destroyed by the sword of Judah , and Judah will be no enemy .
GOLD:	Then at last the jealousy between Israel and Judah will end.They will not be rivals anymore .

ID:	2980
INPUT:	▁Mo a be ko ▁lau ta dan ▁, ▁Jor dan ▁on do an ▁e txo la tu ▁zi ren ▁, ▁Bet-Je xi mo te tik ▁A bel - Xi tim ▁bi tar te an ▁.
PRED:	While they were in the Jordan River , they were camped at the Jordan River in the wilderness of Zin .
GOLD:	Along the Jordan River they camped from Beth-jeshimoth as far as the meadows of Acacia on the plains of Moab .

ID:	2981
INPUT:	▁Jen de ak ▁, ▁ha la ▁e re ▁, ▁bir rin du ▁be har re ko ak ▁zi ren ▁har ra pa ki ne ta tik ▁ar di ▁e ta ▁i di rik ▁ho be re nak ▁har tu ▁di tu ▁Jau na ri ▁, ▁zu re ▁Jain ko a ri ▁, ▁Gil ga len ▁es kain tze ko ▁.
PRED:	But the crowd had said to them , “ You must also offer sacrifices to the Lord your God , and you will offer sacrifices to the Lord your God . ”
GOLD:	Then my troops brought in the best of the sheep , goats , cattle , and plunder to sacrifice to the Lord your God in Gilgal . ”

ID:	2982
INPUT:	▁Er re ge ak ▁, ▁hi ru gar re nez ▁, ▁bes te ▁bu ru za gi ▁bat ▁bi da li ▁zu en ▁, ▁ber ro gei ta ▁ha mar ▁gi zo ne kin ▁. ▁Hi ru gar ren ▁bu ru za gi ▁hau ▁e re ▁i go ▁zen ▁E li a sen ga na ▁; ▁bai na ▁, ▁hel du ▁ze ne an ▁, ▁be lau ni ka tu ▁e gin ▁zen ▁ha ren ▁ai tzi ne an ▁e ta ▁ho ne la ▁er re gu tu ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Jain ko a ren ▁gi zon ▁, ▁utz ▁gai tza zu ▁bi zi rik ▁, ▁bai ▁ni ▁, ▁bai ▁zeu re ▁ber ro gei ta ▁ha mar ▁zer bi tza ri ok ▁.
PRED:	At the third time the king sent fifty men to make a covenant with him . He went to meet him , but he said , “ This is what the Lord says : My father , the man of God , but he was lying on us . ”
GOLD:	Once more the king sent a third captain with fifty men . But this time the captain went up the hill and fell to his knees before Elijah . He pleaded with him , “ O man of God , please spare my life and the lives of these , your fifty servants .

ID:	2983
INPUT:	▁« ▁Aur re ran tze an ▁ez ▁du zu e guz ki rik ▁be har ko ▁e gu na ▁ar gi tze ko ▁, ▁ez ta ▁i lar gi - dis ti ra rik ▁e re ▁gau ez ▁, ▁ni ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁i zan go ▁bai nau zu zeu re ▁ar gi ▁be ti ko ▁, ▁ni ▁, ▁zeu re ▁Jain ko a ▁, ▁dis ti ra ▁.
PRED:	“ When you do n't need to be like the sun , you will be like the moon , and you will be my light . You will be my light , and you will be my light .
GOLD:	“ No longer will you need the sun to shine by day , nor the moon to give its light by night , for the Lord your God will be your everlasting light , and your God will be your glory .

ID:	2984
INPUT:	▁Sa ma ri a ren ▁hon da men di a ▁ber ri ro ▁ai pa tu
PRED:	The Death of Samaria
GOLD:	Assyria Invades Judah

ID:	2985
INPUT:	▁Pla zan ▁e se ri ta ▁, ▁mar mar ka ▁a ri ▁zaiz kit ▁, ▁moz kor rek ▁kop lak ▁a te ra tzen ▁diz ki da te ▁.
PRED:	For my children are like a grapevine ; they are drunk with grief .
GOLD:	But I keep praying to you , Lord , hoping this time you will show me favor.In your unfailing love , O God , answer my prayer with your sure salvation .

ID:	2986
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Ek ro ne ra ▁i gor ri ▁zu ten ▁Jain ko a ren ▁ku txa ▁. ▁Hel du ▁ze ne an ▁, ▁Ek ron go ▁jen de ak ▁e san ▁zu en ▁oi hu ka ▁: ▁« ▁Gu ▁e ta ▁gu re ▁her ri a ▁hil ▁gai tzan ▁e kar ri ▁di gu te ▁Is ra e len ▁Jain ko a ren ▁ku txa ▁! ▁»
PRED:	Then the Ark of God came to Ekron , and when the people of Israel arrived at Ekron , he said , “ Our God is dead , and we will die in the Ark of the God of Israel ! ”
GOLD:	So they sent the Ark of God to the town of Ekron , but when the people of Ekron saw it coming they cried out , “ They are bringing the Ark of the God of Israel here to kill us , too ! ”

ID:	2987
INPUT:	▁Le ak ▁e san ▁zu en ▁: ▁« ▁Hau ▁zo ri a ▁! ▁» ▁E ta ▁Gad ▁e man ▁zi on ▁i zen ▁.
PRED:	Then Leah said to Gad , “ Come , let 's go . ”
GOLD:	Leah named him Gad , for she said , “ How fortunate I am ! ”

ID:	2988
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁e zetz ▁i kus ten ▁ba du ▁, ▁bes te a ▁o rain dik ▁ur ru ti ▁de la ▁, ▁man da ta ri ak ▁bi da li ko ▁diz ki o ▁ba ke a ▁es ka tuz ▁.
PRED:	And if he finds that he has already been sent from the time , he will send the money to the Lord .
GOLD:	And if he ca n't , he will send a delegation to discuss terms of peace while the enemy is still far away .

ID:	2989
INPUT:	▁Han dik ▁e re ▁a bi a tu ▁, ▁e ta ▁Ar non ▁er re kaz ▁bes te ▁al de an ▁e txo la tu ▁zi ren ▁; ▁Ar non ▁er re kak ▁, ▁a mor tar ren ▁lur ral de an ▁sor tu ▁on do ren ▁, ▁ba sa mor tu a ▁ze har ka tzen ▁du ▁e ta ▁mo ab dar ren ▁e ta ▁a mor tar ren ▁lur ral de en ▁mu ga ▁mar ka tzen ▁.
PRED:	From there the Arnon Gorge to the edge of the Arnon Gorge to the Arnon River , the territory of the Amorites , who lived in the land of the Amorites , in the regions of the Amorites , and the Amorites who lived in the land of Moab .
GOLD:	Then they moved out and camped on the far side of the Arnon River , in the wilderness adjacent to the territory of the Amorites . The Arnon is the boundary line between the Moabites and the Amorites .

ID:	2990
INPUT:	▁Ni re ga tik ▁e ra bi li ko ▁zai tuz te te ▁hor re la ▁, ▁bi da li ▁nau e na ▁e za gu tzen ▁ez ▁du te la ko ▁.
PRED:	I will send you out of this way , like those who sent me to do n't know .
GOLD:	They will do all this to you because of me , for they have rejected the one who sent me .

ID:	2991
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁Je re mi a si ▁hitz ▁e gin ▁zi on
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Jeremiah ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord gave this message to Jeremiah :

ID:	2992
INPUT:	▁har ri ▁hu tsez ▁e rai ki ko ▁du zu e ▁al da re a ▁. ▁On do ren ▁, ▁er re - o pa ri ak ▁es kai ni ko ▁diz ki o zu e ▁ber tan ▁Jau na ri ▁zeu en ▁Jain ko a ri ▁;
PRED:	In that same way , you will sacrifice the altar of the Lord your God . Then you will sacrifice the altar of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Build the altar of uncut stones , and use it to offer burnt offerings to the Lord your God .

ID:	2993
INPUT:	▁« ▁On da su nez ▁be te ko ▁zai tuz te ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁e man kor ▁e gin go ▁zai tuz te ▁, ▁bai ▁zeu ek ▁, ▁bai ▁zu en ▁a be re ▁e ta ▁lur rak ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁ar ba so ei ▁zin ▁e gi nez ▁zu ei ▁e man go ▁zi zu e la ▁a gin du ri ko ▁lur ral de an ▁.
PRED:	“ Then the Lord will give you a vow to your ancestors , for he will give you the land the Lord swore to give you . He will give you the land the Lord swore to give you .
GOLD:	“ The Lord will give you prosperity in the land he swore to your ancestors to give you , blessing you with many children , numerous livestock , and abundant crops .

ID:	2994
INPUT:	▁Ba da ki gu ▁Kris to ▁, ▁be hin ▁hil da ko en ▁ar te tik ▁piz tuz ▁ge ro ▁, ▁ez ▁de la ▁ber ri ro ▁hil ko ▁: ▁he ri o ak ▁ez ▁du ▁ha ren gan ▁a gin te rik ▁;
PRED:	For we believe that Christ raised from the dead , not from the dead . For we have died , but we have died .
GOLD:	We are sure of this because Christ was raised from the dead , and he will never die again . Death no longer has any power over him .

ID:	2995
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zi ren ▁be ren ▁ar mei ▁es ker ▁na gu si tu ▁lur ral de az ▁, ▁ez ▁zu ten ▁be ren ▁in dar ra ri ▁es ker ▁lor tu ▁ga rai pe na ▁, ▁zu re ▁a hal me na ri ▁e ta ▁in dar ra ri e ta ▁pre sen tzi a ▁ar gi tsu a ri ▁es ker ▁bai zik ▁, ▁mai te ▁ze ni tu e la ko ▁.
PRED:	They were not able to save them , but they were not able to save them from the power of the power of the Lord . They were not faithful to you , but they were faithful to you .
GOLD:	You are my King and my God.You command victories for Israel .

ID:	2996
INPUT:	▁Ha ran tza go ▁, ▁Az bu ken ▁se me ▁e ta ▁Bet - Tzur re ko ▁bar ru ti ▁er di a ren ▁bu ru ▁zen ▁Ne he mi a sek ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁lan ▁, ▁Da vi den ▁hi lo bi en ▁aur re an ▁, ▁ur ma e le rai no ▁e ta ▁gu da ri en ▁ku ar te le rai no ▁.
PRED:	In the same way , however , Maaseiah son of Nethaniah , leader of the district of Beth-shemesh , and he repaired the wall of the City of David .
GOLD:	Next to him was Nehemiah son of Azbuk , the leader of half the district of Beth-zur . He rebuilt the wall from a place across from the tombs of David 's family as far as the water reservoir and the House of the Warriors .

ID:	2997
INPUT:	▁Jain ko a ren ▁zer bi tzu a ri ▁da go ki o ne an ▁, ▁Kris to ren gan ▁jar tzen ▁dut ▁har ro tze ko ▁neu re ▁bi de a ▁;
PRED:	For I think of God 's servants , that I trust in Christ .
GOLD:	So I have reason to be enthusiastic about all Christ Jesus has done through me in my service to God .

ID:	2998
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁man da tu ▁hau ▁bi da li ▁zi on ▁er re ge ak ▁Ra ha bi ▁: ▁— ▁Ir te na ra zi ▁e txe an ▁sar tu ▁zaiz ki zun ▁gi zon ▁ho ri ek ▁, ▁gu re ▁lur ral de a ▁i ker tze ra ▁e tor ri ▁bai ti ra ▁.
PRED:	Then the king sent this message to the king : “ Go into the palace , ” the king said . “ Go back into the land of Rabbah . ”
GOLD:	So the king of Jericho sent orders to Rahab : “ Bring out the men who have come into your house , for they have come here to spy out the whole land . ”

ID:	2999
INPUT:	▁Ho ri ▁da ▁a gin du rik ▁na gu si e na ▁e ta ▁le he na ▁.
PRED:	This is the account of the first : The first day of the first person is first .
GOLD:	This is the first and greatest commandment .

ID:	3000
INPUT:	▁« ▁I zan ▁al ▁za ra ▁e lur - bil te gi e tan ▁? ▁I ku si ▁al ▁di tu zu ▁kaz ka bar - gor dai lu ak ▁?
PRED:	“ Can you walk along the ground without rain ?
GOLD:	“ Have you visited the storehouses of the snowor seen the storehouses of hail ?

ID:	3001
INPUT:	▁a be re en tzat ▁be lar ra ▁ze lai e tan ▁e ta ▁zeu en tzat ▁a se tze ko ▁a di na ▁ja na ri ▁e man go ▁di zu e ▁.
PRED:	You will know that your wealth is full of silver and gold .
GOLD:	He will give you lush pastureland for your livestock , and you yourselves will have all you want to eat .

ID:	3002
INPUT:	▁Pe ka hi a sen ▁gai ne ra ko ▁jar du e rak ▁e ta ▁e gin tza ▁guz ti ak ▁« ▁Is ra el go ▁Er re ge en ▁Kro ni ka ▁» ▁li bu ru an ▁dau de ▁i da tzi ak ▁.
PRED:	The rest of the events in Pekah 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Pekahiah 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	3003
INPUT:	▁Har tu ▁a paiz - jan tzi ak ▁e ta ▁jan tzi ▁A a ro ni ▁tu ni ka ▁, ▁man tu a ▁, ▁e fo da ▁e ta ▁bu lar re ko a ▁, ▁e ta ▁lo tu ▁e fo da ▁xin go laz ▁;
PRED:	Then present them to the priests and dress them in their tunics , chestpiece , and attach them to the chestpiece .
GOLD:	Dress Aaron in his priestly garments — the tunic , the robe worn with the ephod , the ephod itself , and the chestpiece . Then wrap the decorative sash of the ephod around him .

ID:	3004
INPUT:	▁Da vi dek ▁, ▁or du an ▁, ▁A bi a tar ri ▁: ▁« ▁Ba ne ki en ▁, ▁bai ▁, ▁e gun ▁har tan ▁han ▁ger ta tu ▁zen ▁Do eg ▁e dom dar ra ▁ez ▁ze la ▁gel di tu ko ▁Sau li ▁ber ri ▁e man ▁ga be ▁. ▁Neu ▁nau zu ▁ai ta ren ▁se ni tar te ko ▁guz ti en ▁he ri o tza ren ▁er ru dun ▁.
PRED:	Then David told them , “ Do n't you realize that you 're talking about ? ” So David 's family was missing , and he was killed by the family of Saul 's family .
GOLD:	David exclaimed , “ I knew it ! When I saw Doeg the Edomite there that day , I knew he was sure to tell Saul . Now I have caused the death of all your father 's family .

ID:	3005
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁di o tsu et ▁nik ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁: ▁Ja ki zu e ▁on gi ▁, ▁ez ▁dut ▁ho ne la ▁zu en ga tik ▁jo ka tzen ▁. ▁Is ra el dar rok ▁, ▁zeu ek ▁e gon ▁be har ▁du zu e ▁lo tsaz ▁gor ri ▁zeu en ▁jo ka bi de a ga tik ▁.
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will not abandon you , O Israel , for you are not ashamed of your sins .
GOLD:	But remember , says the Sovereign Lord , I am not doing this because you deserve it . O my people of Israel , you should be utterly ashamed of all you have done !

ID:	3006
INPUT:	▁Je ru sa lem go ▁e ki al de an ▁e ta ▁O li a men di ko ▁he go al de ra ▁zeu den ▁kul tu - le ku ak ▁e re ▁pro fa na tu ▁zi tu en ▁Jo si a sek ▁; ▁kul tu - le ku ▁hai ek ▁Is ra el go ▁er re ge ▁Sa lo mo nek ▁e rai ki ak ▁zi ren ▁si don dar ren ▁jain ko sa ▁zen ▁As tar te ren ▁i ru di ▁hi guin gar ri a ri ▁, ▁mo ab dar ren ▁jain ko ▁zen ▁Ke mo xen ▁i ru di ▁naz ka gar ri a ri ▁e ta ▁a mon dar ren ▁jain ko ▁zen ▁Mil ko men ▁i ru di ▁nar da gar ri a ri ▁kul tu ▁e ma te ko ▁.
PRED:	He also saw the pagan shrines and the other gods of the east of the south . He also saw the pagan shrines of Baal , the god of Israel , and the detestable god of the Ammonites . He also worshiped the gods of the Ammonites .
GOLD:	The king also desecrated the pagan shrines east of Jerusalem , to the south of the Mount of Corruption , where King Solomon of Israel had built shrines for Ashtoreth , the detestable goddess of the Sidonians ; and for Chemosh , the detestable god of the Moabites ; and for Molech , the vile god of the Ammonites .

ID:	3007
INPUT:	▁Sal ba tu ak ▁gau de ▁, ▁bai ▁, ▁bai na ▁i txa ro pe ne tan ▁ba kar rik ▁. ▁E ta ▁i txa ro ▁du gu na ▁be gi en ▁aur re an ▁ba ge nu ▁, ▁ho ri ▁ez ▁li tza te ke ▁i txa ro pe na ▁i zan go ▁, ▁i nork ▁ez ▁bai tu ▁i txa ro ten ▁be gi en ▁aur re an ▁du e na ▁.
PRED:	So we hope in God , but we hope in him . But if we hope in him , we will never be able to face the face of the law . But no one can ever be able to face .
GOLD:	We were given this hope when we were saved . ( If we already have something , we do n't need to hope for it .

ID:	3008
INPUT:	▁A re ▁ge hi a go ▁, ▁ur ru ti ko ▁gi zo nei ▁me zu la ri ak ▁bi da li ▁ziz ki e ten ▁, ▁e tor tze ko ▁e sa nez ▁; ▁e ta ▁hai ek ▁e tor ri ▁on do ren ▁, ▁bai na tu ▁, ▁be gi ak ▁pin ta tu ▁e ta ▁be ren ▁bu ru a ▁bi txiz ▁a pain du ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	The king sent this message to the others , who sent a message to the elders and elders , and they were streaked , and spotted . They were both beautiful and beautiful and beautiful .
GOLD:	“ You sisters sent messengers to distant lands to get men . Then when they arrived , you bathed yourselves , painted your eyelids , and put on your finest jewels for them .

ID:	3009
INPUT:	▁bos gar re na ▁sar do ni zez ▁, ▁sei gar re na ▁kor na li naz ▁, ▁zaz pi gar re na ▁kri so li toz ▁, ▁zor tzi gar re na ▁be ri loz ▁, ▁be de ra tzi gar re na ▁to pa zi oz ▁, ▁ha mar gar re na ▁a ga taz ▁, ▁ha mai ka gar re na ▁hi a zin toz ▁, ▁ha ma bi gar re na ▁a ma tis taz ▁.
PRED:	On the eighth day of the third year , the third year will be a third year of six quarts of choice flour , and the third of the third month will be a third of the third month .
GOLD:	the fifth onyx , the sixth carnelian , the seventh chrysolite , the eighth beryl , the ninth topaz , the tenth chrysoprase , the eleventh jacinth , the twelfth amethyst .

ID:	3010
INPUT:	▁Je ro bo am ▁al da re an ▁in tsen tsu a ▁er re tzen ▁a ri ▁ze la ▁, ▁Jain ko a ren ▁gi zon ▁bat ▁hel du ▁zen ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁a gin duz ▁, ▁Ju da tik ▁Be te le ra ▁.
PRED:	So Jeroboam II , the incense altar of the Lord , arrived at Bethel , and the man of God came to Judah .
GOLD:	At the Lord 's command , a man of God from Judah went to Bethel , arriving there just as Jeroboam was approaching the altar to burn incense .

ID:	3011
INPUT:	▁Jau na ▁, ▁ez ▁u tzi ▁ni ▁! ▁E ne ▁Jain ko ▁, ▁ez ▁gel di ▁ur ru ti ▁!
PRED:	O Lord my God , do n't let my enemies triumph over me .
GOLD:	Come quickly to help me , O Lord my savior .

ID:	3012
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁hon da tu ▁e gin ▁zi tu en ▁e ti o pi ar rak ▁A sa ren ▁e ta ▁Ju da ko en ▁ai tzi ne an ▁, ▁e ta ▁e ti o pi ar rek ▁i hes ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord destroyed the Arameans in the land of Judah , and the Arameans fled .
GOLD:	Then Asa cried out to the Lord his God , “ O Lord , no one but you can help the powerless against the mighty ! Help us , O Lord our God , for we trust in you alone . It is in your name that we have come against this vast horde . O Lord , you are our God ; do not let mere men prevail against you ! ”

ID:	3013
INPUT:	▁Jain ko ak ▁e man ▁di e zaz ki zu la ze ru ko ▁i hin tza e ta ▁lur re ko ▁gu ri ta su na ▁, ▁o gi - ar do tan ▁o pa ro ta su na ▁.
PRED:	May God give you grace and peace in the morning and peace offerings .
GOLD:	“ From the dew of heavenand the richness of the earth , may God always give you abundant harvests of grainand bountiful new wine .

ID:	3014
INPUT:	▁Ju da ko ▁A sa ren ▁er re ge al di ko ▁ho gei ta ▁zaz pi gar ren ▁ur te an ▁e gin ▁zen ▁er re ge ▁Zim ri ▁; ▁zaz pi ▁e gu nez ▁i zan ▁zen ▁er re ge ▁Tir tzan ▁. ▁Gu da ros te a ▁, ▁al di ▁har tan ▁, ▁fi lis te ar ren ▁hi ri ▁Gi be ton ▁se ti a tzen ▁a ri ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	Zimri was buried in the third year of King Asa 's reign in Judah . He reigned in Tirzah for seven days , during the reign of Asa 's reign .
GOLD:	Zimri began to rule over Israel in the twenty-seventh year of King Asa 's reign in Judah , but his reign in Tirzah lasted only seven days . The army of Israel was then attacking the Philistine town of Gibbethon .

ID:	3015
INPUT:	▁Hau xe ▁da ▁ja kin ▁e ta ▁u ler tu ▁be har ▁du zu na ▁: ▁Er bes te tik ▁i tzu li ▁e ta ▁Je ru sa lem ▁ber re rai ki tze ko ▁me zu a ▁a ger tu ▁ze ne tik ▁bu ru za gi ▁sa ga ra tu a ▁a ger tu ▁ar te ▁, ▁zaz pi ▁ur te ko ▁zaz pi ▁den bo ral di ▁i ga ro ko ▁di ra ▁; ▁zaz pi ▁ur te ko ▁hi ru ro gei ta ▁bi ▁den bo ral di tan ▁er bes te tik ▁e tor ri ▁e ta ▁hi ri a ▁e ta ▁ho nen ▁ka le ▁e ta ▁har re si ak ▁e gin go ▁di tuz te ▁, ▁bai na ▁ga rai ▁zai lak ▁i zan go ▁di ra ▁.
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : When you return to Jerusalem and return to Jerusalem , you will return to Jerusalem , and you will return to Jerusalem seven years and seven years . You will be a long time for seven years and seven years .
GOLD:	Now listen and understand ! Seven sets of seven plus sixty-two sets of seven will pass from the time the command is given to rebuild Jerusalem until a ruler — the Anointed One — comes . Jerusalem will be rebuilt with streets and strong defenses , despite the perilous times .

ID:	3016
INPUT:	▁Jain ko a ren ▁a hal men ▁bi kai na
PRED:	The Lord 's Chosen Servant
GOLD:	Future Conversion of Gentiles

ID:	3017
INPUT:	▁Al ko hol - e da ri ei ▁bu ruz ko ▁a rau ak
PRED:	The Most Important Commandment
GOLD:	Instructions for Priestly Conduct

ID:	3018
INPUT:	▁ken du ▁e gin go ▁di et ▁a ho ti ko do la ▁da ri on ▁o ke la ▁, ▁ha gi ne ta tik ▁i do lo ei ▁es kai ni ta ko ▁ja ki ak ▁; ▁ha la ▁e re ▁, ▁gel di tu ko ▁di ra ▁ba tzuk ▁bi zi ri ke ta ▁neu re - neu re ak ▁i zan go ▁di tut ▁, ▁Ju da ko ▁lei nu ak ▁be za la ▁; ▁Ek ron go ak ▁je bus tar rak ▁be za lai zan go ▁di ra ▁.
PRED:	I will take some of the blood of the idols of the idols , and I will give them to them as peace offerings , peace , and peace , and Ekron , and Ekron , and Ekron , and Ekron .
GOLD:	I will grab the bloody meat from their mouthsand snatch the detestable sacrifices from their teeth.Then the surviving Philistines will worship our Godand become like a clan in Judah.The Philistines of Ekron will join my people , as the ancient Jebusites once did .

ID:	3019
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁en gai na tu ▁zeu en ▁bu ru ak ▁, ▁se ni de ▁mai te ok ▁!
PRED:	Do n't be deceived by your brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	So do n't be misled , my dear brothers and sisters .

ID:	3020
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁non bait ▁o nar tzen ▁ez ▁ba zai tuz te te ▁e ta ▁en tzun ▁na hi ▁ez ▁, ▁han dik ▁al de ▁e gi te an ▁, ▁as tin du ▁zeu en ▁oi ne ta ko ▁hau tsa ▁, ▁be rai en ▁kon tra ko ▁sei na le tzat ▁» ▁.
PRED:	If you listen to some of them and refuse to listen to them , do n't be able to turn away from your feet . ”
GOLD:	But if any place refuses to welcome you or listen to you , shake its dust from your feet as you leave to show that you have abandoned those people to their fate . ”

ID:	3021
INPUT:	▁Goi ze an ▁e tor tze an ▁, ▁kez ka ti ▁aur ki tu ▁zi tu en ▁Jo sek
PRED:	When Joseph woke up , he asked them what Joseph had happened .
GOLD:	When Joseph saw them the next morning , he noticed that they both looked upset .

ID:	3022
INPUT:	▁Txa kur ▁gal du a ri ▁be lar ri e ta tik ▁hel tze a ▁be za lai no ren ▁ez ta bai da tan ▁sar tze a ▁.
PRED:	When the bow down from the mouth of the immoral woman , do n't fall into the darkness .
GOLD:	Interfering in someone else 's argumentis as foolish as yanking a dog 's ears .

ID:	3023
INPUT:	▁Jau na ren gan ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁Jain ko a ren gan ▁, ▁i pi ni ▁zu en ▁be re ▁us te a ▁. ▁Ez ▁zen ▁hu ra ▁be za la ko ▁er re ge rik ▁i zan ▁Ju dan ▁, ▁ez ▁aur re tik ▁, ▁ez ▁on do ren ▁.
PRED:	The Lord , the God of Israel , just as he had promised . He did not trust the Lord , just as he did .
GOLD:	Hezekiah trusted in the Lord , the God of Israel . There was no one like him among all the kings of Judah , either before or after his time .

ID:	3024
INPUT:	▁Gau ez ▁, ▁o he an ▁, ▁neu re ▁bi ho tze ko ▁ku tu na ren ▁bi la ▁nen bi <unk> la ▁i bi li ▁, ▁bai ▁, ▁bai na ▁aur ki tu ▁, ▁ez ▁.
PRED:	That night I was in the night , but I searched for you , but you did n't find out what I said .
GOLD:	One night as I lay in bed , I yearned for my lover.I yearned for him , but he did not come .

ID:	3025
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁au ke ra tu ▁ga be a ki zen da tu ▁di tuz te ▁er re ge ▁, ▁ni re ▁o ni ri tzi rik ▁ga be hau ta tu ▁di tuz te ▁bu ru za gi ak.Be ren ▁zi lar ▁e ta ▁ur rez jain ko - i ru di ak ▁e gin ▁di tuz te ▁, ▁be ren ▁bu ru a ren ▁gal bi de ▁.
PRED:	For I have chosen the kingdom of sin , and you have no pity on those who do evil . They have no excuse themselves .
GOLD:	The people have appointed kings without my consent , and princes without my approval.By making idols for themselves from their silver and gold , they have brought about their own destruction .

ID:	3026
INPUT:	▁Ba da kiz ki zu ▁a gin du ak ▁: ▁Ez ▁e gin ▁a dul te ri o rik ▁, ▁ez ▁hil ▁i nor ▁, ▁ez ▁os tu ▁, ▁ez ▁e gin ▁ge zur rez ko ▁tes ti gan tza rik ▁, ▁o ho ra tu ▁ai ta - a mak ▁.
PRED:	You have told me , ‘ You must not commit adultery . You must not commit adultery . You must not testify against your father and mother . '
GOLD:	But to answer your question , you know the commandments : ‘ You must not commit adultery . You must not murder . You must not steal . You must not testify falsely . Honor your father and mother . ' ”

ID:	3027
INPUT:	▁Zi gor ▁na za la ▁Jain ko ▁zu ze nak ▁, ▁zen tza ra zi ▁Jain ko ▁on be rak ▁, ▁bai na ▁ez ▁de za la ▁ni re ▁bu ru ak ▁gaiz to en ▁o li oz ▁dis ti ra ▁e <unk> toi tze an ▁i raun go ▁dut ▁nik ▁, ▁hai en ▁o hi tu ra ▁o ker ren ▁kon tra ▁.
PRED:	May God strike me and punish me , for I am not going to save you , but I will cause your life to survive .
GOLD:	Let the godly strike me ! It will be a kindness ! If they correct me , it is soothing medicine.Do n't let me refuse it.But I pray constantlyagainst the wicked and their deeds .

ID:	3028
INPUT:	▁« ▁Le ge nak ▁jo ta ko ▁gi zo nak ▁ar ro pak ▁ur ra tu ak ▁e ra man go ▁di tu ▁, ▁i le a ▁har ro ▁e ta ▁aur pe gi a ▁er di ▁es ta li rik ▁, ▁e ta ▁“ ▁Ku tsa tu a ▁! ▁Ku tsa tu a ▁! ▁” ▁oi hu ▁e gi nez ▁i bi li ko ▁da ▁.
PRED:	“ The man who has taken off his clothes and bathe himself in water and bathe himself in water , saying , ‘ Do n't be defiled ! '
GOLD:	“ Those who suffer from a serious skin disease must tear their clothing and leave their hair uncombed . They must cover their mouth and call out , ‘ Unclean ! Unclean ! '

ID:	3029
INPUT:	▁Hi ri ▁ho ri ek ▁i zan go ▁di tu zu e ▁ba bes le ku ▁, ▁hil da ko a ▁men de ka tze ko ▁es ku bi de a ▁du e na ren ▁es ku e ta tik ▁i hes ▁e gin ▁a hal ▁i za te ko ▁; ▁hor re la ▁, ▁hil tzai le a ▁ez ▁da ▁hil ko ▁, ▁el kar te a ren ▁aur re an ▁au zi ta ra ▁a ger tu ▁bai no ▁le hen ▁.
PRED:	The towns of the town will be captured , and the town will be killed by the sword of the enemy who will be killed by the power of the enemy , and the community will die .
GOLD:	These cities will be places of protection from a dead person 's relatives who want to avenge the death . The slayer must not be put to death before being tried by the community .

ID:	3030
INPUT:	▁E ran tzun ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁Gi sa ▁ho ne ta ko ▁es pi ri tu ak ▁bo ta tze ko ▁bi de ▁ba kar ra ▁o toi tza ▁da ▁.
PRED:	“ No , ” he said , “ we will be cast out demons . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ This kind can be cast out only by prayer . ”

ID:	3031
INPUT:	▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁gau za ▁guz ti ak ha ren ▁men pe an ▁jar ri ▁di tu ▁Jain ko ak ▁. ▁Bai na ▁Li bu ru ▁San tu ak ▁, ▁de na ▁ha ren ▁men pe ko ▁de la ▁e sa te an ▁, ▁ez ▁du ▁, ▁nos ki ▁, ▁hor ▁sar tzen ▁Jain ko a ▁be ra ▁, ▁gau za ▁guz ti ak ▁men pe an ▁jar ri ▁diz ki o na ▁.
PRED:	For everything is written in Christ 's authority , but it is written in the Scriptures . But the Scriptures say , “ This is the way of the Holy Spirit . ”
GOLD:	For the Scriptures say , “ God has put all things under his authority. ” ( Of course , when it says “ all things are under his authority , ” that does not include God himself , who gave Christ his authority . )

ID:	3032
INPUT:	▁Har tu ▁di ru a ▁e re ▁e ta ▁i tzu li ▁zeu en ▁za ku - mu tur re an ▁e kar ri ta ko a ▁, ▁o ker ren ▁bat ▁i zan ▁da ▁e ta ▁.
PRED:	Then you will return to the top of your springs and olive oil , and you will have one piece of water .
GOLD:	Also take double the money that was put back in your sacks , as it was probably someone 's mistake .

ID:	3033
INPUT:	▁Be raz ▁, ▁zu ek ▁, ▁gaiz to ak ▁i za nik ▁, ▁se me - a la bei ▁gau za ▁o nak ▁e ma ten ▁bal din ▁ba da ki zu e ▁, ▁zen ba tez ▁a re a go ▁ez ▁di e ▁ze ru ko ▁zu en ▁Ai tak ▁Es pi ri tu ▁San tu a ▁e man go ▁es ka tzen ▁di o te nei ▁? ▁»
PRED:	So if you refuse to obey your children , do n't you obey the Holy Spirit . And if you do n't know the Holy Spirit , how can you obey the Holy Spirit ? ”
GOLD:	So if you sinful people know how to give good gifts to your children , how much more will your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him . ”

ID:	3034
INPUT:	▁Da vi dek ▁e san ▁zi en ▁Jo a bi ▁e ta ▁ho ne kin ▁zi ren ▁gi zo nei ▁: ▁« ▁Ur ra tu ▁zeu en ▁jan tzi ak ▁, ▁har tu ▁soi ne an ▁do lu - jan tzi a ▁e ta ▁e gi zu e ▁ne gar ▁Ab ner ren ▁aur re an ▁» ▁.On do ren ▁, ▁Da vid ▁hil ku txa ren ▁a tze tik ▁jo an ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	Then David told them , “ Go back to the man who was wearing clothes of mourning . Then David took his clothes and put it in burlap . ”
GOLD:	Then David said to Joab and all those who were with him , “ Tear your clothes and put on burlap . Mourn for Abner. ” And King David himself walked behind the procession to the grave .

ID:	3035
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ez ▁da ▁her ri an ▁be har tsu rik ▁fal ta ko ▁; ▁hor re ga tik ▁a gin tzen ▁di zu et ▁zeu en ▁her ri tar re kin ▁, ▁zeu en ▁ar du ra pe an ▁di tu zu en ▁do ha ka be ▁e ta ▁be har tsu e kin ▁, ▁es ku za bal ▁i za te ko ▁.
PRED:	“ Do n't let anyone tell you the truth , or you must pay attention to the poor and needy , and let them go with you .
GOLD:	There will always be some in the land who are poor . That is why I am commanding you to share freely with the poor and with other Israelites in need .

ID:	3036
INPUT:	▁Ped rok ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Ar ro tzen gan <unk> su sek ▁, ▁or du an ▁: ▁— ▁E txe ko ak ▁lib re ▁dau de ▁, ▁be raz ▁.
PRED:	Peter replied , “ My lord , let 's get out of the palace ! ”
GOLD:	“ They tax the people they have conquered , ” Peter replied. “ Well , then , ” Jesus said , “ the citizens are free !

ID:	3037
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁Jau na ri ▁, ▁e ne ▁Jain ko a ri ▁, ▁tenplu a ▁e rai ki ▁na hi ▁di ot ▁e ta ▁be ra ri ▁sa ga ra tu ▁. ▁Han ▁in tsen tsu a ▁e ta ▁u sain ki ▁go zo ak ▁er re ko ▁di tu gu ▁Jau na ren ▁aur re an ▁, ▁be ra ri ▁es kai ni ta ko ▁o gi ak ▁jar ri ko ▁di tu gu ▁e ten ga be ▁e ta ▁e gu ne ro ▁, ▁goiz ▁e ta ▁ar ra tsal de ▁; ▁e ta ▁la run ba te tan ▁, ▁il ber ri - jai e tan ▁e ta ▁Jau na ren ▁, ▁gu re ▁Jain ko a ren ▁, ▁jai ▁na gu si e tan ▁er re - o pa ri ak ▁es kai ni ko ▁di tu gu ▁. ▁Ha la ▁e gi nen ▁da ▁be ti ▁Is ra e len ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will reject the Temple of the Lord , the God of Israel , and the fragrant incense altar of the Lord , the God of Israel , and on the Sabbath days of the Lord their God .
GOLD:	Solomon also sent this message to King Hiram at Tyre : “ Send me cedar logs as you did for my father , David , when he was building his palace .

ID:	3038
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zai tez ▁des bi de ra ▁ez ▁es kuin ▁, ▁ez ▁ez ker re ta ra ▁; ▁ur run du ▁oi nak ▁gaiz ta ke ri a tik ▁.
PRED:	Do n't turn away from your left hand ; do n't turn away from evil .
GOLD:	Do n't get sidetracked ; keep your feet from following evil .

ID:	3039
INPUT:	▁Li bu ru ▁San tu e tan ▁i da tzi rik ▁da go en ▁guz ti a ▁Jain ko ak ▁inspi ra tu a ▁da ▁e ta ▁i ra kas te ko ▁, ▁ar ra zoi ak ▁e ma te ko ▁, ▁o ker rak ▁zu zen tze ko ▁e ta ▁bi zi e ra ▁zu ze ne an ▁hez te ko ▁ba li a gar ri a ▁;
PRED:	The Scriptures say , “ The Scriptures say , ‘ The Scriptures say , ‘ You are doing what is right , and you are doing right . '
GOLD:	All Scripture is inspired by God and is useful to teach us what is true and to make us realize what is wrong in our lives . It corrects us when we are wrong and teaches us to do what is right .

ID:	3040
INPUT:	▁Hitz ▁hau ek ▁en tzu te an ▁, ▁e hun ta ri ak ▁gu dal bu ru a ri ▁ja ki na ra zi ▁zi on ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁— ▁Be gi ra ▁on gi ▁zer ▁e gi ten ▁du zun ▁! ▁Gi zon ▁ho ri ▁Er ro ma ko ▁hi ri tar ra ▁du zu ▁.
PRED:	When the Roman officer heard what had happened , he said to the commander , “ Look , you 're going to die ! ”
GOLD:	When the officer heard this , he went to the commander and asked , “ What are you doing ? This man is a Roman citizen ! ”

ID:	3041
INPUT:	▁« ▁Hi ri ▁bat ▁, ▁e ra so ▁e ta ▁kon kis ta tu ▁aur re tik ▁, ▁lu za ro an ▁se ti a tu ▁be har ▁ba du zu e ▁, ▁ez ▁di tu zu e ▁in gu ru ko ▁ar bo lak ▁aiz ko raz ▁bo ta ko ▁, ▁be rai en ▁frui tu ez ▁ja na ri tu ▁be har ko ▁du zu e ▁e ta ▁. ▁Gi za ki ▁o te ▁di ra ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁ar bo lak ▁, ▁se ti a tu tzat ▁har tze ko ▁?
PRED:	“ In the same way , you must set up a long time , and you will receive a harvest of grapes from the forest . If you do n't plant the fruit of the trees , do n't you pick up the grapes from the forest .
GOLD:	“ When you are attacking a town and the war drags on , you must not cut down the trees with your axes . You may eat the fruit , but do not cut down the trees . Are the trees your enemies , that you should attack them ?

ID:	3042
INPUT:	▁O toi tza
PRED:	Restoration for Israel
GOLD:	Cyrus , the Lord 's Chosen One

ID:	3043
INPUT:	▁Zu hur rak ▁, ▁hi le tak ▁jo tzen ▁a ri ▁di re ne txe an ▁du ▁bi ho tza ▁; ▁ten te lak ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁jai e tan ▁da go en ▁e txe an ▁.
PRED:	The words of the wise give wise advice ; the mouth of the dead will become a home .
GOLD:	A wise person thinks a lot about death , while a fool thinks only about having a good time .

ID:	3044
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁hai ek ▁be lar ri ak ▁i txi ▁e ta ▁, ▁gar ra si ka ▁, ▁gai ne ra ▁jaur ti ▁zi tzaiz ki on ▁Es te ba ni ▁de nak ▁ba te an ▁.
PRED:	Then they began to spit on them and threw it into pieces , and Stephen threw it into pieces .
GOLD:	Then they put their hands over their ears and began shouting . They rushed at him

ID:	3045
INPUT:	▁Men de bal de ko ▁mu ga ▁Me di ter ra ne o ▁i tsa so a ▁zen.Hor ra ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁Ju da ren ▁lei nu ko ei ▁se ni tar te ka ▁ba na tu ri ko ▁lur ral de - za ti a ren ▁mu gak ▁.
PRED:	The boundary was the boundaries of the homeland allocated to the clans of the Mediterranean Sea ; the boundary was the homeland allocated to the clans of Judah .
GOLD:	The western boundary was the shoreline of the Mediterranean Sea.These are the boundaries for the clans of the tribe of Judah .

ID:	3046
INPUT:	▁Jau na ri ▁a tse gin ▁zai o na ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁A ma tzi a sek ▁; ▁ez ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁Da vid ▁be re ▁ar ba so ak ▁be zain ▁zin tzo ▁. ▁Be re ▁ai ta ▁Jo a xen ▁an tze ra ▁jo ka tu ▁zu en ▁A ma tzi a sek ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , but he refused to follow his father , Amaziah , and his father , Jotham , was the father of Joash .
GOLD:	Amaziah did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , but not like his ancestor David . Instead , he followed the example of his father , Joash .

ID:	3047
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁Jo si a sek ▁Je ko ni as ▁e ta ▁ho nen ▁a nai ak ▁, ▁is ra el dar rak ▁Ba bi lo ni a ra ▁er bes te ra tu ▁zi tuz ten ▁ga rai an ▁.
PRED:	So Josiah and his brothers and all the Israelites returned to Babylon .
GOLD:	Josiah was the father of Jehoiachin and his brothers ( born at the time of the exile to Babylon ) .

ID:	3048
INPUT:	▁E zin ▁kon ta ▁a ha la ▁di ra ▁gu re ▁er ru ak ▁, ▁bai na ▁zuk ▁bar ka tu ▁e gi ten ▁diz ki gu zu ▁ho be nak ▁.
PRED:	You can not forgive our sins , but we can not forgive them .
GOLD:	What joy for those you choose to bring near , those who live in your holy courts.What festivities await usinside your holy Temple .

ID:	3049
INPUT:	▁Je su sek ▁gal de tu ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁Zer ▁e gin go ▁o te ▁di e ▁ne ka za ri ▁ho ri ei ▁ma has ti - ja be ak ▁i tzul tze an ▁?
PRED:	Jesus asked them , “ What should we do ? ”
GOLD:	“ When the owner of the vineyard returns , ” Jesus asked , “ what do you think he will do to those farmers ? ”

ID:	3050
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ez ▁gu ti zi a tu ▁la gun ▁hur ko a re nik ▁e zer ▁: ▁ez ▁ha ren ▁e maz te rik ▁, ▁ez ▁mor roi - mi ra be rik ▁, ▁ez ▁i di rik ▁, ▁ez ▁as to rik ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁bes te ▁e zer txo ▁e re ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ You must not have any of your neighbor 's wife . You must not have any of your servants or your servants or your livestock . ”
GOLD:	“ You must not covet your neighbor 's house . You must not covet your neighbor 's wife , male or female servant , ox or donkey , or anything else that belongs to your neighbor . ”

ID:	3051
INPUT:	▁O rain ▁, ▁zeu re ▁jo ka bi de ▁zi tal ▁e ta ▁hi guin gar ri a ren ▁on do re nak ▁ja san ▁be har ▁di tu zu ▁. ▁Nik ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁, ▁e sa na ▁.
PRED:	“ But now , your detestable sins are detestable to you . I , the Lord , have spoken !
GOLD:	This is your punishment for all your lewdness and detestable sins , says the Lord .

ID:	3052
INPUT:	▁Go go ra tu ▁e san ▁ni zu e na ▁: ▁mor roi a ▁ez ▁da ▁na gu si a ▁bai no ▁han di a go ▁. ▁Ni ▁per tse gi tu ▁ba nau te ▁, ▁zu ek ▁e re ▁per tse gi tu ko ▁zai tuz te te ▁; ▁ni re ▁me zu a ▁no la ▁har tu ▁, ▁ha la ▁har tu ko ▁du te ▁zu e na ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	I said to you , ‘ My master is not greater than you . If you do n't know me , you will find favor with me , you will find favor with me .
GOLD:	Do you remember what I told you ? ‘ A slave is not greater than the master . ' Since they persecuted me , naturally they will persecute you . And if they had listened to me , they would listen to you .

ID:	3053
INPUT:	▁A pai zek ▁ni re ▁le ge a ▁haus ten ▁du te ▁e ta ▁ni re ▁gau za ▁san tu ak ▁pro fa na tzen ▁; ▁ez ▁du te ▁be reiz ten ▁sak ra tu a ▁e ta ▁pro fa no a ▁, ▁ez ▁du te ▁e za gu ta raz ten ▁gar bi a ren ▁e ta ▁ku tsa tu a ren ▁ar te ko ▁al de a ▁; ▁ez ▁zai e ▁a xo la ▁ni re ▁la run ba ta ▁; ▁hor re la ▁, ▁pro fa na tu ▁e gi ten ▁nau te ▁.
PRED:	The priests who follow my instructions and do not obey my decrees and regulations . They do not know that I am the Lord who makes you ceremonially clean . They do not defile my Temple and defile my Temple .
GOLD:	Your priests have violated my instructions and defiled my holy things . They make no distinction between what is holy and what is not . And they do not teach my people the difference between what is ceremonially clean and unclean . They disregard my Sabbath days so that I am dishonored among them .

ID:	3054
INPUT:	▁Sa mu e lek ▁e ran tzun ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Jau na ▁ur run du ▁bal din ▁ba zai zu ▁e ta ▁kon tra ▁jar ri ▁, ▁zer ta ra ko ▁e gin ▁ni ri ▁kon tsul ta ▁?
PRED:	“ If you turn away from the Lord , ” Samuel asked . “ If you do n't ask me to ask for me , what should I do ? ”
GOLD:	But Samuel replied , “ Why ask me , since the Lord has left you and has become your enemy ?

ID:	3055
INPUT:	▁Jan ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁me se dez ▁, ▁be har rez ko a ▁bai tu zu e ▁sal ba tze ko ▁. ▁Ez ▁du zu e ▁i nork ▁bu ru ko ▁i le ▁bat ▁e re ▁gal du ko ▁» ▁.
PRED:	So you will eat food and drink , but you will be saved . You will not be saved . ”
GOLD:	“ Please eat something now for your own good . For not a hair of your heads will perish . ”

ID:	3056
INPUT:	▁E ra ▁be re an ▁, ▁ze ru ko ▁zu en ▁Ai tak ▁ez ▁du ▁na hi ▁txi ki ▁hau e ta ko ▁i nor ▁gal tze rik ▁.
PRED:	In the same way , no one will ask you what the Father tells you .
GOLD:	In the same way , it is not my heavenly Father 's will that even one of these little ones should perish .

ID:	3057
INPUT:	▁Zin tzo a ▁e ta ▁zu ze na ▁sal ba tu ak ▁, ▁gaiz to a ▁e ta ▁mal tzur ra ▁hai en ▁or dez ▁gai tze tsi ak ▁.
PRED:	The godly will be saved , but the wicked are trapped by their evil schemes .
GOLD:	The wicked are punished in place of the godly , and traitors in place of the honest .

ID:	3058
INPUT:	▁He men ▁du zu e ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁zeu ek ▁hau ta tu ▁e ta ▁es ka tu ▁du zu en ▁er re ge a ▁. ▁Ha ra ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁er re ge a ▁e man ▁di zu e ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ You have given this message to the king , and you have given him the king .
GOLD:	All right , here is the king you have chosen . You asked for him , and the Lord has granted your request .

ID:	3059
INPUT:	▁Is ra el go ▁ze lai e tan ▁dau den ▁ar di ▁e do ▁a hun tze ta tik ▁ber re hu ne ko ▁bat ▁es kai ni ko ▁du zu e ▁. ▁Hau ▁guz ti a ▁la bo re - o pa ri tzat ▁, ▁er re - o pa ri tzat ▁na hiz ▁el kar ta sun - o pa ri tzat ▁aur kez tu ko ▁du zu e ▁be ka tu en ▁bar ka men - o hi ku ne a ▁e gi te ko ▁. ▁Ho ne la ▁di ot ▁nik ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau nak ▁.
PRED:	“ When you present a peace offering to the Lord , you must present a grain offering to the Lord . This is a burnt offering , a pleasing aroma to the Lord . This is what the Sovereign Lord says :
GOLD:	and one sheep or goat for every 200 in your flocks in Israel . These will be the grain offerings , burnt offerings , and peace offerings that will make atonement for the people who bring them , says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	3060
INPUT:	▁Be gi ▁aur re an ▁dut ▁be ti ▁zu re ▁mai ta su na e ta ▁lei al ▁jo ka tu ▁dut ▁zu re ki ko ▁;
PRED:	I will praise you with unfailing love ; I will praise you .
GOLD:	For I am always aware of your unfailing love , and I have lived according to your truth .

ID:	3061
INPUT:	▁Hai en ▁aur re an ▁dar - dar ▁da gi ▁lur rak ▁, ▁i ka ra ▁da ▁ze ru a ▁; ▁e guz ki - i lar gi ak ▁i lun du ▁e gi ten ▁di ra ▁, ▁i zar rek ▁be ren ▁dir di ra ▁gal tzen ▁.
PRED:	The earth trembles at the heavens , and the moon tremble in the clouds .
GOLD:	The earth quakes as they advance , and the heavens tremble.The sun and moon grow dark , and the stars no longer shine .

ID:	3062
INPUT:	▁Ge de o nek ▁e san ▁zi en ▁: ▁— ▁On gi ▁da ▁. ▁Bai na ▁Jau nak ▁Ze bah ▁e ta ▁Tzal mu na ▁ni re ▁es ku ▁uz te an ▁, ▁ba sa mor tu ko ▁o tez ▁e ta ▁gar duz ▁ur ra tu ko ▁zai tuz tet ▁.
PRED:	Gideon replied , “ The Lord is right , but I will hand you over to the wilderness , but I will rescue you from the wilderness .
GOLD:	So Gideon said , “ After the Lord gives me victory over Zebah and Zalmunna , I will return and tear your flesh with the thorns and briers from the wilderness . ”

ID:	3063
INPUT:	▁bai na ▁e gi zu e ▁a pal ta su nez ▁e ta ▁er res pe tuz ▁, ▁kon tzi en tzi a ▁gar biz ▁jo ka tuz ▁. ▁Hor re la ▁, ▁Kris to ren ▁si nes le ▁be za la ▁du zu en ▁jo ka e ra ▁o naz ▁gaiz ki - e sa ka ▁a ri ▁di re nak ▁be ren ▁hitz ▁gaiz to ez ▁lo tsa tu ko ▁di ra ▁.
PRED:	But you must be pure and pure in the sight of Christ . Instead , you must believe that you are pure in the sight of Christ .
GOLD:	But do this in a gentle and respectful way . Keep your conscience clear . Then if people speak against you , they will be ashamed when they see what a good life you live because you belong to Christ .

ID:	3064
INPUT:	▁Ir te e ra ko ▁e ta pen ▁zer ren da
PRED:	Paul 's Final Instructions
GOLD:	Remembering Israel 's Journey

ID:	3065
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁sal ba tu ▁zi tu en ▁Jau nak ▁E ze ki as ▁e ta ▁Je ru sa lem go ▁bi zi la gu nak ▁A si ri a ko ▁er re ge ▁Se na ke ri ben ▁e ta ▁gai ne ra ko ▁e tsai en ▁es ku e tan ▁e ror tze tik ▁. ▁E ta ▁ba ke a ▁e man ▁zi en ▁al de ▁guz ti e tan ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says to King Hezekiah of Assyria , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the king of Assyria , and he handed them over to the king of Assyria .
GOLD:	That is how the Lord rescued Hezekiah and the people of Jerusalem from King Sennacherib of Assyria and from all the others who threatened them . So there was peace throughout the land .

ID:	3066
INPUT:	▁Ho ri ▁i zan ▁zen ▁za bu lon dar ren ▁on da re a ▁, ▁se ni tar te ka ▁ba na tu a ▁, ▁ai pa tu ri ko ▁hi ri ▁e ta ▁her rix kak ▁bar ne ▁.
PRED:	These were the clans of the clans of the tribe of Naphtali . Their homeland included the towns with their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	The homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Zebulun included these towns and their surrounding villages .

ID:	3067
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁ja na ri a ▁, ▁ja ki rik ▁go xo e na ▁e re ▁, ▁naz ka gar ri ▁ger ta tzen ▁zai o ▁.
PRED:	Then you will know what is happening , and you will hate you .
GOLD:	They lose their appetitefor even the most delicious food .

ID:	3068
INPUT:	▁Ze ru ra ▁i go ta ▁e re ▁, ▁zu ▁han txe ▁! ▁Hil da ko en ▁E goi tza ra ▁jai tsi ta ▁e re ▁, ▁zu ▁ber tan ▁!
PRED:	For you will die in the grave , and you will die in the grave .
GOLD:	If I go up to heaven , you are there ; if I go down to the grave , you are there .

ID:	3069
INPUT:	▁Ir ten ▁zi ren ▁, ▁or du an ▁, ▁So do ma ▁, ▁Go mor ra ▁, ▁Ad ma ▁, ▁Tze boim ▁e ta ▁Be la ▁e do ▁Tzo ar ko ▁er re ge ak ▁, ▁e ta ▁e ra so ▁e gin ▁zi e ten ▁Si dim go ▁ha ra ne an
PRED:	So they left Sodom and Gomorrah and Gomorrah and Gomorrah , near the border of Sodom , Gomorrah , and Ekron , and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah .
GOLD:	Then the rebel kings of Sodom , Gomorrah , Admah , Zeboiim , and Bela ( also called Zoar ) prepared for battle in the valley of the Dead Sea .

ID:	3070
INPUT:	▁Zeuk ▁en tzun ▁du zu ▁zer ▁e gin ▁di e ten ▁A si ri a ko ▁er re ge ek ▁her ri al de ▁guz ti ei ▁: ▁e ra bat ▁hon da tu ▁. ▁E ta ▁zu ▁lib ra tu ko ▁za re la ko an ▁al ▁zau de ▁?
PRED:	You have heard what the king of Assyria has done to you . You have destroyed all the kingdoms of the earth , and you are destroyed .
GOLD:	You know perfectly well what the kings of Assyria have done wherever they have gone . They have completely destroyed everyone who stood in their way ! Why should you be any different ?

ID:	3071
INPUT:	▁de na ▁es ta li ko ▁du te ▁, ▁lur ra ▁be ra ▁e zin ▁i kus te rai no ▁. ▁Kaz ka bar rak ▁hon da tze ke ▁u tzi ri ko ▁a pur ra ▁e re ▁jan ▁e gin go ▁du te ▁e ta ▁bai ta ▁lan de tan ▁er ne tzen ▁a ri ▁di ren ▁zu hai tzak ▁e re ▁.
PRED:	It will be thrown into the sea , and everything in it will be destroyed . It will be destroyed , and all the trees of the field will be destroyed .
GOLD:	They will cover the land so that you wo n't be able to see the ground . They will devour what little is left of your crops after the hailstorm , including all the trees growing in the fields .

ID:	3072
INPUT:	▁Je su sen ▁a gin du ▁ber ri a
PRED:	The First Disciples
GOLD:	Jesus Predicts Peter 's Denial

ID:	3073
INPUT:	▁Neu re ▁go go ko ▁bu ru za gi ak ▁e man go ▁diz ki zu et ▁, ▁ja kin du ri az ▁e ta ▁zu hur ta su nez ▁gi da tu ko ▁zai tuz te te nak ▁.
PRED:	I will give you wisdom and understanding , and I will make you wise .
GOLD:	And I will give you shepherds after my own heart , who will guide you with knowledge and understanding .

ID:	3074
INPUT:	▁Is ra el ▁her ri ak ▁Jau na ▁baz ter tu
PRED:	The Lord 's Love for Israel
GOLD:	The Death of Joshua

ID:	3075
INPUT:	▁Bes te ▁er di a re kin ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁jain ko - i ru di ▁bat ▁e gi ten ▁du ▁e ta ▁aur re an ▁a hus pez tu rik ▁gur tzen ▁. ▁E ta ▁o toitz ▁e gi ten ▁di o ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁« ▁Sal ba ▁na za zu ▁, ▁zu ▁bai tzai tut ▁jain ko ▁! ▁»
PRED:	But anyone who does not worship other gods and worship other gods and worship other gods , saying , “ O Lord , save me , for I am your Savior . ”
GOLD:	Then he takes what 's leftand makes his god : a carved idol ! He falls down in front of it , worshiping and praying to it. “ Rescue me ! ” he says. “ You are my god ! ”

ID:	3076
INPUT:	▁E ra ku tsi ▁al ▁diz ki zu te He ri o a ren ▁er rei nu ▁i lu ne ko ▁a te ak ▁?
PRED:	Why do you let the wicked fall into their homes ?
GOLD:	Do you know where the gates of death are located ? Have you seen the gates of utter gloom ?

ID:	3077
INPUT:	▁“ ▁Zi lar ▁mes pre txa gar ri ▁” ▁dei tu ko ▁di tuz te ▁, ▁mes pre txa tu ▁e gin ▁bai ti tut ▁nik ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁» ▁.
PRED:	They will be despised and despised , for I will despise the Lord . ”
GOLD:	I will label them ‘ Rejected Silver , 'for I , the Lord , am discarding them . ”

ID:	3078
INPUT:	▁Zal diz ko ▁gu da ri ak ▁ber re hun ▁mi li oi ▁zi re la ▁en tzun ▁nu en ▁.
PRED:	So I heard that the king had entrusted his best chariots and charioteers .
GOLD:	I heard the size of their army , which was 200 million mounted troops .

ID:	3079
INPUT:	▁Bes te la ▁, ▁lar ru gor ri an ▁u tzi ko ▁dut ▁, ▁jai o ▁zen ▁e gu ne an ▁be za la ▁bi lu <unk> sa mor tu a ren ▁an tze ko ▁e gin go ▁dut ▁, ▁lur ▁i dor ▁bi hur tu ko e ta ▁e gar riz ▁hi la ra zi ko ▁.
PRED:	Then I will turn away from the heat of the desert , like a desert , like a desert , like a desert wind .
GOLD:	Their mother is a shameless prostituteand became pregnant in a shameful way.She said , ‘ I 'll run after other loversand sell myself to them for food and water , for clothing of wool and linen , and for olive oil and drinks . '

ID:	3080
INPUT:	▁Sar tu ▁zen ▁jan to ki an ▁He ro di a sen ▁a la ba ▁e ta ▁dan tzan ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁, ▁e ta ▁a tse gin ▁i zan ▁zi tzai en ▁He ro de si ▁e ta ▁ho nen ▁ma hai ki de ei ▁. ▁Or du an ▁, ▁er re ge ak ▁nes ka txa ri ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁— ▁Es ka tu ▁na hi ▁du zu na ▁, ▁e ta ▁e man go ▁di zut ▁.
PRED:	When they got up and went to meet him , he broke his staff . Then he broke his staff and cried out to the king , “ Oh , I will give you victory over my lord the king . ”
GOLD:	Then his daughter , also named Herodias , came in and performed a dance that greatly pleased Herod and his guests . “ Ask me for anything you like , ” the king said to the girl , “ and I will give it to you . ”

ID:	3081
INPUT:	▁Ha ser re - e gu na ▁i zan go ▁da ▁, ▁lar ri ta sun- ▁e ta ▁na hi ga be - e gu na ▁, ▁hon da men di ▁han di ko ▁e gu na ▁, ▁i lun <unk> ▁e ta ▁goi bel ta sun - e gu na ▁, ▁ho <unk> ▁e ta ▁lai no ▁bel tza ren ▁e gu na ▁.
PRED:	The day of anger will be dark and anguish and day will be anguish and day day day of anguish and day day day day day day day day .
GOLD:	It will be a day when the Lord 's anger is poured out — a day of terrible distress and anguish , a day of ruin and desolation , a day of darkness and gloom , a day of clouds and blackness ,

ID:	3082
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁A sak ▁Jau na ren ▁e txe ko ▁e ta ▁be re ▁jau re gi ko ▁al txor te gi e tan ▁zeu den ▁ur re - zi lar rak ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁Da mas kon ▁bi zi ▁zen ▁Si ri a ko ▁er re ge ▁Ben - Ha da di ▁bi da li ▁ziz ki on ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁:
PRED:	Then King Asa 's palace was taken from the Temple of the Lord , the royal palace , and he sent them to the royal palace of Damascus . He sent them to King Hazael of Aram :
GOLD:	Asa responded by removing the silver and gold from the treasuries of the Temple of the Lord and the royal palace . He sent it to King Ben-hadad of Aram , who was ruling in Damascus , along with this message :

ID:	3083
INPUT:	▁« ▁Ez ▁o te ▁hau ▁guz ti a ▁, ▁Is ra el ▁, ▁bi de an ▁gi da tu ▁zin tu en ▁Jau na ▁, ▁zeu re ▁Jain ko a ▁, ▁baz ter tu ▁du zu la ko ▁?
PRED:	“ Do n't you realize that I am the Lord your God , the God of Israel , has rejected you ?
GOLD:	And you have brought this upon yourselvesby rebelling against the Lord your God , even though he was leading you on the way !

ID:	3084
INPUT:	▁A le lui a ▁! ▁Go ra ▁Jau na ▁! ▁Go re tsa zu e ▁, ▁Jau na ren ▁zer bi tza ri ok ▁, ▁go re tsi ▁Jau na ren ▁i ze na ▁!
PRED:	Praise the Lord ! Praise the Lord , all you who fear him ; praise the Lord !
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! Yes , give praise , O servants of the Lord.Praise the name of the Lord !

ID:	3085
INPUT:	▁Goi ze ro ▁ber ri tzen ▁di ra ▁. ▁Bai ▁han di a ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁zu re ▁lei al ta su na ▁!
PRED:	The Most High is a shelter in the morning , but the Lord is our God .
GOLD:	Great is his faithfulness ; his mercies begin afresh each morning .

ID:	3086
INPUT:	▁No la tan ▁e san ▁de za ke zu e ja kin tsu ▁za re te la ▁, ▁zeu e kin ▁du zu e la ▁Jau na ren ▁le ge a ▁? ▁Zeu en ▁le ge - mai su en ▁lu ma ▁ge zur ti ak fal tsu ▁bi hur tu ▁du ▁le ge ▁ho ri ▁!
PRED:	Do n't you realize that you are wise ? Do you obey the Law of the Lord ? How can you eat the commandments of the Lord ?
GOLD:	“ ‘ How can you say , “ We are wise because we have the word of the Lord , ” when your teachers have twisted it by writing lies ?

ID:	3087
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁ho ne la ▁zi o en ▁kon de na ren ▁ar ra zoi a ▁a di e raz ten ▁zu en ▁i daz ku nak ▁: ▁« ▁Ju du en ▁er re ge a ▁» ▁.
PRED:	So he told them , “ This is the account of the king 's reign . ”
GOLD:	A sign announced the charge against him . It read , “ The King of the Jews . ”

ID:	3088
INPUT:	▁Bi har ▁e do ▁e tzi ▁zu en ▁se me - a la bek ▁ho nek ▁guz ti ak ▁zer ▁e san ▁na hi ▁du en ▁gal de tze an ▁, ▁hau ▁e ran tzun go ▁di e zu e ▁: ▁“ ▁Jau nak ▁a hal men ▁han diz ▁a te ra ▁gin tu en ▁E gip to tik ▁, ▁eskla bo tza tik ▁.
PRED:	Then Job said to his sons , ‘ This is what the Lord says : We will ask , ‘ This is what the Lord rescued us from slavery in Egypt . '
GOLD:	“ And in the future , your children will ask you , ‘ What does all this mean ? ' Then you will tell them , ‘ With the power of his mighty hand , the Lord brought us out of Egypt , the place of our slavery .

ID:	3089
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁e ra man ▁, ▁be raz ▁, ▁e zer ▁hi guin gar ri rik ▁zeu en ▁e txe ra ▁, ▁zu ek ▁e re ▁, ▁i do lo ak ▁be za la ▁, ▁e ra bat ▁sun tsi ▁ez ▁zai tza ten ▁. ▁Guz tiz ▁ar bui a gar ri ▁e ta ▁hi guin gar ri tzat ▁har tu ko ▁di tu zu e ▁, ▁e ra bat ▁sun tsi tu ak ▁be har ▁du te ▁i zan ▁e ta ▁.
PRED:	Do n't be detestable to you , for you have rejected your idols , and do n't be completely destroyed . You must completely destroy all the detestable things you have done .
GOLD:	Do not bring any detestable objects into your home , for then you will be destroyed , just like them . You must utterly detest such things , for they are set apart for destruction .

ID:	3090
INPUT:	▁Er rei nu ▁e ta ▁her ri ak men pe an ▁jar ri ▁ze niz ki en ▁, ▁e ta ▁in gu ru ko ▁lur rak ▁ba na <unk> bon go ▁er re ge ▁Si hon - en ▁lur ral de a har tu ▁zu ten ▁, ▁Ba xan go ▁er re ge ▁Og - e na ▁.
PRED:	Your people lived in the land of King Sihon of Bashan , and the land of King Og of Bashan , and King Og of Bashan .
GOLD:	“ Then you helped our ancestors conquer kingdoms and nations , and you placed your people in every corner of the land . They took over the land of King Sihon of Heshbon and the land of King Og of Bashan .

ID:	3091
INPUT:	▁Jo ka ▁e za zu e ▁on gi ▁jen ti len ▁ar te an ▁; ▁hor re la ▁, ▁o rain ▁gaiz ki le tzat ▁sa la tzen ▁ba zai tuz te te ▁e re ▁, ▁zu en ▁e gin tza ▁o nak ▁ai tor tu ▁be har ko ▁di tuz te ▁e ta ▁Jain ko a ▁go re tsi ko ▁du te ▁, ▁hu ra ▁kon tu ak ▁har tze ra ▁e tor tze an ▁.
PRED:	But when you are doing this , you will know that you are doing what is right , and if you are doing what is right , you will know that God is coming .
GOLD:	Be careful to live properly among your unbelieving neighbors . Then even if they accuse you of doing wrong , they will see your honorable behavior , and they will give honor to God when he judges the world .

ID:	3092
INPUT:	▁Noiz ▁ar te ▁ol dar tu ▁be har ▁du zu e ▁gi za ki a ren ▁kon tra ▁, ▁hau ▁a ka ba tu ▁na hi an ▁? ▁Pa re ta ▁o ker tu a ▁, ▁he si ▁ko lo ka ▁za re te ▁guz ti ok ▁!
PRED:	How long will you fight against these people ? How long will you stand before the whole community ? They are all terrified !
GOLD:	They plan to topple me from my high position.They delight in telling lies about me.They praise me to my facebut curse me in their hearts.Interlude

ID:	3093
INPUT:	▁Er rol da tu ▁ho gei ta ▁ha mar ▁ur te tik ▁ber ro gei ta ▁ha mar ▁ar te ko ak ▁, ▁el kar ke ta - e txo la ko ▁zer bi tzu a ▁be te ▁de za ten ▁.
PRED:	He was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he must serve the Tabernacle of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	List all the men between the ages of thirty and fifty who are eligible to serve in the Tabernacle .

ID:	3094
INPUT:	▁Ho ne la ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai en ▁, ▁or du an ▁, ▁Je sus ▁: ▁« ▁Kon tuz ▁! ▁Ez ▁zai tza te la ▁i nork ▁en gai na ▁.
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Do n't let anyone mislead you .
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't let anyone mislead you ,

ID:	3095
INPUT:	▁Moi se sek ▁al da re a ▁e rai ki ▁zu en ▁e ta ▁« ▁Jau na ▁, ▁ni re ▁ban de ra ▁» ▁e zar ri ▁zi on ▁i ze na ▁,
PRED:	So Moses set up the altar of the Lord , and Moses set up camp at the place of worship .
GOLD:	Moses built an altar there and named it Yahweh-Nissi ( which means “ the Lord is my banner ” ) .

ID:	3096
INPUT:	▁Er di mi ne tan ▁ze go e la ▁, ▁e ma gi nak ▁e san ▁zi on ▁: ▁« ▁Ez ▁i zan ▁bel dur ▁; ▁mu ti ko a ▁du zu ▁ber ri ro ▁! ▁»
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid , ” she said . “ Do n't be afraid ! ”
GOLD:	After a very hard delivery , the midwife finally exclaimed , “ Do n't be afraid — you have another son ! ”

ID:	3097
INPUT:	▁Je sus ▁e ta ▁Be el tze bul
PRED:	Jesus and the Prince of Levi
GOLD:	Jesus and the Prince of Demons

ID:	3098
INPUT:	▁Jo an ▁zen ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁Ta mar ▁be re ▁a nai a ▁Am no nen ▁e txe ra ▁; ▁hau ▁o he an ▁ze tzan ▁. ▁Ta mar rek ▁o gi - i ri na ▁har tu ▁, ▁o re a ▁e gin ▁, ▁a nai a ren ▁aur re an ▁o pi lak ▁pres ta tu ▁e ta ▁er re ▁zi tu en ▁.
PRED:	So Amnon took Tamar to Amnon 's house and gave it to Amnon . So Amnon prepared a bed in the palace . So Amnon prepared his brother , and he prepared it before him .
GOLD:	When Tamar arrived at Amnon 's house , she went to the place where he was lying down so he could watch her mix some dough . Then she baked his favorite dish for him .

ID:	3099
INPUT:	▁Moi se sek ▁, ▁Is ra el go ▁ar du ra du ne kin ▁ba te ra ▁, ▁a gin du ▁hau ▁e man ▁zi on ▁her ri a ri ▁: ▁« ▁Be te ▁gaur ▁e ma ten ▁diz ki zu e dan ▁a gin du ▁guz ti ok ▁.
PRED:	So Moses gave this command to the people of Israel : “ Be careful to obey all the commands I am giving you today .
GOLD:	Then Moses and the leaders of Israel gave this charge to the people : “ Obey all these commands that I am giving you today .

ID:	3100
INPUT:	▁A si ri a ko ▁er re ge a ren tzat ▁zi lar - ko pu ru ▁ho ri ▁bil du ▁a hal ▁i za te ko ▁, ▁Is ra el go ▁a be rats ▁guz ti ei ▁zi lar rez ko ▁ber ro gei ta ▁ha mar na ▁txan pon ▁e ma na ra zi ▁zi en ▁, ▁zer ga tzat ▁. ▁A si ri a ko ▁er re ge a ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁gel di tu ▁ga be ▁, ▁be re ▁er rei nu ra ▁i tzu li ▁zen ▁.
PRED:	Then the king of Assyria brought the body of silver to the king of Assyria . He gave it to all the remaining pieces of silver and gold to the king of Israel . He also gave it to the king of Assyria , and he reigned in Israel .
GOLD:	Menahem extorted the money from the rich of Israel , demanding that each of them pay fifty pieces of silver to the king of Assyria . So the king of Assyria turned from attacking Israel and did not stay in the land .

ID:	3101
INPUT:	▁Is ra e li ▁be re ▁gaiz ta ke ri en ▁kon tu a es ka ▁di e zai o dan ▁e gu ne an ▁, ▁Be tel go ▁al da re a ren ▁kon tra e kin go ▁di ot ▁: ▁er tzak ▁a pur tu ko ▁diz ki o te ta ▁lur re ra ▁bo ta ko ▁.
PRED:	The people of Israel will hear their wickedness , and I will send them against their own land . I will wipe them into the dust of their own land .
GOLD:	“ On the very day I punish Israel for its sins , I will destroy the pagan altars at Bethel.The horns of the altar will be cut offand fall to the ground .

ID:	3102
INPUT:	▁e sa nez ▁: ▁“ ▁Hor re la ▁hon do ra tu ko ▁da ▁Ba bi lo ni a ▁, ▁ez ▁da ▁jai ki ko ▁nik ▁bi da li ko ▁di o dan ▁hon da men di tik ▁” ▁» <unk> men ▁a mai tzen ▁di ra ▁Je re mi a sen ▁me zu ak ▁.
PRED:	They will say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : The time of Babylon will come down from Babylon , ' says the Lord .
GOLD:	Then say , ‘ In this same way Babylon and her people will sink , never again to rise , because of the disasters I will bring upon her . ' ” This is the end of Jeremiah 's messages .

ID:	3103
INPUT:	▁Ba zi ren ▁bi ▁e gun ▁Ge da li as ▁hi la ▁ze la ▁, ▁ger ta tu a ren ▁ber ri ▁ar te an ▁i nork ▁ez ▁ja kin ▁ar ren ▁.
PRED:	After this , Jeremiah sent messengers to the city and told them , “ Do n't know what 's happening to you . ”
GOLD:	The next day , before anyone had heard about Gedaliah 's murder ,

ID:	3104
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁dut ▁ge hi a go ▁se me - i ze nik ▁me re zi ▁. ▁Har ▁na za zu ▁zeu re ▁lan gi le e ta ko ▁bat ▁be za la ▁” ▁.
PRED:	I will no longer say , ‘ This is a reward for you . '
GOLD:	and I am no longer worthy of being called your son . Please take me on as a hired servant . ” '

ID:	3105
INPUT:	▁men di ko ▁he gaz ti ▁har ra pa ri en tza te ta ▁ba sa piz ti en tzat ▁uz ten ▁di ra ▁, ▁he gaz ti ▁har ra pa ri ek ▁u da e ta ▁ba sa piz ti ek ▁ne gu a ber tan ▁i ga ro ▁de za <unk> la xe ▁ger ta tu ko ▁da e ti o pi ar re kin ▁e re ▁» ▁.
PRED:	The birds of the sky are like wild animals , and the birds of the wild animals will devour the vultures and wild animals , and the wild animals will be gone . ”
GOLD:	Your mighty army will be left dead in the fieldsfor the mountain vultures and wild animals.The vultures will tear at the corpses all summer.The wild animals will gnaw at the bones all winter .

ID:	3106
INPUT:	▁Zu re ▁tenplu ▁bi kai ne an ▁sar tu ko ▁naiz ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau na ▁, ▁lei a la ▁zu ▁ba kar rik ▁za re la ▁i ra gar ri ko ▁.
PRED:	I will enter the Temple of the Lord your God ; I will sing praises to your name .
GOLD:	I will praise your mighty deeds , O Sovereign Lord.I will tell everyone that you alone are just .

ID:	3107
INPUT:	▁Zu en ▁gor pu ak ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁ba sa mor tu ▁ho ne tan ▁gel di tu ko ▁di ra ▁;
PRED:	Your body will stay in the wilderness , and you will remain in the wilderness .
GOLD:	But as for you , you will drop dead in this wilderness .

ID:	3108
INPUT:	▁I go ▁men di ▁ga rai ▁ba te ra ▁, ▁Si on ▁, ▁al bis te ▁poz gar ri a ▁hots ▁e gi te ra ▁; ▁go ra tu ▁in dar rez ▁a ho tsa ▁, ▁Je ru sa lem ▁, ▁go ra tu ▁bel dur ga be ▁a ho tsa ▁, ▁e san ▁Ju da ko ▁hi ri ei ▁: ▁« ▁He men ▁da ▁zu en ▁Jain ko a ▁!
PRED:	Let Jerusalem shout , “ Shout to Jerusalem ! Let the sound of the great shout , O Jerusalem ! Let the cry out to Jerusalem , O Jerusalem ! The city of Jerusalem be heard , saying , “ It is the city of Jerusalem !
GOLD:	O Zion , messenger of good news , shout from the mountaintops ! Shout it louder , O Jerusalem.Shout , and do not be afraid.Tell the towns of Judah , “ Your God is coming ! ”

ID:	3109
INPUT:	▁« ▁I zan ▁kon tu ▁, ▁be raz ▁! ▁Jau na ▁su a ren ▁er di tik ▁Ho reb ▁men di an ▁min tza tu ▁zi tzai zu e ne an ▁, ▁ez ▁ze nu ten ▁i no la ko ▁i ru di rik ▁i ku si ▁.
PRED:	“ Be careful to keep the mountain of the Lord , when you saw that you were not burning on Mount Sinai .
GOLD:	“ But be very careful ! You did not see the Lord 's form on the day he spoke to you from the heart of the fire at Mount Sinai .

ID:	3110
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁bel dur tu ▁, ▁ez ▁za ra ▁bar re gar ri ▁gel di tu ko ▁; ▁ez ▁lo tsa tu ▁, ▁ez ▁zai tuz te ▁lai do tu ko.A haz tu ▁e gin go ▁du zu gaz te ta ko ▁lo tsai zu na ▁, ▁ez ▁za ra ▁o roi tu ko a lar gun ▁zi ne ne ko ▁lai do az ▁,
PRED:	Do n't be afraid , O Lord , for you will not be disgraced ; you will not be disgraced , and you will not be disgraced , and you will not be disgraced .
GOLD:	“ Fear not ; you will no longer live in shame.Do n't be afraid ; there is no more disgrace for you.You will no longer remember the shame of your youthand the sorrows of widowhood .

ID:	3111
INPUT:	▁Se nar ▁ber ri ak ▁e re ▁, ▁e ma ku me az ▁go gai tu rik ▁, ▁di bor tzi o - a gi ri a ▁i da tzi ▁, ▁e ma ku me a ri ▁e man ▁e ta ▁e txe tik ▁bi dal tzen ▁ba du ▁e do ta ▁se nar ▁ber ri a ▁hil tzen ▁ba da ▁,
PRED:	However , if the woman leaves his house and gives it to the woman , he sent her to her house and sent her back to her house .
GOLD:	But if the second husband also turns against her , writes a document of divorce , hands it to her , and sends her away , or if he dies ,

ID:	3112
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁la gun du ▁ez ▁ba lit ▁, ▁he ri o - i sil pe an ▁nen go ke en ▁da go e ne ko ▁.
PRED:	So the Lord would n't let me watch over .
GOLD:	Unless the Lord had helped me , I would soon have settled in the silence of the grave .

ID:	3113
INPUT:	▁Za bal du ▁ni ri ▁ga rai le en ▁a te ak ▁, ▁Jau na ▁go res te ra ▁sar ▁na din ▁.
PRED:	Let me praise the Lord , for I am praise the Lord .
GOLD:	Open for me the gates where the righteous enter , and I will go in and thank the Lord .

ID:	3114
INPUT:	▁E gip to ko ▁er re ge ak ▁Jo a ka zen ▁a nai a ▁E li a kim ▁e zar ri ▁zu en ▁Ju da ko ▁e ta ▁Je ru sa lem go ▁er re ge ▁; ▁bai na ▁i ze na ▁al da tu ▁zi on ▁, ▁Joi a kim ▁dei tuz ▁. ▁Jo a kaz ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁E gip to ra ▁e ra man ▁zu en ▁pre so ▁.
PRED:	Then the king of Egypt brought him back to the king of Egypt , and he called out to the king of Egypt . He called him back to Egypt , but he called him back to Egypt .
GOLD:	The king of Egypt then installed Eliakim , the brother of Jehoahaz , as the next king of Judah and Jerusalem , and he changed Eliakim 's name to Jehoiakim . Then Neco took Jehoahaz to Egypt as a prisoner .

ID:	3115
INPUT:	▁Ja kin tsu a ren ▁hitz ▁ez ti a ker ra za go ▁a di tzen ▁di ra er ge len ▁bu ru za gi a ren dei a dar rak ▁bai no ▁.
PRED:	A wise person refuses to speak , but the words of the clouds above the clouds .
GOLD:	Better to hear the quiet words of a wise personthan the shouts of a foolish king .

ID:	3116
INPUT:	▁be re ▁i bai a dar re kin ▁, ▁Ar ▁i bar re ra ▁jai tsi e ta ▁Mo a be ko ▁mu ga ▁on do ti ki ga ro tzen ▁de na ▁» ▁.
PRED:	She goes down to the spring of Moab beside the valley of Moab , near the border of Moab . ”
GOLD:	and the ravines that extend as far as the settlement of Ar on the border of Moab . ”

ID:	3117
INPUT:	▁Kan ta ▁. ▁Ko re ren ▁se me en ▁sal mo a ▁.
PRED:	O God , give thanks to the Lord , for he is your God .
GOLD:	How great is the Lord , how deserving of praise , in the city of our God , which sits on his holy mountain !

ID:	3118
INPUT:	▁No na hi ▁jan ▁de za ke zu e ▁zeu ek ▁e ta ▁zu en ▁e txe ko ek ▁. ▁Ho ri ▁da ▁zu en ▁or dai na ▁el kar ke ta - e txo la ko ▁zer bi tzu a ga tik ▁.
PRED:	You may eat meat from your homes and eat it . This is a permanent law for you , and you may return to the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	You Levites and your families may eat this food anywhere you wish , for it is your compensation for serving in the Tabernacle .

ID:	3119
INPUT:	▁Guz ti a ▁al fer rik ▁ze la ▁e ta ▁, ▁gai ne ra ▁, ▁is kan bi la ▁sor tze ra ▁zi ho a la ▁i ku si rik ▁, ▁Pi la tok ▁u ra ▁har tu ▁e ta ▁es ku ak ▁gar bi tu ▁zi tu en ▁jen de a ren ▁aur re an ▁, ▁e sa nez ▁: ▁— ▁Ez ▁naiz ▁gi zon ▁ho nen ▁he ri o tza ren ▁e ran tzu le ▁! ▁Zeu ek ▁i ku si ▁!
PRED:	But when they saw that the man was thrown into the boat , he saw that he was n't dead . Then Pilate said , “ I am not guilty of any people ! ” So Pilate said . “ No , I am here ! ”
GOLD:	Pilate saw that he was n't getting anywhere and that a riot was developing . So he sent for a bowl of water and washed his hands before the crowd , saying , “ I am innocent of this man 's blood . The responsibility is yours ! ”

ID:	3120
INPUT:	▁Ho na ▁he men ▁zein ▁zi ren ▁jen til - her ri ▁hai ek ▁: ▁fi lis te ar ren ▁bost ▁bu ru za gi ak ▁, ▁ka na an dar ▁guz ti ak ▁, ▁si don dar rak ▁e ta ▁Ba al - <unk> mon ▁men di tik ▁Ha ma te ko ▁sar re ra rai no ▁Li ba no ko ▁men di al de an ▁bi zi ▁zi ren ▁hi bi ar rak ▁.
PRED:	These are the nations who lived in the regions of the sea , the Canaanites , Hittites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites .
GOLD:	These are the nations : the Philistines ( those living under the five Philistine rulers ) , all the Canaanites , the Sidonians , and the Hivites living in the mountains of Lebanon from Mount Baal-hermon to Lebo-hamath .

ID:	3121
INPUT:	▁Gu ar di a bu ru ak ▁, ▁gai ne ra ▁, ▁ur re ▁na hiz ▁zi lar ▁hu tsez ko ▁tres nak ▁har tu ▁zi tu en ▁: ▁er rau tson tzi ak ▁, ▁in tsen tsu - on tzi ak ▁, ▁i si pu - on tzi ak ▁, ▁el tze ak ▁, ▁ar gi mu ti lak ▁e ta ▁ka ti lu ak ▁.
PRED:	The captain of the guard , the guard , and all the articles made of pure gold . He overlaid the incense with pure gold , lamp snuffers , lamp snuffers , ladles , and incense .
GOLD:	The captain of the guard also took the small bowls , incense burners , basins , pots , lampstands , ladles , bowls used for liquid offerings , and all the other articles made of pure gold or silver .

ID:	3122
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁ez ▁pen tsa ▁na hi ko a ▁du zu e nik ▁“ ▁Ab ra ha men ▁on do ren go ▁ga ra ▁” ▁e sa te a ▁. ▁E gi a ▁e san ▁, ▁ho na ko ▁har ri ▁hau e ta tik ▁e re ▁a te ra ▁di tza ke ▁Jain ko ak ▁Ab ra ha men ▁on do ren go ak ▁.
PRED:	Do n't say to Abraham , ‘ This is what the Lord says : Because Abraham 's promise , Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob , and Jacob will be his descendants . '
GOLD:	Do n't just say to each other , ‘ We 're safe , for we are descendants of Abraham . ' That means nothing , for I tell you , God can create children of Abraham from these very stones .

ID:	3123
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁zo ri txar ▁e ta ▁a tse ka be ▁i zu gar ri ▁ho ri ek ▁ger ta tze an ▁, ▁kan ti ka ▁hau ▁le ku ko ▁i zan go ▁du te ▁be ren ▁kon tra ▁, ▁on do ren go ek ▁e re ▁go go an ▁e ta ▁a ho an ▁i zan go ▁bai tu te ▁. ▁I zan ▁e re ▁, ▁on do txo ▁da kit ▁zer ▁as mo ▁da ra bil tzan ▁go go an ▁her ri ▁ho nek ▁, ▁zin ▁e gi nez ▁a gin du ta ko ▁lur ral de ra ▁e ra man ▁bai no ▁le he na go tik ▁e re ▁» ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ When you see these things , you will be very angry with them , and you will be very careful to obey all the commands that I am giving you . That is why I am going to this land . ”
GOLD:	And when great disasters come down on them , this song will stand as evidence against them , for it will never be forgotten by their descendants . I know the intentions of these people , even now before they have entered the land I swore to give them . ”

ID:	3124
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁es ka tu ▁e ta ▁har tzen ▁ez ▁ba du zu e ▁, ▁gaiz ki ▁es ka tzen ▁du zu e la ko ▁da ▁, ▁zeu en ▁gri na ▁txar rak ▁a se tze ko ▁.
PRED:	And if you do n't throw away your evil desires , you wo n't throw away your evil desires .
GOLD:	And even when you ask , you do n't get it because your motives are all wrong — you want only what will give you pleasure .

ID:	3125
INPUT:	▁Su ak ▁kis ka li ▁zu en ▁hai en ▁tal de a ▁, ▁gar rak ▁i ren tsi ▁gaiz to ak ▁.
PRED:	He burned down their rage , and they burned down the wicked .
GOLD:	Fire fell upon their followers ; a flame consumed the wicked .

ID:	3126
INPUT:	▁Lo tek ▁Jor dan go ▁i bar ▁o so a ▁hau ta tu ▁zu en ▁be re tzat ▁e ta ▁e ki al de rantz ▁jo ▁. ▁Ho ne la ▁, ▁ba na tu ▁e gin ▁zi ren ▁ba ta ▁bes te a ren gan dik ▁.
PRED:	So Lot left the Jordan River and went out to the east of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	Lot chose for himself the whole Jordan Valley to the east of them . He went there with his flocks and servants and parted company with his uncle Abram .

ID:	3127
INPUT:	▁Guz ti ra ▁, ▁ur re ▁e ta ▁zi lar rez ko <unk> ▁on <unk> ri ▁guz ti a ▁e ra man ▁zu en ▁Xex ba tzar rek ▁, ▁er bes te ra tu ak ▁Ba bi lo ni a tik ▁Je ru sa le me ra ▁i tzu li ▁zi re ne an ▁.
PRED:	He brought all the silver to the Lord , and he gave it to the people of Judah . This is the first message that came to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	In all , there were 5,400 articles of gold and silver . Sheshbazzar brought all of these along when the exiles went from Babylon to Jerusalem .

ID:	3128
INPUT:	▁Ha ser re tzen ▁ba za re te ▁e re ▁, ▁ez ▁hel du ▁be ka tu ▁e gi te rai no ▁; ▁zu en ▁ha ser re ak ▁ez ▁be za ▁e guz ki a ▁sar tu ▁ar te ▁i raun ▁.
PRED:	A fierce anger burns against him , but he was not very angry .
GOLD:	And “ do n't sin by letting anger control you. ” Do n't let the sun go down while you are still angry ,

ID:	3129
INPUT:	▁A pai za ri ▁e ra man go ▁diz ki o ▁. ▁A pai zak ▁bar ka men - o pa ri tzat ▁es kai ni ▁be har re ko a ▁aur kez tu ko ▁du ▁le hen bi zi ▁; ▁bu ru a ▁moz tu ko ▁di o ▁le po - he zur ▁on do tik ▁, ▁bai na ▁e ra bat ▁e rau zi ▁ga be ▁;
PRED:	The priest must present the animal as a sin offering to Aaron . He must present it to the priest , but he must present it to the priest . He must not cut off the animal from the herd of animal .
GOLD:	You must bring them to the priest , who will present the first bird as the sin offering . He will wring its neck but without severing its head from the body .

ID:	3130
INPUT:	▁Bi zi dun ▁o ro ren ▁bis ta tik ▁ez ku tu an ▁da go ▁, ▁ze ru ko ▁he gaz ti en tzat ▁gor de ta ▁.
PRED:	The birds of the sky will fall on the sky , and the birds of the sky will be scattered .
GOLD:	It is hidden from the eyes of all humanity.Even the sharp-eyed birds in the sky can not discover it .

ID:	3131
INPUT:	▁Ha ren ▁se ni de ek ▁e re ▁ez ▁zu ten ▁, ▁hain ▁zu zen ▁, ▁be ra ren gan ▁si nes ten ▁.
PRED:	His brothers and sisters did n't believe him .
GOLD:	For even his brothers did n't believe in him .

ID:	3132
INPUT:	▁El kar ke ta - e txo la ▁e ra ma te ko ▁gur di en ▁es kain tza
PRED:	Building the Tabernacle
GOLD:	Offerings of Dedication

ID:	3133
INPUT:	▁Es nez ▁ha zi ▁zin tuz te dan ▁, ▁ez ▁ja na ri ▁sen doz ▁, ▁hau ▁har tze ko ▁ez ▁bai tzi ne ten ▁o rain dik ▁gau za ▁. ▁O rain ▁e re ▁ez ▁za re te ▁gau za ▁,
PRED:	Do n't let me drink this cup of wine , for you are not worthy of new wine . But now you do n't know how to drink it .
GOLD:	I had to feed you with milk , not with solid food , because you were n't ready for anything stronger . And you still are n't ready ,

ID:	3134
INPUT:	▁Ho nek ▁e ran tzun ▁: ▁— ▁E ne ▁er re ge ▁jau na ▁, ▁en gai na tu ▁e gin ▁nin du en ▁mor roi ak ▁. ▁Nik ▁, ▁zu re ▁zer bi tza ri ▁ho nek ▁, ▁as to a ▁txal ma tze ko ▁a gin du ▁ni on ▁, ▁gai ne an ▁jar ri ▁e ta ▁er re ge a re kin ▁jo a te ko ▁, ▁her re na ▁naiz ▁e ta ▁.
PRED:	“ My lord the king , ” the king told him . “ I will take my donkey , ” he said . “ I will go with you , my lord the king , and I will go with you . ”
GOLD:	Ziba has slandered me by saying that I refused to come . But I know that my lord the king is like an angel of God , so do what you think is best .

ID:	3135
INPUT:	▁Be ti ▁ha ser re ▁e gon ▁be har ▁al ▁du zu ▁gu re kin ▁, ▁men de rik ▁men de ▁ko pe ti lun ▁?
PRED:	Do n't you angry with us ? Do n't you sit on darkness ?
GOLD:	Wo n't you revive us again , so your people can rejoice in you ?

ID:	3136
INPUT:	▁Ho na ▁Jau nak ▁e ne ▁Jau na ri ▁e sa na ▁: ▁« ▁E se ri ▁ni re ▁es kui ne an ▁, ▁zeu re ▁e tsai ak ▁oi naz pi an ▁jar tzen ▁diz ki zu dan ▁bi tar te an ▁» ▁.
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Sit in my right hand and put your feet on your feet . ”
GOLD:	‘ The said to my Lord , Sit in the place of honor at my right handuntil I humble your enemies beneath your feet . '

ID:	3137
INPUT:	▁Hots ▁han di ko ▁hi tzal di ▁hu tsak ▁e gi ten ▁di tuz te ▁e ta ▁gri na ▁li zu nen ▁bi tar tez ▁o ker bi de tik ▁al den du ▁ber ri ak ▁li lu ra tzen ▁.
PRED:	These words are the words of the Lord , and the words of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	They brag about themselves with empty , foolish boasting . With an appeal to twisted sexual desires , they lure back into sin those who have barely escaped from a lifestyle of deception .

ID:	3138
INPUT:	▁Bi tan ▁ba na tu ri ko ▁a pa txak ▁di tuz ten ▁e ta ▁haus nar tzai le ▁di ren ▁a ni ma li a ▁guz ti ak ▁jan ▁di tza ke zu e ▁.
PRED:	You may eat the animal that has split hooves and the cud , and you may eat it .
GOLD:	“ You may eat any animal that has completely split hooves and chews the cud ,

ID:	3139
INPUT:	▁zu ri ▁hau ▁e sa te ko ▁: ▁“ ▁Bar ka tu ▁, ▁me se dez ▁, ▁zu re ▁se ni de en ▁ho be na ▁e ta ▁be ka tu a ▁; ▁kal te ▁e gin ▁di zu te ▁, ▁bai ▁, ▁bai na ▁o rain ▁bar ka tu ▁be rai en ▁ho be na ▁zu re ▁ai ta ren ▁Jain ko a ren ▁zer bi tza ri ▁hau ei ▁” ▁» ▁.Hau ▁en tzu te an ▁, ▁ne gar ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁Jo sek ▁.
PRED:	He said to them , ‘ This is what happened to you and your brothers and sisters . We have done wrong to you , but now we can tell you what is going to do . Let 's happen . Let 's tell us what happened . '
GOLD:	to say to you : ‘ Please forgive your brothers for the great wrong they did to you — for their sin in treating you so cruelly . ' So we , the servants of the God of your father , beg you to forgive our sin. ” When Joseph received the message , he broke down and wept .

ID:	3140
INPUT:	▁Hai en ▁bu ru ▁hi ru ▁mi nis tro ▁e zar ri ▁zi tu en ▁; ▁hau ei ▁e man ▁be har ▁zi e ten ▁es ku al de bu ru ek ▁be ren ▁ad mi nis tra zi o a ren ▁kon tu a ▁, ▁er re ge a ren ▁kal te tan ▁i bil ▁ez ▁zi te zen ▁. ▁Da ni el ▁zen ▁hi ru ▁mi nis tro ▁ho ri e ta ko ▁bat
PRED:	He placed these officials in charge of the king 's officials , and he handed them over to the rest of the events in the province of Dan 's reign . He was not in charge of the reign of Daniel 's reign .
GOLD:	Daniel soon proved himself more capable than all the other administrators and high officers . Because of Daniel 's great ability , the king made plans to place him over the entire empire .

ID:	3141
INPUT:	▁Be re ▁e txe ko ▁guz ti ak ▁be za la ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁Jain ko a ▁gur tzen ▁zu en ▁e ta ▁jain ko za le a ▁zen ▁; ▁li mos na ▁as ko ▁e ma ten ▁ziz ki on ▁ju du - her ri a ri ▁e ta ▁o toitz ▁e gi ten ▁zi on ▁Jain ko a ri ▁o hi ko ▁or du e tan ▁.
PRED:	He built a pagan shrine for all the people of Israel , just as God had done for them . He prayed to the people of Israel , and he prayed to God .
GOLD:	He was a devout , God-fearing man , as was everyone in his household . He gave generously to the poor and prayed regularly to God .

ID:	3142
INPUT:	▁Le bi ren ▁lei nu a ri ▁ez ▁zi on ▁on da re rik ▁e man ▁, ▁Jau na ▁, ▁Is ra e len ▁Jain ko a ▁, ▁bai tzu en ▁on da re ▁, ▁Jau nak ▁be rak ▁hi tze man ▁be za la ▁.
PRED:	The tribe of Levi received no allotment of land , as the Lord , the God of Israel , just as the Lord had promised .
GOLD:	But Moses gave no allotment of land to the tribe of Levi , for the Lord , the God of Israel , had promised that he himself would be their allotment .

ID:	3143
INPUT:	▁bai na ▁e guz ki ak ▁jo ▁or du ko ▁, ▁er re ▁e gin ▁zen ▁e ta ▁, ▁sus trai rik ▁ez ▁zu e la ko ▁, ▁i har tu ▁.
PRED:	But when the sun was gone , the sun fell down .
GOLD:	But the plant soon wilted under the hot sun , and since it did n't have deep roots , it died .

ID:	3144
INPUT:	▁Mo ab
PRED:	Moab Becomes Israel 's Judge
GOLD:	God 's Judgment on Judah and Israel

ID:	3145
INPUT:	▁Jau na ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁a hal guz ti du na ▁, ▁noiz ▁ar te ▁e gon ▁be har ▁du zu ▁ha ser re ▁, ▁her ri a ▁o toiz ka ▁du zun ▁bi tar te an ▁?
PRED:	O Lord God of Heaven 's Armies , will you be angry with you ? Why do you think you are so angry ?
GOLD:	You have fed us with sorrowand made us drink tears by the bucketful .

ID:	3146
INPUT:	▁A rab ▁, ▁Du ma ▁, ▁E xan ▁,
PRED:	Hormah , Hormah ,
GOLD:	Also included were the towns of Arab , Dumah , Eshan ,

ID:	3147
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁be di ▁i nor ▁sar ▁Jau na ren ▁e txe an ▁, ▁zer bi tzal di a ▁du ten ▁a paiz ▁e ta ▁le bi tar rak ▁i zan ▁e zik ▁; ▁ho ri ek ▁sar ▁dai tez ke ▁, ▁sa ga ra tu ak ▁bai ti ra ▁. ▁Bai na ▁gai ne ra ko ▁jen de ak ▁be te ▁de za la ▁Jau na ren ▁a gin du a ▁.
PRED:	No one may enter the house of the Lord , and the Levites may enter the Temple of the Lord . But the priests who serve the Lord as holy as the Lord has commanded them .
GOLD:	Remember , only the priests and Levites on duty may enter the Temple of the Lord , for they are set apart as holy . The rest of the people must obey the Lord 's instructions and stay outside .

ID:	3148
INPUT:	▁« ▁Nik ▁, ▁Je su sek ▁, ▁neu re ▁ain ge ru a ▁bi da li ▁dut ▁e liz ▁el kar te ei ▁me zu ▁hau ▁e ma te ra ▁. ▁Neu ▁naiz ▁Da vi den ▁ki mu a ▁e ta ▁ja tor ri a ▁, ▁neu ▁goi ze ko ▁ar ti zar ▁dis ti ra tsu a ▁» ▁.
PRED:	“ This letter is from the angel of the church , who sent this message to David : I am the Son of David , the one who comes from David . ”
GOLD:	“ I , Jesus , have sent my angel to give you this message for the churches . I am both the source of David and the heir to his throne . I am the bright morning star . ”

ID:	3149
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁her ri ▁as ko ▁e pai tu ko ▁di tu ▁, ▁na zi o ▁in dar tsu en ▁au zi ak ▁e ra ba ki ko ▁, ▁bai ta ▁ur ru ti ko e ne nak ▁e <unk> pa tak ▁gol de ▁bi hur tu ko ▁di tuz te e ta ▁lan tzak ▁i gi tai.Ez ▁da ▁na zi o rik na zi o ren ▁kon tra ▁al txa tu ko ▁, ▁ez ▁di ra ▁ge hi a go gu du ra ko ▁pres ta tu ko ▁.
PRED:	He will judge many nations , and many nations will fight against them . They will fight against them , and no one will fight against them . They will no longer fight against them , and no one will fight against them .
GOLD:	The Lord will mediate between peoplesand will settle disputes between strong nations far away.They will hammer their swords into plowsharesand their spears into pruning hooks.Nation will no longer fight against nation , nor train for war anymore .

ID:	3150
INPUT:	▁Bai na ▁hon dar - me ta ▁ba te an ▁hon do a ▁jo ▁zu ten ▁; ▁bran ka ▁hon dar re tan ▁sar tu a ▁gel di tu ▁zen ▁, ▁mu gi tu ▁e zi nik ▁; ▁txo pa ▁, ▁ber riz ▁, ▁zar ta tuz ▁zi ho an ▁o la tu en ▁kol pez ▁.
PRED:	But when the people of the sea woke up , they dug a hole in the middle of the sea , but a little child could not find it .
GOLD:	But they hit a shoal and ran the ship aground too soon . The bow of the ship stuck fast , while the stern was repeatedly smashed by the force of the waves and began to break apart .

ID:	3151
INPUT:	▁Go re tsa zu e ▁Jau na ▁, ▁na zi o ▁guz ti ok ▁, ▁os pa ▁e za zu e ▁, ▁her ri ▁guz ti ok ▁!
PRED:	Praise the Lord , all the nations of the earth , all the nations of the earth .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord , all you nations.Praise him , all you people of the earth .

ID:	3152
INPUT:	▁Ka ra ba nak ▁bi de tik ▁o ker tu ▁e gi ten ▁di ra ▁: ▁er re ka ▁le hor rei ▁e re mu rantz ▁jar rai tu ▁e ta ▁ber tan ▁gal tzen ▁.
PRED:	They wander from the land of Canaan , and they wander across the dry ground .
GOLD:	The caravans turn aside to be refreshed , but there is nothing to drink , so they die .

ID:	3153
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁er re ge ak ▁e ran tzun go ▁di e ▁: ▁“ ▁Be ne tan ▁di o tsu et ▁: ▁Ni re ▁se ni de rik ▁txi ki en ▁hau e ta ko ▁e do zei ni ▁e gin ▁ze ni o te na ▁, ▁neu ri ▁e gin ▁ze ni da ten ▁” ▁.
PRED:	“ And the king will reply , ‘ I tell you the truth , I tell you the truth , my family , and I will pay attention to my family . '
GOLD:	“ And the King will say , ‘ I tell you the truth , when you did it to one of the least of these my brothers and sisters , you were doing it to me ! '

ID:	3154
INPUT:	▁A gur tu ▁be sar ka da ▁san tu az ▁se ni de ▁guz ti ak ▁.
PRED:	Greet all the brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	Greet all the brothers and sisters with a sacred kiss .

ID:	3155
INPUT:	▁Tenplu ko ▁la gun tzai le ak ▁O fel ▁au za te gi an ▁bi zi ▁zi ren ▁; ▁Tzi ha ▁e ta <unk> pa ▁zi ren ▁hai en ▁bu ru ▁.
PRED:	At that time the Temple of the Lord came out to meet them , and they were young .
GOLD:	The Temple servants , however , whose leaders were Ziha and Gishpa , all lived on the hill of Ophel .

ID:	3156
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁Jain ko ▁Jau na ▁lai no ▁ba te an ▁jai tsi ▁e ta ▁Moi se se kin ▁e gon ▁zen ▁, ▁e ta ▁be re ▁i ze na ▁hots ▁e gin ▁zu en ▁: ▁« ▁Jau na ▁» ▁.
PRED:	Then the Lord came down to the cloud of the cloud and sat down in the cloud . He said , “ The Lord has spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord came down in a cloud and stood there with him ; and he called out his own name , Yahweh .

ID:	3157
INPUT:	▁Di ru za le ke ri a
PRED:	The Descendants of Our Faith
GOLD:	The Futility of Wealth

ID:	3158
INPUT:	▁Jai ▁hai ek ▁bu ka tu rik ▁, ▁ber tan ▁i za ni ko ▁is ra el dar rak ▁Ju da ko ▁hi ri e tan ▁bar re na ▁i bi li ▁zi ren ▁zu tar ri ▁sak ra tu ak ▁haus ten ▁, ▁zu toin ▁sak ra tu ak ▁e ba ki ▁e ta ▁kul tu - le ku ▁e ta ▁al da re ak ▁de se gi ten ▁, ▁de nak ▁sun tsi tu ▁ar te ▁. ▁E ta ▁ho ri ▁be ra ▁e gin ▁zu ten ▁Ben ja min ▁, ▁Ef raim ▁e ta ▁Ma na se sen ▁lur ral de e tan ▁e re ▁. ▁On do ren ▁, ▁is ra el dar ▁guz ti ak ▁nor ▁be re ▁hi ri ▁e ta ▁e txe ra ▁i tzu li ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	So the people of Israel went to the towns of Judah and Judah . They smashed the sacred pillars and smashed the Asherah poles . They smashed the Asherah poles and smashed the Asherah poles of the pagan shrines and burned them in the towns of Ephraim and Benjamin .
GOLD:	When the festival ended , the Israelites who attended went to all the towns of Judah , Benjamin , Ephraim , and Manasseh , and they smashed all the sacred pillars , cut down the Asherah poles , and removed the pagan shrines and altars . After this , the Israelites returned to their own towns and homes .

ID:	3159
INPUT:	▁Ni re ▁jan tzi ak ▁ba na tzen ▁di tuz te ▁, ▁ni re ▁soi ne ko a ▁zotz ▁e gi ten ▁.
PRED:	They will strip off my robe and put them on my clothing .
GOLD:	O Lord , do not stay far away ! You are my strength ; come quickly to my aid !

ID:	3160
INPUT:	▁Zoz ke taz ▁ba na tu ko ▁du zu e ▁lur ral de a ▁lei nu ▁e ta ▁se ni tar te en ▁ar te an ▁: ▁se ni tar te a ▁u ga ri a ▁ba da ▁, ▁on da re - za ti a ▁e re ▁han di a go a ▁e man go ▁zai o ▁, ▁e ta ▁ur ri a ▁ba da ▁txi ki a go a ▁. ▁Se ni tar te ▁ba koi tzak ▁zoz ke tan ▁e go ki tu ri ko ▁on da re a ▁ja so ko ▁du ▁.
PRED:	You must assign the following area to the clans of the tribe of Levi , and the half-tribe of Levi . This is the homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Levi . These are the clans of the tribe of Levi .
GOLD:	You must distribute the land among the clans by sacred lot and in proportion to their size . A larger portion of land will be allotted to each of the larger clans , and a smaller portion will be allotted to each of the smaller clans . The decision of the sacred lot is final . In this way , the portions of land will be divided among your ancestral tribes .

ID:	3161
INPUT:	▁« ▁I ka si ▁pi kon do a ren ▁i ru di ▁ho ne ta tik ▁: ▁ki mu a ▁ber ri tzen ▁e ta ▁hos to a ▁za bal tzen ▁zai o ne ko ▁, ▁ba da ki zu e ▁u da ▁hur bil ▁de la ▁.
PRED:	“ The fig tree will be like a fig tree , and the fruit of the trees will be cut off .
GOLD:	“ Now learn a lesson from the fig tree . When its branches bud and its leaves begin to sprout , you know that summer is near .

ID:	3162
INPUT:	▁Neu re ▁ar te an ▁ni o en ▁: ▁“ ▁Hitz ▁e gin ▁be za ▁a di nak ▁, ▁i ra kats ▁be za te ▁ur te ek ▁ja kin du ri a ▁” ▁.
PRED:	I said to them , ‘ Listen to my words , listen to my decrees . '
GOLD:	I thought , ‘ Those who are older should speak , for wisdom comes with age . '

ID:	3163
INPUT:	▁Is ra el ▁her ri ak ▁, ▁er re ge ak ▁ka su rik ▁e re ▁ez ▁zi o la ▁e gi ten ▁o har tu rik ▁, ▁i har de tsi ▁zi on ▁: ▁« ▁Ez ▁du gu ▁deus ▁e re ▁na hi ▁Da vi de kin ▁! ▁Ez ▁du gu ▁par te rik ▁na hiJe se ren ▁se me a re kin ▁! ▁Zeu en ▁e txo le ta ra ▁, ▁is ra el dar rok ▁! ▁Zain du ▁zeuk ▁zeu re ▁e txe a ▁, ▁Da vid ▁! ▁» ▁Hor re la ▁, ▁ba da ▁, ▁is ra el dar rak ▁be ren ▁e txo le ta ra ▁jo an ▁zi ren ▁.
PRED:	The people of Israel refused to listen to their fellow Israelites , saying , “ We 're not a descendant of David ! We have no interest in the homes of your own family , O Lord , you are your homes ! ”
GOLD:	When all Israel realized that the king had refused to listen to them , they responded , “ Down with the dynasty of David ! We have no interest in the son of Jesse.Back to your homes , O Israel ! Look out for your own house , O David ! ” So the people of Israel returned home .

ID:	3164
INPUT:	▁be re ▁es ku za bal ta su na ren ▁do hai na ko pa ro ▁i su ri ▁di tu ▁gu re ▁gai ne ra ▁, ▁ja kin du ri a ▁e ta ▁e za gu e ra ▁o roz gu ▁hor ni tuz ▁.
PRED:	We will spread our hands on our riches and knowledge and knowledge and knowledge . We have heard everything we need .
GOLD:	He has showered his kindness on us , along with all wisdom and understanding .

ID:	3165
INPUT:	▁e ta ▁han go ▁o gi a ▁ja te an ▁, ▁za ti ▁bat ▁be rei zi ▁e ta ▁Jau na ri ▁es kai ni ko ▁di o zu e ▁.
PRED:	You will eat the bread and drink from the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	and you eat the crops that grow there , you must set some aside as a sacred offering to the Lord .

ID:	3166
INPUT:	▁I bi li ▁Jau na ren ▁bi la ▁, ▁bi zi ▁zai tez <unk> te la ▁, ▁Jo se ren ▁on do ren go en gai ne ra ▁ol dar tu ko ▁da ▁, ▁i tza li ▁e zi ne ko ▁su zi ren tsi ko ▁du ▁Be tel ▁.
PRED:	They will live in the presence of the Lord , and they will live in the fire of the Lord .
GOLD:	Come back to the Lord and live ! Otherwise , he will roar through Israel like a fire , devouring you completely.Your gods in Bethelwo n't be able to quench the flames .

ID:	3167
INPUT:	▁Or du an ▁, ▁or de a ▁, ▁be re ▁bu ru ra ▁hau tsa ▁bo ta ▁, ▁soi ne ko a ▁ur ra tu ▁e ta ▁es ku ak ▁bu ru an ▁zi tu e la ▁, ▁gar ra si ka ▁jo an ▁zen ▁Ta mar ▁.
PRED:	But when the hair of his head was broken , he tore his hands on his head and put it on his head .
GOLD:	But now Tamar tore her robe and put ashes on her head . And then , with her face in her hands , she went away crying .

ID:	3168
INPUT:	▁Di lan ▁, ▁Mitz pe ▁, ▁Jok te el ▁,
PRED:	Mizpah , Dibon , Nebo ,
GOLD:	Dilean , Mizpeh , Joktheel ,

ID:	3169
INPUT:	▁E tsai ak ▁a te e tan
PRED:	Teaching about Revenge
GOLD:	Jerusalem 's Last Warning

ID:	3170
INPUT:	▁Jau nak ▁hau ▁e san ▁dit ▁: ▁« ▁Le hoi ak ▁na hiz ▁le hoi ku me a kor ro ▁e gi ne ze ra so tzen ▁di o ▁har ra pa ki na ri ▁, ▁e ta ▁ez ▁du te ▁bel dur tze naur ka ▁da tor ki o nar tzain - tal de a ren ▁oi hu ek ▁, ▁ez ▁e ta ▁uz kur ra raz ten hai en ▁za la par <unk> la xe ▁e tor ri ko <unk> ▁a hal guz ti du na Si on ▁men di ra ▁, ▁be re ▁men di ra ▁, ▁bor ro ka ra ▁.
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : ‘ The lion 's lion has roared like a lion 's roar , like a lion 's roar , a lion , a lion of sheep , the shepherds , the shepherds of the mountain , and the mountain of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	But this is what the Lord has told me : “ When a strong young lionstands growling over a sheep it has killed , it is not frightened by the shouts and noiseof a whole crowd of shepherds.In the same way , the Lord of Heaven 's Armieswill come down and fight on Mount Zion .

ID:	3171
INPUT:	▁E ta ▁ho ne la ▁ha si ▁zen ▁be re ki ko ▁pen tsa tzen ▁: ▁“ ▁Zer ▁e gin ▁, ▁ez ▁bai tut ▁uz ta ▁non ▁ja so rik ▁? ▁”
PRED:	And when he saw this , he said , ‘ What did I mean ? '
GOLD:	He said to himself , ‘ What should I do ? I do n't have room for all my crops . '

