BLEU:	0.10463585019041179
ID:	0
INPUT:	Baina badut zerbait zure aurka : bere burua profetesatzat duen Jezabel horri utzi egiten diozula bere irakatsiekin nire zerbitzariak engainatzen , Jainkoarekiko desleial izan eta sasijainkoei eskainiriko haragia jatera bultzatuz .
PRED:	But I have something against you . If you do this , you must do this , you must obey my commands and worship other gods and sacrifices to other gods .
GOLD:	“ But I have this complaint against you . You are permitting that woman — that Jezebel who calls herself a prophet — to lead my servants astray . She teaches them to commit sexual sin and to eat food offered to idols .

ID:	1
INPUT:	Roboamen gainerako jarduerak eta egintza guztiak « Judako Erregeen Kronika » liburuan daude idatziak .
PRED:	Now the rest of the acts of Rehoboam , and all that he did , are they written in the book of the kings of Judah ?
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Rehoboam 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .

ID:	2
INPUT:	Palestinatik kanpora ( 11 , 19 — 12 , 25 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	The Church in Antioch of Syria

ID:	3
INPUT:	JERUSALEM ERORI <unk> TEKOA : IT<unk> ROPENA ETA BIZI BERRIA ISRAE<unk> ( 33 , 1 — 39 , 29 )
PRED:	The people of Jerusalem
GOLD:	Ezekiel as Israel 's Watchman

ID:	4
INPUT:	Gure etsaiak eta inguruko herriak , hori jakin zutenean , zeharo harriturik gelditu ziren , eta lan hori gure Jainkoaren laguntzaz egina zela aitortu beharra izan zuten .
PRED:	When our enemies heard this , they were amazed , and when they heard it , they were amazed , and that the work of our God was in our work .
GOLD:	When our enemies and the surrounding nations heard about it , they were frightened and humiliated . They realized this work had been done with the help of our God .

ID:	5
INPUT:	Haiek honela ari ziren beren artean : « Jainkoaren aginduz ari zela esaten badiogu , zergatik ez genion sinetsi erantzungo digu .
PRED:	They said among themselves , “ If we say , ‘ If we say , ‘ If we say , ' then we will not believe him .
GOLD:	They talked it over among themselves . “ If we say it was from heaven , he will ask why we did n't believe John .

ID:	6
INPUT:	Ondoren , Moises Sinai menditik jaitsi zen , legearen bi harlauzak eskuan zeramatzala . Ez zekien aurpegia distiratsu zuenik , Jaunarekin mintzatu izanagatik .
PRED:	And Moses came down from Mount Sinai , and took the two stone tablets of the law , that they might not find the face of the law of the law of the Lord , because of the word of the Lord .
GOLD:	When Moses came down Mount Sinai carrying the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant , he was n't aware that his face had become radiant because he had spoken to the Lord .

ID:	7
INPUT:	« Ez duzu zeure haurrik Molok jainkoaren ohorez hilko , zeure Jainkoaren izena profanatuz . Neu naiz Jauna .
PRED:	“ You shall not kill the gods of your god , but you shall not die by the name of your God . I am the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Do not permit any of your children to be offered as a sacrifice to Molech , for you must not bring shame on the name of your God . I am the Lord .

ID:	8
INPUT:	Etxola Jaia
PRED:	The Passover
GOLD:	Ezra Reads the Law

ID:	9
INPUT:	Haserretu zen faraoia bi zerbitzarion aurka
PRED:	Pharaoh is angry with Pharaoh
GOLD:	Pharaoh became angry with these two officials ,

ID:	10
INPUT:	Balaam zetorrela jakitean , bidera irten zitzaion Balak , Edom lurraldeko muga-ertzean , Arnon erreka ondoan , zegoen Ar hirira ,
PRED:	When Balaam heard that Balaam was coming , he went out to meet Balaam in the valley of Edom , in the valley of Edom , in the valley of Edom ,
GOLD:	When King Balak heard that Balaam was on the way , he went out to meet him at a Moabite town on the Arnon River at the farthest border of his land .

ID:	11
INPUT:	Eguneroko erre-opari horiek belaunez belaun egingo dituzte Jaunaren aurrean , elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran , zurekin mintzatzeko elkartuko natzaizun lekuan .
PRED:	These are the burnt offering in front of the Lord at the entrance of the tent of meeting . I will speak to you in front of the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	“ These burnt offerings are to be made each day from generation to generation . Offer them in the Lord 's presence at the Tabernacle entrance ; there I will meet with you and speak with you .

ID:	12
INPUT:	Baina haiek arren eta arren eskatu zioten : « Geldi zaitez gurekin , berandu baita eta iluna gainean dugu » . Eta herrian sartu zen haiekin gelditzeko .
PRED:	But they said to him , “ Stay with us , for he is with us , and we will stay in the darkness . ” So he went into the land .
GOLD:	but they begged him , “ Stay the night with us , since it is getting late . ” So he went home with them .

ID:	13
INPUT:	oraindik ez baitzitzaien ogiena buruan sartu , adimena itsu zeukaten eta .
PRED:	For he did not enter into the book , but he was blind .
GOLD:	for they still did n't understand the significance of the miracle of the loaves . Their hearts were too hard to take it in .

ID:	14
INPUT:	Orain , beraz , faraoi jauna , hauta ezazu gizon argi eta jakintsua , eta emaiozu aginpidea Egipto guztiaren gain .
PRED:	So now , my lord , the king , have made me wise and wise men , and give him authority over all the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , Pharaoh should find an intelligent and wise man and put him in charge of the entire land of Egypt .

ID:	15
INPUT:	Hain zegoen haserre Jauna Jerusalemen eta Judaren kontra , ezen bere aurretik urruti bota baitzituen . Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosorren kontra jaiki zen Sedekias .
PRED:	And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Jerusalem and Judah , and cast them out before his face , and he rose up from his face , king of Babylon .
GOLD:	These things happened because of the Lord 's anger against the people of Jerusalem and Judah , until he finally banished them from his presence and sent them into exile.Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon .

ID:	16
INPUT:	Onartzazu , beraz , haien eskaria ; baina jakinarazi argi eta garbi , nolako eskubideak izanen dituen beraien gain aginduko duen erregeak » .
PRED:	Therefore , give them food , but give them light , and make them clean ; for the king commanded them to do their right hand . ”
GOLD:	Do as they ask , but solemnly warn them about the way a king will reign over them . ”

ID:	17
INPUT:	Entzun duzue esan dizuedana : “ Banoa , baina itzuliko naiz zuengana ” . Benetan maite baninduzue , poztu egingo zinatekete Aitarengana noalako , Aita ni baino handiago baita .
PRED:	You have heard what I said to you , ‘ I will return to you . ' But if you love me , you will be glad than the Father .
GOLD:	Remember what I told you : I am going away , but I will come back to you again . If you really loved me , you would be happy that I am going to the Father , who is greater than I am .

ID:	18
INPUT:	« Ez duzu zeure amarekin sexu-harremanik izango , zeure ama baita : aita eta ama , biak desohoratuko zenituzke .
PRED:	“ You shall not have sexual relations with your mother 's wife , for she is your father 's mother , mother , and mother , and mother , and mother .
GOLD:	“ Do not violate your father by having sexual relations with your mother . She is your mother ; you must not have sexual relations with her .

ID:	19
INPUT:	paregabeko egun izango da , gaurik gabeko egun , arratsean ere iraungo baitu argiak . Hori noiz gertatuko den , Jaunak bakarrik daki .
PRED:	And it shall be a day without night , and it shall be no rest in the morning : for it shall come to pass by night , and it shall come to pass by night .
GOLD:	yet there will be continuous day ! Only the Lord knows how this could happen . There will be no normal day and night , for at evening time it will still be light .

ID:	20
INPUT:	Odol errugabea isuri zuten , beren seme-alaben odolakanaandar idoloei opari eskainiz : lurraldea odolez busti zuten eta profanatu .
PRED:	And they poured out the blood of the blood of their sons , and poured out the blood of the blood of their sons , and washed the land with blood .
GOLD:	They shed innocent blood , the blood of their sons and daughters.By sacrificing them to the idols of Canaan , they polluted the land with murder .

ID:	21
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun zion : — Aitak aurpegira txu egin izan balio , zazpi egunez lotsatan egon beharko zukeen , ezta ? Beraz , geldi bedi zazpi egunez kanpalekutik urruti ; ondoren , itzuliko da .
PRED:	The Lord said to him , “ If the Father has shut his face for seven days , he will not be ashamed of you for seven days ? Then he will return from the camp seven days . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord said to Moses , “ If her father had done nothing more than spit in her face , would n't she be defiled for seven days ? So keep her outside the camp for seven days , and after that she may be accepted back . ”

ID:	22
INPUT:	Behin batean , Asiriako errege Sargonek bere gudalburu nagusia bidali zuen Axdod-era , eta hark hiriari eraso eta hartu egin zuen .
PRED:	At that time Nebuchadnezzar king of Assyria sent his army to the king of Assyria , and he captured the city and captured it .
GOLD:	In the year when King Sargon of Assyria sent his commander in chief to capture the Philistine city of Ashdod ,

ID:	23
INPUT:	Errege honek ez die izango begirunerik beraren arbasoek gurtu zituzten jainkoei , ez emakumeek begiko duten jainkoari , ezta beste edozein jainkori ere ; jainko guztiak baino handiagotzat joko baitu bere burua .
PRED:	And this shall be no king in the sight of their fathers , nor their fathers served other gods , nor to other gods , nor to other gods , nor to other gods , nor to other gods .
GOLD:	He will have no respect for the gods of his ancestors , or for the god loved by women , or for any other god , for he will boast that he is greater than them all .

ID:	24
INPUT:	Erregeak isekaz darabiltzate , handikiei irri egiten . Gotorlekuek barreguraematen diete , ondoan lur-pilak eginezhartzen baitituzte .
PRED:	And the king shall go forth , and shall go forth to the great men : for they shall go forth , and they shall bring them up upon the earth .
GOLD:	They scoff at kings and princesand scorn all their fortresses.They simply pile ramps of earthagainst their walls and capture them !

ID:	25
INPUT:	Abrahamen morroia , hitzok entzun orduko , lurrean ahuspeztu zen , Jaunari eskerrak emanez .
PRED:	When the servant of Abraham heard these words , he bowed down and bowed down to the Lord .
GOLD:	When Abraham 's servant heard their answer , he bowed down to the ground and worshiped the Lord .

ID:	26
INPUT:	Darioren erregealdiko bigarren urtean , seigarren hilaren lehen egunean , Ageo profetaren bitartez mintzatu zitzaien Jauna Xealtielen seme Zorobabel Judako gobernariari eta Jotzadaken seme Josue apaiz nagusiari .
PRED:	On the first day of the second month , in the second month , in the first month , in the first month , the Lord spoke to Joshua the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel , the priest , and Joshua the priest of Judah .
GOLD:	On August 29 of the second year of King Darius 's reign , the Lord gave a message through the prophet Haggai to Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel , governor of Judah , and to Jeshua son of Jehozadak , the high priest .

ID:	27
INPUT:	Gerraz , gosez eta izurriz erasoko diet . Hori ikustean , lurreko erreinu guztiak ikaraturik geldituko dira : madarikazio eta izu , lotsaizun eta iseka-gai izango dira jaurtiko ditudan nazio guztietan .
PRED:	And I will strike them with the sword , and with the sword , and all the kingdoms of the earth , and all the kingdoms of the earth shall be cursed , and they shall be cursed in all the kingdoms of the earth , and I will cast them into all the nations .
GOLD:	Yes , I will pursue them with war , famine , and disease , and I will scatter them around the world . In every nation where I send them , I will make them an object of damnation , horror , contempt , and mockery .

ID:	28
INPUT:	han ziren Anas apaiz nagusia , Kaifas , Joan , Alexandro eta apaizburuen familietako guztiak .
PRED:	And the high priest was there , Azariah , Jozabad , and Jozabad , and all the chief priests , and the chief priests , and the chief priests .
GOLD:	Annas the high priest was there , along with Caiaphas , John , Alexander , and other relatives of the high priest .

ID:	29
INPUT:	eta erregeari jakinarazi zion oihuka . Erregeak esan zuen : — Bakarrik baldin badator , berri onak dakartza . Lasterkaria hurbildu ahala , ordea ,
PRED:	And the king heard the voice of the king , and said , If only the good news come , the good news is come near .
GOLD:	He shouted the news down to David , and the king replied , “ If he is alone , he has news . ” As the messenger came closer ,

ID:	30
INPUT:	Eduki beti besoan babeskitzat fedea , etsaiaren suzko geziak oro itzali ahal izateko .
PRED:	It is for all the saints for ever , so that the fire of fire may be put to death .
GOLD:	In addition to all of these , hold up the shield of faith to stop the fiery arrows of the devil .

ID:	31
INPUT:	horrela guztien asmo ezkutuak agerian geldi daitezen . Eta zuri ere saminezko ezpatak zulatuko dizu bihotza » .
PRED:	All these things will be revealed in secret , and your heart will be killed by the sword . ”
GOLD:	As a result , the deepest thoughts of many hearts will be revealed . And a sword will pierce your very soul . ”

ID:	32
INPUT:	sugarrez inguraturik agertuko da , Jainkoa aintzat hartu nahi ez eta Jesus gure Jaunaren berri ona onartu nahi ez dutenak zigortzera .
PRED:	And it shall be revealed to those who do not want to receive the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	in flaming fire , bringing judgment on those who do n't know God and on those who refuse to obey the Good News of our Lord Jesus .

ID:	33
INPUT:	Jaunaren erabakiz , burugogorkeriaz lehiatu ziren israeldarrei kontra egiten , israeldarrek errukirik gabe erabat suntsitu eta desegin zitzaten , Jaunak Moisesi agindu bezala .
PRED:	And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord , as the Lord had commanded Moses . And the children of Israel did not sin , as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	For the Lord hardened their hearts and caused them to fight the Israelites . So they were completely destroyed without mercy , as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	34
INPUT:	Hil beharrez eraso izan diot kristau-bide honi , gizon eta emakumeak atxilotu eta kartzelan sartuz .
PRED:	And I died and took him in the Lord , and put him in prison , and put him in prison .
GOLD:	And I persecuted the followers of the Way , hounding some to death , arresting both men and women and throwing them in prison .

ID:	35
INPUT:	Orduan , hazka egiteko teila-puska bat harturik , zabor artera joan zen Job .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when he had forgotten the feast of the feast , that he went out , and went out .
GOLD:	Job scraped his skin with a piece of broken pottery as he sat among the ashes .

ID:	36
INPUT:	Ez dira alferrik nekatuko , ezta ezbeharrez hiltzeko haurrikekarriko ere , Jaunak bedeinkaturikoherria baitira , eta halaxe izangoberaien ondorengoak ere .
PRED:	They will not die in vain , neither will the children of the Lord bless the children of Israel ; for the Lord has blessed them , and they will be their children .
GOLD:	They will not work in vain , and their children will not be doomed to misfortune.For they are people blessed by the Lord , and their children , too , will be blessed .

ID:	37
INPUT:	Hartu zituen Terahek bere seme Abram , bere biloba Lot , Haranen semea , eta bere erraina Sarai , Abramen emaztea , eta kaldearren Ur hiria utzi zuen Kanaan lurraldera joateko . Haranera iritsi zirenean , bertan kokatu ziren .
PRED:	And Abram took his son Lot , his son , Abram 's son , and Abram his wife , and he went out to the land of Canaan . And they came to the land of Canaan . And they came to the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	One day Terah took his son Abram , his daughter-in-law Sarai ( his son Abram 's wife ) , and his grandson Lot ( his son Haran 's child ) and moved away from Ur of the Chaldeans . He was headed for the land of Canaan , but they stopped at Haran and settled there .

ID:	38
INPUT:	Neure santutegia beraien artean betiko jarriko dudanean , orduan jakingo dute nazioek ni naizela Jauna , Israel beretzat sagaratu duena » .
PRED:	Then they will know that I am the Lord , and they will know that I am the Lord , who made Israel holy . ”
GOLD:	And when my Temple is among them forever , the nations will know that I am the Lord , who makes Israel holy . ”

ID:	39
INPUT:	Ura leporaino heldu zitzaidan , itsas leizeak inguratu ninduen , itsas belarrak buruanbildu zitzaizkidan .
PRED:	And the sea came to me , and the sea round about me , and the sea gathered me together .
GOLD:	I sank down to the very roots of the mountains.I was imprisoned in the earth , whose gates lock shut forever.But you , O Lord my God , snatched me from the jaws of death !

ID:	40
INPUT:	Begirada argiak bihotzondoa alaitzen , albiste pozgarriek indarra berritzen .
PRED:	The light has seen the light , and the glory of the wicked is great .
GOLD:	A cheerful look brings joy to the heart ; good news makes for good health .

ID:	41
INPUT:	Ahuspez gaitezen lotsaturik , desohorez beterik ; zeren bekatu egin baitu<unk> naren , geure Jainkoaren , kontrageuk eta geure gurasoekgaztetandik gaurdaino . Ez dugu adituJaunaren , geure Jainkoaren , esana » .
PRED:	Let us fall down to the sea , because they have sinned , because they have sinned against our God , our fathers , and our fathers , and our fathers , have not spoken unto this day .
GOLD:	Let us now lie down in shameand cover ourselves with dishonor , for we and our ancestors have sinnedagainst the Lord our God.From our childhood to this daywe have never obeyed him . ”

ID:	42
INPUT:	Bedeinkazioak
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Blessings for Obedience

ID:	43
INPUT:	Beraz , berri onaren egiaren bidetik zuzen ez zebiltzala ohartu nintzenean , honela esan nion Pedrori denen aurrean : « Zu , judu izanik , jentil bezala bizi baldin bazara eta ez judu bezala , zergatik behartzen dituzu jentilak judu bezala bizitzera ? »
PRED:	When I heard that he was not right , I said to Peter , “ You are Jews , as if you are Jews , do you not live as a Gentiles ? ”
GOLD:	When I saw that they were not following the truth of the gospel message , I said to Peter in front of all the others , “ Since you , a Jew by birth , have discarded the Jewish laws and are living like a Gentile , why are you now trying to make these Gentiles follow the Jewish traditions ?

ID:	44
INPUT:	beste mezu honekin : « Hau dio Jeftek : Israeldarrek ez zuten moabdarren , ez amondarren lurralderik hartu .
PRED:	And he said unto them , Thus saith the children of Israel , The children of Israel did not take the land of Ammon .
GOLD:	“ This is what Jephthah says : Israel did not steal any land from Moab or Ammon .

ID:	45
INPUT:	Senideok , jarrai beza bakoitzak Jainkoaren aurrean , honek deitzerakoan zuen bizi-egoeran .
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , let each man stand before God , as he called in the cloud .
GOLD:	Each of you , dear brothers and sisters , should remain as you were when God first called you .

ID:	46
INPUT:	Gero , Bildotsak zazpi zigiluetarik lehena ireki zuela ikusi nuen , eta lau izaki bizidunetatik lehenengoak trumoi antzeko ahotsez hau esaten zuela entzun nuen : « Zatoz » .
PRED:	And I saw the seven living creatures , and behold , I saw the first living creatures , and I heard the voice of the living creatures , saying , Come , let me go .
GOLD:	As I watched , the Lamb broke the first of the seven seals on the scroll . Then I heard one of the four living beings say with a voice like thunder , “ Come ! ”

ID:	47
INPUT:	Baina kontuak eman beharko dizkiote biziak eta hilak epaitzeko prest dagoenari .
PRED:	But they shall give their life to the dead , and the dead shall be prepared for the dead .
GOLD:	But remember that they will have to face God , who stands ready to judge everyone , both the living and the dead .

ID:	48
INPUT:	Gaiztoak agintean , bidegabekeria ugari ; haien erorketaren lekuko izango zintzoak .
PRED:	The wicked shall be in the way of the wicked , and the righteous shall be in the place of the wicked .
GOLD:	When the wicked are in authority , sin flourishes , but the godly will live to see their downfall .

ID:	49
INPUT:	Beste hamarrak , hori entzutean , bi anaien aurka haserre jarri ziren .
PRED:	And when they heard these things , they were angry with their brethren .
GOLD:	When the ten other disciples heard what James and John had asked , they were indignant .

ID:	50
INPUT:	Judako hirietan eta Jerusalemgo kaleetan poz-alaitasunezko oihuak eta senar-emaztegaien kantuak bukaraziko ditut , lurraldea basamortu bihurtua geldituko baita » .
PRED:	And I will make the noise of joy in the cities of Judah , and in Jerusalem , and in Jerusalem , and in Jerusalem , and in Jerusalem , and in Jerusalem I will make the land desolate .
GOLD:	I will put an end to the happy singing and laughter in the streets of Jerusalem . The joyful voices of bridegrooms and brides will no longer be heard in the towns of Judah . The land will lie in complete desolation .

ID:	51
INPUT:	Zeuen lotsarako diotsuet . Ez ote duzue inor aditurik , senide arteko auziak erabaki ditzakeenik ?
PRED:	I say to you , “ Do n't you be ashamed of your own brothers or sisters ? ”
GOLD:	I am saying this to shame you . Is n't there anyone in all the church who is wise enough to decide these issues ?

ID:	52
INPUT:	Begira ! Iparraldetik ekarriko ditut , lurreko azken mugetatik bilduko . Jendetza izugarria itzuliko da : itsuak eta herrenak ere bai , haurduneta haurra izan berriekin batera .
PRED:	Behold , I will bring them out of the north , and I will gather them from the end of the earth , and the blind , and the blind , and the blind , and the children , and the children , and the children , and the children .
GOLD:	For I will bring them from the northand from the distant corners of the earth.I will not forget the blind and lame , the expectant mothers and women in labor.A great company will return !

ID:	53
INPUT:	Israeldarrak kanpaleku inguruan nor bere tokian zeudelarik , kanpalekukoak lasterka , garrasika eta iheska hasi ziren .
PRED:	And the children of Israel fled round about the camp round about the camp , and fled , and fled .
GOLD:	Each man stood at his position around the camp and watched as all the Midianites rushed around in a panic , shouting as they ran to escape .

ID:	54
INPUT:	Hori esanik , besoa jaso eta bi aldiz jo zuen makilaz harkaitza . Ur-mordoa atera zen , eta jendeak eta abereek edan zuten .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when he had said these things , he lifted up his hand , and went out into the wilderness two times , and the people came out , and they drank .
GOLD:	Then Moses raised his hand and struck the rock twice with the staff , and water gushed out . So the entire community and their livestock drank their fill .

ID:	55
INPUT:	Bitxiok soldaduek guduan nork beretzat harrapatuak ziren .
PRED:	The men of the soldiers were taken by themselves .
GOLD:	All the fighting men had taken some of the plunder for themselves .

ID:	56
INPUT:	Hautsa lurrera itzuliko duk , handik sortua denez . Bizi-arnasa Jainkoarenganabihurtuko duk , berak emana denez .
PRED:	You will return to the earth , and you will be born by the spirit of God . You will become a spirit of life .
GOLD:	For then the dust will return to the earth , and the spirit will return to God who gave it .

ID:	57
INPUT:	Gerora , antxumea igorri zuen Judak Adulamgo adiskidearen bidez , emakumeagandik bahitura jasotzeko , baina ez zuen aurkitu .
PRED:	And Judah sent a young goat from the friend of Judah , to take her out of a young goat , but he did not find her .
GOLD:	Later Judah asked his friend Hirah the Adullamite to take the young goat to the woman and to pick up the things he had given her as his guarantee . But Hirah could n't find her .

ID:	58
INPUT:	eta barkatu gure erruen zorra , guk ere geure zorduneibarkatu diegunez gero ;
PRED:	And we have forgiven our sins , and we have forgiven all the days of our sins .
GOLD:	and forgive us our sins , as we have forgiven those who sin against us .

ID:	59
INPUT:	Hartzailea pobrea bada , ez zarete bahituran harturiko soingainekoaz estaliko gauez ,
PRED:	If you are poor , you will not take your clothes in the night ,
GOLD:	If your neighbor is poor and gives you his cloak as security for a loan , do not keep the cloak overnight .

ID:	60
INPUT:	Tenpluko laguntzaileak eta Salomonen zerbitzarien ondorengo guztiak , 392 lagun .
PRED:	All the sons of Solomon and the sons of Solomon 's servants were three hundred and three hundred and three hundred .
GOLD:	In all , the Temple servants and the descendants of Solomon 's servants numbered 392 .

ID:	61
INPUT:	Astemea , hura ikustean , harresira arrimatu zen , Balaamen berna harresiaren kontra zanpatuz . Balaamek jo egin zuen berriro .
PRED:	And when the donkey saw the donkey , the wall was filled with the wall , and the wall against Balaam . And Balaam struck him again .
GOLD:	When the donkey saw the angel of the Lord , it tried to squeeze by and crushed Balaam 's foot against the wall . So Balaam beat the donkey again .

ID:	62
INPUT:	Jesus etxeratu zenean , ikasleek bakarrean galdetu zioten : — Eta guk , zergatik ezin izan dugu bota espiritu hori ?
PRED:	When Jesus went into the house , his disciples asked him , “ Why did we not cast this spirit out ? ”
GOLD:	Afterward , when Jesus was alone in the house with his disciples , they asked him , “ Why could n't we cast out that evil spirit ? ”

ID:	63
INPUT:	Nik faraoiaren edalontzia nuen eskuan ; mahats-mordoak hartu nituen eta , edalontzi gainean zukuturik , edalontzia faraoiaren eskuetan ezarri nuen .
PRED:	I took the cup of Pharaoh 's cup in his hand , and I took the grapes , and put it on the cup of Pharaoh , and put it in his hand .
GOLD:	I was holding Pharaoh 's wine cup in my hand , so I took a cluster of grapes and squeezed the juice into the cup . Then I placed the cup in Pharaoh 's hand . ”

ID:	64
INPUT:	« Begira arretaz ortziari , so egin zeu baino askoz gorago dauden hodeiei .
PRED:	“ Look at the sun , for you are greater than the stars .
GOLD:	Look up into the sky , and see the clouds high above you .

ID:	65
INPUT:	Joan ziren , bada , eta han aurkitu zuten astakumea ate ondo batean kanpotik lotuta , eta askatzen hasi ziren .
PRED:	So they went and found a donkey standing outside the door of a donkey , and they began to rescue him .
GOLD:	The two disciples left and found the colt standing in the street , tied outside the front door .

ID:	66
INPUT:	Hain indartsua duenez sama , izu-ikaratu egiten du aurrean duen guztia .
PRED:	The strength of his strength is in his sight , and his fear is in his sight .
GOLD:	Who could pry open its jaws ? For its teeth are terrible !

ID:	67
INPUT:	Honela esaten dio Jainkoak faraoiari Liburu Santuan : Honetarako utzi zaitut bizirik : nire ahalmena erakusteko eta mundu osoak nor naizen jakin dezan .
PRED:	God says to Pharaoh , “ I will let you live , and all the world will see my power and my power . ”
GOLD:	For the Scriptures say that God told Pharaoh , “ I have appointed you for the very purpose of displaying my power in you and to spread my fame throughout the earth . ”

ID:	68
INPUT:	Neba-arrebentzat ere higuingarri bada behartsua , nola ez zaizkio , bada , urrunduko lagunak ?
PRED:	If the poor is an abomination to the poor , how can they turn away from the Sabbath ?
GOLD:	The relatives of the poor despise them ; how much more will their friends avoid them ! Though the poor plead with them , their friends are gone .

ID:	69
INPUT:	Pozez beteko zara , eta beste jende asko ere poztuko da haren jaiotzaz ,
PRED:	When you are glad , many will rejoice , and many will rejoice at his feast .
GOLD:	You will have great joy and gladness , and many will rejoice at his birth ,

ID:	70
INPUT:	eta guda-gurdien arduradunek , hura Israelgo erregea ez zela oharturik , atzera egin zuten .
PRED:	And when the captains of the chariots saw that he was not the king of Israel , they went out .
GOLD:	As soon as the chariot commanders realized he was not the king of Israel , they stopped chasing him .

ID:	71
INPUT:	Burugabearekin auzitan hasten den zuhurrak , haserretu nahiz barre egin , ez du atsedenik izaten .
PRED:	A wise man with the fool , and a wise man is angry , and he will not rest .
GOLD:	If a wise person takes a fool to court , there will be ranting and ridicule but no satisfaction .

ID:	72
INPUT:	Hobe gizon zuhurra indartsua baino , eta gizon ikasia ahaltsua baino .
PRED:	A man is better than a man , and a man is better than a man .
GOLD:	The wise are mightier than the strong , and those with knowledge grow stronger and stronger .

ID:	73
INPUT:	« Hau esan ondoren , apurtu egingo duzu pitxerra zurekin doazen gizonen aurrean ,
PRED:	When you say to them , ‘ When you are taken away , you will be baptized with the man who is with you ,
GOLD:	“ As these men watch you , Jeremiah , smash the jar you brought .

ID:	74
INPUT:	Bekatuen barkamenari buruz : elbarriaren sendakuntza
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Jesus Calls Levi ( Matthew )

ID:	75
INPUT:	mintzorik eta hitzik gabe : entzun ezinekoa da haien ahotsa .
PRED:	The voice of a voice and a voice , and they heard their voice , and their voice was heard .
GOLD:	Yet their message has gone throughout the earth , and their words to all the world.God has made a home in the heavens for the sun .

ID:	76
INPUT:	« Hau pentsatu nuen : Bizitzako sasoirik oneneanjoan behar ; Hildakoen Egoitzara naramate , gainerako bizi-urteakkentzen dizkidate .
PRED:	I said to them , “ I will live in the days of life , and they will bring me into the tabernacle of the dead , and they will take away their life from me .
GOLD:	I said , “ In the prime of my life , must I now enter the place of the dead ? Am I to be robbed of the rest of my years ? ”

ID:	77
INPUT:	ez baitu hori beste estalkirik . Zerekin babestuko da , bestela , etzaterakoan ? Laguntza eske deiadar egitean , entzun egingo diot , errukiorra bainaiz ni .
PRED:	For he shall not cover them , but he shall be with them ; and when he cried out , I will hear him , and I will have pity on him .
GOLD:	If you take your neighbor 's cloak as security for a loan , you must return it before sunset .

ID:	78
INPUT:	garesti ordainduz eskuratu baitzaituzte Jainkoak . Goretsazue , bada , Jainkoa zeuen gorputzaz .
PRED:	For God has given you a price of money . Praise him , God is your body .
GOLD:	for God bought you with a high price . So you must honor God with your body .

ID:	79
INPUT:	Utzi lurrean , ostera , zuhaitzondoa bere erroekin , lotu burdinazkoeta brontzezko kateez , eta geldi bedi zelaiko belarretan . Busti beza ortziko ihintzak , janaritu bedi belarrez , abereak bezala .
PRED:	And when they left the earth , all the great multitude of bronze and bronze , they were filled with bronze , so that they could not be filled with bronze , as the dew of the sun , as the dew of the sun .
GOLD:	It had fresh green leaves , and it was loaded with fruit for all to eat . Wild animals lived in its shade , and birds nested in its branches . All the world was fed from this tree .

ID:	80
INPUT:	honela baitzioen berekiko : « Jantzia ukitzen badiot , besterik gabe sendatuko naiz » .
PRED:	He said to himself , “ If I touch my clothes , I will be healed . ”
GOLD:	for she thought , “ If I can just touch his robe , I will be healed . ”

ID:	81
INPUT:	Zuregandik jaio diren , zeuk sortu dituzun seme-alabetariko batzuk ere eraman egingo dituzte , Babiloniako erregearen jauregian zerbitzari izateko » .
PRED:	Some of you will be born from you , and some of your sons will be brought to you . They will serve the king of Babylon . ”
GOLD:	Some of your very own sons will be taken away into exile . They will become eunuchs who will serve in the palace of Babylon 's king . ”

ID:	82
INPUT:	« “ Iparraldeko erregearen semeak gerrarako prestatuko dira , gudaroste handiak bilduz . Seme horietako bat uholde baten antzera sartuko da bere gudariekin hegoaldeko mugetan barrena . Itzultzean , etsaiaren gotorleku bati erasoko dio .
PRED:	“ The sons of the north will be prepared for the king of the north , and all his army will be like a flood in the south side of his army , and they will return to the south side of his enemies .
GOLD:	However , the sons of the king of the north will assemble a mighty army that will advance like a flood and carry the battle as far as the enemy 's fortress .

ID:	83
INPUT:	Urtzen daukat barrena zure tenpluko atarien irrikaz . Bihotza eta naizen guztiapoz-oihuz ari zait , oi Jainko , Jainko bizia .
PRED:	My heart is in the house of the house of thy house , and my heart is glad , and I will rejoice , and I will rejoice .
GOLD:	Even the sparrow finds a home , and the swallow builds her nest and raises her youngat a place near your altar , O Lord of Heaven 's Armies , my King and my God !

ID:	84
INPUT:	Igo zen jendea gobernariaren jauregira eta ohitura zuena emateko eskatu zioten .
PRED:	And the people went up to the king 's house , and asked him to give it to the king 's house .
GOLD:	The crowd went to Pilate and asked him to release a prisoner as usual .

ID:	85
INPUT:	Adoraim , Lakix , Azeka ,
PRED:	And it came to pass , that is , that is , and Ashdod , and Lachish ,
GOLD:	Adoraim , Lachish , Azekah ,

ID:	86
INPUT:	Galdetu zion irenak Feliperi : — Esadazu , mesedez : Nortaz dio hori profetak , bere buruaz ala beste norbaitez ?
PRED:	Philip asked Philip , “ Tell me , tell me , ‘ Who is this prophet , who is a prophet ? '
GOLD:	The eunuch asked Philip , “ Tell me , was the prophet talking about himself or someone else ? ”

ID:	87
INPUT:	Halere , ez nuen egin , baizik eta neure izenaren ohorez jokatu nuen , nire izena belztua izan ez zedin israeldarrak Egiptotik ateratzen ikusi ninduten nazioen artean .
PRED:	But I did not obey my name , but I did not see my name among the nations who brought me out of the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	Nevertheless , I withdrew my judgment against them to protect the honor of my name before the nations that had seen my power in bringing them out of Egypt .

ID:	88
INPUT:	Izu-ikara ezarri baitzuen bizidunen artean , faraoia eta bere gudarostea sinesgabeen artean geldituko dira etzanik , gerran hildakoekin batera . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	For the king put Pharaoh in the midst of the people of the land of Egypt , and all his people shall fall by the sword ; and they shall fall by the sword , saith the Lord God .
GOLD:	Although I have caused his terror to fall upon all the living , Pharaoh and his hordes will lie there among the outcasts who were slaughtered by the sword . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	89
INPUT:	Babilonia , hiriburu krimi<unk> hori ! Bejondeiola , zuk guri eginaren ordaina emango dizunari !
PRED:	The king of Babylon will give you the head of the city , and you will give it to you .
GOLD:	O Babylon , you will be destroyed.Happy is the one who pays you backfor what you have done to us .

ID:	90
INPUT:	Ondoren , egoitzara eraman zuen kutxa eta errezela ezarri itun-kutxa estaltzeko , Jaunak agindu bezala .
PRED:	And he brought the ark into the tabernacle , and put the ark of the covenant of the covenant of the covenant , as Jehovah commanded him .
GOLD:	Then he brought the Ark of the Covenant into the Tabernacle and hung the inner curtain to shield it from view , just as the Lord had commanded him .

ID:	91
INPUT:	Ikaratu zen lurra eta dardaratu , zeruaren oinarriak mugitu , Jainkoaren haserreakbaitzituen astindu .
PRED:	And the earth grew , and the foundation of the heavens , and the foundation of the heavens , because his wrath was kindled .
GOLD:	“ Then the earth quaked and trembled.The foundations of the heavens shook ; they quaked because of his anger .

ID:	92
INPUT:	Erregearen agindu zorrotzaren arabera labea bizi-bizi piztu baitzuten , Xadrak , Mexak eta Abed-Nego jaurtitzeko labera hurbildu ziren gudariak berak suak kiskalita hil ziren .
PRED:	They came to the king 's commandment , as the king had commanded them to live , Meshach , Meshach , Meshach , and Meshach . They came to the fire of the king .
GOLD:	And because the king , in his anger , had demanded such a hot fire in the furnace , the flames killed the soldiers as they threw the three men in .

ID:	93
INPUT:	Aitak maiteago zuela ikusirik , anaiak gorrotatzen hasi zitzaizkion eta hitza bera ere ukatu egiten zioten .
PRED:	When the Father saw that the Father loved him , his brothers hate him , and they followed him .
GOLD:	But his brothers hated Joseph because their father loved him more than the rest of them . They could n't say a kind word to him .

ID:	94
INPUT:	Baina Jauna erne zegoen juduen arduradunak zaintzeko eta ez zizkieten lanak geldiarazi , harik eta Dariogana txostena bidali eta honen erantzuna jaso arte .
PRED:	But the elders of the Jews refused to keep the guard of the Jews , so that they could not be left until the time that the Lord had sent them , and he sent them back to this book .
GOLD:	But because their God was watching over them , the leaders of the Jews were not prevented from building until a report was sent to Darius and he returned his decision .

ID:	95
INPUT:	Mikaren etxean zeudelarik , lebitar gaztearen ahotsa ezagutu zuten eta , berarengana zuzenduz , galdetu zioten : — Nork ekarri zaitu hona ? Zer ari zara ? Zertan zabiltza hemen ?
PRED:	And when they were in the house of the young Levite , they heard the voice of the young man , and said unto him , Who hath brought thee to him , and who hath brought thee to him ? and who hath brought thee here ?
GOLD:	While at Micah 's house , they recognized the young Levite 's accent , so they went over and asked him , “ Who brought you here , and what are you doing in this place ? Why are you here ? ”

ID:	96
INPUT:	« Hartu gantzuketa-olioa eta isuri egoitzaren eta bertan dagoen guztiaren gainera . Honela sagaratuko duzu bere tresna guztiekin , eta toki sakratua izango da .
PRED:	And thou shalt take the anointing oil , and the anointing oil , and the anointing oil , and all that is in it ; and thou shalt make it holy .
GOLD:	“ Take the anointing oil and anoint the Tabernacle and all its furnishings to consecrate them and make them holy .

ID:	97
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : « Profeta bati edonon ematen zaio ohore , bere herri , senitarte eta etxean izan ezik » .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ This man is a prophet and a prophet who has been given to his own people and to his house . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus told them , “ A prophet is honored everywhere except in his own hometown and among his relatives and his own family . ”

ID:	98
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun zion : — Bai , barkatzen diot , zuk eskatu bezala .
PRED:	And the Lord said unto him , I pray thee , I pray thee , as thou hast asked .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said , “ I will pardon them as you have requested .

ID:	99
INPUT:	Handik Efraimgo mendialdera jo zuten eta Mikaren etxera heldu ziren .
PRED:	And they went up to the hill country of Ephraim , and came to the house of Micah .
GOLD:	Then they went on from there into the hill country of Ephraim and came to the house of Micah .

ID:	100
INPUT:	Horregatik ahalegintzen naiz ni ere , neure kontzientzia Jainkoaren eta gizonen aurrean beti garbi gordetzen .
PRED:	Therefore I have kept my commandments , and I am clean in the sight of God and in the sight of man .
GOLD:	Because of this , I always try to maintain a clear conscience before God and all people .

ID:	101
INPUT:	Biharamunean Salomonek bidali egin zuen herria . Jendea , erregea agurtu ondoren , bere etxeetara itzuli zen , alai eta bihotza bozkarioz betea zuela , Jaunak bere zerbitzari Davidi eta bere herri Israeli egin zien on guztiarengatik .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the next day , that Solomon sent the people away , that the king returned to his house , and returned to his house , and was glad in joy , and with joy , and with joy , and with joy , and with joy , and with all his people Israel .
GOLD:	After the festival was over , Solomon sent the people home . They blessed the king and went to their homes joyful and glad because the Lord had been good to his servant David and to his people Israel .

ID:	102
INPUT:	Hiru adoretsuek , filistearren gudari-tokira sartu , Belengo atean dagoen urtegitik ura atera eta eraman zioten Davidi . Honek , ordea , ez zuen edan nahi izan , eta isuri egin zuen Jaunarentzako eskaintza bezala .
PRED:	And the three mighty men went into the place of the Philistines , and brought him out of Bethlehem , and brought him out of Bethlehem , and brought him out of Bethlehem , but he would not drink , as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	So the Three broke through the Philistine lines , drew some water from the well by the gate in Bethlehem , and brought it back to David . But he refused to drink it . Instead , he poured it out as an offering to the Lord .

ID:	103
INPUT:	Hau dio Jaun ahalguztidunak : « Israeldarrok , ez egin jaramonikprofeta hauen hitzari , amets hutsalezbetetzen baitizuete burua . Beraien kasketako irudipenakazaltzen dizkizueteeta ez nik agindutakoak .
PRED:	Thus says the Lord of hosts : “ Israel , do n't listen to their words , for they have a dream , for they have a dream to teach you , and do not obey the commandments of the prophets .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says to his people : “ Do not listen to these prophets when they prophesy to you , filling you with futile hopes.They are making up everything they say.They do not speak for the Lord !

ID:	104
INPUT:	eta morroiari galdegin : — Nor da landan zehar bidera datorkigun gizon hori ? Morroiak erantzun : — Ene nagusia . Orduan , Rebekak bere aurpegia estali zuen zapi batez .
PRED:	And she said unto his servant , Who is this man who came into the field ? And she said , My lord , my lord , my lord , I pray thee for seven days .
GOLD:	“ Who is that man walking through the fields to meet us ? ” she asked the servant.And he replied , “ It is my master . ” So Rebekah covered her face with her veil .

ID:	105
INPUT:	Hona ekarri dituzuen gizon hauek ez dira gure jainkosaren kontrako sakrilego , ez biraolari .
PRED:	This is the same thing that you have brought to us , and they do not do wrong against our gods .
GOLD:	You have brought these men here , but they have stolen nothing from the temple and have not spoken against our goddess .

ID:	106
INPUT:	Bere indar guztiekin hegoaldeko erreinuaz jabetzea erabakiko du . Horretarako , hegoaldeko erregearekin hitzarmena egingo du , alaba emaztetzat emanez , haren erreinua hondatzeko asmoz ; baina ez du lortuko bere xedea .
PRED:	And he shall take possession of his power , and his kingdom shall be given to the king of the south : and he shall make a covenant with the king of the south , and his daughter shall not enter into his kingdom .
GOLD:	He will make plans to come with the might of his entire kingdom and will form an alliance with the king of the south . He will give him a daughter in marriage in order to overthrow the kingdom from within , but his plan will fail .

ID:	107
INPUT:	Tronu handi zuri bat ikusi nuen , baita bertan eseria zegoena ere ; beronen aurretik ihes egin zuten lurrak eta zeruak eta aztarnarik utzi gabe desagertu .
PRED:	And I saw a great throne , and there was a great throne sitting there ; and the earth fled before him , and the heavens and the earth were not destroyed .
GOLD:	And I saw a great white throne and the one sitting on it . The earth and sky fled from his presence , but they found no place to hide .

ID:	108
INPUT:	Bilatu eta inon ez dituzu aurkitukoborroka egiten zizutenak ; ezerez eta huts bihurtuko diragerra egiten zizutenak .
PRED:	When you find them , they will not find them , and they will be turned away , and they will be turned away .
GOLD:	You will look in vainfor those who tried to conquer you.Those who attack youwill come to nothing .

ID:	109
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak esan zion Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	110
INPUT:	Abrahamek guduan harrapatutako guztiaren hamarrenak eman zizkion orduan . Alde batetik , Melkisedek izenak « Justizi errege » esan nahi du ; eta , bestetik , Salemgo errege zen , hau da , « Bake-errege » .
PRED:	And Abraham gave him all the spoil that he had taken in the battle . And he said to him , “ He is the king of Judah . ”
GOLD:	Then Abraham took a tenth of all he had captured in battle and gave it to Melchizedek . The name Melchizedek means “ king of justice , ” and king of Salem means “ king of peace . ”

ID:	111
INPUT:	Senideok , pikondoak ematen ote du olibarik , edota mahatsondoak pikurik ? Iturri gaziak ez dezake ur gezarik eman .
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , if the fig tree is planted , and the fig tree is not given to drink .
GOLD:	Does a fig tree produce olives , or a grapevine produce figs ? No , and you ca n't draw fresh water from a salty spring .

ID:	112
INPUT:	Paulok egina ikustean , oihuka hasi zen jendea Likaoniako hizkuntzan : « Jainkoak jaitsi zaizkigu geure artera giza itxuran ! »
PRED:	When Paul saw what he had done , he cried out to the crowd of Galilee , saying , “ God has come down to us with a man . ”
GOLD:	When the crowd saw what Paul had done , they shouted in their local dialect , “ These men are gods in human form ! ”

ID:	113
INPUT:	Orduan , Tamar , alargun-soinekoak erantzi eta , inork ez antzemateko bere burua zapiz estalirik , Timna bidean dagoen Enaim hiriko sarreran jarri zen . Izan ere , Xela handi egin zela ikusten zuen , baina ez ziotela senartzat ematen .
PRED:	Then Tamar put on her garments , and she put on her garments , and no one followed her in the entrance of the city of Hamath , for she was very great , but she did not see her husband .
GOLD:	Tamar was aware that Shelah had grown up , but no arrangements had been made for her to come and marry him . So she changed out of her widow 's clothing and covered herself with a veil to disguise herself . Then she sat beside the road at the entrance to the village of Enaim , which is on the road to Timnah .

ID:	114
INPUT:	Gogoan izan Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak egintza guztietan bedeinkatu zaituztela eta basamortu izugarri honetan egin duzuen ibilaldiaz arduratu dela ; zeuekin izan duzue berrogei urte hauetan eta ez zaizue ezer falta izan .
PRED:	Remember that the Lord your God has blessed you in all your works and in the wilderness , and in the wilderness he has chosen you in the wilderness . You have been with you for forty years and forty years .
GOLD:	For the Lord your God has blessed you in everything you have done . He has watched your every step through this great wilderness . During these forty years , the Lord your God has been with you , and you have lacked nothing . ” '

ID:	115
INPUT:	« Eman dezagun gizon batek bi emazte dituela eta bata bestea baino maiteago duela , eta , batak zein besteak seme-alabak eman dizkion arren , gutxiago maite duenarena dela lehen-semea .
PRED:	“ Let a man give her two wives , and one is more than the other , and one is more than the other , and the other children are greater than the firstborn .
GOLD:	“ Suppose a man has two wives , but he loves one and not the other , and both have given him sons . And suppose the firstborn son is the son of the wife he does not love .

ID:	116
INPUT:	Izan ere , zapaltzailea hilko da , harroputza galduko , kalte egiteko erne dabiltzanakakabatuko :
PRED:	For he will die , and he will die ; he will forgive his body , and he will forgive him .
GOLD:	The scoffer will be gone , the arrogant will disappear , and those who plot evil will be killed .

ID:	117
INPUT:	Orduan , Xuaheko Bildadek hitz egin zuen :
PRED:	Then Bildad the son of Hallohesh answered ,
GOLD:	Then Bildad the Shuhite replied :

ID:	118
INPUT:	Hiriaren perimetroa bederatzi kilometrokoa izango da . « Aurrerantzean , “ Jauna bertan dago ” deituko da hiria » .
PRED:	And the breadth of the city shall be the breadth of the city : and when he said , The city shall be called the Lord .
GOLD:	“ The distance around the entire city will be 6 miles . And from that day the name of the city will be ‘ The Lord Is There . ' ”

ID:	119
INPUT:	baita bere egoitza Axtarot eta Edrei hirietan zuen Baxango Og erregearen erreinu osoa ere . Og erregea zen antzinako refatar erraldoietatik gelditutako bakarra . Moisesek garaitu egin zituen bi erregeak eta beren lurraldeetatik bota .
PRED:	and all the kingdom of Og king of Bashan , and all the kingdom of Og king of Bashan , which was left in the land of the Amorites , and he cast them out of their land , and cast them out of their land .
GOLD:	and all the territory of King Og of Bashan , who had reigned in Ashtaroth and Edrei . King Og was the last of the Rephaites , for Moses had attacked them and driven them out .

ID:	120
INPUT:	berria eman zioten : « Bizi da Jose oraindik eta bera da agintari Egipto lurralde osoan » . Jakobek , halaz guztiz , ez zuen zirkinik ere egin , ezin sinetsirik .
PRED:	They told him , “ Joseph is still still alive in the land of Egypt . ” So Jacob did not believe it .
GOLD:	“ Joseph is still alive ! ” they told him . “ And he is governor of all the land of Egypt ! ” Jacob was stunned at the news — he could n't believe it .

ID:	121
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Hondaturiko hiri bihurtuko zaitudanean — jenderik gabeko hiriak bezala — , itsas leizea zure aurka altxarazi eta ur handiek estaliko zaituztenean ,
PRED:	Thus says the Lord God : “ When you are desolate , you will become a city , like the cities of the sea , and the sea will rise up against you , and the waters of the sea will rise up against you .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will make Tyre an uninhabited ruin , like many others . I will bury you beneath the terrible waves of enemy attack . Great seas will swallow you .

ID:	122
INPUT:	Beraz , Israel lurralde osoan neska gazte polit baten bila ibili ondoren , Abixag aurkitu zuten , Xunemgoa , eta bera eraman zioten erregeari .
PRED:	So they sent to the king all the land of Israel , and they found the young women in the land , and brought her to the king .
GOLD:	So they searched throughout the land of Israel for a beautiful girl , and they found Abishag from Shunem and brought her to the king .

ID:	123
INPUT:	Odol-beroak liskarra sorrarazten , suminkorrak bekatuak ugaltzen .
PRED:	The soul of the soul of the poor shall be multiplied , and the sin of the wicked shall be multiplied .
GOLD:	An angry person starts fights ; a hot-tempered person commits all kinds of sin .

ID:	124
INPUT:	Emakumeek , alai dantzatuz , honela kantatzen zuten , batzuek besteei erantzunez : « Saulek mila hil , Davidek hamar mila ! »
PRED:	When the women were glad , some of them shouted , “ Saul killed ten thousand thousand thousand thousand thousand thousand . ”
GOLD:	This was their song : “ Saul has killed his thousands , and David his ten thousands ! ”

ID:	125
INPUT:	Ez zen aurretik izan , ezta geroztik ere izango , egun hura bezalakorik : egun hartan Jaunak gizon baten esana egin zuen , Israelen alde borrokan ari baitzen Jauna .
PRED:	There was no sword in front of them like a day . It was like a man who did what the Lord had commanded him to fight for Israel .
GOLD:	There has never been a day like this one before or since , when the Lord answered such a prayer . Surely the Lord fought for Israel that day !

ID:	126
INPUT:	Orduan , Balakek esan zion Balaami : — Baina , zer egin didazu ? Etsaiak madarikatzeko ekarri , eta zuk bedeinkazioz bete ?
PRED:	Balaam said to Balak , “ What did you do to me ? Bring them to their enemies , and you bless them ? ”
GOLD:	Then King Balak demanded of Balaam , “ What have you done to me ? I brought you to curse my enemies . Instead , you have blessed them ! ”

ID:	127
INPUT:	Ez gara geure buruak predikatzen ari , Jesu Kristo Jauna dela baizik , eta gu ez gara zuen zerbitzari besterik Jesusen maitasunagatik .
PRED:	We do not obey our own bodies , but we are the Lord Jesus Christ , and we are not a servant of Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	You see , we do n't go around preaching about ourselves . We preach that Jesus Christ is Lord , and we ourselves are your servants for Jesus ' sake .

ID:	128
INPUT:	Josek esan zien : — Baina , zer egin duzue ? Ez al zenekiten ni bezalako batek den-dena igar dezakeela ?
PRED:	Then Joseph said to them , “ What do you do ? Do n't you know that I am going to weep like a few days ? ”
GOLD:	“ What have you done ? ” Joseph demanded . “ Do n't you know that a man like me can predict the future ? ”

ID:	129
INPUT:	Inguruko eskualdeetako jendeaberaren kontra altxatu zen ; sarea bota zioten gaineraeta beren zuloan harrapatu .
PRED:	And the people of the land round about him against him , and they cast down the net upon him , and they took him in their net .
GOLD:	Then the armies of the nations attacked him , surrounding him from every direction.They threw a net over himand captured him in their pit .

ID:	130
INPUT:	Bihozberritu ala hil
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	A Call to Repentance

ID:	131
INPUT:	Orduan , Isaias profetak otoitz egin zion Jaunari eta ordurako jaitsiak zituen hamar mailak berriro igoarazi zizkion Jaunak itzalari Akazen mailadian .
PRED:	Then Isaiah the prophet prayed to the Lord , and he brought the ten prophets who had come down from the Lord 's presence .
GOLD:	So Isaiah the prophet asked the Lord to do this , and he caused the shadow to move ten steps backward on the sundial of Ahaz !

ID:	132
INPUT:	bera da suge pozoitsu eta eskorpi<unk> beteriko basamortu handi eta ikaragarritik , ur-tantarik gabeko eremu elkor horretatik , eraman zaituztena ; bera , suharritik ura atera eta edaten eman dizuena ;
PRED:	He is the king of the wilderness , a great kingdom , a great kingdom , and a great nation , and a great nation , and brought you out of the wilderness ; and he brought you out of the rock , and gave you water to drink .
GOLD:	Do not forget that he led you through the great and terrifying wilderness with its poisonous snakes and scorpions , where it was so hot and dry . He gave you water from the rock !

ID:	133
INPUT:	Gure arnasberritzailea , Jaunak gantzuturiko erregea , preso erori da etsaiaren sarean . Herrien artean haren gerizpean biziko ginela uste genuen .
PRED:	The king of our old , the king of our enemies , and the Lord is our enemy , and we thought that he is among the nations .
GOLD:	Our king — the Lord 's anointed , the very life of our nation — was caught in their snares.We had thought that his shadowwould protect us against any nation on earth !

ID:	134
INPUT:	Abiatu zen , bada , David bere gizonekin Keilarantz eta oldartu zitzaien filistearrei . Haien abere-taldeak hartu eta izugarrizko sarraskia egin zien . Horrela salbatu zituen Davidek Keilako bizilagunak .
PRED:	So David and his men went up to Keilah , and fought against the Philistines . And David took their flocks and their flocks , and he saved them , because David saved them .
GOLD:	So David and his men went to Keilah . They slaughtered the Philistines and took all their livestock and rescued the people of Keilah .

ID:	135
INPUT:	Handik denboraldi batera Jaunak esan zidan : « Zoaz Eufrates ibaira eta hartu han gordetzeko agindu nizun gerrikoa » .
PRED:	After a long time , the Lord said to me , “ Go into the river River River , and take it there . ”
GOLD:	A long time afterward the Lord said to me , “ Go back to the Euphrates and get the loincloth I told you to hide there . ”

ID:	136
INPUT:	Ez dute gorpurik ukituko , kutsa ez daitezen , aita edo amarena , seme edo alabarena , anaia edo ezkongabeko arrebarena izan ezik .
PRED:	They shall not touch their body , neither shall they touch their father , nor their father , nor his brother , nor his brother , nor his brother , nor his brother , nor his brother .
GOLD:	“ A priest must not defile himself by being in the presence of a dead person unless it is his father , mother , child , brother , or unmarried sister . In such cases it is permitted .

ID:	137
INPUT:	Jakobek , orduan : — Ez da jaitsiko nire semea zuekin , hila baitu bere anaia eta bera bakarrik gelditzen zait Rakelengandik . Bidean zoritxarren bat gertatuko balitzaio , agure hau Hildakoen Egoitzara jaitsaraziko zenukete atsekabez .
PRED:	Jacob said to them , “ No , my son will not come down with me , because he is dead , because he is dead , and he is left of Rachel . If he is dead , you will be put to shame . ”
GOLD:	But Jacob replied , “ My son will not go down with you . His brother Joseph is dead , and he is all I have left . If anything should happen to him on your journey , you would send this grieving , white-haired man to his grave . ”

ID:	138
INPUT:	Egin otoitz gizon oker eta gaiztoengandik gu onik atera gaitezen ere , ez baitira denak leialak .
PRED:	We pray , and we will not go out from the evil man , because we are not faithful .
GOLD:	Pray , too , that we will be rescued from wicked and evil people , for not everyone is a believer .

ID:	139
INPUT:	Nik , Paulok , Jainkoak hala nahirik , Kristo Jesusen bidez agindu zaigun bizia iragartzeko Jesu Kristoren apostolu naizen honek ,
PRED:	Paul , by the will of God , that I may proclaim the word of Jesus Christ Jesus , to proclaim the life of Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , chosen by the will of God to be an apostle of Christ Jesus . I have been sent out to tell others about the life he has promised through faith in Christ Jesus .

ID:	140
INPUT:	Bekatuarekin zerikusirik ez zuen hura , guregatik bekatuarekin bat egin zuen Jainkoak , guk haren bitartez Jainkoarengandik salbamena irits dezagun .
PRED:	And when he saw that he was not with sin , he made a sin with us , so that we may be saved from God .
GOLD:	For God made Christ , who never sinned , to be the offering for our sin , so that we could be made right with God through Christ .

ID:	141
INPUT:	Saul , asto galduen bila
PRED:	Saul Complains to Pilate
GOLD:	Saul Meets Samuel

ID:	142
INPUT:	Heriotza dakarren eztena bekatua da , eta bekatuak legetik hartzen du bere indarra .
PRED:	The death of death is sin , and the law is sin from his power .
GOLD:	For sin is the sting that results in death , and the law gives sin its power .

ID:	143
INPUT:	asmo txarretan dabilen burua , gaiztakeria egiteko presa duten oinak ,
PRED:	Those who do evil things are evil , but those who do evil things are evil .
GOLD:	a heart that plots evil , feet that race to do wrong ,

ID:	144
INPUT:	Ardi galduaren gisa desbideratuko banintz , bilatu zuk zeure zerbitzari hau , ez baititut zure aginduak ahazten .
PRED:	I will turn away from your servant 's sheep , for I have not forgotten your commandments .
GOLD:	I have wandered away like a lost sheep ; come and find me , for I have not forgotten your commands .

ID:	145
INPUT:	Hari batetik zintzilik bezala biziko zarete , gau eta egun dardaraz , bizitzaz ere etsita .
PRED:	You will live as if you are dead , and you will live by night and night .
GOLD:	Your life will constantly hang in the balance . You will live night and day in fear , unsure if you will survive .

ID:	146
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Gainera , laguntza eske niregana etortzen utziko diet israeldarrei eta artaldea bezala ugalaraziko ditut .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord God says : I will let the people of Israel go to me , as sheep and sheep .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am ready to hear Israel 's prayers and to increase their numbers like a flock .

ID:	147
INPUT:	Uholdearen aurretik , jan-edanean ziharduen eta ezkondu egiten zen jendea , Noe ontzian sartu zen arte ;
PRED:	And when the people ate and drank , they took her , and went into the boat until the waters came into the boat .
GOLD:	In those days before the flood , the people were enjoying banquets and parties and weddings right up to the time Noah entered his boat .

ID:	148
INPUT:	Begira Babiloniari : galdua da herria . Basapiztien menpe utzi du Asiriak ; eraso-dorreak altxaturik , jauregiak desegin dizkioeta lurraldeahondakin-pila bihurtu .
PRED:	Look ! The people of Babylon has been destroyed . The people of Assyria has left the wild animals of the earth . He has destroyed the walls of the earth . He has destroyed its walls and destroyed it .
GOLD:	Look at the land of Babylonia — the people of that land are gone ! The Assyrians have handed Babylon overto the wild animals of the desert.They have built siege ramps against its walls , torn down its palaces , and turned it to a heap of rubble .

ID:	149
INPUT:	Gainera , hildakoen piztueraz , ez al duzue irakurri Jainkoak berak esan zizuena :
PRED:	But if you read not the resurrection of the dead , God said to you ,
GOLD:	“ But now , as to whether there will be a resurrection of the dead — have n't you ever read about this in the Scriptures ? Long after Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob had died , God said ,

ID:	150
INPUT:	Pedro sartzera zihoala , Kornelio bidera atera zitzaion eta oinetara ahuspeztu .
PRED:	When Peter went into the room , Peter went out to meet him and bowed down to his feet .
GOLD:	As Peter entered his home , Cornelius fell at his feet and worshiped him .

ID:	151
INPUT:	Ezin izan zion inork erantzun , eta egun hartatik aurrera ez zen inor ausartu galderarik egiten .
PRED:	There was no one to answer him , and there was no one to ask him that day .
GOLD:	No one could answer him . And after that , no one dared to ask him any more questions .

ID:	152
INPUT:	errudunari diru-trukearrazoi emateneta errugabeari zuzenbideaukatzen diozuenok !
PRED:	You who are guilty of the innocent , and you who are innocent .
GOLD:	They take bribes to let the wicked go free , and they punish the innocent .

ID:	153
INPUT:	Joan nintzen eta gorde nuen Jaunak agindutako tokian .
PRED:	Then I went to the place where the Lord had commanded me .
GOLD:	So I went and hid it by the Euphrates as the Lord had instructed me .

ID:	154
INPUT:	goizeko argia bezain distiratsu egingo du zure zuzentasuna , eguerdiko eguzkia bezain argitsu zure zuzenbidea .
PRED:	Your righteousness will be like the morning , and your righteousness will be like the sun , and your righteousness will be like the sun .
GOLD:	He will make your innocence radiate like the dawn , and the justice of your cause will shine like the noonday sun .

ID:	155
INPUT:	Maitasunaren agindua
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The World 's Hatred

ID:	156
INPUT:	Neure mendi santuaren inguruan ezarriko ditut eta sasoian sasoiko euria bidaliko diet , neure bedeinkazioaren ezaugarri .
PRED:	And I will set my holy mountain round about my holy mountain , and I will send rain upon my holy mountain , and I will bless my blessing .
GOLD:	I will bless my people and their homes around my holy hill . And in the proper season I will send the showers they need . There will be showers of blessing .

ID:	157
INPUT:	Izan ere , gezurrezko mesiasak eta sasiprofetak agertuko dira eta aukeratuak berak ere , ahal balitz , engainatzeko moduko mirari handiak eta egintza harrigarriak egingo dituzte .
PRED:	For if a false prophet will be revealed , and the prophets will be judged by the prophet , and they will do great works and wonders .
GOLD:	For false messiahs and false prophets will rise up and perform great signs and wonders so as to deceive , if possible , even God 's chosen ones .

ID:	158
INPUT:	Terahetik <unk> kara ;
PRED:	And they set out from thence , and encamped at Kadesh .
GOLD:	They left Terah and camped at Mithcah .

ID:	159
INPUT:	Zazpi zigiluz jotako liburua
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The Lamb Opens the Scroll

ID:	160
INPUT:	Jexuan , Moladan , Bet-Peleten ,
PRED:	And it came to pass , that is , that is , that is , that is , that is , that is , that is ,
GOLD:	They also lived in Jeshua , Moladah , Beth-pelet ,

ID:	161
INPUT:	Jainkoaren agintzariaren aurrean ez zen sinesgogor izan , ezta zalantzan ibili ere , baizik eta sendotu egin zen sinesmenean ; horrela , Jainkoak egia zioela aitortu zuen ,
PRED:	And he did not believe in the power of God , but in faith , and in faith he was healed , and that he was healed .
GOLD:	Abraham never wavered in believing God 's promise . In fact , his faith grew stronger , and in this he brought glory to God .

ID:	162
INPUT:	Nola zerua lurraren gainetik garai , halaxe nire jokabideazuenaren gainetiketa nire egitasmoak zuenen gainetik .
PRED:	As long as the heavens above the earth , so is my ways , and my counsel from the end of my counsel .
GOLD:	For just as the heavens are higher than the earth , so my ways are higher than your waysand my thoughts higher than your thoughts .

ID:	163
INPUT:	Gure urrats guztiak zaintzen dituzte : ez daukagu kalera ateratzerik . Hurbil dugu azkena , beteak egunak ; bai , heldu zaigu azkena !
PRED:	All our enemies are rich , but we do not go into the law . The end is near , and the last day has come .
GOLD:	We could n't go into the streetswithout danger to our lives.Our end was near ; our days were numbered.We were doomed !

ID:	164
INPUT:	Tziporren seme eta Moabeko errege Balak baino hobea zarelakoan al zaude ? Hura ez zen aitzakia bila ibili israeldarren kontra borrokatzeko .
PRED:	Is it better for you to fight against the people of Moab and the king of Moab ? Is it better for you to fight against Israel ?
GOLD:	Are you any better than Balak son of Zippor , king of Moab ? Did he try to make a case against Israel for disputed land ? Did he go to war against them ?

ID:	165
INPUT:	Ahiasen seme eta Isakarren leinukoa zen Baxak jaiki eta hil egin zuen Nadab erregea , israeldar guztiekin Gibeton , filistearren hiria , setiatzen ari zenean . Hantxe bertan hil zuen Baxak .
PRED:	He rose up from the tribe of Issachar , and slew him , and slew him in the city of the Philistines , and slew him in the city of the Philistines . And Asa died there .
GOLD:	Then Baasha son of Ahijah , from the tribe of Issachar , plotted against Nadab and assassinated him while he and the Israelite army were laying siege to the Philistine town of Gibbethon .

ID:	166
INPUT:	Erromes-kanta . Begiak zuregana jasoak ditut , zeruan errege zaren horrengana .
PRED:	I have lifted up my eyes to you , and I have lifted up my eyes to you in heaven .
GOLD:	I lift my eyes to you , O God , enthroned in heaven .

ID:	167
INPUT:	Belaunez belaun egingo diozue Jaunari labeko lehen ogien eskaintza .
PRED:	You shall offer an offering to the Lord throughout all your generations .
GOLD:	Throughout the generations to come , you are to present a sacred offering to the Lord each year from the first of your ground flour .

ID:	168
INPUT:	Bedeinkatua zu , Jauna ! Irakats niri zeure arauak .
PRED:	Blessed be you , O Lord , and teach me your statutes .
GOLD:	I praise you , O Lord ; teach me your decrees .

ID:	169
INPUT:	Peratzim mendian bezalaekingo dio Jaunak , Gabaon haranean bezala , bere egitekoa betetzeko , bere lana burutzeko : egiteko harrigarria , ohi ez bezalako lana .
PRED:	And it shall be to pass in the mount of Gibeon , as the Lord hath spoken unto him in the valley of Gilead , as he shall do to himself , as a stone that is not like a stone .
GOLD:	The Lord will come as he did against the Philistines at Mount Perazimand against the Amorites at Gibeon.He will come to do a strange thing ; he will come to do an unusual deed :

ID:	170
INPUT:	eskuinaldetik <unk> da , eta hala ere gose ; ezkerraldetik jan , eta ezin ase . Bakoitzak bere ondokoadu jaten .
PRED:	And he shall sit at his right hand , and he shall eat ; and he shall not eat ; and he shall eat , and shall eat his own food .
GOLD:	The land will be blackenedby the fury of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies.The people will be fuel for the fire , and no one will spare even his own brother .

ID:	171
INPUT:	bere aitaren jokabidea hartuz eta bere aitak zerbitzatu zituen idoloak gurtuz .
PRED:	He walked in the ways of his father , and served the idols of his father .
GOLD:	He followed the example of his father , worshiping the same idols his father had worshiped .

ID:	172
INPUT:	Orduan , apaizak , lebitarrak , atezainak , kantariak , tenpluko laguntzaileak eta atzerritik etorritako israeldar guztiak beren hirietan jarri ziren bizitzen . Zazpigarren hilabetea iritsi zenean , israeldarrak jadanik beren hirietan zeuden .
PRED:	And the priests , the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites , and all the people of Israel , came in unto their cities , in the seventh month of their cities .
GOLD:	The rest of the people gave 20,000 gold coins , about 2,500 pounds of silver , and 67 robes for the priests .

ID:	173
INPUT:	Hau guztia Kafar<unk> go sinagogan irakatsi zuen Jesusek .
PRED:	And he taught all these things in the synagogue of Capernaum .
GOLD:	He said these things while he was teaching in the synagogue in Capernaum .

ID:	174
INPUT:	Orain , bete ezazu , Jainko Jaun horrek , gure aita Davidi eman zenion hitza , zuk egin bainauzu lurreko hautsa baino ugariago den herri honen errege .
PRED:	Now therefore , O Lord God , thou hast spoken unto David our father , because thou hast spoken unto the earth , and hast made me king over this people , as the dust of the earth .
GOLD:	O Lord God , please continue to keep your promise to David my father , for you have made me king over a people as numerous as the dust of the earth !

ID:	175
INPUT:	Esan zion , orduan , Davidek Sauli : — Zergatik entzuten diozu David zu hondatu nahian dabilela diotsun jendeari ?
PRED:	Then David said to Saul , “ Why do you hear David , saying , ‘ Thus says the Lord . '
GOLD:	This very day you can see with your own eyes it is n't true . For the Lord placed you at my mercy back there in the cave . Some of my men told me to kill you , but I spared you . For I said , ‘ I will never harm the king — he is the Lord 's anointed one . '

ID:	176
INPUT:	Fedeari esker erori ziren Jerikoko harresiak , zazpi egunez hiria inguratu ondoren .
PRED:	By faith , the wall of Jericho fell around the city for seven days .
GOLD:	It was by faith that the people of Israel marched around Jericho for seven days , and the walls came crashing down .

ID:	177
INPUT:	Izan ere , bakarra da Jainkoa eta bakarra Jainkoaren eta gizon-emakumeen bitartekoa ere : gizon bat , Kristo Jesus ,
PRED:	For God is one God , and one man , and one man , Jesus Christ ,
GOLD:	For , There is one God and one Mediator who can reconcile God and humanity — the man Christ Jesus .

ID:	178
INPUT:	Hona zer ikusi nuen : Elam eskualdean dagoen Susa gotorlekuan aurkitzen nintzen , Ulai ibai ondoan .
PRED:	And I saw this , and behold , I found it in the place where I was standing in the midst of the river .
GOLD:	In this vision I was at the fortress of Susa , in the province of Elam , standing beside the Ulai River .

ID:	179
INPUT:	Nik esan nion : « Ai Jainko Jauna ! Zera ari dira nitaz esaten : “ Ez al da hori beti parabolak kontatzen ari dena ? ” »
PRED:	I said to him , “ Lord God ! How can this man say to me , ‘ Is n't this the parable in the field ? '
GOLD:	Everyone in the world will know that I am the Lord . My sword is in my hand , and it will not return to its sheath until its work is finished . '

ID:	180
INPUT:	Zure zapaltzaileei beren okelajanaraziko diet , beren odolez mozkorraraziko ditut , ardo berriz bezala . Horrela jakingo dute gizaki guztiekni , Jauna , naizela zure salbatzailea , ni , Jakoben Jainko indartsua , zure askatzailea » .
PRED:	I will give them their blood to their enemies , and I will cause them to drink their blood , and they will know that I am the Lord your God , the God of Jacob , the God of Jacob , your salvation . ”
GOLD:	I will feed your enemies with their own flesh.They will be drunk with rivers of their own blood.All the world will know that I , the Lord , am your Savior and your Redeemer , the Mighty One of Israel . ”

ID:	181
INPUT:	honako irri-kanta hau abestuko diozu Babiloniako erregeari : « Horra zertan den zapaltzailea ! Horra zertan denharen harrokeria !
PRED:	And thou shalt sing unto the king of Babylon , and say unto the king of Babylon , Behold , this is the pride of the sword .
GOLD:	you will taunt the king of Babylon . You will say , “ The mighty man has been destroyed.Yes , your insolence is ended .

ID:	182
INPUT:	Orduan , Josuek : — Ken itzazue , bada , zeuen artean dituzuen sasijainkoen idoloak eta jar zaitezte erabat Jaunaren , Israelen Jainkoaren , aldean .
PRED:	Then Joshua said to them , “ Take away your idols among you , and make yourselves gods , and make yourselves gods in the way of the Lord , the God of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ All right then , ” Joshua said , “ destroy the idols among you , and turn your hearts to the Lord , the God of Israel . ”

ID:	183
INPUT:	Horregatik , bada , etsaiak inguratuko du lurraldea , zure babeslekuak lurreratuko ditu , eta zure jauregiak hustuko » .
PRED:	So your enemies will attack your land , and your houses will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , ” says the Sovereign Lord , “ an enemy is coming ! He will surround them and shatter their defenses.Then he will plunder all their fortresses . ”

ID:	184
INPUT:	Orduan , herriko apaizburu eta lege-maisu guztiak bildu eta Mesias non jaiotzekoa zen galdetu zien .
PRED:	Then the chief priests and the teachers of the people gathered together , and asked them , “ Where is the Messiah ? ”
GOLD:	He called a meeting of the leading priests and teachers of religious law and asked , “ Where is the Messiah supposed to be born ? ”

ID:	185
INPUT:	Jaunarengatik , izan zaitezte giza agintari guztien menpeko : bai denen gain agintea duen erregearen menpeko ,
PRED:	Be careful to obey the Lord for all the commands of men , to rule over all the commandments of the king , and to rule over all men .
GOLD:	For the Lord 's sake , submit to all human authority — whether the king as head of state ,

ID:	186
INPUT:	Ardiak ahulak zirenean , ordea , ez zituen ziriak ezartzen . Honela , ahulak Labanentzat eta azkarrak Jakobentzat suertatzen ziren .
PRED:	But the sheep did not put their hands on them , so that they could not put them in the midst of the flock .
GOLD:	But he did n't do this with the weaker ones , so the weaker lambs belonged to Laban , and the stronger ones were Jacob 's .

ID:	187
INPUT:	gure eta zuen artean eta gure ondorengo belaunaldien artean ezaugarri izateko baizik ; hau da , beraren tenpluan geure erre-opari eta elkartasun-opariak eskainiz Jaunari kultu eman nahi diogula adierazteko ezaugarri . Horrela , zuen seme-alabek ezin esango diete gureei Jaunarekin zerikusirik ez dutela .
PRED:	and to make a sign between us and our sons , but to offer burnt offerings in the temple of the Lord , so that you may not worship the Lord .
GOLD:	but as a memorial . It will remind our descendants and your descendants that we , too , have the right to worship the Lord at his sanctuary with our burnt offerings , sacrifices , and peace offerings . Then your descendants will not be able to say to ours , ‘ You have no claim to the Lord . '

ID:	188
INPUT:	Beste ontziko lagunei keinu egin zieten laguntzera etortzeko ; hurbildu ziren eta bi ontziak ia-ia hondoratzeraino bete zituzten .
PRED:	And they set their hands to help them , and they came near to help them . And they came near unto the ship , and they went near to destroy the ship .
GOLD:	A shout for help brought their partners in the other boat , and soon both boats were filled with fish and on the verge of sinking .

ID:	189
INPUT:	Jaunak , ordea , erantzun zion : — Ez horixe ! Kain hiltzen duena , zazpi aldiz gogorrago izango da zigortua . Eta Jaunak ezaugarri bat ezarri zion Kaini , aurkitzen zuen inork hil ez zezan .
PRED:	But the Lord said to him , “ No ! If anyone dies , he will be punished seven times , and he will be punished for him seven times , and no one found him . ”
GOLD:	The Lord replied , “ No , for I will give a sevenfold punishment to anyone who kills you . ” Then the Lord put a mark on Cain to warn anyone who might try to kill him .

ID:	190
INPUT:	« Ikuskaria neuk bakarrik ikusi nuen . Nirekin zeudenek ez zuten ezer ikusi ; baizik eta , ikara handiak harturik , ihesi joan ziren eta ezkutatu .
PRED:	And I saw a vision , and behold , I saw nothing with me ; and they were all with me , and they fled , and they fled .
GOLD:	Only I , Daniel , saw this vision . The men with me saw nothing , but they were suddenly terrified and ran away to hide .

ID:	191
INPUT:	« Horrela hitz egin zidanean , burumakur eta hitzik gabe gelditu nintzen .
PRED:	And when I spoke to me , I fell down , and there was no tongue .
GOLD:	While he was speaking to me , I looked down at the ground , unable to say a word .

ID:	192
INPUT:	Emakumeak
PRED:	The woman and the woman
GOLD:	Young Women of Jerusalem

ID:	193
INPUT:	Larunbata igaro zenean , Magdalako Mariak , Maria Santiagoren amak eta Salomek usain gozoko ukenduak erosi zituzten , Jesusen gorpua gantzutzeko .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the Sabbath day , Mary Magdalene , Mary Magdalene , Mary the mother of Mary , and Mary the mother of Mary , and the mother of Mary , and the mother of Jesus .
GOLD:	Saturday evening , when the Sabbath ended , Mary Magdalene , Mary the mother of James , and Salome went out and purchased burial spices so they could anoint Jesus ' body .

ID:	194
INPUT:	Emaginek erantzun zioten : — Hebrear emakumeak ez dira egiptoarrak bezalakoak ; oso dira azkarrak eta , emagina joan orduko , izana dute haurra .
PRED:	And the women said unto him , The women are not like the Egyptians , as the Egyptians are not like the Egyptians ; and the child shall come , and the child shall be a child .
GOLD:	“ The Hebrew women are not like the Egyptian women , ” the midwives replied . “ They are more vigorous and have their babies so quickly that we can not get there in time . ”

ID:	195
INPUT:	Haiek , orduan , txalupan hartu nahi izan zuten , baina txalupa berehala iritsi zen zihoazen tokira .
PRED:	And they took him into the boat , but he went into the boat , and came to the place where he was .
GOLD:	Then they were eager to let him in the boat , and immediately they arrived at their destination !

ID:	196
INPUT:	Gainera , beraren aita Manases bezala Jaunaren aurrean apaldu ordez , geroz eta okerkeria gehiago egin zuen .
PRED:	But he did evil in the sight of his father Manasseh , just as his father Manasseh had done .
GOLD:	But unlike his father , he did not humble himself before the Lord . Instead , Amon sinned even more .

ID:	197
INPUT:	Orduan , Satanas sartu zen Hamabien taldeko Judasengan , Iskariote deituarengan .
PRED:	Then Satan went into the territory of the twelve tribes of Judah , and they called on him .
GOLD:	Then Satan entered into Judas Iscariot , who was one of the twelve disciples ,

ID:	198
INPUT:	Ahaltsua izango da lurraldean haren askazia , bedeinkatua zuzenaren ondorengotza .
PRED:	The Almighty will be blessed in his land , and his descendants will be blessed .
GOLD:	Their children will be successful everywhere ; an entire generation of godly people will be blessed .

ID:	199
INPUT:	Israelgo erregeak gudariak igorri zituen Jainkoaren gizonak esandako tokira . Behin baino gehiagotan gertatu zen hau : Eliseok ohartarazten zuen erregea eta hau erne egoten zen .
PRED:	And the king of Israel sent messengers to the place where the men of God had spoken to the man of God . And Elisha took it again more than he was .
GOLD:	So the king of Israel would send word to the place indicated by the man of God . Time and again Elisha warned the king , so that he would be on the alert there .

ID:	200
INPUT:	Josuek gizon batzuk bidali zituen eta , lasterka oihal-etxolara joanik , dena aurkitu zuten oihal-etxolan gordea eta azpian dirua .
PRED:	And Joshua sent men away , and ran into the tent of meeting , and found all that was in the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	So Joshua sent some men to make a search . They ran to the tent and found the stolen goods hidden there , just as Achan had said , with the silver buried beneath the rest .

ID:	201
INPUT:	Ez zintuzket gehiegi nekatu nahi , baina entzun gaitzazu , otoi , unetxo batean , ohi duzun bihotz onez .
PRED:	I do n't want to listen to you , but give us a few times . But if you want to listen to me , you will have a good heart .
GOLD:	But I do n't want to bore you , so please give me your attention for only a moment .

ID:	202
INPUT:	David bere jauregia bedeinkatzeko itzuli zenean , Saulen alaba Mikal atera zitzaion , esanez : — Itxura ederra azaldu du gaur Israelgo erregeak , bere morroi-mirabeen aurrean biluzik , edozein lagun zirtzil biluzik jarriko litzatekeen bezala , jarriz !
PRED:	When David returned to the house of Saul , Saul 's daughter came out to meet him , and said to him , “ This day the king of Israel has appeared to the king of Israel , just as he had done in the sight of his servants .
GOLD:	When David returned home to bless his own family , Michal , the daughter of Saul , came out to meet him . She said in disgust , “ How distinguished the king of Israel looked today , shamelessly exposing himself to the servant girls like any vulgar person might do ! ”

ID:	203
INPUT:	Ongi dakizue esku hauek irabazi dutela niretzat eta neurekin nituenentzat beharrezko guztia .
PRED:	You know that these things have been given to me and to those who are with me , and to those who are with me .
GOLD:	You know that these hands of mine have worked to supply my own needs and even the needs of those who were with me .

ID:	204
INPUT:	Hirian bizi diren guztiak zaurituko ditut , gizaki nahiz abere , eta izurrite beldurgarriz hilko dira .
PRED:	I will scatter all the people who live in the city . They will die in the city . They will die . They will die in the city .
GOLD:	I will send a terrible plague upon this city , and both people and animals will die .

ID:	205
INPUT:	— Zoaz Egiptoko errege faraoiagana eta esaiozu israeldarrei joaten uzteko .
PRED:	“ Go to Pharaoh king of Egypt and tell the Israelites , ‘ Go to Pharaoh king of Egypt . '
GOLD:	“ Go back to Pharaoh , the king of Egypt , and tell him to let the people of Israel leave his country . ”

ID:	206
INPUT:	Ireki zerua , Jauna , eta jaitsi , ukitu mendiak eta jar bitez ketan .
PRED:	O Lord , open the heavens and come down to the mountains , and touch them .
GOLD:	Open the heavens , Lord , and come down.Touch the mountains so they billow smoke .

ID:	207
INPUT:	Jaunak higuin du jokabide gaiztoa , zuzentasun bila dabilena du maite .
PRED:	The Lord is an abomination to the wicked , but he loves the way of the wicked .
GOLD:	The Lord detests the way of the wicked , but he loves those who pursue godliness .

ID:	208
INPUT:	Kutxan ez zegoen Horeb mendian Moisesek bertan ipini zituen bi harlauzak besterik , Egiptotik irten ondoren Jaunak israeldarrekin eginiko itunaren harlauzak besterik ez , alegia .
PRED:	And Moses put the two tablets in the ark of the covenant , which Moses put in the mount Sinai , which the Lord had made with the sons of Israel , when he came out of Egypt , he made a covenant with the children of Israel .
GOLD:	Nothing was in the Ark except the two stone tablets that Moses had placed in it at Mount Sinai , where the Lord made a covenant with the people of Israel when they left Egypt .

ID:	209
INPUT:	Gure etxaldeak kanpotarren eskuetara joan dira ; gure etxeak arrotzen eskuetara .
PRED:	Our fields went into the hand of our fields , and our houses are in our hands .
GOLD:	Our inheritance has been turned over to strangers , our homes to foreigners .

ID:	210
INPUT:	Hori guztia Aaronen eta beronen semeen eskuetan jarri zuen , eta hauek Jaunari eskaini zioten , errituzko aurkezpen-keinua eginez .
PRED:	He put all these things on Aaron and his sons , and they offered them as a burnt offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	He put all these in the hands of Aaron and his sons , and he lifted these gifts as a special offering to the Lord .

ID:	211
INPUT:	Zintzoaren herentzia , bere ondorengoentzat ; bekatariaren ondasunak ere zintzoarentzat .
PRED:	The end of the righteous is the inheritance of the righteous , but the inheritance of the righteous is the inheritance of the righteous .
GOLD:	Good people leave an inheritance to their grandchildren , but the sinner 's wealth passes to the godly .

ID:	212
INPUT:	Faraoiak uste izango du basamortuak bidea ixten diela eta israeldarrak noraezean dabiltzala .
PRED:	And Pharaoh shall see his way in the wilderness , and his way shall pass through the way of the children of Israel .
GOLD:	Then Pharaoh will think , ‘ The Israelites are confused . They are trapped in the wilderness ! '

ID:	213
INPUT:	Ez harritu esaten dizuedanaz , bai baitator ordua hildako guztiek haren ahotsa entzungo dutena ,
PRED:	Do n't know what I say to you , but all those who hear his voice will hear his voice .
GOLD:	Do n't be so surprised ! Indeed , the time is coming when all the dead in their graves will hear the voice of God 's Son ,

ID:	214
INPUT:	Zuk zulatu zenuen eta sarraskitu itsas munstroa , zuk sakabanatu beso bizkorrez etsaiak .
PRED:	Thou hast broken the sea , and thou hast broken the sea ; thou hast broken the sea ; thou hast cast the enemy into the sea .
GOLD:	The heavens are yours , and the earth is yours ; everything in the world is yours — you created it all .

ID:	215
INPUT:	Iparraldeko gudarostea suntsitzean , hegoaldeko erregea harropuztu egingo da ; baina , etsaiari milaka gudari hilagatik , ez du luzaroan iraungo agintean .
PRED:	And when the king of the north shall fall , and the king of the north shall be taken away , and the king of the south shall be taken away , and the king of the south shall not be a long time .
GOLD:	After the enemy army is swept away , the king of the south will be filled with pride and will execute many thousands of his enemies . But his success will be short lived .

ID:	216
INPUT:	Atera bedi kondenatua auzian , huts egin biezaio bere goradeiak .
PRED:	Let him go out to judgment , and let him be put to shame .
GOLD:	When his case comes up for judgment , let him be pronounced guilty.Count his prayers as sins .

ID:	217
INPUT:	Gutxi batzuk besterik ez ziren , etorkin-taldetxo bat besterik ez ;
PRED:	And there were no few of them , but one of the flock of the flock .
GOLD:	He said this when they were few in number , a tiny group of strangers in Canaan .

ID:	218
INPUT:	Ezin izango dituzteberen zilar-urreek ere salbatuJaunaren haserre-egunean : haren grinaren sugarraklur osoa irentsiko du . Beldurgarria benetan , lurtar guztiak suntsituko baititu .
PRED:	The silver of their silver shall not be able to save them in the day of his wrath , in the day of his wrath , in the day of his wrath , and in the wrath of all the earth shall be destroyed .
GOLD:	Your silver and gold will not save youon that day of the Lord 's anger.For the whole land will be devouredby the fire of his jealousy.He will make a terrifying endof all the people on earth .

ID:	219
INPUT:	Zuetaz oroitzen naizen bakoitzean eskerrak ematen dizkiot neure Jainkoari .
PRED:	When I remember you , I will give thanks to my God .
GOLD:	Every time I think of you , I give thanks to my God .

ID:	220
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Begira , suge pozoituak bidaliko dizkizuet . Ez duzue horiek liluratzekomodurik izango , eta zizta egingo dizuete » .
PRED:	“ Look , I will send a arrows to you , ” says the Lord , “ and you will not be able to make them suffer . ”
GOLD:	I will send these enemy troops among youlike poisonous snakes you can not charm.They will bite you , and you will die.I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	221
INPUT:	eta Nazaret izeneko herrian jarri zen bizitzen ; horrela bete zen Jainkoak profeten bidez esana : « Nazaretarra esango diote » .
PRED:	And he lived in the town of Galilee , as God had spoken through the prophets , saying , “ You will say to him , ‘ You will be Nazareth . '
GOLD:	So the family went and lived in a town called Nazareth . This fulfilled what the prophets had said : “ He will be called a Nazarene . ”

ID:	222
INPUT:	Zure ondarea zure anaiena baino hobea izango da : Sikem emango dizut , ezpataz eta uztaiaz amortarrei kendu nien hiria » .
PRED:	Your inheritance will be more than your brother , but I will give you the city of Shechem and the Amorites . ”
GOLD:	And beyond what I have given your brothers , I am giving you an extra portion of the land that I took from the Amorites with my sword and bow . ”

ID:	223
INPUT:	Jauna , zure maitasuna zeru zabala adinakoa , zure leialtasuna hodeietarainokoa .
PRED:	O Lord , you are my love , and you are my God , and you are my God , and you are my God .
GOLD:	Your righteousness is like the mighty mountains , your justice like the ocean depths.You care for people and animals alike , O Lord .

ID:	224
INPUT:	Ziur dakigu orain dena dakizula eta ez duzula inork galdetu beharrik ; honengatik sinesten dugu Jainkoarengandik etorri zarela .
PRED:	We know that you know that no one can ask you , and no one will ask you . We believe that you have come from God .
GOLD:	Now we understand that you know everything , and there 's no need to question you . From this we believe that you came from God . ”

ID:	225
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	226
INPUT:	Dei degizut : salba nazazu , eta beteko ditut zure xedapenak .
PRED:	I call for you , and I will save you , and I will keep your statutes .
GOLD:	I cry out to you ; rescue me , that I may obey your laws .

ID:	227
INPUT:	Zure lan eta ahaleginen emaitzekez ditzatela ezezagunak asebete .
PRED:	Let them be filled with thy work , that they may not be satisfied .
GOLD:	Strangers will consume your wealth , and someone else will enjoy the fruit of your labor .

ID:	228
INPUT:	Esauk galdegin zion : — Zertarako dira ikusi ditudan abere-talde horiek guztiak ? Jakobek erantzun : — Zure abegi ona nahi nuen irabazi .
PRED:	Esau said to him , “ What are these sheep that I have seen ? ” Jacob answered , “ I want to do good . ”
GOLD:	“ And what were all the flocks and herds I met as I came ? ” Esau asked.Jacob replied , “ They are a gift , my lord , to ensure your friendship . ”

ID:	229
INPUT:	Hego-haizea denean , berriz , “ Sargoria dugu ” esaten duzue , eta hala gertatzen da .
PRED:	But when the wind is in the wind , you say to them , ‘ This is what happened to us . '
GOLD:	When the south wind blows , you say , ‘ Today will be a scorcher . ' And it is .

ID:	230
INPUT:	Egin azpilak , erretiluak , pitxerrak eta katiluak , isur-oparietarako ; guztiok urre garbiz egingo dituzu .
PRED:	And thou shalt make the bowls , the bowls , the bowls , the bowls , and the bowls , and the bowls , and the bowls , and all the vessels of pure gold ; and thou shalt make them pure gold .
GOLD:	Make special containers of pure gold for the table — bowls , ladles , pitchers , and jars — to be used in pouring out liquid offerings .

ID:	231
INPUT:	Izan ere , neuretzat sagaratua dudan hiritik hasi naiz zigorra ematen , eta beste nazioek zigorretik aske geldituko direla uste al dute ? Ez horixe ! Ez dira zigorrik gabe geldituko , munduko bizilagun guztiei bidaliko baitiet gerra . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak .
PRED:	For I will bring them out of the city of my holy city , and they will be punished from the nations , and they will not be punished , ” says the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	I have begun to punish Jerusalem , the city that bears my name . Now should I let you go unpunished ? No , you will not escape disaster . I will call for war against all the nations of the earth . I , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken ! '

ID:	232
INPUT:	« Zazpi egunez legamia gabeko ogia jango duzue , eta zazpigarrenean festa ospatuko duzue Jaunaren ohorez .
PRED:	“ On the seventh day you shall eat unleavened bread , and on the seventh day you shall celebrate it , and on the seventh day you shall celebrate it .
GOLD:	For seven days the bread you eat must be made without yeast . Then on the seventh day , celebrate a feast to the Lord .

ID:	233
INPUT:	BUKAERA ( 22 , 1 — 24 , 33 )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The Eastern Tribes Return Home

ID:	234
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jaunarengandik aldentzen bazarete , are gehiago luzatuko dio hark Israeli basamortuko egonaldia , eta , orduan , zuek izango zarete herri osoaren hondamendiaren erantzule .
PRED:	For if you turn away from the Lord , he will make Israel a long time in the wilderness , and you will be a sign to all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	If you turn away from him like this and he abandons them again in the wilderness , you will be responsible for destroying this entire nation ! ”

ID:	235
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Amondarrekgaiztakeriarik asko egin dute , zein baino zein handiago . Eta beraz , zigortu egingo ditut ! Galaadeko emakume haurduneisabela urratu baitzieten , beren lurraldeazabaldu ahal izateko ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ They have done many wickedness , and I will punish them . I will punish them as a woman in Gilead . I will punish them as a woman in the land of Gilead .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Ammon have sinned again and again , and I will not let them go unpunished ! When they attacked Gilead to extend their borders , they ripped open pregnant women with their swords .

ID:	236
INPUT:	Baina hark ezetz . Eta joan eta kartzelan sartu zuen , zorra ordaindu arte .
PRED:	But he went and put him in prison , and put him in prison until he had paid him .
GOLD:	But his creditor would n't wait . He had the man arrested and put in prison until the debt could be paid in full .

ID:	237
INPUT:	gari , garagar , mahasti , pikondo , granadondo , olibondo eta eztiz hornitua ;
PRED:	the grain offering , the olive oil , the olive oil , the olive oil , the olive oil , the olive oil , the olive oil , the olive oil , the olive oil , the olive oil , the olive oil ,
GOLD:	It is a land of wheat and barley ; of grapevines , fig trees , and pomegranates ; of olive oil and honey .

ID:	238
INPUT:	Arantzaz egindako koroa ezarri zioten buruan eta kanabera eskuan , eta , aurrean belaunikaturik , iseka egin zioten esanez : « Agur , juduen erregea ! »
PRED:	And they laid him on the head of his hands , and on the head of his hands , and on the head of the Jews , saying , Amen , the king of the Jews .
GOLD:	They wove thorn branches into a crown and put it on his head , and they placed a reed stick in his right hand as a scepter . Then they knelt before him in mockery and taunted , “ Hail ! King of the Jews ! ”

ID:	239
INPUT:	Baina ia aingeruen pareko egina izan zen Jesus hura ohorez eta aintzaz koroatua ikusten dugu , sufritu zuen heriotzagatik ; horrela , Jainkoaren onginahiaz , gu guztion onerako jasan zuen berak heriotza .
PRED:	But if we see the light of angels , we see the glory of glory and glory and glory , so that we may suffer the grace of God .
GOLD:	What we do see is Jesus , who for a little while was given a position “ a little lower than the angels ” ; and because he suffered death for us , he is now “ crowned with glory and honor . ” Yes , by God 's grace , Jesus tasted death for everyone .

ID:	240
INPUT:	Jaunaren zerbitzariaren pasioa eta aintza
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	241
INPUT:	Gamelu guztiak ase zirenean , hartu zituen morroiak sei gramoko urrezko eraztuna eta ehun gramo baino gehiago zuten urrezko bi eskumuturreko ,
PRED:	And when all the seed were hungry , he took five hundred talents of gold , and five hundred talents of gold , and five hundred talents of gold .
GOLD:	Then at last , when the camels had finished drinking , he took out a gold ring for her nose and two large gold bracelets for her wrists .

ID:	242
INPUT:	egin zintuenak emaztetzathartuko baitzaitu : Jaun ahalguztiduna , horixe du izena . Israelen Jainko santua dazure askatzailea : lur osoaren Jainkoa deritza .
PRED:	For the Lord of hosts will take you away , for he is the name of the Lord of hosts , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , and the whole earth is your God .
GOLD:	For your Creator will be your husband ; the Lord of Heaven 's Armies is his name ! He is your Redeemer , the Holy One of Israel , the God of all the earth .

ID:	243
INPUT:	Nire aurka marmarrean eta azpilanean ari dira etengabe etsaiak .
PRED:	You are my enemies , Lord , and you are my enemies .
GOLD:	My enemies whisper and mutteras they plot against me all day long .

ID:	244
INPUT:	Hona hemen beren buruak eskaini zituzten lebitarrak : Kehaten ondorengoetarik Amasairen seme Mahat eta Azariasen seme Joel ; Merariren ondorengoetarik Abdiren seme Kix eta Jehalelelen seme Azarias ; Gerxonen ondorengoetarik Zimaren seme Joah eta Joahen seme Eden ;
PRED:	These are the names of the Levites , the sons of Gershon , the sons of Gershon , the sons of Gershon , the sons of Jeshua , the son of Jozabad , the son of Jozabad , the son of Jozabad , the son of Jozabad , the son of Jozabad , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel , and the son of Shealtiel .
GOLD:	Then these Levites got right to work : From the clan of Kohath : Mahath son of Amasai and Joel son of Azariah.From the clan of Merari : Kish son of Abdi and Azariah son of Jehallelel.From the clan of Gershon : Joah son of Zimmah and Eden son of Joah .

ID:	245
INPUT:	Baina Balakek beste buruzagi batzuk bidali zituen , aurrekoak baino ugariago eta ospetsuagoak .
PRED:	But Balak sent some of the princes of the princes of the earth , and greater glory than many .
GOLD:	Then Balak tried again . This time he sent a larger number of even more distinguished officials than those he had sent the first time .

ID:	246
INPUT:	Hara , zerbait berria egitera noa : hasia da sortzen , ez al diozue antzematen ? Bidea irekiko dut basamortuan , ibaiak sorraraziko landa lehorrean .
PRED:	Behold , there is a new thing , and a new seed is not like a tree ? I will open the road in the wilderness , in the wilderness .
GOLD:	For I am about to do something new.See , I have already begun ! Do you not see it ? I will make a pathway through the wilderness.I will create rivers in the dry wasteland .

ID:	247
INPUT:	Agur ezazue elkar , maitasunez besarkatuz . Bakea Kristorenak zareten guztioi .
PRED:	Greet one another with love , and love one another . All you who are in Christ .
GOLD:	Greet each other with a kiss of love.Peace be with all of you who are in Christ .

ID:	248
INPUT:	— Bai politak zure oinak abarka horiekin , errege-alaba ! Zure izterretako bihurguneak , zilarginaren egiazko artelan .
PRED:	“ Yes , your feet are filled with your feet , your daughters , your daughters , the day of your breasts , the day of your breasts , and the day of your breasts . ”
GOLD:	Your navel is perfectly formedlike a goblet filled with mixed wine.Between your thighs lies a mound of wheatbordered with lilies .

ID:	249
INPUT:	Bizkarra eman didate , ez aurpegia . Etengabe irakatsi diedan arren , ez didate aditu eta ez dute zentzatu nahi izan .
PRED:	They have given me my face , and I have not taught them , but they have not kept me , and they have not kept me .
GOLD:	My people have turned their backs on me and have refused to return . Even though I diligently taught them , they would not receive instruction or obey .

ID:	250
INPUT:	Jauna honela mintzatu zitzaion Josueri :
PRED:	The Lord spoke to Joshua , saying ,
GOLD:	The Lord said to Joshua ,

ID:	251
INPUT:	Baina erregeak : — Badakit luzatu nahirik zabiltzatela , nire erabakien berri badakizuelako .
PRED:	But the king said to him , “ I know that you are trying to know what I have told you . ”
GOLD:	The king replied , “ I know what you are doing ! You 're stalling for time because you know I am serious when I say ,

ID:	252
INPUT:	Zergatik zabiltzate israeldarrak adoregabetzen , Jaunak emandako lurraldera igaro ez daitezen ?
PRED:	Why do you seek the children of Israel , that they may go into the land which the Lord has given to them ?
GOLD:	“ Why do you want to discourage the rest of the people of Israel from going across to the land the Lord has given them ?

ID:	253
INPUT:	Agur ezazue elkar besarkada santuaz . Fededun guztiek agurtzen zaituztete .
PRED:	Greet one another with a holy way . All the saints worship you .
GOLD:	Greet each other with a sacred kiss .

ID:	254
INPUT:	Bi sorbalda-babeski izango ditu , bi ertzetatik lotzeko .
PRED:	There shall be two corners for the two corners of the two corners of the two corners .
GOLD:	It will consist of two pieces , front and back , joined at the shoulders with two shoulder-pieces .

ID:	255
INPUT:	Garaileari , nire nahia egiten azkeneraino irauten duenari , agintea emango diot nazioen gain ,
PRED:	And I will give to the people of Galilee , and to the end , and to the end , and to the end of the nations ,
GOLD:	To all who are victorious , who obey me to the very end , To them I will give authority over all the nations .

ID:	256
INPUT:	moztu egingo diote eskua . Ez izan gupidarik !
PRED:	They will cut off their hands , and they will not know him .
GOLD:	you must cut off her hand . Show her no pity .

ID:	257
INPUT:	Azken agurra
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Greetings

ID:	258
INPUT:	Ehun eta hogeita hiru urte zituen Aaronek Hor mendian hil zenean .
PRED:	Aaron died at Mount Sinai , and he died at Mount Sinai .
GOLD:	Aaron was 123 years old when he died there on Mount Hor .

ID:	259
INPUT:	Zer itxaron dezaket , beraz , Jauna ? Zuregan nire itxaropen bakarra !
PRED:	I hope , Lord , how can I wait for you ? I hope in you .
GOLD:	Rescue me from my rebellion.Do not let fools mock me .

ID:	260
INPUT:	Hango profetak , ahobero eta engainatzaile . Jaunarentzat sagaratua kutsatzeneta legea hausten dute apaizek .
PRED:	And the prophet , and the prophet , and the priests have broken the law of the Lord , and have broken the law of the Lord .
GOLD:	Its prophets are arrogant liars seeking their own gain.Its priests defile the Temple by disobeying God 's instructions .

ID:	261
INPUT:	Haurdun gelditu zen emakumea eta semea izan zuen . Judak Er eman zion izen .
PRED:	And she conceived and bore a son , and she bore him a son .
GOLD:	she became pregnant and gave birth to a son , and he named the boy Er .

ID:	262
INPUT:	Lebitarren hiriak
PRED:	The Levites and the Levites
GOLD:	Towns for the Levites

ID:	263
INPUT:	Batez ere , gorde ezazue bizi-bizi elkarrenganako maitasuna , maitasunak bekatu askoren barkamena lortzen baitu .
PRED:	But you love one another , because he has forgiven many sins .
GOLD:	Most important of all , continue to show deep love for each other , for love covers a multitude of sins .

ID:	264
INPUT:	Hitz egiten amaitu zuenean , zapi batez estali zuen aurpegia .
PRED:	When he finished speaking , he covered his face seven times .
GOLD:	When Moses finished speaking with them , he covered his face with a veil .

ID:	265
INPUT:	Ezpainetan musu ematea bezala daerantzun egokia ematea .
PRED:	I will give you my lips as a fire in the morning , and I will give it to you .
GOLD:	An honest answeris like a kiss of friendship .

ID:	266
INPUT:	« Hogeita bost urtetik aurrera hasiko dira lebitarrak elkarketa-etxolan duten zerbitzua betetzen ,
PRED:	“ When the Levites are thirty years old , the Levites who serve the tent of meeting will serve the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	“ This is the rule the Levites must follow : They must begin serving in the Tabernacle at the age of twenty-five ,

ID:	267
INPUT:	Ez dut beti auzitan jardungo , ez naiz etengabe haserre egongo , neuk egindako biziduneknire aurreanbizi-arnasa gal ez dezaten .
PRED:	I will not stand in judgment ; I will not be angry ; I will not be angry in my wrath , and those who live before me will live before me .
GOLD:	For I will not fight against you forever ; I will not always be angry.If I were , all people would pass away — all the souls I have made .

ID:	268
INPUT:	Babilonia erori
PRED:	Babylon and Babylon
GOLD:	A Message about Babylon

ID:	269
INPUT:	Jeremiasek oharpen guztiok adierazi zizkion herriari , Jaunaren , bere Jainkoaren , aginduz . Hitzaldia bukatzean ,
PRED:	Then Jeremiah told the people all the words of the Lord his God , and he said to the people , “ Go and speak to them . ”
GOLD:	When Jeremiah had finished giving this message from the Lord their God to all the people ,

ID:	270
INPUT:	elkartasun-opariko zekorrarekin bezala , erre egingo du apaizak erre-oparien aldarean .
PRED:	And the priest shall offer the burnt offering as a bull , and the priest shall burn it on the altar .
GOLD:	just as he does with cattle offered as a peace offering , and burn them on the altar of burnt offerings .

ID:	271
INPUT:	Babiloniako gudaririk bulartsuenekuko egin diote borrokari , beren gotorlekuetan babestuz . Kemena galdurik , emajende dirudite . Hiriko ateak bota dituzte , etxeak sutan daude .
PRED:	The army of Babylon will fight against him , and they will fight against him in their places . They will be destroyed , and the city will be destroyed . They will be destroyed in their houses .
GOLD:	Her mightiest warriors no longer fight.They stay in their barracks , their courage gone.They have become like women.The invaders have burned the housesand broken down the city gates .

ID:	272
INPUT:	« Ez dute jada auzoko herriek Israel mespretxatuko , ez dute arantza zorrotz eta lahar mingarriek bezala zulatuko . Eta jakingo dute ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	“ The people of Israel will not be despised , because they will not remember the words of the Lord , as I am the Lord .
GOLD:	No longer will Israel 's scornful neighborsprick and tear at her like briers and thorns.For then they will knowthat I am the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	273
INPUT:	Eliaxib apaiz nagusiak eta beronen apaizkideek ekin zioten , beraz , lanari , eta Ardien atea egin zuten . Sagaratu ondoren , ate-alderdiak konpondu zituzten . Gero , Ehunen dorreraino konpondu zuten harresia eta , sagaratu ondoren , Hananeelen dorreraino jarraitu zuten .
PRED:	And the high priest and his sons were with him , and the chief priests , and the princes of the guard , and they built the doors of the gate , and they built the doors of the gate , and built the tower of the gate , and followed it .
GOLD:	Then Eliashib the high priest and the other priests started to rebuild at the Sheep Gate . They dedicated it and set up its doors , building the wall as far as the Tower of the Hundred , which they dedicated , and the Tower of Hananel .

ID:	274
INPUT:	Ni mezu hau aldarrikatzen ari nintzen bitartean , Pelatias , Benaiasen semea , hil egin zen . Ahuspez erori eta deiadar egin nuen ozenki : « Ai Jainko Jauna ! Gelditzen diren israeldarrak suntsitu behar dituzu ! »
PRED:	When I heard this message , Zechariah son of Shallum died , I fell down to the ground , and I cried out to him , “ As the Lord God lives , you will destroy the Israelites . ”
GOLD:	While I was still prophesying , Pelatiah son of Benaiah suddenly died . Then I fell face down on the ground and cried out , “ O Sovereign Lord , are you going to kill everyone in Israel ? ”

ID:	275
INPUT:	lurreko narrastiei eta irakatsiko dizute , itsasoko arrainek ere kontatuko ;
PRED:	They will teach you all the animals of the earth and teach you , and the fish of the sea will know it .
GOLD:	Speak to the earth , and it will instruct you.Let the fish in the sea speak to you .

ID:	276
INPUT:	Jakinarazi nion bere etxea betiko zigortuko nuela , egin dituzten gaiztakeriengatik . Bazekien bere semeak Jainkoa iraintzen ari zirena , eta ez zituen zuzenarazi .
PRED:	I told them that I would punish his house for ever , because of their wickedness ; for they know that God was not righteous , and he was not righteous .
GOLD:	I have warned him that judgment is coming upon his family forever , because his sons are blaspheming God and he has n't disciplined them .

ID:	277
INPUT:	Jakingo duzue , noski , Jainkoak bere onginahian zuekiko eman didan eginkizuna ;
PRED:	But you know what God has given you to you .
GOLD:	assuming , by the way , that you know God gave me the special responsibility of extending his grace to you Gentiles .

ID:	278
INPUT:	Mendi-gailurretansakrifizioak eskaintzen dituzte , muinoetan intsentsua erretzen , arte , urki eta haritzenitzalpe ederrean . Horrela , zuen alabakemagaldu sakratu bihurtu dira , zuen errainak adulteriogile .
PRED:	They offer sacrifices on the high hill , and burn incense on the high places until evening , and they have committed adultery . So you have committed adultery .
GOLD:	They offer sacrifices to idols on the mountaintops.They go up into the hills to burn incensein the pleasant shade of oaks , poplars , and terebinth trees . “ That is why your daughters turn to prostitution , and your daughters-in-law commit adultery .

ID:	279
INPUT:	Jauregitik eta hiritik irten zelarik , Moisesek eskuak altxatu zituen otoitzerako . Berehala atertu zituen kazkabarra eta euria , eta ez zen gehiago trumoirik izan .
PRED:	And when Moses went out from the presence of the Lord , he stretched out his hands toward the city , and he stretched out his hands , and there was no rain , and there was no rain .
GOLD:	So Moses left Pharaoh 's court and went out of the city . When he lifted his hands to the Lord , the thunder and hail stopped , and the downpour ceased .

ID:	280
INPUT:	Jakin badakigu , mundu honetan bizileku dugun oihal-etxola hau hondatzen bazaigu ere , Jainkoak prestaturiko bizilekua dugula zeruan betiko , giza eskuz egin gabea .
PRED:	For we know that this tents is in this world , that we may be destroyed in this place , that God will prepare a place for us in heaven for ever and ever .
GOLD:	For we know that when this earthly tent we live in is taken down ( that is , when we die and leave this earthly body ) , we will have a house in heaven , an eternal body made for us by God himself and not by human hands .

ID:	281
INPUT:	Zuen gurasoak Egipto ondoko basamortuan epaitu nituen bezala , hala egingo dut zuekin . Honela diot nik , Jainko Jaunak .
PRED:	I will judge your fathers in the wilderness , just as I chose your fathers in the wilderness , says the Lord God .
GOLD:	I will judge you there just as I did your ancestors in the wilderness after bringing them out of Egypt , says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	282
INPUT:	JERUSALEM<unk> ERROMARA ( 21 , 17 — 28 , 31 )
PRED:	The People of Jerusalem
GOLD:	Paul Arrives at Jerusalem

ID:	283
INPUT:	Hondatua dago gure oihal-etxola , lokarri guztiak etenda . Seme-alabak kendu dizkigute , ez da bat ere gelditugure etxola jasotzeko , oihalak zabaltzeko .
PRED:	Our tents is desolate , and all the tent of our tents has been taken away from us . There is no one left left in our tents .
GOLD:	My home is gone , and no one is left to help me rebuild it.My children have been taken away , and I will never see them again .

ID:	284
INPUT:	Bai , oihal-etxola honetan bizi garenok , hasperenka gaude larri , ez baitugu oraingo jantzi hau galdu nahi , baizik eta honen gainetik beste jantzia hartu nahi dugu , hilkor dena biziak beregana dezan .
PRED:	For we are all living in this tents , but we do not want to eat this , but we want to live on this side , but we want to die .
GOLD:	While we live in these earthly bodies , we groan and sigh , but it 's not that we want to die and get rid of these bodies that clothe us . Rather , we want to put on our new bodies so that these dying bodies will be swallowed up by life .

ID:	285
INPUT:	Sinesten al diezu profetei , Agripa erregea ? Ziur nago sinesten diezula .
PRED:	Do you believe the king of the prophets ? Do you believe that I am going to believe you .
GOLD:	King Agrippa , do you believe the prophets ? I know you do — ”

ID:	286
INPUT:	Senarrari ez zaio errurik egotziko , eta emazte errudunak bere hobenaren ondorenak jasan beharko ditu » .
PRED:	The husband must not have pity on her husband , and the one who has mercy on her , and the one who has mercy on her will receive her . ”
GOLD:	The husband will be innocent of any guilt in this matter , but his wife will be held accountable for her sin . ”

ID:	287
INPUT:	Behartsu izan eta , gero , jende xehea zapaltzen duenauholde suntsigarria da : zer janik ere ez du uzten !
PRED:	The poor is poor and needy , and the poor are destroyed , and there is no end .
GOLD:	A poor person who oppresses the pooris like a pounding rain that destroys the crops .

ID:	288
INPUT:	Baina Jainkoak esku hartzen ez badu , nork gaitzetsiko du ? Aurpegia ezkutatzen badu , nork ikusi ahal izango du ? Halere , herriak eta gizateria osoa zaintzen ditu ,
PRED:	But if God does not let him be put to death , who can not see his face ? But who will see his face ? But his people will see him , and all his people .
GOLD:	But if he chooses to remain quiet , who can criticize him ? When he hides his face , no one can find him , whether an individual or a nation .

ID:	289
INPUT:	Gainera , Jaunak esan zion Jeremiasi :
PRED:	The Lord spoke to Jeremiah , saying ,
GOLD:	Then this message came to Jeremiah from the Lord :

ID:	290
INPUT:	Ezagutzen du idiak nagusia , baita astoak ereugazabareneko aska ; Israelek , ostera , ez du ezagutzen , nire herriak ez du aditzen » .
PRED:	The master has known his master , and many of his servants are a hundred , and Israel does not know him . ”
GOLD:	Even an ox knows its owner , and a donkey recognizes its master 's care — but Israel does n't know its master.My people do n't recognize my care for them . ”

ID:	291
INPUT:	Orduan , Joiadak erregearen seme Joax aterarazi , koroa ezarri eta itunaren agiria eman zion , eta olioa isuriz , errege gantzutu zuen . Jende guztiak , txaloka , honela zioen oihuka : « Gora erregea ! »
PRED:	Then Jehoiada brought Joash the son of Joash the son of Joash , and put him on his head , and anointed him , and anointed him with oil , and all the people shouted , “ Praise the king ! ”
GOLD:	Then Jehoiada brought out Joash , the king 's son , placed the crown on his head , and presented him with a copy of God 's laws . They anointed him and proclaimed him king , and everyone clapped their hands and shouted , “ Long live the king ! ”

ID:	292
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak esan zion : — Jaits zaitez eta igo berriro Aaronekin . Baina apaizak eta herria ez daitezela ahalegin niregana igotzen , haien artean sarraskirik egin ez dezadan .
PRED:	But the Lord said to Moses , “ Go down and go down with Aaron . But the priests and the people will not come to me , so that they may not enter into my presence . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord said , “ Go down and bring Aaron back up with you . In the meantime , do not let the priests or the people break through to approach the Lord , or he will break out and destroy them . ”

ID:	293
INPUT:	Bazen orduan preso sonatu bat , Barrabas zeritzana .
PRED:	And there was a man who had been taken into prison , who was called Barabbas .
GOLD:	This year there was a notorious prisoner , a man named Barabbas .

ID:	294
INPUT:	Nora joko dugu orain ? Mandatariek adore gabe utzi gaituzte esanez , hango jendea gu baino handiagoa eta indartsuagoa dela , hiriak handiak , zerurainoko harresiz inguratuak , eta Anak erraldoiaren ondorengoak ere ikusi dituztela .
PRED:	What shall we go ? And the messengers have not left us , saying , We are greater than we , and great cities , and great cities , and great cities , and great cities , and great , and great cities , and all the cities of the earth .
GOLD:	Where can we go ? Our brothers have demoralized us with their report . They tell us , “ The people of the land are taller and more powerful than we are , and their towns are large , with walls rising high into the sky ! We even saw giants there — the descendants of Anak ! ” '

ID:	295
INPUT:	Jaunak Jerusalemen bizirik geldituak babestuko
PRED:	The
GOLD:	A Promise of Restoration

ID:	296
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : « Itzuli ezpata hori bere tokira , zeren ezpataz ari dena ezpataz hilko baita .
PRED:	Jesus said to him , “ Go back to his place , for he will die by the sword .
GOLD:	“ Put away your sword , ” Jesus told him . “ Those who use the sword will die by the sword .

ID:	297
INPUT:	Eguna argitu zuenean , ikasleei deitu eta haietako hamabi aukeratu zituen , eta apostolu izena eman zien :
PRED:	And it came to pass in the morning , when he called his disciples , he called twelve disciples , and called the name of the apostles :
GOLD:	At daybreak he called together all of his disciples and chose twelve of them to be apostles . Here are their names :

ID:	298
INPUT:	Eguerdian iseka egiten hasi zitzaien Elias , esanez : — Egizue dei ozenkiago ! Jainkoa duk , eta oso lanpetua egongo duk , edo alde egin beharra izango zian edota bidaian izango duk . Behar bada , lo egongo duk eta iratzarri beharra izanen dik .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the same day , when he sat down , he began to call him , saying , `` Go away , for God will be with you , and he will be with you , and he will be with you , and he will be a stone . ''
GOLD:	About noontime Elijah began mocking them . “ You 'll have to shout louder , ” he scoffed , “ for surely he is a god ! Perhaps he is daydreaming , or is relieving himself . Or maybe he is away on a trip , or is asleep and needs to be wakened ! ”

ID:	299
INPUT:	Portaera prestukoa salbatu egiten da , jokabide okerrekoa bat-batean erori .
PRED:	A righteous man is saved by the way of righteousness , and a wicked man shall fall by a way .
GOLD:	The blameless will be rescued from harm , but the crooked will be suddenly destroyed .

ID:	300
INPUT:	hau Rebekaren aita izan zen . Zortzi seme hauek eman zizkion Milkak Abrahamen anaia Nahorri .
PRED:	And she was the father of Nahor . And she gave birth to Abram his brother Nahor .
GOLD:	( Bethuel became the father of Rebekah . ) In addition to these eight sons from Milcah ,

ID:	301
INPUT:	Ene begiek malko-errekak isurtzen dituzte , zure irakaspenari jarraitzen ez diotenengatik .
PRED:	The eyes of men poured water into the water , and those who do not follow your law .
GOLD:	Rivers of tears gush from my eyesbecause people disobey your instructions .

ID:	302
INPUT:	Herriak elkartasun-oparirako eskainiriko zezena eta aharia hil zituen ; semeek odola eraman zioten , eta Aaronek aldarea zipriztindu zuen alde guztietatik .
PRED:	And the people brought the name of the burnt offering , and killed the bull , and the blood of the congregation , and Aaron brought the blood on the altar .
GOLD:	Then Aaron slaughtered the bull and the ram for the people 's peace offering . His sons brought him the blood , and he splattered it against all sides of the altar .

ID:	303
INPUT:	« Norbaitek bere esklaboa , gizasemea nahiz emakumea , begian jotzen badu eta begia hondatzen , libre utziko du hondatutako begiaren ordain .
PRED:	“ If a man is a slave or a woman , he must look at his eyes , and he will be destroyed .
GOLD:	“ If a man hits his male or female slave in the eye and the eye is blinded , he must let the slave go free to compensate for the eye .

ID:	304
INPUT:	Egizue niregandik ikasi , hartu eta entzun zenutena eta niregan ikusia . Eta bakea ematen digun Jainkoa zeuekin izanen duzue .
PRED:	Take away from me , and see what you have heard and heard in me , and you will be with you .
GOLD:	Keep putting into practice all you learned and received from me — everything you heard from me and saw me doing . Then the God of peace will be with you .

ID:	305
INPUT:	Orduan , Hamabietako batek , Judas Iskariote deituak , apaizburuengana joan
PRED:	One of the twelve disciples called Judas , Judas , and went to the chief priests .
GOLD:	Then Judas Iscariot , one of the twelve disciples , went to the leading priests

ID:	306
INPUT:	Matxinsaltoen erasoa
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Locusts Invade like an Army

ID:	307
INPUT:	Ikus dezadala zure aukeratuen zoriona , poz nadila zure herriaren pozarekineta zure oinordeko izateaz harrotu .
PRED:	Let the joy of thy chosen people be glad , that they may rejoice in thy name , and rejoice in thy name .
GOLD:	Let me share in the prosperity of your chosen ones.Let me rejoice in the joy of your people ; let me praise you with those who are your heritage .

ID:	308
INPUT:	Hark galdetu zion : — Zein da zure izena ? — Jakob — erantzun zion .
PRED:	And he said unto him , Who is thy name ? And Jacob said unto him , Who is thy name ?
GOLD:	“ Your name will no longer be Jacob , ” the man told him . “ From now on you will be called Israel , because you have fought with God and with men and have won . ”

ID:	309
INPUT:	Hori guztiaJaun ahalguztidunak xedatua da : haren egitasmoak harrigarriak diraeta arrakasta handikoak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of hosts says : “ His counsel and understanding and understanding . ”
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies is a wonderful teacher , and he gives the farmer great wisdom .

ID:	310
INPUT:	Elitzafanen ondorengoetarik Ximri eta Jeiel ; Asafen ondorengoetarik Zakarias eta Matanias ;
PRED:	Of the sons of Gershon , Zechariah , Zechariah , Zechariah , Zechariah , Zechariah , and Azariah .
GOLD:	From the family of Elizaphan : Shimri and Jeiel.From the family of Asaph : Zechariah and Mattaniah .

ID:	311
INPUT:	hiltzeko tresnak gertatzen ditu , suzko geziak pizten .
PRED:	And the fire of fire came upon him , and the fire of fire came upon him .
GOLD:	The wicked conceive evil ; they are pregnant with troubleand give birth to lies .

ID:	312
INPUT:	Hodeiek , aseak daudelarik , euria egin ohi dute lur gainera . Zuhaitza , hegorantz nahiz iparrerantz erori , han geldituko da , erori den tokian .
PRED:	These are the ones who sit on the earth , and the rain on the earth , and the wind will fall down to the place where it is , and it will fall .
GOLD:	When clouds are heavy , the rains come down.Whether a tree falls north or south , it stays where it falls .

ID:	313
INPUT:	berekin zituen mila gizon benjamindar eta Tziba , Saulen etxeko morroia , ere bai , beronen hamabost seme eta hogei zerbitzariekin . Hauek Jordan igaro zuten erregearen bila ,
PRED:	And the men of Benjamin and Benjamin , the servant of Saul , the servant of Saul , the servant of Saul , and of his sons , and of his sons , and of his sons , and of the Jordan , and of the king 's servants , and of the Jordan .
GOLD:	They crossed the shallows of the Jordan to bring the king 's household across the river , helping him in every way they could.As the king was about to cross the river , Shimei fell down before him .

ID:	314
INPUT:	Berdin zuek ere : hitz ulergarriak ez badituzue adierazten , nola jakin zer ari zareten esaten ? Paretari hitz egiten ariko zinatekete .
PRED:	But if you do not understand these words , how can you speak to them ? How can you speak to them ?
GOLD:	It 's the same for you . If you speak to people in words they do n't understand , how will they know what you are saying ? You might as well be talking into empty space .

ID:	315
INPUT:	Aditu zuen Elik oihua eta esan zuen : — Zer dela-eta ari dira garrasika ? Etorri zen bizkor gizona eta gertatuaren berri eman zion Eliri .
PRED:	And Eli cried out , and said , Why are they weeping ? And the man came , and told him what had happened to Elijah .
GOLD:	“ What is all the noise about ? ” Eli asked.The messenger rushed over to Eli ,

ID:	316
INPUT:	Hori da agindurik nagusiena eta lehena .
PRED:	This is the commandment and the first .
GOLD:	This is the first and greatest commandment .

ID:	317
INPUT:	Egunez , abiatu orduko , Jaunaren lainoak estaltzen zituen .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the morning , that the cloud of the Lord spread out the cloud of cloud .
GOLD:	As they moved on each day , the cloud of the Lord hovered over them .

ID:	318
INPUT:	Edozein etxetan sartzen zaretela , esazue lehenbizi : “ Bakea etxe honetakoei ” .
PRED:	When you enter into your house , say to them , “ Peace be in this house . ”
GOLD:	“ Whenever you enter someone 's home , first say , ‘ May God 's peace be on this house . '

ID:	319
INPUT:	Zenbatez zigor handiagoa ez ote du mereziko Jainkoaren Semea hankapean erabili , sagaratu duen ituneko odola profanatu eta Jainkoak onginahiz eman dion Espiritua iraintzen duenak !
PRED:	How much more more more more more more than the Son of God , the Son of God , who gives him the blood of the Spirit , and the Spirit which God gave him .
GOLD:	Just think how much worse the punishment will be for those who have trampled on the Son of God , and have treated the blood of the covenant , which made us holy , as if it were common and unholy , and have insulted and disdained the Holy Spirit who brings God 's mercy to us .

ID:	320
INPUT:	Eguzkia atera zenean , Jaunak hego-haize sargoritsua bidali zuen ; eguzkiak Jonas buruan jo zuen , ia kordegabe uzteraino . Eta heriotza opa izan zuen : « Hobe dut hil , bizi baino ! »
PRED:	When the sun came out , the Lord sent a strong wind from the east wind to the end of the sun , and he struck down the heads of the sun , and said , “ I am better than to die . ”
GOLD:	And as the sun grew hot , God arranged for a scorching east wind to blow on Jonah . The sun beat down on his head until he grew faint and wished to die . “ Death is certainly better than living like this ! ” he exclaimed .

ID:	321
INPUT:	Ez da urre garbiarekin trukatzen , ezta zilarraz erosten ere .
PRED:	There is no pure gold with gold or silver or silver .
GOLD:	It can not be bought with gold.It can not be purchased with silver .

ID:	322
INPUT:	Baina herriko jende xehea , ezeren jabe ez zena , Judako lurraldean utzi zuen , eta mahastiak eta alorrak eman zizkion .
PRED:	But the people of the land took possession of the land of Judah , and gave them their vineyard and vineyards .
GOLD:	But Nebuzaradan allowed some of the poorest people to stay behind in the land of Judah , and he assigned them to care for the vineyards and fields .

ID:	323
INPUT:	Jesusek irudi bat jarri zien : « Begira pikondoari edo beste edozein zuhaitzi :
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Look at the fig tree or any other fig tree .
GOLD:	Then he gave them this illustration : “ Notice the fig tree , or any other tree .

ID:	324
INPUT:	Hau zioen Jaunak berekiko : « Neure herria dut , neure seme-alabak : ez didate , ez , huts egingo » . Eta onik atera zituen
PRED:	The Lord said to them , “ My people are my children , and they will not be ashamed . ” And he brought them out .
GOLD:	He said , “ They are my very own people.Surely they will not betray me again . ” And he became their Savior .

ID:	325
INPUT:	Egin poz-oihu , zeruok ! Alai zaitez , lurra ! Egin poz-irrintzi , mendiok ! Jaunak bere herria kontsolatu baitu , atsekabean gupida izan dio .
PRED:	Be glad , you heavens ! Be glad ! Let the earth rejoice , you mountains , for the Lord has comfort his people .
GOLD:	Sing for joy , O heavens ! Rejoice , O earth ! Burst into song , O mountains ! For the Lord has comforted his peopleand will have compassion on them in their suffering .

ID:	326
INPUT:	Honek esan nahi du , ez duela giza sortzeak Jainkoaren benetako seme-alaba egiten , baizik eta Jainkoaren agintzariaren arabera sortuak direla Abrahamen benetako ondorengoak .
PRED:	This is what God wanted to do . He does not want to make children of men . He is the children of God . He is the promise of Abraham and his descendants .
GOLD:	This means that Abraham 's physical descendants are not necessarily children of God . Only the children of the promise are considered to be Abraham 's children .

ID:	327
INPUT:	Bide okerrera eramango ditu zurikeriazko promesez ituna hautsi dutenak . Baina sendo iraungo dute eta gogor ekingo Jainkoa aintzakotzat hartzen dutenek .
PRED:	They will bring to you the ways of the prophets who have broken the covenant of the prophets , but they will be healed , and the glory of God will be glorified .
GOLD:	He will flatter and win over those who have violated the covenant . But the people who know their God will be strong and will resist him .

ID:	328
INPUT:	« Gero , Jaunaren aurrean ahuspeztu nintzen eta , aurrekoan bezala , berrogei egun eta berrogei gau egin nituen ezer jan eta edan gabe , zuek egindako bekatuagatik barkamena eskatzen ; izan ere , Jaunari gaizki iruditzen zitzaiona egin zenuten , bera haserraraziz .
PRED:	Then I bowed down before the Lord and bowed down before me forty days and forty days and forty days , and you did n't eat any of the sins of the Lord , because you did evil in the sight of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Then , as before , I threw myself down before the Lord for forty days and nights . I ate no bread and drank no water because of the great sin you had committed by doing what the Lord hated , provoking him to anger .

ID:	329
INPUT:	« Baina Jauna haserretu egin zitzaidan zuen erruz eta ez zidan erregua onartu . Esan zidan : Aski da ! Ez zakizkit mintza berriro horretaz .
PRED:	But the Lord was angry with me , and he was not angry with me . He said to me , “ Do n't speak to me again . ”
GOLD:	“ But the Lord was angry with me because of you , and he would not listen to me . ‘ That 's enough ! ' he declared . ‘ Speak of it no more .

ID:	330
INPUT:	Lebitarburu ziren Konaniasek eta beronen senide Xemaiasek eta Netanelek , baita Haxabiasek , Jeielek eta Jozabadek ere bost mila bildots eta bostehun idi eman zizkieten lebitarrei Pazko-oparitarako .
PRED:	These were the Levites who were in charge of the Levites . Their brothers were Jeshua , Azariah , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , Azariah , Azariah , Azariah , and Jozabad . They gave the Passover offerings for the Levites .
GOLD:	The Levite leaders — Conaniah and his brothers Shemaiah and Nethanel , as well as Hashabiah , Jeiel , and Jozabad — gave 5,000 lambs and young goats and 500 cattle to the Levites for their Passover offerings .

ID:	331
INPUT:	Jainkoaren promesaz nago harro , Jaunaren agintzariaz harro ,
PRED:	The words of the mouth of the Lord came upon me , and the word of the Lord came upon me .
GOLD:	I trust in God , so why should I be afraid ? What can mere mortals do to me ?

ID:	332
INPUT:	Biok elkarri eman diogun hitzaz , berriz , izan bedi Jauna gu bion artean testigu betierean » .
PRED:	But let us speak to one another , and let the Lord be witness among us forever . ”
GOLD:	And may the Lord make us keep our promises to each other , for he has witnessed them . ”

ID:	333
INPUT:	Etorkinak , bizi deneko leinuaren baitan izango du bere zatia . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana .
PRED:	For they shall dwell in the midst of the tribe of the children of Dan : for I , the Lord God , have spoken .
GOLD:	These foreigners are to be given land within the territory of the tribe with whom they now live . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !

ID:	334
INPUT:	« Egin uraska garbikuntzetarako ; uraska eta beronen oina brontzezkoak izango dira . Ipini uraska elkarketa-etxolaren eta aldarearen artean , eta bete urez .
PRED:	“ Make them clean . They will wash their feet with bronze and bronze . They will put the water between the tent of meeting and the altar . They will be filled with water .
GOLD:	“ Make a bronze washbasin with a bronze stand . Place it between the Tabernacle and the altar , and fill it with water .

ID:	335
INPUT:	Haize indartsuak bultzaturikoibai oldartsua bezalaetorriko da Jauna , eta ekialdetik mendebalderainodenek izango diotebegirune Jaunari .
PRED:	The Lord will come like a strong wind , and he will be like a strong wind from the east side of the east . He will fear the Lord .
GOLD:	In the west , people will respect the name of the Lord ; in the east , they will glorify him.For he will come like a raging flood tidedriven by the breath of the Lord .

ID:	336
INPUT:	Zigortu ditu , bai , eta kanpora bota ; mendebal-haizearen antzekoarnasaldi gogorrezeraman ditu urrutira .
PRED:	He will punish them , and he will send them away , and he will rescue them from the midst of the wind ; he will save them from far away .
GOLD:	No , but he exiled Israel to call her to account.She was exiled from her landas though blown away in a storm from the east .

ID:	337
INPUT:	Orduan , oneratzen zer ordutan hasi zen galdegin zien . Eta haiek erantzun : — Atzo eguerdiko ordu batean alde egin zion sukarrak .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when it was done , he began to ask them , and they said unto him , It shall be for a time for the hour .
GOLD:	He asked them when the boy had begun to get better , and they replied , “ Yesterday afternoon at one o'clock his fever suddenly disappeared ! ”

ID:	338
INPUT:	Ez bedi izan zuen artean lizunik nahiz erlijiogaberik , Esau bezala ; janari batengatik saldu baitzuen hark bere lehen-semetza .
PRED:	Let him not eat any of you , as Esau , or sheep , for he saved his firstborn for his firstborn .
GOLD:	Make sure that no one is immoral or godless like Esau , who traded his birthright as the firstborn son for a single meal .

ID:	339
INPUT:	Lurralde osoak egingo du hileta-negarra , senitarteek senitarteka , gizonezkoek batetik eta emakumeek bestetik : Daviden senitarteak eta Natanenak ,
PRED:	And all the land shall weep for the Levites , and the men of the house of the house of David , and of the sons of David , and of the sons of David , and of the sons of David ,
GOLD:	“ All Israel will mourn , each clan by itself , and with the husbands separate from their wives . The clan of David will mourn alone , as will the clan of Nathan ,

ID:	340
INPUT:	gizon batzuk erosi zituzten , zurrumurru hau zabal zezaten : Estebani Moisesen eta Jainkoaren kontra hitz egiten entzun ziotela , alegia .
PRED:	They bought some men and began to say , “ This is what the Lord says to Moses and to listen to the Law of God .
GOLD:	So they persuaded some men to lie about Stephen , saying , “ We heard him blaspheme Moses , and even God . ”

ID:	341
INPUT:	Manasesen seme Makirren ondorengoek Galaadera joan eta konkistatu egin zuten , bertako amortarrak botaz .
PRED:	And the sons of Manasseh came to Gilead , and they took him , and took him , and struck him in the way of the Amorites .
GOLD:	Then the descendants of Makir of the tribe of Manasseh went to Gilead and conquered it , and they drove out the Amorites living there .

ID:	342
INPUT:	Babiloniako Nabukodonosorren erregealdiko hemeretzigarren urtean , bosgarren hilaren zazpian , Nebuzaradan Babiloniako erregearen funtzionarioa eta guardiaburua etorri zen Jerusalemera .
PRED:	In the fifth year of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon , in the fifth year of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon , in the fifth year of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon , the captain of the king of Babylon came to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	On August 14 of that year , which was the nineteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard and an official of the Babylonian king , arrived in Jerusalem .

ID:	343
INPUT:	Zu bai ederra , ene maitea , bai zoragarria ! Belardia da gure ohe ,
PRED:	You are beautiful , my beloved , and my breasts is very beautiful .
GOLD:	You are so handsome , my love , pleasing beyond words ! The soft grass is our bed ;

ID:	344
INPUT:	simeondarren leinukoa Tzurixadairen seme Xelumielen agindupean
PRED:	Of the tribe of the children of the children of the children of Asher was Complains son of Hallohesh .
GOLD:	They were joined by the troops of the tribe of Simeon , led by Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai ,

ID:	345
INPUT:	Erregeak erantzun zion : — Zoaz bakean . Jaiki eta abiatu zen Hebronerantz .
PRED:	And the king said to him , Go in peace . And the king rose up and went up to Hebron .
GOLD:	“ All right , ” the king told him . “ Go and fulfill your vow . ” So Absalom went to Hebron .

ID:	346
INPUT:	Izan ere , ba al da gizasemerik , Jainko bizia guk bezala suaren erditik mintzatzen entzun eta bizirik gelditu denik ?
PRED:	For we have a son of man , as we have heard from the fire of the fire , and we have heard it , and live ?
GOLD:	Can any living thing hear the voice of the living God from the heart of the fire as we did and yet survive ?

ID:	347
INPUT:	Baina ez jan emandako hitza , zeuen kabuz Jaunari zeuen Jainkoari agindutako botoa bete gabe utziz .
PRED:	But you shall not eat any of the word of the Lord your God , and do not obey the commandments of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ When you enter your neighbor 's vineyard , you may eat your fill of grapes , but you must not carry any away in a basket .

ID:	348
INPUT:	Ohorez beteko zaitut eta zuk eskatu guztia egingo ; zatoz , arren , eta madarika ezazu herri hori .
PRED:	I will give you this people , and I will ask you all that you ask , and come and curse them . ”
GOLD:	I will pay you very well and do whatever you tell me . Just come and curse these people for me ! ”

ID:	349
INPUT:	Erditzerakoan bikiak izan zituen .
PRED:	And when they were in the midst of the valley , they were in the midst of them .
GOLD:	And when the time came to give birth , Rebekah discovered that she did indeed have twins !

ID:	350
INPUT:	Zuen likiskeriak merezitako ordaina emango dizuete , eta idoloekin egindako bekatuen ondorenak jasango dituzue . Orduan jakingo duzue ni naizela Jauna » .
PRED:	And you shall bring your idols to your idols , and you shall bear their abominations , and you shall know that I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	You will be fully repaid for all your prostitution — your worship of idols . Yes , you will suffer the full penalty . Then you will know that I am the Sovereign Lord . ”

ID:	351
INPUT:	Lehenari Pixon zeritzan ; urrea aurkitzen den Habilako lurraldea inguratzen du .
PRED:	And the first border of the river , which is before the river : and the land thereof is round about it .
GOLD:	The first branch , called the Pishon , flowed around the entire land of Havilah , where gold is found .

ID:	352
INPUT:	Ez ibili arrandiaz indarrak erakusten , ez hitz egin horrela buru-harro » .
PRED:	Do n't see the power of the sheep , and do n't speak to them . ”
GOLD:	For no one on earth — from east or west , or even from the wilderness — should raise a defiant fist .

ID:	353
INPUT:	baina , lizunkeria dela eta , gizon bakoitzak izan beza bere emaztea eta emakume bakoitzak bere senarra .
PRED:	But if a man 's wife has sexual relations with her , she must have sexual relations with her husband and her husband .
GOLD:	But because there is so much sexual immorality , each man should have his own wife , and each woman should have her own husband .

ID:	354
INPUT:	Jaunak sortu du zerua , bera da Jainkoa ; berak eratu eta egin du lurra , berak finkatu ; ez du hutsik egoteko sortu , bizileku izateko baizik . Hau dio Jaunak : « Neu naiz Jauna , ez da besterik .
PRED:	The Lord has raised up heaven , and he has made the earth , and he has made the earth desolate , and he has not made it desolate , but he has not made it desolate , but I am the Lord .
GOLD:	For the Lord is God , and he created the heavens and earthand put everything in place.He made the world to be lived in , not to be a place of empty chaos . “ I am the Lord , ” he says , “ and there is no other .

ID:	355
INPUT:	Hiri hartan berri ona zabaldu eta ikasle asko egin ondoren , Listrara , Ikoniora eta Antiokiara itzuli ziren .
PRED:	And many disciples spread the Good News in that city , and came to Antioch and Antioch .
GOLD:	After preaching the Good News in Derbe and making many disciples , Paul and Barnabas returned to Lystra , Iconium , and Antioch of Pisidia ,

ID:	356
INPUT:	Horrela , Kristo Jesusengan gurekiko hain ona izanez agertu nahi izan die datozen gizaldiei zein ugaria eta eskuzabala den bere onginahia .
PRED:	so that the grace of Jesus Christ might be revealed to those who are in us , according to the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ , and to those who are in us .
GOLD:	So God can point to us in all future ages as examples of the incredible wealth of his grace and kindness toward us , as shown in all he has done for us who are united with Christ Jesus .

ID:	357
INPUT:	Nagusiak esan zion : “ Ederki , morroi on eta leiala ! Gauza gutxian leial izan zara , askoren buru ipiniko zaitut ; sartu zeure jaunaren festa ospatzera ” .
PRED:	His master said to him , “ You are faithful and faithful servant , and faithful servant . You are faithful in a few times , and I will put you in charge of many things . Go into your lord 's feast . ”
GOLD:	“ The master said , ‘ Well done , my good and faithful servant . You have been faithful in handling this small amount , so now I will give you many more responsibilities . Let 's celebrate together ! '

ID:	358
INPUT:	Axerren leinuko senitarteak : <unk> narengandik <unk> natarrak , Ixbirengandik ixbitarrak eta Beriarengandik beriatarrak .
PRED:	Of the sons of Asher : the sons of Asher , the family of the Levites , the family of the Levites , the family of the family of the children of Asher , the family of the children of Asher .
GOLD:	These were the clans descended from the sons of Asher : The Imnite clan , named after their ancestor Imnah.The Ishvite clan , named after their ancestor Ishvi.The Beriite clan , named after their ancestor Beriah .

ID:	359
INPUT:	Nire herriaren haragia jaten dute , larrua kentzen diote , eta hezurrak apurtzen ; eltzerako haragia bezalapuskatzen dute , lapikorako okela bezala .
PRED:	They eat my people , and take away their flesh , and take away their bones as a thief .
GOLD:	Yes , you eat my people 's flesh , strip off their skin , and break their bones.You chop them uplike meat for the cooking pot .

ID:	360
INPUT:	Banirenak 642 ;
PRED:	the sons of Pashhur , two hundred and twenty .
GOLD:	The family of Bani642

ID:	361
INPUT:	Ez dira berdinak gorputz guztiak : gauza bat da gizakiaren gorputza , bestea aberearena , bestea hegaztiena eta bestea arrainena .
PRED:	These are not the body of man : one body is the body of man , the other , the other , the other , and the other , and the other , and the other , and the other .
GOLD:	Similarly there are different kinds of flesh — one kind for humans , another for animals , another for birds , and another for fish .

ID:	362
INPUT:	Saulek erantzun zion Samueli : — Ez al dut , bada , egin Jaunaren esana ? Berak bidali ninduen bidetik ibili naiz . Ekarri dut Agag , amalektarren erregea , eta suntsitu ditut amalektarrak .
PRED:	Saul said to Samuel , “ Do n't I do what the Lord says ? I have sent me away from the way of the Lord , and I have destroyed the king of the Amalekites . ”
GOLD:	“ But I did obey the Lord , ” Saul insisted . “ I carried out the mission he gave me . I brought back King Agag , but I destroyed everyone else .

ID:	363
INPUT:	Beste zenbait ale sasi artean erori zen , eta sasiek , haztean , ito egin zuten hazia .
PRED:	And some seed fell among the seed , and when they saw it , they grew up .
GOLD:	Other seeds fell among thorns that grew up and choked out the tender plants .

ID:	364
INPUT:	Mendebaldeko muga Mediterraneo itsasoa zen . Horra , bada , Judaren leinukoei senitarteka banaturiko lurralde-zatiaren mugak .
PRED:	This is the border of the sea : it is the border of the children of Judah according to their families .
GOLD:	The western boundary was the shoreline of the Mediterranean Sea.These are the boundaries for the clans of the tribe of Judah .

ID:	365
INPUT:	Dedan , Teman eta Buz herrialdeei eta beduinoei ;
PRED:	And he hath given to his brethren , and to his brethren , and to his cities , and to his cities ;
GOLD:	I gave it to Dedan , Tema , and Buz , and to the people who live in distant places .

ID:	366
INPUT:	Heldugabeok , ikasi zuhurrak izaten ; zentzubakook , ikasi burutsuak izaten .
PRED:	You wise people are wise , and you wise people are wise .
GOLD:	You simple people , use good judgment.You foolish people , show some understanding .

ID:	367
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi Sinai mendian :
PRED:	The Lord spoke to Moses in Mount Sinai , saying ,
GOLD:	While Moses was on Mount Sinai , the Lord said to him ,

ID:	368
INPUT:	Gorets dezagun Jainkoa ! Berak fedean sendotu zaitzakete , nik hots egiten dudan berri onaren eta Jesu Kristori buruz ematen dudan mezuaren arabera . Mezu horren bidez , aspalditik ezkutuan zeukan misterioa agertu du Jainkoak .
PRED:	Let them praise God , that he may heal you in faith , in the faith which I preached to you , and by the word of the gospel which I have spoken by the word of Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	Now all glory to God , who is able to make you strong , just as my Good News says . This message about Jesus Christ has revealed his plan for you Gentiles , a plan kept secret from the beginning of time .

ID:	369
INPUT:	« Ekialdeko muga , Hauran eta Damasko artetik abiatuko da eta , Jordaneko ibarrari jarraituz , Galaad eta Israel lurraldeen artetik , Itsaso Hileraino eta Tamar hiriraino helduko da .
PRED:	The border of the east shall go out from Damascus , and from Damascus to the Jordan , and to the sea of Gilead , and to the sea of Gilead , and to the sea .
GOLD:	“ The eastern border starts at a point between Hauran and Damascus and runs south along the Jordan River between Israel and Gilead , past the Dead Sea and as far south as Tamar . This will be the eastern border .

ID:	370
INPUT:	Egin biezaie justizia herriko dohakabeei , salba bitza behartsuak , apurtu zapaltzaileak !
PRED:	Be careful to the poor , and save the poor , and save the poor .
GOLD:	Help him to defend the poor , to rescue the children of the needy , and to crush their oppressors .

ID:	371
INPUT:	Eta herri guztiek galdetuko dute : “ Zergatik tratatu ote du horrela Jaunak herrialde hori ? Zer dela-eta piztu zaio haserre izugarri hori ? ”
PRED:	And all the people shall say unto him , Why have the Lord done this thing to this land ? Why hath the Lord raised up his wrath against this land ?
GOLD:	They will exclaim , ‘ The whole land is devastated by sulfur and salt . It is a wasteland with nothing planted and nothing growing , not even a blade of grass . It is like the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah , Admah and Zeboiim , which the Lord destroyed in his intense anger . '

ID:	372
INPUT:	Maite nau Jaunak eta entzun egin du nire erregu-oihua ;
PRED:	The Lord loved me and heard my cry .
GOLD:	I love the Lord because he hears my voiceand my prayer for mercy .

ID:	373
INPUT:	Zeure jokabide higuingarri eta lizunkeria guztietan ez zinen haurtzaroko egunez , biluzik eta zeure odoletan mugituz egon zineneko garaiaz , oroitu .
PRED:	And thou shalt remember the days of thy abominations , and thy abominations , and thy abominations , and thy abominations , and in thy blood , and in thy blood , and in thy blood .
GOLD:	In all your years of adultery and detestable sin , you have not once remembered the days long ago when you lay naked in a field , kicking about in your own blood .

ID:	374
INPUT:	Zaudete niri itsatsiak , ni zuei bezala . Aihenak , mahatsondoari itsatsia ez badago , fruiturik eman ezin duen bezala , ezta zuek ere , niri itsatsiak ez bazaudete .
PRED:	Be careful to me , as I am . The Father has no fruit , but you have no fruit . You do n't know what I have said . You do n't have any fruit .
GOLD:	Remain in me , and I will remain in you . For a branch can not produce fruit if it is severed from the vine , and you can not be fruitful unless you remain in me .

ID:	375
INPUT:	Jainkoaz oroiturik , intziri dagit , hartaz pentsatzean , adorea galtzen dut .
PRED:	When I remember God , I will remember him , and I will die .
GOLD:	You do n't let me sleep.I am too distressed even to pray !

ID:	376
INPUT:	Apaiz nagusiak , zekorraren odoletik pixka bat harturik , elkarketa-etxolara eramango du ,
PRED:	The high priest shall take some of the blood of the bull , and bring it into the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	The high priest will then take some of the bull 's blood into the Tabernacle ,

ID:	377
INPUT:	Gudurako prest dauden zaldien itxura zuten matxinsaltoek ; buruan urrezkoak bezalako koroak zeramatzaten ; aurpegiak giza itxurakoak zituzten ,
PRED:	The horses of the horses are ready for battle , as the horses of the horses , and the face of a man 's face was like gold , and the face of men were like a man .
GOLD:	The locusts looked like horses prepared for battle . They had what looked like gold crowns on their heads , and their faces looked like human faces .

ID:	378
INPUT:	Orduan , esan zion profetak erregeari : — Hau dio Jaunak : « Zuk hiltzea nahi nuen gizonari ihes egiten utzi diozu . Horregatik , zeure bizia eman beharko duzu harenaren ordez , eta zeure herria harenaren ordez » .
PRED:	Then the prophet said to the king , “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ I want you to kill the man . So you will give him life , but you will live for his people . ' ”
GOLD:	The prophet said to him , “ This is what the Lord says : Because you have spared the man I said must be destroyed , now you must die in his place , and your people will die instead of his people . ”

ID:	379
INPUT:	purpura more , gorri eta gorrimina , liho fina , ahuntz-ilea ,
PRED:	purple , purple , scarlet , scarlet , scarlet , and scarlet , and goats ' hair .
GOLD:	blue , purple , and scarlet thread ; fine linen and goat hair for cloth ;

ID:	380
INPUT:	Hurbil da Jaunaren etorrera
PRED:	The Temple of the Lord
GOLD:	Jesus Is Coming

ID:	381
INPUT:	Aaronek eta semeek elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran jango dituzte ahari-okela eta saskiko ogia .
PRED:	Aaron and his sons shall eat the bread of the tent of meeting , and the bread of the tent of meeting , and the bread of bread .
GOLD:	Then Aaron and his sons will eat this meat , along with the bread in the basket , at the Tabernacle entrance .

ID:	382
INPUT:	Emakumea , erditzerakoan , triste egoten da , ordua heldu zaiolako ; haurra jaio ondoren , ordea , ahaztu egiten da larrialdiaz , mundura gizon bat ekarri duelako .
PRED:	When the woman goes into the midst of the river , she has come , but when she is born , she has forgotten the child , she has forgotten a man who has brought a man into the world .
GOLD:	It will be like a woman suffering the pains of labor . When her child is born , her anguish gives way to joy because she has brought a new baby into the world .

ID:	383
INPUT:	Gainean ditut , inguratua naute , ni lurrera botatzeko beti prest ,
PRED:	And I am round about me , and I am ready to cast me into the earth .
GOLD:	They track me down and surround me , watching for the chance to throw me to the ground .

ID:	384
INPUT:	haien erregeak katez eta handikiak girgiluz lotzeko .
PRED:	And their king shall make the great king , and the great king shall be made of pure gold .
GOLD:	to bind their kings with shacklesand their leaders with iron chains ,

ID:	385
INPUT:	Orduan , galdetu zien Zebah eta Tzalmunari : — Zer itxura zuten Taborren hil zenituzten gizonek ? Haiek erantzun zioten : — Zure antzekoak ziren ; errege-seme ziruditen denek .
PRED:	Then Gideon said to them , “ What did you want to die ? ” And they said to him , “ Your sons are like you . ”
GOLD:	Then Gideon asked Zebah and Zalmunna , “ The men you killed at Tabor — what were they like ? ” “ Like you , ” they replied . “ They all had the look of a king 's son . ”

ID:	386
INPUT:	Bizia ematen duen zuhaitza da . Zorionekoak bertatik jaten dutenak !
PRED:	The life of life is your life ; blessed are those who eat from it .
GOLD:	Wisdom is a tree of life to those who embrace her ; happy are those who hold her tightly .

ID:	387
INPUT:	Jauna borrokatuko da zuen alde . Zuek egon lasai !
PRED:	The Lord will fight for you , and you will be afraid .
GOLD:	The Lord himself will fight for you . Just stay calm . ”

ID:	388
INPUT:	Ondoren , israeldarren lurraldean zeuden idolo higuingarri guztiak desagerrarazi zituen Josiasek , eta Israelen bizi zirenek Jauna , beren Jainkoa , gurtu zezaten ahalegindu zen . Josias bizi izan zen bitartean ez ziren urrundu Jaunarengandik , beren arbasoen Jainkoarengandik .
PRED:	And he destroyed all the abominations of the children of Israel , which was in the land of the land of Israel , and served the Lord their God , the God of Israel , and did not turn away from the Lord their God of their fathers .
GOLD:	So Josiah removed all detestable idols from the entire land of Israel and required everyone to worship the Lord their God . And throughout the rest of his lifetime , they did not turn away from the Lord , the God of their ancestors .

ID:	389
INPUT:	horrela , bete-beteko izatera iritsi zelarik , betiko salbamenaren iturri bilakatu zen berari obeditzen dioten guztientzat ,
PRED:	And when he came into the same way , he came to eternal salvation for eternal salvation , to all who fear him ,
GOLD:	In this way , God qualified him as a perfect High Priest , and he became the source of eternal salvation for all those who obey him .

ID:	390
INPUT:	Batzuk ez dira ezkontzen jaiotzaz ezin dutelako ; beste batzuk , giza eskuz ezinduak izan direlako ; beste batzuk , berriz , Jainkoaren erregetzagatik hala erabaki dutelako . Onar dezakeenak onar beza .
PRED:	There are some of them who do not marry , but some of them are righteous , because they are righteous by the kingdom of God .
GOLD:	Some are born as eunuchs , some have been made eunuchs by others , and some choose not to marry for the sake of the Kingdom of Heaven . Let anyone accept this who can . ”

ID:	391
INPUT:	Zuzentasunak babesten du prestua , gaiztakeriak hondatzen bekataria .
PRED:	The righteousness of the righteous is right , and the wickedness of the wicked shall be destroyed .
GOLD:	Godliness guards the path of the blameless , but the evil are misled by sin .

ID:	392
INPUT:	Hexbonen bizi zen amortarren errege Sihon eta Axtarot-en eta Edrei-n bizi zen Baxango errege Og garaitu eta gero .
PRED:	And the days of Sihon king of the Amorites , king of the Amorites , and Og king of Bashan , and reigned in Bashan .
GOLD:	This took place after he had defeated King Sihon of the Amorites , who ruled in Heshbon , and at Edrei had defeated King Og of Bashan , who ruled in Ashtaroth .

ID:	393
INPUT:	Jaialdi bakoitzaren amaieran , Jobek semeei dei egiten zien haien garbikuntza egiteko ; egunsentian jaiki eta erre-oparia eskaintzen zuen bakoitzarengatik , semeek beharbada bekatu egin eta beren barnean Jainkoa madarikatu izango zutelakoan . Hauxe egiten zuen Jobek aldi bakoitzean .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when Joab called his sons , that they may be cleansed , that they may wash their hands , and set up their hands on the morning , and offered their burnt offering , and offered their burnt offering , and they shall be forgiven in their sins .
GOLD:	When these celebrations ended — sometimes after several days — Job would purify his children . He would get up early in the morning and offer a burnt offering for each of them . For Job said to himself , “ Perhaps my children have sinned and have cursed God in their hearts . ” This was Job 's regular practice .

ID:	394
INPUT:	Biharamunean , egunsentian , tenplura itzuli zen , eta herri guztia etorri zitzaion . Jesus , eseririk , irakasten hasi zen .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the next day , that he returned to the temple , and came to him , and he taught him .
GOLD:	but early the next morning he was back again at the Temple . A crowd soon gathered , and he sat down and taught them .

ID:	395
INPUT:	Jesus Oliamendira joan zen .
PRED:	Jesus went into the Mount of Olives .
GOLD:	Jesus returned to the Mount of Olives ,

ID:	396
INPUT:	« Egin ihes Babiloniatik , eutsi nork bere biziari ! Ez bedi inor gal haren erruz . Nire mendeku-eguna baita , eta hari bere merezia emango diot .
PRED:	“ Go away from Babylon , let no one escape his life ; let no one escape for his life , but I will give him his own son .
GOLD:	Flee from Babylon ! Save yourselves ! Do n't get trapped in her punishment ! It is the Lord 's time for vengeance ; he will repay her in full .

ID:	397
INPUT:	Moisesek Madiango apaiz Jetro bere aitaginarrebaren artaldea zaintzen zuen . Behin batean , basamortuan barrena eraman zuen artaldea eta Jainkoaren mendiraino , Horeberaino , iritsi zen .
PRED:	And Moses took the flock of his father , and took the flock of his father , and brought the flock in the wilderness , and came to the mountain of God , and came to the mountain of God .
GOLD:	One day Moses was tending the flock of his father-in-law , Jethro , the priest of Midian . He led the flock far into the wilderness and came to Sinai , the mountain of God .

ID:	398
INPUT:	Barka , otoi , zeure mirabe honen errua . Ondorengotza sendoa emanen dizu Jaunak , Jaunaren gudua ari baitzara egiten , eta bizitza osoan ez da okerkeriarik aurkitu zuregan .
PRED:	Now therefore , I pray thee , I pray thee , that thy son may be strong , for the Lord is our Lord , and there is no iniquity in thee .
GOLD:	Please forgive me if I have offended you in any way . The Lord will surely reward you with a lasting dynasty , for you are fighting the Lord 's battles . And you have not done wrong throughout your entire life .

ID:	399
INPUT:	Gorespen-kantakaltxatuko dira handik , pozezko oihuak ; ugaldu egingo ditut , eta ez dira gutxituko , ohoratu egingo , eta ez dituzte gutxietsiko .
PRED:	I will sing praises to him , and he will not cry out ; I will multiply them , and they will not break their voice , and they will not break them .
GOLD:	There will be joy and songs of thanksgiving , and I will multiply my people , not diminish them ; I will honor them , not despise them .

ID:	400
INPUT:	Jesusek ihardetsi zion : — Ur honetatik edaten duena berriro ere egarri izango da ;
PRED:	Jesus answered , “ Whoever does this water will be clean again . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ Anyone who drinks this water will soon become thirsty again .

ID:	401
INPUT:	Ez dute elkarri irakatsi beharrik izango , “ Ezagutu Jauna ” esanez , guzti-guztiek , txiki nahiz handi , ezagutuko bainaute . Barkatu egiten baitiet beren gaiztakeria , beraien bekatua ez dut gehiago gogoratuko . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	They will not teach one another , saying , ‘ Lord , ' and all of them will know me , and all the great and great , because I have sinned , ” declares the Lord . “ I will not remember their sins . ”
GOLD:	And they will not need to teach their neighbors , nor will they need to teach their relatives , saying , ‘ You should know the Lord . ' For everyone , from the least to the greatest , will know me already , ” says the Lord . “ And I will forgive their wickedness , and I will never again remember their sins . ”

ID:	402
INPUT:	Filemonen maitasuna eta sinesmena
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Paul 's Thanksgiving and Prayer

ID:	403
INPUT:	Jainkoak errebelde izaten utzi baitzien gizon-emakume guztiei , denei erruki izateko .
PRED:	For God has turned away all men , so that they may have mercy on all men .
GOLD:	For God has imprisoned everyone in disobedience so he could have mercy on everyone .

ID:	404
INPUT:	Garbikuntza egin behar duen apaizak Jaunaren aurrean , elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran , ezarriko du garbitu behar duena beraren opariekin .
PRED:	And the priest shall make atonement for him in front of the tabernacle of the Lord , and he shall put it on the entrance of the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	Then the officiating priest will present that person for purification , along with the offerings , before the Lord at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	405
INPUT:	Honek guztiak , Jauna , ez al dizu axola ? Geldi egon behar al duzu ? Amaigabeatsekabetu behar al gaituzu ?
PRED:	Have you done all these things , O Lord , do you not be sick ? Do you trust in trouble ?
GOLD:	The holy and beautiful Templewhere our ancestors praised youhas been burned down , and all the things of beauty are destroyed .

ID:	406
INPUT:	Honela bete zen Jeremias profetak esana :
PRED:	Then Jeremiah the prophet spoke to Jeremiah the prophet , saying ,
GOLD:	Herod 's brutal action fulfilled what God had spoken through the prophet Jeremiah :

ID:	407
INPUT:	Hau Liburu Santuak dioena bete zedin gertatu zen : Ez zaio hezurrik hautsiko .
PRED:	It was written that it was written , “ There will be no bones . ”
GOLD:	These things happened in fulfillment of the Scriptures that say , “ Not one of his bones will be broken , ”

ID:	408
INPUT:	Horregatik egin nien nik ere aurka eta etsaien lurraldera eraman , ea horrela haien barru sinesgogorra apaltzen zen eta zigorra merezia zutela aitortzen zuten .
PRED:	So I turned my face against them , and brought them into the land of their enemies , that they might know that they had come upon them .
GOLD:	When I have turned their hostility back on them and brought them to the land of their enemies , then at last their stubborn hearts will be humbled , and they will pay for their sins .

ID:	409
INPUT:	Ai nire aginduei jaramonegin izan bazenie ! Ibaika izango zenuke zoriona , uholdeka salbamena ;
PRED:	If you would listen to my commands , you would listen to my commands . You would be good , and you would be saved .
GOLD:	Oh , that you had listened to my commands ! Then you would have had peace flowing like a gentle riverand righteousness rolling over you like waves in the sea .

ID:	410
INPUT:	Izena biziaren liburuan idatzirik ez zutenak ere suzko aintzirara jaurti zituzten .
PRED:	And they were written in the book of the name of the living , and cast them into the sea .
GOLD:	And anyone whose name was not found recorded in the Book of Life was thrown into the lake of fire .

ID:	411
INPUT:	Azken tokiak aukeratu eta behartsuak gonbidatu
PRED:	The Death of the poor
GOLD:	Jesus Teaches about Humility

ID:	412
INPUT:	Zuen artean jakintsua eta bizitzan asko ikasia denik badela ? Erakuts dezala bere jokabide jatorraz , jakinduriari darion gozotasunean biziz .
PRED:	But if you are wise and wise , how can you teach me the way of wisdom and knowledge in wisdom .
GOLD:	If you are wise and understand God 's ways , prove it by living an honorable life , doing good works with the humility that comes from wisdom .

ID:	413
INPUT:	Hori ikustean , ikasleek , haserre , honela zioten : — Zergatik alferrik galdu horrela ?
PRED:	When his disciples saw this , they said to him , “ Why did this mean ? ”
GOLD:	The disciples were indignant when they saw this . “ What a waste ! ” they said .

ID:	414
INPUT:	Izan ere , hau dio Liburu Santuak : Egin poz-oihu emakume agor eta haur gabe horrek ! Ekin kantari pozaren pozez , erdiminik izan ez duzun horrek ! Bakarrik utziaren seme-alabak gehiago izango baitira , senardunarenak baino .
PRED:	For it is written in the Scriptures : “ Be glad , women , women , women , women , and children ! You have no children , but you have no children . ”
GOLD:	As Isaiah said , “ Rejoice , O childless woman , you who have never given birth ! Break into a joyful shout , you who have never been in labor ! For the desolate woman now has more childrenthan the woman who lives with her husband ! ”

ID:	415
INPUT:	Garbitu egin zaituztet , baina ez zilarra bezala , sufrimenduaren arragoanprobatuz baizik .
PRED:	I have washed you as silver , but not as silver , but not as it is for you .
GOLD:	I have refined you , but not as silver is refined.Rather , I have refined you in the furnace of suffering .

ID:	416
INPUT:	Inoiz egin ote diot uko behartsuen eskubideari ? Utzi ote dut alarguntsarik negarrez lehertzen ?
PRED:	How long will I do to the poor ? Will I leave the widow and weep ?
GOLD:	“ Have I refused to help the poor , or crushed the hopes of widows ?

ID:	417
INPUT:	Oharpen hauek egiten dizkizuedalarik , ezin ditut ontzat eman zuen batzarrak , on baino kalte handiagoa egiten baitizuete .
PRED:	I am not able to do these things to you , for I am not able to give you more than they do .
GOLD:	But in the following instructions , I can not praise you . For it sounds as if more harm than good is done when you meet together .

ID:	418
INPUT:	Eta tronuan eseria zegoenak esan zuen : « Hara , gauza guztiak berri egiten ditut » . Eta erantsi zuen : « Idatzi esaten dudan hau egiazkoa eta fidagarria dela » .
PRED:	And he sat on the throne , and said , Behold , I have done all things ; and he said , This is the true that I have written , and that I have written .
GOLD:	And the one sitting on the throne said , “ Look , I am making everything new ! ” And then he said to me , “ Write this down , for what I tell you is trustworthy and true . ”

ID:	419
INPUT:	Jaunak gauez agertu eta esan zion : « Entzun dut zure otoitza , eta toki hau hautatu dut opariak bertan eskain diezazkidaten .
PRED:	And the Lord appeared to him in the night , and said , I have heard thy prayer , and I have chosen this place .
GOLD:	Then one night the Lord appeared to Solomon and said , “ I have heard your prayer and have chosen this Temple as the place for making sacrifices .

ID:	420
INPUT:	Hauek ere Salomonen esaera zaharrak dira , Judako errege Ezekiasen funtzionarioek jasoak .
PRED:	These are the elders of Solomon , and all the princes of Judah , and all the princes of Hezekiah king of Judah .
GOLD:	These are more proverbs of Solomon , collected by the advisers of King Hezekiah of Judah .

ID:	421
INPUT:	Kontuz emakume lotsagabearekin
PRED:	Do n't be defiled with a woman
GOLD:	Avoid Immoral Women

ID:	422
INPUT:	Harat-honat zebiltzan judu e<unk> <unk> ta batzuk ere Jesus Jaunaren izenaz baliatzen hasi ziren , espiritu gaiztoak botatzeko . Honela esaten zieten : « Paulok hots egiten duen Jesusen izenean , irteteko agintzen dizuet ! »
PRED:	And when they were gathered together , some Jews began to cast out the name of the Lord Jesus , saying , “ When you speak , I tell you , Paul , I tell you . ”
GOLD:	A group of Jews was traveling from town to town casting out evil spirits . They tried to use the name of the Lord Jesus in their incantation , saying , “ I command you in the name of Jesus , whom Paul preaches , to come out ! ”

ID:	423
INPUT:	Zuek irakurri ondoren , bidali gutun hau Laodizeako eliz elkarteari ere , irakur dezaten . Eta zuek ere irakurri Laodizeara bidali nuena .
PRED:	When you read this letter , you must be read to the church of the church , so that you may be read to you .
GOLD:	After you have read this letter , pass it on to the church at Laodicea so they can read it , too . And you should read the letter I wrote to them .

ID:	424
INPUT:	Pedrok erantzun zion : — Arrotzengandik . Jesusek , orduan : — Etxekoak libre daude , beraz .
PRED:	Peter said to him , “ They are free from the fish . ” And he said to them , “ The house are free . ”
GOLD:	“ They tax the people they have conquered , ” Peter replied . “ Well , then , ” Jesus said , “ the citizens are free !

ID:	425
INPUT:	Eta zuk , epai itzazu , epaitu , gizaseme ! Aurpegira iezaiezu beren gurasoen jokaera higuingarria .
PRED:	You , son of man , judge your face , and judge your face . You have seen the abominations of their fathers .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , bring charges against them and condemn them . Make them realize how detestable the sins of their ancestors really were .

ID:	426
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jainkoak bidaliak hitz egitean , Jainkoak berak hitz egiten du , neurririk gabe ematen baitio bere Espiritua .
PRED:	For when God sent them to speak , God speaks to them , because the Spirit has not been given to him .
GOLD:	For he is sent by God . He speaks God 's words , for God gives him the Spirit without limit .

ID:	427
INPUT:	Txalupa , ordurako , lehorretik urruti zihoan , uhinek astindua , haizea kontra baitzuen .
PRED:	And when he was taken away from the water , he stretched out his hand , because the wind was dried up against him .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the disciples were in trouble far away from land , for a strong wind had risen , and they were fighting heavy waves .

ID:	428
INPUT:	Mardokeo juduak eta Ester erreginak agindu zutenaren arabera , Purim Jaiak esaniko egunetan egiteko aginduz . Berentzat eta beren ondorengoentzat antolatu zituzten egun hauek , baraualdi eta negar-kantuei buruzko arauak ere erantsiz .
PRED:	And the Jews and Mordecai commanded the Jews to do what Mordecai had commanded , and they commanded them to do in the days of Mordecai , and to their sons , and to their sons , and to their generations , and to their generations , and to their generations .
GOLD:	These letters established the Festival of Purim — an annual celebration of these days at the appointed time , decreed by both Mordecai the Jew and Queen Esther . ( The people decided to observe this festival , just as they had decided for themselves and their descendants to establish the times of fasting and mourning . )

ID:	429
INPUT:	Santiago eta Joanek , Zebedeoren semeek , Jesusengana hurbildu eta esan zioten : — Maisu , eskatuko dizuguna zuk ematea nahi genuke .
PRED:	John and John 's sons came to Jesus and said to him , “ Teacher , we want you to ask you . ”
GOLD:	Then James and John , the sons of Zebedee , came over and spoke to him . “ Teacher , ” they said , “ we want you to do us a favor . ”

ID:	430
INPUT:	Oparia eskaintzen zuen egunean , Elkanak bere emazte Peninari eta honen seme-alaba guztiei oparigaiaren zati bana eman ohi zien .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the day of the burnt offering , that he offered his wife , and his sons , and his daughters , and his daughters , and his daughters , and his daughters .
GOLD:	On the days Elkanah presented his sacrifice , he would give portions of the meat to Peninnah and each of her children .

ID:	431
INPUT:	Jaun ahalguztidunak erabaki du , ospezale horienharrokeria beheratzeko , mundu guztian ohoratuak zirenaklotsarazteko .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of hosts says : “ The glory of the Lord of hosts will be put to shame on all the earth . ”
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has done itto destroy your prideand bring low all earth 's nobility .

ID:	432
INPUT:	Anatoten , Noben , Ananiasen ,
PRED:	Of the sons of Noah , Zechariah , and Azariah ,
GOLD:	They also lived in Anathoth , Nob , Ananiah ,

ID:	433
INPUT:	Orduan , beren gizonekin Gedaliasengana joan ziren Mitzpara . Hauek ziren gudalburuak : Netaniasen seme Ismael , Kareahen seme Johanan eta Jonatan , Tanhumeten seme Seraias , Netofako Ofairen semeak eta Maakako Jezanias .
PRED:	Then they went to Mizpah , and they went to Mizpah . These were the captains of the army of the army : Azariah son of Shealtiel , Azariah son of Shealtiel , and Benaiah son of Shealtiel , and Benaiah son of Shealtiel , and Azariah son of Shealtiel .
GOLD:	So they went to see Gedaliah at Mizpah . These included : Ishmael son of Nethaniah , Johanan and Jonathan sons of Kareah , Seraiah son of Tanhumeth , the sons of Ephai the Netophathite , Jezaniah son of the Maacathite , and all their men .

ID:	434
INPUT:	Hurbildu zitzaion Saul Samueli hiriko atera , eta esan zion : — Otoi , esadazu non den ikuslearen etxea .
PRED:	And Saul came near to the city of Samuel , and said to him , “ Please tell me where the house where you are . ”
GOLD:	Just then Saul approached Samuel at the gateway and asked , “ Can you please tell me where the seer 's house is ? ”

ID:	435
INPUT:	Heziketa ezarengatik hilko da , bere zentzugabekeria handiarengatik galduko .
PRED:	He will die because of his wickedness , and he will die because of his wickedness .
GOLD:	He will die for lack of self-control ; he will be lost because of his great foolishness .

ID:	436
INPUT:	Une hartantxe , lurrikara handia izan zen eta hiriaren hamarreko bat erori zen ; lurrikaran zazpi mila lagun hil ziren , eta gainerakoek , beldurrez beterik , zeruko Jainkoa goretsi zuten .
PRED:	At that time there was a great earth , and a tenth of the city fell in the tenth of his city , and the rest of the seven thousand , and the rest of them were afraid of God in heaven .
GOLD:	At the same time there was a terrible earthquake that destroyed a tenth of the city . Seven thousand people died in that earthquake , and everyone else was terrified and gave glory to the God of heaven .

ID:	437
INPUT:	Urrerik finenak ez du haren baliorik , ezta onize eder nahiz zafiroek ere .
PRED:	There is no peace in him , nor in him , nor in every precious thing , nor in every kind of wine , nor in every way .
GOLD:	It 's worth more than all the gold of Ophir , greater than precious onyx or lapis lazuli .

ID:	438
INPUT:	Buruzagiak harrapakina urratzen duten otsoak bezalakoak dira : odola isurtzen eta jendea garbitzen dute , berak aberasteko .
PRED:	The princes of the princes are like a man who is caught by the sword , and the people eat their blood , and they eat their riches .
GOLD:	Your leaders are like wolves who tear apart their victims . They actually destroy people 's lives for money !

ID:	439
INPUT:	Raba , gameluen esparru bihurtuko dut eta amondarren herrialdea artaldeentzako eskorta ; orduan jakingo duzue ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	And I will make her a distance for the children of Ammon , and the land of Ammon , and ye shall know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And I will turn the city of Rabbah into a pasture for camels , and all the land of the Ammonites into a resting place for sheep and goats . Then you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	440
INPUT:	justizia egiten die umezurtz eta alargunari , eta maite du etorkina , jatekoa eta janztekoa ematen dizkiolarik .
PRED:	He gives justice to the widow , the widow , and he loves the widow , and he gives them food .
GOLD:	He ensures that orphans and widows receive justice . He shows love to the foreigners living among you and gives them food and clothing .

ID:	441
INPUT:	Aitaginarrebak , neskaren aitak , etxean geldiarazi zuen eta bertan egon zen hiru egunez . Jan , edan eta bertan ematen zuten gaua .
PRED:	And his father 's father stood in the house of his father , and stayed there three days ; and they ate and drank there .
GOLD:	Her father urged him to stay awhile , so he stayed three days , eating , drinking , and sleeping there .

ID:	442
INPUT:	Esna zaitezte , mozkor horiek , eta egizue negar ! Egin garrasi , ardozaleok ! Ez duzue jadanik ardorik dastatuko .
PRED:	Be ye drunk , and weep , and weep ; weep ye , ye lambs ; ye shall not drink wine .
GOLD:	Wake up , you drunkards , and weep ! Wail , all you wine-drinkers ! All the grapes are ruined , and all your sweet wine is gone .

ID:	443
INPUT:	Berreskuratzea lortzen ez badu , nolanahi ere Jubileu Urtean libre geldituko da bere seme-alabekin batera .
PRED:	If it is not sold , then it shall be sold in the year of the field , then it shall be in the year of his sons .
GOLD:	If any Israelites have not been bought back by the time the Year of Jubilee arrives , they and their children must be set free at that time .

ID:	444
INPUT:	Horregatik , beren ondasunak bildueta Sarats errekaz beste alderadaramatzate .
PRED:	So they will bring their wealth and bring them to the other side of Sheba .
GOLD:	The people grab their possessionsand carry them across the Ravine of Willows .

ID:	445
INPUT:	Edan asetzerainoharen bular gozotik ! Xurgatu atseginezharen ugatz oparotik !
PRED:	As far as the border of the Lord , and as far as the border of Lebanon .
GOLD:	Drink deeply of her gloryeven as an infant drinks at its mother 's comforting breasts . ”

ID:	446
INPUT:	Ondoren , oparigaiaren zatiak eta burua eraman zizkioten eta Aaronek aldarean erre zituen .
PRED:	Then they brought the burnt offering and brought it to Aaron , and Aaron burned it on the altar .
GOLD:	Then they handed him each piece of the burnt offering , including the head , and he burned them on the altar .

ID:	447
INPUT:	Hobabek erantzun zion : — Ez , ez noa . Nahiago dut neure herrialdera itzuli , neure ahaideengana .
PRED:	And he said to him , “ No , I will not return to my land , and return to my brethren . ”
GOLD:	But Hobab replied , “ No , I will not go . I must return to my own land and family . ”

ID:	448
INPUT:	Nebaten seme Jeroboamen jokabide bera hartu zuen , hark egin eta Israeli eginarazi zizkion bekatu berak eginez .
PRED:	And he walked in the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat , and walked in the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat , and made Israel sin .
GOLD:	He followed the example of Jeroboam son of Nebat in all the sins he had committed and led Israel to commit . The people provoked the anger of the Lord , the God of Israel , with their worthless idols .

ID:	449
INPUT:	Hau da Israelgo leinuen artean banatuko duzuen lurraldea , hauek leinuei dagozkien ondare-zatiak . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana .
PRED:	This is the inheritance of the tribes of Israel , according to their families , according to their families , says the Lord God .
GOLD:	“ These are the allotments that will be set aside for each tribe 's exclusive possession . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !

ID:	450
INPUT:	Ez daitezela ardura han uzten dutenaz , Egiptoko eskualderik emankorrena izango baitute » .
PRED:	And they shall not bring them into the hand of the Egyptians , for they shall be given into the hand of Egypt .
GOLD:	Do n't worry about your personal belongings , for the best of all the land of Egypt is yours . ' ”

ID:	451
INPUT:	Davidek birrindu egiten zuen lurralde hura ; ez zuen bizirik uzten , ez gizasemerik , ez emakumerik . Ardi , idi , asto , gamelu eta soinekoak ere ostu ohi zituen . Itzultzean , Akixengana joaten zen .
PRED:	David did not leave the land . He did n't let a man live . He did n't let him live . He did n't let him go back to him .
GOLD:	David did not leave one person alive in the villages he attacked . He took the sheep , goats , cattle , donkeys , camels , and clothing before returning home to see King Achish .

ID:	452
INPUT:	Israeldarrak eta jentilak
PRED:	The Israelites and Israel
GOLD:	God 's Mercy Is for Everyone

ID:	453
INPUT:	Babilonia osoa hondatuko dute , nahi beste harrapakin eramango . Nik , Jaunak , esana .
PRED:	And all Babylon shall be destroyed , and they shall be taken into captivity , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	Babylonia will be looteduntil the attackers are glutted with loot.I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	454
INPUT:	eta Xutelahen seme Eranengandik erandarrak .
PRED:	and of the family of Gershon , the son of Hallohesh .
GOLD:	This was the subclan descended from the Shuthelahites : The Eranites , named after their ancestor Eran .

ID:	455
INPUT:	estropezu egiten zuena zeure hitzez altxatueta okertutako belaunak zuzendu izan dituzu ;
PRED:	You have made your promise , and you have made your promise , and you have done wrong .
GOLD:	Your words have supported those who were falling ; you encouraged those with shaky knees .

ID:	456
INPUT:	Berrogeiren bat urtez eroapenez gidatu zituen basamortuan zehar
PRED:	In the wilderness of forty years , in the wilderness of the wilderness ,
GOLD:	He put up with them through forty years of wandering in the wilderness .

ID:	457
INPUT:	Elihuk gaineratu zuen :
PRED:	Then Jehu said ,
GOLD:	Elihu continued speaking :

ID:	458
INPUT:	Denok ni bezala ezkongabe izatea nahi nuke ; baina Jainkoak eman dion dohain berezia du bakoitzak , batak hau eta besteak hura .
PRED:	I want to marry anyone as I want to marry , but God has given to each one another and another .
GOLD:	But I wish everyone were single , just as I am . Yet each person has a special gift from God , of one kind or another .

ID:	459
INPUT:	Errege hauek gudu egin zieten Sodomako Bera , Gomorrako <unk> xa , Admako Xinab , Tze<unk> go Xemeber erregeei eta Belako , hau da , Tzoarko , erregeari .
PRED:	These are the days that the king of Sodom had done to the king of Sodom , and Elioenai , the king of Hamath , the king of Persia , the king of Persia , the king of Persia .
GOLD:	fought against King Bera of Sodom , King Birsha of Gomorrah , King Shinab of Admah , King Shemeber of Zeboiim , and the king of Bela ( also called Zoar ) .

ID:	460
INPUT:	Haiekin hizketan ari zelarik , han agertu zen filistearren lerro artetik Goliat izeneko gizon adoretsu hura , Gateko filistearra , lehengo erronka bera eginez . Davidek entzun egin zion .
PRED:	While he was still speaking with them , he appeared to a man of the Philistines , who was a blind man of the Philistines , and he heard him before the Philistines .
GOLD:	As he was talking with them , Goliath , the Philistine champion from Gath , came out from the Philistine ranks . Then David heard him shout his usual taunt to the army of Israel .

ID:	461
INPUT:	Zeure jantzi bordatuak hartu eta beraiekin estali zenituen irudiak , eta nire olioa eta intsentsua eskaini .
PRED:	You took your garments and put them on their garments , and burn them with them , and burn incense to me .
GOLD:	You used the beautifully embroidered clothes I gave you to dress your idols . Then you used my special oil and my incense to worship them .

ID:	462
INPUT:	Bihurria da gaizkilearen jokabidea , zuzena bihotz garbikoaren portaera .
PRED:	The way of the wicked is the way of the wicked , and the way of the righteous shall be destroyed .
GOLD:	The guilty walk a crooked path ; the innocent travel a straight road .

ID:	463
INPUT:	Jaun ahalguztiduna Egiptoko lurraldean dagoenaren ezaugarri izango dira . Zapaltzen dituztenen aurka Jaunari laguntza eske dei egingo diotenean , hark salbatzailea bidaliko die defendatzera eta askatzera .
PRED:	And the Lord of hosts shall be a sign in the land of Egypt : and when they call on the name of the Lord of hosts , he shall save them , and he shall save them .
GOLD:	It will be a sign and a witness that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies is worshiped in the land of Egypt . When the people cry to the Lord for help against those who oppress them , he will send them a savior who will rescue them .

ID:	464
INPUT:	Zaharrenak semea izan zuen , eta Moab eman zion izen ; berau da gaur eguneko moabdarren arbasoa .
PRED:	And she bore a son , and gave him a son , and he named Moab the father of Moab today .
GOLD:	When the older daughter gave birth to a son , she named him Moab . He became the ancestor of the nation now known as the Moabites .

ID:	465
INPUT:	« Jaiki eta aitaren etxera abiatu zen . Oraindik urruti zegoela , ikusi zuen aitak eta errukitu egin zen ; eta , lasterka joanik , besarkatu eta musuka hasi zitzaion .
PRED:	And he rose up and went into the house of his father 's father ; and his father saw that his father had pity on him , and ran away , and came to him .
GOLD:	“ So he returned home to his father . And while he was still a long way off , his father saw him coming . Filled with love and compassion , he ran to his son , embraced him , and kissed him .

ID:	466
INPUT:	Jainkoa Moisesi eta Josueri agertu
PRED:	Moses and Joshua
GOLD:	The Song of Moses

ID:	467
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Egun hartan , eguerdi beteansarraraziko dut eguzkia , eta egun-argitan ilunduko dut lurra .
PRED:	In that day I will bring the sun in that day , and I will bring the sun into the sun , and I will make the darkness in the darkness .
GOLD:	“ In that day , ” says the Sovereign Lord , “ I will make the sun go down at noonand darken the earth while it is still day .

ID:	468
INPUT:	Hilkiasen familian Haxabias , eta Jedaiasen familian Netanel .
PRED:	Of the family of Jeremiah , Zechariah , Zechariah , Zechariah , and Zechariah .
GOLD:	Hashabiah was leader of the family of Hilkiah.Nethanel was leader of the family of Jedaiah .

ID:	469
INPUT:	eta ez Moisesek bezala , hark zapi batez estaltzen baitzuen aurpegia , israeldarrek distira iragankor hura desagertu egiten zela ikus ez zezaten .
PRED:	And Moses did not see the face of his face , as Moses did , that the children of Israel would not see that the glory of his face was revealed .
GOLD:	We are not like Moses , who put a veil over his face so the people of Israel would not see the glory , even though it was destined to fade away .

ID:	470
INPUT:	« Ai , bizi ahal banitu berriz iragan egunak ! Orduan , Jainkoak zaintzen ninduen ,
PRED:	“ But if I live in the day of my life , then God will keep me safe .
GOLD:	“ I long for the years gone bywhen God took care of me ,

ID:	471
INPUT:	herio-leizeko lokarriekninduten lotu , herio-sareek harrapatu .
PRED:	I am afraid of death , and I am afraid , and I am afraid .
GOLD:	The grave wrapped its ropes around me ; death laid a trap in my path .

ID:	472
INPUT:	Jariodunaren etzalekua ukitzen duenak arropak eta gorputza garbituko ditu eta kutsaturik geldituko da arratsa arte .
PRED:	If any man touches his clothes , he shall wash his clothes and wash his clothes , and he shall be unclean until evening .
GOLD:	So if you touch the man 's bed , you must wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water , and you will remain unclean until evening .

ID:	473
INPUT:	Anaia hura hona ekartzeko esan zenigun zure zerbitzarioi , ikusi nahi zenuela eta .
PRED:	And thou hast said unto thy servants , Behold , I have seen thy brother , that thou hast seen my brother .
GOLD:	“ And you said to us , ‘ Bring him here so I can see him with my own eyes . '

ID:	474
INPUT:	Davidek gogo hau adierazi zuen : « Norbaitek Belengo atean dagoen urtegitik ura ekarriko balit edateko… ! »
PRED:	David said to them , “ If anyone is at Bethlehem , let me drink water from the year that he is at Bethlehem . ”
GOLD:	David remarked longingly to his men , “ Oh , how I would love some of that good water from the well by the gate in Bethlehem . ”

ID:	475
INPUT:	eta gutun hau eman zieten eramateko : « Anaia apostoluek eta arduradunek Antiokiako , Siriako eta Ziliziako jentil-herrietako senideoi , agur !
PRED:	And they gave this letter to them , saying , “ The apostles and the elders of the elders of Antioch and Antioch , the elders of Syria , and the elders of the people of Syria .
GOLD:	This is the letter they took with them : “ This letter is from the apostles and elders , your brothers in Jerusalem . It is written to the Gentile believers in Antioch , Syria , and Cilicia . Greetings !

ID:	476
INPUT:	Herriak , bada , atseden hartu zuen zazpigarren egunean .
PRED:	So the people took rest on the seventh day .
GOLD:	So the people did not gather any food on the seventh day .

ID:	477
INPUT:	eta esan zien : — Badakit Jaunak lurralde hau eman dizuela . Hemen , hirian , izuturik gaude eta herrialdeko jende guztia ere ikaraz dago zuen aurrean ,
PRED:	And he said to them , “ I know that the Lord has given you this land . When we are in the city , all the people of the land , and all the people of the land ,
GOLD:	“ I know the Lord has given you this land , ” she told them . “ We are all afraid of you . Everyone in the land is living in terror .

ID:	478
INPUT:	Eliren heriotza
PRED:	The Death of Elijah
GOLD:	The Death of Eli

ID:	479
INPUT:	Bat bakarra da nire usoa , bakarra eta akatsik gabea , amaren kutuna . Zoriontsu diotse neskatxek ikustean , erreginek eta ohaideek honela goraipatzen :
PRED:	The one is the one who is left , and the daughter of my mother , and the mother of the mother , and the daughter of my mother , and the women who see the house , and all the men who are in the midst of her .
GOLD:	I would still choose my dove , my perfect one — the favorite of her mother , dearly loved by the one who bore her.The young women see her and praise her ; even queens and royal concubines sing her praises :

ID:	480
INPUT:	Haren aginduzurak zeruan pilatzen dira , hodeiak zerumugan gora igotzen , erauntsiak tximistaka lehertzen , haizea bere gordelekuetatikateratzen .
PRED:	His commandments are under the heavens , and the clouds rose up in the heavens , and the clouds is covered with fire , and the wind is under the wind .
GOLD:	When he speaks in the thunder , the heavens roar with rain.He causes the clouds to rise over the earth.He sends the lightning with the rainand releases the wind from his storehouses .

ID:	481
INPUT:	“ Entzun duzu nik toki honetan bizi direnen kontra esan dudana . Horregatik , zure bihotza bigundu egin da eta apaldu egin zara nire aurrean . Nire aurrean apaldu zarelako , zeure jantziak urratu eta negar egin duzulako , nik ere entzun dizut . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	You have heard what I have said to you in this place . So your heart has turned away from me , and your heart has turned away from me , because you have heard your clothes and wept .
GOLD:	You were sorry and humbled yourself before God when you heard his words against this city and its people . You humbled yourself and tore your clothing in despair and wept before me in repentance . And I have indeed heard you , says the Lord .

ID:	482
INPUT:	mendialdea zuena izango baita . Nahiz eta baso hutsa den , soildu egingo duzue eta zuena izango da alde batetik bestera . Gainera , kanaandarrak ere botako dituzue , nahiz eta burdinazko guda-gurdiak dituzten eta indartsuak diren .
PRED:	For it shall be for you , and you shall be cut off , and you shall be cut off from one side ; and the Canaanites shall be cut off from another side , and the Canaanites , and the chariots of iron , and of iron , and of iron , and of iron .
GOLD:	The forests of the hill country will be yours as well . Clear as much of the land as you wish , and take possession of its farthest corners . And you will drive out the Canaanites from the valleys , too , even though they are strong and have iron chariots . ”

ID:	483
INPUT:	Barrez beteko dizu oraindik ahoa , poz-irrintziz ezpainak .
PRED:	I will make you happy with joy , and I will sing with joy .
GOLD:	He will once again fill your mouth with laughterand your lips with shouts of joy .

ID:	484
INPUT:	« Ongi da » erantzungo balu , lasai nintzateke ; haserretuko balitz , ordea , gauza jakina litzateke erabakia duela ni hondatzea .
PRED:	If I would answer , I would answer , but if I would be angry , I would know that I would be angry .
GOLD:	If he says , ‘ Fine ! ' you will know all is well . But if he is angry and loses his temper , you will know he is determined to kill me .

ID:	485
INPUT:	Berrogei urte nituen Moisesek , Jaunaren zerbitzariak , Kadex-Barneatik lurralde hau ikertzera bidali ninduenean ; barruak agintzen zidan eran eman nion hemengo berri .
PRED:	And when I had sent me out of the land of Canaan , I sent me out of the land of Canaan , and gave me the word of the Lord .
GOLD:	I was forty years old when Moses , the servant of the Lord , sent me from Kadesh-barnea to explore the land of Canaan . I returned and gave an honest report ,

ID:	486
INPUT:	Hirugarren egunean , Saulen kanpalekutik zetorren gizon bat agertu zen ; jantziak urraturik eta burua hautsez estalirik zekartzan . Davidengana heltzean , lurreraino ahuspeztu zen .
PRED:	On the third day a man came out of the camp of Saul . He tore his clothes and tore his clothes on his head . When he came to David , he bowed down to the ground .
GOLD:	On the third day a man arrived from Saul 's army camp . He had torn his clothes and put dirt on his head to show that he was in mourning . He fell to the ground before David in deep respect .

ID:	487
INPUT:	Goberna ote lezake zuzenbideari gorroto dionak ? Nola ausartzen zara Zuzen-zuzena gaitzestera ?
PRED:	How can you hate those who hate justice ? How can you judge the righteous ?
GOLD:	Could God govern if he hated justice ? Are you going to condemn the almighty judge ?

ID:	488
INPUT:	Izan ere , jende errebelde , berritsu eta liluratzaile asko dago , judu-jatorrikoen artean batez ere .
PRED:	For many of the people are many Jews and blind , and many of the Jews , and of the Jews .
GOLD:	For there are many rebellious people who engage in useless talk and deceive others . This is especially true of those who insist on circumcision for salvation .

ID:	489
INPUT:	Horra zer egingo dugun : Egin diegun zinarengatik , bizirik utziko ditugu , Jainkoak zigor ez gaitzan .
PRED:	This is what we will do for the nations , so that we will not leave us .
GOLD:	This is what we must do . We must let them live , for divine anger would come upon us if we broke our oath .

ID:	490
INPUT:	Egin beza orro itsasoak eta bertako guztiak , munduak eta bertan bizi direnek !
PRED:	Let the sea and all that are in it be done , and all that dwell in it .
GOLD:	Let the sea and everything in it shout his praise ! Let the earth and all living things join in .

ID:	491
INPUT:	Eta hamabi ateak hamabi perla ziren , bakoitza perla bakarraz egina , eta hiriko plaza urre hutsezkoa , beira gardena bezalakoa .
PRED:	And twelve gates were twelve steps , each one in the city , and twelve gold in the city , as pure gold as pure gold .
GOLD:	The twelve gates were made of pearls — each gate from a single pearl ! And the main street was pure gold , as clear as glass .

ID:	492
INPUT:	<unk> -zuria basamortuan bezala nago , gau-hontza hiri-hondakinen artean bezala .
PRED:	I am like a wilderness in the wilderness , and I am like a desolation in the wilderness .
GOLD:	I lie awake , lonely as a solitary bird on the roof .

ID:	493
INPUT:	Nik , Jaunak , hitz egin dut eta bete egingo dut , atzera egin gabe ; ez naiz errukituko , ez damutuko . Zure jokabidearen eta egintza txarren arabera epaituko zaitut . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	I , the Lord , have spoken to them , and I will not have pity on them ; I will not have pity on you , and I will judge you according to your ways , ” says the Lord God .
GOLD:	“ I , the Lord , have spoken ! The time has come , and I wo n't hold back . I will not change my mind , and I will have no pity on you . You will be judged on the basis of all your wicked actions , says the Sovereign Lord . ”

ID:	494
INPUT:	Amram Lebiren alaba batekin , Lebik Egipton izan zuenarekin , ezkondu zen ; Jokebed zuen izena . Honek hiru seme-alaba sortu zizkion Amrami : Aaron , Moises eta hauen arreba Miriam .
PRED:	And Amnon 's daughter , who was with him in the land of Egypt ; and she had a wife ; and she bore to him three sons , and Aaron , and Aaron , and Aaron , and his sister .
GOLD:	and Amram 's wife was named Jochebed . She also was a descendant of Levi , born among the Levites in the land of Egypt . Amram and Jochebed became the parents of Aaron , Moses , and their sister , Miriam .

ID:	495
INPUT:	Ez zen Anaken ondorengorik bat ere gelditu israeldarren lurraldean , Gaza , Gad eta Axdod hirietan gelditu ziren arren .
PRED:	There was no descendants left in the land of Reuben , Gad , Gad , and Ashdod .
GOLD:	None of the descendants of Anak were left in all the land of Israel , though some still remained in Gaza , Gath , and Ashdod .

ID:	496
INPUT:	Bela Beorren semea , <unk> haba hirikoa ;
PRED:	And he was the son of Healed , the son of Hallohesh ,
GOLD:	Bela son of Beor , who ruled in Edom from his city of Dinhabah .

ID:	497
INPUT:	« Ni , Jauna , ez naiz aldatu ; baina zuek ere Jakoben ondorengo izaten jarraitzen duzue :
PRED:	“ I am the Lord , and you do not turn away from me , but you will follow the descendants of Jacob .
GOLD:	“ I am the Lord , and I do not change . That is why you descendants of Jacob are not already destroyed .

ID:	498
INPUT:	Moisesek , ordea , esan zion : — Arren , Jauna , ni ez , bidali besteren bat .
PRED:	But Moses said to him , “ Lord , do n't send me one . ”
GOLD:	But Moses again pleaded , “ Lord , please ! Send anyone else . ”

ID:	499
INPUT:	Hartu zituen Akazek Jaunaren etxean eta jauregiko altxortegian zeuden urre-zilarrak eta Asiriako erregeari bidali zizkion esku-erakutsi bezala .
PRED:	So Ahaz took the silver and gold in the house of the Lord , and gave them to the king of Assyria .
GOLD:	Then Ahaz took the silver and gold from the Temple of the Lord and the palace treasury and sent it as a payment to the Assyrian king .

ID:	500
INPUT:	Hildakoen gorpuak jaurti zituen putzua , Israelgo errege Baxak eraso zion hartan , Judako errege Asak egindako putzu handia da . Netaniasen seme Ismaelek gorpuz bete zuen .
PRED:	And he cast out the dead bodies of the dead bodies of the dead bodies , which Asa king of Israel had done to King Asa of Judah ; and Israel was dead .
GOLD:	The cistern where Ishmael dumped the bodies of the men he murdered was the large one dug by King Asa when he fortified Mizpah to protect himself against King Baasha of Israel . Ishmael son of Nethaniah filled it with corpses .

ID:	501
INPUT:	Ni heltzean , ziurtagiriak eman eta Jerusalemera bidaliko ditut zuek aukeratuak , zuen erregalua eramatera .
PRED:	When I come , I will send you to Jerusalem , and I will send you to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	When I come , I will write letters of recommendation for the messengers you choose to deliver your gift to Jerusalem .

ID:	502
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaizkien Moises eta Aaron israeldarrei : « Gaur arratsaldean jakingo duzue Jaunak atera zaituztela Egiptotik ,
PRED:	Moses and Aaron said to the Israelites , “ Today you will know that the Lord brought you out of the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	So Moses and Aaron said to all the people of Israel , “ By evening you will realize it was the Lord who brought you out of the land of Egypt .

ID:	503
INPUT:	Jaunak , horrela , apaldua zuen Judako erreinua , Akaz erregea zela eta ; Judari zabarkeriara eragina baitzion Akazek eta Jauna baztertua .
PRED:	This is what the Lord did to King Ahaz of Judah , and he did what was evil in the sight of King Ahaz and Judah .
GOLD:	The Lord was humbling Judah because of King Ahaz of Judah , for he had encouraged his people to sin and had been utterly unfaithful to the Lord .

ID:	504
INPUT:	Ondoren , Samariara abiatu zen Jehu . Bidean , Artzainen Bet-E<unk> zeritzan tokira heltzean ,
PRED:	And he went up to Samaria . And he went to the place of Samaria , which is at the entrance of the valley of Jericho .
GOLD:	Then Jehu set out for Samaria . Along the way , while he was at Beth-eked of the Shepherds ,

ID:	505
INPUT:	Gantzutu Nimxiren seme Jehu Israelgo erregetarako . Gantzutu Abel-Meholako Xafaten seme Eliseo , zure ondorengo profeta izan dadin .
PRED:	And thou shalt take the oil of the king of Israel , and anoint them in the book of the king of Israel : and he shall be the prophet of thy son , that he may be a prophet .
GOLD:	Then anoint Jehu grandson of Nimshi to be king of Israel , and anoint Elisha son of Shaphat from the town of Abel-meholah to replace you as my prophet .

ID:	506
INPUT:	Biharamunean , Jainkoak bidalitako espiritu gaiztoak jo zuen Saul , eta han zebilen eroa bezala bere etxe osoan barrena ; David zitara jotzen ari zitzaion , egunero bezala . Saulek , ordea , eskuan zerabilen lantza
PRED:	And it came to pass on the next day , that the Spirit of God sent him out , as he had sent him , and he went into his house , as he was in his house , as he was in his house .
GOLD:	The very next day a tormenting spirit from God overwhelmed Saul , and he began to rave in his house like a madman . David was playing the harp , as he did each day . But Saul had a spear in his hand ,

ID:	507
INPUT:	Jesus Anasen aurrean
PRED:	Jesus before Jesus
GOLD:	Peter 's First Denial

ID:	508
INPUT:	eta eman mezu hau : “ Honela dio Jaun ahalguztidunak , Israelen Jainkoak : Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosor neure zerbitzaria ekarraraziko dut , eta Jeremiasek lurrean sartu dituen harri horien gainean ezarriko ditut haren tronua eta gaineko oihal-estaldura .
PRED:	and say unto them , Thus saith the Lord of hosts , the God of Israel , the God of Israel : I will bring my servant Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon , and I will bring my servant Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon into the midst of the earth , and put them on their feet .
GOLD:	Then say to the people of Judah , ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : I will certainly bring my servant Nebuchadnezzar , king of Babylon , here to Egypt . I will set his throne over these stones that I have hidden . He will spread his royal canopy over them .

ID:	509
INPUT:	Zergatik ez duzu aditu Jaunaren esana ? Zergatik hartu dituzu harrapakinak , Jaunaren begietan gaizki dagoena eginez ?
PRED:	Why did you not obey the word of the Lord ? Why have you taken away the prey of the Lord , and have done what is evil in the eyes of the Lord ?
GOLD:	Why have n't you obeyed the Lord ? Why did you rush for the plunder and do what was evil in the Lord 's sight ? ”

ID:	510
INPUT:	Lur jota daudeeta makurturik idoloak , ezin dituzte eramaileak salbatu ; beraiek ere erbestera doaz .
PRED:	Those who are in the earth are bowed down , and they are not able to save them , but they have saved them .
GOLD:	Both the idols and their owners are bowed down.The gods can not protect the people , and the people can not protect the gods.They go off into captivity together .

ID:	511
INPUT:	Argi nazazue , eta isildu egingo naiz . Esadazue zertan nagoen oker !
PRED:	I will speak to you , and I will be silent . Tell me what I am doing .
GOLD:	Teach me , and I will keep quiet.Show me what I have done wrong .

ID:	512
INPUT:	Zoritxar biok gertatu zaizkizu : herrialdea hondatua eta desegina , jendea goseak eta gerrak hila . Baina nor errukitzen zaizu ? Nork kontsolatzen zaitu ?
PRED:	Woe to you , O land , and all the people of the land , and the famine , and the famine , and the sword , and the sword , and the sword , and who has pity on you ? Who has pity on you ?
GOLD:	These two calamities have fallen on you : desolation and destruction , famine and war.And who is left to sympathize with you ? Who is left to comfort you ?

ID:	513
INPUT:	Israelgo gudarostea osatzeko gai diren hogei urtetik gorako gizonezko guztiak erroldatuko dituzu , gudari-taldeka banatuz . Zu eta Aaron arduratuko zarete izen-bilketaz ,
PRED:	And thou shalt take all the men of Israel from twenty years old and twenty years old , from twenty years old and upward ; and thou shalt be Aaron and Aaron , and Aaron , and Aaron , and Aaron .
GOLD:	twenty years old or older who are able to go to war . You and Aaron must register the troops ,

ID:	514
INPUT:	Erraz aberastu , erraz galdu ; poliki-poliki bilduz , gehitu .
PRED:	So the king is filled with fire , and spread out his neck , and spread it out .
GOLD:	Wealth from get-rich-quick schemes quickly disappears ; wealth from hard work grows over time .

ID:	515
INPUT:	Horrelako horien aurrean ez genuen une batez ere atzera egin , beraiei amore emanez , beharrezko baitzen berri onaren egiak zuengan sendo irautea .
PRED:	So we did n't want to obey them . We did n't want to obey them . We did n't want to obey the Good News about the Good News .
GOLD:	But we refused to give in to them for a single moment . We wanted to preserve the truth of the gospel message for you .

ID:	516
INPUT:	« Jakintsuok , entzun nire hitzak , zuek , ikasiok , aditu arretaz .
PRED:	“ Hear my words , you wise men , and hear my words .
GOLD:	“ Listen to me , you wise men.Pay attention , you who have knowledge .

ID:	517
INPUT:	Tronu , zahar eta lau izaki bizidunen inguruan zutik zeuden aingeru guztiak ahuspeztu egin ziren tronuaren aurrean eta Jainkoa adoratu zuten ,
PRED:	And all the angels of the living creatures fell down before the throne of the living creatures , and bowed down before God .
GOLD:	And all the angels were standing around the throne and around the elders and the four living beings . And they fell before the throne with their faces to the ground and worshiped God .

ID:	518
INPUT:	Haserrealdi batean , unetxo batezaurpegia ezkutatu nizun , baina etengabe maite zaitudalakogupidatu naiz zutaz . Hala diot nik , Jaunak , zure askatzaileak .
PRED:	In a little while I loved you like a little water , but I love you with all my friends , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	In a burst of anger I turned my face away for a little while.But with everlasting love I will have compassion on you , ” says the Lord , your Redeemer .

ID:	519
INPUT:	baita liho finezko buruzapi eta kapela apainduak ere , eta liho-hari bihurrituzko galtzak ;
PRED:	And they shall make the pillars of fine linen , and the work of fine linen , and they shall be made of fine linen .
GOLD:	The turban and the special head coverings were made of fine linen , and the undergarments were also made of finely woven linen .

ID:	520
INPUT:	Sidimgo harana gali<unk> -putzuz josia zegoen , eta , ihesi zihoazela , hauetara erori ziren Sodoma eta Gomorrako erregeak ; gainerakoek mendialdera egin zuten ihes .
PRED:	And the king fled to the king of Syria , and fled to the city of Sodom , and fled to the city of Sodom , and the kings of Sodom , and fled to the hill country .
GOLD:	As it happened , the valley of the Dead Sea was filled with tar pits . And as the army of the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled , some fell into the tar pits , while the rest escaped into the mountains .

ID:	521
INPUT:	Goretsazue , munduko errege eta herriok , buruzagi eta gobernari guztiok ,
PRED:	Praise the king of the earth and all the kings of the earth , and all the princes , and all the princes ,
GOLD:	kings of the earth and all people , rulers and judges of the earth ,

ID:	522
INPUT:	Konfiantza osoa du senarrak harengan , ez da sekula beharrean aurkituko .
PRED:	All his husband shall be found in him , and his husband shall not be found in him .
GOLD:	Her husband can trust her , and she will greatly enrich his life .

ID:	523
INPUT:	Epaile duten Harkaitzaren kontra amildu dira , atsegin hartu baitzuten niri entzutean :
PRED:	They are fallen down against the elders , because they heard me , because they heard me .
GOLD:	When their leaders are thrown down from a cliff , the wicked will listen to my words and find them true .

ID:	524
INPUT:	Baina , astea igaro ondoren , geure bidaiari jarraitu genion . Hiritik kanporaino lagundu ziguten haiek denek , beren emazte eta haurrekin . Hondartzan otoitz egin genuen belauniko ;
PRED:	But when we had passed over , we followed our way . They left the city and their wives and their wives and their wives . We prayed for them .
GOLD:	When we returned to the ship at the end of the week , the entire congregation , including women and children , left the city and came down to the shore with us . There we knelt , prayed ,

ID:	525
INPUT:	« Bazterturik , gorrotatuaeta bakarrik utzia egon bazara ere , gizaldien harro-bide egingo zaitut , mende guztien pozgarri .
PRED:	“ If you hate , you will not leave , but I will make you glad .
GOLD:	“ Though you were once despised and hated , with no one traveling through you , I will make you beautiful forever , a joy to all generations .

ID:	526
INPUT:	Eta gauza bera zuen artean bizi den edo etorkizunean biziko den etorkinak ere : Jaunak atseginez onartzen dituen opariak egin nahi baditu , zuek bezala egingo du .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , when you live among you , or shall live among you , as the Lord shall do unto you , as ye shall offer to the Lord .
GOLD:	And if any foreigners visit you or live among you and want to present a special gift as a pleasing aroma to the Lord , they must follow these same procedures .

ID:	527
INPUT:	« Efoda , urrez , purpura more , gorri eta gorriminez eta liho-hari bihurrituz apain bordaturik egingo dute .
PRED:	And the ephod shall be made of gold , purple , and scarlet , and scarlet , and scarlet , and scarlet , and scarlet .
GOLD:	“ The craftsmen must make the ephod of finely woven linen and skillfully embroider it with gold and with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .

ID:	528
INPUT:	Orduan , Hananiasek , uztarria Jeremiasen lepotik kendurik , apurtu egin zuen ,
PRED:	Then Jeremiah took away the yoke from Jeremiah 's neck , took away the yoke from Jeremiah 's neck .
GOLD:	Then Hananiah the prophet took the yoke off Jeremiah 's neck and broke it in pieces .

ID:	529
INPUT:	Baina jendetzagatik ezin zuten eraman Jesusenganaino . Orduan , bera zegoen parean etxe gaina zulatu eta zulotik behera eraitsi zuten elbarria , etzana zegoen ohatilan .
PRED:	But they could not bring him to Jesus . Then they brought him to Jesus , and they took him down from the tomb , and came down from the tomb .
GOLD:	They could n't bring him to Jesus because of the crowd , so they dug a hole through the roof above his head . Then they lowered the man on his mat , right down in front of Jesus .

ID:	530
INPUT:	behi-gaztanbera eta ardi-esnea , bildots gizenen haragia , aukerako ahariak eta akerrak , ogi-irin garbi bikainaeman zizkion janarieta ardoa , mahats-odola , edari .
PRED:	He gave him a young bull , a young bull , a young bull , a young bull , a young bull , a young bull , a young bull , a young bull , and a drink offering , and a drink offering .
GOLD:	He fed them yogurt from the herdand milk from the flock , together with the fat of lambs.He gave them choice rams from Bashan , and goats , together with the choicest wheat.You drank the finest wine , made from the juice of grapes .

ID:	531
INPUT:	Jaunak Asiria zigortuko
PRED:	The
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	532
INPUT:	Zeuk , Jauna , zeuk babestuko gaituzu beti , zeuk babestuko horrelako jendearengandik :
PRED:	O Lord , you will be our refuge for ever , for you will take us away from the people of the land .
GOLD:	even though the wicked strut about , and evil is praised throughout the land .

ID:	533
INPUT:	Hauek aurrea hartu ziguten , eta Troaden egon zitzaizkigun zain .
PRED:	And they took them before them , and they sat on Paul .
GOLD:	They went on ahead and waited for us at Troas .

ID:	534
INPUT:	Janes eta <unk> aztiak Moisesen aurka jarri ziren bezalaxe , liluratzaile hauek ere , buru usteleko jendea eta sinesmenean porrot egina baita , egiaren aurka jartzen dira .
PRED:	And all the people of the land were against Moses , as they were in the faith , and in the faith , and in the faith , and in the faith , and in the faith .
GOLD:	These teachers oppose the truth just as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses . They have depraved minds and a counterfeit faith .

ID:	535
INPUT:	« Jaunari erre-oparitzat eskaini beharrekoa hegaztia bada , usapala nahiz usakumea eskainiko da .
PRED:	“ If you offer a burnt offering to the Lord , you must offer a young animal to the Lord . You must offer a sin offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ If you present a bird as a burnt offering to the Lord , choose either a turtledove or a young pigeon .

ID:	536
INPUT:	Erabateko zigorra
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Judah 's Inevitable Doom

ID:	537
INPUT:	Orduan , aker bat hil eta Joseren jantzia harturik , akerraren odoletan busti zuten .
PRED:	And they took a young bull and put it in the blood of Joseph , and put it in the blood of the goats .
GOLD:	Then the brothers killed a young goat and dipped Joseph 's robe in its blood .

ID:	538
INPUT:	« Benetan diotsuet azkeneko hau Jainkoarekin bakean itzuli zela etxera ; fariseua , berriz , ez . Zeren eta bere burua goratzen duena beheratu egingo baitu Jainkoak , eta bere burua beheratzen duena , goratu » .
PRED:	I say to you , “ I tell you that he is with God in peace . But the Pharisees and the Pharisees will not go home , because God will do what he has done . ”
GOLD:	I tell you , this sinner , not the Pharisee , returned home justified before God . For those who exalt themselves will be humbled , and those who humble themselves will be exalted . ”

ID:	539
INPUT:	Izreelgo dorrean zegoen zelatariak , Jehuren gudari-taldea etortzen ikustean , esan zuen : — Gudari-talde bat ageri da han ! Joramek agindu zuen : — Bidali zaldizko bat eta galdegin dezala bakez datozen .
PRED:	When the men who were in the valley of Jezreel saw the army of Jericho , he said , “ There is a large army here . ” Joab said , “ There is a army to ask him , ‘ There is no one to ask him . '
GOLD:	The watchman on the tower of Jezreel saw Jehu and his company approaching , so he shouted to Joram , “ I see a company of troops coming ! ” “ Send out a rider to ask if they are coming in peace , ” King Joram ordered .

ID:	540
INPUT:	Esnatu , Jauna ! Zergatik zaude lo ? Ekin ! Ez gu betiko zapuztu !
PRED:	O Lord , why are you ? Why do you not turn away from ever ?
GOLD:	Why do you look the other way ? Why do you ignore our suffering and oppression ?

ID:	541
INPUT:	Ba , uxaezineko zoritxarragertatuko zaizu , saihestu ezineko ezbeharrajausiko gainera , ustekabean hartuko zaituenbat-bateko hondamendia etorriko .
PRED:	But you will be destroyed by the sword , and you will be destroyed by the sword of the sword , and you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	So disaster will overtake you , and you wo n't be able to charm it away.Calamity will fall upon you , and you wo n't be able to buy your way out.A catastrophe will strike you suddenly , one for which you are not prepared .

ID:	542
INPUT:	Hirugarren egunean , ontziko tresneria itsasora jaurti zuten marinelek .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the third day , that they cast all the vessels of the sea into the sea .
GOLD:	The following day they even took some of the ship 's gear and threw it overboard .

ID:	543
INPUT:	Gatibualditik zetozen erbesteratuek erre-opariak eskaini zizkioten Israelgo Jainkoari : hamabi zezen Israel osoaren alde , laurogeita hamasei ahari , hirurogeita hamazazpi bildots eta hamabi aker bekatuen barkamenerako : guztiak Jaunari erre-oparitzat eskainiak .
PRED:	The rest of the people offered burnt offerings to the God of Israel . They offered sacrifices to the God of Israel , twelve lambs , twelve lambs , twelve lambs , and seven rams , and seven rams .
GOLD:	Then the exiles who had come out of captivity sacrificed burnt offerings to the God of Israel . They presented twelve bulls for all the people of Israel , as well as ninety-six rams and seventy-seven male lambs . They also offered twelve male goats as a sin offering . All this was given as a burnt offering to the Lord .

ID:	544
INPUT:	Damaskoko Abana eta Parpar ibaiak ez ote dira , bada , Israelgo ur guztiak baino hobeak ? Ez ote nintekeen horietan busti , gaitza sendatzeko ? Eta alde egin zuen handik haserre .
PRED:	Damascus and Damascus , are n't there any of them than all the waters of Israel ? Do n't I put them on them with water ? And he went away from there .
GOLD:	Are n't the rivers of Damascus , the Abana and the Pharpar , better than any of the rivers of Israel ? Why should n't I wash in them and be healed ? ” So Naaman turned and went away in a rage .

ID:	545
INPUT:	Lehoiaren antzeko izango naizEfraimentzat , lehoi gaztearen antze<unk> darentzat . Neuk harrapatuko duteta alde egingo , neurekin eramango duteta inork ez du askatuko .
PRED:	I will be like a lion , a lion of a lion , a lion of a lion , and they will take him away , and no one will rescue him .
GOLD:	I will be like a lion to Israel , like a strong young lion to Judah.I will tear them to pieces ! I will carry them off , and no one will be left to rescue them .

ID:	546
INPUT:	« Etsaien aurka borrokatzeko kanpalekua eratzean , gorde zeuen buruak kutsadura orotatik garbi .
PRED:	“ When you fight against your enemies , then you must wash your head from your head .
GOLD:	“ Any man who becomes ceremonially defiled because of a nocturnal emission must leave the camp and stay away all day .

ID:	547
INPUT:	Alderantziz , gonbidatzen zaituztenean , jarri azkeneko tokian , gonbidatu zaituenak , datorrenean , esan diezazun : “ Adiskide , igo gorago ” . Horrela , oso toki onean geldituko zara mahaikide guztien aurrean .
PRED:	But when you are called , you will be called in the last place , when you are called , you will say to me , ‘ friends , you will go up to the place where you are . '
GOLD:	“ Instead , take the lowest place at the foot of the table . Then when your host sees you , he will come and say , ‘ Friend , we have a better place for you ! ' Then you will be honored in front of all the other guests .

ID:	548
INPUT:	Begiratu zuten atzera Aiko gizonek eta ke-mordo handia ikusi zuten hiritik zerurantz igotzen . Ez zitzaien ihesbiderik gelditzen inongo aldetik , basamorturantz ihesi zihoazen israeldarrak itzuli egin baitziren beren pertsegitzaileen kontra .
PRED:	And the men looked toward the city , and behold , there was a great fire from heaven , and there was no one left left to the way of the wilderness . And the children of Israel fled from the way of the wilderness .
GOLD:	When the men of Ai looked behind them , smoke from the town was filling the sky , and they had nowhere to go . For the Israelites who had fled in the direction of the wilderness now turned on their pursuers .

ID:	549
INPUT:	Paulo Efeson
PRED:	Paul in Ephesus
GOLD:	Paul 's Third Missionary Journey

ID:	550
INPUT:	Jesus eskatologiaz mintzo ( 24 , 1 — 25 , 46 )
PRED:	Jesus Heals to Jerusalem
GOLD:	Jesus Speaks about the Future

ID:	551
INPUT:	Hau zioen : « Idatz ezazu liburu batean ikusiko duzuna , eta bidali zazpi eliz elkarte hauei : Efeso , Esmirna , Pergamo , Tiatira , Sardes , Filadelfia eta Laodizeako eliz elkarteei » .
PRED:	He said to them , “ If you see what is written in a book , you will see it in a book , send them to the church of Tyre , Tyre , and Timothy , and Timothy . ”
GOLD:	It said , “ Write in a book everything you see , and send it to the seven churches in the cities of Ephesus , Smyrna , Pergamum , Thyatira , Sardis , Philadelphia , and Laodicea . ”

ID:	552
INPUT:	Etorri ziren , beraz , Kiriat-Jearimgoak eta igo zuten Jaunaren kutxa . Abinadabek muinoan zuen etxean sartu zuten . Ondoren , honen seme Eleazar sagaratu zuten , Jaunaren kutxa zaintzeko .
PRED:	And they came to the ark of the Lord , and went into the house of the Lord , and they went into the hill of the Lord ; and they went into the high place of Eleazar his son , to keep the ark of the Lord .
GOLD:	So the men of Kiriath-jearim came to get the Ark of the Lord . They took it to the hillside home of Abinadab and ordained Eleazar , his son , to be in charge of it .

ID:	553
INPUT:	Esterrek , ordea , erregeagana jo zuen eta honek idatziz agindu zuen , Hamanek juduen aurka erabakia zuen hondamendia gerta zekiola berari ; horrela , bada , Haman eta honen semeak urkabean zintzilikatu zituzten .
PRED:	But Esther went to the king , and wrote it to the king , and it was written in the book of the Jews , that the destruction of the Jews had come upon him , and his sons were written in their sins .
GOLD:	But when Esther came before the king , he issued a decree causing Haman 's evil plot to backfire , and Haman and his sons were impaled on a sharpened pole .

ID:	554
INPUT:	Eta legendun asko zegoen Israelen Eliseo profetaren garaian ; hala ere , ez zuen haietako inor sendatu , Naaman siriarra baizik » .
PRED:	And many of the prophets of Israel were sick in the days of Elijah the prophet , but none of them was healed , but of them was healed .
GOLD:	And many in Israel had leprosy in the time of the prophet Elisha , but the only one healed was Naaman , a Syrian . ”

ID:	555
INPUT:	hau diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak , Israelen Jainkoak : Rekaben seme Jonadabek beti izango ditu ondorengoak nire herrian » .
PRED:	Thus says the Lord of hosts , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , will be my people forever .
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : ‘ Jehonadab son of Recab will always have descendants who serve me . ' ”

ID:	556
INPUT:	Etxegintzan ari direnen izenak eman behar dizkiguzue » .
PRED:	The name of the men who are in charge of the house will be given to you . ”
GOLD:	They also asked for the names of all the men working on the Temple .

ID:	557
INPUT:	Onartu zuen Moisesek bere aitaginarrebaren aholkua eta haren esanaren arabera egin zuen :
PRED:	And Moses heard the counsel of his father , and did according to his voice , and according to his voice , saying ,
GOLD:	Moses listened to his father-in-law 's advice and followed his suggestions .

ID:	558
INPUT:	Baina zeruko erreginari intsentsua erre eta isur-opariak egiteari utzi diogunetik , kale gorrian gaude , goseak eta gerraz hiltzen .
PRED:	But we have burned incense on the day of the heaven , and have left the burnt offering and drink offerings on the day that we are hungry , and we die .
GOLD:	But ever since we quit burning incense to the Queen of Heaven and stopped worshiping her with liquid offerings , we have been in great trouble and have been dying from war and famine . ”

ID:	559
INPUT:	Hala , joan ziren Ezekias erregearen funtzionarioak Isaiasengana .
PRED:	So the officials went to Isaiah the king .
GOLD:	After King Hezekiah 's officials delivered the king 's message to Isaiah ,

ID:	560
INPUT:	Honetan azaltzen da nire Aitaren aintza : zuek , nire ikasle izanik , fruitu asko ematean .
PRED:	This is the glory of my Father : you are my disciples , when I have eaten fruit .
GOLD:	When you produce much fruit , you are my true disciples . This brings great glory to my Father .

ID:	561
INPUT:	Judu e<unk> <unk> tak
PRED:	Judah and Judah
GOLD:	Paul Ministers in Ephesus

ID:	562
INPUT:	Erdian , kopa biribila duzu : eduki dezala beti ardo goxoa ! Zure sabelaliliz inguraturiko gari-piloa .
PRED:	In the middle of the field , you will be like wine , and you will be like a new wine .
GOLD:	Your breasts are like two fawns , twin fawns of a gazelle .

ID:	563
INPUT:	Baina Jaunaren eguna lapurra bezala ustekabean etorriko da . Orduan , burrunba handiz desagertuko dira zeruak , munduaren osagaiak suak kiskalita desegingo eta lurra bere egintza guztiekin agerian geldituko da Jainkoaren epairako .
PRED:	But as a thief of the Lord shall come upon him as a thief : and the heavens shall be destroyed , and the fire of the earth shall be burned with fire , and the fire of the earth shall be burned with all his works .
GOLD:	But the day of the Lord will come as unexpectedly as a thief . Then the heavens will pass away with a terrible noise , and the very elements themselves will disappear in fire , and the earth and everything on it will be found to deserve judgment .

ID:	564
INPUT:	« Bereizi lebitarrak beste israeldarren artetik eta egiezu garbikuntza .
PRED:	“ The Levites who live among the people of Israel , you must make them clean .
GOLD:	“ Now set the Levites apart from the rest of the people of Israel and make them ceremonially clean .

ID:	565
INPUT:	Isakarren leinuaren lurraldea
PRED:	The People of Issachar
GOLD:	The Land Given to Issachar

ID:	566
INPUT:	Jainkoak Noeri eta beronen semeei esan zien , gainera :
PRED:	And God said unto Noah and to his sons , and to his sons ,
GOLD:	Then God told Noah and his sons ,

ID:	567
INPUT:	Gero , Danielen salatzaileak ekartzeko agindu zuen erregeak , eta lehoi-zulora jaurti zituzten beren emazte eta seme-alabekin batera . Eta zulo barrenera heldu baino lehen , lehoiek beren atzaparretan hartu eta txiki-txiki egin zituzten .
PRED:	And the king commanded him to bring him to the lion , and they cast their wives and their sons , and their sons , and their sons , and their daughters , and they came to the valley of the lion .
GOLD:	Then King Darius sent this message to the people of every race and nation and language throughout the world : “ Peace and prosperity to you !

ID:	568
INPUT:	Hesteak eta hankak garbiturik , erre egin zituen beste zatien gainean .
PRED:	And he washed the flesh , and the flesh , and burned them on the other side .
GOLD:	Then he washed the internal organs and the legs and burned them on the altar along with the rest of the burnt offering .

ID:	569
INPUT:	Badoaz nire egunak , kea bezala , erretzen dauzkat hezurrak , txingarrak bezala .
PRED:	My soul is like a lion , and my bones are like a lion .
GOLD:	My heart is sick , withered like grass , and I have lost my appetite .

ID:	570
INPUT:	Orduan , Jesusek esan zion : — Emakumea , handia da zure fedea ! Gerta bekizu nahi duzuna ! Eta une hartatik sendatua gelditu zitzaion alaba .
PRED:	Jesus said to her , “ The woman is your faith . You want to know what you want to do . ” So she was healed .
GOLD:	“ Dear woman , ” Jesus said to her , “ your faith is great . Your request is granted . ” And her daughter was instantly healed .

ID:	571
INPUT:	Ardoz beteriko pitxer eta kopak eskaini nizkien rekabetarrei , eta edateko erregutu .
PRED:	And I gave them their drink offering and their drink offering , and gave them to drink .
GOLD:	I set cups and jugs of wine before them and invited them to have a drink ,

ID:	572
INPUT:	Baina Felipek Jainkoaren erregetza eta Jesu Kristoren berri ona hots egitean , sinetsi egin zioten eta bataioa hartu denek , gizon eta emakume .
PRED:	But when Philip heard the kingdom of God and the Good News of Jesus Christ , they believed and all were baptized .
GOLD:	But now the people believed Philip 's message of Good News concerning the Kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ . As a result , many men and women were baptized .

ID:	573
INPUT:	Hona hemen , babes-hiri izateko hautatu zituztenak : Kedex , Neftaliko mendialdean , Galilean ; Sikem , Efraimgo mendialdean , eta Kiriat-Arba — hau da , Hebron — , Judako mendialdean .
PRED:	These are the names of the cities which were in the hill country of Naphtali , in the hill country of Ephraim , in the hill country of Ephraim , in the hill country of Ephraim , and in the hill country of Judah .
GOLD:	The following cities were designated as cities of refuge : Kedesh of Galilee , in the hill country of Naphtali ; Shechem , in the hill country of Ephraim ; and Kiriath-arba ( that is , Hebron ) , in the hill country of Judah .

ID:	574
INPUT:	Gaur , nire ondotik joan ondoren , bi gizon aurkituko dituzu Rakelen hilobi ondoan , Benjaminen mugetan , <unk> tzahen . Honela mintzatuko zaizkizu : “ Agertu dira bila zabiltzan astoak ; aita astoez ahaztu eta zuetaz kezkatua dago , bere semea aurkitzeko zer egin ez dakiela ” » . Eta Samuelek jarraitu zuen :
PRED:	After this , you will find two men standing in Rachel 's tomb . They will say to you , “ They will find a donkey in Benjamin . They will say to you , ‘ They will find a donkey , and they will not see what he has done . ' ”
GOLD:	When you leave me today , you will see two men beside Rachel 's tomb at Zelzah , on the border of Benjamin . They will tell you that the donkeys have been found and that your father has stopped worrying about them and is now worried about you . He is asking , ‘ Have you seen my son ? '

ID:	575
INPUT:	eta txiki hauetako bati , nire ikasle delako , ontzixka bat ur fresko besterik ez bada ere ematen diona , benetan diotsuet ez dela saririk gabe geldituko » .
PRED:	But if any of these little ones eat of my cup , then I say to you , I say to you , I say to you , I tell you , it will be no more . ”
GOLD:	And if you give even a cup of cold water to one of the least of my followers , you will surely be rewarded . ”

ID:	576
INPUT:	Orduan , haiek belarriak itxi eta , garrasika , gainera jaurti zitzaizkion Estebani denak batean .
PRED:	And they shut their ears , and cried out , and cast them into one of them .
GOLD:	Then they put their hands over their ears and began shouting . They rushed at him

ID:	577
INPUT:	Baina Abrahamek erantzun zion : “ Moisesi eta profetei entzuten ez badiete , hildakoren bat piztuta ere , ez dute kasurik egingo ” » .
PRED:	Abraham said to Moses , “ If they do not listen to Moses and the prophets , they will not be raised from the dead . ”
GOLD:	“ But Abraham said , ‘ If they wo n't listen to Moses and the prophets , they wo n't be persuaded even if someone rises from the dead . ' ”

ID:	578
INPUT:	Benjaminen leinuaren lurraldea
PRED:	The People of Benjamin
GOLD:	The Land Given to Benjamin

ID:	579
INPUT:	Ea , filistearrok , eutsi gogor ! Izan gizon eta ez zarete hebrearren menpe egongo , beraiek zuen menpe egon diren bezala . Izan gizon eta ekin guduari ! »
PRED:	But you , O Philistines , do n't be afraid , and do n't be given into the hand of the Hebrew , just as you were with us . ”
GOLD:	Fight as never before , Philistines ! If you do n't , we will become the Hebrews ' slaves just as they have been ours ! Stand up like men and fight ! ”

ID:	580
INPUT:	Zuek , ordea , Jaunak hartu eta Egiptotik , burdina urtzeko labetik , atera zaituzte , bere herri eta ondare egiteko , gaur egiaz zareten bezala .
PRED:	But the Lord took you out of the land of Egypt , as he brought you out of the land of Egypt , to give you his inheritance , as you are today .
GOLD:	Remember that the Lord rescued you from the iron-smelting furnace of Egypt in order to make you his very own people and his special possession , which is what you are today .

ID:	581
INPUT:	Zeren , goiangeruaren ahotsez eta Jainkoaren turuta-hotsez seinalea emanik , Jauna bera jaitsiko baita zerutik , eta aurrena Kristorekin bat eginik hildakoak piztuko dira ;
PRED:	The sign of the Most High will be raised from heaven , and the sign of God will rise down from heaven , and the dead will rise from the dead .
GOLD:	For the Lord himself will come down from heaven with a commanding shout , with the voice of the archangel , and with the trumpet call of God . First , the believers who have died will rise from their graves .

ID:	582
INPUT:	Eguzkiaren bero izugarriz erre egin ziren gizon-emakumeak ; baina , halere , zigor hauen gain agintea zuen Jainkoaren izena madarikatu zuten , damutu eta Jainkoak arrazoi zuela aitortu beharrean .
PRED:	And the sun poured out their iniquity on men , but they curse the name of God , and the name of God was upon them .
GOLD:	Everyone was burned by this blast of heat , and they cursed the name of God , who had control over all these plagues . They did not repent of their sins and turn to God and give him glory .

ID:	583
INPUT:	Orduan , bere ikasleei esan zien : « Uzta ugaria da , baina langileak gutxi .
PRED:	Then he said to his disciples , “ The harvest is increased , but the fields are shut .
GOLD:	He said to his disciples , “ The harvest is great , but the workers are few .

ID:	584
INPUT:	Behin liburua irakurriz gero , ezarriozu harri bat eta bota Eufrates ibaira ,
PRED:	And thou shalt read the book of the book of the book , and put a stone upon the river .
GOLD:	When you have finished reading the scroll , tie it to a stone and throw it into the Euphrates River .

ID:	585
INPUT:	Morroiak esan zien : — Ez nazazue atzerarazi , Jaunak nire bidaiari bukaera ona eman dionez gero . Uztazue neure nagusiagana itzultzen .
PRED:	The servant said to them , “ Do n't let me go back to my master . Let me return to my master . ”
GOLD:	But he said , “ Do n't delay me . The Lord has made my mission successful ; now send me back so I can return to my master . ”

ID:	586
INPUT:	Astia eman diot damu dadin , baina ez dio bere desleialkeriari uko egin nahi izan .
PRED:	I have given him many things , but he would not turn away from his wickedness .
GOLD:	I gave her time to repent , but she does not want to turn away from her immorality .

ID:	587
INPUT:	Bere erregealdiko hogeita hemeretzigarren urtean oinetan zuen gaitz handi batez gaixotua zegoen Asa ; baina gaixoaldian ere ez zuen Jaunarengana jo , sendagileengana baizik .
PRED:	In the eighteenth year of his reign , in the tenth year of his reign , he was sick , but he did not come to the Lord , but he did not come to those who were sick .
GOLD:	In the thirty-ninth year of his reign , Asa developed a serious foot disease . Yet even with the severity of his disease , he did not seek the Lord 's help but turned only to his physicians .

ID:	588
INPUT:	« Benetan diotsuet : Zuek mundu honetan lotua , zeruan ere lotua geldituko da , eta zuek mundu honetan askatua , zeruan ere askatua geldituko da .
PRED:	I say to you , “ You will be ashamed in heaven , and you will be ashamed in heaven , and you will be free from heaven .
GOLD:	“ I tell you the truth , whatever you forbid on earth will be forbidden in heaven , and whatever you permit on earth will be permitted in heaven .

ID:	589
INPUT:	Izan ere , jakintsua buruargi ; ergela , ordea , ilunpetan dabil . Badakit , hala ere , biek etorkizun bera dutela .
PRED:	For I know that the wise is in darkness , but I know that the wise are coming .
GOLD:	For the wise can see where they are going , but fools walk in the dark . ” Yet I saw that the wise and the foolish share the same fate .

ID:	590
INPUT:	Abere-bordetan ere sartu ziren , ardi eta gamelu ugari lapurtuz . Ondoren , Jerusalemera itzuli ziren .
PRED:	And they went into the gate of the cattle and sheep , and they returned to Jerusalem , and returned to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	While they were at Gerar , they attacked all the towns in that area , and terror from the Lord came upon the people there . As a result , a vast amount of plunder was taken from these towns , too .

ID:	591
INPUT:	Batzuek zutitu eta gezurrezko testigantza hau egin zuten Jesusen kontra :
PRED:	Some of you received false testimony against Jesus , saying ,
GOLD:	Finally , some men stood up and gave this false testimony :

ID:	592
INPUT:	Ekardazue gero zeuen anaia gazteena , eta orduan jakingo dut zelatariak ez , baizik gizon zintzoak zaretela . Ondoren itzuliko dizuet anaia , eta lurralde honetan ibili ahal izango zarete ” » .
PRED:	Give me your youngest brother , and I will know that you are righteous , but you are righteous . Then I will bring you back to this land . ”
GOLD:	But you must bring your youngest brother back to me . Then I will know you are honest men and not spies . Then I will give you back your brother , and you may trade freely in the land . ' ”

ID:	593
INPUT:	Babiloniako Nabukodonosorren erregealdiko hemeretzigarren urtean , bosgarren hilaren hamarrean , Nebuzaradan , Babiloniako erregearen funtzionario eta guardiaburua , etorri zen Jerusalemera .
PRED:	In the tenth year of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon , in the tenth year of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon , in the tenth year of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon , the captain of the king of Babylon came to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	On August 17 of that year , which was the nineteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard and an official of the Babylonian king , arrived in Jerusalem .

ID:	594
INPUT:	Beste herrietako jainkoek libratu ote dituzte beren lurraldeak Asiriako erregearen eskutik ?
PRED:	Will the gods of the nations deliver their land out of the hand of the king of Assyria ?
GOLD:	Have the gods of any other nations ever saved their people from the king of Assyria ?

ID:	595
INPUT:	« Ez egin idolorik , ez irudirik , goian zeruan , behean lurrean nahiz lurpeko uretan dagoenetik .
PRED:	“ Do not make idols , nor make idols in the sky , or on the earth , or on the earth , or on the earth .
GOLD:	“ You must not make for yourself an idol of any kind , or an image of anything in the heavens or on the earth or in the sea .

ID:	596
INPUT:	Bost orga tenpluaren eskuinaldean jarri zituen eta beste bostak ezkerraldean ; « Itsaso » zeritzan uraska handia , berriz , tenpluaren eskuinaldean jarri zuen , hego-ekialdera .
PRED:	And he set the five on the right side of the temple , and five on the left side of the sea , and the sea was on the right side of the house , and on the east side of the house .
GOLD:	He set five water carts on the south side of the Temple and five on the north side . The great bronze basin called the Sea was placed near the southeast corner of the Temple .

ID:	597
INPUT:	nork bere makila jaurti eta suge bihurtu zen . Baina Aaronen makilak irentsi egin zituen jakitun eta aztienak .
PRED:	And each man cast his staff into his hand , but he broke the covenant of Aaron and the first covenant .
GOLD:	They threw down their staffs , which also became serpents ! But then Aaron 's staff swallowed up their staffs .

ID:	598
INPUT:	Santuen kontra borroka egin eta haiek menderatzen ere utzi zioten ; eta arraza , herri , hizkuntza eta nazio ororen gain agintea eman zitzaion .
PRED:	And they fought against the Holy Place , and they left them , and gave him authority over the peoples and tongues .
GOLD:	And the beast was allowed to wage war against God 's holy people and to conquer them . And he was given authority to rule over every tribe and people and language and nation .

ID:	599
INPUT:	35 , 1
PRED:	The Covenant Box
GOLD:	Cities of Refuge

ID:	600
INPUT:	Ez nago jadanik harekin haserre . Sasiak eta laharrakaurkitzen badizkiot , eraso eta bat-batean erre egingo dut .
PRED:	I will not know that the wrath of the Lord is angry , and I will bring him up , and I will burn him up .
GOLD:	My anger will be gone.If I find briers and thorns growing , I will attack them ; I will burn them up —

ID:	601
INPUT:	Emakume zuhurrak eraiki egiten du etxea , zentzugabeak bere eskuez desegin .
PRED:	A wise woman has built a house , but a fool has no right hand .
GOLD:	A wise woman builds her home , but a foolish woman tears it down with her own hands .

ID:	602
INPUT:	Hornitu zortzi zentimetro zabaleko uztai batez , eta egin urrezko ertza uztaiari .
PRED:	And thou shalt make a cubit of pure gold , and thou shalt make the rings of gold .
GOLD:	Decorate it with a 3-inch border all around , and run a gold molding along the border .

ID:	603
INPUT:	Eta hiriko jendeak , zazpigarren egun hartan , ilunabarra baino lehen , esan zion Samsoni : « Zer eztia baino gozoagorik ? Zer lehoia baino indartsuagorik ? » Samsonek erantzun zien : « Nire bigantxarekingoldatu ez bazenute , ez zenuketen inoiz ere asmatuko » .
PRED:	And the people of the city came to him in the seventh day , in the seventh day , and in the seventh day , and in the evening , and in the evening , Samson said unto them , What is it greater than the lion ? And Samson said unto them , What shall ye not know ?
GOLD:	So before sunset of the seventh day , the men of the town came to Samson with their answer : “ What is sweeter than honey ? What is stronger than a lion ? ” Samson replied , “ If you had n't plowed with my heifer , you would n't have solved my riddle ! ”

ID:	604
INPUT:	Hona hemen ni , mihiari eragin eta iragarpenak botatzen diharduten profeten kontra .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Those who prophesy against me , and those who prophesy against me . ”
GOLD:	I am against these smooth-tongued prophets who say , ‘ This prophecy is from the Lord ! '

ID:	605
INPUT:	Ni , berriz , zeuen esku naukazue ; egin nirekin ongi eta zuzen iruditzen zaizuena .
PRED:	But I am in your hand , and you do what is right in me .
GOLD:	As for me , I am in your hands — do with me as you think best .

ID:	606
INPUT:	honela esaten baita Liburu Santuan zazpigarren egunaz : Zazpigarren egunean atseden hartu zuen Jainkoak berak eginiko lan guztitik .
PRED:	For it is written in the seventh day : On the seventh day God took rest from all work .
GOLD:	We know it is ready because of the place in the Scriptures where it mentions the seventh day : “ On the seventh day God rested from all his work . ”

ID:	607
INPUT:	Moabeko erregeak mezulariak bidali zizkion Beorren seme Balaami Eufrates ondoko Petor hirira , a<unk> tarren lurraldera , mandatu hau emateko : « Herri bat atera da Egiptotik eta lurralde osoa estali du ; orain gure aurrean kokatua dago .
PRED:	And the king of Moab sent messengers to Balaam , the son of Balak , the king of Moab , to bring this people out of the land of Egypt , saying , There is a people , and all the land of Egypt , and all the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	sent messengers to call Balaam son of Beor , who was living in his native land of Pethor near the Euphrates River . His message said : “ Look , a vast horde of people has arrived from Egypt . They cover the face of the earth and are threatening me .

ID:	608
INPUT:	« Legeak agindua du beste hau ere : Bere emaztea uzten duenak eman diezaiola dibortzio-agiria .
PRED:	“ This is what the law says : If anyone has given his wife to his wife , he will give him the bread of bread .
GOLD:	“ You have heard the law that says , ‘ A man can divorce his wife by merely giving her a written notice of divorce . '

ID:	609
INPUT:	Zuek , samariarrok , ez dakizue zer adoratzen duzuen ; guk badakigu zer adoratzen dugun , salbamena juduongandik baitator .
PRED:	But you , women , do n't know what you are doing . We know what we are doing . We know what we are from the Jews .
GOLD:	You Samaritans know very little about the one you worship , while we Jews know all about him , for salvation comes through the Jews .

ID:	610
INPUT:	« Betiko lege izango duzue hau : zazpigarren hilaren hamarrean barau egingo duzue ; ez duzue inolako lanik egingo , ez bertakoek , ez zuen artean bizi diren etorkinek ,
PRED:	You shall keep this law for ever , on the tenth day of the seventh month , on the tenth day of the seventh month , you shall not do any work among you .
GOLD:	“ On the tenth day of the appointed month in early autumn , you must deny yourselves . Neither native-born Israelites nor foreigners living among you may do any kind of work . This is a permanent law for you .

ID:	611
INPUT:	Orduan , haurraren arrebak esan zion : — Nahi al duzu hebrear inude baten bila joatea , haurra hazteko ?
PRED:	And the children of the child said to him , “ Do you want me to go to a Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew ? ”
GOLD:	Then the baby 's sister approached the princess . “ Should I go and find one of the Hebrew women to nurse the baby for you ? ” she asked .

ID:	612
INPUT:	Herriak Pazkoa ospatu
PRED:	The Passover
GOLD:	Celebration of Passover

ID:	613
INPUT:	Tzelofhadek , ordea — Tzelofhad Heferren semea zen , hau Galaadena eta hau Manasesen seme Makirrena — , ez zuen semerik izan , alabak baizik ; alaben izenak Mahla , Noa , Hogla , Milka eta Tirtza ziren .
PRED:	But Gilead the son of Shallum , the son of Shallum , the son of Manasseh , the son of Manasseh , the son of Manasseh , the son of Manasseh , the son of Manasseh , the sons of Manasseh , and Noah , and Noah .
GOLD:	However , Zelophehad , a descendant of Hepher son of Gilead , son of Makir , son of Manasseh , had no sons . He had only daughters , whose names were Mahlah , Noah , Hoglah , Milcah , and Tirzah .

ID:	614
INPUT:	Gurasoek galdetu zioten : — Ez al da gure ahaideen artean eta gure herrian emakumerik , filistear jentil arrotz horiengana emazte bila joan gabe ? Samsonek ihardetsi zion aitari : — Huraxe dut , baina , atsegin . Hartzazu niretzat .
PRED:	His parents asked him , “ Is n't there any woman among our brothers ? ” Samson said to the Philistines , “ Do n't you go to the Philistines ? ” Samson answered , “ I have done what you have done to my father . ”
GOLD:	His father and mother objected . “ Is n't there even one woman in our tribe or among all the Israelites you could marry ? ” they asked . “ Why must you go to the pagan Philistines to find a wife ? ” But Samson told his father , “ Get her for me ! She looks good to me . ”

ID:	615
INPUT:	Ni neu madarikatua izatea — Kristorengandik aldendua izatea — ere onartuko nuke , baldin eta hori nire odoleko senideen onerako balitz .
PRED:	I am the curse of Christ , if I be taken away from Christ , then , if I would receive the blood of my brethren .
GOLD:	for my people , my Jewish brothers and sisters . I would be willing to be forever cursed — cut off from Christ ! — if that would save them .

ID:	616
INPUT:	Hau ikustean , errukitu egin zitzaion Jauna eta esan zion : « Ez egin negarrik » .
PRED:	When the Lord saw this , he said to him , “ Do n't weep . ”
GOLD:	When the Lord saw her , his heart overflowed with compassion . “ Do n't cry ! ” he said .

ID:	617
INPUT:	Hatzar-Gada , Hexmon , Bet-Pelet ,
PRED:	and to Sihon , and to Heshbon , and to Heshbon ,
GOLD:	Hazar-gaddah , Heshmon , Beth-pelet ,

ID:	618
INPUT:	Jesu Kristo gure Jaunak berak eta Jainko gure Aitak — maite izan gaituenak eta betiereko kontsolamendua eta halako itxaropen zoragarria dohainik eman dizkigunak —
PRED:	The Lord Jesus Christ , our Father , and our Father , who loved us , who loved us , and gave us hope for ever and ever ,
GOLD:	Now may our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God our Father , who loved us and by his grace gave us eternal comfort and a wonderful hope ,

ID:	619
INPUT:	Hori izan zen isakartarren ondarea , senitarteka banatua , aipaturiko hiri eta herrixkak barne .
PRED:	This is the inheritance of the sons of Issachar according to their families , and their villages , and their villages .
GOLD:	The homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Issachar included these towns and their surrounding villages .

ID:	620
INPUT:	adar-punta ebaki , merkatari-herrialdera eramaneta tratularien hiri bateanlandatu zuen .
PRED:	And he took a trumpet and took them into the land of Assyria , and planted them in a city .
GOLD:	and plucked off its highest branch.He carried it away to a city filled with merchants.He planted it in a city of traders .

ID:	621
INPUT:	Errespeta beza Jauna lur osoak , ikara bitez haren aurrean munduko biztanle guztiak .
PRED:	Let the earth praise the Lord , and let all the inhabitants of the earth fear him .
GOLD:	Let the whole world fear the Lord , and let everyone stand in awe of him .

ID:	622
INPUT:	Hitz haiek aditzen ari zela , Jaunaren espirituak hartu zuen Saul eta amorru bizitan jarri zen .
PRED:	When the Spirit of the Lord heard these words , the Spirit of the Lord took Saul and lived in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Then the Spirit of God came powerfully upon Saul , and he became very angry .

ID:	623
INPUT:	Ez eraman prostituzioan ateratako dirurik Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren tenplura botoren bat betetzeko eskaintza gisa , higuingarri baitzaio Jaunari zuen Jainkoari , bai gizonezkoen , bai emakumezkoen prostituzioa .
PRED:	And thou shalt not bring her to the house of the Lord thy God in the house of the Lord thy God , and the women of the house of the Lord thy God , and the women of the women , and the women of the women , and the women of the Lord thy God .
GOLD:	“ Do not charge interest on the loans you make to a fellow Israelite , whether you loan money , or food , or anything else .

ID:	624
INPUT:	Bat-batean , nolako hondamena ! Haienak egin du , ikaragarrizko azkenaz .
PRED:	How can the destruction be destroyed ! The one who has done great miracles .
GOLD:	In an instant they are destroyed , completely swept away by terrors .

ID:	625
INPUT:	esan zien : — Benetan diotsuet : Berriro haurren antzeko bihurtzen ez bazarete , ez zarete sartuko Jainkoaren erreinuan .
PRED:	He said to them , “ I tell you , if you do not enter the kingdom of God , you will not enter into the kingdom of heaven . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ I tell you the truth , unless you turn from your sins and become like little children , you will never get into the Kingdom of Heaven .

ID:	626
INPUT:	Bere senideari gorroto diona , berriz , ilunpetan dago , ilunpetan dabil eta ez daki nora doan , ilunak itsutu egin baitizkio begiak
PRED:	But the one who hate his brother is in darkness , and the darkness does not know the darkness , because the blind have opened their eyes .
GOLD:	But anyone who hates a fellow believer is still living and walking in darkness . Such a person does not know the way to go , having been blinded by the darkness .

ID:	627
INPUT:	Lur-itsasoei zigorra
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Restoration for Israel

ID:	628
INPUT:	herrialde horretan Noe , Daniel eta Job baleude , nik , Jainko Jaunak , zin dagit neure biziarengatik , ez dutela seme-alabarik ere bizirik aterako . Beraiek bakarrik jarraituko dute bizirik beren zintzotasunagatik .
PRED:	As I live in the land , Daniel , Job , Job , and Job , I live by the Lord God . They will live by their own children , and they will live by their own lives .
GOLD:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , even if Noah , Daniel , and Job were there , they would n't be able to save their own sons or daughters . They alone would be saved by their righteousness .

ID:	629
INPUT:	« Ez eman biderik zeuen barrenean anaiarenganako gorrotoari ; baina ez izan herritarra zentzarazteko beldur ere , harengatik bekaturik egin ez dezazuen .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid of your brother 's brother , but do n't be afraid of his brother . Do n't be afraid because of him .
GOLD:	“ Do not nurse hatred in your heart for any of your relatives . Confront people directly so you will not be held guilty for their sin .

ID:	630
INPUT:	Zuk , gizaseme , egin erbesteratuarena : hartu behar-beharrezkoa eta zoaz erbestera egun-argiz beraien aurrean . Zauden lekutik beste baterantz joango zara beraien aurrean . Agian , orduan ohartuko dira herri errebeldea dela .
PRED:	And thou , son of man , take the silver , and take it , and take it in the sight of their eyes , and go to the other side of their place ; and they shall stand before them , as they shall stand before them , and they shall stand before them .
GOLD:	“ So now , son of man , pretend you are being sent into exile . Pack the few items an exile could carry , and leave your home to go somewhere else . Do this right in front of the people so they can see you . For perhaps they will pay attention to this , even though they are such rebels .

ID:	631
INPUT:	hau Jeserena , hau Jobedena , hau Boozena , hau Salarena , hau Naasonena ,
PRED:	the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Nahor , the son of Nahor , the son of Nahor ,
GOLD:	David was the son of Jesse.Jesse was the son of Obed.Obed was the son of Boaz.Boaz was the son of Salmon.Salmon was the son of Nahshon .

ID:	632
INPUT:	Babiloniaren aurkako mezua . Ikaragarria Jainkoak agertu didana : hor dator basamortutik , lurralde beldurgarritik , Negev aldean sortzen direnhaize-zurrunbiloen antzera , traidorea traizio eginez , hondatzailea hondamena zabalduz . Egin eraso , elamdarrok ! Setiatu hiria , mediarrok ! Jainkoak isilarazten ditu aieneak !
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ This is what God has revealed to me . The Lord has appeared to me from the desert , from the desert , from the desert , from the sea , from the desert , the sea , the sea , the desert , and the inhabitants of the south , and the land of Assyria has been destroyed . ”
GOLD:	This message came to me concerning Babylon — the desert by the sea : Disaster is roaring down on you from the desert , like a whirlwind sweeping in from the Negev .

ID:	633
INPUT:	eta Saraik esan zion Abrami : « Begira , Jaunak agor egin nau . Elkar zaitez , bada , nire mirabearekin . Beharbada , izango dut semerik haren bitartez » . Abramek onartu egin zuen Sarairen proposamena ,
PRED:	And Abram said to Abram , “ Look , the Lord has done to me . If I am with my wife , I will be with my wife 's wife , and I will be her son 's wife . ”
GOLD:	So Sarai said to Abram , “ The Lord has prevented me from having children . Go and sleep with my servant . Perhaps I can have children through her . ” And Abram agreed with Sarai 's proposal .

ID:	634
INPUT:	norbaitek nahiz Israel zure herri osoak , bere okerraz eta atsekabeaz oharturik , tenplu honetarantz eskuak luzatuz , edozein otoitz nahiz eskari egiten badizu ,
PRED:	But if any of your people Israel or all your people Israel , turn their hands toward this house , and pray to them ,
GOLD:	and if your people Israel pray about their troubles or sorrow , raising their hands toward this Temple ,

ID:	635
INPUT:	Entzun , arren , herri ergel eta zentzugabea : Badituzue begiak , baina ez duzue ikusten , belarriak ere bai , baina entzuten ez .
PRED:	Listen , you people and foolish people . You do n't see , but you do n't see , but you do n't hear .
GOLD:	Listen , you foolish and senseless people , with eyes that do not seeand ears that do not hear .

ID:	636
INPUT:	Idatz iezaiozu Esmirnako eliz elkartearen aingeruari : Hona zer dioen lehenak eta azkenak , hila zegoenak eta bizira itzuli zenak :
PRED:	And write to the angel of the church of the church in Ephesus , saying , This is the first , the last and the last , and the last returned .
GOLD:	“ Write this letter to the angel of the church in Smyrna . This is the message from the one who is the First and the Last , who was dead but is now alive :

ID:	637
INPUT:	Izan ere , Kristoren maitasunak bultzatzen gaitu , jakinik bat denengatik hil dela eta , ondorioz , denak hil direla .
PRED:	For because of the love of Christ Jesus , because of all , he died , and all of them died .
GOLD:	Either way , Christ 's love controls us . Since we believe that Christ died for all , we also believe that we have all died to our old life .

ID:	638
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Horiek horrela , nola barkatu zuri ? Zure seme-alabek zapuztu egin naute , sasijainkoen izenean egiten dute zin ; nik ase nitueneta haiek adulterio egin dute , emagalduen etxerazalapartan joanez .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ How did your sons forgive me ? Your sons have rejected me in the name of their gods , and they have filled with their idols , and they have filled with their idols .
GOLD:	“ How can I pardon you ? For even your children have turned from me.They have sworn by gods that are not gods at all ! I fed my people until they were full.But they thanked me by committing adulteryand lining up at the brothels .

ID:	639
INPUT:	Jaunak berak emango dizue , bada , ezaugarria : hona , andre gaztea haurdun dagoeta semea izango du , eta Emmanuel , hau da , “ Jainkoa gurekin ” , jarriko dio izen .
PRED:	The Lord will give you a sign , a sign , a son , a woman , a child , a son , a child , and a son , and a son will be with us .
GOLD:	All right then , the Lord himself will give you the sign . Look ! The virgin will conceive a child ! She will give birth to a son and will call him Immanuel ( which means ‘ God is with us ' ) .

ID:	640
INPUT:	Hain gogor setiatu zuen , izugarrizko gosetea izan baitzen Samarian ; astaburu bakar batek zilarrezko laurogei txanpon balio zuen , eta kilo erdi uso-zirinek zilarrezko bost txanpon .
PRED:	And he was hungry in Samaria , because there was famine in Samaria , and there was a full of silver , and one of the silver of silver , and one hundred talents of silver .
GOLD:	As a result , there was a great famine in the city . The siege lasted so long that a donkey 's head sold for eighty pieces of silver , and a cup of dove 's dung sold for five pieces of silver .

ID:	641
INPUT:	« Ez biezaio inork herritarrari kalterik egin ; horrela erakutsiko duzue begirune diozuela zeuen Jainkoari . Neu naiz Jauna , zuen Jainkoa .
PRED:	“ No one has done evil against his people . You must teach him that you fear the Lord your God . I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Show your fear of God by not taking advantage of each other . I am the Lord your God .

ID:	642
INPUT:	Jesus zerura igo
PRED:	Jesus Heals to heaven
GOLD:	Matthias Replaces Judas

ID:	643
INPUT:	« Txoriak bezala , dardaraz etorriko dira Egiptotik , usoak bezala , Asiriatik . Beren etxeetanjarriko ditut bizitzen . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	“ As a bird will come out of the land of Egypt , and I will put them in their houses , ” declares the Lord .
GOLD:	Like a flock of birds , they will come from Egypt.Trembling like doves , they will return from Assyria.And I will bring them home again , ” says the Lord .

ID:	644
INPUT:	Nik esan nuen : « Ai , Jauna , nola engainatu dituzunherri hau eta Jerusalem ! Bakea zenien iragarrieta , ostera , ezpata daukate zintzurrean » .
PRED:	I said to them , “ Oh , Lord , how have you defiled this people and Jerusalem ! You have brought peace in the midst of the sword , and they are in the midst of the sword . ”
GOLD:	Then I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , the people have been deceived by what you said , for you promised peace for Jerusalem.But the sword is held at their throats ! ”

ID:	645
INPUT:	Arranoa bezalaaltxatuko bazina ere , habia izarretan egingo bazenu ere , bota egingo zintuzket handik .
PRED:	If you were like a eagle , you would put your stars in the stars , and I will drive you out from there .
GOLD:	But even if you soar as high as eaglesand build your nest among the stars , I will bring you crashing down , ” says the Lord .

ID:	646
INPUT:	Lehenengoari agindu hau eman zion : « Esau nire anaiak zurekin topo egin eta galdegingo dizunean : “ Norena zara ? Nora zoaz ? Norena da aurrean daramazun abere-taldea ? ” ,
PRED:	And he commanded the first man , saying , “ Have you found my brother Esau and my brother Esau ? How can you go before you ? Where is your flocks ? ”
GOLD:	You must reply , ‘ They belong to your servant Jacob , but they are a gift for his master Esau . Look , he is coming right behind us . ' ”

ID:	647
INPUT:	Harria astuna da , harea pisua ; are astunagoa burugabearen zitalkeria .
PRED:	The stone is like a stone , and the mouth of the mouth of a fool is a fool .
GOLD:	A stone is heavy and sand is weighty , but the resentment caused by a fool is even heavier .

ID:	648
INPUT:	Gari-sorten Jaia :
PRED:	The Festival of Galilee
GOLD:	The Day of Atonement

ID:	649
INPUT:	Landu iezaiozue lurra heuk , heure seme-alabek eta morroiek ; eramaiozue uzta hire nagusiaren etxekoen janari izan dadin . Hire nagusiaren biloba Mefi-Boxetek nire mahaian jango dik beti . Tzibak hamabost seme-alaba zituen eta hogei morroi .
PRED:	Go up to the ground , and take your sons and daughters , and let them eat the food of your master 's house , that he may eat the bread of my master 's master 's house , that he may eat of my master 's house , and his sons may eat .
GOLD:	You and your sons and servants are to farm the land for him to produce food for your master 's household . But Mephibosheth , your master 's grandson , will eat here at my table . ” ( Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants . )

ID:	650
INPUT:	Antzaldaketa : nekaldi ondoko aintza aurrez agertu
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	The Transfiguration

ID:	651
INPUT:	Behinola , Salomonen ama Betsaberengana etorri zen Adonias , Hagiten semea . Betsabek galdetu zion : — Bake asmotan al zatoz ? Adoniasek erantzun : — Bai , bake asmotan .
PRED:	So King Solomon came to Solomon 's mother , and he asked him , “ Do you want to listen to me ? ” Micaiah answered .
GOLD:	One day Adonijah , whose mother was Haggith , came to see Bathsheba , Solomon 's mother . “ Have you come with peaceful intentions ? ” she asked him . “ Yes , ” he said , “ I come in peace .

ID:	652
INPUT:	Presta zaitez , adorerik baduzu , nire galderei erantzuteko .
PRED:	Get up , go up , and ask me , saying , ‘ What do you say ? '
GOLD:	Brace yourself like a man , because I have some questions for you , and you must answer them .

ID:	653
INPUT:	Saulek zerbitzariei : — Bila ezazue , bada , zitara ongi jotzen dakien norbait , eta ekarri niregana .
PRED:	Saul said to his servants , “ Let me go and bring him to me . ”
GOLD:	“ All right , ” Saul said . “ Find me someone who plays well , and bring him here . ”

ID:	654
INPUT:	Joabek , berriz , utzi zion Abnerren ondoren ibiltzeari eta gizon guztiak bildu zituen . Hemeretzi gizon falta ziren Daviden zerbitzarietarik , Asahelez gainera .
PRED:	But Joab left Abner and all the men who were with him , and all the men gathered together with him . There were two men who were with David 's servants .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Joab and his men also returned home . When Joab counted his casualties , he discovered that only 19 men were missing in addition to Asahel .

ID:	655
INPUT:	gero , beste guztiei eman nien : Egiptoko errege faraoiari , ministro , buruzagi eta herri guztiari ,
PRED:	Then I said to them , “ Pharaoh king of Egypt , king of Egypt , and all the people , and all the people ,
GOLD:	I gave the cup to Pharaoh , king of Egypt , his attendants , his officials , and all his people ,

ID:	656
INPUT:	« Entzun ! Atera zen behin batean ereilea hazia ereitera .
PRED:	“ Listen ! Listen ! Listen to the harvest in one time .
GOLD:	“ Listen ! A farmer went out to plant some seed .

ID:	657
INPUT:	Noek aldarea eraiki zion Jaunari , eta , kutsatu gabeko abere eta hegazti batzuk harturik , erre-oparitzat eskaini zituen aldarean .
PRED:	And Noah built an altar to the Lord , and took some of the birds , and of the birds , and of the birds , and offered them on the altar .
GOLD:	Then Noah built an altar to the Lord , and there he sacrificed as burnt offerings the animals and birds that had been approved for that purpose .

ID:	658
INPUT:	Axdod jende arrotzez beteko da . Honela dio Jaunak : « Horrela ezereztuko dutfilistearren harrokeria ;
PRED:	The Lord said to them , “ I will make the pride of the Philistines , and I will make the pride of the Philistines .
GOLD:	Foreigners will occupy the city of Ashdod.I will destroy the pride of the Philistines .

ID:	659
INPUT:	Azpil batean burua ekarri eta neskatxari eman zioten , eta honek amari .
PRED:	They brought the head and gave it to the young woman , and she gave it to her .
GOLD:	and his head was brought on a tray and given to the girl , who took it to her mother .

ID:	660
INPUT:	Geziak jaurtiz sakabanatu zituen , tximista eginez ihes eragin .
PRED:	And he cast them out , and fled , and fled .
GOLD:	Then at your command , O Lord , at the blast of your breath , the bottom of the sea could be seen , and the foundations of the earth were laid bare .

ID:	661
INPUT:	horregatik , su emango diotTeman hiriari , eta Botzra hiriko jauregiakirentsi egingo ditu » .
PRED:	So I will send fire on the city of Hamath , and it will devour the houses of the city of Hamath . ”
GOLD:	So I will send down fire on Teman , and the fortresses of Bozrah will be destroyed . ”

ID:	662
INPUT:	Kezkak gizona bihozgabetzen du , hitz gozoak adore ematen .
PRED:	When the man goes into a man , we speak to the mouth of the mouth .
GOLD:	Worry weighs a person down ; an encouraging word cheers a person up .

ID:	663
INPUT:	Jagoleak , arerioa datorrela ikustean , adarra jotzen du jendea ohartarazteko .
PRED:	When he saw that he is coming , he is coming , and he is coming to the people .
GOLD:	When the watchman sees the enemy coming , he sounds the alarm to warn the people .

ID:	664
INPUT:	Horregatik , toki hari Beer-Xeba deritzo — hau da , « Zin-Putzu » — , bertan biek zin egin zutelako .
PRED:	That is why they could not live there , because they could not live there .
GOLD:	Then he named the place Beersheba ( which means “ well of the oath ” ) , because that was where they had sworn the oath .

ID:	665
INPUT:	Berriro jaso nituen begiak eta liburu bat ikusi nuen hegan .
PRED:	And I lifted up my eyes , and saw a book in the book of the book .
GOLD:	I looked up again and saw a scroll flying through the air .

ID:	666
INPUT:	eta hurrengo ibilaldietan , Matanatik Nahalielera , Nahalieletik Bamotera ,
PRED:	And they went up from Nazareth to Nazareth , and from Nazareth to Babylon , and from Nazareth to Babylon .
GOLD:	Nahaliel , and Bamoth .

ID:	667
INPUT:	Abixaik esan zion Davidi : — Jainkoak zeure esku jarri dizu gaur etsaia . Uztazu lantza-kolpe batez lurrari josten ; ez dut birritan jo beharrik izango .
PRED:	Then Abishai said to David , “ God has given you this day to this day . Please let me put a spear on the ground , and I will not be put to death . ”
GOLD:	“ God has surely handed your enemy over to you this time ! ” Abishai whispered to David . “ Let me pin him to the ground with one thrust of the spear ; I wo n't need to strike twice ! ”

ID:	668
INPUT:	bertan behera utzi zuen Xiloko egoitza , gizartean bizitzeko eraiki zuen etxola .
PRED:	And he left Shiloh in Shiloh to dwell in Shiloh .
GOLD:	Then he abandoned his dwelling at Shiloh , the Tabernacle where he had lived among the people .

ID:	669
INPUT:	Gerra sorraraziko dut zuen aurka , ituna hausteagatik merezi duzuen zigorra emateko ; hirietan babestuko zarete , baina izurria sortuko dut bertan eta etsaien esku eroriko zarete .
PRED:	I will bring a sword against you for your sake , and I will punish you for your sake , but you will fall in a city , and you will fall into the hand of your enemies .
GOLD:	I will send armies against you to carry out the curse of the covenant you have broken . When you run to your towns for safety , I will send a plague to destroy you there , and you will be handed over to your enemies .

ID:	670
INPUT:	Gauza asko ikusi ditu , baina gogoan hartu ez ; zabalik ditu belarriak , baina ezer entzuten ez .
PRED:	They saw many things , but they did not remember them ; but if they hear not , they did not hear what they hear .
GOLD:	You see and recognize what is rightbut refuse to act on it.You hear with your ears , but you do n't really listen . ”

ID:	671
INPUT:	Jaunak Baxaren aurka Jehu profetaren bidez esan bezala , Zimrik Baxaren etxe osoa suntsitu zuen , beraz .
PRED:	And the Lord struck down all the house of Asa the prophet , as he had spoken by the prophet , and destroyed all the house of Baal .
GOLD:	So Zimri destroyed the dynasty of Baasha as the Lord had promised through the prophet Jehu .

ID:	672
INPUT:	Judako erregeek ezarriak zituzten sasiapaizak Judako hirixka eta Jerusalem inguruetako kultu-lekuetan , toki horietan intsentsua erre zezaten ; Josiasek kendu egin zituen halakoak ; baita Baali , eguzki nahiz ilargiari nahiz izar-multzo eta izar guztiei intsentsua erretzen zietenak ere .
PRED:	And the priests set the priests in the cities of Judah , and in the cities of Judah , and in the high places , and in the high places , and in the high places , and in the places , and in the places of Baal , and in all the incense , and in all the incense , and in the vessels of the sun , and in the sun .
GOLD:	He did away with the idolatrous priests , who had been appointed by the previous kings of Judah , for they had offered sacrifices at the pagan shrines throughout Judah and even in the vicinity of Jerusalem . They had also offered sacrifices to Baal , and to the sun , the moon , the constellations , and to all the powers of the heavens .

ID:	673
INPUT:	Hau guztia zuretzat ematen du Araunak , oi errege . Araunak beste hau ere esan zion erregeari : — Izan dezala atsegin zuregan Jaunak , zeure Jainkoak !
PRED:	This is what the Lord your God says to King Ahaz . He also said to the king , “ May the Lord your God do in you . ”
GOLD:	I will give it all to you , Your Majesty , and may the Lord your God accept your sacrifice . ”

ID:	674
INPUT:	Eta hamarretik bat bakarrabertan gelditzen bada , huraxe ere suari emango diote , haritza eta terebintoa bezala : moztu eta gero , ondoa besterik ez zaie gelditzen ; baina ondo horretatikkimu santua erneko da berriro .
PRED:	And if any of the tenth of the tenth part of the tenth of the tenth of the tenth part of the grain , they shall be cut off , and shall be cut off , and the most holy place shall be holy .
GOLD:	If even a tenth — a remnant — survive , it will be invaded again and burned.But as a terebinth or oak tree leaves a stump when it is cut down , so Israel 's stump will be a holy seed . ”

ID:	675
INPUT:	« Ai zuek , lege-maisu eta fariseu itxurazaleok ! Profeten hilobiak eraikitzen eta gizon zintzoen hilarriak apaintzen dituzue ,
PRED:	“ Woe to you Pharisees and Pharisees , Pharisees , you Pharisees and Pharisees ! You build houses for the dead men who build the dead .
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law and you Pharisees . Hypocrites ! For you build tombs for the prophets your ancestors killed , and you decorate the monuments of the godly people your ancestors destroyed .

ID:	676
INPUT:	Ez itzazue gogor erabil ; horrela erakutsiko duzue begirune diozuela zeuen Jainkoari .
PRED:	Do n't do wrong , but do n't do this . You will fear God .
GOLD:	Show your fear of God by not treating them harshly .

ID:	677
INPUT:	Aldi luze baten ondoren , hil egin zen Egiptoko erregea . Israeldarrek , bitartean , intziri eta deiadarka ziharduten esklabotzapean . Haiek esklabotzaren barrendik laguntza eske eginiko garrasia Jainkoarenganaino iritsi zen .
PRED:	After a long time , the king of Egypt died , and the Israelites cried out , and cried out , and they cried out to God for help .
GOLD:	Years passed , and the king of Egypt died . But the Israelites continued to groan under their burden of slavery . They cried out for help , and their cry rose up to God .

ID:	678
INPUT:	Eskatu Jainkoari , ihes egin beharra neguan edo larunbatez gerta ez dakizuen .
PRED:	When he asked God , he fled on the Sabbath day or on the Sabbath day .
GOLD:	And pray that your flight will not be in winter or on the Sabbath .

ID:	679
INPUT:	Haietariko batzuek , ordea , fariseuengana joan eta Jesusek egin zuena kontatu zieten .
PRED:	But some of them came to the Pharisees and told them what Jesus had done .
GOLD:	But some went to the Pharisees and told them what Jesus had done .

ID:	680
INPUT:	Israeldar ez ziren hitita , amortar , periztar , hibiar eta jebustarren artetik bizirik gelditu zirenak ,
PRED:	And the children of Israel were not able to live among the Amorites , the Amorites , the Amorites , the Amorites , the Amorites , the Amorites , the Amorites , the Amorites , the Amorites , and the Amorites .
GOLD:	There were still some people living in the land who were not Israelites , including the Hittites , Amorites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites .

ID:	681
INPUT:	Erregeak , berriro : — Galdegizu noren semea den mutiko hori .
PRED:	Then the king said to him , “ Tell me , son of man , what is this son ? ”
GOLD:	“ Well , find out who he is ! ” the king told him .

ID:	682
INPUT:	Gaiztoari , berriz , hau diotso Jainkoak : « Nola aipa ditzakezu nire arauak , nola ahotan hartu nirekiko ituna ,
PRED:	But this is what the Lord says : “ How can you take my covenant and my covenant in my mouth ,
GOLD:	But God says to the wicked : “ Why bother reciting my decreesand pretending to obey my covenant ?

ID:	683
INPUT:	Hiru seme zaharrenak Saulekin joanak ziren gudura . Hona gudura joanak ziren hiru semeen izenak : Eliab zaharrena , Abinadab bigarrena eta Xama hirugarrena .
PRED:	And the three sons of Saul went with Saul : and these are the names of the three sons , and the name of the sons of Saul : and the name of the elders , the second , the second , and the third .
GOLD:	Jesse 's three oldest sons — Eliab , Abinadab , and Shimea — had already joined Saul 's army to fight the Philistines .

ID:	684
INPUT:	Hazia gainera erori zaion arropa nahiz larrua uretan garbituko da eta kutsaturik geldituko arratsa arte .
PRED:	And it shall be unclean until the evening , and the skin that is on it shall be unclean until the evening .
GOLD:	Any clothing or leather with semen on it must be washed in water , and it will remain unclean until evening .

ID:	685
INPUT:	Erasto Korinton gelditu zen ; Trofimo gaixorik utzi nuen Mileton .
PRED:	And it came to pass in Ephesus , that I left the sick in Macedonia .
GOLD:	Erastus stayed at Corinth , and I left Trophimus sick at Miletus .

ID:	686
INPUT:	Ni Abrahamen , Isaaken eta Jakoben Jainkoa naiz ? Ez da hildakoen Jainkoa , biziena baizik .
PRED:	I am the God of Abraham and Jacob , the God of the dead , and the God of the dead .
GOLD:	‘ I am the God of Abraham , the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob . ' So he is the God of the living , not the dead . ”

ID:	687
INPUT:	Belen eta Netofako gizonak <unk> ;
PRED:	The men of Bethel , the men of Bethel , the sons of Gershon ,
GOLD:	The people of Bethlehem and Netophah188

ID:	688
INPUT:	Absalomen gudarostea menderatua
PRED:	Absalom and Absalom
GOLD:	Absalom 's Defeat and Death

ID:	689
INPUT:	Han hornituko zaituztet janariz zeu , zure etxekoak eta zure abere-taldeak . Ez zaizu ezer faltako , beste bost gose-urte gelditzen diren arren » .
PRED:	And I will eat you there , and your houses , and your cattle , and your cattle , and your cattle , and your cattle , and your cattle , and your cattle , and your flocks shall not eat . ”
GOLD:	I will take care of you there , for there are still five years of famine ahead of us . Otherwise you , your household , and all your animals will starve . ' ”

ID:	690
INPUT:	Horregatik , senideok , nik ere , Jainkoaren salbamen-asmoa iragartzera joan nintzaizuenean , ez nizuen hitz egin giza jakinduriazko hizkera landua erabiliz .
PRED:	Therefore , brothers and sisters , when I came to you the salvation of God , I did not speak to you in wisdom .
GOLD:	When I first came to you , dear brothers and sisters , I did n't use lofty words and impressive wisdom to tell you God 's secret plan .

ID:	691
INPUT:	mundu honetan askoz gehiago jasoko du , eta datorren munduan betiko bizia .
PRED:	He will give them more than this world , and they will live forever in the world .
GOLD:	will be repaid many times over in this life , and will have eternal life in the world to come . ”

ID:	692
INPUT:	Behera begiratu beharko dutebegi harroek , makurtu beharko dugiza handikeriak . Jauna bakarrik agertuko dagarai egun hartan .
PRED:	The eyes of the proud will look at the eyes of men , and the pride of the Lord will be revealed in that day .
GOLD:	Human pride will be brought down , and human arrogance will be humbled.Only the Lord will be exaltedon that day of judgment .

ID:	693
INPUT:	Jainko arrotz horren laguntzaz erasoko die gotorlekuei . Ohorez beteko ditu jainko hori onartzen dutenak , jende askoren agintari egingo ditu eta lurrak emango dizkie sari .
PRED:	He will fight against the witnesses of God , and he will help them , and he will give them the authority of many people , and the earth will give them the land .
GOLD:	Claiming this foreign god 's help , he will attack the strongest fortresses . He will honor those who submit to him , appointing them to positions of authority and dividing the land among them as their reward .

ID:	694
INPUT:	Ez al dakizue Jainkoaren tenplu zaretela eta Jainkoaren Espiritua zuengan bizi dela ?
PRED:	Do you not know that you are the temple of God , and the Spirit of God is in you ?
GOLD:	Do n't you realize that all of you together are the temple of God and that the Spirit of God lives in you ?

ID:	695
INPUT:	Tesalonikarrak salbamenerako aukeratuak
PRED:	The People of Babylon
GOLD:	Believers Should Stand Firm

ID:	696
INPUT:	Erregea eta beronen jende guztia nekaturik heldu zen Jordanera , eta atseden hartu zuten han .
PRED:	And the king and all his people came to the Jordan , and they found rest there .
GOLD:	The king and all who were with him grew weary along the way , so they rested when they reached the Jordan River .

ID:	697
INPUT:	<unk> ( eta Betelen ) ez zen gizon bat ere gelditu israeldarren ondoren joan gabe , eta hiria babesik gabe utzi zuten .
PRED:	There was no one left in Bethel , but there was no one left the city .
GOLD:	There was not a man left in Ai or Bethel who did not chase after the Israelites , and the town was left wide open .

ID:	698
INPUT:	Izugarria da Jainko biziaren eskuetan erortzea !
PRED:	There is a great God in the hand of the living God .
GOLD:	It is a terrible thing to fall into the hands of the living God .

ID:	699
INPUT:	Ondoren , Zabulongo Elonek gobernatu zuen Israel , hamar urtez .
PRED:	Then Zebulun judged Israel thirty years .
GOLD:	After Ibzan died , Elon from the tribe of Zebulun judged Israel for ten years .

ID:	700
INPUT:	Jaunaren aurrean , bai baitator lurra gobernatzera . Justiziaz gobernatuko du mundua , zuzenbidez herriak .
PRED:	The earth will come before the Lord , and the earth will judge the earth with justice .
GOLD:	before the Lord , for he is coming to judge the earth.He will judge the world with justice , and the nations with fairness .

ID:	701
INPUT:	Eta esan zuen gainera : « Nork esango ziokeen Abrahami , Sarak haurrak izango zituela ? Hala ere , bere zahartzaroan , semea eman diot » .
PRED:	And he said , Who shall say unto Abraham , Who shall say unto him ? And he shall give birth to his son ? And I gave him a son .
GOLD:	Who would have said to Abraham that Sarah would nurse a baby ? Yet I have given Abraham a son in his old age ! ”

ID:	702
INPUT:	Neure buruarengatik dagit zin : Botzra hiria hondamen eta eremu , madarikazio eta iseka-gai bihurtuko da , haren menpeko hiriak hondakin betiereko . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	As I live , saith the Lord , “ Behold , I am going to destroy the city , and a curse , and a curse , and a curse , and an everlasting city , saith the Lord . ”
GOLD:	For I have sworn by my own name , ” says the Lord , “ that Bozrah will become an object of horror and a heap of ruins ; it will be mocked and cursed . All its towns and villages will be desolate forever . ”

ID:	703
INPUT:	Orduan , Moisesek esan zion : — Nirekin datorren herri honi , seiehun mila gizon izanik , hilabete osorako haragia emango diozula diostazu ?
PRED:	And Moses said unto him , This people shall come with me , saying , Is there a hundred men with me , that I may give you the bread of all this people ?
GOLD:	But Moses responded to the Lord , “ There are 600,000 foot soldiers here with me , and yet you say , ‘ I will give them meat for a whole month ! '

ID:	704
INPUT:	Hara ! Bizi guztiak dira nireak , aitaren bizia nahiz semearena . Bekatu egiten duena , hori hilko da .
PRED:	Behold , all the life of my father , and all the life of life , and the life of his father , shall die .
GOLD:	For all people are mine to judge — both parents and children alike . And this is my rule : The person who sins is the one who will die .

ID:	705
INPUT:	Hauxe da testigantza : Jainkoak betiko bizia eman digula , eta bere Semearen bidez eman ere .
PRED:	This is the testimony that God has given us eternal life , and he has given us life through his Son .
GOLD:	And this is what God has testified : He has given us eternal life , and this life is in his Son .

ID:	706
INPUT:	« Ez dela horrela ? Nork gezurtatuko nau , nork ezereztuko nire hitzak ? »
PRED:	“ Who can do this so ? Who will speak about me ? Who will speak my words ? ”
GOLD:	Can anyone claim otherwise ? Who can prove me wrong ? ”

ID:	707
INPUT:	Biharamunean , jaietarako Jerusalemera etorria zen jendetza handia , Jesus zetorrela jakitean ,
PRED:	And it came to pass on the next day , when the people of Jerusalem heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	The next day , the news that Jesus was on the way to Jerusalem swept through the city . A large crowd of Passover visitors

ID:	708
INPUT:	Seinale eske ari da gizaldi gaizto eta desleial hau , baina ez zaio emango seinalerik , Jonas profetarena besterik » . Eta , haiek bertan utzirik , alde egin zuen .
PRED:	This generation is a sign and a sign , but no sign will be given to him , but he left them .
GOLD:	Only an evil , adulterous generation would demand a miraculous sign , but the only sign I will give them is the sign of the prophet Jonah . ” Then Jesus left them and went away .

ID:	709
INPUT:	Lehenengo egunean bezala azkenekoan batzar sakratua izango duzue . Egun horietan ez duzue lanik egingo , bazkaria prestatzeko ez bada .
PRED:	On the first day of the first day you shall be a holy assembly . You shall not eat it in that day , if you do not eat it .
GOLD:	On the first day of the festival and again on the seventh day , all the people must observe an official day for holy assembly . No work of any kind may be done on these days except in the preparation of food .

ID:	710
INPUT:	Joseren argibidea egokia zela ikusirik , okin-arduradunak esan zion : — Ba , nik neure ametsean hiru saski opil neuzkan buru gainean .
PRED:	When Joseph saw that the light was light , he said to him , “ There was three basket on my head . ”
GOLD:	When the chief baker saw that Joseph had given the first dream such a positive interpretation , he said to Joseph , “ I had a dream , too . In my dream there were three baskets of white pastries stacked on my head .

ID:	711
INPUT:	eta hauek lekuko harturik , esan zion Efroni : — Entzun iezadazu , arren . Ordaindu egin nahi dizut soroa . Hartzazu dirua eta orduan ehortziko dut neure emaztea .
PRED:	And he took the place of Ephraim , and said unto him , Hear me , and give me the field ; and I will pay thee my wife , and I will take my wife .
GOLD:	and he replied to Ephron as everyone listened . “ No , listen to me . I will buy it from you . Let me pay the full price for the field so I can bury my dead there . ”

ID:	712
INPUT:	Jaunak esango du : « Berdindu galtzada , berdindu ; zabaldu bidea , kendu nire herriarioztopoak bidetik » .
PRED:	The Lord said to them , “ The way is lost , and spread out my people from the way of my people . ”
GOLD:	God says , “ Rebuild the road ! Clear away the rocks and stonesso my people can return from captivity . ”

ID:	713
INPUT:	Eliseok berriro Israelgo erregeari : — Tenka ezazu uztaia . Erregeak uztaia tenkatu zuenean , Eliseok erregearen eskuen gainean bereak ezarri
PRED:	Elisha said to the king of Israel , “ The children of Israel are under his bow . When the king 's arrows were put on his hands , Elisha put his hands on the king 's hand .
GOLD:	Elisha told him , “ Put your hand on the bow , ” and Elisha laid his own hands on the king 's hands .

ID:	714
INPUT:	Berekin dituzte beren bi semeak : Ahimaatz , Tzadokena eta Jonatan , Abiatarrena . Hauen bidez jakinarazi entzundako guztia niri .
PRED:	They are with their two sons : Zadok , Zadok , Zadok , Zadok , and Abiathar . They have heard all the words that I told them .
GOLD:	and they will send their sons Ahimaaz and Jonathan to tell me what is going on . ”

ID:	715
INPUT:	Keretarren hegoaldeari , Juda eta Kalebeko hegoaldeei eraso genien , eta Tziklagi su eman .
PRED:	And we went up against the south side of Judah and Judah , and burned them on fire .
GOLD:	We were on our way back from raiding the Kerethites in the Negev , the territory of Judah , and the land of Caleb , and we had just burned Ziklag . ”

ID:	716
INPUT:	Benjaminen leinua berpiztu
PRED:	Benjamin and Benjamin
GOLD:	Israel Provides Wives for Benjamin

ID:	717
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Harizko musika-tresnaz . Salmoa . Kanta .
PRED:	O God , you are my God , and you are my God , and you are my God .
GOLD:	May God be merciful and bless us.May his face smile with favor on us.Interlude

ID:	718
INPUT:	Eta honetaz ziur nagoelarik , badakit gelditu egingo naizela eta zuekin guztiokin jarraituko oraindik , zuen sinesmenaren aurrerapen eta pozerako .
PRED:	I know that I am going to live , and I will stay with you , and I will stay with you in the faith and in the faith .
GOLD:	Knowing this , I am convinced that I will remain alive so I can continue to help all of you grow and experience the joy of your faith .

ID:	719
INPUT:	Lau piztitzar horiek munduan sortuko diren lau erreinu dira .
PRED:	These are the four beasts of the earth , and four kingdoms of the earth .
GOLD:	“ These four huge beasts represent four kingdoms that will arise from the earth .

ID:	720
INPUT:	Bete bedi arretaz zeruetako Jainkoak bere etxeari buruz agintzen duen guztia , erregearen eta beronen semeen aurka haserre ez dadin .
PRED:	Let him keep all that God of heaven commanded him to do in his house , so that he may not be angry with his sons and his sons .
GOLD:	Be careful to provide whatever the God of heaven demands for his Temple , for why should we risk bringing God 's anger against the realm of the king and his sons ?

ID:	721
INPUT:	Goizean goiz , mahastietara joango gara , ernamuinak irekitzen hasiak diren , granadondoak loretan dauden ikustera . Hantxe emango dizut neure maite-laztana .
PRED:	And in the morning we will go into the vineyard , and we will see the fig tree , the fig tree , and the fig tree , and I will give you my beloved love .
GOLD:	There the mandrakes give off their fragrance , and the finest fruits are at our door , new delights as well as old , which I have saved for you , my lover .

ID:	722
INPUT:	Orduan , galdetu zion erregeak Danieli , Beltxatzar ere deituari : — Egia al da ametsa argitu eta esanahia azalduko didazula ?
PRED:	Then the king said to Daniel , “ Is it a dream , and you will tell me the dream ? ”
GOLD:	The king said to Daniel ( also known as Belteshazzar ) , “ Is this true ? Can you tell me what my dream was and what it means ? ”

ID:	723
INPUT:	Jaunaren zerbitzaria
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The

ID:	724
INPUT:	Joan zitzaizkion Jesusi bere ama eta anai-arrebak , baina jendearen jendez ezin iritsi ziren berarenganaino .
PRED:	They came to Jesus and his mother and his brothers , but they could not enter into the crowd .
GOLD:	Then Jesus ' mother and brothers came to see him , but they could n't get to him because of the crowd .

ID:	725
INPUT:	Ikusi zuen Jesusek Natanael zetorkiola , eta esan zuen : — Hona benetako israeldar bat , faltsukeriarik gabea .
PRED:	When Jesus saw that Nazareth was come , he said , “ This is a witness of Israel . ”
GOLD:	As they approached , Jesus said , “ Now here is a genuine son of Israel — a man of complete integrity . ”

ID:	726
INPUT:	Eta gu gara hark juduen lurralde osoan eta Jerusalemen egindako guztien lekuko . Jesus hau egur batetik zintzilik hil zuten ;
PRED:	And we are in all the land of the Jews , and in all the land of the Jews , and in Jerusalem : and he died .
GOLD:	“ And we apostles are witnesses of all he did throughout Judea and in Jerusalem . They put him to death by hanging him on a cross ,

ID:	727
INPUT:	Dei egin dizudanean , hurbil izan zaitut ; « Ez beldurtu ! » , esan didazu .
PRED:	When I called to you , I said to you , “ Do n't be afraid . ”
GOLD:	Yes , you came when I called ; you told me , “ Do not fear . ”

ID:	728
INPUT:	Entzutean , poztu egin ziren haiek eta dirua agindu zioten . Jesus haien eskuetara emateko egokiera bila hasi zen Judas .
PRED:	And when they heard it , they were glad , and commanded him to be delivered into their hands . And Judas went out to their hands .
GOLD:	They were delighted when they heard why he had come , and they promised to give him money . So he began looking for an opportunity to betray Jesus .

ID:	729
INPUT:	« Jordan ibaia igaro eta Jerikora heldu zineten . Jerikoko bizilagunek gerra egin zizueten , baita amortarrek , periztarrek , kanaandarrek , hititek , girgaxtarrek , hibiarrek eta jebustarrek ere ; nik , ordea , eskuetara eman nizkizuen .
PRED:	And they crossed the Jordan , and came to Jericho , and all the inhabitants of Jericho , and the Amorites , and the Amorites , and the Amorites , and the Amorites , and the Amorites , and the Amorites , and the Amorites , and the Amorites , and the Amorites , and I gave them into your hand .
GOLD:	“ When you crossed the Jordan River and came to Jericho , the men of Jericho fought against you , as did the Amorites , the Perizzites , the Canaanites , the Hittites , the Girgashites , the Hivites , and the Jebusites . But I gave you victory over them .

ID:	730
INPUT:	Orduan , Pedro biraoka eta maldizioka hasi zen : — Ez dut ezagutzen zuek diozuen hori .
PRED:	Then Peter looked and began to say to him , “ I do n't know this . ”
GOLD:	Peter swore , “ A curse on me if I 'm lying — I do n't know this man you 're talking about ! ”

ID:	731
INPUT:	Davidek gobernariak ezarri zizkien Damaskoko siriarrei , eta haren menpeko eta zergapeko egin ziren siriarrak . Jaunak garaipena eman zion Davidi beronen guda-irtenaldi orotan .
PRED:	And David set them in Damascus , and the Philistines served him and served him , and the Lord gave him victory to David and to all his days .
GOLD:	Then he placed several army garrisons in Damascus , the Aramean capital , and the Arameans became David 's subjects and paid him tribute money . So the Lord made David victorious wherever he went .

ID:	732
INPUT:	Uxatuko dut zuengandikiparraldeko etsaia , eta lur idor eta gorrira jaurtiko : aurreguardia ekialdeko itsasorantz , atzeguardiamendebaldeko itsasorantz . Haren ustel-usaina zabalduko da , kiratsak airea beteko du . Gauza handiak egiten zituenbere ustez ! »
PRED:	And I will cast out the enemy from you , and I will cast them into the midst of you , and cast them into the sea ; and the sheep of the sea shall be opened to the sea , and the sea shall be lifted up , and his eyes shall be lifted up .
GOLD:	I will drive away these armies from the north.I will send them into the parched wastelands.Those in the front will be driven into the Dead Sea , and those at the rear into the Mediterranean.The stench of their rotting bodies will rise over the land . ” Surely the Lord has done great things !

ID:	733
INPUT:	eta nirekin diren senide guztiek Galaziako eliz elkartekooi idazten dizuegu .
PRED:	And all the brothers and sisters who were with me write to you in the church of Gilead .
GOLD:	All the brothers and sisters here join me in sending this letter to the churches of Galatia .

ID:	734
INPUT:	Zuzendaritza gabe , herria behera ; aholkulari asko bada , orduan aurrera .
PRED:	The people of the wicked will die , but many people will be found in front of them .
GOLD:	Without wise leadership , a nation falls ; there is safety in having many advisers .

ID:	735
INPUT:	Orduan , Samsonek esan zion eskutik zeraman itsumutilari : — Eraman nazak jauretxeari eusten dioten zutabeak ukitzeraino , haietan <unk> tenga nadin .
PRED:	Samson brought him out of his hand to the young man , and said to the young man , “ Bring the house to the house of the king 's house , so that they may build the house of the king 's house . ”
GOLD:	Samson said to the young servant who was leading him by the hand , “ Place my hands against the pillars that hold up the temple . I want to rest against them . ”

ID:	736
INPUT:	Ikasbide eman dizuet , zuek ere , nik zuekin bezalaxe , joka dezazuen .
PRED:	I have given you the way , just as I am with you .
GOLD:	I have given you an example to follow . Do as I have done to you .

ID:	737
INPUT:	Bazen kriseilurik asko gu bildurik geunden goiko gela hartan .
PRED:	And there was a lamp in the morning , and there was a light in that night .
GOLD:	The upstairs room where we met was lighted with many flickering lamps .

ID:	738
INPUT:	Elizaren aurka erasoaldia
PRED:	Elijah and Elijah
GOLD:	Persecution Scatters the Believers

ID:	739
INPUT:	Orduan , irakasten hasi zitzaien , Gizonaren Semeak asko sufritu behar zuela ; zahar , apaizburu eta lege-maisuek gaitzetsi egingo zutela eta hil ; eta hiru egunen buruan piztu egingo zela .
PRED:	And he began to teach many things , as the Son of Man must suffer many things , and the chief priests , and the scribes , and the scribes , and the scribes shall rise again .
GOLD:	Then Jesus began to tell them that the Son of Man must suffer many terrible things and be rejected by the elders , the leading priests , and the teachers of religious law . He would be killed , but three days later he would rise from the dead .

ID:	740
INPUT:	Begira , Jainkoak bere jakinduria agertu duenean , gizakiak ez dira gauza izan beren jakinduriaz Jainkoa ezagutzeko ; horregatik , Jainkoak , guk hots egiten dugun zorakeriaren bitartez salbatu nahi izan ditu fededunak .
PRED:	Behold , when God has revealed his wisdom , they are not able to know the wisdom of God , so that we may know God 's wisdom , that we might be saved by the faith of God .
GOLD:	Since God in his wisdom saw to it that the world would never know him through human wisdom , he has used our foolish preaching to save those who believe .

ID:	741
INPUT:	Paulo , Agriparen eta Berenizeren aurrean
PRED:	Paul and King Cyrus went before me in front of me .
GOLD:	Paul Speaks to Agrippa

ID:	742
INPUT:	Gainera , aker bat barkamen-oparitarako , zeuen bekatuen barkamen-ohikunea egiteko .
PRED:	and one male goat for a sin offering , to make atonement for you .
GOLD:	In addition , you must sacrifice a male goat as a sin offering to purify yourselves and make yourselves right with the Lord .

ID:	743
INPUT:	Hartutako dirutik zerbait beretzat gorde zuen Ananiasek , bere emaztearekin ados , eta gainerakoa apostoluen esku jarri .
PRED:	And he took some of these things from the money , and gave them to his wife , and set them on the apostles .
GOLD:	He brought part of the money to the apostles , claiming it was the full amount . With his wife 's consent , he kept the rest .

ID:	744
INPUT:	Sinestedunen itxaropena
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Living as Children of God

ID:	745
INPUT:	eta esanez : « Santutegia desegin eta hiru egunetan eraikitzen omen duan horrek , Jainkoaren Semea baldin bahaiz , salba ezak heure burua ! Jaits hadi gurutzetik ! »
PRED:	and said to him , “ If you build the Holy Place and build the Son of God in three days , save yourself from the cross . ”
GOLD:	“ Look at you now ! ” they yelled at him . “ You said you were going to destroy the Temple and rebuild it in three days . Well then , if you are the Son of God , save yourself and come down from the cross ! ”

ID:	746
INPUT:	Esate baterako , etsaiarekin auzitegira zoazela , saia zaitez bidean harekin konponbidea aurkitzen ; bestela , epaileagana eramango zaitu eta epaileak ertzainaren eskuetan jarriko eta ertzainak kartzelara botako .
PRED:	If you say , ‘ Go with your enemies , do n't find the way with you . But if you find him , you will bring him to the judge , and the priest will bring you into the hand of the priest . '
GOLD:	When you are on the way to court with your accuser , try to settle the matter before you get there . Otherwise , your accuser may drag you before the judge , who will hand you over to an officer , who will throw you into prison .

ID:	747
INPUT:	hona zer diodan nik , Jaunak , Israelen Jainko honek : Hondamen izugarria bidaliko dut Jerusalem eta Judaren kontra ; entzun dezaten guztiei bi belarriek durundi egingo diete .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord , the God of Israel , says : “ I will send disaster against Jerusalem and Jerusalem and Jerusalem , so that they may hear the sound of the ears of the ears .
GOLD:	So this is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : I will bring such disaster on Jerusalem and Judah that the ears of those who hear about it will tingle with horror .

ID:	748
INPUT:	Jesus , hurbildurik , honela mintzatu zitzaien : « Ahalmen osoa eman dit Jainkoak zeru-lurretan .
PRED:	Jesus came to them and said to them , “ The Almighty has given me the whole heaven and earth .
GOLD:	Jesus came and told his disciples , “ I have been given all authority in heaven and on earth .

ID:	749
INPUT:	Amets hau egin zuen : eskailera bat ikusi zuen , beheko ertza lurrean eta goikoa zeruan zituena , eta Jainkoaren aingeruak zurubian gora eta behera .
PRED:	And he saw a dream , and he saw a dream in the earth , and the angel of God was in heaven , and the angel of God went up to the earth , and the angel of God .
GOLD:	As he slept , he dreamed of a stairway that reached from the earth up to heaven . And he saw the angels of God going up and down the stairway .

ID:	750
INPUT:	Eraso zioten Judari , sartu eta jauregian aurkitutako ondasun guztiak eraman zituzten , baita erregearen seme-alaba eta emazteak ere . Ez zioten utzi seme txikiena baizik , Joakaz .
PRED:	And they went into Judah , and brought all that he had found in the king 's house , and his wife , and his wife , and his wife , and his wife , and his wife , and his wife , but they did not leave him .
GOLD:	They marched against Judah , broke down its defenses , and carried away everything of value in the royal palace , including the king 's sons and his wives . Only his youngest son , Ahaziah , was spared .

ID:	751
INPUT:	Sedekias erregeak giltzapean sartua zuen , hark iragarritako mezu hau zela eta : « Hau dio Jaunak : Jerusalem Babiloniako erregearen esku utziko dut eta honek konkistatu egingo du .
PRED:	King Zedekiah went into the prison , saying , “ This is what the Lord says : I will hand Jerusalem into the hand of the king of Babylon , and he will destroy it .
GOLD:	King Zedekiah had put him there , asking why he kept giving this prophecy : “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ I am about to hand this city over to the king of Babylon , and he will take it .

ID:	752
INPUT:	Ez ote naiz libre ? Ez ote naiz apostolu ? Ez ote dut ikusi Jesus gure Jauna ? Ez ote da nire lanaren fruitu zuek kristau izatea ?
PRED:	Is n't I ? Are I not a apostles ? I have not seen our Lord Jesus ? Is not my Lord Jesus ? Is not my work among you ?
GOLD:	Am I not as free as anyone else ? Am I not an apostle ? Have n't I seen Jesus our Lord with my own eyes ? Is n't it because of my work that you belong to the Lord ?

ID:	753
INPUT:	Deika ari zaio Jauna hiriari — zentzuzkoa dahari begirune izatea — : « Israelgo leinu eta herriko batzar , entzun !
PRED:	The voice of the Lord is called to the wisdom of wisdom , saying , “ Hear the voice of the tribes of Israel , and of the tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	Fear the Lord if you are wise ! His voice calls to everyone in Jerusalem : “ The armies of destruction are coming ; the Lord is sending them .

ID:	754
INPUT:	Gizonezko nahiz emakumezko , bota ditzatela kanpalekutik . Horrela ez dute kanpalekua kutsatuko , han bizi bainaiz ni beraien artean » .
PRED:	And they shall bring them out of the camp of the man or woman , that they may not be defiled in the camp , for I am among them .
GOLD:	This command applies to men and women alike . Remove them so they will not defile the camp in which I live among them . ”

ID:	755
INPUT:	Hiri gotortu eta hiri nagusi guztiak xehatuko dituzue , fruta-arbolak ebakiko , iturburu guztiak itxiko eta lur landuak hondatuko harriz betez .
PRED:	And thou shalt destroy all the cities , and thou shalt destroy all the trees of the city , and all the trees of the earth , and all the trees of the earth shall be destroyed .
GOLD:	You will conquer the best of their towns , even the fortified ones . You will cut down all their good trees , stop up all their springs , and ruin all their good land with stones . ”

ID:	756
INPUT:	Eta badakit gizon hori paradisura eraman zutela — gorputzarekin ala gorputzik gabe ez dakit , Jainkoak daki — , eta han , gizakiak ezin esan ditzakeen hitzak entzun zituela .
PRED:	And I know that the man was brought into the midst of the body , and I know that he was not with the body , and God knows that he had not heard the words of men .
GOLD:	Yes , only God knows whether I was in my body or outside my body . But I do know

ID:	757
INPUT:	Orduan , gizaki orozoraturik gelditzen da , ulertezinik ; zilargina idoloez lotsaturik , gezurrezkoak baitira , arnasarik gabeko irudi ,
PRED:	A man 's heart shall be ashamed , and he shall not understand : for there is no false god , because there is no false god , and there is no breath .
GOLD:	The whole human race is foolish and has no knowledge ! The craftsmen are disgraced by the idols they make , for their carefully shaped works are a fraud.These idols have no breath or power .

ID:	758
INPUT:	Beste batek , berriz , esan zion : — Jarraituko dizut , Jauna , baina uztazu aurrena etxekoei agur egiten .
PRED:	But another said to him , “ Lord , I will serve you , but let me go before your house . ”
GOLD:	Another said , “ Yes , Lord , I will follow you , but first let me say good-bye to my family . ”

ID:	759
INPUT:	Azkenik , mendebaldeko harresiak ere luzera bera eta beste hiru ate izango ditu : Gad , Axer eta Neftalirenak .
PRED:	And the wall shall be three months , and the wall shall be three months : Asher , Asher , Asher , Asher , Asher , and Naphtali .
GOLD:	And on the west wall , also 11/2 miles long , the gates will be named for Gad , Asher , and Naphtali .

ID:	760
INPUT:	Gariaren , ardo berriaren eta olioaren hamarrenak , abere handi nahiz txikien lehen-kumeekin batera , Jaunak zuen Jainkoak bizileku eta kultu-lekutzat aukeratuko duen tokira eramango dituzue , eta han otordu sakratua egingo Jaunaren aurrean . Horrela , zeuen bizitza osoan Jaunari begirune izaten ikasiko duzue .
PRED:	And thou shalt bring the oil of thy God , and the oil of thy flock , and of thy cattle , and of thy cattle , and of thy cattle , and of thy cattle , and of thy cattle , and of thy cattle , and thou shalt serve the Lord thy God in the sight of the Lord .
GOLD:	Bring this tithe to the designated place of worship — the place the Lord your God chooses for his name to be honored — and eat it there in his presence . This applies to your tithes of grain , new wine , olive oil , and the firstborn males of your flocks and herds . Doing this will teach you always to fear the Lord your God .

ID:	761
INPUT:	Berak libratuko du laguntza eske oihuka ari den behartsua , nork defendaturik ez duen dohakabea .
PRED:	He will rescue the poor , and he will rescue the poor , and no one will help the poor .
GOLD:	He will rescue the poor when they cry to him ; he will help the oppressed , who have no one to defend them .

ID:	762
INPUT:	Nebuzaradan guardiaburuak hartu eta Riblara eraman zituen , Babiloniako erregeagana ,
PRED:	And the captain of the guard took him , and brought him to the king of Babylon , and brought him to the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , took them all to the king of Babylon at Riblah .

ID:	763
INPUT:	Ikaragarria zara : nork iraun zutik zure aurrean , zure haserrealdian ?
PRED:	You are a sign , and there is no one to stand before you in your anger ?
GOLD:	From heaven you sentenced your enemies ; the earth trembled and stood silent before you .

ID:	764
INPUT:	Mardokeok idatziz eman zituen gauza hauek eta Asuero erregearen agintepeko eskualde orotako judu guztiei gutunak igorri zizkien , nola urrutikoei hala hurbilekoei .
PRED:	Mordecai wrote these words to the Jews and to all the Jews who had been given to the king and to all the Jews who were far away .
GOLD:	Mordecai recorded these events and sent letters to the Jews near and far , throughout all the provinces of King Xerxes ,

ID:	765
INPUT:	Ez gaitezela izan harroxko , elkarren lehian eta elkarren inbidian ibiliz .
PRED:	Let 's not be put to shame in the city of the congregation and in the assembly of the congregation .
GOLD:	Let us not become conceited , or provoke one another , or be jealous of one another .

ID:	766
INPUT:	Jokatu zeure zerbitzari honekin , zure maitasunari dagokionez : irakatsi niri zeure arauak !
PRED:	You are my servant , and I love you , and teach me your statutes .
GOLD:	I am your servant ; deal with me in unfailing love , and teach me your decrees .

ID:	767
INPUT:	Horrela burutu zuen Salomonek bere asmoa , lehen harria ezarri zutenetik Jaunaren etxea bukatu arte . Erabat burutua zen , beraz , tenplua .
PRED:	So Solomon finished building the foundation of the house of the Lord until he laid the foundation of the house of the Lord . So the head was finished .
GOLD:	So Solomon made sure that all the work related to building the Temple of the Lord was carried out , from the day its foundation was laid to the day of its completion .

ID:	768
INPUT:	baina Hebron inguruko lautada eta herrixkak emanak zizkioten jabetzan Jefuneren seme Kalebi ;
PRED:	But Caleb , the son of Caleb , and the villages around Hebron , gave to Caleb the son of Caleb .
GOLD:	But the open fields beyond the town and the surrounding villages were given to Caleb son of Jephunneh as his possession .

ID:	769
INPUT:	Hurrengo urtean , erregeek guduari ekin ohi dioten garaian , Davidek Joab bidali zuen bere ofizialekin eta Israelgo gudari guztiekin . Amondarrak hondatu zituzten eta Raba hiria inguratu . Bitartean , David Jerusalemen gelditu zen .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the days of the reign of the king , that David sent Joab and his servants , and all the people of Israel with him , and they struck the children of Ammon , and the children of Ammon , and the children of Ammon , and the children of Ammon were round about Jerusalem .
GOLD:	In the spring of the year , when kings normally go out to war , David sent Joab and the Israelite army to fight the Ammonites . They destroyed the Ammonite army and laid siege to the city of Rabbah . However , David stayed behind in Jerusalem .

ID:	770
INPUT:	Jesusek gogor eraso zion : — Isil hadi eta irten horrengandik ! Deabruak jendartean lurrera bota zuen gizona , baina batere kalterik egin gabe atera zen harengandik .
PRED:	And Jesus fought against him , and said unto him , Let him go out , and cast out the devil into the earth , but he went not out of him .
GOLD:	But Jesus reprimanded him . “ Be quiet ! Come out of the man , ” he ordered . At that , the demon threw the man to the floor as the crowd watched ; then it came out of him without hurting him further .

ID:	771
INPUT:	Ken iezazkiozu jantziak , hartu zerbait bahituran , arrotz ezezagunaren fidatzaile bihurtu denari .
PRED:	Take away your clothes , and take some of them , and put them on the way of a stranger .
GOLD:	Get security from someone who guarantees a stranger 's debt.Get a deposit if he does it for foreigners .

ID:	772
INPUT:	Nik egingo ditudan zeru-lur berriektinko iraungo duten bezala , tinko iraungo dutezuen ondorengotzak eta izenak ere . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	And I will make heaven and earth and the earth shall remain , as I have spoken , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	“ As surely as my new heavens and earth will remain , so will you always be my people , with a name that will never disappear , ” says the Lord .

ID:	773
INPUT:	Lebitarrek eta Judako guztiek zehatz bete zuten Joiada apaizak agindua . Zerbitzua larunbatez hasten nahiz bukatzen zuten gizonak denak batera hartu zituzten ; izan ere , Joiadak ez zien alde egiteko baimenik eman txanda bukatzen zutenei .
PRED:	And the Levites and all Judah did according to all the commandments of Jehoiada the priest , and all the men of Judah did according to all that were in the sabbath day , and they did not want to do it .
GOLD:	So the Levites and all the people of Judah did everything as Jehoiada the priest ordered . The commanders took charge of the men reporting for duty that Sabbath , as well as those who were going off duty . Jehoiada the priest did not let anyone go home after their shift ended .

ID:	774
INPUT:	Amondarren aurkako mezua
PRED:	A message against Ammon
GOLD:	A Message for Moab

ID:	775
INPUT:	Jaunaren etxeko konponketen arduradunei eman zieten dirua ; hauek , berriz , tenplua konpontzen eta berritzen ari ziren langileei .
PRED:	And they brought the money of the house of the Lord , and they built the house of the Lord , and they built the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	He entrusted the money to the men assigned to supervise the restoration of the Lord 's Temple . Then they paid the workers who did the repairs and renovation of the Temple .

ID:	776
INPUT:	Behin batean , etxean sartu beharra izan zuen Josek , lanarengatik . Ez zegoen une hartan beste zerbitzaririk barruan .
PRED:	And Joseph went into his house , and took him into the house of Joseph , and his servants were not in that hour .
GOLD:	One day , however , no one else was around when he went in to do his work .

ID:	777
INPUT:	Zoazte lanera ! Ez zaizue lastorik emango , baina adreilu-kopuru bera egin beharko duzue .
PRED:	Go , do n't send you back , but you will not give him the money . You will do the same thing .
GOLD:	Now get back to work ! No straw will be given to you , but you must still produce the full quota of bricks . ”

ID:	778
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Hona hemen nire zerbitzaria , nik eusten diodana , nik hautatua , atsegin dudana . Beronen gain ezarri dutneure espiritua : nazioei justizia ekarriko die .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I am my servant , who does what I have done . I will put my Spirit on him , and he will bring justice to him .
GOLD:	“ Look at my servant , whom I strengthen.He is my chosen one , who pleases me.I have put my Spirit upon him.He will bring justice to the nations .

ID:	779
INPUT:	JAUNAREN HITZALDIAK . JOBEKIN ELKARRIZKETA ( 38 , 1 — 42 , 6 )
PRED:	Job 's Death
GOLD:	The

ID:	780
INPUT:	Aaronen ondorengo apaizei , beraz , guztira hamahiru hiri eman zizkieten , eta beraien herri-lurrak .
PRED:	And the sons of Aaron the priests gave to the sons of Aaron , three cities , and their land were three cities .
GOLD:	So in all , thirteen towns with their pasturelands were given to the priests , the descendants of Aaron .

ID:	781
INPUT:	Elbarria larunbatez sendatua
PRED:	Jesus Heals on the Sabbath
GOLD:	Jesus , God 's Chosen Servant

ID:	782
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak esan zion Moisesi : « Zergatik ari zatzaizkit oihuka ? Agindu israeldarrei egiteko aurrera .
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses , “ Why do you cry for me ? Why do you cry out to the Israelites ?
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Why are you crying out to me ? Tell the people to get moving !

ID:	783
INPUT:	honela hitz egin zuen : « Israeldarrok , begira ongi zer egitera zoazten gizon hauekin .
PRED:	Then he said , “ People of Israel , look at what they are doing .
GOLD:	Then he said to his colleagues , “ Men of Israel , take care what you are planning to do to these men !

ID:	784
INPUT:	Kutxa Bet-Xemexen
PRED:	The Covenant Box
GOLD:	The Ark Moved to Kiriath-Jearim

ID:	785
INPUT:	( 2 Kro 23 , 1-21 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jehoiada 's Religious Reforms

ID:	786
INPUT:	Jende xehea zapaltzen duenak irain egiten dio Egileari , behartsuaz errukitzen denak ohore ematen .
PRED:	Those who are poor , but those who have mercy on the poor , and those who have mercy on the poor .
GOLD:	Those who oppress the poor insult their Maker , but helping the poor honors him .

ID:	787
INPUT:	Begira beleei : ez dute ereiten , ez uztarik biltzen ; ez dute bihitegirik , ez mandiorik ; hala ere , Jainkoak janaritzen ditu . Zenbat gehiago ez ote duzue balio zuek hegaztiek baino !
PRED:	Behold , they do not sow ; they do not reap , but they do not reap , but God gives them food to them . But if you do not give them food , you will not eat more than the birds .
GOLD:	Look at the ravens . They do n't plant or harvest or store food in barns , for God feeds them . And you are far more valuable to him than any birds !

ID:	788
INPUT:	Barakek Kedexera deitu zuen Zabulon eta Neftaliren leinuetako jendea . Hamar mila gizon joan zitzaizkion ondoren ; Debora ere berarekin zen .
PRED:	Then Balak called the people of Zebulun , Zebulun , Zebulun , and Naphtali ; and ten thousand men went with him .
GOLD:	At Kedesh , Barak called together the tribes of Zebulun and Naphtali , and 10,000 warriors went up with him . Deborah also went with him .

ID:	789
INPUT:	Eta zenbatez ez da gehiago gizakia ardia baino ! Legezko da , beraz , larunbatez on egitea .
PRED:	And there is no more more than the light of men . So it is better than the Sabbath .
GOLD:	And how much more valuable is a person than a sheep ! Yes , the law permits a person to do good on the Sabbath . ”

ID:	790
INPUT:	Agurra
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Greetings from James

ID:	791
INPUT:	Gizaseme , entzun arretaz esaten dizudan guztia eta sartu buruan .
PRED:	Son of man , hear all that I say to you , and enter into the book .
GOLD:	Then he added , “ Son of man , let all my words sink deep into your own heart first . Listen to them carefully for yourself .

ID:	792
INPUT:	izan ere , honela dio berak : « Nork jan dezake , nor goza daiteke nik jakin gabe ? »
PRED:	For he says , “ Who can eat ? Who can eat it ? ”
GOLD:	For who can eat or enjoy anything apart from him ?

ID:	793
INPUT:	eta 16 . 000 pertsona .
PRED:	and one hundred thousand and twenty thousand and twenty thousand .
GOLD:	and 16,000 virgin girls .

ID:	794
INPUT:	Hamaika larrialdi eta zoritxar pasarazi didazu . Baina berriro biziaraziko nauzu , Herio Leize sakonetik altxatuko .
PRED:	You have given me trouble and trouble , but you will live again , and you will live in the grave .
GOLD:	You have allowed me to suffer much hardship , but you will restore me to life againand lift me up from the depths of the earth .

ID:	795
INPUT:	Iritsi zen Legamia gabeko Ogien Jaieguna , Pazko-bildotsa hil behar zeneko eguna .
PRED:	And it came to pass , that at the feast of the feast of the feast , that is , that the Passover day of the feast .
GOLD:	Now the Festival of Unleavened Bread arrived , when the Passover lamb is sacrificed .

ID:	796
INPUT:	Babiloniatik bizirik ihes egindakoekSion hirian ematen dute berri hau : « Jaunaren , gure Jainkoaren , mendekua da , tenplua hondatu zutenenkontrako mendekua » .
PRED:	The men of Babylon fled from Babylon , saying , “ The city of our Lord our God is the temple of the Lord our God . ”
GOLD:	Listen to the people who have escaped from Babylon , as they tell in Jerusalemhow the Lord our God has taken vengeanceagainst those who destroyed his Temple .

ID:	797
INPUT:	Beraz , hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Hemen nauzue , jendea txoriak bezala harrapatzeko erabiltzen dituzuen lakio horien kontra . Nik desegingo ditut eskumuturreko horiek eta libre joaten utziko zuek menpean harrapaturiko jendeari .
PRED:	Therefore thus saith the Lord God : Behold , I am the Lord God : Behold , I am against them , and I will deliver them into the hand of their hands , and I will deliver them into the hand of their hands , and they shall deliver them into the hand of the people .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am against all your magic charms , which you use to ensnare my people like birds . I will tear them from your arms , setting my people free like birds set free from a cage .

ID:	798
INPUT:	Jakinduriaren sekretuak erakutsiko lizkizuke , giza adimenarentzat sakonegiak direnak ; orduan jakingo zenukehark ez zaituela zigortzen zuk merezi beste .
PRED:	I will speak to you the wisdom of wisdom , and you will know that you do not know that you do not know that you do not know .
GOLD:	If only he would tell you the secrets of wisdom , for true wisdom is not a simple matter.Listen ! God is doubtless punishing youfar less than you deserve !

ID:	799
INPUT:	eta oinetakotzat bakearen berri ona zabaltzeko ardura .
PRED:	and to tell the Good News of peace .
GOLD:	For shoes , put on the peace that comes from the Good News so that you will be fully prepared .

ID:	800
INPUT:	gure hamabi leinuek , Jainkoa gau eta egun etengabe zerbitzatuz , beteko dela espero duten agintzari horretan itxaropena dudalako . Itxaropen horregatik salatzen naute juduek , errege jauna .
PRED:	The twelve tribes of the children of Dan and night and night and night and night , because they have hope in the law of the king , because the Jews hope me .
GOLD:	In fact , that is why the twelve tribes of Israel zealously worship God night and day , and they share the same hope I have . Yet , Your Majesty , they accuse me for having this hope !

ID:	801
INPUT:	Hartan , Jairo zeritzan gizon bat etorri zitzaion , sinagogako buruzagia . Eta Jesusen oinetan ahuspezturik , arren eta arren bere etxera etortzeko eskatzen zion ,
PRED:	One of the synagogue came to him , a man of the synagogue . He bowed down at his feet and bowed down at his feet and asked him to come to his house .
GOLD:	Then a man named Jairus , a leader of the local synagogue , came and fell at Jesus ' feet , pleading with him to come home with him .

ID:	802
INPUT:	Arduradunek senarra atxilotu eta zigorra ezarriko diote ,
PRED:	The master 's husband will be put to shame , and they will be put to death .
GOLD:	The elders must then take the man and punish him .

ID:	803
INPUT:	Nunen seme Josuek , gaztetandik Moisesen laguntzaile zenak , esan zuen : — Ene jaun Moises , galaraz iezaiezu !
PRED:	And Joshua the son of Nun , the son of Nun , said unto him , My lord , thou shalt go unto my lord .
GOLD:	Joshua son of Nun , who had been Moses ' assistant since his youth , protested , “ Moses , my master , make them stop ! ”

ID:	804
INPUT:	Eliren semeek , maltzur-gaizto haiek , ez zuten Jauna aintzakotzat hartzen ,
PRED:	These are the sons of Elijah , and they did not know the glory of the Lord ,
GOLD:	Now the sons of Eli were scoundrels who had no respect for the Lord

ID:	805
INPUT:	ezikasien hezitzaile eta ezjakinen irakasletzat , eta hori , ezagutzaren eta egiaren adierazpena legean duzulako .
PRED:	And he began to teach them and to teach them , because you have heard the law and the law of the truth .
GOLD:	You think you can instruct the ignorant and teach children the ways of God . For you are certain that God 's law gives you complete knowledge and truth .

ID:	806
INPUT:	ezagutzarekin neurritasuna , neurritasunarekin eroapena , eroapenarekin jainkozaletasuna ,
PRED:	But in love , in love , in love , in love , in love , in love ,
GOLD:	and knowledge with self-control , and self-control with patient endurance , and patient endurance with godliness ,

ID:	807
INPUT:	Oroitu ziren haiek Jesusen hitzez ,
PRED:	And they remembered the words of Jesus , saying ,
GOLD:	Then they remembered that he had said this .

ID:	808
INPUT:	Ahiasek jantzia zeraman soingaineko berria hartu , hamabi zati egin
PRED:	Then Amaziah took a garment , took a garment , and put it on twelve men .
GOLD:	and Ahijah took hold of the new cloak he was wearing and tore it into twelve pieces .

ID:	809
INPUT:	egokieraz baliatuz , garai txarrak baititugu .
PRED:	So then , we will remember what we have done .
GOLD:	Make the most of every opportunity in these evil days .

ID:	810
INPUT:	Iseka-gai bihurtu natzaie , ni ikustean , buruari eragiten diote burlaz .
PRED:	I have made a desolation for me , and I have seen the heads of the head .
GOLD:	I am a joke to people everywhere ; when they see me , they shake their heads in scorn .

ID:	811
INPUT:	Madarikaziopean eroriak zaudete , beraz , den-denok iruzur egiten didazue eta .
PRED:	Therefore you are cursed , and all of you are under me .
GOLD:	You are under a curse , for your whole nation has been cheating me .

ID:	812
INPUT:	Erregea Jaunaren etxera joaten zen aldi bakoitzeko , zaintzaile-taldeak babeskiak hartu ohi zituen eta gero , berriro , zaintzaile-gelara ekartzen .
PRED:	And the king went into the house of the Lord , and took the rest of the guard , and brought them to the guard .
GOLD:	Whenever the king went to the Temple of the Lord , the guards would also take the shields and then return them to the guardroom .

ID:	813
INPUT:	Baina ez al ditu , bada , Ezekiasek berak kendu Jainko horren kultu-lekuak eta aldareak , Judako eta Jerusalemgo jendeari aldare bakar baten aurrean ahuspeztu eta intsentsua aldare horretan eskaintzeko aginduz ?
PRED:	Do n't Hezekiah take away the high places of the Lord his God , and the altar of Judah , and the altar of Judah , and the people of Judah , and the altar , and burn incense to the altar ?
GOLD:	Do n't you realize that Hezekiah is the very person who destroyed all the Lord 's shrines and altars ? He commanded Judah and Jerusalem to worship only at the altar at the Temple and to offer sacrifices on it alone .

ID:	814
INPUT:	Hartu zituen , orduan , Samuelek Saul eta honen mutila , jangelan sarrarazi eta mahaiburuan jarri zituen , bazkaldarren aurrean . Hogeita hamarren bat ziren gonbidatuak .
PRED:	So Samuel took the young men and put them in prison , and put them in prison , and put them on his head , and the men who were in front of him were invited .
GOLD:	Then Samuel brought Saul and his servant into the hall and placed them at the head of the table , honoring them above the thirty special guests .

ID:	815
INPUT:	Ez ekarri gehiago opari hutsalik ; higuingarri zait intsentsuaren lurrina . Ilberri-jaiak , larunbatak , batzar<unk> zin ditut jasan jaiokgaiztakeriarekin batera .
PRED:	Do n't bring the burnt offering to me . The new moon of the incense , the new moon , the day of the new moon , and I swore to the people who do evil things .
GOLD:	Stop bringing me your meaningless gifts ; the incense of your offerings disgusts me ! As for your celebrations of the new moon and the Sabbathand your special days for fasting — they are all sinful and false.I want no more of your pious meetings .

ID:	816
INPUT:	« Har dezagun , adibidez , gizon zintzo bat , zuzenbidez eta justiziaz jokatzen duena ;
PRED:	“ Let us take a man who does right and right and right .
GOLD:	“ Suppose a certain man is righteous and does what is just and right .

ID:	817
INPUT:	Emadazu zeure ontasunaren ezaugarria ! Lotsaturik geldituko dira nire etsaiak , zuk , Jauna , kontsolatzen eta laguntzen nauzula ikustean .
PRED:	Give me your wealth , and my enemies will be ashamed . They will be ashamed , Lord , and you will see me .
GOLD:	Send me a sign of your favor.Then those who hate me will be put to shame , for you , O Lord , help and comfort me .

ID:	818
INPUT:	Ala Jauna , zure Jainkoa ! Hamaika lurralde eta erreinutara bidali izan du Akabek jendea zure bila . Eta nonbait bertan ez zinela esaten ziotenean , zin eginez baieztatu behar izaten zion lurralde edo erreinu hark ez zintuela aurkitu .
PRED:	As the Lord your God lives , he sent the people into the land , and sent them into the kingdom of Ahab . And when they had not found you there , he could not find you any kingdom or kingdom .
GOLD:	For I swear by the Lord your God that the king has searched every nation and kingdom on earth from end to end to find you . And each time he was told , ‘ Elijah is n't here , ' King Ahab forced the king of that nation to swear to the truth of his claim .

ID:	819
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak esan zion Moisesi : « Idatzi hau liburuan oroigarri gisa , eta jakinarazi Josueri zeharo ezereztuko ditudala amalektarrak , ez dela munduan haien oroitzapenik ere geldituko » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ This is what the Lord says to Moses , “ I will make a sign to Joshua , and I will destroy the Amalekites , and I will not serve them in the world . ”
GOLD:	After the victory , the Lord instructed Moses , “ Write this down on a scroll as a permanent reminder , and read it aloud to Joshua : I will erase the memory of Amalek from under heaven . ”

ID:	820
INPUT:	Piztiaren batek sarraskitu badu , hala gertatu delakoaren frogak aurkeztuko ditu , eta ez du ordaindu beharrik izango .
PRED:	If a beast has broken his body , it will be revealed to him , and he will not pay it .
GOLD:	But if the animal was indeed stolen , the guilty person must pay compensation to the owner .

ID:	821
INPUT:	Lehenengo hegaldun izakiaren hegoak , zein bata zein bestea , bina metro eta erdi ziren ; hego-mutur batetik besteraino bost metro .
PRED:	And the first wings of the cherubim were two cubits , one hundred cubits , and one hundred cubits , and one hundred cubits , and one hundred cubits .
GOLD:	The wingspan of each of the cherubim was 15 feet , each wing being 71/2 feet long .

ID:	822
INPUT:	Zori hobekotzat jotzen dituthilak biziak baino ,
PRED:	Blessed are those who live in the dead , than those who live .
GOLD:	So I concluded that the dead are better off than the living .

ID:	823
INPUT:	Zorigaiztoko eguna baita , hondamen- eta larritasun-eguna , Jainko Jaun ahalguztidunak bidalia . Ikuskari-haraneanharresiak lurrera , garrasiak mendiraino .
PRED:	Blessed is the day of the wicked , the days of the wicked , the Lord of hosts , the God of hosts , who has sent to the mountains , to the mountains .
GOLD:	Oh , what a day of crushing defeat ! What a day of confusion and terrorbrought by the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , upon the Valley of Vision ! The walls of Jerusalem have been broken , and cries of death echo from the mountainsides .

ID:	824
INPUT:	Fededun guztiak bat ziren bihotzez eta gogoz , eta inork ez zuen esaten zeukana berea zuenik , baizik eta dena denena zuten .
PRED:	All of them were all filled with all their heart , and no one was guilty of sin , but all things were done .
GOLD:	All the believers were united in heart and mind . And they felt that what they owned was not their own , so they shared everything they had .

ID:	825
INPUT:	Horrela jakin zuten israeldar guztiek egun hartan ez zuela erregeak agindu Ner-en seme Abner hiltzea .
PRED:	So all the people of Israel heard that Abner son of Ner was not able to kill Abner .
GOLD:	So everyone in Judah and all Israel understood that David was not responsible for Abner 's murder .

ID:	826
INPUT:	Jokatu , beraz , zentzu onez , erregeok ; zentza zaitezte , munduko agintariok .
PRED:	Therefore , you rulers of the earth , you rulers of the world .
GOLD:	Now then , you kings , act wisely ! Be warned , you rulers of the earth !

ID:	827
INPUT:	Erregetzaren mezua entzun bai , baina ulertzen ez duenari , gaiztoa etortzen zaio eta bihotzean erein zaiona kendu egiten dio . Hori da , mezua “ bide-bazterrak ” hazia bezala hartzen duena .
PRED:	He that hears the word of the king , but he that does not understand the word of the wicked shall come , and he shall take away the way of his heart , as he that reap the word .
GOLD:	The seed that fell on the footpath represents those who hear the message about the Kingdom and do n't understand it . Then the evil one comes and snatches away the seed that was planted in their hearts .

ID:	828
INPUT:	ohoratu aita-amak , eta maitatu lagun hurkoa zeure burua bezala .
PRED:	Take your father and mother , and love your neighbor as you love yourself .
GOLD:	Honor your father and mother . Love your neighbor as yourself . ' ”

ID:	829
INPUT:	Ondoren , jendeak joan eta lurrera bota zuen Baalen jauretxea ; xehe-xehe egin zituen hango aldare eta irudiak , eta Baalen apaiz Matan hil egin zuten aldare aitzinean .
PRED:	And the people went and cast the house of Baal into the ground , and cut down the altars of Baal , and burned down the altars of Baal , and buried him in the altar of Baal .
GOLD:	And all the people went over to the temple of Baal and tore it down . They demolished the altars and smashed the idols , and they killed Mattan the priest of Baal in front of the altars .

ID:	830
INPUT:	Jauna , zu nire indar eta babesle , arriskuan ihesleku ! Zuregana etorriko dira herriaklurreko azken mugetatik , eta esango dizute : « Gurasoek utzi dizkiguten jainkoakgezur huts dira , zentzugabekeriaeta ez ezertarako on .
PRED:	O Lord , you are my strength and my strength , and my people will come to you from the end of the earth , and they will say to you , “ They have left their gods , and their fathers have not served other gods .
GOLD:	Lord , you are my strength and fortress , my refuge in the day of trouble ! Nations from around the worldwill come to you and say , “ Our ancestors left us a foolish heritage , for they worshiped worthless idols .

ID:	831
INPUT:	Eguna argitu bezain laster , apaizburu , zahar eta lege-maisuak bildu ziren — Biltzar Nagusi osoa — , eta , erabakia hartu ondoren , Jesus lotuta eraman zuten eta Pilatoren eskuetara eman .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the morning , when the chief priests and the teachers of the council gathered together , they took him , and brought him into the hands of Pilate , and brought him into the hands of Pilate .
GOLD:	Very early in the morning the leading priests , the elders , and the teachers of religious law — the entire high council — met to discuss their next step . They bound Jesus , led him away , and took him to Pilate , the Roman governor .

ID:	832
INPUT:	Zuhaitz onak ezin du fruitu txarrik eman , ezta zuhaitz txarrak ere fruitu onik .
PRED:	The good tree does not produce good fruit , and the fruit of the trees does not produce fruit .
GOLD:	A good tree ca n't produce bad fruit , and a bad tree ca n't produce good fruit .

ID:	833
INPUT:	Eta hala bihurtu naiz , entzuten ez dueneta erantzun ezin duenaren antzeko .
PRED:	And now I have turned back , and I have not heard , and I am not able to answer him .
GOLD:	For I am waiting for you , O Lord.You must answer for me , O Lord my God .

ID:	834
INPUT:	Zaharrak baino trebeago naiz ulertzen , zure legeak gordetzen ditudalako .
PRED:	I am better than I have understanding , because I keep your law .
GOLD:	I am even wiser than my elders , for I have kept your commandments .

ID:	835
INPUT:	Lurtarra , Adam , lurtarren eredu eta irudi da ; zerutarra , Kristo , zerutarrena .
PRED:	The earth has become the earth , and it is the image of the earth . Christ is the head of the heavens .
GOLD:	Earthly people are like the earthly man , and heavenly people are like the heavenly man .

ID:	836
INPUT:	kehatarrei , berriz , ez zien gurdirik , ez idirik eman , haien egitekoa gauza sakratuak bizkarrean eramatea baitzen .
PRED:	But the Levites did not worship them , because they were not able to carry the sacred things in front of them .
GOLD:	But he gave none of the wagons or oxen to the Kohathite division , since they were required to carry the sacred objects of the Tabernacle on their shoulders .

ID:	837
INPUT:	Afekekoa , Laxarongoa ,
PRED:	the king of Elam , one ; the king of Elam , one ;
GOLD:	The king of AphekThe king of Lasharon

ID:	838
INPUT:	Egoitzaren kultu-hornigai guztiak , bertako hesolak eta atarikoak , brontzezkoak izango dira .
PRED:	And all the vessels of the tabernacle of the tabernacle , and the doors of the tabernacle , and the doors of the tabernacle , shall be of bronze .
GOLD:	“ All the articles used in the rituals of the Tabernacle , including all the tent pegs used to support the Tabernacle and the courtyard curtains , must be made of bronze .

ID:	839
INPUT:	Hileta-kantu hau kantatu zuen Davidek , Saulengatik eta beronen seme Jonatanengatik , eta
PRED:	David sing a song for the city , and for Saul his son Jonathan and Jonathan .
GOLD:	Then David composed a funeral song for Saul and Jonathan ,

ID:	840
INPUT:	Lehoia bezala makurtueta etzaten da : nork egin aurre hari ? Bedeinkatuabedeinkatzen zaituena , madarikatuamadarikatzen zaituena ! »
PRED:	As a lion is bowed down , who has blessed you ? Blessed is he who blessed you , who blessed you . ”
GOLD:	Like a lion , Israel crouches and lies down ; like a lioness , who dares to arouse her ? Blessed is everyone who blesses you , O Israel , and cursed is everyone who curses you . ”

ID:	841
INPUT:	eta ez esklabo bezala , esklabo baino zerbait gehiago , anaia maite bezala baizik . Maite-maitea da niretzat , eta zenbatez maiteago ez ote da izango zuretzat , bai gizon eta bai fededun den aldetik !
PRED:	and not as slaves , as a slave , but he loved me , and he will love you , and he will love you from the faith and faith .
GOLD:	He is no longer like a slave to you . He is more than a slave , for he is a beloved brother , especially to me . Now he will mean much more to you , both as a man and as a brother in the Lord .

ID:	842
INPUT:	eta han toki berezia egin diot bertan ezartzeko : gure gurasoak Egiptotik atera zituenean Jaunak beraiekin eginiko itunaren agiria daukan kutxa » .
PRED:	I have built an altar there , where our fathers brought out of the land of Egypt , where our fathers had made a covenant with them . ”
GOLD:	And I have prepared a place there for the Ark , which contains the covenant that the Lord made with our ancestors when he brought them out of Egypt . ”

ID:	843
INPUT:	Norbaitek zergatik askatzen duzuen galdetuko balizue , erantzun : “ Jaunak behar du ” » .
PRED:	And if any man ask you , you shall ask him , ‘ The Lord will do it . '
GOLD:	If anyone asks , ‘ Why are you untying that colt ? ' just say , ‘ The Lord needs it . ' ”

ID:	844
INPUT:	Israelgo erregea Samariako bere etxera joan zen , goibel eta haserre .
PRED:	And the king of Israel went to his house in Samaria , and was angry .
GOLD:	So the king of Israel went home to Samaria angry and sullen .

ID:	845
INPUT:	Gizon horiek beren bekatuagatik bizia galdu badute ere , errautsontziak sagaratuak daude , nire aurrean intsentsua eskaintzeko erabili izan direlako . Egin errautsontzi horiekin aldarea estaltzeko xaflak ; horrela , oharpide izango dira israeldarrentzat » .
PRED:	And if these men have sinned for their sin , they shall be set apart for their sin , for they are holy to burn incense before me , and they shall make an altar for them to burn incense on the altar of the altar .
GOLD:	Inscribe Aaron 's name on the staff of the tribe of Levi , for there must be one staff for the leader of each ancestral tribe .

ID:	846
INPUT:	nor bereaz axolatzen dira denak eta ez Jesu Kristorenaz .
PRED:	All who are weak are weak , and no one is in Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	All the others care only for themselves and not for what matters to Jesus Christ .

ID:	847
INPUT:	Nire bizia beti arriskuan dagoen arren , ez dut zure irakaspena ahazten .
PRED:	I live forever , and I do not forget your law .
GOLD:	My life constantly hangs in the balance , but I will not stop obeying your instructions .

ID:	848
INPUT:	Ziur baitakigu sinesmenaren bidez onartzen dituela Jainkoak gizon-emakumeak , eta ez legea betetzeagatik .
PRED:	For we know that God does not believe through faith , but by the law , and by the law .
GOLD:	So we are made right with God through faith and not by obeying the law .

ID:	849
INPUT:	Jesusek beso-elbarriari esan zion : — Jaiki eta zatoz hona erdira .
PRED:	Jesus said to the crowd , “ Get up , and come here . ”
GOLD:	Jesus said to the man with the deformed hand , “ Come and stand in front of everyone . ”

ID:	850
INPUT:	Orduan , Jainkoaren gizonarengana itzuli zen bere talde osoarekin ; profetagana heltzean , zutik gelditu eta esan zion : — Orain badakit ez dela lur osoan Jainkorik Israelena baizik . Otoi , onar ezazu zerbitzari honen esku-erakutsia .
PRED:	Then he returned to the man of God , and came to the man of God , and stood at him , and said , “ Now I know that there is no God in all the earth , but let the husband of Israel serve him . ”
GOLD:	Then Naaman and his entire party went back to find the man of God . They stood before him , and Naaman said , “ Now I know that there is no God in all the world except in Israel . So please accept a gift from your servant . ”

ID:	851
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Begira , badator Israel herriarekin eta Juda herriarekin itun berria egingo dudan garaia .
PRED:	“ Look at the time I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and Judah and Judah .
GOLD:	“ The day is coming , ” says the Lord , “ when I will make a new covenant with the people of Israel and Judah .

ID:	852
INPUT:	Eta ez deitu lurrean inori “ aita ” , bat bakarra baita zuen aita , zerukoa .
PRED:	And he did not call a father on the earth , for his father was one father in heaven .
GOLD:	And do n't address anyone here on earth as ‘ Father , ' for only God in heaven is your Father .

ID:	853
INPUT:	Satanek erantzun : — Daukan guztia ematen du gizakiak , larrugorri gelditzeraino , bere bizia salbatzearren .
PRED:	And Satan said unto him , All the work of men are given to the skin , that they may be saved , and to save his life .
GOLD:	Satan replied to the Lord , “ Skin for skin ! A man will give up everything he has to save his life .

ID:	854
INPUT:	Asafen Salmoa . Jauna , jainkoen Jainkoa , mintzo da , mundu osoari egiten dio batzarrera deieguzkiaren sorlekutik sarlekura .
PRED:	The Lord God is God , who speaks to all the earth , to all the earth , to the place of the sun , to the place of the sun .
GOLD:	The Lord , the Mighty One , is God , and he has spoken ; he has summoned all humanityfrom where the sun rises to where it sets .

ID:	855
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak hondatu egin zituen etiopiarrak Asaren eta Judakoen aitzinean , eta etiopiarrek ihes egin zuten .
PRED:	The Lord destroyed the Amalekites and Judah in the days of Asa and Judah , and the Philistines fled .
GOLD:	Then Asa cried out to the Lord his God , “ O Lord , no one but you can help the powerless against the mighty ! Help us , O Lord our God , for we trust in you alone . It is in your name that we have come against this vast horde . O Lord , you are our God ; do not let mere men prevail against you ! ”

ID:	856
INPUT:	Egin Jaunarentzat zuzen eta atsegin dena , zoriontsu izan zaitezten eta Jaunak zuen arbasoei zin eginez hitzemandako lurralde ederrean sartu eta jabetzan har dezazuen .
PRED:	Do what is right in the sight of the Lord , so that you may enter the land which the Lord swore to your fathers , to enter into the land which he swore to your fathers .
GOLD:	Do what is right and good in the Lord 's sight , so all will go well with you . Then you will enter and occupy the good land that the Lord swore to give your ancestors .

ID:	857
INPUT:	Urrezko berrogeita hamar katigailu ere egin zituzten , eta horiekin zapi-sail bat besteari lotu , egoitza osoak bat egiten zuelarik .
PRED:	And they made fifty gold rings of gold , and put them on the other side of the tabernacle , and put them on the other side of the tabernacle .
GOLD:	Then he made fifty gold clasps and fastened the long curtains together with the clasps . In this way , the Tabernacle was made of one continuous piece .

ID:	858
INPUT:	Dan hiritiketa Efraimgo mendietatikberri txarrak datoz .
PRED:	Dan and Dan came from the mountains of Ephraim , and from the mountains of Ephraim .
GOLD:	Your destruction has been announcedfrom Dan and the hill country of Ephraim .

ID:	859
INPUT:	horrela , behartsuen deiadarra harenganaino iritsarazi dute , eta hark entzun egin du dohakabeen oihua .
PRED:	They have heard the voice of the poor , and has heard their voice , and he has heard their cry .
GOLD:	They cause the poor to cry out , catching God 's attention.He hears the cries of the needy .

ID:	860
INPUT:	Bi testiguak
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The Two Witnesses

ID:	861
INPUT:	Hurbil zen Pazkoa , juduen jai nagusia .
PRED:	Now the Passover was near , and the Passover was near .
GOLD:	( It was nearly time for the Jewish Passover celebration . )

ID:	862
INPUT:	Hara , samina bake bihurtu zait . Nire bizia hondamen-leizeanerortzetik gorde duzu , bizkarra eman baitiezunire bekatu guztiei .
PRED:	Behold , my soul has turned away from me ; for thou hast turned away my life from the destruction of my soul ; for thou hast turned away all my sins .
GOLD:	Yes , this anguish was good for me , for you have rescued me from deathand forgiven all my sins .

ID:	863
INPUT:	Ipini sarea aldare-ertzaren azpian , aldare erdiraino jaisten delarik .
PRED:	And he set up the altar on the altar , and went down to the top of the altar .
GOLD:	Install the grating halfway down the side of the altar , under the ledge .

ID:	864
INPUT:	Ur garbiz zipriztinduko zaituztet eta garbi geldituko zarete ; zuen kutsadura eta idolatria guztietatik garbituko zaituztet .
PRED:	I will wash you with water , and you will be clean , and you will be clean . I will wash you from all your idols .
GOLD:	“ Then I will sprinkle clean water on you , and you will be clean . Your filth will be washed away , and you will no longer worship idols .

ID:	865
INPUT:	« Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak jabetzan hartzera zoazten lurraldean sarrarazi ondoren , Garizim mendian emango duzue bedeinkazioa eta Ebal mendian madarikazioa .
PRED:	“ When you go into the land that the Lord your God is giving you to possess , you will bless Aaron , and you will bless him on Mount Sinai and on Mount Sinai .
GOLD:	“ When the Lord your God brings you into the land and helps you take possession of it , you must pronounce the blessing at Mount Gerizim and the curse at Mount Ebal .

ID:	866
INPUT:	Eskerrak ematen dizkiot arbasoen irakatsiei jarraituz bihotz garbiz zerbitzatzen dudan Jainkoari , eta gogoan zaitut etengabe , gau eta egun , neure otoitzetan .
PRED:	I give thanks to the God of my fathers , to walk in the sight of the Lord , and in all night , and in my prayer , and in my prayer , and in my prayer .
GOLD:	Timothy , I thank God for you — the God I serve with a clear conscience , just as my ancestors did . Night and day I constantly remember you in my prayers .

ID:	867
INPUT:	Joan zuek jaietara ; ni ez noa , nire garaia ez baita oraindik bete .
PRED:	And you went down to the door , for I am not yet yet yet yet .
GOLD:	You go on . I 'm not going to this festival , because my time has not yet come . ”

ID:	868
INPUT:	Gainera , esan zion Moisesek Koreri : « Entzun , lebitarrok !
PRED:	Moses said to Korah , “ Hear , you Levites , Levites !
GOLD:	Then Moses spoke again to Korah : “ Now listen , you Levites !

ID:	869
INPUT:	« Zuk , gizaseme , epaitu , epaitu gogor hiri odolzalea , aurpegiratu beraren jokabide higuingarria !
PRED:	“ Son of man , judge the blood of blood , and judge the city , and do their abominations .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , are you ready to judge Jerusalem ? Are you ready to judge this city of murderers ? Publicly denounce her detestable sins ,

ID:	870
INPUT:	( Mt 9 , 37-38 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus ' Prayer of Thanksgiving

ID:	871
INPUT:	eta esan ziela : Horregatik , gizasemeak bere aita-amak utziko ditu eta emazteari elkartuko zaio , eta biak bat izango dira .
PRED:	And he said to them , “ Because of this , men will leave his father and mother and mother , and they will be one of them . ”
GOLD:	And he said , “ ‘ This explains why a man leaves his father and mother and is joined to his wife , and the two are united into one . '

ID:	872
INPUT:	« Zintzoari dagokionez , berriz , bere justiziatik aldendu eta , gaiztoak egin ohi dituen gauza higuingarri guztien antzera , txarkeria egiten badu , bizi egingo ote da , halere ? Haren egintza zuzenak ez ditut gogoan hartuko . Egin dituen desleialkeria eta bekatuengatik hil egingo da .
PRED:	But if the righteous turn away from his righteousness , he shall turn away from all the abominations of the wicked , and shall he live in his sight , and shall he die in his sight , and he shall die because of his wickedness .
GOLD:	However , if righteous people turn from their righteous behavior and start doing sinful things and act like other sinners , should they be allowed to live ? No , of course not ! All their righteous acts will be forgotten , and they will die for their sins .

ID:	873
INPUT:	Zuen oinek zapalduko dituzten leku guztiak zeuenak izango dituzue , eta zuen lurraldea basamortutik Libanoraino eta Eufrates ibaitik Mediterraneo itsasoraino hedatuko da .
PRED:	You will be your witnesses , and your land will be your possession from the wilderness to the sea , and from the sea to the sea .
GOLD:	Wherever you set foot , that land will be yours . Your frontiers will stretch from the wilderness in the south to Lebanon in the north , and from the Euphrates River in the east to the Mediterranean Sea in the west .

ID:	874
INPUT:	Izerdirik aterarazi ez dizuen lurraldea eman dizuet , eraiki ez dituzuen hiriak , eta berorietan bizi zarete ; baita landatu ez dituzuen mahasti eta olibadiak ere , eta berorien fruituez elikatzen zarete » .
PRED:	I have given you the land that I have given you , and you have not built it , and you have not built it , but you have not plant the fruit of your vineyard , and you have not planted the fruit of the fruit of the fruit of your fruit . ”
GOLD:	I gave you land you had not worked on , and I gave you towns you did not build — the towns where you are now living . I gave you vineyards and olive groves for food , though you did not plant them .

ID:	875
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Are okerrago izango da , gizakiak eta abereak suntsitzeko lau zigor beldurgarriok — gerra , gosetea , basapiztiak eta izurria — Jerusalemen aurka bidaliko ditudanean .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord God says : “ I will punish men and animals and animals . They will destroy all the animals of the earth . They will die in Jerusalem . They will be destroyed in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	“ Now this is what the Sovereign Lord says : How terrible it will be when all four of these dreadful punishments fall upon Jerusalem — war , famine , wild animals , and disease — destroying all her people and animals .

ID:	876
INPUT:	Beren lurraldean , inork izutu gabe , seguru biziko direnean , nire kontra egin dituzten lotsagarrikeria eta desleialkeria guztiak ahaztuko dituzte .
PRED:	They will live in their land , and no one will live in their land , and they will forget all their wickedness and their wickedness .
GOLD:	They will accept responsibility for their past shame and unfaithfulness after they come home to live in peace in their own land , with no one to bother them .

ID:	877
INPUT:	Itsuok halakook ! Zer da handiago : oparia ala oparia sagaratzen duen aldarea ?
PRED:	You blind , you blind ! What is greater than the altar that is offered to the altar ?
GOLD:	How blind ! For which is more important — the gift on the altar or the altar that makes the gift sacred ?

ID:	878
INPUT:	Zulora doazenekin bat egina naukate , hain nago indargabetua .
PRED:	They have made me with the idols of the idols , and I am weak .
GOLD:	They have left me among the dead , and I lie like a corpse in a grave.I am forgotten , cut off from your care .

ID:	879
INPUT:	Epaileek zehatz-mehatz ikertuko dute auzia ; ikusten bada lekukoa faltsua dela eta herritarra gezurrez salatu duela ,
PRED:	And the priest shall judge the priest , and behold , he is a witness , and is a false witness , and a false witness .
GOLD:	The judges must investigate the case thoroughly . If the accuser has brought false charges against his fellow Israelite ,

ID:	880
INPUT:	Bene-benetan diotsut : Gazteago zinenean , zeuk lotzen zenuen gerrikoa eta nora joan erabakitzen ; zahartzean , ordea , zuk besoak luzatu eta beste batek lotuko dizu gerrikoa eta nahi izango ez duzun lekura eramango zaitu .
PRED:	I say to you , when you were young , when you were young , you were young , and when you were young , your hands will go , and your hands will be taken away , and you will not be brought to your place .
GOLD:	“ I tell you the truth , when you were young , you were able to do as you liked ; you dressed yourself and went wherever you wanted to go . But when you are old , you will stretch out your hands , and others will dress you and take you where you do n't want to go . ”

ID:	881
INPUT:	Baina benjamindarrek Gibeatik irten eta hogeita bi mila gizon israeldarri lur joarazi zieten .
PRED:	And the children of Benjamin went out of Gibeah , and struck the men of Israel two thousand and fifty thousand men .
GOLD:	But Benjamin 's warriors , who were defending the town , came out and killed 22,000 Israelites on the battlefield that day .

ID:	882
INPUT:	Nondik Jesusen aginpidea ?
PRED:	Jesus Heals the Holy Spirit
GOLD:	The Authority of Jesus Challenged

ID:	883
INPUT:	Ai ene , desegina da Moab ! Egin intziri ! Lotsaren lotsaz bizkarra eman du ! Auzokoen izu eta iseka-gai bihurtu da .
PRED:	Woe to Moab , Moab ! She is ashamed ! She is ashamed ! She has become ashamed of shame , and she has become a desolation .
GOLD:	How it is shattered ! Hear the wailing ! See the shame of Moab ! It has become an object of ridicule , an example of ruin to all its neighbors . ”

ID:	884
INPUT:	Eta agindu hau eman zieten benjamindarrei : « Gorde zaitezte Xiloko mahastietan .
PRED:	And they commanded the children of Benjamin , saying , Go ye in the vineyard of Shiloh .
GOLD:	They told the men of Benjamin who still needed wives , “ Go and hide in the vineyards .

ID:	885
INPUT:	Baina bihozgabetuei adore ematen dien Jainkoak adorez bete ninduen Titoren etorrerarekin .
PRED:	But when God gives me to sin , God 's gift came with me to Tyre .
GOLD:	But God , who encourages those who are discouraged , encouraged us by the arrival of Titus .

ID:	886
INPUT:	Herritarren zenbaketa egin Davidek
PRED:	David and David
GOLD:	David Takes a Census

ID:	887
INPUT:	( Mt 13 , 1-9 ; Mk 4 , 1-9 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	The True Family of Jesus

ID:	888
INPUT:	« Ez duzu zeure aitaren anaia desohoratuko , beronen emaztearekin sexu-harremanak izanez : zeure izeba duzu .
PRED:	“ You shall not have sexual relations with your father 's wife . You shall not have sexual relations with her father 's wife . You shall be your name .
GOLD:	“ Do not violate your uncle , your father 's brother , by having sexual relations with his wife , for she is your aunt .

ID:	889
INPUT:	Gero , ekialderantz bihurtzen zen , Bet-Dagoneraino , eta , Zabulonen leinuaren muga eta Iftah-El harana iparraldetik ukituz , Bet-Emek eta <unk> eldik jarraitzen zuen , eta ezkerraldetik Kabul ,
PRED:	And he went up to the east side of the children of Zebulun , and the border of Zebulun , and the border of Zebulun , and the border thereof , and the border thereof , and the border thereof , and the prince thereof , and the prince thereof , and the prince of the land of Canaan ,
GOLD:	then it turned east toward Beth-dagon , and ran as far as Zebulun in the valley of Iphtah-el , going north to Beth-emek and Neiel . It then continued north to Cabul ,

ID:	890
INPUT:	eta mantxa berdexka nahiz gorrixka bada , lizun-kasua da eta apaizari erakutsi behar zaio .
PRED:	And if it is a plague , or a leper , it shall be revealed unto the priest , and the priest shall teach it .
GOLD:	If the contaminated area in the clothing , the animal hide , the fabric , or the leather article has turned greenish or reddish , it is contaminated with mildew and must be shown to the priest .

ID:	891
INPUT:	Babiloniarrek zatikatu egin zituzten Jaunaren etxean zeuden brontzezko zutabeak , orgak eta uraska handia , eta Babiloniara eraman zuten brontzea .
PRED:	And the men of Babylon cut down the vessels of the house of the Lord , and the sea , and the sea , and the sea , and brought them to Babylon .
GOLD:	The Babylonians broke up the bronze pillars in front of the Lord 's Temple , the bronze water carts , and the great bronze basin called the Sea , and they carried all the bronze away to Babylon .

ID:	892
INPUT:	Bata , zorteak Jaunarentzat aukeratua , aurkeztu eta barkamen-oparitzat eskainiko du .
PRED:	And he shall offer a male goat for the Lord , and he shall offer a sin offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	Aaron will then present as a sin offering the goat chosen by lot for the Lord .

ID:	893
INPUT:	Esan zion Jaunak lihoz jantzitako gizonari : « Sartu kerubinen azpiko gurpil artera ; hartu handik eskuak bete txingar gori eta barreiatu hirian » . Eta gizona sartu egin zen neure begi-bistan .
PRED:	And the Lord said to the man who was in linen , “ Go into the spirit of the spirit of the wheels , and lay his hand in his hand , and spread out his hand , and went into the city . ” And the man went into my sight .
GOLD:	Then the Lord spoke to the man in linen clothing and said , “ Go between the whirling wheels beneath the cherubim , and take a handful of burning coals and scatter them over the city . ” He did this as I watched .

ID:	894
INPUT:	baina bizirik utzi zaitut nire ahalmena erakusteko eta mundu osoak nor naizen jakin dezan .
PRED:	But I have left you to see my power , and all the earth may know that I am .
GOLD:	But I have spared you for a purpose — to show you my power and to spread my fame throughout the earth .

ID:	895
INPUT:	Beraien aurrean , bizkarrean fardela harturik , ilunpetan aterako zara ; estali aurpegia zeure herrialdea ez ikusteko , seinale bihurtu baitzaitut Israel herriarentzat » .
PRED:	When you see that you are in the darkness , you will be brought out in darkness , and you will not see your face , because I have made your face a sign for the house of Israel . ”
GOLD:	As they watch , lift your pack to your shoulders and walk away into the night . Cover your face so you can not see the land you are leaving . For I have made you a sign for the people of Israel . ”

ID:	896
INPUT:	Madarikazioa eta gezurra , hilketa , lapurretaeta adulterioa ugari , odola odolaren gain .
PRED:	curse is the man who has been put to death . He has committed adultery and adultery . He has committed adultery . He has committed adultery and blood .
GOLD:	You make vows and break them ; you kill and steal and commit adultery.There is violence everywhere — one murder after another .

ID:	897
INPUT:	Hilda gero , ez da inor oroitzen zutaz ; Hildakoen Egoitzan , nork goretsi zu ?
PRED:	There is no one to remember you , but who can praise you ? Who can praise you ?
GOLD:	I am worn out from sobbing.All night I flood my bed with weeping , drenching it with my tears .

ID:	898
INPUT:	Idolo-moldeatzaileakhutsa dira denak , hain estimatuak dituzten irudiakezertarako ez . Horien gurtzaileakitsu eta burugabe ; horregatik , lotsagarri geldituko dira .
PRED:	All the idols of idols are made of idols , and the idols of the hands of the hands of the idols : therefore they shall be ashamed , and they shall be ashamed .
GOLD:	How foolish are those who manufacture idols.These prized objects are really worthless.The people who worship idols do n't know this , so they are all put to shame .

ID:	899
INPUT:	Hango nagusiak , lehoi orrolari ; hango epaileak , gauean ehizatuarigoizerako hezurrik ereuzten ez dioten otso .
PRED:	The mighty lion will fall by night , and the judges will not reap the city , and the judges will not reap the night .
GOLD:	Its leaders are like roaring lionshunting for their victims.Its judges are like ravenous wolves at evening time , who by dawn have left no trace of their prey .

ID:	900
INPUT:	Ikusi duzun emakumea , lurreko erregeen gain erregetza duen hiri handia da » .
PRED:	The woman who saw the kingdom of the kings of the earth , is great city . ”
GOLD:	And this woman you saw in your vision represents the great city that rules over the kings of the world . ”

ID:	901
INPUT:	Eta esan zuen , gainera : « Horregatik esan dizuet ezin dela inor ere niregana hurbildu , Aitak ez badio horretarako gaitasuna ematen » .
PRED:	And he said , “ Therefore I told you , that no one can come near to me , but the Father does not come near to me . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ That is why I said that people ca n't come to me unless the Father gives them to me . ”

ID:	902
INPUT:	Aberastasunakharrapatu egingo dizkizuteeta salgaiak ostuko ; harresiak eraitsieta jauregi bikainak botako behera ; harriak , habeak eta hondakinak ereitsasora botako dituzte .
PRED:	The riches will be taken away , and the wealth will be taken away , and the stones will fall down , and the stones will be cut down , and the stones will be cut down .
GOLD:	“ They will plunder all your riches and merchandise and break down your walls . They will destroy your lovely homes and dump your stones and timbers and even your dust into the sea .

ID:	903
INPUT:	Zaudete erne , bada , eta eduki gogoan , hiru urtez gau eta egun aspertu gabe jardun dudala zuetako bakoitzari negar-malkoz aholkuak ematen .
PRED:	Be careful , and remember that I have done this for three days and three days and three days .
GOLD:	Watch out ! Remember the three years I was with you — my constant watch and care over you night and day , and my many tears for you .

ID:	904
INPUT:	Nehemiasek lanean ari direnak armatu
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Instructions
GOLD:	Enemies Oppose the Rebuilding

ID:	905
INPUT:	Irten ziren , bada , Egiptotik eta , Kanaanera , beren aita Jakobengana , heldu zirenean ,
PRED:	So they went out of Egypt , and came to their father Jacob , and came to their father Jacob ,
GOLD:	And they left Egypt and returned to their father , Jacob , in the land of Canaan .

ID:	906
INPUT:	Manasesen lurraldearen muga , Axerren hasi eta Sikemen aurrean dagoen Mikmetatera zihoan ; handik hegoaldera jarraitzen zuen , En-Tapuah aldera .
PRED:	And the border of Manasseh began to go up to Shechem , and they went up from the east side of Shechem .
GOLD:	The boundary of the tribe of Manasseh extended from the border of Asher to Micmethath , near Shechem . Then the boundary went south from Micmethath to the settlement near the spring of Tappuah .

ID:	907
INPUT:	Joanek erantzun zien : — Nik urez bataiatzen dut ; zeuen artean baduzue , ordea , ezagutzen ez duzuen bat ,
PRED:	John said to them , “ I am baptized with water , but you do not know one of you . ”
GOLD:	John told them , “ I baptize with water , but right here in the crowd is someone you do not recognize .

ID:	908
INPUT:	Tira , emazkiguzue Gibeako gizon maltzur-gaizto horiek ; hil egin behar ditugu , Israeldik gaitz hori kentzeko » . Baina benjamindarrek ez zieten entzun nahi izan beren senide israeldarrei .
PRED:	The men of Benjamin , know this evil man 's wife , and we will kill them . But Benjamin would not listen to their brothers .
GOLD:	Give up those evil men , those troublemakers from Gibeah , so we can execute them and purge Israel of this evil . ” But the people of Benjamin would not listen .

ID:	909
INPUT:	Ruben eta Gaden leinuetakoak eta Manasesen leinu erdikoak gainerako israeldarren aurretik joan ziren , guda-lerrotan jarririk , Moisesek agindua zien bezala .
PRED:	And the children of Reuben and the half of the tribes of Manasseh came before the children of Israel , as Moses had commanded them .
GOLD:	The armed warriors from the tribes of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh led the Israelites across the Jordan , just as Moses had directed .

ID:	910
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Erremediorik gabea dazure hondamena , sendaezina zure zauria .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I am going to destroy your destruction .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Your injury is incurable — a terrible wound .

ID:	911
INPUT:	Jendetzagatik ez baitzuten nondik sartu aurkitzen , teilatura igo eta , teilak kendurik , ohatila eta guzti jaitsi zuten erdi-erdira , Jesusen aurrera .
PRED:	And when they found no man , they went into the feast , and they took the feast , and came down to the feast of Jesus .
GOLD:	but they could n't reach him because of the crowd . So they went up to the roof and took off some tiles . Then they lowered the sick man on his mat down into the crowd , right in front of Jesus .

ID:	912
INPUT:	Egiptoarrak , faraoiaren zaldi , gurdi eta zaldun guztiak , israeldarrei erasoka itsas erdiraino sartu ziren .
PRED:	And the Egyptians and all his chariots , and all his chariots , and all his chariots , and all his chariots , and went into the sea .
GOLD:	Then the Egyptians — all of Pharaoh 's horses , chariots , and charioteers — chased them into the middle of the sea .

ID:	913
INPUT:	Esan nien , bada : « Ikusten duzue nolako atsekabetan gabiltzan : Jerusalem hondatua dago eta bertako ateak kiskaliak . Ea , eraiki ditzagun Jerusalemgo harresiak , atera gaitezen egoera lotsagarri honetatik ! »
PRED:	Then I said to them , “ You see what you do . The city is destroyed , and the gates of Jerusalem is destroyed , and the walls of Jerusalem is destroyed , so that the walls of Jerusalem may come out of this city . ”
GOLD:	But now I said to them , “ You know very well what trouble we are in . Jerusalem lies in ruins , and its gates have been destroyed by fire . Let us rebuild the wall of Jerusalem and end this disgrace ! ”

ID:	914
INPUT:	Judak , Joserengana hurbilduz , esan zion : — Arren , jauna , utziozu zeure zerbitzari honi bi hitz esaten ; faraoiaren pareko zara zu eta ez zakizkit haserre !
PRED:	And Judah came to Joseph , and said unto him , My lord , let me speak unto thy servant , and thou shalt speak unto thy servant , and thou shalt not be angry .
GOLD:	Then Judah stepped forward and said , “ Please , my lord , let your servant say just one word to you . Please , do not be angry with me , even though you are as powerful as Pharaoh himself .

ID:	915
INPUT:	Akabek Obadiasi , jauregizain nagusiari , dei egin zion . Obadias honek begirune handia zion Jaunari .
PRED:	Ahab called out to his master 's house , and he called him to the Lord .
GOLD:	So Ahab summoned Obadiah , who was in charge of the palace . ( Obadiah was a devoted follower of the Lord .

ID:	916
INPUT:	Manasesen gainerako jarduerak , egintza guztiak eta egin zuen bekatua « Judako Erregeen Kronika » liburuan daude idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the acts of Manasseh , and all that he did , are they not written in the book of the kings of Judah ?
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Manasseh 's reign and everything he did , including the sins he committed , are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .

ID:	917
INPUT:	Aldare gainean liturgi zerbitzurako erabiltzen diren tresna guztiak ezarriko dituzte : errautsontziak , sardexkak , palak eta isipu-ontziak . Guztia larru finezko estalduraz bilduko dute , eta hagak ezarriko dizkiote aldareari .
PRED:	And they shall put all the vessels of the altar , and all the vessels of the altar , and all the vessels of the altar , and the bowls , and all the vessels thereof , and the vessels thereof , and all the vessels thereof , and the vessels of the altar shall be made for the altar .
GOLD:	All the altar utensils — the firepans , meat forks , shovels , basins , and all the containers — must be placed on the cloth , and a covering of fine goatskin leather must be spread over them . Finally , they must put the carrying poles in place .

ID:	918
INPUT:	Ikusten duzu nola mendekatu zaizkidan , zenbat asmo txar duten nire kontra .
PRED:	You see how I have seen how many things are against me .
GOLD:	You have seen the vengeful plotsmy enemies have laid against me .

ID:	919
INPUT:	Gero , odol horrekin elkarketa-etxolan dagoen aldare-ertzeko adarrak igurtziko ditu Jaunaren aurrean , eta zekorraren gainerako odola elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran dagoen erre-oparien aldare-oinean isuriko .
PRED:	And he shall put the horns of the blood of the tent of meeting in front of the tabernacle of meeting , and he shall put the blood on the altar of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	He will then put some of the blood on the horns of the altar for fragrant incense that stands in the Lord 's presence inside the Tabernacle . He will pour out the rest of the blood at the base of the altar for burnt offerings at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	920
INPUT:	Jesus zein zen ikusi nahirik zebilen , baina ezin zuen jendearengatik , txikia baitzen .
PRED:	And when he saw him , he could not see him , because he could not be broken by the crowd .
GOLD:	He tried to get a look at Jesus , but he was too short to see over the crowd .

ID:	921
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jaunari uzten diot haurra , bizitza osorako Jaunari eskainia izanen da » . Orduan , Jauna gurtu zuen bertan .
PRED:	So I will bring the child to the Lord , and he will be a sacrifice to the Lord . Then he worshiped the Lord there .
GOLD:	Now I am giving him to the Lord , and he will belong to the Lord his whole life . ” And they worshiped the Lord there .

ID:	922
INPUT:	Bartzilai galaadtarra ere jaitsi zen Rogelimdik , Jordan ibaia erregearekin igaro eta ibai ertzean agur egiteko .
PRED:	And he went down from Kadesh , and came unto the king of Gilead , and said unto the king , Go into the Jordan , and send him to pass by the river .
GOLD:	He was very old — eighty years of age — and very wealthy . He was the one who had provided food for the king during his stay in Mahanaim .

ID:	923
INPUT:	Eta Elik dei egin zion Samueli : — Samuel , ene seme . Samuelek erantzun : — Hemen nauzu .
PRED:	Then Eli called to Samuel , “ Samuel my son . ” Samuel answered , “ Here I am . ”
GOLD:	But Eli called out to him , “ Samuel , my son . ” “ Here I am , ” Samuel replied .

ID:	924
INPUT:	apostoluak atxilotu eta herriko kartzelan sarrarazi zituzten .
PRED:	And the apostles took the apostles and put them in prison .
GOLD:	They arrested the apostles and put them in the public jail .

ID:	925
INPUT:	Agripak esan zion Festori : — Neuk ere gustura entzungo nioke gizon horri . — Bihar entzungo diozu — erantzun zion Festok .
PRED:	Esther said to Esther , “ I will listen to this man , and you will hear him . ” “ You will hear him . ”
GOLD:	“ I 'd like to hear the man myself , ” Agrippa said.And Festus replied , “ You will — tomorrow ! ”

ID:	926
INPUT:	Izan ere , behartsuak beti dituzue zeuen artean , eta nahi duzuenean egin diezaiekezue on . Baina ni ez nauzue betiko zuekin .
PRED:	For you have always been poor among you , and when you want to do it , you will not be with me .
GOLD:	You will always have the poor among you , and you can help them whenever you want to . But you will not always have me .

ID:	927
INPUT:	Jauna , zuregan dut babesa : ez diezadala inoiz usteak huts egin !
PRED:	O Lord , my soul is in thee ; I am not able to be put to shame .
GOLD:	O Lord , I have come to you for protection ; do n't let me be disgraced .

ID:	928
INPUT:	Lehenengo hilaren hogeita lauan , Tigris ibai handiaren ertzean nengoen .
PRED:	In the first month , in the first month , in the first month , in the first month , in the first month , in the first month .
GOLD:	On April 23 , as I was standing on the bank of the great Tigris River ,

ID:	929
INPUT:	Aurrean zegoen erromatar ehuntariak , nola hil zen ikustean , esan zuen : « Zinez , gizon hau Jainkoaren Semea zen » .
PRED:	When the centurion saw him , he died , and said , “ This man is the Son of God . ”
GOLD:	When the Roman officer who stood facing him saw how he had died , he exclaimed , “ This man truly was the Son of God ! ”

ID:	930
INPUT:	Josuek esan zion herri osoari : — Hau dio Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak : « Zuen arbasoak , Terah eta beronen seme Abraham eta Nahor , Eufrates ibaiaren beste aldean bizi ziren antzina , eta beste jainko batzuk gurtzen zituzten .
PRED:	Joshua said to all the people , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , the father of Abraham , and his sons , and the gods of the river , and the gods of the Jordan .
GOLD:	Joshua said to the people , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : Long ago your ancestors , including Terah , the father of Abraham and Nahor , lived beyond the Euphrates River , and they worshiped other gods .

ID:	931
INPUT:	otoitza egin zuen : « Jauna , Israelen Jainkoa , ez da zu bezalako beste jainkorik , ez goian zeruan , ez behean lurrean . Betetzen duzu ituna eta onbera zara zure aurrean bihotzez zintzo dabiltzan zeure mirabeentzat .
PRED:	Then he prayed , “ O Lord , the God of Israel , is not like you in the morning , nor in the heavens , nor in the morning , nor in the heavens , nor in the heavens , nor in the sight of your heart , nor in your heart .
GOLD:	and he prayed , “ O Lord , God of Israel , there is no God like you in all of heaven above or on the earth below . You keep your covenant and show unfailing love to all who walk before you in wholehearted devotion .

ID:	932
INPUT:	Su emango diot Egiptori , minez bihurrituko da Sin ; zulatu egingo dituzte Tebaseko harresiak , eta hiria urperatua izango .
PRED:	And I will send fire to Egypt , and they shall be a fire in the valley of Kadesh , and the city of Kadesh shall be made desolate .
GOLD:	Yes , I will set fire to all Egypt ! Pelusium will be racked with pain ; Thebes will be torn apart ; Memphis will live in constant terror .

ID:	933
INPUT:	Mundua gaiztakeriaz eta indarkeriaz betea zegoen ,
PRED:	And the world was filled with the power of the world , and with the power of wickedness ,
GOLD:	Now God saw that the earth had become corrupt and was filled with violence .

ID:	934
INPUT:	Zintzoaren nahia bete egiten da , gaiztoaren itxaropenak huts egiten .
PRED:	The word of the righteous is good , but the hope of the wicked shall be put to shame .
GOLD:	The godly can look forward to a reward , while the wicked can expect only judgment .

ID:	935
INPUT:	Ni , berriz , gizagaixo atsekabetu hau , indarberri nazala , oi Jainko , zure salbazioak .
PRED:	But I am sick , O God , and I am glad ; I am the God of Israel .
GOLD:	Then I will praise God 's name with singing , and I will honor him with thanksgiving .

ID:	936
INPUT:	Adierazi nire , Jainko Jaun honen , mezua : Zure aurka nator , Sidon , zure kontura jantziko naiz ospez . Zure aurka epaia bete eta neure santutasuna agertzean , denek jakingo dute ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	Tell them , ‘ Thus says the Lord God : I am coming against you , and I will praise you , and you will know that I am the Lord , and they will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	Give the people of Sidon this message from the Sovereign Lord : “ I am your enemy , O Sidon , and I will reveal my glory by what I do to you.When I bring judgment against youand reveal my holiness among you , everyone watching will knowthat I am the Lord .

ID:	937
INPUT:	Goraipa zaitzatela herriek , oi Jainko , goraipa zaitzatela herri guztiek !
PRED:	Let the nations praise you , O God , all the nations praise you .
GOLD:	Then the earth will yield its harvests , and God , our God , will richly bless us .

ID:	938
INPUT:	Gelditu harekin denboraldi bat , zure anaiari haserrea baretu arte .
PRED:	After a long time , you will be angry until your brother is angry .
GOLD:	Stay there with him until your brother cools off .

ID:	939
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin zaiona egin zuen Amatziasek ; ez , ordea , David bere arbasoak bezain zintzo . Bere aita Joaxen antzera jokatu zuen Amatziasek ere .
PRED:	Amaziah did what was evil in the sight of the Lord , but he did not obey his fathers as his father Amaziah had walked in the sight of Joash his father .
GOLD:	Amaziah did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , but not like his ancestor David . Instead , he followed the example of his father , Joash .

ID:	940
INPUT:	Jesusek galdetu zien : — Eta zuek , nor naizela diozue ? Pedrok erantzun : — Jainkoaren Mesias .
PRED:	Jesus asked them , “ Who do you say I am ? ” Peter answered , “ I am the Messiah of God . ”
GOLD:	Then he asked them , “ But who do you say I am ? ” Peter replied , “ You are the Messiah sent from God ! ”

ID:	941
INPUT:	Saulen etxekoak eta Davidenekoak liskarretan zebiltzan bitartean , Abner nagusituz joan zen Saulen etxean .
PRED:	When the house of Saul and the men of David came to the house of Saul , Abner went to the house of Saul .
GOLD:	As the war between the house of Saul and the house of David went on , Abner became a powerful leader among those loyal to Saul .

ID:	942
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin ez zaiona egin zuten israeldarrek , eta hark madiandarren menpe eduki zituen zazpi urtez .
PRED:	And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord , and he delivered them into the hand of the children of Ammon seven years .
GOLD:	The Israelites did evil in the Lord 's sight . So the Lord handed them over to the Midianites for seven years .

ID:	943
INPUT:	Ezbeharrez bat-batean heriotza gertatzen bada , barre egiten du hark errugabearen zoritxarraz .
PRED:	But if it is in a moment , it shall be put to death ; and the iniquity of the wicked shall be put to death .
GOLD:	When a plague sweeps through , he laughs at the death of the innocent .

ID:	944
INPUT:	Jainkoak bere santutegitik esan zuen : « Sikem hiria poz-pozik neureganatuko dut , Sukot haranaz jabetuko .
PRED:	Then God said , “ I will gather the city of Shechem with joy and joy .
GOLD:	But Moab , my washbasin , will become my servant , and I will wipe my feet on Edomand shout in triumph over Philistia . ”

ID:	945
INPUT:	Salomonen gainerako jarduerak , lehenengotik azkenera , liburuotan daude idatziak : « Natan Profetaren Kronika » , « Xiloko Ahiasen Profezia » eta Nebaten seme Jeroboami buruz « Ido Ikusleak Izaniko Ikuskariak » izeneko liburuetan .
PRED:	Now the rest of the acts of Solomon , and the last , behold , they are written in the book of the prophet , the prophet of Zechariah the prophet , the son of Nebat , and the prophet of Jeroboam , and the son of Nebat , in the book of the prophets , and in the book of the prophets .
GOLD:	The rest of the events of Solomon 's reign , from beginning to end , are recorded in The Record of Nathan the Prophet , and The Prophecy of Ahijah from Shiloh , and also in The Visions of Iddo the Seer , concerning Jeroboam son of Nebat .

ID:	946
INPUT:	Laino-adarra eman zeniengidari egunez , su-adarra gauez , egin behar zuten bidea argitzeko .
PRED:	You gave them a pillar of cloud for a pillar of cloud by night , so that they might walk in the night .
GOLD:	You led our ancestors by a pillar of cloud during the day and a pillar of fire at night so that they could find their way .

ID:	947
INPUT:	Era berean , Jaunaren etxerako behar ziren beste gauza guztiak ere eginarazi zituen Salomonek : aldarea , urrezkoa ; eskainiriko ogiak jartzeko mahaia , urrezkoa ;
PRED:	And Solomon made all the other vessels of the house of the Lord , which he made for the altar : the altar , and the table of gold , and the table of gold ;
GOLD:	Solomon also made all the furnishings of the Temple of the Lord : the gold altar ; the gold table for the Bread of the Presence ;

ID:	948
INPUT:	entzun zuk zerutik beraren otoitza eta eskaria , eta emaiozu garaipena .
PRED:	Hear their prayer from heaven , and give thanks to them , and give them victory .
GOLD:	then hear their prayers from heaven and uphold their cause .

ID:	949
INPUT:	Zure bi bularrakbi gazelakume biritxi , lili artean bazkatzen .
PRED:	Your two goats are like a young woman , and they are like a flock among them .
GOLD:	Your breasts are like two fawns , twin fawns of a gazelle grazing among the lilies .

ID:	950
INPUT:	« Hitzaldia bukatu ondoren , ofizialek buruzagiak izendatuko dituzte gudari-taldeentzat .
PRED:	When they had finished speaking these words , the princes of the princes of the army will be ruler over the army .
GOLD:	When the officers have finished speaking to their troops , they will appoint the unit commanders .

ID:	951
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Koreren semeen poema .
PRED:	O God , you are my God ; you are my God , and you are my God .
GOLD:	O God , we have heard it with our own ears — our ancestors have told usof all you did in their day , in days long ago :

ID:	952
INPUT:	urre eta zilarrez apainduaketa iltzez eta mailuz josiak , eror ez daitezen .
PRED:	And they shall be put to shame , and with gold , and of gold , and of gold , and of gold , and of gold .
GOLD:	They decorate it with gold and silverand then fasten it securely with hammer and nailsso it wo n't fall over .

ID:	953
INPUT:	Bihotz lasaia gorputzaren bizia , bekaizkeria minbiziaren parekoa .
PRED:	The body of the body was full of life , wickedness , and wickedness .
GOLD:	A peaceful heart leads to a healthy body ; jealousy is like cancer in the bones .

ID:	954
INPUT:	Isaiasek erantzun zien : « Emaiozue zeuen nagusiari Jaunaren mezu hau : “ Ez beldurtu entzun dituzun hitzengatik ; ni iraintzeko esan dituzte halakoak Asiriako erregearen ofizial horiek .
PRED:	Isaiah said to them , “ Tell your master , ‘ Thus says the Lord : Do n't be afraid because of the words you have heard , because they have heard the words of the king of Assyria .
GOLD:	the prophet replied , “ Say to your master , ‘ This is what the Lord says : Do not be disturbed by this blasphemous speech against me from the Assyrian king 's messengers .

ID:	955
INPUT:	Handik Iturriko ate aldera eta Erregearen urtegirantz jo nuen , baina gainean ninderaman abereak ez zuen handik igarotzeko lekurik .
PRED:	Then I went out from there , and went to the king 's gate , and brought me to the king 's house , and he did not pass through it .
GOLD:	Then I went to the Fountain Gate and to the King 's Pool , but my donkey could n't get through the rubble .

ID:	956
INPUT:	Gero , jendeari eta ikasleei dei eginik , esan zien Jesusek : « Nire ondoren etorri nahi duenak uko egin biezaio bere buruari , bere gurutzea hartu eta jarrai biezat .
PRED:	And he called the crowds , and said unto them , If any man shall come after me , he shall follow himself , and follow me , and follow me .
GOLD:	Then , calling the crowd to join his disciples , he said , “ If any of you wants to be my follower , you must give up your own way , take up your cross , and follow me .

ID:	957
INPUT:	Gutizia handikoak liskarrak sorrarazten ; konfiantza Jaunarengan duena asebetea izango .
PRED:	The Lord will make a great nation , and he will be filled with the Lord .
GOLD:	Greed causes fighting ; trusting the Lord leads to prosperity .

ID:	958
INPUT:	Ugalduko ditut zure ondorengoak , nazioen sorburu egingo zaituteta erregeak aterako dirazuregandik .
PRED:	I will multiply you and your descendants , and you will be a ruler over the nations , and you will be king .
GOLD:	I will make you extremely fruitful . Your descendants will become many nations , and kings will be among them !

ID:	959
INPUT:	« Ez dut koloka egingo — dio bere baitan — ; zoriontsu izango naiz beti , ezbeharrik gabe » .
PRED:	“ I will not be ashamed , for I will not be blessed , nor will I be blessed . ”
GOLD:	They think , “ Nothing bad will ever happen to us ! We will be free of trouble forever ! ”

ID:	960
INPUT:	Zergatik iraintzen nauzue zeuen idolatriazko jardueraz , bizitzera etorri zareten Egipton jainko arrotzei intsentsua errez ? Horrela , suntsipena erakarriko duzue zeuen gainera , eta madarikazio eta iseka-gai bihurtuko zarete munduko nazio guztien aurrean .
PRED:	Why do you want me to live in the land of Egypt to worship other gods ? Then you will destroy the gods of the gods of Egypt , and you will be a curse to the gods of all the nations .
GOLD:	Why provoke my anger by burning incense to the idols you have made here in Egypt ? You will only destroy yourselves and make yourselves an object of cursing and mockery for all the nations of the earth .

ID:	961
INPUT:	Hara , badatoz honako hau esango den egunak : “ Zorionekoak agorrak , haurrik sortu ez duten sabelak eta titirik eman ez duten bularrak ” .
PRED:	Behold , this is what the Lord says : “ Blessed are the children who have no children , and they have no children , and they have no children . ”
GOLD:	For the days are coming when they will say , ‘ Fortunate indeed are the women who are childless , the wombs that have not borne a child and the breasts that have never nursed . '

ID:	962
INPUT:	eta esan bertako nagusiari : « Maisuak galdetzen dizu non duen ikasleekin Pazko-bildotsa jateko tokia » .
PRED:	and said to the ruler of the synagogue , “ Teacher , where do you ask your disciples to eat the Passover . ”
GOLD:	say to the owner , ‘ The Teacher asks : Where is the guest room where I can eat the Passover meal with my disciples ? '

ID:	963
INPUT:	Naziorik ankerrenaketorraraziko ditut , etxeez jabe daitezen . Nik bukaraziko dutahaltsuen harrokeriaeta profanatu egingo dituzteberorien santutegiak .
PRED:	And I will bring them into the midst of the nations , that they may not eat ; and I will bring them into the sanctuary of the Almighty , and the sanctuary of the Almighty shall be broken .
GOLD:	I will bring the most ruthless of nationsto occupy their homes.I will break down their proud fortressesand defile their sanctuaries .

ID:	964
INPUT:	Jesus eta legea
PRED:	Jesus and the Law
GOLD:	Teaching about Divorce

ID:	965
INPUT:	Lurraldea ikertu zuten bi gizonei esan zien Josuek : « Zoazte emagalduaren etxera eta atera bera eta beraren ahaideak , zin egin zenioten bezala » .
PRED:	And Joshua said unto the men , Go into the house of the women , and go into the house of the women , and go out into the house of the women , as thou hast swore unto them .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Joshua said to the two spies , “ Keep your promise . Go to the prostitute 's house and bring her out , along with all her family . ”

ID:	966
INPUT:	Moisesek , bada , esan zion herriari : « Aukeratu gizonak eta har ditzatela armak gudurako , Madianen aurka Jaunak erabaki duen mendekua hartzera joateko .
PRED:	So Moses said to the people , “ Let the men be chosen , and let them go and fight against the people of Gilead , that they may go up to fight against the Lord .
GOLD:	So Moses said to the people , “ Choose some men , and arm them to fight the Lord 's war of revenge against Midian .

ID:	967
INPUT:	Aldi hartan , Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosorren ofizialek Jerusalemen kontra igo eta setiatu egin zuten .
PRED:	At that time Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon went up against Jerusalem and destroyed it .
GOLD:	During Jehoiachin 's reign , the officers of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came up against Jerusalem and besieged it .

ID:	968
INPUT:	Jauna , bihotz-bihotzez nahi zaitut goretsi , zure izena , Goi-goiko hori , kantuz ospatu ,
PRED:	I will praise you with all my heart ; I will praise you in the morning ; I will praise you in the morning .
GOLD:	I will be filled with joy because of you.I will sing praises to your name , O Most High .

ID:	969
INPUT:	Horam , Gezerko erregea , Lakixi laguntzera etorri zen ; baina Josuek garaitu egin zituen bera eta beraren gudaroste osoa , bat ere bizirik utzi gabe .
PRED:	And the king of Canaan came to meet him , but Joshua destroyed them , and all his people , and he did not let them live .
GOLD:	During the attack on Lachish , King Horam of Gezer arrived with his army to help defend the town . But Joshua 's men killed him and his army , leaving no survivors .

ID:	970
INPUT:	Brontzea urtuz , bi zutabe egin zituen ; bederatzina metro ziren gora eta seina metro lodi .
PRED:	And he made two cubits of gold ; and he made two cubits high , and the breadth thereof was five cubits long .
GOLD:	Huram cast two bronze pillars , each 27 feet tall and 18 feet in circumference .

ID:	971
INPUT:	Alabaina , herrian hori gehiago zabal ez dadin , mehatxatu egingo ditugu , gaurdanik Jesusen izena inori aipa ez diezaioten » .
PRED:	But this city will not be given to this city , so that we will not be called the name of Jesus . ”
GOLD:	But to keep them from spreading their propaganda any further , we must warn them not to speak to anyone in Jesus ' name again . ”

ID:	972
INPUT:	Soldaduen isekak
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	The Burial of Jesus

ID:	973
INPUT:	Izan gogoan zeuek ere esklabo izan zinetela Egipton eta Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak askatu zintuztela . Horregatik ematen dizuet gaur agindu hau .
PRED:	Remember that you were slaves in Egypt , and the Lord your God saved you from the land of Egypt . So I tell you this day .
GOLD:	Remember that you were once slaves in the land of Egypt and the Lord your God redeemed you ! That is why I am giving you this command .

ID:	974
INPUT:	Izurritea bidaliko dizut , odola isuriko da zure kaleetan ; hildakoak hiri erdian eroriko dira alde guztietatik egingo dizuten erasopean . Orduan , denek jakingo dute ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	I will send a plague to you in your streets , and the blood of your blood shall fall in the midst of the city , and they shall fall in the midst of the city , and they shall know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	I will send a plague against you , and blood will be spilled in your streets.The attack will come from every direction , and your people will lie slaughtered within your walls.Then everyone will knowthat I am the Lord .

ID:	975
INPUT:	Gorets bezate zeru-lur eta itsasoeketa bertan bizi diren guztiek .
PRED:	Let them praise them , and the earth , and all the living in them .
GOLD:	For God will save Jerusalemand rebuild the towns of Judah.His people will live thereand settle in their own land .

ID:	976
INPUT:	Ez zion inori ere berarekin joaten utzi , Pedro , Santiago eta honen anaia Joani izan ezik .
PRED:	He did not let anyone go with him , but Peter and John his brother John .
GOLD:	Then Jesus stopped the crowd and would n't let anyone go with him except Peter , James , and John ( the brother of James ) .

ID:	977
INPUT:	Mendebaldetik , atariaren zabaleran , hogeita bost metro oihal izango dira , hogei zutabe eta hogei oin dituztela .
PRED:	And on the west side of the court shall be five cubits long , and the breadth of the court shall be twenty cubits , and their sockets shall be twenty cubits .
GOLD:	The curtains on the west end of the courtyard will be 75 feet long , supported by ten posts set into ten bases .

ID:	978
INPUT:	Jainkoak zabal egin beza Jafet ! Bizi bedi Semen oihal-etxoletan ! Izan bedi Kanaan Jafeten esklabo ! »
PRED:	Let it be done in the tents of God , that he may dwell in the tents of Canaan .
GOLD:	May God expand the territory of Japheth ! May Japheth share the prosperity of Shem , and may Canaan be his servant . ”

ID:	979
INPUT:	dirua eta altxorrak bezala bilatzen saiatzen bazara ,
PRED:	If you turn away your money and your treasures ,
GOLD:	Search for them as you would for silver ; seek them like hidden treasures .

ID:	980
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Aaroni : « Ez duzu lursailik izango zeure ondaretzat israeldarrei emango diedan lurraldean . Neu izango nauzu ondare eta mantenu beste israeldarren artean .
PRED:	And the Lord said unto Aaron , Thou shalt not say unto the children of Israel , neither shalt thou say unto the children of Israel : I am the inheritance of the children of Israel , and I am their inheritance among the children of Israel .
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Aaron , “ You priests will receive no allotment of land or share of property among the people of Israel . I am your share and your allotment .

ID:	981
INPUT:	( 23 , <unk> )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Hope despite the Disaster

ID:	982
INPUT:	Eta Aaroni esan zion : « Hartu ontzi bat , bete lau litro manaz eta ezarri Jaunaren aurrean , ondorengo belaunaldientzat gordez » .
PRED:	Then Aaron said to Aaron , “ Take a rod of fine flour , and put it in front of the Lord , and put it on the generations of the children of Aaron . ”
GOLD:	Moses said to Aaron , “ Get a jar and fill it with two quarts of manna . Then put it in a sacred place before the Lord to preserve it for all future generations . ”

ID:	983
INPUT:	« Oparo bedeinkatuko ditut bertako biltegiak , ogiz aseko behartsuak .
PRED:	I will bless the poor , and I will bless the poor with bread .
GOLD:	I will bless this city and make it prosperous ; I will satisfy its poor with food .

ID:	984
INPUT:	Haiek esan zioten : — Gezurra . Esaguzu zer zioen . Jehuk , orduan : — Tira , bada ; hauxe esan dit : « Hau dio Jaunak : Israelgo errege gantzutzen zaitut » .
PRED:	They said to him , “ Tell us what you say . ” Jehu said to them , “ This is what the Lord says : I have anointed you king over Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ You 're hiding something , ” they said . “ Tell us . ” So Jehu told them , “ He said to me , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I have anointed you to be king over Israel . ' ”

ID:	985
INPUT:	Bedeinka beza ene arimak Jauna ! Jauna , ene Jainko , bai handia zarela ! Distiraz eta handitasunez zaude jantzia ,
PRED:	Blessed be the Lord my God , my God , my God , and my strength is in the midst of the sea , and in the midst of the sea .
GOLD:	Let all that I am praise the Lord.O Lord my God , how great you are ! You are robed with honor and majesty .

ID:	986
INPUT:	Antiokian denboraldi bat egin ondoren , berriro atera eta Galazian eta Frigian barrena joan zen , ikasle guztiak gogoberotuz .
PRED:	After a long time , he went out to Antioch and went through the region of Galilee and went into Galilee . His disciples were filled with all his disciples .
GOLD:	After spending some time in Antioch , Paul went back through Galatia and Phrygia , visiting and strengthening all the believers .

ID:	987
INPUT:	Israeldarrak Egiptotik irten eta bigarren urtean , urtearen lehen hilean , honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi Sinai basamortuan :
PRED:	And it came to pass in the first year of the second month , in the first year of the month , in the first month , in the first year of the Lord came to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai , saying ,
GOLD:	A year after Israel 's departure from Egypt , the Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai . In the first month of that year he said ,

ID:	988
INPUT:	Jonasek oso gaizki hartu zuen Jaunaren erabakia eta sumindu egin zen .
PRED:	And Joseph did evil in the sight of the Lord , and he was angry .
GOLD:	This change of plans greatly upset Jonah , and he became very angry .

ID:	989
INPUT:	Altxatu ziren denak eta Pilatogana eraman zuten Jesus .
PRED:	And they all took him away , and brought him to Pilate .
GOLD:	Then the entire council took Jesus to Pilate , the Roman governor .

ID:	990
INPUT:	Eta mahastitik kanpora bota eta hil egin zuten . « Zer egingo ote die , bada , mahasti-jabeak ?
PRED:	And they cast him out of the vineyard , and killed him , and said , What shall ye say unto him , What shall the vineyard ?
GOLD:	So they dragged him out of the vineyard and murdered him . “ What do you suppose the owner of the vineyard will do to them ? ” Jesus asked .

ID:	991
INPUT:	Nik , Pedrok , Jesu Kristoren apostolu honek , Ponto , Galazia , Kapadozia , Asia eta Bitiniako lurraldeetan atzerritar bezala sakabanaturik bizi zaretenoi idazten dizuet .
PRED:	Peter , an apostle of Jesus Christ Jesus Christ , Galilee , Galilee , and Sidon , as I write to you in the land of Judea , as a foreigner in the land of Judea .
GOLD:	This letter is from Peter , an apostle of Jesus Christ.I am writing to God 's chosen people who are living as foreigners in the provinces of Pontus , Galatia , Cappadocia , Asia , and Bithynia .

ID:	992
INPUT:	Moises herriarekin egiten ari zena ikusirik , aitaginarrebak galdegin zion : — Zer ari zara egiten herriarekin ? Nola ari zara zeu bakarrik epaitzen , jendea egun osoan zutik egotera behartuz ?
PRED:	When Moses saw the name of the people , his father asked him , “ What are you doing with the people ? How can you judge one man with the people ? ”
GOLD:	When Moses ' father-in-law saw all that Moses was doing for the people , he asked , “ What are you really accomplishing here ? Why are you trying to do all this alone while everyone stands around you from morning till evening ? ”

ID:	993
INPUT:	Hegazti guztiekegiten zituzten habiakharen adarretan , basapiztia guztiek kumeak azpian , herri guztietako jendea bizi zenberaren babespean .
PRED:	And all the birds of the birds were in his power , and all the birds of the earth under him all the birds of the earth , and all the people of the land were in their midst .
GOLD:	The birds nested in its branches , and in its shade all the wild animals gave birth.All the great nations of the worldlived in its shadow .

ID:	994
INPUT:	Erdaingabea , hau da , bere zakil-muturra erdaindu ez duen gizasemea , herritik bota egingo duzue , nire ituna hautsi duelako » .
PRED:	This is the circumcision of a man who is circumcised of a man who does not be circumcised , because you have broken my covenant with me . ”
GOLD:	Any male who fails to be circumcised will be cut off from the covenant family for breaking the covenant . ”

ID:	995
INPUT:	Jerusalemdarrek eta beraien agintariek ez zuten Jesus aintzat hartu eta , berau kondenatuz , larunbatero sinagogan irakurtzen dituzten profeziak bete zituzten .
PRED:	The Jews and their rulers did not receive Jesus , but they did not obey him . They read the Sabbath on the Sabbath day .
GOLD:	The people in Jerusalem and their leaders did not recognize Jesus as the one the prophets had spoken about . Instead , they condemned him , and in doing this they fulfilled the prophets ' words that are read every Sabbath .

ID:	996
INPUT:	Gazakoak burusoil daude dolutan , Axkelongoak mutu . Lautadan bizirik geldituok , noiz arteurratuko dituzue gorputzak ?
PRED:	The princes of Ashdod shall be cut off , and Ashdod shall dwell in the midst of the earth : and the dead shall be unclean .
GOLD:	Gaza will be humiliated , its head shaved bald ; Ashkelon will lie silent.You remnant from the Mediterranean coast , how long will you cut yourselves in mourning ?

ID:	997
INPUT:	« Hartu harritzar batzuk eta sartu faraoiaren Tafnesko jauregi aurrean dagoen buztinezko zoruan ; egin hori judatarren aurrean ,
PRED:	“ Take some of the assembly and enter into the house of Pharaoh in the house of Pharaoh , in front of the house of Judah .
GOLD:	“ While the people of Judah are watching , take some large rocks and bury them under the pavement stones at the entrance of Pharaoh 's palace here in Tahpanhes .

ID:	998
INPUT:	« Ongi ezagutzen ditut zuen gogoetaketa nire aurka dituzuen argudioak .
PRED:	“ I know how you are doing , and your sheep against me .
GOLD:	“ Look , I know what you 're thinking.I know the schemes you plot against me .

ID:	999
INPUT:	Maltzurkeriaz betea , beti asmo txarretaneta sesioan ibiltzen da .
PRED:	A wicked man is always filled with wickedness , and he goes up to the end of wickedness .
GOLD:	Their perverted hearts plot evil , and they constantly stir up trouble .

ID:	1000
INPUT:	Nik trebatu eta indartunizkien besoak , baina haiek nirigaiztakeria asmatzen .
PRED:	I chose their fathers and their fathers , but they have done evil .
GOLD:	I trained them and made them strong , yet now they plot evil against me .

ID:	1001
INPUT:	Egiptotik , mila eta berrehun guda-gurdi , hirurogei mila zaldizko eta zenbatu ezin ahalako libiar , sukiar eta etiopiarrez osoturiko gudari-multzoarekin .
PRED:	And from Egypt two thousand chariots , and two thousand chariots , and two thousand chariots , and two thousand , and of the Egyptians , and of the Egyptians , and of all the vessels of the Egyptians , and of all their fathers .
GOLD:	He came with 1,200 chariots , 60,000 horses , and a countless army of foot soldiers , including Libyans , Sukkites , and Ethiopians .

ID:	1002
INPUT:	Harresi-zuloetatik irtengo zarete , bakoitzak bere aurreanizango duenetik , eta iparralde<unk> tiko zaituztete » .
PRED:	And you shall go out of the wall of the wall , and every man shall stand before his face , and ye shall be brought out of the north .
GOLD:	You will be led out through the ruins of the wall ; you will be thrown from your fortresses , ” says the Lord .

ID:	1003
INPUT:	Itzuli eta Jehuri jakinarazi ziotenean , esan zuen honek : — Horrela bete da Jaunak bere zerbitzari Elias <unk> bitarraren bidez esan zuena : zakurrek irentsiko zutela Izreelgo landan Jezabelen haragia ,
PRED:	When they returned , they told him what he had said , “ This is what the Lord has said through his servant Uriah , ‘ The Lord has said to him , ‘ This is what the prophets have read in the field of Jezreel . '
GOLD:	When they returned and told Jehu , he stated , “ This fulfills the message from the Lord , which he spoke through his servant Elijah from Tishbe : ‘ At the plot of land in Jezreel , dogs will eat Jezebel 's body .

ID:	1004
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak hitz egin zidan
PRED:	Then the word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	Then I received this message from the Lord :

ID:	1005
INPUT:	Zain geratu behar al dut hauek ez dutelako hitz egiten , hor daudelako ezer erantzun gabe ?
PRED:	Do n't I speak these things , because they do n't answer them , because they have no answer ?
GOLD:	Should I continue to wait , now that you are silent ? Must I also remain silent ?

ID:	1006
INPUT:	Oso bestela , ikusi zuten Jainkoak jentilei berri ona hots egiteko aukeratu ninduela , Pedro juduei hots egiteko aukeratu zuen bezala .
PRED:	And when I saw that God chose me to preach the gospel of the Gentiles , he chose Peter as he had chosen .
GOLD:	Instead , they saw that God had given me the responsibility of preaching the gospel to the Gentiles , just as he had given Peter the responsibility of preaching to the Jews .

ID:	1007
INPUT:	Jaunak nahi izan zuenbere zerbitzarialur agorrean sustraiak dituenkimu berria bezala haztea . Ez zuen duintasunik , ez edertasunik , ez gure begientzatitxura erakargarririk .
PRED:	The Lord wanted to be like his servants in the earth , so that he would not forget his servants . He did not want to do what he wanted to do . He did n't want to do anything wrong .
GOLD:	My servant grew up in the Lord 's presence like a tender green shoot , like a root in dry ground.There was nothing beautiful or majestic about his appearance , nothing to attract us to him .

ID:	1008
INPUT:	Hauen ondoren Hakotzen iloba eta Uriasen seme zen Meremotek jardun zuen lanean ; harantzago , berriz , Mexezabeelen iloba eta Berekiasen seme zen Mexulamek , eta honen aldamenean Baanaren seme Tzadokek .
PRED:	After these things he became the son of Uzziah , and he became the son of Uzziah , the son of Uzziah , the son of Shallum , the son of Hilkiah , the son of Zadok , the son of Zadok , and the son of Zadok .
GOLD:	Meremoth son of Uriah and grandson of Hakkoz repaired the next section of wall . Beside him were Meshullam son of Berekiah and grandson of Meshezabel , and then Zadok son of Baana .

ID:	1009
INPUT:	Batzuek atxilotu egin nahi zuten , baina inork ez zion eskurik ezarri .
PRED:	Some of them wanted to kill him , but no one laid his hand on him .
GOLD:	Some even wanted him arrested , but no one laid a hand on him .

ID:	1010
INPUT:	Berehala , atzera begiratu eta Jesus ikusi zuen zutik , baina ez zen konturatu Jesus zela .
PRED:	So he looked up and saw Jesus , but he did not know that Jesus was .
GOLD:	She turned to leave and saw someone standing there . It was Jesus , but she did n't recognize him .

ID:	1011
INPUT:	Gupida izango diozu Sioni berriro , bada-eta errukirako garaia ; bai , heldu da garaia !
PRED:	The time will come to Zion , and the time will come , and the time will come .
GOLD:	For your people love every stone in her wallsand cherish even the dust in her streets .

ID:	1012
INPUT:	Irribarre egiten nienean , ia-ia ezin zuten sinetsi , nire aurpegi argiaren irrikaz zeuden .
PRED:	When I went out , they could not believe my face , and they could not believe my face .
GOLD:	When they were discouraged , I smiled at them.My look of approval was precious to them .

ID:	1013
INPUT:	Gero , Moisesek esan zien : « Ez dezala inork biharamunerako ezer gorde » .
PRED:	Moses said to them , “ No one can keep anything from the next day . ”
GOLD:	Then Moses told them , “ Do not keep any of it until morning . ”

ID:	1014
INPUT:	Txunditurik geldituko dira denak Jaunak eramango zaituzten herrietan , koplak aterako dizkizuete eta iseka egingo .
PRED:	They will be afraid , and the Lord will bring you to a people of the peoples , and they will be hungry .
GOLD:	You will become an object of horror , ridicule , and mockery among all the nations to which the Lord sends you .

ID:	1015
INPUT:	Haur hauxe eskatzen nion Jaunari eta eman dit eskatzen niona .
PRED:	I asked the Lord , and I asked him to ask him what I asked .
GOLD:	I asked the Lord to give me this boy , and he has granted my request .

ID:	1016
INPUT:	Izurriz joko ditut eta lurralde-ondarea kenduko , eta horiek baino herri handi eta ahaltsuagoa sorraraziko dut zuregandik .
PRED:	I will take away the land and take it away from them , and I will make them greater than these nations and greater than you .
GOLD:	I will disown them and destroy them with a plague . Then I will make you into a nation greater and mightier than they are ! ”

ID:	1017
INPUT:	Izen ona zuen Listrako eta Ikonioko senideen artean .
PRED:	There was a name between the brothers and the brothers who were in Galilee .
GOLD:	Timothy was well thought of by the believers in Lystra and Iconium ,

ID:	1018
INPUT:	Berdin zuek : azaletik zintzoak jendaurrean , baina barrutik itxurakeriaz eta gaiztakeriaz beteak .
PRED:	This is what you are doing , but when you are righteous , you are doing evil and evil .
GOLD:	Outwardly you look like righteous people , but inwardly your hearts are filled with hypocrisy and lawlessness .

ID:	1019
INPUT:	Ministroetarik bat honela mintzatu zen : — Har ditzagun hirian gelditzen diren zaldietarik bost , hirian gelditzen diren israeldar guztien bukaera bera izango baitute bestela ere . Bidal ditzagun eta ikusiko dugu .
PRED:	Then Daniel said to him , “ Let us go out to the city of the kings of Israel who are left in the city , for we will see them and send them to us . ”
GOLD:	One of his officers replied , “ We had better send out scouts to check into this . Let them take five of the remaining horses . If something happens to them , it will be no worse than if they stay here and die with the rest of us . ”

ID:	1020
INPUT:	zuek ez aldendu elkarketa-etxolaren sarreratik , hil nahi ez baduzue , olioz Jaunari sagaratuak baitzaudete » . Moisesek agindu bezala egin zuten .
PRED:	Do n't turn away from the entrance of the tent of meeting , because you do n't want to kill it , because they did what Moses commanded . ”
GOLD:	But you must not leave the entrance of the Tabernacle or you will die , for you have been anointed with the Lord 's anointing oil . ” So they did as Moses commanded .

ID:	1021
INPUT:	Herri horien artean ez duzue atsedenik izango , ezta zeuen oinak lasai non pausaturik ere , bihotza ikaraz , begiak tristuraz eta barrua atsekabez beteko baitizkizue Jaunak .
PRED:	You shall not rest among the peoples , neither shall your feet be put to death , neither shall your feet be put to shame , because the Lord has opened your heart , and your heart shall mourn .
GOLD:	There among those nations you will find no peace or place to rest . And the Lord will cause your heart to tremble , your eyesight to fail , and your soul to despair .

ID:	1022
INPUT:	Ardi galduaren parabola
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Parable of the Lost Sheep

ID:	1023
INPUT:	Handik , Ainen ekialdean dagoen Riblara jaitsiko da ; gero , Genesaret aintziraren ekialdetik hegiz hegi jaitsiz joango da
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , that he shall come down to the land of Hamath , that he may go down from the sea of Galilee , and he shall go down from the sea of Galilee .
GOLD:	then down to Riblah on the east side of Ain . From there the boundary will run down along the eastern edge of the Sea of Galilee ,

ID:	1024
INPUT:	Eta Jubileu Urtea iristean , Tzelofhaden alaben ondarea behin betiko erantsiko litzaioke senarren leinukoari eta gure arbasoen leinutik banandurik geldituko » .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , when the daughter of Gilead shall be given the inheritance of the children of Gilead , and the inheritance of the children of our fathers shall be taken away from the tribe of their fathers .
GOLD:	Then when the Year of Jubilee comes , their portion of land will be added to that of the new tribe , causing it to be lost forever to our ancestral tribe . ”

ID:	1025
INPUT:	Bere zangoak moztu eta ozpina edaten duzentzugabearen bidez mezuak bidaltzen dituenak .
PRED:	Those who are wise , and those who are wise , but those who are wise will be sent by the word of fools .
GOLD:	Trusting a fool to convey a messageis like cutting off one 's feet or drinking poison !

ID:	1026
INPUT:	Atzerrian hilko zarete , zeuen etsaien lurpean irentsirik geldituko .
PRED:	You will die in the land of your enemies , and you will be put to death .
GOLD:	You will die among the foreign nations and be devoured in the land of your enemies .

ID:	1027
INPUT:	Hil aharia eta , haren odoletik harturik , aldare-ingurua zirtatuko duzu .
PRED:	And thou shalt take the blood of his blood , and take the blood of the altar round about it .
GOLD:	Then slaughter the ram , and splatter its blood against all sides of the altar .

ID:	1028
INPUT:	Pilatok erantzun zion : — Judua ote naiz , bada , ni ? Zeure herrikoek eta apaizburuek ekarri zaituzte niregana . Zer egin duzu ?
PRED:	Pilate said to him , “ Are I Judah ? Your people brought you to me , and the chief priests brought you to me . What have you done ? ”
GOLD:	“ Am I a Jew ? ” Pilate retorted . “ Your own people and their leading priests brought you to me for trial . Why ? What have you done ? ”

ID:	1029
INPUT:	Gizakiagandik berez jaioa gizaki da , Espiritutik jaioa espiritu .
PRED:	For man is born from man , and the Spirit of the Spirit was born from the Spirit .
GOLD:	Humans can reproduce only human life , but the Holy Spirit gives birth to spiritual life .

ID:	1030
INPUT:	ez duzue zutarri sakraturik egingo , gorroto baititu Jaunak zuen Jainkoak halako gauzak .
PRED:	You shall not do any holy thing , because the Lord your God hate you .
GOLD:	And never set up sacred pillars for worship , for the Lord your God hates them .

ID:	1031
INPUT:	Txalmatu zuen astoa eta esan zion morroiari : — Eraman astoa uhaletik eta ez gelditu bidean nik esan arte .
PRED:	And he called the donkey , and said unto his servant , Bring the donkey out of the donkey , and stay not until I say unto him .
GOLD:	So she saddled the donkey and said to the servant , “ Hurry ! Do n't slow down unless I tell you to . ”

ID:	1032
INPUT:	Orduan , zazpi ontziak azken zazpi izurriez beterik zeuzkaten zazpi aingeruetako batek etorri eta esan zidan : « Zatoz , emaztegaia erakutsi behar dizut , Bildotsaren emaztea » .
PRED:	And one of the seven angels who had no plague , came and said to me , “ Come , I will show you the wife of the Lamb . ”
GOLD:	Then one of the seven angels who held the seven bowls containing the seven last plagues came and said to me , “ Come with me ! I will show you the bride , the wife of the Lamb . ”

ID:	1033
INPUT:	Neu naiz Jauna , zuen Jainko izateko Egiptotik igoarazi zintuztena . Izan zaitezte santu , ni santua naiz eta .
PRED:	I am the Lord your God who brought you out of the land of Egypt . Be holy , and I am holy .
GOLD:	For I , the Lord , am the one who brought you up from the land of Egypt , that I might be your God . Therefore , you must be holy because I am holy .

ID:	1034
INPUT:	Hau duzue zeuen hiri festazalea , aspaldidanik eraikia ? Hau , urrutian koloniakjartzen zituena ?
PRED:	This is what I have built for you ? Do you build a new city ? Is it far from a distance ?
GOLD:	Is this silent ruin all that is left of your once joyous city ? What a long history was yours ! Think of all the colonists you sent to distant places .

ID:	1035
INPUT:	Handik zenbait egunen buruan , Agripa erregea eta Berenize iritsi ziren Zesareara , Festo agurtzera .
PRED:	And it came to pass after these days , when King Xerxes , that the king of Babylon came to Caesarea .
GOLD:	A few days later King Agrippa arrived with his sister , Bernice , to pay their respects to Festus .

ID:	1036
INPUT:	Sar zaitezte haitzuloetan , gorde lurreko leizeetan , Jauna beldurgarrieta ospe distiratsuz agertzean , lurra dardararaztera etortzean .
PRED:	And enter into the midst of the earth , in the midst of the earth , and in the glory of the Lord , and in the glory of the Lord , and in the midst of the earth , and in the midst of the earth .
GOLD:	When the Lord rises to shake the earth , his enemies will crawl into holes in the ground.They will hide in caves in the rocksfrom the terror of the Lordand the glory of his majesty .

ID:	1037
INPUT:	Begira , senideok , ez dezala zuetako inork bihotz gaizto eta sinesgaberik izan , Jainko biziarengandik aldenduko duenik .
PRED:	Look , my brothers and sisters , that no one of you may be evil and evil , and that no one may turn away from God .
GOLD:	Be careful then , dear brothers and sisters . Make sure that your own hearts are not evil and unbelieving , turning you away from the living God .

ID:	1038
INPUT:	Ondoren , erdainkuntza eman zion itunaren ezaugarri ; hala , Isaak jaio zitzaionean , zortzigarren egunean erdaindu egin zuen Abrahamek ; berdin egin zuen Isaakek ere Jakobekin , eta Jakobek hamabi patriarkekin .
PRED:	And when Isaac was circumcised , he circumcised him on the eighth day , Isaac circumcised him , and he circumcised him on the eighth day of the seventh day . And Isaac slept with Jacob , and Jacob with Jacob .
GOLD:	“ God also gave Abraham the covenant of circumcision at that time . So when Abraham became the father of Isaac , he circumcised him on the eighth day . And the practice was continued when Isaac became the father of Jacob , and when Jacob became the father of the twelve patriarchs of the Israelite nation .

ID:	1039
INPUT:	Zergatik gastatu zeuen diruagoserik utziko zaituzten janaritan , eta lansariaaseko ez zaituzteten gauzetan ? Entzun niri arretaz , eta ongi jango duzue , janari gozo mamitsuzelikatuko zarete .
PRED:	Why do you eat the food of your money , and you will be satisfied in the night , and you will eat it in the night , and you will eat it in the night , and you will eat it with food .
GOLD:	Why spend your money on food that does not give you strength ? Why pay for food that does you no good ? Listen to me , and you will eat what is good.You will enjoy the finest food .

ID:	1040
INPUT:	( 2 Kro 9 , 1-12 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Solomon 's Wealth and Splendor

ID:	1041
INPUT:	Gero , alaba izan zuen , eta Dina eman zion izen .
PRED:	Then she gave birth to her , and she gave her the name of her .
GOLD:	Later she gave birth to a daughter and named her Dinah .

ID:	1042
INPUT:	« Nire Aitak nire esku utzi du dena . Eta inork ez du ezagutzen Semea nor den , Aitak baizik ; ezta Aita nor den ere , Semeak baizik eta Semeak agertu nahi dionak » .
PRED:	“ My Father has delivered all things into my hand . No one knows the Son , but the Father is the Father , but the Son is the Father , and the Son will be revealed to him . ”
GOLD:	“ My Father has entrusted everything to me . No one truly knows the Son except the Father , and no one truly knows the Father except the Son and those to whom the Son chooses to reveal him . ”

ID:	1043
INPUT:	Handik aldi batera , Jainkoak probatu egin nahi izan zuen Abraham eta dei egin zion : — Abraham ! Honek erantzun : — Hemen nauzu !
PRED:	And it came to pass after that time , that God would seek him , that he called him , and said unto him , Abraham . And he said , I am .
GOLD:	Some time later , God tested Abraham 's faith . “ Abraham ! ” God called . “ Yes , ” he replied . “ Here I am . ”

ID:	1044
INPUT:	Hala ere , ez ziren muinoetako kultu-lekuak desagertu ; jendeak jarraitu egiten zuen halako muinoetan opariak eskaintzen eta intsentsua erretzen .
PRED:	But the high places were not removed from the high places ; and the people followed him , and burned incense on the high places .
GOLD:	One day King Joash said to the priests , “ Collect all the money brought as a sacred offering to the Lord 's Temple , whether it is a regular assessment , a payment of vows , or a voluntary gift .

ID:	1045
INPUT:	Hau dio Jaunak : « Mahatsak zuku ona duenean , esan ohi da : “ Ez dezagun honda , ardoa ugari dakar eta ” . Halaxe jokatuko dut nik ereneure zerbitzarien amoreagatik : ez dut herria erabat hondatuko .
PRED:	Thus says the Lord : “ Let us say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : Let us not drink wine and drink wine , and I will not destroy my servant 's people . ' ”
GOLD:	“ But I will not destroy them all , ” says the Lord . “ For just as good grapes are found among a cluster of bad ones ( and someone will say , ‘ Do n't throw them all away — some of those grapes are good ! ' ) , so I will not destroy all Israel.For I still have true servants there .

ID:	1046
INPUT:	Gero , haien zakuak gariz bete , bakoitzari bere dirua itzuli eta biderako jan-edariak emateko agindu zuen . Eta hala egin zieten .
PRED:	And he said to them , “ Each one of them has his own money , and he commanded them to drink . ” And they did so .
GOLD:	Joseph then ordered his servants to fill the men 's sacks with grain , but he also gave secret instructions to return each brother 's payment at the top of his sack . He also gave them supplies for their journey home .

ID:	1047
INPUT:	Erregeak galdegin zion etiopiarrari : — Onik al da Absalom gaztea ? Etiopiarrak erantzun zuen : — Gertatuko ahal zaie ene errege jaunaren etsaiei eta erregearen kontra kalte egiteko jaiki ziren guztiei mutilari gertatu zaiona !
PRED:	And the king said unto the king , Is Absalom the young man Absalom ? And the Syrians said unto him , Let him go to battle against my lord the king , and all the men that were evil against his lord the king .
GOLD:	“ What about young Absalom ? ” the king demanded . “ Is he all right ? ” And the Ethiopian replied , “ May all of your enemies , my lord the king , both now and in the future , share the fate of that young man ! ”

ID:	1048
INPUT:	Baina printzeak emaitza bere menpekoren bati egiten badio , ondare-zati hori askapen-urtera arte bakarrik izango da menpekoarena ; gero , printzeari itzuliko zaio . Izan ere , beronen semeei bakarrik dagokie herentzian ondare hori .
PRED:	But if the prince shall give his inheritance to the prince of his inheritance , then the prince shall be given to the king , and he shall return to the king , and his sons shall return to his inheritance .
GOLD:	But if the prince gives a gift of land from his inheritance to one of his servants , the servant may keep it only until the Year of Jubilee , which comes every fiftieth year . At that time the land will return to the prince . But when the prince gives gifts to his sons , those gifts will be permanent .

ID:	1049
INPUT:	Ondoren , Hilelen seme Abdonek , Piratongoak , gobernatu zuen Israel .
PRED:	After this , Abram son of Shealtiel made him ruler over Israel .
GOLD:	After Elon died , Abdon son of Hillel , from Pirathon , judged Israel .

ID:	1050
INPUT:	Eta ikasleek galdegin zioten : — Maisu , zeinek egin zuen bekatu hau itsu jaiotzeko , beronek ala beronen gurasoek ?
PRED:	His disciples asked him , “ Teacher , what man did this man to be blind , that he might be blind ? ”
GOLD:	“ Rabbi , ” his disciples asked him , “ why was this man born blind ? Was it because of his own sins or his parents ' sins ? ”

ID:	1051
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	The Lord spoke to Moses , saying ,
GOLD:	The Lord also said to Moses ,

ID:	1052
INPUT:	« Neure zuzentasunaren ordainaeman dit Jaunak , neure jokabide garbiaren saria .
PRED:	The Lord has given me my righteousness , and I have made my way clean .
GOLD:	The Lord rewarded me for doing right ; he restored me because of my innocence .

ID:	1053
INPUT:	Rimon-Peretzetik Libnara ;
PRED:	And they set out from the children of Ammon , and set out the children of Ammon .
GOLD:	They left Rimmon-perez and camped at Libnah .

ID:	1054
INPUT:	« Epaiketarako bularrekoa artelanez egingo duzu , efodaren gai berak erabiliz : urrea , purpura more , gorri eta gorrimina eta liho-hari bihurritua .
PRED:	And thou shalt make the ephod of the priest , and make the ephod of the ephod , and of blue , and scarlet , and scarlet , and scarlet , and scarlet .
GOLD:	“ Then , with great skill and care , make a chestpiece to be worn for seeking a decision from God . Make it to match the ephod , using finely woven linen embroidered with gold and with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .

ID:	1055
INPUT:	Madarikatuanire aitari albistea eman ziona , « Mutikoa jaio zaizu » esanez , eta pozarren jarri zuena !
PRED:	And he told his father , “ The boy is born , ” and he said , “ The boy is born . ”
GOLD:	I curse the messenger who told my father , “ Good news — you have a son ! ”

ID:	1056
INPUT:	Baina biharamun egunsentian har bat bidali zuen Jainkoak ; harrak jo eta landarea ihartu egin zen .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the morning , that God sent a man in the morning , that he took the stone , and took it up .
GOLD:	But God also arranged for a worm ! The next morning at dawn the worm ate through the stem of the plant so that it withered away .

ID:	1057
INPUT:	Nebaten seme Jeroboamen eta Ahiasen seme Baxaren senitarteak zigortu nituen bezalaxe zigortuko dut Akaben senitartea ere .
PRED:	And I will punish the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat , and the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat , according to all the families of Ahab the son of Ahab .
GOLD:	I will destroy the family of Ahab as I destroyed the families of Jeroboam son of Nebat and of Baasha son of Ahijah .

ID:	1058
INPUT:	SAUL LE<unk> BIZIKO ERREGEA ( 8 , 1 — 15 , 35 )
PRED:	King Solomon of Judah
GOLD:	Israel Requests a King

ID:	1059
INPUT:	Haurtxoak txikituegingo dizkiete begien aurrean , etxeak hustu , emazteak bortxatu .
PRED:	And the little child shall be shut up before them , and his wife shall be taken , and his wife shall be taken away .
GOLD:	Their little children will be dashed to death before their eyes.Their homes will be sacked , and their wives will be raped .

ID:	1060
INPUT:	Jakobek , zu<unk> , hur<unk> eta platano-ziri heze batzuk harturik , zuritu egin zituen .
PRED:	And Jacob took some of them , and took some of them in the valley of the valley , and took them .
GOLD:	Then Jacob took some fresh branches from poplar , almond , and plane trees and peeled off strips of bark , making white streaks on them .

ID:	1061
INPUT:	Bakealdia etorri orduko , ordea , okerbidera itzuli ziren ; eta etsaien menpe utzi zenituen , berauen hankapean . Deiadar egin zizuten berriro , eta zuk zerutik entzun ; sarritan atera zenituen onikzeure erruki handiaz .
PRED:	But when the peace of peace came , they turned back to their enemies , and you delivered them into the hand of their enemies , and you heard them in heaven , and you have heard your mercy in heaven .
GOLD:	“ But as soon as they were at peace , your people again committed evil in your sight , and once more you let their enemies conquer them . Yet whenever your people turned and cried to you again for help , you listened once more from heaven . In your wonderful mercy , you rescued them many times !

ID:	1062
INPUT:	Nire aurka borrokatzeko gauza bada eta hiltzen banau , zuen morroi izanen gara . Baina ni berorren aurka borrokatzeko gauza izan eta hiltzen badut , zuek izanen zarete gure morroi , eta zerbitzatu egin beharko gaituzue .
PRED:	If you fight against me , we will be my servant . But if you fight against me , you will be my servant , and you will be my servant .
GOLD:	If he kills me , then we will be your slaves . But if I kill him , you will be our slaves !

ID:	1063
INPUT:	Zuei zer esanik asko dudan arren , ez dut paperez eta tintaz egin nahi . Zuengana joatea espero dut eta aurrez aurre hitz egitea ; horrela poz bete-betea izango dugu elkarrekin .
PRED:	I have many things that I have said to you , and I do not want to come to you . I want to speak to you , so that we may be glad with you .
GOLD:	I have much more to say to you , but I do n't want to do it with paper and ink . For I hope to visit you soon and talk with you face to face . Then our joy will be complete .

ID:	1064
INPUT:	bati , mirariak egiteko ahalmena ; beste bati , Jainkoaren izenean hitz egitea ; bati , espiritu faltsua eta benetakoa bereiztea ; besteari , hizketa arrotzez mintzatzea , eta beste bati , hizketa horren esanahia adieraztea .
PRED:	and to speak in the name of God , and to speak in the name of God , and to one another , and to another , and to speak , and to another tongue , and to speak , and to another tongue .
GOLD:	He gives one person the power to perform miracles , and another the ability to prophesy . He gives someone else the ability to discern whether a message is from the Spirit of God or from another spirit . Still another person is given the ability to speak in unknown languages , while another is given the ability to interpret what is being said .

ID:	1065
INPUT:	Honen aldamenean , Zebairen seme Barukek egin zuen lan , Zokotik Eliaxib apaiz nagusiaren etxeko ateraino .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when he had finished the altar , Balak the son of Shealtiel , that he went out of the house of the high priest , to the house of the priest .
GOLD:	Next to him was Baruch son of Zabbai , who zealously repaired an additional section from the angle to the door of the house of Eliashib the high priest .

ID:	1066
INPUT:	Gederot , Bet-Dagon , Naama , Makeda : hamasei hiri eta beraien herrixkak .
PRED:	and Beth Shemesh , and Hallohesh ; twelve cities with their villages , and their villages .
GOLD:	Gederoth , Beth-dagon , Naamah , and Makkedah — sixteen towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	1067
INPUT:	Egun hartan bertan , Jainkoak agindu bezala , bere etxeko gizaseme guztiak erdaindu zituen Abrahamek : Ismael bere semea eta esklabo guztiak , nahiz etxean jaioak nahiz diruz erosiak .
PRED:	And it came to pass in that day , as God commanded him , that he circumcised all the sons of Israel , his sons , and all his servants , and his servants , and his household , and his household , and his household , and his household , and his household , and his household .
GOLD:	On that very day Abraham took his son , Ishmael , and every male in his household , including those born there and those he had bought . Then he circumcised them , cutting off their foreskins , just as God had told him .

ID:	1068
INPUT:	Abimelekek galdetu zion : — Zer esan nahi du zazpi arkume horiek bereiz jartzeak ?
PRED:	Abimelech said to him , “ What do you want me to eat the seven lambs ? ”
GOLD:	Abimelech asked , “ Why have you set these seven apart from the others ? ”

ID:	1069
INPUT:	Hau jendea , hortzak ezpatak bezalakoaketa matrailezurrak labanak bezalakoak dituena , herriko dohakabeak irentsieta behartsuak lurretik suntsitzeko !
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ You are like a sword , and you are like a sword . You are like a sword . You are like a sword . You are like a sword , and you are like a sword .
GOLD:	They have teeth like swordsand fangs like knives.They devour the poor from the earthand the needy from among humanity .

ID:	1070
INPUT:	Aztiek erantzun zioten : — Errege jauna , ez dago munduan gizonik eskatzen duzuna egin dezakeenik . Inongo erregek , handiena eta ahaltsuena izanik ere , ez dio inoiz antzeko gauzarik eskatu igarle edo azti bati .
PRED:	They said to him , “ No , my lord the king is in the world , so that you may ask him to do anything in the world . There is no king like a mighty king , or a mighty or a vision . ”
GOLD:	The astrologers replied to the king , “ No one on earth can tell the king his dream ! And no king , however great and powerful , has ever asked such a thing of any magician , enchanter , or astrologer !

ID:	1071
INPUT:	Beste aingeru bat , suaren gain agintea zuena , irten zen aldaretik eta oihu egin zion ahots handiz igitai zorrotza zuenari : « Hartu igitai zorrotz hori eta bildu lurreko mahastiko mordoak , mahatsa heldu-heldua baitago » .
PRED:	And another angel came out of the altar , and cried out to him with a loud voice from the altar , and said to him , “ Take a sword , and gather the vineyard , and the vineyard of the earth . ”
GOLD:	Then another angel , who had power to destroy with fire , came from the altar . He shouted to the angel with the sharp sickle , “ Swing your sickle now to gather the clusters of grapes from the vines of the earth , for they are ripe for judgment . ”

ID:	1072
INPUT:	Eta bere neskame Bilha eman zion Jakobi emazte gisa . Elkartu zitzaion Jakob ,
PRED:	And Jacob gave Jacob his daughter Jacob his wife , and Jacob gave him his wife .
GOLD:	So Rachel gave her servant , Bilhah , to Jacob as a wife , and he slept with her .

ID:	1073
INPUT:	Baina inolako lanik egin ez arren , erruduna errugabe egiten duen Jainkoarengan sinesten duena , sinesmen horri esker onartuko du Jainkoak .
PRED:	But no one does n't do what is right , but whoever does n't believe in God will receive faith .
GOLD:	But people are counted as righteous , not because of their work , but because of their faith in God who forgives sinners .

ID:	1074
INPUT:	« Izan begirune gurasoei , eta errespetatu nik aginduriko atseden-eguna . Neu naiz Jauna , zuen Jainkoa .
PRED:	“ Be careful to fear your fathers , and keep the Sabbath day I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Each of you must show great respect for your mother and father , and you must always observe my Sabbath days of rest . I am the Lord your God .

ID:	1075
INPUT:	Moises menditik jaitsi zen , legearen harlauzak eskuetan zituela . Harlauzak bi aldeetatik idatziak zeuden :
PRED:	And Moses came down from the mountain , and took the stone of the law : and the two stone were written on the four corners of the altar :
GOLD:	Then Moses turned and went down the mountain . He held in his hands the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant . They were inscribed on both sides , front and back .

ID:	1076
INPUT:	Amotzen seme Isaiasek honako mezu hau bidali zion Ezekiasi : « Hau dio Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak : Aditu dut Asiriako errege Senakerib dela-eta egin didazun otoitza .
PRED:	Isaiah son of Hezekiah sent to Hezekiah , saying , “ This is what the Lord God of Israel says : I have heard the prayer that you did to Hezekiah king of Assyria .
GOLD:	Then Isaiah son of Amoz sent this message to Hezekiah : “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : Because you prayed about King Sennacherib of Assyria ,

ID:	1077
INPUT:	Aita-amek zapuzten banaute ere , Jaunak berekin hartuko nau .
PRED:	But if his father 's father is faithful , the Lord will take me with him .
GOLD:	Even if my father and mother abandon me , the Lord will hold me close .

ID:	1078
INPUT:	Egin itzazu kateak , hilketaz betea baitago herria , indarkeriaz betea hiria .
PRED:	Be careful to kill the people , for they are filled with the power of the city .
GOLD:	“ Prepare chains for my people , for the land is bloodied by terrible crimes.Jerusalem is filled with violence .

ID:	1079
INPUT:	Hofni eta Pinhas zure bi semeei gertatuko zaiena izango da ezaugarria : egun berean hilko zaizkizu biak .
PRED:	And thou shalt be a sign unto thy sons , and thy two sons , and thy two sons shall die in the same day .
GOLD:	And to prove that what I have said will come true , I will cause your two sons , Hophni and Phinehas , to die on the same day !

ID:	1080
INPUT:	Hori ukaezina da ; zaudete , beraz , lasai , itsu-itsuan jokatu gabe .
PRED:	This is what you have done , and you are blind , and you are not blind .
GOLD:	Since this is an undeniable fact , you should stay calm and not do anything rash .

ID:	1081
INPUT:	zutabeen oinak brontzezkoak , kakoak eta ziriak zilarrezkoak ; zutabe-gainak ere zilarrez estali zituen ; atariko zutabe guztiek zilarrezko ziriak zituzten .
PRED:	He made their bases of bronze , bronze , bronze , bronze , and bronze , and bronze ; and all the doors of the doors of the court were of silver .
GOLD:	Each post had a bronze base , and all the hooks and rings were silver . The tops of the posts of the courtyard were overlaid with silver , and the rings to hold up the curtains were made of silver .

ID:	1082
INPUT:	Orgaren gainaldean ur-ontzi baten ezpainak ateratzen ziren metro erdi bat gorantz ; ur-ontzia biribila zen , hirurogeita hamabost zentimetroko diametroa zuelarik . Ezpain haietan ere baziren irudi zizelkatuak , panel koadratueetan , ez biribiletan .
PRED:	And on the top of the court were five cubits high , and the breadth of the court was five cubits high , and the breadth of the court was five cubits , and the breadth of the court were five cubits , and on the top of the pillars .
GOLD:	The top of each cart had a rounded frame for the basin . It projected 11/2 feet above the cart 's top like a round pedestal , and its opening was 21/4 feet across ; it was decorated on the outside with carvings of wreaths . The panels of the carts were square , not round .

ID:	1083
INPUT:	Pozaren pozez jauzi egingo dut zure maitasunagatik , ikusi baituzu nire atsekabea , arduratu baitzara nire larrialdiaz ,
PRED:	I will rejoice in your love , because you have seen my affliction , because you have seen my affliction .
GOLD:	You have not handed me over to my enemiesbut have set me in a safe place .

ID:	1084
INPUT:	Negar eta intziri egingo dutmendiak direla eta ; deitore , larre-zelaiak direla eta : erreak gelditu baitira eta hutsik ; ez da ardirik beeka entzuten , hegazti eta abereakihesi joanak dira .
PRED:	I will weep on the mountains and on the mountains , and on the hills , and the sheep and the sheep will be burned , because there is no shepherd , and the birds of the birds will escape .
GOLD:	Should I not punish them for this ? ” says the Lord . “ Should I not avenge myself against such a nation ? ”

ID:	1085
INPUT:	Afarikoan , morroia bidali zuen gonbidatuei esatera : “ Etorri , dena gertu dago eta ” .
PRED:	And he sent his servant to the servants who had sent him , saying , He has come , and it is revealed .
GOLD:	When the banquet was ready , he sent his servant to tell the guests , ‘ Come , the banquet is ready . '

ID:	1086
INPUT:	Zulo sakonera jaurti nauzu , barren-barreneko ilunpetara .
PRED:	You have cast me into the pit , and you have cast me into the darkness .
GOLD:	Your anger weighs me down ; with wave after wave you have engulfed me.Interlude

ID:	1087
INPUT:	Irakatsi niri ongi bereizten eta ezagutzen , zure aginduez fidatzen bainaiz .
PRED:	teach me what I do , and know what I do . I do n't trust your commands .
GOLD:	I believe in your commands ; now teach me good judgment and knowledge .

ID:	1088
INPUT:	Ibar beltz-ilunetan banabil ere , ez dut inolako gaitzen beldurrik , zu nirekin baitzaude : zure artzain-makilak lasaitzen nau .
PRED:	I am not afraid of darkness and darkness ; I am not afraid of you ; I am not afraid of your flock .
GOLD:	Even when I walkthrough the darkest valley , I will not be afraid , for you are close beside me.Your rod and your staffprotect and comfort me .

ID:	1089
INPUT:	Ez ote dugu eskubiderik emakume fededun batekin ibiltzeko , beste apostoluek , Jaunaren anaiek eta Pedrok berak bezala ?
PRED:	Are we not able to go with a woman , as the apostles and the apostles and Peter ?
GOLD:	Do n't we have the right to bring a believing wife with us as the other apostles and the Lord 's brothers do , and as Peter does ?

ID:	1090
INPUT:	Bidez zihoala , Lebi Alfeorena ikusi zuen zerga biltzeko mahaian eseria , eta esan zion : — Jarraitu niri . Lebik zutitu eta jarraitu egin zion .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when he saw the word of Levi , that he sat down at the table , and said unto him , Follow me , and followed him .
GOLD:	As he walked along , he saw Levi son of Alphaeus sitting at his tax collector 's booth . “ Follow me and be my disciple , ” Jesus said to him . So Levi got up and followed him .

ID:	1091
INPUT:	Nornahik , alarguntsen sailean sartzeko , hirurogei urtez gorakoa izan behar du , behin bakarrik ezkondua ,
PRED:	If you enter into the widow , you must take a wife for forty years .
GOLD:	A widow who is put on the list for support must be a woman who is at least sixty years old and was faithful to her husband .

ID:	1092
INPUT:	« Bizi bedi Ruben , ez bedi hil , gutxi izan arren beraren gizonak » .
PRED:	“ Let the children of Reuben live , and let them not die , but let them die . ”
GOLD:	Moses said this about the tribe of Reuben : “ Let the tribe of Reuben live and not die out , though they are few in number . ”

ID:	1093
INPUT:	horregatik , hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Filistearren kontra ekingo diot , keretarrak erauziko ditut eta itsasertzeko gainerako herriak suntsituko .
PRED:	Therefore thus says the Lord God : I will destroy the Philistines and destroy the people of the sea .
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will raise my fist of judgment against the land of the Philistines . I will wipe out the Kerethites and utterly destroy the people who live by the sea .

ID:	1094
INPUT:	Horregatik , hitz egin nire izenean eta adierazi nire , Jainko Jaun honen , mezua : Hondaturik utzi zaituztete eta zuek berenganatzeko irrikaz zeuden beste nazioak zuetaz jabetu dira , isekaz eta irainez bete zaituztete ;
PRED:	Therefore say to them , Thus says the Lord God : Thus says the Lord God : “ You have destroyed the nations who are in your name , and have devoured you , and have devoured you , and have devoured you , and have filled you .
GOLD:	Therefore , son of man , give the mountains of Israel this message from the Sovereign Lord : Your enemies have attacked you from all directions , making you the property of many nations and the object of much mocking and slander .

ID:	1095
INPUT:	Hau hil zenean , Elat hiria berreskuratu eta berreraiki zuen Uziasek .
PRED:	When Uzziah died , he built the city and built it .
GOLD:	After his father 's death , Uzziah rebuilt the town of Elath and restored it to Judah .

ID:	1096
INPUT:	Izan ere , bakea ereingo dut , mahastiak emango du bere fruitua , lurrak bere ekarriaeta zeruak bere ihintza ; herri honetan bizirik gelditueiemango diet hori guztia .
PRED:	For I will plant peace , and I will plant the fruit of the earth , and the earth , and the earth , and the earth , and the earth , and the earth , and the heavens , and the heavens , and the heavens , and all this people .
GOLD:	For I am planting seeds of peace and prosperity among you . The grapevines will be heavy with fruit . The earth will produce its crops , and the heavens will release the dew . Once more I will cause the remnant in Judah and Israel to inherit these blessings .

ID:	1097
INPUT:	Betor gurekin , Jauna , zure maitasun leiala , zuregan jarria baitugu esperantza !
PRED:	The Lord is with us , and we will trust in you .
GOLD:	Let your unfailing love surround us , Lord , for our hope is in you alone .

ID:	1098
INPUT:	Entzun zalaparta mendietan : jendetza handia dirudi . Entzun erresumen , bildu diren herrien iskanbila . Jaun ahalguztidunaikuskapena egiten ari zaioborrokara doan gudarosteari .
PRED:	Listen to the noise of the mountains , a great crowd , a great crowd , a great crowd , a great crowd , a great crowd of the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	Hear the noise on the mountains ! Listen , as the vast armies march ! It is the noise and shouting of many nations.The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has called this army together .

ID:	1099
INPUT:	Jaunarekin mintzatzeko beraren aurrera sartzen zenean , zapia kentzen zuen irten arte . Ateratzean , Jaunak agindua adierazten zien israeldarrei .
PRED:	When he went into the presence of the Lord , he took the spirit from him until evening , and the Lord commanded the children of Israel .
GOLD:	But whenever he went into the Tent of Meeting to speak with the Lord , he would remove the veil until he came out again . Then he would give the people whatever instructions the Lord had given him ,

ID:	1100
INPUT:	Aurreraxeago , Santiago eta Joan anaiak , Zebedeoren semeak , ikusi zituen ; sare-konponketan ari ziren beren ontzian .
PRED:	After this , John and John and John 's brothers saw their sons in the boat . They were under the ship .
GOLD:	A little farther up the shore Jesus saw Zebedee 's sons , James and John , in a boat repairing their nets .

ID:	1101
INPUT:	Eta horra Egipto ederraporrokatua , iparraldeko herriari emana » .
PRED:	This is the beautiful thing of Egypt , the land of the north , and the land of the north .
GOLD:	Egypt will be humiliated ; she will be handed over to people from the north . ”

ID:	1102
INPUT:	Emakumeak erantzun zion Eliasi : — Orain badakit Jainkoaren gizona zarena , eta zuk diozuna egiaz Jaunaren hitza dena .
PRED:	The woman said to Elijah , “ I know that you are the man of God , and the word of the Lord is good . ”
GOLD:	Then the woman told Elijah , “ Now I know for sure that you are a man of God , and that the Lord truly speaks through you . ”

ID:	1103
INPUT:	Baina gaiztoen bidea iluna , ez dakite zerez egingo duten behaztopa .
PRED:	But the way of the wicked shall not be forgotten .
GOLD:	But the way of the wicked is like total darkness.They have no idea what they are stumbling over .

ID:	1104
INPUT:	Pozik eta alai atera zen egun hartan Haman . Baina Mardokeo jauregiko atarian zegoela ikusi zuenean eta ez zela jaikitzen beraren aurrean , ez zirkinik ere egiten , sutan jarri zen Mardokeoren aurka .
PRED:	And it came to pass in that day , when Mordecai saw that Mordecai was in the court of the king 's house , and when he saw that Mordecai was in the court of the king 's house , he did not know that Mordecai was born against Mordecai .
GOLD:	Haman was a happy man as he left the banquet ! But when he saw Mordecai sitting at the palace gate , not standing up or trembling nervously before him , Haman became furious .

ID:	1105
INPUT:	Orduan , ahalmen handiz jokatuko dut eta egiptoarrak joko ditut beraien artean egingo ditudan egintza harrigarriez ; ondoren , utziko dizuete irteten .
PRED:	And I will make the Egyptians with great power , and I will cause the Egyptians among them , and they will not leave you .
GOLD:	So I will raise my hand and strike the Egyptians , performing all kinds of miracles among them . Then at last he will let you go .

ID:	1106
INPUT:	Izan ere , bere bizia gorde nahi duenak galdu egingo du ; bere bizia niregatik galtzen duenak , ordea , gorde egingo du .
PRED:	For whoever wants to save his life will be destroyed . But whoever does n't want to live for me will be saved .
GOLD:	If you try to hang on to your life , you will lose it . But if you give up your life for my sake , you will save it .

ID:	1107
INPUT:	Joan zen Gedeon eta antxume bat prestatu zuen eta , hogei kilo-edo irinez , legamia gabeko ogiak egin . Gero , okela otarrean eta salda eltzean harturik , arteondo azpira eraman eta Jaunari eskaini zion dena .
PRED:	Then Gideon went and prepared a young bull and made a young bull without yeast . Then he took the bread and brought it to the Lord , and brought it to the Lord .
GOLD:	Gideon hurried home . He cooked a young goat , and with a basket of flour he baked some bread without yeast . Then , carrying the meat in a basket and the broth in a pot , he brought them out and presented them to the angel , who was under the great tree .

ID:	1108
INPUT:	heriotzatik libratu eta gosetean bizirik gordetzeko .
PRED:	He saved them from death , and he will save them from death , and he will die .
GOLD:	He rescues them from deathand keeps them alive in times of famine .

ID:	1109
INPUT:	« Jaunak bere jardueraren hasieran sortu ninduen , bere lehen egintzen aurretik .
PRED:	“ The Lord raised me up before him , before he was born before him .
GOLD:	“ The Lord formed me from the beginning , before he created anything else .

ID:	1110
INPUT:	Jaunak ditu heriotzaeta bizia ematen , berak du Herio Leizera jaitsarazten , berak handik igoarazten .
PRED:	The Lord gives life to death , and he gives life to death , and he will be able to be put to death .
GOLD:	The Lord gives both death and life ; he brings some down to the grave but raises others up .

ID:	1111
INPUT:	Zorretan nago , izan ere , greziar herriarekin nahiz greziar ez direnekin , ikasiekin nahiz ezikasiekin .
PRED:	For I am eight days with the nations , and the Gentiles , and the Gentiles , and the Gentiles , and the Gentiles , and those who were not with them .
GOLD:	For I have a great sense of obligation to people in both the civilized world and the rest of the world , to the educated and uneducated alike .

ID:	1112
INPUT:	zuen arbasoek jabetzan hartu zuten lurraldera itzularaziko zaituzte eta beronen jabe bihurtuko zarete ; zeuen arbasoak baino zoriontsuago eta ugariago egingo zaituzte .
PRED:	You will return to the land that your fathers gave you , and you will possess it , and you will possess it more than your fathers , and you will be more than your fathers .
GOLD:	The Lord your God will return you to the land that belonged to your ancestors , and you will possess that land again . Then he will make you even more prosperous and numerous than your ancestors !

ID:	1113
INPUT:	Horrela bete zen Jaunak Jeremias profetaren ahoz esana : « Hirurogeita hamar urtez egongo da utzia lurralde hau , hondamenaldi osoan zehar , Jaunari ukatu zizkioten atseden-urteak bete arte » .
PRED:	So the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the prophet , saying , “ The land will be seventy years until the time of the month , until the time of the year of the Lord came . ”
GOLD:	So the message of the Lord spoken through Jeremiah was fulfilled . The land finally enjoyed its Sabbath rest , lying desolate until the seventy years were fulfilled , just as the prophet had said .

ID:	1114
INPUT:	Idolatriaren aurkako auzia
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Guidelines for a King

ID:	1115
INPUT:	Jakinarazi zioten Joabi erregea negarrez eta aieneka ari zela Absalomengatik .
PRED:	And the king told Joab , saying , The king wept for Absalom 's sake .
GOLD:	As all the people heard of the king 's deep grief for his son , the joy of that day 's victory was turned into deep sadness .

ID:	1116
INPUT:	Jainkoaren aginduen kontra errebelatu baitzireneta Goi-goikoaren egitasmoa mespretxatu .
PRED:	For he hath sinned against the commandments of God , and hath despised the counsel of the Most High .
GOLD:	They rebelled against the words of God , scorning the counsel of the Most High .

ID:	1117
INPUT:	Haiekiko gupida sortu zuenerbestera eraman zituztenengan .
PRED:	And they brought him to the rest of the others , and brought them into captivity .
GOLD:	He even caused their captorsto treat them with kindness .

ID:	1118
INPUT:	adoretsuen gantzez igurtzia ; Jonatanen uztaia , inoiz atzera egin ez zuena , Saulen ezpata , erabili gabe sekula itzuli ez zena .
PRED:	And he wrote the book of the mighty men ; and he did not break the bow of Jonathan , and did not return to the sword .
GOLD:	The bow of Jonathan was powerful , and the sword of Saul did its mighty work.They shed the blood of their enemiesand pierced the bodies of mighty heroes .

ID:	1119
INPUT:	Aberats oheratzen da , baina azken aldiz , begiak zabaltzean ez zaio ezer geratzen .
PRED:	The rich man is rich , but the eyes of his eyes does not know what he does .
GOLD:	The wicked go to bed richbut wake to find that all their wealth is gone .

ID:	1120
INPUT:	( 2 Erg 22 , 1-20 ; 23 , 4-20 )
PRED:	King Ahaz of Judah
GOLD:	Hilkiah Discovers God 's Law

ID:	1121
INPUT:	Larrialdian askatzaile eta mesedegile den Jauna goresteko deia
PRED:	In trouble , in trouble , in the day of trouble , and in the Lord ,
GOLD:	( Psalms 107–150 )

ID:	1122
INPUT:	« Era berean , geure lurraren eta fruta-arbola guztien lehen fruituak Jaunaren etxera eramango ditugu urtero .
PRED:	“ In the same way , we will bring the fruit of the earth and the fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the earth , and all the fruit of the fruit of the Lord 's house .
GOLD:	We agree to give God our oldest sons and the firstborn of all our herds and flocks , as prescribed in the Law . We will present them to the priests who minister in the Temple of our God .

ID:	1123
INPUT:	aldi hau bete zen egun berean , hain zuzen , atera zen lurralde hartatik Jaunaren herria , gudaroste baten gisa .
PRED:	And it came to pass on that day , that the people went out of the land of the Lord , that they might go out of the land .
GOLD:	In fact , it was on the last day of the 430th year that all the Lord 's forces left the land .

ID:	1124
INPUT:	Ez al dit , bada , berak esan arreba zuela ? Andreak ere neba zuela zioen . Nik fede onez eta zintzo jokatu dut .
PRED:	Do n't I say that you are my sister ? Your brother Philip was your brother , and I have walked in faith .
GOLD:	Did n't Abraham tell me , ‘ She is my sister ' ? And she herself said , ‘ Yes , he is my brother . ' I acted in complete innocence ! My hands are clean . ”

ID:	1125
INPUT:	Edomdarren aurkako mezua
PRED:	Edom and Edom
GOLD:	A Message for Edom

ID:	1126
INPUT:	Goizetik iluntzera birrintzen dira , oharkabean betiko galtzen .
PRED:	They bring darkness from the morning , and they perish forever .
GOLD:	They are alive in the morning but dead by evening , gone forever without a trace .

ID:	1127
INPUT:	Ardo-zahagi hauek berriak ziren bete genituenean , eta orain urratuak daude . Gure jantzi eta oinetakoak ere zar<unk> du egin zaizkigu hain bide luzean .
PRED:	And when we had finished the wine , we have heard the new wine , and now our feet have laid their feet on our feet , and our feet have laid their feet in a long time .
GOLD:	These wineskins were new when we filled them , but now they are old and split open . And our clothing and sandals are worn out from our very long journey . ”

ID:	1128
INPUT:	Jaunak , ordea , esan zien Moisesi eta Aaroni : « Ez zarete nitaz fidatu , nire santutasuna israeldarren aurrean argi azal zedin ; beraz , ez duzue herri hau gidatuko emango diodan lurralderaino » .
PRED:	But the Lord said to Moses and Aaron , “ You are not believed in me , so that you may not know my holy name before the children of Israel , so that you will not give this people this land which I will give you . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord said to Moses and Aaron , “ Because you did not trust me enough to demonstrate my holiness to the people of Israel , you will not lead them into the land I am giving them ! ”

ID:	1129
INPUT:	Handik alde egin eta bere herrira joan zen Jesus , bere ikasleak ondoren zituela .
PRED:	And Jesus went away from there and went into his own city , and his disciples followed him .
GOLD:	Jesus left that part of the country and returned with his disciples to Nazareth , his hometown .

ID:	1130
INPUT:	Ene senideok , ezin elkartuak dira Jesu Kristo gure Jaun aintzatsuagan duzuen fedea eta pertsonen artean bereizkeria egitea .
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , are not able to do wrong in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ , and to each other .
GOLD:	My dear brothers and sisters , how can you claim to have faith in our glorious Lord Jesus Christ if you favor some people over others ?

ID:	1131
INPUT:	Apaizak miatu egingo du , eta kopeta eta burusoileko mantxaren handitua zuri-gorrixka ageri bada , larruazaleko legenaren antzekoa ,
PRED:	And the priest shall take the priest , and the priest shall put on his head , and the hair of his garment , as the skin of the law , and the hair of the law , as the skin of the law ,
GOLD:	The priest must examine him , and if he finds swelling around the reddish white sore anywhere on the man 's head and it looks like a skin disease ,

ID:	1132
INPUT:	Saul , Israelgo erregetza harturik , inguruetako etsai ororen kontra borrokatu zen : moabdar , amondar eta edomdarren kontra , Tzobako erregeen eta filistearren kontra . Nora jo , han nagusitzen zen .
PRED:	And Saul took the kingdom of Israel , and fought against him , saying , Moab , Ammon , Ammon , Ammon , and Ammon , and the kings of Ammon , and the kings of Ammon , and went into the hand of the Philistines .
GOLD:	Now when Saul had secured his grasp on Israel 's throne , he fought against his enemies in every direction — against Moab , Ammon , Edom , the kings of Zobah , and the Philistines . And wherever he turned , he was victorious .

ID:	1133
INPUT:	« Hona egiten dizudan agintzaria : herri askoren sorburu izango zara .
PRED:	“ This is what I command you : You will be a prince of many peoples .
GOLD:	“ This is my covenant with you : I will make you the father of a multitude of nations !

ID:	1134
INPUT:	« Gero , atearen ondoko sarreratik , iparralderantz dauden apaizen gela sakratuetara eraman ninduen gizonak . Barren-barrenean mendebaldera zegoen leku bat erakutsiz ,
PRED:	And he brought me out of the gate , and brought me to the north side of the sanctuary , and brought me to the holy place . And he took me to the east side of the inner sanctuary .
GOLD:	In my vision , the man brought me through the entrance beside the gateway and led me to the sacred rooms assigned to the priests , which faced toward the north . He showed me a place at the extreme west end of these rooms .

ID:	1135
INPUT:	Gero , promes hau egin zuen Jakobek : « Jainkoa neurekin badut , eta bidaia honetan babesten banau , jateko ogiaeta janzteko arropakematen badizkit ,
PRED:	And Jacob made a vow to him , saying , If God is with me , and if I am with me in this heart , and if I have put my clothes in my heart ,
GOLD:	Then Jacob made this vow : “ If God will indeed be with me and protect me on this journey , and if he will provide me with food and clothing ,

ID:	1136
INPUT:	Hil zenean , haren seme Pekahias izan zen errege , beraren ordez .
PRED:	Ahaz slept with his fathers , and he slept with his fathers , and he reigned in his stead .
GOLD:	When Menahem died , his son Pekahiah became the next king .

ID:	1137
INPUT:	gorriz tindaturiko ahari-larruak eta larru finak , akazia-zura ,
PRED:	and the ram , and the ram , and the ram , and the blue , and the blue , and the ram ,
GOLD:	tanned ram skins and fine goatskin leather ; acacia wood ;

ID:	1138
INPUT:	zure gaiztakeria agerian gelditu aurretik ? Orain , edomdarren eta berauen auzoko filistearren hirien iseka-gai zara , alde guztietatik mespretxatzen zaituztelarik .
PRED:	Is your wickedness stand before you ? Now now you have broken the cities of Edom , and the cities of the Philistines , for you have despised you from every side of the Philistines .
GOLD:	But now your greater wickedness has been exposed to all the world , and you are the one who is scorned — by Edom and all her neighbors and by Philistia .

ID:	1139
INPUT:	Epaitzeko eseriko da . Zilarra eta urrea birfintzen eta garbitzen dituenak bezala garbituko ditu Lebiren ondorengoak , Jaunari opariak behar bezala eskain diezazkioten .
PRED:	And the priest shall eat the food of the priest , and the silver , and the gold , and the sons of Levi shall be clean as a burnt offering unto the Lord .
GOLD:	He will sit like a refiner of silver , burning away the dross . He will purify the Levites , refining them like gold and silver , so that they may once again offer acceptable sacrifices to the Lord .

ID:	1140
INPUT:	Erruki nitaz , ene Jainko , zeure maitasunaz , suntsitu nire hobena , zeure neurrigabeko gupidaz .
PRED:	Be kind to me , O Lord my God , and destroy me with your mercy .
GOLD:	For I recognize my rebellion ; it haunts me day and night .

ID:	1141
INPUT:	Elkartu zen Jakob Rakelekin ere , eta Lea baino maiteago izan zuen . Beste zazpi urtez lan egin behar izan zuen Labanentzat .
PRED:	Jacob also went with Rachel , and she loved Rachel for seven years .
GOLD:	So Jacob slept with Rachel , too , and he loved her much more than Leah . He then stayed and worked for Laban the additional seven years .

ID:	1142
INPUT:	Aske utzi zituzten lau aingeruak : prest zeuden hilabete , egun , ordu eta une hartan gizon-emakumeen herena hiltzeko .
PRED:	And the four angels left the four months : and the three months was ready to kill men .
GOLD:	Then the four angels who had been prepared for this hour and day and month and year were turned loose to kill one-third of all the people on earth .

ID:	1143
INPUT:	Beraz , senideok , aukera itzazue zeuen artean izen oneko zazpi gizon , Espiritu Santuaz eta jakinduriaz beteak , eta haiei emango diegu egiteko hori .
PRED:	Therefore , brothers and sisters , chosen one among you , and be wise in the Holy Spirit , and in the Holy Spirit , and in the Holy Spirit we will give these things to them .
GOLD:	And so , brothers , select seven men who are well respected and are full of the Spirit and wisdom . We will give them this responsibility .

ID:	1144
INPUT:	Hara , Jainko Jaun ahalguztidunakindarrez lurrera botako dituerasotzaileak , zuhaitzari adarrakmozten zaizkion bezala , nahiz eta garaiak eta sendoak izan .
PRED:	Behold , the Lord of hosts , the Lord of hosts , will cast out his hand on the earth , as the sword of his strength , and the days of his strength , and the days of his strength , and the days of his strength , and the days of his hands shall be broken .
GOLD:	But look ! The Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , will chop down the mighty tree of Assyria with great power ! He will cut down the proud.That lofty tree will be brought down .

ID:	1145
INPUT:	Egunaren amaiera zen , ilunabarra , gau betea eta iluntasuna zetozen .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the morning , that the darkness was dark and darkness , and darkness was dark .
GOLD:	It was at twilight , in the evening , as deep darkness fell .

ID:	1146
INPUT:	eta , esker oneko otoitza egin ondoren , zatitu eta esan zuela : « Hau nire gorputza da , zuentzat ematen dena . Egizue hau nire oroigarri » .
PRED:	Then he prayed and said , “ This is my body , and it is my body for you . ”
GOLD:	and gave thanks to God for it . Then he broke it in pieces and said , “ This is my body , which is given for you . Do this in remembrance of me . ”

ID:	1147
INPUT:	Diakonoak izan bitez behin bakarrik ezkonduak , beren seme-alabak eta etxea ongi gobernatzen dakitenak ;
PRED:	But let them marry their wives , and let them know their own children and their own house .
GOLD:	A deacon must be faithful to his wife , and he must manage his children and household well .

ID:	1148
INPUT:	Konturatu zen Jesus eta esan zien : « Zer ari zarete zeuen artean ogirik ez daukazuela eta , sinesmen gutxikook ?
PRED:	And Jesus knew them , and said unto them , What do ye not eat bread among you , and ye little faith ?
GOLD:	Jesus knew what they were saying , so he said , “ You have so little faith ! Why are you arguing with each other about having no bread ?

ID:	1149
INPUT:	Jesus Jaunaren laguntzaz , Timoteo laster zuengana bidaltzeko itxaropena dut , zuen berri jakinik ni ere bizkor nadin .
PRED:	I hope in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ to send you to you , so that I may run to you .
GOLD:	If the Lord Jesus is willing , I hope to send Timothy to you soon for a visit . Then he can cheer me up by telling me how you are getting along .

ID:	1150
INPUT:	Ez nion inortxori ere adierazi Jainkoaren eraginez Jerusalemen egin nahi nuena . Gauez atera nintzen gizon banaka batzuekin , neu ninderaman astoa beste abererik hartu gabe .
PRED:	I did not want anyone to speak to God in Jerusalem . If I went out to Jerusalem , I was still with a man . I was not able to take another donkey .
GOLD:	I slipped out during the night , taking only a few others with me . I had not told anyone about the plans God had put in my heart for Jerusalem . We took no pack animals with us except the donkey I was riding .

ID:	1151
INPUT:	haren kriseiluak argi egiten zuen nire gain , argi harekin egiten nuen ilunpetan aurrera .
PRED:	My lamp was light in the light of my light , and I put light in the darkness .
GOLD:	when he lit up the way before meand I walked safely through the darkness .

ID:	1152
INPUT:	apaiz nahiz herri xehe , nagusi nahiz morroi , etxekoandre nahiz neskame , saltzaile nahiz erosle , mailegu-emaile nahiz hartzaile , hartzekodun nahiz zordun .
PRED:	He is a priest , a servant , a servant , a servant , a servant , a servant , a servant , or a widow , or a widow , or a widow , or a widow , or a widow , or a widow , or a widow .
GOLD:	Priests and laypeople , servants and masters , maids and mistresses , buyers and sellers , lenders and borrowers , bankers and debtors — none will be spared .

ID:	1153
INPUT:	Zeren ez baitiot inoiz uko egin <unk> ainkoaren asmoa oso-osorik zuei adierazteari .
PRED:	For I do not want to tell you all the glory of the glory of the Lord .
GOLD:	for I did n't shrink from declaring all that God wants you to know .

ID:	1154
INPUT:	<unk> koa du haragia , estu-estua eta mugigaitza .
PRED:	The bread is the bread , the flesh , the flesh , and the lamp .
GOLD:	The scales on its back are like rows of shieldstightly sealed together .

ID:	1155
INPUT:	Giza gorpuren bat ukitu eta garbikuntzarik egiten ez duenak Jaunaren egoitza profanatzen du ; beraz , bota egingo dute Israel herritik . Garbikuntzako urez zipriztindua izan ez denez , kutsaturik jarraitzen du .
PRED:	If anyone touches a man , he shall wash his body , and he shall be cut off from the house of the Lord ; and he shall wash his clothes from the house of Israel , and he shall not wash his blood .
GOLD:	All those who touch a dead body and do not purify themselves in the proper way defile the Lord 's Tabernacle , and they will be cut off from the community of Israel . Since the water of purification was not sprinkled on them , their defilement continues .

ID:	1156
INPUT:	Itxaron Jaunarengan ! Eutsi gogor , izan kemen ! Itxaron Jaunarengan !
PRED:	Remember the Lord , and be strong , and be strong ; wait in the Lord .
GOLD:	Wait patiently for the Lord.Be brave and courageous.Yes , wait patiently for the Lord .

ID:	1157
INPUT:	Biharamunean atera eta Zesareara heldu ginen . Han , apostoluen zazpi laguntzaileetako bat zen Felipe misiolariaren etxera joan ginen , eta bertan gelditu .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the next day , that he came to Caesarea , and came to Caesarea , and a certain man of the apostles who had been left in the house of Philip , and stood there .
GOLD:	The next day we went on to Caesarea and stayed at the home of Philip the Evangelist , one of the seven men who had been chosen to distribute food .

ID:	1158
INPUT:	Haren arnasak ikatzak goritzen ditueta eztarri-zulotik sugarrak irteten .
PRED:	The breath of his breath shall come out of his mouth , and his tongue shall come out of the fire .
GOLD:	Who can strip off its hide , and who can penetrate its double layer of armor ?

ID:	1159
INPUT:	Legearen eta profeten irakurgaiak egin ondoren , sinagogako buruzagiek ohar hau bidali zieten : « Anaiok , herriari adore emateko zerbait esateko baldin baduzue , mintza zaitezte » .
PRED:	And when they read the law and the prophets , the princes of the synagogue sent to the synagogue , saying , “ My brothers , if you say to the people , ‘ My brothers and sisters , if you speak to them , you may speak to them . '
GOLD:	After the usual readings from the books of Moses and the prophets , those in charge of the service sent them this message : “ Brothers , if you have any word of encouragement for the people , come and give it . ”

ID:	1160
INPUT:	Jaunaren testigantza egin eta haren mezua adierazi ondoren , Pedro eta Joan Jerusalemera itzuli ziren , Samariako auzo askotan berri ona zabalduz .
PRED:	And when they heard the word of the Lord , they returned to Peter and John , and they returned to Jerusalem , and told many things in Samaria .
GOLD:	After testifying and preaching the word of the Lord in Samaria , Peter and John returned to Jerusalem . And they stopped in many Samaritan villages along the way to preach the Good News .

ID:	1161
INPUT:	« Ez biezaio inork inori salaketaeta errietarik egin . Zure aurka dut auzia , apaiz .
PRED:	“ No one has done wrong against you , and no one has sinned against you . I am a priest .
GOLD:	“ Do n't point your finger at someone elseand try to pass the blame ! My complaint , you priests , is with you .

ID:	1162
INPUT:	Zentzabide mingarria
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Israel , an Unfaithful Wife

ID:	1163
INPUT:	Jehudik hiruzpalau orrialde irakurtzen zitueneko , erregeak aiztoz moztu eta sutara botatzen zituen , erroilu guztia sutan erre arte .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the king read about four months , that the king cut down the four months , and cast them into the fire , until the fire was burned in fire .
GOLD:	Each time Jehudi finished reading three or four columns , the king took a knife and cut off that section of the scroll . He then threw it into the fire , section by section , until the whole scroll was burned up .

ID:	1164
INPUT:	Orduan , Efraimgo mendialdean dagoen Tzemaraim gailurrera igo eta honela egin zien oihu Abiasek Jeroboami eta Israel erreinuko gudariei : « Entzun !
PRED:	Then Jeroboam went up to the top of the hill country of Ephraim on the hill country of Ephraim , and Jeroboam cried out to Jeroboam and the army of Israel , saying , “ Listen to me !
GOLD:	When the army of Judah arrived in the hill country of Ephraim , Abijah stood on Mount Zemaraim and shouted to Jeroboam and all Israel : “ Listen to me !

ID:	1165
INPUT:	Nire larruazala erabat desitxuratua dago , gaitzez estalia tunikaz bezala .
PRED:	My skin is like my skin , and my flesh is covered with skin .
GOLD:	With a strong hand , God grabs my shirt.He grips me by the collar of my coat .

ID:	1166
INPUT:	« Urrundu elkarte honetatik , bat-batean birrinduko baitut » . Moises eta Aaron lurreraino ahuspeztu ziren ,
PRED:	“ At this time I will destroy you a little while . And Moses and Aaron bowed down to the ground .
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Moses : “ Place Aaron 's staff permanently before the Ark of the Covenant to serve as a warning to rebels . This should put an end to their complaints against me and prevent any further deaths . ”

ID:	1167
INPUT:	Burdina lurzorutik ateratzen daeta haitzak urtuz kobrea lortzen .
PRED:	They send iron out of the earth , and they make them iron .
GOLD:	They know where to dig iron from the earthand how to smelt copper from rock .

ID:	1168
INPUT:	Eta Hildakoen Egoitzatikatera egingo ote ditut ? Heriotzatik askatu egingo ote ditut ? Herio , non dituk heure izurriak ? Herio-leize , non dituk heure gaitzak ? Ez dut gupidarik bihotzean » .
PRED:	And what shall I bring them out of the dead ? shall I deliver them out of death ? behold , I will deliver them out of death ? Behold , behold , there is no plague in your heart .
GOLD:	“ Should I ransom them from the grave ? Should I redeem them from death ? O death , bring on your terrors ! O grave , bring on your plagues ! For I will not take pity on them .

ID:	1169
INPUT:	Hazael Eliseogandik alde egin eta bere jaunarengana joan zen . Erregeak galdetu zion : — Zer esan dizu Eliseok ? Hazaelek erantzun : — Baietz , sendatuko zarela .
PRED:	Elisha left him and went to his lord , and said to him , “ What do you say ? ” Elisha answered , “ You will be healed . ”
GOLD:	When Hazael left Elisha and went back , the king asked him , “ What did Elisha tell you ? ” And Hazael replied , “ He told me that you will surely recover . ”

ID:	1170
INPUT:	Hor menditik , Itsaso Gorrirako bidea hartu zuten israeldarrek , Edom lurraldea inguratzeko asmoz . Bidean , ordea , adorea galdu
PRED:	And the children of Israel took the way of the Red Sea by the Red Sea , that they might fight against the Red Sea . But the way was destroyed .
GOLD:	Then the people of Israel set out from Mount Hor , taking the road to the Red Sea to go around the land of Edom . But the people grew impatient with the long journey ,

ID:	1171
INPUT:	Gizonezkoaren sexu-kutsadura
PRED:	The Death of a man
GOLD:	Bodily Discharges

ID:	1172
INPUT:	Orduan , bai , beldurrik gabe hitz egingo nuke . Baina hori ez da horrela , eta neurez bakarrik behar dut baliatu .
PRED:	Then I would not be afraid , but I would not be afraid . But I would not be alone alone .
GOLD:	Then I could speak to him without fear , but I can not do that in my own strength .

ID:	1173
INPUT:	Baina baliotsutzat nituen gauza guztiok , baliogabetzat jo nituen Kristorengatik .
PRED:	But as for all these things , I made them holy for Christ .
GOLD:	I once thought these things were valuable , but now I consider them worthless because of what Christ has done .

ID:	1174
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun zidan : « Oinezkoekin lasterkanekatzen bazara , nola lehiatu nahi duzuzaldizkoekin ? Lurralde lauanseguru ez bazabiltza , nola moldatuko zaraJordan inguruko malkarretan ?
PRED:	The Lord said to me , “ If you run , how can you run with you , how can you run with your horses ? How long will you go around the land of Egypt ?
GOLD:	“ If racing against mere men makes you tired , how will you race against horses ? If you stumble and fall on open ground , what will you do in the thickets near the Jordan ?

ID:	1175
INPUT:	Faraoiak esan zion Joseri : « Esaiezu anaiei astoak prestatu eta Kanaanera itzultzeko ,
PRED:	Pharaoh said to Joseph , “ Tell his brothers , ‘ Go back to Canaan and return to Canaan . '
GOLD:	Pharaoh said to Joseph , “ Tell your brothers , ‘ This is what you must do : Load your pack animals , and hurry back to the land of Canaan .

ID:	1176
INPUT:	Eleazarrek eskuak gainean ezarri eta kargua eman zion , Jaunak Moisesen bidez agindu bezala .
PRED:	And he laid his hands on it , and brought it to him , as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	Moses laid his hands on him and commissioned him to lead the people , just as the Lord had commanded through Moses .

ID:	1177
INPUT:	Gainera , aker bat barkamen-oparitarako , Barkamen Egun handiko barkamen-opariaz eta eguneroko erre-opariez gain , berauei dagozkien labore- eta isur-opariekin .
PRED:	and one male goat for a sin offering , and for a sin offering , and for the burnt offering , and for the burnt offering , and for the burnt offering , and for the burnt offering .
GOLD:	You must also sacrifice one male goat for a sin offering . This is in addition to the sin offering of atonement and the regular daily burnt offering with its grain offering , and their accompanying liquid offerings .

ID:	1178
INPUT:	Jende xehea larrutzen duzue , gari-zerga ordaintzera behartuz . Harlanduzko etxeak egin dituzue , baina ez zarete berorietan biziko ; mahasti bikainak landatu , baina ez duzueberorien ardorik edango .
PRED:	You have made the people of the land for a grain offering . You have made the houses of silver , but you are not to live in them , but you do not drink the wine of their wine .
GOLD:	You trample the poor , stealing their grain through taxes and unfair rent.Therefore , though you build beautiful stone houses , you will never live in them.Though you plant lush vineyards , you will never drink wine from them .

ID:	1179
INPUT:	Kea zerion sudurretik , su kiskalgarria , ikatz goriak ahotik .
PRED:	They were afraid of the fire , and fire came out of the fire .
GOLD:	He opened the heavens and came down ; dark storm clouds were beneath his feet .

ID:	1180
INPUT:	Jainko santuak galdetzen dizue : « Norekin konparatuko nauzue , norekin berdinduko ? »
PRED:	You say to them , “ What will you know me ? ”
GOLD:	“ To whom will you compare me ? Who is my equal ? ” asks the Holy One .

ID:	1181
INPUT:	Ukendu hau nire gorputzean isuriz , hilobiratua izateko prestatu nau aurrez .
PRED:	When I had taken away my body from my body , he made me a tomb for my body .
GOLD:	She has poured this perfume on me to prepare my body for burial .

ID:	1182
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zuen : — Kendu harria . Martak , Lazaro zenaren arrebak , erantzun zion : — Jauna , kiratsa botako du , lau egun daramatza eta .
PRED:	Jesus said , “ Take away the stone . Mary 's sister Mary 's sister Lazarus answered , “ Lord , he will bring seven days . ”
GOLD:	“ Roll the stone aside , ” Jesus told them.But Martha , the dead man 's sister , protested , “ Lord , he has been dead for four days . The smell will be terrible . ”

ID:	1183
INPUT:	Zeure haserre-suminez , gora jaso eta lurrera jaurti nauzu .
PRED:	You have taken me into your anger , and cast me into the ground .
GOLD:	My life passes as swiftly as the evening shadows.I am withering away like grass .

ID:	1184
INPUT:	Piztu da Jaunaren haserre-suminaeta artegi oparoak deseginak dira .
PRED:	The anger of the Lord is kindled , and the bread of the Lord is full of bread .
GOLD:	Peaceful meadows will be turned into a wastelandby the Lord 's fierce anger .

ID:	1185
INPUT:	Orduan , Jainkoak ur-putzu bat ikusarazi zion Agarri . Honek zahatoa urez bete eta edaten eman zion mutikoari .
PRED:	Then God saw a well of water , and he gave it to the boy , and gave it to the boy .
GOLD:	Then God opened Hagar 's eyes , and she saw a well full of water . She quickly filled her water container and gave the boy a drink .

ID:	1186
INPUT:	Baina hori guztia erdiminen hasiera da .
PRED:	But all these things shall come to pass , and it shall come to pass .
GOLD:	But all this is only the first of the birth pains , with more to come .

ID:	1187
INPUT:	Apaizak ezpataz erori ziren , eta alargunek hiletarik jo ez .
PRED:	And the priest struck them with the sword , and the widow did not escape .
GOLD:	Their priests were slaughtered , and their widows could not mourn their deaths .

ID:	1188
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak zuen Jainkoak ez zion aditu nahi izan Balaami , eta haren madarikazioa bedeinkazio bihurtu zuen , maite zaituztelako .
PRED:	But the Lord your God would not listen to Balaam , and blessed him , because he loved you , because he loved you .
GOLD:	As long as you live , you must never promote the welfare and prosperity of the Ammonites or Moabites .

ID:	1189
INPUT:	Gizon ezereza zelako ez zioten justiziarik egin . Nork aipatuko du haren ondorengotza ? Erauzi egin baitzuten haren bizia lurretik .
PRED:	For there was no righteous man in righteousness ; who shall give his seed to him ? for they lived from the earth .
GOLD:	He was humiliated and received no justice.Who can speak of his descendants ? For his life was taken from the earth . ”

ID:	1190
INPUT:	Bazenekiten beraiek izan zirela , Balaamek zirikaturik , israeldarrak Jaunaren aurka altxarazi zituztenak , Peorko hartan ; horregatik , hain zuzen , gertatu zen izurria Jaunaren elkartearen aurka .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when Balaam heard that Balaam had sinned against the sons of Israel , that they fought against the Lord , that he was a plague against the congregation of the congregation of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ These are the very ones who followed Balaam 's advice and caused the people of Israel to rebel against the Lord at Mount Peor . They are the ones who caused the plague to strike the Lord 's people .

ID:	1191
INPUT:	Samuelek lo egin zuen egunsentia arte . Goizean ireki zuen Jaunaren etxeko atea . Baina beldur zen ikuskaria Eliri adierazteko .
PRED:	Samuel opened the morning until evening , and opened the door of the house of the Lord . But he feared the vision .
GOLD:	Samuel stayed in bed until morning , then got up and opened the doors of the Tabernacle as usual . He was afraid to tell Eli what the Lord had said to him .

ID:	1192
INPUT:	Eutsi sendo ! Gogor egin behar dugu geure herriaren eta geure Jainkoaren hiriaren alde ! Egin beza Jaunak ongi deritzona !
PRED:	Be strong , and let us be strong , and let our people go away from the city of our God , and let them do good .
GOLD:	Be courageous ! Let us fight bravely for our people and the cities of our God . May the Lord 's will be done . ”

ID:	1193
INPUT:	Izan saiatuak eta ez nagi ; izan gogoz kartsu , Jauna zerbitzatzeko beti prest .
PRED:	Remember not , but be strong , but be strong , that ye may serve the Lord forever .
GOLD:	Never be lazy , but work hard and serve the Lord enthusiastically .

ID:	1194
INPUT:	Jaunaren aintza tenpluko sarreratik altxatu zen eta kerubinen gainean kokatu .
PRED:	And the glory of the Lord rose up from the entrance of the house of the Lord , and stood on the top of the house .
GOLD:	Then the glory of the Lord moved out from the entrance of the Temple and hovered above the cherubim .

ID:	1195
INPUT:	Baina profeta zen eta bazekien hark Jainkoak zin eginez hitzeman ziona : beraren odoleko bat ezarriko zuela bere tronuan .
PRED:	But he was the prophet and the prophet , and he swore to him , saying , “ He will put his blood on his throne . ”
GOLD:	But he was a prophet , and he knew God had promised with an oath that one of David 's own descendants would sit on his throne .

ID:	1196
INPUT:	Orain zeure esku gaituzu : egiguzu on eta zuzen iruditzen zaizuna .
PRED:	Now we are in your hand , and you are good , and you are righteous .
GOLD:	Now we are at your mercy — do to us whatever you think is right . ”

ID:	1197
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Utz nazazu , oraindik ez bainaiz igo Aitarengana . Ea , zoaz nire senideengana eta esaiezu neure eta zuen Aitarengana noala , neure eta zuen Jainkoarengana .
PRED:	Jesus said to him , “ Let me go to the Father , for I will not go to my Father , and tell my Father , and go to my Father and to my Father . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't cling to me , ” Jesus said , “ for I have n't yet ascended to the Father . But go find my brothers and tell them , ‘ I am ascending to my Father and your Father , to my God and your God . ' ”

ID:	1198
INPUT:	Orduan , erregeak , pozaren pozez , Daniel zulotik ateratzeko agindu zuen . Atera zutenean , ez zuen urratu bat ere , Jainkoarengan jarri baitzuen bere uste ona .
PRED:	Then the king commanded him to bring him out of Babylon . When he had brought him out of Babylon , he did not trust in God .
GOLD:	Then the king gave orders to arrest the men who had maliciously accused Daniel . He had them thrown into the lions ' den , along with their wives and children . The lions leaped on them and tore them apart before they even hit the floor of the den .

ID:	1199
INPUT:	Hark bere hitza lurrera bidalieta arin lehiatzen da bere helburura .
PRED:	And he sent his word into the earth , and his tongue cometh into his head .
GOLD:	He sends his orders to the world — how swiftly his word flies !

ID:	1200
INPUT:	baizik eta joan Israel herriko ardi galduengana .
PRED:	but he went to the elders of Israel , and to the sheep of Israel .
GOLD:	but only to the people of Israel — God 's lost sheep .

ID:	1201
INPUT:	Ez da santurik Jauna bezalakorik , ez da , izan ere , zu besterik , ez da harkai<unk> gure Jainkoa adinakorik .
PRED:	There is no holy thing like the Lord , for there is no one like you , but there is no one like God .
GOLD:	No one is holy like the Lord ! There is no one besides you ; there is no Rock like our God .

ID:	1202
INPUT:	Moisesek eta Aaronek Jaunak agindua egin zuten . Aaronek makila altxatu eta ibaiko ura jo zuen faraoiaren eta funtzionarioen begi aurrean , eta ura odol bihurtu zen .
PRED:	Moses and Aaron did as the Lord had commanded him . Aaron took the water and water in front of Pharaoh and his officials .
GOLD:	So Moses and Aaron did just as the Lord commanded them . As Pharaoh and all of his officials watched , Aaron raised his staff and struck the water of the Nile . Suddenly , the whole river turned to blood !

ID:	1203
INPUT:	Zeure merkataritza oparoagatik , indarkeriaz bete eta bekatu egin zenuen . Horregatik , zeure postutik kendu eta bota egin zintudan menditik , eta kerubin babesle zinen hori ikatz gorien artetik kendu .
PRED:	And thou hast sinned , and hast sinned , and hast sinned ; therefore hast I taken thee away from the mountains , and hast taken thee away from the mountains , and I have taken thee away from the midst of them .
GOLD:	Your rich commerce led you to violence , and you sinned.So I banished you in disgracefrom the mountain of God.I expelled you , O mighty guardian , from your place among the stones of fire .

ID:	1204
INPUT:	Orduan , nik esan diet : « Ba al du inork urrerik ? » Haiek urrea bildu eta ekarri egin didate ; nik sutara bota eta , hara , zekor hau atera da !
PRED:	And I said unto them , Who is there any man ? And they gathered the gold , and cast them into the fire , and cast them into the fire .
GOLD:	So I told them , ‘ Whoever has gold jewelry , take it off . ' When they brought it to me , I simply threw it into the fire — and out came this calf ! ”

ID:	1205
INPUT:	Baztertu nautelako , jainko arrotzei intsentsua erre dietelako eta idoloak eginez iraindu nautelako , sutu egin zait haserrea toki honen kontra eta ez zait itzaliko ” .
PRED:	For they have turned away from me , because they have made incense to other gods , because they have made me angry , and have made me angry against this place , and I will not turn away from me .
GOLD:	For my people have abandoned me and offered sacrifices to pagan gods , and I am very angry with them for everything they have done . My anger will be poured out on this place , and it will not be quenched . '

ID:	1206
INPUT:	Paulok , orduan : — Anaiok , ez nekien apaiz nagusia zenik . Bai , Liburu Santuak dio : Ez madarikatuzeure herriko buruzagia .
PRED:	Paul said to them , “ My brothers , I do n't know the high priest . For it is written , “ Yes , you will not curse the ruler of your people . ”
GOLD:	“ I 'm sorry , brothers . I did n't realize he was the high priest , ” Paul replied , “ for the Scriptures say , ‘ You must not speak evil of any of your rulers . ' ”

ID:	1207
INPUT:	Larra ezazu , Jauna , artzain-makilazzeure herria , zeurea duzun artaldea ; bakarrik eta sastraka arteanbizi baita , inguruan lur emankorrakdituen arren . Larra bedi Baxan eta Galaadekolur marduletan , antzina bezala .
PRED:	O Lord , thou art thy people , and thy pasture , and thy flock , and thy flock , and thy pasture , and thy flock , and thy pasture , and all Bashan round about thee , as in the land of Gilead .
GOLD:	O Lord , protect your people with your shepherd 's staff ; lead your flock , your special possession.Though they live alone in a thicketon the heights of Mount Carmel , let them graze in the fertile pastures of Bashan and Gileadas they did long ago .

ID:	1208
INPUT:	baita Hexbon eta lautadako hiri guztiak ere : Dibon , Bamot-Baal , Bet-Baal-Meon ,
PRED:	and all the cities of Heshbon and the cities of Heshbon , the sons of Sihon , the wife of Heshbon , the king of Heshbon , the king of Heshbon , the king of Heshbon , the king of Heshbon , the king of Heshbon , the king of Heshbon , and the cities of Heshbon .
GOLD:	It included Heshbon and the other towns on the plain — Dibon , Bamoth-baal , Beth-baal-meon ,

ID:	1209
INPUT:	entzun zuk zerutik , bizi zaren toki horretatik , beraien otoitza eta eskaria , eta egiezu zuzenbide .
PRED:	And thou shalt hear from heaven , and pray , and pray , and pray , and pray unto them .
GOLD:	then hear their prayers and their petition from heaven where you live , and uphold their cause .

ID:	1210
INPUT:	horrela jokatuz , ez al zarete zeuen artean bereizkeriak egiten ari , eta ez al duzue irizpide okerrez epaitzen ?
PRED:	Do you not do what is right among you ? Do n't you judge the truth ? Do n't you judge the truth ?
GOLD:	does n't this discrimination show that your judgments are guided by evil motives ?

ID:	1211
INPUT:	Josue , hain zuzen , soineko zikinez jantzia zegoen , aingeruaren aurrean zutik .
PRED:	And Joshua was clothed with his clothes , and he was clothed in front of the angel .
GOLD:	Jeshua 's clothing was filthy as he stood there before the angel .

ID:	1212
INPUT:	Gizon zintzo hau gaizkile haien artean bizi zen , eta egunero ikusi eta entzun behar izan zituen itsuskeriek atsekabez betetzen zioten bere bihotz zintzoa .
PRED:	This man lived among them , and they saw the evil man among them , and they had heard their wickedness , and their heart was filled with their heart .
GOLD:	Yes , Lot was a righteous man who was tormented in his soul by the wickedness he saw and heard day after day .

ID:	1213
INPUT:	Zin egin nizun , bai , Jaunarengatik , Israelen Jainkoarengatik , zure seme Salomon izanen zela nire ondorengo erregea eta bera jarriko zela nire errege-aulkian . Hara , gaur beteko dut zin hura !
PRED:	I swore to you for the Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , and you will be my son Solomon , and he will sit on my throne .
GOLD:	your son Solomon will be the next king and will sit on my throne this very day , just as I vowed to you before the Lord , the God of Israel . ”

ID:	1214
INPUT:	Davidena . Eskerrak ematen dizkizut , Jauna , bihotz-bihotzez , beste jainkoen aurrean zu kantuz ospatzen .
PRED:	I will give thanks to you , O Lord , with all my heart , with all my heart , with all my heart , and with all my heart .
GOLD:	I give you thanks , O Lord , with all my heart ; I will sing your praises before the gods .

ID:	1215
INPUT:	Ez gorde hiri horretako ezertxo ere , Jaunak bere haserrea baretu eta errukia azal diezazuen ; orduan , gupidaturik , ugaldu egingo zaituzte , zuen arbasoei zin egin bezala ;
PRED:	Do n't do any of these cities , because the Lord has mercy on you , and he has mercy on you , as he swore to your fathers .
GOLD:	“ The Lord your God will be merciful only if you listen to his voice and keep all his commands that I am giving you today , doing what pleases him .

ID:	1216
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Itsu bazinete , ez zenukete bekaturik izango ; baina ikusten duzuela diozuenez , zeuen bekatuzko egoeran irauten duzue .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ If you were blind , you will not sin . But if you see him , you will remember him , and you will remember him . ”
GOLD:	“ If you were blind , you would n't be guilty , ” Jesus replied . “ But you remain guilty because you claim you can see .

ID:	1217
INPUT:	Aurpegi ematen die Jaunak gaizkileei , lur gainetik ezabatzeko haien oroitzapena .
PRED:	The Lord will turn his face against the wicked , and he will be his servant from the earth .
GOLD:	The Lord hears his people when they call to him for help.He rescues them from all their troubles .

ID:	1218
INPUT:	Zilarrezko txanpon erdia balio zuen goldea nahiz aitzurra , sardea nahiz eztena zorrozteak .
PRED:	And if he had a silver , he would give it to his father , or his brother , or his brother , or his brother , or his ox .
GOLD:	The charges were as follows : a quarter of an ounce of silver for sharpening a plowshare or a pick , and an eighth of an ounce for sharpening an ax or making the point of an ox goad .

ID:	1219
INPUT:	Hormetako harriek ereoihu egingo dute zure aurka , eta zurezko habeekoihartzun egingo diete .
PRED:	The stones will cry out to you , and they will cry out to you , and they will answer you with gold .
GOLD:	The very stones in the walls cry out against you , and the beams in the ceilings echo the complaint .

ID:	1220
INPUT:	Zazpi egunez , ahuntz , zezen eta ahari bana eskainiko dituzu egunero , denak akats gabeak , barkamen-oparitzat .
PRED:	And thou shalt offer seven days , and a ram , and a ram , and a ram , and a ram without blemish , and a ram without blemish .
GOLD:	“ Every day for seven days a male goat , a young bull , and a ram from the flock will be sacrificed as a sin offering . None of these animals may have physical defects of any kind .

ID:	1221
INPUT:	Ez dituzue atzean utzitako mahats-hondarrak bilduko , ezta lurrera eroritakoak jasotzen ibiliko ere . Pobreentzat eta etorkinentzat utziko dituzue . Neu naiz Jauna , zuen Jainkoa .
PRED:	You shall not leave the grapes of the grapes of the grapes of the grapes , nor gather the harvest of the earth , nor shall you gather the money of the earth ; I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	It is the same with your grape crop — do not strip every last bunch of grapes from the vines , and do not pick up the grapes that fall to the ground . Leave them for the poor and the foreigners living among you . I am the Lord your God .

ID:	1222
INPUT:	Basamorturik basamortuen bihurtuko dut Egipto , bertako hiriak hiri guztien artean hondatuenak izango dira berrogei urtez , eta atzerriko nazio eta herrialdeen artean sakabanatuko ditut egiptoarrak .
PRED:	And I will make the land of Egypt for forty years , and all the cities of the land of Egypt shall be destroyed , and I will scatter the Egyptians for forty years .
GOLD:	I will make Egypt desolate , and it will be surrounded by other desolate nations . Its cities will be empty and desolate for forty years , surrounded by other ruined cities . I will scatter the Egyptians to distant lands .

ID:	1223
INPUT:	Hitz hauek esatearekin batera , mintzo hau entzun zen zerutik : « Nabukodonosor errege , entzun : Galdua duzu zeure erregetza !
PRED:	When Nebuchadnezzar heard these words , he said to him , “ You have heard the king of heaven . You have heard your kingdom .
GOLD:	“ But all these things did happen to King Nebuchadnezzar .

ID:	1224
INPUT:	Kea irteten zaio sudurretik , bor-bor irakiten dagoen pertzetik bezala .
PRED:	They will come out of the fire , as they go out of the fire .
GOLD:	“ I want to emphasize Leviathan 's limbsand its enormous strength and graceful form .

ID:	1225
INPUT:	Damaskotik etorri eta aldarea ikustean , erregeak , aldarera igoz ,
PRED:	When the king came from Damascus , when he saw the altar and the altar , he went to the altar .
GOLD:	When the king returned , he inspected the altar and made offerings on it .

ID:	1226
INPUT:	Ikararen ikaraz , hau pentsatu nuen : « Bere begi-bistatik bota egin nau Jaunak » . Zuk , ordea , entzun zenuen nire erregua , laguntza eske deiadar egin nizunean .
PRED:	Then I said to them , “ The Lord has brought me out of his eyes , but you heard my cry , and you heard my cry .
GOLD:	Love the Lord , all you godly ones ! For the Lord protects those who are loyal to him , but he harshly punishes the arrogant .

ID:	1227
INPUT:	Lorategiak eta baratzeakatondu nituen , mota orotako zuhaitzak sartuz .
PRED:	And I made the work of Lot , and put them in pieces , and put them in the midst of the house .
GOLD:	I made gardens and parks , filling them with all kinds of fruit trees .

ID:	1228
INPUT:	Horra zer etekinemango dizuten aztiek , gaztetandik ardurazzaindu dituzun horiek . Bakoitza bere bidetik galduko da , eta zu salbatzeko inor ez .
PRED:	This is what the birds will give you , and you will keep them from the youth , and you will be saved by their own way .
GOLD:	And all your friends , those with whom you 've done business since childhood , will go their own ways , turning a deaf ear to your cries .

ID:	1229
INPUT:	Lurrinaren ordez kiratsaizango dute , gerrikoaren ordez soka , ile-txirikorda dotoreen ordezburusoila , jantzi finen ordez zakukia , edertasunaren ordezburdin goriaren marka .
PRED:	And they shall be taken by the sword of the earth , and the glory of the glory of the slain , and the head of the glory of the glory of the glory of the glory of the earth , and the glory of the glory of the glory of the glory of iron .
GOLD:	Instead of smelling of sweet perfume , she will stink.She will wear a rope for a sash , and her elegant hair will fall out.She will wear rough burlap instead of rich robes.Shame will replace her beauty .

ID:	1230
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi Moabeko lautadan , Jordan ondoan , Jeriko parean :
PRED:	And Jehovah spake unto Moses in the valley of Moab , in the valley of Moab , in the valley of Jericho , saying ,
GOLD:	While Israel was camped beside the Jordan on the plains of Moab across from Jericho , the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1231
INPUT:	eta Jerusalemen eta beste hiri guztietan hauxe iragarri behar zutela : « Atera mendira eta ekarri handik olibondo , pinu , mirto , palmondo eta orridun zuhaitzen adarrak , etxolak egiteko » .
PRED:	and in Jerusalem , and in all the cities of Jerusalem , saying , “ Bring olive oil , olive oil , olive oil , olive oil , olive oil , olive oil , and olive oil . ”
GOLD:	He had said that a proclamation should be made throughout their towns and in Jerusalem , telling the people to go to the hills to get branches from olive , wild olive , myrtle , palm , and other leafy trees . They were to use these branches to make shelters in which they would live during the festival , as prescribed in the Law .

ID:	1232
INPUT:	Apolo anaiari dagokionez , behin eta berriz eskatu nion senideekin zuengana joateko , baina oraingoz ez du joan nahi izan . Joango da , egokiera izango duenean .
PRED:	But if he is a brother , he asked his brother to you , he would not go to you . But when he comes , he will go .
GOLD:	Now about our brother Apollos — I urged him to visit you with the other believers , but he was not willing to go right now . He will see you later when he has the opportunity .

ID:	1233
INPUT:	Eskaintzaileak erantzuten zion : — Erre daitezela lehenbizi gantzak , ohi den bezala ; hartu gero nahi duzun guztia . Morroiak , aldiz : — Inola ere ez ! Emadazu berehala ; bestela , indarrez kenduko dizut .
PRED:	The man said to him , “ Let them live first , just as you want to do . ” But the servant said to him , “ Do n't give me anything . I will take away from you . ”
GOLD:	The man offering the sacrifice might reply , “ Take as much as you want , but the fat must be burned first . ” Then the servant would demand , “ No , give it to me now , or I 'll take it by force . ”

ID:	1234
INPUT:	Adamen beste seme bat
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The Birth of Seth

ID:	1235
INPUT:	Orduan , esan nien : « Ez dut jarraitu nahi zuek larratzen . Hil behar duena , hil dadila ! Galdu behar duena , gal dadila ! Geratzen direnek , jan dezatela elkar ! »
PRED:	Then I said to them , “ I do n't want to kill you . If you want to die , let them die , let them die . ”
GOLD:	So I told them , “ I wo n't be your shepherd any longer . If you die , you die . If you are killed , you are killed . And let those who remain devour each other ! ”

ID:	1236
INPUT:	Ez al da izan atzerritar hau besterik Jainkoa goratzera etortzeko ? »
PRED:	Is n't there any other foreigners come to praise God ? ”
GOLD:	Has no one returned to give glory to God except this foreigner ? ”

ID:	1237
INPUT:	« Hartu lebitarrak israeldarren lehen-seme guztien ordez eta lebitarren abereak israeldarrenen ordez : neureak ditut lebitarrak . Neu naiz Jauna .
PRED:	“ Take the Levites and all the firstborn of the firstborn of the sons of Israel . I am the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Take the Levites as substitutes for the firstborn sons of the people of Israel . And take the livestock of the Levites as substitutes for the firstborn livestock of the people of Israel . The Levites belong to me ; I am the Lord .

ID:	1238
INPUT:	Hark begiratu zuen , eta erantzun : — Gizonak-edo nabaritzen ditut : zuhaitzak dirudite , baina ibili dabiltza .
PRED:	And he looked , and said , “ If men or one of them , I say to you , ‘ They are their words , but they sent them . '
GOLD:	The man looked around . “ Yes , ” he said , “ I see people , but I ca n't see them very clearly . They look like trees walking around . ”

ID:	1239
INPUT:	« Zintzo izango zaidan apaiz bat dut sorraraziko ; nire nahiaren arabera du hark jardungo . Ondorengotza iraunkorra emango diot eta nire gantzutuaren zerbitzuan ibiliko da beti .
PRED:	“ I will be a priest who is righteous priest , and he will be his priest . He will serve him , and I will serve him and serve him forever .
GOLD:	“ Then I will raise up a faithful priest who will serve me and do what I desire . I will establish his family , and they will be priests to my anointed kings forever .

ID:	1240
INPUT:	Jaunak agintzaria berritu Abrahami
PRED:	The
GOLD:	Abram Is Named Abraham

ID:	1241
INPUT:	Hobe luke errotarri bat lepotik lotu eta itsasora botako balute , txiki hauetakoren bat galbidean jartzea baino .
PRED:	It is better to be better than a man who has been cut off from the sea to be cut off from the sea .
GOLD:	It would be better to be thrown into the sea with a millstone hung around your neck than to cause one of these little ones to fall into sin .

ID:	1242
INPUT:	Neuk gerizatuko duteta salbatuko hiri hau , naizena naizenagatiketa neure zerbitzari Davidengatik ” » .
PRED:	And I will make him a city , and I will save this city for my servant David . ”
GOLD:	For my own honor and for the sake of my servant David , I will defend this city and protect it . ”

ID:	1243
INPUT:	Gaiztoa bere gezurretan geratzen da harrapatua , zintzoak ihes egiten dio arriskuari .
PRED:	A wicked man is a snare in his own own own lips , but the righteous fled .
GOLD:	The wicked are trapped by their own words , but the godly escape such trouble .

ID:	1244
INPUT:	Zuen jendea ugalduko dut , Israel herri osoa . Hiri hondatuak berreraiki eta berriz jendea biziko da berorietan .
PRED:	And I will multiply all the house of Israel , and all the house of Israel shall be built , and the people shall dwell in their land .
GOLD:	I will greatly increase the population of Israel , and the ruined cities will be rebuilt and filled with people .

ID:	1245
INPUT:	Luzaroegi ibili zarete jadanik mendialde horren inguruan ; jo ezazue iparraldera !
PRED:	You have sent for me a long time around the mountain , and you will go to the north .
GOLD:	‘ You have been wandering around in this hill country long enough ; turn to the north .

ID:	1246
INPUT:	orobat garbituko ditut , niri , Jaun honi , bizkar emanik , bilatzen ez nautenaketa niregana jotzen ez dutenak » .
PRED:	And I will wash one of them that seek me , saith the Lord ; and they that seek me shall not go to me .
GOLD:	And I will destroy those who used to worship mebut now no longer do.They no longer ask for the Lord 's guidanceor seek my blessings . ”

ID:	1247
INPUT:	Asko eta asko ikaratu ziren hartaz , hain baitzegoen itxuragabetua , giza antzik ere gabe , gizaki ez zirudiela ;
PRED:	Many of them were afraid of many things , because there was no man , neither was there any man , nor man .
GOLD:	But many were amazed when they saw him.His face was so disfigured he seemed hardly human , and from his appearance , one would scarcely know he was a man .

ID:	1248
INPUT:	« Baina begira , nirekin mahaian dago salduko nauena .
PRED:	“ Look at me , he who is with me will be saved with me .
GOLD:	“ But here at this table , sitting among us as a friend , is the man who will betray me .

ID:	1249
INPUT:	erabat ziur baitzegoen hark hitzemana betetzeko zuen ahalmenaz .
PRED:	For he was able to give him power to give him power .
GOLD:	He was fully convinced that God is able to do whatever he promises .

ID:	1250
INPUT:	« Zu , Jakoben herri , ez izan beldur ! Ez izutu , Israel , ene zerbitzari hori ! Neuk aterako zaitutbizi zaren urrutiko erbestetik , zeure seme-alabekin batera . Itzuliko zara eta lasai biziko , seguru egongo , inolako kezkarik gabe .
PRED:	“ You , Jacob , do n't be afraid . Do n't be afraid , my servant , Israel , and I will bring you away from far away , and I will bring you back to captivity , and you will live there .
GOLD:	“ But do not be afraid , Jacob , my servant ; do not be dismayed , Israel.For I will bring you home again from distant lands , and your children will return from their exile.Israel will return to a life of peace and quiet , and no one will terrorize them .

ID:	1251
INPUT:	Hurrengo urtean , beraz , zenbatu zituen Ben-Hadadek siriarrak , eta Afekera igo zen Israel borrokatzera .
PRED:	And it came to pass at the end of the year , that Amaziah sent the Syrians to fight against Israel .
GOLD:	The following spring he called up the Aramean army and marched out against Israel , this time at Aphek .

ID:	1252
INPUT:	« Ez zaitzatela engaina Ezekiasek , ezin izango baitzaituzte libratu nire eskutik .
PRED:	Do not let Hezekiah deceive you , for he will not deliver you out of my hand .
GOLD:	This is what the king says : Do n't let Hezekiah deceive you . He will never be able to rescue you from my power .

ID:	1253
INPUT:	Poztu ziren barealdiazeta beren gogoko portura eraman zituen Jainkoak .
PRED:	And they were glad , and they were glad ; and God brought them into their heart .
GOLD:	What a blessing was that stillnessas he brought them safely into harbor !

ID:	1254
INPUT:	Moisesek erantzun zion : — Herria niregana dator , Jainkoaren nahia ezagutzeko .
PRED:	And Moses said unto the people , Come unto me , that I may know the will of God .
GOLD:	Moses replied , “ Because the people come to me to get a ruling from God .

ID:	1255
INPUT:	Emakumeak isilik eta mendetasun osoz entzun behar du irakaspena .
PRED:	The woman must hear the law and obey the law of all her soul .
GOLD:	Women should learn quietly and submissively .

ID:	1256
INPUT:	Zeren munduaren hasieratik orain arte izan ez den eta izango ez den bezalako larrialdi handia izango baita orduan .
PRED:	For the beginning of the world shall be no more than the beginning of the world , for it shall be a great great multitude .
GOLD:	For there will be greater anguish than at any time since the world began . And it will never be so great again .

ID:	1257
INPUT:	« Asko dira emakume jatorrak , baina zuk ez duzu parekorik ! »
PRED:	“ Many women are many women , but you have no burnt offering . ”
GOLD:	“ There are many virtuous and capable women in the world , but you surpass them all ! ”

ID:	1258
INPUT:	edo : Nor jaitsiko da leizera ? — Kristo hildakoen artetik igoarazteko , alegia — .
PRED:	“ Who will go down ? ” he said , “ Who will go down from the dead ? ”
GOLD:	And do n't say , ‘ Who will go down to the place of the dead ? ' ( to bring Christ back to life again ) . ”

ID:	1259
INPUT:	Orduan , mutilaren aitak deiadarka : — Sinetsi nahi dut ! Lagundu sinesgabe honi .
PRED:	Then the father cried out , “ Simon , I want you to believe this . ”
GOLD:	The father instantly cried out , “ I do believe , but help me overcome my unbelief ! ”

ID:	1260
INPUT:	Jainkoak agertu zien , egiten zuten profezi lana ez zutela berentzat egiten , zuentzat baizik . Eta haiek adierazia , zerutik bidalitako Espiritu Santuaren eraginez berri ona hots egiten dizuetenek iragartzen dizuete orain . Aingeruak berak ere gauza horiek ikusteko irrikaz daude .
PRED:	And God appeared to them , as they did not do , but to you , but to them that speak unto you ; and they speak the word of the Holy Spirit , which are sent by the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	They were told that their messages were not for themselves , but for you . And now this Good News has been announced to you by those who preached in the power of the Holy Spirit sent from heaven . It is all so wonderful that even the angels are eagerly watching these things happen .

ID:	1261
INPUT:	eta , haren sutearen ke-mordoa ikustean , honela egin zuten oihu : « Hiri handi horrek ez zuen parekorik ! »
PRED:	When they saw the fire of his fire , they cried out , “ This city was no great city . ”
GOLD:	They will cry out as they watch the smoke ascend , and they will say , “ Where is there another city as great as this ? ”

ID:	1262
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Ez al dago zuen Liburu Santuetan idatzia : Nik esan dut : Jainko zarete ?
PRED:	Jesus answered them , “ Is n't it written , ‘ You are God ? '
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ It is written in your own Scriptures that God said to certain leaders of the people , ‘ I say , you are gods ! '

ID:	1263
INPUT:	Jaunaren eguna
PRED:	The
GOLD:	's Future Reign

ID:	1264
INPUT:	Abigail , David ikusi orduko , asto gainetik bizkor jaitsi eta makurtu egin zen Daviden aitzinean , lurreraino ahuspeztuz .
PRED:	When she saw David , she ran down from the donkey and bowed down to the ground .
GOLD:	When Abigail saw David , she quickly got off her donkey and bowed low before him .

ID:	1265
INPUT:	Zifekoak Gibeara etorri ziren Saulengana , esatera : « Ez al dakizu David Hakila mendixkan , basamortu-ertzean , dagoela gordea ? »
PRED:	The men of Bethel came to Saul , saying , “ Do n't you know that David is in the wilderness ? ”
GOLD:	Now some men from Ziph came to Saul at Gibeah to tell him , “ David is hiding on the hill of Hakilah , which overlooks Jeshimon . ”

ID:	1266
INPUT:	sarea bezala eroriko baita munduan bizi diren guztien gainera .
PRED:	For as the beasts of the earth shall fall upon all the inhabitants of the earth .
GOLD:	like a trap . For that day will come upon everyone living on the earth .

ID:	1267
INPUT:	Beraz , maita dezagun , Jainkoak maitatu baikintuen lehenik .
PRED:	Therefore , let us know that God loved the first one whom God loved .
GOLD:	We love each other because he loved us first .

ID:	1268
INPUT:	Hartu zituen Moisesek gurdiak eta idiak eta lebitarrei banatu zizkien :
PRED:	And Moses took the chariots and the oxen , and the Levites , and the Levites , saying ,
GOLD:	So Moses took the wagons and oxen and presented them to the Levites .

ID:	1269
INPUT:	hau Amariasena , hau Azariasena , hau Meraiotena ,
PRED:	the son of Elioenai , the son of Elioenai , the son of Elioenai , the son of Elioenai ,
GOLD:	son of Amariah , son of Azariah , son of Meraioth ,

ID:	1270
INPUT:	Horrela , Jaunak handik bota eta mundu zabalean sakabanatu zituen ; hiria eraikitzeari utzi egin behar izan zioten .
PRED:	So the Lord scattered them out of the earth and scattered them in the field , so that they would build the city .
GOLD:	In that way , the Lord scattered them all over the world , and they stopped building the city .

ID:	1271
INPUT:	— Zoazte eta kontsulta egin Jaunari nire izenean eta Israelen bizirik gelditutakoen eta Judakoen izenean , aurkitu duten liburu honek dioenaz . Izan ere , haserre bizitan egon behar du Jaunak gurekin , gure arbasoek Jaunaren hitzari kasurik egin ez diotelako eta liburu honetan idatzia bete ez dutelako .
PRED:	“ Go and ask the Lord in my name , and live in the name of the Lord , and in the name of the remnant of the remnant of Judah , and in the book of the Lord , and in the book of our fathers , and in the book of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Go to the Temple and speak to the Lord for me and for all the remnant of Israel and Judah . Inquire about the words written in the scroll that has been found . For the Lord 's great anger has been poured out on us because our ancestors have not obeyed the word of the Lord . We have not been doing everything this scroll says we must do . ”

ID:	1272
INPUT:	Jainkoaren zigorraren zazpi ontziak
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The Seven Bowls of the Seven Plagues

ID:	1273
INPUT:	Eta Kristo pizturik ez badago , funtsik gabea da gure predikua eta zentzurik gabea zuen sinesmena .
PRED:	And if Christ is raised from the dead , our faith is no more , and your faith is no more .
GOLD:	And if Christ has not been raised , then all our preaching is useless , and your faith is useless .

ID:	1274
INPUT:	Aurkitu duzu bere lanean trebea den norbait ? Erregeen zerbitzura egongo daeta ez edonolako jendearenera .
PRED:	Have you found a wise man in his own hand ? He is to serve the king , and not to the people .
GOLD:	Do you see any truly competent workers ? They will serve kingsrather than working for ordinary people .

ID:	1275
INPUT:	neure lehengusu Hanamelen aurrean eta agiria izenpetu zuten lekukoen eta kartzela-atarian suertatu ziren judatarren aurrean , Neriasen seme eta Mahseiasen biloba Baruki eman nizkion .
PRED:	I made my first covenant in front of the Jews , and they burned incense in the fire of the Jews , the son of Hilkiah , the son of Maaseiah , the son of Maaseiah , the son of Maaseiah , and the son of Maaseiah .
GOLD:	and I handed them to Baruch son of Neriah and grandson of Mahseiah . I did all this in the presence of my cousin Hanamel , the witnesses who had signed the deed , and all the men of Judah who were there in the courtyard of the guardhouse .

ID:	1276
INPUT:	Agurtu eta bi opil emango dizkizuete ; hartu .
PRED:	And thou shalt make two loaves of bread , and thou shalt take them .
GOLD:	They will greet you and offer you two of the loaves , which you are to accept .

ID:	1277
INPUT:	Bi lapur gurutziltzatu zituzten Jesusekin batera , bata eskuinean eta bestea ezkerrean .
PRED:	And they crucified two days with Jesus , and one on his right hand and one on his left hand .
GOLD:	Two revolutionaries were crucified with him , one on his right and one on his left .

ID:	1278
INPUT:	Gizon hauek gizakiak berezko duen heriotzaz hiltzen badira , Jaunak bidali ez nauen seinalea ;
PRED:	If men die , they will die by death , the Lord will not send me to death .
GOLD:	If these men die a natural death , or if nothing unusual happens , then the Lord has not sent me .

ID:	1279
INPUT:	Galaadeko arduradunek erantzun zioten : — Jauna testigu , zuk esan bezala egiten ez badugu .
PRED:	The leaders of Gilead answered , “ Lord , if we do n't do what you say , we do n't do . ”
GOLD:	“ The Lord is our witness , ” the elders replied . “ We promise to do whatever you say . ”

ID:	1280
INPUT:	Jakobek erantzun zion : — Ongi dakizu zenbat lan egin dudan zuretzat eta zenbateraino hazi zaizun abere-taldea niri esker .
PRED:	And Jacob said to him , “ You know that I have done for you , and you have made your flock for yourself , and you have made your flock to me . ”
GOLD:	Jacob replied , “ You know how hard I 've worked for you , and how your flocks and herds have grown under my care .

ID:	1281
INPUT:	Egun batez , esan zion neskak etxekoandreari : — Nire nagusiari , Samariako profetagana joango balitz , hark sendatuko lioke legena .
PRED:	And she said unto her , My master 's wife , If I go to Samaria , he shall be healed .
GOLD:	One day the girl said to her mistress , “ I wish my master would go to see the prophet in Samaria . He would heal him of his leprosy . ”

ID:	1282
INPUT:	Bigarren piztiak hartza zirudien : erdi jaikita zegoen eta ahoan , hortz artean , hiru saihets-hezur zituen . Honela esan zioten : “ Jaiki eta jan haragia ugari ! ”
PRED:	And the second beast was given to them the second beast : and he stood up , and there was three women , and said to them , “ Get up , eat bread and eat bread . ”
GOLD:	Then I saw a second beast , and it looked like a bear . It was rearing up on one side , and it had three ribs in its mouth between its teeth . And I heard a voice saying to it , “ Get up ! Devour the flesh of many people ! ”

ID:	1283
INPUT:	Argi eta garbi mintzatzen zitzaien honetaz . Pedro , Jesus aparte harturik , gogor egiten hasi zitzaion .
PRED:	And he spake unto them the light , and he took Peter , and began to be filled with him .
GOLD:	As he talked about this openly with his disciples , Peter took him aside and began to reprimand him for saying such things .

ID:	1284
INPUT:	Horregatik , hau dio Jaunak : « Egin i<unk> keta nazioen artean : nork entzun du horrelakorik ? Israel neskatxa ederrakizugarria egin du !
PRED:	Therefore thus says the Lord : “ Do you listen to the nations , and who has heard such a beautiful woman ? She has done a beautiful thing .
GOLD:	So this is what the Lord says : “ Has anyone ever heard of such a thing , even among the pagan nations ? My virgin daughter Israelhas done something terrible !

ID:	1285
INPUT:	Poztu eta alaitu Jaunarekin , zintzoak ! Egin poz-oihu , bihotz zuzeneko guztiok !
PRED:	Be glad , and rejoice in the Lord , and be glad , and rejoice in all the heart of the righteous .
GOLD:	So rejoice in the Lord and be glad , all you who obey him ! Shout for joy , all you whose hearts are pure !

ID:	1286
INPUT:	Jaunaren begietan oker dena egin zuen , Nebaten seme Jeroboamek Israeli eginarazi zizkion bekatuetatik aldendu gabe .
PRED:	He did what was right in the sight of the Lord , and did not turn away from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat .
GOLD:	But Pekah did what was evil in the Lord 's sight . He refused to turn from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel to commit .

ID:	1287
INPUT:	Zuk asko eta asko hezieta ahulak indartu izan dituzu ;
PRED:	You have made many of you , and your strength has become strong .
GOLD:	“ In the past you have encouraged many people ; you have strengthened those who were weak .

ID:	1288
INPUT:	Boterea kentzen die kontseilarieieta burutik nahasten epaileak ;
PRED:	They take away the cup of the elders , and the judges from the head of the elders .
GOLD:	He leads counselors away , stripped of good judgment ; wise judges become fools .

ID:	1289
INPUT:	Jaunak laguntzen die eta onik ateratzen , onik ateratzen gaiztoengandik eta salbatzen , berarengan baitira babestu .
PRED:	The Lord will help him , and he will save him from the wicked , and he will save him from the wicked ; for he is his shield .
GOLD:	The Lord helps them , rescuing them from the wicked.He saves them , and they find shelter in him .

ID:	1290
INPUT:	Zeuen seme-alaba eta morroi-mirabeekin eta zuekin hiri berean bizi diren lebitar , etorkin , umezurtz eta alargunekin batera ospatuko duzue festa .
PRED:	And you shall celebrate your sons and your servants , the Levites , and the Levites , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow .
GOLD:	This festival will be a happy time of celebrating with your sons and daughters , your male and female servants , and the Levites , foreigners , orphans , and widows from your towns .

ID:	1291
INPUT:	Horregatik irten zitzaion hainbeste jende Jesusi bidera , egin zuen mirarizko seinalearen berri izan zuelako , hain zuzen .
PRED:	So a large crowd came out to Jesus , because he had heard the sign that he had done .
GOLD:	That was the reason so many went out to meet him — because they had heard about this miraculous sign .

ID:	1292
INPUT:	Mikalek Davidi bizia salbatu
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Michal Saves David 's Life

ID:	1293
INPUT:	Judako Asaren erregealdiko hogeita zazpigarren urtean egin zen errege Zimri ; zazpi egunez izan zen errege Tirtzan . Gudarostea , aldi hartan , filistearren hiri Gibeton setiatzen ari zen .
PRED:	In the seventh year of Asa king of Judah , Asa became king of Judah , and he reigned seven days , and he reigned in the city of the Philistines .
GOLD:	Zimri began to rule over Israel in the twenty-seventh year of King Asa 's reign in Judah , but his reign in Tirzah lasted only seven days . The army of Israel was then attacking the Philistine town of Gibbethon .

ID:	1294
INPUT:	Harrapatu egin zituzten hango abere txiki eta handiak , astoak , hirian nahiz landan zeudenak ,
PRED:	And they took the great things that were in the field , and the great , and the cattle , and the donkeys , and the cattle , and the cattle , and the cattle , and the cattle , and the cattle , and the cattle , and the cattle ,
GOLD:	They seized all the flocks and herds and donkeys — everything they could lay their hands on , both inside the town and outside in the fields .

ID:	1295
INPUT:	Honela diotsuet nik , Jaun ahalguztidun honek : Etorriko dira oraindik Jerusalemera herriak eta hiri handietako bizilagunak ;
PRED:	Thus says the Lord of hosts : The people of Jerusalem will come to Jerusalem , and the inhabitants of the cities , and the inhabitants of the city .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : People from nations and cities around the world will travel to Jerusalem .

ID:	1296
INPUT:	Bufalo , zekor eta zezenak , batera eroriko dira denak ; odoletan blai geldituko dahaien lurraldea , gantzetan bustia bertako hautsa .
PRED:	A young bull , a young bull , and a young bull , and a young bull , and a young bull , and the dust of their land shall be filled with them .
GOLD:	Even men as strong as wild oxen will die — the young men alongside the veterans.The land will be soaked with bloodand the soil enriched with fat .

ID:	1297
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaun ahalguztidunak : « Orain gizaki eta abererik gabe , eremu bihurtua dagoen lurralde honetan , bertako hiri guztietan , ardiak biltzeko artegiak egingo dira berriro .
PRED:	This is what the Lord All-Powerful says : “ Now there is no man and animals , and no one to enter into this land . They will gather the sheep in this city .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : This land — though it is now desolate and has no people and animals — will once more have pastures where shepherds can lead their flocks .

ID:	1298
INPUT:	Eta hau , Asuero erregearen menpeko eskualde orotan , egun berean , hamabigarren hilaren , hots , Adar hilaren , hamahiruan .
PRED:	On that day of the month of King Asa , on the first day of the month , on the first day of the month of the month , in the month of the month .
GOLD:	The day chosen for this event throughout all the provinces of King Xerxes was March 7 of the next year .

ID:	1299
INPUT:	Zer esango nizuke , zerekin konparatuko zaitut ? Antzekorik zer aipatuko dizut , Sion neskatxa eder horri , kontsola zaitezen ? Itsasoa bezain handia da zure hondamendia : nork sendatu zu ?
PRED:	What shall I say unto thee , What shall I say unto thee ? and what shall I say unto thee ? And what shall I say unto thee , O daughter of Zion , that thou hast made thee as the sea ?
GOLD:	What can I say about you ? Who has ever seen such sorrow ? O daughter of Jerusalem , to what can I compare your anguish ? O virgin daughter of Zion , how can I comfort you ? For your wound is as deep as the sea.Who can heal you ?

ID:	1300
INPUT:	Erraustutako hirian , zelaian bezalabazkatuko dira ardiak , larratuko ahuntzak .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in the city , as the sheep that are in the midst of the city , and they shall be scattered in the midst of the flock .
GOLD:	In that day lambs will find good pastures , and fattened sheep and young goats will feed among the ruins .

ID:	1301
INPUT:	Mariak Elisabeti ikustaldia
PRED:	Mary 's Death
GOLD:	The Birth of John the Baptist

ID:	1302
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . « Dolareak » doinuan Daviden salmoa .
PRED:	O God , I pray thee , O God of Israel , for thou art my salvation .
GOLD:	O Lord , our Lord , your majestic name fills the earth ! Your glory is higher than the heavens .

ID:	1303
INPUT:	Esnea eta eztia darizkion lurralde hau eman zenien israeldarrei , arbasoei zin eginez agindu zenien lurraldea .
PRED:	You gave this land to the children of Israel , a land flowing with milk and honey , which you swore to their fathers .
GOLD:	You gave the people of Israel this land that you had promised their ancestors long before — a land flowing with milk and honey .

ID:	1304
INPUT:	Lauso bitez haien begiak eta itsutu , ahul bekie gerria betiko !
PRED:	Their eyes have four eyes , and their eyes are blind , and their eyes are eternal .
GOLD:	Pour out your fury on them ; consume them with your burning anger .

ID:	1305
INPUT:	Eskatzen dizun edonori , eman , eta zeurea kentzen dizunari , ez bihurrarazi .
PRED:	If you ask , give it to you , do n't let it be done to you .
GOLD:	Give to anyone who asks ; and when things are taken away from you , do n't try to get them back .

ID:	1306
INPUT:	Gedeonek , orduan : — Nire anaiak , gure amaren semeak ! Ala Jauna , bizirik utzi izan bazenituzte , ez zintuzketedan hilko orain .
PRED:	Then Gideon said to him , “ As surely as the Lord lives , you have left my brothers , and you have not left you . ”
GOLD:	“ They were my brothers , the sons of my own mother ! ” Gideon exclaimed . “ As surely as the Lord lives , I would n't kill you if you had n't killed them . ”

ID:	1307
INPUT:	Espirituaren dohainak
PRED:	The Holy Spirit
GOLD:	Spiritual Gifts

ID:	1308
INPUT:	Nire Jainkoak aingerua bidali du lehoien ahoak ixtera , eta ez didate kalterik egin . Izan ere , badaki nire Jainkoak errugabe naizela eta zure aurka , errege jauna , ez dudala hobenik egin .
PRED:	The angel of my God sent my angel into the mouth of the lion , and they did not hurt me ; for I know that I am God , and I have not sinned against your lord the king .
GOLD:	The king was overjoyed and ordered that Daniel be lifted from the den . Not a scratch was found on him , for he had trusted in his God .

ID:	1309
INPUT:	zure ukenduen usaina lurrin guztiak baino gozoago ! Zu zeu zara ukendu lurrintsu ! Horregatik zaizkizu neskatxak maitemindu !
PRED:	You are better than all your fields , and you are better than all the earth . Therefore you love the women who love you .
GOLD:	How pleasing is your fragrance ; your name is like the spreading fragrance of scented oils.No wonder all the young women love you !

ID:	1310
INPUT:	Zakarias , haurraren aita , Espiritu Santuaz beterik , profeta bezala mintzatu zen , esanez :
PRED:	And Zechariah the son of Zechariah was filled with the Holy Spirit , as he spoke to him , saying ,
GOLD:	Then his father , Zechariah , was filled with the Holy Spirit and gave this prophecy :

ID:	1311
INPUT:	Elkarketa-etxolako tresnen ardura izango dute eta israeldarren zerbitzura egongo dira egoitzako zereginak betetzeko .
PRED:	And they shall serve the tabernacle of the tabernacle of meeting , and they shall serve the tabernacle of the congregation , and they shall serve the tabernacle of Israel .
GOLD:	They will also maintain all the furnishings of the sacred tent , serving in the Tabernacle on behalf of all the Israelites .

ID:	1312
INPUT:	Pinhasen ondorengoetatik Gerxom ; Itamarren ondorengoetatik Daniel ; Daviden ondorengoetatik Hatux ,
PRED:	And of the sons of Phinehas , of the sons of David : of the sons of David : of the sons of David ;
GOLD:	From the family of Phinehas : Gershom.From the family of Ithamar : Daniel.From the family of David : Hattush ,

ID:	1313
INPUT:	Apaizburu eta fariseuek agindua zuten , inork Jesus non zen jakiten bazuen , sala zezala , atxilotu ahal izateko .
PRED:	And when the chief priests and the Pharisees heard that Jesus was , they knew that he was , that he might be bound .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the leading priests and Pharisees had publicly ordered that anyone seeing Jesus must report it immediately so they could arrest him .

ID:	1314
INPUT:	Baina ni , haien defendatzailea , indartsua naiz , “ Jaun ahalguztiduna ” dut izena : neuk defendatuko dut haien auzia , munduari barealdia emanezeta babiloniarrak astinduz » .
PRED:	But I am strong and strong ; I am the name of the Lord of hosts , and I will judge the world , and I will judge the world with the Chaldeans . ”
GOLD:	But the one who redeems them is strong.His name is the Lord of Heaven 's Armies.He will defend themand give them rest again in Israel.But for the people of Babylonthere will be no rest !

ID:	1315
INPUT:	Hau entzutean , Jesus harritu egin zen hartaz eta , ondoren zetorkion jendearengana itzulirik , esan zuen : « Egia esan , Israelen bertan ere ez dut aurkitu horrelako sinestedunik » .
PRED:	When Jesus heard this , he went back to the crowds , and said , “ I tell you , I have found no faith in Israel . ”
GOLD:	When Jesus heard this , he was amazed . Turning to the crowd that was following him , he said , “ I tell you , I have n't seen faith like this in all Israel ! ”

ID:	1316
INPUT:	bere bizilekutik jarriak ditu begiakmunduko biztanle guztiengan ;
PRED:	He hath set his eyes from his place , and he hath seen all the earth .
GOLD:	From his throne he observesall who live on the earth .

ID:	1317
INPUT:	Erregea , haserre bizian , etzaulkitik jaiki eta jauregiko lorategira atera zen . Haman bertan gelditu zen , bizia salbatzeko Ester erreginari eskatuz , sumatu baitzuen erabakia zuela erregeak bere hondamena .
PRED:	And the king rose up from his wrath , and rose up from the bed of the king 's house , and went out to the king 's house . And the king stood in the house of Esther , and asked the king to save him .
GOLD:	Then the king jumped to his feet in a rage and went out into the palace garden.Haman , however , stayed behind to plead for his life with Queen Esther , for he knew that the king intended to kill him .

ID:	1318
INPUT:	Lagun hurkoa maite duenak ez dio gaitzik egiten . Maite duenak , beraz , erabat betetzen du legea .
PRED:	The one who loves his neighbor does not love him . If he loves him , he who loves the law must obey the law .
GOLD:	Love does no wrong to others , so love fulfills the requirements of God 's law .

ID:	1319
INPUT:	Erregeak , erregina aldamenean eseria zuelarik , galdetu zidan : — Zenbat iraungo du zure joan-etorriak ? Noiz itzuliko zara ? Ontzat eman zuen erregeak jarri nion epea eta joaten utzi zidan .
PRED:	When the king was sitting at the altar , he asked me , “ How long will you go back ? How long will you go back ? ” So the king gave him to me .
GOLD:	The king , with the queen sitting beside him , asked , “ How long will you be gone ? When will you return ? ” After I told him how long I would be gone , the king agreed to my request .

ID:	1320
INPUT:	Gizonaren Semea bezala : hura ez da etorri zerbitzatua izatera , zerbitzari izatera baizik , bere bizia guztien alde ordainsaritzat ematera » .
PRED:	The Son of Man is not like the Son of Man , but he is not to serve him , but to give his life for all his life . ”
GOLD:	For even the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve others and to give his life as a ransom for many . ”

ID:	1321
INPUT:	Beraz , mandatariak bidali nizkien erantzun honekin : « Lan handietan nabil eta ez naiteke joan . Zuengana joateagatik bakarrik lanak ez nituzke utzi nahi » .
PRED:	So I sent messengers to them , saying , “ I can not go to you in great works , and I would not go to you . ”
GOLD:	so I replied by sending this message to them : “ I am engaged in a great work , so I ca n't come . Why should I stop working to come and meet with you ? ”

ID:	1322
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jaun ahalguztidunakahulezia bihurtuko duasiriarren sendotasuna , eta haien gorputz ederraksukarrez joko ditu , suak hartuta bezala jarriko .
PRED:	Therefore the Lord of hosts will live , and his glory will be made strong , and his body will be filled with fire , and his body will be burned with fire .
GOLD:	Therefore , the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , will send a plague among Assyria 's proud troops , and a flaming fire will consume its glory .

ID:	1323
INPUT:	Erregearen bihotza ubidea da Jaunaren eskuetan : nahi duen alderantz zuzentzen du .
PRED:	The heart of the Lord is in the hand of the king : and the way of the Lord is righteous .
GOLD:	The king 's heart is like a stream of water directed by the Lord ; he guides it wherever he pleases .

ID:	1324
INPUT:	Ilunpetan biziarazi nau , behin betiko hildakoak bezala .
PRED:	He brought me into darkness , as the slain of the dead .
GOLD:	He has buried me in a dark place , like those long dead .

ID:	1325
INPUT:	Koruak
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Young Women of Jerusalem

ID:	1326
INPUT:	Horregatik , niri dagokidanez , irrikaz nago zuei ere , erromatarroi , berri ona hots egiteko .
PRED:	Therefore , I want you to go out , so that I may proclaim the Good News of your servant .
GOLD:	So I am eager to come to you in Rome , too , to preach the Good News .

ID:	1327
INPUT:	Israelgo errege Joaxek , aldiz , beste erantzun hau bidali zion Judako errege Amatziasi : « Behin batez garduak esan omen zion Libanoko zedroari : “ Emaiok alaba nire semeari emaztetzat ” . Baina Libanoko basabere batek hankazpian hartu zuen gardua .
PRED:	But Joash king of Israel sent another message to Amaziah king of Judah , saying , “ My daughter , my daughter . ”
GOLD:	But King Jehoash of Israel replied to King Amaziah of Judah with this story : “ Out in the Lebanon mountains , a thistle sent a message to a mighty cedar tree : ‘ Give your daughter in marriage to my son . ' But just then a wild animal of Lebanon came by and stepped on the thistle , crushing it !

ID:	1328
INPUT:	zu , ordea , hobiratu gabebota zaituzte , gauza nazkagarriaren pare ; leizeko harri arterabota dituztenekin zaude , ezpataz hildakoen gorpuen artean , hankapean zapaltzen dengorpuaren pare .
PRED:	But you have been destroyed by the sword of the dead , and you have been cut off by the sword of the dead , and you have been taken away from the dead .
GOLD:	but you will be thrown out of your gravelike a worthless branch.Like a corpse trampled underfoot , you will be dumped into a mass gravewith those killed in battle.You will descend to the pit .

ID:	1329
INPUT:	Hartu nuen liburuxka aingeruaren eskutik eta irentsi egin nuen . Ahoan ezti gozoa bezala gertatu zitzaidan , baina , jan nuenean , sabela garraztu zidan .
PRED:	And I took my mouth out of the mouth of the mouth of the angel , and it came to pass , and I ate it , and I ate it , and I washed it .
GOLD:	So I took the small scroll from the hand of the angel , and I ate it ! It was sweet in my mouth , but when I swallowed it , it turned sour in my stomach .

ID:	1330
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Aaroni : « Zu , zure semeak eta leinuko beste kideak izango zarete santutegiaren aurkako hutsegiteen erantzule ; zeuen apaiz-jardueran egindako hutsegiteenak , berriz , zu eta zure semeak bakarrik .
PRED:	The Lord said to Aaron , “ You will be your sons and your children , and you will be holy to the sanctuary , but you will serve your sons and your sons .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Aaron : “ You , your sons , and your relatives from the tribe of Levi will be held responsible for any offenses related to the sanctuary . But you and your sons alone will be held responsible for violations connected with the priesthood .

ID:	1331
INPUT:	Itsasora jo zuten ontzietan , ur handietan zutelarik ogibidea .
PRED:	And they went into the sea , and did eat bread in the sea .
GOLD:	Some went off to sea in ships , plying the trade routes of the world .

ID:	1332
INPUT:	Oso aberats egin zen Jakob : artalde handiak , morroi-mirabeak , gamelu eta astoak eskuratu zituen .
PRED:	And Jacob was very rich , and he took the flocks and the donkeys and the donkeys and the donkeys .
GOLD:	As a result , Jacob became very wealthy , with large flocks of sheep and goats , female and male servants , and many camels and donkeys .

ID:	1333
INPUT:	Hara , aldi hartan , zapaltzen zaituzten guztiaksuntsituko ditut . Zaurituak sendatuko ditut , erbesteratuak etxeratuko . Eta ospez eta aipuz beteko ditutlehen lotsa jasan zutenlurralde guztietan .
PRED:	Behold , I will destroy you in that day , and I will heal you ; and I will heal your houses , and they will be buried in the land of the Chaldeans , and they will be ashamed in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	And I will deal severely with all who have oppressed you.I will save the weak and helpless ones ; I will bring togetherthose who were chased away.I will give glory and fame to my former exiles , wherever they have been mocked and shamed .

ID:	1334
INPUT:	Horregatik , begira zer dioen Jaunak Josiasen seme Joiakim , Judako erregeaz : « Ez diote hileta joko , esanez : “ Hau zoritxarra , anaia ! Hau zoritxarra , arreba ! ” Ez diote hileta joko , esanez : “ Ai gure jauna ! Ai gure jaun agurgarria ! ”
PRED:	Therefore the Lord looked at Jehoiakim the son of Josiah , king of Judah , saying , “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ Woe to my lord Jehoiakim , my sister , my sister , and they will say , ‘ Woe to my lord ! '
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says about Jehoiakim , son of King Josiah : “ The people will not mourn for him , crying to one another , ‘ Alas , my brother ! Alas , my sister ! 'His subjects will not mourn for him , crying , ‘ Alas , our master is dead ! Alas , his splendor is gone ! '

ID:	1335
INPUT:	Otoi , barka iezadazu bekatua , eta zatoz nirekin Jauna gurtzera .
PRED:	I pray thee , O Lord , forgive me , and come to worship me .
GOLD:	But now , please forgive my sin and come back with me so that I may worship the Lord . ”

ID:	1336
INPUT:	Gauzok esan zituenean , askok sinetsi zuten harengan .
PRED:	When many believed in him , many believed in him .
GOLD:	Then many who heard him say these things believed in him .

ID:	1337
INPUT:	Hau diotso Jaunak Israeli : « Egiptoko langileak , Etiopiako merkatariaketa altuera handiko sebatarrakzure menpean jarriko dira , zureak izango ; zure atzetik joango dira , katez loturik ; zure aurrean ahuspeztuko diraeta erreguka esango dizute : “ Zuregan bakarrik dago Jainkoa , ez da besterik ; beste jainkoak ezer ez dira ” » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says to Israel : “ The merchants of the land of Egypt will be like the merchants of the merchants of the merchants of Assyria , and your descendants will fall down to you , and they will worship you . They will worship you . They will worship you , and you will worship other gods . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ You will rule the Egyptians , the Ethiopians , and the Sabeans.They will come to you with all their merchandise , and it will all be yours.They will follow you as prisoners in chains.They will fall to their knees in front of you and say , ‘ God is with you , and he is the only God.There is no other . ' ”

ID:	1338
INPUT:	« Basamorturik basamortuena izango da Egipto , hiri guztien artean hondatuenak bertako hiriak .
PRED:	“ The land of Egypt will be a wilderness , and all its cities will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Egypt will be desolate , surrounded by desolate nations , and its cities will be in ruins , surrounded by other ruined cities .

ID:	1339
INPUT:	Zerbitzari trebeak erregearen onespena du , duin ez denak haren haserrea .
PRED:	The servant of the wise servants of the king shall not be angry with his wrath .
GOLD:	A king rejoices in wise servantsbut is angry with those who disgrace him .

ID:	1340
INPUT:	Jerusalemen ziren israeldarrek poz handiz egin zuten zazpi egunez Legamia gabeko Ogien Jaia . Lebitarrek eta apaizek egunero goretsi ohi zuten Jauna , musika-tresna ozenen laguntzaz , haren ohoretan kantatuz .
PRED:	And the children of Israel rejoice in Jerusalem seven days ; and the Levites lifted up the bread of bread seven days , and the sons of Levi , and the sons of Levi , and the Levites glorified the Lord in the song of the Lord .
GOLD:	So the people of Israel who were present in Jerusalem joyously celebrated the Festival of Unleavened Bread for seven days . Each day the Levites and priests sang to the Lord , accompanied by loud instruments .

ID:	1341
INPUT:	lurra betetzen du<unk> turik hoberenaketa sasian agertu zenaren onginahia : betor hori guztia Joserengana , senideen artean aukeratuagana .
PRED:	And the grace of the earth was revealed to Joseph , and to his brethren , that he may come unto Joseph , and to his brethren .
GOLD:	with the best gifts of the earth and its bounty , and the favor of the one who appeared in the burning bush.May these blessings rest on Joseph 's head , crowning the brow of the prince among his brothers .

ID:	1342
INPUT:	harik eta Jaunak zerutik begiratu eta ikusi arte .
PRED:	And the Lord looked up from heaven and saw him .
GOLD:	until the Lord looks downfrom heaven and sees .

ID:	1343
INPUT:	eta Josuerengana eraman zituzten . Josuek israeldar guztiei dei egin eta guduan berarekin ibilitako gudalburuei agindu hau eman zien : « Hurbil zaitezte eta zapaldu errege hauei lepoa » . Halaxe egin zuten .
PRED:	And they brought them to Joshua . And Joshua called all the sons of Israel , and said unto the princes of Israel , Come near , and do this thing . And they did as they had done .
GOLD:	When they brought them out , Joshua told the commanders of his army , “ Come and put your feet on the kings ' necks . ” And they did as they were told .

ID:	1344
INPUT:	« Zuekin bizi den nire herriko dohakaberen bati dirua maileguz ematen badiozue , ez izan zeken berarekin , ez ezarri interesik .
PRED:	“ If you are living in my people , you will not be able to give him money to his people . You must not put him on his own people .
GOLD:	My anger will blaze against you , and I will kill you with the sword . Then your wives will be widows and your children fatherless .

ID:	1345
INPUT:	« Gaur ematen dizkizuedan agindu hauek benetan onartzen badituzue , Jauna zeuen Jainkoa maitatuz eta bihotz-bihotzez eta gogo osoz zerbitzatuz ,
PRED:	If you obey the commands that I command you today , you must obey the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your heart .
GOLD:	“ If you carefully obey the commands I am giving you today , and if you love the Lord your God and serve him with all your heart and soul ,

ID:	1346
INPUT:	beren burua etsaien esku gatibuutzi arren , han ere ezpataz hilaraziko ditut . Begi-bistan izango ditut , ez onerako , bai kalterako » .
PRED:	I will hand them over into the hand of their enemies , and I will bring them into the hand of their enemies ; and I will see them , and they shall not harm them .
GOLD:	Even if their enemies drive them into exile , I will command the sword to kill them there.I am determined to bring disaster upon themand not to help them . ”

ID:	1347
INPUT:	Loten emazteak atzera begiratu zuen , eta gatz-irudi bihurtu zen .
PRED:	And he looked at his wife , and look at him , and let him be wise .
GOLD:	But Lot 's wife looked back as she was following behind him , and she turned into a pillar of salt .

ID:	1348
INPUT:	Azpikeriaz dabilenak atsekabea dakar , aurrez aurre zentzarazten duenak konponbidea .
PRED:	A man who does evil is evil , but a man who does wrong against him who does wrong .
GOLD:	People who wink at wrong cause trouble , but a bold reproof promotes peace .

ID:	1349
INPUT:	Esterrek agindu eta antolatu zituen Purim Jaiak , eta liburuan idatzia gelditu zen .
PRED:	And Esther commanded them , and sent them away , and wrote in the book of the book of the book .
GOLD:	So the command of Esther confirmed the practices of Purim , and it was all written down in the records .

ID:	1350
INPUT:	E<unk> LOGOA ( 42 , <unk> )
PRED:	The People of Judah
GOLD:	Conclusion : The

ID:	1351
INPUT:	Ondoren , apurtu egingo ditut bata bestearen kontra : gurasoak eta seme-alabak , denak batera . Ez dut errukirik izango , ez barkamenik , ez gupidarik : guztiak suntsituko ditut . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	And I will break them , and I will destroy them , and their fathers , and their children , and their children , and their sons , and their daughters , and their sins , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	I will smash them against each other , even parents against children , says the Lord . I will not let my pity or mercy or compassion keep me from destroying them . ' ”

ID:	1352
INPUT:	Labanen eta Jakoben arteko hitzarmena
PRED:	Laban and Jacob
GOLD:	Jacob 's Treaty with Laban

ID:	1353
INPUT:	Hona hemen etorkizunean Israelekin egingo dudan ituna : Buruan ezarriko dizkiet neure legeak , bihotzean idatziko ; ni beraien Jainko izango naiz , eta haiek nire herri . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : I will make a covenant with the people of Israel , and I will put my statutes on them , and they will be their God , and I will be their God .
GOLD:	But this is the new covenant I will makewith the people of Israel on that day , says the Lord : I will put my laws in their minds , and I will write them on their hearts.I will be their God , and they will be my people .

ID:	1354
INPUT:	Baina Jauna neurekin izan nuen eta indartu egin ninduen , nire bidez mezua oso-osorik iragarria izan zedin eta jentil guztiek entzun zezaten ; berak atera ninduen lehoiaren ahotik .
PRED:	But the Lord was with me , and I became strong in me , so that all the Gentiles would hear my word , and all the Gentiles heard the word of the lion .
GOLD:	But the Lord stood with me and gave me strength so that I might preach the Good News in its entirety for all the Gentiles to hear . And he rescued me from certain death .

ID:	1355
INPUT:	Atezainak ere ezarriak zituen ateetan , kutsatua zegokeen inor inola ere sar ez zedin .
PRED:	And he put them in the gates , so that no one may enter into it .
GOLD:	He also stationed gatekeepers at the gates of the Lord 's Temple to keep out those who for any reason were ceremonially unclean .

ID:	1356
INPUT:	Moisesek israeldar leinuak bedeinkatu
PRED:	Moses Heals to the Israelites
GOLD:	Moses Blesses the People

ID:	1357
INPUT:	Berdin izango da munduaren azkenean : aingeruek etorri eta gaiztoak zintzoen artetik bereiziko dituzte ,
PRED:	And the end of the world shall be in the end of the world : and the angels of the righteous shall come out of the righteous ,
GOLD:	That is the way it will be at the end of the world . The angels will come and separate the wicked people from the righteous ,

ID:	1358
INPUT:	Oi Jainko , begira onez gure babeskiari , zeuk aukeraturiko erregeari .
PRED:	O God , thou art our God , and thou hast chosen the king of Israel .
GOLD:	A single day in your courtsis better than a thousand anywhere else ! I would rather be a gatekeeper in the house of my Godthan live the good life in the homes of the wicked .

ID:	1359
INPUT:	Zure aginduen bidetik lehiatuko naiz , barrua lasaitzen didazunez gero .
PRED:	I will keep your commandments , and I will keep your commandments .
GOLD:	I will pursue your commands , for you expand my understanding .

ID:	1360
INPUT:	Baina , ikusi dudanez , Jainkoak eguzkipean ari dituenegintza guztietarik bat ereezin dute gizon-emakumeekgarbi ulertu . Zenbat eta gehiago saiatuegintza horien arrazoi bila , hainbat eta nekezagoaurkituko dute . Jakintsuak berak , badakiela esanik ere , ez du ulertzen .
PRED:	But when I saw the works of God in the sun , they can not understand all the works of the sun , and they can not understand the works of the sun , and they will know that there is no wisdom .
GOLD:	I realized that no one can discover everything God is doing under the sun . Not even the wisest people discover everything , no matter what they claim .

ID:	1361
INPUT:	Hurbildu zitzaion Sauli emakumea eta , hain larritua ikusirik , esan zion : — Nik , zure mirabe honek , entzun dut zure hitza eta arriskuan jarri dut neure bizia , zure esana betetzearren .
PRED:	And when the woman came near to Saul , she saw that she was sick , and said unto him , I have heard thy word , and have heard thy word , and I have heard thy word .
GOLD:	When the woman saw how distraught he was , she said , “ Sir , I obeyed your command at the risk of my life .

ID:	1362
INPUT:	« Baina , zer ikusten dut ? Lur jota daude , atzera dagite ! Gudari ausartak birrinduta , ihesi doaz zalapartaka , atzera begiratu gabe . Izu-ikara edonon ! Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	“ But what do I see ? ” says the Lord , “ They are coming down to the ground . They are like a man who has fled , ” says the Lord . “ There is no one to look at it . ”
GOLD:	But what do I see ? The Egyptian army flees in terror.The bravest of its fighting men runwithout a backward glance.They are terrorized at every turn , ” says the Lord .

ID:	1363
INPUT:	Nire aurrean goraipatu egiten zuten gainera , eta nik esandakoak berari jakinarazten zizkioten . Tobiasek berak gutunak bidaltzen zizkidan , ni izutzeko .
PRED:	And they found him in front of me , and they told him what I had said , and they sent them to me .
GOLD:	They kept telling me about Tobiah 's good deeds , and then they told him everything I said . And Tobiah kept sending threatening letters to intimidate me .

ID:	1364
INPUT:	Samsonen mendekua
PRED:	Samson and Samson
GOLD:	Samson 's Vengeance on the Philistines

ID:	1365
INPUT:	Izan ere , ardiak ernaltzeko garaian hauxe ikusten nuen ametsetan : ardiak ernaltzen zituzten ahariak marradunak , pintoak eta nabarrak zirela .
PRED:	I saw that it was in the days of the flock , and I saw the sheep , and the sheep , and the sheep , and the sheep , and the sheep , and the sheep .
GOLD:	“ One time during the mating season , I had a dream and saw that the male goats mating with the females were streaked , speckled , and spotted .

ID:	1366
INPUT:	Aitak agindu zien semeei : — Txalmatu iezadazue astoa ! Astoa txalmatu ziotenean , gainean jarri
PRED:	And he said unto his sons , Give me a donkey . And they set it on the donkey , and set it on it .
GOLD:	“ Quick , saddle the donkey , ” the old man said . So they saddled the donkey for him , and he mounted it .

ID:	1367
INPUT:	Zoro bezala mintzatu naiz , baina zeuek behartu nauzue ; izan ere , zeuek atera behar zenuten nire alde , zeren , ezer ez naizen arren , ez bainaiz ezertan superapostolu horiek baino gutxiago .
PRED:	I have spoken to you , but you have received me ; for I am not of you , for I am not of you , because I am not of the apostles .
GOLD:	You have made me act like a fool . You ought to be writing commendations for me , for I am not at all inferior to these “ super apostles , ” even though I am nothing at all .

ID:	1368
INPUT:	Aldi baten buruan , baretu zitzaion haserrea Asuerori ; baina ezin zitzaizkion erregeari ahaztu Baxtik egina eta honen aurka harturiko erabakia .
PRED:	And it came to pass at that time , that the wrath of the king came to pass , that he would not forget the queen of the king , and against the king .
GOLD:	But after Xerxes ' anger had subsided , he began thinking about Vashti and what she had done and the decree he had made .

ID:	1369
INPUT:	Moisesen legea ezagutzen ez dutenekin , legea kontuan hartu gabe bizi izan naiz , legea ezagutzen ez dutenak irabazteko ; ez , noski , Jainkoaren legerik onartzen ez dudalako , nire legea Kristo baita .
PRED:	They do not know the law of Moses , because they do not know the law , because they do not know the law , because they do not know the law of God , because Christ is my law .
GOLD:	When I am with the Gentiles who do not follow the Jewish law , I too live apart from that law so I can bring them to Christ . But I do not ignore the law of God ; I obey the law of Christ .

ID:	1370
INPUT:	Han egingo du sugeak habia , han egin eta berotuko arrautzak , eta bere babespean aterako umeak . Hantxe bilduko dira saiak ere , arra emearekin elkartuz .
PRED:	And the king shall be there , and he shall take the serpent , and he shall take the sheep , and the little ones shall be gathered together , and the sheep shall be gathered together .
GOLD:	There the owl will make her nest and lay her eggs.She will hatch her young and cover them with her wings.And the buzzards will come , each one with its mate .

ID:	1371
INPUT:	Bere lurra lantzen duenak ogia ugari , huskerien atzetik dabilena burugabea galanta .
PRED:	If you plant the land , you will be like a fool , you will not be like a fool .
GOLD:	A hard worker has plenty of food , but a person who chases fantasies has no sense .

ID:	1372
INPUT:	« Zuk , ordea , irabazteari besterikez diozu begiratzen , errugabea hileta herria zapaldu eta esplotatzearibesterik ez » .
PRED:	But thou shalt not fear the poor , neither shalt thou fear the poor , and the poor , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow .
GOLD:	“ But you ! You have eyes only for greed and dishonesty ! You murder the innocent , oppress the poor , and reign ruthlessly . ”

ID:	1373
INPUT:	Beraz , Kristok bere gorputzean sufritu zuenez , hartu zuek ere armatzat pentsaera berbera , jakinik gorputzean sufritu duenak bekatuarekiko lotura hautsi egin duela ,
PRED:	So when Christ suffer in his body , he must suffer you as his body , because he did not know that he has been ashamed of his body ,
GOLD:	So then , since Christ suffered physical pain , you must arm yourselves with the same attitude he had , and be ready to suffer , too . For if you have suffered physically for Christ , you have finished with sin .

ID:	1374
INPUT:	Horren zentzugabeak al zarete ? Espirituagan uste on izanez hasi eta giza indar hutsetan ustea jarriz bukatu behar ote duzue orain ?
PRED:	Do you think that you are wise ? Do you trust in the Spirit in the Spirit , and in the power of men ?
GOLD:	How foolish can you be ? After starting your new lives in the Spirit , why are you now trying to become perfect by your own human effort ?

ID:	1375
INPUT:	Hona nik esan : « Denok jainko , Goi-goikoaren seme zareten arren ,
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ You are the God of the Most High , you are the God of the Most High .
GOLD:	I say , ‘ You are gods ; you are all children of the Most High .

ID:	1376
INPUT:	Bosgarren turuta . Matxinsaltoen izurria
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The Fifth Trumpet Brings the First Terror

ID:	1377
INPUT:	Nazioen egitasmoak Jaunak ditu desegiten , herrien asmoak hutsean galtzen .
PRED:	The counsel of the Lord is in the heart of the nations , And the counsel of the nations shall perish .
GOLD:	The Lord frustrates the plans of the nationsand thwarts all their schemes .

ID:	1378
INPUT:	baita nire alde ere , Jainkoak hitz egokia ahoan jar diezadan , berri onaren misterioa ausardiaz adierazteko .
PRED:	for I am going to speak to you in my mouth , so that I may speak to the gospel of the gospel .
GOLD:	And pray for me , too . Ask God to give me the right words so I can boldly explain God 's mysterious plan that the Good News is for Jews and Gentiles alike .

ID:	1379
INPUT:	Poz handia hartu dut kristau bezala , nireganako duzuen ardura nabarmen agertu delako ; bazenuten lehendik ere , baina agertzeko aukerarik ez .
PRED:	I have a great joy in Christ , because you have come to me , but you did not want to be judged .
GOLD:	How I praise the Lord that you are concerned about me again . I know you have always been concerned for me , but you did n't have the chance to help me .

ID:	1380
INPUT:	Bekatua ugari zedin azaldu zen legea ; baina bekatua ugaldu zenean , are ugariago izan zen Jainkoaren onginahia .
PRED:	And the law came to pass by the law , but when the sin of sin was multiplied , the grace of God was multiplied .
GOLD:	God 's law was given so that all people could see how sinful they were . But as people sinned more and more , God 's wonderful grace became more abundant .

ID:	1381
INPUT:	« Baten batek bere lagun hurkoari kalte egin eta honek madarikaziopean zin egitera behartuko balu eta tenplu honetako zure aldarera etorriko balitz ,
PRED:	“ If one of you must do this to his neighbor and curse him , then he will come to the altar of your neighbor and your altar .
GOLD:	“ If someone wrongs another person and is required to take an oath of innocence in front of your altar at this Temple ,

ID:	1382
INPUT:	( 2 Erg 18 , 17-37 ; Is 36 , <unk> )
PRED:	King Hezekiah of Judah
GOLD:	Summary of Hezekiah 's Reign

ID:	1383
INPUT:	Eskerrak Jainkoari , beraren ezin esan ahalako dohain horrengatik .
PRED:	I will give thanks to God for this reason of this reason .
GOLD:	Thank God for this gift too wonderful for words !

ID:	1384
INPUT:	iraunaraziko dut zure erregetza . Honako hau hitzeman bainion zuen aita Davidi : “ Beti izanen duzu zeure ondorengoetako bat Israel gobernatzeko ” .
PRED:	I will obey your kingdom . I said to my father David , ‘ You will be your father forever . '
GOLD:	then I will establish the throne of your dynasty . For I made this covenant with your father , David , when I said , ‘ One of your descendants will always rule over Israel . '

ID:	1385
INPUT:	Gerra sorraraziko dut zuen aurka eta kanpoko nazioetan barreiatuko zaituztet . Zuen lurraldea eremu bihurtuko dut eta zuen hiriak hondakin .
PRED:	I will bring you into the midst of the nations , and I will scatter you into the midst of the nations , and I will make your cities desolate .
GOLD:	I will scatter you among the nations and bring out my sword against you . Your land will become desolate , and your cities will lie in ruins .

ID:	1386
INPUT:	Nazio eta herrialde horietatik guztietatik bilduko zaituztet , eta zeuen lurraldera eramango .
PRED:	I will gather you from all the countries , and I will gather you out of all the countries , and bring you into your land .
GOLD:	For I will gather you up from all the nations and bring you home again to your land .

ID:	1387
INPUT:	Samuel erre-oparia eskaintzen ari zen bitartean , filistearrak israeldarren aurka borroka egiteko hurbildu ziren . Orduan , Jaunak burrunba handiko trumoiak egin zituen filistearren kontra , izutu eta hondatu egin zituen israeldarren aurrean .
PRED:	When Samuel offered the burnt offering , the Philistines came near to fight against the Philistines . Then the Lord heard a great voice of a great voice , and he destroyed the Israelites .
GOLD:	Just as Samuel was sacrificing the burnt offering , the Philistines arrived to attack Israel . But the Lord spoke with a mighty voice of thunder from heaven that day , and the Philistines were thrown into such confusion that the Israelites defeated them .

ID:	1388
INPUT:	eta denok , judu eta juduberri , kretar eta arabiar , Jainkoaren egintza miragarriak geure hizkuntzetan aipatzen entzuten diegu » .
PRED:	and all Jews and Jews , who hear the works of our God , and of the Jews , and of the works of our God , and of the works of our God .
GOLD:	( both Jews and converts to Judaism ) , Cretans , and Arabs . And we all hear these people speaking in our own languages about the wonderful things God has done ! ”

ID:	1389
INPUT:	Jaun ahalguztidunaren haserreaz , sutan dago lurraldeaeta suaren menpe herria . Ez dio inork inori bizia barkatzen :
PRED:	The Lord of hosts is angry with his wrath , and the land of the earth , and the people of the land , and no one shall forgive them .
GOLD:	This wickedness is like a brushfire.It burns not only briers and thornsbut also sets the forests ablaze.Its burning sends up clouds of smoke .

ID:	1390
INPUT:	Landatik itzultzean , Jakoben semeek gertatuaren berri jakin zuten . Samindurik eta haserre bizitan jarri ziren . Jakoben alabarekin etzanez Sikemek egin zuen itsuskeria , Israelen ez zela inola ere egin behar esaten zuten .
PRED:	And when the sons of Jacob returned out of the field , the sons of Jacob heard what had happened to them ; and they were angry with Jacob , and they were angry with Jacob , and they did not say , “ Go back to the house of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Jacob 's sons had come in from the field as soon as they heard what had happened . They were shocked and furious that their sister had been raped . Shechem had done a disgraceful thing against Jacob 's family , something that should never be done .

ID:	1391
INPUT:	Maitasuna legearen muina
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Love Fulfills God 's Requirements

ID:	1392
INPUT:	Jebus ondora heldu zireneko , ilunabarra zen . Morroiak esan zion nagusiari : — Tira , jo dezagun jebustarren hiri horretara ; eman dezakegu bertan gaua .
PRED:	When they came to Jericho , the servant said to his master , “ Let us go into the city of the Amorites , so that we may go into the city . ”
GOLD:	It was late in the day when they neared Jebus , and the man 's servant said to him , “ Let 's stop at this Jebusite town and spend the night there . ”

ID:	1393
INPUT:	Hartan , zirenear eta alexandriarrez osatua zegoen eta « Askatuena » zeritzan sinagogakoak , ziliziar eta asiar batzuekin batera , Estebanekin eztabaidan hasi ziren .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when they were come to pass , that the synagogue was called Ephesus , and the synagogue , and the Sadducees , and those who had been scattered with him , and they began to be with him .
GOLD:	But one day some men from the Synagogue of Freed Slaves , as it was called , started to debate with him . They were Jews from Cyrene , Alexandria , Cilicia , and the province of Asia .

ID:	1394
INPUT:	Fededun egin diren jentilei dagokienez , berriz , geure erabakiak idatziz eman genizkien : ez dezatela jan sasijainkoei eskainitako haragirik , ezta odolik nahiz odolustu gabeko abererik ere , eta utz ditzatela legearen kontrako sexu-harremanak » .
PRED:	But we wrote to the Gentiles , that we should not eat any of them , nor eat any of the blood of their gods , nor of their blood , nor of their blood , nor of their blood .
GOLD:	“ As for the Gentile believers , they should do what we already told them in a letter : They should abstain from eating food offered to idols , from consuming blood or the meat of strangled animals , and from sexual immorality . ”

ID:	1395
INPUT:	« Jaiegun eta gainerako festaburuetan berrogei kilo irin eskainiko dira labore-oparitzat zezen bakoitzeko , eta beste horrenbeste ahari bakoitzeko ; arkumeengatik , berriz , nahi beste . Gainera , sei litro olio berrogei kilo irineko .
PRED:	“ On the day of the feast , on the day of the feast , on the day of the feast , and on each side of the grain offering , and on the other side of the lambs , and on the other side of the lambs shall be a hin of fine flour .
GOLD:	“ So at the special feasts and sacred festivals , the grain offering will be a basket of choice flour with each young bull , another basket of flour with each ram , and as much flour as the worshiper chooses to give with each lamb . Give one gallon of olive oil with each basket of flour .

ID:	1396
INPUT:	Goretsazue , haren aingeru guztiok , goretsi , haren gudari guztiok !
PRED:	Praise him , all the angels of his angels , praise him .
GOLD:	Praise him , all his angels ! Praise him , all the armies of heaven !

ID:	1397
INPUT:	Mundu honetatik eramana izateko garaia bazetorkiolarik , Jerusalemera joateko erabaki sendoa hartu zuen Jesusek .
PRED:	And when the days of this world was come to pass through this world , Jesus stretched out his hand to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	As the time drew near for him to ascend to heaven , Jesus resolutely set out for Jerusalem .

ID:	1398
INPUT:	Ontzi horretako ura jangai den zerbaiti botatzen bazaio , kutsaturik geldituko da ; halaber , edan daitekeen edariren bati botatzen bazaio , nolanahiko ontzitan dagoela , kutsaturik geldituko da .
PRED:	If any of these things be unclean , it shall be unclean . If it is unclean , it shall be unclean , then it shall be unclean .
GOLD:	If the water from such a container spills on any food , the food will be defiled . And any beverage in such a container will be defiled .

ID:	1399
INPUT:	Baina zuek nazireueiardoa edanarazi diezue , eta profeteinire mezua ez zabaltzeko agindu .
PRED:	But you are to make a vow for yourselves , so that you may not open my word .
GOLD:	“ But you caused the Nazirites to sin by making them drink wine , and you commanded the prophets , ‘ Shut up ! '

ID:	1400
INPUT:	« Hau da adulterio-susmoaren legea , senarraren eskumende egonik , emaztea desleial izan eta desohoratzen denerako ,
PRED:	“ This is the law of the law of the law of the law , when she has committed adultery , and has committed adultery ,
GOLD:	“ This is the ritual law for dealing with suspicion . If a woman goes astray and defiles herself while under her husband 's authority ,

ID:	1401
INPUT:	Hara , ekaitza bezala lehertu daJaunaren haserrea , haize-erauntsia bezala oldartzen da , zurrunbiloka dabilerrudunen buru gainean .
PRED:	Behold , the anger of the Lord is like a storm , like a storm , and a storm is like a wind , and a storm on the head of the heart of the wicked .
GOLD:	Look ! The Lord 's anger bursts out like a storm , a driving wind that swirls down on the heads of the wicked .

ID:	1402
INPUT:	Mahasti-jabeak , orduan , berekiko esan zuen : “ Zer egin ? Neure seme maitea bidaliko dut . Izango ahal diote honi begirune ! ”
PRED:	Then she said to her , “ What did I do to you ? I will send my son , and they will fear him . ”
GOLD:	“ ‘ What will I do ? ' the owner asked himself . ‘ I know ! I 'll send my cherished son . Surely they will respect him . '

ID:	1403
INPUT:	Filistearrak ere bilduak ziren Israel borrokatzeko : hiru mila guda-gurdi , sei mila zaldizko eta itsasertzeko hondarra bezainbat gudari . Igo eta Mikmasen ezarri zituzten guda-etxolak , Bet-Aben-en ekialdera .
PRED:	And the Philistines gathered together against Israel , three thousand chariots , and three thousand chariots , and three thousand chariots , and three thousand chariots , and set them on the east side of the sea .
GOLD:	The Philistines mustered a mighty army of 3,000 chariots , 6,000 charioteers , and as many warriors as the grains of sand on the seashore ! They camped at Micmash east of Beth-aven .

ID:	1404
INPUT:	Kiriat-Arim , Kefira eta Beerotekoak 743 ;
PRED:	And the sons of Bela , the sons of Shimron , and the sons of Shimron , and the sons of Parosh , and the sons of Parosh ,
GOLD:	The people of Kiriath-jearim , Kephirah , and Beeroth743

ID:	1405
INPUT:	Jendea deiadarka hasi zen : « Jainkoa mintzo da , ez gizakia » .
PRED:	And the people cried out , saying , God is not a man .
GOLD:	The people gave him a great ovation , shouting , “ It 's the voice of a god , not of a man ! ”

ID:	1406
INPUT:	Hori entzutean , are gehiago beldurtu zen Pilato .
PRED:	When Pilate heard this , he became very afraid .
GOLD:	When Pilate heard this , he was more frightened than ever .

ID:	1407
INPUT:	Begira , Jauna , zerutik , zeure bizileku santudistiratsu horretatik : Non dirazure maitemina eta indarra ? Non zure bihotz samurraeta errukia ? Ez bitez egon guregandik urrun !
PRED:	Look , O Lord , from heaven , from your holy place ; where is your strength and strength ? Where is your strength and strength ? Where is your mercy and mercy , and do n't turn away from us ?
GOLD:	Lord , look down from heaven ; look from your holy , glorious home , and see us.Where is the passion and the mightyou used to show on our behalf ? Where are your mercy and compassion now ?

ID:	1408
INPUT:	bereizmenak zainduko zaitu eta zentzu onak babestuko ;
PRED:	He will keep you safe , and you will be wise .
GOLD:	Wise choices will watch over you.Understanding will keep you safe .

ID:	1409
INPUT:	Leizera bota , sarrera giltzaz itxi eta zigilatu egin zuen mila urteak bete arte , aurrerantzean herriak lilura ez zitzan ; mila urteon ondoren , pixka baterako aske gelditu behar du .
PRED:	And he entered into the boat , and shut him into the boat until the year , until the people were shut up before the people , and they would not be a thousand years .
GOLD:	The angel threw him into the bottomless pit , which he then shut and locked so Satan could not deceive the nations anymore until the thousand years were finished . Afterward he must be released for a little while .

ID:	1410
INPUT:	Ez egin hitzarmenik haiekin , ezta haien jainkoekin ere .
PRED:	Do not make a covenant with them , nor with their gods .
GOLD:	“ Make no treaties with them or their gods .

ID:	1411
INPUT:	Nork ulertu hodeien zabaltzeaeta trumoien burrundara zeruan ?
PRED:	Who hath called the clouds , and the voice of the clouds , and the sound of the heavens ?
GOLD:	Who can understand the spreading of the cloudsand the thunder that rolls forth from heaven ?

ID:	1412
INPUT:	Nork sinetsi du gure mezua ? Nori agertu dio Jaunakbere ahalmena ?
PRED:	Who has believed our word ? And who has believed the word of the Lord ?
GOLD:	Who has believed our message ? To whom has the Lord revealed his powerful arm ?

ID:	1413
INPUT:	Eta berak aztertuko bazintuzte , zer ? Gizakia bezala engainatuko ote zenukete ?
PRED:	And what shall he break you ? or what shall ye judge us as men ?
GOLD:	What will happen when he finds out what you are doing ? Can you fool him as easily as you fool people ?

ID:	1414
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : « Zatozte zuek bakarrik leku gorde batera , eta hartu atseden pixka bat » . Asko baitziren joan-etorri zebiltzanak , eta ez zuten jateko astirik ere .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Come to a place where there is no place where there is no place . ” And they came and did not eat any food .
GOLD:	Then Jesus said , “ Let 's go off by ourselves to a quiet place and rest awhile . ” He said this because there were so many people coming and going that Jesus and his apostles did n't even have time to eat .

ID:	1415
INPUT:	Ezari-ezarian botako ditut zuen aurretik , lurralde hartaz jabetzeko adina zuek ugaldu arte .
PRED:	I will drive them out before you in the land , until you have many days to possess it .
GOLD:	I will drive them out a little at a time until your population has increased enough to take possession of the land .

ID:	1416
INPUT:	Egun hartan Jaunak , beren Jainkoak , salbatuko du bere herria , artzainak artaldea bezala ; distira egingo dute herritarrekberen lurraldean , diadema bateko harribitxiek bezala .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in that day , that the Lord their God shall save his people as a shepherd , and they shall be saved as a shepherd , and they shall be as a flock of a flock , as a flock of a flock .
GOLD:	On that day the Lord their God will rescue his people , just as a shepherd rescues his sheep.They will sparkle in his landlike jewels in a crown .

ID:	1417
INPUT:	Baina askatasuna ematen duen lege bikaina hausnartu eta horri tinko eusten diona — ez erraz ahazten duen entzule bezala , benetako betetzaile bezala baizik — , hori zoriontsu izango da legea betez .
PRED:	But if anyone does not obey the law , he who does not forget the law , as one who does not forget the law , he will be blessed as one who hears the law .
GOLD:	But if you look carefully into the perfect law that sets you free , and if you do what it says and do n't forget what you heard , then God will bless you for doing it .

ID:	1418
INPUT:	Pedrok esan zion : « Ananias , zergatik utzi diozu Satanasi zure gogoaz nagusitzen Espiritu Santuari gezurra esateko , soroaren ordainetik zati bat zeuretzat gordez ?
PRED:	Peter said to him , “ Why have you left Satan ? Why have you left your master Satan in the Holy Spirit ? How long will you have a lie for you ?
GOLD:	Then Peter said , “ Ananias , why have you let Satan fill your heart ? You lied to the Holy Spirit , and you kept some of the money for yourself .

ID:	1419
INPUT:	Orduan esango duzu : « Zergatik gaitzetsi ote nuen heziketa ? Zergatik mespretxatu ote zentzarazpena ?
PRED:	Then you will say , “ Why did I break my bed ? Why did I despised ?
GOLD:	You will say , “ How I hated discipline ! If only I had not ignored all the warnings !

ID:	1420
INPUT:	Gero , Jainkoaren etxean Obed-Edomen ardurapean zeuden urre , zilar eta tresna guztiak , jauregiko altxortegiko ondasunak eta gatibuak bahituran harturik , Samariara itzuli zen .
PRED:	And he took all the vessels of the vessels of the house of God , and all the vessels of the king 's house , and all the vessels of the treasures of the king 's house , and returned to Samaria .
GOLD:	He carried off all the gold and silver and all the articles from the Temple of God that had been in the care of Obed-edom . He also seized the treasures of the royal palace , along with hostages , and then returned to Samaria .

ID:	1421
INPUT:	Beste gauza asko ere esan zuten ordezkari haiek Jainko Jaunaren eta honen zerbitzari Ezekiasen kontra .
PRED:	They also said many things to Hezekiah and to his servants , and to his servants Hezekiah .
GOLD:	And Sennacherib 's officers further mocked the Lord God and his servant Hezekiah , heaping insult upon insult .

ID:	1422
INPUT:	« Gizon-emakumeak , sexu-harremanak izan dituztenean , bainatu egingo dira eta kutsaturik geldituko arratsa arte .
PRED:	“ When men are defiled , they will be unclean until evening .
GOLD:	After a man and a woman have sexual intercourse , they must each bathe in water , and they will remain unclean until the next evening .

ID:	1423
INPUT:	Urrutiratu bidegabekeria zeure etxetik , itzuli Ahaltsuagana , eta leheneratu egingo zaitu .
PRED:	Turn away from your house , and turn back to the Almighty , and he will destroy you .
GOLD:	If you return to the Almighty , you will be restored — so clean up your life .

ID:	1424
INPUT:	Bestela baizik , Jainkoak berri ona gure esku jartzeko gai ikusi gaituenez , horren arabera hitz egiten dugu , ez gizakiei atsegin emateko , gure bihotzak aztertzen dituen Jainkoari baizik .
PRED:	But we have seen the Good News that God has given us to do the good news , but we do not do what is right in the sight of men .
GOLD:	For we speak as messengers approved by God to be entrusted with the Good News . Our purpose is to please God , not people . He alone examines the motives of our hearts .

ID:	1425
INPUT:	israeldarrengandik hurbil kanpatu eta uztak hondatu ohi zituzten Gazako sarreraraino , israeldarrak deus gabe utziz , janaririk , ardirik , behirik eta astorik gabe .
PRED:	And the children of Israel came near unto the camp of Gilead , and destroyed them ; and they did not eat any of the cattle , and sheep , and cattle , and cattle , and cattle .
GOLD:	camping in the land and destroying crops as far away as Gaza . They left the Israelites with nothing to eat , taking all the sheep , goats , cattle , and donkeys .

ID:	1426
INPUT:	( Mk 14 , 10-11 ; Lk 22 , 3-6 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus Is Betrayed and Arrested

ID:	1427
INPUT:	Bete garrasiz horien etxeak , bat-batean lapurrak sarraraziz ! Zuloa egin baitzuten ni erortzeko , sareak ipini bidean ni harrapatzeko .
PRED:	And the houses of their houses were filled with a thief , and they cast them into a net , and laid them on the road .
GOLD:	Let screaming be heard from their homesas warriors come suddenly upon them.For they have dug a pit for meand have hidden traps along my path .

ID:	1428
INPUT:	Hala , Jaunarengana itzuli eta esan zion : — Benetan bekatu larria egin du herri honek , urrezko jainkoa eginez .
PRED:	Then he returned to the Lord and said to him , “ This people have sinned . They have sinned , and have sinned with gold . ”
GOLD:	So Moses returned to the Lord and said , “ Oh , what a terrible sin these people have committed . They have made gods of gold for themselves .

ID:	1429
INPUT:	eta helbururantz lehiatzen naiz saria iristeko ; horretara deitzen baitit Jainkoak goitik Kristo Jesusen bitartez .
PRED:	and I come to my head , that I may come to Jerusalem : for God has called me out of the Most High Jesus .
GOLD:	I press on to reach the end of the race and receive the heavenly prize for which God , through Christ Jesus , is calling us .

ID:	1430
INPUT:	Zentzudunak menderatu egiten du haserrea , ohoragarri zaio iraina kontuan ez hartzea .
PRED:	A wise man shall be angry , and a wise man shall not know his name .
GOLD:	Sensible people control their temper ; they earn respect by overlooking wrongs .

ID:	1431
INPUT:	Jauna , zergatik gelditzen zara urrun ? Zergatik ezkutatzen larrialdian ?
PRED:	Lord , why are you left ? Why do you turn away from the womb ?
GOLD:	O Lord , why do you stand so far away ? Why do you hide when I am in trouble ?

ID:	1432
INPUT:	« Jainkoa maite dut » esan eta senideari gorroto diona gezurti da ; izan ere , ikusten duen senidea maite ez duenak ezin du maite ikusten ez duen Jainkoa .
PRED:	“ God says , ‘ I love God , ' and he who loves his brother is a false brother , because he does not love God .
GOLD:	If someone says , “ I love God , ” but hates a fellow believer , that person is a liar ; for if we do n't love people we can see , how can we love God , whom we can not see ?

ID:	1433
INPUT:	Oparigai bakoitzari , dagozkion labore- eta isur-opariak erantsiko dizkiozue , arautua dagoenez .
PRED:	And you shall offer a meal offering to the Lord , and the grain offering , and the drink offering , and the drink offering , and the drink offering .
GOLD:	Each of these offerings must be accompanied by its prescribed grain offering and liquid offering .

ID:	1434
INPUT:	Eta Jaunak deiadar dagibere gudarostearen aurrean ; kontaezinak diraharen gudari-sailak , indartsuakharen aginduak betetzeko . Handia da eta guztiz ikaragarriaJaunaren eguna : nork eman aurpegi ?
PRED:	And the Lord cried out before his army , and his army were in front of his army , to obey his commandments , and to keep his commandments , and to do his commandments ; and who is great ?
GOLD:	The Lord is at the head of the column.He leads them with a shout.This is his mighty army , and they follow his orders.The day of the Lord is an awesome , terrible thing.Who can possibly survive ?

ID:	1435
INPUT:	Orduan , Jesusek eskua luzatu eta ukitu egin zuen , esanez : — Nahi dut , izan zaitez garbi . Berehala , legena garbitu egin zitzaion .
PRED:	Then Jesus stretched out his hand and touched him , and touched him , saying , “ I want you to be clean . ” And the law was clean .
GOLD:	Jesus reached out and touched him . “ I am willing , ” he said . “ Be healed ! ” And instantly the leprosy disappeared .

ID:	1436
INPUT:	Zimri , Elam eta Mediako errege guztiei ;
PRED:	Of all the kings of Persia , Azariah , and all the kings of Persia .
GOLD:	and to the kings of Zimri , Elam , and Media .

ID:	1437
INPUT:	« Zure senide batek bekatu egiten badu , zoaz berarengana eta zentzarazi bakarrean . Jaramon egiten badizu , irabazia duzu senidea .
PRED:	If any of your brothers have sinned , go to him , and teach him in the same way . If you listen to him , you will obey his brother .
GOLD:	“ If another believer sins against you , go privately and point out the offense . If the other person listens and confesses it , you have won that person back .

ID:	1438
INPUT:	Eta horrela jokatuko dute ez Aita , ez ni , ezagutu ez gaituztelako .
PRED:	And they shall do this , because they do not know me , because I am not .
GOLD:	This is because they have never known the Father or me .

ID:	1439
INPUT:	Horregatik — ala ni bizi ! — Sodomarena bera gertatuko zaioMoabi , eta Gomorrarena amondarrei : sasiarte eta gatzagaeta hondamendi bihurtuko dira . Nire herrian bizirik geldituekharrapaka erasoko dieteMoabi eta Amonieta bertako jabe bihurtuko dira » .
PRED:	And he said unto them , Behold , I live in the land of Moab , and the children of Ammon , and the children of Ammon , and the children of Ammon shall be desolate , and the children of Ammon shall be destroyed , and the children of Ammon shall be taken into the land of Moab .
GOLD:	Now , as surely as I live , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , “ Moab and Ammon will be destroyed — destroyed as completely as Sodom and Gomorrah.Their land will become a place of stinging nettles , salt pits , and eternal desolation.The remnant of my people will plunder themand take their land . ”

ID:	1440
INPUT:	Mantuaren barreneko ertza purpura more , gorri eta gorriminezko granadaz apaindu zuten .
PRED:	And the curtain of the tabernacle was made of blue , purple , purple , and scarlet , and scarlet .
GOLD:	They made pomegranates of blue , purple , and scarlet yarn , and attached them to the hem of the robe .

ID:	1441
INPUT:	Abiatu zen , beraz , Abram , Jaunak agindu bezala . Hirurogeita hamabost urte zituen Harandik atera zenean .
PRED:	So Abram went out and did as the Lord had commanded him . When he had commanded him , he went out from there .
GOLD:	So Abram departed as the Lord had instructed , and Lot went with him . Abram was seventy-five years old when he left Haran .

ID:	1442
INPUT:	nardoa , ipurua eta a<unk> raia , kanela eta ereinotza ; intsentsu , mirra , aloe , mota guztietako lurrin bereziak .
PRED:	the body , the bowls , the bowls , the bowls , the bowls , and the incense , and the incense , and all the vessels of the field , and all the vessels of the earth .
GOLD:	nard and saffron , fragrant calamus and cinnamon , with all the trees of frankincense , myrrh , and aloes , and every other lovely spice .

ID:	1443
INPUT:	Gailurrean bizi direnakeraitsi egiten ditu , hiri garaia lurreraino , hautsa jotzeraino botatzen ,
PRED:	He makes the people live in the earth , and he makes them go down to the ground to the ground .
GOLD:	He humbles the proudand brings down the arrogant city.He brings it down to the dust .

ID:	1444
INPUT:	Horregatik bururatu zaigu aldarea eraikitzea ; ez , ordea , erre-opariak eta sakrifizioak eskaintzeko ,
PRED:	For this reason we built an altar , but not to offer burnt offerings and sacrifices .
GOLD:	“ So we decided to build the altar , not for burnt offerings or sacrifices ,

ID:	1445
INPUT:	Errezelarentzat akazia-zurezko lau zutabe egin zituzten , urrez estaliak eta urrezko kakoz hornituak , eta , zilarra urtuz , lau oin egin zizkieten zutabeei .
PRED:	And they made four corners of acacia wood for the altar , with gold , with gold , with gold , with gold , and with gold , and with gold .
GOLD:	For the curtain , he made four posts of acacia wood and four gold hooks . He overlaid the posts with gold and set them in four silver bases .

ID:	1446
INPUT:	« Entzun , zentzudunok : Urruti Jainkoarengandik gaiztakeria , urruti Ahaltsuagandik bidegabekeria !
PRED:	“ Listen , you wise people who are far from God , you who are far away from God , from the Almighty .
GOLD:	“ Listen to me , you who have understanding.Everyone knows that God does n't sin ! The Almighty can do no wrong .

ID:	1447
INPUT:	zuen ondorengo belaunaldiek jakin dezaten etxoletan bizitzen jarri nituela israeldarrak , Egiptotik atera nituenean . Neu naiz Jauna , zuen Jainkoa » .
PRED:	When I brought the children of Israel out of Egypt , that they may know that I brought them out of Egypt . I am the Lord your God . ”
GOLD:	This will remind each new generation of Israelites that I made their ancestors live in shelters when I rescued them from the land of Egypt . I am the Lord your God . ”

ID:	1448
INPUT:	Bere eskuz lurraldea neurtu dueta bakoitzari bere saila izendatu . Betiko izango dira haren jabe , menderik mende biziko bertan .
PRED:	He has taken possession of his own hand , and he has given them their inheritance for ever , and they will live forever .
GOLD:	He has surveyed and divided the landand deeded it over to those creatures.They will possess it forever , from generation to generation .

ID:	1449
INPUT:	Jesus artzain ona
PRED:	Jesus Heals the Good News
GOLD:	Jesus Claims to Be the Son of God

ID:	1450
INPUT:	Beltxatzar , aztien buru zaren hori , badakit jainko santuen espirituak gidatzen zaituela eta misterio zailik ez dagoela zuretzat . Azal iezadazu , bada , ametsaren esanahia .
PRED:	I know that the spirit of the Most Holy Spirit has come upon you , and I know that it is not known to you , so that you may tell me the dream . ”
GOLD:	So I issued an order calling in all the wise men of Babylon , so they could tell me what my dream meant .

ID:	1451
INPUT:	Zu , beso zabalik dagoen kerubin babesle zinen , Jainkoaren mendi santuan zeunden eta ikatz gorien artean ibiltzen zinen .
PRED:	And thou shalt open the fire of God , and the fire of the Holy One , and the fire of the Most Holy One , and the fire of God , and the fire of the Most Holy One .
GOLD:	I ordained and anointed youas the mighty angelic guardian.You had access to the holy mountain of Godand walked among the stones of fire .

ID:	1452
INPUT:	Halako batean , ordea , jentilek eta juduek , agintariekin batera , gogorrera jo eta apostoluak harrika hiltzea erabaki zuten ;
PRED:	But the Jews and the Jews went out with the Jews and tried to kill the apostles and the apostles .
GOLD:	Then a mob of Gentiles and Jews , along with their leaders , decided to attack and stone them .

ID:	1453
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Txaloka eta saltoka , poztu egin zarete Israel herriari gertatuaz , biziki mespretxatzen duzuelako ;
PRED:	“ Thus says the Lord God : You are glad , because you have rejected the house of Israel , because you despised the days of your life .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Because you clapped and danced and cheered with glee at the destruction of my people ,

ID:	1454
INPUT:	Jesus bere gogoz heriotzara ( 14 , <unk> )
PRED:	Jesus Heals to Pilate
GOLD:	Judas Agrees to Betray Jesus

ID:	1455
INPUT:	Joramen erregealdian Judaren agintearen aurka jaiki ziren edomdarrak , berentzat erregea izendatuz .
PRED:	And the sons of Edom rose up against the king of Judah , and set up his kingdom as king .
GOLD:	During Jehoram 's reign , the Edomites revolted against Judah and crowned their own king .

ID:	1456
INPUT:	Simonek azaldu digu , nola hasiera-hasieratik Jainkoak jentilen artetik beretzat herri bat aukeratu nahi izan duen .
PRED:	Simon has appeared to us how he chose a people from the beginning of the beginning of the beginning .
GOLD:	Peter has told you about the time God first visited the Gentiles to take from them a people for himself .

ID:	1457
INPUT:	Ondoren , bere ikasleei esan zien Jesusek : « Horregatik diotsuet : Ez kezkatu bizitzeko zer jango , edota gorputza zerez jantziko .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to his disciples , “ I say to you , ‘ Do n't eat anything , or eat any food . '
GOLD:	Then , turning to his disciples , Jesus said , “ That is why I tell you not to worry about everyday life — whether you have enough food to eat or enough clothes to wear .

ID:	1458
INPUT:	Jaunak segurtatzen ditu gizakiaren pausoaketa atsegin duen bidetik eramaten .
PRED:	And the Lord shall fear the Lord , and he shall bring them out of the way of men .
GOLD:	The Lord directs the steps of the godly.He delights in every detail of their lives .

ID:	1459
INPUT:	Esklaboek , ordea — nahiz diruz erositakoek nahiz etxean jaiotakoek — , jan dezakete apaizaren janaritik .
PRED:	But the servants , or those who are in the house , and those who are in the house , shall eat of the priest 's food .
GOLD:	However , if the priest buys a slave for himself , the slave may eat from the sacred offerings . And if his slaves have children , they also may share his food .

ID:	1460
INPUT:	Babes-hiriak
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Cities of Refuge

ID:	1461
INPUT:	Gainera , esan zien : « Zoazte eta jan haragi guria , edan edari bikainak , eta bidali janaria ezer ez dutenei ere , egun hau Jaunari sagaratua baita . Ez atsekabetu , Jaunarengandiko pozak ematen baitizue indar ! »
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Go and eat the meat , and eat the meat , and drink , and do not drink it , for it is holy to the Lord , for it is holy for you . ”
GOLD:	And Nehemiah continued , “ Go and celebrate with a feast of rich foods and sweet drinks , and share gifts of food with people who have nothing prepared . This is a sacred day before our Lord . Do n't be dejected and sad , for the joy of the Lord is your strength ! ”

ID:	1462
INPUT:	Defentsa gabe gelditu da Juda . Zurezko Zutabeen Etxekoarmategira jo duzue orduan ;
PRED:	Judah is left without cause , and you have gone into your house .
GOLD:	Judah 's defenses have been stripped away.You run to the armory for your weapons .

ID:	1463
INPUT:	Eta egin zuen guztia oso ona zela ikusi zuen Jainkoak . Honela , seigarren eguna burutu zen .
PRED:	And God saw that all that was good , and he saw that it was good . And it was the sixth day .
GOLD:	Then God looked over all he had made , and he saw that it was very good ! And evening passed and morning came , marking the sixth day .

ID:	1464
INPUT:	Hurrengo larunbatean , ia hiritar guztiak bildu ziren Jaunaren mezua entzutera .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the Sabbath day , that all the people gathered together together to hear the word of the Lord .
GOLD:	The following week almost the entire city turned out to hear them preach the word of the Lord .

ID:	1465
INPUT:	gainera , Gabai eta Salai ; <unk> benjamindar guztira .
PRED:	And the children of Benjamin , and the children of Benjamin , and the children of Benjamin , and the children of Benjamin .
GOLD:	After him were Gabbai and Sallai and a total of 928 relatives .

ID:	1466
INPUT:	Artaxerxesen erregealdiko hogeigarren urtean Judako gobernari izendatu ninduten , eta hogeita hamabigarren urtea arte iraun nuen karguan . Hamabi urte horietan , nik eta nire senideek ez dugu gobernariari dagokion ordainik jaso .
PRED:	In the first year of the reign of Asher king of Judah , in the first year of the month , in the month of the month , in the first year of the month , in the month , in the month of the month , in the month , in the year of the month , in the year of the house of Asher .
GOLD:	For the entire twelve years that I was governor of Judah — from the twentieth year to the thirty-second year of the reign of King Artaxerxes — neither I nor my officials drew on our official food allowance .

ID:	1467
INPUT:	Bekatuak aitortu eta otoitz egin
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Restore Wandering Believers

ID:	1468
INPUT:	Lau zutabe eta lau oinak brontzezkoak ziren , eta kakoak zilarrezkoak ; zutabe-gainak eta ziriak , berriz , zilarrez estaliak .
PRED:	The four corners of bronze and bronze were of bronze , and their pillars were of silver , and their sockets , and their sockets , and their sockets , and their sockets .
GOLD:	It was supported by four posts , each set securely in its own bronze base . The tops of the posts were overlaid with silver , and the hooks and rings were also made of silver .

ID:	1469
INPUT:	Baina harriak kendu , etxea karraskatu eta zuritu ondoren , mantxa berriro sortzen bada ,
PRED:	But if the stone has taken away the house , then the house is taken away , then the ark is lifted up again .
GOLD:	“ But if the mildew reappears after all the stones have been replaced and the house has been scraped and replastered ,

ID:	1470
INPUT:	Niregana joko duen herriakXaron lautada izango duardien bazkaleku , Akor harana abelgorrien etzaleku .
PRED:	The people of the land will come to me in the valley of the Lord . They will be a place for the sheep of rams , a young bull , a young bull , a young bull .
GOLD:	The plain of Sharon will again be filled with flocksfor my people who have searched for me , and the valley of Achor will be a place to pasture herds .

ID:	1471
INPUT:	Nire aurka ahozabal , honela diote : « Hara , guk geuk ikusi dugu ! »
PRED:	They say to my voice , “ Look , we have seen it . ”
GOLD:	They shout , “ Aha ! Aha ! With our own eyes we saw him do it ! ”

ID:	1472
INPUT:	Printzea atalondora sartuko da kanpoko ataritik eta ate-muntagaren kontra geldituko . Apaizek printzearen erre-oparia eta elkartasun-opariak eskainiko dituzte ; gero , printzea atalasean ahuspeztu eta irten egingo da , baina atea ez da arratsa arte itxiko .
PRED:	The prince shall enter into the court of the court , and he shall stand against the court , and the priests shall offer the burnt offering , and the burnt offering , and the burnt offering shall be shut up , and the prince shall not come out .
GOLD:	The prince will enter the entry room of the gateway from the outside . Then he will stand by the gatepost while the priest offers his burnt offering and peace offering . He will bow down in worship inside the gateway passage and then go back out the way he came . The gateway will not be closed until evening .

ID:	1473
INPUT:	Gizasemeetan ederrena zara , ezpainetatik xarma darizu , Jainkoak betidanik bedeinkatu baitzaitu !
PRED:	You are very beautiful , but you are beautiful , because God has blessed you forever .
GOLD:	Put on your sword , O mighty warrior ! You are so glorious , so majestic !

ID:	1474
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jainkoaz jakin daitekeena agerian dute , Jainkoak berak agertu baitie .
PRED:	For they have heard of God , for God has revealed to them .
GOLD:	They know the truth about God because he has made it obvious to them .

ID:	1475
INPUT:	Herodesen heriotza
PRED:	Herod 's death
GOLD:	The Death of Herod Agrippa

ID:	1476
INPUT:	Asueroren erregealdiaren zazpigarren urteko hamargarren hilean , hots , Tebet hilean , eraman zuten Ester erregearen aurrera .
PRED:	On the tenth day of the seventh month , in the seventh month , in the seventh month , they brought Haman to the king .
GOLD:	Esther was taken to King Xerxes at the royal palace in early winter of the seventh year of his reign .

ID:	1477
INPUT:	Jerusalemen zigorra iragarria
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Judgment on Israel 's Leaders

ID:	1478
INPUT:	Eta hi , mendia besteko harri-multzo hori , berdindu egingo hau Zorobabelek . Honek aterako du tenplua burutuko duen harria . Orduan , jendeak honela egingo du deiadar : Hori bai ederra , hori ! »
PRED:	And he shall speak this song to the mountain , and he shall bring it into the house of the Lord : and the people shall cry out , saying , This is a great voice .
GOLD:	Nothing , not even a mighty mountain , will stand in Zerubbabel 's way ; it will become a level plain before him ! And when Zerubbabel sets the final stone of the Temple in place , the people will shout : ‘ May God bless it ! May God bless it ! ' ”

ID:	1479
INPUT:	Non da Joben indarra ?
PRED:	Joseph is the power of Joseph
GOLD:	Challenges Job Again

ID:	1480
INPUT:	Batek ehun seme-alaba ukan , urte luzez bizieta anitz egun harturik ere , bere ondasunezaski gozatzen ez badu , eta hilobitarako ere ez badu , horra zer diodan : halakoahaur-galdua baino okerrago da .
PRED:	A hundred sons , and many years , and many years , if they do not have many days , they do not know what I say to them , “ The child is greater than the child . ”
GOLD:	A man might have a hundred children and live to be very old . But if he finds no satisfaction in life and does n't even get a decent burial , it would have been better for him to be born dead .

ID:	1481
INPUT:	« Orduan , Jaunak esan zidan : Ebaki lehengoak bezalako beste bi harlauza ; egin zurezko kutxa ere , eta zatozkit mendira .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Make two tablets of stone , just as the first , and let me go up to the mountain .
GOLD:	“ At that time the Lord said to me , ‘ Chisel out two stone tablets like the first ones . Also make a wooden Ark — a sacred chest to store them in . Come up to me on the mountain ,

ID:	1482
INPUT:	Mikak eginiko irudia beren artean izan zuten , Jainkoaren etxea Xilon egon zen bitartean .
PRED:	And the money was among them , while the house of God was in Shiloh .
GOLD:	So Micah 's carved image was worshiped by the tribe of Dan as long as the Tabernacle of God remained at Shiloh .

ID:	1483
INPUT:	Dalilak esan zion Samsoni : — Esadazu nondik duzun horrelako indarra eta nola lotu zaitzaketen zu menderatzeko .
PRED:	Samson said to Samson , “ Tell me what you have done to me , and how can you be able to help you . ”
GOLD:	So Delilah said to Samson , “ Please tell me what makes you so strong and what it would take to tie you up securely . ”

ID:	1484
INPUT:	« Norbaitek , Jaunari sagaratu beharreko emaitzetan iruzur eginez , oharkabean bekatu egiten badu , ahari akats gabea eramango dio Jaunari ordain-oparitzat ; zilarretan hainbesteko bat balioko du ahariak , santutegiko pisu-neurriaren arabera .
PRED:	“ If a man has been holy to the Lord , he must offer a sin offering to the Lord . He must bring it to the Lord . He must offer a grain offering to the Lord . He must give it to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ If one of you commits a sin by unintentionally defiling the Lord 's sacred property , you must bring a guilt offering to the Lord . The offering must be your own ram with no defects , or you may buy one of equal value with silver , as measured by the weight of the sanctuary shekel .

ID:	1485
INPUT:	Gure errege , buruzagi , apaiz eta gurasoekez dute bete zure irakaspena , ez dituzte aditu aginduak , ezta eman zenizkienburubideak ere .
PRED:	Our king and our fathers have not kept thy law , and have not kept thy commandments , and have not kept the commandments of thy commandments , nor have they kept thy commandments .
GOLD:	Our kings , leaders , priests , and ancestors did not obey your Law or listen to the warnings in your commands and laws .

ID:	1486
INPUT:	Bazen han Demetrio zeritzan zilargin bat . Artemisa jainkosaren tenpluko iruditxoak landu ohi zituen zilarrez , artisauei irabazi ederra ematen zielarik .
PRED:	And there was a man whose name was Didymus , and he made the image of the house of the god of the god of the house of the god of the god of the god , and brought it to the sheep .
GOLD:	It began with Demetrius , a silversmith who had a large business manufacturing silver shrines of the Greek goddess Artemis . He kept many craftsmen busy .

ID:	1487
INPUT:	halaxe Kristo ere : behin bakarrik izan zen oparitzat eskainia guztien bekatuak desegiteko , eta gero bigarrenez agertuko da , bekatuarekin zerikusirik gabe , beraren zain daudenak salbatzera .
PRED:	This is what Christ says : There is no sin for all the sins of the sin offering , so that they may be clean , and they may be saved as their sins .
GOLD:	so also Christ was offered once for all time as a sacrifice to take away the sins of many people . He will come again , not to deal with our sins , but to bring salvation to all who are eagerly waiting for him .

ID:	1488
INPUT:	Neure herriarekin haserre nintzela , neure ondarea zapuztu egin nueneta zure eskuetara eman . Zuk ez zenien gupidarik izan , zaharrak ere lehertu egin zenituenzeure uztarri astunaz .
PRED:	I was angry with my people , and you took my inheritance and delivered them into your hand , and you did not know the days of your people .
GOLD:	For I was angry with my chosen peopleand punished them by letting them fall into your hands.But you , Babylon , showed them no mercy.You oppressed even the elderly .

ID:	1489
INPUT:	Hiriko gizonek irten eta eraso egin zioten Joabi . Han erori ziren Daviden gudari eta gudalburu batzuk , baita Urias hitita ere .
PRED:	And the men of the city went out and fought against Joab . And there were some of the army of David , and Uriah the priest , and Uriah .
GOLD:	And when the enemy soldiers came out of the city to fight , Uriah the Hittite was killed along with several other Israelite soldiers .

ID:	1490
INPUT:	Baina apaizak ikusten badu ile zuririk ez duela eta azalekoa baino sakonagoa ez dela , baizik eta zurbilduz doala , aparte edukiko du gaixoa zazpi egunez .
PRED:	But if the priest saw that there is no plague in the skin , he is not greater than the skin , but the priest is not greater than the skin , and the priest shall pronounce him seven days .
GOLD:	But if the priest finds no white hair on the affected area and the problem appears to be no more than skin-deep and has faded , the priest must quarantine the person for seven days .

ID:	1491
INPUT:	Samuelen azken hitzaldia
PRED:	Samuel and Samuel
GOLD:	Samuel 's Farewell Address

ID:	1492
INPUT:	Ez du izango berri txarren beldurrik , adoretsu dago , Jaunarenganako konfiantzaz ;
PRED:	He shall not be afraid , neither shall he be afraid , nor shall he trust in the Lord .
GOLD:	They do not fear bad news ; they confidently trust the Lord to care for them .

ID:	1493
INPUT:	Aurretik joan zen bera , eta zazpi aldiz ahuspeztu zen lurrean bere anaiarengana hurbildu ahala .
PRED:	And he went and bowed down before his brother seven times , and bowed down on the ground seven times .
GOLD:	Then Jacob went on ahead . As he approached his brother , he bowed to the ground seven times before him .

ID:	1494
INPUT:	Gorrotoa duenari ez zaio hitzetan igartzen , baina maltzurkeriaz betea du barrua .
PRED:	A person who does n't want to do what is right , but the heart of the mouth of his mouth is filled with his mouth .
GOLD:	People may cover their hatred with pleasant words , but they 're deceiving you .

ID:	1495
INPUT:	Filistearren buruzagiek emakumeagana joan eta esan zioten : — Atera iezaiozu azpikeriaz Samsoni nondik duen halako indarra eta nola harrapa dezakegun , lotu eta menderatzeko . Bakoitzak mila eta ehun zilarrezko txanpon emango dizkizugu .
PRED:	And the princes of the Philistines came unto the woman , and said unto her , Go forth out of the basket of Samson , and let us take the strength of Samson , and take a hundred talents of silver , and a hundred talents of silver , and a hundred talents of silver .
GOLD:	The rulers of the Philistines went to her and said , “ Entice Samson to tell you what makes him so strong and how he can be overpowered and tied up securely . Then each of us will give you 1,100 pieces of silver . ”

ID:	1496
INPUT:	Ea bada , sendotu beso ahulduak eta belaun makalduak ,
PRED:	So now you will be strong and weak , and you will be weak .
GOLD:	So take a new grip with your tired hands and strengthen your weak knees .

ID:	1497
INPUT:	Aldi haietan ez zen erregerik Israelen . Bakoitzak egoki iruditzen zitzaiona egin ohi zuen .
PRED:	At that time there was no king in Israel . Each man opened his heart .
GOLD:	In those days Israel had no king ; all the people did whatever seemed right in their own eyes .

ID:	1498
INPUT:	« Gure Jaun eta Jainko hori , zu bazara noraintza , ohorea eta ahalmenahartzeko , zeuk baitzenituengauza guztiak egineta , zuk nahi izan duzulako , baitira sortu eta dira oraindik » .
PRED:	“ You are our Lord our God and glory and power , for you have done all these things , because you have done all things , and now you have been born . ”
GOLD:	“ You are worthy , O Lord our God , to receive glory and honor and power.For you created all things , and they exist because you created what you pleased . ”

ID:	1499
INPUT:	Eliz elkarte bakoitzean arduradunak izendatu zituzten eta , otoitz eta barau egin ondoren , Jaunari gomendatu zizkioten , harengan sinetsi baitzuten .
PRED:	And when the elders of the church were called together , they prayed and prayed and prayed , because they believed in him .
GOLD:	Paul and Barnabas also appointed elders in every church . With prayer and fasting , they turned the elders over to the care of the Lord , in whom they had put their trust .

ID:	1500
INPUT:	Barukek erantzun zien : — Jeremiasek berak esan dizkit banan-banan hitz guztiok eta nik liburuan idatzi ditut tintaz .
PRED:	Balaam said to them , “ All these words I have written in the book of the Lord , and I have written in the book . ”
GOLD:	So Baruch explained , “ Jeremiah dictated them , and I wrote them down in ink , word for word , on this scroll . ”

ID:	1501
INPUT:	Gero , Ezekiasek esan zion biltzarrari : « Zuek ere Jaunarentzako eskua bete eskaintza dakarzue . Aurreratu eta ekarri Jaunaren etxera zeuen oparigaiak eta esker oneko eskaintzak » . Orduan , jendeak esker oneko eskaintzak egin zituen . Eskuzabalenek erre-opariak ere egin zituzten .
PRED:	Then Hezekiah said to the assembly , “ You have brought the offerings of the Lord , and bring it to the house of the Lord , and bring it to the house of the Lord , and offer sacrifices to the Lord . ” And the people offered sacrifices to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then Hezekiah declared , “ Now that you have consecrated yourselves to the Lord , bring your sacrifices and thanksgiving offerings to the Temple of the Lord . ” So the people brought their sacrifices and thanksgiving offerings , and all whose hearts were willing brought burnt offerings , too .

ID:	1502
INPUT:	Amatzias , Judako errege
PRED:	King Amaziah of Judah
GOLD:	Amaziah Rules in Judah

ID:	1503
INPUT:	Bere nagusi egiptoarraren etxean bizi zen Jose . Dena ongi ateratzen zitzaion , Jauna berekin baitzuen .
PRED:	And he lived in the house of his lord Joseph ; and the Lord was with him , for he was with him .
GOLD:	The Lord was with Joseph , so he succeeded in everything he did as he served in the home of his Egyptian master .

ID:	1504
INPUT:	Jonatanek , ordea , ez zuen entzun bere aitak jendeari ezarritako zin-hitza . Luzatu zuen , beraz , eskuan zeraman makila-muturra eta , eztitan sarturik , ahora eraman zuen . Bat-batean begiak argitu zitzaizkion .
PRED:	But Jonathan did not listen to the words of his father 's people . So he took him into his hand , and brought him into his hand , and brought him into his hand , and his eyes opened his eyes , and his eyes .
GOLD:	But Jonathan had not heard his father 's command , and he dipped the end of his stick into a piece of honeycomb and ate the honey . After he had eaten it , he felt refreshed .

ID:	1505
INPUT:	Etengabe jarraituko diot zure legeari , beti eta beti .
PRED:	I will keep your statutes forever and ever .
GOLD:	I will keep on obeying your instructionsforever and ever .

ID:	1506
INPUT:	Gutuna jasotzean , erregearen hirurogeita hamar ondorengoei lepoa moztu zieten eta buruak , saskitan harturik , Izreelera bidali zizkioten Jehuri .
PRED:	When the battle was finished , they cut off the heads of the king 's sons , and cut off the heads of the heads of the king 's sons , and sent him to Jezreel .
GOLD:	When the letter arrived , the leaders killed all seventy of the king 's sons . They placed their heads in baskets and presented them to Jehu at Jezreel .

ID:	1507
INPUT:	Baina oroitzen naiz itxaropena susperrarazten didan zerbaitez :
PRED:	But I remember my hope , for I hope in my hope :
GOLD:	Yet I still dare to hopewhen I remember this :

ID:	1508
INPUT:	Baina Paulok deiadar egin zion : — Ez egin kalterik zeure buruari , denok hemen gaude eta .
PRED:	But Paul cried out to him , “ Do n't do anything wrong to you . We are here . ”
GOLD:	But Paul shouted to him , “ Stop ! Do n't kill yourself ! We are all here ! ”

ID:	1509
INPUT:	« Idatzi orain esango dizudan kantika ; irakatsi israeldarrei eta errepika dezatela , kantika hori lekuko izango baitut beraien kontra .
PRED:	“ Now I will write this song to you , and you will teach the people of Israel , and they will be a witness against them .
GOLD:	“ So write down the words of this song , and teach it to the people of Israel . Help them learn it , so it may serve as a witness for me against them .

ID:	1510
INPUT:	Balaamek Israelen etorkizun oparoa iragarri
PRED:	Balaam and Balak
GOLD:	Balaam 's Final Messages

ID:	1511
INPUT:	Astindu ederra eman zien eta sarraski handia egin . Ondoren , Etamgo haitzarteko leize-zulo batera jaitsi zen bizitzera .
PRED:	And he took it into a great sleep , and made it great ; and he went down into the rock of the rock of the rock .
GOLD:	So he attacked the Philistines with great fury and killed many of them . Then he went to live in a cave in the rock of Etam .

ID:	1512
INPUT:	Beste seinale bat agertu zen zeruan : herensuge gorri handi bat , zazpi buru eta hamar adar zituena , eta buruetan koroa bana .
PRED:	And another sign appeared in heaven : and there was a great snake , and ten heads , and ten heads , and ten heads , and ten heads .
GOLD:	Then I witnessed in heaven another significant event . I saw a large red dragon with seven heads and ten horns , with seven crowns on his heads .

ID:	1513
INPUT:	Fede heldua dugunok fede heldugabekoen ahuleziak eraman behar ditugu , geuri atsegin zaiguna bilatu gabe .
PRED:	By faith we will be brought to the faith of the faith , and we will not do what is right in our sight .
GOLD:	We who are strong must be considerate of those who are sensitive about things like this . We must not just please ourselves .

ID:	1514
INPUT:	horregatik , Israelgo mendiok , entzun nik , Jainko Jaunak , zuei guztioi — mendi eta muino , erreka eta haran , hondaturiko toki eta hutsik zaudeten hiri , inguruko nazio guztien harrapakin eta iseka-gai izan zaretenoi — adierazten dizuedan mezua :
PRED:	Therefore hear , O mountains of Israel , and say unto you , Thus saith the Lord God , all ye mountains , and every city , and every city , and every city , and every city , and every city , and every city , and every city that I have spoken unto you .
GOLD:	Therefore , O mountains of Israel , hear the word of the Sovereign Lord . He speaks to the hills and mountains , ravines and valleys , and to ruined wastes and long-deserted cities that have been destroyed and mocked by the surrounding nations .

ID:	1515
INPUT:	Bi zutabe haiek tenpluaren aurrealdean ezarri zituen ezker-eskuin ; eskuinekoari « Jakin » deitu zion , eta ezkerrekoari « Boaz » .
PRED:	And he set them on the right side of the temple , and set them on the right side of the house , and called the left hand of the left .
GOLD:	Then he set up the two pillars at the entrance of the Temple , one to the south of the entrance and the other to the north . He named the one on the south Jakin , and the one on the north Boaz .

ID:	1516
INPUT:	Ba , beldurrez dar-dar geldituko dira , zintzoen elkartean baitago Jauna .
PRED:	They will be afraid of fear , for the Lord is in the midst of the righteous .
GOLD:	Terror will grip them , for God is with those who obey him .

ID:	1517
INPUT:	Efraimen leinukoek ezin izan zituzten bota Gezerko kanaandarrak ; horregatik , kanaandarrak efraimdarren artean bizi izan ziren Gezerren .
PRED:	The sons of Ephraim could not drive out the Canaanites in the land of Ephraim . So the people of Ephraim lived among the children of Ephraim .
GOLD:	The tribe of Ephraim failed to drive out the Canaanites living in Gezer , so the Canaanites continued to live there among them .

ID:	1518
INPUT:	Emakume tekoarrak erregeagana joan eta , lurreraino makurturik , esan zion : — Lagundu , errege jauna !
PRED:	Then the woman went to the king and bowed down to the ground , and said to him , “ Please let my lord the king . ”
GOLD:	When the woman from Tekoa approached the king , she bowed with her face to the ground in deep respect and cried out , “ O king ! Help me ! ”

ID:	1519
INPUT:	Hitz egin behar dut , hustu eta lasaitzeko ; ahoa zabaldu eta erantzun egingo dut .
PRED:	I will speak to you , and I will open my mouth , and I will answer .
GOLD:	I must speak to find relief , so let me give my answers .

ID:	1520
INPUT:	Izan ere , herri honek gogortu egin ditu buru-bihotzak , gortu belarriak , itsutu begiak . Ez bezate beren begiez ikus , ez belarriez entzun , ezta buruaz ulertu ere , horrela niregana bihur ez daitezen eta salba ez ditzadan .
PRED:	For this people hath loved their heart , and their ears , and their ears , and their ears , and their eyes shall not see their eyes , nor their ears , nor their ears , nor their ears , nor their ears , and they shall be saved .
GOLD:	For the hearts of these people are hardened , and their ears can not hear , and they have closed their eyes — so their eyes can not see , and their ears can not hear , and their hearts can not understand , and they can not turn to meand let me heal them . '

ID:	1521
INPUT:	Miktam . DavidenaGorde nazazu , Jauna , zuregan baitut babesa .
PRED:	O Lord , save me , for I am in thee ; for I am in thee .
GOLD:	Keep me safe , O God , for I have come to you for refuge .

ID:	1522
INPUT:	Zure masailakgranada ebaki baten bi erdiak , musu-estalkipean .
PRED:	Your hair is like a covering of fine gold , and your covering is under the covering of a covering .
GOLD:	Your cheeks are like rosy pomegranatesbehind your veil .

ID:	1523
INPUT:	Hala , ura ondu egin zen gaurdaino , Eliseok esan bezala .
PRED:	And it came to pass , as Elisha had said unto this day .
GOLD:	And the water has remained pure ever since , just as Elisha said .

ID:	1524
INPUT:	Erregeak berriro beste buruzagi bat bidali zuen Eliasengana , beste berrogeita hamar gizonekin . Buruzagiak esan zion Eliasi : — Jainkoaren gizon , berehala jaisteko agintzen dizu erregeak .
PRED:	And the king sent another ruler over Elijah , and he went to Elijah , and ten men with him . And the king said to Elijah , Go down to the man of God .
GOLD:	So the king sent another captain with fifty men . The captain said to him , “ Man of God , the king demands that you come down at once . ”

ID:	1525
INPUT:	“ Hau da aspertzea ! ” , diozue , ni mespretxatuz . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord All-Powerful says : “ You have rejected me ! ” says the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	You say , ‘ It 's too hard to serve the Lord , ' and you turn up your noses at my commands , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . “ Think of it ! Animals that are stolen and crippled and sick are being presented as offerings ! Should I accept from you such offerings as these ? ” asks the Lord .

ID:	1526
INPUT:	Jubileu Urtean , ordea , lursaila jatorrizko jabearen eskuetara itzuliko da , hau da , erosia izan zitzaionagana » .
PRED:	But it shall come to pass in the fields of the field , that it may return to the land of the field , that it may be a possession of the field .
GOLD:	In the Year of Jubilee the field must be returned to the person from whom he purchased it , the one who inherited it as family property .

ID:	1527
INPUT:	Esan , bada , nik , Jainko Jaunak , diodan hau : Ez da nire hitzik atzeratuko , bete egingo da esaten dudana . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	So say to me , “ This is what the Sovereign Lord God says : He will not speak to me , ” says the Lord God .
GOLD:	Therefore , tell them , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : No more delay ! I will now do everything I have threatened . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ' ”

ID:	1528
INPUT:	Israelgo leinu guztien izen-bilketa senitarteka eta familiaka egin zen , gudurako gai ziren hogei urtetik gorako gizonezkoak banan-banan erroldatuz . Hona leinu bakoitzak eman zuen emaitza : Jakoben , Israel ere deituaren , lehen-seme Rubenen leinuak 46 . 500 ; Simeonen leinuak <unk> . 300 ; Gaden leinuak 45 . <unk> ; Judaren leinuak 74 . 600 ; Isakarren leinuak 54 . 400 ; Zabulonen leinuak 57 . 400 ; Joseren semeen leinuek : Efraimenak 40 . 500 , eta Manasesenak 32 . 200 ; Benjaminen leinuak 35 . 400 ; Danen leinuak <unk> . <unk> ; Axerren leinuak 41 . 500 ; Neftaliren leinuak 53 . 400 .
PRED:	These are the names of the sons of Israel according to the families of the families of the families of the sons of Reuben , according to their families ; and the names of the sons of Reuben , the sons of Reuben , the sons of Reuben , the sons of Reuben , the sons of Reuben , and the sons of Simeon ; and the sons of Simeon , the sons of Simeon , the sons of Reuben , the sons of Simeon , the sons of Dan , the sons of Simeon , the sons of Simeon , the sons of Dan , the sons of Simeon , the sons of Dan , the sons of Dan , the sons of Dan , the sons of Dan , the sons of Dan , the sons of Dan , the sons of Dan , the sons of Dan , the sons of Dan , the sons of Dan , the sons of Dan , the sons of Dan , the sons of Dan , the sons of Dan , the sons of Dan , were five hundred and the sons of Dan , and the sons of Dan
GOLD:	This is the number of men twenty years old or older who were able to go to war , as their names were listed in the records of their clans and families : Reuben ( Jacob'soldest son ) 46,500

ID:	1529
INPUT:	Baina errege ausart bat sortuko da Grezian . Erreinu txit handia jaso eta nahi duena egingo du .
PRED:	But he shall reign in the kingdom : and he that shall rise up , and shall rise up a great kingdom , and shall rise up .
GOLD:	“ Then a mighty king will rise to power who will rule with great authority and accomplish everything he sets out to do .

ID:	1530
INPUT:	Itzulitako guztiak 42 . 360 ziren .
PRED:	And all the congregation of the congregation were nine hundred and twenty thousand .
GOLD:	So a total of 42,360 people returned to Judah ,

ID:	1531
INPUT:	Gero , Jakobek Joseri esan zion : « Hara , laster hilko naiz ni . Baina Jainkoa zeuekin izango duzue eta zeuen arbasoen lurraldera itzularaziko zaituzte .
PRED:	Then Jacob said to Joseph , “ Behold , I will die . But God will be with you , and you will return to your fathers .
GOLD:	Then Jacob said to Joseph , “ Look , I am about to die , but God will be with you and will take you back to Canaan , the land of your ancestors .

ID:	1532
INPUT:	Pedrok , berriro : — Zuk ez didazu sekula niri oinik garbituko . Jesusek erantzun : — Garbitzen ez bazaitut , ez duzu nirekin zerikusirik izango .
PRED:	Peter said to him , “ You will not wash my feet . If you do n't wash your feet , you will not see me . ”
GOLD:	“ No , ” Peter protested , “ you will never ever wash my feet ! ” Jesus replied , “ Unless I wash you , you wo n't belong to me . ”

ID:	1533
INPUT:	Jaio eta zortzi egunera haurra erdaindu zutenean , Jesus izena ezarri zioten , sortu aurretik aingeruak esan bezala .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the child was circumcised , when he was circumcised , when he was circumcised , they called the name of him , as the angel had said unto him .
GOLD:	Eight days later , when the baby was circumcised , he was named Jesus , the name given him by the angel even before he was conceived .

ID:	1534
INPUT:	« Hau dio Jainkoak : Azken egunetan neure espiritua isuriko diet gizaki guztiei . Zuen seme-alabek profetizatu egingo dute , zuen gazteek ikuskariak izango , zuen zaharrek ametsak egingo .
PRED:	“ On the last day , ” says the Lord , “ I will put my Spirit on all men , and your sons will be prophets , and your young men will see your young men .
GOLD:	‘ In the last days , ' God says , ‘ I will pour out my Spirit upon all people.Your sons and daughters will prophesy.Your young men will see visions , and your old men will dream dreams .

ID:	1535
INPUT:	Guk ziur dakigu Moisesi Jainkoak hitz egin ziola , baina hori nongoa den ere ez dakigu .
PRED:	We know that God spoke to Moses , but we do n't know where he was .
GOLD:	We know God spoke to Moses , but we do n't even know where this man comes from . ”

ID:	1536
INPUT:	Aintzak hiritik alde egin
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The

ID:	1537
INPUT:	Rehum , Haxabna , Maaseias ,
PRED:	Hallohesh , Hallohesh , Hallohesh ,
GOLD:	Ahiah , Hanan , Anan ,

ID:	1538
INPUT:	— Zer aholkatzen didazue ? Zer erantzun behar diot gure aitak ezarri zion uztarria arintzeko eskatu didan herriari ?
PRED:	And he said unto them , What shall ye say unto me , What shall I answer my father , that I may ask my people the yoke of my father ?
GOLD:	“ What is your advice ? ” he asked them . “ How should I answer these people who want me to lighten the burdens imposed by my father ? ”

ID:	1539
INPUT:	Beraz , Boozen morroiekin lan eginez eta garagarburuak bilduz aritu zen Rut , garagar eta gariaren uzta-biltzea bukatu arte . Eta amaginarrebarekin jarraitu zuen bizitzen .
PRED:	So Boaz went with her servants , and came to her , until she came to the harvest of the harvest of the harvest of the harvest of the harvest , and she went with her .
GOLD:	So Ruth worked alongside the women in Boaz 's fields and gathered grain with them until the end of the barley harvest . Then she continued working with them through the wheat harvest in early summer . And all the while she lived with her mother-in-law .

ID:	1540
INPUT:	— izan ere adituko dute zure izen handiaren , zure egintza ahaltsuen berri — tenplu honetara otoitz egitera etortzen bada ,
PRED:	For the great name of thy name shall be great , and the works of thy works shall come into this house ,
GOLD:	for they will hear of your great name and your strong hand and your powerful arm . And when they pray toward this Temple ,

ID:	1541
INPUT:	Eta ez baitziren gauza Espirituak hizketarako ematen zion jakinduriari aurre egiteko ,
PRED:	But he was not able to speak in the Spirit , so that he might speak to wisdom .
GOLD:	None of them could stand against the wisdom and the Spirit with which Stephen spoke .

ID:	1542
INPUT:	Hark erantzun zien : — Ez al duzue irakurri Liburu Santuek diotena ? Egileak hasieran gizaseme eta emakume egin zituela , alegia ,
PRED:	He said to them , “ Do n't you read what the Scriptures says ? ” He said to them , “ The man was like a woman and woman . ”
GOLD:	“ Have n't you read the Scriptures ? ” Jesus replied . “ They record that from the beginning ‘ God made them male and female . ' ”

ID:	1543
INPUT:	Egin bezate negarapaizek , Jaunaren zerbitzariek , atari eta aldare artean . Esan bezate : « Erruki zakizkio , Jauna , zeure herriari . Ez utzi zeure ondarea lotsagarri , ez bezate beste nazioekmenpean har . Zergatik esan behar duteatzerritarrek : “ Non dute , bada , beren Jainkoa ? ” »
PRED:	The priests , the priests , the priests of the Lord , have mercy on the altar , and say to them , “ Have mercy on your people , O Lord , and do n't let your inheritance be ashamed . Why do the nations say , ‘ Where is your inheritance ? '
GOLD:	Let the priests , who minister in the Lord 's presence , stand and weep between the entry room to the Temple and the altar.Let them pray , “ Spare your people , Lord ! Do n't let your special possession become an object of mockery.Do n't let them become a joke for unbelieving foreigners who say , ‘ Has the God of Israel left them ? ' ”

ID:	1544
INPUT:	Israeldarrak ihesi abiatu ziren Judakoen aurretik , baina Jainkoak hauen esku utzi zituen .
PRED:	And the children of Israel fled before Judah , but God delivered them into their hand .
GOLD:	The Israelite army fled from Judah , and God handed them over to Judah in defeat .

ID:	1545
INPUT:	Ni , aldiz , zure maitasun handiari esker , zure etxean sartuko naiz , zure tenplu santuan ahuspeztuko begirunez beterik .
PRED:	But I will go into your house , and I will go into your temple , and I will worship your temple .
GOLD:	Lead me in the right path , O Lord , or my enemies will conquer me.Make your way plain for me to follow .

ID:	1546
INPUT:	Beraz , hartu zituen Eleazar apaizak sutan hil ziren gizonek aurkeztutako brontzezko errautsontziak eta xaflak egin zituen aldarea estaltzeko .
PRED:	So Eleazar took the priest and put them to death in the fire of the Lord 's presence , and put them on the altar .
GOLD:	Place these staffs in the Tabernacle in front of the Ark containing the tablets of the Covenant , where I meet with you .

ID:	1547
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin zaiona egin zuen Ezekiasek , bere arbaso Davidek bezalaxe .
PRED:	Hezekiah did what was evil in the sight of the Lord , just as David his father had done .
GOLD:	He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , just as his ancestor David had done .

ID:	1548
INPUT:	Mundua mundu denetik , berez ikusezina dena , hau da , Jainkoaren betiereko ahalmena eta jainkotasuna , ikusgarri gertatzen zaio haren egintzak aztertzen dituenari . Ez dute , beraz , aitzakiarik ,
PRED:	And all things that came out of the world , and the glory of God , and the glory of God , and the glory of God , and the works of his works , and the works of his works , and the works of his works , and the works of his father .
GOLD:	For ever since the world was created , people have seen the earth and sky . Through everything God made , they can clearly see his invisible qualities — his eternal power and divine nature . So they have no excuse for not knowing God .

ID:	1549
INPUT:	Jesusek hau ere esan zion jendeari : « Sartaldean lainoa ikusi orduko , “ Euria dator ” esaten duzue , eta hala gertatzen da .
PRED:	Jesus also said to the crowd , “ When the cloud has seen the cloud , you say to them , ‘ The rain is coming . '
GOLD:	Then Jesus turned to the crowd and said , “ When you see clouds beginning to form in the west , you say , ‘ Here comes a shower . ' And you are right .

ID:	1550
INPUT:	Joiakim erregeari
PRED:	King Jehoiakim of Judah
GOLD:	A Message about Jehoahaz

ID:	1551
INPUT:	Josiasek Pazkoa ospatu
PRED:	The Passover
GOLD:	Josiah Celebrates Passover

ID:	1552
INPUT:	Zintzo ari ziren langile haiek lanean . Merariren ondorengoetako Jahat eta Obadias , eta Kehaten ondorengoetako Zakarias eta Mexulam lebitarrak ziren lan haiek zuzentzeko arduradunak . Musika-tresnak jotzen zekitenez , lebitarrek
PRED:	These were the names of the Levites . These were the sons of Gershon . These were the families of the Levites . These were the sons of Gershon , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , Azariah , and Jozabad . They were the Levites . They were the Levites .
GOLD:	The workers served faithfully under the leadership of Jahath and Obadiah , Levites of the Merarite clan , and Zechariah and Meshullam , Levites of the Kohathite clan . Other Levites , all of whom were skilled musicians ,

ID:	1553
INPUT:	Abramek esan zion : — Zeure esku duzu mirabea . Egiozu hobekien deritzozuna . Saraik gaizki hartu zuen Agar , eta honek ihes egin zuen .
PRED:	And Abraham said to him , “ You have given me a sign to your servant , and she took Abram 's wife , and she fled . ”
GOLD:	Abram replied , “ Look , she is your servant , so deal with her as you see fit . ” Then Sarai treated Hagar so harshly that she finally ran away .

ID:	1554
INPUT:	Saulek ezagutu egin zuen Daviden ahotsa eta esan zion : — Ez al da hori zure ahotsa , ene seme David ? — Nire ahotsa da , bai , ene errege jauna — erantzun zion Davidek .
PRED:	And Saul heard the voice of David , and said unto him , Is not this voice , my son David ? And David said unto him , My lord the king .
GOLD:	Saul recognized David 's voice and called out , “ Is that you , my son David ? ” And David replied , “ Yes , my lord the king .

ID:	1555
INPUT:	« Gertatua ikusirik , beste zerbitzariak biziki nahigabetu ziren , eta guztiaren berri nagusiari ematera joan ziren .
PRED:	When the servants saw what had happened , they went to the synagogue and told their master everything they had done .
GOLD:	“ When some of the other servants saw this , they were very upset . They went to the king and told him everything that had happened .

ID:	1556
INPUT:	« Horregatik , bada , zu zigortzera nator , Israel ; eta zigortzera natorkizunez gero , presta zaitezzeure Jainkoaren aurreanagertzeko » .
PRED:	Therefore I am coming to punish Israel , and I will punish you , and you will be ready to show that you will be ready to show your God . ”
GOLD:	“ Therefore , I will bring upon you all the disasters I have announced.Prepare to meet your God in judgment , you people of Israel ! ”

ID:	1557
INPUT:	usainkiak eta olioa argi , gantzuketa-olio eta intsentsu usaintsuarentzat .
PRED:	and the anointing oil , and the anointing oil , and the anointing oil , and the anointing oil .
GOLD:	They also brought spices and olive oil for the light , the anointing oil , and the fragrant incense .

ID:	1558
INPUT:	Abiatu zen , bai , Jonas , baina Tarsisera ihes egiteko asmotan , Jaunarengandik urrun . Jafara jaitsi eta Tarsisera zihoan ontzi bat aurkitu zuen ; bidesaria ordaindurik , ontziratu egin zen , ontzikoekin batera Tarsisera joateko , Jaunarengandik urrun .
PRED:	And he fled from Tyre , and fled from the Lord , and found a distance from the Lord . And he went down from the Lord , and found a ship in the way of the Lord . And he went out from thence , and went out of the land of Tyre .
GOLD:	But Jonah got up and went in the opposite direction to get away from the Lord . He went down to the port of Joppa , where he found a ship leaving for Tarshish . He bought a ticket and went on board , hoping to escape from the Lord by sailing to Tarshish .

ID:	1559
INPUT:	Hona hemen zerrenda : urrezko 30 ontzi , zilarrezko 1 . 000 plater , 29 labana ,
PRED:	These are the names of gold : five hundred talents of silver , five thousand and five thousand ,
GOLD:	This is a list of the items that were returned : gold basins30silver basins1,000silver incense burners29

ID:	1560
INPUT:	Larre oparotan bazkatuko ditut , Israelgo mendi garaietan izango dituzte eskortak . Han hartuko dute atseden eskorta ederretan , eta larre oparotan bazkatuko dira Israelgo mendietan .
PRED:	And I will scatter them in the fields of Israel in the mountains of Israel , and they shall eat bread in the high places , and in the high places , and in the high places , and in the hills of Israel , and in the hills of Israel .
GOLD:	Yes , I will give them good pastureland on the high hills of Israel . There they will lie down in pleasant places and feed in the lush pastures of the hills .

ID:	1561
INPUT:	Baina haiek erantzun zuten : — Ez dugu hori egiterik , abere-talde guztiak bildu arte ; orduan mugituko dugu harria putzuko aho gainetik eta edaten emango .
PRED:	But they said to him , “ We do n't do this thing until we have gathered together all the flocks , and then we will give it to us , and we will give it to you . ”
GOLD:	“ We ca n't water the animals until all the flocks have arrived , ” they replied . “ Then the shepherds move the stone from the mouth of the well , and we water all the sheep and goats . ”

ID:	1562
INPUT:	Egunero zuen artean nengoen tenpluan irakasten , eta ez ninduzuen atxilotu . Baina hala behar du , Liburu Santuetan idatzia bete dadin » .
PRED:	On that day I taught you in the temple , and you did not be ashamed . But it must be written in the Scriptures . ”
GOLD:	Why did n't you arrest me in the Temple ? I was there among you teaching every day . But these things are happening to fulfill what the Scriptures say about me . ”

ID:	1563
INPUT:	« Ez egin gezurrezko testigantzarik lagun hurkoaren aurka .
PRED:	“ You shall not bear false testimony against your neighbor .
GOLD:	“ You must not testify falsely against your neighbor .

ID:	1564
INPUT:	Jo ote ditu Jaunak israeldarrakhauen jotzaileak jo zituenbezain gogor ? Hil ote ditu israeldarrakhauen hiltzaileak hil zituen bezala ?
PRED:	Will the Lord hear their voice like the sword of the children of Israel ? Have they killed their slain as the slain of the dead ?
GOLD:	Has the Lord struck Israelas he struck her enemies ? Has he punished heras he punished them ?

ID:	1565
INPUT:	Orduan , Jakobekin , Isaakekin eta Abrahamekin eginiko itunaz oroituko naiz , baita lurraldeari buruzko agintzariaz ere .
PRED:	And I will remember the covenant which I have made with Abraham , and to Abraham , and to Abraham , and to his sons , and to his sons .
GOLD:	Then I will remember my covenant with Jacob and my covenant with Isaac and my covenant with Abraham , and I will remember the land .

ID:	1566
INPUT:	« Dibongo jendeok , jaitsi ohorezko zeuen aulkitik , koka zaitezte eremuan , aurka baitatorkizueMoaben suntsitzailea , gotorlekuak erraustera .
PRED:	“ Brothers , go down from your throne , you people of Moab , and stand before the face of the king of Moab , because he has come to destroy the high places of Moab .
GOLD:	“ Come down from your gloryand sit in the dust , you people of Dibon , for those who destroy Moab will shatter Dibon , too.They will tear down all your towers .

ID:	1567
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Daviden poema .
PRED:	O God , you are my God , and you are my God .
GOLD:	Why do you boast about your crimes , great warrior ? Do n't you realize God 's justice continues forever ?

ID:	1568
INPUT:	Atalak asko , gorputza bat
PRED:	The members of the body
GOLD:	One Body with Many Parts

ID:	1569
INPUT:	Pedrok berriro ukatu zuen , zin eginez : — Ez dut ezagutzen gizon hori .
PRED:	Peter asked , “ I do n't know this man . ”
GOLD:	Again Peter denied it , this time with an oath . “ I do n't even know the man , ” he said .

ID:	1570
INPUT:	Hona Jeremiasen kontakizuna . Jaunak esan zidan :
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to Jeremiah , saying ,
GOLD:	At that time the Lord sent me a message . He said ,

ID:	1571
INPUT:	Bi zekor , ahari bat eta urtebeteko zazpi arkume eskainiko dituzue erre-oparitzat , eta Jaunak atseginez onartuko ditu .
PRED:	You shall offer a young bull for a burnt offering to the Lord . You shall offer a young bull for a burnt offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	Present a special burnt offering on that day as a pleasing aroma to the Lord . It will consist of two young bulls , one ram , and seven one-year-old male lambs .

ID:	1572
INPUT:	Hurbil gaitezen , bada , konfiantza osoz Jainkoaren onginahiaren tronura , errukia iritsi eta premialdian laguntza izan dezagun .
PRED:	So let us come near to the throne of God with all his heart , that we may be kind of mercy , and that we may help him in prison .
GOLD:	So let us come boldly to the throne of our gracious God . There we will receive his mercy , and we will find grace to help us when we need it most .

ID:	1573
INPUT:	Fedea zuelako , bere herria utzi eta atzerritar gisa bizi izan zen Jainkoak agindutako lurraldean ; oihal-etxolatan bizi izan zen , Jainkoaren agintzari bera hartu zuten Isaak eta Jakob biziko ziren bezalaxe ;
PRED:	By faith he left his people and lived in the land of God , as God had commanded them to live in the tents of God , as Isaac had commanded .
GOLD:	And even when he reached the land God promised him , he lived there by faith — for he was like a foreigner , living in tents . And so did Isaac and Jacob , who inherited the same promise .

ID:	1574
INPUT:	Lehenengo gurdiko zaldiak gorriak ziren , bigarrengoak beltzak ,
PRED:	The first horses will be punished , the second , the second and the second .
GOLD:	The first chariot was pulled by red horses , the second by black horses ,

ID:	1575
INPUT:	Ikasleak eztabaidan hasi ziren beren artean , beraietan zein ote zen handiena .
PRED:	And his disciples began to speak with him , and how great it was done in them ?
GOLD:	Then they began to argue among themselves about who would be the greatest among them .

ID:	1576
INPUT:	Orduan jakingo dute ni naizela Jauna eta ez niela alferrik hitz egin zoritxar hau iragartzean » .
PRED:	And they shall know that I am the Lord , and they shall not speak unto me in vain .
GOLD:	They will know that I alone am the Lord and that I was serious when I said I would bring this calamity on them .

ID:	1577
INPUT:	Zeru garaiaren antzeko eraiki zuen bere santutegiaeta lurra bezala sendo oinarritu betiko .
PRED:	He built his sanctuary as the heavens and the earth , and the foundation of the earth forever .
GOLD:	There he built his sanctuary as high as the heavens , as solid and enduring as the earth .

ID:	1578
INPUT:	Zergatik ez zegoen inor , etorri naizenean ? Zergatik ez du inork erantzun , deitu dudanean ? Nire eskua laburregia otezuek askatzeko ? Nik ez ote aski indarzuek libratzeko ? Mehatxu-hitz bat aski dut , itsasoa lehortueta ibaiak basamortu bihurtzeko : urik gabe arrainak egarriz hileta usteldu egiten dira .
PRED:	Why did I come when I came ? Why did no one answer me ? Why did I call out my hand to rescue you ? I have not been able to rescue you ? I have no power to save you ? I have made the sea and the sea .
GOLD:	Why was no one there when I came ? Why did n't anyone answer when I called ? Is it because I have no power to rescue ? No , that is not the reason ! For I can speak to the sea and make it dry up ! I can turn rivers into deserts covered with dying fish .

ID:	1579
INPUT:	Handik egun batzuetara , Maria etxetik atera eta Judeako mendialdeko hiri batera joan zen arin-arin ,
PRED:	After these days , Mary went out of the house of Mary , and went to a city of Judea in the hill country of Judea .
GOLD:	A few days later Mary hurried to the hill country of Judea , to the town

ID:	1580
INPUT:	Eliasek , berriro ere : — Jainkoaren gizona baldin banaiz , jaits dadila sua zerutik eta kiskal zaitzatela zeu eta zeure berrogeita hamar gizonak . Bat-batean zerutik sua jaitsi eta kiskali egin zituen beste buruzagi hura eta berrogeita hamar gizonak .
PRED:	Then Elijah said to him , “ If I am the man of God , I will come down from heaven , and you will be taken away from heaven , and you will be burned , and you will be burned down from heaven . ”
GOLD:	Elijah replied , “ If I am a man of God , let fire come down from heaven and destroy you and your fifty men ! ” And again the fire of God fell from heaven and killed them all .

ID:	1581
INPUT:	Behin batean , jendarteko batek esan zion Jesusi : — Maisu , esaiozu nire anaiari senipartea nirekin erdibanatzeko .
PRED:	One of the crowd said to Jesus , “ Teacher , say to him , ‘ Teacher , speak to my brother 's brother . '
GOLD:	Then someone called from the crowd , “ Teacher , please tell my brother to divide our father 's estate with me . ”

ID:	1582
INPUT:	su kartsuak itzali , ezpataz hilak izatetik ihes egin , gaixotasunetatik sendatu , borrokan bulartsu izan eta atzerritarren gudarosteei atzera eragin .
PRED:	The blind man fled from the midst of the sword , and fled out of the midst of the sick , and struck him with the sword , and let him go out of the midst of the peoples , and let him go out of the land .
GOLD:	quenched the flames of fire , and escaped death by the edge of the sword . Their weakness was turned to strength . They became strong in battle and put whole armies to flight .

ID:	1583
INPUT:	Aluxetik abiaturik , Refidimera iritsi ziren ; baina ez zen han urik herriak edateko .
PRED:	And they departed from thence , and came to the city of Olives , but there was no water to drink .
GOLD:	They left Alush and camped at Rephidim , where there was no water for the people to drink .

ID:	1584
INPUT:	Zerbitzariek ihardetsi zioten erregeari : — Prest gaude gure errege jaunak erabakitakoa betetzeko .
PRED:	The servants said to the king , “ Look , our lord the king is going to do what we want to do . ”
GOLD:	“ We are with you , ” his advisers replied . “ Do what you think is best . ”

ID:	1585
INPUT:	Nola mendiek Jerusalem , hala du Jaunak bere herria inguratzen , oraindanik eta betiko .
PRED:	As for the mountains of Jerusalem , so is the Lord 's people all around his people forever and ever .
GOLD:	Just as the mountains surround Jerusalem , so the Lord surrounds his people , both now and forever .

ID:	1586
INPUT:	« Igo Galaadera , sendabelar bila , Egiptoko herri ! Alferrik dituzu sendabide guztiak : zuretzat ez dago erremediorik .
PRED:	“ Go up to Gilead , O daughter of Egypt , for all the people of Egypt are healed , and all the ways of your flock is no burnt .
GOLD:	“ Go up to Gilead to get medicine , O virgin daughter of Egypt ! But your many treatmentswill bring you no healing .

ID:	1587
INPUT:	Zein arin aldatzen zaren bidez ! Asiriak huts egin zizun bezalaxehuts egingo dizu Egiptok ere .
PRED:	How can you turn away from the altar ? You will be like the Egyptians .
GOLD:	First here , then there — you flit from one ally to another asking for help.But your new friends in Egypt will let you down , just as Assyria did before .

ID:	1588
INPUT:	Anaiek esan zioten : — Geure errege edo menderatzaile izan behar ote zaitugu ? Eta are gehiago gorrotatu zuten bere amets eta esanengatik .
PRED:	His brothers said to him , “ Will we be our king or our king ? ” And they hate him , and they hated him for his dream .
GOLD:	His brothers responded , “ So you think you will be our king , do you ? Do you actually think you will reign over us ? ” And they hated him all the more because of his dreams and the way he talked about them .

ID:	1589
INPUT:	Sagarapenetarako gantzuketa-olioa eta intsentsu usaintsu garbia ere prestatu zituen , lurringileek egin ohi duten eran .
PRED:	And he made the anointing oil for the anointing oil , and the incense , and the anointing oil , as they do .
GOLD:	Then he made the sacred anointing oil and the fragrant incense , using the techniques of a skilled incense maker .

ID:	1590
INPUT:	« Zuek , zentzugabeok , noiz arte maiteko duzue zentzugabekeria ? Zuek , harroputzok , noiz arte jarraituko harrokerian ? Zuek , burugabeok , noiz arte gorrotatuko jakinduria ?
PRED:	“ You wise people are wise , but you are wise , and you are wise , and you are wise , and you are wise , and you are wise .
GOLD:	“ How long , you simpletons , will you insist on being simpleminded ? How long will you mockers relish your mocking ? How long will you fools hate knowledge ?

ID:	1591
INPUT:	Bera da gure Jainkoa , eta gu hark larraturiko herria , haren gidaritzapeko artaldea . Egingo al diozue gaur kasu haren esanari :
PRED:	He is our God , and he will feed his people , and he will give you the flock of his flock . Do you say to him ,
GOLD:	for he is our God.We are the people he watches over , the flock under his care.If only you would listen to his voice today !

ID:	1592
INPUT:	Saulen osabak galdegin zien : — Nora joan zarete ? Saulek erantzun zion : — Astoen bila . Baina ez genituen aurkitzen eta Samuelengana jo genuen .
PRED:	And Saul said to them , “ Where are you going ? ” And Saul said to him , “ I found a donkey , but we did not find Samuel . ”
GOLD:	“ Where have you been ? ” Saul 's uncle asked him and his servant . “ We were looking for the donkeys , ” Saul replied , “ but we could n't find them . So we went to Samuel to ask him where they were . ”

ID:	1593
INPUT:	Jakobek esan zion Joseri : « Orain bai hil naitekeela zure aurpegia ikusi ondoren , oraindik bizirik zaude eta » .
PRED:	Jacob said to Joseph , “ Now I have seen your face , and now you are still alive . ”
GOLD:	Finally , Jacob said to Joseph , “ Now I am ready to die , since I have seen your face again and know you are still alive . ”

ID:	1594
INPUT:	Profeta bat profeta delako onartzen duenak profetari zor zaion saria jasoko du ; eta gizon zuzen bat zuzena delako onartzen duenak gizon zuzenari zor zaion saria jasoko du ;
PRED:	He that is a prophet of the prophets shall receive the reward of the prophet , and he that is righteous shall give him a good man , because he is righteous , he shall give his reward to him .
GOLD:	If you receive a prophet as one who speaks for God , you will be given the same reward as a prophet . And if you receive righteous people because of their righteousness , you will be given a reward like theirs .

ID:	1595
INPUT:	Hau diot : « Oi Jauna , zu zaitut ene Jaun , zuregan baizik ez dut zorionik » .
PRED:	“ Lord , you are my Lord , ” says the Lord , “ I am not good , but I do not find peace . ”
GOLD:	I said to the Lord , “ You are my Master ! Every good thing I have comes from you . ”

ID:	1596
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun : « Nik emandako legea bazter utzi eta nire mintzoa aditu eta jarraitu ez dutelako gertatu da hori .
PRED:	The Lord said to them , “ I have left my statutes and my voice , because they have not kept my voice , and have not kept my voice .
GOLD:	Who is wise enough to understand all this ? Who has been instructed by the Lord and can explain it to others ? Why has the land been so ruined that no one dares to travel through it ?

ID:	1597
INPUT:	Beste batek du nire alde testigatzen , eta jakin badakit haren testigantza baliozkoa dena .
PRED:	But another witness for me , and I know that he is a witness of his testimony .
GOLD:	But someone else is also testifying about me , and I assure you that everything he says about me is true .

ID:	1598
INPUT:	« Jopen otoitzean ari nintzela , goi-ikuskari bat izan nuen : oihal handi baten antzeko zerbait ikusi nuen , lau puntetatik zintzilik , zerutik ni nengoen tokiraino jaisten .
PRED:	When I was praying , I saw a vision like a great eagle , and I saw a great voice from heaven to the four corners of heaven .
GOLD:	“ I was in the town of Joppa , ” he said , “ and while I was praying , I went into a trance and saw a vision . Something like a large sheet was let down by its four corners from the sky . And it came right down to me .

ID:	1599
INPUT:	Zakariasen kontra jaiki eta , erregearen aginduz , harrika eman zioten denek Jaunaren etxeko atarian .
PRED:	And they rose up against Zechariah , and brought him to the king , and they took him in the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the leaders plotted to kill Zechariah , and King Joash ordered that they stone him to death in the courtyard of the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	1600
INPUT:	Profeta bezala mintzo direnei dagokienez , mintza daitezela bi edo hiru , eta gainerakoek eman dezatela beren iritzia .
PRED:	As a prophet speaks to those who speak to those who prophesy , and two others will be given to them .
GOLD:	Let two or three people prophesy , and let the others evaluate what is said .

ID:	1601
INPUT:	Noiz arte behar dute gaiztoek , Jauna , noiz arte behar dute gaiztoek garaile ?
PRED:	How long shall the wicked say , O Lord , how long shall the wicked ?
GOLD:	How long , O Lord ? How long will the wicked be allowed to gloat ?

ID:	1602
INPUT:	Horregatik , dolu egingo du lurrak , ilundu egingo goian ortzia , hartua baitut erabakia ; ez naiz damutuko , ez atzera egingo » .
PRED:	Therefore the earth shall weep , and the earth shall weep ; for I have taken away the law , and I will not go out .
GOLD:	The earth will mournand the heavens will be draped in blackbecause of my decree against my people.I have made up my mind and will not change it . ”

ID:	1603
INPUT:	hamar idi gizen eta hogei idi larreko ; ehun ardi eta , gainera , hainbat orein , basahuntz , orkatz eta hegazti gizen .
PRED:	He was ten oxen and twenty oxen , and twenty oxen , and ten thousand oxen , and many sheep , and the birds , and the birds of the birds .
GOLD:	“ You know that my father , David , was not able to build a Temple to honor the name of the Lord his God because of the many wars waged against him by surrounding nations . He could not build until the Lord gave him victory over all his enemies .

ID:	1604
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , hona zer dioen Israel herriak : “ Honen ikuskariak oso gerorako dira , epe luzerako beronen profeziak ” .
PRED:	“ Son of man , say to the house of Israel , ‘ This is what the prophets of Israel says : ‘ The prophets of their prophets will attack them . '
GOLD:	“ Son of man , the people of Israel are saying , ‘ He 's talking about the distant future . His visions wo n't come true for a long , long time . '

ID:	1605
INPUT:	Zuen aldareak suntsitu eta intsentsua erretzeko ontziak apurtuko dituzte . Zuen gurtzaileak hilik eroraraziko ditut idoloen aurrean .
PRED:	They will cut down your altars and burn incense on your altars . I will destroy your idols before your idols .
GOLD:	All your altars will be demolished , and your places of worship will be destroyed . I will kill your people in front of your idols .

ID:	1606
INPUT:	Ogi-puska hartu bezain laster , Satanas sartu zen haren barrura . Orduan , Jesusek esan zion : « Egin behar duzuna , egizu lehenbailehen » .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when Satan went into his heart , that Satan went into his heart . And he said unto him , Thou shalt do the things that thou shalt do .
GOLD:	When Judas had eaten the bread , Satan entered into him . Then Jesus told him , “ Hurry and do what you 're going to do . ”

ID:	1607
INPUT:	Paulok erantzun zuen : — Ez nago burutik , Festo agurgarria ; nire hitzak egiazkoak eta zentzuzkoak dituzu .
PRED:	Paul answered , “ I am not worthy of the head of my head . You are my words and understanding . ”
GOLD:	But Paul replied , “ I am not insane , Most Excellent Festus . What I am saying is the sober truth .

ID:	1608
INPUT:	Izan ere , bada hor azpikeriaz sartu zaizuen zenbait , aspaldidanik Liburu Santuak kondenatutzat emana , jende sinesgabea . Gure Jainkoaren onginahia jokabide biziotsurako aitzakiatzat hartzen dute eta Jesu Kristo , gure Jaun eta Jabe bakarra , ukatzen .
PRED:	For there are some of you who have come into the end of the Scriptures , who have been judged by the Scriptures , and by the way of our God Jesus Christ , and by the way of our God , and by our Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	I say this because some ungodly people have wormed their way into your churches , saying that God 's marvelous grace allows us to live immoral lives . The condemnation of such people was recorded long ago , for they have denied our only Master and Lord , Jesus Christ .

ID:	1609
INPUT:	baina Jesusek eskutik hartu eta altxarazi egin zuen , eta mutikoa zutitu egin zen .
PRED:	But Jesus took him out of his hand and lifted him up , and the boy grew up .
GOLD:	But Jesus took him by the hand and helped him to his feet , and he stood up .

ID:	1610
INPUT:	Hark erantzun : — Ez al duzue inoiz irakurri zer egin zuen Davidek beharraldi batean , bera eta bere lagunak goseak aurkitu zirenean ?
PRED:	He said to them , “ Do n't you read what David did when he was hungry and his men were hungry ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus said to them , “ Have n't you ever read in the Scriptures what David did when he and his companions were hungry ?

ID:	1611
INPUT:	Josek esan zion : — Hona argibidea . Hiru aihenek hiru egun adierazten dute .
PRED:	Joseph said to him , “ This is the light : three days are three days . ”
GOLD:	“ This is what the dream means , ” Joseph said . “ The three branches represent three days .

ID:	1612
INPUT:	Learen semeak Ruben , Jakoben lehen-semea , Simeon , Lebi , Juda , Isakar eta Zabulon izan ziren .
PRED:	And the sons of Reuben , the firstborn son of Jacob , the firstborn son of Jacob , Simeon , Simeon , and Zebulun .
GOLD:	The sons of Leah were Reuben ( Jacob 's oldest son ) , Simeon , Levi , Judah , Issachar , and Zebulun .

ID:	1613
INPUT:	Jende-multzo handiek jarraitu zioten eta Jesusek gaixoak sendatu zizkien .
PRED:	And many crowds followed him , and he healed them .
GOLD:	Large crowds followed him there , and he healed their sick .

ID:	1614
INPUT:	Neskatxek
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Young Women of Jerusalem

ID:	1615
INPUT:	Beraz , anaia bidali nahi baduzu , jaitsiko gara garia erostera .
PRED:	If you want to send my brother , we will go down to buy food .
GOLD:	If you send Benjamin with us , we will go down and buy more food .

ID:	1616
INPUT:	entzun goizetik nire mintzoa ; goizean neure auzia azaltzen dizuteta zain gelditzen natzaizu .
PRED:	Listen to my voice from the morning , and I will stand before you in the morning .
GOLD:	O God , you take no pleasure in wickedness ; you can not tolerate the sins of the wicked .

ID:	1617
INPUT:	Anas eta Kaifas ziren apaiz nagusi . Garai hartan , Joanek , Zakariasen semeak , Jainkoaren mezua hartu zuen basamortuan .
PRED:	About that time they were priests , and Jonathan the son of Zechariah , the son of Zechariah , took the word of God in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Annas and Caiaphas were the high priests . At this time a message from God came to John son of Zechariah , who was living in the wilderness .

ID:	1618
INPUT:	Horregatik , saia zaitezte gogoz zeuen fedearekin batera bertutea izaten , bertutearekin ezagutza ,
PRED:	Therefore , then , you must be careful to obey your faith , so that you may know the truth with your faith .
GOLD:	In view of all this , make every effort to respond to God 's promises . Supplement your faith with a generous provision of moral excellence , and moral excellence with knowledge ,

ID:	1619
INPUT:	Legearen irakurketa nagusia zazpi urtez behin
PRED:	The priest read the Law seven years and seven years
GOLD:	Israel 's Disobedience Predicted

ID:	1620
INPUT:	« Ez izan ni beste jainkorik .
PRED:	“ You shall not worship other gods .
GOLD:	“ You must not have any other god but me .

ID:	1621
INPUT:	Haiek erantzun : — Begiak zabaltzea , Jauna !
PRED:	They said to him , “ Lord , open your eyes ! ”
GOLD:	“ Lord , ” they said , “ we want to see ! ”

ID:	1622
INPUT:	Nire nardoari usain gozoa dario
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Young Man

ID:	1623
INPUT:	Eliseok , Jainkoaren gizonak , jakin zuen Israelgo erregeak jantziak urratu zituela eta mandatu hau bidali zion : « Zergatik urratu dituzu jantziak ? Datorrela niregana gizon hori eta jakinen du badela profetarik Israelen » .
PRED:	Elisha heard that the man of God had tore off his clothes and sent him to him , saying , “ Why have you taken away your clothes ? Why did you come to me and know that he is a prophet of Israel ? ”
GOLD:	But when Elisha , the man of God , heard that the king of Israel had torn his clothes in dismay , he sent this message to him : “ Why are you so upset ? Send Naaman to me , and he will learn that there is a true prophet here in Israel . ”

ID:	1624
INPUT:	« Ea , bada , itzuli arin aitarengana eta esaiozue : Hau dio zure seme Josek : Jainkoak Egipto osoko buru jarri nau . Zatoz niregana ! Ez luzatu !
PRED:	“ Go back to your father , and say to him , “ This is what your son Joseph has appointed me over all the land of Egypt . Come , do n't let me go . ”
GOLD:	“ Now hurry back to my father and tell him , ‘ This is what your son Joseph says : God has made me master over all the land of Egypt . So come down to me immediately !

ID:	1625
INPUT:	hau da , israeldarrek suntsitu ezinik herrialde hartan gelditu zirenen ondorengoak , lan egitera behartu zituen Salomonek , gaurdaino .
PRED:	This is what the people of Israel left in the land that the Israelites had destroyed , and Solomon took them out to this day .
GOLD:	These were descendants of the nations whom the people of Israel had not destroyed . So Solomon conscripted them for his labor force , and they serve as forced laborers to this day .

ID:	1626
INPUT:	Halakoak ez daude buru den Kristorekin loturik , eta Kristo da , hain zuzen , buru bezala , lokailu eta junturen bitartez gorputz osoa elkarlotzen duena eta , Jainkoak nahi bezala , hazarazten duena .
PRED:	These are not ashamed of Christ , but Christ is his head , as the whole body of his body , and the whole congregation of his body , as God wants to do .
GOLD:	and they are not connected to Christ , the head of the body . For he holds the whole body together with its joints and ligaments , and it grows as God nourishes it .

ID:	1627
INPUT:	Jainko Jauna dut laguntzaile : nork kondenatuko nau ? Sitsak jandako arropak bezalagalduko dira nire etsai guztiak .
PRED:	I am the Lord God , who will help me ? Who will wash my clothes like a garment , and all my enemies will eat my clothes .
GOLD:	See , the Sovereign Lord is on my side ! Who will declare me guilty ? All my enemies will be destroyedlike old clothes that have been eaten by moths !

ID:	1628
INPUT:	Itzuli egin baitzara eta debekatu nizun tokian jan duzu ogia eta edan ura . Horregatik , zure gorpua ez dute zure gurasoen hilobian lurperatuko » .
PRED:	For you have turned back and eat bread in the place where I have sinned , and you have not eaten the bread of your fathers . So they will not be buried in the tomb of your fathers . ”
GOLD:	You came back to this place and ate and drank where he told you not to eat or drink . Because of this , your body will not be buried in the grave of your ancestors . ”

ID:	1629
INPUT:	Zorionekoanire aginduen arabera jokatzeneta horretan leial irauten duena , larunbata profanatu gabeerrespetatzeneta ezer txarrik egiten ez duena ! »
PRED:	Blessed are those who follow my commands and keep my commands and do what is right in this way , and do not do any evil thing . ”
GOLD:	Blessed are all thosewho are careful to do this.Blessed are those who honor my Sabbath days of restand keep themselves from doing wrong .

ID:	1630
INPUT:	Ez zizkizuten eskuak lotu , ez oinak kateatu . Gaizkileen eskuz bezalaerori zara lurrera » . Jendeak are eta negar handiagoak egin zituen orduan .
PRED:	They did not put their hands on their feet , but they did not cry out like the hands of the wicked ; and the people wept and wept .
GOLD:	Your hands were not bound ; your feet were not chained.No , you were murdered — the victim of a wicked plot . ” All the people wept again for Abner .

ID:	1631
INPUT:	Urak gutxituz joan ziren hamargarren hila arte ; hilaren lehen egunean mendi-gailurrak agertu ziren .
PRED:	On the tenth day of the month , on the tenth day of the month , on the first day of the month , the earth appeared upon the mountains .
GOLD:	Two and a half months later , as the waters continued to go down , other mountain peaks became visible .

ID:	1632
INPUT:	Keros , Sia eta Padonenak ;
PRED:	the descendants of Shimron , the descendants of Shimron , the children of Shimron ,
GOLD:	Keros , Siaha , Padon ,

ID:	1633
INPUT:	Bedeinkatu , herriok , gure Jainkoa , oihukatu goraki haren gorespena .
PRED:	O peoples , praise our God , and praise his praise .
GOLD:	Let the whole world bless our Godand loudly sing his praises .

ID:	1634
INPUT:	Ene Timoteo , zaindu Jainkoak zure esku utzi duen fede-gordailua . Utzi alde batera fedearen kontrako berriketa hutsalak eta sasizientziaren argudioak ,
PRED:	Timothy , the faith of your faith has been given to your faith . Let them leave the faith of your faith , and the sheep of the faith ,
GOLD:	Timothy , guard what God has entrusted to you . Avoid godless , foolish discussions with those who oppose you with their so-called knowledge .

ID:	1635
INPUT:	Denak pozik zeudelarik , hona non agertzen diren gizonak , gizon gaizkile halakoak ; etxea inguratu eta ate-joka hasi ziren , etxeko jabea zen gizon zaharrari esanez : — Atera ezazu zure etxean sartu den gizon hori , bortxatu egin nahi dugu eta !
PRED:	And all the men that were found in joy , and all the men that were found , and they went out , and went into the house of the man , and came into the house of the man , and said unto him , Go into the house of the man , and we shall go into thy house .
GOLD:	While they were enjoying themselves , a crowd of troublemakers from the town surrounded the house . They began beating at the door and shouting to the old man , “ Bring out the man who is staying with you so we can have sex with him . ”

ID:	1636
INPUT:	Beraz , zutik dagoela uste duenak egin beza kontu eror ez dadin .
PRED:	So let him say , “ Let him be put to death . ”
GOLD:	If you think you are standing strong , be careful not to fall .

ID:	1637
INPUT:	Eta esan zion erregeari : « Egia zen , bai , neure herrian zure egintzez eta jakinduriaz aditua nuena .
PRED:	Then the king said to the king , “ I have made a covenant in my people and wisdom .
GOLD:	She exclaimed to the king , “ Everything I heard in my country about your achievements and wisdom is true !

ID:	1638
INPUT:	Erromes-kanta . Bedeinka ezazue Jauna , Jaunaren zerbitzariok , gaua beraren etxean igarotzen duzuen guztiok !
PRED:	Sing to the Lord , you servants of the Lord , you servants of all who pass through his house .
GOLD:	Oh , praise the Lord , all you servants of the Lord , you who serve at night in the house of the Lord .

ID:	1639
INPUT:	Korintoarrak direla-eta Paulo kezkatan
PRED:	Paul and Silas
GOLD:	Paul 's Concern for the Corinthians

ID:	1640
INPUT:	Errituzko keinua eginez aurkeztuko ditu apaizak opariok , bi bildotsak barne , lehen fruitu gisa eskainiriko ogiekin batera . Jaunari sagaratuak izango direnez , opariok apaizari dagozkio .
PRED:	And the priest shall offer the offering of the sin offering to the Lord , two rams , and two rams , and two rams , and two rams , and two rams , and the priest shall be holy to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ The priest will lift up the two lambs as a special offering to the Lord , together with the loaves representing the first of your crops . These offerings , which are holy to the Lord , belong to the priests .

ID:	1641
INPUT:	Jauna , emaiezu beren egiteengatik merezi duten ordaina .
PRED:	Lord , pay attention to them for their works , for their works .
GOLD:	Pay them back , Lord , for all the evil they have done .

ID:	1642
INPUT:	« Ez duzue pisu eta neurri faltsurik erabiliko salerosketetan .
PRED:	“ You shall not buy out of the field , neither shall you make a fire in it .
GOLD:	“ You must use accurate scales when you weigh out merchandise ,

ID:	1643
INPUT:	Sinestedunak munduaren aurrean
PRED:	The Death of the world
GOLD:	Do Not Love This World

ID:	1644
INPUT:	ea erantzun okerren batean harrapatzen zuten .
PRED:	They answered and caught him in a snare .
GOLD:	They wanted to trap him into saying something they could use against him .

ID:	1645
INPUT:	ekialdetik , hogeita hamabost metro luzeko oihalak :
PRED:	And the breadth of the east side of the east side was five cubits long , and the breadth thereof :
GOLD:	The east end , the front , was also 75 feet long .

ID:	1646
INPUT:	Edan zuenean , esan zion neskatxak : — Zure gameluentzat ere ura ateratzera noa , ase arte edan dezaten .
PRED:	And she said to her , The young woman shall go out to the camels , and I may eat the water until I eat .
GOLD:	When she had given him a drink , she said , “ I 'll draw water for your camels , too , until they have had enough to drink . ”

ID:	1647
INPUT:	Ura isurian bezala joango zaizkio etxeko aberastasunak , Jainkoaren zigor-egunean .
PRED:	The riches of God will be like the waters of the waters , and the riches of God will come upon the day of the wrath of God .
GOLD:	A flood will sweep away their house.God 's anger will descend on them in torrents .

ID:	1648
INPUT:	neuk ere aurka egingo dizuet eta zazpi bider gogorrago zigortuko zeuen bekatuengatik .
PRED:	I will punish you , and I will punish you for your sins seven times .
GOLD:	then I myself will be hostile toward you . I will personally strike you with calamity seven times over for your sins .

ID:	1649
INPUT:	esatera : — Ba al dakizu Amongo errege Baalisek Netaniasen seme Ismael bidali duela zu hiltzeko ? Gedaliasek ez zien sinetsi .
PRED:	They said to him , “ Do you know that I am the king of Ammon , the son of Hilkiah , sent Israel to kill him ? ” And he did not believe him .
GOLD:	They said to him , “ Did you know that Baalis , king of Ammon , has sent Ishmael son of Nethaniah to assassinate you ? ” But Gedaliah refused to believe them .

ID:	1650
INPUT:	Jesusek hartu eta beraien aurrean jan zuen .
PRED:	Jesus took it and ate it before them .
GOLD:	and he ate it as they watched .

ID:	1651
INPUT:	Zazpi seme eta hiru alaba zituen .
PRED:	He had seven sons and three daughters .
GOLD:	He had seven sons and three daughters .

ID:	1652
INPUT:	Ekron eta beraren herri eta herrixkak ;
PRED:	and their villages , and their villages , and their villages ,
GOLD:	The territory of the tribe of Judah also included Ekron and its surrounding settlements and villages .

ID:	1653
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin zaiona egin zuen , beraren aita Uziasek bezalaxe .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the sight of the Lord , just as his father Uzziah had done .
GOLD:	Jotham did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight . He did everything his father , Uzziah , had done .

ID:	1654
INPUT:	Baina Kristo , gu oraindik bekatari ginela hil zen gure alde : honela erakusten du Jainkoak guri digun maitasuna .
PRED:	But Christ died because of our sins , and he died for us , because we see that God loved us .
GOLD:	But God showed his great love for us by sending Christ to die for us while we were still sinners .

ID:	1655
INPUT:	Erre-oparien aldarea eta brontzezko uraska
PRED:	The altar of burnt offerings and the bronze altar
GOLD:	Building the Altar of Burnt Offering

ID:	1656
INPUT:	Orduan , esan zion Boozek Ruti : — Adizu ! Ez zaitez joan soro honetatik beste inora garagarburuak biltzera . Jarrai hemen lanean nire morroiekin .
PRED:	Then Boaz said to Boaz , “ Do n't go to this place . Do n't go to this place , and you will not go to this place . Stay here with my servant .
GOLD:	Boaz went over and said to Ruth , “ Listen , my daughter . Stay right here with us when you gather grain ; do n't go to any other fields . Stay right behind the young women working in my field .

ID:	1657
INPUT:	Hortan , hil zen amondarren erregea eta honen seme Ha<unk> gertatu zen ondorengo errege .
PRED:	And the king of Ammon died , and his son reigned in his stead .
GOLD:	Some time after this , King Nahash of the Ammonites died , and his son Hanun became king .

ID:	1658
INPUT:	Moisesek lurraldea ikertzera bidali eta itzuleran , lurraldeaz gaizki-esaka jardunez , haren kontra elkartea berotu zutenak
PRED:	And Moses sent them into the land , and returned to the land of Canaan , and spake against him , saying , Thus saith the Lord .
GOLD:	The ten men Moses had sent to explore the land — the ones who incited rebellion against the Lord with their bad report —

ID:	1659
INPUT:	Axerren leinutik , Okranen seme Pagiel ;
PRED:	And from the tribe of Asher the son of Complains the son of Complains .
GOLD:	AsherPagiel son of Ocran

ID:	1660
INPUT:	Davidek erantzun zion : — Hona hemen erregearen lantza . Betor honaino mutilen bat eta har beza .
PRED:	David said to him , “ This is the spear of the king 's field , and I will come to him as a boy . ”
GOLD:	“ Here is your spear , O king , ” David replied . “ Let one of your young men come over and get it .

ID:	1661
INPUT:	Izugarria baita Jauna , Goi-goikoa , mundu osoaren errege handia .
PRED:	The Most High , the Most High , the Most High , and the whole earth is great .
GOLD:	He subdues the nations before us , putting our enemies beneath our feet .

ID:	1662
INPUT:	Urtean hiru bider Salomonek erre-opariak eta elkartasun-opariak eskaini ohi zituen Jaunarentzat eraikia zuen aldarearen gainean , eta intsentsua erre ohi zuen Jaunaren aitzinean zegoen aldarean . Horrela bukatu zuen tenpluaren eraikuntza .
PRED:	And Solomon built an altar for the Lord three times , and offered sacrifices on the altar of burnt offerings , and offered incense on the altar of the Lord . And it was written in the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	Three times each year Solomon presented burnt offerings and peace offerings on the altar he had built for the Lord . He also burned incense to the Lord . And so he finished the work of building the Temple .

ID:	1663
INPUT:	Ez bainauzu Herio Leizera botako , zure fededuna ez duzu hilobian galtzen utziko .
PRED:	For thou hast not cast me into the grave ; thou hast not given me the grave .
GOLD:	For you will not leave my soul among the deador allow your Holy One to rot in the grave .

ID:	1664
INPUT:	inoren soroan galburuak biltzen dituzte , gaiztoaren mahastian hondarrak ;
PRED:	They gather the heads of the field in the field of the wicked , in the vineyard of the wicked .
GOLD:	They harvest a field they do not own , and they glean in the vineyards of the wicked .

ID:	1665
INPUT:	Maakaren seme Abias ezarri zuen Roboamek anaien buru , bere ondorengo errege egin nahi baitzuen .
PRED:	King Rehoboam put him in charge of his brothers , for he wanted to make him king .
GOLD:	Rehoboam appointed Maacah 's son Abijah as leader among the princes , making it clear that he would be the next king .

ID:	1666
INPUT:	Zabaldira atera ninduen , maite nauelako libratu .
PRED:	He brought me out , because he loved me , because he loved me .
GOLD:	The Lord rewarded me for doing right ; he restored me because of my innocence .

ID:	1667
INPUT:	Horien zigorra betiereko hondamena izango da : Jaunak bere aurretik eta bere ahalmen distiratsutik urruti botako ditu ,
PRED:	This will be the destruction of the Lord for ever , and he will cast them out from his power , from his power and from his power .
GOLD:	They will be punished with eternal destruction , forever separated from the Lord and from his glorious power .

ID:	1668
INPUT:	Orduan , hartu eta Melkias errege-familiako printzearen putzuan sartu zuten Jeremias , sokaz jaitsiz . Putzua kartzelako atarian zegoen eta ez zuen urik , lokatza baizik . Jeremias lokatzetan sarturik gelditu zen .
PRED:	Then Jeremiah took Jeremiah and brought him into the king 's house , and brought him into the king 's house . And Jeremiah went into the court of the king 's house , but he was not ashamed .
GOLD:	So the officials took Jeremiah from his cell and lowered him by ropes into an empty cistern in the prison yard . It belonged to Malkijah , a member of the royal family . There was no water in the cistern , but there was a thick layer of mud at the bottom , and Jeremiah sank down into it .

ID:	1669
INPUT:	Nik , Paulok , Jesu Kristoren zerbitzari honek , idazten dizuet . Jainkoak deitu ninduen apostolu izateko eta Liburu Santuetan profeten ahoz aurrez agindua zeukan berri ona hots egiteko .
PRED:	Paul , a servant of Jesus Christ , a servant of Jesus , who called me to be called to the apostles and to preach the Good News of the prophets .
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , a slave of Christ Jesus , chosen by God to be an apostle and sent out to preach his Good News .

ID:	1670
INPUT:	Beraz , ibili onbidetiketa jarraitu zintzoen jokabideari .
PRED:	So therefore walk in the way of the righteous , and walk in the way of the righteous .
GOLD:	So follow the steps of the good , and stay on the paths of the righteous .

ID:	1671
INPUT:	Orduan eguzkia eta egun-argia , izarrak eta ilargiailundu egingo zaizkik , eta euria egin ondorenberriro lainotuko dik .
PRED:	And the sun and the moon shall be light , and the moon shall be light , and the moon shall be opened from the house of the earth .
GOLD:	Remember him before the light of the sun , moon , and stars is dim to your old eyes , and rain clouds continually darken your sky .

ID:	1672
INPUT:	Saulen heriotza
PRED:	Saul 's death
GOLD:	The Death of Saul

ID:	1673
INPUT:	Hitz atseginak , ezti-abaraska : ahorako goxo , gorputzerako osasungarri .
PRED:	When you speak , you are rich , you are rich , but you are sick .
GOLD:	Kind words are like honey — sweet to the soul and healthy for the body .

ID:	1674
INPUT:	Biharamunean , herriko agintari , zahar eta lege-maisuak Jerusalemen bildu ziren ;
PRED:	And it came to pass on the next day , that the chief priests and the teachers of the law were gathered together in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	The next day the council of all the rulers and elders and teachers of religious law met in Jerusalem .

ID:	1675
INPUT:	Aho beretik ateratzen dira bedeinkazioa eta madarikazioa . Senideok , horrek ez du horrela izan behar .
PRED:	They go out of his mouth , bless him , and curse him , that he may not be blessed .
GOLD:	And so blessing and cursing come pouring out of the same mouth . Surely , my brothers and sisters , this is not right !

ID:	1676
INPUT:	Orduan , aldaretik esaten entzun nuen : « Bai , Jauna , Jainko ahalguztiduna , zure epaiakegiazkoak eta zuzenak dira ! »
PRED:	Then I heard a voice from the altar , saying , “ O Lord , the God of hosts , and your judgment are righteous and righteous . ”
GOLD:	And I heard a voice from the altar , saying , “ Yes , O Lord God , the Almighty , your judgments are true and just . ”

ID:	1677
INPUT:	Orduan , funtzionarioek esan zioten : — Zoaz eta ezkutatu Jeremias eta biok , eta ez dezala jakin inork ere non zaudeten .
PRED:	Then the officials said to Jeremiah , “ Go and see Jeremiah , and do n't know where he is . ”
GOLD:	“ You and Jeremiah should both hide , ” the officials told Baruch . “ Do n't tell anyone where you are ! ”

ID:	1678
INPUT:	Hona hemen haien lurraldeak hartzen zuena : Izreel , Kesulot , Xu<unk> ,
PRED:	This is the land that was given to them . They were the land of Jezreel . They were the father of Jezreel . They were the land of Jezreel .
GOLD:	Its boundaries included the following towns : Jezreel , Kesulloth , Shunem ,

ID:	1679
INPUT:	Bere irakastaldian , beste hau ere esan zien : « Zabiltzate kontuz lege-maisuekin ! Gogoko baitute harro-harro jantzita ibiltzea eta plazetan jendeak agur egitea ;
PRED:	He also said to his disciples , “ Be careful to follow the law , for they will remember the law , and they will be filled with clothes , and they will go into the streets .
GOLD:	Jesus also taught : “ Beware of these teachers of religious law ! For they like to parade around in flowing robes and receive respectful greetings as they walk in the marketplaces .

ID:	1680
INPUT:	Josuek Jeriko hartu
PRED:	Joshua Heals to Jesus
GOLD:	The Fall of Jericho

ID:	1681
INPUT:	Eta nik , lurretik jasoko nautenean , neuregana erakarriko ditut denak » .
PRED:	And when they have taken me out of the earth , I will bring them to me . ”
GOLD:	And when I am lifted up from the earth , I will draw everyone to myself . ”

ID:	1682
INPUT:	ez duzue etxerik eraikiko , ez hazirik ereingo , ez mahastirik landatuko nahiz izango ; baizik eta oihal-etxoletan biziko zarete zeuen bizitza guztian . Horrela , luzaro biziko zarete etorkin bezala zaudeten lurralde honetan ” .
PRED:	You shall not build houses or plant , but you shall not plant , but you shall dwell in your tents , as you live in this land . ”
GOLD:	And do not build houses or plant crops or vineyards , but always live in tents . If you follow these commands , you will live long , good lives in the land . '

ID:	1683
INPUT:	Izan ere , nazioa nazioaren kontra eta erreinua erreinuaren kontra altxatuko dira ; goseteak eta lurrikarak izango dira han eta hemen .
PRED:	For the nations will fight against the nations , and the kingdom will rise up against the kingdom , and there will be famine and famine .
GOLD:	Nation will go to war against nation , and kingdom against kingdom . There will be famines and earthquakes in many parts of the world .

ID:	1684
INPUT:	Nola eman guk Jainkoari behar adina esker ? Hainbestekoa baita zuengatik geure Jainkoaren aurrean dugun poza !
PRED:	How can we give thanks to God ? For I have much more joy for you , because we have been filled with joy before our God .
GOLD:	How we thank God for you ! Because of you we have great joy as we enter God 's presence .

ID:	1685
INPUT:	Hontza eta kirikinoajabetuko dira hartaz , hontz zuria eta beleajarriko han bizitzen . Nahas-mahas eta hutsbihurtuko du Jaunak .
PRED:	They will know what the Lord has said . They will live there . They will live there . They will live there . They will live there , and the Lord will make it desolate .
GOLD:	It will be haunted by the desert owl and the screech owl , the great owl and the raven.For God will measure that land carefully ; he will measure it for chaos and destruction .

ID:	1686
INPUT:	Gaza hiria bertan behera utziaizango da , Axkelon erraustua . Axdodeko bizilagunakegun-argitanjaurtiko dituzte hiritik , Ekrongoak errotik aterako .
PRED:	And it shall be left in the city of Ashdod , and it shall be desolate : and it shall be cut off from the city of Ashdod , and the inhabitants of Ashdod shall be cast out of the city of Ashdod .
GOLD:	Gaza and Ashkelon will be abandoned , Ashdod and Ekron torn down .

ID:	1687
INPUT:	Hala ere , Jaunak ez zuen Juda hondatu nahi izan , David bere zerbitzariagatik ; hitzemana baitzion Davidi beronen ondorengoak izanen zirela beti errege Jerusalemen .
PRED:	But the Lord would not destroy Judah because of his servants David his servant , but he gave him his son David as king for ever .
GOLD:	But the Lord did not want to destroy Judah , for he had promised his servant David that his descendants would continue to rule , shining like a lamp forever .

ID:	1688
INPUT:	Ahizparen bidea hartu duzu eta , beraz , haren kopa jarriko dut zure eskuan .
PRED:	You have taken away the way of your sister , and I will put him in your hand .
GOLD:	Because you have followed in your sister 's footsteps , I will force you to drink the same cup of terror she drank .

ID:	1689
INPUT:	euriari legea jarri zioneaneta tximistari eta trumoiari beren ibilbidea ,
PRED:	He gave rain to the law , and the lightning of lightning , and the way of their way .
GOLD:	He made the laws for the rainand laid out a path for the lightning .

ID:	1690
INPUT:	Hauekin izan naizen bitartean , neuk zaindu ditut eman dizkidazunok . Hauen ardura izan dut eta hauetako bat ere ez da galdu , galdu behar zuena baizik ; horrela , Liburu Santuek diotena bete da .
PRED:	As I am with them , I have kept them , and I have kept them , and one of them has not been lost , but that one of these things should not be lost .
GOLD:	During my time here , I protected them by the power of the name you gave me . I guarded them so that not one was lost , except the one headed for destruction , as the Scriptures foretold .

ID:	1691
INPUT:	Berak aterako du onik errugabea , eta zu ere bai , zure jarduera garbia bada » .
PRED:	He will bring back the innocent , and you will be clean . ”
GOLD:	Even sinners will be rescued ; they will be rescued because your hands are pure . ”

ID:	1692
INPUT:	Orduan , gudalburu guztiek , Kareahen seme Johananek eta Hoxaiasen seme Azariasek batik bat , eta berekin zuten jendeak , txiki nahiz handi , Jeremiasengana hurbildu
PRED:	Then all the captains of the army came to Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah , and Abishai the son of Hilkiah , and Abishai son of Hilkiah , and with him , and with him a great multitude , and with him , and with him , and with him , and with him all the people , and with him , and with him .
GOLD:	Then all the military leaders , including Johanan son of Kareah and Jezaniah son of Hoshaiah , and all the people , from the least to the greatest , approached

ID:	1693
INPUT:	Ea , bada , Jakoben herri , ibil gaitezen Jaunaren argitan !
PRED:	So let us pass through the light of the Lord , and let us go into the light of Jacob .
GOLD:	Come , descendants of Jacob , let us walk in the light of the Lord !

ID:	1694
INPUT:	Ikasleek esan zioten : — Orain bai mintzo zarela argi , eta ez irudi bidez .
PRED:	His disciples said to him , “ You are still speaking with light , and you do not make a image . ”
GOLD:	Then his disciples said , “ At last you are speaking plainly and not figuratively .

ID:	1695
INPUT:	Beste zenbait harri artean erori zen , lur handirik ez zen tokian ; eta , axaleko lurra izanik , berehala erne zen ;
PRED:	And others fell among the stones , and there was no great ground , and the earth was like the face of the earth .
GOLD:	Other seeds fell on shallow soil with underlying rock . The seeds sprouted quickly because the soil was shallow .

ID:	1696
INPUT:	Zuek , ordea , beste hau diozue : Norbaitek aitari edo amari esaten badio : « Zuri eman behar nizukeena Jainkoari eskainia diot » ,
PRED:	But you say to them , “ If anyone has given to your father or mother or mother or mother or mother , I will sacrifice to God . ”
GOLD:	But you say it is all right for people to say to their parents , ‘ Sorry , I ca n't help you . For I have vowed to give to God what I would have given to you . '

ID:	1697
INPUT:	Neurekin eduki nahi nuen , zure ordez zerbitzari izan nezan , berri ona hots egiteagatik kartzelan nagoelarik .
PRED:	I want to be with me , because I was my servant , because I was in prison .
GOLD:	I wanted to keep him here with me while I am in these chains for preaching the Good News , and he would have helped me on your behalf .

ID:	1698
INPUT:	Babiloniar herriakhoben larria egin duIsraelgo Santuaren aurka ; izan ere , Israel eta Juda ez dira , alargun gisa , beren Jainko Jaun ahalguztidunagabe gelditu .
PRED:	The people of Babylon have sinned against the Holy One of Israel , because they have not sinned against the Holy One of Israel , neither have they been left in their sight , neither have they left the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armieshas not abandoned Israel and Judah.He is still their God , even though their land was filled with sinagainst the Holy One of Israel . ”

ID:	1699
INPUT:	Gerora , Moises eta Aaron bidali nituen , Egipto zigortu nuen neure ekintzaz , eta zuek handik irtenarazi .
PRED:	Then I sent Moses and Aaron and Aaron , and brought them out of the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	“ Then I sent Moses and Aaron , and I brought terrible plagues on Egypt ; and afterward I brought you out as a free people .

ID:	1700
INPUT:	Akaz erregearentzat mezua
PRED:	King Ahaz of Judah
GOLD:	A Message for Ahaz

ID:	1701
INPUT:	Hemen zaudeten israeldarrok , hitz egin zeuen artean eta hartu erabakia » .
PRED:	And here are the rest of you , house of Israel , and prophesy among you , and take it .
GOLD:	Now then , all of you — the entire community of Israel — must decide here and now what should be done about this ! ”

ID:	1702
INPUT:	Arren , senideok , ondo hartuko ahal duzue sermoi hau ! Hitz labur batzuk erantsiz bidaltzen dizuet .
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , you will know that I send you a few days .
GOLD:	I urge you , dear brothers and sisters , to pay attention to what I have written in this brief exhortation .

ID:	1703
INPUT:	Haiek erantzun zioten : — Sinetsi Jesus Jaunarengan , eta zu eta zure etxekoak salbatuko zarete .
PRED:	They said to him , “ Jesus , believe in the Lord Jesus , and you will be saved . ”
GOLD:	They replied , “ Believe in the Lord Jesus and you will be saved , along with everyone in your household . ”

ID:	1704
INPUT:	ez du gogoan hartzen oinen batek azpian haredo piztiaren batek zanpa ditzakeela .
PRED:	Do n't remember that one of the beasts of the field will be filled with the wild animals .
GOLD:	She does n't worry that a foot might crush themor a wild animal might destroy them .

ID:	1705
INPUT:	Honela bete zen Jainkoak profetaren bidez esana : Parabola bidez mintzatuko naiz , munduaren hasieratik gordea zegoena azalduko .
PRED:	This was what God said through the prophets , “ I will speak through the prophets , and I will speak to them from the world . ”
GOLD:	This fulfilled what God had spoken through the prophet : “ I will speak to you in parables.I will explain things hidden since the creation of the world . ”

ID:	1706
INPUT:	Ezarri estalkia kutxaren gainean , eta ipini nik emango dizudan itun-agiria kutxaren barruan .
PRED:	And thou shalt put the ark upon the ark of the testimony , and put it in the ark of the covenant of the covenant of the covenant of the covenant of the covenant .
GOLD:	Place inside the Ark the stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant , which I will give to you . Then put the atonement cover on top of the Ark .

ID:	1707
INPUT:	Tenplu barruko zedrozko oholtza hura frui<unk> eta lore-sortazko irudiz apaindua zegoen . Dena zedrozkoa zen ; ez zen harririk ikusten .
PRED:	And the cedar trees of the house was made of cedar trees , and the cedar trees of cedar trees , and the cedar tree was not seen .
GOLD:	Cedar paneling completely covered the stone walls throughout the Temple , and the paneling was decorated with carvings of gourds and open flowers .

ID:	1708
INPUT:	Baina hark , Espiritu Santuaz beterik , zerura begiratu eta Jainkoaren aintza ikusi zuen , eta Jesus zutik Jainkoaren eskuinaldean .
PRED:	But when he saw the Holy Spirit , he looked toward heaven and saw the glory of God , and he sat on his right hand .
GOLD:	But Stephen , full of the Holy Spirit , gazed steadily into heaven and saw the glory of God , and he saw Jesus standing in the place of honor at God 's right hand .

ID:	1709
INPUT:	Jauna , ene ondasun bakar , erabakia dut zure hitzak gordetzea .
PRED:	O Lord , I have kept your word , and I have kept your words .
GOLD:	Lord , you are mine ! I promise to obey your words !

ID:	1710
INPUT:	Jesusek galdetu zien : — Zer egingo ote die nekazari horiei mahasti-jabeak itzultzean ?
PRED:	Jesus asked them , “ What will these men do to them when they return to the vineyard ? ”
GOLD:	“ When the owner of the vineyard returns , ” Jesus asked , “ what do you think he will do to those farmers ? ”

ID:	1711
INPUT:	« Kehaten ondorengoen egitekoa elkarketa-etxolan gauza sakratuenez arduratzea da .
PRED:	“ These are the work of the sons of Aaron , which is to do the work of the tabernacle of meeting .
GOLD:	“ The duties of the Kohathites at the Tabernacle will relate to the most sacred objects .

ID:	1712
INPUT:	Hamor eta honen seme Sikem ere ezpataz hil zituzten ; Sikemen etxetik Dina hartu eta atera egin ziren .
PRED:	And Shechem and Shechem killed them with the sword , and they took them out of the house of Shechem , and brought them out of Shechem .
GOLD:	including Hamor and his son Shechem . They killed them with their swords , then took Dinah from Shechem 's house and returned to their camp .

ID:	1713
INPUT:	Hatzorko bizilagunok , egizue ihes arin , ezkutatu koba-zuloetan ! Hala diot nik , Jaunak . Babiloniako erregeNabukodonosorrekzuen aurkako erabakia hartua du , egitasmoa mamitua .
PRED:	You inhabitants of Babylon , escape , you inhabitants of Babylon , ” says the Lord . “ You have taken care of it , ” says the Lord . “ Because you have kept the counsel of the king of Babylon , the counsel of the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	Run for your lives , ” says the Lord . “ Hide yourselves in deep caves , you people of Hazor , for King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon has plotted against youand is preparing to destroy you .

ID:	1714
INPUT:	Entzun , seme , eta izan zuhur , bideratu zuzen zeure bizia .
PRED:	My son , listen to me , and be wise , and be wise .
GOLD:	My child , listen and be wise : Keep your heart on the right course .

ID:	1715
INPUT:	Huts egin dudala egia izanda ere , neuri bakarrik dagokit hutsa .
PRED:	I know that I have done the work of my own body .
GOLD:	Even if I have sinned , that is my concern , not yours .

ID:	1716
INPUT:	Babiloniako erbestealdiaren ondoren , Jekoniasek Salatiel sortu zuen ; Salatielek Zorobabel ;
PRED:	After the rest of the captivity of Babylon , Satan raised Samaria , and Satan became the father of Samaria .
GOLD:	After the Babylonian exile : Jehoiachin was the father of Shealtiel.Shealtiel was the father of Zerubbabel .

ID:	1717
INPUT:	eta , bereziki , errugabeko jendea hilez Jerusalem osoa odolez bete zuelako . Jaunak ez zuen hau guztia barkatu nahi izan .
PRED:	And all the people of Jerusalem were guilty of blood , because they had sinned against the blood of the Lord . And the Lord did not forgive all these things .
GOLD:	who had filled Jerusalem with innocent blood . The Lord would not forgive this .

ID:	1718
INPUT:	Ezekiasen erregealdiko laugarren urtean , hau da , Israelgo Elaren seme Oseasen erregealdiko zazpigarren urtean , Asiriako errege Salmanasarrek Samariari eraso eta setiatu egin zuen .
PRED:	In the fourth year of Hezekiah king of Israel , in the seventh year of Hezekiah the son of Uzziah king of Israel , king of Assyria attacked Samaria , and attacked Samaria .
GOLD:	During the fourth year of Hezekiah 's reign , which was the seventh year of King Hoshea 's reign in Israel , King Shalmaneser of Assyria attacked the city of Samaria and began a siege against it .

ID:	1719
INPUT:	Haiek erantzun zioten : — Kornelio ehuntariaren partetik gatoz . Gizon zuzena da eta Israelen Jainkoa gurtzen duena , eta judu guztien artean izen onekoa . Jaunaren aingeruak agindu dio , zu bere etxera eramateko eta zure hitzak entzuteko .
PRED:	They said to him , “ Paul , because of the centurion of the centurion . The man who worship God is righteous and righteous among all the Jews , and the angel of the Lord God of Israel has commanded you to hear your word . ”
GOLD:	They said , “ We were sent by Cornelius , a Roman officer . He is a devout and God-fearing man , well respected by all the Jews . A holy angel instructed him to summon you to his house so that he can hear your message . ”

ID:	1720
INPUT:	Maite duzue Jesu Kristo , gaurdaino ikusi ez duzuen arren . Eta , ikusi gabe berarengan sinetsiz , esanezin ahalako pozez , poz distiratsuz , beteak zaudete jadanik ,
PRED:	You love the love you have seen Jesus Christ . You have never seen him . You have never seen him . You have seen him with a loud voice . You have not seen him with a loud voice .
GOLD:	You love him even though you have never seen him . Though you do not see him now , you trust him ; and you rejoice with a glorious , inexpressible joy .

ID:	1721
INPUT:	« Aaronek bere barkamen-opariko zekorra aurkeztuko du eta hil , bere eta etxekoen aldeko barkamen-ohikunea eginez .
PRED:	Aaron shall offer a bull for his sin offering , and he shall kill it , and he shall make atonement for the house of his house .
GOLD:	“ Aaron will present his own bull as a sin offering to purify himself and his family , making them right with the Lord . After he has slaughtered the bull as a sin offering ,

ID:	1722
INPUT:	Nabukodonosor Egiptori erasotzeko zorian zegoela , mezu hau adierazi zion Jaunak Jeremias profetari :
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to Jeremiah king of Egypt , saying ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord gave the prophet Jeremiah this message about King Nebuchadnezzar 's plans to attack Egypt .

ID:	1723
INPUT:	Ehuden ondoren , Anaten seme Xamgar izan zen buruzagi . Seiehun filistear hil zituen itzain-akuilu batez . Horrela , berak ere salbatu zuen Israel .
PRED:	After he was the leader of the Philistines . He killed the Philistines in the camp of the Philistines . He saved Israel .
GOLD:	After Ehud , Shamgar son of Anath rescued Israel . He once killed 600 Philistines with an ox goad .

ID:	1724
INPUT:	Ondoren , beste hau dio : Hemen nauzu zure nahia betetzeko . Aipaturiko lehenengo kultua kentzen du bigarrena jartzeko .
PRED:	And he said , Behold , I am thy will , that I may do thy will ; and the first shall be taken away from the first .
GOLD:	Then he said , “ Look , I have come to do your will . ” He cancels the first covenant in order to put the second into effect .

ID:	1725
INPUT:	Egia esan , gonbidatu haietako batek ere ez du nire afaria dastatuko ” » .
PRED:	I tell you , one of them will not eat my food . ”
GOLD:	For none of those I first invited will get even the smallest taste of my banquet . ' ”

ID:	1726
INPUT:	Honela , amortarren lurraldean kokatu zen Israel .
PRED:	So Israel lived in the land of the Amorites .
GOLD:	So the people of Israel occupied the territory of the Amorites .

ID:	1727
INPUT:	Zuen esku utzi ditu Jaunak Oreb eta Zeeb , madiandarren buruzagiak . Egintza horren aldean , nik ez dut deus ere egin . Hau esateak baretu egin zituen efraimdarrak .
PRED:	And the Lord delivered them into your hand , and the princes of Midian ; and I did not do any work in the land of Ephraim , and the princes of Ephraim ; and the sons of Ephraim took them away .
GOLD:	God gave you victory over Oreb and Zeeb , the commanders of the Midianite army . What have I accomplished compared to that ? ” When the men of Ephraim heard Gideon 's answer , their anger subsided .

ID:	1728
INPUT:	« Erre egingo dituzue horien idoloak . Ez gutiziatu idoloak estaltzen dituzten urre-zilarrak , ez hartu zeuentzat , idoloen tranpan harrapatuak geldi ez zaitezten : idoloak higuingarri zaizkio Jaunari zuen Jainkoari .
PRED:	And thou shalt burn their idols , and thou shalt not make their idols to the idols of their idols , and thou shalt not take away the idols of the idols of their idols , neither shalt thou make yourselves an abomination unto the Lord thy God .
GOLD:	“ You must burn their idols in fire , and you must not covet the silver or gold that covers them . You must not take it or it will become a trap to you , for it is detestable to the Lord your God .

ID:	1729
INPUT:	Izan ere , legearen errealitatea beren bihotzetan idatzia daukatela erakusten dute , beren kontzientziak aitortzen duen bezala , batzuetan salatu egiten baititu eta besteetan zuritu .
PRED:	For they see that the law is written in their heart , as it is written in their heart , and they have been written in their own heart , and they have done in another place .
GOLD:	They demonstrate that God 's law is written in their hearts , for their own conscience and thoughts either accuse them or tell them they are doing right .

ID:	1730
INPUT:	Josafatek ur handietako itsasontziak egin zituen Ofirrera urre bila joateko . Baina ezin izan zen joan , ontziak Etzion-Geberreko kaian deseginak gertatu baitziren .
PRED:	And Jehoshaphat made the ships of the sea of the river , that they might go out to Hamath . But he could not go into the boat of Kadesh , because they were under the sea .
GOLD:	At one time Ahaziah son of Ahab had proposed to Jehoshaphat , “ Let my men sail with your men in the ships . ” But Jehoshaphat refused the request .

ID:	1731
INPUT:	Atzerriko nazio guztietatikekarriko dituzte zuen herritarrakzaldi , gurdi eta ohatiletan , mando nahiz gamelu gainean ; niretzat , Jaun honentzat , opari gisa ekarriko dituz<unk> rusalemgo nire mendi santuraino , israeldarrek beren opariakontzi garbietan Jaunaren etxeraeraman ohi dituzten bezalaxe . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	And all the nations of the nations shall bring unto you all the nations of the nations , and upon the horses , and on the horses , and on the horses , and on the horses , and on the hills , and on the hills of the Lord , and in the house of the Lord , as I have spoken unto the house of Israel .
GOLD:	They will bring the remnant of your people back from every nation . They will bring them to my holy mountain in Jerusalem as an offering to the Lord . They will ride on horses , in chariots and wagons , and on mules and camels , ” says the Lord .

ID:	1732
INPUT:	Apaizen ohituren arabera , berari egokitu zitzaion Jaunaren santutegira sartzea intsentsua eskaintzeko .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the priest had made an offering to the Lord , that he might offer incense to the Lord .
GOLD:	As was the custom of the priests , he was chosen by lot to enter the sanctuary of the Lord and burn incense .

ID:	1733
INPUT:	Pedrok eta beste apostoluek erantzun zuten : — Jainkoaren esana egin behar da lehenik , ez gizakiena .
PRED:	But Peter and the apostles answered , “ The first man must do what God has said . ”
GOLD:	But Peter and the apostles replied , “ We must obey God rather than any human authority .

ID:	1734
INPUT:	zuhurrak entzun bitza eta zuhurrago bihurtuko da , burutsuak trebetasuna bereganatuko du ;
PRED:	The wise will be wise , and the wise will be wise , and the wise will be wise .
GOLD:	Let the wise listen to these proverbs and become even wiser.Let those with understanding receive guidance

ID:	1735
INPUT:	Hartu errota eta egin irina ; kendu musu-estalkia , jaso gonak , agertu izterrak , ibaiak oinez igarotzeko :
PRED:	Take it , take it , take it , and take the covering of the fat , and take the covering of the fat , and put it on their feet , and put it on their feet .
GOLD:	Take heavy millstones and grind flour.Remove your veil , and strip off your robe.Expose yourself to public view .

ID:	1736
INPUT:	Zuek duzuen askatasun hori ez bedi gaizki-esanerako bide gerta .
PRED:	For this reason you will not be saved from your evil deeds .
GOLD:	Then you will not be criticized for doing something you believe is good .

ID:	1737
INPUT:	Zer da errazago : “ Barkatuak dituzu bekatuak ” esatea ala “ Jaiki eta zabiltza ” esatea ?
PRED:	What shall you say to him , ‘ You have forgiven sins , ' and say , ‘ Get up and gather ? '
GOLD:	Is it easier to say ‘ Your sins are forgiven , ' or ‘ Stand up and walk ' ?

ID:	1738
INPUT:	Hau ere esan zien Jainkoak : « Hau da zuei eta zuen artean bizi diren bizidun guztiei belaunez belaun eta betiko ematen dizuedan itun-hitzaren ezaugarria :
PRED:	Then God said to them , “ This is the sign between you and all the living living among you and all the living living in your generations .
GOLD:	Then God said , “ I am giving you a sign of my covenant with you and with all living creatures , for all generations to come .

ID:	1739
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Gaur iritsi da salbamena etxe honetara , gizon hau ere Abrahamen ondorengoa baita .
PRED:	Jesus said to him , “ This day has come to this house . This man is the son of Abraham . ”
GOLD:	Jesus responded , “ Salvation has come to this home today , for this man has shown himself to be a true son of Abraham .

ID:	1740
INPUT:	( 37 , 1-9 )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Plans for the Lampstand

ID:	1741
INPUT:	Hau da benetako maitasuna : ez guk Jainkoari izan diogun maitasuna , berak guri izan diguna baizik , hau da , gure bekatuen barkamen-oparitzat bere Semea bidaliz erakutsi digun maitasuna .
PRED:	This is the love of love : we have not love God , but he has given us our sins as a sin offering for our sins .
GOLD:	This is real love — not that we loved God , but that he loved us and sent his Son as a sacrifice to take away our sins .

ID:	1742
INPUT:	Hori izan zen dandarren ondarea , senitarteka banatua , aipaturiko hiri eta herrixkak barne .
PRED:	This is the inheritance of the children of Asher according to their families , and their villages , and their villages .
GOLD:	The homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Dan included these towns and their surrounding villages .

ID:	1743
INPUT:	Izan ere , Sion mendia hondamen bihurtu da , azeri-leku .
PRED:	For Zion has become a desolation , and a place of a city .
GOLD:	For Jerusalem is empty and desolate , a place haunted by jackals .

ID:	1744
INPUT:	Jaunari esker , egiptoarren abegi ona irabazi zuten eta eskatu guztia eman zieten egiptoarrek . Honela kendu zizkieten egiptoarrei beren ondasunak .
PRED:	And the Egyptians took the bread of the Lord , and gave them to the Egyptians , and gave them all that they asked . And the Egyptians took away their inheritance .
GOLD:	The Lord caused the Egyptians to look favorably on the Israelites , and they gave the Israelites whatever they asked for . So they stripped the Egyptians of their wealth !

ID:	1745
INPUT:	Davidek esandako hitzak aditu zituztelarik , Sauli jakinarazi zioten . Saulek etorrarazi
PRED:	When David heard what David had said to Saul , they told him what David had said to Saul .
GOLD:	Then David 's question was reported to King Saul , and the king sent for him .

ID:	1746
INPUT:	Jakintsuaren ahoari darion mintzoaatsegina da ; zentzugabea , berriz , bere hitzak galduko du :
PRED:	The mouth of the wise is sweet , but the mouth of the wise shall perish .
GOLD:	Wise words bring approval , but fools are destroyed by their own words .

ID:	1747
INPUT:	Esku-oinak garbituko dituzte , beraz , hil nahi ez badute . Betiko lege izango da hau Aaronentzat eta beronen ondorengoentzat belaunez belaun » .
PRED:	And they shall wash their hands and wash their hands , and they shall not kill them . This is the law for Aaron and his sons forever .
GOLD:	They must always wash their hands and feet , or they will die . This is a permanent law for Aaron and his descendants , to be observed from generation to generation . ”

ID:	1748
INPUT:	Eta ezetz ikusten badu , bestea oraindik urruti dela , mandatariak bidaliko dizkio bakea eskatuz .
PRED:	But if he does not see him , he will send messengers to him .
GOLD:	And if he ca n't , he will send a delegation to discuss terms of peace while the enemy is still far away .

ID:	1749
INPUT:	Sarrera
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Introduction to Moses ' First Address

ID:	1750
INPUT:	Israel herriaren lehenengo izen-bilketa
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Tribe

ID:	1751
INPUT:	« Hainbeste irrikatzen zenu<unk> tuaurrundu egin zaizu ; galdu dituzu zeure luxua eta ospea , sekula ez berreskuratzeko » .
PRED:	“ You have made you rich , and you have destroyed you , and you have lost your glory and glory , and you have not been sold . ”
GOLD:	“ The fancy things you loved so muchare gone , ” they cry . “ All your luxuries and splendorare gone forever , never to be yours again . ”

ID:	1752
INPUT:	eta Jesus tenpluko Salomonen aterpean zebilen .
PRED:	And he was walking in the temple of Solomon .
GOLD:	He was in the Temple , walking through the section known as Solomon 's Colonnade .

ID:	1753
INPUT:	Jaunaren , gure Jainkoaren , etxearengatik , zoriona eskatzen dut zuretzat .
PRED:	I pray for you , O Lord our God , for the house of the Lord our God .
GOLD:	For the sake of the house of the Lord our God , I will seek what is best for you , O Jerusalem .

ID:	1754
INPUT:	Hegazti guztiak pausatu dira enbor erorian , basapiztiak gorde haren adar artean .
PRED:	All the birds of the birds are in the field , and all the birds of the earth are filled with power .
GOLD:	“ The birds roost on its fallen trunk , and the wild animals lie among its branches .

ID:	1755
INPUT:	Dohakabe eta behartsu bainaiz , urraturik baitut bihotza barruan .
PRED:	For I am poor and poor , for I am weak in my heart .
GOLD:	For I am poor and needy , and my heart is full of pain .

ID:	1756
INPUT:	« Gizon nahiz emakume bati buruan edo kokotsean azaleko gaitzen bat sortzen bazaio ,
PRED:	If a man or a woman lies in his head ,
GOLD:	“ If anyone , either a man or woman , has a sore on the head or chin ,

ID:	1757
INPUT:	Jaunarenganako begirunea da ezagueraren oinarria ; baina zentzugabeek mespretxatu egiten dituztezuhurtzia eta heziketa .
PRED:	The fear of the Lord is the foundation of the Lord , but the fool despised wisdom and understanding .
GOLD:	Fear of the Lord is the foundation of true knowledge , but fools despise wisdom and discipline .

ID:	1758
INPUT:	Baina Jesusek haien gogoetak igarri eta esan zien : « Zergatik dituzue horrelako gogoetak zeuen baitan ?
PRED:	But Jesus knew their thoughts and said to them , “ Why do you do this because you are doing this ?
GOLD:	Jesus knew what they were thinking , so he asked them , “ Why do you question this in your hearts ?

ID:	1759
INPUT:	Babilonia Jainkoaren zigorraren baliabide
PRED:	The People of Babylon
GOLD:	The

ID:	1760
INPUT:	Hiltzailea , beraz , babes-hirian biziko da , apaiz nagusia hil arte . Gero , itzul daiteke bere jabetzara .
PRED:	So the priest shall live in the city , until the high priest has died . Then he shall return to his own possession .
GOLD:	The slayer should have stayed inside the city of refuge until the death of the high priest . But after the death of the high priest , the slayer may return to his own property .

ID:	1761
INPUT:	Ulertzeko gauza denak uler beza Espirituak eliz elkarteei esaten diena . Garaileari mana ezkutua emanen diot , eta harritxo txuri bat ere bai , eta harritxoan izen berri bat idatzia , hartzen duenak bakarrik ezagutuko duena .
PRED:	If anyone has ears , let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches , I will give her a sign , and I will give it to her a sign in Galilee , and one of them who know it will be written .
GOLD:	“ Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the Spirit and understand what he is saying to the churches . To everyone who is victorious I will give some of the manna that has been hidden away in heaven . And I will give to each one a white stone , and on the stone will be engraved a new name that no one understands except the one who receives it .

ID:	1762
INPUT:	Esterrek ez zuen adierazi zein herri eta zein jatorritakoa zen ; hala baitzion Mardokeok agindua eta bete egiten zuen hark Mardokeoren esana , beraren ardurapean zegoenean bezalaxe .
PRED:	Esther did not tell the people what Mordecai had said . But Mordecai did what Mordecai had commanded , and he did what Mordecai had commanded him .
GOLD:	Esther continued to keep her family background and nationality a secret . She was still following Mordecai 's directions , just as she did when she lived in his home .

ID:	1763
INPUT:	Suzko ibai batateratzen zen haren aurretik . Jendetza izugarria zuen zerbitzari , milaka eta milaka zeudenharen aurrean zutik . Auzia hasieta zabaldu ziren liburuak .
PRED:	He was a mighty man before him , and a great crowd came before him , and a thousand thousand thousand thousand thousand men , and the book were opened before him , and the book were opened .
GOLD:	and a river of fire was pouring out , flowing from his presence.Millions of angels ministered to him ; many millions stood to attend him.Then the court began its session , and the books were opened .

ID:	1764
INPUT:	Bertako jendeak ohi ez bezalako gizalegez hartu gintuen . Euria eta hotza baitzen , su handia piztu eta guztioi ondora deitu ziguten .
PRED:	And the men of the people were not like men , as they were not like men , and the cloud was filled with fire , and all the earth called them .
GOLD:	The people of the island were very kind to us . It was cold and rainy , so they built a fire on the shore to welcome us .

ID:	1765
INPUT:	hau da , mila metro neurtuko dituzte ekialde zein mendebaldera , hegoalde zein iparraldera , hiria erdian geldituko delarik . Horiek izango dira herri-lurrak .
PRED:	This shall be the length of the north side of the north side of the north side of the north : for the city shall be in the midst of the land .
GOLD:	Measure off 3,000 feet outside the town walls in every direction — east , south , west , north — with the town at the center . This area will serve as the larger pastureland for the towns .

ID:	1766
INPUT:	Saia gaitezen , bada , atseden horretan sartzen , eta ez dadila inor sinesgogorkerian eror , gure aurrekoen etsenpluari jarraituz .
PRED:	So let us enter into the rest , and let no one enter into the rest of them that believe not , that they may be put to shame .
GOLD:	So let us do our best to enter that rest . But if we disobey God , as the people of Israel did , we will fall .

ID:	1767
INPUT:	Negar eta damu-otoitz arteanekarriko ditut . Ongi ureztaturiko ibarretaraeramango ditut , estropezurik egingo ez dutenbide zelaitik . Aita izango naiz Israelentzat , nire lehen-seme izango da bera .
PRED:	I will bring them into the midst of the mourning , and I will bring them into the midst of the water , and I will bring them out of the way , and I will be my Father , and I will be my Father , and Israel shall be my firstborn .
GOLD:	Tears of joy will stream down their faces , and I will lead them home with great care.They will walk beside quiet streamsand on smooth paths where they will not stumble.For I am Israel 's father , and Ephraim is my oldest child .

ID:	1768
INPUT:	Eta oraindik argiago da hori , baldin beste apaiz bat sortu bada Melkisedeken antzera ,
PRED:	And this is the light of the light , if another priest is a priest ,
GOLD:	This change has been made very clear since a different priest , who is like Melchizedek , has appeared .

ID:	1769
INPUT:	Neuk hedatu dut zeruaeta oinarritu lurra , eta Sioni esaten diot : Zu nire herria ! Neure mezuaren bozeramaileegin zaitut , eta neure eskupean babestu » .
PRED:	I have broken the earth , and the earth , and I say to Simon , “ You are my people , and I have appointed you to obey my word , and I have delivered you into my hand . ”
GOLD:	And I have put my words in your mouthand hidden you safely in my hand.I stretched out the sky like a canopyand laid the foundations of the earth.I am the one who says to Israel , ‘ You are my people ! ' ”

ID:	1770
INPUT:	Han zegoen Jakoben putzua delakoa . Jesus , bideaz nekaturik , putzu-ertzean eseri zen . Eguerdi ingurua zen .
PRED:	And when Jacob was there , he sat by the way of Jacob . And he sat by the way , and sat round about him .
GOLD:	Jacob 's well was there ; and Jesus , tired from the long walk , sat wearily beside the well about noontime .

ID:	1771
INPUT:	etxolatzeko lekua zuei aurkitzeko , bera bidean aurretik zihoakizuen arren , gauez suaren bidez bidea argituz , eta egunez lainoaren bidez gidatuz .
PRED:	And when he found the tabernacle , he went before you in front of the tabernacle , and went by night by night by night by night , and by the way of the cloud .
GOLD:	who goes before you looking for the best places to camp , guiding you with a pillar of fire by night and a pillar of cloud by day .

ID:	1772
INPUT:	zeruan Jainkoak zuentzat prestatua duen sariaren itxaropenak eragiten dizue horretara , berri ona — egiaren mezua — zuengana iritsi zenean ezagutu zenuten itxaropenak , alegia .
PRED:	For the hope of God is prepared for you in heaven , that you may know the word which God has prepared for you , when you heard the word of the truth ,
GOLD:	which come from your confident hope of what God has reserved for you in heaven . You have had this expectation ever since you first heard the truth of the Good News .

ID:	1773
INPUT:	Haren entzutea herrialde hartako bazter guztietara zabaldu zen .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when he heard his voice , that he spread throughout all the cities of the land .
GOLD:	The news about Jesus spread through every village in the entire region .

ID:	1774
INPUT:	Gizon hura zetorrenean , Eli ate ondoan zegoen aulki batean eseria , bidera begira , Jaunaren kutxaz guztiz kezkatua . Gizon hark hirian sartu eta berria eman zuen ; hiri osoa oihuka hasi zen .
PRED:	When the man came to meet him , he sat on the throne , sitting on the throne of the Lord . And he went into the city of the Lord . And he went into the city and wept .
GOLD:	Eli was waiting beside the road to hear the news of the battle , for his heart trembled for the safety of the Ark of God . When the messenger arrived and told what had happened , an outcry resounded throughout the town .

ID:	1775
INPUT:	Eta haiek bertan utzi eta hiritik kanpora atera zen , Betaniara , eta han eman zuen gaua .
PRED:	And he left them , and went out of the city , and brought him out of the city , and there he was night .
GOLD:	Then he returned to Bethany , where he stayed overnight .

ID:	1776
INPUT:	Denek nahi zuten Salomon ikusi , Jainkoak eman zion jakinduriaren berri izateko .
PRED:	All of them saw Solomon , that God gave him wisdom to tell him wisdom .
GOLD:	People from every nation came to consult him and to hear the wisdom God had given him .

ID:	1777
INPUT:	NAZIOEN AURKAKO PROFEZIAK ( 25 , 1 — 32 , 32 )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	A Message for Ammon

ID:	1778
INPUT:	Berdinak ziren laurak , bata bestearen barruan sartuta bezala zeuden .
PRED:	These were the ones who went into the inner courtyard , just as they went into the inner courtyard .
GOLD:	All four wheels looked alike and were made the same ; each wheel had a second wheel turning crosswise within it .

ID:	1779
INPUT:	Ilundu zuenean , ontzia aintzira erdian zegoen , eta Jesus lehorrean , bakarrik .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the sea was in the sea , that he was in the sea , and he was alone alone alone .
GOLD:	Late that night , the disciples were in their boat in the middle of the lake , and Jesus was alone on land .

ID:	1780
INPUT:	Zintzoengana ditu Jaunak begiak , haien deiak entzuteko adi belarriak .
PRED:	The Lord will turn to the righteous , and he will hear their ears .
GOLD:	But the Lord turns his face against those who do evil ; he will erase their memory from the earth .

ID:	1781
INPUT:	Horra zure etsaiak asaldaturik , gorroto dizutenak burua jasorik .
PRED:	You are my enemies , O Lord , and you are my God , and you are my God .
GOLD:	They devise crafty schemes against your people ; they conspire against your precious ones .

ID:	1782
INPUT:	Goraintziak A<unk> tori , <unk> goni , Hermesi , Patrobasi , Hermasi eta haiekin bizi diren senideei .
PRED:	And the sons of Didymus , the son of Didymus , the son of Didymus , and the brethren , and the brethren that dwell with them .
GOLD:	Give my greetings to Asyncritus , Phlegon , Hermes , Patrobas , Hermas , and the brothers and sisters who meet with them .

ID:	1783
INPUT:	Egiptoko errege Xixak Juda erreinuaz jabetu
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Egypt Invades Judah

ID:	1784
INPUT:	Beraz , Kristorena dena sorkari berri da ; zaharrarenak egin du , berria sortu da .
PRED:	So the Good News of Christ has been made known . The old man has become a new news .
GOLD:	This means that anyone who belongs to Christ has become a new person . The old life is gone ; a new life has begun !

ID:	1785
INPUT:	Gero , apaizak eta lebitarrak ekialdeko plazan bildurik ,
PRED:	Then the priest and the Levites gathered the Levites in the east side of the east side of the east .
GOLD:	He summoned the priests and Levites to meet him at the courtyard east of the Temple .

ID:	1786
INPUT:	Egun hartan , Oliamendi gainean jarriko ditu oinak , Jerusalemen sortaldean . Bitan ebakiko da Oliamendi , eta haran bat azalduko da sortaldetik sartaldera ; mendiaren erdi bat iparralderantz aldenduko da , beste erdia hegoalderantz .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in that day , that he shall set his feet on the top of the mount of Olives , and he shall set up his feet on the west side of Jerusalem , and he shall be on the west side of the mountain .
GOLD:	On that day his feet will stand on the Mount of Olives , east of Jerusalem . And the Mount of Olives will split apart , making a wide valley running from east to west . Half the mountain will move toward the north and half toward the south .

ID:	1787
INPUT:	Orduan , Jefte Galaadeko arduradunekin joan eta herriak buruzagi eta gudalburu onartu zuen . Ondoren , Jeftek Mitzpako santutegian baietsi zuen hitzarmen hura .
PRED:	Then Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead , and the princes of the land of Gilead , and took him , because he was in the sanctuary of Mizpah .
GOLD:	So Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead , and the people made him their ruler and commander of the army . At Mizpah , in the presence of the Lord , Jephthah repeated what he had said to the elders .

ID:	1788
INPUT:	Eta ni preso egoteari esker , gure senide gehienak , Jaunarenganako konfiantzan indarberriturik , ausartago sentitzen dira Jainkoaren mezua beldurrik gabe hots egiteko .
PRED:	And I am in prison , brothers , and sisters , in the power of our Lord , in the power of the Lord , that they may be healed by the word of God .
GOLD:	And because of my imprisonment , most of the believers here have gained confidence and boldly speak God 's message without fear .

ID:	1789
INPUT:	Atera nazazu lokatzetik , ez nadila murgil ; libra nazazu gorroto didatenengandik eta ur handietatik !
PRED:	Let me go out to the grave , and let me not be ashamed ; let me go out of the midst of the waters .
GOLD:	Do n't let the floods overwhelm me , or the deep waters swallow me , or the pit of death devour me .

ID:	1790
INPUT:	Baina handiagoa da oraindik ematen digun laguntza , hau baitio Liburu Santuak : Jainkoakaurre egiten die harroei , baina mesede egiten apalei .
PRED:	But he is greater than this , for it is written , “ The man who does not receive the children of the children of the dead . ”
GOLD:	And he gives grace generously . As the Scriptures say , “ God opposes the proudbut gives grace to the humble . ”

ID:	1791
INPUT:	Nire gurtzaileek , sakabanatu nituen guztiek , eskaintzak ekarriko dizkidate , Etiopiako ibaiez beste aldetik .
PRED:	All my enemies will bring them to me , for they will bring them to me , for they will be given to the other side .
GOLD:	My scattered people who live beyond the rivers of Ethiopiawill come to present their offerings .

ID:	1792
INPUT:	Boozek galdegin zion igitari-buruari : — Nor dugu neska hau ?
PRED:	Then Boaz said to the head of the princes , “ Who is this ? ”
GOLD:	Then Boaz asked his foreman , “ Who is that young woman over there ? Who does she belong to ? ”

ID:	1793
INPUT:	Senideok , Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren izenean , arren eskatzen dizuet : bat etor zaitezte guztiok eta ez bedi izan zatiketarik zuen artean . Bizi elkar ongi harturik , ikuspegi eta iritzi bat bera duzuela .
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ , I say to you , that all you may live among you , and you may not see one another , as you have seen one another .
GOLD:	I appeal to you , dear brothers and sisters , by the authority of our Lord Jesus Christ , to live in harmony with each other . Let there be no divisions in the church . Rather , be of one mind , united in thought and purpose .

ID:	1794
INPUT:	Zuhaitzondoa eta erroak uzteko aginduak , berriz , hauxe esan nahi du : denen jabea zeruko Jainkoa dela aitortuko duzunean , errege izango zarela berriro .
PRED:	But he said to them , “ You will know that God is heaven , and you will be king . ”
GOLD:	“ ‘ Then you saw a messenger , a holy one , coming down from heaven and saying , “ Cut down the tree and destroy it . But leave the stump and the roots in the ground , bound with a band of iron and bronze and surrounded by tender grass . Let him be drenched with the dew of heaven . Let him live with the animals of the field for seven periods of time . ”

ID:	1795
INPUT:	Herdoilak jota daude zuen urre-zilarrak , eta herdoil hori izango duzue lekuko zeuen kontra , eta suak bezalaxe jango du zuen haragia . Auzi aurreko azkenak diren egunotan pilatu dituzue aberastasunak .
PRED:	You shall eat the silver and gold , and the silver , and the brass , and the vessels of the earth , and the fire shall be eaten before you , and you shall eat the riches of the end of the end .
GOLD:	Your gold and silver are corroded . The very wealth you were counting on will eat away your flesh like fire . This corroded treasure you have hoarded will testify against you on the day of judgment .

ID:	1796
INPUT:	Semen ondorengoak Abrahamenganaino
PRED:	Abraham and his descendants
GOLD:	The Line of Descent from Shem to Abram

ID:	1797
INPUT:	Mendebaldetik erromatarren itsasontziek erasoko diote . Adorea galdurik , atzera egin beharko du ; orduan , itun santuko herriaren aurka hustuko du bere amorrua ; horretarako , itun santua alde batera utzi dutenen laguntzaz baliatuko da .
PRED:	And the ships of the sea shall go out from the west , and shall be broken ; and he shall take away his holy covenant against his people , and he shall leave his holy covenant , and he shall leave his holy covenant .
GOLD:	For warships from western coastlands will scare him off , and he will withdraw and return home . But he will vent his anger against the people of the holy covenant and reward those who forsake the covenant .

ID:	1798
INPUT:	Jaunak galdetu zidan : — Zer ikusten duzu , Jeremias ? Nik erantzun : — Al<unk> do-adarra ikusten dut erneta .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ What do you see ? ” Jeremiah answered , “ I see a great voice . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Look , Jeremiah ! What do you see ? ” And I replied , “ I see a branch from an almond tree . ”

ID:	1799
INPUT:	Jeremias putzuan sartu
PRED:	Jeremiah Complains to Jeremiah
GOLD:	Jeremiah in a Cistern

ID:	1800
INPUT:	17
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Qoph

ID:	1801
INPUT:	Horrela , Josuek eta israeldarrek sarraski handia egin zuten etsaien artean , ia denak hiltzeraino . Hala ere , batzuek ihes egin zieten eta beren hiri gotorretan babestu ziren .
PRED:	So Joshua and the Israelites fled to their enemies , and they fled to their enemies . But some of them fled to their cities .
GOLD:	So Joshua and the Israelite army continued the slaughter and completely crushed the enemy . They totally wiped out the five armies except for a tiny remnant that managed to reach their fortified towns .

ID:	1802
INPUT:	« Bere bizia segurtatu nahi duenak galdu egingo du ; galtzen duenak , berriz , onik aterako du .
PRED:	“ If anyone touches his life , he will die . But he who eats his life will be brought to him .
GOLD:	If you cling to your life , you will lose it , and if you let your life go , you will save it .

ID:	1803
INPUT:	Xunemgo emakumearen semea hil
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Miracles during a Famine

ID:	1804
INPUT:	Eta hala egin zuen hark : Jainkoaren aurka birao egin eta beronen izena , santutegia eta zeruan bizi direnak iraindu zituen .
PRED:	Then he said , “ He has sinned against God , and his name is holy , and those who live in heaven . ”
GOLD:	And he spoke terrible words of blasphemy against God , slandering his name and his dwelling — that is , those who dwell in heaven .

ID:	1805
INPUT:	Esaiozu entzuteko nik , Jainko Jaunak , adierazten diodan mezua : Horra , sua piztuko dut zure erdian , eta zuhaitz guztiak , heze nahiz ihartuak , irentsiko ditu ; sugarra ez da itzaliko , eta den-dena hartuko du suak , hegoaldetik iparralderaino .
PRED:	Tell them , ‘ Thus says the Lord God : Behold , I will send fire on your fire , in the fire , and in the fire , and in the fire , and in the midst of the north , and in the midst of the north .
GOLD:	Tell her , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I am your enemy , O Israel , and I am about to unsheath my sword to destroy your people — the righteous and the wicked alike .

ID:	1806
INPUT:	Ekialdeko alderdia neurtu zuen makilaz , eta ekialdeak berrehun eta berrogeita hamar metroko luzera zuen .
PRED:	He measured the east side of the east side , and he measured the east side of the east side of the east . He measured a hundred cubits long .
GOLD:	He measured the east side with his measuring rod , and it was 875 feet long .

ID:	1807
INPUT:	Joaben gudarietako bat Amasaren ondoan gelditu zen , eta honela zioen : — Joaben eta Daviden alde dagoen orok jarraitu Joabi !
PRED:	One of the soldiers stood at Samaria , and he said to them , “ Joab and Joab followed the altar of David .
GOLD:	One of Joab 's young men shouted to Amasa 's troops , “ If you are for Joab and David , come and follow Joab . ”

ID:	1808
INPUT:	Jainko Jaunak dioena iragarriko dut : bakea agintzen die bere herri eta fededunei , berari berriro konfiantza agertzen diotenei .
PRED:	I will tell them what the Sovereign Lord God says : I will keep peace and peace and peace to those who trust in him .
GOLD:	Surely his salvation is near to those who fear him , so our land will be filled with his glory .

ID:	1809
INPUT:	esan zuen : — Zer dela-eta dator ene errege jauna bere zerbitzari honengana ? Davidek erantzun : — Larraina erosi nahi dizut , Jaunari aldarea eraikitzeko , horrela izurritea herriarengandik urrun dezan .
PRED:	Then David said , “ Why do you come to my lord my lord the king ? ” David answered , “ I want you to build an altar to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ Why have you come , my lord the king ? ” Araunah asked.David replied , “ I have come to buy your threshing floor and to build an altar to the Lord there , so that he will stop the plague . ”

ID:	1810
INPUT:	Joateko beldur bazara , hartu Pura zeure morroia eta joan biok kanpalekura .
PRED:	If you are afraid , take your servant and go into the camp .
GOLD:	But if you are afraid to attack , go down to the camp with your servant Purah .

ID:	1811
INPUT:	Lege-maisuak eta fariseuak gogoetaka hasi ziren : « Nor da honela biraoka ari den hau ? Nork barka ditzake bekatuak , Jainkoak bakarrik baizik ? »
PRED:	The Pharisees and the Pharisees began to say , “ Who is this ? Who can forgive this man ? Who can forgive him except God alone ? ”
GOLD:	But the Pharisees and teachers of religious law said to themselves , “ Who does he think he is ? That 's blasphemy ! Only God can forgive sins ! ”

ID:	1812
INPUT:	Grazia , errukia eta bakea zuekin , Jainko Aitaren eta beronen Seme Jesu Kristoren partetik , egiaz eta maitasunez .
PRED:	Peace be on you , and peace be with you from the Father and his Son , in love and love .
GOLD:	Grace , mercy , and peace , which come from God the Father and from Jesus Christ — the Son of the Father — will continue to be with us who live in truth and love .

ID:	1813
INPUT:	Hondamendiari ihes egiten badiote , Egiptok bilduko ditu , Menfis izango dute hilobi . Horien zilarrezko altxor ederraketa horien bizilekuakgarduak eta sasiak hartuko ditu .
PRED:	They fled to the mountains of Egypt , and in the land of Egypt , and in the land of Egypt , and in the cities of the silver , and their houses shall be destroyed , and their houses shall be destroyed .
GOLD:	Even if you escape destruction from Assyria , Egypt will conquer you , and Memphis will bury you.Nettles will take over your treasures of silver ; thistles will invade your ruined homes .

ID:	1814
INPUT:	Jefte , israeldarren buruzagi hautatu
PRED:	Jephthah and Israel
GOLD:	Jephthah Becomes Israel 's Judge

ID:	1815
INPUT:	Eman ditzadala urratsak tinko , zure arauak gordetzeko .
PRED:	Give me the gold rings of pure gold , that I may keep your statutes .
GOLD:	Oh , that my actions would consistentlyreflect your decrees !

ID:	1816
INPUT:	Honela zioten : « Bedeinkatua Jaunaren izenean datorren erregea ! Bakea zeruan eta aintza Jainko gorenari ! »
PRED:	They said , “ Blessed is the king who comes in the name of the Lord , who is in heaven and glory . ”
GOLD:	“ Blessings on the King who comes in the name of the Lord ! Peace in heaven , and glory in highest heaven ! ”

ID:	1817
INPUT:	Kantu berria kantatuko dizut , ene Jainko , hamar hariko harpa joko zuretzat :
PRED:	I will sing a new song to you , O God , and I will sing praises to you .
GOLD:	I will sing a new song to you , O God ! I will sing your praises with a ten-stringed harp .

ID:	1818
INPUT:	Honela erantzun zion herriak : — Ez diguzu iruzurrik egin , ezta zapalketarik ere , ez duzu inoren eskutik deus hartu .
PRED:	And the people answered and said unto him , Thou shalt not make us a plague , neither hast thou taken anything from the hand of any man .
GOLD:	“ No , ” they replied , “ you have never cheated or oppressed us , and you have never taken even a single bribe . ”

ID:	1819
INPUT:	Alditxo baterako goratuak , kito berehala ! Landare zimelduak bezala erortzen dira , galburuak bezala ebakitzen dituzte .
PRED:	For a little while , and as a green field , and as a green field , and the heads of the field shall fall as the heads of the heads of the heads .
GOLD:	And though they are great now , in a moment they will be gone like all others , cut off like heads of grain .

ID:	1820
INPUT:	Jainko maitalea niregana etorriko daeta etsaien porrotaz alaiaraziko nau .
PRED:	He will come to me , and he will bring me to the enemies of my enemies .
GOLD:	Do n't kill them , for my people soon forget such lessons ; stagger them with your power , and bring them to their knees , O Lord our shield .

ID:	1821
INPUT:	Honela zioen : « Dario erregeari , bakea !
PRED:	Then Daniel said to them , “ Peace be the king of Babylon ! ”
GOLD:	“ To King Darius . Greetings .

ID:	1822
INPUT:	Moisesek esan zien : « Honela dio Israelgo Jainko Jaunak : Har beza nork bere ezpata eta zeharkatu kanpalekua , aterik ate jendea hilez , nahiz eta anaia , laguna edo auzokoa izan » .
PRED:	And Moses said to them , Thus says the Lord God of Israel : Take the sword and take the sword , and take the camp , and the people , and his brother , and his brother , and his brother , and his brother , and his brother , and his brother , and his brother , and his brother , and his brother , and his brother .
GOLD:	Moses told them , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : Each of you , take your swords and go back and forth from one end of the camp to the other . Kill everyone — even your brothers , friends , and neighbors . ”

ID:	1823
INPUT:	eta Israel herria erditik pasarazi , haren maitasuna betikoa baita ;
PRED:	And he brought the people out of the midst of the fire , for his mercy endures forever .
GOLD:	He led Israel safely through , His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	1824
INPUT:	Hiriak berak bizitzeko izango dituzte , eta herri-lurrak azienda eta abereentzat .
PRED:	They will live in their towns , and they will live in their land , and the land will be for their livestock .
GOLD:	These towns will be for the Levites to live in , and the surrounding lands will provide pasture for their cattle , flocks , and other livestock .

ID:	1825
INPUT:	Ibaiko ur gainean zegoen ehunez jantzitako gizonak , bi eskuak jaso eta betikotasunean bizi den Jainkoaren izenean zin egin zuen : “ Hiru urte eta erdi iraungo dute gauza hauek . Herri santuaren indar guztia erabat desegingo denean amaituko dira ” .
PRED:	And the man who was on the waters of the waters , lifted up his hands , and lifted up his hands in the name of God , and said , There shall be three years in the name of God , and in the name of the Lord , and in the midst of all the people shall love him .
GOLD:	The man dressed in linen , who was standing above the river , raised both his hands toward heaven and took a solemn oath by the One who lives forever , saying , “ It will go on for a time , times , and half a time . When the shattering of the holy people has finally come to an end , all these things will have happened . ”

ID:	1826
INPUT:	Ikasleek , Jesusengana hurbildurik , esnarazi egin zuten , esanez : — Maisu , Maisu ! Galzorian gaude ! Hark , esnaturik , haserre egin zien haizeari eta olatuei ; hauek oneratu eta dena bare gelditu zen .
PRED:	And his disciples came to Jesus , and said unto him , Master , we have come to him . And he said unto them , Master , we are come to him ; and he was angry with the wind , and he was left .
GOLD:	The disciples went and woke him up , shouting , “ Master , Master , we 're going to drown ! ” When Jesus woke up , he rebuked the wind and the raging waves . Suddenly the storm stopped and all was calm .

ID:	1827
INPUT:	Izan ere , egun horietan iritsi baitzuten juduek bakea beren etsaien aurrean ; hil horretan aldatu zitzaien egoera , atsekabea atsegin eta negarra bozkario bihurtuz . Egun horietan , bada , jai alaiak eta otorduak behar zituzten egin , elkarri erregaluak bidaliz eta behartsuei esku-erakutsiak eginez .
PRED:	For the Jews came to their enemies at that time , and they rose up to their enemies , and was glad in the sight of their enemies ; and they made a great feast and joy , and rejoice in the same day .
GOLD:	He told them to celebrate these days with feasting and gladness and by giving gifts of food to each other and presents to the poor . This would commemorate a time when the Jews gained relief from their enemies , when their sorrow was turned into gladness and their mourning into joy .

ID:	1828
INPUT:	« Zorionekoak Jainkoaren nahia betetzeko gose-egarri direnak , haiek baititu Jainkoak aseko .
PRED:	“ Blessed are those who are hungry , for they are filled with God 's will .
GOLD:	God blesses those who hunger and thirst for justice , for they will be satisfied .

ID:	1829
INPUT:	Bekatuaren aurkako borroka
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Struggling with Sin

ID:	1830
INPUT:	Handik aldi batera , Kainek lurreko fruituen eskaintza egin zion Jaunari .
PRED:	And it came to pass after that , that Cain offered a sacrifice unto the Lord .
GOLD:	When it was time for the harvest , Cain presented some of his crops as a gift to the Lord .

ID:	1831
INPUT:	Zuen barne-asmoak belar ihar dira ; hortik sorturikoegintzak , berriz , lasto . Suak bezala erreko ditunire arnasak .
PRED:	Your heart shall be as silver , and your works shall be like fire ; and my breath shall be burned in fire .
GOLD:	You Assyrians produce nothing but dry grass and stubble.Your own breath will turn to fire and consume you .

ID:	1832
INPUT:	Herria ibaia igarotzeko kanpalekutik abiatu zenean , apaizak itun-kutxa hartu eta jendearen aurrean jarri ziren .
PRED:	When the people went out of the camp , the priests took the ark of the covenant and stood before the people .
GOLD:	So the people left their camp to cross the Jordan , and the priests who were carrying the Ark of the Covenant went ahead of them .

ID:	1833
INPUT:	Hondatu egingo dut zuen lurraldea eta harri eta zur eginik geldituko dira hartaz jabetzera etorriko diren etsaiak .
PRED:	I will destroy your land , and they will be destroyed , and their enemies will come to possess it .
GOLD:	Yes , I myself will devastate your land , and your enemies who come to occupy it will be appalled at what they see .

ID:	1834
INPUT:	Gizakiarentzat hoberenajatea , edateaeta bere lanaren fruituaz gozatzea . Nik uste dut , hau e<unk> koaren eskutik datorrela ;
PRED:	to eat the food of man , and to eat the fruit of the flesh , and to drink the fruit of the hands of man : and I know that this man is coming from the hand of God .
GOLD:	So I decided there is nothing better than to enjoy food and drink and to find satisfaction in work . Then I realized that these pleasures are from the hand of God .

ID:	1835
INPUT:	Jakintsuak badaki mihiari eusten , zentzuzkoak ere bai bere buruaren jabe izaten .
PRED:	A wise man is wise , and a wise man may know his wisdom .
GOLD:	A truly wise person uses few words ; a person with understanding is even-tempered .

ID:	1836
INPUT:	Mendi garaiak ahuntzentzat dira , harkaitzak azkonarren gordeleku .
PRED:	The mountains are like the hills , the rock of the rock , and the rock of the rock .
GOLD:	High in the mountains live the wild goats , and the rocks form a refuge for the hyraxes .

ID:	1837
INPUT:	Pazko-jairako prestaketak egiteko eguna zen , eguerdi aldea . Pilatok esan zien juduei : — Hemen duzue zeuen erregea .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the Passover was prepared for the Passover , that it may be for you . Pilate said to the Jews , “ Here is the king . ”
GOLD:	It was now about noon on the day of preparation for the Passover . And Pilate said to the people , “ Look , here is your king ! ”

ID:	1838
INPUT:	pertzak , hauts-palak eta sardexkak eta berauen tresneria . Huram-Abik , Salomon erregearen aginduz , Jaunaren etxerako egin zituen tresna hauek guztiak brontze leunduzkoak ziren denak .
PRED:	And all the vessels of the vessels , and the vessels of the vessels , and the vessels of King Solomon , and the vessels of the house of the Lord , and all the vessels of bronze .
GOLD:	the ash buckets , the shovels , the meat hooks , and all the related articles.Huram-abi made all these things of burnished bronze for the Temple of the Lord , just as King Solomon had directed .

ID:	1839
INPUT:	Nik neuk , nire senideek eta zerbitzariek ere aurreratu dizkiegu dirua eta garia . Barka diezaiegun zor hori !
PRED:	I , my brothers and sisters , and the servants who are in front of me , have given us the money and the money .
GOLD:	I myself , as well as my brothers and my workers , have been lending the people money and grain , but now let us stop this business of charging interest .

ID:	1840
INPUT:	Luzatu zuen Moisesek makila Egiptoren gain eta , Jaunak eraginik , ekialdeko haizeak jo zuen lurraldean egun osoan eta gau osoan . Biharamun goizerako , ekialdeko haizeak larrapoteak ekarriak zituen .
PRED:	And Moses stretched out his hand over the land of Egypt , and the Lord stretched out the wind on the east side of the land of Egypt , and on the east day , and on the east side of the morning , and on the east side of the wind .
GOLD:	So Moses raised his staff over Egypt , and the Lord caused an east wind to blow over the land all that day and through the night . When morning arrived , the east wind had brought the locusts .

ID:	1841
INPUT:	Aaron Aminadaben alaba eta Nahxonen arreba zen Elisabetekin ezkondu zen . Honek Nadab , Abihu , Eleazar eta Itamar eman zizkion .
PRED:	And Aaron the daughter of Aaron , the daughter of Aaron , the daughter of Nadab , the daughter of Nadab , the daughter of Aaron , the daughter of Aaron ; and he gave him to him Eleazar and Eleazar .
GOLD:	Aaron married Elisheba , the daughter of Amminadab and sister of Nahshon , and she gave birth to his sons , Nadab , Abihu , Eleazar , and Ithamar .

ID:	1842
INPUT:	« Noiz arte eman behar dituzue bidegabeko epaiak , errudunen alde jarriz ?
PRED:	How long shall you give the judgment of the judgment , and the judgment of the wicked ?
GOLD:	“ How long will you hand down unjust decisionsby favoring the wicked ? Interlude

ID:	1843
INPUT:	Leiala da Jainkoa , eta berak deitu zaituzte bere Seme Jesu Kristo gure Jaunarekin elkarturik bizitzera .
PRED:	God is God , and he has called you to live with our Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	God will do this , for he is faithful to do what he says , and he has invited you into partnership with his Son , Jesus Christ our Lord .

ID:	1844
INPUT:	Bego hau idatzirik hurrengo gizaldiarentzat , sortzeko dagoen herriak Jauna gorets dezan .
PRED:	This is written in the book of the people , that they may praise the Lord .
GOLD:	Tell them the Lord looked downfrom his heavenly sanctuary.He looked down to earth from heaven

ID:	1845
INPUT:	Jainkoarengan jarria dik uste ona ; libra dezala orain , maite baldin badu ; ez zuen , bada , esaten Jainkoaren Semea zela ? »
PRED:	Do n't you trust in God ? If you love him , do n't you love him ? If you say , ‘ The Son of God is God ? ' ”
GOLD:	He trusted God , so let God rescue him now if he wants him ! For he said , ‘ I am the Son of God . ' ”

ID:	1846
INPUT:	Uraskaren lodiera arra betekoa zen . Ezpainak koparenak bezalakoak ziren , lili-lorearen tankerakoak ; laurogei mila litro ur hartzen zuen uraskak .
PRED:	And their lips were like a sword , and their lips were like the sword of a sword , and their mouth were like the sword ; and the waters of the river was twenty thousand and twenty thousand .
GOLD:	The walls of the Sea were about three inches thick , and its rim flared out like a cup and resembled a water lily blossom . It could hold about 11,000 gallons of water .

ID:	1847
INPUT:	Aberastasun eta ospe handiak izan zituen Ezekiasek . Zilar , urre , harribitxi , usainki , babeski eta era askotako gauza baliotsu ugari bildu zuen .
PRED:	Hezekiah had great riches and glory , silver , gold , and gold , and gold , and precious things , and many things .
GOLD:	Hezekiah was very wealthy and highly honored . He built special treasury buildings for his silver , gold , precious stones , and spices , and for his shields and other valuable items .

ID:	1848
INPUT:	Jo bezate atzera , lotsaturik , Sion gorroto dutenek !
PRED:	Let those who hate Zion be ashamed ; let those who hate Zion be ashamed .
GOLD:	May all who hate Jerusalembe turned back in shameful defeat .

ID:	1849
INPUT:	hiru gizon horiek herrialde horretan baleude , nik , Jainko Jaunak , zin dagit neure biziarengatik , ez dutela beren seme-alabarik ere bizirik aterako ; beraiek bakarrik geldituko dira bizirik .
PRED:	If these three men live in the land , ” says the Lord God , “ As surely as I live , I live , they will live , and they will live alone .
GOLD:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , even if those three men were there , they would n't be able to save their own sons or daughters . They alone would be saved .

ID:	1850
INPUT:	Oholibak areagotu egin zituen bere lizunkeriak : horman marrazturiko gizon-irudiak ikusi zituen , babiloniarren irudiak gorriz margotuak ;
PRED:	And she remembered her daughters , and she saw the idols of men , and she saw the idols of the idols of the Chaldeans .
GOLD:	“ Then she carried her prostitution even further . She fell in love with pictures that were painted on a wall — pictures of Babylonian military officers , outfitted in striking red uniforms .

ID:	1851
INPUT:	Suari indartsu haize emanezmetalari zaborra kentzen zaio . Baina alferrik dahaiek garbitzen aritzea : egite txarrak ez zaizkie joaten .
PRED:	A strong wind has been taken away from the wind , but they have not turned away from them .
GOLD:	The bellows fiercely fan the flamesto burn out the corruption.But it does not purify them , for the wickedness remains .

ID:	1852
INPUT:	« Ekialdean Judaren banderapeko kanpamendua ezarriko da bere gudari-taldeekin .
PRED:	And the camp of the children of Judah shall set their camp on the east side of the land of Judah .
GOLD:	“ The divisions of Judah , Issachar , and Zebulun are to camp toward the sunrise on the east side of the Tabernacle , beneath their family banners . These are the names of the tribes , their leaders , and the numbers of their registered troops : JudahNahshon son of Amminadab74,600

ID:	1853
INPUT:	Simonek berak ere sinetsi egin zuen eta bataioa hartu , eta ez zen Feliperen ondotik aldentzen . Gertatzen ziren mirariak eta egintza ahaltsuak ikusirik , erabat txunditurik zegoen .
PRED:	Simon believed and was baptized , and when he was baptized , he did not turn away from Philip . When he saw the signs and wonders , he was amazed .
GOLD:	Then Simon himself believed and was baptized . He began following Philip wherever he went , and he was amazed by the signs and great miracles Philip performed .

ID:	1854
INPUT:	Gainerako lurraldearen banaketa
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	The Allotments of the Remaining Land

ID:	1855
INPUT:	Baina Eliasek erantzun zion buruzagiari : — Jainkoaren gizona baldin banaiz , jaits dadila sua zerutik eta kiskal zaitzatela zeu eta zeure berrogeita hamar gizonak ! Bat-batean sua zerutik jaitsi eta kiskali egin zituen buruzagia eta berrogeita hamar gizonak .
PRED:	But Elijah said to the princes of God , “ If I go down , I will come down from heaven and send you down from heaven , and you will be burned down , and you will be burned down from heaven . ”
GOLD:	But Elijah replied to the captain , “ If I am a man of God , let fire come down from heaven and destroy you and your fifty men ! ” Then fire fell from heaven and killed them all .

ID:	1856
INPUT:	Legeak , izan ere , gizon ahulak izendatzen ditu apaiz nagusi ; baina legea baino geroago etorri zen Jainkoaren zin-hitzak Semea izendatzen du apaiz nagusi , betidanik bete-beteko dena .
PRED:	For the law has become a priest , but the Son of God came more than the law of God , and the Son of God is a priest for ever .
GOLD:	The law appointed high priests who were limited by human weakness . But after the law was given , God appointed his Son with an oath , and his Son has been made the perfect High Priest forever .

ID:	1857
INPUT:	Eta , bera eta beraren familia guztia bataiatu zirelarik , erregu hau egin zigun : « Jaunarengan egiaz sinesten dudala irizten badiozue , hartzazue ostatu , arren , nire etxean » . Eta bere eskaintza onartzera behartu gintuen .
PRED:	And when they were baptized , they were baptized , and said to us , “ If you believe in the Lord , you have believed in the Lord , and you have believed in my house . ”
GOLD:	She and her household were baptized , and she asked us to be her guests . “ If you agree that I am a true believer in the Lord , ” she said , “ come and stay at my home . ” And she urged us until we agreed .

ID:	1858
INPUT:	Pauloren harrotzeko bidea
PRED:	Paul and Silas
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Advice

ID:	1859
INPUT:	Bazen Jopen emakume fededun bat , Tabita izenekoa ( grekoz « Dorkas » — hau da , « Basahuntza » — ) . On egitera eta behartsuei laguntzera emana bizi zen erabat .
PRED:	And there was a woman named Tamar , whose name was Tamar ; and she was called the name of the woman , and she went out to help the poor and to help the poor .
GOLD:	There was a believer in Joppa named Tabitha ( which in Greek is Dorcas ) . She was always doing kind things for others and helping the poor .

ID:	1860
INPUT:	Gero , hartu zekorraren odoletik , eta behatzez aldare-ertzeko adarrak igurtziko dituzu . Gainerako odola aldare-oinean isuriko duzu .
PRED:	And thou shalt take the blood of the bull , and put it on the horns of the altar , and put it on the horns of the altar .
GOLD:	Put some of its blood on the horns of the altar with your finger , and pour out the rest at the base of the altar .

ID:	1861
INPUT:	Horiek tenpluko ateak zaintzeaz arduratuko dira , eta beste zenbait zerbitzu beteko ; beroriek hilko dituzte erre-oparietako abereak eta herriaren beste sakrifizioetakoak ; herriaren zerbitzura egongo dira .
PRED:	These will be the charge of the temple , and some of them will die . They will eat the burnt offerings and the burnt offerings of the people . They will serve the Lord .
GOLD:	They may still be Temple guards and gatekeepers , and they may slaughter the animals brought for burnt offerings and be present to help the people .

ID:	1862
INPUT:	Agindu hau eman zidan Jaunak , Israelgo Jainkoak : « Hartu nire eskutik pattarrez beteriko kopa hau , eta edanarazi nik bidaliko zaitudan nazio guztiei .
PRED:	The Lord , the God of Israel , said to me , “ Take this cup from my hand and drink wine , and I will send you to drink .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , said to me : “ Take from my hand this cup filled to the brim with my anger , and make all the nations to whom I send you drink from it .

ID:	1863
INPUT:	Izan ere , morroiari lansaria zaio axola eta ez ardiak .
PRED:	For his servant is sick , and his servant is not sick .
GOLD:	The hired hand runs away because he 's working only for the money and does n't really care about the sheep .

ID:	1864
INPUT:	Horrela , Isaias profetaren liburuan idatzirik dagoena gertatu zen : Ahots bat oihuka ari da basamortuan : Prestatu bidea Jaunari , zuzendu bidexkak hari .
PRED:	So it was written in the book of Isaiah the prophet , that it was written in the wilderness , saying , “ Call the way of the Lord , and prepare the way of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Isaiah had spoken of John when he said , “ He is a voice shouting in the wilderness , ‘ Prepare the way for the Lord 's coming ! Clear the road for him !

ID:	1865
INPUT:	Jendea mehatxuka ari da nire aurka : « Izu-ikara inguruan ! Salatu , sala dezagun ! » Adiskideak berak ere zain ditutnik noiz huts egingo . « Ea engainatzen dugun — diote — . Orduan menderatuko dugu , mendekatuko gara hartaz » .
PRED:	And the people cried against me , saying , “ Be careful around , and say , ‘ Be careful ! ' ” And they say , “ We will be like a friend , and we will be forgiven . ”
GOLD:	I have heard the many rumors about me.They call me “ The Man Who Lives in Terror . ” They threaten , “ If you say anything , we will report it . ” Even my old friends are watching me , waiting for a fatal slip . “ He will trap himself , ” they say , “ and then we will get our revenge on him . ”

ID:	1866
INPUT:	Eguneroko janaria , beraz , erregeak eman zion bere bizitza guztian .
PRED:	So the king gave him food in all his life .
GOLD:	So the king gave him a regular food allowance as long as he lived .

ID:	1867
INPUT:	Tiro eta Sidongo errege guztiei ; itsasoaz beste aldean dauden lurraldeetako erregeei ;
PRED:	and all the kings of Tyre and Sidon , and all the kings of the sea , on the other side of the sea .
GOLD:	and the kings of Tyre and Sidon , and the kings of the regions across the sea .

ID:	1868
INPUT:	JEREMIASEN EGINKIZUNARI BU<unk> <unk> TESIA ( 25 , 1-14 )
PRED:	Jesus Heals the Temple
GOLD:	Seventy Years of Captivity

ID:	1869
INPUT:	« Sei babes-hiri aukeratuko dituzue ,
PRED:	You shall choose six cities for yourselves .
GOLD:	Designate six cities of refuge for yourselves ,

ID:	1870
INPUT:	Ez dut ia zuekin luze hitz egiteko aukerarik , gainean baita mundu honetako buruzagia . Horrek ez du nire gain ahalmenik ;
PRED:	I do not speak with you a long time , for I am not a ruler over this world . This is not my power .
GOLD:	“ I do n't have much more time to talk to you , because the ruler of this world approaches . He has no power over me ,

ID:	1871
INPUT:	Gaitzespenerako izan zenaren zerbitzua ospez betea agertu bazen , zenbatez ospetsuago ez ote da izango salbamenerako denaren zerbitzua !
PRED:	For if the name of the name of the glory was revealed , then shall the glory of the salvation be revealed to the salvation of salvation .
GOLD:	If the old way , which brings condemnation , was glorious , how much more glorious is the new way , which makes us right with God !

ID:	1872
INPUT:	Zuek otoitzerako eskuak altxatzean , beste aldera begira jartzen naiz ; nahiz eta zuek eskariak ugaldu , ez dizuet entzuten , eskuak odolez beteak baitituzue .
PRED:	When I lift up my hands toward you , I looked toward the other side , and I pray you , and you have not heard the blood of your hands , because you have not heard your blood .
GOLD:	When you lift up your hands in prayer , I will not look.Though you offer many prayers , I will not listen , for your hands are covered with the blood of innocent victims .

ID:	1873
INPUT:	Amodio-lokarriz erakartzen nituen , maitasun-loturaz . Haurtxoa musurainojasotzen duenaren antzekonintzen haientzat ; makurtu eta jaten ematen nion .
PRED:	And I brought them into the net of the womb , and I was like a child , and I was like a child ; and I bowed down to them , and gave them food to them .
GOLD:	I led Israel alongwith my ropes of kindness and love.I lifted the yoke from his neck , and I myself stooped to feed him .

ID:	1874
INPUT:	Burutsuaren ezpainetan hitz zuhurrak ; burugabearen bizkarrari , eman egurra !
PRED:	The mouth of the mouth of the mouth of the mouth of the fool , and bring him to the fool .
GOLD:	Wise words come from the lips of people with understanding , but those lacking sense will be beaten with a rod .

ID:	1875
INPUT:	Jaunak berak sakabanatu ditu , eta ez ditu gehiago ikusi nahi . Ez da apaizentzat begirunerik , ezta zaharrentzat gupidarik ere .
PRED:	The Lord will forgive them , and he will not see them . He will not see the judgment of the priest , nor will he judge the poor .
GOLD:	The Lord himself has scattered them , and he no longer helps them.People show no respect for the priestsand no longer honor the leaders .

ID:	1876
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Abrami : — Ni Jauna naiz . Nik irtenarazi zintudan kaldearren Ur hiritik lurralde hau zuri emateko .
PRED:	The Lord said to Abram , “ I am the Lord . I brought you out of the city to give you this land . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord told him , “ I am the Lord who brought you out of Ur of the Chaldeans to give you this land as your possession . ”

ID:	1877
INPUT:	Horregatik jakinarazten dizuet , inork ere ez duela esaten « Madarikatua Jesus » Jainkoaren Espirituak eraginda ; eta inork ezin duela esan « Jesus da Jauna » Espiritu Santuak eraginik ez bada .
PRED:	Therefore I tell you that no one will say , “ curse is the Spirit of God , ” and no one can say , “ The Holy Spirit is not the Holy Spirit . ”
GOLD:	So I want you to know that no one speaking by the Spirit of God will curse Jesus , and no one can say Jesus is Lord , except by the Holy Spirit .

ID:	1878
INPUT:	hondamendi , lugorri eta eremu . Lurralde guztia hondamendi , eta inori axola ez .
PRED:	and destruction , and destruction , and all the land , and all the land of the earth shall not be destroyed .
GOLD:	They have made it an empty wasteland ; I hear its mournful cry.The whole land is desolate , and no one even cares .

ID:	1879
INPUT:	Era berean , Judako hiri guztietan ziren kultu-lekuak eta intsentsua erretzeko aldareak kendu egin zituen . Haren erregealdia baketsua izan zen .
PRED:	And the king took away the high places of Judah , and took away the altars of incense , and burned incense in all the cities of Judah . And his kingdom was peace .
GOLD:	He commanded the people of Judah to seek the Lord , the God of their ancestors , and to obey his law and his commands .

ID:	1880
INPUT:	Bai , Libanori egin zeniongogorkeriakazpian hartuko zaitu . Egin zenuen abere-hilketakizu-ikara emango dizu . Eta hori , isuri duzun giza odolarengatik , herrialdeei , hirieieta bertako jendeariegindako gogorkeriengatik .
PRED:	For it shall come to pass , that thou hast done unto the house of Lebanon , that thou hast done to thee , and thou hast made thy peace for the sons of men , and for the house of men , and for the inhabitants of the land , and for the inhabitants of the land .
GOLD:	You cut down the forests of Lebanon.Now you will be cut down.You destroyed the wild animals , so now their terror will be yours.You committed murder throughout the countrysideand filled the towns with violence .

ID:	1881
INPUT:	Hurrengo goizean , astemea txalmatu eta Moabeko buruzagiekin joan zen Balaam .
PRED:	And Balaam rose up early in the morning , and went with the princes of Moab , and with the princes of Moab .
GOLD:	So the next morning Balaam got up , saddled his donkey , and started off with the Moabite officials .

ID:	1882
INPUT:	Hau entzutean , bertan zeuden batzuek esan zuten : « Eliasi deika ari duk » .
PRED:	When some of them heard this , they said , “ Elijah has called him . ”
GOLD:	Some of the bystanders misunderstood and thought he was calling for the prophet Elijah .

ID:	1883
INPUT:	<unk> tzera bidali zuteneskuan hartu baino lehen ; zorroztu egin dute ezpataeta leundu , borreroaren eskuan ipintzeko .
PRED:	And when they sent him , they took him in the hand of the young woman , they took him , and struck him in the hand of the king 's sword .
GOLD:	O sword , slash to the right , then slash to the left , wherever you will , wherever you want .

ID:	1884
INPUT:	Judas eta Silasek , profeta baitziren , luze eta zabal hitz egin zuten senideekin , hauek adoretuz eta gogoberotuz .
PRED:	And Judas and Simon , and Simon the prophet , spoke with his brethren , and were filled with them , and filled with them .
GOLD:	Then Judas and Silas , both being prophets , spoke at length to the believers , encouraging and strengthening their faith .

ID:	1885
INPUT:	Ondoren , beste harri batzuk jarriko dituzte kendutakoen ordez , eta horma zurituko .
PRED:	Then some of them will be taken away from the stones , but they will be cut off .
GOLD:	Other stones will be brought in to replace the ones that were removed , and the walls will be replastered .

ID:	1886
INPUT:	( Mt 25 , <unk> )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus ' Triumphant Entry

ID:	1887
INPUT:	Mexezabeel , Tzadok , Jadua ,
PRED:	Zadok , Zadok , Zadok ,
GOLD:	Pelatiah , Hanan , Anaiah ,

ID:	1888
INPUT:	« Baina salakuntza egia izanik , neska ez zela birjina egiaztatzen bada ,
PRED:	“ But if a man is a virgin , he is not a virgin .
GOLD:	“ But suppose the man 's accusations are true , and he can show that she was not a virgin .

ID:	1889
INPUT:	Ez izan burugogor , egiptoarrak eta faraoia izan ziren bezala . Haiek ere utzi egin behar izan zieten joaten hebrearrei , Jainkoak zigortu ondoren .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of the Egyptians , as Pharaoh and the Egyptians did . They left the Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew Hebrew people .
GOLD:	Do n't be stubborn and rebellious as Pharaoh and the Egyptians were . By the time God was finished with them , they were eager to let Israel go .

ID:	1890
INPUT:	« Moisesek , hain zuzen , esan zuen : Ni bezalako profeta sorraraziko dizue Jaunak , zeuen Jainkoak , herritarren artetik ; onartu hark esango dizuen guztia .
PRED:	Moses said , “ The Lord your God will raise you a prophet like me . He will give you all that he has said to you .
GOLD:	Moses said , ‘ The Lord your God will raise up for you a Prophet like me from among your own people . Listen carefully to everything he tells you . '

ID:	1891
INPUT:	Aberats izan nahi dutenak tentaldiaren sarean eta gizakia hondatzen eta galtzen duten grina zoro eta kaltegarri askotan erortzen dira .
PRED:	Those who want to be rich in the field , and those who are rich will be destroyed , and those who are rich will be destroyed .
GOLD:	But people who long to be rich fall into temptation and are trapped by many foolish and harmful desires that plunge them into ruin and destruction .

ID:	1892
INPUT:	Moisesen legean idatzirik dagoen bezalaxe , hain zuzen , etorri zaigu gainera hainbesteko zoritxar hau ; hala ere , Jauna , ez gara zure haserrea baretzen ahalegindu , gure bekatuetatik urrunduz eta zure leialtasuna aitortuz .
PRED:	For it is written in the law of Moses , as it is written in the law of Moses : for we have not been angry , O Lord , if we have not kept thy commandments , our sins , and our sins , and our sins .
GOLD:	Every curse written against us in the Law of Moses has come true . Yet we have refused to seek mercy from the Lord our God by turning from our sins and recognizing his truth .

ID:	1893
INPUT:	Isakarren leinutik , Tzuarren seme Netanel ;
PRED:	Of the tribe of Issachar , the son of Complains , the son of Hallohesh .
GOLD:	IssacharNethanel son of Zuar

ID:	1894
INPUT:	Sinesmenaren argiak gidatzen gaitu , eta ez ikusten dugunak .
PRED:	The light of faith we see the light , and we do not see it .
GOLD:	For we live by believing and not by seeing .

ID:	1895
INPUT:	Jaunak du behartsunahiz aberats egiten , beheratzen eta goratzen ;
PRED:	The Lord will bless the poor and needy , and he will remember the poor .
GOLD:	The Lord makes some poor and others rich ; he brings some down and lifts others up .

ID:	1896
INPUT:	Hauek ere , berarekin batera , Hildakoen Egoitzara jaitsi ziren , gerran hildakoak bezalaxe ; haren euskarri ziren eta haren gerizpean bizi ziren nazioen artean .
PRED:	And they went down with him to the dead , as they were dead , as they were dead , and they buried him among the nations .
GOLD:	Its allies , too , were all destroyed and had passed away . They had gone down to the grave — all those nations that had lived in its shade .

ID:	1897
INPUT:	Josek , bere sentipenei gehiago eutsi ezinik , inguruan zituen egiptoarrei agindu zien : « Atera denok hemendik ! » Hala , ez zen Joserekin inor gelditu , anaiei bere burua ezagutzera eman zienean .
PRED:	Then Joseph told the Egyptians all around him , saying , “ All the Egyptians go out here ! ” So he did not stay with his brothers when he had known his own brothers .
GOLD:	Joseph could stand it no longer . There were many people in the room , and he said to his attendants , “ Out , all of you ! ” So he was alone with his brothers when he told them who he was .

ID:	1898
INPUT:	Maltzurrak liskarrak sortzen ditu , iraintzaileak lagunak ere urrunarazten .
PRED:	The wicked have turned away from them , and their friends are far away from them .
GOLD:	A troublemaker plants seeds of strife ; gossip separates the best of friends .

ID:	1899
INPUT:	Judako hiri guztietatik bildu ziren Jaunari otoitz egiteko .
PRED:	And all the cities of Judah gathered together from all the cities of Judah to pray to the Lord .
GOLD:	So people from all the towns of Judah came to Jerusalem to seek the Lord 's help .

ID:	1900
INPUT:	Defendatu nire auzia eta aska nazazu , babestu nire bizia , zeuk hitzemanaren arabera !
PRED:	Let me judge my cause , and let me judge my life , and let me live according to thy word .
GOLD:	Argue my case ; take my side ! Protect my life as you promised .

ID:	1901
INPUT:	Ahimeleken seme eta Ahituben biloba bat bakarrik salbatu zen , Abiatar zeritzana , Davidengana ihes eginez .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the son of Shealtiel , the son of Abimelech , the son of Abimelech , and fled to David , and fled to David .
GOLD:	Only Abiathar , one of the sons of Ahimelech , escaped and fled to David .

ID:	1902
INPUT:	Nire ahalmen guztia erakutsi nahi izan banu zu eta zure herria izurriz jotzean , honezkero suntsitua zinatekeen mundu honetatik ;
PRED:	If I would teach you all my power , and you would go into your people , and I will destroy them from this world .
GOLD:	By now I could have lifted my hand and struck you and your people with a plague to wipe you off the face of the earth .

ID:	1903
INPUT:	Zeruko izar eta konstelazioekez dute gehiago argirik emango ; eguzkia atera orduko ilunduko da , eta ilargiak ez du argi egingo .
PRED:	The moon and the stars of the sky will not give light to the sun , and the sun will be light , and the moon will not be light .
GOLD:	The heavens will be black above them ; the stars will give no light.The sun will be dark when it rises , and the moon will provide no light .

ID:	1904
INPUT:	Onaldian hitz egin nizuneta ez zenuen aditu nahi izan . Gaztetandik jokatu duzu horrela : ez didazu inoiz ere obeditu .
PRED:	When I spoke to you , you did n't listen to me . You did n't listen to me . You did n't listen to me .
GOLD:	I warned you when you were prosperous , but you replied , ‘ Do n't bother me . 'You have been that way since childhood — you simply will not obey me !

ID:	1905
INPUT:	Orduan , Jainkoak Lehin dagoen zuloa ebaki zuen eta ura atera zen . Edan ondoren , arnasberritu eta indartu egin zen Samson . Iturri hari En-Kore izena ezarri zioten . Han dago Lehin gaur arte .
PRED:	And God stretched out the net of the field , and went out into the water ; and he went out , and went out , and called the name of Korah , until this day .
GOLD:	So God caused water to gush out of a hollow in the ground at Lehi , and Samson was revived as he drank . Then he named that place “ The Spring of the One Who Cried Out , ” and it is still in Lehi to this day .

ID:	1906
INPUT:	Jerusalem , zure gizonakezpataz eroriko dira , zure gudariak gerran .
PRED:	Jerusalem will fall by the sword , and your army will fall by the sword .
GOLD:	The men of the city will be killed with the sword , and her warriors will die in battle .

ID:	1907
INPUT:	( 2 Kro 34 , <unk> )
PRED:	King Jehoram of Judah
GOLD:	Josiah Celebrates Passover

ID:	1908
INPUT:	« Eman dezagun guraso batzuek seme zentzakaitza eta bihurria dutela , aita-amen esana egiten ez duena eta , zentzarazten saiatu arren , kasurik egiten ez diena ;
PRED:	“ Let us know that some of you are a wise man and a wise man who does not obey the words of his father , and do not obey the voice of his father .
GOLD:	“ Suppose a man has a stubborn and rebellious son who will not obey his father or mother , even though they discipline him .

ID:	1909
INPUT:	Agurtu zeuen zuzendariak eta fededun guztiak . Italiakoek agurtzen zaituztete .
PRED:	And thou shalt worship all thy saints , and all the saints , and they shall worship thee .
GOLD:	Greet all your leaders and all the believers there . The believers from Italy send you their greetings .

ID:	1910
INPUT:	Jesusek , Hamabiak beregana bildurik , deabru guztiak botatzeko eta gaitzak sendatzeko indarra eta ahalmena eman zien .
PRED:	And Jesus came to the twelve , and cast out all the demons , and gave them power and power .
GOLD:	One day Jesus called together his twelve disciples and gave them power and authority to cast out all demons and to heal all diseases .

ID:	1911
INPUT:	Orduan , emakumeak lasterka joan eta esan zion senarrari : « Lehengoan etorri zitzaidan gizona agertu zait berriro » .
PRED:	Then the woman ran and said to her husband , “ The man came first to me again . ”
GOLD:	So she quickly ran and told her husband , “ The man who appeared to me the other day is here again ! ”

ID:	1912
INPUT:	Jaunak Samueli dei egin
PRED:	Samuel and Samuel
GOLD:	The

ID:	1913
INPUT:	Rutek erantzun : — Zuk esan guztia egingo dut .
PRED:	And Reuben said unto him , I will do all that thou hast said .
GOLD:	“ I will do everything you say , ” Ruth replied .

ID:	1914
INPUT:	28 , 1
PRED:	(
GOLD:	The Sabbath Offerings

ID:	1915
INPUT:	Berekin hartu zituen bere emazte Sarai , iloba Lot , Haranen lortutako ondasunak eta erositako esklaboak . Hala , Kanaan aldera jo zuten . Kanaanera iritsi zirenean ,
PRED:	And he took his wife Lot 's wife , Lot 's wife , and his possessions , and his possessions , and his possessions , and they came to Canaan .
GOLD:	He took his wife , Sarai , his nephew Lot , and all his wealth — his livestock and all the people he had taken into his household at Haran — and headed for the land of Canaan . When they arrived in Canaan ,

ID:	1916
INPUT:	Luzaro bizi izan zen Abraham , atzerritar gisa , filistearren lurraldean .
PRED:	Abraham lived a long time in the land of the Philistines .
GOLD:	And Abraham lived as a foreigner in Philistine country for a long time .

ID:	1917
INPUT:	arlotea bezala iritsiko zaizu gabezia , eskalea bezala etorriko miseria .
PRED:	He will come to you like a thief , and you will be like a man who has asked you .
GOLD:	then poverty will pounce on you like a bandit ; scarcity will attack you like an armed robber .

ID:	1918
INPUT:	Horregatik , Axdodekoek ez dute gaurdaino oinik jartzen Dagonen jauretxeko atarian , ez Dagonen apaizek , ezta han sartzen direnek ere .
PRED:	Therefore the priests and the priests do not stand in the house of David , nor the priests , nor the priests , nor the priests , nor the priests , nor the priests who enter into the house of David .
GOLD:	That is why to this day neither the priests of Dagon nor anyone who enters the temple of Dagon in Ashdod will step on its threshold .

ID:	1919
INPUT:	Zuen seme-alabak atzerritarrei emango dizkiete ; begiak urtzeraino egongo zarete haiek noiz itzuliko begira-begira , baina ezin ezer egin .
PRED:	And they shall give your sons to the nations , and they shall return to their eyes , and their eyes shall return unto their eyes , and their eyes shall not do it .
GOLD:	You will watch as your sons and daughters are taken away as slaves . Your heart will break for them , but you wo n't be able to help them .

ID:	1920
INPUT:	Haren irakaspenaz txunditurik zegoen jende guztia , nagusitasunez hitz egiten baitzien .
PRED:	And all the people were amazed at his teaching , because he spoke in the synagogue .
GOLD:	There , too , the people were amazed at his teaching , for he spoke with authority .

ID:	1921
INPUT:	hau Matatena , hau Lebirena , hau Melkirena , hau Janairena , hau Joserena ,
PRED:	the son of Levi , the son of Joseph , the son of Joseph , the son of Joseph , the son of Joseph ,
GOLD:	Heli was the son of Matthat.Matthat was the son of Levi.Levi was the son of Melki.Melki was the son of Jannai.Jannai was the son of Joseph .

ID:	1922
INPUT:	Zazpi hilabete egin zuen Jaunaren kutxak filistearren lurraldean .
PRED:	And the ark of the Lord was seven months in the land of the Philistines .
GOLD:	The Ark of the Lord remained in Philistine territory seven months in all .

ID:	1923
INPUT:	Garai hartan , Judakoak Israelgoekin bilduko dira . Batera itzuliko dira iparraldetik , atzerriraturik dauden lekutik , beraien arbasoei ondaretzat eman nien lurraldera .
PRED:	In that time Judah and Judah will gather together with Israel . They will return from the north , where I gave their ancestors .
GOLD:	In those days the people of Judah and Israel will return together from exile in the north . They will return to the land I gave your ancestors as an inheritance forever .

ID:	1924
INPUT:	Bekatuak , agindutik bide hartuta , era guztietako gutiziak ernearazi zituen niregan . Legerik ezean , bekatua hila dago .
PRED:	And he took away the sins of sin , and caused all the nations to be burned in me . And when the law is sin , it is sin .
GOLD:	But sin used this command to arouse all kinds of covetous desires within me ! If there were no law , sin would not have that power .

ID:	1925
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	The Lord spoke to Moses , saying ,
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1926
INPUT:	Gero , barkamen-opariko zezena hartu eta erre egingo duzu horretarako ezarritako lekuan , santutegitik kanpo .
PRED:	And thou shalt take the bull of the sin offering , and burn it in the place of the sanctuary , in the place of the sanctuary .
GOLD:	Then take the young bull for the sin offering and burn it at the appointed place outside the Temple area .

ID:	1927
INPUT:	artelanak asmatzeko , urre , zilar eta brontzezko lanak egiteko ,
PRED:	and to give them many silver , silver , and bronze , and bronze , and bronze .
GOLD:	He is a master craftsman , expert in working with gold , silver , and bronze .

ID:	1928
INPUT:	Entzun , Israelgo seme-alabok . Hona Jaunak zuen aurka , Egiptotik igoarazi zuen familia horren guztiaren aurka , adierazten duen mezua :
PRED:	Hear , O children of Israel , you children of Israel . This is what the Lord spoke against you from Egypt , saying :
GOLD:	Listen to this message that the Lord has spoken against you , O people of Israel — against the entire family I rescued from Egypt :

ID:	1929
INPUT:	Roboamek erantzun zien : — Zatozkidate berriro hiru egun barru . Eta herriak alde egin zuen .
PRED:	And he said unto them , Come , I pray thee three days . And the people departed .
GOLD:	Rehoboam replied , “ Come back in three days for my answer . ” So the people went away .

ID:	1930
INPUT:	Esan zidan : « Gizaseme , zutitu , hitz egin behar dizut eta » .
PRED:	He said to me , “ Son of man , I will speak to you and speak to you . ”
GOLD:	“ Stand up , son of man , ” said the voice . “ I want to speak with you . ”

ID:	1931
INPUT:	Hil zenean , Samarian ehortzi zuten Omri . Ondorengo erregea haren seme Akab izan zen .
PRED:	And Ahab slept with his fathers , and was buried in Samaria ; and Ahab his son reigned in Samaria .
GOLD:	When Omri died , he was buried in Samaria . Then his son Ahab became the next king .

ID:	1932
INPUT:	eta Jauna , aintzaz beterik , Sinai mendian kokatu zen . Sei egunez estali zuen lainoak mendia ; zazpigarrenean Jaunak dei egin zion Moisesi lainotik .
PRED:	And the glory of the Lord was filled in Mount Sinai . And the cloud covered the mountain for six days ; and the Lord called Moses out of the cloud .
GOLD:	And the glory of the Lord settled down on Mount Sinai , and the cloud covered it for six days . On the seventh day the Lord called to Moses from inside the cloud .

ID:	1933
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	The Lord spoke to Moses , saying ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1934
INPUT:	Beren eskuz urkatu dituzte buruzagiak , ez dute begirunerik izan zaharrentzat .
PRED:	They have delivered their hands into their hands , and they have not eyes to the old man .
GOLD:	Our princes are being hanged by their thumbs , and our elders are treated with contempt .

ID:	1935
INPUT:	Orduan , Gizonaren Semea hodei artean ahalmen eta aintzaz beterik etortzen ikusiko dute .
PRED:	Then the Son of Man will see the Son of Man coming with power and glory .
GOLD:	Then everyone will see the Son of Man coming on a cloud with power and great glory .

ID:	1936
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Moab herriakgaiztakeriarik asko egin du , zein baino zein handiago . Eta beraz , zigortu egingo dut ! Edomgo erregearen hezurrakprofanatu baitzituzten , erraustu eta kare bihurtu ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Moab has done more evil than any of them . So I will punish the bones of the king of Edom , and I will destroy the bones of the king of Edom . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Moab have sinned again and again , and I will not let them go unpunished ! They desecrated the bones of Edom 's king , burning them to ashes .

ID:	1937
INPUT:	Kedorlaomer eta honek lagun zituen erregeak garaitu ondoren , itzulbidetik zetorrela , Sodomako erregea atera zitzaion Abrami bidera Xeba haranean , hau da , Erregearen haranean .
PRED:	And when the king of Assyria had taken counsel , he went back from the way of Sodom , and came to the way of the king of Sodom , which is in the way of the king of Sodom .
GOLD:	After Abram returned from his victory over Kedorlaomer and all his allies , the king of Sodom went out to meet him in the valley of Shaveh ( that is , the King 's Valley ) .

ID:	1938
INPUT:	esanez : « Hobe genukeen Jaunak Egipton hilarazi bagintu , haragi-eltze inguruan eseri eta ase arte jaten genuenean ! Zuek , ordea , gu denok goseak hiltzera ekarri gaituzue basamortu honetara » .
PRED:	We said , “ This is what the Lord commanded us to kill us in Egypt until we were hungry , and we were hungry in the desert . But you brought us into the wilderness . ”
GOLD:	“ If only the Lord had killed us back in Egypt , ” they moaned . “ There we sat around pots filled with meat and ate all the bread we wanted . But now you have brought us into this wilderness to starve us all to death . ”

ID:	1939
INPUT:	Mendi eta muinoak lehortuko ditut , belar guztia ihartuko , ibaiak lur lehor bihurtueta putzuak agortuko .
PRED:	And I will make all the hills and the hills , and all the grass , and the earth shall be desolate , and the dry land shall be desolate .
GOLD:	I will level the mountains and hillsand blight all their greenery.I will turn the rivers into dry landand will dry up all the pools .

ID:	1940
INPUT:	Gizonak sortzen miseria
PRED:	The Son of Man
GOLD:	Eliphaz 's Response Continues

ID:	1941
INPUT:	Leiala da dei egiten dizuena , eta beteko du hitzemana .
PRED:	If you call on him , he will give you the word of the Lord .
GOLD:	God will make this happen , for he who calls you is faithful .

ID:	1942
INPUT:	Mezu hau adieraztekoagindu dit Jaunak : « Giza gorpuak zabalduta daudelurrazalean simaurra bezala , lasto-sortak igitarien atzean bezala , eta ez ditu inork biltzen » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord said to me : “ This is what the Lord has said to me : “ The body has spread out like the face of the earth , and no one will walk in it . ”
GOLD:	For death has crept in through our windowsand has entered our mansions.It has killed off the flower of our youth : Children no longer play in the streets , and young men no longer gather in the squares .

ID:	1943
INPUT:	Salomonen otoitza
PRED:	Solomon 's prayer
GOLD:	The Dedication of the Temple

ID:	1944
INPUT:	Kanta esker onez Jaunari , jo zitara gure Jainkoari :
PRED:	Give thanks to the Lord our God , saying ,
GOLD:	Sing out your thanks to the Lord ; sing praises to our God with a harp .

ID:	1945
INPUT:	Seme zentzugabea aitaren zoritxarra , emazte liskartia etengabeko itogina .
PRED:	A fool 's son , a fool 's wife , and a woman who has no understanding .
GOLD:	A foolish child is a calamity to a father ; a quarrelsome wife is as annoying as constant dripping .

ID:	1946
INPUT:	Jar biezaio masaila joka ari zaionari , utz biezaio irainez ase dezan .
PRED:	Let those who do what they want to do , let them be hungry .
GOLD:	Let them turn the other cheek to those who strike themand accept the insults of their enemies .

ID:	1947
INPUT:	Horiek ziren rubendar senitarteak : 43 . 730 gizonezko guztira .
PRED:	These are the families of the sons of Benjamin : two hundred and fifty thousand .
GOLD:	These were the clans of Reuben . Their registered troops numbered 43,730 .

ID:	1948
INPUT:	Egoitzaren ataria
PRED:	The Holy Tent
GOLD:	Light for the Tabernacle

ID:	1949
INPUT:	Honela dio Jainko Jaunak : « Hara , badatoz egunak : lurrera gosea bidaliko dut ; ez ogi-gosea , eta ez ur-egarria , Jaunaren hitza entzutekogose-egarria baizik .
PRED:	“ Behold , the days come , ” says the Lord God : “ Behold , I will send famine on the earth , and I will not send bread , but the word of the Lord , but the word of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ The time is surely coming , ” says the Sovereign Lord , “ when I will send a famine on the land — not a famine of bread or waterbut of hearing the words of the Lord .

ID:	1950
INPUT:	Lebitarrak erantzun : — Judako Belendik gatoz eta Efraimgo mendialdera noa , hangoa bainaiz . Judako Belenera etorri nintzen eta berriro etxera noa . Herri honetan ez nau inork ere hartu nahi izan bere etxean .
PRED:	The Levites answered , “ I came from Bethlehem , and I came to the hill country of Ephraim . I came to the hill country of Ephraim , and there was no one to enter into his house . ”
GOLD:	“ We have been in Bethlehem in Judah , ” the man replied . “ We are on our way to a remote area in the hill country of Ephraim , which is my home . I traveled to Bethlehem , and now I 'm returning home . But no one has taken us in for the night ,

ID:	1951
INPUT:	behartsuen oinek zapal dezaten , indargabeekhankapean erabil dezaten » .
PRED:	And the poor shall come to the poor , and the poor shall be delivered into the hand of the poor .
GOLD:	The poor and oppressed trample it underfoot , and the needy walk all over it .

ID:	1952
INPUT:	lan handia egiteko aukera ederra egokitu baitzait , nahiz eta asko izan aurka jarri direnak .
PRED:	For he was very beautiful to do great work , and those who fight against the Lord and against many .
GOLD:	There is a wide-open door for a great work here , although many oppose me .

ID:	1953
INPUT:	Baina Moisesek erantzun zion : — Nola egingo dit , bada , faraoiak jaramon , hitz egiten hain traketsa naizelarik ?
PRED:	And Moses said unto him , How shall I do to me ? And Pharaoh said unto him , How shall I speak unto Pharaoh ?
GOLD:	But Moses argued with the Lord , saying , “ I ca n't do it ! I 'm such a clumsy speaker ! Why should Pharaoh listen to me ? ”

ID:	1954
INPUT:	Zelatan dagoen hartz izan da niretzat , gordeta zain dagoen lehoi .
PRED:	A young lion is like a lion , and a lion is like a lion .
GOLD:	He has hidden like a bear or a lion , waiting to attack me .

ID:	1955
INPUT:	Fededun guztiek agurtzen zaituztete , enperadorearen etxean daudenek batez ere .
PRED:	All of them worship you , and all who are in the house of Caesar .
GOLD:	And all the rest of God 's people send you greetings , too , especially those in Caesar 's household .

ID:	1956
INPUT:	ez zegoen oraindik landarerik lurrean , ezta belarrik ere erneta , Jainko Jaunak ez baitzion oraindik lurrari euririk eman , eta ez baitzen lurra lantzeko gizakirik .
PRED:	There was no rain in the earth , nor was there any grass on the earth , for the Lord God did not give rain to the earth , because there was no rain in the earth .
GOLD:	neither wild plants nor grains were growing on the earth . For the Lord God had not yet sent rain to water the earth , and there were no people to cultivate the soil .

ID:	1957
INPUT:	Ondoren , jendetza handiarena bezalako zarata-hotsa entzun nuen zeruan , esanez : « Aleluia ! Salbamena , aintza eta indarragure Jainkoarenak ,
PRED:	And when you heard the sound of a great crowd , you heard a loud voice in heaven , saying , “ Praise the glory of our God , and the glory of our God ,
GOLD:	After this , I heard what sounded like a vast crowd in heaven shouting , “ Praise the Lord ! Salvation and glory and power belong to our God .

ID:	1958
INPUT:	— Zer duk gurekin , Nazareteko Jesus ? Gu hondatzera al hator ? Bazekiat nor haizen : Jainkoaren Santua .
PRED:	“ What are you going with us ? ” he asked , “ Are you going to destroy us ? I know who you are the Holy One of God . ”
GOLD:	“ Why are you interfering with us , Jesus of Nazareth ? Have you come to destroy us ? I know who you are — the Holy One of God ! ”

ID:	1959
INPUT:	Horretarakoxe bidaltzen dizuet , nire berri eman diezazuen eta adorez bete zaitzaten .
PRED:	So I send you to do this , so that you may tell me what I have given you .
GOLD:	I have sent him to you for this very purpose — to let you know how we are doing and to encourage you .

ID:	1960
INPUT:	Lasterka datoz mezulariakbata bestearen ondo-ondotik , Babiloniako erregeariberri ematera : “ Etsaiek alderik aldekonkistatu dute hiria ” ,
PRED:	A message came to the king of Babylon , saying , “ They have captured the city of the enemy , and have taken the city of the enemies of Babylon . ”
GOLD:	The news is passed from one runner to the nextas the messengers hurry to tell the kingthat his city has been captured .

ID:	1961
INPUT:	Jordan ibaitik mendebaldera ( 14 , 1 — 19 , <unk> )
PRED:	From the Jordan River
GOLD:	The Land Divided West of the Jordan

ID:	1962
INPUT:	Apaizak ezin izan ziren zutik egon beren eginkizuna betetzen , laino hura zela eta . Izan ere , Jaunaren aintzak bete zuen Jainkoaren etxea .
PRED:	And the priests could not remain in their works , because the glory of the Lord was filled with the glory of the Lord , and the glory of God filled the house of God .
GOLD:	The priests could not continue their service because of the cloud , for the glorious presence of the Lord filled the Temple of God .

ID:	1963
INPUT:	Arrotzek eraso baitidate , gogorkeria-zaleak ni hil nahian dabiltza , Jainkoaren ardurarik gabe .
PRED:	For the trees rise up against me , and they kill me , and they do not seek God .
GOLD:	May the evil plans of my enemies be turned against them.Do as you promised and put an end to them .

ID:	1964
INPUT:	Egiptotik itzularaziko ditut , Asiriatik bilduko ; Galaad eta Libanoraino ereeramango ditut , eta , hala ere , ez dute behar hainbat leku izango .
PRED:	I will bring them back from the land of Egypt , and I will bring them to Gilead , and they will not be there .
GOLD:	I will bring them back from Egyptand gather them from Assyria.I will resettle them in Gilead and Lebanonuntil there is no more room for them all .

ID:	1965
INPUT:	Ikusazue , apalok , eta poztu ; izan bihotz , Jainkoarengana jotzen duzuenok !
PRED:	Be glad , and be glad ; be glad , you who go to God .
GOLD:	For the Lord hears the cries of the needy ; he does not despise his imprisoned people .

ID:	1966
INPUT:	Matxinada denean , herriak buruzagi ugari ; gizon burutsu eta adituarekin ordena nagusi .
PRED:	The people in Mary are many , and the princes of the people are many , and the princes and the princes .
GOLD:	When there is moral rot within a nation , its government topples easily.But wise and knowledgeable leaders bring stability .

ID:	1967
INPUT:	( Mt 12 , 1-8 ; Mk 2 , 23-28 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus Heals on the Sabbath

ID:	1968
INPUT:	nahiz eta Goi-goikoa giza eskuz eginiko etxetan bizi ez , profetak dioen bezala :
PRED:	As the Most High and the prophets live in the house of man , neither in the house of man , as the prophets :
GOLD:	However , the Most High does n't live in temples made by human hands . As the prophet says ,

ID:	1969
INPUT:	Zuen alde borrokatu zen gure aita , bere bizia arriskatuz , eta madiandarren menpetik libratu zintuzten .
PRED:	Our father fought against you , and he saved you from the hand of the Canaanites .
GOLD:	For he fought for you and risked his life when he rescued you from the Midianites .

ID:	1970
INPUT:	Bai , Jaunaren egunaegun beltza izango da , eta ez egun argia , argi-izpirik gabeko ilun beltza !
PRED:	For the day of the Lord shall be a day , neither the light of the light , nor the light of the light , nor the eye of the eye .
GOLD:	Yes , the day of the Lord will be dark and hopeless , without a ray of joy or hope .

ID:	1971
INPUT:	munduko azken muturreraino bota bazintuzten ere , bertara joan eta bildu egingo zaituzte Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak ;
PRED:	And the Lord your God will cast you down to the end of the earth , and he will gather you to the end of the earth .
GOLD:	Even though you are banished to the ends of the earth , the Lord your God will gather you from there and bring you back again .

ID:	1972
INPUT:	Ez ditut hobenak jendeak ohi bezala ezkutatu , ezta errua barruan gorde ere
PRED:	I will not hide them as men , nor will I hide their iniquity from them .
GOLD:	“ Have I tried to hide my sins like other people do , concealing my guilt in my heart ?

ID:	1973
INPUT:	Bosgarren egunean , jaiki zen goizean goiz abiatzeko asmoz , baina neskaren aitak esan zion berriro : — Hartu indarrak . Geldi zaitezte ilunabarra arte . Eta biek jan zuten .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the third day , that he rose early in the morning , that he rose up early in the morning , and said unto his father , Take ye up , and eat . And they ate .
GOLD:	On the morning of the fifth day he was up early again , ready to leave , and again the woman 's father said , “ Have something to eat ; then you can leave later this afternoon . ” So they had another day of feasting .

ID:	1974
INPUT:	Moisesen legean agindutako garbikuntza egiteko unea iritsi zitzaienean , gurasoek Jesus Jerusalemera eraman zuten Jaunari aurkezteko .
PRED:	When they had finished the law of Moses , they brought Jesus to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Then it was time for their purification offering , as required by the law of Moses after the birth of a child ; so his parents took him to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord .

ID:	1975
INPUT:	Eta hona zer erantzun diguten : “ Zeru-lurren Jainkoaren zerbitzari gara , eta haren etxea ari gara jasotzen . Duela urte asko Israelgo errege handi batek eraiki eta bukatu zuen etxea ;
PRED:	And they say unto us , We are servants of the God of heaven and earth , and we have built the house of his God , and a great king of Israel , and built a great house .
GOLD:	“ This was their answer : ‘ We are the servants of the God of heaven and earth , and we are rebuilding the Temple that was built here many years ago by a great king of Israel .

ID:	1976
INPUT:	Eskerrak ematen dizkiot Jainkoari Titoren bihotzean zuenganako nire ardura bera sortu duelako .
PRED:	I give thanks to God , because I have been born to you in my heart .
GOLD:	But thank God ! He has given Titus the same enthusiasm for you that I have .

ID:	1977
INPUT:	« Hara , neure aingerua bidaltzen dizuet gidari , bidean zain zaitzaten eta prestatu dizuedan lekura eraman .
PRED:	“ Behold , I send my angel to you , that you may walk in the way , and bring you to the place where I have prepared .
GOLD:	“ See , I am sending an angel before you to protect you on your journey and lead you safely to the place I have prepared for you .

ID:	1978
INPUT:	Lebitarrak , goizean goiz jaiki eta bideari ekiteko atea ireki zuenean , han aurkitu zuen bere ohaidea , etxeko atarian eroria , eskuak atondoan zituela .
PRED:	And when the Levites rose early in the morning , he opened the way , and found his table in the house of his brethren , and laid his hands on the high places .
GOLD:	When her husband opened the door to leave , there lay his concubine with her hands on the threshold .

ID:	1979
INPUT:	Jauna , beti kantatuko ditut zure maitasun-egintzak , gizaldiz gizaldi iragarriko leial zarela .
PRED:	I will sing to you , O Lord , and you will be faithful to all generations .
GOLD:	Your unfailing love will last forever.Your faithfulness is as enduring as the heavens .

ID:	1980
INPUT:	Inoren etxean egiten dute olioa ; dolarean mahatsa zapaldu eta , halere , egarri .
PRED:	They make the olive oil in the house , and they eat the wine in the house , and the drink thereof .
GOLD:	They press out olive oil without being allowed to taste it , and they tread in the winepress as they suffer from thirst .

ID:	1981
INPUT:	Zintzoak nahiz gaiztoak garbitu behar ditudalako , bizidun ororen aurka aterako da ezpata zorrotik , hegoaldetik iparralderaino .
PRED:	For the righteous shall be clean , and the wicked shall be clean , and the wicked shall be cleansed by the sword , and from the north side of the north .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , give the people this message from the Lord : “ A sword , a swordis being sharpened and polished .

ID:	1982
INPUT:	Hautsa bezainbat dira : nork zenba<unk> koben ondorengoak ? Nork jakinisraeldar multzoaren kopurua ? Gizon zintzo horien heriotza , horiena bezalako azkena , opa diot neure buruari » .
PRED:	These are the number of the sons of Jacob : who is the head of the people of Israel ? Who is this man ? Who is a man like this man ? I have put him to death as a man . ”
GOLD:	Who can count Jacob 's descendants , as numerous as dust ? Who can count even a fourth of Israel 's people ? Let me die like the righteous ; let my life end like theirs . ”

ID:	1983
INPUT:	Nork kondenatuko ditu ? Jesu Kristo da hil zena ; are gehiago , piztu ere egin zena , eta orain Jainkoaren eskuinaldean gure alde erreguka ari dena !
PRED:	Who will judge them ? Jesus Christ is dead , but he is dead , even though he was raised , and now he has raised up his right hand on the right side of God .
GOLD:	Who then will condemn us ? No one — for Christ Jesus died for us and was raised to life for us , and he is sitting in the place of honor at God 's right hand , pleading for us .

ID:	1984
INPUT:	Badakit nik bost , zuhur ala tentelizanen ote den . Nik mundu honetan halako arretazegin dudan lanaz jabetuko da . Ez du honek zentzurik !
PRED:	I know that you will be wise , and you will be wise in this world . This is what I have done in this world .
GOLD:	And who can tell whether my successors will be wise or foolish ? Yet they will control everything I have gained by my skill and hard work under the sun . How meaningless !

ID:	1985
INPUT:	Ez utzi haiei zuen lurraldean bizitzen , nire aurka bekatu egitera eraman ez zaitzaten ; bada , haien jainkoak gurtuko zenituzkete zeuen galbiderako » .
PRED:	Do n't let them live in your land . If you do n't sin against me , do n't sin against me , then you will worship their gods . ”
GOLD:	They must not live in your land , or they will cause you to sin against me . If you serve their gods , you will be caught in the trap of idolatry . ”

ID:	1986
INPUT:	Libnatik Lakixera jo zuen Josuek israeldar guztiekin ; hiria inguratu eta eraso egin zion .
PRED:	And Joshua and all the people of Israel went out of Kadesh , and fought against him , and fought against him .
GOLD:	From Libnah , Joshua and the Israelites went to Lachish and attacked it .

ID:	1987
INPUT:	Tronu batzuk ere ikusi nituen ; haietan eseri zirenei epaitzeko ahalmena eman zien Jainkoak . Ikusi nituen Jesusen testigantza egiteagatik eta Jainkoaren hitza hots egiteagatik lepo eginikoak ere , hau da , piztia eta beronen irudia gurtu ez zituztenak eta haren marka beren bekoki eta eskuetan hartu ez zutenak . Hauek bizira itzuli ziren eta Mesiasekin errege izan ziren mila urtez .
PRED:	And I saw some of them , and God gave them power to judge those who sat on them . And I saw the testimony of Jesus , and the word of God , and the testimony of the testimony of God , and they did not worship him .
GOLD:	Then I saw thrones , and the people sitting on them had been given the authority to judge . And I saw the souls of those who had been beheaded for their testimony about Jesus and for proclaiming the word of God . They had not worshiped the beast or his statue , nor accepted his mark on their foreheads or their hands . They all came to life again , and they reigned with Christ for a thousand years .

ID:	1988
INPUT:	Eror bitez banan-banan beren sareetan , nik libre ihes egiten dudan bitartean .
PRED:	Let them fall in the valley of the Lord , and let them escape .
GOLD:	Let the wicked fall into their own nets , but let me escape .

ID:	1989
INPUT:	Emakumea purpuraz eta gorriminez zegoen jantzia eta urrez , harribitxiz eta perlaz apaindua ; eskuan urrezko edalontzi bat zuen bere prostituzio zikinaren fruitu higuingarriz betea ;
PRED:	The woman clothed with blue , purple , and scarlet , and scarlet , and scarlet , and scarlet , and scarlet , and scarlet ; and she gave her an abomination to her abominations .
GOLD:	The woman wore purple and scarlet clothing and beautiful jewelry made of gold and precious gems and pearls . In her hand she held a gold goblet full of obscenities and the impurities of her immorality .

ID:	1990
INPUT:	Baina Izreelera joan beharrean gertatu zen Joram , Siriako errege Hazaelen kontrako borrokan siriarrek egin zizkioten zauriak sendatzera . Jehuk esan zien bere ofizialkideei : — Nire alde baldin bazaudete , ez dezala inork ere ihes egin hiri honetatik , egin dugunaren berri Izreelera eramatera .
PRED:	But Jehu went to Jezreel , and fought against Ahab king of Aram , and the Syrians fought against him , and said to his servants , “ If you do n't escape from the land of Jezreel , you will not escape from the city of Jezreel . ”
GOLD:	But King Joram was wounded in the fighting and returned to Jezreel to recover from his wounds . ) So Jehu told the men with him , “ If you want me to be king , do n't let anyone leave town and go to Jezreel to report what we have done . ”

ID:	1991
INPUT:	Madarikatua ote Israel herria ? Bukatu ote da , bada , Jaunaren eroapena ? Hori ote haren jokaera ? Ez al dio onginahiz hitz egitenzuzen dabilenari ? »
PRED:	Is the curse of the house of Israel ? Is it the glory of the Lord ? Is it not he that speaks in his ways ?
GOLD:	Should you talk that way , O family of Israel ? Will the Lord 's Spirit have patience with such behavior ? If you would do what is right , you would find my words comforting .

ID:	1992
INPUT:	Jendeak aho betean iraintzen nau , masailekoz betetzen : denak batera nire kontra .
PRED:	When the people speak to me , they speak against me , and they speak against me .
GOLD:	People jeer and laugh at me.They slap my cheek in contempt.A mob gathers against me .

ID:	1993
INPUT:	Masailak lodituta eta gerrialdea gizen-gizen ,
PRED:	And the court of the court , and the tabernacle thereof , and the tabernacle of the court ,
GOLD:	“ These wicked people are heavy and prosperous ; their waists bulge with fat .

ID:	1994
INPUT:	Madarikatua hauen haserrea , benetan garratza ! Madarikatua beren sumindura , benetan ankerra ! Jakoben leinuen arteanditut banatuko , Israel osoan barreiatuko .
PRED:	Blessed be the curse of them that are in their anger , and curse be in their anger , and I will scatter them among the tribes of Jacob .
GOLD:	A curse on their anger , for it is fierce ; a curse on their wrath , for it is cruel.I will scatter them among the descendants of Jacob ; I will disperse them throughout Israel .

ID:	1995
INPUT:	ez ziren nire bihotzaz jabetu , ez nien nik eskuaz musurik bidali .
PRED:	My heart was not filled with my heart , nor sent me into my hand .
GOLD:	and been secretly enticed in my heartto throw kisses at them in worship ?

ID:	1996
INPUT:	Huxaik esan zien , gero , Tzadok eta Abiatar apaizei : — Hau eta hau aholkatu die Ahitofelek Absalomi eta Israelgo herri-arduradunei ; nik , aldiz , beste hau aholkatu diet .
PRED:	Then Abishai said to the priests and Abiathar the priests , “ This is what I have said to Absalom and the elders of Israel . But I have heard this message . ”
GOLD:	Hushai told Zadok and Abiathar , the priests , what Ahithophel had said to Absalom and the elders of Israel and what he himself had advised instead .

ID:	1997
INPUT:	Eta onginahi hutsez baldin bada , ez da egintzengatik ; bestela , onginahia ez litzateke onginahi izango .
PRED:	And if the flesh is not in the flesh , it shall not be done by the grace of the flesh .
GOLD:	And since it is through God 's kindness , then it is not by their good works . For in that case , God 's grace would not be what it really is — free and undeserved .

ID:	1998
INPUT:	Gero , Judan eta Jerusalemen jakinarazi zuten Jainkoaren zerbitzari Moisesek basamortuan Israeli ezarritako zerga ekarri behar zitzaiola Jaunari .
PRED:	And they told the servants of the Lord , the servant of God in the wilderness , which Moses the servant of God in the wilderness of Israel .
GOLD:	Then a proclamation was sent throughout Judah and Jerusalem , telling the people to bring to the Lord the tax that Moses , the servant of God , had required of the Israelites in the wilderness .

ID:	1999
INPUT:	Akaiara joateko asmoa zuelarik , senideek animatu egin zuten eta hango ikasleei idatzi zieten , harrera ona egin ziezaiotela . Han , Jainkoaren onginahiari esker , guztiz lagungarri gertatu zitzaien fededunei .
PRED:	And when he had gone out to the boat , his brothers and sisters wrote to his disciples , and they found that it was good in the sight of God . And there was great faith in the faith of the faith of God .
GOLD:	Apollos had been thinking about going to Achaia , and the brothers and sisters in Ephesus encouraged him to go . They wrote to the believers in Achaia , asking them to welcome him . When he arrived there , he proved to be of great benefit to those who , by God 's grace , had believed .

ID:	2000
INPUT:	Gero , hodei zuri bat ikusi nuen , eta hodei gainean gizaseme antzeko norbait eseria , buruan urrezko koroa eta eskuan igitai zorrotza zituela .
PRED:	And I saw a cloud in the cloud , and a man sat on the cloud , and a man sat on the top of the cloud , and with gold .
GOLD:	Then I saw a white cloud , and seated on the cloud was someone like the Son of Man . He had a gold crown on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand .

ID:	2001
INPUT:	Xebak Israelgo leinu guztien lurraldeak igaro zituen Abel-Bet-Maakaraino ; Bikriren senitarteko guztiak bildu eta Xebaren atzetik sartu ziren hirira .
PRED:	And all the tribes of Israel went into the land of Samaria , and went up to Shechem , and went into the city of Sheba .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Sheba traveled through all the tribes of Israel and eventually came to the town of Abel-beth-maacah . All the members of his own clan , the Bicrites , assembled for battle and followed him into the town .

ID:	2002
INPUT:	Gure arbasoak Egiptora jaitsi ziren eta gure herria luzaro bizi izan zen bertan ; baina gero , egiptoarrek tratu txarra eman ziguten , bai geuri , bai arbasoei .
PRED:	Our fathers came down to Egypt and lived there for a long time , but the Egyptians gave us a long time .
GOLD:	Our ancestors went down to Egypt , and we lived there a long time , and we and our ancestors were brutally mistreated by the Egyptians .

ID:	2003
INPUT:	Asko izango dira probatuak , garbituak eta berrituak . Gaiztoek , ulertzeko gauza ez direnez , gaiztakeriak egiten jarraituko dute . Jakintsuek , ordea , dena ulertuko dute .
PRED:	The prophets will be clean , and they will be clean . They will understand what they are doing . But the wise will understand what they are doing .
GOLD:	Many will be purified , cleansed , and refined by these trials . But the wicked will continue in their wickedness , and none of them will understand . Only those who are wise will know what it means .

ID:	2004
INPUT:	Segurtatu onbidean zeure zerbitzari hau , ez nazaten harroputzek zapal .
PRED:	Do n't let me serve your servant , but the proud will not be proud .
GOLD:	Please guarantee a blessing for me.Do n't let the arrogant oppress me !

ID:	2005
INPUT:	Makila bat hartuko duzue zeuekin eta , sabela hustera irtetean , berarekin zuloa egin eta gorotza lurrez estaliko duzue .
PRED:	You will take one of you , and when you go out into the field , you will go out with him , and you will cover the ground with you .
GOLD:	The camp must be holy , for the Lord your God moves around in your camp to protect you and to defeat your enemies . He must not see any shameful thing among you , or he will turn away from you .

ID:	2006
INPUT:	eta gaizki-esaka hasi ziren Jainkoaren eta Moisesen aurka : « Zertarako atera gintuzuen Egiptotik ? Basamortuan hilarazteko ? Ez dugu urik , ez jakirik , eta mana delako janari kaskar honetaz asper-asper eginak gaude ! »
PRED:	They began to speak against God and said , “ Why did you bring us out of Egypt ? Why did we not eat bread in the wilderness ? We have no food in the wilderness , and have no food in this wilderness ? ”
GOLD:	and they began to speak against God and Moses . “ Why have you brought us out of Egypt to die here in the wilderness ? ” they complained . “ There is nothing to eat here and nothing to drink . And we hate this horrible manna ! ”

ID:	2007
INPUT:	Sedekias bera , begiak leherrarazi ondoren , Babiloniara eraman zuen katez loturik .
PRED:	When Zedekiah saw him , he put him in prison , and carried him to Babylon .
GOLD:	Then he gouged out Zedekiah 's eyes and bound him in bronze chains to lead him away to Babylon .

ID:	2008
INPUT:	Orduan , Xuaheko Bildadek hitz egin zuen :
PRED:	Then Bildad the son of Hallohesh answered ,
GOLD:	Then Bildad the Shuhite replied to Job :

ID:	2009
INPUT:	Israeldarrek menderatu zituztela ikustean , aramearrak elkartu egin ziren denak .
PRED:	When the Israelites saw that the Israelites were defeated , they all gathered together .
GOLD:	The Arameans now realized that they were no match for Israel . So when they regrouped ,

ID:	2010
INPUT:	Iseka ari dira eta zitalkeriak esaten , goitik behera begira , jendea nola larrutuko hitz egiten .
PRED:	Their eyes are full of wickedness , and their eyes are turned away from the morning , and their eyes are full of them .
GOLD:	They scoff and speak only evil ; in their pride they seek to crush others .

ID:	2011
INPUT:	Jaunak berriro dei egin zion Samueli . Hau jaiki eta Elirengana joan zen , esanez : — Hemen nauzu , dei egin baitidazu . Elik erantzun : — Ez dizut nik dei egin , ene seme . Itzul zaitez eta egizu lo .
PRED:	And the Lord called Samuel again . And he rose up , and said unto him , Behold , I have called thee ; for I have not called thee , my son , and I have not called thee .
GOLD:	Then the Lord called out again , “ Samuel ! ” Again Samuel got up and went to Eli . “ Here I am . Did you call me ? ” “ I did n't call you , my son , ” Eli said . “ Go back to bed . ”

ID:	2012
INPUT:	Baina beraien menpe jartzen ez bazara , hiria babiloniarren esku eroriko da eta erre egingo dute , eta zeu ere ez zara libratuko haien eskuetatik .
PRED:	But if thou shalt not deliver them into the hand of the Chaldeans , and burn them into the hand of the Chaldeans , and thou shalt not deliver them out of their hand .
GOLD:	But if you refuse to surrender , you will not escape ! This city will be handed over to the Babylonians , and they will burn it to the ground . ' ”

ID:	2013
INPUT:	Erregeak gabaondarrei dei egin zien , beraiekin mintzatzeko . Gabaondarrak ez ziren israeldar , amortarren artetik bizirik geldituak baizik . Egina zuten hitzarmena israeldarrekin ; baina Saulek , Israel eta Judakoenganako gehiegizko axolaz , galdu egin nahi izan zituen haiek .
PRED:	And the king called to the sons of Israel , to speak with them . And the children of Israel did not speak unto them , but the children of Israel were left alive , but Saul went to the house of Israel , and to the house of Israel , and to the house of Judah .
GOLD:	So the king summoned the Gibeonites . They were not part of Israel but were all that was left of the nation of the Amorites . The people of Israel had sworn not to kill them , but Saul , in his zeal for Israel and Judah , had tried to wipe them out .

ID:	2014
INPUT:	Pikondoaren madarikazioa : fedea eta otoitza
PRED:	Pilate 's curse and prayer
GOLD:	Parable of the Evil Farmers

ID:	2015
INPUT:	Eman diet zure berri mundutik bereizi eta eman zenizkidan gizon-emakumeei . Zureak ziren , zuk neuri eman zenizkidan , eta hauek onartu dute zure mezua .
PRED:	I have given them the good news from the world , and you gave them to men , and you have received my word .
GOLD:	“ I have revealed you to the ones you gave me from this world . They were always yours . You gave them to me , and they have kept your word .

ID:	2016
INPUT:	Beraz , aurrez ikusi zuen Mesias piztuko zela , eta honetaz mintzo zen hau esatean : ez zuela Jainkoak Herio Leizera botako eta ez zela haren gorputza hilobian galduko .
PRED:	When he saw that he was the Messiah , he said to him , “ The dead will not be put to death , and his body will not be put to death . ”
GOLD:	David was looking into the future and speaking of the Messiah 's resurrection . He was saying that God would not leave him among the dead or allow his body to rot in the grave .

ID:	2017
INPUT:	Elkartea ongi zuzentzen duten arduradunek estimu bikoitza merezi dute , predi<unk> eta irakaste-lanetan ari direnek batik bat .
PRED:	The elders who do what is right is right will be given to each of the people who are in the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	Elders who do their work well should be respected and paid well , especially those who work hard at both preaching and teaching .

ID:	2018
INPUT:	Nire Jainkoak , bere aldetik , bere aberastasun harrigarriaren arabera erantzungo dizue zeuen premia guztietan , Kristo Jesusen bitartez .
PRED:	But God will answer you all his riches , and you will answer you in all your miracles , through Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	And this same God who takes care of me will supply all your needs from his glorious riches , which have been given to us in Christ Jesus .

ID:	2019
INPUT:	Bihotzeko harra sentitu zuen orduan , Saulen soingainekoaren ertza ebaki zuelako .
PRED:	Then he went out to the heart , because he had taken the robe of Saul 's robe .
GOLD:	He said to his men , “ The Lord forbid that I should do this to my lord the king . I should n't attack the Lord 's anointed one , for the Lord himself has chosen him . ”

ID:	2020
INPUT:	Orduan , Jose , bere semeak aitaren belaun artetik atera eta lurreraino makurtu zitzaion .
PRED:	Then Joseph went out of his father 's family and bowed down to the ground .
GOLD:	Joseph moved the boys , who were at their grandfather 's knees , and he bowed with his face to the ground .

ID:	2021
INPUT:	Izan ere , beste guztiek sobera dutenetik eman dute ; honek , ordea , bere eskasian , zeukan guztia , bizitzeko behar zuena , eman du » .
PRED:	For all of them have brought him out of the hands of the hands , but in the same way , he has given them all to live . ”
GOLD:	For they gave a tiny part of their surplus , but she , poor as she is , has given everything she had to live on . ”

ID:	2022
INPUT:	Asmatu egitamuak : bertan behera geldituko dira . Proposatu nahi duzuena : alferrik izango da , Jainkoa gurekin baitago .
PRED:	The truth will be left , and there will be no more left . The Lord will be with us .
GOLD:	Call your councils of war , but they will be worthless.Develop your strategies , but they will not succeed.For God is with us ! ”

ID:	2023
INPUT:	Izan ere , Efesoko Trofimo Paulorekin ikusia zuten aurretik hirian eta Paulok tenpluan sartu zuela uste zuten .
PRED:	For when they saw that Paul was with Paul , they went into the city and entered into the temple .
GOLD:	( For earlier that day they had seen him in the city with Trophimus , a Gentile from Ephesus , and they assumed Paul had taken him into the Temple . )

ID:	2024
INPUT:	zenbat eta urte gehiago falta , hainbat eta handiagoa prezioa ; zenbat eta urte gutxiago , hainbat eta txikiagoa prezioa , saltzen dena gelditzen diren uztak baitira .
PRED:	There are many years , and many years , and much more than many years , and much more than many years , for the harvest of the harvest is left .
GOLD:	The more years until the next jubilee , the higher the price ; the fewer years , the lower the price . After all , the person selling the land is actually selling you a certain number of harvests .

ID:	2025
INPUT:	baina zure mehatxuz ihes egin zuten , zure trumoi-hotsak uxaturik :
PRED:	But they fled from your word , and they fled .
GOLD:	At your command , the water fled ; at the sound of your thunder , it hurried away .

ID:	2026
INPUT:	Hala , irten zen Hatak Mardokeoren bila , jauregi aurrean zegoen plazara .
PRED:	So Mordecai went out to meet Mordecai in the court of the palace .
GOLD:	So Hathach went out to Mordecai in the square in front of the palace gate .

ID:	2027
INPUT:	Pedrok erantzun zien : — Bihozberri zaitezte eta bataiatu guztiok , Jesus Mesiasen izenean bekatuak barka dakizkizuen , eta Espiritu Santua hartuko duzue dohain .
PRED:	And Peter said unto them , Go ye away , and be baptized , and forgive in the name of Jesus Christ , and ye shall receive the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	Peter replied , “ Each of you must repent of your sins and turn to God , and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins . Then you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit .

ID:	2028
INPUT:	Herri izugarri eta ikaragarria : berak ezartzen ditulegea eta nagusitza .
PRED:	You are a people and a great nation . He has appointed the law and the law .
GOLD:	They are notorious for their crueltyand do whatever they like .

ID:	2029
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Hauxe da Jainkoak nahi duena : berak bidali duenarengan zuek sinestea .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ This is the one who sent him , who sent him to believe in you . ”
GOLD:	Jesus told them , “ This is the only work God wants from you : Believe in the one he has sent . ”

ID:	2030
INPUT:	MOISESEN AZKEN <unk> DUERA ( 31 , 1 — 34 , 12 )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Joshua Becomes Israel 's Leader

ID:	2031
INPUT:	Ehun eta hogeita hamar urte zituela , Adamek semea izan zuen , bere <unk> eta irudikoa , eta <unk> eman zion izen .
PRED:	When he was thirty years old , he became the father of Nahor , and he gave him the son of Seth .
GOLD:	When Adam was 130 years old , he became the father of a son who was just like him — in his very image . He named his son Seth .

ID:	2032
INPUT:	« Ikusi al duzu nola apaldu den Akab nire aurrean ? Hara , nire aurrean apaldu denez gero , zoritxarra ez diot bera bizi den artean bidaliko , bere semearen egunetan bidaliko diot zoritxarra haren senitarteari » .
PRED:	“ How did you see Ahab before me ? Behold , I will send evil on my face , and I will not send evil among them in the days of his sons . ”
GOLD:	“ Do you see how Ahab has humbled himself before me ? Because he has done this , I will not do what I promised during his lifetime . It will happen to his sons ; I will destroy his dynasty . ”

ID:	2033
INPUT:	Garailea neure Jainkoaren tenpluko zutabe egingo dut , eta ez da gehiago handik irtengo ; neure Jainkoaren izena eta neure izen berria idatziko ditut harengan ; baita neure Jainkoaren hiriaren izena ere , zerutik , nire Jainkoarengandik , jaisten den Jerusalem berriaren izena .
PRED:	I will build the temple of my God , and I will not go out from there . I will proclaim my name , and my name will be written in him , and my name will be written in him , and the name of my God from heaven .
GOLD:	All who are victorious will become pillars in the Temple of my God , and they will never have to leave it . And I will write on them the name of my God , and they will be citizens in the city of my God — the new Jerusalem that comes down from heaven from my God . And I will also write on them my new name .

ID:	2034
INPUT:	Ondoren , Moisesek azken agurra egin zion bere aitaginarrebari , eta hau bere herrialdera itzuli zen .
PRED:	And Moses served his father , and returned to his own land .
GOLD:	Soon after this , Moses said good-bye to his father-in-law , who returned to his own land .

ID:	2035
INPUT:	Zotz eginez banatuko duzue , zuen artean bizi diren eta seme-alabak izan dituzten etorkinak ahaztu gabe . Hauek jatorrizko israeldar bailiran hartuko dituzue , eta beren ondare-zatia hartuko dute Israelgo leinuen artean .
PRED:	You shall take the lot of the children who are among you , and you shall not forget them ; they shall be like the children of Israel , and they shall take their inheritance among you , and they shall take their inheritance among the tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	Distribute the land as an allotment for yourselves and for the foreigners who have joined you and are raising their families among you . They will be like native-born Israelites to you and will receive an allotment among the tribes .

ID:	2036
INPUT:	Biziki poztu naiz , anaiek etorri eta zure jokabide leialaz hitz egin didatenean , egiaren arabera bizi zarela aitortuz .
PRED:	When I was glad , my brothers and sisters came to me , when I spoke to you in your ways , you have lived according to the truth .
GOLD:	Some of the traveling teachers recently returned and made me very happy by telling me about your faithfulness and that you are living according to the truth .

ID:	2037
INPUT:	Urre eta zilarrezkoak ziren zure bitxiak , liho fin eta zetazkoak zure jantzi bordatuak . Irin garbiz , eztiz eta olioz elikatzen zinen . Ezin ederrago bihurtu zinen , erregina baten pareko .
PRED:	And the silver , and the gold , and the vessels of thy garments , and of fine flour , and of fine flour , and of olive oil , and of olive oil , and of olive oil ; and they could not be made by fire .
GOLD:	And so you were adorned with gold and silver . Your clothes were made of fine linen and costly fabric and were beautifully embroidered . You ate the finest foods — choice flour , honey , and olive oil — and became more beautiful than ever . You looked like a queen , and so you were !

ID:	2038
INPUT:	Axerren leinuaren ondaretik ere lau hiri — Mixal , Abdon , Helkat eta Rehob — eta herri-lurrak .
PRED:	And from the tribe of Asher were four cities of Asher , Elioenai , and Kelita , and Kelita .
GOLD:	From the tribe of Asher they received the following towns with their pasturelands : Mishal , Abdon ,

ID:	2039
INPUT:	Henok izan zuenetik , beste zortziehun urtez bizi izan zen , eta seme-alabak izan zituen .
PRED:	And Noah lived after he became the father of Lamech , and he had other sons and daughters .
GOLD:	After the birth of Enoch , Jared lived another 800 years , and he had other sons and daughters .

ID:	2040
INPUT:	« Orain arte irudi bidez hitz egin dizuet ; baina badator ordua irudi bidez hitz egingo ez dizuedana , baizik eta Aitaren berri argi eta garbi emango dizuedana .
PRED:	“ Now I have spoken to you until now , but the time will not speak to you , but the Father will not speak to you , but the Father will give you light and clean .
GOLD:	“ I have spoken of these matters in figures of speech , but soon I will stop speaking figuratively and will tell you plainly all about the Father .

ID:	2041
INPUT:	hau da , Seir aldera doan Halak menditik Hermon mendi azpiko Libanoko haranean dagoen Baal-Gad hiria arteko lurralde osoa . Errege guztiak harrapatu eta hil egin zituen ,
PRED:	This is the land that is in Mount Seir , which is in Mount Seir , in the mount of Lebanon , in the hill country of Lebanon , in the hill country of Bashan , and killed all the kings of Bashan , and killed them .
GOLD:	The Israelite territory now extended all the way from Mount Halak , which leads up to Seir in the south , as far north as Baal-gad at the foot of Mount Hermon in the valley of Lebanon . Joshua killed all the kings of those territories ,

ID:	2042
INPUT:	Zoaz orain lurralde hau bere luze-zabalean zeharkatzera , zeuri emango baitizut » .
PRED:	Now go and take this land in a long country , for I will give it to you . ”
GOLD:	Go and walk through the land in every direction , for I am giving it to you . ”

ID:	2043
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Esan dizuet , eta ez didazue sinesten . Nik neure Aitaren izenean egiten ditudan egintzek ematen dute nire alde testigantza ;
PRED:	Jesus answered them , “ I told you , and you do n't believe me . They do not believe my Father in my name .
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ I have already told you , and you do n't believe me . The proof is the work I do in my Father 's name .

ID:	2044
INPUT:	Jarri zeuen gogoa goiko gauzetan , ez lurrekoetan ,
PRED:	Remember the morning in the morning , in the morning , in the earth ,
GOLD:	Think about the things of heaven , not the things of earth .

ID:	2045
INPUT:	Jaunaren hitzak jatorrak dira , zilar garbia , zazpitan birfindua .
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to pass , silver , gold , and gold .
GOLD:	Therefore , Lord , we know you will protect the oppressed , preserving them forever from this lying generation ,

ID:	2046
INPUT:	Horregatik esan zuten gurasoek : « Badu adina , galdegin berari » .
PRED:	Therefore their fathers said to them , “ Balak has said , ‘ What is he ? '
GOLD:	That 's why they said , “ He is old enough . Ask him . ”

ID:	2047
INPUT:	Kristauak agintarien menpeko
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Respect for Authority

ID:	2048
INPUT:	Herensugea itsasertzeko hondarretan gelditu zen zutik .
PRED:	And the king stood in the midst of the sea , and stood in the midst of the sea .
GOLD:	Then the dragon took his stand on the shore beside the sea .

ID:	2049
INPUT:	Mahatsondoa zirudien zure amak , ur-bazterrean landatua . Emankor eta mardula zenur-ugaritasunagatik .
PRED:	Your mother was like a vine in the field , and your mother was planted in the desert , and because of the waters of the desert .
GOLD:	“ Your mother was like a vineplanted by the water 's edge.It had lush , green foliagebecause of the abundant water .

ID:	2050
INPUT:	Gure borrokako armak ez dira gizakiarenak , Jainkoarenak baizik , eta hiri gotorrak ere errausteko indarra dute : argudio faltsuak
PRED:	The battle of our fathers are not of men , but the sons of God , and the strength of our God shall be destroyed , and they shall be destroyed by the sword .
GOLD:	We use God 's mighty weapons , not worldly weapons , to knock down the strongholds of human reasoning and to destroy false arguments .

ID:	2051
INPUT:	Harimgoak 320 ;
PRED:	The sons of Pashhur , three hundred and twenty .
GOLD:	The citizens of Harim320

ID:	2052
INPUT:	Epaile zuzena da Jainkoa , gaizkilea zigorrik gabe uzten ez duena .
PRED:	The judgment of God is righteous , and he that does not let the wicked be put to death .
GOLD:	If a person does not repent , God will sharpen his sword ; he will bend and string his bow .

ID:	2053
INPUT:	aitzitik , zigorraren bidezHildakoen Egoitzatik libratuko duzu .
PRED:	But you will save them from the dead , and you will save them from the place of the dead .
GOLD:	Physical disciplinemay well save them from death .

ID:	2054
INPUT:	Laguntza eske erregua
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	's Enemies

ID:	2055
INPUT:	Elorriak erantzun zien : “ Egiaz zeuen errege izendatu nahi banauzue , zatozte , babestu nire itzalpean ; bestela , Libanoko zedroak ere irentsiko dituen sugarra aterako zait ” » .
PRED:	And he said to them , “ If you want me to make me king , then you will come to me , and I will send the cedar trees of Lebanon . ”
GOLD:	And the thornbush replied to the trees , ‘ If you truly want to make me your king , come and take shelter in my shade.If not , let fire come out from meand devour the cedars of Lebanon . ' ”

ID:	2056
INPUT:	Hantxe bertan eraiki zion aldarea Davidek Jaunari , eta erre-opariak eta elkartasun-opariak eskaini zituen . Errukitu zen Jauna lurralde hartaz eta urrundu egin zuen izurritea Israelengandik .
PRED:	And David built an altar to the Lord , and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings and peace offerings . And the Lord turned away from Israel .
GOLD:	David built an altar there to the Lord and sacrificed burnt offerings and peace offerings . And the Lord answered his prayer for the land , and the plague on Israel was stopped .

ID:	2057
INPUT:	Faraoiak Moisesi eta Aaroni presaka deitu eta esan zien : « Zuen Jainko Jaunaren aurka eta zuen aurka egin dut bekatu ;
PRED:	And Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron , and said unto them , I have sinned against the Lord your God , and have sinned against you .
GOLD:	Pharaoh quickly summoned Moses and Aaron . “ I have sinned against the Lord your God and against you , ” he confessed .

ID:	2058
INPUT:	Horixe dut kontsolamendu atsekabean , zure promesak bainau biziberritzen .
PRED:	I will comfort you , because you have heard your word .
GOLD:	Your promise revives me ; it comforts me in all my troubles .

ID:	2059
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , herri errebeldearen artean bizi zara ; badituzte begiak ikusteko , baina ez dute ikusten ; belarriak entzuteko , baina ez dute entzuten ; izan ere , herri errebeldea da .
PRED:	“ Son of man , you are living among the people . If you see them , they do n't see their eyes , but they do n't hear their ears , but they do n't hear their ears .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , you live among rebels who have eyes but refuse to see . They have ears but refuse to hear . For they are a rebellious people .

ID:	2060
INPUT:	eta erantsi zuen : — Gainera , Ester erreginak , erregearekin batera , ni bakarrik gonbidatu nau prestatu duen otordura . Eta biharko ere , erregea eta biok gonbidatu gaitu .
PRED:	Then Esther said , “ Esther , I am with the king who has prepared me , and he has prepared me a feast for the king . ”
GOLD:	Then Haman added , “ And that 's not all ! Queen Esther invited only me and the king himself to the banquet she prepared for us . And she has invited me to dine with her and the king again tomorrow ! ”

ID:	2061
INPUT:	Erne zen haziaeta mahatsondo mardul egin , altuera txikikoa izan arren ; arranoaganazuzentzen zituen adarrak , sustraiak ere haren menpean zituen . Mahatsondo egin zen , aihenak bota zitueneta abartsu egin .
PRED:	And the vine was very high , and the fruit of the garden , because it was great , and the branches of the eagle was broken , and the branches were cut down , and he cut down his branches , and he cut down his branches .
GOLD:	It took root there andgrew into a low , spreading vine.Its branches turned up toward the eagle , and its roots grew down into the ground.It produced strong branchesand put out shoots .

ID:	2062
INPUT:	Ez zaitzatela gaitzets apal-itxuran agertu eta aingeruen kultua atsegin duten horiek ; ikuskarietan murgiltzen dira eta beren giza burutapen ergelez harropuzturik dabiltza .
PRED:	Do n't be judged by the judgment of the angels , and the angels who do evil in the sight of the angels , and they are ashamed of their own heart .
GOLD:	Do n't let anyone condemn you by insisting on pious self-denial or the worship of angels , saying they have had visions about these things . Their sinful minds have made them proud ,

ID:	2063
INPUT:	Tenpluko sala handiaren aurreko atalondoa hamar metro zabal zen — tenpluaren zabalera bera — , eta bost metro luze tenplu barnerantz .
PRED:	And the length of the temple was twenty cubits long , and the breadth of the house , and the breadth of the house was twenty cubits , and the breadth of the house .
GOLD:	The entry room at the front of the Temple was 30 feet wide , running across the entire width of the Temple . It projected outward 15 feet from the front of the Temple .

ID:	2064
INPUT:	Espainiara bidean hortik igarotzean , ikusiko zaituztedan itxaropena dut ; eta bidaiari jarraitzeko lagunduko didazuen itxaropena ere bai . Baina lehenago , zuekin egonaldi bat pozik egingo nuke .
PRED:	When I go through the judgment , I will see you in the way of my judgment , and I will wait for you , but I will wait for you , and I will be glad .
GOLD:	I am planning to go to Spain , and when I do , I will stop off in Rome . And after I have enjoyed your fellowship for a little while , you can provide for my journey .

ID:	2065
INPUT:	Ni ere guztiei atsegin ematen saiatzen naiz gauza guztietan eta ez dut bilatzen neure ona , besteena baizik , salba daitezen .
PRED:	I am pleased with all things , and I do not seek my glory , but to be saved .
GOLD:	I , too , try to please everyone in everything I do . I do n't just do what is best for me ; I do what is best for others so that many may be saved .

ID:	2066
INPUT:	ezkondua , berriz , munduko gauzez , bere emazteari atsegin nola emango ,
PRED:	But if she is married in the world , how she is pleased with her wife ,
GOLD:	But a married man has to think about his earthly responsibilities and how to please his wife .

ID:	2067
INPUT:	Josafat , bere gudarostearekin , harrapakinak hartzera joan zen . Zamari asko , janariak , janzkiak eta gauza ederrak aurkitu zituzten , eta eraman zezaketena baino gehiago hartu . Hiru egunez jardun zuten harrapakinak hartzen , hain baitziren ugari .
PRED:	Jehoshaphat and his army went to meet him , and they found many horses , horses , horses , horses , and horses . They found many days more than three days .
GOLD:	King Jehoshaphat and his men went out to gather the plunder . They found vast amounts of equipment , clothing , and other valuables — more than they could carry . There was so much plunder that it took them three days just to collect it all !

ID:	2068
INPUT:	Jerusalemi eraso egin zioten herrietan bizirik geldituak , urtero-urtero etorriko dira errege Jaun ahalguztiduna gurtzera eta Etxola Jaia ospatzera .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the remnant of the peoples were left in the land , that the remnant of the Lord of hosts shall come to worship the feast of the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	In the end , the enemies of Jerusalem who survive the plague will go up to Jerusalem each year to worship the King , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and to celebrate the Festival of Shelters .

ID:	2069
INPUT:	asmo guztiak ustel aterako zaizkieprobetxugabeko herri horrekin ; ez baitie ezeren laguntzariketa probetxurik ekarriko , lotsa eta laidoa baizik » .
PRED:	And all these things shall come to pass through this people : for they shall not be able to help them ; for they shall not be ashamed , but they shall be ashamed .
GOLD:	all who trust in him will be ashamed.He will not help you.Instead , he will disgrace you . ”

ID:	2070
INPUT:	Isakar eta Axerren lurralde barruan , honako hiri hauek Manasesenak ziren : Bet-Xan eta Ibleam beraien herrixkekin , eta Dor , Endor , Taanak eta Megido , beraietako bizilagun eta herrixkekin .
PRED:	And the cities of Zebulun , and the cities of Manasseh , and their villages , and their villages , and their villages , and their villages , and their villages , and their villages .
GOLD:	The following towns within the territory of Issachar and Asher , however , were given to Manasseh : Beth-shan , Ibleam , Dor ( that is , Naphoth-dor ) , Endor , Taanach , and Megiddo , each with their surrounding settlements .

ID:	2071
INPUT:	arren eta arren eskatzen zidaten fededunen aldeko zerbitzu honetan parte hartzen uzteko .
PRED:	and they asked for the saints , that they may bring them into the faith of faith .
GOLD:	They begged us again and again for the privilege of sharing in the gift for the believers in Jerusalem .

ID:	2072
INPUT:	Baina zuk , Egipto , sinesgabeen artean joko duzu lur , eta gerran hildakoekin geldituko zara etzanda .
PRED:	But you will go among the Egyptians , and you will die with the sword , and you will die with the dead .
GOLD:	“ You too , Egypt , will lie crushed and broken among the outcasts , all slaughtered by the sword .

ID:	2073
INPUT:	Oso begikoa izan zuen faraoiak Hadad , eta bere emaztearen ahizpa eman zion emaztetzat , hau da , Tahpene erreginaren ahizpa .
PRED:	Pharaoh looked at the king 's eyes , and he gave him his wife , the daughter of his sister , the sister of his sister .
GOLD:	Pharaoh grew very fond of Hadad , and he gave him his wife 's sister in marriage — the sister of Queen Tahpenes .

ID:	2074
INPUT:	Arratsaldean beldurgarri , baina goizerako ezerez . Horra gure lapurren zoria , gure harrapatzaileen azkena .
PRED:	In the evening , in the morning , and in the morning , and in the morning , the end of our army , the sword of our enemies .
GOLD:	In the evening Israel waits in terror , but by dawn its enemies are dead.This is the just reward of those who plunder us , a fitting end for those who destroy us .

ID:	2075
INPUT:	Zer egingo duzue , beraz , jaiegunean , Jaunaren festa-egunean ?
PRED:	What shall ye do in the day of the feast of the Lord ?
GOLD:	What then will you do on festival days ? How will you observe the Lord 's festivals ?

ID:	2076
INPUT:	Senideok , ez ibili bata bestearen aurka marmarka , kondenatuak izan ez zaitezten , ate-atean baita gure epailea .
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , do n't turn away from one another , because you do n't be judged by the judgment of our judgment .
GOLD:	Do n't grumble about each other , brothers and sisters , or you will be judged . For look — the Judge is standing at the door !

ID:	2077
INPUT:	Guztiz ederra zara , ene laztana , ederra eta akatsik gabea !
PRED:	You are beautiful , my beloved , you are beautiful and beautiful .
GOLD:	You are altogether beautiful , my darling , beautiful in every way .

ID:	2078
INPUT:	Nehemiasek Jerusalemgo berriak jakin
PRED:	Jeremiah Complains to Jerusalem
GOLD:	Nehemiah 's Concern for Jerusalem

ID:	2079
INPUT:	hirugarrenean , opaloa , agata eta amatista ,
PRED:	And on the third day the third day , an ephah , an ephah , and an ephah ,
GOLD:	The third row contained an orange jacinth , an agate , and a purple amethyst .

ID:	2080
INPUT:	Itzuleran , negar egin zenuten Jaunaren aurrean , baina ez zizuen aditu , ez jaramonik egin .
PRED:	When you returned , you wept in front of the Lord , but you did not listen to them .
GOLD:	Then you returned and wept before the Lord , but he refused to listen .

ID:	2081
INPUT:	Kanaan lurraldean dagoen Luz-era , hau da , Betelera , heldu zen Jakob , berarekin zihoan jende guztiarekin .
PRED:	And Jacob came to the land of Canaan , which is in the land of Canaan , and all the people with him .
GOLD:	Eventually , Jacob and his household arrived at Luz ( also called Bethel ) in Canaan .

ID:	2082
INPUT:	Bizirik eutsi baitziguneta gure oinei erortzen utzi ez .
PRED:	For he has left our feet , and has not left our feet .
GOLD:	Our lives are in his hands , and he keeps our feet from stumbling .

ID:	2083
INPUT:	« Jaunaren handitasunadut goresten , pozaren pozez daukat barrena , Jainkoa baitut salbatzaile .
PRED:	“ I will praise the Lord , and I will praise him , because I am my salvation .
GOLD:	How my spirit rejoices in God my Savior !

ID:	2084
INPUT:	gerriak ere almendra-lore gisako lau kopa zituen , beren kukulu , lore-hosto eta guzti .
PRED:	And he made four corners of pure gold , and their lamps , and their lamps , and their lamps , and their lamps .
GOLD:	The center stem of the lampstand was crafted with four lamp cups shaped like almond blossoms , complete with buds and petals .

ID:	2085
INPUT:	eta harekin bat eginik bizitzearren . Ez dut neurez salbatu nahi , legea betetzetik datorren salbamenaz , alegia , Kristorengan sinestetik datorrenaz baizik , Jainkoak sinesmenaren bidez ematen didan salbamenaz , alegia .
PRED:	and in him I live with him . I do not want to be saved by the law , but by the faith that God has given me through faith through faith .
GOLD:	and become one with him . I no longer count on my own righteousness through obeying the law ; rather , I become righteous through faith in Christ . For God 's way of making us right with himself depends on faith .

ID:	2086
INPUT:	Fededun berri askok ordu arteko beren jarduera okerrak agerian aitortu zituzten ,
PRED:	And many of them believed in their faith , and believed in the truth .
GOLD:	Many who became believers confessed their sinful practices .

ID:	2087
INPUT:	Baina pikondoak erantzun zien : “ Eta neure fruitu eder eta gozoa emateari uko egin , zuhaitzen gainean dilindan ibiltzeko ? ”
PRED:	But the fig tree said to them , “ The fruit of my fruit , and the fruit of my fruit , and the fruit of my fruit , that I may come upon the trees ? ”
GOLD:	But the fig tree also refused , saying , ‘ Should I quit producing my sweet fruitjust to wave back and forth over the trees ? '

ID:	2088
INPUT:	gainera , goizero , sei kilo eta erdi irin labore-oparitzat , eta bi litro olio , irinarekin nahasteko . Arau hauek betiko balio izango dute .
PRED:	And it shall be to pass in the morning , two hundred and a hin of fine flour mixed with oil , and a hin of olive oil , and a hin of olive oil , and a hin of olive oil for ever .
GOLD:	With the lamb , a grain offering must also be given to the Lord — about three quarts of flour with a third of a gallon of olive oil to moisten the choice flour . This will be a permanent law for you .

ID:	2089
INPUT:	Ondoren , zuetako bakoitzak adierazpen hau egingo du Jaunaren zuen Jainkoaren aurrean : “ Erretiratu dut etxetik sagaratu beharrekoa , eta lebitar , etorkin , umezurtz eta alargunari eman diet , zuk , Jaun horrek , agindu bezala . Ez dut zure aginduetariko bat ere hautsi , ez ahaztu .
PRED:	And he shall say unto you , This is what the Lord thy God shall say unto you , I have taken away from the house of the Lord thy God , and the Levites , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow .
GOLD:	Then you must declare in the presence of the Lord your God , ‘ I have taken the sacred gift from my house and have given it to the Levites , foreigners , orphans , and widows , just as you commanded me . I have not violated or forgotten any of your commands .

ID:	2090
INPUT:	Ez dira , beraz , inoiz itzuliko , hain gogoz berriro itzuliko liratekeen herrialdera .
PRED:	So they will not return again to the land of the nations , to return again again .
GOLD:	You will never again return to the land you yearn for .

ID:	2091
INPUT:	Mikak galdetu zion : — Nondik zatoz ? Hark erantzun : — Judako Belengo lebitar bat nauzu , beste nonbait bizitzeko asmotan .
PRED:	And she said unto him , Where are thou ? And he said unto him , I am a Levite from Bethlehem , and one of the Levites .
GOLD:	“ Where are you from ? ” Micah asked him.He replied , “ I am a Levite from Bethlehem in Judah , and I am looking for a place to live . ”

ID:	2092
INPUT:	Eguerdian , ilundu egin zuen lurbira osoan hirurak arte .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the morning , that the whole earth was dark until the three days .
GOLD:	At noon , darkness fell across the whole land until three o'clock .

ID:	2093
INPUT:	Zortzigarren egunean bi usapal edo bi usakume eramango dizkio apaizari , elkarketa-etxolaren sarrerara .
PRED:	On the eighth day he shall bring two young lambs , and two young lambs , and two young lambs , and a young woman in the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	On the eighth day they must bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons to the priest at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	2094
INPUT:	Beraz , gauzarik txikiena ere ezin baduzue , zertan kezkatu gainerakoaz ?
PRED:	If you do not have a small thing , why do you bring it on us ?
GOLD:	And if worry ca n't accomplish a little thing like that , what 's the use of worrying over bigger things ?

ID:	2095
INPUT:	« Baina , harrokeriak eraginda , Jaunaren zuen Jainkoaren zerbitzuan dagoen apaizaren nahiz epailearen erabakia onartu nahi ez duena hil egin behar duzue . Horrela ezabatuko duzue gaiztakeria Israeldik .
PRED:	“ But if you do n't obey the Lord your God , you must not kill the priest or the priest 's priest or the priest who is in the Lord your God 's presence , then you will die from Israel .
GOLD:	Anyone arrogant enough to reject the verdict of the judge or of the priest who represents the Lord your God must die . In this way you will purge the evil from Israel .

ID:	2096
INPUT:	Zer ikustera irten zineten , bada ? Profetaren bat ? Bai , noski , eta profeta baino ere handiagoa .
PRED:	What did you go out to see ? A prophet ? Yes , I tell you , and I am greater than the prophet .
GOLD:	Were you looking for a prophet ? Yes , and he is more than a prophet .

ID:	2097
INPUT:	Amari galdezka ari dira : « Non dira garia eta ardoa ? » Zauriturik bezala erortzen dira hiriko kaleetan , amaren altzoan azken arnasa emanez .
PRED:	They say to the woman , “ Where are we ? ” They will fall like wine and wine in the streets , and they will fall in the streets .
GOLD:	They cry out to their mothers , “ We need food and drink ! ” Their lives ebb away in the streetslike the life of a warrior wounded in battle.They gasp for lifeas they collapse in their mothers ' arms .

ID:	2098
INPUT:	Gainditu ezineko muga ezarri diezu urei , berriro lurra estal ez dezaten .
PRED:	And thou hast set the border for the border of the waters , that it may not be able to cover the earth .
GOLD:	Then you set a firm boundary for the seas , so they would never again cover the earth .

ID:	2099
INPUT:	Atzerriko jendea zerbitzariizango duzue : zuen artaldeak zainduko dituzte , nekazari eta mahastizainizango dituzue .
PRED:	And you shall serve the people of the nations , and they shall keep the sheep of your flock , and they shall serve you , and you shall plant them .
GOLD:	Foreigners will be your servants.They will feed your flocksand plow your fieldsand tend your vineyards .

ID:	2100
INPUT:	Atera ziren benjamindarrak israeldarrei aurre egiteko eta urrutiratu egin ziren beren hiritik . Aurrekoetan bezala , israeldarrak hiltzen hasi ziren landan , Betelerako bidean eta Gibearako bidean ; hogeita hamarren bat israeldar bota zituzten .
PRED:	And the children of Benjamin went out to fight against the children of Israel , and they turned away from their cities , as they were before them in the field , as in the field of Gibeah , in the field of Gibeah , and in the valley of the children of Israel .
GOLD:	When the men of Benjamin came out to attack , they were drawn away from the town . And as they had done before , they began to kill the Israelites . About thirty Israelites died in the open fields and along the roads , one leading to Bethel and the other leading back to Gibeah .

ID:	2101
INPUT:	Orain , ordea , Jerusalem hautatu dut neure bizileku eta David neure herri Israelen buruzagi ” .
PRED:	But now I have chosen Jerusalem , and I have chosen my people Israel . ”
GOLD:	But now I have chosen Jerusalem as the place for my name to be honored , and I have chosen David to be king over my people Israel . ' ”

ID:	2102
INPUT:	Aaronen seme Eleazar zen lebitarren senitarteburuen nagusi . Honek bere menpean zituen santutegiko zerbitzuaz arduratzen ziren guztiak .
PRED:	And the prince of Aaron the son of Eleazar the son of Eleazar the son of Eleazar the son of Eleazar the priest , and all the elders of the sanctuary were in his sanctuary .
GOLD:	Eleazar , son of Aaron the priest , was the chief administrator over all the Levites , with special responsibility for the oversight of the sanctuary .

ID:	2103
INPUT:	Jesusek itsuari eskutik heldu eta herritik kanpora eraman zuen . Begiak listuz igurtzi ondoren , eskuak ezarri zizkion eta galdetu : — Ikusten al duzu ezer ?
PRED:	Jesus took his hand and brought him out of the city , and took him out of the city , and laid his hands on him , and said to him , What do you see ?
GOLD:	Jesus took the blind man by the hand and led him out of the village . Then , spitting on the man 's eyes , he laid his hands on him and asked , “ Can you see anything now ? ”

ID:	2104
INPUT:	Ako , Afek eta Rehob hiriak ere hartzen zituen ; guztira hogeita bi hiri ziren , beren herrixkekin .
PRED:	And he took the cities of Hamath , the cities of Hamath , and the cities of their villages , and their villages .
GOLD:	Ummah , Aphek , and Rehob — twenty-two towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	2105
INPUT:	Errezela ere egin zuen , lihozkoa , more , gorri eta gorriminez tindatua eta bertan hegaldun izakiak bordatu zituen .
PRED:	And he burned up the altar , purple , scarlet , scarlet , scarlet , and scarlet , and scarlet , and made the cherubim .
GOLD:	Across the entrance of the Most Holy Place he hung a curtain made of fine linen , decorated with blue , purple , and scarlet thread and embroidered with figures of cherubim .

ID:	2106
INPUT:	Gudalburuak , orduan , bi ehuntariri deitu eta agindu hauek eman zizkien : « Eduki itzazue prest gaueko bederatzietarako berrehun soldadu oinezko , hirurogeita hamar zaldizko eta berrehun lantzari , Zesareara joateko .
PRED:	Then the commander called two officers , and he said to them , “ Do you want to build the night for the night of the night , and you will be ready for a hundred and fifty thousand , and a hundred and fifty thousand .
GOLD:	Then the commander called two of his officers and ordered , “ Get 200 soldiers ready to leave for Caesarea at nine o'clock tonight . Also take 200 spearmen and 70 mounted troops .

ID:	2107
INPUT:	Soldaduek ere galdetu zioten : — Eta guk , zer egin behar dugu ? Joanek erantzun zien : — Ez atera inori dirurik gogorkeriaz , ezta gezurrezko salakuntzaz ere ; konforma zaitezte daukazuen soldatarekin .
PRED:	The soldiers asked him , “ What should we do ? ” John answered them , “ Do n't let anyone go out out into an idol or false testimony . Do n't tell lies with you . ”
GOLD:	“ What should we do ? ” asked some soldiers.John replied , “ Do n't extort money or make false accusations . And be content with your pay . ”

ID:	2108
INPUT:	Hau jendea , aita madarikatueta ama bedeinkatzen ez duena !
PRED:	This is the people who do not curse their father and mother .
GOLD:	Some people curse their fatherand do not thank their mother .

ID:	2109
INPUT:	Semeek oturuntzak antolatzen zituzten txandaka beren etxeetan , eta arrebak ere gonbidatzen zituzten jan-edan haietara .
PRED:	And the sons ate the Sabbath , and they drank in their houses , and they drank , and drank .
GOLD:	Job 's sons would take turns preparing feasts in their homes , and they would also invite their three sisters to celebrate with them .

ID:	2110
INPUT:	Jauna , Jainko mendekatzaile ! Ager zaitez , oi Jainko mendekatzaile !
PRED:	O Lord God , the God of Israel , and he is the God of Israel .
GOLD:	O Lord , the God of vengeance , O God of vengeance , let your glorious justice shine forth !

ID:	2111
INPUT:	Iraun beza haren izenak betiko , eguzkiak adina ! Bedeinkatuak bitez harengan ondorengoak , zoriontsu nazio guztiak !
PRED:	May his name be established forever , and all the earth be blessed in him , and blessed all the nations .
GOLD:	May the king 's name endure forever ; may it continue as long as the sun shines.May all nations be blessed through himand bring him praise .

ID:	2112
INPUT:	Israel , erreka ondoko harri leunak , zeure kultugai izan dituzunak , horiexek izango dituzu zorigaitz . Horiei eskaini dizkiezui<unk> eta labore-opariak . Eta horrek baretu behar ote dunire haserrea ?
PRED:	You will be angry with the stones of the house of Israel , and you will serve your high places , and you will be angry with their offerings and their grain offerings , and they will not be angry .
GOLD:	Your gods are the smooth stones in the valleys.You worship them with liquid offerings and grain offerings.They , not I , are your inheritance.Do you think all this makes me happy ?

ID:	2113
INPUT:	Erregeak higuin ditu egintza gaiztoak , zuzentasunean oinarritzen baita errege-aulkia .
PRED:	The king is an abomination to the wicked , for the throne of justice is under his throne .
GOLD:	A king detests wrongdoing , for his rule is built on justice .

ID:	2114
INPUT:	Mesias omen duk hori , Israelgo erregea ; jaits dadila orain gurutzetik , ikus eta sinets dezagun » . Berarekin gurutzean josiak zeudenek ere irain egiten zioten .
PRED:	This is the Messiah , the king of Israel , that he may come down from the cross , and let him see him , and let him see him . And all the people who were with him went with him .
GOLD:	Let this Messiah , this King of Israel , come down from the cross so we can see it and believe him ! ” Even the men who were crucified with Jesus ridiculed him .

ID:	2115
INPUT:	Ez dut gehiago seme-izenik merezi . Har nazazu zeure langileetako bat bezala ” .
PRED:	I will not give birth to a son . Take me away as one of your vineyard . ”
GOLD:	and I am no longer worthy of being called your son . Please take me on as a hired servant . ” '

ID:	2116
INPUT:	Davidek galdetu zion , orduan : — Norena zara eta nongoa ? Mutilak erantzun : — Egiptoarra nauzu , amalektar baten esklaboa . Nagusiak utzi egin ninduen duela hiru egun , gaixotu egin bainintzen .
PRED:	David said to him , “ Where are you ? ” The boy answered , “ I am the servant of the Amorites , the servant of the Amorites , and he left me three days . ”
GOLD:	“ To whom do you belong , and where do you come from ? ” David asked him . “ I am an Egyptian — the slave of an Amalekite , ” he replied . “ My master abandoned me three days ago because I was sick .

ID:	2117
INPUT:	Baina Lot zintzoa onik atera zuen , jende gaizto haren biziera biziotsuak saminez betetzen zuelako .
PRED:	But the righteous brought him out of the righteous , because he was pleased with the wicked .
GOLD:	But God also rescued Lot out of Sodom because he was a righteous man who was sick of the shameful immorality of the wicked people around him .

ID:	2118
INPUT:	Davidek galdetu zion Jonatani : — Nork adieraziko dit , zuen aitak haserre erantzuten badizu ?
PRED:	David said to Jonathan , “ Who will tell you what your father will answer you ? ”
GOLD:	Then David asked , “ How will I know whether or not your father is angry ? ”

ID:	2119
INPUT:	Eliseok morroiari : — Dei egiozu . Egin zion dei eta emakumea ate ondora etorri zen .
PRED:	Elisha said to his servant , “ Call me . ” So he called the woman and came to her .
GOLD:	“ Call her back again , ” Elisha told him . When the woman returned , Elisha said to her as she stood in the doorway ,

ID:	2120
INPUT:	Orduan , herriak aho batez erantzun zuen : « Jaunak agindu guztia beteko dugu » . Herriaren erantzuna Jaunari eramatera joan zen Moises .
PRED:	Then the people answered one another , “ We will do all that the Lord commanded us to do . ” So Moses went to the Lord .
GOLD:	And all the people responded together , “ We will do everything the Lord has commanded . ” So Moses brought the people 's answer back to the Lord .

ID:	2121
INPUT:	Zuen leinuetako batean Jaunak berak aukeratuko duen lekuan bakarrik eskainiko dituzue zeuen erre-opariak , eta han beteko nik agindutako guztia .
PRED:	And you shall offer a burnt offering to the Lord , and you shall offer a burnt offering to the Lord , and you shall offer all that I have commanded you .
GOLD:	You may do so only at the place the Lord will choose within one of your tribal territories . There you must offer your burnt offerings and do everything I command you .

ID:	2122
INPUT:	Mardokeo haremeko atari aurrean ibili ohi zen egunero , Ester osasunez nola ote zegoen eta nola ote zerabilten jakin nahiz .
PRED:	And Mordecai went before the king 's gate , and they knew how Mordecai was going , and how they were gathered together .
GOLD:	Every day Mordecai would take a walk near the courtyard of the harem to find out about Esther and what was happening to her .

ID:	2123
INPUT:	Zure xedapenei jarraitzea niretzat pozgarriagoaberastasun handienak baino .
PRED:	I am glad to obey your commands than I am rich .
GOLD:	I have rejoiced in your lawsas much as in riches .

ID:	2124
INPUT:	Arriskuz inguraturik aurkitzean , babestu nire bizia etsai amorratuengandik , luzatu eskua eta salba nazazu .
PRED:	When you see me , you are my strength , you are my life , and I will save me from your enemies .
GOLD:	Though I am surrounded by troubles , you will protect me from the anger of my enemies.You reach out your hand , and the power of your right hand saves me .

ID:	2125
INPUT:	Samariara heltzean , hirian ziren Akaben gainerako ahaide guztiak hil zituen , denak suntsituz , Jaunak Eliasi esana zion bezala .
PRED:	And when they came to Samaria , they struck all the brethren of Ahab 's house , as the Lord had spoken to Elijah .
GOLD:	When Jehu arrived in Samaria , he killed everyone who was left there from Ahab 's family , just as the Lord had promised through Elijah .

ID:	2126
INPUT:	Madarikatua Jauna maite ez duena ! Marana <unk> ! ( Zatoz , Jauna ! ) .
PRED:	Blessed be the Lord , who does not love the Lord ; come , let him come .
GOLD:	If anyone does not love the Lord , that person is cursed . Our Lord , come !

ID:	2127
INPUT:	Justiziaz jantzia nengoen , zuzenbideaz estalia burutik oinetaraino .
PRED:	I walk in righteousness , and in righteousness , and in righteousness to the corners of the book .
GOLD:	Everything I did was honest.Righteousness covered me like a robe , and I wore justice like a turban .

ID:	2128
INPUT:	Justizian sendo ezarria egongo zara . Zapalkuntzatik libre izango zaraeta ez duzu ezeren beldurrik izango , ikara ez zaizu inoiz hurbilduko .
PRED:	You will be established in righteousness , and you will be saved . You will not be afraid , and you will not be afraid .
GOLD:	You will be secure under a government that is just and fair.Your enemies will stay far away.You will live in peace , and terror will not come near .

ID:	2129
INPUT:	Eskerrak eman jainkoen Jainkoari , haren maitasuna betikoa baita .
PRED:	Give thanks to God , for his mercy endures forever .
GOLD:	Give thanks to the God of gods.His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	2130
INPUT:	Erregeak , hirugarrenez , beste buruzagi bat bidali zuen , berrogeita hamar gizonekin . Hirugarren buruzagi hau ere igo zen Eliasengana ; baina , heldu zenean , belaunikatu egin zen haren aitzinean eta honela erregutu zion : — Jainkoaren gizon , utz gaitzazu bizirik , bai ni , bai zeure berrogeita hamar zerbitzariok .
PRED:	And the king sent another ruler over the third day , and he went up to Elijah . And when he came to Elijah , the prince of his father came to him , and said to him , “ You are my father . ”
GOLD:	Once more the king sent a third captain with fifty men . But this time the captain went up the hill and fell to his knees before Elijah . He pleaded with him , “ O man of God , please spare my life and the lives of these , your fifty servants .

ID:	2131
INPUT:	Utzi Jainkoari zeuen kezka guztiak , bera baita zuetaz arduratzen .
PRED:	Be careful to God , for he is the one who gives you understanding .
GOLD:	Give all your worries and cares to God , for he cares about you .

ID:	2132
INPUT:	Berak azaltzen ditugauza sakon eta gordeak ; berak ezagutzen ilunpetan dagoena , argiz inguratua baitago .
PRED:	He sees the things that are in the darkness , and the things that are in darkness : for the light is round about it .
GOLD:	He reveals deep and mysterious thingsand knows what lies hidden in darkness , though he is surrounded by light .

ID:	2133
INPUT:	Sarak , beldurturik , ukatu egin zuen , esanez : — Ez dut irribarrerik egin . — Nola ezetz ! Irri egin duzu — erantzun zion hark .
PRED:	And Sarah fear , and said , I do not go out into the inner court . And he said unto him , “ Do n't go out . ”
GOLD:	Sarah was afraid , so she denied it , saying , “ I did n't laugh . ” But the Lord said , “ No , you did laugh . ”

ID:	2134
INPUT:	Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Zeure xarmak guztiei banatu eta zeure maitale eta idolo higuingarri horiekin guztiekin prostituzioan jarduteko zeure gorputza biluztu duzulako , eta zeure seme-alabak ere horien ohorez hil dituzulako ,
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord God says : “ Because you have defiled all your idols and your abominations with all your abominations , and you have defiled your sons and your daughters , and your daughters will die .
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Because you have poured out your lust and exposed yourself in prostitution to all your lovers , and because you have worshiped detestable idols , and because you have slaughtered your children as sacrifices to your gods ,

ID:	2135
INPUT:	Orduan , agintariek inguratu eta esan zioten : — Noiz arte eduki behar gaituzu zalantzan ? Zu bazara Mesias , esaguzu argi eta garbi .
PRED:	And the Jews round about him , and said unto him , How long shall thou be the Messiah ? thou art the Messiah , and thou art the Messiah .
GOLD:	The people surrounded him and asked , “ How long are you going to keep us in suspense ? If you are the Messiah , tell us plainly . ”

ID:	2136
INPUT:	Ulertzeko gauza denak uler beza .
PRED:	He that has ears , let him hear , let him hear .
GOLD:	Anyone with ears to hear should listen and understand !

ID:	2137
INPUT:	« Onartzen ez bazaituztete eta zuen mezua entzun nahi ez , etxe edo herri hartatik ateratzean , astindu zeuen oinetako hautsa .
PRED:	“ If you do n't listen to the word , do n't listen to the word of the Lord , when you hear the word of your house or from the city , take the dust of your feet .
GOLD:	If any household or town refuses to welcome you or listen to your message , shake its dust from your feet as you leave .

ID:	2138
INPUT:	Jesus egiazko mahatsondoa
PRED:	Jesus is the Son of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus , the True Vine

ID:	2139
INPUT:	Haren haserrea une baterako , haren onginahia bizi guztirako . Arratsean negarrez bagaude ere , goizean berriro poz-oihuz .
PRED:	If we are angry with him , he will live in the morning , and we will weep again in the morning .
GOLD:	When I was prosperous , I said , “ Nothing can stop me now ! ”

ID:	2140
INPUT:	Eta zu , Judako Belen , ez zara , ez , Judako hirietan txikiena ; zuregandik aterako baita buruzagia , Israel nire herria gobernatuko duena .
PRED:	You are not in Bethlehem , nor in Judah , nor in the cities of Judah ; for you are the ruler of my people Israel , for I will judge my people Israel .
GOLD:	‘ And you , O Bethlehem in the land of Judah , are not least among the ruling cities of Judah , for a ruler will come from youwho will be the shepherd for my people Israel . ' ”

ID:	2141
INPUT:	« Hurbilarazi Aaron eta beronen semeak elkarketa-etxolara , eta garbi daitezela urez .
PRED:	“ Bring Aaron and his sons to the tent of meeting to the tent of meeting , so that they may wash water .
GOLD:	“ Present Aaron and his sons at the entrance of the Tabernacle , and wash them with water .

ID:	2142
INPUT:	Goi-agerpen guztiak zigiluz itxitako idazki baten antzeko gertatzen zaizkizue : irakurtzen dakien bati idazkia eman eta « Irakurri hau » esaten diote , eta hark « Ezin dut , zigiluz itxia baitago » erantzuten ;
PRED:	All the words of the Most High will be read in the book of the Most High . They read this book and read it to you , “ I am not able to answer . ”
GOLD:	All the future events in this vision are like a sealed book to them . When you give it to those who can read , they will say , “ We ca n't read it because it is sealed . ”

ID:	2143
INPUT:	Jesusek galdetu zien : — Norenak dira irudi eta izen hauek ?
PRED:	Jesus asked them , “ How are these things ? ”
GOLD:	he asked , “ Whose picture and title are stamped on it ? ”

ID:	2144
INPUT:	Hau diotsuegu , Jaunaren irakatsian oinarrituz : guk , Jauna etortzean bizirik gertatuko garenok , ez diegu hil direnei aurrea hartuko .
PRED:	We say to you , “ We will hear the word of the Lord , when we live , we will not die before those who die . ”
GOLD:	We tell you this directly from the Lord : We who are still living when the Lord returns will not meet him ahead of those who have died .

ID:	2145
INPUT:	Ez dut berri ona zabaltzeko lotsarik , Jainkoaren indarra baita fededun guztiak salbatzeko , juduak lehenengo , baina baita judu ez direnak ere .
PRED:	I do not want to tell the Good News about God , because all the Jews are saved , but those who do not be saved .
GOLD:	For I am not ashamed of this Good News about Christ . It is the power of God at work , saving everyone who believes — the Jew first and also the Gentile .

ID:	2146
INPUT:	Amosek erantzun zion : — Ni ez naiz profeta , ez eta profeta-taldekidea . Abeltzaina naiz eta basapiku-biltzailea .
PRED:	And he said unto him , I am not a prophet ; and I am not a prophet , and I am afraid , and I am afraid .
GOLD:	But Amos replied , “ I 'm not a professional prophet , and I was never trained to be one . I 'm just a shepherd , and I take care of sycamore-fig trees .

ID:	2147
INPUT:	Azarias , Judako errege
PRED:	King Uzziah of Judah
GOLD:	Uzziah Rules in Judah

ID:	2148
INPUT:	« Noren ikara zinen , noren beldur , niri huts egiteko , nitaz erabat ahazteko ? Luzaroegi isilik egon naizelakogaldu didazu beldurra , ezta ?
PRED:	“ Where were you afraid of me ? Do you be afraid of me ? For I have seen a long time , and you have been afraid , and I have been afraid .
GOLD:	“ Are you afraid of these idols ? Do they terrify you ? Is that why you have lied to meand forgotten me and my words ? Is it because of my long silencethat you no longer fear me ?

ID:	2149
INPUT:	Lod , Hadid eta Onokoak <unk> ;
PRED:	the sons of Elioenai , the sons of Elioenai , the sons of Shobal ,
GOLD:	The citizens of Lod , Hadid , and Ono725

ID:	2150
INPUT:	Gizasemeak
PRED:	The Son of Man
GOLD:	Young Woman

ID:	2151
INPUT:	Imerrenak 1 . 052 ;
PRED:	The sons of Pashhur , three hundred and twenty .
GOLD:	The family of Immer1,052

ID:	2152
INPUT:	Lurra baino luzeagoa da , itsasoa baino zabalagoa .
PRED:	It is better than the earth , and it is better than the sea .
GOLD:	It is broader than the earthand wider than the sea .

ID:	2153
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	2154
INPUT:	Su emango dietDamaskoko harresieieta suak Ben-Hadaden jauregiakirentsiko ditu » .
PRED:	I will send fire on the wall of Damascus , and fire shall devour the houses of Samaria . ”
GOLD:	“ And I will set fire to the walls of Damascusthat will burn up the palaces of Ben-hadad . ”

ID:	2155
INPUT:	Baina aitak , jakitean , onirizten ez badie , boto eta konpromiso haiek guztiak hutsean geldituko dira ; haietatik libre utziko du Jaunak neskatxa , aitak oniritzirik eman ez diolako .
PRED:	But if his father heard it , he will not drive out all the prophets , and all the prophets will be left in the midst of them , because the Lord has given her a young child .
GOLD:	“ Now suppose a young woman makes a vow or binds herself with an impulsive pledge and later marries .

ID:	2156
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun zuen : — Sinesmena bazenute , mostaza-hazia bezain txikia izanik ere , pikondo honi « Atera hortik eta landatu itsasoan » esango zeniokete , eta obeditu egingo lizueke .
PRED:	And the Lord said , If thou hast given a little faith , thou shalt give it to a young woman , and thou shalt say unto him , Go out out of the sea , and thou shalt say unto him , It shall be in the sea .
GOLD:	The Lord answered , “ If you had faith even as small as a mustard seed , you could say to this mulberry tree , ‘ May you be uprooted and be planted in the sea , ' and it would obey you !

ID:	2157
INPUT:	Beste hau ere erakutsi zidan Jainko Jaunak : saskia bete fruitu heldu .
PRED:	This is what the Lord God showed me : The basket of the basket has been eaten .
GOLD:	Then the Sovereign Lord showed me another vision . In it I saw a basket filled with ripe fruit .

ID:	2158
INPUT:	Bazkal orduan Boozek esan zion Ruti : « Zatoz , hartzazu ogi-puska bat , busti saltsatan eta jan » . Eseri zen , bada , Rut igitarien ondoan eta Boozek xigortutako ale eskutada bat eskaini zion . Hark asetzeraino jan zuen eta , halere , sobera geratu zitzaion .
PRED:	Then Boaz said to Boaz , “ Come , eat bread , and eat it with water , and eat it in the sea . Then Boaz went to the land of Canaan and ate it , and he ate it in his hand .
GOLD:	At mealtime Boaz called to her , “ Come over here , and help yourself to some food . You can dip your bread in the sour wine . ” So she sat with his harvesters , and Boaz gave her some roasted grain to eat . She ate all she wanted and still had some left over .

ID:	2159
INPUT:	Orduan , gaztetasunaren indarra berreskuratuko du , nerabezaroko egunetara itzuliko berriro .
PRED:	Then the strength of the young man shall be redeemed , and he shall return unto the days of his youth .
GOLD:	Then his body will become as healthy as a child 's , firm and youthful again .

ID:	2160
INPUT:	Bizi nadila luzaro zu goresteko , lagun diezadatela zure erabakiek !
PRED:	Let me live many days , that I may praise thy statutes .
GOLD:	Let me live so I can praise you , and may your regulations help me .

ID:	2161
INPUT:	Kristo Jaunarengan ongi finkaturik , eraikin osoa haziz doa , Jainkoari sagaraturiko tenplu bihurtzeraino .
PRED:	He made a covenant for the Lord Jesus Christ , and he made all his people to build the temple to be holy .
GOLD:	We are carefully joined together in him , becoming a holy temple for the Lord .

ID:	2162
INPUT:	Bildu denok eta entzun ! Zuetako norkiragarri du horrelakorik ? Nire adiskideakburutuko du nire nahia , Babilonia eta bertako jendearenaurkako erabakia .
PRED:	“ All of you , and listen to this . If anyone has heard this , my friends will be my friends , and my friends will be the way of the land of Babylon and the people of Babylon .
GOLD:	Have any of your idols ever told you this ? Come , all of you , and listen : The Lord has chosen Cyrus as his ally.He will use him to put an end to the empire of Babylonand to destroy the Babylonian armies .

ID:	2163
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Gaixoaldirako . Daviden poema .
PRED:	O God , I pray thee , O God , for thou art my God .
GOLD:	Only fools say in their hearts , “ There is no God . ” They are corrupt , and their actions are evil ; not one of them does good !

ID:	2164
INPUT:	Moisesek , Israelgo arduradunekin batera , agindu hau eman zion herriari : « Bete gaur ematen dizkizuedan agindu guztiok .
PRED:	Moses said to the elders of Israel , “ This is what I have commanded you today .
GOLD:	Then Moses and the leaders of Israel gave this charge to the people : “ Obey all these commands that I am giving you today .

ID:	2165
INPUT:	Hogeita zazpigarren urtean , lehen hilaren batean , honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	On the first day of the seventh month , on the first day of the month , the word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	On April 26 , the first day of the new year , during the twenty-seventh year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	2166
INPUT:	Elteke , Gibeton , Baalat ,
PRED:	And it shall be to pass , that they may be in Bethel , that they may be in Bethel ,
GOLD:	Eltekeh , Gibbethon , Baalath ,

ID:	2167
INPUT:	Isaiasen semea , Israelentzat ezaugarri
PRED:	Isaiah the son of Isaiah
GOLD:	The Coming Assyrian Invasion

ID:	2168
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Zuetako zeinek , ardi bakarra eduki eta larunbatez zulora erortzen bazaio , ez du hartu eta aterako ?
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Who of you are one sheep and put them on the Sabbath day , and do n't take him away ? ”
GOLD:	And he answered , “ If you had a sheep that fell into a well on the Sabbath , would n't you work to pull it out ? Of course you would .

ID:	2169
INPUT:	Altxa , munduaren epaile hori , emaiezu harroei merezi dutena !
PRED:	Go up , judge the judge of the earth , and give them the stones .
GOLD:	Arise , O Judge of the earth.Give the proud what they deserve .

ID:	2170
INPUT:	Hananiasen seme Jehu profetak , ordea , bidera irten eta esan zion : « Gaiztoari laguntzen eta Jaunaren etsaia adiskidetzat hartzen , ala ? Hori egin duzulako , haserre duzu Jauna .
PRED:	But Jeremiah the prophet went out and said to him , “ Do you want to help the wicked and help the Lord 's enemies ? You have done this because you have done this .
GOLD:	Jehu son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him . “ Why should you help the wicked and love those who hate the Lord ? ” he asked the king . “ Because of what you have done , the Lord is very angry with you .

ID:	2171
INPUT:	Berak behar zituen handikiak eskolatueta kontseilariei jakinduria irakatsi .
PRED:	He taught the elders and the elders of the elders and the elders of the elders .
GOLD:	He could instruct the king 's aides as he pleasedand teach the king 's advisers .

ID:	2172
INPUT:	Jerusalemgo fededunentzat egin beharreko diru-bilketari dagokionez , egin zuek ere Galaziako eliz elkarteei agindu niena .
PRED:	As for those who are in Jerusalem , I commanded you to do to those who are in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Now regarding your question about the money being collected for God 's people in Jerusalem . You should follow the same procedure I gave to the churches in Galatia .

ID:	2173
INPUT:	Izan ere , kezka gehiegikamesgaiztoa dakar , eta hitz-jarioakzoro-berriketak egitea .
PRED:	For the tongue of the wicked , and the tongue of the mouth of the mouth of the mouth .
GOLD:	Do n't make rash promises , and do n't be hasty in bringing matters before God . After all , God is in heaven , and you are here on earth . So let your words be few .

ID:	2174
INPUT:	Jonasek Jaunaren errukiaren berri ikasi
PRED:	Joseph 's People
GOLD:	Jonah 's Anger at the

ID:	2175
INPUT:	Hilabete batean hiru artzain kendu nituen ; baina haserretu egin nintzen ardien kontra , eta beraiek ere aspertu egin ziren nitaz .
PRED:	And I took them away from me three months , but I was angry with the sheep , and I was angry with them .
GOLD:	I got rid of their three evil shepherds in a single month.But I became impatient with these sheep , and they hated me , too .

ID:	2176
INPUT:	« Madarikatua jaio nintzeneko egunaeta “ Ume bat sortu da ” esan zuteneko gaua !
PRED:	“ Blessed is the day when I was born , and said to them , ‘ A son has a son . '
GOLD:	“ Let the day of my birth be erased , and the night I was conceived .

ID:	2177
INPUT:	Gerrikoa gizonaren gerriari lotzen zaion bezala nahi izan nituen Juda eta Israel herriak niri lotu , nire herri izan zitezen , nire ospe eta ohore ; baina ezentzun egin zidaten » .
PRED:	I wanted to be ashamed of the men of Judah and Judah , and Israel , because they were my glory and glory , but they heard me .
GOLD:	As a loincloth clings to a man 's waist , so I created Judah and Israel to cling to me , says the Lord . They were to be my people , my pride , my glory — an honor to my name . But they would not listen to me .

ID:	2178
INPUT:	Daviden azken hitzak
PRED:	David 's Death
GOLD:	David 's Last Words

ID:	2179
INPUT:	Israeldar guztiek , sua jaitsi eta Jaunaren aintzak tenplua betetzen zuela ikustean , lurreraino makurturik , Jauna adoratu eta goretsi zuten , esanez : « Ona baita , haren maitasuna betikoa baita » .
PRED:	When all the Israelites saw that the glory of the Lord was filled with the glory of the Lord , they bowed down to the earth , and worshiped the Lord , and said , “ His love is eternal . ”
GOLD:	When all the people of Israel saw the fire coming down and the glorious presence of the Lord filling the Temple , they fell face down on the ground and worshiped and praised the Lord , saying , “ He is good ! His faithful love endures forever ! ”

ID:	2180
INPUT:	Ez beza inork bere burua engaina ! Zuetako norbaitek mundu honen arabera jakintsu dela uste badu , egin bedi zoro , egiaz jakintsu izateko .
PRED:	Let no one deceive himself . If any man is wise , let him know that he is wise in this world , let him know that he is wise .
GOLD:	Stop deceiving yourselves . If you think you are wise by this world 's standards , you need to become a fool to be truly wise .

ID:	2181
INPUT:	Galdetu zion Jonadabek Amnoni : — Zer duzu , errege-seme horrek , egunean baino egunean makalago egoteko ? Ez al didazu esan behar ? Amnonek erantzun zion : — Gure anaia Absalomen arreba Tamarrez maitemindurik nago .
PRED:	Then Joab said to Amnon , “ What do you want to do for the king 's son ? ” Amnon answered , “ Do n't you say to me , ‘ My brother Absalom is better than my brother Absalom ? '
GOLD:	One day Jonadab said to Amnon , “ What 's the trouble ? Why should the son of a king look so dejected morning after morning ? ” So Amnon told him , “ I am in love with Tamar , my brother Absalom 's sister . ”

ID:	2182
INPUT:	Abiatar apaizari esan zion erregeak : « Alde hemendik Anatotera , zeure lurretara . Heriotza merezi duzu zuk ere , baina ez zaitut hilko , gure aita Daviden aurrean Jainko Jaunaren kutxa eraman izan duzulako , eta berak jasan zituen nekeak zuk ere jasan izan dituzulako » .
PRED:	Then the king said to the priest , “ Get away from here to your land . You have killed the death of the Lord our father David , but you will not die before the Lord our God , because you have seen the ark of the Lord our God . ”
GOLD:	Then the king said to Abiathar the priest , “ Go back to your home in Anathoth . You deserve to die , but I will not kill you now , because you carried the Ark of the Sovereign Lord for David my father and you shared all his hardships . ”

ID:	2183
INPUT:	Egun hartan , hala ere , harri astun bihurtuko dut Jerusalem herri guztientzat : jasotzen ahalegintzen dena , zauritu egingo da . Lurreko herri guztiak bilduko dira Jerusalemen aurka .
PRED:	In that day I will make Jerusalem a great stone for all the nations , and all the nations will be gathered together against Jerusalem .
GOLD:	On that day I will make Jerusalem an immovable rock . All the nations will gather against it to try to move it , but they will only hurt themselves .

ID:	2184
INPUT:	Jauna gure alde izan ez balitz , etsaiek eraso zigutenean ,
PRED:	For if the Lord was not for us , when our enemies fought against us ,
GOLD:	What if the Lord had not been on our sidewhen people attacked us ?

ID:	2185
INPUT:	Barauari buruzko galdera : ospakizunak eta zuzentasuna
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	A Call to Justice and Mercy

ID:	2186
INPUT:	Zorobabel , Josue , Nehemias , Seraias , Reelaias , Mardokeo , Bilxan , Mispar , Bigbai , Rehum eta Baana zituzten gidari . Hona israeldar hauen zerrenda :
PRED:	These are the names of the sons of Israel : Jeshua , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , and Jozabad , these are the names of the sons of Israel :
GOLD:	Their leaders were Zerubbabel , Jeshua , Nehemiah , Seraiah , Reelaiah , Mordecai , Bilshan , Mispar , Bigvai , Rehum , and Baanah.This is the number of the men of Israel who returned from exile :

ID:	2187
INPUT:	Nabal hila zela aditu zuelarik , esan zuen Davidek : « Bedeinkatua Jauna ! Nire alde jokatu baitu Nabalek egin zidan irainaren aurrean . Okerra egitea galarazi dit ; Nabali , berriz , gainera bota dio Jaunak bere gaiztakeria » . Ondoren , mandatariak igorri zizkion Davidek Abigaili , emaztetzat hartu nahi zuela adieraziz .
PRED:	When David heard that he was dead , he said to him , “ Blessed be the Lord , for he has sinned before me , because he has sinned against me , and has done evil in my sight . But he sent him to his wife . ”
GOLD:	When David heard that Nabal was dead , he said , “ Praise the Lord , who has avenged the insult I received from Nabal and has kept me from doing it myself . Nabal has received the punishment for his sin . ” Then David sent messengers to Abigail to ask her to become his wife .

ID:	2188
INPUT:	Hona , beraz , zenbat gizaldi guztira : Abrahamengandik Davidengana hamalau ; Davidengandik Babiloniako erbestealdira beste hamalau , eta Babiloniako erbestealditik Mesiasengana beste hamalau .
PRED:	And this is the generation of all the horses : for Abraham had come to David , and from him four times , and from the other side of David , and from the other side of the captivity of the captivity of Babylon .
GOLD:	All those listed above include fourteen generations from Abraham to David , fourteen from David to the Babylonian exile , and fourteen from the Babylonian exile to the Messiah .

ID:	2189
INPUT:	Urrun zaitez burugabeagandik , ez duzu haren hitzetan jakintzarik aurkituko .
PRED:	Turn away from the fool , and you will find no knowledge in his word .
GOLD:	Stay away from fools , for you wo n't find knowledge on their lips .

ID:	2190
INPUT:	Zertan hil behar duzue zuk eta zure herriak gerraz , gosez eta izurriz ? Izan ere , Jaunak erabakia du hori gertatuko zaiola Babiloniako erregearen menpeko izatea onartzen ez duen nazioari .
PRED:	Why do you want to kill your people ? For the Lord has shown you what will happen to the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	Why do you insist on dying — you and your people ? Why should you choose war , famine , and disease , which the Lord will bring against every nation that refuses to submit to Babylon 's king ?

ID:	2191
INPUT:	Entzun zuen Hadadek David eta honen gudalburu Joab hilak zirela eta esan zion faraoiari : — Uztazu neure herrira joaten .
PRED:	When David heard that Joab and his army were dead , he said to Pharaoh , “ Let me go to my people . ”
GOLD:	When the news reached Hadad in Egypt that David and his commander Joab were both dead , he said to Pharaoh , “ Let me return to my own country . ”

ID:	2192
INPUT:	« Zoritxarrekoa zu , egur-puska bati : “ Esna zaitez ! ” eta harri mutuari : “ Jaiki ! ” esaten diezun hori ! Agertuko ote dizute horiekmezurik ? Urrez eta zilarrezjantziak daude , bai , baina beren baitan ez dutebizi-arnasarik .
PRED:	“ Woe to you , O Lord ! ” and say to the elders , “ Get up ! ” They say to you , “ Get up ! They will tell you , ‘ Get up , and they will not live among them , but they will not live .
GOLD:	What sorrow awaits you who say to wooden idols , ‘ Wake up and save us ! 'To speechless stone images you say , ‘ Rise up and teach us ! 'Can an idol tell you what to do ? They may be overlaid with gold and silver , but they are lifeless inside .

ID:	2193
INPUT:	( 2 Kro 25 , 1-4 . <unk> . <unk> ; 26 , 1-2 )
PRED:	The King of Judah
GOLD:	Jeroboam II Rules in Israel

ID:	2194
INPUT:	Ninivera joan zen Jonas , Jaunak agindu bezala . Ninive hiria izugarri handia zen ; hiru egun behar ziren alde batetik bestera zeharkatzeko .
PRED:	And he went to the land of Nineveh , as the Lord had commanded : and the great city was great , and it was great for three days .
GOLD:	This time Jonah obeyed the Lord 's command and went to Nineveh , a city so large that it took three days to see it all .

ID:	2195
INPUT:	Orduan , agindu zuen : — Bete urez lau ontzi eta isuri erre-oparigai eta egurraren gainera . Eta gero : — Berriz ere bai ! Halaxe egin zuten berriro ere . Gero , esan zuen : — Hirugarren aldiz ! Eta hirugarren aldiz egin zuten .
PRED:	And he said to them , “ Let them take four loaves of water , and put them on the altar , and on the altar . ” And they said , “ The third time . ” And he said , “ The third time . ”
GOLD:	After they had done this , he said , “ Do the same thing again ! ” And when they were finished , he said , “ Now do it a third time ! ” So they did as he said ,

ID:	2196
INPUT:	Abraham ( 12 , 1 — 23 , 20 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Abram and Sarai in Egypt

ID:	2197
INPUT:	Aurre egiten die ausartenei , bera da basapiztia guztien errege » .
PRED:	He is the king of all the earth , and he is the king of all the earth . ”
GOLD:	No sword can stop it , no spear , dart , or javelin .

ID:	2198
INPUT:	Jerusalemera iritsi ziren . Jesus tenpluan zebilela , apaizburuak , lege-maisuak eta zaharrak hurbildu zitzaizkion ,
PRED:	And they came to Jerusalem . And when Jesus was in the temple , the chief priests and the scribes came near to him ,
GOLD:	Again they entered Jerusalem . As Jesus was walking through the Temple area , the leading priests , the teachers of religious law , and the elders came up to him .

ID:	2199
INPUT:	Ibar lehorra igarotzean , iturburutik edaten dute : lehen euriek ur-begiz baitute estaltzen .
PRED:	When they go through the water , they drink from the waters ; for the waters of the waters are filled with water .
GOLD:	They will continue to grow stronger , and each of them will appear before God in Jerusalem .

ID:	2200
INPUT:	Horregatik , erne egon zara guri zoritxar hau bidaltzeko . Izan ere , zu , Jauna , gure Jainkoa , zuzena zara egiten duzun guztian ; baina guk entzungor egin diogu zure esanari .
PRED:	Therefore , therefore , O Lord our God , for thou hast heard all these evil things that thou hast done in all that thou hast done , and hast heard thy voice .
GOLD:	Therefore , the Lord has brought upon us the disaster he prepared . The Lord our God was right to do all of these things , for we did not obey him .

ID:	2201
INPUT:	Biharamunean goizean goiz jaiki eta begiraldia egin zion Josuek gudarosteari ; gero , Israelgo arduradunekin batera gudarostearen buruan jarri eta Ai hiriari erasotzera abiatu zen .
PRED:	And Joshua rose early early in the morning , and looked at the next morning , and set up his face against the elders of Israel , and went up to fight against Ai .
GOLD:	Early the next morning Joshua roused his men and started toward Ai , accompanied by the elders of Israel .

ID:	2202
INPUT:	Begira , berak hedatu du zeruan argia , berak ezkutatu itsasoaren oinarriak .
PRED:	He looked at the light of the heavens , and the foundation of the sea is unclean .
GOLD:	See how he spreads the lightning around himand how it lights up the depths of the sea .

ID:	2203
INPUT:	Ehun eta bost urte zituela , Setek Enox izan zuen .
PRED:	And Lamech was five hundred and five years old when he became the father of Lamech .
GOLD:	When Seth was 105 years old , he became the father of Enosh .

ID:	2204
INPUT:	Sasiirakasleak
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Instructions

ID:	2205
INPUT:	Gizaseme eta emakume egin zituen , bedeinkatu eta « gizaki » eman zien izen egin zituen egun berean .
PRED:	And he blessed men and women , and blessed them in the same day . And he called them the same day .
GOLD:	He created them male and female , and he blessed them and called them “ human . ”

ID:	2206
INPUT:	beste batzuek isekak eta zigorrak , kateak eta kartzelak jasan zituzten ;
PRED:	Some of them returned and beat them . They told them what they had done .
GOLD:	Some were jeered at , and their backs were cut open with whips . Others were chained in prisons .

ID:	2207
INPUT:	Itxura txarreko eta argal hauek irentsi egin zituzten beste eder eta guri haiek . Une horretan , esnatu egin zen faraoia .
PRED:	And the king struck down the birds of the land of Egypt , and all his servants , and all his servants , and they struck them in that day .
GOLD:	Then the scrawny , thin cows ate the seven healthy , fat cows ! At this point in the dream , Pharaoh woke up .

ID:	2208
INPUT:	Gero , honela mintzatu zitzaizkien gudari-tokiko gizonak Jonatani eta ezkutariari : — Igo guregana ; gauzatxo bat erakutsiko dizuegu . Jonatanek esan zion ezkutariari : — Igo nire atzetik . Israelen esku utzi ditu horiek Jaunak .
PRED:	Then the men of the army said to Jonathan , “ Go up to us , and we will teach you a few things . ” Jonathan said to him , “ We will teach you a few things . The Lord has delivered them out of my hand . ”
GOLD:	Then the men from the outpost shouted to Jonathan , “ Come on up here , and we 'll teach you a lesson ! ” “ Come on , climb right behind me , ” Jonathan said to his armor bearer , “ for the Lord will help us defeat them ! ”

ID:	2209
INPUT:	Denbora asko generaman ezer jan gabe . Paulok erdian zutik jarri eta esan zuen : « Adiskideok , hobe nire esana egin bazenute eta Kretatik atera ez bagina : hartara ez genituzkeen kalte eta galera hauek izango .
PRED:	And when Paul had taken nothing , he stood in the midst of the ship , and said , My friends , you have kept my voice , and you have not kept my voice , and we have not gone out of Macedonia .
GOLD:	No one had eaten for a long time . Finally , Paul called the crew together and said , “ Men , you should have listened to me in the first place and not left Crete . You would have avoided all this damage and loss .

ID:	2210
INPUT:	Hark erantzun zion : “ Ez dut nahi ” ; baina handik berehala damutu eta joan egin zen .
PRED:	And he said unto him , I will not do . And he went out from there , and went .
GOLD:	The son answered , ‘ No , I wo n't go , ' but later he changed his mind and went anyway .

ID:	2211
INPUT:	Jonatan Daviden alde
PRED:	Jonathan and David
GOLD:	Saul Tries to Kill David

ID:	2212
INPUT:	Irakaspenari jaramon egiten dionak izango du arrakastarik . Zorionekoa Jaunarengan uste ona duena !
PRED:	Those who obey the teaching will be taught . Blessed are those who trust in the Lord .
GOLD:	Those who listen to instruction will prosper ; those who trust the Lord will be joyful .

ID:	2213
INPUT:	Hartu gogoan ez duzuela zeuen buruak nola defendatuko kezkatan egon beharrik :
PRED:	Remember that you do n't know how you are going to judge yourselves .
GOLD:	So do n't worry in advance about how to answer the charges against you ,

ID:	2214
INPUT:	usteldu egingo zaio erraietan , sugegorriaren pozoi bihurtuko .
PRED:	He shall be in his kingdom , and his tongue shall be made known in his mouth .
GOLD:	But suddenly the food in their bellies turns sour , a poisonous venom in their stomach .

ID:	2215
INPUT:	Legea betetzen duena seme zentzuduna da , jende galduarekin dabilena aitaren lotsa .
PRED:	A man who does the law is a wise son , but a fool who is a fool .
GOLD:	Young people who obey the law are wise ; those with wild friends bring shame to their parents .

ID:	2216
INPUT:	Susa hirian aldarrikatua zegoen suntsitze-aginduaren kopia ere eman zion , Esterri erakutsi eta berri emateko ; gainera , agindu hau eman zion Esterri : joan zedila erregeagana , beronen onginahia eskuratu eta bere herritarren alde egiteko .
PRED:	And the Spirit of the king commanded Esther to destroy the city , and to tell Esther , and to bring it to Esther , and to bring it to the king , saying , “ Go to the king and to his own land . ”
GOLD:	Mordecai gave Hathach a copy of the decree issued in Susa that called for the death of all Jews . He asked Hathach to show it to Esther and explain the situation to her . He also asked Hathach to direct her to go to the king to beg for mercy and plead for her people .

ID:	2217
INPUT:	Jetro poztu egin zen , egiptoarren eskuetatik libratuz Jainkoak israeldarrei egin zien on guztiarengatik ,
PRED:	And it was glad because of all that God delivered Israel out of the hand of the Egyptians , that God delivered them out of the hand of the Egyptians .
GOLD:	Jethro was delighted when he heard about all the good things the Lord had done for Israel as he rescued them from the hand of the Egyptians .

ID:	2218
INPUT:	Ez ! Zuek maitatu etsaiak , egin ongi eta eman maileguz ordainari begiratu gabe : handia izango da zuen saria eta Goi-goikoaren seme-alaba izango zarete , ona baita bera esker txarreko eta gaiztoentzat .
PRED:	Do n't love your enemies , and do n't pay them what is right . You will be your children , and you will be your children . You will be your children , and you will be your children .
GOLD:	“ Love your enemies ! Do good to them . Lend to them without expecting to be repaid . Then your reward from heaven will be very great , and you will truly be acting as children of the Most High , for he is kind to those who are unthankful and wicked .

ID:	2219
INPUT:	Izan ere , agertu da Jainkoaren onginahia , gizon-emakume guztientzat salbagarri .
PRED:	For the grace of God appeared to all men , to all men .
GOLD:	For the grace of God has been revealed , bringing salvation to all people .

ID:	2220
INPUT:	« Sar zaitezte ate estutik »
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The Tree and Its Fruit

ID:	2221
INPUT:	Egitasmoak aholkuen bidez sendotzen dira , gerra estrategia egokiaz egiten .
PRED:	The counsel of a wise man is made known by knowledge , and the counsel of a man shall be revealed to him .
GOLD:	Plans succeed through good counsel ; do n't go to war without wise advice .

ID:	2222
INPUT:	Eta hori , Tzin basamortuan israeldar elkarteak aurpegi eman zidanean , nire agindua zalantzan jarri zenutelako : ez zenidaten utzi neure santutasuna israeldarren aurrean agertzen , ura sorraraziz » ( Tzin basamortuan , Kadexen dagoen Meribako iturrian gertatua aipatzen da hemen ) .
PRED:	And when the children of Israel set their face against me in the wilderness , you did not keep my commandments in the wilderness of Kadesh , because you did not leave my holy name in the wilderness of Kadesh , in the wilderness of Canaan , in the wilderness of Canaan .
GOLD:	for you both rebelled against my instructions in the wilderness of Zin . When the people of Israel rebelled , you failed to demonstrate my holiness to them at the waters . ” ( These are the waters of Meribah at Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin . )

ID:	2223
INPUT:	egokiak dira heldugabeei zuhurtasuna emateko , gazteei ezaguera eta bereizmena ;
PRED:	A wise man has come to the wise , and to the young men , and to the young men .
GOLD:	These proverbs will give insight to the simple , knowledge and discernment to the young .

ID:	2224
INPUT:	Zigor-eguna
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The Desolation of Israel

ID:	2225
INPUT:	Ebed-Melek zeritzan errege-jauregiko goi-funtzionario etiopiarrak jakin zuen Jeremias putzura bota zutela . Erregea lege-arazoak erabakitzen Benjaminen atean zegoela ,
PRED:	When Jeremiah heard that Jeremiah was in the palace of the king 's palace , the officials of the king 's palace heard that Jeremiah was lying in the palace of Benjamin .
GOLD:	But Ebed-melech the Ethiopian , an important court official , heard that Jeremiah was in the cistern . At that time the king was holding court at the Benjamin Gate ,

ID:	2226
INPUT:	Israeldarren artean biziko naiz eta Jainko izango naute .
PRED:	I will live among the sons of Israel , and they will be God .
GOLD:	Then I will live among the people of Israel and be their God ,

ID:	2227
INPUT:	« Bete ezazue gaur agintzen dizuedana , eta neuk botako ditut zuen aurretik amortar , kanaandar , hitita , periztar , hibiar eta jebustarrak .
PRED:	“ You must do what I command you today , and I will drive them out before you , the Amorites , the Amorites , the Amorites , the Amorites , the Amorites , the Amorites , and the Amorites .
GOLD:	But listen carefully to everything I command you today . Then I will go ahead of you and drive out the Amorites , Canaanites , Hittites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites .

ID:	2228
INPUT:	Baina nik agindu gabeko mezua nire izenean adierazten edota jainko arrotzen izenean hitz egiten ausartzen den profeta hil egingo dute ” .
PRED:	But say to them , “ This is what I command you to say , ‘ The prophet who speaks in my name will die . ' ”
GOLD:	But any prophet who falsely claims to speak in my name or who speaks in the name of another god must die . '

ID:	2229
INPUT:	Purpurazko jantzia ipini zioten soinean eta arantzaz egindako koroa buruan .
PRED:	And they put a blue cloth cloth , and put it on the head of the ephod , and on the head of the ephod .
GOLD:	They dressed him in a purple robe , and they wove thorn branches into a crown and put it on his head .

ID:	2230
INPUT:	Zuk limosna egitean , ez beza jakin zure ezkerrak zer egiten duen eskuinak ;
PRED:	When you give your money , you will not know what you do .
GOLD:	But when you give to someone in need , do n't let your left hand know what your right hand is doing .

ID:	2231
INPUT:	Ezekiasek tenplua garbitu eta konpondu
PRED:	Hezekiah Complains the Temple
GOLD:	The Temple Rededication

ID:	2232
INPUT:	Behi argal eta eskas hauek , ordea , lehengo zazpi behi guriak irentsi zituzten .
PRED:	But they took the cattle and the cattle , and the seven rams , and the seven rams , and the seven rams .
GOLD:	These thin , scrawny cows ate the seven fat cows .

ID:	2233
INPUT:	Jainko gure Aitak eta Jesu Kristo Jaunak eman biezazkizuete grazia eta bakea .
PRED:	Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace .

ID:	2234
INPUT:	« Ez zapaldu etorkina , ongi dakizue-eta zer den etorkin izatea , zeuek ere etorkin izan baitzarete Egipton .
PRED:	“ Do n't let anyone come to you , and you will know what will happen to you . You will be with you in Egypt .
GOLD:	“ You must not oppress foreigners . You know what it 's like to be a foreigner , for you yourselves were once foreigners in the land of Egypt .

ID:	2235
INPUT:	Eman berariberak besteei emandako tratua , ordaindu berari berak egin halako bi ; emaiozue edaten ontzian , berak besteei edanarazi halako bi .
PRED:	And thou shalt bring the same thing to the other , for he hath done to the other ; for he hath given to the other two ; and thou shalt give them the same thing .
GOLD:	Do to her as she has done to others.Double her penalty for all her evil deeds.She brewed a cup of terror for others , so brew twice as much for her .

ID:	2236
INPUT:	Behar duena baldin badaukazu , ez esan inori : « Zoaz eta itzuli , bihar emango dizut » .
PRED:	If you do this , do n't say to anyone , “ Go back , and I will give you back . ”
GOLD:	If you can help your neighbor now , do n't say , “ Come back tomorrow , and then I 'll help you . ”

ID:	2237
INPUT:	Jobek erantzun : — Txoroak bezala hitz egiten duzu . Zoriona Jaunaren dohaintzat hartzen dugu . Eta zoritxarra , zergatik ez ? Halaz guztiz , Jobek ez zuen bere ahoaz bekatu egin .
PRED:	And Joab said to him , “ You speak as a young man . Blessed is the Lord 's blood , and why do you sin ? ” But Job did not sin .
GOLD:	But Job replied , “ You talk like a foolish woman . Should we accept only good things from the hand of God and never anything bad ? ” So in all this , Job said nothing wrong .

ID:	2238
INPUT:	Egiptoko lehen-seme guztiak jo zituen , haien gizontasunaren lehen fruituak .
PRED:	He struck all the firstborn of the land of Egypt , and all the firstborn of men .
GOLD:	Then he killed the oldest son in each Egyptian home , the pride and joy of each family .

ID:	2239
INPUT:	Horrela , bada , sinesmenetik bizi direnek hartzen dute bedeinkazioa Abraham sinestedunarekin batera .
PRED:	So then the blessing of those who live in faith will be blessed with Abraham .
GOLD:	So all who put their faith in Christ share the same blessing Abraham received because of his faith .

ID:	2240
INPUT:	Orduan , alde egin zuen Tamarrek . Estaltzen zuen zapia kendu eta alargun-soinekoak jantzi zituen berriro .
PRED:	Then Tamar left her . Then she took the Spirit from her , and put on her clothes .
GOLD:	Afterward she went back home , took off her veil , and put on her widow 's clothing as usual .

ID:	2241
INPUT:	Dor eskualdean dagoen Dorkoa , Gilgal ondoko Goimgoa
PRED:	King Nebuchadnezzar of Judah , king of Judah , king of Judah ,
GOLD:	The king of Dor in the town of Naphoth-dorThe king of Goyim in Gilgal

ID:	2242
INPUT:	Ibaien aurka al zaude , Jauna , ibaien aurka al zaude haserre , itsasoaren aurka sumindua , zeure zaldien gainean eseria , gurdien gainean garaile zoazela ?
PRED:	For you are angry against the sea , but you are angry with the sea , and you are angry with the sea , and you have sat on the horses .
GOLD:	Was it in anger , Lord , that you struck the riversand parted the sea ? Were you displeased with them ? No , you were sending your chariots of salvation !

ID:	2243
INPUT:	lagunari ordain txarra emaneta etsai zuzengabeari barkatu badiot ,
PRED:	If I have forgiven my friend , and I have forgiven the cause of fools ,
GOLD:	then let my enemies capture me.Let them trample me into the groundand drag my honor in the dust.Interlude

ID:	2244
INPUT:	Trata itzazu haien handikiak Oreb eta Zeeb bezala , haien buruzagiak Zebah eta Tzalmuna bezala .
PRED:	And thou hast made their princes , as thou hast done unto them , and Midian , and Midian , and Midian .
GOLD:	for they said , “ Let us seize for our own usethese pasturelands of God ! ”

ID:	2245
INPUT:	Erregetza mirarien bidez agertua ( 8 , 1 — 9 , 34 )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Man with Leprosy

ID:	2246
INPUT:	Azarias apaiz nagusiak eta beste apaiz guztiek , bekokian legena zuela ikustean , bizkor irtenarazi zuten handik , eta bera ere arrapaladan joan zen , Jaunak joa zegoelako .
PRED:	When Azariah the priest and all the other priests saw that all the priests had kept the law , they ran out from there , because the Lord was with him .
GOLD:	When Azariah the high priest and all the other priests saw the leprosy , they rushed him out . And the king himself was eager to get out because the Lord had struck him .

ID:	2247
INPUT:	Jesus sinagogatik atera eta Simonen eta Andresen etxera joan zen zuzenean , Santiago eta Joanekin .
PRED:	And when Jesus went out of the synagogue , he went into the synagogue , Simon , and Simon , and John , and John , and John .
GOLD:	After Jesus left the synagogue with James and John , they went to Simon and Andrew 's home .

ID:	2248
INPUT:	Jesus heriotzara kondenatua
PRED:	Jesus Heals to Jesus
GOLD:	The Crucifixion

ID:	2249
INPUT:	Galdu itxurak eginez , Josuek eta israeldarrek ihes egin zuten basamorturantz .
PRED:	And Joshua asked , and the children of Israel fled into the wilderness .
GOLD:	Joshua and the Israelite army fled toward the wilderness as though they were badly beaten .

ID:	2250
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun : — Baldin berrogeita hamar errugabe aurkitzen baditut , haiengatik hiri osoari barkatuko diot .
PRED:	And the Lord said unto him , If I find thirty men , I will forgive them for their sins , and I will forgive them .
GOLD:	And the Lord replied , “ If I find fifty righteous people in Sodom , I will spare the entire city for their sake . ”

ID:	2251
INPUT:	arnasa hartzen ere ez dit uzteneta saminez asebetetzen nau .
PRED:	My spirit is filled with me , and my spirit is filled with pain .
GOLD:	He will not let me catch my breath , but fills me instead with bitter sorrows .

ID:	2252
INPUT:	Beste behin , Jesus sinagogara joan zen . Bazen han besoa elbarri zeukan gizon bat .
PRED:	And he went into the synagogue . And there was a man who was in the synagogue .
GOLD:	Jesus went into the synagogue again and noticed a man with a deformed hand .

ID:	2253
INPUT:	Jaunak apartatu egingo du Israelgo leinu guztietatik , bere zoritxarrerako , legearen liburu honetan idatzitako madarikazioen arabera .
PRED:	And the Lord shall turn away from all the tribes of Israel , from all the tribes of Israel , and on the curse of the law , which is written in the book of the law .
GOLD:	The Lord will never pardon such people . Instead his anger and jealousy will burn against them . All the curses written in this book will come down on them , and the Lord will erase their names from under heaven .

ID:	2254
INPUT:	Baina atzera egin zuten gero , eta libre utzitako esklaboak , gizonezko nahiz emakumezko , berreskuratu egin zituzten , berriro esklabo-lanetara behartuz .
PRED:	And they turned away , and left the slaves , and the slaves , and the women , and the women , and the slaves , and brought them back to their slaves .
GOLD:	but later they changed their minds . They took back the men and women they had freed , forcing them to be slaves again .

ID:	2255
INPUT:	Samuelen heriotza
PRED:	Samuel 's death
GOLD:	The Death of Samuel

ID:	2256
INPUT:	Hil zen Rakel , eta Efratara , hots , Belenera , bidean ehortzi zuten .
PRED:	Rachel died and was buried in Bethel , and they buried him in the road .
GOLD:	So Rachel died and was buried on the way to Ephrath ( that is , Bethlehem ) .

ID:	2257
INPUT:	Erruki nitaz , ene Jainko , erruki nitaz , zuregan dut babesa eta ; zure hegalen itzalpean babesten naiz , ezbeharra igaro artean .
PRED:	I have mercy on you , O God , for I have mercy on you , and I will not be put to shame .
GOLD:	I cry out to God Most High , to God who will fulfill his purpose for me .

ID:	2258
INPUT:	Haien lurraldea Arnon erreka ondoko Aroer hiritik Sirion edo Hermon mendiraino hedatzen zen ,
PRED:	And their land was from the Arnon of the Arnon of the Arnon , and from Mount Zion to Mount Zion .
GOLD:	So Israel conquered the entire area from Aroer at the edge of the Arnon Gorge all the way to Mount Sirion , also called Mount Hermon .

ID:	2259
INPUT:	Hobe da jakinduria indarra baino , diot nik ; behartsuaren jakinduria , ordea , arbuiatu egin ohi daeta ez dira haren hitzak aditzen .
PRED:	It is better to be better than I am . But wisdom is better than the poor , but they do not obey his words .
GOLD:	So even though wisdom is better than strength , those who are wise will be despised if they are poor . What they say will not be appreciated for long .

ID:	2260
INPUT:	Orduan , nagusiaren emazteak soinekotik heldu eta esan zion : « Zatoz nirekin ! » Baina Josek soinekoa haren eskuetan utzi eta ihes egin zuen etxetik .
PRED:	Then his master 's wife came and said to him , “ Come with me ! ” But Joseph left his clothes and fled from his house .
GOLD:	She came and grabbed him by his cloak , demanding , “ Come on , sleep with me ! ” Joseph tore himself away , but he left his cloak in her hand as he ran from the house .

ID:	2261
INPUT:	Bai , badut aldeko lekukorik zeruan , badut defendatzailerik goian ,
PRED:	I will stand in heaven , in the morning , and in the morning I will judge the cause of judgment .
GOLD:	Even now my witness is in heaven.My advocate is there on high .

ID:	2262
INPUT:	AZKEN AGURRAK ( 15 , 14 — 16 , 27 )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Paul 's Travel Plans

ID:	2263
INPUT:	Gaitz galgarriz , sukarrez eta hanpaduraz joko zaituzte ; lehortez , haize errez eta gorrinez hondatuko dizkizue uztak : ez du etsiko zuek desagerrarazi arte .
PRED:	You will be filled with fire , and you will be filled with fire , and you will destroy you with the wind , and you will not be destroyed until you have destroyed .
GOLD:	The Lord will strike you with wasting diseases , fever , and inflammation , with scorching heat and drought , and with blight and mildew . These disasters will pursue you until you die .

ID:	2264
INPUT:	« Bai , neure begiek ikusi dute hori dena , neure belarriek entzun dute , eta ulertzen dut .
PRED:	Behold , my eyes have seen all these things , and my ears have heard them , and I understand .
GOLD:	“ Look , I have seen all this with my own eyesand heard it with my own ears , and now I understand .

ID:	2265
INPUT:	Beraz , alferrik gorde dut bihotza garbieta errugabe naizela agertzeko eskuak garbitu ,
PRED:	So I can not wash my heart in vain , and that I have washed my hands ,
GOLD:	Did I keep my heart pure for nothing ? Did I keep myself innocent for no reason ?

ID:	2266
INPUT:	Neure Aitaren ondoan ikusi dudanaz mintzo naiz ni ; zuek , ordea , zeuen aitarengandik ikasi duzuena egiten duzue .
PRED:	I have seen in my Father 's house , but you have seen what I have seen . But you have seen from your father .
GOLD:	I am telling you what I saw when I was with my Father . But you are following the advice of your father . ”

ID:	2267
INPUT:	Paulo Mazedonia eta Greziara
PRED:	Paul and Silas
GOLD:	Paul Goes to Macedonia and Greece

ID:	2268
INPUT:	Kristoren berri ona bat bakarra
PRED:	The Good News of Christ
GOLD:	Paul 's Message Comes from Christ

ID:	2269
INPUT:	Bere lurra lantzen duenak ogia ugari , huskerien atzetik dabilenak miseria sarri .
PRED:	A man who does not sow the land , but he who sent his soul out of his mouth .
GOLD:	A hard worker has plenty of food , but a person who chases fantasies ends up in poverty .

ID:	2270
INPUT:	Maite nautenak ditut maite , nire bila saiatzen direnek aurkituko naute .
PRED:	I love those who love me , and those who seek me will find me .
GOLD:	“ I love all who love me.Those who search will surely find me .

ID:	2271
INPUT:	Baina , garbi egonik edo bidaian ez delarik , Pazkoa ospatu gabe uzten duena , bota egingo dute herritik . Ezarritako egunean Jaunari oparia eskaintzen ez dionak bere hobenaren ondorenak jasan beharko ditu .
PRED:	But if he is clean or clean , he who does not keep the Passover , he shall be cut off from the people , and he shall be cut off from the midst of the people , and he shall eat the offerings of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ But those who neglect to celebrate the Passover at the regular time , even though they are ceremonially clean and not away on a trip , will be cut off from the community of Israel . If they fail to present the Lord 's offering at the proper time , they will suffer the consequences of their guilt .

ID:	2272
INPUT:	Bitarteko hau , ordea , ez da bakar baten izenean ari , eta Jainkoa bat bakarra da .
PRED:	But if there is no one in his name , it is only God .
GOLD:	Now a mediator is helpful if more than one party must reach an agreement . But God , who is one , did not use a mediator when he gave his promise to Abraham .

ID:	2273
INPUT:	beren bizitzak Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren zerbitzuan eman dituzten horiekin .
PRED:	They have given their lives in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	who have risked their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ .

ID:	2274
INPUT:	« Irten zaitez ontzitik emazte , seme eta errainekin .
PRED:	“ Go out of the boat , his wife , his sons , and his sons , and his sons .
GOLD:	“ Leave the boat , all of you — you and your wife , and your sons and their wives .

ID:	2275
INPUT:	Bila ezazue Jauna , aurki dezakezue eta ; egiozue dei , hurbil duzue eta .
PRED:	But if you find the Lord , you will find him , and you will call him near .
GOLD:	Seek the Lord while you can find him.Call on him now while he is near .

ID:	2276
INPUT:	Rafuren seme Palti , Benjaminen leinukoa ;
PRED:	Of the tribe of Benjamin , of Benjamin ;
GOLD:	BenjaminPalti son of Raphu

ID:	2277
INPUT:	Eta Josuek amalektarrak garaitu zituen eta ezpataz garbitu .
PRED:	And Joshua smote the Amalekites , and washed them with the sword .
GOLD:	As a result , Joshua overwhelmed the army of Amalek in battle .

ID:	2278
INPUT:	Urre garbiz urreztatu zuen eta urrezko hegala ezarri inguru guztian .
PRED:	He covered it with pure gold and covered it with pure gold .
GOLD:	He overlaid it with pure gold and ran a gold molding around the edge .

ID:	2279
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zidan : « Ea , maita ezazu berriz ere emaztea , maitalea duen eta adulterio egin duen arren . Halaxe maite baititu Jaunak israeldarrak , hauek beste jainkoengana jotzen duten arren , jainko horiei eskainitako mahats-opilen zale » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Get up , love your wife , and she has committed adultery , because she has loved the gods of the children of Israel , for they have loved the gods of their gods . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Go and love your wife again , even though she commits adultery with another lover . This will illustrate that the Lord still loves Israel , even though the people have turned to other gods and love to worship them . ”

ID:	2280
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zion : — Ez dizut , bada , esan , sinesten baduzu Jainkoaren aintza ikusiko duzula ?
PRED:	Jesus answered , “ I do n't say to you , if you believe that you will see the glory of God ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus responded , “ Did n't I tell you that you would see God 's glory if you believe ? ”

ID:	2281
INPUT:	Askotan bota izan du sutara eta uretara ere , hilarazteko . Ezer egin ahal baduzu , erruki zaitez gutaz eta lagun iezaguzu .
PRED:	For in many times you have cast water into the water , so that you may do what is right . If you do , then , and know us .
GOLD:	The spirit often throws him into the fire or into water , trying to kill him . Have mercy on us and help us , if you can . ”

ID:	2282
INPUT:	Astearen lehen egunean batzar sakratua egingo duzue eta ez da ohiko lan arruntik egingo .
PRED:	On the first day of the first day of the first month , you shall do no work .
GOLD:	On the first day of the festival , all the people must stop their ordinary work and observe an official day for holy assembly .

ID:	2283
INPUT:	Horrela , inork ez dezake esan nire izenean bataiatua izan denik .
PRED:	So no one can speak in my name , so that no one may be baptized in my name .
GOLD:	for now no one can say they were baptized in my name .

ID:	2284
INPUT:	Tiberio enperadorearen agintealdiko hamabosgarren urtea zen . Pontzio Pilato zen Judeako gobernari , Herodes Galileako agintari , honen anaia Felipe Itureako eta Trakonitidako agintari , eta Lisanio Abileneko agintari ;
PRED:	In the fifth year of the fifth month , the fifth year of Tyre , Pilate , the governor of Judea , the governor of Judea , and Herod , the brother of Herod , the ruler of Galilee , and I will send you to Philip , and I will send you to Galilee .
GOLD:	It was now the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius , the Roman emperor . Pontius Pilate was governor over Judea ; Herod Antipas was ruler over Galilee ; his brother Philip was ruler over Iturea and Traconitis ; Lysanias was ruler over Abilene .

ID:	2285
INPUT:	Hartu gero bi onize harri eta zizelkatu haietan Israelen hamabi semeen izenak ,
PRED:	And he took two stones , and put them on the stones of the twelve sons of Israel , and put them in the name of the twelve sons of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Take two onyx stones , and engrave on them the names of the tribes of Israel .

ID:	2286
INPUT:	Uste onez gaude , bai , baina nahiago genuke gorputz honetatik erbesteratuak izan Jaunarekin bizitzera joateko .
PRED:	But we know that we would live in this body , but we would go to live with the Lord .
GOLD:	Yes , we are fully confident , and we would rather be away from these earthly bodies , for then we will be at home with the Lord .

ID:	2287
INPUT:	Honela zioen Davidek : « Har dezadan Nahaxen seme Ha<unk> , beronen aitak ni hartu ninduen bezain ongi » . Davidek mandatariak igorri zizkion aitaren heriotzagatik doluminak ematera . Mandatariak amondarren lurraldera heldu zirenean , ordea ,
PRED:	David said to them , “ Let me go and see my father as my father . ” So David sent messengers to his father 's death . But David sent messengers to the land of Ammon . But the messengers came to the land of Ammon .
GOLD:	David said , “ I am going to show loyalty to Hanun just as his father , Nahash , was always loyal to me . ” So David sent ambassadors to express sympathy to Hanun about his father 's death.But when David 's ambassadors arrived in the land of Ammon ,

ID:	2288
INPUT:	Baina , Pedro Antiokiara etorri zenean , gogor egin behar izan nion aurrez aurre , oker jokatu baitzuen .
PRED:	But when Peter came to Antioch , I would be afraid before him , because he had sinned .
GOLD:	But when Peter came to Antioch , I had to oppose him to his face , for what he did was very wrong .

ID:	2289
INPUT:	« Madarikazio guztiok etorriko zaizkizue gainera , pertsegitu eta harrapatu egingo zaituztete , suntsitu arte , Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren esana ez egiteagatik eta berak emandako agindu eta legeak ez betetzeagatik .
PRED:	All the nations will come upon you , and you will be captured , and you will be captured , until you do not obey the voice of the Lord your God , and do not obey the commandments of the Lord your God , and do not obey the law .
GOLD:	“ If you refuse to listen to the Lord your God and to obey the commands and decrees he has given you , all these curses will pursue and overtake you until you are destroyed .

ID:	2290
INPUT:	Auzoko herriak zigortuak eta salbatuak
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	's Justice

ID:	2291
INPUT:	Gero , ikuskarian , tronu , izaki eta zaharren inguruan zeuden aingeru askoren ahotsa entzun nuen . Milaka eta milioika ziren ,
PRED:	And I saw the voice of the angel standing round about , and the voice of the elders , and the voice of the elders round about , and the voice of the elders ,
GOLD:	Then I looked again , and I heard the voices of thousands and millions of angels around the throne and of the living beings and the elders .

ID:	2292
INPUT:	Jainkoak ituna egin israeldarrekin
PRED:	God 's covenant with Israel
GOLD:	Israel Accepts the

ID:	2293
INPUT:	Juda eta beste anaiak Joseren etxean sartu — hantxe baitzegoen oraindik Jose — eta lurreraino ahuspeztu zitzaizkion .
PRED:	Judah and his brothers went into the house of Joseph , and they bowed down to the ground .
GOLD:	Joseph was still in his palace when Judah and his brothers arrived , and they fell to the ground before him .

ID:	2294
INPUT:	Etxera heldurik , labana hartu eta hamabi puskatan zatikatu zuen emakumearen gorpua eta Israelgo lurralde guztietara bidali zituen puskak .
PRED:	And when he came into the house , he took twelve women , and took the body of the woman , and sent them into the land of Israel .
GOLD:	When he got home , he took a knife and cut his concubine 's body into twelve pieces . Then he sent one piece to each tribe throughout all the territory of Israel .

ID:	2295
INPUT:	Edom , Moab eta Amoni ;
PRED:	Edom , Edom , Moab ,
GOLD:	Then I gave the cup to the nations of Edom , Moab , and Ammon ,

ID:	2296
INPUT:	Ezekiasek galdetu zion Isaiasi : — Zer izango dut berriz ere Jaunaren tenplura joango naizenaren ezaugarri ?
PRED:	Hezekiah said to Isaiah , “ What will I do to you , but I will go to the temple of the Lord ? ”
GOLD:	And Hezekiah had asked , “ What sign will prove that I will go to the Temple of the Lord ? ”

ID:	2297
INPUT:	Jaunaren aingeruak basamortuan , Xur bidean dagoen iturri ondoan , aurkitu zuen
PRED:	When the angel of the Lord saw the angel of the Lord standing in the wilderness , he found a long time in the wilderness .
GOLD:	The angel of the Lord found Hagar beside a spring of water in the wilderness , along the road to Shur .

ID:	2298
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Moisesi : « Bihar goizean goiz jaiki eta zoaz faraoiari esatera : Hala dio Jaunak , hebrearren Jainkoak : Utziozu ene herriari ni gurtzera joaten ;
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses , “ Go up early in the morning and say to Pharaoh , ‘ Thus says the Lord God of the Hebrews : Let my people go and worship me .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Get up early in the morning and stand before Pharaoh . Tell him , ‘ This is what the Lord , the God of the Hebrews , says : Let my people go , so they can worship me .

ID:	2299
INPUT:	« Entzun hau , Job ; hartzazu astia Jainkoaren mirariak hausnartzeko .
PRED:	“ Hear this , Job , and take away the signs of God .
GOLD:	“ Pay attention to this , Job.Stop and consider the wonderful miracles of God !

ID:	2300
INPUT:	Jakin zuen Jakobek bazela Egipton garia , eta honela mintzatu zitzaien semeei : « Zertan zaudete elkarri begira ?
PRED:	When Jacob heard that he was in Egypt , he said to his sons , “ Why do you look for one another ?
GOLD:	When Jacob heard that grain was available in Egypt , he said to his sons , “ Why are you standing around looking at one another ?

ID:	2301
INPUT:	Eta zeruan , lur gainean , lur azpian eta itsasoan dauden sorkari guztiei , hau esaten entzun nien : « Tronuan eseria dagoenarieta Bildotsarigorespena , ohorea , aintza eta agintaritza , menderen mendetan » .
PRED:	And I heard all these things on the earth , and on the earth , and on the earth , saying , The throne of the Lamb , and the glory of the Lamb , and the glory of the Lamb , and the glory and ever .
GOLD:	And then I heard every creature in heaven and on earth and under the earth and in the sea . They sang : “ Blessing and honor and glory and powerbelong to the one sitting on the throneand to the Lamb forever and ever . ”

ID:	2302
INPUT:	Israel herrialdea bakean egon zen berrogei urtez , harik eta Kenazen seme Otniel hil zen arte .
PRED:	And it came to pass in peace for forty years , that the house of Israel were forty years , that he died until he died .
GOLD:	So there was peace in the land for forty years . Then Othniel son of Kenaz died .

ID:	2303
INPUT:	eta zaharraren tokian altxatzen dengaztearen alde jartzen ikusi duteguzkipean dabilen jende guztia ere .
PRED:	And all the people who have seen the young man in the place of the old child , and have seen all the people who are in the sun .
GOLD:	But then everyone rushes to the side of yet another youth who replaces him .

ID:	2304
INPUT:	Goizean , nire semeari bularra emateko jaiki nintzenean , hila zegoen . Eguna argitzean , ordea , begiratu nion ongi eta ikusi nuen ez zela nik izandako semea .
PRED:	And when I rose up early in the morning , I rose up in the morning , and behold , I saw that I had seen him , and I saw that he was not a son .
GOLD:	And in the morning when I tried to nurse my son , he was dead ! But when I looked more closely in the morning light , I saw that it was n't my son at all . ”

ID:	2305
INPUT:	Atezain zegoen neskameak esan zion Pedrori : — Ez al haiz hi ere gizon horren ikasleetakoa ? Pedrok erantzun : — Ez , ez <unk> .
PRED:	And the woman that was called Peter , said unto Peter , Thou art not this man ? And Peter said unto him , Thou art not a man ?
GOLD:	The woman asked Peter , “ You 're not one of that man 's disciples , are you ? ” “ No , ” he said , “ I am not . ”

ID:	2306
INPUT:	Jainkoaren suminak erasotzen dit eta urratzen , hortzak estutzen ditu nire aurka , zorrotz begiratzen , etsai bailitzan .
PRED:	The wrath of God is kindled against me , and he has turned his face against me , because he is my enemy .
GOLD:	God hates me and angrily tears me apart.He snaps his teeth at meand pierces me with his eyes .

ID:	2307
INPUT:	« Mendebaldeko muga Mediterraneo itsasoa izango da , hegoaldeko mugatik Hamateko sarreraraino iparraldean .
PRED:	The border shall be for the west side of the sea , for the north side of the north side to the north .
GOLD:	“ On the west side , the Mediterranean itself will be your border from the southern border to the point where the northern border begins , opposite Lebo-hamath .

ID:	2308
INPUT:	goizean zure maitasuna iragartzea , gau osoan zure leialtasuna ,
PRED:	In the morning , in the morning , in the morning , in the morning , in the morning , in the morning , in the morning .
GOLD:	accompanied by a ten-stringed instrument , a harp , and the melody of a lyre .

ID:	2309
INPUT:	Moises fidagarria izan zen , noski , Jainkoaren etxeko guztientzat , baina Jainkoaren mezua herriari adierazi behar zion zerbitzari bezala .
PRED:	And Moses was faithful in all the house of God , but to all the house of God , according to the word of God .
GOLD:	Moses was certainly faithful in God 's house as a servant . His work was an illustration of the truths God would reveal later .

ID:	2310
INPUT:	Egipto hondamendibihurtuko dudaneaneta herrialdea huts-hutsik utzi , bizilagun guztiak joeta garbituko ditudanean , orduan jakingo dute denekni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	And the land of Egypt shall be desolate , and all the inhabitants of the land of Egypt shall be desolate , and they shall know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And when I destroy Egyptand strip you of everything you ownand strike down all your people , then you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	2311
INPUT:	Kartzelako arduradunak ez zion Joseri bere gain utzitako ezeren konturik eskatzen . Berekin zuen , bai , Jauna , eta egiten zuen guztietan ongi ateratzen laguntzen zion .
PRED:	And the elders of Carmel did not let him leave his hand to Joseph . And he was with him , and the Lord was with him , and he did all that he had done .
GOLD:	The warden had no more worries , because Joseph took care of everything . The Lord was with him and caused everything he did to succeed .

ID:	2312
INPUT:	Asak kultua berriztatu
PRED:	Asa 's Death
GOLD:	Asa 's Religious Reforms

ID:	2313
INPUT:	eta hau , gurutzea lepoan zuela , hiritik « Burezur » — hebreeraz Golgota — zeritzan tokirantz irten zen .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the cross was laid in the city , that is , that is , that is , that is , and went out to the place where it was called the name of the city .
GOLD:	Carrying the cross by himself , he went to the place called Place of the Skull ( in Hebrew , Golgotha ) .

ID:	2314
INPUT:	Etxe oso-osoa jantzi zuen urrez , baita santutegiaren aurrean zegoen aldarea ere .
PRED:	And he clothed all the house with gold , and he covered the altar before the sanctuary .
GOLD:	So he finished overlaying the entire Temple with gold , including the altar that belonged to the Most Holy Place .

ID:	2315
INPUT:	Joanek beronetaz egin zuen testigantza , oihu eginez : « Honetaz ari nintzen ni , “ Nire ondoren datorrena nire gainetik dago , ni baino lehenagokoa baitzen ” esan nuenean » .
PRED:	John heard about his testimony , and said , “ This is what I said , ‘ The one who has come after me is before me . ' ”
GOLD:	John testified about him when he shouted to the crowds , “ This is the one I was talking about when I said , ‘ Someone is coming after me who is far greater than I am , for he existed long before me . ' ”

ID:	2316
INPUT:	ezta Abrahamen jatorriko guztiak ere Abrahamen benetako seme-alaba . Jainkoak esan zion Abrahami : Isaaken bidez izango dituzu ondorengoak .
PRED:	And God said to Abraham , “ You will be the children of Abraham . ”
GOLD:	Being descendants of Abraham does n't make them truly Abraham 's children . For the Scriptures say , “ Isaac is the son through whom your descendants will be counted , ” though Abraham had other children , too .

ID:	2317
INPUT:	Baina jaunak erantzun zien : “ Benetan diotsuet , ez dakit nor zareten ” .
PRED:	But he said to them , “ I say to you , I tell you that you do not know . ”
GOLD:	“ But he called back , ‘ Believe me , I do n't know you ! '

ID:	2318
INPUT:	Bi gizaseme , bata Eldad izenekoa eta bestea Medad , hirurogeita hamarren taldekoak izan arren , ez ziren etxolara joan , baizik eta kanpalekuan gelditu ziren . Baina kokatu zen espiritua haiengan ere eta profeta gisa hasi ziren mintzatzen .
PRED:	And two men , the name of the one , the name of the one , the name of the two men , and the rest of them went into the camp , but they came not into the camp , but the spirit of the prophets began to speak in them .
GOLD:	Two men , Eldad and Medad , had stayed behind in the camp . They were listed among the elders , but they had not gone out to the Tabernacle . Yet the Spirit rested upon them as well , so they prophesied there in the camp .

ID:	2319
INPUT:	Bere gurutzea hartu eta jarraitzen ez didana ez da niretzat gai .
PRED:	He who has received his own cross and does n't follow me .
GOLD:	If you refuse to take up your cross and follow me , you are not worthy of being mine .

ID:	2320
INPUT:	Jesek esan zion bere seme Davidi : — Har itzazu zaku bat gari xigortu eta hamar ogi hauek , eta eraman bizkor zeure anaiei kanpalekura .
PRED:	Jesus said to David , “ Take ten loaves of bread , and take them to your brother 's camp . ”
GOLD:	One day Jesse said to David , “ Take this basket of roasted grain and these ten loaves of bread , and carry them quickly to your brothers .

ID:	2321
INPUT:	Hitz egin bitartean , Jaunaren espiritua sartu zen niregan eta zutitu egin ninduen , eta hitz egiten zidanari entzun nion
PRED:	And when the Spirit of the Lord came into me , the Spirit of the Lord came upon me , and I heard the voice of the Lord , and heard me .
GOLD:	The Spirit came into me as he spoke , and he set me on my feet . I listened carefully to his words .

ID:	2322
INPUT:	Abimelekek jarraitu zuen : — Zer egin diguzu , gero ? Nola bururatu zaizu horrelakorik ? Edozein herritar ohera zitekeen zure emaztearekin . Orduan , denok bihurtuko gintuzun errudun .
PRED:	Abimelech said , “ What have you done to us ? How did you have done this thing ? ” So Abimelech said , “ All the people of the land will be guilty . ”
GOLD:	“ How could you do this to us ? ” Abimelech exclaimed . “ One of my people might easily have taken your wife and slept with her , and you would have made us guilty of great sin . ”

ID:	2323
INPUT:	Ez egin zinik
PRED:	You shall not make an oath to them .
GOLD:	The Power of Prayer

ID:	2324
INPUT:	Biharamuna larunbata zen . Apaizburuak eta fariseuak Pilatogana bildu ziren elkarrekin ,
PRED:	The next day , the chief priests and the Pharisees gathered together to Pilate .
GOLD:	The next day , on the Sabbath , the leading priests and Pharisees went to see Pilate .

ID:	2325
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Zeuen erru guztietatik garbituko zaituztedanean , hiri hondatuak berreraiki eta bizilagunez beteko ditut .
PRED:	Thus says the Lord God : When you are clean , I will destroy you from all your sins , and I will destroy you , and I will build a city with you .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : When I cleanse you from your sins , I will repopulate your cities , and the ruins will be rebuilt .

ID:	2326
INPUT:	Gure aitak uztarri astuna ezarri zizuela ? Astunagoa ezarriko dizuet nik ! Gure aitak larruzko zartailuz zigorkatzen zintuztela ? Burdinazko muturdunez zigorkatuko zaituztet nik ! »
PRED:	“ My father put your yoke on you ? I will put your yoke on you , and I will put you to shame . I will punish you with iron . ”
GOLD:	Yes , my father laid heavy burdens on you , but I 'm going to make them even heavier ! My father beat you with whips , but I will beat you with scorpions ! ' ”

ID:	2327
INPUT:	Pedrok erantzun zuen : — Ez zekiat zertaz ari haizen , mutil ! Eta une berean , oraindik hizketan ari zela , oilarrak jo zuen .
PRED:	Peter answered , “ I do n't know what you do , young men ! ” And he was still still still still speaking .
GOLD:	But Peter said , “ Man , I do n't know what you are talking about . ” And immediately , while he was still speaking , the rooster crowed .

ID:	2328
INPUT:	Neure suminaren suminez zin dagit lurrikara handia izango dela Israelen .
PRED:	As I am angry with my wrath , I will live in the midst of Israel .
GOLD:	In my jealousy and blazing anger , I promise a mighty shaking in the land of Israel on that day .

ID:	2329
INPUT:	Erre-opariaren eskaintza bukatu zuenean , Jehuk gudari eta buruzagiei agindu zien : — Aurrera ! Hil itzazue ! Ez dezala inork ere ihes egin ! Ezpataz hil eta kanpora bota zituzten . Gero , gudari eta buruzagiek , Baalen jauretxeko barne-gelara sartu ,
PRED:	When Jehu had finished offering the burnt offering , he commanded the princes and the princes , “ Do n't let anyone be put to death . ” So they threw the sword into the house of Baal , and they went into the house of Baal , and they went into the house of Baal .
GOLD:	As soon as Jehu had finished sacrificing the burnt offering , he commanded his guards and officers , “ Go in and kill all of them . Do n't let a single one escape ! ” So they killed them all with their swords , and the guards and officers dragged their bodies outside . Then Jehu 's men went into the innermost fortress of the temple of Baal .

ID:	2330
INPUT:	Orduan , Pedrok esan zion : « Ez dut ez urrerik , ez zilarrik , baina dudana emango dizut : Jesu Kristo Nazaretarraren izenean , jaiki eta ibili ! »
PRED:	Peter said to him , “ I do n't give you silver or gold , but I will give you the name of Jesus Christ , and walk . ”
GOLD:	But Peter said , “ I do n't have any silver or gold for you . But I 'll give you what I have . In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene , get up and walk ! ”

ID:	2331
INPUT:	Nork ezagutu du Jaunaren pentsamendua ? Nork irakats diezaioke ? Guk , ordea , Kristoren pentsamendua dugu .
PRED:	Who knows the things of the Lord ? But who can teach him ? But we say that Christ is Christ .
GOLD:	For , “ Who can know the Lord 's thoughts ? Who knows enough to teach him ? ” But we understand these things , for we have the mind of Christ .

ID:	2332
INPUT:	Benetako judua barrutik da eta benetako erdainkuntza bihotzekoa , Espirituak egiten duena eta ez idatzitako legeak . Hau da , gizakiak ez , baina Jainkoak aintzat hartzen duena .
PRED:	This is the law of the Jews and Jews who are circumcised , and those who are not written in the law . This is the law of God , but not the glory of God .
GOLD:	No , a true Jew is one whose heart is right with God . And true circumcision is not merely obeying the letter of the law ; rather , it is a change of heart produced by the Spirit . And a person with a changed heart seeks praise from God , not from people .

ID:	2333
INPUT:	Gau batez , honela esan zion Jaunak Paulori ikuskari batean : « Ez izan beldurrik , jarraitu hitz egiten isildu gabe .
PRED:	One night the Lord said to Paul , “ Do n't be afraid . Do n't be afraid .
GOLD:	One night the Lord spoke to Paul in a vision and told him , “ Do n't be afraid ! Speak out ! Do n't be silent !

ID:	2334
INPUT:	Urrezko lau eraztun urtu zituen kutxaren lau oinentzat , bi eraztun albo baterako eta bi besterako .
PRED:	He made two gold rings for the four corners of gold , and two rings for the two corners of the two corners .
GOLD:	He cast four gold rings and attached them to its four feet , two rings on each side .

ID:	2335
INPUT:	Kutsaturik gaude guztiok , gure egintzarik onenak erezapi zikinen antzeko ; orbela bezala gaude iharturiketa haizeak bezala garamatzategeure erruek .
PRED:	For we are unclean as we are unclean , as we are in the sight of our works , as the wind is in the wind , and our sins are taken away from the wind .
GOLD:	You welcome those who gladly do good , who follow godly ways.But you have been very angry with us , for we are not godly.We are constant sinners ; how can people like us be saved ?

ID:	2336
INPUT:	Zeure neke eta nahigabeen ondoren eta jasan duzun morrontza gogorraren ondoren , Jaunak atseden emango dizunean , Israel ,
PRED:	And when thou hast spoken unto thee , and hast spoken unto thee , when thou hast spoken , and hast spoken unto thee , O house of Israel ,
GOLD:	In that wonderful day when the Lord gives his people rest from sorrow and fear , from slavery and chains ,

ID:	2337
INPUT:	Ez du onik egiten ezti gehiegi jateak , ezta ohore gehiegiren atzetik ibiltzeak ere .
PRED:	It is not good to do what is right to do . It is not good to do anything to do .
GOLD:	It 's not good to eat too much honey , and it 's not good to seek honors for yourself .

ID:	2338
INPUT:	bati , Espirituaren egitez , sinesmen-dohaina ematen dio ; beste bati , sendaketak egiteko dohaina ;
PRED:	For if the Spirit is given to the Spirit , the gift of the Spirit is given to others .
GOLD:	The same Spirit gives great faith to another , and to someone else the one Spirit gives the gift of healing .

ID:	2339
INPUT:	Beraz , errege jauna , onar ezazu nire aholkua : Utzi zeure bekatuak zuzenbide eginez , uko egin gaiztakeriari , behartsuekin errukitsu izanez . Agian , luzaroan eta zoriontsu biziko zara .
PRED:	Therefore , my lord the king , take counsel of my lord the king , and turn away your sins from your sins , and turn away your sins from the poor , in the days of the poor , and in the days of the poor , and in the days of life .
GOLD:	“ ‘ This is what the dream means , Your Majesty , and what the Most High has declared will happen to my lord the king .

ID:	2340
INPUT:	<unk> bat hausten badio , libre utziko du hortzaren ordain .
PRED:	But if he has taken him away , he will be sold for him .
GOLD:	And if a man knocks out the tooth of his male or female slave , he must let the slave go free to compensate for the tooth .

ID:	2341
INPUT:	Gainera , 7 . 337 morroi eta mirabe eta 200 kantari , gizon eta emakume .
PRED:	and a hundred and two thousand , and two thousand and two thousand , and a hundred and two thousand and two thousand .
GOLD:	in addition to 7,337 servants and 200 singers , both men and women .

ID:	2342
INPUT:	Honela , bada , agertu zen Joan Bataiatzailea basamortuan . Bihozberritzeko eta bataiatzeko hots egiten zuen , bekatuen barkamenerako .
PRED:	So John was revealed in the wilderness . He preached to them in the wilderness , to be baptized and baptized for sins .
GOLD:	This messenger was John the Baptist . He was in the wilderness and preached that people should be baptized to show that they had repented of their sins and turned to God to be forgiven .

ID:	2343
INPUT:	Gizakiak egindako jainkoak , nola izan egiazko jainko ? »
PRED:	How can God do to the gods of men ? How can he make them gods ? ”
GOLD:	Can people make their own gods ? These are not real gods at all ! ”

ID:	2344
INPUT:	lege-maisu izan nahian , esaten eta aho betean irakasten dutena ulertzen ez badute ere .
PRED:	If they love the law , they do not understand the law , and do not understand it .
GOLD:	They want to be known as teachers of the law of Moses , but they do n't know what they are talking about , even though they speak so confidently .

ID:	2345
INPUT:	Izan bedi ilun eta labain haien bidea , zure aingeruak pertsegitzean !
PRED:	Let them see their way , and their way is dark , and the angel of thy angels shall seek them .
GOLD:	Make their path dark and slippery , with the angel of the Lord pursuing them .

ID:	2346
INPUT:	Kristo Jesusek , jainkozko izaerako izanik , ez zion gogor eutsi nahi izan
PRED:	But Jesus Christ would not be able to obey him , but he would not obey him .
GOLD:	Though he was God , he did not think of equality with Godas something to cling to .

ID:	2347
INPUT:	Jauna , zergatik baztertzen nauzu , zergatik gordetzen aurpegia ?
PRED:	Lord , why do you turn away from me ? Why do you hide my face ?
GOLD:	I have been sick and close to death since my youth.I stand helpless and desperate before your terrors .

ID:	2348
INPUT:	Atera nintzen , bada , gauez Haraneko atetik eta Herensugearen iturri aldera eta Zabortegiko ate aldera hartu nuen . Harresien alde hura arakatu nuen : harresiak zulatuak zeuden eta ateak suak kiskaliak .
PRED:	And I went out of the night , and went out of the river of the king , and went up to the east side of the river , and I took the wall of the king 's house ; and I took the wall of the wall , and the fire was burnt with fire .
GOLD:	After dark I went out through the Valley Gate , past the Jackal 's Well , and over to the Dung Gate to inspect the broken walls and burned gates .

ID:	2349
INPUT:	Egiptotik atera eta hirugarren hila bete zen egunean iritsi ziren israeldarrak Sinai basamortura .
PRED:	And the children of Israel came out of Egypt on the third day , on the third day of the third month , in the wilderness of Sinai .
GOLD:	Exactly two months after the Israelites left Egypt , they arrived in the wilderness of Sinai .

ID:	2350
INPUT:	( 2 Erg 19 , 8-13 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Isaiah Predicts Judah 's Deliverance

ID:	2351
INPUT:	Leiala ez denaz arriskualdietan fidatzea , hortz hautsiaz jatea eta zango bihurrituaz ibiltzea bezala da .
PRED:	Let me not trust in the high places , and let me be like a witness , and let me go near to him .
GOLD:	Putting confidence in an unreliable person in times of troubleis like chewing with a broken tooth or walking on a lame foot .

ID:	2352
INPUT:	Bere aita Daviden aginduari jarraituz , Salomonek apaiz-taldeei beren eginkizunak ezarri zizkien ; lebitarrei , Jaunaren gorespenak kantatu eta apaizei eguneroko kultuan laguntzekoa . Atezain-taldeei tenpluko ateak zaintzeko eginkizuna eman zien , Davidek , Jainkoaren gizonak , agindu bezala .
PRED:	And David commanded the Levites to keep the commandments of David his father , and the priests , and the Levites , to minister unto the Lord , and to the priests , and to minister unto the priests , as the Lord had commanded them .
GOLD:	In assigning the priests to their duties , Solomon followed the regulations of his father , David . He also assigned the Levites to lead the people in praise and to assist the priests in their daily duties . And he assigned the gatekeepers to their gates by their divisions , following the commands of David , the man of God .

ID:	2353
INPUT:	Zuk , ordea , Jainkoaren gizon horrek , ihes egizu hauetatik guztietatik , eta saia zaitez justizian , jainkozaletasunean , sinesmenean , maitasunean , eroapenean eta otzantasunean .
PRED:	But you , the man of God , escape from all these things , and do right , and do righteousness , in righteousness , in faith , in love , in love , in love , in love , and in love .
GOLD:	But you , Timothy , are a man of God ; so run from all these evil things . Pursue righteousness and a godly life , along with faith , love , perseverance , and gentleness .

ID:	2354
INPUT:	Juduen asmoak desegiteko , errege-kontseilariak erosi egin zituzten . Honela jardun zuten Pertsiako errege Ziroren garai guztian , Darioren erregealdia arte .
PRED:	And the Jews began to destroy them , and the princes of the kings of Persia , and the princes of Persia , until the time of Darius king of Persia .
GOLD:	They bribed agents to work against them and to frustrate their plans . This went on during the entire reign of King Cyrus of Persia and lasted until King Darius of Persia took the throne .

ID:	2355
INPUT:	Entzun baino lehen erantzuten duenakzentzugabearen lotsa jasan beharko du .
PRED:	When you hear , you will be ashamed , you will be ashamed of a fool .
GOLD:	Spouting off before listening to the factsis both shameful and foolish .

ID:	2356
INPUT:	Egun hura ez da lehenik argi eta gero ilun izango ;
PRED:	There is no light in that day , and there will be no more light .
GOLD:	On that day the sources of light will no longer shine ,

ID:	2357
INPUT:	Baina Jesusek berehala hitz egin zien eta esan : — Lasai ! Neu naiz . Ez beldurtu !
PRED:	But Jesus spoke to them and said to them , “ Do n't be afraid . Do n't be afraid . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus spoke to them at once . “ Do n't be afraid , ” he said . “ Take courage . I am here ! ”

ID:	2358
INPUT:	Aitorpen bera egiten digu Espiritu Santuak ere , hau esatean :
PRED:	For we have seen the Holy Spirit , saying ,
GOLD:	And the Holy Spirit also testifies that this is so . For he says ,

ID:	2359
INPUT:	Baina neurekin zaitut zu , Jauna , gudari indartsu bezala ; eroriko dira nire etsaiak , ezin izango naute garaitu ; beraien asmoek porrot egingo dute , haien lotsa sekulakoa izango , behin ere ahaztezina .
PRED:	But I am with you , O Lord , and they will fall like my enemies , and they will not be ashamed ; they will not be ashamed , and they will not be ashamed .
GOLD:	But the Lord stands beside me like a great warrior.Before him my persecutors will stumble.They can not defeat me.They will fail and be thoroughly humiliated.Their dishonor will never be forgotten .

ID:	2360
INPUT:	Nork ez zuri begirune , Jauna ? Nork ez goretsi zure izena ? Zu bakarrik zara santu ! Herriak oro etorrieta zure aurreanahuspeztuko dira , zure salbamen-asmoakdenen aurrean agertu baitira » .
PRED:	Who will fear you , O Lord ? Who will not praise you ? You are holy , and all the nations will come and bow down before you , for your salvation has been revealed to you . ”
GOLD:	Who will not fear you , Lord , and glorify your name ? For you alone are holy.All nations will come and worship before you , for your righteous deeds have been revealed . ”

ID:	2361
INPUT:	Txerrizainek ihes egin zuten eta , herrira joanik , dena kontatu zuten , baita deabrudunena ere .
PRED:	And they fled , and went into the city , and they told all things , and the devil also did the devil .
GOLD:	The herdsmen fled to the nearby town , telling everyone what happened to the demon-possessed men .

ID:	2362
INPUT:	“ Igo gaitezen Judaren aurka , setia dezagun eta menpean hartu , eta jar dezagun bertan erregeTabeel-en semea ” .
PRED:	“ Let us go up and fight against Judah , and let us be under the hand of the king of Judah , and let us take the son of Tamar . ”
GOLD:	‘ We will attack Judah and capture it for ourselves . Then we will install the son of Tabeel as Judah 's king . '

ID:	2363
INPUT:	Nire aurka altxatzen diren erreboltariak kendu egingo ditut zuen artetik ; erbesteraturik daudeneko herrialdetik aterako ditut , baina ez dira Israelen sartuko ; orduan jakingo duzue ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	And I will take away the inhabitants of the land which I have built against you , and I will bring them out of the land of Israel , and they shall know that I am the Lord , and ye shall know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	I will purge you of all those who rebel and revolt against me . I will bring them out of the countries where they are in exile , but they will never enter the land of Israel . Then you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	2364
INPUT:	Begiko ez banau , berriz , egin beza nirekin egoki deritzona .
PRED:	But if I do n't see me , let me do what is right with me .
GOLD:	But if he is through with me , then let him do what seems best to him . ”

ID:	2365
INPUT:	« Beraz , honela diotsuet nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak : Egizue gogoeta zeuen egoeraz .
PRED:	“ Therefore thus says the Lord of hosts , “ Remember what you have done , and remember it .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Look at what 's happening to you !

ID:	2366
INPUT:	Elixama , Eliada , Elifelet .
PRED:	Elijah the mother of Elijah , the mother of Elijah , the father of Elijah .
GOLD:	Elishama , Eliada , and Eliphelet .

ID:	2367
INPUT:	Gure borroka , izan ere , ez da hezur-mamizko arerioen aurkakoa , goiko espiritu gaiztoen aurkakoa baizik , mundu ilun honetako aginte , ahalmen eta botereen aurkakoa .
PRED:	For our battle is not against us , but the tongue is not against the evil spirits , but the evil spirits of the earth , and the power of the evil spirits , and the power of the earth .
GOLD:	For we are not fighting against flesh-and-blood enemies , but against evil rulers and authorities of the unseen world , against mighty powers in this dark world , and against evil spirits in the heavenly places .

ID:	2368
INPUT:	Eta aurreraxeago joanik , lurrean erori eta otoizka ari zitzaion Jainkoari , urrun ziezaiola ordu hura , ahal bazen .
PRED:	And when he went before them , he prayed to God in the earth , and prayed to God , that he would be far away from him .
GOLD:	He went on a little farther and fell to the ground . He prayed that , if it were possible , the awful hour awaiting him might pass him by .

ID:	2369
INPUT:	Bete ezazue gogo onez zeuen zerbitzua , Jaunarentzat bezala eta ez gizakientzat .
PRED:	Be careful to serve the Lord , as you serve the Lord and not to men .
GOLD:	Work with enthusiasm , as though you were working for the Lord rather than for people .

ID:	2370
INPUT:	sustraiak zahartu eta motzondoa lurpean ihartu arren ,
PRED:	They took root , and set it under the ground , and set it under the ground .
GOLD:	Though its roots have grown old in the earthand its stump decays ,

ID:	2371
INPUT:	Sobera gelditzen diren haragia eta ogia erre egingo dituzue .
PRED:	If you remain in Sodom , you will burn bread and bread .
GOLD:	Any meat or bread that is left over must then be burned up .

ID:	2372
INPUT:	Ibai baten adarrek alaitzen dute Jainkoaren hiria . Goi-goikoak bere bizilekua sagaratu du .
PRED:	The people of Israel rejoice in the city of God ; the Most High God Most High is holy .
GOLD:	God dwells in that city ; it can not be destroyed.From the very break of day , God will protect it .

ID:	2373
INPUT:	Aldi hartan , haserreak sorrarazi zituen Jainkoak Abimeleken eta Sikemgo nagusien artean , eta hauek Abimeleken kontra jaiki ziren .
PRED:	At that time God made Abimelech angry between Abimelech and Shechem and Shechem , and they rose up against Abimelech .
GOLD:	God sent a spirit that stirred up trouble between Abimelech and the leading citizens of Shechem , and they revolted .

ID:	2374
INPUT:	Haren senideek ere ez zuten , hain zuzen , berarengan sinesten .
PRED:	His brothers did not believe in him , but they believed in him .
GOLD:	For even his brothers did n't believe in him .

ID:	2375
INPUT:	Horregatik , urruti dugu askapena , ez zaigu iristen salbamena ; argia espero genuen , eta iluna dugu gainean ; egunsentia espero , eta gau beltzetan gabiltza .
PRED:	Therefore we are far away from a distance , but we have not been saved ; and we have darkness , and the darkness is upon us , and darkness and night .
GOLD:	So there is no justice among us , and we know nothing about right living.We look for light but find only darkness.We look for bright skies but walk in gloom .

ID:	2376
INPUT:	« Egun hau gogoangarri izango duzue eta , Jaunaren ohorez , festa nagusiz ospatuko . Festa hau lege-indarrez ezarriko duzue belaunez belaun .
PRED:	“ On that day you will be a sign to the Lord , and it will be a feast to the Lord , and you will keep it in the law of your generations throughout your generations .
GOLD:	“ This is a day to remember . Each year , from generation to generation , you must celebrate it as a special festival to the Lord . This is a law for all time .

ID:	2377
INPUT:	“ Fruitu ederreko olibondo heze ” izenaeman nion behinola ; orain , ordea , hostoa erreko diotesugar bizian , eta adarrak hautsiko .
PRED:	“ I gave you the fruit of the fruit of the trees of the trees , and I gave you the fruit of the olive tree . But now the fruit of the olive tree will be cut down .
GOLD:	I , the Lord , once called them a thriving olive tree , beautiful to see and full of good fruit.But now I have sent the fury of their enemiesto burn them with fire , leaving them charred and broken .

ID:	2378
INPUT:	« Bedeinkatua Jauna , Israelen Jainkoa , bere herriarengana etorrieta askatu duena !
PRED:	Blessed be the Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , who has redeemed his people .
GOLD:	“ Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , because he has visited and redeemed his people .

ID:	2379
INPUT:	Begira zein sailetara doazen biltzera eta joan beraien atzetik . Nire morroiei zuri bakean uzteko eskatu diet . Egarri zarenean , edan haiek betetako ur-ontzietatik .
PRED:	Behold , I have asked them to go and go to their way . I have asked my servant to give you peace in peace . And when they drink , they drink from the water of the year .
GOLD:	See which part of the field they are harvesting , and then follow them . I have warned the young men not to treat you roughly . And when you are thirsty , help yourself to the water they have drawn from the well . ”

ID:	2380
INPUT:	( 27 , 9-19 )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Inventory of Materials

ID:	2381
INPUT:	eta jentilen zerbitzari ere egin zen , bere errukiagatik Jainkoa gorets zezaten . Hau dio , hain zuzen , Liburu Santuak : Horregatik , atzerritarren artean goretsiko zaitut , eta zure omenez kantatuko dut .
PRED:	And he also served the Gentiles , that they may praise God for his sins ; for it is written , “ I will praise you among the nations , and I will praise you with your song . ”
GOLD:	He also came so that the Gentiles might give glory to God for his mercies to them . That is what the psalmist meant when he wrote : “ For this , I will praise you among the Gentiles ; I will sing praises to your name . ”

ID:	2382
INPUT:	Gizon batek beste gizon bat iraintzen badu , Jainkoa izan dezake bitarteko ; bekatua Jaunaren aurka egiten badu , ordea , nor izan dezake aldeko ? » Hala ere , semeek ez zuten aitaren esana aditu . Izan ere , erabakia zuen Jainkoak haiek hilaraztea .
PRED:	But if a man is still alive , he may be God . But if any man sin against the Lord , would he do what his father had said . But his sons did not obey him . But they did not obey the words of God .
GOLD:	If someone sins against another person , God can mediate for the guilty party . But if someone sins against the Lord , who can intercede ? ” But Eli 's sons would n't listen to their father , for the Lord was already planning to put them to death .

ID:	2383
INPUT:	Ireki eta mutikoa ikusi zuen negarrez . Faraoiaren alabak , errukiturik , esan zuen : — Hebrearren haurra da , noski .
PRED:	And he opened the boy , and wept ; and Pharaoh 's daughter , and said , The child of Pharaoh is the child of Hebron .
GOLD:	When the princess opened it , she saw the baby . The little boy was crying , and she felt sorry for him . “ This must be one of the Hebrew children , ” she said .

ID:	2384
INPUT:	Bai zoragarria zure maitasuna , oi Jainko ! Zure hegalpera biltzen dira gizakiak .
PRED:	You are my God , and you are my God , and you are my strength .
GOLD:	You feed them from the abundance of your own house , letting them drink from your river of delights .

ID:	2385
INPUT:	« Bidez zoaztela , zuhaitzean nahiz lurrean habia txorikumeekin edo arrautzekin , ama bertan delarik , aurkitzen baduzue , ez hartu ama kumeekin ;
PRED:	“ When you go in , when you are going to meet the tent , or with a woman , or a woman , or her mother , or her mother , or her mother , or her mother ,
GOLD:	“ If you happen to find a bird 's nest in a tree or on the ground , and there are young ones or eggs in it with the mother sitting in the nest , do not take the mother with the young .

ID:	2386
INPUT:	Esker ona eta eskaria
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Paul 's Joy That Christ Is Preached

ID:	2387
INPUT:	ager bedi zure gorputza biluzik , zeure lotsariak bistan dituzula . Mendeku hartuko dut , ez dit inork eragotziko » .
PRED:	Let them be put to shame , and let them be put to shame , and let them be put to shame .
GOLD:	You will be naked and burdened with shame.I will take vengeance against you without pity . ”

ID:	2388
INPUT:	Eta , nork bere burura hautsa botaz , oihu egiten zuen negarrez eta aieneka : « Ai zu , ai hiri handia ! Zure aberastasunei eskeraberastu zirenitsasontziak zituzten guztiak . Horra orain une batean erraustua ! »
PRED:	And every man cried out to his own dust , and cried out , saying , Woe to the great city ! How great is the riches of thy riches ? And all the riches of thy riches were destroyed in the midst of the earth .
GOLD:	And they will weep and throw dust on their heads to show their grief . And they will cry out , “ How terrible , how terrible for that great city ! The shipowners became wealthyby transporting her great wealth on the seas.In a single moment it is all gone . ”

ID:	2389
INPUT:	Orduan , esan zioten entzuleek : — Ez dituzu oraindik berrogeita hamar urte , eta Abraham ikusi duzula ?
PRED:	And the Jews heard him , saying , Thou art not yet thirty years , and thou hast seen that Abraham ?
GOLD:	The people said , “ You are n't even fifty years old . How can you say you have seen Abraham ? ”

ID:	2390
INPUT:	Era berean , zeruko zuen Aitak ez du nahi txiki hauetako inor galtzerik .
PRED:	In the same way your Father will not destroy any of these things .
GOLD:	In the same way , it is not my heavenly Father 's will that even one of these little ones should perish .

ID:	2391
INPUT:	Asiria ezpataz joa eroriko da , baina ez gizakiari esker ; ezpatak garbituko du , baina ez giza indarrez . Ezpatak ihes eragingo die , gudaririk onenaklan behartuetarakohartuko dizkiote .
PRED:	The king of Assyria will fall by the sword , but the sword will not be cleansed by the sword , but the sword will not escape by the sword , but the sword will fall by the sword .
GOLD:	“ The Assyrians will be destroyed , but not by the swords of men.The sword of God will strike them , and they will panic and flee.The strong young Assyrianswill be taken away as captives .

ID:	2392
INPUT:	atariko oihalak , egoitza eta aldarea inguratzen dituen atariaren sarrerako oihala , sokak eta gainerako osagaiak ; hori guztia da gerxondarren egitekoa .
PRED:	And the tabernacle of the tabernacle , and the tabernacle of the tabernacle , and the tabernacle of the court round about , and the tabernacle , and all the vessels of the tabernacle , and all these are the work of the tabernacle .
GOLD:	They are also to carry the curtains for the courtyard walls that surround the Tabernacle and altar , the curtain across the courtyard entrance , the ropes , and all the equipment related to their use . The Gershonites are responsible for all these items .

ID:	2393
INPUT:	Oroit zaitez nitaz orduan , ongi doakizunean ; egidazu , arren , mesede hau : mintza zakizkio faraoiari nire alde , hemendik atera nazan .
PRED:	Remember what you have done to me , and tell me , ‘ Give me this message to Pharaoh , and go out from here . '
GOLD:	And please remember me and do me a favor when things go well for you . Mention me to Pharaoh , so he might let me out of this place .

ID:	2394
INPUT:	Ez zaitzatela edozein eratako doktrina arrotzek lilura . Garrantzizkoena Jainkoaren dohainaz barrutik sendotzea da , eta ez janariei buruzko arauez arduratzea , hauek ez baitiete ezer onik ekarri bete dituztenei .
PRED:	Do n't let any of you do any of you . The spirit of God has been healed from the spirit of God , and it is not known to those who do not know what they do .
GOLD:	So do not be attracted by strange , new ideas . Your strength comes from God 's grace , not from rules about food , which do n't help those who follow them .

ID:	2395
INPUT:	« Ez okertu zuzenbidea alderdikeriaz jokatuz ; ez onartu eskupekorik , itsutu egiten baititu pertsona jakintsuak ere eta hondatu egiten zintzoen epaia .
PRED:	“ Do n't do what is right . Do n't accept what is right . Do n't be wise , because the wise are wise , and the righteous are destroyed .
GOLD:	You must never twist justice or show partiality . Never accept a bribe , for bribes blind the eyes of the wise and corrupt the decisions of the godly .

ID:	2396
INPUT:	( <unk> , 15-19 )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Jeremiah 's Prayer

ID:	2397
INPUT:	Zipre begiztatu eta ezkerretara utzirik , Siriarantz jarraitu genuen eta Tirora iritsi , han hustu behar baitzuen ontziak bere karga .
PRED:	And we left the border of Tyre , and went to Simon , and came to the city of Tyre , and came to Tyre ; for the boat was there .
GOLD:	We sighted the island of Cyprus , passed it on our left , and landed at the harbor of Tyre , in Syria , where the ship was to unload its cargo .

ID:	2398
INPUT:	Eta berriro Jaunaren aingeruak : — Kontaezin hainbatugalduko ditut zure ondorengoak .
PRED:	Then the angel of the Lord said to him , “ I will not destroy your descendants . ”
GOLD:	Then he added , “ I will give you more descendants than you can count . ”

ID:	2399
INPUT:	( <unk> 4 , 1-3 )
PRED:	The King of Judah
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	2400
INPUT:	Joka ezazue pertsona libre bezala ; ez , ordea , askatasuna gaiztakeriaren estalkitzat erabiliz , zeuen buruak Jainkoaren zerbitzura jarriz baizik .
PRED:	But you must be saved , but you must not be saved . But you must not do wrong , but you must serve God .
GOLD:	For you are free , yet you are God 's slaves , so do n't use your freedom as an excuse to do evil .

ID:	2401
INPUT:	Nazioak bildu ziren haren kontra ; beren zuloan harrapatu zuteneta katepean Egiptora eraman .
PRED:	And the nations gathered together against him ; and they took him into the land of Egypt , and brought him to Egypt .
GOLD:	Then the nations heard about him , and he was trapped in their pit.They led him away with hooksto the land of Egypt .

ID:	2402
INPUT:	Askok hitz egiten dute ongi handikiaz , mundu guztia eskuzabalaren lagun .
PRED:	Many people speak well with him , because of all the world .
GOLD:	Many seek favors from a ruler ; everyone is the friend of a person who gives gifts !

ID:	2403
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Ez zaio inoiz ere faltako Davidi Israelgo tronuan eseriko den ondorengorik .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ No one will sit on David 's throne in Israel 's throne .
GOLD:	For this is what the Lord says : David will have a descendant sitting on the throne of Israel forever .

ID:	2404
INPUT:	ezta Herodesek ere , guri bidali baitigu ostera . Honek ez du , beraz , heriotza merezi duenik ezer egin .
PRED:	But Herod did not send us to death . This is why he did not do anything to death .
GOLD:	Herod came to the same conclusion and sent him back to us . Nothing this man has done calls for the death penalty .

ID:	2405
INPUT:	Gau hartan Jauna agertu zitzaion , esanez : « Ni naizzure aita Abrahamen Jainkoa . Ez izan beldur , zeurekin bainauzu . Bedeinkatuko zaitut , ondorengo ugari emango dizutneure zerbitzari Abrahamengatik » .
PRED:	And the Lord appeared unto him in that night , saying , I am the God of Abraham thy father . Do not be afraid : for I will bless thee , and I will bless thee for thy seed .
GOLD:	where the Lord appeared to him on the night of his arrival . “ I am the God of your father , Abraham , ” he said . “ Do not be afraid , for I am with you and will bless you . I will multiply your descendants , and they will become a great nation . I will do this because of my promise to Abraham , my servant . ”

ID:	2406
INPUT:	Haien buruzagiakberen geziz zulatu dituzu , eraso batean gu sakabanatzera , gizagaixo batezkutuan irenstera bezala , pozik zetozenean .
PRED:	And their princes have set their heads against you , as if they were sick , as if they were sick , they were sick in the wilderness .
GOLD:	With his own weapons , you destroyed the chief of thosewho rushed out like a whirlwind , thinking Israel would be easy prey .

ID:	2407
INPUT:	Eta mintzo hau etorri zen zerutik : « Hau da nire Semea , nire maitea ; berau dut atsegin » .
PRED:	And a voice came from heaven , saying , This is my Son , and my beloved is pleased .
GOLD:	And a voice from heaven said , “ This is my dearly loved Son , who brings me great joy . ”

ID:	2408
INPUT:	Gure Jainkoari mesede hau eskatuz egin genuen barau , eta entzun egin zigun .
PRED:	We asked for our God , and we heard him .
GOLD:	So we fasted and earnestly prayed that our God would take care of us , and he heard our prayer .

ID:	2409
INPUT:	Ez zuen ezagutu , eskuak anaia Esaurenak bezain iletsuak baitziren , eta bedeinkazioa eman zion .
PRED:	He did not know his brother Esau as his brother Esau 's brother Esau . He blessed him and blessed him .
GOLD:	But he did not recognize Jacob , because Jacob 's hands felt hairy just like Esau 's . So Isaac prepared to bless Jacob .

ID:	2410
INPUT:	« Lauoinka dabiltzan intsektu hegaldunak debekatuak dituzue .
PRED:	“ You are all unclean things that are under the four corners of the earth .
GOLD:	“ You must not eat winged insects that walk along the ground ; they are detestable to you .

ID:	2411
INPUT:	Ezekiasek Gihon errekaren goiko irteera estali eta lur azpitik eraman zuen Daviden Hiriaren mendebalderantz . Ezekiasek ongi burutu zituen bere egintza guztiak .
PRED:	Hezekiah went out from the morning to King Hezekiah , and brought him out of the city of David to the west of the city of David , and he did all that he had done .
GOLD:	He blocked up the upper spring of Gihon and brought the water down through a tunnel to the west side of the City of David . And so he succeeded in everything he did .

ID:	2412
INPUT:	Hona Edom lurraldean izan ziren erregeak , israeldarrek erregerik izan aurretik :
PRED:	These are the kings of Edom in the land of Edom , before the sons of Israel :
GOLD:	These are the kings who ruled in the land of Edom before any king ruled over the Israelites :

ID:	2413
INPUT:	Horrela , begirune izanen dizute eta zure bideetan ibiliko dira , gure gurasoei eman zenien lurraldean biziko diren bitartean .
PRED:	So they will fear you , and they will walk in the land which you gave to our fathers .
GOLD:	Then they will fear you and walk in your ways as long as they live in the land you gave to our ancestors .

ID:	2414
INPUT:	Adoretsu nago , ene Jainko . Kantatu eta soinua joko dizut . Ea , ene bihotza !
PRED:	I will praise you , O God , and I will sing to you , and I will praise you .
GOLD:	Wake up , lyre and harp ! I will wake the dawn with my song .

ID:	2415
INPUT:	Zikrik , gudari efraimdar adoretsu hark , erregearen ofiziala zen Maaseias hil zuen , baita Azrikam jauregizaina eta Elkana ministro nagusia ere .
PRED:	And the king of Ephraim died , and he died in the sight of the king of the sons of Ephraim , and Shaphan the king 's lord , the king 's lord , and the king of the land .
GOLD:	Then Zicri , a warrior from Ephraim , killed Maaseiah , the king 's son ; Azrikam , the king 's palace commander ; and Elkanah , the king 's second-in-command .

ID:	2416
INPUT:	eta zuek ere , munduko aginte eta botereen buru den Kristoren bitartez lortu duzue zeuen betetasuna .
PRED:	and you have made the promise of the world , and you have made the love of Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	So you also are complete through your union with Christ , who is the head over every ruler and authority .

ID:	2417
INPUT:	Orain , ordea , zuregana noa . Hau guztia , oraindik munduan nagoela esaten dut , nire poza berengan izan dezaten , eta bete-betea izan ere .
PRED:	But now I am going to you . I say that I am still still still still in the world , so that my joy may be filled with joy .
GOLD:	“ Now I am coming to you . I told them many things while I was with them in this world so they would be filled with my joy .

ID:	2418
INPUT:	Behartsuak bide bazterrera botatzen dituzte , dohakabe guztiak ezkutatzera behartzen .
PRED:	They cast the poor into the way of the poor , and they take away all the needy .
GOLD:	The poor are pushed off the path ; the needy must hide together for safety .

ID:	2419
INPUT:	horrela , Jainkoak bere onginahiaz onartu gaituelarik , itxaro dugun betiko biziaren oinordeko bilakatu gara .
PRED:	For we have received the grace of the grace of God , that we might have eternal life for ever .
GOLD:	Because of his grace he made us right in his sight and gave us confidence that we will inherit eternal life .

ID:	2420
INPUT:	Bai , erreinuanMardokeo judua ze<unk> suero erregearen hurren . Gizon handia juduen aurrean , maitatua bere senideguztien artean . Bere herritarrentzatzorionaren bilatzaile , beretarrentzat bake-ezartzaile .
PRED:	For Mordecai , the king of the Jews , who was a man of the Jews , before all his brethren , and in the sight of the Jews , and in the sight of their brethren , and in the sight of their brethren .
GOLD:	Mordecai the Jew became the prime minister , with authority next to that of King Xerxes himself . He was very great among the Jews , who held him in high esteem , because he continued to work for the good of his people and to speak up for the welfare of all their descendants .

ID:	2421
INPUT:	« Gizon bakar batengandik sorrarazi zituen Jainkoak nazio guztiak , lur zabal osoan bizi zitezen , bakoitzari bere garai eta lur-mugak ezarriz .
PRED:	And God brought them out of one man , and he made all the nations to dwell in the earth , and under the top of the earth , and under the top of the earth .
GOLD:	From one man he created all the nations throughout the whole earth . He decided beforehand when they should rise and fall , and he determined their boundaries .

ID:	2422
INPUT:	Aditu dizut Ismaeli buruz esan duzuna ere . Bedeinkatu egingo dut : ondorengo ugari izango ditu , hamabi printze sortuko ditu eta herri handi baten sorburu egingo dut .
PRED:	I will bless you in Israel , and I will bless you , and I will bless you , and I will give you many peoples , and I will give you a great nation .
GOLD:	As for Ishmael , I will bless him also , just as you have asked . I will make him extremely fruitful and multiply his descendants . He will become the father of twelve princes , and I will make him a great nation .

ID:	2423
INPUT:	Kanpoko atarian iparraldera zegoen sarreraren luzera eta zabalera ere neurtu zituen .
PRED:	And he measured the gate of the inner court , and measured the gate of the inner court , and measured them .
GOLD:	The man measured the gateway on the north just like the one on the east .

ID:	2424
INPUT:	« Hara , ardiak otso artera bezala bidaltzen zaituztet . Izan zaitezte , bada , sugeak bezain zuhur eta usoak bezain xalo .
PRED:	“ Behold , I send you among the sheep , and you are like sheep , and you are like the king , and your hands are like the fire .
GOLD:	“ Look , I am sending you out as sheep among wolves . So be as shrewd as snakes and harmless as doves .

ID:	2425
INPUT:	Ohartu zen Moises Aaronen zabarkeriagatik herria bere onetik aterata zebilela , etsaien barregarri ,
PRED:	And Moses heard that Aaron had brought the people out of his presence , and turned them out of his hand , and turned them out of his enemies .
GOLD:	Moses saw that Aaron had let the people get completely out of control , much to the amusement of their enemies .

ID:	2426
INPUT:	Davidek esan zien gabaondarrei : — Zer egin dezaket zuen alde ? Zerez ordain diezazueket , Jaunaren ondarea bedeinka dezazuen ?
PRED:	David said to the Israelites , “ What can I do for you ? I can give you an inheritance for the Lord 's blessing ? ”
GOLD:	David asked them , “ What can I do for you ? How can I make amends so that you will bless the Lord 's people again ? ”

ID:	2427
INPUT:	Honek esan zien : « Zuek zeuen buruak zintzo azaltzen dituzue jendearen aurrean , baina ezagutzen du Jainkoak zuen barrua ; izan ere , gizakiak baliotsutzat daukana , Jainkoarentzat mespretxagarri da .
PRED:	And he said to them , “ You are righteous in front of the people , but God knows the heart of your heart ; for the heart of man is holy to God .
GOLD:	Then he said to them , “ You like to appear righteous in public , but God knows your hearts . What this world honors is detestable in the sight of God .

ID:	2428
INPUT:	badira gure artean Frigia nahiz Panfiliakoak , Egipto nahiz Zirene inguruko Libia aldekoak , baita erromatarrak ere ;
PRED:	And we passed through the border of the land of Egypt , and all the inhabitants of Egypt , and the Amorites , and the Amorites ,
GOLD:	Phrygia , Pamphylia , Egypt , and the areas of Libya around Cyrene , visitors from Rome

ID:	2429
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Eta zuek zergatik hausten duzue Jainkoaren agindua zeuen usadioengatik ?
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Why do you remember the commandments of God , and do you keep the commandments of your God ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ And why do you , by your traditions , violate the direct commandments of God ?

ID:	2430
INPUT:	Horiek izan ziren Noeren semeen leinuak , nor bere ondorengo eta herrien arabera . Horiengandik sortu ziren herriak uholdearen ondoren eta hedatu munduan zehar .
PRED:	These are the sons of Noah , according to their families , according to their families , according to their families ; and the people of the earth came out of the earth .
GOLD:	These are the clans that descended from Noah 's sons , arranged by nation according to their lines of descent . All the nations of the earth descended from these clans after the great flood .

ID:	2431
INPUT:	Begiraleak oihu egin zuen : « Hemen nago , Jauna , egun osoan neure tokian , eta gauez ereneure guardia-postuan erne .
PRED:	And he cried out , saying , I am the Lord , in my place , and in my place , and in the night of my sheep .
GOLD:	Then the watchman called out , “ Day after day I have stood on the watchtower , my lord.Night after night I have remained at my post .

ID:	2432
INPUT:	Balio handiko bat aurkitzen duenean , joan , bere gauza guztiak saldu eta erosi egiten du .
PRED:	And when he find a great nation , he shall go and buy all things , and buy it .
GOLD:	When he discovered a pearl of great value , he sold everything he owned and bought it !

ID:	2433
INPUT:	Zuen aitak nire galdera egiten badu , esaiozu : « Bere sorterri Belenera albait lehen joaten uzteko eskatu zidan Davidek , urteroko oparia bere ahaide guztiekin egiteko » .
PRED:	If your father ask him , “ Tell him , ‘ Tell me to go to Bethlehem , ' he asked me to go to Bethlehem . ”
GOLD:	If your father asks where I am , tell him I asked permission to go home to Bethlehem for an annual family sacrifice .

ID:	2434
INPUT:	Geziak jaurtiz sakabanatu zituen , tximista eginez ihes eragin .
PRED:	And he cast them out , and fled , and fled .
GOLD:	He shot arrows and scattered his enemies ; his lightning flashed , and they were confused .

ID:	2435
INPUT:	Lekukoak izango dira lehenak kondenatua hiltzen , eta herri osoa ondoren . Horrela ezabatuko duzue gaiztakeria zeuen artetik .
PRED:	The witness of the witnesses will be put to death , and all the people will be put to death . Then you will be guilty of your wickedness .
GOLD:	The witnesses must throw the first stones , and then all the people may join in . In this way , you will purge the evil from among you .

ID:	2436
INPUT:	Nik , Jaun honek , zuzenbidea dut maite , lapurreta eta bidegabekeria gorroto . Leialki emango diet sariaeta betiko ituna egingo beraiekin .
PRED:	I love the Lord , and I love him , and I hate him , and I will give him a covenant for ever and ever .
GOLD:	“ For I , the Lord , love justice.I hate robbery and wrongdoing.I will faithfully reward my people for their sufferingand make an everlasting covenant with them .

ID:	2437
INPUT:	mihi-luze ez dena , lagun hurkoari kalterik egiten ez diona , auzokoa iraintzen ez duena ;
PRED:	If you do n't do anything to your neighbor 's neighbor , you do n't do what is right . You do n't want to do .
GOLD:	Those who refuse to gossipor harm their neighborsor speak evil of their friends .

ID:	2438
INPUT:	Haiek , ordea , ez zuten ulertzen zer ari zitzaien ; galdetzera , berriz , ez ziren ausartzen .
PRED:	But they did not understand what he had said . But they asked him not to ask him .
GOLD:	They did n't understand what he was saying , however , and they were afraid to ask him what he meant .

ID:	2439
INPUT:	eta Jaunaren etxeko eta erregearen jauregiko altxorrez jabetu . Dena harrapatu zuen , baita Salomonek eginiko urrezko babeskiak ere .
PRED:	And he took all the vessels of the house of the Lord , and took the vessels of the king 's house , and the vessels of the king 's house , and all the vessels of gold .
GOLD:	He ransacked the treasuries of the Lord 's Temple and the royal palace ; he stole everything , including all the gold shields Solomon had made .

ID:	2440
INPUT:	Baimen gisa diotsuet hori , ez agindu gisa .
PRED:	But I say to you , “ Do n't do this thing . ”
GOLD:	I say this as a concession , not as a command .

ID:	2441
INPUT:	Batzarrak bekatuen barkamena eskatu
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The People Confess Their Sins

ID:	2442
INPUT:	baizik eta beregana dezala gure bihotza , gu beraren bidean ibil gaitezen eta gure gurasoei eman zizkien agindu , lege eta erabakiak bete ditzagun .
PRED:	but let us go to his heart , and let us walk on his way , and keep the commandments and the statutes , and the statutes , which he commanded our fathers .
GOLD:	May he give us the desire to do his will in everything and to obey all the commands , decrees , and regulations that he gave our ancestors .

ID:	2443
INPUT:	Adoretsu nago , ene Jainko , adoretsu . Kantatu eta soinua joko dizut .
PRED:	I will praise you , O God , and I will sing praises to you , and I will praise you .
GOLD:	Wake up , my heart ! Wake up , O lyre and harp ! I will wake the dawn with my song .

ID:	2444
INPUT:	Gainera , zeuen morroi eta neskame egin nahi dituzue Judako eta Jerusalemgo gizon-emakumeok . Horrela , ez ote zarete zeuek ere errudun bihurtuko Jaunaren , zeuen Jainkoaren , aurrean ?
PRED:	But if you want to obey the Lord your God and your servant and woman in Jerusalem , you will not be guilty in the presence of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	And now you are planning to make slaves of these people from Judah and Jerusalem . What about your own sins against the Lord your God ?

ID:	2445
INPUT:	Orduan , jauregiko arduradunak , hiriko buruzagiak , arduradunek eta hezitzaileek erantzun hau bidali zioten Jehuri : « Zeure zerbitzari gaituzu eta zuk esana eginen dugu . Ez dugu inor ere errege izendatuko . Egizu egokien iruditzen zaizuna » .
PRED:	And the elders of the city , and the princes of the city , and the elders of the city sent unto Jehu , saying , We are thy servants , and we will do what thou hast commanded us , and we will do .
GOLD:	So the palace and city administrators , together with the elders and the guardians of the king 's sons , sent this message to Jehu : “ We are your servants and will do anything you tell us . We will not make anyone king ; do whatever you think is best . ”

ID:	2446
INPUT:	Gero , Ben-Hinom haranaren aurreko mendiaren ertzeraino jaisten zen , refatarren lautadaren iparraldera , eta , Ben-Hinom haranean behera , jebustarren hiria zegoeneko mendi-hegiaren hegoaldetik igaroz , En-Rogeleraino heltzen zen .
PRED:	Then he went down to the top of the valley of the valley of the valley of the Amorites , and went down to the valley of the valley of the Amorites , which is in the valley of the Amorites . And he went down to the top of the valley .
GOLD:	and down to the base of the mountain beside the valley of Ben-Hinnom , at the northern end of the valley of Rephaim . From there it went down the valley of Hinnom , crossing south of the slope where the Jebusites lived , and continued down to En-rogel .

ID:	2447
INPUT:	Haren patuaz izu-ikaratu egiten dira denak , bai ekialdekoak , bai mendebaldekoak :
PRED:	They are afraid of his name , and all the east , and all the east and the west .
GOLD:	People in the west are appalled at their fate ; people in the east are horrified .

ID:	2448
INPUT:	Pazkoa eta Legamia gabeko Ogien Jaia
PRED:	The Passover and the Passover
GOLD:	Celebration of First Harvest

ID:	2449
INPUT:	( Mk 2 , 13-17 ; Lk 5 , <unk> )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus Heals in Response to Faith

ID:	2450
INPUT:	JESUSEN AURKEZPENA ( 1 , 5 — 4 , 13 )
PRED:	The Lord
GOLD:	The Birth of John the Baptist Foretold

ID:	2451
INPUT:	nagusiak eman badio emaztea , eta honek seme-alabak sortu , emaztea eta seme-alabak nagusiarenak dira , eta esklaboa bakarrik joango da .
PRED:	And if his master has given him his wife , and his sons and children , and children , and children , and children , and children , and his wife shall go .
GOLD:	“ If his master gave him a wife while he was a slave and they had sons or daughters , then only the man will be free in the seventh year , but his wife and children will still belong to his master .

ID:	2452
INPUT:	Orduan , erregeak Joiada apaiz nagusiari dei egin eta esan zion : « Zergatik ez zara ahalegindu lebitarrek Judan eta Jerusalemen zerga bil zezaten ? Jaunaren zerbitzari Moisesek eta israeldarren biltzar osoak ezarri zuten zerga hori , Jaunaren itun-agiria gordetzen zen oihal-etxolarako .
PRED:	Then the king called the high priest , and said to him , “ Why do you not keep the commandments of the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites , and all the congregation of Judah , and the congregation of the covenant of the Lord , and the tabernacle of the covenant of the covenant of the covenant of the Lord .
GOLD:	So the king called for Jehoiada the high priest and asked him , “ Why have n't you demanded that the Levites go out and collect the Temple taxes from the towns of Judah and from Jerusalem ? Moses , the servant of the Lord , levied this tax on the community of Israel in order to maintain the Tabernacle of the Covenant . ”

ID:	2453
INPUT:	Orduan , Jesusek esan zion : — Zorionekoa zu , Simon , Jonasen semea , hori ez baitizu hezur-mamizko inork agertu , zeruko nire Aitak baizik .
PRED:	Jesus said to him , “ Blessed are you , Simon , son of Joseph , because no man has seen these bones except my Father in heaven . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ You are blessed , Simon son of John , because my Father in heaven has revealed this to you . You did not learn this from any human being .

ID:	2454
INPUT:	Luzaroegi bizi izan naiz hemen bakea gorroto dutenekin !
PRED:	I have been a long time for peace , and I hate those who hate me .
GOLD:	I am tired of livingamong people who hate peace .

ID:	2455
INPUT:	Abixairekin atera ziren Jerusalemdik Joaben gizonak , keretarrak , peletarrak eta gudaririk adoretsuenak Bikriren seme Xebaren ondoren .
PRED:	And Joab and the men of Jerusalem went out of Jerusalem , and the men of Joab , and the Levites , and Joab the son of Shealtiel , after him .
GOLD:	So Abishai and Joab , together with the king 's bodyguard and all the mighty warriors , set out from Jerusalem to go after Sheba .

ID:	2456
INPUT:	Zaude adi nire deiadarrari , lur jota bainago erabat ! Libra nazazu pertsegitzaileengandik , ni baino indartsuagoak baitira .
PRED:	Be strong and cry out to me , for I am better than for you , for I am more powerful than I am .
GOLD:	Bring me out of prisonso I can thank you.The godly will crowd around me , for you are good to me . ”

ID:	2457
INPUT:	« Onartu egin duzue gaur Jaunak proposatua , hau da : bera izango duzuela zeuen Jainko , berari jarraituko diozuela , beraren lege , agindu eta erabakiak beteko dituzuela eta esana egingo .
PRED:	“ You have heard that the Lord your God will be your God , and you will obey his commands and commands .
GOLD:	You have declared today that the Lord is your God . And you have promised to walk in his ways , and to obey his decrees , commands , and regulations , and to do everything he tells you .

ID:	2458
INPUT:	Jerusalemdarrei gezurrezkoa iruditu zitzaien iragarpen hau , hitzarmena egina baitzuten babiloniarrekin ; baina Babiloniako erregeak beren errua aurpegiratuko die , eta preso hartuko .
PRED:	And he made a false covenant in Jerusalem , and he made a covenant with me , but the king of Babylon shall take away his face .
GOLD:	“ And now , son of man , prophesy concerning the Ammonites and their mockery . Give them this message from the Sovereign Lord : “ A sword , a swordis drawn for your slaughter.It is polished to destroy , flashing like lightning !

ID:	2459
INPUT:	Herrien artean goretsiko zaitut , Jauna , nazioen artean kantatuko .
PRED:	I will praise you among the nations ; I will praise you among the nations .
GOLD:	For your unfailing love is as high as the heavens.Your faithfulness reaches to the clouds .

ID:	2460
INPUT:	Lehen-semeari Manases eman zion izen , esanez : « Jainkoak ahantzarazi dizkit neure atsekabe eta ahaide guztiak » .
PRED:	And Manasseh called his firstborn son Manasseh , saying , God has given me rest and all his brethren .
GOLD:	Joseph named his older son Manasseh , for he said , “ God has made me forget all my troubles and everyone in my father 's family . ”

ID:	2461
INPUT:	Beraz , Jauna baztertu eta Baal eta Astarteren idoloak gurtu zituzten .
PRED:	So they left the Lord and worshiped Baal .
GOLD:	They abandoned the Lord to serve Baal and the images of Ashtoreth .

ID:	2462
INPUT:	Fedeari esker eskaini zion Abelek Jainkoari Kainek baino opari ederragoa ; horregatik , Jainkoak zintzotzat aitortu zuen Abel eta honen eskaintzak onartu , eta fedeari esker hitz egiten du Abelek , hilda gero ere .
PRED:	By faith he offered sacrifices to God , for it was good to him , because of the righteous and offered sacrifices to the righteous and to the faith of his faith .
GOLD:	It was by faith that Abel brought a more acceptable offering to God than Cain did . Abel 's offering gave evidence that he was a righteous man , and God showed his approval of his gifts . Although Abel is long dead , he still speaks to us by his example of faith .

ID:	2463
INPUT:	Gero , Sabako erreginak lau mila kilo urre baino gehiago eta , gainera , egundoko usaingarri- eta harribitxi-multzo handia eman zion erregeari . Ez zen behin ere izan Sabako erreginak Salomon erregeari eman ziona bezalako usaingarririk .
PRED:	And the king made a thousand talents of gold , and of gold , and of gold , and of precious stones , and of oil , and of oil , and of oil , for Solomon had not given to King Solomon .
GOLD:	Then she gave the king a gift of 9,000 pounds of gold , great quantities of spices , and precious jewels . Never before had there been spices as fine as those the queen of Sheba gave to King Solomon .

ID:	2464
INPUT:	Aterrenak , hots , Ezekiasen ondorengoak , 98 ;
PRED:	The sons of Hezekiah , the sons of Hezekiah , the sons of Hezekiah ;
GOLD:	The family of Ater ( descendants of Hezekiah ) 98

ID:	2465
INPUT:	Akaz erregea hil zen urtean , mezu hau iragarri zuen Isaiasek :
PRED:	And it came to pass in the year of King Ahaz , that Isaiah died , saying ,
GOLD:	This message came to me the year King Ahaz died :

ID:	2466
INPUT:	Tesalonikan nintzelarik ere bidali zenidaten behin eta birritan nire premietarako behar nuena .
PRED:	But you sent me to Ephesus , and you sent me away to Ephesus . You sent me to a few days .
GOLD:	Even when I was in Thessalonica you sent help more than once .

ID:	2467
INPUT:	Beteko ditut herrialde horretan , egin nizkion mehatxu guztiak , hau da , nazioen aurka Jeremiasek nire izenean iragarri eta liburu honetan idatzita daudenak .
PRED:	I will bring all the nations in the land , and I will destroy all the nations that I have spoken against them in my name , and they are written in this book .
GOLD:	I will bring upon them all the terrors I have promised in this book — all the penalties announced by Jeremiah against the nations .

ID:	2468
INPUT:	eta bananduko balitz , ez dadila berriro ezkon , edo bakeak egin ditzala senarrarekin . Eta senarrak ez dezala zapuztu emaztea .
PRED:	If I do n't marry her husband , she must not marry her husband . Then she must not marry her husband .
GOLD:	But if she does leave him , let her remain single or else be reconciled to him . And the husband must not leave his wife .

ID:	2469
INPUT:	Noemik bazuen bere senar Elimeleken aldetik ahaide bat , aberatsa eta itzal handiko gizona , Booz zeritzana .
PRED:	She took her husband from her husband 's wife , and she was a man of her husband 's wife , and she was named Boaz .
GOLD:	Now there was a wealthy and influential man in Bethlehem named Boaz , who was a relative of Naomi 's husband , Elimelech .

ID:	2470
INPUT:	Hartu zuen zartagina eta atera zituen , anaiaren aurrean ipiniz . Honek , ordea , ez zuen jan nahi izan , eta agindu zuen : — Alde hemendik denok ! Denak irten zirenean ,
PRED:	And he took the covenant and brought them out , and set them before his brother , but he did not eat ; and he commanded him , and they all went out .
GOLD:	But when she set the serving tray before him , he refused to eat . “ Everyone get out of here , ” Amnon told his servants . So they all left .

ID:	2471
INPUT:	Ene gogoa zure egarri da gauean , ene barrenakzu bilatzen zaitu goizean . Zuk zeure nahiamunduari azaltzeanzure zuzentasuna zer denikasten dute lurtarrek .
PRED:	My soul is great in the morning , and in the morning , and in the morning , and in the morning , the sons of the earth do what thou hast said .
GOLD:	In the night I search for you ; in the morning I earnestly seek you.For only when you come to judge the earthwill people learn what is right .

ID:	2472
INPUT:	Josi zapiak elkarri bosnako bi sailetan ,
PRED:	And thou shalt put them in the five corners of the five corners of the congregation ,
GOLD:	Join five of these curtains together to make one long curtain , then join the other five into a second long curtain .

ID:	2473
INPUT:	Orduan , hogeita lau zaharrek eta lau izaki bizidunek ahuspeztu eta tronuan eseria dagoen Jainkoa gurtu zuten , esanez : « Amen ! Aleluia ! »
PRED:	Then the elders and the elders bowed down and worshiped God , saying , “ Amen ! ”
GOLD:	Then the twenty-four elders and the four living beings fell down and worshiped God , who was sitting on the throne . They cried out , “ Amen ! Praise the Lord ! ”

ID:	2474
INPUT:	etxe gainean dagoena ez bedi jaits etxetik ezer hartzera ,
PRED:	He that is on the house shall not come down from the house , that he may not go down .
GOLD:	A person out on the deck of a roof must not go down into the house to pack .

ID:	2475
INPUT:	Senitarteka harturik , zegokien zatia herritarrei eman ondoren , aparte jartzen zuten Jaunari erre-oparitzat eskaini beharrekoa , Moisesen liburuan idatzia dagoen bezala , eta hori bera egiten zuten idiekin .
PRED:	And when the sons of the sons of the sons of the people were taken , they offered a burnt offering unto the Lord , as it is written in the book of Moses , as it is written in the book of Moses .
GOLD:	They divided the burnt offerings among the people by their family groups , so they could offer them to the Lord as prescribed in the Book of Moses . They did the same with the cattle .

ID:	2476
INPUT:	Hona hemen ni zure aurka ! Mendia bezain handi bihurtu zara , mendi hondatzaile , lur osoaren hondatzaile ! Eskua zure aurka luzatuko dut , harkaitzetatik amilduko zaituteta errauts-mendi bihurtuko .
PRED:	This is what I am against you . You have become like a great mountain , and all the earth has become a desolation , and I will lay your hand on you , and I will cut you down from the rock .
GOLD:	“ Look , O mighty mountain , destroyer of the earth ! I am your enemy , ” says the Lord . “ I will raise my fist against you , to knock you down from the heights.When I am finished , you will be nothing but a heap of burnt rubble .

ID:	2477
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Edom herriakgaiztakeriarik asko egin du , zein baino zein handiago . Eta beraz , zigortu egingo dut ! Ezpataz aurrean erabili baititubere anaia israeldarrak , errukia itoz ; gogor eutsi dio suminari , eten gabe gorrotoari ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Edom has done wrong . I will punish them with the sword . I will punish them with the sword . I will punish the people of Israel with the sword . I will punish their brother 's sin .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Edom have sinned again and again , and I will not let them go unpunished ! They chased down their relatives , the Israelites , with swords , showing them no mercy.In their rage , they slashed them continuallyand were unrelenting in their anger .

ID:	2478
INPUT:	Gelan gizon batzuk zelatan zeudelarik , Dalilak esan zion Samsoni : « Horra ! Filistearrak ! » Samsonek , ordea , eten egin zituen sokak , iztupa-haria suak ukitzean eten ohi den bezala . Eta ez zuten jakin nondik zuen halako indarra .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when he was in the house of the Philistines , that Samson said unto him , Behold , the Philistines are ! And Samson said unto him , Behold , the Philistines are in his hand ; and he did not know what was right in his hand .
GOLD:	She had hidden some men in one of the inner rooms of her house , and she cried out , “ Samson ! The Philistines have come to capture you ! ” But Samson snapped the bowstrings as a piece of string snaps when it is burned by a fire . So the secret of his strength was not discovered .

ID:	2479
INPUT:	Israel daJaun ahalguztidunaren mahastia ; Judako herria , haren landare-sail kutuna . Zuzenbidea espero zuenharengandik , eta horra : zuzengabekeria ! Justizia espero zuen , eta horra : aieneak !
PRED:	The vineyard of the Lord of hosts , the vineyard of Judah , the people of Judah , and the land of Judah , and the righteousness of righteousness , and righteousness , and righteousness , and righteousness , and righteousness , and righteousness .
GOLD:	The nation of Israel is the vineyard of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies.The people of Judah are his pleasant garden.He expected a crop of justice , but instead he found oppression.He expected to find righteousness , but instead he heard cries of violence .

ID:	2480
INPUT:	Zeuen buruak engainatzen ari zarete ; lehenengo , zeuen ararteko egin nauzue , Jaunari , zeuen Jainkoari , otoitz egin eta haren erantzuna osorik zuei jakinarazteko eskatuz , beteko zenutela eta ;
PRED:	You also are too hard for yourselves to pray to the Lord your God , so that you may pray and pray to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	For you were not being honest when you sent me to pray to the Lord your God for you . You said , ‘ Just tell us what the Lord our God says , and we will do it ! '

ID:	2481
INPUT:	« Gogoan hartu hau : etxeko nagusiak , lapurra zein ordutan etorriko den jakingo balu , ez luke etxea zulatzen utziko .
PRED:	Remember this : If the master of the house is coming , then the master of the house would not leave his house .
GOLD:	“ Understand this : If a homeowner knew exactly when a burglar was coming , he would not permit his house to be broken into .

ID:	2482
INPUT:	Orduan , Eliakimek , Xebnak eta Joahek hau erantzun zioten asiriar ordezkari nagusiari : — Mesedez , hitz egiguzu arameeraz , ulertzen baitugu . Ez mintzatu hebreeraz , harresi gainean dagoen jendea entzuten ari da eta .
PRED:	And they said unto the king of the field , and unto the servants of the Chaldeans , and said unto the lord of the Chaldeans , We have heard the words of the people that speak unto us . And they heard not the word of the people .
GOLD:	Then Eliakim , Shebna , and Joah said to the Assyrian chief of staff , “ Please speak to us in Aramaic , for we understand it well . Do n't speak in Hebrew , for the people on the wall will hear . ”

ID:	2483
INPUT:	Salomon erregeak eta beronekin kutxaren aitzinean bildua zegoen israeldar batzar osoak zenbatu ezin ahalako ardi- eta idi-multzo handia eskaini zuten oparitan .
PRED:	King Solomon and all the people of Israel gathered together together with him in the ark of the ark of the sheep , the sheep , the sheep , the sheep , the sheep , and the sheep .
GOLD:	There , before the Ark , King Solomon and the entire community of Israel sacrificed so many sheep , goats , and cattle that no one could keep count !

ID:	2484
INPUT:	Gaitzetik aldendu behar du eta on dena egin , bakea bilatu eta haren bidetik ibili .
PRED:	But he must turn away from him , and do what is good , and turn away from him .
GOLD:	Turn away from evil and do good.Search for peace , and work to maintain it .

ID:	2485
INPUT:	Orduan , jendeari lurrean esertzeko agindu zion . Gero , zazpi ogiak hartu eta , Jainkoari esker oneko otoitza egin ondoren , zatitu eta bere ikasleei eman zizkien , bana zitzaten . Haiek jendeari eskaini zizkioten .
PRED:	And he commanded the people to sit down on the earth . And he took seven loaves , and gave thanks to God , and gave them to his disciples , and they offered them to the people .
GOLD:	So Jesus told all the people to sit down on the ground . Then he took the seven loaves , thanked God for them , and broke them into pieces . He gave them to his disciples , who distributed the bread to the crowd .

ID:	2486
INPUT:	Kanaan lurraldearen mugak
PRED:	The People of Canaan
GOLD:	Boundaries of the Land

ID:	2487
INPUT:	— Maisu , zein da legeko agindurik nagusiena ?
PRED:	“ Teacher , what is the law ? ” he asked , “ Teacher , what is the law ? ”
GOLD:	“ Teacher , which is the most important commandment in the law of Moses ? ”

ID:	2488
INPUT:	Erregearen kideko ziren gazteek erantzun zioten : — Hona zer erantzun behar diozun zure aitak ezarri zion uztarria arintzeko eskatu dizun herri horri : « Nire atzamar txikia lodiagoa da gure aitaren gerria baino .
PRED:	The young men of the king answered , “ This is what your father said to you , ‘ This is what your father has said to this people , ‘ My father is greater than my father . '
GOLD:	The young men replied , “ This is what you should tell those complainers who want a lighter burden : ‘ My little finger is thicker than my father 's waist !

ID:	2489
INPUT:	Bedeinkapenez eta mesedez bete duzu , urre garbizko koroa ezarri .
PRED:	You have blessed him with blessing , and you have made him pure gold .
GOLD:	He asked you to preserve his life , and you granted his request.The days of his life stretch on forever .

ID:	2490
INPUT:	Erregeak , emakume haren hitzak aditzean , urratu egin zituen jantziak . Harresian zebilenez , ikusi zuen herriak zaku-jantzia zeramala erregeak soinekoen azpitik , larru gainean .
PRED:	When the king heard his words , he tore his clothes , and he tore his clothes in the wall . And the people saw his clothes on the top of the house .
GOLD:	When the king heard this , he tore his clothes in despair . And as the king walked along the wall , the people could see that he was wearing burlap under his robe next to his skin .

ID:	2491
INPUT:	« Ez dut erregutzen hauen alde bakarrik , baita berauen predikuaren bidez niregan sinetsiko dutenen alde ere .
PRED:	“ I do n't pray for them , for they will believe in me . They will believe in me .
GOLD:	“ I am praying not only for these disciples but also for all who will ever believe in me through their message .

ID:	2492
INPUT:	« Nor da Nilo bezala hazten den hori , ibai oldartsuen antzeraharrotzen den hori ?
PRED:	“ Who is like the river ? Who is like a mighty man ?
GOLD:	“ Who is this , rising like the Nile at floodtime , overflowing all the land ?

ID:	2493
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : « Zatozte nirekin eta giza arrantzale egingo zaituztet » .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Come with me , and I will make you ruler over men . ”
GOLD:	Jesus called out to them , “ Come , follow me , and I will show you how to fish for people ! ”

ID:	2494
INPUT:	Zaturenak <unk> ;
PRED:	The sons of Pashhur , three hundred and twenty .
GOLD:	The family of Zattu845

ID:	2495
INPUT:	Jo zuen turuta bigarren aingeruak , eta sutan dagoen mendi handi bat bezalako zerbait itsasora amildu zen : itsasoaren herena odol bihurtu zen .
PRED:	And the second angel blew his trumpet , and he fell down like a great mountain , as a great mountain that is in the sea ; and the blood of the sea was turned into blood .
GOLD:	Then the second angel blew his trumpet , and a great mountain of fire was thrown into the sea . One-third of the water in the sea became blood ,

ID:	2496
INPUT:	« Kontuz lege-maisuekin ! Gogoko baitute harro-harro jantzita ibiltzea eta plazetan jendeak beraiei agur egitea ; gogoko dituzte sinagogetan lehenengo aulkiak eta jai-otorduetan mahaiburuak ;
PRED:	“ Remember the law , for they will remember the law , and they will take their garments in the streets , and they will be filled with them in the streets , and in the synagogues , and in the synagogues , and in the synagogues , and in the synagogues .
GOLD:	“ Beware of these teachers of religious law ! For they like to parade around in flowing robes and love to receive respectful greetings as they walk in the marketplaces . And how they love the seats of honor in the synagogues and the head table at banquets .

ID:	2497
INPUT:	asmo garbikoarentzat garbi , asmo txarrekoarentzat zorrotz .
PRED:	You are clean to those who are clean , but you are clean .
GOLD:	To the pure you show yourself pure , but to the crooked you show yourself shrewd .

ID:	2498
INPUT:	Larrainak eta dolareakez diete gosea kenduko , ardoak huts egingo die .
PRED:	They will be hungry , and they will not be hungry ; they will drink wine .
GOLD:	So now your harvests will be too small to feed you.There will be no grapes for making new wine .

ID:	2499
INPUT:	Baditut artegian ez dauden beste ardi batzuk ere ; haiek ere erakarri egin behar ditut ; nire ahotsa entzungo dute eta artalde bakarra izango dira , artzain bakarraren gidaritzapean .
PRED:	I will bring some sheep among them , and they will bring them to me , and they will hear my voice , and they will hear my voice , and they will hear the voice of the shepherd .
GOLD:	I have other sheep , too , that are not in this sheepfold . I must bring them also . They will listen to my voice , and there will be one flock with one shepherd .

ID:	2500
INPUT:	Eta zuen legean dago idatzia , bi lagunen testigantza baliozkoa dela .
PRED:	And it is written in the law , that he is a witness of two friends .
GOLD:	Your own law says that if two people agree about something , their witness is accepted as fact .

ID:	2501
INPUT:	Gogora iezaiezu hau eta eskatu , arren , Jainkoaren izenean , ez daitezela hitzei buruzko eztabaidatan nahas , hori ez baita on ezertarako , entzuten dituztenen hondamendirako baino .
PRED:	Remember this , and pray for it , for it is not written in the name of God , for it is not written in the name of God , for it is not better than to hear them .
GOLD:	Remind everyone about these things , and command them in God 's presence to stop fighting over words . Such arguments are useless , and they can ruin those who hear them .

ID:	2502
INPUT:	Errespetatu , beraz , larunbata , egun sakratua baita zuentzat . Larunbata profanatzen duenak heriotza-zigorra izango du ; egun horretan lan egiten duena herritik bota egingo dute .
PRED:	So you must be put to death on the Sabbath day . If you do this , you must be put to death on the Sabbath day , you will be put to death . If you do this , you will be put to death .
GOLD:	You must keep the Sabbath day , for it is a holy day for you . Anyone who desecrates it must be put to death ; anyone who works on that day will be cut off from the community .

ID:	2503
INPUT:	Eliasek erantzun : — Jauna , Jainko ahalguztiduna , zureganako maiteminak erretzen nau , israeldarrek zurekiko ituna hautsi dutelako , zure aldareak hondatu eta zure profetak ezpataz hil dituztelako . Ni bakarra gelditu naiz , eta nire bila ere badabiltza bizia kentzeko .
PRED:	And he said unto him , Lord God of hosts , the God of hosts , because the children of Israel have broken the covenant of thy covenant , because the sons of Israel have broken thy covenant , and have destroyed thy altars , and I am alive .
GOLD:	He replied again , “ I have zealously served the Lord God Almighty . But the people of Israel have broken their covenant with you , torn down your altars , and killed every one of your prophets . I am the only one left , and now they are trying to kill me , too . ”

ID:	2504
INPUT:	Gerra sorraraziko dut Gogen kontra nire mendi guztietan . Honela diot nik , Jainko Jaunak . Eta haren gerlariek elkar hilko dute .
PRED:	And I will bring a sword against me in all the hill country , saith the Lord God : and they shall be put to death .
GOLD:	I will summon the sword against you on all the hills of Israel , says the Sovereign Lord . Your men will turn their swords against each other .

ID:	2505
INPUT:	Jobek bere burua errugabe aitortu
PRED:	Job 's Death
GOLD:	Job 's Final Protest of Innocence

ID:	2506
INPUT:	« Beraz , ene iritziz , ez zaie alferreko oztoporik ezarri behar Jainkoarengana bihurtzen diren jentilei .
PRED:	Therefore , I pray you , that you may not be put to the Gentiles who turn to God .
GOLD:	“ And so my judgment is that we should not make it difficult for the Gentiles who are turning to God .

ID:	2507
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . « Liliak » doinuan . Koreren semeen poema . Amodio-kanta .
PRED:	O God , you are my God , and you are my God ; you are my God , and you are my God .
GOLD:	Beautiful words stir my heart.I will recite a lovely poem about the king , for my tongue is like the pen of a skillful poet .

ID:	2508
INPUT:	Izan ere , gerta daiteke , hark , mila urte bi aldiz bizi arren , bere ondasunak ez gozatzea . Baina , azkenean , ez al doaz guztiak toki berera ?
PRED:	For how long shall he live for two thousand years ? But when the end of his inheritance is not in the end ?
GOLD:	He might live a thousand years twice over but still not find contentment . And since he must die like everyone else — well , what 's the use ?

ID:	2509
INPUT:	haizeak aurpegian jo ninduen , gorputzeko ilea tentearazi .
PRED:	He turned my face to my face , and he caused my body to seek my body .
GOLD:	A spirit swept past my face , and my hair stood on end .

ID:	2510
INPUT:	Berrogeitik gora ziren horrela hitzartuak .
PRED:	And all the assembly of the congregation came out of the congregation .
GOLD:	There were more than forty of them in the conspiracy .

ID:	2511
INPUT:	Urreztatu urre garbiz barne eta kanpoaldeak , eta ezarri urrezko hegala inguru guztian .
PRED:	And thou shalt make a gold rings of pure gold , and cover it with pure gold round about it .
GOLD:	Overlay it inside and outside with pure gold , and run a molding of gold all around it .

ID:	2512
INPUT:	Ez dut gogoratuko hark egindako bekaturik ; zuzenbidez eta justiziaz jokatu duenez , bizi egingo da .
PRED:	I will remember what he has done . He will not remember what he has done . He will live in his ways .
GOLD:	None of their past sins will be brought up again , for they have done what is just and right , and they will surely live .

ID:	2513
INPUT:	Morroiak eraman zion mutikoa amari eta honek magalean hartu zuen haurra ; baina eguerdian hil egin zitzaion .
PRED:	And the servant brought her to the boy , and she took the child in his mother , and she died in the same day .
GOLD:	So the servant took him home , and his mother held him on her lap . But around noontime he died .

ID:	2514
INPUT:	Joiariben familian Matenai ; Jedaiasen familian Uzi ;
PRED:	Of the family of Jehoiada , Shemaiah the family of Jeremiah , the family of Jeremiah ;
GOLD:	Mattenai was leader of the family of Joiarib.Uzzi was leader of the family of Jedaiah .

ID:	2515
INPUT:	Errekaren bi ertzetan , mota guztietako fruta-arbolak haziko dira ; ez zaizkie hostoak sekula zimelduko , eta etengabe emango dituzte fruituak , hilero emanaldi bat , santutegitik ateratzen den urak ureztatzen baititu . Fruituak elikagai izango dira , eta hostoak sendagai » .
PRED:	And they shall eat fruit in the midst of the river , and they shall eat fruit , and they shall not eat fruit ; and the fruit of the sanctuary shall bear fruit , and the fruit of the sanctuary , and the fruit of the sanctuary , and the fruit of the sanctuary shall be healed .
GOLD:	Fruit trees of all kinds will grow along both sides of the river . The leaves of these trees will never turn brown and fall , and there will always be fruit on their branches . There will be a new crop every month , for they are watered by the river flowing from the Temple . The fruit will be for food and the leaves for healing . ”

ID:	2516
INPUT:	Jerusalemera , Jaunaren etxea egon zen tokira heldu zirenean , familiaburu batzuek borondatezko opariak egin zituzten , berriro Jaunaren etxea toki berean eraikitzeko .
PRED:	When they came to Jerusalem , some of the families of the house of the Lord came to Jerusalem to build the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	When they arrived at the Temple of the Lord in Jerusalem , some of the family leaders made voluntary offerings toward the rebuilding of God 's Temple on its original site ,

ID:	2517
INPUT:	Orain , ordea , ez dut jokatukolehengo aldietan bezalaherri honetan bizirik geldituekin . Hala agintzen dizuet nik , Jaun ahalguztidun honek .
PRED:	But now I have not walked in this land as before the first time , saith the Lord of hosts , the God of hosts .
GOLD:	“ But now I will not treat the remnant of my people as I treated them before , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	2518
INPUT:	Danen leinutik , Amixadairen seme Ahiezer ;
PRED:	from the tribe of Dan , Jozabad son of Hallohesh ,
GOLD:	DanAhiezer son of Ammishaddai

ID:	2519
INPUT:	Paulo Erromarako ontzian
PRED:	Paul and Silas
GOLD:	The Storm at Sea

ID:	2520
INPUT:	Baina Danielek , bere burua erregearen jan-edariz ez kutsatzea erabakia zuenez , janari kutsatu haietara ez behartzeko eskatu zion jauregiko funtzionarioburuari .
PRED:	But Daniel said to the king , “ You must not eat the food of the king 's kingdom . ”
GOLD:	But Daniel was determined not to defile himself by eating the food and wine given to them by the king . He asked the chief of staff for permission not to eat these unacceptable foods .

ID:	2521
INPUT:	Lotsa dira idolozale guztiak , huskeria horiekin harro daudenak . Ahuspez Jaunaren aurrean beste jainko guztiak !
PRED:	All their idols are ashamed , and all their idols are ashamed , and all their idols bow down before the Lord .
GOLD:	Those who worship idols are disgraced — all who brag about their worthless gods — for every god must bow to him .

ID:	2522
INPUT:	Jaunaren legean ezarritako oparia ere eskaini zuten : bi usapal edo bi usakume .
PRED:	And they offered the burnt offering on the law of the Lord : two young , two young , and two young , and two young .
GOLD:	So they offered the sacrifice required in the law of the Lord — “ either a pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons . ”

ID:	2523
INPUT:	Susako juduak , berriz , bildu ziren Adar hilaren hamalauan ere , eta hirurehun gizaseme hil zituzten Susan ; hala ere , ez zituzten haien ondasunak ostu .
PRED:	But the Jews gathered together in the month of the month of the month , in the month of the month , and they killed three hundred men , but they did not receive their wealth .
GOLD:	Then the Jews at Susa gathered together on March 8 and killed 300 more men , and again they took no plunder .

ID:	2524
INPUT:	Zure bizia niretzat gaur hain baliotsua izan den bezala , hala izan bedi nirea Jaunarentzat . Libra nazala atsekabe orotatik !
PRED:	As this day is your life today to the Lord , so let it be to me , as it is a living thing to the Lord .
GOLD:	Now may the Lord value my life , even as I have valued yours today . May he rescue me from all my troubles . ”

ID:	2525
INPUT:	Zuetako norbait gaixo dagoela ? Dei egin diezaiela eliz arduradunei , gaixoaren alde otoitz egin eta Jaunaren izenean olioz i<unk> dezaten .
PRED:	If any of you are sick , called to the elders who are sick , pray for the sick , and pray to the Lord .
GOLD:	Are any of you sick ? You should call for the elders of the church to come and pray over you , anointing you with oil in the name of the Lord .

ID:	2526
INPUT:	Ene seme , zergatik liluratuko zaitu lotsabako batek ? Zergatik besarkatuko duzu emakume arrotzaren gerria ?
PRED:	My son , why will you be ashamed ? Why will you be ashamed ? Why will you be ashamed of a woman ?
GOLD:	Why be captivated , my son , by an immoral woman , or fondle the breasts of a promiscuous woman ?

ID:	2527
INPUT:	Baina epel zarelako eta ez bero , ez hotz , botagura emateraino nazkatzen nauzu .
PRED:	But you have not turned away from me , nor have you turned me away to a long time .
GOLD:	But since you are like lukewarm water , neither hot nor cold , I will spit you out of my mouth !

ID:	2528
INPUT:	Bederatzigarren izurria : ilunpeak
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	A Plague of Darkness

ID:	2529
INPUT:	Iruten trebeak ziren emakumeek beren eskuz ehunduriko purpura more , gorri eta gorrimina eta liho fina ekarri zituzten .
PRED:	And the women of the host of their hands were made of blue , purple , purple , scarlet , and scarlet , and scarlet .
GOLD:	All the women who were skilled in sewing and spinning prepared blue , purple , and scarlet thread , and fine linen cloth .

ID:	2530
INPUT:	Han , Edom lurraldearen mugan , Jaunak esan zien Moisesi eta Aaroni :
PRED:	And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron , saying ,
GOLD:	There , on the border of the land of Edom , the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,

ID:	2531
INPUT:	Goretsazue Jauna , nazio guztiok , ospa ezazue , herri guztiok !
PRED:	Praise the Lord , all the nations , praise him , all the peoples .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord , all you nations.Praise him , all you people of the earth .

ID:	2532
INPUT:	Ezin dugu atzeman Ahaltsua , nagusi da indar eta zuzenbidez , justiziaz aberatsa , ez du inor zanpatzen .
PRED:	We can not give it to the Almighty , and justice , and justice , and justice , and justice , and justice , and not one shall be rich .
GOLD:	We can not imagine the power of the Almighty ; but even though he is just and righteous , he does not destroy us .

ID:	2533
INPUT:	Begiak nahigabez lausotuak ditut , horrenbeste zorigaitzez ahulduak .
PRED:	My eyes are weak , and my eyes are weak .
GOLD:	Go away , all you who do evil , for the Lord has heard my weeping .

ID:	2534
INPUT:	Hamateko errege <unk> -k jakin zuen hondatua zuela Davidek Hadadezerren gudaroste osoa .
PRED:	And David heard that David had been destroyed , and all his army had been destroyed .
GOLD:	When King Toi of Hamath heard that David had destroyed the entire army of Hadadezer ,

ID:	2535
INPUT:	Erdiko solairurako sarrera tenpluaren eskuinaldeko saihetsean zegoen ; eskailera biribil batetik igo zitekeen erdiko solairura eta hemendik gorenekora .
PRED:	And it came to pass , that at the right side of the house of the congregation , at the right side of the house of the Lord , that the cloud was at the right side of the tabernacle , and from the midst of the tabernacle , and from the south side of the house of the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	The entrance to the bottom floor was on the south side of the Temple . There were winding stairs going up to the second floor , and another flight of stairs between the second and third floors .

ID:	2536
INPUT:	Magdalako Maria eta beste Maria hilobi aurrean eserita zeuden .
PRED:	Mary Magdalene and Mary Magdalene were sitting before the tomb .
GOLD:	Both Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were sitting across from the tomb and watching .

ID:	2537
INPUT:	Goraintziak Priska eta Akilari , Jesu Kristoren zerbitzuan laguntzaile izan ditudanei .
PRED:	Greet , Timothy , and Timothy , who served me in the service of Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	Give my greetings to Priscilla and Aquila , my co-workers in the ministry of Christ Jesus .

ID:	2538
INPUT:	Eman dezagun besteak barrutik erantzuten diola : “ Utz nazak bakean , atea itxia zegok eta haurrak eta neu oheratuak ; ezin naitekek ematera jaiki ” .
PRED:	Let us say , “ Let me go out of the spirit , let me say , ‘ Let me go out , and the child is shut up , and the child is shut up . ' ”
GOLD:	And suppose he calls out from his bedroom , ‘ Do n't bother me . The door is locked for the night , and my family and I are all in bed . I ca n't help you . '

ID:	2539
INPUT:	Egon erne , iraun sendo sinesmenean , joka gizonki eta izan indartsu .
PRED:	Be strong , and be strong in faith , and be strong .
GOLD:	Be on guard . Stand firm in the faith . Be courageous . Be strong .

ID:	2540
INPUT:	Kristau-jokabidea
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Concluding Words

ID:	2541
INPUT:	Esauren ondorengoak
PRED:	Esau 's sons
GOLD:	Descendants of Esau

ID:	2542
INPUT:	Behin batean , Jakob lapikokoa egosten ari zela , iritsi zen Esau oihanetik , oso nekatua ,
PRED:	And Jacob came to Jacob , and said , Behold , Esau was very great , and he was very strong .
GOLD:	One day when Jacob was cooking some stew , Esau arrived home from the wilderness exhausted and hungry .

ID:	2543
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	The Lord spoke to Moses , saying ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	2544
INPUT:	Jainkoaren maitasun gupidatsua
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The

ID:	2545
INPUT:	« Egun hartan , Jerusalemi erasoka etor dakizkion guztiak hondatuko ditut .
PRED:	In that day I will destroy Jerusalem , and I will destroy all the nations that are in that day .
GOLD:	For on that day I will begin to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem .

ID:	2546
INPUT:	eta , anaiengana itzulirik , esan zien : « Ez dago mutikoaren arrastorik ! Zer egin behar dut nik orain ? »
PRED:	Then he returned to his brothers and said to them , “ The boy is not rich . What can I do to me ? ”
GOLD:	Then he went back to his brothers and lamented , “ The boy is gone ! What will I do now ? ”

ID:	2547
INPUT:	Jaitsi berehala eta zoaz beroriekin kezkarik gabe , neuk bidali dizkizut eta » .
PRED:	So go down and go down with him , and I have sent you . ”
GOLD:	Get up , go downstairs , and go with them without hesitation . Do n't worry , for I have sent them . ”

ID:	2548
INPUT:	Judaren eta Israelen zoria aldatuko dut , eta behinolako egoeran ezarriko ditut berriro ;
PRED:	And I will make the altar of Judah and Israel , and I will put them in the midst of their months .
GOLD:	I will restore the fortunes of Judah and Israel and rebuild their towns .

ID:	2549
INPUT:	Horrela , itun bikainagoaren bermatzaile da Jesus .
PRED:	So Jesus was the new covenant of the new covenant .
GOLD:	Because of this oath , Jesus is the one who guarantees this better covenant with God .

ID:	2550
INPUT:	Ez duzue surik ere egingo larunbatez zeuen bizilekuetan » .
PRED:	You shall not burn any fire on the Sabbath day . ”
GOLD:	You must not even light a fire in any of your homes on the Sabbath . ”

ID:	2551
INPUT:	Aldi hartan gaixotu egin zitzaion Jeroboami bere seme Abias .
PRED:	And it came to pass at that time , that Jeroboam the son of Nebat was sick .
GOLD:	At that time Jeroboam 's son Abijah became very sick .

ID:	2552
INPUT:	ez dut begirik itxiko , ez loak hartzen utziko ,
PRED:	I will not look at my eyes ; I will not leave my eyes .
GOLD:	I will not let my eyes sleepnor close my eyelids in slumber

ID:	2553
INPUT:	eta txingarraz ahoa ukitu zidan , esanez : « Begira , txingar honekezpainak ukitu dizkizu . Kendu zaizu , beraz , gaiztakeria , barkatu bekatua » .
PRED:	And he touched my voice , and said unto me , Behold , thou hast opened thy mouth , and hast touched thee ; therefore take away thy iniquity , and forgive thy sin .
GOLD:	He touched my lips with it and said , “ See , this coal has touched your lips . Now your guilt is removed , and your sins are forgiven . ”

ID:	2554
INPUT:	Jainkoak Jeroboami emaniko hitza
PRED:	Jeroboam and Jeroboam
GOLD:	Jeroboam Rebels against Solomon

ID:	2555
INPUT:	Hark erantzun zien : “ Etsaiaren lana da hori ” . Eta morroiek : “ Joango al gara olo gaiztoa biltzera ? ”
PRED:	And he said unto them , This is the enemy 's enemies . And his servants said unto them , Shall we go into the evil ?
GOLD:	“ ‘ An enemy has done this ! ' the farmer exclaimed . “ ‘ Should we pull out the weeds ? ' they asked .

ID:	2556
INPUT:	Isuri olioa erre-oparien aldarearen eta bertako tresna guztien gainera . Honela sagaratuko duzu , eta guztiz sakratua izango da aldarea .
PRED:	And thou shalt pour oil upon the altar , and all the vessels of the altar , and all the vessels of the altar , and thou shalt make it holy .
GOLD:	Anoint the altar of burnt offering and its utensils to consecrate them . Then the altar will become absolutely holy .

ID:	2557
INPUT:	Dixon , Etzer eta Dixan . Horiek ziren Seirren ondorengoak , hortarren leinuburuak Edomen .
PRED:	These are the families of the sons of Gershon , according to their families , according to their families , according to their families .
GOLD:	Dishon , Ezer , and Dishan . These were the Horite clan leaders , the descendants of Seir , who lived in the land of Edom .

ID:	2558
INPUT:	nik ez baitut neure kabuz hitz egin , baizik eta bidali nauen Aitak agindu dit zer esan eta irakatsi .
PRED:	For I do not speak , but the Father sent me , and told me what the Father has sent me .
GOLD:	I do n't speak on my own authority . The Father who sent me has commanded me what to say and how to say it .

ID:	2559
INPUT:	Jauna zeuen Jainkoa aurretik doakizue eta zuen alde borrokatuko da , Egipton zuen begi-bistan egin zuen bezala ;
PRED:	The Lord your God will fight before you , and he will fight for you as he did in Egypt .
GOLD:	The Lord your God is going ahead of you . He will fight for you , just as you saw him do in Egypt .

ID:	2560
INPUT:	Jaunak bere herria indar dezala ! Jaunak bere herria bakeaz bedeinka dezala !
PRED:	The Lord will bless his people , and he will bless them in peace .
GOLD:	The Lord gives his people strength.The Lord blesses them with peace .

ID:	2561
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Bene-benetan diotsuet : Abraham sortu baino lehenagokoa naiz ni .
PRED:	Jesus answered them , “ Most certainly I say to you , I say to you , I am greater than Abraham . ”
GOLD:	Jesus answered , “ I tell you the truth , before Abraham was even born , ! ”

ID:	2562
INPUT:	Gemaliren seme Amiel , Danen leinukoa ;
PRED:	Of the tribe of Dan , Zechariah the son of Hallohesh ;
GOLD:	DanAmmiel son of Gemalli

ID:	2563
INPUT:	Biharamun goizean David jaiki zenerako , zuzendua zion Jaunak bere hitza <unk> -i , Daviden zerbitzura zegoen profetari , esanez :
PRED:	And it came to pass in the morning , when David rose up early in the morning , that the word of the Lord came to David the prophet , saying ,
GOLD:	The next morning the word of the Lord came to the prophet Gad , who was David 's seer . This was the message :

ID:	2564
INPUT:	« Egizu proba gurekin hamar egunez : ez eman jaten eta edaten barazkiak eta ura besterik .
PRED:	“ Make ten days with us . Do n't eat bread and drink .
GOLD:	“ Please test us for ten days on a diet of vegetables and water , ” Daniel said .

ID:	2565
INPUT:	( 2 Erg 24 , 18 — 25 , 21 ; 39 , 1-20 ; 52 , <unk> )
PRED:	King Ahaz of Judah
GOLD:	Zedekiah Rules in Judah

ID:	2566
INPUT:	nik ezarri nion muga , ateak eta morroiloak jarriz ,
PRED:	And I set the border of the tabernacle , and the bars , and the bars , and the bars , and the bars ,
GOLD:	For I locked it behind barred gates , limiting its shores .

ID:	2567
INPUT:	Egun haietan judu jainkozale asko ziren Jerusalemen , eguzkiaren azpian diren nazio guztietatik etorriak .
PRED:	In those days many of the Jews who were in Jerusalem came from all the nations in the sun .
GOLD:	At that time there were devout Jews from every nation living in Jerusalem .

ID:	2568
INPUT:	Lotsaz eta laidoz geldituko dirazure aurka lehiatzen direnak ; ezerezean galduko dirazure kontra liskarrean ari direnak .
PRED:	They will be ashamed and ashamed , and they will be ashamed of you . They will be ashamed of your enemies .
GOLD:	“ See , all your angry enemies lie there , confused and humiliated.Anyone who opposes you will dieand come to nothing .

ID:	2569
INPUT:	Gog , Jainkoaren baliabide
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	A Message for Gog

ID:	2570
INPUT:	gizonetan jakintsuena izan baitzen : Etam ezratarra , Mahol-en seme Heman , Kalkol eta Darda baino jakintsuago . Salomonen izena inguruetako lurralde guztietan zabaldu zen .
PRED:	And the wise men were in the wise men , and Shallum the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel , and the son of Shealtiel , and the son of Solomon spread out all the land round about him .
GOLD:	In return , Solomon sent him an annual payment of 100,000 bushels of wheat for his household and 110,000 gallons of pure olive oil .

ID:	2571
INPUT:	« Edozein herri edo auzotara iristen zaretela , jakizue ba ote den konfiantzako inor zuek etxean hartzeko , eta geldi zaitezte harenean herri hartatik atera arte .
PRED:	“ You know that you are going to a town or a city , and you will know that no one will trust in your house until you come out of the city .
GOLD:	“ Whenever you enter a city or village , search for a worthy person and stay in his home until you leave town .

ID:	2572
INPUT:	alderantziz , nire agindu guztiak gogoan eduki eta bete egingo dituzue , eta zeuen Jainko honentzat sagaratuak izango zarete .
PRED:	But you will remember all my commands and obey them , and you will be holy to your God .
GOLD:	The tassels will help you remember that you must obey all my commands and be holy to your God .

ID:	2573
INPUT:	Erregeak agindu hau eman zien Joabi , Abixairi eta Itairi : — Hartu eztiki Absalom gaztea . Gudaroste osoak aditu zuen erregeak Absalomi buruz gudalburu guztiei agindutakoa .
PRED:	And the king commanded Joab , and Abishai , and Abishai , and said , Take Absalom the young man , and all the people of the army , and the king commanded Absalom all the princes of the army .
GOLD:	And the king gave this command to Joab , Abishai , and Ittai : “ For my sake , deal gently with young Absalom . ” And all the troops heard the king give this order to his commanders .

ID:	2574
INPUT:	Behin batean , Josek amets bat izan zuen eta , kontatu zienean , are gehiago gorrotatu zuten anaiek .
PRED:	And Joseph had a dream , and when he heard it , his brothers hate him again .
GOLD:	One night Joseph had a dream , and when he told his brothers about it , they hated him more than ever .

ID:	2575
INPUT:	Han , Italiara zihoan Alexandriako ontzi bat aurkitu zuen ehuntariak , eta denok bertara aldatu gintuen .
PRED:	And when the centurion came to Ephesus , he found a centurion in Ephesus , and he sent us all away .
GOLD:	There the commanding officer found an Egyptian ship from Alexandria that was bound for Italy , and he put us on board .

ID:	2576
INPUT:	Zure hitzaren funtsa leialtasuna da , zure betiko erabakien muina justizia .
PRED:	Your word is true , and your righteousness endures forever .
GOLD:	The very essence of your words is truth ; all your just regulations will stand forever .

ID:	2577
INPUT:	eta ipini efodaren sorbalda-babeskietan . Honela , israeldarren izenak oroigarri gisa eramango ditu Aaronek Jaunaren aurrera .
PRED:	And he shall put them on the two corners of the ephod . And Aaron shall bring the name of the children of Israel before the Lord .
GOLD:	Fasten the two stones on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod as a reminder that Aaron represents the people of Israel . Aaron will carry these names on his shoulders as a constant reminder whenever he goes before the Lord .

ID:	2578
INPUT:	Jaunaren deiak esklabo dena libre egiten du , eta libre dena Kristoren esklabo bihurtzen .
PRED:	The servant of the Lord shall be free , and he shall be free , and he shall be slaves of Christ .
GOLD:	And remember , if you were a slave when the Lord called you , you are now free in the Lord . And if you were free when the Lord called you , you are now a slave of Christ .

ID:	2579
INPUT:	Izreel , Jokdeam , Zanoah ,
PRED:	Hallohesh , Hallohesh , Hallohesh ,
GOLD:	Jezreel , Jokdeam , Zanoah ,

ID:	2580
INPUT:	Eta lurreko bizilagun guztiek gurtuko dute , lepo eginiko Bildotsaren biziaren liburuan beren izenak munduaren hasieratik idatzirik dituztenak izan ezik .
PRED:	All the inhabitants of the earth will worship him , but those who are written in the book of the Lamb who are written in the book of the world .
GOLD:	And all the people who belong to this world worshiped the beast . They are the ones whose names were not written in the Book of Life that belongs to the Lamb who was slaughtered before the world was made .

ID:	2581
INPUT:	Zeure gaiztakeria izango duzu zigor , zeure desleialkeria zentzabide . Kontura zaitez eta ikasizein gogorra eta garratza denJauna , zeure Jainkoa , baztertzea , nireganako begirunerik ez izatea . Nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak , esana .
PRED:	And thou shalt be guilty of thy wickedness , and thou shalt not turn away from thy wickedness , and thine wickedness , and thou shalt turn away the way of the Lord God of hosts , saith the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	Your wickedness will bring its own punishment.Your turning from me will shame you.You will see what an evil , bitter thing it isto abandon the Lord your God and not to fear him.I , the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken !

ID:	2582
INPUT:	Zenbatu zituen Akabek eskualdeburuen laguntzaile ziren gazte haiek : berrehun eta hogeita hamabi ziren . Ondoren , israeldar gudarosteko gainerako jendea zenbatu zuen : zazpi mila gizon ziren .
PRED:	And Ahab took the young men of the land of the east , and the young men of Israel were thirty hundred and thirty thousand , and the people of Israel were seven thousand men .
GOLD:	So Ahab mustered the troops of the 232 provincial commanders . Then he called out the rest of the army of Israel , some 7,000 men .

ID:	2583
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Badator Israel herriari eta Juda herriari egin diedan promesa beteko dudan garaia .
PRED:	“ The time is coming , ” says the Lord , “ and the house of Israel , and Judah , and Judah , and the time I have spoken to them .
GOLD:	“ The day will come , says the Lord , when I will do for Israel and Judah all the good things I have promised them .

ID:	2584
INPUT:	Beste hau ere agintzen dut : norbait nire agindu honetatik aldentzen bada , beraren etxetik habe bat kendu , zorroztu eta sar dezatela bertan , beraren etxea zabor-pila bihurtuz .
PRED:	And I say to you , If any man turn away from this place , let him take away his house from his house , and let him enter into his house , and let him go into his house .
GOLD:	“ Those who violate this decree in any way will have a beam pulled from their house . Then they will be lifted up and impaled on it , and their house will be reduced to a pile of rubble .

ID:	2585
INPUT:	Eta onartzen ez bazaituzte , herri hartatik alde egitean , astindu zeuen oinetako hautsa , beraien kontrako seinaletzat » .
PRED:	But if they do not accept you , take you away from the city , take the dust of your feet , and put the dust on their feet . ”
GOLD:	And if a town refuses to welcome you , shake its dust from your feet as you leave to show that you have abandoned those people to their fate . ”

ID:	2586
INPUT:	Baina Jesusek , itzulirik , esan zion Pedrori : — Alde nire ondotik , Satanas ! Oztopo haiz niretzat , hire asmoak ez baitituk Jainkoarenak , gizakiarenak baizik .
PRED:	But Jesus returned and said to Peter , “ Get away from me , Satan ! You are witnesses , for you are not worthy of me , but of men . ”
GOLD:	Jesus turned to Peter and said , “ Get away from me , Satan ! You are a dangerous trap to me . You are seeing things merely from a human point of view , not from God 's . ”

ID:	2587
INPUT:	Orduan , Jainkoak etorrarazi zuen Babiloniako erregea jende haren kontra , eta hark hango gazteak ezpataz hil zituen tenpluan bertan ; ez zien barkatu ez mutilei , ez neskei , ez zaharrei , ez agureei : Jainkoak dena haren esku utzi zuen .
PRED:	Then God sent the king of Babylon against him , and he killed the young men in the temple . He did not forgive the young men in the temple . He did not forgive the young men of the young men .
GOLD:	So the Lord brought the king of Babylon against them . The Babylonians killed Judah 's young men , even chasing after them into the Temple . They had no pity on the people , killing both young men and young women , the old and the infirm . God handed all of them over to Nebuchadnezzar .

ID:	2588
INPUT:	Adituko dit , bai , erregeak eta libratuko gaitu neure semea eta biok , Jainkoak emandako lurraldetik desagerrarazi nahi gaituenaren eskutik » .
PRED:	And the king will deliver us , and I will deliver us out of the land that God has given us . ”
GOLD:	and rescue us from those who would cut us off from the inheritance God has given us .

ID:	2589
INPUT:	( Mt 19 , 1-9 ; Lk 16 , 18 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus Blesses the Children

ID:	2590
INPUT:	Nik gidatzen zaitut zuhurtziaren bidetik , nik ibilarazten zuzentasunaren ildotik .
PRED:	I am the way of wisdom , and I will walk in the way of righteousness .
GOLD:	I will teach you wisdom 's waysand lead you in straight paths .

ID:	2591
INPUT:	Inork , tentaldirik duenean , ez beza esan Jainkoak tentatzen duenik . Jainkoak ez du gaizkirako tentaziorik eta ez du inor gaizkirako tentatzen ere .
PRED:	But when no one has spoken , God does not say , “ God has said , ” and there is no one to do evil .
GOLD:	And remember , when you are being tempted , do not say , “ God is tempting me . ” God is never tempted to do wrong , and he never tempts anyone else .

ID:	2592
INPUT:	Haiek , ostera , goi-goiko Jainkoa probatu zuten , haren kontra altxatuz ; haren xedapenak ez zituzten gorde .
PRED:	And they went up into the morning , and they rebelled against him ; and they did not keep his statutes .
GOLD:	But they kept testing and rebelling against God Most High.They did not obey his laws .

ID:	2593
INPUT:	Bigarren hilaren hamalauan Pazko-bildotsa hil zuten . Apaizek eta lebitarrek , garbikuntza egin ezaz lotsaturik , garbikuntza egin eta erre-opariak eskaini zituzten Jaunaren etxean .
PRED:	On the first day of the month , the priests and the Levites killed the Passover , the priests , the priests , the priests , the priests , the burnt offerings , and the burnt offerings in the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	On the fourteenth day of the second month , one month later than usual , the people slaughtered the Passover lamb . This shamed the priests and Levites , so they purified themselves and brought burnt offerings to the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	2594
INPUT:	Amnonen heriotzaren samina eztiturik , ordea , baretu zitzaion Davidi Absalomen kontrako haserrea .
PRED:	But Amnon died , but Amnon became very angry with Absalom .
GOLD:	And King David , now reconciled to Amnon 's death , longed to be reunited with his son Absalom .

ID:	2595
INPUT:	Burugabeak ez du zentzu ona gogoko , nahiago du barruan duena aldarrikatu .
PRED:	A fool 's heart is not wise , but he who is wise in his heart shall be forgiven .
GOLD:	Fools have no interest in understanding ; they only want to air their own opinions .

ID:	2596
INPUT:	Zer da errazago : « Barkatuak dituzu bekatuak » esatea ala « Jaiki eta zabiltza » esatea ?
PRED:	“ What are you doing ? ” the king asked , “ Get up , ” and say , “ Get up ! ”
GOLD:	Is it easier to say ‘ Your sins are forgiven , ' or ‘ Stand up and walk ' ?

ID:	2597
INPUT:	Erre-opari eta bekatuen barkamen-oparirik ez duzu atsegin izan .
PRED:	You did not offer burnt offerings and sin offerings to the Lord .
GOLD:	You were not pleased with burnt offeringsor other offerings for sin .

ID:	2598
INPUT:	Orduan , nik ere onak ez ziren legeak eman nizkien , eta bizira eramaten ez zuten erabakiak .
PRED:	So I gave them the law , and they did not teach them the statutes and the statutes .
GOLD:	I gave them over to worthless decrees and regulations that would not lead to life .

ID:	2599
INPUT:	Neu naiz Jauna , zuen Jainkoa . Gorde garbi zeuen buruak , santu izan zaitezten , ni santua naiz eta . Ez zaitezte kutsa lurrean narraska dabiltzan piztia horiekin .
PRED:	I am the Lord your God , and you will be holy , and you will be holy , and you will not be holy . Do n't be defiled with the birds of the earth .
GOLD:	For I am the Lord your God . You must consecrate yourselves and be holy , because I am holy . So do not defile yourselves with any of these small animals that scurry along the ground .

ID:	2600
INPUT:	Atzerritarrak kikildu egin ziren , eta beren gordelekuetatikdar-darka irten .
PRED:	All the nations were glad , and they cried out , and they cried out for help .
GOLD:	They all lose their courageand come trembling from their strongholds .

ID:	2601
INPUT:	zeren eta , geure kontzientziak kondenatzen bagaitu ere , gure kontzientziaren gainetik baitago Jainkoa eta dena ezagutzen baitu .
PRED:	But if we do not know our faith , we know God , and we know him .
GOLD:	Even if we feel guilty , God is greater than our feelings , and he knows everything .

ID:	2602
INPUT:	Izan beti gogoan gaur ematen dizkizudan agindu guztiok ;
PRED:	You must always obey all the commands that I have given you today .
GOLD:	And you must commit yourselves wholeheartedly to these commands that I am giving you today .

ID:	2603
INPUT:	Jainkoak ez gaitu moralgabekerian bizitzeko deitu , berarentzat sagaraturik bizitzeko baizik .
PRED:	God has not called us to live in wickedness , but to live holy .
GOLD:	God has called us to live holy lives , not impure lives .

ID:	2604
INPUT:	Irten , gero , Ben-Hinom haranera , Ontzi-pusken ate aurrera , eta aldarrikatu bertan orain emango dizudan mezua .
PRED:	Get up , go up to the valley of the valley of Hinnom , and stand at the entrance of the valley , and I will give you the word that I will give you .
GOLD:	Go out through the Gate of Broken Pots to the garbage dump in the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and give them this message .

ID:	2605
INPUT:	Lebitarrak onartu zuen gizon haren etxean bizitzea , eta gizonak bere semeetako bat bezala hartu zuen .
PRED:	And the Levites took the Levites to live in his house , and he took one of his sons as one of his sons .
GOLD:	The Levite agreed to this , and the young man became like one of Micah 's sons .

ID:	2606
INPUT:	Jaunak galdetu zidan : — Zer ikusten duzu , Amos ? — Berun-haria — erantzun nion . Eta Jaunak : — Horra , berun-hari honetaz , neure herria zuzen ote dabilen ikusi nahi dut . Ez baitut gehiago ez ikusiarenik egingo .
PRED:	And the Lord said to me , “ What do you see ? ” And I said , “ Behold , I will see my people , and I will not see it . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord said to me , “ Amos , what do you see ? ” I answered , “ A plumb line . ” And the Lord replied , “ I will test my people with this plumb line . I will no longer ignore all their sins .

ID:	2607
INPUT:	« Zoaz ihesi , ene maitea , gazela edo oreinkumea irudi , usain gozoko mendietan barrena » .
PRED:	“ Go , my beloved , my beloved , and see the young woman in the hills . ”
GOLD:	Come away , my love ! Be like a gazelleor a young stag on the mountains of spices .

ID:	2608
INPUT:	gero , Santiagori agertu zitzaion , ondoren apostolu guztiei .
PRED:	After he appeared to him , he appeared to all the apostles .
GOLD:	Then he was seen by James and later by all the apostles .

ID:	2609
INPUT:	Baina ni zurekin izango naiz beti : eskutik hartua naukazu ;
PRED:	But I will be with you , and I will be with you . You will take me out of your hand .
GOLD:	Yet I still belong to you ; you hold my right hand .

ID:	2610
INPUT:	Beste profetak , alabaina : — Profeta nauzu ni ere zu bezala , eta mezulari bat mintzatu zait Jaunaren izenean , esanez : « Itzularazi hori zeure etxera ; jan dezala ogia eta edan ura » . Gezurra zioen .
PRED:	The prophet said to him , “ I am the prophet , just as you have spoken to me , and said , “ Go back to your house , and eat bread . ”
GOLD:	But the old prophet answered , “ I am a prophet , too , just as you are . And an angel gave me this command from the Lord : ‘ Bring him home with you so he can have something to eat and drink . ' ” But the old man was lying to him .

ID:	2611
INPUT:	urrea baino desiragarriago , urre araztua baino ere bai ; eztia baino gozoago , ezti berria baino ere bai .
PRED:	It is better than gold , than gold , than fine gold . It is better than honey .
GOLD:	They are a warning to your servant , a great reward for those who obey them .

ID:	2612
INPUT:	Gerra kanpoan , izurria eta gosea etxean . Landan dagoena gerran hilko da , hirian dagoena goseak eta izurriak irentsita .
PRED:	They will die in the field , famine , famine , famine , and famine in the land . They will die in the city . They will die in the city .
GOLD:	There is war outside the cityand disease and famine within.Those outside the city wallswill be killed by enemy swords.Those inside the citywill die of famine and disease .

ID:	2613
INPUT:	Orduan , honela mintzatu zitzaion Samuel Israel herri osoari : « Jaunarengana bihotz-bihotzez itzuli nahi baduzue , jaurti zeuen artetik sasijainko arrotz guztiak eta Astarteren irudiak ; bizi zaitezte Jaunari zeharo emanak eta ez zerbitza bera besterik . Askatuko zaituzte orduan filistearren eskuetatik » .
PRED:	Samuel spoke to all the people of Israel , saying , “ If you want to return to the Lord with all your heart , you will serve all the gods of the gods of your gods , and you will serve other gods . ”
GOLD:	Then Samuel said to all the people of Israel , “ If you want to return to the Lord with all your hearts , get rid of your foreign gods and your images of Ashtoreth . Turn your hearts to the Lord and obey him alone ; then he will rescue you from the Philistines . ”

ID:	2614
INPUT:	Izarren kopurua finkatzen dueta bakoitzari bere izena ematen .
PRED:	He made the covenant of the covenant of the covenant , and gave each one to his name .
GOLD:	He counts the starsand calls them all by name .

ID:	2615
INPUT:	Erregeak , herri osoarekin , sakrifizioak eskaini zizkion Jaunari .
PRED:	The king offered sacrifices to the Lord all the people , and offered sacrifices to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices to the Lord .

ID:	2616
INPUT:	Beraz , limosna egitean , ez ibili turuta joka , itxurazaleek sinagogetan eta kaleetan egin ohi duten bezala , jendearen txaloak irabazteko . Benetan diotsuet : Hartua dute beren ordaina .
PRED:	So I say to you , you must not walk in the synagogue , as if you do in the synagogues and in the synagogues and in the synagogues , they will be ashamed . I say to you , they will have their reward . ”
GOLD:	When you give to someone in need , do n't do as the hypocrites do — blowing trumpets in the synagogues and streets to call attention to their acts of charity ! I tell you the truth , they have received all the reward they will ever get .

ID:	2617
INPUT:	Honela , edomdarrak Judaren agintepetik libratu egin ziren gaur arte . Libna hiria ere aldi hartan bertan libratu zen .
PRED:	So the people of Edom delivered them out of the hand of Judah until this day , and the city was delivered from the hand of Judah .
GOLD:	So Edom has been independent from Judah to this day . The town of Libnah also revolted about that same time .

ID:	2618
INPUT:	Jaitsi zen Moises menditik , eta garbikuntza eginarazi eta arropa garbiarazi zien israeldarrei .
PRED:	And Moses came down from the mountain , and washed them with water , and washed them with water .
GOLD:	So Moses went down to the people . He consecrated them for worship , and they washed their clothes .

ID:	2619
INPUT:	« Gosearen gezi hilgarriak bota eta suntsitu egingo zaituztet ; gosea areagotuko dizuet , ogi-hornidura guztia kenduz .
PRED:	“ I will destroy you , and I will destroy you , and I will destroy you with famine , and I will destroy you all that I have done .
GOLD:	“ I will shower you with the deadly arrows of famine to destroy you . The famine will become more and more severe until every crumb of food is gone .

ID:	2620
INPUT:	Moisesen aurka matxinatu ziren beste berrehun eta berrogeita hamar israeldarrekin batera . Hauek israeldar elkarteko buruzagi ziren , batzarrean kargu eta itzal handia zituztenak .
PRED:	And the rest of the sons of Israel were thirty hundred and fifty and fifty and fifty thousand , and the princes of the congregation , and the princes of Israel , and the princes of the congregation , and the princes of Israel .
GOLD:	They incited a rebellion against Moses , along with 250 other leaders of the community , all prominent members of the assembly .

ID:	2621
INPUT:	Atzetik hurbildu eta soineko-ertza ukitu zion Jesusi ; eta bat-batean odoljarioa gelditu egin zitzaion .
PRED:	And he came near and touched him , and touched his clothes , and touched him , and his blood was filled with blood .
GOLD:	Coming up behind Jesus , she touched the fringe of his robe . Immediately , the bleeding stopped .

ID:	2622
INPUT:	Erortzear direnei Jaunak die eusten , lur joak ditu altxatzen .
PRED:	The Lord will destroy them , and he will destroy them .
GOLD:	The Lord helps the fallenand lifts those bent beneath their loads .

ID:	2623
INPUT:	Zuek , ene maiteok , gogoratu Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren apostoluek aurrez iragarria :
PRED:	My beloved , remember what the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ says :
GOLD:	But you , my dear friends , must remember what the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ predicted .

ID:	2624
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Gorroto eta higuin ditutzuen jaiak , ez ditut atseginzuen kultu-batzarrak .
PRED:	Thus says the Lord : “ I am not an abomination and an abomination to the Lord . I am not pleased with you .
GOLD:	“ I hate all your show and pretense — the hypocrisy of your religious festivals and solemn assemblies .

ID:	2625
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , hau diotsot nik , Jainko Jaunak , Israel herriari : Amaiera ! Badator amaiera herrialde honetako lau bazterretaraino .
PRED:	“ Son of man , this is what the Sovereign Lord God says : The people of Israel are coming to the four corners of the earth .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , this is what the Sovereign Lord says to Israel : “ The end is here ! Wherever you look — east , west , north , or south — your land is finished .

ID:	2626
INPUT:	Herritarrak zenbat ziren adierazi zion Joabek erregeari : Israelen zortziehun mila ziren ezpata erabil zezaketen gerra-gizonak , eta Judan bostehun mila .
PRED:	And the people of Israel spoke to King Jehoshaphat : and the men of Israel were four hundred thousand and fifty thousand and five thousand and five thousand and five thousand .
GOLD:	Joab reported the number of people to the king . There were 800,000 capable warriors in Israel who could handle a sword , and 500,000 in Judah .

ID:	2627
INPUT:	Eta zer esango duzu , Jerusalem , adiskidetzat eduki ohi dituzunekberen agintea ezartzeaneta zu menderatzean ? Oinaze bizitan aurkituko zara , emakumea erdiminetan bezala .
PRED:	And what shall thou say unto them , If any man is a friend of Jerusalem , and thou shalt be in the midst of her , as a woman that is in the midst of a woman .
GOLD:	What will you say when the Lord takes the allies you have cultivatedand appoints them as your rulers ? Pangs of anguish will grip you , like those of a woman in labor !

ID:	2628
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Galdu egingo ditut Moaben , muinoetako kultu-lekuetan beren jainkoei intsentsua erretzen dieten guztiak » .
PRED:	“ I will ask Moab , ” says the Lord . “ all those who offer incense on the high places of Moab . ”
GOLD:	“ I will put an end to Moab , ” says the Lord , “ for the people offer sacrifices at the pagan shrines and burn incense to their false gods .

ID:	2629
INPUT:	Hau , berehala soldadu eta ehuntariak bildurik , lasterka joan zen ; gudalburua eta soldaduak ikustean , juduek utzi egin zioten Paulo jotzeari .
PRED:	So the soldiers ran away and ran away . When the soldiers saw him , they left him and left Paul .
GOLD:	He immediately called out his soldiers and officers and ran down among the crowd . When the mob saw the commander and the troops coming , they stopped beating Paul .

ID:	2630
INPUT:	Izan ere , Liburu Santuak dio : Izan santu , ni santua naiz eta .
PRED:	For it is written , “ I am holy , holy and I am holy . ”
GOLD:	For the Scriptures say , “ You must be holy because I am holy . ”

ID:	2631
INPUT:	Jainkoaren semeek gizakien alabekin batu eta haurrak izan zituztenean , baita geroago ere , baziren erraldoiak munduan : antzinako heroiak dira hauek , izen handikoak .
PRED:	And when the sons of God were with men , they had sons and children , and they had children , and they were more than the fish of the earth . These are the most important ones of the earth .
GOLD:	In those days , and for some time after , giant Nephilites lived on the earth , for whenever the sons of God had intercourse with women , they gave birth to children who became the heroes and famous warriors of ancient times .

ID:	2632
INPUT:	eta esan zuen : « Hara , guztiak herri bat bera dira , hizkuntza bat berekoak . Hau beren lehenengo lana badute , ez zaie aurrerantzean egin nahiko duten ezer ezinezko gertatuko .
PRED:	And he said , “ Behold , all the people are a people , and all the language of their language ; but if they do this , they will not answer you .
GOLD:	“ Look ! ” he said . “ The people are united , and they all speak the same language . After this , nothing they set out to do will be impossible for them !

ID:	2633
INPUT:	Ozpina edan zuenean , Jesusek esan zuen : « Betea da dena » . Eta , burua makurtuz , azken arnasa eman zuen .
PRED:	And when he had drink the cup , he said , It is he . And he bowed his head , and gave him the last spirit .
GOLD:	When Jesus had tasted it , he said , “ It is finished ! ” Then he bowed his head and gave up his spirit .

ID:	2634
INPUT:	Betiko baztertu ote gaituzu , bada ? Zure haserreak ez ote du mugarik ?
PRED:	Have you rejected us forever ? Will n't your anger be angry ?
GOLD:	Or have you utterly rejected us ? Are you angry with us still ?

ID:	2635
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jaunarentzako bereizitako eremu guztiz sakratuaren zati bat dagokie , lebitarrenaren ondoan .
PRED:	This is why the land is to be holy to the Lord for an inheritance to the Levites .
GOLD:	It will be their special portion when the land is distributed , the most sacred land of all . Next to the priests ' territory will lie the land where the other Levites will live .

ID:	2636
INPUT:	Jaunak esana baitzion Moisesi : « Esan israeldarrei : Herri burugogorra zarete ! Apur batez zuekin joango banintz , hondatu egingo zintuzketet . Erantzi , bada , festa-jantziak , eta ikusiko dut zer egin zuekin » .
PRED:	But the Lord said to Moses , “ Tell the people of Israel , ‘ You are a sign for a long time . If I go with you , I will destroy you with you , and I will see what you have done . ' ”
GOLD:	For the Lord had told Moses to tell them , “ You are a stubborn and rebellious people . If I were to travel with you for even a moment , I would destroy you . Remove your jewelry and fine clothes while I decide what to do with you . ”

ID:	2637
INPUT:	Dolutan , akiturik dago lurraldea , lotsaz eta zimel Libanoko basoa , Xaron lautada basamortu bihurtua , Baxan eta Karmel mendiak gorri .
PRED:	And the land is desolate , and the land of Carmel , and the land of Carmel , and the wilderness of Carmel , and the mountains of Carmel , and Carmel .
GOLD:	The land of Israel wilts in mourning.Lebanon withers with shame.The plain of Sharon is now a wilderness.Bashan and Carmel have been plundered .

ID:	2638
INPUT:	Haiek , entzutean , Jainkoa goretsi zuten ; gero , Paulori esan zioten : « Anaia , ikusten duzu zenbat milaka judu egin diren fededun , baina denak legezale sutsuak dira .
PRED:	When they heard it , they praise God . They said to Paul , “ My brother , you have seen all the Jews , but the teachers of the law are Jews .
GOLD:	After hearing this , they praised God . And then they said , “ You know , dear brother , how many thousands of Jews have also believed , and they all follow the law of Moses very seriously .

ID:	2639
INPUT:	Gero , Akrabim maldaren hegoaldera okertuko da eta , <unk> dik jarraituz , Kadex-Barnearen hegoaldera iritsiko . Ondoren , Hatzar-Adarretik jarraituz , Atzmonetik pasatuko da .
PRED:	And the border shall go up to the south side of the south , and the border of Kadesh , and the border thereof shall pass by the way , and it shall pass by the way of the valley , and it shall pass by the border of the valley .
GOLD:	It will then run south past Scorpion Pass in the direction of Zin . Its southernmost point will be Kadesh-barnea , from which it will go to Hazar-addar , and on to Azmon .

ID:	2640
INPUT:	Israel herriak , erregeak kasurik ere ez ziola egiten oharturik , ihardetsi zion : « Ez dugu deus ere nahi Davidekin ! Ez dugu parterik nahiJeseren semearekin ! Zeuen etxoletara , israeldarrok ! Zaindu zeuk zeure etxea , David ! » Horrela , bada , israeldarrak beren etxoletara joan ziren .
PRED:	And the people of Israel took no bread , and said unto him , We do not want to be with David , neither shall we go into the tents of David ; and they went into the tents of your tents . And the children of Israel went into their tents .
GOLD:	When all Israel realized that the king had refused to listen to them , they responded , “ Down with the dynasty of David ! We have no interest in the son of Jesse.Back to your homes , O Israel ! Look out for your own house , O David ! ” So all the people of Israel returned home .

ID:	2641
INPUT:	Zertarako dut nikSabako intsentsua , zertarako urrutiko lurraldeetakokanabera usaintsua ? Ez ditut atsegin zuen erre-opariak , ez ditut gogoko zuen sakrifizioak .
PRED:	Why shall I make incense for the incense of Solomon , and the incense of the land that is far away ? I will not remember your burnt offerings , nor will I remember your burnt offerings .
GOLD:	There 's no use offering me sweet frankincense from Sheba.Keep your fragrant calamus imported from distant lands ! I will not accept your burnt offerings.Your sacrifices have no pleasing aroma for me . ”

ID:	2642
INPUT:	Zoazte Tarsiseraino , egizue garrasi , kostaldeko jendeok !
PRED:	Go to Tyre , you people of Tyre , and cry out , you inhabitants of the sea .
GOLD:	Send word now to Tarshish ! Wail , you people who live in distant lands !

ID:	2643
INPUT:	Hala egin zuen Balakek , eta bien artean zekor eta ahari bana eskaini zituzten aldare bakoitzean .
PRED:	Balak did as Balaam had done , and offered a bull and a ram on each altar .
GOLD:	Balak followed his instructions , and the two of them sacrificed a young bull and a ram on each altar .

ID:	2644
INPUT:	« Beraz , Egiptotik atera eta basamortura eraman nituen .
PRED:	So I brought them out of Egypt and brought them into the wilderness .
GOLD:	So I brought them out of Egypt and led them into the wilderness .

ID:	2645
INPUT:	Nik esan nuen : « Ene Jainko , ez nazazu eraman sasoirik onenean ! » Zure urteek gizaldiz gizaldi diraute .
PRED:	I said to them , “ O my God , do n't let me put on your garments , and your years will be put on horses . ”
GOLD:	Long ago you laid the foundation of the earthand made the heavens with your hands .

ID:	2646
INPUT:	Izan bedi gurekin Jauna , gure Jainkoa , gure gurasoekin izan zen bezala . Ez gaitzala utz , ez baztertu ;
PRED:	May the Lord our God be with us , just as our fathers had been with us . Do n't leave us .
GOLD:	May the Lord our God be with us as he was with our ancestors ; may he never leave us or abandon us .

ID:	2647
INPUT:	« Norbaitek bere alaba esklabotzat saltzen badu , ez da libre geldituko beste esklaboen erara .
PRED:	If a man is sold to his daughter , he shall not be saved .
GOLD:	“ When a man sells his daughter as a slave , she will not be freed at the end of six years as the men are .

ID:	2648
INPUT:	Nork aldenduko gaitu Kristok digun maitasunetik ? Atsekabeak , larriak , erasoaldiak , goseak , jantzirik ezak , arriskuak , ezpatak ?
PRED:	Who will turn us away from the love of Christ ? He will give us trouble and widows , famine , and widows , and sword , and sword ?
GOLD:	Can anything ever separate us from Christ 's love ? Does it mean he no longer loves us if we have trouble or calamity , or are persecuted , or hungry , or destitute , or in danger , or threatened with death ?

ID:	2649
INPUT:	Judakoek erantzun zioten : — Hil , ez zaitugu hilko ; baina ongi lotu eta filistearren esku utzi , bai . Orduan , bi soka berriz lotu eta atera egin zuten haitzartetik .
PRED:	The men of Judah answered , “ We will not die , but we will not be put to death . ” So they took him out of the assembly .
GOLD:	“ We will only tie you up and hand you over to the Philistines , ” they replied . “ We wo n't kill you . ” So they tied him up with two new ropes and brought him up from the rock .

ID:	2650
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Nola nahi duzue ezteietara deituek barau egitea , senar berria berekin dutelarik ?
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ How do you want to call the wedding feast to fast , because the husband is with them ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus responded , “ Do wedding guests fast while celebrating with the groom ? Of course not .

ID:	2651
INPUT:	gizakiak , berriz , hau da , neskatxa birjinak , 32 . 000 guztira .
PRED:	But the men , the women , the women , and the women of the children of men , one hundred and five thousand .
GOLD:	and 32,000 virgin girls .

ID:	2652
INPUT:	Nazireu-garai guztian Jaunari sagaraturik dago .
PRED:	All the days of the days shall be holy to the Lord .
GOLD:	This requirement applies as long as they are set apart to the Lord .

ID:	2653
INPUT:	Baina altxor baliotsu hau buztinezko ontzitan daramagu , garbi ager dadin honenbesteko indarra Jainkoarengandik datorrela eta ez guregandik .
PRED:	But we are not able to take this wealth from the clay , so that the power of God is coming from us .
GOLD:	We now have this light shining in our hearts , but we ourselves are like fragile clay jars containing this great treasure . This makes it clear that our great power is from God , not from ourselves .

ID:	2654
INPUT:	Hau dio Jaunak : « Ez izan beldur , Israel , Jakoben herri , hartxo bat bezain ezerezeta ahul zaren hori ! Neuk laguntzen dizut ; ni , Israelen Jainko santua , nauzu askatzaile .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid , Israel , ” says the Lord . “ Do n't be afraid of the people of Israel . I am the Lord , the Holy One of Israel , the Holy One of Israel .
GOLD:	Though you are a lowly worm , O Jacob , do n't be afraid , people of Israel , for I will help you.I am the Lord , your Redeemer.I am the Holy One of Israel . '

ID:	2655
INPUT:	Baina esango didazu : « Zergatik haserretzen da , hortaz , Jainkoa , inork ere ezin badio beraren nahiari aurre egin ? »
PRED:	But you will say to me , “ Why is this angry ? God is angry , and no one can stand before him ? ”
GOLD:	Well then , you might say , “ Why does God blame people for not responding ? Have n't they simply done what he makes them do ? ”

ID:	2656
INPUT:	Jakobek bere eskuak luzatu eta eskuina Efraim seme gazteenaren buru gainean ezarri zuen eta ezkerra Manases lehen-semearen buru gainean , eskuak gurutzatuz .
PRED:	Jacob stretched out his hand on his right hand , and put his right hand on the head of the youngest son of Manasseh , and put his hand on the head of the firstborn son of Manasseh .
GOLD:	But Jacob crossed his arms as he reached out to lay his hands on the boys ' heads . He put his right hand on the head of Ephraim , though he was the younger boy , and his left hand on the head of Manasseh , though he was the firstborn .

ID:	2657
INPUT:	Jainkoaren etxean sartu , Jaunari eskainiriko ogiak hartu eta jan egin zituen , eta bere lagunei ere eman zizkien , legez apaizek bakarrik jan zitzaketen ogiak izanik .
PRED:	And he went into the house of God , and ate the bread of the Lord , and gave them to his friends , and the priests ate bread .
GOLD:	He went into the house of God and broke the law by eating the sacred loaves of bread that only the priests can eat . He also gave some to his companions . ”

ID:	2658
INPUT:	Ondoren , Daniel , Babiloniako jakitunak hiltzeko erregearen agindua hartua zuen Ariokengana joan zen , esanez : « Ez hil Babiloniako jakitunik ! Aurkez nazazu erregeagana , neuk argituko baitiot ametsa » .
PRED:	Then Daniel took away the commandment of the king of Babylon , and said , “ Do n't know the king of Babylon , for I will not find the dream . ”
GOLD:	Then Daniel went in to see Arioch , whom the king had ordered to execute the wise men of Babylon . Daniel said to him , “ Do n't kill the wise men . Take me to the king , and I will tell him the meaning of his dream . ”

ID:	2659
INPUT:	Herriak , ordea , esan zion Sauli : — Hil beharra duela Jonatanek , Israeli halako garaipena ekarri ondoren ? Inola ere ez ! Ala Jauna ! Buruko ile bat ere ez zaio eroriko lurrera . Jainkoaren laguntzaz egin du gaur egin duena . Honela libratu zuen herriak Jonatan heriotzatik .
PRED:	But the people said to Saul , “ When Jonathan died , he is dead , he will not be put to death . As the Lord lives , he will not fall from the land of Israel . ” So the people did what was right in the sight of the Lord .
GOLD:	But the people broke in and said to Saul , “ Jonathan has won this great victory for Israel . Should he die ? Far from it ! As surely as the Lord lives , not one hair on his head will be touched , for God helped him do a great deed today . ” So the people rescued Jonathan , and he was not put to death .

ID:	2660
INPUT:	Etxera baraurik bidaltzen baditut , ahuleziak joko ditu bidean , urrutitik etorriak ere badira eta .
PRED:	If I send them into the house , I will send them away , and they will go away from far away .
GOLD:	If I send them home hungry , they will faint along the way . For some of them have come a long distance . ”

ID:	2661
INPUT:	Baina orain arte bezainbat adreilu egitera behartuko dituzue , ezta bakar bat ere gutxiago . Alfer batzuk besterik ez dira ! Horregatik ari dira beren Jainkoari sakrifizioak eskaintzera joan behar dutela esaten .
PRED:	But now you will see one of you until now , and you will not have one of us . There are some of you who sacrifice sacrifices to their God .
GOLD:	But still require them to make the same number of bricks as before . Do n't reduce the quota . They are lazy . That 's why they are crying out , ‘ Let us go and offer sacrifices to our God . '

ID:	2662
INPUT:	Goiza arte negar-zotinka ari naiz , lehoiak bezala haustenbaitizkidazu hezurrak . Gau eta egun hilzorian naukazu .
PRED:	I have heard the voice of the Lord , as a lion , and my bones are as a lion , and my bones are in the day of the night .
GOLD:	I waited patiently all night , but I was torn apart as though by lions.Suddenly , my life was over .

ID:	2663
INPUT:	Eta zuek izan zaitezte Jaunaren , zeuen Jainkoaren , esaneko , beraren lege-bidean ibiliz eta beraren aginduak betez , gaur egin duzuen bezala » .
PRED:	You must obey the Lord your God and obey his commands , just as you have done today . ”
GOLD:	And may you be completely faithful to the Lord our God . May you always obey his decrees and commands , just as you are doing today . ”

ID:	2664
INPUT:	Judasek ere , Jesus salduko zuenak , ezagutzen zuen leku hura , askotan bildua baitzen Jesus han bere ikasleekin .
PRED:	And he that had been saved , he knew him , for he was gathered together in many places , where he was gathered .
GOLD:	Judas , the betrayer , knew this place , because Jesus had often gone there with his disciples .

ID:	2665
INPUT:	Zuena baino herri handiago eta ahaltsuagoak bota ditu , zuek haien lurraldera eraman eta lurraldea zuei ondaretzat emateko , gaur egun gertatzen den bezala .
PRED:	But he hath cast them into your land , and hath brought them into their land , as it is a possession to you today .
GOLD:	He drove out nations far greater than you , so he could bring you in and give you their land as your special possession , as it is today .

ID:	2666
INPUT:	Koreren ardurapean , Edenek , Miniaminek , Jexuak , Xemaiasek , Amariasek eta Xekaniasek beren apaiz-lagunen artean xuxen banatu behar zituzten emaitzak apaizak bizi ziren hirietan , bakoitzari , handi nahiz txiki , bere mailaren arabera .
PRED:	And they were in the midst of the elders of Korah , Azariah , Azariah , Azariah , Azariah , and Azariah , and Azariah , and Azariah , and Azariah , and Azariah , with their fathers , and with their fathers , and with their fathers , and with their great cities .
GOLD:	His faithful assistants were Eden , Miniamin , Jeshua , Shemaiah , Amariah , and Shecaniah . They distributed the gifts among the families of priests in their towns by their divisions , dividing the gifts fairly among old and young alike .

ID:	2667
INPUT:	Aurretik zihoazenek gogor egiten zioten , isil zedin ; baina hark areago oihu : — Daviden Semea , erruki zakizkit !
PRED:	And they did not obey him . But he cried out , but he cried out , “ Son of David , have mercy on me . ”
GOLD:	“ Be quiet ! ” the people in front yelled at him.But he only shouted louder , “ Son of David , have mercy on me ! ”

ID:	2668
INPUT:	Bat-batean , ordea , erorieta txiki-txiki egin da Babilonia . « “ Egin intziri berarengatik , lagunok ! Bila sendagaiak haren zaurientzat , ea sendatzen den ” .
PRED:	But Babylon has become very small , and it has become very small . She has said , “ Get up for her , you people of Babylon , for she is healed . ”
GOLD:	But suddenly Babylon , too , has fallen.Weep for her.Give her medicine.Perhaps she can yet be healed .

ID:	2669
INPUT:	Jesusek bere ikasleei dei egin eta esan zien : — Errukia ematen dit jende honek : badaramatzate hiru egun nirekin eta ez dute deus ere jateko . Eta ez ditut etxera baraurik bidali nahi , ahuleziak joko bailituzke bidean .
PRED:	Jesus called his disciples and said to them , “ This people have mercy on me for three days , and they have no food with me for three days , and I will not send them into their houses . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus called his disciples and told them , “ I feel sorry for these people . They have been here with me for three days , and they have nothing left to eat . I do n't want to send them away hungry , or they will faint along the way . ”

ID:	2670
INPUT:	eta egite txarrez salatzen du orain , ez dela birjina esanez . Hona , ordea , nire alabaren bir<unk> tasunaren froga-agiria ” . « Eta gurasoek herri-arduradunen aurrean zabalduko dute <unk> direa ezkontza-gaueko odol-aztarnekin .
PRED:	And now , behold , it is not good to her , but this is what the Lord has said to her : and they shall say unto the elders of my fathers , and they shall be married in the sight of the elders of the people .
GOLD:	He has accused her of shameful conduct , saying , “ I discovered that your daughter was not a virgin . ” But here is the proof of my daughter 's virginity . ' Then they must spread her bed sheet before the elders .

ID:	2671
INPUT:	Urri bitez haren egunak , har beza beste batek haren kargua .
PRED:	The day of his life shall be one year , and one of them shall be his alone .
GOLD:	Let his years be few ; let someone else take his position .

ID:	2672
INPUT:	Saul mendi-malda batetik zihoan ; David , berriz , bere gizonekin beste maldatik . David lasterka zihoan , Saulengandik ihesi . Saul bere gizonekin David eta beronen gizonak inguratzen ari zen , harrapatzeko .
PRED:	And David went out of the hill country , and his men fled from him ; and David fled from Saul , and his men fled from him . And David and his men were round about him .
GOLD:	Saul and David were now on opposite sides of a mountain . Just as Saul and his men began to close in on David and his men ,

ID:	2673
INPUT:	Hildakoen Egoitza agerian dago Jainkoaren aurrean , Hondamen Leizea estalkirik gabe .
PRED:	The dead is in the presence of God , and there is no mercy in the sight of the dead .
GOLD:	The underworld is naked in God 's presence.The place of destruction is uncovered .

ID:	2674
INPUT:	Aldi hartan , bi profeta , Ageo eta Idoren seme Zakarias , Juda eta Jerusalemgo juduei hitz egiten hasi ziren , beren Jaun Israelgo Jainkoaren izenean .
PRED:	At that time two prophets , Zechariah , Zechariah , Zechariah , Zechariah , and Judah began to speak to the Jews in the name of the Lord their God .
GOLD:	At that time the prophets Haggai and Zechariah son of Iddo prophesied to the Jews in Judah and Jerusalem . They prophesied in the name of the God of Israel who was over them .

ID:	2675
INPUT:	Nora joan zure espiritutik urruti ? Nora ihes egin zure aurretik ?
PRED:	Where are you going out of your Spirit ? How can you escape before you ?
GOLD:	I can never escape from your Spirit ! I can never get away from your presence !

ID:	2676
INPUT:	Hel bekizu nire otoitza , makur belarria nire garrasira !
PRED:	Let my prayer come upon me , and let my ears be put to shame .
GOLD:	For my life is full of troubles , and death draws near .

ID:	2677
INPUT:	Luzatu zuen eskua Aaronek Egiptoko uren gainera eta atera zituen igelek Egipto osoa estali zuten .
PRED:	And Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt , and he brought them out of the land of Egypt , and all the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	If you refuse to let them go , I will send a plague of frogs across your entire land .

ID:	2678
INPUT:	Agarrek « Zeu zara ikusi nauzun Jainkoa » eman zion izen mintzatu zitzaion Jainkoari , hau baitzioen : « Ez dut , bada , ni ikusi nauena bera ikusi ? »
PRED:	Then she said to God , “ You have seen me , ” and he said to God , “ I have not seen me . ”
GOLD:	Thereafter , Hagar used another name to refer to the Lord , who had spoken to her . She said , “ You are the God who sees me . ” She also said , “ Have I truly seen the One who sees me ? ”

ID:	2679
INPUT:	Belardia bezala haziko dira , ibai ondoko sahatsa bezala .
PRED:	They will be like grass , and they will be like grass .
GOLD:	They will thrive like watered grass , like willows on a riverbank .

ID:	2680
INPUT:	Kutxaren gainean bi izaki hegaldun zeuden , Jainkoaren presentzia aintzatsua adierazten zuten kerubinak , beren hegoez kutxa gaineko estalkia babesten zutenak . Baina hau ez da gai hauetaz xehetasunez hitz egiteko unea .
PRED:	And they put the cherubim on the ark of the ark of God , and the glory of the glory of God , and the ark of their wings , and the ark of their wings , that they might not speak these words .
GOLD:	Above the Ark were the cherubim of divine glory , whose wings stretched out over the Ark 's cover , the place of atonement . But we can not explain these things in detail now .

ID:	2681
INPUT:	Ez isuri odolik ! Jaurti ezazue eremuko putzu batera , baina ez kalterik egin . Jose haien eskuetatik libratu egin nahi zuen , aitari itzultzeko .
PRED:	Do not pour out the blood of the blood , but do not hurt it , but do n't do it . He would deliver Joseph out of their father 's hand .
GOLD:	“ Why should we shed any blood ? Let 's just throw him into this empty cistern here in the wilderness . Then he 'll die without our laying a hand on him . ” Reuben was secretly planning to rescue Joseph and return him to his father .

ID:	2682
INPUT:	Zazpigarren egunean , egunsentian jaiki eta itzulia egin zuten hiriaren inguruan , aurreko egunetakoaren arabera , baina egun hartan zazpi itzuli egin zizkioten hiriari .
PRED:	On the seventh day , they rose up early in the city , and returned to the city of the city , and they returned to it seven days .
GOLD:	On the seventh day the Israelites got up at dawn and marched around the town as they had done before . But this time they went around the town seven times .

ID:	2683
INPUT:	orduan dei egingo didazue , baina ez dizuet erantzungo ; bilatu , baina ez nauzue aurkituko .
PRED:	Then you will call me , but I will not answer you , but you will not find me .
GOLD:	“ When they cry for help , I will not answer.Though they anxiously search for me , they will not find me .

ID:	2684
INPUT:	horrela , zuen sinesmena Jainkoaren indarrean oinarri zedin eta ez giza jakindurian .
PRED:	so that the faith of God might be laid in the power of God , and not in knowledge .
GOLD:	I did this so you would trust not in human wisdom but in the power of God .

ID:	2685
INPUT:	Alabaina , Juda erreinuan izana zen gertakari harrigarriaren berri jakitera , Babiloniako agintariek mandatariak bidali zizkiotenean , Jainkoak Ezekias eskutik utzi bazuen , probatzeko izan zen : nolako asmoak zituen ikusteko .
PRED:	But when Judah heard what was written in the kingdom of Judah , he sent messengers to the messengers of the king of Babylon , saying , “ If God sent messengers out of the hand of Hezekiah , he would see what he had done . ”
GOLD:	However , when ambassadors arrived from Babylon to ask about the remarkable events that had taken place in the land , God withdrew from Hezekiah in order to test him and to see what was really in his heart .

ID:	2686
INPUT:	Horrela , emakume lotsagabeeta lausengariagandik aldenduko zara ,
PRED:	And thou shalt turn away from the woman , and from her youth ,
GOLD:	Wisdom will save you from the immoral woman , from the seductive words of the promiscuous woman .

ID:	2687
INPUT:	Betel eta Aikoak 123 ;
PRED:	the sons of Bethel , the sons of Bethel , two hundred and three .
GOLD:	The people of Bethel and Ai123

ID:	2688
INPUT:	Benaias , Joiadaren semea , keretarren eta peletarren buruzagi . Daviden semeak , berriz , apaiz ziren .
PRED:	And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada , the son of Jehoiada , the son of Jehoiada , the son of David , and the princes of David .
GOLD:	Benaiah son of Jehoiada was captain of the king 's bodyguard . And David 's sons served as priestly leaders .

ID:	2689
INPUT:	Jakinarazten dio Jaunak begirune dionarizein jokabide behar duen hautatu .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I am going to do all his ways . ”
GOLD:	Who are those who fear the Lord ? He will show them the path they should choose .

ID:	2690
INPUT:	Izan ikara , arduragabeok ! Egin dardara , axolagabeok ! Erantzi , kendu soineko horiek , eta estali dolu-jantziz .
PRED:	Be careful , you shepherds ! Be strong , you people who are weak ! Take away their clothes , and put on their clothes .
GOLD:	Tremble , you women of ease ; throw off your complacency.Strip off your pretty clothes , and put on burlap to show your grief .

ID:	2691
INPUT:	Joramen erregealdia
PRED:	King Jehoram of Judah
GOLD:	Jehoram Rules in Judah

ID:	2692
INPUT:	Egun berean batzar sakratua egingo duzue eta ez da ohiko lan arruntik egingo . Betiko lege izango duzue hau belaunez belaun , biziko zareten edonon .
PRED:	On that day you shall make a holy assembly , and you shall do no work . This law shall be a law for ever throughout your generations .
GOLD:	That same day will be proclaimed an official day for holy assembly , a day on which you do no ordinary work . This is a permanent law for you , and it must be observed from generation to generation wherever you live .

ID:	2693
INPUT:	« Aita nahiz ama ni baino maiteago duena ez da niretzat gai ; semea nahiz alaba ni baino maiteago duena ez da niretzat gai .
PRED:	“ He who is greater than his father or mother , is not greater than my mother or daughter . He who is not greater than my father or daughter .
GOLD:	“ If you love your father or mother more than you love me , you are not worthy of being mine ; or if you love your son or daughter more than me , you are not worthy of being mine .

ID:	2694
INPUT:	Baina obeditzen ez didan nazioa errotik aterako dut behin betiko eta suntsitu egingo . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	But I will bring the nations out of the midst of the nations , and I will destroy them , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	But any nation who refuses to obey me will be uprooted and destroyed . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	2695
INPUT:	bertan egiten dute txoriek habia , ipuruetan zikoinak etxea .
PRED:	And the tents are in it , and the tents of the house of the two living creatures .
GOLD:	There the birds make their nests , and the storks make their homes in the cypresses .

ID:	2696
INPUT:	Geldi bitez umezurtz haren haurrak , alargun haren emaztea .
PRED:	Let the widow stay at the widow , the widow , and his wife 's wife .
GOLD:	May his children become fatherless , and his wife a widow .

ID:	2697
INPUT:	Judasek diru-poltsaren ardura zuenez , jairako behar zena erosteko edota pobreei zerbait emateko esan ziola uste izan zuen zenbaitek .
PRED:	And Judah took the money of money , and brought it to the poor , and to buy it to the poor , and to buy it .
GOLD:	Since Judas was their treasurer , some thought Jesus was telling him to go and pay for the food or to give some money to the poor .

ID:	2698
INPUT:	Orduan , herensugea , emakumearen aurka amorraturik , beronen gainerako ondorengoak borrokatzera joan zen , Jainkoaren aginduak bete eta Jesusen testigantza leial egiten dutenak , alegia .
PRED:	And the king went out against her , and fought against her children , and came to fight with her , and the law of God , and the testimony of Jesus .
GOLD:	And the dragon was angry at the woman and declared war against the rest of her children — all who keep God 's commandments and maintain their testimony for Jesus .

ID:	2699
INPUT:	Zuek zoriontsu egiten eta ugaltzen izan zuen adinako atsegina izango du Jaunak zuek galtzen eta suntsitzen : jaurti egingo zaituzte jabetzan hartzera zoazten lurraldetik .
PRED:	The Lord will be pleased with you , and he will destroy you and destroy you from the land that he has destroyed you .
GOLD:	“ Just as the Lord has found great pleasure in causing you to prosper and multiply , the Lord will find pleasure in destroying you . You will be torn from the land you are about to enter and occupy .

ID:	2700
INPUT:	Zif , Telem , Bealot ,
PRED:	and Hamath , and Ziph , and Ziph ,
GOLD:	Ziph , Telem , Bealoth ,

ID:	2701
INPUT:	Memukan mintzatu zen erregearen eta buruzagien aitzinean : « Erregea ez ezik , buruzagiak eta Asuero erregearen erresumako eskualde guztietan bizi diren herriak ere iraindu egin ditu Baxti erreginak .
PRED:	And the king said unto the king , and to the princes of the princes , and to the princes , and the princes , and the princes , and the princes of the king , and all the people that dwell in the king 's hand .
GOLD:	Memucan answered the king and his nobles , “ Queen Vashti has wronged not only the king but also every noble and citizen throughout your empire .

ID:	2702
INPUT:	hain zuzen , apaizaren labore-opari guztiak erabatekoak dira ; ez dituzte jango » .
PRED:	All the burnt offerings of the priest shall be eaten .
GOLD:	Aaron and his sons may eat the rest of the flour , but it must be baked without yeast and eaten in a sacred place within the courtyard of the Tabernacle .

ID:	2703
INPUT:	Haiek erantzun zuten : — Israelen Jainkoaren kutxa itzuli nahi baduzue , ez bidali hutsik ; emaiozue zerbait ordain-oparitzat eta sendatuko zarete . Eta jakinen duzue zergatik ez zuen Jainkoak bere eskua kentzen zuen gainetik .
PRED:	They answered , “ If you want to return to the ark of God of Israel , you must not send a grain offering to him , and you will be healed , and you will know what God has done for you . ”
GOLD:	“ Send the Ark of the God of Israel back with a gift , ” they were told . “ Send a guilt offering so the plague will stop . Then , if you are healed , you will know it was his hand that caused the plague . ”

ID:	2704
INPUT:	Beste eratako eskaintzak egiteko seiehun zezen eta hiru mila ardi ekarri zituzten .
PRED:	And they brought them to the burnt offering of the burnt offering , five thousand sheep , and three thousand sheep .
GOLD:	They also brought 600 cattle and 3,000 sheep and goats as sacred offerings .

ID:	2705
INPUT:	Ikuskari hau ez da beteko , epea burutu arte , baina badoa helbururantz , ez du huts egingo . Luzatzen bada , zuk itxaron , iritsiko baita , berandu gabe iritsi ere .
PRED:	He will not see this vision until the end of his head , but he will not be put to shame . If you wait for a long time , he will not come .
GOLD:	This vision is for a future time.It describes the end , and it will be fulfilled.If it seems slow in coming , wait patiently , for it will surely take place.It will not be delayed .

ID:	2706
INPUT:	Osabak Sauli : — Eta zer esan zizuen Samuelek ?
PRED:	And Saul said to Saul , What shall Samuel say ?
GOLD:	“ Oh ? And what did he say ? ” his uncle asked .

ID:	2707
INPUT:	Jainkoaren aginduak betetzen baditugu , ziur dakigu bera ezagutzen dugula .
PRED:	If we keep the commandments of God , we know that we know that we know him .
GOLD:	And we can be sure that we know him if we obey his commandments .

ID:	2708
INPUT:	Honela jakingo dute Jauna naizela ni , beraien Jainkoa , eta beren artean bizitzeko atera nituela Egiptotik . Neu naiz Jauna , haien Jainkoa .
PRED:	They will know that I am the Lord their God , and I brought them out of the land of Egypt . I am the Lord their God .
GOLD:	and they will know that I am the Lord their God . I am the one who brought them out of the land of Egypt so that I could live among them . I am the Lord their God .

ID:	2709
INPUT:	apaizek sua egingo dute aldare gainean eta egurra jarriko sutan ;
PRED:	And the priests shall burn the altar on the altar , and burn it on the altar .
GOLD:	The sons of Aaron the priest will build a wood fire on the altar .

ID:	2710
INPUT:	Jainko ahaltsua lagun , aurki dezazuela gupida gizon haren aurrean , eta Benjaminekin eta beste anaiarekin , Simeonekin , itzuli etxera . Niri dagokidanez , semerik gabe gelditu behar badut , geldi nadila .
PRED:	The Almighty God Almighty has found a man in front of him , and Benjamin , and Benjamin , and Benjamin , and Benjamin , and his brethren , and his brethren , that I may be left .
GOLD:	May God Almighty give you mercy as you go before the man , so that he will release Simeon and let Benjamin return . But if I must lose my children , so be it . ”

ID:	2711
INPUT:	Moises eta Aaron lurreraino ahuspeztu ziren israeldar elkarte osoaren aurrean .
PRED:	And Moses and Aaron bowed down before the face of all the congregation of Israel .
GOLD:	Then Moses and Aaron fell face down on the ground before the whole community of Israel .

ID:	2712
INPUT:	« Egizu lebitarren izen-bilketa , senitarteka eta familiaka , hilabetez gorako gizonezkoak erroldatuz » .
PRED:	“ Take the Levites from the Levites and families of their fathers ' houses , by their fathers ' houses , by their fathers ' houses . ”
GOLD:	“ Record the names of the members of the tribe of Levi by their families and clans . List every male who is one month old or older . ”

ID:	2713
INPUT:	Betsabek erantzun zion : — Ederki . Hitz egingo diot , bada , erregeari zure alde .
PRED:	Then she said to her , “ I will speak , and I will speak to the king . ”
GOLD:	“ All right , ” Bathsheba replied . “ I will speak to the king for you . ”

ID:	2714
INPUT:	Ez ahaztu hau esatea : Jakob zure zerbitzaria bera dator gure atzetik » . Bere baitarako honela pentsatzen zuen : « Aurretik bidaltzen diodan opari honekin bigunduko dut . Gero ni neu agertuko natzaio . Beharbada , ongietorria egingo dit » .
PRED:	Do n't forget this : Jacob your servant is coming from us . He said , “ I will send my sacrifice before you , and I will give it to you . ”
GOLD:	So the gifts were sent on ahead , while Jacob himself spent that night in the camp .

ID:	2715
INPUT:	« Ai zuek , lege-maisu eta fariseu itxurazaleok ! Edalontzia eta platera kanpotik garbitzen dituzue , barrutik lapurretaz eta gutiziaz gainezka beterik dauden bitartean !
PRED:	“ Woe to you Pharisees and Pharisees , Pharisees , Pharisees , you Pharisees and Pharisees ! You have washed the cup in the city , and in the middle of the city , and in the midst of us .
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law and you Pharisees . Hypocrites ! For you are so careful to clean the outside of the cup and the dish , but inside you are filthy — full of greed and self-indulgence !

ID:	2716
INPUT:	« Izan ere , besteei beren hutsegiteak barkatzen badizkiezue , zuei ere barkatuko dizkizue zeruko Aitak ;
PRED:	For if you forgive others , then your Father will forgive you .
GOLD:	“ If you forgive those who sin against you , your heavenly Father will forgive you .

ID:	2717
INPUT:	Zeu izango zara , bada , nire jauregiko buru , eta zuk esana egingo du herri osoak . Neu bakarrik izango nauzu gainetik , errege naizenez .
PRED:	You will be my head , and all the people will obey you . I am the Lord .
GOLD:	You will be in charge of my court , and all my people will take orders from you . Only I , sitting on my throne , will have a rank higher than yours . ”

ID:	2718
INPUT:	Neuk gerizatuko duteta salbatuko hiri hau , naizena naizenagatiketa neure zerbitzari Davidengatik ” » .
PRED:	And I will make him a city , and I will save this city for my servant David . ”
GOLD:	‘ For my own honor and for the sake of my servant David , I will defend this city and protect it . ' ”

ID:	2719
INPUT:	Zebedeoren emaztea bere semeekin Jesusi hurbildu eta aurrean ahuspeztu zitzaion eskabide bat egiteko .
PRED:	And he came near to him , and bowed down before him , and bowed down before him a way .
GOLD:	Then the mother of James and John , the sons of Zebedee , came to Jesus with her sons . She knelt respectfully to ask a favor .

ID:	2720
INPUT:	« Jainkoaren erregetzarekin , atzerrira irten behar zuen gizonarekin bezala gertatzen da . Bere morroiei dei egin eta ondasunak utzi zizkien :
PRED:	“ The kingdom of heaven is like a man who went out with him , and he called his servants , and gave them his blessing .
GOLD:	“ Again , the Kingdom of Heaven can be illustrated by the story of a man going on a long trip . He called together his servants and entrusted his money to them while he was gone .

ID:	2721
INPUT:	Auzoan bizi ez bada edo ezezaguna baduzue , eraman aberea zeuen ukuilura eta eduki bertan , herritarra beraren bila etorri arte ; orduan , itzuli egingo diozue .
PRED:	If you do n't know what is right , bring it to your own land , and put it on your right hand , and you will return to their own people .
GOLD:	If its owner does not live nearby or you do n't know who the owner is , take it to your place and keep it until the owner comes looking for it . Then you must return it .

ID:	2722
INPUT:	Neftali eta beronen semeok : Jahtzeel , Guni , Jetzer eta Xilem .
PRED:	And the sons of Naphtali : Elioenai , Jozabad , and Kelita .
GOLD:	The sons of Naphtali were Jahzeel , Guni , Jezer , and Shillem .

ID:	2723
INPUT:	« Ez hartu , ez dastatu , ez ukitu » esaten dizuete .
PRED:	“ Do n't eat it , ” they say to you , “ Do n't touch it . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't handle ! Do n't taste ! Do n't touch ! ” ?

ID:	2724
INPUT:	ereilearen parabola argitu :
PRED:	The parable of the Law
GOLD:	Jesus Rejected at Nazareth

ID:	2725
INPUT:	Suzkoak bezalako izaki batzuk zituen gainean . Seina hegal zituzten : bi hegalez aurpegia estaltzen zuten , beste biz gorputza , eta beste biz hegaz egiten zuten .
PRED:	And there were a man on the face of the cherubim , and there were two wings , and their face covered their face with two faces , and their face were covered with pure gold .
GOLD:	Attending him were mighty seraphim , each having six wings . With two wings they covered their faces , with two they covered their feet , and with two they flew .

ID:	2726
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak , zuzena baita , hautsi egin du gaiztoen uztarria » .
PRED:	But the Lord is righteous , but he has broken the yoke of the wicked . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord is good ; he has cut me free from the ropes of the ungodly .

ID:	2727
INPUT:	Eskaintza hau honetarako izanen da : Jaunari eskainiriko ogitarako , eguneroko oparietarako , larunbat , ilberri eta jai nagusietako oparietarako , beste eskaintza sakratuetarako , Israelen bekatuen ordain-oparietarako eta gure Jainkoaren etxeko beste eginkizunetarako .
PRED:	This shall be the portion of the offerings of the Lord : for the Sabbath day of the Sabbath , and the new burnt offerings , and the burnt offerings , and the burnt offerings of the Lord , the God of Israel , and for the service of the house of the God of Israel , and for the work of the house of our God .
GOLD:	“ We have cast sacred lots to determine when — at regular times each year — the families of the priests , Levites , and the common people should bring wood to God 's Temple to be burned on the altar of the Lord our God , as is written in the Law .

ID:	2728
INPUT:	Judako Azariasen erregealdiko berrogeita hamargarren urtean hasi zen Israelgo errege izaten Samarian Pekah , Ramaliasen semea ; hogei urtez izan zen errege .
PRED:	In the tenth year of Ahaz king of Judah , Jotham son of Jotham became king of Israel , Jeroboam son of Jotham , reigned forty years .
GOLD:	Pekah son of Remaliah began to rule over Israel in the fifty-second year of King Uzziah 's reign in Judah . He reigned in Samaria twenty years .

ID:	2729
INPUT:	Apaizak miatu egingo du eta ikusten badu larruazalean handitu zuria duela , gaineko ilea zurituz doala eta haragi bizia ageri dela handituan ,
PRED:	And the priest shall pronounce the priest , and behold , the priest shall spread out the skin of the skin , and the blood of the skin , and the blood of the flesh , and the blood of the flesh , and the blood of the flesh , and the blood of the flesh ,
GOLD:	If the priest finds a white swelling on the skin , and some hair on the spot has turned white , and there is an open sore in the affected area ,

ID:	2730
INPUT:	Deiadar egiten didate : “ Israelen Jainko aitortzen zaitugu ” .
PRED:	They cried out to me , saying , “ The God of Israel is our God . ”
GOLD:	Now Israel pleads with me , ‘ Help us , for you are our God ! '

ID:	2731
INPUT:	Zulatua izan den hirira bezalazure ateetatik erregea sartzean , haren zalditeria ugariakharroturiko hautsakestali egingo zaitu ; zalditeriaren harrabotseta gurdien burrunbadazzure harresiekdardara egingo dute .
PRED:	And they shall go out of thy gates , as the king of thy gates , and they shall go into the midst of his horses , and they shall take thy chariots , and the chariots of the chariots of the chariots , and the chariots of the chariots shall be cut down .
GOLD:	The hooves of his horses will choke the city with dust , and the noise of the charioteers and chariot wheels will shake your walls as they storm through your broken gates .

ID:	2732
INPUT:	Josueren heriotza
PRED:	The Death of Joshua
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	2733
INPUT:	Bai , hau esango dizuete segur aski : « Egiezue kontsultanekromante eta igarleei , isil-misilean eta marmarkaari ohi diren horiei . Herri batek ez ote dizkiebizien gorabeherak beren jainkoeieta hildakoei galdetu behar ? »
PRED:	They will say to you , “ Tell the men who ask you , ‘ Do you want to ask those who do n't know what they want to do . They do n't want anyone to live in the land of the dead . '
GOLD:	Someone may say to you , “ Let 's ask the mediums and those who consult the spirits of the dead . With their whisperings and mutterings , they will tell us what to do . ” But should n't people ask God for guidance ? Should the living seek guidance from the dead ?

ID:	2734
INPUT:	Baina aingeruak esan zidan : « Zergatik harritzen zara ? Nik adieraziko dizut emakumearen eta berau gainean daraman eta zazpi buru eta hamar adar dituen piztiaren esanahia .
PRED:	But the angel said to me , “ Why do you receive ? I will tell you the woman and bring her on her seven heads and seven heads of the beast .
GOLD:	“ Why are you so amazed ? ” the angel asked . “ I will tell you the mystery of this woman and of the beast with seven heads and ten horns on which she sits .

ID:	2735
INPUT:	Ondoren , Jair agertu zen , Galaadekoa . Hogeita bi urtez gobernatu zuen Israel .
PRED:	And he appeared to Gilead , and he judged Israel forty years .
GOLD:	After Tola died , Jair from Gilead judged Israel for twenty-two years .

ID:	2736
INPUT:	( Mt 26 , 6-13 ; Mk 14 , <unk> )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus ' Triumphant Entry

ID:	2737
INPUT:	Zure lepoamarfilezko dorrea . Zure begiak Hexbongo bi uraska , hiri jendetsu horren sarreran . Zure sudur-hegiaDamaskora begira dagoenLibanoko dorre .
PRED:	Your eyes are like a stone , and your eyes are like the daughters of Sihon , and your eyes are like the entrance of the city of Damascus . Your eyes are like Lebanon .
GOLD:	Your head is as majestic as Mount Carmel , and the sheen of your hair radiates royalty.The king is held captive by its tresses .

ID:	2738
INPUT:	« Ez ote dira bi txori sos batean saltzen ? Hala ere , ez da bat bakarra ere lurrera erortzen zuen Aitaren baimenik gabe .
PRED:	“ Do n't two small little while ? But only only only only one into the earth , but the Father is not able to fall into the earth .
GOLD:	What is the price of two sparrows — one copper coin ? But not a single sparrow can fall to the ground without your Father knowing it .

ID:	2739
INPUT:	behiak 36 . 000 ,
PRED:	The number of the hundred thousand and five thousand and five thousand .
GOLD:	36,000 cattle ,

ID:	2740
INPUT:	ez du gaiztoa bizirik uzten , zanpatuei justizia egiten die ;
PRED:	He will not let the wicked live , but he will give justice to the righteous .
GOLD:	He does not let the wicked livebut gives justice to the afflicted .

ID:	2741
INPUT:	eta esan zidan : “ Kornelio , entzun du Jainkoak zure otoitza eta gogora ekarri zure limosnak .
PRED:	He said to me , “ Listen to what God has heard , and bring your prayer to your prayer .
GOLD:	He told me , ‘ Cornelius , your prayer has been heard , and your gifts to the poor have been noticed by God !

ID:	2742
INPUT:	Zezenaren eta ahariaren buztanak , heste gaineko gantza , giltzurrunak eta gibela estaltzen zuena eraman zizkioten
PRED:	And they brought the fat , and the fat , and the fat , and the fat , and the fat , and the fat , and the fat , and the fat , and the fat that was upon them ,
GOLD:	Then he took the fat of the bull and the ram — the fat of the broad tail and from around the internal organs — along with the kidneys and the long lobes of the livers .

ID:	2743
INPUT:	Gedeoni eman zizkioten urrezko eraztunek hogei kilo pisatu zuten , apaindurak , belarritakoak , Madiango erregeek zeramatzaten purpurazko jantziak eta gameluek lepoan zeramatzaten lepokoak kontatu gabe .
PRED:	And they brought the gold rings of gold , and made them of gold , and put them on them , and they put on their garments , and put them on their heads , and put them on their heads , and did not put on their heads .
GOLD:	The weight of the gold earrings was forty-three pounds , not including the royal ornaments and pendants , the purple clothing worn by the kings of Midian , or the chains around the necks of their camels .

ID:	2744
INPUT:	Boozek , orduan , herriko hamar nagusi hartu zituen lekuko eta han esertzeko erregutu zien . Eseri zirenean ,
PRED:	Then Boaz took ten of the people of the land of the land , and he burned them there . And when they sat down , they sat down .
GOLD:	Then Boaz called ten leaders from the town and asked them to sit as witnesses .

ID:	2745
INPUT:	Eta galdetzen dut : Ez al dute entzun ? Bai , noski . Lurbira guztira zabaldu da haien hotsa , munduaren bazterreraino haien mezua .
PRED:	And I say to them , “ Do n't I hear ? Yes , you have heard the voice of the earth , even to the ends of the earth . ”
GOLD:	But I ask , have the people of Israel actually heard the message ? Yes , they have : “ The message has gone throughout the earth , and the words to all the world . ”

ID:	2746
INPUT:	eta bildu elkarte osoa elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran » .
PRED:	And all the congregation gathered together together to the entrance of the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	and call the entire community of Israel together at the entrance of the Tabernacle . ”

ID:	2747
INPUT:	Nola ordainduko diot Jaunari egin didan on guztia ?
PRED:	How shall I pay back all that I have done to the Lord ?
GOLD:	What can I offer the Lordfor all he has done for me ?

ID:	2748
INPUT:	Bitartean , eduki zuk eskuan , haien begi-bistan , makila idatziak .
PRED:	You know that it is written in your hand , and you have written in their eyes .
GOLD:	“ Then hold out the pieces of wood you have inscribed , so the people can see them .

ID:	2749
INPUT:	Bekatua onginahi eta leialtasunaz ezabatzen da , gaizkiari Jaunarenganako begiruneaz egiten zaio ihes .
PRED:	If he does what is right and right , he will escape from the Lord .
GOLD:	Unfailing love and faithfulness make atonement for sin.By fearing the Lord , people avoid evil .

ID:	2750
INPUT:	Berdin zuek ere : hartu kontuan bekatuarentzat hilda zaudetela eta Jainkoarentzat bizirik , Jesu Kristorekin bat eginik .
PRED:	You also know that you are dead , and you are dead for sin , and you live in God Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	So you also should consider yourselves to be dead to the power of sin and alive to God through Christ Jesus .

ID:	2751
INPUT:	Izan ere , juduek aspalditik irakurtzen eta azaltzen dute Moisesen legea larunbatero herri guztietako sinagogetan » .
PRED:	For the Jews read from many days , and read in the synagogue of Moses .
GOLD:	For these laws of Moses have been preached in Jewish synagogues in every city on every Sabbath for many generations . ”

ID:	2752
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jainkoaren tronu aurrean daude , gau eta egun hura bere tenpluan zerbitzatzen , eta tronuan eseria dagoena horiekin biziko da .
PRED:	Therefore the throne of God is at the throne of God and night and night and night , and he who sat on his throne will live in his temple .
GOLD:	“ That is why they stand in front of God 's throneand serve him day and night in his Temple.And he who sits on the thronewill give them shelter .

ID:	2753
INPUT:	Gatzik gabe jaten al da janari zozoaedo gusturik hartzen al zaio zapore gabekoari ?
PRED:	Can a man eat bread without bread , or does he eat the bread of his mouth ?
GOLD:	Do n't people complain about unsalted food ? Does anyone want the tasteless white of an egg ?

ID:	2754
INPUT:	Bere zurikeriaz menderatu egiten du , bere hitz goxoez erakarri .
PRED:	He makes his wickedness for ever , and he does not speak with his mouth .
GOLD:	So she seduced him with her pretty speechand enticed him with her flattery .

ID:	2755
INPUT:	Jesus artean herrixkan sartu gabe zegoen , Martak topatu zuen lekuan bertan .
PRED:	And he went into a village , and laid him in the place where Mordecai had found him in his place .
GOLD:	Jesus had stayed outside the village , at the place where Martha met him .

ID:	2756
INPUT:	Aztikeria adinako bekatua dadesleial izatea , sasijainkokeria bezain hutsala setakeria . Jaunaren esana baztertu duzulako , berak baztertzen zaitu orain erregetzatik .
PRED:	You have turned away your sin from sin , and you have turned away from the king 's kingdom .
GOLD:	Rebellion is as sinful as witchcraft , and stubbornness as bad as worshiping idols.So because you have rejected the command of the Lord , he has rejected you as king . ”

ID:	2757
INPUT:	Handik , Etiopiako errege Tirhaka borrokatzeko asmoz zetorkiola jakin zuelarik , Senakeribek mezulariak bidali zizkion berriro Ezekiasi ,
PRED:	And when he heard that he had come to fight against Sihon king of Persia , he sent messengers again to fight against him , saying ,
GOLD:	Soon afterward King Sennacherib received word that King Tirhakah of Ethiopia was leading an army to fight against him . Before leaving to meet the attack , he sent messengers back to Hezekiah in Jerusalem with this message :

ID:	2758
INPUT:	Ahuntz-ilezko beste hamaika zapi ere egin zituzten , egoitza estaliko zuen oihal-etxola eratzeko .
PRED:	And he made seven heads of goats , and made the tabernacle for the tabernacle , to make the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	He made eleven curtains of goat-hair cloth to serve as a tent covering for the Tabernacle .

ID:	2759
INPUT:	nire oinak katez lotzen dituzu , nire pauso guztiak zelatatzen , oinatzak aztertzen .
PRED:	You put my feet on my feet , and I will put my feet on my feet .
GOLD:	You put my feet in stocks.You examine all my paths.You trace all my footprints .

ID:	2760
INPUT:	Bihurritu zaitez , bai , egin aiene , Siongo herri , emakumeak erdiminetan bezala ; orain hiritik aterako baitzareteeta landan biziko . Babiloniara joango zarete , baina han salbatuko zaituzteJaunak , zeuen etsaien eskuetatik askatuko .
PRED:	Go , O daughter of Zion , O daughter of Zion , as a woman in the midst of the city ; for now you will go out of the city , and you will be saved from the hand of the Lord , and you will save you from your enemies .
GOLD:	Writhe and groan like a woman in labor , you people of Jerusalem , for now you must leave this cityto live in the open country.You will soon be sent in exileto distant Babylon.But the Lord will rescue you there ; he will redeem you from the grip of your enemies .

ID:	2761
INPUT:	Honela diotso JaunakZiro erregeari , berak aukeratu eta sagaratuari : « Eskutik heldurik eusten dizut , nazioak zure menpean jarrieta erregeei soinetikarmak kentzeko , zure aurrean hiri-ateak zabaltzeko , guzti-guztiak zabaldu ere .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I have chosen the nations from your hand , ” says the Lord . “ I have put the nations in your hand , and I will put the nations in your hand , and all the kings of the earth .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says to Cyrus , his anointed one , whose right hand he will empower.Before him , mighty kings will be paralyzed with fear.Their fortress gates will be opened , never to shut again .

ID:	2762
INPUT:	Jesusen ama eta anai-arrebak iritsi ziren . Kanpoan gelditurik , deiarazi egin zuten .
PRED:	And his mother and his brothers came to him , and they called him out .
GOLD:	Then Jesus ' mother and brothers came to see him . They stood outside and sent word for him to come out and talk with them .

ID:	2763
INPUT:	Ohean etorkizunaz pentsatzen hasi zinen , eta misterioak argitzen dituen Jainkoak zer gertatuko den eman dizu aditzera .
PRED:	They began to teach you about the bed , and God will show you what will happen to you .
GOLD:	“ While Your Majesty was sleeping , you dreamed about coming events . He who reveals secrets has shown you what is going to happen .

ID:	2764
INPUT:	On egiozu zeure zerbitzari honi , Jauna , zeure promesaren arabera !
PRED:	It is good to your servant , Lord , according to your word .
GOLD:	You have done many good things for me , Lord , just as you promised .

ID:	2765
INPUT:	Gizakiaren kreazioa
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The Man and Woman in Eden

ID:	2766
INPUT:	Ezekias eta jende guztia pozik zegoen , Jainkoak herri osoari horrela eragin ziolako ; dena bat-batean eratua baitzuten .
PRED:	And Hezekiah and all the people were glad , because all the people were filled with joy . And all the people were amazed .
GOLD:	And Hezekiah and all the people rejoiced because of what God had done for the people , for everything had been accomplished so quickly .

ID:	2767
INPUT:	Behinola , Jeroboam Jerusalemdik atera zen batean , Xiloko Ahias profetak aurkitu zuen bidean ; soingaineko berria zeraman honek soinean . Biak bakarrik gertatu ziren landan .
PRED:	So Jeroboam went out from Jerusalem , and found Jeroboam the prophet in Shiloh , and he found him in the field , and he took his clothes in the field .
GOLD:	One day as Jeroboam was leaving Jerusalem , the prophet Ahijah from Shiloh met him along the way . Ahijah was wearing a new cloak . The two of them were alone in a field ,

ID:	2768
INPUT:	Senarraren ezjakinean beste gizon batekin sexu-harremanak izan ditu eta kutsaturik gelditu da ; baina ez dago lekukorik , ez du inork horretan harrapatu .
PRED:	And when she heard of her husband 's wife , she hath defiled her husband , she is unclean , she is unclean ; she is not unclean .
GOLD:	and has sex with another man , but neither her husband nor anyone else knows about it . She has defiled herself , even though there was no witness and she was not caught in the act .

ID:	2769
INPUT:	Lehenengo ibilaldia ( 13 , 1 — 14 , 28 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Barnabas and Saul Are Commissioned

ID:	2770
INPUT:	Bete egingo du nire aurkako epaia , beste erabaki guztiak bezalaxe .
PRED:	He will judge my judgment , just as he has done .
GOLD:	So he will do to me whatever he has planned.He controls my destiny .

ID:	2771
INPUT:	Azken egunak hurbiltzen ari zitzaizkiolarik , agindu hauek eman zizkion Davidek bere seme Salomoni :
PRED:	And it came to pass at the last time , that David commanded his son Solomon , saying ,
GOLD:	As the time of King David 's death approached , he gave this charge to his son Solomon :

ID:	2772
INPUT:	Eta ez esan : “ Aurkitu dugun jakinduri<unk> koak bakarrik mendera dezake , ez gizakiak ” .
PRED:	And they said , We have found no wisdom , that we may not know men .
GOLD:	And do n't tell me , ‘ He is too wise for us.Only God can convince him . '

ID:	2773
INPUT:	Ilunpetan argia ageri da zuzenentzat : Jainko errukiorra , bihozbera eta zintzoa .
PRED:	The light of darkness is a light to the righteous ; the mercy of God is righteous and righteous .
GOLD:	Light shines in the darkness for the godly.They are generous , compassionate , and righteous .

ID:	2774
INPUT:	Anari , berriz , puska berezia eskuratzen zion , oso maitea baitzuen , nahiz eta Jaunak haurrik ematen ez zion .
PRED:	But he took his hand and took it into his hand , because the Lord loved him , and he did not give birth to him .
GOLD:	And though he loved Hannah , he would give her only one choice portion because the Lord had given her no children .

ID:	2775
INPUT:	Errementariak burdin puska hartu eta , txingarretan goriturik , mailuka moldeatzen du , beso indartsuz lantzen . Baina gose baldin bada , indarrak galtzen ditu , eta edaten ez badu , leher egiten .
PRED:	But if the mountains are broken down , they are filled with fire , they are filled with a strong hand , but if they are hungry , they are hungry , they do not eat anything .
GOLD:	The blacksmith stands at his forge to make a sharp tool , pounding and shaping it with all his might.His work makes him hungry and weak.It makes him thirsty and faint .

ID:	2776
INPUT:	Judako erregearen jauregira joan eta mezu hau aldarrikatzeko agindu zion Jaunak Jeremiasi :
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the king of Judah , saying ,
GOLD:	This is what the Lord said to me : “ Go over and speak directly to the king of Judah . Say to him ,

ID:	2777
INPUT:	<unk> , Rimon , Eter eta Axan : lau hiri eta beraien herrixkak .
PRED:	Hallohesh , Hallohesh , Kelita , towns , and their villages .
GOLD:	It also included Ain , Rimmon , Ether , and Ashan — four towns with their villages ,

ID:	2778
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaien Jauna Moisesi eta Aaroni :
PRED:	The Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron , saying ,
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,

ID:	2779
INPUT:	Aitzitik , atseginetara emanik dagoena , bizi delarik ere , hilda dago .
PRED:	But if any man is in rest , he is dead , he is dead .
GOLD:	But the widow who lives only for pleasure is spiritually dead even while she lives .

ID:	2780
INPUT:	Jauna zurekin . Jainkoaren grazia zuekin .
PRED:	The grace of the Lord your God be with you .
GOLD:	May the Lord be with your spirit . And may his grace be with all of you .

ID:	2781
INPUT:	Judako Asaren erregealdiaren bigarren urtean hasi zen Jeroboamen seme Nadab Israelgo errege izaten . Bi urtez izan zen Israelgo errege .
PRED:	In the second year of Asa king of Judah , Jeroboam son of Nebat began to reign over Israel for two years .
GOLD:	Nadab son of Jeroboam began to rule over Israel in the second year of King Asa 's reign in Judah . He reigned in Israel two years .

ID:	2782
INPUT:	Eta hark erantzun : “ Zoaz orain , Daniel ! Mezu hau isilean gordea eta zigilatua egongo da azken garaia arte .
PRED:	He said to them , “ Go , Daniel , you , Daniel ! This is the Messiah , and it will be until the last time .
GOLD:	But he said , “ Go now , Daniel , for what I have said is kept secret and sealed until the time of the end .

ID:	2783
INPUT:	Joan Bataiatzaileak Mesiasen egintzen berri izan zuen kartzelan , eta bere ikasle batzuk bidali zizkion
PRED:	He sent some of his disciples into prison , and sent some of his disciples to him .
GOLD:	John the Baptist , who was in prison , heard about all the things the Messiah was doing . So he sent his disciples to ask Jesus ,

ID:	2784
INPUT:	Izan ere , lapur , hiltzaile eta adulteriogile izan , gezurretan zin egin , Baali intsentsua erre , zuekin zerikusirik ez duten jainko arrotzen atzetik ibili
PRED:	For he is a thief , a thief , and a false woman , and a false woman , and a false woman , and a false god , and a false god , and a false god , and a false god .
GOLD:	Do you really think you can steal , murder , commit adultery , lie , and burn incense to Baal and all those other new gods of yours ,

ID:	2785
INPUT:	Janari-arazo batengatik , ez hondatu Jainkoaren egintza . Janari guztiak garbiak dira ; hala ere , ez dago ongi besteak galbidean jarriz zerbait jatea .
PRED:	For there is no way for the work of God , nor destroy all the work of God ; but the rest of the others are not clean .
GOLD:	Do n't tear apart the work of God over what you eat . Remember , all foods are acceptable , but it is wrong to eat something if it makes another person stumble .

ID:	2786
INPUT:	Jesusek inori ez adierazteko agindu zion eta esan : — Zoaz , azaldu apaizarengana eta eskaini garbikuntzaren ordainez Moisesek agindutakoa , ezaugarri izan dezaten .
PRED:	Jesus said to him , “ Go not to tell anyone . Go to the priest , and offer him to the priest , so that he may be clean . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus instructed him not to tell anyone what had happened . He said , “ Go to the priest and let him examine you . Take along the offering required in the law of Moses for those who have been healed of leprosy . This will be a public testimony that you have been cleansed . ”

ID:	2787
INPUT:	Ea Jaunari erregutzen dioten eta itzultzen diren beren jokabide gaiztotik , handia baita herri honen aurka Jaunak agertu duen haserre-sumina » .
PRED:	They turn back to the Lord , and turn back from their evil ways , for the wrath of the Lord has appeared against this people . ”
GOLD:	Perhaps even yet they will turn from their evil ways and ask the Lord 's forgiveness before it is too late . For the Lord has threatened them with his terrible anger . ”

ID:	2788
INPUT:	Damu zaitez , beraz ; bestela , zuregana joango naiz laster eta horien aurka borroka egingo dut neure ahoko ezpataz .
PRED:	Therefore , therefore , I will come to you , and I will fight against them , and I will fight with my sword .
GOLD:	Repent of your sin , or I will come to you suddenly and fight against them with the sword of my mouth .

ID:	2789
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Guztiz suntsituko zaitudanean , herrialde osoa poztuko da .
PRED:	Thus says the Lord God : When I will destroy you , all the land will be glad .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The whole world will rejoice when I make you desolate .

ID:	2790
INPUT:	Jaunak gaixotasun guztiak urrunduko ditu zuengandik ; ez dizkizue bidaliko ongi ezagutzen dituzuen Egiptoko izurri ikaragarriak , baizik eta gorrotoa dizuetenei bidaliko dizkie .
PRED:	And the Lord will turn away from you , and you will not know all the evil things that the Lord has sent to you . You will not know the plague of the Egyptians , but the plague that you have sent to you .
GOLD:	And the Lord will protect you from all sickness . He will not let you suffer from the terrible diseases you knew in Egypt , but he will inflict them on all your enemies !

ID:	2791
INPUT:	Jesusek Gerasako deabruduna sendatu
PRED:	Jesus Heals to Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Man

ID:	2792
INPUT:	Jaunak Moisesi agindutakoa agindu zion Moisesek Josueri , eta honek bete ; ez zuen bete gabe utzi Jaunak Moisesi agindutako ezer ere .
PRED:	And Moses commanded Moses , and he did not keep it ; and he did not keep it , and did not do what the Lord commanded Moses .
GOLD:	As the Lord had commanded his servant Moses , so Moses commanded Joshua . And Joshua did as he was told , carefully obeying all the commands that the Lord had given to Moses .

ID:	2793
INPUT:	Uztaroan , bostetik bat faraoiari emango diozue eta beste laurak zuentzat izango dituzue , ereiteko eta zeuek , zeuen haurrak eta etxekoak mantentzeko .
PRED:	On the fifth day you will give Pharaoh a fifth time , and your children will be to you , and your children and your children .
GOLD:	Then when you harvest it , one-fifth of your crop will belong to Pharaoh . You may keep the remaining four-fifths as seed for your fields and as food for you , your households , and your little ones . ”

ID:	2794
INPUT:	« Entzun , Israel , ene herri , zure kontra egingo dudan aitorpena . Neu naiz Jainkoa , zure Jainkoa !
PRED:	“ Hear me , O house of Israel , and I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ O my people , listen as I speak.Here are my charges against you , O Israel : I am God , your God !

ID:	2795
INPUT:	Baratzeko hesia bezala bota ditu haren harresiak , haren batzarlekua xehatu . Jaiegunak eta larunbata ahaztarazi ditu Jaunak Sionen . Errege-apaizak gaitzetsi ditu haserrearen haserrez .
PRED:	He has broken down his walls like an eagle , and has broken his tent , and has forgotten the days of the Lord , and have forgotten the sabbath day , and have forgotten the days of the king of Zion .
GOLD:	He has broken down his Templeas though it were merely a garden shelter.The Lord has blotted out all memoryof the holy festivals and Sabbath days.Kings and priests fall togetherbefore his fierce anger .

ID:	2796
INPUT:	Honen ondoren , Absalomek guda-gurdi bat , zaldiak eta aurretik joango zitzaizkion berrogeita hamar gizon eskuratu zituen .
PRED:	And Absalom took a chariot of horses and horses , and went before him , and he delivered them out of his hand .
GOLD:	After this , Absalom bought a chariot and horses , and he hired fifty bodyguards to run ahead of him .

ID:	2797
INPUT:	Batek esan zion : — Adizu , ama eta anai-arrebak dituzu kanpoan , zurekin hitz egin nahian .
PRED:	A man said to him , “ Your mother and your brothers are outside in the court , and your brothers are speaking to you . ”
GOLD:	Someone told Jesus , “ Your mother and your brothers are standing outside , and they want to speak to you . ”

ID:	2798
INPUT:	Jende askok jarraituko die beren jokabide biziotsuan , eta , horiek direla eta , gaitzetsia izango da kristau-bidea .
PRED:	Many people will follow their ways and live in their own ways . They will be judged by the way of the Lord .
GOLD:	Many will follow their evil teaching and shameful immorality . And because of these teachers , the way of truth will be slandered .

ID:	2799
INPUT:	Jeroboam hil nahian ibili zen Salomon ; hark , ordea , Egiptora egin zuen ihes , Egiptoko errege Xi<unk> -engana , eta han egon zen , Salomon hil arte .
PRED:	And Solomon died , and he fled to Egypt , and he fled to the king of Egypt until Solomon died .
GOLD:	Solomon tried to kill Jeroboam , but he fled to King Shishak of Egypt and stayed there until Solomon died .

ID:	2800
INPUT:	Jainko Jaun ahalguztidunak errege-jauregiko arduradun zen Xebna agintariagana bidali ninduen , esatera :
PRED:	Then the Lord Almighty God of hosts sent me to the elders of the king 's house , and said to me ,
GOLD:	This is what the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , said to me : “ Confront Shebna , the palace administrator , and give him this message :

ID:	2801
INPUT:	Ikusi eta entzun duzunaren lekuko izango baitzaitu hark gizon-emakume guztien aurrean .
PRED:	For he will see you , and he will see you in front of all men .
GOLD:	For you are to be his witness , telling everyone what you have seen and heard .

ID:	2802
INPUT:	begiak erreak ditut zuk hitzemanaren zain : noiz kontsolatuko nauzu ?
PRED:	I have looked for your word , and you will comfort me ?
GOLD:	My eyes are straining to see your promises come true.When will you comfort me ?

ID:	2803
INPUT:	Horrelako horrek badu nahikoa zuetako gehienek ezarri dioten zigorraz ;
PRED:	And the king of the people of the city set their hands on them , and they put them to death .
GOLD:	Most of you opposed him , and that was punishment enough .

ID:	2804
INPUT:	Lagun-talde handia berekin zuela eta usaingarriz , urre ugariz eta harribitxiz zamaturiko gameluak zekartzala heldu zen Jerusalemera . Salomonengana joanik , buruan zituen arazo guztiez mintzatu zitzaion .
PRED:	And there came a great great multitude with thee , and of gold , and of gold , and of gold , and of gold , and of precious stones , and of precious stones , and came to Jerusalem , and spake unto Solomon all the things that he had spoken .
GOLD:	She arrived in Jerusalem with a large group of attendants and a great caravan of camels loaded with spices , large quantities of gold , and precious jewels . When she met with Solomon , she talked with him about everything she had on her mind .

ID:	2805
INPUT:	eta auzitara eramana ( 21 , 17 — 23 , 35 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Paul Speaks to the Crowd

ID:	2806
INPUT:	Zorionekoa zu , Jaunak esan dizuna beteko dela sinetsi duzulako ! »
PRED:	Blessed are you , because you have believed that the Lord has spoken to you . ”
GOLD:	You are blessed because you believed that the Lord would do what he said . ”

ID:	2807
INPUT:	Orotariko zuhaitzak sorrarazi zituen lurretik , ikusgarriak eta fruitu gozodunak . Baratze erdian bi zuhaitz ernearazi zituen : batak bizia ematen zuen eta besteak dena ezagutzeko ahalmena .
PRED:	And he brought forth the trees of the earth , and the fruit of the earth , and the fruit of the fruit of the earth , and the fruit of the trees of the trees : and the tree was given to the rest of the tree , and to know it .
GOLD:	The Lord God made all sorts of trees grow up from the ground — trees that were beautiful and that produced delicious fruit . In the middle of the garden he placed the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil .

ID:	2808
INPUT:	eta mendeku-eskubidea duenak , babes-hiriaren mugetatik kanpo aurkitu eta hiltzen badu , ez du hilketarik egiten .
PRED:	And if he shall find the right hand of the city , he shall find him outside the city , and shall not die .
GOLD:	and the avenger finds him outside the city and kills him , it will not be considered murder .

ID:	2809
INPUT:	Erregea ospetsu ikusiko duzu , luze eta zabal lurraldea .
PRED:	You will see the king 's glory , and you will see the land of the long and long .
GOLD:	Your eyes will see the king in all his splendor , and you will see a land that stretches into the distance .

ID:	2810
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaien Hamor : « Sikem nire semea zuen arrebaz maitemindua dago ; emaiozue , arren , emaztetzat .
PRED:	Then Shechem said to them , “ If you love my son Shechem , you will love him as a wife .
GOLD:	Hamor tried to speak with Jacob and his sons . “ My son Shechem is truly in love with your daughter , ” he said . “ Please let him marry her .

ID:	2811
INPUT:	Behin batean , Jesus honela mintzatu zen : « Goresten zaitut , Aita , zeru-lurren Jauna , gauza hauek jakintsu eta ikasiei ezkutatu dizkiezulako eta jende xumeari agertu .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to them , “ I praise you , Father of heaven and earth , because these things you have seen these things , and have seen these things ,
GOLD:	At that time Jesus prayed this prayer : “ O Father , Lord of heaven and earth , thank you for hiding these things from those who think themselves wise and clever , and for revealing them to the childlike .

ID:	2812
INPUT:	Handik , kostarik kosta Regiora heldu ginen . Biharamunean hego-haizeak jo zuen eta bi egunetan Potzuolira iritsi ginen .
PRED:	And it came to pass , that it came to pass , and it came to pass on the next day , that it came to pass in the morning , and came to pass in two days .
GOLD:	From there we sailed across to Rhegium . A day later a south wind began blowing , so the following day we sailed up the coast to Puteoli .

ID:	2813
INPUT:	Ea , bada ! Eraso diezaiogun gauez ! E<unk> ditzagun horren jauregiak ! »
PRED:	Now therefore , let us go up against us , and let us go into the king 's house . ”
GOLD:	‘ Well then , let 's attack at nightand destroy her palaces ! ' ”

ID:	2814
INPUT:	Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : « Ahizparen kopa edango duzu , kopa zabal eta sakona , bete-betea . ( Irrigarri eta iseka-gai izango zara ) .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord God says : “ You will drink the cup of the sister , and you will drink it , and you will be a sign and a sign .
GOLD:	“ Yes , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ You will drink from your sister 's cup of terror , a cup that is large and deep.It is filled to the brimwith scorn and derision .

ID:	2815
INPUT:	Gero , Jainkoaren etxea erre , Jerusalemgo harresia bota eta su eman zien jauregiei eta bertako gauza ederrei , dena hondatuz .
PRED:	And he burned the house of God , and cast down the wall of Jerusalem , and burned the houses of the house of the Lord , and to destroy it .
GOLD:	Then his army burned the Temple of God , tore down the walls of Jerusalem , burned all the palaces , and completely destroyed everything of value .

ID:	2816
INPUT:	Beldur naizenean , zuregan dut konfiantza .
PRED:	When I was afraid , I trust in you .
GOLD:	I praise God for what he has promised.I trust in God , so why should I be afraid ? What can mere mortals do to me ?

ID:	2817
INPUT:	« Horregatik , nik , Jainko Jaunak , zin dagit neure biziarengatik , zigortu egingo dudala nirekiko leialtasun-zina mespretxatu eta ituna hautsi duelako .
PRED:	“ Therefore I live , ” says the Lord God , “ I live because I am going to punish the covenant that I have broken the covenant that I have broken , and have broken the covenant that I have broken .
GOLD:	“ So this is what the Sovereign Lord says : As surely as I live , I will punish him for breaking my covenant and disregarding the solemn oath he made in my name .

ID:	2818
INPUT:	jende xehealurreko hautsaren kontrazapaltzen dute , eta jende errukarriaren eskubideabaztertzen . Aita-semeakneska bat berarekin dabiltza , nire izen santua laidotuz .
PRED:	They hate the ends of the earth , and they turn away the way of the wicked ; their father and their children are gathered together with him , and my holy name was filled with them .
GOLD:	They trample helpless people in the dustand shove the oppressed out of the way.Both father and son sleep with the same woman , corrupting my holy name .

ID:	2819
INPUT:	« Judaren zatiaren ondoren , ekialdeko mugatik Mediterraneo itsasoraino , Jaunarentzat bereizitako zatia egongo da : hamabi kilometro eta erdi izango da luze , leinu bakoitzaren zatia bezalaxe ; erdian santutegia egongo da .
PRED:	And it shall be to pass after the sons of Judah , after the east side of the east side of the sea , that it may be a portion for the Lord , according to the breadth of the house of the Lord , according to the breadth of the house of the Lord , according to their families .
GOLD:	“ South of Judah is the land set aside for a special purpose . It will be 81/3 miles wide and will extend as far east and west as the tribal territories , with the Temple at the center .

ID:	2820
INPUT:	Pilatok galdetu zion : — Egia , zer da egia ? Hori esanik , Pilatok berriro irten eta judu-agintariei esan zien : — Nik ez dut gizon hau kondenatzeko batere arrazoirik aurkitzen .
PRED:	Pilate asked him , “ What do I do ? ” Pilate said to the Jews , “ I do n't find this man . ”
GOLD:	“ What is truth ? ” Pilate asked . Then he went out again to the people and told them , “ He is not guilty of any crime .

ID:	2821
INPUT:	Egin negar isilean , baina ez egin ohiko dolurik ; jarri buruzapia , jantzi sandaliak , ez estali aurpegia eta ez jan hileta-ogirik » .
PRED:	And when he saw it , he shall not wash his head , but put on his head , and put his face on his face , and not eat bread .
GOLD:	Groan silently , but let there be no wailing at her grave . Do not uncover your head or take off your sandals . Do not perform the usual rituals of mourning or accept any food brought to you by consoling friends . ”

ID:	2822
INPUT:	Amondarren erregeak erantzun zien Jefteren mezulariei : « Egiptotik igotzean , nire lurraldean sartu eta Arnon errekatik Jabok erreka eta Jordan ibaia artekoa hartu zidaten israeldarrek . Itzul iezadazu orain bakean lurralde hori » .
PRED:	And the king of Ammon said unto the messengers of Ammon , When I came up out of the land of Egypt , and came into my land , and unto all the kings of the Jordan , and unto the kings of Israel , and unto this land .
GOLD:	The king of Ammon answered Jephthah 's messengers , “ When the Israelites came out of Egypt , they stole my land from the Arnon River to the Jabbok River and all the way to the Jordan . Now then , give back the land peaceably . ”

ID:	2823
INPUT:	Kristo niregan bizi dela bezain egia da harrotzeko bide hori inork ere ez didala kenduko Akaia osoan .
PRED:	As Christ lives in me , so that no one will take away from me .
GOLD:	As surely as the truth of Christ is in me , no one in all of Greece will ever stop me from boasting about this .

ID:	2824
INPUT:	Neskatxaren nagusiek , beren irabazpidea bukatzen zitzaiela ikustean , Paulori eta Silasi eskua bota eta hiriko plazara eraman zituzten agintariengana ,
PRED:	When the young men saw that they had under their authority , they threw Paul and Silas into the city , and brought him into the city .
GOLD:	Her masters ' hopes of wealth were now shattered , so they grabbed Paul and Silas and dragged them before the authorities at the marketplace .

ID:	2825
INPUT:	Izan ere , barrutik , gizakiaren bihotzetik , ateratzen dira asmo txarrak , lizunkeria , lapurretak , hilketak ,
PRED:	For from the heart of man , from the heart of man , evil , wickedness , and scarlet ,
GOLD:	For from within , out of a person 's heart , come evil thoughts , sexual immorality , theft , murder ,

ID:	2826
INPUT:	Aurreraturik , hilkutxa ukitu zuen , eta zeramatenak gelditu egin ziren . Orduan , esan zuen : « Gazte , zuri diotsut : Jaiki ! »
PRED:	And when he had found the ark , he touched the ark , and the men who were left , he said , “ Get up , rise up ! ”
GOLD:	Then he walked over to the coffin and touched it , and the bearers stopped . “ Young man , ” he said , “ I tell you , get up . ”

ID:	2827
INPUT:	Jakinduria deika ari da , zuhurtziak oihu egiten du ;
PRED:	The wise cry out , and the wise cry out .
GOLD:	Listen as Wisdom calls out ! Hear as understanding raises her voice !

ID:	2828
INPUT:	Jaunaren espirituak harturik , Samsonek , eskuetan deus ere ez zuen arren , zatikatu egin zuen lehoia , antxumea zatikatu ohi den bezala . Baina ez zien esan gurasoei zer egin zuen .
PRED:	And the Spirit of the Lord took him in his hand , and did not know anything in his hand , as a lion was a lion , but he did not do what his fathers had done .
GOLD:	At that moment the Spirit of the Lord came powerfully upon him , and he ripped the lion 's jaws apart with his bare hands . He did it as easily as if it were a young goat . But he did n't tell his father or mother about it .

ID:	2829
INPUT:	beste sail batek Bet-Horonerako bidea hartu zuen , eta hirugarrenak Tzeboim haran gainean dagoen mugarantz jo zuen , basamortu aldera .
PRED:	And one of them went on the way of the field , and went toward the wilderness , and went toward the wilderness , and went toward the wilderness .
GOLD:	another went west to Beth-horon , and the third moved toward the border above the valley of Zeboim near the wilderness .

ID:	2830
INPUT:	lehoia , animalien arteko ausartena , inoren aurrean atzera egiten ez duena ;
PRED:	If a lion is among the lion , he shall not go before the gate of a lion .
GOLD:	the lion , king of animals , who wo n't turn aside for anything ,

ID:	2831
INPUT:	Ez zaitez elkartu zurruteroekin , ezta tripazainekin ibili ere ;
PRED:	Do n't be put to shame , and do n't go with the sword .
GOLD:	Do not carouse with drunkardsor feast with gluttons ,

ID:	2832
INPUT:	Eta nire mihiak zure justizia iragarriko du , egunero zu goratuko !
PRED:	And my tongue shall be done in thy mouth , and thou shalt remember it all day .
GOLD:	Then I will proclaim your justice , and I will praise you all day long .

ID:	2833
INPUT:	« Ez duzu sexu-harremanik izango zeure aitaren arrebarekin : zure aitaren odol berekoa da .
PRED:	“ You shall not have sexual relations with your father 's father 's wife . You shall not have sexual relations with your father 's wife .
GOLD:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your father 's sister , for she is your father 's close relative .

ID:	2834
INPUT:	Ikuskari ikaragarria
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Jeremiah 's Vision of Coming Disaster

ID:	2835
INPUT:	Brontzezko aldarea ere eginarazi zuen Salomonek ; hamar metro zen luze-zabal eta bost metro gora .
PRED:	And Solomon made the altar of bronze , five cubits long and twenty cubits wide .
GOLD:	Solomon also made a bronze altar 30 feet long , 30 feet wide , and 15 feet high .

ID:	2836
INPUT:	Sionek , eskuak otoitzean luzatu arren , ez du nork kontsolaturik . Jaunak eraginik , auzoko herriak etsai bihurtu zaizkio Israeli . Haien artean higuingarri bihurtu da Jerusalem .
PRED:	Simon prayed , and no one will comfort , and no one will comfort them . The Lord has chosen the people of Israel . The people of Israel have turned away from their abominations .
GOLD:	Jerusalem reaches out for help , but no one comforts her.Regarding his people Israel , the Lord has said , “ Let their neighbors be their enemies ! Let them be thrown away like a filthy rag ! ”

ID:	2837
INPUT:	Jaunarekin elkartzen dena , berriz , berarekin espiritu bat bera egiten da .
PRED:	But he that is with the Lord is in him , and the Spirit of the Lord is in him .
GOLD:	But the person who is joined to the Lord is one spirit with him .

ID:	2838
INPUT:	Emazteak semea izan zuen eta Moisesek Gerxom — hau da , « Etorkin hemen » — eman zion izen , esanez : « Etorkin bilakatu naiz lurralde arrotzean » .
PRED:	And Moses had a son , and he named her , saying , I have been with him in the land .
GOLD:	Later she gave birth to a son , and Moses named him Gershom , for he explained , “ I have been a foreigner in a foreign land . ”

ID:	2839
INPUT:	Haren erregealdi<unk> da salbatua izango da , Israel seguru biziko . “ Jauna gure salbamena ” emango diote izen » .
PRED:	And his kingdom shall be saved , and Israel shall live in the days of his kingdom : and they shall call the Lord our salvation .
GOLD:	And this will be his name : ‘ The Lord Is Our Righteousness . 'In that day Judah will be saved , and Israel will live in safety .

ID:	2840
INPUT:	Eta bihotz-barrua ezagutzen duen Jainkoak onartzen dituela azaldu du , haiei ere guri bezala Espiritu Santua emanez .
PRED:	And he that knows the heart of all the heart of heart , according to the Holy Spirit , according to the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	God knows people 's hearts , and he confirmed that he accepts Gentiles by giving them the Holy Spirit , just as he did to us .

ID:	2841
INPUT:	Bet-Xemexeko jendea garia igitatzen ari zen haranean ; begiak jaso eta kutxa ikustean , biziki poztu ziren .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the people of Judah went up , that the people of Judah looked up , and when they saw the ark , they were glad , and they were glad .
GOLD:	The people of Beth-shemesh were harvesting wheat in the valley , and when they saw the Ark , they were overjoyed !

ID:	2842
INPUT:	zuk eman zenion erregeari garaipena , zuk askatu zenuen David , zeure zerbitzaria .
PRED:	You saved the king , and you saved him , and you saved him .
GOLD:	For you grant victory to kings ! You rescued your servant David from the fatal sword .

ID:	2843
INPUT:	Erne dira zelaietan loreak , heldu da kanturako garaia , entzun daiteke gure zelaietan usapalen urruma .
PRED:	The mountains will come to the earth , and the time will be heard , and the time will be heard in our midst .
GOLD:	The flowers are springing up , the season of singing birds has come , and the cooing of turtledoves fills the air .

ID:	2844
INPUT:	Jose bere aita ehorztera joan zen . Harekin batera joan ziren faraoiaren funtzionario guztiak , jauregiko eta Egipto osoko handiki guztiak ;
PRED:	And Joseph went to his father , and went with him , and they went with him , and all the princes of the king 's house , and all the great things that were in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	So Joseph went up to bury his father . He was accompanied by all of Pharaoh 's officials , all the senior members of Pharaoh 's household , and all the senior officers of Egypt .

ID:	2845
INPUT:	Refatarren ondorengoetarikoa zen Ixbi-Benobek David hilko zuela esan zuen ; guda-jantzi berria zeraman ; lantzaren punta hiru kilo baino gehiago zen .
PRED:	And he said to him , “ David will die , and he put him to death ; and he put his garments on his head three hundred and three hundred . ”
GOLD:	Ishbi-benob was a descendant of the giants ; his bronze spearhead weighed more than seven pounds , and he was armed with a new sword . He had cornered David and was about to kill him .

ID:	2846
INPUT:	Orduan , Davidek esan zien Abixairi eta bere zerbitzari guztiei : — Nire erraietatik ateratako semea ni hil nahian badabil , ez da harritzekoa benjamindar hori horrela ari izatea . Utziozue madarika nazan , Jaunak aginduko baitzion hori .
PRED:	Then David said to Abishai and all his servants , “ If you want to kill me , you must not kill Benjamin , because the Lord has commanded him to kill Benjamin . ”
GOLD:	Then David said to Abishai and to all his servants , “ My own son is trying to kill me . Does n't this relative of Saul have even more reason to do so ? Leave him alone and let him curse , for the Lord has told him to do it .

ID:	2847
INPUT:	Betetzen ditut zure lege eta xedapenak : begi aurrean dituzu nire ibilbide guztiak .
PRED:	I keep thy statutes and thy statutes , and thy statutes , and thy statutes are before me .
GOLD:	Yes , I obey your commandments and lawsbecause you know everything I do .

ID:	2848
INPUT:	Bizia duen Aitak bidali ninduen eta hari esker dut nik bizia ; halaxe , ni jaten nauenak ere niri esker izango du bizia .
PRED:	The Father sent me life and gave me life , and he who gives me life will live in me .
GOLD:	I live because of the living Father who sent me ; in the same way , anyone who feeds on me will live because of me .

ID:	2849
INPUT:	ez zaitezen haien jokabideetara ohitueta zeure bizia arriskuan jarri .
PRED:	Let them not walk in their ways , and let them live in their ways .
GOLD:	or you will learn to be like themand endanger your soul .

ID:	2850
INPUT:	Nobeko apaizak hilarazi Saulek
PRED:	Saul 's Death
GOLD:	The Slaughter of the Priests

ID:	2851
INPUT:	Zeuk zerikusirik ez zenuela esan arren , adi dago kontzientziak aztertzen dituena , badaki zuri begira dagoenak : nori bere egintzen arabera ordaintzen dio hark .
PRED:	You saw that you did not say , ‘ The one who does n't know what is right , ' he knows what he has done .
GOLD:	Do n't excuse yourself by saying , “ Look , we did n't know . ” For God understands all hearts , and he sees you.He who guards your soul knows you knew.He will repay all people as their actions deserve .

ID:	2852
INPUT:	Honek esan zien : — Zein da zuen lanbidea ? Haiek erantzun : — Gu eta gure gurasoak artzain izan gara betidanik .
PRED:	He said to them , “ What is your way ? ” They answered , “ We are our fathers and our fathers forever . ”
GOLD:	And Pharaoh asked the brothers , “ What is your occupation ? ” They replied , “ We , your servants , are shepherds , just like our ancestors .

ID:	2853
INPUT:	Egipton izu-ikaraz ikusi zenituzten izurri guztiak etorriko zaizkizue gainera eta zuen artean zabalduko .
PRED:	And thou shalt see all the plague which thou hast seen in Egypt , which thou hast seen in the land of Egypt , and shall spread out between thee .
GOLD:	He will afflict you with all the diseases of Egypt that you feared so much , and you will have no relief .

ID:	2854
INPUT:	Ea zuetariko zeinek aurpegiratzen didan bekaturik ! Baina egia badiot , zergatik ez didazue sinesten ?
PRED:	I say to you , “ What do you sin ? ” But if I do n't believe , why do you believe me ?
GOLD:	Which of you can truthfully accuse me of sin ? And since I am telling you the truth , why do n't you believe me ?

ID:	2855
INPUT:	Eta , larriak harturik , oraindik lehiatsuago egiten zuen otoitz . Izerdia tantaka zerion lurrera , odola bezain lodi .
PRED:	And he took up his ears , and prayed more than this time . And he cried out to the earth , as the blood of the earth .
GOLD:	He prayed more fervently , and he was in such agony of spirit that his sweat fell to the ground like great drops of blood .

ID:	2856
INPUT:	Nik ez bainekien auzi hura nondik nora eraman , Jerusalemera joan nahi al zuen galdetu nion , han epai zezaten .
PRED:	For I did not know where I had brought him to Jerusalem , where I would go to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	I was at a loss to know how to investigate these things , so I asked him whether he would be willing to stand trial on these charges in Jerusalem .

ID:	2857
INPUT:	Horregatik , beharrezkoa iruditu zait , ni heldu aurretik anaia horiei zuengana joateko eskatzea , zuek agindutako emaitza prestaturik eduki dezaten . Prest egongo delarik , eskuzabaltasunaren adierazgarri izango da , eta ez zimurkeriaz egindako emaitza .
PRED:	For this reason I have made a gift for you to come to you , so that you may be ready to come to you , that you may be prepared for yourselves , for it is a sign for you , and it will not be done for you .
GOLD:	So I thought I should send these brothers ahead of me to make sure the gift you promised is ready . But I want it to be a willing gift , not one given grudgingly .

ID:	2858
INPUT:	Baina guardiek , joan zirenean , ez zituzten aurkitu , eta berri ematera itzuli ziren :
PRED:	But when the sheep came , they found not ; and they returned , and told them ,
GOLD:	But when the Temple guards went to the jail , the men were gone . So they returned to the council and reported ,

ID:	2859
INPUT:	Jaunaren hitzaHadrak lurraldera dator , eta Damaskon gelditzen da ; Jaunarena baita Siriako hiriburua , Israelgo leinuak bezala ;
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to Damascus , and it is in Damascus , and the city of the Lord is in Damascus , as the tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	This is the message from the Lord against the land of Aram and the city of Damascus , for the eyes of humanity , including all the tribes of Israel , are on the Lord .

ID:	2860
INPUT:	Jainko handi eta santua naizela agertuko dut eta nazio askok aitortuko naute . Orduan jakingo dute ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	And I will show that I am the holy God , and many nations will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	In this way , I will show my greatness and holiness , and I will make myself known to all the nations of the world . Then they will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	2861
INPUT:	Zergatik izutzen nauzu eta erasotzen ? Ez naiz airean doan hosto eta lasto iharra baizik .
PRED:	Why do you attack me ? I do n't know what you say ? I am not worthy of the trees , but the trees of the field .
GOLD:	Would you terrify a leaf blown by the wind ? Would you chase dry straw ?

ID:	2862
INPUT:	« Nire herria desbideratu dute “ Bakea ! ” esanez , bake-arrastorik ez zegoenean ; nire herriak harresi pitzatua eraikitzen zuen bitartean , hauek kareorez estaltzen zuten .
PRED:	They have turned away my people , saying , “ Peace is peace ! ” And when they built my people , they set up a stone for you .
GOLD:	“ This will happen because these evil prophets deceive my people by saying , ‘ All is peaceful ' when there is no peace at all ! It 's as if the people have built a flimsy wall , and these prophets are trying to reinforce it by covering it with whitewash !

ID:	2863
INPUT:	Bueltaka eta balantzaka , mozkorraren antzera , beren trebetasun guztia alferrik zutela .
PRED:	They were like a young man , and they were like a young man , and they did not know all his wisdom .
GOLD:	They reeled and staggered like drunkardsand were at their wits ' end .

ID:	2864
INPUT:	Apaizak , errituzko keinua eginez aurkeztuko dio Jaunari , atseginez onar dezan . Larunbat biharamunean aurkeztuko du .
PRED:	And the priest shall offer the offering before the Lord , and he shall offer it to the Lord on the Sabbath day .
GOLD:	On the day after the Sabbath , the priest will lift it up before the Lord so it may be accepted on your behalf .

ID:	2865
INPUT:	« Irakurri didate argi eta garbi zuek bidali didazuen gutuna .
PRED:	“ They have read my words , and you have sent to me the day I sent you .
GOLD:	“ The letter you sent has been translated and read to me .

ID:	2866
INPUT:	Salomonen zerbitzarien ondorengoak : Sotai , Hasoferet eta Perudaren ondorengoak ;
PRED:	And the sons of Solomon 's servants : the sons of Solomon , the sons of Gershon , the sons of Gershon , the sons of Gershon , the sons of Gershon ,
GOLD:	The descendants of these servants of King Solomon returned from exile : Sotai , Hassophereth , Peruda ,

ID:	2867
INPUT:	Haren mezua onartzen duenarengan , berriz , Jainkoaren maitasuna bere betera iritsi da : horrela dakigu berarekin bat eginik gaudena .
PRED:	But he that hears the word of God came into his love , and we know that all things are in him .
GOLD:	But those who obey God 's word truly show how completely they love him . That is how we know we are living in him .

ID:	2868
INPUT:	Goratua zu , Jauna , onik atera bainauzu ! Nire etsaiei ez diezu nire lepotik pozten utzi .
PRED:	Remember me , O Lord , for I am good ; for thou hast not let my enemies rejoice .
GOLD:	O Lord my God , I cried to you for help , and you restored my health .

ID:	2869
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak agindu zion Moisesi : « Altxa eskua zerurantz , Egipto osoan kazkabarra eror dadin gizaki , abere eta landareen gainera » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Get up your hand toward heaven , so that all the land of Egypt may fall on the ground and on the ground . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Lift your hand toward the sky so hail may fall on the people , the livestock , and all the plants throughout the land of Egypt . ”

ID:	2870
INPUT:	Gero , menditik jaitsi eta kutxan sartu nituen , eta han gelditu ziren , Jaunak agindu bezala .
PRED:	Then I went down from the mountain and took them into the ark , and they stood there , as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	Then I turned and came down the mountain and placed the tablets in the Ark of the Covenant , which I had made , just as the Lord commanded me . And the tablets are still there in the Ark . ”

ID:	2871
INPUT:	Izan ere , honela dio Jaunak Judako erregearen jauregiaz : « Galaad lurraldeaeta Libanoko tontorra bezain ederbazara ere niretzat , basamortu , bizilagunik gabeko hiriaren antzeko , bihurtuko zaitut dudarik gabe .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says to the king of Judah : “ The land of Gilead and Gilead , as a beautiful field in the wilderness of Gilead , as a beautiful city , and I will make you like a city , and I will not make you like a city .
GOLD:	Now this is what the Lord says concerning Judah 's royal palace : “ I love you as much as fruitful Gileadand the green forests of Lebanon.But I will turn you into a desert , with no one living within your walls .

ID:	2872
INPUT:	Oparitzat abere itsua eskaintzea ez al dago gaizki ? Eta abere herrena edo gaixoa eskaintzea ez al dago gaizki ? Eskaini , bada , horiek zeuen gobernariari , ea atsegin dituen edota aurpegi alaia jartzen dizuen . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak .
PRED:	Is it not good for himself to offer his people ? Is it not good for himself to offer it to the Lord of hosts ? Is it not good for you to offer sacrifices to your people , ” says the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	When you give blind animals as sacrifices , is n't that wrong ? And is n't it wrong to offer animals that are crippled and diseased ? Try giving gifts like that to your governor , and see how pleased he is ! ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	2873
INPUT:	« Ez daukat nik » dio Ur Leizeak , « Ez dago nirekin » esaten du Ozeanoak .
PRED:	The waters said , “ There is no water in me , ” and the mountains say , “ I am not with me . ”
GOLD:	‘ It is not here , ' says the ocean . ‘ Nor is it here , ' says the sea .

ID:	2874
INPUT:	« Nork itxi zizkion ateak itsasoari , amaren sabeletik indarrez irten zenean ?
PRED:	“ Who opened the doors of the sea , when he went out of the mother 's womb ?
GOLD:	“ Who kept the sea inside its boundariesas it burst from the womb ,

ID:	2875
INPUT:	SARRERA ( 1 , <unk> )
PRED:	The Good News of God
GOLD:	God Offers Comfort to All

ID:	2876
INPUT:	Jatorrak , ostera , asmo jatorrak , eta egintzak ere jatorrak .
PRED:	When the time is come , and the works of the wicked will come , and the works of the wicked will come .
GOLD:	But generous people plan to do what is generous , and they stand firm in their generosity .

ID:	2877
INPUT:	Beraz , ohikune hau eskumuturrean edo bekokian ipintzen diren seinaleen gisako izango duzue , Jaunak ahalmen handiz Egiptotik atera zaituztela oroitarazteko » .
PRED:	So you will be a sign for the sign that the Lord has given you out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand . ”
GOLD:	This ceremony will be like a mark branded on your hand or your forehead . It is a reminder that the power of the Lord 's mighty hand brought us out of Egypt . ”

ID:	2878
INPUT:	Eramango ditut , ostera , zuen seme-alabak , gatibu eroriko zirela zeniotenak , zuek gutxietsi duzuen lurraldera , hartaz gozatzeko .
PRED:	I will bring them to you , and you will bring your sons and daughters , and you will be taken away to the land that you have taken away .
GOLD:	“ ‘ You said your children would be carried off as plunder . Well , I will bring them safely into the land , and they will enjoy what you have despised .

ID:	2879
INPUT:	Zer da basamortuan gora datorren hori ? Intsentsu , mirra eta beste hainbat usaingarrizkoke-zutabea dirudi .
PRED:	What is it that came to pass in the wilderness ? It is a sweet incense , incense , and honey , and honey .
GOLD:	Who is this sweeping in from the wildernesslike a cloud of smoke ? Who is it , fragrant with myrrh and frankincenseand every kind of spice ?

ID:	2880
INPUT:	eta gazteek emana ziotenari jarraiki . Hau esan zion jendeari : « Gure aitak uztarri astuna ezarri zizuela ? Astunagoa ezarriko dizuet nik ! Gure aitak larruzko zartailuz zigorkatzen zintuztela ? Burdinazko muturdunez zigorkatuko zaituztet nik ! »
PRED:	And the young men followed him , and said to the people , “ My father put the yoke of our father 's yoke , and I will put your yoke on you , and I will put you in pieces , and I will beat you with bronze . ”
GOLD:	and followed the counsel of his younger advisers . He told the people , “ My father laid heavy burdens on you , but I 'm going to make them even heavier ! My father beat you with whips , but I will beat you with scorpions ! ”

ID:	2881
INPUT:	Hark , orduan , eskua jaso eta zin egin zuenbasamortuan hilko zituela ,
PRED:	And he lifted up his hand and swore to you in the wilderness , and swore to you in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Therefore , he solemnly sworethat he would kill them in the wilderness ,

ID:	2882
INPUT:	Abere , zeruko hegazti eta lurrean narraska dabiltzan bizidun guztiei , berriz , belar hezea ematen diet janari » . Eta hala izan zen .
PRED:	But I give them food to all the living creatures of the sky and the birds of the earth , and to give them food , and to give it to them . And it was so .
GOLD:	And I have given every green plant as food for all the wild animals , the birds in the sky , and the small animals that scurry along the ground — everything that has life . ” And that is what happened .

ID:	2883
INPUT:	Urruti dago gaiztoengandik zure salbazioa , ez baitute jotzen zure arauetara .
PRED:	Your salvation is far from the wicked , for they do not walk in your statutes .
GOLD:	The wicked are far from rescue , for they do not bother with your decrees .

ID:	2884
INPUT:	Baina Liburu Santuak ez du hori harengatik bakarrik esaten ,
PRED:	But it is not written , “ Because of him , ” says the Scriptures .
GOLD:	And when God counted him as righteous , it was n't just for Abraham 's benefit . It was recorded

ID:	2885
INPUT:	Zuzen dena izan duzu maite eta oker dena gorroto ; horregatik , Jainkoak , zeure Jainkoak , gantzutu zaitu , jai-giro pozgarrian , lagunen artean aukeraturik .
PRED:	For thou hast loved all things , and thou hast loved all things ; therefore God hath chosen thee , and hast chosen thee in the midst of thy friends .
GOLD:	You love justice and hate evil.Therefore , O God , your God has anointed you , pouring out the oil of joy on you more than on anyone else . ”

ID:	2886
INPUT:	Jonatanek ihardetsi zion bere aita Sauli : — Zergatik du hil beharra ? Zer egin du , bada ?
PRED:	Jonathan answered Saul his father , “ Why did he die ? Why did he kill him ? ”
GOLD:	“ But why should he be put to death ? ” Jonathan asked his father . “ What has he done ? ”

ID:	2887
INPUT:	Aldatu zuen Saulek bere itxura beste soineko batzuk jantziz eta bi gizonekin joan zen . Gauez emakumeagana heldu eta esan zion Saulek : — Igar iezadazu etorkizuna , hilei dei eginez . Agerrarazi esango dizudan hildakoa .
PRED:	Then Saul sent some of his clothes and went to meet him . Then he came to the woman , and said to her , “ Go to me , and tell the woman what I have told you . ”
GOLD:	So Saul disguised himself by wearing ordinary clothing instead of his royal robes . Then he went to the woman 's home at night , accompanied by two of his men . “ I have to talk to a man who has died , ” he said . “ Will you call up his spirit for me ? ”

ID:	2888
INPUT:	Kiriataim , Sibma eta Tzeret-Xahar , haranaren gainaldean dagoen mendixkan ;
PRED:	And the children of Shimron , the children of Shimron , the children of Shimron , and the children of Complains , and the children of Shimron ,
GOLD:	Kiriathaim , Sibmah , Zereth-shahar on the hill above the valley ,

ID:	2889
INPUT:	Mendialdeko , Xefela lautadako eta Negeveko hirietan , Benjaminen herrialdean , Jerusalemgo inguruetan eta Judako hirietan ikusiko dira oraindik artzainak ardiak zenbatzen . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	In the hill country of Judah , in the hill country of Benjamin , in the towns of Benjamin , in the towns of Benjamin , and in the cities of Judah , and in the cities of Judah , and in the cities of Judah , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	Once again shepherds will count their flocks in the towns of the hill country , the foothills of Judah , the Negev , the land of Benjamin , the vicinity of Jerusalem , and all the towns of Judah . I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	2890
INPUT:	Hogeita bost urte zituen errege izaten hastean , eta hamasei urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen . Haren amak Jeruxa zuen izena eta Tzadoken alaba zen .
PRED:	When he became king , he reigned thirty years in Jerusalem , and he reigned six years in Jerusalem . His mother 's name was Zadok 's daughter .
GOLD:	He was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years . His mother was Jerusha , the daughter of Zadok .

ID:	2891
INPUT:	Ertzak lotzeko xingola efodari atxikia egongo da , eta urrez , purpura more , gorri eta gorriminez eta liho-hari bihurrituz egina .
PRED:	And the ephod shall be made of the ephod , and the ephod shall be made of gold , and of blue , and scarlet , and scarlet , and scarlet , and scarlet , and scarlet .
GOLD:	The decorative sash will be made of the same materials : finely woven linen embroidered with gold and with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .

ID:	2892
INPUT:	Legamia gabeko Ogien Jaiko lehen egunean , ikasleak hurbildu ziren Jesusengana , galdetuz : — Non egin behar ditugu Pazko-afarirako prestaketak ?
PRED:	On the first day of the feast , the disciples came near to Jesus , saying , “ Where should we prepare the Passover for the Passover ? ”
GOLD:	On the first day of the Festival of Unleavened Bread , the disciples came to Jesus and asked , “ Where do you want us to prepare the Passover meal for you ? ”

ID:	2893
INPUT:	Eta orain Jainkoaren eskuetan eta haren onginahizko mezuaren babesean uzten zaituztet ; hark badu ahalmena eliz elkartea eraikitzeko eta sagaratu guztiei bere ondarea emateko .
PRED:	And now I have given you the word of God , and in the word of God , and in the word of God , that he might build you , and to make you holy , and to all his inheritance .
GOLD:	“ And now I entrust you to God and the message of his grace that is able to build you up and give you an inheritance with all those he has set apart for himself .

ID:	2894
INPUT:	ur-putzu honen ondoan geldituko naiz ; eta neskatxaren bat ura ateratzera datorrenean , hau esango diot : “ Emadazu , arren , ur pixka bat zeure pegarretik ” .
PRED:	I will stay at the well of the well , and I will say to the woman , ‘ Give me a drink of water , ' and I will say , ‘ Give me a drink of water . '
GOLD:	See , I am standing here beside this spring . This is my request . When a young woman comes to draw water , I will say to her , “ Please give me a little drink of water from your jug . ”

ID:	2895
INPUT:	eskaini elkartasun-opariak ere eta jan bertan , Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren aurrean festa eginez .
PRED:	And thou shalt eat the burnt offerings , and eat it in the presence of the Lord thy God , and in the presence of the Lord thy God .
GOLD:	Also sacrifice peace offerings on it , and celebrate by feasting there before the Lord your God .

ID:	2896
INPUT:	hau esatean : « Zuei dizuet emango Kanaan lurraldea , hauxe da zuen ondare-zatia » .
PRED:	He said to them , “ I will give you the land of Canaan . This is the land of Canaan . ”
GOLD:	“ I will give you the land of Canaanas your special possession . ”

ID:	2897
INPUT:	Israelgo erregea honela mintzatu zitzaion Josafati : — Nik jantziak aldatuko ditut borroka hasteko ; zuk jarraitu zeure errege-jantziekin . Hala , Israelgo erregea jantziz aldatu zenean , borrokara abiatu ziren .
PRED:	The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat , “ I will make your garments with you , and I will put on your garments . Then the king of Israel went into battle . ” So the king of Israel went into battle .
GOLD:	The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat , “ As we go into battle , I will disguise myself so no one will recognize me , but you wear your royal robes . ” So the king of Israel disguised himself , and they went into battle .

ID:	2898
INPUT:	Egin poz-oihu Jaunari , zintzook ! Zuzenek behar dute Jainkoa goretsi .
PRED:	Sing unto the Lord , ye righteous ; the righteous shall praise God .
GOLD:	Let the godly sing for joy to the Lord ; it is fitting for the pure to praise him .

ID:	2899
INPUT:	eta atxilotu egin zituen guardiaburuaren etxeko kartzelan ezarriz , Jose preso zegoen tokian hain zuzen .
PRED:	And he bound them in prison , and put them in prison in the house of the guard , which was in the prison .
GOLD:	and he put them in the prison where Joseph was , in the palace of the captain of the guard .

ID:	2900
INPUT:	Eta ikusiko dutenazioek zure salbamena , errege guztiek zure ospea . Izen berria emango dizute , Jaunak berak ezarria .
PRED:	And they shall see thy salvation , and all the kings of the nations shall see thy glory ; and the Lord shall give thee a new song .
GOLD:	The nations will see your righteousness.World leaders will be blinded by your glory.And you will be given a new nameby the Lord 's own mouth .

ID:	2901
INPUT:	Honetan , Paulori ezpainetako bat emateko agindu zien Ananias apaiz nagusiak bere laguntzaileei .
PRED:	So Ezra commanded the high priest to be given to his servants .
GOLD:	Instantly Ananias the high priest commanded those close to Paul to slap him on the mouth .

ID:	2902
INPUT:	Orduan , apostoluak Jerusalemera itzuli ziren Oliamenditik — mendi hau Jerusalemdik hurbil dago , kilometro batera eskas — .
PRED:	And the apostles returned from Jerusalem to Jerusalem , which is near the Mount of Olives , is near Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Then the apostles returned to Jerusalem from the Mount of Olives , a distance of half a mile .

ID:	2903
INPUT:	Beraiek hitz egin dute gure eliz elkartearen aurrean zure harrera onaz . Ongi egingo duzu biderako behar dutena Jainkoari berari bezala ematen badiezu .
PRED:	They have spoken to you in front of the church . If you do this , you will do what you want to do , just as you do .
GOLD:	They have told the church here of your loving friendship . Please continue providing for such teachers in a manner that pleases God .

ID:	2904
INPUT:	Liburu Santuak dioen bezala : Hona nik Sionen behaztopa-harria ipini , erorarazteko harkaitza . Baina harengan sinesten duenak ez du huts egingo .
PRED:	As it is written , “ Look , I will take a stone for Zion , but whoever believes in him will not be ashamed . ”
GOLD:	God warned them of this in the Scriptures when he said , “ I am placing a stone in Jerusalem that makes people stumble , a rock that makes them fall.But anyone who trusts in himwill never be disgraced . ”

ID:	2905
INPUT:	Behin batean , larunbatez , fariseu-buruetako baten etxera joan zen Jesus bazkaltzera , eta fariseuak zelatan zegozkion .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the Sabbath day of the Pharisees , that he went into the house of the Pharisees , and the Pharisees knew him .
GOLD:	One Sabbath day Jesus went to eat dinner in the home of a leader of the Pharisees , and the people were watching him closely .

ID:	2906
INPUT:	Zergatik ekarri duzue Jaunaren elkartea basamortu honetara ? Geu eta gure abereak hil nahi ote gaituzue ?
PRED:	Why do you bring us to this wilderness ? Why do you want us to die in the wilderness ?
GOLD:	Why have you brought the congregation of the Lord 's people into this wilderness to die , along with all our livestock ?

ID:	2907
INPUT:	ezker-eskuin haziko baitzara ; zure ondorengoeknazio asko berenganatuko dituzteeta orain hondaturik daudenhirietan biziko dira .
PRED:	For the right hand of thy left hand shall come upon thy left hand , and thy seed shall be desolate , and they shall dwell in the cities .
GOLD:	For you will soon be bursting at the seams.Your descendants will occupy other nationsand resettle the ruined cities .

ID:	2908
INPUT:	Orduan , Nataniasen seme Jehudi bidali zuten Barukengana — Natanias , Xelemiasen seme eta Kuxiren biloba zen — , herriaren aurrean irakurritako erroiluarekin etortzeko esatera . Erroilua hartu eta haien aurrean aurkeztu zenean ,
PRED:	And they sent Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah , the son of Hilkiah , the son of Hilkiah , the son of Hilkiah , the son of Hilkiah , the son of Hilkiah , the son of Hilkiah , to read in front of the people , and stood before them .
GOLD:	the officials sent Jehudi son of Nethaniah , grandson of Shelemiah and great-grandson of Cushi , to ask Baruch to come and read the messages to them , too . So Baruch took the scroll and went to them .

ID:	2909
INPUT:	Gaiztoren batek hil egin behar duela esaten badut , eta bere jokabidea alda dezan zuk ez baduzu ohartarazten , hil egingo da bere erruarengatik , baina zuri eskatuko dizut haren heriotzaren kontu .
PRED:	If I say to you , ‘ If a wicked man die , ' and if you do n't kill him , he will die because of his iniquity , but I will give you his blood .
GOLD:	If I announce that some wicked people are sure to die and you fail to tell them to change their ways , then they will die in their sins , and I will hold you responsible for their deaths .

ID:	2910
INPUT:	Bide-ertzean eserita zeuden bi itsu , Jesus igarotzen ari zela entzunik , oihuka hasi ziren : — Erruki zakizkigu , Jauna , Daviden Semea !
PRED:	As they sat on the road , two blind men were sitting by the road , they cried out , “ Lord , have mercy on us , Son of David ! ”
GOLD:	Two blind men were sitting beside the road . When they heard that Jesus was coming that way , they began shouting , “ Lord , Son of David , have mercy on us ! ”

ID:	2911
INPUT:	Zu izan zaitut euskarri amaren sabeletik , zuk atera nauzu amaren erraietatik . Zuri etengabe nire gorespena !
PRED:	You are my mother 's womb , and you brought me out of your mother 's womb .
GOLD:	Yes , you have been with me from birth ; from my mother 's womb you have cared for me.No wonder I am always praising you !

ID:	2912
INPUT:	Aldi horren buruan , zazpigarren hilaren hamarrean , Barkamen Egunean , alegia , adarra joko duzue ozenki lurralde osoan .
PRED:	On the seventh day of the seventh month , on the tenth day of the seventh month , on the tenth day of the seventh month , on the tenth day of the seventh month , you shall go out .
GOLD:	Then on the Day of Atonement in the fiftieth year , blow the ram 's horn loud and long throughout the land .

ID:	2913
INPUT:	Jainkoak bere asmoa bete behar dutela sartu die buruan : elkar hartzera eragingo die , beren erregetza piztiari emateko , harik eta Jainkoaren esana erabat bete arte .
PRED:	And God shall enter into his heart , and he shall bring them to one another , and to bring the kingdom of the beast unto the beast of God , until the word of God .
GOLD:	For God has put a plan into their minds , a plan that will carry out his purposes . They will agree to give their authority to the scarlet beast , and so the words of God will be fulfilled .

ID:	2914
INPUT:	Pauloren ibilaldi-asmoak
PRED:	Paul and Silas
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Greetings

ID:	2915
INPUT:	PROFETAREN BI<unk> ZAKO GORABEHERAK ( 26 , 1 — 29 , 32 )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Jeremiah 's Escape from Death

ID:	2916
INPUT:	Bekatu eta bekatu egin du Jerusalemek ; horregatik , higuingarri bihurtu da . Begirune ziotenek mespretxatu egiten dute , biluzia ikusirik . Aieneka ari da , beraz , aurpegia lotsaz gordeta .
PRED:	And he hath sinned , and he hath sinned ; therefore he hath turned away his face , and hath seen his soul , and hath seen his face , and hath seen his face , and hath seen his face .
GOLD:	Jerusalem has sinned greatly , so she has been tossed away like a filthy rag.All who once honored her now despise her , for they have seen her stripped naked and humiliated.All she can do is groanand hide her face .

ID:	2917
INPUT:	Kalteen ordainketa
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Protecting Marital Faithfulness

ID:	2918
INPUT:	eta Judako gobernari Zorobabeli mezu hau emateko agindu zion : « Zeru-lurrak dardaraziko ditut .
PRED:	and said to him , “ Go to the ruler of Judah , and tell him , ‘ I will make heaven and earth and earth .
GOLD:	“ Tell Zerubbabel , the governor of Judah , that I am about to shake the heavens and the earth .

ID:	2919
INPUT:	Norbaitek hirugarren egunean jango balu , ez litzaioke Jaunari atsegin izango : gaitzesgarria da haragi hori .
PRED:	And if any man shall eat it on the third day , he shall not do evil in the sight of the Lord : it is evil .
GOLD:	If any of the sacrifice is eaten on the third day , it will be contaminated , and I will not accept it .

ID:	2920
INPUT:	Kerubinak hegalpean giza besoaren antzeko zerbait zuela ikusi nuen .
PRED:	And I saw that there was a man like the wings of the wings of the wings of the wings of a man .
GOLD:	( All the cherubim had what looked like human hands under their wings . )

ID:	2921
INPUT:	Hauxe zen niretzat garrantzizkoena : Kristoren izena entzuna ere ez zen tokietan berri ona zabaltzea . Ez nuen nahi bestek ipinitako oinarrien gainean eraiki ,
PRED:	This is what I said : The name of Christ was not worthy to hear the Good News of Christ . I would not build a foundation on the foundation of the foundation .
GOLD:	My ambition has always been to preach the Good News where the name of Christ has never been heard , rather than where a church has already been started by someone else .

ID:	2922
INPUT:	Jainkoa gurtu ohi zuteneko gailurrera heldu zenean , Huxai arkitarra atera zitzaion Davidi bidera , jantziak urraturik eta burua hautsez beterik .
PRED:	And when he came to the ground , he came to meet David , and he went out to meet David with his clothes and washed his clothes with ashes .
GOLD:	When David reached the summit of the Mount of Olives where people worshiped God , Hushai the Arkite was waiting there for him . Hushai had torn his clothing and put dirt on his head as a sign of mourning .

ID:	2923
INPUT:	Nire zauriak gaiztotuak daude eta zornetan , nire zorakeriaren ondorioz .
PRED:	My iniquity is upon me , and my iniquity is upon me , and my iniquity is upon me .
GOLD:	I am bent over and racked with pain.All day long I walk around filled with grief .

ID:	2924
INPUT:	Lehen ikuskaria : zaldizkoak
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	A Man among the Myrtle Trees

ID:	2925
INPUT:	Baliteke , ni ukitu eta iruzur egiten diodala aita ohartzea . Orduan , bedeinkazioaren ordez madarikazioa erakarriko nuke neure gain .
PRED:	If I touched my father , I would give him a blessing to my father . Then I would give the blessing to him . ”
GOLD:	What if my father touches me ? He 'll see that I 'm trying to trick him , and then he 'll curse me instead of blessing me . ”

ID:	2926
INPUT:	Izan ere , pozaren pozez , Samson ateratzeko eskatua zuten , beraren kontura barre egiteko gogoz . Atera zuten , beraz , Samson espetxetik eta beraren bizkar egin zuten barre . Gero , bi zutaberen erdian utzi zuten .
PRED:	For they asked him to bring him out , so that they might be filled with him . And they brought him out of the house of Samson , and they left him in the midst of his house .
GOLD:	Half drunk by now , the people demanded , “ Bring out Samson so he can amuse us ! ” So he was brought from the prison to amuse them , and they had him stand between the pillars supporting the roof .

ID:	2927
INPUT:	Erregea , berriz , zuhaitz batetik zintzilikatu zuen arratsa arte ; eguzkia sartzean , gorpua zuhaitzetik eraisteko agindu zuen Josuek . Gero , hiriaren sarreran bota eta harri-pilo handia ezarri zioten gainean . Han dago oraindik harri-piloa .
PRED:	And the king cast him out of a tree until the evening , and he commanded him to enter into the house of the sun ; and Joshua commanded him to enter into the city , and laid the stone upon it , and the stone was laid upon it .
GOLD:	Joshua impaled the king of Ai on a sharpened pole and left him there until evening . At sunset the Israelites took down the body , as Joshua commanded , and threw it in front of the town gate . They piled a great heap of stones over him that can still be seen today .

ID:	2928
INPUT:	Izan ere , hiri honen gain ezarri ditut begiak , baina ez beraren onerako , kalterako baizik : Babiloniako erregearen esku utziko dut eta honek erre egingo du . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	For I have set my eyes on this city , but not to destroy it , but to destroy it ; and I will hand the king of Babylon into the hand of the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	For I have decided to bring disaster and not good upon this city , says the Lord . It will be handed over to the king of Babylon , and he will reduce it to ashes . '

ID:	2929
INPUT:	« Sarraskia hazitarako den ale gainera jausten bada , haziak garbi dirau ;
PRED:	“ If any of the body is put on a cloth , it is clean .
GOLD:	If the carcass falls on seed grain to be planted in the field , the seed will still be considered clean .

ID:	2930
INPUT:	Hau zen , hain zuzen , nire gutunaren helburua : zuengana joatean , ez nazatela nahigabetu poztu behar ninduketenek ; zeren ziur bainago , zuei guztioi dagokizuenez , nire poza zeuen poz egiten duzuela .
PRED:	This is what my master says : “ I will come to you , so that I may not be glad . I will rejoice in you , because I am glad , and you will be glad . ”
GOLD:	That is why I wrote to you as I did , so that when I do come , I wo n't be grieved by the very ones who ought to give me the greatest joy . Surely you all know that my joy comes from your being joyful .

ID:	2931
INPUT:	Berea du itsasoa , berak egina , eta lehorra , bere eskuz moldatua .
PRED:	He hath made the sea , and he hath made the sea , and he hath made his hands .
GOLD:	The sea belongs to him , for he made it.His hands formed the dry land , too .

ID:	2932
INPUT:	Ez daude antzina eroritako heroiekin , beren armaz horniturik Hildakoen Egoitzara jaitsi zirenekin ; hauei ezpata burupean eta babeskia bular gainean jarri zizkieten . Heroi hauek ere bizidunen artean izu-ikara ezarri zuten .
PRED:	And they did not take away the names of them that were in the tabernacle of the dead ; and they came down to the entrance of the dead , and put them on the head of the sword , and put them on the head of the sword , and put them on the head of the dead .
GOLD:	They are not buried in honor like their fallen heroes , who went down to the grave with their weapons — their shields covering their bodies and their swords beneath their heads . Their guilt rests upon them because they brought terror to everyone while they were still alive .

ID:	2933
INPUT:	Baina guk eskerrak eman behar dizkiogu beti Jainkoari zuengatik , senideok , Jaunaren maiteok : Jainkoak lehen salbatuak izateko aukeratu baitzaituzte , Espiritu Santuaz sagaratuz eta egia fedez onartzea emanez .
PRED:	But we must give thanks to God for ever , brothers and sisters , for the Lord our God has chosen you to be saved by the Holy Spirit and holy .
GOLD:	As for us , we ca n't help but thank God for you , dear brothers and sisters loved by the Lord . We are always thankful that God chose you to be among the first to experience salvation — a salvation that came through the Spirit who makes you holy and through your belief in the truth .

ID:	2934
INPUT:	Baina Balaamek erantzun zien Balaken zerbitzariei : — Nahiz eta Balakek jauregia bete urre eta zilar eman , ezin dut ezertxo ere egin , ez handi ez txiki , Jaunaren , nire Jainkoaren , aginduaren kontra .
PRED:	Balaam answered the servants of Balak , and Balak said to his servants , “ I am not able to obey the Lord my God . Do n't do anything to me .
GOLD:	But Balaam responded to Balak 's messengers , “ Even if Balak were to give me his palace filled with silver and gold , I would be powerless to do anything against the will of the Lord my God .

ID:	2935
INPUT:	Bereako juduek , Tesalonikakoak baino jatorragoak izaki eta , gogo biziz hartu zuten mezua ; egunero aztertu ohi zituzten Liburu Santuak , gauzak hala ote ziren ikusteko .
PRED:	And the Jews of the Jews that were in Antioch were more than the men of Babylon , and they received the word of the word of the Lord , that they might see that it was written in the Scriptures .
GOLD:	And the people of Berea were more open-minded than those in Thessalonica , and they listened eagerly to Paul 's message . They searched the Scriptures day after day to see if Paul and Silas were teaching the truth .

ID:	2936
INPUT:	« Bai , badakit horrela dela , gizakiak ez duela arrazoi Jainkoaren kontra .
PRED:	“ I know that no man is right against God .
GOLD:	“ Yes , I know all this is true in principle.But how can a person be declared innocent in God 's sight ?

ID:	2937
INPUT:	HASIE<unk> ( 1 , 1 — 11 , 32 )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The Account of Creation

ID:	2938
INPUT:	Zulatu eta ebakiz osatzen da gaitza , zigorrez izakiaren barrena .
PRED:	You know that it is good , and it is good to you .
GOLD:	Physical punishment cleanses away evil ; such discipline purifies the heart .

ID:	2939
INPUT:	Sinetsi zuen herriak , eta Jauna alde jarri zitzaiela eta beren atsekabean begiak jarriak zituela jakitean , ahuspeztu eta gurtu egin zuten .
PRED:	When the people believed that the Lord had turned away from them , they bowed down their eyes and bowed down .
GOLD:	Then the people of Israel were convinced that the Lord had sent Moses and Aaron . When they heard that the Lord was concerned about them and had seen their misery , they bowed down and worshiped .

ID:	2940
INPUT:	berau zela eta , herritar askok alde egiten baitzien eta Jesusengan sinesten .
PRED:	When many of the people fast , many of the people left and believed in Jesus .
GOLD:	for it was because of him that many of the people had deserted them and believed in Jesus .

ID:	2941
INPUT:	Erabat hondatuko dut tenplu hau , eta tenplu honen aurretik igaroko diren guztiek , harriturik eta txistuka , galdetuko dute : “ Zergatik egin ote die hau Jaunak lurralde honi eta tenplu honi ? ”
PRED:	And I will destroy this house , and all that pass by before this house shall come , and they shall cry , saying , Why have the Lord done this land , and this house ?
GOLD:	And though this Temple is impressive now , all who pass by will be appalled and will gasp in horror . They will ask , ‘ Why did the Lord do such terrible things to this land and to this Temple ? '

ID:	2942
INPUT:	ERANSKINA
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Epilogue : Jesus Appears to Seven Disciples

ID:	2943
INPUT:	Orain , ordea , inguru hauetan nuen lana bukatu dut eta , aspaldiko urte hauetan zuek ikusi nahian bainago ,
PRED:	But now I have sinned all around these things , and I have seen them many years , for I have seen you many years .
GOLD:	But now I have finished my work in these regions , and after all these long years of waiting , I am eager to visit you .

ID:	2944
INPUT:	Gogoan izan , Jauna , gertatu zaiguna ; begira eta ikus nola iraintzen gaituzten .
PRED:	Remember the Lord , who has appeared to you , and see how we are .
GOLD:	Lord , remember what has happened to us.See how we have been disgraced !

ID:	2945
INPUT:	« Izan ere , nola sar daiteke inor indartsu baten etxera lapurretara , aldez aurretik hura lotzen ez badu ? Orduan bai , harrapa ditzake haren etxeko ondasunak .
PRED:	“ How can anyone enter into the house of a strong man 's house ? If he does not enter into the house , he will take the wealth of his house .
GOLD:	For who is powerful enough to enter the house of a strong man and plunder his goods ? Only someone even stronger — someone who could tie him up and then plunder his house .

ID:	2946
INPUT:	Haiek isilik gelditu ziren ; ez zioten hitzik erantzun , erregeak agindua baitzien ez erantzuteko .
PRED:	They were silent , but they did not answer him , because the king had commanded them to answer him .
GOLD:	But the people were silent and did not utter a word because Hezekiah had commanded them , “ Do not answer him . ”

ID:	2947
INPUT:	Berrogei urtez jan zuten mana israeldarrek , jendedun lurraldeetara , Kanaango lur-mugetara , iritsi arte alegia .
PRED:	And the children of Israel ate it forty years ; and the children of Israel came to the land of Canaan , until the light of the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	So the people of Israel ate manna for forty years until they arrived at the land where they would settle . They ate manna until they came to the border of the land of Canaan .

ID:	2948
INPUT:	Berritsuen mihia ezpata zorrotza , zuhurrena osasunbidea .
PRED:	The tongue of the wicked is a sword , and the tongue of the wise is a sword .
GOLD:	Some people make cutting remarks , but the words of the wise bring healing .

ID:	2949
INPUT:	Sarrerako atalondoan bina mahai zeuden alde bietan , eta haietan hiltzen ziren erre-oparitarako nahiz barkamen- eta ordain-oparitarako abereak .
PRED:	And they were at the entrance of the gate , on the side of the gate , and on the other side of the court , and the sin offering , and the sin offering , and the sin offering .
GOLD:	On each side of this entry room were two tables , where the sacrificial animals were slaughtered for the burnt offerings , sin offerings , and guilt offerings .

ID:	2950
INPUT:	manasestarren leinukoa Pedahtzurren seme Gamelielen agindupean
PRED:	And the children of Manasseh was over the children of Manasseh , and Manasseh the son of Parosh .
GOLD:	They were joined by the troops of the tribe of Manasseh , led by Gamaliel son of Pedahzur ,

ID:	2951
INPUT:	Lehen baino izen handiagoa emango didazu , berriro kontsolatuko .
PRED:	I will give you more than the first , and you will comfort me again .
GOLD:	You will restore me to even greater honorand comfort me once again .

ID:	2952
INPUT:	baita Damasko aldameneko Hamateta hain trebe direnTiro eta Sidon ere .
PRED:	and to the east side of Damascus and Sidon , and Sidon .
GOLD:	Doom is certain for Hamath , near Damascus , and for the cities of Tyre and Sidon , though they are so clever .

ID:	2953
INPUT:	« Hilabetetik bost urte artekoa bada , mutikoarentzat bost txanpon , eta neskatoarentzat hiru .
PRED:	“ If the boy is five years old , then the boy shall be five years old , and five shekels for a daughter .
GOLD:	A boy between the ages of one month and five years is valued at five shekels of silver ; a girl of that age is valued at three shekels of silver .

ID:	2954
INPUT:	Zurginak , berriz , erregelaz neurtu , arkatzez eta konpasez marraztu eta gubiaz lantzen du eta , giza gorpuzkera eta edertasuna emanik , tenpluan kokatzen .
PRED:	But if a man does not know about the king , he does not know what he says . He does not know what he says . He does not want to do . He does n't want to do what he wanted to do . He does n't want to do . He does n't know what he wanted to do .
GOLD:	Then the wood-carver measures a block of woodand draws a pattern on it.He works with chisel and planeand carves it into a human figure.He gives it human beautyand puts it in a little shrine .

ID:	2955
INPUT:	Auzokoek eskuzabal lagundu zieten , eta zilar eta urrezko ontziak , ondasunak , abereak eta bitxi ederrak eman zizkieten , nork bere borondatez eskainitakoaz gainera .
PRED:	And the men delivered their hands , and the vessels of gold , and the vessels of gold , and the vessels of gold , and the vessels of gold , and the things that they offered to him .
GOLD:	And all their neighbors assisted by giving them articles of silver and gold , supplies for the journey , and livestock . They gave them many valuable gifts in addition to all the voluntary offerings .

ID:	2956
INPUT:	Orduan , mandatari bat etorri zitzaion Sauli , esanez : « Zatoz bizkor , filistearrak sartu zaizkigu geure lurraldean » .
PRED:	Then a messenger came to Saul , saying , “ Come , let us go into our land . ”
GOLD:	an urgent message reached Saul that the Philistines were raiding Israel again .

ID:	2957
INPUT:	Haien alabak emaztetzat hartu eta beren alabak haien semeei eman zizkieten eta haien sasijainkoak gurtu zituzten .
PRED:	And they took their daughters , and gave them their daughters to their daughters , and served their gods .
GOLD:	and they intermarried with them . Israelite sons married their daughters , and Israelite daughters were given in marriage to their sons . And the Israelites served their gods .

ID:	2958
INPUT:	« Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak ematen dizuen lurraldera iristean , ez jarraitu hango herrien jokabide higuingarriei :
PRED:	When you come to the land which the Lord your God gives you , you shall not follow the abominations of the nations ,
GOLD:	“ When you enter the land the Lord your God is giving you , be very careful not to imitate the detestable customs of the nations living there .

ID:	2959
INPUT:	Txoroak ongi deritzo bere jokabideari ; zuhurra , berriz , adi egoten da besteen iritziari .
PRED:	A fool 's way is a fool 's way , but a fool is a fool .
GOLD:	Fools think their own way is right , but the wise listen to others .

ID:	2960
INPUT:	Hiria ez da zuentzat tupina izango , ezta zuek ere haren barruan seguru dagoen haragia . Israelen bertan emango dizuet zigor-epaia .
PRED:	The city will be a city for you , and you will not be put to death in your midst . I will give you judgment in Israel .
GOLD:	No , this city will not be an iron pot for you , and you will not be like meat safe inside it . I will judge you even to the borders of Israel ,

ID:	2961
INPUT:	Egoera aldatzearren egin dizu hori Joabek . Zu , ene errege jauna , Jainkoaren aingerua bezain argia zara , eta badakizu mundu honetan gertatzen den guztia .
PRED:	You have done this to the altar . You have made the angel of my lord the king , as the angel of God , and you know all these things in this world .
GOLD:	He did it to place the matter before you in a different light . But you are as wise as an angel of God , and you understand everything that happens among us ! ”

ID:	2962
INPUT:	( Lk 14 , <unk> )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Taxes for Caesar

ID:	2963
INPUT:	israeldar elkartea iristean Jaunak konkistatu duen lurralde hau , aukerakoa da abeltzaintzarako ; eta guk , zure zerbitzariok , abere asko dugu .
PRED:	And when the children of Israel came , the land which the Lord has taken , is the inheritance of the children of Israel ; and we shall be many of your servants .
GOLD:	The Lord has conquered this whole area for the community of Israel , and it is ideally suited for all our livestock .

ID:	2964
INPUT:	Izarrak atsentsio-belar du izena ; uren herena atsentsio-belarra bezain mingots bihurtu zen , eta gizon-emakume asko hil zen ur haiek edateagatik .
PRED:	And the stars was as the incense of incense , and the incense of incense was as the incense of the incense , and many women were killed by the water .
GOLD:	The name of the star was Bitterness . It made one-third of the water bitter , and many people died from drinking the bitter water .

ID:	2965
INPUT:	Amalektar bekatari horiek suntsitzera bidali zaitu , denak birrindu arte borrokatzera .
PRED:	He sent you to destroy all the Amalekites , until he has destroyed you .
GOLD:	And the Lord sent you on a mission and told you , ‘ Go and completely destroy the sinners , the Amalekites , until they are all dead . '

ID:	2966
INPUT:	Orduan , ikasleek esan zioten : — Senar-emazteen arteko lotura horrelakoa bada , ez du merezi ezkontzea .
PRED:	His disciples said to him , “ If this man is put to death , he must not marry her . ”
GOLD:	Jesus ' disciples then said to him , “ If this is the case , it is better not to marry ! ”

ID:	2967
INPUT:	( 2 Kro 18 , 1-3 )
PRED:	King Asa of Judah
GOLD:	Micaiah Prophesies against Ahab

ID:	2968
INPUT:	Eta uretako aingeruari entzun nion esaten : « Zuzena zara eta justizia egin duzu , Santu horrek , zaren eta zinen horrek :
PRED:	Then I heard the angel who heard the angel said to the angel , “ You have done right and righteousness , and this is what you have done .
GOLD:	And I heard the angel who had authority over all water saying , “ You are just , O Holy One , who is and who always was , because you have sent these judgments .

ID:	2969
INPUT:	Horiek dira Sinai mendian Jaunak Moisesi israeldarrentzat emandako aginduak .
PRED:	These are the commandments that the Lord commanded Moses on Mount Sinai .
GOLD:	These are the commands that the Lord gave through Moses on Mount Sinai for the Israelites .

ID:	2970
INPUT:	eta beraren bihotzeko ezkutukoak agerian geldituko dira . Orduan , ahuspeztu eta Jainkoa gurtu egingo du , eta esango : « Jainkoa benetan zuekin dago » .
PRED:	And their heart shall be revealed in their heart ; and they shall bow down and worship God , and he shall say , God is with you .
GOLD:	As they listen , their secret thoughts will be exposed , and they will fall to their knees and worship God , declaring , “ God is truly here among you . ”

ID:	2971
INPUT:	“ Hiri Santukoak ” omen duzue izen , Israelen Jainkoa , Jaun ahalguztidun deritzana , euskarri .
PRED:	You are the holy city , the Holy One of Israel , the Lord All-Powerful , the God of Israel , who rules over it .
GOLD:	even though you call yourself the holy cityand talk about depending on the God of Israel , whose name is the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	2972
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : — Tximista bezala zerutik erortzen ikusi dut Satanas .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ I see Satan from heaven . ”
GOLD:	“ Yes , ” he told them , “ I saw Satan fall from heaven like lightning !

ID:	2973
INPUT:	harribitxiak eta zura lantzeko , eta beste edozein langintzatarako .
PRED:	and to build stones , and to build stones , and to work for every work of work .
GOLD:	He is skilled in engraving and mounting gemstones and in carving wood . He is a master at every craft .

ID:	2974
INPUT:	Herri asko eta nazio indartsuak etorriko dira horrela Jerusalemera , nire , Jaun ahalguztidun honen , bila eta niri mesede eske .
PRED:	Many nations will come to Jerusalem , and many nations will come to Jerusalem , and they will seek the Lord Almighty , the God of hosts , and their children .
GOLD:	Many peoples and powerful nations will come to Jerusalem to seek the Lord of Heaven 's Armies and to ask for his blessing .

ID:	2975
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunaknire herria desbideratzen dutenprofetei buruz : « Jatekoa ematen dieteneibakea iragartzen diete ; ahora ezer ematenez dietenei , berriz , gerra santua .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says to the prophets , “ They tell the prophets who do what they say to the prophets . They say to them , ‘ They tell them what they have done . '
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ You false prophets are leading my people astray ! You promise peace for those who give you food , but you declare war on those who refuse to feed you .

ID:	2976
INPUT:	Ordezkari nagusiak ihardetsi zuen : — Zer uste duzu ? Mezu hau zure erregeari eta zuri bakarrik esatera bidali nauela neure jaunak ? Harresi gainean dagoen jende horrentzat ere bada , horiek ere beren kaka jan eta pixa edan beharko baitute , zuek bezalaxe .
PRED:	The master answered , “ What do you think ? What do you think to the king who sent me to bring me to the king and to bring me to the people who are on the wall ? ”
GOLD:	But Sennacherib 's chief of staff replied , “ Do you think my master sent this message only to you and your master ? He wants all the people to hear it , for when we put this city under siege , they will suffer along with you . They will be so hungry and thirsty that they will eat their own dung and drink their own urine . ”

ID:	2977
INPUT:	Beraz , Kristo Jesus Jauna onartu duzuenez gero , jarraitu berari dagokionez bizitzen .
PRED:	If you have received the Lord Jesus Christ , you follow him .
GOLD:	And now , just as you accepted Christ Jesus as your Lord , you must continue to follow him .

ID:	2978
INPUT:	Goretsazue , eguzki eta ilargi , goretsi , izar argitsu !
PRED:	Praise the sun , the moon , the moon , and the moon .
GOLD:	Praise him , sun and moon ! Praise him , all you twinkling stars !

ID:	2979
INPUT:	nire aholkuak ez dituzuenez onartueta bai zentzarazpen guztiak mespretxatu ,
PRED:	You have not kept my counsel , and you have rejected all my counsel .
GOLD:	They rejected my adviceand paid no attention when I corrected them .

ID:	2980
INPUT:	Gero , agindu zion Akaz erregeak Urias apaizari : « Aldare handiaren gainean egin behar dituzu goizeko erre-oparia eta arratseko labore-oparia , erregearen erre-oparia eta labore-oparia , baita herriaren erre-opari , labore- eta isur-opariak ere . Orobat , aldare handiaren gaina zirtatuko duzu erre-oparietako eta sakrifizioetako odol guztiaz . Brontzezko aldareari buruzkoa neuk erabakiko dut » .
PRED:	Then King Ahaz said to Uriah the priest , “ You must offer the burnt offering on the altar and burnt offerings on the altar . You must offer the burnt offering to the king . You must offer the burnt offering and drink offering . ”
GOLD:	He told Uriah the priest , “ Use the new altar for the morning sacrifices of burnt offering , the evening grain offering , the king 's burnt offering and grain offering , and the burnt offerings of all the people , as well as their grain offerings and liquid offerings . Sprinkle the blood from all the burnt offerings and sacrifices on the new altar . The bronze altar will be for my personal use only . ”

ID:	2981
INPUT:	eta Jesek David erregea . Davidek Salomon sortu zuen , Uriasen emazte izanarengandik ;
PRED:	David was king , and David became king , and he became the wife of Uriah .
GOLD:	Jesse was the father of King David.David was the father of Solomon ( whose mother was Bathsheba , the widow of Uriah ) .

ID:	2982
INPUT:	( Zen 35 , <unk> )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Concern for Justice

ID:	2983
INPUT:	Baina ikusi zituen Jaunak beren larrialdianeta haien garrasiak entzun .
PRED:	But the Lord saw their cry and their ears . He heard their cry .
GOLD:	Even so , he pitied them in their distressand listened to their cries .

ID:	2984
INPUT:	Fededunen poza
PRED:	By faith
GOLD:	A Call to Holy Living

ID:	2985
INPUT:	Bada , neuk ere suminez jokatuko dut ; ez diet errukirik izango , ezta barkatuko ere ; oihu handiz egingo didate dei , baina ez diet entzungo » .
PRED:	And I will punish them with my wrath , and I will not forgive them ; I will not forgive them , but they will cry out with a loud voice .
GOLD:	Therefore , I will respond in fury . I will neither pity nor spare them . And though they cry for mercy , I will not listen . ”

ID:	2986
INPUT:	Orduan , Pedro biraoka eta maldizioka hasi zen : — Ez dut ezagutzen gizon hori . Une hartan oilarrak jo zuen .
PRED:	Then Peter began to cry out and began to say , “ I do n't know this man . ” So the widow fell down at that time .
GOLD:	Peter swore , “ A curse on me if I 'm lying — I do n't know the man ! ” And immediately the rooster crowed .

ID:	2987
INPUT:	« Adi egon , ene herri , entzun arretaz , ene hiri : neure irakaspena emango dut , eta nire esanakherrientzat argi izango dira .
PRED:	“ Be careful , my people , listen to me , and I will give my law to my people , and they will be light to my people .
GOLD:	“ Listen to me , my people.Hear me , Israel , for my law will be proclaimed , and my justice will become a light to the nations .

ID:	2988
INPUT:	Goretsazue Jauna , ona baita , haren maitasuna betikoa baita .
PRED:	Praise the Lord , for he is good ; for his mercy endures forever .
GOLD:	Give thanks to the Lord , for he is good ! His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	2989
INPUT:	Lurralde honetakoemaitza aberatsakatzerriko erregeentzat dira gaur , geure bekatuengatik nagusiezarri dizkiguzun erregeentzat ; geu eta geure abereakmenpean gauzkate beren gogara . Guztiz atsekabetuak gaude ! »
PRED:	This is what we have done for the kings of the earth for our sins , and for our sins we have set our kings for our sins and our sins . We are very sad . ”
GOLD:	The lush produce of this land piles up in the hands of the kings whom you have set over us because of our sins . They have power over us and our livestock . We serve them at their pleasure , and we are in great misery . ”

ID:	2990
INPUT:	« Zeuei eta zuen arbasoei hitzeman bezala , Jaunak Kanaan lurraldera eraman eta lurraren jabe egingo zaituztenean ,
PRED:	“ When the Lord has given you the land of Canaan and your fathers , you will take possession of the land of Canaan , and you will possess it .
GOLD:	“ This is what you must do when the Lord fulfills the promise he swore to you and to your ancestors . When he gives you the land where the Canaanites now live ,

ID:	2991
INPUT:	Hildakoen Egoitzako barrunbeetansartu arren , handik ere aterako ditu nire eskuak ; zeru-goietara igo arren , handik ere jaitsaraziko ditut ;
PRED:	And he shall bring my hands out of the tabernacle of the dead , and he shall bring my hands out of the heavens , and from the midst of the heavens , and from the midst of the heavens .
GOLD:	“ Even if they dig down to the place of the dead , I will reach down and pull them up.Even if they climb up into the heavens , I will bring them down .

ID:	2992
INPUT:	Eman nizun hitzari eutsiko diot , ene Jainko , eta esker onez beteko .
PRED:	I will make my promise to you , my God , and I will give you thanks .
GOLD:	For you have rescued me from death ; you have kept my feet from slipping.So now I can walk in your presence , O God , in your life-giving light .

ID:	2993
INPUT:	Egin aiene eta garrasi , Filisteako hiriok ! Ikaratu , lurralde osoa ! Hor baitator iparraldetikgudarostea , ke-laino trinko baten antzera , inortxo ere bere lerrotikokertzen ez dela .
PRED:	Go and cry , ye daughters of the Philistines , ye daughters of the Philistines ; for the whole land is coming from the north , and the army of the north shall be like a sword , and it shall not be cut off .
GOLD:	Wail at the gates ! Weep in the cities ! Melt with fear , you Philistines ! A powerful army comes like smoke from the north.Each soldier rushes forward eager to fight .

ID:	2994
INPUT:	Baina Jesusek esan zion emakumeari : « Zeure sinesmenak salbatu zaitu ; zoaz bakean » .
PRED:	But Jesus said to the woman , “ Your faith has saved you in peace . ”
GOLD:	And Jesus said to the woman , “ Your faith has saved you ; go in peace . ”

ID:	2995
INPUT:	Ez gaitu erabiltzen gure bekatuek merezi bezala , ez digu ordaintzen geure erruen arabera .
PRED:	We are not like our sins , as our sins are not circumcised .
GOLD:	He does not punish us for all our sins ; he does not deal harshly with us , as we deserve .

ID:	2996
INPUT:	Lebi eta beronen semeok : Gerxon , Kehat eta Merari .
PRED:	And the sons of Levi , the sons of Levi , the sons of Gershon , the sons of Levi , the sons of Levi , the sons of Levi , and the sons of Levi .
GOLD:	The sons of Levi were Gershon , Kohath , and Merari .

ID:	2997
INPUT:	Haren burua urrea , urrerik garbiena ; haren ile-kizkurrak palmondoaren luku , beleak baino beltzago .
PRED:	His head is better than the pure gold , and his hair are written in the book of the children of Ammon .
GOLD:	His head is finest gold , his wavy hair is black as a raven .

ID:	2998
INPUT:	Bizidun orok ikusiko du nik , Jaunak , piztu dudala eta ez dela itzaliko » .
PRED:	He will see that the Lord will raise him up , and he will not be raised again . ”
GOLD:	Yes , I will cut off both the righteous and the wicked ! I will draw my sword against everyone in the land from south to north .

ID:	2999
INPUT:	Salbatzaile duzun Jainkoaahaztu egin baituzu , babesten zaituen Harkaitzazez zara oroitu . Lorategi atsegingarriaklandatzen dituzueta kanpoko landare-haziak ereiten .
PRED:	For thou hast forgotten God 's salvation , which thou hast forgotten thee : thou hast forgotten the glory of thy salvation : thou shalt remember the work of the field , and thou hast planted the fruit of the field .
GOLD:	Why ? Because you have turned from the God who can save you.You have forgotten the Rock who can hide you.So you may plant the finest grapevinesand import the most expensive seedlings .

ID:	3000
INPUT:	Zure aurretik izan direnek baino gaiztakeria handiagoa egin duzu , sasijainkoak eta irudiak eginez , ni haserrarazteko . Niri , berriz , bizkarra eman didazu .
PRED:	You have done more evil than all your wickedness , and you have made me angry . You have made me angry . But you have turned away from me .
GOLD:	You have done more evil than all who lived before you . You have made other gods for yourself and have made me furious with your gold calves . And since you have turned your back on me ,

ID:	3001
INPUT:	Era berean , emakumea abere batekin elkar batzen bada , heriotzara emango dituzte emakumea eta aberea . Berena izango dute heriotzaren errua .
PRED:	And if she is in the same way , she shall be put to death , and the woman shall be put to death , and the woman shall be put to death .
GOLD:	“ If a woman presents herself to a male animal to have intercourse with it , she and the animal must both be put to death . You must kill both , for they are guilty of a capital offense .

ID:	3002
INPUT:	« Entzun beste parabola hau : Behin batean , nagusi batek mahastia landatu zuen eta harresiz inguratu ; lurrean dolarea egin eta mahastizainaren dorrea eraiki zuen . Gero , nekazari batzuei errentan utzirik , urrutira joan zen .
PRED:	“ Listen to this parable : A man planted a vineyard and built a vineyard around it . Then he built a vineyard and built it on the ground . Then he left the vineyard .
GOLD:	“ Now listen to another story . A certain landowner planted a vineyard , built a wall around it , dug a pit for pressing out the grape juice , and built a lookout tower . Then he leased the vineyard to tenant farmers and moved to another country .

ID:	3003
INPUT:	Gose-egarriz hilzorian zeuden , adorea galdurik .
PRED:	And when they were hungry , they sat down at the famine .
GOLD:	Hungry and thirsty , they nearly died .

ID:	3004
INPUT:	Beraz , Jainkoaren jatorrikoak bagara , ez genezake pentsa Jainkoa giza trebetasunak eta irudimenak landutako urre , zilar edo harrizko irudien antzeko denik .
PRED:	But if we are not like God , we are not like silver and gold , silver , silver , gold , and stone .
GOLD:	And since this is true , we should n't think of God as an idol designed by craftsmen from gold or silver or stone .

ID:	3005
INPUT:	Atari inguruko oihal guztiak liho-hari bihurrituzkoak ziren ;
PRED:	And all around the court round about the court round about the tabernacle .
GOLD:	All the curtains used in the courtyard were made of finely woven linen .

ID:	3006
INPUT:	Ilunabarrean , Jose zeritzan Arimateako gizon aberats bat etorri zen , Jesusen ikaslea .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the evening , that a man named Joseph , came to a rich man of the disciples .
GOLD:	As evening approached , Joseph , a rich man from Arimathea who had become a follower of Jesus ,

ID:	3007
INPUT:	Erruak kontuan badituzu , Jauna , oi Jauna , nork iraun bizirik ?
PRED:	If you are guilty , O Lord , who can live forever ?
GOLD:	Lord , if you kept a record of our sins , who , O Lord , could ever survive ?

ID:	3008
INPUT:	Ananias izeneko gizon batek eta beronen emazte Safirak soro bat saldu zuten .
PRED:	There was a man who was in the name of Uzziah and his wife .
GOLD:	But there was a certain man named Ananias who , with his wife , Sapphira , sold some property .

ID:	3009
INPUT:	utzi joaten amari eta hartu kumeak . Horrela , zoriontsu izango zarete eta luzaro biziko .
PRED:	Take her away and take her away , and take her away ; so you will be blessed and a long time .
GOLD:	You may take the young , but let the mother go , so that you may prosper and enjoy a long life .

ID:	3010
INPUT:	Hau esan nahi zuen : « Eraman egin dute Israelen ospea , Jainkoaren kutxa harrapatu baitute » .
PRED:	He said , “ They brought the glory of the God of Israel , because they have taken the ark of God . ”
GOLD:	Then she said , “ The glory has departed from Israel , for the Ark of God has been captured . ”

ID:	3011
INPUT:	Jesus eta Beeltzebul
PRED:	Jesus and John
GOLD:	Receiving the Light

ID:	3012
INPUT:	Baina beren larrialdian Jaunarengana , Israelen Jainkoarengana , jo eta beraren bila ibili zirenean , aurkitu ahal izan zuten .
PRED:	But when they came to the Lord their God in their trouble , they went to him and found him .
GOLD:	But whenever they were in trouble and turned to the Lord , the God of Israel , and sought him out , they found him .

ID:	3013
INPUT:	Beraz , Jaunak zure profeta hauen guztien ahoan gezur-espiritua ezarri duenez , garbi dago erabaki duela zure hondamena .
PRED:	So the Lord has put your prophets in all these prophets , and you have made them clean . You have heard that your destruction is clean .
GOLD:	“ So you see , the Lord has put a lying spirit in the mouths of all your prophets . For the Lord has pronounced your doom . ”

ID:	3014
INPUT:	Mundua eta munduko guztia egin duen Jainkoa zeru-lurren Jauna da eta ez da giza eskuz egindako tenpluetan bizi ;
PRED:	The Lord , the God of the world and all the world , and the earth , is not the Lord , nor the hands of man , nor the work of the hands of man .
GOLD:	“ He is the God who made the world and everything in it . Since he is Lord of heaven and earth , he does n't live in man-made temples ,

ID:	3015
INPUT:	Hango sinagogetan irakasten zuen , denek goraipatzen zutela .
PRED:	They taught in the synagogue , and they remembered that all had praise him .
GOLD:	He taught regularly in their synagogues and was praised by everyone .

ID:	3016
INPUT:	baina itsas eta ibai-uretako bizidunen artean , hegal eta ezkata gabeak debekatuak dituzue :
PRED:	But you are to live among the sea , and you will not be forgiven .
GOLD:	But you must never eat animals from the sea or from rivers that do not have both fins and scales . They are detestable to you . This applies both to little creatures that live in shallow water and to all creatures that live in deep water .

ID:	3017
INPUT:	ikasi onbidea , saiatu zuzenbidean : lagundu zapalduari , egin justizia umezurtzari , defendatu alarguna ! »
PRED:	Tell the way of justice , and do what is right , and save the fatherless , and give justice to the fatherless .
GOLD:	Learn to do good.Seek justice.Help the oppressed.Defend the cause of orphans.Fight for the rights of widows .

ID:	3018
INPUT:	Eta , pasatzean , jantziak zabaltzen zituzten bidean .
PRED:	And when they had spoken , they spread their clothes on the road .
GOLD:	As he rode along , the crowds spread out their garments on the road ahead of him .

ID:	3019
INPUT:	Ez uste izan Aitaren aurrean nik salatuko zaituztedanik ; Moisesek berak , zeuen esperantza duzuenak , salatuko zaituzte .
PRED:	Do n't know that I am going to say to the Father , but Moses said to you , “ You will be put to death . ”
GOLD:	“ Yet it is n't I who will accuse you before the Father . Moses will accuse you ! Yes , Moses , in whom you put your hopes .

ID:	3020
INPUT:	Aldarea sagaratzeko egunean , familiaburuek aldarearen inaugurazioko opariak eraman zituzten eta aldare aurrean ezarri .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the day of the altar , that the princes of the house of the altar were brought to the altar , and set it before the altar .
GOLD:	The leaders also presented dedication gifts for the altar at the time it was anointed . They each placed their gifts before the altar .

ID:	3021
INPUT:	Horrela , kanpalekutik urruti utzi zuten Miriam zazpi egunez . Herria ez zen abiatu Miriam bildu zitzaien arte .
PRED:	So Micaiah left the camp for seven days . And the people did not come near the camp until they were gathered together .
GOLD:	So Miriam was kept outside the camp for seven days , and the people waited until she was brought back before they traveled again .

ID:	3022
INPUT:	Ondoren , herriaren barkamen-oparirako akerra hilko du ; honen odola errezelaz barrualdera eramango du eta zekorraren odolaz eginikoa bera egingo : estalkia zipriztinduko du eta estalki aurrean zirtatuko .
PRED:	And he shall kill the sin offering of the people ; and he shall bring the blood of the sin offering into the blood of the people , and sprinkle the blood of the blood of the blood , and sprinkle it in front of the altar .
GOLD:	“ Then Aaron must slaughter the first goat as a sin offering for the people and carry its blood behind the inner curtain . There he will sprinkle the goat 's blood over the atonement cover and in front of it , just as he did with the bull 's blood .

ID:	3023
INPUT:	Harpak , zitarak eta turutak joz sartu ziren Jerusalemen Jaunaren etxeraino .
PRED:	And they took their clothes , and went into the house of the Lord to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	They marched into Jerusalem to the music of harps , lyres , and trumpets , and they proceeded to the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	3024
INPUT:	horrela bereiziko dituzu lebitarrak gainerako israeldarren artetik eta neureak izango ditut .
PRED:	And thou shalt take the Levites from among the children of Israel , and I will be my possession .
GOLD:	In this way , you will set the Levites apart from the rest of the people of Israel , and the Levites will belong to me .

ID:	3025
INPUT:	Zure irakaspena izan ez banu gozamen , honezkero galdua nintzatekeen atsekabez .
PRED:	If I had not taught your law , my soul was filled with sorrow .
GOLD:	If your instructions had n't sustained me with joy , I would have died in my misery .

ID:	3026
INPUT:	Horregatik , bere maitaleen esku utzi nuen , bere amorante asiriarren esku .
PRED:	So I delivered them into the hand of his love , and gave them into the hand of the Chaldeans .
GOLD:	“ And so I handed her over to her Assyrian lovers , whom she desired so much .

ID:	3027
INPUT:	Edomen kontrako mezua
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	A Message for Philistia

ID:	3028
INPUT:	Siriako Antiokiara itzuli
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Paul and Barnabas Return to Antioch of Syria

ID:	3029
INPUT:	Baina ez dituzue Jaunaren hitzak aditu nahi izan eta zeuen idolatriazko jardueraz iraintzen jarraitu duzue , zigorra zeuen gainera erakarriz .
PRED:	But you must not listen to the words of the Lord . You must not obey the Lord 's words . You have turned away from your idols .
GOLD:	“ But you would not listen to me , ” says the Lord . “ You made me furious by worshiping idols you made with your own hands , bringing on yourselves all the disasters you now suffer .

ID:	3030
INPUT:	zatitu egingo duzue , zatien gainera olioa isuriz ; labore-oparia da hau .
PRED:	You shall take the oil on it , and pour oil on it . This is the burnt offering .
GOLD:	Break it in pieces and pour olive oil on it ; it is a grain offering .

ID:	3031
INPUT:	Eta , Jaunaren esanari jaramonik egin gabe , Egiptora joan eta Tafnes hiriraino iritsi ziren .
PRED:	And they did not listen to the word of the Lord , and came to Egypt , and came to Kadesh .
GOLD:	The people refused to obey the voice of the Lord and went to Egypt , going as far as the city of Tahpanhes .

ID:	3032
INPUT:	Bidez zihoala , jaiotzatik itsua zen gizon bat ikusi zuen Jesusek .
PRED:	As they were going out of the boat , Jesus saw a blind man who was born from the bed .
GOLD:	As Jesus was walking along , he saw a man who had been blind from birth .

ID:	3033
INPUT:	Hilobian sarturik , gazte bat ikusi zuten eskuinaldean eseria , soineko zuriz jantzia , eta erabat izutu ziren .
PRED:	And when they entered into the tomb , they saw a young man sitting at his right hand , and clothed him with clothes .
GOLD:	When they entered the tomb , they saw a young man clothed in a white robe sitting on the right side . The women were shocked ,

ID:	3034
INPUT:	Ohar zaitezte , beraz , ez dela bete gabe gelditu Jaunak Akaben senitartearen kontra esaniko hitz bat ere . Bete du Jaunak bere zerbitzari Eliasen bitartez esana zuena .
PRED:	So be careful that the Lord has spoken against Ahab 's house , so that he has spoken against the house of Ahab his servant Elijah .
GOLD:	You can be sure that the message of the Lord that was spoken concerning Ahab 's family will not fail . The Lord declared through his servant Elijah that this would happen . ”

ID:	3035
INPUT:	orduan , zuekin biziko naiz toki honetan , zuen gurasoei aspaldidanik eta betiko eman nien lurraldean .
PRED:	Then I will live in this place , and I will live in the land which I gave to your fathers and ever .
GOLD:	Then I will let you stay in this land that I gave to your ancestors to keep forever .

ID:	3036
INPUT:	Efraim Egiptora itzuliko da , Asiria izango du nagusi , ez baitu niregana itzuli nahi izan .
PRED:	Ephraim will return to Egypt , for Assyria will not return to me .
GOLD:	“ But since my people refuse to return to me , they will return to Egyptand will be forced to serve Assyria .

ID:	3037
INPUT:	Eta besteei , berriz : — Larunbatez zer dugu legezko , on egitea ala gaitz egitea , bizia salbatzea ala kentzea ? Haiek , ordea , isilik .
PRED:	And they said unto him , What shall we do on the Sabbath day to do good , that we may be saved , and to save life ? But they opened their peace .
GOLD:	Then he turned to his critics and asked , “ Does the law permit good deeds on the Sabbath , or is it a day for doing evil ? Is this a day to save life or to destroy it ? ” But they would n't answer him .

ID:	3038
INPUT:	Bihotz zintzoz zaindu zituen , esku trebez eraman .
PRED:	He made them glad , and brought them into the hand of the hands of the Lord .
GOLD:	He cared for them with a true heartand led them with skillful hands .

ID:	3039
INPUT:	Honela , bosgarren eguna burutu zen .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the fifth day , that it was the fifth day .
GOLD:	And evening passed and morning came , marking the fifth day .

ID:	3040
INPUT:	Lurrak gutiziatzen dituztela ? Lapurtu egiten dituzte . Etxeak irrikatzen dituztela ? Hartu egiten dituzte . Indarrez hartzen dute nagusia , bere familia eta etxaldearekin .
PRED:	The earth is broken , and the earth is broken , and the houses of the house is broken , and the houses of the house is broken , and the master of his father 's household .
GOLD:	When you want a piece of land , you find a way to seize it.When you want someone 's house , you take it by fraud and violence.You cheat a man of his property , stealing his family 's inheritance .

ID:	3041
INPUT:	Bota egin dituzue Jaunaren egiazko apaizak , Aaronen ondorengoak , baita lebitarrak ere , eta , herri arrotzek bezala , zeuen apaizak izendatu . Norbait apaiz izan nahian , bere abere-taldeko zekor bat eta zazpi ahari dakartzala etortzen bazaizue , berehala egiten duzue gezurrezko jainko horien apaiz .
PRED:	And the priests , and the sons of Aaron , and the sons of Aaron , and the Levites , and the priests , and the priests , and the priests , and the priests , and the priests , and the priests , shall come unto you , as a priest of the priests , and shall serve him .
GOLD:	But you have chased away the priests of the Lord ( the descendants of Aaron ) and the Levites , and you have appointed your own priests , just like the pagan nations . You let anyone become a priest these days ! Whoever comes to be dedicated with a young bull and seven rams can become a priest of these so-called gods of yours !

ID:	3042
INPUT:	Asiriarren inbasioa iragarri
PRED:	The People of Assyria
GOLD:	A Call to Trust the

ID:	3043
INPUT:	Saulo triskantza ikaragarria egiten ari zen eliz elkartean : etxeetan sartu , gizon-emakumeak atxilotu eta kartzelara eramaten zituen .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the church of the church , that he went into the house , and brought men into the house of men , and brought them into the house .
GOLD:	But Saul was going everywhere to destroy the church . He went from house to house , dragging out both men and women to throw them into prison .

ID:	3044
INPUT:	Kartzelazainak Paulori berri eman zion , esanez : — Epaileek zuek askatzeko esan dute . Atera , bada , eta zoazte bakean .
PRED:	Then Paul told Paul , “ The priests have said to him , ‘ The priests have said to you , ‘ You are going out . ' ”
GOLD:	So the jailer told Paul , “ The city officials have said you and Silas are free to leave . Go in peace . ”

ID:	3045
INPUT:	Begira zer-nolako lurraldea den , hango biztanleak indartsuak ala ahulak , gutxi ala asko diren .
PRED:	Look at how great is the land of the great and mighty men are mighty , and many are many .
GOLD:	See what the land is like , and find out whether the people living there are strong or weak , few or many .

ID:	3046
INPUT:	Haiek , berriro : — Zer egin dizu ? Nola ireki dizkizu begiak ?
PRED:	They said to him , “ What have you done to you ? How can your eyes open ? ”
GOLD:	“ But what did he do ? ” they asked . “ How did he heal you ? ”

ID:	3047
INPUT:	Jainkoa daizar-multzoak sortu dituena , iluna egunsentieta eguna gau <unk> hurtzen duena ; itsas urak biltzeneta lur gainera isurtzen dituena . Jauna du izena .
PRED:	God made the stars , the stars of the darkness , and the darkness , and the darkness , and the darkness , and the waters of the sea , and the name of the Lord is the Lord .
GOLD:	It is the Lord who created the stars , the Pleiades and Orion.He turns darkness into morningand day into night.He draws up water from the oceansand pours it down as rain on the land.The Lord is his name !

ID:	3048
INPUT:	Guztiok Jainkoaren seme-alaba zarete , Jesu Kristogan duzuen sinesmenari esker .
PRED:	You are children of God , and you are children of God . You have faith in Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	For you are all children of God through faith in Christ Jesus .

ID:	3049
INPUT:	Silas eta Timoteo Mazedoniatik etorri zirenean , Paulok mezuaren predikuari eman zion erabat , Jesus zela Mesias juduen aurrean aitortuz .
PRED:	When Paul and Timothy came from Macedonia , Paul told him that he was the Messiah .
GOLD:	And after Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia , Paul spent all his time preaching the word . He testified to the Jews that Jesus was the Messiah .

ID:	3050
INPUT:	Nagusiak erantzun zien : “ Fruitua dakarrenari eman egingo zaio ; fruiturik ez dakarrenari , ordea , daukan apurra ere kendu egingo zaio .
PRED:	The master said to him , “ The tree will be given to him , but the one who has no fruit will be taken away from him .
GOLD:	“ ‘ Yes , ' the king replied , ‘ and to those who use well what they are given , even more will be given . But from those who do nothing , even what little they have will be taken away .

ID:	3051
INPUT:	Artilea bezala erorarazten du elurra , hautsa bezala zabaltzen antzigarra .
PRED:	He makes the earth as a lamb , and the earth spread out like the dust .
GOLD:	He sends the snow like white wool ; he scatters frost upon the ground like ashes .

ID:	3052
INPUT:	Hala ere , Pedro jaiki eta hilobira joan zen lasterka ; makurturik , barrura begiratu eta oihal-zerrendak bakarrik ikusi zituen , eta etxera itzuli zen gertatuaz harriturik .
PRED:	But Peter got up and ran into the tomb . He looked at the tomb and saw only a feet and a feet , and he returned to his house .
GOLD:	However , Peter jumped up and ran to the tomb to look . Stooping , he peered in and saw the empty linen wrappings ; then he went home again , wondering what had happened .

ID:	3053
INPUT:	iluntasun eta nahas-mahas hutseko , argi-izpirik gabeko herrialdera » .
PRED:	It is darkness and darkness , and darkness , for there is no bread in the land of the eye . ”
GOLD:	It is a land as dark as midnight , a land of gloom and confusion , where even the light is dark as midnight . ' ”

ID:	3054
INPUT:	Hartu ahariaren buztaneko gantza , hesteen gainekoa eta gibela estaltzen duena , giltzurrunak eta itsatsirik daukaten gantza , eta eskuineko izterra ; apaizen sagarapenerako aharia da hau .
PRED:	And thou shalt take the fat of the fat , and the fat that is upon the fat , and the fat , and the fat that is upon the right hand , and the fat that is upon the right hand of the priest .
GOLD:	“ Since this is the ram for the ordination of Aaron and his sons , take the fat of the ram , including the fat of the broad tail , the fat around the internal organs , the long lobe of the liver , and the two kidneys and the fat around them , along with the right thigh .

ID:	3055
INPUT:	Judako herri osoa , emakume , seme-alaba eta haurtxoak ere bai , Jaunaren aurrean zegoen zutik .
PRED:	And all the people of Judah , women , women , children , children , children , and children , and children , before the Lord .
GOLD:	As all the men of Judah stood before the Lord with their little ones , wives , and children ,

ID:	3056
INPUT:	Saulek , orduan : — Zergatik ari zarete Jeseren semea eta biok nire kontra azpilanean ? Ogia eta ezpata eman zenizkion ; kontsulta egin zenion Jainkoari Davidi buruz , ea nire aurka jaiki eta zelatak ipiniko ote zizkidan . Horretan ari da , hain zuzen , orain .
PRED:	Then Saul said to him , “ Why are you the son of Jesse ? Have you made bread and bread , and bread , and bread , because you have set up against God , and you have set up my face against David . ”
GOLD:	“ Why have you and the son of Jesse conspired against me ? ” Saul demanded . “ Why did you give him food and a sword ? Why have you consulted God for him ? Why have you encouraged him to kill me , as he is trying to do this very day ? ”

ID:	3057
INPUT:	Ahaztu egin zaituzte adiskideek , ez dira zutaz axola . Etsai batek bezala jo zaitut , gogor zigortu , zeure erru kontaezinengatik , zeure bekatu izugarriengatik .
PRED:	My friends , have forgotten you , and they have not forgotten you . I have not turned away from your enemies , because of your sins .
GOLD:	All your lovers — your allies — have left youand do not care about you anymore.I have wounded you cruelly , as though I were your enemy.For your sins are many , and your guilt is great .

ID:	3058
INPUT:	Haran bere sorterrian , kaldearren Ur hirian , hil zen , oraino bere aita bizi zela .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when he was in his valley , that he died in the city , and was dead in his father .
GOLD:	But Haran died in Ur of the Chaldeans , the land of his birth , while his father , Terah , was still living .

ID:	3059
INPUT:	Brontzezko uraska
PRED:	The Death of bronze
GOLD:	The Anointing Oil

ID:	3060
INPUT:	Begiratu zuen Eliasek eta horra non ikusten dituen , bere buru aldean , harri goritu baten gainean erretako sutopila eta anto<unk> bat ur . Jan eta edan ondoren , etzan egin zen berriro .
PRED:	And he looked , and see where he saw , and behold , he lay it on his head , and lay it on the top of the fire , and ate it , and drank it .
GOLD:	He looked around and there beside his head was some bread baked on hot stones and a jar of water ! So he ate and drank and lay down again .

ID:	3061
INPUT:	Hala ere , ez dut neure onginahia harengandik baztertuko , Saulengandik baztertu nuen bezala , baztertu egin bainuen neure aurretik bera .
PRED:	But I will not remove my grace from him , as I rejected him from Saul , because I rejected him before me .
GOLD:	But my favor will not be taken from him as I took it from Saul , whom I removed from your sight .

ID:	3062
INPUT:	eta oinaze eta zauriengatik zeruko Jainkoa madarikatzen hasi ziren , baina ez ziren beren egintzez damutu .
PRED:	And they began to curse God in heaven , and to curse them , but they did not obey their works .
GOLD:	and they cursed the God of heaven for their pains and sores . But they did not repent of their evil deeds and turn to God .

ID:	3063
INPUT:	Bazen Lazaro izeneko eskale bat ere , haren ate ondoan egoten zena ; zauriz josia zegoen .
PRED:	A certain man named Lazarus , standing beside him , and he was standing beside him .
GOLD:	At his gate lay a poor man named Lazarus who was covered with sores .

ID:	3064
INPUT:	Zitara eta harpa , danbolin eta txistu-soinuaeta ardoa ugari zuen janaldietan ; baina Jaunaren ekintzazez zarete ohartzen , haren egintzakez dituzue aintzakotzat hartzen .
PRED:	and to the sound of the trumpets , and to the sound of the trumpets , and to the voice of the Lord : but ye shall rejoice in the glory of the Lord , and ye shall be filled with his glory .
GOLD:	They furnish wine and lovely music at their grand parties — lyre and harp , tambourine and flute — but they never think about the Lordor notice what he is doing .

ID:	3065
INPUT:	( 35 , <unk> )
PRED:	The Covenant Box
GOLD:	Instructions for the Sabbath

ID:	3066
INPUT:	Gupida izango die gizagaixo eta pobreei , bizia salbatuko behartsuei .
PRED:	The poor will be poor and poor , and the poor will be saved .
GOLD:	He feels pity for the weak and the needy , and he will rescue them .

ID:	3067
INPUT:	Gazte izan nintzen , orain zaharturik nago : ez dut sekula ikusi zintzoa bertan behera utzia , ezta haren ondorengorik ere ogi eskean .
PRED:	I am young , and I am old ; I have not seen the righteous , and I have not left him in his hand , nor have I seen him in his hand .
GOLD:	Once I was young , and now I am old.Yet I have never seen the godly abandonedor their children begging for bread .

ID:	3068
INPUT:	Eta hori guzti<unk> koben ondorengoenerrebeldiagatik , Israelgo erreinuaren bekatuagatik . Nork daramatzaJakoben ondorengoak errebeldiara ? Ez ote Samaria hiriburuak ? Nork darama Judamuinoetako sasikultura ? Ez ote Jerusalemek berak ?
PRED:	And the iniquity of the house of Abner , because of the iniquity of the house of Israel , and of the iniquity of the house of Israel , and of the iniquity of Samaria , and of the sons of Samaria , and of the house of Judah , who shall not worship Jerusalem ?
GOLD:	And why is this happening ? Because of the rebellion of Israel — yes , the sins of the whole nation.Who is to blame for Israel 's rebellion ? Samaria , its capital city ! Where is the center of idolatry in Judah ? In Jerusalem , its capital !

ID:	3069
INPUT:	eta itun berriaren bitarteko den Jesusengana , Abelena baino indartsuago mintzo den odolaz garbitu gaituenarengana .
PRED:	and to Jesus the new covenant of the new covenant of the new covenant , and to the one who speaks with the blood of Jesus .
GOLD:	You have come to Jesus , the one who mediates the new covenant between God and people , and to the sprinkled blood , which speaks of forgiveness instead of crying out for vengeance like the blood of Abel .

ID:	3070
INPUT:	Zeuentzako dituzue profeten agintzariak , baita Jainkoak zuen arbasoekin egin zuen ituna ere ; hau esan baitzion Abrahami : Zure ondorengoen bidez lurreko herri guztiak bedeinkatuko ditut .
PRED:	You will obey the promise that God made with your fathers . He made a covenant with you . He said to Abraham , “ I will bless all the nations of the earth . ”
GOLD:	You are the children of those prophets , and you are included in the covenant God promised to your ancestors . For God said to Abraham , ‘ Through your descendants all the families on earth will be blessed . '

ID:	3071
INPUT:	« Errege-agintea hartzean , lege hau kopiaraziko du beretzat , apaiz lebitarren zainpean egongo den liburutik .
PRED:	When the king has commanded him , he must take this law for himself , from the book of the priests who are in the book of the law .
GOLD:	“ When he sits on the throne as king , he must copy for himself this body of instruction on a scroll in the presence of the Levitical priests .

ID:	3072
INPUT:	Hark , esnaturik , haserre egin zion haizeari , eta aintzirari esan : — Hago isilik ! Geldi ! Gelditu zen haizea eta barealdi handia egin zen .
PRED:	And he stretched out his hand upon the wind , and said unto the sea , Be silent ; and the wind stood up , and the wind was very great .
GOLD:	When Jesus woke up , he rebuked the wind and said to the waves , “ Silence ! Be still ! ” Suddenly the wind stopped , and there was a great calm .

ID:	3073
INPUT:	Barneko atariko ateetatik sartzean , lihozko jantziak eramango dituzte soinean ; ez dute artilezko jantzirik eramango zerbitzugintzan barneko atarian eta tenpluan ari direnean .
PRED:	And when they enter into the inner court of the court , they shall put on their garments , and they shall not put on their garments , and they shall not be clothed in the inner court , and in the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ When they enter the gateway to the inner courtyard , they must wear only linen clothing . They must wear no wool while on duty in the inner courtyard or in the Temple itself .

ID:	3074
INPUT:	Haren egintza harrigarriak gogora ditzagun nahi du : errukior eta bihozbera da Jauna .
PRED:	He will remember his works , and he will remember his works , and he will be kind to us .
GOLD:	He causes us to remember his wonderful works.How gracious and merciful is our Lord !

ID:	3075
INPUT:	Honela ziotson Anak : « Barka , ene Jauna ! Neu nauzu zure aurrean Jaunari otoizka ari izan zitzaion emakumea .
PRED:	“ O Lord , I am the Lord ! I am the Lord , and I pray to you in front of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Sir , do you remember me ? ” Hannah asked . “ I am the very woman who stood here several years ago praying to the Lord .

ID:	3076
INPUT:	Hartu nuen kopa Jaunaren eskutik , eta Jaunak bidali ninduen nazio guztiei edanarazi nien .
PRED:	And I took my cup from the hand of the Lord , and sent me to all the nations .
GOLD:	So I took the cup of anger from the Lord and made all the nations drink from it — every nation to which the Lord sent me .

ID:	3077
INPUT:	« Ez kutsatu horrelako jokaerez ; horrela kutsatu dira , hain zuzen , zuen aurretik jaurtiko ditudan herriak .
PRED:	“ You shall not defiled these things , for they are defiled , and I will cast out the nations before you .
GOLD:	“ Do not defile yourselves in any of these ways , for the people I am driving out before you have defiled themselves in all these ways .

ID:	3078
INPUT:	« Ohoratu aita-amak , luzaro bizi zaitezen , Jaunak , zeure Jainkoak , ematen dizun lurraldean .
PRED:	“ Tell your father and mother , that you may live a long time in the land which the Lord your God gives you .
GOLD:	“ Honor your father and mother . Then you will live a long , full life in the land the Lord your God is giving you .

ID:	3079
INPUT:	Eta , Jauna lagun zutenez , askok sinetsi zuten eta Jaunarengana bihurtu ziren .
PRED:	And many of them believed the Lord , and came to the Lord .
GOLD:	The power of the Lord was with them , and a large number of these Gentiles believed and turned to the Lord .

ID:	3080
INPUT:	Modu ikaragarrian hilko dira eta ez dute hiletarik , ez hilobirik izango : simaurra bezala geldituko dira lurrazalean . Gerrak eta goseak hilko ditu , eta gorpuak hegazti harrapariek eta basapiztiek jango dituzte » .
PRED:	They will die in the land of Moab , and they will not be buried in the land , and they will die in the land , and the birds of the field will die , and the birds of the field will die . ”
GOLD:	They will die from terrible diseases . No one will mourn for them or bury them , and they will lie scattered on the ground like manure . They will die from war and famine , and their bodies will be food for the vultures and wild animals . ”

ID:	3081
INPUT:	Egin duen bekatuaz jabetzean , elkarte osoak zekorra eskainiko du barkamen-oparitzat . Elkarketa-etxolara eramango du ,
PRED:	When he has sinned , all the congregation of the congregation shall offer a sin offering for a sin offering , and the whole congregation shall bring it to the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	When they become aware of their sin , the people must bring a young bull as an offering for their sin and present it before the Tabernacle .

ID:	3082
INPUT:	« Zorionekoak Jainkoaren nahia betetzeagatik erasotuak , haiek baitute Jainkoa errege .
PRED:	“ Blessed are those who fight for the will of God , for they are the kingdom of God .
GOLD:	God blesses those who are persecuted for doing right , for the Kingdom of Heaven is theirs .

ID:	3083
INPUT:	Jerusalemen hondamena
PRED:	The People of Jerusalem
GOLD:	The Temple Destroyed

ID:	3084
INPUT:	Gudari ausart haien ofizialak bi mila eta seiehun familiaburu ziren .
PRED:	They were two thousand men of war , and of their fathers ' houses , and of their fathers .
GOLD:	These regiments of mighty warriors were commanded by 2,600 clan leaders .

ID:	3085
INPUT:	Burugabe hori , konturatuko al zara behingoz egintzarik gabeko fedea alferrikakoa dena ?
PRED:	Do you think that you do n't know what is right ? Do you think that you do n't do wrong ?
GOLD:	How foolish ! Ca n't you see that faith without good deeds is useless ?

ID:	3086
INPUT:	Zure erabakiak fidagarri dira , zure etxea santutasunez eder , Jauna , egun eta beti .
PRED:	Your statutes are faithful , O Lord , and Your holy temple forever and ever .
GOLD:	Your royal laws can not be changed.Your reign , O Lord , is holy forever and ever .

ID:	3087
INPUT:	Soberako lehen-semeak berreskuratzeko ordain-dirua Aaroni eta beronen semeei emango diezu » .
PRED:	And thou shalt give Aaron the firstborn of the firstborn of the firstborn , and thou shalt give them to Aaron and his sons .
GOLD:	Give the silver to Aaron and his sons as the redemption price for the extra firstborn sons . ”

ID:	3088
INPUT:	Jokabide zuzenekoak begirune dio Jainkoari , bide okerretik dabilenak mespretxatu egiten du .
PRED:	Those who do right will fear God , but those who do what is right will do .
GOLD:	Those who follow the right path fear the Lord ; those who take the wrong path despise him .

ID:	3089
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion Pedrori : « Itzuli ezpata zorrora . Ez ote dut , bada , edan behar Aitak leporatu didan edari samina ? »
PRED:	Jesus said to Peter , “ Go back to the sword . Do n't I drink what the Father has told me to do ? ”
GOLD:	But Jesus said to Peter , “ Put your sword back into its sheath . Shall I not drink from the cup of suffering the Father has given me ? ”

ID:	3090
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jaunak lur osoa arakatzen du bere begiz , zintzo direnak adoretzeko . Oraingo honetan , ordea , burugabe jokatu duzu ; horregatik , aurrerantzean gerrak izango dira zure aurka » .
PRED:	For the Lord will cause all the earth to obey his eyes , but now you have sinned against you . ”
GOLD:	The eyes of the Lord search the whole earth in order to strengthen those whose hearts are fully committed to him . What a fool you have been ! From now on you will be at war . ”

ID:	3091
INPUT:	Zahartzaroaz
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Concluding Thoughts about the Teacher

ID:	3092
INPUT:	Hodeiz inguratu zara , gure erregua hel ez dakizun .
PRED:	You are like a cloud , and you do n't know that we do n't know .
GOLD:	You have hidden yourself in a cloudso our prayers can not reach you .

ID:	3093
INPUT:	Estrategiaz egiten da gerra , aholku egokien poderioz lortzen garaipena .
PRED:	He is in hope , but he is in the time of his counsel .
GOLD:	So do n't go to war without wise guidance ; victory depends on having many advisers .

ID:	3094
INPUT:	Eraman zeuen anaia eta itzuli gizon harengana .
PRED:	Take your brother and your brother back to him .
GOLD:	Then take your brother , and go back to the man .

ID:	3095
INPUT:	Jarraitu Jaunari zeuen Jainkoari eta izan begirune berari , gorde aginduak eta egin haren esana , eman kultu Jaunari eta atxiki berari .
PRED:	You shall fear the Lord your God , and fear him , and keep his commandments , and obey his commandments , and serve him , and serve him .
GOLD:	The false prophets or visionaries who try to lead you astray must be put to death , for they encourage rebellion against the Lord your God , who redeemed you from slavery and brought you out of the land of Egypt . Since they try to lead you astray from the way the Lord your God commanded you to live , you must put them to death . In this way you will purge the evil from among you .

ID:	3096
INPUT:	Berehala , Jesusengana hurbildu eta esan zion : « Agur , Maisu ! » Eta musu eman zion .
PRED:	Then Jesus came to Jesus and said to him , “ Teacher , Teacher ! ” And he gave him the boy .
GOLD:	So Judas came straight to Jesus . “ Greetings , Rabbi ! ” he exclaimed and gave him the kiss .

ID:	3097
INPUT:	zuk izan ezik , zapuztuak gaituzun Jainko horrek , jadanik gure gudarostearekin gudura joaten ez zaren horrek ?
PRED:	God , you are my God , and you are my God , and you are my strength .
GOLD:	Oh , please help us against our enemies , for all human help is useless .

ID:	3098
INPUT:	Paulo , Onesimo esklaboaren alde mesede eske
PRED:	Paul and Silas
GOLD:	Paul 's Appeal for Onesimus

ID:	3099
INPUT:	Urreztatu urre garbiz , eta ezarri urrezko hegala inguru guztian .
PRED:	And thou shalt make gold rings of pure gold , and cover it with pure gold round about .
GOLD:	Overlay it with pure gold and run a gold molding around the edge .

ID:	3100
INPUT:	Eta ni ikusten nauenak ni bidali nauena ere ikusten du .
PRED:	And he that sent me see me , he that sent me .
GOLD:	For when you see me , you are seeing the one who sent me .

ID:	3101
INPUT:	Bete zuen Aaronek Jaunak Moisesi agindua , eta argimutilaren aurrealdea argitzeko eran egokitu zituen kriseiluak .
PRED:	And Aaron did as the Lord commanded Moses , and he kept the lamps in front of the light .
GOLD:	So Aaron did this . He set up the seven lamps so they reflected their light forward , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	3102
INPUT:	Benaias , Bedias , Keluhi ,
PRED:	Shebaniah , Shebaniah , Shebaniah ,
GOLD:	Benaiah , Bedeiah , Keluhi ,

ID:	3103
INPUT:	Zergatik nahi nauzue salatu , zeuek izanik nire aurka altxatuak ? Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	Why do you want me to speak against me ? ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Why do you accuse me of doing wrong ? You are the ones who have rebelled , ” says the Lord .

ID:	3104
INPUT:	Oheratzen naiz eta lokartzen , eta berriro esnatzen , Jauna baitut euskarri .
PRED:	I am put to death , and I am put to death , but the Lord is my shield .
GOLD:	I am not afraid of ten thousand enemieswho surround me on every side .

ID:	3105
INPUT:	Entzun iezadazue , beraz , eta jaregin iezaieizue preso hartu dituzuen zeuen senide horiei ; bestela , zuen kontra ere biziki haserretuko da Jauna » .
PRED:	So listen to me , and listen to me , and you have received your brothers and sisters , so that the Lord will be angry . ”
GOLD:	Listen to me and return these prisoners you have taken , for they are your own relatives . Watch out , because now the Lord 's fierce anger has been turned against you ! ”

ID:	3106
INPUT:	Egun osoan luzatuak nituen eskuakbide txarretik , bere nahierara dabilenherri errebeldeagana ,
PRED:	In that day I stretched out my hand from the evil way of the wicked , to the house of his people ,
GOLD:	All day long I opened my arms to a rebellious people.But they follow their own evil pathsand their own crooked schemes .

ID:	3107
INPUT:	Egun hartan , emakumeen antzeko izango dira egiptoarrak ; beldur-ikarak hartuko ditu , Jaun ahalguztidunak eskua beraien aurka jasotzen duela ikustean .
PRED:	On that day the Egyptians will be as the Egyptians , and they will be afraid of fear , and they will see their hand against them .
GOLD:	In that day the Egyptians will be as weak as women . They will cower in fear beneath the upraised fist of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	3108
INPUT:	Salomonek denei eman zien erantzuna ; ez zen izan erregeak erantzunezineko galdera ilunik .
PRED:	And Solomon answered all those who had answered him , and the king did not answer him a long time .
GOLD:	Solomon had answers for all her questions ; nothing was too hard for the king to explain to her .

ID:	3109
INPUT:	« Sarri itzaltzen ote da gaiztoen kriseilua , sarri jausten ote ezbeharra haien gainera , sarri ematen ote Jainkoak zigorra bere suminean ?
PRED:	Can the wicked enter into the place of the wicked laid on them , that they may enter into their wrath ?
GOLD:	“ Yet the light of the wicked never seems to be extinguished.Do they ever have trouble ? Does God distribute sorrows to them in anger ?

ID:	3110
INPUT:	Ezezagunaren fidatzaileak bere buruari kalte , konpromisorik hartzen ez duenak lasaitasuna ziur .
PRED:	A man who does not know his own heart , but he who does not commit adultery .
GOLD:	There 's danger in putting up security for a stranger 's debt ; it 's safer not to guarantee another person 's debt .

ID:	3111
INPUT:	Gainaldea ere harri bikainez egina zegoen , neurrira landuriko harriz eta zedro-zurez .
PRED:	And the other side was made of cedar wood , and the cedar wood , and the cedar wood .
GOLD:	The blocks of high-quality stone used in the walls were also cut to measure , and cedar beams were also used .

ID:	3112
INPUT:	Kenan izan zuenetik , beste zortziehun eta hamabost urtez bizi izan zen , eta seme-alabak izan zituen .
PRED:	And Lamech lived after he became the father of Lamech , and he had other sons and daughters .
GOLD:	After the birth of Kenan , Enosh lived another 815 years , and he had other sons and daughters .

ID:	3113
INPUT:	Jaunak bete eta burutu egin du berak iragarria . Jaunaren aurka bekatu egin eta obeditu ez diozuelako gertatu zaizue guztia .
PRED:	The Lord has filled his head , and he has sinned against the Lord , because he has sinned against you , and has not done all that has happened to you .
GOLD:	just as he said he would . For these people have sinned against the Lord and disobeyed him . That is why it happened .

ID:	3114
INPUT:	Beraz , eman agindu hori eta sinatu , aldatua izan ez dadin , mediarren eta pertsiarren aldaezineko beste legeak bezala » .
PRED:	So give them this command , so that they may not be taken away , as the law and the rest of the flock . ”
GOLD:	So King Darius signed the law .

ID:	3115
INPUT:	« Zuek sendo iraun duzue nirekin nire probaldietan .
PRED:	“ You have kept my words in my words .
GOLD:	“ You have stayed with me in my time of trial .

ID:	3116
INPUT:	Baina Paulok erantzun zigun : « Zer dela-eta ari zarete negarrez ? Bihozgabetu egin nahi al nauzue ? Prest nago , lotua izateko ez ezik , Jerusalemen hiltzeko ere , Jesus Jaunarengatik » .
PRED:	But Paul said to us , “ Why are you crying and weep ? Do you want me to be ashamed ? I am ready to be put to shame , but for the Lord Jesus Christ . ”
GOLD:	But he said , “ Why all this weeping ? You are breaking my heart ! I am ready not only to be jailed at Jerusalem but even to die for the sake of the Lord Jesus . ”

ID:	3117
INPUT:	Bigarren hegaztia erre-opari gisa eskainiko du , arautua dagoen eran . Era honetan egingo du apaizak bekatuaren barkamen-ohikunea eta barkatua izango du pertsona horrek bekatua .
PRED:	He shall offer the second animal as a burnt offering , and the priest shall make atonement for the sin offering , and the priest shall make atonement for the sin offering , and he shall be forgiven .
GOLD:	The priest will then prepare the second bird as a burnt offering , following all the procedures that have been prescribed . Through this process the priest will purify you from your sin , making you right with the Lord , and you will be forgiven .

ID:	3118
INPUT:	Anaiak Joseren aurrez aurre zeuden eseriak , zaharrenetik gazteenera , eta harriturik elkarri begira .
PRED:	And his brothers were hungry before him , and the old men came out of the old men , and looked at him .
GOLD:	Joseph told each of his brothers where to sit , and to their amazement , he seated them according to age , from oldest to youngest .

ID:	3119
INPUT:	Biguna naiz , errege gantzutua izan arren . Gizon hauek , ordea , Tzeruiaren semeok , ni baino gogorragoak dira . Baina itzul diezaiola Jaunak gaizkileari berak besteri egindako kaltea ! »
PRED:	The next day I have been king , but these men are more than I , sons of Zeruiah , and they are more than I ; but the Lord has done evil to the evil that he has done . ”
GOLD:	And even though I am the anointed king , these two sons of Zeruiah — Joab and Abishai — are too strong for me to control . So may the Lord repay these evil men for their evil deeds . ”

ID:	3120
INPUT:	Geziontziak durundi egiten du beraren gainean , lantzak eta azkonak distira ;
PRED:	He makes the boat on the earth , and the work of the sun , and the face of his face .
GOLD:	The arrows rattle against it , and the spear and javelin flash .

ID:	3121
INPUT:	Zeuena ez duzuen aberastasunarekin fidatzekoak izan ez bazarete , nork eman benetan dagokizuena ?
PRED:	If you do not trust in your riches , who can not trust in you ?
GOLD:	And if you are not faithful with other people 's things , why should you be trusted with things of your own ?

ID:	3122
INPUT:	Horregatik , madarikazioak hartua du lurra , eta bertan bizi direnekzigorra jasan behar . Horregatik , lurreko bizilagunak galtzen ari dira ; banaka batzuk besterikez dira gelditzen .
PRED:	This is why the curse of the earth will be punished , and those who live in it will die . Therefore some of them who live in it will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Therefore , a curse consumes the earth.Its people must pay the price for their sin.They are destroyed by fire , and only a few are left alive .

ID:	3123
INPUT:	Zatirik onena aukeratu du beretzat , zeren eta , buruzagiaren partea non , han biltzen baitiraherriko nagusiak . Jaunaren nahia bete du , Jaunak Israelen aldehartutako erabakiak » .
PRED:	He has chosen one of his people , and he has chosen the princes of the people , where the princes of the people were gathered together , for the Lord has kept the commandments of Israel .
GOLD:	The people of Gad took the best land for themselves ; a leader 's share was assigned to them.When the leaders of the people were assembled , they carried out the Lord 's justiceand obeyed his regulations for Israel . ”

ID:	3124
INPUT:	« Abrahamen , Isaaken eta Jakoben Jainkoak , gure arbasoen Jainkoak , aintzaz bete du Jesus bere zerbitzaria , zuek agintarien eskuetara eman eta Pilatoren aurrean ukatu zenutena , honek askatzea erabaki zuen arren .
PRED:	“ The God of our fathers , Isaac , Isaac , Jacob , and Jacob , has filled his servant with the glory of our fathers , and the rulers of Pilate , whom you have delivered him before Pilate .
GOLD:	For it is the God of Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob — the God of all our ancestors — who has brought glory to his servant Jesus by doing this . This is the same Jesus whom you handed over and rejected before Pilate , despite Pilate 's decision to release him .

ID:	3125
INPUT:	Jaitsi zen , bada , berehala eta pozik hartu zuen etxean .
PRED:	So he went down and took him in his house .
GOLD:	Zacchaeus quickly climbed down and took Jesus to his house in great excitement and joy .

ID:	3126
INPUT:	Gero , zazpi ogiak eta arrainak hartu eta , Jainkoari esker oneko otoitza egin ondoren , zatitu eta bere ikasleei eman zizkien , eta ikasleek jendeari .
PRED:	And he took seven loaves , and took the seven loaves , and gave thanks to God , and gave them to his disciples , and his disciples .
GOLD:	Then he took the seven loaves and the fish , thanked God for them , and broke them into pieces . He gave them to the disciples , who distributed the food to the crowd .

ID:	3127
INPUT:	Behin batean , Jaunaren aurrera aurkeztu ziren beraren zeruko zerbitzariak , eta han zen Satan ere .
PRED:	And the servants of the Lord stood before the Lord , and Satan was there .
GOLD:	One day the members of the heavenly court came again to present themselves before the Lord , and the Accuser , Satan , came with them .

ID:	3128
INPUT:	gizarte maltzur eta gaizto honen erdian garbi eta akats gabe , Jainkoaren seme-alaba errugabe , izan zaitezten ; gizarte honetan izarrek munduan bezala egiten duzue argi ,
PRED:	You are clean and wicked , and you are not pure , children of God , so that you may be guilty , just as the stars in this world .
GOLD:	so that no one can criticize you . Live clean , innocent lives as children of God , shining like bright lights in a world full of crooked and perverse people .

ID:	3129
INPUT:	Damaskorentzat
PRED:	Damascus and Damascus
GOLD:	A Message about Damascus

ID:	3130
INPUT:	Hogeita bat urte zituen Sedekiasek errege izaten hastean , eta hamaika urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen . Haren amak Hamutal zuen izena , eta Libnako Jeremiasen alaba zen .
PRED:	Zedekiah was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned two years in Jerusalem . His mother 's name was Kelita daughter of Jeremiah .
GOLD:	Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years . His mother was Hamutal , the daughter of Jeremiah from Libnah .

ID:	3131
INPUT:	Agian , atzera egineta damutuko da , eta ondasunez bedeinkatukozaituzte ostera . Orduan , labore-opariaketa isur-opariakegin ahal izango dizkiozueJaunari , zeuen Jainkoari .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , and it shall be blessed , and it shall be blessed , and it shall be blessed : and the Lord thy God shall bless thee , and the drink offering , and the drink offering of thy God .
GOLD:	Who knows ? Perhaps he will give you a reprieve , sending you a blessing instead of this curse.Perhaps you will be able to offer grain and wineto the Lord your God as before .

ID:	3132
INPUT:	Zeruak baino garaiagoa da : zer egingo duzu ? Leizeak baino sakonagoa : nola ezagutuko duzu ?
PRED:	It is better than the heavens , and what will you know ? How can you know how to know ?
GOLD:	Such knowledge is higher than the heavens — and who are you ? It is deeper than the underworld — what do you know ?

ID:	3133
INPUT:	Horra beren harrokeriagatikjasoko duten zigorra , Jaun ahalguztidunaren herriairaindu baitute eta gutxietsi .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of hosts says : “ The Lord of hosts will punish his people , because they have devoured him . ”
GOLD:	They will receive the wages of their pride , for they have scoffed at the people of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	3134
INPUT:	Barauaren barauz , zangoak koloka ditut , gorputza argal eta ihar .
PRED:	I will keep my statutes and my body , and my body will be filled with me .
GOLD:	My knees are weak from fasting , and I am skin and bones .

ID:	3135
INPUT:	Badakit , bai , handia dela Jauna , jainko guztien aldean handia gure Jauna .
PRED:	I know that the Lord is great , and the great God is great in all the earth .
GOLD:	I know the greatness of the Lord — that our Lord is greater than any other god .

ID:	3136
INPUT:	Oraingo honetan ez zaituztet bidenabar bakarrik ikusi nahi . Badut itxaropen luzaroxeago egongo naizela zuekin , Jaunak hala nahi badu .
PRED:	But now I will not see you in the way of the way . I will wait for you a long time , if I hope in you , the Lord will be with you .
GOLD:	This time I do n't want to make just a short visit and then go right on . I want to come and stay awhile , if the Lord will let me .

ID:	3137
INPUT:	Noiz arte horrela ? Zer dute buruan profeta horiek , gezurra eta beren burutazio hutsalak iragartzeko ?
PRED:	How long shall these prophets say in the book ? And what shall they say in their own heart ? and what shall they say in their own heart ?
GOLD:	How long will this go on ? If they are prophets , they are prophets of deceit , inventing everything they say .

ID:	3138
INPUT:	Ez zaitez bizkorregi haserretu , ergelena baita haserretzea .
PRED:	Do n't be angry , but do n't be angry .
GOLD:	Control your temper , for anger labels you a fool .

ID:	3139
INPUT:	Honela esaten zion Joanek bataiatzera zetorkion jendeari : « Sugekumeok ! Nork esan dizue gainean duzuen haserre-zigorrari ihes egingo diozuela ?
PRED:	John said to the people , “ You women , who told you that you will escape on the bed ?
GOLD:	When the crowds came to John for baptism , he said , “ You brood of snakes ! Who warned you to flee the coming wrath ?

ID:	3140
INPUT:	Neskatxa Pauloren eta gure atzetik zetorren , deiadarka : « Gizon hauek goi-goiko Jainkoaren zerbitzariak dira , eta salbamen-bidea iragartzen dizuete » .
PRED:	And when Paul and his mother came out of our midst , he cried out , saying , These men are the servants of God , and the way of the Most High God .
GOLD:	She followed Paul and the rest of us , shouting , “ These men are servants of the Most High God , and they have come to tell you how to be saved . ”

ID:	3141
INPUT:	Hala ere , zuei dagokizuenez , badut konfiantza Jaunak iritzi bereko egingo zaituztela gai honetan ; baina zuek nahasten zaituenak , edozein dela ere , izango du bere zigorra .
PRED:	But if I trust in you , I will put you in the Lord . But if you do this , you will be punished , you will be punished .
GOLD:	I am trusting the Lord to keep you from believing false teachings . God will judge that person , whoever he is , who has been confusing you .

ID:	3142
INPUT:	Joiakimen erregealdian guda-ateraldi bat egin zuen Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosorrek , eta Joiakim hiru urtez haren menpeko izan zen ; gero , hau berriro jaiki zen haren kontra .
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon made him king of Babylon for three years , and he rose up against him .
GOLD:	During Jehoiakim 's reign , King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon invaded the land of Judah . Jehoiakim surrendered and paid him tribute for three years but then rebelled .

ID:	3143
INPUT:	Hori dela eta , zuhurrak nahiago du isildugaiztoaldi honetan .
PRED:	This is what the mouth of the wise , and the mouth of the mouth of the mouth of the wicked .
GOLD:	So those who are smart keep their mouths shut , for it is an evil time .

ID:	3144
INPUT:	Oraindik hiritik urrutira gabe zeudela , Josek etxeko arduradunari esan zion : « Zoaz gizon horien atzetik eta , atzemandakoan , esaiezu : Zergatik itzuli duzue gaizkia ongiaren truke ?
PRED:	While he was still far away from the city , Joseph said to the elders of the house , “ Go out of the men , and say to him , ‘ Why do you give good to the man ? '
GOLD:	But when they had gone only a short distance and were barely out of the city , Joseph said to his palace manager , “ Chase after them and stop them . When you catch up with them , ask them , ‘ Why have you repaid my kindness with such evil ?

ID:	3145
INPUT:	« Bidali erbesteratu guztiei Nehlamgo Xemaiasi buruzko nire mezu hau : Nik bidalia izan gabe , nire izenean hitz egin eta gezurrezko konfiantza ematen dizuenez gero ,
PRED:	And he said unto all the others , Thus saith the king of Babylon , Thus saith the Lord , If ye prophesy not , and prophesy in my name , and in a lie , and in a lie ,
GOLD:	“ Send an open letter to all the exiles in Babylon . Tell them , ‘ This is what the Lord says concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite : Since he has prophesied to you when I did not send him and has tricked you into believing his lies ,

ID:	3146
INPUT:	Zortzigarren urtean berriro ereingo duzue ; baina bitartean , bederatzigarren urtean uzta bildu artean , uzta zaharretik jan ahal izango duzue .
PRED:	On the eighth day you shall sow , but in the seventh year you shall gather it in the seventh year , and you shall eat it .
GOLD:	When you plant your fields in the eighth year , you will still be eating from the large crop of the sixth year . In fact , you will still be eating from that large crop when the new crop is harvested in the ninth year .

ID:	3147
INPUT:	Zer ikustera irten zineten bestela ? Soineko apainez jantzitako gizona ? Jantzi apainekoak errege-jauregietan bizi ohi dira .
PRED:	What did the people go out to see ? Is the priest clothed in clothes ? The priests live in the royal palace .
GOLD:	Or were you expecting to see a man dressed in expensive clothes ? No , people with expensive clothes live in palaces .

ID:	3148
INPUT:	Bere zaldien apa<unk> kale guztiak zanpatuko dizkizu , bizilagunak ezpataz garbitukoeta zutabe sendoakbotako behera .
PRED:	And all his horses shall be cut off , and all his men shall be washed with the sword , and all his inhabitants shall be cut off .
GOLD:	His horsemen will trample through every street in the city . They will butcher your people , and your strong pillars will topple .

ID:	3149
INPUT:	Bere etxea ongi gobernatzen eta seme-alabak mendetasunean eta errespetuan hezten jakin behar du ;
PRED:	He shall know his own house , and he shall know his children , and his children , and his children in the midst of his children .
GOLD:	He must manage his own family well , having children who respect and obey him .

ID:	3150
INPUT:	Eta erantsi zuen : — Gizakiaren barrutik irteten denak , horrek bai egiten duela gizakia zikin !
PRED:	And he said , “ All who go out of the spirit of man came out of the spirit of man . ”
GOLD:	And then he added , “ It is what comes from inside that defiles you .

ID:	3151
INPUT:	Akazia-zurezko mahaia egin zuen : metro bat luze , metro erdi bat zabal eta hirurogeita hamabost zentimetro gora .
PRED:	And he made the table of acacia wood , five cubits long , and a half cubits high , and a half cubits high .
GOLD:	Then Bezalel made the table of acacia wood , 36 inches long , 18 inches wide , and 27 inches high .

ID:	3152
INPUT:	Zeure oinak galbidean jartzen bazaitu , moztu ; hobe duzu hankamotz betiko bizitzan sartu , bi oinekin infernura jaurtia izan baino . (
PRED:	If your feet are cut off , cut off your feet . It is better for you to enter into eternal life than for ever .
GOLD:	If your foot causes you to sin , cut it off . It 's better to enter eternal life with only one foot than to be thrown into hell with two feet .

ID:	3153
INPUT:	Hori ikusi zuen gizon batek adierazi zion Joabi : — Absalom arteondo batetik zintzilik ikusi dut .
PRED:	When a man saw this , a man said to Joab , “ I have seen you alone from the garden of Absalom . ”
GOLD:	One of David 's men saw what had happened and told Joab , “ I saw Absalom dangling from a great tree . ”

ID:	3154
INPUT:	<unk> TU ERA<unk> DEEN <unk> TOLAKUNTZA ( 35 , 1 — 40 , 38 )
PRED:	The Temple of Jerusalem
GOLD:	Instructions for the Sabbath

ID:	3155
INPUT:	ez du inor zapaltzen eta bahituran hartua itzuli egiten du ; ez du lapurretarik egiten , baizik eta jatekoa ematen dio gosetuari , eta jantzia biluzik dagoenari ;
PRED:	He does not let anyone go back into the city , but he does not break it , but he does not eat it , and he gives it to the hungry , and he gives it to the hungry .
GOLD:	He is a merciful creditor , not keeping the items given as security by poor debtors . He does not rob the poor but instead gives food to the hungry and provides clothes for the needy .

ID:	3156
INPUT:	Bekarzkigute bi zekor . Aukera bezate horiek bat , zatikatu eta ezar bezate egur-sortaren gainean , baina surik eman gabe . Nik ere horixe bera eginen dut beste zekorrarekin : egur-sortaren gainean ezarri , baina surik eman gabe .
PRED:	Let them bring two rams . They are like a young bull , and they have no fire on the top of the earth , but I will do this to them , but I will make a bull on the altar , but there is no fire on it .
GOLD:	Now bring two bulls . The prophets of Baal may choose whichever one they wish and cut it into pieces and lay it on the wood of their altar , but without setting fire to it . I will prepare the other bull and lay it on the wood on the altar , but not set fire to it .

ID:	3157
INPUT:	Hitz hauek esan ondoren , Jerusalemera bidean gora jarraitu zuen Jesusek , denen aurretik .
PRED:	When Jesus had said these things , he went up to Jerusalem , and followed him .
GOLD:	After telling this story , Jesus went on toward Jerusalem , walking ahead of his disciples .

ID:	3158
INPUT:	Handia da zuengan dudan konfiantza eta harro nago zuengatik . Adorez betea nago eta pozez gainezka neure atsekabe guztien artean .
PRED:	I trust in you , and I trust in you , and I am filled with joy and joy .
GOLD:	I have the highest confidence in you , and I take great pride in you . You have greatly encouraged me and made me happy despite all our troubles .

ID:	3159
INPUT:	Aholkatu behin eta berriz gauza hauek , akats gabeak izan daitezen .
PRED:	But these things must be forgiven , so that they may be without blemish .
GOLD:	Give these instructions to the church so that no one will be open to criticism .

ID:	3160
INPUT:	<unk> gauean , nire jabea den eta nik zerbitzatzen dudan Jainkoaren aingerua agertu zait ,
PRED:	In the night , the angel of God appeared to me , and the angel of God appeared to me .
GOLD:	For last night an angel of the God to whom I belong and whom I serve stood beside me ,

ID:	3161
INPUT:	Israeldarrek , indartsuago egin zirenean , esklabo-lanetara behartu zituzten kanaandarrak , baina ezin izan zituzten handik egotzi .
PRED:	And when the children of Israel became strong , the Canaanites took them out of the land of Canaan , but they could not leave them .
GOLD:	Later , however , when the Israelites became strong enough , they forced the Canaanites to work as slaves . But they did not drive them out of the land .

ID:	3162
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak setatsu bihurtu zuen faraoia , israeldarrei joaten ez uzteko .
PRED:	But the Lord made Pharaoh wise , so that he would not let the children of Israel go .
GOLD:	But the Lord hardened Pharaoh 's heart again , so he refused to let the people go .

ID:	3163
INPUT:	Israeldarrek , berriz , esan zioten Jaunari : « Bekatu egin dugu , bai . Egizu gurekin egokien iruditzen zaizuna . Baina gaur bederen salba gaitzazu ! »
PRED:	But the children of Israel said to the Lord , “ We have sinned , and we have sinned against you , but now we will save you today . ”
GOLD:	But the Israelites pleaded with the Lord and said , “ We have sinned . Punish us as you see fit , only rescue us today from our enemies . ”

ID:	3164
INPUT:	Jakin behar duzue , senideok , bizi dudan egoera berri onaren aurrerapenerako lagungarri gertatu dela .
PRED:	But you must know , brothers and sisters , that I have heard that I am alive before the Good News .
GOLD:	And I want you to know , my dear brothers and sisters , that everything that has happened to me here has helped to spread the Good News .

ID:	3165
INPUT:	« Zergatik eman argia zoritxarrekoari , zergatik bizia atsekabea baizik ez dutenei ?
PRED:	“ Why do you give light to the light , but for those who do evil ?
GOLD:	“ Oh , why give light to those in misery , and life to those who are bitter ?

ID:	3166
INPUT:	Jende guztiak Jesus ukitu nahi zuen , denak sendatzen zituen halako indar bat baitzerion .
PRED:	And all the crowds wanted to touch him , because he had healed all of them .
GOLD:	Everyone tried to touch him , because healing power went out from him , and he healed everyone .

ID:	3167
INPUT:	Jainkoa dut lekuko ez diodala gezurrik idazten dizuedan honetan .
PRED:	I will not write to you in this place that I write to you in this place .
GOLD:	I declare before God that what I am writing to you is not a lie .

ID:	3168
INPUT:	Egiptotik , burdina urtzeko labe hartatik , atera nituenean , zuen gurasoekin egin nuen ituna bera da . Orduan agindu nien : “ Nire mintzoa aditu eta nik agindutako guztia betetzen baduzue , nire herri izango zarete eta ni zuen Jainko ,
PRED:	And when I brought them out of the land of Egypt , I made a covenant with your fathers , saying , If ye hear my voice , and keep my voice , and do all that I commanded you , and ye shall be my people , and I will be my people .
GOLD:	For I said to your ancestors when I brought them out of the iron-smelting furnace of Egypt , “ If you obey me and do whatever I command you , then you will be my people , and I will be your God . ”

ID:	3169
INPUT:	Hain zuzen , hauxe eskatu genizun Egipton geundela : « Utzi egiptoarrentzat lanean jarraitzen . Hobe dugu hemen esklabo izan , basamortuan hil baino » .
PRED:	So we asked you , “ Let us live in the land of Egypt , and we are slaves in the wilderness . ”
GOLD:	Did n't we tell you this would happen while we were still in Egypt ? We said , ‘ Leave us alone ! Let us be slaves to the Egyptians . It 's better to be a slave in Egypt than a corpse in the wilderness ! ' ”

ID:	3170
INPUT:	Salba nazazu , ene Jainko , zarena zarelako ! Defenda nazazu zeure ahalmenaz !
PRED:	You are my God , my God , for you are my God , for you are my strength .
GOLD:	For strangers are attacking me ; violent people are trying to kill me.They care nothing for God.Interlude

ID:	3171
INPUT:	Egiptoarrak gizaki dira , ez jainko , haien zaldiak hezur eta mami huts , ez espiritu . Luzatuko du Jaunak eskua , eta babeslea nahiz babestuabiak eroriko dira , biak batera galduko .
PRED:	And the Egyptians shall not make their gods , and their horses , and their flesh , and their hand shall be stretched out , and their hand shall be cut off , and the other shall be destroyed .
GOLD:	For these Egyptians are mere humans , not God ! Their horses are puny flesh , not mighty spirits ! When the Lord raises his fist against them , those who help will stumble , and those being helped will fall.They will all fall down and die together .

ID:	3172
INPUT:	Izan ere , ongi finkaturiko arrazoien bidez egiten zien aurre juduei denen aurrean , Liburu Santuen bidez Jesus zela Mesias frogatuz .
PRED:	For he made a witness against the Jews , before the Jews , that Jesus was the Messiah .
GOLD:	He refuted the Jews with powerful arguments in public debate . Using the Scriptures , he explained to them that Jesus was the Messiah .

ID:	3173
INPUT:	JA<unk> DURIA ( 28 , <unk> )
PRED:	The King of Haman
GOLD:	Job Speaks of Wisdom and Understanding

ID:	3174
INPUT:	Jesus Kafarnaum herrian sartu zenean , erromatar ehuntari bat hurbildu zitzaion
PRED:	And when Jesus came into Capernaum , a centurion of the centurion , came near to him ,
GOLD:	When Jesus returned to Capernaum , a Roman officer came and pleaded with him ,

ID:	3175
INPUT:	Beldurra sartu nahi ziguten , adorea galdu eta lana utziko genuen ustetan . « Eta orain , Jauna , sendotu nire asmoa ! »
PRED:	And when they were afraid , we thought , “ Lord , ” and we thought , “ now , Lord , help me ! ”
GOLD:	They were just trying to intimidate us , imagining that they could discourage us and stop the work . So I continued the work with even greater determination .

ID:	3176
INPUT:	Horrela , etsaiek atzerriratuko dituzten lurralde horretan , beren bihotz osoz eta gogo guztiz zuregana itzuli eta beren gurasoei eman zenien lurralderantz begira , zuk hautatu duzun hirirantz eta nik eraiki dizudan tenplurantz begira , otoitz egiten badizute ,
PRED:	So they will bring them back to you in this land , with all their heart , with all their heart , with all their heart , and with all their heart , and with all their heart , and they will pray to you , and to the city which I have built for you .
GOLD:	If they turn to you with their whole heart and soul in the land of their captivity and pray toward the land you gave to their ancestors — toward this city you have chosen , and toward this Temple I have built to honor your name —

ID:	3177
INPUT:	Eta israeldarrakberriro jabetu ahal izango diraEdom lurraldetiketa nireak izan dirennazio guztietatikgeratzen denaz . Hala diot nik , hori guztia egingo du<unk> honek » .
PRED:	And the children of Israel shall inherit the land of Edom , and the land of Edom , and the land of Edom , and all the countries of the nations , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	And Israel will possess what is left of Edomand all the nations I have called to be mine . ” The Lord has spoken , and he will do these things .

ID:	3178
INPUT:	Judara iritsiko da , urpean hartuko du , dena leporaino estaliko . Haren ur-adarrekluze-zabal osoanestaliko dute zure lurraldea , oi Emmanuel ! »
PRED:	And Judah shall come to the land of Judah , and he shall take hold of it ; and his heart shall be filled with his mouth , and his heart shall be filled with thee .
GOLD:	and sweep into Judah until it is chin deep . It will spread its wings , submerging your land from one end to the other , O Immanuel .

ID:	3179
INPUT:	SARRERA ( 1 , <unk> )
PRED:	The Good News of God
GOLD:	God 's Good News

ID:	3180
INPUT:	Orduan , adarrak ekartzera joan eta etxolak egin zituen herriak : batak bere etxe gainean , besteak Jainkoaren etxeko atarietan nahiz Ur-ateko plazan nahiz Efraimen ateko plazan .
PRED:	Then the people went and set their tents on the roof of the house of God , and the rest on the roof of the house of God , and in the gates of Ephraim , and in the gates of Ephraim .
GOLD:	So the people went out and cut branches and used them to build shelters on the roofs of their houses , in their courtyards , in the courtyards of God 's Temple , or in the squares just inside the Water Gate and the Ephraim Gate .

ID:	3181
INPUT:	Zorionaren zain , eta zoritxarra etorri zait ; argia itxaroten , eta iluntasuna iritsi .
PRED:	Blessed are the glory of the Lord , and came upon me , and the darkness came into darkness .
GOLD:	So I looked for good , but evil came instead.I waited for the light , but darkness fell .

ID:	3182
INPUT:	bide latzetan sendo ezarri ditut oinak ; zure arrastotik ez dira aldendu nire urratsak .
PRED:	I have set my feet on the road , and my feet have not turned away from my sheep .
GOLD:	My steps have stayed on your path ; I have not wavered from following you .

ID:	3183
INPUT:	Zergatik mintzo den Jesus parabola bidez
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Parable of the Yeast

ID:	3184
INPUT:	Horregatik , honela dio Jaunak : « Hara , zorigaitza dara<unk> gogoanjende horren kontra ; ezin izango dute handik lepoa atera , ezta burua tente ibili ere , zorigaitz-egunak izango baitira » .
PRED:	Therefore thus says the Lord : “ Behold , there will be a curse against the people of Assyria , and they will not go out from the neck , and they will not go out from the neck , for it will be a day to pass . ”
GOLD:	But this is what the Lord says : “ I will reward your evil with evil ; you wo n't be able to pull your neck out of the noose.You will no longer walk around proudly , for it will be a terrible time . ”

ID:	3185
INPUT:	Egun txarraketorraraziko dizkizue Jaunakzuri , zeure herriari eta familiari , Israelgo erreinua Judarengandikbereizi zenez geroizan ez diren bezalako egunak ; hots , Asiriako erregeabidaliko dizue .
PRED:	On that day the Lord will bring disaster on your people , and to your fathers , and to your fathers , and to your fathers , as in the midst of the house of Judah , in the midst of the house of Assyria , and in the midst of the king of Assyria .
GOLD:	“ Then the Lord will bring things on you , your nation , and your family unlike anything since Israel broke away from Judah . He will bring the king of Assyria upon you ! ”

ID:	3186
INPUT:	Orduan , Saulek mandatariak igorri zizkion Jeseri , esatera : « Bidal iezadazu artzain dabilen zeure seme David » .
PRED:	Then Saul sent messengers to Jericho , saying , “ Send David your son . ”
GOLD:	So Saul sent messengers to Jesse to say , “ Send me your son David , the shepherd . ”

ID:	3187
INPUT:	Mexulam , Abias , Miiamin ,
PRED:	Elioenai , Jozabad , Jozabad ,
GOLD:	Maaziah , Bilgai , and Shemaiah . These were the priests .

ID:	3188
INPUT:	Bai , libratu dit bizia heriotzatik , begiak negarretik , oinak erortzetik .
PRED:	He saved me from death , from death , from death , from the feet of death .
GOLD:	He has saved me from death , my eyes from tears , my feet from stumbling .

ID:	3189
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Oraindik pixka batean argia zeuen artean duzue ; ibili argia duzuen bitartean , ilunpeak harrapa ez zaitzaten , ilunpetan dabilenak ez baitaki nora doan .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ While you are still still still still still among you , you will be light among you . You will not be put in darkness , because you do not send darkness into the darkness .
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ My light will shine for you just a little longer . Walk in the light while you can , so the darkness will not overtake you . Those who walk in the darkness can not see where they are going .

ID:	3190
INPUT:	Etsaiak begira ditut , niri zelatan daudenek elkar hartu dute .
PRED:	My enemies have looked at me , and all of them have turned away from me .
GOLD:	For my enemies are whispering against me.They are plotting together to kill me .

ID:	3191
INPUT:	Gogoan ditut , Jauna , zure egintza handiak , gogoan , bai , zure aspaldiko mirariak .
PRED:	I remember your great works , O Lord , and I remember your wonders .
GOLD:	They are constantly in my thoughts.I can not stop thinking about your mighty works .

ID:	3192
INPUT:	Eta geldi litekeen zilar eta urrearekin , zeuk eta zure ahaideek hobekien deritzozuena egingo duzu , zeuen Jainkoaren borondatearen arabera .
PRED:	And thou shalt make the silver and gold , and the gold , and all thy brethren shall do according to the work of thy God , according to the work of thy God .
GOLD:	Any silver and gold that is left over may be used in whatever way you and your colleagues feel is the will of your God .

ID:	3193
INPUT:	Lurraldearen banaketa zozketaz bakarrik egingo da , leinu bakoitzeko senitarteen ondare-zatia lagun-kopuruaren araberakoa izango bada ere .
PRED:	And the inheritance of the land shall be given to the possession of the tribes of the tribe of the children of Israel according to their inheritance , according to their inheritance .
GOLD:	But you must assign the land by lot , and give land to each ancestral tribe according to the number of names on the list .

ID:	3194
INPUT:	Desbideraturik dabiltza gaizkileak ; onginahia eta leialtasuna ongileentzat .
PRED:	The way of the wicked are evil , but the good is good and truth .
GOLD:	If you plan to do evil , you will be lost ; if you plan to do good , you will receive unfailing love and faithfulness .

ID:	3195
INPUT:	Zaturenak <unk> ;
PRED:	The sons of Pashhur , three hundred and twenty .
GOLD:	The family of Zattu945

ID:	3196
INPUT:	Efraimekin batera Manases eta Benjaminen leinuak etxolatuko dira . Manasestarren buruzagia Pedahtzurren seme Gameliel izango da ,
PRED:	And the sons of Ephraim shall go out with them , and the sons of Manasseh : and the prince of Manasseh shall be ruler over the children of Manasseh .
GOLD:	ManassehGamaliel son of Pedahzur32,200

ID:	3197
INPUT:	Jauna Sinai mendiaren gailurrera jaitsi eta bertara dei egin zion Moisesi . Igo zen Moises ,
PRED:	And the Lord came down to the top of Mount Sinai , and he called to Moses . And Moses went up to the top of the mountain .
GOLD:	The Lord came down on the top of Mount Sinai and called Moses to the top of the mountain . So Moses climbed the mountain .

ID:	3198
INPUT:	Hona hemen Jaunak Amotzen seme Isaiasi Juda eta Jerusalemi buruz agertu zion mezua , Uzias , Jotam , Akaz eta Ezekias Judako errege zirela .
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to Hezekiah the son of Uzziah , and to Jerusalem , and to Hezekiah the son of Uzziah , king of Judah , and Hezekiah king of Judah .
GOLD:	These are the visions that Isaiah son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem . He saw these visions during the years when Uzziah , Jotham , Ahaz , and Hezekiah were kings of Judah .

ID:	3199
INPUT:	Pilatok esan zion : — Ez al duzu ezer erantzun behar ? Begira zenbat gauzaz salatzen zaituzten .
PRED:	Pilate said to him , “ Do n't you answer ? What do you answer ? Look at the night ? ”
GOLD:	and Pilate asked him , “ Are n't you going to answer them ? What about all these charges they are bringing against you ? ”

ID:	3200
INPUT:	Haiek , Jesus ahuspez gurtu ondoren , Jerusalemera itzuli ziren poz-pozik .
PRED:	And when they had bowed down , they returned to Jerusalem , and returned to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	So they worshiped him and then returned to Jerusalem filled with great joy .

ID:	3201
INPUT:	eta honela mintzatu zitzaien : « Zergatik ari zarete jendeak adierazi dizkidan gauza izugarri horiek egiten ?
PRED:	He said to them , “ Why are you doing these things ?
GOLD:	Eli said to them , “ I have been hearing reports from all the people about the wicked things you are doing . Why do you keep sinning ?

ID:	3202
INPUT:	« Ez gaitzetsi inor »
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Do Not Judge Others

ID:	3203
INPUT:	Agripak Festori esan zion : — Gizon hau aska zitekeen , enperadoreagana jo izan ez balu .
PRED:	Then Micaiah said to him , “ There were many men who had not turned to Caesar . ”
GOLD:	And Agrippa said to Festus , “ He could have been set free if he had n't appealed to Caesar . ”

ID:	3204
INPUT:	Mikak erantzun : — Neuk egindako jainko-irudiak eta apaiza osturik zoazte ; ezer gabe utzi nauzue , eta zer dudan galdetu , gainera ?
PRED:	Micaiah said to them , “ I have made idols and priests , and you have left me . What do you want me to ask me ? ”
GOLD:	“ What do you mean , ‘ What 's the matter ? ' ” Micah replied . “ You 've taken away all the gods I have made , and my priest , and I have nothing left ! ”

ID:	3205
INPUT:	Jehu jaiki eta etxean sartu zen . Orduan , profetak olioa isuri zion buru gainera , esanez : « Hau dio Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak : “ Ene herri Israelen errege gantzutzen zaitut ” .
PRED:	And he rose up and went into his house . And he poured out the oil on his head , and said , Thus saith the Lord God of Israel , I have anointed you king over Israel .
GOLD:	So Jehu left the others and went into the house . Then the young prophet poured the oil over Jehu 's head and said , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : I anoint you king over the Lord 's people , Israel .

ID:	3206
INPUT:	Datorrela , bai , zuzenbideaura bezala , datorrela justizia , beti darion erreka bezala .
PRED:	As soon as he comes , he is righteous , just as he is righteous forever .
GOLD:	Instead , I want to see a mighty flood of justice , an endless river of righteous living .

ID:	3207
INPUT:	Bere seme Isaak eta Ismaelek ehortzi zuten Makpelako harpean , Tzohar hititaren seme Efronen soroan , Mambreren aurrez aurre .
PRED:	His son Isaac and his sons were buried in the field of Mamre , in the field of Ephraim , in the field of Ephraim , in the field of Ephraim .
GOLD:	His sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah , near Mamre , in the field of Ephron son of Zohar the Hittite .

ID:	3208
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Nik testigantza neure buruaren alde egiten badut ere , nire testigantzak balio du , ongi baitakit nik nondik etorria naizen eta nora noan ; baina zuek ez dakizue , ez nondik natorren , ez nora noan .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ If I bear witness for myself , I know where my testimony has come , I know where I came , and where I came , you do n't know where I came . ”
GOLD:	Jesus told them , “ These claims are valid even though I make them about myself . For I know where I came from and where I am going , but you do n't know this about me .

ID:	3209
INPUT:	Herri berria sortuko
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	The Scattering of the Sheep

ID:	3210
INPUT:	Gau hartan bertan , Jaunaren aingeruak ehun eta laurogeita bost mila gizon jo eta hil zituen asiriarren kanpalekuan ; denak hilda aurkitu zituzten biharamun goizean , jaiki zirenean .
PRED:	And the angel of the Lord came to pass in that night , that night , behold , the angel of the Syrians , and struck them in the camp of the Philistines , and they found them in the camp of the Syrians . And they rose up early in the morning .
GOLD:	That night the angel of the Lord went out to the Assyrian camp and killed 185,000 Assyrian soldiers . When the surviving Assyrians woke up the next morning , they found corpses everywhere .

ID:	3211
INPUT:	Herrian behartsuakzapaltzen dituztela , gogorki epaitzeneta zuzenbidea desegiten dutelaikusten baduzu , ez harritu horregatik . Handikiak , beste handikiago batdu babesle , eta biok , goitiago daudenak dituzte babesle .
PRED:	But if you see the poor in the land , and judge the judgment and justice , you do not know what is right , and there is no more more than all of them .
GOLD:	Talk is cheap , like daydreams and other useless activities . Fear God instead .

ID:	3212
INPUT:	« Hilobian amaitzen da gaiztoen zalapartaeta han aurkitzen atseden indargetuek ;
PRED:	“ The evil person is in the tomb , and the power of the wicked is in the grave .
GOLD:	For in death the wicked cause no trouble , and the weary are at rest .

ID:	3213
INPUT:	Zoazte , bada , Xiloko nire santutegira , antzina nire egoitza izateko aukeratu nuen tokira ; ikusi zer egin nion , neure herri Israelen gaiztakeriagatik .
PRED:	Go to Shiloh , and see my holy place , that I might see what I had done for my people Israel .
GOLD:	“ ‘ Go now to the place at Shiloh where I once put the Tabernacle that bore my name . See what I did there because of all the wickedness of my people , the Israelites .

ID:	3214
INPUT:	Apostoluek , itzultzean , egin zuten guztia kontatu zioten Jesusi . Orduan , haiek berekin hartu eta Betsaida zeritzan herrialdera joan zen bakarrik .
PRED:	And when the apostles returned , they told him all that they had done , they took him , and went into the land of their enemies .
GOLD:	When the apostles returned , they told Jesus everything they had done . Then he slipped quietly away with them toward the town of Bethsaida .

ID:	3215
INPUT:	« Jakin beza ongi , beraz , Israel herri osoak Jaun eta Mesias egin duela Jainkoak , zuek gurutziltzatu zenuten Jesus hau » .
PRED:	“ Let all the people of Israel know that the Lord has done this , and you crucified Jesus . ”
GOLD:	“ So let everyone in Israel know for certain that God has made this Jesus , whom you crucified , to be both Lord and Messiah ! ”

ID:	3216
INPUT:	Honela esan baitigu Jaunak : « Nazioen argitzat ezarri zaitut , salbamena lurraren bazterreraino eraman dezazun » .
PRED:	The Lord said , “ I have set you a light for the nations , so that you may be saved from the earth to the end of the earth . ”
GOLD:	For the Lord gave us this command when he said , ‘ I have made you a light to the Gentiles , to bring salvation to the farthest corners of the earth . ' ”

ID:	3217
INPUT:	hautsak lokatz bihurtueta zokorrak elkar batu daitezen ?
PRED:	Can the dust be turned away from the dust , and let them be put to shame ?
GOLD:	when the parched ground is dryand the soil has hardened into clods ?

ID:	3218
INPUT:	Orduan , Zorobabel eta familiaburuengana hurbildurik , esan zieten : — Zuekin lan egin nahi genuke ; geuk ere zuen Jainkoa gurtzen baitugu eta berari eskaintzen dizkiogu opariak , Asiriako errege Asarhadonek hona ekarri gintuenez geroztik .
PRED:	And they came to the heads of the fathers and the families of the fathers ' houses , and said unto them , We will serve you , for God is our God , and we will serve you , and we will serve him , and the burnt offerings of the king of Assyria .
GOLD:	So they approached Zerubbabel and the other leaders and said , “ Let us build with you , for we worship your God just as you do . We have sacrificed to him ever since King Esarhaddon of Assyria brought us here . ”

ID:	3219
INPUT:	Hau al da mundua basamortueta hiriak errauts bihurtzen zituena ? Hau gatibuak sekulaaskatzen ez zituena ? ”
PRED:	Is this this this the world that is in the wilderness , and the cities of ashes , and the cities that are not redeemed ?
GOLD:	Is this the one who destroyed the worldand made it into a wasteland ? Is this the king who demolished the world 's greatest citiesand had no mercy on his prisoners ? '

ID:	3220
INPUT:	zabaldu haren ospea atzerrietan , haren mirariak herri guztietan !
PRED:	His glory is spread in all the nations , and his wonders is in all the peoples .
GOLD:	Publish his glorious deeds among the nations.Tell everyone about the amazing things he does .

ID:	3221
INPUT:	Txerri-talde handia zebilen mendi inguru hartan , uxarrean .
PRED:	And the multitude of the herd were round about the mountain round about , and they were filled with water .
GOLD:	There happened to be a large herd of pigs feeding on the hillside nearby .

ID:	3222
INPUT:	Aarondar apaizok , izan konfiantza Jaunarengan : bera duzue laguntzaile eta babesle !
PRED:	The priests of Aaron , in the Lord , in the Lord , you are his shield and his shield .
GOLD:	O priests , descendants of Aaron , trust the Lord ! He is your helper and your shield .

ID:	3223
INPUT:	Jauna , Jainko ahalguztiduna , Israelen Jainkoa , susper zaitez sinesgabeok zigortzeko , ez izan traidore zital horien gupidarik .
PRED:	O Lord God of hosts , God of hosts , be a God of Israel , that you may not be put to death ; for there is no root among them .
GOLD:	They come out at night , snarling like vicious dogsas they prowl the streets .

ID:	3224
INPUT:	Jesusek negarrari eman zion .
PRED:	And Jesus gave him a loud voice .
GOLD:	Then Jesus wept .

ID:	3225
INPUT:	Nahigabetu egin zen Samuel « izenda iezaguzu errege bat , gida gaitzan » esan ziotenean . Eta otoitz egin zion Jaunari .
PRED:	Samuel was very angry , and he said , “ Let us reign over us . ” So he prayed to the Lord .
GOLD:	Samuel was displeased with their request and went to the Lord for guidance .

ID:	3226
INPUT:	Etiopiar eta libiar gudarostea ere izugarria zen , beren guda-gurdi eta zalditeria handiarekin , eta Jaunak , bera hartu zenuelako lagun , eskuetara eman zizkizun .
PRED:	Your army was a great army , a great army , a great army , a great army , and a great army , and the Lord delivered them into your hand .
GOLD:	Do n't you remember what happened to the Ethiopians and Libyans and their vast army , with all of their chariots and charioteers ? At that time you relied on the Lord , and he handed them over to you .

ID:	3227
INPUT:	Saul eta zure anaiak eta israeldar guztiak Terebinto haranean daude filistearren aurka borrokan .
PRED:	And Saul and his brothers , and all Israel in Asia , are in Asia , and all the children of Israel with the Philistines .
GOLD:	David 's brothers were with Saul and the Israelite army at the valley of Elah , fighting against the Philistines .

ID:	3228
INPUT:	Izan ere , bazituen erregeak , Huram erregearen itsasontziekin batera , Tarsisera joan ohi ziren merkataritza-ontziak ; hiru urtez behin , ur handietako merkataritza-ontzi haiek urrez , zilarrez , marfilez , tximinoz eta indioilarrez beteak itzuli ohi ziren .
PRED:	And the king went with him in the sea of the king of Assyria , and with the merchants of the merchants of the merchants , and of gold , and of gold , and of gold , and of gold , and of gold , and of gold , and of gold , and of gold , and of gold , and of gold , and of gold , and of gold .
GOLD:	The king had a fleet of trading ships of Tarshish manned by the sailors sent by Hiram . Once every three years the ships returned , loaded with gold , silver , ivory , apes , and peacocks .

ID:	3229
INPUT:	Horregatik diotsuet : Otoitzean eskatzen duzuen edozer gauza , sinetsi lortu duzuela , eta emango dizue Jainkoak .
PRED:	Therefore I say to you , you pray , because you have believed what you have believed , and God will give you .
GOLD:	I tell you , you can pray for anything , and if you believe that you 've received it , it will be yours .

ID:	3230
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , proposatu alegia edo parabola bat Israel herriari ,
PRED:	“ Son of man , you are to take a vow from the house of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , give this riddle , and tell this story to the people of Israel .

ID:	3231
INPUT:	Izan ere , miragarriro sendaturiko gizonak bazituen berrogeitik gora urte .
PRED:	For the man who had been healed from thirty years old when he had been healed .
GOLD:	for this miraculous sign — the healing of a man who had been lame for more than forty years .

ID:	3232
INPUT:	Brontzezko hamar ur-ontzi ere egin zituen , orga bakoitzerako bana ; bina metroko diametroa zuten , eta mila eta seiehuna litro ur hartzen .
PRED:	And he made ten bronze bases of bronze , and the breadth of the one side was five cubits , and the breadth thereof was five cubits , and the breadth of pure water .
GOLD:	Huram also made ten smaller bronze basins , one for each cart . Each basin was six feet across and could hold 220 gallons of water .

ID:	3233
INPUT:	Orduan , Temango Elifazek esan zuen .
PRED:	Then Eliphaz answered , and said to him , “ You are my God . ”
GOLD:	Then Eliphaz the Temanite replied to Job :

ID:	3234
INPUT:	Etengabe egin behar zutela otoitz eta ez zutela etsi behar adierazteko , parabola hau esan zien Jesusek :
PRED:	And when they had no need to pray , he told them that they should not be able to pray , saying ,
GOLD:	One day Jesus told his disciples a story to show that they should always pray and never give up .

ID:	3235
INPUT:	Gero , Eliasek esan zion Akabi : — Zoaz jatera eta edatera , zaparrada handi baten hotsa sumatzen da eta .
PRED:	Then Elijah said to Ahab , “ Go and eat and drink and drink it , and it is a great voice . ”
GOLD:	Then Elijah said to Ahab , “ Go get something to eat and drink , for I hear a mighty rainstorm coming ! ”

ID:	3236
INPUT:	Orduan , ozenki deiadar egiten entzun nuen Jauna : « Hurbildu hiriaren zigortzaileok , bakoitza bere arma suntsitzailearekin ! »
PRED:	Then I heard the voice of the Lord , saying , “ Come near to the city , every man his mother 's mother . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord thundered , “ Bring on the men appointed to punish the city ! Tell them to bring their weapons with them ! ”

ID:	3237
INPUT:	Edozein haritzeta zuhaitz handiren azpianberotzen zarete lizunkeriatan ; erreka ondoko haitzarteetanhiltzen dituzue umeak oparitzat .
PRED:	You are to kill every tree and every green tree in every green tree . You are to kill every green tree . You are to kill the burnt offering .
GOLD:	You worship your idols with great passionbeneath the oaks and under every green tree.You sacrifice your children down in the valleys , among the jagged rocks in the cliffs .

ID:	3238
INPUT:	Emagaldua ogi-zati batez asetzen baita , baina adulteriogileak bizitza osoa harrapatzen du .
PRED:	For a woman is hungry by a man , but the whole soul has committed adultery .
GOLD:	For a prostitute will bring you to poverty , but sleeping with another man 's wife will cost you your life .

ID:	3239
INPUT:	iparraldeko herriei eta Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosor nire zerbitzariari deituko diet herrialde honen aurka , eta hemengo bizilagunen eta inguruko herrien aurka bidaliko . Erabat suntsituko ditut eta betiko eremu eta hondakin bihurtuko , jendearen iseka-gai .
PRED:	I will call my servant Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon , and I will send my servant Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon to this land , and to all the inhabitants of the land , and to destroy them , and to destroy them , and to destroy them , and to destroy them .
GOLD:	I will gather together all the armies of the north under King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon , whom I have appointed as my deputy . I will bring them all against this land and its people and against the surrounding nations . I will completely destroy you and make you an object of horror and contempt and a ruin forever .

ID:	3240
INPUT:	Gogora ezazue Akan , Zerahen semea . Ez zuen leial jokatu , Jerikon dena suntsitzeko agindua hautsi zuelako , eta Israel herri osoak jasan behar izan zuen Jaunaren haserrea , erruduna bera bakarrik izan arren » .
PRED:	Remember what the Lord had commanded you to do . Do n't do what he had commanded you to destroy Jericho , because all the people of Israel would be angry with him . ”
GOLD:	Did n't divine anger fall on the entire community of Israel when Achan , a member of the clan of Zerah , sinned by stealing the things set apart for the Lord ? He was not the only one who died because of his sin . ”

ID:	3241
INPUT:	Eta Jesu Kristorenak direnek gurutzean hilarazi dute bekatuzko beren giza izaera beronen gurari eta grinekin .
PRED:	And those who are in Christ Jesus will be put to death in the third day of their own flesh , and in their flesh .
GOLD:	Those who belong to Christ Jesus have nailed the passions and desires of their sinful nature to his cross and crucified them there .

ID:	3242
INPUT:	Sar bedi etsaia mahastianeta hondatu , baina erabat deuseztatu ez ! Erauz bitza mahats-aihenak , ez baitira nireak !
PRED:	Let them enter into the vineyard , and destroy them , but let them destroy them ; for they have not been cut off ; for they are not mine .
GOLD:	“ Go down the rows of the vineyards and destroy the grapevines , leaving a scattered few alive.Strip the branches from the vines , for these people do not belong to the Lord .

ID:	3243
INPUT:	Pedro , Jesusi urrutitik jarraituz , apaiz nagusiaren jauregiraino joan eta , barrura sarturik , morroiekin eseri zen , hura guztia zertan amaitzen zen ikusteko .
PRED:	And Peter departed from him , and went into the house of the high priest , and came into the house of the high priest , and sat down with the servant , and when he saw all these things .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Peter followed him at a distance and came to the high priest 's courtyard . He went in and sat with the guards and waited to see how it would all end .

ID:	3244
INPUT:	Gure aitaren senitartean denok merezi genuen heriotza zure eskutik , ene errege jauna . Baina zeure mahaian jarri ninduzun , zeure zerbitzari hau . Ba ote dut oraindik eskubiderik erregeari zerbait eskatzeko ? »
PRED:	But we all of our father 's family , who brought me out of your hand , my lord the king . But you have put me in your hand , but now why do you want me to ask the king ? ”
GOLD:	“ You 've said enough , ” David replied . “ I 've decided that you and Ziba will divide your land equally between you . ”

ID:	3245
INPUT:	Akaben senitartekoak hilarazi Jehuk
PRED:	Jehu 's People
GOLD:	Jehu Kills Ahab 's Family

ID:	3246
INPUT:	Orduan , honela egin nuen otoitz : « Zu , Jaun ahalguztiduna , epaile zuzena zara , gizakiaren buru-bihotzakaztertzen dituena . Zure esku utzi dut neure auzia : ikusiko ahal dut zure mendekuaetsaien bizkar ! »
PRED:	Then I prayed , “ Lord of hosts , you are righteous , and you are righteous , and I will see your judgment , and I will see your face , and I will see your enemies . ”
GOLD:	O Lord of Heaven 's Armies , you make righteous judgments , and you examine the deepest thoughts and secrets.Let me see your vengeance against them , for I have committed my cause to you .

ID:	3247
INPUT:	kendu egingo diet ahotikodola darion okela , haginetatik idoloei eskainitako jakiak ; hala ere , geldituko dira batzuk biziriketa neure-neureak izango ditut , Judako leinuak bezala ; Ekrongoak jebustarrak bezalaizango dira .
PRED:	And I will take away the blood of the blood of the blood of the blood of the blood of the blood of the blood of the blood of the blood of the blood of the blood of the blood of the blood of Judah , and they shall be like the inhabitants of the land of Judah .
GOLD:	I will grab the bloody meat from their mouthsand snatch the detestable sacrifices from their teeth.Then the surviving Philistines will worship our Godand become like a clan in Judah.The Philistines of Ekron will join my people , as the ancient Jebusites once did .

ID:	3248
INPUT:	eta mihi orok aitor de<unk> su Kristo dela Jauna , Jainko Aitaren aintzarako .
PRED:	and to the glory of the Lord Jesus Christ , the glory of the Father .
GOLD:	and every tongue declare that Jesus Christ is Lord , to the glory of God the Father .

ID:	3249
INPUT:	Jainkoaren asmo ezkutuaren berri izan ote duzu , jakinduriaren jabe bihurtuz ?
PRED:	Have you heard of the secret of God , and have you become wise ?
GOLD:	Were you listening at God 's secret council ? Do you have a monopoly on wisdom ?

ID:	3250
INPUT:	Behinola , beren jainko Dagoni opari handi bat eskaintzeko eta jai alaia egiteko bildu ziren filistearren buruzagiak . Hau zioten : « Gure jainkoak eskura eman diguSamson gure etsaia ! »
PRED:	And it came to pass , when they offered a great sacrifice to offer a great sacrifice , and they gathered together the princes of the Philistines , saying , Samson our God hath delivered us into our hand .
GOLD:	The Philistine rulers held a great festival , offering sacrifices and praising their god , Dagon . They said , “ Our god has given us victory over our enemy Samson ! ”

ID:	3251
INPUT:	zuek , haren zerbitzari Abrahamen jatorrikook , Jakoben ondorengook , haren aukeratuok !
PRED:	You are his servants , Jacob 's descendants , Jacob 's descendants , whom he chose .
GOLD:	you children of his servant Abraham , you descendants of Jacob , his chosen ones .

ID:	3252
INPUT:	ea aurrerakoan fruiturik ematen duen ; eta bestela , moztu ” » .
PRED:	The fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the fruit , and the others cut off . ”
GOLD:	If we get figs next year , fine . If not , then you can cut it down . ' ”

ID:	3253
INPUT:	Horrela , bada , zergatik tentatzen duzue orain Jainkoa , gure gurasoek eta guk ere ezin eraman izan dugun uztarria ikasle horiei leporatzen saiatuz ?
PRED:	So why do you want us to obey our ancestors and to keep the yoke of the yoke ?
GOLD:	So why are you now challenging God by burdening the Gentile believers with a yoke that neither we nor our ancestors were able to bear ?

ID:	3254
INPUT:	Zeuen baitan diozue : « Noiz amaitu behar ote <unk> berri-jaiak , laborea saltzeko ? Noiz larunbatak , garia salmentan ateratzeko ? Neurria txikiagotueta prezioak handituko ditugu , okerreko pisuak erabiliz .
PRED:	For you say , “ How long will you bring up the feast of the month ? How long will you be saved ? How long will we save the Sabbath day ? It will be great and holy .
GOLD:	You ca n't wait for the Sabbath day to be overand the religious festivals to endso you can get back to cheating the helpless.You measure out grain with dishonest measuresand cheat the buyer with dishonest scales .

ID:	3255
INPUT:	Antzina , Davidek Edom lurraldea menderatu zuenean , haren gudalburu Joabek , israeldar hilei lur ematera joan zelarik , hil egin zituen Edomgo gizaseme guztiak .
PRED:	And when David had taken the land of Edom , he went into the land of Edom , and he died , and all the men of Edom died .
GOLD:	Years before , David had defeated Edom . Joab , his army commander , had stayed to bury some of the Israelite soldiers who had died in battle . While there , they killed every male in Edom .

ID:	3256
INPUT:	Bereizkuntza egingo dut ene herriaren eta zurearen artean . Bihar gertatuko da mirari hau » .
PRED:	I will make a sign between my people and between you and my people . This will be a sign between you . ”
GOLD:	“ This is the finger of God ! ” the magicians exclaimed to Pharaoh . But Pharaoh 's heart remained hard . He would n't listen to them , just as the Lord had predicted .

ID:	3257
INPUT:	Behin eta berriz sareak hustuz , herriak gupidagabe hiltzenjarraituko ote dute ?
PRED:	But the nations will fall down and fall down , and the people will not die .
GOLD:	Will you let them get away with this forever ? Will they succeed forever in their heartless conquests ?

ID:	3258
INPUT:	zuhaitza jotzen ari zen bati aizkora kirtenetik atera eta uretara jausi zitzaion . Garrasika hasi zen hura , esanez : — Ai ene jauna ! Bestek utzia nuen !
PRED:	And the wind went out of the garden of the trees , and came out of the garden , and began to cry out , saying , “ Oh , my lord , my lord ! ”
GOLD:	But as one of them was cutting a tree , his ax head fell into the river . “ Oh , sir ! ” he cried . “ It was a borrowed ax ! ”

ID:	3259
INPUT:	Oi lur , ez estali nire odola , ez bedi isildua izan nire garrasia !
PRED:	Do n't let my blood be put to death , nor let my tongue be opened .
GOLD:	“ O earth , do not conceal my blood.Let it cry out on my behalf .

ID:	3260
INPUT:	« Ez gero utzi lebitarren artean desagertzen Kehaten senitarteak !
PRED:	“ Do n't let the Levites go among the Levites .
GOLD:	“ Do not let the Kohathite clans be destroyed from among the Levites !

ID:	3261
INPUT:	Piztuerakoan , noren emazte izango da , zazpiek izan baitzuten emazte ? »
PRED:	How then shall the wife of the resurrection be her wife ? For she is her wife ?
GOLD:	So tell us , whose wife will she be in the resurrection ? For all seven were married to her ! ”

ID:	3262
INPUT:	Zabulonen leinuko senitarteak : Seredengandik se<unk> tarrak , Elonengandik elondarrak eta Jahleelengandik jahleeldarrak .
PRED:	The sons of Zebulun : the sons of Zebulun , the family of the family of Gershon , the family of the family of Gershon , the family of the family of Gershon , the family of the family of the family of Zebulun , the family of the family of Zebulun .
GOLD:	These were the clans descended from the sons of Zebulun : The Seredite clan , named after their ancestor Sered.The Elonite clan , named after their ancestor Elon.The Jahleelite clan , named after their ancestor Jahleel .

ID:	3263
INPUT:	« Nola larraina gari-jotzean , hala geratuko daBabilonia hiri ederra : denbora gutxi barrubere egiteen uzta jasoko du . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak , Israelen Jainkoak » .
PRED:	“ As soon as you go to Babylon , the city of Babylon will be destroyed , ” says the Lord of hosts , the God of Israel , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : “ Babylon is like wheat on a threshing floor , about to be trampled.In just a little whileher harvest will begin . ”

ID:	3264
INPUT:	Hiltzeko moduko harria jaurtiz norbait jo eta hiltzen duena , hilketa-errudun da : heriotzara emango dute .
PRED:	And he that is put to death shall be put to death , and he shall be put to death ; and he shall be put to death .
GOLD:	Or if someone with a stone in his hand strikes and kills another person , it is murder , and the murderer must be put to death .

ID:	3265
INPUT:	Orduan , israeldarrak itzuli ziren eta benjamindarrak izuturik gelditu , ikusi baitzuten nolako hondamena zetorkien .
PRED:	And the children of Israel returned , and the children of Benjamin returned , and the children of Benjamin , because they saw what was done .
GOLD:	the men of Israel turned and attacked . At this point the men of Benjamin became terrified , because they realized disaster was close at hand .

ID:	3266
INPUT:	Zatoz Libanotik , ene emaztegaia , zatoz ! Jaitsi zaitez Libanotik , jaitsi Amanako gailurretik , Senir eta Hermon tontorretatik . Utzi lehoien eta panteren mendi-zuloak .
PRED:	Come , my wife , my wife , come down from Lebanon , and come down from Lebanon , and stand on the top of the earth , and set up the mountains of the lion , and the mountains of the lion .
GOLD:	Come with me from Lebanon , my bride , come with me from Lebanon.Come down from Mount Amana , from the peaks of Senir and Hermon , where the lions have their densand leopards live among the hills .

ID:	3267
INPUT:	Zuen jabetza den lurraldea kutsatua dagoela eta Jaunaren kulturako desegokia dela iruditzen bazaizue , zatozte Jaunaren jabetza den herrialdera , han baitu Jaunak bere bizilekua , eta jar zaitezte gure artean bizitzen . Baina ez zaitezte Jaunaren kontra eta gure kontra jarri , Jaunaren , gure Jainkoaren , aldareaz gainera beste bat zeuentzat eraikiz .
PRED:	If you know that the land is unclean , you are to serve the Lord , where the Lord your God is in the land where he is holy , and you will live in the land of the Lord our God , and you will not stand before the Lord our God .
GOLD:	“ If you need the altar because the land you possess is defiled , then join us in the Lord 's land , where the Tabernacle of the Lord is situated , and share our land with us . But do not rebel against the Lord or against us by building an altar other than the one true altar of the Lord our God .

ID:	3268
INPUT:	Orduan , amari eman zizkion zilarrezko mila eta ehun txanponak ; baina amak esan zion : — Jaunari eskainia nion zilar hau zure alde , ene seme , zurezko idoloa metalez jantzia egiteko .
PRED:	And he gave him a thousand silver , and a hundred talents of silver , and his mother said to him , “ This is the altar of your son , that you may make for your idols . ”
GOLD:	He returned the money to her , and she said , “ I now dedicate these silver coins to the Lord . In honor of my son , I will have an image carved and an idol cast . ”

ID:	3269
INPUT:	Job
PRED:	Job and Job
GOLD:	Job 's Eighth Speech : A Response to Eliphaz

ID:	3270
INPUT:	Esan zidan jendeak : « Ez al diguzu azaldu behar zer esan nahi duen egiten ari zarenak ? »
PRED:	He said to me , “ Do n't you tell us what you want to do ? ”
GOLD:	Then the people asked , “ What does all this mean ? What are you trying to tell us ? ”

ID:	3271
INPUT:	Zuen gorpuak zeruko hegazti eta lurreko piztien janari izango dira , eta ez da inor ere izango haiek uxatzeko .
PRED:	You will eat the birds of the sky and the birds of the earth and the birds of the earth , and there will be no one to touch them .
GOLD:	Your corpses will be food for all the scavenging birds and wild animals , and no one will be there to chase them away .

ID:	3272
INPUT:	Baina esan dizuedanagatik , barrua tristuraz bete zaizue ;
PRED:	But I have said to you , “ You are weak because of me . ”
GOLD:	Instead , you grieve because of what I 've told you .

ID:	3273
INPUT:	Jesus munduko argia
PRED:	Jesus Heals to the world
GOLD:	A Woman Caught in Adultery

ID:	3274
INPUT:	Honek herriakamorruz jotzen zituen , aspertu gabe jo ere ; nazioak suminez zapaltzen zituen , etengabe pertsegituz .
PRED:	He did not turn away from his people , but did not turn away from them . He led the nations into the wrath of the nations .
GOLD:	You struck the people with endless blows of rageand held the nations in your angry gripwith unrelenting tyranny .

ID:	3275
INPUT:	Baniren ondorengoetan : Maadai , Amram , Uel ,
PRED:	of the sons of Babylon : Amnon , and Amnon ,
GOLD:	From the family of Bani : Maadai , Amram , Uel ,

ID:	3276
INPUT:	Benetan alferrik botatzen da sarea , hegaz doazenek ikusten badute ;
PRED:	There is no wind in vain , and the wings of the wind see it .
GOLD:	If a bird sees a trap being set , it knows to stay away .

ID:	3277
INPUT:	Eta haiei ere esan zien Gedeonek : — Garaile etortzean , eraitsi egingo dut zuen dorre hau .
PRED:	Gideon said to them , “ When I come , I will destroy this tower . ”
GOLD:	So he said to the people of Peniel , “ After I return in victory , I will tear down this tower . ”

ID:	3278
INPUT:	Baina zuen gorabeherak hitz eta izen batzuei buruzkoak eta zuen lege horri buruzkoak direnez gero , hor konpon zeuek . Nik ez dut arazo horietan epaile izan nahi » .
PRED:	But as for you , and to hear the law , and to hear the law and the law of your law , I do not want to judge you . ”
GOLD:	But since it is merely a question of words and names and your Jewish law , take care of it yourselves . I refuse to judge such matters . ”

ID:	3279
INPUT:	Abiamen gainerako jarduerak eta egintza guztiak « Judako Erregeen Kronika » liburuan daude idatziak . Abiamen eta Jeroboamen artean ere izan zen borroka .
PRED:	Now the rest of the acts of Ahaz , and all that he did , are they not written in the book of the kings of Judah ? for Jeroboam and Jeroboam was between Jeroboam and Jeroboam .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Abijam 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah . There was constant war between Abijam and Jeroboam .

ID:	3280
INPUT:	Madongoa , Hatzorrekoa ,
PRED:	Sheba , Sheba , Sheba ,
GOLD:	The king of MadonThe king of Hazor

ID:	3281
INPUT:	« Baina zuei , entzuleoi , hau diotsuet : Maitatu etsaiak , egin ongi gorroto dizuetenei ,
PRED:	“ But I say to you , ‘ Teacher , love those who hate your enemies .
GOLD:	“ But to you who are willing to listen , I say , love your enemies ! Do good to those who hate you .

ID:	3282
INPUT:	Zenbait egunez geldi-geldi ibili ondoren , nekez iritsi ginen <unk> do hirira : haizea kontra genuenez , Kretaren babesera joan ginen , Salmon * lurmuturraren ondotik igaroz .
PRED:	After many days we left there , we went up to the city of Olives , and we went up to the land of Cyprus .
GOLD:	We had several days of slow sailing , and after great difficulty we finally neared Cnidus . But the wind was against us , so we sailed across to Crete and along the sheltered coast of the island , past the cape of Salmone .

ID:	3283
INPUT:	sugeak bezain mihi zorrotza dute , sugegorriaren pozoia ezpainetan .
PRED:	They hate him as a snake , and they speak lies in the lips of a snake .
GOLD:	O Lord , keep me out of the hands of the wicked.Protect me from those who are violent , for they are plotting against me .

ID:	3284
INPUT:	Negevetik igo eta Hebronera iritsi ziren — Hebron Egiptoko Tanis baino zazpi urte lehenago eraikia zen — . Han bizi ziren Anaken ondorengo Ahiman , Xexai eta Talmai .
PRED:	And they came from the south , and came to Hebron , and came to Hebron : and there were seven years more than the days of the sons of Shealtiel , and Jozabad , and Jozabad , and Jozabad .
GOLD:	Going north , they passed through the Negev and arrived at Hebron , where Ahiman , Sheshai , and Talmai — all descendants of Anak — lived . ( The ancient town of Hebron was founded seven years before the Egyptian city of Zoan . )

ID:	3285
INPUT:	Ezekiasek dei egin zien Israel eta Judako guztiei , eta Efraim eta Manasesen lurraldeetakoei ere dei-gutunak bidali zizkien , Jerusalemera , Jaunaren etxera , etor zitezen , Jaunaren , Israelen Jainkoaren , Pazko-jaia ospatzera .
PRED:	Hezekiah called Israel and all Judah , and all Judah , and Ephraim , and Manasseh , and all the land of Manasseh , to go to Jerusalem to the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	King Hezekiah now sent word to all Israel and Judah , and he wrote letters of invitation to the people of Ephraim and Manasseh . He asked everyone to come to the Temple of the Lord at Jerusalem to celebrate the Passover of the Lord , the God of Israel .

ID:	3286
INPUT:	Azter ezazue zer zaion Jaunari atsegin
PRED:	Be careful to do what is right in the Lord .
GOLD:	Carefully determine what pleases the Lord .

ID:	3287
INPUT:	Indarrez jantzi ninduzun gudurako , menpean jarri zenizkidan arerioak .
PRED:	You put me in the strength of my strength , and you put me in the hand of my enemies .
GOLD:	You have armed me with strength for the battle ; you have subdued my enemies under my feet .

ID:	3288
INPUT:	« Sionek esaten zuen : “ Jaunak utzia nauka , ene Jaunak ahaztua ” .
PRED:	Simon said , “ The Lord has forsaken me , and he has forgotten me . ”
GOLD:	Yet Jerusalem says , “ The Lord has deserted us ; the Lord has forgotten us . ”

ID:	3289
INPUT:	Bet-Togarmakoek ibiltzeko edo garraiorako zaldiak eta mandoak ekartzen zizkizuten .
PRED:	And they brought the horses , and the horses , and the horses , and the horses , and the horses .
GOLD:	“ From Beth-togarmah came riding horses , chariot horses , and mules , all in exchange for your goods .

ID:	3290
INPUT:	« Hegoaldetik , Tzin basamortutik hasi eta Edomgo mugaraino hedatuko da . Ekialdean , hegoaldeko muga , Itsaso Hilaren hego-ertzetik hasiko da .
PRED:	“ From the south side of the wilderness to the south side of Edom . The south side of Edom will be at the south side of the Red Sea .
GOLD:	The southern portion of your country will extend from the wilderness of Zin , along the edge of Edom . The southern boundary will begin on the east at the Dead Sea .

ID:	3291
INPUT:	Pozik da Sion mendia , poz-pozik Judako hiriak , zure probidentzia dela eta .
PRED:	The city of Zion is glad , and the city of Judah shall be glad .
GOLD:	Go , inspect the city of Jerusalem.Walk around and count the many towers .

ID:	3292
INPUT:	Bizi-iturri da zuhurraren irakaspenaherioaren sareetatik ihes egiteko .
PRED:	The life of life is a life of life , to escape from the mouth of death .
GOLD:	The instruction of the wise is like a life-giving fountain ; those who accept it avoid the snares of death .

ID:	3293
INPUT:	Goraintziak <unk> fena eta <unk> fosari , Jaunarengatik gogoz lanean jardun duten horiei ; baita Jaunarengatik hainbeste lan egin duen nire Perside maiteari ere .
PRED:	Greet , and Timothy , who are in the work of the Lord , for they work for the work of the Lord , and for the work of my love .
GOLD:	Give my greetings to Tryphena and Tryphosa , the Lord 's workers , and to dear Persis , who has worked so hard for the Lord .

ID:	3294
INPUT:	Ra<unk> , Kixion , E<unk> ,
PRED:	Hallohesh , Hallohesh , Kelita ,
GOLD:	Rabbith , Kishion , Ebez ,

ID:	3295
INPUT:	Gedeonen azken egintza
PRED:	Gideon and Gideon
GOLD:	Gideon 's Sacred Ephod

ID:	3296
INPUT:	Honela diotso Jainko JaunakIsrael herriari : « Gerrara mila gizonbidaltzen dituen hiriariehun itzuliko zaizkio ; ehun bidaltzen dituenari , hamar » .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord God says to the people of Israel : “ A hundred men will return to the city . He will send ten thousand men . ”
GOLD:	The Sovereign Lord says : “ When a city sends a thousand men to battle , only a hundred will return.When a town sends a hundred , only ten will come back alive . ”

ID:	3297
INPUT:	etxe gainean dagoena ez bedi jaits etxeko gauzak hartzera ,
PRED:	He that is on the house shall not come into the house , that he may enter into the house .
GOLD:	A person out on the deck of a roof must not go down into the house to pack .

ID:	3298
INPUT:	Gezi-uztaiez eta lantzazarmatuak datoz ; ankerrak dira eta gupidagabeak ; itsas orroa bezalako deiadarrez , zaldiz datoz , borrokarako lerroturik , zure aurka , Sion hiri eder » .
PRED:	The bow of the bow and the bow are come , and the battle are like the sea , and the sound of the sea , and they shall fight against thee , and they shall fight against thee , and they shall fight against thee .
GOLD:	They are armed with bows and spears.They are cruel and show no mercy.They sound like a roaring seaas they ride forward on horses.They are coming in battle formation , planning to destroy you , beautiful Jerusalem . ”

ID:	3299
INPUT:	Zortzigarren egunean , bi usapal edo bi usakume harturik , Jaunaren aurrera , elkarketa-etxolaren sarrerara , joango da eta apaizari emango dizkio .
PRED:	And on the eighth day , he shall take two young lambs , and two young lambs , and two young goats , and he shall go into the tent of meeting , and the priest shall give it to the priest .
GOLD:	On the eighth day he must get two turtledoves or two young pigeons and come before the Lord at the entrance of the Tabernacle and give his offerings to the priest .

ID:	3300
INPUT:	Gainera , bada hirurehun urte israeldarrok Hexbon eta Aroer hirietan eta berauen inguruetan bizi garela , baita Arnon erreka-ertzetako hirixketan ere . Zergatik ez dituzue libratu denboraldi horretan guztian ?
PRED:	And the sons of Israel were three hundred and five years in the cities of Sihon , and Heshbon , in the cities of the Arnon , and in the cities of the Arnon , and in all the cities of the Arnon , and in all that day ?
GOLD:	“ Israel has been living here for 300 years , inhabiting Heshbon and its surrounding settlements , all the way to Aroer and its settlements , and in all the towns along the Arnon River . Why have you made no effort to recover it before now ?

ID:	3301
INPUT:	Hona zer diotsuedan nik , Jaun ahalguztidun honek : Ekarri osorik zeuen hamarrenak tenpluko altxortegira , nire etxean zer jana egon dadin . Proba nazazue horretan , eta ikusiko duzue nola zeruko atexkak irekitzen dizkizuedan eta bedeinkazioa ugari isurtzen .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of hosts says : Bring the tenth of your tenth of the tenth of your houses , so that you may see what is right in my house , so that you may see what I have seen in heaven , and you will see the blood of the heaven .
GOLD:	Bring all the tithes into the storehouse so there will be enough food in my Temple . If you do , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , “ I will open the windows of heaven for you . I will pour out a blessing so great you wo n't have enough room to take it in ! Try it ! Put me to the test !

ID:	3302
INPUT:	Zaudete , beraz , adi orain , Jaunak zuen aurrean eginen duen gauza harrigarri hau ikusteko .
PRED:	Now therefore , therefore , be careful to see this great thing which the Lord has done before you .
GOLD:	“ Now stand here and see the great thing the Lord is about to do .

ID:	3303
INPUT:	Bada , ostera , zeruan misterioak azaltzen dituen Jainkoa . Honexek jakinaraziko dizu , Nabukodonosor errege , gerora gertatuko dena . Hona , bada , lo zeundela ametsetan ikusi zenuena :
PRED:	And now , behold , the light of the heaven is come to pass , and thou shalt tell him , Thus saith the Lord God of heaven : If thou hast seen this , thou shalt see it in the dream :
GOLD:	But there is a God in heaven who reveals secrets , and he has shown King Nebuchadnezzar what will happen in the future . Now I will tell you your dream and the visions you saw as you lay on your bed .

ID:	3304
INPUT:	Ekaitza haize gozo bihurtu zueneta olatuen orroa isildu .
PRED:	A wind is like a wind , and a wise wind is sweet .
GOLD:	He calmed the storm to a whisperand stilled the waves .

ID:	3305
INPUT:	Gogorkeriaz eta bidegabezeraman zuten ; baina haren zoria nori axola ? Bizidunen lurretik kanporaatera zuten , bere herriaren errebeldiagatik jota .
PRED:	And they brought him out of their wickedness , but they brought him out of the earth , and brought him out of the earth , and brought him out of his people .
GOLD:	Unjustly condemned , he was led away.No one cared that he died without descendants , that his life was cut short in midstream.But he was struck downfor the rebellion of my people .

ID:	3306
INPUT:	Bere haragiaren samina baizik ez du sentitzen , bere buruaren atsekabea besterik ez » .
PRED:	He does n't obey his word , but he does n't have any rest in his own heart . ”
GOLD:	They suffer painfully ; their life is full of trouble . ”

ID:	3307
INPUT:	Bataiatu eta berehala , Jesus uretatik irten zen . Hortan , zerua zabaldu zen , eta Jainkoaren Espiritua ikusi zuen Jesusek uso-tankeran jaisten eta beregana etortzen .
PRED:	As he was baptized , Jesus went out of the water . So the Spirit of God saw the Spirit of God , and came down to him .
GOLD:	After his baptism , as Jesus came up out of the water , the heavens were opened and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and settling on him .

ID:	3308
INPUT:	Filistearrak israeldarren aurka borrokatzeko asmotan
PRED:	The Philistines against the Philistines
GOLD:	Saul Consults a Medium

ID:	3309
INPUT:	« Gizakia pipiak jotako zura bezala birrintzen da , sitsak jandako soinekoa bezala .
PRED:	“ A man is like a man 's spirit , like a man 's clothes .
GOLD:	I waste away like rotting wood , like a moth-eaten coat .

ID:	3310
INPUT:	zeure maitasunagatik , suntsi itzazu nire etsaiak , hondatu nire erasotzaileak , zeure zerbitzari nauzunez gero .
PRED:	You have destroyed my enemies because of your love , and you have destroyed my enemies , and I am your servant .
GOLD:	In your unfailing love , silence all my enemiesand destroy all my foes , for I am your servant .

ID:	3311
INPUT:	Nire hondamen bila dabiltzanak , ordea , bihoaz lurpe sakonera !
PRED:	But those who seek me will be destroyed , but those who seek me will fall into the earth .
GOLD:	They will die by the swordand become the food of jackals .

ID:	3312
INPUT:	Hebrear batzuk Jordanez beste aldera igaro ziren , Gad eta Galaad lurraldeetara . Saulek , aldiz , Gilgalen jarraitu zuen , berarekin zen jende guztia beldur-ikaraz zegoelarik .
PRED:	And there came to pass in Hebron , and came to the land of Gilead ; and Saul walked in Gilgal , and all the people were afraid of him .
GOLD:	Some of them crossed the Jordan River and escaped into the land of Gad and Gilead.Meanwhile , Saul stayed at Gilgal , and his men were trembling with fear .

ID:	3313
INPUT:	Eskuan du sardea garia garbitu eta alea bere mandioan jasotzeko ; lastoa , berriz , inoiz itzaliko ez den sutan erreko du » .
PRED:	And he shall enter into his hand , and wash his hand in his hand , and he shall put it in the fire , and the donkey shall not be burned .
GOLD:	He is ready to separate the chaff from the wheat with his winnowing fork . Then he will clean up the threshing area , gathering the wheat into his barn but burning the chaff with never-ending fire . ”

ID:	3314
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , zure herritarrak zutaz ari dira harresi ondoan eta etxe-atarietan , elkarri esanez : “ Goazen , ea zein mezu ematen digun Jaunak ” .
PRED:	“ Son of man , when your people have heard about you , and in the houses of the house of your people , saying to one another , “ Let us go , and tell us what the Lord has given us to us . ”
GOLD:	“ Son of man , your people talk about you in their houses and whisper about you at the doors . They say to each other , ‘ Come on , let 's go hear the prophet tell us what the Lord is saying ! '

ID:	3315
INPUT:	Orduan , Moisesek , Jaunarengana itzulirik , esan zion : — Jauna , zergatik erabiltzen duzu hain gaizki herri hau ? Zertarako bidali nauzu ?
PRED:	Then Moses turned back to the Lord , and said to him , “ Lord , why have you done this people ? Why have you sent me away ? ”
GOLD:	Then Moses went back to the Lord and protested , “ Why have you brought all this trouble on your own people , Lord ? Why did you send me ?

ID:	3316
INPUT:	« Israeldarrek Jaunari eskainiko dizkioten opari sakratuak apaizarentzat izango dira .
PRED:	“ The people of Israel shall offer a sacrifice to the Lord , and they shall be holy to the priest .
GOLD:	All the sacred offerings that the Israelites bring to a priest will belong to him .

ID:	3317
INPUT:	Zoritxarrekoakzuzengabeko legeak emateneta jasanezineko dekretuakidazten dituztenak !
PRED:	Woe to those who fight against the law , and those who fight against him .
GOLD:	What sorrow awaits the unjust judgesand those who issue unfair laws .

ID:	3318
INPUT:	« Ni izango ote naiz , bada , erantzungo diona ? Nik aurkituko ote argudioak beraren aurka ?
PRED:	“ Will I answer him ? Will I find him ? Will I find him ? ”
GOLD:	“ So who am I , that I should try to answer Godor even reason with him ?

ID:	3319
INPUT:	Bat-batean , hain lurrikara gogorra izan zen , non kartzelaren oinarriei ere dar-dar eragin baitzien . Eta kolpetik ate guztiak zabaldu ziren eta denen kateak askatu .
PRED:	At once the earth was troubled , because the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation were spread out , and the whole world opened , and all of them were scattered .
GOLD:	Suddenly , there was a massive earthquake , and the prison was shaken to its foundations . All the doors immediately flew open , and the chains of every prisoner fell off !

ID:	3320
INPUT:	Horiek ziren Efraimen leinuko senitarteak : 32 . 500 gizonezko guztira . Horiek ziren Joseren ondorengoak , senitarteka erroldaturik .
PRED:	These are the families of Ephraim according to their families : these are the families of the sons of Joseph according to their families .
GOLD:	These were the clans of Ephraim . Their registered troops numbered 32,500.These clans of Manasseh and Ephraim were all descendants of Joseph .

ID:	3321
INPUT:	Azken afaria : hona nire gorputz-odolak !
PRED:	This is the last : My flesh and my flesh .
GOLD:	Peter Denies Jesus

ID:	3322
INPUT:	Jainkoaren guda-gurdiak milaka eta milaka , ezin konta ahalakoa haren gudarostea : horien artean aintzaz beterik dago Jauna santutegian .
PRED:	The chariots of God is not able to serve him , and his army is in the sanctuary of the Lord .
GOLD:	When you ascended to the heights , you led a crowd of captives.You received gifts from the people , even from those who rebelled against you.Now the Lord God will live among us there .

ID:	3323
INPUT:	Eliz elkartean bakoitzari bere tokia ezarri dio Jainkoak : lehenengo apostoluak , bigarren profetak , hirugarren irakasleak ; ondoren , mirarigileak datoz ; gero , sendatzeko edo behartsuei laguntzeko , elkartea gidatzeko edo hizketa arrotzez mintzatzeko dohaina dutenak .
PRED:	And God hath set his place for each one of the church : the first apostles , the second prophets , the second prophets , and the third , that they may be healed , whether they be healed , or to be healed , or to be healed , or to be healed .
GOLD:	Here are some of the parts God has appointed for the church : first are apostles , second are prophets , third are teachers , then those who do miracles , those who have the gift of healing , those who can help others , those who have the gift of leadership , those who speak in unknown languages .

ID:	3324
INPUT:	eta esan zion Jaunari : — Zergatik hartu duzu hain gaizki zeure zerbitzari hau ? Zergatik jarri nauzu zoritxarrean , herri honen zama neuri ezarriz ?
PRED:	and said to the Lord , “ Why have you done this evil thing ? Why have you done this evil thing ? Why have you put me on this people ? ”
GOLD:	And Moses said to the Lord , “ Why are you treating me , your servant , so harshly ? Have mercy on me ! What did I do to deserve the burden of all these people ?

ID:	3325
INPUT:	Gero , Jaun ahalguztidunaren , Israelgo Jainkoaren , mezu hau adierazi zien Jeremiasek Rekaben leinukoei : « Zuen arbaso Jonadaben agindua aditu eta hark agindutako guztiak arretaz bete dituzuelako ,
PRED:	Then Jeremiah said to the tribes of Israel , “ Thus says the Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , saying , ‘ You have kept all the commandments of Joab , and have kept all that he commanded you .
GOLD:	Then Jeremiah turned to the Recabites and said , “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : ‘ You have obeyed your ancestor Jehonadab in every respect , following all his instructions . '

ID:	3326
INPUT:	Nagusiak esan zion : “ Ederki , morroi ona ! Gauza gutxian leial izan zarenez gero , hartzazu hamar hirietako agintea ” .
PRED:	His master said to him , “ What good is good ? If you have been faithful in a few days , take ten of the city . ”
GOLD:	“ ‘ Well done ! ' the king exclaimed . ‘ You are a good servant . You have been faithful with the little I entrusted to you , so you will be governor of ten cities as your reward . '

ID:	3327
INPUT:	Hamaika ikasleak Galileara joan ziren , Jesusek esandako mendira .
PRED:	And his disciples went to Galilee to the mountain of Galilee .
GOLD:	Then the eleven disciples left for Galilee , going to the mountain where Jesus had told them to go .

ID:	3328
INPUT:	Zein dira Jainkoaren mintzoa entzun eta beraren kontra errebelatu zirenok ? Moisesek Egiptotik atera zituen haiek , noski .
PRED:	What is the voice of God , and they sinned against him ? Moses brought them out of Egypt .
GOLD:	And who was it who rebelled against God , even though they heard his voice ? Was n't it the people Moses led out of Egypt ?

ID:	3329
INPUT:	Goizero , kriseiluak prest jartzean , intsentsu usaintsua erreko du Aaronek aldare honen gainean ,
PRED:	And when the lamps is ready , Aaron shall burn incense on the altar , and burn incense on the altar .
GOLD:	“ Every morning when Aaron maintains the lamps , he must burn fragrant incense on the altar .

ID:	3330
INPUT:	Esker oneko otoitza Espirituaren eraginez bakarrik egiten baduzu , dohain hori ez duen entzule hutsak nola erantzungo dio « Amen » zure esker oneko otoitzari , zer diozun ulertzen ez badu ?
PRED:	If you pray , then , if you do not listen to this prayer , how will you hear these words ? How will you answer , “ Amen ! ”
GOLD:	For if you praise God only in the spirit , how can those who do n't understand you praise God along with you ? How can they join you in giving thanks when they do n't understand what you are saying ?

ID:	3331
INPUT:	« Horregatik , hona hemen ni , nire hitzak elkarri lapurtzen dizkioten profeten kontra . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	Therefore this is what the Lord says : “ Behold , this is what I have spoken against the prophets , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , ” says the Lord , “ I am against these prophets who steal messages from each other and claim they are from me .

ID:	3332
INPUT:	Ez naiz , bada , neurriz gain ari , besteen lanaz baliatuz . Hau da , ordea , nire itxaropena : zuen sinesmena haziz doan neurrian , nire lanak gero eta fruitu handiagoa ekarriko duela zuen artean , ezarri zaizkidan mugen barruan ;
PRED:	But I do not want to do the same thing . But this is my hope . But I hope in my faith , and I will give you more fruit among you , and I will give you more fruit among you .
GOLD:	Nor do we boast and claim credit for the work someone else has done . Instead , we hope that your faith will grow so that the boundaries of our work among you will be extended .

ID:	3333
INPUT:	Horrela bada , ene senideok , zuek ere hil zen Kristoren gorputzeko eginak izan zaretenez gero , legearentzat hilda zaudete , eta beste batenak zarete jadanik — hildakoen artetik piztu zenarenak , alegia — , Jainkoarentzat fruitu onak emateko .
PRED:	Therefore , brothers and sisters , if you are dead , you are dead by the law of Christ , and others are raised from the dead .
GOLD:	So , my dear brothers and sisters , this is the point : You died to the power of the law when you died with Christ . And now you are united with the one who was raised from the dead . As a result , we can produce a harvest of good deeds for God .

ID:	3334
INPUT:	Hona hemen Joseren seme zaharrena zen Manasesen leinuari eroritako lurralde zatia . Ma<unk> , Galaaden aita , Manasesen seme zaharrena zen eta , gerrazalea zenez , Galaad eta Baxan lurraldeak eman zizkioten ondaretzat , Jordanez ekialdera .
PRED:	These are the names of the sons of Joseph , the son of Manasseh , the son of Manasseh , the son of Manasseh , the son of Manasseh , the son of Manasseh , the son of Manasseh , and the land of Gilead , and the land of Gilead .
GOLD:	The next allotment of land was given to the half-tribe of Manasseh , the descendants of Joseph 's older son . Makir , the firstborn son of Manasseh , was the father of Gilead . Because his descendants were experienced soldiers , the regions of Gilead and Bashan on the east side of the Jordan had already been given to them .

ID:	3335
INPUT:	esnegaina irabiatuz gurina ateratzen da , sudurra jota odola , haserreari eraginez liskarra .
PRED:	And the day of the day shall come upon the day , and he shall go into the midst of the blood , and the blood of the Philistines shall be filled with the blood of the sword .
GOLD:	As the beating of cream yields butterand striking the nose causes bleeding , so stirring up anger causes quarrels .

ID:	3336
INPUT:	Haiekin zuen egina Jaunak ituna eta haiei zien honako agindu hau emana : « Ez duzue beste jainkorik gurtuko ; ez zarete halakoen aitzinean ahuspeztuko . Ez diezue kulturik emango , ez oparirik eskainiko .
PRED:	This is what the Lord commanded you to do with them . He said to them , “ You will not worship other gods . You will worship other gods . You will not worship other gods .
GOLD:	For the Lord had made a covenant with the descendants of Jacob and commanded them : “ Do not worship any other gods or bow before them or serve them or offer sacrifices to them .

ID:	3337
INPUT:	Hizketa arrotzez mintzatzekotan , bi izan daitezela edo hiru gehienez mintzo direnak , eta txandaka ; eta argi dezala beste batek esanahia .
PRED:	And if they speak in tongues , they shall be two words , and they shall speak three words , and another shall be a light .
GOLD:	No more than two or three should speak in tongues . They must speak one at a time , and someone must interpret what they say .

ID:	3338
INPUT:	Bilarazi zituzten berengana filistearren buruzagi guztiak eta esan zieten : — Zer egin ote dezakegu Israelen Jainkoaren kutxarekin ? Haiek erantzun : — Israelen Jainkoaren kutxarekin ? Eraman dezatela Gatera . Eraman zuten , beraz , Israelen Jainkoaren kutxa .
PRED:	And they brought all the princes of the Philistines , and said unto them , What shall we do with the ark of the God of Israel ? And they said unto him , What shall we do with the ark of God of Israel ? And they brought the ark of God of Israel into the ark of Israel .
GOLD:	So they called together the rulers of the Philistine towns and asked , “ What should we do with the Ark of the God of Israel ? ” The rulers discussed it and replied , “ Move it to the town of Gath . ” So they moved the Ark of the God of Israel to Gath .

ID:	3339
INPUT:	Horregatik , hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Neu ere zure kontra nator , Jerusalem ; zeuregan betearaziko dut epaia , nazioen aurrean ;
PRED:	Therefore thus says the Lord God : Behold , I am against you , and I will judge Jerusalem before you , and I will judge the nations before you .
GOLD:	Therefore , I myself , the Sovereign Lord , am now your enemy . I will punish you publicly while all the nations watch .

ID:	3340
INPUT:	« Horregatik , honela diot nik , Jaunak : Ez didazue aditu zeuen senide esklaboak libre uzteko agindu dizuedanean . Orain , beraz , neuk uzten ditut libre ezpata , izurria eta gosea , zuen aurka ekiteko . Munduko erresuma guztiak izuturik geldituko dira zuei gertatua ikustean . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	Therefore thus says the Lord : You have not given me your brothers to rescue your brothers , and I have delivered them out of your hand , and I have delivered them out of your hand , and I have given them a sword against you , and all the earth shall see you .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Lord says : Since you have not obeyed me by setting your countrymen free , I will set you free to be destroyed by war , disease , and famine . You will be an object of horror to all the nations of the earth .

ID:	3341
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Gibeako garaian hasita , bekatuan ari da Israel . Orduz gero , ez da aldatu . Beraz , guduak Gibean bertanharrapatuko ditu gaizkileak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ In the days of Gibeah , Israel has sinned . The people of Israel will not turn away from their sins , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	The Lord says , “ O Israel , ever since Gibeah , there has been only sin and more sin ! You have made no progress whatsoever.Was it not right that the wicked men of Gibeah were attacked ?

ID:	3342
INPUT:	Apaiz nagusiak bere jantziak urratu zituen eta esan : — Ba ote dugu lekuko beharrik ?
PRED:	And the high priest tore his clothes , and said unto them , Is there any place for us ?
GOLD:	Then the high priest tore his clothing to show his horror and said , “ Why do we need other witnesses ?

ID:	3343
INPUT:	Gau hartan bertan , Abimelek eta beronen jende guztia jaiki eta Sikemgo inguruetan gorde ziren , lau taldetan antolaturik .
PRED:	On that night Abimelech and all his people got up , and all the people round about Shechem .
GOLD:	So Abimelech and all his men went by night and split into four groups , stationing themselves around Shechem .

ID:	3344
INPUT:	Aska nazazu ezpata zitaletik , libratu atzerritarren eskutik ! Haien ahoari faltsukeria dario , haien eskuinak gezurrezko zina dagi .
PRED:	Let me go out of the sword , and save me from the hand of the sword ; and their mouth is an abomination to their right hand .
GOLD:	Save me ! Rescue me from the power of my enemies.Their mouths are full of lies ; they swear to tell the truth , but they lie instead .

ID:	3345
INPUT:	Ai ene ! Izugarria izango da egun hura , berdinik gabea , larrialdi-egu<unk> koben herriarentzat . Baina onik aterako da » .
PRED:	How terrible it will be for us ! It will be a day for the people who have no need . But it will be good to the people . ”
GOLD:	In all history there has never been such a time of terror.It will be a time of trouble for my people Israel.Yet in the end they will be saved !

ID:	3346
INPUT:	Emaguzu , bada , zeure iritzia : zilegi al da Zesarri zerga ordaintzea , bai ala ez ?
PRED:	Give us the book of your law , and what is it written to you ? Is it not it that I have nothing to pay it ?
GOLD:	Now tell us what you think about this : Is it right to pay taxes to Caesar or not ? ”

ID:	3347
INPUT:	Henadaden seme Bi<unk> Azariasen etxetik Zokorainoko sailean .
PRED:	And next to the son of Hallohesh , the son of Hallohesh , from the house of Zechariah , the son of Hallohesh .
GOLD:	Next was Binnui son of Henadad , who rebuilt another section of the wall from Azariah 's house to the angle and the corner .

ID:	3348
INPUT:	Janari guztiei nazka zieten , eta heriotzaren atarian zeuden .
PRED:	And all the words of him were afraid , and they were at the door of death .
GOLD:	They could n't stand the thought of food , and they were knocking on death 's door .

ID:	3349
INPUT:	« Ez gogortu bihotzak zuen gurasoek Meriban bezala , Masako egun hartan basamortuan bezala ,
PRED:	“ Do n't remember your heart as your fathers did in the wilderness of Canaan in the wilderness of Canaan .
GOLD:	The Lord says , “ Do n't harden your hearts as Israel did at Meribah , as they did at Massah in the wilderness .

ID:	3350
INPUT:	Jakoben ondorengoaksu izango dira , Joserenak gar ; Esaurenak , berriz , lasto . Lastoa suak hartuko dueta irentsiko . Eta Esauren ondorengorikez da bizirik aterako » . Jaunak esan du .
PRED:	And the sons of Jacob shall be a fire , and the sons of Esau , and the sons of Esau shall fall ; and the fire shall come upon Esau , and the seed of Esau shall be cut off , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	The people of Israel will be a raging fire , and Edom a field of dry stubble.The descendants of Joseph will be a flameroaring across the field , devouring everything.There will be no survivors in Edom.I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	3351
INPUT:	Egun hartan hogeita bost mila gudari benjamindar erori ziren , denak gizon ausartak .
PRED:	And it came to pass in that day , that the men of Benjamin fell in that day .
GOLD:	So that day the tribe of Benjamin lost 25,000 strong warriors armed with swords ,

ID:	3352
INPUT:	Alabarik ere ez badu , beraren anaiei emango zaie ondarea .
PRED:	But if he does not have any daughter , he will give his inheritance to his brother .
GOLD:	And if he has no daughter either , transfer his inheritance to his brothers .

ID:	3353
INPUT:	Salomonen jakinduria ekialdekoena eta egiptoarrena baino handiagoa izan zen ,
PRED:	Solomon was greater than the east , and he was greater than the Egyptians .
GOLD:	So Hiram supplied as much cedar and cypress timber as Solomon desired .

ID:	3354
INPUT:	Ez da gehiago zure herrialdeangogorkeri hotsik entzungo , ez zure mugetanhondamendi eta triskantzarik izango ; “ Salbamen ” deituko diezuzeure harresiei , “ Gorespen ” zeure ateei .
PRED:	The sound of your people will no more hear the sound of your people , nor will the destruction of your people be destroyed , and they will be called to your walls , and they will be called your walls .
GOLD:	Violence will disappear from your land ; the desolation and destruction of war will end.Salvation will surround you like city walls , and praise will be on the lips of all who enter there .

ID:	3355
INPUT:	Gero , esan zion Tomasi : — Ekarri atzamarra eta aztertu nire eskuak ; ekarri eskua eta sartu nire saihets-zuloan . Eta ez izan sinesgogor , sinestedun baizik .
PRED:	Then she said to Thomas , “ Bring my hands and put my hands on her , and bring her into my hand , and do not believe , but believe . ”
GOLD:	Then he said to Thomas , “ Put your finger here , and look at my hands . Put your hand into the wound in my side . Do n't be faithless any longer . Believe ! ”

ID:	3356
INPUT:	Harentzat ez dago ez greziarrik eta ez judurik , ez erdaindurik eta ez erdaingaberik , ez kultura handiagoko nahiz txikiagokorik , ez esklaborik eta ez librerik : Kristo da dena , eta denetan bizi da .
PRED:	There is no Jews or Jews , nor circumcision , nor circumcision , nor circumcision , nor a slave , nor a slave , nor a slave , nor a slave , nor a slave , but Christ is living in the way .
GOLD:	In this new life , it does n't matter if you are a Jew or a Gentile , circumcised or uncircumcised , barbaric , uncivilized , slave , or free . Christ is all that matters , and he lives in all of us .

ID:	3357
INPUT:	« Apaizak zure eskuetatik saskia hartu eta Jaunaren zure Jainkoaren aldare aurrean ipiniko du .
PRED:	The priest shall take the basket from your hand , and put it before the Lord your God .
GOLD:	The priest will then take the basket from your hand and set it before the altar of the Lord your God .

ID:	3358
INPUT:	Berehala alde egin zion legenak , eta garbi gelditu zen .
PRED:	And the law departed from him , and was clean .
GOLD:	Instantly the leprosy disappeared , and the man was healed .

ID:	3359
INPUT:	Judea herrialde osoa eta jerusalemdar guztiak harengana zihoazen eta , beren bekatuak aitortzen zituztela , Joanek bataiatu egiten zituen Jordan ibaian .
PRED:	And all the land of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem came to him , and they saw that John was baptized in the Jordan .
GOLD:	All of Judea , including all the people of Jerusalem , went out to see and hear John . And when they confessed their sins , he baptized them in the Jordan River .

ID:	3360
INPUT:	Eta esan zidan : “ Ez beldurtu , Jainkoak bereziki maite zaitu ! Egon lasai ! Izan bihotz eta indarberritu ! ” Haren hitzak bizkortu egin ninduen . Orduan , honela esan nion : “ Ene Jauna , mintza zaitez , indarberritu nauzu eta ” .
PRED:	He said to me , “ Do n't be afraid , for God loved you . Be strong , and be strong , and be strong . ” Then I said to him , “ My Lord , you are my strength . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't be afraid , ” he said , “ for you are very precious to God . Peace ! Be encouraged ! Be strong ! ” As he spoke these words to me , I suddenly felt stronger and said to him , “ Please speak to me , my lord , for you have strengthened me . ”

ID:	3361
INPUT:	Tristura poz bilakatuko
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Sadness Will Be Turned to Joy

ID:	3362
INPUT:	Herriak legea beteko duela hitzeman
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	The Vow of the People

ID:	3363
INPUT:	Zentzuzko jokabidetik okertzen denakhildakoen artean amaituko du .
PRED:	He that is in the way of the wise shall love between the dead .
GOLD:	The person who strays from common sensewill end up in the company of the dead .

ID:	3364
INPUT:	« Ez da aski zu nire zerbitzari izate<unk> koben leinuak susperrarazieta berritzekoeta Israelen bizirik geldituakitzularazteko ; nazioen argitzat ezarriko zaitut , nire salbamenalurraren bazterrerainoeraman dezazun » .
PRED:	“ There is no longer many of the tribes of the tribes of Jacob , to bring them back to the house of Jacob , and to bring you back to the land of Israel . I will give you light to the land of my servant . ”
GOLD:	He says , “ You will do more than restore the people of Israel to me.I will make you a light to the Gentiles , and you will bring my salvation to the ends of the earth . ”

ID:	3365
INPUT:	Joan Bataiatzailearen jaiotza iragarri
PRED:	The Death of John
GOLD:	Mary Visits Elizabeth

ID:	3366
INPUT:	Ez dezazuela , beraz , epea baino lehen epai . Itxaron Jauna etorri arte . Berak argituko du ilunpean ezkutatua dagoena , berak agertuko bihotzeko asmo gordeak . Eta orduan , nork bere merezia jasoko du Jainkoarengandik .
PRED:	So you must not be judged until the Lord comes , until he comes , and the light of the darkness will be revealed in the darkness , and it will be revealed to his heart , and every man will receive his reward from God .
GOLD:	So do n't make judgments about anyone ahead of time — before the Lord returns . For he will bring our darkest secrets to light and will reveal our private motives . Then God will give to each one whatever praise is due .

ID:	3367
INPUT:	Israelek , Daviden erreinutik bereizi zen hartan , Nebaten seme Jeroboam izendatu zuen errege , eta errege honek aldendu egin zuen Israel Jaunaren esanetatik , bekatu handia eginaraziz .
PRED:	When Israel was born from the kingdom of David , Jeroboam son of Nebat made him king , and he turned away from the sins of the Lord .
GOLD:	For when the Lord tore Israel away from the kingdom of David , they chose Jeroboam son of Nebat as their king . But Jeroboam drew Israel away from following the Lord and made them commit a great sin .

ID:	3368
INPUT:	Gizaki guztien aldeko otoitza
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Instructions about Worship

ID:	3369
INPUT:	« Oraindik ohean nengoela , zerutik zetorren aingeru zaindari bat ikusi nuen ikuskarian .
PRED:	While I was still still still , I saw a vision coming from heaven .
GOLD:	“ ‘ While I was lying in my bed , this is what I dreamed . I saw a large tree in the middle of the earth .

ID:	3370
INPUT:	Kristauen biziera berria
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Sin 's Power Is Broken

ID:	3371
INPUT:	Elkarri zor diozuen maitasunari buruz , ez duzue nik idatzi beharrik , Jainkoak berak irakasten baitizue elkar maitatzen ,
PRED:	To one another you do not think about love , because God has not written to you , because God loved one another .
GOLD:	But we do n't need to write to you about the importance of loving each other , for God himself has taught you to love one another .

ID:	3372
INPUT:	Zure ondorengoaklurreko hautsa bezain ugariizango dira . Mendebalde eta ekialdera , iparralde eta hegoalderahedatuko zara . Zure eta zure ondorengoen bitartezlurreko senitarte guztiakbedeinkatuko ditut .
PRED:	Your descendants will be like dust on the earth , and you will be like dust on the west and on the west side , and you will be blessed . I will bless your descendants and your descendants .
GOLD:	Your descendants will be as numerous as the dust of the earth ! They will spread out in all directions — to the west and the east , to the north and the south . And all the families of the earth will be blessed through you and your descendants .

ID:	3373
INPUT:	« Beraz , urtean hiru aldiz aurkeztuko dira gizaseme guztiak Jainko Jaunaren aurrera .
PRED:	And all the sons of man shall stand before the Lord their God three times .
GOLD:	At these three times each year , every man in Israel must appear before the Sovereign , the Lord .

ID:	3374
INPUT:	( 18 , <unk> ; 19 , 7-9 ; Mk 9 , <unk> ; 10 , <unk> . 10-12 ; Lk 16 , 18 )
PRED:	( Mk )
GOLD:	Teaching about Love for Enemies

ID:	3375
INPUT:	Eta jarraitu zuen : — Lasai zokoratzen duzue Jainkoaren agindua zeuen usadioak ezartzeko !
PRED:	And he said to them , “ You are rest , that you may keep the commandments of your God . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ You skillfully sidestep God 's law in order to hold on to your own tradition .

ID:	3376
INPUT:	Hadadezerrek Eufrates ibaiaren ekialdeko aramearrei etortzeko agindu zien , eta Helam-en bildu ziren , Hadadezerren gudalburu zen Xobak buruzagi zutela .
PRED:	And the king of Babylon commanded them to come to the children of Ammon , and they gathered together the prince of the Jordan , the prince of Elam , the prince of Elam , the prince of the guard .
GOLD:	they were joined by additional Aramean troops summoned by Hadadezer from the other side of the Euphrates River . These troops arrived at Helam under the command of Shobach , the commander of Hadadezer 's forces .

ID:	3377
INPUT:	egon ziur , Jaunak , zuen Jainkoak , ez duela herri horiek zuen aurretik botatzen jarraituko . Sare eta tranpa izango dituzue , saihetsean eztenkada eta begietan arantza bezain mingarri , Jaunak , zeuen Jainkoak , eman dizuen lurralde eder honetatik zuek desagerrarazi arte .
PRED:	And the Lord your God will not drive them out before you , and they will not drive them out before you , and they will be as a snare in a dream , and in a dream , as the Lord your God has given you out of the land which he has given you .
GOLD:	then know for certain that the Lord your God will no longer drive them out of your land . Instead , they will be a snare and a trap to you , a whip for your backs and thorny brambles in your eyes , and you will vanish from this good land the Lord your God has given you .

ID:	3378
INPUT:	Horregatik , Babel — hau da , « Nahasketa » — , eman zioten izena , han nahasi baitzuen Jaunak mundu osoko hizkuntza eta handik sakabanatu baitzituen mundu zabalera .
PRED:	So they called the name of the Lord , and they called the name of the Lord , for the whole world was scattered from there , and from there to the earth .
GOLD:	That is why the city was called Babel , because that is where the Lord confused the people with different languages . In this way he scattered them all over the world .

ID:	3379
INPUT:	Salomon erregeak berrehun babeski handi egin zituen urre garbiz , babeski bakoitza egiteko ia zazpi kilo urre behar izan zelarik .
PRED:	King Solomon made two hundred talents of pure gold , and he made two hundred talents of pure gold .
GOLD:	King Solomon made 200 large shields of hammered gold , each weighing more than 15 pounds .

ID:	3380
INPUT:	Zazpigarren zigilua . Jainkoaren herriaren otoitzak
PRED:	The seventh Spirit
GOLD:	The Lamb Breaks the Seventh Seal

ID:	3381
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	The Lord spoke to Moses , saying ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	3382
INPUT:	Eta jendea txutxu-mutxuka ari zen hartaz ; batzuek zioten : « Gizon ona da » . Beste batzuek , ordea : « Ez , herria engainatzen ari da » .
PRED:	And when the people heard about him , some of them said , It is good ; but others said , It is not good to the people .
GOLD:	There was a lot of grumbling about him among the crowds . Some argued , “ He 's a good man , ” but others said , “ He 's nothing but a fraud who deceives the people . ”

ID:	3383
INPUT:	« Ipini seinaleak bide-erakusgarri , begira ongi nondik zoazen : itzuli , Israel neskatxa eder , itzuli zeure hirietara .
PRED:	And thou shalt see the sign which thou hast done , and behold , the young men of Israel returned unto thy city , and return to thy city .
GOLD:	Set up road signs ; put up guideposts.Mark well the pathby which you came.Come back again , my virgin Israel ; return to your towns here .

ID:	3384
INPUT:	Gainerako ikasleak txalupaz joan ziren , sarea arrainekin tiraka zekartela , lehorretik hurbil baitziren , ehunen bat metrora .
PRED:	And the disciples went into the boat of the boat to the boat of the boat , for it was near .
GOLD:	The others stayed with the boat and pulled the loaded net to the shore , for they were only about a hundred yards from shore .

ID:	3385
INPUT:	Ahiasek , emakumearen oin-hotsak ate ondoan sumatzean , esan zion : — Sar zaitez , Jeroboamen emazte hori . Zergatik zatozkit itxuraldatua ? Berri txarra eman behar dizut Jaunaren izenean .
PRED:	When Amaziah was sitting at the door of the woman , he said to her , “ Go into the door of Jeroboam 's wife . Why do you come to me in the name of the Lord ? ”
GOLD:	So when Ahijah heard her footsteps at the door , he called out , “ Come in , wife of Jeroboam ! Why are you pretending to be someone else ? ” Then he told her , “ I have bad news for you .

ID:	3386
INPUT:	( Mt 26 , 1-5 ; Lk 22 , 1-2 ; Jn 11 , 45-53 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus Predicts Peter 's Denial

ID:	3387
INPUT:	Horrela , beraz , gurtzen zuten Jauna ; baina , erbesteratu baino lehen beren jatorrizko hirietan zituzten kultuen arabera , beren jainkoak ere gurtu ohi zituzten .
PRED:	So they worshiped the Lord , but they served the gods of their cities before they served their gods .
GOLD:	And though they worshiped the Lord , they continued to follow their own gods according to the religious customs of the nations from which they came .

ID:	3388
INPUT:	zuri idazten dizut , ene seme maite Timoteo . Jainko Aitak eta Kristo Jesus gure Jaunak eman biezazkizute grazia , errukia eta bakea .
PRED:	To you , my beloved son , I am writing to you , my beloved , and peace to you , and peace .
GOLD:	I am writing to Timothy , my dear son.May God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord give you grace , mercy , and peace .

ID:	3389
INPUT:	Geletatik bi ate zeuden hutsarte hartara : bata iparraldera eta bestea hegoaldera . Hutsartearen inguruko hormaren lodiera bi metro eta erdikoa zen .
PRED:	Each side of the outer court , and the other side of the north , and the other side , and the other side of the inner court , and the breadth of the inner court .
GOLD:	Two doors opened from the side rooms into the terrace yard , which was 83/4 feet wide . One door faced north and the other south .

ID:	3390
INPUT:	Ez iezadazu larrialdian aurpegia ezkuta , makur belarria niregana , dei egitean : erantzun bizkor !
PRED:	Do n't hide your face from me , and you will not call on me , and you will answer me .
GOLD:	For my days disappear like smoke , and my bones burn like red-hot coals .

ID:	3391
INPUT:	idolatria , sorginkeria , etsaigoak , haserreak , bekaizkeria , gorrotoak , norgehiagokeria , alderdikeria , zatiketak ,
PRED:	Their idols , their idols , anger , anger , jealousy , wickedness , wickedness , wickedness ,
GOLD:	idolatry , sorcery , hostility , quarreling , jealousy , outbursts of anger , selfish ambition , dissension , division ,

ID:	3392
INPUT:	Eta Jakobek : — Egidazu zin ! Josek zin egin zion . Orduan , Jakob oheburura makurtu zen .
PRED:	Jacob said to him , “ Do n't let me swear . ” So Jacob bowed down to his head .
GOLD:	“ Swear that you will do it , ” Jacob insisted . So Joseph gave his oath , and Jacob bowed humbly at the head of his bed .

ID:	3393
INPUT:	Gutxietsi egin zituzten bai beraien gurasoekin Jaunak egin zuen ituna , bai eman zizkien burubideak ere . Horrela , idolo hutsalen ondoren joanez , hutsal bihurtu ziren beraiek ere . Inguruko herrien antzeko egin ziren , Jainkoak haien antzera ez jokatzeko agindu zien arren .
PRED:	And the Lord made a covenant with their fathers , and made a covenant with their fathers , as their fathers had done ; and they went after their idols , as they had commanded them , and they did not walk in their midst , as they had commanded them .
GOLD:	They rejected his decrees and the covenant he had made with their ancestors , and they despised all his warnings . They worshiped worthless idols , so they became worthless themselves . They followed the example of the nations around them , disobeying the Lord 's command not to imitate them .

ID:	3394
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaien Jauna Moisesi eta Aaroni , israeldarrak Egiptotik ateratzeko mandatua emanez , eta aginduak eman zizkien israeldarrentzat eta Egiptoko errege faraoiarentzat .
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses and Aaron , “ Bring the Israelites out of Egypt to bring them out of Egypt , and he gave them to Pharaoh king of Egypt .
GOLD:	But the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron and gave them orders for the Israelites and for Pharaoh , the king of Egypt . The Lord commanded Moses and Aaron to lead the people of Israel out of Egypt .

ID:	3395
INPUT:	Beraz , haien erortzea munduarentzat aberasbide , hau da , haien hutsegitea jentilentzat aberasbide gertatu bada , zenbatez aberasgarriago ez ote da izanen Israel osoak salbamena iristea !
PRED:	So then , when they are rich , this is the riches of the world , that they may be rich , and all Israel will not be saved .
GOLD:	Now if the Gentiles were enriched because the people of Israel turned down God 's offer of salvation , think how much greater a blessing the world will share when they finally accept it .

ID:	3396
INPUT:	Zuen lurraldea hondatua dago , zuen hiriak suak erreta . Soroetako uztaatzerritarrek dizuete i<unk> zeuen begi aurrean . Dena hondamendi , Sodomaren porrokaldikoan bezala .
PRED:	Your land is destroyed , and your cities will be destroyed , and the nations of Sodom will be destroyed in front of you . The nations of Sodom will be destroyed in the valley of Sodom .
GOLD:	Your country lies in ruins , and your towns are burned.Foreigners plunder your fields before your eyesand destroy everything they see .

ID:	3397
INPUT:	Eta hauengatik ematen dizut erabat neure burua , hauek ere egiaren bidez zeuretzat har ditzazun .
PRED:	And I will give you my own head for these things , so that you may be given to you .
GOLD:	And I give myself as a holy sacrifice for them so they can be made holy by your truth .

ID:	3398
INPUT:	Jariodunak erabilitako eserlekuan esertzen denak arropak eta gorputza garbituko ditu eta kutsaturik geldituko da arratsa arte .
PRED:	And if any man who touches him shall wash his clothes and wash his clothes , he shall wash his clothes , and be unclean until evening .
GOLD:	If you sit where the man with the discharge has sat , you must wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water , and you will remain unclean until evening .

ID:	3399
INPUT:	Joan zitzaizkion jauregiko arduradunak lurretik jaikiarazteko asmotan , baina hark ez zuen nahi izan , ezta deus jan ere haiekin .
PRED:	And the elders of the king came out of the house to bring him out of the earth , but he would not eat anything with them .
GOLD:	The elders of his household pleaded with him to get up and eat with them , but he refused .

ID:	3400
INPUT:	ergela toki gorenean jarriaeta aberatsa behean eseria .
PRED:	He sat down in the place where he sat down , and he sat down at the door of the king .
GOLD:	when they give great authority to foolish people and low positions to people of proven worth .

ID:	3401
INPUT:	Bere guardiako bat bidali zuen , Joanen burua ekartzeko aginduz . Joan zen hura kartzelara eta lepoa moztu zion ,
PRED:	And he sent one of his sheep to bring the head of John . And he went into the prison , and cut off his head .
GOLD:	So he immediately sent an executioner to the prison to cut off John 's head and bring it to him . The soldier beheaded John in the prison ,

ID:	3402
INPUT:	Jaitsi zen Moises eta israeldarrei hitz egin zien .
PRED:	Moses went down and spoke to the Israelites and spoke to them .
GOLD:	So Moses went down to the people and told them what the Lord had said .

ID:	3403
INPUT:	Judeako eliz elkarteek ez ninduten oraindik begiz ezagutzen .
PRED:	The churches of Judea did not know me .
GOLD:	And still the churches in Christ that are in Judea did n't know me personally .

ID:	3404
INPUT:	Jainkoaren agintzaria Jesusengan burutua
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	God 's Promises Bring Hope

ID:	3405
INPUT:	Bigbairenak 2 . <unk> ;
PRED:	The sons of Pashhur , two hundred and twenty .
GOLD:	The family of Bigvai2,056

ID:	3406
INPUT:	Ondoren , ezarri itun-kutxaren gaineko estalkia toki santu-santuan .
PRED:	And he set the ark of the covenant of the covenant of the covenant of the covenant of the covenant of the testimony .
GOLD:	“ Then put the Ark 's cover — the place of atonement — on top of the Ark of the Covenant inside the Most Holy Place .

ID:	3407
INPUT:	David eta Tziba
PRED:	David and Abishai
GOLD:	David and Ziba

ID:	3408
INPUT:	Haien aurretik suak irentsi , haien atzetik garrak kiskali . Lehen , lurra baratze eder ; gero , eremu gorri . Ez die ezerk ihes egiten .
PRED:	Their fire came out from before them , and fire came out of the earth ; and the earth is dry , and it is no one to escape .
GOLD:	Fire burns in front of them , and flames follow after them.Ahead of them the land liesas beautiful as the Garden of Eden.Behind them is nothing but desolation ; not one thing escapes .

ID:	3409
INPUT:	Jaiegunari buruzko eztabaida
PRED:	The feast of the Sabbath
GOLD:	A Discussion about the Sabbath

ID:	3410
INPUT:	Ezin konta ahala dira gure erruak , baina zuk barkatu egiten dizkiguzu hobenak .
PRED:	We can not bear our sins , but you have forgiven our sins .
GOLD:	What joy for those you choose to bring near , those who live in your holy courts.What festivities await usinside your holy Temple .

ID:	3411
INPUT:	Entzun dudanean , ikarak hartu dit barrua . Zarata aditzean , dardaraz ditut ezpainak . Ahulezia sartu zait hezurretaraino , koloka ditut oinak . Geldi nago ni , egun larriaren zain , zapaltzen gaituen herriari datorkionegunaren zain .
PRED:	When I heard it , I was afraid , and I was afraid , and I was afraid of my lips , and I went into the bones of my lips , and I am afraid of my bones , and I am afraid for the day of the people .
GOLD:	I trembled inside when I heard this ; my lips quivered with fear.My legs gave way beneath me , and I shook in terror.I will wait quietly for the coming daywhen disaster will strike the people who invade us .

ID:	3412
INPUT:	David eta Betsabe
PRED:	David and David
GOLD:	David Arranges for Uriah 's Death

ID:	3413
INPUT:	Jake-ren seme Agur-en esanak . Hona gizon honen mezua , Itieli eta Ukali emana .
PRED:	These are the words of Jacob , the son of Jacob , the son of Jacob , the son of Jacob , and the son of Shealtiel , and sent him to Uriah .
GOLD:	The sayings of Agur son of Jakeh contain this message.I am weary , O God ; I am weary and worn out , O God .

ID:	3414
INPUT:	Ismaelek eta berekin zituen hamar gizonek , jaiki , ezpataz jo eta hil egin zuten Gedalias , Babiloniako erregeak Judako gobernari ezarria .
PRED:	And Israel and his ten men rose up , and struck him with the sword , and killed him with the sword , and put him in the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	Ishmael and his ten men suddenly jumped up , drew their swords , and killed Gedaliah , whom the king of Babylon had appointed governor .

ID:	3415
INPUT:	Arduradunek eta herri osoak erantzun zioten : — Ez iezaiozu entzun , ez onartu .
PRED:	The elders and all the people answered , “ Do n't listen to what you have heard . Do n't listen to it . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't give in to any more demands , ” all the elders and the people advised .

ID:	3416
INPUT:	Egin beza nire ahoak Jaunaren gorespenaeta bedeinka bezate izaki guztiek haren izen santuabeti eta beti !
PRED:	Let my mouth praise the Lord , and let all men praise him forever and ever .
GOLD:	I will praise the Lord , and may everyone on earth bless his holy nameforever and ever .

ID:	3417
INPUT:	Zeren Kristorengatik abiatu baitira , jentilengandik ezer ere hartu gabe .
PRED:	For he turned away from the Gentiles , and did not take anything from the Gentiles .
GOLD:	For they are traveling for the Lord , and they accept nothing from people who are not believers .

ID:	3418
INPUT:	Nik , senideok , ezin izan nizuen hitz egin Espiritua dutenei bezala , pertsona heldugabeei bezala baizik , kristau-mailan umetxo direnei bezala .
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , I could not speak to those who speak in the Spirit , but to those who are in Christ .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , when I was with you I could n't talk to you as I would to spiritual people . I had to talk as though you belonged to this world or as though you were infants in Christ .

ID:	3419
INPUT:	Job
PRED:	Job and Job
GOLD:	Job 's Second Speech : A Response to Eliphaz

ID:	3420
INPUT:	Gauerdian jaiki eta , ni lo nengoen bitartean , nire ondotik nire haurra hartu eta bere ondoan etzan zuen ; bere seme hila , berriz , nire ondoan ezarri .
PRED:	And I rose up in the evening , and took my child from me , and lay him on his bed , and lay him on my son 's bed .
GOLD:	Then she got up in the night and took my son from beside me while I was asleep . She laid her dead child in my arms and took mine to sleep beside her .

ID:	3421
INPUT:	Jainko ahalguztiduna , itzuli , arren ! Begira zerutik , ikus ! Hartzazu zeure mahastiaren ardura ,
PRED:	O God of hosts , turn back from heaven , and see your vineyard , and see the vineyard of your vineyard .
GOLD:	that you yourself have planted , this son you have raised for yourself .

ID:	3422
INPUT:	Ez zetozen beren artean bat , eta , alde egitera zihoazela , Paulok azkenik esan zien : « Ederki asko esan zien Espiritu Santuak zuen arbasoei Isaias profetaren bidez :
PRED:	But when he was among them , he went out and went out , and said to them , “ Many times have the Holy Spirit spoken to your fathers , saying ,
GOLD:	And after they had argued back and forth among themselves , they left with this final word from Paul : “ The Holy Spirit was right when he said to your ancestors through Isaiah the prophet ,

ID:	3423
INPUT:	Zuen erruek , aldiz , nahastu egin dute ordena hau ; zeuen bekatuengatikez zarete lurreko ondasunezgozatzen .
PRED:	But you have done these things , but you have not done this thing . You have not sinned in your sins .
GOLD:	Your wickedness has deprived you of these wonderful blessings.Your sin has robbed you of all these good things .

ID:	3424
INPUT:	Jaunaren espirituz jantzirik , Gedeonek adarra jo eta bere ondoan bildu zituen Abiezerren senitartekoak .
PRED:	And Gideon put on the Spirit of the Lord , and lifted up the voice of the house of Abimelech , and gathered the house of Abimelech his brethren .
GOLD:	Then the Spirit of the Lord clothed Gideon with power . He blew a ram 's horn as a call to arms , and the men of the clan of Abiezer came to him .

ID:	3425
INPUT:	Bai , Jainkoa da Kristoren bitartez mundua berekin adiskidetu duena , gizon-emakumeei bekatuen kontuak eskatu gabe , eta adiskidetzearen mezu hau gure esku utzi duena .
PRED:	For God is God , who has made the world with the world , who has not asked for sins , and has given us the Son of our friend .
GOLD:	For God was in Christ , reconciling the world to himself , no longer counting people 's sins against them . And he gave us this wonderful message of reconciliation .

ID:	3426
INPUT:	« Bil bitez nazio guztiak , elkar bitez herriak : horietako zeinek iragarri zuenhau guztiaedo lehengo gertakizunakjakinarazi ? Aurkez bitzate lekukoak , beren buruak zuri ditzaten , entzun diezaieguneta aitortu egia zela .
PRED:	“ Bring together all the nations together , and gather together one another , and let them know all these things , that they may know , and that they may know that they may know that they have heard their thoughts , and they have heard that they have heard their testimony .
GOLD:	Gather the nations together ! Assemble the peoples of the world ! Which of their idols has ever foretold such things ? Which can predict what will happen tomorrow ? Where are the witnesses of such predictions ? Who can verify that they spoke the truth ?

ID:	3427
INPUT:	« Auzitegira zaramatzatela , ez egon zer esango duzuen kezkatan ; une hartan bertan Jainkoak adieraziko dizuena , esan huraxe , ez baitzarete zuek mintzatuko , Espiritu Santua baizik .
PRED:	“ Take him to be brought to you , do n't be afraid . In that time you will speak to you in that time , but you will not speak the Holy Spirit but you will not speak .
GOLD:	But when you are arrested and stand trial , do n't worry in advance about what to say . Just say what God tells you at that time , for it is not you who will be speaking , but the Holy Spirit .

ID:	3428
INPUT:	« Horrela bada , Jordanez beste aldeko , ekialdeko , bi errege amortar haien lurraldeak eskuratu genituen , Arnon errekatik Hermon mendiraino
PRED:	So we delivered their land from the Jordan River , the two kings of the Amorites , the Amorites , and the two kings of the Amorites , from the Arnon to Mount Sinai .
GOLD:	“ So we took the land of the two Amorite kings east of the Jordan River — all the way from the Arnon Gorge to Mount Hermon .

ID:	3429
INPUT:	Joan zen , bada , Samuel Saulen ondoren eta honek gurtu egin zuen Jauna .
PRED:	So Samuel went and worshiped the Lord .
GOLD:	So Samuel finally agreed and went back with him , and Saul worshiped the Lord .

ID:	3430
INPUT:	« Ez zabaldu funsgabeko esamesarik ; ez atera gaiztoaren alde , zuzengabeko testigantza eginez .
PRED:	“ Do n't speak to the words of the wicked ; do n't go out from the wicked ; do n't tell the testimony of the wicked .
GOLD:	“ You must not pass along false rumors . You must not cooperate with evil people by lying on the witness stand .

ID:	3431
INPUT:	Izan ere , oraindik bekatupean indargabe ginela , Jainkoak erabakitako garaian , gaiztoen alde hil zen Kristo .
PRED:	For when he was still in the days of sin , he died in the days of the wicked .
GOLD:	When we were utterly helpless , Christ came at just the right time and died for us sinners .

ID:	3432
INPUT:	« Aitzitik , gaur ematen dizkizuedan agindu eta legeak betetzen saiatu ez eta Jaunari zeuen Jainkoari obeditzen ez badiozue , madarikazio hauek guztiak bete-betean iritsiko zaizkizue .
PRED:	But if you do not obey the commands that I am giving you today , and do not obey the commandments of the Lord your God , and do not obey all these nations .
GOLD:	“ But if you refuse to listen to the Lord your God and do not obey all the commands and decrees I am giving you today , all these curses will come and overwhelm you :

ID:	3433
INPUT:	galdetuko dute : « Zertan gelditu da Kristo etorriko zela zioen agintzaria ? Izan ere , gure gurasoak hil ziren , eta geroztik denak berdin jarraitzen du , mundua mundu denetik bezalaxe » .
PRED:	They will ask him , “ What is Christ who is left ? For our fathers died from the world , just as the world has been done from the world . ”
GOLD:	They will say , “ What happened to the promise that Jesus is coming again ? From before the times of our ancestors , everything has remained the same since the world was first created . ”

ID:	3434
INPUT:	Eta deiadarka esan zion : — Zer duzu nirekin , Jesus , goi-goiko Jainkoaren Seme horrek ? Jainkoarren , ez nazazu oinazetu !
PRED:	And he cried out to him , “ What do you have with me ? Jesus , son of God , is the Son of God ? Do n't call me . ”
GOLD:	With a shriek , he screamed , “ Why are you interfering with me , Jesus , Son of the Most High God ? In the name of God , I beg you , do n't torture me ! ”

ID:	3435
INPUT:	Eta apaiz edo profeta nahiz herrikoren batek “ Jaunaren mezua ( zama ) ” esaten badu , zigortu egingo ditut bera eta bere etxekoak .
PRED:	And if a priest or a prophet or a prophet or a prophet or a prophet , say , The word of the Lord is against him , I will punish his house and his houses .
GOLD:	“ If any prophet , priest , or anyone else says , ‘ I have a prophecy from the Lord , ' I will punish that person along with his entire family .

ID:	3436
INPUT:	Gero , agindu zion Gehazi bere morroiari : — Deitu emakume xunemdar horri . Egin zion dei eta etorri zen emakumea morroiarengana .
PRED:	Then Gideon said to his servant , “ Call the woman , and she came to the servant . ”
GOLD:	He said to his servant Gehazi , “ Tell the woman from Shunem I want to speak to her . ” When she appeared ,

ID:	3437
INPUT:	« Baina Hexbongo Sihon erregeak ez zigun bere lurraldetik igarotzen utzi . Jaunak gure Jainkoak burugogor eta setatsu bihurtu zuen , bera guri eskura emateko asmoz , gaur ikus daitekeen bezala .
PRED:	But the Lord our God did not let us pass through the land of Sihon king of Heshbon . The Lord our God made his heart strong , and made his heart to see him , and to see him as this day .
GOLD:	“ But King Sihon of Heshbon refused to allow us to pass through , because the Lord your God made Sihon stubborn and defiant so he could help you defeat him , as he has now done .

ID:	3438
INPUT:	artelanak asmatzeko , urre , zilar eta brontzezko lanak egiteko ,
PRED:	and to give them many silver , silver , and bronze , and bronze , and bronze .
GOLD:	He is a master craftsman , expert in working with gold , silver , and bronze .

ID:	3439
INPUT:	Jonasek erantzun zien : — Hebrearra naiz eta Jauna gurtzen dut , zeruko Jainkoa , itsasoa eta lehorra egin zituena .
PRED:	Joseph said to them , “ I am the Lord , and I worship the Lord , the God of heaven , who made the sea and the sea .
GOLD:	Jonah answered , “ I am a Hebrew , and I worship the Lord , the God of heaven , who made the sea and the land . ”

ID:	3440
INPUT:	Egin duen bekatuaz jabetzean , ahuntz akats gabea eramango du barkamen-oparitzat .
PRED:	And when he has sinned , he shall bring him to the sin offering without blemish , he shall offer a young goat without blemish .
GOLD:	When they become aware of their sin , they must bring as an offering for their sin a female goat with no defects .

ID:	3441
INPUT:	Gero , miraririk gehienak egin zitueneko herriak madarikatzen hasi zen Jesus , bihozberritu ez zirelako .
PRED:	And the people of the city began to curse him , because they did not turn away .
GOLD:	Then Jesus began to denounce the towns where he had done so many of his miracles , because they had n't repented of their sins and turned to God .

ID:	3442
INPUT:	Ikusi zuenak berak testigatzen du eta haren testigantza egiazkoa da . Berak badaki egia dioena , zuek ere sinets dezazuen .
PRED:	The one who saw his testimony , and his testimony is true . He knows that you will believe that you will believe .
GOLD:	( This report is from an eyewitness giving an accurate account . He speaks the truth so that you also may continue to believe . )

ID:	3443
INPUT:	Santutegiko artisauak
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Craftsmen : Bezalel and Oholiab

ID:	3444
INPUT:	Bere amaren sabeletikbiluzik irten zen , halaxe da itzuliko , bere lanaren saririk batereez du berekin eramango .
PRED:	He went out of his mother 's womb , and he will return to him , and he will not bring him back with him .
GOLD:	Money is put into risky investments that turn sour , and everything is lost . In the end , there is nothing left to pass on to one 's children .

ID:	3445
INPUT:	Gero , Jehu eta Rekaben seme Jonadab Baalen jauretxean sartu ziren . Jehuk esan zien Baalen adoratzaileei : — Begira ezazue ongi hemen , zeuen artean , Jaunaren adoratzailerik ba ote dagoen , ala Baalenak bakarrik zaudeten .
PRED:	And Jehu went into the house of Baal the son of Ahab , and said unto the men of Baal , Behold , thou art here with thee , and thou shalt see that the law of the Lord is among thee .
GOLD:	Then Jehu went into the temple of Baal with Jehonadab son of Recab . Jehu said to the worshipers of Baal , “ Make sure no one who worships the Lord is here — only those who worship Baal . ”

ID:	3446
INPUT:	Israel desleial Jaunarekin
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Judah Follows Israel 's Example

ID:	3447
INPUT:	Horrexegatik , hain zuzen , onartu egin zuen Jainkoak .
PRED:	So God did this so , and he received it .
GOLD:	And because of Abraham 's faith , God counted him as righteous .

ID:	3448
INPUT:	zedroak gure etxe-habe , nekostak etxe-gain .
PRED:	Our houses , our houses , and the house of our house , and the house of our house .
GOLD:	fragrant cedar branches are the beams of our house , and pleasant smelling firs are the rafters .

ID:	3449
INPUT:	Zure zerbitzarien gorpuakzeruko hegaztiei eman dizkiete janari , zure fededunen haragia basapiztiei .
PRED:	Your servants have given food to the birds of the birds of the heavens , to the birds of the earth , and to the beasts of the field .
GOLD:	They have left the bodies of your servantsas food for the birds of heaven.The flesh of your godly oneshas become food for the wild animals .

ID:	3450
INPUT:	Auzitegietan salatzen zaituztenagorrotatzen duzue , eta egia dioena gaitzesten .
PRED:	You hate those who hate you , and those who hate you do what is right .
GOLD:	How you hate honest judges ! How you despise people who tell the truth !

ID:	3451
INPUT:	Neure herri Israeli santu naizela aitorraraziko diot , eta ez diot utziko neure izen santua gehiago belzten . Orduan jakingo dute nazioek ni naizela Jauna , Israelen Santua .
PRED:	I will tell my people Israel that I am holy , and I will not leave my holy name , and they will know that I am the Lord , the Holy One of Israel .
GOLD:	“ In this way , I will make known my holy name among my people of Israel . I will not let anyone bring shame on it . And the nations , too , will know that I am the Lord , the Holy One of Israel .

ID:	3452
INPUT:	Goretsazue Jauna , dei egin berari , jakinarazi herrien artean haren egintza bikainak !
PRED:	Praise the Lord , and call him to him , and let him know his works among the nations .
GOLD:	Give thanks to the Lord and proclaim his greatness.Let the whole world know what he has done .

ID:	3453
INPUT:	zilarrezko ehun txanponeko isuna , israeldar birjina bati izen ona kentzeagatik , eta dirua neskaren aitari emango diote ; gainera , emaztetzat onartu beharko du eta ezin izango du bizitza osoan zapuztu .
PRED:	And he shall take away his wife from the house of Israel a hundred talents of silver , and he shall give it to his father 's wife , and his wife shall not marry her .
GOLD:	They must also fine him 100 pieces of silver , which he must pay to the woman 's father because he publicly accused a virgin of Israel of shameful conduct . The woman will then remain the man 's wife , and he may never divorce her .

ID:	3454
INPUT:	Jauna ihesleku da zapalduarentzat , ihesleku larrialdian .
PRED:	The Lord is a refuge for the needy , a refuge in the high places .
GOLD:	Those who know your name trust in you , for you , O Lord , do not abandon those who search for you .

ID:	3455
INPUT:	aita nahiz ama , anaia nahiz arreba hiltzen bazaio ere , ez da kutsatuko , Jaunari sagaratua baitu bere burua .
PRED:	If his father or his mother or his mother , he shall not be unclean , for he is holy .
GOLD:	Even if the dead person is their own father , mother , brother , or sister , they must not defile themselves , for the hair on their head is the symbol of their separation to God .

ID:	3456
INPUT:	Esdras Jainkoaren etxe aurretik Eliaxiben seme Johananen gelara joan zen , eta bertan eman zuen gaua . Ez zuen ezer jan , ez edan , erbestetik etorritakoen desleialtasunak nahigabeturik .
PRED:	And Ezra the son of Joash went before the house of God , and he went to the house of Joab . And he ate nothing , and did not eat any of the evil things that came from the captivity .
GOLD:	Then Ezra left the front of the Temple of God and went to the room of Jehohanan son of Eliashib . He spent the night there without eating or drinking anything . He was still in mourning because of the unfaithfulness of the returned exiles .

ID:	3457
INPUT:	Beraz , beren fruituetatik antzemango diezue sasiprofetei .
PRED:	So you will be like the fruit of their fruit , and you will be like the prophets .
GOLD:	Yes , just as you can identify a tree by its fruit , so you can identify people by their actions .

ID:	3458
INPUT:	Horregatik ikaratzen nau haren presentziak ; zenbat eta gehiago pentsatu , are gehiago beldurtzen nau .
PRED:	Therefore , he taught me many things , and I am afraid of him .
GOLD:	No wonder I am so terrified in his presence.When I think of it , terror grips me .

ID:	3459
INPUT:	« Badakizue legean aurrekoei agindu zitzaiena : Ez hil inor ; eta hiltzailea kondenatua izango da .
PRED:	“ You know that the law was commanded to the law , “ No one will die . ”
GOLD:	“ You have heard that our ancestors were told , ‘ You must not murder . If you commit murder , you are subject to judgment . '

ID:	3460
INPUT:	halakoak ez duela aitarekiko agindu hori bete beharrik ; horrela , Jainkoaren hitza baliogabe uzten duzue , zeuen usadioengatik .
PRED:	You must not obey the commands of your father , so that you do n't obey the word of God . You do n't obey the word of your God .
GOLD:	In this way , you say they do n't need to honor their parents . And so you cancel the word of God for the sake of your own tradition .

ID:	3461
INPUT:	Haiek okertu , erori egiten dira ; guk , berriz , zutik eta sendo irauten .
PRED:	But they fall , but we do not obey , but we follow and fast .
GOLD:	Give victory to our king , O Lord ! Answer our cry for help .

ID:	3462
INPUT:	Saia gaitezen guztiok lagun hurkoari atsegin ematen , ona eta fedean hazteko lagungarri zaiona bilatuz .
PRED:	Let us do what we want to do , so that we may do what is good and right in faith .
GOLD:	We should help others do what is right and build them up in the Lord .

ID:	3463
INPUT:	Ez al dakizue zuen gorputza Jainkoak eman dizuen eta zuengan bizi den Espiritu Santuaren tenplu dela ? Beraz , ez zarete jadanik zeuenak ,
PRED:	Do you not know that God gave you the body of the Holy Spirit and the Holy Spirit ? Do n't you know that you do n't know that you are the Holy Spirit ?
GOLD:	Do n't you realize that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit , who lives in you and was given to you by God ? You do not belong to yourself ,

ID:	3464
INPUT:	« Dan-ek bere herriadu gobernatuko , Israelgo beste leinuek bezala .
PRED:	And the sons of Dan shall give his people the tribes of Israel according to their families .
GOLD:	“ Dan will govern his people , like any other tribe in Israel .

ID:	3465
INPUT:	Merariren ondorengoen senitarteak mahlitarrak eta muxitarrak ziren .
PRED:	These are the families of the sons of Gershon , the family of the family of Gershon .
GOLD:	The descendants of Merari were composed of the clans descended from Mahli and Mushi .

ID:	3466
INPUT:	Jainko Jaunakhitz egiteko trebatu nau , bihotz-eroriak adore-hitzezbizkor ditzadan . Goizero dit belarria ernearazten , ikasle onak bezalaentzun diezaiodan .
PRED:	The Lord God has spoken to me with all my heart , with all my heart , and with all my heart I have heard the voice of the Lord God , and I have heard the voice of his disciples .
GOLD:	The Sovereign Lord has given me his words of wisdom , so that I know how to comfort the weary.Morning by morning he wakens meand opens my understanding to his will .

ID:	3467
INPUT:	Eta hark erantzun : — Babiloniara ; han santutegia eraikiko diote , eta prest dagokeenean , oin-aulki gainean jarriko dute .
PRED:	And he said unto them , Go into Babylon ; and they shall build the temple , and lay on his feet .
GOLD:	He replied , “ To the land of Babylonia , where they will build a temple for the basket . And when the temple is ready , they will set the basket there on its pedestal . ”

ID:	3468
INPUT:	Ordezkari haiek ahots handiz eta hebreeraz mintzo zitzaizkion Jerusalemgo harresi gainean zegoen jendeari , ikara eta beldur zedin , horrela hiriaz jabetu ahal izateko .
PRED:	And they cried with a loud voice , and with a loud voice in Jerusalem , that they might be afraid of the people , that they may take possession of the city .
GOLD:	The Assyrian officials who brought the letters shouted this in Hebrew to the people gathered on the walls of the city , trying to terrify them so it would be easier to capture the city .

ID:	3469
INPUT:	Hona hemen nire zerbitzaria , nik hautatua , nire maitea , atsegin dudana . Beronen gain ezarriko dut neure espiritua : nazioei justizia iragarriko die .
PRED:	This is my servant , whom I have chosen , and I will put my love on him , and I will put my Spirit on him , and he will bring justice to righteousness .
GOLD:	“ Look at my Servant , whom I have chosen.He is my Beloved , who pleases me.I will put my Spirit upon him , and he will proclaim justice to the nations .

ID:	3470
INPUT:	Goretsiko dut Jauna bizi naizen artean , soinua joko neure Jainkoari naizen artean .
PRED:	I will praise the Lord among my people , and I will praise him in the midst of my God .
GOLD:	I will praise the Lord as long as I live.I will sing praises to my God with my dying breath .

ID:	3471
INPUT:	aitak ez bezala : sasikultu-lekuetako otorduetan parte hartzen du , lagun hurkoaren emaztea desohoratzen ;
PRED:	As his father does not eat the food of the high places , he is to marry his neighbor 's wife .
GOLD:	And that son does all the evil things his father would never do — he worships idols on the mountains , commits adultery ,

ID:	3472
INPUT:	Etsaia ikusiko duzu zeurean ; Israel herriari , ordea , dena ongi aterako zaio . Zure etxean , berriz , bakar bat ere ez da zahartzarora inoiz helduko .
PRED:	When you see your enemies , you will see your enemies , Israel will be well with you , but no one will enter your house .
GOLD:	You will watch with envy as I pour out prosperity on the people of Israel . But no members of your family will ever live out their days .

ID:	3473
INPUT:	Ezekias erregeak ere , hori entzutean , jantziak urratu zituen eta , doluz jantzirik , Jaunaren etxera jo zuen .
PRED:	When King Hezekiah heard this , he tore his clothes and went into the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	When King Hezekiah heard their report , he tore his clothes and put on burlap and went into the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	3474
INPUT:	eta hala jakinarazi zion Davidi , Natan profetaren bidez . Orduan , Jaunaren omenez , Jedidias ipini zion izena , hau da , « Jaunaren Maitea » .
PRED:	And he told David about David by the prophets of Nathan the prophet . And he called him the name of the Lord , saying , The love of the Lord .
GOLD:	and sent word through Nathan the prophet that they should name him Jedidiah ( which means “ beloved of the Lord ” ) , as the Lord had commanded .

ID:	3475
INPUT:	itzul niregana , erruki zakizkit , eman indar zeure zerbitzari honi , salba zeure zerbitzari apala .
PRED:	Return to me , O Lord , for I have mercy on my servant , and have mercy on me .
GOLD:	Look down and have mercy on me.Give your strength to your servant ; save me , the son of your servant .

ID:	3476
INPUT:	lurralde guztian izango dituzue olibondoak , baina ez zarete olioz gantzutuko , erori egingo baitira olibak ;
PRED:	You will be a olive oil in all the land , but you will not be anointed with olive oil , because the olive oil will fall .
GOLD:	You will grow olive trees throughout your land , but you will never use the olive oil , for the fruit will drop before it ripens .

ID:	3477
INPUT:	Benetan diotsuet : Dena barkatuko die Jainkoak gizakiei , bekatuak eta egin litzaketen birao guztiak ;
PRED:	I say to you , God will forgive people , and all their sins will be forgiven .
GOLD:	“ I tell you the truth , all sin and blasphemy can be forgiven ,

ID:	3478
INPUT:	Zure merkantziak lehorreratzean , herri asko hornitzen zenuen ; zeure ondasuneta merkantzia ugarizmunduko erregeakaberasten zenituen .
PRED:	When your merchants were in the field , many peoples are your inheritance , and you gave your wealth to the kings of the earth .
GOLD:	The merchandise you tradedsatisfied the desires of many nations.Kings at the ends of the earthwere enriched by your trade .

ID:	3479
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Zer dago idatzia Moisesen legean ? Zer irakurtzen duzu ?
PRED:	Jesus said to him , “ What do you read in the law of Moses ? What do you read ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ What does the law of Moses say ? How do you read it ? ”

ID:	3480
INPUT:	baina eguzkiak jo orduko , erre egin zen eta , sustrairik ez zuelako , ihartu .
PRED:	But when the sun came , it was burned , because there was no root , because it was no root .
GOLD:	But the plant soon wilted under the hot sun , and since it did n't have deep roots , it died .

ID:	3481
INPUT:	Haiek esan zioten : — Jauna , baditugu hemen bi ezpata . Baina Jesusek erantzun : — Aski da !
PRED:	They said to him , “ Lord , we have two sword . ” But Jesus answered , “ It is well . ”
GOLD:	“ Look , Lord , ” they replied , “ we have two swords among us . ” “ That 's enough , ” he said .

ID:	3482
INPUT:	Zutabe-buruetan zeuden kapitel haietarako sare antzeko apaindurak egin zituen eta kate-sortak , kapitel bakoitzerako zazpi .
PRED:	And he made the pillars on the heads of the pillars of the pillars , and made them on the top of the pillars , and on each side of the pillars , and on each side .
GOLD:	Each capital was decorated with seven sets of latticework and interwoven chains .

ID:	3483
INPUT:	hala ere , hau erantzun zion hark : « Erregeak berak erabaki du zuek zer jan behar duzuen ; horregatik naiz beldur , zeren eta , beste gazteei baino itxura txarragoa ikusiko balizue , nire bizia jarriko baitzenukete arriskuan » .
PRED:	But the king said to him , “ If you eat what the king has commanded you to eat , I am afraid , because I am afraid of the young men , and you will see my life until I have seen my life . ”
GOLD:	But he responded , “ I am afraid of my lord the king , who has ordered that you eat this food and wine . If you become pale and thin compared to the other youths your age , I am afraid the king will have me beheaded . ”

ID:	3484
INPUT:	horixe agertu digu Jainkoak Espirituaren bidez . Espirituak , izan ere , guztia aztertzen du , baita Jainkoaren barne-sakona ere .
PRED:	This is what God has revealed to us through the Spirit . For the Spirit gives us all things , because all things are in the spirit of God .
GOLD:	But it was to us that God revealed these things by his Spirit . For his Spirit searches out everything and shows us God 's deep secrets .

ID:	3485
INPUT:	lehen-semea izan zuen ; oihaletan bildu eta abere-aska batean ezarri zuen , ez baitzen ostatuan haientzat tokirik .
PRED:	And he had a son , and gathered him in his feet , and laid him in a net , because he did not eat them .
GOLD:	She gave birth to her firstborn son . She wrapped him snugly in strips of cloth and laid him in a manger , because there was no lodging available for them .

ID:	3486
INPUT:	Ez nazazu eraman gaiztoekin batera , gaizkile horiekin batera : besteren aurrean bakezko hitzak dituzte , baina barruan txarkeria .
PRED:	Do n't bring me to a wicked man with the wicked ; they will speak in front of another , but they will speak evil .
GOLD:	Do not drag me away with the wicked — with those who do evil — those who speak friendly words to their neighborswhile planning evil in their hearts .

ID:	3487
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : « Ez beldurtu ! Zoazte eta esan nire senideei Galileara joateko ; han ikusiko naute » .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Do n't be afraid . Tell my brothers to Galilee . They will see me there . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus said to them , “ Do n't be afraid ! Go tell my brothers to leave for Galilee , and they will see me there . ”

ID:	3488
INPUT:	Meribako iturrian Jainkoa haserretu zuten , eta haien erruz Moisesek jasan zuen kaltea .
PRED:	And they were angry in the waters of the wilderness , and Moses said unto them , This is what Moses had said .
GOLD:	At Meribah , too , they angered the Lord , causing Moses serious trouble .

ID:	3489
INPUT:	Davidena . Ez zaitez gaiztoengatik haserretu , ezta gaizkileen inbidiatan egon ere ,
PRED:	Do n't be angry because of the wicked ; do n't be angry with the wicked .
GOLD:	Do n't worry about the wickedor envy those who do wrong .

ID:	3490
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Nik ezarritako lege hauekinoiz huts egingo ez duten bezala , Israel herriak ere ez du huts egingo , betiko iraungo du nire aurrean .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Israel will never be put to shame . They will never be put to death . They will never be put to death .
GOLD:	“ I am as likely to reject my people Israelas I am to abolish the laws of nature ! ”

ID:	3491
INPUT:	Goazen , bada , gu ere Jesusengana , kanpalekutik kanpora , haren desohorea bera eramanez ,
PRED:	So we came to Jesus , and brought him out of the camp , and brought him out of the camp .
GOLD:	So let us go out to him , outside the camp , and bear the disgrace he bore .

ID:	3492
INPUT:	Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren ahalmenezko etorrerari buruz hitz egin genizuenean , ez ginen oinarritu irudipenezko ipuinetan , geure esperientzian baizik , geure begiz ikusi baikenuen haren handitasuna .
PRED:	When we heard the word of our Lord Jesus Christ came to us , we did not listen to the foundation of the word of our Lord Jesus Christ , but we saw his glory in our eyes .
GOLD:	For we were not making up clever stories when we told you about the powerful coming of our Lord Jesus Christ . We saw his majestic splendor with our own eyes

ID:	3493
INPUT:	Agindu hau bete zuten , baina « hildakoen artetik pizte » horrekin zer adierazi nahi ote zien ziharduten beren artean .
PRED:	And they did as they had commanded him , saying , The resurrection from the dead . And they would tell him what he had said among them .
GOLD:	So they kept it to themselves , but they often asked each other what he meant by “ rising from the dead . ”

ID:	3494
INPUT:	Neftaliren leinutik , Enanen seme Ahira » .
PRED:	from the tribe of Naphtali , the son of Healed . ”
GOLD:	NaphtaliAhira son of Enan

ID:	3495
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jaunak Sion aukeratu dueta gogoko izan bertan bizitzea :
PRED:	For the Lord has chosen Zion , and he has chosen them to dwell there .
GOLD:	For the Lord has chosen Jerusalem ; he has desired it for his home .

ID:	3496
INPUT:	Ofizialek esan zioten Siriako erregeari : — Mendietako jainkoa dute israeldarrek beren jainko . Horregatik izan dira gu baino indartsuago . Borroka ditzagun , beraz , lautadan ; baietz izan orduan gu haiek baino indartsuago !
PRED:	And the servants of Israel said unto the king of Aram , The gods of the mountains of Israel are greater than they : therefore we shall fight against them , and we shall fight against them , and we shall be greater than they .
GOLD:	After their defeat , Ben-hadad 's officers said to him , “ The Israelite gods are gods of the hills ; that is why they won . But we can beat them easily on the plains .

ID:	3497
INPUT:	« Esan Aaroni : Etorkizunean , gorputz-akatsen bat duen zuen ondorengoetariko inor ere ez da aldarera hurbilduko Jainkoaren oparia eskaintzera .
PRED:	And thou shalt say unto Aaron , When ye come , there shall be no one of your sons , that shall come near unto the altar of God .
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to Aaron : In all future generations , none of your descendants who has any defect will qualify to offer food to his God .

ID:	3498
INPUT:	Emakumeek ere agurgarri izan behar dute eta ez maiseatzaile ; neurritsu eta gauza guztietan fidagarri .
PRED:	The women must not be pure , but they must not love them . They must be faithful and faithful in all things .
GOLD:	In the same way , their wives must be respected and must not slander others . They must exercise self-control and be faithful in everything they do .

ID:	3499
INPUT:	Ezagun-ezagunak ditut zure egintzak , eta inork itxi ezin duen atea utzi dut zure aurrean zabalik . Indar handirik ez duzun arren , onartu duzu nire mezua eta ez duzu ukatu nire izena .
PRED:	I know your works , and I have left your works , and no one can open your face before you . You have heard my word , and you have not obeyed my name .
GOLD:	“ I know all the things you do , and I have opened a door for you that no one can close . You have little strength , yet you obeyed my word and did not deny me .

ID:	3500
INPUT:	« Ez du inork bere aitaren emazte batekin sexu-harremanik izango , aitaren eskubidea hautsiko bailuke .
PRED:	“ No one has sexual relations with his father 's wife , because he has defiled his father 's wife .
GOLD:	“ If a man 's testicles are crushed or his penis is cut off , he may not be admitted to the assembly of the Lord .

ID:	3501
INPUT:	Nahiz argiaren sorlekurantz hegaldatu , nahiz mendebaldeko itsas mugetan kokatu ,
PRED:	He turned from the light to the light , and spread out the sea in the sea ,
GOLD:	If I ride the wings of the morning , if I dwell by the farthest oceans ,

ID:	3502
INPUT:	Neure eskuz sinatzen dizut ordain-agiria : Paulok ; eta ez dizut aipatu nahi zuk zeure burua bera zor didazula .
PRED:	I want you to pay my own hand , Paul , and I do n't want you to tell you that you want me to do what you want .
GOLD:	I , Paul , write this with my own hand : I will repay it . And I wo n't mention that you owe me your very soul !

ID:	3503
INPUT:	« Taberan , Masan eta Kibrot-Taaban ere sumindu zenuten Jauna .
PRED:	And it came to pass , that thou hast spoken unto them , saying , This is what the Lord hath spoken unto thee .
GOLD:	“ You also made the Lord angry at Taberah , Massah , and Kibroth-hattaavah .

ID:	3504
INPUT:	Norbait Jaunarengana itzultzen denean bakarrik kentzen zaio estalkia .
PRED:	And if any man return to the Lord , he shall take away the covering of the Lord .
GOLD:	But whenever someone turns to the Lord , the veil is taken away .

ID:	3505
INPUT:	Eta Dario mediarra egin zen hango errege , hirurogeita bi urte zituela .
PRED:	Then Daniel became king of Dan , and he was thirty years old .
GOLD:	Darius the Mede decided to divide the kingdom into 120 provinces , and he appointed a high officer to rule over each province .

ID:	3506
INPUT:	Neu naiz atea ; ate honetan zehar sartzen dena , onik izango da , eta ez du inolako eragozpenik izango larreak aurkitzeko .
PRED:	I am the door , and the one who goes into the mouth shall enter into the mouth , and he shall not find it .
GOLD:	Yes , I am the gate . Those who come in through me will be saved . They will come and go freely and will find good pastures .

ID:	3507
INPUT:	Gizonezkoak ere , berez dagozkien emakumeekiko harremanak utzirik , elkarren irrikaz suturik dabiltza : gizonezkoek gizonezkoekin itsuskeriak egiten dituzte eta , horrela , beren jokabide okerraz merezitako zigorra berengan hartzen .
PRED:	And the men of the women who are with her , let them go out into the congregation , and the men of the congregation shall be filled with men , and they shall be guilty of their wickedness , and they shall be guilty of their wickedness .
GOLD:	And the men , instead of having normal sexual relations with women , burned with lust for each other . Men did shameful things with other men , and as a result of this sin , they suffered within themselves the penalty they deserved .

ID:	3508
INPUT:	Pisga mendi-gailurreko begiraleku batera eraman zuen . Han ere zazpi aldare eraiki eta bakoitzean zekor eta ahari bana eskaini zituen .
PRED:	He brought him to the top of the top of the top of the top of the top of the top of the top of the top of the top of the top of the top of the top of the top of the top of the top of the top of the mountain . There he built seven altars , and offered a bull for a ram .
GOLD:	So Balak took Balaam to the plateau of Zophim on Pisgah Peak . He built seven altars there and offered a young bull and a ram on each altar .

ID:	3509
INPUT:	Jauna , ordea , leiala da , eta beronek sendotuko zaituzte eta gaiztoarengandik zainduko .
PRED:	But the Lord is faithful , and he will heal you from the wicked .
GOLD:	But the Lord is faithful ; he will strengthen you and guard you from the evil one .

ID:	3510
INPUT:	Josueren seme eta Mitzpako buru zen Ezerrek harresiaren ertzean dagoen armategiko aldapa-aurrealdea konpondu zuen .
PRED:	And Joshua the son of Nun , the son of Shealtiel , and half of the people that were in the wall of the house of the Lord , set up against the altar .
GOLD:	Next to them , Ezer son of Jeshua , the leader of Mizpah , repaired another section of wall across from the ascent to the armory near the angle in the wall .

ID:	3511
INPUT:	« Agindu israeldarrei jabetzan hartuko duten ondaretik lebitarrei zenbait hiri emateko , inguruko lurrekin batera , haietan bizi daitezen .
PRED:	“ Speak to the children of Israel , that they may take possession of the Levites , that they may dwell in them , and they may dwell in them .
GOLD:	“ Command the people of Israel to give to the Levites from their property certain towns to live in , along with the surrounding pasturelands .

ID:	3512
INPUT:	Opariak dakarzkizute errege<unk> rusalemgo zeure tenplura ;
PRED:	A burnt offering to the king in Jerusalem , to the house of the king .
GOLD:	Rebuke these enemy nations — these wild animals lurking in the reeds , this herd of bulls among the weaker calves.Make them bring bars of silver in humble tribute.Scatter the nations that delight in war .

ID:	3513
INPUT:	nire hezur-mamiak ez ziren zuretzat ezkutu , isilpean eratzen ari nintzela , lurraren barruan ehunduz nindoala .
PRED:	And my bones was not found in thee , and my tongue was shut up in the earth , and my flesh was in the midst of the earth .
GOLD:	You watched me as I was being formed in utter seclusion , as I was woven together in the dark of the womb .

ID:	3514
INPUT:	Daviden poema . Zoriontsua Jainkoak hobena kendu eta bekatua barkatu diona !
PRED:	Blessed is the mother of David : blessed is the man whom God has taken away from him , and forgive him .
GOLD:	Oh , what joy for thosewhose disobedience is forgiven , whose sin is put out of sight !

ID:	3515
INPUT:	Ez jo zeure burua jakintsutzat ; izan , ordea , begirune Jaunari eta ihes egin gaizkiari .
PRED:	Do n't be wise , but do n't fear the Lord and escape .
GOLD:	Do n't be impressed with your own wisdom.Instead , fear the Lord and turn away from evil .

ID:	3516
INPUT:	Salomonen esaera zaharrak . Seme zuhurra aitaren pozbide , seme zentzugabea amaren atsekabe .
PRED:	The words of Solomon is the son of Solomon , and the wise son of a fool is glad .
GOLD:	The proverbs of Solomon : A wise child brings joy to a father ; a foolish child brings grief to a mother .

ID:	3517
INPUT:	Hobe behartsu eta prestu izan , mihi maltzurreko eta zentzugabe baino .
PRED:	It is better to be better than to be poor and wise .
GOLD:	Better to be poor and honestthan to be dishonest and a fool .

ID:	3518
INPUT:	Izan bedi beti errege zure begiradapean ! Izan bitza zure maitasun eta leialtasuna zaindari !
PRED:	Let thy kingdom be king forever , and let thy mercy be in thee , and thy truth and truth .
GOLD:	Then I will sing praises to your name foreveras I fulfill my vows each day .

ID:	3519
INPUT:	Salomonen jauregia
PRED:	Solomon 's Temple
GOLD:	Solomon Builds His Palace

ID:	3520
INPUT:	Davidek ez zion inori bizia barkatzen , ez gizonei , ez emakumeei , Gatera inor ez eramatearren ; beraren jokabidearen berri inork eman ez zezan . Horrela jokatu zuen Davidek filistearren artean bizi izan zen denboraldi guztian .
PRED:	And David did not forgive any man , nor the women , nor the women , nor the women , nor the women , nor the way of the Philistines , nor the way of David walked among all the days of the Philistines .
GOLD:	No one was left alive to come to Gath and tell where he had really been . This happened again and again while he was living among the Philistines .

ID:	3521
INPUT:	Tiro hiria erregaliekin datorkizu , herriko handikiak zure abegi onaren bila .
PRED:	The city of Tyre has come to you , and the great people of the land will seek your eyes .
GOLD:	The bride , a princess , looks gloriousin her golden gown .

ID:	3522
INPUT:	horrela , ondaretzat zuek bezala lursailik hartu ez duen lebitarrak eta zuekin bizi diren etorkin , umezurtz eta alargunek zer jana izango dute ; eta Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak eginkizun guztiak ongi burutzeko bidea emango dizue .
PRED:	And the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow , and the widow , and all that Jehovah thy God hath commanded thee .
GOLD:	Give it to the Levites , who will receive no allotment of land among you , as well as to the foreigners living among you , the orphans , and the widows in your towns , so they can eat and be satisfied . Then the Lord your God will bless you in all your work .

ID:	3523
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Zuei eman zaizue Jainkoaren erregetzaren misterioak ezagutzea ; horiei , ordea , ez .
PRED:	Jesus answered them , “ You have given you the kingdom of God , but they do not know them . ”
GOLD:	He replied , “ You are permitted to understand the secrets of the Kingdom of Heaven , but others are not .

ID:	3524
INPUT:	Itzultzean , mendian barrena zeuden hilobiak begiztatu zituen Josiasek , eta hilobi haietako hezurrak hartu eta aldare gainean erretzeko agindu zuen . Horrela profanatu zuen aldare hura . Hala agindua zuen Jaunak , gauza hauek hots egin zituen profetaren bidez .
PRED:	When Joseph returned to the mountain , he took the bones of the dead bodies , and took the bones of their dead bodies , and burned them on the altar , and burned them on the altar , according to the word of the Lord by the prophets .
GOLD:	Then Josiah turned around and noticed several tombs in the side of the hill . He ordered that the bones be brought out , and he burned them on the altar at Bethel to desecrate it . ( This happened just as the Lord had promised through the man of God when Jeroboam stood beside the altar at the festival . ) Then Josiah turned and looked up at the tomb of the man of God who had predicted these things .

ID:	3525
INPUT:	ez beza zuetako inork semea nahiz alaba oparitzat erre ; ez bedi izan zuen artean geroa igartzeko magiazko baliabide , sorginkeria nahiz aztikeriarik erabiliko duenik ,
PRED:	No one of you must offer your sons or daughters as a burnt offering . If you do n't want to make a vow to the end of the law , you must not do anything wrong .
GOLD:	For example , never sacrifice your son or daughter as a burnt offering . And do not let your people practice fortune-telling , or use sorcery , or interpret omens , or engage in witchcraft ,

ID:	3526
INPUT:	Israelgo errege Joax , Joakazen semea , hil eta gero , beste hamabost urtez bizi izan zen Judako errege Amatzias , Joaxen semea .
PRED:	Joash son of Joash became king of Israel , and he died , and he reigned forty years in the days of Joash son of Joash king of Judah .
GOLD:	King Amaziah of Judah lived for fifteen years after the death of King Jehoash of Israel .

ID:	3527
INPUT:	Egundoko kazkabar-aleak erori ziren zerutik gizon-emakumeen gainera , eta hauek madarikatu egin zuten Jainkoa kazkabar-izurriagatik , benetan zigor ikaragarria izan baitzen .
PRED:	And the hail fell upon men from heaven , and there was a curse on men , because there was a great plague in the sight of God .
GOLD:	There was a terrible hailstorm , and hailstones weighing as much as seventy-five pounds fell from the sky onto the people below . They cursed God because of the terrible plague of the hailstorm .

ID:	3528
INPUT:	Osasuntsu iraunaraziko nauzu , zutik eutsiko zeure aurrean betiko .
PRED:	I will destroy you , and I will destroy you from your presence forever .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , who lives from everlasting to everlasting.Amen and amen !

ID:	3529
INPUT:	Jainkoak Moisesi Egiptora itzultzeko agindu
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses
GOLD:	's Power

ID:	3530
INPUT:	Ez da jadanik bereizketarik juduaren eta judu ez denaren artean , esklaboaren eta librearen artean , gizonezkoaren eta emakumezkoaren artean , zuek guztiok bat baitzarete Kristo Jesusengan .
PRED:	There is no peace between the Jews and the Jews and the Jews , and the free woman , and all of you in Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	There is no longer Jew or Gentile , slave or free , male and female . For you are all one in Christ Jesus .

ID:	3531
INPUT:	Ondoren , Jaunak erraietako gaixotasun sendaezinaz jo zuen Joram .
PRED:	Then the Lord made Abram sick in the midst of the fire , and he healed Jehoram .
GOLD:	After all this , the Lord struck Jehoram with an incurable intestinal disease .

ID:	3532
INPUT:	Nik galdetu nuen : “ Zer egin behar dut , Jauna ? ” Eta Jaunak erantzun : “ Jaiki , zoaz Damaskora , eta han esango dizute Jainkoak zuretzat ezarria daukan egiteko guztia ” .
PRED:	And I said to them , What shall I do ? And the Lord said unto them , Get up , and go into Damascus , and say unto thee , Go , and go to Damascus , and make all that thou hast laid upon thee .
GOLD:	“ I asked , ‘ What should I do , Lord ? ' “ And the Lord told me , ‘ Get up and go into Damascus , and there you will be told everything you are to do . '

ID:	3533
INPUT:	Gora , bada , alaitasuna ! Ez baitu gizakiakeguzkipean beste onik , jan , edan eta gozatzea baizik . Horixe bakarrik atera dezakebere eginahaletik , Jainkoak mundu honetan bizitzekoeman dizkion egunetan .
PRED:	So do n't be glad , but do n't eat the sun , but to eat and drink . This is what God has given to us in this world .
GOLD:	So I recommend having fun , because there is nothing better for people in this world than to eat , drink , and enjoy life . That way they will experience some happiness along with all the hard work God gives them under the sun .

ID:	3534
INPUT:	Beren idolo higuingarriak ipini dituzte niri sagaraturiko etxean , berau profanatuz .
PRED:	They have set their idols in the house of their idols , in the house of their idols , in the house of their idols .
GOLD:	They have set up their abominable idols right in my own Temple , defiling it .

ID:	3535
INPUT:	eta berak ematen dio gorputz osoari barne-lotura eta batasuna , atal guztiek , bakoitzak bere jarduera bereziaren arabera , gorputz osoaren alde egiten duten elkarlanaren bitartez ; horrela , gorputza haziz eta maitasunean osoki eraikiz doa .
PRED:	He gives his body to the whole body , and to all his body , and to all his body , according to his flesh , and to his whole body , and to his whole body , and to his whole body , and to build the whole body .
GOLD:	He makes the whole body fit together perfectly . As each part does its own special work , it helps the other parts grow , so that the whole body is healthy and growing and full of love .

ID:	3536
INPUT:	Ez al duzue nahikoa larre bikainetan bazkatzea ? Zergatik zapaldu hankapean gainerako larrea ? Ez al duzue nahikoa ur garbia edatea ? Zergatik zikindu gainerakoa zeuen hankaz ?
PRED:	Do n't you want to eat the grass in the dust ? Why do you not eat the grass on the top of the grass ? Why do you not want to drink the water ? Why do you want to eat the water ?
GOLD:	Is n't it enough for you to keep the best of the pastures for yourselves ? Must you also trample down the rest ? Is n't it enough for you to drink clear water for yourselves ? Must you also muddy the rest with your feet ?

ID:	3537
INPUT:	Hurbildu ziren haiek eta , beren tuniketan bildurik , kanpalekutik atera zituzten , Moisesek agindu bezala .
PRED:	And they came near to their tents , and brought them out of their camp , as Moses commanded them .
GOLD:	So they came forward and picked them up by their garments and carried them out of the camp , just as Moses had commanded .

ID:	3538
INPUT:	Erromes-kanta . Davidena . Jauna , nire bihotza ez da handi-min , ez nire begiak gorazale ; ez nabil gauza handien atzetik , ez neurriz gainekoen atzetik .
PRED:	The Lord is my heart , and my heart is not strong , nor my eyes , nor my eyes , nor my eyes , nor from the mouth of many things .
GOLD:	Lord , my heart is not proud ; my eyes are not haughty.I do n't concern myself with matters too greator too awesome for me to grasp .

ID:	3539
INPUT:	umezurtz eta zapalduaren eskubideak babesteko . Ez beza gehiago beldurrik emanbuztinez eginiko gizakiak !
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of the poor and widows . Do n't be afraid of human beings .
GOLD:	You will bring justice to the orphans and the oppressed , so mere people can no longer terrify them .

ID:	3540
INPUT:	Benetan profeta badira eta Jaunaren hitza hartu badute , erregutu diezaiotela Jaun ahalguztidunari , Babiloniara eraman ez ditzaten , tenpluan , Judako erregearen jauregian eta Jerusalemen oraindik gelditzen diren tresnak .
PRED:	The prophets and prophets have taken away the word of the Lord of hosts , and they have given them to Babylon , and they have not brought them into the house of the Lord of hosts , and the vessels of the king of Judah , and all the vessels of the vessels of the house of the king of Judah .
GOLD:	If they really are prophets and speak the Lord 's messages , let them pray to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . Let them pray that the articles remaining in the Lord 's Temple and in the king 's palace and in the palaces of Jerusalem will not be carried away to Babylon ! '

ID:	3541
INPUT:	Gudalburuak , hurbildurik , preso hartu zuen Paulo eta bi katez lotzeko agindu . Gero , ea nor zen eta zer egin zuen galdetu zuen ;
PRED:	When the commander came to Paul , he took Paul and ordered him to be put to death . Then he asked him what he had done .
GOLD:	Then the commander arrested him and ordered him bound with two chains . He asked the crowd who he was and what he had done .

ID:	3542
INPUT:	Horregatik , bidea sasiz itxiko diot , inguruan hesia jarriko , bere bidezidorrik gehiagoaurki ez dezan .
PRED:	Therefore I will make my way a wall round about , and I will make a wall round about it , and it shall not be built in it .
GOLD:	She does n't realize it was I who gave her everything she has — the grain , the new wine , the olive oil ; I even gave her silver and gold.But she gave all my gifts to Baal .

ID:	3543
INPUT:	Kristori esker eta beronengan dugun sinesmenaren bitartez ausartzen gara konfiantza osoz Jainkoarengana hurbiltzera .
PRED:	For we have faith in Christ , and in faith we have come near to God .
GOLD:	Because of Christ and our faith in him , we can now come boldly and confidently into God 's presence .

ID:	3544
INPUT:	« Gudagizon haiek guztiak hil zirenean ,
PRED:	When all the men died , all the men of war died .
GOLD:	“ When all the men of fighting age had died ,

ID:	3545
INPUT:	Herriko jende xehea baizik ez zuen utzi , alorrak eta mahastiak landu zitzaten .
PRED:	But the people of the land did not leave the land , but they did not leave the fields and vineyards .
GOLD:	But the captain of the guard allowed some of the poorest people to stay behind to care for the vineyards and fields .

ID:	3546
INPUT:	Jainkoaren espirituak harturik , Joiada apaizaren seme Zakariasek , jendeari aurre eginez , esan zuen : « Hau dio Jainkoak : “ Zergatik hautsi dituzue Jaunaren aginduak ? Gaizki bukatu behar duzue . Zuek ni baztertu nauzuelako , nik ere baztertu egiten zaituztet ” » .
PRED:	And the Spirit of God took him up , and he stood before the people , and said , Thus saith the Lord God , Why have ye rejected the commandments of the Lord , and have rejected me ?
GOLD:	Then the Spirit of God came upon Zechariah son of Jehoiada the priest . He stood before the people and said , “ This is what God says : Why do you disobey the Lord 's commands and keep yourselves from prospering ? You have abandoned the Lord , and now he has abandoned you ! ”

ID:	3547
INPUT:	Jauna , zuk sarrarazten duzu zeure herriaeta zeure mendian landatzen , zeure ondarean , zeure egoitza egin duzun lekuan , zeure eskuz eraiki duzunsantutegian .
PRED:	O Lord , thou hast brought thy people into the field , and in the hill country of thy people , in the place where thou hast built thine inheritance in thine hand .
GOLD:	You will bring them in and plant them on your own mountain — the place , O Lord , reserved for your own dwelling , the sanctuary , O Lord , that your hands have established .

ID:	3548
INPUT:	Jainkoaren santutegian sartu nintzen arte ; orduan ulertu nuen zein den haien atarramentua .
PRED:	And I went into the sanctuary of God , and I heard the voice of their understanding .
GOLD:	Then I went into your sanctuary , O God , and I finally understood the destiny of the wicked .

ID:	3549
INPUT:	Eta mintzoak bigarrenez esan zion : — Jainkoak garbi egin duena , zuk ez esan kutsatua denik .
PRED:	And the voice said to him , “ God has done what you have done is clean . ”
GOLD:	But the voice spoke again : “ Do not call something unclean if God has made it clean . ”

ID:	3550
INPUT:	Jesusek elbarria sendatu
PRED:	Jesus Heals His Death
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Paralyzed Man

ID:	3551
INPUT:	Danielek erantzun zion : — Errege jauna , ez dut erregalu edo sari beharrik , gorde zeuretzat edo eman besteren bati . Baina hor idatzia irakurriko dizut eta esanahia azalduko .
PRED:	Daniel said to the king , “ My lord the king , I will not take anything from you . But I will write it to you , and I will read it to you . ”
GOLD:	Daniel answered the king , “ Keep your gifts or give them to someone else , but I will tell you what the writing means .

ID:	3552
INPUT:	Ihartuta zeuzkaten goseak eta miseriak , marraska ibiltzen ziren eremuan , lur ilun idorretan .
PRED:	And when they were hungry , they were hungry and hungry ; and when they were hungry , they sat down in the valley .
GOLD:	They are gaunt from poverty and hunger.They claw the dry ground in desolate wastelands .

ID:	3553
INPUT:	eskuetan hartzean , apurtueta eskuzabala zulatzen zenien ; zure gainean jartzen zirenean , hautsieta erorarazi egiten zenituen .
PRED:	When you took it in your hand , you took it out of your hand , and cut it on it , and you broke it on it .
GOLD:	When Israel leaned on you , you splintered and brokeand stabbed her in the armpit.When she put her weight on you , you collapsed , and her legs gave way .

ID:	3554
INPUT:	Ordurako , Jekonias erregea , ama erregina , jauregiko funtzionarioak , Judako eta Jerusalemgo buruzagiak , artisauak eta errementariak Jerusalemdik erbestera joanak ziren .
PRED:	Then Jeremiah king of Judah and all the officials of the king 's house , and all the princes of Judah , and all the princes of Jerusalem , and all the princes of Jerusalem , and all the princes of Jerusalem , went out of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	This was after King Jehoiachin , the queen mother , the court officials , the other officials of Judah , and all the craftsmen and artisans had been deported from Jerusalem .

ID:	3555
INPUT:	Entzun , arren , niri ! Libra nazazu , ez luza ! Izan zakizkit harkaitz babesle , gaztelu salbatzaile .
PRED:	Hear me , O Lord , and save me ; do not let me be my rock , and save me from a rock .
GOLD:	You are my rock and my fortress.For the honor of your name , lead me out of this danger .

ID:	3556
INPUT:	Morroiak eta guardiak sua egin eta berotzen ari ziren , hotz baitzegoen . Pedro ere haiekin zegoen berotzen .
PRED:	And the servants and the sheep were filled with them , and they were filled with them . And Peter was with them .
GOLD:	Because it was cold , the household servants and the guards had made a charcoal fire . They stood around it , warming themselves , and Peter stood with them , warming himself .

ID:	3557
INPUT:	Aita ehortzi ondoren , Egiptora itzuli zen Jose , bere anaiekin eta aita ehorztera joan ziren guztiekin .
PRED:	And when he was buried , he returned to Egypt , and went into Egypt with his brethren , and bury him with all his brethren .
GOLD:	After burying Jacob , Joseph returned to Egypt with his brothers and all who had accompanied him to his father 's burial .

ID:	3558
INPUT:	Horrela , bada , guda-gurditeriaren arduradunek , Josafat ikustean , esan zuten : — Horra Israelgo erregea ! Eta inguratu egin zuten , erasotzeko asmoz . Baina Josafat deiadarka hasi zen , eta Jaunak lagundu egin zion : atzera eginarazi zien Jainkoak erasotzaileei ,
PRED:	And when the elders of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat , they said unto him , Behold , the king of Israel is against him ; and Jehoshaphat cried out to fight against him , and he cried unto the Lord God of Israel .
GOLD:	So when the Aramean chariot commanders saw Jehoshaphat in his royal robes , they went after him . “ There is the king of Israel ! ” they shouted . But Jehoshaphat called out , and the Lord saved him . God helped him by turning the attackers away from him .

ID:	3559
INPUT:	Ordezkari nagusiak ihardetsi zuen : — Zer uste duzu ? Mezu hau zure erregeari eta zuri bakarrik esatera bidali nauela neure jaunak ? Harresi gainean dagoen jende horrentzat ere bada , horiek ere beren kaka jan eta pixa edan beharko baitute , zuek bezalaxe .
PRED:	The master answered , “ What do you think ? What do you think to the king who sent me to bring me to the king and to bring me to the people who are on the wall ? ”
GOLD:	But Sennacherib 's chief of staff replied , “ Do you think my master sent this message only to you and your master ? He wants all the people to hear it , for when we put this city under siege , they will suffer along with you . They will be so hungry and thirsty that they will eat their own dung and drink their own urine . ”

ID:	3560
INPUT:	Jesus bere jaioterrian gaitzetsia
PRED:	Jesus Heals to Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Rejected at Nazareth

ID:	3561
INPUT:	eta jakinarazi zioten erregeari Natan profeta etorri zela . Erregearen aitzinera sartu eta ahuspeztu egin zen .
PRED:	And they told the king , saying , The prophet came to the king , and came into the king 's house , and bowed down to the ground .
GOLD:	The king 's officials told him , “ Nathan the prophet is here to see you . ” Nathan went in and bowed before the king with his face to the ground .

ID:	3562
INPUT:	Roboamek , ordea , ez zuen aintzat hartu kontseilarien aholkua ; baizik eta berarekin batera hazi ziren eta bere zerbitzura zituen gazteei galdegin zien :
PRED:	But Rehoboam did not take counsel of the elders of the elders , but they went with him and asked the young men who were with him ,
GOLD:	But Rehoboam rejected the advice of the older men and instead asked the opinion of the young men who had grown up with him and were now his advisers .

ID:	3563
INPUT:	Hiltzear zegoen Rakel . Azken arnasa emateko zegoela , Ben-Oni — hau da , « Ene oinazetako seme » — eman zion izen ; baina aitak Benjamin — hau da , « Eskuineko seme » — eman zion izen .
PRED:	When Rachel was dead , Rachel named Rachel 's son , but his father named him Benjamin .
GOLD:	Rachel was about to die , but with her last breath she named the baby Ben-oni ( which means “ son of my sorrow ” ) . The baby 's father , however , called him Benjamin ( which means “ son of my right hand ” ) .

ID:	3564
INPUT:	Gorenera igo zinen , gatibuak harturik ; zerga ordaindu zizuten gizakiek , baita errebeldeek ere , Jainko Jaun horrek bizilekua izan zenezan .
PRED:	And the chief priests went up to the feast , and they paid nothing to him , for all the iniquity of the Lord God was a witness for him .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ; praise God our savior ! For each day he carries us in his arms.Interlude

ID:	3565
INPUT:	Babilonia eroriko eta Israel salbatuko
PRED:	Babylon and Israel
GOLD:	A Message about Babylon

ID:	3566
INPUT:	Gorets bezate Jauna bere maitasunagatik , gizakien alde egiten dituen gauza harrigarriengatik .
PRED:	Let them praise the Lord for his love , because he has done great things for men .
GOLD:	Let them praise the Lord for his great loveand for the wonderful things he has done for them .

ID:	3567
INPUT:	Orain , adore zaitezte eta izan sendo . Hil zaizue Saul zeuen jauna , bai ; baina Judakoek ni gantzutu naute beren errege » .
PRED:	Now therefore , and be strong , and be strong , and be strong ; but the men of Judah have anointed me king .
GOLD:	Now that Saul is dead , I ask you to be my strong and loyal subjects like the people of Judah , who have anointed me as their new king . ”

ID:	3568
INPUT:	Jesusek legenduna sendatu
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Paralyzed Man

ID:	3569
INPUT:	Noiz arte ahoberoak lotsagabe erronkan , gaizkile guztiak harropuzturik ?
PRED:	How long shall the fool be ashamed , and all the wicked are proud ?
GOLD:	How long will they speak with arrogance ? How long will these evil people boast ?

ID:	3570
INPUT:	Jariodunak erabilitako etzalekua nahiz eserlekua kutsatua gelditzen da .
PRED:	And if any man is unclean , he shall be unclean , whether he is unclean .
GOLD:	Any bed on which the man with the discharge lies and anything on which he sits will be ceremonially unclean .

ID:	3571
INPUT:	Joan Bataiatzaileak Jesusen etorrera hots egin
PRED:	Jesus Heals the Baptist
GOLD:	The Baptism and Temptation of Jesus

ID:	3572
INPUT:	Gero , Penuelgo dorrea eraitsi eta hil egin zuen hango jendea .
PRED:	And he took the tower of the children of Dan , and killed the people .
GOLD:	He also tore down the tower of Peniel and killed all the men in the town .

ID:	3573
INPUT:	« Badoaz nire egunak , porrot dagite nire egitasmo eta ametsek .
PRED:	“ My days have been destroyed , and my counsel has been destroyed , and my counsel has been destroyed .
GOLD:	My days are over.My hopes have disappeared.My heart 's desires are broken .

ID:	3574
INPUT:	Jesus bere ikasleen oinak garbitzen
PRED:	Jesus and His disciples
GOLD:	Jesus Predicts His Betrayal

ID:	3575
INPUT:	Txiki eta handi , denak hilko dira herrialde honetan ; ez dute hiletarik , ez hilobirik izango ; ez du inork dolua adierazteko gorputza urratuko , ez burua soilduko .
PRED:	And all of them shall die in this land ; they shall not be put to death , neither shall any more be put to death ; neither shall any man cut off their heads .
GOLD:	Both the great and the lowly will die in this land . No one will bury them or mourn for them . Their friends will not cut themselves in sorrow or shave their heads in sadness .

ID:	3576
INPUT:	« Sutan zegoen menditik jaitsi nintzen , itunaren harlauzak eskuetan nituela ,
PRED:	And I came down from Mount Sinai , and I took the covenant of the covenant of the covenant , which was in my hand .
GOLD:	“ So while the mountain was blazing with fire I turned and came down , holding in my hands the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant .

ID:	3577
INPUT:	Sakrifiziorik bikainena , damuz hautsiriko espiritua ; zuk ez duzu gutxiesten , ene Jainko , bihotz-hautsi eta umildua .
PRED:	O Lord , you are my God , and I will come upon you , and you will not be able to destroy me .
GOLD:	Then you will be pleased with sacrifices offered in the right spirit — with burnt offerings and whole burnt offerings.Then bulls will again be sacrificed on your altar .

ID:	3578
INPUT:	Zuek , Jaunari begirune diozueneta haren zerbitzariaren ahotsaentzuten duzuenok , ilunpetan eta argi-izpirik gabebizi baldin bazarete ere , jarri konfiantza Jaunarengan , hartu Jainkoa euskarri .
PRED:	If you hear the voice of the Lord , you who hear his servant 's voice , and do not trust in the darkness , and trust in the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Who among you fears the Lordand obeys his servant ? If you are walking in darkness , without a ray of light , trust in the Lordand rely on your God .

ID:	3579
INPUT:	Zuk , ordea , zeure erruki handiaz , ez zenituen basamortuan baztertu , laino-adarra ez zenhaiengandik aldenduegunez bidean gidatzeko , ez eta su-adarra gauezbidean argi egiteko .
PRED:	But you have mercy on them in the wilderness , and you have not turned away from them by the way of the cloud , nor by the way of the cloud , nor by the way of the cloud , nor by night .
GOLD:	“ But in your great mercy you did not abandon them to die in the wilderness . The pillar of cloud still led them forward by day , and the pillar of fire showed them the way through the night .

ID:	3580
INPUT:	Ritmatik Rimon-Peretzera ;
PRED:	And they set out from Kadesh , and set out the border of the children of Ammon .
GOLD:	They left Rithmah and camped at Rimmon-perez .

ID:	3581
INPUT:	Zuek , esklabook , izan errespetu osoz zeuen nagusien menpeko , ez on eta bihozbera direnen menpeko bakarrik , baizik eta gogorrak direnen menpeko ere bai .
PRED:	You slaves , obey your master , and do not obey your master , but do not turn away from the mountains , but those who hate him will obey him .
GOLD:	You who are slaves must submit to your masters with all respect . Do what they tell you — not only if they are kind and reasonable , but even if they are cruel .

ID:	3582
INPUT:	Aleluia ! Gora Jauna ! Goretsazue , Jaunaren zerbitzariok , goretsi Jaunaren izena !
PRED:	Praise the Lord ! Praise him , you servants of the Lord , praise the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! Yes , give praise , O servants of the Lord.Praise the name of the Lord !

ID:	3583
INPUT:	Jesus haziz zihoan , bai jakinduriaz , bai gorputzez , eta Jainkoak eta gizakiek gero eta gogokoago zuten .
PRED:	And when Jesus was in wisdom , he was filled with wisdom , and men were more than men and more .
GOLD:	Jesus grew in wisdom and in stature and in favor with God and all the people .

ID:	3584
INPUT:	Une honetan zeure begiz ikus dezakezunez , nire esku utzi zaitu gaur Jaunak leize-zuloan . Zu hiltzeko esaten zidaten , baina errukitu egin natzaizu , neure buruari hau esanez : « Ez diot erantsiko eskurik nire jaunari , Jaunak gantzutua baita » .
PRED:	And it came to pass in that time , that the Lord has given you this day in your hand , that you might die in the midst of the Lord ; and I have mercy on you , and I have mercy on you , and I will not answer my lord the Lord .
GOLD:	Look , my father , at what I have in my hand . It is a piece of the hem of your robe ! I cut it off , but I did n't kill you . This proves that I am not trying to harm you and that I have not sinned against you , even though you have been hunting for me to kill me .

ID:	3585
INPUT:	Artzainak , entzun eta ikusi zutenarengatik Jainkoari aintzaka eta goraka itzuli ziren , dena aingeruak esan bezala gertatu baitzitzaien .
PRED:	And when the shepherds heard the voice of God , they turned back to the glory of God , as the angels had spoken to them .
GOLD:	The shepherds went back to their flocks , glorifying and praising God for all they had heard and seen . It was just as the angel had told them .

ID:	3586
INPUT:	Labean bezala erretzen daukagu larrua , gosearen erreminez .
PRED:	For we are filled with grass , and we are filled with famine .
GOLD:	The famine has blackened our skinas though baked in an oven .

ID:	3587
INPUT:	Akaben etxekoren bat hirian hiltzen delarik , zakurrek jango dute , eta landan hiltzen delarik , zeruko hegaztiek jango dute » .
PRED:	And they shall eat one of the house of Ahab , and eat the flesh of the house of Ahab ; and the birds of the heavens shall eat , and the birds of the heavens shall eat .
GOLD:	“ The members of Ahab 's family who die in the city will be eaten by dogs , and those who die in the field will be eaten by vultures . ”

ID:	3588
INPUT:	Joseren seme Igal , Isakarren leinukoa ;
PRED:	The tribe of Joseph , the sons of Issachar , the sons of Issachar ;
GOLD:	IssacharIgal son of Joseph

ID:	3589
INPUT:	Mendi-gailurretik , Neftoah errekastoaren iturburu aldera egiten zuen mugak eta Efron mendiko herrixketara luzatzen , gero Baalarantz — hau da , Kiriat-Jearimerantz — okertzeko .
PRED:	And he went up from the mountains of the hill country , and went up to the hill country of Ephraim , and went up to the hill country of Ephraim , which is called Bethel .
GOLD:	From there the boundary extended from the top of the mountain to the spring at the waters of Nephtoah , and from there to the towns on Mount Ephron . Then it turned toward Baalah ( that is , Kiriath-jearim ) .

ID:	3590
INPUT:	bata , amondarren Raba hirira ; bestea , Judako Jerusalem hiri gotortura .
PRED:	And the daughter of Ammon came to the city of Ammon , and the other city of Judah .
GOLD:	“ O you corrupt and wicked prince of Israel , your final day of reckoning is here !

ID:	3591
INPUT:	Jaunak ituna proposatu israeldarrei
PRED:	The
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	3592
INPUT:	Hori dela eta , ni Paulo , jentil zaretenon onerako Kristo Jesusen preso naizen <unk>
PRED:	This is why Paul and Paul went out to the Gentiles , where you are Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	When I think of all this , I , Paul , a prisoner of Christ Jesus for the benefit of you Gentiles . . .

ID:	3593
INPUT:	Egon prest bihar goizean mendira igotzeko ; nire aurrean aurkeztuko zara han , mendi-gailurrean .
PRED:	Be ready to go up to the mountain , and stand before me in front of the mountain .
GOLD:	Be ready in the morning to climb up Mount Sinai and present yourself to me on the top of the mountain .

ID:	3594
INPUT:	Jaunak segurtatzen ditu gizakiaren pausoak ; nola jakin lezake gizakiak nora doan ?
PRED:	The Lord will fear the Lord , and he will see the sun in the sun ?
GOLD:	The Lord directs our steps , so why try to understand everything along the way ?

ID:	3595
INPUT:	metro batekoa zen zoruan zegoen oinarritik lehen plataformaraino ; hau metro erdi bat zen zabal . Bi metroko altuera zegoen plataforma hartatik hurrengora , hura ere metro erdi bat zabal zelarik .
PRED:	The length of the temple was five cubits high , and the breadth of the temple was five cubits high , and the breadth of the house was five cubits high .
GOLD:	From the gutter the altar rises 31/2 feet to a lower ledge that surrounds the altar and is 21 inches wide . From the lower ledge the altar rises 7 feet to the upper ledge that is also 21 inches wide .

ID:	3596
INPUT:	Faraoiak ikertzeko agindu zuen , eta egia zen israeldarren abererik ez zela galdu . Hala ere , bere teman jarraitu zuen faraoiak eta ez zien israeldarrei joaten utzi .
PRED:	And Pharaoh commanded the king , and he did not perish ; but the children of Israel did not perish . And Pharaoh followed the children of Israel , and he let the children of Israel go .
GOLD:	Pharaoh sent his officials to investigate , and they discovered that the Israelites had not lost a single animal ! But even so , Pharaoh 's heart remained stubborn , and he still refused to let the people go .

ID:	3597
INPUT:	Goretsazue txilin ozenez , goretsi txilin durunditsuz .
PRED:	Give thanks to the Lord , and praise him with a loud voice .
GOLD:	Praise him with a clash of cymbals ; praise him with loud clanging cymbals .

ID:	3598
INPUT:	Biharamun goizean , Saulek hiru sailetan antolatu zuen gudarostea ; egunsentian etsaiaren kanpaleku erdiraino sartu eta , eguerdiraino amondarrak triskatzen jardun zuen . Bizirik iraun zutenak sakabanatu egin ziren , bi lagun batera ez gelditzeraino .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the morning , when Saul set up his army in the morning , that he went into the camp of the enemies of Ammon , and went into the camp of the children of Ammon , and smote the children of Ammon . And when the children of Ammon were dead , they were not two days .
GOLD:	But before dawn the next morning , Saul arrived , having divided his army into three detachments . He launched a surprise attack against the Ammonites and slaughtered them the whole morning . The remnant of their army was so badly scattered that no two of them were left together .

ID:	3599
INPUT:	Argibiderik nahi balute , galde biezaiete etxean beren senarrei , ez baita egoki emakumeek batzarrean hitz egitea .
PRED:	But if the light is in their house , they will ask her husband , and her husband will not speak in the assembly .
GOLD:	If they have any questions , they should ask their husbands at home , for it is improper for women to speak in church meetings .

ID:	3600
INPUT:	O<unk> profetaren hitzok entzutean , suspertu egin zen Asa , eta Juda eta Benjaminen lurraldeetan eta Efraimgo mendialdean eskuratutako herrixketan zeuden idolo higuingarriak suntsitu egin zituen , eta tenpluko atalondo aurrean zegoen aldarea berriztatu .
PRED:	When Gaal heard the words of the prophets , he built Judah and Benjamin in the hill country of Ephraim and Benjamin , in the hill country of Ephraim , and destroyed the abominations of the house of Ephraim , and destroyed them in front of the altar .
GOLD:	When Asa heard this message from Azariah the prophet , he took courage and removed all the detestable idols from the land of Judah and Benjamin and in the towns he had captured in the hill country of Ephraim . And he repaired the altar of the Lord , which stood in front of the entry room of the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	3601
INPUT:	Gorritua dut aurpegia negarrez , estaliak begiak iluntasun beltzez .
PRED:	I put my face on my face , and my eyes covered my eyes with darkness .
GOLD:	My eyes are red with weeping ; dark shadows circle my eyes .

ID:	3602
INPUT:	« Ba al da inor zuen artean nire tenplua bere lehengo eder-handian ikusi zuenik ? Eta orain nola dagoela iruditzen zaizue ? Ez al duzue ikusten ezereztua dagoela ?
PRED:	“ Who is there among you that you see my temple among you ? How can you see ? How can you see that it is true ? ”
GOLD:	‘ Does anyone remember this house — this Temple — in its former splendor ? How , in comparison , does it look to you now ? It must seem like nothing at all !

ID:	3603
INPUT:	Horrela , israeldarren artean ez da ondare-zatirik leinu batetik bestera aldatuko ; israeldarrek nork bere aitaren ondareari atxikirik jarraituko dute .
PRED:	And the children of Israel shall not take an inheritance from the tribe of the children of Israel ; and the children of Israel shall take their inheritance from their father 's inheritance .
GOLD:	None of the territorial land may pass from tribe to tribe , for all the land given to each tribe must remain within the tribe to which it was first allotted .

ID:	3604
INPUT:	Emakumeak , mendira Jainkoaren gizonarengana heldu zenean , oinak besarkatu zizkion Eliseori . Hurbildu zen Gehazi emakumea apartatzeko , baina Jainkoaren gizonak esan zion : — Utzi , atsekabetua baitago . Hala ere , Jaunak ez dit agertu zergatik ; ez dit deus ere jakinarazi .
PRED:	When the woman came to the man of God on the mountain , she came near to Elisha . She came near to Elisha , and said , “ The man of God has done nothing wrong . ” But she said , “ I do n't know what the Lord has done . ”
GOLD:	But when she came to the man of God at the mountain , she fell to the ground before him and caught hold of his feet . Gehazi began to push her away , but the man of God said , “ Leave her alone . She is deeply troubled , but the Lord has not told me what it is . ”

ID:	3605
INPUT:	Ez bedi Miriam amaren sabeletik irten orduko haragia erdi janik duen hilaurraren pareko gerta !
PRED:	He shall not go out of the womb , nor shall he go out of his mother 's womb for a thousand talents of silver .
GOLD:	Do n't let her be like a stillborn baby , already decayed at birth . ”

ID:	3606
INPUT:	« Mundu guztian erori da jendea , Babiloniak hilik ; orain Babilonia eroriko da , berak Israelen hildakoengatik » .
PRED:	“ All the people of the earth will fall , and Babylon will fall by the dead because of the dead . ”
GOLD:	“ Just as Babylon killed the people of Israeland others throughout the world , so must her people be killed .

ID:	3607
INPUT:	Bazen han eserita zenbait lege-maisu , eta hau zioten beren baitan :
PRED:	There were some of the law and the teachers of the law , and some of them said ,
GOLD:	But some of the teachers of religious law who were sitting there thought to themselves ,

ID:	3608
INPUT:	Berak emango die epai-mahaikoeizuzenbide-senaeta hiriaren defendatzaileei kemena .
PRED:	He will give the judgment to the judgment of justice , and to the judgment of the city .
GOLD:	He will give a longing for justiceto their judges.He will give great courageto their warriors who stand at the gates .

ID:	3609
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin zaiona egin zuen Asak , bere arbaso Davidek bezala .
PRED:	And Asa did what was evil in the sight of the Lord , as David his father had done .
GOLD:	Asa did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , as his ancestor David had done .

ID:	3610
INPUT:	“ Jainkoa baino zuzenagoa izango ote da gizakia ? Egilea bera baino garbiagoa izango ote ?
PRED:	“ Can God be righteous than human beings ? Will he be better than human beings ?
GOLD:	‘ Can a mortal be innocent before God ? Can anyone be pure before the Creator ? '

ID:	3611
INPUT:	Aaron bera ere suntsitu nahi izateraino zegoen Jauna haserre , eta Aaronen alde ere erregutu nuen .
PRED:	And the Lord was angry with Aaron , and I burned them up to destroy them , and I burned them with fire .
GOLD:	The Lord was so angry with Aaron that he wanted to destroy him , too . But I prayed for Aaron , and the Lord spared him .

ID:	3612
INPUT:	Hirugarrenari Tigris , Axurko ekialdetik doana . Laugarrenari Eufrates .
PRED:	The third was the third , the one who was from the east . The fourth was the second river .
GOLD:	The third branch , called the Tigris , flowed east of the land of Asshur . The fourth branch is called the Euphrates .

ID:	3613
INPUT:	Zuen maitasuna izan bedi itxurakeriarik gabea ; gorrotatu gaizkia eta itsatsi ongiari .
PRED:	Let your love be false in your love , and hate those who hate evil .
GOLD:	Do n't just pretend to love others . Really love them . Hate what is wrong . Hold tightly to what is good .

ID:	3614
INPUT:	Aitortuko al duzue behintzat nik ez dudala eskas atera !
PRED:	Do you know that I am not able to know that I am not able to know .
GOLD:	As you test yourselves , I hope you will recognize that we have not failed the test of apostolic authority .

ID:	3615
INPUT:	Sakrifizioak eskaintzea dute atsegin , hildako abereen okela jateko ; baina nik , Jaunak , ez ditut sakrifizio horiek atsegin . Horien bekatuak gogora dakartzat , beren hutsegiteengatikkontuak eskatuko dizkiet , eta Egiptora itzuli beharko dute .
PRED:	They offer sacrifices to the Lord , and they shall eat the blood of the dead ; but I will not offer their sacrifices for their sins , and I will bring them back to Egypt , and they shall return to Egypt .
GOLD:	The people love to offer sacrifices to me , feasting on the meat , but I do not accept their sacrifices.I will hold my people accountable for their sins , and I will punish them.They will return to Egypt .

ID:	3616
INPUT:	Heldu zen , bada , behin Eliseo eta , goiko gelara sarturik , oheratu egin zen .
PRED:	So Elisha came and went into the inner court , and he died .
GOLD:	One day Elisha returned to Shunem , and he went up to this upper room to rest .

ID:	3617
INPUT:	Amatziasen gainerako jarduerak , lehenengotik azkenera , « Judako eta Israelgo Erregeen Liburuan » daude idatziak .
PRED:	Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah , and the last , behold , they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Israel .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Amaziah 's reign , from beginning to end , are recorded in The Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel .

ID:	3618
INPUT:	Jainkoaren maitasunari gorazarrea
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Nothing Can Separate Us from God 's Love

ID:	3619
INPUT:	Ez dira gose , ez egarri izango , ez ditu sargoriak , ez eguzkiak joko , gupidaz hartuko baitituteta gidatuko , iturburu freskoetara eramango .
PRED:	They will not be hungry , nor will they enter into the sun , for they will not enter into the water , because they will be filled with them , and they will bring them into the water .
GOLD:	They will neither hunger nor thirst.The searing sun will not reach them anymore.For the Lord in his mercy will lead them ; he will lead them beside cool waters .

ID:	3620
INPUT:	Josafaten gainerako jarduerak , haren egintza adoretsuak eta izan zituen borrokak « Judako Erregeen Kronika » liburuan daude idatziak .
PRED:	Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat , and all his works , and his works , are they written in the book of the kings of Judah ?
GOLD:	He banished from the land the rest of the male and female shrine prostitutes , who still continued their practices from the days of his father , Asa .

ID:	3621
INPUT:	Handia zara , mirarigilea , zu bakarrik Jainkoa !
PRED:	You are my God , and you are my strength , and you are my God .
GOLD:	For you are great and perform wonderful deeds.You alone are God .

ID:	3622
INPUT:	« Lehen hilaren lehen egunean eraikiko duzu egoitza , elkarketa-etxola .
PRED:	On the first day of the first month , on the first day of the first month , you shall build the tabernacle of meeting .
GOLD:	“ Set up the Tabernacle on the first day of the new year .

ID:	3623
INPUT:	Hadadezerren hiri ziren Betah eta Berotaitik brontze ugari eraman zuen .
PRED:	And he took the cities of Bethlehem , and brought them out of bronze .
GOLD:	along with a large amount of bronze from Hadadezer 's towns of Tebah and Berothai .

ID:	3624
INPUT:	Anak ihardetsi zion : — Ez , ene jauna . Erabat nahigabetua nauzu . Ez dut ardorik edan , ezta inolako edari mozkorgarririk ere . Neure barrua hustu dut Jaunaren aurrean .
PRED:	“ My lord , ” she answered , “ No , my lord , I have no wine . I have no wine to drink wine , nor drink wine , nor drink wine nor drink any wine . ”
GOLD:	“ Oh no , sir ! ” she replied . “ I have n't been drinking wine or anything stronger . But I am very discouraged , and I was pouring out my heart to the Lord .

ID:	3625
INPUT:	nahiz eta olatuek apar-bitsetan orro eginedota mendiak itsasoaren oldarrez ikaratu .
PRED:	And in the morning , and in the morning , and in the mountain , and in the wilderness , and in the midst of the sea .
GOLD:	A river brings joy to the city of our God , the sacred home of the Most High .

ID:	3626
INPUT:	Jaunak ordain diezazula egin duzun guztia eta eman diezazula saria luzaroan Israelgo Jainko Jaunak , honen babesera etorri baitzara .
PRED:	The Lord , the God of Israel , have given you all that you have done to you for a long time , for the Lord , the God of Israel , have come to him .
GOLD:	May the Lord , the God of Israel , under whose wings you have come to take refuge , reward you fully for what you have done . ”

ID:	3627
INPUT:	Lurrak zuek ase arte jateko adina uzta emango du , eta kezkarik gabe bizi ahal izango zarete bertan .
PRED:	And the earth shall give the food to you , and he shall give it to you , and you shall live there .
GOLD:	Then the land will yield large crops , and you will eat your fill and live securely in it .

ID:	3628
INPUT:	Orduan , hiru hiri aukeratu zituen Moisesek Jordanen ekialdean ,
PRED:	So Moses chose three cities on the east side of the Jordan .
GOLD:	Then Moses set apart three cities of refuge east of the Jordan River .

ID:	3629
INPUT:	Jaunaren zain nago , zain bihotz-bihotzez , haren erantzuna dut itxaro .
PRED:	My heart is in the heart of the Lord , and my hope shall be put to death .
GOLD:	I am counting on the Lord ; yes , I am counting on him.I have put my hope in his word .

ID:	3630
INPUT:	Beraz , hitz egin nire izenean horien aurka , hitz egin , gizaseme » .
PRED:	Therefore prophesy against them in my name , Son of man , prophesy against them .
GOLD:	Therefore , son of man , prophesy against them loudly and clearly . ”

ID:	3631
INPUT:	Hark erantzun zien : — Zergatik zenbiltzaten nire bila ? Ez al zenekiten nik neure Aitaren gauzetan jardun behar dudala ?
PRED:	He answered them , “ Why do you seek me ? Do n't you know that my Father is in my Father 's night ? ”
GOLD:	“ But why did you need to search ? ” he asked . “ Did n't you know that I must be in my Father 's house ? ”

ID:	3632
INPUT:	Izan ere , bizia maite duenak , luzaroan bizi eta zoriontsu izan nahi duenak , mihia gorde behar du gaitzetik eta ezpainak engainutik .
PRED:	For he that loves life shall live in a long time , and shall live in a long time , and shall be glad from the lips of the lips .
GOLD:	For the Scriptures say , “ If you want to enjoy lifeand see many happy days , keep your tongue from speaking eviland your lips from telling lies .

ID:	3633
INPUT:	Deabru asko botatzen zuten eta gaixo asko sendatzen , olioz igurtziz .
PRED:	And many demons cast out many demons , and many sick with oil .
GOLD:	And they cast out many demons and healed many sick people , anointing them with olive oil .

ID:	3634
INPUT:	Galaziar zentzugabeok , nork liluratu zaituzte ? Ez nizuen , bada , nik Jesu Kristo gurutziltzatua begien aurrean ipini ?
PRED:	Are you wise men of Gilead ? Do n't I put you in front of you ? I have put you on the cross Jesus Christ ?
GOLD:	Oh , foolish Galatians ! Who has cast an evil spell on you ? For the meaning of Jesus Christ 's death was made as clear to you as if you had seen a picture of his death on the cross .

ID:	3635
INPUT:	Nire gau-ikuskarietan laugarren piztia bat ikusi nuen : beldurgarria zen , izugarria eta guztiz indartsua ; burdinazko hagin handiak zituen ; dena irensten eta txikitzen zuen , jan gabe uzten zuena hankapean apurtzen zuelarik . Beste piztiak ez bezalakoa zen ; hamar adar zituen .
PRED:	And I saw a fourth beast in my vision , and behold , there was a great voice , and a great voice , and a great voice , and a great voice , and a great voice , and a great voice , and he did not eat it , and he did not eat it .
GOLD:	Then in my vision that night , I saw a fourth beast — terrifying , dreadful , and very strong . It devoured and crushed its victims with huge iron teeth and trampled their remains beneath its feet . It was different from any of the other beasts , and it had ten horns .

ID:	3636
INPUT:	Beste hamabost urtez luzatuko dizut bizia . Libratuko zaituztet zu eta Jerusalem Asiriako erregearen eskuetatik eta babestuko dut hiri hau , naizena naizenagatik eta neure zerbitzari Davidengatik ” » .
PRED:	I will give you thirty years , and I will deliver you out of the hand of the king of Assyria , and I will deliver you out of the hand of the king of Assyria , and for my servant David . ”
GOLD:	I will add fifteen years to your life , and I will rescue you and this city from the king of Assyria . I will defend this city for my own honor and for the sake of my servant David . ' ”

ID:	3637
INPUT:	Israel neskatxa ederra erori da , ez da gehiago jaikiko ; lur jota dago , ez da altxatuko duenik .
PRED:	Israel is a beautiful woman , and no more will be born , and it will be no more .
GOLD:	“ The virgin Israel has fallen , never to rise again ! She lies abandoned on the ground , with no one to help her up . ”

ID:	3638
INPUT:	Bota urrea hautsetara , Ofirko metala errekako uharrien artera .
PRED:	And he brought gold from the dust , and brought them into the midst of Hamath .
GOLD:	If you give up your lust for moneyand throw your precious gold into the river ,

ID:	3639
INPUT:	Gerra-hotsak lurralde hartan , hondamendi izugarria .
PRED:	The sound of the land is a great destruction , a destruction of destruction .
GOLD:	“ Let the battle cry be heard in the land , a shout of great destruction .

ID:	3640
INPUT:	Honela ziharduen Jaunak berekiko : « Egingo dudanaren berri eman gabe utzi behar ote dut Abraham ?
PRED:	The Lord said to them , “ Will I leave the new news that I have given to Abraham ?
GOLD:	“ Should I hide my plan from Abraham ? ” the Lord asked .

ID:	3641
INPUT:	Beraz , zuhur jokatu beharrean gaude , areago ugal ez daitezen ; bestela , guduren bat sortuko balitz , gure etsaiekin elkartu eta gure aurka egingo lukete borroka , eta gero Egiptotik alde egingo ligukete » .
PRED:	So we will be wise in the same way , so that we may be saved . If we were born , we will fight against our enemies and fight against our enemies , and they will fight against us . ”
GOLD:	We must make a plan to keep them from growing even more . If we do n't , and if war breaks out , they will join our enemies and fight against us . Then they will escape from the country . ”

ID:	3642
INPUT:	( Mt 16 , <unk> ; Mk 8 , 34 — 9 , 1 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Opposition from Samaritans

ID:	3643
INPUT:	Ohartu zen , beraz , Esau , aitak ez zituela begiko Kanaango emakumeak ,
PRED:	So Esau knew that his father was not able to look at the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	It was now very clear to Esau that his father did not like the local Canaanite women .

ID:	3644
INPUT:	Lasai bizi nintzen , eta birrindu egin nau , lepotik heldu eta zati-zati egin , bere gezien jo-puntu bihurtu .
PRED:	When I live , I was still alive , and laid my neck on my head , and I became a snare , and he made a snare for himself .
GOLD:	“ I was living quietly until he shattered me.He took me by the neck and broke me in pieces.Then he set me up as his target ,

ID:	3645
INPUT:	Jantzi bordatuak eman nizkizun , larru finezko oinetakoak , lihozko gerrikoa eta zetazko gainjantzia .
PRED:	And I put on them , and clothed them with a garment , and a garment of blue , and a garment of fine linen , and a garment .
GOLD:	I gave you expensive clothing of fine linen and silk , beautifully embroidered , and sandals made of fine goatskin leather .

ID:	3646
INPUT:	« Jauna ez da gauza izan hitzeman zion lurraldera herri hau eramateko ; horregatik sarraskitu ditu basamortuan » .
PRED:	The Lord said to the people , “ The Lord has given this land to enter into the wilderness . So he has broken it in the wilderness . ”
GOLD:	‘ The Lord was not able to bring them into the land he swore to give them , so he killed them in the wilderness . '

ID:	3647
INPUT:	Herri osoak sumatzen zituen trumoi eta tximistak , turuta-hotsak eta mendia ketan , eta , beldurrez dar-dar , urrutian zeuden geldi .
PRED:	And all the people of the land burnt with fire , and fire , and the sound of fire , and the sound of fire , and the sound of fire , and all the people were round about .
GOLD:	When the people heard the thunder and the loud blast of the ram 's horn , and when they saw the flashes of lightning and the smoke billowing from the mountain , they stood at a distance , trembling with fear .

ID:	3648
INPUT:	Baina judua zela jabetu bezain laster , denak aho batez oihuka hasi ziren : « Gora Efesoko Artemisa ! » Eta ia bi ordu egin zituzten halaxe oihuka .
PRED:	But when the Jews heard that the Jews were dead , they cried out one voice , saying , “ Amen ! ” And they cried out , and they cried out .
GOLD:	But when the crowd realized he was a Jew , they started shouting again and kept it up for about two hours : “ Great is Artemis of the Ephesians ! Great is Artemis of the Ephesians ! ”

ID:	3649
INPUT:	Babiloniarekin prostituzioan eta atseginkerian ibiliak diren munduko erregeek negar eta dolu egingo dute , haren sutearen ke-mordoa ikustean .
PRED:	And the kings of the earth shall weep with her , and the kings of the earth shall weep and weep , and shall see his wrath .
GOLD:	And the kings of the world who committed adultery with her and enjoyed her great luxury will mourn for her as they see the smoke rising from her charred remains .

ID:	3650
INPUT:	Nire herriaren zauriaazaletik sendatu nahi dute . “ Dena ongi doa , oso ongi ” diote , baina ez doa ongi , ez .
PRED:	They will heal my people from my people , saying , “ All things is good , ” but they do not do good .
GOLD:	They offer superficial treatmentsfor my people 's mortal wound.They give assurances of peacewhen there is no peace .

ID:	3651
INPUT:	Davidek kutxa Jerusalemera eraman
PRED:	David Complains the Covenant Box
GOLD:	Moving the Ark to Jerusalem

ID:	3652
INPUT:	Iron , Migdal-El , Horem , Bet-Anat , Bet-Xemex ; guztira hemeretzi hiri ziren , beren herrixkekin .
PRED:	And it came to pass , that is , that is , that is , that is , that is , and to the border of the city , and to the border of their villages , and to the border of their villages , and to the border of their villages .
GOLD:	Yiron , Migdal-el , Horem , Beth-anath , and Beth-shemesh — nineteen towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	3653
INPUT:	Baina Joakazek otoitz egin zion Jaunari eta honek entzun , ikusi baitzuen zein gogor menderatzen zuen Siriako erregeak Israel .
PRED:	But Ahaz prayed to the Lord , and he heard the voice of the Lord , because the king of Syria had heard him .
GOLD:	Then Jehoahaz prayed for the Lord 's help , and the Lord heard his prayer , for he could see how severely the king of Aram was oppressing Israel .

ID:	3654
INPUT:	Zorabio-haizeasartu die Jaunak barruan : bere egiteko guztietanoker daramate Egipto ; eta hala dabil , botaka eta balantzaka , mozkor baten antzera .
PRED:	The Lord has brought them into the wind , and they have brought them into the midst of all that he has done , and they have cast them into the midst of the land of Egypt , as a young bull .
GOLD:	The Lord has sent a spirit of foolishness on them , so all their suggestions are wrong.They cause Egypt to staggerlike a drunk in his vomit .

ID:	3655
INPUT:	Legendunen garbikuntza
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Cleansing from Skin Diseases

ID:	3656
INPUT:	Hilaren zazpian , gauza bera egingo duzue nahi edo jakin gabe bekatu egin duenaren alde . Horrela egingo da tenpluaren garbikuntza .
PRED:	On the seventh day of the seventh month , you shall know what he has done , and you shall do no sin . So the house shall be clean .
GOLD:	Do this also on the seventh day of the new year for anyone who has sinned through error or ignorance . In this way , you will purify the Temple .

ID:	3657
INPUT:	hau da , Jainkoak agintzari guztiei baietza eman die harengan ; horregatik , Kristoren bitartez esaten diogu « Amen » Jainkoari , berau goresten dugunean .
PRED:	This is why God has given us all things to do . That is why he says to us , “ Amen ! ”
GOLD:	For all of God 's promises have been fulfilled in Christ with a resounding “ Yes ! ” And through Christ , our “ Amen ” ( which means “ Yes ” ) ascends to God for his glory .

ID:	3658
INPUT:	« Horrela , azkenekoak lehenengo izango dira eta lehenengoak azkeneko » .
PRED:	So the first shall be first , and the first shall be first .
GOLD:	“ So those who are last now will be first then , and those who are first will be last . ”

ID:	3659
INPUT:	Jeremias profetak honela erantzun zion Hananias profetari tenpluan bilduta zeuden apaizen eta herriaren aurrean :
PRED:	Then Jeremiah the prophet answered Jeremiah the prophet , and the priest stood in the temple , and the priest stood before the people :
GOLD:	Jeremiah responded to Hananiah as they stood in front of all the priests and people at the Temple .

ID:	3660
INPUT:	Eta erantzungo diete : “ Beren gurasoek Egiptotik atera zituen Jauna , beren Jainkoa , utzi eta jainko arrotzengana jo dutelako , haien aurrean ahuspeztuz eta haiei kultua emanez . Horregatik ekarri die Jaunak halako zoritxarra ” » .
PRED:	And they shall say unto them , The Lord their fathers brought them out of the land of Egypt , and served other gods , and served other gods , and served other gods , and served them , for this is what the Lord their God has done to them .
GOLD:	“ And the answer will be , ‘ Because his people abandoned the Lord their God , who brought their ancestors out of Egypt , and they worshiped other gods instead and bowed down to them . That is why the Lord has brought all these disasters on them . ' ”

ID:	3661
INPUT:	Joan nintzen aingeruagana eta liburuxka emateko esan nion . Hark esan zidan : « Tori eta irentsi : sabela garraztuko dizu , baina ahorako eztia bezain gozo izango duzu » .
PRED:	Then I went to the angel and said to me , “ You will be like a little while . ”
GOLD:	So I went to the angel and told him to give me the small scroll . “ Yes , take it and eat it , ” he said . “ It will be sweet as honey in your mouth , but it will turn sour in your stomach ! ”

ID:	3662
INPUT:	Pedro eta lagunak logaleak jota zeuden ; baina esnatu ziren eta Jesusen aintza eta harekin zeuden bi gizonak ikusi zituzten .
PRED:	And they went to Peter and the men who were with him , and they saw the glory of Jesus and the two men with him .
GOLD:	Peter and the others had fallen asleep . When they woke up , they saw Jesus ' glory and the two men standing with him .

ID:	3663
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Ahal dudan diozu ? Dena ahal du sinesten duenak .
PRED:	Jesus said to him , “ Do you want me to do what I do ? ”
GOLD:	“ What do you mean , ‘ If I can ' ? ” Jesus asked . “ Anything is possible if a person believes . ”

ID:	3664
INPUT:	Gorpuak erre eta errautsak zabaltzen direneko haran osoa eta Zedron erreka inguruko landa , ekialderantz dagoen Zaldien Atearen izkinaraino , niri sagaraturiko esparru izango da . Ez dute sekula erauziko , ez hondatuko » .
PRED:	And the bodies shall spread out the ashes of the ashes , and all around the valley , and all around the valley round about , and it shall be for the right side of the horse , and it shall not be destroyed , neither shall it be destroyed .
GOLD:	And the entire area — including the graveyard and ash dump in the valley , and all the fields out to the Kidron Valley on the east as far as the Horse Gate — will be holy to the Lord . The city will never again be captured or destroyed . ”

ID:	3665
INPUT:	Jainkoaren zerbitzari baitira , zuri ongi jokatzen laguntzeko . Gaizki egiten baduzu , ordea , izan beldur , zigortzeko ahalmena ez baitute alferrik . Izan ere , Jainkoaren zerbitzari dira , justizia egin eta gaizkileak zigortzeko .
PRED:	For you are the servant of God , to help you . But if you do evil , do n't be afraid of the power of God , because they are not afraid of the judgment of God , and to do evil .
GOLD:	The authorities are God 's servants , sent for your good . But if you are doing wrong , of course you should be afraid , for they have the power to punish you . They are God 's servants , sent for the very purpose of punishing those who do what is wrong .

ID:	3666
INPUT:	Senideok , egon zaitezte pozik edozein eratako tentaldik erasotzen dizuenean .
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , be glad in every way , in every way you do , brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , when troubles of any kind come your way , consider it an opportunity for great joy .

ID:	3667
INPUT:	Berehala , Jesusek ikasleak txalupan sarrarazi eta bere aurretik beste aldera , Betsaidarantz , joateko agindu zien , berak jendeari agur egin bitartean .
PRED:	So Jesus led his disciples into the boat , and he commanded them to the other side of his enemies , and he sent the crowds away .
GOLD:	Immediately after this , Jesus insisted that his disciples get back into the boat and head across the lake to Bethsaida , while he sent the people home .

ID:	3668
INPUT:	baina Jaunarenak dira zuzen epaitzeko tresnak , neurgailu guztiak berak eginak dira .
PRED:	But the Lord will judge you , and all the vessels of the Lord will be done .
GOLD:	The Lord demands accurate scales and balances ; he sets the standards for fairness .

ID:	3669
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Zer ari da Israel , ene maitea , nire tenpluan ? Zer , hainbeste gaiztakeriaegin ondoren ? Promesek eta sakrifizioetakoabereekzoritxarra aldenduko diotelauste ote du ? Orduan bai egingo lukeelapozarren oihu !
PRED:	Thus says the Lord : “ What is my beloved love in my temple ? What have I done in my temple ? ” says the Lord , “ Will the prophets turn away from their wickedness ? ”
GOLD:	“ What right do my beloved people have to come to my Temple , when they have done so many immoral things ? Can their vows and sacrifices prevent their destruction ? They actually rejoice in doing evil !

ID:	3670
INPUT:	haren ituna gordetzen eta legeak betetzen dituztenentzat .
PRED:	Those who keep His covenant and keep His statutes .
GOLD:	of those who are faithful to his covenant , of those who obey his commandments !

ID:	3671
INPUT:	Ni ere seme izana nauzue , seme bakarra bezala maite ninduen amak .
PRED:	My son , you are my son , as my mother loved me .
GOLD:	For I , too , was once my father 's son , tenderly loved as my mother 's only child .

ID:	3672
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jainkoak herri santuko kide egin eta zerurako deitu zaituztenok , begira iezaiozue Jesusi : bera da guk aitortzen dugun fedearen apostolu eta apaiz nagusi .
PRED:	For this reason God will call you holy people , and you who are called in heaven will see you . You will see him , and we are a priest and a high priest .
GOLD:	And so , dear brothers and sisters who belong to God and are partners with those called to heaven , think carefully about this Jesus whom we declare to be God 's messenger and High Priest .

ID:	3673
INPUT:	Deika nauzu , Jainko ; erantzungo al didazu ! Itzul niregana belarria , entzun nire mintzoa .
PRED:	You will answer me , O God , and you will answer me , and you will hear my voice .
GOLD:	I am praying to you because I know you will answer , O God.Bend down and listen as I pray .

ID:	3674
INPUT:	Asto zuri baten gainean , tapiz gainean eseriak zoaztenoketa oinez zoaztenok , entzun
PRED:	And they were sitting upon a donkey , and with them that sat upon them , and hear them , and hear them .
GOLD:	“ Consider this , you who ride on fine donkeys , you who sit on fancy saddle blankets , and you who walk along the road .

ID:	3675
INPUT:	Erregea eta beronen zerbitzaria zetozkiola ikustean , Araunak , bidera irten eta erregearen aurrean ahuspezturik ,
PRED:	When the king and his servants saw that the king and his servants came to meet him , they bowed down before the king and bowed down to the king .
GOLD:	When Araunah saw the king and his men coming toward him , he came and bowed before the king with his face to the ground .

ID:	3676
INPUT:	Ez aditu Ezekiasi ; entzun Asiriako erregeak dioena : « Egin bakezkoak nirekin eta jar zaitezte nire menpe . Horrela nork bere mahatsondoaren eta pikondoaren fruituak jan ahal izanen ditu eta bere putzuko ura edan .
PRED:	Do n't listen to Hezekiah . The king of Assyria says to him , “ Go with me , and eat the fruit of his own vine and drink the fruit of his vine .
GOLD:	“ Do n't listen to Hezekiah ! These are the terms the king of Assyria is offering : Make peace with me — open the gates and come out . Then each of you can continue eating from your own grapevine and fig tree and drinking from your own well .

ID:	3677
INPUT:	Israeldarrak eta filistearrak aurrez aurre jarri ziren lerroka .
PRED:	And the children of Israel and the Philistines went before the Philistines .
GOLD:	Soon the Israelite and Philistine forces stood facing each other , army against army .

ID:	3678
INPUT:	Jaunak lagundu ez balit , herio-isilpean nengokeen dagoeneko .
PRED:	If the Lord would not help me , he would not help me .
GOLD:	Unless the Lord had helped me , I would soon have settled in the silence of the grave .

ID:	3679
INPUT:	Saul apaizarekin hizketan ari zen bitarte hartan , ordea , gero eta handiagoa bihurtu zen zalaparta filistearren kanpalekuan . Saulek esan zion apaizari : — Uztazu !
PRED:	While Saul was still speaking with the priest , he became very great and more powerful than the Philistines . Saul said to the priest , “ Give me to me . ”
GOLD:	But while Saul was talking to the priest , the confusion in the Philistine camp grew louder and louder . So Saul said to the priest , “ Never mind ; let 's get going ! ”

ID:	3680
INPUT:	hirugarrengoak zuriak , eta laugarrengoak nabarrak .
PRED:	The third , the third , the fourth , the fourth and the fourth .
GOLD:	the third by white horses , and the fourth by powerful dappled-gray horses .

ID:	3681
INPUT:	Besteek heldu eta atxilotu egin zuten .
PRED:	And others came and beat him , and beat him .
GOLD:	Then the others grabbed Jesus and arrested him .

ID:	3682
INPUT:	Jendearengana itzuli zirenean , gizon bat ondoratu zitzaion Jesusi eta , aurrean belaunikatuz ,
PRED:	When they came back to the crowds , a man followed him , and followed him in front of him .
GOLD:	At the foot of the mountain , a large crowd was waiting for them . A man came and knelt before Jesus and said ,

ID:	3683
INPUT:	Beraz , bekatua ez bedi gehiago nagusi izan zuen gorputz hilkorrean . Ez jarri beraren grinen menpean ,
PRED:	So he would not sin in the flesh of his flesh . He would not be put to death in the flesh of his flesh .
GOLD:	Do not let sin control the way you live ; do not give in to sinful desires .

ID:	3684
INPUT:	Oraindik gehiago egiten duzue : malkoz betetzen duzue Jaunaren aldarea , negar-zotinka ari ohi zarete zuen eskaintzei Jaunak arretarik egiten ez dielako eta gogo onez hartzen ez dituelako .
PRED:	But now you do more than these things , because you do not obey the altar of the Lord , because you do not obey the Lord .
GOLD:	Here is another thing you do . You cover the Lord 's altar with tears , weeping and groaning because he pays no attention to your offerings and does n't accept them with pleasure .

ID:	3685
INPUT:	Zain itzazue zeuen buruak eta artalde osoa , honen zaindari jarri baitzaituzte Espiritu Santuak ; larra ezazue Jainkoaren Eliza , hark bere Semearen odolaz eskuratu zuena .
PRED:	Take your heads and all your flock , for the Holy Spirit has given you the Holy Spirit . You are the Holy Spirit of God , who has given you the blood of his Son .
GOLD:	“ So guard yourselves and God 's people . Feed and shepherd God 's flock — his church , purchased with his own blood — over which the Holy Spirit has appointed you as leaders .

ID:	3686
INPUT:	Errudun izanez gero , ai ene ! Errugabe izanik ere , ezin izango dut bururik altxatu , lotsaz betea bainago , miseria beti begi aurrean .
PRED:	I will be ashamed , O my soul , and I will not be ashamed ; I will not be ashamed , because I will be ashamed , and I will be ashamed in the sight of the Lord .
GOLD:	If I am guilty , too bad for me ; and even if I 'm innocent , I ca n't hold my head high , because I am filled with shame and misery .

ID:	3687
INPUT:	Tenpluan zegoen zutoin sakratua Jerusalemdik kanpora aterarazi eta Zedron errekan erre zuen ; erabat erraustu eta errautsak jende arruntaren hilobira bota zituen .
PRED:	And he led the Asherah out of Jerusalem , and cast them out of Jerusalem , and burned them in the valley of the valley , and cast them into the midst of the people .
GOLD:	The king removed the Asherah pole from the Lord 's Temple and took it outside Jerusalem to the Kidron Valley , where he burned it . Then he ground the ashes of the pole to dust and threw the dust over the graves of the people .

ID:	3688
INPUT:	Horregatik , gero eta beldur handiagoa zion Davidi . Harrezkero , Saulek beti izan zion gorroto Davidi .
PRED:	So Saul feared David , and he hated David forever .
GOLD:	Saul became even more afraid of him , and he remained David 's enemy for the rest of his life .

ID:	3689
INPUT:	Azaldu zeure hitz argigarriak , eman ulermena heldugabeei .
PRED:	Give your words to the wise , and teach them understanding .
GOLD:	The teaching of your word gives light , so even the simple can understand .

ID:	3690
INPUT:	Harresia burutu zenean eta ate-alderdiak jaso , atezainak , kantariak eta lebitarrak beren eginkizunetan jarri nituen .
PRED:	When I had finished the wall , I lifted up the walls of the city and the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites .
GOLD:	After the wall was finished and I had set up the doors in the gates , the gatekeepers , singers , and Levites were appointed .

ID:	3691
INPUT:	Gainerako lebitarrei , hots , Merariren ondorengo senitarteei , lau hiri eman zizkieten Zabulonen leinuaren ondaretik : Jokneam , Karta , Rimon eta Nahalal , herri-lur eta guzti .
PRED:	And the rest of the Levites , the sons of the Levites , of the sons of Zebulun , and of the children of Zebulun , and of the children of Zebulun , and of the children of Zebulun , and of the children of Zebulun , and of the children of Zebulun , and of the children of Zebulun ;
GOLD:	The rest of the Levites — the Merari clan — were given the following towns with their pasturelands from the tribe of Zebulun : Jokneam , Kartah ,

ID:	3692
INPUT:	Horrela erakutsi nahi izan zuen zein eskuzabal zen errukiz hartu zituenekin , bere aintza azaltzeko aukeratu zituenekin .
PRED:	He wanted to teach him what he wanted to show mercy to him , and he chose his glory to show his glory .
GOLD:	He does this to make the riches of his glory shine even brighter on those to whom he shows mercy , who were prepared in advance for glory .

ID:	3693
INPUT:	Eta egunean zazpi aldiz iraintzen bazaitu eta zazpi aldiz etortzen bazaizu “ Damu dut ” esanez , barkatu » .
PRED:	And if you go up again seven times , and if you say to him , ‘ I have forgiven you . '
GOLD:	Even if that person wrongs you seven times a day and each time turns again and asks forgiveness , you must forgive . ”

ID:	3694
INPUT:	Esango dizuet nori izan beldur : Izan beldur hiltzeko eta ondoren infernura jaurtitzeko ahalmena duenari . Bai , izan beldur horri !
PRED:	I will say to you , “ Be afraid , be afraid , and be afraid of the power of the power , that he may cast out the power of the power , and be afraid . ”
GOLD:	But I 'll tell you whom to fear . Fear God , who has the power to kill you and then throw you into hell . Yes , he 's the one to fear .

ID:	3695
INPUT:	“ Neure herri Israel Egiptotik atera nuen egunetik ez dut Israelgo leinu guztien artean inongo hiririk hautatu , nire egoitza izango zen etxea egin ziezadaten ; baizik eta David aukeratu nuen , ene herri Israelen buruzagi izan zedin ” .
PRED:	“ I brought my people out of the land of Egypt , and I did not build any city among all the tribes of Israel , but I chose my name to build a house for my name , but I chose my people Israel . ”
GOLD:	‘ From the day I brought my people Israel out of Egypt , I have never chosen a city among any of the tribes of Israel as the place where a Temple should be built to honor my name . But I have chosen David to be king over my people Israel . ' ”

ID:	3696
INPUT:	Otoi , ez joan hemendik nik eskaintza zure aurrera ekarri arte . Berehala itzuliko naiz . Jaunak erantzun zion : — Hementxe egongo naiz zu etorri arte .
PRED:	But now I will not go before you until I bring you back before you . ” The Lord said to him , “ I will stay here until I come . ”
GOLD:	Do n't go away until I come back and bring my offering to you . ” He answered , “ I will stay here until you return . ”

ID:	3697
INPUT:	Orain , berriz , zer ari naiz ikusten ? Nire herria hutsaren trukeeraman dute gatibu , eta menderatzaileekulu dagite harro , nire izena egun osoanetengabe gaitzetsiz .
PRED:	But now I have seen what I have seen ? They have taken away my people , and they have taken away captive , and have taken away my name , and have been taken away by all day long .
GOLD:	What is this ? ” asks the Lord . “ Why are my people enslaved again ? Those who rule them shout in exultation . My name is blasphemed all day long .

ID:	3698
INPUT:	Jaiki zen hildakoa eta hizketan hasi , eta Jesusek amari bihurtu zion .
PRED:	And the dead rose up , and began to speak , and he followed him .
GOLD:	Then the dead boy sat up and began to talk ! And Jesus gave him back to his mother .

ID:	3699
INPUT:	<unk> txoek arrazoi gabe pertsegitzen naute , baina zure hitzek bakarrik ikaratzen ni .
PRED:	The young men make me right , but your word is right .
GOLD:	Powerful people harass me without cause , but my heart trembles only at your word .

ID:	3700
INPUT:	Erosta-doinuan . Davidena . Kux benjamindarra zela eta , Jaunari abestu ziona .
PRED:	And it came to pass , that the sons of Benjamin was the father of the Lord : and the sons of Benjamin , and the sons of Benjamin , and the children of Israel , and the children of Israel , and the children of Israel .
GOLD:	I come to you for protection , O Lord my God.Save me from my persecutors — rescue me !

ID:	3701
INPUT:	Egia da neure kontzientziak ez nauela ezertan salatzen ; baina horrek ez du esan nahi neure burua errugabetzat dudanik , Jaunak bainau epaitzen .
PRED:	I know that I am not worthy to do anything . But he does not want to say to me , “ I am guilty , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	My conscience is clear , but that does n't prove I 'm right . It is the Lord himself who will examine me and decide .

ID:	3702
INPUT:	Jaunak ez du bere herria zapuztuko , ez bere ondarea bertan behera utziko .
PRED:	The Lord will not leave his people , and he will not leave his inheritance .
GOLD:	The Lord will not reject his people ; he will not abandon his special possession .

ID:	3703
INPUT:	« Hilerokoa izanik , odoljarioa duen emakumea zazpi egunez geldituko da kutsaturik ; emakumea ukitzen duena kutsaturik geldituko da arratsa arte .
PRED:	“ If a woman is unclean for seven days , she shall be unclean until the evening .
GOLD:	“ Whenever a woman has her menstrual period , she will be ceremonially unclean for seven days . Anyone who touches her during that time will be unclean until evening .

ID:	3704
INPUT:	Gero , zuk hitz egin eta nik erantzungo dizut , edota nik hitz egin eta zuk erantzungo .
PRED:	Then I will answer you , and I will answer you , and you will answer me .
GOLD:	Now summon me , and I will answer ! Or let me speak to you , and you reply .

ID:	3705
INPUT:	esanez : — Benetan gorroto zeniola uste nuen eta zure adiskideari eman nion emaztetzat . Hori baino hobea duzu ahizpa gaztea . Hartzazu zeuretzat , bestearen ordez .
PRED:	He said to her , “ I hate you , and I loved your friend , and I loved you as my sister . You are better than your younger sister . ”
GOLD:	“ I truly thought you must hate her , ” her father explained , “ so I gave her in marriage to your best man . But look , her younger sister is even more beautiful than she is . Marry her instead . ”

ID:	3706
INPUT:	Fedeari esker ez zen hondatu Rahab emagaldua sinesgabeekin batera , israeldar ikertzaileei harrera ona egin zielako .
PRED:	By faith he did not have faith with the prostitute , because she did not have faith with the children of Israel .
GOLD:	It was by faith that Rahab the prostitute was not destroyed with the people in her city who refused to obey God . For she had given a friendly welcome to the spies .

ID:	3707
INPUT:	esan zuen : « Desagerrarazi egingo dut mundutik egin dudan gizakia , eta gizakia ez ezik , baita abereak , narrastiak eta zeruko hegaztiak ere , damu bainaiz hauek egin izanaz » .
PRED:	He said , “ I will bring man out of the world , and I will bring man out of the world , and the animals , and the birds of the earth , and the birds of the birds , and the birds of the birds , and the birds of the earth . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord said , “ I will wipe this human race I have created from the face of the earth . Yes , and I will destroy every living thing — all the people , the large animals , the small animals that scurry along the ground , and even the birds of the sky . I am sorry I ever made them . ”

ID:	3708
INPUT:	Hau dio Jaunak : « Egiaz , nire egitasmoakez dira zuenak bezalakoak , ezta nire jokabidea erezuena bezalakoa .
PRED:	For thus says the Lord : “ My counsel is like you , and my ways are not like you .
GOLD:	“ My thoughts are nothing like your thoughts , ” says the Lord . “ And my ways are far beyond anything you could imagine .

ID:	3709
INPUT:	( 1 Erg 10 , 1-13 )
PRED:	King Josiah of Judah
GOLD:	Solomon 's Wealth and Splendor

ID:	3710
INPUT:	Egidazu zin , Jaunaren izenean , ez dituzula nire ondorengoak suntsituko , ezta nire izena ezabatuko ere nire aitaren senitartetik .
PRED:	You shall swear by the name of the Lord , and you shall not destroy My name , nor shall my name be cut off from my father 's house .
GOLD:	So David promised this to Saul with an oath . Then Saul went home , but David and his men went back to their stronghold .

ID:	3711
INPUT:	Jaunak erraustu egin zituen hiriak eta bertako bizilagunak , lautada osoa eta lurralde hartako landaretza .
PRED:	And the Lord destroyed the cities , and all the inhabitants of the land , and all the inhabitants of the land , and all the inhabitants of the land .
GOLD:	He utterly destroyed them , along with the other cities and villages of the plain , wiping out all the people and every bit of vegetation .

ID:	3712
INPUT:	Heldu ziren Hebronera eta David erregeari eraman zioten Ix-Boxeten burua , esanez : — Hona Ix-Boxeten burua ; zu hil nahi izan zintuen zure etsai Saulen semea zen . Honela eman dio Jaunak Davidi Saulen eta beronen ondorengoen lepotik mendekatzeko aukera .
PRED:	And David came to Hebron , and brought him to the king in Hebron , and said to him , This is the head of the son of Saul : for the Lord hath delivered thee out of the hand of Saul , and the son of Saul .
GOLD:	When they arrived at Hebron , they presented Ishbosheth 's head to David . “ Look ! ” they exclaimed to the king . “ Here is the head of Ishbosheth , the son of your enemy Saul who tried to kill you . Today the Lord has given my lord the king revenge on Saul and his entire family ! ”

ID:	3713
INPUT:	Izan zaitezte elkarren menpeko , Kristori diozuen begiruneagatik .
PRED:	Be ye to one another , because of the fear of Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	And further , submit to one another out of reverence for Christ .

ID:	3714
INPUT:	« Zuen artean jarriko dut neure egonlekua eta ez zaituztet zapuztuko .
PRED:	“ I will put my witnesses among you , and I will not take you away .
GOLD:	I will live among you , and I will not despise you .

ID:	3715
INPUT:	Inbasioaren arrazoiak : Jerusalemen bekatuak
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The Sins of Judah

ID:	3716
INPUT:	Hitz hauek entzutean , atsekabez alde egin zuen gazteak , ondasun handien jabe baitzen .
PRED:	When the young man heard these words , he departed from his youth , because he was very great .
GOLD:	But when the young man heard this , he went away sad , for he had many possessions .

ID:	3717
INPUT:	Lasterka bideratuz , Esauk , besarkatu eta lepotik heldurik , laztandu egin zuen Jakob , eta negarrari eman zioten biek .
PRED:	And Esau ran , and went into the valley , and came in , and came out of his neck , and came to him , and wept .
GOLD:	Then Esau ran to meet him and embraced him , threw his arms around his neck , and kissed him . And they both wept .

ID:	3718
INPUT:	Ondoren , mezu hau bidali zion Judako errege Josafati : « Moabeko erregea kontra jarri zait . Etorriko al zara moabdarrak borrokatzera ? » Hark erantzun : « Joango naiz . Biok bat gara ; nire gudarostea eta zurea , nire zalditeria eta zurea bat dira » .
PRED:	Then he sent messengers to Jehoshaphat king of Judah , saying , “ Are you going to fight against Moab ? ” And he said , “ I will go and fight with you , and I will go . ”
GOLD:	On the way , he sent this message to King Jehoshaphat of Judah : “ The king of Moab has rebelled against me . Will you join me in battle against him ? ” And Jehoshaphat replied , “ Why , of course ! You and I are as one . My troops are your troops , and my horses are your horses . ”

ID:	3719
INPUT:	Baina indartsuago batek eraso eta menderatzen badu , segurantza ematen zioten armak kendu eta hari harrapatutako gauzak banatu egingo ditu .
PRED:	But if a strong hand has fought against him , and he has taken away his mother , and he will be taken away , and he will be taken away by night .
GOLD:	until someone even stronger attacks and overpowers him , strips him of his weapons , and carries off his belongings .

ID:	3720
INPUT:	Israeldarrak geroz eta gogorrago izan ziren Kanaango errege Jabinekin , erabat hondatu zuten arte .
PRED:	And the children of Israel were filled with all the kings of Canaan , and all the days of Canaan , until they destroyed them .
GOLD:	And from that time on Israel became stronger and stronger against King Jabin until they finally destroyed him .

ID:	3721
INPUT:	Orduan , bidera atera zen profeta , erregeari itxarotera . Ezin zitzaion igarri nor zen , begiak zapi batez estaliak baitzituen .
PRED:	Then he went out to the way of the king , and there was no one to wait for him , because his eyes were covered with seven eyes .
GOLD:	The prophet placed a bandage over his eyes to disguise himself and then waited beside the road for the king .

ID:	3722
INPUT:	Emateko borondatea zuten bihotz-zabaleko israeldar guztiek Jaunarentzat oparia ekarri zuten , elkarketa-etxola eraikitzeko , hango zerbitzu eta jantzi sakratuetarako .
PRED:	And all the sons of Israel brought them to the Lord , to bring them to the tent of meeting , to build the tabernacle of meeting , and to minister to the Lord , and to minister to the tabernacle of meeting .
GOLD:	All whose hearts were stirred and whose spirits were moved came and brought their sacred offerings to the Lord . They brought all the materials needed for the Tabernacle , for the performance of its rituals , and for the sacred garments .

ID:	3723
INPUT:	Larunbata
PRED:	The Sabbath and the Sabbath
GOLD:	Passover and the Festival of Unleavened Bread

ID:	3724
INPUT:	Zer egin behar dizugu , itsasoa baretzeko ? Izan ere , itsasoa gero eta haserreago baitzegoen .
PRED:	What shall we do to you , that we may make the sea for the sea , because the sea was angry .
GOLD:	And since the storm was getting worse all the time , they asked him , “ What should we do to you to stop this storm ? ”

ID:	3725
INPUT:	gainera hustu zien bere haserre-sua , bere sumin , amorru eta suntsipena : zoritxar-mandatari taldea ,
PRED:	And he bowed down his wrath , and his wrath , and his wrath , and his wrath , and his wrath , and his company ,
GOLD:	He loosed on them his fierce anger — all his fury , rage , and hostility.He dispatched against thema band of destroying angels .

ID:	3726
INPUT:	Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak emango dizuen lurraldera joateko Jordan ibaia igaroko duzuen egunean , harritzar batzuk hartu , tente ipini eta karez zurituko dituzue .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in the day that the Lord your God will give you the Jordan , that you may pass over the Jordan , and put them on the face of the Jordan , and put them on it .
GOLD:	When you cross the Jordan River and enter the land the Lord your God is giving you , set up some large stones and coat them with plaster .

ID:	3727
INPUT:	Kito Israelgo profetak , Jerusalemi nire izenean hitz egin eta , bakerik ez zegoenean , bake-ikuskariak azaltzen zizkiotenak ! Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the prophets of Israel prophesy in my name , saying , Thus saith the Lord God .
GOLD:	They were lying prophets who claimed peace would come to Jerusalem when there was no peace . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! '

ID:	3728
INPUT:	— Zergatik ez duzue barkamen-oparigaia toki sakratuan jan ? Guztiz sakratua da , elkartearen errua kentzeko eta Jaunaren aurrean haren aldeko barkamen-ohikunea egiteko Jaunak zuei emana .
PRED:	“ Why do you not eat the sin offering in the holy place ? It is most holy . It is most holy . It is holy to the Lord and to make atonement for you .
GOLD:	“ Why did n't you eat the sin offering in the sacred area ? ” he demanded . “ It is a holy offering ! The Lord has given it to you to remove the guilt of the community and to purify the people , making them right with the Lord .

ID:	3729
INPUT:	Harkaitzetik ur-lasterrak atera zituen , ura ibaika isurarazi .
PRED:	He led them out of the rock , and he led them out of the rock .
GOLD:	He made streams pour from the rock , making the waters flow down like a river !

ID:	3730
INPUT:	Horrek arindu egingo ninduke . Eta pozez salto egingo nuke tortura latz honetan , ez niekeelako horrela Santuaren hitzei uko egingo .
PRED:	And I will sing , and I will be glad , and I will be glad , because I would not speak the words of the Holy One .
GOLD:	At least I can take comfort in this : Despite the pain , I have not denied the words of the Holy One .

ID:	3731
INPUT:	Gutako batzuk ere izan dira hilobian eta emakumeek esan bezala aurkitu dute guztia ; baina bera ez dute ikusi .
PRED:	For there are some of us in the tomb , as the women have found , but they have not seen it .
GOLD:	Some of our men ran out to see , and sure enough , his body was gone , just as the women had said . ”

ID:	3732
INPUT:	« Zuek bakarrikhautatu zaituztetlurreko familia guztien artetik ; horregatik , bada , zuen bekatu guztienkontua eskatuko dizuet » .
PRED:	“ I have chosen you out of all your household . So I will ask you for all your sins . ”
GOLD:	“ From among all the families on the earth , I have been intimate with you alone.That is why I must punish youfor all your sins . ”

ID:	3733
INPUT:	Zeure ospez , izan garaile egia eta justiziaren aldeko borrokan . Jaurti zeure eskuaz
PRED:	Let them be glad , and let them be glad , and let them fall on your right hand .
GOLD:	Your arrows are sharp , piercing your enemies ' hearts.The nations fall beneath your feet .

ID:	3734
INPUT:	Baina israeldarrek garaitu egin zuten eta haren lurraldeaz jabetu , Arnon errekatik Jabok errekaraino , hau da , amondarren lurralderaino , hauek gotortua baitzuten muga .
PRED:	But the children of Israel took possession of his land , and took possession of his land , from the Arnon , even to the Arnon , even to the border of Ammon , even to the border of Ammon , even to the border of Ammon .
GOLD:	But the Israelites slaughtered them with their swords and occupied their land from the Arnon River to the Jabbok River . They went only as far as the Ammonite border because the boundary of the Ammonites was fortified .

ID:	3735
INPUT:	dei egin eta esan zion : — Ez al nizun Jaunarengatik zin eginarazi eta ez al nizun zorrotz esan norabait ateratzen bazinen , ziur hilko zinela ? Ongi zela erantzun zenidan , bazenekiela .
PRED:	And he called out and said to him , “ Do n't you say to me , ‘ Do you not tell anyone to tell me that you would die ? '
GOLD:	So the king sent for Shimei and demanded , “ Did n't I make you swear by the Lord and warn you not to go anywhere else or you would surely die ? And you replied , ‘ The sentence is fair ; I will do as you say . '

ID:	3736
INPUT:	Handia izango da , Goi-goikoaren Seme deituko diote , eta bere aita Daviden tronua emango dio Jainko Jaunak .
PRED:	And there shall be a great name of the Most High , and he shall call his father David his father .
GOLD:	He will be very great and will be called the Son of the Most High . The Lord God will give him the throne of his ancestor David .

ID:	3737
INPUT:	« Zatozte niregana , nekatu eta zamatu guztiok , eta neuk emango dizuet atseden .
PRED:	Come near to me , and forgive all you , and I will give you rest .
GOLD:	Then Jesus said , “ Come to me , all of you who are weary and carry heavy burdens , and I will give you rest .

ID:	3738
INPUT:	eta sartuko den etxeko nagusiari esan : « Maisuak galdetzen du non duen ikasleekin Pazko-bildotsa jateko tokia » .
PRED:	and said to the master of the house , “ Teacher , where his disciples ask the Passover to eat the Passover . ”
GOLD:	At the house he enters , say to the owner , ‘ The Teacher asks : Where is the guest room where I can eat the Passover meal with my disciples ? '

ID:	3739
INPUT:	Uzielen semeak : Mixael , Eltzafan eta Si<unk> .
PRED:	These are the sons of Shallum : Elioenai , Elioenai , Jozabad , and Jozabad .
GOLD:	The sons of Uzziel were Mishael , Elzaphan , and Sithri .

ID:	3740
INPUT:	Zure etxekoren bat hirian hiltzen delarik , zakurrek jango dute ; landan hiltzen delarik , zeruko hegaztiek jango dute » .
PRED:	And the birds of thy house shall eat in the city , and the birds of the field shall eat , and the birds of the heavens shall eat .
GOLD:	The members of Baasha 's family who die in the city will be eaten by dogs , and those who die in the field will be eaten by vultures . ”

ID:	3741
INPUT:	Saul , beronen seme Jonatan eta biekin zen jendea Benjamingo Gibean zeuden ; filistearrak , berriz , Mikmasen , etxolatuak .
PRED:	And Saul and his son Jonathan and his sons were in Benjamin , and the Philistines were at Gibeah .
GOLD:	Saul and Jonathan and the troops with them were staying at Geba in the land of Benjamin . The Philistines set up their camp at Micmash .

ID:	3742
INPUT:	Zanoahen , Adulamen eta inguruko herrixketan , Lakixen eta inguruetan , Azekan eta inguruetan . Beer-Xeba eta Hinom harana bitartean jarri ziren bizitzen .
PRED:	And it came to pass , that is , and in the villages round about , and in the villages round about , and in the villages round about it , and in the valley thereof , and in the valley thereof , and in the valley thereof .
GOLD:	Zanoah , and Adullam with their surrounding villages . They also lived in Lachish with its nearby fields and Azekah with its surrounding villages . So the people of Judah were living all the way from Beersheba in the south to the valley of Hinnom .

ID:	3743
INPUT:	Abiam , Judako errege
PRED:	King Ahaz of Judah
GOLD:	Abijam Rules in Judah

ID:	3744
INPUT:	Haien aurrean ikara dira herriak , zurbil jartzen aurpegi guztiak .
PRED:	They are afraid of the nations , and all their faces are under their face .
GOLD:	Fear grips all the people ; every face grows pale with terror .

ID:	3745
INPUT:	Beste hau esan behar zenukete : « Jaunak nahi badu eta bizi bagara , hau eta bestea egingo dugu » .
PRED:	You must say to them , “ If the Lord will live , we will also live . ”
GOLD:	What you ought to say is , “ If the Lord wants us to , we will live and do this or that . ”

ID:	3746
INPUT:	« Ez zapaldu lagun hurkoa , ez larrutu . Ez utzi biharamuna arte ordaindu gabe langilearen lansaria .
PRED:	“ Do n't let your neighbor take care of his neighbor . Do n't let him pay the next morning until the next morning .
GOLD:	“ Do not defraud or rob your neighbor . “ Do not make your hired workers wait until the next day to receive their pay .

ID:	3747
INPUT:	Handik Karmel mendira joan zen eta , gero , Samariara itzuli .
PRED:	And he went up to Mount Carmel , and returned to Samaria .
GOLD:	From there Elisha went to Mount Carmel and finally returned to Samaria .

ID:	3748
INPUT:	Hau esango dute : “ Ai Jaunaren ezpata ! Noiz hartu behar duzu atseden ? Bildu zorrora , zaude , gelditu ! ”
PRED:	They will say to them , “ How long will you take the sword of the Lord ? How long will you gather , and stay here ! ”
GOLD:	“ Now , O sword of the Lord , when will you be at rest again ? Go back into your sheath ; rest and be still .

ID:	3749
INPUT:	hau Xalumena , hau Tzadokena , hau Ahitubena ,
PRED:	the son of Zadok , the son of Zadok , the son of Zadok , the son of Zadok ,
GOLD:	son of Shallum , son of Zadok , son of Ahitub ,

ID:	3750
INPUT:	Biltzarraren jardun-haria
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Paul and Barnabas Separate

ID:	3751
INPUT:	« Horregatik diotsuet : Jainkoaren erreinua zuei kendu eta fruitua aterako dion herri bati emango zaio .
PRED:	Therefore I say unto you , The kingdom of God shall take away the kingdom of heaven , and shall give it to a people .
GOLD:	I tell you , the Kingdom of God will be taken away from you and given to a nation that will produce the proper fruit .

ID:	3752
INPUT:	Paulo berri onaren zerbitzari leial
PRED:	Paul and the Good News
GOLD:	Treasure in Fragile Clay Jars

ID:	3753
INPUT:	« Aita zuzen hori , munduak ez zaitu ezagutu ; nik , ordea , ezagutu zaitut , eta hauek jakin dute zuk bidali nauzula .
PRED:	“ Father , you have not known this world , but I know you , and they know that you sent me .
GOLD:	“ O righteous Father , the world does n't know you , but I do ; and these disciples know you sent me .

ID:	3754
INPUT:	Jesus preso hartu eta apaiz nagusiaren etxera eraman zuten . Pedrok urrutitik jarraitzen zion .
PRED:	And they took him and brought him into the house of the high priest . And Peter followed him .
GOLD:	So they arrested him and led him to the high priest 's home . And Peter followed at a distance .

ID:	3755
INPUT:	Jaiki zaitez , Jauna ! Salba nazazu , ene Jainko ! Nire etsaiak masailean jotzen dituzu , gaizkileei hortzak hausten dizkiezu .
PRED:	Arise , O Lord , my God , save me ; thou hast cast my enemies into the hand of the wicked .
GOLD:	Victory comes from you , O Lord.May you bless your people.Interlude

ID:	3756
INPUT:	Entzun , Jauna ! Erruki nitaz ! Jauna , zatozkit lagun ! »
PRED:	Hear me , O Lord , and be gracious to me .
GOLD:	You have turned my mourning into joyful dancing.You have taken away my clothes of mourning and clothed me with joy ,

ID:	3757
INPUT:	Pedrok galdetu zion : — Esadazu , honenbestean saldu al zenuten soroa ? — Bai , horrenbestean — erantzun zuen hark .
PRED:	Peter said to him , “ Tell me , what do you sold this field ? ” And he answered , “ Yes , I am . ”
GOLD:	Peter asked her , “ Was this the price you and your husband received for your land ? ” “ Yes , ” she replied , “ that was the price . ”

ID:	3758
INPUT:	Josuek eta israeldar arduradunek jantziak urratu zituzten , buru gainera hautsa bota eta ahuspezturik egon ziren Jaunaren kutxa aurrean arratsa arte .
PRED:	And Joshua and the elders of Israel tore their clothes , and cast them on the head , and bowed down before the Lord until evening .
GOLD:	Joshua and the elders of Israel tore their clothing in dismay , threw dust on their heads , and bowed face down to the ground before the Ark of the Lord until evening .

ID:	3759
INPUT:	Baxango mendi , mendi gorena , gailur garaidun Baxango mendia ,
PRED:	Mount Bashan , the mountains of Bashan , the mountains of Bashan , the hills of Bashan ,
GOLD:	Why do you look with envy , O rugged mountains , at Mount Zion , where God has chosen to live , where the Lord himself will live forever ?

ID:	3760
INPUT:	Fedea eta egintzak
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Faith without Good Deeds Is Dead

ID:	3761
INPUT:	Barkamen-oparirako zekorra eta akerra , zeinen odola barkamen-ohikunea egiteko santutegira eramana izan baita , kanpalekutik aterako dituzte eta haien larru , haragi eta hesteak erreko .
PRED:	And they shall bring a bull for a sin offering , and for a sin offering , and for a sin offering , and they shall bring them out of the camp , and the fat of the sanctuary , and the fat , and the fat , and the fat , and the fat of them .
GOLD:	“ The bull and the goat presented as sin offerings , whose blood Aaron takes into the Most Holy Place for the purification ceremony , will be carried outside the camp . The animals ' hides , internal organs , and dung are all to be burned .

ID:	3762
INPUT:	Baina bazen Gabaonen , Jaunaren egoitza aurrean , Uriren seme eta Hurren biloba Betzalelek egindako brontzezko aldare bat , eta bertan egin zioten kontsulta Jaunari Salomonek eta biltzar osoak .
PRED:	But there was a bronze altar in the presence of the Lord , the son of Uriah , the son of Uriah , the son of Uriah , and all the assembly of Solomon , and all the assembly of the Lord .
GOLD:	But the bronze altar made by Bezalel son of Uri and grandson of Hur was there at Gibeon in front of the Tabernacle of the Lord . So Solomon and the people gathered in front of it to consult the Lord .

ID:	3763
INPUT:	Ogi-irinaren katilua ez zen hustu , ezta oliontzia agortu ere , Jaunak Eliasen bidez esana zuen bezala .
PRED:	And the bread of bread was not covered with oil , nor did he put oil on his head , as the Lord had spoken through Elijah .
GOLD:	There was always enough flour and olive oil left in the containers , just as the Lord had promised through Elijah .

ID:	3764
INPUT:	Saiatu nintzen ulertzen begi aurreko arazo hori ,
PRED:	So I went before the eyes of my eyes , and understand all these things .
GOLD:	So I tried to understand why the wicked prosper.But what a difficult task it is !

ID:	3765
INPUT:	Nik esan nuen : « Ai ene , galdua naiz ! Ezpain kutsatuak baititut eta kutsaturiko ezpainak dituen herrian bizi bainaiz . Bekatari izanik , Errege eta Jaun ahalguztiduna ikusi baitut neure begiz » .
PRED:	I said to them , “ Oh , my soul is defiled . I am unclean and unclean in the peoples . I am the Lord of hosts , and I have seen my face , and I have seen it . ”
GOLD:	Then I said , “ It 's all over ! I am doomed , for I am a sinful man . I have filthy lips , and I live among a people with filthy lips . Yet I have seen the King , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . ”

ID:	3766
INPUT:	Gero , jaitsi ziren muinotik hirira , eta Samuel hizketan aritu zen Saulekin etxe gainean .
PRED:	And when they came down from the hill , Samuel spoke to Saul in the city .
GOLD:	When they came down from the place of worship and returned to town , Samuel took Saul up to the roof of the house and prepared a bed for him there .

ID:	3767
INPUT:	Jerusalem inguratua eta askatua
PRED:	The People of Jerusalem
GOLD:	Future Deliverance for Jerusalem

ID:	3768
INPUT:	Hona arduradun hauen izenak : « Judaren leinutik , Jefuneren seme Kaleb ;
PRED:	These are the names of the tribes of Judah : Caleb son of Caleb .
GOLD:	These are the tribes and the names of the leaders : JudahCaleb son of Jephunneh

ID:	3769
INPUT:	Gizasemeak
PRED:	The Son of Man
GOLD:	Young Woman

ID:	3770
INPUT:	Benjaminentzat esan zuen : « Seguru bizi daJaunaren leinu kutuna , Goi-goikoak babesten du egunero , beraren mendi gainean bizi da » .
PRED:	And Benjamin said to Benjamin , “ The Lord of the Most High is high in the morning , and the Most High will live on the mountain . ”
GOLD:	Moses said this about the tribe of Benjamin : “ The people of Benjamin are loved by the Lordand live in safety beside him.He surrounds them continuouslyand preserves them from every harm . ”

ID:	3771
INPUT:	Jaiki , egizu aiene gau osoan etengabe ; hustu ezazu bihotza Jaunaren aurrean ; jaso eskuak hari , kaleburu guztietangoseak hiltzen dauden zeure haurren alde otoika .
PRED:	Get up early in the sight of the Lord all night , and bow down in the sight of the Lord , and lay your hands on the head of all the heads of the head of the head , and pray for your children .
GOLD:	Rise during the night and cry out.Pour out your hearts like water to the Lord.Lift up your hands to him in prayer , pleading for your children , for in every streetthey are faint with hunger .

ID:	3772
INPUT:	( Mt 19 , 13-15 ; Mk 10 , 13-16 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	The Rich Man

ID:	3773
INPUT:	Halakoaren etxera joatea heriotzarantz joatea da , beraren bideak ilunpeetara eramaten zaitu .
PRED:	He went to the door of his own house , and the way of his own house , and he brought you into the darkness .
GOLD:	Entering her house leads to death ; it is the road to the grave .

ID:	3774
INPUT:	Honek jaso , urrea urtu eta , zizelez landuz , zekor-irudia moldeatu zuen . Orduan , israeldarrek esan zuten : — Hau da zure jainkoa , Israel , Egiptotik atera zintuena !
PRED:	And he took away the gold of gold , and made an idol of wood , and made an idol , and the sons of Israel said , This is your god , Israel , who brought you out of Egypt .
GOLD:	Then Aaron took the gold , melted it down , and molded it into the shape of a calf . When the people saw it , they exclaimed , “ O Israel , these are the gods who brought you out of the land of Egypt ! ”

ID:	3775
INPUT:	Norbaitek esan dezake egia dela ez natzaizuela nekagarri gertatu , baina , begi argikoa naizenez , engainuz harrapatu zaituztedala .
PRED:	If anyone says to you , “ I do n't tell you that you do n't do what is right , but I am a light , because I am with you . ”
GOLD:	Some of you admit I was not a burden to you . But others still think I was sneaky and took advantage of you by trickery .

ID:	3776
INPUT:	Hau entzutean , harritu egin zen Jesus eta ondoren zetozkionei esan zien : « Benetan diotsuet : Israel guztian ez dut aurkitu horrelako sinestedunik .
PRED:	When Jesus heard this , he took hold of him and said to those who came to him , “ I say to you , I have found no faith in Israel .
GOLD:	When Jesus heard this , he was amazed . Turning to those who were following him , he said , “ I tell you the truth , I have n't seen faith like this in all Israel !

ID:	3777
INPUT:	Jaunak gidatuko zaitu beti , basamorturik gorrienean ereasebetekoeta zure gorputza indarberrituko . Ongi bustiriko baratze izango zara , agortzen ez den iturburu .
PRED:	The Lord will bless you in the wilderness , in the wilderness , in the wilderness , in the wilderness , and in your power , and your body will be like a spring of water .
GOLD:	The Lord will guide you continually , giving you water when you are dryand restoring your strength.You will be like a well-watered garden , like an ever-flowing spring .

ID:	3778
INPUT:	« Hurbilarazi Aaron eta beronen semeak elkarketa-etxolaren sarrerara eta garbi daitezela urez .
PRED:	“ Bring Aaron and his sons to the entrance to the tent of meeting , so that they may be clean .
GOLD:	“ Present Aaron and his sons at the entrance of the Tabernacle , and wash them with water .

ID:	3779
INPUT:	Jakingo dute hori kanaandarrek eta lurralde honetako beste bizilagunek , altxatuko dira gure kontra eta gure oroitzapena ere desagerrarazi egingo dute lurrazaletik . Zer eginen duzu , orduan , zeure izen handiaren alde ?
PRED:	And the Canaanites shall know this , and the inhabitants of this land , and the inhabitants of this land shall rise up against us , and they shall rise up against our servants , and they shall perish from the land of our lord , and what shall thou do for thy name ?
GOLD:	For when the Canaanites and all the other people living in the land hear about it , they will surround us and wipe our name off the face of the earth . And then what will happen to the honor of your great name ? ”

ID:	3780
INPUT:	Adar-hots luzea entzun bezain laster , herri osoak irrintzi handia egingo du eta hiriko harresia behera etorriko da . Orduan , eraso diezaiola jende guztiak , nork bere aurrean izango duen tartetik »
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , when all the people heard the sound of a loud voice , that the city shall be heard , and all the people shall come up before him , and every man shall come out of his sight .
GOLD:	When you hear the priests give one long blast on the rams ' horns , have all the people shout as loud as they can . Then the walls of the town will collapse , and the people can charge straight into the town . ”

ID:	3781
INPUT:	Gure aita Davidek izan zuen Jaunarentzat , Israelen Jainkoarentzat , tenplua eraikitzeko asmoa .
PRED:	David built a temple for the Lord our father , the God of Israel , to build the temple of the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	Then Solomon said , “ My father , David , wanted to build this Temple to honor the name of the Lord , the God of Israel .

ID:	3782
INPUT:	Mutzritik ekarritako guda-gurdi batek zilarrezko seiehun txanpon balio zuen , eta zaldi batek ehun eta berrogeita hamar . Salomonen merkatariek hititen eta aramearren errege guztientzat ekarri ohi zituzten halakoak .
PRED:	And there was a chariot of silver from Egypt for a hundred talents of silver , and one hundred and fifty thousand horses , and the merchants of Solomon , and all the cities of the kings of the kings of Samaria .
GOLD:	At that time chariots from Egypt could be purchased for 600 pieces of silver , and horses for 150 pieces of silver . They were then exported to the kings of the Hittites and the kings of Aram .

ID:	3783
INPUT:	Morroi eta mirabeei ereneure espiritua isuriko dietegun haietan .
PRED:	In that day my Spirit will be poured out in my Spirit .
GOLD:	I will gather the armies of the worldinto the valley of Jehoshaphat.There I will judge themfor harming my people , my special possession , for scattering my people among the nations , and for dividing up my land .

ID:	3784
INPUT:	Nire herriko gizagaixoenek ereizango dute non bazkatu , behartsuek lasaihartuko dute atseden ; filistearrak , ordea , goseak hilaraziko ditut , bat bakarrik ereez da bizirik geldituko .
PRED:	The poor people of my people will eat bread , but the poor will die . But the Philistines will die , but I will not live alone .
GOLD:	I will feed the poor in my pasture ; the needy will lie down in peace.But as for you , I will wipe you out with famineand destroy the few who remain .

ID:	3785
INPUT:	Eta ilberri oro eta larunbateronire aurrean ahuspezteraetorriko dira gizaki guztiak . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	And they shall bow down before me on the Sabbath day of the new moon , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	“ All humanity will come to worship mefrom week to weekand from month to month .

ID:	3786
INPUT:	Libnakoa , Adulamgoa ,
PRED:	the king of Elam , the king of Elam , the king of Elam ,
GOLD:	The king of LibnahThe king of Adullam

ID:	3787
INPUT:	— Jauna , gizaki orori bizi-arnasa ematen diozun Jainkoa , izendatu elkartearen buru izango den norbait ,
PRED:	“ Lord , who gives life to you , ” he said , “ God , who gives life to you , who will be head over each other .
GOLD:	“ O Lord , you are the God who gives breath to all creatures . Please appoint a new man as leader for the community .

ID:	3788
INPUT:	Bi ume ari zitzaizkion sabelean elkarren lehian . Rebekak zioen berekiko : « Zergatik gertatu zait gero niri horrelakorik ? » Jaunarengana jo zuen argitasun eske ,
PRED:	And she had two sons in the field of the congregation , and she said to her , “ Why have I done this thing to the Lord ? ” And she went to the Lord .
GOLD:	But the two children struggled with each other in her womb . So she went to ask the Lord about it . “ Why is this happening to me ? ” she asked .

ID:	3789
INPUT:	Josuek bidali egin zuen herria , eta israeldarrak nor bere lurraldearen jabetza hartzera joan ziren .
PRED:	So Joshua sent the people away , and each man went to his own land .
GOLD:	After Joshua sent the people away , each of the tribes left to take possession of the land allotted to them .

ID:	3790
INPUT:	Eta honako promes hau egin zion Jaunari : « Amondarrak eskura ematen badizkidazu ,
PRED:	And he swore to the Lord , saying , If the children of Ammon give me into the hand of the children of Ammon ,
GOLD:	And Jephthah made a vow to the Lord . He said , “ If you give me victory over the Ammonites ,

ID:	3791
INPUT:	Izan ere , ez zieten israeldarrei lagundu ogia eta ura emanez . Moabdarrek Balaam erosi zuten , israeldarrak madarika zitzan ; baina gure Jainkoak madarikazioa bedeinkapen bihurtu zuen .
PRED:	For the children of Israel did not help the children of Israel , and gave them water to drink ; and the children of Israel blessed Balaam , but blessed him , and blessed him .
GOLD:	For they had not provided the Israelites with food and water in the wilderness . Instead , they hired Balaam to curse them , though our God turned the curse into a blessing .

ID:	3792
INPUT:	Ondoren , Pisidian barrena , Panfiliara iritsi ziren .
PRED:	After that , they came to Ephesus , and came to Ephesus .
GOLD:	Then they traveled back through Pisidia to Pamphylia .

ID:	3793
INPUT:	Moisesek Josue bere ondorengo izendatu
PRED:	Joshua and his sons
GOLD:	Public Reading of the Book of Instruction

ID:	3794
INPUT:	Kafarnaumen sartu ziren . Eta , larunbatean sinagogara joanik , irakasten hasi zen Jesus .
PRED:	And they came into Capernaum , and came to the synagogue , and taught him in the synagogue .
GOLD:	Jesus and his companions went to the town of Capernaum . When the Sabbath day came , he went into the synagogue and began to teach .

ID:	3795
INPUT:	Egiptotik atera den herriak lurralde osoa estali du . Zatoz berehala herri hori madarikatzera ; beharbada , borrokatu ahal izango dut eta bota .
PRED:	And all the people of the land of Egypt came out of the land of Egypt , and curse them , and I will fight with them , and I will drive them out .
GOLD:	‘ Look , a vast horde of people has arrived from Egypt , and they cover the face of the earth . Come and curse these people for me . Then perhaps I will be able to stand up to them and drive them from the land . ' ”

ID:	3796
INPUT:	Baina alarguntsak semeak nahiz bilobak baditu , hauek ikasi behar dute lehenik beren etxekoenganako eginbeharrak betetzen eta gurasoei zor dietena itzultzen , hori baitu atsegin Jainkoak .
PRED:	But if the widow or the children , or the widow , they have seen the works of the house of their fathers , they have turned back to their fathers , because God has done evil in the sight of God .
GOLD:	But if she has children or grandchildren , their first responsibility is to show godliness at home and repay their parents by taking care of them . This is something that pleases God .

ID:	3797
INPUT:	bata iparraldean zegoen , Mikmasen aurrean ; bestea hegoaldean , Gebaren aurrean .
PRED:	And the other side was on the north side , on the east side , on the east side , on the east side .
GOLD:	The cliff on the north was in front of Micmash , and the one on the south was in front of Geba .

ID:	3798
INPUT:	Jesusen ondora iristean , han ikusi zuten deabruduna , eserita , jantzirik eta bere onean , lehen deabru-taldearen menpe zegoen huraxe bera , eta biziki izutu ziren .
PRED:	When they came to Jesus , they saw the devil sitting by the devil and sat down , and when he was sitting by the devil , they could live .
GOLD:	A crowd soon gathered around Jesus , and they saw the man who had been possessed by the legion of demons . He was sitting there fully clothed and perfectly sane , and they were all afraid .

ID:	3799
INPUT:	Gainera , nik , zure zerbitzari honek , neure gain hartua dut mutikoaren erantzukizuna ; hitza eman nion aitari ; berekiko errudun izango nintzateke betiko , itzuliko ez banio .
PRED:	But I will give you my servant 's answer , and I will give you the word of my father . If I would be guilty , I would not return to him .
GOLD:	My lord , I guaranteed to my father that I would take care of the boy . I told him , ‘ If I do n't bring him back to you , I will bear the blame forever . '

ID:	3800
INPUT:	Betozkie gainera txingar goriak , a<unk> bitez leize sakonera , eta gehiago jaiki ez !
PRED:	Come near to me , for the locusts of locusts , and there is no more , nor rise up .
GOLD:	Do n't let liars prosper here in our land.Cause great disasters to fall on the violent .

ID:	3801
INPUT:	Zoazte Kalne hirira eta begira , hurbil zaitezte handikHamat handira , eta jaitsi hortik Filisteako Gat-era . Erresuma horiek baino hobeaote da zuena ? Zuen lurraldeahoriena baino zabalagoa ote ?
PRED:	Go near to the city of Hamath , and look at Hamath , and go down to the border of Hamath , and to the border of Hamath , and to the border of the Philistines , and to the border of your land ?
GOLD:	But go over to Calnehand see what happened there.Then go to the great city of Hamathand down to the Philistine city of Gath.You are no better than they were , and look at how they were destroyed .

ID:	3802
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin ez zaiona egin zuen , Nebaten seme Jeroboamek Israeli eginarazi zizkion bekatuetatik aldendu gabe .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the sight of the Lord , and did not turn away from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat , the son of Nebat .
GOLD:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight . He refused to turn from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel to commit .

ID:	3803
INPUT:	Etorri zen Nikodemo ere — behin batean gauez Jesus ikustera joan zen hura — hogeita hamarren bat kiloko mirra- eta aloe-nahastura zekarrela .
PRED:	And when he came to see that he was in the night , he came to see that he was a hundred and fifty talents of Judea .
GOLD:	With him came Nicodemus , the man who had come to Jesus at night . He brought about seventy-five pounds of perfumed ointment made from myrrh and aloes .

ID:	3804
INPUT:	Jaelen oinetara makurtu zen , erori eta lurrean gelditu zerraldo . Beraren oinetaramakurtu zen tokianerori zen hi<unk> .
PRED:	And he fell down to the feet of Jacob , and fell upon the ground , and sat down at his feet . And he fell at his feet .
GOLD:	He sank , he fell , he lay still at her feet.And where he sank , there he died .

ID:	3805
INPUT:	Harresia , E<unk> hilaren hogeita bostean bukatu zen , hasi eta berrogeita hamabi egunera .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the tenth day of the month , that the wall was built , in the tenth day of the month , that the wall was built .
GOLD:	So on October 2 the wall was finished — just fifty-two days after we had begun .

ID:	3806
INPUT:	Hizketa arrotzez mintzo denak , beraz , eska biezaio Jainkoari esaten duena argitzeko dohaina ere .
PRED:	If anyone speaks in tongues , he will pray to God , and he who speaks to the light of the light .
GOLD:	So anyone who speaks in tongues should pray also for the ability to interpret what has been said .

ID:	3807
INPUT:	« Ez eman aurrerantzean israeldarrei adreiluak egiteko lastorik , orain arte bezala ; doazela beraiek lasto bila .
PRED:	“ Do n't bring the people of Israel before you until now , as now as now as they were .
GOLD:	“ Do not supply any more straw for making bricks . Make the people get it themselves !

ID:	3808
INPUT:	Konbertsiorako deia
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	A Call to Repentance

ID:	3809
INPUT:	Nire gauza santuak mespretxatzen dira , nire larunbata hausten .
PRED:	My holy things are despised , and my holy name is broken in the Sabbath .
GOLD:	You despise my holy things and violate my Sabbath days of rest .

ID:	3810
INPUT:	Egun hartan , agindu hau eman zion Moisesek herriari :
PRED:	And Moses commanded the people that day , saying ,
GOLD:	That same day Moses also gave this charge to the people :

ID:	3811
INPUT:	Baina israeldar lehen-semeen ordez lebitarrak hartu ditut
PRED:	But I have taken the Levites from the firstborn of the children of Israel .
GOLD:	Yes , I have claimed the Levites in place of all the firstborn sons of Israel .

ID:	3812
INPUT:	laurehun granada-fruitu , bi sareetan ezartzeko , bina lerro sare bakoitzean , zutabeburuetan zeuden kapiteletako bi bolak apaintzeko ;
PRED:	And on the two corners of the trees , on the two corners of the pillars , and on the two corners of the pillars , and on the two corners of the pillars , and on the top of the pillars .
GOLD:	the 400 pomegranates that hung from the chains on the capitals ( two rows of pomegranates for each of the chain networks that decorated the capitals on top of the pillars ) ;

ID:	3813
INPUT:	Parabola-hitzaldia ( 4 , 1-34 )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Parable of the Farmer Scattering Seed

ID:	3814
INPUT:	Han zeudenetako batzuek , ahotsa entzunik , trumoia izan zela zioten ; beste batzuek , ordea , aingeru batek hitz egin ziola .
PRED:	Some of those who were standing there heard the voice of a voice , but others said to him , “ A angel spoke to him . ”
GOLD:	When the crowd heard the voice , some thought it was thunder , while others declared an angel had spoken to him .

ID:	3815
INPUT:	Jeremias profetaren otoitza
PRED:	Jeremiah Complains to Jeremiah
GOLD:	Jeremiah 's Prayer

ID:	3816
INPUT:	Zuk , gure Jainko horrek , bota zenituen lurralde honetako herriak zure herri Israel sartu ahala , eta zeure adiskide Abrahamen ondorengoei eman zenien betiko .
PRED:	You brought the people of this land into the land of our God , and you brought them into the land of Israel , and you gave to your friends forever .
GOLD:	O our God , did you not drive out those who lived in this land when your people Israel arrived ? And did you not give this land forever to the descendants of your friend Abraham ?

ID:	3817
INPUT:	Goizean atera zen Jehu kanpora eta , zutik , esan zion jendeari : — Zuek errugabe zarete . Ni ibili nintzen azpilanean Israelgo errege Joramen aurka , eta nik hil nuen . Baina nork hil ditu hauek guztiak ?
PRED:	And he went out early in the morning , and said unto the people , You are not guilty . And I walked in the midst of the house of Ahab king of Israel , and I killed all these men .
GOLD:	In the morning he went out and spoke to the crowd that had gathered around them . “ You are not to blame , ” he told them . “ I am the one who conspired against my master and killed him . But who killed all these ?

ID:	3818
INPUT:	Ezkondua zarela ? Ez ibili banandu nahian . Ezkongabea zarela ? Ez hasi emazte bila .
PRED:	Do n't you want to marry a wife ? Do n't you take her as a wife ? Do n't you seek her .
GOLD:	If you have a wife , do not seek to end the marriage . If you do not have a wife , do not seek to get married .

ID:	3819
INPUT:	Ilunabarrean , joan zen Jesus Hamabiekin
PRED:	And it came to pass in the evening , that Jesus went with the twelve disciples ,
GOLD:	In the evening Jesus arrived with the Twelve .

ID:	3820
INPUT:	Neurria hartzerakoan , ordea , ez zuen sobera asko bildu zuenak , ez eta eskas gutxi bildu zuenak ere . Bakoitzak jateko behar adina zuen .
PRED:	But the ten thousand are not gathered together , and the one who had gathered together , and the one who had not gathered together , and the one who had much .
GOLD:	But when they measured it out , everyone had just enough . Those who gathered a lot had nothing left over , and those who gathered only a little had enough . Each family had just what it needed .

ID:	3821
INPUT:	Orduan , joan eta beste zazpi espiritu hartzen ditu berekin , bera baino gaiztoagoak , eta gizakiagan sartu eta bertan jartzen da bizitzen ; horrela , pertsona horren azken egoera lehengoa baino okerragoa gertatzen da . Gauza bera gertatuko zaio gizaldi gaizto honi ere » .
PRED:	Then he goes and took seven other spirits , and the seven evil spirits of men , and enter into the same way , and the last shall be more than the last generation . ”
GOLD:	Then the spirit finds seven other spirits more evil than itself , and they all enter the person and live there . And so that person is worse off than before . That will be the experience of this evil generation . ”

ID:	3822
INPUT:	Berak atera gaitu ilunpearen menpetik eta bere Seme maitearen erreinura aldatu ;
PRED:	He brought us out of darkness , and he gave him the kingdom of his Son .
GOLD:	For he has rescued us from the kingdom of darkness and transferred us into the Kingdom of his dear Son ,

ID:	3823
INPUT:	Gauza hauetaz ez dugu giza jakinduriak irakatsitako hizkeraz hitz egiten , Espirituak irakatsitakoaz baizik , espirituzko gaiak Espiritua hartu duten gizon-emakumeei adieraziz .
PRED:	We do not speak in wisdom , but by the Spirit , and by the Spirit , and by the Spirit , and by the Spirit , and by the Spirit .
GOLD:	When we tell you these things , we do not use words that come from human wisdom . Instead , we speak words given to us by the Spirit , using the Spirit 's words to explain spiritual truths .

ID:	3824
INPUT:	Eta beste hau ere badio : Jauna , hasieratik sendo ezarri zenuen lurra , zure eskuek egina da zerua ;
PRED:	“ Lord , ” says the Lord , “ You have established the earth from the beginning , and the earth is your hand .
GOLD:	He also says to the Son , “ In the beginning , Lord , you laid the foundation of the earthand made the heavens with your hands .

ID:	3825
INPUT:	Orduan , esan nien : “ Zer da zuek joaten zareteneko muino hori ? ” Eta “ Muino ” — sasikultu-leku — deitu izan dute gaur arte .
PRED:	Then I said to them , “ What are you going to go to the high places ? ” And they called the high places .
GOLD:	I said to them , ‘ What is this high place where you are going ? ' ( This kind of pagan shrine has been called Bamah — ‘ high place ' — ever since . )

ID:	3826
INPUT:	Entzun sorrarazi zintuen aitari , ez mespretxatu ama , zahartu egin dela eta .
PRED:	He raised you up to his father , and did not forget his mother , because he was old .
GOLD:	Listen to your father , who gave you life , and do n't despise your mother when she is old .

ID:	3827
INPUT:	Eskatzen dizunari eman , eta dirua uzteko eskatzen dizunari ez ukatu .
PRED:	Give thanks to you , and do n't forgive your money .
GOLD:	Give to those who ask , and do n't turn away from those who want to borrow .

ID:	3828
INPUT:	Baina Jainkoak bere tokia jarri zion atal bakoitzari gorputzean , berak nahi bezala .
PRED:	But God made his place a place for each of his body as he wanted .
GOLD:	But our bodies have many parts , and God has put each part just where he wants it .

ID:	3829
INPUT:	Ai ene ! Hobe nuen atzerrian urruti bizi izan banintz , Mexeken edo Kedarko oihal-etxoletan !
PRED:	How long it was for me to live in the midst of the nations , and in the tents of Hamath , and in the tents of Midian .
GOLD:	How I suffer in far-off Meshech.It pains me to live in distant Kedar .

ID:	3830
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak zuen arbasoak bakarrik izan zituen atsegin eta maite , eta segidan zuek , haien ondorengoak , hautatu zintuzten herri guztien artean , gaur egun gertatzen denez .
PRED:	But the Lord loved your fathers , and he loved them , and he loved them , and he chose you among all the peoples that day .
GOLD:	Yet the Lord chose your ancestors as the objects of his love . And he chose you , their descendants , above all other nations , as is evident today .

ID:	3831
INPUT:	Leize-zulo sakona emagalduaren ahoa ; bertara amilduko Jaunak gaitzetsia .
PRED:	For the mouth of a woman , and the mouth of the Lord shall fall down to the ground .
GOLD:	The mouth of an immoral woman is a dangerous trap ; those who make the Lord angry will fall into it .

ID:	3832
INPUT:	Aztertu dut neure jokabidea , eta neure pausoak zure xedapenetara nahi ditut bideratu .
PRED:	I will walk in my ways , and I will walk in your statutes .
GOLD:	I pondered the direction of my life , and I turned to follow your laws .

ID:	3833
INPUT:	23 , 9
PRED:	(
GOLD:	The Festival of Trumpets

ID:	3834
INPUT:	Ezkututik daude zelatan , nondik nora nabilen begira , niri bizia kentzeko zain .
PRED:	They are hidden from the secret place where they look for me to take away my life .
GOLD:	Do n't let them get away with their wickedness ; in your anger , O God , bring them down .

ID:	3835
INPUT:	Izan ere , barrua samindu zioten , eta hark zentzugabe hitz egin .
PRED:	For they spoke in their hearts , and he spoke without understanding .
GOLD:	They made Moses angry , and he spoke foolishly .

ID:	3836
INPUT:	Bizia da Jainkoaren hitza , bizia eta eragin handikoa , aho biko ezpata bera baino sarkorragoa : gogo eta espirituaren sakon-sakoneraino sartzen da , pertsonaren zokorik ezkutueneraino , eta barneko pentsamendu eta asmo guztiak miatzen ditu .
PRED:	The word of God is better than the life of life , and he is greater than the sword , and the spirit of his mouth is more than the sword , and the spirit of his spirit , and the spirit of his spirit shall be revealed unto him , and all his heart shall be forgiven .
GOLD:	For the word of God is alive and powerful . It is sharper than the sharpest two-edged sword , cutting between soul and spirit , between joint and marrow . It exposes our innermost thoughts and desires .

ID:	3837
INPUT:	Noiz arte , Jauna ? Betiko al zaude ezkutuan ? Betiko al dago zure haserrea su eta gar ?
PRED:	How long will you stand in secret ? Will you be angry forever ? Is your anger forever ?
GOLD:	Remember how short my life is , how empty and futile this human existence !

ID:	3838
INPUT:	Baina salatzaileak aurkeztu zirenean , ez zioten nik uste nuen okerrik batere leporatu .
PRED:	But when they came to me , they did n't know that I was not guilty .
GOLD:	But the accusations made against him were n't any of the crimes I expected .

ID:	3839
INPUT:	Ahimaatzek esan zion oihuka erregeari : — Agur , jauna ! Eta , erregearen aurrean lurreraino ahuspeztuz , jarraitu zuen : — Bedeinkatua Jauna , zure Jainkoa , menderatu baititu ene errege jaunaren kontra jaiki ziren gizonak !
PRED:	The king said to the king , “ Amen , I pray you , my lord ! ” Then the king bowed down and bowed down to the ground and bowed down before the king and said , “ Blessed be the Lord your God ! ”
GOLD:	Then Ahimaaz cried out to the king , “ Everything is all right ! ” He bowed before the king with his face to the ground and said , “ Praise to the Lord your God , who has handed over the rebels who dared to stand against my lord the king . ”

ID:	3840
INPUT:	Zoko ilunetan pilaturiko altxorrak , ongi gorderiko ondasunakemango dizkizut . Horrela jakingo duzuneu naizela Jauna , Israelen Jainkoa , zeure izenez dei egiten dizuna .
PRED:	In the days of old , I will give you riches , and you will know that I am the Lord your God , the God of Israel , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	And I will give you treasures hidden in the darkness — secret riches.I will do this so you may know that I am the Lord , the God of Israel , the one who calls you by name .

ID:	3841
INPUT:	« Orain , bada , nik , Jaun ahalguztidun honek , Israelen Jainkoak , galdetzen dizuet : Zergatik nahi duzue zeuen buruen galbide izaten jarraitu eta , horrela , Judako gizon eta emakumeak , umetxo eta bularreko haurrak suntsiarazi eta zeuen herria bizilagunik gabe utzi ?
PRED:	Therefore I say unto you , Thus saith the Lord of hosts , the God of Israel , the God of Israel : Why shall ye walk in your ways , and the women , and the women , and the children of Judah , and the children , and the little ones , and the children , and the children , and the children , and the children , and the children , and the children , and the children , and the children , and the children , and the children , and the children , and the little ones , and the children , and the children , and the children , and the little ones , and the little ones , and the little ones , and the children , and the children , and the children , and the children , and the little ones , and the little ones , and the little ones , and the little ones , and the little ones , and the children , and the children , and the children , and the children , and the children , and the children , and the children , and
GOLD:	“ And now the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , asks you : Why are you destroying yourselves ? For not one of you will survive — not a man , woman , or child among you who has come here from Judah , not even the babies in your arms .

ID:	3842
INPUT:	Hilkias apaizak Jaunaren etxean aurkitu zuen lege-liburuko aginduak betez , Josiasek desagerrarazi egin zituen Jerusalemdik eta Juda lurralde osotik hildakoen espirituei dei egiten zieten guztiak eta igarleak ; eta etxe-jainkoen irudiak , idoloak eta irudi nazkagarriak hautsi egin zituen .
PRED:	And Hilkiah the priest found the words of the Lord in the house of the Lord , which he had commanded in the book of the Lord , in Jerusalem , and in all the land of Judah , and in all the land of Judah , and in all the land of Judah , and in all the land of Judah , and in the idols of their idols .
GOLD:	Josiah also got rid of the mediums and psychics , the household gods , the idols , and every other kind of detestable practice , both in Jerusalem and throughout the land of Judah . He did this in obedience to the laws written in the scroll that Hilkiah the priest had found in the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	3843
INPUT:	Hauen ordez , Roboamek brontzezko babeskiak egin eta jauregiko sarrera zaintzen zuen taldearen buru zirenei utzi zizkien .
PRED:	But Rehoboam made bronze bronze bronze , and he put them in charge of the guard of the king 's house .
GOLD:	King Rehoboam later replaced them with bronze shields as substitutes , and he entrusted them to the care of the commanders of the guard who protected the entrance to the royal palace .

ID:	3844
INPUT:	ez diot neure ahoari bekatu egiten utzi , harentzako heriotza eskatuz .
PRED:	I do n't let my mouth sin , and let my soul be put to death .
GOLD:	No , I have never sinned by cursing anyoneor by asking for revenge .

ID:	3845
INPUT:	Baina zuek eta zuen seme-alabak niregandik urruntzen bazarete , nik eman dizkizuedan agindu eta legeak betetzen ez badituzue , beste jainko batzuk zerbitzatzera jo eta haien aurrean ahuspezten bazarete ,
PRED:	But if you do not turn away from me and keep my commandments , and keep the commandments which I have given you , and serve other gods , and serve other gods .
GOLD:	“ But if you or your descendants abandon me and disobey the commands and decrees I have given you , and if you serve and worship other gods ,

ID:	3846
INPUT:	Ilea motz-motz egingo du nazireuak elkarketa-etxolako sarreran eta bere sagarapenaren ezaugarri duen ile moztua elkartasun-oparia erretzen deneko sutara botako du .
PRED:	He shall cut his head on his head , and he shall cut off his head in the entrance of the tent of meeting , and he shall cast it into the fire of his sin offering .
GOLD:	“ Then the Nazirites will shave their heads at the entrance of the Tabernacle . They will take the hair that had been dedicated and place it on the fire beneath the peace-offering sacrifice .

ID:	3847
INPUT:	Moisesek Jaunari aurkeztu zion arazoa ,
PRED:	Moses brought it to the Lord , and brought it to him .
GOLD:	So Moses brought their case before the Lord .

ID:	3848
INPUT:	adinekoek izaten dute jakinduria , urtetan aurreratuek zuhurtzia .
PRED:	The wise are wise , and the wise are wise in the year .
GOLD:	Wisdom belongs to the aged , and understanding to the old .

ID:	3849
INPUT:	Jakobek hamabi semeak bedeinkatu
PRED:	Jacob 's Death
GOLD:	Jacob 's Last Words to His Sons

ID:	3850
INPUT:	« Egun hartan ez duzu gehiagolotsatu beharrik izangonire aurka egin dituzunerrebeldiengatik . Izan ere , erronka harroakahotik kenduko dizkizut , eta ez zara harrezkero harropuztukonire mendi santuan .
PRED:	“ In that day you will not be ashamed because you have sinned against me because you have sinned against me , because I will take away your pride from your mouth , and I will not take away your pride from my holy mountain .
GOLD:	On that day you will no longer need to be ashamed , for you will no longer be rebels against me.I will remove all proud and arrogant people from among you.There will be no more haughtiness on my holy mountain .

ID:	3851
INPUT:	Poz gaitezen eta egin festa , eman diezaiogun aintza , heldu baitira Bildotsaren ezteiak . Apaindurik dagoberaren emaztegaia :
PRED:	Let us rejoice and rejoice , because the glory of the Lamb has come to the Lamb , and let us rejoice .
GOLD:	Let us be glad and rejoice , and let us give honor to him.For the time has come for the wedding feast of the Lamb , and his bride has prepared herself .

ID:	3852
INPUT:	Hartu zuen , orduan , Samuelek oliontzia eta Sauli burura isuri zion ; gero , besarkatuz , esan zion : « Hara , Jaunak bere herri Israelen buruzagi gantzutu zaitu .
PRED:	Then Samuel took the oil and poured it on Saul . Then he said to him , “ Behold , the Lord has anointed you over his people Israel .
GOLD:	Then Samuel took a flask of olive oil and poured it over Saul 's head . He kissed Saul and said , “ I am doing this because the Lord has appointed you to be the ruler over Israel , his special possession .

ID:	3853
INPUT:	Lekuko egiazaleak biziak salbatzen ditu , iruzurtiak gezurra barra-barra .
PRED:	A witness of man shall save his life , and a false witness shall be put to death .
GOLD:	A truthful witness saves lives , but a false witness is a traitor .

ID:	3854
INPUT:	Biharamun goizean Tekoako basamorturantz abiatu ziren . Ateratzean , Josafat zutitu eta honela mintzatu zitzaien : « Entzun , Juda eta Jerusalemgo gizonok . Izan uste on Jaunarengan , zeuen Jainkoarengan , eta seguru izango zarete . Izan konfiantza beraren profetengan , eta garaile aterako zarete ! »
PRED:	And it came to pass in the morning , that they went up into the wilderness of Kadesh , and went up to the wilderness of Kadesh , and said unto them , Hear ye , and say unto them , Hear ye , O house of Judah , and ye shall be a prophet in the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Early the next morning the army of Judah went out into the wilderness of Tekoa . On the way Jehoshaphat stopped and said , “ Listen to me , all you people of Judah and Jerusalem ! Believe in the Lord your God , and you will be able to stand firm . Believe in his prophets , and you will succeed . ”

ID:	3855
INPUT:	eta apaizen gelen artean hamar metroko hutsartea zegoen , tenpluaren inguru guztian .
PRED:	And the priests , and the breadth of the priests , and the breadth of the house round about about .
GOLD:	and the row of rooms along the outer wall of the inner courtyard . This open area was 35 feet wide , and it went all the way around the Temple .

ID:	3856
INPUT:	Emakumeei dagokienez , dabiltzala egoki jantzita , lotsaz eta eratsu atondurik ; ez daitezela apain orrazkera nabarmenez , urrez , harribitxiz edota soineko aberatsez ,
PRED:	The women who are clothed with gold , clothed with gold , purple , and scarlet , and fine gold , and fine gold .
GOLD:	And I want women to be modest in their appearance . They should wear decent and appropriate clothing and not draw attention to themselves by the way they fix their hair or by wearing gold or pearls or expensive clothes .

ID:	3857
INPUT:	« Zuk ematen al diozu zaldiari azkartasuna , zuk janzten ote lepoa ile-zurdaz ?
PRED:	Do you make the horse of the horses ? Do you make the garment of skin ?
GOLD:	“ Have you given the horse its strengthor clothed its neck with a flowing mane ?

ID:	3858
INPUT:	Baina batez ere , senideok , ez egin zinik , ez zeruarengatik , ez lurrarengatik , ezta beste edozergatik ere . Zuek esan « bai » , bai denean , eta « ez » , ez denean , Jainkoak kondena ez zaitzaten .
PRED:	But I , brothers and sisters , do not do it for the heavens , nor for the earth , nor for the sake of the earth , nor for the sake of the earth , nor for the sake of God .
GOLD:	But most of all , my brothers and sisters , never take an oath , by heaven or earth or anything else . Just say a simple yes or no , so that you will not sin and be condemned .

ID:	3859
INPUT:	Zure borreroei emango diet , zuri esaten zizutenei : “ Etzan lurrean , gainetik igaro gaitezen ! ” Eta bizkarraeskaini behar izan zenien , zoru eta kale gisa , gainetik igaro zitezen » .
PRED:	I will give them to those who say to you , ‘ Let us pass over the earth , and let us go over on the earth . ' And you brought them on the ground . ”
GOLD:	Instead , I will hand that cup to your tormentors , those who said , ‘ We will trample you into the dustand walk on your backs . ' ”

ID:	3860
INPUT:	Harpe hau Makpela soroan dago , Mambre parean . Abrahamek hilobitarako erosia zion , soro eta guzti , Efron hititari .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the field of Canaan , that is in the field of Canaan : and Abraham bought the field of Canaan , and all the cities of Ephraim , and all the cities of Ephraim .
GOLD:	This is the cave in the field of Machpelah , near Mamre in Canaan , that Abraham bought from Ephron the Hittite as a permanent burial site .

ID:	3861
INPUT:	Behinola esan zion amari : — Oroitzen al zara nola ostu zizkizuten zilarrezko mila eta ehun txanpon ? Madarikazioa bota zenuen orduan nire aurrean . Begira , neuk ditut txanpon haiek , neuk ostu bainizkizun . Tori dirua ! Amak esan zion : — Bedeinka zaitzala Jaunak , ene seme !
PRED:	And he said to the mother , “ How did you remember how you took a thousand silver and a thousand pieces of silver ? ” And he said to the woman , “ I have found you , my son , for I have found you . ”
GOLD:	One day he said to his mother , “ I heard you place a curse on the person who stole 1,100 pieces of silver from you . Well , I have the money . I was the one who took it . ” “ The Lord bless you for admitting it , ” his mother replied .

ID:	3862
INPUT:	Gaizkilea onik irteten da hondamendikoan , babesean egoten zigor-egunean .
PRED:	When the wicked go out into the mountains , they sat down on the day of trouble .
GOLD:	Evil people are spared in times of calamityand are allowed to escape disaster .

ID:	3863
INPUT:	Hamar egun ingururen buruan , heriotzaz jo zuen Jaunak Nabal eta hil egin zen .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the days of ten days , that the Lord struck him , that he died , and died .
GOLD:	About ten days later , the Lord struck him , and he died .

ID:	3864
INPUT:	Denboralditxo bat iragan ondoren , nagusiaren emazteak , Joserengan begiak jarri eta esan zion : — Zatoz nirekin ohera .
PRED:	After a long time , the wife of Joseph 's lord 's wife looked at Joseph and said to him , “ Come with me . ”
GOLD:	and Potiphar 's wife soon began to look at him lustfully . “ Come and sleep with me , ” she demanded .

ID:	3865
INPUT:	Ene maiteok , egiten dizuedan bigarren gutuna dut hau . Eta biotan zenbait gauza gogoratuz bizkortu nahi izan zaituztet , zuzen irizteko gai izan zaitezten .
PRED:	My dear friends , I want you to do the second day . I want you to think about what I want you to do . I want you to do .
GOLD:	This is my second letter to you , dear friends , and in both of them I have tried to stimulate your wholesome thinking and refresh your memory .

ID:	3866
INPUT:	Paulo hiltzeko zorian
PRED:	Paul 's Death
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Greetings

ID:	3867
INPUT:	Abrahamek Isaak sortu zuen ; Isaakek Jakob ; Jakobek Juda eta honen anaiak ;
PRED:	Abraham bore Isaac , and Jacob , and Jacob his brother Jacob , and his brothers .
GOLD:	Abraham was the father of Isaac.Isaac was the father of Jacob.Jacob was the father of Judah and his brothers .

ID:	3868
INPUT:	Nahiz eta zeruraino hazi eta bere buruaz hodeiak ukitu ,
PRED:	or to the heavens , and to the heavens , and to the heavens , and to the heavens , and to the heavens ,
GOLD:	Though the pride of the godless reaches to the heavensand their heads touch the clouds ,

ID:	3869
INPUT:	Ez dezatela nire odola lurrera isuri , Jaunarengandik urrun ! Israelgo erregea arkakuso baten bila dabil , ehiztaria mendiz mendi eperraren atzetik bezala .
PRED:	Let not my blood be poured out of the earth , and let the king of Israel turn away from the Lord , as the king of Israel as an eagle from the mountains .
GOLD:	Must I die on foreign soil , far from the presence of the Lord ? Why has the king of Israel come out to search for a single flea ? Why does he hunt me down like a partridge on the mountains ? ”

ID:	3870
INPUT:	« Eser zaitez isilik , babiloniarren hiriburu , zoaz ilunpetara : ez dizute deituko gehiago “ Erreinuen erregina ” .
PRED:	“ Come down to the city of the Chaldeans , and go into the darkness . They will not call you more than the kingdom of the kings . ”
GOLD:	“ O beautiful Babylon , sit now in darkness and silence.Never again will you be known as the queen of kingdoms .

ID:	3871
INPUT:	Seme-alabok , azken ordua da . Entzuna duzue antikristoak etorri behar duela . Hara bada , antikristo asko agertu da dagoeneko , eta hori da azken orduaren seinalea .
PRED:	My children , it is the end of the end . You have heard the coming from the beginning , and many are coming , and the sign that has been revealed .
GOLD:	Dear children , the last hour is here . You have heard that the Antichrist is coming , and already many such antichrists have appeared . From this we know that the last hour has come .

ID:	3872
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : — Zeri buruz zoazte bidean elkarrekin hizketan ? Haiek gelditu egin ziren , aurpegia ilun ,
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ What do you want to speak with one another ? ” They left their face , and their face was face .
GOLD:	He asked them , “ What are you discussing so intently as you walk along ? ” They stopped short , sadness written across their faces .

ID:	3873
INPUT:	Bertan Adoni-Bezek zeritzan erregea aurkitu eta eraso egin zioten hari ere . Kanaandarrak eta periztarrak garaitu zituztela ikustean ,
PRED:	And they found the king in Bethel , and they fought against him , and saw that the Canaanites and the Canaanites were in the days of Canaan .
GOLD:	While at Bezek they encountered King Adoni-bezek and fought against him , and the Canaanites and Perizzites were defeated .

ID:	3874
INPUT:	Jauna , ene Jainkoa , oihuz laguntza eskatu dizut , eta sendatu nauzu .
PRED:	I will praise you , Lord my God , and I will praise you , and you will be healed .
GOLD:	You brought me up from the grave , O Lord.You kept me from falling into the pit of death .

ID:	3875
INPUT:	Hebron hiria Kalebentzat
PRED:	In Hebron
GOLD:	Caleb Requests His Land

ID:	3876
INPUT:	Zintzoari zuzentasunak bidea prestatzen , gaiztoa bere maltzurkeriak erorarazten .
PRED:	The way of the righteous is right , but the wicked shall be put to shame .
GOLD:	The godly are directed by honesty ; the wicked fall beneath their load of sin .

ID:	3877
INPUT:	Hona Jaunaren atea : sar bitez hemendik garaileak !
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Let them go into the road . ”
GOLD:	These gates lead to the presence of the Lord , and the godly enter there .

ID:	3878
INPUT:	Jaunaren egintzak israeldarren begi-bistan
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	The Blessings of Obedience

ID:	3879
INPUT:	Baina apaizak ezkabiak jotako aldea miatzean , azalekoa baino sakonagoa ez dela eta ilea ez dela belztu ikusten badu , aparte edukiko du gaixoa zazpi egunez .
PRED:	But when the priest shall go out , and if the priest is not greater than the skin , he is not greater than the skin , and the priest shall pronounce him seven days .
GOLD:	If the priest examines the scabby sore and finds that it is only skin-deep but there is no black hair on it , he must quarantine the person for seven days .

ID:	3880
INPUT:	Orduan , Ekronera igorri zuten Jainkoaren kutxa . Heldu zenean , Ekrongo jendeak esan zuen oihuka : « Gu eta gure herria hil gaitzan ekarri digute Israelen Jainkoaren kutxa ! »
PRED:	Then they sent the ark of God , and they cried out , saying , “ We have brought us to our people , and we have brought the ark of our God , the ark of Israel . ”
GOLD:	So they sent the Ark of God to the town of Ekron , but when the people of Ekron saw it coming they cried out , “ They are bringing the Ark of the God of Israel here to kill us , too ! ”

ID:	3881
INPUT:	Gizakiaren egunak belarraren pareko : zelaiko lorea bezala loratzen da
PRED:	For the day of man shall be as the grass of the night , and as the glory of the field ,
GOLD:	Our days on earth are like grass ; like wildflowers , we bloom and die .

ID:	3882
INPUT:	Erregearen funtzionario nagusienetakoren batek soinekoak hartu eta erregeak ohoratu nahi duenari janzten lagundu beharko lioke ; gero , zaldi gainera igoarazi eta hiriko kale nagusian barrena erabili beharko luke , beraren aurretik honela oihukatuz : « Hona hemen zer egiten zaion erregeak ohoratu nahi duen gizonari ! »
PRED:	One of the servants of the lord of the lord of the king shall take his garments , and let him go up to the king 's house , and let him go up to the horse , and let the horse go up to the city , and say , “ This is what the king says to the king . ”
GOLD:	Let the robes and the horse be handed over to one of the king 's most noble officials . And let him see that the man whom the king wishes to honor is dressed in the king 's robes and led through the city square on the king 's horse . Have the official shout as they go , ‘ This is what the king does for someone he wishes to honor ! ' ”

ID:	3883
INPUT:	Zaindu zeuen buruak edonolako gaiztakeriatik .
PRED:	Take your heart from your wickedness , because of your wickedness .
GOLD:	Stay away from every kind of evil .

ID:	3884
INPUT:	Eta hauxe eskatzen dut otoitzean : zuen maitasuna izan dadila ezagueraz geroz eta jantziagoa eta sentiberatasunez biziagoa ,
PRED:	And I pray to you , that your love has been filled with love , and with love , and eternal life ,
GOLD:	I pray that your love will overflow more and more , and that you will keep on growing in knowledge and understanding .

ID:	3885
INPUT:	Zuregan da biziaren iturriaeta zure argiaz ikusten dugu argia .
PRED:	Your life is in you , and we see the light of your light .
GOLD:	Pour out your unfailing love on those who love you ; give justice to those with honest hearts .

ID:	3886
INPUT:	Ez , sutara botatzen da erregai : suak irensten du bi muturretatik , eta erdia ere suak hartzen dio ; balioko ote du ezertarako ?
PRED:	He is not cast into the fire , but the fire is poured out of the fire , and the fire is burned up , and the fire is burned up , and the fire is burned with fire ?
GOLD:	No , it can only be used for fuel , and even as fuel , it burns too quickly .

ID:	3887
INPUT:	Nire eskuak sendo eutsiko dio , nire besoak indartsu egingo .
PRED:	My hands will be healed , and my hands will be strong .
GOLD:	His enemies will not defeat him , nor will the wicked overpower him .

ID:	3888
INPUT:	Saridetik ekialdera bihurtzen zen , Kis<unk> -Taborreko mugetaraino ; gero , Daberateraino luzatzen zen eta Jafiara igotzen .
PRED:	And it came to pass by the east side of Samaria , as far as the border of Samaria , and went up to the border of Hamath .
GOLD:	In the other direction , the boundary went east from Sarid to the border of Kisloth-tabor , and from there to Daberath and up to Japhia .

ID:	3889
INPUT:	Berak jo zituen Egiptoko lehen-sortuak , gizaki eta abere .
PRED:	He struck the firstborn of Egypt , the firstborn of man and man .
GOLD:	He destroyed the firstborn in each Egyptian home , both people and animals .

ID:	3890
INPUT:	Baina ez duzue odola jango , lurrera isuriko baizik , ura bezala .
PRED:	But you shall not eat the blood , but the blood of the earth shall be poured out like water .
GOLD:	But you must not consume the blood . You must pour it out on the ground like water .

ID:	3891
INPUT:	Horrela , gauzak ongi ulertzen omen dituzun horrek galdu egingo zenuke kontzientzi hezigabeko zeure senidea , harengatik ere Kristo hila izan den arren .
PRED:	so that you may know what you are doing , so that you would not let your brother be destroyed because of his brother Christ .
GOLD:	So because of your superior knowledge , a weak believer for whom Christ died will be destroyed .

ID:	3892
INPUT:	Aitzitik , beren joera gaiztoen ondoren , gurasoengandik hartutako Baalen ondoren , ibili dira .
PRED:	But after they went after their fathers , they went away from Baal , and followed Baal .
GOLD:	The Lord replies , “ This has happened because my people have abandoned my instructions ; they have refused to obey what I said .

ID:	3893
INPUT:	Bizkorrenak ereezin izango du ihes egin , indartsuenaezin izango da bere indarraz baliatu , oldartsuaez da bizirik aterako .
PRED:	He will not escape ; he will not escape ; he will not escape with his strength , and his strength will not escape .
GOLD:	Your fastest runners will not get away.The strongest among you will become weak.Even mighty warriors will be unable to save themselves .

ID:	3894
INPUT:	Horretarako , hirurogeita hamar mila zamaketari bildu zituen eta laurogei mila hargin mendian , hiru mila eta seiehun lan-arduradunen menpean .
PRED:	And he gathered all the elders of the land of Israel , and took them in the hill country , five thousand and twenty thousand and twenty thousand and twenty thousand , and five hundred and twenty thousand .
GOLD:	Solomon decided to build a Temple to honor the name of the Lord , and also a royal palace for himself .

ID:	3895
INPUT:	Gizakia bada ere , ez daiteke berreskura : heriotzara emango dute .
PRED:	If a man is not able to be sold , they will be put to death .
GOLD:	No person specially set apart for destruction may be bought back . Such a person must be put to death .

ID:	3896
INPUT:	Horiek beren ondasunetan oinarritzen diraeta beren aberastasun handiaz harrotzen .
PRED:	These [ are ] the foundation of their inheritance , and the riches of their riches , and the riches of their riches .
GOLD:	Yet they can not redeem themselves from deathby paying a ransom to God .

ID:	3897
INPUT:	Hartu zituen Davidek emakumeak ekarritakoak eta esan zion : — Igo bakean zeure etxera . Aditu dut zure ahotsa . Onartu dut zure eskaria .
PRED:	David took the women and said to her , “ Go home in peace . I have heard your voice . I have heard your voice . ”
GOLD:	Then David accepted her present and told her , “ Return home in peace . I have heard what you said . We will not kill your husband . ”

ID:	3898
INPUT:	« Behar bada galdegingo duzue : “ Zer jango dugu zazpigarren urtean , ezin badugu erein , ez uztarik bildu ? ”
PRED:	“ What shall you say to you , ‘ What shall we eat in the seventh year , when we do not reap ? '
GOLD:	But you might ask , ‘ What will we eat during the seventh year , since we are not allowed to plant or harvest crops that year ? '

ID:	3899
INPUT:	Aurrez eskuak uretan garbitzeke , jariodunak norbait ukitzen badu , honek arropak eta gorputza garbituko ditu eta kutsaturik geldituko da arratsa arte .
PRED:	If any man touches his hands , he shall wash his hands , and wash his clothes , and wash his clothes , and be unclean until evening .
GOLD:	If the man touches you without first rinsing his hands , you must wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water , and you will remain unclean until evening .

ID:	3900
INPUT:	Lebaot , Xil<unk> , <unk> , Rimon : hogeita bederatzi hiri eta beraien inguruko herrixkak .
PRED:	Jozabad , Hallohesh , and Shimron , and their villages round about them .
GOLD:	Lebaoth , Shilhim , Ain , and Rimmon — twenty-nine towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	3901
INPUT:	GEDE<unk> ( 6 , 1 — 8 , 35 )
PRED:	The Covenant Box
GOLD:	Gideon Becomes Israel 's Judge

ID:	3902
INPUT:	ile-adatsa emakumeena bezalakoa , eta hortzak lehoiarenak bezalakoak ;
PRED:	As a woman is like a lion , and a lion like a lion .
GOLD:	They had hair like women 's hair and teeth like the teeth of a lion .

ID:	3903
INPUT:	Hau jakin zuenean , Baxa Tirtzan gelditu zen , Rama gotortzeari utzirik .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when he heard it , that he left Ramah , that he left Ramah .
GOLD:	As soon as Baasha of Israel heard what was happening , he abandoned his project of fortifying Ramah and withdrew to Tirzah .

ID:	3904
INPUT:	« Badakizue legean agindua : Begia begiaren ordain , hortza hortzaren ordain .
PRED:	“ You know that it is written in the law : eye for eye for eye .
GOLD:	“ You have heard the law that says the punishment must match the injury : ‘ An eye for an eye , and a tooth for a tooth . '

ID:	3905
INPUT:	« Gorde , beraz , nire lege eta erabakiak : bizia ematen diote betetzen dituenari . Neu naiz Jauna .
PRED:	“ Therefore , therefore , keep my statutes and my statutes , and keep My statutes , and keep My statutes ; I am the Lord .
GOLD:	If you obey my decrees and my regulations , you will find life through them . I am the Lord .

ID:	3906
INPUT:	Izan ere , kontzientzia hezigabeko batek zu , gauzak behar bezala ulertzen dituzun hori , sasijainkoen jauretxeko otorduetan parte hartzen ikusten bazaitu , ez ote da sasijainkoei eskainitako haragia jatera bultzatua sentituko , jokabide hori beraren hezigabeko kontzientziaren kontrakoa izanda ere ?
PRED:	For if any of you know this thing , how can you understand these things in the house of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods ?
GOLD:	For if others see you — with your “ superior knowledge ” — eating in the temple of an idol , wo n't they be encouraged to violate their conscience by eating food that has been offered to an idol ?

ID:	3907
INPUT:	Eta horra non datorren gizon batbi zaldiko gurdi gainean . Hau dio ozenki : “ Erori da Babilonia , erori da ! Haren jainko-irudi guztiaklurrean gelditu dira apurtuta ” » .
PRED:	And behold , two men came upon horses , and say unto him , Behold , Babylon is fallen upon the earth , and all the idols of his god are broken down .
GOLD:	Now at last — look ! Here comes a man in a chariotwith a pair of horses ! ” Then the watchman said , “ Babylon is fallen , fallen ! All the idols of Babylonlie broken on the ground ! ”

ID:	3908
INPUT:	Egiptoko herri , presta erbesterako hornidura : eremu bihurtuko da Menfis , bizilagunik gabeko lur erraustu .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Go into the land of Egypt , in the towns of the land of Egypt , and in the towns , and in the towns , and in the towns of the land of Egypt , and in the land of Egypt , and in the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Pack up ! Get ready to leave for exile , you citizens of Egypt ! The city of Memphis will be destroyed , without a single inhabitant .

ID:	3909
INPUT:	prest dituzte bi eskuakkalte egiteko : buruzagiak eta epaileakeskupekoa eskatzen dute , handikiekberen diru-gosea adierazten ; eta bat datoz denaknork berea egiteko .
PRED:	They make two hands ready to hurt them , and the princes of the land with their hand , and with their hand , and their princes are hungry , and every one shall be satisfied .
GOLD:	Both their hands are equally skilled at doing evil ! Officials and judges alike demand bribes.The people with influence get what they want , and together they scheme to twist justice .

ID:	3910
INPUT:	Eta maitasuna Jainkoaren aginduen arabera bizitzea da . Eta hasieratik entzun duzuen bezala , agindu hau da zuen jokabidea arautu behar duena .
PRED:	And the love of God is to live , as he commanded you , and you heard the way that he commanded you .
GOLD:	Love means doing what God has commanded us , and he has commanded us to love one another , just as you heard from the beginning .

ID:	3911
INPUT:	Ezaguna duzue Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren eskuzabaltasuna : aberats izanik , behartsu egin zen zuengatik , bere behartsu izateaz zuek aberats egiteko .
PRED:	You know the love of our Lord Jesus Christ , that you may be rich , and you may be rich , and you may be rich .
GOLD:	You know the generous grace of our Lord Jesus Christ . Though he was rich , yet for your sakes he became poor , so that by his poverty he could make you rich .

ID:	3912
INPUT:	Bertan bizi ziren guztiak ezpataz hil eta erabat suntsitu zituen , bat ere bizirik utzi gabe , eta hiriari su eman zion .
PRED:	And he destroyed all the living in them , and destroyed them , and destroyed them not , and burned them in the city , and set fire on fire .
GOLD:	The Israelites completely destroyed every living thing in the city , leaving no survivors . Not a single person was spared . And then Joshua burned the city .

ID:	3913
INPUT:	Jaunak ez zaitu erortzen utziko , zure zaintzailea ez dago lo .
PRED:	The Lord will not let you fall ; he will not let you fall .
GOLD:	He will not let you stumble ; the one who watches over you will not slumber .

ID:	3914
INPUT:	Zintzoaren mihia zilar garbi-garbia , gaiztoaren bihotza hutsaren parekoa .
PRED:	The tongue of the righteous is pure , and the heart of the wicked is an abomination .
GOLD:	The words of the godly are like sterling silver ; the heart of a fool is worthless .

ID:	3915
INPUT:	Gorputzak , bat izan arren , atal asko ditu , baina atal guztiek , asko izan arren , gorputz bat osatzen dute . Gauza bera gertatzen da Kristorekin ere .
PRED:	For the body is many body , but many members are many members of the body , and many body are many body . This is the same thing .
GOLD:	The human body has many parts , but the many parts make up one whole body . So it is with the body of Christ .

ID:	3916
INPUT:	Ez begira nire azal ilunari , eguzkiak bainau kiskali : neure anaiek , nirekin haserre , mahastiak zaintzen jarri naute . Eta neure mahastia utzi dut zaindu gabe !
PRED:	Do n't look at my eyes , for the sun has been burned with me . My brothers have kept my vineyard , and I have kept my vineyard .
GOLD:	Do n't stare at me because I am dark — the sun has darkened my skin.My brothers were angry with me ; they forced me to care for their vineyards , so I could n't care for myself — my own vineyard .

ID:	3917
INPUT:	Begira , bada , zure barruan argi behar lukeena ez dadin ilun gerta .
PRED:	Behold , if your heart is not in your heart , that it may not be revealed .
GOLD:	Make sure that the light you think you have is not actually darkness .

ID:	3918
INPUT:	Baina zenbat eta gehiago deitu nik , hainbat eta urrutiagoalde egiten zidaten . Baalei sakrifizioakeskaintzen zizkieten , sasijainkoei intsentsua erretzen .
PRED:	But they called them many times , and they turned away from them , and gave them sacrifices to the gods of their gods .
GOLD:	But the more I called to him , the farther he moved from me , offering sacrifices to the images of Baaland burning incense to idols .

ID:	3919
INPUT:	Anitz sasiprofeta altxatuko dira eta asko engainatuko dituzte .
PRED:	And many prophets shall rise up , and many prophets shall be judged .
GOLD:	And many false prophets will appear and will deceive many people .

ID:	3920
INPUT:	Harimenak 1 . 017 .
PRED:	The sons of Pashhur , three hundred and twenty .
GOLD:	The family of Harim1,017

ID:	3921
INPUT:	nire zerbitzariekpoz-oihu egingo dutebihotza bete zorionez ; zuek , berriz , garrasi egingo bihotzeko nahigabez , aiene barruko saminez .
PRED:	My servants will shout for joy , but you will weep , but you will weep and weep .
GOLD:	My servants will sing for joy , but you will cry in sorrow and despair .

ID:	3922
INPUT:	« Horregatik maite nau Aitak , neure bizia ematen dudalako eta horrela eskuratzen berriro .
PRED:	Therefore my Father loved me , and he gives me life again .
GOLD:	“ The Father loves me because I sacrifice my life so I may take it back again .

ID:	3923
INPUT:	azpian zilarrezko berrogei oin zituztela : ohol bakoitzak bi oin beste horrenbeste mingainentzat ;
PRED:	And they made twenty silver bases of silver , two bases under the two bases , two bases under the two bases .
GOLD:	He also made forty silver bases — two bases under each frame , with the pegs fitting securely into the bases .

ID:	3924
INPUT:	Jainkoak sabaia egin zuen eta sabai azpiko urak sabai gainekoetatik bereizi zituen .
PRED:	God did what God said , and he divided the waters from the waters of the waters .
GOLD:	And that is what happened . God made this space to separate the waters of the earth from the waters of the heavens .

ID:	3925
INPUT:	gizakiari auzia oker egiten diotenean , Jaunak ez ote du ikusten ?
PRED:	Will the Lord see the judgment of men , and he will not see it ?
GOLD:	if they twist justice in the courts — does n't the Lord see all these things ?

ID:	3926
INPUT:	Kasu bereziak
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Sins Requiring a Sin Offering

ID:	3927
INPUT:	Zekor bat , ahari bat eta urtebeteko zazpi arkume — denak akats gabeak — eskainiko dituzue erre-oparitzat , eta Jaunak atseginez onartuko ditu .
PRED:	You shall offer a burnt offering to the Lord , a young bull , and seven lambs without blemish , and seven lambs without blemish .
GOLD:	You must present a burnt offering as a special gift , a pleasing aroma to the Lord . It will consist of one young bull , one ram , and seven one-year-old male lambs , all with no defects .

ID:	3928
INPUT:	Zazpi egunez etxoletan biziko zarete jaiotzaz israeldar zareten guztiok ,
PRED:	For seven days you shall live in the tents of all the house of Israel seven days .
GOLD:	For seven days you must live outside in little shelters . All native-born Israelites must live in shelters .

ID:	3929
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Moisesi : « Hartu orotariko usainkiak , neurri bera bakoitzetik : erretxina , anbarra , galbanoa eta intsentsu garbia ;
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Take some of the garments for each of you . Take some of them from each of them . They are to take some of them . They are to take some of them . They are to take the incense and incense and incense .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Gather fragrant spices — resin droplets , mollusk shell , and galbanum — and mix these fragrant spices with pure frankincense , weighed out in equal amounts .

ID:	3930
INPUT:	eta purpura morezko lokarriak ipini zituzten bi zapi-sailen ertzetan :
PRED:	And they put them on the two corners of blue , and put them on the two corners of the ephod , saying ,
GOLD:	He made fifty loops of blue yarn and put them along the edge of the last curtain in each set .

ID:	3931
INPUT:	Zuk ezarritako bidetikgoaz gu ere , Jauna , itxaropena zuregan dugula . Zutaz oroitzea , zu goratzea : horixe dugu irrika .
PRED:	For we are in your ways , O Lord , for we have hope in you , that we may remember you , that we may remember you .
GOLD:	Lord , we show our trust in you by obeying your laws ; our heart 's desire is to glorify your name .

ID:	3932
INPUT:	leporainoko uholde oldartsuaharen arnasak . Galbahean bezalaastinduko ditu nazioak , muturrekoaz bezalamasailetik lotuko , hondamenera eramateko .
PRED:	He will run like a flood of a flood , and his breath will be like a lion , and he will take away the nations from the womb , and he will bring them down to destruction .
GOLD:	His hot breath pours out like a floodup to the neck of his enemies.He will sift out the proud nations for destruction.He will bridle them and lead them away to ruin .

ID:	3933
INPUT:	Horrela , bada , atera zen gudarostea zelaira , israeldarrei aurre egitera . Efraimgo oihanean ekin zioten guduari .
PRED:	So the cloud went out out to meet the Israelites . So the people were with the Israelites at the feet of Ephraim .
GOLD:	So the battle began in the forest of Ephraim ,

ID:	3934
INPUT:	Pahat-Moaben ondorengoetan : Adna , Kelal , Benaias , Maaseias , Matanias , Betzalel , Binui eta Manases .
PRED:	And of the sons of the sons of Elam : Elioenai , Elioenai , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , and Manasseh .
GOLD:	From the family of Pahath-moab : Adna , Kelal , Benaiah , Maaseiah , Mattaniah , Bezalel , Binnui , and Manasseh .

ID:	3935
INPUT:	gero , sinagogetan predikatzen hasi zen , Jesus Jainkoaren Semea dela hots eginez .
PRED:	And he began to teach in the synagogue , saying , He is the Son of God .
GOLD:	And immediately he began preaching about Jesus in the synagogues , saying , “ He is indeed the Son of God ! ”

ID:	3936
INPUT:	Moises mendira igo zen Jainkoarengana . Jaunak menditik dei egin eta esan zion : « Mintza zakizkie Jakoben ondorengoei , israeldarrei , eta adierazi hau :
PRED:	And Moses went up to God on the mountain , and the Lord called him out of the mountain , and said unto him , Speak unto the sons of Jacob , and say unto the sons of Israel ,
GOLD:	Then Moses climbed the mountain to appear before God . The Lord called to him from the mountain and said , “ Give these instructions to the family of Jacob ; announce it to the descendants of Israel :

ID:	3937
INPUT:	Handikien ahotsa ito egiten zen , mihia ahosabaiari erantsita geratzen .
PRED:	The voice of a great voice was a voice , because the mouth of the mouth of the mouth of the mouth .
GOLD:	The highest officials of the city stood quietly , holding their tongues in respect .

ID:	3938
INPUT:	ur handietako itsasontziak egiteko . Etzion-Geber zeritzan hirian egin zituzten ontziak .
PRED:	And the ships of the sea were under the sea ; and they buried the ship in the city .
GOLD:	Together they built a fleet of trading ships at the port of Ezion-geber .

ID:	3939
INPUT:	eta apaizak erabakiko du ordaindu beharrekoa , aberea zer-nolakoa den kontuan harturik . Apaizaren erabakia atzeraezina da .
PRED:	And the priest shall give it to the priest , and the priest shall give it to the priest : and the priest shall take it according to the law of the priest .
GOLD:	He will assess its value , and his assessment will be final , whether high or low .

ID:	3940
INPUT:	Jendea haien aurka altxatu zen , eta epaileek jantziak kendu eta zigorkatzeko agindu zuten .
PRED:	And the people lifted up against them , and took away their garments , and commanded them to kill them .
GOLD:	A mob quickly formed against Paul and Silas , and the city officials ordered them stripped and beaten with wooden rods .

ID:	3941
INPUT:	Justizia eta zuzenbidea maite ditu ; Jaunaren maitasunaz betea da lurra .
PRED:	He loves justice and justice , and his love is in the Lord 's love .
GOLD:	He loves whatever is just and good ; the unfailing love of the Lord fills the earth .

ID:	3942
INPUT:	Orduan , agindu hau eman zien Josuek herriko funtzionarioei :
PRED:	Then Joshua commanded the officials to the officials , saying ,
GOLD:	Joshua then commanded the officers of Israel ,

ID:	3943
INPUT:	Eta orain , hona agertu behar dizudan egiazko mezua : « “ Begira , hiru errege izango dira oraindik Pertsian . Eta horien ondoren , aurrekoak baino aberastasun gehiago izango duen laugarren bat . Bere aberastasunek nahiko indarra emango diotenean , inon direnak egingo ditu Greziako erregeari erasotzeko .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says to me : “ Behold , three kings will be more than their riches , and their riches will be more than their riches .
GOLD:	“ Now then , I will reveal the truth to you . Three more Persian kings will reign , to be succeeded by a fourth , far richer than the others . He will use his wealth to stir up everyone to fight against the kingdom of Greece .

ID:	3944
INPUT:	horregatik , orduko mundua uholdeko urek estalirik galdu zen .
PRED:	And the waters of the earth was dried up , and the waters of the earth dried up .
GOLD:	Then he used the water to destroy the ancient world with a mighty flood .

ID:	3945
INPUT:	Mikak pentsatu zuen : « Orain bai izanen dudala Jauna neure alde , lebitarra baita nire apaiza » .
PRED:	Then she said , “ Now the Lord will be my priest , for he is my priest . ”
GOLD:	“ I know the Lord will bless me now , ” Micah said , “ because I have a Levite serving as my priest . ”

ID:	3946
INPUT:	Libra nazazu ezpataz hila izatetik , atera nire bizi hau zakur horien atzaparretatik .
PRED:	Let me go out of the midst of the sword , and let me live in the midst of my mouth .
GOLD:	Snatch me from the lion 's jawsand from the horns of these wild oxen .

ID:	3947
INPUT:	Herri bat etorri da iparraldetikBabiloniaren aurka , haren lurraldeabasamortu bihurtuko duena : inor ere ez da gelditukohan bizitzen , gizaki eta abereakihesi joango dira » .
PRED:	A people will come from the north side of the north , and no one will live there , and no one will escape . ”
GOLD:	For a nation will attack her from the northand bring such destruction that no one will live there again.Everything will be gone ; both people and animals will flee .

ID:	3948
INPUT:	bahituran hartutakoa bueltatu , ostutakoa itzuli eta , bidegabekeria egiteari utziz , bizia ematen duten aginduetan badabil , bizi egingo da , bai , eta ez da hilko .
PRED:	And if the elders of the city is taken away , then he shall return to him , and he shall live , and he shall not die .
GOLD:	For instance , they might give back a debtor 's security , return what they have stolen , and obey my life-giving laws , no longer doing what is evil . If they do this , then they will surely live and not die .

ID:	3949
INPUT:	Gantzak apaizak erreko ditu aldarean ; aurkezturiko bularra , berriz , Aaron eta beronen ondorengoentzat izango da .
PRED:	And the priest shall burn the fat on the altar , but Aaron and his sons shall be for his sons .
GOLD:	Then the priest will burn the fat on the altar , but the breast will belong to Aaron and his descendants .

ID:	3950
INPUT:	Berak ematen die arrakasta zintzoeieta babesa jokabide zuzenekoei ;
PRED:	He will teach the righteous and teach those who are righteous and right .
GOLD:	He grants a treasure of common sense to the honest.He is a shield to those who walk with integrity .

ID:	3951
INPUT:	Berehala ekarriko dizuet ura , oinak garbitzeko . Hartzazue atseden bitartean , zuhaitzaren itzalpean .
PRED:	I will bring water to you , that you may wash your feet and wash your feet , and put them under their feet .
GOLD:	Rest in the shade of this tree while water is brought to wash your feet .

ID:	3952
INPUT:	Ondoren , Davidek kontsulta egin zion Jaunari : — Igoko al naiz Judako hiriren batera ? — Bai , igo — erantzun zion Jaunak . — Zeinetara igoko naiz ? — Davidek , berriro . — Hebronera — esan zion Jaunak .
PRED:	Then David asked the Lord , “ Will I go up to the city of Judah ? ” The Lord said to him , “ Yes , I will go up to Hebron . ”
GOLD:	After this , David asked the Lord , “ Should I move back to one of the towns of Judah ? ” “ Yes , ” the Lord replied.Then David asked , “ Which town should I go to ? ” “ To Hebron , ” the Lord answered .

ID:	3953
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunari dei egin diezaionasalbatuko da . Jerusalemen , Sion mendian , izango da salbaturik , Jaunak esan bezala . Jaunak deituakgeldituko dira bizirik .
PRED:	And he shall call on the name of the Lord , and he shall be saved in mount Zion , as the Lord hath spoken , and they shall live .
GOLD:	You have taken my silver and gold and all my precious treasures , and have carried them off to your pagan temples .

ID:	3954
INPUT:	Buztina ez ote dago buztinlariaren esku , honek lur beretik ontzi baliotsuak nahiz ontzi arruntak egiteko ?
PRED:	Is it not the clay of the clay , that the clay is not cut off from the earth , or the olive oil , or the olive oil from the earth ?
GOLD:	When a potter makes jars out of clay , does n't he have a right to use the same lump of clay to make one jar for decoration and another to throw garbage into ?

ID:	3955
INPUT:	Ez dezatela pentsa : « A zer gozamena ! » Ez dezatela esan : « Horrenak egin ditugu ! »
PRED:	Let them not say , “ What is this ? ” Let them say , “ We have done these things . ”
GOLD:	Do n't let them say , “ Look , we got what we wanted ! Now we will eat him alive ! ”

ID:	3956
INPUT:	Honek bere ama Sararena izandako oihal-etxolara eraman zuen Rebeka . Emaztetzat hartu eta maite izan zuen . Honela poztu zuen Isaakek bere burua , ama hil ondoren .
PRED:	And she brought her to the tent of her mother , and she loved her , and she loved her , and she loved her , and she was glad .
GOLD:	And Isaac brought Rebekah into his mother Sarah 's tent , and she became his wife . He loved her deeply , and she was a special comfort to him after the death of his mother .

ID:	3957
INPUT:	harrikatu egin zituzten , zerraz ebaki , ezpataz hil ; noraezean ibili ziren , a<unk> nahiz ardi-larruz jantzirik , premia gorrian , erasopean eta tratu txarrak hartuz .
PRED:	And they took him , and struck him with the sword ; and they struck him with the sword , with the sword , and with the sword , and with the sword , and with the sword , and with the sword , and with the sword .
GOLD:	Some died by stoning , some were sawed in half , and others were killed with the sword . Some went about wearing skins of sheep and goats , destitute and oppressed and mistreated .

ID:	3958
INPUT:	Kanpora zeramatela , Tamarrek bere aitaginarrebari mandatu hau bidali zion : « Gauza hauen jabe denarengandik nago haurdun . Ikus norenak diren zigilua , honen lokarria eta makila » .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when she had brought her to her father Tamar , that she sent her to her father , saying , I am this thing : and the eyes of the children of her father was brought forth , and behold , the eyes of her father was brought to her .
GOLD:	But as they were taking her out to kill her , she sent this message to her father-in-law : “ The man who owns these things made me pregnant . Look closely . Whose seal and cord and walking stick are these ? ”

ID:	3959
INPUT:	Gaua zelarik altxatu ziren ohetik faraoia , funtzionarioak eta egiptoar guztiak . Garrasi latzak izan ziren Egipto osoan , ez baitzen hildakorik gabeko etxerik .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the night , that the king of Egypt went out of the land of Egypt , and all the servants of the Egyptians , and all the servants of the Egyptians saw that there was no dead .
GOLD:	Pharaoh and all his officials and all the people of Egypt woke up during the night , and loud wailing was heard throughout the land of Egypt . There was not a single house where someone had not died .

ID:	3960
INPUT:	Apaiz nagusiak galdetu zion Estebani : « Egia al da hori guztia ? »
PRED:	The high priest asked him , “ Is this bread ? ”
GOLD:	Then the high priest asked Stephen , “ Are these accusations true ? ”

ID:	3961
INPUT:	Esdras apaiza Jerusalemen
PRED:	Ezra the priest in Jerusalem
GOLD:	Artaxerxes ' Letter to Ezra

ID:	3962
INPUT:	Eta hori , nire erabakiak mespretxatu zituztelako , ez zutelako nire legeen arabera jokatu eta bai nire larunbatak hautsi ; izan ere , haien bihotzak idoloei atxikiak zeuden guztiz .
PRED:	And they rejected my statutes , because they did not obey my statutes , because they did not obey My statutes and My statutes and My statutes , because they had broken My statutes , and their heart was broken .
GOLD:	For they had rejected my regulations , refused to follow my decrees , and violated my Sabbath days . Their hearts were given to their idols .

ID:	3963
INPUT:	izuaren erasotik ihes egin dezanazuloan jausiko da ; zulotik ihes egin dezanazepoan harrapatua geldituko . Zigorra bidaliko diot Moabikontuak hartzeko egunean . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	And he shall escape from the wall of the sword , and he shall escape from the wall , and he shall escape ; and I will send upon Moab on the day of the sword , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Those who flee in terror will fall into a trap , and those who escape the trap will step into a snare.I will see to it that you do not get away , for the time of your judgment has come , ” says the Lord .

ID:	3964
INPUT:	Bere begi-bistan botarazi zituen Baalen aldareak , berauen gainean zeuden intsentsu-ontziak hautsiz ; zutoin sakratu eta zurezko nahiz metalezko idoloak xehatu eta puskak halakoei sakrifizioak eskaintzen zizkietenen hilobi gainean barreiatu zituen .
PRED:	And he cast down the altars of Baal in his sight , and burned incense on the altar of Baal , and cut down the images of the Asherah , and put down the images of the idols , and put them in the midst of the idols .
GOLD:	He ordered that the altars of Baal be demolished and that the incense altars which stood above them be broken down . He also made sure that the Asherah poles , the carved idols , and the cast images were smashed and scattered over the graves of those who had sacrificed to them .

ID:	3965
INPUT:	Haiek , berriz , alde guztietara joan ziren berri ona hots egitera . Eta Jauna bera ari zen haiekin , egiten zituzten mirarien bidez mezua baietsiz .
PRED:	But they went and preached the word of the Lord . And the word of the Lord was with them , because he was with them .
GOLD:	And the disciples went everywhere and preached , and the Lord worked through them , confirming what they said by many miraculous signs .

ID:	3966
INPUT:	Molok jainkoarenganajoaten zinen , olioa eta lurrinak ugari eramanez ; urrutiraino bidali zenituenmandatariak , Hildakoen Egoitzaraino jaitsarazi .
PRED:	And they went to the gods of Moab , and the oil , and the oil of the land , and sent messengers unto the entrance of the dead , to the entrance of the dead .
GOLD:	You have gone to Molechwith olive oil and many perfumes , sending your agents far and wide , even to the world of the dead .

ID:	3967
INPUT:	« Bete arretaz nire lege eta erabaki guztiak . Neu naiz Jauna » .
PRED:	“ Be careful to keep my statutes and my statutes . I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ You must be careful to keep all of my decrees and regulations by putting them into practice . I am the Lord . ”

ID:	3968
INPUT:	Jaunak galdetu zion : — Ohartu al haiz Job ene zerbitzariaz ? Ez dik parekorik munduan : gizon zintzo eta zuzena duk , Jainkoa errespetatu eta gaiztakeriatik urruti dabilena . Arrazoirik gabe berari kalte egitera bultzatu ninduan arren , bere zintzotasunean tinko irauten dik .
PRED:	The Lord said to him , “ Have you taken Job my servant Job ? There is no one who is righteous in the world . He is righteous and righteous , and he is righteous , and he is righteous and righteous , and did not sin in his sight . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord asked Satan , “ Have you noticed my servant Job ? He is the finest man in all the earth . He is blameless — a man of complete integrity . He fears God and stays away from evil . And he has maintained his integrity , even though you urged me to harm him without cause . ”

ID:	3969
INPUT:	Izan ere , benetako judua ez da kanpotik hala dena ; eta benetako erdainkuntza ez da kanpotik gorputzean egiten dena .
PRED:	For there is none of the Jews outside him , but all things are not circumcised , and all things that are in the body .
GOLD:	For you are not a true Jew just because you were born of Jewish parents or because you have gone through the ceremony of circumcision .

ID:	3970
INPUT:	Hain zuzen , honetarako ere idatzi nizuen : zuek probatzeko , gauza guztietan esaneko zareten ala ez jakiteko , alegia .
PRED:	So I wrote to you , that you may not know the truth in all these things .
GOLD:	I wrote to you as I did to test you and see if you would fully comply with my instructions .

ID:	3971
INPUT:	« Bai , gauza ona da gatza ; baina gatza gezatzen bada , nola gazitu berriro ?
PRED:	“ Yes , it is good , but if it is good , how can it be ?
GOLD:	“ Salt is good for seasoning . But if it loses its flavor , how do you make it salty again ?

ID:	3972
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Zoaz etxera , dei egiozu zeure senarrari eta itzuli hona .
PRED:	Jesus said to her , “ Go home , call your husband and return to her husband . ”
GOLD:	“ Go and get your husband , ” Jesus told her .

ID:	3973
INPUT:	gauza guztiengatik Jainko Aitari etengabe eskerrak emanez , Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren izenean .
PRED:	For all things , in the name of our Father , in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	And give thanks for everything to God the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ .

ID:	3974
INPUT:	« Artaxerxes erregeen erregeak , Esdras apaizari , zeruetako Jainkoaren legean maisu denari , osasuna !
PRED:	King Cyrus , the priest , the priest , the priest , who is in the law of the God of heaven ,
GOLD:	“ From Artaxerxes , the king of kings , to Ezra the priest , the teacher of the law of the God of heaven . Greetings .

ID:	3975
INPUT:	Ondoren , herri osoari , israeldar jendetza guztiari , gizaseme nahiz emakume , opil bana , haragi-zati bana eta mahaspasa-opil bana eman zizkien . Orduan , jende guztiak nork bere etxera alde egin zuen .
PRED:	And he took all the people of Israel , a man , a young man , a young man , a young man , and a hin of bread , and a grain offering , and one of them , and every man left his house .
GOLD:	Then he gave to every Israelite man and woman in the crowd a loaf of bread , a cake of dates , and a cake of raisins . Then all the people returned to their homes .

ID:	3976
INPUT:	baita erregeen eta agintea duten guztien alde ere , bizitza bare eta baketsuan bizi gaitezen , jainkozaletasunez eta gizabidez .
PRED:	and all that the kings and the king commanded us to live in peace and peace , and in truth .
GOLD:	Pray this way for kings and all who are in authority so that we can live peaceful and quiet lives marked by godliness and dignity .

ID:	3977
INPUT:	Bedeinkatua izan bedi Jaunaren izena orain eta beti !
PRED:	May the name of the Lord be blessed forever and ever .
GOLD:	Blessed be the name of the Lordnow and forever .

ID:	3978
INPUT:	Berriro ere errukituko zara gutaz , lurperatuko dituzugure gaiztakeriak , eta itsas hondora botakogure bekatu guztiak .
PRED:	Then you will be guilty of us , and you will know our wickedness , and all our sins will fall into the sea .
GOLD:	Once again you will have compassion on us.You will trample our sins under your feetand throw them into the depths of the ocean !

ID:	3979
INPUT:	Horrela , bekatuak ez du zuen gain aginterik izango , ez baitzaudete legepean , Jainkoaren onginahiaren eraginpean baizik .
PRED:	so that there will be no sin in the law , but in the law of God , but in the grace of God .
GOLD:	Sin is no longer your master , for you no longer live under the requirements of the law . Instead , you live under the freedom of God 's grace .

ID:	3980
INPUT:	Jango dute , baina ez dira aseko ; emagaldu sakratueki<unk> kartuko dira , baina ez dute haurrik izango ; Jauna bazter utzi baitute , beste jainkoei jarraitzeko .
PRED:	They will eat , but they will not eat ; they will eat the bread of the holy women , but they will not have children . They will leave the Lord , for they have left other gods .
GOLD:	They will eat and still be hungry.They will play the prostitute and gain nothing from it , for they have deserted the Lord

ID:	3981
INPUT:	Baina desagertu da , ez da jadanik , bila ibili eta ezin izan dut aurkitu .
PRED:	But I did not know , but I could not find him .
GOLD:	But when I looked again , they were gone ! Though I searched for them , I could not find them !

ID:	3982
INPUT:	Moisesek eta Aaronek Jaunak agindu bezala egin zuten zehatz-mehatz .
PRED:	And Moses and Aaron did according to all that the Lord commanded him .
GOLD:	So Moses and Aaron did just as the Lord had commanded them .

ID:	3983
INPUT:	<unk> egin eta botatakoaren jirabiran dabilen txakurra bezalakoa dabehin eta berriz ergelkeria berera itzultzen den zentzugabea .
PRED:	As a man that is in his mouth , he that is in his mouth , and he shall return to the fool , and shall return to him .
GOLD:	As a dog returns to its vomit , so a fool repeats his foolishness .

ID:	3984
INPUT:	Ur sakratua hartuko du buztinezko ontzi batean eta egoitzako zorutik hartutako hautsaz nahasiko du .
PRED:	And he shall take the holy place in a clay cloth , and shall be ashamed of the tabernacle , and shall be ashamed .
GOLD:	He must take some holy water in a clay jar and pour into it dust he has taken from the Tabernacle floor .

ID:	3985
INPUT:	Orduan , emakumeak : — Jauna , emadazu ur horretatik , berriro egarri ez nadin , eta hona uretara etorri beharrik izan ez dezadan .
PRED:	Then the woman said to her , “ Lord , give me this water , that I may not drink water , and that I may not drink water . ”
GOLD:	“ Please , sir , ” the woman said , “ give me this water ! Then I 'll never be thirsty again , and I wo n't have to come here to get water . ”

ID:	3986
INPUT:	Zerbitzariek erregea bere guda-gurditik hartu , beste guda-gurdi batera igo eta Jerusalemera eraman zuten . Han hil zen , eta bere arbasoen hilobian ehortzi zuten . Juda eta Jerusalem osoak egin zuen dolu Josiasengatik .
PRED:	And the servants took his chariot , and brought him to a chariot , and brought him to Jerusalem , and buried him in the tomb of his fathers , and buried him in Jerusalem , and all Judah and Jerusalem .
GOLD:	So they lifted Josiah out of his chariot and placed him in another chariot . Then they brought him back to Jerusalem , where he died . He was buried there in the royal cemetery . And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for him .

ID:	3987
INPUT:	Azkenik , zekorretik gelditzen dena — larrua eta haragia , burua , hankak eta hesteak —
PRED:	And he that is left of the bull , and the skin , and the skin , and the fat , and the fat ,
GOLD:	But he must take whatever is left of the bull — its hide , meat , head , legs , internal organs , and dung —

ID:	3988
INPUT:	« Bere erregealdiaren lehen urtean , Ziro erregeak agindu hau eman du Jerusalemgo Jainkoaren etxeari buruz : eraiki bedi berriro Jerusalemen Jainkoaren etxea , opariak eskaintzen diren eta lehengo zimentarrien toki berean ; hogeita zazpi metro izango da gora eta beste horrenbeste zabal .
PRED:	In the first year of his reign , King Cyrus commanded him to build the house of God in Jerusalem , to build the house of God , and to build the house of God , and to the house of the house of God , and to the house of God , and to the house of his God .
GOLD:	“ In the first year of King Cyrus 's reign , a decree was sent out concerning the Temple of God at Jerusalem . “ Let the Temple be rebuilt on the site where Jews used to offer their sacrifices , using the original foundations . Its height will be ninety feet , and its width will be ninety feet .

ID:	3989
INPUT:	Jasaten duzuena zuek zentzarazteko da ; Jainkoak seme-alaba bezala tratatzen zaituzte . Izan ere , zein seme-alaba ez du aitak zentzarazten ?
PRED:	For you know what you say , God will make you like children . For what is your father ? For what is his father ?
GOLD:	As you endure this divine discipline , remember that God is treating you as his own children . Who ever heard of a child who is never disciplined by its father ?

ID:	3990
INPUT:	Jonatanek Davidi ihes egiten lagundu
PRED:	Jonathan and David
GOLD:	Jonathan Helps David

ID:	3991
INPUT:	Ez badakizu , oi emakumerik ederren , zoaz ardien oinatzen ondoreneta larratu zeure antxumeakartzainen txabola ondoan .
PRED:	Do n't know that you are beautiful women , but you are very beautiful , and you will take care of the young goat .
GOLD:	If you do n't know , O most beautiful woman , follow the trail of my flock , and graze your young goats by the shepherds ' tents .

ID:	3992
INPUT:	eta , ondoren , nire aurrera zatozte , niri sagaratua dagoen tenplu honetara , “ Seguru gaude ” esaten duzuela , segidan egintza higuingarri guztiok egiten jarraitzeko .
PRED:	After you come to me , you are my holy temple , and you say to me , ‘ Son , we are doing all the abominations that I have done . '
GOLD:	and then come here and stand before me in my Temple and chant , “ We are safe ! ” — only to go right back to all those evils again ?

ID:	3993
INPUT:	Kanaandar kultuen aurkako oharpena
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	's Chosen Place for Worship

ID:	3994
INPUT:	Josiasen seme Joiakim Judako erregearen bosgarren urtean , bederatzigarren hilean , barau-eguna aldarrikatu zuten Jaunaren ohorez , eta Jerusalemen bildu ziren bertako jendea eta Judako hirietatik etorriak .
PRED:	In the fifth year of Josiah the son of Josiah the son of Josiah , in the fifth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah , and the people of Judah gathered together from Jerusalem and Jerusalem .
GOLD:	He did this on a day of sacred fasting held in late autumn , during the fifth year of the reign of Jehoiakim son of Josiah . People from all over Judah had come to Jerusalem to attend the services at the Temple on that day .

ID:	3995
INPUT:	Gero , Kana errekaraino jaisten zen muga . Errekaz hegoaldeko hiriak Efraimen leinuak Manasesen lurraldean zituenak ziren . Manasesen muga errekaren iparraldeko ertzetik zihoan eta Mediterraneo itsasoan bukatzen zen .
PRED:	And he went down to the border of Manasseh , to the border of Manasseh , to the border of Manasseh , to the border of Manasseh , and to the border of Manasseh ; and the border of Manasseh was in the sea .
GOLD:	From the spring of Tappuah , the boundary of Manasseh followed the Kanah Ravine to the Mediterranean Sea . Several towns south of the ravine were inside Manasseh 's territory , but they actually belonged to the tribe of Ephraim .

ID:	3996
INPUT:	Jaunak gauza berriak iragarri
PRED:	The
GOLD:	God 's Stubborn People

ID:	3997
INPUT:	Larri zeuden egun hartan israeldarrak , Saulek honelako zin-hitzez mehatxatu baitzuen jendea : « Madarikatua ilunabarra baino lehen , neure etsaiez mendeka nadin arte , zerbait jan dezana ! » Hala , inork ez zuen deus ere jan .
PRED:	And it came to pass in that day , when the people of Israel heard that Saul had spoken to the people in that day , that Saul said unto the people , Blessed be my enemies before the evening , that I may not eat any of them .
GOLD:	Now the men of Israel were pressed to exhaustion that day , because Saul had placed them under an oath , saying , “ Let a curse fall on anyone who eats before evening — before I have full revenge on my enemies . ” So no one ate anything all day ,

ID:	3998
INPUT:	eta barkatu gure bekatuak , guk ere zor diguten guztieibarkatzen baitiegu , eta ez utzi gu tentaldian erortzen » .
PRED:	And we forgive our sins , because we are forgiven , and we do not let them fall . ”
GOLD:	and forgive us our sins , as we forgive those who sin against us.And do n't let us yield to temptation . ”

ID:	3999
INPUT:	David , aldi hartan , bere babeslekuan zegoen ; filistearrek , berriz , gudari-toki bat zuten Belenen .
PRED:	At that time David was in his place , but the Philistines had a army in Bethlehem .
GOLD:	David was staying in the stronghold at the time , and a Philistine detachment had occupied the town of Bethlehem .

ID:	4000
INPUT:	Gainera , bere janari eta edari beretik emateko agindu zuen erregeak . Hiru urtez horrela hezi ondoren , erregearen zerbitzari izango ziren .
PRED:	And the king commanded him to drink and drink , and drink of his own wine ; and the king 's servants shall serve the king for three years .
GOLD:	The king assigned them a daily ration of food and wine from his own kitchens . They were to be trained for three years , and then they would enter the royal service .

ID:	4001
INPUT:	sasizientziaren zenbait jarraitzaile aldendu egin baita fede-bidetik . Jainkoaren grazia zuekin .
PRED:	For some of you have turned away from the faith . The grace of God be with you .
GOLD:	Some people have wandered from the faith by following such foolishness.May God 's grace be with you all .

ID:	4002
INPUT:	Egiptoarren jakintza guztia ikasi zuen Moisesek , eta hizketan eta ekintzan trebea izan zen .
PRED:	And Moses saw all the wisdom of the Egyptians , and wisdom , and wisdom , and understanding .
GOLD:	Moses was taught all the wisdom of the Egyptians , and he was powerful in both speech and action .

ID:	4003
INPUT:	buruzagiei sena kentzen dieeta biderik gabeko eremuetan galbideratzen ;
PRED:	He will take away the princes of the princes , and he will ask the way of his ways .
GOLD:	He strips kings of understandingand leaves them wandering in a pathless wasteland .

ID:	4004
INPUT:	Jobek erantzun zuen :
PRED:	Job answered ,
GOLD:	Then Job spoke again :

ID:	4005
INPUT:	Bekokia altxaturik , ez da arduratzen : « Ez da Jainkorik » , pentsatzen du .
PRED:	There is no hope , and no one says , “ There is no God . ”
GOLD:	The wicked are too proud to seek God.They seem to think that God is dead .

ID:	4006
INPUT:	Ehun eta hirurogeita hamabost urtez bizi izan zen Abraham .
PRED:	Abraham lived thirty years old when he became the father of Abraham .
GOLD:	Abraham lived for 175 years ,

ID:	4007
INPUT:	Jafeten semeak Gomer , Magog , Madai , Jaban , Tubal , Mexek eta Tiras izan ziren .
PRED:	The sons of Gershon were the sons of Gershon , Jozabad , Jozabad , and Jozabad , and Sidon .
GOLD:	The descendants of Japheth were Gomer , Magog , Madai , Javan , Tubal , Meshech , and Tiras .

ID:	4008
INPUT:	Jaunak justizia egiten du , zapalduen eskubideak defendatzen .
PRED:	The Lord gives justice to the righteous , and he will judge the cause of the wicked .
GOLD:	The Lord gives righteousnessand justice to all who are treated unfairly .

ID:	4009
INPUT:	Jaunak beste behin ere hitz egin zion Jeremiasi . Sedekias erregeak esklaboak askatzeko hitzarmena egin zuen Jerusalemgo jendearekin :
PRED:	And the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah , and he made a covenant with the people in Jerusalem :
GOLD:	This message came to Jeremiah from the Lord after King Zedekiah made a covenant with the people , proclaiming freedom for the slaves .

ID:	4010
INPUT:	Baina handik berehala , euroakiloi deitzen zuten haize-erauntsi batek eraso zion lehorraldetik ontziari ;
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the rain came out of the sea , a cloud came up out of the sea .
GOLD:	But the weather changed abruptly , and a wind of typhoon strength ( called a “ northeaster ” ) burst across the island and blew us out to sea .

ID:	4011
INPUT:	Gobernariak gutuna irakurri eta Paulo zein probintziatakoa zen galdetu zuen . Ziliziakoa zela jakinik ,
PRED:	The governor read the letter and asked him , “ Paul , who is in Asia . ”
GOLD:	He read it and then asked Paul what province he was from . “ Cilicia , ” Paul answered .

ID:	4012
INPUT:	Jaunari oparitzat aurkezturiko brontzea , bi mila hirurehun eta hogeita hamasei kilo izan zen ;
PRED:	And he brought the bronze offering to the Lord , two hundred and five hundred and five hundred talents .
GOLD:	The people also brought as special offerings 5,310 pounds of bronze ,

ID:	4013
INPUT:	Moises eta Aaron faraoiagana
PRED:	Moses and Aaron
GOLD:	Moses and Aaron Speak to Pharaoh

ID:	4014
INPUT:	Baina luzatu eskua eta uki iezaiozu daukan guztia ; baietz madarikatu aurpegira !
PRED:	But you have stretched out your hand , and you have touched all that you have touched , for you have seen . ”
GOLD:	But reach out and take away everything he has , and he will surely curse you to your face ! ”

ID:	4015
INPUT:	Joan zen , bada , Tamar bere anaia Amnonen etxera ; hau ohean zetzan . Tamarrek ogi-irina hartu , orea egin , anaiaren aurrean opilak prestatu eta erre zituen .
PRED:	So Amnon went to his brother Amnon 's house . Tamar took the bread and set it in front of his brother Tamar , and set it in front of his brother Tamar .
GOLD:	When Tamar arrived at Amnon 's house , she went to the place where he was lying down so he could watch her mix some dough . Then she baked his favorite dish for him .

ID:	4016
INPUT:	« Madarikatua arrebaordearekin , aitaren nahiz amaren alabarekin , oheratzen dena ! » Eta herri osoak erantzungo du : « Amen » .
PRED:	But curse is he who is with his father or mother or mother 's mother , and all the people shall answer him , Amen .
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who has sexual intercourse with his sister , whether she is the daughter of his father or his mother . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	4017
INPUT:	Gorets bezate Jauna bere maitasunagatik , gizakien alde egiten dituen gauza harrigarriengatik .
PRED:	Let them praise the Lord for his love , because he has done great things for men .
GOLD:	Let them praise the Lord for his great loveand for the wonderful things he has done for them .

ID:	4018
INPUT:	Egitasmo handiak dituzu eta huts egin gabe burutzen . Gizakien jokabide guztiak begi-bistan dituzu , nori bere jokaeraren ordaina , bere egiteen merezia , emateko .
PRED:	You have made the counsel of a man , and you have no knowledge . You have seen all the ways of men . You have seen all the ways of his ways .
GOLD:	You have all wisdom and do great and mighty miracles . You see the conduct of all people , and you give them what they deserve .

ID:	4019
INPUT:	Jaunak , ordea , esan zion : « Jeroboamen emaztea datorkizu , gaixorik duen semeari zer gertatuko zaion galdetzera . Hau eta hau erantzun behar diozu . Beste baten itxurak eginez etorriko zaizu » .
PRED:	But the Lord said to him , “ When Jeroboam 's wife is sick , you know what will happen to him , and you will say to him , ‘ What will you do to him ? '
GOLD:	But the Lord had told Ahijah , “ Jeroboam 's wife will come here , pretending to be someone else . She will ask you about her son , for he is very sick . Give her the answer I give you . ”

ID:	4020
INPUT:	Jaunak mezu hau eman zion Jeremias profetari filistearrentzat , faraoiak Gazari eraso baino lehen .
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the prophet before he fought against the Philistines .
GOLD:	This is the Lord 's message to the prophet Jeremiah concerning the Philistines of Gaza , before it was captured by the Egyptian army .

ID:	4021
INPUT:	Jainko Ahaltsu bezala agertu nintzaien Abrahami , Isaaki eta Jakobi ; baina ez nintzaien nire egiazko izenaz , Jauna bezala alegia , ezagutzera eman .
PRED:	As God Almighty appeared to Abraham , Isaac , Isaac , and Jacob , and Jacob ; but I did not know the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	I appeared to Abraham , to Isaac , and to Jacob as El-Shaddai — ‘ God Almighty ' — but I did not reveal my name , Yahweh , to them .

ID:	4022
INPUT:	Eta mutila atzetik joaten zaio berehala , hiltegira doan idia bezala , lakioan jausten den oreina legez ,
PRED:	And it shall come out of the boy , as it is in the blood , as it is written in it ,
GOLD:	He followed her at once , like an ox going to the slaughter.He was like a stag caught in a trap ,

ID:	4023
INPUT:	Zuek ere , emazteok , izan zaitezte zeuen senarren menpeko ; horrela , horietakoren batzuek salbamen-mezua onartzen ez badute ere , emazteen jokabideak , eta ez hitzek , salbamenerako irabaz ditzan ,
PRED:	But you , my wives , be under the power of your husband . If some of them do not believe the word of the word , they will not be saved by the word of the righteous , and they will not be saved .
GOLD:	In the same way , you wives must accept the authority of your husbands . Then , even if some refuse to obey the Good News , your godly lives will speak to them without any words . They will be won over

ID:	4024
INPUT:	Bera da batzuk apostolu egin zituena , beste batzuk profeta , beste batzuk berri onaren hotsegile , beste batzuk artzain eta irakasle .
PRED:	There were some of the apostles , some prophets , and others , some of them , and some of them , and some of them .
GOLD:	Now these are the gifts Christ gave to the church : the apostles , the prophets , the evangelists , and the pastors and teachers .

ID:	4025
INPUT:	Gero , mahasti artean , albotara bi harresi zituen bide estu batean gelditu zen Jaunaren aingerua .
PRED:	Then the angel of the Lord appeared to them in a vineyard , and the angel of the Lord stood in a vineyard .
GOLD:	Then the angel of the Lord stood at a place where the road narrowed between two vineyard walls .

ID:	4026
INPUT:	Josuek agindu zuen : « Eraman biraka harri handi batzuk leize-ahoraino eta ezarri bertan zaintzaileak .
PRED:	Then Joshua said , “ Take some of the stones and put them in the mouth of a great stone and put them in the midst of the flock .
GOLD:	he issued this command : “ Cover the opening of the cave with large rocks , and place guards at the entrance to keep the kings inside .

ID:	4027
INPUT:	Baina ekialdera joan , eta ez dago han ; mendebaldera jo , eta ez dut sumatzen .
PRED:	But he is not going to the east , and he is not there ; and I do not send him to the west .
GOLD:	I go east , but he is not there.I go west , but I can not find him .

ID:	4028
INPUT:	Salaminara heldurik , juduen sinagogetan Jainkoaren mezua hots egiten hasi ziren ; Joan ere berekin zuten laguntzaile .
PRED:	And when they came into the synagogue , they began to preach the word of God : and they went with him .
GOLD:	There , in the town of Salamis , they went to the Jewish synagogues and preached the word of God . John Mark went with them as their assistant .

ID:	4029
INPUT:	Jauna , ez ukatu niri zeure errukia ! Zure maitasun eta leialtasunak gorde nazatela beti !
PRED:	O Lord , do n't turn away your mercy from me , as I love and truth for ever .
GOLD:	For troubles surround me — too many to count ! My sins pile up so highI ca n't see my way out.They outnumber the hairs on my head.I have lost all courage .

ID:	4030
INPUT:	Kibrot-Taabatik Hatzerotera joan zen herria eta han gelditu .
PRED:	And they went out from thence , and encamped there , and there .
GOLD:	From Kibroth-hattaavah the Israelites traveled to Hazeroth , where they stayed for some time .

ID:	4031
INPUT:	Hara , zure aurka noa , haranaren gainaldean , harkaitza bezain tinkolautadaren gainaldean zaudenerrege-jauregi horren aurka . “ Nork guri eraso ? — diozue — . Nor iritsi gure gordelekuetara ? ”
PRED:	Behold , the king is on the top of the rock , and on the top of the rock , and on the top of the rock , and say , Who hath come to battle against us ? Who hath ye come to our place ?
GOLD:	I will personally fight against the people in Jerusalem , that mighty fortress — the people who boast , “ No one can touch us here.No one can break in here . ”

ID:	4032
INPUT:	urre askoren jabe izandako printzeekin , jauregiak zilarrez beteak zituztenekin batera .
PRED:	And the princes of the king , and the princes of the king , and the king 's house , and the silver , and the silver , and the king 's house .
GOLD:	I would rest with princes , rich in gold , whose palaces were filled with silver .

ID:	4033
INPUT:	Baina juduek kontra egiten baitzioten eta irainka erantzuten , Paulok , jantziak astinduz , esan zien : « Zeuek zarete gerta dakizuekeenaren erantzule bakar ; nik ez dut errurik . Aurrerantzean jentilengana joango naiz » .
PRED:	But when the Jews heard him , Paul tore his clothes and said to them , “ You know what you have done , and I will not return to the Gentiles . ”
GOLD:	But when they opposed and insulted him , Paul shook the dust from his clothes and said , “ Your blood is upon your own heads — I am innocent . From now on I will go preach to the Gentiles . ”

ID:	4034
INPUT:	Joan ziren , bada , eta hilobia segurtatu zuten , harria zigilatuz eta guardia ipiniz .
PRED:	So they went and worshiped the tomb and worshiped the tomb . They took the stone and went out .
GOLD:	So they sealed the tomb and posted guards to protect it .

ID:	4035
INPUT:	Ikusi dut mundu honetanbidegabekeria dagoelazuzenbidearen ordez , eta gaiztakeriazuzentasunaren ordez .
PRED:	I have seen the way of this world , but the wickedness of wickedness is done in righteousness .
GOLD:	I also noticed that under the sun there is evil in the courtroom . Yes , even the courts of law are corrupt !

ID:	4036
INPUT:	Orduan , Joan Bataiatzaileaz ari zitzaiela jabetu ziren ikasleak .
PRED:	And his disciples heard that John was John the Baptist .
GOLD:	Then the disciples realized he was talking about John the Baptist .

ID:	4037
INPUT:	Behinola , Judaren leinuko batzuk Josuerengana etorri ziren , Gilgalera , eta haietariko batek , Jefuneren seme Kaleb keniztarrak , esan zion : « Badakizu zer esan zion Jaunak Moisesi , Jainkoaren gizonari , zuri eta niri buruz Kadex-Barnean .
PRED:	Some of the tribes of Judah came to Joshua at Gilgal , and one of them said to Joshua , “ You know what the Lord had said to Moses .
GOLD:	A delegation from the tribe of Judah , led by Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite , came to Joshua at Gilgal . Caleb said to Joshua , “ Remember what the Lord said to Moses , the man of God , about you and me when we were at Kadesh-barnea .

ID:	4038
INPUT:	eta han ere berri ona zabaltzen jardun zuten .
PRED:	And they spread the Good News about the Good News .
GOLD:	And there they preached the Good News .

ID:	4039
INPUT:	Jaiki zaitez eta agindu herriari garbikuntza egiteko . Esaiozu : « Egin garbikuntza biharko . Hau dio Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak : Erabat suntsitu behar zenuten zerbait duzue zeuen artean , israeldarrok ; hori desagerrarazi arte , ezin izango diezue aurre egin etsaiei .
PRED:	Go up and make atonement for the people , and say to them , “ Tell them , ‘ Thus says the Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel . You will destroy some of you , until you have destroyed your enemies .
GOLD:	“ Get up ! Command the people to purify themselves in preparation for tomorrow . For this is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : Hidden among you , O Israel , are things set apart for the Lord . You will never defeat your enemies until you remove these things from among you .

ID:	4040
INPUT:	berak du jende xeheahauts artetik jasotzen , behartsua satsetik ateratzen , handikiekin eser dadineta aulki ospetsuan jarri . Jaunarenak dira lurraren zutoinak , mundua haien gainean du kokatua .
PRED:	The people have taken away from the dust , and they have taken away the poor from the dust , and they have laid down his throne on the throne of the Lord , and the earth is laid down on them .
GOLD:	He lifts the poor from the dustand the needy from the garbage dump.He sets them among princes , placing them in seats of honor.For all the earth is the Lord 's , and he has set the world in order .

ID:	4041
INPUT:	Adierazi nire , Jainko Jaun honen , mezua : Gog , zure kontra nator , Mexek eta Tubalgo buruzagi nagusi horren kontra .
PRED:	Tell them , ‘ Thus says the Lord God : I am coming against you , Midian , and Midian . I am against you .
GOLD:	Give him this message from the Sovereign Lord : Gog , I am your enemy !

ID:	4042
INPUT:	Horrela jokatuz , beren buruak kutsatueta Jainkoari desleial izan zitzaizkion .
PRED:	So they turned away their own sins and defiled God .
GOLD:	They defiled themselves by their evil deeds , and their love of idols was adultery in the Lord 's sight .

ID:	4043
INPUT:	Izan ere , honela agintzen du Jaunaren legeak : Lehen-seme guztiak Jaunari sagaratuko zaizkio .
PRED:	For the law of the Lord shall be holy unto the Lord : all the firstborn of the firstborn shall be holy unto the Lord .
GOLD:	The law of the Lord says , “ If a woman 's first child is a boy , he must be dedicated to the Lord . ”

ID:	4044
INPUT:	Eta Bet-Xemexeko jendeak honela zioen : « Nork iraun dezake zutik Jainko Jaun santu honen aurrean ? Nori eramango genioke kutxa gure artetik bidaltzeko ? »
PRED:	And the men of Judah said unto them , Who shall stand before the Lord God ? How shall we bring the ark from among us ?
GOLD:	“ Who is able to stand in the presence of the Lord , this holy God ? ” they cried out . “ Where can we send the Ark from here ? ”

ID:	4045
INPUT:	Moisesek israeldarrak abiarazi zituen Itsaso Gorritik . Xur basamortura jo zuten eta hiru eguneko bidea egin basamortuan barrena , urik aurkitu gabe .
PRED:	And Moses sent the children of Israel out of the Red Sea , as they passed through the wilderness , and passed through the wilderness three days , and they found no water in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Then Moses led the people of Israel away from the Red Sea , and they moved out into the desert of Shur . They traveled in this desert for three days without finding any water .

ID:	4046
INPUT:	Honela , galarazi egin zion Edom herriak Israeli bere lurraldetik igarotzea , eta israeldarrak urrundu egin ziren , zeharbidea hartuz .
PRED:	So the people of Edom sent Israel to pass through his land , and they turned away from the way of their own land .
GOLD:	Because Edom refused to allow Israel to pass through their country , Israel was forced to turn around .

ID:	4047
INPUT:	Zuk kendu duzu zentzu ona horiengandik , ez utzi garaile atera daitezen .
PRED:	You have taken away your heart from them , so that they may not be saved .
GOLD:	You have closed their minds to understanding , but do not let them triumph .

ID:	4048
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak Jerubaal , Bedan , Jefte eta Samuel bidali eta askatu egin zintuzten inguruan zenituzten etsaien eskuetatik , eta lasai bizi izan zarete .
PRED:	Then the Lord sent you out of the hand of Jephthah and Samuel , and sent you out of the hand of your enemies , and ye shall live in the hand of your enemies .
GOLD:	Then the Lord sent Gideon , Bedan , Jephthah , and Samuel to save you , and you lived in safety .

ID:	4049
INPUT:	Israelgo errege Joaxek , aldiz , beste erantzun hau bidali zion Judako errege Amatziasi : « Behin batez , garduak esan omen zion Libanoko zedroari : “ Emaiok alaba nire semeari emaztetzat ” . Baina Libanoko basabere batek hankazpian hartu zuen gardua .
PRED:	But Joash king of Israel sent another message to Amaziah king of Judah , saying , “ My daughter , my daughter . ”
GOLD:	But King Jehoash of Israel replied to King Amaziah of Judah with this story : “ Out in the Lebanon mountains , a thistle sent a message to a mighty cedar tree : ‘ Give your daughter in marriage to my son . ' But just then a wild animal of Lebanon came by and stepped on the thistle , crushing it !

ID:	4050
INPUT:	bizi bagara , Jaunarentzat gara bizi ; eta hiltzen bagara , Jaunarentzat gara hiltzen . Beraz , nahiz bizi nahiz hil , Jaunarenak gara .
PRED:	If we live in the Lord , we are alive . If we are dead , we are dead to the Lord . If we die , we are dead .
GOLD:	If we live , it 's to honor the Lord . And if we die , it 's to honor the Lord . So whether we live or die , we belong to the Lord .

ID:	4051
INPUT:	Jainkoak esan zion : « Jakob duzu izena . Baina ez zara aurrerantze<unk> kob deituko : Israel izango duzu izen » . Eta Israel izena eman ondoren ,
PRED:	God said to Jacob , “ You are not called Jacob , but you will not be called Jacob , but you will be called Israel . ”
GOLD:	saying , “ Your name is Jacob , but you will not be called Jacob any longer . From now on your name will be Israel . ” So God renamed him Israel .

ID:	4052
INPUT:	« Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak emango dizuen lurraldeko hiriren batean zuen herritarren bat behartsu bada , ez izan bihozgabe , ez laguntzarik ukatu senide behartsuari ;
PRED:	“ If the Lord your God will give you a poor people in your land , you must not be poor or poor or poor .
GOLD:	“ But if there are any poor Israelites in your towns when you arrive in the land the Lord your God is giving you , do not be hard-hearted or tightfisted toward them .

ID:	4053
INPUT:	Zerahengandik zerahtarrak eta Saulengandik <unk> darrak .
PRED:	from the tribe of the Amorites , the family of Saul , the family of Saul , the family of Saul .
GOLD:	The Zoharite clan , named after their ancestor Zohar.The Shaulite clan , named after their ancestor Shaul .

ID:	4054
INPUT:	Nola urrezko eraztuna txerriaren muturrean , hala da zentzugabeko emakume ederra .
PRED:	How can a man put a gold rings in the well of a fool ?
GOLD:	A beautiful woman who lacks discretionis like a gold ring in a pig 's snout .

ID:	4055
INPUT:	Jainkoarengandikoak badira , berriz , ezin izango dituzue desegin . Ez dakizuela gerta Jainkoarekin borrokan aritzea ! » Haren iritzia onartu zuten .
PRED:	But if God 's sons are from God , you will not be destroyed . You will not be able to fight with God . They did n't know that it was written in his book . ”
GOLD:	But if it is from God , you will not be able to overthrow them . You may even find yourselves fighting against God ! ”

ID:	4056
INPUT:	Gomerren semeak , Axkenaz , Rifat eta Togarma .
PRED:	These are the sons of Gershon : Ashdod , Ashdod , and Kelita .
GOLD:	The descendants of Gomer were Ashkenaz , Riphath , and Togarmah .

ID:	4057
INPUT:	Jesusek , ikustean , esan zien : — Joan eta azaldu apaizengana . Bidean zihoazela , garbi gelditu ziren .
PRED:	When Jesus saw them , he said to them , “ Go to the priest and judge the priest . When they were still clean , they were clean . ”
GOLD:	He looked at them and said , “ Go show yourselves to the priests . ” And as they went , they were cleansed of their leprosy .

ID:	4058
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Zoaz etxera , semea onik duzu eta . Gizonak sinetsi egin zuen Jesusek esandakoa eta joan egin zen .
PRED:	Jesus said to him , “ Go home , and you have a son . ” And the man believed what Jesus had said , and went .
GOLD:	Then Jesus told him , “ Go back home . Your son will live ! ” And the man believed what Jesus said and started home .

ID:	4059
INPUT:	Bai ugariak , Jauna , zuk eginak ! Denak jakinduriaz egin dituzu , zure sorkariz betea da lurra .
PRED:	O Lord , thou hast made many things ; thou hast made all the things of thy wisdom , and the earth is thy sin .
GOLD:	O Lord , what a variety of things you have made ! In wisdom you have made them all.The earth is full of your creatures .

ID:	4060
INPUT:	Han zeuen jokabideaz oroituko zarete , zeuen buruak kutsatu zituzten egintza txar guztiez ; orduan , zeuen buruaren nazka sentituko duzue egindako gaiztakeria guztiengatik .
PRED:	And thou shalt remember thy ways , and thou shalt remember all the evil things that thou hast done , and thou shalt be healed for all the evil that thou hast done .
GOLD:	You will look back on all the ways you defiled yourselves and will hate yourselves because of the evil you have done .

ID:	4061
INPUT:	Nik , Jainko Jaunak , zin dagit neure biziarengatik , ahalmen handiz , esku indartsuz eta neure sumina isuriz erreinatuko dudala zuen gain .
PRED:	As surely as I live , saith the Lord God , I live by my power , and with a strong hand , and with a strong hand , and with a strong hand ,
GOLD:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , I will rule over you with an iron fist in great anger and with awesome power .

ID:	4062
INPUT:	piku-opil puska bat eta bi mahaspasa-mordo ere eman zizkioten . Jan zituen eta indarrak hartu , hiru gau eta hiru egun ogirik jan gabe eta urik edan gabe baitzegoen .
PRED:	And they took two loaves of bread , and gave them to drink , and gave them to eat , and took the strength , and eat it three days , and did not eat it .
GOLD:	They also gave him part of a fig cake and two clusters of raisins , for he had n't had anything to eat or drink for three days and nights . Before long his strength returned .

ID:	4063
INPUT:	Joramek mugaz beste aldera jo zuen bere buruzagiekin eta guda-gurdi guztiekin . Gauez jaiki eta garaitu egin zituen setiatua zeukaten edomdarrak eta hauen guda-gurdien buruzagiak .
PRED:	And he went to the other side of the other side of his chariots , and all his chariots , and rose up in the night ; and he rose up , and smote the princes of Edom , and the princes of the chariots .
GOLD:	So Jehoram went out with his full army and all his chariots . The Edomites surrounded him and his chariot commanders , but he went out at night and attacked them under cover of darkness .

ID:	4064
INPUT:	Hauek dira Esauren , hots , Edomen ondorengoak .
PRED:	These are the sons of Esau : the sons of Esau , the sons of Esau .
GOLD:	This is the account of the descendants of Esau ( also known as Edom ) .

ID:	4065
INPUT:	Itzul zaitez , Israel , zeure Jainko Jaunarengana , bekatuan estropezu egin baituzu .
PRED:	Return to the Lord your God , Israel , for you have sinned .
GOLD:	Bring your confessions , and return to the Lord.Say to him , “ Forgive all our sins and graciously receive us , so that we may offer you our praises .

ID:	4066
INPUT:	Amaitu ote erabat haren maitasuna ? Bukatu ote betiko haren agintzaria ?
PRED:	Will he love his love forever ? Will he remember his commands forever ?
GOLD:	Has God forgotten to be gracious ? Has he slammed the door on his compassion ? Interlude

ID:	4067
INPUT:	« Abia zaitez hemendik , zoaz ekialderantz eta gorde zaitez Jordan ibaiaz beste aldera dagoen Kerit erreka inguruan .
PRED:	“ Get up , go up to the east side of the Jordan , and go on the east side of the Jordan .
GOLD:	“ Go to the east and hide by Kerith Brook , near where it enters the Jordan River .

ID:	4068
INPUT:	Eutsi niri , zeuk hitzeman bezala , eta biziko naiz ; ez dakidala neure esperantza huts gerta .
PRED:	Be careful , as thou hast said , and I will live ; I will not be put to shame .
GOLD:	Lord , sustain me as you promised , that I may live ! Do not let my hope be crushed .

ID:	4069
INPUT:	« Bidal itzazu gizaseme batzuk israeldarrei ematen diedan Kanaan lurraldea ikertzera . Bidali leinu bakoitzetik gizaseme bana , israeldarren arduradunen artetik aukeraturik » .
PRED:	“ Send some men to go to the land of Canaan , and send them out of the land of Canaan , and send them out of each tribe of the tribes of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ Send out men to explore the land of Canaan , the land I am giving to the Israelites . Send one leader from each of the twelve ancestral tribes . ”

ID:	4070
INPUT:	Gau hartan Jauna agertu zitzaion Salomoni eta esan zion : — Eskatu nahi duzuna ; emango dizut .
PRED:	And it came to pass in that night , that the Lord appeared unto Solomon , and said unto him , I will give thee .
GOLD:	That night God appeared to Solomon and said , “ What do you want ? Ask , and I will give it to you ! ”

ID:	4071
INPUT:	Moabeko lautadan , Jordan ondoan etxolatu ziren , Bet-Jeximotetik Abel-Xi<unk> bitartean .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the valley of Moab , that is in the valley of Moab , in the valley of Moab .
GOLD:	Along the Jordan River they camped from Beth-jeshimoth as far as the meadows of Acacia on the plains of Moab .

ID:	4072
INPUT:	Misiako mugara iritsi zirenean , Bitiniarantz jo nahi izan zuten , baina Jesusen Espirituak ez zien utzi .
PRED:	And when they came to Antioch , they went to Antioch , but the Spirit would not leave them .
GOLD:	Then coming to the borders of Mysia , they headed north for the province of Bithynia , but again the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them to go there .

ID:	4073
INPUT:	Honela esan zion Boozek : — Ekarri zeure soingainekoa eta zabaldu . Hala egin zuen Rutek , eta Boozek hogeiren bat kilo garagar bota zizkion eta bizkarrean hartzen lagundu . Honela , herrira itzuli zen Rut bere zamarekin .
PRED:	Then Boaz said to Boaz , “ Take your robe , and spread it on her . Then Boaz took her back to her , and she returned to her own land .
GOLD:	Then Boaz said to her , “ Bring your cloak and spread it out . ” He measured six scoops of barley into the cloak and placed it on her back . Then he returned to the town .

ID:	4074
INPUT:	Hiramek emanak zizkion Salomoni lau tona inguru urre .
PRED:	And Solomon gave to Solomon four hundred cubits round about .
GOLD:	Nevertheless , Hiram paid Solomon 9,000 pounds of gold .

ID:	4075
INPUT:	Behartsuarena
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Procedures for the Guilt Offering

ID:	4076
INPUT:	Herria begira zegoen . Agintariek , berriz , Jesusi burla egiten zioten , esanez : « Besteak salbatu ditik ; salba dezala bere burua , Jainkoaren Mesias , hautatua , baldin bada » .
PRED:	And the people looked at him . But the Jews said to him , “ If others saved others , let them be saved , let them be saved , just as the Messiah is the Messiah . ”
GOLD:	The crowd watched and the leaders scoffed . “ He saved others , ” they said , “ let him save himself if he is really God 's Messiah , the Chosen One . ”

ID:	4077
INPUT:	Gebal , Amon eta Amalekek , filistear eta tiroarrek .
PRED:	Elioenai , Jozabad , and the Philistines , and the Philistines .
GOLD:	Assyria has joined them , too , and is allied with the descendants of Lot.Interlude

ID:	4078
INPUT:	Jaiki zaitez , irten eta gogoberotu zeure gudariak . Hara , Jaunarengatik zin degizut : ateratzen ez bazara , ez da inor ere geldituko zurekin gaur gauean ; orduan , zeure bizitza osoan ikusi izan dituzunak baino gorriagoak ikusi beharko dituzu .
PRED:	Arise , go up and see your soldiers , and remember what you have done . But if you do n't go out with the Lord , you will not be left with you today . Then you will see all the days you have seen .
GOLD:	So the king went out and took his seat at the town gate , and as the news spread throughout the town that he was there , everyone went to him.Meanwhile , the Israelites who had supported Absalom fled to their homes .

ID:	4079
INPUT:	« Beren fruituetatik antzemango diezue »
PRED:	“ You will be like the fruit of their fruit . ”
GOLD:	Building on a Solid Foundation

ID:	4080
INPUT:	Salomonek Roboam ; Roboamek Abia ; Abiak Asaf ;
PRED:	Solomon was the father of Rehoboam , the father of Abiathar , the father of Abiathar .
GOLD:	Solomon was the father of Rehoboam.Rehoboam was the father of Abijah.Abijah was the father of Asa .

ID:	4081
INPUT:	Ez dute Jaunaren lurraldeanbizitzerik izango : Efraim Egiptora itzuliko da , eta janari kutsatuakjango dituzte Asirian .
PRED:	They will not live in the land of the Lord ; Ephraim will return to Egypt , and they will eat their food in Assyria .
GOLD:	You may no longer stay here in the Lord 's land.Instead , you will return to Egypt , and in Assyria you will eat foodthat is ceremonially unclean .

ID:	4082
INPUT:	Gero , Saul kendu eta David jarri zuen errege , eta aitorpen hau egin zuen honetaz : “ David , Jeseren semea , aurkitu dut neure gogoko gizon ; nik nahi guztia egingo du honek ” .
PRED:	Then Saul took David away from him and followed him , saying , “ David son of Jesse , I have found all that I want to do . ”
GOLD:	But God removed Saul and replaced him with David , a man about whom God said , ‘ I have found David son of Jesse , a man after my own heart . He will do everything I want him to do . '

ID:	4083
INPUT:	Zerua Jaunarena da ; lurra , berriz , gizakien esku utzi du .
PRED:	The Lord is the heavens , but he has delivered them into the hand of men .
GOLD:	The heavens belong to the Lord , but he has given the earth to all humanity .

ID:	4084
INPUT:	eta bi litro ardo isur-oparitzat , eta Jaunak atseginez onartuko du oparia .
PRED:	And he shall offer a drink offering for a drink offering , and he shall offer it to the Lord .
GOLD:	and give a third of a gallon of wine as a liquid offering . This will be a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	4085
INPUT:	Larunbatero , betierean , ezarriko dituzte Jaunaren aurrean . Betiko betebeharra izango dute hau israeldarrek .
PRED:	And the children of Israel shall set them in the sight of the Lord for ever . And the children of Israel shall be for ever .
GOLD:	Every Sabbath day this bread must be laid out before the Lord as a gift from the Israelites ; it is an ongoing expression of the eternal covenant .

ID:	4086
INPUT:	Fededunen aldeko diru-laguntzari buruz ez duzue nik gehiago idatzi beharrik .
PRED:	By faith you have not been written in faith .
GOLD:	I really do n't need to write to you about this ministry of giving for the believers in Jerusalem .

ID:	4087
INPUT:	Ahoa bai , eta hitzik ez dute ; begiak bai , eta ikusten ez ;
PRED:	They speak , and they do not speak ; they see , and they do not see .
GOLD:	They have mouths but can not speak , and eyes but can not see .

ID:	4088
INPUT:	Gainerako hilak ez ziren bizira itzuli , harik eta mila urteak bete arte . Hau lehen piztuera da .
PRED:	The rest of the dead did not return to life until the last year . This is the first month .
GOLD:	This is the first resurrection . ( The rest of the dead did not come back to life until the thousand years had ended . )

ID:	4089
INPUT:	Orduan , honela hitz egin zion Jaunak Jeremiasi :
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to Jeremiah , saying ,
GOLD:	So the Lord gave them this message through Jeremiah :

ID:	4090
INPUT:	Herriaren buruzagiak : Pa<unk> , Pahat-Mohab , Elam , Zatu , Bani ,
PRED:	The princes of the sons of the sons of the children of Israel : Elioenai , Elioenai , Elioenai , Jozabad ,
GOLD:	Bunni , Azgad , Bebai ,

ID:	4091
INPUT:	Esan duzuen hori ez dizue inork ere onartuko , zeren eta , « nolako zatia borrokara doanak , halakoa tresneria zaindu duenak . Berdin hartuko dute denek » .
PRED:	This is what you have said , “ No one will accept it , for the battle is like the war , and all the vessels of the field will be taken . ”
GOLD:	Who will listen when you talk like this ? We share and share alike — those who go to battle and those who guard the equipment . ”

ID:	4092
INPUT:	Oi Jainko , eraberri gaitzazu , erakutsi guri aurpegi argia , salba gaitezen !
PRED:	You are my God , and you are my God , and you are my God , and you are my God .
GOLD:	O Lord God of Heaven 's Armies , how long will you be angry with our prayers ?

ID:	4093
INPUT:	izan ere , kanporatu egingo dituzte gaizkileak ; herrialdeaz jabetuko dira , ordea , Jaunaz fio direnak .
PRED:	For the wicked shall rejoice in the land ; but they shall inherit the land , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	For the wicked will be destroyed , but those who trust in the Lord will possess the land .

ID:	4094
INPUT:	Labore-oparia
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Procedures for the Grain Offering

ID:	4095
INPUT:	Gauza bera gertatzen da musika-tresnekin ere , txirula edota zitararekin , adibidez : notak argi eta garbi ematen ez badituzte , nola jakin zer jotzen duten ?
PRED:	This is the thing that has been done in the beginning , and with the blood , and with the blood ; if they do not know what they do , how can they do ?
GOLD:	Even lifeless instruments like the flute or the harp must play the notes clearly , or no one will recognize the melody .

ID:	4096
INPUT:	Faraoiak , orduan : — Bai , eta Jauna izan dezazuela lagun ! Baina zuen haur eta guzti joaten utziko dizuedala uste al duzue ? Ez horixe ! Argi dago asmo txarretan zabiltzatela .
PRED:	Pharaoh said to them , “ Yes , the Lord will be with you . But you will let me go and leave all your children and all your children . Do n't you think that you are evil ? ”
GOLD:	Pharaoh retorted , “ The Lord will certainly need to be with you if I let you take your little ones ! I can see through your evil plan .

ID:	4097
INPUT:	Danielen lagunak Jainkoarekiko leial
PRED:	David and Daniel
GOLD:	The Blazing Furnace

ID:	4098
INPUT:	Horiek dira Sinai mendian Jaunak Moisesen bidez israeldarrei eman zizkien lege , erabaki eta irakaspenak , beraren eta israeldarren arteko harremanak zehazteko .
PRED:	These are the law which the Lord gave to the children of Israel in Mount Sinai , to keep the statutes , and the statutes , and the statutes , and the law of the children of Israel .
GOLD:	These are the decrees , regulations , and instructions that the Lord gave through Moses on Mount Sinai as evidence of the relationship between himself and the Israelites .

ID:	4099
INPUT:	Ardoak iluntzen ditu haren begiak , esneak zuritzen haren hortzak !
PRED:	His eyes are dark , and his eyes are under his feet .
GOLD:	His eyes are darker than wine , and his teeth are whiter than milk .

ID:	4100
INPUT:	Baina Egiptoko aztiek , beren aztikeriez baliaturik , gauza bera egin ahal izan zutenez gero , faraoiak bere teman jarraitu zuen eta ez zien Moisesi eta Aaroni jaramonik egin , Jaunak esan bezala .
PRED:	But all the Egyptians did not obey their wickedness , so that they could not listen to all the things that the king had done to Moses and Aaron , as the Lord had said .
GOLD:	But again the magicians of Egypt used their magic , and they , too , turned water into blood . So Pharaoh 's heart remained hard . He refused to listen to Moses and Aaron , just as the Lord had predicted .

ID:	4101
INPUT:	Egunero esan eta esan ari zitzaion arren , Josek ez zion onartu berarekin oheratzea .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the day , that he spake unto him , and said unto him , It shall not be with him .
GOLD:	She kept putting pressure on Joseph day after day , but he refused to sleep with her , and he kept out of her way as much as possible .

ID:	4102
INPUT:	Hizketa arrotzez mintzatzea , beraz , sinesgogorrentzat da seinale , ez sinestedunentzat ; profeta bezala hitz egitea , berriz , ez da sinesgogorrentzat , sinestedunentzat baizik .
PRED:	So it is a sign to those who do not believe , but to those who do not believe , but to those who believe , but to those who believe .
GOLD:	So you see that speaking in tongues is a sign , not for believers , but for unbelievers . Prophecy , however , is for the benefit of believers , not unbelievers .

ID:	4103
INPUT:	Judako errege Joaxek , ordea , bere aurretik Judan errege izaniko Josafat , Joram eta Akaziasek Jaunari sagaraturiko eskaintza guztiak Siriako errege Hazaeli igorri zizkion , baita Joaxek berak egindakoak eta Jaunaren etxeko nahiz erregearen jauregiko altxortegian zegoen urre guztia ere . Orduan , Hazaelek alde egin zuen Jerusalemdik .
PRED:	But Jehoshaphat king of Judah sent Jehoshaphat king of Judah , and all the offerings that he had offered to the Lord , and all the things that he had dedicated to the Lord , and in the house of the Lord , and in the house of the Lord , and in the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Joash 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .

ID:	4104
INPUT:	Akabek Jezabeli adierazi zion Eliasek egin zuen guztia eta Baalen profetak oro ezpataz hilarazi zituela .
PRED:	So Elijah told him everything Elijah had told him , and he killed all the prophets of Baal by the sword .
GOLD:	When Ahab got home , he told Jezebel everything Elijah had done , including the way he had killed all the prophets of Baal .

ID:	4105
INPUT:	Tenpluaren behea ere , nahiz barnean nahiz kanpoan , urrez estali zuen .
PRED:	He covered the temple with gold and gold .
GOLD:	He overlaid the floor in both rooms with gold .

ID:	4106
INPUT:	Kristau-bizitza jentilen artean
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Respecting People in Authority

ID:	4107
INPUT:	Eskuzabala bedeinkatua izango dabere ogia behartsuarekin banatzeagatik .
PRED:	The blessing of the poor will be blessed because of the poor .
GOLD:	Blessed are those who are generous , because they feed the poor .

ID:	4108
INPUT:	Gerora , beste gatazka bat izan zen God hirian filistearren kontra . Huxako Sibe<unk> hil egin zuen <unk> , refatarren ondorengoa hau ere .
PRED:	And there was another battle against the Philistines in the city of the Philistines ; and he slew him , the son of Shealtiel .
GOLD:	After this , there was another battle against the Philistines at Gob . As they fought , Sibbecai from Hushah killed Saph , another descendant of the giants .

ID:	4109
INPUT:	hartzaileak Jaunaren izenean zin egingo dio jabeari , berari utzitakoa ez duela ukitu aitortuz . Jabeak haren zin-hitza onartuko du , eta hark ez du ordaindu beharrik izango .
PRED:	And when the thief shall not eat it in the name of the Lord , he shall not touch it ; and he shall receive his word , and he shall not pay it .
GOLD:	“ Now suppose someone leaves a donkey , ox , sheep , or any other animal with a neighbor for safekeeping , but it dies or is injured or is taken away , and no one sees what happened .

ID:	4110
INPUT:	eta bere senarra utzi eta beste bat hartzen duen emakumeak adulterio egiten du era berean .
PRED:	And she shall leave her husband and her husband , and she shall commit adultery in her .
GOLD:	And if a woman divorces her husband and marries someone else , she commits adultery . ”

ID:	4111
INPUT:	Horrela zaintzen du hilobian eror ez dadin , heriotzaren muga pasa ez dezan .
PRED:	so that he may not be put to death , lest he be put to death .
GOLD:	He protects them from the grave , from crossing over the river of death .

ID:	4112
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jainkoa Moisesi : « Neu naiz Jauna !
PRED:	And God said unto Moses , I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And God said to Moses , “ I am Yahweh — ‘ the Lord . '

ID:	4113
INPUT:	Oinetaraino makurtuz , esan zion : « Neurea , bai , neurea dut errua , jauna ! Uztazu , otoi , mintzatzen eta entzun zeure mirabe honen hitzak .
PRED:	He fell down to his feet and said , “ My lord , my lord , my lord , my lord , my lord , hear my voice , and hear your words . ”
GOLD:	She fell at his feet and said , “ I accept all blame in this matter , my lord . Please listen to what I have to say .

ID:	4114
INPUT:	Zintzoa estuasunetik atera duteeta gaiztoa sartu da haren lekura .
PRED:	The righteous will come out of the righteous , and the wicked will go into his place .
GOLD:	The godly are rescued from trouble , and it falls on the wicked instead .

ID:	4115
INPUT:	Jefte , Efraimen leinuaren kontra
PRED:	Jephthah and Manasseh
GOLD:	Ephraim Fights with Jephthah

ID:	4116
INPUT:	« Badut oraindik hamaika gauza esateko , baina oraingoz ez zarete gauza ondo ulertzeko .
PRED:	But now I say to you , but now you are not able to understand these things .
GOLD:	“ There is so much more I want to tell you , but you ca n't bear it now .

ID:	4117
INPUT:	Talentuen parabola
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Parable of the Three Servants

ID:	4118
INPUT:	Gosea bidaliko dut zuen aurka , eta seme-alabarik gabe utziko zaituzteten basapiztiak ; izurria eta hilketak izango dituzue , eta gerra sorraraziko dut zuen aurka . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	I will send famine against you , and you will not leave your sons , and the birds of the field , and the bones of the field will die , and I will bring you up against you , ” declares the Lord .
GOLD:	And along with the famine , wild animals will attack you and rob you of your children . Disease and war will stalk your land , and I will bring the sword of the enemy against you . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	4119
INPUT:	Eta , esan ere , esan nien handiki , agintari eta herriko gainerako jendeari : « Lana handia eta zabala dugulako , harresi gainean sakabanatuta gabiltza , bata bestearengandik urrun .
PRED:	And I said unto them , I said unto the people of the land , and to the people of the land , saying , The great one is great and great , and a great multitude , and a great multitude , and a far away from him .
GOLD:	So I placed armed guards behind the lowest parts of the wall in the exposed areas . I stationed the people to stand guard by families , armed with swords , spears , and bows .

ID:	4120
INPUT:	Inola ere ez ! Hala balitz , nola epai lezake Jainkoak mundua ?
PRED:	How can God do not do it ? How can God judge the world ?
GOLD:	Of course not ! If God were not entirely fair , how would he be qualified to judge the world ?

ID:	4121
INPUT:	« Ez eraman urrerik , ez zilarrik , ez dirurik gerrikoan ,
PRED:	“ Do n't bring gold or gold or silver or gold ,
GOLD:	“ Do n't take any money in your money belts — no gold , silver , or even copper coins .

ID:	4122
INPUT:	Hogeita hamar urte zituen Davidek errege izaten hasi zenean , eta berrogei urtez izan zen errege .
PRED:	And David was thirty years old when he began to reign , and he reigned forty years .
GOLD:	David was thirty years old when he began to reign , and he reigned forty years in all .

ID:	4123
INPUT:	Orduan , berarekin zintzo eztabaidatueta behin betiko irabaziko nuke auzia .
PRED:	Then I will judge the judgment with him , and I will judge him forever .
GOLD:	Honest people can reason with him , so I would be forever acquitted by my judge .

ID:	4124
INPUT:	Burdina ihia bezalakoa da harentzat , brontzea egur ustela .
PRED:	He is like iron , and he is like bronze , and he is bronze .
GOLD:	Lightning leaps from its mouth ; flames of fire flash out .

ID:	4125
INPUT:	Abner eta beronen gizonak gau osoz ibili ziren Araba ibarrean barna ; Jordan ibaia igaro eta , Bi<unk> osoa zeharkaturik , Mahanaimera heldu ziren .
PRED:	Abner and his men went into the valley of the Jordan , and they crossed over the Jordan River , and they came to Kadesh .
GOLD:	All that night Abner and his men retreated through the Jordan Valley . They crossed the Jordan River , traveling all through the morning , and did n't stop until they arrived at Mahanaim .

ID:	4126
INPUT:	Lebik , dena utzirik , zutitu eta jarraitu egin zion .
PRED:	And he left all , and followed him , and followed him .
GOLD:	So Levi got up , left everything , and followed him .

ID:	4127
INPUT:	Harresiaren sagarapen-jaia
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Dedication of Jerusalem 's Wall

ID:	4128
INPUT:	Erakutsi guri , Jauna , zeure maitasuna , eman zeure salbamena !
PRED:	O Lord , show me your mercy , and save me from your salvation .
GOLD:	I listen carefully to what God the Lord is saying , for he speaks peace to his faithful people.But let them not return to their foolish ways .

ID:	4129
INPUT:	Profeta guztiek testigantza hau egiten dute hartaz : harengan sinets dezaten guztiek bekatuen barkamena hartuko dutela beraren bitartez » .
PRED:	All the prophets speak about him , so that all who believe in him may be forgiven by their sins . ”
GOLD:	He is the one all the prophets testified about , saying that everyone who believes in him will have their sins forgiven through his name . ”

ID:	4130
INPUT:	Apaizen lurrak bakarrik utzi zituen erosi gabe , haien alde lege bat baitzuen faraoiak emana ; honek ematen zien jateko behar zutena . Honengatik , ez zuten beren lurrak saldu beharrik izan .
PRED:	And the priest left the land without the king , for he had given them a law for their sake ; and the land was given to them , and their land was not sold .
GOLD:	The only land he did not buy was the land belonging to the priests . They received an allotment of food directly from Pharaoh , so they did n't need to sell their land .

ID:	4131
INPUT:	Judas irten zenean , esan zien Jesusek : « Oraintxe azaltzen da Gizonaren Semearen aintza , eta haren bidez Jainkoarena .
PRED:	And when he went out , he said unto them , The Son of Man is now now now , and the glory of God is in him .
GOLD:	As soon as Judas left the room , Jesus said , “ The time has come for the Son of Man to enter into his glory , and God will be glorified because of him .

ID:	4132
INPUT:	Berriro lokartu eta amets egin zuen . Gerri beretik , zazpi galburu aletsu eta mardul sortu ziren ;
PRED:	And he brought again again , and saw a dream , and there was a dream , and there were seven heads of heads , and they saw it .
GOLD:	But he fell asleep again and had a second dream . This time he saw seven heads of grain , plump and beautiful , growing on a single stalk .

ID:	4133
INPUT:	Hala , Loten bi alabak haurdun gelditu ziren beren aitarengandik .
PRED:	So Lot 's two daughters were born to their father .
GOLD:	As a result , both of Lot 's daughters became pregnant by their own father .

ID:	4134
INPUT:	gaizkileak , berriz , jo eta garbitu egingo dituzte mundutik , eta maltzurrak desagerrarazi bertatik .
PRED:	But the wicked will be clean , and they will be clean from the earth , and they will be destroyed from the evil .
GOLD:	But the wicked will be removed from the land , and the treacherous will be uprooted .

ID:	4135
INPUT:	« Ozeanoa edo Itsas Mamua ote naizzaintzailea jar diezadazun ?
PRED:	“ How can I know that I have seen the sea and the sea ?
GOLD:	Am I a sea monster or a dragonthat you must place me under guard ?

ID:	4136
INPUT:	Hirurak inguruan , Jesusek oihu handiz esan zuen : « Eli , Eli , lema sabaktani ? » ( Hau da : « Ene Jainko , ene Jainko , zergatik utzi nauzu ? » ) .
PRED:	Then Jesus cried out with a loud voice , “ Elijah , are your mother ? ” “ My God , why have you left me ? ”
GOLD:	At about three o'clock , Jesus called out with a loud voice , which means “ My God , my God , why have you abandoned me ? ”

ID:	4137
INPUT:	Asak eta beronen gudarosteak aurrean eraman zituzten Gerar-eraino . Ez zen bizirik bat ere gelditu ; denak erori ziren eta hondatu Jaunaren eta beronen gudarostearen aurrean . Asaren gizonek harrapakin asko eskuratu zuten .
PRED:	So Asa and all his army carried him to Kadesh . There was no one left alive . There was no one left in the presence of the Lord , and all the people who were left in front of the Lord .
GOLD:	So the Lord defeated the Ethiopians in the presence of Asa and the army of Judah , and the enemy fled .

ID:	4138
INPUT:	« Ba al dakizu noiz erditzen diren basahuntzak ? Ikusi al dituzu oreinak umea egiten ?
PRED:	“ Do you know what the wild goat are you doing ? Do you see the young goat ?
GOLD:	“ Do you know when the wild goats give birth ? Have you watched as deer are born in the wild ?

ID:	4139
INPUT:	« Txarra , txarra » esaten du erosleak ; baina hor doa gero , pozik asko egindako erosketaz .
PRED:	He said to them , “ It is good and bad ; it is good , but it is good , and there is many mighty works . ”
GOLD:	The buyer haggles over the price , saying , “ It 's worthless , ” then brags about getting a bargain !

ID:	4140
INPUT:	ez gogortu bihotzak , errebelde izan zinetenean bezala , tentaldi-egunean basamortuan bezala .
PRED:	Do n't remember them as when they were guilty , as they were in the wilderness .
GOLD:	do n't harden your heartsas Israel did when they rebelled , when they tested me in the wilderness .

ID:	4141
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Moisesi :
PRED:	And Jehovah spake unto Moses , saying ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	4142
INPUT:	Jaunak lasaitasuna eman zien beren lur-muga osoan , beraien arbasoei zin egin bezala . Etsaietako batek ere ezin izan zien aurre egin , Jaunak eskura eman baitzizkien guztiak .
PRED:	The Lord gave them love in all their land , as their fathers had swore to their fathers . There was no one like their enemies , because the Lord had given them into their hand .
GOLD:	And the Lord gave them rest on every side , just as he had solemnly promised their ancestors . None of their enemies could stand against them , for the Lord helped them conquer all their enemies .

ID:	4143
INPUT:	Zahatoko ura ahitu zitzaionean , zuhaitz baten azpian utzi zuen haurra
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the waters came to pass , that the child was buried in a tree , and the child under a green tree .
GOLD:	When the water was gone , she put the boy in the shade of a bush .

ID:	4144
INPUT:	Eta ase zirenean , esan zien Jesusek ikasleei : « Bil itzazue hondarrak , ezer gal ez dadin » .
PRED:	When they were hungry , Jesus said to his disciples , “ Call yourselves , so that it may not be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	After everyone was full , Jesus told his disciples , “ Now gather the leftovers , so that nothing is wasted . ”

ID:	4145
INPUT:	« Hartzazu , beraz , onez zeure zerbitzari honen eskaria eta zeure herri Israelen otoitza ; entzun iezaiezu dei eginen dizuten bakoitzean .
PRED:	“ Take this prayer and pray for your servant , and pray to your people Israel , and pray to them in a loud voice .
GOLD:	“ May your eyes be open to my requests and to the requests of your people Israel . May you hear and answer them whenever they cry out to you .

ID:	4146
INPUT:	Hona hemen Jainkoaren tenplua eraikitzeko Salomonek erabaki zituen neurriak : hogeita hamar metro luze eta hamar metro zabal .
PRED:	This is the law that Solomon built for the temple of God , the length of the house of God , the breadth of the house of God , the breadth of the house of the Lord , the breadth of the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	These are the dimensions Solomon used for the foundation of the Temple of God ( using the old standard of measurement ) . It was 90 feet long and 30 feet wide .

ID:	4147
INPUT:	Bildotsak hirugarren zigilua ireki zuenean , hirugarren izakiak hau esaten zuela entzun nuen : « Zatoz » . Begiratu eta zaldi beltz bat ikusi nuen . Haren gainekoak balantza bat zuen eskuan ,
PRED:	When the Lamb opened the third seal , I heard the third living creatures saying , “ Come ! Come ! ” So I looked at his hand , and I looked at his hand .
GOLD:	When the Lamb broke the third seal , I heard the third living being say , “ Come ! ” I looked up and saw a black horse , and its rider was holding a pair of scales in his hand .

ID:	4148
INPUT:	eta morroia bidaliko dut , esanez : “ Hoa eta bila itzak geziak ” . Morroiari “ Hi baino honantzago dituk geziak , har itzak ” esango banio , orduan etor zaitezke , dena bakean izango baita . Ez da arriskurik izango , ala Jauna !
PRED:	and I will send his servant , saying , ‘ This is what the servant says : ‘ You are better than you . ' Then you will say to my servant , ‘ You are better than you . ' But if you do , you will not see the Lord . '
GOLD:	Then I will send a boy to bring the arrows back . If you hear me tell him , ‘ They 're on this side , ' then you will know , as surely as the Lord lives , that all is well , and there is no trouble .

ID:	4149
INPUT:	Jainkoak bedeinkatu eta erruz ugaltzen dira , haien abere-taldeei ez die urritzen uzten .
PRED:	God bless them , and they are multiplied , and they do not leave their flocks .
GOLD:	How he blesses them ! They raise large families there , and their herds of livestock increase .

ID:	4150
INPUT:	Hemendik ere lotsaz irtengo zara , eskuak buruan dituzula . Izan ere , nik , Jaunak , mespretxatu egiten ditutzure konfiantza-euskarriak ; ez duzu horiekin ezer onik lortuko » .
PRED:	You will be ashamed , and you will be ashamed ; for I , the Lord , have rejected your hope , and you will not be ashamed . ”
GOLD:	In despair , you will be led into exilewith your hands on your heads , for the Lord has rejected the nations you trust.They will not help you at all .

ID:	4151
INPUT:	Zazpi egunez , aldarearen garbikuntza-ohikunea egingo da , garbi eta sagaratua geldi dadin .
PRED:	On the seventh day he shall make atonement for the altar seven days , and he shall be clean .
GOLD:	Do this each day for seven days to cleanse and make atonement for the altar , thus setting it apart for holy use .

ID:	4152
INPUT:	Nori egiten diozue barre ? Noren kontra zabaltzen duzue ahoaeta luzatzen mihia ? Ez zarete , bada , zeuek erebekatukume eta sasi-umealdi ?
PRED:	What do you do so ? Why do you prophesy against your mouth ? Why do you not prophesy against your mouth ? Do n't you think that you are guilty of sin and children ?
GOLD:	Whom do you mock , making faces and sticking out your tongues ? You children of sinners and liars !

ID:	4153
INPUT:	Alabaina , hango jendea indartsua da , hango hiriak gotorrak eta izugarri handiak . Gainera , Anak erraldoiaren ondorengoak ere ikusi ditugu .
PRED:	But there is great multitude , great and great cities , and great and great cities , and great and great and great cities , and we saw the children of Ammon .
GOLD:	But the people living there are powerful , and their towns are large and fortified . We even saw giants there , the descendants of Anak !

ID:	4154
INPUT:	Hau dio Jaunak , Jakoben herriaren erregeak : « Aurkeztu zeuen auzia , idolook , ekarri frogak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says to the king of Jacob : “ Take your case , you idols , you idols , and you idols .
GOLD:	“ Present the case for your idols , ” says the Lord . “ Let them show what they can do , ” says the King of Israel .

ID:	4155
INPUT:	Pisu faltsuak , neurgailu faltsuak : biak ditu higuingarri Jaunak .
PRED:	A false man is an abomination , and the Lord is an abomination .
GOLD:	False weights and unequal measures — the Lord detests double standards of every kind .

ID:	4156
INPUT:	Jaunak jakinduriaz oinarritu zuen lurraeta zentzuz ezarri zerua ;
PRED:	The Lord gave wisdom to the earth , and the wise men of the earth were wise .
GOLD:	By wisdom the Lord founded the earth ; by understanding he created the heavens .

ID:	4157
INPUT:	Egiptoko lehen-semeak jo zituen , haren maitasuna betikoa baita .
PRED:	He struck the firstborn of Egypt , for his love endures forever .
GOLD:	Give thanks to him who killed the firstborn of Egypt.His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	4158
INPUT:	Bertan zeudenetariko batzuek esan zieten : « Zer ari zarete hor astakumea askatzen ? »
PRED:	Some of those who were in them said to them , “ What are you doing ? ”
GOLD:	As they were untying it , some bystanders demanded , “ What are you doing , untying that colt ? ”

ID:	4159
INPUT:	Absalomen mutilek , etxe hartara heldurik , galdetu zioten etxekoandreari : — Non dira Ahimaatz eta Jonatan ? Etxekoandreak erantzun : — Alde egin dute hemendik uretara . Ibili ziren bila , baina aurkitzen ez eta Jerusalemera itzuli ziren .
PRED:	When Absalom came to the house of his wife , they asked her , “ Where are they ? ” The wife said to her , “ They have gone away from here , but they did not find him . ”
GOLD:	When Absalom 's men arrived , they asked her , “ Have you seen Ahimaaz and Jonathan ? ” The woman replied , “ They were here , but they crossed over the brook . ” Absalom 's men looked for them without success and returned to Jerusalem .

ID:	4160
INPUT:	Beste hau ere erakutsi zidan Jaunak : horma baten ondoan zegoen bera , eskuan berun-haria zuela .
PRED:	This is what the Lord showed me . He was standing beside it . He was standing beside it . He was standing beside the Sabbath .
GOLD:	Then he showed me another vision . I saw the Lord standing beside a wall that had been built using a plumb line . He was using a plumb line to see if it was still straight .

ID:	4161
INPUT:	Ondoren , Salomon jarri zen bere aita Daviden errege-aulkian eta sendotu egin zuen haren erregetza .
PRED:	Then Solomon stood in the throne of David his father , and his kingdom was healed .
GOLD:	Solomon became king and sat on the throne of David his father , and his kingdom was firmly established .

ID:	4162
INPUT:	Ordutik , apostoluekin batera ibili ohi zen Saulo Jerusalemen , Jaunari buruz ausardiaz hitz eginez .
PRED:	Saul went to Jerusalem with the apostles and spoke to the Lord in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	So Saul stayed with the apostles and went all around Jerusalem with them , preaching boldly in the name of the Lord .

ID:	4163
INPUT:	Binuirenak <unk> ;
PRED:	the sons of Hallohesh , the sons of Hallohesh ,
GOLD:	The family of Bani648

ID:	4164
INPUT:	Lebitarren familiaburuen izenak Kronika liburuetan idatzita daude Eliaxiben seme Johananen garaia arte .
PRED:	The words of the Levites are written in the book of the book of the book of the fathers ' houses , and the days of Jonathan the son of Joseph .
GOLD:	A record of the heads of the Levite families was kept in The Book of History down to the days of Johanan , the grandson of Eliashib .

ID:	4165
INPUT:	Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Barreiaturik egon deneko herrien artetik Israel bilduko dudanean , neure santutasuna agertuko dut nazioen aurrean , eta israeldarrak neure zerbitzari Jakobi eman nion lurraldean biziko dira berriro .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord God says : “ When I gather Israel from among the nations , I will show my holy name to the people of Israel , and they will live in the land which I gave to my servant Jacob .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The people of Israel will again live in their own land , the land I gave my servant Jacob . For I will gather them from the distant lands where I have scattered them . I will reveal to the nations of the world my holiness among my people .

ID:	4166
INPUT:	guregan irauten duen eta betiko gurekin izango den egiarengatik .
PRED:	And he that is in us , and he shall be with us for ever .
GOLD:	because the truth lives in us and will be with us forever .

ID:	4167
INPUT:	Behinola , Zerah etiopiarra Asaren kontra abiatu zen , milioi bat gudari eta hirurehun guda-gurdirekin , eta Marexaraino heldu zen .
PRED:	At that time a thousand men went up against Ahab , and with his chariots , and with his chariots , and his chariots , and came to Beersheba .
GOLD:	King Asa had an army of 300,000 warriors from the tribe of Judah , armed with large shields and spears . He also had an army of 280,000 warriors from the tribe of Benjamin , armed with small shields and bows . Both armies were composed of well-trained fighting men .

ID:	4168
INPUT:	Sar zaitez gero etxean zeure semeekin eta itxi atea . Isuri olioa ontzi guztietara eta , bete ahala , eraman denak bazterrera .
PRED:	Go into your house , and shut the door , and shut the door of your sons , and take all the oil of oil , and let all the vessels be taken away .
GOLD:	Then go into your house with your sons and shut the door behind you . Pour olive oil from your flask into the jars , setting each one aside when it is filled . ”

ID:	4169
INPUT:	eta su-labera botako . Negarra eta hortz-karraska izango da han » .
PRED:	And they shall cast them into the fire , and there shall be weeping and weeping .
GOLD:	throwing the wicked into the fiery furnace , where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth .

ID:	4170
INPUT:	« Horrela ere obeditzen ez badidazue , zazpi bider gogorrago zigortuko zaituztet zeuen bekatuengatik .
PRED:	If you do not listen to me , I will punish you seven times for your sins .
GOLD:	“ And if , in spite of all this , you still disobey me , I will punish you seven times over for your sins .

ID:	4171
INPUT:	ez ditu begiak zuzenengandik kentzen , errege-aulkietan ezartzen ditueta hantxe betiko goraipatzen .
PRED:	He will not take away his eyes from the righteous , and he will sit on his throne forever .
GOLD:	He never takes his eyes off the innocent , but he sets them on thrones with kingsand exalts them forever .

ID:	4172
INPUT:	Eta Jesusek , zuhurki erantzun ziola ikusirik , esan zion : — Ez zaude Jainkoaren erreinutik urruti . Eta harrezkero , ez zen inor galderarik egitera ausartzen .
PRED:	When Jesus saw that he was wise , he said to him , “ You are not far from the kingdom of God . ” And there was no one to ask him .
GOLD:	Realizing how much the man understood , Jesus said to him , “ You are not far from the Kingdom of God . ” And after that , no one dared to ask him any more questions .

ID:	4173
INPUT:	Atsekabetu egin zen David , Jaunak Uza jo eta ebaki zuelako , eta toki hari Pe<unk> -Uza esan zion , hau da , « Uzaren Ebakidura » , eta horrela deritza egundaino .
PRED:	And David sinned , because the Lord had done it , and he said unto him , This place is the place which the Lord hath spoken unto him , that he may help him .
GOLD:	David was angry because the Lord 's anger had burst out against Uzzah . He named that place Perez-uzzah ( which means “ to burst out against Uzzah ” ) , as it is still called today .

ID:	4174
INPUT:	Kristo , betiko salbamenaren iturri ( 10 , <unk> )
PRED:	Jesus is the Good News of eternal life
GOLD:	Christ 's Sacrifice Once for All

ID:	4175
INPUT:	Orduan , adierazpenak egiten zizkidan aingerua aurreratu zen eta bidera zetorkion beste aingeru bati
PRED:	Then the angel who talked with me came to me , and another angel came to him .
GOLD:	Come away , people of Zion , you who are exiled in Babylon ! ”

ID:	4176
INPUT:	Esauren seme Reuelen semeak , berriz , hauek izan ziren : Nahat , Zerah , Xama eta Miza . Hauek izan ziren Esauren emazte Basmaten ondorengoak .
PRED:	The sons of Esau were the sons of Esau . These were the sons of Esau . These are the sons of Esau 's sons . These are the sons of Esau 's wife . These are the sons of Esau .
GOLD:	The descendants of Reuel were Nahath , Zerah , Shammah , and Mizzah . These are the descendants of Esau 's wife Basemath .

ID:	4177
INPUT:	Zein ederrak zure maite-laztanak , ene arreba , ene emaztegaia ! Ardoa baino gozoago dira ! Zure ukenduen usaina lurrin guztiak baino gozoago !
PRED:	How beautiful is your beloved love , my beloved , my sister , my sister , and my wife is better than all the land that has been taken away from you .
GOLD:	Your love delights me , my treasure , my bride.Your love is better than wine , your perfume more fragrant than spices .

ID:	4178
INPUT:	Egin promesak Jaunari , zeuen Jainkoari , eta bete ; haren inguruan bilduok , ekarri emaitzak Jainko beldurgarriari ,
PRED:	You must obey the Lord your God , and you who are around him will be afraid of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	For he breaks the pride of princes , and the kings of the earth fear him .

ID:	4179
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jesu Kristori esker , bizia ematen duen Espirituaren legeak askatu egin zaitu bekatuaren eta heriotzaren legetik .
PRED:	For by the Spirit of Jesus Christ , who has redeemed you from the law of the Spirit , and from the law .
GOLD:	And because you belong to him , the power of the life-giving Spirit has freed you from the power of sin that leads to death .

ID:	4180
INPUT:	Hori izan zen Judaren leinuko senitarteek hartu zuten ondarea .
PRED:	This was the inheritance of the children of Judah according to their families , according to their inheritance .
GOLD:	This was the homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Judah .

ID:	4181
INPUT:	Mendiak argizaria bezala urtzen diraJaunaren aurrean , lur osoaren Jabearen aurrean .
PRED:	As a light in the sight of the Lord , in the sight of all the earth .
GOLD:	The mountains melt like wax before the Lord , before the Lord of all the earth .

ID:	4182
INPUT:	Neuk bilduko ditut bizirik geldituriko neure ardiak , sakabanatu nituen herrialde guztietatik . Beren larreetara ekarriko ditut berriro , hazi egingo dira eta erruz ugalduko .
PRED:	I will gather my sheep , and I will gather them from all the countries of the countries , and I will bring them to their pasture , and they will be multiplied .
GOLD:	But I will gather together the remnant of my flock from the countries where I have driven them . I will bring them back to their own sheepfold , and they will be fruitful and increase in number .

ID:	4183
INPUT:	Horrela , senideok , gure atsekabe eta estualdi guztien artean , adorez beterik utzi gaituzue zeuen sinesmenagatik .
PRED:	So , brothers and sisters , let us be filled with joy , because of your faith .
GOLD:	So we have been greatly encouraged in the midst of our troubles and suffering , dear brothers and sisters , because you have remained strong in your faith .

ID:	4184
INPUT:	Zuei , Jainkoaren Semearengan sinetsi duzuenoi , idatzi dizkizuet gauza hauek , betiko bizia duzuela jakin dezazuen .
PRED:	You believed in the Son of God , and I wrote these things to you , that you may know that you have eternal life .
GOLD:	I have written this to you who believe in the name of the Son of God , so that you may know you have eternal life .

ID:	4185
INPUT:	Baal-Hananen ondoren Hadar , <unk> hirikoa ( Mehetabel izan zuen emazte , Matreden alaba , eta hau Mezahabena ) .
PRED:	And after the days of Cyrus , the daughter of Seth , the daughter of Seth , the daughter of Seth , and the name of his name .
GOLD:	When Baal-hanan son of Acbor died , Hadad became king in his place and ruled from the city of Pau . His wife was Mehetabel , the daughter of Matred and granddaughter of Me-zahab .

ID:	4186
INPUT:	Elbarri bat ekarri zioten , ohatilan etzana . Jesusek , lagun haien sinesmena ikusirik , esan zion elbarriari : — Izan bihotz , seme ! Barkatuak dituzu bekatuak .
PRED:	And they brought one another to him . And when he saw their faith , he said to the congregation , “ Be strong , my son ! You are forgiven . ”
GOLD:	Some people brought to him a paralyzed man on a mat . Seeing their faith , Jesus said to the paralyzed man , “ Be encouraged , my child ! Your sins are forgiven . ”

ID:	4187
INPUT:	jakinik , Jesus Jauna piztu duenak piztu egingo gaituela gu ere Jesusekin eta beronen ondoan ipiniko gaituela zuekin batera .
PRED:	When we know that the Lord Jesus will raise us up , he will raise us up with him and put us on him .
GOLD:	We know that God , who raised the Lord Jesus , will also raise us with Jesus and present us to himself together with you .

ID:	4188
INPUT:	Eufrates ibaiaz mendebaldera , Tifsahetik Gazaraino , Salomonek agintzen zuen ; ibaiaz mendebaldeko errege guztiak haren menpeko ziren , eta bakean bizi zen inguruetako lurralde guztietakoekin .
PRED:	And Solomon sent out all the kings of the Jordan to the River , to the west , and to the west , and to the west , and all the kings of the land round about him .
GOLD:	But now the Lord my God has given me peace on every side ; I have no enemies , and all is well .

ID:	4189
INPUT:	Joan ziren , orduan , morroiak etxeko nagusiari esatera : “ Jauna , ez al zenuen hazi ona erein soroan ? Nondik du , bada , olo gaiztoa ? ”
PRED:	Then his servants went to the house of his master , saying , ‘ Lord , did you not sow the field ? Where did you sow the wicked ? '
GOLD:	“ The farmer 's workers went to him and said , ‘ Sir , the field where you planted that good seed is full of weeds ! Where did they come from ? '

ID:	4190
INPUT:	Eta emaginei beraiei , Jainkoari begirune izan ziotenez gero , ondorengoak eman zizkien .
PRED:	And he feared them , and followed God , and gave them children to their children .
GOLD:	And because the midwives feared God , he gave them families of their own .

ID:	4191
INPUT:	ohol bakoitza bost metro luze eta hirurogeita hamabost zentimetro zabal izango da ;
PRED:	And the length of one hundred cubits , and the breadth thereof shall be five cubits , and the breadth thereof shall be five cubits .
GOLD:	Each frame must be 15 feet high and 27 inches wide ,

ID:	4192
INPUT:	Beste apostolurik ez nuen ikusi , Jaunaren anaia Santiago izan ezik .
PRED:	I saw no other apostles , but the brother of the Lord .
GOLD:	The only other apostle I met at that time was James , the Lord 's brother .

ID:	4193
INPUT:	Basamortuan ere eraiki zituen dorreak , putzu ugari zulatu zuen , abere-talde asko baitzuen Xefela lautadan eta goi-lautadan ; baita nekazariak eta mahastilariak ere mendietan eta alorretan , nekazaritza gogoko baitzuen .
PRED:	And he built houses in the wilderness , and built many cattle in the wilderness , in the valley , in the valley , in the valley , in the valley , and in the valley , and in the hills , and in the hills , and in the hills .
GOLD:	He also constructed forts in the wilderness and dug many water cisterns , because he kept great herds of livestock in the foothills of Judah and on the plains . He was also a man who loved the soil . He had many workers who cared for his farms and vineyards , both on the hillsides and in the fertile valleys .

ID:	4194
INPUT:	eta haren gorpua simaur bihurtuko zela alorrean , Izreelgo landan ; inork ere ezin izango zuela « Hau Jezabel da » esan .
PRED:	and his body , and his flesh , and his flesh , in the field of Jezreel , and no one shall say , This is the word of Jehu .
GOLD:	Her remains will be scattered like dung on the plot of land in Jezreel , so that no one will be able to recognize her . ' ”

ID:	4195
INPUT:	Utz beza gaiztoak bere bidea , gaizkileak bere asmo txarrak . Bihur dadila Jaunarengana , gupidaz hartuko baitu ; bihurtu gure Jainkoarengana , guztiz barkabera baita .
PRED:	Let the wicked turn away from his evil ways , and let the wicked go to the Lord , because he has mercy on our God , because he has turned to our God .
GOLD:	Let the wicked change their waysand banish the very thought of doing wrong.Let them turn to the Lord that he may have mercy on them.Yes , turn to our God , for he will forgive generously .

ID:	4196
INPUT:	Erregeak , epaimahaian esertzean , begiratu hutsez haizatzen du gaiztakeria guztia .
PRED:	When the king is in the table , he sees all the wickedness of the wicked .
GOLD:	When a king sits in judgment , he weighs all the evidence , distinguishing the bad from the good .

ID:	4197
INPUT:	Ondoren , harri-pilo handia ezarri zioten gainean Akani . Han dago oraindik harri-piloa . Horregatik deritza toki hari gaurdaino « Akor ibarra » , hau da , « Ezbehar-ibarra » . Orduan baretu zen Jaunaren haserrea .
PRED:	And they set a stone upon the top of the rock , and there is a stone . Therefore this place is called the valley of the Lord . So the wrath of the Lord was kindled .
GOLD:	They piled a great heap of stones over Achan , which remains to this day . That is why the place has been called the Valley of Trouble ever since . So the Lord was no longer angry .

ID:	4198
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaun ahalguztidunak , Israelgo Jainkoak : « Eskaini nahi adina erre-opari eta sakrifizio eta jan berorien haragia .
PRED:	Thus saith the Lord of hosts , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , and the meat offering and the meat offering .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : “ Take your burnt offerings and your other sacrifices and eat them yourselves !

ID:	4199
INPUT:	« Jauna dela Jainkoa jakin dezazuen ikusarazi zaizue hori guztia : ez da bera besterik .
PRED:	“ When you know that the Lord your God has shown you all these things , it is no other .
GOLD:	“ He showed you these things so you would know that the Lord is God and there is no other .

ID:	4200
INPUT:	Ez zekiten Josek ulertzen ziela , itzultzaile baten bitartez mintzatzen baitzitzaien .
PRED:	And they did not understand , for he spoke to them , for he spoke to them .
GOLD:	Of course , they did n't know that Joseph understood them , for he had been speaking to them through an interpreter .

ID:	4201
INPUT:	Nahastu , Jauna , horien mihi maltzurra . Gogorkeria eta haserrea besterik ez baitut ikusten hirian ,
PRED:	But now , O Lord , I have seen their wickedness , and I have seen no more in the city .
GOLD:	Its walls are patrolled day and night against invaders , but the real danger is wickedness within the city .

ID:	4202
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jaunarenak zeuen Jainkoarenak dira zeru zabalak , lurra eta bertako guztia .
PRED:	For the Lord your God is your God , the heavens and the earth , and all the earth .
GOLD:	“ Look , the highest heavens and the earth and everything in it all belong to the Lord your God .

ID:	4203
INPUT:	Jaunari honako hauek aurkeztuko zaizkio , beraren ohorez erretzeko opari gisa : heste inguru eta gaineko gantza ,
PRED:	He shall offer them to the Lord , and the fat thereof , and the fat thereof , and the fat thereof , and the fat thereof ,
GOLD:	The priest must present part of this offering as a special gift to the Lord . This includes all the fat around the internal organs ,

ID:	4204
INPUT:	Eraiki , bada , hiriak zeuen familientzat eta artegiak artaldeentzat . Baina eutsi emandako hitzari .
PRED:	And thou shalt build thy cities for thy fathers , and the light of thy fathers , and to the flock , and to the flock that I have given thee .
GOLD:	Go ahead and build towns for your families and pens for your flocks , but do everything you have promised . ”

ID:	4205
INPUT:	« Gizonaren Semea , aingeru guztiak lagun dituela , aintzaz beterik etortzean , bere errege-aulkian eseriko da .
PRED:	“ When the Son of Man comes with all the angels , he will sit on his throne .
GOLD:	“ But when the Son of Man comes in his glory , and all the angels with him , then he will sit upon his glorious throne .

ID:	4206
INPUT:	Haiekin batera , berealdiko jende-multzoa zihoan , baita abere-talde handiak ere .
PRED:	And the multitude of the people went out with them , and great multitude , and great multitude .
GOLD:	A rabble of non-Israelites went with them , along with great flocks and herds of livestock .

ID:	4207
INPUT:	Hala egin zuten . Aaronek eskuan zeraman makila luzatu eta lurra jo zuen , eta Egiptoko hauts guztia gizaki eta abereentzat gogaikarri zen eltxo-izurri bihurtu zen .
PRED:	And Aaron took it into his hand , and brought it into the ground , and cast it into the ground , and all the dust of the land of Egypt , and went into the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	And the Lord did just what Moses had predicted . The frogs in the houses , the courtyards , and the fields all died .

ID:	4208
INPUT:	meta ditzala : errugabeak jantziko ditu , eta dirua zintzoak bereganatuko .
PRED:	They will be guilty , and they will wash their clothes , and the righteous will be forgotten .
GOLD:	But the righteous will wear that clothing , and the innocent will divide that money .

ID:	4209
INPUT:	Ez ziren izango beren gurasoen antzeko : jende ez-esaneko eta errebeldea , gizaldi bihotz-arina , Jainkoarekiko barru desleialekoa .
PRED:	And they shall not be like their fathers , as their fathers , and their fathers , and their wickedness , and their heart , and their heart , and their heart , and their heart , and their heart , and their hearts , and their hearts ,
GOLD:	Then they will not be like their ancestors — stubborn , rebellious , and unfaithful , refusing to give their hearts to God .

ID:	4210
INPUT:	Ezin zen jakin zenbat pisatzen zuen Salomonek Jaunaren etxerako eginak ziren bi zutabeen , uraskaren eta orgen brontzeak .
PRED:	And Solomon could not know the word of the Lord , and the vessels of the house of the Lord , and the vessels of the vessels of the house of the Lord , and the vessels of the brass .
GOLD:	The weight of the bronze from the two pillars , the Sea , and the water carts was too great to be measured . These things had been made for the Lord 's Temple in the days of Solomon .

ID:	4211
INPUT:	Badut zuri kalte egiteko ahalbiderik , baina zuen arbasoen Jainkoak esan dit bart : « Ez , gero , esan ezertxo ere Jakobi » .
PRED:	I have seen what was right for you , but God of your fathers said to me , “ Do n't go up to you , and tell Jacob what you have done . ”
GOLD:	I could destroy you , but the God of your father appeared to me last night and warned me , ‘ Leave Jacob alone ! '

ID:	4212
INPUT:	Jendea entzuten ari zitzaiola , Jesusek beste parabola bat kontatu zien , Jerusalemdik hurbil baitzen eta jendeak Jainkoaren erregetza une batetik bestera azalduko zela uste baitzuen :
PRED:	When the crowds heard this , Jesus told them another parable in Jerusalem , because the kingdom of God is near , saying ,
GOLD:	The crowd was listening to everything Jesus said . And because he was nearing Jerusalem , he told them a story to correct the impression that the Kingdom of God would begin right away .

ID:	4213
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Ez beronek , ez beronen gurasoek , ez zuten bekatu egin , baizik eta Jainkoaren egintzak honengan ager daitezen jaio zen itsu .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ No one of his fathers did not sin , but their fathers did not sin , but so that the works of God may be blind .
GOLD:	“ It was not because of his sins or his parents ' sins , ” Jesus answered . “ This happened so the power of God could be seen in him .

ID:	4214
INPUT:	Zilarra labearen erdian urtzen den bezala , hala urtuko zaituztet Jerusalemen erdian ; orduan jakingo duzue ni naizela Jauna , zuen kontra bere sumina isurtzen duena » .
PRED:	And you shall know that I am the Lord , and you shall be in the midst of Jerusalem . And you shall know that I am the Lord , and you shall know that I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	and you will melt like silver in fierce heat . Then you will know that I , the Lord , have poured out my fury on you . ' ”

ID:	4215
INPUT:	Kanta bezate nazioek pozaren pozez , herriak justiziaz gobernatzen baitituzu , nazioak munduan zuk gidatzen .
PRED:	Let the nations rejoice in joy ; for the nations rejoice in thee ; for thou hast made the earth rejoice .
GOLD:	May the nations praise you , O God.Yes , may all the nations praise you .

ID:	4216
INPUT:	Ez nau gehiago ikusiko so egiten zidanak ; zuk begiratzean , ez naiz jadanik munduan izango .
PRED:	They did not see me any more . When you see me , I will not know that I will be in the world .
GOLD:	You see me now , but not for long.You will look for me , but I will be gone .

ID:	4217
INPUT:	Argizagi handiak egin ditu , haren maitasuna betikoa baita ;
PRED:	He made the light of men , for his mercy endures forever .
GOLD:	Give thanks to him who made the heavenly lights — His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	4218
INPUT:	Aditu zuen Jainkoak haien negar-zotina , Abraham , Isaak eta Jakobekin egindako ituna gogora ekarriz .
PRED:	God heard their voice , Isaac , Isaac , Isaac , and Jacob , and Jacob .
GOLD:	God heard their groaning , and he remembered his covenant promise to Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob .

ID:	4219
INPUT:	Orduan , jaiki , bere jantzia urratu eta ilea zeharo moztu zuen Jobek . Gero , lurreraino ahuspeztuz , otoitz egin zuen ,
PRED:	Then Joab got up and tore his clothes and tore his head . Then he bowed down to the ground .
GOLD:	Job stood up and tore his robe in grief . Then he shaved his head and fell to the ground to worship .

ID:	4220
INPUT:	Eta begiraleak erantzun : « Egunsentia badator , baina gaua ere bai berriro . Oraindik galdetu nahi baduzue , etorri berriz ere , eta galdetu » .
PRED:	And he said to them , “ The morning is coming , but the night is coming again . But if you want to ask him , you will ask him , and ask him . ”
GOLD:	The watchman replies , “ Morning is coming , but night will soon return.If you wish to ask again , then come back and ask . ”

ID:	4221
INPUT:	Jaun ahalguztidunak hau azaldu dit : « Bekatu hau ez dizuet barkatukozeuen bizialdi guztian » . Jainko Jaun ahalguztidunakesan du .
PRED:	This is what the Lord Almighty says to me : “ I have not sinned in all your sins , ” says the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has revealed this to me : “ Till the day you die , you will never be forgiven for this sin . ” That is the judgment of the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	4222
INPUT:	Hitz egin nuen Jaunaren izenean berak agindu bezala , eta hitz egin bitartean hots bat izan zen : lurrak dardara egin zuen eta hezurrak bata bestearekin elkartzen hasi .
PRED:	And I spoke in the name of the Lord , as he had commanded : and the earth grew up , and the earth grew up , and the bones began to speak with one another .
GOLD:	So I spoke this message , just as he told me . Suddenly as I spoke , there was a rattling noise all across the valley . The bones of each body came together and attached themselves as complete skeletons .

ID:	4223
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Itzuli niregana , herri fedegabe hori , neu bakarrik nauzu zeure nagusia eta . Banan-banan bilduko zaituztet hiri eta familia bakoitzetik eta Sion mendira eramango .
PRED:	“ Go back to me , ” says the Lord . “ I am your master , and I will gather you together , and I will gather you out of the cities of your fathers , and they will bring you up from Mount Zion .
GOLD:	“ Return home , you wayward children , ” says the Lord , “ for I am your master.I will bring you back to the land of Israel — one from this town and two from that family — from wherever you are scattered .

ID:	4224
INPUT:	Orduan , Salomon erregeak Joiadaren seme Benaias bidali , eta honek Adonias hil egin zuen .
PRED:	King Solomon sent Benaiah the son of Jehoiada the son of Jehoiada , and he killed him .
GOLD:	So King Solomon ordered Benaiah son of Jehoiada to execute him , and Adonijah was put to death .

ID:	4225
INPUT:	Emagaldu batengana bezala zihoazen beraiengana , Ohola eta Oholibagana , emakume li<unk> haiengana .
PRED:	And she went to them as a prostitute , as she was a prostitute , and she went to the women .
GOLD:	And that is what they did . They had sex with Oholah and Oholibah , these shameless prostitutes .

ID:	4226
INPUT:	Saulo , ordea , gero eta kementsuago agertzen zen eta nahasturik uzten zituen Damaskoko juduak , argi frogatzen baitzuen Jesus Mesias zela .
PRED:	But Saul began to show the Jews that Jesus was the Messiah . He was the Messiah .
GOLD:	Saul 's preaching became more and more powerful , and the Jews in Damascus could n't refute his proofs that Jesus was indeed the Messiah .

ID:	4227
INPUT:	Esan zidan Jaunak : « Gizaseme , jarri arreta , begira erne eta entzun adi tenpluari buruz emango dizkizudan lege eta arau guztiak ; hartu gogoan , batez ere , tenpluan sartzeko eskubideari buruzkoak .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Son of man , look at your eyes , and listen to all the statutes that I have given to you and all the statutes that I have heard in the temple .
GOLD:	And the Lord said to me , “ Son of man , take careful notice . Use your eyes and ears , and listen to everything I tell you about the regulations concerning the Lord 's Temple . Take careful note of the procedures for using the Temple 's entrances and exits .

ID:	4228
INPUT:	Betiko lege izango duzue hau belaunez belaun ; horrela , zer den sakratu eta zer profano , zer garbi eta zer kutsatu bereizi ahal izango duzue ,
PRED:	This law shall be a law for ever , and it shall be holy , and it shall be unclean , and it shall be unclean , and it shall be unclean .
GOLD:	You must distinguish between what is sacred and what is common , between what is ceremonially unclean and what is clean .

ID:	4229
INPUT:	Asiria neure lurralde Israelenbirrinduko dut , neure mendietan zapalduko . Kenduko zaio haren uztarrianire herriari , eroriko haren zama bizkarretik .
PRED:	I will destroy the land of Israel , and I will destroy them in the mountains of my people Israel . He will remove my yoke from his face .
GOLD:	I will break the Assyrians when they are in Israel ; I will trample them on my mountains.My people will no longer be their slavesnor bow down under their heavy loads .

ID:	4230
INPUT:	Izan ere , duenari eman egingo zaio , eta gainezka izango du ; ez duenari , ordea , daukan apurra ere kendu egingo zaio .
PRED:	For he that hath given him shall be given to him , and he that hath not been broken , shall be taken away from him .
GOLD:	To those who listen to my teaching , more understanding will be given , and they will have an abundance of knowledge . But for those who are not listening , even what little understanding they have will be taken away from them .

ID:	4231
INPUT:	Bizi zelarik , eraikia zuen beretzat Absalomek Errege Haranean dagoen oroitarria , berekiko esanez : « Ez dut ene izena oroitaraziko duen semerik » . Eta bere izena ezarri zion oroitarriari . Horregatik deritza gaurdaino « Absalomen oroitarria » .
PRED:	And Absalom built an altar for his son , which was in the days of the days of Absalom , and said , I will not remember my name ; therefore he called the name of his name to this day . And he called the name of Absalom this day .
GOLD:	During his lifetime , Absalom had built a monument to himself in the King 's Valley , for he said , “ I have no son to carry on my name . ” He named the monument after himself , and it is known as Absalom 's Monument to this day .

ID:	4232
INPUT:	hau Matusalemena , hau Henokena , hau Jaretena , hau Maleleelena , hau Kainamena ,
PRED:	the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel ,
GOLD:	Lamech was the son of Methuselah.Methuselah was the son of Enoch.Enoch was the son of Jared.Jared was the son of Mahalalel.Mahalalel was the son of Kenan .

ID:	4233
INPUT:	Zuen arbasoak ahaztu egin ziren , ordea , Jaunaz , beren Jainkoaz , eta Jaunak Hatzorko gudarostearen buruzagi zen Sisera-ren eskuetara eman zituen , baita filistearren eta Moabeko erregearen eskuetara ere , eta hauek gudukatu egin zituzten zuen arbasoak .
PRED:	But your fathers forgotten the Lord their God , and the Lord their God delivered them into the hand of the Philistines , and he delivered them into the hand of the Philistines , and the kings of the Philistines , and the kings of the Philistines .
GOLD:	But the people soon forgot about the Lord their God , so he handed them over to Sisera , the commander of Hazor 's army , and also to the Philistines and to the king of Moab , who fought against them .

ID:	4234
INPUT:	Joiakimen gainerako jarduerak , egin zituen gauza higuingarriak eta gertatu zitzaiona « Israelgo eta Judako Erregeen Liburuan » daude idatziak . Hurrengo erregea haren seme Joiakin izan zen .
PRED:	And the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim , which he did , and all the abominations that he had done , are they not written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah ? And his son reigned in his stead .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Jehoiakim 's reign , including all the evil things he did and everything found against him , are recorded in The Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah . Then his son Jehoiachin became the next king .

ID:	4235
INPUT:	Gauerdian jaikitzen naiz zu gorestera , zure erabakiak zuzenak direlako .
PRED:	In the night I praise you in the night , because your statutes are righteous .
GOLD:	I rise at midnight to thank youfor your just regulations .

ID:	4236
INPUT:	Handik bi egunera , Pazko-jaia eta Legamia gabeko Ogien Jaia ospatzen ziren . Apaizburu eta lege-maisuak Jesus maltzurkeriaz nola atxilotuko zebiltzan , hiltzeko .
PRED:	On the next day , the Passover and the Pharisees began to kill the Passover . The chief priests and the teachers of the Law began to kill Jesus .
GOLD:	It was now two days before Passover and the Festival of Unleavened Bread . The leading priests and the teachers of religious law were still looking for an opportunity to capture Jesus secretly and kill him .

ID:	4237
INPUT:	Izu-ikara bidaliko dizut , bada , alde guztietatik . Nork bere aldetikemango dio ihesari , eta inor ez sakabanatuak biltzeko . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak .
PRED:	So I will send you out of all the land , ” says the Lord of hosts . “ I will send you away , ” says the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	But look ! I will bring terror upon you , ” says the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . “ Your neighbors will chase you from your land , and no one will help your exiles as they flee .

ID:	4238
INPUT:	bi alboetatik sei beso ateratzen zitzaizkion , hiruna beso albo bakoitzetik .
PRED:	And there were six corners of them , and six corners of them were six corners of each side .
GOLD:	The lampstand had six branches going out from the center stem , three on each side .

ID:	4239
INPUT:	« Aita , nahi baduzu , urrun ezazu niregandik edari samin hau . Hala ere , egin bedi zure nahia , ez nirea » .
PRED:	“ Father , if you want to take away from me , do this thing from me . But you will not be my will . ”
GOLD:	“ Father , if you are willing , please take this cup of suffering away from me . Yet I want your will to be done , not mine . ”

ID:	4240
INPUT:	Bide okerretara makurtzen direnak , berriz , desagerraraz bitza Jaunak gaizkileekin batera ! Bakea Israeli !
PRED:	But those who follow the ways of the wicked are in the way of the Lord : peace is peace in Israel .
GOLD:	But banish those who turn to crooked ways , O Lord.Take them away with those who do evil.May Israel have peace !

ID:	4241
INPUT:	Gutxi al deritzozue Israelgo Jainkoak herri osoaren artetik zuek hautatuak izateari , harengana hurbildu , Jaunaren egoitzako zerbitzuaren ardura izan eta herri osoaren izenean jarduteko ?
PRED:	Have you not a little while , the God of Israel , the God of all the people of Israel , that you may come near to him , to serve him , and to serve him , and to all the people ?
GOLD:	Does it seem insignificant to you that the God of Israel has chosen you from among all the community of Israel to be near him so you can serve in the Lord 's Tabernacle and stand before the people to minister to them ?

ID:	4242
INPUT:	Garaia baino lehen eraman zituzten , ibaiak ura bezala , haien oinarriak urtuta .
PRED:	And they brought them before the waters , as the waters of the waters , and their foundation were dried up .
GOLD:	They were snatched away in the prime of life , the foundations of their lives washed away .

ID:	4243
INPUT:	Hala egin zuen Josuek .
PRED:	So Joshua did so , and he did so .
GOLD:	So Joshua gave the command .

ID:	4244
INPUT:	Kalebek , jendeak Moisesen aurka ziharduen zurrumurrua isilaraziz , esan zuen : « Ea , goazen ! Igo eta jabe gaitezen lurralde hartaz , bagara horretarako gauza eta » .
PRED:	And when the people saw that Moses had spoken against Moses , he said , “ Get up , go up , let us go up and possess it , and we will possess it . ”
GOLD:	But Caleb tried to quiet the people as they stood before Moses . “ Let 's go at once to take the land , ” he said . “ We can certainly conquer it ! ”

ID:	4245
INPUT:	Hondamendiahondamendiaren gainetorriko da , albiste txarrak albiste txarren gain ; ikuskaria eskatuko diote profetari ; apaizak ez du irakaspenik emango , ezta kontseilariek ere aholkurik .
PRED:	The destruction of destruction will come upon the mountains , and the prophets will see evil things , and the prophets will ask , and the priests will not teach the law .
GOLD:	Calamity will follow calamity ; rumor will follow rumor.They will look in vainfor a vision from the prophets.They will receive no teaching from the priestsand no counsel from the leaders .

ID:	4246
INPUT:	Dohain hutsez zarete salbatuak sinesmenaren bidez ; eta hau ez dator zuengandik , baizik eta Jainkoaren emaitza da ;
PRED:	You are saved by faith through faith , but not from you , but the love of God is God .
GOLD:	God saved you by his grace when you believed . And you ca n't take credit for this ; it is a gift from God .

ID:	4247
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun : — Benetan diotsut : Gaur gauean , oilarrak jo baino lehen , hiru aldiz ukatuko nauzu .
PRED:	Jesus answered , “ Most certainly I say to you , today I say to you , today , before the moon has passed , you will deny me three times . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ I tell you the truth , Peter — this very night , before the rooster crows , you will deny three times that you even know me . ”

ID:	4248
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , zure begien pozgarri dena kenduko dizut bat-batean . Baina zuk ez egin dolu , ez hasi aieneka edo negarrez .
PRED:	“ Son of man , I will take away your eyes from you . But you will not weep and weep .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , with one blow I will take away your dearest treasure . Yet you must not show any sorrow at her death . Do not weep ; let there be no tears .

ID:	4249
INPUT:	Jesusek agindu bezala egin zuten ikasleek , eta Pazko-afaria prestatu zuten .
PRED:	And his disciples did as Jesus commanded them , and they prepared the Passover .
GOLD:	So the disciples did as Jesus told them and prepared the Passover meal there .

ID:	4250
INPUT:	« Espiritu gaiztoa , norbaitengandik irten ondoren , leku idorretan barrena ibili ohi da atseden bila ; baina , aurkitzen ez duelarik ,
PRED:	“ When the Spirit comes out of him , he is going out of him to a place where he does not find him , but he does not find him .
GOLD:	“ When an evil spirit leaves a person , it goes into the desert , seeking rest but finding none .

ID:	4251
INPUT:	Lagundu , gure Jainko salbatzaile horrek ; zeure izenaren ohoreagatik , libra gaitzazu , barkatu gure bekatuak .
PRED:	Our God , save us from your name , and save us from your name .
GOLD:	Help us , O God of our salvation ! Help us for the glory of your name.Save us and forgive our sinsfor the honor of your name .

ID:	4252
INPUT:	bizi dadila Kristo zuen bihotzetan sinesmenaren bidez eta izan dadila maitasuna zuen bizitzaren erro eta oinarri .
PRED:	I live in your heart , in faith , in faith , in faith , in love , and in love , and on your foundation .
GOLD:	Then Christ will make his home in your hearts as you trust in him . Your roots will grow down into God 's love and keep you strong .

ID:	4253
INPUT:	Hau nioen neurekiko : « Palmondora igoko naizharen fruituak hartzera » . Mahats-lukuen gozoa dute niretzat zure bularrek , sagar-usain eztia zure arnasak .
PRED:	I said to me , “ I will go down to the palm tree of Ramah , and my breasts will be filled with the fruit of your vineyard . ”
GOLD:	May your kisses be as exciting as the best wine — Yes , wine that goes down smoothly for my lover , flowing gently over lips and teeth .

ID:	4254
INPUT:	Joiadaren berrikuntzak
PRED:	Jehoiakim 's King
GOLD:	Jehoiada 's Religious Reforms

ID:	4255
INPUT:	Eta badakizue bekatuak kentzeko agertu zela Kristo , eta harengan ez da bekaturik .
PRED:	You know that Christ has been taken away from sin , and there is no sin in him .
GOLD:	And you know that Jesus came to take away our sins , and there is no sin in him .

ID:	4256
INPUT:	Neure baitan diot : « Ai uso-hegalak banitu ! Hegan egingo nuke , beste nonbait pausatzeko .
PRED:	I said to myself , “ How long it will be for me , and I will trust in it .
GOLD:	I would fly far awayto the quiet of the wilderness.Interlude

ID:	4257
INPUT:	Orduan , Sedekias erregeak Jeremias kartzela-atarian zainpean jartzeko agindu zuen eta egunero opil bat emateko okinen kaletik , hirian ogia ahitu arte . Hala , kartzelako atarian gelditu zen Jeremias .
PRED:	Then King Zedekiah commanded Jeremiah to put him in the court of the guard , and he put him in the court of bread , until he had put bread in the city , until he was left in the court .
GOLD:	So King Zedekiah commanded that Jeremiah not be returned to the dungeon . Instead , he was imprisoned in the courtyard of the guard in the royal palace . The king also commanded that Jeremiah be given a loaf of fresh bread every day as long as there was any left in the city . So Jeremiah was put in the palace prison .

ID:	4258
INPUT:	Nork ezagutu bere hutsegiteak ? Aska nazazu oharkabeko erruetatik .
PRED:	Who can see his eyes ? Let me take away from the iniquity of the wicked .
GOLD:	Keep your servant from deliberate sins ! Do n't let them control me.Then I will be free of guiltand innocent of great sin .

ID:	4259
INPUT:	Sedekias , Judako errege
PRED:	King Zedekiah of Judah
GOLD:	The Fall of Jerusalem

ID:	4260
INPUT:	Seme-alabatxook , zuek Jainkoarenak zarete , eta garaituak dituzue sasiprofeta horiek , zuengan dagoena munduan dagoena baino handiagoa baita .
PRED:	My children , you are God 's prophets , and you are prophets who are in the world . You are greater than you .
GOLD:	But you belong to God , my dear children . You have already won a victory over those people , because the Spirit who lives in you is greater than the spirit who lives in the world .

ID:	4261
INPUT:	Zuzena baitzara , libra nazazu , askatu , makur belarria niregana eta salba nazazu .
PRED:	But you will save me , and you will save me , and you will save me .
GOLD:	Save me and rescue me , for you do what is right.Turn your ear to listen to me , and set me free .

ID:	4262
INPUT:	Davidek , orduan : — Dei egin Tzadok apaizari , Natan profetari eta Joaiadaren seme Benaiasi . Hauek sartu zirenean ,
PRED:	Then David said to Zadok the priest , “ Zadok the priest , Nathan the prophet , the son of Joab the prophet , and they came into .
GOLD:	Then King David ordered , “ Call Zadok the priest , Nathan the prophet , and Benaiah son of Jehoiada . ” When they came into the king 's presence ,

ID:	4263
INPUT:	eta Jainkoak apaiz nagusi izendatu zuen Melkisedeken antzera .
PRED:	And God made a high priest as a priest , and made him a high priest .
GOLD:	And God designated him to be a High Priest in the order of Melchizedek .

ID:	4264
INPUT:	Artean gizona nire ondoan zegoela , norbaitek tenplu barrutik hitz egiten zidala ohartu nintzen .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when a man was standing beside me , that a man spoke to me from the house .
GOLD:	And I heard someone speaking to me from within the Temple , while the man who had been measuring stood beside me .

ID:	4265
INPUT:	Hala ere , Jainkoak ezarritako oinarri sendoak tinko dirau eta idazkun hau darama : Ezagutzen ditu Jaunak bereak dituenak , eta « Ihes egin beza gaiztakeriatik Jainkoaren izenari dei egiten dionak » .
PRED:	But as for the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of God , it is written in the book of the Lord , and those who know the Lord shall escape from the wickedness of God .
GOLD:	But God 's truth stands firm like a foundation stone with this inscription : “ The Lord knows those who are his , ” and “ All who belong to the Lord must turn away from evil . ”

ID:	4266
INPUT:	Itsasoan zabaldutako lehor-bidetik igaro ziren israeldarrak , urak ezker-eskuin zituztela harresi gisa .
PRED:	And the children of Israel passed through the sea by the way of the sea , and the waters stood on the right side of the sea .
GOLD:	So the people of Israel walked through the middle of the sea on dry ground , with walls of water on each side !

ID:	4267
INPUT:	Ordain-opariko ahariaren bidez , bekatuaren barkamen-ohikunea egingo du apaizak Jaunaren aurrean eta barkatua izango du gizonak bekatua .
PRED:	And the priest shall make atonement for the sin offering , and the priest shall make atonement for the sin offering before the Lord , and the man shall be forgiven .
GOLD:	The priest will then purify him before the Lord with the ram of the guilt offering , and the man 's sin will be forgiven .

ID:	4268
INPUT:	Eta honela bukatu zuen Josuek : « Jaunak , zuen Jainkoak , Jordango urak lehortu ditu zuen aurrean zuek igaro ahal izateko , lehen Itsaso Gorria gure aurrean gu igarotzeko lehortu zuen bezala .
PRED:	Then Joshua said , “ The Lord your God has given you the Jordan River to cross the Red Sea before you , as we passed through the Red Sea .
GOLD:	For the Lord your God dried up the river right before your eyes , and he kept it dry until you were all across , just as he did at the Red Sea when he dried it up until we had all crossed over .

ID:	4269
INPUT:	« Nik , Jaunak , lau zigor-mota bidaliko dizkiet : gerra , hiltzeko ; txakurrak , zati-zati egiteko ; hegazti harrapariak eta basapiztiak , irentsi eta haiekikoa egiteko .
PRED:	“ I will send them to death , and I will send them to death . I will send them to death . They will kill the birds of the birds , the birds , the birds , the birds , the birds , the birds , and the birds of the field .
GOLD:	“ I will send four kinds of destroyers against them , ” says the Lord . “ I will send the sword to kill , the dogs to drag away , the vultures to devour , and the wild animals to finish up what is left .

ID:	4270
INPUT:	Gero , parabola hau kontatu zien : « Gizon aberats bati lurrak uzta handia eman zion .
PRED:	He told them this parable , “ The rich man is rich and gave him a great land .
GOLD:	Then he told them a story : “ A rich man had a fertile farm that produced fine crops .

ID:	4271
INPUT:	Zure ondotik berriro pasatu eta amodio-garaian zeundela ikusi nuen . Zure gorputz biluzia estali eta zutaz arduratu nintzen ; ezkontza-hitzarmena egin nuen zurekin eta nirea izan zinen . Honela diot nik , Jainko Jaunak .
PRED:	Then I saw that you were in your days , and I saw you in the days of your body , and your body was filled with you ; and I made a covenant with you , saith the Lord God .
GOLD:	And when I passed by again , I saw that you were old enough for love . So I wrapped my cloak around you to cover your nakedness and declared my marriage vows . I made a covenant with you , says the Sovereign Lord , and you became mine .

ID:	4272
INPUT:	baina nire partea etekinik gabeko egunak dira , eta gau nekagarriak dagozkit .
PRED:	But the day of my Spirit is no more ; and I know the night and night .
GOLD:	I , too , have been assigned months of futility , long and weary nights of misery .

ID:	4273
INPUT:	Izan ere , gezurrezko mesiasak eta sasiprofetak agertuko dira eta aukeratuak berak ere , ahal balitz , engainatzeko moduko mirariak eta egintza harrigarriak egingo dituzte .
PRED:	For if a false prophet shall be revealed , and the prophets shall be revealed , and his chosen ones shall be judged , and his wonders shall be done in them .
GOLD:	For false messiahs and false prophets will rise up and perform signs and wonders so as to deceive , if possible , even God 's chosen ones .

ID:	4274
INPUT:	Gaiztakeria sortzen du , zoritxarra ematen argitara , iruzurkeriaz bete-betea du barrua » .
PRED:	He has done evil things , and he has done evil , and he has filled his heart . ”
GOLD:	They conceive trouble and give birth to evil.Their womb produces deceit . ”

ID:	4275
INPUT:	Zazpi egun eta zazpi gau eman zituzten berarekin lurrean eserita , hitzik ere esan gabe , ikusten baitzuten zein handia zen haren samina .
PRED:	And they brought them seven days and seven days in the earth , and they did not speak with him , because they had seen the voice of his mouth .
GOLD:	Then they sat on the ground with him for seven days and nights . No one said a word to Job , for they saw that his suffering was too great for words .

ID:	4276
INPUT:	Laugarren egunean Beraka haranean , hau da , « Bedeinkapen-haranean » , bildu eta Jauna bedeinkatu zuten ; horregatik du toki horrek izen hori gaurdaino .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the fourth day , in the fourth day , in the fourth day , in the blessing of the Lord , that he may bless the Lord , and this place shall be called unto this day .
GOLD:	On the fourth day they gathered in the Valley of Blessing , which got its name that day because the people praised and thanked the Lord there . It is still called the Valley of Blessing today .

ID:	4277
INPUT:	Israeldarrek gatibu hartu zituzten madiandar emakume eta haurrak , eta abere , azienda eta ondasunak harrapatu .
PRED:	And the children of Israel took away captive , women , and children , and children , and children , and daughters , and daughters , and daughters .
GOLD:	Then the Israelite army captured the Midianite women and children and seized their cattle and flocks and all their wealth as plunder .

ID:	4278
INPUT:	Jonatanek eman zizkion mutikoari bere iskiluak eta esan zion : — Hoa , eraman hirira .
PRED:	Jonathan gave his sons to the boy , and he said to him , “ This is the city . ”
GOLD:	Then Jonathan gave his bow and arrows to the boy and told him to take them back to town .

ID:	4279
INPUT:	Han izango nauzu ni , Horeb mendiko harkaitzean . Harkaitza jo eta ura sortuko da , herriak edan dezan . Hala egin zuen Moisesek , Israelgo arduradunen aurrean .
PRED:	And I will be there in the rock , and I will be a rock , and the people shall drink water , and the people shall drink water before the elders of Israel .
GOLD:	I will stand before you on the rock at Mount Sinai . Strike the rock , and water will come gushing out . Then the people will be able to drink . ” So Moses struck the rock as he was told , and water gushed out as the elders looked on .

ID:	4280
INPUT:	esanez : “ Gure arbasoen garaian bizi izan bagina , ez genukeen profeten hilketan haiekin parterik izango ” .
PRED:	and said to him , “ If we live in the days of our fathers , we would not die with them . ”
GOLD:	Then you say , ‘ If we had lived in the days of our ancestors , we would never have joined them in killing the prophets . '

ID:	4281
INPUT:	Baina iparraldetik eta ekialdetik etorriko zaizkion albisteek asaldatu egingo dute ; orduan , amorru bizian irtengo da jende asko suntsitzeko asmoz .
PRED:	But they will see him from the north and from the north , and they will be saved from the north . Then they will go out to destroy many people .
GOLD:	“ But then news from the east and the north will alarm him , and he will set out in great anger to destroy and obliterate many .

ID:	4282
INPUT:	Samsonek egarri handia sumatu zuen ; Jaunari dei egin eta esan zion : « Garaipen handi hau eman ondoren , egarriak hiltzen utziko ote nauzu eta jentil arrotz horien esku erortzen ? »
PRED:	Samson cried out to the Lord , and said to him , “ Have you given this great great great victory to the Gentiles and to the Gentiles ? ”
GOLD:	Samson was now very thirsty , and he cried out to the Lord , “ You have accomplished this great victory by the strength of your servant . Must I now die of thirst and fall into the hands of these pagans ? ”

ID:	4283
INPUT:	Begira : neuk , Jaun honek , eman dizuet larunbata , atseden hartzeko ; horregatik , seigarren egunean bi egunerako janaria ematen dizuet . Beraz , zazpigarren egunean zaudete nor bere tokian , kanpora atera gabe » .
PRED:	Behold , I have given you the Sabbath day , and I have given you food on the seventh day . So on the seventh day I give you food to eat . So on the seventh day you will not go outside the door . ”
GOLD:	They must realize that the Sabbath is the Lord 's gift to you . That is why he gives you a two-day supply on the sixth day , so there will be enough for two days . On the Sabbath day you must each stay in your place . Do not go out to pick up food on the seventh day . ”

ID:	4284
INPUT:	Ez nien ukatu neure begieieskatzen zidatenik deus ere , ezta neure bihotzaripozik batere . Nire lan guztietanatsegin hartu nuen ; hauxe izan zennire lan guztien saria .
PRED:	I did not forgive my eyes , nor did my heart rejoice in my heart , nor did my heart rejoice in my heart ; for this is the work of all my work .
GOLD:	Anything I wanted , I would take . I denied myself no pleasure . I even found great pleasure in hard work , a reward for all my labors .

ID:	4285
INPUT:	Moab , zeure indar eta ondasunetanfidatu zara : hara orain zu ere konkistatua ! Zure jainko Kemox erbestera doa , bere apaiz eta buruzagiekin .
PRED:	You have trusted in your power and power , and now you have taken away your inheritance , and now you have become a god of Baal , and your princes and princes .
GOLD:	Because you have trusted in your wealth and skill , you will be taken captive.Your god Chemosh , with his priests and officials , will be hauled off to distant lands !

ID:	4286
INPUT:	Bere hirietan ezpatak erasoko dio , babeslekuak hauts bihurtuko dizkio , beraien burutazioengatik .
PRED:	He will fall by the sword of his city , and he will turn away from his cities , and he will turn away their heads .
GOLD:	War will swirl through their cities ; their enemies will crash through their gates.They will destroy them , trapping them in their own evil plans .

ID:	4287
INPUT:	Baina nik Jaunarengan ditut begiak , salbatzen nauen Jainkoarengankonfiantza ; entzungo dit , bai , Jainkoak .
PRED:	But I trust in the Lord , and he will hear me , and he will hear me .
GOLD:	As for me , I look to the Lord for help.I wait confidently for God to save me , and my God will certainly hear me .

ID:	4288
INPUT:	zedrozko oholez estali zituen tenplu barneko hormak , behetik hasi eta goiko habeetaraino , barne osoa zurez jantziz . Tenpluaren behea zipres-oholez estali zuen .
PRED:	And he covered the house with cedar wood , and he cut down all the doors of the house , and all the doors of the house . And he put the blood of the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	The entire inside , from floor to ceiling , was paneled with wood . He paneled the walls and ceilings with cedar , and he used planks of cypress for the floors .

ID:	4289
INPUT:	Egurra amaitzean , sua itzali ; iraintzailerik gabe , kito liskarra !
PRED:	And when they worship him , they are not turned into the fire ; they do not seek him .
GOLD:	Fire goes out without wood , and quarrels disappear when gossip stops .

ID:	4290
INPUT:	Jauna biziki haserretu zitzaion Uzari ; bertan zauritu zuen eta han hil zen , Jainkoaren kutxa ondoan .
PRED:	The Lord became angry , and he died there , and he died at the ark of God .
GOLD:	Then the Lord 's anger was aroused against Uzzah , and God struck him dead because of this . So Uzzah died right there beside the Ark of God .

ID:	4291
INPUT:	Batzuk egun osoan irrikaz bila , zintzoak ezer gorde gabe eman .
PRED:	And it came to pass in that day , that the righteous go out , that they may seek nothing .
GOLD:	Some people are always greedy for more , but the godly love to give !

ID:	4292
INPUT:	Jainkoak esan du — behin eta berriro entzun diot — berari dagokiola ahalmena .
PRED:	And God said to him , “ I have heard that he is right . ”
GOLD:	unfailing love , O Lord , is yours.Surely you repay all peopleaccording to what they have done .

ID:	4293
INPUT:	Barneko ataria eta tenplua
PRED:	The Temple and the Temple
GOLD:	The South Gateway

ID:	4294
INPUT:	Beraz , guztira bederatziehun eta hamabi urtez bizi izan ondoren , hil egin zen .
PRED:	And all the days of Lamech were nine hundred and nine years , and he died .
GOLD:	Seth lived 912 years , and then he died .

ID:	4295
INPUT:	Beste hamarrak , hori entzutean , Santiago eta Joanen aurka haserre jarri ziren .
PRED:	When they heard these things , they became angry with John and John .
GOLD:	When the ten other disciples heard what James and John had asked , they were indignant .

ID:	4296
INPUT:	Kendu nire bekatua , eta ur bizia baino gardenago izango naiz ; garbi nazazu , eta elurra baino zuriago izango .
PRED:	Take away my sin , and I will be more than the water , and I will be clean than the earth .
GOLD:	Do n't keep looking at my sins.Remove the stain of my guilt .

ID:	4297
INPUT:	Bere biziaren jabe izan nahian dabilenak galdu egingo du ; bere bizia niregatik galtzen duenak , ordea , eskuratu egingo du .
PRED:	He who does n't want to live will be destroyed . But he who does n't want to live for me will be saved .
GOLD:	If you cling to your life , you will lose it ; but if you give up your life for me , you will find it .

ID:	4298
INPUT:	eta , Bet-Hoglaren iparraldeko malda igaroz , Itsaso Hilera heltzen zen , Jordan ibaia itsasoratzen den lekuan . Hau zen Benjaminen leinuaren hegoaldeko muga .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass through the north side of the Jordan , to the sea , to the sea , and to the sea , and to the sea : this is the border of Benjamin .
GOLD:	ran past the north slope of Beth-hoglah , and ended at the north bay of the Dead Sea , which is the southern end of the Jordan River . This was the southern boundary .

ID:	4299
INPUT:	Izan ere , duenari eman egingo zaio ; ez duenari , ordea , daukan apurra ere kendu egingo » .
PRED:	For he who is given to him will be given to him . But he who does not be broken , he will be taken away . ”
GOLD:	To those who listen to my teaching , more understanding will be given . But for those who are not listening , even what little understanding they have will be taken away from them . ”

ID:	4300
INPUT:	Gari-hautsa bera eresaldu egingo dugu . Jende xehea dirutan erosiko dugu , eta behartsuakoinetako pare baten truke » .
PRED:	And we will buy the dust into the dust , and we will bought the people in the dust , and we will bought the poor , and each one of the poor . ”
GOLD:	And you mix the grain you sellwith chaff swept from the floor.Then you enslave poor peoplefor one piece of silver or a pair of sandals .

ID:	4301
INPUT:	Hari lotuak zeuden , bada , bere aztikeriaz txunditurik baitzeuzkan aspaldidanik .
PRED:	So they were ashamed , because they were ashamed of their idols , because they had not been ashamed .
GOLD:	They listened closely to him because for a long time he had astounded them with his magic .

ID:	4302
INPUT:	Ez bedi zure bihotza horrelako emakumearen atzetik abia , ez zaitez berarengatik galbidean jar ,
PRED:	Do n't let your heart go out of the woman 's heart , and do n't ask for her .
GOLD:	Do n't let your hearts stray away toward her.Do n't wander down her wayward path .

ID:	4303
INPUT:	Erregeagana hurbildu zirenen artean zeuden Karxena , Xetar , Admata , Tar<unk> , Meres , Marsena eta Memukan , Pertsia eta Mediako zazpi buruzagiak ; hauek sar zitezkeen erregearen aurrera , erreinuko mailarik gorenetakoak zirelako .
PRED:	And the king came near to the king in the midst of them that came near unto the king of Carmel , and Jozabad , and Jozabad , and Jozabad , and Jozabad , and Jozabad , and Jozabad , the king of Persia : for the seven princes of the kingdom were come to the king , for they had loved the king .
GOLD:	The names of these men were Carshena , Shethar , Admatha , Tarshish , Meres , Marsena , and Memucan — seven nobles of Persia and Media . They met with the king regularly and held the highest positions in the empire .

ID:	4304
INPUT:	Moisesen gorazarrea
PRED:	Moses and Aaron
GOLD:	A Song of Deliverance

ID:	4305
INPUT:	Josuek Ruben eta Gaden leinuetakoei eta Manasesen leinu erdikoei dei egin
PRED:	And Joshua called unto the children of Reuben , and to the children of Manasseh , and to the children of Manasseh , and to the children of Manasseh , and to the children of Manasseh , and to the children of Manasseh , and to the children of Manasseh ,
GOLD:	Then Joshua called together the tribes of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh .

ID:	4306
INPUT:	Horra Salomonen esku-aulkia . Hirurogei gudari ditu inguruan , Israelgo ausartenak ;
PRED:	This is the throne of Solomon 's hand . He chose three thousand men around him .
GOLD:	Look , it is Solomon 's carriage , surrounded by sixty heroic men , the best of Israel 's soldiers .

ID:	4307
INPUT:	Orduan , aurreratu zen espirituetariko bat , Jaunaren aitzinean gelditu eta esan zuen : « Neuk konbentzituko dut » . Jaunak galdetu zion : « Nola ? »
PRED:	And a spirit stood before the Lord , and stood in the presence of the Lord , and said , I will tell you , What shall I do ?
GOLD:	and finally a spirit approached the Lord and said , ‘ I can do it ! '

ID:	4308
INPUT:	Urte hartan bertan , Sedekiasen erregealdiko laugarren urtean , bosgarren hilean , Hananias profetak , jatorriz Gabaongoa zen Azurren semeak , Jeremiasekin topo egin zuen tenpluan , eta apaizen eta jende guztiaren aurrean esan zion :
PRED:	In the fourth year of Zedekiah king of Judah , in the fifth year of Zedekiah the prophet , Zechariah the prophet , the prophet , the son of Hilkiah , the prophet , came to Jeremiah in the temple , and said to all the people ,
GOLD:	One day in late summer of that same year — the fourth year of the reign of Zedekiah , king of Judah — Hananiah son of Azzur , a prophet from Gibeon , addressed me publicly in the Temple while all the priests and people listened . He said ,

ID:	4309
INPUT:	Baina Asahelen seme Jonatan eta Tikbaren seme Jahzias erabaki honen kontra atera ziren , Mexulam eta Xabtai lebitarrak ere alde zituztela .
PRED:	But they went out against this man , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel , the Levites , the Levites , the Levites , the Levites .
GOLD:	Only Jonathan son of Asahel and Jahzeiah son of Tikvah opposed this course of action , and they were supported by Meshullam and Shabbethai the Levite .

ID:	4310
INPUT:	Gogoan izan zuen bere agintzari sakratua , Abraham bere zerbitzariari egina .
PRED:	Remember what he had commanded , and he did to his servant Abraham his servant .
GOLD:	For he remembered his sacred promiseto his servant Abraham .

ID:	4311
INPUT:	Menfis eta Tafneskoek ereburezurra apurtu diote .
PRED:	And they that are in Ashdod , have broken their bones , and have broken their bones .
GOLD:	Egyptians , marching from their cities of Memphis and Tahpanhes , have destroyed Israel 's glory and power .

ID:	4312
INPUT:	« Hona hemen labore-opariei buruzko ohikunea : Aaronen ondorengoei dagokie Jaunaren aurrean , aldarearen aitzinean , aurkeztea .
PRED:	“ This is the law of a grain offering for a sin offering , and the sons of Aaron , before the altar before the Lord .
GOLD:	Through this process , the priest will purify you before the Lord , making you right with him , and you will be forgiven for any of these sins you have committed . ”

ID:	4313
INPUT:	Hodias , Haxum , Be<unk> ,
PRED:	And these are the names of the sons of Hallohesh , and Hallohesh ,
GOLD:	Hariph , Anathoth , Nebai ,

ID:	4314
INPUT:	Sare horretan <unk> tengatzen bada , sareak ez du jasaten , heldu egiten badio , ez dio eusten .
PRED:	But if he does n't eat , he does n't eat it , he does n't keep it .
GOLD:	They cling to their home for security , but it wo n't last.They try to hold it tight , but it will not endure .

ID:	4315
INPUT:	Jesusek ihardetsi zien : — Ez al zaituztet neuk aukeratu Hamabiok ? Halere , zuetariko bat deabru da .
PRED:	Jesus answered them , “ Do n't I chosen you ? I have chosen you , but one of you is a devil . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus said , “ I chose the twelve of you , but one is a devil . ”

ID:	4316
INPUT:	Israeldarrekin bake-hitzarmena egin zuen hiri bakarra hibiarrak bizi zireneko Gabaon izan zen . Beste guztiak armen indarrez hartu zituzten .
PRED:	And he made a covenant with the sons of Israel , to dwell in Gibeon . And all the rest of them were strong .
GOLD:	No one in this region made peace with the Israelites except the Hivites of Gibeon . All the others were defeated .

ID:	4317
INPUT:	<unk> ETA ELKARTEAREN <unk> TOLAKETA ( 7 , <unk> )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Ezra Arrives in Jerusalem

ID:	4318
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	The Lord spoke to Moses , saying ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	4319
INPUT:	Atalondoaren luzera hamar metrokoa zen , eta zabalera seikoa ; hamar harmaila igo behar ziren hara iristeko . Atearen bi aldeetara zutabe bana zegoen .
PRED:	And the length of the gate was twenty cubits , and the breadth of the gate was twenty cubits , and the breadth of the gate were twenty cubits .
GOLD:	The entry room was 35 feet wide and 21 feet deep . There were ten steps leading up to it , with a column on each side .

ID:	4320
INPUT:	« Ez dute emaztetzat hartuko emagaldu edo desohoratua izandako emakumerik , ezta senarrak zapuztutakorik ere , apaizak Jainkoari sagaratuak baitaude .
PRED:	“ You must not marry a woman who has sexual relations with a wife . You must not marry her . You must not marry her husband , because the priest is holy .
GOLD:	“ Priests may not marry a woman defiled by prostitution , and they may not marry a woman who is divorced from her husband , for the priests are set apart as holy to their God .

ID:	4321
INPUT:	Herri horien erlijioahutsaren pareko : horien idoloakbasoan ebakitako egur-puskak dira , artisauaren eskuak zizelez landuak ,
PRED:	Their idols are in the land of their idols , and their idols are cut down by the idols of their idols , and their hands are under the hands of the flock .
GOLD:	Their ways are futile and foolish.They cut down a tree , and a craftsman carves an idol .

ID:	4322
INPUT:	Nork eman dizkie jakinduria eta senai<unk> hegaztiari eta oilarrari ?
PRED:	Who has given wisdom to them , and to the mother of the young men , and to the mother of the field ?
GOLD:	Who gives intuition to the heartand instinct to the mind ?

ID:	4323
INPUT:	Eta zuek ez egon hor geldirik . Zoazte etsaien ondoren eta moztu ihesbideak ; ez utzi beren hirietan sartzen , Jaunak , zeuen Jainkoak , eskura eman dizkizue eta » .
PRED:	And you shall not be left . Go and cut off your enemies , and cut off their way , and do not go into their cities , but the Lord your God has given you into your hand . ”
GOLD:	The rest of you continue chasing the enemy and cut them down from the rear . Do n't give them a chance to get back to their towns , for the Lord your God has given you victory over them . ”

ID:	4324
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Gedeoni : « Gudaroste handiegia dakarzu , madiandarrak zuri eskura nik emateko . Harrotu egingo litzaidake Israel , garaipena bere eskuz lortu duela pentsatuz .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Gideon , “ Bring me into your hand , and I will give you into your hand , and I will send Israel into his hand .
GOLD:	The Lord said to Gideon , “ You have too many warriors with you . If I let all of you fight the Midianites , the Israelites will boast to me that they saved themselves by their own strength .

ID:	4325
INPUT:	Ez du giza adimenik izango , abereen sena baizik . Zazpi urtez biziko da horrela !
PRED:	No man shall be made of man , but he shall live seven years .
GOLD:	“ ‘ Then as I lay there dreaming , I saw a messenger , a holy one , coming down from heaven .

ID:	4326
INPUT:	hiri batekoak bestekoengana joango dira eta esango diete : “ Goazen Jaunaren bila , berari mesede eske ” . Eta erantzungo diete : “ Bai , bagoaz gu ere ” .
PRED:	And they shall go to the rest of the cities , and shall say unto them , Let us seek the Lord , and we shall say unto him , We shall go .
GOLD:	The people of one city will say to the people of another , ‘ Come with us to Jerusalem to ask the Lord to bless us . Let 's worship the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . I 'm determined to go . '

ID:	4327
INPUT:	Harremanetan zebilen Tzeruiaren seme Joabekin eta Abiatar apaizarekin ; bere alde zituen hauek .
PRED:	And Joab the son of Zeruiah , and Joab the son of Zeruiah , and the priest , and the priests with him ; and these were with him .
GOLD:	Adonijah took Joab son of Zeruiah and Abiathar the priest into his confidence , and they agreed to help him become king .

ID:	4328
INPUT:	Erantzun ezinik gelditu ziren .
PRED:	And they answered him .
GOLD:	Again they could not answer .

ID:	4329
INPUT:	Kezka guztiak kendu nahi nizkizueke . Ezkongabea Jaunaren gauzez kezkatzen da , Jaunari atsegin nola emango ;
PRED:	I would take away all the things that I would take away from you . It is a wife of the Lord , and I will give thanks to the Lord .
GOLD:	I want you to be free from the concerns of this life . An unmarried man can spend his time doing the Lord 's work and thinking how to please him .

ID:	4330
INPUT:	eta zeuen behi eta arkumeak , zilar eta urreak eta era guztietako ondasunak gehitzean ,
PRED:	and your cattle , and your cattle , and your cattle , and all that you have , and all that you have .
GOLD:	and when your flocks and herds have become very large and your silver and gold have multiplied along with everything else , be careful !

ID:	4331
INPUT:	Eta nik hau diotsut : Pedro zara zu , eta harkaitz horren gainean eraikiko dut nik neure eliza ; eta herioaren indarrak ere ez du menderatuko .
PRED:	I say to you , Peter , you are Peter , and I will build my glory on the rock , and the power of death will not be saved .
GOLD:	Now I say to you that you are Peter ( which means ‘ rock ' ) , and upon this rock I will build my church , and all the powers of hell will not conquer it .

ID:	4332
INPUT:	« Esan beste hau ere : Niretzat zatirik hoberena bereizi ondoren , hartu gainerakoa zeuentzat , beste israeldarrek garia eta olio-ardoak berentzat hartzen dituzten bezala .
PRED:	And he said to them , “ You are my inheritance , and you are to take it for yourselves , as for the sons of Israel , and for the sons of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Also , give these instructions to the Levites : When you present the best part as your offering , it will be considered as though it came from your own threshing floor or winepress .

ID:	4333
INPUT:	Prezioa ezartzeko , honako baliokidetza hauek erabiliko dira : « Pertsona hogei urtetik hirurogei artekoa bada , gizonezkoarentzat berrogeita hamar zilarrezko txanpon , santutegiko dirutan ,
PRED:	These are the names of the sanctuary , which is twenty years old and twenty years old and twenty years old .
GOLD:	here is the scale of values to be used . A man between the ages of twenty and sixty is valued at fifty shekels of silver , as measured by the sanctuary shekel .

ID:	4334
INPUT:	« Hori da kutsagarri diren sexu-jarioari eta hazi-isurketari buruzko legea ,
PRED:	This is the law of the man who is unclean , and of his blood , and of his blood ,
GOLD:	These are the instructions for dealing with anyone who has a bodily discharge — a man who is unclean because of an emission of semen

ID:	4335
INPUT:	zeure eskulan guztien buru egin duzu , denak haren menpean jarri :
PRED:	You have made him ruler over all the work of your hands ; you have made him ruler over all the work of your hands .
GOLD:	the flocks and the herdsand all the wild animals ,

ID:	4336
INPUT:	Bakea eta errukia arau horri lotuak bizi direnei , baita Jainkoaren Israel herriari ere .
PRED:	And peace and peace , and peace , and the house of Israel , even to the house of God .
GOLD:	May God 's peace and mercy be upon all who live by this principle ; they are the new people of God .

ID:	4337
INPUT:	( Mt 10 , 1-4 ; Mk 3 , <unk> )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Love for Enemies

ID:	4338
INPUT:	Orain arte hor ibili gara goseak , egarriak , larrugorri eta gaizki erabiliak ; ez daukagu non bildurik ,
PRED:	But now we are hungry until we are hungry until we are hungry . We are not gathered together , but we are not gathered .
GOLD:	Even now we go hungry and thirsty , and we do n't have enough clothes to keep warm . We are often beaten and have no home .

ID:	4339
INPUT:	Eta lebitarren ondoren , Jauna , Israelen Jainkoa , benetan gurtu nahi zuten guztiak ere Jerusalemera etorri ziren Israelgo leinu guztietatik , Jaunari , beren arbasoen Jainkoari , opariak eskaintzera .
PRED:	After the Levites served the Lord , the God of Israel , all the tribes of Israel came to Jerusalem to offer sacrifices to the Lord their God .
GOLD:	From all the tribes of Israel , those who sincerely wanted to worship the Lord , the God of Israel , followed the Levites to Jerusalem , where they could offer sacrifices to the Lord , the God of their ancestors .

ID:	4340
INPUT:	eta gauza bera ilunabarrean , kriseiluak piztean ; etengabe erreko duzue intsentsua Jaunaren aurrean belaunez belaun .
PRED:	You shall burn the lamps in the evening , and you shall burn incense in the sight of the Lord throughout your generations .
GOLD:	And each evening when he lights the lamps , he must again burn incense in the Lord 's presence . This must be done from generation to generation .

ID:	4341
INPUT:	Zergatik esaten ote du “ Nire bila ibiliko zarete , baina ez nauzue aurkituko ; zeren eta , ni egongo naizen tokira , zuek ezin baitzarete joan ” ? »
PRED:	“ Why do you seek me , but you will not find me , but I will be where I am . ”
GOLD:	What does he mean when he says , ‘ You will search for me but not find me , ' and ‘ You can not go where I am going ' ? ”

ID:	4342
INPUT:	Jainkoak idatziriko epaia betetzeaohoragarri da haren fededun guztientzat ! Aleluia ! Gora Jauna !
PRED:	This is the name of God , that he might judge all his saints . Praise the Lord !
GOLD:	to execute the judgment written against them.This is the glorious privilege of his faithful ones.Praise the Lord !

ID:	4343
INPUT:	Bizirako bidea erakutsiko didazu : alaitasun betea zure aurrean , betiko zoriona zure ondoan .
PRED:	I will teach you the way of life , and I will show you joy in your presence forever .
GOLD:	You will show me the way of life , granting me the joy of your presenceand the pleasures of living with you forever .

ID:	4344
INPUT:	zeuekin eramango dituzue , Damaskotik harantz atzerrira bidaliko zaituztedanean » . Jainko Jaun ahalguztiduna , hori du izena .
PRED:	And they shall bring you to Damascus , when I send you to Damascus , and you shall go to Damascus ; and this is the name of the Lord God of hosts .
GOLD:	So I will send you into exile , to a land east of Damascus , ” says the Lord , whose name is the God of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	4345
INPUT:	Gogoratu esan nizuena : morroia ez da nagusia baino handiago . Ni pertsegitu banaute , zuek ere pertsegituko zaituztete ; nire mezua nola hartu , hala hartuko dute zuena ere .
PRED:	Remember what I said to you , “ The servant is not greater than the master . If I am not greater than my master , they will hate you , and you will take care of my word . ”
GOLD:	Do you remember what I told you ? ‘ A slave is not greater than the master . ' Since they persecuted me , naturally they will persecute you . And if they had listened to me , they would listen to you .

ID:	4346
INPUT:	Orduan , Daniel purpuraz janzteko eta lepoan urrezko katea jartzeko agindu zuen Belxatzarrek , eta agintez hirugarren zela erreinuan aldarrikatu zuen .
PRED:	Then Daniel said to him , “ You must put on sackcloth and put on sackcloth , and it was the third month . ”
GOLD:	Then at Belshazzar 's command , Daniel was dressed in purple robes , a gold chain was hung around his neck , and he was proclaimed the third highest ruler in the kingdom .

ID:	4347
INPUT:	Zenbait apaiz ere egoera berean zeuden : Hobaias , Hakotz eta Barzilairen ondorengoak ziren . Azken honek Galaadeko Barzilairen alaba batekin ezkondu zelako zeraman izen hori .
PRED:	These are the priests : the sons of Gershon , the sons of Gershon , the sons of Gershon , the sons of Gershon , the sons of Gilead , who had married a wife of Gilead .
GOLD:	Three families of priests — Hobaiah , Hakkoz , and Barzillai — also returned . ( This Barzillai had married a woman who was a descendant of Barzillai of Gilead , and he had taken her family name . )

ID:	4348
INPUT:	Baina zuzen jokatzeagatik sufritu beharrean gertatzen bazarete , zorionekoak zuek ! Ez izan inoren beldur , ez ikaratu !
PRED:	But if you suffer for the judgment , you will be blessed . Do n't be afraid .
GOLD:	But even if you suffer for doing what is right , God will reward you for it . So do n't worry or be afraid of their threats .

ID:	4349
INPUT:	eta beste bi atzealdeko kantoietarako .
PRED:	And for the two corners of the tabernacle , on the two corners of the tabernacle .
GOLD:	along with two additional frames to reinforce the rear corners of the Tabernacle .

ID:	4350
INPUT:	Egun hartan , Jaunari sagaraturiko aldare bat egongo da Egiptoren erdian , eta Jaunaren ohorezko oroitarri bat muga ondoan .
PRED:	On that day there shall be a holy altar to the Lord in the midst of Egypt , and there shall be a pillar of an offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	In that day there will be an altar to the Lord in the heart of Egypt , and there will be a monument to the Lord at its border .

ID:	4351
INPUT:	( 38 , 8 )
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	The Incense

ID:	4352
INPUT:	gizakia etzan eta ez da berriro jaikiko , ortzia desagertu eta gero ere , ez da itzartuko , ez da bere loalditik esnatuko .
PRED:	But the man shall not rise again , nor shall he rise again , nor shall he be made known , neither shall he enter into his hand .
GOLD:	people are laid to rest and do not rise again.Until the heavens are no more , they will not wake upnor be roused from their sleep .

ID:	4353
INPUT:	Ikusi zuen Jaunak handituz zihoala munduan gizakiaren gaiztakeria eta honen burubide guztiek txarrera jotzen zutela beti .
PRED:	And the Lord saw that the wickedness of men and the wickedness of men were done in the world , as all their heart had done evil .
GOLD:	The Lord observed the extent of human wickedness on the earth , and he saw that everything they thought or imagined was consistently and totally evil .

ID:	4354
INPUT:	Aurrekoetan baino ere oparoago bedeinkatu zuen Jaunak Job bere ondorengo urteetan : hamalau mila ardi , sei mila gamelu , mila idi-pare eta mila asteme izan zituen .
PRED:	And the Lord blessed Job in the sight of his sons , and blessed him in the sight of his sons , five thousand and five thousand sheep , and a thousand sheep , and a thousand sheep , and a thousand sheep .
GOLD:	So the Lord blessed Job in the second half of his life even more than in the beginning . For now he had 14,000 sheep , 6,000 camels , 1,000 teams of oxen , and 1,000 female donkeys .

ID:	4355
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Jehuri : « Niri atsegin zaidana eginez ongi jokatu duzulako , eta Akaben errege-etxeari nik nahi nuena egin diozulako , zure ondorengoak jarriko dira , laugarren belaunaldiraino , Israelgo errege-aulkian » .
PRED:	The Lord said to Jehu , “ Because you have done what was right in the sight of Ahab , and your descendants will sit on the throne of Ahab . ”
GOLD:	Nonetheless the Lord said to Jehu , “ You have done well in following my instructions to destroy the family of Ahab . Therefore , your descendants will be kings of Israel down to the fourth generation . ”

ID:	4356
INPUT:	Eta Jaunaren aldarea berriztaturik , elkartasun- eta esker oneko opariak eskaini zituen bertan , eta Jauna , Israelen Jainkoa , gurtzeko agindu zion Judari .
PRED:	And he built an altar of the Lord , and offered a burnt offering , and a sacrifice , and a sacrifice to the Lord God of Israel , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	Then he restored the altar of the Lord and sacrificed peace offerings and thanksgiving offerings on it . He also encouraged the people of Judah to worship the Lord , the God of Israel .

ID:	4357
INPUT:	Etorri den bidetik itzuliko da ; ez da sartuko hiri honetan . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	And he shall return from the way , and he shall not enter into this city : Thus saith the Lord .
GOLD:	The king will return to his own countryby the same road on which he came.He will not enter this city , 'says the Lord .

ID:	4358
INPUT:	Ni mendian nintzen , Jaunak zuekin eginiko itunaren harlauzak jasotzera igota . Berrogei egun eta berrogei gau egin nituen mendian ezer jan eta edan gabe .
PRED:	And I went up to the mountain of the Lord , and took up the covenant of the covenant which the Lord had made with you , and forty days and forty days , and I ate nothing in the mountain .
GOLD:	This happened when I was on the mountain receiving the tablets of stone inscribed with the words of the covenant that the Lord had made with you . I was there for forty days and forty nights , and all that time I ate no food and drank no water .

ID:	4359
INPUT:	Jerusalem mendeku eske
PRED:	The People of Jerusalem
GOLD:	's Vengeance on Babylon

ID:	4360
INPUT:	Judak Jaunaren ituna hautsi
PRED:	Judah and Judah
GOLD:	A Call to Faithfulness

ID:	4361
INPUT:	Pertsona zentzudunei bezala mintzo natzaizue ; juzgatu zeuek diodana .
PRED:	I speak to those who are wise , just as you are wise .
GOLD:	You are reasonable people . Decide for yourselves if what I am saying is true .

ID:	4362
INPUT:	Lehorte handia
PRED:	The Death of the Temple
GOLD:	Judah 's Terrible Drought

ID:	4363
INPUT:	« Joani entzun zion herri osoak , baita zergalariek ere , Jainkoak arrazoi zuela aitortu zuten , haren bataioa hartuz .
PRED:	And all the people heard John , and the servants of the people did know that God was right .
GOLD:	When they heard this , all the people — even the tax collectors — agreed that God 's way was right , for they had been baptized by John .

ID:	4364
INPUT:	Delaias , Tobias eta Nekodaren ondorengoak ziren , 652 lagun .
PRED:	And the sons of Elioenai , and the sons of Gershon , two hundred and eight hundred and twenty .
GOLD:	This group included the families of Delaiah , Tobiah , and Nekoda — a total of 652 people .

ID:	4365
INPUT:	Lebana , Hagaba eta Xalmairenak ;
PRED:	The children of Levi , the children of Levi , the children of Levi , the children of Levi ,
GOLD:	Lebanah , Hagabah , Shalmai ,

ID:	4366
INPUT:	Hildakoagandik hurbilen legokeen hiriko arduradunek bigai bat hartuko dute , behin ere lanean jardun edo uztarrian lotu gabea .
PRED:	And the elders of the city of the dead shall be brought to the elders of the dead , and the elders of the city shall not be put to death .
GOLD:	When the nearest town has been determined , that town 's elders must select from the herd a heifer that has never been trained or yoked to a plow .

ID:	4367
INPUT:	Jaunak Jeremiasi beste mezu hau eman zion :
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to Jeremiah , saying ,
GOLD:	The Lord gave another message to Jeremiah . He said ,

ID:	4368
INPUT:	« Abereei dagokienez , abelgorria nahiz abere xehea izan , hamarretik bat Jaunari sagaratuko zaio , zozketa bidez aukeratuz .
PRED:	“ If any of the animals of the animal is to be holy to the Lord , it shall be holy to the Lord , and it shall be holy to the Lord .
GOLD:	Count off every tenth animal from your herds and flocks and set them apart for the Lord as holy .

ID:	4369
INPUT:	hasieran begizko testigu eta gero berri onaren predikari izandakoek jakinarazi digutenaren arabera .
PRED:	We have a witness to be a witness , and they will know the Good News of the Good News .
GOLD:	They used the eyewitness reports circulating among us from the early disciples .

ID:	4370
INPUT:	Horrela , erosi nion Anatoteko alorra neure lehengusu Hanameli . Zilarrezko hamazazpi txanpon ordaindu nizkion .
PRED:	So I began to buy the field of Aaron my father , and I gave him ten shekels of silver and twenty shekels of silver .
GOLD:	So I bought the field at Anathoth , paying Hanamel seventeen pieces of silver for it .

ID:	4371
INPUT:	Beraz , jendea bildu zenean , Pilatok galdetu zien : — Zein nahi duzue askatzea , Barrabas ala Jesus , Mesias delakoa ?
PRED:	When the crowds gathered together , Pilate asked them , “ What do you want to ask for you to be free ? ”
GOLD:	As the crowds gathered before Pilate 's house that morning , he asked them , “ Which one do you want me to release to you — Barabbas , or Jesus who is called the Messiah ? ”

ID:	4372
INPUT:	baina oihuka eta deiadarka hasi naizenean , bere soinekoa utzi eta ihes egin du kanpora » .
PRED:	But when I cried out , I cry out , he left his clothes and fled . ”
GOLD:	“ But when I screamed , he ran outside , leaving his cloak with me ! ”

ID:	4373
INPUT:	Dena dela , zuetariko bakoitzak maita beza emaztea bere burua bezala , eta emazteak izan biezaio begirune senarrari .
PRED:	But let each of you love his wife as his wife , and let him be his wife , and let him be his wife .
GOLD:	So again I say , each man must love his wife as he loves himself , and the wife must respect her husband .

ID:	4374
INPUT:	Leak zioen : « Jainkoak saritu egin nau senarrari neskamea eman diodalako » . Eta Isakar eman zion izen .
PRED:	Then Leah said to them , “ Because God has given me the faith I have given me . ” So Isaac named him Isaac .
GOLD:	She named him Issachar , for she said , “ God has rewarded me for giving my servant to my husband as a wife . ”

ID:	4375
INPUT:	« Nola ausartzen zarete , moabdarrok , adoretsu , borrokan zaildutakogudari zaretela esaten ?
PRED:	“ How are you going to speak to you , Moab , Moab , that you may know the battle ?
GOLD:	“ You used to boast , ‘ We are heroes , mighty men of war . '

ID:	4376
INPUT:	Hori guztia gertatuko zaie nire hitzak aditu nahi izan ez dituztelako eta behin eta berriro , etengabe , bidali dizkiedan profetei jaramonik egin ez dietelako . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	All these things will happen to you , because they would not listen to my words , and they did not listen to my words , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	For they refuse to listen to me , though I have spoken to them repeatedly through the prophets I sent . And you who are in exile have not listened either , ” says the Lord .

ID:	4377
INPUT:	esaten : « Gizaseme , israeldarrengana bidaltzen zaitut , jende errebelde horrengana ; horiek eta horien arbasoak nire aurka altxatu dira gaur arte .
PRED:	“ Son of man , I send you to the children of Israel , to the house of Israel , and to the house of their fathers , until this day .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , ” he said , “ I am sending you to the nation of Israel , a rebellious nation that has rebelled against me . They and their ancestors have been rebelling against me to this very day .

ID:	4378
INPUT:	Kristo Melkisedeken antzera apaiz ( 7 , <unk> )
PRED:	Jesus is a priest who is a priest
GOLD:	Melchizedek Is Greater Than Abraham

ID:	4379
INPUT:	Ez fidatu , “ Jaunaren tenplua , Jaunaren tenplua ” errepikatuz engainatzen zaituzteten horietaz .
PRED:	Do n't trust in the temple of the Lord , and do n't trust you .
GOLD:	But do n't be fooled by those who promise you safety simply because the Lord 's Temple is here . They chant , “ The Lord 's Temple is here ! The Lord 's Temple is here ! ”

ID:	4380
INPUT:	eta ez ziren leial izan Jerubaal-Gedeonen senitartekoekin , hark israeldarrei hainbeste on egin zien arren .
PRED:	And they did not be faithful to the children of Israel by the families of Gideon , and the children of Israel became a great multitude of the children of Israel .
GOLD:	Nor did they show any loyalty to the family of Jerub-baal ( that is , Gideon ) , despite all the good he had done for Israel .

ID:	4381
INPUT:	ez dute ezagutzen bake-bidea .
PRED:	They do not know the way of peace .
GOLD:	They do n't know where to find peace . ”

ID:	4382
INPUT:	Zahagi zaharretan ere ez da ardo berririk sartzen ; bestela , zahagiak lehertu egingo lirateke , eta ardoa isuri eta zahagiak galdu . Ez ! Ardo berria zahagi berrietan sartzen da , eta batak eta besteak irauten dute » .
PRED:	There is no new wine in the old age , but the people will be cut off , and the new wine , and the new wine , and the new wine , and the new wine will not enter into it . ”
GOLD:	“ And no one puts new wine into old wineskins . For the old skins would burst from the pressure , spilling the wine and ruining the skins . New wine is stored in new wineskins so that both are preserved . ”

ID:	4383
INPUT:	Gau-ikuskari batean , zaldizko bat ikusi nuen zaldi gorri baten gainean , zulogune batean geldirik , sastraka artean ; haren atzean , zenbait zaldi gorri , nabar eta zuri .
PRED:	When I saw a vision on a horse , I saw a horse on a horse on a horse , and there were some horses on him . There were some horses , horses , horses , and horses .
GOLD:	In a vision during the night , I saw a man sitting on a red horse that was standing among some myrtle trees in a small valley . Behind him were riders on red , brown , and white horses .

ID:	4384
INPUT:	Paulok honela esan zien ehuntari eta soldaduei : « Horiek ontzian gelditzen ez badira , zuek ez zarete bizirik aterako » .
PRED:	Paul said to the centurion and the soldiers , “ If you do n't remain in the boat , you will not live . ”
GOLD:	But Paul said to the commanding officer and the soldiers , “ You will all die unless the sailors stay aboard . ”

ID:	4385
INPUT:	Zu hari begira zeundela , harri bat atera zen menditik , inork ere bultzatu gabe , eta irudiaren burdinazko eta buztinezko oinak jo eta txiki-txiki egin zituen .
PRED:	When you looked at the mountain , no one took a stone from the mountain , and no one cut it out of the mountain , and he struck the pieces of iron , and cut down the pieces of iron .
GOLD:	As you watched , a rock was cut from a mountain , but not by human hands . It struck the feet of iron and clay , smashing them to bits .

ID:	4386
INPUT:	Jakobengatik dolua
PRED:	Jacob and Jacob
GOLD:	Joseph Reassures His Brothers

ID:	4387
INPUT:	Heriotza-zigorra merezi duen hiltzailearen bizia ezin izango da ordaindu diruaren truke ; heriotzara emango dute .
PRED:	The death of death will not be sold to death , but the dead will not be sold . They will die .
GOLD:	Also , you must never accept a ransom payment for the life of someone judged guilty of murder and subject to execution ; murderers must always be put to death .

ID:	4388
INPUT:	Benjaminen leinutik , Gideoniren seme Abidan ;
PRED:	Of the tribe of Benjamin , of the tribe of Benjamin ;
GOLD:	BenjaminAbidan son of Gideoni

ID:	4389
INPUT:	Itsasoak ditu azpiratu , hondora jaitsi diraharritzarraren antzera .
PRED:	He hath broken the sea into the midst of the assembly , and hath come down to the assembly of the assembly .
GOLD:	The deep waters gushed over them ; they sank to the bottom like a stone .

ID:	4390
INPUT:	Ona denak ona ateratzen du bere barneko ontasun-altxorretik ; eta gaiztoak gaitza bere gaiztakeri altxorretik . Ahoak esan , bihotzari gainezka darionetik esaten baitu .
PRED:	A good man is good , and a good thing from his sins , and the evil from his treasures ; for the mouth of the wicked shall say unto him , This is the heart of his heart .
GOLD:	A good person produces good things from the treasury of a good heart , and an evil person produces evil things from the treasury of an evil heart . What you say flows from what is in your heart .

ID:	4391
INPUT:	Ohartu , bada , Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak lurralde eder horren jabetza ez dizuela zeuen merezimenduengatik ematen ; izan ere , herri burugogor baitzarete .
PRED:	You must know that the Lord your God is giving you this land , because you have not given it to your descendants , because you are a people .
GOLD:	You must recognize that the Lord your God is not giving you this good land because you are good , for you are not — you are a stubborn people .

ID:	4392
INPUT:	« Esan Aaroni , beronen semeei eta israeldar guztiei : Norbaitek , israeldarra nahiz Israelen bizi den etorkina izan , botoren bat betetzeko edo norberaren borondatez egin ohi diren erre-oparietakoren bat Jaunari eskaini nahi badio ,
PRED:	“ Speak to Aaron and his sons , and to all Israel , and to all the house of Israel , and to offer a sacrifice to the Lord , and to offer an offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Give Aaron and his sons and all the Israelites these instructions , which apply both to native Israelites and to the foreigners living among you . “ If you present a gift as a burnt offering to the Lord , whether it is to fulfill a vow or is a voluntary offering ,

ID:	4393
INPUT:	Ken iezaiozue , bada , talentua eta eman hamar dituenari .
PRED:	So take away the money and give it to the one who has given to the one who has ten .
GOLD:	“ Then he ordered , ‘ Take the money from this servant , and give it to the one with the ten bags of silver .

ID:	4394
INPUT:	« Nire gau-ikuskarietan , gizaseme antzeko bat ikusi nuen zeruetako hodeietan etortzen . Gizon zaharrarengana hurbildu zenean , honi aurkeztu zioten .
PRED:	When I saw my vision in the vision , I saw a man coming in the sky . When he came near to the man , they brought him to the old man .
GOLD:	As my vision continued that night , I saw someone like a son of man coming with the clouds of heaven . He approached the Ancient One and was led into his presence .

ID:	4395
INPUT:	Hurbil zakizkit , defenda nazazu , askatu etsaien eskutik .
PRED:	Come near to me , and save me from the hand of my enemies .
GOLD:	You know of my shame , scorn , and disgrace.You see all that my enemies are doing .

ID:	4396
INPUT:	Xunemgo emakumearen istorioa bukatu
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The Woman from Shunem Returns Home

ID:	4397
INPUT:	urrezko bi katetxoak bularreko ertzen eraztunetan katigatu zituzten ,
PRED:	And they made two gold rings of gold , and put them on the two corners of the tabernacle .
GOLD:	They tied the two gold cords to the rings on the chestpiece .

ID:	4398
INPUT:	( 2 Erg 23 , <unk> — 24 , 17 )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Jehoiakim Rules in Judah

ID:	4399
INPUT:	Egin lurraldearen planoa , zazpi zatitan banatuz , eta ekarri niri . Nik hemen , Jaunaren , gure Jainkoaren , aurrean , zotz egingo dut .
PRED:	Go into the land of the land , and bring it to me , and bring it to me , and I will cast out before the Lord our God .
GOLD:	And when you record the seven divisions of the land and bring them to me , I will cast sacred lots in the presence of the Lord our God to assign land to each tribe .

ID:	4400
INPUT:	Laugarren egunean , esan zioten Samsonen emazteari : — Atera iezaiozu azpikeriaz senarrari igarkizunak zer esan nahi duen ; bestela , su emango dizugu , baita zuen aitaren etxeari ere . Guri lapurtzeko asmoz gonbidatu al gaituzue ?
PRED:	And it came to pass on the fourth day , that Samson 's wife said unto his wife , Go out , and say unto his wife , Is it that thy husband speak unto thee , that he may send us into the house of thy father 's wife ?
GOLD:	On the fourth day they said to Samson 's wife , “ Entice your husband to explain the riddle for us , or we will burn down your father 's house with you in it . Did you invite us to this party just to make us poor ? ”

ID:	4401
INPUT:	Izan ere , zuenetik zabaldu da Mazedonia eta Akaiara Jaunaren mezua ; eta eskualde horietara ez ezik , bazter guztietara ere heldu da Jainkoarengan duzuen sinesmenaren entzutea , guk ezer esan beharrik gabe .
PRED:	For the word of the Lord has spread out from you , and the word of the Lord , and has not come into the hands of the Lord , but we have not heard the word of God .
GOLD:	And now the word of the Lord is ringing out from you to people everywhere , even beyond Macedonia and Achaia , for wherever we go we find people telling us about your faith in God . We do n't need to tell them about it ,

ID:	4402
INPUT:	kanpalekura bertara erorarazi zituen , oihal-etxolen ingurura .
PRED:	He brought them into the camp , and brought them to the camp of the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	He caused the birds to fall within their campand all around their tents .

ID:	4403
INPUT:	baina apaizak ikusten badu lizuna ez dela zabaldu esandako gauza horietako batean ,
PRED:	But if the priest has seen it , he will not spread it in one of these things .
GOLD:	“ But if the priest examines it and finds that the contaminated area has not spread in the clothing , the fabric , or the leather ,

ID:	4404
INPUT:	Jaunak , ordea , erantzun zion : — Marta , Marta , gauza askorengatik zabiltza kezkaz eta larri ;
PRED:	But the Lord said to him , “ Mordecai , and Mordecai , for many things , and for many things . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord said to her , “ My dear Martha , you are worried and upset over all these details !

ID:	4405
INPUT:	Orduan , Saulek esan zien berekin zituenei : — Begiratu eta ikusi nor joan den gure artetik . Begiratu zuten , bada , eta Jonatan eta ezkutaria falta ziren .
PRED:	Then Saul said to the men who were with him , “ Look and see who is among us . ” So they looked at Jonathan , and there was a witness in the sight of Jonathan .
GOLD:	“ Call the roll and find out who 's missing , ” Saul ordered . And when they checked , they found that Jonathan and his armor bearer were gone .

ID:	4406
INPUT:	Zabulondarren buruzagia Helonen seme Eliab izango da ,
PRED:	And the prince of Zebulun shall be the prince of Zebulun : and the prince of the children of Zebulun shall be Shimei .
GOLD:	ZebulunEliab son of Helon57,400

ID:	4407
INPUT:	Baina ikusten ez duguna itxaro badugu , iraupenez behar dugu zain egon .
PRED:	But if we see that we do not see , we must wait for our hope .
GOLD:	But if we look forward to something we do n't yet have , we must wait patiently and confidently . )

ID:	4408
INPUT:	Handik , biharamunean , Kio pareraino iritsi ginen itsasoz ; hurrengo egunean Samosera heldu ginen , eta hurrengoan Miletora .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the next day , that it came to pass by the sea , and it came to pass by the next day .
GOLD:	The next day we sailed past the island of Kios . The following day we crossed to the island of Samos , and a day later we arrived at Miletus .

ID:	4409
INPUT:	egoitzaren beste aldera , iparraldera , beste hogei ohol ,
PRED:	On the north side of the tabernacle , the north side of the tabernacle , twenty bases ,
GOLD:	For the north side of the Tabernacle , he made another twenty frames ,

ID:	4410
INPUT:	eta guk erantzun genion ez gintezkeela etor geure anaia gazteena geurekin ez bagenekarren , hura gabe ezin ginela zure aurrera agertu .
PRED:	And we answered and said unto him , Let not our brother be with us , but we do not know that he is not with you .
GOLD:	we replied , ‘ We ca n't go unless you let our youngest brother go with us . We 'll never get to see the man 's face unless our youngest brother is with us . '

ID:	4411
INPUT:	Behin batean , Joabi dei egin zion , erregeagana bidaltzeko asmoz ; Joabek , ordea , ez zuen Absalomengana joan nahi izan . Bigarrenez egin zion dei ; baina etorri nahi izan ez zuenez ,
PRED:	Then Joab called Joab to the king , but Joab refused to go to Absalom . But he would not come to Absalom , but he would not come to Absalom .
GOLD:	Then Absalom sent for Joab to ask him to intercede for him , but Joab refused to come . Absalom sent for him a second time , but again Joab refused to come .

ID:	4412
INPUT:	Eta esan zien : — Zoazte mendira , zuen bila dabiltzanek harrapa ez zaitzaten . Egon bertan hiru egun ezkutaturik , zuen pertsegitzaileak hirira itzuli arte . Gero , jarraitu zeuen bideari .
PRED:	He said to them , “ Go up into the mountain , that you may not take you away ; stay there three days until you return to the city . ”
GOLD:	“ Escape to the hill country , ” she told them . “ Hide there for three days from the men searching for you . Then , when they have returned , you can go on your way . ”

ID:	4413
INPUT:	Uziasen erregealdia
PRED:	King Uzziah of Judah
GOLD:	Uzziah Rules in Judah

ID:	4414
INPUT:	Egiteko hau bete eta bildutako dirua haien esku jarri ondoren , Espainiara abiatuko naiz , zuen hiritik igaroz .
PRED:	After I have done this , I will hand them over to the priest , and I will go to the city for you .
GOLD:	As soon as I have delivered this money and completed this good deed of theirs , I will come to see you on my way to Spain .

ID:	4415
INPUT:	Baina hondar-meta batean hondoa jo zuten ; branka hondarretan sartua gelditu zen , mugitu ezinik ; txopa , berriz , zartatuz zihoan olatuen kolpez .
PRED:	But when they had gone into the ship , he went into the sea , and he went into the sea ; and they laid their hands on him .
GOLD:	But they hit a shoal and ran the ship aground too soon . The bow of the ship stuck fast , while the stern was repeatedly smashed by the force of the waves and began to break apart .

ID:	4416
INPUT:	Nik ere biluztu egingo zaitut , zure lotsariak bistan jarriko .
PRED:	I will make you ashamed , and I will put you to shame .
GOLD:	I myself will strip youand expose you to shame .

ID:	4417
INPUT:	Gaiztoak harrokeriaz erasotzen dio errukarriari , asmatzen dituen azpikeriez dauka harrapatua .
PRED:	The wicked are proud , and the wicked are not taken away .
GOLD:	The wicked arrogantly hunt down the poor.Let them be caught in the evil they plan for others .

ID:	4418
INPUT:	Jainkoak zuen aurretik bidali nau , zuentzat behar adina janari gordetzeko eta zuek harrigarriro salbatzeko .
PRED:	And God sent me before you , that he may give me food to you , and to save you .
GOLD:	God has sent me ahead of you to keep you and your families alive and to preserve many survivors .

ID:	4419
INPUT:	Sasoi bikaina izango duzu hilobia arte , gari-balak uztaroan bezala .
PRED:	You will be like a man in the field until the harvest of the field .
GOLD:	You will go to the grave at a ripe old age , like a sheaf of grain harvested at the proper time !

ID:	4420
INPUT:	Davidek , orduan , Akixi : — Zer egin dut , baina ? Ikusi al duzu zeure zerbitzari honengan deus txarrik zuregana heldu nintzenez geroztik ? Zergatik ezin naiz , bada , joan ene errege jaunaren etsaiak borrokatzera ?
PRED:	David said , “ What have I done ? ” But David asked , “ Why did you see anything evil in your servant ? Why did I go to fight against my lord the king 's enemies ? ”
GOLD:	“ What have I done to deserve this treatment ? ” David demanded . “ What have you ever found in your servant , that I ca n't go and fight the enemies of my lord the king ? ”

ID:	4421
INPUT:	Liztortzarrak bidaliko ditu Jaunak zuen Jainkoak haien kontra , ezkutuan gordeta bizirik gelditutako azkenak ere garbitu arte .
PRED:	The Lord your God will send you out against them , and he who is left in secret , until the last time of the last .
GOLD:	And then the Lord your God will send terror to drive out the few survivors still hiding from you !

ID:	4422
INPUT:	Bukatzean , esan zioten : — Non da Sara zure emaztea ? — Oihal-etxolan — erantzun zuen Abrahamek .
PRED:	They said to him , “ Where is your wife ? ” And Abraham said , “ Where is your wife ? ”
GOLD:	“ Where is Sarah , your wife ? ” the visitors asked . “ She 's inside the tent , ” Abraham replied .

ID:	4423
INPUT:	Bai , egia da diotsuedana , higuingarri zait maltzurki hitz egitea .
PRED:	For it is good to me , that I speak evil words .
GOLD:	for I speak the truthand detest every kind of deception .

ID:	4424
INPUT:	Esna zaitez , Sion , esnatu , jantzi indarrez ! Jantzi soinekorik ederrenak , Jerusalem , hiri santu horrek ! Atzerritar sinesgaberik , kutsaturiko inorez baita berriro zuregan sartuko .
PRED:	Be careful , O Zion , put on sackcloth , put on sackcloth , and put on your garments , Jerusalem , Jerusalem , holy city , and the holy city will be unclean , for it will come into you .
GOLD:	Wake up , wake up , O Zion ! Clothe yourself with strength.Put on your beautiful clothes , O holy city of Jerusalem , for unclean and godless people will enter your gates no longer .

ID:	4425
INPUT:	Bazen Samarian Jaunaren profeta bat , O<unk> izenekoa . Samariara itzulian zetorren gudarosteari bidera atera eta esan zien : « Jaunak , gure arbasoen Jainkoak , zuen esku utzi ditu Judakoak , berauen kontra haserre zegoelako . Baina zuek halako amorruz hil dituzue , ezen zeruraino heldu baita zuen egintzaren oihartzuna .
PRED:	And there was a prophet of the Lord in Samaria . And he went to Samaria to Samaria , and said unto them , The Lord our God hath delivered us into the hand of our fathers , because he was angry with his fathers , and he was angry with him .
GOLD:	But a prophet of the Lord named Oded was there in Samaria when the army of Israel returned home . He went out to meet them and said , “ The Lord , the God of your ancestors , was angry with Judah and let you defeat them . But you have gone too far , killing them without mercy , and all heaven is disturbed .

ID:	4426
INPUT:	Eguna zabaltzean , zenbait juduk elkar hartu zuten eta zin egin , ez zutela ez jango eta ez edango Paulori bizia kendu arte .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when they saw that some of the Jews were not able to eat , and they did not eat , until Paul had taken away the life of Paul .
GOLD:	The next morning a group of Jews got together and bound themselves with an oath not to eat or drink until they had killed Paul .

ID:	4427
INPUT:	Hona hemen israeldarren arbasoen familiaburuak : Israelen lehen-seme Rubenen semeak Henok , Palu , Hetzron eta Karmi izan ziren . Hauek dira Rubenen jatorriko familiak .
PRED:	These are the names of the fathers of the fathers of the sons of Israel : the sons of Reuben , Reuben , Reuben , Reuben , and Jozabad . These are the families of the sons of Reuben . These are the families of the sons of Reuben .
GOLD:	These are the ancestors of some of the clans of Israel : The sons of Reuben , Israel 's oldest son , were Hanoch , Pallu , Hezron , and Carmi . Their descendants became the clans of Reuben .

ID:	4428
INPUT:	Zuei , seme-ala<unk> , diotsuet : Ezagutzen duzue Aita . Zuei , gurasooi , diotsuet : Ezagutzen duzue hasieratik zen hura . Zuei , gazteoi , diotsuet : Indartsu zarete eta Jainkoaren mezua zuengan tinko dago eta garaitu duzue gaiztoa .
PRED:	I tell you , my Father , you know the Father . I say to you , you know him from the beginning . You know him from the beginning of the beginning . I say to you , you will know the word of God , and you will do evil .
GOLD:	I have written to you who are God 's childrenbecause you know the Father.I have written to you who are mature in the faithbecause you know Christ , who existed from the beginning.I have written to you who are young in the faithbecause you are strong.God 's word lives in your hearts , and you have won your battle with the evil one .

ID:	4429
INPUT:	Eta eskatu eta hartzen ez baduzue , gaizki eskatzen duzuelako da , zeuen grina txarrak asetzeko .
PRED:	But if you ask , you do n't ask , because you do evil , because you do evil .
GOLD:	And even when you ask , you do n't get it because your motives are all wrong — you want only what will give you pleasure .

ID:	4430
INPUT:	Marfilezko errege-aulki bikain bat ere eginarazi zuen erregeak , eta urre hutsez jantzi .
PRED:	And the king made a high throne on the throne of the king , and he clothed him with gold .
GOLD:	Then the king made a huge throne , decorated with ivory and overlaid with pure gold .

ID:	4431
INPUT:	Denak harriturik gelditu ziren ikusten zutenaz : mutuak hizketan , elbarriak sendaturik , herrenak ibiltzen eta itsuak ikusten . Eta Israelen Jainkoa goresten hasi ziren .
PRED:	And when all the people saw him , they were amazed ; and when they were healed , they were healed , and saw the blind , and they glorified God of Israel .
GOLD:	The crowd was amazed ! Those who had n't been able to speak were talking , the crippled were made well , the lame were walking , and the blind could see again ! And they praised the God of Israel .

ID:	4432
INPUT:	Ai ni errespetatzeko eta nire aginduak betetzeko jarrera hori izango balute beti ! Zoriontsu izango lirateke beti , bai beraiek , bai ondorengoak .
PRED:	Woe to me , and to keep my commandments , and to keep my commandments , and to keep my commandments , and to keep my commandments , and to his seed forever .
GOLD:	Oh , that they would always have hearts like this , that they might fear me and obey all my commands ! If they did , they and their descendants would prosper forever .

ID:	4433
INPUT:	Izen bat darama bere jantzian eta bere izterrean idatzia : « erregeen Errege eta jaunen Jaun » .
PRED:	And it was written in his mother 's clothes , and written in the book of the king , and in his right hand , and in the king 's house .
GOLD:	On his robe at his thigh was written this title : King of all kings and Lord of all lords .

ID:	4434
INPUT:	Gero , batzar osoak mandatariak igorri zizkien Rimon harkaitzean gorderik zeuden benjamindarrei , bakea eskainiz .
PRED:	And all the congregation sent messengers to Benjamin in the rock of Benjamin , and they offered peace .
GOLD:	The Israelite assembly sent a peace delegation to the remaining people of Benjamin who were living at the rock of Rimmon .

ID:	4435
INPUT:	Jakoben ondorengoen artean , bakar batzuk besterikez dira itzuli<unk> indartsuagana .
PRED:	There are some of the sons of Jacob , and there are some of the sons of Jacob .
GOLD:	A remnant will return ; yes , the remnant of Jacob will return to the Mighty God .

ID:	4436
INPUT:	Balaamek erantzun zion : — Orain hemen nauzu ! Baina , zer esan dezaket ? Jainkoak ahoan jarriko dizkidan hitzak bakarrik esan ditzaket .
PRED:	Balaam said to Balak , “ I am here . But what can I say to you ? But what can I say to you ? ”
GOLD:	Balaam replied , “ Look , now I have come , but I have no power to say whatever I want . I will speak only the message that God puts in my mouth . ”

ID:	4437
INPUT:	nire legeen arabera joka eta nire erabakiak betetzen saia zaitezten . Zuek nire herri izango zarete eta ni zuen Jainko .
PRED:	and walk in my statutes , and keep my statutes , and keep my statutes , and ye shall be my people , and I am your God .
GOLD:	so they will obey my decrees and regulations . Then they will truly be my people , and I will be their God .

ID:	4438
INPUT:	Eta hauxe da Jainkoaren asmo ezkutua : Kristo Jesusen bitartez eta berri onari esker , jentilok oinordekide izatea , Kristorekin gorputz bat bera osatzea eta agintzari beraren partaide izatea .
PRED:	This is the secret of God , which is through Jesus Christ , and through the Gentiles , to the Gentiles , and to be baptized in Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	And this is God 's plan : Both Gentiles and Jews who believe the Good News share equally in the riches inherited by God 's children . Both are part of the same body , and both enjoy the promise of blessings because they belong to Christ Jesus .

ID:	4439
INPUT:	Dohatsuak zure emazteak ! Dohatsuak zure jakinduria entzunez beti zure aurrean dauden zerbitzari hauek !
PRED:	How happy are your wife ! They are the servants who are in your presence forever !
GOLD:	How happy your people must be ! What a privilege for your officials to stand here day after day , listening to your wisdom !

ID:	4440
INPUT:	Salomonek otoitza bukatzean , zerutik jaitsitako suak kiskali egin zituen erre-opariak eta eskaintzak , eta Jaunaren aintzak bete zuen tenplua .
PRED:	When Solomon finished praying , he burned the fire from heaven , and burnt offerings , and the glory of the Lord filled the temple .
GOLD:	When Solomon finished praying , fire flashed down from heaven and burned up the burnt offerings and sacrifices , and the glorious presence of the Lord filled the Temple .

ID:	4441
INPUT:	Bi eskuak aker biziaren buruan ezarriz , israeldarren gaiztakeria , errebeldia eta bekatu guztien aitormena egingo du . Honela , akerraren burura botako ditu guztiak , eta horren kargu duenaren eskuz basamortura bidaliko du .
PRED:	But two hands shall put their hands on the head of the sons of Israel , and the iniquity of all their sins , and the sin of all their sins , and all their sins shall be cast into the wilderness , and we shall send them into the wilderness .
GOLD:	He will lay both of his hands on the goat 's head and confess over it all the wickedness , rebellion , and sins of the people of Israel . In this way , he will transfer the people 's sins to the head of the goat . Then a man specially chosen for the task will drive the goat into the wilderness .

ID:	4442
INPUT:	Orduan , marmarka hasi ziren entzuleak , « Neu naiz zerutik jaitsiriko ogia » esan zuelako ,
PRED:	And when they heard him , they began to say , I am the bread that came down from heaven .
GOLD:	Then the people began to murmur in disagreement because he had said , “ I am the bread that came down from heaven . ”

ID:	4443
INPUT:	Felipe Andresi esatera joan zen , eta biek , Andresek eta Felipek , Jesusi jakinarazi zioten .
PRED:	Philip went out to Antioch , and Philip , and Philip , and Philip , and Philip , and Philip , heard him .
GOLD:	Philip told Andrew about it , and they went together to ask Jesus .

ID:	4444
INPUT:	Jaunaren izen ahaltsua iragarriko dute Sionen , haren gorespena Jerusalemen ,
PRED:	The name of the Lord is mighty in Zion , and his praise is in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	when multitudes gather togetherand kingdoms come to worship the Lord .

ID:	4445
INPUT:	baita geroago ere , Josiasen seme Joiakim Judako errege izan zen garaitik Josiasen beste seme baten , Sedekiasen , erregealdiko hamaikagarren urtearen azkena arte . Urte horretako bosgarren hilean Jerusalemgo bizilagunak erbesteratu zituzten .
PRED:	In the first year of Josiah the son of Josiah king of Judah , Josiah son of Josiah king of Judah was king of Judah until the first month of the month .
GOLD:	The Lord 's messages continued throughout the reign of King Jehoiakim , Josiah 's son , until the eleventh year of the reign of King Zedekiah , another of Josiah 's sons . In August of that eleventh year the people of Jerusalem were taken away as captives .

ID:	4446
INPUT:	Apaizek eta lebitarrek , beren buruaren garbikuntza egin ondoren , herriaren , harresiaren eta ateen garbikuntza egin zuten .
PRED:	And when the priests and the Levites had washed themselves , they washed their heads , and washed the wall of the people , and washed themselves .
GOLD:	The priests and Levites first purified themselves ; then they purified the people , the gates , and the wall .

ID:	4447
INPUT:	Madarikatua , artaldeko abere osasuntsu bat eskainiko didala agindu eta gero gaixoa eskaintzen didan gezurtia ! Errege handia naiz ni , eta begirune didate herriek . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak .
PRED:	Blessed be the Lord of hosts , that he may offer a thousand sheep , and he shall offer a lie to me , saith the Lord of hosts : and I am a king , and my people shall fear him .
GOLD:	“ Cursed is the cheat who promises to give a fine ram from his flock but then sacrifices a defective one to the Lord . For I am a great king , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , “ and my name is feared among the nations !

ID:	4448
INPUT:	Emazte asko zuenez , hirurogeita hamar seme-alaba izan zituen .
PRED:	After he had other wives , he had other sons and daughters .
GOLD:	He had seventy sons born to him , for he had many wives .

ID:	4449
INPUT:	Eta nik erregetza ematen dizuet , Aitak neuri eman zidan bezala :
PRED:	And I give you the kingdom as my Father gave me , saying ,
GOLD:	And just as my Father has granted me a Kingdom , I now grant you the right

ID:	4450
INPUT:	Moisesek , Jaunaren zerbitzariak , eta israeldarrek menderatu egin zituzten bi errege haiek . Moisesek , Jaunaren zerbitzariak , Ruben eta Gaden leinuei eta Manasesen leinu erdiari eman zizkien jabetzan haien lurraldeak .
PRED:	And Moses the servant of the Lord , and the sons of Israel defeated them , and the two kings of Israel , and the sons of Reuben , and the children of Reuben , and the children of Reuben , and the land of Manasseh , and the children of Manasseh .
GOLD:	Moses , the servant of the Lord , and the Israelites had destroyed the people of King Sihon and King Og . And Moses gave their land as a possession to the tribes of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh .

ID:	4451
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin ez zaiona egin zuen , Joiakimek bezalaxe .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the sight of the Lord , just as Jehoiakim had done .
GOLD:	But Zedekiah did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as Jehoiakim had done .

ID:	4452
INPUT:	Hau dio Jaunak , zuen askatzaileak , Israelen Jainko santuak : « Zuen onerako , gudarostea bidaliko dut Babiloniaraeta denak ihesi aterako dira , ihesi babiloniarrak , beren ontzietan babesturik .
PRED:	Thus says the Lord , the Holy One of Israel , the Holy One of Israel , saying , “ I will send all the people of Babylon to escape , and all the people of Babylon will escape .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says — your Redeemer , the Holy One of Israel : “ For your sakes I will send an army against Babylon , forcing the Babylonians to flee in those ships they are so proud of .

ID:	4453
INPUT:	Begiratu eta zaldi horixka bat ikusi nuen . Gainekoak Herio zuen izena , eta bere erreinukoek jarraitzen zioten . Lurraren laurdenaren gain ahalmena eman zion Jainkoak , ezpata , gosete , heriotza eta lurreko piztien bitartez jendea hiltzeko .
PRED:	And I looked and saw a horse , and behold , there was a horse , and his kingdom was ten thousand , and his kingdom was given to him by the sword of the sword , and by the sword of the earth , and by the sword of the beasts of the earth .
GOLD:	I looked up and saw a horse whose color was pale green . Its rider was named Death , and his companion was the Grave . These two were given authority over one-fourth of the earth , to kill with the sword and famine and disease and wild animals .

ID:	4454
INPUT:	« Horrekin guztiarekin gantzuketa-olioa egingo duzu , lurringileak egiten duen bezala usainkiak nahasiz . Hori izango da sagarapenetarako gantzuketa-olioa .
PRED:	And thou shalt make the anointing oil for all these things , as the anointing oil of the earth : and it shall be for the anointing oil of the oil .
GOLD:	Like a skilled incense maker , blend these ingredients to make a holy anointing oil .

ID:	4455
INPUT:	Amaitu ziren Egipton ugaritasunezko zazpi urteak ,
PRED:	And the seven years of the land of Egypt came to pass in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	At last the seven years of bumper crops throughout the land of Egypt came to an end .

ID:	4456
INPUT:	Intziriz eta negar-zotinka nago , garrasi bizian Moabengatik , Kir-Heresko jendearengatik .
PRED:	I cry for Moab , for the people of Moab , and for the people of Moab .
GOLD:	So now I wail for Moab ; yes , I will mourn for Moab.My heart is broken for the men of Kir-hareseth .

ID:	4457
INPUT:	Txundi zaitezte , beraz , zeruok ! Izu zaitezte eta ikaratu ! Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	Be careful , you heavens , and be careful to obey , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	The heavens are shocked at such a thingand shrink back in horror and dismay , ” says the Lord .

ID:	4458
INPUT:	Egun hartan garaipena dolu bihurtu zen gudaroste osoarentzat , entzun baitzuten gudariek erregea atsekabetua zegoela bere semearengatik .
PRED:	And it came to pass in that day , when all the people heard it , because the king heard the voice of his sons , as the king had done for his son .
GOLD:	They crept back into the town that day as though they were ashamed and had deserted in battle .

ID:	4459
INPUT:	Orduan , Jainko Jauna laino batean jaitsi eta Moisesekin egon zen , eta bere izena hots egin zuen : « Jauna » .
PRED:	And the Lord God came down with Moses , and he stood in a cloud , and called his name , saying , Lord .
GOLD:	Then the Lord came down in a cloud and stood there with him ; and he called out his own name , Yahweh .

ID:	4460
INPUT:	Eta emakumeari esan zion : « Barkatuak dituzu zeure bekatuak » .
PRED:	And she said to the woman , “ Your sins are forgiven . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus said to the woman , “ Your sins are forgiven . ”

ID:	4461
INPUT:	Jesusek , bere hamabi ikasleei dei eginik , ahalmena eman zien espiritu gaiztoak botatzeko eta gaitz eta eritasun guztiak sendatzeko .
PRED:	Jesus called his twelve disciples to cast out evil spirits and evil spirits .
GOLD:	Jesus called his twelve disciples together and gave them authority to cast out evil spirits and to heal every kind of disease and illness .

ID:	4462
INPUT:	Ez ekialdetik eta ez mendebaldetik , ez basamortutik ere , ez dator goraldia :
PRED:	It is not from the east , nor from the west , nor from the west , nor from the wilderness :
GOLD:	It is God alone who judges ; he decides who will rise and who will fall .

ID:	4463
INPUT:	Besteek erantzun zioten : — Zu ere galilearra ote zaitugu ? Aztertu Liburu Santuak , eta ikusiko duzu Galileatik ez dela inoiz profetarik sortu .
PRED:	They said to him , “ Are we still ? We have seen you , and you will see that there is no prophet from Galilee . ”
GOLD:	They replied , “ Are you from Galilee , too ? Search the Scriptures and see for yourself — no prophet ever comes from Galilee ! ” -- -- -- -- -- [ The most ancient Greek manuscripts do not include John 7:53–8:11 . ]

ID:	4464
INPUT:	Egin lau adar lau ertzetarako , aldarearekin gorputz bat bera eginez ; estali brontzez aldarea .
PRED:	And thou shalt make four corners of the four corners of the four corners of the altar : and thou shalt make the altar of bronze .
GOLD:	Make horns for each of its four corners so that the horns and altar are all one piece . Overlay the altar with bronze .

ID:	4465
INPUT:	Zeuen elkarte-otorduetarako biltzen zaretenean , egiten duzuena ez da Jaunaren afaria ,
PRED:	When you gather the feast of your congregation , you do not do the work of the congregation of the Lord .
GOLD:	When you meet together , you are not really interested in the Lord 's Supper .

ID:	4466
INPUT:	Ez duzu nahi izan sakrifizio eta eskaintzarik , ez erre-opari , ez bekatuen barkamen-oparirik ; baizik eta belarriak ireki dizkidazu , zuri entzuteko .
PRED:	You must not offer sacrifices to me , but you must not offer sacrifices to me . You must not offer sacrifices to me , but you have opened your ears .
GOLD:	Then I said , “ Look , I have come.As is written about me in the Scriptures :

ID:	4467
INPUT:	« Horregatik , nik , Jainko Jaunak , zin dagit neure biziarengatik , zeure idolatria eta jokaera higuingarriaz nire santutegia kutsatu duzulako , nik ere baztertu egingo zaitudala ; ez dizut batere errukirik izango , ezta barkatuko ere .
PRED:	“ So I live , ” says the Lord God . “ I live because you have defiled your idols and your idols , because you have defiled my sanctuary , and I will not forgive you .
GOLD:	“ As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , I will cut you off completely . I will show you no pity at all because you have defiled my Temple with your vile images and detestable sins .

ID:	4468
INPUT:	baina Abimelekek pertsegitu egin zuen eta Gaal ihesi joan zen . Ugari izan ziren hiriko sarrera bitartean eroriak .
PRED:	And Abimelech smote him , and fled ; and he fled , and fled from the entrance of the gate of the city .
GOLD:	But Abimelech chased him , and many of Shechem 's men were wounded and fell along the road as they retreated to the city gate .

ID:	4469
INPUT:	Horregatik , beharrezko da agintarien menpeko izatea , baina zigorraren beldurrez ez ezik , baita kontzientziaren eraginez ere .
PRED:	For this reason the authority will be given to the authority , but not to be afraid , but not to do the truth .
GOLD:	So you must submit to them , not only to avoid punishment , but also to keep a clear conscience .

ID:	4470
INPUT:	Lekuko faltsua galdu egingo da ; entzuten dakiena ez da hitzik gabe geldituko .
PRED:	A false witness shall be lost ; and he that hears shall not speak , neither shall he speak .
GOLD:	A false witness will be cut off , but a credible witness will be allowed to speak .

ID:	4471
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaun ahalguztidunak : « Ebaki zuhaitzak , egin betelana Jerusalemi erasotzeko . Hiria zigortzea erabaki dut , zapalkuntza baita nagusi bertan .
PRED:	Thus says the Lord of hosts , “ Go up and fight against Jerusalem , for I have judged the city , and I have judged it in the day of judgment .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ Cut down the trees for battering rams.Build siege ramps against the walls of Jerusalem.This is the city to be punished , for she is wicked through and through .

ID:	4472
INPUT:	« Ba ote da zuen artean aitarik , semeak arraina eskatu eta arrainaren ordez sugea emango dionik ?
PRED:	“ Is there among you among your father ? Can he ask the sheep and the sheep , and will give him a fire ?
GOLD:	“ You fathers — if your children ask for a fish , do you give them a snake instead ?

ID:	4473
INPUT:	Badakit Jaunak dohakabeari justizia egiteneta behartsuen eskubideak defendatzen dituela .
PRED:	I know that the Lord will judge the cause of the poor and the cause of the poor .
GOLD:	Surely righteous people are praising your name ; the godly will live in your presence .

ID:	4474
INPUT:	« Eskatu , eta emango dizue Jainkoak ; bilatu , eta aurkituko duzue ; jo atea , eta zabalduko zaizue .
PRED:	“ When you ask , you will find it , and you will find it , and it will be opened , and it will be opened .
GOLD:	“ Keep on asking , and you will receive what you ask for . Keep on seeking , and you will find . Keep on knocking , and the door will be opened to you .

ID:	4475
INPUT:	Bertako jauregien artean , gotorleku seguru ageri da Jainkoa .
PRED:	There is a strong place in the house of the house of God , and there is a place of God .
GOLD:	The kings of the earth joined forcesand advanced against the city .

ID:	4476
INPUT:	Baina faraoiak erantzun zien : — Eta nor da Jaun hori , nik haren esana bete eta israeldarrei joaten uzteko ? Ez dut halako Jaunik ezagutzen , eta israeldarrei ez diet joaten utziko .
PRED:	But Pharaoh said to them , “ Who is the Lord ? I will not let the children of Israel go , because I have not known him , and I will not let the children of Israel go . ”
GOLD:	“ Is that so ? ” retorted Pharaoh . “ And who is the Lord ? Why should I listen to him and let Israel go ? I do n't know the Lord , and I will not let Israel go . ”

ID:	4477
INPUT:	Liburu Santuaren arabera , hauxe da lege nagusia : Maitatulagun hurkoa zeure burua bezala ; eta hori benetan betetzen baduzue , ondo baino hobeto .
PRED:	This is the law of the Law : ‘ You love your neighbor as you love your neighbor . If you do this , you will do better than it . '
GOLD:	Yes indeed , it is good when you obey the royal law as found in the Scriptures : “ Love your neighbor as yourself . ”

ID:	4478
INPUT:	Danen leinutik , Jogliren seme Buki ;
PRED:	from the tribe of Dan , the son of Zebulun ;
GOLD:	DanBukki son of Jogli

ID:	4479
INPUT:	ahotik ahora hitz egiten diot , aurrez aurre eta ez hitz-erdika . Hark nire irudia ikusten du , Jaun honena . « Nola ausartzen zarete , beraz , Moisesez gaizki-esaka jardutera ? »
PRED:	I speak to the mouth of the mouth of the mouth of the mouth , and in the mouth of the mouth of my mouth , and in the mouth of the Lord , and in the mouth of Moses , and in the mouth of Moses , and in the mouth of the Lord .
GOLD:	I speak to him face to face , clearly , and not in riddles ! He sees the Lord as he is.So why were you not afraidto criticize my servant Moses ? ”

ID:	4480
INPUT:	Zabulonen leinutik hamabi mila ; Joseren leinutik hamabi mila ; Benjaminen leinutik hamabi mila zigilatu .
PRED:	Of the tribe of Zebulun , twelve thousand and twelve thousand , from the tribe of Benjamin , twelve thousand thousand thousand .
GOLD:	from Zebulun12,000from Joseph12,000from Benjamin12,000

ID:	4481
INPUT:	SALBAMEN MEZUAK : HERRIAREN BERRIZTAPENA ( 30 , 1 — 33 , 26 )
PRED:	The Lord says to Job ,
GOLD:	Promises of Deliverance

ID:	4482
INPUT:	Eguerdian , Ben-Hadad , bere laguntzaile zituen hogeita hamabi erregeekin batera , horditu arte oihal-etxoletan edaten ari zen bitartean , irtenaldi bat egin zuten israeldarrek ,
PRED:	And it came to pass in the same day , when Gaal was with him twelve kings , that he and his men were with him , when they went out to the tents of the children of Israel .
GOLD:	About noontime , as Ben-hadad and the thirty-two allied kings were still in their tents drinking themselves into a stupor ,

ID:	4483
INPUT:	Halaxe izan zen . Biharamun goizean jaiki , ardi-larrua hartu eta , ihintza ateratzeko bihurritu zuenean , anto<unk> bat bete zuen urez .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the morning , that he rose up early in the morning , and took the sheep , and went into the morning , and took the dew , and he filled it with water .
GOLD:	And that is just what happened . When Gideon got up early the next morning , he squeezed the fleece and wrung out a whole bowlful of water .

ID:	4484
INPUT:	( Mt 4 , 1-11 ; Lk 4 , 1-13 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Man with Leprosy

ID:	4485
INPUT:	GEROAGO <unk> <unk> <unk> KOA ( 4 , 1 — 22 , 21 )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Worship in Heaven

ID:	4486
INPUT:	Izu-ikarek inguratzen dute alde guztietatik , urratsez urrats jarraitzen diote .
PRED:	And the waters round about him , and they walk in ashes .
GOLD:	“ Terrors surround the wickedand trouble them at every step .

ID:	4487
INPUT:	Horrela egingo dugu , beraz , Jainkoa lagun .
PRED:	So we will do this so , and God will do it .
GOLD:	And so , God willing , we will move forward to further understanding .

ID:	4488
INPUT:	Honela ezarri zuen Josek Egiptoko lurretan bildutako bostetik bat faraoiari emateko legea . Lege honek gaurdaino dirau . Apaizen lurrak bakarrik gelditu ziren faraoiarenak bihurtu gabe .
PRED:	And Joseph set a law in the land of Egypt , to bring it out of the land of Egypt , to this day : and the priests did not obey the law of Pharaoh .
GOLD:	Joseph then issued a decree still in effect in the land of Egypt , that Pharaoh should receive one-fifth of all the crops grown on his land . Only the land belonging to the priests was not given to Pharaoh .

ID:	4489
INPUT:	Zoaz bizkor , ez baitezaket ezer egin zu hara iritsi arte . Honengatik , herri hari Tzoar — hau da , « Txiki » — deritza .
PRED:	Go , for I can not do what you have done to me until you came to you . This is why this people is called Kiriath .
GOLD:	But hurry ! Escape to it , for I can do nothing until you arrive there . ” ( This explains why that village was known as Zoar , which means “ little place . ” )

ID:	4490
INPUT:	Honela , agindutako ondasun baliotsu eta bikainak ere eman dizkigu , grina txarrek munduan eragiten duten ustelkeriatik ihes eginez , jainkozko izaeraren partaide izan zaitezten .
PRED:	So we have given us the good things that we have commanded , so that we may escape from the world , so that you may be baptized in the world .
GOLD:	And because of his glory and excellence , he has given us great and precious promises . These are the promises that enable you to share his divine nature and escape the world 's corruption caused by human desires .

ID:	4491
INPUT:	Jabeak langile bat bezala hartuko du berekin emango dituen urteetan ; ez diozue utziko herritarrari tratu txarra ematen .
PRED:	And it shall be to pass in the year that his eyes shall be as a field , that he shall give it to you in the year , that he may not let him go away from his people .
GOLD:	The foreigner must treat them as workers hired on a yearly basis . You must not allow a foreigner to treat any of your fellow Israelites harshly .

ID:	4492
INPUT:	— Ez ote zen , bada , Jauna ohartzen , zuek eta zuen guraso , errege eta buruzagiek , herritarrok oro , Judako hirietan eta Jerusalemgo kaleetan intsentsua erretzen zenutela ? Horixe zuen gogoan , hain zuzen ,
PRED:	“ Is n't the Lord your God , and the princes of Israel , and the princes of Judah , and the princes of Judah , and the princes of Judah , that you burn incense in Jerusalem , and in Jerusalem ? ”
GOLD:	“ Do you think the Lord did not know that you and your ancestors , your kings and officials , and all the people were burning incense to idols in the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem ?

ID:	4493
INPUT:	Baina ihesleku duen babes-hiriaren mugetatik irteten bada ,
PRED:	But if you go out of the city of the city , you shall go out of the city .
GOLD:	“ But if the slayer ever leaves the limits of the city of refuge ,

ID:	4494
INPUT:	Abereak eta konkistatu genituen hirietako ondasunak bakarrik gorde genituen guda-harrapakin gisa .
PRED:	And we took the cattle , and took the spoil of the cities , and we took away the spoil of the city .
GOLD:	We took all the livestock as plunder for ourselves , along with anything of value from the towns we ransacked .

ID:	4495
INPUT:	Eta , otoitzean ari zela , aurpegiko itxura aldatu egin zitzaion , eta jantziak zuri distiratsu bihurtu .
PRED:	And when he was praying , he turned into his face toward his face , and his clothes became white .
GOLD:	And as he was praying , the appearance of his face was transformed , and his clothes became dazzling white .

ID:	4496
INPUT:	Zazpigarren hilean , ordea , Netaniasen seme eta Elixamaren biloba Ismael , errege-jatorrikoa bera , Mitzpara joan zen hamar gizonekin eta hil egin zuen bertan Godalias , baita honekin ziren judatarrak eta babiloniarrak ere .
PRED:	But on the seventh day of the seventh month , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shallum , came to Mizpah , and they buried him in Mizpah , and the men of Judah with him , and they buried him .
GOLD:	But in midautumn of that year , Ishmael son of Nethaniah and grandson of Elishama , who was a member of the royal family , went to Mizpah with ten men and killed Gedaliah . He also killed all the Judeans and Babylonians who were with him at Mizpah .

ID:	4497
INPUT:	Paulok bere konbertsioa kontatu
PRED:	Paul and the Good News
GOLD:	Paul Reveals His Roman Citizenship

ID:	4498
INPUT:	harribitxiak eta zura lantzeko nahiz beste edozein langintzatarako .
PRED:	and the stones , and the stones , and the stones , and the work of the work of the field , and of the work of the field , and of the work of the work of the field .
GOLD:	He is skilled in engraving and mounting gemstones and in carving wood . He is a master at every craft !

ID:	4499
INPUT:	Horrelako parabola askoren bidez , Jesusek mezua iragartzen zien , beraiek ulertzeko eran .
PRED:	In many days Jesus taught them to teach them the word that he had spoken to them .
GOLD:	Jesus used many similar stories and illustrations to teach the people as much as they could understand .

ID:	4500
INPUT:	Gaiztoentzat oinaze ugari ; Jaunarengan konfiantza duena , berriz , haren maitasunak inguratzen .
PRED:	He that is in the heart of the wicked is in the Lord , but his love is round about him .
GOLD:	Many sorrows come to the wicked , but unfailing love surrounds those who trust the Lord .

ID:	4501
INPUT:	Tenpluaren barneneko azken hamar metroak , berriz , zedrozko oholez estali zituen , behetik hasi eta goiko habeetaraino , eta toki hori santutegia , hots , toki santu-santua , izateko antolatu zuen .
PRED:	And he made the end of the house of the house of the house of the house of the house , to the top of the sanctuary , and to the Most Holy Place , to the holy place , and to the holy place .
GOLD:	He partitioned off an inner sanctuary — the Most Holy Place — at the far end of the Temple . It was 30 feet deep and was paneled with cedar from floor to ceiling .

ID:	4502
INPUT:	Erre-oparia ere eskaini zuen , arautua zegoen eran .
PRED:	And he offered a burnt offering for a burnt offering , and he kept the statutes .
GOLD:	Then he presented the burnt offering and sacrificed it in the prescribed way .

ID:	4503
INPUT:	Davidekin zeuden gizonek , ordea , esaten zioten : — Hemen Judan beldurrez bagaude , zer izango ote da Keilara filistear taldeen kontra borrokara joaten bagara ?
PRED:	But the men who were with David said to him , “ If we are afraid of Judah , what will we go to Keilah ? ”
GOLD:	But David 's men said , “ We 're afraid even here in Judah . We certainly do n't want to go to Keilah to fight the whole Philistine army ! ”

ID:	4504
INPUT:	Baina Jesusek esan zuen : « Utzi ! Aski da ! » Eta , belarria ukiturik , sendatu egin zion .
PRED:	But Jesus said , “ Let her leave ! ” And he touched her , and she touched her .
GOLD:	But Jesus said , “ No more of this . ” And he touched the man 's ear and healed him .

ID:	4505
INPUT:	Beraz , Jainkoak hala nahirik sufritzen dutenek jar dezatela beren burua leiala den Egilearen eskuetan , on egiteari utzi gabe .
PRED:	So let those who suffer the will of God , that they may suffer themselves in their own hands , that they may not do good .
GOLD:	So if you are suffering in a manner that pleases God , keep on doing what is right , and trust your lives to the God who created you , for he will never fail you .

ID:	4506
INPUT:	Hala , Akab jatera eta edatera joan zen ; bitartean , Karmel mendiaren gailurrera igo zen Elias eta ahuspeztu , aurpegia belaun artean jarriz .
PRED:	So Ahab went and ate , and went up to the mountain of Carmel , and he went up to the top of Carmel , and bowed down before his face .
GOLD:	So Ahab went to eat and drink . But Elijah climbed to the top of Mount Carmel and bowed low to the ground and prayed with his face between his knees .

ID:	4507
INPUT:	« Une berean , adimena eman zitzaidan berriro , eta neure erregetzaren aintzarako , neure ohore eta ospe guztiaz jabetu nintzen . Bila etorri zitzaizkidan kontseilari eta handikiak . Errege-aulkian jarri ninduten berriro eta lehen baino ohore handiagoa izan nuen .
PRED:	At that time I was given me the glory of my glory , and my glory was filled with my glory , and my glory came to me , and the elders of the elders of the elders were greater than I stood before the throne .
GOLD:	“ That same hour the judgment was fulfilled , and Nebuchadnezzar was driven from human society . He ate grass like a cow , and he was drenched with the dew of heaven . He lived this way until his hair was as long as eagles ' feathers and his nails were like birds ' claws .

ID:	4508
INPUT:	Diotre<unk> handizalea
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Conclusion

ID:	4509
INPUT:	basamortuan ere ikusi ahal izan duzue nola Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak , aitak bere haurra bezala , ekarri zaituzten honaino bide guztian zehar .
PRED:	As the Lord your God saw you in the wilderness , so the Lord your God has brought you into the wilderness .
GOLD:	And you saw how the Lord your God cared for you all along the way as you traveled through the wilderness , just as a father cares for his child . Now he has brought you to this place . '

ID:	4510
INPUT:	Nik , Paulok , ez giza aginduz edo izendapenez , Jesu Kristoren eta hau hildakoen artetik piztu zuen Jainko Aitaren izendapenez baizik apostolu naizen honek ,
PRED:	Paul did not obey the command of men , but from the dead Jesus Christ , and from the dead ,
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , an apostle . I was not appointed by any group of people or any human authority , but by Jesus Christ himself and by God the Father , who raised Jesus from the dead .

ID:	4511
INPUT:	Leiho-ertzean eseria zegoen Eutiko izeneko mutil gazte bat ; Paulok hitzaldia amaitzen ez zuenez , logaletu egin zen mutila ; azkenean , loak harturik , hirugarren solairutik behera erori zen , eta hilda jaso zuten .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the famine was sitting in the midst of the mouth of the youth , that a young man was sitting in the mouth of a young man ; and when he had spoken , he fell down from the midst of the sea .
GOLD:	As Paul spoke on and on , a young man named Eutychus , sitting on the windowsill , became very drowsy . Finally , he fell sound asleep and dropped three stories to his death below .

ID:	4512
INPUT:	Beraz , Jainkoak sinesmenaren bidez onartu gaituelarik , bakean gaude berarekin , Jesu Kristo gure Jaunari esker .
PRED:	Therefore , if we have faith in faith , we are in peace with him in the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	Therefore , since we have been made right in God 's sight by faith , we have peace with God because of what Jesus Christ our Lord has done for us .

ID:	4513
INPUT:	Zer gelditzen zaio gizakiarieguzkipean egin duenhainbeste lan eta eginahaletatik ?
PRED:	What does a man stand in the sun , and in the work of the sun ?
GOLD:	So what do people get in this life for all their hard work and anxiety ?

ID:	4514
INPUT:	Daviden salmoa . Jauna , deika naukazu , zatozkit bizkor ! Entzun nire ahotsa , nik dei egitean .
PRED:	O Lord , hear my voice ; hear my voice , and hear my voice .
GOLD:	O Lord , I am calling to you . Please hurry ! Listen when I cry to you for help !

ID:	4515
INPUT:	Horregatik , nahiago dut alarguntsa gazteak ezkontzea , seme-alabak sortu eta etxeaz arduratzea , etsaiari inolako hizpiderik eman ez diezaioten .
PRED:	Therefore I will make my youth more than a young widow , and I will give birth to her children and children to her house , because she has not given her children to her enemies .
GOLD:	So I advise these younger widows to marry again , have children , and take care of their own homes . Then the enemy will not be able to say anything against them .

ID:	4516
INPUT:	gauez Jesusengana etorri eta esan zion : — Maisu , ziur gaude Jainkoak guri irakasteko bidali zaituena , inork ez baititzake egin zuk egiten dituzun mirarizko seinaleak , Jainkoa berekin ez badu .
PRED:	And he came to Jesus in the night , and said unto him , Master , we know that no man sent you to teach us , but no one can do with us , because God did not do with us .
GOLD:	After dark one evening , he came to speak with Jesus . “ Rabbi , ” he said , “ we all know that God has sent you to teach us . Your miraculous signs are evidence that God is with you . ”

ID:	4517
INPUT:	Nagusiak ihardetsi zion : — Ez gara israeldarrik bizi ez den hiri arrotz batera joango ; Gibearaino joango gara .
PRED:	His master said to him , “ We will not go into a city of Israel . We will go to Gibeah . ”
GOLD:	“ No , ” his master said , “ we ca n't stay in this foreign town where there are no Israelites . Instead , we will go on to Gibeah .

ID:	4518
INPUT:	Eta egun asko egin baitzituzten han , Festok Pauloren arazoaren berri eman zion erregeari , esanez : « Badut hemen Felixek preso utzi zuen gizon bat .
PRED:	And many days they left Paul , and told the king , saying , Behold , I have taken a man from Nazareth .
GOLD:	During their stay of several days , Festus discussed Paul 's case with the king . “ There is a prisoner here , ” he told him , “ whose case was left for me by Felix .

ID:	4519
INPUT:	Lebitarrak arduratuko dira elkarketa-etxolako zerbitzuaz , eta beren hutsegiteen erantzule izanen dira . Betiko lege izango duzue hau belaunez belaun . Lebitarrek , beraz , ez dute Israelen lursailik izango ondare .
PRED:	And the Levites shall serve the tabernacle of the tabernacle of meeting , and they shall return unto their service , and they shall be a law for ever ; and this is the law of their generations , and the Levites shall not be their inheritance .
GOLD:	Only the Levites may serve at the Tabernacle , and they will be held responsible for any offenses against it . This is a permanent law for you , to be observed from generation to generation . The Levites will receive no allotment of land among the Israelites ,

ID:	4520
INPUT:	Esklaboak nagusien menpeko izan daitezela gauza guztietan : bete dezatela beraien gogoa , ezezkorik esan gabe
PRED:	Let them be slaves in all things , so that they may be under all things . I would not say to them ,
GOLD:	Slaves must always obey their masters and do their best to please them . They must not talk back

ID:	4521
INPUT:	Izan bedi nagusi itsasotik itsasora , lurraren bazter batetik bestera .
PRED:	Let his master see him from the sea , and let him go out of the earth .
GOLD:	May he reign from sea to sea , and from the Euphrates River to the ends of the earth .

ID:	4522
INPUT:	Janari sendoa , berriz , pertsona helduentzat da , ona eta txarra bereizteko eskarmentua dutenentzat .
PRED:	But to those who are wise , to those who are wise , and to those who are evil .
GOLD:	Solid food is for those who are mature , who through training have the skill to recognize the difference between right and wrong .

ID:	4523
INPUT:	Ez zen han herriarentzat urik , eta Moisesen eta Aaronen aurka bildu ziren israeldarrak .
PRED:	There was no water for the people , and they gathered together against Moses and Aaron .
GOLD:	There was no water for the people to drink at that place , so they rebelled against Moses and Aaron .

ID:	4524
INPUT:	hiru hiri aukeratuko dituzue Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak jabetzan emandako lurraldean .
PRED:	You shall choose three cities in the land which the Lord your God has given you .
GOLD:	Then you must set apart three cities of refuge in the land the Lord your God is giving you .

ID:	4525
INPUT:	Baina Sihonek ez zion Israel herriari lurraldea zeharkatzen utzi ; aitzitik , bere herria bildu eta bidera atera zitzaion basamortuan eta , Jahtzara etorririk , eraso egin zion .
PRED:	But Simon did not leave the land of Israel . He left his people in the wilderness , and came to him in the wilderness , and came to him in the wilderness .
GOLD:	But King Sihon refused to let them cross his territory . Instead , he mobilized his entire army and attacked Israel in the wilderness , engaging them in battle at Jahaz .

ID:	4526
INPUT:	Badakit , Jauna , zuzena zarela zeure erabakietan , leiala zarelako atsekabetu nauzula .
PRED:	I know that you are righteous , Lord , because you have sinned , because you have sinned .
GOLD:	I know , O Lord , that your regulations are fair ; you disciplined me because I needed it .

ID:	4527
INPUT:	Hara , misterio bat adierazten dizuet : ez gara denok hilko , baina izatez aldatuak izango gara denok
PRED:	Behold , I tell you , we will not die , but all of you will die .
GOLD:	But let me reveal to you a wonderful secret . We will not all die , but we will all be transformed !

ID:	4528
INPUT:	Ez da lotsagabea , ez berekoia , ez haserrekorra ; kaltea ez du gogoan hartzen .
PRED:	There is no shame in his anger ; neither is he angry with his anger .
GOLD:	or rude . It does not demand its own way . It is not irritable , and it keeps no record of being wronged .

ID:	4529
INPUT:	Egun batez , Jesus irakasten ari zen , eta han zeuden eserita fariseu eta lege-maisu batzuk , Galileako auzo guztietatik , Judeatik eta Jerusalemdik etorriak . Jaunaren indarra berekin zuen eta sendatzera eragiten zion .
PRED:	On that day Jesus taught his disciples and the Pharisees and the teachers of the law and the teachers of Galilee , from Judea , and from Judea , and from Judea , and came with him , and healed him .
GOLD:	One day while Jesus was teaching , some Pharisees and teachers of religious law were sitting nearby . ( It seemed that these men showed up from every village in all Galilee and Judea , as well as from Jerusalem . ) And the Lord 's healing power was strongly with Jesus .

ID:	4530
INPUT:	Hain zuzen , behin eta berriz lotua zuten girgiluz eta katez , baina hark beti kateak eten eta girgiluak puskatu egiten zituen , eta ez zen inor ere hura menderatzeko gauza .
PRED:	And he was put to shame , and bound his body , and his sin and his sins , and he cast off his eyes , and no man to make him to go .
GOLD:	Whenever he was put into chains and shackles — as he often was — he snapped the chains from his wrists and smashed the shackles . No one was strong enough to subdue him .

ID:	4531
INPUT:	Orduan , Moises eta Aaron elkarketa-etxolaren aurrera joan ziren ,
PRED:	So Moses and Aaron went to the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	When he went into the Tabernacle of the Covenant the next day , he found that Aaron 's staff , representing the tribe of Levi , had sprouted , budded , blossomed , and produced ripe almonds !

ID:	4532
INPUT:	Isaakek Xibea eman zion izen ; horregatik , gaurdaino Beer-Xeba — hau da , « Zin-Putzu » — deitzen zaio hiri hari .
PRED:	And Isaac called his name Dan , and this day , that is why the name of the name of the name of that day .
GOLD:	So Isaac named the well Shibah ( which means “ oath ” ) . And to this day the town that grew up there is called Beersheba ( which means “ well of the oath ” ) .

ID:	4533
INPUT:	Pedrok , berriro : — Jauna , zergatik ezin dizut jarraitu orain ? Neure burua emango dut zuregatik .
PRED:	Peter said to him , “ Lord , why do I not follow you ? I will give you my own head for you . ”
GOLD:	“ But why ca n't I come now , Lord ? ” he asked . “ I 'm ready to die for you . ”

ID:	4534
INPUT:	eta gelditutako o<unk> eta arrain-hondarrez hamabi saski bete zituzten .
PRED:	And they took up the twelve baskets , and twelve baskets of barley , which was left .
GOLD:	and afterward , the disciples picked up twelve baskets of leftover bread and fish .

ID:	4535
INPUT:	Erregeak galdegin zion : — Onik al da Absalom gaztea ? Ahimaatzek erantzun : — Iskanbila handia ikusi nuen , Joabek ni , zure zerbitzari hau , zuregana bidali ninduenean ; baina ez dakit zer gertatuko zen .
PRED:	The king said to Absalom , “ Is it right to Absalom ? ” “ I saw that he was very great . ” “ I saw that he sent me to you , but I did n't know what had happened . ”
GOLD:	“ What about young Absalom ? ” the king demanded . “ Is he all right ? ” Ahimaaz replied , “ When Joab told me to come , there was a lot of commotion . But I did n't know what was happening . ”

ID:	4536
INPUT:	Lege hau entzutean , atzerritarrak oro batzarretik botatzea erabaki zuten .
PRED:	And when they heard this law , they cast them out of the congregation .
GOLD:	When this passage of the Law was read , all those of foreign descent were immediately excluded from the assembly .

ID:	4537
INPUT:	Izan bedi gari ugari lurraldean , mendi gainetan kulunkan ; sor beza fruitua Libanok bezala , zelaiko belarra bezain ugari !
PRED:	Let them be in the land of the earth , and let the fruit of the earth be as the trees of Lebanon , as the grass of the field .
GOLD:	May there be abundant grain throughout the land , flourishing even on the hilltops.May the fruit trees flourish like the trees of Lebanon , and may the people thrive like grass in a field .

ID:	4538
INPUT:	ez itzazu gal ontasuna eta leialtasuna , eramatzazu beti zeurekin , ezarri barru-barruan .
PRED:	Do n't let your righteousness be with you , and let your truth be in your heart .
GOLD:	Never let loyalty and kindness leave you ! Tie them around your neck as a reminder.Write them deep within your heart .

ID:	4539
INPUT:	Jauna da nire haitza , nire geriza , bera nire askatzailea ; ene Jainko , nire harkaitz babesgarria , nire babeski eta indar salbatzailea , nire gotorlekua .
PRED:	The Lord is my shield , and my salvation is my salvation ; my rock is my rock , my rock , and my salvation , and my salvation .
GOLD:	I called on the Lord , who is worthy of praise , and he saved me from my enemies .

ID:	4540
INPUT:	eta Jehuk Israel osora zabalarazi zuen . Baalen adoratzaile guztiak etorri ziren , ez zen bat ere gelditu etorri gabe . Sartu zirenean , Baalen jauretxea erabat bete zen .
PRED:	And Jehu made all Israel like him , and all the leaders of Baal came , and no one came into the house of Baal . And when they came into the house of Baal , they went into the house of Baal .
GOLD:	He sent messengers throughout all Israel summoning those who worshiped Baal . They all came — not a single one remained behind — and they filled the temple of Baal from one end to the other .

ID:	4541
INPUT:	Neure ahotsez iragartzen ditut zuk emaniko erabaki guztiak .
PRED:	I speak to you in my mouth , and I teach you all my statutes .
GOLD:	I have recited aloudall the regulations you have given us .

ID:	4542
INPUT:	Maitasuna ospatuz
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Young Woman

ID:	4543
INPUT:	beraren mezu hau Judako eta Jerusalemgo jendeari adieraztera joateko agindu zion : « Nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak , Israelen Jainkoak , galdetzen dizuet : Ez al duzue rekabetarren ikasbidea jaso behar eta nire esanak aditu ?
PRED:	Then he said to the people of Judah and Jerusalem , “ Thus says the Lord of hosts , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , saying , “ Have you not kept my ways ?
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : Go and say to the people in Judah and Jerusalem , ‘ Come and learn a lesson about how to obey me .

ID:	4544
INPUT:	eta , berak ezarritako garaia iristean , bere mezua agerrarazi du Jainko gure Salbatzailearen aginduz gomendatu zaidan predikuaren bitartez .
PRED:	And when he came , he will bring you the word of our God , according to the word of our God , according to the word of our salvation .
GOLD:	And now at just the right time he has revealed this message , which we announce to everyone . It is by the command of God our Savior that I have been entrusted with this work for him .

ID:	4545
INPUT:	« Ikasi pikondoaren irudi honetatik : kimua berritzen eta hostoa zabaltzen zaioneko , badakizue uda hurbil dela .
PRED:	“ This is what the fig tree says : “ If the fig tree spread out its fruit , you know that it is near .
GOLD:	“ Now learn a lesson from the fig tree . When its branches bud and its leaves begin to sprout , you know that summer is near .

ID:	4546
INPUT:	Lebitarrak , berriz , itunaren egoitzaren inguruan etxolatuko dira ; honela libratuko dute israeldarren elkartea Jaunaren haserretik . Itunaren egoitzako zerbitzuaz arduratuko dira » .
PRED:	And the Levites shall set up the tabernacle round about the tabernacle of the tabernacle , and they shall deliver them out of the tabernacle of the Lord ; and they shall serve the covenant of the covenant of the Lord .
GOLD:	But the Levites will camp around the Tabernacle of the Covenant to protect the community of Israel from the Lord 's anger . The Levites are responsible to stand guard around the Tabernacle . ”

ID:	4547
INPUT:	Hura etzanda edo eserita egondako lekuan dagoen edozer gauza kutsaturik geldituko da arratsa arte .
PRED:	And he that is in his bed , and in his place , and in his place , he shall be unclean until evening .
GOLD:	This includes her bed or any other object she has sat on ; you will be unclean until evening if you touch it .

ID:	4548
INPUT:	Gizon horiek urik gabeko iturri dira , ekaitzak eramaten duen laino . Ilunpe beltzak dauzkate zain .
PRED:	These men are without water , and they are given to the rock of the rock . They are like darkness .
GOLD:	These people are as useless as dried-up springs or as mist blown away by the wind . They are doomed to blackest darkness .

ID:	4549
INPUT:	Urrutitik ikusi zutenean , ia ezin zuten ezagutu ere , eta aiene bizian egin zuten negar . Jantziak urratu eta hautsa bota zuten beren buru gainera .
PRED:	When they saw him from a distance , they could not know him . They washed his father and wept and tore his clothes on his head .
GOLD:	When they saw Job from a distance , they scarcely recognized him . Wailing loudly , they tore their robes and threw dust into the air over their heads to show their grief .

ID:	4550
INPUT:	Poztu egin zen Egipto haiek irteteaz , haienganako beldur-ikarak hartuak baitzituen .
PRED:	And when they were glad , they were glad , because they were afraid of them .
GOLD:	Egypt was glad when they were gone , for they feared them greatly .

ID:	4551
INPUT:	Baina Jainkoak haiek hiltzea erabakitzen zuen orduko , harengana jotzen zuten , damutu eta hura bilatzen saiatzen ziren ,
PRED:	But if they would kill him , they went to him , and they began to seek him .
GOLD:	When God began killing them , they finally sought him.They repented and took God seriously .

ID:	4552
INPUT:	Moisesek esan zion herriari : « Gogoan izan egun honetan irten zaretela Egiptotik , esklabotzatik , ahalmen handiz atera baitzaituzte bertatik Jaunak . Beraz , ez duzue legamiadun ogirik jango .
PRED:	Moses said to the people , “ Remember that you came out of the land of Egypt , because the Lord brought you out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand , and you shall not eat bread .
GOLD:	So Moses said to the people , “ This is a day to remember forever — the day you left Egypt , the place of your slavery . Today the Lord has brought you out by the power of his mighty hand . ( Remember , eat no food containing yeast . )

ID:	4553
INPUT:	Adam berriro batu zitzaion bere emazteari ; honek semea sortu eta <unk> eman zion izen . Orduan , esan zuen : « Jainkoak sorrarazi dit beste seme hau , Kainek hil zigun Abelen ordez » .
PRED:	Then Abimelech 's wife became his wife , and she bore him a son . Then he said , “ God has raised this son to me . ”
GOLD:	Adam had sexual relations with his wife again , and she gave birth to another son . She named him Seth , for she said , “ God has granted me another son in place of Abel , whom Cain killed . ”

ID:	4554
INPUT:	Artisauak urtzen du idoloa , zilarginak estaltzen urrezeta apaintzen zilarrezko katez .
PRED:	All the idols of the idols are made of gold , and the work of gold , and the gold of gold .
GOLD:	Can he be compared to an idol formed in a mold , overlaid with gold , and decorated with silver chains ?

ID:	4555
INPUT:	Aitzitik , Jeremias profeta eta Baruk idazkaria atxilotzeko agindu zien erregeak Jerahmeel errege-familiako printzeari , Azrielen seme Seraiasi eta Abdeelen seme Xelemiasi . Baina Jaunak ezkutuan jarriak zituen .
PRED:	But the king commanded the prophet Jeremiah the prophet , and the scribe , and the scribe , and the scribe of the house of the king of Judah , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel , and the Lord appeared to them .
GOLD:	Then the king commanded his son Jerahmeel , Seraiah son of Azriel , and Shelemiah son of Abdeel to arrest Baruch and Jeremiah . But the Lord had hidden them .

ID:	4556
INPUT:	Nabot harrikatu eta hil zutela jakitean , Jezabelek esan zion Akabi : — Jaiki eta egin zaitez Izreelgo Nabotek diruaren truke ere eman nahi izan ez zizun mahastiaren jabe . Ez da bizi Nabot , hil da .
PRED:	When Jehu heard that he was dead , he said to Ahab , “ Get up , and go up , and give you the vineyard of Naboth , and you would not live . ”
GOLD:	When Jezebel heard the news , she said to Ahab , “ You know the vineyard Naboth would n't sell you ? Well , you can have it now ! He 's dead ! ”

ID:	4557
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak esan zion : Erantzioinetakoak , zu zauden lekua lur santua baita .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Make your feet , for the place where you are holy . ”
GOLD:	“ Then the Lord said to him , ‘ Take off your sandals , for you are standing on holy ground .

ID:	4558
INPUT:	Justiziak bakea ekarriko du , patxada eta konfiantza betiko .
PRED:	He will bring justice to him , and he will trust in him forever .
GOLD:	And this righteousness will bring peace.Yes , it will bring quietness and confidence forever .

ID:	4559
INPUT:	Hori izango duzue zeuen eskaintza Jaunarentzat , beste israeldarrek beren garitik nahiz olio eta ardo berritik egin ohi dutenaren parekoa .
PRED:	This is what you want to offer to the Lord . The people of Israel must offer their grain offerings and wine and wine .
GOLD:	The Lord will consider this offering to be your harvest offering , as though it were the first grain from your own threshing floor or wine from your own winepress .

ID:	4560
INPUT:	Ez dagokit niri kanpokoak epaitzea ; horiek Jainkoak epaituko ditu . Zuek elkartekideak epaitu behar dituzue . Liburu Santuak dio : Bota gaiztoa zeuen artetik .
PRED:	I know not the judgment of my lips , but God will judge them , and you will judge each other . As it is written , “ You are evil and evil from among you . ”
GOLD:	It is n't my responsibility to judge outsiders , but it certainly is your responsibility to judge those inside the church who are sinning .

ID:	4561
INPUT:	Horra zergatik agindu dien Jaunak israeldarrei , ez dezala inork odolik jan , ezta haien artean bizi den etorkinak ere .
PRED:	This is why the Lord commanded the people of Israel , that no one may eat any of them , nor eat any of them that live among them .
GOLD:	That is why I have said to the people of Israel , ‘ You must never eat or drink blood — neither you nor the foreigners living among you . '

ID:	4562
INPUT:	Era ezberdinean azaltzen da bakoitzarengan Jainkoak ematen duen Espiritua , baina beti denen onerako .
PRED:	The Spirit is given to each man , but the Spirit of God is given to him forever .
GOLD:	A spiritual gift is given to each of us so we can help each other .

ID:	4563
INPUT:	Zintzotasunak eta leialtasunak zaintzen dute erregea , zintzotasunean dago sendo errege-aulkia .
PRED:	The righteous and justice are in righteousness , but the throne of the righteous is established in righteousness .
GOLD:	Unfailing love and faithfulness protect the king ; his throne is made secure through love .

ID:	4564
INPUT:	Kutsaturiko pertsonak bereiz ezarri
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Purity in Israel 's Camp

ID:	4565
INPUT:	Kutxa filistearren esku
PRED:	The ark of the Philistines
GOLD:	The Ark in Philistia

ID:	4566
INPUT:	Joax , Israelgo errege
PRED:	King Joash of Israel
GOLD:	Jehoash Rules in Israel

ID:	4567
INPUT:	Gizakiak egitasmoak , Jaunak azken hitza .
PRED:	The counsel of man is made known , and the word of the Lord is the end .
GOLD:	We can make our own plans , but the Lord gives the right answer .

ID:	4568
INPUT:	Orduan , zentzugabeek zentzudunei esan zieten : “ Emaguzue olio pixka bat , kriseiluak itzaltzera doazkigu eta ” .
PRED:	Then the wise said to those who were wise , “ Give us a little olive oil , so that we may put out their lamps . ”
GOLD:	Then the five foolish ones asked the others , ‘ Please give us some of your oil because our lamps are going out . '

ID:	4569
INPUT:	Gauza bera egin zuen iparralde , hegoalde eta mendebaldeko alderdiekin , eta denek luzera bera zuten : berrehun eta berrogeita hamar metro .
PRED:	He did the same thing in the north side of the north , and on the west side of the west , and the breadth of the north was five cubits , and the breadth of one hundred cubits .
GOLD:	Then he measured the north side , and it was also 875 feet .

ID:	4570
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Ikusi , bada ; zeure sinesmenak sendatu zaitu .
PRED:	Jesus said to him , “ If you see , your faith has healed you . ”
GOLD:	And Jesus said , “ All right , receive your sight ! Your faith has healed you . ”

ID:	4571
INPUT:	Zaindu eta gorde , Jerusalemera iritsi eta Jaunaren etxeko aretoetan , apaiz , lebitar eta Israelgo familiaburuen aurrean pisatuko dituzuen arte » .
PRED:	and take him to Jerusalem , and come to the house of the Lord , and set him in the house of the Lord , and in the house of the priests , and in the house of Israel , and in the sight of the house of Israel .
GOLD:	Guard these treasures well until you present them to the leading priests , the Levites , and the leaders of Israel , who will weigh them at the storerooms of the Lord 's Temple in Jerusalem . ”

ID:	4572
INPUT:	Babiloniaren konkistarenoihartzunaklurra dardararaziko du , garrasiak nazio guztietan entzungo » .
PRED:	The sound of the noise of Babylon will be heard in all the nations , and all the nations will hear . ”
GOLD:	The earth will shake with the shout , “ Babylon has been taken ! ” and its cry of despair will be heard around the world .

ID:	4573
INPUT:	Horrela , zuek ere harri biziaz osaturiko espirituzko tenplu egingo zaituzte Jainkoak eta apaiz sagaratuko , Jainkoari atsegin zaizkion espirituzko opariak Jesu Kristoren bitartez eskaintzeko .
PRED:	so that you will be holy by the Spirit of your life , and you will be holy to the Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	And you are living stones that God is building into his spiritual temple . What 's more , you are his holy priests . Through the mediation of Jesus Christ , you offer spiritual sacrifices that please God .

ID:	4574
INPUT:	Igarotzen zituen lurraldeetan senideak hizketaldi askoren bidez adoretzen zituen . Greziara iritsi
PRED:	He went through many of his brothers in the land , and taught them .
GOLD:	While there , he encouraged the believers in all the towns he passed through . Then he traveled down to Greece ,

ID:	4575
INPUT:	Judako errege Josiasen seme Sedekias errege izaten hasi zen garaian , Jaunak agindu hau eman zion Jeremiasi :
PRED:	In the days of Josiah the son of Josiah king of Judah , king of Judah came to Jeremiah , saying ,
GOLD:	This message came to Jeremiah from the Lord early in the reign of Zedekiah son of Josiah , king of Judah .

ID:	4576
INPUT:	Erregeak galdetu zion : — Ez al dabil Joaben eskua zurekin arazo honetan guztian ? Emakumeak erantzun : — Ala ene errege jauna ! Bete-betean asmatu duzu esan duzun guztian . Bai , zure zerbitzari Joabek agindu dit , ene errege jauna , zer esan behar nizun .
PRED:	And the king said unto him , Is not this thing with thee in all these things ? And the woman said unto him , As my lord the king lives in thine hand , my lord the king commanded me , I pray thee , my lord the king .
GOLD:	“ Did Joab put you up to this ? ” And the woman replied , “ My lord the king , how can I deny it ? Nobody can hide anything from you . Yes , Joab sent me and told me what to say .

ID:	4577
INPUT:	Salu , Amok , Hilkias eta Jedaias . Horiek ziren apaiz-familien eta ahaideen buru Josueren garaian .
PRED:	These are the names of the priests , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , and Jeshua . These were the chief priests in the days of Joshua .
GOLD:	Sallu , Amok , Hilkiah , and Jedaiah.These were the leaders of the priests and their associates in the days of Jeshua .

ID:	4578
INPUT:	« Ituna egiten dut zuekin eta zuen ondorengoekin ,
PRED:	“ I have made a covenant with you and your descendants .
GOLD:	“ I hereby confirm my covenant with you and your descendants ,

ID:	4579
INPUT:	Zaingelek , hormek eta atalondoak besteen neurri berberak zituzten . Sarrerak , atalondoa barne , leihoak zituen inguru guztian , eta hogeita bost metro zen luze eta hamabi eta erdi zabal . (
PRED:	And it was the same side of the court , and the other side of the court , and the doors thereof , and the gate thereof , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof , and the breadth thereof .
GOLD:	Its guard alcoves , dividing walls , and entry room were the same size as those in the others . It also had windows along its walls and in the entry room . And like the others , the gateway passage was 871/2 feet long and 433/4 feet wide .

ID:	4580
INPUT:	Xemaias , Joiarib , Jedaias ,
PRED:	Jeremiah the son of Jehoiada , Jeremiah ,
GOLD:	Shemaiah , Joiarib , Jedaiah ,

ID:	4581
INPUT:	Ez al dakizue , senideok — legeen berri dakizuenoi mintzo natzaizue — , gizakia bizi den bitartean bakarrik behartzen duela legeak ?
PRED:	Do n't you know that I am speaking to you , brothers and sisters , who say to you , “ Do n't you know that the law is still alive ? ”
GOLD:	Now , dear brothers and sisters — you who are familiar with the law — do n't you know that the law applies only while a person is living ?

ID:	4582
INPUT:	Horregatik , hildakoen artetik piztu zenean , esandako hori gogoratu zitzaien haren ikasleei , eta sinetsi egin zuten Liburu Santuko eta Jesusek esandako hitza .
PRED:	And when he was raised from the dead , he remembered his disciples , and believed in the Scriptures , and believed the word of Jesus .
GOLD:	After he was raised from the dead , his disciples remembered he had said this , and they believed both the Scriptures and what Jesus had said .

ID:	4583
INPUT:	Jainkoak ez zien barkatu bekatu egin zuten aingeruei , eta , infernuko barrunbe ilunetara jaurtiz , han utzi zituen auzirako gordeta .
PRED:	And God did not forgive the angels , and they cast them into the darkness , and cast them into the sabbath day of the Sabbath .
GOLD:	For God did not spare even the angels who sinned . He threw them into hell , in gloomy pits of darkness , where they are being held until the day of judgment .

ID:	4584
INPUT:	Ondoren , ikasleei esan zien : — Falta izan al zenuten ezer , poltsarik eta zakutorik eta oinetakorik gabe bidali zintuztedanean ? Haiek erantzun : — Ezer ere ez .
PRED:	Then he said to his disciples , “ Did you know what the Lord has blessed you ? ” And when they sent you away , they answered , “ What do you do ? ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus asked them , “ When I sent you out to preach the Good News and you did not have money , a traveler 's bag , or an extra pair of sandals , did you need anything ? ” “ No , ” they replied .

ID:	4585
INPUT:	Orduan , zaldien hanka-hotsaentzun zen , lurra joz , zaldiak bizkor lauoinka .
PRED:	And the sound of the horses heard the sound of the horses , and the horses fell on their feet .
GOLD:	Then the horses ' hooves hammered the ground , the galloping , galloping of Sisera 's mighty steeds .

ID:	4586
INPUT:	« Agindua nion neure buruariez niela irrikaz begiratuko neska<unk> .
PRED:	“ I commanded you to do what I commanded you to do . I did n't want to look at my head .
GOLD:	“ I made a covenant with my eyesnot to look with lust at a young woman .

ID:	4587
INPUT:	Ez dugu , beraz , beldurrik , nahiz eta lurrak dardara eginedota mendiak itsas hondora amildu ,
PRED:	So we do n't fear , and the earth and the earth fell down into the sea .
GOLD:	Let the oceans roar and foam.Let the mountains tremble as the waters surge ! Interlude

ID:	4588
INPUT:	Iraunkor izateko nire agindua gorde duzulako , nik ere gordeko zaitut , lurreko bizilagunak probatzeko mundu osora iristear dagoen probaldikoan .
PRED:	For I will keep my commandments , because I have kept my commandments , and I will punish you in the land of the earth .
GOLD:	“ Because you have obeyed my command to persevere , I will protect you from the great time of testing that will come upon the whole world to test those who belong to this world .

ID:	4589
INPUT:	Hilobira erortzetik libratu nau , argiz beterik biziko naiz ” .
PRED:	He saved me from the dead , and I will live in the light . ”
GOLD:	God rescued me from the grave , and now my life is filled with light . '

ID:	4590
INPUT:	Jesusen Jaiotza
PRED:	Jesus Heals to Jesus
GOLD:	The Birth of Jesus

ID:	4591
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Bene-benetan diotsuet : Nire bila zabiltzate , ez ikusi dituzuen mirarizko seinaleengatik , ogia asetzeraino jan duzuelako baizik .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Most certainly I tell you , you are looking for my sake , but you have not seen the sign of the sign which you have seen .
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ I tell you the truth , you want to be with me because I fed you , not because you understood the miraculous signs .

ID:	4592
INPUT:	Saulek Davidi : — Bedeinkatua zu , ene seme David ! Handiak eginen dituzu eta garaile izango egintza guztietan ! David bere bidetik joan zen , eta Saul etxera itzuli .
PRED:	Saul said to David , “ Blessed be you , my son David , and you will be great in all the days of David , and you will go to his own house . ”
GOLD:	And Saul said to David , “ Blessings on you , my son David . You will do many heroic deeds , and you will surely succeed . ” Then David went away , and Saul returned home .

ID:	4593
INPUT:	Gero , esan nien : « Ondo baderitzozue , ordaindu lansaria ; bestela , utzi » . Haiek zilarrezko hogeita hamar txanpon ordaindu zizkidaten .
PRED:	Then I said to them , “ If you pay a field , give it to me . ” And they gave me thirty shekels of silver .
GOLD:	And I said to them , “ If you like , give me my wages , whatever I am worth ; but only if you want to . ” So they counted out for my wages thirty pieces of silver .

ID:	4594
INPUT:	Orduan , gizaki guztiek ikusiko dute Jainkoak ematen duen salbamena .
PRED:	And all men shall see the salvation of God .
GOLD:	And then all people will seethe salvation sent from God . ' ”

ID:	4595
INPUT:	Nork ez du maite bizia ? Nork ez du nahi luzaroan bizi eta zoriontsu izan ?
PRED:	Who can love the life of life ? Who can live in a long time ?
GOLD:	Then keep your tongue from speaking eviland your lips from telling lies !

ID:	4596
INPUT:	Hurbildu zitzaion , orduan , tentatzailea eta esan zion : — Jainkoaren Semea zarenez , agindu harri hauek ogi bihurtzeko .
PRED:	And he came near unto him , and said unto him , Thou art the Son of God , that thou art the Son of God , to make this stone .
GOLD:	During that time the devil came and said to him , “ If you are the Son of God , tell these stones to become loaves of bread . ”

ID:	4597
INPUT:	Nire ondasunak arakatzean , aurkitu al duzu ezer zeure etxeko gauzetarik ? Hala bada , ekarri hona , nire eta zure ahaideen aurrera , eta erabaki dezatela hauek nork duen arrazoi !
PRED:	When you find my wealth , what did you find ? Bring it to my brothers and to my brothers , so that they may know that they are right . ”
GOLD:	You have rummaged through everything I own . Now show me what you found that belongs to you ! Set it out here in front of us , before our relatives , for all to see . Let them judge between us !

ID:	4598
INPUT:	mendietako zaparradak blai egiten ditu , non babesturik ez , eta harkaitzaren kontra jartzen dira .
PRED:	The mountains of the mountains , and there is no one , and they fight against the rock .
GOLD:	They are soaked by mountain showers , and they huddle against the rocks for want of a home .

ID:	4599
INPUT:	« Emakumeagandik sortutako gizakiakegunak gutxi eta kezkak ugari ;
PRED:	“ A man who is born from a woman , and a few are many .
GOLD:	“ How frail is humanity ! How short is life , how full of trouble !

ID:	4600
INPUT:	Damaskon nengoela , Are<unk> erregearen gobernariak zaintzaileak ezarri zituen hirian ni harrapatzeko ;
PRED:	And when I was in Damascus , he set the guard of the king of Assyria , and set them in the city .
GOLD:	When I was in Damascus , the governor under King Aretas kept guards at the city gates to catch me .

ID:	4601
INPUT:	Orobat , berarekin gurutzean josiak zeuden lapurrek ere irain egiten zioten .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the thief came with him , that the thief went with him , and the thief came to him .
GOLD:	Even the revolutionaries who were crucified with him ridiculed him in the same way .

ID:	4602
INPUT:	Ogia erretzean , labealdi bakoitzeko opil bat eskainiko diozue hasikin gisa , uzta-sasoian lehen fruituak eskaintzen dituzuen bezala .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , when ye offer the bread of bread , that ye offer a tenth of bread , as the first year of the harvest , as the first year of the harvest .
GOLD:	Present a cake from the first of the flour you grind , and set it aside as a sacred offering , as you do with the first grain from the threshing floor .

ID:	4603
INPUT:	Joan ziren ikasleak eta , hirira iristean , dena Jesusek esan bezala gertatu zitzaien , eta Pazko-afaria prestatu zuten .
PRED:	And his disciples came to the city , as Jesus had said to them , and they prepared the Passover .
GOLD:	So the two disciples went into the city and found everything just as Jesus had said , and they prepared the Passover meal there .

ID:	4604
INPUT:	Hildakoen Egoitzan oinazez zegoela , begiak jaso eta Abraham ikusi zuen urruti , eta Lazaro haren ondoan .
PRED:	When he looked at the feet of the dead , he looked at the feet of the dead , and saw Abraham standing beside him .
GOLD:	and he went to the place of the dead . There , in torment , he saw Abraham in the far distance with Lazarus at his side .

ID:	4605
INPUT:	Nik Kixon errekara ekarriko dizut Sisera , Jabinen gudarostearen buruzagia , bere guda-gurdi eta gudari-taldearekin , eta eskura emango » .
PRED:	I will bring you to the river of the Jordan , the princes of Jacob , and all his chariots , and his chariots , and his chariots , and his chariots , and his chariots , and his chariots .
GOLD:	And I will call out Sisera , commander of Jabin 's army , along with his chariots and warriors , to the Kishon River . There I will give you victory over him . ”

ID:	4606
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaun ahalguztidunak : « Oi zu , Sionen bizi zaren nire herria ! Ez izan Asiriaren beldurrik , zigorrez jotzen bazaitu ereeta zure aurkamakila jasotzen badu ere , behinola egiptoarrek bezala .
PRED:	Thus says the Lord of hosts : “ You are my people who live in Zion , and do n't be afraid of you . Do n't be afraid of the Egyptians , as if the Egyptians do to you .
GOLD:	So this is what the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , says : “ O my people in Zion , do not be afraid of the Assyrians when they oppress you with rod and club as the Egyptians did long ago .

ID:	4607
INPUT:	Barak Siseraren ondoren zebilen . Jaelek , bidera irtenik , esan zion : « Zatoz , neuk erakutsiko dizut bila zabiltzan gizona » . Sartu zen Barak oihal-etxolara eta Sisera hila aurkitu zuen , ziria buruan sartua zuela .
PRED:	And when he went out to Shechem , he went out , and said unto him , Come , I will show thee a man , and I will show thee the man , and he went into the tent of meeting , and found it in the book of his tent .
GOLD:	When Barak came looking for Sisera , Jael went out to meet him . She said , “ Come , and I will show you the man you are looking for . ” So he followed her into the tent and found Sisera lying there dead , with the tent peg through his temple .

ID:	4608
INPUT:	Elkartu zirenean , beste ikasleek esan zioten : — Jauna ikusi dugu . Tomasek erantzun zien : — Haren eskuetan iltzeen seinalea ikusten ez badut , eta nire atzamarra iltze-zuloetan eta nire eskua haren saihets-zuloan sartzen ez badut , ez dut inola ere sinetsiko .
PRED:	And his disciples said unto him , Lord , we have seen the sign of the Lord , and he said unto them , If I see the sign that I have not seen in his hand , and I will not enter into my mother 's womb .
GOLD:	They told him , “ We have seen the Lord ! ” But he replied , “ I wo n't believe it unless I see the nail wounds in his hands , put my fingers into them , and place my hand into the wound in his side . ”

ID:	4609
INPUT:	gaizki-esaka ari zaizkigu eta guk gozoki erantzun . Orain artean , munduko simaurra bezala gara , guztien hondakin .
PRED:	We have spoken evil against us , and we have answered , and now we are under the face of all the earth .
GOLD:	We appeal gently when evil things are said about us . Yet we are treated like the world 's garbage , like everybody 's trash — right up to the present moment .

ID:	4610
INPUT:	« Landan dabilela , hila izan den nahiz berez hildako norbaiten gorpua edota giza hezurrak nahiz hilobia ukitzen dituena kutsaturik geldituko da zazpi egunez .
PRED:	If any man is dead in the field , or in the field , or in the field , or in the field , he shall be unclean seven days .
GOLD:	And if someone in an open field touches the corpse of someone who was killed with a sword or who died a natural death , or if someone touches a human bone or a grave , that person will be defiled for seven days .

ID:	4611
INPUT:	eta , seme-alaba bagara , baita oinordeko ere , Jainkoaren oinordeko eta Kristoren oinordekide ; zeren , nekeetan Kristoren kideko garenez gero , aintzan ere beraren kideko izango baikara .
PRED:	and we are children , and we are children , and we are the children of God , and we are the same way of Christ , for we are the glory of Christ .
GOLD:	And since we are his children , we are his heirs . In fact , together with Christ we are heirs of God 's glory . But if we are to share his glory , we must also share his suffering .

ID:	4612
INPUT:	Tronutik tximistak , danbatekoak eta trumoiak ateratzen ziren ; aulkiaren aurrean zazpi argi-zuzi zeuden sutan , Jainkoaren zazpi espirituak adierazten zituztenak ,
PRED:	And there came out of the midst of fire , and the voice of the throne , and the seven angels who were in front of the throne , and the seven spirits of God ,
GOLD:	From the throne came flashes of lightning and the rumble of thunder . And in front of the throne were seven torches with burning flames . This is the sevenfold Spirit of God .

ID:	4613
INPUT:	Naamanek Israelgo erregeari eman zion gutunak hau zioen : « Gutun hau eramanez Naaman neure gudalburua bidaltzen dizut , legena senda diezaiozun » .
PRED:	Then Amaziah said to the king of Israel , “ I have sent my commander to you , and I will send you over my army . ”
GOLD:	The letter to the king of Israel said : “ With this letter I present my servant Naaman . I want you to heal him of his leprosy . ”

ID:	4614
INPUT:	Egun hartan , bertsoak aterako dizkizuete , eta eresi hau kantatuko : « Zeharo larruturik gaude ! Jaunaren herriaren ondareaarrotzen eskuetara joan da ; nolatan kendu diote gero ? Sinesgabeen arteanbanatzen dituzte gure soroak » .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in that day , that they shall bring forth the song of the Lord , and say unto him , We shall go into the hand of the Lord ; and what shall we go into the hand of the people of Zion ?
GOLD:	In that day your enemies will make fun of youby singing this song of despair about you : “ We are finished , completely ruined ! God has confiscated our land , taking it from us.He has given our fieldsto those who betrayed us . ”

ID:	4615
INPUT:	« Erosta kantatuko dizute : « “ Nola dagoen hondatua , itsasoetako erregina , hiri ospetsua ! Bera eta bertako bizilagunakindartsu ziren itsasoaneta izua sorrarazten zutenalde guztietan ” .
PRED:	And they shall sing unto thee , How is the waste of the sea , the great city , the great city , the great city , the great city , and the mighty city , and the mighty men of the sea .
GOLD:	Then they will wail for you , singing this funeral song : “ O famous island city , once ruler of the sea , how you have been destroyed ! Your people , with their naval power , once spread fear around the world .

ID:	4616
INPUT:	Eta basoan geldituko direnzuhaitzakhain gutxi izango dira , ezen ume batek erekontatu ahal izango baititu .
PRED:	And he that is left in the field shall be a little child , for a son shall know it .
GOLD:	Of all that glorious forest , only a few trees will survive — so few that a child could count them !

ID:	4617
INPUT:	Agripak esan zion Paulori : — Beste pixka bat , eta kristau bihurtuko nauzu .
PRED:	Then Festus said to Paul , “ A little while , and you will be wise . ”
GOLD:	Agrippa interrupted him . “ Do you think you can persuade me to become a Christian so quickly ? ”

ID:	4618
INPUT:	Jesus Jerusalemen Mesias bezala sartu
PRED:	Jesus is the Messiah
GOLD:	Jesus Clears the Temple

ID:	4619
INPUT:	Artalde eta abere-taldeak ere eskuratu zituen . Jendeak abereak hartu eta Daviden aitzinera eraman zituen , esanez : « Hona Davidentzako harrapakinak » .
PRED:	And he took their flocks and their flocks , and brought them to David , and brought them to David his father , saying , This is the prey of David .
GOLD:	He also recovered all the flocks and herds , and his men drove them ahead of the other livestock . “ This plunder belongs to David ! ” they said .

ID:	4620
INPUT:	« Apaiz-tunika liho finez bordatua egingo duzu , eta buruzapia ere liho finezkoa izango da ; gerrikoa apain bordatua egingo duzu .
PRED:	And thou shalt make the holy priests with blue , and thou shalt make them of fine linen , and the head of fine linen ; and thou shalt make the work of fine linen .
GOLD:	“ Weave Aaron 's patterned tunic from fine linen cloth . Fashion the turban from this linen as well . Also make a sash , and decorate it with colorful embroidery .

ID:	4621
INPUT:	Batek garrantzi berezia ematen dio egun bati ; beste batentzat , berriz , egun guztiak berdinak dira . Joka dezala bakoitzak bere kontzientziaren arabera .
PRED:	A second day has been given to him a second day , but all the days are for each day . Each one of them must tell each one to his own own own father .
GOLD:	In the same way , some think one day is more holy than another day , while others think every day is alike . You should each be fully convinced that whichever day you choose is acceptable .

ID:	4622
INPUT:	Oi nire anaia bazina , nire amaren bularrean hazia ! Musu emango nizuke kalean aurkitzean , inoren iseka-beldurrik gabe .
PRED:	But if you find my brother 's breasts , I would send fire on you , and I would find no fear of man .
GOLD:	Oh , I wish you were my brother , who nursed at my mother 's breasts.Then I could kiss you no matter who was watching , and no one would criticize me .

ID:	4623
INPUT:	Tenpluari buruz hitzaldia
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Jeremiah Speaks at the Temple

ID:	4624
INPUT:	Herri guztiak zuk eginak : adoratzera etorriko zaizkizu , zuri , Jauna , ohore ematera .
PRED:	All the peoples will come to you , and you will be brought to you , Lord , to give glory to you .
GOLD:	All the nations you madewill come and bow before you , Lord ; they will praise your holy name .

ID:	4625
INPUT:	Manasesen leinukoek ezin izan zituzten hartu Bet-Xan , Taanak , Dor , Ibleam eta Megido hiriak , ezta haien inguruak , ez bizilagunak ere ; kanaandarrek jarraitu zuten bertan bizitzen .
PRED:	And the sons of Manasseh did not enter into the land of Manasseh , and the cities of the children of Manasseh , and the cities of Canaan , and the cities of the Amorites , and their villages , and their villages , and their villages , and their villages , and their villages , and their villages , and their villages , and their cities , and their inhabitants .
GOLD:	The tribe of Manasseh failed to drive out the people living in Beth-shan , Taanach , Dor , Ibleam , Megiddo , and all their surrounding settlements , because the Canaanites were determined to stay in that region .

ID:	4626
INPUT:	( Mk 14 , <unk> ; Jn 12 , 1-8 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus Predicts Peter 's Denial

ID:	4627
INPUT:	Bataioaz Jesusen garaipenaren partaide
PRED:	Jesus Heals in the Son
GOLD:	Suffering for Doing Good

ID:	4628
INPUT:	Juduak Pazko-jaia ospatu
PRED:	The Passover Passover
GOLD:	Celebration of Passover

ID:	4629
INPUT:	Jaunak bedeinkazioa agindu
PRED:	The
GOLD:	Promises for Zerubbabel

ID:	4630
INPUT:	Jesusek berriro jendeari dei egin eta esan zion : « Entzun niri denok eta ulertu ongi !
PRED:	Then Jesus called the crowd again and said to them , “ Listen to me and understand .
GOLD:	Then Jesus called to the crowd to come and hear . “ All of you listen , ” he said , “ and try to understand .

ID:	4631
INPUT:	Gosea erakarri zuen lurraldera , janari-hornidura oro kendu .
PRED:	He brought the famine into the land , and took away the food of food .
GOLD:	He called for a famine on the land of Canaan , cutting off its food supply .

ID:	4632
INPUT:	edo irakurtzen ez dakien bati eman eta « Irakurri hau » esaten diote , eta hark « Ez dakit irakurtzen » erantzuten .
PRED:	But if they read not , they say , “ I know not , ” and he said , “ I know . ”
GOLD:	When you give it to those who can not read , they will say , “ We do n't know how to read . ”

ID:	4633
INPUT:	Senarrok , maitatu emazteak eta ez izan horiekin zakar .
PRED:	My beloved , love them , and do not be with them .
GOLD:	Husbands , love your wives and never treat them harshly .

ID:	4634
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Koreren semeen salmoa .
PRED:	O God , you are my God ; you are my God , and you are my God .
GOLD:	Listen to this , all you people ! Pay attention , everyone in the world !

ID:	4635
INPUT:	Baina orain ez oroitu antzinakoez , ez gogoratu lehenago gertatuez .
PRED:	But now I remember not the old , nor remember the former things that I have done .
GOLD:	“ But forget all that — it is nothing compared to what I am going to do .

ID:	4636
INPUT:	« Esan israeldarrei : Gizonezkoa , sexu-jarioa duenean , kutsatu bihurtzen da .
PRED:	Speak unto the children of Israel , and say unto them , When a man is defiled , he is unclean .
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel . “ Any man who has a bodily discharge is ceremonially unclean .

ID:	4637
INPUT:	Joanek noren aginduz bataiatzen zuen , Jainkoaren aginduz ala giza aginduz ? Haiek honela zioten beren artean : « Jainkoaren aginduz ari zela esaten badiogu , zergatik ez genion sinetsi erantzungo digu .
PRED:	John was baptized by the authority of John , saying , “ If we say , ‘ If we do not believe God 's commands , we will not believe him . '
GOLD:	“ Did John 's authority to baptize come from heaven , or was it merely human ? ” They talked it over among themselves . “ If we say it was from heaven , he will ask us why we did n't believe John .

ID:	4638
INPUT:	Ez gehiago harropuzkeriarik , beraz , kateak estuagobihur ez dakizkizuen . Izan ere , zuen lurralde osoasuntsitzeko erabakia hartua duelajakinarazi dit Jainko Jaunak .
PRED:	So I will not be proud , nor will I make you afraid , because I have heard that the Lord your God has shown me all your land .
GOLD:	For the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , has plainly said that he is determined to crush the whole land.So scoff no more , or your punishment will be even greater .

ID:	4639
INPUT:	Baziren han emakume asko ere , urrutitik begira ; Jesusi jarraituz Galileatik etorriak ziren , beraren zerbitzari ;
PRED:	And there were many women from a distance , and came from Galilee , and followed him .
GOLD:	And many women who had come from Galilee with Jesus to care for him were watching from a distance .

ID:	4640
INPUT:	Ene seme , ez baztertu Jaunaren heziketa , ez haserretu zentzarazten bazaitu ,
PRED:	My son , do n't turn away from the Lord , and do n't be angry .
GOLD:	My child , do n't reject the Lord 's discipline , and do n't be upset when he corrects you .

ID:	4641
INPUT:	Harri gaineko hazia bezalakoak , hauek dira : mezua entzutean , pozik onartzen dutenak ; baina , sustrairik gabeak izanik , denboraldi batean sinesten dute , baina tentaldi-garaian huts egiten .
PRED:	These are the ones who hear the word , and when they hear the word , they are glad , but they have no faith in a long time .
GOLD:	The seeds on the rocky soil represent those who hear the message and receive it with joy . But since they do n't have deep roots , they believe for a while , then they fall away when they face temptation .

ID:	4642
INPUT:	gogoko dute plazetan jendeak agur egitea eta guztiek “ maisu ” deitzea .
PRED:	They will sing out the crowd in the streets , and all the people will call him ‘ Teacher . '
GOLD:	They love to receive respectful greetings as they walk in the marketplaces , and to be called ‘ Rabbi . '

ID:	4643
INPUT:	« Norbaitek bere abereak sorora nahiz mahastira larratzera atera eta beste baten soroan larratzen uzten baditu , bere soro nahiz mahastiko emaitzarik hoberenez ordainduko du .
PRED:	“ If a man has bought his field , or his field , or his field , or his field , or his field , he shall pay it to his field , or his vineyard .
GOLD:	If someone steals an ox or a donkey or a sheep and it is found in the thief 's possession , then the thief must pay double the value of the stolen animal .

ID:	4644
INPUT:	entzuiozu zerutik , bizi zaren toki horretatik , eta barkatu . Egizu nork bere jokaeraren ordaina har dezan , ongi baitakizu halakoaren barruaren berri ; jakin ere , zuk bakarrik dakizu gizon-emakume guztien barruaren berri .
PRED:	And hear from heaven , and forgive them , and forgive them , that every man may be forgiven , for thou hast heard the words of his mouth , and thou hast known all the men of men .
GOLD:	then hear from heaven where you live , and forgive . Give your people what their actions deserve , for you alone know each human heart .

ID:	4645
INPUT:	Haren aginduz eguzkia ez da ateratzen , izarrak ezkutuan uzten ditu .
PRED:	He does not obey his commands , and his stars under the stars .
GOLD:	If he commands it , the sun wo n't riseand the stars wo n't shine .

ID:	4646
INPUT:	esku hartuko duzu zeuk ere irabazietan , gordailu bakarra izango dugu eta » .
PRED:	And thou shalt take it into thy hand , and it shall be for us .
GOLD:	Come , throw in your lot with us ; we 'll all share the loot . ”

ID:	4647
INPUT:	Hodeiaren erdian lau izaki bizidun zeuden , gizaki-itxurakoak .
PRED:	There were four living creatures on the four corners of the four living creatures .
GOLD:	From the center of the cloud came four living beings that looked human ,

ID:	4648
INPUT:	Seigarren ikuskaria : liburua
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	A Flying Scroll

ID:	4649
INPUT:	Ala ni , Jainko Jauna ! Nire artaldea larrutua eta basapiztia guztien harrapakin izan da artzainik ez zuelako , eta artzainak ez dira nire artaldeaz arduratu ; aitzitik , artzainek beren buruak zaindu dituzte eta ez nire artaldea ;
PRED:	As I am the Lord God , my sheep , and all the animals of the field , and all the beasts of the field were not with you , because they have not kept my sheep , but they have not kept my sheep , and they have not kept my sheep .
GOLD:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , you abandoned my flock and left them to be attacked by every wild animal . And though you were my shepherds , you did n't search for my sheep when they were lost . You took care of yourselves and left the sheep to starve .

ID:	4650
INPUT:	Eraman egin zioten . Jesus ikusteaz batera , espirituak gogor astindu zuen mutikoa , eta lurrean iraulka eta lerdea zeriola utzi .
PRED:	And they brought him to him . And when he saw Jesus , he stretched out his spirit , and cast him into the ground , and let him understand that it was written in the earth .
GOLD:	So they brought the boy . But when the evil spirit saw Jesus , it threw the child into a violent convulsion , and he fell to the ground , writhing and foaming at the mouth .

ID:	4651
INPUT:	Josuek agindu bezala egin zuten israeldarrek : Jordan erditik hamabi harri , israeldar leinuak hainbat harri , hartu , gaua igaroko zuten lekura eraman eta bertan ezarri zituzten , Jaunak Josueri agindu bezala .
PRED:	And the children of Israel did as Joshua commanded them : and they took twelve stones from the Jordan , and brought them to the place of the Jordan , as the Lord had commanded Joshua .
GOLD:	So the men did as Joshua had commanded them . They took twelve stones from the middle of the Jordan River , one for each tribe , just as the Lord had told Joshua . They carried them to the place where they camped for the night and constructed the memorial there .

ID:	4652
INPUT:	Hori esatean , ahaztu egiten dute aspaldi bazirela zeruak , eta baita lurra ere , Jainkoaren hitzak uretatik sorrarazia eta uren erdian finkatua ;
PRED:	When they say these things , they forget that the heavens and the earth were forgotten , and the word of God came out of the earth , and the waters of God spread out the waters of the earth .
GOLD:	They deliberately forget that God made the heavens long ago by the word of his command , and he brought the earth out from the water and surrounded it with water .

ID:	4653
INPUT:	Hirira heltzean , oihu egin zieten atezainei eta berri eman , esanez : — Siriarren kanpalekuan izan gara , eta han ez dago inor ; ez da giza hotsik aditzen . Zaldiak eta astoak lotuak eta oihal-etxolak zeuden zeudenean utziak besterik ez dago han .
PRED:	When they came to the city , they cried out to the people , saying , “ We have seen no one in the camp of Syria , and there is no one in the camp , and there is no one in the camp . ”
GOLD:	So they went back to the city and told the gatekeepers what had happened . “ We went out to the Aramean camp , ” they said , “ and no one was there ! The horses and donkeys were tethered and the tents were all in order , but there was n't a single person around ! ”

ID:	4654
INPUT:	Hortan , honela mintzatu zitzaion Elkana bere senarra : — Ana , zergatik ari zara negarrez eta ez duzu jaten ? Zergatik zaude goibel ? Ez al naiz , bada , ni zuretzat hamar seme baino hobe ?
PRED:	Then Boaz said to her husband , “ Why do you not eat ? Why do you eat ? Why do you not eat ? Why do n't I have ten sons than ten sons ? ”
GOLD:	“ Why are you crying , Hannah ? ” Elkanah would ask . “ Why are n't you eating ? Why be downhearted just because you have no children ? You have me — is n't that better than having ten sons ? ”

ID:	4655
INPUT:	Errautsa dut janari , malkoak edari .
PRED:	I have eaten my flesh , and I have eaten my flesh .
GOLD:	because of your anger and wrath.For you have picked me up and thrown me out .

ID:	4656
INPUT:	Baina Sanbalat horondarrak eta Tobias amondar funtzionarioak , zertara nentorren jakitean , oso gaizki hartu zuten israeldarren egoera ontzeko norbait etortzea .
PRED:	But when he heard that he had come , the servants of Ammon , and the princes of Ammon , and the sons of Ammon , and the princes of Ammon , and the children of Israel heard that he had come to fight against Israel .
GOLD:	But when Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the Ammonite official heard of my arrival , they were very displeased that someone had come to help the people of Israel .

ID:	4657
INPUT:	Zeren , egia esan , niregan bete beharra baita Liburu Santuak dioena : Bekatarien kidekotzat jo zuten . Izan ere , nireak laster egingo du .
PRED:	I tell you , that it is written in me , for it is written , “ I am going to sin . ”
GOLD:	For the time has come for this prophecy about me to be fulfilled : ‘ He was counted among the rebels . ' Yes , everything written about me by the prophets will come true . ”

ID:	4658
INPUT:	Roboamek , Jerusalemen kokatu zenean , Judako zenbait hiri gotortu egin zuen .
PRED:	When Rehoboam was buried in Jerusalem , he built some cities of Judah .
GOLD:	Rehoboam remained in Jerusalem and fortified various towns for the defense of Judah .

ID:	4659
INPUT:	Aintziraz beste aldera iritsi ziren , gerasatarren lurraldera .
PRED:	And they came to the other side of the sea , and came to the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	So they arrived at the other side of the lake , in the region of the Gerasenes .

ID:	4660
INPUT:	« Zaude tenpluko atarian zutik , eta hitz egin Judako hirietatik Jauna gurtzera tenplura datozen guztiei . Hots egin zehatz-mehatz haiei esateko agindu dizkizudan hitzak , bakar bat ere utzi gabe .
PRED:	And thou shalt speak unto them in the court of the house of the Lord , and speak unto all the cities of Judah , and unto all the cities of Judah , saying , Thus saith the Lord .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord says : Stand in the courtyard in front of the Temple of the Lord , and make an announcement to the people who have come there to worship from all over Judah . Give them my entire message ; include every word .

ID:	4661
INPUT:	eta ezarri Jaunaren aurrean , urre garbizko mahai gainean , seina opileko bi lerrotan .
PRED:	and put them in front of the Lord in front of the Lord , on the two ends of pure gold .
GOLD:	Place the bread before the Lord on the pure gold table , and arrange the loaves in two stacks , with six loaves in each stack .

ID:	4662
INPUT:	Begira , zeurekin nauzu ! Noranahi zoazela , zainduko zaituteta lurralde honetara itzularaziko . Ez , ez zaitut eskutik utziko , esan dizudana bete arte » .
PRED:	Behold , I am with thee , that thou art with me , and thou shalt go into this land ; for I will not deliver thee into the hand of this land , until I have spoken unto thee .
GOLD:	What 's more , I am with you , and I will protect you wherever you go . One day I will bring you back to this land . I will not leave you until I have finished giving you everything I have promised you . ”

ID:	4663
INPUT:	Deabruei eskaini zizkietensakrifizioak , ezagutzen ez zituzten sasijainkoei , arestian etorritako jainko berriei , arbasoek inoiz gurtu ez zituztenei .
PRED:	They offered sacrifices to the gods of demons , and they did not know the gods of the gods of the gods of their fathers .
GOLD:	They offered sacrifices to demons , which are not God , to gods they had not known before , to new gods only recently arrived , to gods their ancestors had never feared .

ID:	4664
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jainko Jauna , handia zara , ez baita zu adinakorik . Ez da jainkorik zu baizik , geure belarriz entzun izan dugun bezala .
PRED:	Therefore , O Lord God , thou art great , for thou art no God , but thou hast not heard thy voice , as we have heard .
GOLD:	“ How great you are , O Sovereign Lord ! There is no one like you . We have never even heard of another God like you !

ID:	4665
INPUT:	Omri erregearen aginduaketa Akaben familiaren ohiturakgordetzen dituzu : haien esanetara zabiltza . Horregatik , zuen hiria hondatua utziko duteta bizilagunak lotsa gorrian . Nire herriaren lotsaizunajasan beharko duzue » .
PRED:	And thou shalt keep all the commandments of Ahab and Ahab , and the house of Ahab , and the house of Ahab : therefore thou shalt be destroyed , and the city shall be destroyed , and they shall be put to shame , and they shall be ashamed .
GOLD:	You keep only the laws of evil King Omri ; you follow only the example of wicked King Ahab ! Therefore , I will make an example of you , bringing you to complete ruin.You will be treated with contempt , mocked by all who see you . ”

ID:	4666
INPUT:	Ene maiteok , ihes egiozue , beraz , idolatriari .
PRED:	My beloved , run away , my friends , and flee to idols .
GOLD:	So , my dear friends , flee from the worship of idols .

ID:	4667
INPUT:	esan zion emazteari : — Seguru hilko garela , Jainkoa ikusi baitugu .
PRED:	He said to his wife , “ We will die three days , because we saw God . ”
GOLD:	and he said to his wife , “ We will certainly die , for we have seen God ! ”

ID:	4668
INPUT:	Nork ezagutzen du zure haserrearen indarra ? Nork dio aski beldur zure suminari ?
PRED:	Who shall know thy wrath ? Who shall know thy wrath ? Who shall be afraid of thee ?
GOLD:	Who can comprehend the power of your anger ? Your wrath is as awesome as the fear you deserve .

ID:	4669
INPUT:	Hogei urte zituen Akazek errege izaten hastean , eta hamasei urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen . Ez zuen Jaunari atsegin zaiona egin , bere arbaso Davidek ez bezala jokatuz .
PRED:	Ahaz was twenty years old when he became king , and he reigned six years in Jerusalem . He did not do what was evil in the sight of the Lord .
GOLD:	Ahaz was twenty years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years . He did not do what was pleasing in the sight of the Lord , as his ancestor David had done .

ID:	4670
INPUT:	Ez egin jaramonik Babiloniako erregeak ez zaituztela menderatuko esaten dizueten profetei , gezurra esaten baitizuete .
PRED:	Do n't listen to the words of the king of Babylon , for they say to you , ‘ You will not be put to death . '
GOLD:	Do not listen to the false prophets who keep telling you , ‘ The king of Babylon will not conquer you . ' They are liars .

ID:	4671
INPUT:	Ez izan zeure baitan beste jainkorik , ez dezazula adora jainko arrotzik .
PRED:	For there is no other gods in you , that you may not worship other gods .
GOLD:	For it was I , the Lord your God , who rescued you from the land of Egypt.Open your mouth wide , and I will fill it with good things .

ID:	4672
INPUT:	Sei urtez egon zen Joax bi emakumeekin Jainkoaren etxean gorderik , Atalia lurralde hartan erregina izan zen bitarte guztian .
PRED:	And Joash was eight years in the house of God , and he was in the house of his God all the days of Uriah .
GOLD:	Joash remained hidden in the Temple of God for six years while Athaliah ruled over the land .

ID:	4673
INPUT:	Hilaurra bezala , ez nintzatekeen izan ere egingo , argirik ikusi ez duten umeen pareko .
PRED:	I would not be like three thousand , for I would not see the light of the flock .
GOLD:	Why was n't I buried like a stillborn child , like a baby who never lives to see the light ?

ID:	4674
INPUT:	Jeroboamek kultu-lekuak egin zituen muinoetan eta , haietarako , Lebiren ondorengoak ez ziren apaizak izendatu zituen jende artetik .
PRED:	Jeroboam built high places in the high places , and the priests did not judge the priests from among the people .
GOLD:	Jeroboam also erected buildings at the pagan shrines and ordained priests from the common people — those who were not from the priestly tribe of Levi .

ID:	4675
INPUT:	Jehuk gora , leihora , begiratu eta esan zuen : — Nor dut neure aldeko ? Bizpahiru zerbitzari atera ziren orduan leihora eta Jehuri begira jarri .
PRED:	Jehu looked up and looked at him , and said , “ Who will I leave my country ? ” So they went out and looked at Jericho .
GOLD:	Jehu looked up and saw her at the window and shouted , “ Who is on my side ? ” And two or three eunuchs looked out at him .

ID:	4676
INPUT:	ostera , ostatu-emailea behar du izan , ongia maite duena , zentzuduna , zuzena , jainkozalea , bere buruaren jabea ;
PRED:	If you are wise , you must love those who love you , you will be wise , and you will be wise , and you will be wise .
GOLD:	Rather , he must enjoy having guests in his home , and he must love what is good . He must live wisely and be just . He must live a devout and disciplined life .

ID:	4677
INPUT:	Apaizak miatu egingo du eta aparte edukiko zazpi egunez .
PRED:	The priest shall burn the priest seven days , and the priest shall eat it seven days .
GOLD:	After examining the affected spot , the priest will put the article in quarantine for seven days .

ID:	4678
INPUT:	Behin batez , ordea , hiru urteren buruan , Ximeiren bi mor<unk> ihes egin eta Gateko errege Akixengana , Maakaren semearengana , jo zuten . Morroiak Gaten zirela salatu ziotenean ,
PRED:	And it came to pass in the third year , in the third year , that three years , that three years , when the servants of Joash king of Gilead came to him , saying , The servants of Gilead came to him .
GOLD:	But three years later two of Shimei 's slaves ran away to King Achish son of Maacah of Gath . When Shimei learned where they were ,

ID:	4679
INPUT:	bata ertz batean eta bestea bestean , estalkiarekin gorputz bat bera egiten zutelarik .
PRED:	And they made one body on the other side of the other body , and the other covering of the covering .
GOLD:	He molded the cherubim on each end of the atonement cover , making it all of one piece of gold .

ID:	4680
INPUT:	Ez du gezurrik esaten Israelen ospea denak , eta ez da damutuko , bera ez baita gizakumea , damutzen ibiltzeko .
PRED:	The glory of Israel shall not be put to shame ; for he is not a man , for he is not a man .
GOLD:	And he who is the Glory of Israel will not lie , nor will he change his mind , for he is not human that he should change his mind ! ”

ID:	4681
INPUT:	Sedekiasen semeei lepoa moztu zieten aitaren aurrean , Riblan bertan , baita Judako buruzagiei ere .
PRED:	Zedekiah 's sons cut off the heads of Zedekiah 's sons in the presence of Zedekiah , and in the land of Judah , and in the land of Judah .
GOLD:	The king of Babylon made Zedekiah watch as he slaughtered his sons . He also slaughtered all the officials of Judah at Riblah .

ID:	4682
INPUT:	Orduan , faraoiak Moisesi eta Aaroni dei egin eta esan zien : — Eskaini , bai , sakrifizioak zeuen Jainkoari , baina lurralde honetan bertan .
PRED:	Then Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron and Aaron , and said to them , “ sacrifice sacrifices to your God , but in this place . ”
GOLD:	If you refuse , then I will send swarms of flies on you , your officials , your people , and all the houses . The Egyptian homes will be filled with flies , and the ground will be covered with them .

ID:	4683
INPUT:	Hona hemen lagunduko dizueten familiaburuak : Rubenen leinutik , Xedeurren seme Elitzur ;
PRED:	These are the names of the families of the sons of Reuben : of the tribe of Reuben , of the tribe of Reuben ;
GOLD:	“ These are the tribes and the names of the leaders who will assist you : ReubenElizur son of Shedeur

ID:	4684
INPUT:	Atalondoko ateak itxi zituzten eta argiak itzali ; ez zuten intsentsurik erre , ez erre-oparirik eskaini Israelen Jainkoaren tenpluan .
PRED:	And the doors of the gate were shut , and the light was not burned , nor burnt incense , nor burnt offerings in the house of the God of Israel .
GOLD:	They also shut the doors to the Temple 's entry room , and they snuffed out the lamps . They stopped burning incense and presenting burnt offerings at the sanctuary of the God of Israel .

ID:	4685
INPUT:	Zekorraren okela , larrua eta hondakinak kanpalekutik aparte erreko dituzu , bekatuaren barkamenerako sakrifizioa da eta .
PRED:	And thou shalt burn the fat of the bull , and the fat , and the fat of the camp , and the fat of the congregation , and the fat of the camp , shall be forgiven .
GOLD:	Then take the rest of the bull , including its hide , meat , and dung , and burn it outside the camp as a sin offering .

ID:	4686
INPUT:	Goretsi Jauna , munduko herriok , goretsi Jaunaren ospea eta indarra ,
PRED:	Praise the Lord , you nations of the earth , praise the glory of the Lord , and the glory of the Lord .
GOLD:	O nations of the world , recognize the Lord ; recognize that the Lord is glorious and strong .

ID:	4687
INPUT:	Goxen , Holon , Gilo : hamaika hiri eta beraien herrixkak .
PRED:	And in Mizpah , in Mizpah , and in their villages , and in their villages .
GOLD:	Goshen , Holon , and Giloh — eleven towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	4688
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Entzun ! Aieneak eta negar samina Raman ! Rakel ari dabere haurrengatik negarrez : ez du kontsolatu nahi , ez baitira bizi » .
PRED:	The Lord says , “ Listen to Rachel and weep for her children , Rachel and her children , for she is not able to comfort her . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ A cry is heard in Ramah — deep anguish and bitter weeping.Rachel weeps for her children , refusing to be comforted — for her children are gone . ”

ID:	4689
INPUT:	« Nola ikusten duzu senidearen begiko lasto-izpia eta zeure begiko hagaz ohartzen ez ?
PRED:	“ How do you see the eye of your brother 's eye , and do n't you see the eye of your brother 's eye ?
GOLD:	“ And why worry about a speck in your friend 's eye when you have a log in your own ?

ID:	4690
INPUT:	Jaun ahalguztidunakgutariko batzukbizirik utzi ez balitu , Sodoma eta Gomorraren azkenaizango genukeen guk ere .
PRED:	And when we had gone out from the cities of Sodom , we would not leave Sodom and Sodom .
GOLD:	If the Lord of Heaven 's Armieshad not spared a few of us , we would have been wiped out like Sodom , destroyed like Gomorrah .

ID:	4691
INPUT:	Tziklag , Madmana , Sansana ,
PRED:	And Judah , Gilgal , and Eglon ,
GOLD:	Ziklag , Madmannah , Sansannah ,

ID:	4692
INPUT:	Urte hartan janaria ahitu zen hirian eta jendearen gosea izugarria zen . Laugarren hilaren bederatzian ,
PRED:	In the fourth year there was food in the city , and in the fourth month , in the fourth month , the famine was filled with the people .
GOLD:	By July 18 in the eleventh year of Zedekiah 's reign , the famine in the city had become very severe , and the last of the food was entirely gone .

ID:	4693
INPUT:	Apaizek ez dute galdetu : “ Non da Jauna ? ” Lege-maisuek ez naute aintzat hartu , buruzagiak kontra jaiki zaizkit , profetek Baalen izeneanhitz egin dute , ezertarako ez diren idoloen ondorenjoan dira .
PRED:	The priests asked him , “ Where is the Lord ? ” The teachers of the law did not love me , because they have spoken against me , and they have spoken against me , and have not spoken to the idols of Baal .
GOLD:	The priests did not ask , ‘ Where is the Lord ? 'Those who taught my word ignored me , the rulers turned against me , and the prophets spoke in the name of Baal , wasting their time on worthless idols .

ID:	4694
INPUT:	Hondatuak izango diramuinoetako sasikultu-lekuak , Israeli huts egitera eragin ziotenak . Sasiak eta laharrakhartuko ditu aldareak . Orduan , honela esango diete mendiei : « Ezkuta gaitzazue » , eta muinoei : « Eror zaitezte gure gainera » .
PRED:	And the high places of the high places shall be destroyed , and the high places of Israel shall be taken away ; and they shall say unto them , Go up , and let us fall upon the mountains .
GOLD:	And the pagan shrines of Aven , the place of Israel 's sin , will crumble.Thorns and thistles will grow up around their altars.They will beg the mountains , “ Bury us ! ” and plead with the hills , “ Fall on us ! ”

ID:	4695
INPUT:	“ Herrialde honetan bizitzen gelditzen bazarete , eraitsi ordez eraiki egingo zaituztet eta erauzi ordez landatu , damutu egin bainaiz egin dizuedan kalteaz .
PRED:	“ If you live in this land , you will live in this land , and I will build you , and I will plant you , because I have plant you .
GOLD:	‘ Stay here in this land . If you do , I will build you up and not tear you down ; I will plant you and not uproot you . For I am sorry about all the punishment I have had to bring upon you .

ID:	4696
INPUT:	eta esan zien : « Zoazte Jaunaren , zeuen Jainkoaren , itun-kutxaren aurrera Jordan erdiraino eta hartu harri bana sorbaldan , israeldar leinuak hainbat harri .
PRED:	And he said unto them , Go , and take the stone of the covenant of the Lord your God , and take it before the ark of the covenant of the covenant of the covenant of the covenant of the covenant of the covenant of Israel , and take a great stone .
GOLD:	He told them , “ Go into the middle of the Jordan , in front of the Ark of the Lord your God . Each of you must pick up one stone and carry it out on your shoulder — twelve stones in all , one for each of the twelve tribes of Israel .

ID:	4697
INPUT:	Oroitarri gisa eraiki dudan harri <unk> koaren etxe izango da . Jaunari , ematen didan guztitikhamarrena bihurtuko diot » .
PRED:	And I will build a house for the house of the Lord , which I have built , and I will make a tenth of all that I have given to the Lord .
GOLD:	And this memorial pillar I have set up will become a place for worshiping God , and I will present to God a tenth of everything he gives me . ”

ID:	4698
INPUT:	aski ezaguna baita Judaren leinutik datorrela gure Jauna , eta Moisesek aipatu ere ez zuen egin leinu hori apaizei buruz hitz egitean .
PRED:	But Moses knew that the Lord came from the tribe of Judah , and he did not speak to the priests concerning the tribes of Judah .
GOLD:	What I mean is , our Lord came from the tribe of Judah , and Moses never mentioned priests coming from that tribe .

ID:	4699
INPUT:	« Bazen hiri batean epaile bat , ez Jainkoari beldurrik , ez gizakiari begirunerik ez ziona .
PRED:	And there was a judgment in a city , neither fear nor fear God , nor fear man .
GOLD:	“ There was a judge in a certain city , ” he said , “ who neither feared God nor cared about people .

ID:	4700
INPUT:	« Siseraren amak , leihotik begira , leiho-saretik oihuka , zioen : “ Zergatik dator hain beranduharen guda-gurdia ? Zergatik hain geldoharen zaldiak ? ”
PRED:	The mother of Zion looked at his voice , and he cried out , “ Why are his chariots come ? Why is his chariots ? ”
GOLD:	“ From the window Sisera 's mother looked out.Through the window she watched for his return , saying , ‘ Why is his chariot so long in coming ? Why do n't we hear the sound of chariot wheels ? '

ID:	4701
INPUT:	« Guk ere berri on hau iragartzen dizuegu : gure arbasoei egindako agintzaria ,
PRED:	We tell you , “ We tell you , ‘ We have commanded our ancestors to obey our ancestors . '
GOLD:	“ And now we are here to bring you this Good News . The promise was made to our ancestors ,

ID:	4702
INPUT:	Hauek bertan kokatu eta santutegia eraiki zizuten , esanez :
PRED:	And they built the temple , and said unto them ,
GOLD:	Your people settled here and built this Temple to honor your name .

ID:	4703
INPUT:	Hona hemen Aaronen eta Moisesen ondorengoak , Sinai mendian Jauna Moisesi mintzatu zitzaionean .
PRED:	These are the sons of Aaron and Aaron , when the Lord spoke to Moses in Mount Sinai .
GOLD:	This is the family line of Aaron and Moses as it was recorded when the Lord spoke to Moses on Mount Sinai :

ID:	4704
INPUT:	Zortzi urte zituen Josiasek errege izaten hastean , eta hogeita hamaika urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen . Haren amak Jedida zuen izena eta Botzkateko Adaiaren alaba zen .
PRED:	Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign , and he reigned in Jerusalem . His mother 's name was Kelita daughter .
GOLD:	Josiah was eight years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem thirty-one years . His mother was Jedidah , the daughter of Adaiah from Bozkath .

ID:	4705
INPUT:	Herioarekin zenuten itunahautsi egingo da , Hildakoen Egoitzarekiko tratuakez du iraungo . Ezbehar suntsigarriak joeta zapalduko zaituzte .
PRED:	He will break the covenant with the death of death , and he will not be put to death . He will not be destroyed . He will destroy you and destroy you .
GOLD:	I will cancel the bargain you made to cheat death , and I will overturn your deal to dodge the grave.When the terrible enemy sweeps through , you will be trampled into the ground .

ID:	4706
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	This message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	4707
INPUT:	« Halaber , ospatu uzta-jaia , soroan erein duzuenaren lehen fruituena ; baita urteburuko uzta-biltzearena ere , zeuen soroetako lanaren fruituak biltzen dituzuenekoa .
PRED:	“ You must not eat the fruit of the harvest of the harvest , but you must reap the fruit of the harvest of your harvest . You must reap the fruit of your harvest .
GOLD:	“ Second , celebrate the Festival of Harvest , when you bring me the first crops of your harvest . “ Finally , celebrate the Festival of the Final Harvest at the end of the harvest season , when you have harvested all the crops from your fields .

ID:	4708
INPUT:	Honela jango duzue : gerrikoa loturik , oinetakoak jantzirik eta makila eskuan , abiatzeko prest ; presaka jango duzue , Jaunaren Pazkoa baita .
PRED:	You shall eat it , and put on your feet , and put on your feet , and put on your feet , and put on your hands , for the Passover is the Lord .
GOLD:	“ These are your instructions for eating this meal : Be fully dressed , wear your sandals , and carry your walking stick in your hand . Eat the meal with urgency , for this is the Lord 's Passover .

ID:	4709
INPUT:	Kea zerion sudurretik , su kiskalgarria , ikatz goriak ahotik .
PRED:	They were afraid of the fire , and fire came out of the fire .
GOLD:	Smoke poured from his nostrils ; fierce flames leaped from his mouth.Glowing coals blazed forth from him .

ID:	4710
INPUT:	Arren , Jainko , izan zeu nire bermatzaile ; nor jarriko , bestela , nire alde ?
PRED:	But you , O God , who is my Father , who is my refuge for me ?
GOLD:	“ You must defend my innocence , O God , since no one else will stand up for me .

ID:	4711
INPUT:	Hasi ziren berriro borrokan filistearrak israeldarren aurka . Jaitsi zen David bere gizonekin filistearren kontra gudukatzera , baina nekatu egin zen .
PRED:	And the Philistines fought against the Philistines again . And David went down to fight against the Philistines , but David fought against the Philistines .
GOLD:	Once again the Philistines were at war with Israel . And when David and his men were in the thick of battle , David became weak and exhausted .

ID:	4712
INPUT:	Zuregan ditut begiak , ene Jaun eta Jainko , zuregan naiz babesten , ez ni hiltzen utzi .
PRED:	My eyes are in thee , O Lord God , and I am in thee , and I am not put to death .
GOLD:	I look to you for help , O Sovereign Lord.You are my refuge ; do n't let them kill me .

ID:	4713
INPUT:	Zuei , jaiotzaz jentil zaretenoi , juduek , gorputzean egina duten erdainkuntzagatik « erdainduak » direneko horiek , « erdaingabe » deitzen zizueten . Ez ahaztu
PRED:	You who are Jews who are Jews , who are circumcised by the body , were circumcised by the circumcision , and they did not forget them .
GOLD:	Do n't forget that you Gentiles used to be outsiders . You were called “ uncircumcised heathens ” by the Jews , who were proud of their circumcision , even though it affected only their bodies and not their hearts .

ID:	4714
INPUT:	Orduan , Judako herri osoak Azarias , hamasei urteko gaztea , izendatu zuen errege , bere aita Amatziasen ordez .
PRED:	And all the people of Judah made Amaziah king of Judah six years old , and he reigned in his father Amaziah his father .
GOLD:	All the people of Judah had crowned Amaziah 's sixteen-year-old son , Uzziah , as king in place of his father , Amaziah .

ID:	4715
INPUT:	Jerusalemen jendeak dio : « Horren berri jakitean , indarge gaude , estu eta larri , emakumea erdiminetan bezala .
PRED:	When the people of Jerusalem heard this , they say , “ When we heard it , we are strong and powerful , as a woman in a woman .
GOLD:	We have heard reports about the enemy , and we wring our hands in fright.Pangs of anguish have gripped us , like those of a woman in labor .

ID:	4716
INPUT:	Jainko Jaun ahalguztidunak lurra joeta lurrak dardara , bizilagun guztiek dolu ; Egiptoko Nilo ibaiaren antzeralur guztia puztu eta hustu ;
PRED:	The Lord Almighty , the God of hosts , the earth , and all the inhabitants of the land of Egypt , and all the inhabitants of the land of Egypt , and all the land of Egypt ;
GOLD:	The Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , touches the land and it melts , and all its people mourn.The ground rises like the Nile River at floodtime , and then it sinks again .

ID:	4717
INPUT:	Josuek ikertzaileak bidali Jerikora
PRED:	Joshua Speaks to Jericho
GOLD:	Rahab Protects the Spies

ID:	4718
INPUT:	Baina , oraindik pozaren pozez sinetsi ezinik eta guztiz harriturik zeudenez , Jesusek esan zien : « Ba al duzue hemen jatekorik ? »
PRED:	But when they had believed , they were glad , and said to them , “ Do you know that there is no food here here ? ”
GOLD:	Still they stood there in disbelief , filled with joy and wonder . Then he asked them , “ Do you have anything here to eat ? ”

ID:	4719
INPUT:	Asna , Meunim eta Nefusimenak ;
PRED:	the children of Elioenai , the children of Shealtiel , the children of Shealtiel ,
GOLD:	Asnah , Meunim , Nephusim ,

ID:	4720
INPUT:	Egunero bedeinkatuko zaitut , zure izena beti goretsiko .
PRED:	I will bless you all day long , and you will praise your name forever .
GOLD:	I will praise you every day ; yes , I will praise you forever .

ID:	4721
INPUT:	ez zangoa edo besoa hautsirik duena ,
PRED:	He that hath not broken his hand , or hath broken his hand ,
GOLD:	or has a broken foot or arm ,

ID:	4722
INPUT:	nire ondoren datorrena , eta ni ez naiz inor hari oinetako lokarriak askatzeko ere .
PRED:	I am coming , and there is no one to lay his feet under his feet .
GOLD:	Though his ministry follows mine , I 'm not even worthy to be his slave and untie the straps of his sandal . ”

ID:	4723
INPUT:	Uko egin diegu isilpeko baliabide lotsagarriei ; ez dugu azpikeriaz jokatzen , ezta Jainkoaren mezua faltsifikatzen ere . Aitzitik , egia argi eta garbi azalduz , geure buruak sinesgarri bihurtzen dizkiegu gizon-emakume guztiei Jainkoaren aurrean .
PRED:	For we have turned away to shame , but we do not believe the word of God , but we do not believe the word of God , and the light of men , and the light of all men .
GOLD:	We reject all shameful deeds and underhanded methods . We do n't try to trick anyone or distort the word of God . We tell the truth before God , and all who are honest know this .

ID:	4724
INPUT:	Ongi ezagutzen dugu hau esan zuena : Niri dagokit mendekua , neuk emango dut ordaina . Eta beste hau ere esan zuen : Jaunak epaituko du bere herria .
PRED:	We know what we say to you : I know that I will give it to you . And the Lord said to you , “ He will judge his people . ”
GOLD:	For we know the one who said , “ I will take revenge.I will pay them back . ” He also said , “ The Lord will judge his own people . ”

ID:	4725
INPUT:	Arabiaren aurka
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	A Message about Arabia

ID:	4726
INPUT:	Zein ugari , Jauna , nire etsaiak ! Zein ugari aurka altxa zaizkidanak !
PRED:	Lord , you are my enemies , and you are my enemies .
GOLD:	So many are saying , “ God will never rescue him ! ” Interlude

ID:	4727
INPUT:	Ez lurreko erregeek , ezta munduko inork ere , ez zuen uste etsaia Jerusalemgo ateetan sekula sartuko zenik .
PRED:	And the kings of the earth shall not be able to enter into the midst of the earth , neither shall any man enter into the gates of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Not a king in all the earth — no one in all the world — would have believed that an enemycould march through the gates of Jerusalem .

ID:	4728
INPUT:	Haren eskuak urretan biribilduak , topazioz tarteka apainduak . Haren bularramarfilez landua , zafiroz estalia .
PRED:	His hands were gathered together in pure gold , and his hands were made of fine linen , and his breasts was made of fine linen .
GOLD:	His arms are like rounded bars of gold , set with beryl.His body is like bright ivory , glowing with lapis lazuli .

ID:	4729
INPUT:	Honen guztiaren ondoren , Jerusalemera joatea erabaki zuen Paulok Mazedonia eta Akaiatik igaroz . Eta han izan ondoren , Erromara ere joan behar zuela pentsatu zuen .
PRED:	After this , Paul went to Jerusalem and went to Jerusalem . After he had gone to Macedonia , he told him that he would go to Macedonia .
GOLD:	Afterward Paul felt compelled by the Spirit to go over to Macedonia and Achaia before going to Jerusalem . “ And after that , ” he said , “ I must go on to Rome ! ”

ID:	4730
INPUT:	Zuek zerbitzatu ahal izateko , beste eliz elkarteei kendu behar izan nien neuretzako behar nuena .
PRED:	And so that I may serve you , that I may take away the church of the church .
GOLD:	I “ robbed ” other churches by accepting their contributions so I could serve you at no cost .

ID:	4731
INPUT:	Artilea eta lihoa eskuratzen ditu , gogotsu lan egiten haren eskuek .
PRED:	He gives the lamb and the lamb into his hands , and his hands are strong .
GOLD:	She finds wool and flaxand busily spins it .

ID:	4732
INPUT:	Gedeonek Israelgo gizon gehienak bidali zituen nor bere etxera , hirurehun haiekin bakarrik geldituz ; hauek beren lagunen jakiak eta adarrak hartu zituzten . Madiandarren kanpalekua israeldarrena baino beherago zegoen , lautadan .
PRED:	Gideon sent the men of Israel to his own house , one hundred and three hundred and three hundred and three hundred , and the sons of Ammon , and the sons of Ammon were in the valley of the children of Israel .
GOLD:	So Gideon collected the provisions and rams ' horns of the other warriors and sent them home . But he kept the 300 men with him.The Midianite camp was in the valley just below Gideon .

ID:	4733
INPUT:	Pilatok galdetu zion : — Zu al zara juduen erregea ? Jesusek erantzun zion : — Zeuk diozu .
PRED:	Pilate asked him , “ Are you the king of the Jews ? ” Jesus answered , “ You are well . ”
GOLD:	Pilate asked Jesus , “ Are you the king of the Jews ? ” Jesus replied , “ You have said it . ”

ID:	4734
INPUT:	Baina , gau hartan , Jainkoa agertu zitzaion Abimeleki ametsetan , esanez : « Hil egingo zara , hartu duzun emakumea ezkondua baita » .
PRED:	But God appeared to Abimelech in a dream in the dream , saying , “ You will die , because you have taken her . ”
GOLD:	But that night God came to Abimelech in a dream and told him , “ You are a dead man , for that woman you have taken is already married ! ”

ID:	4735
INPUT:	Emakumeak
PRED:	The woman and the woman
GOLD:	Young Man

ID:	4736
INPUT:	Jaunak Moisesek eskatua egin zuen : etxe , atari eta landetan zeuden igelak hil egin ziren .
PRED:	So Moses asked , “ The Lord said , ‘ They killed the houses in the fields and in the field . '
GOLD:	“ You set the time ! ” Moses replied . “ Tell me when you want me to pray for you , your officials , and your people . Then you and your houses will be rid of the frogs . They will remain only in the Nile River . ”

ID:	4737
INPUT:	Amasari , berriz , esan : « Ez al zaitut neure odolekoa ? Zigor nazala Jainkoak gogor , baldin eta gudalburu egiten ez bazaitut betiko , Joaben ordez ! »
PRED:	But he said to Ahab , “ Do n't I have the blood of my blood ? If I do not want you to do it , I will not make you ruler over Joab . ”
GOLD:	Then Amasa convinced all the men of Judah , and they responded unanimously . They sent word to the king , “ Return to us , and bring back all who are with you . ”

ID:	4738
INPUT:	neska gazteei beren senarrak eta haurrak maitatzen irakats diezaieten ,
PRED:	He will teach the young men to give birth to their young children and children .
GOLD:	These older women must train the younger women to love their husbands and their children ,

ID:	4739
INPUT:	Jatun handia bazara , eutsi zeure jangurari .
PRED:	You have made me great , O Lord , and you have made me known to me .
GOLD:	If you are a big eater , put a knife to your throat ;

ID:	4740
INPUT:	Asiriar ordezkari nagusiak esan zien : — Eramaiozue Ezekias erregeari errege handiaren , Asiriako erregearen , mezu hau : « Zer dela-eta zaude hain ziur ?
PRED:	The master of Assyria said to them , “ Tell Hezekiah the great king of Assyria , ‘ What are you doing ? '
GOLD:	Then the Assyrian king 's chief of staff told them to give this message to Hezekiah : “ This is what the great king of Assyria says : What are you trusting in that makes you so confident ?

ID:	4741
INPUT:	Egun hartan bertan , ezaugarri bat eman zuen Jainkoaren gizonak , esanez : « Honetan igarriko duzue Jaunak hitz egin duela : Zartatu egingo da aldarea eta lurrera isuriko gainean duen errautsa » .
PRED:	And it came to pass in that day , that the man of God spoke unto the man of God , saying , This shall be the sign of the Lord : This shall be the altar of the altar , and upon the top of the earth .
GOLD:	That same day the man of God gave a sign to prove his message . He said , “ The Lord has promised to give this sign : This altar will split apart , and its ashes will be poured out on the ground . ”

ID:	4742
INPUT:	Zer egin , bada , senideok ? Biltzen zaretenean , batek kantua egin dezala , besteak irakatsi edota goi-agerpen bat eman , hizketa arrotzez mintzatu edota mintzaira hori argitu ; baina guztia elkarteari hazten laguntzeko izan dadila .
PRED:	Therefore , brothers and sisters , what are you doing ? If you are gathered , one of you must teach another another message and speak to another , and to speak in tongues , and to speak to each other , and to help them .
GOLD:	Well , my brothers and sisters , let 's summarize . When you meet together , one will sing , another will teach , another will tell some special revelation God has given , one will speak in tongues , and another will interpret what is said . But everything that is done must strengthen all of you .

ID:	4743
INPUT:	Joan ziren , bada , haiek Jesusengana eta esan zioten : — Joan Bataiatzaileak bidali gaitu zuri galdetzera : « Zu al zara “ Etortzekoa ” ala besteren baten zain egon behar dugu ? »
PRED:	So they came to Jesus and said to him , “ Are you the Baptist who sent us to ask us , ‘ Are you like one ? '
GOLD:	John 's two disciples found Jesus and said to him , “ John the Baptist sent us to ask , ‘ Are you the Messiah we 've been expecting , or should we keep looking for someone else ? ' ”

ID:	4744
INPUT:	Turuta , txirula , zitara , alboka , harpa eta beste musika-tresnen hotsa entzun orduko , lurreraino ahuspeztuz , Nabukodonosor erregeak eraiki duen urrezko irudia gurtuko duzue .
PRED:	And you shall hear the sound of the trumpet , and the sound of the trumpet , and all the vessels of the king of Babylon , and all the vessels of gold , which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had built .
GOLD:	When you hear the sound of the horn , flute , zither , lyre , harp , pipes , and other musical instruments , bow to the ground to worship King Nebuchadnezzar 's gold statue .

ID:	4745
INPUT:	Eskerrak ematen dizkiot Jainkoari , Kristoren bidez lortu duen garaipenaren partaide egiten gaituelako beti , eta , gure bitartez , Kristoren ezagutza usain gozoa bezala leku guztietan zabaltzen duelako .
PRED:	I give thanks to God , because we have been baptized in the time of Christ , and in the time of our Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	But thank God ! He has made us his captives and continues to lead us along in Christ 's triumphal procession . Now he uses us to spread the knowledge of Christ everywhere , like a sweet perfume .

ID:	4746
INPUT:	Beraz , hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Zeuek salatu duzue zeuen errua eta agerian jarri zeuen hobenak ; zeuek nabarmendu dituzue zeuen bekatu eta egintza txarrak ; zeuen buruak salatu dituzue ; horregatik , preso hartuko zaituztete bortxaz .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ You have sinned and have sinned in your eyes . You have forgiven your sins , and you have forgiven your sins , and you have taken away your sins .
GOLD:	Your prophets have given false visions , and your fortune-tellers have told lies.The sword will fall on the necks of the wickedfor whom the day of final reckoning has come .

ID:	4747
INPUT:	zuen arbasoak bezalaxe , nire aginduetatik aldendu egin zarete , ez dituzue bete . Itzuli , beraz , zuek niregana , eta itzuliko naiz ni zuengana . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak . Baina hau diozue : “ Zergatik behar dugu zuregana itzuli ? ”
PRED:	You have turned away from me as your fathers did . You have not kept my commands . So I will return to you , ” says the Lord of hosts . “ Why do you turn back to me ? ”
GOLD:	Ever since the days of your ancestors , you have scorned my decrees and failed to obey them . Now return to me , and I will return to you , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . “ But you ask , ‘ How can we return when we have never gone away ? '

ID:	4748
INPUT:	« Zoaz Davidengana eta esaiozu : “ Hau dio Jaunak : Hiru zigor ipiniko dizkizut aukeran ; hautatu bat eta huraxe ezarriko dizut ” » .
PRED:	“ Go to David and say to him , ‘ Thus says the Lord : ‘ I will punish you three months , and I will put them on you . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Go and say to David , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will give you three choices . Choose one of these punishments , and I will inflict it on you . ' ”

ID:	4749
INPUT:	eta Zesarean lehorreratu zen ; handik Jerusalemgo eliz elkartea agurtzera igo zen eta gero Antiokiara jaitsi .
PRED:	And he went down from Judea , and went down to the church of the church of Jerusalem , and went down to Antioch .
GOLD:	The next stop was at the port of Caesarea . From there he went up and visited the church at Jerusalem and then went back to Antioch .

ID:	4750
INPUT:	Davidek galdetu zion berria zekarkion gazteari : — Nola dakizu hilak direla Saul eta beronen seme Jonatan ?
PRED:	David asked the young man , “ How do you know that Saul and his son Jonathan are dead ? ”
GOLD:	“ How do you know Saul and Jonathan are dead ? ” David demanded of the young man .

ID:	4751
INPUT:	Berrogei egunen buruan , Noek , berak egindako ontziko leihoa irekiz ,
PRED:	And it came to pass in the days of Noah forty days , that Noah set up the ark of the Lord , which he had given to him ,
GOLD:	After another forty days , Noah opened the window he had made in the boat

ID:	4752
INPUT:	« Orduan , zuen etsaien artean erbesteraturik emango duzuen denboraldi guztian , lurrak , bertan behera utzia egongo delarik , atseden hartu ahal izango du : zor zitzaizkion atsedenaldiak izango ditu .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in that time , that thou shalt bring them into captivity in all thy enemies , that the earth may be rest , because the land shall be rest , and his children shall be rest .
GOLD:	Then at last the land will enjoy its neglected Sabbath years as it lies desolate while you are in exile in the land of your enemies . Then the land will finally rest and enjoy the Sabbaths it missed .

ID:	4753
INPUT:	« Jerusalemera itzuli nintzen eta , tenpluan otoitzean ari nintzela , goi-ikuskari bat izan nuen .
PRED:	When I returned to Jerusalem , I saw a vision in the temple .
GOLD:	“ After I returned to Jerusalem , I was praying in the Temple and fell into a trance .

ID:	4754
INPUT:	Aldarea zartatu egin zen eta errautsa aldaretik behera isuri , Jainkoaren gizonak , Jaunaren aginduz , emaniko ezaugarriaren arabera .
PRED:	And he set up the altar , and poured it out of the altar , and the man of God , according to the word of the Lord God , which he commanded him .
GOLD:	At the same time a wide crack appeared in the altar , and the ashes poured out , just as the man of God had predicted in his message from the Lord .

ID:	4755
INPUT:	Deboraren kantua
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The Song of Deborah

ID:	4756
INPUT:	Orduan , Abrahamek , ahuspezturik , irri egin zuen . Pentsatu zuen bere baitan : « Ehun urteko gizakumeari sortu al lekioke semerik ? Edota , izan ote dezake semerik Sarak bere laurogeita hamarrekin ? »
PRED:	Abraham bowed down and bowed down to his face , and said , “ Can a man be a hundred years old ? Can he be a man ? ”
GOLD:	Then Abraham bowed down to the ground , but he laughed to himself in disbelief . “ How could I become a father at the age of 100 ? ” he thought . “ And how can Sarah have a baby when she is ninety years old ? ”

ID:	4757
INPUT:	Ate ondora irten zen , eta beste neskame batek ikusi eta han zeudenei esan zien : — Jesus nazaretarrarekin ibilia da hau .
PRED:	After he went out , another young woman saw another young woman and said to them , “ This is the way of Jesus . ”
GOLD:	Later , out by the gate , another servant girl noticed him and said to those standing around , “ This man was with Jesus of Nazareth . ”

ID:	4758
INPUT:	Berehala zutitu eta ibiltzen hasi zen , hamabi urte bazituen eta . Jende guztia harri eta zur gelditu zen .
PRED:	And he went up , and began to walk twelve years , and he was twelve years old , and all the people were amazed .
GOLD:	And the girl , who was twelve years old , immediately stood up and walked around ! They were overwhelmed and totally amazed .

ID:	4759
INPUT:	Apaizari eramaten zaizkion opari sakratuak apaizarentzat dira » .
PRED:	The priest shall bring the burnt offering to the priest , and the priest shall bring it to the priest .
GOLD:	Each priest may keep all the sacred donations that he receives . ”

ID:	4760
INPUT:	Eta deabrua , haiek liluratu zituena , su eta sufrezko aintzirara jaurtia izan zen ; hantxe daude piztia eta sasiprofeta ere . Gau eta egun oinazetuko dituzte han menderen mendetan .
PRED:	And the devil cast them out , and cast them into the sea , and the sea was cast into the sea , and the beast , and the prophets , and the prophets , and night , and night and night .
GOLD:	Then the devil , who had deceived them , was thrown into the fiery lake of burning sulfur , joining the beast and the false prophet . There they will be tormented day and night forever and ever .

ID:	4761
INPUT:	Josuek Ai hiria erre eta zeharo hondatua utzi zuen , hondakin-pilo bihurtua betiko ; eta horrela dirau gaur arte .
PRED:	And Joshua left the city , and destroyed it , and destroyed it , until this day .
GOLD:	So Joshua burned the town of Ai , and it became a permanent mound of ruins , desolate to this very day .

ID:	4762
INPUT:	Zelatan egoten da lapurra bezalaeta desleialtasun asko sorrarazten gizonen artean .
PRED:	Why is it like a thief ? It is like a thief among a thief ?
GOLD:	She hides and waits like a robber , eager to make more men unfaithful .

ID:	4763
INPUT:	Mesede bat eskatu nahi dizut , ez ukatu . Betsabek , orduan : — Esazu .
PRED:	“ I want you to ask you , ” she said . “ Tell me , ‘ Tell me . '
GOLD:	So now I have just one favor to ask of you . Please do n't turn me down . ” “ What is it ? ” she asked .

ID:	4764
INPUT:	Gizon hura itzularazia zuen profeta zaharrak , berri hori jakitean , esan zuen : « Jainkoaren gizona da ! Ez du bete Jaunaren agindua , eta Jaunak lehoiaren atzaparretara eman du ; lehoiak zatikatu eta hil egin du , Jaunak aurrez esana zion bezala » .
PRED:	When the old prophet heard this , he said , “ The man of God has not kept the commandments of the Lord , and he has not kept the commandments of the lion , as the Lord had commanded him . ”
GOLD:	When the prophet heard the report , he said , “ It is the man of God who disobeyed the Lord 's command . The Lord has fulfilled his word by causing the lion to attack and kill him . ”

ID:	4765
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . « Ez suntsitu » doinuan . Davidena . Miktam . Davidek Saulengandik haitzulora ihes egin zuenekoa .
PRED:	O God , do n't destroy me ! Do n't destroy me ! Do n't let me escape from my enemies .
GOLD:	Have mercy on me , O God , have mercy ! I look to you for protection.I will hide beneath the shadow of your wingsuntil the danger passes by .

ID:	4766
INPUT:	ohoratzen gaituztela nahiz iraintzen , gutaz ongi hitz egiten dutela nahiz gaizki . Gezurtitzat jotzen gaituzte , egia esaten dugun arren ;
PRED:	But if they do not know that we speak to us , whether they speak evil or evil , they speak evil , and do what we say .
GOLD:	We serve God whether people honor us or despise us , whether they slander us or praise us . We are honest , but they call us impostors .

ID:	4767
INPUT:	Haren esanera , haizea altxatu zen , olatu handiak harrotu zituen ekaitza .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the wind rose up , that the wind was lifted up , and the rock was lifted up .
GOLD:	He spoke , and the winds rose , stirring up the waves .

ID:	4768
INPUT:	Eta hemen bilduak diren guztiek jakinen dute , Jaunak ez duela behar ezpatarik , ez lantzarik gu salbatzeko , Jaunak baitu gudua erabakitzen . Gure esku jarriko zaituzte berak .
PRED:	All these are the elders who are gathered together will know that the Lord will not be saved by the sword , because the Lord has delivered us into our hand . He will hand you over to us .
GOLD:	And everyone assembled here will know that the Lord rescues his people , but not with sword and spear . This is the Lord 's battle , and he will give you to us ! ”

ID:	4769
INPUT:	lizun eta homosexualentzat , esklabo-salerosle , gezurti eta zinausleentzat , eta irakaspen osasungarriaren kontra jartzen den edonorentzat ;
PRED:	And thou shalt be a slave to the son of a slave , a slave , a stranger , and a lie against him , and a lie against him .
GOLD:	The law is for people who are sexually immoral , or who practice homosexuality , or are slave traders , liars , promise breakers , or who do anything else that contradicts the wholesome teaching

ID:	4770
INPUT:	Gure herria Egipton egon zenetik gaur arte , mirariak eta egintza harrigarriak burutu dituzu , eta izen ospetsua zeureganatu bai Israelen , bai gizaki guztien artean .
PRED:	You have kept our people from Egypt until this day and wonders and wonders and wonders and wonders among all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	You performed miraculous signs and wonders in the land of Egypt — things still remembered to this day ! And you have continued to do great miracles in Israel and all around the world . You have made your name famous to this day .

ID:	4771
INPUT:	Harria bezain gogorra dute bihotza ; nik zure irakaspena dut gozamen .
PRED:	They keep my heart as stones , and I remember your law .
GOLD:	Their hearts are dull and stupid , but I delight in your instructions .

ID:	4772
INPUT:	Jobek bere burua errugabetzat zuenez gero , hiru gizonek ez zioten gehiago erantzun .
PRED:	And Job did not answer himself for himself , and three men answered him .
GOLD:	Job 's three friends refused to reply further to him because he kept insisting on his innocence .

ID:	4773
INPUT:	Eta ereiten duzuna ez da gero haziko den landarea , hazi hutsa baizik , gari-hazia nahiz beste edozein hazi izan .
PRED:	And it shall not be planted in the field , but it shall not be planted , but it shall not be eaten , but it shall be done for it .
GOLD:	And what you put in the ground is not the plant that will grow , but only a bare seed of wheat or whatever you are planting .

ID:	4774
INPUT:	Irentsitako ondasunak oka egingo ditu , Jainkoak botarazi egingo dizkio sabeletik .
PRED:	He will praise him from his womb , and he will drive him out of his womb .
GOLD:	They will vomit the wealth they swallowed.God wo n't let them keep it down .

ID:	4775
INPUT:	Orain ikusiko duzue , bada , Gizonaren Semeak baduela mundu honetan bekatuak barkatzeko ahalmena . Eta esan zion elbarriari :
PRED:	And now you shall see that the Son of Man is the Son of Man , to forgive sins in this world . And he said to the congregation ,
GOLD:	So I will prove to you that the Son of Man has the authority on earth to forgive sins . ” Then Jesus turned to the paralyzed man and said ,

ID:	4776
INPUT:	Handik alde egin eta Adulamgo leizean ezkutatu zen David . Anaiak eta aitaren senitarte osoa , hori entzun zutelarik , hara jaitsi zitzaizkion .
PRED:	And David went out from there , and stood in the valley of Elam . And David and his brethren heard him , and came down to him .
GOLD:	So David left Gath and escaped to the cave of Adullam . Soon his brothers and all his other relatives joined him there .

ID:	4777
INPUT:	eta soroan dena ez bedi itzul soingaineko bila .
PRED:	And he that is in the field shall not return to his garment .
GOLD:	A person out in the field must not return even to get a coat .

ID:	4778
INPUT:	« Zorionekoak errukitsu direnak , haiek baititu Jainkoak erruki izango .
PRED:	Blessed are those who have pity on them , for they will have mercy on them .
GOLD:	God blesses those who are merciful , for they will be shown mercy .

ID:	4779
INPUT:	Ez dut gogoratuko egindako gaiztakeriarik , baizik eta bere egintza zuzenengatik biziko da .
PRED:	I will remember no evil thing that he did , but he will live for his good works .
GOLD:	All their past sins will be forgotten , and they will live because of the righteous things they have done .

ID:	4780
INPUT:	Hil zenean , bere arbaso Daviden Hirian ehortzi zuten . Ondorengo erregea haren seme Josafat izan zen .
PRED:	And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers , and was buried in the city of David . And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead .
GOLD:	When Asa died , he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David.Then Jehoshaphat , Asa 's son , became the next king .

ID:	4781
INPUT:	Igo mendi garai batera , Sion , albiste pozgarria hots egitera ; goratu indarrez ahotsa , Jerusalem , goratu beldurgabe ahotsa , esan Judako hiriei : « Hemen da zuen Jainkoa !
PRED:	And it came to pass in the mountains of Zion , that the voice of the voice of the voice of the voice of the voice of Zion , and the voice of the voice of the people of Judah , saying , Behold , God is your God .
GOLD:	O Zion , messenger of good news , shout from the mountaintops ! Shout it louder , O Jerusalem.Shout , and do not be afraid.Tell the towns of Judah , “ Your God is coming ! ”

ID:	4782
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Aaroni :
PRED:	The Lord spoke to Aaron , saying ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Aaron ,

ID:	4783
INPUT:	Herri honen buru egingo baninduzue , berehala urrunaraziko nuke Abimelek hori . Bere gudarostea indartu eta borrokara ateratzeko esango nioke » .
PRED:	If you will be the head of this people , you will be far from me . I will go out to fight with his army and fight . ”
GOLD:	If I were in charge here , I would get rid of Abimelech . I would say to him , ‘ Get some soldiers , and come out and fight ! ' ”

ID:	4784
INPUT:	Horrelakoak egiten dituen oro higuingarri zaio Jaunari ; hain zuzen , higuingarritasun horiengatik botatzen ditu Jaunak zuen Jainkoak herri horiek zuen aurretik .
PRED:	This is what the Lord your God has done for all the abominations that the Lord your God has cast out before you .
GOLD:	Anyone who does these things is detestable to the Lord . It is because the other nations have done these detestable things that the Lord your God will drive them out ahead of you .

ID:	4785
INPUT:	Azkenik , barkamen-oparigaiaren gantza aldarean erreko du .
PRED:	And the priest shall burn the altar on the altar .
GOLD:	He must then burn all the fat of the sin offering on the altar .

ID:	4786
INPUT:	Hona hemen Davidi Hebronen jaio zitzaizkion semeak : zaharrena Amnon , Izreelgo Ahinoamengandik ;
PRED:	These are the names of David 's sons in Hebron : Amnon was the son of Amnon , the son of Amnon , from the border of Jezreel .
GOLD:	These are the sons who were born to David in Hebron : The oldest was Amnon , whose mother was Ahinoam from Jezreel .

ID:	4787
INPUT:	( Dt 5 , <unk> )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Proper Use of Altars

ID:	4788
INPUT:	Nahiago Jaunak gizakiak justiziaz eta zuzenbidez jokatzea , sakrifizioak eskaintzea baino .
PRED:	The Lord will do right and right . He will do what is right and right . He will offer sacrifices to God .
GOLD:	The Lord is more pleased when we do what is right and justthan when we offer him sacrifices .

ID:	4789
INPUT:	bizi-bizirik irentsiko gintuzketen : hain haserre-suminduak zeuden gure kontra ;
PRED:	They will destroy us alive ; they will be angry with you , and they will be angry .
GOLD:	They would have swallowed us alivein their burning anger .

ID:	4790
INPUT:	Beste hau ere badio : Jainkoarengan jarriko dut nik konfiantza . Baita ere : Hona ni eta hona Jainkoak eman dizkidan haurrak .
PRED:	“ I trust in God , ” says , “ and I will trust in God . But this is what God has given me .
GOLD:	He also said , “ I will put my trust in him , ” that is , “ I and the children God has given me . ”

ID:	4791
INPUT:	Tira ! Ekardazue harpa-jotzaile bat . Eta harpa-jotzailea jotzen ari zela , Jaunaren indarrak hartu zuen Eliseo ,
PRED:	Go to Tyre , and take a sword ; and when he went out , he took the sword of the Lord , and he took the sword of the Lord .
GOLD:	Now bring me someone who can play the harp . ” While the harp was being played , the power of the Lord came upon Elisha ,

ID:	4792
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : — Nire garaia ez da oraino iritsi ; zuentzat , aldiz , edozein garai da ona .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ My time has not come to this time , but it is good for you .
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ Now is not the right time for me to go , but you can go anytime .

ID:	4793
INPUT:	Biderako gudari- eta zaldizko-talde bat ere eman zidan . Eufrates ibaiaren mendebaldeko gobernariengana iritsi nintzenean , erregearen agiriak aurkeztu nizkien .
PRED:	I also also also gave me a horses and horses and horses . When I came to the governor of the Euphrates River , I found the king 's face .
GOLD:	When I came to the governors of the province west of the Euphrates River , I delivered the king 's letters to them . The king , I should add , had sent along army officers and horsemen to protect me .

ID:	4794
INPUT:	eta mailegua lukurreriaz egin eta interesak kobratzen ditu . Zin dagit neure biziarengatik hori ez dela biziko ; gauza higuingarri horiek guztiak egin dituenez , hil egingo da , eta bera izango da bere heriotzaren errudun .
PRED:	As I live , as I live , as I live , as I live , I live for this life , and all the abominations of their abominations will die .
GOLD:	and lends money at excessive interest . Should such a sinful person live ? No ! He must die and must take full blame .

ID:	4795
INPUT:	ikara bizian barrua . Eta zu , Jauna , noiz arte geldi ?
PRED:	You are my life , O Lord , until the time of your life ?
GOLD:	Return , O Lord , and rescue me.Save me because of your unfailing love .

ID:	4796
INPUT:	mendebaldetik , hogeita bost metro luzeko oihalak , hamar zutabe eta hamar oin zituztelarik ; zutabeen kakoak eta ziriak zilarrezkoak ziren ;
PRED:	And the length of the west was five cubits long , and their sockets were twenty cubits , and their sockets , and their sockets were of silver , and their sockets were of silver .
GOLD:	The curtains on the west end of the courtyard were 75 feet long , hung with silver hooks and rings and supported by ten posts set into ten bases .

ID:	4797
INPUT:	Hala ere , alai nago ni Jaunarekin , pozaren pozezsalbatzaile dudan Jainkoarekin .
PRED:	But I am glad in the Lord , and I am not afraid .
GOLD:	yet I will rejoice in the Lord ! I will be joyful in the God of my salvation !

ID:	4798
INPUT:	guztiek , bera ohoratzen duten bezala , Semea ere ohora dezaten . Semea ohoratzen ez duenak , hura bidali duen Aita ere ez du ohoratzen .
PRED:	As all these things do this , so also the Son will be glory . Whoever does not honor the Son who sent the Father has not sent him .
GOLD:	so that everyone will honor the Son , just as they honor the Father . Anyone who does not honor the Son is certainly not honoring the Father who sent him .

ID:	4799
INPUT:	Elamenak 1 . 254 ;
PRED:	The sons of Elam , two hundred and two .
GOLD:	The family of Elam1,254

ID:	4800
INPUT:	« Zerbait kutsatua ukitzen duena , hala nola basabere nahiz etxabere kutsatu baten edo piztiaren baten sarraskia , konturatu gabe izanda ere , kutsatu bihurtzen da eta errudun .
PRED:	If any man touches any unclean thing , whether he is unclean or unclean , he is unclean , he is unclean .
GOLD:	“ Or suppose you unknowingly touch something that is ceremonially unclean , such as the carcass of an unclean animal . When you realize what you have done , you must admit your defilement and your guilt . This is true whether it is a wild animal , a domestic animal , or an animal that scurries along the ground .

ID:	4801
INPUT:	Judas Iskariotek , salduko zuen ikasleak , esan zuen :
PRED:	Judas , Judas , who would betray him , said ,
GOLD:	But Judas Iscariot , the disciple who would soon betray him , said ,

ID:	4802
INPUT:	Moisesek esan zien Aaroni eta beronen semeei : « Egosi haragia elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran ; han bertan jango duzue sagarapenerako prestaturiko saskian dagoen ogiarekin batera , nik jaso nuen aginduaren arabera : “ Aaronek eta beronen semeek jango dute ” .
PRED:	Moses said to Aaron and his sons , “ Make bread in front of the tent of meeting , where you will eat bread in the entrance of the tent of meeting , and Aaron and his sons will eat the bread that I commanded you . ”
GOLD:	Then Moses said to Aaron and his sons , “ Boil the remaining meat of the offerings at the Tabernacle entrance , and eat it there , along with the bread that is in the basket of offerings for the ordination , just as I commanded when I said , ‘ Aaron and his sons will eat it . '

ID:	4803
INPUT:	Esadazu , ene bihotzeko kutuna , non duzun larratzen artaldea , non abaroan uzten eguerdian . Ez nadin isil-gorderik ibil , zure lagunen artaldeen atzetik .
PRED:	Give me my heart , that I may see where your sheep is , and there is no peace in the midst of the flock , that I may not be shut up from your flock .
GOLD:	Tell me , my love , where are you leading your flock today ? Where will you rest your sheep at noon ? For why should I wander like a prostituteamong your friends and their flocks ?

ID:	4804
INPUT:	« Klaudio Lisiasek Felix gobernari agurgarri horri , agur !
PRED:	“ Let me go and tell the governor of Hilkiah , that I may send them .
GOLD:	“ From Claudius Lysias , to his Excellency , Governor Felix : Greetings !

ID:	4805
INPUT:	baina , sasi eta sastrakak ematen baditu , ez du ezertarako balio , Jainkoak madarikatu egingo du eta , azkenik , erre egingo dute .
PRED:	But if they say , “ If a wild donkey or a wild donkey , God will curse them , and they will be burned . ”
GOLD:	But if a field bears thorns and thistles , it is useless . The farmer will soon condemn that field and burn it .

ID:	4806
INPUT:	Erregeak mahai-zerbitzariei esan zien , orduan : “ Lot ezazue hanka eta esku , eta bota kanpora , ilunpetara . Negarra eta hortz-karraska izango da han ” .
PRED:	Then the king said to his servants , “ Take him away , and cast him into the hand of the prison , and cast him into the darkness , and there shall be weeping . ”
GOLD:	Then the king said to his aides , ‘ Bind his hands and feet and throw him into the outer darkness , where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . '

ID:	4807
INPUT:	Erregeak erantzun zion : — Babiloniarren aldera igaro diren judatarren beldur naiz ; haien eskuetan eroriz gero , tratu txarra emango baitidate .
PRED:	And the king said unto him , I am afraid of the Jews , and I am afraid of them : for they are against them .
GOLD:	“ But I am afraid to surrender , ” the king said , “ for the Babylonians may hand me over to the Judeans who have defected to them . And who knows what they will do to me ! ”

ID:	4808
INPUT:	« Behin batez , zuhaitzek erregea izendatu nahi zuten berentzat . Eta esan zioten olibondoari : “ Izan hadi gure errege ! ”
PRED:	At that time the trees wanted to know the king , and they said to the olive oil , “ Let us reign over us . ”
GOLD:	Once upon a time the trees decided to choose a king.First they said to the olive tree , ‘ Be our king ! '

ID:	4809
INPUT:	Judaren leinutik hamabi mila zigilatu ; Rubenen leinutik hamabi mila ; Gaden leinutik hamabi mila ;
PRED:	From the tribe of Judah were twelve thousand thousand thousand , from the tribe of Reuben , twelve thousand and twelve thousand thousand thousand thousand .
GOLD:	from Judah12,000from Reuben12,000from Gad12,000

ID:	4810
INPUT:	Nik , ordea , zure indarra dut kantatuko , goizean zure maitasuna poz-oihuz ospatuko ; zu izan zaitut gotorleku , larrialdian ihesleku .
PRED:	But I will sing to you in the morning , and I will praise you in the morning , and I will praise you in the morning .
GOLD:	O my Strength , to you I sing praises , for you , O God , are my refuge , the God who shows me unfailing love .

ID:	4811
INPUT:	« Orduan , madarikazio-hitzok idatzi eta idazkia ur garratzetan garbituko du apaizak .
PRED:	“ Then the priest shall write these words to the priest , and he shall wash the book of the words of the law .
GOLD:	And the priest will write these curses on a piece of leather and wash them off into the bitter water .

ID:	4812
INPUT:	Erbestetik etorritako guztiek egin zituzten etxolak eta horietan jarri ziren bizitzen . Nunen seme Josueren garaietatik ez zuten halako jairik egin israeldarrek ! Hango poza guztiena !
PRED:	All the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the people of Israel were glad .
GOLD:	So everyone who had returned from captivity lived in these shelters during the festival , and they were all filled with great joy ! The Israelites had not celebrated like this since the days of Joshua son of Nun .

ID:	4813
INPUT:	Eta zerbait gaizki egina badizu edota zerbait zor , utzi hori nire gain .
PRED:	And if you do evil , do what you do , do something to me .
GOLD:	If he has wronged you in any way or owes you anything , charge it to me .

ID:	4814
INPUT:	Jaiki eta Jainkoaren mendira igo zen Moises , Josue bere laguntzailearekin .
PRED:	And Moses rose up and went up into the mountain of God , and he and his men with him .
GOLD:	So Moses and his assistant Joshua set out , and Moses climbed up the mountain of God .

ID:	4815
INPUT:	Haiekin hitz egiten jardun zuen erregeak , eta Daniel , Hananias , Mixael eta Azarias adinakorik ez zuen aurkitu . Harrezkero , beraz , bere zerbitzurako hartu zituen .
PRED:	The king spoke with them , Daniel , Azariah , Azariah , Azariah , and Azariah . So he took them away .
GOLD:	The king talked with them , and no one impressed him as much as Daniel , Hananiah , Mishael , and Azariah . So they entered the royal service .

ID:	4816
INPUT:	Ez duzue zeuen baitan esaten : “ Errespeta dezagun Jauna , geure Jainkoa ! Berak bidaltzen dizkigugaraian garaiko euriak , berak zaintzen uzta biltzeko sasoiak ” .
PRED:	Do n't say in your heart , ‘ The Lord our God is our God , and we will send rain on the day of his days , and he will send rain for us . '
GOLD:	They do not say from the heart , ‘ Let us live in awe of the Lord our God , for he gives us rain each spring and fall , assuring us of a harvest when the time is right . '

ID:	4817
INPUT:	Eta guardiaburuarekin batera zetorren babiloniar gudarosteak Jerusalemgo harresi guztia bota egin zuen .
PRED:	And the army of the Chaldeans came with the captains of the guard , and all the army of Jerusalem , and cast down all the walls of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Then he supervised the entire Babylonian army as they tore down the walls of Jerusalem on every side .

ID:	4818
INPUT:	Alde batera utzi baitu Jaunakzure aurkako epaia , uxatu ditu zure etsaiak . Jauna , Israelgo erregea , zurekin dago : ez zara gehiagoezeren beldur izango .
PRED:	For the Lord has left your enemies against you , and he has rejected your enemies . The Lord , the king of Israel , is with you , and you will not be afraid .
GOLD:	For the Lord will remove his hand of judgmentand will disperse the armies of your enemy.And the Lord himself , the King of Israel , will live among you ! At last your troubles will be over , and you will never again fear disaster .

ID:	4819
INPUT:	Hiria Babiloniako erregearen eskuetan eroriko da erremediorik gabe , eta konkistatu egingo du . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	And the city shall fall in the hand of the king of Babylon , and it shall be taken , and it shall be taken , saith the Lord .
GOLD:	The Lord also says : ‘ The city of Jerusalem will certainly be handed over to the army of the king of Babylon , who will capture it . ' ”

ID:	4820
INPUT:	Ene laztana , errege-karroza daraman behorra dirudizu .
PRED:	My beloved , you have brought me to the king . You have brought him to the king .
GOLD:	You are as exciting , my darling , as a mare among Pharaoh 's stallions .

ID:	4821
INPUT:	Azkena ezereztuko den etsaia heriotza izango da .
PRED:	The enemy who has been put to death will be put to death .
GOLD:	And the last enemy to be destroyed is death .

ID:	4822
INPUT:	Salomonek lau mila zalditegi zituen bere guda-gurdietarako zaldientzat eta hamabi mila zaldizko .
PRED:	Solomon had four thousand horses for his chariots and twelve thousand horses .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , please command that cedars from Lebanon be cut for me . Let my men work alongside yours , and I will pay your men whatever wages you ask . As you know , there is no one among us who can cut timber like you Sidonians ! ”

ID:	4823
INPUT:	« Jaunari elkartasun-opariak egitean , eskaini hark atseginez onartzeko eran :
PRED:	“ When you offer an offering to the Lord , you must offer an offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ When you sacrifice a peace offering to the Lord , offer it properly so you will be accepted by God .

ID:	4824
INPUT:	baina agurtzean esan zien : « Berriz ere etorriko natzaizue , Jainkoa lagun » . Efesotik ontziz atera
PRED:	But he said to them , “ I will come to you , and I will come from Ephesus . ”
GOLD:	As he left , however , he said , “ I will come back later , God willing . ” Then he set sail from Ephesus .

ID:	4825
INPUT:	Judatarrek Simeonen leinuko beren senideekin joan eta Tzefat hirian bizi ziren kanaandarrak garaitu zituzten eta hiria erabat suntsitu . Horma deitu zioten hiriari , hau da , « Suntsipen » .
PRED:	And the sons of Judah went with their brethren , and went with their brethren , and destroyed them in the city , and destroyed them , and called the city thereof .
GOLD:	Then Judah joined with Simeon to fight against the Canaanites living in Zephath , and they completely destroyed the town . So the town was named Hormah .

ID:	4826
INPUT:	Astemeak esan zion : — Ez al nauzu , bada , zeure astemea , betidanik gainean eraman zaituena ? Eta inoiz portatu al naiz honela zurekin ? — Ez ! — erantzun zion Balaamek .
PRED:	The donkey said to him , “ Do n't you know me ? Do n't you bring your donkey on me ? ” Balaam answered , “ I am with you . ”
GOLD:	“ But I am the same donkey you have ridden all your life , ” the donkey answered . “ Have I ever done anything like this before ? ” “ No , ” Balaam admitted .

ID:	4827
INPUT:	Eskutik heldu eta esan zion : « Ta<unk> ha <unk> » ( hau da : « Neskatxa , zuri diotsut : Jaiki zaitez » ) .
PRED:	And he stretched out his hand and said to him , “ Behold , I say to you , rise up . ”
GOLD:	Holding her hand , he said to her , which means “ Little girl , get up ! ”

ID:	4828
INPUT:	Jaunaren ezpata odolez betea , gantzetan bustia dago : sakrifizioetako bildotseta akerren odolezeta aharien giltzurrun-gantzez . Izan ere , sakrifizioa burutu behar du JaunakBotzra hirian , hilketa izugarria Edom herrian .
PRED:	The blood of the Lord is in the blood of the blood of the Lord , and the blood of the blood of the sacrifice , and the blood of the blood of the sacrifice , and the fat of the blood of the blood of the burnt offering , and the people of Edom shall die in the city of Edom .
GOLD:	The sword of the Lord is drenched with bloodand covered with fat — with the blood of lambs and goats , with the fat of rams prepared for sacrifice.Yes , the Lord will offer a sacrifice in the city of Bozrah.He will make a mighty slaughter in Edom .

ID:	4829
INPUT:	mundu guztia epaitzera eta gaizkile guztiak kondenatzera , egin dituzten gaiztakeria guztiengatik eta bekatari sinesgabeok Jainkoaren kontra esan dituzten irain guztiengatik » .
PRED:	and to judge all the world , and to judge all the evil things that are done , because of all the evil things that they have spoken against God .
GOLD:	to execute judgment on the people of the world . He will convict every person of all the ungodly things they have done and for all the insults that ungodly sinners have spoken against him . ”

ID:	4830
INPUT:	Eta zuek ere egingo duzue testigantza , hasieratik nirekin egon baitzarete .
PRED:	You will also bear witness , for you have been with me .
GOLD:	And you must also testify about me because you have been with me from the beginning of my ministry .

ID:	4831
INPUT:	Zu zaitut ene gordeleku eta babes , zure hitza ene itxaropen .
PRED:	You are my refuge , my refuge , and my hope is in your word .
GOLD:	You are my refuge and my shield ; your word is my source of hope .

ID:	4832
INPUT:	Oi Jainko , geure belarriz entzuna dugu , gurasoek kontaturik , zuk haien garaian , aspaldi hartan , eginaren berri .
PRED:	For we have heard the voice of our fathers , in the days of their fathers , in the days of their fathers , and in the days of their fathers .
GOLD:	You drove out the pagan nations by your powerand gave all the land to our ancestors.You crushed their enemiesand set our ancestors free .

ID:	4833
INPUT:	Jaitsi zen hura , zeru gorenera dena betetzera igo dena bera da .
PRED:	And he went down to heaven , and all things that he has done to all things .
GOLD:	And the same one who descended is the one who ascended higher than all the heavens , so that he might fill the entire universe with himself .

ID:	4834
INPUT:	Orduan , Daniel ekarri eta lehoien zulora jaurtitzeko agindu zuen . Erregeak esan zion : « Halako iraupen handiz zerbitzatzen duzun Jainkoak bakarrik salba zaitzake ! »
PRED:	Then Daniel brought Daniel and threw him to the lion . The king said to him , “ God is able to save you . ”
GOLD:	A stone was brought and placed over the mouth of the den . The king sealed the stone with his own royal seal and the seals of his nobles , so that no one could rescue Daniel .

ID:	4835
INPUT:	Badakigu Jainkoak bera maite dutenen onerako bideratzen dituela gauza guztiak , bere aurre-erabakiz deitu dituenen onerako , alegia .
PRED:	We know that God loves those who love those who love him , and those who are called in his presence .
GOLD:	And we know that God causes everything to work together for the good of those who love God and are called according to his purpose for them .

ID:	4836
INPUT:	Pedrok berriro ukatu zuen . Geroxeago , ingurukoek ere esan zioten : — Bai , haietakoa haiz , noski , galilearra haiz eta .
PRED:	Then Peter asked him again . The others said to him , “ You are one of them . You are one of them . ”
GOLD:	But Peter denied it again.A little later some of the other bystanders confronted Peter and said , “ You must be one of them , because you are a Galilean . ”

ID:	4837
INPUT:	Izu-garrasitik ihes egin dezanazuloan jausiko da ; zulotik ihes egin dezanazepoan harrapatua geldituko . Zeru goitik uholdeak eraso , lurraren oinarriek dardara .
PRED:	He will escape from the rock , and he will escape from the rock ; he will escape from the rock , and the waters will be taken away from the heavens , and the sound of the earth will fall .
GOLD:	Those who flee in terror will fall into a trap , and those who escape the trap will be caught in a snare.Destruction falls like rain from the heavens ; the foundations of the earth shake .

ID:	4838
INPUT:	Santutegirako zerga
PRED:	The Holy Place
GOLD:	Plans for the Washbasin

ID:	4839
INPUT:	Heriotzatik libratu zaretenok , alde egin luzatzeke ! Oroitu Jaunaz urrutitik , ekarri gogora Jerusalem .
PRED:	You who are saved from death , let them go away from death . Remember the Lord , who brought Jerusalem to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Get out , all you who have escaped the sword ! Do not stand and watch — flee while you can ! Remember the Lord , though you are in a far-off land , and think about your home in Jerusalem . ”

ID:	4840
INPUT:	zerez ordaindurik ez baduzu , etzateko duzun ohea ere kenduko baitizute .
PRED:	If you do not pay any reward , you will be taken away from you .
GOLD:	If you ca n't pay it , even your bed will be snatched from under you .

ID:	4841
INPUT:	Efraimen leinuko gizonak bildu , Jordan ibaia igaro eta Tzafon hirira joan ziren . Eta esan zioten Jefteri : — Zergatik joan zara amondarren kontra borrokara guri dei egin gabe ? Su emango diogu zure etxeari , zu barrenean zarela !
PRED:	And the men of Ephraim came to the Jordan , and they came to the Jordan , and said unto Jephthah , Why have ye come to fight against the children of Ammon ? And they said unto him , Why shall we send fire into the house of Ammon ?
GOLD:	Then the people of Ephraim mobilized an army and crossed over the Jordan River to Zaphon . They sent this message to Jephthah : “ Why did n't you call for us to help you fight against the Ammonites ? We are going to burn down your house with you in it ! ”

ID:	4842
INPUT:	Espiritu gaiztoa zeukala ziotenei erantzun zien hau .
PRED:	And he said unto them that were evil spirits , saying , This is the spirit of evil spirits .
GOLD:	He told them this because they were saying , “ He 's possessed by an evil spirit . ”

ID:	4843
INPUT:	Hara , ahalmen osoz da<unk> ko Jauna , bere nagusigoa indartsu ezarriz . Hara , berekin dakar garaipen-agiria , berak askaturiko herria .
PRED:	Behold , the Lord is able to help his master , and he is strong in his strength . He is with him , and he will forgive his people .
GOLD:	Yes , the Sovereign Lord is coming in power.He will rule with a powerful arm.See , he brings his reward with him as he comes .

ID:	4844
INPUT:	Janaria ematen die abereeieta karranka ari zaizkion belakumeei .
PRED:	She gives food to the women , and she gives her food to the women .
GOLD:	He gives food to the wild animalsand feeds the young ravens when they cry .

ID:	4845
INPUT:	Ondoren , Jaunak lau errementari erakutsi zizkidan .
PRED:	Then the Lord showed me the four corners of the four corners of the altar .
GOLD:	Then the angel who was with me went to meet a second angel who was coming toward him .

ID:	4846
INPUT:	Nire erreinuko jende hau opariak eskaintzeko Jerusalemera , Jaunaren etxera , igotzen bada , Judako errege Roboamengana , lehengo bere jaunarengana , itzuli egingo da jende honen bihotza . Orduan , hil egingo naute eta Judako errege Roboamengana itzuliko dira » .
PRED:	If I go up to Jerusalem to offer a burnt offering to the Lord , he will return to his master Rehoboam king of Judah , and he will return to his lord king Rehoboam , and he will return to his master Rehoboam king of Judah . ”
GOLD:	When these people go to Jerusalem to offer sacrifices at the Temple of the Lord , they will again give their allegiance to King Rehoboam of Judah . They will kill me and make him their king instead . ”

ID:	4847
INPUT:	Lehen , Jainkoa ezagutzen ez zenutelarik , izatez jainko ez direnen menpeko zineten ;
PRED:	But you did n't know God , and you did n't know him . You did n't know him .
GOLD:	Before you Gentiles knew God , you were slaves to so-called gods that do not even exist .

ID:	4848
INPUT:	Liburu Santuak dioenez : Hitz egingo diet zutaz neure senideei , goretsiko zaitut batzarraren erdian .
PRED:	As it is written , “ I will praise you , and I will praise you in the assembly of the congregation . ”
GOLD:	For he said to God , “ I will proclaim your name to my brothers and sisters.I will praise you among your assembled people . ”

ID:	4849
INPUT:	Ez du oihu egingo , ez ahotsa goratuko , ez kaleetan bere mintzoaentzunaraziko .
PRED:	He shall not cry out , neither shall he hear his voice in the streets , nor shall he hear his voice in the streets .
GOLD:	He will not shoutor raise his voice in public .

ID:	4850
INPUT:	« Jose , ubide ondoanlandare emankor , honen adarrak harresian gora .
PRED:	“ Joseph is in the field of the field , in the field of his strength .
GOLD:	“ Joseph is the foal of a wild donkey , the foal of a wild donkey at a spring — one of the wild donkeys on the ridge .

ID:	4851
INPUT:	lurrean arrastaka dabiltzan narrasti- nahiz lur azpiko uretan dabiltzan arrain-irudiak .
PRED:	As for all the birds of the earth , as for every green thing in the earth , and on every green tree , and on every green tree .
GOLD:	a small animal that scurries along the ground , or a fish in the deepest sea .

ID:	4852
INPUT:	Goraintziak Apelesi , kristau zintzo dela erakutsi duen horri ; baita Aristobuloren familiakoei ere .
PRED:	Remember that he was faithful in Christ , and also he showed to the families of the family of Caesar .
GOLD:	Greet Apelles , a good man whom Christ approves . And give my greetings to the believers from the household of Aristobulus .

ID:	4853
INPUT:	Bukatu zutenean , Santiagok hitza hartu eta esan zuen : « Entzun , anaiok :
PRED:	When Herod was amazed , he said , “ My brothers , listen to me .
GOLD:	When they had finished , James stood and said , “ Brothers , listen to me .

ID:	4854
INPUT:	Pedro eta Joan sartzen ikusirik , limosna eskatu zien .
PRED:	When Peter and John went into the boat , he asked them what he had said to them .
GOLD:	When he saw Peter and John about to enter , he asked them for some money .

ID:	4855
INPUT:	Bernaberi <unk> deitzen zioten eta Paulori Hermes , hau baitzen hitz egiten zuena .
PRED:	And they called Barnabas , and they called Paul , for he was speaking to them .
GOLD:	They decided that Barnabas was the Greek god Zeus and that Paul was Hermes , since he was the chief speaker .

ID:	4856
INPUT:	Baina Jesusek erantzun : — Ez eragotzi , zeren zuen kontra ez dagoena zuen alde baitago .
PRED:	But Jesus said to him , “ Do n't remember what was right for you , for he is not against you . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus said , “ Do n't stop him ! Anyone who is not against you is for you . ”

ID:	4857
INPUT:	Sukoteko gazte bat atzeman eta galdeketa egin zion . Gazteak idatziz eman zizkion Sukoteko buruzagi eta arduradunen izenak , orotara hirurogeita hamazazpi gizonen izenak .
PRED:	And he took a young young young young young man , and asked him , and wrote them in the name of the young man , and the name of the elders of the king of Babylon , and the elders of the elders of the elders , and the elders of the elders .
GOLD:	There he captured a young man from Succoth and demanded that he write down the names of all the seventy-seven officials and elders in the town .

ID:	4858
INPUT:	Baina herriek iseka egingo dioteeta koplak aterako , denek batera . Hara zer esango duten : « Zoritxarrekoa zu , besteren ondasunezaberasten zaren hori — noiz arte ? — , zeure zorra gero eta astunagoegiten ari baitzara !
PRED:	But the people will be hungry and a song of a song , and a song of a song , saying , “ Woe to you , O Lord , how long is your inheritance ? ”
GOLD:	“ But soon their captives will taunt them.They will mock them , saying , ‘ What sorrow awaits you thieves ! Now you will get what you deserve ! You 've become rich by extortion , but how much longer can this go on ? '

ID:	4859
INPUT:	Egunez gordeta egoten dira , ez dute argia maite .
PRED:	They love him in the day , and do not love the light .
GOLD:	Thieves break into houses at nightand sleep in the daytime.They are not acquainted with the light .

ID:	4860
INPUT:	Ez , baizik eta Joel profetak esan zuena ari da hemen gertatzen :
PRED:	But the prophet did not say , “ This is what the prophet has said :
GOLD:	No , what you see was predicted long ago by the prophet Joel :

ID:	4861
INPUT:	Jakoben semeek aitak agindu bezala egin zuten .
PRED:	And the sons of Jacob did as their father had commanded them .
GOLD:	So Jacob 's sons did as he had commanded them .

ID:	4862
INPUT:	gainera nire seme-alabak lepo egin eta haien ohorez erretzeko ?
PRED:	Have you found my sons and my daughters to burn them with fire ?
GOLD:	Must you also slaughter my children by sacrificing them to idols ?

ID:	4863
INPUT:	Zorionekoa zuzenbidea errespetatueta etengabe justizia egiten duena !
PRED:	Blessed is the man who does justice and justice , who does justice and justice .
GOLD:	There is joy for those who deal justly with othersand always do what is right .

ID:	4864
INPUT:	Izan ere , horrela hitz egiten dutenek garbi adierazten dute aberriaren bila dabiltzala .
PRED:	For those who speak these things are clean , that they may seek them .
GOLD:	Obviously people who say such things are looking forward to a country they can call their own .

ID:	4865
INPUT:	Horregatik , lebitarrek ez dute ondare-zatirik beste israeldarrek bezala , Jauna baitute beren ondare , Jaunak gure Jainkoak hitzeman dien bezala .
PRED:	So the Levites have no inheritance as their inheritance , as the Lord our God has given them .
GOLD:	That is why the Levites have no share of property or possession of land among the other Israelite tribes . The Lord himself is their special possession , as the Lord your God told them . )

ID:	4866
INPUT:	Bazen , aldi hartan , Kix zeritzan gizon handiki bat , Abielen semea , Tzeror , Bekorat eta Afiasen ondorengoetarikoa . Benjaminen leinukoa zen .
PRED:	And it came to pass in that day , that there was a great man , that was a great man in the land of Benjamin , and of the children of Benjamin , and of the children of Benjamin , and of the children of Benjamin .
GOLD:	There was a wealthy , influential man named Kish from the tribe of Benjamin . He was the son of Abiel , son of Zeror , son of Becorath , son of Aphiah , of the tribe of Benjamin .

ID:	4867
INPUT:	Baina Joanek aurpegira botatzen zizkion Herodes agintariari bere anaiaren emazte Herodiasekin elkartu izana eta gainerako gaiztakeria guztiak .
PRED:	But John put his face to Herod the ruler of Herod his brother 's wife , and all the evil things that he had done .
GOLD:	John also publicly criticized Herod Antipas , the ruler of Galilee , for marrying Herodias , his brother 's wife , and for many other wrongs he had done .

ID:	4868
INPUT:	« Juda , zeure senideekgoretsiko zaituzte , etsaiei eskua erantsiko diezu lepoan , zeure aitaren semeakahuspeztuko zaizkizu .
PRED:	“ Judah , your brothers and sisters will praise you , and you will bow down to your father 's face .
GOLD:	“ Judah , your brothers will praise you.You will grasp your enemies by the neck.All your relatives will bow before you .

ID:	4869
INPUT:	« Seme zaharrena soroan zen . Etxerakoan , hurbildu ahala , soinua eta dantzak sumatu zituen .
PRED:	“ Son of man went up to the field . When he came near to the house , he tore his clothes and filled his clothes .
GOLD:	“ Meanwhile , the older son was in the fields working . When he returned home , he heard music and dancing in the house ,

ID:	4870
INPUT:	Hona zer dioen Davidek berak Espiritu Santuaren argiz : « Hona Jaunak ene Jaunari esana : “ Eseri nire eskuinean , zure etsaiak oinazpian jartzen dizkizudan bitartean ” .
PRED:	This is what David said to the Holy Spirit : “ The Lord says to my Lord , ‘ Sit at my right hand until I put your enemies under your feet . '
GOLD:	For David himself , speaking under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit , said , ‘ The said to my Lord , Sit in the place of honor at my right handuntil I humble your enemies beneath your feet . '

ID:	4871
INPUT:	Israeldarren ondaretik lebitarrei hiriak ematerakoan , leinu bakoitzak egokitu zaion ondare-zatiaren arabera emango dizkie : ondare handiagoa jaso duenak hiri gehiago , txikiagoa jaso duenak gutxiago » .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , when the sons of Israel take the inheritance of the children of Israel , according to their inheritance , according to their inheritance , according to their inheritance , that they may receive the inheritance of the children of Israel , that is greater than the cities of the children of Israel .
GOLD:	These towns will come from the property of the people of Israel . The larger tribes will give more towns to the Levites , while the smaller tribes will give fewer . Each tribe will give property in proportion to the size of its land . ”

ID:	4872
INPUT:	Jerikoko bizilagunak honela mintzatu zitzaizkion Eliseori : — Zeuk , gure jaun horrek , ikus dezakezunez , gure hiri hau toki ederrean egina dago ; baina ura txarra dugu eta lurraldea agorra .
PRED:	And the men of Jericho spoke unto Elisha , saying , Our lord shall see this city , that we may see it in our sight , and the land is good , and the land is good .
GOLD:	One day the leaders of the town of Jericho visited Elisha . “ We have a problem , my lord , ” they told him . “ This town is located in pleasant surroundings , as you can see . But the water is bad , and the land is unproductive . ”

ID:	4873
INPUT:	Baina Jainkoaren laguntzari esker , handi eta txikien aurrean testigantza egiten jarraitu dut gaurdaino ; nik ez dut profetek eta Moisesek aurrez iragarria besterik esaten , hau da ,
PRED:	But I pray to God , a great witness , and a great witness before the least , and I have not seen the testimony of Moses and the prophets .
GOLD:	But God has protected me right up to this present time so I can testify to everyone , from the least to the greatest . I teach nothing except what the prophets and Moses said would happen —

ID:	4874
INPUT:	« Madarikatua lege honen xedapenak gogoan hartzen eta betetzen ez dituena ! » Eta herri osoak erantzungo du : « Amen » .
PRED:	Blessed be the man who does not obey the law of this law , and he who does not obey the law , and all the people shall say , Amen .
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who does not affirm and obey the terms of these instructions . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	4875
INPUT:	zure kontra eta Niloren kontra nator . Basamortu eta hondamendi bihurtuko dut Egipto , Migdoletik Asuaneraino eta Etiopiako mugaraino .
PRED:	I am coming against you , and I will destroy the land of Egypt , and I will destroy the land of Egypt , and the border of Hamath .
GOLD:	I am now the enemy of both you and your river . I will make the land of Egypt a totally desolate wasteland , from Migdol to Aswan , as far south as the border of Ethiopia .

ID:	4876
INPUT:	Nire mahastiahondamendi bihurtzen dute , nire pikondoa ezpal ; dena karraskatzen eta zuritzen , abarrak larrutuz .
PRED:	My vineyard is desolate , and my vineyard is desolate , and I have taken away , and I have taken away my vineyard .
GOLD:	It has destroyed my grapevinesand ruined my fig trees , stripping their bark and destroying it , leaving the branches white and bare .

ID:	4877
INPUT:	Epai latzak ematen dituzu ene aurka , gaztaroko erruak egotziz ;
PRED:	You speak evil things against me , and you have no pity on my youth .
GOLD:	“ You write bitter accusations against meand bring up all the sins of my youth .

ID:	4878
INPUT:	Eta hau da Kristok egin zigun agintzaria : betiko bizia .
PRED:	This is what Christ commanded us to do : eternal life forever .
GOLD:	And in this fellowship we enjoy the eternal life he promised us .

ID:	4879
INPUT:	Hara , suak irensten duenlastoaren antzeko izango dira ; ezin izango dituzte beren buruaksugarretatik libratu . Ez da , ez , txingar-sua izango , ondoan eseri eta berotzekoa .
PRED:	Behold , they shall be like a fire , and they shall not be able to deliver their heads from their fire ; they shall not be saved from their fire , nor shall it be fire , nor shall it be like fire .
GOLD:	But they are like straw burning in a fire ; they can not save themselves from the flame.You will get no help from them at all ; their hearth is no place to sit for warmth .

ID:	4880
INPUT:	18
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Resh

ID:	4881
INPUT:	Jakin zuen , ordea , Davidek bera hondatzeko prestatzen ari zela Saul , eta esan zion Abiatar apaizari : — Ekatzu efod apaiz-jantzia .
PRED:	But when David heard that he was going to destroy him , he said to the priest , “ Make a ephod . ”
GOLD:	But David learned of Saul 's plan and told Abiathar the priest to bring the ephod and ask the Lord what he should do .

ID:	4882
INPUT:	Erregeak , aldiz , erantzun zion Araunari : — Ez , balio duena ordainduz erosi nahi dizut . Jaunari , ene Jainkoari , ez diot eskainiko kostatu ez zaidan erre-oparirik . Horrela bada , zilarrezko berrogeita hamar txanponetan erosi zizkion Davidek larraina eta idiak .
PRED:	But the king said to Aaron , “ I will not pay you what I want to pay you . I will not give you the burnt offering to the Lord my God . I will not offer it to the Lord my God . ”
GOLD:	But the king replied to Araunah , “ No , I insist on buying it , for I will not present burnt offerings to the Lord my God that have cost me nothing . ” So David paid him fifty pieces of silver for the threshing floor and the oxen .

ID:	4883
INPUT:	Etxeko ate-alboetanezarri zenituenidolatriazko zeure oroigarriak . Ni alde batera utzirik , biluzik jarri , zeure ohe zabalean etzaneta maitaleez aprobetxatzen zinen . Atsegin zenuen haiekin oheratzea .
PRED:	And thou hast set thy servants in the house of the house of the house of thy house , and thou hast put them in the midst of the house of thy house ; and thou hast put them in thy bed , and hast not been put to death with them .
GOLD:	You have put pagan symbolson your doorposts and behind your doors.You have left meand climbed into bed with these detestable gods.You have committed yourselves to them.You love to look at their naked bodies .

ID:	4884
INPUT:	SARRERA : E<unk> KIELEN PROFETA BOKAZIOA ( 1 , 1 — 3 , 27 )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	A Vision of Living Beings

ID:	4885
INPUT:	Gelditu zen Jesus , dei egin eta esan zien : — Zer nahi duzue niregandik ?
PRED:	And he stood , and called them , and said unto them , What do you want to do from me ?
GOLD:	When Jesus heard them , he stopped and called , “ What do you want me to do for you ? ”

ID:	4886
INPUT:	Orduan , israeldarrek , Jaunak agindu bezala , beren ondaretik hiriak , beren herri-lur eta guzti , eman zizkieten lebitarrei .
PRED:	And the children of Israel gave them their inheritance , as the Lord had commanded them , and their cities , and their cities , and their cities , as the Lord had commanded them .
GOLD:	So by the command of the Lord the people of Israel gave the Levites the following towns and pasturelands out of their own grants of land .

ID:	4887
INPUT:	eta honela egin zion oihu Judatik etorritako Jainkoaren gizonari : — Hona zer dioen Jaunak : « Ez duzu egin Jaunaren esana ; ez duzu bete Jaunak , zeure Jainkoak , eman zizun agindua .
PRED:	And he cried to the man of God from Judah , saying , This is what the Lord says : You have not obeyed the voice of the Lord your God , and you have not kept the commandments of the Lord your God commanded you .
GOLD:	He cried out to the man of God from Judah , “ This is what the Lord says : You have defied the word of the Lord and have disobeyed the command the Lord your God gave you .

ID:	4888
INPUT:	Jaunak ezarri du eguzkiaeguna argitzeko , ilargia eta izarrakgaua argitzeko ; hark itsasoa astindueta olatuek orro dagite . Jaun ahalguztiduna , hori du izena !
PRED:	The Lord has set the sun to the sun , the moon and the moon , and the moon has dried up the sea , and the sea has been called the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	It is the Lord who provides the sun to light the dayand the moon and stars to light the night , and who stirs the sea into roaring waves.His name is the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and this is what he says :

ID:	4889
INPUT:	Orduan , Pilatok haien esku utzi zuen gurutziltza zezaten . Hartu zuten , beraz , Jesus ,
PRED:	Then Pilate delivered him into their hand , and they crucified him . So they took him away .
GOLD:	Then Pilate turned Jesus over to them to be crucified.So they took Jesus away .

ID:	4890
INPUT:	Behin betiko egin dut zin neure buruarengatik , eta ez natzaio sekula Davidi desleial izango .
PRED:	I will make a promise for my own sake , and I will not be unfaithful to David .
GOLD:	His dynasty will go on forever ; his kingdom will endure as the sun .

ID:	4891
INPUT:	Sei egunez egingo duzu lan eta zeure eginbehar guztiak burutuko ;
PRED:	And thou shalt work six days , and thou shalt do all thy work .
GOLD:	You have six days each week for your ordinary work ,

ID:	4892
INPUT:	Buruko ileak baino gehiago diraarrazoirik gabe gorroto didatenak , nire tximak baino ugariago nire erasotzaileak , nire etsai gezurtiak . Lapurtu ez dudana itzuli behar ote dut ?
PRED:	Do you hate me more than my mother , and I hate my mother more than my mother , and I will not turn back to my enemies .
GOLD:	O God , you know how foolish I am ; my sins can not be hidden from you .

ID:	4893
INPUT:	Zelaietako belarra bezain mardul hazarazi zintudan ; hazi , handia egin eta sasoira iritsi zinen : bularrak hazi zitzaizkizun eta bi<unk> ka atera ; baina jantzirik gabe zeunden , larrugorrian .
PRED:	I made you like the cloud of the cloud , and I made you great , and they came down to you , and they came to you , and you were not naked , but you were not naked .
GOLD:	And I helped you to thrive like a plant in the field . You grew up and became a beautiful jewel . Your breasts became full , and your body hair grew , but you were still naked .

ID:	4894
INPUT:	Jesusen ezagun guztiak , baita Galileatik jarraitu zioten emakumeak ere , urrutixeago zeuden begira .
PRED:	And all the women followed him from Galilee , and followed him from Galilee .
GOLD:	But Jesus ' friends , including the women who had followed him from Galilee , stood at a distance watching .

ID:	4895
INPUT:	Sedekiasen hamaikagarren urtean , laugarren hilaren bederatzian , babiloniarrek zuloa ireki zuten hiriko harresian .
PRED:	In the first year of Zedekiah , in the fourth month , in the fourth month , in the fourth month , the Chaldeans opened the city .
GOLD:	Two and a half years later , on July 18 in the eleventh year of Zedekiah 's reign , a section of the city wall was broken down .

ID:	4896
INPUT:	Ez irten landara , ez ibili bideetan ! Hor dago etsaia armaturik , nonahi beldurra nagusi ! »
PRED:	Do n't go out into the field , but do n't go into the field . The enemies of the enemy will be afraid . ”
GOLD:	Do n't go out to the fields ! Do n't travel on the roads ! The enemy 's sword is everywhereand terrorizes us at every turn !

ID:	4897
INPUT:	Ez bedi fida itxura engainagarriaz , horixe izango du ordainsari eta .
PRED:	He shall not be put to shame , nor shall he pay his reward .
GOLD:	Let them no longer fool themselves by trusting in empty riches , for emptiness will be their only reward .

ID:	4898
INPUT:	Jauna hartu baituzu babesleku , Goi-goikoa bizileku .
PRED:	Lord , you are my refuge , and you are my refuge in the morning .
GOLD:	If you make the Lord your refuge , if you make the Most High your shelter ,

ID:	4899
INPUT:	Eskua buruan ezarri ondoren , hil egingo du erre-oparietako abereak hiltzen diren tokian .
PRED:	And he shall lay his hand on the head of the sin offering , and he shall kill the burnt offering in the place where the burnt offering is dead .
GOLD:	They must lay a hand on the head of the sin offering and slaughter it at the place where burnt offerings are slaughtered .

ID:	4900
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak etsaiak xaxatu dizkioeta aurka altxarazi :
PRED:	But the Lord hath set his enemies against him , and against him , saying ,
GOLD:	They said , “ We will replace the broken bricks of our ruins with finished stone , and replant the felled sycamore-fig trees with cedars . ”

ID:	4901
INPUT:	Jokaera prestua duena , justiziaren arabera ari dena , bihotz barrutik egia dioena ;
PRED:	It is a good way to do what is right , and it is good to do what is right .
GOLD:	Those who lead blameless lives and do what is right , speaking the truth from sincere hearts .

ID:	4902
INPUT:	Israeldar gudariak onik itzuli ziren Josuerengana , Makedako kanpalekura . Inor ez zen israeldarren kontra hitzik ere egitera ausartu .
PRED:	And all the men of Israel returned to Joshua , and came to the camp of Jericho , and no man spoke against the children of Israel .
GOLD:	Then the Israelites returned safely to Joshua in the camp at Makkedah . After that , no one dared to speak even a word against Israel .

ID:	4903
INPUT:	Beraz , nirekin Zesareara etorri ziren haiek eta , hurrengo egunean , batere luzapenik gabe , auzi-mahaian eseri nintzen eta gizon hori ekartzeko agindu nuen .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the same day , when they came with me , I sat down , and sat down in the table , and I commanded the man to bring this man .
GOLD:	“ When his accusers came here for the trial , I did n't delay . I called the case the very next day and ordered Paul brought in .

ID:	4904
INPUT:	Ibili beti Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak erakutsitako bidetik , bizirik iraun eta zoriontsu izan zaitezten , eta luzaro biziko zarete jabetzan hartuko duzuen lurraldean .
PRED:	Be careful to live in the way that the Lord your God will teach you , and you will live in the land where you live .
GOLD:	Stay on the path that the Lord your God has commanded you to follow . Then you will live long and prosperous lives in the land you are about to enter and occupy .

ID:	4905
INPUT:	Jakin zuten Moab , Amon , Edom eta beste herrialdeetara ihesi joanak ziren judatarrek ere , Babiloniako erregeak judatar batzuk beren herrialdean utzi zituela , eta Gedalias , Ahikamen seme eta Xafanen biloba , ezarri zuela gobernari .
PRED:	When the Jews heard this , they fled to the land of Edom , and fled to the land of Edom , some of the kings of Judah left them in their land , and they buried them in their land .
GOLD:	When the Judeans in Moab , Ammon , Edom , and the other nearby countries heard that the king of Babylon had left a few people in Judah and that Gedaliah was the governor ,

ID:	4906
INPUT:	Israeldarrak , ordea , itsas erditik oinik busti gabe igaro ziren , urak ezker-eskuin zituztela harresi gisa .
PRED:	And the children of Israel passed by the sea , and passed by the sea , and stood on the right side of the sea , on the left side of the sea .
GOLD:	But the people of Israel had walked through the middle of the sea on dry ground , as the water stood up like a wall on both sides .

ID:	4907
INPUT:	Zeukan guztia Isaaki utzi zion Abrahamek .
PRED:	And Abraham left all that he had done to Isaac .
GOLD:	Abraham gave everything he owned to his son Isaac .

ID:	4908
INPUT:	Gerora , Absalomen alaba Maaka ere hartu zuen emazte , eta honek Abias , Atai , Ziza eta Xelomit ekarri zizkion .
PRED:	And he took Absalom 's daughter , and brought her to Absalom 's wife , and she brought her to him , the daughter of Elam , and the priest .
GOLD:	Later Rehoboam married another cousin , Maacah , the granddaughter of Absalom . Maacah gave birth to Abijah , Attai , Ziza , and Shelomith .

ID:	4909
INPUT:	Gainerakoetarako , bereiz itzazu herri osoaren artetik gizon iaioak , Jainkoari begirune diotenak , fidagarriak eta eskupeko-zale ez direnak , eta ezarri mila , ehun , berrogeita hamar eta hamarreko taldeen buru .
PRED:	Give to all the people who fear God from all the people , who fear God , who do not fear God , those who fear God , and those who do not trust in their hands , fifty thousand and fifty thousand and fifty thousand .
GOLD:	But select from all the people some capable , honest men who fear God and hate bribes . Appoint them as leaders over groups of one thousand , one hundred , fifty , and ten .

ID:	4910
INPUT:	Hau da zuk eta zure ondorengoek nirekiko duzuen konpromisoa : zuetako gizaseme oro erdaintzea .
PRED:	This is what you have said to your descendants , and your descendants will be circumcised to be circumcised .
GOLD:	This is the covenant that you and your descendants must keep : Each male among you must be circumcised .

ID:	4911
INPUT:	Hauek ere Babiloniara eramango dituzte eta hantxe geldituko dira , toki honetara berriro ekartzea neuk erabakiko dudan arte . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	They will bring them to Babylon , and there will be left there until I bring them to this place . ”
GOLD:	‘ They will all be carried away to Babylon and will stay there until I send for them , ' says the Lord . ‘ Then I will bring them back to Jerusalem again . ' ”

ID:	4912
INPUT:	Eremu horretatik , zati bat , karratua — berrehun eta berrogeita hamar metrokoa luze-zabalean — , tenpluarentzat izango da , eta hogeita bost metro zabaleko hutsartea izango du inguru guztian .
PRED:	And the length of the land shall be a hundred cubits , and a hundred cubits long , and a hundred cubits wide , and a hundred cubits round about the temple .
GOLD:	A section of this land , measuring 875 feet by 875 feet , will be set aside for the Temple . An additional strip of land 871/2 feet wide is to be left empty all around it .

ID:	4913
INPUT:	Erantzun laster , Jauna , arnasarik gabe bainago . Ez ezkutatu niri zeure aurpegia , zulora doazenekin bat egin ez dezadan .
PRED:	But now , O Lord , answer me , for I am no more . Do n't hide your face from your face , so that I may not be with your idols .
GOLD:	Come quickly , Lord , and answer me , for my depression deepens.Do n't turn away from me , or I will die .

ID:	4914
INPUT:	Hauek dira edomdarren arbaso Esauren ondorengoak Seir mendialdean .
PRED:	These are the sons of Edom , the sons of Edom , in mount Seir .
GOLD:	This is the account of Esau 's descendants , the Edomites , who lived in the hill country of Seir .

ID:	4915
INPUT:	Baina ezin du inork mihia hezi , gaiztoa eta menderagaitza baita , pozoi hilgarriz betea .
PRED:	But no one can speak , but the tongue of the wicked and evil , and the tongue of death .
GOLD:	but no one can tame the tongue . It is restless and evil , full of deadly poison .

ID:	4916
INPUT:	Hondamen Leizeak eta Herioak esaten dute : « Hari buruz zer edo zer entzun dugu , bai » .
PRED:	The dead and death say , “ We have heard what we have heard , and we have heard . ”
GOLD:	Destruction and Death say , ‘ We 've heard only rumors of where wisdom can be found . '

ID:	4917
INPUT:	« Sinagogetara eta buruzagien eta agintarien aurrera eramango zaituztetenean , ez egon kezkatan nola egin edo zer esan zeuen alde ,
PRED:	When they bring you into the synagogue , and the princes of the princes , and the princes , and the princes of the princes , do not ask what you do .
GOLD:	“ And when you are brought to trial in the synagogues and before rulers and authorities , do n't worry about how to defend yourself or what to say ,

ID:	4918
INPUT:	Gurekin ez doala ohartu orduko , hilko litzateke ; geure aita zaharra atsekabez hilobiratuko genuke .
PRED:	If we would not die with us , we would die with our father , and we would die .
GOLD:	If he sees that the boy is not with us , our father will die . We , your servants , will indeed be responsible for sending that grieving , white-haired man to his grave .

ID:	4919
INPUT:	Jesus Jaunari eta fededun guztiei dizkiezun maitasun eta leialtasunaren berri izan baitut .
PRED:	For I have heard the grace of the Lord Jesus and all the saints and truth .
GOLD:	because I keep hearing about your faith in the Lord Jesus and your love for all of God 's people .

ID:	4920
INPUT:	Eta Jaunak esan zion Oseasi : « Jarriozu izena “ Ez-nire-herria ” , zuek ez baitzarete jadanik nire herria eta ni ez bainaiz zuen Jainkoa » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Hezekiah , “ Follow my people , because you do n't know my people , because I am your God . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord said , “ Name him Lo-ammi — ‘ Not my people ' — for Israel is not my people , and I am not their God .

ID:	4921
INPUT:	Jaunaren eskua ez da , ez , laburregia zuek salbatzeko , ezta haren belarria eregogorregia zuei entzuteko :
PRED:	The hand of the Lord is not able to save you , nor to save you , nor to hear your ears .
GOLD:	Listen ! The Lord 's arm is not too weak to save you , nor is his ear too deaf to hear you call .

ID:	4922
INPUT:	Eta nik erantzun : “ Iruzur egin ote diezaioke gizakiak Jainkoari , zuek niri egiten didazuen bezala ? ” “ Zertan egiten dizugu , bada , iruzur ? ” , galdetzen duzue oraindik . Hamarrenak eta dohainak ematerakoan egiten didazue iruzur .
PRED:	And I said to them , “ Can God do to you as you do to me ? Why do you say to me , ‘ What do we do to you ? ' And you say , ‘ What do we do ? ' ”
GOLD:	“ Should people cheat God ? Yet you have cheated me ! “ But you ask , ‘ What do you mean ? When did we ever cheat you ? ' “ You have cheated me of the tithes and offerings due to me .

ID:	4923
INPUT:	Pauloren mintzaira , jakintsuena ez bezalakoa
PRED:	Paul is not like a wise man
GOLD:	Paul 's Message of Wisdom

ID:	4924
INPUT:	( 1 Erg 22 , 1-3 )
PRED:	King Ahaz of Judah
GOLD:	Micaiah Prophesies against Ahab

ID:	4925
INPUT:	Adama , Rama , Hatzor ,
PRED:	Eliphaz , Ramah , Sheba ,
GOLD:	Adamah , Ramah , Hazor ,

ID:	4926
INPUT:	Senideok , hauxe da nire bihotzeko irrikarik handiena eta israeldarren alde Jainkoari eskatzen diodana : salbamenera hel daitezela .
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , this is what I ask for the people of Israel , that they may be saved .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , the longing of my heart and my prayer to God is for the people of Israel to be saved .

ID:	4927
INPUT:	Eta dirua Aaroni eta beronen semeei eman zien , Jaunak agindu bezala .
PRED:	And he gave Aaron and his sons , as the Lord had commanded them .
GOLD:	And Moses gave the silver for the redemption to Aaron and his sons , just as the Lord had commanded .

ID:	4928
INPUT:	Orobat , bik , batera lotaratuz , elkar dute berotuko ; bakarrik dagoena nola berotu ?
PRED:	But if one of them will be put to shame , how can they be one another ?
GOLD:	Likewise , two people lying close together can keep each other warm . But how can one be warm alone ?

ID:	4929
INPUT:	Hala ere , ez diet zuen alabeikonturik eskatuko , emagaldu bihurtu direlako ; ezta zuen errainei ere , adulteriogile bihurtu direlako . Apaizak berak baitoazemagalduekin , tenpluko emagaldueki<unk> kartzen baitirasakrifizioak eskaintzeko . Eta hala , zentzugabeko herriahondamendira doa .
PRED:	But I will not forgive you , because they have committed adultery , and they have committed adultery , because they have committed adultery , and the priests have committed adultery with the priests , and the priests have committed adultery with the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	But why should I punish themfor their prostitution and adultery ? For your men are doing the same thing , sinning with whores and shrine prostitutes.O foolish people ! You refuse to understand , so you will be destroyed .

ID:	4930
INPUT:	eta esan zion : — Ireki ekialdeko leihoa . Erregeak leihoa irekitzean , Eliseok agindu zion : — Jaurti ! Eta erregeak gezia jaurti zuenean , Eliseok esan zuen : — Jaunaren garaipen-gezia ! Siriarren kontrako garaipen-gezia ! Suntsitzeraino hondatuko dituzu siriarrak Afeken .
PRED:	And the king said to him , “ Go up to the east side of the east . ” And he said to him , “ Take the arrows of the Lord ! ” And the king said to him , “ You will be destroyed until the time of the time of the days of the king of Syria . ”
GOLD:	Then he commanded , “ Open that eastern window , ” and he opened it . Then he said , “ Shoot ! ” So he shot an arrow . Elisha proclaimed , “ This is the Lord 's arrow , an arrow of victory over Aram , for you will completely conquer the Arameans at Aphek . ”

ID:	4931
INPUT:	Biltzarraren zergatia
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The Letter for Gentile Believers

ID:	4932
INPUT:	Begira , Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak eskura ematen dizue lurraldea . Joan eta jabetu hartaz , Jaunak zuen arbasoen Jainkoak hitzeman bezala . Ez izan beldur ! Ez kikildu !
PRED:	Look at the land that the Lord your God has given you . Go and take possession of it , just as the Lord your God has given you . Do n't be afraid . Do n't be afraid .
GOLD:	Look ! He has placed the land in front of you . Go and occupy it as the Lord , the God of your ancestors , has promised you . Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be discouraged ! '

ID:	4933
INPUT:	Hanani , neure anaietako bat , etorri zitzaidan Judatik , gizon-talde batekin . Erbestealditik libre gelditu ziren juduen eta Jerusalem hiriko berriak eskatu nizkien .
PRED:	But one of my brothers came to me from Judah , and with men , and from the other side of the Jews , and from the other side of the Jews , and from the other side of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Hanani , one of my brothers , came to visit me with some other men who had just arrived from Judah . I asked them about the Jews who had returned there from captivity and about how things were going in Jerusalem .

ID:	4934
INPUT:	Orduan , Joabek , erregeagana joan eta halaxe jakinarazi zion . Orduan , erregeak dei egin zion Absalomi ; hau erregeagana etorri eta lurreraino ahuspeztu zitzaion . Erregeak besarkatu egin zuen Absalom .
PRED:	Then Joab went to the king and told him what he had said . Then the king called Absalom to the king and bowed down to the ground .
GOLD:	So Joab told the king what Absalom had said . Then at last David summoned Absalom , who came and bowed low before the king , and the king kissed him .

ID:	4935
INPUT:	Txalupara igo zirenean , haizea baretu egin zen .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when he went into the boat , that the wind was dried up .
GOLD:	When they climbed back into the boat , the wind stopped .

ID:	4936
INPUT:	Jesusek jendetzari bigarrenez jaten eman
PRED:	Jesus Heals to the crowds
GOLD:	Jesus Feeds Four Thousand

ID:	4937
INPUT:	Orduan , eman zizkion Jakobek anaiari ogia eta platerkada dilista . Hark jan , edan , mahaitik altxa eta alde egin zuen . Honela gutxietsi zuen Esauk bere lehen-semetzaren eskubidea .
PRED:	And Jacob gave him the bread and the bread in the streets , and he ate , and drank , and drank from the table , and went away from the table ; and Esau took his firstborn .
GOLD:	Then Jacob gave Esau some bread and lentil stew . Esau ate the meal , then got up and left . He showed contempt for his rights as the firstborn .

ID:	4938
INPUT:	« Larunbatezzeure eginkizunak uzteneta nire egun santuannegoziotan jarduten ez baduzu , larunbatari zeure atsegin deitzeneta Jaunaren egun santuaohoragarritzat hartzen baduzu , zeure eginkizun , negozio eta arazoak baztertuz ,
PRED:	“ If you do not obey my commands and keep My holy name on the Sabbath day , you will call on the Sabbath day , and you will keep the Sabbath day of the Lord , and you will keep your commands and your commands .
GOLD:	“ Keep the Sabbath day holy.Do n't pursue your own interests on that day , but enjoy the Sabbathand speak of it with delight as the Lord 's holy day.Honor the Sabbath in everything you do on that day , and do n't follow your own desires or talk idly .

ID:	4939
INPUT:	« Eta zuk , gizaseme , egin negar eta intziri beraien aurrean , bihotza hautsia eta samindua bazenu bezala .
PRED:	“ You , son of man , weep and weep in front of them , just as you have spoken .
GOLD:	Yes , the sword is now being sharpened and polished ; it is being prepared for the executioner .

ID:	4940
INPUT:	Ekialdetik mendebaldera , herri guztiek aitortzen dute nire izen handia , eta nonahi erretzen didate intsentsua eta behar bezalako oparia eskaintzen . Herri guztiek aitortzen dute nire izen handia — dio Jaun ahalguztidunak — .
PRED:	And all the people of the east side of the east , and they shall know my name , and burn incense on them , and burn incense on them , saith the Lord of hosts , the God of hosts .
GOLD:	But my name is honored by people of other nations from morning till night . All around the world they offer sweet incense and pure offerings in honor of my name . For my name is great among the nations , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	4941
INPUT:	Esan zidan : « Gizaseme , zulatu horma hortxe bertan » . Zulatu nuen horma eta irekidura bat egin zen .
PRED:	He said to me , “ Son of man , this place has been here . ” So I opened the wall , and there was a wall .
GOLD:	He said to me , “ Now , son of man , dig into the wall . ” So I dug into the wall and found a hidden doorway .

ID:	4942
INPUT:	Benetan diotsuet : Gizaldi honetakoak hil baino lehen gertatuko dira gauza guztiok .
PRED:	I say to you , this generation will die before all these things come .
GOLD:	I tell you the truth , this generation will not pass from the scene until all these things have taken place .

ID:	4943
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion hau : — Erregeak ongi baderitzo eta ni begiko baldin banau , eskari hau erregeari egoki iruditzen bazaio eta ni atsegin baldin banau , agindu beza idatziz , Hamedataren seme eta Agagen jatorriko Hamanek , asmo maltzurrez , erreinuko eskualde guztietan bizi diren juduak oro hondatzearren , emaniko gutunak baliogabe ditzaten .
PRED:	The king said to the king , “ If the king does what is right , and if I pray to the king , and if I pray to the king , and if I do what the king has commanded me to do , I will do to the Jews , and all the Jews of the land of Judah . ”
GOLD:	Esther said , “ If it please the king , and if I have found favor with him , and if he thinks it is right , and if I am pleasing to him , let there be a decree that reverses the orders of Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite , who ordered that Jews throughout all the king 's provinces should be destroyed .

ID:	4944
INPUT:	« Ondoren , neure espirituaisuriko diet gizaki guztiei . Zuen seme-alabekprofetizatu egingo dute , zuen zaharrekametsak egingo dituzte , zuen gazteek ikuskariak izango .
PRED:	Then I will put my Spirit on all men , and they will tell your children , and they will see your young men , and your young men will see you .
GOLD:	“ At the time of those events , ” says the Lord , “ when I restore the prosperity of Judah and Jerusalem ,

ID:	4945
INPUT:	Orduan , Israelgo erregeak agindu zuen : — Heldu Mikeasi ! Eraman hiri-gobernari Amonengana eta Joax printzearengana .
PRED:	Then the king of Israel said , “ Go to Micaiah , and bring him to the king of Israel and to Joash the king . ”
GOLD:	“ Arrest him ! ” the king of Israel ordered . “ Take him back to Amon , the governor of the city , and to my son Joash .

ID:	4946
INPUT:	Jordan ibaiaz beste aldera , Jerikotik ekialdera , Betzer aukeratu zuten , basamortuan , Rubenen leinuaren lautadan ; Ramot , Galaaden , Gaden leinuaren lurraldean , eta Golan , Baxanen , Manasesen leinuaren lurraldean .
PRED:	This is the border of the Jordan , which is in the wilderness of Jericho , in the wilderness of Gilead , in the valley of Gilead , in Gilead , in the land of Manasseh , in the land of Manasseh , and in the land of Manasseh .
GOLD:	On the east side of the Jordan River , across from Jericho , the following cities were designated : Bezer , in the wilderness plain of the tribe of Reuben ; Ramoth in Gilead , in the territory of the tribe of Gad ; and Golan in Bashan , in the land of the tribe of Manasseh .

ID:	4947
INPUT:	Maaseias , Baruken semea — hau Kol-Hozerena , hau Hazaiasena , hau Adaiasena , hau Joiaribena , hau Zakariasena , hau Haxilonirena — .
PRED:	Azariah the son of Elioenai , the son of Elioenai , the son of Jozabad , the son of Hilkiah , the son of Hilkiah , the son of Hilkiah , the son of Hilkiah , the son of Hilkiah , the son of Hilkiah .
GOLD:	Also Maaseiah son of Baruch , son of Col-hozeh , son of Hazaiah , son of Adaiah , son of Joiarib , son of Zechariah , of the family of Shelah .

ID:	4948
INPUT:	Euri-jasa izan zen berrogei egun eta berrogei gauez .
PRED:	And there was rain for forty days and forty days .
GOLD:	The rain continued to fall for forty days and forty nights .

ID:	4949
INPUT:	Eta morroiek belarrira esan zizkioten hitz horiek Davidi . Baina honek erantzun zien : — Gauza hutsa iruditzen al zaizue erregearen suhi izatea ? Gizon behartsu eta ezereza nauzue ni horretarako .
PRED:	The servants said to David , “ What do you say ? ” But he said to them , “ Do you think that you are blind ? Do you want me to be poor and poor ? ”
GOLD:	When Saul 's men said these things to David , he replied , “ How can a poor man from a humble family afford the bride price for the daughter of a king ? ”

ID:	4950
INPUT:	Libanoko zedro handi eta tantaiaketa Baxango haritz guztiak ,
PRED:	And all the trees of Lebanon , and all of Bashan , and all Bashan of Bashan , shall be cut off .
GOLD:	He will cut down the tall cedars of Lebanonand all the mighty oaks of Bashan .

ID:	4951
INPUT:	Horrelakoak ez beza uste Jaunarengandik ezer iritsiko duenik ,
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ He will not come from the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Such people should not expect to receive anything from the Lord .

ID:	4952
INPUT:	elkarketa-etxolako sarrerara eramango du aberea , Jaunari eskaintzeko ; bestela , herritik bota egingo dute .
PRED:	And he shall bring the animal to the tent of meeting , to bring it to the Lord ; and they shall be cut off from his people .
GOLD:	but does not bring it to the entrance of the Tabernacle to offer it to the Lord , that person will be cut off from the community .

ID:	4953
INPUT:	Jerusalemgo neskatxok , basoetako orein eta gazelen izenean , otoi , ez iratzarri ene maitea , utzi lo egiten , nahi duen arte .
PRED:	O daughters of Jerusalem , I pray thee , O daughters of Jerusalem , and in the name of the field , and in the name of the field , and do not leave my beloved , until I want to love them .
GOLD:	Promise me , O women of Jerusalem , by the gazelles and wild deer , not to awaken love until the time is right .

ID:	4954
INPUT:	Zu Seirtik ateratzean , Jauna , Edomgo zelaietan barrenaaurrera egitean , lurra ikaratu egin zen , ortzia dardaratu ; hodeiek euria isuri zuten ,
PRED:	When you came out of Seir , when you came out of Edom , the Lord stood before Edom , and the earth was dried up , and the cloud covered the earth with rain .
GOLD:	“ Lord , when you set out from Seirand marched across the fields of Edom , the earth trembled , and the cloudy skies poured down rain .

ID:	4955
INPUT:	« Zeruko izarrak bezain ugari izan ondoren , banaka batzuk besterik ez zarete bizirik geldituko , Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren esana ez egiteagatik .
PRED:	When you are as the stars of heaven , some of you will live by the word of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Though you become as numerous as the stars in the sky , few of you will be left because you would not listen to the Lord your God .

ID:	4956
INPUT:	Babilonia behin betiko gaitzetsia
PRED:	The Lord of Babylon
GOLD:	A Hymn of Praise to the

ID:	4957
INPUT:	« Izan gogoan zeuek ere esklabo izan zinetela Egipton ; horregatik agintzen dizuet xedapen horiek betetzeko .
PRED:	Remember that you were slaves in the land of Egypt , and I command you to obey these statutes .
GOLD:	Remember that you were slaves in the land of Egypt . That is why I am giving you this command .

ID:	4958
INPUT:	Gero , Jakobek otoitz hau egin zuen : « Jauna , gure guraso Abrahamen eta Isaaken Jainkoa , zuk esan didazu : “ Itzul zaitez zeure lurraldera eta zeure ahaideengana , eta bedeinkatuko zaitut ” .
PRED:	Then Jacob prayed , “ Lord , our father Abraham and Isaac , have said to me , ‘ Go back to your land , and I will bless you . '
GOLD:	I am not worthy of all the unfailing love and faithfulness you have shown to me , your servant . When I left home and crossed the Jordan River , I owned nothing except a walking stick . Now my household fills two large camps !

ID:	4959
INPUT:	Jesus Hamaikei eta ikasleei agertu
PRED:	Jesus and His disciples
GOLD:	Jesus Appears to the Disciples

ID:	4960
INPUT:	Ez dugu inola ere Jaunaren kontra errebelatu nahi izan , ez Jaunarengandik aldendu , ezta Jaunaren , gure Jainkoaren , egoitza aurrean dagoen aldareaz gainera , erre-opariak , labore-opariak eta gainerako sakrifizioak eskaintzeko beste bat eraiki ere » .
PRED:	We do n't turn away from the Lord our God , nor turn away from him , nor turn away from the altar of our Lord our God , nor offer burnt offerings on the altar . ”
GOLD:	Far be it from us to rebel against the Lord or turn away from him by building our own altar for burnt offerings , grain offerings , or sacrifices . Only the altar of the Lord our God that stands in front of the Tabernacle may be used for that purpose . ”

ID:	4961
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	4962
INPUT:	zezenen eta akerren odolak ez baititzake bekatuak desegin .
PRED:	For the blood of the righteous and the blood of the righteous shall not be destroyed .
GOLD:	For it is not possible for the blood of bulls and goats to take away sins .

ID:	4963
INPUT:	Zeren indar gaizto eta misteriotsu hori lanean ari da dagoeneko ; baina orain erabat agertzea galarazten dion hura desagertu bezain laster ,
PRED:	This is the power of the power of the hail , and it is revealed to him , but now it is revealed to him as it has been revealed to him .
GOLD:	For this lawlessness is already at work secretly , and it will remain secret until the one who is holding it back steps out of the way .

ID:	4964
INPUT:	Entzun , zeru-lurrok ! Honela mintzo da Jauna : « Haurrak sortu ditut eta hazi , baina aurka altxatu zaizkit .
PRED:	Hear , you heaven and earth ! The Lord says , “ I have raised up children , but they have rebelled against me .
GOLD:	Listen , O heavens ! Pay attention , earth ! This is what the Lord says : “ The children I raised and cared forhave rebelled against me .

ID:	4965
INPUT:	Zeuk utzi nauzu , zeuk bizkarra eman . Hala , zure aurka luzatu dut eskua , zu suntsitzeko , zutaz erruki izateaz aspertuta .
PRED:	You have turned me away from me , but I have stretched out your hand against you , so that I might destroy you .
GOLD:	You have abandoned meand turned your back on me , ” says the Lord . “ Therefore , I will raise my fist to destroy you.I am tired of always giving you another chance .

ID:	4966
INPUT:	Izugarrizko eskarmentu izango dira munduko erreinu guztientzat ; lotsaizun eta iseka-gai izango dira , koplak aterako dizkiete eta madarikatu egingo jaurtiko ditudan toki guztietan .
PRED:	They will be a sign for all the kingdoms of the earth , and they will be a sign for your enemies , and they will be given to their enemies , and they will curse them in every place .
GOLD:	I will make them an object of horror and a symbol of evil to every nation on earth . They will be disgraced and mocked , taunted and cursed , wherever I scatter them .

ID:	4967
INPUT:	« Zuei , nire artaldekoei , hau diotsuet nik , Jainko Jaunak : Nik erabakiko dut ardien arteko auzia , ahari eta akerren artekoa .
PRED:	“ I say to you , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord God says : I will judge between the sheep and the sheep and the sheep .
GOLD:	“ And as for you , my flock , this is what the Sovereign Lord says to his people : I will judge between one animal of the flock and another , separating the sheep from the goats .

ID:	4968
INPUT:	baina Nekok mezulariak bidali zizkion esatera : « Ez dugu deus ere elkarren kontra , Judako errege . Ez nator zure kontra , gerra egiten ari zaidan beste errege-etxe baten kontra baizik . Bizkor ibiltzeko esan dit Jainkoak . Ez jarri zuk eragozpenik Jainkoari , neure alde baitut ; bestela , hondatu egingo zaitu » .
PRED:	But many sent messengers to him , saying , “ We have nothing against the king of Judah . I have not come against you , but I have not turned against you , but God has said to me , ‘ I will not leave you . ' ”
GOLD:	But King Neco sent messengers to Josiah with this message : “ What do you want with me , king of Judah ? I have no quarrel with you today ! I am on my way to fight another nation , and God has told me to hurry ! Do not interfere with God , who is with me , or he will destroy you . ”

ID:	4969
INPUT:	ardoa kopa handitan edaten duzue , olio usaintsu onenezigurzten zarete . Eta ez zaizue axolaIsrael herriaren hondamendia !
PRED:	You drink wine in the great wine , and put oil on them , and do not make the destruction of the house of Israel .
GOLD:	You drink wine by the bowlfuland perfume yourselves with fragrant lotions.You care nothing about the ruin of your nation .

ID:	4970
INPUT:	Eliudek Eleazar ; Eleazarrek Matan ; Matanek Jakob ,
PRED:	Eleazar , Eleazar , Eleazar , and Manasseh , and Manasseh , and Manasseh , and Manasseh ,
GOLD:	Eliud was the father of Eleazar.Eleazar was the father of Matthan.Matthan was the father of Jacob .

ID:	4971
INPUT:	Orduan , israeldar elkarte osoa oihu batean hasi zen eta gau osoa negarrez eman zuen .
PRED:	And all the congregation of Israel cried out in a loud voice , and wept all night .
GOLD:	Then the whole community began weeping aloud , and they cried all night .

ID:	4972
INPUT:	Harritu zen Pilato ordurako hila izateaz , eta ehuntariari dei egin eta galdetu zion ea egia zen hilda zegoela .
PRED:	When Pilate took him , he called the centurion and asked him , “ The man was dead . ”
GOLD:	Pilate could n't believe that Jesus was already dead , so he called for the Roman officer and asked if he had died yet .

ID:	4973
INPUT:	Dorreak eraiki zituen Jerusalemen , Kantoiko ate gainean , Haranekoaren gainean eta Izkinan , eta sendotu egin zituen .
PRED:	And he built altars in Jerusalem , in the court of the house of the Lord , in the court of the court , and he healed them .
GOLD:	Uzziah built fortified towers in Jerusalem at the Corner Gate , at the Valley Gate , and at the angle in the wall .

ID:	4974
INPUT:	Aaronek erantzun zien : — Kendu zeuen emazte eta seme-alabei urrezko belarritakoak eta ekarzkidazue .
PRED:	Aaron said to them , “ Take away your wives and your children , and bring them to me . ”
GOLD:	So Aaron said , “ Take the gold rings from the ears of your wives and sons and daughters , and bring them to me . ”

ID:	4975
INPUT:	Kontuz lagun gaiztoekin
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Wisdom Shouts in the Streets

ID:	4976
INPUT:	Beldurtu ziren Joseren senideak haren etxera eraman zituztenean . Pentsatu zuten : « Gari-zakuetan aurreko txandan itzulitako diruarengatik eramaten gaituzte . Orain , gainera oldartuko zaizkigu , esklabotzat hartzeko , geure asto eta guzti » .
PRED:	When Joseph 's brothers were afraid , they brought him to his house . They said , “ They will bring us back for the money that I have given to them in Gilead , and we will go back to our slaves . ”
GOLD:	The brothers were terrified when they saw that they were being taken into Joseph 's house . “ It 's because of the money someone put in our sacks last time we were here , ” they said . “ He plans to pretend that we stole it . Then he will seize us , make us slaves , and take our donkeys . ”

ID:	4977
INPUT:	biziaren sorburua hil zenuten , baina Jainkoak piztu egin du hildakoen artetik ; gu gara horren testigu .
PRED:	You killed the head of life , but God raised him up from the dead , and we are witnesses .
GOLD:	You killed the author of life , but God raised him from the dead . And we are witnesses of this fact !

ID:	4978
INPUT:	Joan zitzaien hirugarren aldiz eta esan zien : « Egin lo eta hartu atseden ! Kito ! Iritsi da ordua : hona Gizonaren Semea bekatarien eskuetara emana .
PRED:	The third time he went and said to them , “ Get up and sleep ! The time has come , and the Son of Man has come into the hands of sinners .
GOLD:	When he returned to them the third time , he said , “ Go ahead and sleep . Have your rest . But no — the time has come . The Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners .

ID:	4979
INPUT:	Beren ahaide Bakbukiasek eta Unik laguntzen zieten betebehar horretan .
PRED:	And their brethren , Gad , Gad , and Abiram , went out to help them .
GOLD:	Their associates , Bakbukiah and Unni , stood opposite them during the service .

ID:	4980
INPUT:	Baina jabe izateko bertara sartu zirenean , ez ziren zure esaneko izan , ez zituzten zure legeak bete , ez zuten zuk aginduaren arabera jokatu . Horregatik bidali diezu zoritxar handi hau .
PRED:	But when they went into the court , they did not obey your commands , because they did not obey your commands , and did not obey your commands . So you sent this great evil evil evil evil .
GOLD:	Our ancestors came and conquered it and lived in it , but they refused to obey you or follow your word . They have not done anything you commanded . That is why you have sent this terrible disaster upon them .

ID:	4981
INPUT:	Asper-asper egina daukazue Jauna zeuen hizketaz . « Zertan asperrarazi dugu , bada ? » , galdetzen duzue hala ere . Hona , gaizki egiten duena Jainkoari begiko eta atsegin zaiola esaten duzuelako , eta Jainkoa zuzena ote den galdezka ari zaretelako .
PRED:	You have made a new heart in the Lord , saying , “ Why have we saved us ? ” But you say , “ What do you do evil , because you have done evil in God 's sight , and God is good . ”
GOLD:	You have wearied the Lord with your words . “ How have we wearied him ? ” you ask.You have wearied him by saying that all who do evil are good in the Lord 's sight , and he is pleased with them . You have wearied him by asking , “ Where is the God of justice ? ”

ID:	4982
INPUT:	Hiltzeko moduko zurezko tresna jaurtiz norbait jo eta hiltzen duena , hilketa-errudun da : heriotzara emango dute .
PRED:	And he that is put to death shall be put to death , and he that is put to death shall be put to death .
GOLD:	Or if someone strikes and kills another person with a wooden object , it is murder , and the murderer must be put to death .

ID:	4983
INPUT:	Horrez gain , legamiadun ogia eskainiko da , esker onez eskaintzen den elkartasun-opariarekin batera .
PRED:	And he shall offer bread to the Lord , and he shall offer it to the congregation , and he shall offer a burnt offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	This peace offering of thanksgiving must also be accompanied by loaves of bread made with yeast .

ID:	4984
INPUT:	Beste aingeru bat ikusi nuen ekialdetik igotzen , Jainko biziaren zigilua zuelarik , eta ozenki egin zien deiadar lurra eta itsasoa hondatzeko ahalmena eman zitzaien lau aingeruei ,
PRED:	And I saw another angel coming up from the east side of the east , and the living God cried out to the earth , and he cried out to the sea and to destroy the sea .
GOLD:	And I saw another angel coming up from the east , carrying the seal of the living God . And he shouted to those four angels , who had been given power to harm land and sea ,

ID:	4985
INPUT:	« Zure baitan Israelgo printzeek odola isurtzen dute , nor bere indarraz baliatuz .
PRED:	“ The princes of Israel have shed blood in your hand , each man 's blood with his power .
GOLD:	“ Every leader in Israel who lives within your walls is bent on murder .

ID:	4986
INPUT:	esanez : « Ez ekarri hona preso horiek , Jaunaren aurrean bekatu egingo baikenuke . Bekatu eta oker gehiago egin nahi al duzue , gure errua aski handia ez delakoan eta Jauna Israelen kontra aski haserre eta sumindua ez dagoelakoan ? »
PRED:	He said to them , “ Do n't bring these things into the presence of the Lord , for I have sinned against you , because you have sinned against us , because the Lord is angry with us , and is not angry with Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ You must not bring the prisoners here ! ” they declared . “ We can not afford to add to our sins and guilt . Our guilt is already great , and the Lord 's fierce anger is already turned against Israel . ”

ID:	4987
INPUT:	Teofilo agurgarria , askok ekin diote gure artean izan diren gertakarien historia idazteari ,
PRED:	And many of them that were with us , and many of them that had been written among us in the book of this generation ,
GOLD:	Many people have set out to write accounts about the events that have been fulfilled among us .

ID:	4988
INPUT:	Horregatik , hala diot nik , Jaunak : Neure haserrea eta sumina hustuko ditut toki honen gain , gizaki eta abere , landako zuhaitz eta lurreko fruituen gain : itzaliko ez den sua izango da » .
PRED:	Therefore thus says the Lord : My wrath and My wrath shall be upon this place , and My wrath shall be upon this place , and upon the trees of the earth , and upon the trees of the trees of the earth .
GOLD:	So this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ I will pour out my terrible fury on this place . Its people , animals , trees , and crops will be consumed by the unquenchable fire of my anger . ”

ID:	4989
INPUT:	Kristorengan uste on izan eta bizi
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Pressing toward the Goal

ID:	4990
INPUT:	Zuzena zarelako , Jauna , urrundu Jerusalemdik , zeure hiri eta mendi santutik , zeure haserrea eta sumina . Gure hoben eta gurasoen egintza gaiztoengatik irainez betetzen dituzte Jerusalem eta zure herria inguruan bizi diren guztiek .
PRED:	For you are righteous , O Lord , turn away from Jerusalem , from your holy city , and from your holy city , and in your wrath , and in the wrath of our fathers , and in the midst of our fathers , and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	In view of all your faithful mercies , Lord , please turn your furious anger away from your city Jerusalem , your holy mountain . All the neighboring nations mock Jerusalem and your people because of our sins and the sins of our ancestors .

ID:	4991
INPUT:	« Orduan , nagusiagatik gaizki-esaka hasi ziren ; eta esan zioten berari :
PRED:	And they began to cry out for their master 's sake , and they said unto him ,
GOLD:	When they received their pay , they protested to the owner ,

ID:	4992
INPUT:	Eta zuri , artzain-dorre , Sion hiriko gotorleku horri , berriro itzuliko zaizuantzinako agintea , zuri , Jerusalem hiriburu , lehen zenuen erregetza » .
PRED:	And you shall return to the tower of the tower of Zion , which is in the city of Zion , and you shall return to you , and you shall be king over Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	As for you , Jerusalem , the citadel of God 's people , your royal might and powerwill come back to you again.The kingship will be restoredto my precious Jerusalem .

ID:	4993
INPUT:	Hauei guztiei bidali zizkieten emaitzak : Betelen , Negeveko Ramoten , Jatiren ,
PRED:	And they sent them unto them , and to them that were in Bethel , and to them that were in the land of Benjamin ,
GOLD:	The gifts were sent to the people of the following towns David had visited : Bethel , Ramoth-negev , Jattir ,

ID:	4994
INPUT:	Zuen artetik ere aterako dira batzuk irakaspen okerrak zabalduz , ikasleak beren atzetik eramateko .
PRED:	Some of you will be brought out from among you , and they will teach their disciples .
GOLD:	Even some men from your own group will rise up and distort the truth in order to draw a following .

ID:	4995
INPUT:	Apaizburuek eta zaharrek salaketa asko egiten zuten haren aurka , baina hark ez zuen ezer erantzuten .
PRED:	The chief priests and the elders heard him , but he did not answer him .
GOLD:	But when the leading priests and the elders made their accusations against him , Jesus remained silent .

ID:	4996
INPUT:	zeren Jaunaren gorputza dela kontuan izan gabe jan-edaten duenak , bere gaitzespena baitu jaten eta edaten .
PRED:	Whoever does not eat the flesh of the Lord 's body , but he who does not eat it , and drank it .
GOLD:	For if you eat the bread or drink the cup without honoring the body of Christ , you are eating and drinking God 's judgment upon yourself .

ID:	4997
INPUT:	Jauna zuen Jainkoa zuekin doa , etsaien aurka borrokatzeko eta garaipena zuei emateko ” .
PRED:	The Lord your God is with you , to fight against your enemies and to fight you . ”
GOLD:	For the Lord your God is going with you ! He will fight for you against your enemies , and he will give you victory ! '

ID:	4998
INPUT:	Egin diezaiogun goian gelatxo bat , horma batzuk jasoz ; ohea , mahaia , aulkia eta argiontzia ipiniko dizkiogu bertan . Horrela , etxera etortzean , geldi dadila bertan .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the morning , that a little while , that we may give it to us , that he may put the table on his throne , and his throne , and let him go into his house , that he may stay there .
GOLD:	Let 's build a small room for him on the roof and furnish it with a bed , a table , a chair , and a lamp . Then he will have a place to stay whenever he comes by . ”

ID:	4999
INPUT:	Maita ezazue , bada , etorkina , zeuek ere etorkin izan baitzineten Egipton .
PRED:	So love yourselves , because you were with you in Egypt .
GOLD:	So you , too , must show love to foreigners , for you yourselves were once foreigners in the land of Egypt .

ID:	5000
INPUT:	Honela eratua zegoen , beraz , santutegia . Lehenengo aldean edozein garaitan sartzen dira apaizak beren kultu-zerbitzua betetzeko ;
PRED:	So the sanctuary was made holy , and the priests went in to serve their service .
GOLD:	When these things were all in place , the priests regularly entered the first room as they performed their religious duties .

ID:	5001
INPUT:	Salomonek , orduan : — Jator jokatzen badu , ez zaio ile bat ere eroriko lurrera ; baina nolabaiteko gaiztakeriarik aurkitzen badiogu , heriotza izango du .
PRED:	King Solomon said to him , “ If a hair has come , he will not fall into the earth . But if we find any evil thing , we will die . ”
GOLD:	Solomon replied , “ If he proves himself to be loyal , not a hair on his head will be touched . But if he makes trouble , he will die . ”

ID:	5002
INPUT:	Lurrak , zabaldurik , irentsi egin zituen Korerekin batera , honen taldea hil eta suak berrehun eta berrogeita hamar gizon suntsitu zituenean ; herriaren eskarmenturako izan zen hori .
PRED:	And the earth opened the earth , and destroyed all the company of Korah , and all the company of his flock , and the hundred and fifty men , and the people of the land .
GOLD:	But the earth opened up its mouth and swallowed them with Korah , and fire devoured 250 of their followers . This served as a warning to the entire nation of Israel .

ID:	5003
INPUT:	Lursaila Jubileu Urtetik bertatik sagaratzen bada , ezarritako prezioa ordainduko da ;
PRED:	If the field is sold for the field , then it shall be sold for the price of the field .
GOLD:	If the field is dedicated to the Lord in the Year of Jubilee , then the entire assessment will apply .

ID:	5004
INPUT:	Hartu arkume ederrena ; gero , pilatu azpian egurra , irakin dezala borbor , hezurrak ere ongi egosteko .
PRED:	Take the beautiful woman , and put him in the garden , and put him in the spirit , and the bones of the bones , and the bones of the bones .
GOLD:	Use only the best sheep from the flock , and heap fuel on the fire beneath the pot.Bring the pot to a boil , and cook the bones along with the meat .

ID:	5005
INPUT:	« Eleazar apaiza eta Nunen seme Josue izango dira lurraldearen banaketa egingo dutenak ;
PRED:	“ Eleazar the priest , Eleazar the priest , and Joshua son of Nun , will be their inheritance .
GOLD:	“ Eleazar the priest and Joshua son of Nun are the men designated to divide the grants of land among the people .

ID:	5006
INPUT:	Hogeita hamasei mila gudari zenbatu zituzten egun hartan hirietatik etorriak , Gibeako bertako bizilagunak sartu gabe .
PRED:	And it came to pass in that day , that the men of the city were six thousand and fifty thousand men that were in the city , and did not enter into the city of Gibeah .
GOLD:	In all , 26,000 of their warriors armed with swords arrived in Gibeah to join the 700 elite troops who lived there .

ID:	5007
INPUT:	Izu-ikarak menpean hartzen nau , haizea bezala desagertzen nire duintasuna , hodeia bezala ezerezten nire ongizatea .
PRED:	I am under the wind , and my glory is like a wind , and my glory is like the wind .
GOLD:	I live in terror now.My honor has blown away in the wind , and my prosperity has vanished like a cloud .

ID:	5008
INPUT:	Eta zuek gure eta Jaunaren ereduari jarraitu zenioten , atsekabe askoren artean izanik ere , Espiritu Santuaren pozez onartu baitzenuten Jainkoaren mezua .
PRED:	You followed the word of our Lord , and you followed the word of our Lord , because I heard the word of the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	So you received the message with joy from the Holy Spirit in spite of the severe suffering it brought you . In this way , you imitated both us and the Lord .

ID:	5009
INPUT:	Bazen Efraimgo mendialdean Elkana zeritzan Ramako gizaseme bat , Tzufen ondorengoetakoa . Jerohamen semea zen , eta hau Elihurena , eta hau Tohurena , eta hau Tzufena . Elkana efratar leinukoa zen .
PRED:	In the hill country of Ephraim , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Jesse , the son of Jesse , the son of Zechariah , the son of Jozabad , the son of Jozabad , the son of Gershon .
GOLD:	There was a man named Elkanah who lived in Ramah in the region of Zuph in the hill country of Ephraim . He was the son of Jeroham , son of Elihu , son of Tohu , son of Zuph , of Ephraim .

ID:	5010
INPUT:	Amaitu dira labore-opariaketa isur-opariak Jaunaren etxean . Dolu dagite apaizek , Jaunaren zerbitzariek .
PRED:	The priests and their burnt offerings are in the house of the Lord , and the priests cried out to the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	For there is no grain or wineto offer at the Temple of the Lord.So the priests are in mourning.The ministers of the Lord are weeping .

ID:	5011
INPUT:	faraoia eta honen gudarostea Itsaso Gorrian amildu zituen , haren maitasuna betikoa baita .
PRED:	Pharaoh threw his army into the Red Sea , for his love endures forever .
GOLD:	but he hurled Pharaoh and his army into the Red Sea.His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	5012
INPUT:	Nik eman diot landa zabala bizitoki , lurralde gazia , egoitza izan dezan .
PRED:	If I live in my field , it will be a land to dwell in it .
GOLD:	I have placed it in the wilderness ; its home is the wasteland .

ID:	5013
INPUT:	Eta honela esan zuen : « Hara , zerua zabalik ikusten dut eta Gizonaren Semea zutik Jainkoaren eskuinaldean » .
PRED:	He said , “ Look , I see heaven opened heaven , and I see the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God . ”
GOLD:	And he told them , “ Look , I see the heavens opened and the Son of Man standing in the place of honor at God 's right hand ! ”

ID:	5014
INPUT:	Orduan , ikasleetako batzuk honela ari ziren beren artean : « Zer ote da esaten digun hau : “ Gutxi barru ez nauzue gehiago ikusiko , baina pixka bat geroago , berriro ikusiko nauzue ” eta “ Aitarengana noa ” ?
PRED:	Some of his disciples said to them , “ What do you say to us , ‘ A little while you do n't see me again , but you will see my Father , and you will see my Father ? '
GOLD:	Some of the disciples asked each other , “ What does he mean when he says , ‘ In a little while you wo n't see me , but then you will see me , ' and ‘ I am going to the Father ' ?

ID:	5015
INPUT:	Pedro , Santiago eta Joan eraman zituen berekin . Ikara eta larria sentitzen hasi zen ,
PRED:	Peter took Peter and John and John and John . He was afraid and began to be healed .
GOLD:	He took Peter , James , and John with him , and he became deeply troubled and distressed .

ID:	5016
INPUT:	Hala , lehertu egin da nire haserre-sumina , eta erre egin ditu Judako hiriak eta Jerusalemgo kaleak : hondamendi eta eremu bihurtu dira , eta halaxe daude orain .
PRED:	So my anger has become angry , and the cities of Judah and Jerusalem have become desolate , and the cities of Jerusalem , and the cities of Jerusalem have become desolate .
GOLD:	And so my fury boiled over and fell like fire on the towns of Judah and into the streets of Jerusalem , and they are still a desolate ruin today .

ID:	5017
INPUT:	Indar handia izango du eta izugarrizko hondamena egingo . Ongi aterako da bere egintza guztietan , jende ahaltsua eta herri santua bera ere suntsitu arte .
PRED:	He will be great and great destruction , and great destruction will be done in all his works , until he has destroyed his holy people and his holy people .
GOLD:	He will become very strong , but not by his own power . He will cause a shocking amount of destruction and succeed in everything he does . He will destroy powerful leaders and devastate the holy people .

ID:	5018
INPUT:	Huts eragiten diet aztien zantzuei , zentzugabe bihurtzen igarleak ; jakintsuak hankaz gora botatzeneta haien zientziazorakeria bilakarazten .
PRED:	And I speak unto the wise men that are wise , and they are wise in the sight of the wise men .
GOLD:	I expose the false prophets as liarsand make fools of fortune-tellers.I cause the wise to give bad advice , thus proving them to be fools .

ID:	5019
INPUT:	Zeren eta judu-elkartetik bota egingo baitzaituztete ; are gehiago , badator ordua , zuek hilko zaituztenak Jainkoari kultu ematen diola uste izango duena .
PRED:	And they shall be cast out of the synagogue , and they shall be cast away from the synagogue : and they that worship God shall serve him .
GOLD:	For you will be expelled from the synagogues , and the time is coming when those who kill you will think they are doing a holy service for God .

ID:	5020
INPUT:	Jakobek erantzun zion bere ama Rebekari : — Baina Esau iletsua da , eta ni azal leunekoa .
PRED:	Jacob said to her mother , “ The wise man is blind , and the righteous are wise . ”
GOLD:	“ But look , ” Jacob replied to Rebekah , “ my brother , Esau , is a hairy man , and my skin is smooth .

ID:	5021
INPUT:	Idatzia Danielek azaldu
PRED:	Daniel and Daniel
GOLD:	Daniel Explains the Writing

ID:	5022
INPUT:	Giza indarra baizik ez du horrek ; guk , ordea , Jauna , geure Jainkoa , dugu geurekin , laguntzeko eta gurekin borrokatzeko » . Judako errege Ezekiasen hitz hauek bizkortu egin zuten herria .
PRED:	But the power of man is not strong , but we , the Lord our God , is with us , to fight with us , and to fight with us , and to fight with us . And the people turned away from Hezekiah king of Judah .
GOLD:	He may have a great army , but they are merely men . We have the Lord our God to help us and to fight our battles for us ! ” Hezekiah 's words greatly encouraged the people .

ID:	5023
INPUT:	Egun osoan gudukatu zen Abimelek hiriaren kontra , hartu eta hango bizilagun guztiak hil zituen arte . Gero , hiria desegin eta gatzez estali zuen .
PRED:	And Abimelech fought against the city , and struck all the inhabitants of the city , until he had destroyed all the inhabitants of the city , and destroyed it .
GOLD:	The battle went on all day before Abimelech finally captured the city . He killed the people , leveled the city , and scattered salt all over the ground .

ID:	5024
INPUT:	Esan zidan Jaunak : « Ikusten al duzu , gizaseme ? Bada , ikusiko duzu oraindik hau baino higuingarritasun handiagorik » .
PRED:	The Lord said to me , “ Son of man , do you see ? You will see more abominations than these abominations . ”
GOLD:	“ Have you seen this ? ” he asked . “ But I will show you even more detestable sins than these ! ”

ID:	5025
INPUT:	Zenbatu zituen Saulek Bezek-en : hirurehun mila israeldar ziren eta hogeita hamar mila Judako seme .
PRED:	And Saul was the number of the sons of Israel : and the number of the sons of Judah were three hundred and fifty thousand and fifty thousand .
GOLD:	When Saul mobilized them at Bezek , he found that there were 300,000 men from Israel and 30,000 men from Judah .

ID:	5026
INPUT:	Oroitu zen Pedro , eta Jesusi esan zion : — Maisu , begira , zuk madarikatutako pikondoa dena ihartu da .
PRED:	And Peter remembered him , and said unto him , Master , thou art the one who is cursed , and he hath taken the fig tree .
GOLD:	Peter remembered what Jesus had said to the tree on the previous day and exclaimed , “ Look , Rabbi ! The fig tree you cursed has withered and died ! ”

ID:	5027
INPUT:	Salba nazazu lehoiaren ahotik , bufaloen adarretatik . Erantzun didazu !
PRED:	You answered me from the mouth of the lion , and you answered me .
GOLD:	I will proclaim your name to my brothers and sisters.I will praise you among your assembled people .

ID:	5028
INPUT:	Jonasek Niniven mezua aldarrikatu . Ninivetarren konbertsioa
PRED:	Joseph gave the message in the land of Canaan . He told the Good News in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	Jonah Goes to Nineveh

ID:	5029
INPUT:	Ez dute gogoeta egiten , ez dute zentzurik , ez ulermenik , esateko : « Egurraren erdia sutara bota dut , ogia eta okela txingarretan erre eta jan egin dut . Eta gainerakoarekin , jainko-irudi higuingarria egin ? Egur-puska baten aurrean ahuspeztu ? »
PRED:	They do n't understand , and do n't understand , and say , “ I have cast fire into the fire of the altar , and burn it with fire , and burn it with fire ? ” And they bowed down to other gods .
GOLD:	The person who made the idol never stops to reflect , “ Why , it 's just a block of wood ! I burned half of it for heatand used it to bake my bread and roast my meat.How can the rest of it be a god ? Should I bow down to worship a piece of wood ? ”

ID:	5030
INPUT:	Mikeasek erantzun : — Zeuk ikusiko duzu , gelaz gela gordeka joan beharko duzun egunean .
PRED:	Micaiah said to him , “ You will see it on the day when you do it . ”
GOLD:	And Micaiah replied , “ You will find out soon enough when you are trying to hide in some secret room ! ”

ID:	5031
INPUT:	Honela esan zion , bada , Seraiasi : « Babiloniara iristean , irakurri hitz horiek denen aurrean .
PRED:	So Zedekiah said to Zedekiah , “ When you came to Babylon , all these words are read in front of them .
GOLD:	He said to Seraiah , “ When you get to Babylon , read aloud everything on this scroll .

ID:	5032
INPUT:	Buruzapiekin eta sandaliekin jarraituko duzue , ez duzue dolu egingo , ezta negarrik ere , baizik eta zeuen erruengatik galduko zarete eta elkarren artean jardungo negar-zotinka .
PRED:	And thou shalt speak with the princes , and thou shalt not weep , but thou shalt not weep , but for thy iniquity , and for thy iniquity , and for thy iniquity , and for the multitude of the congregation .
GOLD:	Your heads will remain covered , and your sandals will not be taken off . You will not mourn or weep , but you will waste away because of your sins . You will groan among yourselves for all the evil you have done .

ID:	5033
INPUT:	Jendeak oihu dagi : « Geure bekatueksalatzen bagaituzte ere , ekin , Jauna , zeu zarena zarelako ! Asko dira gure errebeldiak , zure aurka egin dugu bekatu .
PRED:	The people cried out , “ If you forgive our sins , you are the Lord . You are our sins , because you have sinned against us .
GOLD:	The people say , “ Our wickedness has caught up with us , Lord , but help us for the sake of your own reputation.We have turned away from youand sinned against you again and again .

ID:	5034
INPUT:	Hark epaituko ditu nazioak , erabakiko herrialde askoren auziak . Ezpatak golde bihurtuko dituzteeta lantzak igitai . Ez da nazioriknazioren aurka altxatuko , ez dira gehiagogudurako prestatuko .
PRED:	He will judge the nations of the nations , and many nations of the nations will be destroyed by the sword . They will make their swords and their swords , and they will not rise up against the nations , nor will they prepare for battle .
GOLD:	The Lord will mediate between nationsand will settle international disputes.They will hammer their swords into plowsharesand their spears into pruning hooks.Nation will no longer fight against nation , nor train for war anymore .

ID:	5035
INPUT:	Hala ere , jende arrotz hark , bizi zen hiri guztietan , nork bere jainkoen irudiak egin eta samariarrek muinoetan eraikitako jauretxeetan ezarri zituen .
PRED:	But the people living in all the cities , and he built their gods in every city , and put them in the high places of the hills .
GOLD:	But these various groups of foreigners also continued to worship their own gods . In town after town where they lived , they placed their idols at the pagan shrines that the people of Samaria had built .

ID:	5036
INPUT:	Gezurrezkoa da xarma , hutsala edertasuna ; goresgarria , ordea , Jauna errespetatzen duen emakumea .
PRED:	There is a false woman whose name is beautiful , but a woman who gives praise to the Lord .
GOLD:	Charm is deceptive , and beauty does not last ; but a woman who fears the Lord will be greatly praised .

ID:	5037
INPUT:	Gaizki tratatu zuten , eta bera apaldu egin zen , ahorik zabaldu gabe ; hiltzera daramatenarkumeak bezala , moztaileen aurrean isilik dagoenardiak bezala , ez zuen ahorik zabaldu .
PRED:	And they did evil , and did not open his mouth , and spread out his mouth , as the woman that is in the sight of the dead , and did not open his mouth .
GOLD:	He was oppressed and treated harshly , yet he never said a word.He was led like a lamb to the slaughter.And as a sheep is silent before the shearers , he did not open his mouth .

ID:	5038
INPUT:	Gaiztakeria ez da oinarri sendoa inorentzat ; zintzoaren sustraia , ordea , iraunkorra .
PRED:	The foundation of the wicked will not be healed , but the root of the righteous will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Wickedness never brings stability , but the godly have deep roots .

ID:	5039
INPUT:	eta beteko dut zuen gurasoei zin egindakoa , alegia , esnea eta eztia darizkion lurraldea emango niela ” . Lurralde hori orain daukazuena da , hain zuzen » . Nik erantzun nion : « Bai , Jauna » .
PRED:	and I will give you the land that I swore to your fathers , and to give them to a land with milk and honey , and honey , and honey . And I said , “ Yes , I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	I said this so I could keep my promise to your ancestors to give you a land flowing with milk and honey — the land you live in today . ' ” Then I replied , “ Amen , Lord ! May it be so . ”

ID:	5040
INPUT:	kanta haren omenez , eman ohore hari gorespenez .
PRED:	Give thanks to him , praise him , and praise him .
GOLD:	Sing about the glory of his name ! Tell the world how glorious he is .

ID:	5041
INPUT:	sasi eta laharrak haziko diranire herriaren lurraldean ; dolu egin , bai , alaitasunez beterik zeudenetxeengatik , hiri festazaleagatik .
PRED:	And I will bring the stones in the land of my people , and weep for the house of my people , and for the joy of joy .
GOLD:	For your land will be overgrown with thorns and briers.Your joyful homes and happy towns will be gone .

ID:	5042
INPUT:	« Honela agintzen du Pertsiako errege Zirok : Lurreko erreinu guztiak eman dizkit Jaunak , zeruetako Jainkoak , eta Judako Jerusalemen berari tenplua eraikitzeko agindu dit .
PRED:	Thus says the Lord God of Persia : All the kingdoms of the earth have given me all the kingdoms of the earth , and he commanded me to build the temple of Judah .
GOLD:	“ This is what King Cyrus of Persia says : “ The Lord , the God of heaven , has given me all the kingdoms of the earth . He has appointed me to build him a Temple at Jerusalem , which is in Judah .

ID:	5043
INPUT:	Ez nahasi zuen inguruan gelditzen diren arrotzekin , ez aipatu ere egin horien jainkoen izenak , ez egin zinik beraien izenean , ez gurtu eta ez ahuspeztu beraien aurrean .
PRED:	He did not follow the gods of those who are left around him . He did not worship their gods . He did not worship their gods . He did not worship them . He did n't worship them .
GOLD:	Make sure you do not associate with the other people still remaining in the land . Do not even mention the names of their gods , much less swear by them or serve them or worship them .

ID:	5044
INPUT:	Ondoren , esan zion Xafan idazkariak erregeari : — Hilkias apaizak liburu hau eman dit . Eta Xafanek irakurri egin zuen liburua erregearen aitzinean .
PRED:	Then Shaphan said to the king , “ Hilkiah the priest has given me this book . ” And Shaphan read it in the book of the king 's book .
GOLD:	Shaphan also told the king , “ Hilkiah the priest has given me a scroll . ” So Shaphan read it to the king .

ID:	5045
INPUT:	Dolu-egunak amaitu zirenean , honela mintzatu zitzaien Jose faraoiaren jauregikoei : « Gogoko banauzue , esaiozue , arren , faraoiari :
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the days were come to pass , when the days of Pharaoh , he said unto them , If ye shall remember me , I will remember the king of Egypt :
GOLD:	When the period of mourning was over , Joseph approached Pharaoh 's advisers and said , “ Please do me this favor and speak to Pharaoh on my behalf .

ID:	5046
INPUT:	Hiriaren lau aldeetan ehun eta hogeita bost metro zabaleko hiri-lurrak izango dira .
PRED:	On the four corners of the city shall be a half of the cities of the city .
GOLD:	Open lands will surround the city for 150 yards in every direction .

ID:	5047
INPUT:	Zeren , egia ezagutu ondoren , nahita bekatu egiten jarraitzen badugu , ez dago gehiago bekatuen barkamenerako oparirik :
PRED:	For if we know the truth , we have sinned , and have sinned , we have no more than for sin .
GOLD:	Dear friends , if we deliberately continue sinning after we have received knowledge of the truth , there is no longer any sacrifice that will cover these sins .

ID:	5048
INPUT:	Jaunak Moisesen bidez aginduriko guztia egin zuten Aaronek eta beronen semeek .
PRED:	Aaron and his sons did all that the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	So Aaron and his sons did everything the Lord had commanded through Moses .

ID:	5049
INPUT:	Ondoren , Hiramek brontzea urtu eta « Itsaso » deitu zuen uraska biribil bat egin zuen ; ertz batetik bestera bost metroko diametroa zuen , bi metro eta erdiko sakona eta hamabost metroko ingurua .
PRED:	And he made the sea of bronze , and called the sea , five cubits long , and five cubits high , and five cubits high , and five cubits high .
GOLD:	Then Huram cast a great round basin , 15 feet across from rim to rim , called the Sea . It was 71/2 feet deep and about 45 feet in circumference .

ID:	5050
INPUT:	Eta gauzok idatzi , gure poza bete-betea izan dadin idazten ditugu .
PRED:	We wrote this letter that our joy may be written in the same way .
GOLD:	We are writing these things so that you may fully share our joy .

ID:	5051
INPUT:	Oi Jainko , hautsi horiei hortzak ahoan ! Jauna , puskatu lehoien haginak !
PRED:	O God , hear these words , O God , and break them in the mouth of the lion .
GOLD:	May they disappear like water into thirsty ground.Make their weapons useless in their hands .

ID:	5052
INPUT:	Jokatu argiaren partaide zaretenez
PRED:	The Good News of the light
GOLD:	Living in the Light

ID:	5053
INPUT:	Hobe eroapena adorea baino , nor bere buruaren jabe izatea hiriak menderatzea baino .
PRED:	It is better to be better than a man to possess his own own inheritance than for ever .
GOLD:	Better to be patient than powerful ; better to have self-control than to conquer a city .

ID:	5054
INPUT:	Purim Jaiaren sorrera
PRED:	( Mk )
GOLD:	The Festival of Purim

ID:	5055
INPUT:	Neuk jasoko dut eskua haien aurka , beren esklaboek dituzte larrutuko » . Orduan jakingo duzueJaun ahalguztidunak bidali nauela .
PRED:	I will lift up my hand against them , and they will be their slaves . Then you will know that the Lord of hosts has sent me .
GOLD:	Be silent before the Lord , all humanity , for he is springing into action from his holy dwelling . ”

ID:	5056
INPUT:	Nemuel , Datan eta Abiramen aita . Datan eta Abiram hauek Moises eta Aaronen aurka altxatutako elkarte-ordezkariak ziren ; Koreren taldearekin bat egin zuten , hau Jaunaren aurka altxatu zenean .
PRED:	And they stood up against the congregation of the congregation of the congregation of the congregation of the congregation of the congregation , and Azariah , and Abiram , and Aaron , and Aaron , and Aaron , and Aaron , and Aaron , and Aaron ; and they lifted up against the Lord .
GOLD:	and Eliab was the father of Nemuel , Dathan , and Abiram . This Dathan and Abiram are the same community leaders who conspired with Korah against Moses and Aaron , rebelling against the Lord .

ID:	5057
INPUT:	Erakustazu , Jauna , zeure bidea , eraman nazazu bide zuzenetik , etsaiak ugari baititut .
PRED:	Give me your way , O Lord , and give me your way , for I have many enemies .
GOLD:	Teach me how to live , O Lord.Lead me along the right path , for my enemies are waiting for me .

ID:	5058
INPUT:	Baina nor zara zu , gizagaixo hori , Jainkoari kontuak eskatzeko ? Buztinezko ontziak esango ote dio buztinlariari : « Zergatik egin nauzu honelakoa ? »
PRED:	“ But who are sick with you , who are sick ? Will you say to God , “ Why have you done this thing ? ”
GOLD:	No , do n't say that . Who are you , a mere human being , to argue with God ? Should the thing that was created say to the one who created it , “ Why have you made me like this ? ”

ID:	5059
INPUT:	oinak zepoan sartzen dizkit , nire ibilbide guztiak zelatatzen ” .
PRED:	I will go into my feet , and I will walk in my ways . ”
GOLD:	He puts my feet in the stocksand watches my every move . '

ID:	5060
INPUT:	Bortxakeriak zuhurra ereergel du bihurtzen , eta eskupekoak bihotza usteltzen .
PRED:	A wise man is wise , and the hands of a wise man is wise .
GOLD:	Extortion turns wise people into fools , and bribes corrupt the heart .

ID:	5061
INPUT:	Hala egingo dute apaiz nagusi sagaratuak izango diren Aaronen ondorengo guztiek ere . Betiko legea da . Jaunarentzat erreko dute oso-osorik oparia ;
PRED:	And they shall serve the priests , and all the sons of Aaron , and all the sons of Aaron , shall be holy unto the Lord for ever .
GOLD:	The priest on duty will take from the grain offering a handful of the choice flour moistened with olive oil , together with all the frankincense . He will burn this representative portion on the altar as a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	5062
INPUT:	Moabeko bizilagunok , utzi hiriak , joan harkaitzetara bizitzera , koba-zuloetan habia egiten dutenusoen antzera .
PRED:	And I left the inhabitants of Moab , and went into the rock of the rock ; and I made them as a rock in the rock .
GOLD:	“ You people of Moab , flee from your towns and live in the caves.Hide like doves that nestin the clefts of the rocks .

ID:	5063
INPUT:	David Jerusalemera itzularazi nahi
PRED:	David Complains to Jerusalem
GOLD:	David 's Return to Jerusalem

ID:	5064
INPUT:	Bestela , lehoiak bezala harrapatueta zati-zati egingo naute , eta ezin izango nau inork libratu .
PRED:	They will take me away as a lion , and I will be like a lion , and no one will rescue me .
GOLD:	O Lord my God , if I have done wrongor am guilty of injustice ,

ID:	5065
INPUT:	Ene maitearen ahotsa ! Horra , hor dator bera , mendiz mendi saltari , muinoz muino jauzika ;
PRED:	My beloved , behold , the voice of my beloved is coming upon the mountains , and the mountains of the hills .
GOLD:	Ah , I hear my lover coming ! He is leaping over the mountains , bounding over the hills .

ID:	5066
INPUT:	Agurtu Priska eta Akila , baita Onesifororen etxekoak ere .
PRED:	And thou shalt serve them , and Magdalene , and the house of the house of Timothy , the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	Give my greetings to Priscilla and Aquila and those living in the household of Onesiphorus .

ID:	5067
INPUT:	Harengan errotuak eta oinarrituak , iraun sendo sinesmenean , irakatsi zaizuen bezala , eta eman eskerrak etengabe .
PRED:	And when you have faith in him , you have faith and faith in him , just as you have taught , and have given thanks to him .
GOLD:	Let your roots grow down into him , and let your lives be built on him . Then your faith will grow strong in the truth you were taught , and you will overflow with thankfulness .

ID:	5068
INPUT:	Ezarri bertan itun-kutxa eta estali errezelaz .
PRED:	And thou shalt put the ark of the covenant of the covenant , and burn it on the altar .
GOLD:	Place the Ark of the Covenant inside , and install the inner curtain to enclose the Ark within the Most Holy Place .

ID:	5069
INPUT:	Ikertzaileen kontakizuna
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Tribe

ID:	5070
INPUT:	Bere egintzen misterioagatik zor zaio aintza Jainkoari , arazoak aztertu eta argitzeagatik erregeari .
PRED:	because of his works , the glory of God , and the wisdom of the wise , and the king 's kingdom .
GOLD:	It is God 's privilege to conceal thingsand the king 's privilege to discover them .

ID:	5071
INPUT:	( 10 , 12-16 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Babylon 's Great Punishment

ID:	5072
INPUT:	Egin dituzten gaiztakeriengatik gertatu zaie hori : iraindu egin naute , ez zuek , ez zuen gurasoek , ez beraiek ezagutzen ez zenituzten jainkoei intsentsua errez eta kultua emanez .
PRED:	For their wickedness has been done for their wickedness , and they have not known me , neither have ye known their fathers , nor have ye known their gods , nor have ye known them to other gods .
GOLD:	They provoked my anger with all their wickedness . They burned incense and worshiped other gods — gods that neither they nor you nor any of your ancestors had ever even known .

ID:	5073
INPUT:	Gaiztoen hitzak heriotzako tranpa dira ; zintzoenak , berriz , salbameneko bide .
PRED:	The words of the wicked shall be put to death ; but the righteous shall be saved .
GOLD:	The words of the wicked are like a murderous ambush , but the words of the godly save lives .

ID:	5074
INPUT:	Ekialdeko jakintsu batzuek Jesus gurtu
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Visitors from the East

ID:	5075
INPUT:	Jainkoak bere eskuinaldera altxatu du , buru eta salbatzaile eginez , Israeli bihozberritzea eta bekatuen barkamena emateko .
PRED:	And God turned his right hand toward his right hand , and saved Israel , to make atonement for sin .
GOLD:	Then God put him in the place of honor at his right hand as Prince and Savior . He did this so the people of Israel would repent of their sins and be forgiven .

ID:	5076
INPUT:	ez baitira Jainkoaren aurrean zuzen legea entzun bakarrik egiten dutenak , bete ere egiten dutenak baizik .
PRED:	For they do not hear the law of God , but those who hear the law of God .
GOLD:	For merely listening to the law does n't make us right with God . It is obeying the law that makes us right in his sight .

ID:	5077
INPUT:	Bere isatsez zeruko izarren herena herrestan hartu eta lurrera jaurti zuen . Herensugea , haurra izateko zegoen emakumearen aitzinean gelditu zen , jaio bezain laster semea irensteko .
PRED:	And he took him in the midst of the heavens , and cast him into the earth , and cast him into the earth : and the king stood in the midst of the woman , as the child of a child was born .
GOLD:	His tail swept away one-third of the stars in the sky , and he threw them to the earth . He stood in front of the woman as she was about to give birth , ready to devour her baby as soon as it was born .

ID:	5078
INPUT:	Davidek Ximeiri barkatu
PRED:	David Complains to Saul
GOLD:	David 's Mercy to Shimei

ID:	5079
INPUT:	Joab eta beronekin ziren mutil guztiak heldu zirenean , honela esan zioten batzuek Joabi : « Ner-en seme Abner etorri zaio erregeari eta , honek agur eginik , bakean joan da hura » .
PRED:	And when Joab and his men came to him , some of them said , Abner the son of Zeruiah came to the king of Babylon , and he is sent to the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	When Joab arrived , he was told that Abner had just been there visiting the king and had been sent away in safety .

ID:	5080
INPUT:	Anaiek bekaitzez begiratzen zioten ; aitak , ordea , gauza hauek sarritan hausnartzen zituen .
PRED:	His brothers looked at him with his eyes , but his father did these things in these things .
GOLD:	But while his brothers were jealous of Joseph , his father wondered what the dreams meant .

ID:	5081
INPUT:	Lotsaz eta laidoz beterik , bai , laidoz estalirikdoaz idologileak .
PRED:	and with shame , and with shame , and with wine , and with wine , and with wine , and with wine .
GOLD:	All craftsmen who make idols will be humiliated.They will all be disgraced together .

ID:	5082
INPUT:	zuek bildu gabeko ondasun-mota guztiz beteriko etxeak , zuek zulatu gabeko putzuak , zuek landatu gabeko mahasti eta olibadiak . Asetzeraino jan ahal izango duzue .
PRED:	You shall gather the houses of the field , and your houses , and your houses , and your fields , and your fields , and your fields , and you shall eat it .
GOLD:	The houses will be richly stocked with goods you did not produce . You will draw water from cisterns you did not dig , and you will eat from vineyards and olive trees you did not plant . When you have eaten your fill in this land ,

ID:	5083
INPUT:	Ikus nire atsekabea eta pena , barka nire bekatu guztiak .
PRED:	I will see my affliction , and I will see all my sins .
GOLD:	Feel my pain and see my trouble.Forgive all my sins .

ID:	5084
INPUT:	Askatu gizagaixo eta behartsuak , libratu gaizkileen eskutik ! »
PRED:	Take away from the poor and needy , and deliver them out of the hand of the wicked .
GOLD:	Rescue the poor and helpless ; deliver them from the grasp of evil people .

ID:	5085
INPUT:	Zabulonen leinukoek ezin izan zituzten bota Ki<unk> eta Naha<unk> hirietako bizilagunak . Kanaandarrak zabulondarren artean bizi izan ziren , baina lanera behartuak .
PRED:	The sons of Zebulun could not drive out the men of Zebulun , and the men of Shechem , and the inhabitants of the land of Canaan , but they were among them .
GOLD:	The tribe of Zebulun failed to drive out the residents of Kitron and Nahalol , so the Canaanites continued to live among them . But the Canaanites were forced to work as slaves for the people of Zebulun .

ID:	5086
INPUT:	Ondoren , Etzion-Geber eta Elatera joan zen Salomon . Hiri hauek Itsaso Gorriaren ertzean daude , Edom lurraldean .
PRED:	And he went and went out to Hamath ; and they are in the midst of the Red Sea , in the wilderness of Edom .
GOLD:	Later Solomon went to Ezion-geber and Elath , ports along the shore of the Red Sea in the land of Edom .

ID:	5087
INPUT:	Jehu hiriko atetik sartzean , Jezabelek esan zuen : — Ongi al zara , Zimri zeure jaunaren hiltzaile hori ?
PRED:	And when he came out of the city , he said unto him , Is it well , that thou art the head of thy lord the dead ?
GOLD:	When Jehu entered the gate of the palace , she shouted at him , “ Have you come in peace , you murderer ? You 're just like Zimri , who murdered his master ! ”

ID:	5088
INPUT:	Mendiak landatuak izan aurretik , muinoak baino lehen izan nintzen sortua ;
PRED:	Before the mountains were planted before the mountains , I was born before the hills .
GOLD:	Before the mountains were formed , before the hills , I was born —

ID:	5089
INPUT:	Esterrek ihardetsi zion : — Erregeak ongi baderitzo , utz diezaiela Susako juduei bihar ere gaurko aginduaren arabera egiten , eta zintzilika ditzatela urkabean Hamanen hamar semeen gorpuak .
PRED:	Esther said to her , “ If you do what the king commanded to do to the Jews and to the Jews that the king commanded to do this day , so that ten years will be put to death . ”
GOLD:	Esther responded , “ If it please the king , give the Jews in Susa permission to do again tomorrow as they have done today , and let the bodies of Haman 's ten sons be impaled on a pole . ”

ID:	5090
INPUT:	Ez al dakizue harresi gainetik jaurtika egiten dutela ? Ez al zarete oroitzen nola hil zuen emakume batek Te<unk> hirian Jerubexeten seme Abimelek , harresi gainetik errotarri bat jaurtiz ? Zergatik hurbildu zarete harresiraino ? ” Orduan , zuk erantzun : “ Zure zerbitzari Urias hitita ere hila da ” » .
PRED:	Do you not know that they are cast out of the wall ? Do you not remember how the woman of Shallum the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Ahab , whom have you been thrown down from the midst of the city ? ”
GOLD:	Was n't Abimelech son of Gideon killed at Thebez by a woman who threw a millstone down on him from the wall ? Why would you get so close to the wall ? ' Then tell him , ‘ Uriah the Hittite was killed , too . ' ”

ID:	5091
INPUT:	Eta hori , nik ere badudalarik giza mailako gauzetan uste ona jartzeko arrazoia . Norbaitek gauza horietan uste ona jar dezakeela pentsatzen badu , nik gehiago :
PRED:	But if I do this , I do not want to do what is right . But if any man say , “ If anyone does this , ”
GOLD:	though I could have confidence in my own effort if anyone could . Indeed , if others have reason for confidence in their own efforts , I have even more !

ID:	5092
INPUT:	Egin zuen , beraz , Samuelek Jaunak esandakoa , eta Belenera joan zen . Hiri hartako zaharrak bidera irten zitzaizkion arduratsu , eta galdetu zioten : — Bake onean al zatoz ?
PRED:	So Samuel did what the Lord had said to him , and went to Bethel . And the elders of the city came out and asked him , “ Have you come ? ”
GOLD:	So Samuel did as the Lord instructed . When he arrived at Bethlehem , the elders of the town came trembling to meet him . “ What 's wrong ? ” they asked . “ Do you come in peace ? ”

ID:	5093
INPUT:	Orroka ari den lehoia eta hartz gosetia bezalakoagobernari gaiztoa herri xehearentzat .
PRED:	A lion is like a lion and a lion , and a lion 's people are like a lion .
GOLD:	A wicked ruler is as dangerous to the pooras a roaring lion or an attacking bear .

ID:	5094
INPUT:	Moisesek lehengoak bezalako bi harlauza ebaki zituen . Eta biharamunean , goizean goiz , harlauza biak harturik , Sinai mendira igo zen , Jaunak agindu bezala .
PRED:	And Moses set up two stone stone , as Moses had commanded : and the next morning he took up the two stone , and the two stone stone , as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	So Moses chiseled out two tablets of stone like the first ones . Early in the morning he climbed Mount Sinai as the Lord had commanded him , and he carried the two stone tablets in his hands .

ID:	5095
INPUT:	Herri honetako gorpuak hegazti harraparien eta basapiztien janari izango dira , eta haiek uxatzeko inor ez da izango .
PRED:	The animals of this people will eat the animals of the animals and the birds of the earth , and there will be no one to drink .
GOLD:	The bodies of my people will be food for the vultures and wild animals , and no one will be left to scare them away .

ID:	5096
INPUT:	Altxatzen badut , berriz , lehoiak bezala harrapatuko nauzu , zure balentriak nire kontra berreginez ,
PRED:	But if I rise up , I will be taken as a lion , as a lion , and your father shall be caught against me .
GOLD:	And if I hold my head high , you hunt me like a lionand display your awesome power against me .

ID:	5097
INPUT:	Egurraren erdiarekin sua egiten du , eta gainean okela erre eta asetzeraino jaten . Ondoren , su ondoan berotzen da eta esaten : « Ederki ! Bero-bero nago ! A zer lamada ! »
PRED:	He makes a fire with the altar , and burn it on the fire , and burn it on the fire , and said , “ It is good for me . ”
GOLD:	He burns part of the tree to roast his meatand to keep himself warm.He says , “ Ah , that fire feels good . ”

ID:	5098
INPUT:	« Madarikatua errugabea hiltzeagatik eskupekoa onartzen duena ! » Eta herri osoak erantzungo du : « Amen » .
PRED:	“ Blessed is the man who has been put to death for sin , ” and all the people shall answer , “ Amen . ”
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who accepts payment to kill an innocent person . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	5099
INPUT:	Efraimgo mendialdean gorderik zeuden israeldar guztiak ere , filistearrak ihesi zihoazela ohartzean , beretarrengana bildu ziren , filistearren ondoren erasoka joateko .
PRED:	When all the Israelites saw that the Philistines fled from the hill country of Ephraim , they fled to the Philistines .
GOLD:	Likewise , the men of Israel who were hiding in the hill country of Ephraim joined the chase when they saw the Philistines running away .

ID:	5100
INPUT:	Deitu zien honek Kareahen seme Johanani , gudalburuei eta beraiekin zen jende guztiari , txiki nahiz handiei ,
PRED:	Then Gideon called the son of Jonathan , the captains of the army , and all the people with him , and great and great .
GOLD:	So he called for Johanan son of Kareah and the other military leaders , and for all the people , from the least to the greatest .

ID:	5101
INPUT:	Jesus mendira igo eta han eseri zen bere ikasleekin .
PRED:	Jesus went up into the mountain and sat down with his disciples .
GOLD:	Then Jesus climbed a hill and sat down with his disciples around him .

ID:	5102
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Daviden salmoa . Kanta .
PRED:	O God , you are my God ; you are my God , and I will praise you .
GOLD:	Rise up , O God , and scatter your enemies.Let those who hate God run for their lives .

ID:	5103
INPUT:	Honek , lagun haien sinesmena ikusirik , esan zuen : — Gizona , barkatuak dituzu bekatuak .
PRED:	When he saw their faith , he said , “ You are forgiven . ”
GOLD:	Seeing their faith , Jesus said to the man , “ Young man , your sins are forgiven . ”

ID:	5104
INPUT:	« Kedemot basamortutik mezulariak bidali nizkion Hexbongo Sihon erregeari bakezko mezu honekin :
PRED:	I sent messengers from the wilderness to Sihon king of Heshbon , saying ,
GOLD:	Moses continued , “ From the wilderness of Kedemoth I sent ambassadors to King Sihon of Heshbon with this proposal of peace :

ID:	5105
INPUT:	Kutxa abiatzerakoan , Moisesek zioen : « Jaiki , Jauna , eta sakabana daitezela zure etsaiak , bihoaz ihesi gorroto dizutenak ! »
PRED:	And it came to pass , when Moses went out , Moses said unto them , Arise , O Lord , and say unto them that hate thy enemies , that they may flee .
GOLD:	And whenever the Ark set out , Moses would shout , “ Arise , O Lord , and let your enemies be scattered ! Let them flee before you ! ”

ID:	5106
INPUT:	Atzerrietan putzuak egin dituteta bertako ura edan ; oinpean zapalduz lehortu egin ditutEgiptoko ubide guztiak ” .
PRED:	I brought them into the midst of the earth , and I caused them to dwell in the land of Egypt , and I delivered them out of the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	I have dug wells in many foreign landsand refreshed myself with their water.With the sole of my footI stopped up all the rivers of Egypt ! '

ID:	5107
INPUT:	Orduan , esan zien ikasleei : — Non da zuen sinesmena ? Haiek , beldurrez eta harriturik , elkarri ziotsaten : « Nor ote dugu hau , haizeari eta urari ere agindu eta esana egiten baitiote ? »
PRED:	And he said unto his disciples , Where is he ? And they were afraid , and were afraid , and said unto one another , Who is this man , and hath commanded the wind , saying , Who is this ?
GOLD:	Then he asked them , “ Where is your faith ? ” The disciples were terrified and amazed . “ Who is this man ? ” they asked each other . “ When he gives a command , even the wind and waves obey him ! ”

ID:	5108
INPUT:	edertu egingo zaituzte , koroak burua eta idunekoak lepoa bezala .
PRED:	You will be beautiful , and your head will be beautiful , just as the hair of your head .
GOLD:	What you learn from them will crown you with graceand be a chain of honor around your neck .

ID:	5109
INPUT:	Igaro zirenean , esan zion Eliasek Eliseori : — Esadazu zer nahi duzun nik zure alde egitea , Jaunak zure ondotik eraman nazan baino lehen . Eliseok erantzun : — Izan nadila , otoi , zure profeta-espirituaren oinordeko .
PRED:	When Elijah came to Elisha , Elisha said to him , “ Tell me what you want to do for me , for the Lord has brought you out of your hand before you , ” Elisha answered , “ I will give you the Spirit of your prophets . ”
GOLD:	When they came to the other side , Elijah said to Elisha , “ Tell me what I can do for you before I am taken away . ” And Elisha replied , “ Please let me inherit a double share of your spirit and become your successor . ”

ID:	5110
INPUT:	« Ez naiz aurrerantzean munduan egongo ; hauek , ordea , bai , munduan jarraituko dute . Ni zuregana noa . Aita santu horrek , zaindu zeure ahalmenaz zuk eman dizkidazunok , bat izan daitezen gu geu bat garen bezala .
PRED:	“ I will not stand before the world , but they will walk in the world , but they will follow you , but the Father has given you power , so that we may be just as you have given me .
GOLD:	Now I am departing from the world ; they are staying in this world , but I am coming to you . Holy Father , you have given me your name ; now protect them by the power of your name so that they will be united just as we are .

ID:	5111
INPUT:	Kristoren zerbitzariak direla ? Ni gehiago , nahiz zorakeria izan hori esatea . Haiek baino neke gehiago jasan dut , kartzela gehiago , zigorradak zer esanik ez ; hilzorian ere egona naiz hamaika aldiz .
PRED:	For I am the servants of Christ , and I am more important than all these things . I say more more than they say , I am not dead , but I am not dead .
GOLD:	Are they servants of Christ ? I know I sound like a madman , but I have served him far more ! I have worked harder , been put in prison more often , been whipped times without number , and faced death again and again .

ID:	5112
INPUT:	Efraimen leinuko senitarteak : Xutelahengandik xute<unk> tarrak , Bekerrengandik bekertarrak , Tahanengandik tahandarrak ,
PRED:	The tribe of Ephraim : the family of Ephraim , the family of the family of the family of the family of the family of the family of Ephraim , the family of the family of the family of the family of Ephraim , the family of the family of the family of the family of Ephraim .
GOLD:	These were the clans descended from the sons of Ephraim : The Shuthelahite clan , named after their ancestor Shuthelah.The Bekerite clan , named after their ancestor Beker.The Tahanite clan , named after their ancestor Tahan .

ID:	5113
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Bata bestearen aurkabultzatuko ditut egiptoarrak , eta elkarren aurkaborrokatuko dira : senidea senideareneta adiskidea adiskidearen aurka , hiria hiriareneta erresuma erresumaren aurka .
PRED:	Thus says the Lord : “ I will scatter the Egyptians , and the Egyptians shall fight against another , and they shall fight against his brother and his brother , and his friends , and his friends , and his sisters , and his city against the fire .
GOLD:	“ I will make Egyptian fight against Egyptian — brother against brother , neighbor against neighbor , city against city , province against province .

ID:	5114
INPUT:	Aldi txarren ondoren , lasai biziarazten duzu , gaiztoentzat hilobia zulatzen duten bitartean .
PRED:	When you live , you will live , and you will live in the grave of the wicked .
GOLD:	You give them relief from troubled timesuntil a pit is dug to capture the wicked .

ID:	5115
INPUT:	berrogeita zortzi hiri , beraz , guztira , bakoitza bere herri-lurrekin .
PRED:	And all the cities of the earth were thirty and thirty years .
GOLD:	In all , forty-eight towns with the surrounding pastureland will be given to the Levites .

ID:	5116
INPUT:	« Gaden eta Rubenen ondorengoei , Jaunaren agindura borrokatzeko armaturik zuekin batera Jordan ibaia igarotzen badute , lurraldea menderatu ondoren , Galaad eskualdea emango diezue ondare .
PRED:	And if the children of Reuben and the children of Reuben and the children of Reuben , go up to fight with you , and go over to the Jordan , then you shall possess the land of Gilead .
GOLD:	He said , “ The men of Gad and Reuben who are armed for battle must cross the Jordan with you to fight for the Lord . If they do , give them the land of Gilead as their property when the land is conquered .

ID:	5117
INPUT:	Beste anaia bat ere bidaltzen dizuet berarekin , berri onaren zerbitzuan egin duen lanarengatik eliz elkarte guztiek goraipatzen dutena .
PRED:	And I send another brother to you , and I send him to you , because all the churches in the service of the gospel .
GOLD:	We are also sending another brother with Titus . All the churches praise him as a preacher of the Good News .

ID:	5118
INPUT:	Bidea zabalagotu didazueta nire oinak ez dira oztopatu .
PRED:	You have turned away my feet , and I have not turned away from my feet .
GOLD:	You have made a wide path for my feetto keep them from slipping .

ID:	5119
INPUT:	Haizea bezala , batera nahiz bestera , aurrera doaz . Indarra dute beren jainko » .
PRED:	They are like a wind , or a wind ; they are strong in front of them .
GOLD:	They sweep past like the windand are gone.But they are deeply guilty , for their own strength is their god . ”

ID:	5120
INPUT:	Ondoren , ikuskari bat izan nuen . Irekitako ate bat ikusi nuen zeruan , eta lehen mintzatua zitzaidan turuta-hotsa bezalako ahotsak esan zuen : « Igo hona , eta ondoren gertatzekoak direnak erakutsiko dizkizut » .
PRED:	And I saw a vision , and I saw a voice in heaven , and I saw a voice in heaven , as the voice of a voice of a voice , saying , Come , and I will show thee these things .
GOLD:	Then as I looked , I saw a door standing open in heaven , and the same voice I had heard before spoke to me like a trumpet blast . The voice said , “ Come up here , and I will show you what must happen after this . ”

ID:	5121
INPUT:	Moisesek zenbait gizon bidali zituen Jazer hiria ikertzera , eta israeldarrek Jazer eta inguruko hiriak eskuratu zituzten , beraietako amortarrak jaurtiz .
PRED:	And Moses sent some men to go out to the city , and the children of Israel saw what they had done , and the cities that were round about them .
GOLD:	After Moses sent men to explore the Jazer area , they captured all the towns in the region and drove out the Amorites who lived there .

ID:	5122
INPUT:	Jauna , ene Jainkoa , zu nire indar salbatzailea , guduan burua babesten didazuna .
PRED:	Lord my God , you are my strength , and you are my strength .
GOLD:	Lord , do not let evil people have their way.Do not let their evil schemes succeed , or they will become proud.Interlude

ID:	5123
INPUT:	Rubenen ondorengoek Hexbon , Elale , Kiriataim , Nebo , Baal-Meon eta Sibma berreraiki zituzten , eta berreraikitako hiriei izena aldatu zieten .
PRED:	And the sons of Reuben came to the sons of Reuben , and Heshbon , and Heshbon , and the king of Heshbon , and the cities of the children of Reuben , and the cities of the children of Reuben , and the cities of the children of Reuben , and the cities of the children of Reuben , and the cities of the children of Gad built .
GOLD:	The descendants of Reuben built the towns of Heshbon , Elealeh , Kiriathaim ,

ID:	5124
INPUT:	Mirariak eta egintza harrigarriakegin zenituen faraoiaren kontra , honen zerbitzarieta Egiptoko herriaren kontra ; bazenekien , bai , harrokeriaz jokatu zute<unk> raeldarrekin . Horrela zeureganatu zenuengaurdaino duzun izen ospetsua .
PRED:	You did miracles and wonders in Pharaoh 's presence and wonders against the people of Egypt , so that you might be great in the sight of the king of Egypt .
GOLD:	You displayed miraculous signs and wonders against Pharaoh , his officials , and all his people , for you knew how arrogantly they were treating our ancestors . You have a glorious reputation that has never been forgotten .

ID:	5125
INPUT:	Neftali , Efraim eta Manasesena , Judaren lurralde guztia Mediterraneo itsasoraino ,
PRED:	Naphtali , Manasseh , Manasseh , Manasseh , and Manasseh , and all the land of Judah , to the sea .
GOLD:	all the land of Naphtali ; the land of Ephraim and Manasseh ; all the land of Judah , extending to the Mediterranean Sea ;

ID:	5126
INPUT:	Hori ikustean , harritu egingo dira zintzoaketa barre egingo diote , esanez :
PRED:	When the righteous see this , they will be amazed , and they will say ,
GOLD:	But I am like an olive tree , thriving in the house of God.I will always trust in God 's unfailing love .

ID:	5127
INPUT:	Lehen-astakumea arkume edo antxumearekin trukatuko duzue ; trukatzen ez baduzue , hil egingo duzue , lepoa hautsiz . Zuen lehen-semeak oro berreskuratu egingo dituzue , ordezko eskaintza eginez . Ez da inor nire aurrera esku-hutsik agertuko .
PRED:	You shall make a young goat for a young goat , a young goat , or a young goat , and you shall not kill it , but you shall bring it to me , but you shall not be sold to me .
GOLD:	A firstborn donkey may be bought back from the Lord by presenting a lamb or young goat in its place . But if you do not buy it back , you must break its neck . However , you must buy back every firstborn son . “ No one may appear before me without an offering .

ID:	5128
INPUT:	Haragia egosi deneko ontzia buztinezkoa bada , hautsi egingo da ; brontzezkoa bada , berriz , gogor igurtzi eta uretan garbituko .
PRED:	But if any of the flesh is broken in pieces , it shall be broken in pieces ; but if it is bronze , it shall be clean , and he shall wash it with water .
GOLD:	It must be carefully mixed with olive oil and cooked on a griddle . Then slice this grain offering and present it as a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	5129
INPUT:	Gu , berriz , Pazko-jaien ondoren atera ginen itsasoz Filipotik , eta bost egunen buruan bildu ginen haiekin Troaden , eta astebete egin genuen bertan .
PRED:	But we went out of the Passover , and came out of the sea , and with them five days we gathered together with them , and there were many .
GOLD:	After the Passover ended , we boarded a ship at Philippi in Macedonia and five days later joined them in Troas , where we stayed a week .

ID:	5130
INPUT:	Aldi hartan , Adoni-Tzedek zeritzan Jerusalemgo erregeak jakin zuen Josuek Ai hiria hartu eta erabat suntsitu zuela , Ai hiriari eta bertako erregeari , lehen Jerikori eta bertako erregeari egindakoa bera eginez . Jakin zuen , orobat , Gabaongo bizilagunek bake-hitzarmena egin zutela israeldarrekin eta beraiekin elkartu zirela .
PRED:	And it came to pass at that time , that the king of Jerusalem heard that Joshua had taken it , and destroyed it , and destroyed it , and destroyed it , and destroyed it , and all the cities of the kings of Israel , and made a covenant with him , and all the people of Israel , and all the people of Israel with him .
GOLD:	Adoni-zedek , king of Jerusalem , heard that Joshua had captured and completely destroyed Ai and killed its king , just as he had destroyed the town of Jericho and killed its king . He also learned that the Gibeonites had made peace with Israel and were now their allies .

ID:	5131
INPUT:	Jaunak agindu zion Jeremiasi : « Zoaz eta erosi buztinezko pitxer bat . Eraman zeurekin herri-agintari eta apaiz-kontseiluko batzuk .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Jeremiah , “ Go and take some of these vessels of clay , and some of the elders of the people , and some of the priests .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord said to me : “ Go and buy a clay jar . Then ask some of the leaders of the people and of the priests to follow you .

ID:	5132
INPUT:	Baina gudari batek gezia itsu-itsuan jaurti eta Israelgo erregea zauritu zuen bular-oskolaren juntura artetik . Orduan , erregeak esan zion gurdi-gidariari : — Itzuli eta atera nazazu guda-zelaitik . Zauritu egin naute .
PRED:	But one of the army fell into a blind man , and struck the king of Israel from the border of the chariot of the chariots , and said to the king of Israel , “ Go and see me . ” And the king said to him , “ I have been put to death . ”
GOLD:	An Aramean soldier , however , randomly shot an arrow at the Israelite troops and hit the king of Israel between the joints of his armor . “ Turn the horses and get me out of here ! ” Ahab groaned to the driver of the chariot . “ I 'm badly wounded ! ”

ID:	5133
INPUT:	Nork aurpegi eman haren etorrera-egunari ? Nork zutik iraun hura agertzean ? Metala birfintzeko sua bezala , arropa garbitzeko lixiba bezala izango da .
PRED:	Who has put his face on his face ? Who is it that he may stand before you ? Who shall be like a fire , as a olive tree of water .
GOLD:	“ But who will be able to endure it when he comes ? Who will be able to stand and face him when he appears ? For he will be like a blazing fire that refines metal , or like a strong soap that bleaches clothes .

ID:	5134
INPUT:	Nik , Jaunarengatik preso nagoen honek , hartu duzuen deiari dagokionez bizi zaiteztela eskatzen dizuet .
PRED:	I beg you to live in the name of the Lord , so that you may live in the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	Therefore I , a prisoner for serving the Lord , beg you to lead a life worthy of your calling , for you have been called by God .

ID:	5135
INPUT:	« Gora Jauna , bedeinkatua ene harkaitza ! Goretsia Jainkoa , salbatzen nauen haitza !
PRED:	“ Praise the Lord , my rock , my God , and I will praise them .
GOLD:	“ The Lord lives ! Praise to my Rock ! May God , the Rock of my salvation , be exalted !

ID:	5136
INPUT:	Davidek bizia barkatu Sauli
PRED:	David Complains to Saul
GOLD:	David Spares Saul 's Life

ID:	5137
INPUT:	Israelgo erregeak erantzun zion Josafati . — Bai , bada beste gizon bat : Mikeas , Imlaren semea . Galdegin diezaiokegu Jaunari horren bidez ; baina nik gorroto dut , gauza txarrak bakarrik iragartzen baitizkit , onak iragarri beharrean . Josafatek esan zion : — Ez zaitez horrela mintza , errege jauna .
PRED:	And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat , There is another man , and another man , and another man : for I hate the Lord by the hand of the Lord , and I hate him ; but he said unto him , Go not to my lord the king .
GOLD:	The king of Israel replied to Jehoshaphat , “ There is one more man who could consult the Lord for us , but I hate him . He never prophesies anything but trouble for me ! His name is Micaiah son of Imlah . ” Jehoshaphat replied , “ That 's not the way a king should talk ! Let 's hear what he has to say . ”

ID:	5138
INPUT:	Bata barkamen-oparitzat eta bestea erre-oparitzat eskainiko ditu apaizak , eta haren alde barkamen-ohikunea egingo du , gorpua ukitzean eginiko hobenagatik . Egun horretan berriro sagaratuko dio nazireuak bere burua Jaunari .
PRED:	And the priest shall offer the burnt offering and the other as a sin offering , and the priest shall make atonement for him for his sin , and he shall make atonement for him on the day of his flesh .
GOLD:	The priest will offer one of the birds for a sin offering and the other for a burnt offering . In this way , he will purify them from the guilt they incurred through contact with the dead body . Then they must reaffirm their commitment and let their hair begin to grow again .

ID:	5139
INPUT:	Emazte jatorra senarraren koroa , emazte lotsagabea minbiziaren parekoa .
PRED:	The wife of her husband 's wife came to her husband 's wife , and she was ashamed .
GOLD:	A worthy wife is a crown for her husband , but a disgraceful woman is like cancer in his bones .

ID:	5140
INPUT:	Zentzugabearen hitzek liskarra sortzen , beraren mintzoak kolpeak erakartzen .
PRED:	The mouth of the mouth of the mouth of the mouth of the mouth of the mouth of the fool is a fool .
GOLD:	Fools ' words get them into constant quarrels ; they are asking for a beating .

ID:	5141
INPUT:	Zuregatik jasan ditut irainak , zuregatik estali dit lotsak aurpegia .
PRED:	For I have said , “ Because of your sake , I have turned my face to your face . ”
GOLD:	Even my own brothers pretend they do n't know me ; they treat me like a stranger .

ID:	5142
INPUT:	« Jerusalemgo hiriak hamabi ate izango ditu , eta bakoitzak Israelgo leinu baten izena izango du . Iparraldeko harresiak , bi kilometro eta laurden luze , hiru ate izango ditu : Ruben , Juda eta Lebirenak .
PRED:	“ The cities of Jerusalem will be twelve cubits , and the city of Israel will be twelve cubits long , and the walls of the north will be twelve cubits long and twenty cubits wide .
GOLD:	“ These will be the exits to the city : On the north wall , which is 11/2 miles long ,

ID:	5143
INPUT:	Etorriko zaie , bai , senar berria kenduko dieten eguna ; orduan , egun hartan , egingo dute barau .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in that day , when the husband shall take away the wife from them , and they shall fast .
GOLD:	But someday the groom will be taken away from them , and then they will fast .

ID:	5144
INPUT:	atxilotu eta ekartzeko aginduko dute beraren hiriko arduradunek eta mendeku-eskubidea duenaren esku utziko , hil dezan .
PRED:	And they shall take him and bring him into the hand of the elders of his city , and the elders of his city shall be put to death .
GOLD:	In that case , the elders of the murderer 's hometown must send agents to the city of refuge to bring him back and hand him over to the dead person 's avenger to be put to death .

ID:	5145
INPUT:	Isaiasek Jesusi buruz esan zuen hau , ikusia baitzuen beraren Jainko-aintza .
PRED:	And he told him about this , for he saw the glory of their God .
GOLD:	Isaiah was referring to Jesus when he said this , because he saw the future and spoke of the Messiah 's glory .

ID:	5146
INPUT:	Horra ! Gizakiak ezin du bere burua salbatu , ezta Jainkoari bere biziaren erospen-saria ordaindu ere .
PRED:	For this man is not able to save himself , neither shall he save himself , nor shall he pay his life for his life .
GOLD:	Redemption does not come so easily , for no one can ever pay enough

ID:	5147
INPUT:	Horregatik ziotson Abrahamek Jainkoari : — Ai , Ismaeli bederen bizirik eutsiko bazenio !
PRED:	So Abraham said to God , “ Woe to the people of Israel , if you will live in their way . ”
GOLD:	So Abraham said to God , “ May Ishmael live under your special blessing ! ”

ID:	5148
INPUT:	Jaunak zabaltzen itsuen begiak , Jaunak altxatzen lur jota daudenak . Jaunak maitatzen zintzoak ,
PRED:	The eyes of the blind men , and the Lord shall rise up , and the righteous shall perish .
GOLD:	The Lord opens the eyes of the blind.The Lord lifts up those who are weighed down.The Lord loves the godly .

ID:	5149
INPUT:	Bitartean , aukerako hamar mila gudari , Israel osokoak , Gibearen aurrez aurre jarri ziren . Gudua latza izan zen eta benjamindarrak ez ziren ohartu gainera zetorkien hondamenaz .
PRED:	And all Israel had chosen ten thousand thousand men , and all Israel before Gibeah , and the men of Benjamin had not come to Gibeah . And the men of Benjamin had not come upon them .
GOLD:	There were 10,000 elite Israelite troops who advanced against Gibeah . The fighting was so heavy that Benjamin did n't realize the impending disaster .

ID:	5150
INPUT:	Etsaiak gaizki-esaka ari zaizkit : « Noiz hil behar ote du ? Noiz galduko ote honen izena ? »
PRED:	“ How long will I die ? How long will my name die ? ”
GOLD:	They visit me as if they were my friends , but all the while they gather gossip , and when they leave , they spread it everywhere .

ID:	5151
INPUT:	Goratu Jauna , gure Jainkoa , ahuspeztu haren oin-aulki aurrean ! Santua da bera !
PRED:	Remember the Lord our God , and bow down before his feet , for he is holy .
GOLD:	Exalt the Lord our God ! Bow low before his feet , for he is holy !

ID:	5152
INPUT:	Gedeonek jendea errekara jaitsarazi zuenean , Jaunak esan zion : « Bereiz itzazu ura eskuan hartu eta zakurrek bezala miazkatuz edango dutenak , edateko belauniko jarriko direnengandik » .
PRED:	When Gideon had brought the people down to the river , the Lord said to him , “ Take water in your hand , and eat it in your hand , and eat it from the valley of those who drink it . ”
GOLD:	When Gideon took his warriors down to the water , the Lord told him , “ Divide the men into two groups . In one group put all those who cup water in their hands and lap it up with their tongues like dogs . In the other group put all those who kneel down and drink with their mouths in the stream . ”

ID:	5153
INPUT:	Etiopia , Put , Lud eta Arabia osoa , Libia eta herrialde aliatu honetakojendea gerran eroriko daegiptoarrekin batera .
PRED:	And all the people of the land of Egypt , and all the people of Assyria , and all the land of Egypt , with the sword of the sword .
GOLD:	Ethiopia , Libya , Lydia , all Arabia , and all their other allieswill be destroyed in that war .

ID:	5154
INPUT:	Orduan , apaiz nagusiak zutitu eta galdetu zion : — Ez al diezu deus erantzun behar zure kontra ateratzen dituztenei ?
PRED:	Then the high priest stood up and asked him , “ Do n't you answer those who speak against you ? ”
GOLD:	Then the high priest stood up and said to Jesus , “ Well , are n't you going to answer these charges ? What do you have to say for yourself ? ”

ID:	5155
INPUT:	Bihotz-bihotzez bilatzen dut zure mesedea : erruki nitaz , hitzemana duzunez !
PRED:	I have filled your son with all my heart , and have mercy on me , according to your word .
GOLD:	With all my heart I want your blessings.Be merciful as you promised .

ID:	5156
INPUT:	Hots handiko hitzaldi hutsak egiten dituzte eta grina lizunen bitartez okerbidetik aldendu berriak liluratzen .
PRED:	A voice of a loud voice , and they turn away from the ways of the Amorites .
GOLD:	They brag about themselves with empty , foolish boasting . With an appeal to twisted sexual desires , they lure back into sin those who have barely escaped from a lifestyle of deception .

ID:	5157
INPUT:	Eta Jainkoak aldi hori laburtuko ez balu , ez litzateke inortxo ere bizirik aterako ; baina , aukeratuak direla eta , laburtu egingo ditu egun horiek .
PRED:	But if God would not be able to live , it would not be able to live . But the chosen are chosen .
GOLD:	In fact , unless that time of calamity is shortened , not a single person will survive . But it will be shortened for the sake of God 's chosen ones .

ID:	5158
INPUT:	hurrengo sailean , aldiz , Xelemiasen seme Hananiasek eta Tzalafen seigarren seme Hanunek bere etxebizitzaren aurrean .
PRED:	Of the next time , Azariah the son of Hilkiah , Azariah the son of Azariah , and Azariah the son of Zadok , and Azariah the son of Zadok , and his house .
GOLD:	Next Hananiah son of Shelemiah and Hanun , the sixth son of Zalaph , repaired another section , while Meshullam son of Berekiah rebuilt the wall across from where he lived .

ID:	5159
INPUT:	herri ankerra , zaharrentzat errespeturik eta haurrentzat errukirik izango ez duena .
PRED:	If you are a nation , you will not have pity on a nation , and you will not have pity on children .
GOLD:	a fierce and heartless nation that shows no respect for the old and no pity for the young .

ID:	5160
INPUT:	esan zien : « Gogoan hartu nik gaur agindu dizuedan guztia , eta agindu zeuen seme-alabei lege honen xedapen guztiak betetzen saiatzeko ,
PRED:	He said to them , “ Remember all that I have commanded you today , and keep all the statutes that I have commanded you today , to keep all the statutes that I have commanded you today .
GOLD:	he added : “ Take to heart all the words of warning I have given you today . Pass them on as a command to your children so they will obey every word of these instructions .

ID:	5161
INPUT:	Hautsi da indartsuen uztaia ; ahulak , berriz , indarrez jantzi dira .
PRED:	These are the bow of the bow , but the bow are clothed with power .
GOLD:	The bow of the mighty is now broken , and those who stumbled are now strong .

ID:	5162
INPUT:	Benetan gizon apala zen Moises , munduko gizonik apalena .
PRED:	And Moses was a man , who was a man of the world .
GOLD:	( Now Moses was very humble — more humble than any other person on earth . )

ID:	5163
INPUT:	Intsentsu-aldarea
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Plans for the Incense Altar

ID:	5164
INPUT:	Hark profezi dohaina zuten lau alaba ezkongabe zituen .
PRED:	And he had done these things , and he had not married four daughters .
GOLD:	He had four unmarried daughters who had the gift of prophecy .

ID:	5165
INPUT:	Bere ikasleek erantzun zioten : — Hainbeste jendek estutzen zaituela ikusi eta nork ukitu zaituen galdetzen duzu ?
PRED:	His disciples said to him , “ How many times have you seen you , and who touched you ? ”
GOLD:	His disciples said to him , “ Look at this crowd pressing around you . How can you ask , ‘ Who touched me ? ' ”

ID:	5166
INPUT:	Non dira zure kontseilari jakintsuak , faraoi ? Jaun ahalguztidunakEgiptoren aurka dituen asmoakiragar diezazkizutela , bada , gauza badira !
PRED:	Where are the wise men of the wise men of the land of Egypt ? If they say to you , ‘ The Lord of hosts , the wise men of Egypt , are these things . '
GOLD:	Where are your wise counselors , Pharaoh ? Let them tell you what God plans , what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies is going to do to Egypt .

ID:	5167
INPUT:	Goizero berritzen dira . Bai handia , Jauna , zure leialtasuna !
PRED:	The Lord is great , and he is great ; he is great and faithful .
GOLD:	Great is his faithfulness ; his mercies begin afresh each morning .

ID:	5168
INPUT:	Efratan entzun genuen kutxaren berrieta Jaar aldean aurkitu .
PRED:	And when we heard it , we found it , and found it in the land of Moab .
GOLD:	We heard that the Ark was in Ephrathah ; then we found it in the distant countryside of Jaar .

ID:	5169
INPUT:	Ez zaiteztela marmarrean ari ere , haietako batzuk ari izan ziren bezala , gero aingeru suntsitzailearen esku hil zirelarik .
PRED:	Do n't do any of them , as some of them were some of them . They killed the angels who were killed by the devil .
GOLD:	And do n't grumble as some of them did , and then were destroyed by the angel of death .

ID:	5170
INPUT:	Nolanahi ere , gorputzean nahiz gorputzetik kanpo , Jaunari atsegingarri izaten ahalegintzen gara ,
PRED:	But if we walk in the body , or in the body , or in the body of the Lord , and in the sight of the Lord ,
GOLD:	So whether we are here in this body or away from this body , our goal is to please him .

ID:	5171
INPUT:	Zorigaitz guztiak geure egintza gaizto eta erru handiengatik gertatu zaizkigu . Hala ere , zuk , gure Jainko horrek , gure bekatuek merezi baino gutxiago zigortu gaituzu , eta bizirik atera gaituzu hemen gaudenok .
PRED:	All the evil things that we have done for our sins , and for our sins , even as for our sins , so that we are more than our sins , and we all are here .
GOLD:	“ Now we are being punished because of our wickedness and our great guilt . But we have actually been punished far less than we deserve , for you , our God , have allowed some of us to survive as a remnant .

ID:	5172
INPUT:	Jaunak emandako lurraldeak ekarritako emaitza guztien lehen fruituak saski batean hartu eta Jaunak zure Jainkoak bizileku eta kultu-lekutzat aukeratuko duen tokira joango zara .
PRED:	And thou shalt take the fruit of the land which the Lord thy God hath given to thee , and thou shalt take the fruit of the land which the Lord thy God hath given thee , and thou shalt go to the place where the Lord thy God shall choose .
GOLD:	put some of the first produce from each crop you harvest into a basket and bring it to the designated place of worship — the place the Lord your God chooses for his name to be honored .

ID:	5173
INPUT:	Fariseu batzuek hurbildu eta , zertan harrapatuko , gizonak bere emaztea uztea zilegi ote zuen galdetu zioten .
PRED:	Some Pharisees came to him and asked him , “ Why do you want to take his wife ? ”
GOLD:	Some Pharisees came and tried to trap him with this question : “ Should a man be allowed to divorce his wife ? ”

ID:	5174
INPUT:	Ester , erregina izendatu
PRED:	Esther and Haman
GOLD:	Esther Becomes Queen

ID:	5175
INPUT:	Adoniasen gonbidatu guztiak , izuturik , jaiki eta nor bere aldetik joan ziren .
PRED:	And all the men that had been called together , and every man rose up , and every man went to his own side .
GOLD:	Then all of Adonijah 's guests jumped up in panic from the banquet table and quickly scattered .

ID:	5176
INPUT:	Bebairenak <unk> ;
PRED:	The children of Akkub , one hundred and twenty .
GOLD:	The family of Bebai623

ID:	5177
INPUT:	Eta honela egin zion otoitz Jaunari : « Ai ene , Jauna ! Neure herrian nengoenean , iruditu zitzaidan , bai , horrela gertatuko zela ! Horregatik , hain zuzen , nahi izan nuen Tarsisera ihes egin . Banekien nik Jainko bihozbera eta errukiorra zarena , haserregaitza eta onginahiz betea , bere mehatxuez damutzen dena .
PRED:	Then he prayed to the Lord , “ Oh , Lord , when I was in my people , I thought that it would happen to you , so that I would be angry , and I would not turn away from you .
GOLD:	So he complained to the Lord about it : “ Did n't I say before I left home that you would do this , Lord ? That is why I ran away to Tarshish ! I knew that you are a merciful and compassionate God , slow to get angry and filled with unfailing love . You are eager to turn back from destroying people .

ID:	5178
INPUT:	Baina beste behin ere bere teman jarraitu zuen faraoiak eta ez zien israeldarrei joaten utzi .
PRED:	But Pharaoh followed the king , and he did not let the Israelites go .
GOLD:	“ All right , go ahead , ” Pharaoh replied . “ I will let you go into the wilderness to offer sacrifices to the Lord your God . But do n't go too far away . Now hurry and pray for me . ”

ID:	5179
INPUT:	Oraindik Pedro eta Joan herriari mintzatzen ari zitzaizkiola , apaizak , tenpluko guardiaburua eta saduzearrak agertu zitzaizkien .
PRED:	While Peter and John was still speaking to the people , the priests and John the priest appeared to them , and the guard of the temple was revealed to them .
GOLD:	While Peter and John were speaking to the people , they were confronted by the priests , the captain of the Temple guard , and some of the Sadducees .

ID:	5180
INPUT:	jendeak ohi duen bezala ; gorde dut zure hitza ,
PRED:	I will keep your word as the Gentiles ; I will keep your word .
GOLD:	I have followed your commands , which keep me from following cruel and evil people .

ID:	5181
INPUT:	Onar ezazu , bada , nire aholkua , eta izan dezazula lagun Jainkoa ! Zu herriaren ordezkari zara Jainkoaren aurrean eta herriaren arazoak aurkeztu behar dizkiozu berari ;
PRED:	If you know my counsel , you will be my friend , and you will be God 's people , and you will bring them to the people of God and to the people .
GOLD:	Now listen to me , and let me give you a word of advice , and may God be with you . You should continue to be the people 's representative before God , bringing their disputes to him .

ID:	5182
INPUT:	Izan zaitezte , beraz , Jainkoaren antzekoak , beraren seme-alaba maite zaretenez .
PRED:	So you must be like God 's children , and you love their children .
GOLD:	Imitate God , therefore , in everything you do , because you are his dear children .

ID:	5183
INPUT:	gudari-gezi zorrotzen , ipuru-ikatz gorien antzeko zaren hori !
PRED:	He is like a mighty man , and he is like fire of fire .
GOLD:	You will be pierced with sharp arrowsand burned with glowing coals .

ID:	5184
INPUT:	Niri , berriz , egia diodalako , ez didazue sinesten .
PRED:	But you do n't believe me , because you do n't believe me .
GOLD:	So when I tell the truth , you just naturally do n't believe me !

ID:	5185
INPUT:	Abraham , Sara eta Abimelek
PRED:	Abraham and Abimelech and Abimelech
GOLD:	Abraham Deceives Abimelech

ID:	5186
INPUT:	Badaki Jaunak giza asmoak hutsak direla .
PRED:	The Lord knows that the rich men are weak .
GOLD:	The Lord knows people 's thoughts ; he knows they are worthless !

ID:	5187
INPUT:	Nik esan nuen : — Ene Jainko Jauna , zaude geldi ! Nola eutsiko dio , bada , Israel herriak bere biziari , hain txikia izanik ?
PRED:	I said to them , “ O Lord God , stay here ! How can the people of Israel live ? ”
GOLD:	Then I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , please stop or we will not survive , for Israel is so small . ”

ID:	5188
INPUT:	Arratsean , Jesusen ikasleak aintzirara jaitsi
PRED:	And it came to pass in the evening , that the disciples came down to the sea .
GOLD:	That evening Jesus ' disciples went down to the shore to wait for him .

ID:	5189
INPUT:	Jaunak bere haserrea hustu du , bere sumina isuri . Sioni su eman dio eta oinarrietaraino kiskali .
PRED:	The Lord was angry with his anger , and he burned his wrath on Simon , and he burned the foundation of the foundation of the foundation .
GOLD:	But now the anger of the Lord is satisfied.His fierce anger has been poured out.He started a fire in Jerusalemthat burned the city to its foundations .

ID:	5190
INPUT:	Errege izaten hastean , Baxak Jeroboamen etxeko guztiak hilarazi zituen . Ez zuen Jeroboamen etxeko bat ere utzi hil gabe , halaxe esana baitzuen Jaunak Xiloko Ahias bere zerbitzariaren bidez .
PRED:	When he became king of Judah , he killed all the houses of Jeroboam 's house . He did not leave any of the house of Jeroboam his servant , but he did as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	He immediately slaughtered all the descendants of King Jeroboam , so that not one of the royal family was left , just as the Lord had promised concerning Jeroboam by the prophet Ahijah from Shiloh .

ID:	5191
INPUT:	Paulok jasandako nekeak
PRED:	Paul 's Death
GOLD:	Paul 's Many Trials

ID:	5192
INPUT:	Ateratzean , honela ziotsaten elkarren artean : — Gizon honek ez du ez heriotza , ez kartzela merezi duenik ezer egin .
PRED:	When they went out , they said to one another , “ This man has not put to death , neither has he done anything to death . ”
GOLD:	As they went out , they talked it over and agreed , “ This man has n't done anything to deserve death or imprisonment . ”

ID:	5193
INPUT:	Orduan , erregeak deitu eta esan zien : — Zer dela-eta uzten dituzue mutikoak bizirik ?
PRED:	Then the king called and said to them , “ Why do you let the boy live ? ”
GOLD:	So the king of Egypt called for the midwives . “ Why have you done this ? ” he demanded . “ Why have you allowed the boys to live ? ”

ID:	5194
INPUT:	« Ez uste izan Moisesen legea edo profeten esanak huts bihurtzera etorria naizenik ; ez naiz huts bihurtzera etorri , beren betera eramatera baizik .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid of the law of Moses , or by the law of Moses , but I came not to turn back to their own way .
GOLD:	“ Do n't misunderstand why I have come . I did not come to abolish the law of Moses or the writings of the prophets . No , I came to accomplish their purpose .

ID:	5195
INPUT:	Sarraskia egiteko zorroztua , distira botatzeko leundua .
PRED:	The man that is in the gate shall be made of fine linen ; and the one that is in the midst of the gate shall be cut off .
GOLD:	Let their hearts melt with terror , for the sword glitters at every gate.It flashes like lightningand is polished for slaughter !

ID:	5196
INPUT:	— Gogora ezazue Moisesek , Jaunaren zerbitzariak , agindu zizuena : « Jaunak , zeuen Jainkoak , atseden harrarazi dizue lurralde hau zuei emanez .
PRED:	“ Remember the servant of the Lord , the servant of the Lord , said to you , “ Remember this land which the Lord your God has given you .
GOLD:	“ Remember what Moses , the servant of the Lord , commanded you : ‘ The Lord your God is giving you a place of rest . He has given you this land . '

ID:	5197
INPUT:	eta bere gutizia aseezina izan zuenez , ondasun guztiak galduko ditu .
PRED:	and he was hungry , and he will destroy all his possessions .
GOLD:	They were always greedy and never satisfied.Nothing remains of all the things they dreamed about .

ID:	5198
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak honela dio : « Zer egin dezaket zuretzat , Efraim ? Eta zer zuretzat , Juda ? Zuen maitasunagoiz-lainoa bezala doa , berehala kentzen duengoiz-ihintza bezala .
PRED:	The Lord says , “ What will I do for you ? ” “ Judah , what will I do to you ? ” says the Lord , “ I will do to you , as the dew of the morning is like the dew .
GOLD:	“ O Israel and Judah , what should I do with you ? ” asks the Lord . “ For your love vanishes like the morning mistand disappears like dew in the sunlight .

ID:	5199
INPUT:	Nork egin eta burutu duhori guztia ? Ni , Jauna , neu naiz lehena , hasieratik gizaldiak munduraekartzen dituena , eta azkenekoak iristean ereni betiko berbera .
PRED:	Who has made all these things ? I am the Lord , who brought them out of the beginning , and I am the beginning of the world , and in the last time I am the last .
GOLD:	Who has done such mighty deeds , summoning each new generation from the beginning of time ? It is I , the Lord , the First and the Last.I alone am he . ”

ID:	5200
INPUT:	Labanek Jegar Sahaduta deitu zuen harri-pila hura ; Jakobek , berriz , Galed .
PRED:	Laban called for Sarah , and he called him a stone , but Jacob was called Jacob .
GOLD:	To commemorate the event , Laban called the place Jegar-sahadutha ( which means “ witness pile ” in Aramaic ) , and Jacob called it Galeed ( which means “ witness pile ” in Hebrew ) .

ID:	5201
INPUT:	Orduan , bi gizonek menditik jaitsi eta ibaia igaro zuten . Eta , Nunen seme Josuerengana itzulirik , gertatu zitzaien guztiaren berri eman zioten ,
PRED:	And the two men came down from the mountain , and came to Joshua the son of Nun , and came unto Joshua the son of Nun , and told him all these things .
GOLD:	Then the two spies came down from the hill country , crossed the Jordan River , and reported to Joshua all that had happened to them .

ID:	5202
INPUT:	Horrela bete zen Liburu Santuak dioena : Abrahameksinetsi egin zion Jainkoari eta , horregatik , Jainkoak zuzenetsi egin zuen , eta « Jainkoaren adiskide » deitu zitzaion .
PRED:	So it was written , “ Abraham believed God , and he believed God , and he called him his friend . ”
GOLD:	And so it happened just as the Scriptures say : “ Abraham believed God , and God counted him as righteous because of his faith . ” He was even called the friend of God .

ID:	5203
INPUT:	Josue Jordan igarotzeko prestatu
PRED:	Joshua Complains the Jordan
GOLD:	's Charge to Joshua

ID:	5204
INPUT:	Nondik sortzen dira zeuen artean dituzuen borroka eta haserreak ? Ez ote zuen baitan borrokan dabiltzan grina txarretatik ?
PRED:	Where are you going out from among you ? Do you not be angry with you ? Do n't you want to fight with the flesh ?
GOLD:	What is causing the quarrels and fights among you ? Do n't they come from the evil desires at war within you ?

ID:	5205
INPUT:	Gero , Israel lurraldeko hazia hartueta soroan erein zuen , ur ugariren ondoan .
PRED:	And he took the land of Israel , and planted it in the field , and planted in the waters of water .
GOLD:	He also took a seedling from the landand planted it in fertile soil.He placed it beside a broad river , where it could grow like a willow tree .

ID:	5206
INPUT:	Harmailetara iritsi zirenean , soldaduek airean eraman behar izan zuten Paulo jendearen erasoagatik ,
PRED:	When they came to the love , the soldiers took Paul to the crowd because of the crowd .
GOLD:	As Paul reached the stairs , the mob grew so violent the soldiers had to lift him to their shoulders to protect him .

ID:	5207
INPUT:	Abrahamekin mintzatzen amaitu ondoren , alde egin zuen Jaunak . Eta Abraham bere oihal-etxolara itzuli zen .
PRED:	And when he had finished speaking with Abraham , the Lord departed from him . And Abraham returned to his tent .
GOLD:	When the Lord had finished his conversation with Abraham , he went on his way , and Abraham returned to his tent .

ID:	5208
INPUT:	ez , ordea , hegal eta ezkata gabeak : kutsatutzat edukiko dituzue .
PRED:	But you shall not be unclean . You shall be unclean .
GOLD:	You may not , however , eat marine animals that do not have both fins and scales . They are ceremonially unclean for you .

ID:	5209
INPUT:	Senideok , neure aldetik , ziur dakit zuek onginahiz beterik eta jakite guztiz horniturik zaudetena , eta elkarri argi egiteko gai zaretena .
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , I know that you know what you are doing , and you know what you are doing .
GOLD:	I am fully convinced , my dear brothers and sisters , that you are full of goodness . You know these things so well you can teach each other all about them .

ID:	5210
INPUT:	Eta zoritxar eta atsekabe izugarri horiek gertatzean , kantika hau lekuko izango dute beren kontra , ondorengoek ere gogoan eta ahoan izango baitute . Izan ere , ondotxo dakit zer asmo darabiltzan gogoan herri honek , zin eginez agindutako lurraldera eraman baino lehenagotik ere » .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , when these things shall be done , that it shall be a witness against their children , and their children shall be remembered in their mouth , and in their mouth , and in their mouth , and in their mouth , that they may go out of the land of the land which he swore unto them .
GOLD:	And when great disasters come down on them , this song will stand as evidence against them , for it will never be forgotten by their descendants . I know the intentions of these people , even now before they have entered the land I swore to give them . ”

ID:	5211
INPUT:	Ene maiteok , geure kontzientziak kondenatzen ez bagaitu , berriz , uste osoz jo dezakegu Jainkoarengana ,
PRED:	My friends , if we do not obey our teaching , then we may turn to God .
GOLD:	Dear friends , if we do n't feel guilty , we can come to God with bold confidence .

ID:	5212
INPUT:	Idoloei desafioa
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Restoration for Jerusalem

ID:	5213
INPUT:	Baina hemendik aurrera Gizonaren Semea Jainko ahalguztidunaren eskuinean eserita egongo da .
PRED:	But the Son of Man will sit at the right hand of God , and he will sit at the right hand of God .
GOLD:	But from now on the Son of Man will be seated in the place of power at God 's right hand . ”

ID:	5214
INPUT:	Entzutez bakarrik ezagutzen zintudan ; orain , neure begiz ikusi zaitut !
PRED:	I know you alone , but now I have seen you alone . I have seen you .
GOLD:	I had only heard about you before , but now I have seen you with my own eyes .

ID:	5215
INPUT:	Bet-Hogla aldetik igotzen zen eta , Bet-Arabaren iparraldetik igaroz , Rubenen seme Bohan-en Harkaitzeraino zihoan .
PRED:	And it came to pass , as far as the north side of the north side of the valley of Reuben , to the top of the valley of the children of Reuben , to the top of the valley .
GOLD:	went up from there to Beth-hoglah , then proceeded north of Beth-arabah to the Stone of Bohan . ( Bohan was Reuben 's son . )

ID:	5216
INPUT:	mespretxua botatzen du handikien gaineraeta ahaltsuak indarge uzten ;
PRED:	He shall cast down the great , and the mighty power of the mighty .
GOLD:	He pours disgrace upon princesand disarms the strong .

ID:	5217
INPUT:	Emadazu eskua eta salbatuko naiz , begi aurrean izango ditut beti zure arauak .
PRED:	Give me my hand , and I will be saved , and I will see your statutes forever .
GOLD:	Sustain me , and I will be rescued ; then I will meditate continually on your decrees .

ID:	5218
INPUT:	Tenpluan sartzeko eskubidea
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The Prince , Levites , and Priests

ID:	5219
INPUT:	Gizon hari Elimelek zeritzan , emazteari Noemi eta semeei Mahlon eta Kilion . Efratar leinukoak ziren , Judako Belengoak . Moaben bizi zirelarik ,
PRED:	These are the names of the sons of Levi , the sons of Ephraim , the sons of Ephraim , the sons of Ephraim , the sons of Ephraim , and the sons of Judah , and the sons of Israel , and the sons of Benjamin , and the sons of Israel .
GOLD:	The man 's name was Elimelech , and his wife was Naomi . Their two sons were Mahlon and Kilion . They were Ephrathites from Bethlehem in the land of Judah . And when they reached Moab , they settled there .

ID:	5220
INPUT:	Israelen argi den Jainkoasu bihurtuko da , Israelen Santua sugar , eta bat-batean erreko ditu , sasia eta laharra bailiran .
PRED:	The God of Israel will become a fire , the Holy One of Israel , and the Holy One of Israel will be burned in a fire .
GOLD:	The Lord , the Light of Israel , will be a fire ; the Holy One will be a flame.He will devour the thorns and briers with fire , burning up the enemy in a single night .

ID:	5221
INPUT:	« Era berean , zuetako inor ez daiteke izan nire ikasle , dituen guztiei uko egiten ez badie .
PRED:	And if any one of you shall be able to do any of you , he shall not deny all my disciples .
GOLD:	So you can not become my disciple without giving up everything you own .

ID:	5222
INPUT:	Bera ere biluztu eta beste guztiekin batera sartu zen profeta-trantzean Samuelen aitzinean . Han egon zen etzana , larrugorri , egun eta gau osoan . Hortik dator esaera : « Saul ere profeta artean ? »
PRED:	And when he went into the midst of all the days of Samuel , he went into the prophets , and stood in the sight of Samuel ; and he was there , and he was naked , and said , Saul is among the prophets .
GOLD:	He tore off his clothes and lay naked on the ground all day and all night , prophesying in the presence of Samuel . The people who were watching exclaimed , “ What ? Is even Saul a prophet ? ”

ID:	5223
INPUT:	neuk adieraziko dizuet zer eta nola esan , eta zuen etsaietako inork ez du zuei aurre ematerik edo erantzuterik izango .
PRED:	I will tell you what I will say and tell you , and no one will answer you or answer you .
GOLD:	for I will give you the right words and such wisdom that none of your opponents will be able to reply or refute you !

ID:	5224
INPUT:	David eta Betsabe ( 11 , 1 — 12 , 25 )
PRED:	David and John
GOLD:	David and Bathsheba

ID:	5225
INPUT:	« Halere , badaki hark zein den nire jokabidea ; proba nazala , urrea bezain garbi aterako naiz .
PRED:	“ But I know what he has done , and I will make my way clean as pure as gold .
GOLD:	“ But he knows where I am going.And when he tests me , I will come out as pure as gold .

ID:	5226
INPUT:	Beraz , bi gauza ditugu Jainkoaren asmoa aldaezina dela adierazten digutenak : agintzaria eta zin-hitza — eta horietan Jainkoak ez dezake gezurrik esan — ; horietan oinarriturik , adorez beteak sentitzen gara aurrean dugun itxaropenari eusteko .
PRED:	So we have two things , that God 's word is given us , and the word of God , and the word , and the word , and the word of God , and the word of God , that we may not be put to death , and the hope that we may wait for ever .
GOLD:	So God has given both his promise and his oath . These two things are unchangeable because it is impossible for God to lie . Therefore , we who have fled to him for refuge can have great confidence as we hold to the hope that lies before us .

ID:	5227
INPUT:	Gizon-emakume berrien jokabidea
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Living the New Life

ID:	5228
INPUT:	Baina ez dute guztiek hau behar bezala ulertzen . Batzuek , oraintsu arte idolatrian ibiliak , haragi hori sasijainkoei eskainia balitz bezala jaten dute eta , beraien kontzientzia ongi hezigabea denez , errudun bihurtzen dira .
PRED:	But they do not understand these things , but some of them do not understand , as if they offer sacrifices to idols , and they offer their blood to their idols .
GOLD:	However , not all believers know this . Some are accustomed to thinking of idols as being real , so when they eat food that has been offered to idols , they think of it as the worship of real gods , and their weak consciences are violated .

ID:	5229
INPUT:	Sakrifizioa eskaini zuen Jakobek mendian , eta bere ahaideak otordura gonbidatu . Otordua egin ondoren , mendian igaro zuten gaua .
PRED:	And Jacob offered a sacrifice on the mountain , and he called his brethren to eat ; and when they had eaten , they crossed the mountain .
GOLD:	Then Jacob offered a sacrifice to God there on the mountain and invited everyone to a covenant feast . After they had eaten , they spent the night on the mountain .

ID:	5230
INPUT:	Kiriat-Arban hil zen , Hebronen alegia , Kanaan lurraldean . Abrahamek dolu egin zuen haren heriotzagatik .
PRED:	And Abraham died in Hebron , in Hebron , in the land of Canaan . And Abraham wept for his death .
GOLD:	she died at Kiriath-arba ( now called Hebron ) in the land of Canaan . There Abraham mourned and wept for her .

ID:	5231
INPUT:	Egizu negar , neskatxa batekhil zaion senar berriazdoluz jantzitanegar dagien bezala .
PRED:	You will cry out like a young woman , and you will weep like a woman who has been clothed with sackcloth .
GOLD:	Weep like a bride dressed in black , mourning the death of her husband .

ID:	5232
INPUT:	Gordelekutzat hartu zituen ilunpeak , etxola gisa bere inguruan hodei-laino euritsuak .
PRED:	He took them in darkness , and darkness covered their tents round about his tent .
GOLD:	Thick clouds shielded the brightness around himand rained down hail and burning coals .

ID:	5233
INPUT:	Noeren hiru seme hauetatik sorturiko ondorengoak munduan barrena hedatu ziren .
PRED:	And Noah 's sons were born out of these three sons , and their descendants were born in the world .
GOLD:	From these three sons of Noah came all the people who now populate the earth .

ID:	5234
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Babiloniako erregeNabukodonosorren bitartezamaiaraziko dutEgiptoren harropuzkeria .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will bring the pride of the king of Babylon to Babylon .
GOLD:	“ For this is what the Sovereign Lord says : By the power of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon , I will destroy the hordes of Egypt .

ID:	5235
INPUT:	Ezinbestekoa Jainkoaren zigorra
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The Certainty of the

ID:	5236
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Zoaz , zeure sinesmenak sendatu zaitu . Une berean ikusmena etorri zitzaion berriro , eta Jesusen ondoren zihoan bidean .
PRED:	Jesus said to him , “ Go , your faith has healed you . Then he came again to him again and followed Jesus . ”
GOLD:	And Jesus said to him , “ Go , for your faith has healed you . ” Instantly the man could see , and he followed Jesus down the road .

ID:	5237
INPUT:	baita haren arrantzu-lagun Santiago eta Joan Zebedeoren semeak ere . Baina Jesusek esan zion Simoni : — Ez beldurtu , hemendik aurrera giza arrantzale izango zara .
PRED:	But as soon as John 's son , John 's son , he said to Simon , “ Do n't be afraid , but you will be a man . ”
GOLD:	His partners , James and John , the sons of Zebedee , were also amazed.Jesus replied to Simon , “ Do n't be afraid ! From now on you 'll be fishing for people ! ”

ID:	5238
INPUT:	Alai zaitezte egun horretan eta egin pozez jauzi , handia izango baita zuen saria zeruan ; gauza bera egin zieten profetei jende horren gurasoek .
PRED:	Be glad in that day , and rejoice in that day , for the name of your fathers in heaven , and the prophets did as their fathers had done .
GOLD:	When that happens , be happy ! Yes , leap for joy ! For a great reward awaits you in heaven . And remember , their ancestors treated the ancient prophets that same way .

ID:	5239
INPUT:	Moisesek , beraz , Kanaan lurraldea ikertzera bidali zituen , esanez : — Zoazte Negevetik eta igo mendialdera .
PRED:	So Moses sent them back to the land of Canaan , saying , “ Go and go into the hill country of Canaan . ”
GOLD:	Moses gave the men these instructions as he sent them out to explore the land : “ Go north through the Negev into the hill country .

ID:	5240
INPUT:	Israelgo Jainkoaren aintza , euskarritzat zituen kerubinen gainetik altxaturik , tenpluko sarrerarantz joan zen . Orduan , lihozko jantzia eta gerrian idazteko tresnak zeuzkan gizonari dei egin
PRED:	And the glory of God of Israel stood on the altar , and went into the inner court of the house of the Lord God of Israel . And he went into the house of the Lord God of Israel , and called the men who had been written on them .
GOLD:	Then the glory of the God of Israel rose up from between the cherubim , where it had rested , and moved to the entrance of the Temple . And the Lord called to the man dressed in linen who was carrying the writer 's case .

ID:	5241
INPUT:	Baina arropak eta gorputza garbitzen ez baditu , bere hobenaren ondorenak jasan beharko ditu » .
PRED:	But if he does not wash his clothes and wash his body , then he shall receive his inheritance . ”
GOLD:	But if they do not wash their clothes and bathe themselves , they will be punished for their sin . ”

ID:	5242
INPUT:	Nob-en da dagoeneko erasotzaileaeta eskua altxatzen du mehatxukaSion mendiaren aurka , Jerusalemgo muinoaren aurka .
PRED:	I have said to you , “ I have told you what I have told you to do to you . ”
GOLD:	The enemy stops at Nob for the rest of that day.He shakes his fist at beautiful Mount Zion , the mountain of Jerusalem .

ID:	5243
INPUT:	Nik emandako ogia , elikatzeko ematen nizkizun irin garbia , olioa eta eztia eskaini zenizkien opari atsegingarri gisa . Honela diot nik , Jainko Jaunak .
PRED:	I , the Sovereign LORD , have spoken to you , and the olive oil , and the olive oil , and the oil , and the oil , and the oil , and the oil , says the Lord God .
GOLD:	Imagine it ! You set before them as a sacrifice the choice flour , olive oil , and honey I had given you , says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	5244
INPUT:	Printzea sarrerako atalondotik sartu/irtengo da beti .
PRED:	And the prince of the gate shall come out of the gate of the gate of the gate , and he shall go out from the gate of the gate .
GOLD:	“ The prince must enter the gateway through the entry room , and he must leave the same way .

ID:	5245
INPUT:	Zigilupean gordea uzten dutirakaspen eta aitorpen hauneure ikasleentzat .
PRED:	He will keep my teaching in darkness , and he will teach my disciples .
GOLD:	Preserve the teaching of God ; entrust his instructions to those who follow me .

ID:	5246
INPUT:	« Ez al dakizu , betidanik , gizakia lurrean jarria izan denetik ,
PRED:	“ Do n't you know that I am the one who has set the earth on the earth .
GOLD:	“ Do n't you realize that from the beginning of time , ever since people were first placed on the earth ,

ID:	5247
INPUT:	Jaunarengandik hartu nuen nik , neure aldetik zuei eskualdatu dizuedan hau : Jesus Jaunak , saldu zuten gauean , ogia hartu zuela
PRED:	I took from the Lord Jesus from my side , saying , “ This is what the Lord Jesus has saved you in the night , and they took bread .
GOLD:	For I pass on to you what I received from the Lord himself . On the night when he was betrayed , the Lord Jesus took some bread

ID:	5248
INPUT:	esanez : « Horra ! Filistearrak , Samson ! » Esnatu zen Samson eta aurrekoetan bezala libratuko zela uste izan zuen ; baina ez zekien Jaunak zapuztua zuela .
PRED:	He said to him , “ Look ! ” Samson went out and said , “ Samson will rescue him as he was in the sight of the Philistines , but the Lord did not destroy him .
GOLD:	Then she cried out , “ Samson ! The Philistines have come to capture you ! ” When he woke up , he thought , “ I will do as before and shake myself free . ” But he did n't realize the Lord had left him .

ID:	5249
INPUT:	Egun hartan Jaunaren beldur izan zen David . Honela zioen : « Nola ekarriko dut , bada , nirera Jaunaren kutxa ? »
PRED:	On that day David feared the Lord . He said to them , “ How will I bring the ark of the Lord to me ? ”
GOLD:	David was now afraid of the Lord , and he asked , “ How can I ever bring the Ark of the Lord back into my care ? ”

ID:	5250
INPUT:	Salomon erregeak erantzun zion bere amari : — Zergatik eskatzen didazu Abixag xunemdarra Adoniasentzat ? Nire anaia zaharragoa dela eta , Abiatar apaiza eta Tzeruiaren seme Joab bere alde dituela eta , horrentzat erregetza eskatzea besterik ez zaizu falta .
PRED:	King Solomon said to his mother , “ Why do you ask me to give me my brother Abishai ? ” So the priest said , “ I am old and Joab the priest , and Joab the priest , and Joab the priest , and Joab his son . ”
GOLD:	“ How can you possibly ask me to give Abishag to Adonijah ? ” King Solomon demanded . “ You might as well ask me to give him the kingdom ! You know that he is my older brother , and that he has Abiathar the priest and Joab son of Zeruiah on his side . ”

ID:	5251
INPUT:	Orduan , apostoluek eta arduradunek , eliz elkarte osoarekin bat , beren arteko batzuk hautatu eta Paulo eta Bernaberekin Antiokiara bidaltzea erabaki zuten . Judas Barsaba eta Silas hautatu zituzten , senideen artean itzal handiko gizonak biak ,
PRED:	Then the apostles and the elders and the elders of the church gathered together with them , and sent some of them to Antioch and Barnabas , and Barnabas , and Barnabas , and Barnabas , and Barnabas , and Barnabas .
GOLD:	Then the apostles and elders together with the whole church in Jerusalem chose delegates , and they sent them to Antioch of Syria with Paul and Barnabas to report on this decision . The men chosen were two of the church leaders — Judas ( also called Barsabbas ) and Silas .

ID:	5252
INPUT:	Utzi egin beharko duzueman nizun ondarea . Zeure etsaien esklabo egingo zaitutezagutzen ez duzun lurralde batean , nire haserrearen sua harrotu baituzuitzalezineko sugarretan » .
PRED:	And thou shalt take away the inheritance of thy enemies , and thou shalt be slaves in the land which thou hast not known , because thou hast not known my wrath in the fire of my wrath .
GOLD:	The wonderful possession I have reserved for youwill slip from your hands.I will tell your enemies to take youas captives to a foreign land.For my anger blazes like a firethat will burn forever . ”

ID:	5253
INPUT:	Hegoaldeko gelen azpian , pasabidearen muturrean , sarrera bat zegoen , babes-hormaren aurrez aurre ; ekialdetik sartzen zen .
PRED:	And it came to pass at the south side of the south side of the south side of the south side of the south side of the south side of the south side .
GOLD:	So there was an entrance in the wall facing the doors of the inner block of rooms , and another on the east at the end of the interior walkway .

ID:	5254
INPUT:	eta Jakobek Jose , Mariaren senarra ; eta Mariagandik jaio zen Jesus , Mesias deritzana .
PRED:	Jacob 's wife , Joseph 's wife , and Mary was born from Mary , who was the Messiah .
GOLD:	Jacob was the father of Joseph , the husband of Mary.Mary gave birth to Jesus , who is called the Messiah .

ID:	5255
INPUT:	Lurreko lehen emaitza eta fruituen eta niretzat bereizitako opari guztien zatirik onena apaizentzat izango da . Labealdi bakoitzeko ogirik onenak emango dizkiete israeldarrek , berauen etxeak bedeinka ditzadan .
PRED:	And the first of the earth shall be to the priest , and to the priest , and to the priest , and to the priest , and to every one of the sons of Israel shall be blessed , and the blessing of the children of Israel shall be blessed .
GOLD:	The first of the ripe fruits and all the gifts brought to the Lord will go to the priests . The first batch of dough must also be given to the priests so the Lord will bless your homes .

ID:	5256
INPUT:	Zoritxarrekoa zu , Moab ! Galdua zara , Kemox jainkoaren herri hori ! Bizirik geldituriko zure seme-alabakgatibu eraman dituSihon errege amortarrak .
PRED:	Woe to you , Moab ! You will be ashamed of the people of Moab ! Your sons will be taken away captive , your sons and your daughters will be carried away captive .
GOLD:	What sorrow awaits you , O people of Moab ! You are finished , O worshipers of Chemosh ! Chemosh has left his sons as refugees , his daughters as captives of Sihon , the Amorite king .

ID:	5257
INPUT:	baina jendaurrean ukatzen nauena ukatu egingo dute Jainkoaren aingeruen aurrean .
PRED:	But if anyone touches me , they will be forgiven before the angel of God .
GOLD:	But anyone who denies me here on earth will be denied before God 's angels .

ID:	5258
INPUT:	Etxegileek bazterturiko harria giltzarri gertatu da .
PRED:	The houses of the house will be taken away .
GOLD:	The stone that the builders rejectedhas now become the cornerstone .

ID:	5259
INPUT:	Haren aginduak oro aurrean izan ditut beti , ez naiz saihestu haren arauetatik .
PRED:	I have kept his commandments before him , and I have not turned away from his statutes .
GOLD:	I am blameless before God ; I have kept myself from sin .

ID:	5260
INPUT:	Seir lurraldean , berriz , hortarrak bizi izan ziren lehenago ; baina Esauren ondorengoek lurralde hartatik bota eta suntsitu egin zituzten eta bertan jarri ziren bizitzen , israeldarrek Jaunak jabetzan eman dien lurraldean egin duten bezala ) .
PRED:	But the Levites lived in the land of Seir , but the sons of Esau destroyed them from the land of Esau , and destroyed them , as the Lord had given them .
GOLD:	In earlier times the Horites had lived in Seir , but they were driven out and displaced by the descendants of Esau , just as Israel drove out the people of Canaan when the Lord gave Israel their land . )

ID:	5261
INPUT:	Honela dio Judako herriak : « Ezaguna duguMoaben gehiegizko harrokeria , haren oilarkeria eta handiustea , haren handi-iritzi hutsalak .
PRED:	The people of Judah said , “ Let us know what the Lord says : “ We know about Moab , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	We have heard about proud Moab — about its pride and arrogance and rage.But all that boasting has disappeared .

ID:	5262
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak herri honi buruz : « Maite du honek harat-honat ibiltzea , ez ditu oinak lotzen . Ez dut gogoko . Gogora dakart honen jokaera gaiztoa , eta zigortu egingo dut bere bekatuengatik » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Because I love all this people , I will not put their feet on their feet . I will remember their wickedness , and I will punish them for their sins . ”
GOLD:	So this is what the Lord says to his people : “ You love to wander far from meand do not restrain yourselves.Therefore , I will no longer accept you as my people.Now I will remember all your wickednessand will punish you for your sins . ”

ID:	5263
INPUT:	Lurrean eserita , isilik daude Sion hiri ederreko zaharrak , beren buruetara hautsa bota eta dolu-jantziaz estalirik . Jerusalemgo neskatxak burumakur dabiltza .
PRED:	They are sitting on the earth , and the beautiful city of Zion , and the elders of Zion , and they are clothed in ashes , and in sackcloth , and in sackcloth , and in the streets of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	The leaders of beautiful Jerusalemsit on the ground in silence.They are clothed in burlapand throw dust on their heads.The young women of Jerusalemhang their heads in shame .

ID:	5264
INPUT:	Norbaitek galde dezake : Eta hilak nola pizten dira ? Nolako gorputzez itzuliko dira bizira ?
PRED:	Who can say , “ How can the dead say ? How can they return into the body ? ”
GOLD:	But someone may ask , “ How will the dead be raised ? What kind of bodies will they have ? ”

ID:	5265
INPUT:	Geure bekatuak aitortzen baditugu , ordea , leiala eta zuzena den Jainkoak bekatuak barkatu eta gaiztakeria orotatik garbituko gaitu .
PRED:	But if we are guilty of our sins , God is righteous and righteous , and he will forgive us from their wickedness .
GOLD:	But if we confess our sins to him , he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all wickedness .

ID:	5266
INPUT:	Zedro , arkazi , mirto eta olibondoaklandatuko ditut basamortuan ; zipres , zumar eta izeiak eremuan .
PRED:	And I will plant them in the wilderness , and olive trees , and olive oil , and olive trees , and olive trees , and all of them that are in the wilderness .
GOLD:	I will plant trees in the barren desert — cedar , acacia , myrtle , olive , cypress , fir , and pine .

ID:	5267
INPUT:	dakidana hauxe da : hiriz hiri , Espiritu Santuak garbi esaten didala kateak eta nekeak ditudala zain .
PRED:	This is what I know : I say that the Holy Spirit is clean , and those who say , ‘ I am clean . '
GOLD:	except that the Holy Spirit tells me in city after city that jail and suffering lie ahead .

ID:	5268
INPUT:	Hau da abestuko duten eresia : nazio orotako emakumeekabestuko dute , Egipto eta hangojende guztiarengatik abestuko . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The woman will be taken away from the nations and all the people of the land of Egypt , and all the people of the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Yes , this is the funeral songthey will sing for Egypt.Let all the nations mourn.Let them mourn for Egypt and its hordes.I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	5269
INPUT:	Eraikia zuen Davidek oihal-etxola Jaunarentzat , eta han sartu zuten Jaunaren kutxa , eta erdian ezarri , bere tokian . Orduan , erre-opariak eskaini zizkion Davidek Jaunari , baita elkartasun-opariak ere .
PRED:	And David built an altar for the Lord , and they went into the tent of the Lord , and set it in the fire of the Lord ; and David offered a burnt offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	They brought the Ark of the Lord and set it in its place inside the special tent David had prepared for it . And David sacrificed burnt offerings and peace offerings to the Lord .

ID:	5270
INPUT:	Erdiminetan zegoela , emaginak esan zion : « Ez izan beldur ; mutikoa duzu berriro ! »
PRED:	And when he was sick , he said to him , “ Do n't be afraid . Do n't be afraid . ”
GOLD:	After a very hard delivery , the midwife finally exclaimed , “ Do n't be afraid — you have another son ! ”

ID:	5271
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , hitz egin nire izenean nire , Jainko Jaun honen , mezua adieraziz : « Ezpata ! Ezpata zorrotzaeta ongi leundua !
PRED:	“ Son of man , prophesy in my name : Thus says the Lord God : Thus says the Lord God : ‘ The sword and the sword .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , prophesy to themand clap your hands.Then take the sword and brandish it twice , even three times , to symbolize the great massacre , the great massacre facing them on every side .

ID:	5272
INPUT:	« Esan Aaronen seme Eleazarri ateratzeko errautsontziak sutatik urrutira , sagaratuak baitaude , eta sakabanatzeko txingarrak .
PRED:	“ Speak to Aaron the son of Aaron , to bring the fire from far away , for it is holy , and it is holy .
GOLD:	“ Tell the people of Israel to bring you twelve wooden staffs , one from each leader of Israel 's ancestral tribes , and inscribe each leader 's name on his staff .

ID:	5273
INPUT:	« Egokiera hartan , honela erregutu nion Jaunari :
PRED:	I prayed to the Lord at that time , saying ,
GOLD:	“ At that time I pleaded with the Lord and said ,

ID:	5274
INPUT:	Bestela , ene errege jauna , zu hiltzean , neure seme Salomon eta biok hil egin nahi izango gaituzte .
PRED:	But when the king died , my lord the king will kill you and kill you .
GOLD:	If you do not act , my son Solomon and I will be treated as criminals as soon as my lord the king has died . ”

ID:	5275
INPUT:	Lurrera erori nintzen , eta mintzo hau entzun nuen : “ Saulo , Saulo , zergatik pertsegitzen nauzu ? ”
PRED:	And I fell on the earth , and heard a voice , saying , Saul , Saul , Saul , why do you seek me ?
GOLD:	I fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to me , ‘ Saul , Saul , why are you persecuting me ? '

ID:	5276
INPUT:	Ezin izan zuten ezertan ere herriaren aurrean harrapatu eta , haren erantzunaz harriturik , hitzik gabe gelditu ziren .
PRED:	And they could not take him in front of the people , and they took him in his sight , and there was no answer .
GOLD:	So they failed to trap him by what he said in front of the people . Instead , they were amazed by his answer , and they became silent .

ID:	5277
INPUT:	Zuek sortu umeak , ugaldu , zabaldu munduaneta bete ezazue jendez ” » .
PRED:	You have many children , and spread out the world , and you have many children . ”
GOLD:	Now be fruitful and multiply , and repopulate the earth . ”

ID:	5278
INPUT:	Etorri da Gizonaren Semea , jaten eta edaten duela , eta esaten duzue : “ A zer tripazain eta mozkorra , zergalari eta bekatarien laguna ! ”
PRED:	The Son of Man came to eat and drink , and say to you , “ Behold , this is a man who is a thief and sinners and sinners . ”
GOLD:	The Son of Man , on the other hand , feasts and drinks , and you say , ‘ He 's a glutton and a drunkard , and a friend of tax collectors and other sinners ! '

ID:	5279
INPUT:	Jaunaren etxea , bere jauregia , Milo-ko lubeta , Jerusalemgo harresia , Hatzor , Megido eta Gezer egiteko , lan behartuak antolatu zituen Salomon erregeak .
PRED:	And the king built the house of the Lord , and the wall of the house of the Lord , and the wall of Jerusalem , and the wall that he had built in the house of the Lord , which he had done in the house of Jehovah .
GOLD:	This is the account of the forced labor that King Solomon conscripted to build the Lord 's Temple , the royal palace , the supporting terraces , the wall of Jerusalem , and the cities of Hazor , Megiddo , and Gezer .

ID:	5280
INPUT:	Hark baimena eman zien . Espiritu gaiztoak gizonarengandik atera eta txerrietan sartu ziren ; eta txerri-taldea ezpondan behera aintzirara amildu zen ; bi milaren bat txerri ito ziren .
PRED:	But he gave them the Spirit . The spirit came out of the man and went into the boat , and they went into the lake , and they fell down into the sea .
GOLD:	So Jesus gave them permission . The evil spirits came out of the man and entered the pigs , and the entire herd of about 2,000 pigs plunged down the steep hillside into the lake and drowned in the water .

ID:	5281
INPUT:	Errukitu zen Jainko Jauna , eta esan zuen : — Hau ere ez da gertatuko !
PRED:	And the Lord God pity upon him , and said , This shall not be done .
GOLD:	Then the Lord relented from this plan , too . “ I will not do that either , ” said the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	5282
INPUT:	aita semearen aurka eta semea aitaren aurka , ama alabaren kontra eta alaba amaren kontra , amaginarreba errainaren kontra eta erraina amaginarrebaren kontra » .
PRED:	and against his father , and against his father , and against his mother , and against her mother , and against her mother , and against her mother , and against her husband .
GOLD:	‘ Father will be divided against sonand son against father ; mother against daughterand daughter against mother ; and mother-in-law against daughter-in-lawand daughter-in-law against mother-in-law . ' ”

ID:	5283
INPUT:	honela , Baal-Peorren kultuetara makurtu zen herria eta Jaunaren haserre-sua piztu zen Israelen aurka .
PRED:	So the people bowed down to the high places of Baal , and the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel .
GOLD:	In this way , Israel joined in the worship of Baal of Peor , causing the Lord 's anger to blaze against his people .

ID:	5284
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunaren eraginez , mendebaldeko haizeak jo zuen indartsu ; honek larrapoteak aurrean eraman eta Itsaso Gorrira jaurti zituen . Ez zen larrapote bat bera ere Egipto osoan gelditu .
PRED:	And the wind lifted up the wind of the Lord , and the wind lifted up before the eyes of the sea , and cast them into the Red Sea , and he cast them into the Red Sea . And there was no one left in Egypt .
GOLD:	The Lord responded by shifting the wind , and the strong west wind blew the locusts into the Red Sea . Not a single locust remained in all the land of Egypt .

ID:	5285
INPUT:	« Niri sagaraturiko pertsonak behar duzue izan . « Ez jan piztiek oihanean sarraskituriko abereen okelarik ; zakurrei botako diezue .
PRED:	“ You must eat any of the animals that are holy to me . You must not eat any of the animals of the animals . You must throw them down .
GOLD:	“ You must also give me the firstborn of your cattle , sheep , and goats . But leave the newborn animal with its mother for seven days ; then give it to me on the eighth day .

ID:	5286
INPUT:	Jaunaren aurrean dagoen aldareko ikatz goriz errautsontzia betez eta bi eskutada intsentsu-hauts usaintsu hartuz , errezelaz barrualdera eramango ditu .
PRED:	He shall put fire on the altar of the Lord , and burn incense on the altar of the altar , and burn incense on the top of the altar , and burn incense on the top of the heaven .
GOLD:	he will fill an incense burner with burning coals from the altar that stands before the Lord . Then he will take two handfuls of fragrant powdered incense and will carry the burner and the incense behind the inner curtain .

ID:	5287
INPUT:	buruz gain ustetsuen burlaz , harroen mespretxuz .
PRED:	The Lord said , “ You are proud , and you are proud . ”
GOLD:	We have had more than our fill of the scoffing of the proudand the contempt of the arrogant .

ID:	5288
INPUT:	Horrelaxe eratu zen egun hartan Jaunaren zerbitzua Pazkoa ospatzeko eta Jaunaren aldarean erre-opariak eskaintzeko , Josias erregeak agindu bezala .
PRED:	And it came to pass in that day , that the Lord had made the Passover offering to the Lord , and to offer the burnt offering to the Lord , as King Josiah had commanded .
GOLD:	The entire ceremony for the Lord 's Passover was completed that day . All the burnt offerings were sacrificed on the altar of the Lord , as King Josiah had commanded .

ID:	5289
INPUT:	Amorru biziz zapaldu ditut herriak , neure sumin-edariz mozkortueta haien odola lurrean isuri .
PRED:	I have caused my people to drink , and I have caused them to drink their blood and drink their blood on the earth .
GOLD:	I crushed the nations in my angerand made them stagger and fall to the ground , spilling their blood upon the earth . ”

ID:	5290
INPUT:	Jakina da gaiztakeria eta miseriaez direla berez sortzen lurrean :
PRED:	This is the thing that is evil and wickedness in the earth :
GOLD:	But evil does not spring from the soil , and trouble does not sprout from the earth .

ID:	5291
INPUT:	Tenpluko tresnak
PRED:	The Temple
GOLD:	Furnishings for the Temple

ID:	5292
INPUT:	Ismaelek gatibu zeraman jendea , Johanan eta beronen gudalburuak ikustean , pozez bete zen .
PRED:	When the people of Israel carried away captive and his army , they saw him , and they were filled with joy .
GOLD:	The people Ishmael had captured shouted for joy when they saw Johanan and the other military leaders .

ID:	5293
INPUT:	Eufrates ibaiaz beste aldetik hartu eta Kanaan lurraldean barrena ibilarazi nuen zuen aita Abraham . Semea eman nion , Isaak , eta ondorengotza ugaldu .
PRED:	And I took him from the Jordan River , and brought him to the land of Canaan . And I gave him the son of Isaac , Isaac , and his son Isaac .
GOLD:	But I took your ancestor Abraham from the land beyond the Euphrates and led him into the land of Canaan . I gave him many descendants through his son Isaac .

ID:	5294
INPUT:	Entzun mezu hau : Badator herri batiparraldetik istilu handiz , Judako hiriakbasamortu eta txakal-zulobihurtzera .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : The people of the north is coming from the north , and the cities of Judah , and the cities of Judah , and the cities of Judah , and the cities of Judah .
GOLD:	Listen ! Hear the terrifying roar of great armiesas they roll down from the north.The towns of Judah will be destroyedand become a haunt for jackals .

ID:	5295
INPUT:	Erdiminak baino lehenizan du Sionek haurra , oinazeak baino lehenekarri du umea .
PRED:	She has been better than the daughter of Zion ; she has brought the child to her feet .
GOLD:	“ Before the birth pains even begin , Jerusalem gives birth to a son .

ID:	5296
INPUT:	alde bakoitzetik bi mila berrehun eta berrogeita hamar metro dituen karratua izango da .
PRED:	And the length of each side of each side shall be a hundred and fifty cubits .
GOLD:	The city will measure 11/2 miles on each side — north , south , east , and west .

ID:	5297
INPUT:	Sararen heriotza eta e<unk> ta
PRED:	The Death of Samaria and Samaria
GOLD:	The Burial of Sarah

ID:	5298
INPUT:	Neskameek arroztzat naukate , kanpotartzat hartzen naute .
PRED:	The young women have taken me as a young woman , and they have taken me outside .
GOLD:	My servants and maids consider me a stranger.I am like a foreigner to them .

ID:	5299
INPUT:	Baina orain , lotuak gintuen legearentzat hilak gaudelarik , legetik aske gaude ; horrela , Espirituaren bizi berriaren arabera zerbitza dezakegu Jauna , eta ez lege idatziaren arau zaharraren arabera .
PRED:	But now we are put to shame by the law , so that we may serve the Lord , so that we may live by the Spirit , and not according to the law of the Spirit .
GOLD:	But now we have been released from the law , for we died to it and are no longer captive to its power . Now we can serve God , not in the old way of obeying the letter of the law , but in the new way of living in the Spirit .

ID:	5300
INPUT:	Nire bitartez esan zuena bete du Jaunak : zure eskuetatik erregetza kendu eta beste bati eman dio , Davidi .
PRED:	The Lord has spoken to David , saying , “ He has taken the kingdom from your hand and has given him another king . ”
GOLD:	The Lord has done just as he said he would . He has torn the kingdom from you and given it to your rival , David .

ID:	5301
INPUT:	3
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	He

ID:	5302
INPUT:	Hain zuzen , faraoia , gertatuaren berri jakin zuelarik , Moises hil nahian zebilen , baina honek faraoiagandik ihes egin zuen eta Madian eskualdera joan zen bizitzera . Han , putzu baten ondoan eseri zen .
PRED:	And when Pharaoh heard that it was done , he fled from Pharaoh , and fled from the land of Egypt , and went into the hand of Pharaoh .
GOLD:	And sure enough , Pharaoh heard what had happened , and he tried to kill Moses . But Moses fled from Pharaoh and went to live in the land of Midian.When Moses arrived in Midian , he sat down beside a well .

ID:	5303
INPUT:	lurrikara handiak izango dira , eta izurrite eta goseteak han eta hemen ; gauza ikaragarriak gertatuko dira , eta ortzian seinale handiak azalduko .
PRED:	The earth will be great , and there will be famine , and there will be famine and famine , and there will be a sign in it , and there will be great sign in the sixth day .
GOLD:	There will be great earthquakes , and there will be famines and plagues in many lands , and there will be terrifying things and great miraculous signs from heaven .

ID:	5304
INPUT:	Hau dio Jainko Jaunak : « Egin txalo eta dantza ! Zoriondu Israel herria bere jokabide guztiz higuingarriagatik ! Gerraz , gosez eta izurriz eroriko dira .
PRED:	Thus says the Lord God : “ Go up and drink ! Blessed is the house of Israel , because of all their abominations , and in famine , and in famine , and in famine , and in famine .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Clap your hands in horror , and stamp your feet . Cry out because of all the detestable sins the people of Israel have committed . Now they are going to die from war and famine and disease .

ID:	5305
INPUT:	Gero , leinuen ordezkari bezala izen-bilketa egiten jardun zuten familiaburuek
PRED:	And the heads of the children of Dan , according to their fathers ' houses , according to their fathers ' houses .
GOLD:	Then the leaders of Israel — the tribal leaders who had registered the troops — came and brought their offerings .

ID:	5306
INPUT:	Jaunak zigortu egin zituen Bet-Xemexekoak ere , Jaunaren kutxari ikusmiraz begira egon zirelako ; herri hartako hirurogeita hamar gizaseme zigortu zituen Jaunak . Atsekabe handia izan zuen herriak , Jaunak oso gogor zigortu zuelako .
PRED:	And the Lord struck the men of Judah , and he saw the ark of the Lord , because he had seen the ark of the Lord , and he struck the sons of the people of the land . And the Lord was very great in the sight of the people .
GOLD:	But the Lord killed seventy men from Beth-shemesh because they looked into the Ark of the Lord . And the people mourned greatly because of what the Lord had done .

ID:	5307
INPUT:	Jesus nola atxilotuko
PRED:	Jesus Heals to Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Anointed at Bethany

ID:	5308
INPUT:	Habia bati bezala erantsi diet eskuaherrien aberastasunei . Habian utzitako arrautzakhartzen diren bezalaxehartu dut neuretzat lur guztia , eta ez zuen inork hegalik mugitu , ez txio egiteko mokorik zabaldu » .
PRED:	I have given them the riches of the nations forever , and I have taken all the wealth of the earth , and I have taken away all the land of the earth , and there is no one to open it . ”
GOLD:	I have robbed their nests of richesand gathered up kingdoms as a farmer gathers eggs.No one can even flap a wing against meor utter a peep of protest . ”

ID:	5309
INPUT:	Zu zara , oi Jainko , zu betidanik nire errege . Zuk lortu zenuen lurrean garaipena :
PRED:	You are my God , and you are my King forever . You have made me king over the earth .
GOLD:	You , O God , are my king from ages past , bringing salvation to the earth .

ID:	5310
INPUT:	Nork bere biziaren ordain Jaunarentzat zerga ematean , ez du aberatsak bost gramo baino gehiago ordainduko , ezta pobreak ere gutxiago .
PRED:	And if any man give his life to the Lord , he shall not pay five hundred talents of silver , and the poor shall not be poor .
GOLD:	When this offering is given to the Lord to purify your lives , making you right with him , the rich must not give more than the specified amount , and the poor must not give less .

ID:	5311
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun zion : — Itxurazaleok ! Zuetako nork ez du larunbatez ere idia nahiz astoa ukuilutik askatu eta ura edatera eramaten ?
PRED:	And the Lord said to him , “ You blind men of you , who do n't let any of you go out on the Sabbath day , or on the Sabbath day , or on the Sabbath , or on the Sabbath day , or on the Sabbath day ? ”
GOLD:	But the Lord replied , “ You hypocrites ! Each of you works on the Sabbath day ! Do n't you untie your ox or your donkey from its stall on the Sabbath and lead it out for water ?

ID:	5312
INPUT:	Ohoratu aita-amak : hori da berekin agintzari bat daraman lehen mandamendua , hau da :
PRED:	You shall say to your father , ‘ This is the first thing that I have given to you , saying ,
GOLD:	“ Honor your father and mother . ” This is the first commandment with a promise :

ID:	5313
INPUT:	Bildu zituen Saulek bere gizonak Telamen eta zenbatu : berrehun mila oinezko eta Judaren leinuko hamar mila gizon .
PRED:	And Saul gathered together his men together with him , and gathered them together , one hundred thousand thousand and ten thousand thousand thousand thousand and five thousand .
GOLD:	So Saul mobilized his army at Telaim . There were 200,000 soldiers from Israel and 10,000 men from Judah .

ID:	5314
INPUT:	Judako jende guztia pozik zegoen zin eginarengatik , bihotz-bihotzez egin baitzuten . Eta Jaunaren bila gogo osoz ibili zirenez , aurkitu ahal izan zuten eta hark bakea eman zien alde guztietatik .
PRED:	And all the people of Judah were filled with joy , because they were filled with all their heart . And they found the Lord with all their heart , and they found peace in all their heart .
GOLD:	All in Judah were happy about this covenant , for they had entered into it with all their heart . They earnestly sought after God , and they found him . And the Lord gave them rest from their enemies on every side .

ID:	5315
INPUT:	Eta errege nahi ez ninduten etsai horiek , berriz , ekarri hona eta hil itzazue nire aurrean ” » .
PRED:	But these enemies do not want me to be king , but you must die before me . ”
GOLD:	And as for these enemies of mine who did n't want me to be their king — bring them in and execute them right here in front of me . ' ”

ID:	5316
INPUT:	Egun hartan , nire eraginez , Judako buruzagiek aldameneko herri guztiak irentsiko dituzte , ezker-eskuin , suteak sasia bezala , zuziak lasto-balak bezala ; Jerusalemgo bizilagunek , ordea , beren hirian jarraituko dute bizitzen .
PRED:	And in that day the princes of Judah shall devour all the inhabitants of the altar , as the fire of the altar , and all the inhabitants of the land of Judah shall be burnt with fire , and they shall live in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	“ On that day I will make the clans of Judah like a flame that sets a woodpile ablaze or like a burning torch among sheaves of grain . They will burn up all the neighboring nations right and left , while the people living in Jerusalem remain secure .

ID:	5317
INPUT:	eta , Jaunak zuen Jainkoak hura zuen esku jartzean , bertako gizonezko guztiak ezpataz hilko dituzue .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , when the Lord your God has delivered you into your hand , and all the men of you shall fall into the hand of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	When the Lord your God hands the town over to you , use your swords to kill every man in the town .

ID:	5318
INPUT:	« Hauxe da nik , Nabukodonosor erregeak , izan dudan ametsa . Orain zuk , Beltxatzar , azaldu ametsaren esanahia . Erreinuko jakitun guztiak ez dira gai izan hori azaltzeko ; zuk , ordea , egin dezakezu , jainko santuen espirituak gidatzen baitzaitu » .
PRED:	“ This is the dream that Nebuchadnezzar king , the dream , the dream , and the interpretation of the dream , and the interpretation of the dream , and all the wise men of the kingdom , that they may not know it . ”
GOLD:	But leave the stump and the roots in the ground , bound with a band of iron and bronzeand surrounded by tender grass.Now let him be drenched with the dew of heaven , and let him live with the wild animals among the plants of the field .

ID:	5319
INPUT:	Aurrerantzean , ez duzuAbram izango izen , Abraham baizik , herri askoren sorburuegingo baitzaitut .
PRED:	And when you do not stand before , you will not be Abram , but I will make you ruler over many peoples .
GOLD:	What 's more , I am changing your name . It will no longer be Abram . Instead , you will be called Abraham , for you will be the father of many nations .

ID:	5320
INPUT:	Orobat , Baalat eta beronenak ziren biltegi-herrixkak berreraiki zituen , baita guda-gurdi eta zaldiak gordetzekoak ere . Nahi izan zuen guztia eraiki zuen Salomonek , nola Jerusalemen hala Libanon eta bere menpeko lurralde osoan .
PRED:	And he built the cities of Sodom , and his chariots , and his chariots , and his chariots , and his chariots , and his chariots , and all that Solomon had built in Jerusalem , and in all his land .
GOLD:	He also rebuilt Baalath and other supply centers and constructed towns where his chariots and horses could be stationed . He built everything he desired in Jerusalem and Lebanon and throughout his entire realm .

ID:	5321
INPUT:	Jaunak Daviden erreinua berregin
PRED:	The
GOLD:	A Promise of Restoration

ID:	5322
INPUT:	Orduan , erregeak eraztuna bere behatzetik atera eta juduen etsai zen Hamani , Hamedataren seme eta Agagen jatorrikoari , eman zion ,
PRED:	Then the king brought him out of his presence , and delivered him out of his hand , and gave him the son of Zaccur , the son of Zaccur , the son of Zaccur , the son of Zaccur , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Shealtiel ,
GOLD:	The king agreed , confirming his decision by removing his signet ring from his finger and giving it to Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite , the enemy of the Jews .

ID:	5323
INPUT:	Hauek dira Moisesek Israel herri osoari zuzenduriko hitzaldiak , Jordanez beste aldean , basamortuan , Sufen aurrez aurre dagoen haranean , hau da , Paran eta Tofel , Laban , Hatzerot eta Di-Zahaben arteko haranean .
PRED:	These are the cities that Moses had spoken to all the people of Israel , in the wilderness , in the wilderness , in the wilderness , in the wilderness , in the wilderness of Mamre , in the wilderness of Mamre , in the wilderness of Kadesh .
GOLD:	These are the words that Moses spoke to all the people of Israel while they were in the wilderness east of the Jordan River . They were camped in the Jordan Valley near Suph , between Paran on one side and Tophel , Laban , Hazeroth , and Di-zahab on the other .

ID:	5324
INPUT:	Bai , badator eguna , Efraimgo mendialdeanzaintzaileek oihu egingo dutena : “ Ea , igo gaitezen Sionera , goazen Jaunarengana , geure Jainkoarengana ” » .
PRED:	For it shall come to pass in the mountains of Ephraim , that the mountains of Ephraim shall cry out , saying , Come , let us go up to the Lord our God .
GOLD:	The day will come when watchmen will shoutfrom the hill country of Ephraim , ‘ Come , let us go up to Jerusalemto worship the Lord our God . ' ”

ID:	5325
INPUT:	Judako Asaren erregealdiko hogeita hemezortzigarren urtean hasi zen Omriren seme Akab Israelgo errege izaten . Hogeita bi urtez izan zen errege Samarian .
PRED:	In the eighteenth year of Asa king of Judah , Ahab son of Ahab became king of Israel , and he reigned two years in Samaria .
GOLD:	Ahab son of Omri began to rule over Israel in the thirty-eighth year of King Asa 's reign in Judah . He reigned in Samaria twenty-two years .

ID:	5326
INPUT:	Emaiezu beren egintzen ordaina , beren gaiztakerien ordaina . Emaiezu egin dutenaren saria , itzuli merezi dutena .
PRED:	Give them what they have done , and they have done for their wickedness . Give them what they have done .
GOLD:	Give them the punishment they so richly deserve ! Measure it out in proportion to their wickedness.Pay them back for all their evil deeds ! Give them a taste of what they have done to others .

ID:	5327
INPUT:	eta berorien ahaideok : Xebanias , Hodias , Kelita , Pelaias , Hanan ,
PRED:	And their brothers : Azariah , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , and Jozabad .
GOLD:	Mica , Rehob , Hashabiah ,

ID:	5328
INPUT:	Ez jo auzitara zeure zerbitzari honekin , ez baita bizidunik zure aurrean errugabe .
PRED:	Do n't judge your servant 's servant , for you do n't have pity on your face .
GOLD:	Do n't put your servant on trial , for no one is innocent before you .

ID:	5329
INPUT:	Rubenekin batera Simeon eta Gaden leinuak etxolatuko dira . Simeondarren buruzagia Tzurixadairen seme Xelumiel izango da ,
PRED:	And the sons of Reuben shall go out with him : and the prince of the children of Reuben shall be Nethanel the son of Healed .
GOLD:	SimeonShelumiel son of Zurishaddai59,300

ID:	5330
INPUT:	Hark erantzun zien : — Zer agindu zizuen horretaz Moisesek ?
PRED:	And he said unto them , What hath Moses commanded you to do these things ?
GOLD:	Jesus answered them with a question : “ What did Moses say in the law about divorce ? ”

ID:	5331
INPUT:	« Ezertarako ez diren gezurrezko arrazoietan sinesten duzue .
PRED:	“ You do n't believe false testimony , but you do n't believe lies .
GOLD:	“ ‘ Do n't be fooled into thinking that you will never suffer because the Temple is here . It 's a lie !

ID:	5332
INPUT:	Ene Jainko Jauna , gure aita Daviden ordez ni , zeure zerbitzari hau , egin nauzu errege . Ni , berriz , mutil gaztea nauzu eta gobernatzen ikasi gabea .
PRED:	O Lord our God , you have done this thing to my father David my father , but I am a young man , and I am a young man .
GOLD:	“ Now , O Lord my God , you have made me king instead of my father , David , but I am like a little child who does n't know his way around .

ID:	5333
INPUT:	Zoaz zeu hurrengo barau-egunean eta irakurri tenpluan , herriaren aurrean , nik esanik erroiluan idatzi duzun Jaunaren mezua ; irakurri Judako hirietatik etorriko diren guztiei ere .
PRED:	Go and read the words of the Lord in the house of the Lord , and read it in the book of the people , which I have written in the book of all the cities of Judah .
GOLD:	So you go to the Temple on the next day of fasting , and read the messages from the Lord that I have had you write on this scroll . Read them so the people who are there from all over Judah will hear them .

ID:	5334
INPUT:	Horiren seme Xafat , Simeonen leinukoa ;
PRED:	These are the names of the children of Simeon : Of the tribe of Manasseh :
GOLD:	SimeonShaphat son of Hori

ID:	5335
INPUT:	Ni , Paulo , Jainkoaren zerbitzari eta Jesu Kristoren apostolu naiz , Jainkoak hautatuak sinesmenera ekartzeko eta betiko biziaren itxaropenean oinarritzen den egiazko erlijioaren egia ezagutarazteko . Gezurrik ez dioen Jainkoak mundua izaten hasi baino lehen agindua zuen betiko bizi hori ,
PRED:	I am Paul , the servant of God and the servant of God Jesus Christ , to bring the faith of faith and eternal life to eternal life and eternal life , as God did not know the law of the world .
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , a slave of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ . I have been sent to proclaim faith to those God has chosen and to teach them to know the truth that shows them how to live godly lives .

ID:	5336
INPUT:	( Lk 11 , 2-4 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Teaching about Money and Possessions

ID:	5337
INPUT:	Goretsazue adar-soinuz , goretsi harpa eta zitaraz .
PRED:	Give thanks to him , praise him , and praise him , and praise him .
GOLD:	Praise him with a blast of the ram 's horn ; praise him with the lyre and harp !

ID:	5338
INPUT:	Sarrera eta printzipio nagusia
PRED:	The King and the King
GOLD:	Everything Is Meaningless

ID:	5339
INPUT:	Jainkoaren sumin-ardoa edan beharko du , haren zigor-kopan nahasgabe garbi prestatua dagoena . <unk> eta sufrez oinazetuko dute aingeru santuen eta Bildotsaren aurrean .
PRED:	And he shall drink the wine of God 's wrath , and he shall be clean in his wrath , and shall be clean in the sanctuary , and in the presence of the Lamb , and before the Lamb .
GOLD:	must drink the wine of God 's anger . It has been poured full strength into God 's cup of wrath . And they will be tormented with fire and burning sulfur in the presence of the holy angels and the Lamb .

ID:	5340
INPUT:	Hona hemen seme-alaba zaretenaren seinalea : Jainkoak bere Semearen Espiritua bidali du gure bihotzetara , eta Espirituak « Abba ! » , hau da , « Aita ! » dio oihuka .
PRED:	This is the sign of the sign of the children : God sent his Son into his heart , and he sent us into his heart , saying , “ Father ! ”
GOLD:	And because we are his children , God has sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts , prompting us to call out , “ Abba , Father . ”

ID:	5341
INPUT:	Gerxondarren familiaburua Laelen seme Eliasaf zen .
PRED:	These are the names of the families of the sons of Gershon , the son of Jozabad .
GOLD:	The leader of the Gershonite clans was Eliasaph son of Lael .

ID:	5342
INPUT:	eta esan zion : — Etor hakit , bai . Zeruko hegaztiei eta lurreko piztiei emango zieat hire haragia .
PRED:	And he said to him , “ Come , I will give you my bread to the birds of heaven and the birds of the earth , and the birds of the earth . ”
GOLD:	“ Come over here , and I 'll give your flesh to the birds and wild animals ! ” Goliath yelled .

ID:	5343
INPUT:	Begira , ni basamortuko lautadetan geldituko naiz , zuen berririk izan dezadan arte .
PRED:	Behold , I will stay in the wilderness , until I am going to see you .
GOLD:	I will stop at the shallows of the Jordan River and wait there for a report from you . ”

ID:	5344
INPUT:	Maltzurra , berriz , azpijokoz ari daeta zitalkeriaz baliatzen , dohakabe eta behartsueneskubideak gezurrez deuseztatzeko .
PRED:	But if a wicked man has put him to death , he will not destroy the poor and the poor and the poor .
GOLD:	The smooth tricks of scoundrels are evil.They plot crooked schemes.They lie to convict the poor , even when the cause of the poor is just .

ID:	5345
INPUT:	Horregatik , prestatu zeuen gogoa zerbitzurako eta bizi neurritasunez . Jar ezazue zeuen itxaropen osoa Jesu Kristoren agerpenak ekarriko dizuen dohainean .
PRED:	Therefore prepare your heart to serve the Lord Jesus Christ , and put your hope in the grace of Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	So prepare your minds for action and exercise self-control . Put all your hope in the gracious salvation that will come to you when Jesus Christ is revealed to the world .

ID:	5346
INPUT:	Geldi bekit mihia ahosabaian itsatsirik , beti gogoan ez bazaitut , zu , Jerusalem , neure pozik handiena ez bazaitut .
PRED:	Let my tongue stay in the sea , and I will not remember you , Jerusalem , and I will not rejoice in you .
GOLD:	May my tongue stick to the roof of my mouthif I fail to remember you , if I do n't make Jerusalem my greatest joy .

ID:	5347
INPUT:	Itzuli zen Balaam Balakengana eta erre-oparien ondoan aurkitu zuen moabdar buruzagi guztiekin .
PRED:	Balaam returned to Balaam , and found the princes of Moab with all the princes of Moab .
GOLD:	So Balaam returned and found the king standing beside his burnt offerings with all the officials of Moab .

ID:	5348
INPUT:	Belztu eta erori egiten zait larruazala , hezurrak ere bai sukarraz .
PRED:	My flesh is full of skin , and my bones are full of bones .
GOLD:	My skin has turned dark , and my bones burn with fever .

ID:	5349
INPUT:	Daviden hirian beretzat eginarazia zuen hilobian ehortzi zuten . Lurrin eta usainki gozoak nahasiz eginiko ukenduz betetako etzalekuan ezarri ondoren , su handia egin zuten haren ohorez .
PRED:	And they buried him in the city of David , and buried him in the city of David . And they laid him on the ground , and set him in the place where he had made for him , and they burned it with fire .
GOLD:	He was buried in the tomb he had carved out for himself in the City of David . He was laid on a bed perfumed with sweet spices and fragrant ointments , and the people built a huge funeral fire in his honor .

ID:	5350
INPUT:	Hori gertatzean , jakingo dute egiptoarrek ni naizela Jauna » .
PRED:	The Egyptians will know that I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	When my glory is displayed through them , all Egypt will see my glory and know that I am the Lord ! ”

ID:	5351
INPUT:	Ugari baino ugariago nuen esnea , harkaitzek ere olio-errekak isurtzen zituztenniretzat .
PRED:	And I poured out the water before the waters , and the trees poured out the olive oil for me .
GOLD:	My steps were awash in cream , and the rocks gushed olive oil for me .

ID:	5352
INPUT:	<unk> tarren buruzagia Reuelen seme Eliasaf izango da ,
PRED:	And the prince of the tribe of the children of Gershon shall be the prince of the children of Gershon , and the prince of the children of Gershon .
GOLD:	GadEliasaph son of Deuel45,650

ID:	5353
INPUT:	hodei guztien gainetik igoko naizeta Goi-goikoaren antzeko izango ” .
PRED:	I will set my face on the clouds , and I will be like the Most High . ”
GOLD:	I will climb to the highest heavensand be like the Most High . '

ID:	5354
INPUT:	Hark , orduan : — Maisu , gazte-gaztetandik bete izan dut hori guztia .
PRED:	He said to them , “ Teacher , I have kept all these things from my youth . ”
GOLD:	“ Teacher , ” the man replied , “ I 've obeyed all these commandments since I was young . ”

ID:	5355
INPUT:	Hau esaten duzue eta ez dakizue zuen bizitza bihar zer izango den . Une batez agertu eta berehala desagertzen den lainoa besterik ez zarete eta !
PRED:	This is what you say , and you do n't know what will live . You will live in one hour , and the cloud will be revealed .
GOLD:	How do you know what your life will be like tomorrow ? Your life is like the morning fog — it 's here a little while , then it 's gone .

ID:	5356
INPUT:	Jeremiasen esanera Barukek idatzitako erroilua erregeak erre ondoren , Jaunak agindu hau eman zion Jeremiasi :
PRED:	Then Jeremiah the servant of the Lord came to Jeremiah , saying ,
GOLD:	After the king had burned the scroll on which Baruch had written Jeremiah 's words , the Lord gave Jeremiah another message . He said ,

ID:	5357
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Moisesi : « Egizu israeldarren lehen-semeen izen-bilketa , hilabetez gorako gizonezkoak erroldatuz .
PRED:	And the Lord said unto Moses , Speak unto the sons of Israel , and take the names of the firstborn of the firstborn of the sons of Israel .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Now count all the firstborn sons in Israel who are one month old or older , and make a list of their names .

ID:	5358
INPUT:	Israelen leinu guztietarik zuen aita hautatu nuen apaizgorako , nire aldarera igo zedin , intsentsua erre ziezadan eta nire santutegian efod delakoa jantzi zezan . Era berean , israeldarrek egindako eskaintza guztietarik beren zatia hartzeko eskubidea eman nien zuen aitaren ondorengoei .
PRED:	And I chose all the tribes of Israel , that they may go up to the altar of my father , to burn incense , and to burn incense in my sanctuary , and to burn incense in the sanctuary of the house of Israel for ever .
GOLD:	I chose your ancestor Aaron from among all the tribes of Israel to be my priest , to offer sacrifices on my altar , to burn incense , and to wear the priestly vest as he served me . And I assigned the sacrificial offerings to you priests .

ID:	5359
INPUT:	Zuen abereek eta basabereek , berriz , lurrak berez ematen duena izango dute janari .
PRED:	But your livestock and your animals will eat their food .
GOLD:	Your livestock and the wild animals in your land will also be allowed to eat what the land produces .

ID:	5360
INPUT:	Aramearrei , moabdarrei , amondarrei , filistearrei , amalektarrei eta Tzobako errege Hadadezerri , Rehoben semeari , harrapatua zen hura guztia .
PRED:	And the children of Ammon , and the Philistines , and the Amorites , and the Amorites , and the king of Ammon , and the king of Ammon , and all that was taken .
GOLD:	from Edom , Moab , Ammon , Philistia , and Amalek — and from Hadadezer son of Rehob , king of Zobah .

ID:	5361
INPUT:	Zatozte , egiogun poz-oihu Jaunari , poz-irrintzi salbatzen gaituen harkaitzari !
PRED:	Come , let us sing to the Lord , for he has saved us with joy .
GOLD:	Come , let us sing to the Lord ! Let us shout joyfully to the Rock of our salvation .

ID:	5362
INPUT:	baina elkarte osoarentzako eta Jaunaren aldarerako , Jaunak aukeratuko zuen tokian , egurgile eta ur-ekarle izatera behartu zituen . Eta eginkizun hori bera dute gaur egun ere .
PRED:	But the Lord will choose all the congregation of the congregation of the congregation of the congregation of the congregation and of gold , and of gold , and of gold , and of gold , and of gold , and of gold , and of gold , and of gold , which thou hast done unto this day .
GOLD:	But that day he made the Gibeonites the woodcutters and water carriers for the community of Israel and for the altar of the Lord — wherever the Lord would choose to build it . And that is what they do to this day .

ID:	5363
INPUT:	Xalum , Amarias eta Jose .
PRED:	Azariah , Azariah , Azariah , and Joseph .
GOLD:	Shallum , Amariah , and Joseph .

ID:	5364
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Filistearrek mendekuz jokatu dute , gogor eta mespretxu biziz mendekatu dira , beren betidaniko etsaiak suntsitzeraino ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord God says : “ The Philistines have turned away from their enemies . They have rejected their enemies . They have turned away from their enemies to their enemies .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The people of Philistia have acted against Judah out of bitter revenge and long-standing contempt .

ID:	5365
INPUT:	Bai handi eta sakonak Jainkoaren eskuzabaltasuna , jakinduria eta ezaguera ! Bai aztergaitzak beraren erabakiak eta sumaezinak haren bideak !
PRED:	How great is the power of God , and the wisdom of God , and knowledge , and knowledge , and his ways are in his ways .
GOLD:	Oh , how great are God 's riches and wisdom and knowledge ! How impossible it is for us to understand his decisions and his ways !

ID:	5366
INPUT:	lurralde lehorrean sargoria bezala . Zuk mututu duzuatzerritarren zalaparta-hotsa ; lainoaren itzalak beroa bezala , hala ito dituzujende ankerraren oihuak .
PRED:	As you go into the land of the land , you have heard the voice of a stranger , as the sound of a cloud , as the sound of a cloud , and the sound of the people of the land .
GOLD:	or like the relentless heat of the desert.But you silence the roar of foreign nations.As the shade of a cloud cools relentless heat , so the boastful songs of ruthless people are stilled .

ID:	5367
INPUT:	Biziki haserretu ziren biak , eta nor bere aldetik joan zen . Bernabek Markos hartu zuen eta Ziprera atera zen itsasoz ;
PRED:	And they were angry , and every man went to his own way . Barnabas took Barnabas , and went out to Antioch .
GOLD:	Their disagreement was so sharp that they separated . Barnabas took John Mark with him and sailed for Cyprus .

ID:	5368
INPUT:	Moisesen eta Aaronen arbasoak
PRED:	Moses and Aaron
GOLD:	The Ancestors of Moses and Aaron

ID:	5369
INPUT:	Hau entzutean , bertan zeuden batzuek esan zuten : « Eliasi deika ari da » .
PRED:	When some of them heard this , they said , “ Elijah is called . ”
GOLD:	Some of the bystanders misunderstood and thought he was calling for the prophet Elijah .

ID:	5370
INPUT:	Itsas herrietako printze guztiak beren tronuetatik jaitsiko dira , beren soingainekoak kendu eta jantzi bordatuak erantziko dituzte ; ikaraz beteko dira eta , lurrean eseririk , dardara egingo dute etengabe , zuregatik txundituta .
PRED:	And all the princes of the sea shall come down from their throne , and they shall take their garments , and take their garments , and their garments , and they shall be filled with fear , and they shall be satisfied , and they shall be hungry .
GOLD:	All the seaport rulers will step down from their thrones and take off their royal robes and beautiful clothing . They will sit on the ground trembling with horror at your destruction .

ID:	5371
INPUT:	Ez duzue elkarketa-etxolaren sarreratik alde egingo zazpi egunez , apaiz-sagarapena burutu arte ; zazpi egun iraungo baitu apaizgoa hartzeko ohikuneak .
PRED:	You shall not leave the tent of meeting seven days , until the door of the tent of meeting , until the days of Aaron , for seven days shall be priests .
GOLD:	You must not leave the Tabernacle entrance for seven days , for that is when the ordination ceremony will be completed .

ID:	5372
INPUT:	Davidek honela zioen bere baitan : « Halakoren batean , Saulen eskuak galdu behar nau ! Filistearren lurraldera ihes egin eta neure burua salbatzea izanen dut hoberena . Horrela , etsiko du Saulek eta ez da nire bila ibiliko Israel lurraldean , eta ni libre izango naiz haren eskuetatik » .
PRED:	David said to himself , “ If Saul has fled to the land of the Philistines , I will go to the land of the Philistines , and I will save him from my hand , and he will not be saved from my land . ”
GOLD:	But David kept thinking to himself , “ Someday Saul is going to get me . The best thing I can do is escape to the Philistines . Then Saul will stop hunting for me in Israelite territory , and I will finally be safe . ”

ID:	5373
INPUT:	Eguzkia ateratzen ari zuen Lot Tzoarrera iritsi zenean .
PRED:	And when the sun came to Lot , he came to Lot .
GOLD:	Lot reached the village just as the sun was rising over the horizon .

ID:	5374
INPUT:	Baina barkatuko al dit hauxe Jaunak : nire nagusia , niri besotik heldurik , Rimon jainkoa bere jauretxean gurtzera sartzean , nik ere harekin batera ahuspeztu beharra izatea . Barkatuko al dit Jaunak ekintza hori !
PRED:	But this is what the Lord says : “ When my master came to my master 's house , when he went into his own house , he will worship my god , and he will worship me . ”
GOLD:	However , may the Lord pardon me in this one thing : When my master the king goes into the temple of the god Rimmon to worship there and leans on my arm , may the Lord pardon me when I bow , too . ”

ID:	5375
INPUT:	Jaunaren aginduak ez dira beteezinak
PRED:	The Lord 's commands
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	5376
INPUT:	Jauna , senda nazazueta sendatua geldituko naiz , salba nazazueta salbatua izango . Zu zaitut goresten !
PRED:	Lord , I will heal you , and you will be saved , and you will be saved .
GOLD:	O Lord , if you heal me , I will be truly healed ; if you save me , I will be truly saved.My praises are for you alone !

ID:	5377
INPUT:	Gurpil haien tankera guda-gurdiena bezalakoxea zen . Haien ardatzak , uztaiak , erradioak eta gurpegiak ere brontzezkoak ziren denak .
PRED:	And their wheels were like the wheels of their chariots , and their lamps were of bronze , and their lamps were of bronze .
GOLD:	and were similar to chariot wheels . The axles , spokes , rims , and hubs were all cast from molten bronze .

ID:	5378
INPUT:	Tenpluan irakasten ari zela , galdera hau egin zuen Jesusek : « Nola esan dezakete lege-maisuek Mesias Daviden ondorengo dela ?
PRED:	When Jesus was teaching in the temple , he asked , “ How can the teachers of the law say , ‘ How can the Son of David ? '
GOLD:	Later , as Jesus was teaching the people in the Temple , he asked , “ Why do the teachers of religious law claim that the Messiah is the son of David ?

ID:	5379
INPUT:	Israeldarrek esan zioten : — Bai , emango dizkizugu . Eta , soingaineko bat zabaldurik , bertara bota zuen nork bere harrapakinetarik eraztun bana .
PRED:	And the children of Israel said unto him , We will give thee ; and he spread a garment , and spread it out , and cast it into the midst of the spoil .
GOLD:	“ Gladly ! ” they replied . They spread out a cloak , and each one threw in a gold earring he had gathered from the plunder .

ID:	5380
INPUT:	heldugabeko gazte batzuen arteanzentzubako bat zegoela ohartu nintzen .
PRED:	And I saw that there was a young young man among the young men who had not come to me .
GOLD:	I saw some naive young men , and one in particular who lacked common sense .

ID:	5381
INPUT:	Herriko jende xehea baizik ez zuen utzi , alorrak eta mahastiak landu zitzaten .
PRED:	But the people of the land did not leave the land , but they did not leave the fields and vineyards .
GOLD:	But Nebuzaradan allowed some of the poorest people to stay behind to care for the vineyards and fields .

ID:	5382
INPUT:	Haserretzen bazarete ere , ez heldu bekatu egiteraino ; zuen haserreak ez beza eguzkia sartu arte iraun .
PRED:	But if you are angry , do n't sin , do n't sin until the sun has come into the sun .
GOLD:	And “ do n't sin by letting anger control you . ” Do n't let the sun go down while you are still angry ,

ID:	5383
INPUT:	Dar-dar egingo du zeruaketa lurrak oinarritik ikara , Jaun ahalguztidun honekneure haserrea eta sumin goriaazalduko dudan egunean .
PRED:	And the earth and the earth shall be broken , and the earth , and the earth , and the earth , and the earth shall be angry in the day of the wrath of the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	For I will shake the heavens.The earth will move from its placewhen the Lord of Heaven 's Armies displays his wrathin the day of his fierce anger . ”

ID:	5384
INPUT:	Honekin , hau adierazi nahi digu Espiritu Santuak : lehenengo santutegiak irauten zuen bitartean , benetako santutegirako bidea ez zegoela zabalik .
PRED:	This is what the Holy Spirit says : “ As the Holy Spirit lives in the sanctuary , so that he would not live in his sanctuary . ”
GOLD:	By these regulations the Holy Spirit revealed that the entrance to the Most Holy Place was not freely open as long as the Tabernacle and the system it represented were still in use .

ID:	5385
INPUT:	Larunbatean , hiritik kanpora atera eta ibai ondora joan ginen , han juduen otoizleku bat zegoela uste baikenuen . Bertan eseri eta bilduak ziren emakumeei hitz egiten hasi ginen .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the Sabbath day , that we came out of the city , and went into the city , and there was a certain place where there was a certain man , and came to the women , and spake unto the women .
GOLD:	On the Sabbath we went a little way outside the city to a riverbank , where we thought people would be meeting for prayer , and we sat down to speak with some women who had gathered there .

ID:	5386
INPUT:	Jaunaren aingerua aurreratu eta inori eskuin-ezkerrera egiten ez uzteko moduko estugune batean gelditu zen .
PRED:	And the angel of the Lord stood before the right hand of the Lord , and on the left hand , and on the left hand , and on the left hand of the left hand , and on the left side of the left hand of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the angel of the Lord moved farther down the road and stood in a place too narrow for the donkey to get by at all .

ID:	5387
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : « Galilear horiek gainerakoak baino bekatariago zirela uste al duzue , heriotza hori izan zutelako ?
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Do you say that these are more than these sinners ? Do you think that they were death ?
GOLD:	“ Do you think those Galileans were worse sinners than all the other people from Galilee ? ” Jesus asked . “ Is that why they suffered ?

ID:	5388
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Kanta . Salmoa . Egin irrintzi Jainkoari , lurtar guztiok ,
PRED:	Sing to God , O God , all the earth !
GOLD:	Shout joyful praises to God , all the earth !

ID:	5389
INPUT:	Jeremias preso
PRED:	Jeremiah in the Temple
GOLD:	Jeremiah Is Imprisoned

ID:	5390
INPUT:	mespretxu eta irainak direla eta , mendeku bila dabilen etsaia dela eta .
PRED:	They say , “ They are ashamed , ” and they say , “ The enemy has sent them away . ”
GOLD:	All this has happened though we have not forgotten you.We have not violated your covenant .

ID:	5391
INPUT:	Izendatu zioten , beraz , egun bat , eta asko joan zitzaizkion bera zegoen etxera . Paulo Jainkoaren erregetzaren azalpena eta testigantza egiten jardun zitzaien goizetik arratsaldera eta , Moisesen legea eta profetak oinarri hartuz , Jesusen mezua sinestarazten ahalegindu zen .
PRED:	And many days came to the house of God , and many days came to the house of God , and the testimony of the kingdom of God , and the law of Moses , and the law of Moses , and the prophets , and the law of Moses , and the law of Moses .
GOLD:	So a time was set , and on that day a large number of people came to Paul 's lodging . He explained and testified about the Kingdom of God and tried to persuade them about Jesus from the Scriptures . Using the law of Moses and the books of the prophets , he spoke to them from morning until evening .

ID:	5392
INPUT:	egun batean galtzen dengari-hautsa bezalasakabanatuak izan baino lehen , Jaunaren haserre-suminazuen gainera jausi baino lehen , bai , Jaunaren haserre-egunazuen gainera jausi baino lehen .
PRED:	And when he had scattered the dust in the sight of the Lord , the wrath of the Lord came upon the face of the house of the Lord , before he came upon the face of his lord .
GOLD:	Gather before judgment begins , before your time to repent is blown away like chaff.Act now , before the fierce fury of the Lord fallsand the terrible day of the Lord 's anger begins .

ID:	5393
INPUT:	David eta Absalom adiskidetu
PRED:	Absalom and Absalom
GOLD:	Absalom Reconciled to David

ID:	5394
INPUT:	Aitak ez zion sekula haserrerik egin , ezta galdetu ere zergatik jokatzen zuen horrela . Bestalde , Adonias oso liraina zen ; Absalomen ondoren jaioa Davidi .
PRED:	And his father was angry with him , and he did not ask him what he had done , and he did not ask him . And Joab 's son was born to David .
GOLD:	Now his father , King David , had never disciplined him at any time , even by asking , “ Why are you doing that ? ” Adonijah had been born next after Absalom , and he was very handsome .

ID:	5395
INPUT:	« Agor egingo zaituzte Jaunak , bai zeuek , bai zuen lur eta abereak , eta antzu zuen behi eta ardiak .
PRED:	The Lord will punish you and your livestock and your livestock , and you will be like sheep and sheep .
GOLD:	Your children and your cropswill be cursed.The offspring of your herds and flockswill be cursed .

ID:	5396
INPUT:	ez du sasikultu-lekuetako otorduetan parte hartzen , ezta uste ona jartzen ere Israelgo idoloetan ; ez du lagun hurkoaren emaztea desohoratzen , ez da hurbiltzen ere hilerokoa duen emakumeagana ;
PRED:	He shall not eat any of the high places of worship , neither shall he go near to the idols of Israel , neither shall his wife come near to her .
GOLD:	He does not feast in the mountains before Israel 's idols or worship them . He does not commit adultery or have intercourse with a woman during her menstrual period .

ID:	5397
INPUT:	Alderantziz , amaigabeko poza eta alaitasunaizango duzuenik sortuko dudanagatik , poz-hiri bihurtuko baitut Jerusalem , alaitasun-herri bertako jendea .
PRED:	But I will make her glad , and I will make her glad , because I will make her glad , because I will make her glad , and the people of the land of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Be glad ; rejoice forever in my creation ! And look ! I will create Jerusalem as a place of happiness.Her people will be a source of joy .

ID:	5398
INPUT:	Horregatik , basoko lehoiek zaurituko dituzte , basamortuko otsoek txikituko ; lehoinabarrak zelatan daudehaien hiri inguruan , handik irteten diren guztiaksarraskitzeko . Izan ere , asko baitira haien errebeldiak , izugarri larriak haien desleialkeriak .
PRED:	Therefore the lion will be killed by the lion , and the young lion will come out of the wilderness ; for they will come out of their cities , for they will go out of their cities , because they are many abominations .
GOLD:	So now a lion from the forest will attack them ; a wolf from the desert will pounce on them.A leopard will lurk near their towns , tearing apart any who dare to venture out.For their rebellion is great , and their sins are many .

ID:	5399
INPUT:	Israeldar ororekin batera ibili izan naizen bitarte osoan , esan al diet inoiz ene herri Israel zaintzeko agindu nien buruzagiei , niretzat zedrozko etxerik egiteko ? »
PRED:	And I said unto my people all the house of Israel , Have I said unto my people Israel , that I have commanded my people Israel to build a house for me ?
GOLD:	Yet no matter where I have gone with the Israelites , I have never once complained to Israel 's tribal leaders , the shepherds of my people Israel . I have never asked them , “ Why have n't you built me a beautiful cedar house ? ” '

ID:	5400
INPUT:	Aita , azaldu zeure aintza ! » Ahots bat entzun zen orduan zerutik : « Azaldu dut , eta berriro ere azalduko dut » .
PRED:	And the glory of thy Father came out of heaven , and said unto them , I have seen it again , and I will show it again .
GOLD:	Father , bring glory to your name . ” Then a voice spoke from heaven , saying , “ I have already brought glory to my name , and I will do so again . ”

ID:	5401
INPUT:	Filistearren kontra abiaturik , Gat , Jabne eta Axdodeko harresiak eraitsi zituen , eta gero hiriak eraiki Axdod eskualdean eta filistearren lurraldean .
PRED:	And he went up against the Philistines , and the cities of Ashdod , and the cities of the Philistines , and the cities of the Philistines , and the cities of the Philistines , and the cities of the Philistines , and the cities of the Philistines .
GOLD:	Uzziah declared war on the Philistines and broke down the walls of Gath , Jabneh , and Ashdod . Then he built new towns in the Ashdod area and in other parts of Philistia .

ID:	5402
INPUT:	Arduratu erbesteraturik zaudeteneko herrialdearen ongizateaz eta egin otoitz Jaunari haren alde , haren ongizatea zeuen onerako izango baita .
PRED:	For you have taken away from the land , and pray to the Lord , and pray to him for your sake .
GOLD:	And work for the peace and prosperity of the city where I sent you into exile . Pray to the Lord for it , for its welfare will determine your welfare . ”

ID:	5403
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	Then another message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	5404
INPUT:	Eta horretarako bidaltzen dizuet Timoteo , neure seme maite eta kristau zintzoa . Berak gogoratuko dizkizue kristau-bizitzarako nire burubideak , eliz elkarte guztiei han eta hemen irakasten dizkiedan bezala .
PRED:	And I send them to you in Christ Jesus , my son , and my beloved son , and he will remember you in the way of my life , as I have taught you , and to all the churches that I have taught you .
GOLD:	That 's why I have sent Timothy , my beloved and faithful child in the Lord . He will remind you of how I follow Christ Jesus , just as I teach in all the churches wherever I go .

ID:	5405
INPUT:	« Norbaiti larruazalean handitua , zornea edota orbaina ateratzen bazaio , legenarena bezalako zauria sortuz , Aaron apaizarengana edo beronen ondorengoetariko apaiz batengana eramango dute .
PRED:	“ If a man has a skin skin , he is a skin , and he is a skin , and he is a priest , and he shall bring it to Aaron the priest and his sons .
GOLD:	“ If anyone has a swelling or a rash or discolored skin that might develop into a serious skin disease , that person must be brought to Aaron the priest or to one of his sons .

ID:	5406
INPUT:	Gilboako muinoak , ez ihintzik , ez euririk zuen gainera ! Ez bedi zuetanalor emankorrik izan ! Paraje horretan gelditu baitzenSaulen ezkutua , olioz ez , hildakoen odolez baizik ,
PRED:	And the mountains of Gilgal did not rain on the top of the mountains . Let there be no rain on it ; for it has been defiled in the sight of Saul , but the blood of the dead , but the blood of the dead .
GOLD:	O mountains of Gilboa , let there be no dew or rain upon you , nor fruitful fields producing offerings of grain.For there the shield of the mighty heroes was defiled ; the shield of Saul will no longer be anointed with oil .

ID:	5407
INPUT:	Begira zeruko zeure egoitza santu horretatik eta bedeinka itzazu Israel zeure herria eta , arbasoei zin egin bezala , eman diguzun lurraldea , esnea eta eztia darizkion lurraldea ” .
PRED:	Look at your holy temple , and bless your people Israel , as I swore to their fathers , as I swore to their fathers , a land flowing with milk and honey . ”
GOLD:	Now look down from your holy dwelling place in heaven and bless your people Israel and the land you swore to our ancestors to give us — a land flowing with milk and honey . '

ID:	5408
INPUT:	Berarekin elkartasunean bizi garela esan eta ilunpetan baldin bagabiltza , gezurra diogu eta ez gara egiaren arabera ari .
PRED:	If we say to one another , “ If we live in the darkness , we are lying in darkness , and we do not obey the truth . ”
GOLD:	So we are lying if we say we have fellowship with God but go on living in spiritual darkness ; we are not practicing the truth .

ID:	5409
INPUT:	abere arra eta akats gabea aurkeztuko du , Jaunak atseginez onar diezaion : zekorra , aharia nahiz akerra .
PRED:	The Lord will bring him a young bull , a young bull , a young bull , a young bull , a young bull , a young bull , and a ram .
GOLD:	you will be accepted only if your offering is a male animal with no defects . It may be a bull , a ram , or a male goat .

ID:	5410
INPUT:	Une honetan , zuek sobera duzuenak haien eskasia konponduko du , eta egunen batean haien ugaritasunak zuen eskasia . Honela , berdintasuna izango da nagusi ,
PRED:	At that time your hands will ask for them , and you will ask for them in a few days , so that you will be a synagogue .
GOLD:	Right now you have plenty and can help those who are in need . Later , they will have plenty and can share with you when you need it . In this way , things will be equal .

ID:	5411
INPUT:	Aurrez aurre hitz egin zizuen Jaunak mendian , suaren erditik .
PRED:	The Lord spoke to them in the mountain , from the fire of fire .
GOLD:	At the mountain the Lord spoke to you face to face from the heart of the fire .

ID:	5412
INPUT:	Davidek Ahimeleken seme Abiatar apaizari dei egin eta esan zion : — Ekatzu , mesedez , efod hori . Ekarri zion Abiatarrek Davidi efoda .
PRED:	And David called the priest , the priest , and said unto him , Go , and bring it to David , and bring it to David .
GOLD:	Then he said to Abiathar the priest , “ Bring me the ephod ! ” So Abiathar brought it .

ID:	5413
INPUT:	Astakumea askatzen ari zirela , jabeek galdetu zieten : — Zergatik askatzen duzue astakumea ?
PRED:	And when the donkey were scattered , they asked him , “ Why do you ask the woman ? ”
GOLD:	And sure enough , as they were untying it , the owners asked them , “ Why are you untying that colt ? ”

ID:	5414
INPUT:	Baduzu eroapenik eta niregatik nekeak jasan dituzu , etsi gabe .
PRED:	You have said , “ You have given me my strength and my mother 's sake . ”
GOLD:	You have patiently suffered for me without quitting .

ID:	5415
INPUT:	Idatz iezaiozu Tiatirako eliz elkartearen aingeruari : Hona zer dioen Jainkoaren Semeak , begiak sugarra bezalako eta oinak brontze goriaren antzeko dituenak :
PRED:	To the angel of the church in Ephesus , write to the angel of God : This is what the Son of God says : The Son of God is like bronze and bronze .
GOLD:	“ Write this letter to the angel of the church in Thyatira . This is the message from the Son of God , whose eyes are like flames of fire , whose feet are like polished bronze :

ID:	5416
INPUT:	Atzo bertakoak gara gu , ez dakigu ezer , gure egunak ez baitira itzala baizik munduan .
PRED:	We do n't know what we are doing , but we do n't know what we are not worthy to do .
GOLD:	For we were born but yesterday and know nothing.Our days on earth are as fleeting as a shadow .

ID:	5417
INPUT:	Askapen Urtea ( Jubileu Urtea )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Redemption of the Poor and Enslaved

ID:	5418
INPUT:	Orduan , Jehuk agindu zion jantzi sakratuen arduradunari : — Atera jantzi sakratuak Baalen adoratzaile guztientzat . Eta atera zituen .
PRED:	Then Jehu said to the elders of the holy garments , “ Take the holy garments for all the people of Baal . ” And he brought them out .
GOLD:	And Jehu instructed the keeper of the wardrobe , “ Be sure that every worshiper of Baal wears one of these robes . ” So robes were given to them .

ID:	5419
INPUT:	Aita gaizki hartu eta ama etxetik bidaltzen duenaseme lotsabako eta ohoregabea da .
PRED:	And he that hath done evil , and he that sent his mother out of his house , and his mother 's house is not ashamed .
GOLD:	Children who mistreat their father or chase away their motherare an embarrassment and a public disgrace .

ID:	5420
INPUT:	Egun horretatik aurrera , jakingo dute israeldarrek ni naizela Jauna , beraien Jainkoa .
PRED:	And the children of Israel shall know that I am the Lord their God .
GOLD:	And from that time on the people of Israel will know that I am the Lord their God .

ID:	5421
INPUT:	Ater , Hizkias , Azur ,
PRED:	Shebaniah , Shebaniah , Jozabad ,
GOLD:	Hodiah , Hashum , Bezai ,

ID:	5422
INPUT:	Harbonak , erregearen aurrean zeuden laguntzaileetariko batek , esan zuen : — Hamanek prestatua du , hain zuzen , urkabea Mardokeorentzat , bizia salbatu zizunarentzat . Hamanen etxean dago eraikia , hogeita bost metro ditu . — Zintzilika bezate Haman bertan ! — esan zuen erregeak .
PRED:	One of the men who were in front of the king said , “ Haman has prepared for Mordecai , for he has prepared for Mordecai the king 's house for Mordecai , and he has been sold to the house of Mordecai . ” And the king said , “ It is a hundred cubits . ”
GOLD:	Then Harbona , one of the king 's eunuchs , said , “ Haman has set up a sharpened pole that stands seventy-five feet tall in his own courtyard . He intended to use it to impale Mordecai , the man who saved the king from assassination . ” “ Then impale Haman on it ! ” the king ordered .

ID:	5423
INPUT:	Xaaraim , Aditaim , Gedera , Gederotaim : hamalau hiri eta beraien herrixkak .
PRED:	They will fall down and fall down , and will fall down to the city of Ai and their villages , and their villages .
GOLD:	Shaaraim , Adithaim , Gederah , and Gederothaim — fourteen towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	5424
INPUT:	Baduzu itxaropenik etorkizunerako : zure seme-alabakaberrira itzuliko dira . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	You will wait for your hope , ” says the Lord . “ They will return to your sons and daughters .
GOLD:	There is hope for your future , ” says the Lord . “ Your children will come again to their own land .

ID:	5425
INPUT:	Eta une berean , ireki egin zitzaizkion belarriak , mihia askatu eta garbi hitz egiten hasi zen .
PRED:	At that time they opened their eyes , and their tongue began to speak , and they began to speak .
GOLD:	Instantly the man could hear perfectly , and his tongue was freed so he could speak plainly !

ID:	5426
INPUT:	Zeure haserreaz inguratu zara , eta pertsegitu egin gaituzu , erruki gabe sarraskitu .
PRED:	You have made us angry , and you have made us angry . You have made us angry .
GOLD:	“ You have engulfed us with your anger , chased us down , and slaughtered us without mercy .

ID:	5427
INPUT:	« Aberea hiltzen duenak , aberea itzuliko du ; gizakia hiltzen duena heriotzara emango dute .
PRED:	“ If anyone eats the animal , he will return to the animal . If anyone dies , he will be put to death .
GOLD:	“ Whoever kills an animal must pay for it in full , but whoever kills another person must be put to death .

ID:	5428
INPUT:	Herri jendetsua erregearen ohore , jende gutxiko herria printzearen hondamendi .
PRED:	And the people of the land , and the princes of the people , and the princes of the people , and the princes of the people .
GOLD:	A growing population is a king 's glory ; a prince without subjects has nothing .

ID:	5429
INPUT:	« Jubileu Urtean zuetako bakoitzak bere lurren jabetza berreskuratuko du .
PRED:	“ Every man who is in the field of the field shall be sold to his possession .
GOLD:	In the Year of Jubilee each of you may return to the land that belonged to your ancestors .

ID:	5430
INPUT:	Baina zu zara , Jauna , nire babeski , zu nire ohore . Zuk didazu burua jasotzen .
PRED:	But thou art my Lord , thou art my shield ; thou hast given me understanding .
GOLD:	I cried out to the Lord , and he answered me from his holy mountain.Interlude

ID:	5431
INPUT:	Babiloniaren zigorra
PRED:	The People of Babylon
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	5432
INPUT:	Ez arbuiatu erregearen nagusigoa , eta ez jardun gaiztakerian , nahi duen guztiaegiten baitu erregeak .
PRED:	Do n't be pleased with the king 's master , and do n't do evil in his sight , because the king does what the king wanted to do .
GOLD:	Do n't try to avoid doing your duty , and do n't stand with those who plot evil , for the king can do whatever he wants .

ID:	5433
INPUT:	Aurkitu ez zituztelarik , Jason eta beste zenbait senide hiriko agintarien aurrera eraman zituzten arrastaka , eta oihuka zioten : « Mundu guztia nahastu duten horiek bertaraino iritsi zaizkigu ,
PRED:	And when they found no more , they brought them to the princes of the cities of Ephesus , and they cried out , saying , These are the ones of the earth , and have come to the land of the earth .
GOLD:	Not finding them there , they dragged out Jason and some of the other believers instead and took them before the city council . “ Paul and Silas have caused trouble all over the world , ” they shouted , “ and now they are here disturbing our city , too .

ID:	5434
INPUT:	Erbestetik etorritakoen desleialtasuna izugarria zela eta , Israelen Jainkoaren hitzari begirune zioten guztiak nire ondoan bildu ziren . Ni , lur jota , eserita egon nintzen arratsaldeko oparia arte .
PRED:	And when they had turned away from the captivity of the captivity , they feared the word of the God of Israel , and all the fear of the Lord God of Israel , and I sat down until evening until evening .
GOLD:	Then all who trembled at the words of the God of Israel came and sat with me because of this outrage committed by the returned exiles . And I sat there utterly appalled until the time of the evening sacrifice .

ID:	5435
INPUT:	Bildu zituen Israelgo erregeak profetak , laurehun inguru , eta galdegin zien : — Joango al naiz Galaadeko Ramoti erasotzera , ala utzi egingo dut ? Profetek erantzun zioten : — Eraso ! Zeure eskuetara emango dizu Jaunak .
PRED:	And the king of Israel gathered together two hundred prophets , and said unto them , Shall I go up to battle against Gilead ? And the prophet said unto them , Go , and I will deliver them into your hand .
GOLD:	So the king of Israel summoned the prophets , about 400 of them , and asked them , “ Should I go to war against Ramoth-gilead , or should I hold back ? ” They all replied , “ Yes , go right ahead ! The Lord will give the king victory . ”

ID:	5436
INPUT:	Neskatxaren aitak emaztetzat eman nahi ez badio , berriz , neska birjinei dagokien dotea eman beharko du .
PRED:	But if she does not give her to her father 's wife , she must give her to her father 's wife .
GOLD:	“ If a man seduces a virgin who is not engaged to anyone and has sex with her , he must pay the customary bride price and marry her .

ID:	5437
INPUT:	« Gizakia Jainkoarentzat izaten ote onuragarri ? Zentzu onekoa bere buruarentzat da onuragarri !
PRED:	“ Can you want to be a man to God ? How can you want to be wise to himself ? ”
GOLD:	“ Can a person do anything to help God ? Can even a wise person be helpful to him ?

ID:	5438
INPUT:	Jandakoa bota egin beharko duzueta zure hitz atseginak alferrikakoak izango lirateke .
PRED:	You will eat their food , and you will eat them , and your words will be in vain .
GOLD:	You will throw up what little you 've eaten , and your compliments will be wasted .

ID:	5439
INPUT:	Jesus eta haurrak
PRED:	Jesus and His Son
GOLD:	The Rich Man

ID:	5440
INPUT:	baizik eta lurrera isuriko duzue , ura bezala .
PRED:	but you shall pour out the earth on the earth , as water .
GOLD:	Instead , pour out the blood on the ground like water .

ID:	5441
INPUT:	Larrialdi eta atsekabe arteanbizi beharko baduzue ere , irakasle duzuen Jaunaez zaizue gehiago ezkutatuko ; zeuen begiz ikusiko duzue .
PRED:	But if you live among you , you will not see the Lord any more .
GOLD:	Though the Lord gave you adversity for foodand suffering for drink , he will still be with you to teach you.You will see your teacher with your own eyes .

ID:	5442
INPUT:	Zatozte eta entzun , ene semeok ; entzun arretaz zeuen aita Israeli :
PRED:	Come , my sons , listen to me , and listen to the voice of your father Israel :
GOLD:	“ Come and listen , you sons of Jacob ; listen to Israel , your father .

ID:	5443
INPUT:	Abram Kanaan lurraldean jarri zen bizitzen , eta Lot ibarreko hirietan . Honen oihal-etxolak Sodoma bertaraino hedatzen ziren .
PRED:	Abram lived in the land of Canaan , and Lot lived in the city of Canaan , and Lot went down to the tent of Sodom .
GOLD:	So Abram settled in the land of Canaan , and Lot moved his tents to a place near Sodom and settled among the cities of the plain .

ID:	5444
INPUT:	Josiasen gainerako jarduerak , Jaunaren legea betetzeko izan zuen leialtasuna
PRED:	And the rest of the acts of Josiah , that he might keep the law of the Lord .
GOLD:	The rest of the events of Josiah 's reign and his acts of devotion ( carried out according to what was written in the Law of the Lord ) ,

ID:	5445
INPUT:	Lebiri deia . Jesus bekatariekin bazkaltzen
PRED:	(
GOLD:	A Discussion about the Sabbath

ID:	5446
INPUT:	Berriro ezarri nituen epe jakinetan egin behar ziren egur-eskaintzak , baita lurraren lehen fruituen eskaintzak ere . « Oi ene Jainko , gogora zaitez nitaz , eta har nazazu onez ! »
PRED:	Then I set my hands on them , and they offered sacrifices to the Lord , and the first of the earth said , “ O my God , you are my God , and give me understanding . ”
GOLD:	I also made sure that the supply of wood for the altar and the first portions of the harvest were brought at the proper times.Remember this in my favor , O my God .

ID:	5447
INPUT:	NEKALDIA ETA PIZTUERA ( 26 , 1 — 28 , 15 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	The Plot to Kill Jesus

ID:	5448
INPUT:	Zentzarazi semea , itxaropena dagoen bitartean ; baina ez hartu gogorregi , hiltzeraino zigortuz .
PRED:	Give a son to a son who is hope , but do n't take care of him , but do n't want to die .
GOLD:	Discipline your children while there is hope.Otherwise you will ruin their lives .

ID:	5449
INPUT:	« Adi , zeruok , eta mintzatuko naiz , entzun , lurra , nire ahoko esanak ;
PRED:	“ O heaven , listen to me , you heavens , and listen to my voice .
GOLD:	“ Listen , O heavens , and I will speak ! Hear , O earth , the words that I say !

ID:	5450
INPUT:	Beraz , senideok , Jesu Kristoren odolari esker konfiantza dugu santutegian sartzeko ,
PRED:	Therefore , brothers and sisters , we have faith in the sanctuary of Jesus Christ ,
GOLD:	And so , dear brothers and sisters , we can boldly enter heaven 's Most Holy Place because of the blood of Jesus .

ID:	5451
INPUT:	Mespretxatua zen , eta jendeak baztertua , oinaze-gizona , sufritzen ikasia . Ikusteak ere nazka ematen duennorbait bezalaxe , mespretxatu egin genuen , eta aintzakotzat hartu ez .
PRED:	For the Lord has rejected the people , and the people who are sick , as though any man saw the voice of a man , we despised him , and did not receive the glory of his glory .
GOLD:	He was despised and rejected — a man of sorrows , acquainted with deepest grief.We turned our backs on him and looked the other way.He was despised , and we did not care .

ID:	5452
INPUT:	Orobat bi talentu hartu zituenak : inbertitu eta beste bi irabazi zituen .
PRED:	And he took two vessels , and set them up , and set them on the other side .
GOLD:	The servant with two bags of silver also went to work and earned two more .

ID:	5453
INPUT:	Eta apaizei esan zien : « Hartu itun-kutxa eta jar zaitezte herriaren aurrean » . Apaizak itun-kutxa hartu eta herriaren aurretik abiatu ziren .
PRED:	And he said unto the priests , Take the ark of the covenant , and stand before the people . And the priests took the ark of the covenant , and stood before the people .
GOLD:	In the morning Joshua said to the priests , “ Lift up the Ark of the Covenant and lead the people across the river . ” And so they started out and went ahead of the people .

ID:	5454
INPUT:	Eta niregatik Jainkoa goresten zuten .
PRED:	And they praise God for me .
GOLD:	And they praised God because of me .

ID:	5455
INPUT:	Ez naiz atsegin bila ari izanfes<unk> eta algarazaleekin batera ; bakarrik ibiltzera behartu nauzu , zeure suminaz betea nauzu eta .
PRED:	I have not turned away from my eyes , and I have found no rest in the days of the feast , and have taken me away with your wrath .
GOLD:	I never joined the people in their merry feasts.I sat alone because your hand was on me.I was filled with indignation at their sins .

ID:	5456
INPUT:	Jaunak itsasoaren aurkaluzatu du eskua , erreinuak dardarazi ditu ; Kanaango gotorlekuakdesegiteko agindu du .
PRED:	The Lord has stretched out his hand against the sea , and he has stretched out his hand against the sea , and he has commanded them to destroy it .
GOLD:	The Lord held out his hand over the seaand shook the kingdoms of the earth.He has spoken out against Phoenicia , ordering that her fortresses be destroyed .

ID:	5457
INPUT:	Eta luze hitz egin zien parabola bidez . Honela mintzatu zitzaien : « Atera zen behin ereilea hazia ereitera .
PRED:	And he spake unto them a long time , and said unto them , Go forth out out into the field .
GOLD:	He told many stories in the form of parables , such as this one : “ Listen ! A farmer went out to plant some seeds .

ID:	5458
INPUT:	hau Zerahiasena , hau Uzirena , hau Bukirena ,
PRED:	the son of Hallohesh , the son of Hallohesh , the son of Hallohesh , the son of Hallohesh , the son of Hallohesh ,
GOLD:	son of Zerahiah , son of Uzzi , son of Bukki ,

ID:	5459
INPUT:	Hemezortzi mila gudari benjamindar ausart erori ziren .
PRED:	And there were ten thousand men of Benjamin , and with a mighty army .
GOLD:	That day 18,000 of Benjamin 's strongest warriors died in battle .

ID:	5460
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun : — Ez dakizue zer eskatzen ari zareten . Gauza al zarete nik edan behar dudan edari saminetik edateko ? — Bai , gauza gara — esan zioten .
PRED:	Jesus answered , “ Do n't you know what you ask . Do you want to drink from the cup I drink ? ” They said to him , “ Yes , we are . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus answered by saying to them , “ You do n't know what you are asking ! Are you able to drink from the bitter cup of suffering I am about to drink ? ” “ Oh yes , ” they replied , “ we are able ! ”

ID:	5461
INPUT:	Benetan ikasbide ona da nik emandakoa , ez baztertu nire irakaspena .
PRED:	It is good to me , and do not forsake my law .
GOLD:	for I am giving you good guidance.Do n't turn away from my instructions .

ID:	5462
INPUT:	Israelgo buruzagien aurkako mezua
PRED:	The People of Israel
GOLD:	The Shepherds of Israel

ID:	5463
INPUT:	Akab erregea hil zenean , Israelen kontra jaiki ziren moabdarrak .
PRED:	When Ahab died , the king of Moab rose up against Israel .
GOLD:	After King Ahab 's death , the land of Moab rebelled against Israel .

ID:	5464
INPUT:	Jesusek eskua hartu zion eta sukarrak alde egin ; orduan , emakumea jaiki eta zerbitzatzen hasi zitzaion .
PRED:	Then Jesus took his hand and left her . Then the woman arose and began to serve him .
GOLD:	But when Jesus touched her hand , the fever left her . Then she got up and prepared a meal for him .

ID:	5465
INPUT:	Hitz hauekin , nekez bada ere , kendu zioten jendeari oparia eskaintzeko asmoa .
PRED:	And when they heard these words , they took away the people to offer sacrifices to the people .
GOLD:	But even with these words , Paul and Barnabas could scarcely restrain the people from sacrificing to them .

ID:	5466
INPUT:	ez dezan etsaiak esan : « Garaitu dut » . Ez bedi nire arerioa nire hondamendiaz poztu !
PRED:	Do n't let my enemies say , “ I have sinned ! ” Do n't be glad .
GOLD:	But I trust in your unfailing love.I will rejoice because you have rescued me .

ID:	5467
INPUT:	Mihia zaintzen duenak bizia babesten du ; mintzatzeak sobera darama kaltera .
PRED:	If you keep your life , you will live ; you will be able to kill you .
GOLD:	Those who control their tongue will have a long life ; opening your mouth can ruin everything .

ID:	5468
INPUT:	Morroiak galdetu zion : — Nola banatuko dut hau ehun gizonen artean ? Eliseok erantzun : — Banatu jendeari , eta jan dezatela . Hau baitio Jaunak : « Jango dute eta sobera geldituko da » .
PRED:	And the servant said unto him , How shall I make this man among the men ? And he said unto the people , The people shall eat , and they shall eat , and they shall eat .
GOLD:	“ What ? ” his servant exclaimed . “ Feed a hundred people with only this ? ” But Elisha repeated , “ Give it to the people so they can eat , for this is what the Lord says : Everyone will eat , and there will even be some left over ! ”

ID:	5469
INPUT:	Bietarik bat eroriko balitz , besteak jasoko luke ; baina urrikalgarri bakarrik dagoena ; eroriko balitz , ez bailuke izango nork jaso .
PRED:	If one of them fall , it would be sold for a long time . But if it is a great thing , it would not be able to take it .
GOLD:	If one person falls , the other can reach out and help . But someone who falls alone is in real trouble .

ID:	5470
INPUT:	Gaiztoak zelatan egoten zaizkio zintzoari , nola hilko asmatzen .
PRED:	The wicked will die in the sight of the righteous , and how many people will die .
GOLD:	The wicked wait in ambush for the godly , looking for an excuse to kill them .

ID:	5471
INPUT:	Biharamunean , Santiagoren etxera joan ginen Paulo eta gainerakook ; han zeuden bilduak arduradun guztiak ere .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the next day , that Paul went into the house of James , and all the elders gathered together together together .
GOLD:	The next day Paul went with us to meet with James , and all the elders of the Jerusalem church were present .

ID:	5472
INPUT:	« Zortzigarren egunean , amaierako batzarra izango duzue eta ez da ohiko lan arruntik egingo .
PRED:	On the eighth day you shall be a holy assembly , and you shall do no work .
GOLD:	“ On the eighth day of the festival , proclaim another holy day . You must do no ordinary work on that day .

ID:	5473
INPUT:	Etsaiak atzetik harrapatu eta jo egin zitueneta behin betiko porrokatu .
PRED:	He took them away from their enemies , and struck them , and destroyed them forever .
GOLD:	He routed his enemiesand sent them to eternal shame .

ID:	5474
INPUT:	begi harroak , mihi gezurtia , errugabearen odola isurtzen duten eskuak ,
PRED:	The eyes of the poor are a false witness , And the hand of the innocent , and the blood of the innocent .
GOLD:	haughty eyes , a lying tongue , hands that kill the innocent ,

ID:	5475
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Apaiz eta profetak erefedegabe bihurtu dira , neure tenpluan bertan ereaurkitu dituthorien gaiztakerien aztarnak .
PRED:	The Lord says , “ I have found the prophets and prophets in my temple , and I have found all their wickedness in my temple .
GOLD:	“ Even the priests and prophetsare ungodly , wicked men.I have seen their despicable actsright here in my own Temple , ” says the Lord .

ID:	5476
INPUT:	Eguna zabaldu zuenean , oso urduri zegoen faraoia eta , Egiptoko azti eta jakintsu guztiei deiturik , ametsa kontatu zien . Baina inor ez zen gauza izan faraoiaren ametsak argitzeko .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the morning , when the king heard the voice of Pharaoh , that he called all the wise men of Egypt , and all the wise men of the land of Egypt , and there was no man in the sight of Pharaoh .
GOLD:	The next morning Pharaoh was very disturbed by the dreams . So he called for all the magicians and wise men of Egypt . When Pharaoh told them his dreams , not one of them could tell him what they meant .

ID:	5477
INPUT:	Jarri ziren , beraz , eta jan eta edan zuten biek elkarrekin . Gero , neskaren aitak esan zion : — Igaro ezazu , arren , beste gau bat hemen eta alai zaitez .
PRED:	So they ate and drank , and drank , and they drank , and said to his father , “ Get up here another night , and be glad . ”
GOLD:	So the two men sat down together and had something to eat and drink . Then the woman 's father said , “ Please stay another night and enjoy yourself . ”

ID:	5478
INPUT:	Orduan , Ehudek ezker-eskua luzatu , eskuineko izterrean zekarren ezpata hartu eta sabelean sartu zion erregeari
PRED:	Then David took his hand from the right hand of his right hand , and took him in the right hand of his right hand , and went into the king 's right hand .
GOLD:	Ehud reached with his left hand , pulled out the dagger strapped to his right thigh , and plunged it into the king 's belly .

ID:	5479
INPUT:	Mikmasekoak 122 ;
PRED:	The men of Pashhur , three hundred and three hundred and twenty .
GOLD:	The people of Micmash122

ID:	5480
INPUT:	Barneko atariak ere bazuen sarrera bat hegoaldera . Bi sarreren arteko distantzia neurtu zuen gizonak : berrogeita hamar metro .
PRED:	And he measured the gate of the gate of the gate , and measured the gate of the gate , one hundred cubits , and one hundred cubits .
GOLD:	And here again , directly opposite the outer gateway , was another gateway that led into the inner courtyard . The distance between the two gateways was 175 feet .

ID:	5481
INPUT:	Horretarako , lurraldea hiru zatitan banatuko duzue eta hiri haietarako bideak egokituko , edozein hiltzailek nora ihes egin izan dezan .
PRED:	And thou shalt scatter three cities in three cities , and thou shalt know the way of the city , that every man may escape .
GOLD:	Survey the territory , and divide the land the Lord your God is giving you into three districts , with one of these cities in each district . Then anyone who has killed someone can flee to one of the cities of refuge for safety .

ID:	5482
INPUT:	Horrela , beraz , aurrera egin zuten bidean . Benjaminen dagoen Gibea herritik hurbil zirelarik , gorde egin zen eguzkia .
PRED:	So they went before the way of Benjamin . And the people came near the way of Benjamin , and the sun was near .
GOLD:	So they went on . The sun was setting as they came to Gibeah , a town in the land of Benjamin ,

ID:	5483
INPUT:	Tenpluaren eta hiriaren aurkako zigorra
PRED:	The People of the Temple
GOLD:	The Slaughter of Idolaters

ID:	5484
INPUT:	( Mt 15 , <unk> )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Pharisees Demand a Miraculous Sign

ID:	5485
INPUT:	Hik ez duk honetan eskurik , ez parterik , hire kontzientzia ez baita zuzena Jainkoaren aurrean .
PRED:	There was no hand in his hand , but his word was not righteous in the sight of God .
GOLD:	You can have no part in this , for your heart is not right with God .

ID:	5486
INPUT:	Haiek erantzun : — Egiptoar batek defendatu gaitu artzainen kontra . Gainera , berak atera digu putzutik ura eta ardiei edaten eman .
PRED:	And they said to him , “ A Egyptians has prepared us against the Egyptians , and he has brought us out of the well , and gave us water . ”
GOLD:	“ An Egyptian rescued us from the shepherds , ” they answered . “ And then he drew water for us and watered our flocks . ”

ID:	5487
INPUT:	« Jainkoaren erregetzarekin , landan ezkutatua dagoen altxorrarekin bezala gertatzen da . Norbaitek aurkitzen duelarik , berriro ezkutatu egiten du , eta pozaren pozez joan , dituen guztiak saldu eta landa hura erosten du .
PRED:	“ The kingdom of heaven is like a man in the field of God . If a man find it , he has found it , and he has found it , and he has sold all the work of the field .
GOLD:	“ The Kingdom of Heaven is like a treasure that a man discovered hidden in a field . In his excitement , he hid it again and sold everything he owned to get enough money to buy the field .

ID:	5488
INPUT:	Norbaitek , heriotzara ez daraman bekaturen bat egiten ikusten badu bere senidea , egin beza otoitz eta Jainkoak bizia emango dio ; heriotzara ez daraman bekatua egiten dutenei buruz diot hau . Izan ere , bada heriotzara daraman bekatua ere , eta ez dut esaten horren alde eskatzeko .
PRED:	If any man sees a sin , he must not be put to death . He must pray to his brother , and God will give him life to death . He will not be put to death . He will not be put to death .
GOLD:	If you see a fellow believer sinning in a way that does not lead to death , you should pray , and God will give that person life . But there is a sin that leads to death , and I am not saying you should pray for those who commit it .

ID:	5489
INPUT:	Hurrengo urtean , siriar gudarosteak eraso egin zion Joaxi . Judan eta Jerusalemen sartu , herriko agintariak hil eta harrapakin guztiak Damaskoko erregeari igorri zizkioten .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the second year , that the army of the Chaldeans fought against Joash , and the king of Judah , and all the people of the land of Damascus , and they sent him to the king of Damascus , and all the people of Damascus .
GOLD:	In the spring of the year the Aramean army marched against Joash . They invaded Judah and Jerusalem and killed all the leaders of the nation . Then they sent all the plunder back to their king in Damascus .

ID:	5490
INPUT:	Ahabara doan ibaiaren ondoan bildu nituen gizon horiek , eta han gelditu ginen hiru egunez . Herriko jendea eta apaizak han zeudela ohartu nintzen , baina ez nuen lebitarrik aurkitu .
PRED:	And I gathered the men in the valley , and stood there three days . And I found that the people and the priests were there , and I found no Levites .
GOLD:	I assembled the exiles at the Ahava Canal , and we camped there for three days while I went over the lists of the people and the priests who had arrived . I found that not one Levite had volunteered to come along .

ID:	5491
INPUT:	Zoraturik dago erregea zure edertasunaz . Bera da zure jaun ; egiozu agur .
PRED:	The king is very beautiful , and he is very beautiful . He is your master . ”
GOLD:	The princess of Tyre will shower you with gifts.The wealthy will beg your favor .

ID:	5492
INPUT:	Lursailik , mahastirik eta olibadirik ederrenak kenduko dizkizue , bere zerbitzariei emateko .
PRED:	And thou shalt take away the fruit of the earth , and thou shalt take away the fruit of the earth , and the oil of his servants .
GOLD:	He will take away the best of your fields and vineyards and olive groves and give them to his own officials .

ID:	5493
INPUT:	Horregatik , estali dolu-jantziz , egin negar eta intziri ; ez , ez da Jaunaren haserre-sumi<unk> darengandik aldendu .
PRED:	So he tore his clothes and wept . He did n't turn away from the Lord 's anger .
GOLD:	So put on clothes of mourningand weep with broken hearts , for the fierce anger of the Lordis still upon us .

ID:	5494
INPUT:	Orduan , mezu hau igorri zion Salomonek Tiroko errege Hurami : « Zedro-zura bidali zenion gure aita Davidi , bere jauregia eraikitzeko .
PRED:	Then Solomon sent this message to Solomon king of Tyre , saying , “ You sent my father David my father to build his house .
GOLD:	He enlisted a force of 70,000 laborers , 80,000 men to quarry stone in the hill country , and 3,600 foremen .

ID:	5495
INPUT:	Xedapen zuzenak ezarri dituzu , zeharo fidagarriak .
PRED:	You have made them known in the morning , and you have made them trust in your name .
GOLD:	Your laws are perfectand completely trustworthy .

ID:	5496
INPUT:	Orduan , itsuekikusi egingo dute berriroeta gorrek entzun .
PRED:	And they shall see again , and shall see , and shall hear them .
GOLD:	And when he comes , he will open the eyes of the blindand unplug the ears of the deaf .

ID:	5497
INPUT:	Nagusiak , errukiturik , dena barkatu eta libre utzi zuen zerbitzaria .
PRED:	And his master had pity on him , and delivered him away , and delivered him away .
GOLD:	Then his master was filled with pity for him , and he released him and forgave his debt .

ID:	5498
INPUT:	« Erantzun , ahal baduzu , presta zaitez aurre egiteko .
PRED:	“ If you say to them , ‘ Go and prepare for yourself . '
GOLD:	Answer me , if you can ; make your case and take your stand .

ID:	5499
INPUT:	Libratuko zaituztet zu eta Jerusalem Asiriako erregearen eskuetatik eta babestuko dut hiri hau » .
PRED:	I will deliver you out of the hand of the king of Assyria , and I will deliver you out of the hand of the king of Assyria . ”
GOLD:	and I will rescue you and this city from the king of Assyria . Yes , I will defend this city .

ID:	5500
INPUT:	Eta Judako Baalatik abiatu zen , bere jende guztiarekin , Jaunaren kutxa handik ekartzeko asmoz . Kutxa hau Jaunaren izenari eskainia dago , izaki hegaldunen gainean jarria dagoen Jaun ahalguztidunaren izenari .
PRED:	And he went out of Judah , and went out of Judah , to bring the ark of the Lord of hosts , to bring the ark of the Lord of hosts .
GOLD:	He led them to Baalah of Judah to bring back the Ark of God , which bears the name of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who is enthroned between the cherubim .

ID:	5501
INPUT:	haserre bizitan jarriko naiz eta gerraz hilko zaituztet ; orduan , zuen emazteak bihurtuko dira alargun eta zuen seme-alabak umezurtz .
PRED:	I will make you angry , and I will put you to death . Then your wife will become like a widow , and your children will become a widow .
GOLD:	If you exploit them in any way and they cry out to me , then I will certainly hear their cry .

ID:	5502
INPUT:	Esauk begitan hartu zuen Jakob , honek aitarengandik lortutako bedeinkazioagatik . Honela zioen berekiko : « Hurbil duk gure aitaren hileta-eguna ; orduan , Jakob nire anaia hilko diat » .
PRED:	Esau looked at his eyes and blessed Jacob for his father 's blessing . He said to them , “ I will kill my brother Jacob 's brother . ”
GOLD:	From that time on , Esau hated Jacob because their father had given Jacob the blessing . And Esau began to scheme : “ I will soon be mourning my father 's death . Then I will kill my brother , Jacob . ”

ID:	5503
INPUT:	Erregeak oso zakar erantzun zion herriari , kontseilariek emana zioten aholkua aintzat hartu gabe ,
PRED:	And the king said unto the people , The counsel of the elders of the elders of the elders of the elders of the elders , and the elders of the people ,
GOLD:	But Rehoboam spoke harshly to the people , for he rejected the advice of the older counselors

ID:	5504
INPUT:	Samuelek esan zuen : « Bil ezazue herri osoa Mitzpan eta nik otoitz eginen diot Jaunari zuen alde » .
PRED:	Samuel said , “ Call all the people in Mizpah , and pray to the Lord for you . ”
GOLD:	Then Samuel told them , “ Gather all of Israel to Mizpah , and I will pray to the Lord for you . ”

ID:	5505
INPUT:	Mirabeagandikoa giza sorbide hutsez jaio zen ; emazte librearengandikoa , berriz , Jainkoaren agintzariaren indarrez .
PRED:	The man was born from the man , but the woman was born from the woman , but the power of God 's authority .
GOLD:	The son of the slave wife was born in a human attempt to bring about the fulfillment of God 's promise . But the son of the freeborn wife was born as God 's own fulfillment of his promise .

ID:	5506
INPUT:	Azkenik , bertso hauek abestu zituen : « Ai ene ! Nor aterako da bizi<unk> koak ekingo dionean ?
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ How long will you go out ? Who will you go out ?
GOLD:	Balaam concluded his messages by saying : “ Alas , who can surviveunless God has willed it ?

ID:	5507
INPUT:	Ez ugaritu hitzaldi handizaleak , ez izan harrokeriarik zeuen ahoan ; dena dakien Jainkoa baitugu Jauna , berak epaitzen ditu egintzak .
PRED:	Thou shalt not speak many things , neither shalt thou be proud in thy mouth : for the Lord is God .
GOLD:	“ Stop acting so proud and haughty ! Do n't speak with such arrogance ! For the Lord is a God who knows what you have done ; he will judge your actions .

ID:	5508
INPUT:	Labanek Zilpa bere neskamea eman zion bere alaba Leari neskametzat .
PRED:	Leah gave his daughter Leah a daughter to her daughter .
GOLD:	( Laban had given Leah a servant , Zilpah , to be her maid . )

ID:	5509
INPUT:	Izan Jaunari begirune zuek , hari sagaratuok , ez baitzaie ezer faltako begirune diotenei .
PRED:	Do n't fear the Lord , you people who fear him , for he will not do anything .
GOLD:	Even strong young lions sometimes go hungry , but those who trust in the Lord will lack no good thing .

ID:	5510
INPUT:	Berehala aurkeztu zitzaizkion apaizburuak eta judu handikiak , Paulo salatzera .
PRED:	And the chief priests came to him , and the chief priests and the Jews brought Paul to Paul .
GOLD:	where the leading priests and other Jewish leaders met with him and made their accusations against Paul .

ID:	5511
INPUT:	« Egin itzazu hedeak eta uztarria , eta hartu lepoan .
PRED:	“ Take your yoke , and put your yoke on your neck .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord said to me : “ Make a yoke , and fasten it on your neck with leather straps .

ID:	5512
INPUT:	Gaiztoen aginpideak ez du iraun<unk> nak zintzoei emandako lurraldean , zintzoak ere has ez daitezen bidegabekeria egiten .
PRED:	There is no power in the land of the wicked , but the righteous do not do wrong .
GOLD:	The wicked will not rule the land of the godly , for then the godly might be tempted to do wrong .

ID:	5513
INPUT:	Nola gorde dezake gazteak bere burua garbi ? Bere bizimodua zure hitzera egokituz .
PRED:	How can the young man be clean ? How can he see your word ?
GOLD:	How can a young person stay pure ? By obeying your word .

ID:	5514
INPUT:	Handikiak ezereztu egiten ditu , munduko gobernariakhutsaren pareko bihurtzen .
PRED:	He hath made a mighty man , And the princes of the earth shall be turned away .
GOLD:	He judges the great people of the worldand brings them all to nothing .

ID:	5515
INPUT:	Ankerra da kumeekin , bereak ez balitu bezala ; ez zaio axola bere nekeak alferrikako gertatzea .
PRED:	He is not like a woman , but he is not like a woman , but he is not able to be put to shame .
GOLD:	She is harsh toward her young , as if they were not her own.She does n't care if they die .

ID:	5516
INPUT:	entzun zuk zerutik , bizi zaren toki horretatik , eta barkatu . Egizu har dezala nork bere jokaeraren ordaina , ongi baitakizu halakoaren barruaren berri ; izan ere , zuk bakarrik dakizu gizon-emakume guztien barruaren berri .
PRED:	And thou shalt hear from heaven , and thou shalt forgive them , and thou shalt forgive them ; for thou hast heard the word of the man , and thou hast seen all the things of men .
GOLD:	then hear from heaven where you live , and forgive . Give your people what their actions deserve , for you alone know each human heart .

ID:	5517
INPUT:	Sasijainkoei eskainitako haragiaz , denok dakigu , noski , jakin behar dena . Baina jakiteak harrotu egiten du ; maitasunak bakarrik hazarazten du fedean .
PRED:	For we know that all of you offer sacrifices to idols , but we know that it is good . But if you know , we know , love is in faith .
GOLD:	Now regarding your question about food that has been offered to idols . Yes , we know that “ we all have knowledge ” about this issue . But while knowledge makes us feel important , it is love that strengthens the church .

ID:	5518
INPUT:	Ni , Kohelet , Israel herriaren errege izana naizJerusalemen .
PRED:	I am the king of Israel , king of Israel , king of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	I , the Teacher , was king of Israel , and I lived in Jerusalem .

ID:	5519
INPUT:	Ez izan beldurrik gorputza hil bai , baina bizia hondatu ezin dutenei ; izan beldur , gorputza ez ezik , pertsona osoa infernuan honda dezakeenari .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of the body , but do n't be afraid . Do n't be afraid , but do n't be afraid , but do n't be afraid .
GOLD:	“ Do n't be afraid of those who want to kill your body ; they can not touch your soul . Fear only God , who can destroy both soul and body in hell .

ID:	5520
INPUT:	Jainko salbatzaile dugu Jainkoa , Jainko Jaunari esker libratu gara heriotzatik .
PRED:	God is our God , who saved us from the hand of the Lord our God , who saved us from death .
GOLD:	But God will smash the heads of his enemies , crushing the skulls of those who love their guilty ways .

ID:	5521
INPUT:	Joiakimen gainerako jarduerak eta egintzak « Judako Erregeen Kronika » liburuan daude idatziak .
PRED:	Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim , and all that he did , are they written in the book of the kings of Judah ?
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Jehoiakim 's reign and all his deeds are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .

ID:	5522
INPUT:	Ez egin jaramonik esamesa guztiei ; horrela , ez diozu entzungo zeure morroiarizutaz gaizki-esaka .
PRED:	Do n't listen to all these words . Do n't listen to what your servant says . Do n't listen to what you have done .
GOLD:	Do n't eavesdrop on others — you may hear your servant curse you .

ID:	5523
INPUT:	Ez gara zuregandik inoiz aldenduko ; bizia emango diguzu eta guk zuri dei egingo .
PRED:	We will not turn away from you , but you will give us life , and we will call you .
GOLD:	Turn us again to yourself , O Lord God of Heaven 's Armies.Make your face shine down upon us.Only then will we be saved .

ID:	5524
INPUT:	Emakumeak , orduan , Eliseori : — Eskatu al nizun nik semerik ? Ez al nizun esan ez engainatzeko ?
PRED:	Then the woman said to Elisha , “ Did I ask you , that I should not tell you ? ”
GOLD:	Then she said , “ Did I ask you for a son , my lord ? And did n't I say , ‘ Do n't deceive me and get my hopes up ' ? ”

ID:	5525
INPUT:	Berrogei urte zituen Saulen seme Ix-Boxetek Israelen errege izaten hasi zenean , eta bi urtez izan zen errege . Judak , aldiz , David onartu zuen errege .
PRED:	When Saul was forty years old when he began to reign over Israel , he reigned two years , and he became king over Judah .
GOLD:	Ishbosheth , Saul 's son , was forty years old when he became king , and he ruled from Mahanaim for two years . Meanwhile , the people of Judah remained loyal to David .

ID:	5526
INPUT:	Ipini mahaia errezelaren aurrealdean , egoitzaren iparraldera , eta argimutila mahaiaren parean , hegoaldera .
PRED:	And thou shalt set the table before the altar , in the north side of the tabernacle , and on the south side of the table , and on the south side of the table .
GOLD:	Place the table outside the inner curtain on the north side of the Tabernacle , and place the lampstand across the room on the south side .

ID:	5527
INPUT:	Emakumeak
PRED:	The woman and the woman
GOLD:	1:1

ID:	5528
INPUT:	Gogora ezazu zeure ituna , beteak baitaude herrialdeko bazterrak gogorkeriaz .
PRED:	Remember your covenant , for they have kept your covenant ; they have turned away from the land of the earth .
GOLD:	Remember your covenant promises , for the land is full of darkness and violence !

ID:	5529
INPUT:	Handik Gibeara zihoazelarik , hara non datorkien profeta-taldea . Hartu zuen Saul Jaunaren espirituak eta , besteekin batera , profeta-trantzean jarri zen bera ere .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the prophets of the prophets came to Gibeah , behold , the Spirit of the Lord came upon him , and the Spirit of the Lord came upon him , and he went with him .
GOLD:	When Saul and his servant arrived at Gibeah , they saw a group of prophets coming toward them . Then the Spirit of God came powerfully upon Saul , and he , too , began to prophesy .

ID:	5530
INPUT:	emaguzu egunean eguneko ogia ,
PRED:	Give us bread on the day of the day , and give us bread .
GOLD:	Give us each day the food we need ,

ID:	5531
INPUT:	Baina , egun hartatik aurrera , nire gizonen erdiak lan egiten zuen bitartean , beste erdia lantzaz , ezkutuz , gezi-uz<unk> eta korazaz armaturik egon ohi zen . Buruzagiek judu guztien ardura zuten .
PRED:	But before that day , the men of the men of Judah served me in the work of my work , and in the fields , and in the fields , and in the fields , and in the fields of the Jews , and in the land of the Jews .
GOLD:	Then the people of Judah began to complain , “ The workers are getting tired , and there is so much rubble to be moved . We will never be able to build the wall by ourselves . ”

ID:	5532
INPUT:	Eramatzazu beti zeurekin , ezarri barru-barruan .
PRED:	Put them in your heart , and put them in your heart .
GOLD:	Tie them on your fingers as a reminder.Write them deep within your heart .

ID:	5533
INPUT:	Ez ahaztu zuekin egin duen ituna . Ez duzue beste jainkorik gurtuko .
PRED:	Do n't forget the covenant which you have done with you . Do n't worship other gods .
GOLD:	Do not forget the covenant I made with you , and do not worship other gods .

ID:	5534
INPUT:	Haiek , ordea , ez zuten entzun ; burugogor izan ziren , beraien gurasoak bezalaxe , ez baitzuten uste onik izan Jaunarengan , beren Jainkoarengan .
PRED:	But they did not listen to them , as their fathers did , because they did not trust in the Lord their God .
GOLD:	But the Israelites would not listen . They were as stubborn as their ancestors who had refused to believe in the Lord their God .

ID:	5535
INPUT:	Hauek ez dira giza odolekoak , ezta gizakiaren borondatezsortuak ere , Jainkoarengandik jaioak baizik .
PRED:	These are not the blood of men , nor of men , but of men , but of God .
GOLD:	They are reborn — not with a physical birth resulting from human passion or plan , but a birth that comes from God .

ID:	5536
INPUT:	ERREGE ETA PROFE<unk> AURKAKO MEZUAK ( 21 , 1 — 24 , 10 )
PRED:	King Hezekiah of Judah
GOLD:	No Deliverance from Babylon

ID:	5537
INPUT:	Eta elkarteari esan zion : « Alde gizon gaizto horien etxola ingurutik eta ez ukitu horienik ezer , horien bekatuengatik zeuek ere gal ez zaitezten » .
PRED:	Then he said to one another , “ Get away from their tents , and do n't touch them , and do n't touch them . Do n't touch them for their sins . ”
GOLD:	“ Quick ! ” he told the people . “ Get away from the tents of these wicked men , and do n't touch anything that belongs to them . If you do , you will be destroyed for their sins . ”

ID:	5538
INPUT:	Jaunak bere zigor-epaiabeteko duenean , Siongo bizilagunen zikinakkenduko ditueta Jerusalemen isuritakoodola garbituko .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass , when the judgment of the Lord shall take away the inhabitants of Zion , and shall take away the blood of the inhabitants of Zion , and the blood of the inhabitants of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	The Lord will wash the filth from beautiful Zionand cleanse Jerusalem of its bloodstainswith the hot breath of fiery judgment .

ID:	5539
INPUT:	Bide zuzena utzirik , galdu egin dira , Bosorren seme Balaam profetaren jokabideari jarraituz . Honek bidegabeko irabazia irrikatu zuen ;
PRED:	And he left the way of the right way , and made a prostitute , and walked by the way of Balaam the prophet , and walked in the way of his ways .
GOLD:	They have wandered off the right road and followed the footsteps of Balaam son of Beor , who loved to earn money by doing wrong .

ID:	5540
INPUT:	Beraz , ez zaie zilegi israeldarrei landan abererik hiltzea , baizik eta apaizari eraman behar diote elkarketa-etxolaren sarrerara , eta Jaunari eskaini elkartasun-oparitzat .
PRED:	So you must not kill the Israelites in the field , but the priest must bring them to the tent of meeting , and bring them to the tent of meeting , and offer a burnt offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	The purpose of this rule is to stop the Israelites from sacrificing animals in the open fields . It will ensure that they bring their sacrifices to the priest at the entrance of the Tabernacle , so he can present them to the Lord as peace offerings .

ID:	5541
INPUT:	ez die inork esaten , ondotik pasatzean : « Bedeinka zaitzatela Jaunak ! Jaunaren izenean bedeinkatzen zaituztegu » .
PRED:	No one can say to them , “ May the Lord bless you in the name of the Lord , and we will bless you . ”
GOLD:	And may those who pass byrefuse to give them this blessing : “ The Lord bless you ; we bless you in the Lord 's name . ”

ID:	5542
INPUT:	Jakobek aitari : — Esau zure seme nagusia . Bete dut eskatu didazuna . Jaiki , mesedez , eseri eta jan nik ehizatua , bedeinka nazazun .
PRED:	Jacob said to his father , “ I have heard your master Esau . Get up , eat and eat and eat . ”
GOLD:	Jacob replied , “ It 's Esau , your firstborn son . I 've done as you told me . Here is the wild game . Now sit up and eat it so you can give me your blessing . ”

ID:	5543
INPUT:	Zure balentria ikaragarriak aipatzen dituzte , eta nik zure egintza handiak kontatzen .
PRED:	Your name is an abomination to your name , and I do great works .
GOLD:	Your awe-inspiring deeds will be on every tongue ; I will proclaim your greatness .

ID:	5544
INPUT:	« Lehorrean dituzun hiriaksuntsituko dizkizu gerraz ; gerlariek eraso-dorreakjarriko dituzte zure kontra , lubetak eraikiko zuri erasotzekoeta ezkutu-hesia jarrikoberen babeserako .
PRED:	You will destroy your cities , and all your cities will be destroyed by the sword . They will destroy you , and they will destroy you , and they will destroy you .
GOLD:	First he will destroy your mainland villages . Then he will attack you by building a siege wall , constructing a ramp , and raising a roof of shields against you .

ID:	5545
INPUT:	« Zuek , Jainkoaren agindua bazterrera utzi eta giza ohiturari eusten diozue » .
PRED:	“ You must leave the commandments of God and keep the commandments of men . ”
GOLD:	For you ignore God 's law and substitute your own tradition . ”

ID:	5546
INPUT:	badatorren , lurra gobernatzera datorren Jaunaren aurrean . Justiziaz gobernatuko du mundua eta leialtasunez herriak .
PRED:	He will come to the earth before the Lord , and he will judge the earth with justice and truth .
GOLD:	before the Lord , for he is coming ! He is coming to judge the earth.He will judge the world with justice , and the nations with his truth .

ID:	5547
INPUT:	beste erresumak baino apalagoa , eta ez da berriro nazioen gain jarriko . Txiki egingo dut , nazioak mendera ez ditzan .
PRED:	He is more than his mother , and he will not rule over the nations ; and I will break down the nations , and I will not destroy the nations .
GOLD:	It will be the lowliest of all the nations , never again great enough to rise above its neighbors .

ID:	5548
INPUT:	Entzun , Jauna , errukarrien desioak , emaiezu adore , adi izan belarria haiengana ,
PRED:	O Lord , hear the iniquity of the nations , and let them go to their ears .
GOLD:	Lord , you know the hopes of the helpless.Surely you will hear their cries and comfort them .

ID:	5549
INPUT:	Jaun ahalguztidunak erantzun hau eman zidan ,
PRED:	The Lord of hosts said to me ,
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies sent me this message in reply :

ID:	5550
INPUT:	Eglonengana hurbildu zen Ehud . Erregea beretzat bakarrik zuen goiko gela freskoan zegoen eseria . Ehudek esan zion : — Jainkoaren mandatua dut zuretzat . Erregea jaiki egin zen aulkitik .
PRED:	And he came near to Eglon . And he sat in the house of the king , and he sat in the house of God ; and he said unto him , I have given thee the kingdom of God . And the king rose up from his throne .
GOLD:	Ehud walked over to Eglon , who was sitting alone in a cool upstairs room . And Ehud said , “ I have a message from God for you ! ” As King Eglon rose from his seat ,

ID:	5551
INPUT:	Ez duzu , hil eta gero , beste erregeen zoria izango , zeure lurraldea hondatu baituzueta zeure herriko jendea hil . Zure , gaizkile horren , ondorengotzakez du luzaroan iraungo .
PRED:	You shall not die , and you shall die ; for your land shall be destroyed , and your people shall be destroyed , and the people of your land shall be a long time for a long time .
GOLD:	You will not be given a proper burial , for you have destroyed your nationand slaughtered your people.The descendants of such an evil personwill never again receive honor .

ID:	5552
INPUT:	( 2 Erg 18 , 2-3 )
PRED:	King Josiah of Judah
GOLD:	Hezekiah Reopens the Temple

ID:	5553
INPUT:	Zure ontasun neurrigabearen berri zabaltzen duteeta zure salbamena pozik oihukatzen .
PRED:	For thou hast heard the voice of thy glory , and thy salvation is in thy salvation .
GOLD:	Everyone will share the story of your wonderful goodness ; they will sing with joy about your righteousness .

ID:	5554
INPUT:	Azkenean , Juda eta Jerusalemgo gizon guztiak , Josafat aurretik zutela , Jerusalemera itzuli ziren bozkarioz beterik , Jaunak poztu egin baitzituen beraien etsaiengandik libratuz .
PRED:	And all the men of Judah and Jerusalem returned before Jehoshaphat , and returned to Jerusalem , because the Lord had delivered them out of their enemies .
GOLD:	Then all the men returned to Jerusalem , with Jehoshaphat leading them , overjoyed that the Lord had given them victory over their enemies .

ID:	5555
INPUT:	« Madarikatua abereekin haragizko bekatua egiten duena ! » Eta herri osoak erantzungo du : « Amen » .
PRED:	“ Blessed is the man who has committed adultery with him . ” And all the people shall answer , “ Amen . ”
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who has sexual intercourse with an animal . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	5556
INPUT:	Beldurgarri gertatuko zaie Jauna : lurreko jainko guztiakezereztuko ditu , eta herri guztiek gurtuko dute , baita urrutienekoek ere , nork bere lurraldean .
PRED:	The Lord will show you a sign , and all the gods of the earth will worship him , and all the nations will worship him in his land .
GOLD:	The Lord will terrify themas he destroys all the gods in the land.Then nations around the world will worship the Lord , each in their own land .

ID:	5557
INPUT:	Ez dut neure barnean <unk> tengurik aurkitzen , ez dut inolako laguntzarik .
PRED:	I have found nothing in my heart , and there is no one to help me .
GOLD:	No , I am utterly helpless , without any chance of success .

ID:	5558
INPUT:	Emakumeak erantzun zien : — Ongi . Hala bedi ! Eta agur egin zien . Alde egin zutenean , emakumeak lokarri gorria lotu zuen leihoan .
PRED:	The woman said to them , “ Let it be well . ” And when the woman left her , she took her away , and put her in the bed .
GOLD:	“ I accept your terms , ” she replied . And she sent them on their way , leaving the scarlet rope hanging from the window .

ID:	5559
INPUT:	Babesle izan genituen , gau eta egun , beraien artean artzain ibili ginen bitarte guztian .
PRED:	And we were one another night and night and night and night and night , and all the way of their flock .
GOLD:	In fact , day and night they were like a wall of protection to us and the sheep .

ID:	5560
INPUT:	Hain bihotzeko zintuztegunez , prest geunden , Jainkoaren berri ona ez ezik , baita geure bizia ere zuei emateko . Hainbesteraino maite zintuztegun !
PRED:	For we were ready to be ready for you , but not the Good News of God , but for we have loved you .
GOLD:	We loved you so much that we shared with you not only God 's Good News but our own lives , too .

ID:	5561
INPUT:	Sinesgabeei dagokien heriotza lotsagarria izango duzu atzerritarren eskutik . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	You will be put to death , ” declares the Lord God . “ and you will be put to death . ”
GOLD:	You will die like an outcastat the hands of foreigners.I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	5562
INPUT:	Bere bidean zihoala , Jainkoaren aingeru batzuekin egin zuen topo Jakobek .
PRED:	And Jacob saw a angel of God in his way , and he saw a angel of God .
GOLD:	When Jacob saw them , he exclaimed , “ This is God 's camp ! ” So he named the place Mahanaim .

ID:	5563
INPUT:	Aldi hartan Heber kendarra beste kendarrengandik , hau da , Moisesen aitaginarreba zen Hobaben ondorengoengandik banandu eta Kedex ondoan zegoen etxolatua , Tzaanaimgo artearen inguruan .
PRED:	And it came to pass at that time , that the father of Moses , the daughter of Moses , the wife of Moses , the daughter of Levi , and the daughter of Zadok , which was at Kadesh .
GOLD:	Now Heber the Kenite , a descendant of Moses ' brother-in-law Hobab , had moved away from the other members of his tribe and pitched his tent by the oak of Zaanannim near Kedesh .

ID:	5564
INPUT:	Baditut , dagoeneko , laurogei urte . Uste al duzu badudala ahalmenik ona eta txarra bereizteko ? Edota janari-edariez gozatzeko ? Edota kantariei entzuteko ? Zuretzat oztopo baizik ez nintzateke izango , ene errege jauna .
PRED:	Do you think that I am doing good and evil ? Do you think that I am right and evil ? Do you think that I would be a king for you ? I would not hear my lord the king . ”
GOLD:	Just to go across the Jordan River with the king is all the honor I need !

ID:	5565
INPUT:	benjamindarrak , eta inguratu , pertsegitu eta Gibearen ekialderaino atsedenik eman gabe oinperatu zituzten .
PRED:	And the children of Benjamin were round about them , and smote them , and they put them on the east side of the gate of Gibeah .
GOLD:	The Israelites surrounded the men of Benjamin and chased them relentlessly , finally overtaking them east of Gibeah .

ID:	5566
INPUT:	Zuen alde otoitz egitean , eskerrak ematen dizkiogu etengabe Jainkoari , Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren Aitari ,
PRED:	When we pray for you , we pray to the Lord our Father Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	We always pray for you , and we give thanks to God , the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ .

ID:	5567
INPUT:	Eta Aaroni esan zion : « Hartu zekor bat barkamen-oparirako eta ahari bat erre-oparirako , akats gabeak biak , eta aurkez itzazu Jaunaren aurrean .
PRED:	And Aaron said to Aaron , Take a young bull , and offer a young bull for a sin offering , and a young bull without blemish before the Lord .
GOLD:	He said to Aaron , “ Take a young bull for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering , both without defects , and present them to the Lord .

ID:	5568
INPUT:	Hogeita hamabi urte zituen errege izaten hastean eta zortzi urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen .
PRED:	He was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned two years in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Jehoram was thirty-two years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years .

ID:	5569
INPUT:	Gaurdanik zuenganako izua eta beldurra sartuko diet munduko herri guztiei : zuen berri jakitean , ikara larriak hartuko ditu .
PRED:	This day I will come to you , and I will be afraid of all the peoples of the earth : and when they heard it , they will be afraid .
GOLD:	Beginning today I will make people throughout the earth terrified because of you . When they hear reports about you , they will tremble with dread and fear . ' ”

ID:	5570
INPUT:	Ez aldatu lekuz antzinako mugarririk , zure arbasoek jarritakoak dira eta .
PRED:	Do n't turn away from the old man , and your fathers are their fathers .
GOLD:	Do n't cheat your neighbor by moving the ancient boundary markersset up by previous generations .

ID:	5571
INPUT:	Bilarazi zituzten , orduan , filistearren buruzagi guztiak eta esan zieten : « Bidal ezazue Israelen Jainkoaren kutxa . Itzul bedi bere tokira ; bestela , hil egingo gaitu geu eta geure herria » . Hiri osoa guztiz izutua zegoen , oso gogor jo baitzituen Jainkoak .
PRED:	And they sent all the princes of the Philistines , and said unto them , Send the ark of the God of Israel , and let us return to his place ; and let us return to his place , and let us go to his place , and we shall die .
GOLD:	The people summoned the Philistine rulers again and begged them , “ Please send the Ark of the God of Israel back to its own country , or it will kill us all . ” For the deadly plague from God had already begun , and great fear was sweeping across the town .

ID:	5572
INPUT:	( 2 Kro 7 , <unk> )
PRED:	The King of Judah
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	5573
INPUT:	Jehuren gainerako jarduerak , egin zuen guztia eta egintza bizkorrak « Israelgo Erregeen Kronika » liburuan daude idatziak .
PRED:	Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam , and all that he did , are they written in the book of the kings of Israel ?
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Jehu 's reign — everything he did and all his achievements — are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	5574
INPUT:	Judako errege Sedekias eta bere funtzionarioak , beraiek galdu nahian dabiltzan etsaien esku utziko ditut , orain hiriari erasotzeari utzi dion Babiloniako erregearen gudarostearen menpe eroriko dira .
PRED:	I will hand them into the hand of Zedekiah king of Judah and his officials into the hand of their enemies , and I will hand them into the hand of the king of Babylon , and they shall fall into the hand of the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	“ I will hand over King Zedekiah of Judah and his officials to the army of the king of Babylon . And although they have left Jerusalem for a while ,

ID:	5575
INPUT:	Morroiak kanpora bota zuen neska eta atea giltzaz itxi . Soineko luze ederrez jantzia zegoen neska , halaxe janzten baitziren errege-alaba ezkongabeak .
PRED:	And the servant cast him out , and cast him into the prison , and put him in the garment ; for the daughter of the king was clothed with a garment , and the daughter of the king 's daughter was clothed .
GOLD:	So the servant put her out and locked the door behind her . She was wearing a long , beautiful robe , as was the custom in those days for the king 's virgin daughters .

ID:	5576
INPUT:	Eta ezin du inork apaiz nagusigoaren ohorea beretzat hartu , Jainkoak dei eginik ez bada , Aaronek bezala .
PRED:	And no one can receive the glory of the high priest , as God has not called him , as Aaron had not called .
GOLD:	And no one can become a high priest simply because he wants such an honor . He must be called by God for this work , just as Aaron was .

ID:	5577
INPUT:	Josek bere burua ezagutzera eman anaiei
PRED:	Joseph and his brothers
GOLD:	Joseph Reveals His Identity

ID:	5578
INPUT:	Nor bere zentzu onaren arabera txalotuko dute , bihotz okerrekoak mespretxua izango du .
PRED:	They will be ashamed of their own heart , and they will be ashamed .
GOLD:	A sensible person wins admiration , but a warped mind is despised .

ID:	5579
INPUT:	Tinko ezarriak ditut oinak ; Jauna bedeinkatuko dut batzarrean .
PRED:	I will praise the Lord in the assembly ; I will bless him in the assembly .
GOLD:	Now I stand on solid ground , and I will publicly praise the Lord .

ID:	5580
INPUT:	Bidean zihoala , putzu bat begiztatu zuen landan eta hiru artalde putzu ondoan etzanak , handik edaten baitzuten artaldeek . Harri handi batek estaltzen zuen putzuko ahoa .
PRED:	And he went out into the field , and took a well in the field , and he took three sheep from there ; and there was a great stone that was by the well .
GOLD:	He saw a well in the distance . Three flocks of sheep and goats lay in an open field beside it , waiting to be watered . But a heavy stone covered the mouth of the well .

ID:	5581
INPUT:	Erreinuko ministro , eskualdeburu , kontseilari eta gobernariek aho batez eskatzen dizute errege-agindu hau eman eta aldarrika dezazun : Errege jauna , hogeita hamar egun hauetan , zuri ez beste jainko nahiz gizonen bati otoitz egingo diona , jaurti dezatela lehoien zulora .
PRED:	Then the king and the princes of the kingdom , and the princes , and the princes , and the princes , and the princes , and the princes , and the king , and the princes of the king , and the king , and the princes of the king , and the king shall be cast into the house of a lion , that he may be cast into a lion .
GOLD:	And now , Your Majesty , issue and sign this law so it can not be changed , an official law of the Medes and Persians that can not be revoked . ”

ID:	5582
INPUT:	Esan zuen , gainera : « Bedeinkatua Jauna , Semen Jainkoa ! Izan bedi Kanaan Semen esklabo !
PRED:	He said , “ Blessed be the Lord , the God of Canaan , that he may be slaves in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	Then Noah said , “ May the Lord , the God of Shem , be blessed , and may Canaan be his servant !

ID:	5583
INPUT:	Joseren leinukoak Betel hiriaren kontra abiatu ziren , Jauna lagun zutela ,
PRED:	And the sons of Joseph went out against the city of Bethel , and they went out against the Lord , saying ,
GOLD:	The descendants of Joseph attacked the town of Bethel , and the Lord was with them .

ID:	5584
INPUT:	Tzenan , Hadaxa , Migdal-Gad ,
PRED:	Gad , Gad , Gad ,
GOLD:	Also included were Zenan , Hadashah , Migdal-gad ,

ID:	5585
INPUT:	Antola zaitezte senitarteka zeuen eginkizunen arabera , Israelgo errege Daviden eta beronen seme Salomonen idatzietan agindua dagoenez .
PRED:	Be careful to obey the Lord 's command , as he commanded you to be king over Israel and his son Solomon .
GOLD:	Report for duty according to the family divisions of your ancestors , following the directions of King David of Israel and the directions of his son Solomon .

ID:	5586
INPUT:	Eta osabarik ere ez badu , gainerako ahaideetatik hurbilenekoari emango zaio ondarea eta bera izango da jabe . Lege izango dute hau israeldarrek , nik , Jaunak , Moisesi agindutakoaren arabera » .
PRED:	But if it is not good , it shall be given to the man who is on the altar , and it shall be his inheritance , and it shall be a possession of the sons of Israel , according to all that the Lord commanded Moses .
GOLD:	But if his father has no brothers , give his inheritance to the nearest relative in his clan . This is a legal requirement for the people of Israel , just as the Lord commanded Moses . ”

ID:	5587
INPUT:	Oraindik haragia hagin artean zerabiltela , biziki haserretu zen Jauna israeldarren aurka , eta izurri ikaragarriz zigortu zituen .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when the light was come upon the children of Israel , that the Lord was kindled against the children of Israel ; and he was angry with the plague of the plague .
GOLD:	But while they were gorging themselves on the meat — while it was still in their mouths — the anger of the Lord blazed against the people , and he struck them with a severe plague .

ID:	5588
INPUT:	Lukas bakarrik dago nirekin . Har ezazu Markos eta ekarri zeurekin , lanerako oso ona baitut .
PRED:	I am alone alone alone , and send me to me , but I am well with you .
GOLD:	Only Luke is with me . Bring Mark with you when you come , for he will be helpful to me in my ministry .

ID:	5589
INPUT:	Ondoren , kanpoko atarira eraman eta hango lau kantoien aurretik pasarazi ninduen : kantoi bakoitzean patio txiki bat zegoen .
PRED:	And he brought me to the outer court , and brought me to the outer court , and there were four corners of the camp , and there was a small voice .
GOLD:	Then he brought me back to the outer courtyard and led me to each of its four corners . In each corner I saw an enclosure .

ID:	5590
INPUT:	« Seme nahiz alabagatik garbikuntza-egunak betetzean , apaizarengana joango da , elkarketa-etxolaren sarrerara , eta urteko bildotsa eramango dio erre-oparirako eta usakumea edo usapala barkamen-oparirako .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in the days of his son or his daughter , that he may come to the priest , and he shall bring him to the door of the tabernacle of meeting , and a sin offering for a sin offering , and a sin offering , and a sin offering .
GOLD:	“ When the time of purification is completed for either a son or a daughter , the woman must bring a one-year-old lamb for a burnt offering and a young pigeon or turtledove for a purification offering . She must bring her offerings to the priest at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	5591
INPUT:	Adiskide maite , espirituz ongi doakizun bezala , beste gauza guztietan ere ongi joan dakizula eta osasuna izan dezazula .
PRED:	My beloved friends , as you love in the Spirit , so that you may know that you are right in all things .
GOLD:	Dear friend , I hope all is well with you and that you are as healthy in body as you are strong in spirit .

ID:	5592
INPUT:	Akabek hirurogeita hamar ondorengo zituen Samarian . Jehuk gutunak igorri zizkien Samariara Izreelgo buruzagi , arduradun eta Akaben ondorengo haien hezitzaileei , esanez :
PRED:	Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria , and he sent them to Samaria , the chief prince of Samaria , and the heads of the sons of Ahab , saying ,
GOLD:	Ahab had seventy sons living in the city of Samaria . So Jehu wrote letters and sent them to Samaria , to the elders and officials of the city , and to the guardians of King Ahab 's sons . He said ,

ID:	5593
INPUT:	Leial izango natzaio betiko , harekin dudan itunari sendo eutsiko .
PRED:	I will keep my covenant forever , and I will keep my covenant with him .
GOLD:	I will preserve an heir for him ; his throne will be as endless as the days of heaven .

ID:	5594
INPUT:	Andreak , bere eskuetan soinekoa utzita kanpora ihes egin ziola ikusirik ,
PRED:	And when Philip saw that he was clothed in his hand , he fled into his hand .
GOLD:	When she saw that she was holding his cloak and he had fled ,

ID:	5595
INPUT:	Utz itzazu berriketa hutsalak , horietara emanak gero eta gehiago aldentzen baitira benetako erlijiotik .
PRED:	Let me go away from the same way , and let them go away from the end of all their wickedness .
GOLD:	Avoid worthless , foolish talk that only leads to more godless behavior .

ID:	5596
INPUT:	Rakelek , orduan : — Hor duzu nire neskame Bilha . Elkar zaitez berarekin eta emango dizu semerik nire ordez ; honela , nik ere izango dut semerik , hura bitarteko .
PRED:	Rachel said to her , “ You are my servant , and you will give him his son , and you will give him a son to be my son . ”
GOLD:	Then Rachel told him , “ Take my maid , Bilhah , and sleep with her . She will bear children for me , and through her I can have a family , too . ”

ID:	5597
INPUT:	Itzharren semeak : Kore , Ne<unk> eta Zikri .
PRED:	These are the sons of Reuben : Elioenai , Jozabad , and Elasah .
GOLD:	The sons of Izhar were Korah , Nepheg , and Zicri .

ID:	5598
INPUT:	Bada , nire herria ahaztu egin da nitaz , intsentsua erretzen die sasijainkoei . Desbideratu egin daantzinako bidetik , sekula ibili gabekobideetan ibiltzeko .
PRED:	My people have forgotten me , and they burn incense to the gods of my people ; they have turned their way , and they have turned their way to pass by the way of their way .
GOLD:	But my people are not so reliable , for they have deserted me ; they burn incense to worthless idols.They have stumbled off the ancient highwaysand walk in muddy paths .

ID:	5599
INPUT:	PROFETAREN BI<unk> ZAKO GORABEHERAK ( 34 , 1 — 45 , 5 )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	A Warning for Zedekiah

ID:	5600
INPUT:	Zeruetan zure agintzari miragarria goresten dute , Jauna , aingeruen batzarrean zure leialtasuna .
PRED:	They praise your commands in the heavens , O Lord , in the assembly of the Lord , in the assembly of the earth .
GOLD:	For who in all of heaven can compare with the Lord ? What mightiest angel is anything like the Lord ?

ID:	5601
INPUT:	( Is 38 , 1-8 ; 2 Kro 32 , 24 )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Envoys from Babylon

ID:	5602
INPUT:	eta biak bat izango dira . Beraz , aurrerantzean ez dira bi , bat baino .
PRED:	And they shall be two , and there shall be no more more than two .
GOLD:	and the two are united into one . ' Since they are no longer two but one ,

ID:	5603
INPUT:	Jaunaren aintza tenplura sartu zen ekialdeko atetik .
PRED:	And the glory of the Lord came out of the east side of the east .
GOLD:	And the glory of the Lord came into the Temple through the east gateway .

ID:	5604
INPUT:	Izan ere , beste horiek guztiek sobera dutenetik egin dute limosna ; honek , ordea , bere eskasian , bizitzeko zeukan guztia eman du » .
PRED:	For all these things have taken away from his own hands , but it is given to him , that he may live in his own faith .
GOLD:	For they have given a tiny part of their surplus , but she , poor as she is , has given everything she has . ”

ID:	5605
INPUT:	Davidek galdetu zuen : « Gelditzen ote da bizirik Saulen senitartekoren bat ? Neure onginahia agertu nahi nioke Jonatanengatik » .
PRED:	David asked , “ Is there any of the family of Saul 's family ? I want to show my grace for Jonathan 's sake . ”
GOLD:	One day David asked , “ Is anyone in Saul 's family still alive — anyone to whom I can show kindness for Jonathan 's sake ? ”

ID:	5606
INPUT:	aurrez aurre etengabeiraintzen nauen herriarengana : baratze sakratuetansakrifizioak eskaintzen dituzteeta adreiluzko aldareetanintsentsua erretzen ,
PRED:	I went to the people of the land , to the people who offer sacrifices to me in the holy places , and to burn incense on the altar .
GOLD:	All day long they insult me to my faceby worshiping idols in their sacred gardens.They burn incense on pagan altars .

ID:	5607
INPUT:	Filistearra ere bazetorren eta Davidengana hurbiltzen ari zen , ezkutaria aurretik zuela .
PRED:	And the Philistines came to David , and came near to David , and saw that he was standing before him .
GOLD:	Goliath walked out toward David with his shield bearer ahead of him ,

ID:	5608
INPUT:	jakintzaz janzten dira gelakmota guztietako ondasun baliotsu eta atseginez .
PRED:	I will make them wise , and I will make them happy , and I will make them happy .
GOLD:	Through knowledge its rooms are filledwith all sorts of precious riches and valuables .

ID:	5609
INPUT:	Izaki haiek aurrera egitean , gurpilek ere aurrera egiten zuten ondoan , eta izakiak lurretik altxatzean , gurpilak ere altxatu .
PRED:	When the living creatures came before them , the wheels lifted up the wheels , and the wheels lifted up the wheels .
GOLD:	When the living beings moved , the wheels moved with them . When they flew upward , the wheels went up , too .

ID:	5610
INPUT:	Hizketa ugari , huts egitea sarri ; mihiari eusten dakiena , hori bai zuhurra !
PRED:	A tongue is a fool , and a tongue is a fool , but a wise man is wise .
GOLD:	Too much talk leads to sin.Be sensible and keep your mouth shut .

ID:	5611
INPUT:	Eberrek bi seme izan zituen : batak Pe<unk> , hau da , « Zatiketa » , zuen izena , bere garaian zatitu baitzen mundua ; anaiak , berriz , Joktan .
PRED:	And he had two sons : and he called the name of the world , and the name of the name of the Lord , and the name of the earth .
GOLD:	Eber had two sons . The first was named Peleg ( which means “ division ” ) , for during his lifetime the people of the world were divided into different language groups . His brother 's name was Joktan .

ID:	5612
INPUT:	Goretsazue bere egite ahaltsuengatik , goretsi bere neurrigabeko handitasunagatik .
PRED:	Praise him because of his mighty power , and praise him for his great abundance .
GOLD:	Praise him for his mighty works ; praise his unequaled greatness !

ID:	5613
INPUT:	Jesusen gorpua bien artean hartu eta oihal-zerrendaz lotu zuten , tartean lurringaiak ezarriz , juduek hobiratzeko zuten ohiturari jarraituz .
PRED:	And they took the body of Jesus , and was filled with power , and laid hands on the face of the Jews , and followed him .
GOLD:	Following Jewish burial custom , they wrapped Jesus ' body with the spices in long sheets of linen cloth .

ID:	5614
INPUT:	Jesusek , ikasleei begira , honela esan zuen : « Zorionekoak behartsuok , zuek baituzue Jainkoa errege .
PRED:	Jesus looked at his disciples and said , “ Blessed are you poor , for you are the kingdom of God .
GOLD:	Then Jesus turned to his disciples and said , “ God blesses you who are poor , for the Kingdom of God is yours .

ID:	5615
INPUT:	Neure lurraldearen jagole izango naizinguruan dabiltzangudari-taldeen aurka ; zapaltzailea ez da gehiagolurralde honetan sartuko , orain neure begiz zaintzen dut eta » .
PRED:	And I will take the land of my land in the midst of my people , and I will not enter into this land , and I will keep my eyes in my eyes .
GOLD:	I will guard my Templeand protect it from invading armies.I am watching closely to ensurethat no more foreign oppressors overrun my people 's land .

ID:	5616
INPUT:	Bestela , zuek lurralde hartako biztanleekin hitzarmena egingo bazenute , haiek , beren sasikultuak egitean eta beren jainkoei opariak eskaintzean , zuek ere gonbidatuko zintuzketete eta haien oparietatik jango zenukete ;
PRED:	But if you make a covenant with them in the land , you shall make a covenant with them in the land of the land , and you shall serve their gods , and you shall eat your burnt offerings , and you shall eat your burnt offerings .
GOLD:	“ You must not make a treaty of any kind with the people living in the land . They lust after their gods , offering sacrifices to them . They will invite you to join them in their sacrificial meals , and you will go with them .

ID:	5617
INPUT:	eta dei egin zioten erregeari . Hilkiasen seme Eliakim jauregizaina , Xebna idazkaria eta Asafen seme Joah , erregearen bozeramailea , atera ziren haiengana .
PRED:	And they called the king to the king , and Hilkiah the son of Hilkiah , the son of Hilkiah , the scribe , the scribe , the scribe , the son of Hilkiah , the son of Hilkiah , and the priest came to them .
GOLD:	They summoned King Hezekiah , but the king sent these officials to meet with them : Eliakim son of Hilkiah , the palace administrator ; Shebna the court secretary ; and Joah son of Asaph , the royal historian .

ID:	5618
INPUT:	Turuta-hotsa irrintziz lagundua bada , lehenengo joaldian ekialdean etxolaturiko kanpamenduak abiatuko dira ;
PRED:	If the sound of the trumpet heard the sound of the trumpet , then the camp shall come to the east side of the camp .
GOLD:	“ When you sound the signal to move on , the tribes camped on the east side of the Tabernacle must break camp and move forward .

ID:	5619
INPUT:	Jatorriz zeurea zenuen basaolibondotik moztu eta zeurea ez zenuen olibondoan txertatu bazintuen , askoz errazago izango du olibondotik sortutakoak beren berezko olibondoan txertatzea .
PRED:	And thou shalt cut off thy olive oil from the olive oil , and thou shalt not cut off thy olive oil from the olive oil of the olive oil , and the olive oil of the olive oil of the olive oil .
GOLD:	You , by nature , were a branch cut from a wild olive tree . So if God was willing to do something contrary to nature by grafting you into his cultivated tree , he will be far more eager to graft the original branches back into the tree where they belong .

ID:	5620
INPUT:	Gertatua ikusi zutenek deabruduna nola sendatua izan zen kontatu zioten jendeari .
PRED:	When those who saw what had happened , they told the people how the devil had been healed .
GOLD:	Then those who had seen what happened told the others how the demon-possessed man had been healed .

ID:	5621
INPUT:	Jaunak onez begiratu zion Anari , eta honek sabelean sortu eta hiru seme eta bi alaba izan zituen . Bitartean , Samuel mutikoa hazten ari zen Jaunarenean .
PRED:	And the Lord looked at Samuel , and he raised up three sons and three sons and daughters . And Samuel forgotten the Lord .
GOLD:	And the Lord blessed Hannah , and she conceived and gave birth to three sons and two daughters . Meanwhile , Samuel grew up in the presence of the Lord .

ID:	5622
INPUT:	Danen leinuko seiehun gizon haiek , berriz , atarian gelditu ziren .
PRED:	And the five hundred men of Dan stood in the court .
GOLD:	As the 600 armed warriors from the tribe of Dan stood at the entrance of the gate ,

ID:	5623
INPUT:	Horretatik guztitik , bereizi zati bat Jaunarentzat : gudura borrokatzera joan direnei dagokienetik , bostehuneko bat , bai gizakietatik , bai behi , asto nahiz ardietatik ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ It is a fifth part of the people who go to fight against us . It is a fifth part of a fifth , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , and sheep .
GOLD:	From the army 's portion , first give the Lord his share of the plunder — one of every 500 of the prisoners and of the cattle , donkeys , sheep , and goats .

ID:	5624
INPUT:	Abram , Egiptotik Negev aldera abiatu zen bere emazte eta ondasun guztiekin . Lot ere berarekin zihoan .
PRED:	And Abram went out of Egypt , and his wife , and all that he had with him , and Lot and all that he had with him .
GOLD:	So Abram left Egypt and traveled north into the Negev , along with his wife and Lot and all that they owned .

ID:	5625
INPUT:	Beraz , hau diotsuet : Ez ditut jende horiek botako zuen aurretik ; ondoan izanen dituzue eta beraien jainkoak tranpa gertatuko dira zuentzat » .
PRED:	Therefore I say unto you , I will not cast them out before you ; and they shall be a snare unto you , and they shall be a snare for you .
GOLD:	So now I declare that I will no longer drive out the people living in your land . They will be thorns in your sides , and their gods will be a constant temptation to you . ”

ID:	5626
INPUT:	Gure izate ustelkorra bizi ustelezinez jantziko denean , eta izate hilkorra hilezkortasunez , orduan beteko da Liburu Santuak dioena : Behin betiko galdua gertatu da heriotza .
PRED:	For when we live in our clothes , you will live in a dead body , and then it will be written in the Scriptures , “ It will be eternal life forever . ”
GOLD:	Then , when our dying bodies have been transformed into bodies that will never die , this Scripture will be fulfilled : “ Death is swallowed up in victory .

ID:	5627
INPUT:	Madiandik atera eta Paranera heldu ziren ; Parango gizon batzuek berekin hartu eta Egiptora jo zuten , hango errege faraoiagana . Honek etxebizitza eman zion Hadadi , baita janaria eta lurzati bat ere .
PRED:	And they went out from Midian , and came to the king of Egypt , and some men took him , and brought him to Pharaoh king of Egypt , and gave him the land of Egypt , and gave him food and bread .
GOLD:	They set out from Midian and went to Paran , where others joined them . Then they traveled to Egypt and went to Pharaoh , who gave them a home , food , and some land .

ID:	5628
INPUT:	Apaizburu eta lege-maisuak Jesus nola hilko zebiltzan , baina herriaren beldur ziren .
PRED:	And the chief priests and the scribes began to kill Jesus , but they feared the people .
GOLD:	The leading priests and teachers of religious law were plotting how to kill Jesus , but they were afraid of the people 's reaction .

ID:	5629
INPUT:	Hau ikustean , herri osoa lurreraino ahuspeztu zen , esanez : « Jauna da Jainkoa ! Jauna da Jainkoa ! »
PRED:	When all the people saw this , they fell down to the ground and said , “ The Lord God is God . ”
GOLD:	And when all the people saw it , they fell face down on the ground and cried out , “ The Lord — he is God ! Yes , the Lord is God ! ”

ID:	5630
INPUT:	Handik bi urtera , Absalomek errege-seme guztiak gonbidatu zituen Efraim ondoko Baal-Hatzorren egiten ari zen ardi-mozketako jaira .
PRED:	After two years Absalom sent all the sons of Israel to be called by the sword of Ephraim , and he went down to the sheep of Baal .
GOLD:	Two years later , when Absalom 's sheep were being sheared at Baal-hazor near Ephraim , Absalom invited all the king 's sons to come to a feast .

ID:	5631
INPUT:	Guk goresten dugu Jauna , orain eta beti . Aleluia ! Gora Jauna !
PRED:	We praise the Lord , and now we praise him forever . Amen .
GOLD:	But we can praise the Lordboth now and forever ! Praise the Lord !

ID:	5632
INPUT:	Mesias etorriko denean , ez du inork jakingo nongoa den ; hau , ordea , badakigu nongoa den » .
PRED:	When the Messiah comes , no one knows where it is , but we know where it is . ”
GOLD:	But how could he be ? For we know where this man comes from . When the Messiah comes , he will simply appear ; no one will know where he comes from . ”

ID:	5633
INPUT:	Zein ederki dakizunmaitaleen etxerako bidea ! Zein maisu zarengaiztakeriarako bidean !
PRED:	How beautiful is the way of the house of her youth ? How is the way of wickedness ?
GOLD:	“ How you plot and scheme to win your lovers.Even an experienced prostitute could learn from you !

ID:	5634
INPUT:	« Negar-zotinak ditut ogi , urak bezala gainezka egiten nire intziriek .
PRED:	“ My eyes are pure , and my feet are like water .
GOLD:	I can not eat for sighing ; my groans pour out like water .

ID:	5635
INPUT:	Hona hemen , Jerusalemen sortu zitzaizkion semeen izenak : Xamua , Xobab , Natan , Salomon ,
PRED:	These are the names of the sons of Solomon , who were born to him in Jerusalem : Nadab the son of Hallohesh , the son of Malluch , the father of Solomon ,
GOLD:	These are the names of David 's sons who were born in Jerusalem : Shammua , Shobab , Nathan , Solomon ,

ID:	5636
INPUT:	« Nik , Danielek , begiratu eta beste bi gizon ikusi nituen zutik ibaiaren alde banatan .
PRED:	“ I looked and saw another man , and I saw two men standing on the other side .
GOLD:	Then I , Daniel , looked and saw two others standing on opposite banks of the river .

ID:	5637
INPUT:	Satanasen esku utziko duzue hori , ea horrela , beraren bekatuzko izaera suntsiturik , Jaunaren egunean salbatzen den .
PRED:	You will hand this into the hand of Satan , so that you will be destroyed in the day of the Lord 's salvation .
GOLD:	Then you must throw this man out and hand him over to Satan so that his sinful nature will be destroyed and he himself will be saved on the day the Lord returns .

ID:	5638
INPUT:	Horrela bada , Espirituaren dohainak irrikatzen dituzuenez gero , saia zaitezte dohainok ugari izaten , baina eliz elkarteari hazten laguntzeko .
PRED:	So then , when the Spirit says these things to you , then , you may be many of them , but to help the church .
GOLD:	And the same is true for you . Since you are so eager to have the special abilities the Spirit gives , seek those that will strengthen the whole church .

ID:	5639
INPUT:	Atze eta aurre , estu bildua naukazu , zeure eskua nire gain ezarrita .
PRED:	You have gathered me together , and I have gathered my hand upon you , and put my hand on me .
GOLD:	You go before me and follow me.You place your hand of blessing on my head .

ID:	5640
INPUT:	Gu ere , noizbait , burugabe , errebelde , bide-galdu , edozein grina eta atseginkeriaren menpeko izanak gara , gaiztakerian eta bekaizkerian bizi izanak , gorrotagarri eta elkarren gorrotatzaile .
PRED:	For we are not guilty of the way of the law , and of the flesh , and of the flesh , and of wickedness , and wickedness , and wickedness , and of the congregation .
GOLD:	Once we , too , were foolish and disobedient . We were misled and became slaves to many lusts and pleasures . Our lives were full of evil and envy , and we hated each other .

ID:	5641
INPUT:	ez ilunpetan zabaltzen den izurriari , ez egun-argitan jotzen duen gaitzari .
PRED:	There is no plague in darkness , nor put us in darkness .
GOLD:	Do not dread the disease that stalks in darkness , nor the disaster that strikes at midday .

ID:	5642
INPUT:	Harroputzek zuloak egin dizkidate bidean , zure legea aintzat hartu gabe .
PRED:	The pride of the proud have laid me in the way of thy law , and I have not received thy law .
GOLD:	These arrogant people who hate your instructionshave dug deep pits to trap me .

ID:	5643
INPUT:	Jaunarengana bidali zituen galdetzera : « Zu al zara “ Etortzekoa ” , ala besteren baten zain egon behar dugu ? »
PRED:	He sent them to the Lord , saying , “ Are you going to come to us ? Is it for us to wait for another ? ”
GOLD:	and he sent them to the Lord to ask him , “ Are you the Messiah we 've been expecting , or should we keep looking for someone else ? ”

ID:	5644
INPUT:	Hirurogeita hamar urte zituela , Kenanek Mahalalel izan zuen .
PRED:	He was thirty years old when he became the father of Lamech .
GOLD:	When Kenan was 70 years old , he became the father of Mahalalel .

ID:	5645
INPUT:	Nire erabakiak gutxietsiz , Jerusalemgo Jainkoaren etxea hondatzeko eskua luzatzen duen edozein errege edo herri eraitsi dezala bertan bizi den Jainkoak . Neuk , Dariok , ematen dut agindu hau ; bete bedi zehatz-mehatz » .
PRED:	and to destroy all my statutes , and to destroy the house of the God of Jerusalem , and to destroy the house of the Lord , and to dwell in it , and to dwell there , and to dwell in it , as I have commanded .
GOLD:	May the God who has chosen the city of Jerusalem as the place to honor his name destroy any king or nation that violates this command and destroys this Temple . “ I , Darius , have issued this decree . Let it be obeyed with all diligence . ”

ID:	5646
INPUT:	Brontzezko berrogeita hamar katigailu ere egin zituzten , oihal-etxola osoa lotu eta bat eginik geldi zedin .
PRED:	And he made fifty bronze , and put them on the tabernacle of the tabernacle , so that the tabernacle may remain there .
GOLD:	He also made fifty bronze clasps to fasten the long curtains together . In this way , the tent covering was made of one continuous piece .

ID:	5647
INPUT:	Josafatek aginduok eman zizkien : « Jaunarekiko begirunez , leial eta jator jardun behar duzue .
PRED:	Jehoshaphat said to them , “ You will fear the Lord , and you will know him .
GOLD:	These were his instructions to them : “ You must always act in the fear of the Lord , with faithfulness and an undivided heart .

ID:	5648
INPUT:	« Emaztea utzi eta beste batekin ezkontzen denak adulterio egiten du ; eta senarrak utzitako emakume batekin ezkontzen denak adulterio egiten du .
PRED:	“ If a man has sexual relations with another wife , she must marry her , and she must marry her .
GOLD:	“ For example , a man who divorces his wife and marries someone else commits adultery . And anyone who marries a woman divorced from her husband commits adultery . ”

ID:	5649
INPUT:	Media eta Pertsiako Erregeen Kronika Liburuan daude idatzirik erregearen egintza indartsu eta bizkor hauek , baita erregeak Mardokeo nola altxatu eta handi egin zuen ere .
PRED:	The words of the king of Persia and Persia are written in the book of the kings of Persia , and the power of Mordecai , and the king lifted up his hands , and made him very great .
GOLD:	His great achievements and the full account of the greatness of Mordecai , whom the king had promoted , are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Media and Persia .

ID:	5650
INPUT:	Trebatzen dizkit eskuak gudurako , eta besoak brontzezko uztaia tenkatzeko .
PRED:	He has stretched out his hand against me , and his arms are under my feet .
GOLD:	You have given me your shield of victory.Your right hand supports me ; your help has made me great .

ID:	5651
INPUT:	Honek esan zien : « Zuei eman zaizue Jainkoaren erregetzaren misterioak ezagutzea ; gainerakoei , ordea , parabola bidez hitz egiten diet . Horrela , ikusten dute , bai , baina ohartzen ez ; entzuten dute , bai , baina ulertzen ez .
PRED:	He said to them , “ You have given to the kingdom of God , but to the rest of the kingdom of God , but to those who hear it , but they do not understand it .
GOLD:	He replied , “ You are permitted to understand the secrets of the Kingdom of God . But I use parables to teach the others so that the Scriptures might be fulfilled : ‘ When they look , they wo n't really see.When they hear , they wo n't understand . '

ID:	5652
INPUT:	Errautsez janaritzen da , gezurrezko burutapen zoroek okerbidetik daramate ; idoloak ez du salbatuko , baina ez du , hala ere , aitortuko gezur huts dela eskuetan duena .
PRED:	He shall eat the flesh of his flesh , and he shall be saved from the way of the wicked ; but he shall not be saved , but he shall not be saved by the hand of his testimony .
GOLD:	The poor , deluded fool feeds on ashes.He trusts something that ca n't help him at all.Yet he can not bring himself to ask , “ Is this idol that I 'm holding in my hand a lie ? ”

ID:	5653
INPUT:	Orduan , erregeak askarazi egin zuen , herrien nagusiak giltzapetik libre utzi .
PRED:	And the king delivered him out of the hand of the people , and delivered him out of the prison .
GOLD:	Then Pharaoh sent for him and set him free ; the ruler of the nation opened his prison door .

ID:	5654
INPUT:	Harroputza zigortzean , zuhur bihurtzen da heldugabea , eta zuhurrari dagokion heziketaz lortzen du jakintza .
PRED:	A wise man is wise , but a wise man is wise , and a wise man is wise .
GOLD:	If you punish a mocker , the simpleminded become wise ; if you instruct the wise , they will be all the wiser .

ID:	5655
INPUT:	Horiek ziren Manasesen senitarteak : 52 . <unk> gizonezko guztira .
PRED:	These are the families of Manasseh : the sons of Manasseh , three hundred and three thousand .
GOLD:	These were the clans of Manasseh . Their registered troops numbered 52,700 .

ID:	5656
INPUT:	Han , giza eskuz eginiko zurezko eta harrizko jainkoak gurtu beharko dituzue , ez ikusi eta ez entzun , ez jan eta ez usaindu egiten ez dutenak .
PRED:	And you shall worship the gods of men , and you shall worship the gods of men , and you shall not see , neither shall they eat , nor eat any of them that do not eat .
GOLD:	There , in a foreign land , you will worship idols made from wood and stone — gods that neither see nor hear nor eat nor smell .

ID:	5657
INPUT:	Esnatutakoan ametsa bezala , gutxietsi egingo dituzu , Jauna , mamuen erreinuan .
PRED:	You will break them in the Spirit like a dream , and you will break them in the kingdom of the Lord .
GOLD:	When you arise , O Lord , you will laugh at their silly ideasas a person laughs at dreams in the morning .

ID:	5658
INPUT:	Etsaiak ateetan
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Jerusalem 's Last Warning

ID:	5659
INPUT:	Jaunaren aingeruak Manoahi : — Zure emazteak bete dezala esan nion guztia .
PRED:	The angel of the Lord said to Mary , “ I told you everything I had said to her . ”
GOLD:	The angel of the Lord replied , “ Be sure your wife follows the instructions I gave her .

ID:	5660
INPUT:	Filistearrak , hara heltzean , Refaim haranean zabaldu ziren .
PRED:	And when the Philistines came into the valley , they spread out in the valley .
GOLD:	The Philistines arrived and spread out across the valley of Rephaim .

ID:	5661
INPUT:	baina Lot Sodomatik atera zen egunean , su eta sufrezko euria egin zuen zerutik eta denak galdu zituen .
PRED:	And Lot went out of Sodom , and he poured out the rain from heaven , and the rain from heaven .
GOLD:	until the morning Lot left Sodom . Then fire and burning sulfur rained down from heaven and destroyed them all .

ID:	5662
INPUT:	esan zion Noeri : « Izaki oro suntsitzea erabaki dut , gizakien erruz indarkeriaz betea baitago mundua ; gizakia eta mundua , biak suntsituko ditut .
PRED:	Then Noah said to Noah , “ If I destroy the whole world , I will destroy the whole world with the power of men , and I will destroy the world .
GOLD:	So God said to Noah , “ I have decided to destroy all living creatures , for they have filled the earth with violence . Yes , I will wipe them all out along with the earth !

ID:	5663
INPUT:	Aldareak ezarri zituen Jaunaren etxean jainko arrotzentzat , tenplu hartaz Jaunak hau esana zuen arren : « Jerusalem dut neure egoitza » .
PRED:	He built altars for the gods of the Lord in the house of the Lord , saying , “ Jerusalem is my tabernacle . ”
GOLD:	He built pagan altars in the Temple of the Lord , the place where the Lord had said , “ My name will remain in Jerusalem forever . ”

ID:	5664
INPUT:	neure zerbitzari Davidi emandakoa ere hautsezina da : ez zaio faltako inoiz ere bere tronuan eseriko den ondorengorik . Ez da inoiz hautsiko ere apaiz eta lebitarrei , nire zerbitzariei , emandako hitza .
PRED:	My servant David 's servant , will not be cut off from his throne , nor will he break his throne in his throne , nor shall he break the words of the Levites , nor break my words , nor shall he break my word .
GOLD:	only then will my covenant with my servant David be broken . Only then will he no longer have a descendant to reign on his throne . The same is true for my covenant with the Levitical priests who minister before me .

ID:	5665
INPUT:	Beraz , bete Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren aginduak , ibili berak erakutsitako bidetik eta bizi berarenganako begirunean .
PRED:	So you must obey the commands of the Lord your God , and walk in the way of the Lord your God , and live in his sight .
GOLD:	“ So obey the commands of the Lord your God by walking in his ways and fearing him .

ID:	5666
INPUT:	Israel ere filistearren eskuetara emango du Jaunak zurekin batera . Bihar zure semea eta biok nirekin izanen zarete , eta Israelen gudarostea ere filistearren eskuetara emango du Jaunak .
PRED:	The Lord will hand them into the hand of the Philistines , and your sons and your sons , and you will be with me , and you will be with me , and the Lord will hand over the Philistines into the hand of the Philistines .
GOLD:	What 's more , the Lord will hand you and the army of Israel over to the Philistines tomorrow , and you and your sons will be here with me . The Lord will bring down the entire army of Israel in defeat . ”

ID:	5667
INPUT:	Haiek ikusi orduko , Jakobek esan zuen : « Jainkoaren kanpalekua da hau ! » Eta leku hari Mahanaim — hau da , « Kanpaleku-bieta » — eman zion izen .
PRED:	When Jacob saw them , he said , “ This is the camp of God ! ” And he named him the camp .
GOLD:	Then Jacob sent messengers ahead to his brother , Esau , who was living in the region of Seir in the land of Edom .

ID:	5668
INPUT:	Xiloko kultu-lekuari eman nion tratu bera emango diot tenplu honi ; hiri hau , berriz , nire madarikazioaren adierazgarri izango da munduko nazio guztientzat » .
PRED:	I will give this temple to the high places of Shiloh , but this city will be a sign to all the nations of the earth . ”
GOLD:	then I will destroy this Temple as I destroyed Shiloh , the place where the Tabernacle was located . And I will make Jerusalem an object of cursing in every nation on earth . ' ”

ID:	5669
INPUT:	Eta ohar hau egin zien Jesusek : « Ulertzeko gauza denak uler beza » .
PRED:	And he said unto them , Let him hear , let him hear .
GOLD:	Then he said , “ Anyone with ears to hear should listen and understand . ”

ID:	5670
INPUT:	Ezekias , Judako errege
PRED:	King Hezekiah of Judah
GOLD:	Assyria Invades Judah

ID:	5671
INPUT:	Jezabel emaztea etorri zitzaion , esanez : — Zer duzu goibel egoteko ? Zergatik ez duzu ezer ere jan nahi ?
PRED:	And the wife of Jesse came to him , and said , What do you eat ? Why do you want to eat ?
GOLD:	“ What 's the matter ? ” his wife Jezebel asked him . “ What 's made you so upset that you 're not eating ? ”

ID:	5672
INPUT:	Zilarra arragoan , urrea labean , gizakia goratzen duenaren ahoan .
PRED:	The silver and gold are in the mouth of a man .
GOLD:	Fire tests the purity of silver and gold , but a person is tested by being praised .

ID:	5673
INPUT:	hau Melearena , hau Menarena , hau Matatarena , hau Natanena , hau Davidena ,
PRED:	the son of Pashhur , the son of Nathan , the son of Nathan , the son of David , the son of David ,
GOLD:	Eliakim was the son of Melea.Melea was the son of Menna.Menna was the son of Mattatha.Mattatha was the son of Nathan.Nathan was the son of David .

ID:	5674
INPUT:	Jehuren erregealdiko zazpigarren urtea zen , eta berrogei urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen . Haren amak Tzibia zuen izena eta Beer-Xebakoa zen .
PRED:	In the seventh year of Jeroboam king of Judah , he reigned forty years in Jerusalem , and his mother 's name was Kelita .
GOLD:	All his life Joash did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight because Jehoiada the priest instructed him .

ID:	5675
INPUT:	Honela , Josue lurralde osoaz jabetu zen : mendialdeaz , Negev basamortuaz , Xefela lautadaz eta alderdi menditsuez , eta errege guztiak hil zituzten . Erabat suntsitu zituen bizidun guztiak , bat ere utzi gabe , Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak , agindu bezala .
PRED:	So Joshua took possession of all the land , and all the land of the wilderness , and the great mountain , and the great mountain , and all the kings of the Amorites , and all the kings of the wilderness , and all the kings of Israel , as the Lord God had commanded him .
GOLD:	So Joshua conquered the whole region — the kings and people of the hill country , the Negev , the western foothills , and the mountain slopes . He completely destroyed everyone in the land , leaving no survivors , just as the Lord , the God of Israel , had commanded .

ID:	5676
INPUT:	Hau bai gaitz negargarria : etorri bezalaxe joan behar . Eta zein fruitu atera dioegin duen lanari ?
PRED:	This is a sign : As he has done , so shall he go , and what does the work which he has done ?
GOLD:	We all come to the end of our lives as naked and empty-handed as on the day we were born . We ca n't take our riches with us .

ID:	5677
INPUT:	Gero , eguzki-haizea aterarazi zuen zerutiketa hego-haizea bidali bere gotorlekutik .
PRED:	Then he led the sun wind from his place , and he sent the wind from his place .
GOLD:	He released the east wind in the heavensand guided the south wind by his mighty power .

ID:	5678
INPUT:	Ez zaitez indarkeria-zalearen inbidiaz bizi , ezta haren biderik hartu ere .
PRED:	Do n't live in the strength of the strength of his strength , nor do he take his way .
GOLD:	Do n't envy violent peopleor copy their ways .

ID:	5679
INPUT:	Egosi genuen , beraz , nire semea eta jan . Biharamunean , berea emateko esan nion , jan egin behar genuela eta . Baina gorde egin du .
PRED:	So we began to eat my son and eat it . On the next day I told him to eat it , and we would eat it .
GOLD:	So we cooked my son and ate him . Then the next day I said to her , ‘ Kill your son so we can eat him , ' but she has hidden her son . ”

ID:	5680
INPUT:	dardara egin zuen lurrak , urtu egin zen Jainkoaren aurrean zerua , Sinaiko Jainkoaren , Israelen Jainkoaren aurrean .
PRED:	And the earth lifted up the earth before God , the God of Zion , the God of Israel , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	You sent abundant rain , O God , to refresh the weary land .

ID:	5681
INPUT:	Baina hau zioten : « Ez gero jaiegunean , herrian iskanbilarik sor ez dadin » .
PRED:	But they said to him , “ Do n't be born on the day of the feast . ”
GOLD:	“ But not during the Passover celebration , ” they agreed , “ or the people may riot . ”

ID:	5682
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	5683
INPUT:	erre-oparien aldarea bere tresnekin , uraska bere oinarekin ,
PRED:	the altar , the altar with its vessels , its poles , its poles , its poles ,
GOLD:	the altar of burnt offering with all its utensils ; the washbasin with its stand ;

ID:	5684
INPUT:	Horrela , Zakariasen aita Joiadak erregearekiko izan zuen onginahia ahazturik , haren semea hilarazi zuen Joax erregeak . Baina hiltzeko zorian zegoela , Zakariasek esan zuen : « Ikus beza hau Jaunak eta eska biezazkizu kontuak » .
PRED:	So Jehoiada the father of Azariah the father of Jehoiada king of Judah forgotten his son , and he killed him , and said , “ This is what the Lord has said to him , ‘ You have seen . '
GOLD:	That was how King Joash repaid Jehoiada for his loyalty — by killing his son . Zechariah 's last words as he died were , “ May the Lord see what they are doing and avenge my death ! ”

ID:	5685
INPUT:	« Haien zoria aldatuko dut , Sodoma eta hirien zoria , Samaria eta hirien zoria ( zure zoria ere aldatuko dut haiena bezala ) ,
PRED:	“ I will make an altar for them , Sodom , Samaria , Samaria , Samaria , and Samaria , as I have built your altar .
GOLD:	“ But someday I will restore the fortunes of Sodom and Samaria , and I will restore you , too .

ID:	5686
INPUT:	« Elkartasun-opariko aberetik , Jaunari honako hauek aurkeztuko zaizkio , beraren ohorez erretzeko opari gisa : heste inguru eta gaineko gantza ,
PRED:	And they shall offer the burnt offering unto the Lord , and the fat thereof , and the fat thereof , and the fat thereof , and the fat thereof , and the fat thereof ,
GOLD:	The priest must present part of this peace offering as a special gift to the Lord . This includes all the fat around the internal organs ,

ID:	5687
INPUT:	Zeure etxeko janari guriz asetzen dituzu , zeure atseginen ibaian edanarazten .
PRED:	You eat the food of your house , and you make them drink in your rest .
GOLD:	For you are the fountain of life , the light by which we see .

ID:	5688
INPUT:	Ez zen aurrerantzean gerrarik izan Asaren erregealdiko hogeita hamabosgarren urtea arte .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the fifth year of Asa king of Judah , in the fifth year of Asa king of Judah .
GOLD:	So there was no more war until the thirty-fifth year of Asa 's reign .

ID:	5689
INPUT:	Ikusi duzue zer egin diedan egiptoarrei , eta nola , arranoak bere kumeak hegaletan bezala hartuz , niregana ekarri zaituztedan .
PRED:	You have seen what I have done to the Egyptians , and how I brought you to me in the streets , and brought you to me .
GOLD:	‘ You have seen what I did to the Egyptians . You know how I carried you on eagles ' wings and brought you to myself .

ID:	5690
INPUT:	Sion hiri , Jaunak zu maiteago Israelgo herri guztiak baino .
PRED:	The Lord loved Zion than all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	He loves the city of Jerusalemmore than any other city in Israel .

ID:	5691
INPUT:	Harrotzeko nire bidea neure kontzientziaren aitorpena da ; kontzientziak esaten dit Jainkoak emandako xalotasun eta zintzotasunez jokatu dudala edonon , eta gehiago zuen artean ; eta hori , ez giza jakintzak eraginda , Jainkoaren onginahiak baizik .
PRED:	I have been a witness to boast about my teaching . I have heard the truth that God has given me by the power of the righteous , and by the righteousness of the righteous , and by the works of God , and by the works of men .
GOLD:	We can say with confidence and a clear conscience that we have lived with a God-given holiness and sincerity in all our dealings . We have depended on God 's grace , not on our own human wisdom . That is how we have conducted ourselves before the world , and especially toward you .

ID:	5692
INPUT:	« Horregatik diotsuet : Ez kezkatu bizitzeko zer jan edo edango , edota gorputza zerez jantziko . Ez ote da bizia janaria baino gehiago , eta gorputza jantzia baino gehiago ?
PRED:	“ Therefore I say to you , ‘ Do n't eat any food or drink any food or drink . Do n't eat the flesh of life than the body ? '
GOLD:	“ That is why I tell you not to worry about everyday life — whether you have enough food and drink , or enough clothes to wear . Is n't life more than food , and your body more than clothing ?

ID:	5693
INPUT:	Bazen Jerusalemen Simeon izeneko bat , gizon zintzo eta jainkozalea , Jainkoak Israel noiz kontsolatuko zain zegoena . Espiritu Santua berekin zuen
PRED:	There was a man named Zion , who was a man named Shechem , who was a man who was a god in Jerusalem , and God was with him , and he was with him .
GOLD:	At that time there was a man in Jerusalem named Simeon . He was righteous and devout and was eagerly waiting for the Messiah to come and rescue Israel . The Holy Spirit was upon him

ID:	5694
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak : « Zoaz Judako hirietara eta Jerusalemgo kaleetara eta hots egin nire mezu hau : Onartu nire aginduak eta bete .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to them , “ Go into the cities of Judah and prophesy to Jerusalem , and say to them , ‘ Hear my commands and obey my commands .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said , “ Broadcast this message in the streets of Jerusalem . Go from town to town throughout the land and say , ‘ Remember the ancient covenant , and do everything it requires .

ID:	5695
INPUT:	Amalektarren aurkako gudua
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Israel Defeats the Amalekites

ID:	5696
INPUT:	eta , Zifronetik jarraituz , Hatzar-Enanen amaituko da . Hori izango da iparraldeko muga .
PRED:	Listen to my prayer , and listen to my prayer . This will be the border of the north .
GOLD:	and Ziphron to Hazar-enan . This will be your northern boundary .

ID:	5697
INPUT:	« Era askotan hitz egiten du Jainkoak , baina jendea ez da ohartzen :
PRED:	And God speaks in many things , but the people do not say ,
GOLD:	For God speaks again and again , though people do not recognize it .

ID:	5698
INPUT:	Eta horien guztien gainetik , eguneroko nire buru-haustea : eliz elkarte guztien ardura .
PRED:	And on the day of all these things , that I should put my head on the day of the church : and all the congregation of the church .
GOLD:	Then , besides all this , I have the daily burden of my concern for all the churches .

ID:	5699
INPUT:	Egun hartan zigortuko ditut , baita , atalarri gainetik salto egineztenplura sartzen direnaketa beren Jaunaren etxeagogorkeriaz eta iruzurrezirabazitakoarekinbetetzen dutenak » .
PRED:	In that day I will punish those who enter into the house of the Lord , and those who enter into the house of the Lord , and those who enter into the house of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Yes , I will punish those who participate in pagan worship ceremonies , and those who fill their masters ' houses with violence and deceit .

ID:	5700
INPUT:	Ez dezatela gauza sakraturik ikus , ezta begirada bizkor batez ere , hil nahi ez badute » .
PRED:	Let them see no holy things , nor let them see the holy things , but if they do not want to kill him . ”
GOLD:	The Kohathites must never enter the sanctuary to look at the sacred objects for even a moment , or they will die . ”

ID:	5701
INPUT:	Zoaz , bada , eta hots egin mezu hau iparraldekoei : « Itzul niregana , Israel fedegabe hori ! Ez dizut ipiniko aurpegi ilunik , errukibera bainaiz ; nire haserrea ez da betiko . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	Go and say to the north , “ Go back to me , ” says the Lord . “ I will put my face on you , Israel , because I have mercy on you , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Therefore , go and give this message to Israel . This is what the Lord says : “ O Israel , my faithless people , come home to me again , for I am merciful.I will not be angry with you forever .

ID:	5702
INPUT:	Abramek ihardetsi zion : — Jaunarengatik , zeru-lurren egile den Goi-goiko Jainkoarengatik , dagit zin
PRED:	Abraham answered , “ Because of the Lord , I swear by the Most High God in heaven and earth . ”
GOLD:	Abram replied to the king of Sodom , “ I solemnly swear to the Lord , God Most High , Creator of heaven and earth ,

ID:	5703
INPUT:	Saldu egin baikaituzte ni eta nire herritarrak , hondatu , hil eta suntsi gaitzaten . Gizonak eta emakumeak esklabo saldu izan bagintuzte ere , isilduko nintzatekeen , ez baitzukeen horrek erregea nekaraztea merezi izango .
PRED:	For they sold my people , and destroy them , and destroy them ; and the man and the women were saved ; for the king would not be saved .
GOLD:	For my people and I have been sold to those who would kill , slaughter , and annihilate us . If we had merely been sold as slaves , I could remain quiet , for that would be too trivial a matter to warrant disturbing the king . ”

ID:	5704
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Luzaro egon naiz geldi , ezer esan eta egin gabe ; baina orain garrasika ari naiz , intzirika eta aienez , emakumea erdiminetan bezala .
PRED:	The Lord says to me , “ I am still a long time , and I have not spoken , but now I have wept , as a woman in a woman in a woman .
GOLD:	He will say , “ I have long been silent ; yes , I have restrained myself.But now , like a woman in labor , I will cry and groan and pant .

ID:	5705
INPUT:	Sem eta Jafetek , soingaineko bat hartu , sorbaldan bien artean ipini eta , atzeraka joanez , aita biluzia estali egin zuten . Beste aldera begiratzen zutenez , ez zuten aita biluzik ikusi .
PRED:	And they took a garment among them , and took a garment among them , and went out , and went out , and went out , and they did not see their father , and did not see his father .
GOLD:	Then Shem and Japheth took a robe , held it over their shoulders , and backed into the tent to cover their father . As they did this , they looked the other way so they would not see him naked .

ID:	5706
INPUT:	Bihotz zuhurrekoak hitzak ere egokiak ; are eraginkorragoak halakoaren esanak .
PRED:	The words of a wise man is wise , but the mouth of a fool is a fool .
GOLD:	From a wise mind comes wise speech ; the words of the wise are persuasive .

ID:	5707
INPUT:	Salomonek Jaunaren etxe aurreko atariaren erdigunea sagaratu egin zuen , erre-opariak eta elkartasun-oparietako gantzak bertan eskaintzeko . Izan ere , Salomonek eginiko brontzezko aldarea txikiegi gertatu zen hainbeste erre-opari , labore-opari eta gantz hartzeko .
PRED:	Solomon anointed the burnt offering of the Lord in front of the house of the Lord , and offered the burnt offerings and burnt offerings , for the altar was made of bronze .
GOLD:	Solomon then consecrated the central area of the courtyard in front of the Lord 's Temple . He offered burnt offerings and the fat of peace offerings there , because the bronze altar he had built could not hold all the burnt offerings , grain offerings , and sacrificial fat .

ID:	5708
INPUT:	zu , oi Jainko , epaia ematera jaikitzean , munduko dohakabeak salbatzera .
PRED:	You , O God , when you go down to the earth , you will be saved .
GOLD:	Human defiance only enhances your glory , for you use it as a weapon .

ID:	5709
INPUT:	eta , zuen egintza gaizto eta higuingarriak jasanezinak zitzaizkiolako , zuen lurraldea hondamendi eta eremu bihurtu zuen Jaunak , gaitzetsi eta bizilagunik gabe utzi . Eta halaxe dago gaur ere .
PRED:	and because they had done all the evil things which the Lord had done , and the land was desolate , and the land was desolate , and the Lord did not let us live .
GOLD:	It was because the Lord could no longer bear all the disgusting things you were doing that he made your land an object of cursing — a desolate ruin without inhabitants — as it is today .

ID:	5710
INPUT:	Izan zen beste profeta bat ere Jaunaren izenean hitz egin zuena : Urias , Xemaiasen semea , Kiriat-Jearimgoa . Jeremiasek bezala , Jerusalemen eta Judaren aurka hitz egin zuen .
PRED:	And there was another prophet in the name of the Lord , and Uzziah the son of Uzziah , the son of Uzziah , the son of Uzziah , in Jerusalem , as Jeremiah had spoken against Judah and Judah .
GOLD:	At this time Uriah son of Shemaiah from Kiriath-jearim was also prophesying for the Lord . And he predicted the same terrible disaster against the city and nation as Jeremiah did .

ID:	5711
INPUT:	Bestela , hil ere askotan hil behar izango zuen mundua mundu denetik gaur arte . Baina ez , Kristo behin bakarrik agertu da orain , azkenak diren garai hauetan , bere buruaren opariaz bekatua desegiteko .
PRED:	But as for many days , you must die from the world until this day . But Christ has not been revealed to the last time , but now , the last time of their sin .
GOLD:	If that had been necessary , Christ would have had to die again and again , ever since the world began . But now , once for all time , he has appeared at the end of the age to remove sin by his own death as a sacrifice .

ID:	5712
INPUT:	Esauren ezkontza
PRED:	Esau and Esau
GOLD:	Isaac 's Covenant with Abimelech

ID:	5713
INPUT:	eta egite txarrez salatu eta izen txarra jartzen diola , esanez : “ Emakume honekin ezkondu eta , bereganatzean , ez dela birjina konturatu naiz ” .
PRED:	and they say to him , “ This woman has married her , and I have married her , and I have married her . ”
GOLD:	and publicly accuses her of shameful conduct , saying , ‘ When I married this woman , I discovered she was not a virgin . '

ID:	5714
INPUT:	Haserre baitago Jauna nazioekin , sumindua haien gudarosteekin : erabat suntsitzea erabaki du , hilketara eman ditu .
PRED:	For the anger of the Lord was angry with the people , and he hath destroyed them , to destroy them , and to destroy them .
GOLD:	For the Lord is enraged against the nations.His fury is against all their armies.He will completely destroy them , dooming them to slaughter .

ID:	5715
INPUT:	Hauxe agindu nien bakar-bakarrik : “ Aditu nire mintzoa , eta ni izango nauzue zeuen Jainko eta zuek izango zaituztet neure herri . Ibili beti nik agindutako bidean , eta zorioneko izango zarete ” .
PRED:	And I commanded one to another , saying , Hear my voice , and I will be your God , and I will be your God , and you shall be blessed in the way of my people .
GOLD:	This is what I told them : ‘ Obey me , and I will be your God , and you will be my people . Do everything as I say , and all will be well ! '

ID:	5716
INPUT:	Egoitzaren gainean egun bi , hilabete edo urtebete geldituz gero , israeldarrak geldi egoten ziren eta ez ziren abiatzen . Baina lainoa aldendu orduko , abiatu egiten ziren .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the tabernacle of the tabernacle for two months , that the children of Israel stood at the end of the tabernacle for two months ; and the cloud turned away from them .
GOLD:	Whether the cloud stayed above the Tabernacle for two days , a month , or a year , the people of Israel stayed in camp and did not move on . But as soon as it lifted , they broke camp and moved on .

ID:	5717
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun zion Samueli : « Onar iezaiezu eskaria eta eman erregea » . Orduan , Samuelek esan zien israeldarrei : « Zoazte nor bere herrira » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Samuel , “ Go and ask the king . ” So Samuel said to the Israelites , “ Go , each man to his people . ”
GOLD:	and the Lord replied , “ Do as they say , and give them a king . ” Then Samuel agreed and sent the people home .

ID:	5718
INPUT:	Baina nagusiak : “ Ez , ez dadila gerta olo gaiztoa biltzean garia ere ateratzea .
PRED:	But his master said , “ I do n't want to go into the grain of the wicked .
GOLD:	“ ‘ No , ' he replied , ‘ you 'll uproot the wheat if you do .

ID:	5719
INPUT:	Paulo Antiokiara itzuli
PRED:	Paul Complains to Antioch
GOLD:	Paul Returns to Antioch of Syria

ID:	5720
INPUT:	Zotz eginez amaitzen dira eztabaidak , lehiakideen arteko auzia erabakiz .
PRED:	For the lot is cast out , for there is a lot for judgment between the brothers .
GOLD:	Flipping a coin can end arguments ; it settles disputes between powerful opponents .

ID:	5721
INPUT:	zeuen erruek ezarri dute hesiazuen eta Jainkoaren artean ; zeuen bekatuekezkutarazi diote aurpegia , zuen otoitzik ez entzuteko .
PRED:	You have set your sins among you , and they have set your face among you . They have set their face on your face , so that they may not hear your prayer .
GOLD:	It 's your sins that have cut you off from God.Because of your sins , he has turned awayand will not listen anymore .

ID:	5722
INPUT:	bere morroikideak jotzen eta mozkorrekin jan-edanean hasten bada ,
PRED:	If his servants are drunk and drank with wine , then when they eat it ,
GOLD:	and he begins beating the other servants , partying , and getting drunk ?

ID:	5723
INPUT:	Horrela , bada , ahalik lasterren bidali dizuet , hura berriro ikustean poz zaitezten eta ni lasaiago senti nadin .
PRED:	So I sent to you again , that I may see him again , and that I may rejoice .
GOLD:	So I am all the more anxious to send him back to you , for I know you will be glad to see him , and then I will not be so worried about you .

ID:	5724
INPUT:	Oraindik loretan dagoela , eta inork atera gabe , beste edozein belar baino lehen ihartzen da ” .
PRED:	But now there is no one to go into the bed , and there is no one to go into the bed . ”
GOLD:	While they are still flowering , not ready to be cut , they begin to wither more quickly than grass .

ID:	5725
INPUT:	Joabek Absalom hil
PRED:	Absalom 's King Absalom
GOLD:	David Mourns Absalom 's Death

ID:	5726
INPUT:	ISRAELEN AURKA MEZUAK ( 3 , 1 — 6 , 14 )
PRED:	The People of Judah
GOLD:	Witnesses against Guilty Israel

ID:	5727
INPUT:	Gero , beste aingeru bat irten zen zeruko tenplutik , hura ere eskuan igitai zorrotza zuela .
PRED:	And another angel went out from heaven , from the temple of the Lord , from the north side of the temple .
GOLD:	After that , another angel came from the Temple in heaven , and he also had a sharp sickle .

ID:	5728
INPUT:	« Eska , bila , jo atea »
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The Golden Rule

ID:	5729
INPUT:	Josuek erantzun zien : — Hain herri ugaria bazarete eta Efraimgo mendialdea estuegia iruditzen bazaizue , igo zaitezte oihanera eta soildu periztarren eta refatarren lurraldea .
PRED:	Then Joshua said to them , “ If you are many people , then you will make the hill country of Ephraim and the land of Ephraim , and you will cut off your heads and your houses . ”
GOLD:	Joshua replied , “ If there are so many of you , and if the hill country of Ephraim is not large enough for you , clear out land for yourselves in the forest where the Perizzites and Rephaites live . ”

ID:	5730
INPUT:	Hadad , ordea , mutiko gazte zelarik , ihesi joan zen Egiptora , bere aitaren zerbitzari ziren edomdar batzuekin .
PRED:	But Gaal was a young child , and fled to Egypt with his father 's servants .
GOLD:	But Hadad and a few of his father 's royal officials escaped and headed for Egypt . ( Hadad was just a boy at the time . )

ID:	5731
INPUT:	Abiasen gainerako jarduerak , ibilerak eta egintzak « Ido Profetaren Azalpenak » izeneko liburuan daude idatziak .
PRED:	And the rest of the acts of Ahaz , and all that he did , are they written in the book of the prophets .
GOLD:	The rest of the events of Abijah 's reign , including his words and deeds , are recorded in The Commentary of Iddo the Prophet .

ID:	5732
INPUT:	Ruben eta Gaden leinuetakoei eta Manasesen leinu erdikoei esan zien Josuek :
PRED:	And Joshua said unto the children of Reuben , and to the children of Reuben , and to the children of Manasseh , and to the children of Manasseh , saying ,
GOLD:	Then Joshua called together the tribes of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh . He told them ,

ID:	5733
INPUT:	Zaldiari zigorra , astoari aho-soka , zentzugabearen bizkarrari egurra .
PRED:	The horse of the horses are like a horse , and the mouth of the fool is a fool 's face .
GOLD:	Guide a horse with a whip , a donkey with a bridle , and a fool with a rod to his back !

ID:	5734
INPUT:	Bildotsa Sion mendian
PRED:	The Lamb at Mount Zion
GOLD:	The Lamb and the 144,000

ID:	5735
INPUT:	Hezurrak ere mailatuak ditut , etsaiek iseka egiten didate , etengabe ari zaizkidala : « Non duk Jainkoa ? »
PRED:	I love the bones , and the bones of my enemies against me , saying , “ Where is your God ? ”
GOLD:	Why am I discouraged ? Why is my heart so sad ? I will put my hope in God ! I will praise him again — my Savior and my God !

ID:	5736
INPUT:	Eta , eroapenez itxaron ondoren , eskuratu egin zuen Abrahamek Jainkoaren agintzaria .
PRED:	And when he had hope , he lifted up his hands , and gave him the promise of God .
GOLD:	Then Abraham waited patiently , and he received what God had promised .

ID:	5737
INPUT:	Kontsolatu nire herria
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The

ID:	5738
INPUT:	Josiasek Pazkoa ospatu zuen Jerusalemen , Jaunaren ohoretan . Lehen hilabeteko hamalauan Pazko-bildotsa hil zuten .
PRED:	And Josiah kept the Passover in Jerusalem , in the first month , in the first month of the month , in the first month of the month .
GOLD:	Then Josiah announced that the Passover of the Lord would be celebrated in Jerusalem , and so the Passover lamb was slaughtered on the fourteenth day of the first month .

ID:	5739
INPUT:	« Borroka da gizakiaren bizitza lurrean , lanera behartuarenak bezalakoak haren egunak .
PRED:	“ A man is like a man who lived in the earth , like a man who has been old .
GOLD:	“ Is not all human life a struggle ? Our lives are like that of a hired hand ,

ID:	5740
INPUT:	Lau urteren buruan , behin batean , esan zion Absalomek erregeari : — Joan al naiteke Hebronera , Jaunari hitzeman nion eskaintza egitera ?
PRED:	And it came to pass at the end of four years , when Absalom said unto the king , Shall I go up to Hebron to the Lord in Hebron ?
GOLD:	After four years , Absalom said to the king , “ Let me go to Hebron to offer a sacrifice to the Lord and fulfill a vow I made to him .

ID:	5741
INPUT:	Gaizkile-taldeak inguratu nau , zakur-tropelak erdian hartu , esku-oinak zulatu dizkidate .
PRED:	The wicked are round about me , and their feet are under their feet , and their feet have laid their hands on me .
GOLD:	I can count all my bones.My enemies stare at me and gloat .

ID:	5742
INPUT:	Zuk ez nauzu musu emanez agurtu ; hau , berriz , sartu denetik ez da gelditu nire oinei musuka .
PRED:	You have not served me , but you have not gone into the fire , but you have not left my voice .
GOLD:	You did n't greet me with a kiss , but from the time I first came in , she has not stopped kissing my feet .

ID:	5743
INPUT:	Legamia gabeko ogien egunei buruzko legeak
PRED:	The Law of the Law
GOLD:	Dedication of the Firstborn

ID:	5744
INPUT:	Jendeak gogor egiten zien , isilarazteko ; baina haiek areago oihu : — Erruki zakizkigu , Jauna , Daviden Semea !
PRED:	And the people began to see him , but they cried out , “ Lord , have mercy on us , Son of David ! ”
GOLD:	“ Be quiet ! ” the crowd yelled at them.But they only shouted louder , “ Lord , Son of David , have mercy on us ! ”

ID:	5745
INPUT:	Egun hartan , zilarrezko mila txanpon balio zituen mila landareko mahastia sasi- eta lahar-toki bihurtuko da .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in that day , that the vineyard of silver shall be a hundred talents of silver , and a hundred talents of silver .
GOLD:	In that day the lush vineyards , now worth 1,000 pieces of silver , will become patches of briers and thorns .

ID:	5746
INPUT:	ez duela arbasoei hitzemandako lurraldea ikusiko mespretxatu nauten horietako inork , Egipton eta basamortuan nire aintza eta mirariak ikusi arren , behin eta berriro ni auzitan jarri eta desobeditu egin baitidate .
PRED:	They have not seen the land which I have given their fathers to their fathers in the wilderness , and in the wilderness , and in the wilderness , and in the wilderness , and in the wilderness , and in the wilderness , and they have done it .
GOLD:	not one of these people will ever enter that land . They have all seen my glorious presence and the miraculous signs I performed both in Egypt and in the wilderness , but again and again they have tested me by refusing to listen to my voice .

ID:	5747
INPUT:	Zuen lurraldea hegoaldeko basamortutik iparraldean dagoen Libanoraino eta ekialdeko ibai handitik , Eufratesetik , hititen lurraldean zehar , mendebaldean dagoen Mediterraneo itsasoraino hedatuko da .
PRED:	The border of your land is toward the north side of the north , and from the north to the east side of the north , and from the north to the sea , and from the sea to the sea .
GOLD:	from the Negev wilderness in the south to the Lebanon mountains in the north , from the Euphrates River in the east to the Mediterranean Sea in the west , including all the land of the Hittites . '

ID:	5748
INPUT:	Iseka egiten didate etsaiek ; areago , neure auzokoek . Beldurra ematen diet adiskideei : ni kalean ikustean , ihesi doaz .
PRED:	My enemies are afraid of me , and my friends are afraid of me . I am afraid of them . I am afraid of them .
GOLD:	I am ignored as if I were dead , as if I were a broken pot .

ID:	5749
INPUT:	« Zuek , ordea , ez zenuten igo nahi izan , baizik eta Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren esana desobeditu
PRED:	But you would not obey the word of the Lord your God , but did not obey the voice of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ But you rebelled against the command of the Lord your God and refused to go in .

ID:	5750
INPUT:	Ruben eta Gaden leinuetako gizonak utzirik , Pinhas , Eleazar apaizaren semea , eta herri-ordezkariak Galaadetik Kanaanera itzuli ziren , mendebaldeko israeldarrengana , eta gertatuaren berri eman zieten .
PRED:	And the men of Reuben and Reuben , the son of Eleazar , the son of Eleazar the priest , and the children of Israel returned from the land of Canaan to the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	Then Phinehas son of Eleazar , the priest , and the other leaders left the tribes of Reuben and Gad in Gilead and returned to the land of Canaan to tell the Israelites what had happened .

ID:	5751
INPUT:	Baina niregana itzultzen bazarete eta nire aginduak gorde eta betetzen badituzue , zeruko azken muturreraino jaurtiko bazintuztete ere , bildu egingo zintuzketet eta bizileku eta kultu-lekutzat aukeratu dudan tokira ekarriko ” .
PRED:	But if you return to me and keep my commands and keep my commands , then I will gather you to the last part of heaven , and I will bring you to the place where I have chosen you . ”
GOLD:	But if you return to me and obey my commands and live by them , then even if you are exiled to the ends of the earth , I will bring you back to the place I have chosen for my name to be honored . '

ID:	5752
INPUT:	Elkarketa-etxolan sartzean , esku-oinak garbituko dituzte , hil nahi ez badute ; orobat , beren zerbitzua betetzeko , Jaunari opariak erretzeko , aldarera hurbiltzean .
PRED:	And when they enter into the tent of meeting , they shall wash their hands , and they shall wash their feet , and they shall not kill them ; and when they come near unto the altar of the Lord , they shall come near unto the altar .
GOLD:	They must wash with water whenever they go into the Tabernacle to appear before the Lord and when they approach the altar to burn up their special gifts to the Lord — or they will die !

ID:	5753
INPUT:	epaiari buruz , mundu honetako buruzagia jadanik gaitzetsia dagoelako .
PRED:	For it is for the judgment of this world , because the prince of this world has come to pass over this world .
GOLD:	Judgment will come because the ruler of this world has already been judged .

ID:	5754
INPUT:	Ez dut harkaitzaren sendotasunik , ez da brontzezkoa nire haragia .
PRED:	I will not take away the rock of the rock , neither will my eyes be bronze .
GOLD:	Do I have the strength of a stone ? Is my body made of bronze ?

ID:	5755
INPUT:	« Errege horien garaian , erreinu bat ezarriko du zeruko Jainkoak : ez dute inoiz ere hondatuko eta haren agintea ez da beste herri baten eskuetara aldatuko . Beste guztiak suntsitu eta desagerturik ere , erreinu horrek betiko iraungo du .
PRED:	In the days of these kings , God will set a kingdom in heaven , and the kingdom will not be destroyed , and all the kingdoms of his kingdom will be destroyed , and all his kingdom will be destroyed .
GOLD:	“ During the reigns of those kings , the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed or conquered . It will crush all these kingdoms into nothingness , and it will stand forever .

ID:	5756
INPUT:	Moises Jaunari barkamen eske
PRED:	Moses and Aaron
GOLD:	Moses Intercedes for the People

ID:	5757
INPUT:	« Jaun ahalguztidunak badu beste zerbait ere esateko , zutabeei , brontzezko uraskari , orgei eta hiri honetan oraindik gelditzen diren gainerako tresnei buruz :
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord of hosts says to you , ‘ This is what the Lord of hosts says . He has made bronze bronze bronze , bronze , bronze , bronze , bronze , bronze , and bronze ;
GOLD:	“ For the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has spoken about the pillars in front of the Temple , the great bronze basin called the Sea , the water carts , and all the other ceremonial articles .

ID:	5758
INPUT:	baina zazpigarrena atseden-eguna duzu , Jaunari , zeure Jainkoari , sagaratua . Ez egin inolako lanik egun horretan , ez zuk , ez zure seme-alabek , ez zure morroi-mirabeek , ez zure abereek , ezta zure herrian bizi den etorkinak ere .
PRED:	But the seventh day of the seventh month you are holy to the Lord your God . Do n't do any work in that day , your servants , your servants , your servants , your servants , your servants , and your servants , and your daughters , and your daughters , and your people who live in your land .
GOLD:	but the seventh day is a Sabbath day of rest dedicated to the Lord your God . On that day no one in your household may do any work . This includes you , your sons and daughters , your male and female servants , your livestock , and any foreigners living among you .

ID:	5759
INPUT:	Espiritua , ura eta odola , eta hirurok bat datoz .
PRED:	And the Spirit is filled with water and blood , and one of them is coming .
GOLD:	the Spirit , the water , and the blood — and all three agree .

ID:	5760
INPUT:	Lau gurpilak panelen azpialdean zeuden eta haien ardatzak orgari atxikiak . Gurpil bakoitzak hirurogeita hamabost zentimetroko altuera zuen .
PRED:	And the four corners of the four corners were on the four corners of the four corners of the four corners of the four corners of the four corners of the four corners of the four corners of the altar , and the horses were five cubits on the top of the altar .
GOLD:	Under the panels were four wheels that were connected to axles that had been cast as one unit with the cart . The wheels were 21/4 feet in diameter

ID:	5761
INPUT:	« Ene herri , zer egin dizut nik zuri , zertan izan natzaizu nekagarri ? Erantzun , mesedez !
PRED:	“ My people , what have I done to you ? What have I done to you ? Give me a sign , my people ? ”
GOLD:	“ O my people , what have I done to you ? What have I done to make you tired of me ? Answer me !

ID:	5762
INPUT:	giltzurrunak gaineko gantzarekin , saihetsei itsatsia dagoen gantza eta gibela estaltzen duena ; hori guztia kendurik ,
PRED:	And he shall take the fat that is on the liver , and the fat that is on the liver , and the fat that is on the liver , and the fat that is upon them , and the fat that is upon them .
GOLD:	the two kidneys and the fat around them near the loins , and the long lobe of the liver . These must be removed with the kidneys ,

ID:	5763
INPUT:	astoak 30 . 500 ,
PRED:	The donkeys were five thousand and five thousand and five thousand .
GOLD:	30,500 donkeys ,

ID:	5764
INPUT:	Nik lurreko gauzak esatean sinesten ez badidazue , nola sinetsiko didazue zerukoak esatean ?
PRED:	If you do not believe me in the things of the earth , how will you believe me in heaven ?
GOLD:	But if you do n't believe me when I tell you about earthly things , how can you possibly believe if I tell you about heavenly things ?

ID:	5765
INPUT:	Faraoiak entzungor egin Moisesi eta Aaroni
PRED:	Pharaoh and Aaron
GOLD:	A Plague of Blood

ID:	5766
INPUT:	« Guztiarekin ere nire zentzarazpena onartu ez eta aurka egiten badidazue ,
PRED:	“ If you listen to me , do n't listen to me , and do n't obey me .
GOLD:	“ And if you fail to learn the lesson and continue your hostility toward me ,

ID:	5767
INPUT:	Gau-ikuskari batean , Jainkoak dei egin zion Jakobi : — Jakob ! Jakob ! Jakobek erantzun : — Hemen nauzu .
PRED:	When Jacob saw the vision , God called Jacob , “ Jacob ! ” Jacob answered , “ Here I am . ”
GOLD:	During the night God spoke to him in a vision . “ Jacob ! Jacob ! ” he called . “ Here I am , ” Jacob replied .

ID:	5768
INPUT:	Uztazu , otoi , Jordanez beste aldera igarotzen , hango lurralde ederra , hango mendialdea eta Libano ikus ahal ditzadan .
PRED:	Let me go to the Jordan River River , that I may see the good land and the hill country , and the mountains of Lebanon .
GOLD:	Please let me cross the Jordan to see the wonderful land on the other side , the beautiful hill country and the Lebanon mountains . '

ID:	5769
INPUT:	Zure egunak eta urteak gizakiarenak bezain laburrak ote ,
PRED:	Your days are like a man , and the years of men are like iron .
GOLD:	Is your lifetime only as long as ours ? Is your life so short

ID:	5770
INPUT:	Emakumeak joan ondoren , guardiako batzuk hirira etorri ziren gertaturiko guztiaren berri apaizburuei ematera .
PRED:	And when the women came , some of them came to the chief priests and the elders of the city , and told them what had happened .
GOLD:	As the women were on their way , some of the guards went into the city and told the leading priests what had happened .

ID:	5771
INPUT:	Zuen arbasoei eman nien lurraldean biziko zarete ; nire herri izango zarete eta ni zuen Jainko .
PRED:	You will live in the land I gave to your fathers , and you will be my people and I am your God .
GOLD:	“ And you will live in Israel , the land I gave your ancestors long ago . You will be my people , and I will be your God .

ID:	5772
INPUT:	Juduen apaizburuek esan zioten Pilatori : — Ez idatzi « juduen erregea » , « juduen erregea dela dioena » baizik .
PRED:	The chief priests said to Pilate , “ Do n't write on the king of the Jews , but the king of the Jews . ”
GOLD:	Then the leading priests objected and said to Pilate , “ Change it from ‘ The King of the Jews ' to ‘ He said , I am King of the Jews . ' ”

ID:	5773
INPUT:	Baina Benjaminen atera iritsi zenean , han zegoen Ierias guardiaburua , Xelemiasen seme eta Hananiasen biloba , eta Jeremias profetari alto eman eta esan zion : — Babiloniarrengana igarotzeko asmotan zabiltza zu .
PRED:	But when he came to Benjamin , he was the captain of the guard of Benjamin , Zechariah the son of Hilkiah , the son of Hilkiah , and Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah the prophet , and said to Jeremiah , “ Go to Babylon . ”
GOLD:	But as he was walking through the Benjamin Gate , a sentry arrested him and said , “ You are defecting to the Babylonians ! ” The sentry making the arrest was Irijah son of Shelemiah , grandson of Hananiah .

ID:	5774
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	The Lord spoke to Moses , saying ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	5775
INPUT:	ez zakutorik biderako , ez soinekorik aldatzeko , ez oinetakorik , ezta makilarik ere , zor baitzaio langileari behar duen janaria .
PRED:	neither shall he put on the road , nor shall he put on his feet , nor shall he put on his feet ; for he shall give his food to his field .
GOLD:	Do n't carry a traveler 's bag with a change of clothes and sandals or even a walking stick . Do n't hesitate to accept hospitality , because those who work deserve to be fed .

ID:	5776
INPUT:	Han zeuden juduek esan zuten : — Bai maite zuela !
PRED:	The Jews who were there said to him , “ You love him ! ”
GOLD:	The people who were standing nearby said , “ See how much he loved him ! ”

ID:	5777
INPUT:	Josafat , Paruahen semea , Isakarren ;
PRED:	Jehoshaphat 's son , Isaac 's son , and Isaac 's son .
GOLD:	Jehoshaphat son of Paruah , in Issachar .

ID:	5778
INPUT:	“ Nor zaitut , Jauna ? ” galdetu nion nik . Eta Jaunak erantzun : “ Jesus naiz , zuk pertsegitzen duzuna .
PRED:	And I said unto him , Who art thou ? And I said unto him , Lord Jesus , I am Jesus , whom thou hast done .
GOLD:	“ ‘ Who are you , lord ? ' I asked . “ And the Lord replied , ‘ I am Jesus , the one you are persecuting .

ID:	5779
INPUT:	Larunbatekoa
PRED:	The Sabbath
GOLD:	Offerings for the Festival of Harvest

ID:	5780
INPUT:	Zentzugabeari harrokeria dario ahotik , zuhurra bere hitzek babesten dute .
PRED:	A fool 's mouth is a fool , but the mouth of the fool is wise .
GOLD:	A fool 's proud talk becomes a rod that beats him , but the words of the wise keep them safe .

ID:	5781
INPUT:	Presta zaitez , presta zeu eta inguruan duzun gudarostea , eduki ezazu erne .
PRED:	Be ready , and go , and fight against him , and fight against him .
GOLD:	“ Get ready ; be prepared ! Keep all the armies around you mobilized , and take command of them .

ID:	5782
INPUT:	Adierazi zion , beraz , Samuelek errege eske ari zitzaion herriari Jaunak esandako guztia ,
PRED:	So Samuel told the people everything the Lord had said to the people .
GOLD:	So Samuel passed on the Lord 's warning to the people who were asking him for a king .

ID:	5783
INPUT:	Jesusen berri entzunik , judu-buruzagi batzuk bidali zizkion , morroia sendatzera etortzeko erreguaz .
PRED:	And when he heard this , he sent some of the Jews to heal him , to heal him .
GOLD:	When the officer heard about Jesus , he sent some respected Jewish elders to ask him to come and heal his slave .

ID:	5784
INPUT:	Hiri santua ikusi nuen , Jerusalem berria , zerutik , Jainkoarengandik , jaisten , emaztegaia bere senarrarentzat bezala apaindua .
PRED:	And I saw the holy city , and Jerusalem came down from heaven , and came down from heaven to her husband as her husband .
GOLD:	And I saw the holy city , the new Jerusalem , coming down from God out of heaven like a bride beautifully dressed for her husband .

ID:	5785
INPUT:	Israelgo errege hark , Remaliasen seme Pekahek , Judako ehun eta hogei mila gudari ausart hil zituen egun berean , Judakoek Jauna , beren arbasoen Jainkoa , baztertua zutelako .
PRED:	In the same day the king of Israel killed Shallum the son of Shallum , the son of Shallum , the king of Judah , and the people of Judah killed him in that day , because the Lord their God had rejected their fathers .
GOLD:	In a single day Pekah son of Remaliah , Israel 's king , killed 120,000 of Judah 's troops , all of them experienced warriors , because they had abandoned the Lord , the God of their ancestors .

ID:	5786
INPUT:	Profeta batek Akab gaitzetsi
PRED:	Ahab and Ahab
GOLD:	A Prophet Condemns Ahab

ID:	5787
INPUT:	Ez dago hemen , piztua baita , esan zuen bezala . Zatozte eta ikusi ezarria egon zeneko tokia .
PRED:	He is not here , but he said , “ Come and see the place where he was laid . ”
GOLD:	He is n't here ! He is risen from the dead , just as he said would happen . Come , see where his body was lying .

ID:	5788
INPUT:	Espiritua duenak , berriz , dena juzgatzen du ; bera , ordea , ez dezake inork juzga .
PRED:	But he that hath the Spirit shall come unto him ; but he shall not be put to shame .
GOLD:	Those who are spiritual can evaluate all things , but they themselves can not be evaluated by others .

ID:	5789
INPUT:	Agintekeria
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Approaching God with Care

ID:	5790
INPUT:	Lau eraztun egin zituen brontzezko sarearen lau izkinetarako , haietatik hagak pasarazteko .
PRED:	He made four corners of bronze rings on the four corners of the corners of the altar . He made the poles for the poles .
GOLD:	He cast four rings and attached them to the corners of the bronze grating to hold the carrying poles .

ID:	5791
INPUT:	Ezekiasek eta agintariek , hainbeste multzo ikustean , Jauna eta beronen herri Israel bedeinkatu zituzten .
PRED:	When Hezekiah saw a large crowd , he blessed the Lord and his people Israel .
GOLD:	When Hezekiah and his officials came and saw these huge piles , they thanked the Lord and his people Israel !

ID:	5792
INPUT:	Bete zerbitzari honi zeure promesa , begirune dizutenei egina .
PRED:	Let them obey your word , and let them fear you .
GOLD:	Reassure me of your promise , made to those who fear you .

ID:	5793
INPUT:	Honek esan zion Amasari : — Ongi al zara , ene anaia ? Eta eskuineko eskuaz bizarretik heldu zion musu emateko .
PRED:	He said to Ahab , “ Are you well well ? ” So he went to the right hand of his right hand .
GOLD:	“ How are you , my cousin ? ” Joab said and took him by the beard with his right hand as though to kiss him .

ID:	5794
INPUT:	Arabiako errege guztiei ; basamortuan bizi diren populazio nahasien erregeei ;
PRED:	All the kings of Assyria were living in the wilderness , in the wilderness .
GOLD:	I gave it to the kings of Arabia , the kings of the nomadic tribes of the desert ,

ID:	5795
INPUT:	baina orain nola ikusten duen edo begiak nork ireki dizkion , hori ez dakigu . Galdegin berari , badu adina-eta bere buruaren berri emateko .
PRED:	But now , behold , no one opened his eyes , and we know that no one opened his eyes , and ask him , and tell him what he has said .
GOLD:	but we do n't know how he can see or who healed him . Ask him . He is old enough to speak for himself . ”

ID:	5796
INPUT:	« Esaiozu Aaroni , zazpi kriseiluak pizterakoan , argimutilaren aurrealdea argitzeko eran egokitzeko » .
PRED:	Tell Aaron , “ Tell Aaron the seven lamps in front of the lamp , so that he may stand before the light . ”
GOLD:	“ Give Aaron the following instructions : When you set up the seven lamps in the lampstand , place them so their light shines forward in front of the lampstand . ”

ID:	5797
INPUT:	eta zu hil nahian dabiltzan eta beldurrik handiena diezun etsaien esku utziko , Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosor eta beraren gudarostearen esku , alegia .
PRED:	and thou shalt deliver them into the hand of the king of Babylon , and all the great fear of his enemies , king of Babylon , and his army , and his army , and his army , and his army .
GOLD:	I will hand you over to those who seek to kill you , those you so desperately fear — to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon and the mighty Babylonian army .

ID:	5798
INPUT:	Gero , irakasten hasi zitzaien , esanez : « Ez al dio Liburu Santuak : Nire etxea otoitz-etxe izango da herri guztientzat ? Zuek , berriz , lapur-zulo egina duzue » .
PRED:	He began to teach them , “ Do n't you say , ‘ Is it written , ‘ My house will be a house for all the peoples ? ' ”
GOLD:	He said to them , “ The Scriptures declare , ‘ My Temple will be called a house of prayer for all nations , ' but you have turned it into a den of thieves . ”

ID:	5799
INPUT:	<unk> ta , Kiriat-Arba — hau da , Hebron — , Tzior : bederatzi hiri eta beraien herrixkak .
PRED:	And he said to them , “ Let them be in Hebron and their villages and their villages . ”
GOLD:	Humtah , Kiriath-arba ( that is , Hebron ) , and Zior — nine towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	5800
INPUT:	aurreko biztanleak lurraldetik garbituz . Sustraiak bota zituen eta lurraldea bete .
PRED:	I have washed them from the land of the land , and I have blessed them , and I have given them the land .
GOLD:	Our shade covered the mountains ; our branches covered the mighty cedars .

ID:	5801
INPUT:	balio gabeko arrazoiez argudiatuz , alferrikakoa dena esanez ?
PRED:	Is it not a cause for no reason , that he might say to him , “ Is it not right ? ”
GOLD:	The wise do n't engage in empty chatter.What good are such words ?

ID:	5802
INPUT:	Orduan jakingo dute egiptoarrek ni naizela Jauna , Egipto zigortu eta bertatik israeldarrak aterako ditudanean .
PRED:	And the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord , and I will scatter the Egyptians out of the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	When I raise my powerful hand and bring out the Israelites , the Egyptians will know that I am the Lord . ”

ID:	5803
INPUT:	Jendetza handia bildu zitzaion , herren , itsu , besamotz , mutu eta bestelako gaixo asko berekin zituztela . Ondoan ipintzen zizkioten eta Jesusek sendatu egiten zituen .
PRED:	And a great crowd gathered unto him , that they might be blind , and cast away , for they were sick with him ; and they laid them on him , and he healed them .
GOLD:	A vast crowd brought to him people who were lame , blind , crippled , those who could n't speak , and many others . They laid them before Jesus , and he healed them all .

ID:	5804
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	The Lord spoke to Moses , saying ,
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	5805
INPUT:	Eta gizonari esan zion : « Emaztearen esanari jaramon egineta galarazi nizun zuhaitzetikjan duzunez gero , madarikatua lurra zure erruz ! Nekearen nekezaterako diozu janariazeure bizitzako egun guztietan .
PRED:	And he said to the man , “ You have heard the voice of the wife of the wife of the wife , and you have eaten the fruit of the wife of your wife , that you may eat the food of your life in all the days of your life .
GOLD:	And to the man he said , “ Since you listened to your wife and ate from the treewhose fruit I commanded you not to eat , the ground is cursed because of you.All your life you will struggle to scratch a living from it .

ID:	5806
INPUT:	Jainkoa , ez gelditu niregandik urrun , ene Jainko , zatoz laster laguntzera !
PRED:	God will not turn away from me , nor will he turn away from me .
GOLD:	O God , do n't stay away.My God , please hurry to help me .

ID:	5807
INPUT:	Denek nahi zuten Salomon ikusi , Jainkoak eman zion jakinduriaren berri izateko .
PRED:	All of them saw Solomon , that God gave him wisdom to tell him wisdom .
GOLD:	Kings from every nation came to consult him and to hear the wisdom God had given him .

ID:	5808
INPUT:	Alaba Merab Davidi emateko garaia heltzean , ordea , Saulek Meholako Adrieli eman zion emazte .
PRED:	But when Saul had come to David , Saul gave her a wife to him , because he had married her .
GOLD:	So when the time came for Saul to give his daughter Merab in marriage to David , he gave her instead to Adriel , a man from Meholah .

ID:	5809
INPUT:	Gero , haurraren gainean etzan zen , bere ahoa haurraren aho gainean , begiak begi gainean eta eskuak esku gainean ezarriz . Horrela , haurraren gainean etzana zegoelarik , berotzen hasi zen haurraren gorputza .
PRED:	And the child lay on the child 's mouth , and lay his eyes on his eyes , and lay his eyes on his eyes , and his eyes upon him , and his body was upon the child .
GOLD:	Then he lay down on the child 's body , placing his mouth on the child 's mouth , his eyes on the child 's eyes , and his hands on the child 's hands . And as he stretched out on him , the child 's body began to grow warm again !

ID:	5810
INPUT:	Egin poz-oihu Jainkoari , gure indarrari , egin irrintzi Jakoben Jainkoari !
PRED:	And he shall sing unto the God of Jacob , and shall sing unto the God of Jacob .
GOLD:	Sing ! Beat the tambourine.Play the sweet lyre and the harp .

ID:	5811
INPUT:	Beste hirurehun babeski txiki ere egin zituen urre garbiz , babeski bakoitza egiteko ia bi kilo urre behar izan zelarik . Eta « Libanoko Oihana » zeritzan jauregian ipini zituen .
PRED:	He also also also also made two hundred talents of pure gold , and he put them in the house of Lebanon . And he put them in the house of Lebanon .
GOLD:	He also made 300 smaller shields of hammered gold , each weighing nearly four pounds . The king placed these shields in the Palace of the Forest of Lebanon .

ID:	5812
INPUT:	zentzugabeko eta barregarri ; Jaunak hondatuko ditukontuak hartzeko egunean .
PRED:	The Lord will destroy them in the day of the fool , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Idols are worthless ; they are ridiculous lies ! On the day of reckoning they will all be destroyed .

ID:	5813
INPUT:	Bizi-arbolarena bezalakoa da zintzoaren fruitua ; zuhurrak jendearen onespena bereganatzen du .
PRED:	The fruit of the righteous is like a tree , but the wise is like a tree , but the people of the land is like a tree .
GOLD:	The seeds of good deeds become a tree of life ; a wise person wins friends .

ID:	5814
INPUT:	Ez dago , ordea , beste berri onik ; baina badabiltza hor norbaitzuk zuek nahasten eta Kristoren berri ona goitik behera irauli nahian .
PRED:	But there is no other new news . But if any of you are a new news , the Good News and the Good News of Christ .
GOLD:	but is not the Good News at all . You are being fooled by those who deliberately twist the truth concerning Christ .

ID:	5815
INPUT:	Animalia gehiago naiz gizon baino , ez dut giza adimenik ;
PRED:	I am more than a man , and I am not a man .
GOLD:	I am too stupid to be human , and I lack common sense .

ID:	5816
INPUT:	Hona hemen gotortu zituen hiriak : Belen , Etam , Tekoa ,
PRED:	These are the cities that were in the towns : Elioenai , Jozabad , Jozabad ,
GOLD:	He built up Bethlehem , Etam , Tekoa ,

ID:	5817
INPUT:	Goraintziak Justo deritzan Jesusen izenean ere . Judu-jatorrikoetatik hauek dira Jainkoaren erregetza zabaltzen nirekin lanean ari diren bakarrak , eta oso kontsolagarri gertatu zaizkit .
PRED:	In the name of Jesus , in the name of Jesus . These are those who come from Judea , who spread the kingdom of God , and in the kingdom of God appeared to me .
GOLD:	Jesus ( the one we call Justus ) also sends his greetings . These are the only Jewish believers among my co-workers ; they are working with me here for the Kingdom of God . And what a comfort they have been !

ID:	5818
INPUT:	Eta Belenerantz abiatu ziren . Iristean , herri osoa asaldatu zen eta emakumeek hau zioten : — Noemi bera ote da hau ?
PRED:	And when they went up to Bethel , all the people came to Bethel , and all the people said unto him , How is this this ?
GOLD:	So the two of them continued on their journey . When they came to Bethlehem , the entire town was excited by their arrival . “ Is it really Naomi ? ” the women asked .

ID:	5819
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Moisesi : « Igo Abarim mendiaren gailur horretara eta israeldarrei emango diedan lurraldea ikusi ahal izango duzu bertatik .
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses , “ Go up to the top of Mount Sinai , and see the land which I will give to the children of Israel .
GOLD:	One day the Lord said to Moses , “ Climb one of the mountains east of the river , and look out over the land I have given the people of Israel .

ID:	5820
INPUT:	Jaunaren indarrak eraginik , Elias jantzia gerrian lotu eta lasterka joan zen Akaben aurretik Izreeleraino .
PRED:	And the strength of the Lord was in the strength of the Lord , and ran before Ahab to Jezreel .
GOLD:	Then the Lord gave special strength to Elijah . He tucked his cloak into his belt and ran ahead of Ahab 's chariot all the way to the entrance of Jezreel .

ID:	5821
INPUT:	edo ehunean , larruan nahiz edozein larrukitan mantxa agertzen bada ,
PRED:	If it is a skin , or if it is a skin , or a skin , or a skin , or a skin ,
GOLD:	woolen or linen fabric , the hide of an animal , or anything made of leather .

ID:	5822
INPUT:	Ez horixe ! Uste dugu Jesus Jaunaren onginahiari esker salbatzen gaituela Jainkoak , bai gu eta bai jentilak » .
PRED:	This is what we say : If we are saved by the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ , and the Gentiles and the Gentiles . ”
GOLD:	We believe that we are all saved the same way , by the undeserved grace of the Lord Jesus . ”

ID:	5823
INPUT:	Eta esaiozu : Jaunak , hebrearren Jainkoak , zuregana bidali nau bere herriari joaten uzteko esatera , basamortuan gurtza eman diezaioten . Zuk muzin egin duzu orain arte ,
PRED:	and say to them , “ The Lord God of the Hebrews has sent me to go to your people in the wilderness , to send me to his people in the wilderness , until now you have swore to them . ”
GOLD:	Then announce to him , ‘ The Lord , the God of the Hebrews , has sent me to tell you , “ Let my people go , so they can worship me in the wilderness . ” Until now , you have refused to listen to him .

ID:	5824
INPUT:	Igo Pisga mendiaren gailurrera eta begira bertatik iparralde zein hegoaldera , ekialde zein mendebaldera ; zabaldu ongi begiak eta begiratu , ez baituzu Jordan hori zeharkatuko .
PRED:	The top of the hill country and look toward the top of the north , toward the east side of the north , toward the west , and look toward the east , for you will not see it , because you do n't know it .
GOLD:	But go up to Pisgah Peak , and look over the land in every direction . Take a good look , but you may not cross the Jordan River .

ID:	5825
INPUT:	Baina horren ondoren , errukitu egingo natzaie , eta herri bakoitza , nor bere ondarera eta lurraldera itzuliko dut .
PRED:	But after I have pity on them , I will have pity on them , and I will return to their own land .
GOLD:	But afterward I will return and have compassion on all of them . I will bring them home to their own lands again , each nation to its own possession .

ID:	5826
INPUT:	Galdu egin da haren oroitzapena herrialdean , izena ere ez dute gogoratzen inguruetan .
PRED:	They asked his servant , “ They do n't remember his name . They do n't remember him . ”
GOLD:	All memory of their existence will fade from the earth ; no one will remember their names .

ID:	5827
INPUT:	Zure hildakoak bai , berpiztuko dira , haien gorpuak altxatuko ! Lurpean etzanak esnatuko diraeta pozez oihuka ekingo . Izan ere , zuk , Jauna , argia bidaltzen duzu ihintza bezala , eta lurpetik argitaraateratzen hildakoak .
PRED:	And the dead shall rise , and the dead shall rise up , and the dead shall be lifted up , and shall be glad , because thou hast sent the light of the earth , as thou hast sent the light of the earth .
GOLD:	But those who die in the Lord will live ; their bodies will rise again ! Those who sleep in the earthwill rise up and sing for joy ! For your life-giving light will fall like dewon your people in the place of the dead !

ID:	5828
INPUT:	Ondoren , jendeak Baalen jauretxera joan eta lurrera bota zuen ; xehe-xehe egin zituen hango aldare eta irudiak , eta Baalen apaiza zen Matan hil egin zuten aldarearen aitzinean . Joiada apaizak zaintzaileak ipini zituen Jaunaren etxean .
PRED:	And the people went into the house of Baal , and cast them down into the house of Baal , and cut down the altars of Baal , and burned down the altar of Baal the priest in the house of the Lord . And he put the priests in the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	And all the people of the land went over to the temple of Baal and tore it down . They demolished the altars and smashed the idols to pieces , and they killed Mattan the priest of Baal in front of the altars.Jehoiada the priest stationed guards at the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	5829
INPUT:	Ez izan , beraz , burugogor , zeuen gurasoen antzera . Hurbil zaitezte Jaunarengana , eta zatozte berak betiko sagaratu duen santutegira . Obeditu Jaunari , zeuen Jainkoari , eta berak aldenduko du zuengandik bere haserre-sumina .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of your fathers , as your fathers have come near to the Lord , and come near to the sanctuary of the Lord your God , and he will turn away his wrath from you .
GOLD:	Do not be stubborn , as they were , but submit yourselves to the Lord . Come to his Temple , which he has set apart as holy forever . Worship the Lord your God so that his fierce anger will turn away from you .

ID:	5830
INPUT:	Baina hark esan zien : « Ez izutu ! Nazareteko Jesus gurutziltzatuaren bila zabiltzate . Piztua da , ez dago hemen . Ikusi jarri zuteneko tokia .
PRED:	But he said to them , “ Do n't be afraid ! You are looking for Jesus to be crucified . He is dead , and he is not here . He has seen the place where they had been crucified .
GOLD:	but the angel said , “ Do n't be alarmed . You are looking for Jesus of Nazareth , who was crucified . He is n't here ! He is risen from the dead ! Look , this is where they laid his body .

ID:	5831
INPUT:	Neriasen seme Barukek zirikatu zaitu gure kontra : babiloniarren esku jarri nahi gaitu , hil edo Babiloniara gatibu eraman gaitzaten » .
PRED:	And Balaam the son of Shallum against us , saying , He hath delivered us into the hand of the Chaldeans , and have delivered us into the hand of the Chaldeans .
GOLD:	Baruch son of Neriah has convinced you to say this , because he wants us to stay here and be killed by the Babylonians or be carried off into exile . ”

ID:	5832
INPUT:	Larrainera jaitsi zen Rut eta amaginarrebak gomendatua zehatz-mehatz egin zuen .
PRED:	And she went down to the time , and did according to all that she had done .
GOLD:	So she went down to the threshing floor that night and followed the instructions of her mother-in-law .

ID:	5833
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Badator , gorputzean bakarrik erdainduak direnak zigortuko ditudan eguna :
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in the day that I will punish those who are circumcised , saith the Lord :
GOLD:	But those who wish to boastshould boast in this alone : that they truly know me and understand that I am the Lordwho demonstrates unfailing loveand who brings justice and righteousness to the earth , and that I delight in these things.I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	5834
INPUT:	harriak jaurtitzeko garaiaeta harriak biltzeko garaia , besarkatzeko garaiaeta banantzeko garaia ,
PRED:	For the time to cast down the stones , and the time to gather the stones , and the time to pass through , and the time of the time of judgment .
GOLD:	A time to scatter stones and a time to gather stones.A time to embrace and a time to turn away .

ID:	5835
INPUT:	eta Jordanen ekialdeko Araba haran guztian zehar Pisga mendiaren magaleko Itsaso Hileraino .
PRED:	and to the east side of the Jordan , and to the sea of the Jordan , as far as the Red Sea .
GOLD:	And they conquered the eastern bank of the Jordan River as far south as the Dead Sea , below the slopes of Pisgah . )

ID:	5836
INPUT:	Landatzen dituzun egun bereanloratzen dira , ereiten dituzun egun bereanernetzen , baina , azkenean , bertan behera galduko da fruitua , zoritxarrak , sendaezineko gaitzak jota .
PRED:	In the same day , in the field , in the same day , in the end , in the last day , in the last day , the fruit of the wicked will be healed .
GOLD:	They may sprout on the day you set them out ; yes , they may blossom on the very morning you plant them , but you will never pick any grapes from them.Your only harvest will be a load of grief and unrelieved pain .

ID:	5837
INPUT:	Israeldarrentzat oroigarri zen hori , Aaronen ondorengo ez zen inor Jaunaren aurrean intsentsua erretzera hurbil ez zedin ohartarazteko ; horrela , ez zitzaien gertatuko Koreri eta beronen taldekoei gertaturiko ezbeharra , Jaunak Moisesen bitartez aldez aurretik adierazitakoa .
PRED:	This was a sign for the sons of Israel , that no man would come near to burn incense before the Lord , so that he would not come near to burn incense before the Lord , nor to his sons , nor to burn incense in the sight of the Lord his God .
GOLD:	Buds will sprout on the staff belonging to the man I choose . Then I will finally put an end to the people 's murmuring and complaining against you . ”

ID:	5838
INPUT:	Danen leinuko Ahisamaken seme Oholiab eman diot lankide . Gainera , artisau guztiak trebeago egiten ditut , agindu dizudan guztia egin dezaten :
PRED:	And I have given to you all that I have given to you . I have given you , and all that I have commanded you .
GOLD:	“ And I have personally appointed Oholiab son of Ahisamach , of the tribe of Dan , to be his assistant . Moreover , I have given special skill to all the gifted craftsmen so they can make all the things I have commanded you to make :

ID:	5839
INPUT:	Judaren leinua aukeratu zuen , Sion mendia , bere maitea .
PRED:	He chose the tribe of Judah , and he loved Zion .
GOLD:	He chose instead the tribe of Judah , and Mount Zion , which he loved .

ID:	5840
INPUT:	Jaunarengan jarria nuen itxaropen guztia : makurtu eta entzun du nire deiadarra .
PRED:	I put my hope in the Lord , and I heard my voice .
GOLD:	He lifted me out of the pit of despair , out of the mud and the mire.He set my feet on solid groundand steadied me as I walked along .

ID:	5841
INPUT:	Bizirik gelditu diren eta itzuli nahi duten israeldarrei lagun biezaie inguruko jendeak ; eman biezazkie zilarra , urrea , ondasunak , abereak eta nork bere borondatezko opariak , Jerusalemen dagoen Jainkoaren etxerako » .
PRED:	The people of Israel who want to return and return to the people of Israel . They gave them silver , silver , silver , gold , and everything that is in Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	Wherever this Jewish remnant is found , let their neighbors contribute toward their expenses by giving them silver and gold , supplies for the journey , and livestock , as well as a voluntary offering for the Temple of God in Jerusalem . ”

ID:	5842
INPUT:	Jesusen piztueraren berria
PRED:	Jesus Heals the Good News
GOLD:	The Resurrection

ID:	5843
INPUT:	« Ez joan festa-otordua egiten ari diren etxera , bertakoekin jan-edatera .
PRED:	“ Do n't go into the house of the feast , and eat it .
GOLD:	“ And do not go to their feasts and parties . Do not eat and drink with them at all .

ID:	5844
INPUT:	Egin otoitz gure alde ere , Jainkoak mezua hots egiteko eta Kristoren misterioa adierazteko aukera eman diezagun , misterio horrengatik bainago kartzelan .
PRED:	and pray for us , that we may proclaim the word of God , and to proclaim the word of Christ , because I am in prison .
GOLD:	Pray for us , too , that God will give us many opportunities to speak about his mysterious plan concerning Christ . That is why I am here in chains .

ID:	5845
INPUT:	Hau dago idatzia , hain zuzen , Salmoen liburuan : « Bihur bedi haren bizilekua basamortu , geldi bedi inor gabe . « Eta beste hau ere bai : « Har beza beste batek haren kargua .
PRED:	This is what it was written in the book : “ Let him live in the wilderness , and let him live in the wilderness , and another man say , ‘ Take his only one . '
GOLD:	Peter continued , “ This was written in the book of Psalms , where it says , ‘ Let his home become desolate , with no one living in it . ' It also says , ‘ Let someone else take his position . '

ID:	5846
INPUT:	Presta zaitezte , bada , haren seme-alabak hiltzeko ; gurasoek egindakogaiztakeriengatikbehar dute hil , sekula berriz altxaeta lurraldeaz jabe ez daitezen , mundua berriro hirizbete ez dezaten » .
PRED:	Be ready to kill his children , so that they may die because of the evil their fathers have done , that they may die in the land that their fathers had done , so that they may not inherit it again . ”
GOLD:	Kill this man 's children ! Let them die because of their father 's sins ! They must not rise and conquer the earth , filling the world with their cities . ”

ID:	5847
INPUT:	Paulori entzuten zegoen batean , Paulo begira-begira jarri zitzaion eta , sendatzeko adinako fedea bazuela ikusirik ,
PRED:	And when Paul heard that Paul had heard him , he looked at him , and saw that the faith of faith was healed .
GOLD:	and listening as Paul preached . Looking straight at him , Paul realized he had faith to be healed .

ID:	5848
INPUT:	Izan ere , bekatuak , agindutik bide hartuta , liluratu egin ninduen eta aginduaren bidez hil .
PRED:	For he took away the sins of sin , and took me away from the commandments , and killed me by the commandment of the commandments .
GOLD:	Sin took advantage of those commands and deceived me ; it used the commands to kill me .

ID:	5849
INPUT:	Emakume zaharrei , amari bezala . Eta neska<unk> , arrebei bezala , garbitasun osoz .
PRED:	As a woman , a woman , and a woman with her soul , and with all her soul .
GOLD:	Treat older women as you would your mother , and treat younger women with all purity as you would your own sisters .

ID:	5850
INPUT:	« Esan israeldarrei : Norbaitek , israeldarra nahiz Israelen bizi den etorkina izan , seme-alabaren bat Molok jainkoari oparitan eskaintzen badio , heriotza-zigorra izango du : harrika hilko du herriko jendeak .
PRED:	Speak unto the children of Israel , and say unto them , If a man of the children of Israel , or of the sons of Israel , or of the sons of Israel , he shall be put to death , he shall be put to death .
GOLD:	“ Give the people of Israel these instructions , which apply both to native Israelites and to the foreigners living in Israel . “ If any of them offer their children as a sacrifice to Molech , they must be put to death . The people of the community must stone them to death .

ID:	5851
INPUT:	Jaunaren aintzak tenplutik alde egin
PRED:	The glory of the Lord
GOLD:	The

ID:	5852
INPUT:	Jesusek jarraitu zuen : — Zuek behekoak zarete , ni goikoa naiz ; zuek mundu honetakoak zarete , ni ez naiz mundu honetakoa .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ You are the light , and I am the tabernacle , and you are all this world . I am not the world . ”
GOLD:	Jesus continued , “ You are from below ; I am from above . You belong to this world ; I do not .

ID:	5853
INPUT:	Daviden zahartzaroa
PRED:	David 's Death
GOLD:	Adonijah Claims the Throne

ID:	5854
INPUT:	itsasoko hondarrak baino gehiago egingo lukete ; horregatik dira hain neurrigabeak ene hitzak .
PRED:	The sand of the sea will be more than the sand of the sea ; therefore the tongue of my mouth will be great .
GOLD:	they would outweigh all the sands of the sea.That is why I spoke impulsively .

ID:	5855
INPUT:	« Jainkoaren erregetzarekin , uretara botatzen den eta mota guztietako arrainak biltzen dituen sarearekin bezala gertatzen da .
PRED:	“ The kingdom of heaven is like the king of heaven , and all that are gathered together with him .
GOLD:	“ Again , the Kingdom of Heaven is like a fishing net that was thrown into the water and caught fish of every kind .

ID:	5856
INPUT:	Kantu berria ipini dit ezpainetan , gure Jainkoarentzat gorespen-kanta . Askok ikusiko dute hau eta , ikaraturik , Jaunarengan konfiantza izango .
PRED:	A new song in my lips , a new song to our God , and many will see this song in the Lord .
GOLD:	Oh , the joys of those who trust the Lord , who have no confidence in the proudor in those who worship idols .

ID:	5857
INPUT:	Azaleko kultua eta obedientziarik eza
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Judah 's Persistent Idolatry

ID:	5858
INPUT:	Gizonak , garaitu ezin zuela ikusirik , borrokaldian izter-giltza ukitu zion Jakobi eta koloka jarri .
PRED:	And when the man saw that he could not see that he was not able to touch the fat that was in the field , he touched Jacob .
GOLD:	Then the man said , “ Let me go , for the dawn is breaking ! ” But Jacob said , “ I will not let you go unless you bless me . ”

ID:	5859
INPUT:	Nire zintzoa fedeari esker biziko da , baina atzera egiten badu , ez dut atsegin izango .
PRED:	If I live in my faith , I will live , but I will not be pleased .
GOLD:	And my righteous ones will live by faith.But I will take no pleasure in anyone who turns away . ”

ID:	5860
INPUT:	entzuten zidaten eta esana betetzen , arrotzek lausengatzen ninduten .
PRED:	And they heard the voice of the mouth of the trees , and said unto me , I was healed .
GOLD:	They all lose their courageand come trembling from their strongholds .

ID:	5861
INPUT:	Baina ez harrotu adar moztuen lepotik . Eta harrotzeko tentazioa baduzu , izan gogoan ez diozula zuk eusten sustraiari , sustraiak zuri baizik .
PRED:	But if you have not cut off your heads , you will not be cut off from your head . If you do n't know that the root of your roots is not cut off .
GOLD:	But you must not brag about being grafted in to replace the branches that were broken off . You are just a branch , not the root .

ID:	5862
INPUT:	Bitartean , faraoiaren gudarostea Egiptotik atera zen . Hori jakitean , Jerusalem inguraturik zeukaten gudari babiloniarrak , erasoari utzirik , urrundu egin ziren hiritik .
PRED:	And the army of Pharaoh came out of Egypt , and when they heard it , they went out of the land of Egypt , and left Jerusalem , and departed from the city .
GOLD:	At this time the army of Pharaoh Hophra of Egypt appeared at the southern border of Judah . When the Babylonian army heard about it , they withdrew from their siege of Jerusalem .

ID:	5863
INPUT:	Garailea neurekin eseraraziko dut neure tronuan , neu ere garaile izan eta neure Aitarekin beronen tronuan eseri naizen bezala .
PRED:	I will put my throne on my throne , as I sit on my throne , and I will sit on my throne as my Father sat on his throne .
GOLD:	Those who are victorious will sit with me on my throne , just as I was victorious and sat with my Father on his throne .

ID:	5864
INPUT:	Ez egin zinik zeure buruarengatik ere , ez baitezakezu zeure ile bakar bat ere zuri edo beltz bihur .
PRED:	You shall not make your own heart for your own sake , for you shall not be put to shame .
GOLD:	Do not even say , ‘ By my head ! ' for you ca n't turn one hair white or black .

ID:	5865
INPUT:	Erru guztiak barkatzen dizkit , gaitz guztiak sendatzen ;
PRED:	All my sins are forgiven , and all my sins are healed .
GOLD:	He forgives all my sinsand heals all my diseases .

ID:	5866
INPUT:	esaiezu i<unk> eta amaigabeko jatorri-zerrendetan arretarik ez jartzeko ; izan ere , honelakoak egokiagoak dira eztabaidak sortzeko , sinesmenez onartzen den Jainkoaren salbamen-asmoan hezteko baino .
PRED:	Say to them , “ Do n't have enough to come , for they are not greater than those who have faith in the faith of God 's salvation .
GOLD:	Do n't let them waste their time in endless discussion of myths and spiritual pedigrees . These things only lead to meaningless speculations , which do n't help people live a life of faith in God .

ID:	5867
INPUT:	baliogabetu egin du legea bere agindu eta arauekin , eta bi herriekin gizadi berri bakarra sortu du bere baitan , bakeak eginez .
PRED:	And he hath not kept the law and the statutes , and the statutes , and the two people have made peace with him .
GOLD:	He did this by ending the system of law with its commandments and regulations . He made peace between Jews and Gentiles by creating in himself one new people from the two groups .

ID:	5868
INPUT:	Entzun hau , Jakoben herriaren buruzagiok , Israelgo agintariok , zuzentasuna higuintzeneta zuzenbidea okertzen duzuenok :
PRED:	Hear this , you princes of Jacob , you princes of Israel , you rulers of Israel , and do what is right .
GOLD:	Listen to me , you leaders of Israel ! You hate justice and twist all that is right .

ID:	5869
INPUT:	Pertza bezala jartzen du irakiten ur azpia , lurrinontzian bezala lurrinarazten gaineko ura .
PRED:	He makes the waters like the waters of the earth , as the waters of the earth , and the waters on the earth .
GOLD:	Its flesh is hard and firmand can not be penetrated .

ID:	5870
INPUT:	Entzun hau , herri guztiok , egon adi , munduko biztanleok ,
PRED:	Hear this , O peoples of the earth , and hear it , you inhabitants of the earth .
GOLD:	High and low , rich and poor — listen !

ID:	5871
INPUT:	Gau horretan Egipto osoan zehar igaroko naiz , eta hil egingo ditut Egiptoko lehen-seme eta lehen abere-kumeak oro eta neure epaia emango diet Egiptoko jainkoei . Ala ni Jauna !
PRED:	In that night I will pass through all the land of Egypt , and I will kill all the firstborn of the firstborn , and all the firstborn of the firstborn , and all the firstborn of the firstborn , and all the firstborn of the firstborn of the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	On that night I will pass through the land of Egypt and strike down every firstborn son and firstborn male animal in the land of Egypt . I will execute judgment against all the gods of Egypt , for I am the Lord !

ID:	5872
INPUT:	erruduna salatzen duena onetsia izaten da , jendeak zoriondu egingo du .
PRED:	The one who does what is evil will be done , and the people will be blessed .
GOLD:	But it will go well for those who convict the guilty ; rich blessings will be showered on them .

ID:	5873
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , artean beren herrialdean bizi zirenean , israeldarrek kutsatu egin zuten lurraldea beren jokabide eta egintza txarrez ; kutsatua zen haien portaera , hilerokoan botatako odola bezain kutsatua .
PRED:	“ Son of man , when the children of Israel lived in their land , the children of Israel defiled their land , and their abominations , and their abominations , and their abominations , and their abominations was unclean in the streets .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , when the people of Israel were living in their own land , they defiled it by the evil way they lived . To me their conduct was as unclean as a woman 's menstrual cloth .

ID:	5874
INPUT:	Sinesgarria eta guztiok onartzekoa da doktrina hau : Kristo Jesus bekatariak salbatzera etorri zela mundura . Eta inor ez ni baino bekatariagorik ;
PRED:	This is the message that Jesus Christ came to save the world and to save the sinners . There is no sin than I .
GOLD:	This is a trustworthy saying , and everyone should accept it : “ Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners ” — and I am the worst of them all .

ID:	5875
INPUT:	eta bertan ezarri dut Jaunak israeldarrekin eginiko itunaren agiria daukan kutxa » .
PRED:	And I have set the ark of the Lord , which he made with the sons of Israel , which he made with the children of Israel .
GOLD:	There I have placed the Ark , which contains the covenant that the Lord made with the people of Israel . ”

ID:	5876
INPUT:	Siria guztian zabaldu zen Jesusen entzutea . Edozein gaitz edo oinazek jotakoak — deabrudun , epileptiko nahiz elbarriak — eramaten zizkioten , eta hark sendatu egiten zituen .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when he heard all that he had heard him , that he and the brethren and the spirits were brought to him , and they healed him , and he healed them .
GOLD:	News about him spread as far as Syria , and people soon began bringing to him all who were sick . And whatever their sickness or disease , or if they were demon possessed or epileptic or paralyzed — he healed them all .

ID:	5877
INPUT:	Neuk , Jaunak , ikertzen eta aztertzen ditutgizakiaren buru-bihotzak , nori bere jokaeraren ordaina , bere egiteen merezia emateko .
PRED:	I am the Lord , and the heart of man , and the heart of man , and the heart of man shall be given to his ways .
GOLD:	But I , the Lord , search all heartsand examine secret motives.I give all people their due rewards , according to what their actions deserve . ”

ID:	5878
INPUT:	Lehen fruituen eskaintza eta fede-aitorpena
PRED:	The Good News and the Good News
GOLD:	Harvest Offerings and Tithes

ID:	5879
INPUT:	Ezereztuko ditutzure lurraldeko hiriak , eta zure gotorleku guztiakerraustuko .
PRED:	And I will make the cities of thy land , and all thy cities shall be destroyed .
GOLD:	“ In that day , ” says the Lord , “ I will slaughter your horsesand destroy your chariots .

ID:	5880
INPUT:	Lehorrari « lur » eman zion izen eta ur-multzoari « itsaso » . Eta Jainkoak ona zela ikusi zuen .
PRED:	And he called the name of the sea , and it was called the sea . And God saw that it was good .
GOLD:	God called the dry ground “ land ” and the waters “ seas . ” And God saw that it was good .

ID:	5881
INPUT:	Betiko izu-ikaraz eta lotsaz beterik , gal bitez desohorez !
PRED:	Let them be ashamed , and be ashamed , and let them be ashamed .
GOLD:	Then they will learn that you alone are called the Lord , that you alone are the Most High , supreme over all the earth .

ID:	5882
INPUT:	« Burdinazko tresnaz norbait jo eta hiltzen duena , hilketa-errudun da : heriotzara emango dute .
PRED:	“ If any of you will die with iron , you will be put to death .
GOLD:	“ But if someone strikes and kills another person with a piece of iron , it is murder , and the murderer must be executed .

ID:	5883
INPUT:	Zeure behatzez eratu duzun ortziaeta ezarri dituzun ilargi-izarrak ikusita ,
PRED:	You have made the moon and the moon , and you have seen the moon , and you have seen the moon .
GOLD:	what are mere mortals that you should think about them , human beings that you should care for them ?

ID:	5884
INPUT:	Jordan ibaia igarotzean , beraz , gaur agindu dizuedanez , Garizim mendian harriak tente ipini eta karez zurituko dituzue .
PRED:	When you cross over the Jordan River , you must set up the Jordan River River , Aaron , Aaron , Aaron , and Aaron will put them in front of them .
GOLD:	When you cross the Jordan , set up these stones at Mount Ebal and coat them with plaster , as I am commanding you today .

ID:	5885
INPUT:	« Etxe batean sartzean , esan : « Bakea zuekin » ;
PRED:	And when he entered into a house , he said , Peace be with you .
GOLD:	When you enter the home , give it your blessing .

ID:	5886
INPUT:	Baina bai estua dela bizirako atea eta meharra bidea , eta gutxi dira aurkitzen dutenak .
PRED:	But those who seek the way to live , and those who find the way are not found .
GOLD:	But the gateway to life is very narrow and the road is difficult , and only a few ever find it .

ID:	5887
INPUT:	Ez dezagun tenta Jauna , haietako batzuek egin zuten bezala , eta sugeek zizta eginda hil ziren .
PRED:	And they did not know the Lord , as some of them did , and they killed them and killed them .
GOLD:	Nor should we put Christ to the test , as some of them did and then died from snakebites .

ID:	5888
INPUT:	Jesusen jatorriaz eztabaida
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Is Jesus the Messiah ?

ID:	5889
INPUT:	Israeldarrek , segika atera zitzaizkien Aiko gizonak landa zabalean azkeneraino garbitu ondoren , Aira itzuli eta hiriko bizilagun guztiak hil zituzten .
PRED:	And the men of Israel went out out out of the field to the end of the field , and returned to the end of the field , and all the people of Israel returned to the end of the city .
GOLD:	When the Israelite army finished chasing and killing all the men of Ai in the open fields , they went back and finished off everyone inside .

ID:	5890
INPUT:	Jesusek , gupidaturik , begiak ukitu zizkien , eta une berean ikusmena etorri zitzaien berriro . Eta Jesusen ondoren joan ziren .
PRED:	And when Jesus saw them , he touched them , and he came again to them again . And they went after Jesus .
GOLD:	Jesus felt sorry for them and touched their eyes . Instantly they could see ! Then they followed him .

ID:	5891
INPUT:	Zure gorespenez eta ekintza ospetsuezbetea nuen ahoa egun osoan .
PRED:	I will praise your name , and I will praise you all day long .
GOLD:	That is why I can never stop praising you ; I declare your glory all day long .

ID:	5892
INPUT:	izaki ororen bizia odolean baitago . Horregatik agindu die Jaunak israeldarrei inolako izakiren odolik ez jateko , izaki ororen bizia odolean dagoelako ; jaten duena herritik bota egingo dute .
PRED:	This is why the Lord commanded the people of Israel to eat blood . That is why the Lord commanded them to eat the blood of any man 's blood , and they will be cut off from his people .
GOLD:	The life of every creature is in its blood . That is why I have said to the people of Israel , ‘ You must never eat or drink blood , for the life of any creature is in its blood . ' So whoever consumes blood will be cut off from the community .

ID:	5893
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , ohartarazi Jerusalem bere jokabide higuingarriaz .
PRED:	“ Son of man , bring it to the land of Jerusalem , to the abominations of their abominations .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , confront Jerusalem with her detestable sins .

ID:	5894
INPUT:	<unk> katik Haxmonara ;
PRED:	And they set out and set out their tents , and encamped in their place .
GOLD:	They left Mithcah and camped at Hashmonah .

ID:	5895
INPUT:	Amondarrek Daviden mandatariak iraindu
PRED:	The children of Ammon
GOLD:	David Defeats the Ammonites

ID:	5896
INPUT:	Hala ere , Davidengatik bederen , Jaunak , haren Jainkoak , ez zuen errege-etxearen argia itzaltzen utzi Jerusalemen ; seme bat eman zion , beraren ondoren errege izan zedin eta Jerusalemen iraun zezan .
PRED:	But the Lord his God did not leave the light of the king 's house , but he gave him a son in Jerusalem , and he reigned in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	But for David 's sake , the Lord his God allowed his descendants to continue ruling , shining like a lamp , and he gave Abijam a son to rule after him in Jerusalem .

ID:	5897
INPUT:	Larunbatero hitz egiten zuen Paulok sinagogan , eta bai juduak , bai greziarrak , sinesmenera ekartzen saiatzen zen .
PRED:	On the Sabbath day Paul spoke in the synagogue , and the Jews and the Jews believed in faith .
GOLD:	Each Sabbath found Paul at the synagogue , trying to convince the Jews and Greeks alike .

ID:	5898
INPUT:	Efraim , Benjamin eta Manases leinuei ! Suspertu zeure ahalmena eta zatozkigu salbatzera !
PRED:	Ephraim , Ephraim , Manasseh , Manasseh , Manasseh , Manasseh , and Manasseh . Come and save us .
GOLD:	Turn us again to yourself , O God.Make your face shine down upon us.Only then will we be saved .

ID:	5899
INPUT:	Hexbongo deiadarrak Elale eta Jahatzeraino iristen dira ; garrasiak entzuten Tzoartik Horonaimeraino , Eglat-Xelixiaraino , Nimrimgo urak ere agortu egin baitira .
PRED:	The Amorites cry out from Heshbon to Heshbon , and they heard the sound of their voice , and they heard the sound of their voice , because they have destroyed the waters of Eglon .
GOLD:	“ Instead , their awful cries of terror can be heard from Heshbon clear across to Elealeh and Jahaz ; from Zoar all the way to Horonaim and Eglath-shelishiyah . Even the waters of Nimrim are dried up now .

ID:	5900
INPUT:	Behartsuei bahitutakosoineko gaineanetzaten dira edozein kultu-lekutan , eta bidegabekeriaz bildutakoardoa edaten duteberen Jainkoaren etxean .
PRED:	The poor are on every high places , on every high places , and in every high places , and in the house of their God .
GOLD:	At their religious festivals , they lounge in clothing their debtors put up as security.In the house of their gods , they drink wine bought with unjust fines .

ID:	5901
INPUT:	Orduan , Davidek mandatariak bidali zituen , emakume hura ekar ziezaioten . Etortzean , David berarekin etzan zen ; hilerokoaren garbikuntza egin berria zen emakumea . Ondoren , bere etxera itzuli zen Betsabe .
PRED:	So David sent messengers to him , and they brought him to him . When David came with her , David went with her , and she went back to her house .
GOLD:	Then David sent messengers to get her ; and when she came to the palace , he slept with her . She had just completed the purification rites after having her menstrual period . Then she returned home .

ID:	5902
INPUT:	Labanek , etxean sartu , gameluei zamak kendu eta lastoa eta belarra eman zizkien . Ondoren , ura ekarri zien morroiari eta honen bidelagunei , oinak garbitzeko .
PRED:	Laban went into the house and took the donkey and the donkey and gave them water . Then he brought water to his servants and to wash their feet .
GOLD:	So the man went home with Laban , and Laban unloaded the camels , gave him straw for their bedding , fed them , and provided water for the man and the camel drivers to wash their feet .

ID:	5903
INPUT:	argiz inguratua soinekoz bezala . Oihal-etxola bezala zabaltzen duzu zerua ,
PRED:	You spread out the sky like a light around it . You spread out the heavens like a tent .
GOLD:	You are dressed in a robe of light.You stretch out the starry curtain of the heavens ;

ID:	5904
INPUT:	den-denek jokaera makurra baitzeramaten . Jainkoak , mundua hain gaiztotua ikustean ,
PRED:	For they are all brought into the way ; and God hath seen the evil things of the world .
GOLD:	God observed all this corruption in the world , for everyone on earth was corrupt .

ID:	5905
INPUT:	Bost errege amortarrak , ihes egin eta Makedan , leize-zulo batean , gorde ziren .
PRED:	And the five kings of the Amorites fled , and fled in the wilderness of Naphtali .
GOLD:	During the battle the five kings escaped and hid in a cave at Makkedah .

ID:	5906
INPUT:	Gezurtiak gorroto dio biktimari , lausengariak hondamendira darama .
PRED:	He will hate the slain of the slain , and the hills will be destroyed .
GOLD:	A lying tongue hates its victims , and flattering words cause ruin .

ID:	5907
INPUT:	Baina Jehuk uztaia eskuetan hartu , gezia jaurti eta bizkarraren erdian jo zuen Joram , bihotza zauritu eta aurretik ateraz . Hilik erori zen bere guda-gurdian .
PRED:	But Jehu took his bow in his hand and threw him in the midst of his face , and struck him in the midst of his heart , and struck him in his chariot , and he fell in his chariot .
GOLD:	But Jehu drew his bow and shot Joram between the shoulders . The arrow pierced his heart , and he sank down dead in his chariot .

ID:	5908
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak esan zion : — Luzatu eskua eta heldu isatsetik ! Eskua luzatu eta heldu egin zion , eta sugea makila bihurtu zen berriro eskuan .
PRED:	But the Lord said to him , “ stretched out your hand and stretched out his hand and stretched out his hand , and he stretched out his hand , and he went into his hand . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord told him , “ Reach out and grab its tail . ” So Moses reached out and grabbed it , and it turned back into a shepherd 's staff in his hand .

ID:	5909
INPUT:	haustura hausturaren ordain , begia begiaren ordain , hortza hortzaren ordain ; egin duen zauria egingo diote .
PRED:	And they shall remember their eye , and their eye for their eye , and their eye shall be for them .
GOLD:	a fracture for a fracture , an eye for an eye , a tooth for a tooth . Whatever anyone does to injure another person must be paid back in kind .

ID:	5910
INPUT:	Madarikazioak
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Punishments for Disobedience

ID:	5911
INPUT:	Bakea ekarriko dien ituna egingo dut neure artaldearekin : basapiztiak desagerraraziko ditut herrialdetik , seguru biziko dira landa zabalean eta lasai lo egingo basoetan .
PRED:	I will make peace with my sheep , and I will make peace with my sheep , and they will fall in the land of the field , and they will dwell in the land of the field , and in the field .
GOLD:	“ I will make a covenant of peace with my people and drive away the dangerous animals from the land . Then they will be able to camp safely in the wildest places and sleep in the woods without fear .

ID:	5912
INPUT:	Emagaldu handiaren gaitzespena
PRED:	The Death of a woman
GOLD:	The Great Prostitute

ID:	5913
INPUT:	Egiaz zuk agindurik egin al dute hori ? Guri , zeure zerbitzarioi , ez diguzu esan nor izanen den zure hurrengo erregea .
PRED:	Do n't you do this ? Do n't you do this ? Your servants , your servants , so that no one can say to you . ”
GOLD:	Has my lord the king really done this without letting any of his officials know who should be the next king ? ”

ID:	5914
INPUT:	Ni eta gainerako gerra-gizonak hirira hurbilduko gara eta , aurrekoan bezala , hirikoak guri erasotzera ateratzean , guk ihesari emango diogu .
PRED:	And we will come near to the city , and we will come to the city , as before the face of the city , when we go up to fight against our fathers , and we will flee .
GOLD:	When our main army attacks , the men of Ai will come out to fight as they did before , and we will run away from them .

ID:	5915
INPUT:	« Korrikalaria baino bizkorrago doaz nire egunak : zoriona ikusi gabe doaz ihesi ,
PRED:	“ I want you to go to the city of Ephesus . I have seen the good news that I have seen .
GOLD:	“ My life passes more swiftly than a runner.It flees away without a glimpse of happiness .

ID:	5916
INPUT:	Berrogeita hamarnaka eta ehunaka eseri ziren .
PRED:	And they sat down , and sat down , and sat down .
GOLD:	So they sat down in groups of fifty or a hundred .

ID:	5917
INPUT:	Izan itzazue zeuen artean Kristo Jesusek izan zituen sentipen berak .
PRED:	Be ye among yourselves , that he might be with you for ever .
GOLD:	You must have the same attitude that Christ Jesus had .

ID:	5918
INPUT:	Haiek galdu nahian dabiltzan etsaien esku utziko ditut , eta haien gorpuak hegazti harraparien eta basapiztien janari izango dira .
PRED:	And I will deliver them into the hand of their enemies , and they shall be delivered into the hand of their enemies , and the birds of the field , and the beasts of the beasts of the field .
GOLD:	I will give you to your enemies , and they will kill you . Your bodies will be food for the vultures and wild animals .

ID:	5919
INPUT:	Erantzun zion Simon Pedrok : — Jauna , norengana joango gara ? Betiko bizia dute zure irakatsiek .
PRED:	Simon Peter said to Simon Peter , “ Lord , will we go to you ? Your statutes have eternal life . ”
GOLD:	Simon Peter replied , “ Lord , to whom would we go ? You have the words that give eternal life .

ID:	5920
INPUT:	« Beraz , honela diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Nik sorraraziko dut gerra zure kontra , eta gizakiak eta abereak erauziko ditu .
PRED:	Therefore thus says the Lord God : I will raise up your face against you , and men and animals and animals .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will bring an army against you , O Egypt , and destroy both people and animals .

ID:	5921
INPUT:	Artzain gabe , ardiak sakabanatu egin dira eta basapiztien harrapakin bihurtu .
PRED:	They have scattered the sheep without the sheep , and they have devoured the beasts of the field .
GOLD:	So my sheep have been scattered without a shepherd , and they are easy prey for any wild animal .

ID:	5922
INPUT:	A bai , Estebanen etxekoak ere nik bataiatu nituen , baina ez dut uste beste inor bataiatu dudanik .
PRED:	I also also also baptized the houses of those who were baptized , but there is no one to be baptized .
GOLD:	( Oh yes , I also baptized the household of Stephanas , but I do n't remember baptizing anyone else . )

ID:	5923
INPUT:	Gogora ezazue , bada , bekatarien aldetik halako eraso gogorra jasan zuen hura , adorea galdu eta etsi ez dezazuen .
PRED:	Remember this , because of the sins of sin , which he lifted up against you , so that it might not be destroyed .
GOLD:	Think of all the hostility he endured from sinful people ; then you wo n't become weary and give up .

ID:	5924
INPUT:	Abrahamen beste ondorengo batzuk
PRED:	Abraham and his sons
GOLD:	The Death of Abraham

ID:	5925
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin zaiona egin zuen , beraren aita Amatziasek bezalaxe .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the sight of the Lord , just as his father Amaziah had done .
GOLD:	He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , just as his father , Amaziah , had done .

ID:	5926
INPUT:	Gero , apaizak Jaunari aurkeztuko dio hori guztia : gauza sakratua da eta apaizari dagokio , aurkezturiko bularra eta aparte utzitako izterra bezala . Horren guztiaren ondoren , ardoa edan ahal izango du nazireu-botoa zuenak .
PRED:	And the priest shall bring all these things to the Lord : it is holy , and the priest shall offer it to the priest , and the priest shall offer it to the priest , and the priest shall give it to the priest ; and he shall give it to the priest .
GOLD:	Then the priest will lift them up as a special offering before the Lord . These are holy portions for the priest , along with the breast of the special offering and the thigh of the sacred offering that are lifted up before the Lord . After this ceremony the Nazirites may again drink wine .

ID:	5927
INPUT:	Aaronen seme Eleazar Putielen alabetariko batekin ezkondu zen . Honek Pinhas sortu zion . Hauek guztiak lebitar familiaburuak dira beren jatorriko familiekin .
PRED:	And Aaron , the son of Eleazar , the son of Eleazar , took a wife of the priest ; and all these are the families of the fathers ' houses .
GOLD:	Eleazar son of Aaron married one of the daughters of Putiel , and she gave birth to his son , Phinehas.These are the ancestors of the Levite families , listed according to their clans .

ID:	5928
INPUT:	Judan Salomonen seme Roboam zen errege . Berrogeita bat urte zituen Roboamek errege izaten hastean , eta hamazazpi urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen , Jaunak Israelgo leinu guztien artetik bere egoitza jartzeko hautatu zuen hirian . Roboam erregearen amak Naama zuen izena eta amondarra zen .
PRED:	Rehoboam son of Solomon became king of Judah . When he became king of Judah , he reigned seven years in Jerusalem , and he reigned in Jerusalem for seven years in the city of the Lord , and his mother reigned in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Rehoboam son of Solomon was king in Judah . He was forty-one years old when he became king , and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem , the city the Lord had chosen from among all the tribes of Israel as the place to honor his name . Rehoboam 's mother was Naamah , an Ammonite woman .

ID:	5929
INPUT:	Libra nazazu , arren , neure anaia Esauren eskutik , ni eta ama-semeak hiltzeko etorriko den beldur bainaiz .
PRED:	Take me away from the hand of Esau my brother Esau , and I am afraid of the sons of Esau , because I am afraid .
GOLD:	But you promised me , ‘ I will surely treat you kindly , and I will multiply your descendants until they become as numerous as the sands along the seashore — too many to count . ' ”

ID:	5930
INPUT:	Etsai indartsuagandiksalbatu ninduen , ni baino indartsuago ziren arerioengandik .
PRED:	He saved me from the power of my enemies , and I am more powerful than I am .
GOLD:	He rescued me from my powerful enemies , from those who hated me and were too strong for me .

ID:	5931
INPUT:	Alde gaitzetik , egin on dena , bila bakea eta jarrai haren bidetik .
PRED:	And turn away from him , and seek peace , and follow his ways .
GOLD:	The eyes of the Lord watch over those who do right ; his ears are open to their cries for help .

ID:	5932
INPUT:	« Judako errege Manasesek bere aurretiko amortarrek baino egintza higuingarriagoak egin dituenez eta , sasijainkoak direla eta , judatarrei bekatu eginarazi dienez ,
PRED:	And Manasseh king of Judah did more abominations than all the abominations that Manasseh had done before him , and made the gods of the Amorites , and caused the people of Judah to sin .
GOLD:	“ King Manasseh of Judah has done many detestable things . He is even more wicked than the Amorites , who lived in this land before Israel . He has caused the people of Judah to sin with his idols .

ID:	5933
INPUT:	Ez du inork bere gorputza gorrotatzen , baizik eta jaten eman eta zaindu egiten du , Kristok Elizarekin egiten duen bezala ;
PRED:	He does not hate his body , but he gives him his body , as Christ is with him .
GOLD:	No one hates his own body but feeds and cares for it , just as Christ cares for the church .

ID:	5934
INPUT:	Ix-Boxet israeldarren errege izendatua
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Ishbosheth Proclaimed King of Israel

ID:	5935
INPUT:	Jauna , barkatzeko prest
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Blessings for the

ID:	5936
INPUT:	Etxera bidean , morroiak atera zitzaizkion bere semea onik zuela esatera .
PRED:	And his servants went into the house , and said to him , ‘ He is my son . '
GOLD:	While the man was on his way , some of his servants met him with the news that his son was alive and well .

ID:	5937
INPUT:	Argimutilaren gerritik ateratzen diren sei besoetariko bakoitzak almendra-lore gisako hiru kopa izango ditu , beren kukulu , lore-hosto eta guzti ;
PRED:	And they shall be six branches of the lampstand of the lampstand , and two branches , and three branches , and three branches , and three branches , and three branches , and all the trees of the lampstand .
GOLD:	Each of the six branches will have three lamp cups shaped like almond blossoms , complete with buds and petals .

ID:	5938
INPUT:	Halaber , emaztetzat hartzen dut Rut moabdarra , Mahlonen alarguntsa ; honela , Mahlonen familian iraungo du jabegoak eta Elimeleken izenak bere senideen artean eta herri honetan jarraituko du . Zuek zarete , gaur , honen guztiaren lekuko .
PRED:	And I take the wife of Moab , the widow of Moab , and the widow of the house of Reuben , and the wife of his brother 's wife , and the wife of his brother 's wife , and his father 's wife shall be in this city , and all this day .
GOLD:	And with the land I have acquired Ruth , the Moabite widow of Mahlon , to be my wife . This way she can have a son to carry on the family name of her dead husband and to inherit the family property here in his hometown . You are all witnesses today . ”

ID:	5939
INPUT:	Zeure etsaien esklabo egingo zaitut , ezagutzen ez duzun lurraldean ; piztu baita nire haserrea , sutan dago zure aurka ) .
PRED:	I will make you slaves of your enemies , and you will not know the land that you do not know , because My anger is kindled against you .
GOLD:	I will tell your enemies to take youas captives to a foreign land.For my anger blazes like a firethat will burn forever . ”

ID:	5940
INPUT:	Behin batean , baziren zazpi anaia . Zaharrena ezkondu eta seme-alabarik gabe hil zen .
PRED:	And there were seven brothers . The first took her and died without children .
GOLD:	Well , suppose there were seven brothers . The oldest one married and then died without children .

ID:	5941
INPUT:	hegoek elkar ukitzen zuten . Ibiltzerakoan zuzen zihoazen aurrera , inoiz itzuli gabe .
PRED:	And the cherubim touched each other . And when they had touched them , they went before him , they did not return .
GOLD:	The wings of each living being touched the wings of the beings beside it . Each one moved straight forward in any direction without turning around .

ID:	5942
INPUT:	Zifeko batzuek Gibeara igo eta esan zioten Sauli : — Ez al dakizu David gure artean gordetzen dela , Horexeko haitzarteetan , basamortuaren hegoalderantz dagoen Hakila mendixkan ?
PRED:	Some of the prophets went up to Gibeah and said to Saul , “ Do n't you know that David is between us in the wilderness of the wilderness ? ”
GOLD:	But now the men of Ziph went to Saul in Gibeah and betrayed David to him . “ We know where David is hiding , ” they said . “ He is in the strongholds of Horesh on the hill of Hakilah , which is in the southern part of Jeshimon .

ID:	5943
INPUT:	« Eta urrutiko lurraldetik , zure izen handiaren eta zure egintza ahaltsuen berri aditurik , zure herri Israelgoa ez den arrotzen bat
PRED:	“ And you have heard your mighty name from far country , and your mighty power has not been known to your people Israel .
GOLD:	“ In the future , foreigners who do not belong to your people Israel will hear of you . They will come from distant lands because of your name ,

ID:	5944
INPUT:	Eta Kristo honela zerbitzatzen duena Jainkoari atsegin zaio eta gizon-emakumeek onartua da .
PRED:	And he that serve Christ is pleased with God , and the sons of men is blessed .
GOLD:	If you serve Christ with this attitude , you will please God , and others will approve of you , too .

ID:	5945
INPUT:	« Geure lehen-semeak eta abereen lehen-umeak gure Jainkoaren etxean zerbitzua betetzen duten apaizei aurkeztuko dizkiegu , legeak agintzen duenez .
PRED:	“ We will bring the priests to the priests in the Temple of our God , and the firstborn of our sons , and the firstborn of the firstborn , and the firstborn of our God .
GOLD:	We will store the produce in the storerooms of the Temple of our God . We will bring the best of our flour and other grain offerings , the best of our fruit , and the best of our new wine and olive oil . And we promise to bring to the Levites a tenth of everything our land produces , for it is the Levites who collect the tithes in all our rural towns .

ID:	5946
INPUT:	Zenbait filosofo epikureo eta estoikok ere jardun ohi zuen harekin eztabaidan . Batzuek zioten : « Zer ote dio berritsu honek ? » Beste batzuek , berriz : « Jainko arrotzen predikari dirudi » . Izan ere , Jesusen eta piztueraren berri ematen zien Paulok .
PRED:	Many of them were amazed and praying with him . Some of them said , “ What do these things say ? ” Some said , “ What do these things ? ” But some of them said , “ The God of the dead , and the resurrection of Jesus . ”
GOLD:	He also had a debate with some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers . When he told them about Jesus and his resurrection , they said , “ What 's this babbler trying to say with these strange ideas he 's picked up ? ” Others said , “ He seems to be preaching about some foreign gods . ”

ID:	5947
INPUT:	Hauxe da Jainkoaren agindua : sinets dezagula beraren Seme Jesu Kristogan eta maita dezagula elkar , berak agindu bezala .
PRED:	This is the commandment of God : that he may know his Son and love one another , just as he commanded .
GOLD:	And this is his commandment : We must believe in the name of his Son , Jesus Christ , and love one another , just as he commanded us .

ID:	5948
INPUT:	Esnez hazi zintuztedan , ez janari sendoz , hau hartzeko ez baitzineten oraindik gauza . Orain ere ez zarete gauza ,
PRED:	I gave you the food that I did not want you to drink with wine , but now you are not yet yet yet .
GOLD:	I had to feed you with milk , not with solid food , because you were n't ready for anything stronger . And you still are n't ready ,

ID:	5949
INPUT:	Jesusek Jainko Aitarengandik hartu zituen ohorea eta aintza , honela esan baitzion Jainkoaren ospe bikainetik etorritako mintzoak : « Hauxe dut neure Seme maitea , hauxe dut nik atsegin » .
PRED:	Jesus took glory from the Father and glory , because he said to him , “ This is my Son , whom I love . ”
GOLD:	when he received honor and glory from God the Father . The voice from the majestic glory of God said to him , “ This is my dearly loved Son , who brings me great joy . ”

ID:	5950
INPUT:	Faraoia hurbil zen . Israeldarrak , egiptoarrak atzean zituztela ohartzean , izutu eta oihuka hasi zitzaizkion Jaunari .
PRED:	When Pharaoh was near , the Egyptians heard that the Egyptians had come near , and they cried out to the Lord .
GOLD:	As Pharaoh approached , the people of Israel looked up and panicked when they saw the Egyptians overtaking them . They cried out to the Lord ,

ID:	5951
INPUT:	gaizki-esale , Jainkoaren etsai , iraintzaile , harro handiputz , gaizkirako trebe eta gurasoekin bihurri dira ;
PRED:	They are an enemy of God , an enemy of God , a mighty man , a mighty man , a mighty man , a mighty man , and a mighty man , and a mighty man .
GOLD:	They are backstabbers , haters of God , insolent , proud , and boastful . They invent new ways of sinning , and they disobey their parents .

ID:	5952
INPUT:	Etsaiek Danieli tranpa jarri
PRED:	David 's People
GOLD:	Daniel in the Lions ' Den

ID:	5953
INPUT:	Ontzako urreen parabola
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Parable of the Ten Servants

ID:	5954
INPUT:	Kontu izan zuk ere horrekin , gogor jarri baitzen gure irakatsien kontra .
PRED:	Remember this , because you are very angry with us .
GOLD:	Be careful of him , for he fought against everything we said .

ID:	5955
INPUT:	Lagundu fededunei beren beharretan ; eman gogoz ostatu arrotzari .
PRED:	In the same way , let them give thanks to the saints .
GOLD:	When God 's people are in need , be ready to help them . Always be eager to practice hospitality .

ID:	5956
INPUT:	Gero , berrogeita hamar lokarri ipini zituzten elkarrekin jositako sail bakoitzaren ertzean .
PRED:	And they put them in the midst of the congregation , in the midst of the congregation , in the midst of the congregation .
GOLD:	He made fifty loops for the edge of each large curtain .

ID:	5957
INPUT:	Han ehortzi zituzten Abraham eta honen emazte Sara ; han Isaak eta honen emazte Rebeka ere . Eta hantxe ehortzi nuen Lea .
PRED:	And they buried Abraham and his wife , Isaac and his wife , and his wife Isaac , and his wife ; and I buried him there .
GOLD:	There Abraham and his wife Sarah are buried . There Isaac and his wife , Rebekah , are buried . And there I buried Leah .

ID:	5958
INPUT:	Eta ahotsa sortu zen izakien buru gainean zegoen sabai gainetik .
PRED:	And the voice of the princes above the heads of the princes , which was above the heads of the princes .
GOLD:	As they stood with wings lowered , a voice spoke from beyond the crystal surface above them .

ID:	5959
INPUT:	Esan zidan gizonak : « Gizaseme , begira erne , entzun adi eta jarri arreta erakutsiko dizudan guztiari , erakuts diezazudan ekarri baitzaituzte hona . Gero , kontatu israeldarrei ikusiko duzun guztia » .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Son of man , listen to my voice , and listen to my voice , and teach me all that I have given you , and I will show you all the things that you have seen . ”
GOLD:	He said to me , “ Son of man , watch and listen . Pay close attention to everything I show you . You have been brought here so I can show you many things . Then you will return to the people of Israel and tell them everything you have seen . ”

ID:	5960
INPUT:	Erregeak ongi baderitzo , eman bedi berorren izenean eta ezarri Pertsia eta Mediako legeen artean aldaezineko agindu hau : “ Ez dadila Baxti aurrerantzean Asuero erregeagana inoiz agertu eta hura baino hobea izanen denari eman diezaiola berorrek erregina izatea ” .
PRED:	And the king commanded them to be made known in his name , and put them on the altar of Persia , and to the king of Persia , saying , Thus saith the king of Persia , Let no more come to the king , as he hath done to the king .
GOLD:	“ So if it please the king , we suggest that you issue a written decree , a law of the Persians and Medes that can not be revoked . It should order that Queen Vashti be forever banished from the presence of King Xerxes , and that the king should choose another queen more worthy than she .

ID:	5961
INPUT:	Zergatik ahaztu nahi gaituzu betiko ? Zergatik utzi nahi bertan behera bizi guztirako ?
PRED:	Why do you forget us forever ? Why do you want us to live in this place ?
GOLD:	Why do you continue to forget us ? Why have you abandoned us for so long ?

ID:	5962
INPUT:	Erortzear nagoela uste dudanean , zure maitasunak eusten dit , Jauna .
PRED:	The Lord is my God , and I am my God , and I am my God .
GOLD:	I cried out , “ I am slipping ! ” but your unfailing love , O Lord , supported me .

ID:	5963
INPUT:	Kadex-Barneatik atera eta Zered erreka igaro arteko bidean hogeita hemezortzi urte eman genituen . Ordurako desagertua zen kanpalekutik , Jaunak zin egin zien bezala , gerra-gizonen belaunaldi hura guztia .
PRED:	And we went out from Kadesh , and passed through the valley of Kadesh , and passed through the valley of Kadesh , as the Lord had swore unto them , as he swore unto them , as the Lord had swore unto them .
GOLD:	“ Thirty-eight years passed from the time we first left Kadesh-barnea until we finally crossed the Zered Brook ! By then , all the men old enough to fight in battle had died in the wilderness , as the Lord had vowed would happen .

ID:	5964
INPUT:	Horregatik , beraien bidea labainkor egingo dut : ilunpera bultzatuak , bertan eroriko dira . Zoritxarra bidaliko diet gainerakontuak hartzeko egunean . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	Therefore I will come to them , and they will fall in darkness , and they will fall in the darkness ; and I will send disaster on them on the day of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , the paths they takewill become slippery.They will be chased through the dark , and there they will fall.For I will bring disaster upon themat the time fixed for their punishment.I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	5965
INPUT:	Bidaliak , beraz , Antiokiara jaitsi ziren eta , biltzarra bildurik , gutuna eman zieten .
PRED:	So they sent them down to Antioch , and they gathered together the assembly of the assembly .
GOLD:	The messengers went at once to Antioch , where they called a general meeting of the believers and delivered the letter .

ID:	5966
INPUT:	alargun gelditu zen , eta bazituen laurogeita lau urte . Ez zen tenplutik ateratzen , eta gau eta egun Jainkoa zerbitzatzen zuen bertan , barau eta otoitz .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when he was forty years old , that he went out of the house of the Lord , and went out of the house of God , and prayed .
GOLD:	Then she lived as a widow to the age of eighty-four . She never left the Temple but stayed there day and night , worshiping God with fasting and prayer .

ID:	5967
INPUT:	Nikodemo zeritzan gizon batek , fariseuen taldekoa eta juduen buruetakoa bera ,
PRED:	One of the Pharisees , a man of the Pharisees , the Pharisees and the Jews ,
GOLD:	There was a man named Nicodemus , a Jewish religious leader who was a Pharisee .

ID:	5968
INPUT:	Orduan , nazio artean sakabanatu eta herrialde artean barreiatuko ditudanean , jakingo dute ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	Then I will scatter them among the nations and scatter them among the countries , and they will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And when I scatter them among the nations , they will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	5969
INPUT:	Liburu Santuetan , hain zuzen , hauxe esana du norbaitek : Zer da gizona , zu hartaz oroitzeko , zer gizakia , zu hartaz arduratzeko ?
PRED:	This is what it is written : “ What is the man who is able to remember him ? What do you think about him ? ”
GOLD:	For in one place the Scriptures say , “ What are mere mortals that you should think about them , or a son of man that you should care for him ?

ID:	5970
INPUT:	Bakea ekarriko dien ituna egingo dut beraiekin , betiko balioko duena . Herrialdean ezarri eta ugaldu egingo ditut . Neure santutegia beraien artean jarriko dut betiko .
PRED:	I will make peace with them , and I will make peace with them for ever , and they will multiply them in the land , and I will make my holy name among them forever .
GOLD:	And I will make a covenant of peace with them , an everlasting covenant . I will give them their land and increase their numbers , and I will put my Temple among them forever .

ID:	5971
INPUT:	Hogeita hamaseiren bat israeldar hil zituzten Aikoek eta hiriko ateetatik harrobietaraino pertsegitu zituzten , maldan behera denak porrokatuz . Israeldarrak adoregabeturik gelditu ziren ; hauen kemena urtu eta ura bezala isuri zen .
PRED:	And the sons of Israel killed the men of Israel , and struck them from the city of the city , as far as the valley of the city ; and the children of Israel were desolate , as the waters of the waters of Israel was dried up .
GOLD:	chased the Israelites from the town gate as far as the quarries , and they killed about thirty-six who were retreating down the slope . The Israelites were paralyzed with fear at this turn of events , and their courage melted away .

ID:	5972
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , begira Israelgo mendietarantz eta hitz egin nire izenean berorien aurka .
PRED:	“ Son of man , look toward the hill country of Israel and prophesy against them .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , turn and face the mountains of Israel and prophesy against them .

ID:	5973
INPUT:	Ez izan horrelakoaz gupidarik ! Horrela ezabatuko duzue errugabearen hilketa Israeldik , eta zoriontsu izango zarete .
PRED:	Do n't know this . If you do this , you will die from their wickedness , and you will be blessed in Israel .
GOLD:	Do not feel sorry for that murderer ! Purge from Israel the guilt of murdering innocent people ; then all will go well with you .

ID:	5974
INPUT:	Lege bera izango duzue oharkabean huts egin duenarentzat , bertakoa nahiz zuen artean bizi den etorkina izan .
PRED:	You must be a law to anyone who does not sin . If you do n't want to live among you , you must live among you .
GOLD:	These same instructions apply both to native-born Israelites and to the foreigners living among you .

ID:	5975
INPUT:	Samsonek esan zien : — Hori egin al duzue ? Ba , nik ez dut etsiko zuei mendeku egin arte .
PRED:	Samson said to them , “ Have you done this thing ? I will not tell you until I have given you . ”
GOLD:	“ Because you did this , ” Samson vowed , “ I wo n't rest until I take my revenge on you ! ”

ID:	5976
INPUT:	Egiptora ihesi
PRED:	The People of Egypt
GOLD:	The Escape to Egypt

ID:	5977
INPUT:	Bazen entzuleen artean Lidia izeneko emakume bat , izatez Tiatirakoa , purpurazko oihalen saleroslea ; Israelen Jainkoa gurtzen zuen . Jaunak barrutik eragin zion , Pauloren hitzak gogoz onar zitzan .
PRED:	And a woman who heard it was written among the women who had been in the name of Tyre , a blue cloth of a blue cloth , and a blue cloth of the Lord , the God of Israel , went out of the spirit of Paul .
GOLD:	One of them was Lydia from Thyatira , a merchant of expensive purple cloth , who worshiped God . As she listened to us , the Lord opened her heart , and she accepted what Paul was saying .

ID:	5978
INPUT:	« Lizuna ikertzera sartu baino lehen , etxea husteko aginduko du apaizak , etxean dagoen guztia kutsa ez dadin ; ondoren , etxea miatzera sartuko da .
PRED:	And the priest shall go into the house , and the priest shall go into the house of the house , and the priest shall not enter into the house , and the house shall enter into the house .
GOLD:	Before the priest goes in to inspect the house , he must have the house emptied so nothing inside will be pronounced ceremonially unclean .

ID:	5979
INPUT:	Ondoren , berrehun eta zazpi urtez bizi izan zen , eta seme-alabak izan zituen .
PRED:	After he had other sons and daughters , he had other sons and daughters .
GOLD:	After the birth of Serug , Reu lived another 207 years and had other sons and daughters .

ID:	5980
INPUT:	SA<unk> KOEI ES<unk> <unk> RIKO HARAGIA ( 8 , 1 — 11 , 1 )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Food Sacrificed to Idols

ID:	5981
INPUT:	Gu , berriz , Jainkoak , Espirituaren egitez eta sinesmenari esker , salbamena emango digun itxaropenez bizi gara .
PRED:	But we will be saved by the Spirit , and by faith , and by faith , and by faith we will be saved .
GOLD:	But we who live by the Spirit eagerly wait to receive by faith the righteousness God has promised to us .

ID:	5982
INPUT:	Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosorrek Babiloniara gatibu eramandako judu asko Jerusalemera eta Judako beste herrietara , nor bere herrira , itzuli zen .
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon will bring many Jews to Babylon and Judah and Judah to their own country .
GOLD:	Here is the list of the Jewish exiles of the provinces who returned from their captivity . King Nebuchadnezzar had deported them to Babylon , but now they returned to Jerusalem and the other towns in Judah where they originally lived .

ID:	5983
INPUT:	Juduak mirarizko seinale eske dabiltza , eta jentilak jakinduria bila ;
PRED:	The Jews seek the signs of the Jews , and the Gentiles seek wisdom .
GOLD:	It is foolish to the Jews , who ask for signs from heaven . And it is foolish to the Greeks , who seek human wisdom .

ID:	5984
INPUT:	Ulertzeko gauza denak uler beza » .
PRED:	He that has ears , let him hear , let him hear .
GOLD:	Anyone with ears to hear should listen and understand . ”

ID:	5985
INPUT:	Jauna , zuri dei egitean , ez dakidala neure ustea huts gerta ! Huts egin biezaie , ordea , beren usteak gaiztoei , gal bitez Herio Leizeko isilpean !
PRED:	When I call to you , I know that I am not ashamed , but I am not ashamed , but the wicked will be put to shame in the name of death .
GOLD:	Silence their lying lips — those proud and arrogant lips that accuse the godly .

ID:	5986
INPUT:	Netziah eta Hatifarenak .
PRED:	the sons of Hallohesh , the sons of Hallohesh , the children of Beeri .
GOLD:	Neziah , and Hatipha .

ID:	5987
INPUT:	« Zuen lehen-semeak oro nireak dira , baita lehen abere-kume arrak ere , zekor nahiz arkume .
PRED:	“ All the firstborn of your firstborn are mine , and all the firstborn of your firstborn , sheep , sheep , sheep , sheep , and sheep .
GOLD:	“ The firstborn of every animal belongs to me , including the firstborn males from your herds of cattle and your flocks of sheep and goats .

ID:	5988
INPUT:	( Mk 15 , 1 ; Lk 23 , 1-2 ; Jn 18 , 28 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus ' Trial before Pilate

ID:	5989
INPUT:	inurriak , herri ahula izan arren , udan beren ogia ziurtatzen dutenak ;
PRED:	For they were a people , and they eat bread , and drink their bread .
GOLD:	Ants — they are n't strong , but they store up food all summer .

ID:	5990
INPUT:	Zuzentasunik geratzen ez
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Misery Turned to Hope

ID:	5991
INPUT:	« Ez duzue bahituran hartuko , ez errota , ez errotarria , bahituran bizia bera hartzea izango bailitzateke hori .
PRED:	“ You shall not enter into the city , neither shall you enter into the city , for it shall be for you to live .
GOLD:	“ It is wrong to take a set of millstones , or even just the upper millstone , as security for a loan , for the owner uses it to make a living .

ID:	5992
INPUT:	Simon Zelote eta Judas Iskariote , Jesus saldu zuena .
PRED:	Simon Peter , Simon Peter , and Judas , who had sold him .
GOLD:	Simon ( the zealot ) , Judas Iscariot ( who later betrayed him ) .

ID:	5993
INPUT:	Hilaraz itzazue , beraz , zeuen baitan mundu honen araberako jarrerak : lizunkeria , zikinkeria , irrits eta grina txarrak eta idolatria den diru-gosea .
PRED:	Therefore , therefore , in this world , in this world , in the same way , in the flesh , in the flesh , and in the flesh , and in the flesh , and in the flesh , and in the flesh , and in the flesh , and in the flesh .
GOLD:	So put to death the sinful , earthly things lurking within you . Have nothing to do with sexual immorality , impurity , lust , and evil desires . Do n't be greedy , for a greedy person is an idolater , worshiping the things of this world .

ID:	5994
INPUT:	Gainera , aker bat eskainiko zaio Jaunari barkamen-oparitzat , eguneroko erre-opari eta isur-opariez gain .
PRED:	And he shall offer one male goat for a sin offering to the Lord , and the drink offering , and the drink offering , and the drink offering .
GOLD:	“ On the first day of each month , you must also offer one male goat for a sin offering to the Lord . This is in addition to the regular burnt offering and its accompanying liquid offering .

ID:	5995
INPUT:	Hogeita hiru urte predikatzen
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The Cup of the

ID:	5996
INPUT:	Diru-bilketa Jerusalemgo kristauen alde
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Instructions

ID:	5997
INPUT:	Arnon erreka ondoan dagoen Aroer hiritik eta lautadaren erdian dagoen hiritik , Madaba lautada osoa Diboneraino
PRED:	And the border of the Arnon , which is in the valley , from the valley of the valley , and from the valley of the valley , even unto the valley of the valley , which is in the valley of the valley .
GOLD:	Their territory extended from Aroer on the edge of the Arnon Gorge ( including the town in the middle of the gorge ) to the plain beyond Medeba , as far as Dibon .

ID:	5998
INPUT:	Alargun gelditu eta benetan bakarrik dagoenak Jainkoarengan jarria du itxaropena , eta etengabe ari zaio eskean , gau eta egun otoitzean .
PRED:	And he that is left in the day , and hath hope in God , and hath hope in him , and hath no hope in the night and night .
GOLD:	Now a true widow , a woman who is truly alone in this world , has placed her hope in God . She prays night and day , asking God for his help .

ID:	5999
INPUT:	Hamateko sarreratik Araba itsasorainoko lurraldea berreskuratu zuen Israelentzat , Gat-Heferreko Amitairen seme Jonas bere zerbitzari profetaren bidez Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak , esana zuen bezala .
PRED:	And he took the land from the sea to the sea of the sea , to the border of the sea , to the end of the sea , as the Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	Jeroboam II recovered the territories of Israel between Lebo-hamath and the Dead Sea , just as the Lord , the God of Israel , had promised through Jonah son of Amittai , the prophet from Gath-hepher .

ID:	6000
INPUT:	Bizirik geldituriko israeldarrak , herri askotan sakabanatuak , lehoia basapiztien artean bezala , lehoikumea ardien artean bezalaizango dira : edonon sartzen direlarik , harrapatu eta txikitu egiten dute , eta ez da inorhaien eskutik libratuko .
PRED:	And the sons of Israel shall live in the midst of many peoples , as a lion among the lion , and they shall be as a lion among the lion , as a lion , and they shall be taken from the hand of a lion , and they shall not be delivered from their hand .
GOLD:	Then the remnant left in Israelwill take their place among the nations.They will be like dew sent by the Lordor like rain falling on the grass , which no one can hold backand no one can restrain .

ID:	6001
INPUT:	« Simeon eta Lebi anaiakindarkeria erabiltzeko bat datoz .
PRED:	“ Come to Simon and Leah and Leah .
GOLD:	“ Simeon and Levi are two of a kind ; their weapons are instruments of violence .

ID:	6002
INPUT:	Nola elurraren freskotasuna uzta-garaian , hala mezulari fidagarria igorlearentzat : ugazaba indarberritu egiten du .
PRED:	As in the days of the earth , so is the word of the earth , so is the word of the word , and the strength of many .
GOLD:	Trustworthy messengers refresh like snow in summer.They revive the spirit of their employer .

ID:	6003
INPUT:	batzarrak harrikatu eta ezpataz hilko ditu ; seme-alabak hilko dizkie eta etxeak erreko .
PRED:	And he shall take up the assembly , and shall die ; and his sons shall die , and his house shall be burned with the sword .
GOLD:	For their enemies will stone them and kill them with swords . They will butcher their sons and daughters and burn their homes .

ID:	6004
INPUT:	Aberatsek ur bilabidaltzen dituzte morroiak : badoaz putzuetara , baina urik ez , eta ontziak hutsik itzuli behar , lotsaz gorri eta burumakur .
PRED:	My children , let them hear , and let their servants go into the well , and let them go away , and let them be ashamed , and let their heads be ashamed .
GOLD:	The nobles send servants to get water , but all the wells are dry.The servants return with empty pitchers , confused and desperate , covering their heads in grief .

ID:	6005
INPUT:	Etsaien aurrean ihes eragin diguzu , eta gorroto digutenek larrutu egiten gaituzte .
PRED:	You have fled before our enemies , and you hate us .
GOLD:	You have butchered us like sheepand scattered us among the nations .

ID:	6006
INPUT:	Daviden mutilak eta Joab irtenaldi bat egitetik zetozen , harrapakin ugari zekartela . Abner ez zegoen Hebronen Davidekin , ordurako joana baitzen bakean .
PRED:	And the young men went out of the place of David and Joab , and they were with him , but Abner did not go with him in Hebron .
GOLD:	But just after David had sent Abner away in safety , Joab and some of David 's troops returned from a raid , bringing much plunder with them .

ID:	6007
INPUT:	Anitz mirari eta egintza harrigarri gertatzen ziren herrian apostoluen eskuz . Fededun guztiak Salomonen aterpean bildu ohi ziren gogo batez ;
PRED:	And many signs and wonders came to the people in the city , and in the sight of the apostles , and all the saints gathered together to Solomon for a long time .
GOLD:	The apostles were performing many miraculous signs and wonders among the people . And all the believers were meeting regularly at the Temple in the area known as Solomon 's Colonnade .

ID:	6008
INPUT:	Neuk ere ez nuen ezagutzen ; baina ni urez bataiatzera etorri banaiz , bera Israel herriari agerrarazteko izan da » .
PRED:	I did not know him , but I came to baptized with water , so that he might be revealed to the people Israel . ”
GOLD:	I did not recognize him as the Messiah , but I have been baptizing with water so that he might be revealed to Israel . ”

ID:	6009
INPUT:	Zure legeek egiten naute ulertzeko gai ; horregatik , gorroto dut jokabide maltzur oro .
PRED:	I hate your law , so that I hate you .
GOLD:	Your commandments give me understanding ; no wonder I hate every false way of life .

ID:	6010
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , hitz egin nire izenean eta adierazi nire , Jainko Jaun honen , mezua : « Egin aienezoritxarreko egunarengatik !
PRED:	“ Son of man , prophesy in my name , and say to them , ‘ Thus says the Lord God , “ Tell them , ‘ Thus says the Lord God , for the day of trouble .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , prophesy and give this message from the Sovereign Lord : “ Weep and wailfor that day ,

ID:	6011
INPUT:	Jeroboamek , gainera , Judan egin ohi zenaren antzeko jai bat egin zuen zortzigarren hilabeteko hamabosgarren egunean . Betelen ere bera igo zen aldarera , berak egindako zekor-irudiei opariak eskaintzera , eta bertan izendatu zituen berak eginiko kultu-lekuetako apaizak .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the fifth day of the seventh month , in the fifth month , in the fifth month , in the fifth month , in the fifth month , in the tenth month of Jeroboam , that he made a feast for himself , and he made a sacrifice to the priests .
GOLD:	And Jeroboam instituted a religious festival in Bethel , held on the fifteenth day of the eighth month , in imitation of the annual Festival of Shelters in Judah . There at Bethel he himself offered sacrifices to the calves he had made , and he appointed priests for the pagan shrines he had made .

ID:	6012
INPUT:	Orduan , zaharretariko batek esan zidan : « Ez egin negarrik ; hara , Judaren leinuko lehoiak , Daviden kimuak eskuratu du garaipena , eta beronek irekiko ditu liburua eta zazpi zigiluak » .
PRED:	Then one of the elders of the elders said to me , “ Do n't weep . The lion of Judah has stretched out his hands to David , the lion of Judah , and his hands will be opened . ”
GOLD:	But one of the twenty-four elders said to me , “ Stop weeping ! Look , the Lion of the tribe of Judah , the heir to David 's throne , has won the victory . He is worthy to open the scroll and its seven seals . ”

ID:	6013
INPUT:	ezagut dezan munduak zure nagusitza , jentil-herriek zure garaipena .
PRED:	Let the earth know your power , and let the nations go to you .
GOLD:	May the nations praise you , O God.Yes , may all the nations praise you .

ID:	6014
INPUT:	Zoritxarrekoa aitari esaten diona : « Zergatik sortu ninduzun ? » , eta amari : « Zergatikekarri ninduzun mundura ? »
PRED:	Woe to my father , saying , “ Why have you brought me up ? ” And she said to the woman , “ Why have you brought me into the world ? ”
GOLD:	How terrible it would be if a newborn baby said to its father , ‘ Why was I born ? 'or if it said to its mother , ‘ Why did you make me this way ? ' ”

ID:	6015
INPUT:	eta pozten naiz han ez izanaz , zeuen onerako izango baita , horrela sinets dezazuen . Goazen , bada , haren etxera .
PRED:	I rejoice there , that you may not be glad , because you may believe it . So let 's go home to his house .
GOLD:	And for your sakes , I 'm glad I was n't there , for now you will really believe . Come , let 's go see him . ”

ID:	6016
INPUT:	Hogeita hamabost kilo urre garbi erabili zituen argimutila eta hornigaiak egiteko .
PRED:	And he made two hundred talents of pure gold , and he made the light for the light .
GOLD:	The entire lampstand , along with its accessories , was made from 75 pounds of pure gold .

ID:	6017
INPUT:	Bai , zuek , israeldarrok , nire mendi santuanzigor-kopatik edan zenuten bezala , hala beharko dute edannazio guztiek etengabe , azken hondarreraino edan ere . Eta aztarnarik utzi gabegalduko dira .
PRED:	For you , house of Israel , will drink from my holy mountain , as you drink from my holy mountain , and all the nations will drink , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Just as you swallowed up my peopleon my holy mountain , so you and the surrounding nationswill swallow the punishment I pour out on you.Yes , all you nations will drink and staggerand disappear from history .

ID:	6018
INPUT:	Non duk , Herio , heure garaipena ? Non heure eztena ?
PRED:	Where is your salvation ? Where is your salvation ? Where is your salvation ?
GOLD:	O death , where is your victory ? O death , where is your sting ? ”

ID:	6019
INPUT:	Ez naiz inoiz ere etxe batean bizi izan , israeldarrak Egiptotik atera nituenetik egundaino ; bizilekutzat oihal-etxola nuela ibilia naiz .
PRED:	I did not live in the house of Israel from the house of Israel to the day of Egypt to the day of the land of Egypt , to the place where I live .
GOLD:	I have never lived in a house , from the day I brought the Israelites out of Egypt until this very day . I have always moved from one place to another with a tent and a Tabernacle as my dwelling .

ID:	6020
INPUT:	Orduan , Judak esan zion Onani : « Ezkon zaitez zeure anaiaren emaztearekin , eta bete koinatuari dagokion eginbidea , anaiari ondorengoa emateko » .
PRED:	Judah said to him , “ Take your wife 's wife , and take her to your brother 's wife , and do what is right to his brother 's son . ”
GOLD:	Then Judah said to Er 's brother Onan , “ Go and marry Tamar , as our law requires of the brother of a man who has died . You must produce an heir for your brother . ”

ID:	6021
INPUT:	Eta zuek Jaunarengandik aldentzen zarete gaur ! Zuek gaur beraren kontra errebelatzeagatik , Jauna bihar haserretu egingo da Israel herri osoarekin .
PRED:	You have turned away from the Lord . You have turned away from the Lord . You have been angry with all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	And yet today you are turning away from following the Lord . If you rebel against the Lord today , he will be angry with all of us tomorrow .

ID:	6022
INPUT:	Diakonoak
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	The Truths of Our Faith

ID:	6023
INPUT:	Ez nuen hartu janari goxorik , ez haragirik , ez ardorik , eta ez nuen erabili usain gozoko lurrinik ere , hiru asteak amaitu arte .
PRED:	I did not eat bread , nor wine , nor wine , nor wine , nor wine , until I loved three months .
GOLD:	All that time I had eaten no rich food . No meat or wine crossed my lips , and I used no fragrant lotions until those three weeks had passed .

ID:	6024
INPUT:	( Mt 4 , 1-11 ; Mk 1 , 12-13 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	Jesus Rejected at Nazareth

ID:	6025
INPUT:	Hona , bada , Jaunak Ageo profetaren bidez eman zuen mezua :
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the prophet , saying ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord sent this message through the prophet Haggai :

ID:	6026
INPUT:	Hezur guztiak zaintzen dizkio , bat bakarra ere ez diote hautsiko .
PRED:	And all the bones shall be put to death , and they shall not break it .
GOLD:	Calamity will surely destroy the wicked , and those who hate the righteous will be punished .

ID:	6027
INPUT:	Saia zaitez Jainkoaren aurrean onesgarri agertzen , zertan lotsaturik ez duen langilea bezala , egiaren mezua zuzen irakasten duena bezala .
PRED:	Be careful to do what is right in the sight of God , as if it is not ashamed , as it is not ashamed of the word of God .
GOLD:	Work hard so you can present yourself to God and receive his approval . Be a good worker , one who does not need to be ashamed and who correctly explains the word of truth .

ID:	6028
INPUT:	Bularreko haurrasuge-zuloetan jolastuko da , sugegorri-habian sartuko du eskua .
PRED:	And the child shall run into the field , and he shall enter into his hand , and his hand shall enter into his hand .
GOLD:	The baby will play safely near the hole of a cobra.Yes , a little child will put its hand in a nest of deadly snakes without harm .

ID:	6029
INPUT:	Neure in<unk> dira jaitsi naiz , ibarretako landaretza ikustera , mahastiak kimuberritzen , granadondoak loratzen ikustera .
PRED:	I came down to my strength , and see the fig tree in the field , and I saw the fig tree , and the fig trees of the trees .
GOLD:	I went down to the grove of walnut treesand out to the valley to see the new spring growth , to see whether the grapevines had buddedor the pomegranates were in bloom .

ID:	6030
INPUT:	garbitzeko aginduko du , eta beste zazpi egunez aparte edukiko .
PRED:	And he shall make atonement for him , and he shall make him clean seven days .
GOLD:	the priest will order the object to be washed and then quarantined for seven more days .

ID:	6031
INPUT:	Kristorengan jarria dugun itxaropenak bizitza honetarako bakarrik balio badu , gizaki guztietan errukarrienak gara .
PRED:	But if we hope in Christ , we will be saved by all men .
GOLD:	And if our hope in Christ is only for this life , we are more to be pitied than anyone in the world .

ID:	6032
INPUT:	Zeruek Jainkoaren aintza kontatzen dute , ortziak haren eskuen lana adierazten .
PRED:	But the glory of God is in heaven , but the glory of his hands is given to them .
GOLD:	Day after day they continue to speak ; night after night they make him known .

ID:	6033
INPUT:	« Hilabete beraren hamabostean Legamia gabeko Ogien Jaia ospatuko duzue Jaunaren ohorez . Zazpi egunez legamia gabeko ogia jango duzue .
PRED:	“ On the first month of the month of the month , in the month of the month , you shall eat the bread of the Lord ; seven days you shall eat unleavened bread .
GOLD:	On the next day , the fifteenth day of the month , you must begin celebrating the Festival of Unleavened Bread . This festival to the Lord continues for seven days , and during that time the bread you eat must be made without yeast .

ID:	6034
INPUT:	Lurra danbadaka zapaltzen zutengudari-botaketa odolez zikinduriko jantziaksuak erreko ditu eta irentsiko .
PRED:	And they shall drink the waters of the earth , and cast down the blood of the earth ; and they shall burn their garments with fire , and shall devour them .
GOLD:	For you will break the yoke of their slaveryand lift the heavy burden from their shoulders.You will break the oppressor 's rod , just as you did when you destroyed the army of Midian .

ID:	6035
INPUT:	ez lurrarengatik , haren oin-aulkia baita ; ezta Jerusalemengatik ere , Errege handiaren hiria baita .
PRED:	For his throne is not for the earth , for his throne is not for the sake of Jerusalem ; for the city of the king is great .
GOLD:	And do not say , ‘ By the earth ! ' because the earth is his footstool . And do not say , ‘ By Jerusalem ! ' for Jerusalem is the city of the great King .

ID:	6036
INPUT:	Orduan , parabola hau esan zion Jesusek herriari : « Gizon batek mahastia landatu zuen eta , nekazari batzuei errentan utzirik , urrutira joan zen aldi baterako .
PRED:	Then Jesus told the people this parable , “ A man planted a vineyard , and he left some of the vineyard and went to a long time .
GOLD:	Now Jesus turned to the people again and told them this story : “ A man planted a vineyard , leased it to tenant farmers , and moved to another country to live for several years .

ID:	6037
INPUT:	Hil , denok hil behar dugu ; lurrera isuri eta berriro bildu ezin den ura bezala gara . Jainkoak , aldiz , ez du bizia kentzen ; aitzitik , erabaki du zuk atzerriratua berak ez atzerriratzea .
PRED:	We must die , and we will die . We will not be gathered to the ground . But God will not take away the life of the earth , but he will not take away the remnant of the nations .
GOLD:	All of us must die eventually . Our lives are like water spilled out on the ground , which can not be gathered up again . But God does not just sweep life away ; instead , he devises ways to bring us back when we have been separated from him .

ID:	6038
INPUT:	salbatuko gintuelagure etsaien menpetik , gorroto gaituzten guztien eskutik ;
PRED:	He will save us from our enemies , from all those who hate us .
GOLD:	Now we will be saved from our enemiesand from all who hate us .

ID:	6039
INPUT:	ilargi betearen aurpegia iluntzen du , haren gain bere hodeia hedatuz ;
PRED:	He gives light to the moon , and his cloud spread out his clouds .
GOLD:	He covers the face of the moon , shrouding it with his clouds .

ID:	6040
INPUT:	Israeldarrok , ez gero profanatu nire izen santua , baizik eta aitortu santua naizela . Neu naiz Jauna , neuretzat sagaratzen zaituztedana ,
PRED:	And you , house of Israel , do not make my holy name holy , but I am the Lord , who makes you holy .
GOLD:	Do not bring shame on my holy name , for I will display my holiness among the people of Israel . I am the Lord who makes you holy .

ID:	6041
INPUT:	Orduan jabetu ziren ez ziela esan ogi-legamiarekin kontuz ibiltzeko , fariseu eta saduzearren irakaspenekin baizik .
PRED:	And they did not know that they were not able to speak with the yeast of bread , but of the Pharisees and the Pharisees .
GOLD:	Then at last they understood that he was n't speaking about the yeast in bread , but about the deceptive teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees .

ID:	6042
INPUT:	« Ez da israeldarren artean prostituzio sakratura emaniko inor izango , ez gizonezkorik , ez emakumezkorik .
PRED:	“ There shall be no man among the sons of Israel , nor shall any man be a daughter of man , nor woman .
GOLD:	When you are bringing an offering to fulfill a vow , you must not bring to the house of the Lord your God any offering from the earnings of a prostitute , whether a man or a woman , for both are detestable to the Lord your God .

ID:	6043
INPUT:	Festaburuetan Jaunari sagaratzeko Jerusalemera eramaten diren ardiak bezain ugari izango dira hiri hondatuak beteko dituzten gizataldeak ; orduan jakingo dute denek ni naizela Jauna » .
PRED:	And they shall be as sheep in the head of the Lord in Jerusalem , and they shall be as the sheep of the flock , and they shall know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	They will be as numerous as the sacred flocks that fill Jerusalem 's streets at the time of her festivals . The ruined cities will be crowded with people once more , and everyone will know that I am the Lord . ”

ID:	6044
INPUT:	Itzul belarria niregana , Jauna , eta entzun . Zabaldu begiak , Jauna , eta ikusi . Entzun nolako irainak zuzendu dizkizun Senakeribek zuri , Jainko bizi horri .
PRED:	Return to me , Lord , and hear my voice ; open your eyes , Lord , and open your eyes , because you have heard the words of the living God .
GOLD:	Bend down , O Lord , and listen ! Open your eyes , O Lord , and see ! Listen to Sennacherib 's words of defiance against the living God .

ID:	6045
INPUT:	Eman dezagun , ordea , emazteak , artean senarraren etxean bizi dela , botoz nahiz edozein zin-hitzez bere burua lotzen duela .
PRED:	But let her live among her husband , and let her live in the house of her husband , and let her live in her house , or in her mouth .
GOLD:	If her husband hears of it and does not object to it , her vow or pledge will stand .

ID:	6046
INPUT:	Jesusen senideek sinetsi ez
PRED:	Jesus and His disciples
GOLD:	Jesus and His Brothers

ID:	6047
INPUT:	Egun batez esan zion Noemik Ruti : — Ez ote dizut egokitu behar bizitzan zorioneko egingo zaituen etxerik ?
PRED:	Then Ruth said to Ruth , “ If I do n't remember you , I will not remember you ? ”
GOLD:	One day Naomi said to Ruth , “ My daughter , it 's time that I found a permanent home for you , so that you will be provided for .

ID:	6048
INPUT:	Ez ! Ardo berria zahagi berrietan sartu behar da .
PRED:	The new wine will not enter into a new wine .
GOLD:	New wine must be stored in new wineskins .

ID:	6049
INPUT:	hau esango diozu : “ Jakob zure zerbitzariarena ; Esauri bidaltzen dion oparia da ; eta bera dator atzetik ” » .
PRED:	You shall say to them , ‘ Jacob your servant Esau , whom he sent to Esau , and he is coming from him . '
GOLD:	Jacob gave the same instructions to the second and third herdsmen and to all who followed behind the herds : “ You must say the same thing to Esau when you meet him .

ID:	6050
INPUT:	Horra hor , bada , Eleazar apaizak , Nunen seme Josuek eta israeldar leinuetako senitarteburuek Xilon , Jaunaren aurrean , elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran zotz eginez , izendatu zituzten ondareak . Horrela burutu zuten lurraldearen banaketa .
PRED:	These are the priests , Eleazar the son of Nun , and the heads of the tribes of Israel , and the heads of the children of Israel , in Shiloh , and in the sight of the Lord , according to their inheritance . So they divided their inheritance .
GOLD:	These are the territories that Eleazar the priest , Joshua son of Nun , and the tribal leaders allocated as grants of land to the tribes of Israel by casting sacred lots in the presence of the Lord at the entrance of the Tabernacle at Shiloh . So the division of the land was completed .

ID:	6051
INPUT:	Ebaki beza Jaunak ezpain lausengari oro , handikeriaz mintzo diren mihiak .
PRED:	May the Lord speak with all his words , and the tongue of his mouth shall speak with all his tongue .
GOLD:	They say , “ We will lie to our hearts ' content.Our lips are our own — who can stop us ? ”

ID:	6052
INPUT:	Aita-amak harriturik zeuden Simeonek haurraz esaten zuenarengatik .
PRED:	And the mother of Shechem took hold of her mother , for her mother 's sake .
GOLD:	Jesus ' parents were amazed at what was being said about him .

ID:	6053
INPUT:	« Egin akazia-zurezko kutxa : metro bat eta hogeita bost zentimetro luze , hirurogeita hamabost zentimetro zabal eta beste hainbeste gora izango da .
PRED:	And thou shalt make the ark of acacia wood : two cubits long and five cubits , and a half cubits long , and a half cubits wide , and a half the breadth thereof .
GOLD:	“ Have the people make an Ark of acacia wood — a sacred chest 45 inches long , 27 inches wide , and 27 inches high .

ID:	6054
INPUT:	Zeukan guztia ere errekaz beste aldera igaroarazi zuen .
PRED:	And he made all that he had done to the other side of the altar .
GOLD:	This left Jacob all alone in the camp , and a man came and wrestled with him until the dawn began to break .

ID:	6055
INPUT:	Jendea hiri handietara aldarazi zuen lurraldearen ertz batetik bestera .
PRED:	And he brought the people into the land of the great city , and put them on the other side of the land .
GOLD:	As for the people , he made them all slaves , from one end of Egypt to the other .

ID:	6056
INPUT:	Efraimdarrek menderatu duteAmalek ; haien atzetik benjamindarrak datoz , beraien gudari artean . Makirren senitartetik datozzure gudalburuaketa Zabulonengandikaginte-makila dutenak .
PRED:	And the sons of Ephraim came out of the sons of Benjamin , and the men of Benjamin came out of their midst ; and the prince of their fathers came out of the house of Manasseh , and of the princes of the princes of Zebulun , and of the princes of Zebulun .
GOLD:	They came down from Ephraim — a land that once belonged to the Amalekites ; they followed you , Benjamin , with your troops.From Makir the commanders marched down ; from Zebulun came those who carry a commander 's staff .

ID:	6057
INPUT:	Ondoren , begiak jasorik , lau adar ikusi nituen .
PRED:	Then I lifted up my eyes , and saw four horns .
GOLD:	When I looked again , I saw a man with a measuring line in his hand .

ID:	6058
INPUT:	Geroago , Artaxerxesen garaian , <unk> lam , Mitridates , Tabeel eta beste funtzionarioek Pertsiako errege Artaxerxesi idatzi zioten ; gutuna arameera-idazkeraz eta <unk> keraz idatzia zegoen .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the days of Asher , in the days of Asher , in the days of the king of Persia , and in the days of the king of Persia , and in the days of the king of Persia , in the days of Persia , and in the days of the king of Persia .
GOLD:	Even later , during the reign of King Artaxerxes of Persia , the enemies of Judah , led by Bishlam , Mithredath , and Tabeel , sent a letter to Artaxerxes in the Aramaic language , and it was translated for the king .

ID:	6059
INPUT:	Badator garaia , bertan da eguna ! Eroslea ez dadila poz , saltzailea ez dadila atsekabe , guztiak harrapatuko baititu nire suminak .
PRED:	The time is coming , and the army is not glad ; I will not be glad , because all my wrath will be taken away .
GOLD:	Yes , the time has come ; the day is here ! Buyers should not rejoice over bargains , nor sellers grieve over losses , for all of them will fallunder my terrible anger .

ID:	6060
INPUT:	Eskaintzaileak , eskua buruan ezarri ondoren , elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran hilko du ; gero , apaizek , Aaronen ondorengoek , haren odolaz aldarea zipriztinduko dute alde guztietatik .
PRED:	And he shall lay his hand on the head of the tent of meeting , and the sons of Aaron , and the sons of Aaron , and the sons of Aaron , and the sons of Aaron shall sprinkle the blood of the altar round about .
GOLD:	Lay your hand on the animal 's head , and slaughter it at the entrance of the Tabernacle . Then Aaron 's sons , the priests , will splatter its blood against all sides of the altar .

ID:	6061
INPUT:	Kanta Jaunari , gauza harrigarriak egin baititu ; mundu osoan jakin bezateharen berri .
PRED:	Sing to the Lord , for he has done great things in all the earth .
GOLD:	Sing to the Lord , for he has done wonderful things.Make known his praise around the world .

ID:	6062
INPUT:	Izan ere , zer axola zaizkio etxekoak , hil eta gero , bere hilabete-kopurua amaitu ondoren ?
PRED:	For what does the house be sick , and the house is dead , and the body of his own months ?
GOLD:	For they will not care what happens to their familyafter they are dead .

ID:	6063
INPUT:	Jesusek , berriz , erantzun zion : — Nor da nire ama eta zein nire anai-arrebak ?
PRED:	Jesus answered , “ Who is my mother and my brothers ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus asked , “ Who is my mother ? Who are my brothers ? ”

ID:	6064
INPUT:	« Zuk , Israel , Jakoben herri horrek , ez didazu dei egin , nitaz asperturik .
PRED:	“ You are the people of Israel , Jacob , and you have not called me .
GOLD:	“ But , dear family of Jacob , you refuse to ask for my help.You have grown tired of me , O Israel !

ID:	6065
INPUT:	Zazpi mila handiki ere eraman zituen Babiloniako erregeak , baita mila errementari eta sarrailgile ere , denak gudari izateko gai . Babiloniara eraman zituen denak gatibu .
PRED:	And the king of Babylon took seven thousand thousand seven thousand seven thousand and seven thousand , and those who were left in the land of Babylon , and all of them that were carried away to Babylon .
GOLD:	He also exiled 7,000 of the best troops and 1,000 craftsmen and artisans , all of whom were strong and fit for war .

ID:	6066
INPUT:	erreinuaren oinordeko zirenak , berriz , kanpora , ilunpetara , botako ditu Jainkoak . Negarra eta hortz-karraska izango dira han » .
PRED:	But those who are in the kingdom will be cast into the darkness , and they will be cast into the darkness . ”
GOLD:	But many Israelites — those for whom the Kingdom was prepared — will be thrown into outer darkness , where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . ”

ID:	6067
INPUT:	Ez egin jaramonik ! Jarri Babiloniako erregearen menpe , eta biziko zarete . Zertan bihurtu herri hau hondakin-pila ?
PRED:	Do n't listen to me , but you will live in the hand of the king of Babylon , and you will live . Why have this people become a desolation ?
GOLD:	Do not listen to them . Surrender to the king of Babylon , and you will live . Why should this whole city be destroyed ?

ID:	6068
INPUT:	Gertakari guztiotaz mintzo ziren elkarrekin .
PRED:	And all these things came to the congregation , and all these things were with them .
GOLD:	As they walked along they were talking about everything that had happened .

ID:	6069
INPUT:	Jainkoaren hitzak eta gure otoitzak sakratu bihurtzen baitu .
PRED:	For the words of our God and our prayer is turned away .
GOLD:	For we know it is made acceptable by the word of God and prayer .

ID:	6070
INPUT:	Hiria eta bertan den guztia erabat suntsitu behar da Jaunaren ohorez . Rahab emagaldua eta beronen etxean direnak bakarrik geldituko dira bizirik , guk bidalitako mandatariak gorde zituelako .
PRED:	and all the cities of the city shall be destroyed , and the woman that is in her house shall be left in her house , and the messengers that are in her house shall be sent to us .
GOLD:	Jericho and everything in it must be completely destroyed as an offering to the Lord . Only Rahab the prostitute and the others in her house will be spared , for she protected our spies .

ID:	6071
INPUT:	Bigarren ikuskaria : adarrak eta errementariak
PRED:	A vision and a vision
GOLD:	Future Prosperity of Jerusalem

ID:	6072
INPUT:	Dalila , egunero , nazkatzeraino galdezka ari zitzaionez , bizitzaz ere asperturik ,
PRED:	And it came to pass on the day that he began to ask him , that he might not be saved .
GOLD:	She tormented him with her nagging day after day until he was sick to death of it .

ID:	6073
INPUT:	Pilato barrura sartu zen berriro eta , Jesusi deituz , galdegin zion : — Zu al zara juduen erregea ?
PRED:	Then Pilate went into the spirit and called Jesus , “ Are you the King of the Jews ? ”
GOLD:	Then Pilate went back into his headquarters and called for Jesus to be brought to him . “ Are you the king of the Jews ? ” he asked him .

ID:	6074
INPUT:	David Saulengana joaten zen eta Belenera etortzen , aitaren artaldea zaintzera .
PRED:	And David went to Saul and came to Bethlehem , and came to Bethlehem , to keep the flock of his father 's flock .
GOLD:	but David went back and forth so he could help his father with the sheep in Bethlehem .

ID:	6075
INPUT:	Eliren semeek oker jokatu
PRED:	Elisha 's sons
GOLD:	Eli 's Wicked Sons

ID:	6076
INPUT:	Haien asmoaksuge-arrautzak bezain zital : arrautzok jaten dituenahil egiten da , <unk> katzen dituenarisugegorria ateratzen . Haien emaitzakarmiarma-sareen antzeko : hauekin inor ezin jantzi , ez estali . Egintza guztiak gaiztoak dituzte , gogorkeria besterik ez dute egiten .
PRED:	Their arrows are like a serpent , and the fire of the fire is like the fire of the fire , and the spirit of the spirit of the Spirit , and the spirit of them is like the spirit of the Spirit ; and they do not do all their works .
GOLD:	They hatch deadly snakesand weave spiders ' webs.Whoever eats their eggs will die ; whoever cracks them will hatch a viper .

ID:	6077
INPUT:	Hitzok entzutean , ikasleek , erabat nahasturik , honela zioten : — Nor salba daiteke , orduan ?
PRED:	When the disciples heard this , they said , “ Who can be saved ? ”
GOLD:	The disciples were astounded . “ Then who in the world can be saved ? ” they asked .

ID:	6078
INPUT:	Halaxe gu ere : adingabekoak ginen bitartean , munduan agintzen duten indarren menpe geunden .
PRED:	We also said to us , “ We were weak in the world . We had power over the world . ”
GOLD:	And that 's the way it was with us before Christ came . We were like children ; we were slaves to the basic spiritual principles of this world .

ID:	6079
INPUT:	Oraindik fariseuak bildurik zeudela , Jesusek galdera hau egin zien :
PRED:	When the Pharisees were gathered together , Jesus asked them ,
GOLD:	Then , surrounded by the Pharisees , Jesus asked them a question :

ID:	6080
INPUT:	Eliasek erantzun : — Bere zerbitzari nauen Jaun ahalguztiduna bizi dela bezain egia da , ni gaur bertan agertuko naizela Akaben aurrera .
PRED:	Elijah answered , “ As the Lord of hosts lives , I will see that I am the Lord of hosts . ”
GOLD:	But Elijah said , “ I swear by the Lord Almighty , in whose presence I stand , that I will present myself to Ahab this very day . ”

ID:	6081
INPUT:	Israeldarrak , Hor menditik abiaturik , Tzalmonara iritsi ziren ;
PRED:	And the children of Israel went up from Mount Sinai , and came to Mount Sinai .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the Israelites left Mount Hor and camped at Zalmonah .

ID:	6082
INPUT:	Bai , nola urak itsasoa , hala beteko du lurraJaunaren aintzaren ezagupenak .
PRED:	As the waters of the sea , so shall the glory of the Lord be made known .
GOLD:	For as the waters fill the sea , the earth will be filled with an awarenessof the glory of the Lord .

ID:	6083
INPUT:	Guregana bedi Jaunaren , gure Jainkoaren , gozoa ! Burutu bitza ongi gure eginbeharrak , burutu ongi gure eginbehar guztiak !
PRED:	Let us go to the Lord our God , and let us rejoice in our own heart , and let us know all our works .
GOLD:	And may the Lord our God show us his approvaland make our efforts successful.Yes , make our efforts successful !

ID:	6084
INPUT:	« Baina kontuz ! Ez gero engainatu zeuen buruak , ez saihestu Jaunarengandik , jainko arrotzak gurtuz eta haien aurrean ahuspeztuz ;
PRED:	“ Do n't turn away from the Lord . Do n't turn away from the Lord and worship other gods and worship them .
GOLD:	“ But be careful . Do n't let your heart be deceived so that you turn away from the Lord and serve and worship other gods .

ID:	6085
INPUT:	Jesusek entzun eta esan zien : — Ez dute osasundunek behar sendagilea , gaixoek baizik .
PRED:	Jesus heard them and said to them , “ Those who are sick must not be healed , but those who are sick . ”
GOLD:	When Jesus heard this , he said , “ Healthy people do n't need a doctor — sick people do . ”

ID:	6086
INPUT:	Nolanahi ere , sekula ez da berrogei zigorrada baino gehiago emango , zigorraldia gogorregia gerta eta herritarra denen aurrean laidotua geldi ez dadin .
PRED:	How can it be better for forty days , that it may be more than forty days , that it may be taken away from the people of the land , that it may not be put to death .
GOLD:	But never give more than forty lashes ; more than forty lashes would publicly humiliate your neighbor .

ID:	6087
INPUT:	Zatozkit zeure gupidaz , biziberri nadin , zure irakaspena baitut gozamen !
PRED:	Come to me , O Lord , for I have kept your law , but I have kept your law .
GOLD:	Surround me with your tender mercies so I may live , for your instructions are my delight .

ID:	6088
INPUT:	Lege-maisu eta fariseuak beren onetik aterata gelditu ziren , eta Jesusi zer egingo ari ziren beren artean .
PRED:	And the Pharisees and the Pharisees stood , and they stood among them , and they told him what they had done .
GOLD:	At this , the enemies of Jesus were wild with rage and began to discuss what to do with him .

ID:	6089
INPUT:	Zuek bertan bizi zinetela izan ez zituen atsedenaldiak , bertan behera utzia egongo den aldian beteko ditu .
PRED:	The rest of you who lived in it will not leave them in the high places .
GOLD:	As long as the land lies in ruins , it will enjoy the rest you never allowed it to take every seventh year while you lived in it .

ID:	6090
INPUT:	Eta loturik , beren jantzi eta guzti , <unk> ka , soingaineko eta burukoekin , labeko su bizira jaurti zituzten .
PRED:	And they tore their clothes , and put them on their heads , and they cast them into the fire .
GOLD:	So they tied them up and threw them into the furnace , fully dressed in their pants , turbans , robes , and other garments .

ID:	6091
INPUT:	Mahastiaren maite-kanta
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	A Song about the

ID:	6092
INPUT:	Hau dio Jainko Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak : « Geldi eta lasai egoteada zuen salbabidea ; patxada eta konfiantza , zuen indarra » . Ez duzue , ordea , hala nahi izan ,
PRED:	The Sovereign Lord , the God of Israel , says to them , “ Stay at rest , and trust in you , but you do not want to trust in your power . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord , the Holy One of Israel , says : “ Only in returning to meand resting in me will you be saved.In quietness and confidence is your strength.But you would have none of it .

ID:	6093
INPUT:	Elihuren hirugarren hitzaldia ( 35 , <unk> )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Elihu Reminds Job of God 's Justice

ID:	6094
INPUT:	« Hori guztia lege izango duzue belaunez belaun , biziko zareten edonon .
PRED:	“ This is the law that you are to be a law throughout your generations throughout your generations .
GOLD:	These are legal requirements for you to observe from generation to generation , wherever you may live .

ID:	6095
INPUT:	Izan ere , honela dio Jaunak Judako errege Josiasen seme eta ondorengo Xalum erregeari buruz : « Joan da hemendik eta ez da berriro itzuliko .
PRED:	For thus says the Lord : The son of Josiah , king of Judah , king of Judah , and he shall return again , and shall not return again .
GOLD:	For this is what the Lord says about Jehoahaz , who succeeded his father , King Josiah , and was taken away as a captive : “ He will never return .

ID:	6096
INPUT:	dorre trinkoaketa harresi menderagaitzak ,
PRED:	He will cut down the walls of the high walls , and all the mountains will be cut down .
GOLD:	He will break down every high towerand every fortified wall .

ID:	6097
INPUT:	Morroiak onartu zuen proposamena , eta hamar eguneko proba egin zuen haiekin .
PRED:	And the servant heard the word of the prophet , and he sent him ten days .
GOLD:	The attendant agreed to Daniel 's suggestion and tested them for ten days .

ID:	6098
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	The Lord spoke to Moses , saying ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	6099
INPUT:	Lur eman ondoren , esan zien bere semeei : — Ni hil nadinean , ehortz nazazue Jainkoaren gizona ehortzia dagoeneko hilobian . Ezarri nire hezurrak haren hezurren ondoan .
PRED:	And he brought them into the earth , and said unto his sons , I am dead ; and put me in the tomb of the man of God , and put my bones upon his bones .
GOLD:	Afterward the prophet said to his sons , “ When I die , bury me in the grave where the man of God is buried . Lay my bones beside his bones .

ID:	6100
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Daviden salmoa .
PRED:	O God , you are my God , and you are my God , and you are my God .
GOLD:	The heavens proclaim the glory of God.The skies display his craftsmanship .

ID:	6101
INPUT:	Ondoren , santutegia , itunaren egoitza , ikusi nuen zeruan irekitzen ,
PRED:	And I saw the tabernacle of the sanctuary , and I opened the covenant of heaven ,
GOLD:	Then I looked and saw that the Temple in heaven , God 's Tabernacle , was thrown wide open .

ID:	6102
INPUT:	utzi oparia han , aldare aurrean , eta zoaz lehenbizi senidearekin bakeak egitera ; itzuli gero zeure oparia eskaintzera .
PRED:	And thou shalt offer a burnt offering before the altar , and go to peace with thy brother , to offer thy burnt offering .
GOLD:	leave your sacrifice there at the altar . Go and be reconciled to that person . Then come and offer your sacrifice to God .

ID:	6103
INPUT:	Ez izan beldur , ene artaldetxo hori , atsegin izan baitu zuen Aitak zuen alde errege izatea .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid , my sheep , for your Father loved you for your sake .
GOLD:	“ So do n't be afraid , little flock . For it gives your Father great happiness to give you the Kingdom .

ID:	6104
INPUT:	Tanisko buruzagiak erotuak daude , Menfisko buruzagiak engainatuak . Oker daramate Egiptobere eskualde-buruek .
PRED:	The princes of Tamar are destroyed , and their princes are cast out of the land of Egypt , and their princes are brought into their hand .
GOLD:	The officials of Zoan are fools , and the officials of Memphis are deluded.The leaders of the peoplehave led Egypt astray .

ID:	6105
INPUT:	Labore-opariak , nahiz labean erreak nahiz eltzean edo zartaginean prestatuak , eskaintzen dituen apaizari dagozkio .
PRED:	And he shall offer the burnt offering , or the burnt offering , or the meat offering , or the burnt offering , or the priest shall offer it .
GOLD:	Any grain offering that has been baked in an oven , prepared in a pan , or cooked on a griddle belongs to the priest who presents it .

ID:	6106
INPUT:	Zeure mehatxuaz , Jakoben Jainkoa , zurrun utzi dituzu gurdi eta zaldiak .
PRED:	God of Jacob , who has given you horses and horses .
GOLD:	No wonder you are greatly feared ! Who can stand before you when your anger explodes ?

ID:	6107
INPUT:	Baina Jainkoaren gizon batek etorri eta esan zion : — Errege jauna , ez eraman zeurekin Israelgo gizon horiek , Jauna ez baitago israeldarrekin , Efraimen ondorengo horiekin .
PRED:	But a man of God came to the king and said to him , “ My lord the king , do n't bring these men with you , but they are not with the sons of Israel . ”
GOLD:	But a man of God came to him and said , “ Your Majesty , do not hire troops from Israel , for the Lord is not with Israel . He will not help those people of Ephraim !

ID:	6108
INPUT:	Horregatik , gizasemeak bere aita-amak utziko ditu eta emazteari elkartuko zaio , eta biak batizango dira .
PRED:	Therefore the sons of man shall leave his father and his mother , and his wife shall be divided , and they shall be eternal .
GOLD:	As the Scriptures say , “ A man leaves his father and mother and is joined to his wife , and the two are united into one . ”

ID:	6109
INPUT:	Ibhar , Elixua , Ne<unk> , Jafia ,
PRED:	Elioenai , Jozabad , Kelita ,
GOLD:	Ibhar , Elishua , Nepheg , Japhia ,

ID:	6110
INPUT:	Hiru urteren buruan hartu zuten asiriarrek Samaria . Ezekiasen erregealdiko seigarren urtea eta Israelgo Oseasen erregealdiko bederatzigarren urtea zen Samaria hartu zutenean .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the third year of Samaria , in the sixth year of Hezekiah , that the sixth year of Hezekiah king of Israel , when he had taken Samaria , that he was king of Israel .
GOLD:	Three years later , during the sixth year of King Hezekiah 's reign and the ninth year of King Hoshea 's reign in Israel , Samaria fell .

ID:	6111
INPUT:	Kutsaturik egon eta garbikuntza egiten ez duena bota egingo dute elkartetik , Jaunaren santutegia profanatu baitu . Garbikuntzako urez zipriztindua izan ez denez , kutsaturik jarraitzen du .
PRED:	If any man is unclean , he shall be cut off from the congregation of the congregation , and he shall wash the sanctuary of the Lord ; and he shall wash his blood with water .
GOLD:	“ But those who become defiled and do not purify themselves will be cut off from the community , for they have defiled the sanctuary of the Lord . Since the water of purification has not been sprinkled on them , they remain defiled .

ID:	6112
INPUT:	Nire ahaideengana joan ondoren , zin-hitzetik aske geldituko zara . Emaztea eman nahi ez badizute ere , zin-hitzetik aske geldituko zara » .
PRED:	If you go to my brothers , you will be free from my family . If you do n't want to give her to your wife , you will be free . ”
GOLD:	Then you will have fulfilled your obligation . But if you go to my relatives and they refuse to let her go with you , you will be free from my oath . '

ID:	6113
INPUT:	Josue , beronen seme eta ahaide Kadmiel , Binui eta Hodabiasek elkarrekin zuzentzen zituzten Jaunaren etxeko lanak ; orobat Henadaden seme eta ahaide lebitarrek ere .
PRED:	And Joshua and his sons were Jeshua , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , Jozabad , and Jozabad , and the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites .
GOLD:	The workers at the Temple of God were supervised by Jeshua with his sons and relatives , and Kadmiel and his sons , all descendants of Hodaviah . They were helped in this task by the Levites of the family of Henadad .

ID:	6114
INPUT:	Zuzena naizelako eta salbatzailea , askatu egingo dut Sion , askatu niregana itzul daitezenak .
PRED:	I will save them , because I am righteous , and I will rescue them , and they will turn back to me .
GOLD:	Zion will be restored by justice ; those who repent will be revived by righteousness .

ID:	6115
INPUT:	Dolu-jantziz dabiltza kalean ; aieneka eta negarrez urtzen denak , etxe gain eta plazetan .
PRED:	In the streets , in the streets , and weep , and weep in the streets , and in the streets .
GOLD:	They will wear burlap as they wander the streets.From every home and public square will come the sound of wailing .

ID:	6116
INPUT:	Nahiz eta alearekin batera burugabea errotarrian xehatu , ez diozu ergelkeria kenduko .
PRED:	You shall not take away your iniquity from your brother or your mother 's house , nor take away your iniquity .
GOLD:	You can not separate fools from their foolishness , even though you grind them like grain with mortar and pestle .

ID:	6117
INPUT:	<unk> . ( <unk> . ) SALMOA
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Aleph

ID:	6118
INPUT:	bost anaia ditut eta ; jar ditzala jakinaren gainean , beraiek ere oinaze-toki honetara etor ez daitezen ” .
PRED:	I am five brothers and sisters , so that they may know that they may not come into this place . ”
GOLD:	For I have five brothers , and I want him to warn them so they do n't end up in this place of torment . '

ID:	6119
INPUT:	Horregatik , hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Zure aurka nator , Tiro . Nazio ugari altxaraziko dutzure kontra , itsasoak uhinakharrotzen dituen bezala .
PRED:	Therefore thus says the Lord God : I am against you , Tyre , and Tyre will rise up against you like the sea , as the sand of the sea .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am your enemy , O Tyre , and I will bring many nations against you , like the waves of the sea crashing against your shoreline .

ID:	6120
INPUT:	ekialdeko haizeak ur handietako ontziakpuskatzen dituenean bezala .
PRED:	When the east wind is broken down , they are broken down like the waters of the sea .
GOLD:	We had heard of the city 's glory , but now we have seen it ourselves — the city of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies.It is the city of our God ; he will make it safe forever.Interlude

ID:	6121
INPUT:	« Herriak zure kontra bekatu egin duelako zerua itxi eta euririk egin ez dezanean , toki honetarantz begira otoitz egin eta zure izena goresten badute , eta zuk emaniko zigorrarengatik beren bekatuaz damutzen badira ,
PRED:	And when the people have sinned against thee , they have sinned against thee , that they may not be shut up , and pray unto this place , and pray unto thy name , and pray for thy name , and for their sin .
GOLD:	“ If the skies are shut up and there is no rain because your people have sinned against you , and if they pray toward this Temple and acknowledge your name and turn from their sins because you have punished them ,

ID:	6122
INPUT:	Hara — erantsi zuen Abramek — , semerik ez didazu eman eta neure etxeko morroia izango dut oinordeko !
PRED:	Abraham said , “ Look , I will give you no son , and I will be my servant 's house . ”
GOLD:	You have given me no descendants of my own , so one of my servants will be my heir . ”

ID:	6123
INPUT:	Urte eta erdi egin zuen han Paulok , Jainkoaren mezua irakasten .
PRED:	Paul stayed there a long time and taught the word of God .
GOLD:	So Paul stayed there for the next year and a half , teaching the word of God .

ID:	6124
INPUT:	Beraz , arrats hartan ihesi joanak ziren , beren oihal-etxola , zaldi , asto eta kanpalekua bera ere zegoen zegoenean utziz . Ihes egin zuten , bizia salbatzearren .
PRED:	So they fled to their tents , and their tents , and their tents , and they fled , and fled .
GOLD:	So they panicked and ran into the night , abandoning their tents , horses , donkeys , and everything else , as they fled for their lives .

ID:	6125
INPUT:	bere zerbitzari Israeli eman zion ondare , haren maitasuna betikoa baita .
PRED:	And he gave Israel his inheritance for ever ; for his mercy endures forever .
GOLD:	a special possession to his servant Israel.His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	6126
INPUT:	Josueri jakinarazi zioten : — Makedan aurkitu ditugu bost erregeak , leize-zulo batean gordeta .
PRED:	And they said unto Joshua , We found five kings in the wilderness .
GOLD:	When Joshua heard that they had been found ,

ID:	6127
INPUT:	Kiriat-Arba — hau da , Hebron — eta beraren herri-lurrak , Judako mendialdean ( Arba Anaken aita zen ) ;
PRED:	And the land of Hebron , which is called Hebron , and his land in the hill country of Judah :
GOLD:	Kiriath-arba ( that is , Hebron ) , in the hill country of Judah , along with its surrounding pasturelands . ( Arba was an ancestor of Anak . )

ID:	6128
INPUT:	Guk geuk entzun genuen zerutik etorritako mintzo hori , mendi santuan Jesusekin geundela .
PRED:	We heard this voice from heaven , and we spoke to him in the holy mountain .
GOLD:	We ourselves heard that voice from heaven when we were with him on the holy mountain .

ID:	6129
INPUT:	Euri-jasak izan ziren , uholdeak etorri , mendebalak jo , eta etxeari eraso zioten ; baina ez zen erori , oinarriak harkaitzean zituelako .
PRED:	And the waters came , and the waters came upon the house ; and the waters fought against the house , and it was no rain .
GOLD:	Though the rain comes in torrents and the floodwaters rise and the winds beat against that house , it wo n't collapse because it is built on bedrock .

ID:	6130
INPUT:	Kanpoko atarira herriarengana irtetean , zerbitzugintzan erabilitako jantziak kendu eta santutegiko geletan utziko dituzte . Beste jantzi batzuk jarriko dituzte , bestela beren jantzi sakratuez herria sagaratuko bailukete .
PRED:	When they come to the people , they will take away the garments of the people , and put them in the holy garments , and they will be holy . They will be holy . They will not be holy .
GOLD:	When they return to the outer courtyard where the people are , they must take off the clothes they wear while ministering to me . They must leave them in the sacred rooms and put on other clothes so they do not endanger anyone by transmitting holiness to them through this clothing .

ID:	6131
INPUT:	Orduan , mahastizainari esan zion : “ Begira , badira hiru urte pikondo honetara piku bila natorrela , eta ez dut aurkitzen . Moztu ezazu . Zertarako egongo da hor lurra alferrik jaten ? ”
PRED:	Then he said to the vineyard , “ Behold , three years I have come into this vineyard , and I have not found a fig tree , and I have not found it . Why do you eat it in vain ? ”
GOLD:	Finally , he said to his gardener , ‘ I 've waited three years , and there has n't been a single fig ! Cut it down . It 's just taking up space in the garden . '

ID:	6132
INPUT:	« Gaur nik ematen dizuedan agindua ez da zuen indarrez gaindikoa , ezta eskuraezina ere .
PRED:	“ This is what I command you today , and there is no power that I have commanded you today .
GOLD:	“ This command I am giving you today is not too difficult for you , and it is not beyond your reach .

ID:	6133
INPUT:	Zaldizkoaren ahotik ezpata zorrotza ateratzen zen , herriak zauritzeko : burdinazko makilaz gobernatuko ditu . Hark dolarea zapaldu eta Jainko ahalguztidunaren haserre biziaren zigor-ardoa aterako du .
PRED:	And the sword of the horse shall fall by the sword of the horse , and the sword of the horse shall be cut off ; and he shall make them drink with iron , and he shall drink the wine of the God of hosts .
GOLD:	From his mouth came a sharp sword to strike down the nations . He will rule them with an iron rod . He will release the fierce wrath of God , the Almighty , like juice flowing from a winepress .

ID:	6134
INPUT:	Aaronek eta semeek eskainitako lehen sakrifizioak
PRED:	Aaron and his sons
GOLD:	The Priests Begin Their Work

ID:	6135
INPUT:	Ez erantzun gaiztakeriari gaiztakeriaz , ezta irainari irainaz ere , bedeinkazioz baizik , Jainkoak bere bedeinkazioa jasotzeko deitu zaituzte eta .
PRED:	Do not answer , nor answer the wickedness of their wickedness , but blessed you , but God has called you to bless you .
GOLD:	Do n't repay evil for evil . Do n't retaliate with insults when people insult you . Instead , pay them back with a blessing . That is what God has called you to do , and he will grant you his blessing .

ID:	6136
INPUT:	Absalomek Joabi : — Hara , etortzeko eskatu nizun , erregeari hau esan zeniezaion : « Zertarako etorri nintzen Gexurtik ? Hobeki nengoen han . Erregea ikusi nahi nuke . Errudun banaiz , hil nazala » .
PRED:	Absalom said to the king , “ Look , I asked you , ‘ Why did you say to the king , ‘ Why did I come to the king ? ' I want to see the king . I want to kill the king . ' ”
GOLD:	And Absalom replied , “ Because I wanted you to ask the king why he brought me back from Geshur if he did n't intend to see me . I might as well have stayed there . Let me see the king ; if he finds me guilty of anything , then let him kill me . ”

ID:	6137
INPUT:	Eta eltzegilearen soroa erosteko erabili zituzten , Jaunak agindu zidan bezala .
PRED:	And they brought them into the field of the congregation , as the Lord commanded me .
GOLD:	and purchased the potter 's field , as the Lord directed . ”

ID:	6138
INPUT:	eta jende asko joaten zitzaion . Honela zioten : « Joanek , egia esan , ez zuen mirarizko seinalerik batere egin , baina honetaz esan zuen guztia egia zen » .
PRED:	And many people came to him . And they said unto him , Thus saith John , I do not speak unto you , but did not do all that he had done to you .
GOLD:	And many followed him . “ John did n't perform miraculous signs , ” they remarked to one another , “ but everything he said about this man has come true . ”

ID:	6139
INPUT:	Joax Jainkoarengandik aldendu
PRED:	Joash 's King
GOLD:	The End of Joash 's Reign

ID:	6140
INPUT:	Urre-harizko apaingarriak eginen dituzu
PRED:	And thou shalt make of pure gold , and of pure gold .
GOLD:	Make the settings of gold filigree ,

ID:	6141
INPUT:	Horrela , janari hori gorderik geldituko da Egipto lurraldean izango diren zazpi gose-urteetarako , eta goseteak ez du lurralde hau hondatuko » .
PRED:	This will be the food of the seven years of Egypt , and the famine of the seven years of famine , and the famine will not be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	That way there will be enough to eat when the seven years of famine come to the land of Egypt . Otherwise this famine will destroy the land . ”

ID:	6142
INPUT:	« Orduan jabetzan hartu genuen lurraldea honela banatu genuen : Arnon erreka ondoan dagoen Aroertik hasita Galaadeko mendialdearen erdia bertako hiriekin Ruben eta Gaden leinuei eman nien .
PRED:	And we took possession of the land , and gave it to us , saying , The land of the Arnon , which is beside the Arnon of the Arnon , and the cities of Gilead , and the children of Reuben , and the children of Gad .
GOLD:	“ When we took possession of this land , I gave to the tribes of Reuben and Gad the territory beyond Aroer along the Arnon Gorge , plus half of the hill country of Gilead with its towns .

ID:	6143
INPUT:	Sinai basamortuan , lehen hilaren hamalauko ilunabarrean ospatu zuten . Israeldarrek zehatz-mehatz bete zuten Jaunak Moisesi agindurikoa .
PRED:	On the first day of the first month , on the first day of the month , the children of Israel did according to all that the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	in the wilderness of Sinai as twilight fell on the fourteenth day of the month . And they celebrated the festival there , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	6144
INPUT:	Isaias , bere aldetik , hau esatera ausartzen da : Nire bila ez zebiltzanei atera nintzaien bidera ; nitaz galdetzen ez zutenei agertu nintzaien .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when Isaiah went out , that he went out to meet me , that he might not seek me .
GOLD:	And later Isaiah spoke boldly for God , saying , “ I was found by people who were not looking for me.I showed myself to those who were not asking for me . ”

ID:	6145
INPUT:	Eta , gainera , esan zien : — Larunbataren nagusi da Gizonaren Semea .
PRED:	He said to them , “ The Son of Man is the Sabbath . ”
GOLD:	And Jesus added , “ The Son of Man is Lord , even over the Sabbath . ”

ID:	6146
INPUT:	Orduan , berriro galdetu zioten itsuari : — Eta zuk , zer diozu begiak ireki dizkizunaz ? Hark erantzun : — Profeta dela .
PRED:	Then they asked the blind man , “ What do you see ? ” And he answered , “ The prophet is the prophet . ”
GOLD:	Then the Pharisees again questioned the man who had been blind and demanded , “ What 's your opinion about this man who healed you ? ” The man replied , “ I think he must be a prophet . ”

ID:	6147
INPUT:	« Ez naiz zuek guztiotaz ari ; badakit , bai , zein aukeratu ditudan , baina bete beharra du Liburu Santuak dioen honek : Neure mahaikide nuena kontra altxatu zait .
PRED:	“ I do n't know all things , but I know how I chose , but it is written , “ I have fought against my table . ”
GOLD:	“ I am not saying these things to all of you ; I know the ones I have chosen . But this fulfills the Scripture that says , ‘ The one who eats my food has turned against me . '

ID:	6148
INPUT:	eta honek bertan hilarazi , Hamat eskualdean . Horrela erbesteratu zuten Judako jendea bere lurraldetik urruti .
PRED:	And they brought them into the hand of Hamath , in the land of Hamath , and they carried away the people of Judah from his land .
GOLD:	And there at Riblah , in the land of Hamath , the king of Babylon had them all put to death . So the people of Judah were sent into exile from their land .

ID:	6149
INPUT:	« Sar zaitezte ate estutik ; zabala baita hondamenerako atea eta lasaia bidea , eta asko dira hortik doazenak .
PRED:	“ Go into the midst of the door , for it is a way to destroy it , and the way to destroy it , and many will pass by .
GOLD:	“ You can enter God 's Kingdom only through the narrow gate . The highway to hell is broad , and its gate is wide for the many who choose that way .

ID:	6150
INPUT:	Obotetik Moabeko mugaldean dagoen Iie-Abarimera ;
PRED:	And it came to pass in the valley of Moab , that is in the valley of Moab , which is in the valley of Moab .
GOLD:	They left Oboth and camped at Iye-abarim on the border of Moab .

ID:	6151
INPUT:	Joab eta Abixai Abnerren atzetik joan ziren . Eguzkia sartzen ari zen Gabaon basamorturako bidean , Gia-ren ekialdera dagoen Amma mendixkara heldu zirenean .
PRED:	Joab and Abishai went out of the wilderness . When Joab went into the wilderness of Gilead , Amnon went to the hill country of Gilead .
GOLD:	When Joab and Abishai found out what had happened , they set out after Abner . The sun was just going down as they arrived at the hill of Ammah near Giah , along the road to the wilderness of Gibeon .

ID:	6152
INPUT:	Jakin nuen , gainera , lebitarrei ez zitzaiela ematen zegokien partea eta , horregatik , lebitarrek eta kantariek , beren zerbitzua bete beharrean , beren herrietara alde egin zutela .
PRED:	And I heard that the Levites were not given to the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites , and the Levites left their land .
GOLD:	I also discovered that the Levites had not been given their prescribed portions of food , so they and the singers who were to conduct the worship services had all returned to work their fields .

ID:	6153
INPUT:	Zilegi al zaigu Zesarri zerga ordaintzea , bai ala ez ?
PRED:	What do we want to pay for us ? Is n't we want to pay for him ?
GOLD:	Now tell us — is it right for us to pay taxes to Caesar or not ? ”

ID:	6154
INPUT:	Bere hilobian ehortzi zuen gorpua eta negar egin zion , esanez : « Ai , ene anaia ! »
PRED:	He buried his body in the tomb and wept , saying , “ Oh , my brother ! ”
GOLD:	He laid the body in his own grave , crying out in grief , “ Oh , my brother ! ”

ID:	6155
INPUT:	badakizu noiz esertzen naizen eta noiz jaikitzen . Urrutitik sumatzen dituzu nire burutapenak .
PRED:	You know that I am angry , and you know what I am coming from a distance .
GOLD:	You know when I sit down or stand up.You know my thoughts even when I 'm far away .

ID:	6156
INPUT:	Atsegingarriak dira haren bideak , zorionera eramaten dute .
PRED:	The ways of the wicked are glad , and the way of the wicked shall be brought to death .
GOLD:	She will guide you down delightful paths ; all her ways are satisfying .

ID:	6157
INPUT:	Horra non datozen urrutitik : ipar eta mendebaldetik datoz , Egipto aldetik ere bai .
PRED:	This is the way that came from a far country , from the west , and from the west , and from the east .
GOLD:	See , my people will return from far away , from lands to the north and west , and from as far south as Egypt . ”

ID:	6158
INPUT:	Errege-alabak dituzu inguruan , zure eskuinean erregina , urre finez apaindurik .
PRED:	Your daughters are round about you , and your right hand is in gold .
GOLD:	Listen to me , O royal daughter ; take to heart what I say.Forget your people and your family far away .

ID:	6159
INPUT:	Jaunak honela hitz egin zion Eliasi :
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to Elijah :
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Elijah ,

ID:	6160
INPUT:	Zaude erne , eta indarberri ezazu oraindik bizirik daukazuna , erabat hil baino lehen . Zure jokabidea nire Jainkoaren aurrean behar bezain ona ez dela ikusi dut .
PRED:	Be strong and strong , and tell me the life of your life . I have seen that you are still alive before my God .
GOLD:	Wake up ! Strengthen what little remains , for even what is left is almost dead . I find that your actions do not meet the requirements of my God .

ID:	6161
INPUT:	Ez dira konturatzenberaien gaiztakeria guztiakgogoan ditudala . Beren okerretan sartuak daudeleporaino , eta begi aurrean ditut nik guztiak .
PRED:	They do n't know that I remember all their wickedness . They are all their wickedness . They are in front of their own eyes , and I have eyes before them .
GOLD:	Its people do n't realizethat I am watching them.Their sinful deeds are all around them , and I see them all .

ID:	6162
INPUT:	Berriz ere oihu egin zion Jonatanek atzetik mutikoari : — Bizkor ! Habil agudo ! Ez hadi geldi ! Hartu zuen Jonatanen morroiak gezia eta bere nagusiagana itzuli zen .
PRED:	But Jonathan cried out to the boy , “ Get up ! Do n't stay here ! ” So Jonathan took the servant of Jonathan 's servants and returned to his master .
GOLD:	Hurry , hurry , do n't wait . ” So the boy quickly gathered up the arrows and ran back to his master .

ID:	6163
INPUT:	Erregea ez du gudaroste handiak salbatzen , ezta gudaria ere indar handiak libratzen .
PRED:	The king will not save his army , nor will he save his mighty army .
GOLD:	The best-equipped army can not save a king , nor is great strength enough to save a warrior .

ID:	6164
INPUT:	Izugarrizko iskanbila sortu zen . Fariseuen alderdiko lege-maisu batzuek altxatu eta gogor esan zuten : « Ez dugu honengan errurik aurkitzen . Eta espiritu edo aingeruren batek hitz egin badio , zer ? »
PRED:	And there was a great sign , and some of the Pharisees lifted up their hands , and said unto them , We have found no pity in this man : and who hath spoken unto him ? or what shall we speak unto him ?
GOLD:	So there was a great uproar . Some of the teachers of religious law who were Pharisees jumped up and began to argue forcefully . “ We see nothing wrong with him , ” they shouted . “ Perhaps a spirit or an angel spoke to him . ”

ID:	6165
INPUT:	Bai handia niretzat duzun maitasuna : Herio Leize sakonetik libratu nauzu !
PRED:	You have given me great love , and you have saved me from the grave .
GOLD:	for your love for me is very great.You have rescued me from the depths of death .

ID:	6166
INPUT:	« Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak mezu bat eman dit zuretzat , Baruk .
PRED:	“ The Lord , the God of Israel , has given me a message to you .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says to you , Baruch :

ID:	6167
INPUT:	ezaugarri handiak , mirari eta egintza ikaragarriak .
PRED:	and great and wonders , and wonders , and wonders .
GOLD:	Moses summoned all the Israelites and said to them , “ You have seen with your own eyes everything the Lord did in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh and to all his servants and to his whole country —

ID:	6168
INPUT:	Kadexetik abiaturik Edom lurraldeko mugan dagoen Hor mendian etxolatu ziren hurrengo .
PRED:	And they went out from the land of Edom , and encamped in the hill country of Edom .
GOLD:	They left Kadesh and camped at Mount Hor , at the border of Edom .

ID:	6169
INPUT:	<unk> tzotan pilatu zituzten eta kiratsez bete zen lurralde osoa .
PRED:	And they set them in the morning , and in the sight of all the land was filled with them .
GOLD:	“ Do it tomorrow , ” Pharaoh said . “ All right , ” Moses replied , “ it will be as you have said . Then you will know that there is no one like the Lord our God .

ID:	6170
INPUT:	Neure maitaleei egin diet dei , baina zapuztu egin naute . Nire apaizak eta zaharrak hirian hil dira , biziari eusteko janari bila zebiltzan bitartean .
PRED:	I called to my friends , but they have rejected me , and the priests have killed me , and the priests have killed me in the city where they live .
GOLD:	“ I begged my allies for help , but they betrayed me.My priests and leadersstarved to death in the city , even as they searched for foodto save their lives .

ID:	6171
INPUT:	Seme zuhurrak aitari poz ematen , seme zentzugabeak ama mespretxatzen .
PRED:	My son , you are wise , and you are wise , and you are wise .
GOLD:	Sensible children bring joy to their father ; foolish children despise their mother .

ID:	6172
INPUT:	Beste guztiei agertu ondoren , neuri ere agertu zitzaidan , garaiz kanpo jaiotako haurra bezalakoa naizen honi ;
PRED:	After I had appeared to all these things , I will be like a child who is born like a child .
GOLD:	Last of all , as though I had been born at the wrong time , I also saw him .

ID:	6173
INPUT:	Isaiasek , orduan , Ezekiasi : — Entzun Jaun ahalguztidunak dioena :
PRED:	Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah , “ Hear what the Lord of hosts says :
GOLD:	Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah , “ Listen to this message from the Lord of Heaven 's Armies :

ID:	6174
INPUT:	Ben-Hadadek esan zuen : — Bake-asmoz atera baldin badira , atzeman itzazue bizirik ; borroka-asmoz atera badira ere , atzeman itzazue bizirik .
PRED:	And he said , If ye go out to peace , let them go out , and let them go into battle ; and they shall be able to fight , and they shall live .
GOLD:	“ Take them alive , ” Ben-hadad commanded , “ whether they have come for peace or for war . ”

ID:	6175
INPUT:	Nire aurrekoek hondatu zituzten nazio horietako jainkoetarik batek ere libratu ahal izan ote du bere herria nire eskuetatik ? Eta zeuen Jainkoak libratuko zaituztela nire eskuetan erortzetik ?
PRED:	Will any god save you from my people ? Can God rescue you out of my hand ?
GOLD:	Which of their gods was able to rescue its people from the destructive power of my predecessors ? What makes you think your God can rescue you from me ?

ID:	6176
INPUT:	Gose banintz , ez nizuke zuri eskatuko , neurea baitut mundua eta bertako guztia .
PRED:	If I was hungry , I would not ask you , for I will not ask you , for I will give you all the world and all the world .
GOLD:	If I were hungry , I would not tell you , for all the world is mine and everything in it .

ID:	6177
INPUT:	Nik , Jainko Jaunak , zin dagit neure biziarengatik , ez duzuela berriro esango esaera hau Israelen !
PRED:	As surely as I live , saith the Lord God , I will not say to you , ‘ This is what the Lord God says to Israel . '
GOLD:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , you will not quote this proverb anymore in Israel .

ID:	6178
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	The word of the Lord came to me , saying ,
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	6179
INPUT:	Santutegia eta tenpluko gotorlekua profanatu egingo dituzte haren gudariek , eguneroko oparia kendu eta idolo higuingarria ezarriko aldare gainean .
PRED:	And the sanctuary and the place of the sanctuary shall be cut off , and his army shall take away the burnt offering , and burn it on the altar , and on the altar .
GOLD:	“ His army will take over the Temple fortress , pollute the sanctuary , put a stop to the daily sacrifices , and set up the sacrilegious object that causes desecration .

ID:	6180
INPUT:	Santutegira sartuko diren apaizak ezin izango dira kanpoko atarira irten , Jaunaren zerbitzuan erabilitako jantziak aurrez gela horietan utzi gabe , sakratuak baitira jantzi horiek . Arropaz aldatuko dira herriari dagokion esparrura ateratzeko » .
PRED:	And the priest shall enter into the sanctuary , and they shall not go out into the inner court of the Lord ; for they shall not leave the garments of the holy garments , for they shall go out into the midst of the house of the Lord .
GOLD:	When the priests leave the sanctuary , they must not go directly to the outer courtyard . They must first take off the clothes they wore while ministering , because these clothes are holy . They must put on other clothes before entering the parts of the building complex open to the public . ”

ID:	6181
INPUT:	Eta honela hasi zen berekiko pentsatzen : “ Zer egin , ez baitut uzta non jasorik ? ”
PRED:	And he began to say to him , What do I do , for I have not sold ?
GOLD:	He said to himself , ‘ What should I do ? I do n't have room for all my crops . '

ID:	6182
INPUT:	Zelatan dago ezkutuan , lehoia bere zuloan bezala , zelatan , dohakabea harrapatzeko : bere sarera erakarriz harrapatzen du .
PRED:	A lion is in secret , like a lion in a lion , and a lion is caught in the streets ; he is caught in his own womb .
GOLD:	Like lions crouched in hiding , they wait to pounce on the helpless.Like hunters they capture the helplessand drag them away in nets .

ID:	6183
INPUT:	Ikasleetako bat , Jesusek gehien maite zuen hura , beraren ondoan zegoen mahaian .
PRED:	One of his disciples loved him , and he sat beside them at their table .
GOLD:	The disciple Jesus loved was sitting next to Jesus at the table .

ID:	6184
INPUT:	Bazen Tzoran Manoah izeneko gizon bat , Danen leinukoa . Haren emazteak ez zuen haurrik izan , agorra baitzen .
PRED:	And there was a man from the tribe of Dan : and his wife was no child , because he had no children .
GOLD:	In those days a man named Manoah from the tribe of Dan lived in the town of Zorah . His wife was unable to become pregnant , and they had no children .

ID:	6185
INPUT:	Errugabea al naiz ? Neuk ere ez dakit . Nazkatua nago bizitzaz !
PRED:	I am innocent , and I am not innocent ; I am not guilty .
GOLD:	“ I am innocent , but it makes no difference to me — I despise my life .

ID:	6186
INPUT:	Joabek erregeagana joan eta esan zion : « Zer egin duzu ? Abner etorri omen zaizu . Zergatik utzi diozu joaten ?
PRED:	Then Joab went to the king and said to him , “ What have you done ? Abner has come to you . Why have you left your way ?
GOLD:	Joab rushed to the king and demanded , “ What have you done ? What do you mean by letting Abner get away ?

ID:	6187
INPUT:	Hau idatzi zuen gutunetan : « Agindu ezazue baraualdia egiteko . Eserarazi Nabot biltzarraren aurrean ;
PRED:	And it came to pass in that day , that he wrote it to the altar , saying , Give a fast to the congregation , and set him before him .
GOLD:	In her letters she commanded : “ Call the citizens together for a time of fasting , and give Naboth a place of honor .

ID:	6188
INPUT:	Adar sendoak zituen , aginte-makila bihurtu zirenak ; hodeietaraino hazi zen : nabarmena zen bere altueragatiketa adar-ugaritasunagatik .
PRED:	He became strong , and he gave them the authority to the clouds ; and his heart was turned away from the cloud , and the abundance of many .
GOLD:	Its branches became strong — strong enough to be a ruler 's scepter.It grew very tall , towering above all others.It stood out because of its heightand its many lush branches .

ID:	6189
INPUT:	Lege-liburua irakurtzeko biltzarra
PRED:	The Law of the Law
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	6190
INPUT:	Zerura igota ere , zu hantxe ! Hildakoen Egoitzara jaitsita ere , zu bertan !
PRED:	Go up to heaven , and go down to the place of the dead ; and thou shalt go down to the place of the dead .
GOLD:	If I go up to heaven , you are there ; if I go down to the grave , you are there .

ID:	6191
INPUT:	Egun hartan , gizakiak bere Egilearibegiratuko dioeta Israelgo Santuarenganazuzenduko ditu begiak .
PRED:	In that day men will look at his eyes , and they will open their eyes to the Holy One of Israel .
GOLD:	Then at last the people will look to their Creatorand turn their eyes to the Holy One of Israel .

ID:	6192
INPUT:	Hiru mila inguru gizon joan ziren Ai hiriari erasotzera , baina ihes egin behar izan zuten Ai hirikoengandik .
PRED:	And three thousand men went up to fight against Ai , but they fled from the cities of Ai .
GOLD:	So approximately 3,000 warriors were sent , but they were soundly defeated . The men of Ai

ID:	6193
INPUT:	neureak baititut israeldar lehen-semeak oro , baita lehen abere-kumeak ere . Egiptoko lehen-seme guztiak hil nituenean , neuretzat sagaratu nituen .
PRED:	For all the firstborn of the sons of Israel , and all the firstborn of the firstborn of the sons of Israel , and all the firstborn of the firstborn of the firstborn of the firstborn , and all the firstborn of the firstborn of the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	For all the firstborn males among the people of Israel are mine , both of people and of animals . I set them apart for myself on the day I struck down all the firstborn sons of the Egyptians .

ID:	6194
INPUT:	Izan zaitezte neurritsu eta egon erne . Zuen etsaia , deabrua , zuen inguruan dabil , goseak dagoen lehoia bezala , nor irentsiko .
PRED:	Be strong , and be strong ; for the devil is round about you , as a lion is sitting in you .
GOLD:	Stay alert ! Watch out for your great enemy , the devil . He prowls around like a roaring lion , looking for someone to devour .

ID:	6195
INPUT:	Ohol hauek behealdean bereiz jarriko dituzu eta gainaldean , lehenengo eraztunaren parean , ongi lotuak . Egin honela bi kantoietarako bi oholak ere .
PRED:	And thou shalt take the ark on the east side of the altar , and thou shalt put the poles on the other side , and thou shalt make two boards for the two corners of the tabernacle .
GOLD:	These corner frames will be matched at the bottom and firmly attached at the top with a single ring , forming a single corner unit . Make both of these corner units the same way .

ID:	6196
INPUT:	Orduan , erregeak esan zuen : — Ez hil haurra . Emaiozue lehenengoari ; horixe da haurraren ama .
PRED:	Then the king said , “ Do n't kill the child , but she is the mother of the child . ”
GOLD:	Then the king said , “ Do not kill the child , but give him to the woman who wants him to live , for she is his mother ! ”

ID:	6197
INPUT:	Zerbitzariek esan zioten : — Zertan ari zara ? Haurra bizi zela barau eta negar egiten zenuen . Hil da haurra , eta zu jaiki eta jaten ?
PRED:	The servants said to him , “ Why are you doing ? Why did you fast and wept and wept ? You got up , and eat and eat ? ”
GOLD:	His advisers were amazed . “ We do n't understand you , ” they told him . “ While the child was still living , you wept and refused to eat . But now that the child is dead , you have stopped your mourning and are eating again . ”

ID:	6198
INPUT:	« Israeldarren izen-bilketa egitean , ez duzu erroldatuko Lebiren leinua .
PRED:	“ When you gather the tribes of Israel , you will not take the tribe of Levi .
GOLD:	“ Do not include the tribe of Levi in the registration ; do not count them with the rest of the Israelites .

ID:	6199
INPUT:	Zeren eskatzen duenak hartu egiten baitu , bilatzen duenak aurkitu , eta atea jotzen duenari zabaldu egiten baitzaio .
PRED:	If anyone ask , he who does n't find it , and he who does it will be opened to him .
GOLD:	For everyone who asks , receives . Everyone who seeks , finds . And to everyone who knocks , the door will be opened .

ID:	6200
INPUT:	Aingeruak Jaun ahalguztidunaren hitzok Zorobabeli adierazteko agindu zidan : « Zeure eginkizuna ez duzu boterez , ez indarrez beteko , nire espirituaz baizik .
PRED:	And the angel of the Lord of hosts said unto me , Thus saith the Lord of hosts , Thus saith the Lord of hosts , Thou hast not done the work of thy hand , but with the power of thy hand , but with my spirit .
GOLD:	Then he said to me , “ This is what the Lord says to Zerubbabel : It is not by force nor by strength , but by my Spirit , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	6201
INPUT:	Heziketa maite duenak maite du jakinduria ; zentzapena gorrotatzen duena , inozoa galanta !
PRED:	Those who love wisdom love wisdom , but those who hate understanding , but those who hate understanding .
GOLD:	To learn , you must love discipline ; it is stupid to hate correction .

ID:	6202
INPUT:	« Semetxook , ez zait denbora asko gelditzen zuekin egoteko . Nire bila ibiliko zarete , baina juduei esan niena bera diotsuet zuei ere : ni noan tokira zuek ezin zarete joan .
PRED:	“ My sons , I do n't stay with you many days . You will seek me , but I tell you the Jews , and you will not go to where I told you .
GOLD:	Dear children , I will be with you only a little longer . And as I told the Jewish leaders , you will search for me , but you ca n't come where I am going .

ID:	6203
INPUT:	Haiek erantzun : — Ikusi dugu lurralde hori eta oso ederra da . Jaiki ! Eraso diezaiogun ! Zertan zaudete hor ezer egin gabe ? Ez egon geldi eta abia zaitezte lurralde horretaz jabetzera .
PRED:	They said to him , “ We have seen this land , and it is good . Get up and fight against us ! Why do n't you stay here ? Do n't stay here , and take possession of this land . ”
GOLD:	The men replied , “ Come on , let 's attack them ! We have seen the land , and it is very good . What are you waiting for ? Do n't hesitate to go and take possession of it .

ID:	6204
INPUT:	« Arrazoia dute Tzelofhaden alabek ; lur-ondarea emango diezu jabetzan , beraien aitaren anaiei bezala : aitaren ondarea emango diezu .
PRED:	“ The daughters of Gilead will give their inheritance as their father 's inheritance . You will give them their inheritance as their father 's inheritance .
GOLD:	“ The claim of the daughters of Zelophehad is legitimate . You must give them a grant of land along with their father 's relatives . Assign them the property that would have been given to their father .

ID:	6205
INPUT:	Joan ziren Moises eta Aaron faraoiagana eta Jaunak agindua egin zuten : Aaronek lurrera jaurti zuen makila faraoiaren eta funtzionarioen aurrean , eta makila suge bihurtu zen .
PRED:	And Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh , and the Lord commanded him , and he cast them into the earth , and the king 's officials took them into the earth .
GOLD:	So Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and did what the Lord had commanded them . Aaron threw down his staff before Pharaoh and his officials , and it became a serpent !

ID:	6206
INPUT:	Izan ere , kanpoko atari aldera jotzen zuten gela haien luzera ere hogeita bost metrokoa zen ; tenplura jotzen zuten gelena , berriz , berrogeita hamarrekoa .
PRED:	For the temple was five cubits high , and the breadth of the court was five cubits high , and the law was fifty cubits .
GOLD:	This wall added length to the outer block of rooms , which extended for only 871/2 feet , while the inner block — the rooms toward the Temple — extended for 175 feet .

ID:	6207
INPUT:	mundu osoan guduak geldiarazi , uztaiak puskatu , lantzak apurtu , babeskiak sutan erre .
PRED:	And all the earth shall be broken , and break down his bow , and break down his arrows , and burn them in the fire .
GOLD:	“ Be still , and know that I am God ! I will be honored by every nation.I will be honored throughout the world . ”

ID:	6208
INPUT:	Arin ! Egin ihes , Babilonian bizi zaretenSiongo seme-alabok ! »
PRED:	Woe to her , O daughter of Zion , you who live in Babylon ! ”
GOLD:	Many nations will join themselves to the Lord on that day , and they , too , will be my people . I will live among you , and you will know that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies sent me to you .

ID:	6209
INPUT:	Hain zuzen , Satanas ere bere baitan zatiturik badago , nola iraun dezake haren erreinuak ? Nik deabruak Beeltzebulen indarrez botatzen ditudala baitiozue zuek .
PRED:	For if Satan is in himself , how can he remain in his kingdom ? For I cast out demons out demons .
GOLD:	You say I am empowered by Satan . But if Satan is divided and fighting against himself , how can his kingdom survive ?

ID:	6210
INPUT:	Astemeak ikusi eta hiru bider saihestu nau . Bestela , hila zintudan dagoeneko , bera bizirik utziko nuelarik .
PRED:	The donkey saw me three times and three times . If I was dead , I was dead , because I left you .
GOLD:	Three times the donkey saw me and shied away ; otherwise , I would certainly have killed you by now and spared the donkey . ”

ID:	6211
INPUT:	Gero , ikasleei esan zien : « Iritsiko zaizue Gizonaren Semearen etorrerako egun bat bederen ikusi nahi izango duzuen garaia , baina ez duzue ikusiko .
PRED:	He said to his disciples , “ You will come to you , but you will see the days of the Son of Man coming , but you will not see it .
GOLD:	Then he said to his disciples , “ The time is coming when you will long to see the day when the Son of Man returns , but you wo n't see it .

ID:	6212
INPUT:	horrela jakingo duteEgiptoko bizilagun guztiekni naizela Jauna , kanabera bezain euskarri ahulaizan baitzara Israel herriarentzat ;
PRED:	And they shall know that I am the Lord , and all the inhabitants of Egypt shall know that I am the Lord , as the cloud of the house of Israel .
GOLD:	All the people of Egypt will know that I am the Lord , for to Israel you were just a staff made of reeds .

ID:	6213
INPUT:	Berriro diotsuet : Orratzaren begitik gamelua igarotzea errazago , aberatsa Jainkoaren erreinuan sartzea baino .
PRED:	I say to you again , I say to you , ‘ You are better than for their eyes to enter into the kingdom of heaven than for a rich man . '
GOLD:	I 'll say it again — it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich person to enter the Kingdom of God ! ”

ID:	6214
INPUT:	Izan ere , Gizonaren Semea galdua zegoena bilatzera eta salbatzera etorri da .
PRED:	For the Son of Man came to save him , and to save him .
GOLD:	For the Son of Man came to seek and save those who are lost . ”

ID:	6215
INPUT:	Berezko adar zirenekin Jainkoak begiramenik izan ez bazuen , beharbada zurekin ere ez du izango .
PRED:	If God 's eyes were not with you , he would not be with you .
GOLD:	For if God did not spare the original branches , he wo n't spare you either .

ID:	6216
INPUT:	Emakumeak , orduan : — Antzina esan ohi zuten : « Galdetzekotan , galdetu Abel hirian , eta kito » .
PRED:	The woman said to them , “ What do you say ? ” The woman asked , “ What do you want to ask ? ”
GOLD:	Then she continued , “ There used to be a saying , ‘ If you want to settle an argument , ask advice at the town of Abel . '

ID:	6217
INPUT:	Une hartan , erregea altxatu egin zen , baita gobernaria , Berenize eta haiekin zeudenak ere .
PRED:	At that time the king got up , and the king and all the people with him were with him .
GOLD:	Then the king , the governor , Bernice , and all the others stood and left .

ID:	6218
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin ez zaiona egin zuen Salomonek , eta ez zen bere aita David bezain zintzo izan Jaunarentzat .
PRED:	And Solomon did what was evil in the sight of the Lord , and he did not seek the Lord as his father David his father .
GOLD:	In this way , Solomon did what was evil in the Lord 's sight ; he refused to follow the Lord completely , as his father , David , had done .

ID:	6219
INPUT:	Orduan , oihu egin zioten Jaunari , esanez : « Bekatu egin dugu , baztertu egin dugu Jauna , Baalen eta Astarteren irudiak gurtzeko . Aska gaitzazu orain geure etsaien eskuetatik eta zerbitzatuko zaitugu » .
PRED:	And they cried unto the Lord , saying , We have sinned , because we have sinned , and have forsaken the idols of Baal , and have forsaken us from our enemies , and we will serve thee .
GOLD:	“ Then they cried to the Lord again and confessed , ‘ We have sinned by turning away from the Lord and worshiping the images of Baal and Ashtoreth . But we will worship you and you alone if you will rescue us from our enemies . '

ID:	6220
INPUT:	Morroiak jarraitu zuen : — Abrahamen morroia nauzu .
PRED:	The servant said , “ I am the servant of Abraham . ”
GOLD:	“ I am Abraham 's servant , ” he explained .

ID:	6221
INPUT:	Buruargitasuna behar da hemen . Zazpi buruak , emakumea gainean eseria dagoen zazpi muinoak dira ; zazpi errege ere esan nahi dute :
PRED:	The prince must be here . The seven heads of the seven women are sitting on the high places , and the seven kings will say to them :
GOLD:	“ This calls for a mind with understanding : The seven heads of the beast represent the seven hills where the woman rules . They also represent seven kings .

ID:	6222
INPUT:	Egun hartan , etxe gainean dagoena eta bere gauzak etxean dituena ez bedi hartzera jaits ; era berean , soroan dena ez bedi atzera itzul .
PRED:	In that day he that is on the house , and he that is in his house shall not go into his house ; let him go into the field , and let him return to his field .
GOLD:	On that day a person out on the deck of a roof must not go down into the house to pack . A person out in the field must not return home .

ID:	6223
INPUT:	Orduan , Manoahek : — Zuk hitzemana betetzean , zein arau eta zein jokabide hartu beharko du haurrak ?
PRED:	Then Micaiah said to him , “ What shall you say to you , and what shall the child walk ? ”
GOLD:	So Manoah asked him , “ When your words come true , what kind of rules should govern the boy 's life and work ? ”

ID:	6224
INPUT:	Bigarren egunean , akats gabeko ahuntz bat eskainiko duzu barkamen-oparitzat , eta aldarearen garbikuntza-ohikunea egingo duzu , zezenarekin bezalaxe .
PRED:	On the second day you shall offer a young bull for a sin offering , and you shall make atonement for the altar as a sin offering .
GOLD:	“ On the second day , sacrifice as a sin offering a young male goat that has no physical defects . Then cleanse and make atonement for the altar again , just as you did with the young bull .

ID:	6225
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . « Jedutun » en doinuaz . Asafen salmoa .
PRED:	O God , you are my God , and you are my strength ; you are my God , and you are my God .
GOLD:	I cry out to God ; yes , I shout.Oh , that God would listen to me !

ID:	6226
INPUT:	Zortzigarren egunean , guztiok apaizari eramango dizkio bere garbikuntzarako , elkarketa-etxolaren sarrerara , Jaunaren aurrera .
PRED:	And on the eighth day he shall bring them to the priest , and he shall make atonement for himself in front of the tent of meeting .
GOLD:	On the eighth day of the purification ceremony , the person being purified must bring the offerings to the priest in the Lord 's presence at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	6227
INPUT:	« Madarikatua lagun hurkoa azpikeriaz hiltzen duena ! » Eta herri osoak erantzungo du : « Amen » .
PRED:	“ Blessed is the man who is put to death . ” And all the people shall answer , “ Amen . ”
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who attacks a neighbor in secret . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	6228
INPUT:	Eroapenez buruzagiak ere konbentzi daitezke , mihi eztiak hezurrak ere hautsi .
PRED:	And the princes of the princes shall be put to death , and the bones of the bones shall be broken down .
GOLD:	Patience can persuade a prince , and soft speech can break bones .

ID:	6229
INPUT:	Biharamunean , alaba zaharrenak gazteenari esan zion : « <unk> ni egon <unk> aitarekin . Mozkor dezagun berriro eta gaur gauean hi joango haiz harekin etzatera ; horrela , biok izango dizkinagu semeak geure aitarengandik » .
PRED:	And it came to pass on the next day , that the younger daughter of the young man said unto the young man , Give him the father of the young men , and he said unto him , Behold , thou shalt go with him , and we shall go with him , and we shall go with him .
GOLD:	The next morning the older daughter said to her younger sister , “ I had sex with our father last night . Let 's get him drunk with wine again tonight , and you go in and have sex with him . That way we will preserve our family line through our father . ”

ID:	6230
INPUT:	Lauso bitez haien begiak , ez dezaten ikus , makur bekie bizkarra betiko .
PRED:	Let their eyes see their eyes , that they may not see their faces forever .
GOLD:	Let their eyes go blind so they can not see , and let their backs be bent forever . ”

ID:	6231
INPUT:	Bizidun guztiak hil ziren : narrastiak , hegaztiak , abereak eta piztiak , eta lurrazalean mugitzen den oro , eta gizaki guztiak .
PRED:	All the birds of the living creatures , the birds , the birds , the birds , and the birds , and the birds of the earth , and the birds of the earth , and all the birds of the earth .
GOLD:	All the living things on earth died — birds , domestic animals , wild animals , small animals that scurry along the ground , and all the people .

ID:	6232
INPUT:	gizonak , emakumeak , haurrak , erregearen alabak eta Nebuzaradan guardiaburuak Ahikamen seme eta Xafanen biloba Gedaliasi utzitako denak ; baita Jeremias profeta eta Neriasen seme Baruk ere .
PRED:	And the woman , and the princes of the king , and the princes of the guard , and the princes of the princes of the king , and the princes of the guard , and Jeremiah the son of Shaphan , and Azariah the son of Shaphan , and Zechariah the son of Shaphan .
GOLD:	In the crowd were men , women , and children , the king 's daughters , and all those whom Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , had left with Gedaliah . The prophet Jeremiah and Baruch were also included .

ID:	6233
INPUT:	Nik , berriro : — Ez dago ondo egiten ari zaretena . Ez al duzue gure Jainkoaren beldurrean bizi nahi , atzerriko gure etsaien aurrean barregarri gerta ez gaitezen ?
PRED:	Then I said to them , “ You do n't know what is right . Do n't you want to live in the presence of our God ? Do n't you want us to live before our enemies ? ”
GOLD:	Then I pressed further , “ What you are doing is not right ! Should you not walk in the fear of our God in order to avoid being mocked by enemy nations ?

ID:	6234
INPUT:	Hogei zutabe eta hogei oinak brontzezkoak izango dira ; zutabeen kako eta ziriak , berriz , zilarrezkoak .
PRED:	The twenty bases and twenty bases will be of bronze , and the bases of your sins will be of silver and silver .
GOLD:	They will be held up by twenty posts set securely in twenty bronze bases . Hang the curtains with silver hooks and rings .

ID:	6235
INPUT:	Ikusi eta entzun duguna dizuegu zuei ere iragartzen , zuek ere gurekin elkartasunean bizi zaitezten . Eta gure elkartasuna Aitarekin eta honen seme Jesu Kristorekin da .
PRED:	And we have heard what we have seen , and we have heard your teaching , and ye shall live together with our Father and our Father Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	We proclaim to you what we ourselves have actually seen and heard so that you may have fellowship with us . And our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son , Jesus Christ .

ID:	6236
INPUT:	Beraz , hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Egiptoko errege faraoiaren kontra nator . Bi besoak hautsiko dizkiot , ongi duena eta jadanik hautsia duena , eta ezpata eroraraziko diot eskutik .
PRED:	Therefore thus says the Lord God : Behold , I am coming against Pharaoh king of Egypt , and I will break his hands , and I will break his hand , and I will break his hand from the hand of the king of Egypt .
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am the enemy of Pharaoh , the king of Egypt ! I will break both of his arms — the good arm along with the broken one — and I will make his sword clatter to the ground .

ID:	6237
INPUT:	Garaipen handiak eman dizkiobere erregeari , maitasunez jokatu dubere gantzutuarekin , Davidekineta beraren ondorengoekin betiko » .
PRED:	He has given him a great victory to the king , and his descendants for ever . ”
GOLD:	You give great victories to your king ; you show unfailing love to your anointed , to David and all his descendants forever . ”

ID:	6238
INPUT:	Nor biziko da heriotzarik ikusi gabe ? Nork ihes egin Herio Leizearen atzaparretatik ?
PRED:	Who can see death ? Who can escape from death ? Who can escape from the grave ?
GOLD:	Lord , where is your unfailing love ? You promised it to David with a faithful pledge .

ID:	6239
INPUT:	Jaunaren espiritua nire gainean dago , berak bainau sagaratu behartsuei berri ona adierazteko ; berak nau bidali gatibuei askatasuna eta itsuei ikusmena hots egitera eta zapalduak askatzera ,
PRED:	The Spirit of the Lord is on me , for he has sent me to tell the poor , to tell the poor , to proclaim the poor , and to the poor , and to the poor ,
GOLD:	“ The Spirit of the is upon me , for he has anointed me to bring Good News to the poor.He has sent me to proclaim that captives will be released , that the blind will see , that the oppressed will be set free ,

ID:	6240
INPUT:	eta esan zien : « Baditut dagoeneko ehun eta hogei urte eta ez naiz gauza daukadan kargurako ; gainera , Jaunak esan dit : “ Ez duzu horko Jordan hori igaroko ” .
PRED:	He said to them , “ I have a hundred and twenty years , and twenty years old and twenty years . The Lord said to me , ‘ You will not cross over the Jordan . '
GOLD:	he said , “ I am now 120 years old , and I am no longer able to lead you . The Lord has told me , ‘ You will not cross the Jordan River . '

ID:	6241
INPUT:	Beren egunak gozo-gozo pasatueta lasai asko jaisten dira lurpera .
PRED:	The days of their days shall come down to the earth , and many shall fall down to the earth .
GOLD:	They spend their days in prosperity , then go down to the grave in peace .

ID:	6242
INPUT:	Hitzaurrea
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Prologue

ID:	6243
INPUT:	bi zutabe , zutabe horien buruetan zeuden kapiteletarako bola bana , zutabeburuetako kapiteletan zeuden bola haiek apaintzeko sare bana ,
PRED:	And the two pillars were under the head of the pillars , and the pillars were under the pillars of the pillars , and the pillars were under their heads .
GOLD:	the two pillars ; the two bowl-shaped capitals on top of the pillars ; the two networks of interwoven chains that decorated the capitals ;

ID:	6244
INPUT:	Eta Saulek agindu zien bere morroiei : « Esaiozue ahapeka Davidi : “ Erregearen begiko zara eta maite zaituzte beraren zerbitzari guztiek . Egin zaitez erregearen suhi ” » .
PRED:	Then Saul said to his servants , “ Tell David , ‘ You will fear the king , and all his servants love you . ' ”
GOLD:	Then Saul told his men to say to David , “ The king really likes you , and so do we . Why do n't you accept the king 's offer and become his son-in-law ? ”

ID:	6245
INPUT:	Ez dut hau esaten giza testigantzaren beharrik dudalako , zuek salba zaitezten baizik .
PRED:	I say not to you , because I speak of men , but you will be saved .
GOLD:	Of course , I have no need of human witnesses , but I say these things so you might be saved .

ID:	6246
INPUT:	Mahalatek hiru seme ekarri zizkion : Jeux , Xemarias eta Zaham .
PRED:	And she brought unto him three sons , Zechariah , and Azariah .
GOLD:	Mahalath had three sons — Jeush , Shemariah , and Zaham .

ID:	6247
INPUT:	Orain itsasoak suntsiturik zaude , urpean galdurik , zure merkantziaketa tripulazio guztia erehondoratuta .
PRED:	And now the sea will be destroyed , and all the peoples of the earth will be destroyed , and all the peoples of the earth will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Now you are a wrecked ship , broken at the bottom of the sea.All your merchandise and crewhave gone down with you .

ID:	6248
INPUT:	itsasoan jaun eta jabe zinen , ontzi eder bat bezalakoaeraiki zintuzten zeure egileek :
PRED:	And thou hast built thee in the sea , and hast built thee a good times , as thou hast built thee .
GOLD:	You extended your boundaries into the sea.Your builders made your beauty perfect .

ID:	6249
INPUT:	Geure begiak ez ditugu ipintzen ikusten diren gauzetan , ikusten ez direnetan baizik ; ikusten direnak behin-behinekoak baitira ; ikusten ez direnak , berriz , behin betikoak .
PRED:	Our eyes see us in the night , but we see not in the night , but the seed of the field , and the seed of the field , and all things that see not .
GOLD:	So we do n't look at the troubles we can see now ; rather , we fix our gaze on things that can not be seen . For the things we see now will soon be gone , but the things we can not see will last forever .

ID:	6250
INPUT:	Akatsik gabeak izan behar zuten , itxura ederrekoak , jakinduriaz , adimenez eta zuhurtasunez beteak , erregearen jauregian zerbitzatzeko modukoak . Babiloniarren hizkera eta idazkera irakatsiko zizkieten .
PRED:	The fool would not be wise , but wisdom , wisdom , wisdom , wisdom , and knowledge , and knowledge , and knowledge , and knowledge , and knowledge , and knowledge in the king 's house , and in the words of the Chaldeans .
GOLD:	“ Select only strong , healthy , and good-looking young men , ” he said . “ Make sure they are well versed in every branch of learning , are gifted with knowledge and good judgment , and are suited to serve in the royal palace . Train these young men in the language and literature of Babylon . ”

ID:	6251
INPUT:	« Zuek , bidean zoaztenok , begira eta ikus : ba ote da nirea bezainbateko oinazerik ? Bai mingarria zaidalaJaunak bere haserre-suminean eman didan oinazea !
PRED:	“ You who walk in the way , look at me , and see my voice , and see my voice ; for the Lord is angry with me in his wrath .
GOLD:	“ Does it mean nothing to you , all you who pass by ? Look around and see if there is any suffering like mine , which the Lord brought on mewhen he erupted in fierce anger .

ID:	6252
INPUT:	Ospatu Jauna zitaraz , zitaraz eta kantu ederrez !
PRED:	Give thanks to the Lord , and praise him with joy .
GOLD:	Sing your praise to the Lord with the harp , with the harp and melodious song ,

ID:	6253
INPUT:	Ez eduki zorrik inorekin , elkar maitatzekoa baizik , zeren lagun hurkoa maite duenak betea baitu legea .
PRED:	There is no one to love one another , but to love one another , for he who love his neighbor is the law .
GOLD:	Owe nothing to anyone — except for your obligation to love one another . If you love your neighbor , you will fulfill the requirements of God 's law .

ID:	6254
INPUT:	harri hutsez eraikiko duzue aldarea . Ondoren , erre-opariak eskainiko dizkiozue bertan Jaunari zeuen Jainkoari ;
PRED:	You shall build an altar to the Lord your God . You shall offer a burnt offering to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Build the altar of uncut stones , and use it to offer burnt offerings to the Lord your God .

ID:	6255
INPUT:	Samsonen heriotza
PRED:	Samson 's death
GOLD:	Samson 's Final Victory

ID:	6256
INPUT:	Eta honek aitortzen du ikusitako guztia Jainkoaren mezua dela , Jesu Kristok baieztatua .
PRED:	And this is the word of God , that the word of God is revealed by Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	who faithfully reported everything he saw . This is his report of the word of God and the testimony of Jesus Christ .

ID:	6257
INPUT:	Gertakari honen ondoren , Jeroboamek , bere jokabide okerretik aldendu ordez , kultu-lekuetako apaizak herriko jende xehearen artetik hartzen jarraitu zuen . Kargu hori gogoko zuen edonor sagaratu ohi zuen kultu-lekuetako apaiz izateko .
PRED:	After these things , Jeroboam went away from his ways , and the priests of the people of the people of the cities of the land , and followed them , that they may be holy .
GOLD:	But even after this , Jeroboam did not turn from his evil ways . He continued to choose priests from the common people . He appointed anyone who wanted to become a priest for the pagan shrines .

ID:	6258
INPUT:	Jaunaren epaia : desleialarentzat zigorra , zintzoarentzat zoriona
PRED:	The judgment of the Lord is to the righteous , and to the righteous , and to the righteous .
GOLD:	Judgment and Final Salvation

ID:	6259
INPUT:	Orduan , Pedrok , hamaika apostoluen artean zutik , honela hitz egin zien : « Juduok eta Jerusalemen zaudeten guztiok : entzun arretaz nire hitzak , otoi , hemen gertatzen denaz ongi jabe zaitezten .
PRED:	Then Peter stood among the apostles , and said to them , “ People of Judah and Jerusalem , listen to my words , so that you may know what has happened to me .
GOLD:	Then Peter stepped forward with the eleven other apostles and shouted to the crowd , “ Listen carefully , all of you , fellow Jews and residents of Jerusalem ! Make no mistake about this .

ID:	6260
INPUT:	« Norbait emakumeekin ohi bezala gizonezkoarekin oheratzen bada , higuingarritasuna egiten dute biek : heriotza-zigorra izango dute . Berena izango dute heriotzaren errua .
PRED:	“ If a man is a man with a man 's wife , he shall be put to death . They shall be put to death . They shall be put to death . They shall be put to death .
GOLD:	“ If a man practices homosexuality , having sex with another man as with a woman , both men have committed a detestable act . They must both be put to death , for they are guilty of a capital offense .

ID:	6261
INPUT:	Ez utzi zeure ahoaribekatu eginarazten , ez esan gero Jainkoariohartu gabe egin duzula . Ea haserretzen zaizun Jainkoazeure hitzengatiketa zeure lanak orodesegiten dizkizun !
PRED:	Do n't turn away your mouth from your mouth , and do n't say , ‘ You have sinned against God . You have done what you have done . '
GOLD:	It is better to say nothing than to make a promise and not keep it .

ID:	6262
INPUT:	Ason elkartu zitzaigunean , ontzian hartu genuen geurekin eta Mitilenera joan ginen .
PRED:	And it came to pass , when we were in Ephesus , we took him in the boat , and went to Kadesh .
GOLD:	He joined us there , and we sailed together to Mitylene .

ID:	6263
INPUT:	Jaunak , aldiz , esan zion Samueli : — Ez begiratu horren itxura eta luzerari . Alde batera utzia dut hori . Kontua ez da gizakiak zeri begiratzen dion , gizakiak itxurari begiratzen baitio ; Jaunak , berriz , bihotzari .
PRED:	But the Lord said to Samuel , “ Do n't look at him . I have turned away from him . This is what the Lord says . He does n't look at him , but his heart is not like a man . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord said to Samuel , “ Do n't judge by his appearance or height , for I have rejected him . The Lord does n't see things the way you see them . People judge by outward appearance , but the Lord looks at the heart . ”

ID:	6264
INPUT:	Erauziko ditutzure zutoin sakratuak , eta zure hiriak erraustuko .
PRED:	And thou shalt destroy thy altars , and shalt destroy thy cities .
GOLD:	I will destroy all your idols and sacred pillars , so you will never again worship the work of your own hands .

ID:	6265
INPUT:	Jainkoak Horeb menditik abiatzeko agindu
PRED:	God 's People
GOLD:	Moses Appoints Leaders from Each Tribe

ID:	6266
INPUT:	Jauna errespetatzea da zuhurtziaren ikasbidea ; apaltasuna lehenengo , ohorea gero .
PRED:	The way of the Lord is wisdom , and the way of wisdom is before the end .
GOLD:	Fear of the Lord teaches wisdom ; humility precedes honor .

ID:	6267
INPUT:	Ene maiteok , honelako agintzariak ditugunez gero , garbi gaitezen gorputzeko eta espirituko zikin guztietatik , eta eraman dezagun bere betera geure sagarapena , Jainkoarenganako begirunean biziz .
PRED:	My beloved , because we are doing this , we will wash our body , and the Spirit will be given to us , and we will turn to our God in the sight of God .
GOLD:	Because we have these promises , dear friends , let us cleanse ourselves from everything that can defile our body or spirit . And let us work toward complete holiness because we fear God .

ID:	6268
INPUT:	« Geroago , morroiak esan zion : “ Egin dut , jauna , zuk agindua , eta oraindik badago tokia ” .
PRED:	Then the servant said to him , “ My lord , I have done what you have commanded , and now it is still still here . ”
GOLD:	After the servant had done this , he reported , ‘ There is still room for more . '

ID:	6269
INPUT:	Bekaturik ez dugula esaten badugu , geure burua engainatzen dugu , eta egia ez dago gure baitan .
PRED:	If we say that we do not sin , we do not sin , and it is not in us .
GOLD:	If we claim we have no sin , we are only fooling ourselves and not living in the truth .

ID:	6270
INPUT:	Baina Jainkoak entzun egin zidan , nire otoitz-oihua aditu .
PRED:	But God heard me , and I cried out to my prayer .
GOLD:	But God did listen ! He paid attention to my prayer .

ID:	6271
INPUT:	Zeren eta , etsai ginelarik , Jainkoak bere Semearen heriotzari esker berekin baketu bagintuen , behin baketuz gero , zenbatez gehiago ez ote gaitu salbatuko beraren biziaz !
PRED:	For if we were enemies , God saved us from the death of his Son , then we will not be saved .
GOLD:	For since our friendship with God was restored by the death of his Son while we were still his enemies , we will certainly be saved through the life of his Son .

ID:	6272
INPUT:	Pedrok esan zion : — Zergatik hartu duzue elkar Jaunaren Espiritua tentatzeko ? Hara , atean dira dagoeneko zure senarrari lur eman diotenak ; zu eramango zaituzte orain .
PRED:	Peter said to him , “ Why have you received the Spirit of the Lord ? Behold , the Spirit of the Lord has given you to the husband who is coming out , and now you will be brought to your husband . ”
GOLD:	And Peter said , “ How could the two of you even think of conspiring to test the Spirit of the Lord like this ? The young men who buried your husband are just outside the door , and they will carry you out , too . ”

ID:	6273
INPUT:	Maitemindua nauzu , ene arreba , ene emaztegaia ! Maitemindua nauzu zeure begirada bakar batez , bihotz-lotua zeure lepoko kate-bira batez .
PRED:	If you love me , my sister , love me ! If you love me , you love me with a whole heart .
GOLD:	You have captured my heart , my treasure , my bride.You hold it hostage with one glance of your eyes , with a single jewel of your necklace .

ID:	6274
INPUT:	« Bigarren egunetik zazpigarrenera , eguneroko erre-opari eta berauei dagozkien labore- eta isur-opariez gain , akats gabeko abereak eskainiko dituzue erre-oparitzat , dagozkien labore- eta isur-opariekin , eta aker bat barkamen-oparitarako . Hona erre-oparitzat eskaini beharreko abereak : « Bigarren egunean , hamabi zekor , bi ahari eta urtebeteko hamalau arkume ; hirugarren egunean , hamaika zekor , bi ahari eta urtebeteko hamalau arkume ; laugarren egunean , hamar zekor , bi ahari eta urtebeteko hamalau arkume ; bosgarren egunean , bederatzi zekor , bi ahari eta urtebeteko hamalau arkume ; seigarren egunean , zortzi zekor , bi ahari eta urtebeteko hamalau arkume ; zazpigarren egunean , zazpi zekor , bi ahari eta urtebeteko hamalau arkume .
PRED:	“ On the seventh day , on the seventh day , on the seventh day , on the seventh day , on the eighth day , on the eighth day , on the eighth day , on the eighth day , on the eighth day , on the eighth day , on the eighth day , on the eighth day , on the eighth day , on the eighth day , on the eighth day , on the eighth day , on the altar , on the altar , on the altar , on the eighth day of the altar , on the seventh day of the altar , on the altar , on the altar , on the altar , on the altar , on the altar , on the altar , on the altar , on the altar , on the altar , on the eighth day of the altar , on the eighth day of the altar , on the altar , on the altar , on the altar , on the altar , on the altar , on the altar , on the altar , on the altar , on the altar , on the altar
GOLD:	“ On the second day of this seven-day festival , sacrifice twelve young bulls , two rams , and fourteen one-year-old male lambs , all with no defects .

ID:	6275
INPUT:	Beraz , Semeak askatzen bazaituzte , benetan aske izango zarete .
PRED:	If you are free , you will be free in many days .
GOLD:	So if the Son sets you free , you are truly free .

ID:	6276
INPUT:	Baina bihotza idolatria eta jokaera higuingarrietara makurtzen dutenei beren jokabidearen ordaina emango diet . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	But I will give them their heart to their idols , and to their abominations , saith the Lord God .
GOLD:	But as for those who long for vile images and detestable idols , I will repay them fully for their sins . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	6277
INPUT:	Neure morroi eta mirabeei ere neure espiritua isuriko diet egun haietaneta profetizatu egingo dute .
PRED:	And I will send my servant and his servants , and I will pour out my Spirit on them , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	In those days I will pour out my Spiriteven on my servants — men and women alike — and they will prophesy .

ID:	6278
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jesus Jaunarengan nola sinesten duzuen eta fededun guztiak nola maite dituzuen jakinik ,
PRED:	Therefore you know how you believe in the Lord Jesus , how you love all the saints and all the saints .
GOLD:	Ever since I first heard of your strong faith in the Lord Jesus and your love for God 's people everywhere ,

ID:	6279
INPUT:	Jesus aintziraren beste bazterrera itzuli zenean , jende-talde handia bildu zitzaion ondora . Oraindik aintzira ondoan zegoela ,
PRED:	When Jesus returned to the other side of the sea , a large crowd gathered to him , and a large crowd stood beside the sea .
GOLD:	Jesus got into the boat again and went back to the other side of the lake , where a large crowd gathered around him on the shore .

ID:	6280
INPUT:	Simonek , apostoluek jendeari eskuak ezartzean Espiritua etortzen zitzaiela ikusirik , dirua eskaini zien ,
PRED:	Simon , when he had laid his hands on the people , he saw that the Spirit had come upon them , he offered a sacrifice .
GOLD:	When Simon saw that the Spirit was given when the apostles laid their hands on people , he offered them money to buy this power .

ID:	6281
INPUT:	Ilunabarrean siriarren kanpalekura abiatu ziren . Kanpaleku-ertzera heltzean , inor ere ez zegoela ikusi zuten .
PRED:	And they went into the camp of the camp . And when they came into the camp , they saw no one .
GOLD:	So at twilight they set out for the camp of the Arameans . But when they came to the edge of the camp , no one was there !

ID:	6282
INPUT:	berak emango dio lurrari sasoian sasoiko euria , eta garia , ardoa eta olioa izango dituzue ;
PRED:	He will give the rain on the earth , and he will give it to you , and the oil , and the oil , and the oil .
GOLD:	then he will send the rains in their proper seasons — the early and late rains — so you can bring in your harvests of grain , new wine , and olive oil .

ID:	6283
INPUT:	Utzi zuten , bada , Jaunaren mendia eta hiru eguneko bidean joan ziren . Jaunaren itun-kutxa aurretik joan zitzaien hiru egunetan , kanpatu behar zuten tokia jakinarazteko .
PRED:	So they left the mountain of the Lord and went on the way of the Lord three days , and they went before the ark of the covenant of the covenant of the covenant of the Lord three days .
GOLD:	They marched for three days after leaving the mountain of the Lord , with the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant moving ahead of them to show them where to stop and rest .

ID:	6284
INPUT:	Aspalditik ezagutzen zutenek , profetekin batera profeta-trantzean ikusi zutenean , honela ziotsoten elkarri : — Zer gertatzen ote zaio Kixen semeari ? Saul ere profeta artean ?
PRED:	And when they heard him , they saw him walking by a prophet , and they said unto one another , What shall he be done among the prophets ? And they said unto one another , What shall he be a prophet ?
GOLD:	When those who knew Saul heard about it , they exclaimed , “ What ? Is even Saul a prophet ? How did the son of Kish become a prophet ? ”

ID:	6285
INPUT:	Hori guztia etortzeko ziren gauzen itzala besterik ez da ; errealitatea Kristo da .
PRED:	All these things came to pass by night , but Christ is Christ .
GOLD:	For these rules are only shadows of the reality yet to come . And Christ himself is that reality .

ID:	6286
INPUT:	Nire esana beti egin duzuenez gero , ene maiteok , egizue orain ere , hor ez nagoelarik ; ez hor nagoenean bezala bakarrik , askoz gehiago baizik . Saia zaitezte zeuen salbamena begirune santuz burutzen ;
PRED:	My beloved and sisters , you have done what I have said . Now I am not in the same way , but in the same way I am not more than I am .
GOLD:	Dear friends , you always followed my instructions when I was with you . And now that I am away , it is even more important . Work hard to show the results of your salvation , obeying God with deep reverence and fear .

ID:	6287
INPUT:	Jauna , ez ni zigortu haserre , ez ni zentzatu sumindurik .
PRED:	O Lord , I am angry , and I am not angry .
GOLD:	Have compassion on me , Lord , for I am weak.Heal me , Lord , for my bones are in agony .

ID:	6288
INPUT:	Jainkoa goresten zuten , eta herri osoaren estimazioa zuten . Eta Jaunak egunetik egunera gehitzen zizkion elkarteari salbatzen zirenak .
PRED:	And they praise God , and gave him thanks to all the people . And the Lord gave him all the people that were saved from the day .
GOLD:	all the while praising God and enjoying the goodwill of all the people . And each day the Lord added to their fellowship those who were being saved .

ID:	6289
INPUT:	Neu bainaiz Jauna , zure Jainkoa , Israelen Jainko santua dazure salbatzailea . Egipto eman dut zure askapen-sari , Etiopia eta Seba , zure ordainetan
PRED:	I am the Lord your God , the Holy One of Israel , your salvation , the God of Israel , and I have redeemed your name , and your brother , and your brother ,
GOLD:	For I am the Lord , your God , the Holy One of Israel , your Savior.I gave Egypt as a ransom for your freedom ; I gave Ethiopia and Seba in your place .

ID:	6290
INPUT:	Jaiki zen , bada , Jakob eta bere seme-alabak eta emazteak gamelu gainera igoarazi zituen .
PRED:	So Jacob got up and took his sons and his sons and his wives and daughters on them .
GOLD:	So Jacob put his wives and children on camels ,

ID:	6291
INPUT:	Aberastasunak zuhurren koroa , zentzugabeen ergelkeria beti ergelkeria .
PRED:	The riches of the wise is wise , but the mouth of the fool is foolish .
GOLD:	Wealth is a crown for the wise ; the effort of fools yields only foolishness .

ID:	6292
INPUT:	Denak negarrez eta aieneka ari ziren neskarengatik . Jesusek esan zien : « Ez egin negarrik ; ez dago hilda , lo dago » .
PRED:	They all wept for their father , and said to them , “ He is not clean . He is dead , but he is dead . ”
GOLD:	The house was filled with people weeping and wailing , but he said , “ Stop the weeping ! She is n't dead ; she 's only asleep . ”

ID:	6293
INPUT:	Bai , zuregandik urrun doazenak galduak dira , desleial zaizkizunak suntsitu egingo dituzu .
PRED:	You will be destroyed , and you will be destroyed , and you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Those who desert him will perish , for you destroy those who abandon you .

ID:	6294
INPUT:	( 38 , 1-7 )
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Plans for the Courtyard

ID:	6295
INPUT:	Hartzeko gelditzen ziren lurraldeak
PRED:	The people of the land
GOLD:	The Land Yet to Be Conquered

ID:	6296
INPUT:	Joan zen , beraz , Naaman bere zaldi , guda-gurdi eta guzti , eta Eliseoren etxeko ate aurrean gelditu zen .
PRED:	So Nathan went to his chariot and chariots , and he stood at the door of Elisha 's house .
GOLD:	So Naaman went with his horses and chariots and waited at the door of Elisha 's house .

ID:	6297
INPUT:	Bai , zu izan zaitut laguntzaile ; kantuz ariko naiz pozik zure hegalen itzalean .
PRED:	I will sing to you , and I will sing praises to you , and I will sing praises to you .
GOLD:	I cling to you ; your strong right hand holds me securely .

ID:	6298
INPUT:	Erre-oparitarako abereak ere hara eramango dituzue eta , haragi eta odol , oso-osorik erreko Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren aldarean . Beste sakrifizioetako odola Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren aldare gainean isuriko duzue ; haragia , berriz , jan egingo .
PRED:	You shall bring the burnt offering to the Lord your God . You shall offer it to the altar of burnt offerings . You shall eat the blood of the Lord your God . You shall eat it on the altar of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	You must offer the meat and blood of your burnt offerings on the altar of the Lord your God . The blood of your other sacrifices must be poured out on the altar of the Lord your God , but you may eat the meat .

ID:	6299
INPUT:	ikusi hango harresiak , ikertu jauregiak , hurrengo gizaldiari esateko :
PRED:	When you see the wall , you will see it , and you will say to the wise man ,
GOLD:	For that is what God is like.He is our God forever and ever , and he will guide us until we die .

ID:	6300
INPUT:	Egun hartan , Jaun ahalguztidunariopariak ekarriko dizkioherri lerden eta beltzaranak , edonon beldurrasortzen duen jendeak , ibaiz ureztaturiko lurraldeanbizi denherri gogor eta menderatzaileak . Opariak ekarriko ditu Sion mendira , Jaun ahalguztidunaren bizilekura .
PRED:	And it shall come to pass in that day , that the sacrifice of the Lord of hosts shall bring unto the people that fear , and all the people that fear , and all the people of the land , and the land of the land , and the land of the Lord of hosts , and the land of hosts , and the land of Zion , and the Lord of hosts , and the Lord of hosts , shall bring them into Mount Zion .
GOLD:	At that time the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will receive giftsfrom this land divided by rivers , from this tall , smooth-skinned people , who are feared far and wide for their conquests and destruction.They will bring the gifts to Jerusalem , where the Lord of Heaven 's Armies dwells .

ID:	6301
INPUT:	Zazpigarren hilean , Netaniasen seme eta Elixamaren biloba Ismael , errege-jatorrikoa bera , Mitzpara joan zen hamar gizonekin , Gedalias ikustera . Elkarrekin otordua egiten ari zirela ,
PRED:	On the seventh day of the seventh month , the son of Shallum , the son of Shallum , the son of Shallum , came to Mizpah , and with him ten men with him , and they ate bread with him .
GOLD:	But in midautumn of that year , Ishmael son of Nethaniah and grandson of Elishama , who was a member of the royal family and had been one of the king 's high officials , went to Mizpah with ten men to meet Gedaliah . While they were eating together ,

ID:	6302
INPUT:	Jaunaren menpean jarri
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Drawing Close to God

ID:	6303
INPUT:	Baina gaiztoaren gaiztoz oker jokatzen baduzue , galdu egingo zarete bai zuek , bai zuen erregea .
PRED:	But if you do evil , you will die .
GOLD:	But if you continue to sin , you and your king will be swept away . ”

ID:	6304
INPUT:	errugabea zarela diozu , Jauna ez dagoela inola erezurekin haserre . Hara , epaitu egingo zaitut , huts egin ez duzula esaka ari zarelako .
PRED:	You are guilty of the Lord , and you do n't know how he is angry with you . I will judge you , because you have not sinned .
GOLD:	And yet you say , ‘ I have done nothing wrong.Surely God is n't angry with me ! 'But now I will punish you severelybecause you claim you have not sinned .

ID:	6305
INPUT:	Jesus fariseuekin eztabaidan ( 5 , 17 — 6 , 11 )
PRED:	Jesus and the Pharisees
GOLD:	A Discussion about Fasting

ID:	6306
INPUT:	Israeldarrak Sinai basamortuan zeudelarik , Jauna mintzatu zitzaion Moisesi elkarketa-etxolan . Egiptotik irten eta hurrengo urtea zen , bigarren hilaren lehen eguna . Hau esan zion :
PRED:	And it came to pass in the wilderness of Sinai , that the Lord spoke unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai , in the first year of the month , in the second year of the month , that the Lord spake unto Moses , saying ,
GOLD:	A year after Israel 's departure from Egypt , the Lord spoke to Moses in the Tabernacle in the wilderness of Sinai . On the first day of the second month of that year he said ,

ID:	6307
INPUT:	Biharamun goizean , berriro hirira zetorrela , Jesus gosetu egin zen .
PRED:	And it came to pass in the morning , when he came to the city , he was hungry .
GOLD:	In the morning , as Jesus was returning to Jerusalem , he was hungry ,

ID:	6308
INPUT:	Dohakabeari eskua zabaltzen dioeta behartsuari laguntza ematen .
PRED:	He gives the poor to the poor , and he gives the poor to help the poor .
GOLD:	She extends a helping hand to the poorand opens her arms to the needy .

ID:	6309
INPUT:	Xefatiasen ondorengoetatik Zebadias , Mikaelen semea , beste laurogei gizonekin ;
PRED:	Of the sons of Manasseh , Zechariah the son of Azariah , and with him forty men .
GOLD:	From the family of Shephatiah : Zebadiah son of Michael and 80 other men .

ID:	6310
INPUT:	Moisesek legean honelakoak harrika hiltzeko agindu zigun ; zuk zer diozu ?
PRED:	Moses commanded us to kill the law , and what do you say to us ?
GOLD:	The law of Moses says to stone her . What do you say ? ”

ID:	6311
INPUT:	Poz bitez basamortuaeta bertako kanpalekuak , Kedar leinuaren bizilekuak . Sela hiriko bizilagunekegin bezate poz-oihu , mendi-gailurretan irrintzi .
PRED:	Be glad in the wilderness , and all the camp of the children of Asher , as they live in the wilderness , as they live in the midst of the earth .
GOLD:	Join in the chorus , you desert towns ; let the villages of Kedar rejoice ! Let the people of Sela sing for joy ; shout praises from the mountaintops !

ID:	6312
INPUT:	Ea , sal diezaiegun ismaeldarrei , kalterik egin gabe , anaia hau geure odolekoa dugu eta » . Amore eman zuten anaiek .
PRED:	For if the people of Israel were sold for us , we did n't hurt our brother or our blood , and they gave it to him .
GOLD:	Instead of hurting him , let 's sell him to those Ishmaelite traders . After all , he is our brother — our own flesh and blood ! ” And his brothers agreed .

ID:	6313
INPUT:	Orduan , esan zien Jesusek sinetsi zioten juduei : — Nire mezuan tinko irauten baduzue , zinez nire ikasle izango zarete ;
PRED:	Then Jesus said to the Jews , “ If you walk in my word , you will be my disciples .
GOLD:	Jesus said to the people who believed in him , “ You are truly my disciples if you remain faithful to my teachings .

ID:	6314
INPUT:	Nahiz eta zeure buruaxa<unk> eta lixibaz garbitu , ez da nire begi aurretik aldentzenzure bekatuaren zikina . Hala diot nik , Jainko Jaunak .
PRED:	And thou shalt wash thy head , and thine eyes , and thine eyes shall not turn away from me , saith the Lord God .
GOLD:	No amount of soap or lye can make you clean.I still see the stain of your guilt.I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !

ID:	6315
INPUT:	( Mt 9 , 1-8 ; Lk 5 , 17-26 )
PRED:	(
GOLD:	A Discussion about Fasting

ID:	6316
INPUT:	eta azkengabeko otoitzen aitzakiaz , emakume alargunen ondasunak irensten dituzte . Epairik zorrotzena izango dute horrelako horiek » .
PRED:	And they have taken away from the prayer of the widow , and have devoured the riches of the widow , and have devoured them .
GOLD:	Yet they shamelessly cheat widows out of their property and then pretend to be pious by making long prayers in public . Because of this , they will be severely punished . ”

ID:	6317
INPUT:	Ga<unk> , Uza eta Paseahenak ;
PRED:	the sons of Shimron , the sons of Shimron , the children of Shimron ,
GOLD:	Gazzam , Uzza , Paseah ,

ID:	6318
INPUT:	Zeure jaunaren etxea eman dizut , eta altzoan jarri dizkizut zeure jaunaren emazteak . Israel eta Juda erreinuak eman dizkizut . Eta hori gutxi balitz , askoz handiagoak emanen dizkizut .
PRED:	I have given you your lord 's wife , and I have given you the wives of your lord 's wife . I have given you the kingdom of Israel and Judah , and I have given you many times .
GOLD:	I gave you your master 's house and his wives and the kingdoms of Israel and Judah . And if that had not been enough , I would have given you much , much more .

ID:	6319
INPUT:	Alferrik zigortu ditutzuen seme-alabak , ez baituzue eskarmenturik hartu . Zeuek hil dituzue profetak ezpataz , lehoi amorratuak bezala .
PRED:	You have not killed your sons in vain , for you have not killed them . You have killed them as a lion .
GOLD:	“ I have punished your children , but they did not respond to my discipline.You yourselves have killed your prophetsas a lion kills its prey .

ID:	6320
INPUT:	Begira Jainkoak eginari : nork zuzen ote dezakehark okertua ?
PRED:	Behold , who is righteous , who is righteous ?
GOLD:	Accept the way God does things , for who can straighten what he has made crooked ?

ID:	6321
INPUT:	Jainkoak Moisesi esan zion , gainera : — Esan israeldarrei : Jaunak , zuen arbaso Abraham , Isaak eta Jakoben Jainkoak , zuengana bidali nau . Horixe izango da nire izena betiko ; hala deituko naute belaunez belaun .
PRED:	God said to Moses , “ Tell the Israelites , ‘ The Lord , the God of your fathers , Isaac , Isaac , Isaac , and Jacob , and Jacob , and Jacob , and Jacob , will be my name forever .
GOLD:	God also said to Moses , “ Say this to the people of Israel : Yahweh , the God of your ancestors — the God of Abraham , the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob — has sent me to you.This is my eternal name , my name to remember for all generations .

ID:	6322
INPUT:	Apaizburuek eta herriak ere okerkeria okerkeriaren gainean egiten zuten , arrotzen ohitura higuingarriak hartuz . Jaunak Jerusalemen beretzat sagaratua zuen tenplua ere kutsatu egin zuten .
PRED:	And the chief priests and the people did evil in the sight of their wickedness , and they defiled the abominations of their wickedness , and defiled the house of the Lord in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Likewise , all the leaders of the priests and the people became more and more unfaithful . They followed all the pagan practices of the surrounding nations , desecrating the Temple of the Lord that had been consecrated in Jerusalem .

ID:	6323
INPUT:	Eta zeu , Paxhur , eta zure familia osoa gatibu eramango zaituztete Babiloniara . Han hilko zara eta han hilobiratuko zaituzte , gezurrezko profeta-mezua ematen zenien adiskide guztiekin batera » .
PRED:	You will be taken away to Babylon , and all your household will be taken away to Babylon . There you will die there , and you will die there . There you will be a false prophet in all your friends . ”
GOLD:	As for you , Pashhur , you and all your household will go as captives to Babylon . There you will die and be buried , you and all your friends to whom you prophesied that everything would be all right . ' ”

ID:	6324
INPUT:	Eta eroapenak lortuko du bere helburua , heldutasun beteko pertsonak izan zaitezten , ezertan akatsik gabeak .
PRED:	And he that is wise shall be wise in his own heart , that ye may be wise .
GOLD:	So let it grow , for when your endurance is fully developed , you will be perfect and complete , needing nothing .

ID:	6325
INPUT:	Eta hori ere gutxitzat jota , Jainko Jauna , zure morroi honen etxeari luzarorako hitza eman diozu . Hori ez da maiz gertatzen , Jainko Jauna .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord our God has given you a long time to build your house for a long time . This is what the Sovereign Lord God has done .
GOLD:	And now , Sovereign Lord , in addition to everything else , you speak of giving your servant a lasting dynasty ! Do you deal with everyone this way , O Sovereign Lord ?

ID:	6326
INPUT:	Ondoren , beste zazpi behi itxura txarreko eta argal atera ziren . Haiek bezain eskasik ez zen inoiz ordu arte ikusi Egipto lurraldean .
PRED:	And there were seven other seven loaves , and the remnant of the land of Egypt , until the time of the king of Egypt had not seen it .
GOLD:	But then I saw seven sick-looking cows , scrawny and thin , come up after them . I 've never seen such sorry-looking animals in all the land of Egypt .

ID:	6327
INPUT:	Simonek erantzun zion : — Gehien barkatu zionak , nik uste . Jesusek esan zion : — Zuzen diozu .
PRED:	Simon said to him , “ This is what he asked . ” Jesus said to him , “ You are right . ”
GOLD:	Simon answered , “ I suppose the one for whom he canceled the larger debt . ” “ That 's right , ” Jesus said .

ID:	6328
INPUT:	Orduan , bisitariek heldu eta etxe barrura erakarri zuten Lot , eta atea itxi .
PRED:	And the men came and brought him into the house , and brought him into the house , and the door shut the door .
GOLD:	But the two angels reached out , pulled Lot into the house , and bolted the door .

ID:	6329
INPUT:	Haren ondoren , erroldatzea egin zen garaian , Judas galilearra * atera zen , eta hainbat jende bereganatu zuen ; baina hil egin zuten hura ere , eta jarraitzaile guztiak sakabanatu ziren .
PRED:	After the days of his reign , Judas went to Samaria , and many of the people killed him , but they killed him , and all the others were scattered .
GOLD:	After him , at the time of the census , there was Judas of Galilee . He got people to follow him , but he was killed , too , and all his followers were scattered .

ID:	6330
INPUT:	Seme-alabek egurra biltzen dute , gurasoek sua pizten eta emakumeek orea egiten , Istar-i , zeruko erregina deitzen diotenari , opilak eskaintzeko ; gainera , jainko arrotzei isur-opariak eskaintzen dizkiete , ni iraintzeko .
PRED:	And they send their children to worship , and the women of the field , and the women call the name of the Lord , to offer sacrifices to the gods of heaven , and to offer sacrifices to other gods .
GOLD:	No wonder I am so angry ! Watch how the children gather wood and the fathers build sacrificial fires . See how the women knead dough and make cakes to offer to the Queen of Heaven . And they pour out liquid offerings to their other idol gods !

ID:	6331
INPUT:	Lege eta ohikune bat bera izango duzue , bai zuek , bai zuen artean bizi den etorkinak » .
PRED:	You shall be a witness and a witness , and all who live among you shall live among you . ”
GOLD:	The same instructions and regulations will apply both to you and to the foreigners living among you . ”

ID:	6332
INPUT:	« Kartzela arreta guztiaz itxia aurkitu dugu eta zaintzaileak ateetan erne , baina irekitzean barruan ez dugu inor aurkitu » .
PRED:	“ We found all the light and the guard in the middle of the guard , but we found no one in our hearts . ”
GOLD:	“ The jail was securely locked , with the guards standing outside , but when we opened the gates , no one was there ! ”

ID:	6333
INPUT:	Irents beza gau hura iluntasunak , ez beza inork urteko egunen artean sar , ezta zenbatu ere hilekoen artean !
PRED:	Let the darkness be covered with darkness , and let no one enter into the gates of the city .
GOLD:	Let that night be blotted off the calendar , never again to be counted among the days of the year , never again to appear among the months .

ID:	6334
INPUT:	Hauek ziren Lebiren semeak : Gerxon , Kehat eta Merari .
PRED:	These are the sons of Levi : the sons of Levi , the sons of Gershon , the sons of Levi , the sons of Levi , the sons of Levi .
GOLD:	Levi had three sons , whose names were Gershon , Kohath , and Merari .

ID:	6335
INPUT:	Ez diegu jaramonik egin zure zerbitzari profetei , zure izenean gure errege eta buruzagiei , gure arbaso eta herri osoari hitz egin dietenean .
PRED:	We did not listen to your servants the prophets in your name , when we spoke to your servants , and to our princes , and to all the people .
GOLD:	We have refused to listen to your servants the prophets , who spoke on your authority to our kings and princes and ancestors and to all the people of the land .

ID:	6336
INPUT:	ez du haurrik , ez ondorengorik herrian , ez da inor bizirik gelditzen haren egoitzan .
PRED:	There is no child in the land , neither shall any man live in his tents .
GOLD:	They will have neither children nor grandchildren , nor any survivor in the place where they lived .

ID:	6337
INPUT:	etengabeko sesioak ; horietan aritzen direnak burua galdutako jendea da , egiaren axolarik gabea ; horiek erlijioa irabazpide bihurtzen dute .
PRED:	A man who does n't have enough food , but a man who is a fool is a fool . These are the way of a fool .
GOLD:	These people always cause trouble . Their minds are corrupt , and they have turned their backs on the truth . To them , a show of godliness is just a way to become wealthy .

ID:	6338
INPUT:	ez dute legamiarekin erreko , neure ohorez erretako oparietatik ematen diedan partea baita . Guztiz sakratua da , barkamen-oparia eta ordain-oparia bezainbeste .
PRED:	They are not to burn with the yeast of my burnt offering , for it is most holy . It is holy . It is holy , and it is holy .
GOLD:	In the morning , after the priest on duty has put on his official linen clothing and linen undergarments , he must clean out the ashes of the burnt offering and put them beside the altar .

ID:	6339
INPUT:	santutegiko liturgi zerbitzurako jantziak , Aaron apaizaren jantzi sakratuak eta beronen semeen apaiz-zerbitzurako jantziak » .
PRED:	And the garments of the sanctuary , the garments of Aaron the priest , and the holy garments , and the garments of Aaron the priest , and his sons .
GOLD:	the beautifully stitched garments for the priests to wear while ministering in the Holy Place — the sacred garments for Aaron the priest , and the garments for his sons to wear as they minister as priests . ”

ID:	6340
INPUT:	Betea dago lurraldea idoloz : beren eskuz eginaren aurreandira ahuspezten , beren behatzez landuaren aurrean .
PRED:	The land is broken in front of them . They bow down before their hands , and bowed down before their own eyes .
GOLD:	Their land is full of idols ; the people worship things they have madewith their own hands .

ID:	6341
INPUT:	Jerusalem berriaren distira
PRED:	The People of Jerusalem
GOLD:	Future Glory for Jerusalem

ID:	6342
INPUT:	Handik hiru urtera Jerusalemera igo nintzen Pedro ezagutzera , eta hamabost egun egin nituen berarekin .
PRED:	After three years I went up to Jerusalem to know Peter , and I had five days with him .
GOLD:	Then three years later I went to Jerusalem to get to know Peter , and I stayed with him for fifteen days .

ID:	6343
INPUT:	Haren barruan izango dute etzalekuartalde eta mota guztietakoabereek . Hango zutabeburuetanemango dute gauahontzak eta trikuak . Leiho eta ateburuetankarranka egingo du beleak . Zedrozko oholeriagorri agertuko da .
PRED:	And they shall be in his heart , and all his cattle , and all his cattle , and his cattle , and all his cattle , and all his cattle , and all the things that are in his heart ; and they shall bring them into the valley of the valley .
GOLD:	The proud city will become a pasture for flocks and herds , and all sorts of wild animals will settle there.The desert owl and screech owl will roost on its ruined columns , their calls echoing through the gaping windows.Rubble will block all the doorways , and the cedar paneling will be exposed to the weather .

ID:	6344
INPUT:	Zintzoak , ongi pentsatu eta gero erantzun ; gaiztoak , gaiztakeria botatzen ahotik .
PRED:	The righteous will say , “ The righteous will answer , but the wicked will be cut off from their mouth . ”
GOLD:	The heart of the godly thinks carefully before speaking ; the mouth of the wicked overflows with evil words .

ID:	6345
INPUT:	Behia eta hartz emeaelkarrekin larratuko diraeta haien umeak batera etzango . Lehoiak lastoa jango du , idiaren antzera .
PRED:	The young lion and her young men will lie down with them , and they will eat their young lion like a lion .
GOLD:	The cow will graze near the bear.The cub and the calf will lie down together.The lion will eat hay like a cow .

ID:	6346
INPUT:	eta , hilobitik itzulirik , gertatutako guztiaren berri eman zieten Hamaikei eta gainerako ikasleei .
PRED:	And they returned from the tomb , and told all that had happened to him , and to his disciples .
GOLD:	So they rushed back from the tomb to tell his eleven disciples — and everyone else — what had happened .

ID:	6347
INPUT:	( Ir 21 , 1-6 )
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Sacrificing Firstborn Male Animals

ID:	6348
INPUT:	Kuxek Nimrod izan zuen . Hau izan zen lehenengo gizon boteretsua munduan ;
PRED:	Gideon was the son of Joash . He was the first man in the world .
GOLD:	Cush was also the ancestor of Nimrod , who was the first heroic warrior on earth .

ID:	6349
INPUT:	Bat bakarra epailea
PRED:	CHAPTER 3 .
GOLD:	Warning against Judging Others

ID:	6350
INPUT:	Eta ongi egiten dizuetenei bakarrik egiten badiezue ongi , zer esker on zor zaizue ? Bekatariek ere egiten dute beste horrenbeste .
PRED:	And if you do what you do , what will you do to those who do , what will you do ? The sinners also do these things .
GOLD:	And if you do good only to those who do good to you , why should you get credit ? Even sinners do that much !

ID:	6351
INPUT:	Horientzat egunsentia gau iluna da , ohituak baitaude iluntasuneko izuetara » .
PRED:	This is the darkness for them , for it is dark to you in darkness . ”
GOLD:	The black night is their morning.They ally themselves with the terrors of the darkness .

ID:	6352
INPUT:	Baina hark erantzun zion aitari : “ Hainbeste urte da zure agindu bat ere sekula huts egin gabe zerbitzatzen zaitudala , eta ez didazu egundaino antxume bat ere eman , lagunekin festa egiteko ;
PRED:	But he said to his father , “ You have many years , and you have not kept your commandments , and you have not kept your commandments , and you have not given me a young goat .
GOLD:	but he replied , ‘ All these years I 've slaved for you and never once refused to do a single thing you told me to . And in all that time you never gave me even one young goat for a feast with my friends .

ID:	6353
INPUT:	« Eman dezagun norbaitek okela sagaratua daramala bere jantzian eta jantzi-ertzak ogia , eltzekoa , ardoa , olioa nahiz bestelako janariren bat ukitzen duela ; janari hauek sagaratu bihurtzen ote dira ? » Apaizek ezetz erantzun zuten .
PRED:	“ Can anyone give us the food that is holy , and the bread , and the bread , and the bread , and the bread , and the wine , and the wine , and the wine , or the wine , or the wine , and the priests answered him .
GOLD:	‘ If one of you is carrying some meat from a holy sacrifice in his robes and his robe happens to brush against some bread or stew , wine or olive oil , or any other kind of food , will it also become holy ? ' ” The priests replied , “ No . ”

ID:	6354
INPUT:	Beraz , adieraz iezaiezu nire , Jainko Jaun honen , mezua : Zuek haragia odolarekin jaten duzue , idoloetan uste ona jarri eta hilketak egiten dituzue . Nola nahi duzue , bada , lurralde honen jabetza izan ?
PRED:	So then say to them , Thus says the Lord God : You know the blood of the blood of the blood , and you know the blood of the blood of the idols , and do you want to die , so that you may possess it ?
GOLD:	So tell these people , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : You eat meat with blood in it , you worship idols , and you murder the innocent . Do you really think the land should be yours ?

ID:	6355
INPUT:	Israeldarrei zegokien zatitik , gizaki eta abere-mota bakoitzetik berrogeita hamarreko bat bereizi zuen , eta Jaunaren egoitzako zerbitzuaz arduratzen ziren lebitarrei eman zien , Jaunak agindu bezala .
PRED:	And he took one of the sons of Israel from the sons of Israel , and one tenth of them , according to the commandment of the Lord , according to the commandment of the Levites , as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	From the half-share given to the people , Moses took one of every fifty prisoners and animals and gave them to the Levites , who maintained the Lord 's Tabernacle . All this was done as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	6356
INPUT:	Haren aurreko distiraz , tximista eta sugarrezko ikatz goribihurtzen ziren hodeiak .
PRED:	And they stood before him , and fire came out of fire , and fire came upon them .
GOLD:	The Lord thundered from heaven ; the voice of the Most High resoundedamid the hail and burning coals .

ID:	6357
INPUT:	Jesus Espiritu Santuaz betea itzuli zen Jordandik . Espirituak eramanik , basamortuan barrena ibili zen
PRED:	And Jesus returned from the Holy Spirit . And the Holy Spirit took him into the wilderness , and went into the wilderness .
GOLD:	Then Jesus , full of the Holy Spirit , returned from the Jordan River . He was led by the Spirit in the wilderness ,

ID:	6358
INPUT:	baina munduak jakin behar du nik Aita maite dudala eta hark agindua zintzo betetzen dudala . Jaiki , goazen hemendik !
PRED:	But the world must know that I love the Father , and that he loves the Father , and he commanded me , and rose up from there .
GOLD:	but I will do what the Father requires of me , so that the world will know that I love the Father . Come , let 's be going .

ID:	6359
INPUT:	bere nagusiaren etxean kartzelatuak zeuden faraoiaren funtzionarioak eta galdegin zien : — Zergatik zaudete hain aurpegi-ilun ?
PRED:	When the king 's servants were in his house , the servants of Pharaoh said to them , “ Why do you look at your face ? ”
GOLD:	“ Why do you look so worried today ? ” he asked them .

ID:	6360
INPUT:	Esterrek otordura deitu erregea eta Haman
PRED:	Esther 's King and Haman
GOLD:	Esther 's Request to the King

ID:	6361
INPUT:	Hogeita hamabost urte zituen Josafatek Judako errege izaten hastean , eta hogeita bost urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen . Beraren amak Azuba zuen izena eta Xilhiren alaba zen .
PRED:	Jehoshaphat was twenty-five years old when he became king of Judah , and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem . His mother 's name was Pethahiah the daughter of Healed .
GOLD:	So Jehoshaphat ruled over the land of Judah . He was thirty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem twenty-five years . His mother was Azubah , the daughter of Shilhi .

ID:	6362
INPUT:	Joan zen , bada , agindutakoa hartzera , eta amarengana itzuli zen . Honek jaki goxoa prestatu zuen , aitak atsegin zuen bezalakoa .
PRED:	So he went and went to the woman , and returned to the mother , and he prepared for her , as his father had done .
GOLD:	So Jacob went out and got the young goats for his mother . Rebekah took them and prepared a delicious meal , just the way Isaac liked it .

ID:	6363
INPUT:	goizero ikuskatzeko , uneoro aztertzen jarduteko ?
PRED:	When you see the morning , do you turn away ?
GOLD:	For you examine us every morningand test us every moment .

ID:	6364
INPUT:	Lemuel erregearen esanak , bere amak irakatsitakoak .
PRED:	The words of the king , the words of the king , and the law of his mother .
GOLD:	The sayings of King Lemuel contain this message , which his mother taught him .

ID:	6365
INPUT:	zeure desohorea har dezazun eta lotsa zaitezen egin duzun guztiaz ; horrela , kontsolatu egingo dira haiek .
PRED:	And so that you may be ashamed , and you will be ashamed , and they will comfort you .
GOLD:	Then you will be truly ashamed of everything you have done , for your sins make them feel good in comparison .

ID:	6366
INPUT:	Senideok , guri dagokigunez , aldi batez zuengandik urruti aurkitu ginelarik — gorputzez , ez bihotzez — , eginahalak eta gehiago egin genituen zuek aurrez aurre ikustera joateko . Hain baitzen kartsua gure gogoa ,
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , we found nothing from you for a long time . We did not find the body in your body . We did n't see the flesh and the flesh , but we did not see it .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , after we were separated from you for a little while ( though our hearts never left you ) , we tried very hard to come back because of our intense longing to see you again .

ID:	6367
INPUT:	Gero , esan zuen filistearrak : — Erronka hau botatzen dizuet gaur , israeldar guda-lerroetakooi ! Bidal iezadazue gizon bat , eta ekin diezaiogun borrokari !
PRED:	Then the Philistines said , “ I tell you this day , today , send a man to fight with us . ”
GOLD:	I defy the armies of Israel today ! Send me a man who will fight me ! ”

ID:	6368
INPUT:	Han zihoan ura aldare inguru guztian , erretena betetzeraino .
PRED:	And they were there all around the altar all around the altar , as they were on the top of the altar .
GOLD:	and the water ran around the altar and even filled the trench .

ID:	6369
INPUT:	Jainkoaren alde jarri nahi al duzueeta haren defendatzaile bihurtu ?
PRED:	Do you want to turn away from God ? Do you want him to judge his cause ?
GOLD:	Will you slant your testimony in his favor ? Will you argue God 's case for him ?

ID:	6370
INPUT:	Saulek , orduan , esan zion Jaunari : — Israelen Jainko , ager iezaguzu egia osoa . Zotz egin eta Jonatan eta Saul izendatu zituen Jainkoak ; herria , aldiz , libre atera zen .
PRED:	Then Saul said to the Lord , “ God of Israel , let us see the bread of the Lord , the God of Israel , and Saul sent the people out of the hand of the people . ”
GOLD:	Then Saul prayed , “ O Lord , God of Israel , please show us who is guilty and who is innocent . ” Then they cast sacred lots , and Jonathan and Saul were chosen as the guilty ones , and the people were declared innocent .

ID:	6371
INPUT:	Ez dago han zeruan , zuek honela esan behar izateko : “ Nor joango zaigu zerura , agindua ekarri eta guri jakinarazteko , bete ahal izan dezagun ? ”
PRED:	There is no one to say to you , ‘ Who will go into heaven , and bring us to heaven , and bring us to us , that we may know it ? '
GOLD:	It is not kept in heaven , so distant that you must ask , ‘ Who will go up to heaven and bring it down so we can hear it and obey ? '

ID:	6372
INPUT:	Agindu maitagarri horiek ditut besarkatzen , zure arauak darabilzkit gogoan .
PRED:	I have kept these commandments , and I have kept your commandments .
GOLD:	I honor and love your commands.I meditate on your decrees .

ID:	6373
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Mugarriak aurreratzendituztenek bezalajokatzen dute Judako buruzagiek . Ura bezala isuriko dietneure haserrea .
PRED:	Thus says the Lord : The princes of Judah shall walk before them , as the princes of Judah have done , and the princes of Judah shall be angry with fire .
GOLD:	“ The leaders of Judah have become like thieves.So I will pour my anger on them like a waterfall .

ID:	6374
INPUT:	ez dago ilunperik , ez itzal edo gerizperik , gaizkileen gordeleku izan daitekeenik .
PRED:	There is no darkness in darkness , and there is no darkness , that there may be no place for the wicked .
GOLD:	No darkness is thick enoughto hide the wicked from his eyes .

ID:	6375
INPUT:	Horrelako horiek sasiapostolu dira , gezurrezko langile , Kristoren apostolu-itxura baino ez dutenak .
PRED:	These are the apostles who are apostles , and those who are not a false apostles . They are not an apostle of Christ .
GOLD:	These people are false apostles . They are deceitful workers who disguise themselves as apostles of Christ .

ID:	6376
INPUT:	Hartzazue Jaunaren izenean poz handiz , eta ohoratu beti hori bezalakoak direnak .
PRED:	Take the name of the Lord in the name of the Lord , and let them rejoice as this generation forever .
GOLD:	Welcome him in the Lord 's love and with great joy , and give him the honor that people like him deserve .

ID:	6377
INPUT:	Ezar nazazu bihotzean zigilu bezala , besoan zigilu bezala . Herioa bezain gogorra maitasuna , Hildakoen Egoitza bezain iraunkorra maite-grina . Su eta gar da maitasuna , Jaunarengandiko sugar .
PRED:	Let me look like the stars of the earth , as the stars of death , as the fire of death , and the fire of the dead , and the fire of the fire of the Lord , and the fire of fire .
GOLD:	Place me like a seal over your heart , like a seal on your arm.For love is as strong as death , its jealousy as enduring as the grave.Love flashes like fire , the brightest kind of flame .

ID:	6378
INPUT:	Jauna , zer da gizakia , zu hartaz arduratzeko , zer gizasemea , zuk harengan pentsatzeko ?
PRED:	O Lord , what is it that thou art a man , that thou art a man , that thou art his son ?
GOLD:	O Lord , what are human beings that you should notice them , mere mortals that you should think about them ?

ID:	6379
INPUT:	“ Sortzen al da kanabera paduratik kanpo , hazten ote ihia urik gabe ?
PRED:	Will he say to him , “ Can he see the word of the Lord ?
GOLD:	“ Can papyrus reeds grow tall without a marsh ? Can marsh grass flourish without water ?

ID:	6380
INPUT:	Israeldarrak berriro abiatu eta Moabeko lautadan ezarri zuten kanpalekua , Jordanez ekialdera , Jerikoren parean .
PRED:	And the children of Israel turned again , and encamped in the valley of Moab , in the valley of Moab , in the valley of Jericho .
GOLD:	Then the people of Israel traveled to the plains of Moab and camped east of the Jordan River , across from Jericho .

ID:	6381
INPUT:	Gaiztoari hil egingo dela esaten badiot , eta hark bekatutik aldendu eta zuzenbidez eta justiziaz jokatzen badu ,
PRED:	If I say to the wicked , ‘ I will die , ' and he will turn away from his sins and righteousness and righteousness ,
GOLD:	And suppose I tell some wicked people that they will surely die , but then they turn from their sins and do what is just and right .

