BLEU:	0.11731867188528931
ID:	0
INPUT:	Baina badut zerbait zure aurka : bere burua profetesatzat duen Jezabel horri utzi egiten diozula bere irakatsiekin nire zerbitzariak engainatzen , Jainkoarekiko desleial izan eta sasijainkoei eskainiriko haragia jatera bultzatuz .
PRED:	But I say to you , ‘ This is what the prophets of Jerusalem says : Do n't you turn away from me ? Do you turn away from me ? Do n't you turn away from me ? Do you turn away from me by worshiping idols ? '
GOLD:	“ But I have this complaint against you . You are permitting that woman — that Jezebel who calls herself a prophet — to lead my servants astray . She teaches them to commit sexual sin and to eat food offered to idols .

ID:	1
INPUT:	Roboamen gainerako jarduerak eta egintza guztiak « Judako Erregeen Kronika » liburuan daude idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Rehoboam 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Rehoboam 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .

ID:	2
INPUT:	Palestinatik kanpora ( 11 , 19 — 12 , 25 )
PRED:	Parable of the perish
GOLD:	The Church in Antioch of Syria

ID:	3
INPUT:	JERUSALEM ERORI <unk> TEKOA : IT<unk> ROPENA ETA BIZI BERRIA ISRAE<unk> ( 33 , 1 — 39 , 29 )
PRED:	The Sign of the Coming Judgment
GOLD:	Ezekiel as Israel 's Watchman

ID:	4
INPUT:	Gure etsaiak eta inguruko herriak , hori jakin zutenean , zeharo harriturik gelditu ziren , eta lan hori gure Jainkoaren laguntzaz egina zela aitortu beharra izan zuten .
PRED:	When the enemy heard that his enemies were with their enemies , they were amazed at his command , and they became very proud .
GOLD:	When our enemies and the surrounding nations heard about it , they were frightened and humiliated . They realized this work had been done with the help of our God .

ID:	5
INPUT:	Haiek honela ari ziren beren artean : « Jainkoaren aginduz ari zela esaten badiogu , zergatik ez genion sinetsi erantzungo digu .
PRED:	They said to each other , “ If we say the word of God , we wo n't believe what we say , ‘ We do n't believe it . '
GOLD:	They talked it over among themselves . “ If we say it was from heaven , he will ask why we did n't believe John .

ID:	6
INPUT:	Ondoren , Moises Sinai menditik jaitsi zen , legearen bi harlauzak eskuan zeramatzala . Ez zekien aurpegia distiratsu zuenik , Jaunarekin mintzatu izanagatik .
PRED:	Then Moses came down from Mount Sinai , and the two men of Mount Sinai . No one was lying on the mountain of the Lord .
GOLD:	When Moses came down Mount Sinai carrying the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant , he was n't aware that his face had become radiant because he had spoken to the Lord .

ID:	7
INPUT:	« Ez duzu zeure haurrik Molok jainkoaren ohorez hilko , zeure Jainkoaren izena profanatuz . Neu naiz Jauna .
PRED:	“ Do n't let your children die in Moab , for I am the Lord your God . I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Do not permit any of your children to be offered as a sacrifice to Molech , for you must not bring shame on the name of your God . I am the Lord .

ID:	8
INPUT:	Etxola Jaia
PRED:	The Festival of Shelters
GOLD:	Ezra Reads the Law

ID:	9
INPUT:	Haserretu zen faraoia bi zerbitzarion aurka
PRED:	Pharaoh 's anger against Pharaoh
GOLD:	Pharaoh became angry with these two officials ,

ID:	10
INPUT:	Balaam zetorrela jakitean , bidera irten zitzaion Balak , Edom lurraldeko muga-ertzean , Arnon erreka ondoan , zegoen Ar hirira ,
PRED:	When Balaam heard that the people of Edom had arrived in the land of Edom had settled in the land of Seir ,
GOLD:	When King Balak heard that Balaam was on the way , he went out to meet him at a Moabite town on the Arnon River at the farthest border of his land .

ID:	11
INPUT:	Eguneroko erre-opari horiek belaunez belaun egingo dituzte Jaunaren aurrean , elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran , zurekin mintzatzeko elkartuko natzaizun lekuan .
PRED:	On the same day you must present these instructions to the Lord at the entrance of the Tabernacle . This is a permanent law for you , and you must present it to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ These burnt offerings are to be made each day from generation to generation . Offer them in the Lord 's presence at the Tabernacle entrance ; there I will meet with you and speak with you .

ID:	12
INPUT:	Baina haiek arren eta arren eskatu zioten : « Geldi zaitez gurekin , berandu baita eta iluna gainean dugu » . Eta herrian sartu zen haiekin gelditzeko .
PRED:	But they begged them , “ Stay here with us , for we will stay with them . We will stay with them , but we will stay with them . ”
GOLD:	but they begged him , “ Stay the night with us , since it is getting late . ” So he went home with them .

ID:	13
INPUT:	oraindik ez baitzitzaien ogiena buruan sartu , adimena itsu zeukaten eta .
PRED:	Yet when you do n't enter the boat , you must not enter your head .
GOLD:	for they still did n't understand the significance of the miracle of the loaves . Their hearts were too hard to take it in .

ID:	14
INPUT:	Orain , beraz , faraoi jauna , hauta ezazu gizon argi eta jakintsua , eta emaiozu aginpidea Egipto guztiaren gain .
PRED:	So now , O Pharaoh , king of Egypt , you have made wisdom and power over all the world .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , Pharaoh should find an intelligent and wise man and put him in charge of the entire land of Egypt .

ID:	15
INPUT:	Hain zegoen haserre Jauna Jerusalemen eta Judaren kontra , ezen bere aurretik urruti bota baitzituen . Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosorren kontra jaiki zen Sedekias .
PRED:	This was the Lord 's anger against King Nebuchadnezzar of Judah and Jerusalem . He rebelled against the king of Babylon , and he rebelled against King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon .
GOLD:	These things happened because of the Lord 's anger against the people of Jerusalem and Judah , until he finally banished them from his presence and sent them into exile.Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon .

ID:	16
INPUT:	Onartzazu , beraz , haien eskaria ; baina jakinarazi argi eta garbi , nolako eskubideak izanen dituen beraien gain aginduko duen erregeak » .
PRED:	So pray that you will be sure to understand what is right , but you will be sure to do what is right . ”
GOLD:	Do as they ask , but solemnly warn them about the way a king will reign over them . ”

ID:	17
INPUT:	Entzun duzue esan dizuedana : “ Banoa , baina itzuliko naiz zuengana ” . Benetan maite baninduzue , poztu egingo zinatekete Aitarengana noalako , Aita ni baino handiago baita .
PRED:	“ Listen to me , ” he said . “ I have heard what I say , ‘ I am going to love you , but I will love you more than I am . '
GOLD:	Remember what I told you : I am going away , but I will come back to you again . If you really loved me , you would be happy that I am going to the Father , who is greater than I am .

ID:	18
INPUT:	« Ez duzu zeure amarekin sexu-harremanik izango , zeure ama baita : aita eta ama , biak desohoratuko zenituzke .
PRED:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your mother , for your mother is your mother , and your mother would be your mother .
GOLD:	“ Do not violate your father by having sexual relations with your mother . She is your mother ; you must not have sexual relations with her .

ID:	19
INPUT:	paregabeko egun izango da , gaurik gabeko egun , arratsean ere iraungo baitu argiak . Hori noiz gertatuko den , Jaunak bakarrik daki .
PRED:	On that day the Lord will be a Sabbath day , for it will be a Sabbath day , for it will be a day of rest , and it will be a day .
GOLD:	yet there will be continuous day ! Only the Lord knows how this could happen . There will be no normal day and night , for at evening time it will still be light .

ID:	20
INPUT:	Odol errugabea isuri zuten , beren seme-alaben odolakanaandar idoloei opari eskainiz : lurraldea odolez busti zuten eta profanatu .
PRED:	The blood of blood was poured out blood on the blood of the blood of the blood of the blood of the blood , which was burned with blood .
GOLD:	They shed innocent blood , the blood of their sons and daughters.By sacrificing them to the idols of Canaan , they polluted the land with murder .

ID:	21
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun zion : — Aitak aurpegira txu egin izan balio , zazpi egunez lotsatan egon beharko zukeen , ezta ? Beraz , geldi bedi zazpi egunez kanpalekutik urruti ; ondoren , itzuliko da .
PRED:	The Lord replied , “ Father , if the child wo n't be able to enter the sea , how can he see seven days ? ” And the Lord said , “ It will be a permanent law for seven years . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord said to Moses , “ If her father had done nothing more than spit in her face , would n't she be defiled for seven days ? So keep her outside the camp for seven days , and after that she may be accepted back . ”

ID:	22
INPUT:	Behin batean , Asiriako errege Sargonek bere gudalburu nagusia bidali zuen Axdod-era , eta hark hiriari eraso eta hartu egin zuen .
PRED:	One day the king of Assyria sent his army to fight the commander of the army of Ashdod , Moab , and Moab .
GOLD:	In the year when King Sargon of Assyria sent his commander in chief to capture the Philistine city of Ashdod ,

ID:	23
INPUT:	Errege honek ez die izango begirunerik beraren arbasoek gurtu zituzten jainkoei , ez emakumeek begiko duten jainkoari , ezta beste edozein jainkori ere ; jainko guztiak baino handiagotzat joko baitu bere burua .
PRED:	The kings of Israel did not worship other gods or worship other gods . They did not worship other gods or worship other gods or worship other gods or worship other gods .
GOLD:	He will have no respect for the gods of his ancestors , or for the god loved by women , or for any other god , for he will boast that he is greater than them all .

ID:	24
INPUT:	Erregeak isekaz darabiltzate , handikiei irri egiten . Gotorlekuek barreguraematen diete , ondoan lur-pilak eginezhartzen baitituzte .
PRED:	The king goes around to the king and fast . Let them go through the valley , for they are filled with new moon celebrations , too .
GOLD:	They scoff at kings and princesand scorn all their fortresses.They simply pile ramps of earthagainst their walls and capture them !

ID:	25
INPUT:	Abrahamen morroia , hitzok entzun orduko , lurrean ahuspeztu zen , Jaunari eskerrak emanez .
PRED:	As soon as Abraham heard this , he fell down on the ground and bowed low before the Lord .
GOLD:	When Abraham 's servant heard their answer , he bowed down to the ground and worshiped the Lord .

ID:	26
INPUT:	Darioren erregealdiko bigarren urtean , seigarren hilaren lehen egunean , Ageo profetaren bitartez mintzatu zitzaien Jauna Xealtielen seme Zorobabel Judako gobernariari eta Jotzadaken seme Josue apaiz nagusiari .
PRED:	On the first day of King Darius 's reign , during the first year of the reign of King Darius 's reign , Zerubbabel son of Jehozadak , the priest , and Jeshua son of Jehozadak , the priest of Jeshua son of Jehozadak , the priest , and Jeshua son of Jehozadak , the priest .
GOLD:	On August 29 of the second year of King Darius 's reign , the Lord gave a message through the prophet Haggai to Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel , governor of Judah , and to Jeshua son of Jehozadak , the high priest .

ID:	27
INPUT:	Gerraz , gosez eta izurriz erasoko diet . Hori ikustean , lurreko erreinu guztiak ikaraturik geldituko dira : madarikazio eta izu , lotsaizun eta iseka-gai izango dira jaurtiko ditudan nazio guztietan .
PRED:	So I will tell you , famine , famine , and disease . I will cause war against all the kingdoms of the earth , and disease . I will cause war against them , famine , and disease .
GOLD:	Yes , I will pursue them with war , famine , and disease , and I will scatter them around the world . In every nation where I send them , I will make them an object of damnation , horror , contempt , and mockery .

ID:	28
INPUT:	han ziren Anas apaiz nagusia , Kaifas , Joan , Alexandro eta apaizburuen familietako guztiak .
PRED:	Caiaphas , the high priest , the high priest , was the leader of the leading priests , and the high priest .
GOLD:	Annas the high priest was there , along with Caiaphas , John , Alexander , and other relatives of the high priest .

ID:	29
INPUT:	eta erregeari jakinarazi zion oihuka . Erregeak esan zuen : — Bakarrik baldin badator , berri onak dakartza . Lasterkaria hurbildu ahala , ordea ,
PRED:	Then the king turned to the king and told him , “ Let 's find him , ” the king told him . “ Let 's find him a little while he is going . ”
GOLD:	He shouted the news down to David , and the king replied , “ If he is alone , he has news . ” As the messenger came closer ,

ID:	30
INPUT:	Eduki beti besoan babeskitzat fedea , etsaiaren suzko geziak oro itzali ahal izateko .
PRED:	One of them sent another person to live in a field , and he sent them back to his enemies .
GOLD:	In addition to all of these , hold up the shield of faith to stop the fiery arrows of the devil .

ID:	31
INPUT:	horrela guztien asmo ezkutuak agerian geldi daitezen . Eta zuri ere saminezko ezpatak zulatuko dizu bihotza » .
PRED:	You will be careful to understand what I am going to happen to you , and your armor bearer will be fulfilled . ”
GOLD:	As a result , the deepest thoughts of many hearts will be revealed . And a sword will pierce your very soul . ”

ID:	32
INPUT:	sugarrez inguraturik agertuko da , Jainkoa aintzat hartu nahi ez eta Jesus gure Jaunaren berri ona onartu nahi ez dutenak zigortzera .
PRED:	This will happen to us , and we will not be able to obey the glorious presence of the Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	in flaming fire , bringing judgment on those who do n't know God and on those who refuse to obey the Good News of our Lord Jesus .

ID:	33
INPUT:	Jaunaren erabakiz , burugogorkeriaz lehiatu ziren israeldarrei kontra egiten , israeldarrek errukirik gabe erabat suntsitu eta desegin zitzaten , Jaunak Moisesi agindu bezala .
PRED:	So the people of Israel rebelled against the Lord 's command , just as the Lord had commanded Moses to destroy the people of Israel , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	For the Lord hardened their hearts and caused them to fight the Israelites . So they were completely destroyed without mercy , as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	34
INPUT:	Hil beharrez eraso izan diot kristau-bide honi , gizon eta emakumeak atxilotu eta kartzelan sartuz .
PRED:	When I died , I will die in the presence of Christ , and I will put my hands on the women and encouraged them .
GOLD:	And I persecuted the followers of the Way , hounding some to death , arresting both men and women and throwing them in prison .

ID:	35
INPUT:	Orduan , hazka egiteko teila-puska bat harturik , zabor artera joan zen Job .
PRED:	Then Job got up and started out to a wedding feast .
GOLD:	Job scraped his skin with a piece of broken pottery as he sat among the ashes .

ID:	36
INPUT:	Ez dira alferrik nekatuko , ezta ezbeharrez hiltzeko haurrikekarriko ere , Jaunak bedeinkaturikoherria baitira , eta halaxe izangoberaien ondorengoak ere .
PRED:	Do n't be surprised when you die , you will not die , for the Lord your God will bless you , for he will give birth to his descendants .
GOLD:	They will not work in vain , and their children will not be doomed to misfortune.For they are people blessed by the Lord , and their children , too , will be blessed .

ID:	37
INPUT:	Hartu zituen Terahek bere seme Abram , bere biloba Lot , Haranen semea , eta bere erraina Sarai , Abramen emaztea , eta kaldearren Ur hiria utzi zuen Kanaan lurraldera joateko . Haranera iritsi zirenean , bertan kokatu ziren .
PRED:	Abram also captured Abram 's sons , Abram , and his wife , Abram , and his wife , Sarah , and his wife , was buried in the land of Canaan . So Abram left the land of Canaan and settled in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	One day Terah took his son Abram , his daughter-in-law Sarai ( his son Abram 's wife ) , and his grandson Lot ( his son Haran 's child ) and moved away from Ur of the Chaldeans . He was headed for the land of Canaan , but they stopped at Haran and settled there .

ID:	38
INPUT:	Neure santutegia beraien artean betiko jarriko dudanean , orduan jakingo dute nazioek ni naizela Jauna , Israel beretzat sagaratu duena » .
PRED:	Then they will know that I am the Holy One of Israel , and they will know that I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	And when my Temple is among them forever , the nations will know that I am the Lord , who makes Israel holy . ”

ID:	39
INPUT:	Ura leporaino heldu zitzaidan , itsas leizeak inguratu ninduen , itsas belarrak buruanbildu zitzaizkidan .
PRED:	As soon as I arrived , the waters of the sea came down , I came down to the sea , and the stars came around me .
GOLD:	I sank down to the very roots of the mountains.I was imprisoned in the earth , whose gates lock shut forever.But you , O Lord my God , snatched me from the jaws of death !

ID:	40
INPUT:	Begirada argiak bihotzondoa alaitzen , albiste pozgarriek indarra berritzen .
PRED:	There is a great shout of joy , and there is great joy .
GOLD:	A cheerful look brings joy to the heart ; good news makes for good health .

ID:	41
INPUT:	Ahuspez gaitezen lotsaturik , desohorez beterik ; zeren bekatu egin baitu<unk> naren , geure Jainkoaren , kontrageuk eta geure gurasoekgaztetandik gaurdaino . Ez dugu adituJaunaren , geure Jainkoaren , esana » .
PRED:	Then they worshiped the idols of the sea , and they worshiped the God of their ancestors . We have sinned against the Lord our God , the God of our ancestors , the God of their ancestors , and our ancestors , the Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Let us now lie down in shameand cover ourselves with dishonor , for we and our ancestors have sinnedagainst the Lord our God.From our childhood to this daywe have never obeyed him . ”

ID:	42
INPUT:	Bedeinkazioak
PRED:	Paul 's Second Response to Faith
GOLD:	Blessings for Obedience

ID:	43
INPUT:	Beraz , berri onaren egiaren bidetik zuzen ez zebiltzala ohartu nintzenean , honela esan nion Pedrori denen aurrean : « Zu , judu izanik , jentil bezala bizi baldin bazara eta ez judu bezala , zergatik behartzen dituzu jentilak judu bezala bizitzera ? »
PRED:	So when he arrived at the home of the synagogue , he said to Peter , “ Since you are a believer , you would be a believer to be a believer , you would have been a believer to serve me . ”
GOLD:	When I saw that they were not following the truth of the gospel message , I said to Peter in front of all the others , “ Since you , a Jew by birth , have discarded the Jewish laws and are living like a Gentile , why are you now trying to make these Gentiles follow the Jewish traditions ?

ID:	44
INPUT:	beste mezu honekin : « Hau dio Jeftek : Israeldarrek ez zuten moabdarren , ez amondarren lurralderik hartu .
PRED:	Then Jephthah said to Jephthah , “ This is what the people of Israel said , ‘ Do n't let the Ammonites conquer the Ammonites . '
GOLD:	“ This is what Jephthah says : Israel did not steal any land from Moab or Ammon .

ID:	45
INPUT:	Senideok , jarrai beza bakoitzak Jainkoaren aurrean , honek deitzerakoan zuen bizi-egoeran .
PRED:	Now , dear brothers and sisters , each of you should stand before God at the place of worship in the name of God .
GOLD:	Each of you , dear brothers and sisters , should remain as you were when God first called you .

ID:	46
INPUT:	Gero , Bildotsak zazpi zigiluetarik lehena ireki zuela ikusi nuen , eta lau izaki bizidunetatik lehenengoak trumoi antzeko ahotsez hau esaten zuela entzun nuen : « Zatoz » .
PRED:	Then I saw seven horns of the Lamb standing there , and I saw four wings of the first living beings . I heard the sound of the first beast , and I heard the sound of the Good News : “ Come ! ”
GOLD:	As I watched , the Lamb broke the first of the seven seals on the scroll . Then I heard one of the four living beings say with a voice like thunder , “ Come ! ”

ID:	47
INPUT:	Baina kontuak eman beharko dizkiote biziak eta hilak epaitzeko prest dagoenari .
PRED:	But the Lord will give justice to his people , and he will judge them with justice .
GOLD:	But remember that they will have to face God , who stands ready to judge everyone , both the living and the dead .

ID:	48
INPUT:	Gaiztoak agintean , bidegabekeria ugari ; haien erorketaren lekuko izango zintzoak .
PRED:	The wicked will be destroyed , but the hopes of the godly will be destroyed .
GOLD:	When the wicked are in authority , sin flourishes , but the godly will live to see their downfall .

ID:	49
INPUT:	Beste hamarrak , hori entzutean , bi anaien aurka haserre jarri ziren .
PRED:	When he heard this , he was very angry with his brothers .
GOLD:	When the ten other disciples heard what James and John had asked , they were indignant .

ID:	50
INPUT:	Judako hirietan eta Jerusalemgo kaleetan poz-alaitasunezko oihuak eta senar-emaztegaien kantuak bukaraziko ditut , lurraldea basamortu bihurtua geldituko baita » .
PRED:	The towns of Judah and Jerusalem will be filled with joy in the streets of Jerusalem , and I will cause the people of Judah to live in the wilderness , and I will become a desolate wilderness . ”
GOLD:	I will put an end to the happy singing and laughter in the streets of Jerusalem . The joyful voices of bridegrooms and brides will no longer be heard in the towns of Judah . The land will lie in complete desolation .

ID:	51
INPUT:	Zeuen lotsarako diotsuet . Ez ote duzue inor aditurik , senide arteko auziak erabaki ditzakeenik ?
PRED:	“ Do n't you realize that I am going to punish you for the sake of your brothers and sisters ?
GOLD:	I am saying this to shame you . Is n't there anyone in all the church who is wise enough to decide these issues ?

ID:	52
INPUT:	Begira ! Iparraldetik ekarriko ditut , lurreko azken mugetatik bilduko . Jendetza izugarria itzuliko da : itsuak eta herrenak ere bai , haurduneta haurra izan berriekin batera .
PRED:	I will come from the north to the north of the north , and I will gather the people of the north and the children of the north . They will return to their children and grandchildren , and they will return to their children .
GOLD:	For I will bring them from the northand from the distant corners of the earth.I will not forget the blind and lame , the expectant mothers and women in labor.A great company will return !

ID:	53
INPUT:	Israeldarrak kanpaleku inguruan nor bere tokian zeudelarik , kanpalekukoak lasterka , garrasika eta iheska hasi ziren .
PRED:	When the people of Israel saw the vast army of Israel standing outside the camp , they ran back to the camp .
GOLD:	Each man stood at his position around the camp and watched as all the Midianites rushed around in a panic , shouting as they ran to escape .

ID:	54
INPUT:	Hori esanik , besoa jaso eta bi aldiz jo zuen makilaz harkaitza . Ur-mordoa atera zen , eta jendeak eta abereek edan zuten .
PRED:	As soon as he grew up , he took two rams and beat the water into the wilderness , and the people attacked it .
GOLD:	Then Moses raised his hand and struck the rock twice with the staff , and water gushed out . So the entire community and their livestock drank their fill .

ID:	55
INPUT:	Bitxiok soldaduek guduan nork beretzat harrapatuak ziren .
PRED:	These soldiers were the soldiers who were killed by the soldiers .
GOLD:	All the fighting men had taken some of the plunder for themselves .

ID:	56
INPUT:	Hautsa lurrera itzuliko duk , handik sortua denez . Bizi-arnasa Jainkoarenganabihurtuko duk , berak emana denez .
PRED:	Here is a sign from the earth , a great display of life . He will become a great Shepherd , and he will become a great nation . ”
GOLD:	For then the dust will return to the earth , and the spirit will return to God who gave it .

ID:	57
INPUT:	Gerora , antxumea igorri zuen Judak Adulamgo adiskidearen bidez , emakumeagandik bahitura jasotzeko , baina ez zuen aurkitu .
PRED:	A man named Elam , a man named Elam , who lived in Judah , but he did not find a woman who would not find him .
GOLD:	Later Judah asked his friend Hirah the Adullamite to take the young goat to the woman and to pick up the things he had given her as his guarantee . But Hirah could n't find her .

ID:	58
INPUT:	eta barkatu gure erruen zorra , guk ere geure zorduneibarkatu diegunez gero ;
PRED:	We have sinned against our sins , but we have rebelled against our sins .
GOLD:	and forgive us our sins , as we have forgiven those who sin against us .

ID:	59
INPUT:	Hartzailea pobrea bada , ez zarete bahituran harturiko soingainekoaz estaliko gauez ,
PRED:	Those who are poor should not boast about the poor or poor . They must not boast about it .
GOLD:	If your neighbor is poor and gives you his cloak as security for a loan , do not keep the cloak overnight .

ID:	60
INPUT:	Tenpluko laguntzaileak eta Salomonen zerbitzarien ondorengo guztiak , 392 lagun .
PRED:	The descendants of Solomon and all the descendants of Solomon 's servants numbered 64,400 years .
GOLD:	In all , the Temple servants and the descendants of Solomon 's servants numbered 392 .

ID:	61
INPUT:	Astemea , hura ikustean , harresira arrimatu zen , Balaamen berna harresiaren kontra zanpatuz . Balaamek jo egin zuen berriro .
PRED:	But when Balaam saw the Arameans , he became very powerful , and he went to war against Balaam .
GOLD:	When the donkey saw the angel of the Lord , it tried to squeeze by and crushed Balaam 's foot against the wall . So Balaam beat the donkey again .

ID:	62
INPUT:	Jesus etxeratu zenean , ikasleek bakarrean galdetu zioten : — Eta guk , zergatik ezin izan dugu bota espiritu hori ?
PRED:	When Jesus was leaving the home of his home , they asked him , “ Why ca n't we cast out demons ? ”
GOLD:	Afterward , when Jesus was alone in the house with his disciples , they asked him , “ Why could n't we cast out that evil spirit ? ”

ID:	63
INPUT:	Nik faraoiaren edalontzia nuen eskuan ; mahats-mordoak hartu nituen eta , edalontzi gainean zukuturik , edalontzia faraoiaren eskuetan ezarri nuen .
PRED:	I took Pharaoh 's palace , and he took care of Pharaoh 's concubines and put it in his palm tree . He also took the entry room of the gateway to the entry room of the gateway .
GOLD:	I was holding Pharaoh 's wine cup in my hand , so I took a cluster of grapes and squeezed the juice into the cup . Then I placed the cup in Pharaoh 's hand . ”

ID:	64
INPUT:	« Begira arretaz ortziari , so egin zeu baino askoz gorago dauden hodeiei .
PRED:	“ Look at the light until you see how you are going to see what you are saying .
GOLD:	Look up into the sky , and see the clouds high above you .

ID:	65
INPUT:	Joan ziren , bada , eta han aurkitu zuten astakumea ate ondo batean kanpotik lotuta , eta askatzen hasi ziren .
PRED:	So they found the donkey and found many women standing outside the city , and they ran out of the tomb and found them there .
GOLD:	The two disciples left and found the colt standing in the street , tied outside the front door .

ID:	66
INPUT:	Hain indartsua duenez sama , izu-ikaratu egiten du aurrean duen guztia .
PRED:	I am a great nation that makes the arrogant , and you must stand before all the nations .
GOLD:	Who could pry open its jaws ? For its teeth are terrible !

ID:	67
INPUT:	Honela esaten dio Jainkoak faraoiari Liburu Santuan : Honetarako utzi zaitut bizirik : nire ahalmena erakusteko eta mundu osoak nor naizen jakin dezan .
PRED:	This is what the Scriptures say to Pharaoh , “ I will give you this message from the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , and I will give you everything I have done . ”
GOLD:	For the Scriptures say that God told Pharaoh , “ I have appointed you for the very purpose of displaying my power in you and to spread my fame throughout the earth . ”

ID:	68
INPUT:	Neba-arrebentzat ere higuingarri bada behartsua , nola ez zaizkio , bada , urrunduko lagunak ?
PRED:	They are like a flock of sheep , but they are detestable to the Lord .
GOLD:	The relatives of the poor despise them ; how much more will their friends avoid them ! Though the poor plead with them , their friends are gone .

ID:	69
INPUT:	Pozez beteko zara , eta beste jende asko ere poztuko da haren jaiotzaz ,
PRED:	There will be joy in the world , and many will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	You will have great joy and gladness , and many will rejoice at his birth ,

ID:	70
INPUT:	eta guda-gurdien arduradunek , hura Israelgo erregea ez zela oharturik , atzera egin zuten .
PRED:	Then the chariot commanders of Israel realized that the king of Israel had no king .
GOLD:	As soon as the chariot commanders realized he was not the king of Israel , they stopped chasing him .

ID:	71
INPUT:	Burugabearekin auzitan hasten den zuhurrak , haserretu nahiz barre egin , ez du atsedenik izaten .
PRED:	So they rebelled against themselves , but they are angry with their own schemes .
GOLD:	If a wise person takes a fool to court , there will be ranting and ridicule but no satisfaction .

ID:	72
INPUT:	Hobe gizon zuhurra indartsua baino , eta gizon ikasia ahaltsua baino .
PRED:	Better to have a man greater than a man than a man who is greater than the Almighty .
GOLD:	The wise are mightier than the strong , and those with knowledge grow stronger and stronger .

ID:	73
INPUT:	« Hau esan ondoren , apurtu egingo duzu pitxerra zurekin doazen gizonen aurrean ,
PRED:	“ This is what the man says : When you enter the pigs , you will enter the pigs .
GOLD:	“ As these men watch you , Jeremiah , smash the jar you brought .

ID:	74
INPUT:	Bekatuen barkamenari buruz : elbarriaren sendakuntza
PRED:	Then he said to the church ,
GOLD:	Jesus Calls Levi ( Matthew )

ID:	75
INPUT:	mintzorik eta hitzik gabe : entzun ezinekoa da haien ahotsa .
PRED:	The godly have no attention to their words ; they have no sound of their mouths .
GOLD:	Yet their message has gone throughout the earth , and their words to all the world.God has made a home in the heavens for the sun .

ID:	76
INPUT:	« Hau pentsatu nuen : Bizitzako sasoirik oneneanjoan behar ; Hildakoen Egoitzara naramate , gainerako bizi-urteakkentzen dizkidate .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : I will put my hope in the grave , and I will send them away to the grave .
GOLD:	I said , “ In the prime of my life , must I now enter the place of the dead ? Am I to be robbed of the rest of my years ? ”

ID:	77
INPUT:	ez baitu hori beste estalkirik . Zerekin babestuko da , bestela , etzaterakoan ? Laguntza eske deiadar egitean , entzun egingo diot , errukiorra bainaiz ni .
PRED:	Do n't you think about this ? Should I go with you ? But if someone calls for another , I will help you , but I will help you , for I will help you .
GOLD:	If you take your neighbor 's cloak as security for a loan , you must return it before sunset .

ID:	78
INPUT:	garesti ordainduz eskuratu baitzaituzte Jainkoak . Goretsazue , bada , Jainkoa zeuen gorputzaz .
PRED:	You have been purchased by the high priest , but God has given you the body of God . It is the body of God .
GOLD:	for God bought you with a high price . So you must honor God with your body .

ID:	79
INPUT:	Utzi lurrean , ostera , zuhaitzondoa bere erroekin , lotu burdinazkoeta brontzezko kateez , eta geldi bedi zelaiko belarretan . Busti beza ortziko ihintzak , janaritu bedi belarrez , abereak bezala .
PRED:	Let the earth be great and great , and there will be great joy and bronze ; there will be great joy for the powers of the heavens .
GOLD:	It had fresh green leaves , and it was loaded with fruit for all to eat . Wild animals lived in its shade , and birds nested in its branches . All the world was fed from this tree .

ID:	80
INPUT:	honela baitzioen berekiko : « Jantzia ukitzen badiot , besterik gabe sendatuko naiz » .
PRED:	For she thought , “ If I have a beautiful robe , I will heal her , I will heal her . ”
GOLD:	for she thought , “ If I can just touch his robe , I will be healed . ”

ID:	81
INPUT:	Zuregandik jaio diren , zeuk sortu dituzun seme-alabetariko batzuk ere eraman egingo dituzte , Babiloniako erregearen jauregian zerbitzari izateko » .
PRED:	You will become pregnant and give birth to the king of Babylon , and some of you will serve me as king of Babylon . ”
GOLD:	Some of your very own sons will be taken away into exile . They will become eunuchs who will serve in the palace of Babylon 's king . ”

ID:	82
INPUT:	« “ Iparraldeko erregearen semeak gerrarako prestatuko dira , gudaroste handiak bilduz . Seme horietako bat uholde baten antzera sartuko da bere gudariekin hegoaldeko mugetan barrena . Itzultzean , etsaiaren gotorleku bati erasoko dio .
PRED:	“ The king of the north will come to the king of the north , and he will prepared a vast army for his own sons . He will return to the south side of the Jordan Valley , and he will return to his enemies .
GOLD:	However , the sons of the king of the north will assemble a mighty army that will advance like a flood and carry the battle as far as the enemy 's fortress .

ID:	83
INPUT:	Urtzen daukat barrena zure tenpluko atarien irrikaz . Bihotza eta naizen guztiapoz-oihuz ari zait , oi Jainko , Jainko bizia .
PRED:	My heart is filled with joy , and I will sing your praises . I will sing your praises to God , and I will sing praises to God .
GOLD:	Even the sparrow finds a home , and the swallow builds her nest and raises her youngat a place near your altar , O Lord of Heaven 's Armies , my King and my God !

ID:	84
INPUT:	Igo zen jendea gobernariaren jauregira eta ohitura zuena emateko eskatu zioten .
PRED:	So the people of Judah went to the palace and asked the king what had happened to the palace .
GOLD:	The crowd went to Pilate and asked him to release a prisoner as usual .

ID:	85
INPUT:	Adoraim , Lakix , Azeka ,
PRED:	Gath , Gath , Gath ,
GOLD:	Adoraim , Lachish , Azekah ,

ID:	86
INPUT:	Galdetu zion irenak Feliperi : — Esadazu , mesedez : Nortaz dio hori profetak , bere buruaz ala beste norbaitez ?
PRED:	Philip replied , “ You are the one who sent him to him , ‘ You are the one who sent by the other prophet ? '
GOLD:	The eunuch asked Philip , “ Tell me , was the prophet talking about himself or someone else ? ”

ID:	87
INPUT:	Halere , ez nuen egin , baizik eta neure izenaren ohorez jokatu nuen , nire izena belztua izan ez zedin israeldarrak Egiptotik ateratzen ikusi ninduten nazioen artean .
PRED:	But I did not remember my name , but I did not worship my name . I did not see the name of the people of Israel when I saw the name of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Nevertheless , I withdrew my judgment against them to protect the honor of my name before the nations that had seen my power in bringing them out of Egypt .

ID:	88
INPUT:	Izu-ikara ezarri baitzuen bizidunen artean , faraoia eta bere gudarostea sinesgabeen artean geldituko dira etzanik , gerran hildakoekin batera . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	For the Lord your God has placed your ancestors in Pharaoh 's household and his entire army , and they will be killed by Pharaoh . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Although I have caused his terror to fall upon all the living , Pharaoh and his hordes will lie there among the outcasts who were slaughtered by the sword . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	89
INPUT:	Babilonia , hiriburu krimi<unk> hori ! Bejondeiola , zuk guri eginaren ordaina emango dizunari !
PRED:	Now restore the Temple of the Lord , the God of Babylon , the source of your salvation .
GOLD:	O Babylon , you will be destroyed.Happy is the one who pays you backfor what you have done to us .

ID:	90
INPUT:	Ondoren , egoitzara eraman zuen kutxa eta errezela ezarri itun-kutxa estaltzeko , Jaunak agindu bezala .
PRED:	Then he took the Ark of the Covenant and placed it on the Ark of the Covenant , just as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	Then he brought the Ark of the Covenant into the Tabernacle and hung the inner curtain to shield it from view , just as the Lord had commanded him .

ID:	91
INPUT:	Ikaratu zen lurra eta dardaratu , zeruaren oinarriak mugitu , Jainkoaren haserreakbaitzituen astindu .
PRED:	Then the heavens poured out the heavens on the earth , for the fierce anger of God was very angry with them .
GOLD:	“ Then the earth quaked and trembled.The foundations of the heavens shook ; they quaked because of his anger .

ID:	92
INPUT:	Erregearen agindu zorrotzaren arabera labea bizi-bizi piztu baitzuten , Xadrak , Mexak eta Abed-Nego jaurtitzeko labera hurbildu ziren gudariak berak suak kiskalita hil ziren .
PRED:	So the king ordered Shadrach , Meshach , and Abednego to be thrown into the blazing furnace , and Abednego . They threw Shadrach , Meshach , and Abednego to be killed by fire .
GOLD:	And because the king , in his anger , had demanded such a hot fire in the furnace , the flames killed the soldiers as they threw the three men in .

ID:	93
INPUT:	Aitak maiteago zuela ikusirik , anaiak gorrotatzen hasi zitzaizkion eta hitza bera ere ukatu egiten zioten .
PRED:	When his father saw that his brother was dead , he began to punish him , and they began breaking their sins .
GOLD:	But his brothers hated Joseph because their father loved him more than the rest of them . They could n't say a kind word to him .

ID:	94
INPUT:	Baina Jauna erne zegoen juduen arduradunak zaintzeko eta ez zizkieten lanak geldiarazi , harik eta Dariogana txostena bidali eta honen erantzuna jaso arte .
PRED:	But the Lord spoke to the people of Judah and Jerusalem , and they refused to listen to King Darius 's command . The Lord sent this reply to King Darius of Israel , and he told them what he had said .
GOLD:	But because their God was watching over them , the leaders of the Jews were not prevented from building until a report was sent to Darius and he returned his decision .

ID:	95
INPUT:	Mikaren etxean zeudelarik , lebitar gaztearen ahotsa ezagutu zuten eta , berarengana zuzenduz , galdetu zioten : — Nork ekarri zaitu hona ? Zer ari zara ? Zertan zabiltza hemen ?
PRED:	When Micah 's young men arrived at Micah 's house , they asked him , “ What are you doing ? What are you doing ? ” “ What are you doing ? ”
GOLD:	While at Micah 's house , they recognized the young Levite 's accent , so they went over and asked him , “ Who brought you here , and what are you doing in this place ? Why are you here ? ”

ID:	96
INPUT:	« Hartu gantzuketa-olioa eta isuri egoitzaren eta bertan dagoen guztiaren gainera . Honela sagaratuko duzu bere tresna guztiekin , eta toki sakratua izango da .
PRED:	“ Take the anointing oil and the anointing oil , and burn it on the Tabernacle , and burn it on the altar . This is a sacred offering to the Lord , and it must be holy .
GOLD:	“ Take the anointing oil and anoint the Tabernacle and all its furnishings to consecrate them and make them holy .

ID:	97
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : « Profeta bati edonon ematen zaio ohore , bere herri , senitarte eta etxean izan ezik » .
PRED:	Jesus told them , “ A prophet is living among you , and he is the family of the family of my family . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus told them , “ A prophet is honored everywhere except in his own hometown and among his relatives and his own family . ”

ID:	98
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun zion : — Bai , barkatzen diot , zuk eskatu bezala .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” the Lord replied . “ I have sinned , just as you have forgiven me . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said , “ I will pardon them as you have requested .

ID:	99
INPUT:	Handik Efraimgo mendialdera jo zuten eta Mikaren etxera heldu ziren .
PRED:	From there they went to Micah 's home and went home to Micah 's home .
GOLD:	Then they went on from there into the hill country of Ephraim and came to the house of Micah .

ID:	100
INPUT:	Horregatik ahalegintzen naiz ni ere , neure kontzientzia Jainkoaren eta gizonen aurrean beti garbi gordetzen .
PRED:	That is why I am trying to obey God 's commandments , and I am pure in my presence .
GOLD:	Because of this , I always try to maintain a clear conscience before God and all people .

ID:	101
INPUT:	Biharamunean Salomonek bidali egin zuen herria . Jendea , erregea agurtu ondoren , bere etxeetara itzuli zen , alai eta bihotza bozkarioz betea zuela , Jaunak bere zerbitzari Davidi eta bere herri Israeli egin zien on guztiarengatik .
PRED:	So Solomon sent the people home of the land , and the people of Israel went home to meet the king of his people . So the Lord gave David a great feast for his people , and he rescued them from all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	After the festival was over , Solomon sent the people home . They blessed the king and went to their homes joyful and glad because the Lord had been good to his servant David and to his people Israel .

ID:	102
INPUT:	Hiru adoretsuek , filistearren gudari-tokira sartu , Belengo atean dagoen urtegitik ura atera eta eraman zioten Davidi . Honek , ordea , ez zuen edan nahi izan , eta isuri egin zuen Jaunarentzako eskaintza bezala .
PRED:	Three days later the Philistines came into the Philistine Philistine Philistine army , and they brought him out of the Philistines . But David did n't want him to bring him back to the Lord 's Temple . But he did not offer it to the Lord .
GOLD:	So the Three broke through the Philistine lines , drew some water from the well by the gate in Bethlehem , and brought it back to David . But he refused to drink it . Instead , he poured it out as an offering to the Lord .

ID:	103
INPUT:	Hau dio Jaun ahalguztidunak : « Israeldarrok , ez egin jaramonikprofeta hauen hitzari , amets hutsalezbetetzen baitizuete burua . Beraien kasketako irudipenakazaltzen dizkizueteeta ez nik agindutakoak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Do n't tell you about the dreams of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says to his people : “ Do not listen to these prophets when they prophesy to you , filling you with futile hopes.They are making up everything they say.They do not speak for the Lord !

ID:	104
INPUT:	eta morroiari galdegin : — Nor da landan zehar bidera datorkigun gizon hori ? Morroiak erantzun : — Ene nagusia . Orduan , Rebekak bere aurpegia estali zuen zapi batez .
PRED:	“ Who is this man ? ” the servant asked . “ Who is this man , my master ? ” “ Yes , my master , ” she replied . “ He sent his master back to his master . ”
GOLD:	“ Who is that man walking through the fields to meet us ? ” she asked the servant.And he replied , “ It is my master . ” So Rebekah covered her face with her veil .

ID:	105
INPUT:	Hona ekarri dituzuen gizon hauek ez dira gure jainkosaren kontrako sakrilego , ez biraolari .
PRED:	These are the people of Israel who worship other gods . They must not worship other gods or worship other gods .
GOLD:	You have brought these men here , but they have stolen nothing from the temple and have not spoken against our goddess .

ID:	106
INPUT:	Bere indar guztiekin hegoaldeko erreinuaz jabetzea erabakiko du . Horretarako , hegoaldeko erregearekin hitzarmena egingo du , alaba emaztetzat emanez , haren erreinua hondatzeko asmoz ; baina ez du lortuko bere xedea .
PRED:	He will take his kingdom with his kingdom and force it to enter the land of the south , and he will give it to his wife . That is why he will not be captured , but he will not destroy it . ”
GOLD:	He will make plans to come with the might of his entire kingdom and will form an alliance with the king of the south . He will give him a daughter in marriage in order to overthrow the kingdom from within , but his plan will fail .

ID:	107
INPUT:	Tronu handi zuri bat ikusi nuen , baita bertan eseria zegoena ere ; beronen aurretik ihes egin zuten lurrak eta zeruak eta aztarnarik utzi gabe desagertu .
PRED:	And I saw a great city , and the one sitting on the throne of the living beings and the stars in the sky , and the stars disappeared .
GOLD:	And I saw a great white throne and the one sitting on it . The earth and sky fled from his presence , but they found no place to hide .

ID:	108
INPUT:	Bilatu eta inon ez dituzu aurkitukoborroka egiten zizutenak ; ezerez eta huts bihurtuko diragerra egiten zizutenak .
PRED:	You have not fought against you , and you have fought against you . They have no fear , and they will have no fear .
GOLD:	You will look in vainfor those who tried to conquer you.Those who attack youwill come to nothing .

ID:	109
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak esan zion Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	110
INPUT:	Abrahamek guduan harrapatutako guztiaren hamarrenak eman zizkion orduan . Alde batetik , Melkisedek izenak « Justizi errege » esan nahi du ; eta , bestetik , Salemgo errege zen , hau da , « Bake-errege » .
PRED:	In the same way , Abraham gave a tenth of the tithe of the tithe of the king of Israel , which means “ Melchizedek , the king of Israel , ” he said . “ This is what the king of Israel means “ The king of Israel is king of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Then Abraham took a tenth of all he had captured in battle and gave it to Melchizedek . The name Melchizedek means “ king of justice , ” and king of Salem means “ king of peace . ”

ID:	111
INPUT:	Senideok , pikondoak ematen ote du olibarik , edota mahatsondoak pikurik ? Iturri gaziak ez dezake ur gezarik eman .
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , why are you like a grapevine ? Even if you do n't have a grapevine , you can not drink the water of water .
GOLD:	Does a fig tree produce olives , or a grapevine produce figs ? No , and you ca n't draw fresh water from a salty spring .

ID:	112
INPUT:	Paulok egina ikustean , oihuka hasi zen jendea Likaoniako hizkuntzan : « Jainkoak jaitsi zaizkigu geure artera giza itxuran ! »
PRED:	When Paul saw Paul , he began preaching in the synagogue , saying , “ We are willing to come down to the Gentiles ! ”
GOLD:	When the crowd saw what Paul had done , they shouted in their local dialect , “ These men are gods in human form ! ”

ID:	113
INPUT:	Orduan , Tamar , alargun-soinekoak erantzi eta , inork ez antzemateko bere burua zapiz estalirik , Timna bidean dagoen Enaim hiriko sarreran jarri zen . Izan ere , Xela handi egin zela ikusten zuen , baina ez ziotela senartzat ematen .
PRED:	He also had ten curtains of finely woven linen for the rest of the events of Tamar , and he did n't want to take his finger in the hill country of Judah . But when he saw that he was n't dead , he would n't see whether he was dead .
GOLD:	Tamar was aware that Shelah had grown up , but no arrangements had been made for her to come and marry him . So she changed out of her widow 's clothing and covered herself with a veil to disguise herself . Then she sat beside the road at the entrance to the village of Enaim , which is on the road to Timnah .

ID:	114
INPUT:	Gogoan izan Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak egintza guztietan bedeinkatu zaituztela eta basamortu izugarri honetan egin duzuen ibilaldiaz arduratu dela ; zeuekin izan duzue berrogei urte hauetan eta ez zaizue ezer falta izan .
PRED:	Remember that the Lord your God has commanded you to bless you in the wilderness and bless you in the wilderness . You have made a covenant with your ancestors in the wilderness , and you have not obeyed your instructions .
GOLD:	For the Lord your God has blessed you in everything you have done . He has watched your every step through this great wilderness . During these forty years , the Lord your God has been with you , and you have lacked nothing . ” '

ID:	115
INPUT:	« Eman dezagun gizon batek bi emazte dituela eta bata bestea baino maiteago duela , eta , batak zein besteak seme-alabak eman dizkion arren , gutxiago maite duenarena dela lehen-semea .
PRED:	“ Suppose two men marry one of them than two wives , one of them , and one of them will be more than the other , and the other half of them will have the firstborn sons and daughters .
GOLD:	“ Suppose a man has two wives , but he loves one and not the other , and both have given him sons . And suppose the firstborn son is the son of the wife he does not love .

ID:	116
INPUT:	Izan ere , zapaltzailea hilko da , harroputza galduko , kalte egiteko erne dabiltzanakakabatuko :
PRED:	For the dead will be destroyed , and those who hate me will die in a heap of rubble .
GOLD:	The scoffer will be gone , the arrogant will disappear , and those who plot evil will be killed .

ID:	117
INPUT:	Orduan , Xuaheko Bildadek hitz egin zuen :
PRED:	Then Bildad the Shuhite replied :
GOLD:	Then Bildad the Shuhite replied :

ID:	118
INPUT:	Hiriaren perimetroa bederatzi kilometrokoa izango da . « Aurrerantzean , “ Jauna bertan dago ” deituko da hiria » .
PRED:	The foundation of the city will be the foundation of the city , and it will be called ‘ The Lord will be called ‘ The city of the city . ' ”
GOLD:	“ The distance around the entire city will be 6 miles . And from that day the name of the city will be ‘ The Lord Is There . ' ”

ID:	119
INPUT:	baita bere egoitza Axtarot eta Edrei hirietan zuen Baxango Og erregearen erreinu osoa ere . Og erregea zen antzinako refatar erraldoietatik gelditutako bakarra . Moisesek garaitu egin zituen bi erregeak eta beren lurraldeetatik bota .
PRED:	So King Og of Bashan and all the kings of Bashan and King Og of Bashan , and the kingdom of King Og of Bashan . So Moses destroyed all the kings of the land .
GOLD:	and all the territory of King Og of Bashan , who had reigned in Ashtaroth and Edrei . King Og was the last of the Rephaites , for Moses had attacked them and driven them out .

ID:	120
INPUT:	berria eman zioten : « Bizi da Jose oraindik eta bera da agintari Egipto lurralde osoan » . Jakobek , halaz guztiz , ez zuen zirkinik ere egin , ezin sinetsirik .
PRED:	Then they said to Joseph , “ Joseph is Joseph , and he has given Joseph the entire land of Egypt . ” So Jacob did n't realize that he could n't make it right with his ancestors .
GOLD:	“ Joseph is still alive ! ” they told him . “ And he is governor of all the land of Egypt ! ” Jacob was stunned at the news — he could n't believe it .

ID:	121
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Hondaturiko hiri bihurtuko zaitudanean — jenderik gabeko hiriak bezala — , itsas leizea zure aurka altxarazi eta ur handiek estaliko zaituztenean ,
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : When I will destroy you , I will destroy you , I will make you as numerous as the stars in the sky , and you will stand in the depths of the sea .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will make Tyre an uninhabited ruin , like many others . I will bury you beneath the terrible waves of enemy attack . Great seas will swallow you .

ID:	122
INPUT:	Beraz , Israel lurralde osoan neska gazte polit baten bila ibili ondoren , Abixag aurkitu zuten , Xunemgoa , eta bera eraman zioten erregeari .
PRED:	So the young women of Israel took their young girl , and they sent him to drink . So they took him to the king of Shunem , and they took him to Naboth .
GOLD:	So they searched throughout the land of Israel for a beautiful girl , and they found Abishag from Shunem and brought her to the king .

ID:	123
INPUT:	Odol-beroak liskarra sorrarazten , suminkorrak bekatuak ugaltzen .
PRED:	The Philistines are full of anger ; their fury burns against them .
GOLD:	An angry person starts fights ; a hot-tempered person commits all kinds of sin .

ID:	124
INPUT:	Emakumeek , alai dantzatuz , honela kantatzen zuten , batzuek besteei erantzunez : « Saulek mila hil , Davidek hamar mila ! »
PRED:	When the women heard that Saul had been filled with joy , they said to his men , “ May Saul kill David be killed ? ”
GOLD:	This was their song : “ Saul has killed his thousands , and David his ten thousands ! ”

ID:	125
INPUT:	Ez zen aurretik izan , ezta geroztik ere izango , egun hura bezalakorik : egun hartan Jaunak gizon baten esana egin zuen , Israelen alde borrokan ari baitzen Jauna .
PRED:	For the Lord was not greater than all the people of Israel . For the Lord had done a fight against Israel , for he had fought against Israel .
GOLD:	There has never been a day like this one before or since , when the Lord answered such a prayer . Surely the Lord fought for Israel that day !

ID:	126
INPUT:	Orduan , Balakek esan zion Balaami : — Baina , zer egin didazu ? Etsaiak madarikatzeko ekarri , eta zuk bedeinkazioz bete ?
PRED:	Then Balaam said to Balak , “ What have you done to me ? ” Balak asked Balaam , “ What are you trying to help me ? ”
GOLD:	Then King Balak demanded of Balaam , “ What have you done to me ? I brought you to curse my enemies . Instead , you have blessed them ! ”

ID:	127
INPUT:	Ez gara geure buruak predikatzen ari , Jesu Kristo Jauna dela baizik , eta gu ez gara zuen zerbitzari besterik Jesusen maitasunagatik .
PRED:	We do n't belong to the Lord Jesus Christ , but we do n't belong to the Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	You see , we do n't go around preaching about ourselves . We preach that Jesus Christ is Lord , and we ourselves are your servants for Jesus ' sake .

ID:	128
INPUT:	Josek esan zien : — Baina , zer egin duzue ? Ez al zenekiten ni bezalako batek den-dena igar dezakeela ?
PRED:	Then Joseph asked them , “ Do n't you want me to weep ? Do n't you laugh at peace ? ”
GOLD:	“ What have you done ? ” Joseph demanded . “ Do n't you know that a man like me can predict the future ? ”

ID:	129
INPUT:	Inguruko eskualdeetako jendeaberaren kontra altxatu zen ; sarea bota zioten gaineraeta beren zuloan harrapatu .
PRED:	They fought against him , and they rebelled against him and threw him into a snare .
GOLD:	Then the armies of the nations attacked him , surrounding him from every direction.They threw a net over himand captured him in their pit .

ID:	130
INPUT:	Bihozberritu ala hil
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	A Call to Repentance

ID:	131
INPUT:	Orduan , Isaias profetak otoitz egin zion Jaunari eta ordurako jaitsiak zituen hamar mailak berriro igoarazi zizkion Jaunak itzalari Akazen mailadian .
PRED:	Then Isaiah prayed to the prophet Isaiah the prophet , and the Lord gave a second message to the prophet Haggai .
GOLD:	So Isaiah the prophet asked the Lord to do this , and he caused the shadow to move ten steps backward on the sundial of Ahaz !

ID:	132
INPUT:	bera da suge pozoitsu eta eskorpi<unk> beteriko basamortu handi eta ikaragarritik , ur-tantarik gabeko eremu elkor horretatik , eraman zaituztena ; bera , suharritik ura atera eta edaten eman dizuena ;
PRED:	It is a strong king , a great king of Assyria , a great king of Israel , a great calf that has been poured out from the wilderness . It is a great nation , a great nation that has been given to you .
GOLD:	Do not forget that he led you through the great and terrifying wilderness with its poisonous snakes and scorpions , where it was so hot and dry . He gave you water from the rock !

ID:	133
INPUT:	Gure arnasberritzailea , Jaunak gantzuturiko erregea , preso erori da etsaiaren sarean . Herrien artean haren gerizpean biziko ginela uste genuen .
PRED:	The Lord is with us , a king of the sea , a king of Assyria , who was among the nations . The king 's people were riding on the road ahead of us .
GOLD:	Our king — the Lord 's anointed , the very life of our nation — was caught in their snares.We had thought that his shadowwould protect us against any nation on earth !

ID:	134
INPUT:	Abiatu zen , bada , David bere gizonekin Keilarantz eta oldartu zitzaien filistearrei . Haien abere-taldeak hartu eta izugarrizko sarraskia egin zien . Horrela salbatu zituen Davidek Keilako bizilagunak .
PRED:	So David went out to Keilah , and he led his men to Keilah with the Philistines . So David brought them back to Keilah , and he brought them out of Keilah . So David brought them back to Keilah .
GOLD:	So David and his men went to Keilah . They slaughtered the Philistines and took all their livestock and rescued the people of Keilah .

ID:	135
INPUT:	Handik denboraldi batera Jaunak esan zidan : « Zoaz Eufrates ibaira eta hartu han gordetzeko agindu nizun gerrikoa » .
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord : “ Go back to the Euphrates River , for I will send you to the Euphrates River . ”
GOLD:	A long time afterward the Lord said to me , “ Go back to the Euphrates and get the loincloth I told you to hide there . ”

ID:	136
INPUT:	Ez dute gorpurik ukituko , kutsa ez daitezen , aita edo amarena , seme edo alabarena , anaia edo ezkongabeko arrebarena izan ezik .
PRED:	They must not defile the dead , nor any of their father or mother or a mother or a mother or a mother or a sister or a brother or sister .
GOLD:	“ A priest must not defile himself by being in the presence of a dead person unless it is his father , mother , child , brother , or unmarried sister . In such cases it is permitted .

ID:	137
INPUT:	Jakobek , orduan : — Ez da jaitsiko nire semea zuekin , hila baitu bere anaia eta bera bakarrik gelditzen zait Rakelengandik . Bidean zoritxarren bat gertatuko balitzaio , agure hau Hildakoen Egoitzara jaitsaraziko zenukete atsekabez .
PRED:	But Jacob replied , “ No , my son is gone with me , for I have been buried with you in the grave . My brother 's grave has been torn down from her dead . ”
GOLD:	But Jacob replied , “ My son will not go down with you . His brother Joseph is dead , and he is all I have left . If anything should happen to him on your journey , you would send this grieving , white-haired man to his grave . ”

ID:	138
INPUT:	Egin otoitz gizon oker eta gaiztoengandik gu onik atera gaitezen ere , ez baitira denak leialak .
PRED:	Do n't pray to us , for we have sinned , but we are faithful to those who are faithful .
GOLD:	Pray , too , that we will be rescued from wicked and evil people , for not everyone is a believer .

ID:	139
INPUT:	Nik , Paulok , Jainkoak hala nahirik , Kristo Jesusen bidez agindu zaigun bizia iragartzeko Jesu Kristoren apostolu naizen honek ,
PRED:	This letter is from Paul , chosen by the word of God through Jesus Christ Jesus Christ , who is a apostle of Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , chosen by the will of God to be an apostle of Christ Jesus . I have been sent out to tell others about the life he has promised through faith in Christ Jesus .

ID:	140
INPUT:	Bekatuarekin zerikusirik ez zuen hura , guregatik bekatuarekin bat egin zuen Jainkoak , guk haren bitartez Jainkoarengandik salbamena irits dezagun .
PRED:	God was with us , and he did not sin with us because we have sinned against you . We have been saved from God to save us from God .
GOLD:	For God made Christ , who never sinned , to be the offering for our sin , so that we could be made right with God through Christ .

ID:	141
INPUT:	Saul , asto galduen bila
PRED:	Saul Becomes Saul 's Parable
GOLD:	Saul Meets Samuel

ID:	142
INPUT:	Heriotza dakarren eztena bekatua da , eta bekatuak legetik hartzen du bere indarra .
PRED:	The grave is a life-giving fountain ; the mouth of a person who takes refuge in death .
GOLD:	For sin is the sting that results in death , and the law gives sin its power .

ID:	143
INPUT:	asmo txarretan dabilen burua , gaiztakeria egiteko presa duten oinak ,
PRED:	They are evil in their own desires , but they care for evil .
GOLD:	a heart that plots evil , feet that race to do wrong ,

ID:	144
INPUT:	Ardi galduaren gisa desbideratuko banintz , bilatu zuk zeure zerbitzari hau , ez baititut zure aginduak ahazten .
PRED:	You have led me away , O my servant , for I have forgotten your servant , for I have forgotten your commands .
GOLD:	I have wandered away like a lost sheep ; come and find me , for I have not forgotten your commands .

ID:	145
INPUT:	Hari batetik zintzilik bezala biziko zarete , gau eta egun dardaraz , bizitzaz ere etsita .
PRED:	You will be silent before dawn , and you will live in the night and night .
GOLD:	Your life will constantly hang in the balance . You will live night and day in fear , unsure if you will survive .

ID:	146
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Gainera , laguntza eske niregana etortzen utziko diet israeldarrei eta artaldea bezala ugalaraziko ditut .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will help the people of Israel , and I will let them go to their flocks and herds of sheep and goats .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am ready to hear Israel 's prayers and to increase their numbers like a flock .

ID:	147
INPUT:	Uholdearen aurretik , jan-edanean ziharduen eta ezkondu egiten zen jendea , Noe ontzian sartu zen arte ;
PRED:	After the flood came out of the flood , Noah got up from the boat and ate the boat until the next morning .
GOLD:	In those days before the flood , the people were enjoying banquets and parties and weddings right up to the time Noah entered his boat .

ID:	148
INPUT:	Begira Babiloniari : galdua da herria . Basapiztien menpe utzi du Asiriak ; eraso-dorreak altxaturik , jauregiak desegin dizkioeta lurraldeahondakin-pila bihurtu .
PRED:	The people of Babylon is treasures of Babylon , and the wild animals are treasures of Babylon . They have been destroyed by the siege and destroyed by the walls of Babylon .
GOLD:	Look at the land of Babylonia — the people of that land are gone ! The Assyrians have handed Babylon overto the wild animals of the desert.They have built siege ramps against its walls , torn down its palaces , and turned it to a heap of rubble .

ID:	149
INPUT:	Gainera , hildakoen piztueraz , ez al duzue irakurri Jainkoak berak esan zizuena :
PRED:	And now , since you have been raised from the dead , you must not read it to God .
GOLD:	“ But now , as to whether there will be a resurrection of the dead — have n't you ever read about this in the Scriptures ? Long after Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob had died , God said ,

ID:	150
INPUT:	Pedro sartzera zihoala , Kornelio bidera atera zitzaion eta oinetara ahuspeztu .
PRED:	Cornelius went to Caesarea and bowed low to the ground .
GOLD:	As Peter entered his home , Cornelius fell at his feet and worshiped him .

ID:	151
INPUT:	Ezin izan zion inork erantzun , eta egun hartatik aurrera ez zen inor ausartu galderarik egiten .
PRED:	For no one could n't answer him , and no one asked him , “ No one can stop him . ”
GOLD:	No one could answer him . And after that , no one dared to ask him any more questions .

ID:	152
INPUT:	errudunari diru-trukearrazoi emateneta errugabeari zuzenbideaukatzen diozuenok !
PRED:	Oh , you who are kind of suffering and wrong , you who are honest and wrong .
GOLD:	They take bribes to let the wicked go free , and they punish the innocent .

ID:	153
INPUT:	Joan nintzen eta gorde nuen Jaunak agindutako tokian .
PRED:	So I did everything the Lord had commanded me to do .
GOLD:	So I went and hid it by the Euphrates as the Lord had instructed me .

ID:	154
INPUT:	goizeko argia bezain distiratsu egingo du zure zuzentasuna , eguerdiko eguzkia bezain argitsu zure zuzenbidea .
PRED:	Your light will be as bright as morning , and your light will be as bright as light .
GOLD:	He will make your innocence radiate like the dawn , and the justice of your cause will shine like the noonday sun .

ID:	155
INPUT:	Maitasunaren agindua
PRED:	Jesus Predicts His Death
GOLD:	The World 's Hatred

ID:	156
INPUT:	Neure mendi santuaren inguruan ezarriko ditut eta sasoian sasoiko euria bidaliko diet , neure bedeinkazioaren ezaugarri .
PRED:	I will put my foot on the mountain of my holy mountain , and I will pour out my blessing on my holy mountain .
GOLD:	I will bless my people and their homes around my holy hill . And in the proper season I will send the showers they need . There will be showers of blessing .

ID:	157
INPUT:	Izan ere , gezurrezko mesiasak eta sasiprofetak agertuko dira eta aukeratuak berak ere , ahal balitz , engainatzeko moduko mirari handiak eta egintza harrigarriak egingo dituzte .
PRED:	For the false prophets will declare that the prophet will be revealed to him , and his faithful prophet will be revealed to him , and his great power will be revealed to him .
GOLD:	For false messiahs and false prophets will rise up and perform great signs and wonders so as to deceive , if possible , even God 's chosen ones .

ID:	158
INPUT:	Terahetik <unk> kara ;
PRED:	They left Terah and camped at Terah .
GOLD:	They left Terah and camped at Mithcah .

ID:	159
INPUT:	Zazpi zigiluz jotako liburua
PRED:	Building the seven times of the Temple
GOLD:	The Lamb Opens the Scroll

ID:	160
INPUT:	Jexuan , Moladan , Bet-Peleten ,
PRED:	In the same way , Moab , Beth-peor ,
GOLD:	They also lived in Jeshua , Moladah , Beth-pelet ,

ID:	161
INPUT:	Jainkoaren agintzariaren aurrean ez zen sinesgogor izan , ezta zalantzan ibili ere , baizik eta sendotu egin zen sinesmenean ; horrela , Jainkoak egia zioela aitortu zuen ,
PRED:	When God had done this , he was not trying to kill him , but he did n't believe that he was healed . He was healed by faith that he was healed .
GOLD:	Abraham never wavered in believing God 's promise . In fact , his faith grew stronger , and in this he brought glory to God .

ID:	162
INPUT:	Nola zerua lurraren gainetik garai , halaxe nire jokabideazuenaren gainetiketa nire egitasmoak zuenen gainetik .
PRED:	For the earth is coming from heaven , and the earth will hear my plans , and I will hear my plans .
GOLD:	For just as the heavens are higher than the earth , so my ways are higher than your waysand my thoughts higher than your thoughts .

ID:	163
INPUT:	Gure urrats guztiak zaintzen dituzte : ez daukagu kalera ateratzerik . Hurbil dugu azkena , beteak egunak ; bai , heldu zaigu azkena !
PRED:	Our ancestors care about him , but we are n't looking for a few years . We are coming to come , but we are coming soon .
GOLD:	We could n't go into the streetswithout danger to our lives.Our end was near ; our days were numbered.We were doomed !

ID:	164
INPUT:	Tziporren seme eta Moabeko errege Balak baino hobea zarelakoan al zaude ? Hura ez zen aitzakia bila ibili israeldarren kontra borrokatzeko .
PRED:	This is what the king of Moab , the king of Moab , says : “ Have you come to war against Moab ? ”
GOLD:	Are you any better than Balak son of Zippor , king of Moab ? Did he try to make a case against Israel for disputed land ? Did he go to war against them ?

ID:	165
INPUT:	Ahiasen seme eta Isakarren leinukoa zen Baxak jaiki eta hil egin zuen Nadab erregea , israeldar guztiekin Gibeton , filistearren hiria , setiatzen ari zenean . Hantxe bertan hil zuen Baxak .
PRED:	Baasha son of Aaron died , and he became the next king of Israel . He died at the door of the Philistines , and he killed all the Israelites in the land of the Philistines .
GOLD:	Then Baasha son of Ahijah , from the tribe of Issachar , plotted against Nadab and assassinated him while he and the Israelite army were laying siege to the Philistine town of Gibbethon .

ID:	166
INPUT:	Erromes-kanta . Begiak zuregana jasoak ditut , zeruan errege zaren horrengana .
PRED:	I will praise you in the presence of the Lord , for I have made you king of heaven .
GOLD:	I lift my eyes to you , O God , enthroned in heaven .

ID:	167
INPUT:	Belaunez belaun egingo diozue Jaunari labeko lehen ogien eskaintza .
PRED:	You must present it to the Lord as a special offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	Throughout the generations to come , you are to present a sacred offering to the Lord each year from the first of your ground flour .

ID:	168
INPUT:	Bedeinkatua zu , Jauna ! Irakats niri zeure arauak .
PRED:	Praise the Lord , you are my decrees ; teach me your decrees .
GOLD:	I praise you , O Lord ; teach me your decrees .

ID:	169
INPUT:	Peratzim mendian bezalaekingo dio Jaunak , Gabaon haranean bezala , bere egitekoa betetzeko , bere lana burutzeko : egiteko harrigarria , ohi ez bezalako lana .
PRED:	For the Lord is like a warrior ; he is like a warrior like a warrior in the middle of the mountain . It is like a tree in the middle of the mountain , and he does n't need it .
GOLD:	The Lord will come as he did against the Philistines at Mount Perazimand against the Amorites at Gibeon.He will come to do a strange thing ; he will come to do an unusual deed :

ID:	170
INPUT:	eskuinaldetik <unk> da , eta hala ere gose ; ezkerraldetik jan , eta ezin ase . Bakoitzak bere ondokoadu jaten .
PRED:	They are hungry and hungry , but they are hungry . They are hungry and thirsty , but they are never satisfied .
GOLD:	The land will be blackenedby the fury of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies.The people will be fuel for the fire , and no one will spare even his own brother .

ID:	171
INPUT:	bere aitaren jokabidea hartuz eta bere aitak zerbitzatu zituen idoloak gurtuz .
PRED:	He followed his father 's father 's example and followed his father 's example .
GOLD:	He followed the example of his father , worshiping the same idols his father had worshiped .

ID:	172
INPUT:	Orduan , apaizak , lebitarrak , atezainak , kantariak , tenpluko laguntzaileak eta atzerritik etorritako israeldar guztiak beren hirietan jarri ziren bizitzen . Zazpigarren hilabetea iritsi zenean , israeldarrak jadanik beren hirietan zeuden .
PRED:	Then the priests , Levites , who had returned from the Temple of the Lord , from all the people of Israel , who had been appointed by the Lord 's Temple . The people of Israel took possession of the people of Israel to this city .
GOLD:	The rest of the people gave 20,000 gold coins , about 2,500 pounds of silver , and 67 robes for the priests .

ID:	173
INPUT:	Hau guztia Kafar<unk> go sinagogan irakatsi zuen Jesusek .
PRED:	When Jesus was in the synagogue , he was in the synagogue .
GOLD:	He said these things while he was teaching in the synagogue in Capernaum .

ID:	174
INPUT:	Orain , bete ezazu , Jainko Jaun horrek , gure aita Davidi eman zenion hitza , zuk egin bainauzu lurreko hautsa baino ugariago den herri honen errege .
PRED:	“ Now , O Lord , God of my father , David , have made me very numerous than these nations .
GOLD:	O Lord God , please continue to keep your promise to David my father , for you have made me king over a people as numerous as the dust of the earth !

ID:	175
INPUT:	Esan zion , orduan , Davidek Sauli : — Zergatik entzuten diozu David zu hondatu nahian dabilela diotsun jendeari ?
PRED:	Then David said to David , “ Why have you heard that I am the only one who sent this city to destroy the people of Israel ? ”
GOLD:	This very day you can see with your own eyes it is n't true . For the Lord placed you at my mercy back there in the cave . Some of my men told me to kill you , but I spared you . For I said , ‘ I will never harm the king — he is the Lord 's anointed one . '

ID:	176
INPUT:	Fedeari esker erori ziren Jerikoko harresiak , zazpi egunez hiria inguratu ondoren .
PRED:	It was by faith that the people of Jerusalem had been received by the number of seven days .
GOLD:	It was by faith that the people of Israel marched around Jericho for seven days , and the walls came crashing down .

ID:	177
INPUT:	Izan ere , bakarra da Jainkoa eta bakarra Jainkoaren eta gizon-emakumeen bitartekoa ere : gizon bat , Kristo Jesus ,
PRED:	For God alone is the one God of us , and Christ , who is the one who is Christ Jesus , the man of God .
GOLD:	For , There is one God and one Mediator who can reconcile God and humanity — the man Christ Jesus .

ID:	178
INPUT:	Hona zer ikusi nuen : Elam eskualdean dagoen Susa gotorlekuan aurkitzen nintzen , Ulai ibai ondoan .
PRED:	This is what the vision I saw in the fortress of Susa , which was in the fortress of Susa .
GOLD:	In this vision I was at the fortress of Susa , in the province of Elam , standing beside the Ulai River .

ID:	179
INPUT:	Nik esan nion : « Ai Jainko Jauna ! Zera ari dira nitaz esaten : “ Ez al da hori beti parabolak kontatzen ari dena ? ” »
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits the Sovereign Lord ! What sorrow awaits those who say to me , ‘ What are I going to catch up ? '
GOLD:	Everyone in the world will know that I am the Lord . My sword is in my hand , and it will not return to its sheath until its work is finished . '

ID:	180
INPUT:	Zure zapaltzaileei beren okelajanaraziko diet , beren odolez mozkorraraziko ditut , ardo berriz bezala . Horrela jakingo dute gizaki guztiekni , Jauna , naizela zure salbatzailea , ni , Jakoben Jainko indartsua , zure askatzailea » .
PRED:	I will give you the blood of your blood , and I will cut down the blood of your blood , like sheep , goats , goats , sheep , goats , and goats . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	I will feed your enemies with their own flesh.They will be drunk with rivers of their own blood.All the world will know that I , the Lord , am your Savior and your Redeemer , the Mighty One of Israel . ”

ID:	181
INPUT:	honako irri-kanta hau abestuko diozu Babiloniako erregeari : « Horra zertan den zapaltzailea ! Horra zertan denharen harrokeria !
PRED:	Say to the king of Babylon , ‘ This is what the king of Babylon , the king of Babylon , says : The king of Babylon will rest ! '
GOLD:	you will taunt the king of Babylon . You will say , “ The mighty man has been destroyed.Yes , your insolence is ended .

ID:	182
INPUT:	Orduan , Josuek : — Ken itzazue , bada , zeuen artean dituzuen sasijainkoen idoloak eta jar zaitezte erabat Jaunaren , Israelen Jainkoaren , aldean .
PRED:	Then Joshua said to Joshua , “ Get up and serve the Lord your God , and serve him in the worship of the Lord your God . ”
GOLD:	“ All right then , ” Joshua said , “ destroy the idols among you , and turn your hearts to the Lord , the God of Israel . ”

ID:	183
INPUT:	Horregatik , bada , etsaiak inguratuko du lurraldea , zure babeslekuak lurreratuko ditu , eta zure jauregiak hustuko » .
PRED:	That is why the enemy will conquer you , and your enemies will be destroyed by your enemies . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , ” says the Sovereign Lord , “ an enemy is coming ! He will surround them and shatter their defenses.Then he will plunder all their fortresses . ”

ID:	184
INPUT:	Orduan , herriko apaizburu eta lege-maisu guztiak bildu eta Mesias non jaiotzekoa zen galdetu zien .
PRED:	Then the leading priests and teachers of religious law gathered all the teachers of religious law and the teachers of religious law .
GOLD:	He called a meeting of the leading priests and teachers of religious law and asked , “ Where is the Messiah supposed to be born ? ”

ID:	185
INPUT:	Jaunarengatik , izan zaitezte giza agintari guztien menpeko : bai denen gain agintea duen erregearen menpeko ,
PRED:	Instead , be careful to obey the commands of the Lord . Be careful to obey all the commands of the Lord ,
GOLD:	For the Lord 's sake , submit to all human authority — whether the king as head of state ,

ID:	186
INPUT:	Ardiak ahulak zirenean , ordea , ez zituen ziriak ezartzen . Honela , ahulak Labanentzat eta azkarrak Jakobentzat suertatzen ziren .
PRED:	But the shepherds paid no attention to them , but they were not part of the island of Benjamin .
GOLD:	But he did n't do this with the weaker ones , so the weaker lambs belonged to Laban , and the stronger ones were Jacob 's .

ID:	187
INPUT:	gure eta zuen artean eta gure ondorengo belaunaldien artean ezaugarri izateko baizik ; hau da , beraren tenpluan geure erre-opari eta elkartasun-opariak eskainiz Jaunari kultu eman nahi diogula adierazteko ezaugarri . Horrela , zuen seme-alabek ezin esango diete gureei Jaunarekin zerikusirik ez dutela .
PRED:	On the third day of your children and your children will be able to celebrate the Sabbath day of the Lord 's Temple . He will provide a burnt offering to the Lord , and he will not destroy the altar of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	but as a memorial . It will remind our descendants and your descendants that we , too , have the right to worship the Lord at his sanctuary with our burnt offerings , sacrifices , and peace offerings . Then your descendants will not be able to say to ours , ‘ You have no claim to the Lord . '

ID:	188
INPUT:	Beste ontziko lagunei keinu egin zieten laguntzera etortzeko ; hurbildu ziren eta bi ontziak ia-ia hondoratzeraino bete zituzten .
PRED:	So they went up to the other side of the boat to carry the two rams ' side of the boat , and they started up to the boat .
GOLD:	A shout for help brought their partners in the other boat , and soon both boats were filled with fish and on the verge of sinking .

ID:	189
INPUT:	Jaunak , ordea , erantzun zion : — Ez horixe ! Kain hiltzen duena , zazpi aldiz gogorrago izango da zigortua . Eta Jaunak ezaugarri bat ezarri zion Kaini , aurkitzen zuen inork hil ez zezan .
PRED:	But the Lord replied , “ No one will die ! ” But the Lord replied , “ No one will be punished for seven times , and the Lord struck him with a single one who killed him . ” So Cain did not kill him .
GOLD:	The Lord replied , “ No , for I will give a sevenfold punishment to anyone who kills you . ” Then the Lord put a mark on Cain to warn anyone who might try to kill him .

ID:	190
INPUT:	« Ikuskaria neuk bakarrik ikusi nuen . Nirekin zeudenek ez zuten ezer ikusi ; baizik eta , ikara handiak harturik , ihesi joan ziren eta ezkutatu .
PRED:	“ I saw a vision , and I was there with you . I saw nothing but could n't see what it was happening . But when they saw it , they did n't see it .
GOLD:	Only I , Daniel , saw this vision . The men with me saw nothing , but they were suddenly terrified and ran away to hide .

ID:	191
INPUT:	« Horrela hitz egin zidanean , burumakur eta hitzik gabe gelditu nintzen .
PRED:	“ That is why I spoke to them , and they would n't believe me .
GOLD:	While he was speaking to me , I looked down at the ground , unable to say a word .

ID:	192
INPUT:	Emakumeak
PRED:	Young Women of Jerusalem
GOLD:	Young Women of Jerusalem

ID:	193
INPUT:	Larunbata igaro zenean , Magdalako Mariak , Maria Santiagoren amak eta Salomek usain gozoko ukenduak erosi zituzten , Jesusen gorpua gantzutzeko .
PRED:	When the Sabbath day of Mary Magdalene , the daughter of Mary Magdalene , the daughter of Mary Magdalene , the man of the dead , had been stripped away from the dead .
GOLD:	Saturday evening , when the Sabbath ended , Mary Magdalene , Mary the mother of James , and Salome went out and purchased burial spices so they could anoint Jesus ' body .

ID:	194
INPUT:	Emaginek erantzun zioten : — Hebrear emakumeak ez dira egiptoarrak bezalakoak ; oso dira azkarrak eta , emagina joan orduko , izana dute haurra .
PRED:	All the women replied , “ The women of Egypt are not like a woman in Egypt , but the women of Egypt will come to Egypt . ”
GOLD:	“ The Hebrew women are not like the Egyptian women , ” the midwives replied . “ They are more vigorous and have their babies so quickly that we can not get there in time . ”

ID:	195
INPUT:	Haiek , orduan , txalupan hartu nahi izan zuten , baina txalupa berehala iritsi zen zihoazen tokira .
PRED:	But when they got up , they got up into the boat , they got up into a boat .
GOLD:	Then they were eager to let him in the boat , and immediately they arrived at their destination !

ID:	196
INPUT:	Gainera , beraren aita Manases bezala Jaunaren aurrean apaldu ordez , geroz eta okerkeria gehiago egin zuen .
PRED:	But he did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as his father had done .
GOLD:	But unlike his father , he did not humble himself before the Lord . Instead , Amon sinned even more .

ID:	197
INPUT:	Orduan , Satanas sartu zen Hamabien taldeko Judasengan , Iskariote deituarengan .
PRED:	So Satan went into the courtyard , and he called out to the people of Judah .
GOLD:	Then Satan entered into Judas Iscariot , who was one of the twelve disciples ,

ID:	198
INPUT:	Ahaltsua izango da lurraldean haren askazia , bedeinkatua zuzenaren ondorengotza .
PRED:	The Almighty will possess the land of the Almighty , and his descendants will be blessed .
GOLD:	Their children will be successful everywhere ; an entire generation of godly people will be blessed .

ID:	199
INPUT:	Israelgo erregeak gudariak igorri zituen Jainkoaren gizonak esandako tokira . Behin baino gehiagotan gertatu zen hau : Eliseok ohartarazten zuen erregea eta hau erne egoten zen .
PRED:	So the king of Israel sent his chief cup-bearer and chief baker to tell the people of Israel , “ This is what the Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies says : My lord the king of Israel , and this was the next king . ”
GOLD:	So the king of Israel would send word to the place indicated by the man of God . Time and again Elisha warned the king , so that he would be on the alert there .

ID:	200
INPUT:	Josuek gizon batzuk bidali zituen eta , lasterka oihal-etxolara joanik , dena aurkitu zuten oihal-etxolan gordea eta azpian dirua .
PRED:	So Joshua sent some of the men to find out and hurried out to the tent where they found the tent and put it into a tent .
GOLD:	So Joshua sent some men to make a search . They ran to the tent and found the stolen goods hidden there , just as Achan had said , with the silver buried beneath the rest .

ID:	201
INPUT:	Ez zintuzket gehiegi nekatu nahi , baina entzun gaitzazu , otoi , unetxo batean , ohi duzun bihotz onez .
PRED:	I want you to do n't want you to understand what you want , but if you want to live in your kindness , you will have a little child .
GOLD:	But I do n't want to bore you , so please give me your attention for only a moment .

ID:	202
INPUT:	David bere jauregia bedeinkatzeko itzuli zenean , Saulen alaba Mikal atera zitzaion , esanez : — Itxura ederra azaldu du gaur Israelgo erregeak , bere morroi-mirabeen aurrean biluzik , edozein lagun zirtzil biluzik jarriko litzatekeen bezala , jarriz !
PRED:	When David returned to his palace , he sent his daughter Michal , Michal , Michal , Michal , the servant of Saul , “ May the king of Israel bring him back to the king of Israel today . ”
GOLD:	When David returned home to bless his own family , Michal , the daughter of Saul , came out to meet him . She said in disgust , “ How distinguished the king of Israel looked today , shamelessly exposing himself to the servant girls like any vulgar person might do ! ”

ID:	203
INPUT:	Ongi dakizue esku hauek irabazi dutela niretzat eta neurekin nituenentzat beharrezko guztia .
PRED:	You have made me right with me , and you have made me my covenant with me .
GOLD:	You know that these hands of mine have worked to supply my own needs and even the needs of those who were with me .

ID:	204
INPUT:	Hirian bizi diren guztiak zaurituko ditut , gizaki nahiz abere , eta izurrite beldurgarriz hilko dira .
PRED:	I will live in the cities of the city , and I will punish them with fear and disease .
GOLD:	I will send a terrible plague upon this city , and both people and animals will die .

ID:	205
INPUT:	— Zoaz Egiptoko errege faraoiagana eta esaiozu israeldarrei joaten uzteko .
PRED:	“ Go to Pharaoh and tell the people of Israel , ‘ Go to Pharaoh and tell the people of Israel . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Go back to Pharaoh , the king of Egypt , and tell him to let the people of Israel leave his country . ”

ID:	206
INPUT:	Ireki zerua , Jauna , eta jaitsi , ukitu mendiak eta jar bitez ketan .
PRED:	O Lord , you have come down from heaven , and let them go down to the mountain .
GOLD:	Open the heavens , Lord , and come down.Touch the mountains so they billow smoke .

ID:	207
INPUT:	Jaunak higuin du jokabide gaiztoa , zuzentasun bila dabilena du maite .
PRED:	The Lord detests the wicked , but he delights in the path of the wicked .
GOLD:	The Lord detests the way of the wicked , but he loves those who pursue godliness .

ID:	208
INPUT:	Kutxan ez zegoen Horeb mendian Moisesek bertan ipini zituen bi harlauzak besterik , Egiptotik irten ondoren Jaunak israeldarrekin eginiko itunaren harlauzak besterik ez , alegia .
PRED:	So Moses took the Ark of the Lord at Mount Sinai , where he took two stone tablets inscribed with the other terms of the covenant that the Lord had given them to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Nothing was in the Ark except the two stone tablets that Moses had placed in it at Mount Sinai , where the Lord made a covenant with the people of Israel when they left Egypt .

ID:	209
INPUT:	Gure etxaldeak kanpotarren eskuetara joan dira ; gure etxeak arrotzen eskuetara .
PRED:	We are left in our homes , and our homes are left in the fields .
GOLD:	Our inheritance has been turned over to strangers , our homes to foreigners .

ID:	210
INPUT:	Hori guztia Aaronen eta beronen semeen eskuetan jarri zuen , eta hauek Jaunari eskaini zioten , errituzko aurkezpen-keinua eginez .
PRED:	Next Moses gave these instructions to Aaron and his sons as a special offering to the Lord as a special offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	He put all these in the hands of Aaron and his sons , and he lifted these gifts as a special offering to the Lord .

ID:	211
INPUT:	Zintzoaren herentzia , bere ondorengoentzat ; bekatariaren ondasunak ere zintzoarentzat .
PRED:	The family of the godly are righteous , but the children of the righteous are righteous .
GOLD:	Good people leave an inheritance to their grandchildren , but the sinner 's wealth passes to the godly .

ID:	212
INPUT:	Faraoiak uste izango du basamortuak bidea ixten diela eta israeldarrak noraezean dabiltzala .
PRED:	When Pharaoh 's people of Israel arrive in the wilderness , the Lord will send them into battle , and they will find him there .
GOLD:	Then Pharaoh will think , ‘ The Israelites are confused . They are trapped in the wilderness ! '

ID:	213
INPUT:	Ez harritu esaten dizuedanaz , bai baitator ordua hildako guztiek haren ahotsa entzungo dutena ,
PRED:	Do n't be surprised when I tell you the truth , they will hear the voice of the dead .
GOLD:	Do n't be so surprised ! Indeed , the time is coming when all the dead in their graves will hear the voice of God 's Son ,

ID:	214
INPUT:	Zuk zulatu zenuen eta sarraskitu itsas munstroa , zuk sakabanatu beso bizkorrez etsaiak .
PRED:	You placed the waters of the sea and crushed the sea . You crushed the sea with your enemies .
GOLD:	The heavens are yours , and the earth is yours ; everything in the world is yours — you created it all .

ID:	215
INPUT:	Iparraldeko gudarostea suntsitzean , hegoaldeko erregea harropuztu egingo da ; baina , etsaiari milaka gudari hilagatik , ez du luzaroan iraungo agintean .
PRED:	He will destroy the north side of the north , and he will destroy the king of the north , but he will not rule over their enemies .
GOLD:	After the enemy army is swept away , the king of the south will be filled with pride and will execute many thousands of his enemies . But his success will be short lived .

ID:	216
INPUT:	Atera bedi kondenatua auzian , huts egin biezaio bere goradeiak .
PRED:	The grave is a safe fortress , and the path of the godly will be saved .
GOLD:	When his case comes up for judgment , let him be pronounced guilty.Count his prayers as sins .

ID:	217
INPUT:	Gutxi batzuk besterik ez ziren , etorkin-taldetxo bat besterik ez ;
PRED:	There were only a little while there were only a little while there .
GOLD:	He said this when they were few in number , a tiny group of strangers in Canaan .

ID:	218
INPUT:	Ezin izango dituzteberen zilar-urreek ere salbatuJaunaren haserre-egunean : haren grinaren sugarraklur osoa irentsiko du . Beldurgarria benetan , lurtar guztiak suntsituko baititu .
PRED:	Their descendants will not be angry with them , and their hopes will be at the ends of the earth , and their ancestors will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Your silver and gold will not save youon that day of the Lord 's anger.For the whole land will be devouredby the fire of his jealousy.He will make a terrifying endof all the people on earth .

ID:	219
INPUT:	Zuetaz oroitzen naizen bakoitzean eskerrak ematen dizkiot neure Jainkoari .
PRED:	I will thank each other , and I will give thanks to God for you .
GOLD:	Every time I think of you , I give thanks to my God .

ID:	220
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Begira , suge pozoituak bidaliko dizkizuet . Ez duzue horiek liluratzekomodurik izango , eta zizta egingo dizuete » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will punish you for your sins , and you will not be shaken . I will not make you ruler over them . ”
GOLD:	I will send these enemy troops among youlike poisonous snakes you can not charm.They will bite you , and you will die.I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	221
INPUT:	eta Nazaret izeneko herrian jarri zen bizitzen ; horrela bete zen Jainkoak profeten bidez esana : « Nazaretarra esango diote » .
PRED:	When they arrived at Nazareth in Galilee , they said , “ The Kingdom of Nazareth will be fulfilled . ” And they said , “ They will be the prophet . ”
GOLD:	So the family went and lived in a town called Nazareth . This fulfilled what the prophets had said : “ He will be called a Nazarene . ”

ID:	222
INPUT:	Zure ondarea zure anaiena baino hobea izango da : Sikem emango dizut , ezpataz eta uztaiaz amortarrei kendu nien hiria » .
PRED:	For I will give you the land of Shechem , and I will give you a sword to the Philistine army of Shechem . ”
GOLD:	And beyond what I have given your brothers , I am giving you an extra portion of the land that I took from the Amorites with my sword and bow . ”

ID:	223
INPUT:	Jauna , zure maitasuna zeru zabala adinakoa , zure leialtasuna hodeietarainokoa .
PRED:	O Lord , your unfailing love is above the highest heavens.May your faithfulness shine over the clouds .
GOLD:	Your righteousness is like the mighty mountains , your justice like the ocean depths.You care for people and animals alike , O Lord .

ID:	224
INPUT:	Ziur dakigu orain dena dakizula eta ez duzula inork galdetu beharrik ; honengatik sinesten dugu Jainkoarengandik etorri zarela .
PRED:	So we know that we know that no one can find him . We are trying to believe that we have been saved from God .
GOLD:	Now we understand that you know everything , and there 's no need to question you . From this we believe that you came from God . ”

ID:	225
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	226
INPUT:	Dei degizut : salba nazazu , eta beteko ditut zure xedapenak .
PRED:	I pray to you , “ Men , you are my laws , and I will obey your laws .
GOLD:	I cry out to you ; rescue me , that I may obey your laws .

ID:	227
INPUT:	Zure lan eta ahaleginen emaitzekez ditzatela ezezagunak asebete .
PRED:	Those who work hard hard work hard work hard , but those who love them will be hungry .
GOLD:	Strangers will consume your wealth , and someone else will enjoy the fruit of your labor .

ID:	228
INPUT:	Esauk galdegin zion : — Zertarako dira ikusi ditudan abere-talde horiek guztiak ? Jakobek erantzun : — Zure abegi ona nahi nuen irabazi .
PRED:	Esau asked , “ Why are you going to see all these animals ? ” Esau replied , “ Yes , my sheep , ” Jacob replied , “ I want you to do everything I wanted . ”
GOLD:	“ And what were all the flocks and herds I met as I came ? ” Esau asked.Jacob replied , “ They are a gift , my lord , to ensure your friendship . ”

ID:	229
INPUT:	Hego-haizea denean , berriz , “ Sargoria dugu ” esaten duzue , eta hala gertatzen da .
PRED:	But when we are in the south , we will tell you the truth , and it is written in the evening .
GOLD:	When the south wind blows , you say , ‘ Today will be a scorcher . ' And it is .

ID:	230
INPUT:	Egin azpilak , erretiluak , pitxerrak eta katiluak , isur-oparietarako ; guztiok urre garbiz egingo dituzu .
PRED:	Also make the ash buckets , shovels , ladles , ladles , ladles , ladles , ladles , and trays , all of pure gold .
GOLD:	Make special containers of pure gold for the table — bowls , ladles , pitchers , and jars — to be used in pouring out liquid offerings .

ID:	231
INPUT:	Izan ere , neuretzat sagaratua dudan hiritik hasi naiz zigorra ematen , eta beste nazioek zigorretik aske geldituko direla uste al dute ? Ez horixe ! Ez dira zigorrik gabe geldituko , munduko bizilagun guztiei bidaliko baitiet gerra . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak .
PRED:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says , “ Should I bring disaster on them ? Of course not , I will punish them for the sake of the world , and I will not punish them for the sake of the world ? ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	I have begun to punish Jerusalem , the city that bears my name . Now should I let you go unpunished ? No , you will not escape disaster . I will call for war against all the nations of the earth . I , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken ! '

ID:	232
INPUT:	« Zazpi egunez legamia gabeko ogia jango duzue , eta zazpigarrenean festa ospatuko duzue Jaunaren ohorez .
PRED:	“ On the seventh day you must celebrate the Festival of Unleavened Bread . You must celebrate the Festival of Shelters , and you must celebrate the Festival of Shelters .
GOLD:	For seven days the bread you eat must be made without yeast . Then on the seventh day , celebrate a feast to the Lord .

ID:	233
INPUT:	BUKAERA ( 22 , 1 — 24 , 33 )
PRED:	Rehoboam Rules in Judah
GOLD:	The Eastern Tribes Return Home

ID:	234
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jaunarengandik aldentzen bazarete , are gehiago luzatuko dio hark Israeli basamortuko egonaldia , eta , orduan , zuek izango zarete herri osoaren hondamendiaren erantzule .
PRED:	For if you turn away from the Lord , you will turn away from the wilderness , and you will be your ancestors , and you will be your ancestors .
GOLD:	If you turn away from him like this and he abandons them again in the wilderness , you will be responsible for destroying this entire nation ! ”

ID:	235
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Amondarrekgaiztakeriarik asko egin dute , zein baino zein handiago . Eta beraz , zigortu egingo ditut ! Galaadeko emakume haurduneisabela urratu baitzieten , beren lurraldeazabaldu ahal izateko ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Israel have sinned against them , and I will punish them for their children , just as I have destroyed them .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Ammon have sinned again and again , and I will not let them go unpunished ! When they attacked Gilead to extend their borders , they ripped open pregnant women with their swords .

ID:	236
INPUT:	Baina hark ezetz . Eta joan eta kartzelan sartu zuen , zorra ordaindu arte .
PRED:	But when he went , he took him into the prison , and he took him into the prison until he was circumcised .
GOLD:	But his creditor would n't wait . He had the man arrested and put in prison until the debt could be paid in full .

ID:	237
INPUT:	gari , garagar , mahasti , pikondo , granadondo , olibondo eta eztiz hornitua ;
PRED:	olive groves , wine , olive groves , olive groves , olive trees , and olive trees .
GOLD:	It is a land of wheat and barley ; of grapevines , fig trees , and pomegranates ; of olive oil and honey .

ID:	238
INPUT:	Arantzaz egindako koroa ezarri zioten buruan eta kanabera eskuan , eta , aurrean belaunikaturik , iseka egin zioten esanez : « Agur , juduen erregea ! »
PRED:	Then they laid their hands on their heads and put them on their heads , and they asked , “ Hail to the Jews ! ” So they said , “ Hail to the Jews ! ”
GOLD:	They wove thorn branches into a crown and put it on his head , and they placed a reed stick in his right hand as a scepter . Then they knelt before him in mockery and taunted , “ Hail ! King of the Jews ! ”

ID:	239
INPUT:	Baina ia aingeruen pareko egina izan zen Jesus hura ohorez eta aintzaz koroatua ikusten dugu , sufritu zuen heriotzagatik ; horrela , Jainkoaren onginahiaz , gu guztion onerako jasan zuen berak heriotza .
PRED:	But Jesus knew that he was going to suffer with the glory of Jesus , and he was filled with the glory of the Lord Jesus . He said , “ He is the one who comes from the dead . ”
GOLD:	What we do see is Jesus , who for a little while was given a position “ a little lower than the angels ” ; and because he suffered death for us , he is now “ crowned with glory and honor . ” Yes , by God 's grace , Jesus tasted death for everyone .

ID:	240
INPUT:	Jaunaren zerbitzariaren pasioa eta aintza
PRED:	The
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	241
INPUT:	Gamelu guztiak ase zirenean , hartu zituen morroiak sei gramoko urrezko eraztuna eta ehun gramo baino gehiago zuten urrezko bi eskumuturreko ,
PRED:	He also took all the pomegranates to the hem of the pomegranates to the hem of the robe , which were two gold rings at the top of the chestpiece .
GOLD:	Then at last , when the camels had finished drinking , he took out a gold ring for her nose and two large gold bracelets for her wrists .

ID:	242
INPUT:	egin zintuenak emaztetzathartuko baitzaitu : Jaun ahalguztiduna , horixe du izena . Israelen Jainko santua dazure askatzailea : lur osoaren Jainkoa deritza .
PRED:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : “ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Holy One of Israel , is the Holy One of Israel .
GOLD:	For your Creator will be your husband ; the Lord of Heaven 's Armies is his name ! He is your Redeemer , the Holy One of Israel , the God of all the earth .

ID:	243
INPUT:	Nire aurka marmarrean eta azpilanean ari dira etengabe etsaiak .
PRED:	My enemies surround me with a complaining about me ; they have rebelled against me .
GOLD:	My enemies whisper and mutteras they plot against me all day long .

ID:	244
INPUT:	Hona hemen beren buruak eskaini zituzten lebitarrak : Kehaten ondorengoetarik Amasairen seme Mahat eta Azariasen seme Joel ; Merariren ondorengoetarik Abdiren seme Kix eta Jehalelelen seme Azarias ; Gerxonen ondorengoetarik Zimaren seme Joah eta Joahen seme Eden ;
PRED:	These are the names of the clans of the tribe of Levi : The descendants of Aaron and his sons were descendants of Hashabiah , descendants of Jeshua son of Hashabiah , Hashabiah , and Uzziel . The descendants of Jeshua son of Hashabiah , Binnui from the family of Joseph .
GOLD:	Then these Levites got right to work : From the clan of Kohath : Mahath son of Amasai and Joel son of Azariah.From the clan of Merari : Kish son of Abdi and Azariah son of Jehallelel.From the clan of Gershon : Joah son of Zimmah and Eden son of Joah .

ID:	245
INPUT:	Baina Balakek beste buruzagi batzuk bidali zituen , aurrekoak baino ugariago eta ospetsuagoak .
PRED:	But Balaam sent some of the other officials to find out more than they were more powerful than the poor .
GOLD:	Then Balak tried again . This time he sent a larger number of even more distinguished officials than those he had sent the first time .

ID:	246
INPUT:	Hara , zerbait berria egitera noa : hasia da sortzen , ez al diozue antzematen ? Bidea irekiko dut basamortuan , ibaiak sorraraziko landa lehorrean .
PRED:	Look , some bread are like trees , and it 's true . You are like a tree in the wilderness , but you are like a tree in the wilderness , like a vine planted in the wilderness .
GOLD:	For I am about to do something new.See , I have already begun ! Do you not see it ? I will make a pathway through the wilderness.I will create rivers in the dry wasteland .

ID:	247
INPUT:	Agur ezazue elkar , maitasunez besarkatuz . Bakea Kristorenak zareten guztioi .
PRED:	Greet each other with each other with each other , and each other with Christ .
GOLD:	Greet each other with a kiss of love.Peace be with all of you who are in Christ .

ID:	248
INPUT:	— Bai politak zure oinak abarka horiekin , errege-alaba ! Zure izterretako bihurguneak , zilarginaren egiazko artelan .
PRED:	“ Yes , it 's the king ! ” he said , “ You are like a friend of your friend , your friend 's friend , too . ”
GOLD:	Your navel is perfectly formedlike a goblet filled with mixed wine.Between your thighs lies a mound of wheatbordered with lilies .

ID:	249
INPUT:	Bizkarra eman didate , ez aurpegia . Etengabe irakatsi diedan arren , ez didate aditu eta ez dute zentzatu nahi izan .
PRED:	They have brought me into my presence , but they have refused to listen to me . They have not listened to me , and they have refused to obey me .
GOLD:	My people have turned their backs on me and have refused to return . Even though I diligently taught them , they would not receive instruction or obey .

ID:	250
INPUT:	Jauna honela mintzatu zitzaion Josueri :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Joshua ,
GOLD:	The Lord said to Joshua ,

ID:	251
INPUT:	Baina erregeak : — Badakit luzatu nahirik zabiltzatela , nire erabakien berri badakizuelako .
PRED:	But the king replied , “ I know that you are going to know that I know that you are going to know me . ”
GOLD:	The king replied , “ I know what you are doing ! You 're stalling for time because you know I am serious when I say ,

ID:	252
INPUT:	Zergatik zabiltzate israeldarrak adoregabetzen , Jaunak emandako lurraldera igaro ez daitezen ?
PRED:	Why are the people of Israel not yet come to the land the Lord has given them ?
GOLD:	“ Why do you want to discourage the rest of the people of Israel from going across to the land the Lord has given them ?

ID:	253
INPUT:	Agur ezazue elkar besarkada santuaz . Fededun guztiek agurtzen zaituztete .
PRED:	Greet each other with each other . Greet all the brothers and sisters with the same kiss .
GOLD:	Greet each other with a sacred kiss .

ID:	254
INPUT:	Bi sorbalda-babeski izango ditu , bi ertzetatik lotzeko .
PRED:	There will be two miles long , and two miles long .
GOLD:	It will consist of two pieces , front and back , joined at the shoulders with two shoulder-pieces .

ID:	255
INPUT:	Garaileari , nire nahia egiten azkeneraino irauten duenari , agintea emango diot nazioen gain ,
PRED:	I will teach you the decrees and regulations I have given you , and I will give it to you .
GOLD:	To all who are victorious , who obey me to the very end , To them I will give authority over all the nations .

ID:	256
INPUT:	moztu egingo diote eskua . Ez izan gupidarik !
PRED:	They must not be handed over to him . Do n't be handed over to us .
GOLD:	you must cut off her hand . Show her no pity .

ID:	257
INPUT:	Azken agurra
PRED:	Greetings from Paul
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Greetings

ID:	258
INPUT:	Ehun eta hogeita hiru urte zituen Aaronek Hor mendian hil zenean .
PRED:	After Abimelech was ninety-nine years old , he died at Mount Hor .
GOLD:	Aaron was 123 years old when he died there on Mount Hor .

ID:	259
INPUT:	Zer itxaron dezaket , beraz , Jauna ? Zuregan nire itxaropen bakarra !
PRED:	So why are you looking for me ? O Lord , how can I wait for you ?
GOLD:	Rescue me from my rebellion.Do not let fools mock me .

ID:	260
INPUT:	Hango profetak , ahobero eta engainatzaile . Jaunarentzat sagaratua kutsatzeneta legea hausten dute apaizek .
PRED:	Then the prophet said , “ This is what the Lord says : The priests are ceremonially unclean by touching the law and the priests . ”
GOLD:	Its prophets are arrogant liars seeking their own gain.Its priests defile the Temple by disobeying God 's instructions .

ID:	261
INPUT:	Haurdun gelditu zen emakumea eta semea izan zuen . Judak Er eman zion izen .
PRED:	She became pregnant and gave birth to a son , and she named him Shelah .
GOLD:	she became pregnant and gave birth to a son , and he named the boy Er .

ID:	262
INPUT:	Lebitarren hiriak
PRED:	The Towns Given to the Levites
GOLD:	Towns for the Levites

ID:	263
INPUT:	Batez ere , gorde ezazue bizi-bizi elkarrenganako maitasuna , maitasunak bekatu askoren barkamena lortzen baitu .
PRED:	Let them live in your love , and love each other with love . Instead , let them be forgiven .
GOLD:	Most important of all , continue to show deep love for each other , for love covers a multitude of sins .

ID:	264
INPUT:	Hitz egiten amaitu zuenean , zapi batez estali zuen aurpegia .
PRED:	As soon as he was speaking , he put the seven stars in front of the sky .
GOLD:	When Moses finished speaking with them , he covered his face with a veil .

ID:	265
INPUT:	Ezpainetan musu ematea bezala daerantzun egokia ematea .
PRED:	She is like a mark on the roof of a burn , and she replied , “ She is a dangerous woman ! ”
GOLD:	An honest answeris like a kiss of friendship .

ID:	266
INPUT:	« Hogeita bost urtetik aurrera hasiko dira lebitarrak elkarketa-etxolan duten zerbitzua betetzen ,
PRED:	“ In the same way , the Levites must set up camp at the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ This is the rule the Levites must follow : They must begin serving in the Tabernacle at the age of twenty-five ,

ID:	267
INPUT:	Ez dut beti auzitan jardungo , ez naiz etengabe haserre egongo , neuk egindako biziduneknire aurreanbizi-arnasa gal ez dezaten .
PRED:	I will not stand trial before the Lord , for I will not stand firm in my anger . I will not stand trial because of my life .
GOLD:	For I will not fight against you forever ; I will not always be angry.If I were , all people would pass away — all the souls I have made .

ID:	268
INPUT:	Babilonia erori
PRED:	The Fall of Babylon
GOLD:	A Message about Babylon

ID:	269
INPUT:	Jeremiasek oharpen guztiok adierazi zizkion herriari , Jaunaren , bere Jainkoaren , aginduz . Hitzaldia bukatzean ,
PRED:	Then Jeremiah sent this message to the Lord : “ This is what the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says :
GOLD:	When Jeremiah had finished giving this message from the Lord their God to all the people ,

ID:	270
INPUT:	elkartasun-opariko zekorrarekin bezala , erre egingo du apaizak erre-oparien aldarean .
PRED:	“ If you present a burnt offering to the Lord , you must present a burnt offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	just as he does with cattle offered as a peace offering , and burn them on the altar of burnt offerings .

ID:	271
INPUT:	Babiloniako gudaririk bulartsuenekuko egin diote borrokari , beren gotorlekuetan babestuz . Kemena galdurik , emajende dirudite . Hiriko ateak bota dituzte , etxeak sutan daude .
PRED:	They will be destroyed by the Babylonians , and they will fight against the fortified towns of Babylon . They will be destroyed by the walls of the city , and the houses will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Her mightiest warriors no longer fight.They stay in their barracks , their courage gone.They have become like women.The invaders have burned the housesand broken down the city gates .

ID:	272
INPUT:	« Ez dute jada auzoko herriek Israel mespretxatuko , ez dute arantza zorrotz eta lahar mingarriek bezala zulatuko . Eta jakingo dute ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	“ The people of Israel will not listen to me , and they will say , ‘ I am the Lord , and you will know that I am the Lord . '
GOLD:	No longer will Israel 's scornful neighborsprick and tear at her like briers and thorns.For then they will knowthat I am the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	273
INPUT:	Eliaxib apaiz nagusiak eta beronen apaizkideek ekin zioten , beraz , lanari , eta Ardien atea egin zuten . Sagaratu ondoren , ate-alderdiak konpondu zituzten . Gero , Ehunen dorreraino konpondu zuten harresia eta , sagaratu ondoren , Hananeelen dorreraino jarraitu zuten .
PRED:	So the high priest and the other priests who were with the high priest , who had been appointed by the high priest , and they repaired the wall as far as the wall . Then they rebuilt the walls of Samaria and set up the wall .
GOLD:	Then Eliashib the high priest and the other priests started to rebuild at the Sheep Gate . They dedicated it and set up its doors , building the wall as far as the Tower of the Hundred , which they dedicated , and the Tower of Hananel .

ID:	274
INPUT:	Ni mezu hau aldarrikatzen ari nintzen bitartean , Pelatias , Benaiasen semea , hil egin zen . Ahuspez erori eta deiadar egin nuen ozenki : « Ai Jainko Jauna ! Gelditzen diren israeldarrak suntsitu behar dituzu ! »
PRED:	As for me , I was buried in the presence of the Lord , the God of Peor , and he fell down on his throne . “ Oh , ” he said , “ for you have refused to destroy the people of Israel ! ”
GOLD:	While I was still prophesying , Pelatiah son of Benaiah suddenly died . Then I fell face down on the ground and cried out , “ O Sovereign Lord , are you going to kill everyone in Israel ? ”

ID:	275
INPUT:	lurreko narrastiei eta irakatsiko dizute , itsasoko arrainek ere kontatuko ;
PRED:	All the small animals that scurry along the ground will be defiled by the sea .
GOLD:	Speak to the earth , and it will instruct you.Let the fish in the sea speak to you .

ID:	276
INPUT:	Jakinarazi nion bere etxea betiko zigortuko nuela , egin dituzten gaiztakeriengatik . Bazekien bere semeak Jainkoa iraintzen ari zirena , eta ez zituen zuzenarazi .
PRED:	I told him that I would punish the family of Jacob for doing wrong . I did not punish them for their sins , and they refused to listen to God .
GOLD:	I have warned him that judgment is coming upon his family forever , because his sons are blaspheming God and he has n't disciplined them .

ID:	277
INPUT:	Jakingo duzue , noski , Jainkoak bere onginahian zuekiko eman didan eginkizuna ;
PRED:	You will know that God has given you the promise I have given you .
GOLD:	assuming , by the way , that you know God gave me the special responsibility of extending his grace to you Gentiles .

ID:	278
INPUT:	Mendi-gailurretansakrifizioak eskaintzen dituzte , muinoetan intsentsua erretzen , arte , urki eta haritzenitzalpe ederrean . Horrela , zuen alabakemagaldu sakratu bihurtu dira , zuen errainak adulteriogile .
PRED:	They offered sacrifices to the gods of the earth , where they worshiped other gods . They offered sacrifices to idols , saying , ‘ You must commit adultery . ' So you must commit adultery , and you must commit adultery .
GOLD:	They offer sacrifices to idols on the mountaintops.They go up into the hills to burn incensein the pleasant shade of oaks , poplars , and terebinth trees . “ That is why your daughters turn to prostitution , and your daughters-in-law commit adultery .

ID:	279
INPUT:	Jauregitik eta hiritik irten zelarik , Moisesek eskuak altxatu zituen otoitzerako . Berehala atertu zituen kazkabarra eta euria , eta ez zen gehiago trumoirik izan .
PRED:	So Moses left the town and lifted up the ram 's hands toward the Lord . He shut the ram 's horn and pray that the rain had no rain .
GOLD:	So Moses left Pharaoh 's court and went out of the city . When he lifted his hands to the Lord , the thunder and hail stopped , and the downpour ceased .

ID:	280
INPUT:	Jakin badakigu , mundu honetan bizileku dugun oihal-etxola hau hondatzen bazaigu ere , Jainkoak prestaturiko bizilekua dugula zeruan betiko , giza eskuz egin gabea .
PRED:	We know that we are with this world , where we are going to live in the tents of our tents , which we have prepared for eternal life for our own hands .
GOLD:	For we know that when this earthly tent we live in is taken down ( that is , when we die and leave this earthly body ) , we will have a house in heaven , an eternal body made for us by God himself and not by human hands .

ID:	281
INPUT:	Zuen gurasoak Egipto ondoko basamortuan epaitu nituen bezala , hala egingo dut zuekin . Honela diot nik , Jainko Jaunak .
PRED:	I will scatter your ancestors in the wilderness of Egypt in the wilderness , just as the Sovereign Lord has commanded you .
GOLD:	I will judge you there just as I did your ancestors in the wilderness after bringing them out of Egypt , says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	282
INPUT:	JERUSALEM<unk> ERROMARA ( 21 , 17 — 28 , 31 )
PRED:	A Call to Betray Jesus
GOLD:	Paul Arrives at Jerusalem

ID:	283
INPUT:	Hondatua dago gure oihal-etxola , lokarri guztiak etenda . Seme-alabak kendu dizkigute , ez da bat ere gelditugure etxola jasotzeko , oihalak zabaltzeko .
PRED:	Their tents will be like a tent , and their children will be wiped out , and their children will be destroyed , and their children will be destroyed .
GOLD:	My home is gone , and no one is left to help me rebuild it.My children have been taken away , and I will never see them again .

ID:	284
INPUT:	Bai , oihal-etxola honetan bizi garenok , hasperenka gaude larri , ez baitugu oraingo jantzi hau galdu nahi , baizik eta honen gainetik beste jantzia hartu nahi dugu , hilkor dena biziak beregana dezan .
PRED:	Yes , we are like a stranger , but we are not like a stranger , but we are not allowed to eat or drink anything we want to eat . We want to kill us , but we want to die . ”
GOLD:	While we live in these earthly bodies , we groan and sigh , but it 's not that we want to die and get rid of these bodies that clothe us . Rather , we want to put on our new bodies so that these dying bodies will be swallowed up by life .

ID:	285
INPUT:	Sinesten al diezu profetei , Agripa erregea ? Ziur nago sinesten diezula .
PRED:	“ Do you believe the prophets of the prophets ? Do you believe in the Kingdom of Heaven ? ”
GOLD:	King Agrippa , do you believe the prophets ? I know you do — ”

ID:	286
INPUT:	Senarrari ez zaio errurik egotziko , eta emazte errudunak bere hobenaren ondorenak jasan beharko ditu » .
PRED:	But if her husband refuses to have her husband 's wife , she will have her husband 's wife , and she will have her husband 's wife . ”
GOLD:	The husband will be innocent of any guilt in this matter , but his wife will be held accountable for her sin . ”

ID:	287
INPUT:	Behartsu izan eta , gero , jende xehea zapaltzen duenauholde suntsigarria da : zer janik ere ez du uzten !
PRED:	For they are poor and helpless , and they are crushed by the power of the oppressed . They have nothing to eat .
GOLD:	A poor person who oppresses the pooris like a pounding rain that destroys the crops .

ID:	288
INPUT:	Baina Jainkoak esku hartzen ez badu , nork gaitzetsiko du ? Aurpegia ezkutatzen badu , nork ikusi ahal izango du ? Halere , herriak eta gizateria osoa zaintzen ditu ,
PRED:	But if someone can not boast about God 's hand , how can he be able to save them ? Who can see the whole land of the enemy , and he will see the whole land he chooses .
GOLD:	But if he chooses to remain quiet , who can criticize him ? When he hides his face , no one can find him , whether an individual or a nation .

ID:	289
INPUT:	Gainera , Jaunak esan zion Jeremiasi :
PRED:	Then the Lord gave this message to Jeremiah :
GOLD:	Then this message came to Jeremiah from the Lord :

ID:	290
INPUT:	Ezagutzen du idiak nagusia , baita astoak ereugazabareneko aska ; Israelek , ostera , ez du ezagutzen , nire herriak ez du aditzen » .
PRED:	For they are set aside for their own high days , and they themselves themselves are no longer holy . They are no longer their own people , but they do n't understand me . ”
GOLD:	Even an ox knows its owner , and a donkey recognizes its master 's care — but Israel does n't know its master.My people do n't recognize my care for them . ”

ID:	291
INPUT:	Orduan , Joiadak erregearen seme Joax aterarazi , koroa ezarri eta itunaren agiria eman zion , eta olioa isuriz , errege gantzutu zuen . Jende guztiak , txaloka , honela zioen oihuka : « Gora erregea ! »
PRED:	Then Jehoiada son of Jehoiada son of Jehoiada the priest took a solemn oath to the king , and he put him on his head , shouting , “ Long live the king ! ” And the people shouted , “ Let 's go to the king ! ”
GOLD:	Then Jehoiada brought out Joash , the king 's son , placed the crown on his head , and presented him with a copy of God 's laws . They anointed him and proclaimed him king , and everyone clapped their hands and shouted , “ Long live the king ! ”

ID:	292
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak esan zion : — Jaits zaitez eta igo berriro Aaronekin . Baina apaizak eta herria ez daitezela ahalegin niregana igotzen , haien artean sarraskirik egin ez dezadan .
PRED:	But the Lord said to Moses , “ Go up and go back to the priests and Aaron , and the priest will not enter the gate of the town . ” So he did not enter the gate of the water .
GOLD:	But the Lord said , “ Go down and bring Aaron back up with you . In the meantime , do not let the priests or the people break through to approach the Lord , or he will break out and destroy them . ”

ID:	293
INPUT:	Bazen orduan preso sonatu bat , Barrabas zeritzana .
PRED:	Then one of the prisoners arrived in prison , one of the prisoners of Barabbas .
GOLD:	This year there was a notorious prisoner , a man named Barabbas .

ID:	294
INPUT:	Nora joko dugu orain ? Mandatariek adore gabe utzi gaituzte esanez , hango jendea gu baino handiagoa eta indartsuagoa dela , hiriak handiak , zerurainoko harresiz inguratuak , eta Anak erraldoiaren ondorengoak ere ikusi dituztela .
PRED:	So why have we come to the land ? We have given us greater than we are greater than we are greater than we are greater than the other nations ? We have seen the towns of the city , and we saw that the walls of the city is filled with violence and strong and strong .
GOLD:	Where can we go ? Our brothers have demoralized us with their report . They tell us , “ The people of the land are taller and more powerful than we are , and their towns are large , with walls rising high into the sky ! We even saw giants there — the descendants of Anak ! ” '

ID:	295
INPUT:	Jaunak Jerusalemen bizirik geldituak babestuko
PRED:	A Message about Jerusalem
GOLD:	A Promise of Restoration

ID:	296
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : « Itzuli ezpata hori bere tokira , zeren ezpataz ari dena ezpataz hilko baita .
PRED:	Jesus told him , “ Go back to the sword and the sword of the sword , for the sword is going to be killed . ”
GOLD:	“ Put away your sword , ” Jesus told him . “ Those who use the sword will die by the sword .

ID:	297
INPUT:	Eguna argitu zuenean , ikasleei deitu eta haietako hamabi aukeratu zituen , eta apostolu izena eman zien :
PRED:	On the day he called his disciples to the disciples , and he chose two apostles and called them to the apostles .
GOLD:	At daybreak he called together all of his disciples and chose twelve of them to be apostles . Here are their names :

ID:	298
INPUT:	Eguerdian iseka egiten hasi zitzaien Elias , esanez : — Egizue dei ozenkiago ! Jainkoa duk , eta oso lanpetua egongo duk , edo alde egin beharra izango zian edota bidaian izango duk . Behar bada , lo egongo duk eta iratzarri beharra izanen dik .
PRED:	Elisha was sitting at the next day , and Elijah said to him , “ Look , God will call him to him , and he will be able to kill him , and he will be able to have him ! ”
GOLD:	About noontime Elijah began mocking them . “ You 'll have to shout louder , ” he scoffed , “ for surely he is a god ! Perhaps he is daydreaming , or is relieving himself . Or maybe he is away on a trip , or is asleep and needs to be wakened ! ”

ID:	299
INPUT:	Portaera prestukoa salbatu egiten da , jokabide okerrekoa bat-batean erori .
PRED:	It is good for those who are rich , but it is the day when it dies , it will be destroyed .
GOLD:	The blameless will be rescued from harm , but the crooked will be suddenly destroyed .

ID:	300
INPUT:	hau Rebekaren aita izan zen . Zortzi seme hauek eman zizkion Milkak Abrahamen anaia Nahorri .
PRED:	This was the father of Nahor 's father . He gave birth to Nahor 's brother Nahor 's brother Nahor 's brother Nahor .
GOLD:	( Bethuel became the father of Rebekah . ) In addition to these eight sons from Milcah ,

ID:	301
INPUT:	Ene begiek malko-errekak isurtzen dituzte , zure irakaspenari jarraitzen ez diotenengatik .
PRED:	My heart is filled with rivers , and they refuse to obey your teaching .
GOLD:	Rivers of tears gush from my eyesbecause people disobey your instructions .

ID:	302
INPUT:	Herriak elkartasun-oparirako eskainiriko zezena eta aharia hil zituen ; semeek odola eraman zioten , eta Aaronek aldarea zipriztindu zuen alde guztietatik .
PRED:	Then the people of Israel brought a burnt offering to the Lord , and they killed the blood of the sin offering and the sons of Aaron 's sons .
GOLD:	Then Aaron slaughtered the bull and the ram for the people 's peace offering . His sons brought him the blood , and he splattered it against all sides of the altar .

ID:	303
INPUT:	« Norbaitek bere esklaboa , gizasemea nahiz emakumea , begian jotzen badu eta begia hondatzen , libre utziko du hondatutako begiaren ordain .
PRED:	“ If a man is a slave or a slave or a slave dies , he must pay a ransom for his son .
GOLD:	“ If a man hits his male or female slave in the eye and the eye is blinded , he must let the slave go free to compensate for the eye .

ID:	304
INPUT:	Egizue niregandik ikasi , hartu eta entzun zenutena eta niregan ikusia . Eta bakea ematen digun Jainkoa zeuekin izanen duzue .
PRED:	You have heard me from the truth , and you have heard me , and you have seen me . And if you have seen God , you will be with me .
GOLD:	Keep putting into practice all you learned and received from me — everything you heard from me and saw me doing . Then the God of peace will be with you .

ID:	305
INPUT:	Orduan , Hamabietako batek , Judas Iskariote deituak , apaizburuengana joan
PRED:	Then Judas Iscariot , one of the twelve disciples of Judas , went to the leading priests and elders of Israel .
GOLD:	Then Judas Iscariot , one of the twelve disciples , went to the leading priests

ID:	306
INPUT:	Matxinsaltoen erasoa
PRED:	The armies of Midian
GOLD:	Locusts Invade like an Army

ID:	307
INPUT:	Ikus dezadala zure aukeratuen zoriona , poz nadila zure herriaren pozarekineta zure oinordeko izateaz harrotu .
PRED:	Let me rejoice in your presence , O God , for you have heard your salvation , and you will rejoice in your salvation .
GOLD:	Let me share in the prosperity of your chosen ones.Let me rejoice in the joy of your people ; let me praise you with those who are your heritage .

ID:	308
INPUT:	Hark galdetu zion : — Zein da zure izena ? — Jakob — erantzun zion .
PRED:	“ Where is your name ? ” he asked . “ What is your name ? ” “ Yes , ” Jacob replied .
GOLD:	“ Your name will no longer be Jacob , ” the man told him . “ From now on you will be called Israel , because you have fought with God and with men and have won . ”

ID:	309
INPUT:	Hori guztiaJaun ahalguztidunak xedatua da : haren egitasmoak harrigarriak diraeta arrakasta handikoak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the best of his wisdom and knowledge .
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies is a wonderful teacher , and he gives the farmer great wisdom .

ID:	310
INPUT:	Elitzafanen ondorengoetarik Ximri eta Jeiel ; Asafen ondorengoetarik Zakarias eta Matanias ;
PRED:	From the family of Zattu : The family of Elam was the family of Parosh : Zechariah , Zechariah , Zechariah , and Zechariah .
GOLD:	From the family of Elizaphan : Shimri and Jeiel.From the family of Asaph : Zechariah and Mattaniah .

ID:	311
INPUT:	hiltzeko tresnak gertatzen ditu , suzko geziak pizten .
PRED:	They killed their arrows and burned them with fire .
GOLD:	The wicked conceive evil ; they are pregnant with troubleand give birth to lies .

ID:	312
INPUT:	Hodeiek , aseak daudelarik , euria egin ohi dute lur gainera . Zuhaitza , hegorantz nahiz iparrerantz erori , han geldituko da , erori den tokian .
PRED:	These are the rains of the sky , and the rain will fall on the ground , where it is going on the north to the south .
GOLD:	When clouds are heavy , the rains come down.Whether a tree falls north or south , it stays where it falls .

ID:	313
INPUT:	berekin zituen mila gizon benjamindar eta Tziba , Saulen etxeko morroia , ere bai , beronen hamabost seme eta hogei zerbitzariekin . Hauek Jordan igaro zuten erregearen bila ,
PRED:	He also married the men of Benjamin and Benjamin , along with Saul 's servants , Benjamin , and twenty sons of Saul 's servants .
GOLD:	They crossed the shallows of the Jordan to bring the king 's household across the river , helping him in every way they could.As the king was about to cross the river , Shimei fell down before him .

ID:	314
INPUT:	Berdin zuek ere : hitz ulergarriak ez badituzue adierazten , nola jakin zer ari zareten esaten ? Paretari hitz egiten ariko zinatekete .
PRED:	Even if you understand these things , you wo n't understand what I am talking about to you ? Do you understand what I say to you ?
GOLD:	It 's the same for you . If you speak to people in words they do n't understand , how will they know what you are saying ? You might as well be talking into empty space .

ID:	315
INPUT:	Aditu zuen Elik oihua eta esan zuen : — Zer dela-eta ari dira garrasika ? Etorri zen bizkor gizona eta gertatuaren berri eman zion Eliri .
PRED:	So he opened his feet and shouted , “ What 's it ? What happened ? ” And the man quickly quickly quickly quickly quickly quickly quickly quickly ran back to Elisha .
GOLD:	“ What is all the noise about ? ” Eli asked.The messenger rushed over to Eli ,

ID:	316
INPUT:	Hori da agindurik nagusiena eta lehena .
PRED:	This is the law of Moses and the law .
GOLD:	This is the first and greatest commandment .

ID:	317
INPUT:	Egunez , abiatu orduko , Jaunaren lainoak estaltzen zituen .
PRED:	So the cloud of the Lord appeared to them , and the cloud covered them .
GOLD:	As they moved on each day , the cloud of the Lord hovered over them .

ID:	318
INPUT:	Edozein etxetan sartzen zaretela , esazue lehenbizi : “ Bakea etxe honetakoei ” .
PRED:	Wherever you enter the house , you may live in your home and say , ‘ May your home be here . '
GOLD:	“ Whenever you enter someone 's home , first say , ‘ May God 's peace be on this house . '

ID:	319
INPUT:	Zenbatez zigor handiagoa ez ote du mereziko Jainkoaren Semea hankapean erabili , sagaratu duen ituneko odola profanatu eta Jainkoak onginahiz eman dion Espiritua iraintzen duenak !
PRED:	But if the Son of God has not been punished , he will not spare the children of God 's Son . He will not punish those who do what is right with God by giving them the Spirit of God .
GOLD:	Just think how much worse the punishment will be for those who have trampled on the Son of God , and have treated the blood of the covenant , which made us holy , as if it were common and unholy , and have insulted and disdained the Holy Spirit who brings God 's mercy to us .

ID:	320
INPUT:	Eguzkia atera zenean , Jaunak hego-haize sargoritsua bidali zuen ; eguzkiak Jonas buruan jo zuen , ia kordegabe uzteraino . Eta heriotza opa izan zuen : « Hobe dut hil , bizi baino ! »
PRED:	At the time the Lord sent a mighty blast of the wings of the wind , the Lord sent a terrible storm upon Jonah 's head , and he sent his hair to kill him . He said , “ I 'm not trying to kill him ! ”
GOLD:	And as the sun grew hot , God arranged for a scorching east wind to blow on Jonah . The sun beat down on his head until he grew faint and wished to die . “ Death is certainly better than living like this ! ” he exclaimed .

ID:	321
INPUT:	Ez da urre garbiarekin trukatzen , ezta zilarraz erosten ere .
PRED:	It is not good to buy back the land of silver and gold .
GOLD:	It can not be bought with gold.It can not be purchased with silver .

ID:	322
INPUT:	Baina herriko jende xehea , ezeren jabe ez zena , Judako lurraldean utzi zuen , eta mahastiak eta alorrak eman zizkion .
PRED:	But the people of Judah did not neglect the land of Judah , leaving the land of Judah and gave it to the people of Judah .
GOLD:	But Nebuzaradan allowed some of the poorest people to stay behind in the land of Judah , and he assigned them to care for the vineyards and fields .

ID:	323
INPUT:	Jesusek irudi bat jarri zien : « Begira pikondoari edo beste edozein zuhaitzi :
PRED:	Then Jesus told them , “ Look at the fig tree , and they say ,
GOLD:	Then he gave them this illustration : “ Notice the fig tree , or any other tree .

ID:	324
INPUT:	Hau zioen Jaunak berekiko : « Neure herria dut , neure seme-alabak : ez didate , ez , huts egingo » . Eta onik atera zituen
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will destroy my people , ” the Lord said , “ I will never fail to destroy them . ”
GOLD:	He said , “ They are my very own people.Surely they will not betray me again . ” And he became their Savior .

ID:	325
INPUT:	Egin poz-oihu , zeruok ! Alai zaitez , lurra ! Egin poz-irrintzi , mendiok ! Jaunak bere herria kontsolatu baitu , atsekabean gupida izan dio .
PRED:	Shout to the heavens , O heavens ! Shout out to the earth ! Shout for joy , for the Lord has comforted his people , for he has comforted his people .
GOLD:	Sing for joy , O heavens ! Rejoice , O earth ! Burst into song , O mountains ! For the Lord has comforted his peopleand will have compassion on them in their suffering .

ID:	326
INPUT:	Honek esan nahi du , ez duela giza sortzeak Jainkoaren benetako seme-alaba egiten , baizik eta Jainkoaren agintzariaren arabera sortuak direla Abrahamen benetako ondorengoak .
PRED:	These are the children of God 's children , but they are not children of God 's children . They are children of God 's children , and they are children of Abraham 's children .
GOLD:	This means that Abraham 's physical descendants are not necessarily children of God . Only the children of the promise are considered to be Abraham 's children .

ID:	327
INPUT:	Bide okerrera eramango ditu zurikeriazko promesez ituna hautsi dutenak . Baina sendo iraungo dute eta gogor ekingo Jainkoa aintzakotzat hartzen dutenek .
PRED:	They will tell you the truth , and they will believe in you . But they will be destroyed , and they will be destroyed by the glory of God .
GOLD:	He will flatter and win over those who have violated the covenant . But the people who know their God will be strong and will resist him .

ID:	328
INPUT:	« Gero , Jaunaren aurrean ahuspeztu nintzen eta , aurrekoan bezala , berrogei egun eta berrogei gau egin nituen ezer jan eta edan gabe , zuek egindako bekatuagatik barkamena eskatzen ; izan ere , Jaunari gaizki iruditzen zitzaiona egin zenuten , bera haserraraziz .
PRED:	“ Then I bowed low before the Lord in front of me , and I ate it for forty days and forty nights . I did not eat or drank from the Lord 's anger . I did not turn away from the sins of the Lord 's anger .
GOLD:	“ Then , as before , I threw myself down before the Lord for forty days and nights . I ate no bread and drank no water because of the great sin you had committed by doing what the Lord hated , provoking him to anger .

ID:	329
INPUT:	« Baina Jauna haserretu egin zitzaidan zuen erruz eta ez zidan erregua onartu . Esan zidan : Aski da ! Ez zakizkit mintza berriro horretaz .
PRED:	But the Lord was angry with me , and he refused to answer me again . He said to me , “ Do n't let me speak again ! ”
GOLD:	“ But the Lord was angry with me because of you , and he would not listen to me . ‘ That 's enough ! ' he declared . ‘ Speak of it no more .

ID:	330
INPUT:	Lebitarburu ziren Konaniasek eta beronen senide Xemaiasek eta Netanelek , baita Haxabiasek , Jeielek eta Jozabadek ere bost mila bildots eta bostehun idi eman zizkieten lebitarrei Pazko-oparitarako .
PRED:	These were the leaders of the Levites who returned from exile : Shemaiah , Shemaiah , Shemaiah , and Uzziel . They were killed by the number of Levites who had been appointed by the number of Levites .
GOLD:	The Levite leaders — Conaniah and his brothers Shemaiah and Nethanel , as well as Hashabiah , Jeiel , and Jozabad — gave 5,000 lambs and young goats and 500 cattle to the Levites for their Passover offerings .

ID:	331
INPUT:	Jainkoaren promesaz nago harro , Jaunaren agintzariaz harro ,
PRED:	They will understand the word of the Lord , and they will be shaken .
GOLD:	I trust in God , so why should I be afraid ? What can mere mortals do to me ?

ID:	332
INPUT:	Biok elkarri eman diogun hitzaz , berriz , izan bedi Jauna gu bion artean testigu betierean » .
PRED:	And now , dear brothers and sisters , let us be our witness to the Lord our God . ”
GOLD:	And may the Lord make us keep our promises to each other , for he has witnessed them . ”

ID:	333
INPUT:	Etorkinak , bizi deneko leinuaren baitan izango du bere zatia . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana .
PRED:	For the Lord will live in those who live in the land , for I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !
GOLD:	These foreigners are to be given land within the territory of the tribe with whom they now live . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !

ID:	334
INPUT:	« Egin uraska garbikuntzetarako ; uraska eta beronen oina brontzezkoak izango dira . Ipini uraska elkarketa-etxolaren eta aldarearen artean , eta bete urez .
PRED:	“ Make water from acacia wood , and overlay them with bronze bases . They must be made of bronze bases for the entrance of the Tabernacle , and they must be made of water .
GOLD:	“ Make a bronze washbasin with a bronze stand . Place it between the Tabernacle and the altar , and fill it with water .

ID:	335
INPUT:	Haize indartsuak bultzaturikoibai oldartsua bezalaetorriko da Jauna , eta ekialdetik mendebalderainodenek izango diotebegirune Jaunari .
PRED:	Like a mighty wind , a mighty army will fall like a mighty wind , and everyone will rise from the west .
GOLD:	In the west , people will respect the name of the Lord ; in the east , they will glorify him.For he will come like a raging flood tidedriven by the breath of the Lord .

ID:	336
INPUT:	Zigortu ditu , bai , eta kanpora bota ; mendebal-haizearen antzekoarnasaldi gogorrezeraman ditu urrutira .
PRED:	He threw them into the sky , and he sent them out into the sky , and he led them into the sky to the sea .
GOLD:	No , but he exiled Israel to call her to account.She was exiled from her landas though blown away in a storm from the east .

ID:	337
INPUT:	Orduan , oneratzen zer ordutan hasi zen galdegin zien . Eta haiek erantzun : — Atzo eguerdiko ordu batean alde egin zion sukarrak .
PRED:	But when he heard what was happening , he asked them , “ All right , ” And the men replied , “ He will be saved . ”
GOLD:	He asked them when the boy had begun to get better , and they replied , “ Yesterday afternoon at one o'clock his fever suddenly disappeared ! ”

ID:	338
INPUT:	Ez bedi izan zuen artean lizunik nahiz erlijiogaberik , Esau bezala ; janari batengatik saldu baitzuen hark bere lehen-semetza .
PRED:	You must not eat any cattle , sheep , cattle , sheep , sheep , goats , cattle , sheep , sheep , goats , and goats .
GOLD:	Make sure that no one is immoral or godless like Esau , who traded his birthright as the firstborn son for a single meal .

ID:	339
INPUT:	Lurralde osoak egingo du hileta-negarra , senitarteek senitarteka , gizonezkoek batetik eta emakumeek bestetik : Daviden senitarteak eta Natanenak ,
PRED:	These are the clans of the land , the clans of the tribe of Dan , and from the tribe of David :
GOLD:	“ All Israel will mourn , each clan by itself , and with the husbands separate from their wives . The clan of David will mourn alone , as will the clan of Nathan ,

ID:	340
INPUT:	gizon batzuk erosi zituzten , zurrumurru hau zabal zezaten : Estebani Moisesen eta Jainkoaren kontra hitz egiten entzun ziotela , alegia .
PRED:	Some of the men were eager to speak against Moses , and they said , “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says concerning Moses . ”
GOLD:	So they persuaded some men to lie about Stephen , saying , “ We heard him blaspheme Moses , and even God . ”

ID:	341
INPUT:	Manasesen seme Makirren ondorengoek Galaadera joan eta konkistatu egin zuten , bertako amortarrak botaz .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the sons of Manasseh led the Amorites into the wilderness of Manasseh and led them into the wilderness of Gilead .
GOLD:	Then the descendants of Makir of the tribe of Manasseh went to Gilead and conquered it , and they drove out the Amorites living there .

ID:	342
INPUT:	Babiloniako Nabukodonosorren erregealdiko hemeretzigarren urtean , bosgarren hilaren zazpian , Nebuzaradan Babiloniako erregearen funtzionarioa eta guardiaburua etorri zen Jerusalemera .
PRED:	On the third year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , during the third year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign in Babylon , the Babylonian officials , came to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	On August 14 of that year , which was the nineteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard and an official of the Babylonian king , arrived in Jerusalem .

ID:	343
INPUT:	Zu bai ederra , ene maitea , bai zoragarria ! Belardia da gure ohe ,
PRED:	You are beautiful , O Lord , and your strength is broken .
GOLD:	You are so handsome , my love , pleasing beyond words ! The soft grass is our bed ;

ID:	344
INPUT:	simeondarren leinukoa Tzurixadairen seme Xelumielen agindupean
PRED:	They were joined by the troops of the tribe of Issachar , led by the tribe of Issachar .
GOLD:	They were joined by the troops of the tribe of Simeon , led by Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai ,

ID:	345
INPUT:	Erregeak erantzun zion : — Zoaz bakean . Jaiki eta abiatu zen Hebronerantz .
PRED:	“ Go back to the king , ” the king replied . “ Go back to Hebron , and go back to Hebron . ”
GOLD:	“ All right , ” the king told him . “ Go and fulfill your vow . ” So Absalom went to Hebron .

ID:	346
INPUT:	Izan ere , ba al da gizasemerik , Jainko bizia guk bezala suaren erditik mintzatzen entzun eta bizirik gelditu denik ?
PRED:	For how can we live in God 's children ? Are we all living in the fire ? Of course not !
GOLD:	Can any living thing hear the voice of the living God from the heart of the fire as we did and yet survive ?

ID:	347
INPUT:	Baina ez jan emandako hitza , zeuen kabuz Jaunari zeuen Jainkoari agindutako botoa bete gabe utziz .
PRED:	But you must not eat any meat from the presence of the Lord your God . You must not throw it into the presence of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ When you enter your neighbor 's vineyard , you may eat your fill of grapes , but you must not carry any away in a basket .

ID:	348
INPUT:	Ohorez beteko zaitut eta zuk eskatu guztia egingo ; zatoz , arren , eta madarika ezazu herri hori .
PRED:	I will give you whatever you ask , and you will come and help me , and I will give you victory over the nations .
GOLD:	I will pay you very well and do whatever you tell me . Just come and curse these people for me ! ”

ID:	349
INPUT:	Erditzerakoan bikiak izan zituen .
PRED:	He lived in everything he had done for them .
GOLD:	And when the time came to give birth , Rebekah discovered that she did indeed have twins !

ID:	350
INPUT:	Zuen likiskeriak merezitako ordaina emango dizuete , eta idoloekin egindako bekatuen ondorenak jasango dituzue . Orduan jakingo duzue ni naizela Jauna » .
PRED:	When you arrive in your own land , you will know that I am the Lord . Then you will know that I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	You will be fully repaid for all your prostitution — your worship of idols . Yes , you will suffer the full penalty . Then you will know that I am the Sovereign Lord . ”

ID:	351
INPUT:	Lehenari Pixon zeritzan ; urrea aurkitzen den Habilako lurraldea inguratzen du .
PRED:	The people of Israel are trying to kill him , and they are trying to kill him .
GOLD:	The first branch , called the Pishon , flowed around the entire land of Havilah , where gold is found .

ID:	352
INPUT:	Ez ibili arrandiaz indarrak erakusten , ez hitz egin horrela buru-harro » .
PRED:	Do n't understand the meaning of your power , and do n't understand these words . ”
GOLD:	For no one on earth — from east or west , or even from the wilderness — should raise a defiant fist .

ID:	353
INPUT:	baina , lizunkeria dela eta , gizon bakoitzak izan beza bere emaztea eta emakume bakoitzak bere senarra .
PRED:	But suppose she had sexual intercourse with her , she gave herself to her husband , her husband , and her husband .
GOLD:	But because there is so much sexual immorality , each man should have his own wife , and each woman should have her own husband .

ID:	354
INPUT:	Jaunak sortu du zerua , bera da Jainkoa ; berak eratu eta egin du lurra , berak finkatu ; ez du hutsik egoteko sortu , bizileku izateko baizik . Hau dio Jaunak : « Neu naiz Jauna , ez da besterik .
PRED:	The Lord has created the heavens , and he created the earth . He created the heavens and the earth , and he created them , and he will no longer be created , for I am the Lord .
GOLD:	For the Lord is God , and he created the heavens and earthand put everything in place.He made the world to be lived in , not to be a place of empty chaos . “ I am the Lord , ” he says , “ and there is no other .

ID:	355
INPUT:	Hiri hartan berri ona zabaldu eta ikasle asko egin ondoren , Listrara , Ikoniora eta Antiokiara itzuli ziren .
PRED:	So they went to Antioch and traveled through the town of Lystra and traveled to Antioch of Lystra and Derbe and traveled to Antioch .
GOLD:	After preaching the Good News in Derbe and making many disciples , Paul and Barnabas returned to Lystra , Iconium , and Antioch of Pisidia ,

ID:	356
INPUT:	Horrela , Kristo Jesusengan gurekiko hain ona izanez agertu nahi izan die datozen gizaldiei zein ugaria eta eskuzabala den bere onginahia .
PRED:	This means that Christ Jesus Christ has revealed his kindness to us so that we can understand the meaning of his wonderful grace and understanding .
GOLD:	So God can point to us in all future ages as examples of the incredible wealth of his grace and kindness toward us , as shown in all he has done for us who are united with Christ Jesus .

ID:	357
INPUT:	Nagusiak esan zion : “ Ederki , morroi on eta leiala ! Gauza gutxian leial izan zara , askoren buru ipiniko zaitut ; sartu zeure jaunaren festa ospatzera ” .
PRED:	“ But the master said to him , ‘ You are a faithful servant , and you are faithful to me . You are my lord the king , and I will give you a great feast . '
GOLD:	“ The master said , ‘ Well done , my good and faithful servant . You have been faithful in handling this small amount , so now I will give you many more responsibilities . Let 's celebrate together ! '

ID:	358
INPUT:	Axerren leinuko senitarteak : <unk> narengandik <unk> natarrak , Ixbirengandik ixbitarrak eta Beriarengandik beriatarrak .
PRED:	These were the clans descended from the tribe of Asher : The sons of Asher were created by their ancestor Asher , and their ancestor Asher .
GOLD:	These were the clans descended from the sons of Asher : The Imnite clan , named after their ancestor Imnah.The Ishvite clan , named after their ancestor Ishvi.The Beriite clan , named after their ancestor Beriah .

ID:	359
INPUT:	Nire herriaren haragia jaten dute , larrua kentzen diote , eta hezurrak apurtzen ; eltzerako haragia bezalapuskatzen dute , lapikorako okela bezala .
PRED:	My people have broken my flesh and broken my bones , like a broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken jar .
GOLD:	Yes , you eat my people 's flesh , strip off their skin , and break their bones.You chop them uplike meat for the cooking pot .

ID:	360
INPUT:	Banirenak 642 ;
PRED:	The family of Shephatiah372
GOLD:	The family of Bani642

ID:	361
INPUT:	Ez dira berdinak gorputz guztiak : gauza bat da gizakiaren gorputza , bestea aberearena , bestea hegaztiena eta bestea arrainena .
PRED:	There is no one like a human body , and the body of one body is like the other , the birds of the sky , and the other parts are the other parts .
GOLD:	Similarly there are different kinds of flesh — one kind for humans , another for animals , another for birds , and another for fish .

ID:	362
INPUT:	Saulek erantzun zion Samueli : — Ez al dut , bada , egin Jaunaren esana ? Berak bidali ninduen bidetik ibili naiz . Ekarri dut Agag , amalektarren erregea , eta suntsitu ditut amalektarrak .
PRED:	Saul replied , “ Did n't I have killed the kingdom of the Lord ? I have taken away the kingdom of the kingdom of the Lord , and I will completely destroy it . ”
GOLD:	“ But I did obey the Lord , ” Saul insisted . “ I carried out the mission he gave me . I brought back King Agag , but I destroyed everyone else .

ID:	363
INPUT:	Beste zenbait ale sasi artean erori zen , eta sasiek , haztean , ito egin zuten hazia .
PRED:	Other seed fell among thorns that grew up , and the seed grew up and grew up .
GOLD:	Other seeds fell among thorns that grew up and choked out the tender plants .

ID:	364
INPUT:	Mendebaldeko muga Mediterraneo itsasoa zen . Horra , bada , Judaren leinukoei senitarteka banaturiko lurralde-zatiaren mugak .
PRED:	The western boundary extended south to the Mediterranean Sea , and the territory allocated to the clans of Judah .
GOLD:	The western boundary was the shoreline of the Mediterranean Sea.These are the boundaries for the clans of the tribe of Judah .

ID:	365
INPUT:	Dedan , Teman eta Buz herrialdeei eta beduinoei ;
PRED:	The Second leaders of the land of Canaan , and everything in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	I gave it to Dedan , Tema , and Buz , and to the people who live in distant places .

ID:	366
INPUT:	Heldugabeok , ikasi zuhurrak izaten ; zentzubakook , ikasi burutsuak izaten .
PRED:	When she arrived , she saw her , she became a fool .
GOLD:	You simple people , use good judgment.You foolish people , show some understanding .

ID:	367
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi Sinai mendian :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	While Moses was on Mount Sinai , the Lord said to him ,

ID:	368
INPUT:	Gorets dezagun Jainkoa ! Berak fedean sendotu zaitzakete , nik hots egiten dudan berri onaren eta Jesu Kristori buruz ematen dudan mezuaren arabera . Mezu horren bidez , aspalditik ezkutuan zeukan misterioa agertu du Jainkoak .
PRED:	Let us praise the Good News about God 's Good News . Let us proclaim this Good News about the Good News about the Good News I have given you the Good News about Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	Now all glory to God , who is able to make you strong , just as my Good News says . This message about Jesus Christ has revealed his plan for you Gentiles , a plan kept secret from the beginning of time .

ID:	369
INPUT:	« Ekialdeko muga , Hauran eta Damasko artetik abiatuko da eta , Jordaneko ibarrari jarraituz , Galaad eta Israel lurraldeen artetik , Itsaso Hileraino eta Tamar hiriraino helduko da .
PRED:	“ These are the boundaries of Damascus , who will cross the Jordan River , along with the border of Damascus and camped at the Mediterranean Sea . The Israelites will then return to the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	“ The eastern border starts at a point between Hauran and Damascus and runs south along the Jordan River between Israel and Gilead , past the Dead Sea and as far south as Tamar . This will be the eastern border .

ID:	370
INPUT:	Egin biezaie justizia herriko dohakabeei , salba bitza behartsuak , apurtu zapaltzaileak !
PRED:	O people of Israel , do not ignore the rights of the poor , for they have plundered the oppressed .
GOLD:	Help him to defend the poor , to rescue the children of the needy , and to crush their oppressors .

ID:	371
INPUT:	Eta herri guztiek galdetuko dute : “ Zergatik tratatu ote du horrela Jaunak herrialde hori ? Zer dela-eta piztu zaio haserre izugarri hori ? ”
PRED:	And all the nations will ask , ‘ Why are these nations so angry ? Why did the Lord be angry with you ? '
GOLD:	They will exclaim , ‘ The whole land is devastated by sulfur and salt . It is a wasteland with nothing planted and nothing growing , not even a blade of grass . It is like the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah , Admah and Zeboiim , which the Lord destroyed in his intense anger . '

ID:	372
INPUT:	Maite nau Jaunak eta entzun egin du nire erregu-oihua ;
PRED:	The Lord has heard me , and he has heard my cry for help .
GOLD:	I love the Lord because he hears my voiceand my prayer for mercy .

ID:	373
INPUT:	Zeure jokabide higuingarri eta lizunkeria guztietan ez zinen haurtzaroko egunez , biluzik eta zeure odoletan mugituz egon zineneko garaiaz , oroitu .
PRED:	Do not turn away from your detestable sins and prostitution . Do n't turn away from your sins , for you have kept on your old days .
GOLD:	In all your years of adultery and detestable sin , you have not once remembered the days long ago when you lay naked in a field , kicking about in your own blood .

ID:	374
INPUT:	Zaudete niri itsatsiak , ni zuei bezala . Aihenak , mahatsondoari itsatsia ez badago , fruiturik eman ezin duen bezala , ezta zuek ere , niri itsatsiak ez bazaudete .
PRED:	Let me be ashamed of your Father , just as I have said , “ My Father is a grapevine , and you can not eat any fruit from your own grapevine , and you can not eat any fruit . ”
GOLD:	Remain in me , and I will remain in you . For a branch can not produce fruit if it is severed from the vine , and you can not be fruitful unless you remain in me .

ID:	375
INPUT:	Jainkoaz oroiturik , intziri dagit , hartaz pentsatzean , adorea galtzen dut .
PRED:	As surely as I live , I will say , “ As surely as I live , I will be ashamed . ”
GOLD:	You do n't let me sleep.I am too distressed even to pray !

ID:	376
INPUT:	Apaiz nagusiak , zekorraren odoletik pixka bat harturik , elkarketa-etxolara eramango du ,
PRED:	The high priest will then take some of the blood of the bull 's blood into the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	The high priest will then take some of the bull 's blood into the Tabernacle ,

ID:	377
INPUT:	Gudurako prest dauden zaldien itxura zuten matxinsaltoek ; buruan urrezkoak bezalako koroak zeramatzaten ; aurpegiak giza itxurakoak zituzten ,
PRED:	They are ready to be ready for battle , and they are like grasshoppers . They looked like a human horse 's eyes , and they looked like human eyes .
GOLD:	The locusts looked like horses prepared for battle . They had what looked like gold crowns on their heads , and their faces looked like human faces .

ID:	378
INPUT:	Orduan , esan zion profetak erregeari : — Hau dio Jaunak : « Zuk hiltzea nahi nuen gizonari ihes egiten utzi diozu . Horregatik , zeure bizia eman beharko duzu harenaren ordez , eta zeure herria harenaren ordez » .
PRED:	Then the prophet said to the prophet , “ This is what the Lord says : You are going to kill me ! ” So the king said , “ You are the one who escaped from your land . ”
GOLD:	The prophet said to him , “ This is what the Lord says : Because you have spared the man I said must be destroyed , now you must die in his place , and your people will die instead of his people . ”

ID:	379
INPUT:	purpura more , gorri eta gorrimina , liho fina , ahuntz-ilea ,
PRED:	blue , purple , and scarlet thread ; fine linen cloth ;
GOLD:	blue , purple , and scarlet thread ; fine linen and goat hair for cloth ;

ID:	380
INPUT:	Hurbil da Jaunaren etorrera
PRED:	The Coming of the Exiles
GOLD:	Jesus Is Coming

ID:	381
INPUT:	Aaronek eta semeek elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran jango dituzte ahari-okela eta saskiko ogia .
PRED:	Aaron and his sons must wear garments on the entrance of the Tabernacle , and the basket must be eaten by the basket of bread .
GOLD:	Then Aaron and his sons will eat this meat , along with the bread in the basket , at the Tabernacle entrance .

ID:	382
INPUT:	Emakumea , erditzerakoan , triste egoten da , ordua heldu zaiolako ; haurra jaio ondoren , ordea , ahaztu egiten da larrialdiaz , mundura gizon bat ekarri duelako .
PRED:	But when she finds that her child is gone , she will have a child 's child , but she will have forgotten her . But she will have a baby 's home .
GOLD:	It will be like a woman suffering the pains of labor . When her child is born , her anguish gives way to joy because she has brought a new baby into the world .

ID:	383
INPUT:	Gainean ditut , inguratua naute , ni lurrera botatzeko beti prest ,
PRED:	I have given me strength , and I will throw my bow down to the ground .
GOLD:	They track me down and surround me , watching for the chance to throw me to the ground .

ID:	384
INPUT:	haien erregeak katez eta handikiak girgiluz lotzeko .
PRED:	He will put them into the royal palace , and he will put them under his control .
GOLD:	to bind their kings with shacklesand their leaders with iron chains ,

ID:	385
INPUT:	Orduan , galdetu zien Zebah eta Tzalmunari : — Zer itxura zuten Taborren hil zenituzten gizonek ? Haiek erantzun zioten : — Zure antzekoak ziren ; errege-seme ziruditen denek .
PRED:	Then Gideon asked Zebah and Zalmunna , “ What are you trying to kill me ? ” And the men replied , “ Why are you going to kill me ? ”
GOLD:	Then Gideon asked Zebah and Zalmunna , “ The men you killed at Tabor — what were they like ? ” “ Like you , ” they replied . “ They all had the look of a king 's son . ”

ID:	386
INPUT:	Bizia ematen duen zuhaitza da . Zorionekoak bertatik jaten dutenak !
PRED:	Yes , joyful are those who obey God 's instructions .
GOLD:	Wisdom is a tree of life to those who embrace her ; happy are those who hold her tightly .

ID:	387
INPUT:	Jauna borrokatuko da zuen alde . Zuek egon lasai !
PRED:	The Lord will fight against you , and you will stay in peace .
GOLD:	The Lord himself will fight for you . Just stay calm . ”

ID:	388
INPUT:	Ondoren , israeldarren lurraldean zeuden idolo higuingarri guztiak desagerrarazi zituen Josiasek , eta Israelen bizi zirenek Jauna , beren Jainkoa , gurtu zezaten ahalegindu zen . Josias bizi izan zen bitartean ez ziren urrundu Jaunarengandik , beren arbasoen Jainkoarengandik .
PRED:	Then Joseph did everything that the people of Israel had done in the land of Egypt . He did not worship the Lord their God , the God of Israel , and he did not worship the Lord , the God of their ancestors .
GOLD:	So Josiah removed all detestable idols from the entire land of Israel and required everyone to worship the Lord their God . And throughout the rest of his lifetime , they did not turn away from the Lord , the God of their ancestors .

ID:	389
INPUT:	horrela , bete-beteko izatera iritsi zelarik , betiko salbamenaren iturri bilakatu zen berari obeditzen dioten guztientzat ,
PRED:	When they arrived , they came to the winds , they are being saved because they are being saved because they are being saved .
GOLD:	In this way , God qualified him as a perfect High Priest , and he became the source of eternal salvation for all those who obey him .

ID:	390
INPUT:	Batzuk ez dira ezkontzen jaiotzaz ezin dutelako ; beste batzuk , giza eskuz ezinduak izan direlako ; beste batzuk , berriz , Jainkoaren erregetzagatik hala erabaki dutelako . Onar dezakeenak onar beza .
PRED:	But some of you can not be married . But some of you will not be like others , but some of you will serve the Kingdom of God .
GOLD:	Some are born as eunuchs , some have been made eunuchs by others , and some choose not to marry for the sake of the Kingdom of Heaven . Let anyone accept this who can . ”

ID:	391
INPUT:	Zuzentasunak babesten du prestua , gaiztakeriak hondatzen bekataria .
PRED:	The godliness of integrity is a refuge for the wicked , but the wicked are destroyed .
GOLD:	Godliness guards the path of the blameless , but the evil are misled by sin .

ID:	392
INPUT:	Hexbonen bizi zen amortarren errege Sihon eta Axtarot-en eta Edrei-n bizi zen Baxango errege Og garaitu eta gero .
PRED:	So King Sihon of Heshbon and King Sihon of the Amorites , who lived in the wilderness of King Sihon of the Amorites and King Og of Bashan .
GOLD:	This took place after he had defeated King Sihon of the Amorites , who ruled in Heshbon , and at Edrei had defeated King Og of Bashan , who ruled in Ashtaroth .

ID:	393
INPUT:	Jaialdi bakoitzaren amaieran , Jobek semeei dei egiten zien haien garbikuntza egiteko ; egunsentian jaiki eta erre-oparia eskaintzen zuen bakoitzarengatik , semeek beharbada bekatu egin eta beren barnean Jainkoa madarikatu izango zutelakoan . Hauxe egiten zuen Jobek aldi bakoitzean .
PRED:	Then Job called together each of the altar to purify his sons , and they began to sacrifice a sacrifice for a burnt offering and a burnt offering to God for each of them . This was a sin offering for each of them , just as God had commanded them to be forgiven .
GOLD:	When these celebrations ended — sometimes after several days — Job would purify his children . He would get up early in the morning and offer a burnt offering for each of them . For Job said to himself , “ Perhaps my children have sinned and have cursed God in their hearts . ” This was Job 's regular practice .

ID:	394
INPUT:	Biharamunean , egunsentian , tenplura itzuli zen , eta herri guztia etorri zitzaion . Jesus , eseririk , irakasten hasi zen .
PRED:	When the next day Jesus returned to the Temple , he returned to the Temple and began to teach the people .
GOLD:	but early the next morning he was back again at the Temple . A crowd soon gathered , and he sat down and taught them .

ID:	395
INPUT:	Jesus Oliamendira joan zen .
PRED:	Jesus went to the Mount of Olives .
GOLD:	Jesus returned to the Mount of Olives ,

ID:	396
INPUT:	« Egin ihes Babiloniatik , eutsi nork bere biziari ! Ez bedi inor gal haren erruz . Nire mendeku-eguna baita , eta hari bere merezia emango diot .
PRED:	“ You have escaped from Babylon , and no one has escaped from the land of Babylon . But no one can escape his fierce anger , and I will give it to you .
GOLD:	Flee from Babylon ! Save yourselves ! Do n't get trapped in her punishment ! It is the Lord 's time for vengeance ; he will repay her in full .

ID:	397
INPUT:	Moisesek Madiango apaiz Jetro bere aitaginarrebaren artaldea zaintzen zuen . Behin batean , basamortuan barrena eraman zuen artaldea eta Jainkoaren mendiraino , Horeberaino , iritsi zen .
PRED:	So Moses took the Ark of God 's father , and he divided the entire flock on the edge of the wilderness . One day he took the Ark of God , and he took it to the mountain of God .
GOLD:	One day Moses was tending the flock of his father-in-law , Jethro , the priest of Midian . He led the flock far into the wilderness and came to Sinai , the mountain of God .

ID:	398
INPUT:	Barka , otoi , zeure mirabe honen errua . Ondorengotza sendoa emanen dizu Jaunak , Jaunaren gudua ari baitzara egiten , eta bizitza osoan ez da okerkeriarik aurkitu zuregan .
PRED:	Please , Lord , please give me a special gift . We have given you a gift of loyalty to the Lord , for we have no fear of the Lord .
GOLD:	Please forgive me if I have offended you in any way . The Lord will surely reward you with a lasting dynasty , for you are fighting the Lord 's battles . And you have not done wrong throughout your entire life .

ID:	399
INPUT:	Gorespen-kantakaltxatuko dira handik , pozezko oihuak ; ugaldu egingo ditut , eta ez dira gutxituko , ohoratu egingo , eta ez dituzte gutxietsiko .
PRED:	But I will turn away from them , but I will never abandon them . I will cover them with water , and they will cover them with contempt , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	There will be joy and songs of thanksgiving , and I will multiply my people , not diminish them ; I will honor them , not despise them .

ID:	400
INPUT:	Jesusek ihardetsi zion : — Ur honetatik edaten duena berriro ere egarri izango da ;
PRED:	Then Jesus told him , “ Anyone who eats water from the tree will be forgiven . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ Anyone who drinks this water will soon become thirsty again .

ID:	401
INPUT:	Ez dute elkarri irakatsi beharrik izango , “ Ezagutu Jauna ” esanez , guzti-guztiek , txiki nahiz handi , ezagutuko bainaute . Barkatu egiten baitiet beren gaiztakeria , beraien bekatua ez dut gehiago gogoratuko . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	They must not need to teach them , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will teach them everything I have done for them , but I will not forgive their sins , for I am the Lord . ' ”
GOLD:	And they will not need to teach their neighbors , nor will they need to teach their relatives , saying , ‘ You should know the Lord . ' For everyone , from the least to the greatest , will know me already , ” says the Lord . “ And I will forgive their wickedness , and I will never again remember their sins . ”

ID:	402
INPUT:	Filemonen maitasuna eta sinesmena
PRED:	Paul 's Prayer and Prayer
GOLD:	Paul 's Thanksgiving and Prayer

ID:	403
INPUT:	Jainkoak errebelde izaten utzi baitzien gizon-emakume guztiei , denei erruki izateko .
PRED:	For God has abandoned all the people of the world , for everyone has turned away from God 's mercy .
GOLD:	For God has imprisoned everyone in disobedience so he could have mercy on everyone .

ID:	404
INPUT:	Garbikuntza egin behar duen apaizak Jaunaren aurrean , elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran , ezarriko du garbitu behar duena beraren opariekin .
PRED:	The priest must present the oil to the Lord as a special offering to the Lord . Through this process , the priest must present it to the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Then the officiating priest will present that person for purification , along with the offerings , before the Lord at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	405
INPUT:	Honek guztiak , Jauna , ez al dizu axola ? Geldi egon behar al duzu ? Amaigabeatsekabetu behar al gaituzu ?
PRED:	“ O Lord , are you sick ? Do n't you watch me ? Why should you be sick ? Will you keep on sinning ? ”
GOLD:	The holy and beautiful Templewhere our ancestors praised youhas been burned down , and all the things of beauty are destroyed .

ID:	406
INPUT:	Honela bete zen Jeremias profetak esana :
PRED:	This message came to Jeremiah from the prophet Jeremiah :
GOLD:	Herod 's brutal action fulfilled what God had spoken through the prophet Jeremiah :

ID:	407
INPUT:	Hau Liburu Santuak dioena bete zedin gertatu zen : Ez zaio hezurrik hautsiko .
PRED:	As the Scriptures say , “ No one will be condemned to die . ”
GOLD:	These things happened in fulfillment of the Scriptures that say , “ Not one of his bones will be broken , ”

ID:	408
INPUT:	Horregatik egin nien nik ere aurka eta etsaien lurraldera eraman , ea horrela haien barru sinesgogorra apaltzen zen eta zigorra merezia zutela aitortzen zuten .
PRED:	That is why I sinned against my enemies and brought them out of the land of the enemy , and they struck them down on the ground .
GOLD:	When I have turned their hostility back on them and brought them to the land of their enemies , then at last their stubborn hearts will be humbled , and they will pay for their sins .

ID:	409
INPUT:	Ai nire aginduei jaramonegin izan bazenie ! Ibaika izango zenuke zoriona , uholdeka salbamena ;
PRED:	If you would listen to my commands , you would have rejected me . But if you were my mother , you would be saved .
GOLD:	Oh , that you had listened to my commands ! Then you would have had peace flowing like a gentle riverand righteousness rolling over you like waves in the sea .

ID:	410
INPUT:	Izena biziaren liburuan idatzirik ez zutenak ere suzko aintzirara jaurti zituzten .
PRED:	But when they were thrown into the sky , they threw the fire into the fire .
GOLD:	And anyone whose name was not found recorded in the Book of Life was thrown into the lake of fire .

ID:	411
INPUT:	Azken tokiak aukeratu eta behartsuak gonbidatu
PRED:	Invitation against the weak
GOLD:	Jesus Teaches about Humility

ID:	412
INPUT:	Zuen artean jakintsua eta bizitzan asko ikasia denik badela ? Erakuts dezala bere jokabide jatorraz , jakinduriari darion gozotasunean biziz .
PRED:	Do you realize that you are wise and wise ? Do you know that I am going to see the wisdom you have done to me ? ”
GOLD:	If you are wise and understand God 's ways , prove it by living an honorable life , doing good works with the humility that comes from wisdom .

ID:	413
INPUT:	Hori ikustean , ikasleek , haserre , honela zioten : — Zergatik alferrik galdu horrela ?
PRED:	When the disciples saw this , they asked him , “ Why are you trying to get it ? ”
GOLD:	The disciples were indignant when they saw this . “ What a waste ! ” they said .

ID:	414
INPUT:	Izan ere , hau dio Liburu Santuak : Egin poz-oihu emakume agor eta haur gabe horrek ! Ekin kantari pozaren pozez , erdiminik izan ez duzun horrek ! Bakarrik utziaren seme-alabak gehiago izango baitira , senardunarenak baino .
PRED:	For the Scriptures say , “ Be strong and courageous ! Let the child be filled with joy , for the children of the Lord has given you great joy , and you will have no children . ”
GOLD:	As Isaiah said , “ Rejoice , O childless woman , you who have never given birth ! Break into a joyful shout , you who have never been in labor ! For the desolate woman now has more childrenthan the woman who lives with her husband ! ”

ID:	415
INPUT:	Garbitu egin zaituztet , baina ez zilarra bezala , sufrimenduaren arragoanprobatuz baizik .
PRED:	I am suffering you , but you did n't suffer for suffering . Instead , I am suffering for you .
GOLD:	I have refined you , but not as silver is refined.Rather , I have refined you in the furnace of suffering .

ID:	416
INPUT:	Inoiz egin ote diot uko behartsuen eskubideari ? Utzi ote dut alarguntsarik negarrez lehertzen ?
PRED:	Should I ever stop eating the rights of the needy ? Should I leave the land ?
GOLD:	“ Have I refused to help the poor , or crushed the hopes of widows ?

ID:	417
INPUT:	Oharpen hauek egiten dizkizuedalarik , ezin ditut ontzat eman zuen batzarrak , on baino kalte handiagoa egiten baitizuete .
PRED:	I am giving you these things so that you can not be a solemn oath that I am giving you a solemn oath .
GOLD:	But in the following instructions , I can not praise you . For it sounds as if more harm than good is done when you meet together .

ID:	418
INPUT:	Eta tronuan eseria zegoenak esan zuen : « Hara , gauza guztiak berri egiten ditut » . Eta erantsi zuen : « Idatzi esaten dudan hau egiazkoa eta fidagarria dela » .
PRED:	And the throne was sitting on the throne and said , “ Look , I have spoken ! ” And he said , “ I have told you everything I did . ”
GOLD:	And the one sitting on the throne said , “ Look , I am making everything new ! ” And then he said to me , “ Write this down , for what I tell you is trustworthy and true . ”

ID:	419
INPUT:	Jaunak gauez agertu eta esan zion : « Entzun dut zure otoitza , eta toki hau hautatu dut opariak bertan eskain diezazkidaten .
PRED:	Then the Lord appeared to him and said , “ Listen to me , I have heard this prayer and offered sacrifices to you .
GOLD:	Then one night the Lord appeared to Solomon and said , “ I have heard your prayer and have chosen this Temple as the place for making sacrifices .

ID:	420
INPUT:	Hauek ere Salomonen esaera zaharrak dira , Judako errege Ezekiasen funtzionarioek jasoak .
PRED:	These are the officials of Judah and all the officials of Judah .
GOLD:	These are more proverbs of Solomon , collected by the advisers of King Hezekiah of Judah .

ID:	421
INPUT:	Kontuz emakume lotsagabearekin
PRED:	Warning about Serving Others
GOLD:	Avoid Immoral Women

ID:	422
INPUT:	Harat-honat zebiltzan judu e<unk> <unk> ta batzuk ere Jesus Jaunaren izenaz baliatzen hasi ziren , espiritu gaiztoak botatzeko . Honela esaten zieten : « Paulok hots egiten duen Jesusen izenean , irteteko agintzen dizuet ! »
PRED:	Meanwhile , Peter was in the synagogue and began preaching the Good News about the Lord Jesus . They began to cast out the evil spirit of the synagogue , saying , “ I want you to go out to the synagogue . ”
GOLD:	A group of Jews was traveling from town to town casting out evil spirits . They tried to use the name of the Lord Jesus in their incantation , saying , “ I command you in the name of Jesus , whom Paul preaches , to come out ! ”

ID:	423
INPUT:	Zuek irakurri ondoren , bidali gutun hau Laodizeako eliz elkarteari ere , irakur dezaten . Eta zuek ere irakurri Laodizeara bidali nuena .
PRED:	When you read this letter , you must read this letter to the churches in the name of the church in the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	After you have read this letter , pass it on to the church at Laodicea so they can read it , too . And you should read the letter I wrote to them .

ID:	424
INPUT:	Pedrok erantzun zion : — Arrotzengandik . Jesusek , orduan : — Etxekoak libre daude , beraz .
PRED:	Peter replied , “ They are out of the synagogue , ” Peter replied , “ They are all free from their own home . ”
GOLD:	“ They tax the people they have conquered , ” Peter replied . “ Well , then , ” Jesus said , “ the citizens are free !

ID:	425
INPUT:	Eta zuk , epai itzazu , epaitu , gizaseme ! Aurpegira iezaiezu beren gurasoen jokaera higuingarria .
PRED:	You have made me innocent , O Lord , for you have made me innocent , and you are detestable to me .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , bring charges against them and condemn them . Make them realize how detestable the sins of their ancestors really were .

ID:	426
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jainkoak bidaliak hitz egitean , Jainkoak berak hitz egiten du , neurririk gabe ematen baitio bere Espiritua .
PRED:	For God speaks through his words , and he speaks through the same words of God .
GOLD:	For he is sent by God . He speaks God 's words , for God gives him the Spirit without limit .

ID:	427
INPUT:	Txalupa , ordurako , lehorretik urruti zihoan , uhinek astindua , haizea kontra baitzuen .
PRED:	But after the boat he got out of the boat , he got out of the boat , for he had many others against them .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the disciples were in trouble far away from land , for a strong wind had risen , and they were fighting heavy waves .

ID:	428
INPUT:	Mardokeo juduak eta Ester erreginak agindu zutenaren arabera , Purim Jaiak esaniko egunetan egiteko aginduz . Berentzat eta beren ondorengoentzat antolatu zituzten egun hauek , baraualdi eta negar-kantuei buruzko arauak ere erantsiz .
PRED:	So the Jews and the people of Judah did as Mordecai commanded them to obey the commands of the Jews and Levites . They were appointed by Haman to obey the commands of the Lord 's laws and decrees and decrees .
GOLD:	These letters established the Festival of Purim — an annual celebration of these days at the appointed time , decreed by both Mordecai the Jew and Queen Esther . ( The people decided to observe this festival , just as they had decided for themselves and their descendants to establish the times of fasting and mourning . )

ID:	429
INPUT:	Santiago eta Joanek , Zebedeoren semeek , Jesusengana hurbildu eta esan zioten : — Maisu , eskatuko dizuguna zuk ematea nahi genuke .
PRED:	John the Baptist came to Jesus and asked him , “ Teacher , I want you to ask you what you want to do . ”
GOLD:	Then James and John , the sons of Zebedee , came over and spoke to him . “ Teacher , ” they said , “ we want you to do us a favor . ”

ID:	430
INPUT:	Oparia eskaintzen zuen egunean , Elkanak bere emazte Peninari eta honen seme-alaba guztiei oparigaiaren zati bana eman ohi zien .
PRED:	On the same day the burnt offering , the sons of Perez and the other sons of Reuben , and all the other sons of Reuben , were presented to the Lord .
GOLD:	On the days Elkanah presented his sacrifice , he would give portions of the meat to Peninnah and each of her children .

ID:	431
INPUT:	Jaun ahalguztidunak erabaki du , ospezale horienharrokeria beheratzeko , mundu guztian ohoratuak zirenaklotsarazteko .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : “ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has done itto destroy your prideand bring low all earth 's nobility .

ID:	432
INPUT:	Anatoten , Noben , Ananiasen ,
PRED:	The family of Ahab
GOLD:	They also lived in Anathoth , Nob , Ananiah ,

ID:	433
INPUT:	Orduan , beren gizonekin Gedaliasengana joan ziren Mitzpara . Hauek ziren gudalburuak : Netaniasen seme Ismael , Kareahen seme Johanan eta Jonatan , Tanhumeten seme Seraias , Netofako Ofairen semeak eta Maakako Jezanias .
PRED:	So Johanan son of Kareah and the other military leaders went to Mizpah . These are the leaders of the army of Mizpah , Johanan son of Jehozadak , the leader of the men of Israel . These are the leaders of Israel .
GOLD:	So they went to see Gedaliah at Mizpah . These included : Ishmael son of Nethaniah , Johanan and Jonathan sons of Kareah , Seraiah son of Tanhumeth , the sons of Ephai the Netophathite , Jezaniah son of the Maacathite , and all their men .

ID:	434
INPUT:	Hurbildu zitzaion Saul Samueli hiriko atera , eta esan zion : — Otoi , esadazu non den ikuslearen etxea .
PRED:	So Samuel called for Samuel and said to Samuel , “ Please give me the house where you can see me . ”
GOLD:	Just then Saul approached Samuel at the gateway and asked , “ Can you please tell me where the seer 's house is ? ”

ID:	435
INPUT:	Heziketa ezarengatik hilko da , bere zentzugabekeria handiarengatik galduko .
PRED:	They will die because of their sins , and they will die because of their sins .
GOLD:	He will die for lack of self-control ; he will be lost because of his great foolishness .

ID:	436
INPUT:	Une hartantxe , lurrikara handia izan zen eta hiriaren hamarreko bat erori zen ; lurrikaran zazpi mila lagun hil ziren , eta gainerakoek , beldurrez beterik , zeruko Jainkoa goretsi zuten .
PRED:	At that time the waters of the Temple was a great city , a great city was filled with a tenth day of the beast , and the three days of God died .
GOLD:	At the same time there was a terrible earthquake that destroyed a tenth of the city . Seven thousand people died in that earthquake , and everyone else was terrified and gave glory to the God of heaven .

ID:	437
INPUT:	Urrerik finenak ez du haren baliorik , ezta onize eder nahiz zafiroek ere .
PRED:	My tears flow from the finest gold , or the finest gold or the finest gold .
GOLD:	It 's worth more than all the gold of Ophir , greater than precious onyx or lapis lazuli .

ID:	438
INPUT:	Buruzagiak harrapakina urratzen duten otsoak bezalakoak dira : odola isurtzen eta jendea garbitzen dute , berak aberasteko .
PRED:	A wise person makes a trap for a common heart , like a passing shadow that makes them fall , and they eat their meat .
GOLD:	Your leaders are like wolves who tear apart their victims . They actually destroy people 's lives for money !

ID:	439
INPUT:	Raba , gameluen esparru bihurtuko dut eta amondarren herrialdea artaldeentzako eskorta ; orduan jakingo duzue ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	I will make three camels from Rabbah , and you will know that I am the Lord . Then you will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And I will turn the city of Rabbah into a pasture for camels , and all the land of the Ammonites into a resting place for sheep and goats . Then you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	440
INPUT:	justizia egiten die umezurtz eta alargunari , eta maite du etorkina , jatekoa eta janztekoa ematen dizkiolarik .
PRED:	The poor and poor are poor , and the poor are rich and poor . They love their clothing , and their garments are like fine clothing .
GOLD:	He ensures that orphans and widows receive justice . He shows love to the foreigners living among you and gives them food and clothing .

ID:	441
INPUT:	Aitaginarrebak , neskaren aitak , etxean geldiarazi zuen eta bertan egon zen hiru egunez . Jan , edan eta bertan ematen zuten gaua .
PRED:	So his father and mother left the house of his father , and he ate it . So they ate the food and drank from the night .
GOLD:	Her father urged him to stay awhile , so he stayed three days , eating , drinking , and sleeping there .

ID:	442
INPUT:	Esna zaitezte , mozkor horiek , eta egizue negar ! Egin garrasi , ardozaleok ! Ez duzue jadanik ardorik dastatuko .
PRED:	Wake up , do n't be drunk ! Come , weep and weep ! Come , you people of Jerusalem ! Do n't drink wine from wine !
GOLD:	Wake up , you drunkards , and weep ! Wail , all you wine-drinkers ! All the grapes are ruined , and all your sweet wine is gone .

ID:	443
INPUT:	Berreskuratzea lortzen ez badu , nolanahi ere Jubileu Urtean libre geldituko da bere seme-alabekin batera .
PRED:	If the field is not bought back , it must be bought back to the owner of the Year of Jubilee .
GOLD:	If any Israelites have not been bought back by the time the Year of Jubilee arrives , they and their children must be set free at that time .

ID:	444
INPUT:	Horregatik , beren ondasunak bildueta Sarats errekaz beste alderadaramatzate .
PRED:	That is why the rich of Sheba and the rich of Sheba and the rich of Samaria .
GOLD:	The people grab their possessionsand carry them across the Ravine of Willows .

ID:	445
INPUT:	Edan asetzerainoharen bular gozotik ! Xurgatu atseginezharen ugatz oparotik !
PRED:	Let them go to Egypt ! Let 's go out to Egypt , for there is plenty of water .
GOLD:	Drink deeply of her gloryeven as an infant drinks at its mother 's comforting breasts . ”

ID:	446
INPUT:	Ondoren , oparigaiaren zatiak eta burua eraman zizkioten eta Aaronek aldarean erre zituen .
PRED:	Then they brought the blood of the altar and burned it on the altar and burned it on the altar .
GOLD:	Then they handed him each piece of the burnt offering , including the head , and he burned them on the altar .

ID:	447
INPUT:	Hobabek erantzun zion : — Ez , ez noa . Nahiago dut neure herrialdera itzuli , neure ahaideengana .
PRED:	“ No ! ” Joab replied , “ I wo n't go back to my people . I will return to my people . ”
GOLD:	But Hobab replied , “ No , I will not go . I must return to my own land and family . ”

ID:	448
INPUT:	Nebaten seme Jeroboamen jokabide bera hartu zuen , hark egin eta Israeli eginarazi zizkion bekatu berak eginez .
PRED:	So Jeroboam son of Nebat followed the example of Jeroboam son of Nebat , and he led Israel to commit .
GOLD:	He followed the example of Jeroboam son of Nebat in all the sins he had committed and led Israel to commit . The people provoked the anger of the Lord , the God of Israel , with their worthless idols .

ID:	449
INPUT:	Hau da Israelgo leinuen artean banatuko duzuen lurraldea , hauek leinuei dagozkien ondare-zatiak . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says among the tribes of Israel , who are among the tribes of Israel . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !
GOLD:	“ These are the allotments that will be set aside for each tribe 's exclusive possession . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !

ID:	450
INPUT:	Ez daitezela ardura han uzten dutenaz , Egiptoko eskualderik emankorrena izango baitute » .
PRED:	Do n't let them enter the land of Egypt , for they will give an inheritance to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Do n't worry about your personal belongings , for the best of all the land of Egypt is yours . ' ”

ID:	451
INPUT:	Davidek birrindu egiten zuen lurralde hura ; ez zuen bizirik uzten , ez gizasemerik , ez emakumerik . Ardi , idi , asto , gamelu eta soinekoak ere ostu ohi zituen . Itzultzean , Akixengana joaten zen .
PRED:	So David bought the entire land , but he did n't give it to his sons . So David did n't go back to the fields , his son , Isaac , and his sons , and his sons , and they returned to their homes .
GOLD:	David did not leave one person alive in the villages he attacked . He took the sheep , goats , cattle , donkeys , camels , and clothing before returning home to see King Achish .

ID:	452
INPUT:	Israeldarrak eta jentilak
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	God 's Mercy Is for Everyone

ID:	453
INPUT:	Babilonia osoa hondatuko dute , nahi beste harrapakin eramango . Nik , Jaunak , esana .
PRED:	They will destroy Babylon and destroy Babylon , ” says the Lord . “ I will destroy them , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Babylonia will be looteduntil the attackers are glutted with loot.I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	454
INPUT:	eta Xutelahen seme Eranengandik erandarrak .
PRED:	These are the subclans descended from the ancestor of the ancestor of Esau .
GOLD:	This was the subclan descended from the Shuthelahites : The Eranites , named after their ancestor Eran .

ID:	455
INPUT:	estropezu egiten zuena zeure hitzez altxatueta okertutako belaunak zuzendu izan dituzu ;
PRED:	You have made a solemn oath of your unfailing love , and your unfailing love will be remembered .
GOLD:	Your words have supported those who were falling ; you encouraged those with shaky knees .

ID:	456
INPUT:	Berrogeiren bat urtez eroapenez gidatu zituen basamortuan zehar
PRED:	He reigned in the wilderness for forty years ,
GOLD:	He put up with them through forty years of wandering in the wilderness .

ID:	457
INPUT:	Elihuk gaineratu zuen :
PRED:	Then Elihu said :
GOLD:	Elihu continued speaking :

ID:	458
INPUT:	Denok ni bezala ezkongabe izatea nahi nuke ; baina Jainkoak eman dion dohain berezia du bakoitzak , batak hau eta besteak hura .
PRED:	But if you want to marry me , it would be better to marry God . But God has given you this gift to others .
GOLD:	But I wish everyone were single , just as I am . Yet each person has a special gift from God , of one kind or another .

ID:	459
INPUT:	Errege hauek gudu egin zieten Sodomako Bera , Gomorrako <unk> xa , Admako Xinab , Tze<unk> go Xemeber erregeei eta Belako , hau da , Tzoarko , erregeari .
PRED:	This was the king of Sodom and Gomorrah , who were also included in the wilderness of Paran . This was the ancestor of the kings of Judah .
GOLD:	fought against King Bera of Sodom , King Birsha of Gomorrah , King Shinab of Admah , King Shemeber of Zeboiim , and the king of Bela ( also called Zoar ) .

ID:	460
INPUT:	Haiekin hizketan ari zelarik , han agertu zen filistearren lerro artetik Goliat izeneko gizon adoretsu hura , Gateko filistearra , lehengo erronka bera eginez . Davidek entzun egin zion .
PRED:	While he was still talking with the Philistines , he became a friend of Goliath , a Philistine champion from Gath , and the Philistine champion was afraid to hear him .
GOLD:	As he was talking with them , Goliath , the Philistine champion from Gath , came out from the Philistine ranks . Then David heard him shout his usual taunt to the army of Israel .

ID:	461
INPUT:	Zeure jantzi bordatuak hartu eta beraiekin estali zenituen irudiak , eta nire olioa eta intsentsua eskaini .
PRED:	You took off your chariot and burned it with the finest oil , and pour out my hands on the altar .
GOLD:	You used the beautifully embroidered clothes I gave you to dress your idols . Then you used my special oil and my incense to worship them .

ID:	462
INPUT:	Bihurria da gaizkilearen jokabidea , zuzena bihotz garbikoaren portaera .
PRED:	The path of the godly are destroyed , but the path of the godly will be destroyed .
GOLD:	The guilty walk a crooked path ; the innocent travel a straight road .

ID:	463
INPUT:	Jaun ahalguztiduna Egiptoko lurraldean dagoenaren ezaugarri izango dira . Zapaltzen dituztenen aurka Jaunari laguntza eske dei egingo diotenean , hark salbatzailea bidaliko die defendatzera eta askatzera .
PRED:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies will be a mighty nation in the land of Egypt , and he will call the name of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . He will bring justice to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	It will be a sign and a witness that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies is worshiped in the land of Egypt . When the people cry to the Lord for help against those who oppress them , he will send them a savior who will rescue them .

ID:	464
INPUT:	Zaharrenak semea izan zuen , eta Moab eman zion izen ; berau da gaur eguneko moabdarren arbasoa .
PRED:	The son of Jacob became pregnant and gave birth to a son named Moab . He was the father of Moab .
GOLD:	When the older daughter gave birth to a son , she named him Moab . He became the ancestor of the nation now known as the Moabites .

ID:	465
INPUT:	« Jaiki eta aitaren etxera abiatu zen . Oraindik urruti zegoela , ikusi zuen aitak eta errukitu egin zen ; eta , lasterka joanik , besarkatu eta musuka hasi zitzaion .
PRED:	“ Go back to the house of his father , and he saw a distance from heaven . He saw that his father was dead , and he ran out into heaven and ran back to him .
GOLD:	“ So he returned home to his father . And while he was still a long way off , his father saw him coming . Filled with love and compassion , he ran to his son , embraced him , and kissed him .

ID:	466
INPUT:	Jainkoa Moisesi eta Josueri agertu
PRED:	The Death of Joshua
GOLD:	The Song of Moses

ID:	467
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Egun hartan , eguerdi beteansarraraziko dut eguzkia , eta egun-argitan ilunduko dut lurra .
PRED:	“ On that day , ” says the Lord , “ I will enter the night , and I will make the light of the darkness .
GOLD:	“ In that day , ” says the Sovereign Lord , “ I will make the sun go down at noonand darken the earth while it is still day .

ID:	468
INPUT:	Hilkiasen familian Haxabias , eta Jedaiasen familian Netanel .
PRED:	These are the family of Jeremiah the family of Elam , Jeremiah , Shemaiah , and Uzziel .
GOLD:	Hashabiah was leader of the family of Hilkiah.Nethanel was leader of the family of Jedaiah .

ID:	469
INPUT:	eta ez Moisesek bezala , hark zapi batez estaltzen baitzuen aurpegia , israeldarrek distira iragankor hura desagertu egiten zela ikus ez zezaten .
PRED:	And Moses did not see seven of the people of Israel , for he saw the light of the people of Israel , and they did n't see him .
GOLD:	We are not like Moses , who put a veil over his face so the people of Israel would not see the glory , even though it was destined to fade away .

ID:	470
INPUT:	« Ai , bizi ahal banitu berriz iragan egunak ! Orduan , Jainkoak zaintzen ninduen ,
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits those who live in me , for the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies was watching over me .
GOLD:	“ I long for the years gone bywhen God took care of me ,

ID:	471
INPUT:	herio-leizeko lokarriekninduten lotu , herio-sareek harrapatu .
PRED:	My cry out to me , O Lord ; my cry out to me !
GOLD:	The grave wrapped its ropes around me ; death laid a trap in my path .

ID:	472
INPUT:	Jariodunaren etzalekua ukitzen duenak arropak eta gorputza garbituko ditu eta kutsaturik geldituko da arratsa arte .
PRED:	If you touch the discharge , you must wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water , and you will remain unclean until evening .
GOLD:	So if you touch the man 's bed , you must wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water , and you will remain unclean until evening .

ID:	473
INPUT:	Anaia hura hona ekartzeko esan zenigun zure zerbitzarioi , ikusi nahi zenuela eta .
PRED:	I said to myself , “ You are my servant , my servant , and I want to help you . ”
GOLD:	“ And you said to us , ‘ Bring him here so I can see him with my own eyes . '

ID:	474
INPUT:	Davidek gogo hau adierazi zuen : « Norbaitek Belengo atean dagoen urtegitik ura ekarriko balit edateko… ! »
PRED:	When David heard this , he told him , “ Get up to Bethlehem in Bethlehem in the land of Bethlehem ! ”
GOLD:	David remarked longingly to his men , “ Oh , how I would love some of that good water from the well by the gate in Bethlehem . ”

ID:	475
INPUT:	eta gutun hau eman zieten eramateko : « Anaia apostoluek eta arduradunek Antiokiako , Siriako eta Ziliziako jentil-herrietako senideoi , agur !
PRED:	Then they gave this letter to the apostles : “ The apostles and elders of Syria and elders of Syria and Antioch of Syria and Antioch of Syria and Antioch of Syria . ”
GOLD:	This is the letter they took with them : “ This letter is from the apostles and elders , your brothers in Jerusalem . It is written to the Gentile believers in Antioch , Syria , and Cilicia . Greetings !

ID:	476
INPUT:	Herriak , bada , atseden hartu zuen zazpigarren egunean .
PRED:	So the people set up early autumn , and the seventh day of the festival was dry .
GOLD:	So the people did not gather any food on the seventh day .

ID:	477
INPUT:	eta esan zien : — Badakit Jaunak lurralde hau eman dizuela . Hemen , hirian , izuturik gaude eta herrialdeko jende guztia ere ikaraz dago zuen aurrean ,
PRED:	“ Yes , ” he said , “ this is what the Lord has given you this land to your people . We will stand here in the towns of the earth , and all the nations will stand before you . ”
GOLD:	“ I know the Lord has given you this land , ” she told them . “ We are all afraid of you . Everyone in the land is living in terror .

ID:	478
INPUT:	Eliren heriotza
PRED:	The Soldiers Mock Jesus
GOLD:	The Death of Eli

ID:	479
INPUT:	Bat bakarra da nire usoa , bakarra eta akatsik gabea , amaren kutuna . Zoriontsu diotse neskatxek ikustean , erreginek eta ohaideek honela goraipatzen :
PRED:	So the one who alone is a servant , one of the two servant , and the servant of the tribe of Levi — the servant of the tribe of Levi , and the other half of the tribe of Levi .
GOLD:	I would still choose my dove , my perfect one — the favorite of her mother , dearly loved by the one who bore her.The young women see her and praise her ; even queens and royal concubines sing her praises :

ID:	480
INPUT:	Haren aginduzurak zeruan pilatzen dira , hodeiak zerumugan gora igotzen , erauntsiak tximistaka lehertzen , haizea bere gordelekuetatikateratzen .
PRED:	The stars are in the sky , and the lightning flashes in the sky , and the lightning flashes in the sky , and the lightning flashes in the sky .
GOLD:	When he speaks in the thunder , the heavens roar with rain.He causes the clouds to rise over the earth.He sends the lightning with the rainand releases the wind from his storehouses .

ID:	481
INPUT:	“ Entzun duzu nik toki honetan bizi direnen kontra esan dudana . Horregatik , zure bihotza bigundu egin da eta apaldu egin zara nire aurrean . Nire aurrean apaldu zarelako , zeure jantziak urratu eta negar egin duzulako , nik ere entzun dizut . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	“ Listen to me and say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : Because you have sinned against me , you have sinned against me and have sinned against me , and I will bring you back to you . '
GOLD:	You were sorry and humbled yourself before God when you heard his words against this city and its people . You humbled yourself and tore your clothing in despair and wept before me in repentance . And I have indeed heard you , says the Lord .

ID:	482
INPUT:	mendialdea zuena izango baita . Nahiz eta baso hutsa den , soildu egingo duzue eta zuena izango da alde batetik bestera . Gainera , kanaandarrak ere botako dituzue , nahiz eta burdinazko guda-gurdiak dituzten eta indartsuak diren .
PRED:	But if you obey your command , you will be utterly destroyed , and you will be cut off from your land . If you do , you will be cut off from your iron chariots and iron chariots , or iron , or iron , or iron , or iron , or iron .
GOLD:	The forests of the hill country will be yours as well . Clear as much of the land as you wish , and take possession of its farthest corners . And you will drive out the Canaanites from the valleys , too , even though they are strong and have iron chariots . ”

ID:	483
INPUT:	Barrez beteko dizu oraindik ahoa , poz-irrintziz ezpainak .
PRED:	We are filled with joy , O Lord , with joy ! We are filled with joy .
GOLD:	He will once again fill your mouth with laughterand your lips with shouts of joy .

ID:	484
INPUT:	« Ongi da » erantzungo balu , lasai nintzateke ; haserretuko balitz , ordea , gauza jakina litzateke erabakia duela ni hondatzea .
PRED:	“ If I were too hard , I would be angry with you . But if I were angry , I would know that it would be too hard for me . ”
GOLD:	If he says , ‘ Fine ! ' you will know all is well . But if he is angry and loses his temper , you will know he is determined to kill me .

ID:	485
INPUT:	Berrogei urte nituen Moisesek , Jaunaren zerbitzariak , Kadex-Barneatik lurralde hau ikertzera bidali ninduenean ; barruak agintzen zidan eran eman nion hemengo berri .
PRED:	Moses was twenty years old when he left the Lord 's servant , and he sent me out of the land of Canaan to explore the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	I was forty years old when Moses , the servant of the Lord , sent me from Kadesh-barnea to explore the land of Canaan . I returned and gave an honest report ,

ID:	486
INPUT:	Hirugarren egunean , Saulen kanpalekutik zetorren gizon bat agertu zen ; jantziak urraturik eta burua hautsez estalirik zekartzan . Davidengana heltzean , lurreraino ahuspeztu zen .
PRED:	On the third day of Saul 's army came out of the camp , he tore his clothes in burlap and went to the ground . He fell down on his head , and he fell face down on his ground .
GOLD:	On the third day a man arrived from Saul 's army camp . He had torn his clothes and put dirt on his head to show that he was in mourning . He fell to the ground before David in deep respect .

ID:	487
INPUT:	Goberna ote lezake zuzenbideari gorroto dionak ? Nola ausartzen zara Zuzen-zuzena gaitzestera ?
PRED:	How can the poor be punished for those who are poor ? How can those who are honest ?
GOLD:	Could God govern if he hated justice ? Are you going to condemn the almighty judge ?

ID:	488
INPUT:	Izan ere , jende errebelde , berritsu eta liluratzaile asko dago , judu-jatorrikoen artean batez ere .
PRED:	For many of the people of Judah and Jerusalem , too , will hear the Good News about many Jews .
GOLD:	For there are many rebellious people who engage in useless talk and deceive others . This is especially true of those who insist on circumcision for salvation .

ID:	489
INPUT:	Horra zer egingo dugun : Egin diegun zinarengatik , bizirik utziko ditugu , Jainkoak zigor ez gaitzan .
PRED:	That is why we have abandoned us , and we will live in eternal life . We will not spare our lives .
GOLD:	This is what we must do . We must let them live , for divine anger would come upon us if we broke our oath .

ID:	490
INPUT:	Egin beza orro itsasoak eta bertako guztiak , munduak eta bertan bizi direnek !
PRED:	Then let all the animals die again , and all the earth live in the sea .
GOLD:	Let the sea and everything in it shout his praise ! Let the earth and all living things join in .

ID:	491
INPUT:	Eta hamabi ateak hamabi perla ziren , bakoitza perla bakarraz egina , eta hiriko plaza urre hutsezkoa , beira gardena bezalakoa .
PRED:	Each of them were twelve twelve twelve twelve twelve rows of pure gold , one piece of pure gold , and the other on each side of the city .
GOLD:	The twelve gates were made of pearls — each gate from a single pearl ! And the main street was pure gold , as clear as glass .

ID:	492
INPUT:	<unk> -zuria basamortuan bezala nago , gau-hontza hiri-hondakinen artean bezala .
PRED:	I will destroy you in the wilderness , like a wilderness of sorrow and sorrow .
GOLD:	I lie awake , lonely as a solitary bird on the roof .

ID:	493
INPUT:	Nik , Jaunak , hitz egin dut eta bete egingo dut , atzera egin gabe ; ez naiz errukituko , ez damutuko . Zure jokabidearen eta egintza txarren arabera epaituko zaitut . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	I will speak to them , and I will speak to them , and I will not punish you . I will judge you for your sins , says the Sovereign Lord . I will judge you for your sins , says the Sovereign Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ I , the Lord , have spoken ! The time has come , and I wo n't hold back . I will not change my mind , and I will have no pity on you . You will be judged on the basis of all your wicked actions , says the Sovereign Lord . ”

ID:	494
INPUT:	Amram Lebiren alaba batekin , Lebik Egipton izan zuenarekin , ezkondu zen ; Jokebed zuen izena . Honek hiru seme-alaba sortu zizkion Amrami : Aaron , Moises eta hauen arreba Miriam .
PRED:	But Amnon married two sons , who were still married to the land of Egypt . He married two sons , whom he had married two sons . These are the sons of Moses , Aaron , the daughter of Aaron .
GOLD:	and Amram 's wife was named Jochebed . She also was a descendant of Levi , born among the Levites in the land of Egypt . Amram and Jochebed became the parents of Aaron , Moses , and their sister , Miriam .

ID:	495
INPUT:	Ez zen Anaken ondorengorik bat ere gelditu israeldarren lurraldean , Gaza , Gad eta Axdod hirietan gelditu ziren arren .
PRED:	No one of the descendants of Aaron , remained in the land of Gilead , and the Israelites remained in the land of Gilead .
GOLD:	None of the descendants of Anak were left in all the land of Israel , though some still remained in Gaza , Gath , and Ashdod .

ID:	496
INPUT:	Bela Beorren semea , <unk> haba hirikoa ;
PRED:	The family of Hashumi from the city of Bethel ;
GOLD:	Bela son of Beor , who ruled in Edom from his city of Dinhabah .

ID:	497
INPUT:	« Ni , Jauna , ez naiz aldatu ; baina zuek ere Jakoben ondorengo izaten jarraitzen duzue :
PRED:	“ I am not the Lord , but you have not turned away from the descendants of Jacob .
GOLD:	“ I am the Lord , and I do not change . That is why you descendants of Jacob are not already destroyed .

ID:	498
INPUT:	Moisesek , ordea , esan zion : — Arren , Jauna , ni ez , bidali besteren bat .
PRED:	But Moses said to him , “ Lord , I am not one of the other . ”
GOLD:	But Moses again pleaded , “ Lord , please ! Send anyone else . ”

ID:	499
INPUT:	Hartu zituen Akazek Jaunaren etxean eta jauregiko altxortegian zeuden urre-zilarrak eta Asiriako erregeari bidali zizkion esku-erakutsi bezala .
PRED:	So the king took the articles of silver and gold from the treasuries of the Temple of the Lord , just as the king of Assyria had given him .
GOLD:	Then Ahaz took the silver and gold from the Temple of the Lord and the palace treasury and sent it as a payment to the Assyrian king .

ID:	500
INPUT:	Hildakoen gorpuak jaurti zituen putzua , Israelgo errege Baxak eraso zion hartan , Judako errege Asak egindako putzu handia da . Netaniasen seme Ismaelek gorpuz bete zuen .
PRED:	The king of Israel took him away and threw him into the cistern . He killed King Baasha of Israel , who was killed by King Baasha of Israel . He killed the body of King Amaziah of Israel , just as the king of Israel had killed .
GOLD:	The cistern where Ishmael dumped the bodies of the men he murdered was the large one dug by King Asa when he fortified Mizpah to protect himself against King Baasha of Israel . Ishmael son of Nethaniah filled it with corpses .

ID:	501
INPUT:	Ni heltzean , ziurtagiriak eman eta Jerusalemera bidaliko ditut zuek aukeratuak , zuen erregalua eramatera .
PRED:	When I arrived in Jerusalem , I will bring disaster on you , and I will bring disaster on you to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	When I come , I will write letters of recommendation for the messengers you choose to deliver your gift to Jerusalem .

ID:	502
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaizkien Moises eta Aaron israeldarrei : « Gaur arratsaldean jakingo duzue Jaunak atera zaituztela Egiptotik ,
PRED:	Then Moses and Aaron spoke to the people of Israel and said , “ Today you will know that the Lord has rescued you from the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	So Moses and Aaron said to all the people of Israel , “ By evening you will realize it was the Lord who brought you out of the land of Egypt .

ID:	503
INPUT:	Jaunak , horrela , apaldua zuen Judako erreinua , Akaz erregea zela eta ; Judari zabarkeriara eragina baitzion Akazek eta Jauna baztertua .
PRED:	But the Lord did what was evil in Judah , just as King Ahaz of Judah , Ahaz , Ahaz , the king of Judah , and the king of Judah .
GOLD:	The Lord was humbling Judah because of King Ahaz of Judah , for he had encouraged his people to sin and had been utterly unfaithful to the Lord .

ID:	504
INPUT:	Ondoren , Samariara abiatu zen Jehu . Bidean , Artzainen Bet-E<unk> zeritzan tokira heltzean ,
PRED:	Then Jesus went to Samaria to the city of Samaria , near Beth-aven , near the city of Jericho .
GOLD:	Then Jehu set out for Samaria . Along the way , while he was at Beth-eked of the Shepherds ,

ID:	505
INPUT:	Gantzutu Nimxiren seme Jehu Israelgo erregetarako . Gantzutu Abel-Meholako Xafaten seme Eliseo , zure ondorengo profeta izan dadin .
PRED:	“ anointed anointed anointed king of Israel , ” Saul said . “ He would be the son of Amon 's son , and he will be his son Abishai son . ”
GOLD:	Then anoint Jehu grandson of Nimshi to be king of Israel , and anoint Elisha son of Shaphat from the town of Abel-meholah to replace you as my prophet .

ID:	506
INPUT:	Biharamunean , Jainkoak bidalitako espiritu gaiztoak jo zuen Saul , eta han zebilen eroa bezala bere etxe osoan barrena ; David zitara jotzen ari zitzaion , egunero bezala . Saulek , ordea , eskuan zerabilen lantza
PRED:	As Saul was walking along the road , the spirit of God struck Saul with a tormenting spirit , and he went into the house of Saul . But Saul went into the fields , and Saul went into the fields .
GOLD:	The very next day a tormenting spirit from God overwhelmed Saul , and he began to rave in his house like a madman . David was playing the harp , as he did each day . But Saul had a spear in his hand ,

ID:	507
INPUT:	Jesus Anasen aurrean
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Peter 's First Denial

ID:	508
INPUT:	eta eman mezu hau : “ Honela dio Jaun ahalguztidunak , Israelen Jainkoak : Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosor neure zerbitzaria ekarraraziko dut , eta Jeremiasek lurrean sartu dituen harri horien gainean ezarriko ditut haren tronua eta gaineko oihal-estaldura .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : ‘ I will send King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon , the king of Babylon , and I will put them on the top of the top of the wall . '
GOLD:	Then say to the people of Judah , ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : I will certainly bring my servant Nebuchadnezzar , king of Babylon , here to Egypt . I will set his throne over these stones that I have hidden . He will spread his royal canopy over them .

ID:	509
INPUT:	Zergatik ez duzu aditu Jaunaren esana ? Zergatik hartu dituzu harrapakinak , Jaunaren begietan gaizki dagoena eginez ?
PRED:	Why have you rejected the Lord 's command ? Why are you doing such evil deeds ? Why do you think about the evil of the Lord ?
GOLD:	Why have n't you obeyed the Lord ? Why did you rush for the plunder and do what was evil in the Lord 's sight ? ”

ID:	510
INPUT:	Lur jota daudeeta makurturik idoloak , ezin dituzte eramaileak salbatu ; beraiek ere erbestera doaz .
PRED:	They lie down in the dust , and they can not be able to sell them to the pit .
GOLD:	Both the idols and their owners are bowed down.The gods can not protect the people , and the people can not protect the gods.They go off into captivity together .

ID:	511
INPUT:	Argi nazazue , eta isildu egingo naiz . Esadazue zertan nagoen oker !
PRED:	I am silent and thought , “ I wo n't be silent ! I do n't know what I say . ”
GOLD:	Teach me , and I will keep quiet.Show me what I have done wrong .

ID:	512
INPUT:	Zoritxar biok gertatu zaizkizu : herrialdea hondatua eta desegina , jendea goseak eta gerrak hila . Baina nor errukitzen zaizu ? Nork kontsolatzen zaitu ?
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you , my people , and I will destroy you and destroy you ? But who will destroy you and destroy you ? ”
GOLD:	These two calamities have fallen on you : desolation and destruction , famine and war.And who is left to sympathize with you ? Who is left to comfort you ?

ID:	513
INPUT:	Israelgo gudarostea osatzeko gai diren hogei urtetik gorako gizonezko guztiak erroldatuko dituzu , gudari-taldeka banatuz . Zu eta Aaron arduratuko zarete izen-bilketaz ,
PRED:	All the men of Israel will fight for twenty years , for the troops of Israel will be called for help , and you will gather them out of the community of Israel .
GOLD:	twenty years old or older who are able to go to war . You and Aaron must register the troops ,

ID:	514
INPUT:	Erraz aberastu , erraz galdu ; poliki-poliki bilduz , gehitu .
PRED:	So go out to the pool of water , and find it .
GOLD:	Wealth from get-rich-quick schemes quickly disappears ; wealth from hard work grows over time .

ID:	515
INPUT:	Horrelako horien aurrean ez genuen une batez ere atzera egin , beraiei amore emanez , beharrezko baitzen berri onaren egiak zuengan sendo irautea .
PRED:	That is why I did n't understand the meaning of these things I had done to you , so that you would continue to trust in God 's kindness .
GOLD:	But we refused to give in to them for a single moment . We wanted to preserve the truth of the gospel message for you .

ID:	516
INPUT:	« Jakintsuok , entzun nire hitzak , zuek , ikasiok , aditu arretaz .
PRED:	“ Brothers , listen to me , you who are wise , you who are wise .
GOLD:	“ Listen to me , you wise men.Pay attention , you who have knowledge .

ID:	517
INPUT:	Tronu , zahar eta lau izaki bizidunen inguruan zutik zeuden aingeru guztiak ahuspeztu egin ziren tronuaren aurrean eta Jainkoa adoratu zuten ,
PRED:	And the living beings and the four living beings , who fell on the throne of the living beings , and the twenty-four elders fell before God and stood before him .
GOLD:	And all the angels were standing around the throne and around the elders and the four living beings . And they fell before the throne with their faces to the ground and worshiped God .

ID:	518
INPUT:	Haserrealdi batean , unetxo batezaurpegia ezkutatu nizun , baina etengabe maite zaitudalakogupidatu naiz zutaz . Hala diot nik , Jaunak , zure askatzaileak .
PRED:	Instead , let them be angry with them , but let them be ashamed of them , for I have loved you , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	In a burst of anger I turned my face away for a little while.But with everlasting love I will have compassion on you , ” says the Lord , your Redeemer .

ID:	519
INPUT:	baita liho finezko buruzapi eta kapela apainduak ere , eta liho-hari bihurrituzko galtzak ;
PRED:	With fine linen cloth , purple , and scarlet thread and fine linen cloth , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	The turban and the special head coverings were made of fine linen , and the undergarments were also made of finely woven linen .

ID:	520
INPUT:	Sidimgo harana gali<unk> -putzuz josia zegoen , eta , ihesi zihoazela , hauetara erori ziren Sodoma eta Gomorrako erregeak ; gainerakoek mendialdera egin zuten ihes .
PRED:	The king of Aram had fled to the valley of Succoth and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah , who lived in the wilderness of Sodom and Gomorrah . They fled to the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah .
GOLD:	As it happened , the valley of the Dead Sea was filled with tar pits . And as the army of the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled , some fell into the tar pits , while the rest escaped into the mountains .

ID:	521
INPUT:	Goretsazue , munduko errege eta herriok , buruzagi eta gobernari guztiok ,
PRED:	Praise the King of the earth , you kings of the earth , all you people of the earth .
GOLD:	kings of the earth and all people , rulers and judges of the earth ,

ID:	522
INPUT:	Konfiantza osoa du senarrak harengan , ez da sekula beharrean aurkituko .
PRED:	He will trust in him , but he will never find him in him .
GOLD:	Her husband can trust her , and she will greatly enrich his life .

ID:	523
INPUT:	Epaile duten Harkaitzaren kontra amildu dira , atsegin hartu baitzuten niri entzutean :
PRED:	They are trying to stand against him , for they have heard what they say .
GOLD:	When their leaders are thrown down from a cliff , the wicked will listen to my words and find them true .

ID:	524
INPUT:	Baina , astea igaro ondoren , geure bidaiari jarraitu genion . Hiritik kanporaino lagundu ziguten haiek denek , beren emazte eta haurrekin . Hondartzan otoitz egin genuen belauniko ;
PRED:	But when we turned away from the city , we turned away from the towns of the city , and we prayed to the Lord for their children , and I prayed to them .
GOLD:	When we returned to the ship at the end of the week , the entire congregation , including women and children , left the city and came down to the shore with us . There we knelt , prayed ,

ID:	525
INPUT:	« Bazterturik , gorrotatuaeta bakarrik utzia egon bazara ere , gizaldien harro-bide egingo zaitut , mende guztien pozgarri .
PRED:	“ Even if you refuse to hate your ways and refuse to obey your commands , I will cause you to stumble , and all your hordes will rejoice .
GOLD:	“ Though you were once despised and hated , with no one traveling through you , I will make you beautiful forever , a joy to all generations .

ID:	526
INPUT:	Eta gauza bera zuen artean bizi den edo etorkizunean biziko den etorkinak ere : Jaunak atseginez onartzen dituen opariak egin nahi baditu , zuek bezala egingo du .
PRED:	And when you live in your ways , you will live in peace , just as the Lord has commanded you , you will be a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	And if any foreigners visit you or live among you and want to present a special gift as a pleasing aroma to the Lord , they must follow these same procedures .

ID:	527
INPUT:	« Efoda , urrez , purpura more , gorri eta gorriminez eta liho-hari bihurrituz apain bordaturik egingo dute .
PRED:	“ To attach the ephod with blue , purple , and scarlet thread , and scarlet thread , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	“ The craftsmen must make the ephod of finely woven linen and skillfully embroider it with gold and with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .

ID:	528
INPUT:	Orduan , Hananiasek , uztarria Jeremiasen lepotik kendurik , apurtu egin zuen ,
PRED:	So Jeremiah took Jeremiah from the yoke of the Lord 's neck , and he stripped him from his neck .
GOLD:	Then Hananiah the prophet took the yoke off Jeremiah 's neck and broke it in pieces .

ID:	529
INPUT:	Baina jendetzagatik ezin zuten eraman Jesusenganaino . Orduan , bera zegoen parean etxe gaina zulatu eta zulotik behera eraitsi zuten elbarria , etzana zegoen ohatilan .
PRED:	But they could n't go out to the crowd , and they took Jesus out of the house where he was staying . Then he took him out of the tomb , and he took him out of the synagogue .
GOLD:	They could n't bring him to Jesus because of the crowd , so they dug a hole through the roof above his head . Then they lowered the man on his mat , right down in front of Jesus .

ID:	530
INPUT:	behi-gaztanbera eta ardi-esnea , bildots gizenen haragia , aukerako ahariak eta akerrak , ogi-irin garbi bikainaeman zizkion janarieta ardoa , mahats-odola , edari .
PRED:	The young bulls and lambs , the sheep , goats , lambs , lambs , lambs , lambs , lambs , and lambs , and lambs . He also gave two lambs to the Lord , and olive oil .
GOLD:	He fed them yogurt from the herdand milk from the flock , together with the fat of lambs.He gave them choice rams from Bashan , and goats , together with the choicest wheat.You drank the finest wine , made from the juice of grapes .

ID:	531
INPUT:	Jaunak Asiria zigortuko
PRED:	A Message about Philistia
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	532
INPUT:	Zeuk , Jauna , zeuk babestuko gaituzu beti , zeuk babestuko horrelako jendearengandik :
PRED:	You will have only one of them , and you will have a large crowd from me .
GOLD:	even though the wicked strut about , and evil is praised throughout the land .

ID:	533
INPUT:	Hauek aurrea hartu ziguten , eta Troaden egon zitzaizkigun zain .
PRED:	They waited for the day and night , and they waited for the night .
GOLD:	They went on ahead and waited for us at Troas .

ID:	534
INPUT:	Janes eta <unk> aztiak Moisesen aurka jarri ziren bezalaxe , liluratzaile hauek ere , buru usteleko jendea eta sinesmenean porrot egina baita , egiaren aurka jartzen dira .
PRED:	This is the account of Moses , the leader of the people of Israel , who had been appointed by Moses , the leader of the synagogue , and the people of Israel are rejoicing .
GOLD:	These teachers oppose the truth just as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses . They have depraved minds and a counterfeit faith .

ID:	535
INPUT:	« Jaunari erre-oparitzat eskaini beharrekoa hegaztia bada , usapala nahiz usakumea eskainiko da .
PRED:	“ If you present a burnt offering to the Lord , you must present a young goat as a burnt offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ If you present a bird as a burnt offering to the Lord , choose either a turtledove or a young pigeon .

ID:	536
INPUT:	Erabateko zigorra
PRED:	Hope for Exiled Israel
GOLD:	Judah 's Inevitable Doom

ID:	537
INPUT:	Orduan , aker bat hil eta Joseren jantzia harturik , akerraren odoletan busti zuten .
PRED:	So they killed a male goat and put it in the blood of Joseph 's blood .
GOLD:	Then the brothers killed a young goat and dipped Joseph 's robe in its blood .

ID:	538
INPUT:	« Benetan diotsuet azkeneko hau Jainkoarekin bakean itzuli zela etxera ; fariseua , berriz , ez . Zeren eta bere burua goratzen duena beheratu egingo baitu Jainkoak , eta bere burua beheratzen duena , goratu » .
PRED:	“ I tell you the truth , unless I return to the Temple of God , the Pharisees , the Pharisees , and the head of the Pharisees , and the head of the Pharisees , too . ”
GOLD:	I tell you , this sinner , not the Pharisee , returned home justified before God . For those who exalt themselves will be humbled , and those who humble themselves will be exalted . ”

ID:	539
INPUT:	Izreelgo dorrean zegoen zelatariak , Jehuren gudari-taldea etortzen ikustean , esan zuen : — Gudari-talde bat ageri da han ! Joramek agindu zuen : — Bidali zaldizko bat eta galdegin dezala bakez datozen .
PRED:	When Jezebel arrived at the palace of Jezreel , he told the men of Jezreel , “ There is one of you , ” he said , “ we 'll tell you what you have done . ” So Jehoram did n't tell him about it .
GOLD:	The watchman on the tower of Jezreel saw Jehu and his company approaching , so he shouted to Joram , “ I see a company of troops coming ! ” “ Send out a rider to ask if they are coming in peace , ” King Joram ordered .

ID:	540
INPUT:	Esnatu , Jauna ! Zergatik zaude lo ? Ekin ! Ez gu betiko zapuztu !
PRED:	O Lord , why are you so far away ? Why are you so far away ?
GOLD:	Why do you look the other way ? Why do you ignore our suffering and oppression ?

ID:	541
INPUT:	Ba , uxaezineko zoritxarragertatuko zaizu , saihestu ezineko ezbeharrajausiko gainera , ustekabean hartuko zaituenbat-bateko hondamendia etorriko .
PRED:	You will be destroyed , and you will be destroyed by the sword of judgment . But when disaster comes upon you , you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	So disaster will overtake you , and you wo n't be able to charm it away.Calamity will fall upon you , and you wo n't be able to buy your way out.A catastrophe will strike you suddenly , one for which you are not prepared .

ID:	542
INPUT:	Hirugarren egunean , ontziko tresneria itsasora jaurti zuten marinelek .
PRED:	On the third day the third day , the sailors picked up the ship and threw it into the sea .
GOLD:	The following day they even took some of the ship 's gear and threw it overboard .

ID:	543
INPUT:	Gatibualditik zetozen erbesteratuek erre-opariak eskaini zizkioten Israelgo Jainkoari : hamabi zezen Israel osoaren alde , laurogeita hamasei ahari , hirurogeita hamazazpi bildots eta hamabi aker bekatuen barkamenerako : guztiak Jaunari erre-oparitzat eskainiak .
PRED:	These offerings were given to the people of Israel as a burnt offering to the Lord , the God of Israel , six quarts of choice flour moistened with olive oil , each lamb , and seven one-year-old male lambs .
GOLD:	Then the exiles who had come out of captivity sacrificed burnt offerings to the God of Israel . They presented twelve bulls for all the people of Israel , as well as ninety-six rams and seventy-seven male lambs . They also offered twelve male goats as a sin offering . All this was given as a burnt offering to the Lord .

ID:	544
INPUT:	Damaskoko Abana eta Parpar ibaiak ez ote dira , bada , Israelgo ur guztiak baino hobeak ? Ez ote nintekeen horietan busti , gaitza sendatzeko ? Eta alde egin zuen handik haserre .
PRED:	For example , we are far from Damascus , but we are far greater than the other nations of Damascus . They did n't even think about me , even though I was so angry with you .
GOLD:	Are n't the rivers of Damascus , the Abana and the Pharpar , better than any of the rivers of Israel ? Why should n't I wash in them and be healed ? ” So Naaman turned and went away in a rage .

ID:	545
INPUT:	Lehoiaren antzeko izango naizEfraimentzat , lehoi gaztearen antze<unk> darentzat . Neuk harrapatuko duteta alde egingo , neurekin eramango duteta inork ez du askatuko .
PRED:	I will destroy the young lions , and I will destroy them as a young lion . I will destroy them , and no one will help them . I will destroy them , and no one will help them .
GOLD:	I will be like a lion to Israel , like a strong young lion to Judah.I will tear them to pieces ! I will carry them off , and no one will be left to rescue them .

ID:	546
INPUT:	« Etsaien aurka borrokatzeko kanpalekua eratzean , gorde zeuen buruak kutsadura orotatik garbi .
PRED:	“ If you present your enemy against your enemies , you must wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water .
GOLD:	“ Any man who becomes ceremonially defiled because of a nocturnal emission must leave the camp and stay away all day .

ID:	547
INPUT:	Alderantziz , gonbidatzen zaituztenean , jarri azkeneko tokian , gonbidatu zaituenak , datorrenean , esan diezazun : “ Adiskide , igo gorago ” . Horrela , oso toki onean geldituko zara mahaikide guztien aurrean .
PRED:	But when you remain in trouble , you will protect you in your home . When you arrive , you will say , ‘ You will be your friend , ' when you are standing in the palace , you will be found in the palace .
GOLD:	“ Instead , take the lowest place at the foot of the table . Then when your host sees you , he will come and say , ‘ Friend , we have a better place for you ! ' Then you will be honored in front of all the other guests .

ID:	548
INPUT:	Begiratu zuten atzera Aiko gizonek eta ke-mordo handia ikusi zuten hiritik zerurantz igotzen . Ez zitzaien ihesbiderik gelditzen inongo aldetik , basamorturantz ihesi zihoazen israeldarrak itzuli egin baitziren beren pertsegitzaileen kontra .
PRED:	The man looked up toward the wilderness and saw the great army coming toward the wilderness , and they traveled through the wilderness toward the hill country of the Amorites . The Israelites traveled through the wilderness toward the wilderness , and the Israelites returned to the wilderness .
GOLD:	When the men of Ai looked behind them , smoke from the town was filling the sky , and they had nowhere to go . For the Israelites who had fled in the direction of the wilderness now turned on their pursuers .

ID:	549
INPUT:	Paulo Efeson
PRED:	Paul and Silas in Ephesus
GOLD:	Paul 's Third Missionary Journey

ID:	550
INPUT:	Jesus eskatologiaz mintzo ( 24 , 1 — 25 , 46 )
PRED:	Jesus ' body was bitter in bitter trouble , and there was an opportunity to trap Jesus .
GOLD:	Jesus Speaks about the Future

ID:	551
INPUT:	Hau zioen : « Idatz ezazu liburu batean ikusiko duzuna , eta bidali zazpi eliz elkarte hauei : Efeso , Esmirna , Pergamo , Tiatira , Sardes , Filadelfia eta Laodizeako eliz elkarteei » .
PRED:	“ Write this letter to me , ” he said , “ when I see seven churches , I am writing to you from the churches , Philip , and I am writing to the churches . ”
GOLD:	It said , “ Write in a book everything you see , and send it to the seven churches in the cities of Ephesus , Smyrna , Pergamum , Thyatira , Sardis , Philadelphia , and Laodicea . ”

ID:	552
INPUT:	Etorri ziren , beraz , Kiriat-Jearimgoak eta igo zuten Jaunaren kutxa . Abinadabek muinoan zuen etxean sartu zuten . Ondoren , honen seme Eleazar sagaratu zuten , Jaunaren kutxa zaintzeko .
PRED:	So they went to the Ark of the Lord , Kiriath-jearim , and he went into the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant . Then they went into the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant .
GOLD:	So the men of Kiriath-jearim came to get the Ark of the Lord . They took it to the hillside home of Abinadab and ordained Eleazar , his son , to be in charge of it .

ID:	553
INPUT:	Esterrek , ordea , erregeagana jo zuen eta honek idatziz agindu zuen , Hamanek juduen aurka erabakia zuen hondamendia gerta zekiola berari ; horrela , bada , Haman eta honen semeak urkabean zintzilikatu zituzten .
PRED:	But Esther refused to pay attention to the king 's command . He ordered that the Jews throughout the city of Haman had been destroyed by Haman 's son , and it was written in the hill country .
GOLD:	But when Esther came before the king , he issued a decree causing Haman 's evil plot to backfire , and Haman and his sons were impaled on a sharpened pole .

ID:	554
INPUT:	Eta legendun asko zegoen Israelen Eliseo profetaren garaian ; hala ere , ez zuen haietako inor sendatu , Naaman siriarra baizik » .
PRED:	As a man named him there , a man named Elijah , a prophet from the group of prophets from the synagogue , but no one could find him . ”
GOLD:	And many in Israel had leprosy in the time of the prophet Elisha , but the only one healed was Naaman , a Syrian . ”

ID:	555
INPUT:	hau diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak , Israelen Jainkoak : Rekaben seme Jonadabek beti izango ditu ondorengoak nire herrian » .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : I will give them this message from the descendants of Jehonadab son of Ahab , the God of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : ‘ Jehonadab son of Recab will always have descendants who serve me . ' ”

ID:	556
INPUT:	Etxegintzan ari direnen izenak eman behar dizkiguzue » .
PRED:	You must teach the sons of your daughters , and you must teach them everything you need . ”
GOLD:	They also asked for the names of all the men working on the Temple .

ID:	557
INPUT:	Onartu zuen Moisesek bere aitaginarrebaren aholkua eta haren esanaren arabera egin zuen :
PRED:	So Moses took his father 's message and told him about his father 's advice . He said ,
GOLD:	Moses listened to his father-in-law 's advice and followed his suggestions .

ID:	558
INPUT:	Baina zeruko erreginari intsentsua erre eta isur-opariak egiteari utzi diogunetik , kale gorrian gaude , goseak eta gerraz hiltzen .
PRED:	But burn incense on the altar and burned incense on the altar , including the fat of the fire , the daily sacrifice , just as the daily grain offering .
GOLD:	But ever since we quit burning incense to the Queen of Heaven and stopped worshiping her with liquid offerings , we have been in great trouble and have been dying from war and famine . ”

ID:	559
INPUT:	Hala , joan ziren Ezekias erregearen funtzionarioak Isaiasengana .
PRED:	So Hezekiah went to King Hezekiah 's officials and told him what had happened to Isaiah .
GOLD:	After King Hezekiah 's officials delivered the king 's message to Isaiah ,

ID:	560
INPUT:	Honetan azaltzen da nire Aitaren aintza : zuek , nire ikasle izanik , fruitu asko ematean .
PRED:	That is why I tell you the truth , you will enjoy my own fruit .
GOLD:	When you produce much fruit , you are my true disciples . This brings great glory to my Father .

ID:	561
INPUT:	Judu e<unk> <unk> tak
PRED:	The Message about Judah
GOLD:	Paul Ministers in Ephesus

ID:	562
INPUT:	Erdian , kopa biribila duzu : eduki dezala beti ardo goxoa ! Zure sabelaliliz inguraturiko gari-piloa .
PRED:	I will put your hope in you , like a stranger , a stranger , a stranger , and a belt around you .
GOLD:	Your breasts are like two fawns , twin fawns of a gazelle .

ID:	563
INPUT:	Baina Jaunaren eguna lapurra bezala ustekabean etorriko da . Orduan , burrunba handiz desagertuko dira zeruak , munduaren osagaiak suak kiskalita desegingo eta lurra bere egintza guztiekin agerian geldituko da Jainkoaren epairako .
PRED:	But the Lord will come upon the people of the Lord , like a mighty storm , and the whole earth will be destroyed , and the whole earth will be destroyed by the Lord their God .
GOLD:	But the day of the Lord will come as unexpectedly as a thief . Then the heavens will pass away with a terrible noise , and the very elements themselves will disappear in fire , and the earth and everything on it will be found to deserve judgment .

ID:	564
INPUT:	« Bereizi lebitarrak beste israeldarren artetik eta egiezu garbikuntza .
PRED:	“ Give the Levites to the Levites , Levites , Levites , Levites , Levites , and Levites .
GOLD:	“ Now set the Levites apart from the rest of the people of Israel and make them ceremonially clean .

ID:	565
INPUT:	Isakarren leinuaren lurraldea
PRED:	The Land Given to Dan
GOLD:	The Land Given to Issachar

ID:	566
INPUT:	Jainkoak Noeri eta beronen semeei esan zien , gainera :
PRED:	Then God said to Noah and his sons and his sons ,
GOLD:	Then God told Noah and his sons ,

ID:	567
INPUT:	Gero , Danielen salatzaileak ekartzeko agindu zuen erregeak , eta lehoi-zulora jaurti zituzten beren emazte eta seme-alabekin batera . Eta zulo barrenera heldu baino lehen , lehoiek beren atzaparretan hartu eta txiki-txiki egin zituzten .
PRED:	Then Daniel sent messengers to the king , and they took him to the lions and threw him into a lion 's den of lions , and they took him to the lions and killed him .
GOLD:	Then King Darius sent this message to the people of every race and nation and language throughout the world : “ Peace and prosperity to you !

ID:	568
INPUT:	Hesteak eta hankak garbiturik , erre egin zituen beste zatien gainean .
PRED:	Then the internal organs and the legs were burned on the internal organs and the other side .
GOLD:	Then he washed the internal organs and the legs and burned them on the altar along with the rest of the burnt offering .

ID:	569
INPUT:	Badoaz nire egunak , kea bezala , erretzen dauzkat hezurrak , txingarrak bezala .
PRED:	You are my friend , but you are my own flesh ! I have scattered my enemies like an ox .
GOLD:	My heart is sick , withered like grass , and I have lost my appetite .

ID:	570
INPUT:	Orduan , Jesusek esan zion : — Emakumea , handia da zure fedea ! Gerta bekizu nahi duzuna ! Eta une hartatik sendatua gelditu zitzaion alaba .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to her , “ She is a prophet ! She is your prophet ! ” So she urged her to be healed .
GOLD:	“ Dear woman , ” Jesus said to her , “ your faith is great . Your request is granted . ” And her daughter was instantly healed .

ID:	571
INPUT:	Ardoz beteriko pitxer eta kopak eskaini nizkien rekabetarrei , eta edateko erregutu .
PRED:	I also took some of the fat from the altar , along with the fat around the altar and the altar .
GOLD:	I set cups and jugs of wine before them and invited them to have a drink ,

ID:	572
INPUT:	Baina Felipek Jainkoaren erregetza eta Jesu Kristoren berri ona hots egitean , sinetsi egin zioten eta bataioa hartu denek , gizon eta emakume .
PRED:	But Philip , the Kingdom of God , and he preached the Good News about the Kingdom of Christ Jesus , who was baptized with a woman .
GOLD:	But now the people believed Philip 's message of Good News concerning the Kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ . As a result , many men and women were baptized .

ID:	573
INPUT:	Hona hemen , babes-hiri izateko hautatu zituztenak : Kedex , Neftaliko mendialdean , Galilean ; Sikem , Efraimgo mendialdean , eta Kiriat-Arba — hau da , Hebron — , Judako mendialdean .
PRED:	These are the towns of Simeon , who lived in the hill country of Ephraim ( also known as the hill country of Ephraim ) , the hill country of Ephraim , Simeon , Simeon , and the hill country of Ephraim .
GOLD:	The following cities were designated as cities of refuge : Kedesh of Galilee , in the hill country of Naphtali ; Shechem , in the hill country of Ephraim ; and Kiriath-arba ( that is , Hebron ) , in the hill country of Judah .

ID:	574
INPUT:	Gaur , nire ondotik joan ondoren , bi gizon aurkituko dituzu Rakelen hilobi ondoan , Benjaminen mugetan , <unk> tzahen . Honela mintzatuko zaizkizu : “ Agertu dira bila zabiltzan astoak ; aita astoez ahaztu eta zuetaz kezkatua dago , bere semea aurkitzeko zer egin ez dakiela ” » . Eta Samuelek jarraitu zuen :
PRED:	That is why you can see two men of Benjamin , two men from the tribe of Benjamin . You will say , ‘ You will be your father and mother , and you will find out what you have done to me . ' ” So Samuel did not eat it .
GOLD:	When you leave me today , you will see two men beside Rachel 's tomb at Zelzah , on the border of Benjamin . They will tell you that the donkeys have been found and that your father has stopped worrying about them and is now worried about you . He is asking , ‘ Have you seen my son ? '

ID:	575
INPUT:	eta txiki hauetako bati , nire ikasle delako , ontzixka bat ur fresko besterik ez bada ere ematen diona , benetan diotsuet ez dela saririk gabe geldituko » .
PRED:	And if I tell you the truth , I 'll tell you the truth , there is no water in water . I tell you the truth , I wo n't find it . ”
GOLD:	And if you give even a cup of cold water to one of the least of my followers , you will surely be rewarded . ”

ID:	576
INPUT:	Orduan , haiek belarriak itxi eta , garrasika , gainera jaurti zitzaizkion Estebani denak batean .
PRED:	Then the shepherds got up and threw him into the blazing furnace , and the Lord struck him with a strong hand .
GOLD:	Then they put their hands over their ears and began shouting . They rushed at him

ID:	577
INPUT:	Baina Abrahamek erantzun zion : “ Moisesi eta profetei entzuten ez badiete , hildakoren bat piztuta ere , ez dute kasurik egingo ” » .
PRED:	But Abraham said to Abraham , ‘ This is what the prophets of the prophets , the prophets of the prophets , and they will never die . '
GOLD:	“ But Abraham said , ‘ If they wo n't listen to Moses and the prophets , they wo n't be persuaded even if someone rises from the dead . ' ”

ID:	578
INPUT:	Benjaminen leinuaren lurraldea
PRED:	The Land Given to the Tribe of Benjamin
GOLD:	The Land Given to Benjamin

ID:	579
INPUT:	Ea , filistearrok , eutsi gogor ! Izan gizon eta ez zarete hebrearren menpe egongo , beraiek zuen menpe egon diren bezala . Izan gizon eta ekin guduari ! »
PRED:	Take courage , you Philistines ! Do n't be afraid of the Philistines ! Do n't be handed over to the Philistines , and you will be angry with us . ”
GOLD:	Fight as never before , Philistines ! If you do n't , we will become the Hebrews ' slaves just as they have been ours ! Stand up like men and fight ! ”

ID:	580
INPUT:	Zuek , ordea , Jaunak hartu eta Egiptotik , burdina urtzeko labetik , atera zaituzte , bere herri eta ondare egiteko , gaur egiaz zareten bezala .
PRED:	But you are the Lord , who rescued you from the land of Egypt , who rescued you from the land of Egypt , just as the Lord has commanded you .
GOLD:	Remember that the Lord rescued you from the iron-smelting furnace of Egypt in order to make you his very own people and his special possession , which is what you are today .

ID:	581
INPUT:	Zeren , goiangeruaren ahotsez eta Jainkoaren turuta-hotsez seinalea emanik , Jauna bera jaitsiko baita zerutik , eta aurrena Kristorekin bat eginik hildakoak piztuko dira ;
PRED:	For the Son of Heaven 's Armies , who will rise up from the dead and on the throne of the Lord Jesus , who will rise from the dead , and the dead will be raised from the dead .
GOLD:	For the Lord himself will come down from heaven with a commanding shout , with the voice of the archangel , and with the trumpet call of God . First , the believers who have died will rise from their graves .

ID:	582
INPUT:	Eguzkiaren bero izugarriz erre egin ziren gizon-emakumeak ; baina , halere , zigor hauen gain agintea zuen Jainkoaren izena madarikatu zuten , damutu eta Jainkoak arrazoi zuela aitortu beharrean .
PRED:	Once again the people of Israel became pregnant and gave birth to a woman . But they did n't realize that God had given us the law of God , and he was innocent in his name .
GOLD:	Everyone was burned by this blast of heat , and they cursed the name of God , who had control over all these plagues . They did not repent of their sins and turn to God and give him glory .

ID:	583
INPUT:	Orduan , bere ikasleei esan zien : « Uzta ugaria da , baina langileak gutxi .
PRED:	Then his disciples said to his disciples , “ Let 's get a little , but it 's too late .
GOLD:	He said to his disciples , “ The harvest is great , but the workers are few .

ID:	584
INPUT:	Behin liburua irakurriz gero , ezarriozu harri bat eta bota Eufrates ibaira ,
PRED:	But if you read it again , you will cross the Euphrates River to the Euphrates River , and to the Euphrates River ,
GOLD:	When you have finished reading the scroll , tie it to a stone and throw it into the Euphrates River .

ID:	585
INPUT:	Morroiak esan zien : — Ez nazazue atzerarazi , Jaunak nire bidaiari bukaera ona eman dionez gero . Uztazue neure nagusiagana itzultzen .
PRED:	“ No , ” the servant told them , “ do n't let me return to my master 's home . If you return to my master 's home , you may return to my master . ”
GOLD:	But he said , “ Do n't delay me . The Lord has made my mission successful ; now send me back so I can return to my master . ”

ID:	586
INPUT:	Astia eman diot damu dadin , baina ez dio bere desleialkeriari uko egin nahi izan .
PRED:	For I have given him a desolate land , but he would not turn away from me .
GOLD:	I gave her time to repent , but she does not want to turn away from her immorality .

ID:	587
INPUT:	Bere erregealdiko hogeita hemeretzigarren urtean oinetan zuen gaitz handi batez gaixotua zegoen Asa ; baina gaixoaldian ere ez zuen Jaunarengana jo , sendagileengana baizik .
PRED:	In the first year of the reign of his reign , he healed the sick and healed the sick . But he was healed , but he refused to heal the sick .
GOLD:	In the thirty-ninth year of his reign , Asa developed a serious foot disease . Yet even with the severity of his disease , he did not seek the Lord 's help but turned only to his physicians .

ID:	588
INPUT:	« Benetan diotsuet : Zuek mundu honetan lotua , zeruan ere lotua geldituko da , eta zuek mundu honetan askatua , zeruan ere askatua geldituko da .
PRED:	“ I tell you the truth , you will be tied up in the heavens , and you will be buried in the heavens , and you will be released in heaven .
GOLD:	“ I tell you the truth , whatever you forbid on earth will be forbidden in heaven , and whatever you permit on earth will be permitted in heaven .

ID:	589
INPUT:	Izan ere , jakintsua buruargi ; ergela , ordea , ilunpetan dabil . Badakit , hala ere , biek etorkizun bera dutela .
PRED:	For I know that you are wise , but you know that the light of the darkness is near .
GOLD:	For the wise can see where they are going , but fools walk in the dark . ” Yet I saw that the wise and the foolish share the same fate .

ID:	590
INPUT:	Abere-bordetan ere sartu ziren , ardi eta gamelu ugari lapurtuz . Ondoren , Jerusalemera itzuli ziren .
PRED:	So they went into the fields and goats , goats , and camels returned to Jerusalem . Then they returned to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	While they were at Gerar , they attacked all the towns in that area , and terror from the Lord came upon the people there . As a result , a vast amount of plunder was taken from these towns , too .

ID:	591
INPUT:	Batzuek zutitu eta gezurrezko testigantza hau egin zuten Jesusen kontra :
PRED:	Then some of the people began to testify against Jesus .
GOLD:	Finally , some men stood up and gave this false testimony :

ID:	592
INPUT:	Ekardazue gero zeuen anaia gazteena , eta orduan jakingo dut zelatariak ez , baizik gizon zintzoak zaretela . Ondoren itzuliko dizuet anaia , eta lurralde honetan ibili ahal izango zarete ” » .
PRED:	So I will give you the youngest brother , and I will give you the wisdom of your brothers and sisters . But I will bring you back to this land , and I will return to you . ”
GOLD:	But you must bring your youngest brother back to me . Then I will know you are honest men and not spies . Then I will give you back your brother , and you may trade freely in the land . ' ”

ID:	593
INPUT:	Babiloniako Nabukodonosorren erregealdiko hemeretzigarren urtean , bosgarren hilaren hamarrean , Nebuzaradan , Babiloniako erregearen funtzionario eta guardiaburua , etorri zen Jerusalemera .
PRED:	On January 15 , during the eleventh year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , during the third year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , he came to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	On August 17 of that year , which was the nineteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard and an official of the Babylonian king , arrived in Jerusalem .

ID:	594
INPUT:	Beste herrietako jainkoek libratu ote dituzte beren lurraldeak Asiriako erregearen eskutik ?
PRED:	Has any other nations ever been able to rescue us from the power of the kings of Assyria ?
GOLD:	Have the gods of any other nations ever saved their people from the king of Assyria ?

ID:	595
INPUT:	« Ez egin idolorik , ez irudirik , goian zeruan , behean lurrean nahiz lurpeko uretan dagoenetik .
PRED:	“ You must not make any bird in the sky , or in the sky , or on the earth below the bottom of the earth .
GOLD:	“ You must not make for yourself an idol of any kind , or an image of anything in the heavens or on the earth or in the sea .

ID:	596
INPUT:	Bost orga tenpluaren eskuinaldean jarri zituen eta beste bostak ezkerraldean ; « Itsaso » zeritzan uraska handia , berriz , tenpluaren eskuinaldean jarri zuen , hego-ekialdera .
PRED:	Then he placed the five cherubim on the south side of the Temple , and the other side of the Sea was placed on the south side of the Sea .
GOLD:	He set five water carts on the south side of the Temple and five on the north side . The great bronze basin called the Sea was placed near the southeast corner of the Temple .

ID:	597
INPUT:	nork bere makila jaurti eta suge bihurtu zen . Baina Aaronen makilak irentsi egin zituen jakitun eta aztienak .
PRED:	So each of his men took a snake and threw it into the forest . But they took some of the men and attacked them .
GOLD:	They threw down their staffs , which also became serpents ! But then Aaron 's staff swallowed up their staffs .

ID:	598
INPUT:	Santuen kontra borroka egin eta haiek menderatzen ere utzi zioten ; eta arraza , herri , hizkuntza eta nazio ororen gain agintea eman zitzaion .
PRED:	He fought against the nations and against them , and he gave them authority over many nations , and he gave them authority over many nations .
GOLD:	And the beast was allowed to wage war against God 's holy people and to conquer them . And he was given authority to rule over every tribe and people and language and nation .

ID:	599
INPUT:	35 , 1
PRED:	Building the Ark of the Covenant
GOLD:	Cities of Refuge

ID:	600
INPUT:	Ez nago jadanik harekin haserre . Sasiak eta laharrakaurkitzen badizkiot , eraso eta bat-batean erre egingo dut .
PRED:	I will fulfill my covenant with him , and I will fulfill my covenant with him , and I will fulfill my covenant with him .
GOLD:	My anger will be gone.If I find briers and thorns growing , I will attack them ; I will burn them up —

ID:	601
INPUT:	Emakume zuhurrak eraiki egiten du etxea , zentzugabeak bere eskuez desegin .
PRED:	A wise woman commits adultery , but fools are wise , but fools do n't hurt her .
GOLD:	A wise woman builds her home , but a foolish woman tears it down with her own hands .

ID:	602
INPUT:	Hornitu zortzi zentimetro zabaleko uztai batez , eta egin urrezko ertza uztaiari .
PRED:	These are the same size of the tribe of Asher , and a gold molding around the border .
GOLD:	Decorate it with a 3-inch border all around , and run a gold molding along the border .

ID:	603
INPUT:	Eta hiriko jendeak , zazpigarren egun hartan , ilunabarra baino lehen , esan zion Samsoni : « Zer eztia baino gozoagorik ? Zer lehoia baino indartsuagorik ? » Samsonek erantzun zien : « Nire bigantxarekingoldatu ez bazenute , ez zenuketen inoiz ere asmatuko » .
PRED:	On that same day the people of the town came to him and said to him , “ What are you like a lion ? ” And Samson asked , “ What do you think about me ? ” And Samson replied , “ I would n't marry her ? ”
GOLD:	So before sunset of the seventh day , the men of the town came to Samson with their answer : “ What is sweeter than honey ? What is stronger than a lion ? ” Samson replied , “ If you had n't plowed with my heifer , you would n't have solved my riddle ! ”

ID:	604
INPUT:	Hona hemen ni , mihiari eragin eta iragarpenak botatzen diharduten profeten kontra .
PRED:	These are the words of Anyone who speaks against me , and anyone who speaks against me .
GOLD:	I am against these smooth-tongued prophets who say , ‘ This prophecy is from the Lord ! '

ID:	605
INPUT:	Ni , berriz , zeuen esku naukazue ; egin nirekin ongi eta zuzen iruditzen zaizuena .
PRED:	But you have made me right with me , and you have made me right with me .
GOLD:	As for me , I am in your hands — do with me as you think best .

ID:	606
INPUT:	honela esaten baita Liburu Santuan zazpigarren egunaz : Zazpigarren egunean atseden hartu zuen Jainkoak berak eginiko lan guztitik .
PRED:	For the Scriptures say , “ On the seventh day of the Holy Place , the seventh day of the covenant God had made for you . ”
GOLD:	We know it is ready because of the place in the Scriptures where it mentions the seventh day : “ On the seventh day God rested from all his work . ”

ID:	607
INPUT:	Moabeko erregeak mezulariak bidali zizkion Beorren seme Balaami Eufrates ondoko Petor hirira , a<unk> tarren lurraldera , mandatu hau emateko : « Herri bat atera da Egiptotik eta lurralde osoa estali du ; orain gure aurrean kokatua dago .
PRED:	The king of Moab sent this message to King Balak son of Beor to the Euphrates River : “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will bring you out of Egypt . '
GOLD:	sent messengers to call Balaam son of Beor , who was living in his native land of Pethor near the Euphrates River . His message said : “ Look , a vast horde of people has arrived from Egypt . They cover the face of the earth and are threatening me .

ID:	608
INPUT:	« Legeak agindua du beste hau ere : Bere emaztea uzten duenak eman diezaiola dibortzio-agiria .
PRED:	“ The law has given another command : If a man gives his wife to his wife , he has given his wife to his wife .
GOLD:	“ You have heard the law that says , ‘ A man can divorce his wife by merely giving her a written notice of divorce . '

ID:	609
INPUT:	Zuek , samariarrok , ez dakizue zer adoratzen duzuen ; guk badakigu zer adoratzen dugun , salbamena juduongandik baitator .
PRED:	You say , “ You are n't going to know what we are doing , but we are Jews who are saved from the Jews . ”
GOLD:	You Samaritans know very little about the one you worship , while we Jews know all about him , for salvation comes through the Jews .

ID:	610
INPUT:	« Betiko lege izango duzue hau : zazpigarren hilaren hamarrean barau egingo duzue ; ez duzue inolako lanik egingo , ez bertakoek , ez zuen artean bizi diren etorkinek ,
PRED:	“ You must always eat the first month of the first month . If you do this , you must do not eat any of these instructions , you must not return to the foreigners living among you .
GOLD:	“ On the tenth day of the appointed month in early autumn , you must deny yourselves . Neither native-born Israelites nor foreigners living among you may do any kind of work . This is a permanent law for you .

ID:	611
INPUT:	Orduan , haurraren arrebak esan zion : — Nahi al duzu hebrear inude baten bila joatea , haurra hazteko ?
PRED:	Then the child asked her , “ Are you willing to give birth to a Hebrew baby ? ”
GOLD:	Then the baby 's sister approached the princess . “ Should I go and find one of the Hebrew women to nurse the baby for you ? ” she asked .

ID:	612
INPUT:	Herriak Pazkoa ospatu
PRED:	The Second Passover
GOLD:	Celebration of Passover

ID:	613
INPUT:	Tzelofhadek , ordea — Tzelofhad Heferren semea zen , hau Galaadena eta hau Manasesen seme Makirrena — , ez zuen semerik izan , alabak baizik ; alaben izenak Mahla , Noa , Hogla , Milka eta Tirtza ziren .
PRED:	The daughters of Zelophehad , Zelophehad , was the father of Zelophehad , the daughter of Zelophehad , was the son of Noah , the daughter of Makir , son of Noah , was the son of Noah . ( Milcah , Tirzah , Tirzah , Milcah , and Tirzah . )
GOLD:	However , Zelophehad , a descendant of Hepher son of Gilead , son of Makir , son of Manasseh , had no sons . He had only daughters , whose names were Mahlah , Noah , Hoglah , Milcah , and Tirzah .

ID:	614
INPUT:	Gurasoek galdetu zioten : — Ez al da gure ahaideen artean eta gure herrian emakumerik , filistear jentil arrotz horiengana emazte bila joan gabe ? Samsonek ihardetsi zion aitari : — Huraxe dut , baina , atsegin . Hartzazu niretzat .
PRED:	“ Is n't it right ? ” the young man asked . “ Do n't you realize that the Philistines are young among us ? ” But Samson replied , “ But please let me go back to the Philistines ? ” But Samson replied , “ I will take care for you . ”
GOLD:	His father and mother objected . “ Is n't there even one woman in our tribe or among all the Israelites you could marry ? ” they asked . “ Why must you go to the pagan Philistines to find a wife ? ” But Samson told his father , “ Get her for me ! She looks good to me . ”

ID:	615
INPUT:	Ni neu madarikatua izatea — Kristorengandik aldendua izatea — ere onartuko nuke , baldin eta hori nire odoleko senideen onerako balitz .
PRED:	If I were a believer , I would be a believer , if it would be a believer , then if it would be a believer , then if it would be a believer , it would be a believer .
GOLD:	for my people , my Jewish brothers and sisters . I would be willing to be forever cursed — cut off from Christ ! — if that would save them .

ID:	616
INPUT:	Hau ikustean , errukitu egin zitzaion Jauna eta esan zion : « Ez egin negarrik » .
PRED:	When the Lord saw this , he said to him , “ Lord , do n't weep . ”
GOLD:	When the Lord saw her , his heart overflowed with compassion . “ Do n't cry ! ” he said .

ID:	617
INPUT:	Hatzar-Gada , Hexmon , Bet-Pelet ,
PRED:	Besides , there were Maon , Hammon , Beth-peor ,
GOLD:	Hazar-gaddah , Heshmon , Beth-pelet ,

ID:	618
INPUT:	Jesu Kristo gure Jaunak berak eta Jainko gure Aitak — maite izan gaituenak eta betiereko kontsolamendua eta halako itxaropen zoragarria dohainik eman dizkigunak —
PRED:	For our Lord Jesus Christ , the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , who loved us and comfort them .
GOLD:	Now may our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God our Father , who loved us and by his grace gave us eternal comfort and a wonderful hope ,

ID:	619
INPUT:	Hori izan zen isakartarren ondarea , senitarteka banatua , aipaturiko hiri eta herrixkak barne .
PRED:	These were the homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Levi , their surrounding villages , and their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	The homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Issachar included these towns and their surrounding villages .

ID:	620
INPUT:	adar-punta ebaki , merkatari-herrialdera eramaneta tratularien hiri bateanlandatu zuen .
PRED:	He also built a target for the walls of the fortified towns and villages .
GOLD:	and plucked off its highest branch.He carried it away to a city filled with merchants.He planted it in a city of traders .

ID:	621
INPUT:	Errespeta beza Jauna lur osoak , ikara bitez haren aurrean munduko biztanle guztiak .
PRED:	Fear of the Lord , all the earth will praise him in all the earth .
GOLD:	Let the whole world fear the Lord , and let everyone stand in awe of him .

ID:	622
INPUT:	Hitz haiek aditzen ari zela , Jaunaren espirituak hartu zuen Saul eta amorru bizitan jarri zen .
PRED:	As Saul realized that the Spirit of the Lord was in the wilderness , he went out into the wilderness .
GOLD:	Then the Spirit of God came powerfully upon Saul , and he became very angry .

ID:	623
INPUT:	Ez eraman prostituzioan ateratako dirurik Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren tenplura botoren bat betetzeko eskaintza gisa , higuingarri baitzaio Jaunari zuen Jainkoari , bai gizonezkoen , bai emakumezkoen prostituzioa .
PRED:	Do not defile yourselves by worshiping the Lord your God . You must not commit any detestable practices of the Temple of the Lord your God , for you have committed adultery with the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Do not charge interest on the loans you make to a fellow Israelite , whether you loan money , or food , or anything else .

ID:	624
INPUT:	Bat-batean , nolako hondamena ! Haienak egin du , ikaragarrizko azkenaz .
PRED:	Suddenly , the Lord says , “ Look ! The Lord has done great things !
GOLD:	In an instant they are destroyed , completely swept away by terrors .

ID:	625
INPUT:	esan zien : — Benetan diotsuet : Berriro haurren antzeko bihurtzen ez bazarete , ez zarete sartuko Jainkoaren erreinuan .
PRED:	“ I tell you the truth , ” he said , “ if you are children of the Kingdom of Heaven will never enter the Kingdom of Heaven . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ I tell you the truth , unless you turn from your sins and become like little children , you will never get into the Kingdom of Heaven .

ID:	626
INPUT:	Bere senideari gorroto diona , berriz , ilunpetan dago , ilunpetan dabil eta ez daki nora doan , ilunak itsutu egin baitizkio begiak
PRED:	My brothers and sisters , if they refuse to obey me , they wo n't look at night , for the Lord has spoken !
GOLD:	But anyone who hates a fellow believer is still living and walking in darkness . Such a person does not know the way to go , having been blinded by the darkness .

ID:	627
INPUT:	Lur-itsasoei zigorra
PRED:	The Red Sea
GOLD:	Restoration for Israel

ID:	628
INPUT:	herrialde horretan Noe , Daniel eta Job baleude , nik , Jainko Jaunak , zin dagit neure biziarengatik , ez dutela seme-alabarik ere bizirik aterako . Beraiek bakarrik jarraituko dute bizirik beren zintzotasunagatik .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Daniel , Job , the Sovereign Lord , the God of my people , says : “ I will not be able to save them from their own children . ”
GOLD:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , even if Noah , Daniel , and Job were there , they would n't be able to save their own sons or daughters . They alone would be saved by their righteousness .

ID:	629
INPUT:	« Ez eman biderik zeuen barrenean anaiarenganako gorrotoari ; baina ez izan herritarra zentzarazteko beldur ere , harengatik bekaturik egin ez dezazuen .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid of your brother , but do n't be afraid of your brothers . Do n't be afraid of them , but do n't be afraid of them .
GOLD:	“ Do not nurse hatred in your heart for any of your relatives . Confront people directly so you will not be held guilty for their sin .

ID:	630
INPUT:	Zuk , gizaseme , egin erbesteratuarena : hartu behar-beharrezkoa eta zoaz erbestera egun-argiz beraien aurrean . Zauden lekutik beste baterantz joango zara beraien aurrean . Agian , orduan ohartuko dira herri errebeldea dela .
PRED:	“ Son of man , make another man a stone for the center of the other men . You must be put to the center of your flocks and herds , but you will be terrified by the center of your people . ”
GOLD:	“ So now , son of man , pretend you are being sent into exile . Pack the few items an exile could carry , and leave your home to go somewhere else . Do this right in front of the people so they can see you . For perhaps they will pay attention to this , even though they are such rebels .

ID:	631
INPUT:	hau Jeserena , hau Jobedena , hau Boozena , hau Salarena , hau Naasonena ,
PRED:	was the son of Jesse , the son of Jesse was the son of Boaz was the son of Jesse .
GOLD:	David was the son of Jesse.Jesse was the son of Obed.Obed was the son of Boaz.Boaz was the son of Salmon.Salmon was the son of Nahshon .

ID:	632
INPUT:	Babiloniaren aurkako mezua . Ikaragarria Jainkoak agertu didana : hor dator basamortutik , lurralde beldurgarritik , Negev aldean sortzen direnhaize-zurrunbiloen antzera , traidorea traizio eginez , hondatzailea hondamena zabalduz . Egin eraso , elamdarrok ! Setiatu hiria , mediarrok ! Jainkoak isilarazten ditu aieneak !
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies is coming from the land of the Negev , the land of the Negev , the Negev , lies in the Negev , and the houses of the Negev .
GOLD:	This message came to me concerning Babylon — the desert by the sea : Disaster is roaring down on you from the desert , like a whirlwind sweeping in from the Negev .

ID:	633
INPUT:	eta Saraik esan zion Abrami : « Begira , Jaunak agor egin nau . Elkar zaitez , bada , nire mirabearekin . Beharbada , izango dut semerik haren bitartez » . Abramek onartu egin zuen Sarairen proposamena ,
PRED:	So Sarai , Abram 's servant , said to Abram , “ The Lord has punished me if I have sex with you , I will have sex with you , and I will have a son of Abraham . ”
GOLD:	So Sarai said to Abram , “ The Lord has prevented me from having children . Go and sleep with my servant . Perhaps I can have children through her . ” And Abram agreed with Sarai 's proposal .

ID:	634
INPUT:	norbaitek nahiz Israel zure herri osoak , bere okerraz eta atsekabeaz oharturik , tenplu honetarantz eskuak luzatuz , edozein otoitz nahiz eskari egiten badizu ,
PRED:	“ If you pray to the people of Israel and pray to the Lord your God ,
GOLD:	and if your people Israel pray about their troubles or sorrow , raising their hands toward this Temple ,

ID:	635
INPUT:	Entzun , arren , herri ergel eta zentzugabea : Badituzue begiak , baina ez duzue ikusten , belarriak ere bai , baina entzuten ez .
PRED:	Listen , you people of the nations ! You are foolish and foolish , but you do n't see , but you do n't understand what they see .
GOLD:	Listen , you foolish and senseless people , with eyes that do not seeand ears that do not hear .

ID:	636
INPUT:	Idatz iezaiozu Esmirnako eliz elkartearen aingeruari : Hona zer dioen lehenak eta azkenak , hila zegoenak eta bizira itzuli zenak :
PRED:	Write this letter to the angel of the church in Jerusalem : “ This is what the angel of the Lord says : The one who sent you back to the city and said ,
GOLD:	“ Write this letter to the angel of the church in Smyrna . This is the message from the one who is the First and the Last , who was dead but is now alive :

ID:	637
INPUT:	Izan ere , Kristoren maitasunak bultzatzen gaitu , jakinik bat denengatik hil dela eta , ondorioz , denak hil direla .
PRED:	For the love of Christ is raised from the power of Christ , and he killed someone who believes in Christ 's kindness .
GOLD:	Either way , Christ 's love controls us . Since we believe that Christ died for all , we also believe that we have all died to our old life .

ID:	638
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Horiek horrela , nola barkatu zuri ? Zure seme-alabek zapuztu egin naute , sasijainkoen izenean egiten dute zin ; nik ase nitueneta haiek adulterio egin dute , emagalduen etxerazalapartan joanez .
PRED:	“ But this is what the Lord says : Because you have sinned against me , you have rejected me , and you have rejected me by worshiping other gods .
GOLD:	“ How can I pardon you ? For even your children have turned from me.They have sworn by gods that are not gods at all ! I fed my people until they were full.But they thanked me by committing adulteryand lining up at the brothels .

ID:	639
INPUT:	Jaunak berak emango dizue , bada , ezaugarria : hona , andre gaztea haurdun dagoeta semea izango du , eta Emmanuel , hau da , “ Jainkoa gurekin ” , jarriko dio izen .
PRED:	The Lord will give you a young child , a young child , a young child , and a child is a child . She will be a son named after her , and she will be with him .
GOLD:	All right then , the Lord himself will give you the sign . Look ! The virgin will conceive a child ! She will give birth to a son and will call him Immanuel ( which means ‘ God is with us ' ) .

ID:	640
INPUT:	Hain gogor setiatu zuen , izugarrizko gosetea izan baitzen Samarian ; astaburu bakar batek zilarrezko laurogei txanpon balio zuen , eta kilo erdi uso-zirinek zilarrezko bost txanpon .
PRED:	So he became very angry with a thousand pieces of silver , and a total of silver was valued at fifteen pieces of silver . He was valued at five pieces of silver , and five pieces of silver .
GOLD:	As a result , there was a great famine in the city . The siege lasted so long that a donkey 's head sold for eighty pieces of silver , and a cup of dove 's dung sold for five pieces of silver .

ID:	641
INPUT:	« Ez biezaio inork herritarrari kalterik egin ; horrela erakutsiko duzue begirune diozuela zeuen Jainkoari . Neu naiz Jauna , zuen Jainkoa .
PRED:	“ Do not judge the people of Israel . You must not judge yourselves for yourselves , for I am the Lord your God . I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Show your fear of God by not taking advantage of each other . I am the Lord your God .

ID:	642
INPUT:	Jesus zerura igo
PRED:	The First Disciples
GOLD:	Matthias Replaces Judas

ID:	643
INPUT:	« Txoriak bezala , dardaraz etorriko dira Egiptotik , usoak bezala , Asiriatik . Beren etxeetanjarriko ditut bizitzen . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	“ When you come from Egypt , I will make a bird from Egypt , ” says the Lord . “ I will destroy them , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Like a flock of birds , they will come from Egypt.Trembling like doves , they will return from Assyria.And I will bring them home again , ” says the Lord .

ID:	644
INPUT:	Nik esan nuen : « Ai , Jauna , nola engainatu dituzunherri hau eta Jerusalem ! Bakea zenien iragarrieta , ostera , ezpata daukate zintzurrean » .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you , O Lord , ” I said , “ this is what the Lord says : I am telling you , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will punish you in the land of Babylon . '
GOLD:	Then I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , the people have been deceived by what you said , for you promised peace for Jerusalem.But the sword is held at their throats ! ”

ID:	645
INPUT:	Arranoa bezalaaltxatuko bazina ere , habia izarretan egingo bazenu ere , bota egingo zintuzket handik .
PRED:	I will give you a solemn oath , and I will establish you with your name , and I will drive you out of the nations .
GOLD:	But even if you soar as high as eaglesand build your nest among the stars , I will bring you crashing down , ” says the Lord .

ID:	646
INPUT:	Lehenengoari agindu hau eman zion : « Esau nire anaiak zurekin topo egin eta galdegingo dizunean : “ Norena zara ? Nora zoaz ? Norena da aurrean daramazun abere-taldea ? ” ,
PRED:	So Esau gave this command to Esau : “ I will give you your brother Esau , Esau , and you will ask , ‘ Where are you going to go ? '
GOLD:	You must reply , ‘ They belong to your servant Jacob , but they are a gift for his master Esau . Look , he is coming right behind us . ' ”

ID:	647
INPUT:	Harria astuna da , harea pisua ; are astunagoa burugabearen zitalkeria .
PRED:	Its branches are like an eagle , but the mouth of an eagle on its head .
GOLD:	A stone is heavy and sand is weighty , but the resentment caused by a fool is even heavier .

ID:	648
INPUT:	Gari-sorten Jaia :
PRED:	The Festival of Harvest
GOLD:	The Day of Atonement

ID:	649
INPUT:	Landu iezaiozue lurra heuk , heure seme-alabek eta morroiek ; eramaiozue uzta hire nagusiaren etxekoen janari izan dadin . Hire nagusiaren biloba Mefi-Boxetek nire mahaian jango dik beti . Tzibak hamabost seme-alaba zituen eta hogei morroi .
PRED:	Take your servant , and go home to the ground . Take your master 's home and bury him in the City of Mephibosheth , for he was buried in the City of Mephibosheth . He also gave his daughter Mephibosheth , who was twenty years old or older son of Mephibosheth .
GOLD:	You and your sons and servants are to farm the land for him to produce food for your master 's household . But Mephibosheth , your master 's grandson , will eat here at my table . ” ( Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants . )

ID:	650
INPUT:	Antzaldaketa : nekaldi ondoko aintza aurrez agertu
PRED:	The Transfiguration
GOLD:	The Transfiguration

ID:	651
INPUT:	Behinola , Salomonen ama Betsaberengana etorri zen Adonias , Hagiten semea . Betsabek galdetu zion : — Bake asmotan al zatoz ? Adoniasek erantzun : — Bai , bake asmotan .
PRED:	Then Solomon came to Solomon and asked him , “ Am I the son of Amon , the son of Ahab ? ” “ Yes , ” Adonijah replied . “ Yes , I am here ! ”
GOLD:	One day Adonijah , whose mother was Haggith , came to see Bathsheba , Solomon 's mother . “ Have you come with peaceful intentions ? ” she asked him . “ Yes , ” he said , “ I come in peace .

ID:	652
INPUT:	Presta zaitez , adorerik baduzu , nire galderei erantzuteko .
PRED:	“ Get up and prepare a meal for me , for I will answer you . ”
GOLD:	Brace yourself like a man , because I have some questions for you , and you must answer them .

ID:	653
INPUT:	Saulek zerbitzariei : — Bila ezazue , bada , zitara ongi jotzen dakien norbait , eta ekarri niregana .
PRED:	But Saul said to his servants , “ If you go out into the fields , you can find some food to me . ”
GOLD:	“ All right , ” Saul said . “ Find me someone who plays well , and bring him here . ”

ID:	654
INPUT:	Joabek , berriz , utzi zion Abnerren ondoren ibiltzeari eta gizon guztiak bildu zituen . Hemeretzi gizon falta ziren Daviden zerbitzarietarik , Asahelez gainera .
PRED:	So Joab left Abner and put all his men on the road . And Joab and all the men who had been killed by David .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Joab and his men also returned home . When Joab counted his casualties , he discovered that only 19 men were missing in addition to Asahel .

ID:	655
INPUT:	gero , beste guztiei eman nien : Egiptoko errege faraoiari , ministro , buruzagi eta herri guztiari ,
PRED:	Then I gave all his officials to Pharaoh , king of Egypt , all his officials , officials , officials , and all the people of Egypt .
GOLD:	I gave the cup to Pharaoh , king of Egypt , his attendants , his officials , and all his people ,

ID:	656
INPUT:	« Entzun ! Atera zen behin batean ereilea hazia ereitera .
PRED:	“ Listen to what I am saying , ‘ Listen to the farmer who plants seed . '
GOLD:	“ Listen ! A farmer went out to plant some seed .

ID:	657
INPUT:	Noek aldarea eraiki zion Jaunari , eta , kutsatu gabeko abere eta hegazti batzuk harturik , erre-oparitzat eskaini zituen aldarean .
PRED:	Then Noah built an altar to the Lord and gave it to the young goat and a young goat as a burnt offering .
GOLD:	Then Noah built an altar to the Lord , and there he sacrificed as burnt offerings the animals and birds that had been approved for that purpose .

ID:	658
INPUT:	Axdod jende arrotzez beteko da . Honela dio Jaunak : « Horrela ezereztuko dutfilistearren harrokeria ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will destroy the Philistines , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Foreigners will occupy the city of Ashdod.I will destroy the pride of the Philistines .

ID:	659
INPUT:	Azpil batean burua ekarri eta neskatxari eman zioten , eta honek amari .
PRED:	Then they brought the head to the head and gave it to the girl .
GOLD:	and his head was brought on a tray and given to the girl , who took it to her mother .

ID:	660
INPUT:	Geziak jaurtiz sakabanatu zituen , tximista eginez ihes eragin .
PRED:	Then he threw them away , and he threw them into a lightning .
GOLD:	Then at your command , O Lord , at the blast of your breath , the bottom of the sea could be seen , and the foundations of the earth were laid bare .

ID:	661
INPUT:	horregatik , su emango diotTeman hiriari , eta Botzra hiriko jauregiakirentsi egingo ditu » .
PRED:	So I will send down fire on the city of Rabbah , and it will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	So I will send down fire on Teman , and the fortresses of Bozrah will be destroyed . ”

ID:	662
INPUT:	Kezkak gizona bihozgabetzen du , hitz gozoak adore ematen .
PRED:	Anyone who speaks to the person who speaks to the person who speaks to the person who speaks to Christ .
GOLD:	Worry weighs a person down ; an encouraging word cheers a person up .

ID:	663
INPUT:	Jagoleak , arerioa datorrela ikustean , adarra jotzen du jendea ohartarazteko .
PRED:	When the people see that they are coming , they are terrified by the people of the town .
GOLD:	When the watchman sees the enemy coming , he sounds the alarm to warn the people .

ID:	664
INPUT:	Horregatik , toki hari Beer-Xeba deritzo — hau da , « Zin-Putzu » — , bertan biek zin egin zutelako .
PRED:	This is the homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Dan : “ The people of Judah will not be rebuilt . ”
GOLD:	Then he named the place Beersheba ( which means “ well of the oath ” ) , because that was where they had sworn the oath .

ID:	665
INPUT:	Berriro jaso nituen begiak eta liburu bat ikusi nuen hegan .
PRED:	Then I looked up and saw a scroll , and I saw a scroll in it .
GOLD:	I looked up again and saw a scroll flying through the air .

ID:	666
INPUT:	eta hurrengo ibilaldietan , Matanatik Nahalielera , Nahalieletik Bamotera ,
PRED:	They left Hazeroth and camped at Marah . They left Hazeroth and camped at Marah .
GOLD:	Nahaliel , and Bamoth .

ID:	667
INPUT:	Abixaik esan zion Davidi : — Jainkoak zeure esku jarri dizu gaur etsaia . Uztazu lantza-kolpe batez lurrari josten ; ez dut birritan jo beharrik izango .
PRED:	“ O Lord your God , ” Hushai replied . “ I have put your hand on your enemies and put it on the ground . If you do n't sleep , I would n't have a single piece of stones . ”
GOLD:	“ God has surely handed your enemy over to you this time ! ” Abishai whispered to David . “ Let me pin him to the ground with one thrust of the spear ; I wo n't need to strike twice ! ”

ID:	668
INPUT:	bertan behera utzi zuen Xiloko egoitza , gizartean bizitzeko eraiki zuen etxola .
PRED:	He placed the Tabernacle at Shiloh in the Tabernacle , where he set up the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Then he abandoned his dwelling at Shiloh , the Tabernacle where he had lived among the people .

ID:	669
INPUT:	Gerra sorraraziko dut zuen aurka , ituna hausteagatik merezi duzuen zigorra emateko ; hirietan babestuko zarete , baina izurria sortuko dut bertan eta etsaien esku eroriko zarete .
PRED:	I will raise up your fist against you , and I will punish you for your enemies , but I will scatter them on the wall of the enemy . I will hand them over to you .
GOLD:	I will send armies against you to carry out the curse of the covenant you have broken . When you run to your towns for safety , I will send a plague to destroy you there , and you will be handed over to your enemies .

ID:	670
INPUT:	Gauza asko ikusi ditu , baina gogoan hartu ez ; zabalik ditu belarriak , baina ezer entzuten ez .
PRED:	For when I saw many things , they did n't understand what they were saying , but they are n't able to hear what they say .
GOLD:	You see and recognize what is rightbut refuse to act on it.You hear with your ears , but you do n't really listen . ”

ID:	671
INPUT:	Jaunak Baxaren aurka Jehu profetaren bidez esan bezala , Zimrik Baxaren etxe osoa suntsitu zuen , beraz .
PRED:	The Lord spoke to King Baasha of Babylon , just as Baasha had said . So Zimri destroyed the entire family of Baasha , just as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	So Zimri destroyed the dynasty of Baasha as the Lord had promised through the prophet Jehu .

ID:	672
INPUT:	Judako erregeek ezarriak zituzten sasiapaizak Judako hirixka eta Jerusalem inguruetako kultu-lekuetan , toki horietan intsentsua erre zezaten ; Josiasek kendu egin zituen halakoak ; baita Baali , eguzki nahiz ilargiari nahiz izar-multzo eta izar guztiei intsentsua erretzen zietenak ere .
PRED:	Then the priests stationed all the towns of Judah and Jerusalem in Jerusalem , along with all the incense altars that King Josiah of Judah and Jerusalem , along with the incense altar and burned incense there . He also removed the incense altars and burned incense altars , as well as well as the Lord had commanded .
GOLD:	He did away with the idolatrous priests , who had been appointed by the previous kings of Judah , for they had offered sacrifices at the pagan shrines throughout Judah and even in the vicinity of Jerusalem . They had also offered sacrifices to Baal , and to the sun , the moon , the constellations , and to all the powers of the heavens .

ID:	673
INPUT:	Hau guztia zuretzat ematen du Araunak , oi errege . Araunak beste hau ere esan zion erregeari : — Izan dezala atsegin zuregan Jaunak , zeure Jainkoak !
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ You have made this king , ” the king said , “ for he is your God ! ”
GOLD:	I will give it all to you , Your Majesty , and may the Lord your God accept your sacrifice . ”

ID:	674
INPUT:	Eta hamarretik bat bakarrabertan gelditzen bada , huraxe ere suari emango diote , haritza eta terebintoa bezala : moztu eta gero , ondoa besterik ez zaie gelditzen ; baina ondo horretatikkimu santua erneko da berriro .
PRED:	And if one of you remain faithful in the presence of the Lord , then you will be cut off from the herd of Asia , you will be cut off from the holy land , and it will be holy .
GOLD:	If even a tenth — a remnant — survive , it will be invaded again and burned.But as a terebinth or oak tree leaves a stump when it is cut down , so Israel 's stump will be a holy seed . ”

ID:	675
INPUT:	« Ai zuek , lege-maisu eta fariseu itxurazaleok ! Profeten hilobiak eraikitzen eta gizon zintzoen hilarriak apaintzen dituzue ,
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law and teachers of religious law ! You are teachers of religious law , but you are like children who are teachers of religious law .
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law and you Pharisees . Hypocrites ! For you build tombs for the prophets your ancestors killed , and you decorate the monuments of the godly people your ancestors destroyed .

ID:	676
INPUT:	Ez itzazue gogor erabil ; horrela erakutsiko duzue begirune diozuela zeuen Jainkoari .
PRED:	Do n't let them die ! Do n't let them die . Instead , you will know that God is merciful to you .
GOLD:	Show your fear of God by not treating them harshly .

ID:	677
INPUT:	Aldi luze baten ondoren , hil egin zen Egiptoko erregea . Israeldarrek , bitartean , intziri eta deiadarka ziharduten esklabotzapean . Haiek esklabotzaren barrendik laguntza eske eginiko garrasia Jainkoarenganaino iritsi zen .
PRED:	At that time the king of Egypt died , and the king of Israel called out of Egypt to rescue the people of Israel from their slavery in Egypt .
GOLD:	Years passed , and the king of Egypt died . But the Israelites continued to groan under their burden of slavery . They cried out for help , and their cry rose up to God .

ID:	678
INPUT:	Eskatu Jainkoari , ihes egin beharra neguan edo larunbatez gerta ez dakizuen .
PRED:	Then God sent him to the place of worship , and he did n't escape the Sabbath day of the Sabbath .
GOLD:	And pray that your flight will not be in winter or on the Sabbath .

ID:	679
INPUT:	Haietariko batzuek , ordea , fariseuengana joan eta Jesusek egin zuena kontatu zieten .
PRED:	But some of the Pharisees and the Pharisees heard what Jesus had happened to them .
GOLD:	But some went to the Pharisees and told them what Jesus had done .

ID:	680
INPUT:	Israeldar ez ziren hitita , amortar , periztar , hibiar eta jebustarren artetik bizirik gelditu zirenak ,
PRED:	The people of Israel did not drive out the Amorites , Amorites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites , and Jebusites .
GOLD:	There were still some people living in the land who were not Israelites , including the Hittites , Amorites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites .

ID:	681
INPUT:	Erregeak , berriro : — Galdegizu noren semea den mutiko hori .
PRED:	“ Just ask me , ” the king said . “ You are a boy 's son . ”
GOLD:	“ Well , find out who he is ! ” the king told him .

ID:	682
INPUT:	Gaiztoari , berriz , hau diotso Jainkoak : « Nola aipa ditzakezu nire arauak , nola ahotan hartu nirekiko ituna ,
PRED:	But this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ O God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says :
GOLD:	But God says to the wicked : “ Why bother reciting my decreesand pretending to obey my covenant ?

ID:	683
INPUT:	Hiru seme zaharrenak Saulekin joanak ziren gudura . Hona gudura joanak ziren hiru semeen izenak : Eliab zaharrena , Abinadab bigarrena eta Xama hirugarrena .
PRED:	The three sons of Saul went with Saul and told them , “ These three sons are the sons of Saul 's sons , Nadab , Abihu , and Ithamar . ”
GOLD:	Jesse 's three oldest sons — Eliab , Abinadab , and Shimea — had already joined Saul 's army to fight the Philistines .

ID:	684
INPUT:	Hazia gainera erori zaion arropa nahiz larrua uretan garbituko da eta kutsaturik geldituko arratsa arte .
PRED:	The entire animal must be ceremonially unclean until he is ceremonially unclean until evening . He will remain unclean until evening .
GOLD:	Any clothing or leather with semen on it must be washed in water , and it will remain unclean until evening .

ID:	685
INPUT:	Erasto Korinton gelditu zen ; Trofimo gaixorik utzi nuen Mileton .
PRED:	Paul remained in Corinth , and he left the pool of believers in Macedonia .
GOLD:	Erastus stayed at Corinth , and I left Trophimus sick at Miletus .

ID:	686
INPUT:	Ni Abrahamen , Isaaken eta Jakoben Jainkoa naiz ? Ez da hildakoen Jainkoa , biziena baizik .
PRED:	This is the God of Abraham , the God of Jacob , says , “ I am the God of Jacob , the God of Israel . ”
GOLD:	‘ I am the God of Abraham , the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob . ' So he is the God of the living , not the dead . ”

ID:	687
INPUT:	Belen eta Netofako gizonak <unk> ;
PRED:	The family of Hashum223
GOLD:	The people of Bethlehem and Netophah188

ID:	688
INPUT:	Absalomen gudarostea menderatua
PRED:	Absalom 's Revenge on Abimelech
GOLD:	Absalom 's Defeat and Death

ID:	689
INPUT:	Han hornituko zaituztet janariz zeu , zure etxekoak eta zure abere-taldeak . Ez zaizu ezer faltako , beste bost gose-urte gelditzen diren arren » .
PRED:	I will take you out of my house , and you will have five loaves of flocks and herds and herds , but you wo n't have five years . ”
GOLD:	I will take care of you there , for there are still five years of famine ahead of us . Otherwise you , your household , and all your animals will starve . ' ”

ID:	690
INPUT:	Horregatik , senideok , nik ere , Jainkoaren salbamen-asmoa iragartzera joan nintzaizuenean , ez nizuen hitz egin giza jakinduriazko hizkera landua erabiliz .
PRED:	Therefore , dear brothers and sisters , I preached the word of God in my salvation . I did n't want you to understand what I had done to you .
GOLD:	When I first came to you , dear brothers and sisters , I did n't use lofty words and impressive wisdom to tell you God 's secret plan .

ID:	691
INPUT:	mundu honetan askoz gehiago jasoko du , eta datorren munduan betiko bizia .
PRED:	He will have more more than many more than this world , and he will live in this world .
GOLD:	will be repaid many times over in this life , and will have eternal life in the world to come . ”

ID:	692
INPUT:	Behera begiratu beharko dutebegi harroek , makurtu beharko dugiza handikeriak . Jauna bakarrik agertuko dagarai egun hartan .
PRED:	They will be proud and proud , and they will be able to be proud and will be brought to the Lord .
GOLD:	Human pride will be brought down , and human arrogance will be humbled.Only the Lord will be exaltedon that day of judgment .

ID:	693
INPUT:	Jainko arrotz horren laguntzaz erasoko die gotorlekuei . Ohorez beteko ditu jainko hori onartzen dutenak , jende askoren agintari egingo ditu eta lurrak emango dizkie sari .
PRED:	He will rescue them from the power of God . He will give them authority to the nations of the world , and he will give them authority to many nations .
GOLD:	Claiming this foreign god 's help , he will attack the strongest fortresses . He will honor those who submit to him , appointing them to positions of authority and dividing the land among them as their reward .

ID:	694
INPUT:	Ez al dakizue Jainkoaren tenplu zaretela eta Jainkoaren Espiritua zuengan bizi dela ?
PRED:	Do n't you realize that you are the Spirit of God and the living in the Temple of God ?
GOLD:	Do n't you realize that all of you together are the temple of God and that the Spirit of God lives in you ?

ID:	695
INPUT:	Tesalonikarrak salbamenerako aukeratuak
PRED:	Paul 's Silas and Silas
GOLD:	Believers Should Stand Firm

ID:	696
INPUT:	Erregea eta beronen jende guztia nekaturik heldu zen Jordanera , eta atseden hartu zuten han .
PRED:	So the king and all the people of Judah arrived at the Jordan River , where they camped at the Jordan River .
GOLD:	The king and all who were with him grew weary along the way , so they rested when they reached the Jordan River .

ID:	697
INPUT:	<unk> ( eta Betelen ) ez zen gizon bat ere gelditu israeldarren ondoren joan gabe , eta hiria babesik gabe utzi zuten .
PRED:	There was no one in Bethel , and there was no one in the towns of Israel . They left the Ark of the Lord 's presence , and they left him there .
GOLD:	There was not a man left in Ai or Bethel who did not chase after the Israelites , and the town was left wide open .

ID:	698
INPUT:	Izugarria da Jainko biziaren eskuetan erortzea !
PRED:	You will live in the blazing anger of God , and you will live in the hands of God .
GOLD:	It is a terrible thing to fall into the hands of the living God .

ID:	699
INPUT:	Ondoren , Zabulongo Elonek gobernatu zuen Israel , hamar urtez .
PRED:	Then Shallum judged Israel for ten years . He judged Israel for ten years .
GOLD:	After Ibzan died , Elon from the tribe of Zebulun judged Israel for ten years .

ID:	700
INPUT:	Jaunaren aurrean , bai baitator lurra gobernatzera . Justiziaz gobernatuko du mundua , zuzenbidez herriak .
PRED:	For I will walk in the presence of the Lord , who gives justice to the nations .
GOLD:	before the Lord , for he is coming to judge the earth.He will judge the world with justice , and the nations with fairness .

ID:	701
INPUT:	Eta esan zuen gainera : « Nork esango ziokeen Abrahami , Sarak haurrak izango zituela ? Hala ere , bere zahartzaroan , semea eman diot » .
PRED:	Then he said to Abram , “ Who will give birth to Sarah , just as Sarah had given birth to her son ? ”
GOLD:	Who would have said to Abraham that Sarah would nurse a baby ? Yet I have given Abraham a son in his old age ! ”

ID:	702
INPUT:	Neure buruarengatik dagit zin : Botzra hiria hondamen eta eremu , madarikazio eta iseka-gai bihurtuko da , haren menpeko hiriak hondakin betiereko . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	As surely as I live , says the Lord , “ Look , I will destroy the city and destroy it , and the city will become a desolate city . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	For I have sworn by my own name , ” says the Lord , “ that Bozrah will become an object of horror and a heap of ruins ; it will be mocked and cursed . All its towns and villages will be desolate forever . ”

ID:	703
INPUT:	Orduan , Moisesek esan zion : — Nirekin datorren herri honi , seiehun mila gizon izanik , hilabete osorako haragia emango diozula diostazu ?
PRED:	Then Moses said to Moses , “ Have you come with me to the people of Israel ? Will you give them a miraculous sign to you ? ”
GOLD:	But Moses responded to the Lord , “ There are 600,000 foot soldiers here with me , and yet you say , ‘ I will give them meat for a whole month ! '

ID:	704
INPUT:	Hara ! Bizi guztiak dira nireak , aitaren bizia nahiz semearena . Bekatu egiten duena , hori hilko da .
PRED:	Look ! Look ! Look , everyone who lives in my father 's life , whether they live , they will die .
GOLD:	For all people are mine to judge — both parents and children alike . And this is my rule : The person who sins is the one who will die .

ID:	705
INPUT:	Hauxe da testigantza : Jainkoak betiko bizia eman digula , eta bere Semearen bidez eman ere .
PRED:	This is the message God has given us through his Son . He gave us his Son through his Son , and he gave us his Son through his Son .
GOLD:	And this is what God has testified : He has given us eternal life , and this life is in his Son .

ID:	706
INPUT:	« Ez dela horrela ? Nork gezurtatuko nau , nork ezereztuko nire hitzak ? »
PRED:	“ No one can tell me , ‘ Who is my liar ? '
GOLD:	Can anyone claim otherwise ? Who can prove me wrong ? ”

ID:	707
INPUT:	Biharamunean , jaietarako Jerusalemera etorria zen jendetza handia , Jesus zetorrela jakitean ,
PRED:	The next day Jesus went up to Jerusalem to Jerusalem , where the crowds had gathered around to Jerusalem ,
GOLD:	The next day , the news that Jesus was on the way to Jerusalem swept through the city . A large crowd of Passover visitors

ID:	708
INPUT:	Seinale eske ari da gizaldi gaizto eta desleial hau , baina ez zaio emango seinalerik , Jonas profetarena besterik » . Eta , haiek bertan utzirik , alde egin zuen .
PRED:	The sixth generation can tell you the truth , but it will be a prophet who sent him to be a prophet . But the prophet Jonah did n't let them go . ” So he left them and left them .
GOLD:	Only an evil , adulterous generation would demand a miraculous sign , but the only sign I will give them is the sign of the prophet Jonah . ” Then Jesus left them and went away .

ID:	709
INPUT:	Lehenengo egunean bezala azkenekoan batzar sakratua izango duzue . Egun horietan ez duzue lanik egingo , bazkaria prestatzeko ez bada .
PRED:	On the first day you must celebrate the Festival of Unleavened Bread . It must be a permanent law for you , and you must not offer it to the Lord .
GOLD:	On the first day of the festival and again on the seventh day , all the people must observe an official day for holy assembly . No work of any kind may be done on these days except in the preparation of food .

ID:	710
INPUT:	Joseren argibidea egokia zela ikusirik , okin-arduradunak esan zion : — Ba , nik neure ametsean hiru saski opil neuzkan buru gainean .
PRED:	When Joseph saw that the light was coming , he said to him , “ I have a great basket of bread in the fields . ”
GOLD:	When the chief baker saw that Joseph had given the first dream such a positive interpretation , he said to Joseph , “ I had a dream , too . In my dream there were three baskets of white pastries stacked on my head .

ID:	711
INPUT:	eta hauek lekuko harturik , esan zion Efroni : — Entzun iezadazu , arren . Ordaindu egin nahi dizut soroa . Hartzazu dirua eta orduan ehortziko dut neure emaztea .
PRED:	Then he took his body and said , “ Listen to me , for I want you to pay me back . ” So he told him , “ Take my wife , and I will pay him back to my wife . ”
GOLD:	and he replied to Ephron as everyone listened . “ No , listen to me . I will buy it from you . Let me pay the full price for the field so I can bury my dead there . ”

ID:	712
INPUT:	Jaunak esango du : « Berdindu galtzada , berdindu ; zabaldu bidea , kendu nire herriarioztopoak bidetik » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said , “ This is what the Lord says : The people have taken away from my land , and they have taken away their own land . ”
GOLD:	God says , “ Rebuild the road ! Clear away the rocks and stonesso my people can return from captivity . ”

ID:	713
INPUT:	Eliseok berriro Israelgo erregeari : — Tenka ezazu uztaia . Erregeak uztaia tenkatu zuenean , Eliseok erregearen eskuen gainean bereak ezarri
PRED:	So Elisha said to the king of Israel , “ You are a skin disease . Give it to the king of Israel . ” So the king 's hand handed over to the king of Israel .
GOLD:	Elisha told him , “ Put your hand on the bow , ” and Elisha laid his own hands on the king 's hands .

ID:	714
INPUT:	Berekin dituzte beren bi semeak : Ahimaatz , Tzadokena eta Jonatan , Abiatarrena . Hauen bidez jakinarazi entzundako guztia niri .
PRED:	These are the sons of Ahimaaz and Ahimaaz . Zadok the priest , Ahimaaz , and John , who had been sent by the number of all who heard me .
GOLD:	and they will send their sons Ahimaaz and Jonathan to tell me what is going on . ”

ID:	715
INPUT:	Keretarren hegoaldeari , Juda eta Kalebeko hegoaldeei eraso genien , eta Tziklagi su eman .
PRED:	The land of Canaan , and the kings of Judah captured it and burned it to the east side of the Jordan Valley .
GOLD:	We were on our way back from raiding the Kerethites in the Negev , the territory of Judah , and the land of Caleb , and we had just burned Ziklag . ”

ID:	716
INPUT:	Benjaminen leinua berpiztu
PRED:	The Land Given to the Tribe of Benjamin
GOLD:	Israel Provides Wives for Benjamin

ID:	717
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Harizko musika-tresnaz . Salmoa . Kanta .
PRED:	O God , listen to my cry ; answer me , for I have heard your prayer .
GOLD:	May God be merciful and bless us.May his face smile with favor on us.Interlude

ID:	718
INPUT:	Eta honetaz ziur nagoelarik , badakit gelditu egingo naizela eta zuekin guztiokin jarraituko oraindik , zuen sinesmenaren aurrerapen eta pozerako .
PRED:	And if I were with you , I will stay with you , and I will stand with you , and you will believe that I will be with you .
GOLD:	Knowing this , I am convinced that I will remain alive so I can continue to help all of you grow and experience the joy of your faith .

ID:	719
INPUT:	Lau piztitzar horiek munduan sortuko diren lau erreinu dira .
PRED:	These four kingdoms of the earth will come into four kingdoms of the world .
GOLD:	“ These four huge beasts represent four kingdoms that will arise from the earth .

ID:	720
INPUT:	Bete bedi arretaz zeruetako Jainkoak bere etxeari buruz agintzen duen guztia , erregearen eta beronen semeen aurka haserre ez dadin .
PRED:	For he did what was right in heaven , and he did not punish the king 's descendants . He will not be angry with his son , and he will not be angry with his son .
GOLD:	Be careful to provide whatever the God of heaven demands for his Temple , for why should we risk bringing God 's anger against the realm of the king and his sons ?

ID:	721
INPUT:	Goizean goiz , mahastietara joango gara , ernamuinak irekitzen hasiak diren , granadondoak loretan dauden ikustera . Hantxe emango dizut neure maite-laztana .
PRED:	Early the next morning I will go to the top of the hill country of the Sidonians , where I will give you victory over the people of the Sidonians . I will give you a drink of wine .
GOLD:	There the mandrakes give off their fragrance , and the finest fruits are at our door , new delights as well as old , which I have saved for you , my lover .

ID:	722
INPUT:	Orduan , galdetu zion erregeak Danieli , Beltxatzar ere deituari : — Egia al da ametsa argitu eta esanahia azalduko didazula ?
PRED:	Then the king asked the king , “ Are you Daniel , Daniel ? ” And the king replied , “ Can you tell me this dream ? ”
GOLD:	The king said to Daniel ( also known as Belteshazzar ) , “ Is this true ? Can you tell me what my dream was and what it means ? ”

ID:	723
INPUT:	Jaunaren zerbitzaria
PRED:	The
GOLD:	The

ID:	724
INPUT:	Joan zitzaizkion Jesusi bere ama eta anai-arrebak , baina jendearen jendez ezin iritsi ziren berarenganaino .
PRED:	Then Jesus began talking about his brothers and sisters and sisters , but they could n't betray Jesus .
GOLD:	Then Jesus ' mother and brothers came to see him , but they could n't get to him because of the crowd .

ID:	725
INPUT:	Ikusi zuen Jesusek Natanael zetorkiola , eta esan zuen : — Hona benetako israeldar bat , faltsukeriarik gabea .
PRED:	When they saw that Jesus was coming , he said , “ A poor man is poor , and one of them is poor . ”
GOLD:	As they approached , Jesus said , “ Now here is a genuine son of Israel — a man of complete integrity . ”

ID:	726
INPUT:	Eta gu gara hark juduen lurralde osoan eta Jerusalemen egindako guztien lekuko . Jesus hau egur batetik zintzilik hil zuten ;
PRED:	So we went to Jerusalem to Jerusalem and told him everything Jesus had done to the Jews in Jerusalem . So Jesus sent him out of the synagogue , and he killed him .
GOLD:	“ And we apostles are witnesses of all he did throughout Judea and in Jerusalem . They put him to death by hanging him on a cross ,

ID:	727
INPUT:	Dei egin dizudanean , hurbil izan zaitut ; « Ez beldurtu ! » , esan didazu .
PRED:	Watch out ! Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! ”
GOLD:	Yes , you came when I called ; you told me , “ Do not fear . ”

ID:	728
INPUT:	Entzutean , poztu egin ziren haiek eta dirua agindu zioten . Jesus haien eskuetara emateko egokiera bila hasi zen Judas .
PRED:	When they heard this , they began talking about Jesus ' disciples , and they began to betray Jesus to them , they began to betray him .
GOLD:	They were delighted when they heard why he had come , and they promised to give him money . So he began looking for an opportunity to betray Jesus .

ID:	729
INPUT:	« Jordan ibaia igaro eta Jerikora heldu zineten . Jerikoko bizilagunek gerra egin zizueten , baita amortarrek , periztarrek , kanaandarrek , hititek , girgaxtarrek , hibiarrek eta jebustarrek ere ; nik , ordea , eskuetara eman nizkizuen .
PRED:	“ Go back to the Jordan River , where you were going to live in Jericho . But the Canaanites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites , Jebusites , and Jebusites , and Jebusites .
GOLD:	“ When you crossed the Jordan River and came to Jericho , the men of Jericho fought against you , as did the Amorites , the Perizzites , the Canaanites , the Hittites , the Girgashites , the Hivites , and the Jebusites . But I gave you victory over them .

ID:	730
INPUT:	Orduan , Pedro biraoka eta maldizioka hasi zen : — Ez dut ezagutzen zuek diozuen hori .
PRED:	Then Peter Peter Peter Peter Peter and said , “ I do n't know what you 're doing . ”
GOLD:	Peter swore , “ A curse on me if I 'm lying — I do n't know this man you 're talking about ! ”

ID:	731
INPUT:	Davidek gobernariak ezarri zizkien Damaskoko siriarrei , eta haren menpeko eta zergapeko egin ziren siriarrak . Jaunak garaipena eman zion Davidi beronen guda-irtenaldi orotan .
PRED:	David placed the Arameans under the sun , and the Lord gave them victory over the Arameans . And the Lord gave him victory over all the people of Damascus .
GOLD:	Then he placed several army garrisons in Damascus , the Aramean capital , and the Arameans became David 's subjects and paid him tribute money . So the Lord made David victorious wherever he went .

ID:	732
INPUT:	Uxatuko dut zuengandikiparraldeko etsaia , eta lur idor eta gorrira jaurtiko : aurreguardia ekialdeko itsasorantz , atzeguardiamendebaldeko itsasorantz . Haren ustel-usaina zabalduko da , kiratsak airea beteko du . Gauza handiak egiten zituenbere ustez ! »
PRED:	I will destroy the north side of the sea , and there will be a terrible hailstorm against the land of the sea and the sea . The sea will be opened , and the sea will be opened , and the sea will be opened . ”
GOLD:	I will drive away these armies from the north.I will send them into the parched wastelands.Those in the front will be driven into the Dead Sea , and those at the rear into the Mediterranean.The stench of their rotting bodies will rise over the land . ” Surely the Lord has done great things !

ID:	733
INPUT:	eta nirekin diren senide guztiek Galaziako eliz elkartekooi idazten dizuegu .
PRED:	And we are writing to you in the church in the church in Galilee .
GOLD:	All the brothers and sisters here join me in sending this letter to the churches of Galatia .

ID:	734
INPUT:	Zuzendaritza gabe , herria behera ; aholkulari asko bada , orduan aurrera .
PRED:	Those who are wise are foolish , but the advice of the wise will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Without wise leadership , a nation falls ; there is safety in having many advisers .

ID:	735
INPUT:	Orduan , Samsonek esan zion eskutik zeraman itsumutilari : — Eraman nazak jauretxeari eusten dioten zutabeak ukitzeraino , haietan <unk> tenga nadin .
PRED:	Then Samson said to him , “ Let 's go down to the palace and give it to the Lord 's palace . ”
GOLD:	Samson said to the young servant who was leading him by the hand , “ Place my hands against the pillars that hold up the temple . I want to rest against them . ”

ID:	736
INPUT:	Ikasbide eman dizuet , zuek ere , nik zuekin bezalaxe , joka dezazuen .
PRED:	I have given you your disciples to be with you , just as I have done .
GOLD:	I have given you an example to follow . Do as I have done to you .

ID:	737
INPUT:	Bazen kriseilurik asko gu bildurik geunden goiko gela hartan .
PRED:	There were many lamps in the morning , and we were found in the morning .
GOLD:	The upstairs room where we met was lighted with many flickering lamps .

ID:	738
INPUT:	Elizaren aurka erasoaldia
PRED:	A Message for Israel
GOLD:	Persecution Scatters the Believers

ID:	739
INPUT:	Orduan , irakasten hasi zitzaien , Gizonaren Semeak asko sufritu behar zuela ; zahar , apaizburu eta lege-maisuek gaitzetsi egingo zutela eta hil ; eta hiru egunen buruan piztu egingo zela .
PRED:	Then he began to teach the Son of Man , just as the Son of Man began to suffer . He would suffer three days and kill the leading priests and the teachers of religious law and the leading priests .
GOLD:	Then Jesus began to tell them that the Son of Man must suffer many terrible things and be rejected by the elders , the leading priests , and the teachers of religious law . He would be killed , but three days later he would rise from the dead .

ID:	740
INPUT:	Begira , Jainkoak bere jakinduria agertu duenean , gizakiak ez dira gauza izan beren jakinduriaz Jainkoa ezagutzeko ; horregatik , Jainkoak , guk hots egiten dugun zorakeriaren bitartez salbatu nahi izan ditu fededunak .
PRED:	For God has revealed his wisdom to us , so that we can not be able to understand the wonderful things God has done for us . It is God 's wonderful things to save us from God 's grace .
GOLD:	Since God in his wisdom saw to it that the world would never know him through human wisdom , he has used our foolish preaching to save those who believe .

ID:	741
INPUT:	Paulo , Agriparen eta Berenizeren aurrean
PRED:	Paul and Silas before Festus
GOLD:	Paul Speaks to Agrippa

ID:	742
INPUT:	Gainera , aker bat barkamen-oparitarako , zeuen bekatuen barkamen-ohikunea egiteko .
PRED:	You must offer one male goat as a sin offering to purify yourselves , making them right with the Lord .
GOLD:	In addition , you must sacrifice a male goat as a sin offering to purify yourselves and make yourselves right with the Lord .

ID:	743
INPUT:	Hartutako dirutik zerbait beretzat gorde zuen Ananiasek , bere emaztearekin ados , eta gainerakoa apostoluen esku jarri .
PRED:	I took some of you to serve as a slave to you , along with the authority of Moses and his wife .
GOLD:	He brought part of the money to the apostles , claiming it was the full amount . With his wife 's consent , he kept the rest .

ID:	744
INPUT:	Sinestedunen itxaropena
PRED:	The Danger of False Teachers
GOLD:	Living as Children of God

ID:	745
INPUT:	eta esanez : « Santutegia desegin eta hiru egunetan eraikitzen omen duan horrek , Jainkoaren Semea baldin bahaiz , salba ezak heure burua ! Jaits hadi gurutzetik ! »
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ You know the Scriptures say , ‘ You are the Son of God , the Son of God , the Son of God , save us from the cross . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Look at you now ! ” they yelled at him . “ You said you were going to destroy the Temple and rebuild it in three days . Well then , if you are the Son of God , save yourself and come down from the cross ! ”

ID:	746
INPUT:	Esate baterako , etsaiarekin auzitegira zoazela , saia zaitez bidean harekin konponbidea aurkitzen ; bestela , epaileagana eramango zaitu eta epaileak ertzainaren eskuetan jarriko eta ertzainak kartzelara botako .
PRED:	If you find a case with your enemy , you will find a case against the other side of the enemy . Then you will be put to death , and you will be put to death , and you will be put to death .
GOLD:	When you are on the way to court with your accuser , try to settle the matter before you get there . Otherwise , your accuser may drag you before the judge , who will hand you over to an officer , who will throw you into prison .

ID:	747
INPUT:	hona zer diodan nik , Jaunak , Israelen Jainko honek : Hondamen izugarria bidaliko dut Jerusalem eta Judaren kontra ; entzun dezaten guztiei bi belarriek durundi egingo diete .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will bring disaster upon Jerusalem , and I will bring disaster upon the people of Judah .
GOLD:	So this is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : I will bring such disaster on Jerusalem and Judah that the ears of those who hear about it will tingle with horror .

ID:	748
INPUT:	Jesus , hurbildurik , honela mintzatu zitzaien : « Ahalmen osoa eman dit Jainkoak zeru-lurretan .
PRED:	Then Jesus looked at them and said , “ Look , God Almighty has given me the earth .
GOLD:	Jesus came and told his disciples , “ I have been given all authority in heaven and on earth .

ID:	749
INPUT:	Amets hau egin zuen : eskailera bat ikusi zuen , beheko ertza lurrean eta goikoa zeruan zituena , eta Jainkoaren aingeruak zurubian gora eta behera .
PRED:	He also saw a dream , and he saw a dream that had a dream , and the Most High Priest in heaven and the Most Holy Place .
GOLD:	As he slept , he dreamed of a stairway that reached from the earth up to heaven . And he saw the angels of God going up and down the stairway .

ID:	750
INPUT:	Eraso zioten Judari , sartu eta jauregian aurkitutako ondasun guztiak eraman zituzten , baita erregearen seme-alaba eta emazteak ere . Ez zioten utzi seme txikiena baizik , Joakaz .
PRED:	So all the men of Judah went into the palace and took all the men of Judah and their wives and children , but they refused to let them marry their wives .
GOLD:	They marched against Judah , broke down its defenses , and carried away everything of value in the royal palace , including the king 's sons and his wives . Only his youngest son , Ahaziah , was spared .

ID:	751
INPUT:	Sedekias erregeak giltzapean sartua zuen , hark iragarritako mezu hau zela eta : « Hau dio Jaunak : Jerusalem Babiloniako erregearen esku utziko dut eta honek konkistatu egingo du .
PRED:	The king of Babylon will enter the royal palace , and he will say , “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will hand it over to the king of Babylon . '
GOLD:	King Zedekiah had put him there , asking why he kept giving this prophecy : “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ I am about to hand this city over to the king of Babylon , and he will take it .

ID:	752
INPUT:	Ez ote naiz libre ? Ez ote naiz apostolu ? Ez ote dut ikusi Jesus gure Jauna ? Ez ote da nire lanaren fruitu zuek kristau izatea ?
PRED:	Do n't I ever see the Good News ? Do n't I ever see the Lord Jesus ? Do n't you see me unless you see me ?
GOLD:	Am I not as free as anyone else ? Am I not an apostle ? Have n't I seen Jesus our Lord with my own eyes ? Is n't it because of my work that you belong to the Lord ?

ID:	753
INPUT:	Deika ari zaio Jauna hiriari — zentzuzkoa dahari begirune izatea — : « Israelgo leinu eta herriko batzar , entzun !
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Listen to my people ! Hear my cry , ‘ Listen to the people of Israel ! '
GOLD:	Fear the Lord if you are wise ! His voice calls to everyone in Jerusalem : “ The armies of destruction are coming ; the Lord is sending them .

ID:	754
INPUT:	Gizonezko nahiz emakumezko , bota ditzatela kanpalekutik . Horrela ez dute kanpalekua kutsatuko , han bizi bainaiz ni beraien artean » .
PRED:	If you are defiled by touching a man , you must not defile the camp . This is a permanent law for you , for I am going to live among you . ”
GOLD:	This command applies to men and women alike . Remove them so they will not defile the camp in which I live among them . ”

ID:	755
INPUT:	Hiri gotortu eta hiri nagusi guztiak xehatuko dituzue , fruta-arbolak ebakiko , iturburu guztiak itxiko eta lur landuak hondatuko harriz betez .
PRED:	You have bought all the fortified towns and fortified towns . You will plant all the fruit that has been planted in the fields , and you will plant crops that grow in the fields .
GOLD:	You will conquer the best of their towns , even the fortified ones . You will cut down all their good trees , stop up all their springs , and ruin all their good land with stones . ”

ID:	756
INPUT:	Eta badakit gizon hori paradisura eraman zutela — gorputzarekin ala gorputzik gabe ez dakit , Jainkoak daki — , eta han , gizakiak ezin esan ditzakeen hitzak entzun zituela .
PRED:	And I know that there is a man who brought him out of his body . I know that God is not a body , and he said , “ I know that there is no secret . ”
GOLD:	Yes , only God knows whether I was in my body or outside my body . But I do know

ID:	757
INPUT:	Orduan , gizaki orozoraturik gelditzen da , ulertezinik ; zilargina idoloez lotsaturik , gezurrezkoak baitira , arnasarik gabeko irudi ,
PRED:	Then the man will be terrified , and there will be no shame . The craftsmen will not be ashamed of their idols , for they have no breath to idols .
GOLD:	The whole human race is foolish and has no knowledge ! The craftsmen are disgraced by the idols they make , for their carefully shaped works are a fraud.These idols have no breath or power .

ID:	758
INPUT:	Beste batek , berriz , esan zion : — Jarraituko dizut , Jauna , baina uztazu aurrena etxekoei agur egiten .
PRED:	But one of them said , “ Follow me , Lord , for I will go home to the house of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Another said , “ Yes , Lord , I will follow you , but first let me say good-bye to my family . ”

ID:	759
INPUT:	Azkenik , mendebaldeko harresiak ere luzera bera eta beste hiru ate izango ditu : Gad , Axer eta Neftalirenak .
PRED:	But I will make you ruler over the mountains of Naphtali , and you will also say , “ Men of Naphtali , and Naphtali will be gone . ”
GOLD:	And on the west wall , also 11/2 miles long , the gates will be named for Gad , Asher , and Naphtali .

ID:	760
INPUT:	Gariaren , ardo berriaren eta olioaren hamarrenak , abere handi nahiz txikien lehen-kumeekin batera , Jaunak zuen Jainkoak bizileku eta kultu-lekutzat aukeratuko duen tokira eramango dituzue , eta han otordu sakratua egingo Jaunaren aurrean . Horrela , zeuen bizitza osoan Jaunari begirune izaten ikasiko duzue .
PRED:	“ If you present a young goat to the Lord your God , you must present it to the Lord your God and your God , and you must present it to the Lord your God , and you will be honored in your presence .
GOLD:	Bring this tithe to the designated place of worship — the place the Lord your God chooses for his name to be honored — and eat it there in his presence . This applies to your tithes of grain , new wine , olive oil , and the firstborn males of your flocks and herds . Doing this will teach you always to fear the Lord your God .

ID:	761
INPUT:	Berak libratuko du laguntza eske oihuka ari den behartsua , nork defendaturik ez duen dohakabea .
PRED:	He will rescue the poor ; he will rescue the poor , and he will defend the helpless .
GOLD:	He will rescue the poor when they cry to him ; he will help the oppressed , who have no one to defend them .

ID:	762
INPUT:	Nebuzaradan guardiaburuak hartu eta Riblara eraman zituen , Babiloniako erregeagana ,
PRED:	They captured the captain of the guard and took him to Babylon and captured the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , took them all to the king of Babylon at Riblah .

ID:	763
INPUT:	Ikaragarria zara : nork iraun zutik zure aurrean , zure haserrealdian ?
PRED:	O God , why are you so angry ? Who will bring you out of your anger ?
GOLD:	From heaven you sentenced your enemies ; the earth trembled and stood silent before you .

ID:	764
INPUT:	Mardokeok idatziz eman zituen gauza hauek eta Asuero erregearen agintepeko eskualde orotako judu guztiei gutunak igorri zizkien , nola urrutikoei hala hurbilekoei .
PRED:	So Mordecai gave these orders to the Jews and to the governors of the province of Xerxes and all the Jews who had been appointed by King Xerxes .
GOLD:	Mordecai recorded these events and sent letters to the Jews near and far , throughout all the provinces of King Xerxes ,

ID:	765
INPUT:	Ez gaitezela izan harroxko , elkarren lehian eta elkarren inbidian ibiliz .
PRED:	Do n't be proud of the whole church in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	Let us not become conceited , or provoke one another , or be jealous of one another .

ID:	766
INPUT:	Jokatu zeure zerbitzari honekin , zure maitasunari dagokionez : irakatsi niri zeure arauak !
PRED:	Give me your servant , your servant , and teach me your decrees .
GOLD:	I am your servant ; deal with me in unfailing love , and teach me your decrees .

ID:	767
INPUT:	Horrela burutu zuen Salomonek bere asmoa , lehen harria ezarri zutenetik Jaunaren etxea bukatu arte . Erabat burutua zen , beraz , tenplua .
PRED:	So Solomon took the head of the Lord 's Temple and set it apart for the Temple of the Lord . So the Temple was completed .
GOLD:	So Solomon made sure that all the work related to building the Temple of the Lord was carried out , from the day its foundation was laid to the day of its completion .

ID:	768
INPUT:	baina Hebron inguruko lautada eta herrixkak emanak zizkioten jabetzan Jefuneren seme Kalebi ;
PRED:	But the surrounding villages were given to the towns of Hebron , and Caleb son of Jephunneh and Caleb son of Jephunneh .
GOLD:	But the open fields beyond the town and the surrounding villages were given to Caleb son of Jephunneh as his possession .

ID:	769
INPUT:	Hurrengo urtean , erregeek guduari ekin ohi dioten garaian , Davidek Joab bidali zuen bere ofizialekin eta Israelgo gudari guztiekin . Amondarrak hondatu zituzten eta Raba hiria inguratu . Bitartean , David Jerusalemen gelditu zen .
PRED:	On the third year of King David 's reign , King David sent his army to attack David and all the towns of Israel . So David and all the army of Israel deserted him .
GOLD:	In the spring of the year , when kings normally go out to war , David sent Joab and the Israelite army to fight the Ammonites . They destroyed the Ammonite army and laid siege to the city of Rabbah . However , David stayed behind in Jerusalem .

ID:	770
INPUT:	Jesusek gogor eraso zion : — Isil hadi eta irten horrengandik ! Deabruak jendartean lurrera bota zuen gizona , baina batere kalterik egin gabe atera zen harengandik .
PRED:	Jesus said to him , “ Get up ! Let 's kill him ! ” So the man got out of the country and threw him away from the ground .
GOLD:	But Jesus reprimanded him . “ Be quiet ! Come out of the man , ” he ordered . At that , the demon threw the man to the floor as the crowd watched ; then it came out of him without hurting him further .

ID:	771
INPUT:	Ken iezazkiozu jantziak , hartu zerbait bahituran , arrotz ezezagunaren fidatzaile bihurtu denari .
PRED:	Get security from the security of someone else , but if you do n't believe the word of the Lord , you will live in battle .
GOLD:	Get security from someone who guarantees a stranger 's debt.Get a deposit if he does it for foreigners .

ID:	772
INPUT:	Nik egingo ditudan zeru-lur berriektinko iraungo duten bezala , tinko iraungo dutezuen ondorengotzak eta izenak ere . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	I will remain in the heavens , and I will remain in the heavens like the stars in the sky , says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ As surely as my new heavens and earth will remain , so will you always be my people , with a name that will never disappear , ” says the Lord .

ID:	773
INPUT:	Lebitarrek eta Judako guztiek zehatz bete zuten Joiada apaizak agindua . Zerbitzua larunbatez hasten nahiz bukatzen zuten gizonak denak batera hartu zituzten ; izan ere , Joiadak ez zien alde egiteko baimenik eman txanda bukatzen zutenei .
PRED:	The priests and Levites obeyed all the commands of Jehoiada the priest had commanded them to do what was happening to the Sabbath day , for they had been killed by Jehoiada the priest .
GOLD:	So the Levites and all the people of Judah did everything as Jehoiada the priest ordered . The commanders took charge of the men reporting for duty that Sabbath , as well as those who were going off duty . Jehoiada the priest did not let anyone go home after their shift ended .

ID:	774
INPUT:	Amondarren aurkako mezua
PRED:	A Message about Ammon
GOLD:	A Message for Moab

ID:	775
INPUT:	Jaunaren etxeko konponketen arduradunei eman zieten dirua ; hauek , berriz , tenplua konpontzen eta berritzen ari ziren langileei .
PRED:	They also brought the money to the Temple of the Lord , and they rebuilt the Temple of the Lord . They also rebuilt the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	He entrusted the money to the men assigned to supervise the restoration of the Lord 's Temple . Then they paid the workers who did the repairs and renovation of the Temple .

ID:	776
INPUT:	Behin batean , etxean sartu beharra izan zuen Josek , lanarengatik . Ez zegoen une hartan beste zerbitzaririk barruan .
PRED:	One day Joseph took Joseph into his home , so he could n't let them go into the fields .
GOLD:	One day , however , no one else was around when he went in to do his work .

ID:	777
INPUT:	Zoazte lanera ! Ez zaizue lastorik emango , baina adreilu-kopuru bera egin beharko duzue .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid ! Do n't put your trust in your eye , but do n't put it in your body .
GOLD:	Now get back to work ! No straw will be given to you , but you must still produce the full quota of bricks . ”

ID:	778
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Hona hemen nire zerbitzaria , nik eusten diodana , nik hautatua , atsegin dudana . Beronen gain ezarri dutneure espiritua : nazioei justizia ekarriko die .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : My servant is the one who keeps my covenant on my head , and I will put my hope on my name .
GOLD:	“ Look at my servant , whom I strengthen.He is my chosen one , who pleases me.I have put my Spirit upon him.He will bring justice to the nations .

ID:	779
INPUT:	JAUNAREN HITZALDIAK . JOBEKIN ELKARRIZKETA ( 38 , 1 — 42 , 6 )
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	The

ID:	780
INPUT:	Aaronen ondorengo apaizei , beraz , guztira hamahiru hiri eman zizkieten , eta beraien herri-lurrak .
PRED:	So all the descendants of Aaron and his descendants gave these instructions to the priests and Levites .
GOLD:	So in all , thirteen towns with their pasturelands were given to the priests , the descendants of Aaron .

ID:	781
INPUT:	Elbarria larunbatez sendatua
PRED:	Jesus Heals on the Sabbath
GOLD:	Jesus , God 's Chosen Servant

ID:	782
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak esan zion Moisesi : « Zergatik ari zatzaizkit oihuka ? Agindu israeldarrei egiteko aurrera .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Why are you trying to help me ? Why are you trying to stand against me ? ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Why are you crying out to me ? Tell the people to get moving !

ID:	783
INPUT:	honela hitz egin zuen : « Israeldarrok , begira ongi zer egitera zoazten gizon hauekin .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Listen to this man , you men of Israel !
GOLD:	Then he said to his colleagues , “ Men of Israel , take care what you are planning to do to these men !

ID:	784
INPUT:	Kutxa Bet-Xemexen
PRED:	The Ark of the Covenant
GOLD:	The Ark Moved to Kiriath-Jearim

ID:	785
INPUT:	( 2 Kro 23 , 1-21 )
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Blind Man
GOLD:	Jehoiada 's Religious Reforms

ID:	786
INPUT:	Jende xehea zapaltzen duenak irain egiten dio Egileari , behartsuaz errukitzen denak ohore ematen .
PRED:	But now the poor are like those who insult the poor , even though they are poor , they are poor .
GOLD:	Those who oppress the poor insult their Maker , but helping the poor honors him .

ID:	787
INPUT:	Begira beleei : ez dute ereiten , ez uztarik biltzen ; ez dute bihitegirik , ez mandiorik ; hala ere , Jainkoak janaritzen ditu . Zenbat gehiago ez ote duzue balio zuek hegaztiek baino !
PRED:	They do n't plant their crops , but they do n't harvest it . But they do n't need to eat any meat or harvest it . But if you do n't want to eat it , you will have more than you .
GOLD:	Look at the ravens . They do n't plant or harvest or store food in barns , for God feeds them . And you are far more valuable to him than any birds !

ID:	788
INPUT:	Barakek Kedexera deitu zuen Zabulon eta Neftaliren leinuetako jendea . Hamar mila gizon joan zitzaizkion ondoren ; Debora ere berarekin zen .
PRED:	One of the tribe of Simeon called out of the tribe of Naphtali , along with ten of the tribes of Naphtali . The men of Naphtali had ten of them left with him .
GOLD:	At Kedesh , Barak called together the tribes of Zebulun and Naphtali , and 10,000 warriors went up with him . Deborah also went with him .

ID:	789
INPUT:	Eta zenbatez ez da gehiago gizakia ardia baino ! Legezko da , beraz , larunbatez on egitea .
PRED:	So do n't be condemned to do what was right , for the law of the Lord has done for the Sabbath .
GOLD:	And how much more valuable is a person than a sheep ! Yes , the law permits a person to do good on the Sabbath . ”

ID:	790
INPUT:	Agurra
PRED:	Greetings from Paul
GOLD:	Greetings from James

ID:	791
INPUT:	Gizaseme , entzun arretaz esaten dizudan guztia eta sartu buruan .
PRED:	Son of man , listen to me and understand all these things .
GOLD:	Then he added , “ Son of man , let all my words sink deep into your own heart first . Listen to them carefully for yourself .

ID:	792
INPUT:	izan ere , honela dio berak : « Nork jan dezake , nor goza daiteke nik jakin gabe ? »
PRED:	For they say , “ Who can eat the meat ? Who can eat it ? ”
GOLD:	For who can eat or enjoy anything apart from him ?

ID:	793
INPUT:	eta 16 . 000 pertsona .
PRED:	and 72,000 cattle ,
GOLD:	and 16,000 virgin girls .

ID:	794
INPUT:	Hamaika larrialdi eta zoritxar pasarazi didazu . Baina berriro biziaraziko nauzu , Herio Leize sakonetik altxatuko .
PRED:	O Lord , have mercy on me , for you have sent me back to the grave . But you will have mercy on me , O Lord , for you have made me a mighty storm .
GOLD:	You have allowed me to suffer much hardship , but you will restore me to life againand lift me up from the depths of the earth .

ID:	795
INPUT:	Iritsi zen Legamia gabeko Ogien Jaieguna , Pazko-bildotsa hil behar zeneko eguna .
PRED:	So the Festival of Unleavened Bread , for the Passover was celebrated Passover .
GOLD:	Now the Festival of Unleavened Bread arrived , when the Passover lamb is sacrificed .

ID:	796
INPUT:	Babiloniatik bizirik ihes egindakoekSion hirian ematen dute berri hau : « Jaunaren , gure Jainkoaren , mendekua da , tenplua hondatu zutenenkontrako mendekua » .
PRED:	The people of Babylon will flee from Mount Zion , and the city of the Lord , says , “ Our God is coming to destroy the Temple of the Lord our God . ”
GOLD:	Listen to the people who have escaped from Babylon , as they tell in Jerusalemhow the Lord our God has taken vengeanceagainst those who destroyed his Temple .

ID:	797
INPUT:	Beraz , hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Hemen nauzue , jendea txoriak bezala harrapatzeko erabiltzen dituzuen lakio horien kontra . Nik desegingo ditut eskumuturreko horiek eta libre joaten utziko zuek menpean harrapaturiko jendeari .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will bring disaster upon you , just as I have planned to crush you , and I will hand you over to you , and I will rescue you from your enemies .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am against all your magic charms , which you use to ensnare my people like birds . I will tear them from your arms , setting my people free like birds set free from a cage .

ID:	798
INPUT:	Jakinduriaren sekretuak erakutsiko lizkizuke , giza adimenarentzat sakonegiak direnak ; orduan jakingo zenukehark ez zaituela zigortzen zuk merezi beste .
PRED:	If you do n't know that I am the one who sent you to do the same thing ? But if you do n't know that it is the one who sent you to die .
GOLD:	If only he would tell you the secrets of wisdom , for true wisdom is not a simple matter.Listen ! God is doubtless punishing youfar less than you deserve !

ID:	799
INPUT:	eta oinetakotzat bakearen berri ona zabaltzeko ardura .
PRED:	And if they were told to spread out the olive oil , they will be spread out to their bases .
GOLD:	For shoes , put on the peace that comes from the Good News so that you will be fully prepared .

ID:	800
INPUT:	gure hamabi leinuek , Jainkoa gau eta egun etengabe zerbitzatuz , beteko dela espero duten agintzari horretan itxaropena dudalako . Itxaropen horregatik salatzen naute juduek , errege jauna .
PRED:	That night two tribes will be like two of the tribe of Levi , and they will serve me in the presence of the Lord our God , who gives me victory over this world .
GOLD:	In fact , that is why the twelve tribes of Israel zealously worship God night and day , and they share the same hope I have . Yet , Your Majesty , they accuse me for having this hope !

ID:	801
INPUT:	Hartan , Jairo zeritzan gizon bat etorri zitzaion , sinagogako buruzagia . Eta Jesusen oinetan ahuspezturik , arren eta arren bere etxera etortzeko eskatzen zion ,
PRED:	Suddenly , a man named Jesus , a man who was possessed by a demon — an expert in charge of his hands and fell on his head . He begged him to bow down to meet him .
GOLD:	Then a man named Jairus , a leader of the local synagogue , came and fell at Jesus ' feet , pleading with him to come home with him .

ID:	802
INPUT:	Arduradunek senarra atxilotu eta zigorra ezarriko diote ,
PRED:	The husband who sits on her husband will put her husband on her head , and her husband will be put to death .
GOLD:	The elders must then take the man and punish him .

ID:	803
INPUT:	Nunen seme Josuek , gaztetandik Moisesen laguntzaile zenak , esan zuen : — Ene jaun Moises , galaraz iezaiezu !
PRED:	So Joshua son of Nun , who had been a young man named Moses . “ Go back to me , my lord the Lord ! ”
GOLD:	Joshua son of Nun , who had been Moses ' assistant since his youth , protested , “ Moses , my master , make them stop ! ”

ID:	804
INPUT:	Eliren semeek , maltzur-gaizto haiek , ez zuten Jauna aintzakotzat hartzen ,
PRED:	The children of the wicked will not be destroyed , but the glory of the Lord will not be destroyed .
GOLD:	Now the sons of Eli were scoundrels who had no respect for the Lord

ID:	805
INPUT:	ezikasien hezitzaile eta ezjakinen irakasletzat , eta hori , ezagutzaren eta egiaren adierazpena legean duzulako .
PRED:	He taught them the truth , and he taught them to teach them to teach the truth and teach them to teach them .
GOLD:	You think you can instruct the ignorant and teach children the ways of God . For you are certain that God 's law gives you complete knowledge and truth .

ID:	806
INPUT:	ezagutzarekin neurritasuna , neurritasunarekin eroapena , eroapenarekin jainkozaletasuna ,
PRED:	Give thanks to the truth , who lives with us , who live with Christ , who lives with us .
GOLD:	and knowledge with self-control , and self-control with patient endurance , and patient endurance with godliness ,

ID:	807
INPUT:	Oroitu ziren haiek Jesusen hitzez ,
PRED:	Then the disciples began talking about Jesus ' words .
GOLD:	Then they remembered that he had said this .

ID:	808
INPUT:	Ahiasek jantzia zeraman soingaineko berria hartu , hamabi zati egin
PRED:	Then Amaziah took the robe to the priest , and put it in his robe .
GOLD:	and Ahijah took hold of the new cloak he was wearing and tore it into twelve pieces .

ID:	809
INPUT:	egokieraz baliatuz , garai txarrak baititugu .
PRED:	So if we were doing this , we will keep it safe .
GOLD:	Make the most of every opportunity in these evil days .

ID:	810
INPUT:	Iseka-gai bihurtu natzaie , ni ikustean , buruari eragiten diote burlaz .
PRED:	When you see me , you will see me when I see the power of the Lord .
GOLD:	I am a joke to people everywhere ; when they see me , they shake their heads in scorn .

ID:	811
INPUT:	Madarikaziopean eroriak zaudete , beraz , den-denok iruzur egiten didazue eta .
PRED:	So you who are cursed , and you are my flesh and blood , and you are flesh and blood .
GOLD:	You are under a curse , for your whole nation has been cheating me .

ID:	812
INPUT:	Erregea Jaunaren etxera joaten zen aldi bakoitzeko , zaintzaile-taldeak babeskiak hartu ohi zituen eta gero , berriro , zaintzaile-gelara ekartzen .
PRED:	So the king went to the Temple of the Lord , and he put the shields shields and goats to the Temple of the Lord 's Temple .
GOLD:	Whenever the king went to the Temple of the Lord , the guards would also take the shields and then return them to the guardroom .

ID:	813
INPUT:	Baina ez al ditu , bada , Ezekiasek berak kendu Jainko horren kultu-lekuak eta aldareak , Judako eta Jerusalemgo jendeari aldare bakar baten aurrean ahuspeztu eta intsentsua aldare horretan eskaintzeko aginduz ?
PRED:	But if Hezekiah did not destroy the pagan shrines , he will remove all the pagan shrines and burn incense altars to the pagan shrines and burn incense before the altar and burn incense before the altar .
GOLD:	Do n't you realize that Hezekiah is the very person who destroyed all the Lord 's shrines and altars ? He commanded Judah and Jerusalem to worship only at the altar at the Temple and to offer sacrifices on it alone .

ID:	814
INPUT:	Hartu zituen , orduan , Samuelek Saul eta honen mutila , jangelan sarrarazi eta mahaiburuan jarri zituen , bazkaldarren aurrean . Hogeita hamarren bat ziren gonbidatuak .
PRED:	So Samuel took Saul and put him on his head , and he put him on his head and put him on his head .
GOLD:	Then Samuel brought Saul and his servant into the hall and placed them at the head of the table , honoring them above the thirty special guests .

ID:	815
INPUT:	Ez ekarri gehiago opari hutsalik ; higuingarri zait intsentsuaren lurrina . Ilberri-jaiak , larunbatak , batzar<unk> zin ditut jasan jaiokgaiztakeriarekin batera .
PRED:	Do n't let me go down to the land of Egypt , for I will bring the grain offerings to the Lord . I will bring the people out of the land , and I will bring them down to the ground .
GOLD:	Stop bringing me your meaningless gifts ; the incense of your offerings disgusts me ! As for your celebrations of the new moon and the Sabbathand your special days for fasting — they are all sinful and false.I want no more of your pious meetings .

ID:	816
INPUT:	« Har dezagun , adibidez , gizon zintzo bat , zuzenbidez eta justiziaz jokatzen duena ;
PRED:	“ Get rid of what is right , and do what is right and right , and do what is right .
GOLD:	“ Suppose a certain man is righteous and does what is just and right .

ID:	817
INPUT:	Emadazu zeure ontasunaren ezaugarria ! Lotsaturik geldituko dira nire etsaiak , zuk , Jauna , kontsolatzen eta laguntzen nauzula ikustean .
PRED:	I will give you victory over your enemies , and you will be ashamed of your enemies , and you will comfort me .
GOLD:	Send me a sign of your favor.Then those who hate me will be put to shame , for you , O Lord , help and comfort me .

ID:	818
INPUT:	Ala Jauna , zure Jainkoa ! Hamaika lurralde eta erreinutara bidali izan du Akabek jendea zure bila . Eta nonbait bertan ez zinela esaten ziotenean , zin eginez baieztatu behar izaten zion lurralde edo erreinu hark ez zintuela aurkitu .
PRED:	As surely as the Lord our God lives , the God of Assyria sent his people to live in the land of Assyria , so they could not find any kind of land .
GOLD:	For I swear by the Lord your God that the king has searched every nation and kingdom on earth from end to end to find you . And each time he was told , ‘ Elijah is n't here , ' King Ahab forced the king of that nation to swear to the truth of his claim .

ID:	819
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak esan zion Moisesi : « Idatzi hau liburuan oroigarri gisa , eta jakinarazi Josueri zeharo ezereztuko ditudala amalektarrak , ez dela munduan haien oroitzapenik ere geldituko » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Write these instructions to the people , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will give them victory over the land of the Amalekites . ' ”
GOLD:	After the victory , the Lord instructed Moses , “ Write this down on a scroll as a permanent reminder , and read it aloud to Joshua : I will erase the memory of Amalek from under heaven . ”

ID:	820
INPUT:	Piztiaren batek sarraskitu badu , hala gertatu delakoaren frogak aurkeztuko ditu , eta ez du ordaindu beharrik izango .
PRED:	If a wild animal has been permitted to enter the field , he must pay the value of the beast , and he must pay his hand for his testimony .
GOLD:	But if the animal was indeed stolen , the guilty person must pay compensation to the owner .

ID:	821
INPUT:	Lehenengo hegaldun izakiaren hegoak , zein bata zein bestea , bina metro eta erdi ziren ; hego-mutur batetik besteraino bost metro .
PRED:	Each of the wings of the first wings of the first , and it was 101/2 feet wide , and it was 101/2 feet high .
GOLD:	The wingspan of each of the cherubim was 15 feet , each wing being 71/2 feet long .

ID:	822
INPUT:	Zori hobekotzat jotzen dituthilak biziak baino ,
PRED:	What sorrow for those who follow me , for they are better than dust .
GOLD:	So I concluded that the dead are better off than the living .

ID:	823
INPUT:	Zorigaiztoko eguna baita , hondamen- eta larritasun-eguna , Jainko Jaun ahalguztidunak bidalia . Ikuskari-haraneanharresiak lurrera , garrasiak mendiraino .
PRED:	For the evil of the wicked , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Oh , what a day of crushing defeat ! What a day of confusion and terrorbrought by the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , upon the Valley of Vision ! The walls of Jerusalem have been broken , and cries of death echo from the mountainsides .

ID:	824
INPUT:	Fededun guztiak bat ziren bihotzez eta gogoz , eta inork ez zuen esaten zeukana berea zuenik , baizik eta dena denena zuten .
PRED:	It was by faith that the spirit of every kind of bread and bitter spirit , but they did n't need it , but it was good for you .
GOLD:	All the believers were united in heart and mind . And they felt that what they owned was not their own , so they shared everything they had .

ID:	825
INPUT:	Horrela jakin zuten israeldar guztiek egun hartan ez zuela erregeak agindu Ner-en seme Abner hiltzea .
PRED:	So the people of Israel did n't know that Abner son of Ner , the king of Israel had killed Abner son of Ner .
GOLD:	So everyone in Judah and all Israel understood that David was not responsible for Abner 's murder .

ID:	826
INPUT:	Jokatu , beraz , zentzu onez , erregeok ; zentza zaitezte , munduko agintariok .
PRED:	So be careful to be wise , you leaders of the world , and you are wise .
GOLD:	Now then , you kings , act wisely ! Be warned , you rulers of the earth !

ID:	827
INPUT:	Erregetzaren mezua entzun bai , baina ulertzen ez duenari , gaiztoa etortzen zaio eta bihotzean erein zaiona kendu egiten dio . Hori da , mezua “ bide-bazterrak ” hazia bezala hartzen duena .
PRED:	But if you hear the word of the king , you will not listen to what is right , and you will plant it . If you do n't plant it , you will be harvested from its own fruit . '
GOLD:	The seed that fell on the footpath represents those who hear the message about the Kingdom and do n't understand it . Then the evil one comes and snatches away the seed that was planted in their hearts .

ID:	828
INPUT:	ohoratu aita-amak , eta maitatu lagun hurkoa zeure burua bezala .
PRED:	Love your father and mother , as yourself as yourself as yourself yourself yourself .
GOLD:	Honor your father and mother . Love your neighbor as yourself . ' ”

ID:	829
INPUT:	Ondoren , jendeak joan eta lurrera bota zuen Baalen jauretxea ; xehe-xehe egin zituen hango aldare eta irudiak , eta Baalen apaiz Matan hil egin zuten aldare aitzinean .
PRED:	Then the people went to the land of Babylon and killed the king of Babylon . He killed the temple of Baal , and he killed the temple of his father , Manasseh , and his father , the high priest .
GOLD:	And all the people went over to the temple of Baal and tore it down . They demolished the altars and smashed the idols , and they killed Mattan the priest of Baal in front of the altars .

ID:	830
INPUT:	Jauna , zu nire indar eta babesle , arriskuan ihesleku ! Zuregana etorriko dira herriaklurreko azken mugetatik , eta esango dizute : « Gurasoek utzi dizkiguten jainkoakgezur huts dira , zentzugabekeriaeta ez ezertarako on .
PRED:	O Lord , rescue me from the power of the enemy , and the kings of the earth will come to attack you , ” says the Lord , “ and the kings of the earth will be destroyed , and they will not worship idols .
GOLD:	Lord , you are my strength and fortress , my refuge in the day of trouble ! Nations from around the worldwill come to you and say , “ Our ancestors left us a foolish heritage , for they worshiped worthless idols .

ID:	831
INPUT:	Eguna argitu bezain laster , apaizburu , zahar eta lege-maisuak bildu ziren — Biltzar Nagusi osoa — , eta , erabakia hartu ondoren , Jesus lotuta eraman zuten eta Pilatoren eskuetara eman .
PRED:	So the leading priests and teachers of religious law called the leading priests and teachers of religious law , and they took Jesus to the high council , where they took him to Pilate and took him to Pilate .
GOLD:	Very early in the morning the leading priests , the elders , and the teachers of religious law — the entire high council — met to discuss their next step . They bound Jesus , led him away , and took him to Pilate , the Roman governor .

ID:	832
INPUT:	Zuhaitz onak ezin du fruitu txarrik eman , ezta zuhaitz txarrak ere fruitu onik .
PRED:	The good fruit of your fruit , and the bad tree produces bad fruit .
GOLD:	A good tree ca n't produce bad fruit , and a bad tree ca n't produce good fruit .

ID:	833
INPUT:	Eta hala bihurtu naiz , entzuten ez dueneta erantzun ezin duenaren antzeko .
PRED:	I have heard that they were foolish , and they would not answer them .
GOLD:	For I am waiting for you , O Lord.You must answer for me , O Lord my God .

ID:	834
INPUT:	Zaharrak baino trebeago naiz ulertzen , zure legeak gordetzen ditudalako .
PRED:	For I am greater than these things , and I will obey your commandments .
GOLD:	I am even wiser than my elders , for I have kept your commandments .

ID:	835
INPUT:	Lurtarra , Adam , lurtarren eredu eta irudi da ; zerutarra , Kristo , zerutarrena .
PRED:	The people of the tribe of Levi , Adam , is Christ , and Christ is the leader of the heavens .
GOLD:	Earthly people are like the earthly man , and heavenly people are like the heavenly man .

ID:	836
INPUT:	kehatarrei , berriz , ez zien gurdirik , ez idirik eman , haien egitekoa gauza sakratuak bizkarrean eramatea baitzen .
PRED:	But the Levites did not worship the Lord 's promises , for they were not allowed to carry out the sacred offerings .
GOLD:	But he gave none of the wagons or oxen to the Kohathite division , since they were required to carry the sacred objects of the Tabernacle on their shoulders .

ID:	837
INPUT:	Afekekoa , Laxarongoa ,
PRED:	The king of Arad
GOLD:	The king of AphekThe king of Lasharon

ID:	838
INPUT:	Egoitzaren kultu-hornigai guztiak , bertako hesolak eta atarikoak , brontzezkoak izango dira .
PRED:	All the Tabernacle must be made of bronze bases ; the curtain for the entrance of the Tabernacle will be made of bronze .
GOLD:	“ All the articles used in the rituals of the Tabernacle , including all the tent pegs used to support the Tabernacle and the courtyard curtains , must be made of bronze .

ID:	839
INPUT:	Hileta-kantu hau kantatu zuen Davidek , Saulengatik eta beronen seme Jonatanengatik , eta
PRED:	When David heard this , he chased Saul and Jonathan son of Jonathan , and Jonathan son of David and his son Jonathan .
GOLD:	Then David composed a funeral song for Saul and Jonathan ,

ID:	840
INPUT:	Lehoia bezala makurtueta etzaten da : nork egin aurre hari ? Bedeinkatuabedeinkatzen zaituena , madarikatuamadarikatzen zaituena ! »
PRED:	“ Who is like a lion ? Who is like a lion ? Who can curse you ? Blessed are those who curse you ? ”
GOLD:	Like a lion , Israel crouches and lies down ; like a lioness , who dares to arouse her ? Blessed is everyone who blesses you , O Israel , and cursed is everyone who curses you . ”

ID:	841
INPUT:	eta ez esklabo bezala , esklabo baino zerbait gehiago , anaia maite bezala baizik . Maite-maitea da niretzat , eta zenbatez maiteago ez ote da izango zuretzat , bai gizon eta bai fededun den aldetik !
PRED:	You must not have a slave to your brother , but you must love one another . But if you love one another , you must be a slave to one of you , and you will be a prophet . ”
GOLD:	He is no longer like a slave to you . He is more than a slave , for he is a beloved brother , especially to me . Now he will mean much more to you , both as a man and as a brother in the Lord .

ID:	842
INPUT:	eta han toki berezia egin diot bertan ezartzeko : gure gurasoak Egiptotik atera zituenean Jaunak beraiekin eginiko itunaren agiria daukan kutxa » .
PRED:	I have built a place to place the place where the Lord has made a covenant with his ancestors , and he will carry out the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant . ”
GOLD:	And I have prepared a place there for the Ark , which contains the covenant that the Lord made with our ancestors when he brought them out of Egypt . ”

ID:	843
INPUT:	Norbaitek zergatik askatzen duzuen galdetuko balizue , erantzun : “ Jaunak behar du ” » .
PRED:	If you ask one of your servants , ‘ The Lord will answer you , ' he will reply , ‘ The Lord will answer you . '
GOLD:	If anyone asks , ‘ Why are you untying that colt ? ' just say , ‘ The Lord needs it . ' ”

ID:	844
INPUT:	Israelgo erregea Samariako bere etxera joan zen , goibel eta haserre .
PRED:	So the king of Israel went home to the home of Samaria and sat down at the ground .
GOLD:	So the king of Israel went home to Samaria angry and sullen .

ID:	845
INPUT:	Gizon horiek beren bekatuagatik bizia galdu badute ere , errautsontziak sagaratuak daude , nire aurrean intsentsua eskaintzeko erabili izan direlako . Egin errautsontzi horiekin aldarea estaltzeko xaflak ; horrela , oharpide izango dira israeldarrentzat » .
PRED:	These are the instructions for the people of Israel . They must bring them into exile , and they will burn incense on the altar for the burnt offering to the Lord . This is a special offering to the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Inscribe Aaron 's name on the staff of the tribe of Levi , for there must be one staff for the leader of each ancestral tribe .

ID:	846
INPUT:	nor bereaz axolatzen dira denak eta ez Jesu Kristorenaz .
PRED:	Those who are honest in their hearts are not worthy to be honest in Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	All the others care only for themselves and not for what matters to Jesus Christ .

ID:	847
INPUT:	Nire bizia beti arriskuan dagoen arren , ez dut zure irakaspena ahazten .
PRED:	I have seen my suffering , but I have not forgotten your instructions .
GOLD:	My life constantly hangs in the balance , but I will not stop obeying your instructions .

ID:	848
INPUT:	Ziur baitakigu sinesmenaren bidez onartzen dituela Jainkoak gizon-emakumeak , eta ez legea betetzeagatik .
PRED:	For we know that Christ is the one who believes in God 's law , and he does n't obey God 's law .
GOLD:	So we are made right with God through faith and not by obeying the law .

ID:	849
INPUT:	Jesusek beso-elbarriari esan zion : — Jaiki eta zatoz hona erdira .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to each other , “ Stand up , pick up your mat , and go . ”
GOLD:	Jesus said to the man with the deformed hand , “ Come and stand in front of everyone . ”

ID:	850
INPUT:	Orduan , Jainkoaren gizonarengana itzuli zen bere talde osoarekin ; profetagana heltzean , zutik gelditu eta esan zion : — Orain badakit ez dela lur osoan Jainkorik Israelena baizik . Otoi , onar ezazu zerbitzari honen esku-erakutsia .
PRED:	Then the man of God returned to the man of God , and the group of prophets came to him and said , “ Please let me go back to the land of the Lord your God , for we know that you are the Lord your God , the God of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Then Naaman and his entire party went back to find the man of God . They stood before him , and Naaman said , “ Now I know that there is no God in all the world except in Israel . So please accept a gift from your servant . ”

ID:	851
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Begira , badator Israel herriarekin eta Juda herriarekin itun berria egingo dudan garaia .
PRED:	“ The time is coming , ” says the Lord , “ when the people of Israel and Judah will return to the people of Judah and Judah .
GOLD:	“ The day is coming , ” says the Lord , “ when I will make a new covenant with the people of Israel and Judah .

ID:	852
INPUT:	Eta ez deitu lurrean inori “ aita ” , bat bakarra baita zuen aita , zerukoa .
PRED:	And he did n't say , ‘ There is one of the earth , ' he said , ‘ Father , the heavens , and the heavenly Father . '
GOLD:	And do n't address anyone here on earth as ‘ Father , ' for only God in heaven is your Father .

ID:	853
INPUT:	Satanek erantzun : — Daukan guztia ematen du gizakiak , larrugorri gelditzeraino , bere bizia salbatzearren .
PRED:	“ All right , ” Satan replied , “ let all the animals be allowed to wash their clothes , and let them be saved . ”
GOLD:	Satan replied to the Lord , “ Skin for skin ! A man will give up everything he has to save his life .

ID:	854
INPUT:	Asafen Salmoa . Jauna , jainkoen Jainkoa , mintzo da , mundu osoari egiten dio batzarrera deieguzkiaren sorlekutik sarlekura .
PRED:	The Lord is God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , who sits on the west of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	The Lord , the Mighty One , is God , and he has spoken ; he has summoned all humanityfrom where the sun rises to where it sets .

ID:	855
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak hondatu egin zituen etiopiarrak Asaren eta Judakoen aitzinean , eta etiopiarrek ihes egin zuten .
PRED:	So the Lord destroyed all the people of Judah and Judah and Judah , and they fled to the towns of Judah and Judah .
GOLD:	Then Asa cried out to the Lord his God , “ O Lord , no one but you can help the powerless against the mighty ! Help us , O Lord our God , for we trust in you alone . It is in your name that we have come against this vast horde . O Lord , you are our God ; do not let mere men prevail against you ! ”

ID:	856
INPUT:	Egin Jaunarentzat zuzen eta atsegin dena , zoriontsu izan zaitezten eta Jaunak zuen arbasoei zin eginez hitzemandako lurralde ederrean sartu eta jabetzan har dezazuen .
PRED:	So he did what was good to the Lord , and he did not enter the land the Lord swore to give to your ancestors , and he would not enter the land he swore to give you .
GOLD:	Do what is right and good in the Lord 's sight , so all will go well with you . Then you will enter and occupy the good land that the Lord swore to give your ancestors .

ID:	857
INPUT:	Urrezko berrogeita hamar katigailu ere egin zituzten , eta horiekin zapi-sail bat besteari lotu , egoitza osoak bat egiten zuelarik .
PRED:	They made fifty gold rings and overlaid them with pure gold . They also made one piece of barley and olive oil for the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Then he made fifty gold clasps and fastened the long curtains together with the clasps . In this way , the Tabernacle was made of one continuous piece .

ID:	858
INPUT:	Dan hiritiketa Efraimgo mendietatikberri txarrak datoz .
PRED:	The tribe of Dan will come from the tribe of Ephraim , and the warriors of Ephraim .
GOLD:	Your destruction has been announcedfrom Dan and the hill country of Ephraim .

ID:	859
INPUT:	horrela , behartsuen deiadarra harenganaino iritsarazi dute , eta hark entzun egin du dohakabeen oihua .
PRED:	The Lord has called his brother , and he has called his brother , and he has heard his prayer .
GOLD:	They cause the poor to cry out , catching God 's attention.He hears the cries of the needy .

ID:	860
INPUT:	Bi testiguak
PRED:	( Psalms 1–41 )
GOLD:	The Two Witnesses

ID:	861
INPUT:	Hurbil zen Pazkoa , juduen jai nagusia .
PRED:	The Passover was celebrated in the Festival of Unleavened Bread .
GOLD:	( It was nearly time for the Jewish Passover celebration . )

ID:	862
INPUT:	Hara , samina bake bihurtu zait . Nire bizia hondamen-leizeanerortzetik gorde duzu , bizkarra eman baitiezunire bekatu guztiei .
PRED:	But if I have turned away , my anger would destroy me , for I have destroyed all my enemies .
GOLD:	Yes , this anguish was good for me , for you have rescued me from deathand forgiven all my sins .

ID:	863
INPUT:	Ipini sarea aldare-ertzaren azpian , aldare erdiraino jaisten delarik .
PRED:	As surely as the south wind goes down on the south side of the altar , it will fall into the south .
GOLD:	Install the grating halfway down the side of the altar , under the ledge .

ID:	864
INPUT:	Ur garbiz zipriztinduko zaituztet eta garbi geldituko zarete ; zuen kutsadura eta idolatria guztietatik garbituko zaituztet .
PRED:	I will cover you with pure water , and you will be defiled by the blood of your blood . I will cleanse you from all your detestable sins .
GOLD:	“ Then I will sprinkle clean water on you , and you will be clean . Your filth will be washed away , and you will no longer worship idols .

ID:	865
INPUT:	« Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak jabetzan hartzera zoazten lurraldean sarrarazi ondoren , Garizim mendian emango duzue bedeinkazioa eta Ebal mendian madarikazioa .
PRED:	“ When you enter the land the Lord your God is giving you as a special possession in the land of Gibeon , you must proclaim a blessing in the hill country of Gilead .
GOLD:	“ When the Lord your God brings you into the land and helps you take possession of it , you must pronounce the blessing at Mount Gerizim and the curse at Mount Ebal .

ID:	866
INPUT:	Eskerrak ematen dizkiot arbasoen irakatsiei jarraituz bihotz garbiz zerbitzatzen dudan Jainkoari , eta gogoan zaitut etengabe , gau eta egun , neure otoitzetan .
PRED:	I thank God for my ancestors , and I humble you with pure motives . I pray to you , O God of Heaven 's Armies , and I pray to you in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	Timothy , I thank God for you — the God I serve with a clear conscience , just as my ancestors did . Night and day I constantly remember you in my prayers .

ID:	867
INPUT:	Joan zuek jaietara ; ni ez noa , nire garaia ez baita oraindik bete .
PRED:	John was born into the boat , for I have not yet been born .
GOLD:	You go on . I 'm not going to this festival , because my time has not yet come . ”

ID:	868
INPUT:	Gainera , esan zion Moisesek Koreri : « Entzun , lebitarrok !
PRED:	Then Moses said to Korah , “ Listen , you people of Israel ! Listen to me !
GOLD:	Then Moses spoke again to Korah : “ Now listen , you Levites !

ID:	869
INPUT:	« Zuk , gizaseme , epaitu , epaitu gogor hiri odolzalea , aurpegiratu beraren jokabide higuingarria !
PRED:	“ Son of man , son of man , you have punished the sins of the wicked .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , are you ready to judge Jerusalem ? Are you ready to judge this city of murderers ? Publicly denounce her detestable sins ,

ID:	870
INPUT:	( Mt 9 , 37-38 )
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Men
GOLD:	Jesus ' Prayer of Thanksgiving

ID:	871
INPUT:	eta esan ziela : Horregatik , gizasemeak bere aita-amak utziko ditu eta emazteari elkartuko zaio , eta biak bat izango dira .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Your father will lead you into your father 's mother , and your mother will be your wife . ”
GOLD:	And he said , “ ‘ This explains why a man leaves his father and mother and is joined to his wife , and the two are united into one . '

ID:	872
INPUT:	« Zintzoari dagokionez , berriz , bere justiziatik aldendu eta , gaiztoak egin ohi dituen gauza higuingarri guztien antzera , txarkeria egiten badu , bizi egingo ote da , halere ? Haren egintza zuzenak ez ditut gogoan hartuko . Egin dituen desleialkeria eta bekatuengatik hil egingo da .
PRED:	“ But if you turn away from the righteous ways of the righteous and refuse to turn away from their sins and refuse to turn away from their sins , I will destroy them and turn away from their sins .
GOLD:	However , if righteous people turn from their righteous behavior and start doing sinful things and act like other sinners , should they be allowed to live ? No , of course not ! All their righteous acts will be forgotten , and they will die for their sins .

ID:	873
INPUT:	Zuen oinek zapalduko dituzten leku guztiak zeuenak izango dituzue , eta zuen lurraldea basamortutik Libanoraino eta Eufrates ibaitik Mediterraneo itsasoraino hedatuko da .
PRED:	You will crush all the nations of the Euphrates River , and you will drive them out of the hill country of Lebanon , from the Mediterranean Sea to the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	Wherever you set foot , that land will be yours . Your frontiers will stretch from the wilderness in the south to Lebanon in the north , and from the Euphrates River in the east to the Mediterranean Sea in the west .

ID:	874
INPUT:	Izerdirik aterarazi ez dizuen lurraldea eman dizuet , eraiki ez dituzuen hiriak , eta berorietan bizi zarete ; baita landatu ez dituzuen mahasti eta olibadiak ere , eta berorien fruituez elikatzen zarete » .
PRED:	I have not given you the land of your land , and you have not built your towns and vineyards . You have not planted your crops in your fields , vineyards , olive groves , and olive trees . ”
GOLD:	I gave you land you had not worked on , and I gave you towns you did not build — the towns where you are now living . I gave you vineyards and olive groves for food , though you did not plant them .

ID:	875
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Are okerrago izango da , gizakiak eta abereak suntsitzeko lau zigor beldurgarriok — gerra , gosetea , basapiztiak eta izurria — Jerusalemen aurka bidaliko ditudanean .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The Sovereign Lord says : I will punish those who try to harm them , and they will be terrified by the wild animals that scurry along the ground .
GOLD:	“ Now this is what the Sovereign Lord says : How terrible it will be when all four of these dreadful punishments fall upon Jerusalem — war , famine , wild animals , and disease — destroying all her people and animals .

ID:	876
INPUT:	Beren lurraldean , inork izutu gabe , seguru biziko direnean , nire kontra egin dituzten lotsagarrikeria eta desleialkeria guztiak ahaztuko dituzte .
PRED:	They will live in the land of Egypt , and no one will turn against me and cause them to commit adultery .
GOLD:	They will accept responsibility for their past shame and unfaithfulness after they come home to live in peace in their own land , with no one to bother them .

ID:	877
INPUT:	Itsuok halakook ! Zer da handiago : oparia ala oparia sagaratzen duen aldarea ?
PRED:	What are you saying ? What is your important ? What a burnt offering for the burnt offering ?
GOLD:	How blind ! For which is more important — the gift on the altar or the altar that makes the gift sacred ?

ID:	878
INPUT:	Zulora doazenekin bat egina naukate , hain nago indargabetua .
PRED:	I am with you , O God , who gives me victory .
GOLD:	They have left me among the dead , and I lie like a corpse in a grave.I am forgotten , cut off from your care .

ID:	879
INPUT:	Epaileek zehatz-mehatz ikertuko dute auzia ; ikusten bada lekukoa faltsua dela eta herritarra gezurrez salatu duela ,
PRED:	“ If the priest returns and finds that he has done a case , he will prove that he is a liar and lies .
GOLD:	The judges must investigate the case thoroughly . If the accuser has brought false charges against his fellow Israelite ,

ID:	880
INPUT:	Bene-benetan diotsut : Gazteago zinenean , zeuk lotzen zenuen gerrikoa eta nora joan erabakitzen ; zahartzean , ordea , zuk besoak luzatu eta beste batek lotuko dizu gerrikoa eta nahi izango ez duzun lekura eramango zaitu .
PRED:	I tell you the young man , “ You are young and old , and you are too old to catch up . But if you do n't have a long life , you will have a long life for you , and you will not have a long time . ”
GOLD:	“ I tell you the truth , when you were young , you were able to do as you liked ; you dressed yourself and went wherever you wanted to go . But when you are old , you will stretch out your hands , and others will dress you and take you where you do n't want to go . ”

ID:	881
INPUT:	Baina benjamindarrek Gibeatik irten eta hogeita bi mila gizon israeldarri lur joarazi zieten .
PRED:	But the men of Benjamin heard that the men of Benjamin had taken from the land of Benjamin .
GOLD:	But Benjamin 's warriors , who were defending the town , came out and killed 22,000 Israelites on the battlefield that day .

ID:	882
INPUT:	Nondik Jesusen aginpidea ?
PRED:	Do n't you understand the authority of Jesus
GOLD:	The Authority of Jesus Challenged

ID:	883
INPUT:	Ai ene , desegina da Moab ! Egin intziri ! Lotsaren lotsaz bizkarra eman du ! Auzokoen izu eta iseka-gai bihurtu da .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who mourn for Moab , for the shame of those who have been captured , and the shame of those who mourn for destruction .
GOLD:	How it is shattered ! Hear the wailing ! See the shame of Moab ! It has become an object of ridicule , an example of ruin to all its neighbors . ”

ID:	884
INPUT:	Eta agindu hau eman zieten benjamindarrei : « Gorde zaitezte Xiloko mahastietan .
PRED:	So they said to the men of Benjamin , “ Get out of the vineyard .
GOLD:	They told the men of Benjamin who still needed wives , “ Go and hide in the vineyards .

ID:	885
INPUT:	Baina bihozgabetuei adore ematen dien Jainkoak adorez bete ninduen Titoren etorrerarekin .
PRED:	But I was filled with the blood of God 's people , who commit adultery with God 's children .
GOLD:	But God , who encourages those who are discouraged , encouraged us by the arrival of Titus .

ID:	886
INPUT:	Herritarren zenbaketa egin Davidek
PRED:	David Builds the Temple
GOLD:	David Takes a Census

ID:	887
INPUT:	( Mt 13 , 1-9 ; Mk 4 , 1-9 )
PRED:	Parable of the Growing Seed
GOLD:	The True Family of Jesus

ID:	888
INPUT:	« Ez duzu zeure aitaren anaia desohoratuko , beronen emaztearekin sexu-harremanak izanez : zeure izeba duzu .
PRED:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your father 's brother 's wife , for you have sexual intercourse with your brother 's wife .
GOLD:	“ Do not violate your uncle , your father 's brother , by having sexual relations with his wife , for she is your aunt .

ID:	889
INPUT:	Gero , ekialderantz bihurtzen zen , Bet-Dagoneraino , eta , Zabulonen leinuaren muga eta Iftah-El harana iparraldetik ukituz , Bet-Emek eta <unk> eldik jarraitzen zuen , eta ezkerraldetik Kabul ,
PRED:	The boundary of Zebulun went south to Beth-shemesh , near the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and the boundary extended south of the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and the boundary extended from the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and the western boundary .
GOLD:	then it turned east toward Beth-dagon , and ran as far as Zebulun in the valley of Iphtah-el , going north to Beth-emek and Neiel . It then continued north to Cabul ,

ID:	890
INPUT:	eta mantxa berdexka nahiz gorrixka bada , lizun-kasua da eta apaizari erakutsi behar zaio .
PRED:	The mildew on the ground will be burned on the ground , and it must be burned on the ground .
GOLD:	If the contaminated area in the clothing , the animal hide , the fabric , or the leather article has turned greenish or reddish , it is contaminated with mildew and must be shown to the priest .

ID:	891
INPUT:	Babiloniarrek zatikatu egin zituzten Jaunaren etxean zeuden brontzezko zutabeak , orgak eta uraska handia , eta Babiloniara eraman zuten brontzea .
PRED:	Then the people of Babylon did what was evil in the Lord 's Temple , and they made gold from bronze chains and bronze basin .
GOLD:	The Babylonians broke up the bronze pillars in front of the Lord 's Temple , the bronze water carts , and the great bronze basin called the Sea , and they carried all the bronze away to Babylon .

ID:	892
INPUT:	Bata , zorteak Jaunarentzat aukeratua , aurkeztu eta barkamen-oparitzat eskainiko du .
PRED:	You must present a male goat as a sin offering to the Lord , and you must present it to the Lord .
GOLD:	Aaron will then present as a sin offering the goat chosen by lot for the Lord .

ID:	893
INPUT:	Esan zion Jaunak lihoz jantzitako gizonari : « Sartu kerubinen azpiko gurpil artera ; hartu handik eskuak bete txingar gori eta barreiatu hirian » . Eta gizona sartu egin zen neure begi-bistan .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Go out into the chariot of linen clothing , and pour out his bowl on the ground . ” So the man went into his hand and went out to the ground .
GOLD:	Then the Lord spoke to the man in linen clothing and said , “ Go between the whirling wheels beneath the cherubim , and take a handful of burning coals and scatter them over the city . ” He did this as I watched .

ID:	894
INPUT:	baina bizirik utzi zaitut nire ahalmena erakusteko eta mundu osoak nor naizen jakin dezan .
PRED:	But I have given you life , and I will give you the power I have given you .
GOLD:	But I have spared you for a purpose — to show you my power and to spread my fame throughout the earth .

ID:	895
INPUT:	Beraien aurrean , bizkarrean fardela harturik , ilunpetan aterako zara ; estali aurpegia zeure herrialdea ez ikusteko , seinale bihurtu baitzaitut Israel herriarentzat » .
PRED:	When you look at the door of the darkness , you will return to the land of darkness , but you will see the miraculous signs I have done to you . ”
GOLD:	As they watch , lift your pack to your shoulders and walk away into the night . Cover your face so you can not see the land you are leaving . For I have made you a sign for the people of Israel . ”

ID:	896
INPUT:	Madarikazioa eta gezurra , hilketa , lapurretaeta adulterioa ugari , odola odolaren gain .
PRED:	They murder and murder , adultery , and murder and adultery .
GOLD:	You make vows and break them ; you kill and steal and commit adultery.There is violence everywhere — one murder after another .

ID:	897
INPUT:	Hilda gero , ez da inor oroitzen zutaz ; Hildakoen Egoitzan , nork goretsi zu ?
PRED:	No one can escape the grave ; no one can escape the grave .
GOLD:	I am worn out from sobbing.All night I flood my bed with weeping , drenching it with my tears .

ID:	898
INPUT:	Idolo-moldeatzaileakhutsa dira denak , hain estimatuak dituzten irudiakezertarako ez . Horien gurtzaileakitsu eta burugabe ; horregatik , lotsagarri geldituko dira .
PRED:	You will be ashamed of all who worship idols , but you will be ashamed of their idols . They will be ashamed of their idols , and they will be ashamed .
GOLD:	How foolish are those who manufacture idols.These prized objects are really worthless.The people who worship idols do n't know this , so they are all put to shame .

ID:	899
INPUT:	Hango nagusiak , lehoi orrolari ; hango epaileak , gauean ehizatuarigoizerako hezurrik ereuzten ez dioten otso .
PRED:	On the day of the lioness will be like a lion 's head , and no one will laugh at night .
GOLD:	Its leaders are like roaring lionshunting for their victims.Its judges are like ravenous wolves at evening time , who by dawn have left no trace of their prey .

ID:	900
INPUT:	Ikusi duzun emakumea , lurreko erregeen gain erregetza duen hiri handia da » .
PRED:	You saw the king sitting on the earth , and the king of the earth will rule over the royal city . ”
GOLD:	And this woman you saw in your vision represents the great city that rules over the kings of the world . ”

ID:	901
INPUT:	Eta esan zuen , gainera : « Horregatik esan dizuet ezin dela inor ere niregana hurbildu , Aitak ez badio horretarako gaitasuna ematen » .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ That 's why I am not going to bring you out of my Father . But the Father who is n't looking for me . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ That is why I said that people ca n't come to me unless the Father gives them to me . ”

ID:	902
INPUT:	Aberastasunakharrapatu egingo dizkizuteeta salgaiak ostuko ; harresiak eraitsieta jauregi bikainak botako behera ; harriak , habeak eta hondakinak ereitsasora botako dituzte .
PRED:	Your wealth will be taken away , and your wealth will be broken . The wealth of the world will be destroyed , and all the kingdoms of the sea will be destroyed .
GOLD:	“ They will plunder all your riches and merchandise and break down your walls . They will destroy your lovely homes and dump your stones and timbers and even your dust into the sea .

ID:	903
INPUT:	Zaudete erne , bada , eta eduki gogoan , hiru urtez gau eta egun aspertu gabe jardun dudala zuetako bakoitzari negar-malkoz aholkuak ematen .
PRED:	Keep watch over the night , and keep watch over the night . For three years you did n't understand the meaning of the meaning of the flood .
GOLD:	Watch out ! Remember the three years I was with you — my constant watch and care over you night and day , and my many tears for you .

ID:	904
INPUT:	Nehemiasek lanean ari direnak armatu
PRED:	Nehemiah 's Final Reforms
GOLD:	Enemies Oppose the Rebuilding

ID:	905
INPUT:	Irten ziren , bada , Egiptotik eta , Kanaanera , beren aita Jakobengana , heldu zirenean ,
PRED:	So they went out to Egypt , where they arrived at Kadesh and went to Egypt .
GOLD:	And they left Egypt and returned to their father , Jacob , in the land of Canaan .

ID:	906
INPUT:	Manasesen lurraldearen muga , Axerren hasi eta Sikemen aurrean dagoen Mikmetatera zihoan ; handik hegoaldera jarraitzen zuen , En-Tapuah aldera .
PRED:	From the tribe of Manasseh began to stir up the territory of the tribe of Manasseh . From the boundary on the south side of the Arnon River to the clans of Manasseh .
GOLD:	The boundary of the tribe of Manasseh extended from the border of Asher to Micmethath , near Shechem . Then the boundary went south from Micmethath to the settlement near the spring of Tappuah .

ID:	907
INPUT:	Joanek erantzun zien : — Nik urez bataiatzen dut ; zeuen artean baduzue , ordea , ezagutzen ez duzuen bat ,
PRED:	John replied , “ I am baptized with water , but if you do n't know it , you wo n't know it . ”
GOLD:	John told them , “ I baptize with water , but right here in the crowd is someone you do not recognize .

ID:	908
INPUT:	Tira , emazkiguzue Gibeako gizon maltzur-gaizto horiek ; hil egin behar ditugu , Israeldik gaitz hori kentzeko » . Baina benjamindarrek ez zieten entzun nahi izan beren senide israeldarrei .
PRED:	“ We have heard about Tyre , ” the men of Israel said . “ We have sinned against the Israelites . ” But the Israelites did n't listen to their relatives , but they would n't listen to the Israelites . ”
GOLD:	Give up those evil men , those troublemakers from Gibeah , so we can execute them and purge Israel of this evil . ” But the people of Benjamin would not listen .

ID:	909
INPUT:	Ruben eta Gaden leinuetakoak eta Manasesen leinu erdikoak gainerako israeldarren aurretik joan ziren , guda-lerrotan jarririk , Moisesek agindua zien bezala .
PRED:	Then Moses and the tribes of Reuben returned from the tribe of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh followed the instructions Moses had commanded .
GOLD:	The armed warriors from the tribes of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh led the Israelites across the Jordan , just as Moses had directed .

ID:	910
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Erremediorik gabea dazure hondamena , sendaezina zure zauria .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will punish you for disaster , and your punishment will be healed .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Your injury is incurable — a terrible wound .

ID:	911
INPUT:	Jendetzagatik ez baitzuten nondik sartu aurkitzen , teilatura igo eta , teilak kendurik , ohatila eta guzti jaitsi zuten erdi-erdira , Jesusen aurrera .
PRED:	For they did n't go into the crowd , and they came into the wedding feast and put on the wedding feast . They came down to the banquet hall of Jesus .
GOLD:	but they could n't reach him because of the crowd . So they went up to the roof and took off some tiles . Then they lowered the sick man on his mat down into the crowd , right in front of Jesus .

ID:	912
INPUT:	Egiptoarrak , faraoiaren zaldi , gurdi eta zaldun guztiak , israeldarrei erasoka itsas erdiraino sartu ziren .
PRED:	Pharaoh 's horses , chariots , charioteers , and charioteers — all the chariots , charioteers , and charioteers — all the people of Israel — fled to the sea .
GOLD:	Then the Egyptians — all of Pharaoh 's horses , chariots , and charioteers — chased them into the middle of the sea .

ID:	913
INPUT:	Esan nien , bada : « Ikusten duzue nolako atsekabetan gabiltzan : Jerusalem hondatua dago eta bertako ateak kiskaliak . Ea , eraiki ditzagun Jerusalemgo harresiak , atera gaitezen egoera lotsagarri honetatik ! »
PRED:	Then I said to them , “ Go back to Jerusalem , and see that the day of Jerusalem will be destroyed , and Jerusalem will be torn down on the walls of Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	But now I said to them , “ You know very well what trouble we are in . Jerusalem lies in ruins , and its gates have been destroyed by fire . Let us rebuild the wall of Jerusalem and end this disgrace ! ”

ID:	914
INPUT:	Judak , Joserengana hurbilduz , esan zion : — Arren , jauna , utziozu zeure zerbitzari honi bi hitz esaten ; faraoiaren pareko zara zu eta ez zakizkit haserre !
PRED:	Judah came to him and said , “ Please , my lord , please let me go to the palace of Pharaoh . You will be angry with me , and you will not be angry with me . ”
GOLD:	Then Judah stepped forward and said , “ Please , my lord , let your servant say just one word to you . Please , do not be angry with me , even though you are as powerful as Pharaoh himself .

ID:	915
INPUT:	Akabek Obadiasi , jauregizain nagusiari , dei egin zion . Obadias honek begirune handia zion Jaunari .
PRED:	Then Sennacherib of Assyria shouted to the king , “ My lord the king , the leader of his palace . ”
GOLD:	So Ahab summoned Obadiah , who was in charge of the palace . ( Obadiah was a devoted follower of the Lord .

ID:	916
INPUT:	Manasesen gainerako jarduerak , egintza guztiak eta egin zuen bekatua « Judako Erregeen Kronika » liburuan daude idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Manasseh 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Manasseh 's reign and everything he did , including the sins he committed , are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .

ID:	917
INPUT:	Aldare gainean liturgi zerbitzurako erabiltzen diren tresna guztiak ezarriko dituzte : errautsontziak , sardexkak , palak eta isipu-ontziak . Guztia larru finezko estalduraz bilduko dute , eta hagak ezarriko dizkiote aldareari .
PRED:	They must take all the utensils of the Presence on the altar , along with the ash buckets , shovels , basins , and all the furnishings of the altar . They must also burn the altar for the altar , and the carrying poles of the altar .
GOLD:	All the altar utensils — the firepans , meat forks , shovels , basins , and all the containers — must be placed on the cloth , and a covering of fine goatskin leather must be spread over them . Finally , they must put the carrying poles in place .

ID:	918
INPUT:	Ikusten duzu nola mendekatu zaizkidan , zenbat asmo txar duten nire kontra .
PRED:	You have seen me that I have sinned against you , and you have forgotten me .
GOLD:	You have seen the vengeful plotsmy enemies have laid against me .

ID:	919
INPUT:	Gero , odol horrekin elkarketa-etxolan dagoen aldare-ertzeko adarrak igurtziko ditu Jaunaren aurrean , eta zekorraren gainerako odola elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran dagoen erre-oparien aldare-oinean isuriko .
PRED:	Then he must take some of the blood into the Tabernacle and put it on the horns of the Lord 's presence . He must lay the rest of the Tabernacle at the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	He will then put some of the blood on the horns of the altar for fragrant incense that stands in the Lord 's presence inside the Tabernacle . He will pour out the rest of the blood at the base of the altar for burnt offerings at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	920
INPUT:	Jesus zein zen ikusi nahirik zebilen , baina ezin zuen jendearengatik , txikia baitzen .
PRED:	When Jesus saw the crowd , he could n't understand what he was saying , but they were afraid of him .
GOLD:	He tried to get a look at Jesus , but he was too short to see over the crowd .

ID:	921
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jaunari uzten diot haurra , bizitza osorako Jaunari eskainia izanen da » . Orduan , Jauna gurtu zuen bertan .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says to the child of the Lord , the God of Israel , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Now I am giving him to the Lord , and he will belong to the Lord his whole life . ” And they worshiped the Lord there .

ID:	922
INPUT:	Bartzilai galaadtarra ere jaitsi zen Rogelimdik , Jordan ibaia erregearekin igaro eta ibai ertzean agur egiteko .
PRED:	We went to the king of the Jordan River , where we traveled through the Jordan River to visit the king of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	He was very old — eighty years of age — and very wealthy . He was the one who had provided food for the king during his stay in Mahanaim .

ID:	923
INPUT:	Eta Elik dei egin zion Samueli : — Samuel , ene seme . Samuelek erantzun : — Hemen nauzu .
PRED:	Then Samuel called to Samuel , “ Samuel , my son , Samuel , my son . ” “ Here is Samuel ! ”
GOLD:	But Eli called out to him , “ Samuel , my son . ” “ Here I am , ” Samuel replied .

ID:	924
INPUT:	apostoluak atxilotu eta herriko kartzelan sarrarazi zituzten .
PRED:	They arrested the apostles and brought them into the synagogue .
GOLD:	They arrested the apostles and put them in the public jail .

ID:	925
INPUT:	Agripak esan zion Festori : — Neuk ere gustura entzungo nioke gizon horri . — Bihar entzungo diozu — erantzun zion Festok .
PRED:	Then Festus said to him , “ I 'm going to hear this man , and I 'll tell you what it means . ”
GOLD:	“ I 'd like to hear the man myself , ” Agrippa said.And Festus replied , “ You will — tomorrow ! ”

ID:	926
INPUT:	Izan ere , behartsuak beti dituzue zeuen artean , eta nahi duzuenean egin diezaiekezue on . Baina ni ez nauzue betiko zuekin .
PRED:	You will always have a poor among you , and you will always want me to help me . But you wo n't have me with me .
GOLD:	You will always have the poor among you , and you can help them whenever you want to . But you will not always have me .

ID:	927
INPUT:	Jauna , zuregan dut babesa : ez diezadala inoiz usteak huts egin !
PRED:	O Lord , I have put my hope in you ; they have no hope .
GOLD:	O Lord , I have come to you for protection ; do n't let me be disgraced .

ID:	928
INPUT:	Lehenengo hilaren hogeita lauan , Tigris ibai handiaren ertzean nengoen .
PRED:	This was the first time of the first month of the first year of King Tiglath-pileser of Babylon .
GOLD:	On April 23 , as I was standing on the bank of the great Tigris River ,

ID:	929
INPUT:	Aurrean zegoen erromatar ehuntariak , nola hil zen ikustean , esan zuen : « Zinez , gizon hau Jainkoaren Semea zen » .
PRED:	When the officer saw that the Roman officer was dead , he said , “ May the Son of God be the Son of God . ”
GOLD:	When the Roman officer who stood facing him saw how he had died , he exclaimed , “ This man truly was the Son of God ! ”

ID:	930
INPUT:	Josuek esan zion herri osoari : — Hau dio Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak : « Zuen arbasoak , Terah eta beronen seme Abraham eta Nahor , Eufrates ibaiaren beste aldean bizi ziren antzina , eta beste jainko batzuk gurtzen zituzten .
PRED:	Then Joshua said to all the people of Israel , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : “ Your ancestors , the descendants of Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob , who lived in the province west of the Euphrates River . ”
GOLD:	Joshua said to the people , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : Long ago your ancestors , including Terah , the father of Abraham and Nahor , lived beyond the Euphrates River , and they worshiped other gods .

ID:	931
INPUT:	otoitza egin zuen : « Jauna , Israelen Jainkoa , ez da zu bezalako beste jainkorik , ez goian zeruan , ez behean lurrean . Betetzen duzu ituna eta onbera zara zure aurrean bihotzez zintzo dabiltzan zeure mirabeentzat .
PRED:	Then he prayed , “ O Lord , God of Israel , the God of Israel , says : You are not like the other gods of the earth , but you are not worthy to open your hearts .
GOLD:	and he prayed , “ O Lord , God of Israel , there is no God like you in all of heaven above or on the earth below . You keep your covenant and show unfailing love to all who walk before you in wholehearted devotion .

ID:	932
INPUT:	Su emango diot Egiptori , minez bihurrituko da Sin ; zulatu egingo dituzte Tebaseko harresiak , eta hiria urperatua izango .
PRED:	I will destroy the land of Egypt , and it will be a heap of ruins , a city of refuge in the cities of Sinai .
GOLD:	Yes , I will set fire to all Egypt ! Pelusium will be racked with pain ; Thebes will be torn apart ; Memphis will live in constant terror .

ID:	933
INPUT:	Mundua gaiztakeriaz eta indarkeriaz betea zegoen ,
PRED:	The wickedness of the earth are filled with wickedness , and the wickedness of the earth .
GOLD:	Now God saw that the earth had become corrupt and was filled with violence .

ID:	934
INPUT:	Zintzoaren nahia bete egiten da , gaiztoaren itxaropenak huts egiten .
PRED:	The words of the godly are full of the godly , but the hopes of the godly are buried .
GOLD:	The godly can look forward to a reward , while the wicked can expect only judgment .

ID:	935
INPUT:	Ni , berriz , gizagaixo atsekabetu hau , indarberri nazala , oi Jainko , zure salbazioak .
PRED:	But I am praying to you , O God , for I am praying for you , O God of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	Then I will praise God 's name with singing , and I will honor him with thanksgiving .

ID:	936
INPUT:	Adierazi nire , Jainko Jaun honen , mezua : Zure aurka nator , Sidon , zure kontura jantziko naiz ospez . Zure aurka epaia bete eta neure santutasuna agertzean , denek jakingo dute ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will bring you a terrible bow before you , Sidon , and you will bow down in your presence , and you will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	Give the people of Sidon this message from the Sovereign Lord : “ I am your enemy , O Sidon , and I will reveal my glory by what I do to you.When I bring judgment against youand reveal my holiness among you , everyone watching will knowthat I am the Lord .

ID:	937
INPUT:	Goraipa zaitzatela herriek , oi Jainko , goraipa zaitzatela herri guztiek !
PRED:	Praise the Lord , all the nations of the earth ! Let all the nations sing for joy !
GOLD:	Then the earth will yield its harvests , and God , our God , will richly bless us .

ID:	938
INPUT:	Gelditu harekin denboraldi bat , zure anaiari haserrea baretu arte .
PRED:	Stay away with your brother , and get angry with you until you are angry with me .
GOLD:	Stay there with him until your brother cools off .

ID:	939
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin zaiona egin zuen Amatziasek ; ez , ordea , David bere arbasoak bezain zintzo . Bere aita Joaxen antzera jokatu zuen Amatziasek ere .
PRED:	Amaziah did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , but he did not seek the Lord 's father , Amaziah , his father , Amaziah , and his father .
GOLD:	Amaziah did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , but not like his ancestor David . Instead , he followed the example of his father , Joash .

ID:	940
INPUT:	Jesusek galdetu zien : — Eta zuek , nor naizela diozue ? Pedrok erantzun : — Jainkoaren Mesias .
PRED:	Then Jesus asked them , “ How can you say I am ? ” Peter replied , “ You are the Messiah ? ”
GOLD:	Then he asked them , “ But who do you say I am ? ” Peter replied , “ You are the Messiah sent from God ! ”

ID:	941
INPUT:	Saulen etxekoak eta Davidenekoak liskarretan zebiltzan bitartean , Abner nagusituz joan zen Saulen etxean .
PRED:	When Saul and Saul 's men arrived at Saul 's house , they went home to Saul 's house .
GOLD:	As the war between the house of Saul and the house of David went on , Abner became a powerful leader among those loyal to Saul .

ID:	942
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin ez zaiona egin zuten israeldarrek , eta hark madiandarren menpe eduki zituen zazpi urtez .
PRED:	The Israelites did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as he had done .
GOLD:	The Israelites did evil in the Lord 's sight . So the Lord handed them over to the Midianites for seven years .

ID:	943
INPUT:	Ezbeharrez bat-batean heriotza gertatzen bada , barre egiten du hark errugabearen zoritxarraz .
PRED:	If a wild animal dies on its head , it 's too late for the time of death .
GOLD:	When a plague sweeps through , he laughs at the death of the innocent .

ID:	944
INPUT:	Jainkoak bere santutegitik esan zuen : « Sikem hiria poz-pozik neureganatuko dut , Sukot haranaz jabetuko .
PRED:	Then God said to them , “ I will take refuge in the presence of the Lord your God , and I will take possession of the descendants of Succoth .
GOLD:	But Moab , my washbasin , will become my servant , and I will wipe my feet on Edomand shout in triumph over Philistia . ”

ID:	945
INPUT:	Salomonen gainerako jarduerak , lehenengotik azkenera , liburuotan daude idatziak : « Natan Profetaren Kronika » , « Xiloko Ahiasen Profezia » eta Nebaten seme Jeroboami buruz « Ido Ikusleak Izaniko Ikuskariak » izeneko liburuetan .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Solomon 's reign were recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Babylon , are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	The rest of the events of Solomon 's reign , from beginning to end , are recorded in The Record of Nathan the Prophet , and The Prophecy of Ahijah from Shiloh , and also in The Visions of Iddo the Seer , concerning Jeroboam son of Nebat .

ID:	946
INPUT:	Laino-adarra eman zeniengidari egunez , su-adarra gauez , egin behar zuten bidea argitzeko .
PRED:	I heard the sound of a cloud that covered the pillar of cloud , and they refused to turn away from the night .
GOLD:	You led our ancestors by a pillar of cloud during the day and a pillar of fire at night so that they could find their way .

ID:	947
INPUT:	Era berean , Jaunaren etxerako behar ziren beste gauza guztiak ere eginarazi zituen Salomonek : aldarea , urrezkoa ; eskainiriko ogiak jartzeko mahaia , urrezkoa ;
PRED:	Then Solomon brought all the treasures of the Temple of the Lord , and he made gold from the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	Solomon also made all the furnishings of the Temple of the Lord : the gold altar ; the gold table for the Bread of the Presence ;

ID:	948
INPUT:	entzun zuk zerutik beraren otoitza eta eskaria , eta emaiozu garaipena .
PRED:	O heaven , hear the prayers of heaven , and give thanks to the Lord .
GOLD:	then hear their prayers from heaven and uphold their cause .

ID:	949
INPUT:	Zure bi bularrakbi gazelakume biritxi , lili artean bazkatzen .
PRED:	Your neck was as white as the sparkling pools of Bad , like a gate of Bad .
GOLD:	Your breasts are like two fawns , twin fawns of a gazelle grazing among the lilies .

ID:	950
INPUT:	« Hitzaldia bukatu ondoren , ofizialek buruzagiak izendatuko dituzte gudari-taldeentzat .
PRED:	“ When the people of Israel were defeated by the graves of the battle , they will know what they have done .
GOLD:	When the officers have finished speaking to their troops , they will appoint the unit commanders .

ID:	951
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Koreren semeen poema .
PRED:	How wonderful for you , O Lord , you are my dear children .
GOLD:	O God , we have heard it with our own ears — our ancestors have told usof all you did in their day , in days long ago :

ID:	952
INPUT:	urre eta zilarrez apainduaketa iltzez eta mailuz josiak , eror ez daitezen .
PRED:	They are clothed with gold and overlaid with gold , and they are never satisfied .
GOLD:	They decorate it with gold and silverand then fasten it securely with hammer and nailsso it wo n't fall over .

ID:	953
INPUT:	Bihotz lasaia gorputzaren bizia , bekaizkeria minbiziaren parekoa .
PRED:	The body of a body is filled with jealousy , but jealousy is filled with jealousy .
GOLD:	A peaceful heart leads to a healthy body ; jealousy is like cancer in the bones .

ID:	954
INPUT:	Isaiasek erantzun zien : « Emaiozue zeuen nagusiari Jaunaren mezu hau : “ Ez beldurtu entzun dituzun hitzengatik ; ni iraintzeko esan dituzte halakoak Asiriako erregearen ofizial horiek .
PRED:	Then Isaiah replied , “ Give me this message from the Lord : Do n't be afraid of the Assyrian citizens of Assyria ? Do n't be afraid of the Assyrian king of Assyria ?
GOLD:	the prophet replied , “ Say to your master , ‘ This is what the Lord says : Do not be disturbed by this blasphemous speech against me from the Assyrian king 's messengers .

ID:	955
INPUT:	Handik Iturriko ate aldera eta Erregearen urtegirantz jo nuen , baina gainean ninderaman abereak ez zuen handik igarotzeko lekurik .
PRED:	After this , the king turned around to the south side of the river and headed toward the river , but there was no water .
GOLD:	Then I went to the Fountain Gate and to the King 's Pool , but my donkey could n't get through the rubble .

ID:	956
INPUT:	Gero , jendeari eta ikasleei dei eginik , esan zien Jesusek : « Nire ondoren etorri nahi duenak uko egin biezaio bere buruari , bere gurutzea hartu eta jarrai biezat .
PRED:	Then Jesus called his disciples to the crowd and said to them , “ If you want to follow me , you must follow my own ways , you must follow me .
GOLD:	Then , calling the crowd to join his disciples , he said , “ If any of you wants to be my follower , you must give up your own way , take up your cross , and follow me .

ID:	957
INPUT:	Gutizia handikoak liskarrak sorrarazten ; konfiantza Jaunarengan duena asebetea izango .
PRED:	The Philistines trust in the Lord , and they will trust in him .
GOLD:	Greed causes fighting ; trusting the Lord leads to prosperity .

ID:	958
INPUT:	Ugalduko ditut zure ondorengoak , nazioen sorburu egingo zaituteta erregeak aterako dirazuregandik .
PRED:	I will multiply your descendants , and I will make you ruler over all your descendants .
GOLD:	I will make you extremely fruitful . Your descendants will become many nations , and kings will be among them !

ID:	959
INPUT:	« Ez dut koloka egingo — dio bere baitan — ; zoriontsu izango naiz beti , ezbeharrik gabe » .
PRED:	“ I will not be put to shame , but I will not be poor . ”
GOLD:	They think , “ Nothing bad will ever happen to us ! We will be free of trouble forever ! ”

ID:	960
INPUT:	Zergatik iraintzen nauzue zeuen idolatriazko jardueraz , bizitzera etorri zareten Egipton jainko arrotzei intsentsua errez ? Horrela , suntsipena erakarriko duzue zeuen gainera , eta madarikazio eta iseka-gai bihurtuko zarete munduko nazio guztien aurrean .
PRED:	So why are you going to worship me ? Why have you led me to Egypt to worship other gods ? Why have you led me to the gods of Egypt to destroy all the other nations of Egypt ?
GOLD:	Why provoke my anger by burning incense to the idols you have made here in Egypt ? You will only destroy yourselves and make yourselves an object of cursing and mockery for all the nations of the earth .

ID:	961
INPUT:	Hara , badatoz honako hau esango den egunak : “ Zorionekoak agorrak , haurrik sortu ez duten sabelak eta titirik eman ez duten bularrak ” .
PRED:	“ But this is what the Lord says : What sorrow awaits those who say , ‘ What sorrow awaits those who have children who do n't have children and have children . '
GOLD:	For the days are coming when they will say , ‘ Fortunate indeed are the women who are childless , the wombs that have not borne a child and the breasts that have never nursed . '

ID:	962
INPUT:	eta esan bertako nagusiari : « Maisuak galdetzen dizu non duen ikasleekin Pazko-bildotsa jateko tokia » .
PRED:	Then he said to the disciples , “ Teacher , the teachers of religious law are going to eat with the Passover meal . ”
GOLD:	say to the owner , ‘ The Teacher asks : Where is the guest room where I can eat the Passover meal with my disciples ? '

ID:	963
INPUT:	Naziorik ankerrenaketorraraziko ditut , etxeez jabe daitezen . Nik bukaraziko dutahaltsuen harrokeriaeta profanatu egingo dituzteberorien santutegiak .
PRED:	I will punish those who refuse to listen to my Temple , and I will not destroy them . I will punish them by the power of the Almighty , and I will destroy them .
GOLD:	I will bring the most ruthless of nationsto occupy their homes.I will break down their proud fortressesand defile their sanctuaries .

ID:	964
INPUT:	Jesus eta legea
PRED:	Jesus and the Law
GOLD:	Teaching about Divorce

ID:	965
INPUT:	Lurraldea ikertu zuten bi gizonei esan zien Josuek : « Zoazte emagalduaren etxera eta atera bera eta beraren ahaideak , zin egin zenioten bezala » .
PRED:	Then they divided the twelve men and said to Joshua , “ Go out to the house of the house , where they are going into the house of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Joshua said to the two spies , “ Keep your promise . Go to the prostitute 's house and bring her out , along with all her family . ”

ID:	966
INPUT:	Moisesek , bada , esan zion herriari : « Aukeratu gizonak eta har ditzatela armak gudurako , Madianen aurka Jaunak erabaki duen mendekua hartzera joateko .
PRED:	So Moses said to the people , “ The people of Israel must go to war against the elders of the community of Midian , and the Lord will defeat them . ”
GOLD:	So Moses said to the people , “ Choose some men , and arm them to fight the Lord 's war of revenge against Midian .

ID:	967
INPUT:	Aldi hartan , Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosorren ofizialek Jerusalemen kontra igo eta setiatu egin zuten .
PRED:	At that time King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon and besieged it .
GOLD:	During Jehoiachin 's reign , the officers of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came up against Jerusalem and besieged it .

ID:	968
INPUT:	Jauna , bihotz-bihotzez nahi zaitut goretsi , zure izena , Goi-goiko hori , kantuz ospatu ,
PRED:	I will praise you with all my heart , O Lord , for I will praise you , O Lord , my God ,
GOLD:	I will be filled with joy because of you.I will sing praises to your name , O Most High .

ID:	969
INPUT:	Horam , Gezerko erregea , Lakixi laguntzera etorri zen ; baina Josuek garaitu egin zituen bera eta beraren gudaroste osoa , bat ere bizirik utzi gabe .
PRED:	One day King Joram of Abram came to meet him , but he attacked his entire army , but his entire army had no one left him .
GOLD:	During the attack on Lachish , King Horam of Gezer arrived with his army to help defend the town . But Joshua 's men killed him and his army , leaving no survivors .

ID:	970
INPUT:	Brontzea urtuz , bi zutabe egin zituen ; bederatzina metro ziren gora eta seina metro lodi .
PRED:	They also made two bronze bronze bases for each year , each was 71/2 feet long and 6 feet wide .
GOLD:	Huram cast two bronze pillars , each 27 feet tall and 18 feet in circumference .

ID:	971
INPUT:	Alabaina , herrian hori gehiago zabal ez dadin , mehatxatu egingo ditugu , gaurdanik Jesusen izena inori aipa ez diezaioten » .
PRED:	But the people of Israel , do n't need the word of the Lord Jesus , who will never again be fulfilled . ”
GOLD:	But to keep them from spreading their propaganda any further , we must warn them not to speak to anyone in Jesus ' name again . ”

ID:	972
INPUT:	Soldaduen isekak
PRED:	The Great Commission
GOLD:	The Burial of Jesus

ID:	973
INPUT:	Izan gogoan zeuek ere esklabo izan zinetela Egipton eta Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak askatu zintuztela . Horregatik ematen dizuet gaur agindu hau .
PRED:	Remember that the Lord your God has rescued you from your slavery in Egypt . That is why the Lord your God has commanded you today .
GOLD:	Remember that you were once slaves in the land of Egypt and the Lord your God redeemed you ! That is why I am giving you this command .

ID:	974
INPUT:	Izurritea bidaliko dizut , odola isuriko da zure kaleetan ; hildakoak hiri erdian eroriko dira alde guztietatik egingo dizuten erasopean . Orduan , denek jakingo dute ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	I will send terrible plagues upon you , and you will die in your cities . Then you will know that I am the Lord . Then you will know that I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	I will send a plague against you , and blood will be spilled in your streets.The attack will come from every direction , and your people will lie slaughtered within your walls.Then everyone will knowthat I am the Lord .

ID:	975
INPUT:	Gorets bezate zeru-lur eta itsasoeketa bertan bizi diren guztiek .
PRED:	Let them praise the heavens and earth , and all the earth and everything in them .
GOLD:	For God will save Jerusalemand rebuild the towns of Judah.His people will live thereand settle in their own land .

ID:	976
INPUT:	Ez zion inori ere berarekin joaten utzi , Pedro , Santiago eta honen anaia Joani izan ezik .
PRED:	Do n't let anyone go with him . Instead , Peter , John , James , and John .
GOLD:	Then Jesus stopped the crowd and would n't let anyone go with him except Peter , James , and John ( the brother of James ) .

ID:	977
INPUT:	Mendebaldetik , atariaren zabaleran , hogeita bost metro oihal izango dira , hogei zutabe eta hogei oin dituztela .
PRED:	On the west side of the Tabernacle , the bases under each side of the Tabernacle , and five bases under each frame .
GOLD:	The curtains on the west end of the courtyard will be 75 feet long , supported by ten posts set into ten bases .

ID:	978
INPUT:	Jainkoak zabal egin beza Jafet ! Bizi bedi Semen oihal-etxoletan ! Izan bedi Kanaan Jafeten esklabo ! »
PRED:	Yes , God has done great things ! Let them be the tents of Canaan . Let them be the slave of Canaan . ”
GOLD:	May God expand the territory of Japheth ! May Japheth share the prosperity of Shem , and may Canaan be his servant . ”

ID:	979
INPUT:	dirua eta altxorrak bezala bilatzen saiatzen bazara ,
PRED:	Just as if you are instructed , you will live in your own treasury .
GOLD:	Search for them as you would for silver ; seek them like hidden treasures .

ID:	980
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Aaroni : « Ez duzu lursailik izango zeure ondaretzat israeldarrei emango diedan lurraldean . Neu izango nauzu ondare eta mantenu beste israeldarren artean .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Aaron , “ Do not let your descendants be your special possession in the land I am giving you . I will give you the land I am giving you .
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Aaron , “ You priests will receive no allotment of land or share of property among the people of Israel . I am your share and your allotment .

ID:	981
INPUT:	( 23 , <unk> )
PRED:	Eliphaz 's First Response to Jesus
GOLD:	Hope despite the Disaster

ID:	982
INPUT:	Eta Aaroni esan zion : « Hartu ontzi bat , bete lau litro manaz eta ezarri Jaunaren aurrean , ondorengo belaunaldientzat gordez » .
PRED:	Then he said to Aaron , “ Take a stone , and put it on a pole beside the Lord 's presence . ”
GOLD:	Moses said to Aaron , “ Get a jar and fill it with two quarts of manna . Then put it in a sacred place before the Lord to preserve it for all future generations . ”

ID:	983
INPUT:	« Oparo bedeinkatuko ditut bertako biltegiak , ogiz aseko behartsuak .
PRED:	“ I will bless the poor , and the poor will prosper in their eyes .
GOLD:	I will bless this city and make it prosperous ; I will satisfy its poor with food .

ID:	984
INPUT:	Haiek esan zioten : — Gezurra . Esaguzu zer zioen . Jehuk , orduan : — Tira , bada ; hauxe esan dit : « Hau dio Jaunak : Israelgo errege gantzutzen zaitut » .
PRED:	“ Go and tell us , ” they said . “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ This is what the king of Israel says : I will give you victory over Israel . ' ”
GOLD:	“ You 're hiding something , ” they said . “ Tell us . ” So Jehu told them , “ He said to me , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I have anointed you to be king over Israel . ' ”

ID:	985
INPUT:	Bedeinka beza ene arimak Jauna ! Jauna , ene Jainko , bai handia zarela ! Distiraz eta handitasunez zaude jantzia ,
PRED:	Praise the Lord , all who fear him , O Lord , will be our God , and he will rejoice in his majesty .
GOLD:	Let all that I am praise the Lord.O Lord my God , how great you are ! You are robed with honor and majesty .

ID:	986
INPUT:	Antiokian denboraldi bat egin ondoren , berriro atera eta Galazian eta Frigian barrena joan zen , ikasle guztiak gogoberotuz .
PRED:	After that , the Israelites traveled through Antioch of Syria and traveled through the territory of the Amorites and traveled through the territory of the Lord .
GOLD:	After spending some time in Antioch , Paul went back through Galatia and Phrygia , visiting and strengthening all the believers .

ID:	987
INPUT:	Israeldarrak Egiptotik irten eta bigarren urtean , urtearen lehen hilean , honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi Sinai basamortuan :
PRED:	On the first month of the first month , during the first month of the first month , the Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai .
GOLD:	A year after Israel 's departure from Egypt , the Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai . In the first month of that year he said ,

ID:	988
INPUT:	Jonasek oso gaizki hartu zuen Jaunaren erabakia eta sumindu egin zen .
PRED:	But Joseph did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , and he spoke to the Lord .
GOLD:	This change of plans greatly upset Jonah , and he became very angry .

ID:	989
INPUT:	Altxatu ziren denak eta Pilatogana eraman zuten Jesus .
PRED:	So they went to Pilate and took Jesus to Pilate .
GOLD:	Then the entire council took Jesus to Pilate , the Roman governor .

ID:	990
INPUT:	Eta mahastitik kanpora bota eta hil egin zuten . « Zer egingo ote die , bada , mahasti-jabeak ?
PRED:	They grabbed him and murdered him and murdered him . “ What do you plant vineyards ? ” they asked .
GOLD:	So they dragged him out of the vineyard and murdered him . “ What do you suppose the owner of the vineyard will do to them ? ” Jesus asked .

ID:	991
INPUT:	Nik , Pedrok , Jesu Kristoren apostolu honek , Ponto , Galazia , Kapadozia , Asia eta Bitiniako lurraldeetan atzerritar bezala sakabanaturik bizi zaretenoi idazten dizuet .
PRED:	This letter is from Peter , the apostle of Christ Jesus Christ , who is from the province of Asia ; I want you to live in the province of Asia . I want you to live in the land of Christ .
GOLD:	This letter is from Peter , an apostle of Jesus Christ.I am writing to God 's chosen people who are living as foreigners in the provinces of Pontus , Galatia , Cappadocia , Asia , and Bithynia .

ID:	992
INPUT:	Moises herriarekin egiten ari zena ikusirik , aitaginarrebak galdegin zion : — Zer ari zara egiten herriarekin ? Nola ari zara zeu bakarrik epaitzen , jendea egun osoan zutik egotera behartuz ?
PRED:	When Moses saw the people of the land , he asked , “ What are you doing ? What are you doing ? ” And they asked Moses , “ Why are you doing such a thing ? ”
GOLD:	When Moses ' father-in-law saw all that Moses was doing for the people , he asked , “ What are you really accomplishing here ? Why are you trying to do all this alone while everyone stands around you from morning till evening ? ”

ID:	993
INPUT:	Hegazti guztiekegiten zituzten habiakharen adarretan , basapiztia guztiek kumeak azpian , herri guztietako jendea bizi zenberaren babespean .
PRED:	All the birds of the sky were small , all the birds of the sky , all the birds of the sky , and all the other nations of the world .
GOLD:	The birds nested in its branches , and in its shade all the wild animals gave birth.All the great nations of the worldlived in its shadow .

ID:	994
INPUT:	Erdaingabea , hau da , bere zakil-muturra erdaindu ez duen gizasemea , herritik bota egingo duzue , nire ituna hautsi duelako » .
PRED:	This is a permanent law for you , but you must not cut it off from the town . You must carry it out of my own land , and you will carry it on my own flesh . ”
GOLD:	Any male who fails to be circumcised will be cut off from the covenant family for breaking the covenant . ”

ID:	995
INPUT:	Jerusalemdarrek eta beraien agintariek ez zuten Jesus aintzat hartu eta , berau kondenatuz , larunbatero sinagogan irakurtzen dituzten profeziak bete zituzten .
PRED:	The people of Jerusalem did not welcome Jesus because they did n't believe him , and they did n't believe in him .
GOLD:	The people in Jerusalem and their leaders did not recognize Jesus as the one the prophets had spoken about . Instead , they condemned him , and in doing this they fulfilled the prophets ' words that are read every Sabbath .

ID:	996
INPUT:	Gazakoak burusoil daude dolutan , Axkelongoak mutu . Lautadan bizirik geldituok , noiz arteurratuko dituzue gorputzak ?
PRED:	The people of Gilead are as far as dust , but the total of all the people of Ashdod will be filled with flocks of Ashkelon , and their bodies will die .
GOLD:	Gaza will be humiliated , its head shaved bald ; Ashkelon will lie silent.You remnant from the Mediterranean coast , how long will you cut yourselves in mourning ?

ID:	997
INPUT:	« Hartu harritzar batzuk eta sartu faraoiaren Tafnesko jauregi aurrean dagoen buztinezko zoruan ; egin hori judatarren aurrean ,
PRED:	So Moses took some of the council and put it in charge of Pharaoh 's palace , just as he had done .
GOLD:	“ While the people of Judah are watching , take some large rocks and bury them under the pavement stones at the entrance of Pharaoh 's palace here in Tahpanhes .

ID:	998
INPUT:	« Ongi ezagutzen ditut zuen gogoetaketa nire aurka dituzuen argudioak .
PRED:	“ You know how much I love you , and I will remember your sins .
GOLD:	“ Look , I know what you 're thinking.I know the schemes you plot against me .

ID:	999
INPUT:	Maltzurkeriaz betea , beti asmo txarretaneta sesioan ibiltzen da .
PRED:	A hungry person is hungry and hungry , while evil goes hungry .
GOLD:	Their perverted hearts plot evil , and they constantly stir up trouble .

ID:	1000
INPUT:	Nik trebatu eta indartunizkien besoak , baina haiek nirigaiztakeria asmatzen .
PRED:	I gave them the power of the nations , but I gave them their ancestors evil desires .
GOLD:	I trained them and made them strong , yet now they plot evil against me .

ID:	1001
INPUT:	Egiptotik , mila eta berrehun guda-gurdi , hirurogei mila zaldizko eta zenbatu ezin ahalako libiar , sukiar eta etiopiarrez osoturiko gudari-multzoarekin .
PRED:	He will remove all Egypt 's chariots and horses , along with the chariots of Egypt , horses , chariots , and horses . He will not destroy the entire army of Egypt .
GOLD:	He came with 1,200 chariots , 60,000 horses , and a countless army of foot soldiers , including Libyans , Sukkites , and Ethiopians .

ID:	1002
INPUT:	Harresi-zuloetatik irtengo zarete , bakoitzak bere aurreanizango duenetik , eta iparralde<unk> tiko zaituztete » .
PRED:	You will come out of the courtyard , and you will come out of the north , and I will bring you out of the north . ”
GOLD:	You will be led out through the ruins of the wall ; you will be thrown from your fortresses , ” says the Lord .

ID:	1003
INPUT:	Itzuli eta Jehuri jakinarazi ziotenean , esan zuen honek : — Horrela bete da Jaunak bere zerbitzari Elias <unk> bitarraren bidez esan zuena : zakurrek irentsiko zutela Izreelgo landan Jezabelen haragia ,
PRED:	When Jezebel heard about Jericho , he told him , “ This is what the Lord says : The Lord will send you out of Jezreel . ”
GOLD:	When they returned and told Jehu , he stated , “ This fulfills the message from the Lord , which he spoke through his servant Elijah from Tishbe : ‘ At the plot of land in Jezreel , dogs will eat Jezebel 's body .

ID:	1004
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak hitz egin zidan
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then I received this message from the Lord :

ID:	1005
INPUT:	Zain geratu behar al dut hauek ez dutelako hitz egiten , hor daudelako ezer erantzun gabe ?
PRED:	For I will keep on doing these things , and I will not answer them .
GOLD:	Should I continue to wait , now that you are silent ? Must I also remain silent ?

ID:	1006
INPUT:	Oso bestela , ikusi zuten Jainkoak jentilei berri ona hots egiteko aukeratu ninduela , Pedro juduei hots egiteko aukeratu zuen bezala .
PRED:	When I saw this , I was preaching the Good News about the Good News to the Gentiles , just as God had appointed me to be appointed by the Jews .
GOLD:	Instead , they saw that God had given me the responsibility of preaching the gospel to the Gentiles , just as he had given Peter the responsibility of preaching to the Jews .

ID:	1007
INPUT:	Jaunak nahi izan zuenbere zerbitzarialur agorrean sustraiak dituenkimu berria bezala haztea . Ez zuen duintasunik , ez edertasunik , ez gure begientzatitxura erakargarririk .
PRED:	For the Lord has given you a beautiful crown that bears your name . It will be like a beautiful fire , a beautiful crown that bears your fire .
GOLD:	My servant grew up in the Lord 's presence like a tender green shoot , like a root in dry ground.There was nothing beautiful or majestic about his appearance , nothing to attract us to him .

ID:	1008
INPUT:	Hauen ondoren Hakotzen iloba eta Uriasen seme zen Meremotek jardun zuen lanean ; harantzago , berriz , Mexezabeelen iloba eta Berekiasen seme zen Mexulamek , eta honen aldamenean Baanaren seme Tzadokek .
PRED:	From the family of Zadok son of Bani and grandson of Zadok the grandson of Mattaniah , who repaired the section of the altar . He was the son of Zadok son of Meshullam , the son of Meshullam , the son of Zadok son of Meshullam , and grandson of Zadok the priest .
GOLD:	Meremoth son of Uriah and grandson of Hakkoz repaired the next section of wall . Beside him were Meshullam son of Berekiah and grandson of Meshezabel , and then Zadok son of Baana .

ID:	1009
INPUT:	Batzuek atxilotu egin nahi zuten , baina inork ez zion eskurik ezarri .
PRED:	But some of the people tried to arrest him , but no one laid his hands on him .
GOLD:	Some even wanted him arrested , but no one laid a hand on him .

ID:	1010
INPUT:	Berehala , atzera begiratu eta Jesus ikusi zuen zutik , baina ez zen konturatu Jesus zela .
PRED:	So Jesus went to look at him and saw that he was n't talking about Jesus . But Jesus did n't understand what he had said .
GOLD:	She turned to leave and saw someone standing there . It was Jesus , but she did n't recognize him .

ID:	1011
INPUT:	Gupida izango diozu Sioni berriro , bada-eta errukirako garaia ; bai , heldu da garaia !
PRED:	Then you will be handed over to us , and you will have mercy on us .
GOLD:	For your people love every stone in her wallsand cherish even the dust in her streets .

ID:	1012
INPUT:	Irribarre egiten nienean , ia-ia ezin zuten sinetsi , nire aurpegi argiaren irrikaz zeuden .
PRED:	Come out , let my face out , and do n't let me see the light of the living .
GOLD:	When they were discouraged , I smiled at them.My look of approval was precious to them .

ID:	1013
INPUT:	Gero , Moisesek esan zien : « Ez dezala inork biharamunerako ezer gorde » .
PRED:	Then Moses said to them , “ Do n't let anyone go back to the next morning . ”
GOLD:	Then Moses told them , “ Do not keep any of it until morning . ”

ID:	1014
INPUT:	Txunditurik geldituko dira denak Jaunak eramango zaituzten herrietan , koplak aterako dizkizuete eta iseka egingo .
PRED:	The Lord will be able to look favorably on you , and they will mock you , and they will mock you and mock you .
GOLD:	You will become an object of horror , ridicule , and mockery among all the nations to which the Lord sends you .

ID:	1015
INPUT:	Haur hauxe eskatzen nion Jaunari eta eman dit eskatzen niona .
PRED:	The Lord rewarded me for doing this , and he rescued me from my hands .
GOLD:	I asked the Lord to give me this boy , and he has granted my request .

ID:	1016
INPUT:	Izurriz joko ditut eta lurralde-ondarea kenduko , eta horiek baino herri handi eta ahaltsuagoa sorraraziko dut zuregandik .
PRED:	I will turn my bones and drive out the land of the land , and I will drive out the nations ahead of you . I will drive them out of the land .
GOLD:	I will disown them and destroy them with a plague . Then I will make you into a nation greater and mightier than they are ! ”

ID:	1017
INPUT:	Izen ona zuen Listrako eta Ikonioko senideen artean .
PRED:	So it was on the east of the Jordan Valley and the sister of Lystra .
GOLD:	Timothy was well thought of by the believers in Lystra and Iconium ,

ID:	1018
INPUT:	Berdin zuek : azaletik zintzoak jendaurrean , baina barrutik itxurakeriaz eta gaiztakeriaz beteak .
PRED:	So you say to the godly , but do n't look at doing wrong , for they are doing evil .
GOLD:	Outwardly you look like righteous people , but inwardly your hearts are filled with hypocrisy and lawlessness .

ID:	1019
INPUT:	Ministroetarik bat honela mintzatu zen : — Har ditzagun hirian gelditzen diren zaldietarik bost , hirian gelditzen diren israeldar guztien bukaera bera izango baitute bestela ere . Bidal ditzagun eta ikusiko dugu .
PRED:	Then his officers went to the king and told him , “ Get out of the cities of Israel , and we will see five men of Israel . They will be sent to the king of Israel , and we will see him . ”
GOLD:	One of his officers replied , “ We had better send out scouts to check into this . Let them take five of the remaining horses . If something happens to them , it will be no worse than if they stay here and die with the rest of us . ”

ID:	1020
INPUT:	zuek ez aldendu elkarketa-etxolaren sarreratik , hil nahi ez baduzue , olioz Jaunari sagaratuak baitzaudete » . Moisesek agindu bezala egin zuten .
PRED:	So you must not enter the Tabernacle of the Lord 's presence , just as Moses had commanded you . ” So Moses did as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	But you must not leave the entrance of the Tabernacle or you will die , for you have been anointed with the Lord 's anointing oil . ” So they did as Moses commanded .

ID:	1021
INPUT:	Herri horien artean ez duzue atsedenik izango , ezta zeuen oinak lasai non pausaturik ere , bihotza ikaraz , begiak tristuraz eta barrua atsekabez beteko baitizkizue Jaunak .
PRED:	When you do n't rest , you will be afraid to rest in the land of your grief , for the Lord has given you grief . So do n't lose heart , for this is what the Lord has done .
GOLD:	There among those nations you will find no peace or place to rest . And the Lord will cause your heart to tremble , your eyesight to fail , and your soul to despair .

ID:	1022
INPUT:	Ardi galduaren parabola
PRED:	Parable of the Great Feast
GOLD:	Parable of the Lost Sheep

ID:	1023
INPUT:	Handik , Ainen ekialdean dagoen Riblara jaitsiko da ; gero , Genesaret aintziraren ekialdetik hegiz hegi jaitsiz joango da
PRED:	They will go to Riblah in the region of Riblah in the Sea of Galilee . They will go down to the Sea of Galilee and camped at Riblah in the Sea of Galilee .
GOLD:	then down to Riblah on the east side of Ain . From there the boundary will run down along the eastern edge of the Sea of Galilee ,

ID:	1024
INPUT:	Eta Jubileu Urtea iristean , Tzelofhaden alaben ondarea behin betiko erantsiko litzaioke senarren leinukoari eta gure arbasoen leinutik banandurik geldituko » .
PRED:	If the land of Judah returns to the daughters of the daughters of the daughters of the tribe of Judah , the tribe of Judah will be lifted up from the tribe of Judah . ”
GOLD:	Then when the Year of Jubilee comes , their portion of land will be added to that of the new tribe , causing it to be lost forever to our ancestral tribe . ”

ID:	1025
INPUT:	Bere zangoak moztu eta ozpina edaten duzentzugabearen bidez mezuak bidaltzen dituenak .
PRED:	Those who cut off their branches and fall into poverty , and those who ignore God 's message .
GOLD:	Trusting a fool to convey a messageis like cutting off one 's feet or drinking poison !

ID:	1026
INPUT:	Atzerrian hilko zarete , zeuen etsaien lurpean irentsirik geldituko .
PRED:	Your enemies will die in the pit , and you will never be able to shame them .
GOLD:	You will die among the foreign nations and be devoured in the land of your enemies .

ID:	1027
INPUT:	Hil aharia eta , haren odoletik harturik , aldare-ingurua zirtatuko duzu .
PRED:	Then slaughter the blood of the altar , and slaughter it with its blood , and sprinkle it with its blood .
GOLD:	Then slaughter the ram , and splatter its blood against all sides of the altar .

ID:	1028
INPUT:	Pilatok erantzun zion : — Judua ote naiz , bada , ni ? Zeure herrikoek eta apaizburuek ekarri zaituzte niregana . Zer egin duzu ?
PRED:	Pilate replied , “ How can I do such a thing ? If you are my own people ? Why are you doing such a thing ? Why do you do such a thing ? ”
GOLD:	“ Am I a Jew ? ” Pilate retorted . “ Your own people and their leading priests brought you to me for trial . Why ? What have you done ? ”

ID:	1029
INPUT:	Gizakiagandik berez jaioa gizaki da , Espiritutik jaioa espiritu .
PRED:	For the Holy Spirit is born from the Holy Spirit , just as the Son of Man is born .
GOLD:	Humans can reproduce only human life , but the Holy Spirit gives birth to spiritual life .

ID:	1030
INPUT:	ez duzue zutarri sakraturik egingo , gorroto baititu Jaunak zuen Jainkoak halako gauzak .
PRED:	You must not defile the sacred offerings , for the Lord your God is giving you .
GOLD:	And never set up sacred pillars for worship , for the Lord your God hates them .

ID:	1031
INPUT:	Txalmatu zuen astoa eta esan zion morroiari : — Eraman astoa uhaletik eta ez gelditu bidean nik esan arte .
PRED:	Then the donkey said to the servant , “ Bring out the donkey and feed them . ” So he told them , “ Do n't let them go . ”
GOLD:	So she saddled the donkey and said to the servant , “ Hurry ! Do n't slow down unless I tell you to . ”

ID:	1032
INPUT:	Orduan , zazpi ontziak azken zazpi izurriez beterik zeuzkaten zazpi aingeruetako batek etorri eta esan zidan : « Zatoz , emaztegaia erakutsi behar dizut , Bildotsaren emaztea » .
PRED:	Then the seven angels came out and saw the seven angels standing there . One of the seven angels said , “ Come , I will give you the wife of the Lamb . ”
GOLD:	Then one of the seven angels who held the seven bowls containing the seven last plagues came and said to me , “ Come with me ! I will show you the bride , the wife of the Lamb . ”

ID:	1033
INPUT:	Neu naiz Jauna , zuen Jainko izateko Egiptotik igoarazi zintuztena . Izan zaitezte santu , ni santua naiz eta .
PRED:	I am the Lord your God , who rescued you from the land of Egypt , and you will be holy .
GOLD:	For I , the Lord , am the one who brought you up from the land of Egypt , that I might be your God . Therefore , you must be holy because I am holy .

ID:	1034
INPUT:	Hau duzue zeuen hiri festazalea , aspaldidanik eraikia ? Hau , urrutian koloniakjartzen zituena ?
PRED:	You are the first to celebrate the meaning of your word , and you are so far away from me ?
GOLD:	Is this silent ruin all that is left of your once joyous city ? What a long history was yours ! Think of all the colonists you sent to distant places .

ID:	1035
INPUT:	Handik zenbait egunen buruan , Agripa erregea eta Berenize iritsi ziren Zesareara , Festo agurtzera .
PRED:	Three days later Festus went to the king , and he went to the king of Babylon to worship him .
GOLD:	A few days later King Agrippa arrived with his sister , Bernice , to pay their respects to Festus .

ID:	1036
INPUT:	Sar zaitezte haitzuloetan , gorde lurreko leizeetan , Jauna beldurgarrieta ospe distiratsuz agertzean , lurra dardararaztera etortzean .
PRED:	Do n't let them go into the land , for the Lord is watching over the land of the sea , with his glory and majesty .
GOLD:	When the Lord rises to shake the earth , his enemies will crawl into holes in the ground.They will hide in caves in the rocksfrom the terror of the Lordand the glory of his majesty .

ID:	1037
INPUT:	Begira , senideok , ez dezala zuetako inork bihotz gaizto eta sinesgaberik izan , Jainko biziarengandik aldenduko duenik .
PRED:	And now , dear brothers and sisters , do n't believe that anyone who believes in God 's kindness will live in you .
GOLD:	Be careful then , dear brothers and sisters . Make sure that your own hearts are not evil and unbelieving , turning you away from the living God .

ID:	1038
INPUT:	Ondoren , erdainkuntza eman zion itunaren ezaugarri ; hala , Isaak jaio zitzaionean , zortzigarren egunean erdaindu egin zuen Abrahamek ; berdin egin zuen Isaakek ere Jakobekin , eta Jakobek hamabi patriarkekin .
PRED:	After the birth of Abraham had been circumcised , he was circumcised on the eighth day of the birth of Abraham . When he was circumcised , he took some of his ancestors in the wilderness of Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob .
GOLD:	“ God also gave Abraham the covenant of circumcision at that time . So when Abraham became the father of Isaac , he circumcised him on the eighth day . And the practice was continued when Isaac became the father of Jacob , and when Jacob became the father of the twelve patriarchs of the Israelite nation .

ID:	1039
INPUT:	Zergatik gastatu zeuen diruagoserik utziko zaituzten janaritan , eta lansariaaseko ez zaituzteten gauzetan ? Entzun niri arretaz , eta ongi jango duzue , janari gozo mamitsuzelikatuko zarete .
PRED:	Why do you think you are hungry ? Why are you hungry ? Do you think you are hungry ? Do n't you think you are hungry and thirsty , and you are hungry ? Why are you doing this ?
GOLD:	Why spend your money on food that does not give you strength ? Why pay for food that does you no good ? Listen to me , and you will eat what is good.You will enjoy the finest food .

ID:	1040
INPUT:	( 2 Kro 9 , 1-12 )
PRED:	A Message about Ishmael
GOLD:	Solomon 's Wealth and Splendor

ID:	1041
INPUT:	Gero , alaba izan zuen , eta Dina eman zion izen .
PRED:	Then he married her daughter , and she named him .
GOLD:	Later she gave birth to a daughter and named her Dinah .

ID:	1042
INPUT:	« Nire Aitak nire esku utzi du dena . Eta inork ez du ezagutzen Semea nor den , Aitak baizik ; ezta Aita nor den ere , Semeak baizik eta Semeak agertu nahi dionak » .
PRED:	“ My Father has given me my Father . No one knows what he tells us , but the Father is the Son of the Father and the Son of the Father . ”
GOLD:	“ My Father has entrusted everything to me . No one truly knows the Son except the Father , and no one truly knows the Father except the Son and those to whom the Son chooses to reveal him . ”

ID:	1043
INPUT:	Handik aldi batera , Jainkoak probatu egin nahi izan zuen Abraham eta dei egin zion : — Abraham ! Honek erantzun : — Hemen nauzu !
PRED:	After this , God called for a prophet to go and called him , “ Abraham ! ” “ Yes , ” Abraham replied . “ Yes , I am here ! ”
GOLD:	Some time later , God tested Abraham 's faith . “ Abraham ! ” God called . “ Yes , ” he replied . “ Here I am . ”

ID:	1044
INPUT:	Hala ere , ez ziren muinoetako kultu-lekuak desagertu ; jendeak jarraitu egiten zuen halako muinoetan opariak eskaintzen eta intsentsua erretzen .
PRED:	But he did not destroy the pagan shrines , and he burned incense altars to the pagan shrines and burned incense there .
GOLD:	One day King Joash said to the priests , “ Collect all the money brought as a sacred offering to the Lord 's Temple , whether it is a regular assessment , a payment of vows , or a voluntary gift .

ID:	1045
INPUT:	Hau dio Jaunak : « Mahatsak zuku ona duenean , esan ohi da : “ Ez dezagun honda , ardoa ugari dakar eta ” . Halaxe jokatuko dut nik ereneure zerbitzarien amoreagatik : ez dut herria erabat hondatuko .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The rich of Midian will be destroyed , ” says the Lord . “ I will not destroy the people of Israel , but I will not destroy them .
GOLD:	“ But I will not destroy them all , ” says the Lord . “ For just as good grapes are found among a cluster of bad ones ( and someone will say , ‘ Do n't throw them all away — some of those grapes are good ! ' ) , so I will not destroy all Israel.For I still have true servants there .

ID:	1046
INPUT:	Gero , haien zakuak gariz bete , bakoitzari bere dirua itzuli eta biderako jan-edariak emateko agindu zuen . Eta hala egin zieten .
PRED:	Then he sent his men back to each other , and he sent them to wear their robes and put them on their heads .
GOLD:	Joseph then ordered his servants to fill the men 's sacks with grain , but he also gave secret instructions to return each brother 's payment at the top of his sack . He also gave them supplies for their journey home .

ID:	1047
INPUT:	Erregeak galdegin zion etiopiarrari : — Onik al da Absalom gaztea ? Etiopiarrak erantzun zuen : — Gertatuko ahal zaie ene errege jaunaren etsaiei eta erregearen kontra kalte egiteko jaiki ziren guztiei mutilari gertatu zaiona !
PRED:	Then the king asked Absalom , “ Are you the commander of the army ? ” “ No , my lord the king , my lord the king ? ” So the king told him , “ He will destroy all your enemies . ”
GOLD:	“ What about young Absalom ? ” the king demanded . “ Is he all right ? ” And the Ethiopian replied , “ May all of your enemies , my lord the king , both now and in the future , share the fate of that young man ! ”

ID:	1048
INPUT:	Baina printzeak emaitza bere menpekoren bati egiten badio , ondare-zati hori askapen-urtera arte bakarrik izango da menpekoarena ; gero , printzeari itzuliko zaio . Izan ere , beronen semeei bakarrik dagokie herentzian ondare hori .
PRED:	“ But the prince will be like a prince , a prince of a prince , a prince of land , a prince of his descendants . He will be his son , and he will return to his descendants , and he will be his son .
GOLD:	But if the prince gives a gift of land from his inheritance to one of his servants , the servant may keep it only until the Year of Jubilee , which comes every fiftieth year . At that time the land will return to the prince . But when the prince gives gifts to his sons , those gifts will be permanent .

ID:	1049
INPUT:	Ondoren , Hilelen seme Abdonek , Piratongoak , gobernatu zuen Israel .
PRED:	Then Abimelech took some of the ram 's sons to set up the place where he had prepared .
GOLD:	After Elon died , Abdon son of Hillel , from Pirathon , judged Israel .

ID:	1050
INPUT:	Eta ikasleek galdegin zioten : — Maisu , zeinek egin zuen bekatu hau itsu jaiotzeko , beronek ala beronen gurasoek ?
PRED:	Then the disciples asked Jesus , “ Teacher , how can these things be born ? ” And the disciples asked him , “ How can we be born ? ”
GOLD:	“ Rabbi , ” his disciples asked him , “ why was this man born blind ? Was it because of his own sins or his parents ' sins ? ”

ID:	1051
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	The Lord also said to Moses ,

ID:	1052
INPUT:	« Neure zuzentasunaren ordainaeman dit Jaunak , neure jokabide garbiaren saria .
PRED:	“ The Lord rewarded me for doing wrong ; he has turned me from my path .
GOLD:	The Lord rewarded me for doing right ; he restored me because of my innocence .

ID:	1053
INPUT:	Rimon-Peretzetik Libnara ;
PRED:	They left Libnah and camped at Libnah .
GOLD:	They left Rimmon-perez and camped at Libnah .

ID:	1054
INPUT:	« Epaiketarako bularrekoa artelanez egingo duzu , efodaren gai berak erabiliz : urrea , purpura more , gorri eta gorrimina eta liho-hari bihurritua .
PRED:	“ Make the chestpiece to the ephod , with blue , purple , and scarlet thread , and scarlet thread , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	“ Then , with great skill and care , make a chestpiece to be worn for seeking a decision from God . Make it to match the ephod , using finely woven linen embroidered with gold and with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .

ID:	1055
INPUT:	Madarikatuanire aitari albistea eman ziona , « Mutikoa jaio zaizu » esanez , eta pozarren jarri zuena !
PRED:	Then the prophet said to Mary , “ Your father is a boy . ” And the boy said , “ You are a boy . ”
GOLD:	I curse the messenger who told my father , “ Good news — you have a son ! ”

ID:	1056
INPUT:	Baina biharamun egunsentian har bat bidali zuen Jainkoak ; harrak jo eta landarea ihartu egin zen .
PRED:	But the next morning the owner got up , and he sent a spear and beat him up .
GOLD:	But God also arranged for a worm ! The next morning at dawn the worm ate through the stem of the plant so that it withered away .

ID:	1057
INPUT:	Nebaten seme Jeroboamen eta Ahiasen seme Baxaren senitarteak zigortu nituen bezalaxe zigortuko dut Akaben senitartea ere .
PRED:	This is the account of Jeroboam son of Nebat , the family of Jeroboam son of Nebat , the family of Baasha son of Nebat , the family of Ahab 's family .
GOLD:	I will destroy the family of Ahab as I destroyed the families of Jeroboam son of Nebat and of Baasha son of Ahijah .

ID:	1058
INPUT:	SAUL LE<unk> BIZIKO ERREGEA ( 8 , 1 — 15 , 35 )
PRED:	Samuel Intercedes for Israel
GOLD:	Israel Requests a King

ID:	1059
INPUT:	Haurtxoak txikituegingo dizkiete begien aurrean , etxeak hustu , emazteak bortxatu .
PRED:	They will give birth to their children , and they will be married to their homes .
GOLD:	Their little children will be dashed to death before their eyes.Their homes will be sacked , and their wives will be raped .

ID:	1060
INPUT:	Jakobek , zu<unk> , hur<unk> eta platano-ziri heze batzuk harturik , zuritu egin zituen .
PRED:	When Jacob heard about it , he took some of them in the streets and scattered them .
GOLD:	Then Jacob took some fresh branches from poplar , almond , and plane trees and peeled off strips of bark , making white streaks on them .

ID:	1061
INPUT:	Bakealdia etorri orduko , ordea , okerbidera itzuli ziren ; eta etsaien menpe utzi zenituen , berauen hankapean . Deiadar egin zizuten berriro , eta zuk zerutik entzun ; sarritan atera zenituen onikzeure erruki handiaz .
PRED:	But the people of Israel came to Balaam and sent them back to the land of the enemy , and they turned away from their sins . They shouted to him , “ Get out of heaven , and learn that you have heard me from heaven . ”
GOLD:	“ But as soon as they were at peace , your people again committed evil in your sight , and once more you let their enemies conquer them . Yet whenever your people turned and cried to you again for help , you listened once more from heaven . In your wonderful mercy , you rescued them many times !

ID:	1062
INPUT:	Nire aurka borrokatzeko gauza bada eta hiltzen banau , zuen morroi izanen gara . Baina ni berorren aurka borrokatzeko gauza izan eta hiltzen badut , zuek izanen zarete gure morroi , eta zerbitzatu egin beharko gaituzue .
PRED:	But if you fight against me , I will fight against you and kill me . But if you have fought against me , I will kill you and kill you , and you will kill me . ”
GOLD:	If he kills me , then we will be your slaves . But if I kill him , you will be our slaves !

ID:	1063
INPUT:	Zuei zer esanik asko dudan arren , ez dut paperez eta tintaz egin nahi . Zuengana joatea espero dut eta aurrez aurre hitz egitea ; horrela poz bete-betea izango dugu elkarrekin .
PRED:	I want to say to you , but I want to talk to you . I want to speak to you , and I will speak to you , and I will be glad with joy .
GOLD:	I have much more to say to you , but I do n't want to do it with paper and ink . For I hope to visit you soon and talk with you face to face . Then our joy will be complete .

ID:	1064
INPUT:	bati , mirariak egiteko ahalmena ; beste bati , Jainkoaren izenean hitz egitea ; bati , espiritu faltsua eta benetakoa bereiztea ; besteari , hizketa arrotzez mintzatzea , eta beste bati , hizketa horren esanahia adieraztea .
PRED:	As a result , it is a gift to God , it is a different kind of talk to God . He is a different kind of talk and different kind of talk . He is a different kind of talk , and he speaks to you .
GOLD:	He gives one person the power to perform miracles , and another the ability to prophesy . He gives someone else the ability to discern whether a message is from the Spirit of God or from another spirit . Still another person is given the ability to speak in unknown languages , while another is given the ability to interpret what is being said .

ID:	1065
INPUT:	Honen aldamenean , Zebairen seme Barukek egin zuen lan , Zokotik Eliaxib apaiz nagusiaren etxeko ateraino .
PRED:	This is the account of the family of Joiada son of Eliashib , who was high priest , who had been set apart from the Temple of God .
GOLD:	Next to him was Baruch son of Zabbai , who zealously repaired an additional section from the angle to the door of the house of Eliashib the high priest .

ID:	1066
INPUT:	Gederot , Bet-Dagon , Naama , Makeda : hamasei hiri eta beraien herrixkak .
PRED:	From there on , there were six towns with their surrounding villages . The towns of Dan included these towns with their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	Gederoth , Beth-dagon , Naamah , and Makkedah — sixteen towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	1067
INPUT:	Egun hartan bertan , Jainkoak agindu bezala , bere etxeko gizaseme guztiak erdaindu zituen Abrahamek : Ismael bere semea eta esklabo guztiak , nahiz etxean jaioak nahiz diruz erosiak .
PRED:	In that same day Abraham did as God had commanded him . He obeyed all his sons , Abraham , all the male and female servants , all the descendants of Abraham , slave , slave , slave , and all Israel .
GOLD:	On that very day Abraham took his son , Ishmael , and every male in his household , including those born there and those he had bought . Then he circumcised them , cutting off their foreskins , just as God had told him .

ID:	1068
INPUT:	Abimelekek galdetu zion : — Zer esan nahi du zazpi arkume horiek bereiz jartzeak ?
PRED:	Then Abimelech asked her , “ What are these seven young women who want to eat these animals ? ”
GOLD:	Abimelech asked , “ Why have you set these seven apart from the others ? ”

ID:	1069
INPUT:	Hau jendea , hortzak ezpatak bezalakoaketa matrailezurrak labanak bezalakoak dituena , herriko dohakabeak irentsieta behartsuak lurretik suntsitzeko !
PRED:	They will be like a strong lion , like a strong lion , and their teeth will be destroyed , and their victims will be destroyed .
GOLD:	They have teeth like swordsand fangs like knives.They devour the poor from the earthand the needy from among humanity .

ID:	1070
INPUT:	Aztiek erantzun zioten : — Errege jauna , ez dago munduan gizonik eskatzen duzuna egin dezakeenik . Inongo erregek , handiena eta ahaltsuena izanik ere , ez dio inoiz antzeko gauzarik eskatu igarle edo azti bati .
PRED:	“ No , ” the king replied . “ No , my lord the king , ” the king replied . “ No one can serve the king of the Almighty . ”
GOLD:	The astrologers replied to the king , “ No one on earth can tell the king his dream ! And no king , however great and powerful , has ever asked such a thing of any magician , enchanter , or astrologer !

ID:	1071
INPUT:	Beste aingeru bat , suaren gain agintea zuena , irten zen aldaretik eta oihu egin zion ahots handiz igitai zorrotza zuenari : « Hartu igitai zorrotz hori eta bildu lurreko mahastiko mordoak , mahatsa heldu-heldua baitago » .
PRED:	Then another angel of the Lord appeared to him , and he shouted to him , “ Look , a mighty man who was standing in the field , and a mighty army will walk in the valley . ”
GOLD:	Then another angel , who had power to destroy with fire , came from the altar . He shouted to the angel with the sharp sickle , “ Swing your sickle now to gather the clusters of grapes from the vines of the earth , for they are ripe for judgment . ”

ID:	1072
INPUT:	Eta bere neskame Bilha eman zion Jakobi emazte gisa . Elkartu zitzaion Jakob ,
PRED:	Then Jacob gave Jacob a servant to Jacob , Jacob . He gave Jacob two sons , Jacob , and Jacob .
GOLD:	So Rachel gave her servant , Bilhah , to Jacob as a wife , and he slept with her .

ID:	1073
INPUT:	Baina inolako lanik egin ez arren , erruduna errugabe egiten duen Jainkoarengan sinesten duena , sinesmen horri esker onartuko du Jainkoak .
PRED:	But anyone who believes in God 's sight will never be made right with God 's mercy . But anyone who believes in him will be made right with God .
GOLD:	But people are counted as righteous , not because of their work , but because of their faith in God who forgives sinners .

ID:	1074
INPUT:	« Izan begirune gurasoei , eta errespetatu nik aginduriko atseden-eguna . Neu naiz Jauna , zuen Jainkoa .
PRED:	“ Be careful to obey my commands and obey my commands . I am the Lord your God . I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Each of you must show great respect for your mother and father , and you must always observe my Sabbath days of rest . I am the Lord your God .

ID:	1075
INPUT:	Moises menditik jaitsi zen , legearen harlauzak eskuetan zituela . Harlauzak bi aldeetatik idatziak zeuden :
PRED:	So Moses went down to the mountain of the Covenant , and the two tablets inscribed with the terms of the stone tablets .
GOLD:	Then Moses turned and went down the mountain . He held in his hands the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant . They were inscribed on both sides , front and back .

ID:	1076
INPUT:	Amotzen seme Isaiasek honako mezu hau bidali zion Ezekiasi : « Hau dio Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak : Aditu dut Asiriako errege Senakerib dela-eta egin didazun otoitza .
PRED:	Then Isaiah son of Amoz sent this message to King Hezekiah : “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : ‘ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says :
GOLD:	Then Isaiah son of Amoz sent this message to Hezekiah : “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : Because you prayed about King Sennacherib of Assyria ,

ID:	1077
INPUT:	Aita-amek zapuzten banaute ere , Jaunak berekin hartuko nau .
PRED:	For the Lord is my Father , and he has rejected me .
GOLD:	Even if my father and mother abandon me , the Lord will hold me close .

ID:	1078
INPUT:	Egin itzazu kateak , hilketaz betea baitago herria , indarkeriaz betea hiria .
PRED:	Do n't let them die because of their sins , for they have done such wonderful deeds .
GOLD:	“ Prepare chains for my people , for the land is bloodied by terrible crimes.Jerusalem is filled with violence .

ID:	1079
INPUT:	Hofni eta Pinhas zure bi semeei gertatuko zaiena izango da ezaugarria : egun berean hilko zaizkizu biak .
PRED:	Phinehas son of Phinehas , the two sons of Phinehas , will be ceremonially clean , and you will die .
GOLD:	And to prove that what I have said will come true , I will cause your two sons , Hophni and Phinehas , to die on the same day !

ID:	1080
INPUT:	Hori ukaezina da ; zaudete , beraz , lasai , itsu-itsuan jokatu gabe .
PRED:	That is why you are so weak , and you will live in safety .
GOLD:	Since this is an undeniable fact , you should stay calm and not do anything rash .

ID:	1081
INPUT:	zutabeen oinak brontzezkoak , kakoak eta ziriak zilarrezkoak ; zutabe-gainak ere zilarrez estali zituen ; atariko zutabe guztiek zilarrezko ziriak zituzten .
PRED:	He hung the curtains with bronze hooks and rings and overlaid them with gold . He overlaid them with silver hooks and rings .
GOLD:	Each post had a bronze base , and all the hooks and rings were silver . The tops of the posts of the courtyard were overlaid with silver , and the rings to hold up the curtains were made of silver .

ID:	1082
INPUT:	Orgaren gainaldean ur-ontzi baten ezpainak ateratzen ziren metro erdi bat gorantz ; ur-ontzia biribila zen , hirurogeita hamabost zentimetroko diametroa zuelarik . Ezpain haietan ere baziren irudi zizelkatuak , panel koadratueetan , ez biribiletan .
PRED:	They also made a distance from the top of the Temple , a distance from the center stem , a distance from the center of the guard alcoves , and 30 feet wide . They were decorated with the walls of the guard alcoves on the walls .
GOLD:	The top of each cart had a rounded frame for the basin . It projected 11/2 feet above the cart 's top like a round pedestal , and its opening was 21/4 feet across ; it was decorated on the outside with carvings of wreaths . The panels of the carts were square , not round .

ID:	1083
INPUT:	Pozaren pozez jauzi egingo dut zure maitasunagatik , ikusi baituzu nire atsekabea , arduratu baitzara nire larrialdiaz ,
PRED:	I will rejoice in your love , for I have seen your tears , for you have seen my misery .
GOLD:	You have not handed me over to my enemiesbut have set me in a safe place .

ID:	1084
INPUT:	Negar eta intziri egingo dutmendiak direla eta ; deitore , larre-zelaiak direla eta : erreak gelditu baitira eta hutsik ; ez da ardirik beeka entzuten , hegazti eta abereakihesi joanak dira .
PRED:	I will weep and mourn for the mountains , for the grass of the mountain , and the grass will yield no grass , for the flocks of sheep and goats will starve to death .
GOLD:	Should I not punish them for this ? ” says the Lord . “ Should I not avenge myself against such a nation ? ”

ID:	1085
INPUT:	Afarikoan , morroia bidali zuen gonbidatuei esatera : “ Etorri , dena gertu dago eta ” .
PRED:	He sent his servants to tell the servants , ‘ Go and tell the truth , ' he will tell them , ‘ Go and tell you what it means . '
GOLD:	When the banquet was ready , he sent his servant to tell the guests , ‘ Come , the banquet is ready . '

ID:	1086
INPUT:	Zulo sakonera jaurti nauzu , barren-barreneko ilunpetara .
PRED:	I will go down to the valley of darkness , and darkness will cover me with darkness .
GOLD:	Your anger weighs me down ; with wave after wave you have engulfed me.Interlude

ID:	1087
INPUT:	Irakatsi niri ongi bereizten eta ezagutzen , zure aginduez fidatzen bainaiz .
PRED:	Teach me to obey my commands , for I do n't trust your commands .
GOLD:	I believe in your commands ; now teach me good judgment and knowledge .

ID:	1088
INPUT:	Ibar beltz-ilunetan banabil ere , ez dut inolako gaitzen beldurrik , zu nirekin baitzaude : zure artzain-makilak lasaitzen nau .
PRED:	Dark surround me , for I am not afraid of anyone who is n't afraid of me .
GOLD:	Even when I walkthrough the darkest valley , I will not be afraid , for you are close beside me.Your rod and your staffprotect and comfort me .

ID:	1089
INPUT:	Ez ote dugu eskubiderik emakume fededun batekin ibiltzeko , beste apostoluek , Jaunaren anaiek eta Pedrok berak bezala ?
PRED:	Do n't we serve the Lord with the other prophets ? Are we like Peter , Peter , and other other believers ?
GOLD:	Do n't we have the right to bring a believing wife with us as the other apostles and the Lord 's brothers do , and as Peter does ?

ID:	1090
INPUT:	Bidez zihoala , Lebi Alfeorena ikusi zuen zerga biltzeko mahaian eseria , eta esan zion : — Jarraitu niri . Lebik zutitu eta jarraitu egin zion .
PRED:	While he was walking along the first way , he saw two servant girl sitting at the table . “ Follow me , ” he said . “ Follow me and follow me . ”
GOLD:	As he walked along , he saw Levi son of Alphaeus sitting at his tax collector 's booth . “ Follow me and be my disciple , ” Jesus said to him . So Levi got up and followed him .

ID:	1091
INPUT:	Nornahik , alarguntsen sailean sartzeko , hirurogei urtez gorakoa izan behar du , behin bakarrik ezkondua ,
PRED:	If you enter the land , the priest must be put to the third year , and the priest must be put to death .
GOLD:	A widow who is put on the list for support must be a woman who is at least sixty years old and was faithful to her husband .

ID:	1092
INPUT:	« Bizi bedi Ruben , ez bedi hil , gutxi izan arren beraren gizonak » .
PRED:	“ The man did not have a few sheep or goats , but the man who had been killed . ”
GOLD:	Moses said this about the tribe of Reuben : “ Let the tribe of Reuben live and not die out , though they are few in number . ”

ID:	1093
INPUT:	horregatik , hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Filistearren kontra ekingo diot , keretarrak erauziko ditut eta itsasertzeko gainerako herriak suntsituko .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will destroy the nations of the Philistines , and I will destroy them and destroy them .
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will raise my fist of judgment against the land of the Philistines . I will wipe out the Kerethites and utterly destroy the people who live by the sea .

ID:	1094
INPUT:	Horregatik , hitz egin nire izenean eta adierazi nire , Jainko Jaun honen , mezua : Hondaturik utzi zaituztete eta zuek berenganatzeko irrikaz zeuden beste nazioak zuetaz jabetu dira , isekaz eta irainez bete zaituztete ;
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I have spoken to you , saying , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will destroy you and destroy you and your children and grandchildren . '
GOLD:	Therefore , son of man , give the mountains of Israel this message from the Sovereign Lord : Your enemies have attacked you from all directions , making you the property of many nations and the object of much mocking and slander .

ID:	1095
INPUT:	Hau hil zenean , Elat hiria berreskuratu eta berreraiki zuen Uziasek .
PRED:	After the death of his father , Uzziah rebuilt the town and rebuilt it .
GOLD:	After his father 's death , Uzziah rebuilt the town of Elath and restored it to Judah .

ID:	1096
INPUT:	Izan ere , bakea ereingo dut , mahastiak emango du bere fruitua , lurrak bere ekarriaeta zeruak bere ihintza ; herri honetan bizirik gelditueiemango diet hori guztia .
PRED:	For I will plant the vineyards of the earth , and I will give it to the heavens and the earth . And I will give them the dew of the earth .
GOLD:	For I am planting seeds of peace and prosperity among you . The grapevines will be heavy with fruit . The earth will produce its crops , and the heavens will release the dew . Once more I will cause the remnant in Judah and Israel to inherit these blessings .

ID:	1097
INPUT:	Betor gurekin , Jauna , zure maitasun leiala , zuregan jarria baitugu esperantza !
PRED:	May the Lord be with us , for he delights in you , for he rescues us from the face of the earth .
GOLD:	Let your unfailing love surround us , Lord , for our hope is in you alone .

ID:	1098
INPUT:	Entzun zalaparta mendietan : jendetza handia dirudi . Entzun erresumen , bildu diren herrien iskanbila . Jaun ahalguztidunaikuskapena egiten ari zaioborrokara doan gudarosteari .
PRED:	Listen to this message from the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the great army of Israel ! Listen to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken !
GOLD:	Hear the noise on the mountains ! Listen , as the vast armies march ! It is the noise and shouting of many nations.The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has called this army together .

ID:	1099
INPUT:	Jaunarekin mintzatzeko beraren aurrera sartzen zenean , zapia kentzen zuen irten arte . Ateratzean , Jaunak agindua adierazten zien israeldarrei .
PRED:	When they entered the presence of the Lord , they took the stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant that the Lord had commanded them .
GOLD:	But whenever he went into the Tent of Meeting to speak with the Lord , he would remove the veil until he came out again . Then he would give the people whatever instructions the Lord had given him ,

ID:	1100
INPUT:	Aurreraxeago , Santiago eta Joan anaiak , Zebedeoren semeak , ikusi zituen ; sare-konponketan ari ziren beren ontzian .
PRED:	When James and John saw what had happened , he saw the brothers and sisters who had been telling them what had happened to them .
GOLD:	A little farther up the shore Jesus saw Zebedee 's sons , James and John , in a boat repairing their nets .

ID:	1101
INPUT:	Eta horra Egipto ederraporrokatua , iparraldeko herriari emana » .
PRED:	And the land of Egypt will become a beautiful nation , a nation of Egypt , a land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Egypt will be humiliated ; she will be handed over to people from the north . ”

ID:	1102
INPUT:	Emakumeak erantzun zion Eliasi : — Orain badakit Jainkoaren gizona zarena , eta zuk diozuna egiaz Jaunaren hitza dena .
PRED:	She said to her , “ Now I am going to see the man of God , and you are good and good . ”
GOLD:	Then the woman told Elijah , “ Now I know for sure that you are a man of God , and that the Lord truly speaks through you . ”

ID:	1103
INPUT:	Baina gaiztoen bidea iluna , ez dakite zerez egingo duten behaztopa .
PRED:	But the wicked will be forgotten , and they will never forget the fate of the wicked .
GOLD:	But the way of the wicked is like total darkness.They have no idea what they are stumbling over .

ID:	1104
INPUT:	Pozik eta alai atera zen egun hartan Haman . Baina Mardokeo jauregiko atarian zegoela ikusi zuenean eta ez zela jaikitzen beraren aurrean , ez zirkinik ere egiten , sutan jarri zen Mardokeoren aurka .
PRED:	The king was glad when he saw Mordecai was returning to the palace . But when he saw that Mordecai had been put into his palace , he could n't see him .
GOLD:	Haman was a happy man as he left the banquet ! But when he saw Mordecai sitting at the palace gate , not standing up or trembling nervously before him , Haman became furious .

ID:	1105
INPUT:	Orduan , ahalmen handiz jokatuko dut eta egiptoarrak joko ditut beraien artean egingo ditudan egintza harrigarriez ; ondoren , utziko dizuete irteten .
PRED:	Then I will turn the power of the Lord , and I will bring them into the land of Egypt . I will not let them go out into the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	So I will raise my hand and strike the Egyptians , performing all kinds of miracles among them . Then at last he will let you go .

ID:	1106
INPUT:	Izan ere , bere bizia gorde nahi duenak galdu egingo du ; bere bizia niregatik galtzen duenak , ordea , gorde egingo du .
PRED:	For everyone who wants to obey my life will be punished for my life . But those who are punished for me will be punished for my sake .
GOLD:	If you try to hang on to your life , you will lose it . But if you give up your life for my sake , you will save it .

ID:	1107
INPUT:	Joan zen Gedeon eta antxume bat prestatu zuen eta , hogei kilo-edo irinez , legamia gabeko ogiak egin . Gero , okela otarrean eta salda eltzean harturik , arteondo azpira eraman eta Jaunari eskaini zion dena .
PRED:	Then Joseph prepared a young goat for a young goat , a young goat , and he sacrificed it to the Lord . He made a vow to the Lord , and he gave it to the people of Israel as a special gift .
GOLD:	Gideon hurried home . He cooked a young goat , and with a basket of flour he baked some bread without yeast . Then , carrying the meat in a basket and the broth in a pot , he brought them out and presented them to the angel , who was under the great tree .

ID:	1108
INPUT:	heriotzatik libratu eta gosetean bizirik gordetzeko .
PRED:	He will rescue them from death , and he will save them from death .
GOLD:	He rescues them from deathand keeps them alive in times of famine .

ID:	1109
INPUT:	« Jaunak bere jardueraren hasieran sortu ninduen , bere lehen egintzen aurretik .
PRED:	“ For the Lord appeared to me , just as I had commanded me .
GOLD:	“ The Lord formed me from the beginning , before he created anything else .

ID:	1110
INPUT:	Jaunak ditu heriotzaeta bizia ematen , berak du Herio Leizera jaitsarazten , berak handik igoarazten .
PRED:	The Lord protects the bones of the grave ; he leads the grave into the grave .
GOLD:	The Lord gives both death and life ; he brings some down to the grave but raises others up .

ID:	1111
INPUT:	Zorretan nago , izan ere , greziar herriarekin nahiz greziar ez direnekin , ikasiekin nahiz ezikasiekin .
PRED:	There were eight people in Greek , Greeks , Greeks , Greeks , Greeks , and Greeks — both Jews and Greeks .
GOLD:	For I have a great sense of obligation to people in both the civilized world and the rest of the world , to the educated and uneducated alike .

ID:	1112
INPUT:	zuen arbasoek jabetzan hartu zuten lurraldera itzularaziko zaituzte eta beronen jabe bihurtuko zarete ; zeuen arbasoak baino zoriontsuago eta ugariago egingo zaituzte .
PRED:	You will possess the land you have given to your ancestors , and you will be your ancestors . You will be your ancestors , and you will have many children .
GOLD:	The Lord your God will return you to the land that belonged to your ancestors , and you will possess that land again . Then he will make you even more prosperous and numerous than your ancestors !

ID:	1113
INPUT:	Horrela bete zen Jaunak Jeremias profetaren ahoz esana : « Hirurogeita hamar urtez egongo da utzia lurralde hau , hondamenaldi osoan zehar , Jaunari ukatu zizkioten atseden-urteak bete arte » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord had said to Jeremiah : “ This is what the Lord says : At the time of the year of King Zedekiah 's reign in the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	So the message of the Lord spoken through Jeremiah was fulfilled . The land finally enjoyed its Sabbath rest , lying desolate until the seventy years were fulfilled , just as the prophet had said .

ID:	1114
INPUT:	Idolatriaren aurkako auzia
PRED:	A Warning against Idolatry
GOLD:	Guidelines for a King

ID:	1115
INPUT:	Jakinarazi zioten Joabi erregea negarrez eta aieneka ari zela Absalomengatik .
PRED:	When Joseph heard that the king had been healed , he sent Abram out of the hill country and Isaac .
GOLD:	As all the people heard of the king 's deep grief for his son , the joy of that day 's victory was turned into deep sadness .

ID:	1116
INPUT:	Jainkoaren aginduen kontra errebelatu baitzireneta Goi-goikoaren egitasmoa mespretxatu .
PRED:	For they have rebelled against the Most High , and they are confident in the Most High .
GOLD:	They rebelled against the words of God , scorning the counsel of the Most High .

ID:	1117
INPUT:	Haiekiko gupida sortu zuenerbestera eraman zituztenengan .
PRED:	So Abner led him into a snake , and they buried him in him .
GOLD:	He even caused their captorsto treat them with kindness .

ID:	1118
INPUT:	adoretsuen gantzez igurtzia ; Jonatanen uztaia , inoiz atzera egin ez zuena , Saulen ezpata , erabili gabe sekula itzuli ez zena .
PRED:	When the bow down to the bow and bow down to meet Jonathan , he did n't welcome Saul . But when he returned to meet Saul , he did n't welcome him .
GOLD:	The bow of Jonathan was powerful , and the sword of Saul did its mighty work.They shed the blood of their enemiesand pierced the bodies of mighty heroes .

ID:	1119
INPUT:	Aberats oheratzen da , baina azken aldiz , begiak zabaltzean ez zaio ezer geratzen .
PRED:	But the rich person is rich , but he does n't know what he thinks .
GOLD:	The wicked go to bed richbut wake to find that all their wealth is gone .

ID:	1120
INPUT:	( 2 Erg 22 , 1-20 ; 23 , 4-20 )
PRED:	The Death of Athaliah
GOLD:	Hilkiah Discovers God 's Law

ID:	1121
INPUT:	Larrialdian askatzaile eta mesedegile den Jauna goresteko deia
PRED:	If you fear the Lord , you will show unfailing love to the Coming One of the earth .
GOLD:	( Psalms 107–150 )

ID:	1122
INPUT:	« Era berean , geure lurraren eta fruta-arbola guztien lehen fruituak Jaunaren etxera eramango ditugu urtero .
PRED:	“ On the first day , we will plant all kinds of plants and trees that grow in the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	We agree to give God our oldest sons and the firstborn of all our herds and flocks , as prescribed in the Law . We will present them to the priests who minister in the Temple of our God .

ID:	1123
INPUT:	aldi hau bete zen egun berean , hain zuzen , atera zen lurralde hartatik Jaunaren herria , gudaroste baten gisa .
PRED:	On that day , the people of the land of the Lord came out of the land of the Lord .
GOLD:	In fact , it was on the last day of the 430th year that all the Lord 's forces left the land .

ID:	1124
INPUT:	Ez al dit , bada , berak esan arreba zuela ? Andreak ere neba zuela zioen . Nik fede onez eta zintzo jokatu dut .
PRED:	Do n't you think about me ? Do you say , ‘ Look , my sister , and I am sending you to sin . '
GOLD:	Did n't Abraham tell me , ‘ She is my sister ' ? And she herself said , ‘ Yes , he is my brother . ' I acted in complete innocence ! My hands are clean . ”

ID:	1125
INPUT:	Edomdarren aurkako mezua
PRED:	A Message about Edom
GOLD:	A Message for Edom

ID:	1126
INPUT:	Goizetik iluntzera birrintzen dira , oharkabean betiko galtzen .
PRED:	They wandered from the morning to the morning , for they are destroyed in the morning .
GOLD:	They are alive in the morning but dead by evening , gone forever without a trace .

ID:	1127
INPUT:	Ardo-zahagi hauek berriak ziren bete genituenean , eta orain urratuak daude . Gure jantzi eta oinetakoak ere zar<unk> du egin zaizkigu hain bide luzean .
PRED:	We have been filled with old old system , and we have been filled with sorrow and sorrow . We have been given to us , too , and we have worked for food .
GOLD:	These wineskins were new when we filled them , but now they are old and split open . And our clothing and sandals are worn out from our very long journey . ”

ID:	1128
INPUT:	Jaunak , ordea , esan zien Moisesi eta Aaroni : « Ez zarete nitaz fidatu , nire santutasuna israeldarren aurrean argi azal zedin ; beraz , ez duzue herri hau gidatuko emango diodan lurralderaino » .
PRED:	But the Lord said to Moses and Aaron , “ Do n't believe me , for you are my own special possession . You must not be my own people , and you will be my special possession . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord said to Moses and Aaron , “ Because you did not trust me enough to demonstrate my holiness to the people of Israel , you will not lead them into the land I am giving them ! ”

ID:	1129
INPUT:	Handik alde egin eta bere herrira joan zen Jesus , bere ikasleak ondoren zituela .
PRED:	After this , Jesus went up to the village of his disciples and began walking along the shore .
GOLD:	Jesus left that part of the country and returned with his disciples to Nazareth , his hometown .

ID:	1130
INPUT:	Ene senideok , ezin elkartuak dira Jesu Kristo gure Jaun aintzatsuagan duzuen fedea eta pertsonen artean bereizkeria egitea .
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , do n't be able to stand in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	My dear brothers and sisters , how can you claim to have faith in our glorious Lord Jesus Christ if you favor some people over others ?

ID:	1131
INPUT:	Apaizak miatu egingo du , eta kopeta eta burusoileko mantxaren handitua zuri-gorrixka ageri bada , larruazaleko legenaren antzekoa ,
PRED:	Then the priest will take the ram 's head and put it on his head , and he will burn it with a skin disease . He will burn it with a skin disease .
GOLD:	The priest must examine him , and if he finds swelling around the reddish white sore anywhere on the man 's head and it looks like a skin disease ,

ID:	1132
INPUT:	Saul , Israelgo erregetza harturik , inguruetako etsai ororen kontra borrokatu zen : moabdar , amondar eta edomdarren kontra , Tzobako erregeen eta filistearren kontra . Nora jo , han nagusitzen zen .
PRED:	When Saul realized that Saul had defeated the army of Israel , he fought against the Philistines , and the Philistines fought against the Ammonites .
GOLD:	Now when Saul had secured his grasp on Israel 's throne , he fought against his enemies in every direction — against Moab , Ammon , Edom , the kings of Zobah , and the Philistines . And wherever he turned , he was victorious .

ID:	1133
INPUT:	« Hona egiten dizudan agintzaria : herri askoren sorburu izango zara .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : I will make many nations as ruler over the nations .
GOLD:	“ This is my covenant with you : I will make you the father of a multitude of nations !

ID:	1134
INPUT:	« Gero , atearen ondoko sarreratik , iparralderantz dauden apaizen gela sakratuetara eraman ninduen gizonak . Barren-barrenean mendebaldera zegoen leku bat erakutsiz ,
PRED:	“ Then he took me out of the north gateway to the north side of the north gateway to the north side of the Tabernacle , where the priest was located in front of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	In my vision , the man brought me through the entrance beside the gateway and led me to the sacred rooms assigned to the priests , which faced toward the north . He showed me a place at the extreme west end of these rooms .

ID:	1135
INPUT:	Gero , promes hau egin zuen Jakobek : « Jainkoa neurekin badut , eta bidaia honetan babesten banau , jateko ogiaeta janzteko arropakematen badizkit ,
PRED:	Then Jacob gave this message to Jacob : “ God is with me , my father , Jacob , and his flocks , flocks , sheep , goats , and goats .
GOLD:	Then Jacob made this vow : “ If God will indeed be with me and protect me on this journey , and if he will provide me with food and clothing ,

ID:	1136
INPUT:	Hil zenean , haren seme Pekahias izan zen errege , beraren ordez .
PRED:	When Pekah died , he became the next king . But his son Pekah became the next king .
GOLD:	When Menahem died , his son Pekahiah became the next king .

ID:	1137
INPUT:	gorriz tindaturiko ahari-larruak eta larru finak , akazia-zura ,
PRED:	tanned ram skins and fine goatskin leather ; fine goatskin leather ;
GOLD:	tanned ram skins and fine goatskin leather ; acacia wood ;

ID:	1138
INPUT:	zure gaiztakeria agerian gelditu aurretik ? Orain , edomdarren eta berauen auzoko filistearren hirien iseka-gai zara , alde guztietatik mespretxatzen zaituztelarik .
PRED:	“ But why did you stay away from the land of Edom ? And now , the Philistines will be destroyed by the sword of the Philistines , who have been killed by the Philistines .
GOLD:	But now your greater wickedness has been exposed to all the world , and you are the one who is scorned — by Edom and all her neighbors and by Philistia .

ID:	1139
INPUT:	Epaitzeko eseriko da . Zilarra eta urrea birfintzen eta garbitzen dituenak bezala garbituko ditu Lebiren ondorengoak , Jaunari opariak behar bezala eskain diezazkioten .
PRED:	The priest will be ceremonially clean , and he will be ceremonially clean . He will be ceremonially clean , just as the Lord has commanded him , and he will offer a grain offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	He will sit like a refiner of silver , burning away the dross . He will purify the Levites , refining them like gold and silver , so that they may once again offer acceptable sacrifices to the Lord .

ID:	1140
INPUT:	Erruki nitaz , ene Jainko , zeure maitasunaz , suntsitu nire hobena , zeure neurrigabeko gupidaz .
PRED:	O Lord , hear my unfailing love ; teach me your unfailing love .
GOLD:	For I recognize my rebellion ; it haunts me day and night .

ID:	1141
INPUT:	Elkartu zen Jakob Rakelekin ere , eta Lea baino maiteago izan zuen . Beste zazpi urtez lan egin behar izan zuen Labanentzat .
PRED:	So Jacob took Leah and slept with her , and he loved Jacob for seven years . He worked seven years for seven years .
GOLD:	So Jacob slept with Rachel , too , and he loved her much more than Leah . He then stayed and worked for Laban the additional seven years .

ID:	1142
INPUT:	Aske utzi zituzten lau aingeruak : prest zeuden hilabete , egun , ordu eta une hartan gizon-emakumeen herena hiltzeko .
PRED:	And the four angels were ready to kill them . They were willing to kill them , but they would die in the crowd .
GOLD:	Then the four angels who had been prepared for this hour and day and month and year were turned loose to kill one-third of all the people on earth .

ID:	1143
INPUT:	Beraz , senideok , aukera itzazue zeuen artean izen oneko zazpi gizon , Espiritu Santuaz eta jakinduriaz beteak , eta haiei emango diegu egiteko hori .
PRED:	So now , dear brothers and sisters , stay here among you in the Holy Spirit , and we will teach you the Holy Spirit to the Holy Spirit and understanding .
GOLD:	And so , brothers , select seven men who are well respected and are full of the Spirit and wisdom . We will give them this responsibility .

ID:	1144
INPUT:	Hara , Jainko Jaun ahalguztidunakindarrez lurrera botako dituerasotzaileak , zuhaitzari adarrakmozten zaizkion bezala , nahiz eta garaiak eta sendoak izan .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , says : I will punish the nations and animals , and they will bow down on the ground .
GOLD:	But look ! The Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , will chop down the mighty tree of Assyria with great power ! He will cut down the proud.That lofty tree will be brought down .

ID:	1145
INPUT:	Egunaren amaiera zen , ilunabarra , gau betea eta iluntasuna zetozen .
PRED:	At night the sun was dark , dark day , and darkness fell across the night .
GOLD:	It was at twilight , in the evening , as deep darkness fell .

ID:	1146
INPUT:	eta , esker oneko otoitza egin ondoren , zatitu eta esan zuela : « Hau nire gorputza da , zuentzat ematen dena . Egizue hau nire oroigarri » .
PRED:	Then he stood up and prayed , “ This is what you have done for me . This is what you have done for me . This is what you have done for me . ”
GOLD:	and gave thanks to God for it . Then he broke it in pieces and said , “ This is my body , which is given for you . Do this in remembrance of me . ”

ID:	1147
INPUT:	Diakonoak izan bitez behin bakarrik ezkonduak , beren seme-alabak eta etxea ongi gobernatzen dakitenak ;
PRED:	Do n't have sexual relations with a neighbor 's wife , but anyone who does n't have children 's house .
GOLD:	A deacon must be faithful to his wife , and he must manage his children and household well .

ID:	1148
INPUT:	Konturatu zen Jesus eta esan zien : « Zer ari zarete zeuen artean ogirik ez daukazuela eta , sinesmen gutxikook ?
PRED:	Jesus knew them and said , “ What are you doing ? What are you saying ? Do n't you believe in the truth ?
GOLD:	Jesus knew what they were saying , so he said , “ You have so little faith ! Why are you arguing with each other about having no bread ?

ID:	1149
INPUT:	Jesus Jaunaren laguntzaz , Timoteo laster zuengana bidaltzeko itxaropena dut , zuen berri jakinik ni ere bizkor nadin .
PRED:	Instead , I am sending Jesus to the Lord Jesus to Timothy , so I can send him back to the Lord Jesus .
GOLD:	If the Lord Jesus is willing , I hope to send Timothy to you soon for a visit . Then he can cheer me up by telling me how you are getting along .

ID:	1150
INPUT:	Ez nion inortxori ere adierazi Jainkoaren eraginez Jerusalemen egin nahi nuena . Gauez atera nintzen gizon banaka batzuekin , neu ninderaman astoa beste abererik hartu gabe .
PRED:	I did n't want you to live in Jerusalem in Jerusalem . I wanted to go to Jerusalem to Jerusalem , but I did n't want to take it back to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	I slipped out during the night , taking only a few others with me . I had not told anyone about the plans God had put in my heart for Jerusalem . We took no pack animals with us except the donkey I was riding .

ID:	1151
INPUT:	haren kriseiluak argi egiten zuen nire gain , argi harekin egiten nuen ilunpetan aurrera .
PRED:	For the light of the light , the light of the darkness , and the light of the darkness .
GOLD:	when he lit up the way before meand I walked safely through the darkness .

ID:	1152
INPUT:	apaiz nahiz herri xehe , nagusi nahiz morroi , etxekoandre nahiz neskame , saltzaile nahiz erosle , mailegu-emaile nahiz hartzaile , hartzekodun nahiz zordun .
PRED:	Even if you are young , you are a slave or a slave or a slave or a slave or a slave or a slave or a woman who has been a slave or a slave or a slave or a slave or a slave or a slave or a virgin .
GOLD:	Priests and laypeople , servants and masters , maids and mistresses , buyers and sellers , lenders and borrowers , bankers and debtors — none will be spared .

ID:	1153
INPUT:	Zeren ez baitiot inoiz uko egin <unk> ainkoaren asmoa oso-osorik zuei adierazteari .
PRED:	For I did n't turn away from the presence of the God of Jacob , so I could not listen to you .
GOLD:	for I did n't shrink from declaring all that God wants you to know .

ID:	1154
INPUT:	<unk> koa du haragia , estu-estua eta mugigaitza .
PRED:	Bring the ram 's armor , and the whole animal on it , and the boy 's bag .
GOLD:	The scales on its back are like rows of shieldstightly sealed together .

ID:	1155
INPUT:	Giza gorpuren bat ukitu eta garbikuntzarik egiten ez duenak Jaunaren egoitza profanatzen du ; beraz , bota egingo dute Israel herritik . Garbikuntzako urez zipriztindua izan ez denez , kutsaturik jarraitzen du .
PRED:	If you touch the body of purification , you must not wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water , and you will remain defiled by the Lord 's presence . Then you must never be purified by the community of Israel .
GOLD:	All those who touch a dead body and do not purify themselves in the proper way defile the Lord 's Tabernacle , and they will be cut off from the community of Israel . Since the water of purification was not sprinkled on them , their defilement continues .

ID:	1156
INPUT:	Itxaron Jaunarengan ! Eutsi gogor , izan kemen ! Itxaron Jaunarengan !
PRED:	Trust in the Lord ! Be strong in the Lord ! Be strong and courageous !
GOLD:	Wait patiently for the Lord.Be brave and courageous.Yes , wait patiently for the Lord .

ID:	1157
INPUT:	Biharamunean atera eta Zesareara heldu ginen . Han , apostoluen zazpi laguntzaileetako bat zen Felipe misiolariaren etxera joan ginen , eta bertan gelditu .
PRED:	The next day he arrived at the next day , where the apostles arrived in the synagogue . There was a man named Simon Peter , who was from the home of Philip , and he went home to the home of the synagogue .
GOLD:	The next day we went on to Caesarea and stayed at the home of Philip the Evangelist , one of the seven men who had been chosen to distribute food .

ID:	1158
INPUT:	Haren arnasak ikatzak goritzen ditueta eztarri-zulotik sugarrak irteten .
PRED:	The breath of the Lord leads to the proud , and the breath of the Lord leads to life .
GOLD:	Who can strip off its hide , and who can penetrate its double layer of armor ?

ID:	1159
INPUT:	Legearen eta profeten irakurgaiak egin ondoren , sinagogako buruzagiek ohar hau bidali zieten : « Anaiok , herriari adore emateko zerbait esateko baldin baduzue , mintza zaitezte » .
PRED:	They read the Book of the Law and read it to them , “ Brothers , you people of Assyria , ” they said . “ If you are willing to listen to me , you will be encouraged by some of you . ”
GOLD:	After the usual readings from the books of Moses and the prophets , those in charge of the service sent them this message : “ Brothers , if you have any word of encouragement for the people , come and give it . ”

ID:	1160
INPUT:	Jaunaren testigantza egin eta haren mezua adierazi ondoren , Pedro eta Joan Jerusalemera itzuli ziren , Samariako auzo askotan berri ona zabalduz .
PRED:	Then they went to the Lord 's message to Peter and John the Baptist , and they returned to Jerusalem to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	After testifying and preaching the word of the Lord in Samaria , Peter and John returned to Jerusalem . And they stopped in many Samaritan villages along the way to preach the Good News .

ID:	1161
INPUT:	« Ez biezaio inork inori salaketaeta errietarik egin . Zure aurka dut auzia , apaiz .
PRED:	“ No one can stand against you , and no one can stand against you .
GOLD:	“ Do n't point your finger at someone elseand try to pass the blame ! My complaint , you priests , is with you .

ID:	1162
INPUT:	Zentzabide mingarria
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	Israel , an Unfaithful Wife

ID:	1163
INPUT:	Jehudik hiruzpalau orrialde irakurtzen zitueneko , erregeak aiztoz moztu eta sutara botatzen zituen , erroilu guztia sutan erre arte .
PRED:	As soon as the king had read this dream , he must cut off four quarts of choice flour and cut off the fire on the fire .
GOLD:	Each time Jehudi finished reading three or four columns , the king took a knife and cut off that section of the scroll . He then threw it into the fire , section by section , until the whole scroll was burned up .

ID:	1164
INPUT:	Orduan , Efraimgo mendialdean dagoen Tzemaraim gailurrera igo eta honela egin zien oihu Abiasek Jeroboami eta Israel erreinuko gudariei : « Entzun !
PRED:	Then Jeroboam called the hill country of Ephraim , Ephraim , Ephraim , and Ephraim , and Jeroboam said , “ Listen to us ! Listen , you people of Israel !
GOLD:	When the army of Judah arrived in the hill country of Ephraim , Abijah stood on Mount Zemaraim and shouted to Jeroboam and all Israel : “ Listen to me !

ID:	1165
INPUT:	Nire larruazala erabat desitxuratua dago , gaitzez estalia tunikaz bezala .
PRED:	My soul is as fragrant as if I am in the sun , and I am deeply troubled by all my troubles .
GOLD:	With a strong hand , God grabs my shirt.He grips me by the collar of my coat .

ID:	1166
INPUT:	« Urrundu elkarte honetatik , bat-batean birrinduko baitut » . Moises eta Aaron lurreraino ahuspeztu ziren ,
PRED:	“ As soon as the people of Israel left the Sabbath , I will go down to the ground before Moses . ” So Moses and Aaron bowed low before the ground .
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Moses : “ Place Aaron 's staff permanently before the Ark of the Covenant to serve as a warning to rebels . This should put an end to their complaints against me and prevent any further deaths . ”

ID:	1167
INPUT:	Burdina lurzorutik ateratzen daeta haitzak urtuz kobrea lortzen .
PRED:	The words of an iron heart is as hard as iron , and the words of the wicked are filled with knowledge .
GOLD:	They know where to dig iron from the earthand how to smelt copper from rock .

ID:	1168
INPUT:	Eta Hildakoen Egoitzatikatera egingo ote ditut ? Heriotzatik askatu egingo ote ditut ? Herio , non dituk heure izurriak ? Herio-leize , non dituk heure gaitzak ? Ez dut gupidarik bihotzean » .
PRED:	Should I go out to the grave ? Should I go out of the grave ? Should I go out of the grave ? Do n't lose your fate ? Do n't worry about it ? Do n't worry about it ? ”
GOLD:	“ Should I ransom them from the grave ? Should I redeem them from death ? O death , bring on your terrors ! O grave , bring on your plagues ! For I will not take pity on them .

ID:	1169
INPUT:	Hazael Eliseogandik alde egin eta bere jaunarengana joan zen . Erregeak galdetu zion : — Zer esan dizu Eliseok ? Hazaelek erantzun : — Baietz , sendatuko zarela .
PRED:	So Hazael went to his palace and asked him , “ What are you doing ? ” “ What are you doing ? ” “ Yes , ” the king replied . “ What are you doing ? ”
GOLD:	When Hazael left Elisha and went back , the king asked him , “ What did Elisha tell you ? ” And Hazael replied , “ He told me that you will surely recover . ”

ID:	1170
INPUT:	Hor menditik , Itsaso Gorrirako bidea hartu zuten israeldarrek , Edom lurraldea inguratzeko asmoz . Bidean , ordea , adorea galdu
PRED:	So the Israelites left the Red Sea and camped at the Red Sea . But the Israelites tried to attack the land of Edom , where the Israelites were crossing the Red Sea .
GOLD:	Then the people of Israel set out from Mount Hor , taking the road to the Red Sea to go around the land of Edom . But the people grew impatient with the long journey ,

ID:	1171
INPUT:	Gizonezkoaren sexu-kutsadura
PRED:	Young Woman
GOLD:	Bodily Discharges

ID:	1172
INPUT:	Orduan , bai , beldurrik gabe hitz egingo nuke . Baina hori ez da horrela , eta neurez bakarrik behar dut baliatu .
PRED:	Then I would n't be afraid , but I would n't be afraid . But if I were n't alone , I would be alone . ”
GOLD:	Then I could speak to him without fear , but I can not do that in my own strength .

ID:	1173
INPUT:	Baina baliotsutzat nituen gauza guztiok , baliogabetzat jo nituen Kristorengatik .
PRED:	But if you are pure and unclean for me , I will make you right with Christ .
GOLD:	I once thought these things were valuable , but now I consider them worthless because of what Christ has done .

ID:	1174
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun zidan : « Oinezkoekin lasterkanekatzen bazara , nola lehiatu nahi duzuzaldizkoekin ? Lurralde lauanseguru ez bazabiltza , nola moldatuko zaraJordan inguruko malkarretan ?
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ I am making a covenant with you ? Why did n't you look like the waters of the Dead Sea ? Why are you like the waters of the sea ?
GOLD:	“ If racing against mere men makes you tired , how will you race against horses ? If you stumble and fall on open ground , what will you do in the thickets near the Jordan ?

ID:	1175
INPUT:	Faraoiak esan zion Joseri : « Esaiezu anaiei astoak prestatu eta Kanaanera itzultzeko ,
PRED:	Then Pharaoh said to Joseph , “ Go back to Egypt and prepare your donkeys to buy grain .
GOLD:	Pharaoh said to Joseph , “ Tell your brothers , ‘ This is what you must do : Load your pack animals , and hurry back to the land of Canaan .

ID:	1176
INPUT:	Eleazarrek eskuak gainean ezarri eta kargua eman zion , Jaunak Moisesen bidez agindu bezala .
PRED:	Then Moses placed the rest of the people on the altar , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	Moses laid his hands on him and commissioned him to lead the people , just as the Lord had commanded through Moses .

ID:	1177
INPUT:	Gainera , aker bat barkamen-oparitarako , Barkamen Egun handiko barkamen-opariaz eta eguneroko erre-opariez gain , berauei dagozkien labore- eta isur-opariekin .
PRED:	You must offer a male goat as a sin offering to the Lord , along with the regular burnt offering , a pleasing aroma to the regular burnt offering , a regular burnt offering , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	You must also sacrifice one male goat for a sin offering . This is in addition to the sin offering of atonement and the regular daily burnt offering with its grain offering , and their accompanying liquid offerings .

ID:	1178
INPUT:	Jende xehea larrutzen duzue , gari-zerga ordaintzera behartuz . Harlanduzko etxeak egin dituzue , baina ez zarete berorietan biziko ; mahasti bikainak landatu , baina ez duzueberorien ardorik edango .
PRED:	You are building stones , but do n't work for the construction supervisors , too , for you do n't work for the work you have done for yourselves . You must not drink wine , but you must not drink wine .
GOLD:	You trample the poor , stealing their grain through taxes and unfair rent.Therefore , though you build beautiful stone houses , you will never live in them.Though you plant lush vineyards , you will never drink wine from them .

ID:	1179
INPUT:	Kea zerion sudurretik , su kiskalgarria , ikatz goriak ahotik .
PRED:	A great fire came from the sea , and burning coals blazed forth from the fire .
GOLD:	He opened the heavens and came down ; dark storm clouds were beneath his feet .

ID:	1180
INPUT:	Jainko santuak galdetzen dizue : « Norekin konparatuko nauzue , norekin berdinduko ? »
PRED:	Then you will ask , “ How can you compare me ? ”
GOLD:	“ To whom will you compare me ? Who is my equal ? ” asks the Holy One .

ID:	1181
INPUT:	Ukendu hau nire gorputzean isuriz , hilobiratua izateko prestatu nau aurrez .
PRED:	My body has broken my body , and he has broken my body in my grave .
GOLD:	She has poured this perfume on me to prepare my body for burial .

ID:	1182
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zuen : — Kendu harria . Martak , Lazaro zenaren arrebak , erantzun zion : — Jauna , kiratsa botako du , lau egun daramatza eta .
PRED:	Then Jesus told him , “ Get up , pick up your mat , and put it into four days . ” And the man said , “ It 's the man who has four days . ”
GOLD:	“ Roll the stone aside , ” Jesus told them.But Martha , the dead man 's sister , protested , “ Lord , he has been dead for four days . The smell will be terrible . ”

ID:	1183
INPUT:	Zeure haserre-suminez , gora jaso eta lurrera jaurti nauzu .
PRED:	You threw me into anger , and I will throw my anger into the ground .
GOLD:	My life passes as swiftly as the evening shadows.I am withering away like grass .

ID:	1184
INPUT:	Piztu da Jaunaren haserre-suminaeta artegi oparoak deseginak dira .
PRED:	The Lord has poured out his fierce anger against the nations , and he will be filled with fire .
GOLD:	Peaceful meadows will be turned into a wastelandby the Lord 's fierce anger .

ID:	1185
INPUT:	Orduan , Jainkoak ur-putzu bat ikusarazi zion Agarri . Honek zahatoa urez bete eta edaten eman zion mutikoari .
PRED:	Then God saw a well of a well , and the water covered it with water . Then the water gave it to Isaac .
GOLD:	Then God opened Hagar 's eyes , and she saw a well full of water . She quickly filled her water container and gave the boy a drink .

ID:	1186
INPUT:	Baina hori guztia erdiminen hasiera da .
PRED:	But these are the same size of all these things .
GOLD:	But all this is only the first of the birth pains , with more to come .

ID:	1187
INPUT:	Apaizak ezpataz erori ziren , eta alargunek hiletarik jo ez .
PRED:	Eleazar the priest and the priest did not attack the town .
GOLD:	Their priests were slaughtered , and their widows could not mourn their deaths .

ID:	1188
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak zuen Jainkoak ez zion aditu nahi izan Balaami , eta haren madarikazioa bedeinkazio bihurtu zuen , maite zaituztelako .
PRED:	But the Lord God would not bless Balaam , for he had not bless you , and he will bless you and bless you .
GOLD:	As long as you live , you must never promote the welfare and prosperity of the Ammonites or Moabites .

ID:	1189
INPUT:	Gizon ezereza zelako ez zioten justiziarik egin . Nork aipatuko du haren ondorengotza ? Erauzi egin baitzuten haren bizia lurretik .
PRED:	There was no one like a man who was a poor man . Who could ever live in the land of his father ? ” So they returned from his own land .
GOLD:	He was humiliated and received no justice.Who can speak of his descendants ? For his life was taken from the earth . ”

ID:	1190
INPUT:	Bazenekiten beraiek izan zirela , Balaamek zirikaturik , israeldarrak Jaunaren aurka altxarazi zituztenak , Peorko hartan ; horregatik , hain zuzen , gertatu zen izurria Jaunaren elkartearen aurka .
PRED:	But when Balaam realized that the people of Israel had sinned against the Lord , they rebelled against the people of Israel , but the Lord had spoken against them .
GOLD:	“ These are the very ones who followed Balaam 's advice and caused the people of Israel to rebel against the Lord at Mount Peor . They are the ones who caused the plague to strike the Lord 's people .

ID:	1191
INPUT:	Samuelek lo egin zuen egunsentia arte . Goizean ireki zuen Jaunaren etxeko atea . Baina beldur zen ikuskaria Eliri adierazteko .
PRED:	When Samuel heard what was happening , he was afraid of the Temple of the Lord . But when he saw that he was afraid , he was afraid of the Lord 's Temple .
GOLD:	Samuel stayed in bed until morning , then got up and opened the doors of the Tabernacle as usual . He was afraid to tell Eli what the Lord had said to him .

ID:	1192
INPUT:	Eutsi sendo ! Gogor egin behar dugu geure herriaren eta geure Jainkoaren hiriaren alde ! Egin beza Jaunak ongi deritzona !
PRED:	Let us kill us ! Let us be strong and courageous , for the Lord our God has done for us ! ”
GOLD:	Be courageous ! Let us fight bravely for our people and the cities of our God . May the Lord 's will be done . ”

ID:	1193
INPUT:	Izan saiatuak eta ez nagi ; izan gogoz kartsu , Jauna zerbitzatzeko beti prest .
PRED:	Do n't be willing to be willing , and be willing to serve the Lord .
GOLD:	Never be lazy , but work hard and serve the Lord enthusiastically .

ID:	1194
INPUT:	Jaunaren aintza tenpluko sarreratik altxatu zen eta kerubinen gainean kokatu .
PRED:	Then the glory of the Lord rose up from the Temple of the Lord , and the rest of the cherubim .
GOLD:	Then the glory of the Lord moved out from the entrance of the Temple and hovered above the cherubim .

ID:	1195
INPUT:	Baina profeta zen eta bazekien hark Jainkoak zin eginez hitzeman ziona : beraren odoleko bat ezarriko zuela bere tronuan .
PRED:	But God was not a prophet , and he could not lay his throne in his throne . He took a throne in his throne , and he was buried in his throne .
GOLD:	But he was a prophet , and he knew God had promised with an oath that one of David 's own descendants would sit on his throne .

ID:	1196
INPUT:	Orain zeure esku gaituzu : egiguzu on eta zuzen iruditzen zaizuna .
PRED:	Now save us , Lord , and we are your name .
GOLD:	Now we are at your mercy — do to us whatever you think is right . ”

ID:	1197
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Utz nazazu , oraindik ez bainaiz igo Aitarengana . Ea , zoaz nire senideengana eta esaiezu neure eta zuen Aitarengana noala , neure eta zuen Jainkoarengana .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ My Father , my Father , for I am not my brothers and sisters . Go back to my brothers and sisters , for I am the God of your Father . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't cling to me , ” Jesus said , “ for I have n't yet ascended to the Father . But go find my brothers and tell them , ‘ I am ascending to my Father and your Father , to my God and your God . ' ”

ID:	1198
INPUT:	Orduan , erregeak , pozaren pozez , Daniel zulotik ateratzeko agindu zuen . Atera zutenean , ez zuen urratu bat ere , Jainkoarengan jarri baitzuen bere uste ona .
PRED:	Then the king ordered Daniel to stay away from the king 's presence , but he did n't believe in him . But he did n't believe him , but he did n't believe in him .
GOLD:	Then the king gave orders to arrest the men who had maliciously accused Daniel . He had them thrown into the lions ' den , along with their wives and children . The lions leaped on them and tore them apart before they even hit the floor of the den .

ID:	1199
INPUT:	Hark bere hitza lurrera bidalieta arin lehiatzen da bere helburura .
PRED:	The Savior of the earth is coming , and his words are coming to the ground .
GOLD:	He sends his orders to the world — how swiftly his word flies !

ID:	1200
INPUT:	baizik eta joan Israel herriko ardi galduengana .
PRED:	but the elders of Israel will return to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	but only to the people of Israel — God 's lost sheep .

ID:	1201
INPUT:	Ez da santurik Jauna bezalakorik , ez da , izan ere , zu besterik , ez da harkai<unk> gure Jainkoa adinakorik .
PRED:	Do n't be holy , O Lord our God , for you have no idea what you say to us .
GOLD:	No one is holy like the Lord ! There is no one besides you ; there is no Rock like our God .

ID:	1202
INPUT:	Moisesek eta Aaronek Jaunak agindua egin zuten . Aaronek makila altxatu eta ibaiko ura jo zuen faraoiaren eta funtzionarioen begi aurrean , eta ura odol bihurtu zen .
PRED:	So Moses and Aaron did as the Lord commanded Moses . Then Aaron put the staff into the blood of Pharaoh 's staff and put it into the blood of Pharaoh 's blood .
GOLD:	So Moses and Aaron did just as the Lord commanded them . As Pharaoh and all of his officials watched , Aaron raised his staff and struck the water of the Nile . Suddenly , the whole river turned to blood !

ID:	1203
INPUT:	Zeure merkataritza oparoagatik , indarkeriaz bete eta bekatu egin zenuen . Horregatik , zeure postutik kendu eta bota egin zintudan menditik , eta kerubin babesle zinen hori ikatz gorien artetik kendu .
PRED:	You brought you out of your great power and powerful arm , and you brought you out of the nations . So I took you away from the oppression of your enemies and brought you out of the world .
GOLD:	Your rich commerce led you to violence , and you sinned.So I banished you in disgracefrom the mountain of God.I expelled you , O mighty guardian , from your place among the stones of fire .

ID:	1204
INPUT:	Orduan , nik esan diet : « Ba al du inork urrerik ? » Haiek urrea bildu eta ekarri egin didate ; nik sutara bota eta , hara , zekor hau atera da !
PRED:	“ Do you know ? ” he asked . “ Who are you ? ” And they demanded . “ What 's this ? ” And they threw it into the fire !
GOLD:	So I told them , ‘ Whoever has gold jewelry , take it off . ' When they brought it to me , I simply threw it into the fire — and out came this calf ! ”

ID:	1205
INPUT:	Baztertu nautelako , jainko arrotzei intsentsua erre dietelako eta idoloak eginez iraindu nautelako , sutu egin zait haserrea toki honen kontra eta ez zait itzaliko ” .
PRED:	I will pour out my anger against foreign gods , and I will pour out my anger against them , and I will pour out my anger against them . ' ”
GOLD:	For my people have abandoned me and offered sacrifices to pagan gods , and I am very angry with them for everything they have done . My anger will be poured out on this place , and it will not be quenched . '

ID:	1206
INPUT:	Paulok , orduan : — Anaiok , ez nekien apaiz nagusia zenik . Bai , Liburu Santuak dio : Ez madarikatuzeure herriko buruzagia .
PRED:	But Paul replied , “ No , I am not the high priest , for the Scriptures say , ‘ You must not commit any other Jewish leaders . '
GOLD:	“ I 'm sorry , brothers . I did n't realize he was the high priest , ” Paul replied , “ for the Scriptures say , ‘ You must not speak evil of any of your rulers . ' ”

ID:	1207
INPUT:	Larra ezazu , Jauna , artzain-makilazzeure herria , zeurea duzun artaldea ; bakarrik eta sastraka arteanbizi baita , inguruan lur emankorrakdituen arren . Larra bedi Baxan eta Galaadekolur marduletan , antzina bezala .
PRED:	O Lord , you are my flock , drink the wine of your flock . You are like a flock of sheep , goats , goats , and goats , and Bashan are like a shepherd in the land of Gilead .
GOLD:	O Lord , protect your people with your shepherd 's staff ; lead your flock , your special possession.Though they live alone in a thicketon the heights of Mount Carmel , let them graze in the fertile pastures of Bashan and Gileadas they did long ago .

ID:	1208
INPUT:	baita Hexbon eta lautadako hiri guztiak ere : Dibon , Bamot-Baal , Bet-Baal-Meon ,
PRED:	Heshbon , all the towns of Heshbon , Dibon , and Ekron ,
GOLD:	It included Heshbon and the other towns on the plain — Dibon , Bamoth-baal , Beth-baal-meon ,

ID:	1209
INPUT:	entzun zuk zerutik , bizi zaren toki horretatik , beraien otoitza eta eskaria , eta egiezu zuzenbide .
PRED:	O heaven , hear the prayers of heaven , from heaven , and forgive them .
GOLD:	then hear their prayers and their petition from heaven where you live , and uphold their cause .

ID:	1210
INPUT:	horrela jokatuz , ez al zarete zeuen artean bereizkeriak egiten ari , eta ez al duzue irizpide okerrez epaitzen ?
PRED:	Do n't you realize that you are wrong ? Do n't you realize that we are honest and wrong ?
GOLD:	does n't this discrimination show that your judgments are guided by evil motives ?

ID:	1211
INPUT:	Josue , hain zuzen , soineko zikinez jantzia zegoen , aingeruaren aurrean zutik .
PRED:	Then Joshua stood before the angel of the sky , and he stood before the angel of heaven .
GOLD:	Jeshua 's clothing was filthy as he stood there before the angel .

ID:	1212
INPUT:	Gizon zintzo hau gaizkile haien artean bizi zen , eta egunero ikusi eta entzun behar izan zituen itsuskeriek atsekabez betetzen zioten bere bihotz zintzoa .
PRED:	When the man saw this , he was a man who had seen what was going to happen to them and see what they had done to their lives .
GOLD:	Yes , Lot was a righteous man who was tormented in his soul by the wickedness he saw and heard day after day .

ID:	1213
INPUT:	Zin egin nizun , bai , Jaunarengatik , Israelen Jainkoarengatik , zure seme Salomon izanen zela nire ondorengo erregea eta bera jarriko zela nire errege-aulkian . Hara , gaur beteko dut zin hura !
PRED:	I have sworn an oath to the Lord your God , the God of Israel , just as Solomon had promised to his son Solomon , his son Solomon , and he will sit on his throne .
GOLD:	your son Solomon will be the next king and will sit on my throne this very day , just as I vowed to you before the Lord , the God of Israel . ”

ID:	1214
INPUT:	Davidena . Eskerrak ematen dizkizut , Jauna , bihotz-bihotzez , beste jainkoen aurrean zu kantuz ospatzen .
PRED:	I will thank you , Lord , for I will praise you with all my heart .
GOLD:	I give you thanks , O Lord , with all my heart ; I will sing your praises before the gods .

ID:	1215
INPUT:	Ez gorde hiri horretako ezertxo ere , Jaunak bere haserrea baretu eta errukia azal diezazuen ; orduan , gupidaturik , ugaldu egingo zaituzte , zuen arbasoei zin egin bezala ;
PRED:	Do n't be angry with your servant , for the Lord 's anger has made you very angry with you . But if you do n't realize that you are angry with your ancestors , you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	“ The Lord your God will be merciful only if you listen to his voice and keep all his commands that I am giving you today , doing what pleases him .

ID:	1216
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Itsu bazinete , ez zenukete bekaturik izango ; baina ikusten duzuela diozuenez , zeuen bekatuzko egoeran irauten duzue .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ If you do n't need to sin , you will be cursed , but you will be cursed .
GOLD:	“ If you were blind , you would n't be guilty , ” Jesus replied . “ But you remain guilty because you claim you can see .

ID:	1217
INPUT:	Aurpegi ematen die Jaunak gaizkileei , lur gainetik ezabatzeko haien oroitzapena .
PRED:	For the Lord is good to those who hate them , and he rescued them from their enemies .
GOLD:	The Lord hears his people when they call to him for help.He rescues them from all their troubles .

ID:	1218
INPUT:	Zilarrezko txanpon erdia balio zuen goldea nahiz aitzurra , sardea nahiz eztena zorrozteak .
PRED:	If a thief 's ox or a ox or a wild ox or a ox or a ox or a ox or a ox or a ox or a thief .
GOLD:	The charges were as follows : a quarter of an ounce of silver for sharpening a plowshare or a pick , and an eighth of an ounce for sharpening an ax or making the point of an ox goad .

ID:	1219
INPUT:	Hormetako harriek ereoihu egingo dute zure aurka , eta zurezko habeekoihartzun egingo diete .
PRED:	They will cry out to you , and you will stand before you , and you will answer them .
GOLD:	The very stones in the walls cry out against you , and the beams in the ceilings echo the complaint .

ID:	1220
INPUT:	Zazpi egunez , ahuntz , zezen eta ahari bana eskainiko dituzu egunero , denak akats gabeak , barkamen-oparitzat .
PRED:	On the seventh day you must present a young goat as a sin offering to the Lord . You must present a young goat as a sin offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Every day for seven days a male goat , a young bull , and a ram from the flock will be sacrificed as a sin offering . None of these animals may have physical defects of any kind .

ID:	1221
INPUT:	Ez dituzue atzean utzitako mahats-hondarrak bilduko , ezta lurrera eroritakoak jasotzen ibiliko ere . Pobreentzat eta etorkinentzat utziko dituzue . Neu naiz Jauna , zuen Jainkoa .
PRED:	You must not eat any fruit from the trees of your crops . You must not harvest the fruit of your fields and foreigners living among you . I am the Lord your God . I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	It is the same with your grape crop — do not strip every last bunch of grapes from the vines , and do not pick up the grapes that fall to the ground . Leave them for the poor and the foreigners living among you . I am the Lord your God .

ID:	1222
INPUT:	Basamorturik basamortuen bihurtuko dut Egipto , bertako hiriak hiri guztien artean hondatuenak izango dira berrogei urtez , eta atzerriko nazio eta herrialdeen artean sakabanatuko ditut egiptoarrak .
PRED:	I will destroy all the nations of Egypt in the wilderness , and I will destroy all the towns of Egypt and forty years . I will bring them out of the land of Egypt , and I will scatter them in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	I will make Egypt desolate , and it will be surrounded by other desolate nations . Its cities will be empty and desolate for forty years , surrounded by other ruined cities . I will scatter the Egyptians to distant lands .

ID:	1223
INPUT:	Hitz hauek esatearekin batera , mintzo hau entzun zen zerutik : « Nabukodonosor errege , entzun : Galdua duzu zeure erregetza !
PRED:	As soon as he heard this , he said , “ Listen to this message from the King Nebuchadnezzar , you have heard what you have said .
GOLD:	“ But all these things did happen to King Nebuchadnezzar .

ID:	1224
INPUT:	Kea irteten zaio sudurretik , bor-bor irakiten dagoen pertzetik bezala .
PRED:	All who fear him will drive you out of the world , so that you will be filled with fear .
GOLD:	“ I want to emphasize Leviathan 's limbsand its enormous strength and graceful form .

ID:	1225
INPUT:	Damaskotik etorri eta aldarea ikustean , erregeak , aldarera igoz ,
PRED:	After this , the king of Damascus came to Damascus and saw the king of Damascus .
GOLD:	When the king returned , he inspected the altar and made offerings on it .

ID:	1226
INPUT:	Ikararen ikaraz , hau pentsatu nuen : « Bere begi-bistatik bota egin nau Jaunak » . Zuk , ordea , entzun zenuen nire erregua , laguntza eske deiadar egin nizunean .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : O God of Heaven 's Armies , ” says the Lord . “ You have heard me , but you answered me from my distress . ”
GOLD:	Love the Lord , all you godly ones ! For the Lord protects those who are loyal to him , but he harshly punishes the arrogant .

ID:	1227
INPUT:	Lorategiak eta baratzeakatondu nituen , mota orotako zuhaitzak sartuz .
PRED:	Instead , I begged them to send them into sin , and they begged them to go into the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	I made gardens and parks , filling them with all kinds of fruit trees .

ID:	1228
INPUT:	Horra zer etekinemango dizuten aztiek , gaztetandik ardurazzaindu dituzun horiek . Bakoitza bere bidetik galduko da , eta zu salbatzeko inor ez .
PRED:	That is why I will give you the birds of the sky , and you will care for them , and you will lose each other .
GOLD:	And all your friends , those with whom you 've done business since childhood , will go their own ways , turning a deaf ear to your cries .

ID:	1229
INPUT:	Lurrinaren ordez kiratsaizango dute , gerrikoaren ordez soka , ile-txirikorda dotoreen ordezburusoila , jantzi finen ordez zakukia , edertasunaren ordezburdin goriaren marka .
PRED:	But they will be like the nations of the earth , but they will be destroyed by the pride of their enemies , but they will wear beautiful clothes .
GOLD:	Instead of smelling of sweet perfume , she will stink.She will wear a rope for a sash , and her elegant hair will fall out.She will wear rough burlap instead of rich robes.Shame will replace her beauty .

ID:	1230
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi Moabeko lautadan , Jordan ondoan , Jeriko parean :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	While Israel was camped beside the Jordan on the plains of Moab across from Jericho , the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1231
INPUT:	eta Jerusalemen eta beste hiri guztietan hauxe iragarri behar zutela : « Atera mendira eta ekarri handik olibondo , pinu , mirto , palmondo eta orridun zuhaitzen adarrak , etxolak egiteko » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will bring you out of Jerusalem , ” says the Lord , “ I will send you out of the Hittites , Perizzites , Hivites , and olive oil , and olive oil . ”
GOLD:	He had said that a proclamation should be made throughout their towns and in Jerusalem , telling the people to go to the hills to get branches from olive , wild olive , myrtle , palm , and other leafy trees . They were to use these branches to make shelters in which they would live during the festival , as prescribed in the Law .

ID:	1232
INPUT:	Apolo anaiari dagokionez , behin eta berriz eskatu nion senideekin zuengana joateko , baina oraingoz ez du joan nahi izan . Joango da , egokiera izango duenean .
PRED:	But when Joseph 's brothers and sisters , he will visit you and visit you . But when he returns , he will be willing to visit you , but he will be willing to visit you .
GOLD:	Now about our brother Apollos — I urged him to visit you with the other believers , but he was not willing to go right now . He will see you later when he has the opportunity .

ID:	1233
INPUT:	Eskaintzaileak erantzuten zion : — Erre daitezela lehenbizi gantzak , ohi den bezala ; hartu gero nahi duzun guztia . Morroiak , aldiz : — Inola ere ez ! Emadazu berehala ; bestela , indarrez kenduko dizut .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Let me give you the firstborn of the firstborn males to your servant . ” But the man replied , “ I will give you the best of you , but I will take it away . ”
GOLD:	The man offering the sacrifice might reply , “ Take as much as you want , but the fat must be burned first . ” Then the servant would demand , “ No , give it to me now , or I 'll take it by force . ”

ID:	1234
INPUT:	Adamen beste seme bat
PRED:	A Message about Abimelech
GOLD:	The Birth of Seth

ID:	1235
INPUT:	Orduan , esan nien : « Ez dut jarraitu nahi zuek larratzen . Hil behar duena , hil dadila ! Galdu behar duena , gal dadila ! Geratzen direnek , jan dezatela elkar ! »
PRED:	Then I said to them , “ I want you to kill you . You must kill me , but you will die ! ” And Gideon replied , “ Let 's kill me ! ”
GOLD:	So I told them , “ I wo n't be your shepherd any longer . If you die , you die . If you are killed , you are killed . And let those who remain devour each other ! ”

ID:	1236
INPUT:	Ez al da izan atzerritar hau besterik Jainkoa goratzera etortzeko ? »
PRED:	Is there any other than any other nations to come to worship God ? ”
GOLD:	Has no one returned to give glory to God except this foreigner ? ”

ID:	1237
INPUT:	« Hartu lebitarrak israeldarren lehen-seme guztien ordez eta lebitarren abereak israeldarrenen ordez : neureak ditut lebitarrak . Neu naiz Jauna .
PRED:	“ Take all the Levites from the Levites and Levites , the Levites , Levites , and Levites . I am the Lord . I am the Lord . I am the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Take the Levites as substitutes for the firstborn sons of the people of Israel . And take the livestock of the Levites as substitutes for the firstborn livestock of the people of Israel . The Levites belong to me ; I am the Lord .

ID:	1238
INPUT:	Hark begiratu zuen , eta erantzun : — Gizonak-edo nabaritzen ditut : zuhaitzak dirudite , baina ibili dabiltza .
PRED:	He looked and looked at them and said , “ If I tell you the truth , I will send them out , but they will find out everything they do . ”
GOLD:	The man looked around . “ Yes , ” he said , “ I see people , but I ca n't see them very clearly . They look like trees walking around . ”

ID:	1239
INPUT:	« Zintzo izango zaidan apaiz bat dut sorraraziko ; nire nahiaren arabera du hark jardungo . Ondorengotza iraunkorra emango diot eta nire gantzutuaren zerbitzuan ibiliko da beti .
PRED:	“ I will be a member of the family of the godly , and I will be a witness to the people of Israel . Then I will give them a solemn oath that I will be my servant , and I will be my servant .
GOLD:	“ Then I will raise up a faithful priest who will serve me and do what I desire . I will establish his family , and they will be priests to my anointed kings forever .

ID:	1240
INPUT:	Jaunak agintzaria berritu Abrahami
PRED:	The
GOLD:	Abram Is Named Abraham

ID:	1241
INPUT:	Hobe luke errotarri bat lepotik lotu eta itsasora botako balute , txiki hauetakoren bat galbidean jartzea baino .
PRED:	It is better for a long time to drive out of the sea and throw it into the sea .
GOLD:	It would be better to be thrown into the sea with a millstone hung around your neck than to cause one of these little ones to fall into sin .

ID:	1242
INPUT:	Neuk gerizatuko duteta salbatuko hiri hau , naizena naizenagatiketa neure zerbitzari Davidengatik ” » .
PRED:	I will be the one who rescued me , and I will rescue my servant David from my servant David . ' ”
GOLD:	For my own honor and for the sake of my servant David , I will defend this city and protect it . ”

ID:	1243
INPUT:	Gaiztoa bere gezurretan geratzen da harrapatua , zintzoak ihes egiten dio arriskuari .
PRED:	The wicked care of the wicked , but the godly escape the path of the godly .
GOLD:	The wicked are trapped by their own words , but the godly escape such trouble .

ID:	1244
INPUT:	Zuen jendea ugalduko dut , Israel herri osoa . Hiri hondatuak berreraiki eta berriz jendea biziko da berorietan .
PRED:	I will completely destroy the nations of Israel , and all the towns of Israel will be rebuilt .
GOLD:	I will greatly increase the population of Israel , and the ruined cities will be rebuilt and filled with people .

ID:	1245
INPUT:	Luzaroegi ibili zarete jadanik mendialde horren inguruan ; jo ezazue iparraldera !
PRED:	You have sent a long path for battle ; you have sent us safely through the north .
GOLD:	‘ You have been wandering around in this hill country long enough ; turn to the north .

ID:	1246
INPUT:	orobat garbituko ditut , niri , Jaun honi , bizkar emanik , bilatzen ez nautenaketa niregana jotzen ez dutenak » .
PRED:	I will pour out my fury on them , says the Lord , “ I will not let them go unpunished ! ”
GOLD:	And I will destroy those who used to worship mebut now no longer do.They no longer ask for the Lord 's guidanceor seek my blessings . ”

ID:	1247
INPUT:	Asko eta asko ikaratu ziren hartaz , hain baitzegoen itxuragabetua , giza antzik ere gabe , gizaki ez zirudiela ;
PRED:	Many evil people were foolish , but they could n't understand what they had done .
GOLD:	But many were amazed when they saw him.His face was so disfigured he seemed hardly human , and from his appearance , one would scarcely know he was a man .

ID:	1248
INPUT:	« Baina begira , nirekin mahaian dago salduko nauena .
PRED:	“ But when I am with them , they will betray me .
GOLD:	“ But here at this table , sitting among us as a friend , is the man who will betray me .

ID:	1249
INPUT:	erabat ziur baitzegoen hark hitzemana betetzeko zuen ahalmenaz .
PRED:	But he knew that he was going to get out of the water , so he could understand what he had done .
GOLD:	He was fully convinced that God is able to do whatever he promises .

ID:	1250
INPUT:	« Zu , Jakoben herri , ez izan beldur ! Ez izutu , Israel , ene zerbitzari hori ! Neuk aterako zaitutbizi zaren urrutiko erbestetik , zeure seme-alabekin batera . Itzuliko zara eta lasai biziko , seguru egongo , inolako kezkarik gabe .
PRED:	“ Do not be afraid , O people of Israel ! Do not be afraid or discouraged , for I will bring you home to your servant , and I will bring you back to distant lands .
GOLD:	“ But do not be afraid , Jacob , my servant ; do not be dismayed , Israel.For I will bring you home again from distant lands , and your children will return from their exile.Israel will return to a life of peace and quiet , and no one will terrorize them .

ID:	1251
INPUT:	Hurrengo urtean , beraz , zenbatu zituen Ben-Hadadek siriarrak , eta Afekera igo zen Israel borrokatzera .
PRED:	So during the third year of the reign of Ben-hadad 's reign , the Arameans began to war against Israel .
GOLD:	The following spring he called up the Aramean army and marched out against Israel , this time at Aphek .

ID:	1252
INPUT:	« Ez zaitzatela engaina Ezekiasek , ezin izango baitzaituzte libratu nire eskutik .
PRED:	“ Do n't let Hezekiah deceive you , for he will rescue you from my power .
GOLD:	This is what the king says : Do n't let Hezekiah deceive you . He will never be able to rescue you from my power .

ID:	1253
INPUT:	Poztu ziren barealdiazeta beren gogoko portura eraman zituen Jainkoak .
PRED:	They were glad because they were glad , and God gave them prosperity to them .
GOLD:	What a blessing was that stillnessas he brought them safely into harbor !

ID:	1254
INPUT:	Moisesek erantzun zion : — Herria niregana dator , Jainkoaren nahia ezagutzeko .
PRED:	But Moses replied , “ The time is coming , and you are coming to know the word of God .
GOLD:	Moses replied , “ Because the people come to me to get a ruling from God .

ID:	1255
INPUT:	Emakumeak isilik eta mendetasun osoz entzun behar du irakaspena .
PRED:	She must be silent and her husband must be able to pay attention to her instructions .
GOLD:	Women should learn quietly and submissively .

ID:	1256
INPUT:	Zeren munduaren hasieratik orain arte izan ez den eta izango ez den bezalako larrialdi handia izango baita orduan .
PRED:	For this world will be like the light of the world , and there will be no greater anguish and anguish .
GOLD:	For there will be greater anguish than at any time since the world began . And it will never be so great again .

ID:	1257
INPUT:	« Asko dira emakume jatorrak , baina zuk ez duzu parekorik ! »
PRED:	“ You have come to a woman , but you have no peace . ”
GOLD:	“ There are many virtuous and capable women in the world , but you surpass them all ! ”

ID:	1258
INPUT:	edo : Nor jaitsiko da leizera ? — Kristo hildakoen artetik igoarazteko , alegia — .
PRED:	“ Who is this ? ” he asked . “ Who is the one who speaks through Christ ? ”
GOLD:	And do n't say , ‘ Who will go down to the place of the dead ? ' ( to bring Christ back to life again ) . ”

ID:	1259
INPUT:	Orduan , mutilaren aitak deiadarka : — Sinetsi nahi dut ! Lagundu sinesgabe honi .
PRED:	Then the boy said to his father , “ I have never believed me ! ”
GOLD:	The father instantly cried out , “ I do believe , but help me overcome my unbelief ! ”

ID:	1260
INPUT:	Jainkoak agertu zien , egiten zuten profezi lana ez zutela berentzat egiten , zuentzat baizik . Eta haiek adierazia , zerutik bidalitako Espiritu Santuaren eraginez berri ona hots egiten dizuetenek iragartzen dizuete orain . Aingeruak berak ere gauza horiek ikusteko irrikaz daude .
PRED:	But God appeared to them , but they refused to listen to him . But they did n't see the Holy Spirit and by the Holy Spirit and by the Holy Spirit . And now we see the Good News about the Holy Spirit . And now we can see the Good News about the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	They were told that their messages were not for themselves , but for you . And now this Good News has been announced to you by those who preached in the power of the Holy Spirit sent from heaven . It is all so wonderful that even the angels are eagerly watching these things happen .

ID:	1261
INPUT:	eta , haren sutearen ke-mordoa ikustean , honela egin zuten oihu : « Hiri handi horrek ez zuen parekorik ! »
PRED:	When they saw him , they shouted out , “ It 's a great crowd ! ” And they shouted , “ There 's no one ! ”
GOLD:	They will cry out as they watch the smoke ascend , and they will say , “ Where is there another city as great as this ? ”

ID:	1262
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Ez al dago zuen Liburu Santuetan idatzia : Nik esan dut : Jainko zarete ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't I tell you the Scriptures , ‘ Do I tell you the truth ? '
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ It is written in your own Scriptures that God said to certain leaders of the people , ‘ I say , you are gods ! '

ID:	1263
INPUT:	Jaunaren eguna
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	's Future Reign

ID:	1264
INPUT:	Abigail , David ikusi orduko , asto gainetik bizkor jaitsi eta makurtu egin zen Daviden aitzinean , lurreraino ahuspeztuz .
PRED:	When David saw Nabal coming from his hand , she bowed down on his head and bowed low before the ground .
GOLD:	When Abigail saw David , she quickly got off her donkey and bowed low before him .

ID:	1265
INPUT:	Zifekoak Gibeara etorri ziren Saulengana , esatera : « Ez al dakizu David Hakila mendixkan , basamortu-ertzean , dagoela gordea ? »
PRED:	Meanwhile , the prophets of Saul came to Saul and told him , “ Do n't you know that Saul is near the hill country of Ziph ? ”
GOLD:	Now some men from Ziph came to Saul at Gibeah to tell him , “ David is hiding on the hill of Hakilah , which overlooks Jeshimon . ”

ID:	1266
INPUT:	sarea bezala eroriko baita munduan bizi diren guztien gainera .
PRED:	For he lives in the world , just as he lives in the world .
GOLD:	like a trap . For that day will come upon everyone living on the earth .

ID:	1267
INPUT:	Beraz , maita dezagun , Jainkoak maitatu baikintuen lehenik .
PRED:	So let us love God , for he loved us .
GOLD:	We love each other because he loved us first .

ID:	1268
INPUT:	Hartu zituen Moisesek gurdiak eta idiak eta lebitarrei banatu zizkien :
PRED:	So Moses took the chariot commanders and the Levites with their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	So Moses took the wagons and oxen and presented them to the Levites .

ID:	1269
INPUT:	hau Amariasena , hau Azariasena , hau Meraiotena ,
PRED:	son of Amariah , son of Amariah , son of Amariah , son of Amariah , son of Amariah ,
GOLD:	son of Amariah , son of Azariah , son of Meraioth ,

ID:	1270
INPUT:	Horrela , Jaunak handik bota eta mundu zabalean sakabanatu zituen ; hiria eraikitzeari utzi egin behar izan zioten .
PRED:	So the Lord brought them out of the world and set them apart from the city .
GOLD:	In that way , the Lord scattered them all over the world , and they stopped building the city .

ID:	1271
INPUT:	— Zoazte eta kontsulta egin Jaunari nire izenean eta Israelen bizirik gelditutakoen eta Judakoen izenean , aurkitu duten liburu honek dioenaz . Izan ere , haserre bizitan egon behar du Jaunak gurekin , gure arbasoek Jaunaren hitzari kasurik egin ez diotelako eta liburu honetan idatzia bete ez dutelako .
PRED:	“ Go and tell them what the Lord has done to the people of Israel and to live in the land of Judah . They have refused to obey the commands of the Lord , the God of Israel , and their ancestors will not be angry with them . ”
GOLD:	“ Go to the Temple and speak to the Lord for me and for all the remnant of Israel and Judah . Inquire about the words written in the scroll that has been found . For the Lord 's great anger has been poured out on us because our ancestors have not obeyed the word of the Lord . We have not been doing everything this scroll says we must do . ”

ID:	1272
INPUT:	Jainkoaren zigorraren zazpi ontziak
PRED:	God 's People
GOLD:	The Seven Bowls of the Seven Plagues

ID:	1273
INPUT:	Eta Kristo pizturik ez badago , funtsik gabea da gure predikua eta zentzurik gabea zuen sinesmena .
PRED:	And Christ is raised from the dead , and he is no fool . He is the one who believes in Christ 's eyes .
GOLD:	And if Christ has not been raised , then all our preaching is useless , and your faith is useless .

ID:	1274
INPUT:	Aurkitu duzu bere lanean trebea den norbait ? Erregeen zerbitzura egongo daeta ez edonolako jendearenera .
PRED:	Do you realize that some of the wise men who are in charge of the king 's eunuchs who are in charge of the king 's personal court ?
GOLD:	Do you see any truly competent workers ? They will serve kingsrather than working for ordinary people .

ID:	1275
INPUT:	neure lehengusu Hanamelen aurrean eta agiria izenpetu zuten lekukoen eta kartzela-atarian suertatu ziren judatarren aurrean , Neriasen seme eta Mahseiasen biloba Baruki eman nizkion .
PRED:	As soon as I was on the first day , I saw the law of Moses and the teachers of religious law and the leader of the Jews who had been led by name of Jesus , a man named Simon , who had been led by name of Jesus .
GOLD:	and I handed them to Baruch son of Neriah and grandson of Mahseiah . I did all this in the presence of my cousin Hanamel , the witnesses who had signed the deed , and all the men of Judah who were there in the courtyard of the guardhouse .

ID:	1276
INPUT:	Agurtu eta bi opil emango dizkizuete ; hartu .
PRED:	He will take two wagons and two quarts of choice flour moistened with olive oil .
GOLD:	They will greet you and offer you two of the loaves , which you are to accept .

ID:	1277
INPUT:	Bi lapur gurutziltzatu zituzten Jesusekin batera , bata eskuinean eta bestea ezkerrean .
PRED:	Two men were crucified with Jesus , one on his right hand , one on his right side .
GOLD:	Two revolutionaries were crucified with him , one on his right and one on his left .

ID:	1278
INPUT:	Gizon hauek gizakiak berezko duen heriotzaz hiltzen badira , Jaunak bidali ez nauen seinalea ;
PRED:	These men are the one who sent me to death , but the Lord sent me to life .
GOLD:	If these men die a natural death , or if nothing unusual happens , then the Lord has not sent me .

ID:	1279
INPUT:	Galaadeko arduradunek erantzun zioten : — Jauna testigu , zuk esan bezala egiten ez badugu .
PRED:	The elders replied , “ We are witnesses of the Lord , but we do n't know him . ”
GOLD:	“ The Lord is our witness , ” the elders replied . “ We promise to do whatever you say . ”

ID:	1280
INPUT:	Jakobek erantzun zion : — Ongi dakizu zenbat lan egin dudan zuretzat eta zenbateraino hazi zaizun abere-taldea niri esker .
PRED:	Jacob replied , “ You know how much I have worked for you , and you have worked for your flocks and herds and herds . ”
GOLD:	Jacob replied , “ You know how hard I 've worked for you , and how your flocks and herds have grown under my care .

ID:	1281
INPUT:	Egun batez , esan zion neskak etxekoandreari : — Nire nagusiari , Samariako profetagana joango balitz , hark sendatuko lioke legena .
PRED:	One day she said to her , “ My daughter , if I would be a prophet who would be a prophet who would be a prophet named Satan . ”
GOLD:	One day the girl said to her mistress , “ I wish my master would go to see the prophet in Samaria . He would heal him of his leprosy . ”

ID:	1282
INPUT:	Bigarren piztiak hartza zirudien : erdi jaikita zegoen eta ahoan , hortz artean , hiru saihets-hezur zituen . Honela esan zioten : “ Jaiki eta jan haragia ugari ! ”
PRED:	Then the third angel said to the beast , “ Get up ! ” And he got up and said , “ Get up and eat the meat ! ” And they said , “ Get up and eat it ! ”
GOLD:	Then I saw a second beast , and it looked like a bear . It was rearing up on one side , and it had three ribs in its mouth between its teeth . And I heard a voice saying to it , “ Get up ! Devour the flesh of many people ! ”

ID:	1283
INPUT:	Argi eta garbi mintzatzen zitzaien honetaz . Pedro , Jesus aparte harturik , gogor egiten hasi zitzaion .
PRED:	Suddenly , Peter was very sick and began talking about Jesus . A blind man was filled with a demon .
GOLD:	As he talked about this openly with his disciples , Peter took him aside and began to reprimand him for saying such things .

ID:	1284
INPUT:	Horregatik , hau dio Jaunak : « Egin i<unk> keta nazioen artean : nork entzun du horrelakorik ? Israel neskatxa ederrakizugarria egin du !
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says : “ Bring me to the people of Israel , and tell them , ‘ How can the young women of Israel be ? '
GOLD:	So this is what the Lord says : “ Has anyone ever heard of such a thing , even among the pagan nations ? My virgin daughter Israelhas done something terrible !

ID:	1285
INPUT:	Poztu eta alaitu Jaunarekin , zintzoak ! Egin poz-oihu , bihotz zuzeneko guztiok !
PRED:	Be glad and rejoice , O Lord , all you who rejoice in the presence of the godly .
GOLD:	So rejoice in the Lord and be glad , all you who obey him ! Shout for joy , all you whose hearts are pure !

ID:	1286
INPUT:	Jaunaren begietan oker dena egin zuen , Nebaten seme Jeroboamek Israeli eginarazi zizkion bekatuetatik aldendu gabe .
PRED:	So Jeroboam son of Nebat did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , following the example of Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel to commit .
GOLD:	But Pekah did what was evil in the Lord 's sight . He refused to turn from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel to commit .

ID:	1287
INPUT:	Zuk asko eta asko hezieta ahulak indartu izan dituzu ;
PRED:	You made many arrows and goats ; you made them the finest of the flock .
GOLD:	“ In the past you have encouraged many people ; you have strengthened those who were weak .

ID:	1288
INPUT:	Boterea kentzen die kontseilarieieta burutik nahasten epaileak ;
PRED:	The elders of the poor are stripped away from the judges and the judges fairly .
GOLD:	He leads counselors away , stripped of good judgment ; wise judges become fools .

ID:	1289
INPUT:	Jaunak laguntzen die eta onik ateratzen , onik ateratzen gaiztoengandik eta salbatzen , berarengan baitira babestu .
PRED:	The Lord protects those who fear him and obey him , for he rescues them from the oppression of the wicked .
GOLD:	The Lord helps them , rescuing them from the wicked.He saves them , and they find shelter in him .

ID:	1290
INPUT:	Zeuen seme-alaba eta morroi-mirabeekin eta zuekin hiri berean bizi diren lebitar , etorkin , umezurtz eta alargunekin batera ospatuko duzue festa .
PRED:	Your sons and daughters will be with you and your daughters , foreigners living among you , foreigners , foreigners , foreigners , foreigners , and foreigners living among you .
GOLD:	This festival will be a happy time of celebrating with your sons and daughters , your male and female servants , and the Levites , foreigners , orphans , and widows from your towns .

ID:	1291
INPUT:	Horregatik irten zitzaion hainbeste jende Jesusi bidera , egin zuen mirarizko seinalearen berri izan zuelako , hain zuzen .
PRED:	That is why the people of the crowd followed Jesus because of the miraculous signs he had done for you .
GOLD:	That was the reason so many went out to meet him — because they had heard about this miraculous sign .

ID:	1292
INPUT:	Mikalek Davidi bizia salbatu
PRED:	David 's Kindness to David
GOLD:	Michal Saves David 's Life

ID:	1293
INPUT:	Judako Asaren erregealdiko hogeita zazpigarren urtean egin zen errege Zimri ; zazpi egunez izan zen errege Tirtzan . Gudarostea , aldi hartan , filistearren hiri Gibeton setiatzen ari zen .
PRED:	Asa was buried in the seventh year of King Asa 's reign in Judah . He reigned in Tirzah , seven years in Tirzah , and he reigned in Tirzah .
GOLD:	Zimri began to rule over Israel in the twenty-seventh year of King Asa 's reign in Judah , but his reign in Tirzah lasted only seven days . The army of Israel was then attacking the Philistine town of Gibbethon .

ID:	1294
INPUT:	Harrapatu egin zituzten hango abere txiki eta handiak , astoak , hirian nahiz landan zeudenak ,
PRED:	They took all the plunder to the poor , large , large , large , large , large , and small animals , and cattle , and donkeys .
GOLD:	They seized all the flocks and herds and donkeys — everything they could lay their hands on , both inside the town and outside in the fields .

ID:	1295
INPUT:	Honela diotsuet nik , Jaun ahalguztidun honek : Etorriko dira oraindik Jerusalemera herriak eta hiri handietako bizilagunak ;
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : The Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the people of Jerusalem , will come to Jerusalem to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : People from nations and cities around the world will travel to Jerusalem .

ID:	1296
INPUT:	Bufalo , zekor eta zezenak , batera eroriko dira denak ; odoletan blai geldituko dahaien lurraldea , gantzetan bustia bertako hautsa .
PRED:	The Teacher , the captain of the Nile , and the leaders of the community will be put to the place of the Lord , along with the fat around the internal organs , and the fat around the altar .
GOLD:	Even men as strong as wild oxen will die — the young men alongside the veterans.The land will be soaked with bloodand the soil enriched with fat .

ID:	1297
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaun ahalguztidunak : « Orain gizaki eta abererik gabe , eremu bihurtua dagoen lurralde honetan , bertako hiri guztietan , ardiak biltzeko artegiak egingo dira berriro .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ Look , I will destroy the land where the Babylonians will become desolate among the nations .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : This land — though it is now desolate and has no people and animals — will once more have pastures where shepherds can lead their flocks .

ID:	1298
INPUT:	Eta hau , Asuero erregearen menpeko eskualde orotan , egun berean , hamabigarren hilaren , hots , Adar hilaren , hamahiruan .
PRED:	And in the sixth year of King Xerxes 's reign , on the fifteenth day of the reign of King Xerxes .
GOLD:	The day chosen for this event throughout all the provinces of King Xerxes was March 7 of the next year .

ID:	1299
INPUT:	Zer esango nizuke , zerekin konparatuko zaitut ? Antzekorik zer aipatuko dizut , Sion neskatxa eder horri , kontsola zaitezen ? Itsasoa bezain handia da zure hondamendia : nork sendatu zu ?
PRED:	What can I say to you ? What can I compare you ? I will give you a young girl named Simon , a young girl named Simon , a young girl named Simon , a great nation ? ”
GOLD:	What can I say about you ? Who has ever seen such sorrow ? O daughter of Jerusalem , to what can I compare your anguish ? O virgin daughter of Zion , how can I comfort you ? For your wound is as deep as the sea.Who can heal you ?

ID:	1300
INPUT:	Erraustutako hirian , zelaian bezalabazkatuko dira ardiak , larratuko ahuntzak .
PRED:	You will destroy the cities of the dead , like a lush pasture , and you will cover them with sorrow .
GOLD:	In that day lambs will find good pastures , and fattened sheep and young goats will feed among the ruins .

ID:	1301
INPUT:	Mariak Elisabeti ikustaldia
PRED:	Gabriel 's Vision of a Plumb Line
GOLD:	The Birth of John the Baptist

ID:	1302
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . « Dolareak » doinuan Daviden salmoa .
PRED:	How wonderful for you , O God , you are my salvation ? Why are you so angry ?
GOLD:	O Lord , our Lord , your majestic name fills the earth ! Your glory is higher than the heavens .

ID:	1303
INPUT:	Esnea eta eztia darizkion lurralde hau eman zenien israeldarrei , arbasoei zin eginez agindu zenien lurraldea .
PRED:	And I gave the land to the people of Israel , who gave this land to the land I swore to give to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	You gave the people of Israel this land that you had promised their ancestors long before — a land flowing with milk and honey .

ID:	1304
INPUT:	Lauso bitez haien begiak eta itsutu , ahul bekie gerria betiko !
PRED:	In those who are weak and are weak , and they are weak .
GOLD:	Pour out your fury on them ; consume them with your burning anger .

ID:	1305
INPUT:	Eskatzen dizun edonori , eman , eta zeurea kentzen dizunari , ez bihurrarazi .
PRED:	If you do n't know what you have done , you will be taken away , and you will not escape .
GOLD:	Give to anyone who asks ; and when things are taken away from you , do n't try to get them back .

ID:	1306
INPUT:	Gedeonek , orduan : — Nire anaiak , gure amaren semeak ! Ala Jauna , bizirik utzi izan bazenituzte , ez zintuzketedan hilko orain .
PRED:	Then Gideon said , “ My brother , do n't let my brother die , for the Lord has given you victory over you . But now you would die ! ”
GOLD:	“ They were my brothers , the sons of my own mother ! ” Gideon exclaimed . “ As surely as the Lord lives , I would n't kill you if you had n't killed them . ”

ID:	1307
INPUT:	Espirituaren dohainak
PRED:	Life in the Spirit
GOLD:	Spiritual Gifts

ID:	1308
INPUT:	Nire Jainkoak aingerua bidali du lehoien ahoak ixtera , eta ez didate kalterik egin . Izan ere , badaki nire Jainkoak errugabe naizela eta zure aurka , errege jauna , ez dudala hobenik egin .
PRED:	For God sent me to the lions , and no one tried to kill me . For I have not sinned against you , O God of heaven , and I have not sinned against you .
GOLD:	The king was overjoyed and ordered that Daniel be lifted from the den . Not a scratch was found on him , for he had trusted in his God .

ID:	1309
INPUT:	zure ukenduen usaina lurrin guztiak baino gozoago ! Zu zeu zara ukendu lurrintsu ! Horregatik zaizkizu neskatxak maitemindu !
PRED:	O Lord , you are more powerful than all the earth , and you are more powerful than the young women ! ”
GOLD:	How pleasing is your fragrance ; your name is like the spreading fragrance of scented oils.No wonder all the young women love you !

ID:	1310
INPUT:	Zakarias , haurraren aita , Espiritu Santuaz beterik , profeta bezala mintzatu zen , esanez :
PRED:	Zechariah was the Holy Spirit , just as the Holy Spirit had said ,
GOLD:	Then his father , Zechariah , was filled with the Holy Spirit and gave this prophecy :

ID:	1311
INPUT:	Elkarketa-etxolako tresnen ardura izango dute eta israeldarren zerbitzura egongo dira egoitzako zereginak betetzeko .
PRED:	They will serve at the Tabernacle , and they will serve at the Tabernacle , and they will serve at the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	They will also maintain all the furnishings of the sacred tent , serving in the Tabernacle on behalf of all the Israelites .

ID:	1312
INPUT:	Pinhasen ondorengoetatik Gerxom ; Itamarren ondorengoetatik Daniel ; Daviden ondorengoetatik Hatux ,
PRED:	The son of Phinehas was the son of Phinehas , the son of David , from the son of David .
GOLD:	From the family of Phinehas : Gershom.From the family of Ithamar : Daniel.From the family of David : Hattush ,

ID:	1313
INPUT:	Apaizburu eta fariseuek agindua zuten , inork Jesus non zen jakiten bazuen , sala zezala , atxilotu ahal izateko .
PRED:	When the leading priests and the leading priests heard that Jesus was going to arrest Jesus , they realized that he was going to arrest him .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the leading priests and Pharisees had publicly ordered that anyone seeing Jesus must report it immediately so they could arrest him .

ID:	1314
INPUT:	Baina ni , haien defendatzailea , indartsua naiz , “ Jaun ahalguztiduna ” dut izena : neuk defendatuko dut haien auzia , munduari barealdia emanezeta babiloniarrak astinduz » .
PRED:	But the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says , ‘ I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who will bring charges against the earth . ' ”
GOLD:	But the one who redeems them is strong.His name is the Lord of Heaven 's Armies.He will defend themand give them rest again in Israel.But for the people of Babylonthere will be no rest !

ID:	1315
INPUT:	Hau entzutean , Jesus harritu egin zen hartaz eta , ondoren zetorkion jendearengana itzulirik , esan zuen : « Egia esan , Israelen bertan ere ez dut aurkitu horrelako sinestedunik » .
PRED:	When Jesus heard this , he was amazed at the center of the crowd followed him and said , “ I have heard the truth , ” he said , “ I have never heard about it . ”
GOLD:	When Jesus heard this , he was amazed . Turning to the crowd that was following him , he said , “ I tell you , I have n't seen faith like this in all Israel ! ”

ID:	1316
INPUT:	bere bizilekutik jarriak ditu begiakmunduko biztanle guztiengan ;
PRED:	He rescues them from the oppression of the world , and all who live in him .
GOLD:	From his throne he observesall who live on the earth .

ID:	1317
INPUT:	Erregea , haserre bizian , etzaulkitik jaiki eta jauregiko lorategira atera zen . Haman bertan gelditu zen , bizia salbatzeko Ester erreginari eskatuz , sumatu baitzuen erabakia zuela erregeak bere hondamena .
PRED:	When the king got up , he got up from the palace and went down to the palace . So Haman returned to the king 's palace , but the king ordered that his kingdom to destroy it .
GOLD:	Then the king jumped to his feet in a rage and went out into the palace garden.Haman , however , stayed behind to plead for his life with Queen Esther , for he knew that the king intended to kill him .

ID:	1318
INPUT:	Lagun hurkoa maite duenak ez dio gaitzik egiten . Maite duenak , beraz , erabat betetzen du legea .
PRED:	A person who loves a friend is not a fool , but anyone who refuses to obey him .
GOLD:	Love does no wrong to others , so love fulfills the requirements of God 's law .

ID:	1319
INPUT:	Erregeak , erregina aldamenean eseria zuelarik , galdetu zidan : — Zenbat iraungo du zure joan-etorriak ? Noiz itzuliko zara ? Ontzat eman zuen erregeak jarri nion epea eta joaten utzi zidan .
PRED:	When the king came to me , he asked me , “ How long will I come to you ? ” And the king asked him , “ How long will you return to me ? ” And the king asked him .
GOLD:	The king , with the queen sitting beside him , asked , “ How long will you be gone ? When will you return ? ” After I told him how long I would be gone , the king agreed to my request .

ID:	1320
INPUT:	Gizonaren Semea bezala : hura ez da etorri zerbitzatua izatera , zerbitzari izatera baizik , bere bizia guztien alde ordainsaritzat ematera » .
PRED:	For the Son of Man is not like the Son of Man . He is not a slave to his servant , but he is the one who has been circumcised . ”
GOLD:	For even the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve others and to give his life as a ransom for many . ”

ID:	1321
INPUT:	Beraz , mandatariak bidali nizkien erantzun honekin : « Lan handietan nabil eta ez naiteke joan . Zuengana joateagatik bakarrik lanak ez nituzke utzi nahi » .
PRED:	So I told them , “ If I were with you , I would not go with you . I would n't go with you , I would n't let you go with me . ”
GOLD:	so I replied by sending this message to them : “ I am engaged in a great work , so I ca n't come . Why should I stop working to come and meet with you ? ”

ID:	1322
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jaun ahalguztidunakahulezia bihurtuko duasiriarren sendotasuna , eta haien gorputz ederraksukarrez joko ditu , suak hartuta bezala jarriko .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ The fire will consume them like a fire , and the fire will consume them . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , will send a plague among Assyria 's proud troops , and a flaming fire will consume its glory .

ID:	1323
INPUT:	Erregearen bihotza ubidea da Jaunaren eskuetan : nahi duen alderantz zuzentzen du .
PRED:	The king is coming to the king of the Lord 's hand ; he is coming to the west of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	The king 's heart is like a stream of water directed by the Lord ; he guides it wherever he pleases .

ID:	1324
INPUT:	Ilunpetan biziarazi nau , behin betiko hildakoak bezala .
PRED:	He will live in darkness , just as I live in darkness .
GOLD:	He has buried me in a dark place , like those long dead .

ID:	1325
INPUT:	Koruak
PRED:	The Futility of Wealth
GOLD:	Young Women of Jerusalem

ID:	1326
INPUT:	Horregatik , niri dagokidanez , irrikaz nago zuei ere , erromatarroi , berri ona hots egiteko .
PRED:	Therefore , let me go out to the banquet I have given to you , so that I will preach the Good News for you .
GOLD:	So I am eager to come to you in Rome , too , to preach the Good News .

ID:	1327
INPUT:	Israelgo errege Joaxek , aldiz , beste erantzun hau bidali zion Judako errege Amatziasi : « Behin batez garduak esan omen zion Libanoko zedroari : “ Emaiok alaba nire semeari emaztetzat ” . Baina Libanoko basabere batek hankazpian hartu zuen gardua .
PRED:	But King Jehoash of Israel sent this message to King Jehoash of Israel : “ This is what King Ahab of Israel says : You are saying , ‘ My daughter , the daughter of Heaven 's Armies , the daughter of Heaven 's Armies , the daughter of Heaven 's Armies . '
GOLD:	But King Jehoash of Israel replied to King Amaziah of Judah with this story : “ Out in the Lebanon mountains , a thistle sent a message to a mighty cedar tree : ‘ Give your daughter in marriage to my son . ' But just then a wild animal of Lebanon came by and stepped on the thistle , crushing it !

ID:	1328
INPUT:	zu , ordea , hobiratu gabebota zaituzte , gauza nazkagarriaren pare ; leizeko harri arterabota dituztenekin zaude , ezpataz hildakoen gorpuen artean , hankapean zapaltzen dengorpuaren pare .
PRED:	But if you are proud , you will throw them into the sea , and you will be driven out of the sea , and you will be slaughtered by the sword of your body .
GOLD:	but you will be thrown out of your gravelike a worthless branch.Like a corpse trampled underfoot , you will be dumped into a mass gravewith those killed in battle.You will descend to the pit .

ID:	1329
INPUT:	Hartu nuen liburuxka aingeruaren eskutik eta irentsi egin nuen . Ahoan ezti gozoa bezala gertatu zitzaidan , baina , jan nuenean , sabela garraztu zidan .
PRED:	Then I opened the scroll and opened the angel 's hand . I saw that it was good , but it was a certain man who had eaten it , just as I had eaten it .
GOLD:	So I took the small scroll from the hand of the angel , and I ate it ! It was sweet in my mouth , but when I swallowed it , it turned sour in my stomach .

ID:	1330
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Aaroni : « Zu , zure semeak eta leinuko beste kideak izango zarete santutegiaren aurkako hutsegiteen erantzule ; zeuen apaiz-jardueran egindako hutsegiteenak , berriz , zu eta zure semeak bakarrik .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Aaron , “ You will be your sons and your sons , and your sons will be brought to you . You will be your own sons and your sons , and your sons will be put to death .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Aaron : “ You , your sons , and your relatives from the tribe of Levi will be held responsible for any offenses related to the sanctuary . But you and your sons alone will be held responsible for violations connected with the priesthood .

ID:	1331
INPUT:	Itsasora jo zuten ontzietan , ur handietan zutelarik ogibidea .
PRED:	The sailors crossed the sea into the sea , taking the water into the sea .
GOLD:	Some went off to sea in ships , plying the trade routes of the world .

ID:	1332
INPUT:	Oso aberats egin zen Jakob : artalde handiak , morroi-mirabeak , gamelu eta astoak eskuratu zituen .
PRED:	Jacob became very wealthy because Jacob had many cattle , sheep , goats , cattle , sheep , goats , and goats .
GOLD:	As a result , Jacob became very wealthy , with large flocks of sheep and goats , female and male servants , and many camels and donkeys .

ID:	1333
INPUT:	Hara , aldi hartan , zapaltzen zaituzten guztiaksuntsituko ditut . Zaurituak sendatuko ditut , erbesteratuak etxeratuko . Eta ospez eta aipuz beteko ditutlehen lotsa jasan zutenlurralde guztietan .
PRED:	I will destroy you , O Lord , and all your houses will be destroyed , and all your houses will be destroyed . I will bring you down to the ground , and I will bring you down to the ground .
GOLD:	And I will deal severely with all who have oppressed you.I will save the weak and helpless ones ; I will bring togetherthose who were chased away.I will give glory and fame to my former exiles , wherever they have been mocked and shamed .

ID:	1334
INPUT:	Horregatik , begira zer dioen Jaunak Josiasen seme Joiakim , Judako erregeaz : « Ez diote hileta joko , esanez : “ Hau zoritxarra , anaia ! Hau zoritxarra , arreba ! ” Ez diote hileta joko , esanez : “ Ai gure jauna ! Ai gure jaun agurgarria ! ”
PRED:	This is what the Lord says to Josiah son of Josiah , the king of Judah , says : “ Do n't go to the king of Judah and say , ‘ What sorrow awaits you , for I am going to worship the Lord ! '
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says about Jehoiakim , son of King Josiah : “ The people will not mourn for him , crying to one another , ‘ Alas , my brother ! Alas , my sister ! 'His subjects will not mourn for him , crying , ‘ Alas , our master is dead ! Alas , his splendor is gone ! '

ID:	1335
INPUT:	Otoi , barka iezadazu bekatua , eta zatoz nirekin Jauna gurtzera .
PRED:	Please forgive me , please forgive me , and come with me . ”
GOLD:	But now , please forgive my sin and come back with me so that I may worship the Lord . ”

ID:	1336
INPUT:	Gauzok esan zituenean , askok sinetsi zuten harengan .
PRED:	Many of the people who believed in him , and many who believed in him .
GOLD:	Then many who heard him say these things believed in him .

ID:	1337
INPUT:	Hau diotso Jaunak Israeli : « Egiptoko langileak , Etiopiako merkatariaketa altuera handiko sebatarrakzure menpean jarriko dira , zureak izango ; zure atzetik joango dira , katez loturik ; zure aurrean ahuspeztuko diraeta erreguka esango dizute : “ Zuregan bakarrik dago Jainkoa , ez da besterik ; beste jainkoak ezer ez dira ” » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : You will live in the land of Egypt , and you will worship your gods , and you will never worship your gods . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ You will rule the Egyptians , the Ethiopians , and the Sabeans.They will come to you with all their merchandise , and it will all be yours.They will follow you as prisoners in chains.They will fall to their knees in front of you and say , ‘ God is with you , and he is the only God.There is no other . ' ”

ID:	1338
INPUT:	« Basamorturik basamortuena izango da Egipto , hiri guztien artean hondatuenak bertako hiriak .
PRED:	“ I will scatter the wilderness among the nations in the wilderness , and all the towns of Egypt will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Egypt will be desolate , surrounded by desolate nations , and its cities will be in ruins , surrounded by other ruined cities .

ID:	1339
INPUT:	Zerbitzari trebeak erregearen onespena du , duin ez denak haren haserrea .
PRED:	So the king 's servant will be angry with the king 's anger ; he will not be angry with his anger .
GOLD:	A king rejoices in wise servantsbut is angry with those who disgrace him .

ID:	1340
INPUT:	Jerusalemen ziren israeldarrek poz handiz egin zuten zazpi egunez Legamia gabeko Ogien Jaia . Lebitarrek eta apaizek egunero goretsi ohi zuten Jauna , musika-tresna ozenen laguntzaz , haren ohoretan kantatuz .
PRED:	The people of Israel mourned for seven days for seven days , for the priests and Levites celebrated the Festival of Unleavened Bread for seven days . The priests and Levites accepted the Temple of the Lord 's Covenant .
GOLD:	So the people of Israel who were present in Jerusalem joyously celebrated the Festival of Unleavened Bread for seven days . Each day the Levites and priests sang to the Lord , accompanied by loud instruments .

ID:	1341
INPUT:	lurra betetzen du<unk> turik hoberenaketa sasian agertu zenaren onginahia : betor hori guztia Joserengana , senideen artean aukeratuagana .
PRED:	I looked at the earth and saw that it was good , and it was good to the family of Joseph , the family of Joseph , the family of Joseph .
GOLD:	with the best gifts of the earth and its bounty , and the favor of the one who appeared in the burning bush.May these blessings rest on Joseph 's head , crowning the brow of the prince among his brothers .

ID:	1342
INPUT:	harik eta Jaunak zerutik begiratu eta ikusi arte .
PRED:	The Lord looked up from heaven and looked up from the sky until he saw him .
GOLD:	until the Lord looks downfrom heaven and sees .

ID:	1343
INPUT:	eta Josuerengana eraman zituzten . Josuek israeldar guztiei dei egin eta guduan berarekin ibilitako gudalburuei agindu hau eman zien : « Hurbil zaitezte eta zapaldu errege hauei lepoa » . Halaxe egin zuten .
PRED:	So Joshua called together all the people of Israel . So Joshua called together all the elders of Israel and called them to the commander of the army of Israel , and they called to the king of Israel , “ This is what the king has commanded . ”
GOLD:	When they brought them out , Joshua told the commanders of his army , “ Come and put your feet on the kings ' necks . ” And they did as they were told .

ID:	1344
INPUT:	« Zuekin bizi den nire herriko dohakaberen bati dirua maileguz ematen badiozue , ez izan zeken berarekin , ez ezarri interesik .
PRED:	“ If you lend money to the poor , you must not lend money to the poor , and you must not enter the land of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	My anger will blaze against you , and I will kill you with the sword . Then your wives will be widows and your children fatherless .

ID:	1345
INPUT:	« Gaur ematen dizkizuedan agindu hauek benetan onartzen badituzue , Jauna zeuen Jainkoa maitatuz eta bihotz-bihotzez eta gogo osoz zerbitzatuz ,
PRED:	“ If you obey all these commands , you must obey the Lord your God and obey all your heart and soul , and serve him with all your heart and soul .
GOLD:	“ If you carefully obey the commands I am giving you today , and if you love the Lord your God and serve him with all your heart and soul ,

ID:	1346
INPUT:	beren burua etsaien esku gatibuutzi arren , han ere ezpataz hilaraziko ditut . Begi-bistan izango ditut , ez onerako , bai kalterako » .
PRED:	I will hand them over to my enemies , and I will give them victory over my enemies . I will not harm them , and I will not harm them . ”
GOLD:	Even if their enemies drive them into exile , I will command the sword to kill them there.I am determined to bring disaster upon themand not to help them . ”

ID:	1347
INPUT:	Loten emazteak atzera begiratu zuen , eta gatz-irudi bihurtu zen .
PRED:	After Lot 's wife , he took his wife and put them into the boat .
GOLD:	But Lot 's wife looked back as she was following behind him , and she turned into a pillar of salt .

ID:	1348
INPUT:	Azpikeriaz dabilenak atsekabea dakar , aurrez aurre zentzarazten duenak konponbidea .
PRED:	In the end of the body , you will be put to trust in your own understanding .
GOLD:	People who wink at wrong cause trouble , but a bold reproof promotes peace .

ID:	1349
INPUT:	Esterrek agindu eta antolatu zituen Purim Jaiak , eta liburuan idatzia gelditu zen .
PRED:	Then Esther did as Esther commanded . So the rest of the people who were left in the scroll , and the rest of the people returned from the land of the Lord .
GOLD:	So the command of Esther confirmed the practices of Purim , and it was all written down in the records .

ID:	1350
INPUT:	E<unk> LOGOA ( 42 , <unk> )
PRED:	Summary of Solomon 's Reign
GOLD:	Conclusion : The

ID:	1351
INPUT:	Ondoren , apurtu egingo ditut bata bestearen kontra : gurasoak eta seme-alabak , denak batera . Ez dut errukirik izango , ez barkamenik , ez gupidarik : guztiak suntsituko ditut . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	Then I will destroy them , and they will destroy their sons and daughters and daughters and daughters . I will not destroy them , ” says the Lord . “ I will destroy them , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	I will smash them against each other , even parents against children , says the Lord . I will not let my pity or mercy or compassion keep me from destroying them . ' ”

ID:	1352
INPUT:	Labanen eta Jakoben arteko hitzarmena
PRED:	Jacob 's Death and Burial
GOLD:	Jacob 's Treaty with Laban

ID:	1353
INPUT:	Hona hemen etorkizunean Israelekin egingo dudan ituna : Buruan ezarriko dizkiet neure legeak , bihotzean idatziko ; ni beraien Jainko izango naiz , eta haiek nire herri . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : I will make my covenant with you , and I will put my yoke on my head , says the Sovereign Lord . I will establish my people as my people . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !
GOLD:	But this is the new covenant I will makewith the people of Israel on that day , says the Lord : I will put my laws in their minds , and I will write them on their hearts.I will be their God , and they will be my people .

ID:	1354
INPUT:	Baina Jauna neurekin izan nuen eta indartu egin ninduen , nire bidez mezua oso-osorik iragarria izan zedin eta jentil guztiek entzun zezaten ; berak atera ninduen lehoiaren ahotik .
PRED:	But I was with the Lord , and I took my life with you . I was a strong man , a strong lion , and all the people of the earth .
GOLD:	But the Lord stood with me and gave me strength so that I might preach the Good News in its entirety for all the Gentiles to hear . And he rescued me from certain death .

ID:	1355
INPUT:	Atezainak ere ezarriak zituen ateetan , kutsatua zegokeen inor inola ere sar ez zedin .
PRED:	Then he placed them on the sides of the sea , so no one could enter the sea .
GOLD:	He also stationed gatekeepers at the gates of the Lord 's Temple to keep out those who for any reason were ceremonially unclean .

ID:	1356
INPUT:	Moisesek israeldar leinuak bedeinkatu
PRED:	Moses Blesses the Israelites
GOLD:	Moses Blesses the People

ID:	1357
INPUT:	Berdin izango da munduaren azkenean : aingeruek etorri eta gaiztoak zintzoen artetik bereiziko dituzte ,
PRED:	For the Son of the world will come to the world , and the wicked will enter the Kingdom of the godly .
GOLD:	That is the way it will be at the end of the world . The angels will come and separate the wicked people from the righteous ,

ID:	1358
INPUT:	Oi Jainko , begira onez gure babeskiari , zeuk aukeraturiko erregeari .
PRED:	O God of our God , you alone are the king of Israel .
GOLD:	A single day in your courtsis better than a thousand anywhere else ! I would rather be a gatekeeper in the house of my Godthan live the good life in the homes of the wicked .

ID:	1359
INPUT:	Zure aginduen bidetik lehiatuko naiz , barrua lasaitzen didazunez gero .
PRED:	I will turn from your commands , and I will turn your back to your commands .
GOLD:	I will pursue your commands , for you expand my understanding .

ID:	1360
INPUT:	Baina , ikusi dudanez , Jainkoak eguzkipean ari dituenegintza guztietarik bat ereezin dute gizon-emakumeekgarbi ulertu . Zenbat eta gehiago saiatuegintza horien arrazoi bila , hainbat eta nekezagoaurkituko dute . Jakintsuak berak , badakiela esanik ere , ez du ulertzen .
PRED:	But God has seen everything he did , and he does not understand the meaning of all the wonderful things he has done , and he will not understand the meaning of the meaning of the meaning of the word of the Lord .
GOLD:	I realized that no one can discover everything God is doing under the sun . Not even the wisest people discover everything , no matter what they claim .

ID:	1361
INPUT:	Hurbildu zitzaion Sauli emakumea eta , hain larritua ikusirik , esan zion : — Nik , zure mirabe honek , entzun dut zure hitza eta arriskuan jarri dut neure bizia , zure esana betetzearren .
PRED:	So Saul returned to the woman and told him , “ I have seen the anguish I have seen you , and I have heard your word . ”
GOLD:	When the woman saw how distraught he was , she said , “ Sir , I obeyed your command at the risk of my life .

ID:	1362
INPUT:	« Baina , zer ikusten dut ? Lur jota daude , atzera dagite ! Gudari ausartak birrinduta , ihesi doaz zalapartaka , atzera begiratu gabe . Izu-ikara edonon ! Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	“ But what do you see ? Look , my friend ? Look , I have come back to the north and go to the south gateway to the south gateway to the north , and I have gone to the north . ”
GOLD:	But what do I see ? The Egyptian army flees in terror.The bravest of its fighting men runwithout a backward glance.They are terrorized at every turn , ” says the Lord .

ID:	1363
INPUT:	Nire aurrean goraipatu egiten zuten gainera , eta nik esandakoak berari jakinarazten zizkioten . Tobiasek berak gutunak bidaltzen zizkidan , ni izutzeko .
PRED:	They brought me to the sanctuary of the Most Holy Place , and they brought me to the Most Holy Place .
GOLD:	They kept telling me about Tobiah 's good deeds , and then they told him everything I said . And Tobiah kept sending threatening letters to intimidate me .

ID:	1364
INPUT:	Samsonen mendekua
PRED:	Samson and Samson
GOLD:	Samson 's Vengeance on the Philistines

ID:	1365
INPUT:	Izan ere , ardiak ernaltzeko garaian hauxe ikusten nuen ametsetan : ardiak ernaltzen zituzten ahariak marradunak , pintoak eta nabarrak zirela .
PRED:	For this time I saw that you were streaked and spotted , which means that you were streaked and spotted , speckled , speckled , speckled , and spotted , and spotted .
GOLD:	“ One time during the mating season , I had a dream and saw that the male goats mating with the females were streaked , speckled , and spotted .

ID:	1366
INPUT:	Aitak agindu zien semeei : — Txalmatu iezadazue astoa ! Astoa txalmatu ziotenean , gainean jarri
PRED:	Then the father said to his sons , “ Get out of the donkey ! ” So the donkey took the donkey 's donkey into the donkey .
GOLD:	“ Quick , saddle the donkey , ” the old man said . So they saddled the donkey for him , and he mounted it .

ID:	1367
INPUT:	Zoro bezala mintzatu naiz , baina zeuek behartu nauzue ; izan ere , zeuek atera behar zenuten nire alde , zeren , ezer ez naizen arren , ez bainaiz ezertan superapostolu horiek baino gutxiago .
PRED:	Yes , I am the one who speaks to you , but you are my own brother , and you are my own brother . I am not the apostle of this apostle .
GOLD:	You have made me act like a fool . You ought to be writing commendations for me , for I am not at all inferior to these “ super apostles , ” even though I am nothing at all .

ID:	1368
INPUT:	Aldi baten buruan , baretu zitzaion haserrea Asuerori ; baina ezin zitzaizkion erregeari ahaztu Baxtik egina eta honen aurka harturiko erabakia .
PRED:	At that time some time the king was angry with the king , but the king could not be punished for the sins of the king .
GOLD:	But after Xerxes ' anger had subsided , he began thinking about Vashti and what she had done and the decree he had made .

ID:	1369
INPUT:	Moisesen legea ezagutzen ez dutenekin , legea kontuan hartu gabe bizi izan naiz , legea ezagutzen ez dutenak irabazteko ; ez , noski , Jainkoaren legerik onartzen ez dudalako , nire legea Kristo baita .
PRED:	If you obey the law of Moses , it is not a permanent law for the law of Moses . I know that God 's law is not a witness against us , and I do n't obey God 's law .
GOLD:	When I am with the Gentiles who do not follow the Jewish law , I too live apart from that law so I can bring them to Christ . But I do not ignore the law of God ; I obey the law of Christ .

ID:	1370
INPUT:	Han egingo du sugeak habia , han egin eta berotuko arrautzak , eta bere babespean aterako umeak . Hantxe bilduko dira saiak ere , arra emearekin elkartuz .
PRED:	There will be a snake there there there , and there will be plenty of straw . There will be plenty of wine , and there will be plenty of wine .
GOLD:	There the owl will make her nest and lay her eggs.She will hatch her young and cover them with her wings.And the buzzards will come , each one with its mate .

ID:	1371
INPUT:	Bere lurra lantzen duenak ogia ugari , huskerien atzetik dabilena burugabea galanta .
PRED:	A lazy person produces good crops to produce good crops , without yeast , and bread made without yeast .
GOLD:	A hard worker has plenty of food , but a person who chases fantasies has no sense .

ID:	1372
INPUT:	« Zuk , ordea , irabazteari besterikez diozu begiratzen , errugabea hileta herria zapaldu eta esplotatzearibesterik ez » .
PRED:	“ But if you refused to reject the other ; if you reject one another , stop calling the other , orphans , and widows , and widows . ”
GOLD:	“ But you ! You have eyes only for greed and dishonesty ! You murder the innocent , oppress the poor , and reign ruthlessly . ”

ID:	1373
INPUT:	Beraz , Kristok bere gorputzean sufritu zuenez , hartu zuek ere armatzat pentsaera berbera , jakinik gorputzean sufritu duenak bekatuarekiko lotura hautsi egin duela ,
PRED:	So when Christ has finished his body , he will suffer for you to suffer so that he will suffer for you .
GOLD:	So then , since Christ suffered physical pain , you must arm yourselves with the same attitude he had , and be ready to suffer , too . For if you have suffered physically for Christ , you have finished with sin .

ID:	1374
INPUT:	Horren zentzugabeak al zarete ? Espirituagan uste on izanez hasi eta giza indar hutsetan ustea jarriz bukatu behar ote duzue orain ?
PRED:	Do you think of the Holy Spirit ? Do you think you think we are weak ? Are you doing this ?
GOLD:	How foolish can you be ? After starting your new lives in the Spirit , why are you now trying to become perfect by your own human effort ?

ID:	1375
INPUT:	Hona nik esan : « Denok jainko , Goi-goikoaren seme zareten arren ,
PRED:	This is what you say : “ Men of the Most High , the Most High , the Most High , says :
GOLD:	I say , ‘ You are gods ; you are all children of the Most High .

ID:	1376
INPUT:	Bosgarren turuta . Matxinsaltoen izurria
PRED:	A Plague of Locusts
GOLD:	The Fifth Trumpet Brings the First Terror

ID:	1377
INPUT:	Nazioen egitasmoak Jaunak ditu desegiten , herrien asmoak hutsean galtzen .
PRED:	The plans of the Lord will be destroyed , but the plans of the godly will be destroyed .
GOLD:	The Lord frustrates the plans of the nationsand thwarts all their schemes .

ID:	1378
INPUT:	baita nire alde ere , Jainkoak hitz egokia ahoan jar diezadan , berri onaren misterioa ausardiaz adierazteko .
PRED:	For God has spoken to me in my heart , and he will prophesy against me .
GOLD:	And pray for me , too . Ask God to give me the right words so I can boldly explain God 's mysterious plan that the Good News is for Jews and Gentiles alike .

ID:	1379
INPUT:	Poz handia hartu dut kristau bezala , nireganako duzuen ardura nabarmen agertu delako ; bazenuten lehendik ere , baina agertzeko aukerarik ez .
PRED:	I am poor and needy , but I am not worthy to be an apostle to you . But if you do n't want to boast about it , you would not have a case .
GOLD:	How I praise the Lord that you are concerned about me again . I know you have always been concerned for me , but you did n't have the chance to help me .

ID:	1380
INPUT:	Bekatua ugari zedin azaldu zen legea ; baina bekatua ugaldu zenean , are ugariago izan zen Jainkoaren onginahia .
PRED:	He became a prostitute , but he became a prostitute . But when he became a prostitute , he became a prostitute .
GOLD:	God 's law was given so that all people could see how sinful they were . But as people sinned more and more , God 's wonderful grace became more abundant .

ID:	1381
INPUT:	« Baten batek bere lagun hurkoari kalte egin eta honek madarikaziopean zin egitera behartuko balu eta tenplu honetako zure aldarera etorriko balitz ,
PRED:	“ If a man commits adultery , he would not destroy the Temple and destroy it , and if there were an altar to the Lord your God ,
GOLD:	“ If someone wrongs another person and is required to take an oath of innocence in front of your altar at this Temple ,

ID:	1382
INPUT:	( 2 Erg 18 , 17-37 ; Is 36 , <unk> )
PRED:	Sennacherib Threatens Jerusalem
GOLD:	Summary of Hezekiah 's Reign

ID:	1383
INPUT:	Eskerrak Jainkoari , beraren ezin esan ahalako dohain horrengatik .
PRED:	I thank God for all these things , so I can not be able to do such things .
GOLD:	Thank God for this gift too wonderful for words !

ID:	1384
INPUT:	iraunaraziko dut zure erregetza . Honako hau hitzeman bainion zuen aita Davidi : “ Beti izanen duzu zeure ondorengoetako bat Israel gobernatzeko ” .
PRED:	I will establish the king of Israel as king of Israel , for he said to David , ‘ You will have a son of David , a descendant of David . '
GOLD:	then I will establish the throne of your dynasty . For I made this covenant with your father , David , when I said , ‘ One of your descendants will always rule over Israel . '

ID:	1385
INPUT:	Gerra sorraraziko dut zuen aurka eta kanpoko nazioetan barreiatuko zaituztet . Zuen lurraldea eremu bihurtuko dut eta zuen hiriak hondakin .
PRED:	I will bring you out to war against you , and I will bring you into the land I have given you . I will destroy you and destroy your land .
GOLD:	I will scatter you among the nations and bring out my sword against you . Your land will become desolate , and your cities will lie in ruins .

ID:	1386
INPUT:	Nazio eta herrialde horietatik guztietatik bilduko zaituztet , eta zeuen lurraldera eramango .
PRED:	I will drive you out of this land , and I will send you out of your land .
GOLD:	For I will gather you up from all the nations and bring you home again to your land .

ID:	1387
INPUT:	Samuel erre-oparia eskaintzen ari zen bitartean , filistearrak israeldarren aurka borroka egiteko hurbildu ziren . Orduan , Jaunak burrunba handiko trumoiak egin zituen filistearren kontra , izutu eta hondatu egin zituen israeldarren aurrean .
PRED:	As Samuel grew up , the people of Israel were defeated by the Philistines , the Philistines gathered against the Philistines . Then the Lord blew the ram 's horn 's horn , and the Lord struck them with fear .
GOLD:	Just as Samuel was sacrificing the burnt offering , the Philistines arrived to attack Israel . But the Lord spoke with a mighty voice of thunder from heaven that day , and the Philistines were thrown into such confusion that the Israelites defeated them .

ID:	1388
INPUT:	eta denok , judu eta juduberri , kretar eta arabiar , Jainkoaren egintza miragarriak geure hizkuntzetan aipatzen entzuten diegu » .
PRED:	And all who hear the word of God and the people of the Jews and officials , too , will hear the word of God . ”
GOLD:	( both Jews and converts to Judaism ) , Cretans , and Arabs . And we all hear these people speaking in our own languages about the wonderful things God has done ! ”

ID:	1389
INPUT:	Jaun ahalguztidunaren haserreaz , sutan dago lurraldeaeta suaren menpe herria . Ez dio inork inori bizia barkatzen :
PRED:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies is angry with the nations , and there is no one living in the land of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	This wickedness is like a brushfire.It burns not only briers and thornsbut also sets the forests ablaze.Its burning sends up clouds of smoke .

ID:	1390
INPUT:	Landatik itzultzean , Jakoben semeek gertatuaren berri jakin zuten . Samindurik eta haserre bizitan jarri ziren . Jakoben alabarekin etzanez Sikemek egin zuen itsuskeria , Israelen ez zela inola ere egin behar esaten zuten .
PRED:	When the brothers returned to Egypt , the sons of Jacob returned to Egypt . They were angry with them , but they did n't realize that he had done such a shameful thing in Israel .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Jacob 's sons had come in from the field as soon as they heard what had happened . They were shocked and furious that their sister had been raped . Shechem had done a disgraceful thing against Jacob 's family , something that should never be done .

ID:	1391
INPUT:	Maitasuna legearen muina
PRED:	The New Commandment
GOLD:	Love Fulfills God 's Requirements

ID:	1392
INPUT:	Jebus ondora heldu zireneko , ilunabarra zen . Morroiak esan zion nagusiari : — Tira , jo dezagun jebustarren hiri horretara ; eman dezakegu bertan gaua .
PRED:	When he arrived at the place of Canaan , he said to his master , “ We are the father of the Amorites , we are the father of Tyre . ”
GOLD:	It was late in the day when they neared Jebus , and the man 's servant said to him , “ Let 's stop at this Jebusite town and spend the night there . ”

ID:	1393
INPUT:	Hartan , zirenear eta alexandriarrez osatua zegoen eta « Askatuena » zeritzan sinagogakoak , ziliziar eta asiar batzuekin batera , Estebanekin eztabaidan hasi ziren .
PRED:	While he was still in Egypt , he became a slave named Apollos , who lived in Egypt , had been a slave from the province of Asia . And when he arrived with me , they began to argue with him .
GOLD:	But one day some men from the Synagogue of Freed Slaves , as it was called , started to debate with him . They were Jews from Cyrene , Alexandria , Cilicia , and the province of Asia .

ID:	1394
INPUT:	Fededun egin diren jentilei dagokienez , berriz , geure erabakiak idatziz eman genizkien : ez dezatela jan sasijainkoei eskainitako haragirik , ezta odolik nahiz odolustu gabeko abererik ere , eta utz ditzatela legearen kontrako sexu-harremanak » .
PRED:	For example , I want to write out the charges against the Gentiles and by eating the meat from eating and drinking from eating and drinking from eating and drinking from eating and drinking wine . ”
GOLD:	“ As for the Gentile believers , they should do what we already told them in a letter : They should abstain from eating food offered to idols , from consuming blood or the meat of strangled animals , and from sexual immorality . ”

ID:	1395
INPUT:	« Jaiegun eta gainerako festaburuetan berrogei kilo irin eskainiko dira labore-oparitzat zezen bakoitzeko , eta beste horrenbeste ahari bakoitzeko ; arkumeengatik , berriz , nahi beste . Gainera , sei litro olio berrogei kilo irineko .
PRED:	“ On that day the prince will provide a grain offering of choice flour moistened with olive oil , six quarts of choice flour , one gallon of olive oil , one gallon of olive oil , olive oil , and each lamb .
GOLD:	“ So at the special feasts and sacred festivals , the grain offering will be a basket of choice flour with each young bull , another basket of flour with each ram , and as much flour as the worshiper chooses to give with each lamb . Give one gallon of olive oil with each basket of flour .

ID:	1396
INPUT:	Goretsazue , haren aingeru guztiok , goretsi , haren gudari guztiok !
PRED:	Praise him , all you kingdoms of the earth ! Praise him !
GOLD:	Praise him , all his angels ! Praise him , all the armies of heaven !

ID:	1397
INPUT:	Mundu honetatik eramana izateko garaia bazetorkiolarik , Jerusalemera joateko erabaki sendoa hartu zuen Jesusek .
PRED:	When Jesus came to Jerusalem to Jerusalem , he went to Jerusalem to Jerusalem to Jerusalem and told him what Jesus meant .
GOLD:	As the time drew near for him to ascend to heaven , Jesus resolutely set out for Jerusalem .

ID:	1398
INPUT:	Ontzi horretako ura jangai den zerbaiti botatzen bazaio , kutsaturik geldituko da ; halaber , edan daitekeen edariren bati botatzen bazaio , nolanahiko ontzitan dagoela , kutsaturik geldituko da .
PRED:	If you eat any meat that is ceremonially unclean , you may be ceremonially unclean . If any of these things are unclean , you will be ceremonially unclean for any of these things , you will be ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	If the water from such a container spills on any food , the food will be defiled . And any beverage in such a container will be defiled .

ID:	1399
INPUT:	Baina zuek nazireueiardoa edanarazi diezue , eta profeteinire mezua ez zabaltzeko agindu .
PRED:	But you must not offer a sacrifice to the Lord your God , and you must be fulfilled by my word .
GOLD:	“ But you caused the Nazirites to sin by making them drink wine , and you commanded the prophets , ‘ Shut up ! '

ID:	1400
INPUT:	« Hau da adulterio-susmoaren legea , senarraren eskumende egonik , emaztea desleial izan eta desohoratzen denerako ,
PRED:	“ This is the law of a man who commits adultery against her husband , and she is unfaithful to her husband , and she is unfaithful to her husband .
GOLD:	“ This is the ritual law for dealing with suspicion . If a woman goes astray and defiles herself while under her husband 's authority ,

ID:	1401
INPUT:	Hara , ekaitza bezala lehertu daJaunaren haserrea , haize-erauntsia bezala oldartzen da , zurrunbiloka dabilerrudunen buru gainean .
PRED:	The anger of the Lord is like a whirlwind , like a whirlwind from a whirlwind , like a whirlwind that falls on the heads of the wicked .
GOLD:	Look ! The Lord 's anger bursts out like a storm , a driving wind that swirls down on the heads of the wicked .

ID:	1402
INPUT:	Mahasti-jabeak , orduan , berekiko esan zuen : “ Zer egin ? Neure seme maitea bidaliko dut . Izango ahal diote honi begirune ! ”
PRED:	But Mary asked them , ‘ What did I love my son ? What will I love my son ? '
GOLD:	“ ‘ What will I do ? ' the owner asked himself . ‘ I know ! I 'll send my cherished son . Surely they will respect him . '

ID:	1403
INPUT:	Filistearrak ere bilduak ziren Israel borrokatzeko : hiru mila guda-gurdi , sei mila zaldizko eta itsasertzeko hondarra bezainbat gudari . Igo eta Mikmasen ezarri zituzten guda-etxolak , Bet-Aben-en ekialdera .
PRED:	The Philistines chased the Philistine army with three chariots , and the army of Israel . They killed 3,000 chariots and horses , and the army of Ai , and the army of Ai was killed by the warriors of Benjamin .
GOLD:	The Philistines mustered a mighty army of 3,000 chariots , 6,000 charioteers , and as many warriors as the grains of sand on the seashore ! They camped at Micmash east of Beth-aven .

ID:	1404
INPUT:	Kiriat-Arim , Kefira eta Beerotekoak 743 ;
PRED:	The people of Kiriath-jearim , who were descendants of Anak .
GOLD:	The people of Kiriath-jearim , Kephirah , and Beeroth743

ID:	1405
INPUT:	Jendea deiadarka hasi zen : « Jainkoa mintzo da , ez gizakia » .
PRED:	Then the crowds began shouting , “ The voice of God is n't talking about him . ”
GOLD:	The people gave him a great ovation , shouting , “ It 's the voice of a god , not of a man ! ”

ID:	1406
INPUT:	Hori entzutean , are gehiago beldurtu zen Pilato .
PRED:	When Pilate heard this , he was afraid of him .
GOLD:	When Pilate heard this , he was more frightened than ever .

ID:	1407
INPUT:	Begira , Jauna , zerutik , zeure bizileku santudistiratsu horretatik : Non dirazure maitemina eta indarra ? Non zure bihotz samurraeta errukia ? Ez bitez egon guregandik urrun !
PRED:	O Lord , you are a guide from heaven , a place of terror , a terror of your people — a vast army of terror — a vast army of Jerusalem — a vast army of many nations — a vast army — a vast army — a vast army — a vast and a vast army — a vast army — a vast army — a vast army — a vast army — a vast army — a vast army — a vast army — a vast army — a vast and great and great and great and great and awesome army — a vast army — a vast army of refuge from the Lord — a vast army of Jerusalem — a vast army of the Lord — a vast army — a vast and great and great and great and awesome army of the Lord — a vast army of the Lord — a vast army of Israel — a vast army of Israel — a vast army of Israel — a vast army — a vast army — a vast army — a vast army — a vast army of the Lord — a city
GOLD:	Lord , look down from heaven ; look from your holy , glorious home , and see us.Where is the passion and the mightyou used to show on our behalf ? Where are your mercy and compassion now ?

ID:	1408
INPUT:	bereizmenak zainduko zaitu eta zentzu onak babestuko ;
PRED:	You will be sure that you are wise , and you will be wise .
GOLD:	Wise choices will watch over you.Understanding will keep you safe .

ID:	1409
INPUT:	Leizera bota , sarrera giltzaz itxi eta zigilatu egin zuen mila urteak bete arte , aurrerantzean herriak lilura ez zitzan ; mila urteon ondoren , pixka baterako aske gelditu behar du .
PRED:	When he entered the prison , he shut the stone tablets and put them into the prison until the next year . But when he could n't touch the water , he would n't be able to drink .
GOLD:	The angel threw him into the bottomless pit , which he then shut and locked so Satan could not deceive the nations anymore until the thousand years were finished . Afterward he must be released for a little while .

ID:	1410
INPUT:	Ez egin hitzarmenik haiekin , ezta haien jainkoekin ere .
PRED:	Do not worship other gods , or I will not be with them .
GOLD:	“ Make no treaties with them or their gods .

ID:	1411
INPUT:	Nork ulertu hodeien zabaltzeaeta trumoien burrundara zeruan ?
PRED:	Who is able to understand the thunder of the thunder ? Who is the thunder of the thunder ?
GOLD:	Who can understand the spreading of the cloudsand the thunder that rolls forth from heaven ?

ID:	1412
INPUT:	Nork sinetsi du gure mezua ? Nori agertu dio Jaunakbere ahalmena ?
PRED:	Can anyone believe in your faith ? Who is the Lord of Heaven 's Armies ?
GOLD:	Who has believed our message ? To whom has the Lord revealed his powerful arm ?

ID:	1413
INPUT:	Eta berak aztertuko bazintuzte , zer ? Gizakia bezala engainatuko ote zenukete ?
PRED:	And how can you understand what is right ? How can you understand that we are ?
GOLD:	What will happen when he finds out what you are doing ? Can you fool him as easily as you fool people ?

ID:	1414
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : « Zatozte zuek bakarrik leku gorde batera , eta hartu atseden pixka bat » . Asko baitziren joan-etorri zebiltzanak , eta ez zuten jateko astirik ere .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to them , “ Come , let 's go back to the place where you can see a little while . ” And they did n't come .
GOLD:	Then Jesus said , “ Let 's go off by ourselves to a quiet place and rest awhile . ” He said this because there were so many people coming and going that Jesus and his apostles did n't even have time to eat .

ID:	1415
INPUT:	Ezari-ezarian botako ditut zuen aurretik , lurralde hartaz jabetzeko adina zuek ugaldu arte .
PRED:	I will drive you out of the land ahead of you , so I will give you the land I have given you .
GOLD:	I will drive them out a little at a time until your population has increased enough to take possession of the land .

ID:	1416
INPUT:	Egun hartan Jaunak , beren Jainkoak , salbatuko du bere herria , artzainak artaldea bezala ; distira egingo dute herritarrekberen lurraldean , diadema bateko harribitxiek bezala .
PRED:	On that day the Lord our God will save his people , just as his own people , they will be their own own own special possession .
GOLD:	On that day the Lord their God will rescue his people , just as a shepherd rescues his sheep.They will sparkle in his landlike jewels in a crown .

ID:	1417
INPUT:	Baina askatasuna ematen duen lege bikaina hausnartu eta horri tinko eusten diona — ez erraz ahazten duen entzule bezala , benetako betetzaile bezala baizik — , hori zoriontsu izango da legea betez .
PRED:	But if you refuse to obey the law , you must be careful to obey the law of Moses , and you must be careful to obey all the commands of the Lord .
GOLD:	But if you look carefully into the perfect law that sets you free , and if you do what it says and do n't forget what you heard , then God will bless you for doing it .

ID:	1418
INPUT:	Pedrok esan zion : « Ananias , zergatik utzi diozu Satanasi zure gogoaz nagusitzen Espiritu Santuari gezurra esateko , soroaren ordainetik zati bat zeuretzat gordez ?
PRED:	Peter said to him , “ Why did you say that Satan has given you the Holy Spirit to us ? For you have rejected the Holy Spirit by the Holy Spirit by the Holy Spirit ?
GOLD:	Then Peter said , “ Ananias , why have you let Satan fill your heart ? You lied to the Holy Spirit , and you kept some of the money for yourself .

ID:	1419
INPUT:	Orduan esango duzu : « Zergatik gaitzetsi ote nuen heziketa ? Zergatik mespretxatu ote zentzarazpena ?
PRED:	Then you said , “ Why did you reject me ? Why did you reject me ? Why did you treat them with contempt ?
GOLD:	You will say , “ How I hated discipline ! If only I had not ignored all the warnings !

ID:	1420
INPUT:	Gero , Jainkoaren etxean Obed-Edomen ardurapean zeuden urre , zilar eta tresna guztiak , jauregiko altxortegiko ondasunak eta gatibuak bahituran harturik , Samariara itzuli zen .
PRED:	Then he took some of the treasures from the Temple of God and all the treasures of the Temple of God and the treasures of Samaria , and he returned to Samaria and returned to Samaria .
GOLD:	He carried off all the gold and silver and all the articles from the Temple of God that had been in the care of Obed-edom . He also seized the treasures of the royal palace , along with hostages , and then returned to Samaria .

ID:	1421
INPUT:	Beste gauza asko ere esan zuten ordezkari haiek Jainko Jaunaren eta honen zerbitzari Ezekiasen kontra .
PRED:	Then they said to each other , “ We are confident in the name of the Lord our God . ”
GOLD:	And Sennacherib 's officers further mocked the Lord God and his servant Hezekiah , heaping insult upon insult .

ID:	1422
INPUT:	« Gizon-emakumeak , sexu-harremanak izan dituztenean , bainatu egingo dira eta kutsaturik geldituko arratsa arte .
PRED:	“ If anyone has sexual relations with a woman , she must be ceremonially unclean until she is defiled until she is defiled until evening .
GOLD:	After a man and a woman have sexual intercourse , they must each bathe in water , and they will remain unclean until the next evening .

ID:	1423
INPUT:	Urrutiratu bidegabekeria zeure etxetik , itzuli Ahaltsuagana , eta leheneratu egingo zaitu .
PRED:	When you return to your home , you will return home from your home and return to your home .
GOLD:	If you return to the Almighty , you will be restored — so clean up your life .

ID:	1424
INPUT:	Bestela baizik , Jainkoak berri ona gure esku jartzeko gai ikusi gaituenez , horren arabera hitz egiten dugu , ez gizakiei atsegin emateko , gure bihotzak aztertzen dituen Jainkoari baizik .
PRED:	But when we see that God is able to speak to us , we want to speak to him , but we do n't understand what God has done to us .
GOLD:	For we speak as messengers approved by God to be entrusted with the Good News . Our purpose is to please God , not people . He alone examines the motives of our hearts .

ID:	1425
INPUT:	israeldarrengandik hurbil kanpatu eta uztak hondatu ohi zituzten Gazako sarreraraino , israeldarrak deus gabe utziz , janaririk , ardirik , behirik eta astorik gabe .
PRED:	So the Israelites left the camp and took them out of the land of Gilead , leaving them no food . They had no food to eat without food , and there was no food .
GOLD:	camping in the land and destroying crops as far away as Gaza . They left the Israelites with nothing to eat , taking all the sheep , goats , cattle , and donkeys .

ID:	1426
INPUT:	( Mk 14 , 10-11 ; Lk 22 , 3-6 )
PRED:	Jesus Predicts Peter 's Death
GOLD:	Jesus Is Betrayed and Arrested

ID:	1427
INPUT:	Bete garrasiz horien etxeak , bat-batean lapurrak sarraraziz ! Zuloa egin baitzuten ni erortzeko , sareak ipini bidean ni harrapatzeko .
PRED:	I will tear down the walls of the Temple , for it has broken its pieces . I will put it into a pit to catch it and catch it .
GOLD:	Let screaming be heard from their homesas warriors come suddenly upon them.For they have dug a pit for meand have hidden traps along my path .

ID:	1428
INPUT:	Hala , Jaunarengana itzuli eta esan zion : — Benetan bekatu larria egin du herri honek , urrezko jainkoa eginez .
PRED:	So the Lord turned to him and said to him , “ Get rid of all these nations ! ”
GOLD:	So Moses returned to the Lord and said , “ Oh , what a terrible sin these people have committed . They have made gods of gold for themselves .

ID:	1429
INPUT:	eta helbururantz lehiatzen naiz saria iristeko ; horretara deitzen baitit Jainkoak goitik Kristo Jesusen bitartez .
PRED:	I have come to Jerusalem to Jerusalem , for God has called me from the home of Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	I press on to reach the end of the race and receive the heavenly prize for which God , through Christ Jesus , is calling us .

ID:	1430
INPUT:	Zentzudunak menderatu egiten du haserrea , ohoragarri zaio iraina kontuan ez hartzea .
PRED:	But those who are angry with anger , and they will not be angry with them .
GOLD:	Sensible people control their temper ; they earn respect by overlooking wrongs .

ID:	1431
INPUT:	Jauna , zergatik gelditzen zara urrun ? Zergatik ezkutatzen larrialdian ?
PRED:	O Lord , why have you abandoned me ? Why are you so far away ?
GOLD:	O Lord , why do you stand so far away ? Why do you hide when I am in trouble ?

ID:	1432
INPUT:	« Jainkoa maite dut » esan eta senideari gorroto diona gezurti da ; izan ere , ikusten duen senidea maite ez duenak ezin du maite ikusten ez duen Jainkoa .
PRED:	“ I love God , ” says the Lord , “ and I love those who love me . They do n't love me , but they do n't love God . ”
GOLD:	If someone says , “ I love God , ” but hates a fellow believer , that person is a liar ; for if we do n't love people we can see , how can we love God , whom we can not see ?

ID:	1433
INPUT:	Oparigai bakoitzari , dagozkion labore- eta isur-opariak erantsiko dizkiozue , arautua dagoenez .
PRED:	You must present a liquid offering to each of the regular burnt offering and a liquid offering . You must present a liquid offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	Each of these offerings must be accompanied by its prescribed grain offering and liquid offering .

ID:	1434
INPUT:	Eta Jaunak deiadar dagibere gudarostearen aurrean ; kontaezinak diraharen gudari-sailak , indartsuakharen aginduak betetzeko . Handia da eta guztiz ikaragarriaJaunaren eguna : nork eman aurpegi ?
PRED:	And the Lord 's cry out against his mighty army , and his mighty warriors were shouting , “ The Lord is a mighty warrior ! His name is the one who gives us victory , the Lord , is the one who gives us victory . ”
GOLD:	The Lord is at the head of the column.He leads them with a shout.This is his mighty army , and they follow his orders.The day of the Lord is an awesome , terrible thing.Who can possibly survive ?

ID:	1435
INPUT:	Orduan , Jesusek eskua luzatu eta ukitu egin zuen , esanez : — Nahi dut , izan zaitez garbi . Berehala , legena garbitu egin zitzaion .
PRED:	Then Jesus touched him and touched him . “ I want you to wash your hands , ” he said . “ Be healed ! ” So he healed the leprosy .
GOLD:	Jesus reached out and touched him . “ I am willing , ” he said . “ Be healed ! ” And instantly the leprosy disappeared .

ID:	1436
INPUT:	Zimri , Elam eta Mediako errege guztiei ;
PRED:	Zimri , Nathan , Nathan , and all the kings of the world .
GOLD:	and to the kings of Zimri , Elam , and Media .

ID:	1437
INPUT:	« Zure senide batek bekatu egiten badu , zoaz berarengana eta zentzarazi bakarrean . Jaramon egiten badizu , irabazia duzu senidea .
PRED:	“ If one of your brothers and sisters , if they are honest and refuse to listen to me , you are my relatives .
GOLD:	“ If another believer sins against you , go privately and point out the offense . If the other person listens and confesses it , you have won that person back .

ID:	1438
INPUT:	Eta horrela jokatuko dute ez Aita , ez ni , ezagutu ez gaituztelako .
PRED:	And they will not repent of their Father 's Father , and they will not be condemned .
GOLD:	This is because they have never known the Father or me .

ID:	1439
INPUT:	Horregatik — ala ni bizi ! — Sodomarena bera gertatuko zaioMoabi , eta Gomorrarena amondarrei : sasiarte eta gatzagaeta hondamendi bihurtuko dira . Nire herrian bizirik geldituekharrapaka erasoko dieteMoabi eta Amonieta bertako jabe bihurtuko dira » .
PRED:	“ Look ! ” they said , “ I will bring you out of the land of Moab , two cities of Moab , and the cities of Moab will be destroyed , and I will destroy the land of Moab . ”
GOLD:	Now , as surely as I live , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , “ Moab and Ammon will be destroyed — destroyed as completely as Sodom and Gomorrah.Their land will become a place of stinging nettles , salt pits , and eternal desolation.The remnant of my people will plunder themand take their land . ”

ID:	1440
INPUT:	Mantuaren barreneko ertza purpura more , gorri eta gorriminezko granadaz apaindu zuten .
PRED:	Bezalel made a robe that is worn with a blue cloth , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	They made pomegranates of blue , purple , and scarlet yarn , and attached them to the hem of the robe .

ID:	1441
INPUT:	Abiatu zen , beraz , Abram , Jaunak agindu bezala . Hirurogeita hamabost urte zituen Harandik atera zenean .
PRED:	So Abram did as the Lord had commanded him , just as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	So Abram departed as the Lord had instructed , and Lot went with him . Abram was seventy-five years old when he left Haran .

ID:	1442
INPUT:	nardoa , ipurua eta a<unk> raia , kanela eta ereinotza ; intsentsu , mirra , aloe , mota guztietako lurrin bereziak .
PRED:	Also take the body of wine and wine , frankincense , and myrrh , frankincense , frankincense , and burn it with myrrh .
GOLD:	nard and saffron , fragrant calamus and cinnamon , with all the trees of frankincense , myrrh , and aloes , and every other lovely spice .

ID:	1443
INPUT:	Gailurrean bizi direnakeraitsi egiten ditu , hiri garaia lurreraino , hautsa jotzeraino botatzen ,
PRED:	And if you break the dust on the earth , you will throw it into the dust to the ground .
GOLD:	He humbles the proudand brings down the arrogant city.He brings it down to the dust .

ID:	1444
INPUT:	Horregatik bururatu zaigu aldarea eraikitzea ; ez , ordea , erre-opariak eta sakrifizioak eskaintzeko ,
PRED:	That is why we have built an altar for burnt offering . But we are to offer burnt offerings to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ So we decided to build the altar , not for burnt offerings or sacrifices ,

ID:	1445
INPUT:	Errezelarentzat akazia-zurezko lau zutabe egin zituzten , urrez estaliak eta urrezko kakoz hornituak , eta , zilarra urtuz , lau oin egin zizkieten zutabeei .
PRED:	They also made four posts of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold hooks and rings . They overlaid them with gold hooks and rings .
GOLD:	For the curtain , he made four posts of acacia wood and four gold hooks . He overlaid the posts with gold and set them in four silver bases .

ID:	1446
INPUT:	« Entzun , zentzudunok : Urruti Jainkoarengandik gaiztakeria , urruti Ahaltsuagandik bidegabekeria !
PRED:	“ Listen to me , you who are far away from the evil of the wicked , from the Almighty .
GOLD:	“ Listen to me , you who have understanding.Everyone knows that God does n't sin ! The Almighty can do no wrong .

ID:	1447
INPUT:	zuen ondorengo belaunaldiek jakin dezaten etxoletan bizitzen jarri nituela israeldarrak , Egiptotik atera nituenean . Neu naiz Jauna , zuen Jainkoa » .
PRED:	When you enter the land of Egypt , you must live in the presence of the people of Israel . I am the Lord your God . I am the Lord your God . ”
GOLD:	This will remind each new generation of Israelites that I made their ancestors live in shelters when I rescued them from the land of Egypt . I am the Lord your God . ”

ID:	1448
INPUT:	Bere eskuz lurraldea neurtu dueta bakoitzari bere saila izendatu . Betiko izango dira haren jabe , menderik mende biziko bertan .
PRED:	He will use a measuring line for each part of his own land , and he will possess it . He will live forever and ever .
GOLD:	He has surveyed and divided the landand deeded it over to those creatures.They will possess it forever , from generation to generation .

ID:	1449
INPUT:	Jesus artzain ona
PRED:	The sheep of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Claims to Be the Son of God

ID:	1450
INPUT:	Beltxatzar , aztien buru zaren hori , badakit jainko santuen espirituak gidatzen zaituela eta misterio zailik ez dagoela zuretzat . Azal iezadazu , bada , ametsaren esanahia .
PRED:	I know that you are my own gods , and I know that you are talking about the Holy Spirit . You are saying , ‘ You know that I am the one who speaks to you . '
GOLD:	So I issued an order calling in all the wise men of Babylon , so they could tell me what my dream meant .

ID:	1451
INPUT:	Zu , beso zabalik dagoen kerubin babesle zinen , Jainkoaren mendi santuan zeunden eta ikatz gorien artean ibiltzen zinen .
PRED:	But when you were silent , the angel of God appeared to them , and a fierce storm struck them with a whirlwind .
GOLD:	I ordained and anointed youas the mighty angelic guardian.You had access to the holy mountain of Godand walked among the stones of fire .

ID:	1452
INPUT:	Halako batean , ordea , jentilek eta juduek , agintariekin batera , gogorrera jo eta apostoluak harrika hiltzea erabaki zuten ;
PRED:	But some Jews and the Gentiles tried to kill the Jewish leaders and the Jews and tried to kill him .
GOLD:	Then a mob of Gentiles and Jews , along with their leaders , decided to attack and stone them .

ID:	1453
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Txaloka eta saltoka , poztu egin zarete Israel herriari gertatuaz , biziki mespretxatzen duzuelako ;
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Let the people of Israel rejoice , and they will rejoice in triumph over the people of Israel .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Because you clapped and danced and cheered with glee at the destruction of my people ,

ID:	1454
INPUT:	Jesus bere gogoz heriotzara ( 14 , <unk> )
PRED:	Jesus Walks on Water
GOLD:	Judas Agrees to Betray Jesus

ID:	1455
INPUT:	Joramen erregealdian Judaren agintearen aurka jaiki ziren edomdarrak , berentzat erregea izendatuz .
PRED:	In Jehoram 's reign , Jehoram followed the example of King Jehoshaphat of Judah .
GOLD:	During Jehoram 's reign , the Edomites revolted against Judah and crowned their own king .

ID:	1456
INPUT:	Simonek azaldu digu , nola hasiera-hasieratik Jainkoak jentilen artetik beretzat herri bat aukeratu nahi izan duen .
PRED:	He has shown us how he chose us from the beginning to be called by the nations of the world .
GOLD:	Peter has told you about the time God first visited the Gentiles to take from them a people for himself .

ID:	1457
INPUT:	Ondoren , bere ikasleei esan zien Jesusek : « Horregatik diotsuet : Ez kezkatu bizitzeko zer jango , edota gorputza zerez jantziko .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to his disciples , “ I tell you the truth , you must not eat any meat from the dead .
GOLD:	Then , turning to his disciples , Jesus said , “ That is why I tell you not to worry about everyday life — whether you have enough food to eat or enough clothes to wear .

ID:	1458
INPUT:	Jaunak segurtatzen ditu gizakiaren pausoaketa atsegin duen bidetik eramaten .
PRED:	The Lord protects the lives of the earth , and he protects the rest of the earth .
GOLD:	The Lord directs the steps of the godly.He delights in every detail of their lives .

ID:	1459
INPUT:	Esklaboek , ordea — nahiz diruz erositakoek nahiz etxean jaiotakoek — , jan dezakete apaizaren janaritik .
PRED:	But if you have been circumcised , you may eat any meat or eat any meat or eat it .
GOLD:	However , if the priest buys a slave for himself , the slave may eat from the sacred offerings . And if his slaves have children , they also may share his food .

ID:	1460
INPUT:	Babes-hiriak
PRED:	The Fall of Jerusalem
GOLD:	Cities of Refuge

ID:	1461
INPUT:	Gainera , esan zien : « Zoazte eta jan haragi guria , edan edari bikainak , eta bidali janaria ezer ez dutenei ere , egun hau Jaunari sagaratua baita . Ez atsekabetu , Jaunarengandiko pozak ematen baitizue indar ! »
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Go and eat the meat that has been eaten by eating and drinking , for the Lord has sent this message to the people of Israel . You must not drink the cup of the Lord 's Covenant . ”
GOLD:	And Nehemiah continued , “ Go and celebrate with a feast of rich foods and sweet drinks , and share gifts of food with people who have nothing prepared . This is a sacred day before our Lord . Do n't be dejected and sad , for the joy of the Lord is your strength ! ”

ID:	1462
INPUT:	Defentsa gabe gelditu da Juda . Zurezko Zutabeen Etxekoarmategira jo duzue orduan ;
PRED:	“ You have heard the noise of Judah ; you have been led to the home of Edom .
GOLD:	Judah 's defenses have been stripped away.You run to the armory for your weapons .

ID:	1463
INPUT:	Eta egin zuen guztia oso ona zela ikusi zuen Jainkoak . Honela , seigarren eguna burutu zen .
PRED:	And when he saw that everything was good , he was very early in the days of God .
GOLD:	Then God looked over all he had made , and he saw that it was very good ! And evening passed and morning came , marking the sixth day .

ID:	1464
INPUT:	Hurrengo larunbatean , ia hiritar guztiak bildu ziren Jaunaren mezua entzutera .
PRED:	So all the people went to Jerusalem to hear the word of the Lord .
GOLD:	The following week almost the entire city turned out to hear them preach the word of the Lord .

ID:	1465
INPUT:	gainera , Gabai eta Salai ; <unk> benjamindar guztira .
PRED:	We went to Gibeon , all of Benjamin , and Benjamin .
GOLD:	After him were Gabbai and Sallai and a total of 928 relatives .

ID:	1466
INPUT:	Artaxerxesen erregealdiko hogeigarren urtean Judako gobernari izendatu ninduten , eta hogeita hamabigarren urtea arte iraun nuen karguan . Hamabi urte horietan , nik eta nire senideek ez dugu gobernariari dagokion ordainik jaso .
PRED:	In the first year of the reign of King Artaxerxes of Judah , during the reign of King Artaxerxes of Judah and Judah , who had been exiled to Jerusalem , but we have not been exiled to the fortified towns of Judah .
GOLD:	For the entire twelve years that I was governor of Judah — from the twentieth year to the thirty-second year of the reign of King Artaxerxes — neither I nor my officials drew on our official food allowance .

ID:	1467
INPUT:	Bekatuak aitortu eta otoitz egin
PRED:	God 's Judgment against Sin
GOLD:	Restore Wandering Believers

ID:	1468
INPUT:	Lau zutabe eta lau oinak brontzezkoak ziren , eta kakoak zilarrezkoak ; zutabe-gainak eta ziriak , berriz , zilarrez estaliak .
PRED:	There were four bronze bases for each of the posts , posts , posts , posts , and bases for the posts set securely for the posts .
GOLD:	It was supported by four posts , each set securely in its own bronze base . The tops of the posts were overlaid with silver , and the hooks and rings were also made of silver .

ID:	1469
INPUT:	Baina harriak kendu , etxea karraskatu eta zuritu ondoren , mantxa berriro sortzen bada ,
PRED:	But if the priest finds that the house has been taken away , then the priest may return to the house .
GOLD:	“ But if the mildew reappears after all the stones have been replaced and the house has been scraped and replastered ,

ID:	1470
INPUT:	Niregana joko duen herriakXaron lautada izango duardien bazkaleku , Akor harana abelgorrien etzaleku .
PRED:	I will go to the land of Aroer , and it will be a place among the nations .
GOLD:	The plain of Sharon will again be filled with flocksfor my people who have searched for me , and the valley of Achor will be a place to pasture herds .

ID:	1471
INPUT:	Nire aurka ahozabal , honela diote : « Hara , guk geuk ikusi dugu ! »
PRED:	Yes , let my thoughts be like this , ” they say , “ we see him ! ”
GOLD:	They shout , “ Aha ! Aha ! With our own eyes we saw him do it ! ”

ID:	1472
INPUT:	Printzea atalondora sartuko da kanpoko ataritik eta ate-muntagaren kontra geldituko . Apaizek printzearen erre-oparia eta elkartasun-opariak eskainiko dituzte ; gero , printzea atalasean ahuspeztu eta irten egingo da , baina atea ez da arratsa arte itxiko .
PRED:	The prince will enter the entry room of the inner courtyard , and the prince will be handed over to the prince of the prince of the prince . The priests will bow down to the entrance of the inner courtyard , but they will bow down and bow down to the ground .
GOLD:	The prince will enter the entry room of the gateway from the outside . Then he will stand by the gatepost while the priest offers his burnt offering and peace offering . He will bow down in worship inside the gateway passage and then go back out the way he came . The gateway will not be closed until evening .

ID:	1473
INPUT:	Gizasemeetan ederrena zara , ezpainetatik xarma darizu , Jainkoak betidanik bedeinkatu baitzaitu !
PRED:	O people of Israel , you are my people , and I will praise you , for I have blessed them .
GOLD:	Put on your sword , O mighty warrior ! You are so glorious , so majestic !

ID:	1474
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jainkoaz jakin daitekeena agerian dute , Jainkoak berak agertu baitie .
PRED:	For God has given us the privilege of following law , for he has shown us the same things God has done .
GOLD:	They know the truth about God because he has made it obvious to them .

ID:	1475
INPUT:	Herodesen heriotza
PRED:	The Burial of Jesus
GOLD:	The Death of Herod Agrippa

ID:	1476
INPUT:	Asueroren erregealdiaren zazpigarren urteko hamargarren hilean , hots , Tebet hilean , eraman zuten Ester erregearen aurrera .
PRED:	On January 15 , during the eleventh year of King Xerxes 's reign , the second year of King Darius 's reign in Judah .
GOLD:	Esther was taken to King Xerxes at the royal palace in early winter of the seventh year of his reign .

ID:	1477
INPUT:	Jerusalemen zigorra iragarria
PRED:	Hope for Restoration
GOLD:	Judgment on Israel 's Leaders

ID:	1478
INPUT:	Eta hi , mendia besteko harri-multzo hori , berdindu egingo hau Zorobabelek . Honek aterako du tenplua burutuko duen harria . Orduan , jendeak honela egingo du deiadar : Hori bai ederra , hori ! »
PRED:	Then he will say to them , “ Go back to the top of the mountain , and these stones will be cut off from the Temple . Then the people will say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : ' ”
GOLD:	Nothing , not even a mighty mountain , will stand in Zerubbabel 's way ; it will become a level plain before him ! And when Zerubbabel sets the final stone of the Temple in place , the people will shout : ‘ May God bless it ! May God bless it ! ' ”

ID:	1479
INPUT:	Non da Joben indarra ?
PRED:	Where are the strength of Joab
GOLD:	Challenges Job Again

ID:	1480
INPUT:	Batek ehun seme-alaba ukan , urte luzez bizieta anitz egun harturik ere , bere ondasunezaski gozatzen ez badu , eta hilobitarako ere ez badu , horra zer diodan : halakoahaur-galdua baino okerrago da .
PRED:	After a thousand years , there will be a hundred years with many years and many years . In addition , there will be many years old enough for many years . In fact , there will be no more than any other children .
GOLD:	A man might have a hundred children and live to be very old . But if he finds no satisfaction in life and does n't even get a decent burial , it would have been better for him to be born dead .

ID:	1481
INPUT:	« Orduan , Jaunak esan zidan : Ebaki lehengoak bezalako beste bi harlauza ; egin zurezko kutxa ere , eta zatozkit mendira .
PRED:	“ Then the Lord said to me , ‘ Bring me two stone tablets , and make me clean . Come , let me make me ceremonially clean . '
GOLD:	“ At that time the Lord said to me , ‘ Chisel out two stone tablets like the first ones . Also make a wooden Ark — a sacred chest to store them in . Come up to me on the mountain ,

ID:	1482
INPUT:	Mikak eginiko irudia beren artean izan zuten , Jainkoaren etxea Xilon egon zen bitartean .
PRED:	When Micah was at the Temple of God , there was a descendant of Micah 's family in Shiloh .
GOLD:	So Micah 's carved image was worshiped by the tribe of Dan as long as the Tabernacle of God remained at Shiloh .

ID:	1483
INPUT:	Dalilak esan zion Samsoni : — Esadazu nondik duzun horrelako indarra eta nola lotu zaitzaketen zu menderatzeko .
PRED:	Then Samson said to him , “ What are you going to take you out of bed ? ”
GOLD:	So Delilah said to Samson , “ Please tell me what makes you so strong and what it would take to tie you up securely . ”

ID:	1484
INPUT:	« Norbaitek , Jaunari sagaratu beharreko emaitzetan iruzur eginez , oharkabean bekatu egiten badu , ahari akats gabea eramango dio Jaunari ordain-oparitzat ; zilarretan hainbesteko bat balioko du ahariak , santutegiko pisu-neurriaren arabera .
PRED:	“ If a man commits adultery with the Lord , he must bring a young bull to the Lord as a special offering to the Lord . He must bring a full offering to the Lord as a special offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ If one of you commits a sin by unintentionally defiling the Lord 's sacred property , you must bring a guilt offering to the Lord . The offering must be your own ram with no defects , or you may buy one of equal value with silver , as measured by the weight of the sanctuary shekel .

ID:	1485
INPUT:	Gure errege , buruzagi , apaiz eta gurasoekez dute bete zure irakaspena , ez dituzte aditu aginduak , ezta eman zenizkienburubideak ere .
PRED:	For our ancestors have refused to obey the commands of our ancestors , decrees , and regulations , and regulations , and commands that you have given them .
GOLD:	Our kings , leaders , priests , and ancestors did not obey your Law or listen to the warnings in your commands and laws .

ID:	1486
INPUT:	Bazen han Demetrio zeritzan zilargin bat . Artemisa jainkosaren tenpluko iruditxoak landu ohi zituen zilarrez , artisauei irabazi ederra ematen zielarik .
PRED:	There was an idol there in the temple of Baal , where there was a temple of gods in the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	It began with Demetrius , a silversmith who had a large business manufacturing silver shrines of the Greek goddess Artemis . He kept many craftsmen busy .

ID:	1487
INPUT:	halaxe Kristo ere : behin bakarrik izan zen oparitzat eskainia guztien bekatuak desegiteko , eta gero bigarrenez agertuko da , bekatuarekin zerikusirik gabe , beraren zain daudenak salbatzera .
PRED:	For Christ has given us a sacrifice to God , and he is a sacrifice for all who have been purchased . He will be made right with him , and he will never be saved .
GOLD:	so also Christ was offered once for all time as a sacrifice to take away the sins of many people . He will come again , not to deal with our sins , but to bring salvation to all who are eagerly waiting for him .

ID:	1488
INPUT:	Neure herriarekin haserre nintzela , neure ondarea zapuztu egin nueneta zure eskuetara eman . Zuk ez zenien gupidarik izan , zaharrak ere lehertu egin zenituenzeure uztarri astunaz .
PRED:	I was angry with my people , and you have rejected me because you have rejected me , and you did not let my people go out to my own land .
GOLD:	For I was angry with my chosen peopleand punished them by letting them fall into your hands.But you , Babylon , showed them no mercy.You oppressed even the elderly .

ID:	1489
INPUT:	Hiriko gizonek irten eta eraso egin zioten Joabi . Han erori ziren Daviden gudari eta gudalburu batzuk , baita Urias hitita ere .
PRED:	So the men of the town went out to the town of Ai , and the commander of the army of David and his army were killed .
GOLD:	And when the enemy soldiers came out of the city to fight , Uriah the Hittite was killed along with several other Israelite soldiers .

ID:	1490
INPUT:	Baina apaizak ikusten badu ile zuririk ez duela eta azalekoa baino sakonagoa ez dela , baizik eta zurbilduz doala , aparte edukiko du gaixoa zazpi egunez .
PRED:	But if the priest finds that he is not greater than skin-deep and finds that the skin is not greater than skin-deep , and the priest will pronounce the person ceremonially clean .
GOLD:	But if the priest finds no white hair on the affected area and the problem appears to be no more than skin-deep and has faded , the priest must quarantine the person for seven days .

ID:	1491
INPUT:	Samuelen azken hitzaldia
PRED:	Samuel 's Final Words
GOLD:	Samuel 's Farewell Address

ID:	1492
INPUT:	Ez du izango berri txarren beldurrik , adoretsu dago , Jaunarenganako konfiantzaz ;
PRED:	They will not be afraid of the Lord , for they will trust in him .
GOLD:	They do not fear bad news ; they confidently trust the Lord to care for them .

ID:	1493
INPUT:	Aurretik joan zen bera , eta zazpi aldiz ahuspeztu zen lurrean bere anaiarengana hurbildu ahala .
PRED:	So he went to the ground and bowed low before the ground . Then his brother went up to the ground , and his brother came to the ground .
GOLD:	Then Jacob went on ahead . As he approached his brother , he bowed to the ground seven times before him .

ID:	1494
INPUT:	Gorrotoa duenari ez zaio hitzetan igartzen , baina maltzurkeriaz betea du barrua .
PRED:	They hate evil , but evil people do n't get tired of doing wrong .
GOLD:	People may cover their hatred with pleasant words , but they 're deceiving you .

ID:	1495
INPUT:	Filistearren buruzagiek emakumeagana joan eta esan zioten : — Atera iezaiozu azpikeriaz Samsoni nondik duen halako indarra eta nola harrapa dezakegun , lotu eta menderatzeko . Bakoitzak mila eta ehun zilarrezko txanpon emango dizkizugu .
PRED:	Then the Philistine rulers went to the Philistine rulers and said , “ We have sex with the Philistines , and we will give them a piece of silver and a single piece of wood and a single piece of wood . ”
GOLD:	The rulers of the Philistines went to her and said , “ Entice Samson to tell you what makes him so strong and how he can be overpowered and tied up securely . Then each of us will give you 1,100 pieces of silver . ”

ID:	1496
INPUT:	Ea bada , sendotu beso ahulduak eta belaun makalduak ,
PRED:	It 's better to be weak and tired , and their hands will be weak , and their knees will be weak .
GOLD:	So take a new grip with your tired hands and strengthen your weak knees .

ID:	1497
INPUT:	Aldi haietan ez zen erregerik Israelen . Bakoitzak egoki iruditzen zitzaiona egin ohi zuen .
PRED:	At that time the king of Israel did n't know what the king of Israel had done .
GOLD:	In those days Israel had no king ; all the people did whatever seemed right in their own eyes .

ID:	1498
INPUT:	« Gure Jaun eta Jainko hori , zu bazara noraintza , ohorea eta ahalmenahartzeko , zeuk baitzenituengauza guztiak egineta , zuk nahi izan duzulako , baitira sortu eta dira oraindik » .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , says : Because you are so far away . ”
GOLD:	“ You are worthy , O Lord our God , to receive glory and honor and power.For you created all things , and they exist because you created what you pleased . ”

ID:	1499
INPUT:	Eliz elkarte bakoitzean arduradunak izendatu zituzten eta , otoitz eta barau egin ondoren , Jaunari gomendatu zizkioten , harengan sinetsi baitzuten .
PRED:	So each other with each other in the churches , and they prayed to the Lord , and they encouraged him to believe in him .
GOLD:	Paul and Barnabas also appointed elders in every church . With prayer and fasting , they turned the elders over to the care of the Lord , in whom they had put their trust .

ID:	1500
INPUT:	Barukek erantzun zien : — Jeremiasek berak esan dizkit banan-banan hitz guztiok eta nik liburuan idatzi ditut tintaz .
PRED:	Then Balak said to Jeremiah , “ These are the leaders who are talking about me , and I gave them all the words I have given them . ”
GOLD:	So Baruch explained , “ Jeremiah dictated them , and I wrote them down in ink , word for word , on this scroll . ”

ID:	1501
INPUT:	Gero , Ezekiasek esan zion biltzarrari : « Zuek ere Jaunarentzako eskua bete eskaintza dakarzue . Aurreratu eta ekarri Jaunaren etxera zeuen oparigaiak eta esker oneko eskaintzak » . Orduan , jendeak esker oneko eskaintzak egin zituen . Eskuzabalenek erre-opariak ere egin zituzten .
PRED:	Then Elijah called to the assembly of the Lord and said , “ You must sacrifice a burnt offering to the Lord . You must sacrifice a burnt offering to the Lord your God , and you will sacrifice a sacrifice to the Lord . ” So the burnt offering and peace offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then Hezekiah declared , “ Now that you have consecrated yourselves to the Lord , bring your sacrifices and thanksgiving offerings to the Temple of the Lord . ” So the people brought their sacrifices and thanksgiving offerings , and all whose hearts were willing brought burnt offerings , too .

ID:	1502
INPUT:	Amatzias , Judako errege
PRED:	Amaziah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Amaziah Rules in Judah

ID:	1503
INPUT:	Bere nagusi egiptoarraren etxean bizi zen Jose . Dena ongi ateratzen zitzaion , Jauna berekin baitzuen .
PRED:	So Joseph lived in Egypt with Joseph , and he brought Joseph out of Egypt . But the Lord gave him everything he had done .
GOLD:	The Lord was with Joseph , so he succeeded in everything he did as he served in the home of his Egyptian master .

ID:	1504
INPUT:	Jonatanek , ordea , ez zuen entzun bere aitak jendeari ezarritako zin-hitza . Luzatu zuen , beraz , eskuan zeraman makila-muturra eta , eztitan sarturik , ahora eraman zuen . Bat-batean begiak argitu zitzaizkion .
PRED:	But Jonathan refused to listen to his father , and he put you into his hand . So he put the hand of his father 's hand into his hand , and he took him into his hand .
GOLD:	But Jonathan had not heard his father 's command , and he dipped the end of his stick into a piece of honeycomb and ate the honey . After he had eaten it , he felt refreshed .

ID:	1505
INPUT:	Etengabe jarraituko diot zure legeari , beti eta beti .
PRED:	I will always always always follow your laws , and I will always always always always obey your laws .
GOLD:	I will keep on obeying your instructionsforever and ever .

ID:	1506
INPUT:	Gutuna jasotzean , erregearen hirurogeita hamar ondorengoei lepoa moztu zieten eta buruak , saskitan harturik , Izreelera bidali zizkioten Jehuri .
PRED:	So the king took some of his men to Jezreel and took some of the twelve baskets of leftovers from Jezreel to Jezreel .
GOLD:	When the letter arrived , the leaders killed all seventy of the king 's sons . They placed their heads in baskets and presented them to Jehu at Jezreel .

ID:	1507
INPUT:	Baina oroitzen naiz itxaropena susperrarazten didan zerbaitez :
PRED:	But I boast about the roots of the forest , for I say , “ I am giving them authority . ”
GOLD:	Yet I still dare to hopewhen I remember this :

ID:	1508
INPUT:	Baina Paulok deiadar egin zion : — Ez egin kalterik zeure buruari , denok hemen gaude eta .
PRED:	But Paul called out to him , “ Do n't harm me , for you are all over here . ”
GOLD:	But Paul shouted to him , “ Stop ! Do n't kill yourself ! We are all here ! ”

ID:	1509
INPUT:	« Idatzi orain esango dizudan kantika ; irakatsi israeldarrei eta errepika dezatela , kantika hori lekuko izango baitut beraien kontra .
PRED:	“ Go and tell the people of Israel , ‘ This is what the Lord says to the people of Israel , and I will stand against you . '
GOLD:	“ So write down the words of this song , and teach it to the people of Israel . Help them learn it , so it may serve as a witness for me against them .

ID:	1510
INPUT:	Balaamek Israelen etorkizun oparoa iragarri
PRED:	Balaam Anointed One of Israel
GOLD:	Balaam 's Final Messages

ID:	1511
INPUT:	Astindu ederra eman zien eta sarraski handia egin . Ondoren , Etamgo haitzarteko leize-zulo batera jaitsi zen bizitzera .
PRED:	So he took the beautiful robe and brought it into the boat . Then he got up and went down to the ground .
GOLD:	So he attacked the Philistines with great fury and killed many of them . Then he went to live in a cave in the rock of Etam .

ID:	1512
INPUT:	Beste seinale bat agertu zen zeruan : herensuge gorri handi bat , zazpi buru eta hamar adar zituena , eta buruetan koroa bana .
PRED:	Then another miraculous sign came to the sky : A third of the ten horns of the sky , and ten heads on the head of the head .
GOLD:	Then I witnessed in heaven another significant event . I saw a large red dragon with seven heads and ten horns , with seven crowns on his heads .

ID:	1513
INPUT:	Fede heldua dugunok fede heldugabekoen ahuleziak eraman behar ditugu , geuri atsegin zaiguna bilatu gabe .
PRED:	Through faith , we have faith in Christ , but we have given you complete confidence in our hearts .
GOLD:	We who are strong must be considerate of those who are sensitive about things like this . We must not just please ourselves .

ID:	1514
INPUT:	horregatik , Israelgo mendiok , entzun nik , Jainko Jaunak , zuei guztioi — mendi eta muino , erreka eta haran , hondaturiko toki eta hutsik zaudeten hiri , inguruko nazio guztien harrapakin eta iseka-gai izan zaretenoi — adierazten dizuedan mezua :
PRED:	Therefore , listen to this message from the Lord , all you people of Israel : “ Listen to this mountain , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : ‘ You are a vast army of Israel , a city , and you will be captured . ' ”
GOLD:	Therefore , O mountains of Israel , hear the word of the Sovereign Lord . He speaks to the hills and mountains , ravines and valleys , and to ruined wastes and long-deserted cities that have been destroyed and mocked by the surrounding nations .

ID:	1515
INPUT:	Bi zutabe haiek tenpluaren aurrealdean ezarri zituen ezker-eskuin ; eskuinekoari « Jakin » deitu zion , eta ezkerrekoari « Boaz » .
PRED:	There were two rooms on the north side of the Temple , one on the north side of the north side of the Temple , and the one on the north side of the Temple .
GOLD:	Then he set up the two pillars at the entrance of the Temple , one to the south of the entrance and the other to the north . He named the one on the south Jakin , and the one on the north Boaz .

ID:	1516
INPUT:	Ba , beldurrez dar-dar geldituko dira , zintzoen elkartean baitago Jauna .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of the godly , but the godly will be saved .
GOLD:	Terror will grip them , for God is with those who obey him .

ID:	1517
INPUT:	Efraimen leinukoek ezin izan zituzten bota Gezerko kanaandarrak ; horregatik , kanaandarrak efraimdarren artean bizi izan ziren Gezerren .
PRED:	They failed to drive out the tribe of Ephraim , and the tribe of Ephraim , who lived in the tribe of Ephraim .
GOLD:	The tribe of Ephraim failed to drive out the Canaanites living in Gezer , so the Canaanites continued to live there among them .

ID:	1518
INPUT:	Emakume tekoarrak erregeagana joan eta , lurreraino makurturik , esan zion : — Lagundu , errege jauna !
PRED:	She bowed low before the king and said to the king , “ Look , my lord the king ! ”
GOLD:	When the woman from Tekoa approached the king , she bowed with her face to the ground in deep respect and cried out , “ O king ! Help me ! ”

ID:	1519
INPUT:	Hitz egin behar dut , hustu eta lasaitzeko ; ahoa zabaldu eta erantzun egingo dut .
PRED:	Listen to me , and I will say , ‘ Listen to what I say , and I will answer . '
GOLD:	I must speak to find relief , so let me give my answers .

ID:	1520
INPUT:	Izan ere , herri honek gogortu egin ditu buru-bihotzak , gortu belarriak , itsutu begiak . Ez bezate beren begiez ikus , ez belarriez entzun , ezta buruaz ulertu ere , horrela niregana bihur ez daitezen eta salba ez ditzadan .
PRED:	For these people are stubborn and stubborn , and they are deaf to their eyes . They do n't see their eyes , but they do n't understand what is right , and they refuse to hear me , but they can not understand me .
GOLD:	For the hearts of these people are hardened , and their ears can not hear , and they have closed their eyes — so their eyes can not see , and their ears can not hear , and their hearts can not understand , and they can not turn to meand let me heal them . '

ID:	1521
INPUT:	Miktam . DavidenaGorde nazazu , Jauna , zuregan baitut babesa .
PRED:	Rescue me from my enemies , but do n't let me be afraid of me .
GOLD:	Keep me safe , O God , for I have come to you for refuge .

ID:	1522
INPUT:	Zure masailakgranada ebaki baten bi erdiak , musu-estalkipean .
PRED:	Your neck is like a crown of atonement ; your mouth is like a flock of fire .
GOLD:	Your cheeks are like rosy pomegranatesbehind your veil .

ID:	1523
INPUT:	Hala , ura ondu egin zen gaurdaino , Eliseok esan bezala .
PRED:	So now , Elisha continued to let 's go down to this day .
GOLD:	And the water has remained pure ever since , just as Elisha said .

ID:	1524
INPUT:	Erregeak berriro beste buruzagi bat bidali zuen Eliasengana , beste berrogeita hamar gizonekin . Buruzagiak esan zion Eliasi : — Jainkoaren gizon , berehala jaisteko agintzen dizu erregeak .
PRED:	Then the king sent a chief of staff to heal him , and he told him , “ Go back to the king , and tell him the story of the Kingdom of God . ”
GOLD:	So the king sent another captain with fifty men . The captain said to him , “ Man of God , the king demands that you come down at once . ”

ID:	1525
INPUT:	“ Hau da aspertzea ! ” , diozue , ni mespretxatuz . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak .
PRED:	You say , ‘ As surely as I say , ‘ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken ! '
GOLD:	You say , ‘ It 's too hard to serve the Lord , ' and you turn up your noses at my commands , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . “ Think of it ! Animals that are stolen and crippled and sick are being presented as offerings ! Should I accept from you such offerings as these ? ” asks the Lord .

ID:	1526
INPUT:	Jubileu Urtean , ordea , lursaila jatorrizko jabearen eskuetara itzuliko da , hau da , erosia izan zitzaionagana » .
PRED:	But when the Year of Jubilee , the land will return to the land of the field , it will be bought back to the land . ”
GOLD:	In the Year of Jubilee the field must be returned to the person from whom he purchased it , the one who inherited it as family property .

ID:	1527
INPUT:	Esan , bada , nik , Jainko Jaunak , diodan hau : Ez da nire hitzik atzeratuko , bete egingo da esaten dudana . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	So this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : They will say , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! '
GOLD:	Therefore , tell them , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : No more delay ! I will now do everything I have threatened . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ' ”

ID:	1528
INPUT:	Israelgo leinu guztien izen-bilketa senitarteka eta familiaka egin zen , gudurako gai ziren hogei urtetik gorako gizonezkoak banan-banan erroldatuz . Hona leinu bakoitzak eman zuen emaitza : Jakoben , Israel ere deituaren , lehen-seme Rubenen leinuak 46 . 500 ; Simeonen leinuak <unk> . 300 ; Gaden leinuak 45 . <unk> ; Judaren leinuak 74 . 600 ; Isakarren leinuak 54 . 400 ; Zabulonen leinuak 57 . 400 ; Joseren semeen leinuek : Efraimenak 40 . 500 , eta Manasesenak 32 . 200 ; Benjaminen leinuak 35 . 400 ; Danen leinuak <unk> . <unk> ; Axerren leinuak 41 . 500 ; Neftaliren leinuak 53 . 400 .
PRED:	These were the clans of the tribe of Benjamin . Their registered troops numbered 64,400 years . Their registered troops was the clans of the tribe of Ephraim . Their registered troops were the clans of the tribe of Benjamin .
GOLD:	This is the number of men twenty years old or older who were able to go to war , as their names were listed in the records of their clans and families : Reuben ( Jacob'soldest son ) 46,500

ID:	1529
INPUT:	Baina errege ausart bat sortuko da Grezian . Erreinu txit handia jaso eta nahi duena egingo du .
PRED:	But a king will rule over the kingdom of judgment . He will take a kingdom of kingdom with kingdom , and he will destroy it .
GOLD:	“ Then a mighty king will rise to power who will rule with great authority and accomplish everything he sets out to do .

ID:	1530
INPUT:	Itzulitako guztiak 42 . 360 ziren .
PRED:	So the men of Judah returned to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	So a total of 42,360 people returned to Judah ,

ID:	1531
INPUT:	Gero , Jakobek Joseri esan zion : « Hara , laster hilko naiz ni . Baina Jainkoa zeuekin izango duzue eta zeuen arbasoen lurraldera itzularaziko zaituzte .
PRED:	Then Jacob said to Joseph , “ Look , I will die with you . But I will be with you , and you will be your ancestors , and you will be your ancestors .
GOLD:	Then Jacob said to Joseph , “ Look , I am about to die , but God will be with you and will take you back to Canaan , the land of your ancestors .

ID:	1532
INPUT:	Pedrok , berriro : — Zuk ez didazu sekula niri oinik garbituko . Jesusek erantzun : — Garbitzen ez bazaitut , ez duzu nirekin zerikusirik izango .
PRED:	Then Peter said to him , “ Do n't believe me . ” And Jesus replied , “ If you do n't see me , I will see you . ”
GOLD:	“ No , ” Peter protested , “ you will never ever wash my feet ! ” Jesus replied , “ Unless I wash you , you wo n't belong to me . ”

ID:	1533
INPUT:	Jaio eta zortzi egunera haurra erdaindu zutenean , Jesus izena ezarri zioten , sortu aurretik aingeruak esan bezala .
PRED:	On the eighth day , Jesus was circumcised on the eighth day of the birth of a boy , just as the angel had commanded him .
GOLD:	Eight days later , when the baby was circumcised , he was named Jesus , the name given him by the angel even before he was conceived .

ID:	1534
INPUT:	« Hau dio Jainkoak : Azken egunetan neure espiritua isuriko diet gizaki guztiei . Zuen seme-alabek profetizatu egingo dute , zuen gazteek ikuskariak izango , zuen zaharrek ametsak egingo .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will give you the Spirit of Heaven 's Armies , the Holy Spirit , and your children will see you .
GOLD:	‘ In the last days , ' God says , ‘ I will pour out my Spirit upon all people.Your sons and daughters will prophesy.Your young men will see visions , and your old men will dream dreams .

ID:	1535
INPUT:	Guk ziur dakigu Moisesi Jainkoak hitz egin ziola , baina hori nongoa den ere ez dakigu .
PRED:	We know that God speaks through Moses , but he did n't understand it .
GOLD:	We know God spoke to Moses , but we do n't even know where this man comes from . ”

ID:	1536
INPUT:	Aintzak hiritik alde egin
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	The

ID:	1537
INPUT:	Rehum , Haxabna , Maaseias ,
PRED:	Rehum , Malkijah , Malkijah ,
GOLD:	Ahiah , Hanan , Anan ,

ID:	1538
INPUT:	— Zer aholkatzen didazue ? Zer erantzun behar diot gure aitak ezarri zion uztarria arintzeko eskatu didan herriari ?
PRED:	“ What is your advice ? ” he asked . “ What should I answer my father ? ”
GOLD:	“ What is your advice ? ” he asked them . “ How should I answer these people who want me to lighten the burdens imposed by my father ? ”

ID:	1539
INPUT:	Beraz , Boozen morroiekin lan eginez eta garagarburuak bilduz aritu zen Rut , garagar eta gariaren uzta-biltzea bukatu arte . Eta amaginarrebarekin jarraitu zuen bizitzen .
PRED:	So Ruth went home with her , and she went to her home with her . She went home with her husband , her husband , and she went home with her husband .
GOLD:	So Ruth worked alongside the women in Boaz 's fields and gathered grain with them until the end of the barley harvest . Then she continued working with them through the wheat harvest in early summer . And all the while she lived with her mother-in-law .

ID:	1540
INPUT:	— izan ere adituko dute zure izen handiaren , zure egintza ahaltsuen berri — tenplu honetara otoitz egitera etortzen bada ,
PRED:	“ For the great power of your God will pray for you , and you will pray to this Temple .
GOLD:	for they will hear of your great name and your strong hand and your powerful arm . And when they pray toward this Temple ,

ID:	1541
INPUT:	Eta ez baitziren gauza Espirituak hizketarako ematen zion jakinduriari aurre egiteko ,
PRED:	For he did n't understand the Holy Spirit , and he will understand what he wants to do .
GOLD:	None of them could stand against the wisdom and the Spirit with which Stephen spoke .

ID:	1542
INPUT:	Hark erantzun zien : — Ez al duzue irakurri Liburu Santuek diotena ? Egileak hasieran gizaseme eta emakume egin zituela , alegia ,
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't you read the Scriptures ? ” And the Scriptures replied , “ You are like a woman , a woman , a woman , and a woman was like a woman . ”
GOLD:	“ Have n't you read the Scriptures ? ” Jesus replied . “ They record that from the beginning ‘ God made them male and female . ' ”

ID:	1543
INPUT:	Egin bezate negarapaizek , Jaunaren zerbitzariek , atari eta aldare artean . Esan bezate : « Erruki zakizkio , Jauna , zeure herriari . Ez utzi zeure ondarea lotsagarri , ez bezate beste nazioekmenpean har . Zergatik esan behar duteatzerritarrek : “ Non dute , bada , beren Jainkoa ? ” »
PRED:	Then the priests and Levites said to the Lord , “ You are a servant of the Lord , and you said , ‘ Do n't let your descendants be ashamed of the Lord your God , and let them go ahead of you . ' ”
GOLD:	Let the priests , who minister in the Lord 's presence , stand and weep between the entry room to the Temple and the altar.Let them pray , “ Spare your people , Lord ! Do n't let your special possession become an object of mockery.Do n't let them become a joke for unbelieving foreigners who say , ‘ Has the God of Israel left them ? ' ”

ID:	1544
INPUT:	Israeldarrak ihesi abiatu ziren Judakoen aurretik , baina Jainkoak hauen esku utzi zituen .
PRED:	Then the people of Israel returned from the land of Judah , but God allowed them to hold them back .
GOLD:	The Israelite army fled from Judah , and God handed them over to Judah in defeat .

ID:	1545
INPUT:	Ni , aldiz , zure maitasun handiari esker , zure etxean sartuko naiz , zure tenplu santuan ahuspeztuko begirunez beterik .
PRED:	But I will praise you in your presence , O Lord , for I will enter your Temple with your name , and I will worship your name .
GOLD:	Lead me in the right path , O Lord , or my enemies will conquer me.Make your way plain for me to follow .

ID:	1546
INPUT:	Beraz , hartu zituen Eleazar apaizak sutan hil ziren gizonek aurkeztutako brontzezko errautsontziak eta xaflak egin zituen aldarea estaltzeko .
PRED:	So Eleazar took the priest 's blood and put it on the horns of the altar . He put it on the front of the altar , and he sprinkled it on the front of the altar .
GOLD:	Place these staffs in the Tabernacle in front of the Ark containing the tablets of the Covenant , where I meet with you .

ID:	1547
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin zaiona egin zuen Ezekiasek , bere arbaso Davidek bezalaxe .
PRED:	He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , just as David had done .
GOLD:	He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , just as his ancestor David had done .

ID:	1548
INPUT:	Mundua mundu denetik , berez ikusezina dena , hau da , Jainkoaren betiereko ahalmena eta jainkotasuna , ikusgarri gertatzen zaio haren egintzak aztertzen dituenari . Ez dute , beraz , aitzakiarik ,
PRED:	He has seen the world , but he is the one who has seen the power of God . He is the power of his power , and he does n't understand what he tells you . So do n't understand what he tells you .
GOLD:	For ever since the world was created , people have seen the earth and sky . Through everything God made , they can clearly see his invisible qualities — his eternal power and divine nature . So they have no excuse for not knowing God .

ID:	1549
INPUT:	Jesusek hau ere esan zion jendeari : « Sartaldean lainoa ikusi orduko , “ Euria dator ” esaten duzue , eta hala gertatzen da .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to his people , “ Go into the country , but when you see the rain , you will know that it is coming . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus turned to the crowd and said , “ When you see clouds beginning to form in the west , you say , ‘ Here comes a shower . ' And you are right .

ID:	1550
INPUT:	Joiakim erregeari
PRED:	Jehoiakim Rules in Judah
GOLD:	A Message about Jehoahaz

ID:	1551
INPUT:	Josiasek Pazkoa ospatu
PRED:	Josiah 's Second Passover
GOLD:	Josiah Celebrates Passover

ID:	1552
INPUT:	Zintzo ari ziren langile haiek lanean . Merariren ondorengoetako Jahat eta Obadias , eta Kehaten ondorengoetako Zakarias eta Mexulam lebitarrak ziren lan haiek zuzentzeko arduradunak . Musika-tresnak jotzen zekitenez , lebitarrek
PRED:	These were the names of the tribes of the tribe of Levi . The descendants of Levi were members of the family of Levi , listed according to the clans of the tribe of Levi , Levites , Levites , who were guilty of the Levites . The Levites who were guilty of the Levites , who were appointed by the Levites .
GOLD:	The workers served faithfully under the leadership of Jahath and Obadiah , Levites of the Merarite clan , and Zechariah and Meshullam , Levites of the Kohathite clan . Other Levites , all of whom were skilled musicians ,

ID:	1553
INPUT:	Abramek esan zion : — Zeure esku duzu mirabea . Egiozu hobekien deritzozuna . Saraik gaizki hartu zuen Agar , eta honek ihes egin zuen .
PRED:	Then Abram said to Abram , “ Your hand is your hand . Now let 's go and bury her . ” So Abram escaped and escaped .
GOLD:	Abram replied , “ Look , she is your servant , so deal with her as you see fit . ” Then Sarai treated Hagar so harshly that she finally ran away .

ID:	1554
INPUT:	Saulek ezagutu egin zuen Daviden ahotsa eta esan zion : — Ez al da hori zure ahotsa , ene seme David ? — Nire ahotsa da , bai , ene errege jauna — erantzun zion Davidek .
PRED:	When Saul heard this , he asked David , “ Is n't my lord the king ? ” And David replied , “ My lord the king , my lord David , my lord the king ! ”
GOLD:	Saul recognized David 's voice and called out , “ Is that you , my son David ? ” And David replied , “ Yes , my lord the king .

ID:	1555
INPUT:	« Gertatua ikusirik , beste zerbitzariak biziki nahigabetu ziren , eta guztiaren berri nagusiari ematera joan ziren .
PRED:	“ When they saw the other servants , they were told to find out everything they had done , and they went to the town .
GOLD:	“ When some of the other servants saw this , they were very upset . They went to the king and told him everything that had happened .

ID:	1556
INPUT:	« Horregatik , bada , zu zigortzera nator , Israel ; eta zigortzera natorkizunez gero , presta zaitezzeure Jainkoaren aurreanagertzeko » .
PRED:	“ Therefore , come down to the land of Israel , and bring judgment upon you , and bring you back to the God of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ Therefore , I will bring upon you all the disasters I have announced.Prepare to meet your God in judgment , you people of Israel ! ”

ID:	1557
INPUT:	usainkiak eta olioa argi , gantzuketa-olio eta intsentsu usaintsuarentzat .
PRED:	the anointing oil and fragrant incense ; the anointing oil for the fragrant incense ; the anointing oil and the fragrant incense .
GOLD:	They also brought spices and olive oil for the light , the anointing oil , and the fragrant incense .

ID:	1558
INPUT:	Abiatu zen , bai , Jonas , baina Tarsisera ihes egiteko asmotan , Jaunarengandik urrun . Jafara jaitsi eta Tarsisera zihoan ontzi bat aurkitu zuen ; bidesaria ordaindurik , ontziratu egin zen , ontzikoekin batera Tarsisera joateko , Jaunarengandik urrun .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Jonah was sent by the Lord , but he fled to the land of Tarshish , where he traveled through the land of Egypt . But when he came down to Egypt , he left him and left him in the land of the Lord .
GOLD:	But Jonah got up and went in the opposite direction to get away from the Lord . He went down to the port of Joppa , where he found a ship leaving for Tarshish . He bought a ticket and went on board , hoping to escape from the Lord by sailing to Tarshish .

ID:	1559
INPUT:	Hona hemen zerrenda : urrezko 30 ontzi , zilarrezko 1 . 000 plater , 29 labana ,
PRED:	These are the names of the gold : two gold rings at the center stem ,
GOLD:	This is a list of the items that were returned : gold basins30silver basins1,000silver incense burners29

ID:	1560
INPUT:	Larre oparotan bazkatuko ditut , Israelgo mendi garaietan izango dituzte eskortak . Han hartuko dute atseden eskorta ederretan , eta larre oparotan bazkatuko dira Israelgo mendietan .
PRED:	I will feed them in the mountains of Israel , and they will be caught in the mountains of Israel . They will be caught in the mountains of Israel , and they will be scattered in the mountains of Israel .
GOLD:	Yes , I will give them good pastureland on the high hills of Israel . There they will lie down in pleasant places and feed in the lush pastures of the hills .

ID:	1561
INPUT:	Baina haiek erantzun zuten : — Ez dugu hori egiterik , abere-talde guztiak bildu arte ; orduan mugituko dugu harria putzuko aho gainetik eta edaten emango .
PRED:	But they replied , “ We do n't need any of these animals , but we will put on their bodies . We will put on their bodies , and we will put on their bodies . ”
GOLD:	“ We ca n't water the animals until all the flocks have arrived , ” they replied . “ Then the shepherds move the stone from the mouth of the well , and we water all the sheep and goats . ”

ID:	1562
INPUT:	Egunero zuen artean nengoen tenpluan irakasten , eta ez ninduzuen atxilotu . Baina hala behar du , Liburu Santuetan idatzia bete dadin » .
PRED:	When I was in the Temple , I began to teach you that the Scriptures would not be fulfilled . But the Scriptures say , “ The Scriptures know that the Scriptures will be fulfilled . ”
GOLD:	Why did n't you arrest me in the Temple ? I was there among you teaching every day . But these things are happening to fulfill what the Scriptures say about me . ”

ID:	1563
INPUT:	« Ez egin gezurrezko testigantzarik lagun hurkoaren aurka .
PRED:	“ You must not testify falsely against your neighbor .
GOLD:	“ You must not testify falsely against your neighbor .

ID:	1564
INPUT:	Jo ote ditu Jaunak israeldarrakhauen jotzaileak jo zituenbezain gogor ? Hil ote ditu israeldarrakhauen hiltzaileak hil zituen bezala ?
PRED:	Then the Lord blew the people of Israel 's horn , and he struck them in the dust , just as the people of Israel had killed them .
GOLD:	Has the Lord struck Israelas he struck her enemies ? Has he punished heras he punished them ?

ID:	1565
INPUT:	Orduan , Jakobekin , Isaakekin eta Abrahamekin eginiko itunaz oroituko naiz , baita lurraldeari buruzko agintzariaz ere .
PRED:	Then I will remember that Abraham and his sons , Isaac , and Jacob , and I will confirm that I am giving you .
GOLD:	Then I will remember my covenant with Jacob and my covenant with Isaac and my covenant with Abraham , and I will remember the land .

ID:	1566
INPUT:	« Dibongo jendeok , jaitsi ohorezko zeuen aulkitik , koka zaitezte eremuan , aurka baitatorkizueMoaben suntsitzailea , gotorlekuak erraustera .
PRED:	“ Look , you people of Moab , go down to the ground , for you have rebelled against the enemy of Moab . When you see Moab , you will destroy Moab .
GOLD:	“ Come down from your gloryand sit in the dust , you people of Dibon , for those who destroy Moab will shatter Dibon , too.They will tear down all your towers .

ID:	1567
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Daviden poema .
PRED:	O God , listen to my cry ; listen to my cry .
GOLD:	Why do you boast about your crimes , great warrior ? Do n't you realize God 's justice continues forever ?

ID:	1568
INPUT:	Atalak asko , gorputza bat
PRED:	Parable of the Sea
GOLD:	One Body with Many Parts

ID:	1569
INPUT:	Pedrok berriro ukatu zuen , zin eginez : — Ez dut ezagutzen gizon hori .
PRED:	Peter denied it . “ I do n't know this man ! ” he asked .
GOLD:	Again Peter denied it , this time with an oath . “ I do n't even know the man , ” he said .

ID:	1570
INPUT:	Hona Jeremiasen kontakizuna . Jaunak esan zidan :
PRED:	This message came to Jeremiah from the Lord :
GOLD:	At that time the Lord sent me a message . He said ,

ID:	1571
INPUT:	Bi zekor , ahari bat eta urtebeteko zazpi arkume eskainiko dituzue erre-oparitzat , eta Jaunak atseginez onartuko ditu .
PRED:	You must sacrifice two one-year-old male lambs and two one-year-old male lambs , a pleasing aroma to the Lord . This is a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	Present a special burnt offering on that day as a pleasing aroma to the Lord . It will consist of two young bulls , one ram , and seven one-year-old male lambs .

ID:	1572
INPUT:	Hurbil gaitezen , bada , konfiantza osoz Jainkoaren onginahiaren tronura , errukia iritsi eta premialdian laguntza izan dezagun .
PRED:	It is the one who sits on the throne of God , who sits on the throne of God , who sits on the throne of God .
GOLD:	So let us come boldly to the throne of our gracious God . There we will receive his mercy , and we will find grace to help us when we need it most .

ID:	1573
INPUT:	Fedea zuelako , bere herria utzi eta atzerritar gisa bizi izan zen Jainkoak agindutako lurraldean ; oihal-etxolatan bizi izan zen , Jainkoaren agintzari bera hartu zuten Isaak eta Jakob biziko ziren bezalaxe ;
PRED:	It was by faith that the people of the land , where God had commanded them to live in the land he had given to Jacob , Isaac , and Jacob .
GOLD:	And even when he reached the land God promised him , he lived there by faith — for he was like a foreigner , living in tents . And so did Isaac and Jacob , who inherited the same promise .

ID:	1574
INPUT:	Lehenengo gurdiko zaldiak gorriak ziren , bigarrengoak beltzak ,
PRED:	The first angel of the sea will be filled with fear of the Lord .
GOLD:	The first chariot was pulled by red horses , the second by black horses ,

ID:	1575
INPUT:	Ikasleak eztabaidan hasi ziren beren artean , beraietan zein ote zen handiena .
PRED:	For the disciples began talking about him and began to teach them what he had done .
GOLD:	Then they began to argue among themselves about who would be the greatest among them .

ID:	1576
INPUT:	Orduan jakingo dute ni naizela Jauna eta ez niela alferrik hitz egin zoritxar hau iragartzean » .
PRED:	Then they will know that I am the Lord , and they did n't prophesy against me . ”
GOLD:	They will know that I alone am the Lord and that I was serious when I said I would bring this calamity on them .

ID:	1577
INPUT:	Zeru garaiaren antzeko eraiki zuen bere santutegiaeta lurra bezala sendo oinarritu betiko .
PRED:	He built three days to build the Temple as holy as the Most High , Creator of all the earth .
GOLD:	There he built his sanctuary as high as the heavens , as solid and enduring as the earth .

ID:	1578
INPUT:	Zergatik ez zegoen inor , etorri naizenean ? Zergatik ez du inork erantzun , deitu dudanean ? Nire eskua laburregia otezuek askatzeko ? Nik ez ote aski indarzuek libratzeko ? Mehatxu-hitz bat aski dut , itsasoa lehortueta ibaiak basamortu bihurtzeko : urik gabe arrainak egarriz hileta usteldu egiten dira .
PRED:	“ Why did n't you come to me ? Why did n't someone call me ? Why did n't someone call me to rescue me ? Why did n't I call you to rescue me from the sea ? ” says the Lord , “ I will rescue you from the sea ? ”
GOLD:	Why was no one there when I came ? Why did n't anyone answer when I called ? Is it because I have no power to rescue ? No , that is not the reason ! For I can speak to the sea and make it dry up ! I can turn rivers into deserts covered with dying fish .

ID:	1579
INPUT:	Handik egun batzuetara , Maria etxetik atera eta Judeako mendialdeko hiri batera joan zen arin-arin ,
PRED:	About that time , Mary left the home of Mary and went home to the hill country of Judah .
GOLD:	A few days later Mary hurried to the hill country of Judea , to the town

ID:	1580
INPUT:	Eliasek , berriro ere : — Jainkoaren gizona baldin banaiz , jaits dadila sua zerutik eta kiskal zaitzatela zeu eta zeure berrogeita hamar gizonak . Bat-batean zerutik sua jaitsi eta kiskali egin zituen beste buruzagi hura eta berrogeita hamar gizonak .
PRED:	Then Elijah said , “ If the man of God is coming to save you from heaven , then if you do n't repent of your sins and turn away from the fire and burned it on the ground , you will be cut off from the fire . ” So the man jumped up and burned on his head and burned the fire .
GOLD:	Elijah replied , “ If I am a man of God , let fire come down from heaven and destroy you and your fifty men ! ” And again the fire of God fell from heaven and killed them all .

ID:	1581
INPUT:	Behin batean , jendarteko batek esan zion Jesusi : — Maisu , esaiozu nire anaiari senipartea nirekin erdibanatzeko .
PRED:	One day one of the crowd said to Jesus , “ Teacher , tell me what I am saying to you , ‘ Teacher , the one I am with you . '
GOLD:	Then someone called from the crowd , “ Teacher , please tell my brother to divide our father 's estate with me . ”

ID:	1582
INPUT:	su kartsuak itzali , ezpataz hilak izatetik ihes egin , gaixotasunetatik sendatu , borrokan bulartsu izan eta atzerritarren gudarosteei atzera eragin .
PRED:	He has sent down fire to kill those who flee from the poor , and he has killed those who hated them .
GOLD:	quenched the flames of fire , and escaped death by the edge of the sword . Their weakness was turned to strength . They became strong in battle and put whole armies to flight .

ID:	1583
INPUT:	Aluxetik abiaturik , Refidimera iritsi ziren ; baina ez zen han urik herriak edateko .
PRED:	They left the fortress of Rebekah , but there was no water there . But there was no water there .
GOLD:	They left Alush and camped at Rephidim , where there was no water for the people to drink .

ID:	1584
INPUT:	Zerbitzariek ihardetsi zioten erregeari : — Prest gaude gure errege jaunak erabakitakoa betetzeko .
PRED:	So the officials came to the king and told him , “ We are going to destroy the king 's palace . ”
GOLD:	“ We are with you , ” his advisers replied . “ Do what you think is best . ”

ID:	1585
INPUT:	Nola mendiek Jerusalem , hala du Jaunak bere herria inguratzen , oraindanik eta betiko .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ The Lord is his people , and he is his power . ”
GOLD:	Just as the mountains surround Jerusalem , so the Lord surrounds his people , both now and forever .

ID:	1586
INPUT:	« Igo Galaadera , sendabelar bila , Egiptoko herri ! Alferrik dituzu sendabide guztiak : zuretzat ez dago erremediorik .
PRED:	“ Be strong and courageous , for I will give you the people of Egypt — all your people — the land of Egypt — all your people — will be rewarded for you .
GOLD:	“ Go up to Gilead to get medicine , O virgin daughter of Egypt ! But your many treatmentswill bring you no healing .

ID:	1587
INPUT:	Zein arin aldatzen zaren bidez ! Asiriak huts egin zizun bezalaxehuts egingo dizu Egiptok ere .
PRED:	How can you live in the land of Egypt ? Who will escape the laws of Assyria ?
GOLD:	First here , then there — you flit from one ally to another asking for help.But your new friends in Egypt will let you down , just as Assyria did before .

ID:	1588
INPUT:	Anaiek esan zioten : — Geure errege edo menderatzaile izan behar ote zaitugu ? Eta are gehiago gorrotatu zuten bere amets eta esanengatik .
PRED:	The brothers replied , “ Since we have been our king , why should we tell you this dream ? ” And the dream means . “ We will tell you what it means . ”
GOLD:	His brothers responded , “ So you think you will be our king , do you ? Do you actually think you will reign over us ? ” And they hated him all the more because of his dreams and the way he talked about them .

ID:	1589
INPUT:	Sagarapenetarako gantzuketa-olioa eta intsentsu usaintsu garbia ere prestatu zituen , lurringileek egin ohi duten eran .
PRED:	Solomon offered the anointing oil and fragrant incense for the anointing oil and fragrant incense for the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Then he made the sacred anointing oil and the fragrant incense , using the techniques of a skilled incense maker .

ID:	1590
INPUT:	« Zuek , zentzugabeok , noiz arte maiteko duzue zentzugabekeria ? Zuek , harroputzok , noiz arte jarraituko harrokerian ? Zuek , burugabeok , noiz arte gorrotatuko jakinduria ?
PRED:	“ You fools , you people of Israel , but when you are wise , you will know what you think about this ? You will know what you are doing , and you will know how to do you ?
GOLD:	“ How long , you simpletons , will you insist on being simpleminded ? How long will you mockers relish your mocking ? How long will you fools hate knowledge ?

ID:	1591
INPUT:	Bera da gure Jainkoa , eta gu hark larraturiko herria , haren gidaritzapeko artaldea . Egingo al diozue gaur kasu haren esanari :
PRED:	He is the God of our God , and he will raise his sheep and goats , and he will pour out his fury on you today .
GOLD:	for he is our God.We are the people he watches over , the flock under his care.If only you would listen to his voice today !

ID:	1592
INPUT:	Saulen osabak galdegin zien : — Nora joan zarete ? Saulek erantzun zion : — Astoen bila . Baina ez genituen aurkitzen eta Samuelengana jo genuen .
PRED:	“ Why are you looking for me ? ” Saul asked . “ But I did n't find him . ” But Samuel replied , “ But I did n't find him . ”
GOLD:	“ Where have you been ? ” Saul 's uncle asked him and his servant . “ We were looking for the donkeys , ” Saul replied , “ but we could n't find them . So we went to Samuel to ask him where they were . ”

ID:	1593
INPUT:	Jakobek esan zion Joseri : « Orain bai hil naitekeela zure aurpegia ikusi ondoren , oraindik bizirik zaude eta » .
PRED:	Then Jacob said to Joseph , “ Now I am going to kill your brother , and now you can find him there . ”
GOLD:	Finally , Jacob said to Joseph , “ Now I am ready to die , since I have seen your face again and know you are still alive . ”

ID:	1594
INPUT:	Profeta bat profeta delako onartzen duenak profetari zor zaion saria jasoko du ; eta gizon zuzen bat zuzena delako onartzen duenak gizon zuzenari zor zaion saria jasoko du ;
PRED:	A prophet who believes in him is a prophet . Anyone who welcomes a prophet who welcomes a prophet 's father , and he will receive a reward for the good man .
GOLD:	If you receive a prophet as one who speaks for God , you will be given the same reward as a prophet . And if you receive righteous people because of their righteousness , you will be given a reward like theirs .

ID:	1595
INPUT:	Hau diot : « Oi Jauna , zu zaitut ene Jaun , zuregan baizik ez dut zorionik » .
PRED:	“ O Lord , ” says the Lord , “ you are my rock , but I have no peace . ”
GOLD:	I said to the Lord , “ You are my Master ! Every good thing I have comes from you . ”

ID:	1596
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun : « Nik emandako legea bazter utzi eta nire mintzoa aditu eta jarraitu ez dutelako gertatu da hori .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : If you refused to obey my instructions , you will not stop speaking to me , and you will not speak to me .
GOLD:	Who is wise enough to understand all this ? Who has been instructed by the Lord and can explain it to others ? Why has the land been so ruined that no one dares to travel through it ?

ID:	1597
INPUT:	Beste batek du nire alde testigatzen , eta jakin badakit haren testigantza baliozkoa dena .
PRED:	If someone claims to testify about me , then I know that my testimony is from God .
GOLD:	But someone else is also testifying about me , and I assure you that everything he says about me is true .

ID:	1598
INPUT:	« Jopen otoitzean ari nintzela , goi-ikuskari bat izan nuen : oihal handi baten antzeko zerbait ikusi nuen , lau puntetatik zintzilik , zerutik ni nengoen tokiraino jaisten .
PRED:	“ Then I saw a loud voice coming from the sky , and I saw a loud voice from the sky . I saw four large horn that looked at the top of the four corners of the sky .
GOLD:	“ I was in the town of Joppa , ” he said , “ and while I was praying , I went into a trance and saw a vision . Something like a large sheet was let down by its four corners from the sky . And it came right down to me .

ID:	1599
INPUT:	Zakariasen kontra jaiki eta , erregearen aginduz , harrika eman zioten denek Jaunaren etxeko atarian .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the king 's officials rebelled against him and handed him over to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the leaders plotted to kill Zechariah , and King Joash ordered that they stone him to death in the courtyard of the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	1600
INPUT:	Profeta bezala mintzo direnei dagokienez , mintza daitezela bi edo hiru , eta gainerakoek eman dezatela beren iritzia .
PRED:	Then you will understand that the prophets are talking about to those who speak to the Lord 's words are written on them .
GOLD:	Let two or three people prophesy , and let the others evaluate what is said .

ID:	1601
INPUT:	Noiz arte behar dute gaiztoek , Jauna , noiz arte behar dute gaiztoek garaile ?
PRED:	How long will the wicked be destroyed ? How long will the wicked be ?
GOLD:	How long , O Lord ? How long will the wicked be allowed to gloat ?

ID:	1602
INPUT:	Horregatik , dolu egingo du lurrak , ilundu egingo goian ortzia , hartua baitut erabakia ; ez naiz damutuko , ez atzera egingo » .
PRED:	That is why I will cover the earth with darkness , but I will cover it with darkness , but I will not tear it down . ”
GOLD:	The earth will mournand the heavens will be draped in blackbecause of my decree against my people.I have made up my mind and will not change it . ”

ID:	1603
INPUT:	hamar idi gizen eta hogei idi larreko ; ehun ardi eta , gainera , hainbat orein , basahuntz , orkatz eta hegazti gizen .
PRED:	He made ten sheep and goats , five loaves of wine , and a small cup of wine , a small donkey , and a small basket of wine .
GOLD:	“ You know that my father , David , was not able to build a Temple to honor the name of the Lord his God because of the many wars waged against him by surrounding nations . He could not build until the Lord gave him victory over all his enemies .

ID:	1604
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , hona zer dioen Israel herriak : “ Honen ikuskariak oso gerorako dira , epe luzerako beronen profeziak ” .
PRED:	“ Son of man , give this message to the people of Israel : ‘ This is what the Lord says : Because of their sins , they will see their evil deeds . '
GOLD:	“ Son of man , the people of Israel are saying , ‘ He 's talking about the distant future . His visions wo n't come true for a long , long time . '

ID:	1605
INPUT:	Zuen aldareak suntsitu eta intsentsua erretzeko ontziak apurtuko dituzte . Zuen gurtzaileak hilik eroraraziko ditut idoloen aurrean .
PRED:	I will destroy your pagan altars and burn incense altars . I will smash their pagan altars to your idols , and I will smash their idols .
GOLD:	All your altars will be demolished , and your places of worship will be destroyed . I will kill your people in front of your idols .

ID:	1606
INPUT:	Ogi-puska hartu bezain laster , Satanas sartu zen haren barrura . Orduan , Jesusek esan zion : « Egin behar duzuna , egizu lehenbailehen » .
PRED:	As soon as soon as Satan was sleeping , Jesus went into the sleeping mat , and he said , “ You must be the first . ”
GOLD:	When Judas had eaten the bread , Satan entered into him . Then Jesus told him , “ Hurry and do what you 're going to do . ”

ID:	1607
INPUT:	Paulok erantzun zuen : — Ez nago burutik , Festo agurgarria ; nire hitzak egiazkoak eta zentzuzkoak dituzu .
PRED:	Paul replied , “ No , you must not worship my meaning . You must not worship my meaning . ”
GOLD:	But Paul replied , “ I am not insane , Most Excellent Festus . What I am saying is the sober truth .

ID:	1608
INPUT:	Izan ere , bada hor azpikeriaz sartu zaizuen zenbait , aspaldidanik Liburu Santuak kondenatutzat emana , jende sinesgabea . Gure Jainkoaren onginahia jokabide biziotsurako aitzakiatzat hartzen dute eta Jesu Kristo , gure Jaun eta Jabe bakarra , ukatzen .
PRED:	For you have been taught by the Holy One of your own people . For the Scriptures say , “ God has given you the privilege of faith , and he will bring you back to the Lord Jesus Christ , the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	I say this because some ungodly people have wormed their way into your churches , saying that God 's marvelous grace allows us to live immoral lives . The condemnation of such people was recorded long ago , for they have denied our only Master and Lord , Jesus Christ .

ID:	1609
INPUT:	baina Jesusek eskutik hartu eta altxarazi egin zuen , eta mutikoa zutitu egin zen .
PRED:	But Jesus took the hand from his hand and beat it up . Then he got up and stood up and stood up .
GOLD:	But Jesus took him by the hand and helped him to his feet , and he stood up .

ID:	1610
INPUT:	Hark erantzun : — Ez al duzue inoiz irakurri zer egin zuen Davidek beharraldi batean , bera eta bere lagunak goseak aurkitu zirenean ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Have n't you read this to your relatives in the land David and his companions were hungry ? ” So David asked .
GOLD:	Jesus said to them , “ Have n't you ever read in the Scriptures what David did when he and his companions were hungry ?

ID:	1611
INPUT:	Josek esan zion : — Hona argibidea . Hiru aihenek hiru egun adierazten dute .
PRED:	Then Joseph told him , “ This is the light that makes three days . ”
GOLD:	“ This is what the dream means , ” Joseph said . “ The three branches represent three days .

ID:	1612
INPUT:	Learen semeak Ruben , Jakoben lehen-semea , Simeon , Lebi , Juda , Isakar eta Zabulon izan ziren .
PRED:	The oldest son of Jacob 's oldest son , was the oldest son of Jacob , Simeon , and Zebulun .
GOLD:	The sons of Leah were Reuben ( Jacob 's oldest son ) , Simeon , Levi , Judah , Issachar , and Zebulun .

ID:	1613
INPUT:	Jende-multzo handiek jarraitu zioten eta Jesusek gaixoak sendatu zizkien .
PRED:	Then the crowd followed Jesus and healed the sick .
GOLD:	Large crowds followed him there , and he healed their sick .

ID:	1614
INPUT:	Neskatxek
PRED:	Young Woman
GOLD:	Young Women of Jerusalem

ID:	1615
INPUT:	Beraz , anaia bidali nahi baduzu , jaitsiko gara garia erostera .
PRED:	So if you are my brother , go to war with famine , you will go to war with famine .
GOLD:	If you send Benjamin with us , we will go down and buy more food .

ID:	1616
INPUT:	entzun goizetik nire mintzoa ; goizean neure auzia azaltzen dizuteta zain gelditzen natzaizu .
PRED:	When you hear my voice from heaven , you will stand before me at the ends of the grave .
GOLD:	O God , you take no pleasure in wickedness ; you can not tolerate the sins of the wicked .

ID:	1617
INPUT:	Anas eta Kaifas ziren apaiz nagusi . Garai hartan , Joanek , Zakariasen semeak , Jainkoaren mezua hartu zuen basamortuan .
PRED:	Caiaphas , the high priest , who was high priest , was the son of Caiaphas , the son of John , was God 's son .
GOLD:	Annas and Caiaphas were the high priests . At this time a message from God came to John son of Zechariah , who was living in the wilderness .

ID:	1618
INPUT:	Horregatik , saia zaitezte gogoz zeuen fedearekin batera bertutea izaten , bertutearekin ezagutza ,
PRED:	Instead , you yourselves yourselves yourselves yourselves yourselves yourselves so that you will continue to share with God 's holy people .
GOLD:	In view of all this , make every effort to respond to God 's promises . Supplement your faith with a generous provision of moral excellence , and moral excellence with knowledge ,

ID:	1619
INPUT:	Legearen irakurketa nagusia zazpi urtez behin
PRED:	The Law of Moses and the Law
GOLD:	Israel 's Disobedience Predicted

ID:	1620
INPUT:	« Ez izan ni beste jainkorik .
PRED:	“ You must not have any other gods .
GOLD:	“ You must not have any other god but me .

ID:	1621
INPUT:	Haiek erantzun : — Begiak zabaltzea , Jauna !
PRED:	“ Yes , Lord , ” they replied . “ The Lord is good ! ”
GOLD:	“ Lord , ” they said , “ we want to see ! ”

ID:	1622
INPUT:	Nire nardoari usain gozoa dario
PRED:	The Fall of my Fall
GOLD:	Young Man

ID:	1623
INPUT:	Eliseok , Jainkoaren gizonak , jakin zuen Israelgo erregeak jantziak urratu zituela eta mandatu hau bidali zion : « Zergatik urratu dituzu jantziak ? Datorrela niregana gizon hori eta jakinen du badela profetarik Israelen » .
PRED:	Elisha heard that the man of God was with him , and he tore his clothes in burlap and said , “ Why did you eat this man from the king of Israel ? Why did you eat this man ? ”
GOLD:	But when Elisha , the man of God , heard that the king of Israel had torn his clothes in dismay , he sent this message to him : “ Why are you so upset ? Send Naaman to me , and he will learn that there is a true prophet here in Israel . ”

ID:	1624
INPUT:	« Ea , bada , itzuli arin aitarengana eta esaiozue : Hau dio zure seme Josek : Jainkoak Egipto osoko buru jarri nau . Zatoz niregana ! Ez luzatu !
PRED:	“ Go back to Egypt , ” says the Lord . “ This is what the God of your ancestors , says : O Pharaoh , the God of Egypt , have mercy on me . ”
GOLD:	“ Now hurry back to my father and tell him , ‘ This is what your son Joseph says : God has made me master over all the land of Egypt . So come down to me immediately !

ID:	1625
INPUT:	hau da , israeldarrek suntsitu ezinik herrialde hartan gelditu zirenen ondorengoak , lan egitera behartu zituen Salomonek , gaurdaino .
PRED:	So Solomon completely destroyed all the people of Israel , and they left their homes and set them apart to this day .
GOLD:	These were descendants of the nations whom the people of Israel had not destroyed . So Solomon conscripted them for his labor force , and they serve as forced laborers to this day .

ID:	1626
INPUT:	Halakoak ez daude buru den Kristorekin loturik , eta Kristo da , hain zuzen , buru bezala , lokailu eta junturen bitartez gorputz osoa elkarlotzen duena eta , Jainkoak nahi bezala , hazarazten duena .
PRED:	There is no wonder that God is no longer with you . He is no longer a friend of Christ 's armor , and his armor bearer , and his armor bearer , and his armor bearer can not be put to death .
GOLD:	and they are not connected to Christ , the head of the body . For he holds the whole body together with its joints and ligaments , and it grows as God nourishes it .

ID:	1627
INPUT:	Jainko Jauna dut laguntzaile : nork kondenatuko nau ? Sitsak jandako arropak bezalagalduko dira nire etsai guztiak .
PRED:	For the Sovereign Lord says , “ I will answer my enemies , and my enemies will perish at my enemies .
GOLD:	See , the Sovereign Lord is on my side ! Who will declare me guilty ? All my enemies will be destroyedlike old clothes that have been eaten by moths !

ID:	1628
INPUT:	Itzuli egin baitzara eta debekatu nizun tokian jan duzu ogia eta edan ura . Horregatik , zure gorpua ez dute zure gurasoen hilobian lurperatuko » .
PRED:	For you have turned away and eat it , and you have eaten the food I have given to you . That is why you have been buried in the dead bodies of our ancestors . ”
GOLD:	You came back to this place and ate and drank where he told you not to eat or drink . Because of this , your body will not be buried in the grave of your ancestors . ”

ID:	1629
INPUT:	Zorionekoanire aginduen arabera jokatzeneta horretan leial irauten duena , larunbata profanatu gabeerrespetatzeneta ezer txarrik egiten ez duena ! »
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who obey my commands and obey my commands and obey my commands and obey my commands and decrees and regulations . ”
GOLD:	Blessed are all thosewho are careful to do this.Blessed are those who honor my Sabbath days of restand keep themselves from doing wrong .

ID:	1630
INPUT:	Ez zizkizuten eskuak lotu , ez oinak kateatu . Gaizkileen eskuz bezalaerori zara lurrera » . Jendeak are eta negar handiagoak egin zituen orduan .
PRED:	They did n't wear out their hands , but they would n't wear out the hands of the wicked . ” So the people begged them to weep for their work .
GOLD:	Your hands were not bound ; your feet were not chained.No , you were murdered — the victim of a wicked plot . ” All the people wept again for Abner .

ID:	1631
INPUT:	Urak gutxituz joan ziren hamargarren hila arte ; hilaren lehen egunean mendi-gailurrak agertu ziren .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day the first month of the first month , during the first month of the first month .
GOLD:	Two and a half months later , as the waters continued to go down , other mountain peaks became visible .

ID:	1632
INPUT:	Keros , Sia eta Padonenak ;
PRED:	Bazluth , Mehida , Harsha ,
GOLD:	Keros , Siaha , Padon ,

ID:	1633
INPUT:	Bedeinkatu , herriok , gure Jainkoa , oihukatu goraki haren gorespena .
PRED:	Praise God , you people of Israel , and praise him ! Praise his praises !
GOLD:	Let the whole world bless our Godand loudly sing his praises .

ID:	1634
INPUT:	Ene Timoteo , zaindu Jainkoak zure esku utzi duen fede-gordailua . Utzi alde batera fedearen kontrako berriketa hutsalak eta sasizientziaren argudioak ,
PRED:	God has given him a long time for Tyre , and he has given them a long time for a long time . They were greatly greatly disturbed by their faith and sorrow .
GOLD:	Timothy , guard what God has entrusted to you . Avoid godless , foolish discussions with those who oppose you with their so-called knowledge .

ID:	1635
INPUT:	Denak pozik zeudelarik , hona non agertzen diren gizonak , gizon gaizkile halakoak ; etxea inguratu eta ate-joka hasi ziren , etxeko jabea zen gizon zaharrari esanez : — Atera ezazu zure etxean sartu den gizon hori , bortxatu egin nahi dugu eta !
PRED:	So the man 's men went out into the town , and the man who had been a man who had been killed . “ Take care of him , ” he said . “ We want to go home ! ” So the man went into his house , and he went into his house .
GOLD:	While they were enjoying themselves , a crowd of troublemakers from the town surrounded the house . They began beating at the door and shouting to the old man , “ Bring out the man who is staying with you so we can have sex with him . ”

ID:	1636
INPUT:	Beraz , zutik dagoela uste duenak egin beza kontu eror ez dadin .
PRED:	So let me be sure that we can not be able to be able to stand firm .
GOLD:	If you think you are standing strong , be careful not to fall .

ID:	1637
INPUT:	Eta esan zion erregeari : « Egia zen , bai , neure herrian zure egintzez eta jakinduriaz aditua nuena .
PRED:	Then the king said to the king , “ Everything I did to do , and you will know what I have done to you .
GOLD:	She exclaimed to the king , “ Everything I heard in my country about your achievements and wisdom is true !

ID:	1638
INPUT:	Erromes-kanta . Bedeinka ezazue Jauna , Jaunaren zerbitzariok , gaua beraren etxean igarotzen duzuen guztiok !
PRED:	How joyful are those who fear the Lord , you who serve him in the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	Oh , praise the Lord , all you servants of the Lord , you who serve at night in the house of the Lord .

ID:	1639
INPUT:	Korintoarrak direla-eta Paulo kezkatan
PRED:	Paul and Silas in Corinth
GOLD:	Paul 's Concern for the Corinthians

ID:	1640
INPUT:	Errituzko keinua eginez aurkeztuko ditu apaizak opariok , bi bildotsak barne , lehen fruitu gisa eskainiriko ogiekin batera . Jaunari sagaratuak izango direnez , opariok apaizari dagozkio .
PRED:	If you present a young goat as a burnt offering , you must present it to the Lord as a pleasing aroma to the Lord . If you present it to the Lord , you must present it to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ The priest will lift up the two lambs as a special offering to the Lord , together with the loaves representing the first of your crops . These offerings , which are holy to the Lord , belong to the priests .

ID:	1641
INPUT:	Jauna , emaiezu beren egiteengatik merezi duten ordaina .
PRED:	O Lord , do n't let them go to their sins , for they are watching for their sins .
GOLD:	Pay them back , Lord , for all the evil they have done .

ID:	1642
INPUT:	« Ez duzue pisu eta neurri faltsurik erabiliko salerosketetan .
PRED:	“ You must not use dishonest scales and weights .
GOLD:	“ You must use accurate scales when you weigh out merchandise ,

ID:	1643
INPUT:	Sinestedunak munduaren aurrean
PRED:	The Coming of the world
GOLD:	Do Not Love This World

ID:	1644
INPUT:	ea erantzun okerren batean harrapatzen zuten .
PRED:	They replied , “ They did n't need a sacrifice for a burnt offering . ”
GOLD:	They wanted to trap him into saying something they could use against him .

ID:	1645
INPUT:	ekialdetik , hogeita hamabost metro luzeko oihalak :
PRED:	On the east side of the Tabernacle , the curtains were 150 feet long and 75 feet wide .
GOLD:	The east end , the front , was also 75 feet long .

ID:	1646
INPUT:	Edan zuenean , esan zion neskatxak : — Zure gameluentzat ere ura ateratzera noa , ase arte edan dezaten .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Even if you are young , you may eat the food you have to eat . ”
GOLD:	When she had given him a drink , she said , “ I 'll draw water for your camels , too , until they have had enough to drink . ”

ID:	1647
INPUT:	Ura isurian bezala joango zaizkio etxeko aberastasunak , Jainkoaren zigor-egunean .
PRED:	Their riches will be like a snake ; their wealth will be destroyed in the house of God .
GOLD:	A flood will sweep away their house.God 's anger will descend on them in torrents .

ID:	1648
INPUT:	neuk ere aurka egingo dizuet eta zazpi bider gogorrago zigortuko zeuen bekatuengatik .
PRED:	I will punish you seven times , and I will punish you for your sins .
GOLD:	then I myself will be hostile toward you . I will personally strike you with calamity seven times over for your sins .

ID:	1649
INPUT:	esatera : — Ba al dakizu Amongo errege Baalisek Netaniasen seme Ismael bidali duela zu hiltzeko ? Gedaliasek ez zien sinetsi .
PRED:	“ Do you know that the king of Ammon had sent Gedaliah son of Josiah son of Amoz sent him to kill him ? ” he demanded .
GOLD:	They said to him , “ Did you know that Baalis , king of Ammon , has sent Ishmael son of Nethaniah to assassinate you ? ” But Gedaliah refused to believe them .

ID:	1650
INPUT:	Jesusek hartu eta beraien aurrean jan zuen .
PRED:	Jesus took them and ate them before him .
GOLD:	and he ate it as they watched .

ID:	1651
INPUT:	Zazpi seme eta hiru alaba zituen .
PRED:	He also gave Job seven more sons and daughters .
GOLD:	He had seven sons and three daughters .

ID:	1652
INPUT:	Ekron eta beraren herri eta herrixkak ;
PRED:	The towns of Ekron , and the surrounding villages .
GOLD:	The territory of the tribe of Judah also included Ekron and its surrounding settlements and villages .

ID:	1653
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin zaiona egin zuen , beraren aita Uziasek bezalaxe .
PRED:	He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , just as Uzziah had done .
GOLD:	Jotham did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight . He did everything his father , Uzziah , had done .

ID:	1654
INPUT:	Baina Kristo , gu oraindik bekatari ginela hil zen gure alde : honela erakusten du Jainkoak guri digun maitasuna .
PRED:	But we know that Christ is dead , and he lives in us . He is our love for our lives .
GOLD:	But God showed his great love for us by sending Christ to die for us while we were still sinners .

ID:	1655
INPUT:	Erre-oparien aldarea eta brontzezko uraska
PRED:	the bronze altar for the Sin
GOLD:	Building the Altar of Burnt Offering

ID:	1656
INPUT:	Orduan , esan zion Boozek Ruti : — Adizu ! Ez zaitez joan soro honetatik beste inora garagarburuak biltzera . Jarrai hemen lanean nire morroiekin .
PRED:	Then Boaz said to Boaz , “ Do n't go back to the other side of the field . Do n't go back to the other side of the field , and leave me alone . ”
GOLD:	Boaz went over and said to Ruth , “ Listen , my daughter . Stay right here with us when you gather grain ; do n't go to any other fields . Stay right behind the young women working in my field .

ID:	1657
INPUT:	Hortan , hil zen amondarren erregea eta honen seme Ha<unk> gertatu zen ondorengo errege .
PRED:	So the king of Ammon killed the king of Ammon , and he killed the sons of Ammon .
GOLD:	Some time after this , King Nahash of the Ammonites died , and his son Hanun became king .

ID:	1658
INPUT:	Moisesek lurraldea ikertzera bidali eta itzuleran , lurraldeaz gaizki-esaka jardunez , haren kontra elkartea berotu zutenak
PRED:	When Moses sent the land to explore the land , he will bring war against the people of Israel .
GOLD:	The ten men Moses had sent to explore the land — the ones who incited rebellion against the Lord with their bad report —

ID:	1659
INPUT:	Axerren leinutik , Okranen seme Pagiel ;
PRED:	from the tribe of Asher , led by the tribe of Asher ,
GOLD:	AsherPagiel son of Ocran

ID:	1660
INPUT:	Davidek erantzun zion : — Hona hemen erregearen lantza . Betor honaino mutilen bat eta har beza .
PRED:	David replied , “ This is what the Lord says : Your brother is here , and one of your brother is here in the field . ”
GOLD:	“ Here is your spear , O king , ” David replied . “ Let one of your young men come over and get it .

ID:	1661
INPUT:	Izugarria baita Jauna , Goi-goikoa , mundu osoaren errege handia .
PRED:	For the Most High is the Most High , and the Most High rules over the earth .
GOLD:	He subdues the nations before us , putting our enemies beneath our feet .

ID:	1662
INPUT:	Urtean hiru bider Salomonek erre-opariak eta elkartasun-opariak eskaini ohi zituen Jaunarentzat eraikia zuen aldarearen gainean , eta intsentsua erre ohi zuen Jaunaren aitzinean zegoen aldarean . Horrela bukatu zuen tenpluaren eraikuntza .
PRED:	Solomon offered a sacrifice of burnt offering to the Lord , and he offered sacrifices to the Lord . He offered it to the Lord as a burnt offering for the Temple of the Lord . Then he burned incense on the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	Three times each year Solomon presented burnt offerings and peace offerings on the altar he had built for the Lord . He also burned incense to the Lord . And so he finished the work of building the Temple .

ID:	1663
INPUT:	Ez bainauzu Herio Leizera botako , zure fededuna ez duzu hilobian galtzen utziko .
PRED:	But you will not let me go down to the grave , for you will die in the grave .
GOLD:	For you will not leave my soul among the deador allow your Holy One to rot in the grave .

ID:	1664
INPUT:	inoren soroan galburuak biltzen dituzte , gaiztoaren mahastian hondarrak ;
PRED:	They are like trees , but the wicked are destroyed by the wicked .
GOLD:	They harvest a field they do not own , and they glean in the vineyards of the wicked .

ID:	1665
INPUT:	Maakaren seme Abias ezarri zuen Roboamek anaien buru , bere ondorengo errege egin nahi baitzuen .
PRED:	Rehoboam appointed his brother Rehoboam son Rehoboam , for he had appointed his brother to rule over the next king .
GOLD:	Rehoboam appointed Maacah 's son Abijah as leader among the princes , making it clear that he would be the next king .

ID:	1666
INPUT:	Zabaldira atera ninduen , maite nauelako libratu .
PRED:	He led me to a place of safety ; he rescued me from the grave .
GOLD:	The Lord rewarded me for doing right ; he restored me because of my innocence .

ID:	1667
INPUT:	Horien zigorra betiereko hondamena izango da : Jaunak bere aurretik eta bere ahalmen distiratsutik urruti botako ditu ,
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies will drive out his throne and from his throne .
GOLD:	They will be punished with eternal destruction , forever separated from the Lord and from his glorious power .

ID:	1668
INPUT:	Orduan , hartu eta Melkias errege-familiako printzearen putzuan sartu zuten Jeremias , sokaz jaitsiz . Putzua kartzelako atarian zegoen eta ez zuen urik , lokatza baizik . Jeremias lokatzetan sarturik gelditu zen .
PRED:	Then Jeremiah took a crown from the royal palace and put it in the royal treasury . Then he put Jeremiah in the cistern , and he did n't let him go into the cistern .
GOLD:	So the officials took Jeremiah from his cell and lowered him by ropes into an empty cistern in the prison yard . It belonged to Malkijah , a member of the royal family . There was no water in the cistern , but there was a thick layer of mud at the bottom , and Jeremiah sank down into it .

ID:	1669
INPUT:	Nik , Paulok , Jesu Kristoren zerbitzari honek , idazten dizuet . Jainkoak deitu ninduen apostolu izateko eta Liburu Santuetan profeten ahoz aurrez agindua zeukan berri ona hots egiteko .
PRED:	This letter is from Paul , a servant of Christ Jesus , who called me to be called by the Holy Spirit , and the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , a slave of Christ Jesus , chosen by God to be an apostle and sent out to preach his Good News .

ID:	1670
INPUT:	Beraz , ibili onbidetiketa jarraitu zintzoen jokabideari .
PRED:	So do n't follow the path of the godly , and follow the path of the godly .
GOLD:	So follow the steps of the good , and stay on the paths of the righteous .

ID:	1671
INPUT:	Orduan eguzkia eta egun-argia , izarrak eta ilargiailundu egingo zaizkik , eta euria egin ondorenberriro lainotuko dik .
PRED:	Then the sun will shine over the sun , and the moon will be able to light the sky , and the stars will grow in the sky .
GOLD:	Remember him before the light of the sun , moon , and stars is dim to your old eyes , and rain clouds continually darken your sky .

ID:	1672
INPUT:	Saulen heriotza
PRED:	Saul 's Death and Burial
GOLD:	The Death of Saul

ID:	1673
INPUT:	Hitz atseginak , ezti-abaraska : ahorako goxo , gorputzerako osasungarri .
PRED:	Do n't be quiet , O God , for your body is sick .
GOLD:	Kind words are like honey — sweet to the soul and healthy for the body .

ID:	1674
INPUT:	Biharamunean , herriko agintari , zahar eta lege-maisuak Jerusalemen bildu ziren ;
PRED:	The next morning the people gathered around Jerusalem , and the teachers of religious law gathered around Jerusalem .
GOLD:	The next day the council of all the rulers and elders and teachers of religious law met in Jerusalem .

ID:	1675
INPUT:	Aho beretik ateratzen dira bedeinkazioa eta madarikazioa . Senideok , horrek ez du horrela izan behar .
PRED:	Those who curse them from the blessing of blessing will be blessed , so that the Son of Man will never be shaken .
GOLD:	And so blessing and cursing come pouring out of the same mouth . Surely , my brothers and sisters , this is not right !

ID:	1676
INPUT:	Orduan , aldaretik esaten entzun nuen : « Bai , Jauna , Jainko ahalguztiduna , zure epaiakegiazkoak eta zuzenak dira ! »
PRED:	Then I heard a message from the Lord of Heaven 's Armies : “ Yes , I will judge your righteous deeds , O God of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	And I heard a voice from the altar , saying , “ Yes , O Lord God , the Almighty , your judgments are true and just . ”

ID:	1677
INPUT:	Orduan , funtzionarioek esan zioten : — Zoaz eta ezkutatu Jeremias eta biok , eta ez dezala jakin inork ere non zaudeten .
PRED:	Then the officials said to Jeremiah , “ Go and bury him , and do n't know what Jeremiah is going to happen . ”
GOLD:	“ You and Jeremiah should both hide , ” the officials told Baruch . “ Do n't tell anyone where you are ! ”

ID:	1678
INPUT:	Hona hemen haien lurraldeak hartzen zuena : Izreel , Kesulot , Xu<unk> ,
PRED:	These are the names of the sons of Jezreel , Elam , Elam , Elam , Elam , and Elam .
GOLD:	Its boundaries included the following towns : Jezreel , Kesulloth , Shunem ,

ID:	1679
INPUT:	Bere irakastaldian , beste hau ere esan zien : « Zabiltzate kontuz lege-maisuekin ! Gogoko baitute harro-harro jantzita ibiltzea eta plazetan jendeak agur egitea ;
PRED:	Then he said to his disciples , “ Rejoice with them , for the teachers of religious law has been breaking off from the streets . Let the crowds walk around the ground , and teach the people to wear food .
GOLD:	Jesus also taught : “ Beware of these teachers of religious law ! For they like to parade around in flowing robes and receive respectful greetings as they walk in the marketplaces .

ID:	1680
INPUT:	Josuek Jeriko hartu
PRED:	Joshua 's Second Response to Joshua
GOLD:	The Fall of Jericho

ID:	1681
INPUT:	Eta nik , lurretik jasoko nautenean , neuregana erakarriko ditut denak » .
PRED:	I will give them the land of the earth , and I will give them victory over the earth . ”
GOLD:	And when I am lifted up from the earth , I will draw everyone to myself . ”

ID:	1682
INPUT:	ez duzue etxerik eraikiko , ez hazirik ereingo , ez mahastirik landatuko nahiz izango ; baizik eta oihal-etxoletan biziko zarete zeuen bizitza guztian . Horrela , luzaro biziko zarete etorkin bezala zaudeten lurralde honetan ” .
PRED:	You must not plant any of your houses or plant or planted crops , but you will live in your tents . You will live in your tents , and you will live in the land you live in your own land . '
GOLD:	And do not build houses or plant crops or vineyards , but always live in tents . If you follow these commands , you will live long , good lives in the land . '

ID:	1683
INPUT:	Izan ere , nazioa nazioaren kontra eta erreinua erreinuaren kontra altxatuko dira ; goseteak eta lurrikarak izango dira han eta hemen .
PRED:	For the Kingdom of Heaven is against the nations , and the kingdom of Heaven 's Armies will be rebuilt .
GOLD:	Nation will go to war against nation , and kingdom against kingdom . There will be famines and earthquakes in many parts of the world .

ID:	1684
INPUT:	Nola eman guk Jainkoari behar adina esker ? Hainbestekoa baita zuengatik geure Jainkoaren aurrean dugun poza !
PRED:	And why should we have God given us more than we need for anything ? For God has given us a gift of God .
GOLD:	How we thank God for you ! Because of you we have great joy as we enter God 's presence .

ID:	1685
INPUT:	Hontza eta kirikinoajabetuko dira hartaz , hontz zuria eta beleajarriko han bizitzen . Nahas-mahas eta hutsbihurtuko du Jaunak .
PRED:	I will destroy them and destroy their homes and destroy them , and they will destroy the lies of lies , and the Lord will destroy them .
GOLD:	It will be haunted by the desert owl and the screech owl , the great owl and the raven.For God will measure that land carefully ; he will measure it for chaos and destruction .

ID:	1686
INPUT:	Gaza hiria bertan behera utziaizango da , Axkelon erraustua . Axdodeko bizilagunakegun-argitanjaurtiko dituzte hiritik , Ekrongoak errotik aterako .
PRED:	The town of Ashkelon will be deserted , and the towns of Ashkelon will be destroyed in the city of Ashkelon will destroy the city of Ashkelon , Ekron , and Ekron .
GOLD:	Gaza and Ashkelon will be abandoned , Ashdod and Ekron torn down .

ID:	1687
INPUT:	Hala ere , Jaunak ez zuen Juda hondatu nahi izan , David bere zerbitzariagatik ; hitzemana baitzion Davidi beronen ondorengoak izanen zirela beti errege Jerusalemen .
PRED:	But the Lord did not destroy the king of Judah , for he had caused his servant David to rule over all the descendants of David .
GOLD:	But the Lord did not want to destroy Judah , for he had promised his servant David that his descendants would continue to rule , shining like a lamp forever .

ID:	1688
INPUT:	Ahizparen bidea hartu duzu eta , beraz , haren kopa jarriko dut zure eskuan .
PRED:	I will give you a small donkey , and I will give it to you .
GOLD:	Because you have followed in your sister 's footsteps , I will force you to drink the same cup of terror she drank .

ID:	1689
INPUT:	euriari legea jarri zioneaneta tximistari eta trumoiari beren ibilbidea ,
PRED:	thunder and lightning flashed over the lightning , and lightning flashed over the lightning .
GOLD:	He made the laws for the rainand laid out a path for the lightning .

ID:	1690
INPUT:	Hauekin izan naizen bitartean , neuk zaindu ditut eman dizkidazunok . Hauen ardura izan dut eta hauetako bat ere ez da galdu , galdu behar zuena baizik ; horrela , Liburu Santuek diotena bete da .
PRED:	For I have given them all to you . I have given them a care of you , but I have no one else to do these things . But I will ask you , ‘ This is what the Scriptures say . '
GOLD:	During my time here , I protected them by the power of the name you gave me . I guarded them so that not one was lost , except the one headed for destruction , as the Scriptures foretold .

ID:	1691
INPUT:	Berak aterako du onik errugabea , eta zu ere bai , zure jarduera garbia bada » .
PRED:	You have made him innocent , and you have turned away from your sins . ”
GOLD:	Even sinners will be rescued ; they will be rescued because your hands are pure . ”

ID:	1692
INPUT:	Orduan , gudalburu guztiek , Kareahen seme Johananek eta Hoxaiasen seme Azariasek batik bat , eta berekin zuten jendeak , txiki nahiz handi , Jeremiasengana hurbildu
PRED:	Then Johanan son of Jehozadak , the commander of the army , Johanan son of Jehoahaz , and all the people who had been killed by the army .
GOLD:	Then all the military leaders , including Johanan son of Kareah and Jezaniah son of Hoshaiah , and all the people , from the least to the greatest , approached

ID:	1693
INPUT:	Ea , bada , Jakoben herri , ibil gaitezen Jaunaren argitan !
PRED:	So Jacob is coming to see the Lord , the God of Jacob , though he was watching over the light of the Lord .
GOLD:	Come , descendants of Jacob , let us walk in the light of the Lord !

ID:	1694
INPUT:	Ikasleek esan zioten : — Orain bai mintzo zarela argi , eta ez irudi bidez .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” they said , “ we are all talking about the light . ”
GOLD:	Then his disciples said , “ At last you are speaking plainly and not figuratively .

ID:	1695
INPUT:	Beste zenbait harri artean erori zen , lur handirik ez zen tokian ; eta , axaleko lurra izanik , berehala erne zen ;
PRED:	Other seed fell among thorns that grew up in the soil , and the soil was not part of the soil .
GOLD:	Other seeds fell on shallow soil with underlying rock . The seeds sprouted quickly because the soil was shallow .

ID:	1696
INPUT:	Zuek , ordea , beste hau diozue : Norbaitek aitari edo amari esaten badio : « Zuri eman behar nizukeena Jainkoari eskainia diot » ,
PRED:	But you say , “ If someone is your father or mother or mother or mother , you must give a vow to me , I will give you a sacrifice to God . ”
GOLD:	But you say it is all right for people to say to their parents , ‘ Sorry , I ca n't help you . For I have vowed to give to God what I would have given to you . '

ID:	1697
INPUT:	Neurekin eduki nahi nuen , zure ordez zerbitzari izan nezan , berri ona hots egiteagatik kartzelan nagoelarik .
PRED:	I decided to be with you , but I decided to preach the Good News I wanted to preach the Good News .
GOLD:	I wanted to keep him here with me while I am in these chains for preaching the Good News , and he would have helped me on your behalf .

ID:	1698
INPUT:	Babiloniar herriakhoben larria egin duIsraelgo Santuaren aurka ; izan ere , Israel eta Juda ez dira , alargun gisa , beren Jainko Jaun ahalguztidunagabe gelditu .
PRED:	The people of Israel will be defeated by the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Holy One of Israel , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armieshas not abandoned Israel and Judah.He is still their God , even though their land was filled with sinagainst the Holy One of Israel . ”

ID:	1699
INPUT:	Gerora , Moises eta Aaron bidali nituen , Egipto zigortu nuen neure ekintzaz , eta zuek handik irtenarazi .
PRED:	Then Moses sent Moses and Aaron away the land of Egypt , and he led me out of Egypt .
GOLD:	“ Then I sent Moses and Aaron , and I brought terrible plagues on Egypt ; and afterward I brought you out as a free people .

ID:	1700
INPUT:	Akaz erregearentzat mezua
PRED:	Ahaz Rules in Judah
GOLD:	A Message for Ahaz

ID:	1701
INPUT:	Hemen zaudeten israeldarrok , hitz egin zeuen artean eta hartu erabakia » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ You are saying to the elders of Israel , ‘ This is what the Lord says : ' ”
GOLD:	Now then , all of you — the entire community of Israel — must decide here and now what should be done about this ! ”

ID:	1702
INPUT:	Arren , senideok , ondo hartuko ahal duzue sermoi hau ! Hitz labur batzuk erantsiz bidaltzen dizuet .
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , I am very angry with you , my dear brothers and sisters , I am very angry with you .
GOLD:	I urge you , dear brothers and sisters , to pay attention to what I have written in this brief exhortation .

ID:	1703
INPUT:	Haiek erantzun zioten : — Sinetsi Jesus Jaunarengan , eta zu eta zure etxekoak salbatuko zarete .
PRED:	They replied , “ You believe in the Lord Jesus , and you will be saved . ”
GOLD:	They replied , “ Believe in the Lord Jesus and you will be saved , along with everyone in your household . ”

ID:	1704
INPUT:	ez du gogoan hartzen oinen batek azpian haredo piztiaren batek zanpa ditzakeela .
PRED:	No one else can crush someone else , or a wild animal that dies in the forest .
GOLD:	She does n't worry that a foot might crush themor a wild animal might destroy them .

ID:	1705
INPUT:	Honela bete zen Jainkoak profetaren bidez esana : Parabola bidez mintzatuko naiz , munduaren hasieratik gordea zegoena azalduko .
PRED:	This is the message God of the prophets : I will send them out of the world , and I will send them out of the world .
GOLD:	This fulfilled what God had spoken through the prophet : “ I will speak to you in parables.I will explain things hidden since the creation of the world . ”

ID:	1706
INPUT:	Ezarri estalkia kutxaren gainean , eta ipini nik emango dizudan itun-agiria kutxaren barruan .
PRED:	Put on the Ark 's cover — the place of atonement — on the tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant I have given to you .
GOLD:	Place inside the Ark the stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant , which I will give to you . Then put the atonement cover on top of the Ark .

ID:	1707
INPUT:	Tenplu barruko zedrozko oholtza hura frui<unk> eta lore-sortazko irudiz apaindua zegoen . Dena zedrozkoa zen ; ez zen harririk ikusten .
PRED:	He also built a cedar beams between the cypress trees , and the cedar trees that had been carved out of the cedar trees .
GOLD:	Cedar paneling completely covered the stone walls throughout the Temple , and the paneling was decorated with carvings of gourds and open flowers .

ID:	1708
INPUT:	Baina hark , Espiritu Santuaz beterik , zerura begiratu eta Jainkoaren aintza ikusi zuen , eta Jesus zutik Jainkoaren eskuinaldean .
PRED:	But when Jesus was filled with the Holy Spirit , he saw the Holy Spirit and saw him coming from heaven .
GOLD:	But Stephen , full of the Holy Spirit , gazed steadily into heaven and saw the glory of God , and he saw Jesus standing in the place of honor at God 's right hand .

ID:	1709
INPUT:	Jauna , ene ondasun bakar , erabakia dut zure hitzak gordetzea .
PRED:	O Lord , please grant me your unfailing love , and I will put my words in your mouth .
GOLD:	Lord , you are mine ! I promise to obey your words !

ID:	1710
INPUT:	Jesusek galdetu zien : — Zer egingo ote die nekazari horiei mahasti-jabeak itzultzean ?
PRED:	Jesus asked them , “ What do you want to return to the vineyard ? ”
GOLD:	“ When the owner of the vineyard returns , ” Jesus asked , “ what do you think he will do to those farmers ? ”

ID:	1711
INPUT:	« Kehaten ondorengoen egitekoa elkarketa-etxolan gauza sakratuenez arduratzea da .
PRED:	“ The Tabernacle must be set aside for the Tabernacle , and it must be set apart for the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ The duties of the Kohathites at the Tabernacle will relate to the most sacred objects .

ID:	1712
INPUT:	Hamor eta honen seme Sikem ere ezpataz hil zituzten ; Sikemen etxetik Dina hartu eta atera egin ziren .
PRED:	Shechem 's sons killed Shechem and Shechem . They killed Shechem and brought him out of Shechem .
GOLD:	including Hamor and his son Shechem . They killed them with their swords , then took Dinah from Shechem 's house and returned to their camp .

ID:	1713
INPUT:	Hatzorko bizilagunok , egizue ihes arin , ezkutatu koba-zuloetan ! Hala diot nik , Jaunak . Babiloniako erregeNabukodonosorrekzuen aurkako erabakia hartua du , egitasmoa mamitua .
PRED:	Come , you who are like Hazor , ” says the Lord . “ I will give you victory over Babylon , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	Run for your lives , ” says the Lord . “ Hide yourselves in deep caves , you people of Hazor , for King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon has plotted against youand is preparing to destroy you .

ID:	1714
INPUT:	Entzun , seme , eta izan zuhur , bideratu zuzen zeure bizia .
PRED:	My child , listen to your child , and live in your life .
GOLD:	My child , listen and be wise : Keep your heart on the right course .

ID:	1715
INPUT:	Huts egin dudala egia izanda ere , neuri bakarrik dagokit hutsa .
PRED:	For it is wrong , and it is my fault ; it is too heavy for me .
GOLD:	Even if I have sinned , that is my concern , not yours .

ID:	1716
INPUT:	Babiloniako erbestealdiaren ondoren , Jekoniasek Salatiel sortu zuen ; Salatielek Zorobabel ;
PRED:	As for the people of Babylon , King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon became the next king of Babylon .
GOLD:	After the Babylonian exile : Jehoiachin was the father of Shealtiel.Shealtiel was the father of Zerubbabel .

ID:	1717
INPUT:	eta , bereziki , errugabeko jendea hilez Jerusalem osoa odolez bete zuelako . Jaunak ez zuen hau guztia barkatu nahi izan .
PRED:	Then he made an ambush for all the people of Jerusalem , for the Lord had made this covenant with all the people of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	who had filled Jerusalem with innocent blood . The Lord would not forgive this .

ID:	1718
INPUT:	Ezekiasen erregealdiko laugarren urtean , hau da , Israelgo Elaren seme Oseasen erregealdiko zazpigarren urtean , Asiriako errege Salmanasarrek Samariari eraso eta setiatu egin zuen .
PRED:	Hezekiah son of Hezekiah began to rule over Israel in the fourth year of King Hezekiah 's reign in Israel . He went to Samaria and attacked the king of Assyria .
GOLD:	During the fourth year of Hezekiah 's reign , which was the seventh year of King Hoshea 's reign in Israel , King Shalmaneser of Assyria attacked the city of Samaria and began a siege against it .

ID:	1719
INPUT:	Haiek erantzun zioten : — Kornelio ehuntariaren partetik gatoz . Gizon zuzena da eta Israelen Jainkoa gurtzen duena , eta judu guztien artean izen onekoa . Jaunaren aingeruak agindu dio , zu bere etxera eramateko eta zure hitzak entzuteko .
PRED:	“ Cornelius , ” they replied , “ we have come from the Temple of the Lord , the God of Israel , and he will worship the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , and he will hear the word of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	They said , “ We were sent by Cornelius , a Roman officer . He is a devout and God-fearing man , well respected by all the Jews . A holy angel instructed him to summon you to his house so that he can hear your message . ”

ID:	1720
INPUT:	Maite duzue Jesu Kristo , gaurdaino ikusi ez duzuen arren . Eta , ikusi gabe berarengan sinetsiz , esanezin ahalako pozez , poz distiratsuz , beteak zaudete jadanik ,
PRED:	You have seen Christ Jesus Christ , and you have seen no reason to see him . You have seen him with joy because of his anguish and joy .
GOLD:	You love him even though you have never seen him . Though you do not see him now , you trust him ; and you rejoice with a glorious , inexpressible joy .

ID:	1721
INPUT:	« Aaronek bere barkamen-opariko zekorra aurkeztuko du eta hil , bere eta etxekoen aldeko barkamen-ohikunea eginez .
PRED:	“ Aaron must present the goat as a sin offering to purify the Lord , making it right with the Lord , and he will be forgiven .
GOLD:	“ Aaron will present his own bull as a sin offering to purify himself and his family , making them right with the Lord . After he has slaughtered the bull as a sin offering ,

ID:	1722
INPUT:	Nabukodonosor Egiptori erasotzeko zorian zegoela , mezu hau adierazi zion Jaunak Jeremias profetari :
PRED:	This message came to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon from Egypt : “ This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	Then the Lord gave the prophet Jeremiah this message about King Nebuchadnezzar 's plans to attack Egypt .

ID:	1723
INPUT:	Ehuden ondoren , Anaten seme Xamgar izan zen buruzagi . Seiehun filistear hil zituen itzain-akuilu batez . Horrela , berak ere salbatu zuen Israel .
PRED:	After this , the leader of the Philistines , the leader of the Philistines killed 500 men in the land of the Philistines . So the Philistines killed the land of Israel .
GOLD:	After Ehud , Shamgar son of Anath rescued Israel . He once killed 600 Philistines with an ox goad .

ID:	1724
INPUT:	Ondoren , beste hau dio : Hemen nauzu zure nahia betetzeko . Aipaturiko lehenengo kultua kentzen du bigarrena jartzeko .
PRED:	Then this is what the Lord says : “ Here I am the one who sent me to worship me . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ Look , I have come to do your will . ” He cancels the first covenant in order to put the second into effect .

ID:	1725
INPUT:	Egia esan , gonbidatu haietako batek ere ez du nire afaria dastatuko ” » .
PRED:	And if someone told me , ‘ One of my master will not die . ' ”
GOLD:	For none of those I first invited will get even the smallest taste of my banquet . ' ”

ID:	1726
INPUT:	Honela , amortarren lurraldean kokatu zen Israel .
PRED:	This was the territory of the Amorites , who lived in the land of Israel .
GOLD:	So the people of Israel occupied the territory of the Amorites .

ID:	1727
INPUT:	Zuen esku utzi ditu Jaunak Oreb eta Zeeb , madiandarren buruzagiak . Egintza horren aldean , nik ez dut deus ere egin . Hau esateak baretu egin zituen efraimdarrak .
PRED:	Then the Lord handed him over to the Midianites , and I will drive out the people of Ephraim , the people of Ephraim , the land of Ephraim , and the people of Ephraim .
GOLD:	God gave you victory over Oreb and Zeeb , the commanders of the Midianite army . What have I accomplished compared to that ? ” When the men of Ephraim heard Gideon 's answer , their anger subsided .

ID:	1728
INPUT:	« Erre egingo dituzue horien idoloak . Ez gutiziatu idoloak estaltzen dituzten urre-zilarrak , ez hartu zeuentzat , idoloen tranpan harrapatuak geldi ez zaitezten : idoloak higuingarri zaizkio Jaunari zuen Jainkoari .
PRED:	“ You must not worship the idols of your idols . You must not worship the images of gold , and you must not worship other gods . You must not worship the Lord your God . You must not worship the images of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ You must burn their idols in fire , and you must not covet the silver or gold that covers them . You must not take it or it will become a trap to you , for it is detestable to the Lord your God .

ID:	1729
INPUT:	Izan ere , legearen errealitatea beren bihotzetan idatzia daukatela erakusten dute , beren kontzientziak aitortzen duen bezala , batzuetan salatu egiten baititu eta besteetan zuritu .
PRED:	For the king 's decree is written in the Book of Instruction , just as the king 's decree is written in his own eyes , for he sees everything he did .
GOLD:	They demonstrate that God 's law is written in their hearts , for their own conscience and thoughts either accuse them or tell them they are doing right .

ID:	1730
INPUT:	Josafatek ur handietako itsasontziak egin zituen Ofirrera urre bila joateko . Baina ezin izan zen joan , ontziak Etzion-Geberreko kaian deseginak gertatu baitziren .
PRED:	But Pharaoh did not go to Egypt to Ophir , for he did n't escape from Ophir . But there was no water in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	At one time Ahaziah son of Ahab had proposed to Jehoshaphat , “ Let my men sail with your men in the ships . ” But Jehoshaphat refused the request .

ID:	1731
INPUT:	Atzerriko nazio guztietatikekarriko dituzte zuen herritarrakzaldi , gurdi eta ohatiletan , mando nahiz gamelu gainean ; niretzat , Jaun honentzat , opari gisa ekarriko dituz<unk> rusalemgo nire mendi santuraino , israeldarrek beren opariakontzi garbietan Jaunaren etxeraeraman ohi dituzten bezalaxe . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	All the nations of the nations will be brought to you from distant lands , their horses , cattle , sheep , sheep , goats , cattle , sheep , and goats , or goats , or goats . I will give them a sacred offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	They will bring the remnant of your people back from every nation . They will bring them to my holy mountain in Jerusalem as an offering to the Lord . They will ride on horses , in chariots and wagons , and on mules and camels , ” says the Lord .

ID:	1732
INPUT:	Apaizen ohituren arabera , berari egokitu zitzaion Jaunaren santutegira sartzea intsentsua eskaintzeko .
PRED:	Then the priest went to the sanctuary of the Lord 's Temple and burned incense to the entrance of the sanctuary .
GOLD:	As was the custom of the priests , he was chosen by lot to enter the sanctuary of the Lord and burn incense .

ID:	1733
INPUT:	Pedrok eta beste apostoluek erantzun zuten : — Jainkoaren esana egin behar da lehenik , ez gizakiena .
PRED:	Peter and John replied , “ It 's the apostle to be the one who does God 's work . ”
GOLD:	But Peter and the apostles replied , “ We must obey God rather than any human authority .

ID:	1734
INPUT:	zuhurrak entzun bitza eta zuhurrago bihurtuko da , burutsuak trebetasuna bereganatuko du ;
PRED:	Wisdom will be wise , and wisdom will become wise , and understanding will become wise .
GOLD:	Let the wise listen to these proverbs and become even wiser.Let those with understanding receive guidance

ID:	1735
INPUT:	Hartu errota eta egin irina ; kendu musu-estalkia , jaso gonak , agertu izterrak , ibaiak oinez igarotzeko :
PRED:	Take the breast and put it on the altar , and take it to the herd of goats , for it is set apart for the Lord 's share .
GOLD:	Take heavy millstones and grind flour.Remove your veil , and strip off your robe.Expose yourself to public view .

ID:	1736
INPUT:	Zuek duzuen askatasun hori ez bedi gaizki-esanerako bide gerta .
PRED:	You are the fate of your wickedness , and you will not be destroyed .
GOLD:	Then you will not be criticized for doing something you believe is good .

ID:	1737
INPUT:	Zer da errazago : “ Barkatuak dituzu bekatuak ” esatea ala “ Jaiki eta zabiltza ” esatea ?
PRED:	“ What is your sins ? ” says the Lord . “ Get up and pick up your mat , and pick up your mat ! '
GOLD:	Is it easier to say ‘ Your sins are forgiven , ' or ‘ Stand up and walk ' ?

ID:	1738
INPUT:	Hau ere esan zien Jainkoak : « Hau da zuei eta zuen artean bizi diren bizidun guztiei belaunez belaun eta betiko ematen dizuedan itun-hitzaren ezaugarria :
PRED:	Then God said to them , “ This is what the God of your ancestors , who live among you , and you must be observed from generation to generation to generation .
GOLD:	Then God said , “ I am giving you a sign of my covenant with you and with all living creatures , for all generations to come .

ID:	1739
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Gaur iritsi da salbamena etxe honetara , gizon hau ere Abrahamen ondorengoa baita .
PRED:	Jesus told him , “ That is why you are going to be saved , for this man is his son Abraham . ”
GOLD:	Jesus responded , “ Salvation has come to this home today , for this man has shown himself to be a true son of Abraham .

ID:	1740
INPUT:	( 37 , 1-9 )
PRED:	The Faith of a Gentile Woman
GOLD:	Plans for the Lampstand

ID:	1741
INPUT:	Hau da benetako maitasuna : ez guk Jainkoari izan diogun maitasuna , berak guri izan diguna baizik , hau da , gure bekatuen barkamen-oparitzat bere Semea bidaliz erakutsi digun maitasuna .
PRED:	This is the love of God 's love for us , but he loved us by our sins . He is the one who loves us , and he loved us .
GOLD:	This is real love — not that we loved God , but that he loved us and sent his Son as a sacrifice to take away our sins .

ID:	1742
INPUT:	Hori izan zen dandarren ondarea , senitarteka banatua , aipaturiko hiri eta herrixkak barne .
PRED:	These are the homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Levi , their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	The homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Dan included these towns and their surrounding villages .

ID:	1743
INPUT:	Izan ere , Sion mendia hondamen bihurtu da , azeri-leku .
PRED:	For Jerusalem is a desolate fortress of Zion , a fortress of refuge .
GOLD:	For Jerusalem is empty and desolate , a place haunted by jackals .

ID:	1744
INPUT:	Jaunari esker , egiptoarren abegi ona irabazi zuten eta eskatu guztia eman zieten egiptoarrek . Honela kendu zizkieten egiptoarrei beren ondasunak .
PRED:	They brought the Egyptians to the Lord , and they brought them to the Egyptians , and they brought them to the Egyptians .
GOLD:	The Lord caused the Egyptians to look favorably on the Israelites , and they gave the Israelites whatever they asked for . So they stripped the Egyptians of their wealth !

ID:	1745
INPUT:	Davidek esandako hitzak aditu zituztelarik , Sauli jakinarazi zioten . Saulek etorrarazi
PRED:	When David heard what Saul had said , he sent Saul to tell Saul what Saul had happened .
GOLD:	Then David 's question was reported to King Saul , and the king sent for him .

ID:	1746
INPUT:	Jakintsuaren ahoari darion mintzoaatsegina da ; zentzugabea , berriz , bere hitzak galduko du :
PRED:	The wise are wise , but the mouth of the righteous are wise , but the mouth of the godly will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Wise words bring approval , but fools are destroyed by their own words .

ID:	1747
INPUT:	Esku-oinak garbituko dituzte , beraz , hil nahi ez badute . Betiko lege izango da hau Aaronentzat eta beronen ondorengoentzat belaunez belaun » .
PRED:	They must wash their hands and bathe themselves in water , and they will never be observed from generation to generation . This is a permanent law for Aaron and his descendants . ”
GOLD:	They must always wash their hands and feet , or they will die . This is a permanent law for Aaron and his descendants , to be observed from generation to generation . ”

ID:	1748
INPUT:	Eta ezetz ikusten badu , bestea oraindik urruti dela , mandatariak bidaliko dizkio bakea eskatuz .
PRED:	And if they see that there is a distance , then there is a distance from there , then there is no peace .
GOLD:	And if he ca n't , he will send a delegation to discuss terms of peace while the enemy is still far away .

ID:	1749
INPUT:	Sarrera
PRED:	The Beatitudes
GOLD:	Introduction to Moses ' First Address

ID:	1750
INPUT:	Israel herriaren lehenengo izen-bilketa
PRED:	Registration of Israel 's Leaders
GOLD:	Tribe

ID:	1751
INPUT:	« Hainbeste irrikatzen zenu<unk> tuaurrundu egin zaizu ; galdu dituzu zeure luxua eta ospea , sekula ez berreskuratzeko » .
PRED:	“ You have done this to me , and I have sinned against you . If you do n't have enough for yourself , you will have a long time for a long time . ”
GOLD:	“ The fancy things you loved so muchare gone , ” they cry . “ All your luxuries and splendorare gone forever , never to be yours again . ”

ID:	1752
INPUT:	eta Jesus tenpluko Salomonen aterpean zebilen .
PRED:	When Solomon finished building the Temple , he was teaching in the Temple of Jesus .
GOLD:	He was in the Temple , walking through the section known as Solomon 's Colonnade .

ID:	1753
INPUT:	Jaunaren , gure Jainkoaren , etxearengatik , zoriona eskatzen dut zuretzat .
PRED:	I will give you the Temple of the Lord our God , who is good to you .
GOLD:	For the sake of the house of the Lord our God , I will seek what is best for you , O Jerusalem .

ID:	1754
INPUT:	Hegazti guztiak pausatu dira enbor erorian , basapiztiak gorde haren adar artean .
PRED:	All the wild animals that scurry along the ground , and the wild animals that scurry along the ground .
GOLD:	“ The birds roost on its fallen trunk , and the wild animals lie among its branches .

ID:	1755
INPUT:	Dohakabe eta behartsu bainaiz , urraturik baitut bihotza barruan .
PRED:	For I am poor and needy , for I have no pity on them .
GOLD:	For I am poor and needy , and my heart is full of pain .

ID:	1756
INPUT:	« Gizon nahiz emakume bati buruan edo kokotsean azaleko gaitzen bat sortzen bazaio ,
PRED:	“ If a man commits adultery on a man or a woman ,
GOLD:	“ If anyone , either a man or woman , has a sore on the head or chin ,

ID:	1757
INPUT:	Jaunarenganako begirunea da ezagueraren oinarria ; baina zentzugabeek mespretxatu egiten dituztezuhurtzia eta heziketa .
PRED:	Fear of the Lord is close to those who fear him , but they despise the discipline of the Lord .
GOLD:	Fear of the Lord is the foundation of true knowledge , but fools despise wisdom and discipline .

ID:	1758
INPUT:	Baina Jesusek haien gogoetak igarri eta esan zien : « Zergatik dituzue horrelako gogoetak zeuen baitan ?
PRED:	But Jesus knew them , and he said , “ Why are you doing such things ?
GOLD:	Jesus knew what they were thinking , so he asked them , “ Why do you question this in your hearts ?

ID:	1759
INPUT:	Babilonia Jainkoaren zigorraren baliabide
PRED:	Hope for God 's People
GOLD:	The

ID:	1760
INPUT:	Hiltzailea , beraz , babes-hirian biziko da , apaiz nagusia hil arte . Gero , itzul daiteke bere jabetzara .
PRED:	So if the Levitical priests are dead , then the high priest must return to the city , then return to the other priests must return to the dead .
GOLD:	The slayer should have stayed inside the city of refuge until the death of the high priest . But after the death of the high priest , the slayer may return to his own property .

ID:	1761
INPUT:	Ulertzeko gauza denak uler beza Espirituak eliz elkarteei esaten diena . Garaileari mana ezkutua emanen diot , eta harritxo txuri bat ere bai , eta harritxoan izen berri bat idatzia , hartzen duenak bakarrik ezagutuko duena .
PRED:	“ Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the Spirit and understand what he is saying to the churches . I will give you a little bird and a little bird , and I will give it to you . ”
GOLD:	“ Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the Spirit and understand what he is saying to the churches . To everyone who is victorious I will give some of the manna that has been hidden away in heaven . And I will give to each one a white stone , and on the stone will be engraved a new name that no one understands except the one who receives it .

ID:	1762
INPUT:	Esterrek ez zuen adierazi zein herri eta zein jatorritakoa zen ; hala baitzion Mardokeok agindua eta bete egiten zuen hark Mardokeoren esana , beraren ardurapean zegoenean bezalaxe .
PRED:	Esther did not listen to Mordecai 's command . He did as Mordecai had commanded , and Mordecai had commanded him to do what he had commanded . So Mordecai did as Mordecai had commanded .
GOLD:	Esther continued to keep her family background and nationality a secret . She was still following Mordecai 's directions , just as she did when she lived in his home .

ID:	1763
INPUT:	Suzko ibai batateratzen zen haren aurretik . Jendetza izugarria zuen zerbitzari , milaka eta milaka zeudenharen aurrean zutik . Auzia hasieta zabaldu ziren liburuak .
PRED:	Just as he was walking along the road ahead of the crowd , the leader of the people who had been watching for him and spread him out of the synagogue .
GOLD:	and a river of fire was pouring out , flowing from his presence.Millions of angels ministered to him ; many millions stood to attend him.Then the court began its session , and the books were opened .

ID:	1764
INPUT:	Bertako jendeak ohi ez bezalako gizalegez hartu gintuen . Euria eta hotza baitzen , su handia piztu eta guztioi ondora deitu ziguten .
PRED:	So the people of the crowd did n't want to take part of the synagogue , for he called the light of the sky , and he called out everything around them .
GOLD:	The people of the island were very kind to us . It was cold and rainy , so they built a fire on the shore to welcome us .

ID:	1765
INPUT:	hau da , mila metro neurtuko dituzte ekialde zein mendebaldera , hegoalde zein iparraldera , hiria erdian geldituko delarik . Horiek izango dira herri-lurrak .
PRED:	This is the same measurements as far north as the west side of the south side of the north side of the south , and the land will be rebuilt .
GOLD:	Measure off 3,000 feet outside the town walls in every direction — east , south , west , north — with the town at the center . This area will serve as the larger pastureland for the towns .

ID:	1766
INPUT:	Saia gaitezen , bada , atseden horretan sartzen , eta ez dadila inor sinesgogorkerian eror , gure aurrekoen etsenpluari jarraituz .
PRED:	So let us go into the rest of those who are rich in their faith , and they will not escape the example of their faith .
GOLD:	So let us do our best to enter that rest . But if we disobey God , as the people of Israel did , we will fall .

ID:	1767
INPUT:	Negar eta damu-otoitz arteanekarriko ditut . Ongi ureztaturiko ibarretaraeramango ditut , estropezurik egingo ez dutenbide zelaitik . Aita izango naiz Israelentzat , nire lehen-seme izango da bera .
PRED:	I will weep and pray for joy , and I will give you a new harvest of wine . I will give you a new harvest of joy , and you will be my firstborn son , and you will be my home .
GOLD:	Tears of joy will stream down their faces , and I will lead them home with great care.They will walk beside quiet streamsand on smooth paths where they will not stumble.For I am Israel 's father , and Ephraim is my oldest child .

ID:	1768
INPUT:	Eta oraindik argiago da hori , baldin beste apaiz bat sortu bada Melkisedeken antzera ,
PRED:	And there is another High Priest who is a new priest , a priest , a priest of Melchizedek .
GOLD:	This change has been made very clear since a different priest , who is like Melchizedek , has appeared .

ID:	1769
INPUT:	Neuk hedatu dut zeruaeta oinarritu lurra , eta Sioni esaten diot : Zu nire herria ! Neure mezuaren bozeramaileegin zaitut , eta neure eskupean babestu » .
PRED:	I am the one who created the heavens and earth , says , “ You are my people , and you are my people , and I will pour out my hands on you . ”
GOLD:	And I have put my words in your mouthand hidden you safely in my hand.I stretched out the sky like a canopyand laid the foundations of the earth.I am the one who says to Israel , ‘ You are my people ! ' ”

ID:	1770
INPUT:	Han zegoen Jakoben putzua delakoa . Jesus , bideaz nekaturik , putzu-ertzean eseri zen . Eguerdi ingurua zen .
PRED:	When Jacob heard that Jacob was there , he was a man named Jesus . When he was there , he sat down and sat down on the road .
GOLD:	Jacob 's well was there ; and Jesus , tired from the long walk , sat wearily beside the well about noontime .

ID:	1771
INPUT:	etxolatzeko lekua zuei aurkitzeko , bera bidean aurretik zihoakizuen arren , gauez suaren bidez bidea argituz , eta egunez lainoaren bidez gidatuz .
PRED:	When they found the place where they were going to find out of the Tabernacle , they did n't see the light of the light . But they did n't belong to the light .
GOLD:	who goes before you looking for the best places to camp , guiding you with a pillar of fire by night and a pillar of cloud by day .

ID:	1772
INPUT:	zeruan Jainkoak zuentzat prestatua duen sariaren itxaropenak eragiten dizue horretara , berri ona — egiaren mezua — zuengana iritsi zenean ezagutu zenuten itxaropenak , alegia .
PRED:	When you pray to God , you will receive the word of God in heaven , for it is good for you . When you heard this , you will receive the word of God in heaven .
GOLD:	which come from your confident hope of what God has reserved for you in heaven . You have had this expectation ever since you first heard the truth of the Good News .

ID:	1773
INPUT:	Haren entzutea herrialde hartako bazter guztietara zabaldu zen .
PRED:	So all the people returned to their homes , and the news spread quickly throughout the town .
GOLD:	The news about Jesus spread through every village in the entire region .

ID:	1774
INPUT:	Gizon hura zetorrenean , Eli ate ondoan zegoen aulki batean eseria , bidera begira , Jaunaren kutxaz guztiz kezkatua . Gizon hark hirian sartu eta berria eman zuen ; hiri osoa oihuka hasi zen .
PRED:	When he arrived at the door of the house , he put a seat on his head and put it on his head . He discovered that he had made a vow to the Lord .
GOLD:	Eli was waiting beside the road to hear the news of the battle , for his heart trembled for the safety of the Ark of God . When the messenger arrived and told what had happened , an outcry resounded throughout the town .

ID:	1775
INPUT:	Eta haiek bertan utzi eta hiritik kanpora atera zen , Betaniara , eta han eman zuen gaua .
PRED:	So he left the town and left the town of Bethel and took it out of the town .
GOLD:	Then he returned to Bethany , where he stayed overnight .

ID:	1776
INPUT:	Denek nahi zuten Salomon ikusi , Jainkoak eman zion jakinduriaren berri izateko .
PRED:	When Solomon saw what had happened , he asked the wisdom God had given him .
GOLD:	People from every nation came to consult him and to hear the wisdom God had given him .

ID:	1777
INPUT:	NAZIOEN AURKAKO PROFEZIAK ( 25 , 1 — 32 , 32 )
PRED:	Judgment against Judah
GOLD:	A Message for Ammon

ID:	1778
INPUT:	Berdinak ziren laurak , bata bestearen barruan sartuta bezala zeuden .
PRED:	There were three o'clock in the afternoon , just as it was the same measurements as the other .
GOLD:	All four wheels looked alike and were made the same ; each wheel had a second wheel turning crosswise within it .

ID:	1779
INPUT:	Ilundu zuenean , ontzia aintzira erdian zegoen , eta Jesus lehorrean , bakarrik .
PRED:	When Jesus was in the evening , he sat down in the boat and sat down in the lake .
GOLD:	Late that night , the disciples were in their boat in the middle of the lake , and Jesus was alone on land .

ID:	1780
INPUT:	Zintzoengana ditu Jaunak begiak , haien deiak entzuteko adi belarriak .
PRED:	The Lord hears the plans of the godly , and he hears the ears of their ears .
GOLD:	But the Lord turns his face against those who do evil ; he will erase their memory from the earth .

ID:	1781
INPUT:	Horra zure etsaiak asaldaturik , gorroto dizutenak burua jasorik .
PRED:	That is why the enemy is your enemy , and your enemies have ruled over your enemies .
GOLD:	They devise crafty schemes against your people ; they conspire against your precious ones .

ID:	1782
INPUT:	Goraintziak A<unk> tori , <unk> goni , Hermesi , Patrobasi , Hermasi eta haiekin bizi diren senideei .
PRED:	While they were still speaking , some of the people of Israel , some of the people of Israel , some of the people , themselves , and some of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Give my greetings to Asyncritus , Phlegon , Hermes , Patrobas , Hermas , and the brothers and sisters who meet with them .

ID:	1783
INPUT:	Egiptoko errege Xixak Juda erreinuaz jabetu
PRED:	Menahem Rules in Israel
GOLD:	Egypt Invades Judah

ID:	1784
INPUT:	Beraz , Kristorena dena sorkari berri da ; zaharrarenak egin du , berria sortu da .
PRED:	So Christ is the one who has become wise , and he has become a new child .
GOLD:	This means that anyone who belongs to Christ has become a new person . The old life is gone ; a new life has begun !

ID:	1785
INPUT:	Gero , apaizak eta lebitarrak ekialdeko plazan bildurik ,
PRED:	Then the priest took all the Levites and stationed themselves in the towns of the Lord .
GOLD:	He summoned the priests and Levites to meet him at the courtyard east of the Temple .

ID:	1786
INPUT:	Egun hartan , Oliamendi gainean jarriko ditu oinak , Jerusalemen sortaldean . Bitan ebakiko da Oliamendi , eta haran bat azalduko da sortaldetik sartaldera ; mendiaren erdi bat iparralderantz aldenduko da , beste erdia hegoalderantz .
PRED:	On that day the mountain will be set up on Mount Hor , and it will become like a vast army of Olives . It will be like a vast army from the north to the west side of the hill country .
GOLD:	On that day his feet will stand on the Mount of Olives , east of Jerusalem . And the Mount of Olives will split apart , making a wide valley running from east to west . Half the mountain will move toward the north and half toward the south .

ID:	1787
INPUT:	Orduan , Jefte Galaadeko arduradunekin joan eta herriak buruzagi eta gudalburu onartu zuen . Ondoren , Jeftek Mitzpako santutegian baietsi zuen hitzarmen hura .
PRED:	Then Jephthah led the army of Gilead to the elders of Gilead , and the commander of the army of Mizpah . Then he took a solemn assembly of Mizpah .
GOLD:	So Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead , and the people made him their ruler and commander of the army . At Mizpah , in the presence of the Lord , Jephthah repeated what he had said to the elders .

ID:	1788
INPUT:	Eta ni preso egoteari esker , gure senide gehienak , Jaunarenganako konfiantzan indarberriturik , ausartago sentitzen dira Jainkoaren mezua beldurrik gabe hots egiteko .
PRED:	And if we are in prison , the Lord our God will make us strong and courageous , we will not be afraid of you . We will not be afraid of you .
GOLD:	And because of my imprisonment , most of the believers here have gained confidence and boldly speak God 's message without fear .

ID:	1789
INPUT:	Atera nazazu lokatzetik , ez nadila murgil ; libra nazazu gorroto didatenengandik eta ur handietatik !
PRED:	I will go out to you , but I will not leave me alone . I will rescue me from the waters of my enemies .
GOLD:	Do n't let the floods overwhelm me , or the deep waters swallow me , or the pit of death devour me .

ID:	1790
INPUT:	Baina handiagoa da oraindik ematen digun laguntza , hau baitio Liburu Santuak : Jainkoakaurre egiten die harroei , baina mesede egiten apalei .
PRED:	But the Scriptures declare , “ The Scriptures declare , ‘ The Scriptures say , ‘ This is what God says : The Scriptures say , ‘ You are a slave to the poor man . '
GOLD:	And he gives grace generously . As the Scriptures say , “ God opposes the proudbut gives grace to the humble . ”

ID:	1791
INPUT:	Nire gurtzaileek , sakabanatu nituen guztiek , eskaintzak ekarriko dizkidate , Etiopiako ibaiez beste aldetik .
PRED:	My chariot commanders must worship me , for they will offer sacrifices to me , for they will not worship other gods .
GOLD:	My scattered people who live beyond the rivers of Ethiopiawill come to present their offerings .

ID:	1792
INPUT:	Boozek galdegin zion igitari-buruari : — Nor dugu neska hau ?
PRED:	“ Who is this ? ” Boaz asked . “ Who is this young woman ? ”
GOLD:	Then Boaz asked his foreman , “ Who is that young woman over there ? Who does she belong to ? ”

ID:	1793
INPUT:	Senideok , Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren izenean , arren eskatzen dizuet : bat etor zaitezte guztiok eta ez bedi izan zatiketarik zuen artean . Bizi elkar ongi harturik , ikuspegi eta iritzi bat bera duzuela .
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , I am writing to you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ . Do n't be afraid of you , and do n't need a single one of you .
GOLD:	I appeal to you , dear brothers and sisters , by the authority of our Lord Jesus Christ , to live in harmony with each other . Let there be no divisions in the church . Rather , be of one mind , united in thought and purpose .

ID:	1794
INPUT:	Zuhaitzondoa eta erroak uzteko aginduak , berriz , hauxe esan nahi du : denen jabea zeruko Jainkoa dela aitortuko duzunean , errege izango zarela berriro .
PRED:	There will be a Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies , and it will be a reward for you . You will receive the Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	“ ‘ Then you saw a messenger , a holy one , coming down from heaven and saying , “ Cut down the tree and destroy it . But leave the stump and the roots in the ground , bound with a band of iron and bronze and surrounded by tender grass . Let him be drenched with the dew of heaven . Let him live with the animals of the field for seven periods of time . ”

ID:	1795
INPUT:	Herdoilak jota daude zuen urre-zilarrak , eta herdoil hori izango duzue lekuko zeuen kontra , eta suak bezalaxe jango du zuen haragia . Auzi aurreko azkenak diren egunotan pilatu dituzue aberastasunak .
PRED:	You will go to the ground and throw it into the streets and throw it into the fire , and you will eat it . You will eat the flesh of your blood , just as you have done .
GOLD:	Your gold and silver are corroded . The very wealth you were counting on will eat away your flesh like fire . This corroded treasure you have hoarded will testify against you on the day of judgment .

ID:	1796
INPUT:	Semen ondorengoak Abrahamenganaino
PRED:	The descendants of Abraham
GOLD:	The Line of Descent from Shem to Abram

ID:	1797
INPUT:	Mendebaldetik erromatarren itsasontziek erasoko diote . Adorea galdurik , atzera egin beharko du ; orduan , itun santuko herriaren aurka hustuko du bere amorrua ; horretarako , itun santua alde batera utzi dutenen laguntzaz baliatuko da .
PRED:	The entire province west of the Mediterranean Sea will be destroyed , and the entire province of Asia will be destroyed in the south . But they will be destroyed by the holiness of the Holy Place , and he will let them go to the sacred tent .
GOLD:	For warships from western coastlands will scare him off , and he will withdraw and return home . But he will vent his anger against the people of the holy covenant and reward those who forsake the covenant .

ID:	1798
INPUT:	Jaunak galdetu zidan : — Zer ikusten duzu , Jeremias ? Nik erantzun : — Al<unk> do-adarra ikusten dut erneta .
PRED:	“ What do you see me ? ” the Lord asked me . “ I see you , and I see you ! ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Look , Jeremiah ! What do you see ? ” And I replied , “ I see a branch from an almond tree . ”

ID:	1799
INPUT:	Jeremias putzuan sartu
PRED:	The Fall of Jeremiah
GOLD:	Jeremiah in a Cistern

ID:	1800
INPUT:	17
PRED:	A Message about Edom
GOLD:	Qoph

ID:	1801
INPUT:	Horrela , Josuek eta israeldarrek sarraski handia egin zuten etsaien artean , ia denak hiltzeraino . Hala ere , batzuek ihes egin zieten eta beren hiri gotorretan babestu ziren .
PRED:	So Joshua and the Israelite army fled to their enemies , where they fled to their enemies , and they fled to their own towns .
GOLD:	So Joshua and the Israelite army continued the slaughter and completely crushed the enemy . They totally wiped out the five armies except for a tiny remnant that managed to reach their fortified towns .

ID:	1802
INPUT:	« Bere bizia segurtatu nahi duenak galdu egingo du ; galtzen duenak , berriz , onik aterako du .
PRED:	“ If you search for your lives , you will lose your lives . But if you find a good life , you will be saved .
GOLD:	If you cling to your life , you will lose it , and if you let your life go , you will save it .

ID:	1803
INPUT:	Xunemgo emakumearen semea hil
PRED:	The Woman
GOLD:	Miracles during a Famine

ID:	1804
INPUT:	Eta hala egin zuen hark : Jainkoaren aurka birao egin eta beronen izena , santutegia eta zeruan bizi direnak iraindu zituen .
PRED:	And he said , “ As surely as God lives , he has sinned against his holy name , and he will live in heaven . ”
GOLD:	And he spoke terrible words of blasphemy against God , slandering his name and his dwelling — that is , those who dwell in heaven .

ID:	1805
INPUT:	Esaiozu entzuteko nik , Jainko Jaunak , adierazten diodan mezua : Horra , sua piztuko dut zure erdian , eta zuhaitz guztiak , heze nahiz ihartuak , irentsiko ditu ; sugarra ez da itzaliko , eta den-dena hartuko du suak , hegoaldetik iparralderaino .
PRED:	Say to me , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will tell you the meaning of the wild trees that scurry along the ground and the ground , and it will be torn down to the ground . '
GOLD:	Tell her , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I am your enemy , O Israel , and I am about to unsheath my sword to destroy your people — the righteous and the wicked alike .

ID:	1806
INPUT:	Ekialdeko alderdia neurtu zuen makilaz , eta ekialdeak berrehun eta berrogeita hamar metroko luzera zuen .
PRED:	He also measured the top of the altar , and he measured the top of the altar . He measured the walls of the altar , and it was 101/2 feet long .
GOLD:	He measured the east side with his measuring rod , and it was 875 feet long .

ID:	1807
INPUT:	Joaben gudarietako bat Amasaren ondoan gelditu zen , eta honela zioen : — Joaben eta Daviden alde dagoen orok jarraitu Joabi !
PRED:	When Joab realized that Joab had been taken away , he said to Joab , “ Jonathan , Jonathan , Jonathan , and Joab 's two sons ! ”
GOLD:	One of Joab 's young men shouted to Amasa 's troops , “ If you are for Joab and David , come and follow Joab . ”

ID:	1808
INPUT:	Jainko Jaunak dioena iragarriko dut : bakea agintzen die bere herri eta fededunei , berari berriro konfiantza agertzen diotenei .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : If you obey my commands , I will fulfill my vows to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Surely his salvation is near to those who fear him , so our land will be filled with his glory .

ID:	1809
INPUT:	esan zuen : — Zer dela-eta dator ene errege jauna bere zerbitzari honengana ? Davidek erantzun : — Larraina erosi nahi dizut , Jaunari aldarea eraikitzeko , horrela izurritea herriarengandik urrun dezan .
PRED:	“ What is my lord ? ” he asked . “ My lord , my lord the king , ” David replied , “ I want you to destroy the land of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ Why have you come , my lord the king ? ” Araunah asked.David replied , “ I have come to buy your threshing floor and to build an altar to the Lord there , so that he will stop the plague . ”

ID:	1810
INPUT:	Joateko beldur bazara , hartu Pura zeure morroia eta joan biok kanpalekura .
PRED:	So go to the land of Egypt , and go to the camp .
GOLD:	But if you are afraid to attack , go down to the camp with your servant Purah .

ID:	1811
INPUT:	Lege-maisuak eta fariseuak gogoetaka hasi ziren : « Nor da honela biraoka ari den hau ? Nork barka ditzake bekatuak , Jainkoak bakarrik baizik ? »
PRED:	The teachers of religious law and the Pharisees asked , “ Who is this man ? Who can forgive anyone 's sins ? ”
GOLD:	But the Pharisees and teachers of religious law said to themselves , “ Who does he think he is ? That 's blasphemy ! Only God can forgive sins ! ”

ID:	1812
INPUT:	Grazia , errukia eta bakea zuekin , Jainko Aitaren eta beronen Seme Jesu Kristoren partetik , egiaz eta maitasunez .
PRED:	May God give you grace and peace with you and Father , the Father of the Father and the Son of Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	Grace , mercy , and peace , which come from God the Father and from Jesus Christ — the Son of the Father — will continue to be with us who live in truth and love .

ID:	1813
INPUT:	Hondamendiari ihes egiten badiote , Egiptok bilduko ditu , Menfis izango dute hilobi . Horien zilarrezko altxor ederraketa horien bizilekuakgarduak eta sasiak hartuko ditu .
PRED:	They will escape the cities of Egypt in the cities of Egypt . They will rejoice in the cities of Egypt , silver , and gold , and precious jewels .
GOLD:	Even if you escape destruction from Assyria , Egypt will conquer you , and Memphis will bury you.Nettles will take over your treasures of silver ; thistles will invade your ruined homes .

ID:	1814
INPUT:	Jefte , israeldarren buruzagi hautatu
PRED:	Jephthah 's Victory over Israel
GOLD:	Jephthah Becomes Israel 's Judge

ID:	1815
INPUT:	Eman ditzadala urratsak tinko , zure arauak gordetzeko .
PRED:	Give me your decrees , O Lord , and pay attention to your decrees .
GOLD:	Oh , that my actions would consistentlyreflect your decrees !

ID:	1816
INPUT:	Honela zioten : « Bedeinkatua Jaunaren izenean datorren erregea ! Bakea zeruan eta aintza Jainko gorenari ! »
PRED:	They said , “ Praise the Lord ! Blessings on the throne of the Lord ! The King of heaven is in heaven ! ”
GOLD:	“ Blessings on the King who comes in the name of the Lord ! Peace in heaven , and glory in highest heaven ! ”

ID:	1817
INPUT:	Kantu berria kantatuko dizut , ene Jainko , hamar hariko harpa joko zuretzat :
PRED:	I will sing a new song for you , for I will sing a music for you .
GOLD:	I will sing a new song to you , O God ! I will sing your praises with a ten-stringed harp .

ID:	1818
INPUT:	Honela erantzun zion herriak : — Ez diguzu iruzurrik egin , ezta zapalketarik ere , ez duzu inoren eskutik deus hartu .
PRED:	But the people said to the people , “ Do n't let them go unpunished ! Do n't let them save them from the hands of their enemies . ”
GOLD:	“ No , ” they replied , “ you have never cheated or oppressed us , and you have never taken even a single bribe . ”

ID:	1819
INPUT:	Alditxo baterako goratuak , kito berehala ! Landare zimelduak bezala erortzen dira , galburuak bezala ebakitzen dituzte .
PRED:	A single one of you will catch up , and the grass will wither like a parched ground . But if you do n't realize it , you will be destroyed by the heads of your heads .
GOLD:	And though they are great now , in a moment they will be gone like all others , cut off like heads of grain .

ID:	1820
INPUT:	Jainko maitalea niregana etorriko daeta etsaien porrotaz alaiaraziko nau .
PRED:	O God , you have mercy on me , and I will destroy all who hate me .
GOLD:	Do n't kill them , for my people soon forget such lessons ; stagger them with your power , and bring them to their knees , O Lord our shield .

ID:	1821
INPUT:	Honela zioen : « Dario erregeari , bakea !
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Long live the king !
GOLD:	“ To King Darius . Greetings .

ID:	1822
INPUT:	Moisesek esan zien : « Honela dio Israelgo Jainko Jaunak : Har beza nork bere ezpata eta zeharkatu kanpalekua , aterik ate jendea hilez , nahiz eta anaia , laguna edo auzokoa izan » .
PRED:	Then Moses said , “ This is what the Sovereign Lord , the God of Israel , says : Take a sword or a sword or a sword or a sword or a sword or a sword or a sword . ”
GOLD:	Moses told them , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : Each of you , take your swords and go back and forth from one end of the camp to the other . Kill everyone — even your brothers , friends , and neighbors . ”

ID:	1823
INPUT:	eta Israel herria erditik pasarazi , haren maitasuna betikoa baita ;
PRED:	He brought Israel out of the nation of Israel , His faithful love endures forever .
GOLD:	He led Israel safely through , His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	1824
INPUT:	Hiriak berak bizitzeko izango dituzte , eta herri-lurrak azienda eta abereentzat .
PRED:	The towns of the city will be rebuilt , and the towns of the earth will be given to its people .
GOLD:	These towns will be for the Levites to live in , and the surrounding lands will provide pasture for their cattle , flocks , and other livestock .

ID:	1825
INPUT:	Ibaiko ur gainean zegoen ehunez jantzitako gizonak , bi eskuak jaso eta betikotasunean bizi den Jainkoaren izenean zin egin zuen : “ Hiru urte eta erdi iraungo dute gauza hauek . Herri santuaren indar guztia erabat desegingo denean amaituko dira ” .
PRED:	For the water of the Covenant will flow from the water , and the man of God will be eaten in the fire of the Covenant of God . He will say , ‘ The entire land will be holy , and all the people of Israel will be scattered . '
GOLD:	The man dressed in linen , who was standing above the river , raised both his hands toward heaven and took a solemn oath by the One who lives forever , saying , “ It will go on for a time , times , and half a time . When the shattering of the holy people has finally come to an end , all these things will have happened . ”

ID:	1826
INPUT:	Ikasleek , Jesusengana hurbildurik , esnarazi egin zuten , esanez : — Maisu , Maisu ! Galzorian gaude ! Hark , esnaturik , haserre egin zien haizeari eta olatuei ; hauek oneratu eta dena bare gelditu zen .
PRED:	The disciples came to Jesus and asked him , “ Teacher , Teacher ! ” So they said , “ Teacher , Teacher , do n't be angry with these things . ” So he was angry with them .
GOLD:	The disciples went and woke him up , shouting , “ Master , Master , we 're going to drown ! ” When Jesus woke up , he rebuked the wind and the raging waves . Suddenly the storm stopped and all was calm .

ID:	1827
INPUT:	Izan ere , egun horietan iritsi baitzuten juduek bakea beren etsaien aurrean ; hil horretan aldatu zitzaien egoera , atsekabea atsegin eta negarra bozkario bihurtuz . Egun horietan , bada , jai alaiak eta otorduak behar zituzten egin , elkarri erregaluak bidaliz eta behartsuei esku-erakutsiak eginez .
PRED:	That same day the Jews killed their enemies , and they killed their enemies in the land of the Jews . So they went to their homes and filled their homes with joy and sorrow . They were filled with great joy and sorrow and sorrow and sorrow .
GOLD:	He told them to celebrate these days with feasting and gladness and by giving gifts of food to each other and presents to the poor . This would commemorate a time when the Jews gained relief from their enemies , when their sorrow was turned into gladness and their mourning into joy .

ID:	1828
INPUT:	« Zorionekoak Jainkoaren nahia betetzeko gose-egarri direnak , haiek baititu Jainkoak aseko .
PRED:	“ God blesses those who are good , for they are children of God , for they are children of God .
GOLD:	God blesses those who hunger and thirst for justice , for they will be satisfied .

ID:	1829
INPUT:	Bekatuaren aurkako borroka
PRED:	Edom 's Sin
GOLD:	Struggling with Sin

ID:	1830
INPUT:	Handik aldi batera , Kainek lurreko fruituen eskaintza egin zion Jaunari .
PRED:	After a time Cain went out to the Lord 's Temple .
GOLD:	When it was time for the harvest , Cain presented some of his crops as a gift to the Lord .

ID:	1831
INPUT:	Zuen barne-asmoak belar ihar dira ; hortik sorturikoegintzak , berriz , lasto . Suak bezala erreko ditunire arnasak .
PRED:	Your flocks are like sheep , goats , goats , and goats , and goats will flow from your heart .
GOLD:	You Assyrians produce nothing but dry grass and stubble.Your own breath will turn to fire and consume you .

ID:	1832
INPUT:	Herria ibaia igarotzeko kanpalekutik abiatu zenean , apaizak itun-kutxa hartu eta jendearen aurrean jarri ziren .
PRED:	When the people saw the Ark of the Covenant , they took the Ark of the Covenant with the Ark of the Covenant and placed it on the Ark of the Covenant .
GOLD:	So the people left their camp to cross the Jordan , and the priests who were carrying the Ark of the Covenant went ahead of them .

ID:	1833
INPUT:	Hondatu egingo dut zuen lurraldea eta harri eta zur eginik geldituko dira hartaz jabetzera etorriko diren etsaiak .
PRED:	I will destroy your land and destroy your enemies , and I will bring disaster on them .
GOLD:	Yes , I myself will devastate your land , and your enemies who come to occupy it will be appalled at what they see .

ID:	1834
INPUT:	Gizakiarentzat hoberenajatea , edateaeta bere lanaren fruituaz gozatzea . Nik uste dut , hau e<unk> koaren eskutik datorrela ;
PRED:	I want you to eat the fruit of the human fruit , and I will give it to you . I want you to know that I have come from human society .
GOLD:	So I decided there is nothing better than to enjoy food and drink and to find satisfaction in work . Then I realized that these pleasures are from the hand of God .

ID:	1835
INPUT:	Jakintsuak badaki mihiari eusten , zentzuzkoak ere bai bere buruaren jabe izaten .
PRED:	Wise words are wise , but the wise are wise .
GOLD:	A truly wise person uses few words ; a person with understanding is even-tempered .

ID:	1836
INPUT:	Mendi garaiak ahuntzentzat dira , harkaitzak azkonarren gordeleku .
PRED:	You are the Rock of the Rock , but the rocks are broken .
GOLD:	High in the mountains live the wild goats , and the rocks form a refuge for the hyraxes .

ID:	1837
INPUT:	Pazko-jairako prestaketak egiteko eguna zen , eguerdi aldea . Pilatok esan zien juduei : — Hemen duzue zeuen erregea .
PRED:	The first day of the Passover was prepared for the Passover celebration , and Pilate said to the Jews , “ You are the king of the Jews . ”
GOLD:	It was now about noon on the day of preparation for the Passover . And Pilate said to the people , “ Look , here is your king ! ”

ID:	1838
INPUT:	pertzak , hauts-palak eta sardexkak eta berauen tresneria . Huram-Abik , Salomon erregearen aginduz , Jaunaren etxerako egin zituen tresna hauek guztiak brontze leunduzkoak ziren denak .
PRED:	the ash buckets , shovels , and all the ash buckets , all the kings of the Temple of the Lord , King Solomon , had made for the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	the ash buckets , the shovels , the meat hooks , and all the related articles.Huram-abi made all these things of burnished bronze for the Temple of the Lord , just as King Solomon had directed .

ID:	1839
INPUT:	Nik neuk , nire senideek eta zerbitzariek ere aurreratu dizkiegu dirua eta garia . Barka diezaiegun zor hori !
PRED:	I am my brothers and sisters , and they are my servants . They are my servants , and they are brought to me . ”
GOLD:	I myself , as well as my brothers and my workers , have been lending the people money and grain , but now let us stop this business of charging interest .

ID:	1840
INPUT:	Luzatu zuen Moisesek makila Egiptoren gain eta , Jaunak eraginik , ekialdeko haizeak jo zuen lurraldean egun osoan eta gau osoan . Biharamun goizerako , ekialdeko haizeak larrapoteak ekarriak zituen .
PRED:	So Moses took the staff from the land of Egypt and put it on the east side of the land of Egypt . The Lord struck the ground on the east side of the next morning and night .
GOLD:	So Moses raised his staff over Egypt , and the Lord caused an east wind to blow over the land all that day and through the night . When morning arrived , the east wind had brought the locusts .

ID:	1841
INPUT:	Aaron Aminadaben alaba eta Nahxonen arreba zen Elisabetekin ezkondu zen . Honek Nadab , Abihu , Eleazar eta Itamar eman zizkion .
PRED:	These are the names of the clans of Eliab , the daughter of Eliab , and Ithamar . These are the sons of Aaron , Abihu , Eleazar , Eleazar , and Ithamar .
GOLD:	Aaron married Elisheba , the daughter of Amminadab and sister of Nahshon , and she gave birth to his sons , Nadab , Abihu , Eleazar , and Ithamar .

ID:	1842
INPUT:	« Noiz arte eman behar dituzue bidegabeko epaiak , errudunen alde jarriz ?
PRED:	“ How long must you return to the Lord ? How long will you keep on sinning ?
GOLD:	“ How long will you hand down unjust decisionsby favoring the wicked ? Interlude

ID:	1843
INPUT:	Leiala da Jainkoa , eta berak deitu zaituzte bere Seme Jesu Kristo gure Jaunarekin elkarturik bizitzera .
PRED:	For God has called you to be called you , and he has called you to live in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	God will do this , for he is faithful to do what he says , and he has invited you into partnership with his Son , Jesus Christ our Lord .

ID:	1844
INPUT:	Bego hau idatzirik hurrengo gizaldiarentzat , sortzeko dagoen herriak Jauna gorets dezan .
PRED:	For this is what the Lord says : “ Let the nations be able to praise the Lord !
GOLD:	Tell them the Lord looked downfrom his heavenly sanctuary.He looked down to earth from heaven

ID:	1845
INPUT:	Jainkoarengan jarria dik uste ona ; libra dezala orain , maite baldin badu ; ez zuen , bada , esaten Jainkoaren Semea zela ? »
PRED:	Do n't you think that God will save us from the dead ? But if he loves the Son of God , how can he be the Son of God ? ”
GOLD:	He trusted God , so let God rescue him now if he wants him ! For he said , ‘ I am the Son of God . ' ”

ID:	1846
INPUT:	Uraskaren lodiera arra betekoa zen . Ezpainak koparenak bezalakoak ziren , lili-lorearen tankerakoak ; laurogei mila litro ur hartzen zuen uraskak .
PRED:	The water of the Sea were like a small lion , and it was like the size of the same size of the Sea . The water was 30 feet wide , and the water were identical .
GOLD:	The walls of the Sea were about three inches thick , and its rim flared out like a cup and resembled a water lily blossom . It could hold about 11,000 gallons of water .

ID:	1847
INPUT:	Aberastasun eta ospe handiak izan zituen Ezekiasek . Zilar , urre , harribitxi , usainki , babeski eta era askotako gauza baliotsu ugari bildu zuen .
PRED:	Hezekiah also made silver and gold , gold , silver , gold , and gold , and gold . He also had many spices for many spices , and donkeys .
GOLD:	Hezekiah was very wealthy and highly honored . He built special treasury buildings for his silver , gold , precious stones , and spices , and for his shields and other valuable items .

ID:	1848
INPUT:	Jo bezate atzera , lotsaturik , Sion gorroto dutenek !
PRED:	Blow the ram 's horn , for the sound of the sea will be destroyed .
GOLD:	May all who hate Jerusalembe turned back in shameful defeat .

ID:	1849
INPUT:	hiru gizon horiek herrialde horretan baleude , nik , Jainko Jaunak , zin dagit neure biziarengatik , ez dutela beren seme-alabarik ere bizirik aterako ; beraiek bakarrik geldituko dira bizirik .
PRED:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , the Sovereign Lord , I will not be able to live by his own children , and they will live in peace .
GOLD:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , even if those three men were there , they would n't be able to save their own sons or daughters . They alone would be saved .

ID:	1850
INPUT:	Oholibak areagotu egin zituen bere lizunkeriak : horman marrazturiko gizon-irudiak ikusi zituen , babiloniarren irudiak gorriz margotuak ;
PRED:	She gave her daughters to her daughters , defiling herself with her . She gave herself to her as a prostitute , she gave herself to her as a prostitute .
GOLD:	“ Then she carried her prostitution even further . She fell in love with pictures that were painted on a wall — pictures of Babylonian military officers , outfitted in striking red uniforms .

ID:	1851
INPUT:	Suari indartsu haize emanezmetalari zaborra kentzen zaio . Baina alferrik dahaiek garbitzen aritzea : egite txarrak ez zaizkie joaten .
PRED:	Their tongues are like a mighty woman , but their tongues are like a strong wind . Their eyes are like bad , and their eyes are like bad .
GOLD:	The bellows fiercely fan the flamesto burn out the corruption.But it does not purify them , for the wickedness remains .

ID:	1852
INPUT:	« Ekialdean Judaren banderapeko kanpamendua ezarriko da bere gudari-taldeekin .
PRED:	“ The troops of Judah will camp at the edge of the banner of the banner .
GOLD:	“ The divisions of Judah , Issachar , and Zebulun are to camp toward the sunrise on the east side of the Tabernacle , beneath their family banners . These are the names of the tribes , their leaders , and the numbers of their registered troops : JudahNahshon son of Amminadab74,600

ID:	1853
INPUT:	Simonek berak ere sinetsi egin zuen eta bataioa hartu , eta ez zen Feliperen ondotik aldentzen . Gertatzen ziren mirariak eta egintza ahaltsuak ikusirik , erabat txunditurik zegoen .
PRED:	When Simon Peter believed him , he was baptized with a clear conscience , and he did n't believe because of the miraculous signs he had done .
GOLD:	Then Simon himself believed and was baptized . He began following Philip wherever he went , and he was amazed by the signs and great miracles Philip performed .

ID:	1854
INPUT:	Gainerako lurraldearen banaketa
PRED:	The Land Given to Joshua
GOLD:	The Allotments of the Remaining Land

ID:	1855
INPUT:	Baina Eliasek erantzun zion buruzagiari : — Jainkoaren gizona baldin banaiz , jaits dadila sua zerutik eta kiskal zaitzatela zeu eta zeure berrogeita hamar gizonak ! Bat-batean sua zerutik jaitsi eta kiskali egin zituen buruzagia eta berrogeita hamar gizonak .
PRED:	But Elijah replied , “ If you do n't know the man of God is coming to save you from heaven , then let your hair fall into the fire . ” So Elijah left his head and burned the fire on his head and burned it .
GOLD:	But Elijah replied to the captain , “ If I am a man of God , let fire come down from heaven and destroy you and your fifty men ! ” Then fire fell from heaven and killed them all .

ID:	1856
INPUT:	Legeak , izan ere , gizon ahulak izendatzen ditu apaiz nagusi ; baina legea baino geroago etorri zen Jainkoaren zin-hitzak Semea izendatzen du apaiz nagusi , betidanik bete-beteko dena .
PRED:	For the law of Moses , who had been appointed by the law of Moses , became the law of God . He was the Son of God , who has been called the Son of God .
GOLD:	The law appointed high priests who were limited by human weakness . But after the law was given , God appointed his Son with an oath , and his Son has been made the perfect High Priest forever .

ID:	1857
INPUT:	Eta , bera eta beraren familia guztia bataiatu zirelarik , erregu hau egin zigun : « Jaunarengan egiaz sinesten dudala irizten badiozue , hartzazue ostatu , arren , nire etxean » . Eta bere eskaintza onartzera behartu gintuen .
PRED:	Then they all came to him and baptized him in the presence of the Lord , saying , “ We have made a great faith in the Lord 's Temple . ” So they took him to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	She and her household were baptized , and she asked us to be her guests . “ If you agree that I am a true believer in the Lord , ” she said , “ come and stay at my home . ” And she urged us until we agreed .

ID:	1858
INPUT:	Pauloren harrotzeko bidea
PRED:	Paul 's Hardships
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Advice

ID:	1859
INPUT:	Bazen Jopen emakume fededun bat , Tabita izenekoa ( grekoz « Dorkas » — hau da , « Basahuntza » — ) . On egitera eta behartsuei laguntzera emana bizi zen erabat .
PRED:	One day a woman named Tamar , who had been a son named Zerah ( This is a son named Levi ) , who was the least of God 's people .
GOLD:	There was a believer in Joppa named Tabitha ( which in Greek is Dorcas ) . She was always doing kind things for others and helping the poor .

ID:	1860
INPUT:	Gero , hartu zekorraren odoletik , eta behatzez aldare-ertzeko adarrak igurtziko dituzu . Gainerako odola aldare-oinean isuriko duzu .
PRED:	Then take some of the bull 's blood and put it on the horns of the altar , and burn it on the altar at the base of the altar .
GOLD:	Put some of its blood on the horns of the altar with your finger , and pour out the rest at the base of the altar .

ID:	1861
INPUT:	Horiek tenpluko ateak zaintzeaz arduratuko dira , eta beste zenbait zerbitzu beteko ; beroriek hilko dituzte erre-oparietako abereak eta herriaren beste sakrifizioetakoak ; herriaren zerbitzura egongo dira .
PRED:	These are the leaders of the Temple guard , and they will serve as sacrifices to the Lord . They will serve as a burnt offering to the Lord . They will serve as priests and Levites , and they will serve the Lord .
GOLD:	They may still be Temple guards and gatekeepers , and they may slaughter the animals brought for burnt offerings and be present to help the people .

ID:	1862
INPUT:	Agindu hau eman zidan Jaunak , Israelgo Jainkoak : « Hartu nire eskutik pattarrez beteriko kopa hau , eta edanarazi nik bidaliko zaitudan nazio guztiei .
PRED:	Then the Lord gave me this message to me from the God of Israel : “ Take away the cup of wine and wine that I have given you .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , said to me : “ Take from my hand this cup filled to the brim with my anger , and make all the nations to whom I send you drink from it .

ID:	1863
INPUT:	Izan ere , morroiari lansaria zaio axola eta ez ardiak .
PRED:	For the master cares for the sheep and cattle , sheep , goats , and goats .
GOLD:	The hired hand runs away because he 's working only for the money and does n't really care about the sheep .

ID:	1864
INPUT:	Horrela , Isaias profetaren liburuan idatzirik dagoena gertatu zen : Ahots bat oihuka ari da basamortuan : Prestatu bidea Jaunari , zuzendu bidexkak hari .
PRED:	This fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah the prophet Isaiah the prophet Isaiah the prophet said , “ A voice is coming in the wilderness , shouting , ‘ Clear the way to the Lord ! '
GOLD:	Isaiah had spoken of John when he said , “ He is a voice shouting in the wilderness , ‘ Prepare the way for the Lord 's coming ! Clear the road for him !

ID:	1865
INPUT:	Jendea mehatxuka ari da nire aurka : « Izu-ikara inguruan ! Salatu , sala dezagun ! » Adiskideak berak ere zain ditutnik noiz huts egingo . « Ea engainatzen dugun — diote — . Orduan menderatuko dugu , mendekatuko gara hartaz » .
PRED:	“ Look ! ” they say , “ I have sinned against you , and I will make you as weak as the sun , ” says the Lord . “ Yes , I will destroy them , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	I have heard the many rumors about me.They call me “ The Man Who Lives in Terror . ” They threaten , “ If you say anything , we will report it . ” Even my old friends are watching me , waiting for a fatal slip . “ He will trap himself , ” they say , “ and then we will get our revenge on him . ”

ID:	1866
INPUT:	Eguneroko janaria , beraz , erregeak eman zion bere bizitza guztian .
PRED:	So the king gave him food to the king , and he gave him everything he had done .
GOLD:	So the king gave him a regular food allowance as long as he lived .

ID:	1867
INPUT:	Tiro eta Sidongo errege guztiei ; itsasoaz beste aldean dauden lurraldeetako erregeei ;
PRED:	On the north side of Tyre and Sidon , all the kings of Tyre and Sidon .
GOLD:	and the kings of Tyre and Sidon , and the kings of the regions across the sea .

ID:	1868
INPUT:	JEREMIASEN EGINKIZUNARI BU<unk> <unk> TESIA ( 25 , 1-14 )
PRED:	The First Disciples
GOLD:	Seventy Years of Captivity

ID:	1869
INPUT:	« Sei babes-hiri aukeratuko dituzue ,
PRED:	“ You must have six lambs for each month ,
GOLD:	Designate six cities of refuge for yourselves ,

ID:	1870
INPUT:	Ez dut ia zuekin luze hitz egiteko aukerarik , gainean baita mundu honetako buruzagia . Horrek ez du nire gain ahalmenik ;
PRED:	I will not speak with you , for I will not speak to you in this world , and you will not prophesy against me .
GOLD:	“ I do n't have much more time to talk to you , because the ruler of this world approaches . He has no power over me ,

ID:	1871
INPUT:	Gaitzespenerako izan zenaren zerbitzua ospez betea agertu bazen , zenbatez ospetsuago ez ote da izango salbamenerako denaren zerbitzua !
PRED:	Those who are righteous will be punished for their lives , and they will be saved . They will be saved because they will be saved .
GOLD:	If the old way , which brings condemnation , was glorious , how much more glorious is the new way , which makes us right with God !

ID:	1872
INPUT:	Zuek otoitzerako eskuak altxatzean , beste aldera begira jartzen naiz ; nahiz eta zuek eskariak ugaldu , ez dizuet entzuten , eskuak odolez beteak baitituzue .
PRED:	When you pray to prayer , you wo n't pray for yourselves , and if you refuse to listen to me , I do n't require the blood of your hands to you .
GOLD:	When you lift up your hands in prayer , I will not look.Though you offer many prayers , I will not listen , for your hands are covered with the blood of innocent victims .

ID:	1873
INPUT:	Amodio-lokarriz erakartzen nituen , maitasun-loturaz . Haurtxoa musurainojasotzen duenaren antzekonintzen haientzat ; makurtu eta jaten ematen nion .
PRED:	I brought them to a heavy pit , and I took a little child to destroy them . I was like a little child , and they ate it .
GOLD:	I led Israel alongwith my ropes of kindness and love.I lifted the yoke from his neck , and I myself stooped to feed him .

ID:	1874
INPUT:	Burutsuaren ezpainetan hitz zuhurrak ; burugabearen bizkarrari , eman egurra !
PRED:	The wise are foolish , but fools are wise ; they are led astray by their hands .
GOLD:	Wise words come from the lips of people with understanding , but those lacking sense will be beaten with a rod .

ID:	1875
INPUT:	Jaunak berak sakabanatu ditu , eta ez ditu gehiago ikusi nahi . Ez da apaizentzat begirunerik , ezta zaharrentzat gupidarik ere .
PRED:	For the Lord will judge the wicked , and he will not judge the helpless , nor have no mercy on us .
GOLD:	The Lord himself has scattered them , and he no longer helps them.People show no respect for the priestsand no longer honor the leaders .

ID:	1876
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Abrami : — Ni Jauna naiz . Nik irtenarazi zintudan kaldearren Ur hiritik lurralde hau zuri emateko .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Abraham , “ I am the one who sent you away from the land of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord told him , “ I am the Lord who brought you out of Ur of the Chaldeans to give you this land as your possession . ”

ID:	1877
INPUT:	Horregatik jakinarazten dizuet , inork ere ez duela esaten « Madarikatua Jesus » Jainkoaren Espirituak eraginda ; eta inork ezin duela esan « Jesus da Jauna » Espiritu Santuak eraginik ez bada .
PRED:	That is why I know that no one can curse you from Mary , the Holy Spirit , the Holy Spirit , and the Holy Spirit is saying , “ The Holy Spirit is the Holy Spirit . ”
GOLD:	So I want you to know that no one speaking by the Spirit of God will curse Jesus , and no one can say Jesus is Lord , except by the Holy Spirit .

ID:	1878
INPUT:	hondamendi , lugorri eta eremu . Lurralde guztia hondamendi , eta inori axola ez .
PRED:	I will destroy all the nations , and all the nations will be destroyed . I will not destroy them .
GOLD:	They have made it an empty wasteland ; I hear its mournful cry.The whole land is desolate , and no one even cares .

ID:	1879
INPUT:	Era berean , Judako hiri guztietan ziren kultu-lekuak eta intsentsua erretzeko aldareak kendu egin zituen . Haren erregealdia baketsua izan zen .
PRED:	Asa also took all the pagan shrines and burned incense altars to the kings of Judah and burned incense altars to the king of Judah .
GOLD:	He commanded the people of Judah to seek the Lord , the God of their ancestors , and to obey his law and his commands .

ID:	1880
INPUT:	Bai , Libanori egin zeniongogorkeriakazpian hartuko zaitu . Egin zenuen abere-hilketakizu-ikara emango dizu . Eta hori , isuri duzun giza odolarengatik , herrialdeei , hirieieta bertako jendeariegindako gogorkeriengatik .
PRED:	You have done this to the land of Lebanon , so that you will die in the land of Egypt . You will have destroyed the people of this city , and you will bring them back to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	You cut down the forests of Lebanon.Now you will be cut down.You destroyed the wild animals , so now their terror will be yours.You committed murder throughout the countrysideand filled the towns with violence .

ID:	1881
INPUT:	Hurrengo goizean , astemea txalmatu eta Moabeko buruzagiekin joan zen Balaam .
PRED:	So Balaam got up and returned to the city of Moab , where Balaam and the leader of the district of Moab .
GOLD:	So the next morning Balaam got up , saddled his donkey , and started off with the Moabite officials .

ID:	1882
INPUT:	Hau entzutean , bertan zeuden batzuek esan zuten : « Eliasi deika ari duk » .
PRED:	When they heard this , some of them said , “ Elijah 's going to be called out . ”
GOLD:	Some of the bystanders misunderstood and thought he was calling for the prophet Elijah .

ID:	1883
INPUT:	<unk> tzera bidali zuteneskuan hartu baino lehen ; zorroztu egin dute ezpataeta leundu , borreroaren eskuan ipintzeko .
PRED:	As soon as the young women arrived , they picked up the sword and cut it off . Then they took the sword and put it in his hand .
GOLD:	O sword , slash to the right , then slash to the left , wherever you will , wherever you want .

ID:	1884
INPUT:	Judas eta Silasek , profeta baitziren , luze eta zabal hitz egin zuten senideekin , hauek adoretuz eta gogoberotuz .
PRED:	Judas , who had betrayed him and began talking with them , and they began talking about him and began talking with them .
GOLD:	Then Judas and Silas , both being prophets , spoke at length to the believers , encouraging and strengthening their faith .

ID:	1885
INPUT:	Ondoren , beste harri batzuk jarriko dituzte kendutakoen ordez , eta horma zurituko .
PRED:	Then he took some of the other prisoners and force them to be cut off .
GOLD:	Other stones will be brought in to replace the ones that were removed , and the walls will be replastered .

ID:	1886
INPUT:	( Mt 25 , <unk> )
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Message
GOLD:	Jesus ' Triumphant Entry

ID:	1887
INPUT:	Mexezabeel , Tzadok , Jadua ,
PRED:	Zadok the priest , Zadok the court secretary ,
GOLD:	Pelatiah , Hanan , Anaiah ,

ID:	1888
INPUT:	« Baina salakuntza egia izanik , neska ez zela birjina egiaztatzen bada ,
PRED:	“ But if you are a virgin , you are not a virgin . But if you are a virgin , you are not a virgin .
GOLD:	“ But suppose the man 's accusations are true , and he can show that she was not a virgin .

ID:	1889
INPUT:	Ez izan burugogor , egiptoarrak eta faraoia izan ziren bezala . Haiek ere utzi egin behar izan zieten joaten hebrearrei , Jainkoak zigortu ondoren .
PRED:	So Pharaoh did not spare the Egyptians , just as Pharaoh had commanded them . They would n't let them go to Egypt and let them go into the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	Do n't be stubborn and rebellious as Pharaoh and the Egyptians were . By the time God was finished with them , they were eager to let Israel go .

ID:	1890
INPUT:	« Moisesek , hain zuzen , esan zuen : Ni bezalako profeta sorraraziko dizue Jaunak , zeuen Jainkoak , herritarren artetik ; onartu hark esango dizuen guztia .
PRED:	“ But Moses said , ‘ You will become a prophet like me , and the Lord your God will raise you up from all the nations of the nations . '
GOLD:	Moses said , ‘ The Lord your God will raise up for you a Prophet like me from among your own people . Listen carefully to everything he tells you . '

ID:	1891
INPUT:	Aberats izan nahi dutenak tentaldiaren sarean eta gizakia hondatzen eta galtzen duten grina zoro eta kaltegarri askotan erortzen dira .
PRED:	Those who are rich in their own desires are full of lies in their own desires and sinful desires . They are full of lies in their own desires .
GOLD:	But people who long to be rich fall into temptation and are trapped by many foolish and harmful desires that plunge them into ruin and destruction .

ID:	1892
INPUT:	Moisesen legean idatzirik dagoen bezalaxe , hain zuzen , etorri zaigu gainera hainbesteko zoritxar hau ; hala ere , Jauna , ez gara zure haserrea baretzen ahalegindu , gure bekatuetatik urrunduz eta zure leialtasuna aitortuz .
PRED:	But now we know that the law of Moses had come to us , so that we are being angry with you . But the Lord 's anger has not been angry with us , and he did not turn away from our sins .
GOLD:	Every curse written against us in the Law of Moses has come true . Yet we have refused to seek mercy from the Lord our God by turning from our sins and recognizing his truth .

ID:	1893
INPUT:	Isakarren leinutik , Tzuarren seme Netanel ;
PRED:	Merarite clans from the tribe of Issachar .
GOLD:	IssacharNethanel son of Zuar

ID:	1894
INPUT:	Sinesmenaren argiak gidatzen gaitu , eta ez ikusten dugunak .
PRED:	For we see the light of the light , and we do n't see it .
GOLD:	For we live by believing and not by seeing .

ID:	1895
INPUT:	Jaunak du behartsunahiz aberats egiten , beheratzen eta goratzen ;
PRED:	The rich and poor are rich , but the rich are rich and rich .
GOLD:	The Lord makes some poor and others rich ; he brings some down and lifts others up .

ID:	1896
INPUT:	Hauek ere , berarekin batera , Hildakoen Egoitzara jaitsi ziren , gerran hildakoak bezalaxe ; haren euskarri ziren eta haren gerizpean bizi ziren nazioen artean .
PRED:	These are the same ones who died in the grave , just as the dead had died . They were buried in the pit , and they were killed by the power of the dragon .
GOLD:	Its allies , too , were all destroyed and had passed away . They had gone down to the grave — all those nations that had lived in its shade .

ID:	1897
INPUT:	Josek , bere sentipenei gehiago eutsi ezinik , inguruan zituen egiptoarrei agindu zien : « Atera denok hemendik ! » Hala , ez zen Joserekin inor gelditu , anaiei bere burua ezagutzera eman zienean .
PRED:	When Joseph arrived at the fortress of Egypt , he told his men , “ Look , all you who are left in Egypt ! ” So Joseph told his brothers , “ No one is left with us . ”
GOLD:	Joseph could stand it no longer . There were many people in the room , and he said to his attendants , “ Out , all of you ! ” So he was alone with his brothers when he told them who he was .

ID:	1898
INPUT:	Maltzurrak liskarrak sortzen ditu , iraintzaileak lagunak ere urrunarazten .
PRED:	My enemies taunt me , but my enemies pay attention to their pay attention .
GOLD:	A troublemaker plants seeds of strife ; gossip separates the best of friends .

ID:	1899
INPUT:	Judako hiri guztietatik bildu ziren Jaunari otoitz egiteko .
PRED:	So all the people of Judah went to pray to the Lord .
GOLD:	So people from all the towns of Judah came to Jerusalem to seek the Lord 's help .

ID:	1900
INPUT:	Defendatu nire auzia eta aska nazazu , babestu nire bizia , zeuk hitzemanaren arabera !
PRED:	You have made my case against me , and you have made me your promise .
GOLD:	Argue my case ; take my side ! Protect my life as you promised .

ID:	1901
INPUT:	Ahimeleken seme eta Ahituben biloba bat bakarrik salbatu zen , Abiatar zeritzana , Davidengana ihes eginez .
PRED:	There was a man named Abimelech , who was one of the family of Ahab 's son , who lived in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Only Abiathar , one of the sons of Ahimelech , escaped and fled to David .

ID:	1902
INPUT:	Nire ahalmen guztia erakutsi nahi izan banu zu eta zure herria izurriz jotzean , honezkero suntsitua zinatekeen mundu honetatik ;
PRED:	I have told you everything I wanted to do , but I would not destroy my people . But I would not destroy them from this world .
GOLD:	By now I could have lifted my hand and struck you and your people with a plague to wipe you off the face of the earth .

ID:	1903
INPUT:	Zeruko izar eta konstelazioekez dute gehiago argirik emango ; eguzkia atera orduko ilunduko da , eta ilargiak ez du argi egingo .
PRED:	The heavens will never be destroyed , and the stars will be destroyed , and the moon will cover the light , and the moon will cover it with light .
GOLD:	The heavens will be black above them ; the stars will give no light.The sun will be dark when it rises , and the moon will provide no light .

ID:	1904
INPUT:	Onaldian hitz egin nizuneta ez zenuen aditu nahi izan . Gaztetandik jokatu duzu horrela : ez didazu inoiz ere obeditu .
PRED:	I spoke to you , and I did n't want to give you a young young young young man . You have not obeyed me , but you have not obeyed me .
GOLD:	I warned you when you were prosperous , but you replied , ‘ Do n't bother me . 'You have been that way since childhood — you simply will not obey me !

ID:	1905
INPUT:	Orduan , Jainkoak Lehin dagoen zuloa ebaki zuen eta ura atera zen . Edan ondoren , arnasberritu eta indartu egin zen Samson . Iturri hari En-Kore izena ezarri zioten . Han dago Lehin gaur arte .
PRED:	At that time God opened a new stone , and there was a new water between the island of Cyprus , which was a permanent law , and it was a permanent law . So it was a permanent law that day .
GOLD:	So God caused water to gush out of a hollow in the ground at Lehi , and Samson was revived as he drank . Then he named that place “ The Spring of the One Who Cried Out , ” and it is still in Lehi to this day .

ID:	1906
INPUT:	Jerusalem , zure gizonakezpataz eroriko dira , zure gudariak gerran .
PRED:	O Jerusalem , you will come to Jerusalem , and your troops will be slaughtered by the sword .
GOLD:	The men of the city will be killed with the sword , and her warriors will die in battle .

ID:	1907
INPUT:	( 2 Kro 34 , <unk> )
PRED:	Hilkiah 's Law
GOLD:	Josiah Celebrates Passover

ID:	1908
INPUT:	« Eman dezagun guraso batzuek seme zentzakaitza eta bihurria dutela , aita-amen esana egiten ez duena eta , zentzarazten saiatu arren , kasurik egiten ez diena ;
PRED:	“ Or suppose you are a neighbor 's son , give a second son to fulfill a vow of a vow or a voluntary offering , but you do n't make it right .
GOLD:	“ Suppose a man has a stubborn and rebellious son who will not obey his father or mother , even though they discipline him .

ID:	1909
INPUT:	Agurtu zeuen zuzendariak eta fededun guztiak . Italiakoek agurtzen zaituztete .
PRED:	All the prophets worshiped the Lord , and all the prophets worship you .
GOLD:	Greet all your leaders and all the believers there . The believers from Italy send you their greetings .

ID:	1910
INPUT:	Jesusek , Hamabiak beregana bildurik , deabru guztiak botatzeko eta gaitzak sendatzeko indarra eta ahalmena eman zien .
PRED:	Jesus took all the twelve disciples and cast out demons . He cast out demons , and he gave them authority to cast out demons .
GOLD:	One day Jesus called together his twelve disciples and gave them power and authority to cast out all demons and to heal all diseases .

ID:	1911
INPUT:	Orduan , emakumeak lasterka joan eta esan zion senarrari : « Lehengoan etorri zitzaidan gizona agertu zait berriro » .
PRED:	Then she ran back to her husband and told her , “ I have appeared to the man who has appeared to me again . ”
GOLD:	So she quickly ran and told her husband , “ The man who appeared to me the other day is here again ! ”

ID:	1912
INPUT:	Jaunak Samueli dei egin
PRED:	The
GOLD:	The

ID:	1913
INPUT:	Rutek erantzun : — Zuk esan guztia egingo dut .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” Ruth replied , “ I will do everything . ”
GOLD:	“ I will do everything you say , ” Ruth replied .

ID:	1914
INPUT:	28 , 1
PRED:	Clothing for the Priests
GOLD:	The Sabbath Offerings

ID:	1915
INPUT:	Berekin hartu zituen bere emazte Sarai , iloba Lot , Haranen lortutako ondasunak eta erositako esklaboak . Hala , Kanaan aldera jo zuten . Kanaanera iritsi zirenean ,
PRED:	So Abram took Abram 's wife with Abram 's wife , Abram , and his wife , Abram , and his wife , and his servants went to Kadesh and settled in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	He took his wife , Sarai , his nephew Lot , and all his wealth — his livestock and all the people he had taken into his household at Haran — and headed for the land of Canaan . When they arrived in Canaan ,

ID:	1916
INPUT:	Luzaro bizi izan zen Abraham , atzerritar gisa , filistearren lurraldean .
PRED:	After a long time , Abram lived as a foreigner in the land of the Philistines .
GOLD:	And Abraham lived as a foreigner in Philistine country for a long time .

ID:	1917
INPUT:	arlotea bezala iritsiko zaizu gabezia , eskalea bezala etorriko miseria .
PRED:	You will be like a stranger , like a bird that has been put to death .
GOLD:	then poverty will pounce on you like a bandit ; scarcity will attack you like an armed robber .

ID:	1918
INPUT:	Horregatik , Axdodekoek ez dute gaurdaino oinik jartzen Dagonen jauretxeko atarian , ez Dagonen apaizek , ezta han sartzen direnek ere .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the priests of Ashdod , the priests , will not stay in the house of King Darius .
GOLD:	That is why to this day neither the priests of Dagon nor anyone who enters the temple of Dagon in Ashdod will step on its threshold .

ID:	1919
INPUT:	Zuen seme-alabak atzerritarrei emango dizkiete ; begiak urtzeraino egongo zarete haiek noiz itzuliko begira-begira , baina ezin ezer egin .
PRED:	Your children will be like your children , and your children will be able to open their eyes , but they will never return to their own homes .
GOLD:	You will watch as your sons and daughters are taken away as slaves . Your heart will break for them , but you wo n't be able to help them .

ID:	1920
INPUT:	Haren irakaspenaz txunditurik zegoen jende guztia , nagusitasunez hitz egiten baitzien .
PRED:	The crowds were amazed at his teaching , for they were amazed at his teaching .
GOLD:	There , too , the people were amazed at his teaching , for he spoke with authority .

ID:	1921
INPUT:	hau Matatena , hau Lebirena , hau Melkirena , hau Janairena , hau Joserena ,
PRED:	Levi was the son of Levi , son of Levi was the son of Levi .
GOLD:	Heli was the son of Matthat.Matthat was the son of Levi.Levi was the son of Melki.Melki was the son of Jannai.Jannai was the son of Joseph .

ID:	1922
INPUT:	Zazpi hilabete egin zuen Jaunaren kutxak filistearren lurraldean .
PRED:	After seven months , the Philistines did as the Lord had commanded .
GOLD:	The Ark of the Lord remained in Philistine territory seven months in all .

ID:	1923
INPUT:	Garai hartan , Judakoak Israelgoekin bilduko dira . Batera itzuliko dira iparraldetik , atzerriraturik dauden lekutik , beraien arbasoei ondaretzat eman nien lurraldera .
PRED:	At that time the people of Israel will return to the land of Judah , where they will return to the land where they have been exiled to the land of the north .
GOLD:	In those days the people of Judah and Israel will return together from exile in the north . They will return to the land I gave your ancestors as an inheritance forever .

ID:	1924
INPUT:	Bekatuak , agindutik bide hartuta , era guztietako gutiziak ernearazi zituen niregan . Legerik ezean , bekatua hila dago .
PRED:	He took all the male and female servants and female servants , along with the king 's command , just as he had commanded .
GOLD:	But sin used this command to arouse all kinds of covetous desires within me ! If there were no law , sin would not have that power .

ID:	1925
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1926
INPUT:	Gero , barkamen-opariko zezena hartu eta erre egingo duzu horretarako ezarritako lekuan , santutegitik kanpo .
PRED:	Then you must offer a male goat as a sin offering to the Lord , along with the sanctuary of the Most Holy Place .
GOLD:	Then take the young bull for the sin offering and burn it at the appointed place outside the Temple area .

ID:	1927
INPUT:	artelanak asmatzeko , urre , zilar eta brontzezko lanak egiteko ,
PRED:	He also made many articles of gold , silver , gold , bronze , and bronze ;
GOLD:	He is a master craftsman , expert in working with gold , silver , and bronze .

ID:	1928
INPUT:	Entzun , Israelgo seme-alabok . Hona Jaunak zuen aurka , Egiptotik igoarazi zuen familia horren guztiaren aurka , adierazten duen mezua :
PRED:	Listen to me , you people of Israel ! Listen to this message from the Lord :
GOLD:	Listen to this message that the Lord has spoken against you , O people of Israel — against the entire family I rescued from Egypt :

ID:	1929
INPUT:	Roboamek erantzun zien : — Zatozkidate berriro hiru egun barru . Eta herriak alde egin zuen .
PRED:	But Rehoboam replied , “ Come , let 's go back again and restore three days . ” So the people went back to the land .
GOLD:	Rehoboam replied , “ Come back in three days for my answer . ” So the people went away .

ID:	1930
INPUT:	Esan zidan : « Gizaseme , zutitu , hitz egin behar dizut eta » .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Son of man , I will speak to you . ”
GOLD:	“ Stand up , son of man , ” said the voice . “ I want to speak with you . ”

ID:	1931
INPUT:	Hil zenean , Samarian ehortzi zuten Omri . Ondorengo erregea haren seme Akab izan zen .
PRED:	When Omri died , he was buried in Samaria . Then his son Omri became the next king .
GOLD:	When Omri died , he was buried in Samaria . Then his son Ahab became the next king .

ID:	1932
INPUT:	eta Jauna , aintzaz beterik , Sinai mendian kokatu zen . Sei egunez estali zuen lainoak mendia ; zazpigarrenean Jaunak dei egin zion Moisesi lainotik .
PRED:	Then the angel of the Lord appeared to Moses in Mount Sinai , and the cloud covered the foot of Mount Sinai . And the Lord called Moses out of the mountain .
GOLD:	And the glory of the Lord settled down on Mount Sinai , and the cloud covered it for six days . On the seventh day the Lord called to Moses from inside the cloud .

ID:	1933
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1934
INPUT:	Beren eskuz urkatu dituzte buruzagiak , ez dute begirunerik izan zaharrentzat .
PRED:	They are proud of their hands , but they have no respect for their own hands .
GOLD:	Our princes are being hanged by their thumbs , and our elders are treated with contempt .

ID:	1935
INPUT:	Orduan , Gizonaren Semea hodei artean ahalmen eta aintzaz beterik etortzen ikusiko dute .
PRED:	Then the Son of Man will see the Son of Man coming to see the glory of the Son of Man .
GOLD:	Then everyone will see the Son of Man coming on a cloud with power and great glory .

ID:	1936
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Moab herriakgaiztakeriarik asko egin du , zein baino zein handiago . Eta beraz , zigortu egingo dut ! Edomgo erregearen hezurrakprofanatu baitzituzten , erraustu eta kare bihurtu ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will destroy the people of Moab , ” says the Lord . “ I will destroy them , and I will destroy them , and I will destroy them .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Moab have sinned again and again , and I will not let them go unpunished ! They desecrated the bones of Edom 's king , burning them to ashes .

ID:	1937
INPUT:	Kedorlaomer eta honek lagun zituen erregeak garaitu ondoren , itzulbidetik zetorrela , Sodomako erregea atera zitzaion Abrami bidera Xeba haranean , hau da , Erregearen haranean .
PRED:	About that time King Shishak of Babylon returned to the king of Sodom and captured it . So the king of Sodom came to the king of Sodom and Gomorrah .
GOLD:	After Abram returned from his victory over Kedorlaomer and all his allies , the king of Sodom went out to meet him in the valley of Shaveh ( that is , the King 's Valley ) .

ID:	1938
INPUT:	esanez : « Hobe genukeen Jaunak Egipton hilarazi bagintu , haragi-eltze inguruan eseri eta ase arte jaten genuenean ! Zuek , ordea , gu denok goseak hiltzera ekarri gaituzue basamortu honetara » .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : If you were in the land of Egypt , we were hungry to eat the meat of Egypt . But you were hungry , but you have been killed by the wilderness of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	“ If only the Lord had killed us back in Egypt , ” they moaned . “ There we sat around pots filled with meat and ate all the bread we wanted . But now you have brought us into this wilderness to starve us all to death . ”

ID:	1939
INPUT:	Mendi eta muinoak lehortuko ditut , belar guztia ihartuko , ibaiak lur lehor bihurtueta putzuak agortuko .
PRED:	I will destroy all the mountains and hills , for I will fill the earth with birds of the valleys , and the valleys will fill the earth .
GOLD:	I will level the mountains and hillsand blight all their greenery.I will turn the rivers into dry landand will dry up all the pools .

ID:	1940
INPUT:	Gizonak sortzen miseria
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Man
GOLD:	Eliphaz 's Response Continues

ID:	1941
INPUT:	Leiala da dei egiten dizuena , eta beteko du hitzemana .
PRED:	He will call on the name of the Lord , and he will give it to you .
GOLD:	God will make this happen , for he who calls you is faithful .

ID:	1942
INPUT:	Mezu hau adieraztekoagindu dit Jaunak : « Giza gorpuak zabalduta daudelurrazalean simaurra bezala , lasto-sortak igitarien atzean bezala , eta ez ditu inork biltzen » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord has commanded me : “ Son of Man has put my flesh on the ground , and you will lie on the ground . ”
GOLD:	For death has crept in through our windowsand has entered our mansions.It has killed off the flower of our youth : Children no longer play in the streets , and young men no longer gather in the squares .

ID:	1943
INPUT:	Salomonen otoitza
PRED:	Solomon 's Prayer of Dedication
GOLD:	The Dedication of the Temple

ID:	1944
INPUT:	Kanta esker onez Jaunari , jo zitara gure Jainkoari :
PRED:	For the Lord our God is a strong hand ; he is the God of Israel .
GOLD:	Sing out your thanks to the Lord ; sing praises to our God with a harp .

ID:	1945
INPUT:	Seme zentzugabea aitaren zoritxarra , emazte liskartia etengabeko itogina .
PRED:	A man is a father of a man , a man who is a neighbor 's wife .
GOLD:	A foolish child is a calamity to a father ; a quarrelsome wife is as annoying as constant dripping .

ID:	1946
INPUT:	Jar biezaio masaila joka ari zaionari , utz biezaio irainez ase dezan .
PRED:	I pray to you , O Lord , for he has given you a good path .
GOLD:	Let them turn the other cheek to those who strike themand accept the insults of their enemies .

ID:	1947
INPUT:	Horiek ziren rubendar senitarteak : 43 . 730 gizonezko guztira .
PRED:	These are the clans of Benjamin . Their registered troops numbered 64,400 .
GOLD:	These were the clans of Reuben . Their registered troops numbered 43,730 .

ID:	1948
INPUT:	Egoitzaren ataria
PRED:	Building the Courtyard
GOLD:	Light for the Tabernacle

ID:	1949
INPUT:	Honela dio Jainko Jaunak : « Hara , badatoz egunak : lurrera gosea bidaliko dut ; ez ogi-gosea , eta ez ur-egarria , Jaunaren hitza entzutekogose-egarria baizik .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ Look , I will bring disaster upon the earth , famine , and disease . I will not bring disaster upon the land of the Lord , and disease .
GOLD:	“ The time is surely coming , ” says the Sovereign Lord , “ when I will send a famine on the land — not a famine of bread or waterbut of hearing the words of the Lord .

ID:	1950
INPUT:	Lebitarrak erantzun : — Judako Belendik gatoz eta Efraimgo mendialdera noa , hangoa bainaiz . Judako Belenera etorri nintzen eta berriro etxera noa . Herri honetan ez nau inork ere hartu nahi izan bere etxean .
PRED:	The Levites replied , “ Come to Bethlehem in the hill country of Ephraim and Ephraim , and I went to Bethlehem in the hill country of Ephraim , where no one can enter my house . ”
GOLD:	“ We have been in Bethlehem in Judah , ” the man replied . “ We are on our way to a remote area in the hill country of Ephraim , which is my home . I traveled to Bethlehem , and now I 'm returning home . But no one has taken us in for the night ,

ID:	1951
INPUT:	behartsuen oinek zapal dezaten , indargabeekhankapean erabil dezaten » .
PRED:	The strength of the poor are a fortress , and the strength of the Lord is close to him . ”
GOLD:	The poor and oppressed trample it underfoot , and the needy walk all over it .

ID:	1952
INPUT:	lan handia egiteko aukera ederra egokitu baitzait , nahiz eta asko izan aurka jarri direnak .
PRED:	For the Lord is greater than he has done great things , and he is worse than any other .
GOLD:	There is a wide-open door for a great work here , although many oppose me .

ID:	1953
INPUT:	Baina Moisesek erantzun zion : — Nola egingo dit , bada , faraoiak jaramon , hitz egiten hain traketsa naizelarik ?
PRED:	But Moses replied , “ How can I tell you the miraculous signs I do to Pharaoh ? ”
GOLD:	But Moses argued with the Lord , saying , “ I ca n't do it ! I 'm such a clumsy speaker ! Why should Pharaoh listen to me ? ”

ID:	1954
INPUT:	Zelatan dagoen hartz izan da niretzat , gordeta zain dagoen lehoi .
PRED:	For there is a lion who has been like a lion , and there is a lion .
GOLD:	He has hidden like a bear or a lion , waiting to attack me .

ID:	1955
INPUT:	Fededun guztiek agurtzen zaituztete , enperadorearen etxean daudenek batez ere .
PRED:	All who worship him with their greetings , and those who worship him will be honored in his house .
GOLD:	And all the rest of God 's people send you greetings , too , especially those in Caesar 's household .

ID:	1956
INPUT:	ez zegoen oraindik landarerik lurrean , ezta belarrik ere erneta , Jainko Jaunak ez baitzion oraindik lurrari euririk eman , eta ez baitzen lurra lantzeko gizakirik .
PRED:	He did n't plant or planted the ground , for the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies was not allowed to grow in the field , for the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies is n't working on earth .
GOLD:	neither wild plants nor grains were growing on the earth . For the Lord God had not yet sent rain to water the earth , and there were no people to cultivate the soil .

ID:	1957
INPUT:	Ondoren , jendetza handiarena bezalako zarata-hotsa entzun nuen zeruan , esanez : « Aleluia ! Salbamena , aintza eta indarragure Jainkoarenak ,
PRED:	Then I heard the sound of the mighty army , and I heard the voice speaking : “ Praise the Lord ! Praise the Lord !
GOLD:	After this , I heard what sounded like a vast crowd in heaven shouting , “ Praise the Lord ! Salvation and glory and power belong to our God .

ID:	1958
INPUT:	— Zer duk gurekin , Nazareteko Jesus ? Gu hondatzera al hator ? Bazekiat nor haizen : Jainkoaren Santua .
PRED:	“ What are you going to destroy Jesus ? Why are you going to destroy us ? ” the Holy One of God .
GOLD:	“ Why are you interfering with us , Jesus of Nazareth ? Have you come to destroy us ? I know who you are — the Holy One of God ! ”

ID:	1959
INPUT:	Horretarakoxe bidaltzen dizuet , nire berri eman diezazuen eta adorez bete zaitzaten .
PRED:	That is why I am sending you to you , and I will give you the message I have given you .
GOLD:	I have sent him to you for this very purpose — to let you know how we are doing and to encourage you .

ID:	1960
INPUT:	Lasterka datoz mezulariakbata bestearen ondo-ondotik , Babiloniako erregeariberri ematera : “ Etsaiek alderik aldekonkistatu dute hiria ” ,
PRED:	“ Come quickly , ” says the Lord , “ and the king of Babylon will destroy the land of Babylon , and the kings of Babylon will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	The news is passed from one runner to the nextas the messengers hurry to tell the kingthat his city has been captured .

ID:	1961
INPUT:	Jordan ibaitik mendebaldera ( 14 , 1 — 19 , <unk> )
PRED:	From the west of the Jordan
GOLD:	The Land Divided West of the Jordan

ID:	1962
INPUT:	Apaizak ezin izan ziren zutik egon beren eginkizuna betetzen , laino hura zela eta . Izan ere , Jaunaren aintzak bete zuen Jainkoaren etxea .
PRED:	The priests could not keep the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant , for they had sworn by the glory of the Lord their God .
GOLD:	The priests could not continue their service because of the cloud , for the glorious presence of the Lord filled the Temple of God .

ID:	1963
INPUT:	Arrotzek eraso baitidate , gogorkeria-zaleak ni hil nahian dabiltza , Jainkoaren ardurarik gabe .
PRED:	For the light of the wicked rise , and the dead are trying to kill me .
GOLD:	May the evil plans of my enemies be turned against them.Do as you promised and put an end to them .

ID:	1964
INPUT:	Egiptotik itzularaziko ditut , Asiriatik bilduko ; Galaad eta Libanoraino ereeramango ditut , eta , hala ere , ez dute behar hainbat leku izango .
PRED:	I will bring you out of Egypt , and I will bring you out of the land of Gilead , and I will bring you out of the land of Gilead .
GOLD:	I will bring them back from Egyptand gather them from Assyria.I will resettle them in Gilead and Lebanonuntil there is no more room for them all .

ID:	1965
INPUT:	Ikusazue , apalok , eta poztu ; izan bihotz , Jainkoarengana jotzen duzuenok !
PRED:	Be glad , O God , and rejoice ! Be strong and courageous ! Be strong and courageous !
GOLD:	For the Lord hears the cries of the needy ; he does not despise his imprisoned people .

ID:	1966
INPUT:	Matxinada denean , herriak buruzagi ugari ; gizon burutsu eta adituarekin ordena nagusi .
PRED:	Mary , the captain of the people , are so wise , but the leader of the people who are wise .
GOLD:	When there is moral rot within a nation , its government topples easily.But wise and knowledgeable leaders bring stability .

ID:	1967
INPUT:	( Mt 12 , 1-8 ; Mk 2 , 23-28 )
PRED:	Jesus Heals on the Sabbath
GOLD:	Jesus Heals on the Sabbath

ID:	1968
INPUT:	nahiz eta Goi-goikoa giza eskuz eginiko etxetan bizi ez , profetak dioen bezala :
PRED:	He did not serve the Most High , just as he did . He said , “ He is a prophet who lives in the house of the Most High . ”
GOLD:	However , the Most High does n't live in temples made by human hands . As the prophet says ,

ID:	1969
INPUT:	Zuen alde borrokatu zen gure aita , bere bizia arriskatuz , eta madiandarren menpetik libratu zintuzten .
PRED:	He fought against your father and mother , who rescued you from the power of his father , and he rescued you from his power .
GOLD:	For he fought for you and risked his life when he rescued you from the Midianites .

ID:	1970
INPUT:	Bai , Jaunaren egunaegun beltza izango da , eta ez egun argia , argi-izpirik gabeko ilun beltza !
PRED:	For it is the day of the Lord 's light , and there will be no light .
GOLD:	Yes , the day of the Lord will be dark and hopeless , without a ray of joy or hope .

ID:	1971
INPUT:	munduko azken muturreraino bota bazintuzten ere , bertara joan eta bildu egingo zaituzte Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak ;
PRED:	You will drive you out of the land , and you will gather you back to the ends of the earth . The Lord your God will drive you out .
GOLD:	Even though you are banished to the ends of the earth , the Lord your God will gather you from there and bring you back again .

ID:	1972
INPUT:	Ez ditut hobenak jendeak ohi bezala ezkutatu , ezta errua barruan gorde ere
PRED:	I do n't want to do these people , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Have I tried to hide my sins like other people do , concealing my guilt in my heart ?

ID:	1973
INPUT:	Bosgarren egunean , jaiki zen goizean goiz abiatzeko asmoz , baina neskaren aitak esan zion berriro : — Hartu indarrak . Geldi zaitezte ilunabarra arte . Eta biek jan zuten .
PRED:	After the next morning , the servant got up early the next morning , the servant said to him , “ Take your father 's staff and eat it until morning . ” So the men ate and drank the water .
GOLD:	On the morning of the fifth day he was up early again , ready to leave , and again the woman 's father said , “ Have something to eat ; then you can leave later this afternoon . ” So they had another day of feasting .

ID:	1974
INPUT:	Moisesen legean agindutako garbikuntza egiteko unea iritsi zitzaienean , gurasoek Jesus Jerusalemera eraman zuten Jaunari aurkezteko .
PRED:	When the Jewish leaders came to the Law of Moses , the Jewish leaders came to Jerusalem to meet Jesus before the Lord Jesus .
GOLD:	Then it was time for their purification offering , as required by the law of Moses after the birth of a child ; so his parents took him to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord .

ID:	1975
INPUT:	Eta hona zer erantzun diguten : “ Zeru-lurren Jainkoaren zerbitzari gara , eta haren etxea ari gara jasotzen . Duela urte asko Israelgo errege handi batek eraiki eta bukatu zuen etxea ;
PRED:	And they say , ‘ What sorrow awaits you who live in the Temple of God , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , and there is a great nation of Israel .
GOLD:	“ This was their answer : ‘ We are the servants of the God of heaven and earth , and we are rebuilding the Temple that was built here many years ago by a great king of Israel .

ID:	1976
INPUT:	Eskerrak ematen dizkiot Jainkoari Titoren bihotzean zuenganako nire ardura bera sortu duelako .
PRED:	I thank God for Tyre , and I will send you to send you into my flock .
GOLD:	But thank God ! He has given Titus the same enthusiasm for you that I have .

ID:	1977
INPUT:	« Hara , neure aingerua bidaltzen dizuet gidari , bidean zain zaitzaten eta prestatu dizuedan lekura eraman .
PRED:	“ Look , I am sending you the angel to you , and he is sending you to prepare for you .
GOLD:	“ See , I am sending an angel before you to protect you on your journey and lead you safely to the place I have prepared for you .

ID:	1978
INPUT:	Lebitarrak , goizean goiz jaiki eta bideari ekiteko atea ireki zuenean , han aurkitu zuen bere ohaidea , etxeko atarian eroria , eskuak atondoan zituela .
PRED:	Early the next morning he got up early the next morning , where he prepared a place for his house , he prepared a place for his own household .
GOLD:	When her husband opened the door to leave , there lay his concubine with her hands on the threshold .

ID:	1979
INPUT:	Jauna , beti kantatuko ditut zure maitasun-egintzak , gizaldiz gizaldi iragarriko leial zarela .
PRED:	I will proclaim your unfailing love , O Lord , for I will make you a faithful generation to generation .
GOLD:	Your unfailing love will last forever.Your faithfulness is as enduring as the heavens .

ID:	1980
INPUT:	Inoren etxean egiten dute olioa ; dolarean mahatsa zapaldu eta , halere , egarri .
PRED:	They are allowed to enter the house of the house , but they are allowed to hide it .
GOLD:	They press out olive oil without being allowed to taste it , and they tread in the winepress as they suffer from thirst .

ID:	1981
INPUT:	Zintzoak nahiz gaiztoak garbitu behar ditudalako , bizidun ororen aurka aterako da ezpata zorrotik , hegoaldetik iparralderaino .
PRED:	The godly will be pure , and those who are godly will be allowed to live in the north gateway to the north gateway .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , give the people this message from the Lord : “ A sword , a swordis being sharpened and polished .

ID:	1982
INPUT:	Hautsa bezainbat dira : nork zenba<unk> koben ondorengoak ? Nork jakinisraeldar multzoaren kopurua ? Gizon zintzo horien heriotza , horiena bezalako azkena , opa diot neure buruari » .
PRED:	They say to each other , “ Who can see the descendants of Jacob 's descendants ? Who is the one who can see the meaning of his own body ? I will put my head on his head , and I will put my head on my head . ”
GOLD:	Who can count Jacob 's descendants , as numerous as dust ? Who can count even a fourth of Israel 's people ? Let me die like the righteous ; let my life end like theirs . ”

ID:	1983
INPUT:	Nork kondenatuko ditu ? Jesu Kristo da hil zena ; are gehiago , piztu ere egin zena , eta orain Jainkoaren eskuinaldean gure alde erreguka ari dena !
PRED:	Who is able to save us from the dead ? No one can raise him from the dead , and now he will raise his right hand against us in his right hand .
GOLD:	Who then will condemn us ? No one — for Christ Jesus died for us and was raised to life for us , and he is sitting in the place of honor at God 's right hand , pleading for us .

ID:	1984
INPUT:	Badakit nik bost , zuhur ala tentelizanen ote den . Nik mundu honetan halako arretazegin dudan lanaz jabetuko da . Ez du honek zentzurik !
PRED:	I know that you are so wise , and you will know what I have done in this world . I will not do it , but I will never do it . ”
GOLD:	And who can tell whether my successors will be wise or foolish ? Yet they will control everything I have gained by my skill and hard work under the sun . How meaningless !

ID:	1985
INPUT:	Ez utzi haiei zuen lurraldean bizitzen , nire aurka bekatu egitera eraman ez zaitzaten ; bada , haien jainkoak gurtuko zenituzkete zeuen galbiderako » .
PRED:	Do not let them live in your land , for they have sinned against you , and they will worship other gods . ”
GOLD:	They must not live in your land , or they will cause you to sin against me . If you serve their gods , you will be caught in the trap of idolatry . ”

ID:	1986
INPUT:	Libnatik Lakixera jo zuen Josuek israeldar guztiekin ; hiria inguratu eta eraso egin zion .
PRED:	So Joshua and the Israelite army went out to Libnah and attacked the town .
GOLD:	From Libnah , Joshua and the Israelites went to Lachish and attacked it .

ID:	1987
INPUT:	Tronu batzuk ere ikusi nituen ; haietan eseri zirenei epaitzeko ahalmena eman zien Jainkoak . Ikusi nituen Jesusen testigantza egiteagatik eta Jainkoaren hitza hots egiteagatik lepo eginikoak ere , hau da , piztia eta beronen irudia gurtu ez zituztenak eta haren marka beren bekoki eta eskuetan hartu ez zutenak . Hauek bizira itzuli ziren eta Mesiasekin errege izan ziren mila urtez .
PRED:	I saw some of the believers who had seen the power of the Lord Jesus , who had been given by the power of God and the prophets who had seen him , and they were not worthy to worship him by the law of Moses and the beast .
GOLD:	Then I saw thrones , and the people sitting on them had been given the authority to judge . And I saw the souls of those who had been beheaded for their testimony about Jesus and for proclaiming the word of God . They had not worshiped the beast or his statue , nor accepted his mark on their foreheads or their hands . They all came to life again , and they reigned with Christ for a thousand years .

ID:	1988
INPUT:	Eror bitez banan-banan beren sareetan , nik libre ihes egiten dudan bitartean .
PRED:	Let them rejoice in the presence of the Lord ; let them be able to escape .
GOLD:	Let the wicked fall into their own nets , but let me escape .

ID:	1989
INPUT:	Emakumea purpuraz eta gorriminez zegoen jantzia eta urrez , harribitxiz eta perlaz apaindua ; eskuan urrezko edalontzi bat zuen bere prostituzio zikinaren fruitu higuingarriz betea ;
PRED:	She made a beautiful robe that was decorated with a blue cloth , purple , and scarlet thread , and scarlet thread . She was decorated with gold , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	The woman wore purple and scarlet clothing and beautiful jewelry made of gold and precious gems and pearls . In her hand she held a gold goblet full of obscenities and the impurities of her immorality .

ID:	1990
INPUT:	Baina Izreelera joan beharrean gertatu zen Joram , Siriako errege Hazaelen kontrako borrokan siriarrek egin zizkioten zauriak sendatzera . Jehuk esan zien bere ofizialkideei : — Nire alde baldin bazaudete , ez dezala inork ere ihes egin hiri honetatik , egin dugunaren berri Izreelera eramatera .
PRED:	But when Jezebel arrived at Jezreel , the king of Jezreel came to visit King Ahab of Israel . “ If you are going to attack the land of Jezreel , ” Jehu said , “ if you are willing to go out to Jezreel to Jezreel , you will find out of Jezreel . ”
GOLD:	But King Joram was wounded in the fighting and returned to Jezreel to recover from his wounds . ) So Jehu told the men with him , “ If you want me to be king , do n't let anyone leave town and go to Jezreel to report what we have done . ”

ID:	1991
INPUT:	Madarikatua ote Israel herria ? Bukatu ote da , bada , Jaunaren eroapena ? Hori ote haren jokaera ? Ez al dio onginahiz hitz egitenzuzen dabilenari ? »
PRED:	Why are the people of Israel Israel Israel Israel ? Is it the Lord 's judge ? Should n't you talk to the Lord 's word ? Should n't I talk to you ? ”
GOLD:	Should you talk that way , O family of Israel ? Will the Lord 's Spirit have patience with such behavior ? If you would do what is right , you would find my words comforting .

ID:	1992
INPUT:	Jendeak aho betean iraintzen nau , masailekoz betetzen : denak batera nire kontra .
PRED:	Everyone who speaks against me is greater than me ; they are trying to stand against me .
GOLD:	People jeer and laugh at me.They slap my cheek in contempt.A mob gathers against me .

ID:	1993
INPUT:	Masailak lodituta eta gerrialdea gizen-gizen ,
PRED:	the curtains of the Tabernacle and its carrying poles ;
GOLD:	“ These wicked people are heavy and prosperous ; their waists bulge with fat .

ID:	1994
INPUT:	Madarikatua hauen haserrea , benetan garratza ! Madarikatua beren sumindura , benetan ankerra ! Jakoben leinuen arteanditut banatuko , Israel osoan barreiatuko .
PRED:	I am very angry with them , O God of Israel ! I will raise my fist against them in the presence of the Lord , the God of Israel , says the Lord .
GOLD:	A curse on their anger , for it is fierce ; a curse on their wrath , for it is cruel.I will scatter them among the descendants of Jacob ; I will disperse them throughout Israel .

ID:	1995
INPUT:	ez ziren nire bihotzaz jabetu , ez nien nik eskuaz musurik bidali .
PRED:	They did n't give me my heart , but they did n't give me their own hands .
GOLD:	and been secretly enticed in my heartto throw kisses at them in worship ?

ID:	1996
INPUT:	Huxaik esan zien , gero , Tzadok eta Abiatar apaizei : — Hau eta hau aholkatu die Ahitofelek Absalomi eta Israelgo herri-arduradunei ; nik , aldiz , beste hau aholkatu diet .
PRED:	Hushai replied , “ This is what Zadok the priest says : I have chosen the people of Israel and told them , ‘ This is what Ahithophel says about the people of Israel . '
GOLD:	Hushai told Zadok and Abiathar , the priests , what Ahithophel had said to Absalom and the elders of Israel and what he himself had advised instead .

ID:	1997
INPUT:	Eta onginahi hutsez baldin bada , ez da egintzengatik ; bestela , onginahia ez litzateke onginahi izango .
PRED:	And if there is no resurrection from the dead , there is no other people who try to enter the city .
GOLD:	And since it is through God 's kindness , then it is not by their good works . For in that case , God 's grace would not be what it really is — free and undeserved .

ID:	1998
INPUT:	Gero , Judan eta Jerusalemen jakinarazi zuten Jainkoaren zerbitzari Moisesek basamortuan Israeli ezarritako zerga ekarri behar zitzaiola Jaunari .
PRED:	Then Moses and the people of Judah sent this message to the Lord , the God of Israel :
GOLD:	Then a proclamation was sent throughout Judah and Jerusalem , telling the people to bring to the Lord the tax that Moses , the servant of God , had required of the Israelites in the wilderness .

ID:	1999
INPUT:	Akaiara joateko asmoa zuelarik , senideek animatu egin zuten eta hango ikasleei idatzi zieten , harrera ona egin ziezaiotela . Han , Jainkoaren onginahiari esker , guztiz lagungarri gertatu zitzaien fededunei .
PRED:	So they went to the town of Cyprus and encouraged the believers to visit them . They brought him to the believers , and they brought him to the place of worship of God . So they gave thanks to God by the good things he had done .
GOLD:	Apollos had been thinking about going to Achaia , and the brothers and sisters in Ephesus encouraged him to go . They wrote to the believers in Achaia , asking them to welcome him . When he arrived there , he proved to be of great benefit to those who , by God 's grace , had believed .

ID:	2000
INPUT:	Gero , hodei zuri bat ikusi nuen , eta hodei gainean gizaseme antzeko norbait eseria , buruan urrezko koroa eta eskuan igitai zorrotza zituela .
PRED:	Then I saw a voice coming to me , and I saw a man sitting on his head and a gold chain around his head .
GOLD:	Then I saw a white cloud , and seated on the cloud was someone like the Son of Man . He had a gold crown on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand .

ID:	2001
INPUT:	Xebak Israelgo leinu guztien lurraldeak igaro zituen Abel-Bet-Maakaraino ; Bikriren senitarteko guztiak bildu eta Xebaren atzetik sartu ziren hirira .
PRED:	Then all the tribes of Israel went out to the town of Bicri , and all the men of Sheba and all the people of Judah went out to Beth-shemesh .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Sheba traveled through all the tribes of Israel and eventually came to the town of Abel-beth-maacah . All the members of his own clan , the Bicrites , assembled for battle and followed him into the town .

ID:	2002
INPUT:	Gure arbasoak Egiptora jaitsi ziren eta gure herria luzaro bizi izan zen bertan ; baina gero , egiptoarrek tratu txarra eman ziguten , bai geuri , bai arbasoei .
PRED:	So our ancestors came down to Egypt and settled in the land of Egypt . But when the Egyptians came down to Egypt , they settled in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	Our ancestors went down to Egypt , and we lived there a long time , and we and our ancestors were brutally mistreated by the Egyptians .

ID:	2003
INPUT:	Asko izango dira probatuak , garbituak eta berrituak . Gaiztoek , ulertzeko gauza ez direnez , gaiztakeriak egiten jarraituko dute . Jakintsuek , ordea , dena ulertuko dute .
PRED:	Many who do evil will understand what is right , and the wicked will be doing wrong . But they will know what they are doing wrong , but they will understand what they do .
GOLD:	Many will be purified , cleansed , and refined by these trials . But the wicked will continue in their wickedness , and none of them will understand . Only those who are wise will know what it means .

ID:	2004
INPUT:	Segurtatu onbidean zeure zerbitzari hau , ez nazaten harroputzek zapal .
PRED:	Instead , let your brothers go into the boat , so that you can not boast about it .
GOLD:	Please guarantee a blessing for me.Do n't let the arrogant oppress me !

ID:	2005
INPUT:	Makila bat hartuko duzue zeuekin eta , sabela hustera irtetean , berarekin zuloa egin eta gorotza lurrez estaliko duzue .
PRED:	You will find a stone and put it in its mouth . Then you will go out to the ground and put it on the ground .
GOLD:	The camp must be holy , for the Lord your God moves around in your camp to protect you and to defeat your enemies . He must not see any shameful thing among you , or he will turn away from you .

ID:	2006
INPUT:	eta gaizki-esaka hasi ziren Jainkoaren eta Moisesen aurka : « Zertarako atera gintuzuen Egiptotik ? Basamortuan hilarazteko ? Ez dugu urik , ez jakirik , eta mana delako janari kaskar honetaz asper-asper eginak gaude ! »
PRED:	Then the people of Israel began to stand against Moses and said , “ Why did n't we bring you out of Egypt ? Why did n't we bring you out of Egypt ? Why did n't you realize that I do n't want you to know you ? ”
GOLD:	and they began to speak against God and Moses . “ Why have you brought us out of Egypt to die here in the wilderness ? ” they complained . “ There is nothing to eat here and nothing to drink . And we hate this horrible manna ! ”

ID:	2007
INPUT:	Sedekias bera , begiak leherrarazi ondoren , Babiloniara eraman zuen katez loturik .
PRED:	Then Zedekiah led Zedekiah to Babylon to Babylon , where he led him to Babylon .
GOLD:	Then he gouged out Zedekiah 's eyes and bound him in bronze chains to lead him away to Babylon .

ID:	2008
INPUT:	Orduan , Xuaheko Bildadek hitz egin zuen :
PRED:	Then Bildad the Shuhite replied :
GOLD:	Then Bildad the Shuhite replied to Job :

ID:	2009
INPUT:	Israeldarrek menderatu zituztela ikustean , aramearrak elkartu egin ziren denak .
PRED:	When the Israelites saw that the people of Israel were in the hills , they were scattered by the Israelites .
GOLD:	The Arameans now realized that they were no match for Israel . So when they regrouped ,

ID:	2010
INPUT:	Iseka ari dira eta zitalkeriak esaten , goitik behera begira , jendea nola larrutuko hitz egiten .
PRED:	They are like flocks of sheep and goats , goats , and goats . They prophesy against them , and they prophesy against them .
GOLD:	They scoff and speak only evil ; in their pride they seek to crush others .

ID:	2011
INPUT:	Jaunak berriro dei egin zion Samueli . Hau jaiki eta Elirengana joan zen , esanez : — Hemen nauzu , dei egin baitidazu . Elik erantzun : — Ez dizut nik dei egin , ene seme . Itzul zaitez eta egizu lo .
PRED:	Then the Lord called to Samuel , and he got up and went to Eli . “ I am going to call you , ” Eli replied . “ Do n't call me back , my son , ” Eli replied .
GOLD:	Then the Lord called out again , “ Samuel ! ” Again Samuel got up and went to Eli . “ Here I am . Did you call me ? ” “ I did n't call you , my son , ” Eli said . “ Go back to bed . ”

ID:	2012
INPUT:	Baina beraien menpe jartzen ez bazara , hiria babiloniarren esku eroriko da eta erre egingo dute , eta zeu ere ez zara libratuko haien eskuetatik .
PRED:	But if you refuse to surrender to the Babylonians , you will not be put into the hands of the Babylonians , and you will not be put to death .
GOLD:	But if you refuse to surrender , you will not escape ! This city will be handed over to the Babylonians , and they will burn it to the ground . ' ”

ID:	2013
INPUT:	Erregeak gabaondarrei dei egin zien , beraiekin mintzatzeko . Gabaondarrak ez ziren israeldar , amortarren artetik bizirik geldituak baizik . Egina zuten hitzarmena israeldarrekin ; baina Saulek , Israel eta Judakoenganako gehiegizko axolaz , galdu egin nahi izan zituen haiek .
PRED:	So the king of Israel called a solemn oath to the elders of Israel . But the Israelites refused to listen to them , but they were afraid of Saul 's men , but Saul 's men were afraid of them .
GOLD:	So the king summoned the Gibeonites . They were not part of Israel but were all that was left of the nation of the Amorites . The people of Israel had sworn not to kill them , but Saul , in his zeal for Israel and Judah , had tried to wipe them out .

ID:	2014
INPUT:	Pikondoaren madarikazioa : fedea eta otoitza
PRED:	Jesus Is Betrayed and Arrested
GOLD:	Parable of the Evil Farmers

ID:	2015
INPUT:	Eman diet zure berri mundutik bereizi eta eman zenizkidan gizon-emakumeei . Zureak ziren , zuk neuri eman zenizkidan , eta hauek onartu dute zure mezua .
PRED:	I gave you the world from the earth , and you gave it to the people of the world . You gave me the same message I gave you .
GOLD:	“ I have revealed you to the ones you gave me from this world . They were always yours . You gave them to me , and they have kept your word .

ID:	2016
INPUT:	Beraz , aurrez ikusi zuen Mesias piztuko zela , eta honetaz mintzo zen hau esatean : ez zuela Jainkoak Herio Leizera botako eta ez zela haren gorputza hilobian galduko .
PRED:	So he saw that he was raised from the dead , and he said , “ This is what God says : The dead will not be put into the dead bodies of the dead . ”
GOLD:	David was looking into the future and speaking of the Messiah 's resurrection . He was saying that God would not leave him among the dead or allow his body to rot in the grave .

ID:	2017
INPUT:	Elkartea ongi zuzentzen duten arduradunek estimu bikoitza merezi dute , predi<unk> eta irakaste-lanetan ari direnek batik bat .
PRED:	Those who are wise will become wise and rebellious , and they will live among you . Those who live among you will be scattered by the same way .
GOLD:	Elders who do their work well should be respected and paid well , especially those who work hard at both preaching and teaching .

ID:	2018
INPUT:	Nire Jainkoak , bere aldetik , bere aberastasun harrigarriaren arabera erantzungo dizue zeuen premia guztietan , Kristo Jesusen bitartez .
PRED:	For God will answer you from all my troubles , and you will be able to answer all your wonderful deeds .
GOLD:	And this same God who takes care of me will supply all your needs from his glorious riches , which have been given to us in Christ Jesus .

ID:	2019
INPUT:	Bihotzeko harra sentitu zuen orduan , Saulen soingainekoaren ertza ebaki zuelako .
PRED:	So Saul took Saul 's robe and put him on his head .
GOLD:	He said to his men , “ The Lord forbid that I should do this to my lord the king . I should n't attack the Lord 's anointed one , for the Lord himself has chosen him . ”

ID:	2020
INPUT:	Orduan , Jose , bere semeak aitaren belaun artetik atera eta lurreraino makurtu zitzaion .
PRED:	Then Joseph read his father and mother to his father and mother , who had been born to the earth .
GOLD:	Joseph moved the boys , who were at their grandfather 's knees , and he bowed with his face to the ground .

ID:	2021
INPUT:	Izan ere , beste guztiek sobera dutenetik eman dute ; honek , ordea , bere eskasian , zeukan guztia , bizitzeko behar zuena , eman du » .
PRED:	For all these things have been given to your ancestors , but you have given them everything you need , but you will have eternal life . ”
GOLD:	For they gave a tiny part of their surplus , but she , poor as she is , has given everything she had to live on . ”

ID:	2022
INPUT:	Asmatu egitamuak : bertan behera geldituko dira . Proposatu nahi duzuena : alferrik izango da , Jainkoa gurekin baitago .
PRED:	You will be like a boy , and you will be filled with joy . You will be like a prophet , but you will be with God .
GOLD:	Call your councils of war , but they will be worthless.Develop your strategies , but they will not succeed.For God is with us ! ”

ID:	2023
INPUT:	Izan ere , Efesoko Trofimo Paulorekin ikusia zuten aurretik hirian eta Paulok tenpluan sartu zuela uste zuten .
PRED:	When Paul and Barnabas saw that Paul was in the synagogue , they went into the Temple of the Lord and found him there .
GOLD:	( For earlier that day they had seen him in the city with Trophimus , a Gentile from Ephesus , and they assumed Paul had taken him into the Temple . )

ID:	2024
INPUT:	zenbat eta urte gehiago falta , hainbat eta handiagoa prezioa ; zenbat eta urte gutxiago , hainbat eta txikiagoa prezioa , saltzen dena gelditzen diren uztak baitira .
PRED:	How much more gold is more valuable than gold , silver , and small , and small that small is small . But the whole whole world could be saved , but the whole crop would be saved .
GOLD:	The more years until the next jubilee , the higher the price ; the fewer years , the lower the price . After all , the person selling the land is actually selling you a certain number of harvests .

ID:	2025
INPUT:	baina zure mehatxuz ihes egin zuten , zure trumoi-hotsak uxaturik :
PRED:	But the voice of the Lord appeared to him , and the voice of the Lord appeared to him .
GOLD:	At your command , the water fled ; at the sound of your thunder , it hurried away .

ID:	2026
INPUT:	Hala , irten zen Hatak Mardokeoren bila , jauregi aurrean zegoen plazara .
PRED:	So Haman went to the palace gate , just as Mordecai had arrived in the palace .
GOLD:	So Hathach went out to Mordecai in the square in front of the palace gate .

ID:	2027
INPUT:	Pedrok erantzun zien : — Bihozberri zaitezte eta bataiatu guztiok , Jesus Mesiasen izenean bekatuak barka dakizkizuen , eta Espiritu Santua hartuko duzue dohain .
PRED:	Peter replied , “ Stand up , all of you must repent of your sins and turn away from God 's Holy Spirit . Then you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit . ”
GOLD:	Peter replied , “ Each of you must repent of your sins and turn to God , and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins . Then you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit .

ID:	2028
INPUT:	Herri izugarri eta ikaragarria : berak ezartzen ditulegea eta nagusitza .
PRED:	You are a great and awesome army ; you are the law and the law of the law .
GOLD:	They are notorious for their crueltyand do whatever they like .

ID:	2029
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Hauxe da Jainkoak nahi duena : berak bidali duenarengan zuek sinestea .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ It is the one who sent the message to God , who sent you to believe in him . ”
GOLD:	Jesus told them , “ This is the only work God wants from you : Believe in the one he has sent . ”

ID:	2030
INPUT:	MOISESEN AZKEN <unk> DUERA ( 31 , 1 — 34 , 12 )
PRED:	The Death of Jonah
GOLD:	Joshua Becomes Israel 's Leader

ID:	2031
INPUT:	Ehun eta hogeita hamar urte zituela , Adamek semea izan zuen , bere <unk> eta irudikoa , eta <unk> eman zion izen .
PRED:	When Ahaz was 30 years old , he became the father of Abram , and he was the father of Abram .
GOLD:	When Adam was 130 years old , he became the father of a son who was just like him — in his very image . He named his son Seth .

ID:	2032
INPUT:	« Ikusi al duzu nola apaldu den Akab nire aurrean ? Hara , nire aurrean apaldu denez gero , zoritxarra ez diot bera bizi den artean bidaliko , bere semearen egunetan bidaliko diot zoritxarra haren senitarteari » .
PRED:	“ Have you seen how wicked I ever before Ahab ? ” Ahab asked . “ As surely as I live , I will send them to war against the family of Ahab 's family , and I will send them to war against their family . ”
GOLD:	“ Do you see how Ahab has humbled himself before me ? Because he has done this , I will not do what I promised during his lifetime . It will happen to his sons ; I will destroy his dynasty . ”

ID:	2033
INPUT:	Garailea neure Jainkoaren tenpluko zutabe egingo dut , eta ez da gehiago handik irtengo ; neure Jainkoaren izena eta neure izen berria idatziko ditut harengan ; baita neure Jainkoaren hiriaren izena ere , zerutik , nire Jainkoarengandik , jaisten den Jerusalem berriaren izena .
PRED:	I will go down to the Temple of God , and I will not go down to the Temple of God . I will go down to the city of the Lord your God , and I will send down from heaven to heaven and heaven .
GOLD:	All who are victorious will become pillars in the Temple of my God , and they will never have to leave it . And I will write on them the name of my God , and they will be citizens in the city of my God — the new Jerusalem that comes down from heaven from my God . And I will also write on them my new name .

ID:	2034
INPUT:	Ondoren , Moisesek azken agurra egin zion bere aitaginarrebari , eta hau bere herrialdera itzuli zen .
PRED:	Then Moses went up to the place of worship , and he returned to his father and mother .
GOLD:	Soon after this , Moses said good-bye to his father-in-law , who returned to his own land .

ID:	2035
INPUT:	Zotz eginez banatuko duzue , zuen artean bizi diren eta seme-alabak izan dituzten etorkinak ahaztu gabe . Hauek jatorrizko israeldar bailiran hartuko dituzue , eta beren ondare-zatia hartuko dute Israelgo leinuen artean .
PRED:	You are among the nations that are among you , and you have forgotten your sons and daughters . They are among you , but you have forgotten the land you have given to the tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	Distribute the land as an allotment for yourselves and for the foreigners who have joined you and are raising their families among you . They will be like native-born Israelites to you and will receive an allotment among the tribes .

ID:	2036
INPUT:	Biziki poztu naiz , anaiek etorri eta zure jokabide leialaz hitz egin didatenean , egiaren arabera bizi zarela aitortuz .
PRED:	I am glad , and I will rejoice in your presence , just as I have told you what I have done .
GOLD:	Some of the traveling teachers recently returned and made me very happy by telling me about your faithfulness and that you are living according to the truth .

ID:	2037
INPUT:	Urre eta zilarrezkoak ziren zure bitxiak , liho fin eta zetazkoak zure jantzi bordatuak . Irin garbiz , eztiz eta olioz elikatzen zinen . Ezin ederrago bihurtu zinen , erregina baten pareko .
PRED:	They were also made of gold , silver , and fine linen clothing , fine linen , fine linen , and liquid offerings . They were also made of choice flour mixed with olive oil .
GOLD:	And so you were adorned with gold and silver . Your clothes were made of fine linen and costly fabric and were beautifully embroidered . You ate the finest foods — choice flour , honey , and olive oil — and became more beautiful than ever . You looked like a queen , and so you were !

ID:	2038
INPUT:	Axerren leinuaren ondaretik ere lau hiri — Mixal , Abdon , Helkat eta Rehob — eta herri-lurrak .
PRED:	From the tribe of Asher included the following towns with their pasturelands from the tribe of Asher ( also known as the homeland allocated to the clans of Asher ) .
GOLD:	From the tribe of Asher they received the following towns with their pasturelands : Mishal , Abdon ,

ID:	2039
INPUT:	Henok izan zuenetik , beste zortziehun urtez bizi izan zen , eta seme-alabak izan zituen .
PRED:	After the birth of Enoch lived another 830 years , and he had other sons and daughters .
GOLD:	After the birth of Enoch , Jared lived another 800 years , and he had other sons and daughters .

ID:	2040
INPUT:	« Orain arte irudi bidez hitz egin dizuet ; baina badator ordua irudi bidez hitz egingo ez dizuedana , baizik eta Aitaren berri argi eta garbi emango dizuedana .
PRED:	“ And now I have been talking about you . But if you do n't understand what I say , you will be talking about the Father 's words , and you will be ceremonially clean .
GOLD:	“ I have spoken of these matters in figures of speech , but soon I will stop speaking figuratively and will tell you plainly all about the Father .

ID:	2041
INPUT:	hau da , Seir aldera doan Halak menditik Hermon mendi azpiko Libanoko haranean dagoen Baal-Gad hiria arteko lurralde osoa . Errege guztiak harrapatu eta hil egin zituen ,
PRED:	So King Sihon of the Amorites left Mount Seir and camped at Mount Seir . He killed all the towns of Mount Seir and killed all the towns of Gad .
GOLD:	The Israelite territory now extended all the way from Mount Halak , which leads up to Seir in the south , as far north as Baal-gad at the foot of Mount Hermon in the valley of Lebanon . Joshua killed all the kings of those territories ,

ID:	2042
INPUT:	Zoaz orain lurralde hau bere luze-zabalean zeharkatzera , zeuri emango baitizut » .
PRED:	Now go to the land of the Lord , for I will give it to you . ”
GOLD:	Go and walk through the land in every direction , for I am giving it to you . ”

ID:	2043
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Esan dizuet , eta ez didazue sinesten . Nik neure Aitaren izenean egiten ditudan egintzek ematen dute nire alde testigantza ;
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I tell you the truth , and you do n't believe me . I do n't believe in my Father 's name . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ I have already told you , and you do n't believe me . The proof is the work I do in my Father 's name .

ID:	2044
INPUT:	Jarri zeuen gogoa goiko gauzetan , ez lurrekoetan ,
PRED:	You must set up the curtain at the end of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Think about the things of heaven , not the things of earth .

ID:	2045
INPUT:	Jaunaren hitzak jatorrak dira , zilar garbia , zazpitan birfindua .
PRED:	The Lord has given me pure silver , silver , and small animals that are ceremonially clean .
GOLD:	Therefore , Lord , we know you will protect the oppressed , preserving them forever from this lying generation ,

ID:	2046
INPUT:	Horregatik esan zuten gurasoek : « Badu adina , galdegin berari » .
PRED:	That is why our ancestors said , “ The Lord has destroyed us ! ”
GOLD:	That 's why they said , “ He is old enough . Ask him . ”

ID:	2047
INPUT:	Kristauak agintarien menpeko
PRED:	Paul 's Life in Christ
GOLD:	Respect for Authority

ID:	2048
INPUT:	Herensugea itsasertzeko hondarretan gelditu zen zutik .
PRED:	The sea became very angry with the sea , and the sea became very angry .
GOLD:	Then the dragon took his stand on the shore beside the sea .

ID:	2049
INPUT:	Mahatsondoa zirudien zure amak , ur-bazterrean landatua . Emankor eta mardula zenur-ugaritasunagatik .
PRED:	A basket of bread was filled with fresh , a basket of bread made without yeast . A basket of bread made without yeast , a basket of bread made without yeast .
GOLD:	“ Your mother was like a vineplanted by the water 's edge.It had lush , green foliagebecause of the abundant water .

ID:	2050
INPUT:	Gure borrokako armak ez dira gizakiarenak , Jainkoarenak baizik , eta hiri gotorrak ere errausteko indarra dute : argudio faltsuak
PRED:	Our mothers are surrounded by the armies of God , but they are surrounded by the cities of God . They are surrounded by the graves of battle .
GOLD:	We use God 's mighty weapons , not worldly weapons , to knock down the strongholds of human reasoning and to destroy false arguments .

ID:	2051
INPUT:	Harimgoak 320 ;
PRED:	The citizens of West Elam1,254
GOLD:	The citizens of Harim320

ID:	2052
INPUT:	Epaile zuzena da Jainkoa , gaizkilea zigorrik gabe uzten ez duena .
PRED:	The wicked will not judge the wicked , but the wicked will not be punished .
GOLD:	If a person does not repent , God will sharpen his sword ; he will bend and string his bow .

ID:	2053
INPUT:	aitzitik , zigorraren bidezHildakoen Egoitzatik libratuko duzu .
PRED:	No one will rescue you from the grave ; you will rescue me from the grave .
GOLD:	Physical disciplinemay well save them from death .

ID:	2054
INPUT:	Laguntza eske erregua
PRED:	Paul 's Final Advice
GOLD:	's Enemies

ID:	2055
INPUT:	Elorriak erantzun zien : “ Egiaz zeuen errege izendatu nahi banauzue , zatozte , babestu nire itzalpean ; bestela , Libanoko zedroak ere irentsiko dituen sugarra aterako zait ” » .
PRED:	Then he told them , ‘ Go ahead and tell me , ‘ If you want me to tell me the story of the Lebanon , let me use my cedar trees . ' ”
GOLD:	And the thornbush replied to the trees , ‘ If you truly want to make me your king , come and take shelter in my shade.If not , let fire come out from meand devour the cedars of Lebanon . ' ”

ID:	2056
INPUT:	Hantxe bertan eraiki zion aldarea Davidek Jaunari , eta erre-opariak eta elkartasun-opariak eskaini zituen . Errukitu zen Jauna lurralde hartaz eta urrundu egin zuen izurritea Israelengandik .
PRED:	Then David built an altar to the Lord , and he burned up the burnt offerings and peace offerings and peace offerings to the Lord .
GOLD:	David built an altar there to the Lord and sacrificed burnt offerings and peace offerings . And the Lord answered his prayer for the land , and the plague on Israel was stopped .

ID:	2057
INPUT:	Faraoiak Moisesi eta Aaroni presaka deitu eta esan zien : « Zuen Jainko Jaunaren aurka eta zuen aurka egin dut bekatu ;
PRED:	Then Pharaoh called out to Moses and Aaron , “ I am the Lord your God , and I will sinned against you .
GOLD:	Pharaoh quickly summoned Moses and Aaron . “ I have sinned against the Lord your God and against you , ” he confessed .

ID:	2058
INPUT:	Horixe dut kontsolamendu atsekabean , zure promesak bainau biziberritzen .
PRED:	I will comfort you in my heart , for I will rejoice in your word .
GOLD:	Your promise revives me ; it comforts me in all my troubles .

ID:	2059
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , herri errebeldearen artean bizi zara ; badituzte begiak ikusteko , baina ez dute ikusten ; belarriak entzuteko , baina ez dute entzuten ; izan ere , herri errebeldea da .
PRED:	“ Son of man , do n't be afraid of the people who live among you , but they will see their sins , but they will see their sins . They are rebels , but they are rebels , but they are rebels .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , you live among rebels who have eyes but refuse to see . They have ears but refuse to hear . For they are a rebellious people .

ID:	2060
INPUT:	eta erantsi zuen : — Gainera , Ester erreginak , erregearekin batera , ni bakarrik gonbidatu nau prestatu duen otordura . Eta biharko ere , erregea eta biok gonbidatu gaitu .
PRED:	Then he replied , “ What is the king who sent me to meet the king who prepared me to prepare for me to prepare for battle , and he will invite me to prepare my meal . ”
GOLD:	Then Haman added , “ And that 's not all ! Queen Esther invited only me and the king himself to the banquet she prepared for us . And she has invited me to dine with her and the king again tomorrow ! ”

ID:	2061
INPUT:	Erne zen haziaeta mahatsondo mardul egin , altuera txikikoa izan arren ; arranoaganazuzentzen zituen adarrak , sustraiak ere haren menpean zituen . Mahatsondo egin zen , aihenak bota zitueneta abartsu egin .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ Do n't be angry ! Do n't be angry with them ! For the roots of the trees were dried up , and the roots of the trees were ruined .
GOLD:	It took root there andgrew into a low , spreading vine.Its branches turned up toward the eagle , and its roots grew down into the ground.It produced strong branchesand put out shoots .

ID:	2062
INPUT:	Ez zaitzatela gaitzets apal-itxuran agertu eta aingeruen kultua atsegin duten horiek ; ikuskarietan murgiltzen dira eta beren giza burutapen ergelez harropuzturik dabiltza .
PRED:	Do n't let them be thrown into the blazing furnace , and you will be ashamed of the Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies . Instead , you will see the meaning of the Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	Do n't let anyone condemn you by insisting on pious self-denial or the worship of angels , saying they have had visions about these things . Their sinful minds have made them proud ,

ID:	2063
INPUT:	Tenpluko sala handiaren aurreko atalondoa hamar metro zabal zen — tenpluaren zabalera bera — , eta bost metro luze tenplu barnerantz .
PRED:	The entry room of the Temple was 30 feet wide , 30 feet wide , and the entry room was 101/2 feet wide .
GOLD:	The entry room at the front of the Temple was 30 feet wide , running across the entire width of the Temple . It projected outward 15 feet from the front of the Temple .

ID:	2064
INPUT:	Espainiara bidean hortik igarotzean , ikusiko zaituztedan itxaropena dut ; eta bidaiari jarraitzeko lagunduko didazuen itxaropena ere bai . Baina lehenago , zuekin egonaldi bat pozik egingo nuke .
PRED:	When I have seen this , I will see you to see the justice I have seen you , and I will give you the future to help you . But if you do n't have a baby , then you will have a baby who is able to help you . ”
GOLD:	I am planning to go to Spain , and when I do , I will stop off in Rome . And after I have enjoyed your fellowship for a little while , you can provide for my journey .

ID:	2065
INPUT:	Ni ere guztiei atsegin ematen saiatzen naiz gauza guztietan eta ez dut bilatzen neure ona , besteena baizik , salba daitezen .
PRED:	I am praying to everyone who does good , but I do n't want to live in everything I do . I do n't want to save me , but I am not saved .
GOLD:	I , too , try to please everyone in everything I do . I do n't just do what is best for me ; I do what is best for others so that many may be saved .

ID:	2066
INPUT:	ezkondua , berriz , munduko gauzez , bere emazteari atsegin nola emango ,
PRED:	But when we have married the world , we will give birth to a wife .
GOLD:	But a married man has to think about his earthly responsibilities and how to please his wife .

ID:	2067
INPUT:	Josafat , bere gudarostearekin , harrapakinak hartzera joan zen . Zamari asko , janariak , janzkiak eta gauza ederrak aurkitu zituzten , eta eraman zezaketena baino gehiago hartu . Hiru egunez jardun zuten harrapakinak hartzen , hain baitziren ugari .
PRED:	So King Jehoshaphat of his army went to war with his army , brothers , weapons , weapons , weapons , weapons of war , and weapons of war against him .
GOLD:	King Jehoshaphat and his men went out to gather the plunder . They found vast amounts of equipment , clothing , and other valuables — more than they could carry . There was so much plunder that it took them three days just to collect it all !

ID:	2068
INPUT:	Jerusalemi eraso egin zioten herrietan bizirik geldituak , urtero-urtero etorriko dira errege Jaun ahalguztiduna gurtzera eta Etxola Jaia ospatzera .
PRED:	When the people of Jerusalem attacked Jerusalem , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will return to Jerusalem and worship the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	In the end , the enemies of Jerusalem who survive the plague will go up to Jerusalem each year to worship the King , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and to celebrate the Festival of Shelters .

ID:	2069
INPUT:	asmo guztiak ustel aterako zaizkieprobetxugabeko herri horrekin ; ez baitie ezeren laguntzariketa probetxurik ekarriko , lotsa eta laidoa baizik » .
PRED:	You must not test the people of Israel , but you will not talk to them , but you will be ashamed . You will be ashamed of their dreams , but you will be ashamed . ”
GOLD:	all who trust in him will be ashamed.He will not help you.Instead , he will disgrace you . ”

ID:	2070
INPUT:	Isakar eta Axerren lurralde barruan , honako hiri hauek Manasesenak ziren : Bet-Xan eta Ibleam beraien herrixkekin , eta Dor , Endor , Taanak eta Megido , beraietako bizilagun eta herrixkekin .
PRED:	The towns of Asher were also included in the towns of Asher , Aijalon , and Japheth — the towns of Judah — the towns of Judah — the towns of Judah , Geba , and the towns of Judah .
GOLD:	The following towns within the territory of Issachar and Asher , however , were given to Manasseh : Beth-shan , Ibleam , Dor ( that is , Naphoth-dor ) , Endor , Taanach , and Megiddo , each with their surrounding settlements .

ID:	2071
INPUT:	arren eta arren eskatzen zidaten fededunen aldeko zerbitzu honetan parte hartzen uzteko .
PRED:	They are asking for the light of the flock , asking them to serve as a prophet .
GOLD:	They begged us again and again for the privilege of sharing in the gift for the believers in Jerusalem .

ID:	2072
INPUT:	Baina zuk , Egipto , sinesgabeen artean joko duzu lur , eta gerran hildakoekin geldituko zara etzanda .
PRED:	But you will believe in the land of Egypt , and you will die in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	“ You too , Egypt , will lie crushed and broken among the outcasts , all slaughtered by the sword .

ID:	2073
INPUT:	Oso begikoa izan zuen faraoiak Hadad , eta bere emaztearen ahizpa eman zion emaztetzat , hau da , Tahpene erreginaren ahizpa .
PRED:	Pharaoh 's wife , whom he became pregnant and gave birth to his wife , and she gave birth to a son .
GOLD:	Pharaoh grew very fond of Hadad , and he gave him his wife 's sister in marriage — the sister of Queen Tahpenes .

ID:	2074
INPUT:	Arratsaldean beldurgarri , baina goizerako ezerez . Horra gure lapurren zoria , gure harrapatzaileen azkena .
PRED:	That evening the morning and morning came to the evening of the morning , and the warriors of the enemy had been killed .
GOLD:	In the evening Israel waits in terror , but by dawn its enemies are dead.This is the just reward of those who plunder us , a fitting end for those who destroy us .

ID:	2075
INPUT:	Zer egingo duzue , beraz , jaiegunean , Jaunaren festa-egunean ?
PRED:	So why do you continue to celebrate the Festival of Shelters ?
GOLD:	What then will you do on festival days ? How will you observe the Lord 's festivals ?

ID:	2076
INPUT:	Senideok , ez ibili bata bestearen aurka marmarka , kondenatuak izan ez zaitezten , ate-atean baita gure epailea .
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , do n't prophesy against each other . Do n't condemn yourselves , for you are judged by the law of our Jewish leaders .
GOLD:	Do n't grumble about each other , brothers and sisters , or you will be judged . For look — the Judge is standing at the door !

ID:	2077
INPUT:	Guztiz ederra zara , ene laztana , ederra eta akatsik gabea !
PRED:	How beautiful is , my darling , how beautiful are ! She is pure and beautiful , and she is pure .
GOLD:	You are altogether beautiful , my darling , beautiful in every way .

ID:	2078
INPUT:	Nehemiasek Jerusalemgo berriak jakin
PRED:	Nehemiah Rules in Jerusalem
GOLD:	Nehemiah 's Concern for Jerusalem

ID:	2079
INPUT:	hirugarrenean , opaloa , agata eta amatista ,
PRED:	The third row will contain a purple , and a third row will contain a purple robe .
GOLD:	The third row contained an orange jacinth , an agate , and a purple amethyst .

ID:	2080
INPUT:	Itzuleran , negar egin zenuten Jaunaren aurrean , baina ez zizuen aditu , ez jaramonik egin .
PRED:	When you heard this , you were in the presence of the Lord , but you refused to listen to me .
GOLD:	Then you returned and wept before the Lord , but he refused to listen .

ID:	2081
INPUT:	Kanaan lurraldean dagoen Luz-era , hau da , Betelera , heldu zen Jakob , berarekin zihoan jende guztiarekin .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Jacob arrived at Kadesh and camped in the land of Canaan , where Jacob and all the people of Canaan .
GOLD:	Eventually , Jacob and his household arrived at Luz ( also called Bethel ) in Canaan .

ID:	2082
INPUT:	Bizirik eutsi baitziguneta gure oinei erortzen utzi ez .
PRED:	For the days of the Lord is covered with rain , and he did n't let them go down .
GOLD:	Our lives are in his hands , and he keeps our feet from stumbling .

ID:	2083
INPUT:	« Jaunaren handitasunadut goresten , pozaren pozez daukat barrena , Jainkoa baitut salbatzaile .
PRED:	I sing to the Lord for joy , for I have heard my cry for joy , but I am the God of my salvation .
GOLD:	How my spirit rejoices in God my Savior !

ID:	2084
INPUT:	gerriak ere almendra-lore gisako lau kopa zituen , beren kukulu , lore-hosto eta guzti .
PRED:	The lamp cups shaped like almond blossoms , lamp cups , buds , and petals .
GOLD:	The center stem of the lampstand was crafted with four lamp cups shaped like almond blossoms , complete with buds and petals .

ID:	2085
INPUT:	eta harekin bat eginik bizitzearren . Ez dut neurez salbatu nahi , legea betetzetik datorren salbamenaz , alegia , Kristorengan sinestetik datorrenaz baizik , Jainkoak sinesmenaren bidez ematen didan salbamenaz , alegia .
PRED:	I want you to live with Christ , but I want you to be saved by the law of Moses . I want you to be saved by the law of Moses , who believes in God 's grace .
GOLD:	and become one with him . I no longer count on my own righteousness through obeying the law ; rather , I become righteous through faith in Christ . For God 's way of making us right with himself depends on faith .

ID:	2086
INPUT:	Fededun berri askok ordu arteko beren jarduera okerrak agerian aitortu zituzten ,
PRED:	But many of the crowd followed him , and many of the people came to their father .
GOLD:	Many who became believers confessed their sinful practices .

ID:	2087
INPUT:	Baina pikondoak erantzun zien : “ Eta neure fruitu eder eta gozoa emateari uko egin , zuhaitzen gainean dilindan ibiltzeko ? ”
PRED:	But the fig tree replied , ‘ My fruit is good and good . ' So I did n't go back to the trees of the trees ? '
GOLD:	But the fig tree also refused , saying , ‘ Should I quit producing my sweet fruitjust to wave back and forth over the trees ? '

ID:	2088
INPUT:	gainera , goizero , sei kilo eta erdi irin labore-oparitzat , eta bi litro olio , irinarekin nahasteko . Arau hauek betiko balio izango dute .
PRED:	You must also offer a grain offering of six quarts of choice flour mixed with olive oil , one quart of olive oil , one gallon of olive oil , and sprinkle it with olive oil .
GOLD:	With the lamb , a grain offering must also be given to the Lord — about three quarts of flour with a third of a gallon of olive oil to moisten the choice flour . This will be a permanent law for you .

ID:	2089
INPUT:	Ondoren , zuetako bakoitzak adierazpen hau egingo du Jaunaren zuen Jainkoaren aurrean : “ Erretiratu dut etxetik sagaratu beharrekoa , eta lebitar , etorkin , umezurtz eta alargunari eman diet , zuk , Jaun horrek , agindu bezala . Ez dut zure aginduetariko bat ere hautsi , ez ahaztu .
PRED:	Then he will say to each other , ‘ This is what the Lord your God says : I will take care of you from the Temple of the Lord your God , and I will give you the Levites , orphans , and widows , and widows . I will not forget the Lord your God . '
GOLD:	Then you must declare in the presence of the Lord your God , ‘ I have taken the sacred gift from my house and have given it to the Levites , foreigners , orphans , and widows , just as you commanded me . I have not violated or forgotten any of your commands .

ID:	2090
INPUT:	Ez dira , beraz , inoiz itzuliko , hain gogoz berriro itzuliko liratekeen herrialdera .
PRED:	So do n't return to their own desires , so they could return to their homeland .
GOLD:	You will never again return to the land you yearn for .

ID:	2091
INPUT:	Mikak galdetu zion : — Nondik zatoz ? Hark erantzun : — Judako Belengo lebitar bat nauzu , beste nonbait bizitzeko asmotan .
PRED:	“ Where are you ? ” Naomi asked . “ Where are you going to live in Bethlehem ? ” And he replied , “ I 'll find some of you there . ”
GOLD:	“ Where are you from ? ” Micah asked him.He replied , “ I am a Levite from Bethlehem in Judah , and I am looking for a place to live . ”

ID:	2092
INPUT:	Eguerdian , ilundu egin zuen lurbira osoan hirurak arte .
PRED:	At noon , darkness fell across the land until three o'clock in the evening .
GOLD:	At noon , darkness fell across the whole land until three o'clock .

ID:	2093
INPUT:	Zortzigarren egunean bi usapal edo bi usakume eramango dizkio apaizari , elkarketa-etxolaren sarrerara .
PRED:	On the eighth day , the priest must give two turtledoves or two young pigeons , the priest must go to the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	On the eighth day they must bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons to the priest at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	2094
INPUT:	Beraz , gauzarik txikiena ere ezin baduzue , zertan kezkatu gainerakoaz ?
PRED:	So why are you trying to help us ? Why are you trying to help us ?
GOLD:	And if worry ca n't accomplish a little thing like that , what 's the use of worrying over bigger things ?

ID:	2095
INPUT:	« Baina , harrokeriak eraginda , Jaunaren zuen Jainkoaren zerbitzuan dagoen apaizaren nahiz epailearen erabakia onartu nahi ez duena hil egin behar duzue . Horrela ezabatuko duzue gaiztakeria Israeldik .
PRED:	“ But if you obey the commands of the Lord your God , you may not judge the law of the Lord your God . If you do this , you must not commit any of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Anyone arrogant enough to reject the verdict of the judge or of the priest who represents the Lord your God must die . In this way you will purge the evil from Israel .

ID:	2096
INPUT:	Zer ikustera irten zineten , bada ? Profetaren bat ? Bai , noski , eta profeta baino ere handiagoa .
PRED:	“ What do you see ? ” they asked . “ Yes , we have a prophet than a prophet ! ”
GOLD:	Were you looking for a prophet ? Yes , and he is more than a prophet .

ID:	2097
INPUT:	Amari galdezka ari dira : « Non dira garia eta ardoa ? » Zauriturik bezala erortzen dira hiriko kaleetan , amaren altzoan azken arnasa emanez .
PRED:	“ Where are you looking for ? ” they asked . “ Where are you looking for ? ” And they will be buried at the end of the slaughter .
GOLD:	They cry out to their mothers , “ We need food and drink ! ” Their lives ebb away in the streetslike the life of a warrior wounded in battle.They gasp for lifeas they collapse in their mothers ' arms .

ID:	2098
INPUT:	Gainditu ezineko muga ezarri diezu urei , berriro lurra estal ez dezaten .
PRED:	You placed the boundaries of the boundaries of the boundaries of the earth , but it is created by the earth .
GOLD:	Then you set a firm boundary for the seas , so they would never again cover the earth .

ID:	2099
INPUT:	Atzerriko jendea zerbitzariizango duzue : zuen artaldeak zainduko dituzte , nekazari eta mahastizainizango dituzue .
PRED:	You will serve your servants , your servants , and you will be your servants . You will be your own flesh , and you will be my own flesh .
GOLD:	Foreigners will be your servants.They will feed your flocksand plow your fieldsand tend your vineyards .

ID:	2100
INPUT:	Atera ziren benjamindarrak israeldarrei aurre egiteko eta urrutiratu egin ziren beren hiritik . Aurrekoetan bezala , israeldarrak hiltzen hasi ziren landan , Betelerako bidean eta Gibearako bidean ; hogeita hamarren bat israeldar bota zituzten .
PRED:	Then the Israelites went to fight against the Israelites from the town of Benjamin , just as the Lord had commanded them , and they killed them in the towns of Benjamin , just as the Lord had commanded them .
GOLD:	When the men of Benjamin came out to attack , they were drawn away from the town . And as they had done before , they began to kill the Israelites . About thirty Israelites died in the open fields and along the roads , one leading to Bethel and the other leading back to Gibeah .

ID:	2101
INPUT:	Orain , ordea , Jerusalem hautatu dut neure bizileku eta David neure herri Israelen buruzagi ” .
PRED:	But now I have chosen this Temple to honor my people Israel , and I have chosen my people Israel to do what is right . '
GOLD:	But now I have chosen Jerusalem as the place for my name to be honored , and I have chosen David to be king over my people Israel . ' ”

ID:	2102
INPUT:	Aaronen seme Eleazar zen lebitarren senitarteburuen nagusi . Honek bere menpean zituen santutegiko zerbitzuaz arduratzen ziren guztiak .
PRED:	Next Eleazar son of Eleazar son of Eleazar son of Eleazar son of Eleazar the priest began to serve in charge of the sanctuary .
GOLD:	Eleazar , son of Aaron the priest , was the chief administrator over all the Levites , with special responsibility for the oversight of the sanctuary .

ID:	2103
INPUT:	Jesusek itsuari eskutik heldu eta herritik kanpora eraman zuen . Begiak listuz igurtzi ondoren , eskuak ezarri zizkion eta galdetu : — Ikusten al duzu ezer ?
PRED:	When Jesus arrived , he took him out of the synagogue and brought him out of the Philistines . “ Why did you see him ? ” he asked . “ What do you see ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus took the blind man by the hand and led him out of the village . Then , spitting on the man 's eyes , he laid his hands on him and asked , “ Can you see anything now ? ”

ID:	2104
INPUT:	Ako , Afek eta Rehob hiriak ere hartzen zituen ; guztira hogeita bi hiri ziren , beren herrixkekin .
PRED:	The following towns with their pasturelands were given to the Levites : The following towns with their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	Ummah , Aphek , and Rehob — twenty-two towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	2105
INPUT:	Errezela ere egin zuen , lihozkoa , more , gorri eta gorriminez tindatua eta bertan hegaldun izakiak bordatu zituen .
PRED:	He also sinned against the king , and he tore his finger in his linen chains and put them on his waist .
GOLD:	Across the entrance of the Most Holy Place he hung a curtain made of fine linen , decorated with blue , purple , and scarlet thread and embroidered with figures of cherubim .

ID:	2106
INPUT:	Gudalburuak , orduan , bi ehuntariri deitu eta agindu hauek eman zizkien : « Eduki itzazue prest gaueko bederatzietarako berrehun soldadu oinezko , hirurogeita hamar zaldizko eta berrehun lantzari , Zesareara joateko .
PRED:	Then the commander ordered two of the soldiers , and he told them , “ Quick , pay attention to the soldiers , and pay him thirty pounds of silver . He will pay him thirty pounds of silver and 75 pounds of silver .
GOLD:	Then the commander called two of his officers and ordered , “ Get 200 soldiers ready to leave for Caesarea at nine o'clock tonight . Also take 200 spearmen and 70 mounted troops .

ID:	2107
INPUT:	Soldaduek ere galdetu zioten : — Eta guk , zer egin behar dugu ? Joanek erantzun zien : — Ez atera inori dirurik gogorkeriaz , ezta gezurrezko salakuntzaz ere ; konforma zaitezte daukazuen soldatarekin .
PRED:	The soldiers replied , “ Why should we do this ? ” And the soldiers replied , “ We wo n't have any value of these witnesses ? ” And the soldiers replied , “ It 's all right with you ? ”
GOLD:	“ What should we do ? ” asked some soldiers.John replied , “ Do n't extort money or make false accusations . And be content with your pay . ”

ID:	2108
INPUT:	Hau jendea , aita madarikatueta ama bedeinkatzen ez duena !
PRED:	Anyone who denies a father or mother or mother or mother or mother or mother .
GOLD:	Some people curse their fatherand do not thank their mother .

ID:	2109
INPUT:	Semeek oturuntzak antolatzen zituzten txandaka beren etxeetan , eta arrebak ere gonbidatzen zituzten jan-edan haietara .
PRED:	They were like the Sabbath day of the Sabbath , and they invited them to drink their garments . They also drank from their own homes .
GOLD:	Job 's sons would take turns preparing feasts in their homes , and they would also invite their three sisters to celebrate with them .

ID:	2110
INPUT:	Jauna , Jainko mendekatzaile ! Ager zaitez , oi Jainko mendekatzaile !
PRED:	O God of Israel , you who live in peace , you who live in peace .
GOLD:	O Lord , the God of vengeance , O God of vengeance , let your glorious justice shine forth !

ID:	2111
INPUT:	Iraun beza haren izenak betiko , eguzkiak adina ! Bedeinkatuak bitez harengan ondorengoak , zoriontsu nazio guztiak !
PRED:	May all who fear him forever and ever ! All who fear him will praise him , for he will bless all who fear him .
GOLD:	May the king 's name endure forever ; may it continue as long as the sun shines.May all nations be blessed through himand bring him praise .

ID:	2112
INPUT:	Israel , erreka ondoko harri leunak , zeure kultugai izan dituzunak , horiexek izango dituzu zorigaitz . Horiei eskaini dizkiezui<unk> eta labore-opariak . Eta horrek baretu behar ote dunire haserrea ?
PRED:	O people of Israel , may the descendants of Jacob be able to worship your idols , and there will be no peace for you , and there will be no peace .
GOLD:	Your gods are the smooth stones in the valleys.You worship them with liquid offerings and grain offerings.They , not I , are your inheritance.Do you think all this makes me happy ?

ID:	2113
INPUT:	Erregeak higuin ditu egintza gaiztoak , zuzentasunean oinarritzen baita errege-aulkia .
PRED:	The wicked are wicked , but the wicked are just like the king .
GOLD:	A king detests wrongdoing , for his rule is built on justice .

ID:	2114
INPUT:	Mesias omen duk hori , Israelgo erregea ; jaits dadila orain gurutzetik , ikus eta sinets dezagun » . Berarekin gurutzean josiak zeudenek ere irain egiten zioten .
PRED:	This is the Messiah , the King of Israel , the king of Israel , says the king of Israel . And now you will believe in him . ”
GOLD:	Let this Messiah , this King of Israel , come down from the cross so we can see it and believe him ! ” Even the men who were crucified with Jesus ridiculed him .

ID:	2115
INPUT:	Ez dut gehiago seme-izenik merezi . Har nazazu zeure langileetako bat bezala ” .
PRED:	I will not have a single word to you . I will have one of your sons and daughters . ' ”
GOLD:	and I am no longer worthy of being called your son . Please take me on as a hired servant . ” '

ID:	2116
INPUT:	Davidek galdetu zion , orduan : — Norena zara eta nongoa ? Mutilak erantzun : — Egiptoarra nauzu , amalektar baten esklaboa . Nagusiak utzi egin ninduen duela hiru egun , gaixotu egin bainintzen .
PRED:	“ Where are you ? ” David asked . “ What are you the boy ? ” And David replied , “ I was a slave who rescued me from the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	“ To whom do you belong , and where do you come from ? ” David asked him . “ I am an Egyptian — the slave of an Amalekite , ” he replied . “ My master abandoned me three days ago because I was sick .

ID:	2117
INPUT:	Baina Lot zintzoa onik atera zuen , jende gaizto haren biziera biziotsuak saminez betetzen zuelako .
PRED:	But Lot sent Abram to tell him the truth , and he was afraid of those who had lived in his life .
GOLD:	But God also rescued Lot out of Sodom because he was a righteous man who was sick of the shameful immorality of the wicked people around him .

ID:	2118
INPUT:	Davidek galdetu zion Jonatani : — Nork adieraziko dit , zuen aitak haserre erantzuten badizu ?
PRED:	“ Who are you talking about me ? ” David asked . “ Who is your father ? ”
GOLD:	Then David asked , “ How will I know whether or not your father is angry ? ”

ID:	2119
INPUT:	Eliseok morroiari : — Dei egiozu . Egin zion dei eta emakumea ate ondora etorri zen .
PRED:	Elisha said to her , “ Bring her back to her , and she called her back to her . ” So she returned to her .
GOLD:	“ Call her back again , ” Elisha told him . When the woman returned , Elisha said to her as she stood in the doorway ,

ID:	2120
INPUT:	Orduan , herriak aho batez erantzun zuen : « Jaunak agindu guztia beteko dugu » . Herriaren erantzuna Jaunari eramatera joan zen Moises .
PRED:	Then the people shouted out , “ We will follow all the commands the Lord has commanded Moses . ” So Moses returned to the land of the Lord .
GOLD:	And all the people responded together , “ We will do everything the Lord has commanded . ” So Moses brought the people 's answer back to the Lord .

ID:	2121
INPUT:	Zuen leinuetako batean Jaunak berak aukeratuko duen lekuan bakarrik eskainiko dituzue zeuen erre-opariak , eta han beteko nik agindutako guztia .
PRED:	If you present an animal to the Lord , you must present a burnt offering to the Lord your God , and you must present it to him as a burnt offering .
GOLD:	You may do so only at the place the Lord will choose within one of your tribal territories . There you must offer your burnt offerings and do everything I command you .

ID:	2122
INPUT:	Mardokeo haremeko atari aurrean ibili ohi zen egunero , Ester osasunez nola ote zegoen eta nola ote zerabilten jakin nahiz .
PRED:	So Mordecai returned to the banquet Esther had said , “ Let 's go back to the banquet he had done . ” So they told him about everything he had done .
GOLD:	Every day Mordecai would take a walk near the courtyard of the harem to find out about Esther and what was happening to her .

ID:	2123
INPUT:	Zure xedapenei jarraitzea niretzat pozgarriagoaberastasun handienak baino .
PRED:	Your laws are better to those who reject me , for they are better than dishonest .
GOLD:	I have rejoiced in your lawsas much as in riches .

ID:	2124
INPUT:	Arriskuz inguraturik aurkitzean , babestu nire bizia etsai amorratuengandik , luzatu eskua eta salba nazazu .
PRED:	You have placed your enemy on your enemies , making them a footstool under your feet , and you rescued me from your enemies .
GOLD:	Though I am surrounded by troubles , you will protect me from the anger of my enemies.You reach out your hand , and the power of your right hand saves me .

ID:	2125
INPUT:	Samariara heltzean , hirian ziren Akaben gainerako ahaide guztiak hil zituen , denak suntsituz , Jaunak Eliasi esana zion bezala .
PRED:	When Ahab arrived at Samaria , he killed all the towns of Samaria , just as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	When Jehu arrived in Samaria , he killed everyone who was left there from Ahab 's family , just as the Lord had promised through Elijah .

ID:	2126
INPUT:	Madarikatua Jauna maite ez duena ! Marana <unk> ! ( Zatoz , Jauna ! ) .
PRED:	Cursed is the Lord who loves those who love me , but the Lord is not my God .
GOLD:	If anyone does not love the Lord , that person is cursed . Our Lord , come !

ID:	2127
INPUT:	Justiziaz jantzia nengoen , zuzenbideaz estalia burutik oinetaraino .
PRED:	I long for you , from the oppression of the harvest of the harvest of harvest .
GOLD:	Everything I did was honest.Righteousness covered me like a robe , and I wore justice like a turban .

ID:	2128
INPUT:	Justizian sendo ezarria egongo zara . Zapalkuntzatik libre izango zaraeta ez duzu ezeren beldurrik izango , ikara ez zaizu inoiz hurbilduko .
PRED:	You will be strong in trouble , and you will be able to rescue you from the oppression of the nations , and you will no longer be afraid .
GOLD:	You will be secure under a government that is just and fair.Your enemies will stay far away.You will live in peace , and terror will not come near .

ID:	2129
INPUT:	Eskerrak eman jainkoen Jainkoari , haren maitasuna betikoa baita .
PRED:	Give thanks to God , for he is good ! His faithful love endures forever .
GOLD:	Give thanks to the God of gods.His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	2130
INPUT:	Erregeak , hirugarrenez , beste buruzagi bat bidali zuen , berrogeita hamar gizonekin . Hirugarren buruzagi hau ere igo zen Eliasengana ; baina , heldu zenean , belaunikatu egin zen haren aitzinean eta honela erregutu zion : — Jainkoaren gizon , utz gaitzazu bizirik , bai ni , bai zeure berrogeita hamar zerbitzariok .
PRED:	So the king sent a chief of staff on the third day , and he sent fifty men back to Elisha , along with the third day of his father , Isaac , and his officials . He said to him , “ Let 's go on to your father , for you have done this man . ”
GOLD:	Once more the king sent a third captain with fifty men . But this time the captain went up the hill and fell to his knees before Elijah . He pleaded with him , “ O man of God , please spare my life and the lives of these , your fifty servants .

ID:	2131
INPUT:	Utzi Jainkoari zeuen kezka guztiak , bera baita zuetaz arduratzen .
PRED:	May God give you everything you need , for you are good and good .
GOLD:	Give all your worries and cares to God , for he cares about you .

ID:	2132
INPUT:	Berak azaltzen ditugauza sakon eta gordeak ; berak ezagutzen ilunpetan dagoena , argiz inguratua baitago .
PRED:	He makes the light shine on the sun , and he makes the light shine on the dark day , but the light shines on the day .
GOLD:	He reveals deep and mysterious thingsand knows what lies hidden in darkness , though he is surrounded by light .

ID:	2133
INPUT:	Sarak , beldurturik , ukatu egin zuen , esanez : — Ez dut irribarrerik egin . — Nola ezetz ! Irri egin duzu — erantzun zion hark .
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid , ” he asked . “ I do n't go out . ” “ I do n't want you , ” he said . “ Yes , ” he said , “ I am here . ”
GOLD:	Sarah was afraid , so she denied it , saying , “ I did n't laugh . ” But the Lord said , “ No , you did laugh . ”

ID:	2134
INPUT:	Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Zeure xarmak guztiei banatu eta zeure maitale eta idolo higuingarri horiekin guztiekin prostituzioan jarduteko zeure gorputza biluztu duzulako , eta zeure seme-alabak ere horien ohorez hil dituzulako ,
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will strip away your pagan shrines and detestable sins and prostitution , your detestable sins , and your bodies will be destroyed by your own sons and daughters .
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Because you have poured out your lust and exposed yourself in prostitution to all your lovers , and because you have worshiped detestable idols , and because you have slaughtered your children as sacrifices to your gods ,

ID:	2135
INPUT:	Orduan , agintariek inguratu eta esan zioten : — Noiz arte eduki behar gaituzu zalantzan ? Zu bazara Mesias , esaguzu argi eta garbi .
PRED:	“ How long will you be ? ” they shouted . “ How long will you be the Messiah ? ”
GOLD:	The people surrounded him and asked , “ How long are you going to keep us in suspense ? If you are the Messiah , tell us plainly . ”

ID:	2136
INPUT:	Ulertzeko gauza denak uler beza .
PRED:	Anyone with ears to hear must listen and understand .
GOLD:	Anyone with ears to hear should listen and understand !

ID:	2137
INPUT:	« Onartzen ez bazaituztete eta zuen mezua entzun nahi ez , etxe edo herri hartatik ateratzean , astindu zeuen oinetako hautsa .
PRED:	“ If you listen to me , you must not listen to what you say , ‘ Do n't listen to the place where you are going . '
GOLD:	If any household or town refuses to welcome you or listen to your message , shake its dust from your feet as you leave .

ID:	2138
INPUT:	Jesus egiazko mahatsondoa
PRED:	Jesus Is Betrayed and Arrested
GOLD:	Jesus , the True Vine

ID:	2139
INPUT:	Haren haserrea une baterako , haren onginahia bizi guztirako . Arratsean negarrez bagaude ere , goizean berriro poz-oihuz .
PRED:	I will pour out my fierce anger , and I will bring you out of the night . I will sing the praises of the Most High .
GOLD:	When I was prosperous , I said , “ Nothing can stop me now ! ”

ID:	2140
INPUT:	Eta zu , Judako Belen , ez zara , ez , Judako hirietan txikiena ; zuregandik aterako baita buruzagia , Israel nire herria gobernatuko duena .
PRED:	You are not my people of Judah , but you are not from the city of Judah . But you are my own people , and you are my people Israel .
GOLD:	‘ And you , O Bethlehem in the land of Judah , are not least among the ruling cities of Judah , for a ruler will come from youwho will be the shepherd for my people Israel . ' ”

ID:	2141
INPUT:	« Hurbilarazi Aaron eta beronen semeak elkarketa-etxolara , eta garbi daitezela urez .
PRED:	“ Next Aaron and the sons of Aaron and the sons of Aaron and his sons will be ceremonially clean .
GOLD:	“ Present Aaron and his sons at the entrance of the Tabernacle , and wash them with water .

ID:	2142
INPUT:	Goi-agerpen guztiak zigiluz itxitako idazki baten antzeko gertatzen zaizkizue : irakurtzen dakien bati idazkia eman eta « Irakurri hau » esaten diote , eta hark « Ezin dut , zigiluz itxia baitago » erantzuten ;
PRED:	I tell you the truth , it is written in the book of the Most High . I tell you the truth , ‘ This is what it says : I am saying , ‘ This is what it says : I am saying , ‘ I am going to read it . ' ”
GOLD:	All the future events in this vision are like a sealed book to them . When you give it to those who can read , they will say , “ We ca n't read it because it is sealed . ”

ID:	2143
INPUT:	Jesusek galdetu zien : — Norenak dira irudi eta izen hauek ?
PRED:	Jesus asked them , “ Where are these animals ? ”
GOLD:	he asked , “ Whose picture and title are stamped on it ? ”

ID:	2144
INPUT:	Hau diotsuegu , Jaunaren irakatsian oinarrituz : guk , Jauna etortzean bizirik gertatuko garenok , ez diegu hil direnei aurrea hartuko .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says to us , “ We are trying to believe in the Lord 's presence , but we will not die . ”
GOLD:	We tell you this directly from the Lord : We who are still living when the Lord returns will not meet him ahead of those who have died .

ID:	2145
INPUT:	Ez dut berri ona zabaltzeko lotsarik , Jainkoaren indarra baita fededun guztiak salbatzeko , juduak lehenengo , baina baita judu ez direnak ere .
PRED:	I do n't know the meaning of the Jewish law , for I am determined to condemn the Jews and the Jews . But I do n't want to condemn the Jews and the Jews .
GOLD:	For I am not ashamed of this Good News about Christ . It is the power of God at work , saving everyone who believes — the Jew first and also the Gentile .

ID:	2146
INPUT:	Amosek erantzun zion : — Ni ez naiz profeta , ez eta profeta-taldekidea . Abeltzaina naiz eta basapiku-biltzailea .
PRED:	But Amaziah replied , “ I am not a prophet or a prophet . I did n't know what the prophets said , ‘ I am a prophet . ' ”
GOLD:	But Amos replied , “ I 'm not a professional prophet , and I was never trained to be one . I 'm just a shepherd , and I take care of sycamore-fig trees .

ID:	2147
INPUT:	Azarias , Judako errege
PRED:	Ahaziah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Uzziah Rules in Judah

ID:	2148
INPUT:	« Noren ikara zinen , noren beldur , niri huts egiteko , nitaz erabat ahazteko ? Luzaroegi isilik egon naizelakogaldu didazu beldurra , ezta ?
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid of me ? Can you be afraid of me ? Can you be afraid of me , or if you refuse to fear me ? Why are you afraid ?
GOLD:	“ Are you afraid of these idols ? Do they terrify you ? Is that why you have lied to meand forgotten me and my words ? Is it because of my long silencethat you no longer fear me ?

ID:	2149
INPUT:	Lod , Hadid eta Onokoak <unk> ;
PRED:	The citizens of Lod , Hadid , and Hadid ,
GOLD:	The citizens of Lod , Hadid , and Ono725

ID:	2150
INPUT:	Gizasemeak
PRED:	Young Woman
GOLD:	Young Woman

ID:	2151
INPUT:	Imerrenak 1 . 052 ;
PRED:	The family of Shephatiah372
GOLD:	The family of Immer1,052

ID:	2152
INPUT:	Lurra baino luzeagoa da , itsasoa baino zabalagoa .
PRED:	It is better than the earth than the sea , for it is better than the sea .
GOLD:	It is broader than the earthand wider than the sea .

ID:	2153
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	2154
INPUT:	Su emango dietDamaskoko harresieieta suak Ben-Hadaden jauregiakirentsiko ditu » .
PRED:	So I will send down fire on the walls of Damascus , and the fortresses of Judah will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	“ And I will set fire to the walls of Damascusthat will burn up the palaces of Ben-hadad . ”

ID:	2155
INPUT:	Baina aitak , jakitean , onirizten ez badie , boto eta konpromiso haiek guztiak hutsean geldituko dira ; haietatik libre utziko du Jaunak neskatxa , aitak oniritzirik eman ez diolako .
PRED:	But if you refuse to listen to my father or mother , you will be cut off from the land of Egypt , and the Lord will rescue her from the dead .
GOLD:	“ Now suppose a young woman makes a vow or binds herself with an impulsive pledge and later marries .

ID:	2156
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun zuen : — Sinesmena bazenute , mostaza-hazia bezain txikia izanik ere , pikondo honi « Atera hortik eta landatu itsasoan » esango zeniokete , eta obeditu egingo lizueke .
PRED:	The Lord replied , “ You are poor and needy , as if you are willing , you will be like the one who planted in the sea , and you will say , ‘ I am the one who planted in the sea . ' ”
GOLD:	The Lord answered , “ If you had faith even as small as a mustard seed , you could say to this mulberry tree , ‘ May you be uprooted and be planted in the sea , ' and it would obey you !

ID:	2157
INPUT:	Beste hau ere erakutsi zidan Jainko Jaunak : saskia bete fruitu heldu .
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Sovereign Lord :
GOLD:	Then the Sovereign Lord showed me another vision . In it I saw a basket filled with ripe fruit .

ID:	2158
INPUT:	Bazkal orduan Boozek esan zion Ruti : « Zatoz , hartzazu ogi-puska bat , busti saltsatan eta jan » . Eseri zen , bada , Rut igitarien ondoan eta Boozek xigortutako ale eskutada bat eskaini zion . Hark asetzeraino jan zuen eta , halere , sobera geratu zitzaion .
PRED:	So Ruth said to Boaz , “ Come , let me eat a piece of bread and eat it . ” So Ruth took the loaves of bread and eat it , and she gave it to her husband , and she gave it to her husband .
GOLD:	At mealtime Boaz called to her , “ Come over here , and help yourself to some food . You can dip your bread in the sour wine . ” So she sat with his harvesters , and Boaz gave her some roasted grain to eat . She ate all she wanted and still had some left over .

ID:	2159
INPUT:	Orduan , gaztetasunaren indarra berreskuratuko du , nerabezaroko egunetara itzuliko berriro .
PRED:	Then the priest will return to the ground , and the priest will return to the next day .
GOLD:	Then his body will become as healthy as a child 's , firm and youthful again .

ID:	2160
INPUT:	Bizi nadila luzaro zu goresteko , lagun diezadatela zure erabakiek !
PRED:	How long will you think of me , O Lord , how long will your wonderful deeds shine on you ?
GOLD:	Let me live so I can praise you , and may your regulations help me .

ID:	2161
INPUT:	Kristo Jaunarengan ongi finkaturik , eraikin osoa haziz doa , Jainkoari sagaraturiko tenplu bihurtzeraino .
PRED:	Christ has made a covenant with the Lord , and he has made him holy Temple .
GOLD:	We are carefully joined together in him , becoming a holy temple for the Lord .

ID:	2162
INPUT:	Bildu denok eta entzun ! Zuetako norkiragarri du horrelakorik ? Nire adiskideakburutuko du nire nahia , Babilonia eta bertako jendearenaurkako erabakia .
PRED:	And if you hear this , how can someone say to me ? If you say , ‘ My friend is my friend , my dear friend , my dear friend , my chosen people will go to the land of Babylon . '
GOLD:	Have any of your idols ever told you this ? Come , all of you , and listen : The Lord has chosen Cyrus as his ally.He will use him to put an end to the empire of Babylonand to destroy the Babylonian armies .

ID:	2163
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Gaixoaldirako . Daviden poema .
PRED:	O Lord , listen to my cry ; listen to my prayer .
GOLD:	Only fools say in their hearts , “ There is no God . ” They are corrupt , and their actions are evil ; not one of them does good !

ID:	2164
INPUT:	Moisesek , Israelgo arduradunekin batera , agindu hau eman zion herriari : « Bete gaur ematen dizkizuedan agindu guztiok .
PRED:	So Moses gave this order to the elders of Israel : “ If you obey all the commands I have given you today , you must obey all the commands I have given you today .
GOLD:	Then Moses and the leaders of Israel gave this charge to the people : “ Obey all these commands that I am giving you today .

ID:	2165
INPUT:	Hogeita zazpigarren urtean , lehen hilaren batean , honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	On April 21 , during the first year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	On April 26 , the first day of the new year , during the twenty-seventh year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	2166
INPUT:	Elteke , Gibeton , Baalat ,
PRED:	Balaam , the father of Shem ,
GOLD:	Eltekeh , Gibbethon , Baalath ,

ID:	2167
INPUT:	Isaiasen semea , Israelentzat ezaugarri
PRED:	A Call to Return to Egypt
GOLD:	The Coming Assyrian Invasion

ID:	2168
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Zuetako zeinek , ardi bakarra eduki eta larunbatez zulora erortzen bazaio , ez du hartu eta aterako ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ If you ca n't be handed over to the Sabbath , how can you be put into a stone ? ”
GOLD:	And he answered , “ If you had a sheep that fell into a well on the Sabbath , would n't you work to pull it out ? Of course you would .

ID:	2169
INPUT:	Altxa , munduaren epaile hori , emaiezu harroei merezi dutena !
PRED:	Rise up , O people of the earth , and judge the nations !
GOLD:	Arise , O Judge of the earth.Give the proud what they deserve .

ID:	2170
INPUT:	Hananiasen seme Jehu profetak , ordea , bidera irten eta esan zion : « Gaiztoari laguntzen eta Jaunaren etsaia adiskidetzat hartzen , ala ? Hori egin duzulako , haserre duzu Jauna .
PRED:	But the prophet Jehu son of Josiah went out to meet him and said , “ Why are you fighting for the Lord 's enemies ? Why do you know that the Lord 's anger ? ”
GOLD:	Jehu son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him . “ Why should you help the wicked and love those who hate the Lord ? ” he asked the king . “ Because of what you have done , the Lord is very angry with you .

ID:	2171
INPUT:	Berak behar zituen handikiak eskolatueta kontseilariei jakinduria irakatsi .
PRED:	He knew their advice and wise men and wise men and wise men .
GOLD:	He could instruct the king 's aides as he pleasedand teach the king 's advisers .

ID:	2172
INPUT:	Jerusalemgo fededunentzat egin beharreko diru-bilketari dagokionez , egin zuek ere Galaziako eliz elkarteei agindu niena .
PRED:	When I heard that the prophets of Jerusalem had done to you in Jerusalem , they did what I had done to you .
GOLD:	Now regarding your question about the money being collected for God 's people in Jerusalem . You should follow the same procedure I gave to the churches in Galatia .

ID:	2173
INPUT:	Izan ere , kezka gehiegikamesgaiztoa dakar , eta hitz-jarioakzoro-berriketak egitea .
PRED:	For the words of a wicked person is sinful ; the words of a wicked person produces knowledge .
GOLD:	Do n't make rash promises , and do n't be hasty in bringing matters before God . After all , God is in heaven , and you are here on earth . So let your words be few .

ID:	2174
INPUT:	Jonasek Jaunaren errukiaren berri ikasi
PRED:	Josiah 's Religious Reforms
GOLD:	Jonah 's Anger at the

ID:	2175
INPUT:	Hilabete batean hiru artzain kendu nituen ; baina haserretu egin nintzen ardien kontra , eta beraiek ere aspertu egin ziren nitaz .
PRED:	I took three sheep and goats , but I took them to them , but they were very angry with me .
GOLD:	I got rid of their three evil shepherds in a single month.But I became impatient with these sheep , and they hated me , too .

ID:	2176
INPUT:	« Madarikatua jaio nintzeneko egunaeta “ Ume bat sortu da ” esan zuteneko gaua !
PRED:	“ When I was born , I was pregnant and gave birth to a son named a son . '
GOLD:	“ Let the day of my birth be erased , and the night I was conceived .

ID:	2177
INPUT:	Gerrikoa gizonaren gerriari lotzen zaion bezala nahi izan nituen Juda eta Israel herriak niri lotu , nire herri izan zitezen , nire ospe eta ohore ; baina ezentzun egin zidaten » .
PRED:	When the people of Israel saw that I would happen to the people of Israel , they would be ashamed of me , but they did n't listen to me . ” So they listened to me , but they did n't listen to me .
GOLD:	As a loincloth clings to a man 's waist , so I created Judah and Israel to cling to me , says the Lord . They were to be my people , my pride , my glory — an honor to my name . But they would not listen to me .

ID:	2178
INPUT:	Daviden azken hitzak
PRED:	David 's Final Instructions
GOLD:	David 's Last Words

ID:	2179
INPUT:	Israeldar guztiek , sua jaitsi eta Jaunaren aintzak tenplua betetzen zuela ikustean , lurreraino makurturik , Jauna adoratu eta goretsi zuten , esanez : « Ona baita , haren maitasuna betikoa baita » .
PRED:	When the people of Israel saw that the glory of the Lord filled the Temple of the Lord , they read it to him , “ His faithful love endures forever . ” And they said , “ His faithful love endures forever . ”
GOLD:	When all the people of Israel saw the fire coming down and the glorious presence of the Lord filling the Temple , they fell face down on the ground and worshiped and praised the Lord , saying , “ He is good ! His faithful love endures forever ! ”

ID:	2180
INPUT:	Ez beza inork bere burua engaina ! Zuetako norbaitek mundu honen arabera jakintsu dela uste badu , egin bedi zoro , egiaz jakintsu izateko .
PRED:	No one can hear the truth , but no one can see it , for it will be wise and wise . But when it returns , it will be wise and wise .
GOLD:	Stop deceiving yourselves . If you think you are wise by this world 's standards , you need to become a fool to be truly wise .

ID:	2181
INPUT:	Galdetu zion Jonadabek Amnoni : — Zer duzu , errege-seme horrek , egunean baino egunean makalago egoteko ? Ez al didazu esan behar ? Amnonek erantzun zion : — Gure anaia Absalomen arreba Tamarrez maitemindurik nago .
PRED:	But Amnon asked him , “ What have you done to us than this ? ” So Amnon asked , “ Do n't you think about this ? ” But Amnon replied , “ No , my brother 's sister Amnon would n't love her . ”
GOLD:	One day Jonadab said to Amnon , “ What 's the trouble ? Why should the son of a king look so dejected morning after morning ? ” So Amnon told him , “ I am in love with Tamar , my brother Absalom 's sister . ”

ID:	2182
INPUT:	Abiatar apaizari esan zion erregeak : « Alde hemendik Anatotera , zeure lurretara . Heriotza merezi duzu zuk ere , baina ez zaitut hilko , gure aita Daviden aurrean Jainko Jaunaren kutxa eraman izan duzulako , eta berak jasan zituen nekeak zuk ere jasan izan dituzulako » .
PRED:	Then the priest said to the king , “ Get out of the hill country , and go to the place where you live in the place of your father , David , and I will give you the Ark of the Lord your God , and you will know what you have done . ”
GOLD:	Then the king said to Abiathar the priest , “ Go back to your home in Anathoth . You deserve to die , but I will not kill you now , because you carried the Ark of the Sovereign Lord for David my father and you shared all his hardships . ”

ID:	2183
INPUT:	Egun hartan , hala ere , harri astun bihurtuko dut Jerusalem herri guztientzat : jasotzen ahalegintzen dena , zauritu egingo da . Lurreko herri guztiak bilduko dira Jerusalemen aurka .
PRED:	On that day I will bring many new letter to the people of Jerusalem . I will bring disaster upon the people of Jerusalem , and all the people of Jerusalem will stand against Jerusalem .
GOLD:	On that day I will make Jerusalem an immovable rock . All the nations will gather against it to try to move it , but they will only hurt themselves .

ID:	2184
INPUT:	Jauna gure alde izan ez balitz , etsaiek eraso zigutenean ,
PRED:	If the Lord would not let our enemies go on to war against us ,
GOLD:	What if the Lord had not been on our sidewhen people attacked us ?

ID:	2185
INPUT:	Barauari buruzko galdera : ospakizunak eta zuzentasuna
PRED:	A Vision of good judgment , and godliness is good and good .
GOLD:	A Call to Justice and Mercy

ID:	2186
INPUT:	Zorobabel , Josue , Nehemias , Seraias , Reelaias , Mardokeo , Bilxan , Mispar , Bigbai , Rehum eta Baana zituzten gidari . Hona israeldar hauen zerrenda :
PRED:	Zerubbabel , Jeshua , Jeshua , Nehemiah , Kadmiel , Rehum , and Meshullam ,
GOLD:	Their leaders were Zerubbabel , Jeshua , Nehemiah , Seraiah , Reelaiah , Mordecai , Bilshan , Mispar , Bigvai , Rehum , and Baanah.This is the number of the men of Israel who returned from exile :

ID:	2187
INPUT:	Nabal hila zela aditu zuelarik , esan zuen Davidek : « Bedeinkatua Jauna ! Nire alde jokatu baitu Nabalek egin zidan irainaren aurrean . Okerra egitea galarazi dit ; Nabali , berriz , gainera bota dio Jaunak bere gaiztakeria » . Ondoren , mandatariak igorri zizkion Davidek Abigaili , emaztetzat hartu nahi zuela adieraziz .
PRED:	When David realized that Nabal had been blessed , he said to David , “ Praise the Lord , for I have sinned against the Lord . ” So David sent his wife , and he sent him back to his wife , and he sent me to marry her .
GOLD:	When David heard that Nabal was dead , he said , “ Praise the Lord , who has avenged the insult I received from Nabal and has kept me from doing it myself . Nabal has received the punishment for his sin . ” Then David sent messengers to Abigail to ask her to become his wife .

ID:	2188
INPUT:	Hona , beraz , zenbat gizaldi guztira : Abrahamengandik Davidengana hamalau ; Davidengandik Babiloniako erbestealdira beste hamalau , eta Babiloniako erbestealditik Mesiasengana beste hamalau .
PRED:	So this is what the king of Babylon says : “ A man from David , from the king of Babylon , who has been exiled to Babylon to Babylon , and he will also be exiled to Babylon .
GOLD:	All those listed above include fourteen generations from Abraham to David , fourteen from David to the Babylonian exile , and fourteen from the Babylonian exile to the Messiah .

ID:	2189
INPUT:	Urrun zaitez burugabeagandik , ez duzu haren hitzetan jakintzarik aurkituko .
PRED:	Do n't turn away from him , for he will make you wise .
GOLD:	Stay away from fools , for you wo n't find knowledge on their lips .

ID:	2190
INPUT:	Zertan hil behar duzue zuk eta zure herriak gerraz , gosez eta izurriz ? Izan ere , Jaunak erabakia du hori gertatuko zaiola Babiloniako erregearen menpeko izatea onartzen ez duen nazioari .
PRED:	Then you will die in your land , and you will die in war , famine , and disease . But if you refuse to obey the word of the Lord , you will never die .
GOLD:	Why do you insist on dying — you and your people ? Why should you choose war , famine , and disease , which the Lord will bring against every nation that refuses to submit to Babylon 's king ?

ID:	2191
INPUT:	Entzun zuen Hadadek David eta honen gudalburu Joab hilak zirela eta esan zion faraoiari : — Uztazu neure herrira joaten .
PRED:	Then David heard that Joab and his army had fled to Joab and told him , “ Let me go to the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	When the news reached Hadad in Egypt that David and his commander Joab were both dead , he said to Pharaoh , “ Let me return to my own country . ”

ID:	2192
INPUT:	« Zoritxarrekoa zu , egur-puska bati : “ Esna zaitez ! ” eta harri mutuari : “ Jaiki ! ” esaten diezun hori ! Agertuko ote dizute horiekmezurik ? Urrez eta zilarrezjantziak daude , bai , baina beren baitan ez dutebizi-arnasarik .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you ! ” they exclaimed . “ Go and get up ! ” And the boy said , “ Get up ! Get up and eat the meat of silver , and silver , and gold .
GOLD:	What sorrow awaits you who say to wooden idols , ‘ Wake up and save us ! 'To speechless stone images you say , ‘ Rise up and teach us ! 'Can an idol tell you what to do ? They may be overlaid with gold and silver , but they are lifeless inside .

ID:	2193
INPUT:	( 2 Kro 25 , 1-4 . <unk> . <unk> ; 26 , 1-2 )
PRED:	Hezekiah Rules in Israel
GOLD:	Jeroboam II Rules in Israel

ID:	2194
INPUT:	Ninivera joan zen Jonas , Jaunak agindu bezala . Ninive hiria izugarri handia zen ; hiru egun behar ziren alde batetik bestera zeharkatzeko .
PRED:	Then the Lord sent Jonah out to the people of Nineveh . He went out to the great city of Nineveh and had three days from the great city .
GOLD:	This time Jonah obeyed the Lord 's command and went to Nineveh , a city so large that it took three days to see it all .

ID:	2195
INPUT:	Orduan , agindu zuen : — Bete urez lau ontzi eta isuri erre-oparigai eta egurraren gainera . Eta gero : — Berriz ere bai ! Halaxe egin zuten berriro ere . Gero , esan zuen : — Hirugarren aldiz ! Eta hirugarren aldiz egin zuten .
PRED:	Then he told them , “ Bring four horns of the altar , and pour some of the burnt offering on the altar . ” So they said , “ Let 's go back to the third time . ” So the third time the third time , and the third time they went .
GOLD:	After they had done this , he said , “ Do the same thing again ! ” And when they were finished , he said , “ Now do it a third time ! ” So they did as he said ,

ID:	2196
INPUT:	Abraham ( 12 , 1 — 23 , 20 )
PRED:	The First Disciples
GOLD:	Abram and Sarai in Egypt

ID:	2197
INPUT:	Aurre egiten die ausartenei , bera da basapiztia guztien errege » .
PRED:	It is the one who is chosen to enter the Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	No sword can stop it , no spear , dart , or javelin .

ID:	2198
INPUT:	Jerusalemera iritsi ziren . Jesus tenpluan zebilela , apaizburuak , lege-maisuak eta zaharrak hurbildu zitzaizkion ,
PRED:	When Jesus arrived in Jerusalem , the leading priests and teachers of religious law came to Jerusalem , the leading priests and teachers of religious law came to him .
GOLD:	Again they entered Jerusalem . As Jesus was walking through the Temple area , the leading priests , the teachers of religious law , and the elders came up to him .

ID:	2199
INPUT:	Ibar lehorra igarotzean , iturburutik edaten dute : lehen euriek ur-begiz baitute estaltzen .
PRED:	They are like trees that grow in the spring , for they are like springs of water .
GOLD:	They will continue to grow stronger , and each of them will appear before God in Jerusalem .

ID:	2200
INPUT:	Horregatik , erne egon zara guri zoritxar hau bidaltzeko . Izan ere , zu , Jauna , gure Jainkoa , zuzena zara egiten duzun guztian ; baina guk entzungor egin diogu zure esanari .
PRED:	Therefore , let us go down to the land of Egypt , for the Lord our God has heard us . You have heard everything you did , but you have heard what you have done to us .
GOLD:	Therefore , the Lord has brought upon us the disaster he prepared . The Lord our God was right to do all of these things , for we did not obey him .

ID:	2201
INPUT:	Biharamunean goizean goiz jaiki eta begiraldia egin zion Josuek gudarosteari ; gero , Israelgo arduradunekin batera gudarostearen buruan jarri eta Ai hiriari erasotzera abiatu zen .
PRED:	Early the next morning Joshua got up early the next morning , and Joshua and his army went out to fight the army of Israel .
GOLD:	Early the next morning Joshua roused his men and started toward Ai , accompanied by the elders of Israel .

ID:	2202
INPUT:	Begira , berak hedatu du zeruan argia , berak ezkutatu itsasoaren oinarriak .
PRED:	Look , the light of the sky , and the earth trembles at the sea .
GOLD:	See how he spreads the lightning around himand how it lights up the depths of the sea .

ID:	2203
INPUT:	Ehun eta bost urte zituela , Setek Enox izan zuen .
PRED:	When Seth was 30 years old , he became the father of Eber .
GOLD:	When Seth was 105 years old , he became the father of Enosh .

ID:	2204
INPUT:	Sasiirakasleak
PRED:	Peter 's Declaration about Jesus
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Instructions

ID:	2205
INPUT:	Gizaseme eta emakume egin zituen , bedeinkatu eta « gizaki » eman zien izen egin zituen egun berean .
PRED:	Then he blessed them and blessed them , and he blessed them with a man named them , and he blessed them .
GOLD:	He created them male and female , and he blessed them and called them “ human . ”

ID:	2206
INPUT:	beste batzuek isekak eta zigorrak , kateak eta kartzelak jasan zituzten ;
PRED:	Others were also beaten , and they were also brought to the others and said ,
GOLD:	Some were jeered at , and their backs were cut open with whips . Others were chained in prisons .

ID:	2207
INPUT:	Itxura txarreko eta argal hauek irentsi egin zituzten beste eder eta guri haiek . Une horretan , esnatu egin zen faraoia .
PRED:	They became very hard and tired of these fat , and he grew up . Then Pharaoh woke up and looked at Pharaoh 's staff .
GOLD:	Then the scrawny , thin cows ate the seven healthy , fat cows ! At this point in the dream , Pharaoh woke up .

ID:	2208
INPUT:	Gero , honela mintzatu zitzaizkien gudari-tokiko gizonak Jonatani eta ezkutariari : — Igo guregana ; gauzatxo bat erakutsiko dizuegu . Jonatanek esan zion ezkutariari : — Igo nire atzetik . Israelen esku utzi ditu horiek Jaunak .
PRED:	Then the man spoke to Joseph and said , “ We will have a hand to the men of Israel . ” So Jonathan said , “ We will hand you over to you , but we will give you victory over Israel . ”
GOLD:	Then the men from the outpost shouted to Jonathan , “ Come on up here , and we 'll teach you a lesson ! ” “ Come on , climb right behind me , ” Jonathan said to his armor bearer , “ for the Lord will help us defeat them ! ”

ID:	2209
INPUT:	Denbora asko generaman ezer jan gabe . Paulok erdian zutik jarri eta esan zuen : « Adiskideok , hobe nire esana egin bazenute eta Kretatik atera ez bagina : hartara ez genituzkeen kalte eta galera hauek izango .
PRED:	Some time Paul ate nothing more than he wanted . He said , “ Brothers , you are my friend , and I did n't want you to help you from Crete , and you wo n't go out to the synagogue .
GOLD:	No one had eaten for a long time . Finally , Paul called the crew together and said , “ Men , you should have listened to me in the first place and not left Crete . You would have avoided all this damage and loss .

ID:	2210
INPUT:	Hark erantzun zion : “ Ez dut nahi ” ; baina handik berehala damutu eta joan egin zen .
PRED:	He replied , ‘ I want you to do n't want , but I want him to go . ' So the boy went .
GOLD:	The son answered , ‘ No , I wo n't go , ' but later he changed his mind and went anyway .

ID:	2211
INPUT:	Jonatan Daviden alde
PRED:	Jonathan 's Kindness to David
GOLD:	Saul Tries to Kill David

ID:	2212
INPUT:	Irakaspenari jaramon egiten dionak izango du arrakastarik . Zorionekoa Jaunarengan uste ona duena !
PRED:	The Lord will teach those who are wise , and they will be hungry . Blessed are those who trust in him .
GOLD:	Those who listen to instruction will prosper ; those who trust the Lord will be joyful .

ID:	2213
INPUT:	Hartu gogoan ez duzuela zeuen buruak nola defendatuko kezkatan egon beharrik :
PRED:	You must not present the money to the poor . You must present it to the poor .
GOLD:	So do n't worry in advance about how to answer the charges against you ,

ID:	2214
INPUT:	usteldu egingo zaio erraietan , sugegorriaren pozoi bihurtuko .
PRED:	The tongue of a person will be a fool , but the tongue of a fool will be put to death .
GOLD:	But suddenly the food in their bellies turns sour , a poisonous venom in their stomach .

ID:	2215
INPUT:	Legea betetzen duena seme zentzuduna da , jende galduarekin dabilena aitaren lotsa .
PRED:	The law of the law is foolish to those who are wise , but they are ashamed of their father 's shame .
GOLD:	Young people who obey the law are wise ; those with wild friends bring shame to their parents .

ID:	2216
INPUT:	Susa hirian aldarrikatua zegoen suntsitze-aginduaren kopia ere eman zion , Esterri erakutsi eta berri emateko ; gainera , agindu hau eman zion Esterri : joan zedila erregeagana , beronen onginahia eskuratu eta bere herritarren alde egiteko .
PRED:	In the fortress of Susa , the Holy Spirit gave it to Esther . He gave this message to Esther , and he gave it to Esther . He said , “ This is what the Lord has commanded . ”
GOLD:	Mordecai gave Hathach a copy of the decree issued in Susa that called for the death of all Jews . He asked Hathach to show it to Esther and explain the situation to her . He also asked Hathach to direct her to go to the king to beg for mercy and plead for her people .

ID:	2217
INPUT:	Jetro poztu egin zen , egiptoarren eskuetatik libratuz Jainkoak israeldarrei egin zien on guztiarengatik ,
PRED:	So the people of Israel became very glad , and God rescued the people of Israel from the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	Jethro was delighted when he heard about all the good things the Lord had done for Israel as he rescued them from the hand of the Egyptians .

ID:	2218
INPUT:	Ez ! Zuek maitatu etsaiak , egin ongi eta eman maileguz ordainari begiratu gabe : handia izango da zuen saria eta Goi-goikoaren seme-alaba izango zarete , ona baita bera esker txarreko eta gaiztoentzat .
PRED:	You must not lend money to your enemies , for they will lend money to the poor , and they will be their children . They will be their children , and they will be their children , and they will be their children .
GOLD:	“ Love your enemies ! Do good to them . Lend to them without expecting to be repaid . Then your reward from heaven will be very great , and you will truly be acting as children of the Most High , for he is kind to those who are unthankful and wicked .

ID:	2219
INPUT:	Izan ere , agertu da Jainkoaren onginahia , gizon-emakume guztientzat salbagarri .
PRED:	For God has revealed everything to everyone , and everyone has been saved .
GOLD:	For the grace of God has been revealed , bringing salvation to all people .

ID:	2220
INPUT:	« Sar zaitezte ate estutik »
PRED:	The Narrow Door
GOLD:	The Tree and Its Fruit

ID:	2221
INPUT:	Egitasmoak aholkuen bidez sendotzen dira , gerra estrategia egokiaz egiten .
PRED:	A wise advice is made of advice ; the advice of a fool gives them advice .
GOLD:	Plans succeed through good counsel ; do n't go to war without wise advice .

ID:	2222
INPUT:	Eta hori , Tzin basamortuan israeldar elkarteak aurpegi eman zidanean , nire agindua zalantzan jarri zenutelako : ez zenidaten utzi neure santutasuna israeldarren aurrean agertzen , ura sorraraziz » ( Tzin basamortuan , Kadexen dagoen Meribako iturrian gertatua aipatzen da hemen ) .
PRED:	Then I brought the people of Israel out of Egypt in the wilderness of Zin and camped at Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin . I said , “ I did n't escape from the wilderness of Zin and camped in the wilderness of Zin . ”
GOLD:	for you both rebelled against my instructions in the wilderness of Zin . When the people of Israel rebelled , you failed to demonstrate my holiness to them at the waters . ” ( These are the waters of Meribah at Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin . )

ID:	2223
INPUT:	egokiak dira heldugabeei zuhurtasuna emateko , gazteei ezaguera eta bereizmena ;
PRED:	Wisdom is to those who are wise , and knowledge are wise .
GOLD:	These proverbs will give insight to the simple , knowledge and discernment to the young .

ID:	2224
INPUT:	Zigor-eguna
PRED:	Cyrus Rules in Judah
GOLD:	The Desolation of Israel

ID:	2225
INPUT:	Ebed-Melek zeritzan errege-jauregiko goi-funtzionario etiopiarrak jakin zuen Jeremias putzura bota zutela . Erregea lege-arazoak erabakitzen Benjaminen atean zegoela ,
PRED:	So Ebed-melech took charge of the royal palace , and he learned that Jeremiah had been imprisoned in the palace of the royal palace and the royal palace .
GOLD:	But Ebed-melech the Ethiopian , an important court official , heard that Jeremiah was in the cistern . At that time the king was holding court at the Benjamin Gate ,

ID:	2226
INPUT:	Israeldarren artean biziko naiz eta Jainko izango naute .
PRED:	I will live among the people of Israel , and I will be their God .
GOLD:	Then I will live among the people of Israel and be their God ,

ID:	2227
INPUT:	« Bete ezazue gaur agintzen dizuedana , eta neuk botako ditut zuen aurretik amortar , kanaandar , hitita , periztar , hibiar eta jebustarrak .
PRED:	“ I am giving you today that I will drive you out of the Amorites , Hittites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites .
GOLD:	But listen carefully to everything I command you today . Then I will go ahead of you and drive out the Amorites , Canaanites , Hittites , Perizzites , Hivites , and Jebusites .

ID:	2228
INPUT:	Baina nik agindu gabeko mezua nire izenean adierazten edota jainko arrotzen izenean hitz egiten ausartzen den profeta hil egingo dute ” .
PRED:	But if you refuse to listen to me , you will prophesy against me , and you will die in my name . '
GOLD:	But any prophet who falsely claims to speak in my name or who speaks in the name of another god must die . '

ID:	2229
INPUT:	Purpurazko jantzia ipini zioten soinean eta arantzaz egindako koroa buruan .
PRED:	They placed the robe on the ephod and put it on a blue cloth , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	They dressed him in a purple robe , and they wove thorn branches into a crown and put it on his head .

ID:	2230
INPUT:	Zuk limosna egitean , ez beza jakin zure ezkerrak zer egiten duen eskuinak ;
PRED:	Lazy people do n't know what you do , but do n't know what is right to do .
GOLD:	But when you give to someone in need , do n't let your left hand know what your right hand is doing .

ID:	2231
INPUT:	Ezekiasek tenplua garbitu eta konpondu
PRED:	Hezekiah also repaired the Temple
GOLD:	The Temple Rededication

ID:	2232
INPUT:	Behi argal eta eskas hauek , ordea , lehengo zazpi behi guriak irentsi zituzten .
PRED:	But the other believers wanted to eat the first bread , so they wanted to teach seven days .
GOLD:	These thin , scrawny cows ate the seven fat cows .

ID:	2233
INPUT:	Jainko gure Aitak eta Jesu Kristo Jaunak eman biezazkizuete grazia eta bakea .
PRED:	May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace .
GOLD:	May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace .

ID:	2234
INPUT:	« Ez zapaldu etorkina , ongi dakizue-eta zer den etorkin izatea , zeuek ere etorkin izan baitzarete Egipton .
PRED:	“ You must not have any interest to foreigners living in the land of Egypt , for you have been with your ancestors in Egypt .
GOLD:	“ You must not oppress foreigners . You know what it 's like to be a foreigner , for you yourselves were once foreigners in the land of Egypt .

ID:	2235
INPUT:	Eman berariberak besteei emandako tratua , ordaindu berari berak egin halako bi ; emaiozue edaten ontzian , berak besteei edanarazi halako bi .
PRED:	Give the following gifts to those who have been sold to the poor . You must pay back two bags of silver to the one who had been sold to the other .
GOLD:	Do to her as she has done to others.Double her penalty for all her evil deeds.She brewed a cup of terror for others , so brew twice as much for her .

ID:	2236
INPUT:	Behar duena baldin badaukazu , ez esan inori : « Zoaz eta itzuli , bihar emango dizut » .
PRED:	If you do n't want to catch them , do n't go back and tell them , “ Go back to them . ”
GOLD:	If you can help your neighbor now , do n't say , “ Come back tomorrow , and then I 'll help you . ”

ID:	2237
INPUT:	Jobek erantzun : — Txoroak bezala hitz egiten duzu . Zoriona Jaunaren dohaintzat hartzen dugu . Eta zoritxarra , zergatik ez ? Halaz guztiz , Jobek ez zuen bere ahoaz bekatu egin .
PRED:	Then Job replied , “ We are like a fool ! Blessed are those who do n't know the word of the Lord . ” So Joab replied , “ Why are you trying to do such a thing ? ” So Joab did n't do it .
GOLD:	But Job replied , “ You talk like a foolish woman . Should we accept only good things from the hand of God and never anything bad ? ” So in all this , Job said nothing wrong .

ID:	2238
INPUT:	Egiptoko lehen-seme guztiak jo zituen , haien gizontasunaren lehen fruituak .
PRED:	He struck all the firstborn males throughout the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	Then he killed the oldest son in each Egyptian home , the pride and joy of each family .

ID:	2239
INPUT:	Horrela , bada , sinesmenetik bizi direnek hartzen dute bedeinkazioa Abraham sinestedunarekin batera .
PRED:	That is why God blesses those who believe in him , and those who live in God 's faith .
GOLD:	So all who put their faith in Christ share the same blessing Abraham received because of his faith .

ID:	2240
INPUT:	Orduan , alde egin zuen Tamarrek . Estaltzen zuen zapia kendu eta alargun-soinekoak jantzi zituen berriro .
PRED:	So Tamar took Tamar 's robe and put it on her head . He stripped her robe and put it on her head .
GOLD:	Afterward she went back home , took off her veil , and put on her widow 's clothing as usual .

ID:	2241
INPUT:	Dor eskualdean dagoen Dorkoa , Gilgal ondoko Goimgoa
PRED:	Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , who rescued us from Gilgal ,
GOLD:	The king of Dor in the town of Naphoth-dorThe king of Goyim in Gilgal

ID:	2242
INPUT:	Ibaien aurka al zaude , Jauna , ibaien aurka al zaude haserre , itsasoaren aurka sumindua , zeure zaldien gainean eseria , gurdien gainean garaile zoazela ?
PRED:	But you have rebelled against the Lord , but you have rebelled against your anger . Have you kept on your foot on your forehead ?
GOLD:	Was it in anger , Lord , that you struck the riversand parted the sea ? Were you displeased with them ? No , you were sending your chariots of salvation !

ID:	2243
INPUT:	lagunari ordain txarra emaneta etsai zuzengabeari barkatu badiot ,
PRED:	I will repay you for protection , and I will repay you for your sins .
GOLD:	then let my enemies capture me.Let them trample me into the groundand drag my honor in the dust.Interlude

ID:	2244
INPUT:	Trata itzazu haien handikiak Oreb eta Zeeb bezala , haien buruzagiak Zebah eta Tzalmuna bezala .
PRED:	Then give them victory over Zebah and Zalmunna , like Zebah and Zalmunna , like Zebah and Zalmunna , and Zalmunna .
GOLD:	for they said , “ Let us seize for our own usethese pasturelands of God ! ”

ID:	2245
INPUT:	Erregetza mirarien bidez agertua ( 8 , 1 — 9 , 34 )
PRED:	Parable of the Law
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Man with Leprosy

ID:	2246
INPUT:	Azarias apaiz nagusiak eta beste apaiz guztiek , bekokian legena zuela ikustean , bizkor irtenarazi zuten handik , eta bera ere arrapaladan joan zen , Jaunak joa zegoelako .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the high priest and all the other priests saw that the high priest had been standing beside the altar , so they could see the Lord 's command .
GOLD:	When Azariah the high priest and all the other priests saw the leprosy , they rushed him out . And the king himself was eager to get out because the Lord had struck him .

ID:	2247
INPUT:	Jesus sinagogatik atera eta Simonen eta Andresen etxera joan zen zuzenean , Santiago eta Joanekin .
PRED:	Then Jesus went up to the synagogue and went up to the home of Peter and John .
GOLD:	After Jesus left the synagogue with James and John , they went to Simon and Andrew 's home .

ID:	2248
INPUT:	Jesus heriotzara kondenatua
PRED:	The Burial of Jesus
GOLD:	The Crucifixion

ID:	2249
INPUT:	Galdu itxurak eginez , Josuek eta israeldarrek ihes egin zuten basamorturantz .
PRED:	Then the people of Israel cried out to Joshua and the Israelites fled to the wilderness .
GOLD:	Joshua and the Israelite army fled toward the wilderness as though they were badly beaten .

ID:	2250
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun : — Baldin berrogeita hamar errugabe aurkitzen baditut , haiengatik hiri osoari barkatuko diot .
PRED:	And the Lord replied , “ I will not spare the guilt of the wicked , and I will forgive their sins . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord replied , “ If I find fifty righteous people in Sodom , I will spare the entire city for their sake . ”

ID:	2251
INPUT:	arnasa hartzen ere ez dit uzteneta saminez asebetetzen nau .
PRED:	He has made me a stranger , and he has led me to a thousand times of trouble .
GOLD:	He will not let me catch my breath , but fills me instead with bitter sorrows .

ID:	2252
INPUT:	Beste behin , Jesus sinagogara joan zen . Bazen han besoa elbarri zeukan gizon bat .
PRED:	One day Jesus went to the synagogue , where he was a man there .
GOLD:	Jesus went into the synagogue again and noticed a man with a deformed hand .

ID:	2253
INPUT:	Jaunak apartatu egingo du Israelgo leinu guztietatik , bere zoritxarrerako , legearen liburu honetan idatzitako madarikazioen arabera .
PRED:	The Lord will judge all the people of Israel , from the tribe of Levi , from all the tribes of Israel , and they will follow their own desires .
GOLD:	The Lord will never pardon such people . Instead his anger and jealousy will burn against them . All the curses written in this book will come down on them , and the Lord will erase their names from under heaven .

ID:	2254
INPUT:	Baina atzera egin zuten gero , eta libre utzitako esklaboak , gizonezko nahiz emakumezko , berreskuratu egin zituzten , berriro esklabo-lanetara behartuz .
PRED:	But the man did n't let the man escape from the slave of the man who had been purchased and brought back to the male and female slaves .
GOLD:	but later they changed their minds . They took back the men and women they had freed , forcing them to be slaves again .

ID:	2255
INPUT:	Samuelen heriotza
PRED:	The Birth of Samuel
GOLD:	The Death of Samuel

ID:	2256
INPUT:	Hil zen Rakel , eta Efratara , hots , Belenera , bidean ehortzi zuten .
PRED:	So Rachel died , and he was buried in Ramah .
GOLD:	So Rachel died and was buried on the way to Ephrath ( that is , Bethlehem ) .

ID:	2257
INPUT:	Erruki nitaz , ene Jainko , erruki nitaz , zuregan dut babesa eta ; zure hegalen itzalpean babesten naiz , ezbeharra igaro artean .
PRED:	I pray to you , O God , for I pray to you , O God , my God , have spoken !
GOLD:	I cry out to God Most High , to God who will fulfill his purpose for me .

ID:	2258
INPUT:	Haien lurraldea Arnon erreka ondoko Aroer hiritik Sirion edo Hermon mendiraino hedatzen zen ,
PRED:	The territory extended from Aroer to the edge of the Arnon Gorge ( also known as far as Mount Hermon ) ,
GOLD:	So Israel conquered the entire area from Aroer at the edge of the Arnon Gorge all the way to Mount Sirion , also called Mount Hermon .

ID:	2259
INPUT:	Hobe da jakinduria indarra baino , diot nik ; behartsuaren jakinduria , ordea , arbuiatu egin ohi daeta ez dira haren hitzak aditzen .
PRED:	It is better to be greater than the strength of the wise , but I do n't want to see it . But I do n't want to see it , but it is meaningless .
GOLD:	So even though wisdom is better than strength , those who are wise will be despised if they are poor . What they say will not be appreciated for long .

ID:	2260
INPUT:	Orduan , nagusiaren emazteak soinekotik heldu eta esan zion : « Zatoz nirekin ! » Baina Josek soinekoa haren eskuetan utzi eta ihes egin zuen etxetik .
PRED:	Then the wife of his wife arrived with his wife and said , “ Come with me ! ” But Joseph got away from the house of Joseph , and he escaped from his house .
GOLD:	She came and grabbed him by his cloak , demanding , “ Come on , sleep with me ! ” Joseph tore himself away , but he left his cloak in her hand as he ran from the house .

ID:	2261
INPUT:	Bai , badut aldeko lekukorik zeruan , badut defendatzailerik goian ,
PRED:	I will hide in heaven , and I will hide my vows in the morning .
GOLD:	Even now my witness is in heaven.My advocate is there on high .

ID:	2262
INPUT:	AZKEN AGURRAK ( 15 , 14 — 16 , 27 )
PRED:	Final Greetings
GOLD:	Paul 's Travel Plans

ID:	2263
INPUT:	Gaitz galgarriz , sukarrez eta hanpaduraz joko zaituzte ; lehortez , haize errez eta gorrinez hondatuko dizkizue uztak : ez du etsiko zuek desagerrarazi arte .
PRED:	Their actions are full of thinking , and their evil deeds are written about by the wonderful things I have done . They have told you , ‘ Do n't follow them ! '
GOLD:	The Lord will strike you with wasting diseases , fever , and inflammation , with scorching heat and drought , and with blight and mildew . These disasters will pursue you until you die .

ID:	2264
INPUT:	« Bai , neure begiek ikusi dute hori dena , neure belarriek entzun dute , eta ulertzen dut .
PRED:	“ Yes , my eyes have seen , and they hear my ears and understand what I have seen .
GOLD:	“ Look , I have seen all this with my own eyesand heard it with my own ears , and now I understand .

ID:	2265
INPUT:	Beraz , alferrik gorde dut bihotza garbieta errugabe naizela agertzeko eskuak garbitu ,
PRED:	So I do n't want to wash my hands and show mercy to heaven and show no mercy .
GOLD:	Did I keep my heart pure for nothing ? Did I keep myself innocent for no reason ?

ID:	2266
INPUT:	Neure Aitaren ondoan ikusi dudanaz mintzo naiz ni ; zuek , ordea , zeuen aitarengandik ikasi duzuena egiten duzue .
PRED:	I have seen my Father in my own family , but you have seen me . But you have seen me because you have seen me .
GOLD:	I am telling you what I saw when I was with my Father . But you are following the advice of your father . ”

ID:	2267
INPUT:	Paulo Mazedonia eta Greziara
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Paul Goes to Macedonia and Greece

ID:	2268
INPUT:	Kristoren berri ona bat bakarra
PRED:	Christ Is the Good News
GOLD:	Paul 's Message Comes from Christ

ID:	2269
INPUT:	Bere lurra lantzen duenak ogia ugari , huskerien atzetik dabilenak miseria sarri .
PRED:	Those who plant crops that grow in the fields , and the crops of the harvest will be filled with yeast .
GOLD:	A hard worker has plenty of food , but a person who chases fantasies ends up in poverty .

ID:	2270
INPUT:	Maite nautenak ditut maite , nire bila saiatzen direnek aurkituko naute .
PRED:	Those who love me will love me , and they will search for me .
GOLD:	“ I love all who love me.Those who search will surely find me .

ID:	2271
INPUT:	Baina , garbi egonik edo bidaian ez delarik , Pazkoa ospatu gabe uzten duena , bota egingo dute herritik . Ezarritako egunean Jaunari oparia eskaintzen ez dionak bere hobenaren ondorenak jasan beharko ditu .
PRED:	But if you are ceremonially clean , you must not eat any of the Passover lamb or any other alcoholic drink from the Lord 's presence , you must not eat any meat from the special gifts from the Lord 's presence .
GOLD:	“ But those who neglect to celebrate the Passover at the regular time , even though they are ceremonially clean and not away on a trip , will be cut off from the community of Israel . If they fail to present the Lord 's offering at the proper time , they will suffer the consequences of their guilt .

ID:	2272
INPUT:	Bitarteko hau , ordea , ez da bakar baten izenean ari , eta Jainkoa bat bakarra da .
PRED:	No one can ever say , “ There is only one thing in God 's name , and it is God . ”
GOLD:	Now a mediator is helpful if more than one party must reach an agreement . But God , who is one , did not use a mediator when he gave his promise to Abraham .

ID:	2273
INPUT:	beren bizitzak Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren zerbitzuan eman dituzten horiekin .
PRED:	May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ give us through his servant Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	who have risked their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ .

ID:	2274
INPUT:	« Irten zaitez ontzitik emazte , seme eta errainekin .
PRED:	“ Get out of the boat with his wife , and go with the wife of his wife .
GOLD:	“ Leave the boat , all of you — you and your wife , and your sons and their wives .

ID:	2275
INPUT:	Bila ezazue Jauna , aurki dezakezue eta ; egiozue dei , hurbil duzue eta .
PRED:	You know that the Lord is near , and you are near . You are near , and you are near .
GOLD:	Seek the Lord while you can find him.Call on him now while he is near .

ID:	2276
INPUT:	Rafuren seme Palti , Benjaminen leinukoa ;
PRED:	The people of Ramah were the tribe of Benjamin .
GOLD:	BenjaminPalti son of Raphu

ID:	2277
INPUT:	Eta Josuek amalektarrak garaitu zituen eta ezpataz garbitu .
PRED:	So Joshua killed the Amalekites and completely destroyed them .
GOLD:	As a result , Joshua overwhelmed the army of Amalek in battle .

ID:	2278
INPUT:	Urre garbiz urreztatu zuen eta urrezko hegala ezarri inguru guztian .
PRED:	He also made gold rings and overlaid them with pure gold .
GOLD:	He overlaid it with pure gold and ran a gold molding around the edge .

ID:	2279
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zidan : « Ea , maita ezazu berriz ere emaztea , maitalea duen eta adulterio egin duen arren . Halaxe maite baititu Jaunak israeldarrak , hauek beste jainkoengana jotzen duten arren , jainko horiei eskainitako mahats-opilen zale » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ You are my wife , but you love my neighbor 's wife , but you have committed adultery with the other gods of Israel . For the Lord has made these gods of Israel 's household . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Go and love your wife again , even though she commits adultery with another lover . This will illustrate that the Lord still loves Israel , even though the people have turned to other gods and love to worship them . ”

ID:	2280
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zion : — Ez dizut , bada , esan , sinesten baduzu Jainkoaren aintza ikusiko duzula ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't I tell you the truth , if you see the glory of God , how can you see the glory of God ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus responded , “ Did n't I tell you that you would see God 's glory if you believe ? ”

ID:	2281
INPUT:	Askotan bota izan du sutara eta uretara ere , hilarazteko . Ezer egin ahal baduzu , erruki zaitez gutaz eta lagun iezaguzu .
PRED:	You have been thrown into the blazing furnace , and you will know what you have done . Tell us about it , and you will know what it means . ”
GOLD:	The spirit often throws him into the fire or into water , trying to kill him . Have mercy on us and help us , if you can . ”

ID:	2282
INPUT:	Astearen lehen egunean batzar sakratua egingo duzue eta ez da ohiko lan arruntik egingo .
PRED:	On the first day you must celebrate the Festival of Shelters , and you must do no ordinary work on the Sabbath day .
GOLD:	On the first day of the festival , all the people must stop their ordinary work and observe an official day for holy assembly .

ID:	2283
INPUT:	Horrela , inork ez dezake esan nire izenean bataiatua izan denik .
PRED:	No one can be able to believe me unless I were baptized in my name .
GOLD:	for now no one can say they were baptized in my name .

ID:	2284
INPUT:	Tiberio enperadorearen agintealdiko hamabosgarren urtea zen . Pontzio Pilato zen Judeako gobernari , Herodes Galileako agintari , honen anaia Felipe Itureako eta Trakonitidako agintari , eta Lisanio Abileneko agintari ;
PRED:	This is the message from Tyre : Christ , who was governor of Judea , Herod , governor of Judea , Herod , governor of Judea , Herod , governor of Galilee , and Herod , the governor of Galilee , and all the people of Galilee .
GOLD:	It was now the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius , the Roman emperor . Pontius Pilate was governor over Judea ; Herod Antipas was ruler over Galilee ; his brother Philip was ruler over Iturea and Traconitis ; Lysanias was ruler over Abilene .

ID:	2285
INPUT:	Hartu gero bi onize harri eta zizelkatu haietan Israelen hamabi semeen izenak ,
PRED:	Then I took two stone tablets and attached them to the top of the two sons of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Take two onyx stones , and engrave on them the names of the tribes of Israel .

ID:	2286
INPUT:	Uste onez gaude , bai , baina nahiago genuke gorputz honetatik erbesteratuak izan Jaunarekin bizitzera joateko .
PRED:	For I am confident that I can not be angry with the Lord , even though I were with you .
GOLD:	Yes , we are fully confident , and we would rather be away from these earthly bodies , for then we will be at home with the Lord .

ID:	2287
INPUT:	Honela zioen Davidek : « Har dezadan Nahaxen seme Ha<unk> , beronen aitak ni hartu ninduen bezain ongi » . Davidek mandatariak igorri zizkion aitaren heriotzagatik doluminak ematera . Mandatariak amondarren lurraldera heldu zirenean , ordea ,
PRED:	Then David said to me , “ Get rid of the father of David 's father 's father , David , the father of David , had sent me out of the land . ” So David returned to the land of Ammon .
GOLD:	David said , “ I am going to show loyalty to Hanun just as his father , Nahash , was always loyal to me . ” So David sent ambassadors to express sympathy to Hanun about his father 's death.But when David 's ambassadors arrived in the land of Ammon ,

ID:	2288
INPUT:	Baina , Pedro Antiokiara etorri zenean , gogor egin behar izan nion aurrez aurre , oker jokatu baitzuen .
PRED:	But Peter and Barnabas came to Antioch of Antioch . He tried to kill me , for he had been forgiven .
GOLD:	But when Peter came to Antioch , I had to oppose him to his face , for what he did was very wrong .

ID:	2289
INPUT:	« Madarikazio guztiok etorriko zaizkizue gainera , pertsegitu eta harrapatu egingo zaituztete , suntsitu arte , Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren esana ez egiteagatik eta berak emandako agindu eta legeak ez betetzeagatik .
PRED:	“ All of you will come to war against the Lord your God , and he will destroy you and destroy you . You will not drive out the word of the Lord your God , and you will not destroy you .
GOLD:	“ If you refuse to listen to the Lord your God and to obey the commands and decrees he has given you , all these curses will pursue and overtake you until you are destroyed .

ID:	2290
INPUT:	Auzoko herriak zigortuak eta salbatuak
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Prayer of Confidence
GOLD:	's Justice

ID:	2291
INPUT:	Gero , ikuskarian , tronu , izaki eta zaharren inguruan zeuden aingeru askoren ahotsa entzun nuen . Milaka eta milioika ziren ,
PRED:	Then I saw the angel sitting on the throne , and the angel of the Lord appeared to them with a mighty voice .
GOLD:	Then I looked again , and I heard the voices of thousands and millions of angels around the throne and of the living beings and the elders .

ID:	2292
INPUT:	Jainkoak ituna egin israeldarrekin
PRED:	God 's Covenant
GOLD:	Israel Accepts the

ID:	2293
INPUT:	Juda eta beste anaiak Joseren etxean sartu — hantxe baitzegoen oraindik Jose — eta lurreraino ahuspeztu zitzaizkion .
PRED:	So Joseph went into the house of Joseph 's brothers and went into the house of Joseph , and he bowed low before him .
GOLD:	Joseph was still in his palace when Judah and his brothers arrived , and they fell to the ground before him .

ID:	2294
INPUT:	Etxera heldurik , labana hartu eta hamabi puskatan zatikatu zuen emakumearen gorpua eta Israelgo lurralde guztietara bidali zituen puskak .
PRED:	So he took one of the house and cut it into twelve pieces of twelve pieces . He took the twelve women and sent them out to the town of Israel .
GOLD:	When he got home , he took a knife and cut his concubine 's body into twelve pieces . Then he sent one piece to each tribe throughout all the territory of Israel .

ID:	2295
INPUT:	Edom , Moab eta Amoni ;
PRED:	Edom , Edom , Edom , and Edom ,
GOLD:	Then I gave the cup to the nations of Edom , Moab , and Ammon ,

ID:	2296
INPUT:	Ezekiasek galdetu zion Isaiasi : — Zer izango dut berriz ere Jaunaren tenplura joango naizenaren ezaugarri ?
PRED:	Hezekiah asked Isaiah , “ What will I go to the Temple of the Lord ? I will go to the Temple of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	And Hezekiah had asked , “ What sign will prove that I will go to the Temple of the Lord ? ”

ID:	2297
INPUT:	Jaunaren aingeruak basamortuan , Xur bidean dagoen iturri ondoan , aurkitu zuen
PRED:	When the angel of the Lord came near the Red Sea , near the water near the Jordan River .
GOLD:	The angel of the Lord found Hagar beside a spring of water in the wilderness , along the road to Shur .

ID:	2298
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Moisesi : « Bihar goizean goiz jaiki eta zoaz faraoiari esatera : Hala dio Jaunak , hebrearren Jainkoak : Utziozu ene herriari ni gurtzera joaten ;
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Get up early the next morning , the man of Pharaoh , the man of the Hebrews , and go to the land of the Hebrews , and go to the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Get up early in the morning and stand before Pharaoh . Tell him , ‘ This is what the Lord , the God of the Hebrews , says : Let my people go , so they can worship me .

ID:	2299
INPUT:	« Entzun hau , Job ; hartzazu astia Jainkoaren mirariak hausnartzeko .
PRED:	“ Listen to this message from Job , Job , Job , the God of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	“ Pay attention to this , Job.Stop and consider the wonderful miracles of God !

ID:	2300
INPUT:	Jakin zuen Jakobek bazela Egipton garia , eta honela mintzatu zitzaien semeei : « Zertan zaudete elkarri begira ?
PRED:	When Jacob heard that Jacob was in Egypt , he said to his sons , “ Why are you doing this ? Why are you doing this ?
GOLD:	When Jacob heard that grain was available in Egypt , he said to his sons , “ Why are you standing around looking at one another ?

ID:	2301
INPUT:	Eta zeruan , lur gainean , lur azpian eta itsasoan dauden sorkari guztiei , hau esaten entzun nien : « Tronuan eseria dagoenarieta Bildotsarigorespena , ohorea , aintza eta agintaritza , menderen mendetan » .
PRED:	And when the sky was on the earth , the heavens and the earth began to hear the sound of the beast , the one who sits on the throne of the living beings , and the glory of the living God . ”
GOLD:	And then I heard every creature in heaven and on earth and under the earth and in the sea . They sang : “ Blessing and honor and glory and powerbelong to the one sitting on the throneand to the Lamb forever and ever . ”

ID:	2302
INPUT:	Israel herrialdea bakean egon zen berrogei urtez , harik eta Kenazen seme Otniel hil zen arte .
PRED:	When Israel was forty years old , Ehud became the next king , and he died .
GOLD:	So there was peace in the land for forty years . Then Othniel son of Kenaz died .

ID:	2303
INPUT:	eta zaharraren tokian altxatzen dengaztearen alde jartzen ikusi duteguzkipean dabilen jende guztia ere .
PRED:	And when all the people return to the Lord , they saw everything in the Lord 's sight and all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	But then everyone rushes to the side of yet another youth who replaces him .

ID:	2304
INPUT:	Goizean , nire semeari bularra emateko jaiki nintzenean , hila zegoen . Eguna argitzean , ordea , begiratu nion ongi eta ikusi nuen ez zela nik izandako semea .
PRED:	When I was in the morning , I learned that I was in the morning . But when I was born , I saw that it was good , I would n't have a good reputation .
GOLD:	And in the morning when I tried to nurse my son , he was dead ! But when I looked more closely in the morning light , I saw that it was n't my son at all . ”

ID:	2305
INPUT:	Atezain zegoen neskameak esan zion Pedrori : — Ez al haiz hi ere gizon horren ikasleetakoa ? Pedrok erantzun : — Ez , ez <unk> .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the girl named Peter . “ Do n't you want to be a man ? ” Peter asked . “ Do n't you think about this man ? ”
GOLD:	The woman asked Peter , “ You 're not one of that man 's disciples , are you ? ” “ No , ” he said , “ I am not . ”

ID:	2306
INPUT:	Jainkoaren suminak erasotzen dit eta urratzen , hortzak estutzen ditu nire aurka , zorrotz begiratzen , etsai bailitzan .
PRED:	I am the God of Heaven 's Armies , who rescued me from his enemies , for they are my enemies .
GOLD:	God hates me and angrily tears me apart.He snaps his teeth at meand pierces me with his eyes .

ID:	2307
INPUT:	« Mendebaldeko muga Mediterraneo itsasoa izango da , hegoaldeko mugatik Hamateko sarreraraino iparraldean .
PRED:	“ The eastern boundary will run south to the Mediterranean Sea , and the south will run south to the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	“ On the west side , the Mediterranean itself will be your border from the southern border to the point where the northern border begins , opposite Lebo-hamath .

ID:	2308
INPUT:	goizean zure maitasuna iragartzea , gau osoan zure leialtasuna ,
PRED:	O Lord , sing your unfailing love ; your faithfulness reaches to the clouds .
GOLD:	accompanied by a ten-stringed instrument , a harp , and the melody of a lyre .

ID:	2309
INPUT:	Moises fidagarria izan zen , noski , Jainkoaren etxeko guztientzat , baina Jainkoaren mezua herriari adierazi behar zion zerbitzari bezala .
PRED:	And Moses was told that he was a good man of God , but he was a servant of God . He sent this message to the people of God .
GOLD:	Moses was certainly faithful in God 's house as a servant . His work was an illustration of the truths God would reveal later .

ID:	2310
INPUT:	Egipto hondamendibihurtuko dudaneaneta herrialdea huts-hutsik utzi , bizilagun guztiak joeta garbituko ditudanean , orduan jakingo dute denekni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	All the people of Egypt will destroy the land of Egypt , and all the people of Egypt will be deserted , but they will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And when I destroy Egyptand strip you of everything you ownand strike down all your people , then you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	2311
INPUT:	Kartzelako arduradunak ez zion Joseri bere gain utzitako ezeren konturik eskatzen . Berekin zuen , bai , Jauna , eta egiten zuen guztietan ongi ateratzen laguntzen zion .
PRED:	The Lord had not kept the covenant with Joshua and his ancestors , and he refused to help them . And the Lord gave him everything he had done for him .
GOLD:	The warden had no more worries , because Joseph took care of everything . The Lord was with him and caused everything he did to succeed .

ID:	2312
INPUT:	Asak kultua berriztatu
PRED:	Asa Rules in Israel
GOLD:	Asa 's Religious Reforms

ID:	2313
INPUT:	eta hau , gurutzea lepoan zuela , hiritik « Burezur » — hebreeraz Golgota — zeritzan tokirantz irten zen .
PRED:	This was the captain of the city , which means “ Place ” ) , which means “ Place ” ) , which means “ Place ” ) .
GOLD:	Carrying the cross by himself , he went to the place called Place of the Skull ( in Hebrew , Golgotha ) .

ID:	2314
INPUT:	Etxe oso-osoa jantzi zuen urrez , baita santutegiaren aurrean zegoen aldarea ere .
PRED:	He overlaid the entire Temple with gold , and he placed it in front of the Temple .
GOLD:	So he finished overlaying the entire Temple with gold , including the altar that belonged to the Most Holy Place .

ID:	2315
INPUT:	Joanek beronetaz egin zuen testigantza , oihu eginez : « Honetaz ari nintzen ni , “ Nire ondoren datorrena nire gainetik dago , ni baino lehenagokoa baitzen ” esan nuenean » .
PRED:	John shouted out , “ Listen to me , for I am calling out , ‘ This is my witness against me , for I am far greater than I am . ' ”
GOLD:	John testified about him when he shouted to the crowds , “ This is the one I was talking about when I said , ‘ Someone is coming after me who is far greater than I am , for he existed long before me . ' ”

ID:	2316
INPUT:	ezta Abrahamen jatorriko guztiak ere Abrahamen benetako seme-alaba . Jainkoak esan zion Abrahami : Isaaken bidez izango dituzu ondorengoak .
PRED:	And Abraham 's descendants will come to Abraham and told him , “ Your descendants will be Abraham . Your descendants will be Abraham , Isaac , Isaac , Isaac , and Jacob . ”
GOLD:	Being descendants of Abraham does n't make them truly Abraham 's children . For the Scriptures say , “ Isaac is the son through whom your descendants will be counted , ” though Abraham had other children , too .

ID:	2317
INPUT:	Baina jaunak erantzun zien : “ Benetan diotsuet , ez dakit nor zareten ” .
PRED:	But the man replied , ‘ I tell you the truth , no one can help me . '
GOLD:	“ But he called back , ‘ Believe me , I do n't know you ! '

ID:	2318
INPUT:	Bi gizaseme , bata Eldad izenekoa eta bestea Medad , hirurogeita hamarren taldekoak izan arren , ez ziren etxolara joan , baizik eta kanpalekuan gelditu ziren . Baina kokatu zen espiritua haiengan ere eta profeta gisa hasi ziren mintzatzen .
PRED:	Then the two sons of Reuben , and the other five of the camp were covering . But they did n't go to the camp , but they did n't understand the word of God . But when they saw that the prophets were prophesying in the Lord 's sight , they began talking about him .
GOLD:	Two men , Eldad and Medad , had stayed behind in the camp . They were listed among the elders , but they had not gone out to the Tabernacle . Yet the Spirit rested upon them as well , so they prophesied there in the camp .

ID:	2319
INPUT:	Bere gurutzea hartu eta jarraitzen ez didana ez da niretzat gai .
PRED:	For he is n't working on us , and he does n't care for me .
GOLD:	If you refuse to take up your cross and follow me , you are not worthy of being mine .

ID:	2320
INPUT:	Jesek esan zion bere seme Davidi : — Har itzazu zaku bat gari xigortu eta hamar ogi hauek , eta eraman bizkor zeure anaiei kanpalekura .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to his son David , “ Take one of Saul 's ten pieces of barley and some of them to the camp . ”
GOLD:	One day Jesse said to David , “ Take this basket of roasted grain and these ten loaves of bread , and carry them quickly to your brothers .

ID:	2321
INPUT:	Hitz egin bitartean , Jaunaren espiritua sartu zen niregan eta zutitu egin ninduen , eta hitz egiten zidanari entzun nion
PRED:	As a result , the Spirit of the Lord came into me and spoke to me , and he spoke to me and spoke to me .
GOLD:	The Spirit came into me as he spoke , and he set me on my feet . I listened carefully to his words .

ID:	2322
INPUT:	Abimelekek jarraitu zuen : — Zer egin diguzu , gero ? Nola bururatu zaizu horrelakorik ? Edozein herritar ohera zitekeen zure emaztearekin . Orduan , denok bihurtuko gintuzun errudun .
PRED:	Abimelech replied , “ What have you done to us ? What have you done to the people who have been married to you ? ” And he told her , “ What have you done to me ? ”
GOLD:	“ How could you do this to us ? ” Abimelech exclaimed . “ One of my people might easily have taken your wife and slept with her , and you would have made us guilty of great sin . ”

ID:	2323
INPUT:	Ez egin zinik
PRED:	Do not make any vows to the
GOLD:	The Power of Prayer

ID:	2324
INPUT:	Biharamuna larunbata zen . Apaizburuak eta fariseuak Pilatogana bildu ziren elkarrekin ,
PRED:	Meanwhile , the leading priests and the leading priests and the Pharisees and the Pharisees met together with the leading priests .
GOLD:	The next day , on the Sabbath , the leading priests and Pharisees went to see Pilate .

ID:	2325
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Zeuen erru guztietatik garbituko zaituztedanean , hiri hondatuak berreraiki eta bizilagunez beteko ditut .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will destroy you from all your towns , and I will destroy you and destroy you .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : When I cleanse you from your sins , I will repopulate your cities , and the ruins will be rebuilt .

ID:	2326
INPUT:	Gure aitak uztarri astuna ezarri zizuela ? Astunagoa ezarriko dizuet nik ! Gure aitak larruzko zartailuz zigorkatzen zintuztela ? Burdinazko muturdunez zigorkatuko zaituztet nik ! »
PRED:	You have made many arrows , my father , my father ! I have placed you in my father 's beat you with arrows . But I will beat you with whips , but I will beat you with scorpions ! ”
GOLD:	Yes , my father laid heavy burdens on you , but I 'm going to make them even heavier ! My father beat you with whips , but I will beat you with scorpions ! ' ”

ID:	2327
INPUT:	Pedrok erantzun zuen : — Ez zekiat zertaz ari haizen , mutil ! Eta une berean , oraindik hizketan ari zela , oilarrak jo zuen .
PRED:	Peter replied , “ Do n't you know me , my lord , I 'm n't talking about it . ” So he went down to the ground .
GOLD:	But Peter said , “ Man , I do n't know what you are talking about . ” And immediately , while he was still speaking , the rooster crowed .

ID:	2328
INPUT:	Neure suminaren suminez zin dagit lurrikara handia izango dela Israelen .
PRED:	I will pour out my fury on the earth , and the earth will be filled with fire .
GOLD:	In my jealousy and blazing anger , I promise a mighty shaking in the land of Israel on that day .

ID:	2329
INPUT:	Erre-opariaren eskaintza bukatu zuenean , Jehuk gudari eta buruzagiei agindu zien : — Aurrera ! Hil itzazue ! Ez dezala inork ere ihes egin ! Ezpataz hil eta kanpora bota zituzten . Gero , gudari eta buruzagiek , Baalen jauretxeko barne-gelara sartu ,
PRED:	While Jehu had finished eating the burnt offering , Jehu ordered his officials to kill him . “ No one can kill you , ” he said . “ No one can kill you ! ” So they killed the palace and killed him .
GOLD:	As soon as Jehu had finished sacrificing the burnt offering , he commanded his guards and officers , “ Go in and kill all of them . Do n't let a single one escape ! ” So they killed them all with their swords , and the guards and officers dragged their bodies outside . Then Jehu 's men went into the innermost fortress of the temple of Baal .

ID:	2330
INPUT:	Orduan , Pedrok esan zion : « Ez dut ez urrerik , ez zilarrik , baina dudana emango dizut : Jesu Kristo Nazaretarraren izenean , jaiki eta ibili ! »
PRED:	Then Peter said to him , “ I wo n't need a gold or silver or gold or gold . I will give you the gifts of Jesus Christ , the Nazarene , the one who sent you to live in the name of Jesus Christ . ”
GOLD:	But Peter said , “ I do n't have any silver or gold for you . But I 'll give you what I have . In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene , get up and walk ! ”

ID:	2331
INPUT:	Nork ezagutu du Jaunaren pentsamendua ? Nork irakats diezaioke ? Guk , ordea , Kristoren pentsamendua dugu .
PRED:	Who can know the Lord 's thoughts ? Who can be able to be ashamed of him ? But we know that Christ is the one who is Christ .
GOLD:	For , “ Who can know the Lord 's thoughts ? Who knows enough to teach him ? ” But we understand these things , for we have the mind of Christ .

ID:	2332
INPUT:	Benetako judua barrutik da eta benetako erdainkuntza bihotzekoa , Espirituak egiten duena eta ez idatzitako legeak . Hau da , gizakiak ez , baina Jainkoak aintzat hartzen duena .
PRED:	For the Jewish believers who are Jews are Jews and Gentiles are circumcised , but they do n't receive the Holy Spirit . This is the law of God 's law . This is the law of God .
GOLD:	No , a true Jew is one whose heart is right with God . And true circumcision is not merely obeying the letter of the law ; rather , it is a change of heart produced by the Spirit . And a person with a changed heart seeks praise from God , not from people .

ID:	2333
INPUT:	Gau batez , honela esan zion Jaunak Paulori ikuskari batean : « Ez izan beldurrik , jarraitu hitz egiten isildu gabe .
PRED:	That same night the Lord said to Paul , “ Do n't be afraid . Do n't be afraid of them .
GOLD:	One night the Lord spoke to Paul in a vision and told him , “ Do n't be afraid ! Speak out ! Do n't be silent !

ID:	2334
INPUT:	Urrezko lau eraztun urtu zituen kutxaren lau oinentzat , bi eraztun albo baterako eta bi besterako .
PRED:	Then he made two gold rings and attached them to the four corners of the two gold rings .
GOLD:	He cast four gold rings and attached them to its four feet , two rings on each side .

ID:	2335
INPUT:	Kutsaturik gaude guztiok , gure egintzarik onenak erezapi zikinen antzeko ; orbela bezala gaude iharturiketa haizeak bezala garamatzategeure erruek .
PRED:	For we are united with Christ , just as we live in the days of our lives . We are like the wind , like the wind , and we are like the wind .
GOLD:	You welcome those who gladly do good , who follow godly ways.But you have been very angry with us , for we are not godly.We are constant sinners ; how can people like us be saved ?

ID:	2336
INPUT:	Zeure neke eta nahigabeen ondoren eta jasan duzun morrontza gogorraren ondoren , Jaunak atseden emango dizunean , Israel ,
PRED:	When you see , you will remember the word of the Lord , and you will give it to you in the wilderness , the Lord will give it to Israel .
GOLD:	In that wonderful day when the Lord gives his people rest from sorrow and fear , from slavery and chains ,

ID:	2337
INPUT:	Ez du onik egiten ezti gehiegi jateak , ezta ohore gehiegiren atzetik ibiltzeak ere .
PRED:	A person who refuses to eat anything from the mouth of a fool , even though they are not allowed to eat .
GOLD:	It 's not good to eat too much honey , and it 's not good to seek honors for yourself .

ID:	2338
INPUT:	bati , Espirituaren egitez , sinesmen-dohaina ematen dio ; beste bati , sendaketak egiteko dohaina ;
PRED:	And one who believes in the Holy Spirit is the one who believes in God 's grace and peace .
GOLD:	The same Spirit gives great faith to another , and to someone else the one Spirit gives the gift of healing .

ID:	2339
INPUT:	Beraz , errege jauna , onar ezazu nire aholkua : Utzi zeure bekatuak zuzenbide eginez , uko egin gaiztakeriari , behartsuekin errukitsu izanez . Agian , luzaroan eta zoriontsu biziko zara .
PRED:	So you will be sure that your lord the king will be wise , and you will become proud and arrogant , and you will be proud and arrogant , and you will live in prosperity .
GOLD:	“ ‘ This is what the dream means , Your Majesty , and what the Most High has declared will happen to my lord the king .

ID:	2340
INPUT:	<unk> bat hausten badio , libre utziko du hortzaren ordain .
PRED:	The Lord says , “ I will put my hope in safety , for he will save me . ”
GOLD:	And if a man knocks out the tooth of his male or female slave , he must let the slave go free to compensate for the tooth .

ID:	2341
INPUT:	Gainera , 7 . 337 morroi eta mirabe eta 200 kantari , gizon eta emakume .
PRED:	There were a male and female servants in addition to the Lord 's Temple .
GOLD:	in addition to 7,337 servants and 200 singers , both men and women .

ID:	2342
INPUT:	Honela , bada , agertu zen Joan Bataiatzailea basamortuan . Bihozberritzeko eta bataiatzeko hots egiten zuen , bekatuen barkamenerako .
PRED:	So John was baptized in the wilderness , and he was baptized in the wilderness to repent of their sins and turn away from their sins .
GOLD:	This messenger was John the Baptist . He was in the wilderness and preached that people should be baptized to show that they had repented of their sins and turned to God to be forgiven .

ID:	2343
INPUT:	Gizakiak egindako jainkoak , nola izan egiazko jainko ? »
PRED:	For how can I do such things ? ”
GOLD:	Can people make their own gods ? These are not real gods at all ! ”

ID:	2344
INPUT:	lege-maisu izan nahian , esaten eta aho betean irakasten dutena ulertzen ez badute ere .
PRED:	Even if you are teachers of religious law , you do n't understand what it means .
GOLD:	They want to be known as teachers of the law of Moses , but they do n't know what they are talking about , even though they speak so confidently .

ID:	2345
INPUT:	Izan bedi ilun eta labain haien bidea , zure aingeruak pertsegitzean !
PRED:	For the light of the darkness and the angels are filled with joy .
GOLD:	Make their path dark and slippery , with the angel of the Lord pursuing them .

ID:	2346
INPUT:	Kristo Jesusek , jainkozko izaerako izanik , ez zion gogor eutsi nahi izan
PRED:	Jesus Appears to the Scriptures , but he refused to pay attention to what he wanted .
GOLD:	Though he was God , he did not think of equality with Godas something to cling to .

ID:	2347
INPUT:	Jauna , zergatik baztertzen nauzu , zergatik gordetzen aurpegia ?
PRED:	O Lord , why do you reject me ? Why do you reject me ?
GOLD:	I have been sick and close to death since my youth.I stand helpless and desperate before your terrors .

ID:	2348
INPUT:	Atera nintzen , bada , gauez Haraneko atetik eta Herensugearen iturri aldera eta Zabortegiko ate aldera hartu nuen . Harresien alde hura arakatu nuen : harresiak zulatuak zeuden eta ateak suak kiskaliak .
PRED:	So I did n't go out to the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and the king of terrors were coming out of the river . I took the wall and threw it into the fire . I threw it into the fire and burned it down on fire .
GOLD:	After dark I went out through the Valley Gate , past the Jackal 's Well , and over to the Dung Gate to inspect the broken walls and burned gates .

ID:	2349
INPUT:	Egiptotik atera eta hirugarren hila bete zen egunean iritsi ziren israeldarrak Sinai basamortura .
PRED:	On the third day the Israelites arrived in the wilderness of Sinai and traveled through the wilderness of Sinai .
GOLD:	Exactly two months after the Israelites left Egypt , they arrived in the wilderness of Sinai .

ID:	2350
INPUT:	( 2 Erg 19 , 8-13 )
PRED:	Isaiah Predicts Judah 's Deliverance
GOLD:	Isaiah Predicts Judah 's Deliverance

ID:	2351
INPUT:	Leiala ez denaz arriskualdietan fidatzea , hortz hautsiaz jatea eta zango bihurrituaz ibiltzea bezala da .
PRED:	If you rescue me from your rescue , you will be caught in your mouth , and you will be my treasure .
GOLD:	Putting confidence in an unreliable person in times of troubleis like chewing with a broken tooth or walking on a lame foot .

ID:	2352
INPUT:	Bere aita Daviden aginduari jarraituz , Salomonek apaiz-taldeei beren eginkizunak ezarri zizkien ; lebitarrei , Jaunaren gorespenak kantatu eta apaizei eguneroko kultuan laguntzekoa . Atezain-taldeei tenpluko ateak zaintzeko eginkizuna eman zien , Davidek , Jainkoaren gizonak , agindu bezala .
PRED:	Then Solomon issued these orders to all the priests and Levites , along with the sacred tent that the Lord had commanded them to perform the Temple of the Lord , the priests , and Temple servants , and the Lord , had commanded them to perform the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	In assigning the priests to their duties , Solomon followed the regulations of his father , David . He also assigned the Levites to lead the people in praise and to assist the priests in their daily duties . And he assigned the gatekeepers to their gates by their divisions , following the commands of David , the man of God .

ID:	2353
INPUT:	Zuk , ordea , Jainkoaren gizon horrek , ihes egizu hauetatik guztietatik , eta saia zaitez justizian , jainkozaletasunean , sinesmenean , maitasunean , eroapenean eta otzantasunean .
PRED:	But you are a man of God , a man of God , from all the other nations , and do what is right , and do n't believe in your love .
GOLD:	But you , Timothy , are a man of God ; so run from all these evil things . Pursue righteousness and a godly life , along with faith , love , perseverance , and gentleness .

ID:	2354
INPUT:	Juduen asmoak desegiteko , errege-kontseilariak erosi egin zituzten . Honela jardun zuten Pertsiako errege Ziroren garai guztian , Darioren erregealdia arte .
PRED:	When the officials of Judah learned that the older men of Judah had been appointed by King Cyrus of Persia , they appointed him to rule over the entire province of Persia .
GOLD:	They bribed agents to work against them and to frustrate their plans . This went on during the entire reign of King Cyrus of Persia and lasted until King Darius of Persia took the throne .

ID:	2355
INPUT:	Entzun baino lehen erantzuten duenakzentzugabearen lotsa jasan beharko du .
PRED:	Listen to the foolish arguments of fools , and they will be ashamed of their own shame .
GOLD:	Spouting off before listening to the factsis both shameful and foolish .

ID:	2356
INPUT:	Egun hura ez da lehenik argi eta gero ilun izango ;
PRED:	In that day there will be no light , and it will be no longer .
GOLD:	On that day the sources of light will no longer shine ,

ID:	2357
INPUT:	Baina Jesusek berehala hitz egin zien eta esan : — Lasai ! Neu naiz . Ez beldurtu !
PRED:	But Jesus said to them , “ Do n't be afraid ! I am afraid . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus spoke to them at once . “ Do n't be afraid , ” he said . “ Take courage . I am here ! ”

ID:	2358
INPUT:	Aitorpen bera egiten digu Espiritu Santuak ere , hau esatean :
PRED:	For the Holy Spirit has come to us in the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	And the Holy Spirit also testifies that this is so . For he says ,

ID:	2359
INPUT:	Baina neurekin zaitut zu , Jauna , gudari indartsu bezala ; eroriko dira nire etsaiak , ezin izango naute garaitu ; beraien asmoek porrot egingo dute , haien lotsa sekulakoa izango , behin ere ahaztezina .
PRED:	But you are my strength , O Lord , and I will give you victory over my enemies . They will be ashamed of their enemies , and their shame will be ashamed of shame .
GOLD:	But the Lord stands beside me like a great warrior.Before him my persecutors will stumble.They can not defeat me.They will fail and be thoroughly humiliated.Their dishonor will never be forgotten .

ID:	2360
INPUT:	Nork ez zuri begirune , Jauna ? Nork ez goretsi zure izena ? Zu bakarrik zara santu ! Herriak oro etorrieta zure aurreanahuspeztuko dira , zure salbamen-asmoakdenen aurrean agertu baitira » .
PRED:	No one can praise the Lord ! Who is your name ? Who has brought you out of the nations , and you will worship your name , and you will bow down before you . ”
GOLD:	Who will not fear you , Lord , and glorify your name ? For you alone are holy.All nations will come and worship before you , for your righteous deeds have been revealed . ”

ID:	2361
INPUT:	Txerrizainek ihes egin zuten eta , herrira joanik , dena kontatu zuten , baita deabrudunena ere .
PRED:	The young man ran and fled to the nearby town , but the demon 's possessed by a demon .
GOLD:	The herdsmen fled to the nearby town , telling everyone what happened to the demon-possessed men .

ID:	2362
INPUT:	“ Igo gaitezen Judaren aurka , setia dezagun eta menpean hartu , eta jar dezagun bertan erregeTabeel-en semea ” .
PRED:	“ Then the king of Judah went to war against the king of Judah and his sons and King Amaziah of Judah . '
GOLD:	‘ We will attack Judah and capture it for ourselves . Then we will install the son of Tabeel as Judah 's king . '

ID:	2363
INPUT:	Nire aurka altxatzen diren erreboltariak kendu egingo ditut zuen artetik ; erbesteraturik daudeneko herrialdetik aterako ditut , baina ez dira Israelen sartuko ; orduan jakingo duzue ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	I will redeem you from the community of Israel , and I will bring you out of exile from the community of Israel . I will bring you out of the land , but you will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	I will purge you of all those who rebel and revolt against me . I will bring them out of the countries where they are in exile , but they will never enter the land of Israel . Then you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	2364
INPUT:	Begiko ez banau , berriz , egin beza nirekin egoki deritzona .
PRED:	But if I do n't do anything , let me go with me , for he is righteous .
GOLD:	But if he is through with me , then let him do what seems best to him . ”

ID:	2365
INPUT:	« Beraz , honela diotsuet nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak : Egizue gogoeta zeuen egoeraz .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says :
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Look at what 's happening to you !

ID:	2366
INPUT:	Elixama , Eliada , Elifelet .
PRED:	Oholibamah , Elijah , Elijah , and Elijah .
GOLD:	Elishama , Eliada , and Eliphelet .

ID:	2367
INPUT:	Gure borroka , izan ere , ez da hezur-mamizko arerioen aurkakoa , goiko espiritu gaiztoen aurkakoa baizik , mundu ilun honetako aginte , ahalmen eta botereen aurkakoa .
PRED:	For our boasting is not against us , and there is no one else else . He will put them into the face of the world , but he will drive them out of this world .
GOLD:	For we are not fighting against flesh-and-blood enemies , but against evil rulers and authorities of the unseen world , against mighty powers in this dark world , and against evil spirits in the heavenly places .

ID:	2368
INPUT:	Eta aurreraxeago joanik , lurrean erori eta otoizka ari zitzaion Jainkoari , urrun ziezaiola ordu hura , ahal bazen .
PRED:	Then he went to the ground at the ground and gave it to the ground . Then God gave it to the ground , but he soon died .
GOLD:	He went on a little farther and fell to the ground . He prayed that , if it were possible , the awful hour awaiting him might pass him by .

ID:	2369
INPUT:	Bete ezazue gogo onez zeuen zerbitzua , Jaunarentzat bezala eta ez gizakientzat .
PRED:	Instead , be sure that you will serve the Lord your God as you do .
GOLD:	Work with enthusiasm , as though you were working for the Lord rather than for people .

ID:	2370
INPUT:	sustraiak zahartu eta motzondoa lurpean ihartu arren ,
PRED:	The roots of the earth and conquered it .
GOLD:	Though its roots have grown old in the earthand its stump decays ,

ID:	2371
INPUT:	Sobera gelditzen diren haragia eta ogia erre egingo dituzue .
PRED:	Your kingdom will remain in Sodom , and your kingdom will be your kingdom .
GOLD:	Any meat or bread that is left over must then be burned up .

ID:	2372
INPUT:	Ibai baten adarrek alaitzen dute Jainkoaren hiria . Goi-goikoak bere bizilekua sagaratu du .
PRED:	O God , you have made the godly , and the Most High rules over the Most High .
GOLD:	God dwells in that city ; it can not be destroyed.From the very break of day , God will protect it .

ID:	2373
INPUT:	Aldi hartan , haserreak sorrarazi zituen Jainkoak Abimeleken eta Sikemgo nagusien artean , eta hauek Abimeleken kontra jaiki ziren .
PRED:	At that time the anger of God was very angry with the leading citizens of Shechem , and the leading citizens of Shechem and Abimelech .
GOLD:	God sent a spirit that stirred up trouble between Abimelech and the leading citizens of Shechem , and they revolted .

ID:	2374
INPUT:	Haren senideek ere ez zuten , hain zuzen , berarengan sinesten .
PRED:	But his brothers and sisters , they did n't believe in him .
GOLD:	For even his brothers did n't believe in him .

ID:	2375
INPUT:	Horregatik , urruti dugu askapena , ez zaigu iristen salbamena ; argia espero genuen , eta iluna dugu gainean ; egunsentia espero , eta gau beltzetan gabiltza .
PRED:	That 's why we can not save you , but we can not save you . We are looking for help , but we are looking for help and night .
GOLD:	So there is no justice among us , and we know nothing about right living.We look for light but find only darkness.We look for bright skies but walk in gloom .

ID:	2376
INPUT:	« Egun hau gogoangarri izango duzue eta , Jaunaren ohorez , festa nagusiz ospatuko . Festa hau lege-indarrez ezarriko duzue belaunez belaun .
PRED:	“ On that day you must celebrate the Festival of Shelters , and you must celebrate the Festival of Unleavened Bread . This is a permanent law for you , and it must be observed from generation to generation .
GOLD:	“ This is a day to remember . Each year , from generation to generation , you must celebrate it as a special festival to the Lord . This is a law for all time .

ID:	2377
INPUT:	“ Fruitu ederreko olibondo heze ” izenaeman nion behinola ; orain , ordea , hostoa erreko diotesugar bizian , eta adarrak hautsiko .
PRED:	He said , ‘ This is the tree that is good and good fruit . ' But now it means that the branches will grow into the ground , and it will pour out on the ground .
GOLD:	I , the Lord , once called them a thriving olive tree , beautiful to see and full of good fruit.But now I have sent the fury of their enemiesto burn them with fire , leaving them charred and broken .

ID:	2378
INPUT:	« Bedeinkatua Jauna , Israelen Jainkoa , bere herriarengana etorrieta askatu duena !
PRED:	“ Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , who has redeemed his people .
GOLD:	“ Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , because he has visited and redeemed his people .

ID:	2379
INPUT:	Begira zein sailetara doazen biltzera eta joan beraien atzetik . Nire morroiei zuri bakean uzteko eskatu diet . Egarri zarenean , edan haiek betetako ur-ontzietatik .
PRED:	I went to meet you , and I will send you out of my slaves . I will send them out of the prison , just as I have commanded you to send them out of the land .
GOLD:	See which part of the field they are harvesting , and then follow them . I have warned the young men not to treat you roughly . And when you are thirsty , help yourself to the water they have drawn from the well . ”

ID:	2380
INPUT:	( 27 , 9-19 )
PRED:	Treatment of Contaminated Clothing
GOLD:	Inventory of Materials

ID:	2381
INPUT:	eta jentilen zerbitzari ere egin zen , bere errukiagatik Jainkoa gorets zezaten . Hau dio , hain zuzen , Liburu Santuak : Horregatik , atzerritarren artean goretsiko zaitut , eta zure omenez kantatuko dut .
PRED:	All the people of Israel have sinned , and they praise the Lord your God . This is what the Scriptures say : “ Yes , I will praise you from all the nations of the nations , and I will praise you . ”
GOLD:	He also came so that the Gentiles might give glory to God for his mercies to them . That is what the psalmist meant when he wrote : “ For this , I will praise you among the Gentiles ; I will sing praises to your name . ”

ID:	2382
INPUT:	Gizon batek beste gizon bat iraintzen badu , Jainkoa izan dezake bitarteko ; bekatua Jaunaren aurka egiten badu , ordea , nor izan dezake aldeko ? » Hala ere , semeek ez zuten aitaren esana aditu . Izan ere , erabakia zuen Jainkoak haiek hilaraztea .
PRED:	If a man is not a man , how can he be a man who is a believer ? But if someone asks the Lord God of God , how can he be his father ? ” But the man of God would not be his father .
GOLD:	If someone sins against another person , God can mediate for the guilty party . But if someone sins against the Lord , who can intercede ? ” But Eli 's sons would n't listen to their father , for the Lord was already planning to put them to death .

ID:	2383
INPUT:	Ireki eta mutikoa ikusi zuen negarrez . Faraoiaren alabak , errukiturik , esan zuen : — Hebrearren haurra da , noski .
PRED:	Then he opened his arms and washed his feet . Then he looked up and looked at his feet , and he said , “ Here is my child ! ”
GOLD:	When the princess opened it , she saw the baby . The little boy was crying , and she felt sorry for him . “ This must be one of the Hebrew children , ” she said .

ID:	2384
INPUT:	Bai zoragarria zure maitasuna , oi Jainko ! Zure hegalpera biltzen dira gizakiak .
PRED:	O God , you are saying , “ O God of Heaven 's Armies ! ”
GOLD:	You feed them from the abundance of your own house , letting them drink from your river of delights .

ID:	2385
INPUT:	« Bidez zoaztela , zuhaitzean nahiz lurrean habia txorikumeekin edo arrautzekin , ama bertan delarik , aurkitzen baduzue , ez hartu ama kumeekin ;
PRED:	“ Stand up , suppose you are about to enter the land with your mother , or if you enter the land , you must not find a mother or mother or mother or mother or mother .
GOLD:	“ If you happen to find a bird 's nest in a tree or on the ground , and there are young ones or eggs in it with the mother sitting in the nest , do not take the mother with the young .

ID:	2386
INPUT:	Esker ona eta eskaria
PRED:	Encouragement to Be Faithful
GOLD:	Paul 's Joy That Christ Is Preached

ID:	2387
INPUT:	ager bedi zure gorputza biluzik , zeure lotsariak bistan dituzula . Mendeku hartuko dut , ez dit inork eragotziko » .
PRED:	O Lord , I will hide your body in your dead bodies , and no one will help me . ”
GOLD:	You will be naked and burdened with shame.I will take vengeance against you without pity . ”

ID:	2388
INPUT:	Eta , nork bere burura hautsa botaz , oihu egiten zuen negarrez eta aieneka : « Ai zu , ai hiri handia ! Zure aberastasunei eskeraberastu zirenitsasontziak zituzten guztiak . Horra orain une batean erraustua ! »
PRED:	Then they shouted , “ O God , you cry out to me , ‘ What sorrow awaits you who have been killed by great riches and great riches ! How terrible for you ! Now you have been destroyed ! ”
GOLD:	And they will weep and throw dust on their heads to show their grief . And they will cry out , “ How terrible , how terrible for that great city ! The shipowners became wealthyby transporting her great wealth on the seas.In a single moment it is all gone . ”

ID:	2389
INPUT:	Orduan , esan zioten entzuleek : — Ez dituzu oraindik berrogeita hamar urte , eta Abraham ikusi duzula ?
PRED:	“ Do n't you hear him ? ” they asked . “ Do n't you see ten years ? ”
GOLD:	The people said , “ You are n't even fifty years old . How can you say you have seen Abraham ? ”

ID:	2390
INPUT:	Era berean , zeruko zuen Aitak ez du nahi txiki hauetako inor galtzerik .
PRED:	In the same way , the heavenly Father would n't ask anyone to ask anyone about these things .
GOLD:	In the same way , it is not my heavenly Father 's will that even one of these little ones should perish .

ID:	2391
INPUT:	Asiria ezpataz joa eroriko da , baina ez gizakiari esker ; ezpatak garbituko du , baina ez giza indarrez . Ezpatak ihes eragingo die , gudaririk onenaklan behartuetarakohartuko dizkiote .
PRED:	The sword of a sword is a sword , but a sword is a sword . It is a dangerous sword , a sword , a sword will run with a sword , and a sword will destroy them with a sword .
GOLD:	“ The Assyrians will be destroyed , but not by the swords of men.The sword of God will strike them , and they will panic and flee.The strong young Assyrianswill be taken away as captives .

ID:	2392
INPUT:	atariko oihalak , egoitza eta aldarea inguratzen dituen atariaren sarrerako oihala , sokak eta gainerako osagaiak ; hori guztia da gerxondarren egitekoa .
PRED:	the bases for the Tabernacle and the bases ; the curtain for the bases ; the curtain for the bases ; the curtain for the bases ; the curtain for the bases ; the curtain for the Tabernacle must be used for the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	They are also to carry the curtains for the courtyard walls that surround the Tabernacle and altar , the curtain across the courtyard entrance , the ropes , and all the equipment related to their use . The Gershonites are responsible for all these items .

ID:	2393
INPUT:	Oroit zaitez nitaz orduan , ongi doakizunean ; egidazu , arren , mesede hau : mintza zakizkio faraoiari nire alde , hemendik atera nazan .
PRED:	Remember , remember what I have done to you in the future , for you have said to Pharaoh , ‘ Let me go to Pharaoh 's land . '
GOLD:	And please remember me and do me a favor when things go well for you . Mention me to Pharaoh , so he might let me out of this place .

ID:	2394
INPUT:	Ez zaitzatela edozein eratako doktrina arrotzek lilura . Garrantzizkoena Jainkoaren dohainaz barrutik sendotzea da , eta ez janariei buruzko arauez arduratzea , hauek ez baitiete ezer onik ekarri bete dituztenei .
PRED:	Do n't worry about this . Do n't worry about the plot of suffering of the Good News about the teaching of God . That is why you do n't want to teach those who do what is right , for they do n't need to do what is right .
GOLD:	So do not be attracted by strange , new ideas . Your strength comes from God 's grace , not from rules about food , which do n't help those who follow them .

ID:	2395
INPUT:	« Ez okertu zuzenbidea alderdikeriaz jokatuz ; ez onartu eskupekorik , itsutu egiten baititu pertsona jakintsuak ere eta hondatu egiten zintzoen epaia .
PRED:	“ Do not twist justice . Do not ignore the rights of the poor , but do n't ignore the rights of the poor and the godly .
GOLD:	You must never twist justice or show partiality . Never accept a bribe , for bribes blind the eyes of the wise and corrupt the decisions of the godly .

ID:	2396
INPUT:	( <unk> , 15-19 )
PRED:	Parable of the Sons
GOLD:	Jeremiah 's Prayer

ID:	2397
INPUT:	Zipre begiztatu eta ezkerretara utzirik , Siriarantz jarraitu genuen eta Tirora iritsi , han hustu behar baitzuen ontziak bere karga .
PRED:	They sailed to Cyprus and sailed along the coast of Cyprus , where we traveled through Cyprus and traveled through the island of Cyprus .
GOLD:	We sighted the island of Cyprus , passed it on our left , and landed at the harbor of Tyre , in Syria , where the ship was to unload its cargo .

ID:	2398
INPUT:	Eta berriro Jaunaren aingeruak : — Kontaezin hainbatugalduko ditut zure ondorengoak .
PRED:	Then the angel of the Lord said to him , “ Do n't you remember all these children ? ”
GOLD:	Then he added , “ I will give you more descendants than you can count . ”

ID:	2399
INPUT:	( <unk> 4 , 1-3 )
PRED:	Asa Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	2400
INPUT:	Joka ezazue pertsona libre bezala ; ez , ordea , askatasuna gaiztakeriaren estalkitzat erabiliz , zeuen buruak Jainkoaren zerbitzura jarriz baizik .
PRED:	Instead , let your servants be free , but do n't let them be afraid of your servants . But do n't let them serve God 's servants .
GOLD:	For you are free , yet you are God 's slaves , so do n't use your freedom as an excuse to do evil .

ID:	2401
INPUT:	Nazioak bildu ziren haren kontra ; beren zuloan harrapatu zuteneta katepean Egiptora eraman .
PRED:	They gathered against him , and they brought him out of Egypt and brought him to Egypt .
GOLD:	Then the nations heard about him , and he was trapped in their pit.They led him away with hooksto the land of Egypt .

ID:	2402
INPUT:	Askok hitz egiten dute ongi handikiaz , mundu guztia eskuzabalaren lagun .
PRED:	Many will speak about him , and many people will talk about him .
GOLD:	Many seek favors from a ruler ; everyone is the friend of a person who gives gifts !

ID:	2403
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Ez zaio inoiz ere faltako Davidi Israelgo tronuan eseriko den ondorengorik .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will never again again be a descendant of David , a descendant of David .
GOLD:	For this is what the Lord says : David will have a descendant sitting on the throne of Israel forever .

ID:	2404
INPUT:	ezta Herodesek ere , guri bidali baitigu ostera . Honek ez du , beraz , heriotza merezi duenik ezer egin .
PRED:	But Herod sent us to tell us , “ We have n't been sent to death . ” So Herod sent his death to die .
GOLD:	Herod came to the same conclusion and sent him back to us . Nothing this man has done calls for the death penalty .

ID:	2405
INPUT:	Gau hartan Jauna agertu zitzaion , esanez : « Ni naizzure aita Abrahamen Jainkoa . Ez izan beldur , zeurekin bainauzu . Bedeinkatuko zaitut , ondorengo ugari emango dizutneure zerbitzari Abrahamengatik » .
PRED:	That night the Lord appeared to Abraham and told him , “ I am the God of your father , Isaac , and Jacob . Do n't be afraid of me , for I will give you a blessing to Abraham . ”
GOLD:	where the Lord appeared to him on the night of his arrival . “ I am the God of your father , Abraham , ” he said . “ Do not be afraid , for I am with you and will bless you . I will multiply your descendants , and they will become a great nation . I will do this because of my promise to Abraham , my servant . ”

ID:	2406
INPUT:	Haien buruzagiakberen geziz zulatu dituzu , eraso batean gu sakabanatzera , gizagaixo batezkutuan irenstera bezala , pozik zetozenean .
PRED:	Even if we are human , we are weak and tired of breaking the blood on the ground . We are like grass in the dust , but you are driven from the ground .
GOLD:	With his own weapons , you destroyed the chief of thosewho rushed out like a whirlwind , thinking Israel would be easy prey .

ID:	2407
INPUT:	Eta mintzo hau etorri zen zerutik : « Hau da nire Semea , nire maitea ; berau dut atsegin » .
PRED:	Then a voice from heaven said , “ This is my Son , my dear Son , and my child is my child . ”
GOLD:	And a voice from heaven said , “ This is my dearly loved Son , who brings me great joy . ”

ID:	2408
INPUT:	Gure Jainkoari mesede hau eskatuz egin genuen barau , eta entzun egin zigun .
PRED:	We pleaded with God for us , and we prayed to God for us .
GOLD:	So we fasted and earnestly prayed that our God would take care of us , and he heard our prayer .

ID:	2409
INPUT:	Ez zuen ezagutu , eskuak anaia Esaurenak bezain iletsuak baitziren , eta bedeinkazioa eman zion .
PRED:	So he did n't need the younger brother , for he was as strong as his brother , Esau , had blessed him .
GOLD:	But he did not recognize Jacob , because Jacob 's hands felt hairy just like Esau 's . So Isaac prepared to bless Jacob .

ID:	2410
INPUT:	« Lauoinka dabiltzan intsektu hegaldunak debekatuak dituzue .
PRED:	“ All winged insects that walk along the ground are detestable to you .
GOLD:	“ You must not eat winged insects that walk along the ground ; they are detestable to you .

ID:	2411
INPUT:	Ezekiasek Gihon errekaren goiko irteera estali eta lur azpitik eraman zuen Daviden Hiriaren mendebalderantz . Ezekiasek ongi burutu zituen bere egintza guztiak .
PRED:	Then King Sihon sent him back to King Sihon of the Amorites , and he led them out of the hill country of David , across the hill country of David .
GOLD:	He blocked up the upper spring of Gihon and brought the water down through a tunnel to the west side of the City of David . And so he succeeded in everything he did .

ID:	2412
INPUT:	Hona Edom lurraldean izan ziren erregeak , israeldarrek erregerik izan aurretik :
PRED:	These are the kings of Edom who lived in the land of Edom , for the kings of Edom had no king .
GOLD:	These are the kings who ruled in the land of Edom before any king ruled over the Israelites :

ID:	2413
INPUT:	Horrela , begirune izanen dizute eta zure bideetan ibiliko dira , gure gurasoei eman zenien lurraldean biziko diren bitartean .
PRED:	Therefore , you will live in the land of your ancestors , and you will live in the land you gave to your ancestors .
GOLD:	Then they will fear you and walk in your ways as long as they live in the land you gave to our ancestors .

ID:	2414
INPUT:	Adoretsu nago , ene Jainko . Kantatu eta soinua joko dizut . Ea , ene bihotza !
PRED:	I will praise you , O God , and I will praise you with all my heart .
GOLD:	Wake up , lyre and harp ! I will wake the dawn with my song .

ID:	2415
INPUT:	Zikrik , gudari efraimdar adoretsu hark , erregearen ofiziala zen Maaseias hil zuen , baita Azrikam jauregizaina eta Elkana ministro nagusia ere .
PRED:	These are the officials of Ephraim , who had been killed by the king of Ephraim , the court secretary , and Asaiah the officials of the king 's personal adviser .
GOLD:	Then Zicri , a warrior from Ephraim , killed Maaseiah , the king 's son ; Azrikam , the king 's palace commander ; and Elkanah , the king 's second-in-command .

ID:	2416
INPUT:	eta zuek ere , munduko aginte eta botereen buru den Kristoren bitartez lortu duzue zeuen betetasuna .
PRED:	And you will be thrown into the world , and you will be sure that you have been purchased by the power of Christ .
GOLD:	So you also are complete through your union with Christ , who is the head over every ruler and authority .

ID:	2417
INPUT:	Orain , ordea , zuregana noa . Hau guztia , oraindik munduan nagoela esaten dut , nire poza berengan izan dezaten , eta bete-betea izan ere .
PRED:	But now I am the one who gives you this world , just as I have done . And now I have been filled with all my heart , just as I have done .
GOLD:	“ Now I am coming to you . I told them many things while I was with them in this world so they would be filled with my joy .

ID:	2418
INPUT:	Behartsuak bide bazterrera botatzen dituzte , dohakabe guztiak ezkutatzera behartzen .
PRED:	Those who reject the poor and rob them of the poor , and they stumble .
GOLD:	The poor are pushed off the path ; the needy must hide together for safety .

ID:	2419
INPUT:	horrela , Jainkoak bere onginahiaz onartu gaituelarik , itxaro dugun betiko biziaren oinordeko bilakatu gara .
PRED:	For God has made us right with doing this , and we will have eternal life for a long life .
GOLD:	Because of his grace he made us right in his sight and gave us confidence that we will inherit eternal life .

ID:	2420
INPUT:	Bai , erreinuanMardokeo judua ze<unk> suero erregearen hurren . Gizon handia juduen aurrean , maitatua bere senideguztien artean . Bere herritarrentzatzorionaren bilatzaile , beretarrentzat bake-ezartzaile .
PRED:	This is the King of the Jews , the king of the Jews , who had been appointed by the royal family of the Jews , who were appointed by their fellow Jews .
GOLD:	Mordecai the Jew became the prime minister , with authority next to that of King Xerxes himself . He was very great among the Jews , who held him in high esteem , because he continued to work for the good of his people and to speak up for the welfare of all their descendants .

ID:	2421
INPUT:	« Gizon bakar batengandik sorrarazi zituen Jainkoak nazio guztiak , lur zabal osoan bizi zitezen , bakoitzari bere garai eta lur-mugak ezarriz .
PRED:	“ A man who made a man from one man , who made a covenant with God , and he made the earth as high as the stars .
GOLD:	From one man he created all the nations throughout the whole earth . He decided beforehand when they should rise and fall , and he determined their boundaries .

ID:	2422
INPUT:	Aditu dizut Ismaeli buruz esan duzuna ere . Bedeinkatu egingo dut : ondorengo ugari izango ditu , hamabi printze sortuko ditu eta herri handi baten sorburu egingo dut .
PRED:	I tell you the leaders of Israel , ‘ I will bless you , and I will bless you . I will make you ruler over many nations , and I will make you ruler over many nations . '
GOLD:	As for Ishmael , I will bless him also , just as you have asked . I will make him extremely fruitful and multiply his descendants . He will become the father of twelve princes , and I will make him a great nation .

ID:	2423
INPUT:	Kanpoko atarian iparraldera zegoen sarreraren luzera eta zabalera ere neurtu zituen .
PRED:	He measured the entry room of the north gateway leading into the inner courtyard , and he measured it .
GOLD:	The man measured the gateway on the north just like the one on the east .

ID:	2424
INPUT:	« Hara , ardiak otso artera bezala bidaltzen zaituztet . Izan zaitezte , bada , sugeak bezain zuhur eta usoak bezain xalo .
PRED:	“ Look , I am sending you to the Babylonians , and I am sending you as numerous as the Nile River .
GOLD:	“ Look , I am sending you out as sheep among wolves . So be as shrewd as snakes and harmless as doves .

ID:	2425
INPUT:	Ohartu zen Moises Aaronen zabarkeriagatik herria bere onetik aterata zebilela , etsaien barregarri ,
PRED:	So Moses took Aaron 's blood from the community of Israel , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	Moses saw that Aaron had let the people get completely out of control , much to the amusement of their enemies .

ID:	2426
INPUT:	Davidek esan zien gabaondarrei : — Zer egin dezaket zuen alde ? Zerez ordain diezazueket , Jaunaren ondarea bedeinka dezazuen ?
PRED:	“ What can I do for you ? ” David asked . “ How can I give you a blessing for the Lord ? ”
GOLD:	David asked them , “ What can I do for you ? How can I make amends so that you will bless the Lord 's people again ? ”

ID:	2427
INPUT:	Honek esan zien : « Zuek zeuen buruak zintzo azaltzen dituzue jendearen aurrean , baina ezagutzen du Jainkoak zuen barrua ; izan ere , gizakiak baliotsutzat daukana , Jainkoarentzat mespretxagarri da .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ You are permitted to see the truth , but you are shown to see the truth . If you see the truth , you are a disgrace to God .
GOLD:	Then he said to them , “ You like to appear righteous in public , but God knows your hearts . What this world honors is detestable in the sight of God .

ID:	2428
INPUT:	badira gure artean Frigia nahiz Panfiliakoak , Egipto nahiz Zirene inguruko Libia aldekoak , baita erromatarrak ere ;
PRED:	We are also in the province of Egypt , along with coast , the coast of the province of Egypt , and the rest of the people of Egypt , and all the people of Egypt .
GOLD:	Phrygia , Pamphylia , Egypt , and the areas of Libya around Cyrene , visitors from Rome

ID:	2429
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Eta zuek zergatik hausten duzue Jainkoaren agindua zeuen usadioengatik ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Why did you reject the commands of God ? Why did you hear the word of God ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ And why do you , by your traditions , violate the direct commandments of God ?

ID:	2430
INPUT:	Horiek izan ziren Noeren semeen leinuak , nor bere ondorengo eta herrien arabera . Horiengandik sortu ziren herriak uholdearen ondoren eta hedatu munduan zehar .
PRED:	These are the descendants of Noah , the descendants of Noah , who had been chosen by the descendants of Noah , who had been given birth to many nations .
GOLD:	These are the clans that descended from Noah 's sons , arranged by nation according to their lines of descent . All the nations of the earth descended from these clans after the great flood .

ID:	2431
INPUT:	Begiraleak oihu egin zuen : « Hemen nago , Jauna , egun osoan neure tokian , eta gauez ereneure guardia-postuan erne .
PRED:	Then he shouted , “ Shout to the Lord , for he is my ancestors , and he did n't even know me in the night .
GOLD:	Then the watchman called out , “ Day after day I have stood on the watchtower , my lord.Night after night I have remained at my post .

ID:	2432
INPUT:	Balio handiko bat aurkitzen duenean , joan , bere gauza guztiak saldu eta erosi egiten du .
PRED:	There is a great nation in the sun , and everyone who believes in it will be saved .
GOLD:	When he discovered a pearl of great value , he sold everything he owned and bought it !

ID:	2433
INPUT:	Zuen aitak nire galdera egiten badu , esaiozu : « Bere sorterri Belenera albait lehen joaten uzteko eskatu zidan Davidek , urteroko oparia bere ahaide guztiekin egiteko » .
PRED:	“ If you were my father , tell me , ‘ You are my father , David , ' they told him , ‘ You must go to the threshing floor of Lebanon . ' ”
GOLD:	If your father asks where I am , tell him I asked permission to go home to Bethlehem for an annual family sacrifice .

ID:	2434
INPUT:	Geziak jaurtiz sakabanatu zituen , tximista eginez ihes eragin .
PRED:	Then he threw them away , and he threw them into a lightning .
GOLD:	He shot arrows and scattered his enemies ; his lightning flashed , and they were confused .

ID:	2435
INPUT:	Lekukoak izango dira lehenak kondenatua hiltzen , eta herri osoa ondoren . Horrela ezabatuko duzue gaiztakeria zeuen artetik .
PRED:	But you will be sure that your descendants will die in death , just as you have done for the murder of your ancestors .
GOLD:	The witnesses must throw the first stones , and then all the people may join in . In this way , you will purge the evil from among you .

ID:	2436
INPUT:	Nik , Jaun honek , zuzenbidea dut maite , lapurreta eta bidegabekeria gorroto . Leialki emango diet sariaeta betiko ituna egingo beraiekin .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : I will put my fist and consume them , and I will destroy them with all their belongings .
GOLD:	“ For I , the Lord , love justice.I hate robbery and wrongdoing.I will faithfully reward my people for their sufferingand make an everlasting covenant with them .

ID:	2437
INPUT:	mihi-luze ez dena , lagun hurkoari kalterik egiten ez diona , auzokoa iraintzen ez duena ;
PRED:	It is not a day for a thousand years , but a person who refuses to kill a neighbor .
GOLD:	Those who refuse to gossipor harm their neighborsor speak evil of their friends .

ID:	2438
INPUT:	Haiek , ordea , ez zuten ulertzen zer ari zitzaien ; galdetzera , berriz , ez ziren ausartzen .
PRED:	But they did n't understand what he meant . But they would n't understand what he meant .
GOLD:	They did n't understand what he was saying , however , and they were afraid to ask him what he meant .

ID:	2439
INPUT:	eta Jaunaren etxeko eta erregearen jauregiko altxorrez jabetu . Dena harrapatu zuen , baita Salomonek eginiko urrezko babeskiak ere .
PRED:	Solomon took all the treasures of the Temple of the Lord , and he stored up the gold shields from the treasuries of the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	He ransacked the treasuries of the Lord 's Temple and the royal palace ; he stole everything , including all the gold shields Solomon had made .

ID:	2440
INPUT:	Baimen gisa diotsuet hori , ez agindu gisa .
PRED:	But this is what the Lord says : “ I do n't do it ! ”
GOLD:	I say this as a concession , not as a command .

ID:	2441
INPUT:	Batzarrak bekatuen barkamena eskatu
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	The People Confess Their Sins

ID:	2442
INPUT:	baizik eta beregana dezala gure bihotza , gu beraren bidean ibil gaitezen eta gure gurasoei eman zizkien agindu , lege eta erabakiak bete ditzagun .
PRED:	But we know that we are our ancestors , just as our ancestors had given us our ancestors , and we gave us his decrees and regulations to our ancestors .
GOLD:	May he give us the desire to do his will in everything and to obey all the commands , decrees , and regulations that he gave our ancestors .

ID:	2443
INPUT:	Adoretsu nago , ene Jainko , adoretsu . Kantatu eta soinua joko dizut .
PRED:	I will praise you , O God , and I will praise you with songs of joy .
GOLD:	Wake up , my heart ! Wake up , O lyre and harp ! I will wake the dawn with my song .

ID:	2444
INPUT:	Gainera , zeuen morroi eta neskame egin nahi dituzue Judako eta Jerusalemgo gizon-emakumeok . Horrela , ez ote zarete zeuek ere errudun bihurtuko Jaunaren , zeuen Jainkoaren , aurrean ?
PRED:	And now , you are a servant of Judah and Jerusalem . Why do you want to serve the Lord your God in Jerusalem ? Do n't you realize that you are guilty of the Lord your God ?
GOLD:	And now you are planning to make slaves of these people from Judah and Jerusalem . What about your own sins against the Lord your God ?

ID:	2445
INPUT:	Orduan , jauregiko arduradunak , hiriko buruzagiak , arduradunek eta hezitzaileek erantzun hau bidali zioten Jehuri : « Zeure zerbitzari gaituzu eta zuk esana eginen dugu . Ez dugu inor ere errege izendatuko . Egizu egokien iruditzen zaizuna » .
PRED:	Then the leaders of the palace commanders , the leaders of the city officials , and the leaders of the city replied , “ We have sent this message to you , ‘ You are the king of Jerusalem , and we will do what you do . ' ”
GOLD:	So the palace and city administrators , together with the elders and the guardians of the king 's sons , sent this message to Jehu : “ We are your servants and will do anything you tell us . We will not make anyone king ; do whatever you think is best . ”

ID:	2446
INPUT:	Gero , Ben-Hinom haranaren aurreko mendiaren ertzeraino jaisten zen , refatarren lautadaren iparraldera , eta , Ben-Hinom haranean behera , jebustarren hiria zegoeneko mendi-hegiaren hegoaldetik igaroz , En-Rogeleraino heltzen zen .
PRED:	Then they went down to the valley of Ben-Hinnom , near the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and the Jebusites went down to the valley of Ben-Hinnom , near the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and the valley of Slaughter .
GOLD:	and down to the base of the mountain beside the valley of Ben-Hinnom , at the northern end of the valley of Rephaim . From there it went down the valley of Hinnom , crossing south of the slope where the Jebusites lived , and continued down to En-rogel .

ID:	2447
INPUT:	Haren patuaz izu-ikaratu egiten dira denak , bai ekialdekoak , bai mendebaldekoak :
PRED:	Look at what they are going to happen to you , and everyone who calls on the west of the west .
GOLD:	People in the west are appalled at their fate ; people in the east are horrified .

ID:	2448
INPUT:	Pazkoa eta Legamia gabeko Ogien Jaia
PRED:	Passover and the Festival of Harvest
GOLD:	Celebration of First Harvest

ID:	2449
INPUT:	( Mk 2 , 13-17 ; Lk 5 , <unk> )
PRED:	Jesus Heals Many People
GOLD:	Jesus Heals in Response to Faith

ID:	2450
INPUT:	JESUSEN AURKEZPENA ( 1 , 5 — 4 , 13 )
PRED:	The Ancestors of Jesus
GOLD:	The Birth of John the Baptist Foretold

ID:	2451
INPUT:	nagusiak eman badio emaztea , eta honek seme-alabak sortu , emaztea eta seme-alabak nagusiarenak dira , eta esklaboa bakarrik joango da .
PRED:	The master has given his wife , his wife , his wife , and his sons and daughters , and his children will be slaves .
GOLD:	“ If his master gave him a wife while he was a slave and they had sons or daughters , then only the man will be free in the seventh year , but his wife and children will still belong to his master .

ID:	2452
INPUT:	Orduan , erregeak Joiada apaiz nagusiari dei egin eta esan zion : « Zergatik ez zara ahalegindu lebitarrek Judan eta Jerusalemen zerga bil zezaten ? Jaunaren zerbitzari Moisesek eta israeldarren biltzar osoak ezarri zuten zerga hori , Jaunaren itun-agiria gordetzen zen oihal-etxolarako .
PRED:	Then Jehoiada called the high priest , and he called out to the elders of Judah and said , “ Why are you trying to serve the Temple of the Lord , the God of Israel , the Covenant of Moses , the Covenant of the Covenant , and the Covenant of the Covenant of the Covenant .
GOLD:	So the king called for Jehoiada the high priest and asked him , “ Why have n't you demanded that the Levites go out and collect the Temple taxes from the towns of Judah and from Jerusalem ? Moses , the servant of the Lord , levied this tax on the community of Israel in order to maintain the Tabernacle of the Covenant . ”

ID:	2453
INPUT:	Orduan , Jesusek esan zion : — Zorionekoa zu , Simon , Jonasen semea , hori ez baitizu hezur-mamizko inork agertu , zeruko nire Aitak baizik .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to him , “ Go and Simon son of John , John , the Baptist , but you wo n't tell anyone about me . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ You are blessed , Simon son of John , because my Father in heaven has revealed this to you . You did not learn this from any human being .

ID:	2454
INPUT:	Luzaroegi bizi izan naiz hemen bakea gorroto dutenekin !
PRED:	I am the one who hates me , and I hate him .
GOLD:	I am tired of livingamong people who hate peace .

ID:	2455
INPUT:	Abixairekin atera ziren Jerusalemdik Joaben gizonak , keretarrak , peletarrak eta gudaririk adoretsuenak Bikriren seme Xebaren ondoren .
PRED:	Joab and all the men of Jerusalem went out to Jerusalem with Joab son of Bicri , who attacked Sheba son of Bicri .
GOLD:	So Abishai and Joab , together with the king 's bodyguard and all the mighty warriors , set out from Jerusalem to go after Sheba .

ID:	2456
INPUT:	Zaude adi nire deiadarrari , lur jota bainago erabat ! Libra nazazu pertsegitzaileengandik , ni baino indartsuagoak baitira .
PRED:	Be quiet , O Lord , for I will go to the earth , for I am watching for you to look for help .
GOLD:	Bring me out of prisonso I can thank you.The godly will crowd around me , for you are good to me . ”

ID:	2457
INPUT:	« Onartu egin duzue gaur Jaunak proposatua , hau da : bera izango duzuela zeuen Jainko , berari jarraituko diozuela , beraren lege , agindu eta erabakiak beteko dituzuela eta esana egingo .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : You must be careful to obey the commands that the Lord your God is giving you today , and you will obey him and obey him .
GOLD:	You have declared today that the Lord is your God . And you have promised to walk in his ways , and to obey his decrees , commands , and regulations , and to do everything he tells you .

ID:	2458
INPUT:	Jerusalemdarrei gezurrezkoa iruditu zitzaien iragarpen hau , hitzarmena egina baitzuten babiloniarrekin ; baina Babiloniako erregeak beren errua aurpegiratuko die , eta preso hartuko .
PRED:	“ Say to the people of Jerusalem , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will bring them back to Babylon , but they will be exiled to Babylon . '
GOLD:	“ And now , son of man , prophesy concerning the Ammonites and their mockery . Give them this message from the Sovereign Lord : “ A sword , a swordis drawn for your slaughter.It is polished to destroy , flashing like lightning !

ID:	2459
INPUT:	Herrien artean goretsiko zaitut , Jauna , nazioen artean kantatuko .
PRED:	I will praise you , O Lord , among all the nations .
GOLD:	For your unfailing love is as high as the heavens.Your faithfulness reaches to the clouds .

ID:	2460
INPUT:	Lehen-semeari Manases eman zion izen , esanez : « Jainkoak ahantzarazi dizkit neure atsekabe eta ahaide guztiak » .
PRED:	Moses named his firstborn son Manasseh , for he said , “ God has given me success in all my troubles . ”
GOLD:	Joseph named his older son Manasseh , for he said , “ God has made me forget all my troubles and everyone in my father 's family . ”

ID:	2461
INPUT:	Beraz , Jauna baztertu eta Baal eta Astarteren idoloak gurtu zituzten .
PRED:	So they worshiped the images of Baal and worshiped the images of Baal .
GOLD:	They abandoned the Lord to serve Baal and the images of Ashtoreth .

ID:	2462
INPUT:	Fedeari esker eskaini zion Abelek Jainkoari Kainek baino opari ederragoa ; horregatik , Jainkoak zintzotzat aitortu zuen Abel eta honen eskaintzak onartu , eta fedeari esker hitz egiten du Abelek , hilda gero ere .
PRED:	It was by faith that Abraham offered a sacrifice to God . It was a good sacrifice to God , who was a good sacrifice for a good sacrifice to God , and his father , Isaac , and his father , who believes in him .
GOLD:	It was by faith that Abel brought a more acceptable offering to God than Cain did . Abel 's offering gave evidence that he was a righteous man , and God showed his approval of his gifts . Although Abel is long dead , he still speaks to us by his example of faith .

ID:	2463
INPUT:	Gero , Sabako erreginak lau mila kilo urre baino gehiago eta , gainera , egundoko usaingarri- eta harribitxi-multzo handia eman zion erregeari . Ez zen behin ere izan Sabako erreginak Salomon erregeari eman ziona bezalako usaingarririk .
PRED:	Then King Solomon gave the five pounds of gold , gold , and olive oil . He also made many spices for the king of Tyre and Sidon . He did not make Solomon ceremonially unclean for the king of Samaria .
GOLD:	Then she gave the king a gift of 9,000 pounds of gold , great quantities of spices , and precious jewels . Never before had there been spices as fine as those the queen of Sheba gave to King Solomon .

ID:	2464
INPUT:	Aterrenak , hots , Ezekiasen ondorengoak , 98 ;
PRED:	The family of Ater ( descendants of Hezekiah )
GOLD:	The family of Ater ( descendants of Hezekiah ) 98

ID:	2465
INPUT:	Akaz erregea hil zen urtean , mezu hau iragarri zuen Isaiasek :
PRED:	When Ahaz died , he was buried in the second year of King Ahaz .
GOLD:	This message came to me the year King Ahaz died :

ID:	2466
INPUT:	Tesalonikan nintzelarik ere bidali zenidaten behin eta birritan nire premietarako behar nuena .
PRED:	You sent me to Thessalonica , where I could have been exiles in Thessalonica , and I would n't have a thousand years .
GOLD:	Even when I was in Thessalonica you sent help more than once .

ID:	2467
INPUT:	Beteko ditut herrialde horretan , egin nizkion mehatxu guztiak , hau da , nazioen aurka Jeremiasek nire izenean iragarri eta liburu honetan idatzita daudenak .
PRED:	I will destroy all the nations of the land , so I will destroy all the nations that were scattered in the land of the Babylonians , and they are telling me what Jeremiah had said .
GOLD:	I will bring upon them all the terrors I have promised in this book — all the penalties announced by Jeremiah against the nations .

ID:	2468
INPUT:	eta bananduko balitz , ez dadila berriro ezkon , edo bakeak egin ditzala senarrarekin . Eta senarrak ez dezala zapuztu emaztea .
PRED:	If they marry her , they would n't marry her husband or marry her . If they marry her , they would marry her husband and marry her .
GOLD:	But if she does leave him , let her remain single or else be reconciled to him . And the husband must not leave his wife .

ID:	2469
INPUT:	Noemik bazuen bere senar Elimeleken aldetik ahaide bat , aberatsa eta itzal handiko gizona , Booz zeritzana .
PRED:	So Naomi said to her husband , “ Let 's go down from the land of the Hittites , the man who was filled with fear . ”
GOLD:	Now there was a wealthy and influential man in Bethlehem named Boaz , who was a relative of Naomi 's husband , Elimelech .

ID:	2470
INPUT:	Hartu zuen zartagina eta atera zituen , anaiaren aurrean ipiniz . Honek , ordea , ez zuen jan nahi izan , eta agindu zuen : — Alde hemendik denok ! Denak irten zirenean ,
PRED:	So he took his brother and put him in his face . But he did n't want him to eat , but he said , “ Get out of here ! ” But the man said , “ Get out of here ! ”
GOLD:	But when she set the serving tray before him , he refused to eat . “ Everyone get out of here , ” Amnon told his servants . So they all left .

ID:	2471
INPUT:	Ene gogoa zure egarri da gauean , ene barrenakzu bilatzen zaitu goizean . Zuk zeure nahiamunduari azaltzeanzure zuzentasuna zer denikasten dute lurtarrek .
PRED:	My heart is confident in you , O Lord.Each morning you will know what you have done , and you will understand what it means .
GOLD:	In the night I search for you ; in the morning I earnestly seek you.For only when you come to judge the earthwill people learn what is right .

ID:	2472
INPUT:	Josi zapiak elkarri bosnako bi sailetan ,
PRED:	Also make two more curtains of the second long curtains .
GOLD:	Join five of these curtains together to make one long curtain , then join the other five into a second long curtain .

ID:	2473
INPUT:	Orduan , hogeita lau zaharrek eta lau izaki bizidunek ahuspeztu eta tronuan eseria dagoen Jainkoa gurtu zuten , esanez : « Amen ! Aleluia ! »
PRED:	Then the twenty-four elders fell down and worshiped the four living beings . Then they worshiped the Lord , saying , “ Praise God ! Amen ! ”
GOLD:	Then the twenty-four elders and the four living beings fell down and worshiped God , who was sitting on the throne . They cried out , “ Amen ! Praise the Lord ! ”

ID:	2474
INPUT:	etxe gainean dagoena ez bedi jaits etxetik ezer hartzera ,
PRED:	For it is nothing to save us from the home of the house , though it is nothing to take it away .
GOLD:	A person out on the deck of a roof must not go down into the house to pack .

ID:	2475
INPUT:	Senitarteka harturik , zegokien zatia herritarrei eman ondoren , aparte jartzen zuten Jaunari erre-oparitzat eskaini beharrekoa , Moisesen liburuan idatzia dagoen bezala , eta hori bera egiten zuten idiekin .
PRED:	These are the names of the clans of the tribe of Levi , the special gifts presented to the Lord as a special offering to Moses , the special gifts presented to the Lord , just as Moses had commanded .
GOLD:	They divided the burnt offerings among the people by their family groups , so they could offer them to the Lord as prescribed in the Book of Moses . They did the same with the cattle .

ID:	2476
INPUT:	Hona hemen ni zure aurka ! Mendia bezain handi bihurtu zara , mendi hondatzaile , lur osoaren hondatzaile ! Eskua zure aurka luzatuko dut , harkaitzetatik amilduko zaituteta errauts-mendi bihurtuko .
PRED:	Look , you have become a great nation ! You have become a great nation ! You have made a great nation , a great nation , a great nation , a great nation , a great nation , and a great nation will destroy you .
GOLD:	“ Look , O mighty mountain , destroyer of the earth ! I am your enemy , ” says the Lord . “ I will raise my fist against you , to knock you down from the heights.When I am finished , you will be nothing but a heap of burnt rubble .

ID:	2477
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Edom herriakgaiztakeriarik asko egin du , zein baino zein handiago . Eta beraz , zigortu egingo dut ! Ezpataz aurrean erabili baititubere anaia israeldarrak , errukia itoz ; gogor eutsi dio suminari , eten gabe gorrotoari ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Edom have sinned against Edom , and I will punish them , and I will punish them for their sins . I will pour out their fury on them , and I will pour out the fire on them .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Edom have sinned again and again , and I will not let them go unpunished ! They chased down their relatives , the Israelites , with swords , showing them no mercy.In their rage , they slashed them continuallyand were unrelenting in their anger .

ID:	2478
INPUT:	Gelan gizon batzuk zelatan zeudelarik , Dalilak esan zion Samsoni : « Horra ! Filistearrak ! » Samsonek , ordea , eten egin zituen sokak , iztupa-haria suak ukitzean eten ohi den bezala . Eta ez zuten jakin nondik zuen halako indarra .
PRED:	As Samson grew up , he turned his arms and said to him , “ Do n't be angry with us ! ” But when the Philistines attacked Samson 's eye , they would n't eat with him .
GOLD:	She had hidden some men in one of the inner rooms of her house , and she cried out , “ Samson ! The Philistines have come to capture you ! ” But Samson snapped the bowstrings as a piece of string snaps when it is burned by a fire . So the secret of his strength was not discovered .

ID:	2479
INPUT:	Israel daJaun ahalguztidunaren mahastia ; Judako herria , haren landare-sail kutuna . Zuzenbidea espero zuenharengandik , eta horra : zuzengabekeria ! Justizia espero zuen , eta horra : aieneak !
PRED:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , has planted a field with its fruit . He has given you victory over all the people of Israel , and he said , “ We have heard this , and we have been given to you . ”
GOLD:	The nation of Israel is the vineyard of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies.The people of Judah are his pleasant garden.He expected a crop of justice , but instead he found oppression.He expected to find righteousness , but instead he heard cries of violence .

ID:	2480
INPUT:	Zeuen buruak engainatzen ari zarete ; lehenengo , zeuen ararteko egin nauzue , Jaunari , zeuen Jainkoari , otoitz egin eta haren erantzuna osorik zuei jakinarazteko eskatuz , beteko zenutela eta ;
PRED:	Then you will know that I am the Lord your God , who rescued me from your ancestors , and you will pray to the Lord your God , Isaac , and Jacob .
GOLD:	For you were not being honest when you sent me to pray to the Lord your God for you . You said , ‘ Just tell us what the Lord our God says , and we will do it ! '

ID:	2481
INPUT:	« Gogoan hartu hau : etxeko nagusiak , lapurra zein ordutan etorriko den jakingo balu , ez luke etxea zulatzen utziko .
PRED:	“ When the master returns , he will remove all the houses of the houses in the house of the house , and the houses will be filled with mildew .
GOLD:	“ Understand this : If a homeowner knew exactly when a burglar was coming , he would not permit his house to be broken into .

ID:	2482
INPUT:	Orduan , Eliakimek , Xebnak eta Joahek hau erantzun zioten asiriar ordezkari nagusiari : — Mesedez , hitz egiguzu arameeraz , ulertzen baitugu . Ez mintzatu hebreeraz , harresi gainean dagoen jendea entzuten ari da eta .
PRED:	Then Eliakim , the chief of staff , spoke to the Assyrian chief of staff . “ Do n't speak to us , ” they said . “ Do n't listen to us , for we are talking about to the people . ”
GOLD:	Then Eliakim , Shebna , and Joah said to the Assyrian chief of staff , “ Please speak to us in Aramaic , for we understand it well . Do n't speak in Hebrew , for the people on the wall will hear . ”

ID:	2483
INPUT:	Salomon erregeak eta beronekin kutxaren aitzinean bildua zegoen israeldar batzar osoak zenbatu ezin ahalako ardi- eta idi-multzo handia eskaini zuten oparitan .
PRED:	The king of Israel and his entire community of Israel assembled at the foot of the entire community of Israel , including the fat of the sheep , goats , and goats .
GOLD:	There , before the Ark , King Solomon and the entire community of Israel sacrificed so many sheep , goats , and cattle that no one could keep count !

ID:	2484
INPUT:	Gaitzetik aldendu behar du eta on dena egin , bakea bilatu eta haren bidetik ibili .
PRED:	He must turn away from his ways and turn away from his ways and turn away from his ways .
GOLD:	Turn away from evil and do good.Search for peace , and work to maintain it .

ID:	2485
INPUT:	Orduan , jendeari lurrean esertzeko agindu zion . Gero , zazpi ogiak hartu eta , Jainkoari esker oneko otoitza egin ondoren , zatitu eta bere ikasleei eman zizkien , bana zitzaten . Haiek jendeari eskaini zizkioten .
PRED:	Then he told the people to sit down on the ground . Then he took seven loaves of bread and gave thanks to God , and he gave thanks to the people , and they gave thanks to God .
GOLD:	So Jesus told all the people to sit down on the ground . Then he took the seven loaves , thanked God for them , and broke them into pieces . He gave them to his disciples , who distributed the bread to the crowd .

ID:	2486
INPUT:	Kanaan lurraldearen mugak
PRED:	The Land Given to the Land
GOLD:	Boundaries of the Land

ID:	2487
INPUT:	— Maisu , zein da legeko agindurik nagusiena ?
PRED:	“ Teacher , how can we find the law ? ” he asked .
GOLD:	“ Teacher , which is the most important commandment in the law of Moses ? ”

ID:	2488
INPUT:	Erregearen kideko ziren gazteek erantzun zioten : — Hona zer erantzun behar diozun zure aitak ezarri zion uztarria arintzeko eskatu dizun herri horri : « Nire atzamar txikia lodiagoa da gure aitaren gerria baino .
PRED:	The young men replied , “ This is what the king says : If your father laid a heavy hand on his head , I will put the yoke of my father 's finger in my land . ”
GOLD:	The young men replied , “ This is what you should tell those complainers who want a lighter burden : ‘ My little finger is thicker than my father 's waist !

ID:	2489
INPUT:	Bedeinkapenez eta mesedez bete duzu , urre garbizko koroa ezarri .
PRED:	For he has blessed you with a crown of pure gold , and he placed them on his shoulders .
GOLD:	He asked you to preserve his life , and you granted his request.The days of his life stretch on forever .

ID:	2490
INPUT:	Erregeak , emakume haren hitzak aditzean , urratu egin zituen jantziak . Harresian zebilenez , ikusi zuen herriak zaku-jantzia zeramala erregeak soinekoen azpitik , larru gainean .
PRED:	When the king saw the king , he tore his clothes in despair , he tore his clothes in burlap and put on his clothes . He dressed himself in burlap .
GOLD:	When the king heard this , he tore his clothes in despair . And as the king walked along the wall , the people could see that he was wearing burlap under his robe next to his skin .

ID:	2491
INPUT:	« Ez dut erregutzen hauen alde bakarrik , baita berauen predikuaren bidez niregan sinetsiko dutenen alde ere .
PRED:	“ I do n't want you to do these things , for I will show you your unfailing love and faithfulness .
GOLD:	“ I am praying not only for these disciples but also for all who will ever believe in me through their message .

ID:	2492
INPUT:	« Nor da Nilo bezala hazten den hori , ibai oldartsuen antzeraharrotzen den hori ?
PRED:	“ Who is my strength ? Who is like a warrior ? Who is like a warrior ?
GOLD:	“ Who is this , rising like the Nile at floodtime , overflowing all the land ?

ID:	2493
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : « Zatozte nirekin eta giza arrantzale egingo zaituztet » .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to them , “ Come with me , and I will answer you . ”
GOLD:	Jesus called out to them , “ Come , follow me , and I will show you how to fish for people ! ”

ID:	2494
INPUT:	Zaturenak <unk> ;
PRED:	The family of Hashum223
GOLD:	The family of Zattu845

ID:	2495
INPUT:	Jo zuen turuta bigarren aingeruak , eta sutan dagoen mendi handi bat bezalako zerbait itsasora amildu zen : itsasoaren herena odol bihurtu zen .
PRED:	Then the fifth angel blew his trumpet , and a great fire fell down on the heads of the sea . There was a great nation that had been thrown into the sea .
GOLD:	Then the second angel blew his trumpet , and a great mountain of fire was thrown into the sea . One-third of the water in the sea became blood ,

ID:	2496
INPUT:	« Kontuz lege-maisuekin ! Gogoko baitute harro-harro jantzita ibiltzea eta plazetan jendeak beraiei agur egitea ; gogoko dituzte sinagogetan lehenengo aulkiak eta jai-otorduetan mahaiburuak ;
PRED:	“ Beware of the teachers of religious law , and they will wear off their heads . They will wear their heads on their heads , and they will sit on their heads . They will sit on their heads and sit on their heads .
GOLD:	“ Beware of these teachers of religious law ! For they like to parade around in flowing robes and love to receive respectful greetings as they walk in the marketplaces . And how they love the seats of honor in the synagogues and the head table at banquets .

ID:	2497
INPUT:	asmo garbikoarentzat garbi , asmo txarrekoarentzat zorrotz .
PRED:	You may keep the humble , but you will keep the proud of the proud .
GOLD:	To the pure you show yourself pure , but to the crooked you show yourself shrewd .

ID:	2498
INPUT:	Larrainak eta dolareakez diete gosea kenduko , ardoak huts egingo die .
PRED:	They will never fail to drink wine , and their wine will never leave them .
GOLD:	So now your harvests will be too small to feed you.There will be no grapes for making new wine .

ID:	2499
INPUT:	Baditut artegian ez dauden beste ardi batzuk ere ; haiek ere erakarri egin behar ditut ; nire ahotsa entzungo dute eta artalde bakarra izango dira , artzain bakarraren gidaritzapean .
PRED:	I will scatter them among the sheep and goats , and they will hear my voice . They will hear my sheep and goats and goats , and they will be brought to them .
GOLD:	I have other sheep , too , that are not in this sheepfold . I must bring them also . They will listen to my voice , and there will be one flock with one shepherd .

ID:	2500
INPUT:	Eta zuen legean dago idatzia , bi lagunen testigantza baliozkoa dela .
PRED:	And when he was on the side of the law , he sent two of the two witnesses of the law .
GOLD:	Your own law says that if two people agree about something , their witness is accepted as fact .

ID:	2501
INPUT:	Gogora iezaiezu hau eta eskatu , arren , Jainkoaren izenean , ez daitezela hitzei buruzko eztabaidatan nahas , hori ez baita on ezertarako , entzuten dituztenen hondamendirako baino .
PRED:	Give them this message from the Lord : Do n't let them teach them to say , ‘ Do n't turn away from the face of the earth , for they refuse to listen to the Lord your God . '
GOLD:	Remind everyone about these things , and command them in God 's presence to stop fighting over words . Such arguments are useless , and they can ruin those who hear them .

ID:	2502
INPUT:	Errespetatu , beraz , larunbata , egun sakratua baita zuentzat . Larunbata profanatzen duenak heriotza-zigorra izango du ; egun horretan lan egiten duena herritik bota egingo dute .
PRED:	So observe the Sabbath day of the Sabbath day , for it is holy to the Lord . It will be a Sabbath day for holy day , and it will be a Sabbath day for holy people .
GOLD:	You must keep the Sabbath day , for it is a holy day for you . Anyone who desecrates it must be put to death ; anyone who works on that day will be cut off from the community .

ID:	2503
INPUT:	Eliasek erantzun : — Jauna , Jainko ahalguztiduna , zureganako maiteminak erretzen nau , israeldarrek zurekiko ituna hautsi dutelako , zure aldareak hondatu eta zure profetak ezpataz hil dituztelako . Ni bakarra gelditu naiz , eta nire bila ere badabiltza bizia kentzeko .
PRED:	Then Elijah replied , “ O Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , who has broken my covenant with you , and I will kill you and destroy your pagan shrines . I will kill you , and I will kill you . ”
GOLD:	He replied again , “ I have zealously served the Lord God Almighty . But the people of Israel have broken their covenant with you , torn down your altars , and killed every one of your prophets . I am the only one left , and now they are trying to kill me , too . ”

ID:	2504
INPUT:	Gerra sorraraziko dut Gogen kontra nire mendi guztietan . Honela diot nik , Jainko Jaunak . Eta haren gerlariek elkar hilko dute .
PRED:	I will cause war against Gog and war against them , ” says the Sovereign Lord . “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says :
GOLD:	I will summon the sword against you on all the hills of Israel , says the Sovereign Lord . Your men will turn their swords against each other .

ID:	2505
INPUT:	Jobek bere burua errugabe aitortu
PRED:	Job 's Religious Reforms
GOLD:	Job 's Final Protest of Innocence

ID:	2506
INPUT:	« Beraz , ene iritziz , ez zaie alferreko oztoporik ezarri behar Jainkoarengana bihurtzen diren jentilei .
PRED:	“ Therefore , you must not throw away the privilege of suffering for yourselves . Instead , you must be unfaithful to the Gentiles .
GOLD:	“ And so my judgment is that we should not make it difficult for the Gentiles who are turning to God .

ID:	2507
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . « Liliak » doinuan . Koreren semeen poema . Amodio-kanta .
PRED:	O Lord , you are our God , ” says the Lord . “ We are witnesses , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Beautiful words stir my heart.I will recite a lovely poem about the king , for my tongue is like the pen of a skillful poet .

ID:	2508
INPUT:	Izan ere , gerta daiteke , hark , mila urte bi aldiz bizi arren , bere ondasunak ez gozatzea . Baina , azkenean , ez al doaz guztiak toki berera ?
PRED:	For how can this be a thousand years ? But how can the end of his life ? But how can the end of his life be filled with prosperity ?
GOLD:	He might live a thousand years twice over but still not find contentment . And since he must die like everyone else — well , what 's the use ?

ID:	2509
INPUT:	haizeak aurpegian jo ninduen , gorputzeko ilea tentearazi .
PRED:	When I was in the shadow of the wind , I took my body into the desert .
GOLD:	A spirit swept past my face , and my hair stood on end .

ID:	2510
INPUT:	Berrogeitik gora ziren horrela hitzartuak .
PRED:	So they all gathered for three days .
GOLD:	There were more than forty of them in the conspiracy .

ID:	2511
INPUT:	Urreztatu urre garbiz barne eta kanpoaldeak , eta ezarri urrezko hegala inguru guztian .
PRED:	Overlay the altar with pure gold , and overlay them with pure gold .
GOLD:	Overlay it inside and outside with pure gold , and run a molding of gold all around it .

ID:	2512
INPUT:	Ez dut gogoratuko hark egindako bekaturik ; zuzenbidez eta justiziaz jokatu duenez , bizi egingo da .
PRED:	I will not do what is right , and I will do what is right , and I will do what is right .
GOLD:	None of their past sins will be brought up again , for they have done what is just and right , and they will surely live .

ID:	2513
INPUT:	Morroiak eraman zion mutikoa amari eta honek magalean hartu zuen haurra ; baina eguerdian hil egin zitzaion .
PRED:	The servant gave the servant to his servant , and he took his servant to the banquet he had been killed .
GOLD:	So the servant took him home , and his mother held him on her lap . But around noontime he died .

ID:	2514
INPUT:	Joiariben familian Matenai ; Jedaiasen familian Uzi ;
PRED:	Zechariah was leader of the family of Elam . He was leader of the family of Shemaiah .
GOLD:	Mattenai was leader of the family of Joiarib.Uzzi was leader of the family of Jedaiah .

ID:	2515
INPUT:	Errekaren bi ertzetan , mota guztietako fruta-arbolak haziko dira ; ez zaizkie hostoak sekula zimelduko , eta etengabe emango dituzte fruituak , hilero emanaldi bat , santutegitik ateratzen den urak ureztatzen baititu . Fruituak elikagai izango dira , eta hostoak sendagai » .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says : “ You will plant every sort of plants and trees that grow in every plant . It will produce good fruit from every green tree that does not produce good fruit from every green tree , and every green tree that does not produce good fruit . ”
GOLD:	Fruit trees of all kinds will grow along both sides of the river . The leaves of these trees will never turn brown and fall , and there will always be fruit on their branches . There will be a new crop every month , for they are watered by the river flowing from the Temple . The fruit will be for food and the leaves for healing . ”

ID:	2516
INPUT:	Jerusalemera , Jaunaren etxea egon zen tokira heldu zirenean , familiaburu batzuek borondatezko opariak egin zituzten , berriro Jaunaren etxea toki berean eraikitzeko .
PRED:	So they went to Jerusalem to the Temple of the Lord , where the leaders of the Temple of the Lord had dedicated to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	When they arrived at the Temple of the Lord in Jerusalem , some of the family leaders made voluntary offerings toward the rebuilding of God 's Temple on its original site ,

ID:	2517
INPUT:	Orain , ordea , ez dut jokatukolehengo aldietan bezalaherri honetan bizirik geldituekin . Hala agintzen dizuet nik , Jaun ahalguztidun honek .
PRED:	But now I will not return to you , just as I have done , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	“ But now I will not treat the remnant of my people as I treated them before , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	2518
INPUT:	Danen leinutik , Amixadairen seme Ahiezer ;
PRED:	From the tribe of Dan
GOLD:	DanAhiezer son of Ammishaddai

ID:	2519
INPUT:	Paulo Erromarako ontzian
PRED:	Paul Appears before Paul
GOLD:	The Storm at Sea

ID:	2520
INPUT:	Baina Danielek , bere burua erregearen jan-edariz ez kutsatzea erabakia zuenez , janari kutsatu haietara ez behartzeko eskatu zion jauregiko funtzionarioburuari .
PRED:	But if Daniel was allowed to eat the meat of the king 's royal palace , he refused to eat any forbidden food .
GOLD:	But Daniel was determined not to defile himself by eating the food and wine given to them by the king . He asked the chief of staff for permission not to eat these unacceptable foods .

ID:	2521
INPUT:	Lotsa dira idolozale guztiak , huskeria horiekin harro daudenak . Ahuspez Jaunaren aurrean beste jainko guztiak !
PRED:	You will be ashamed of the shame of the nations , and all the other nations will worship the Lord .
GOLD:	Those who worship idols are disgraced — all who brag about their worthless gods — for every god must bow to him .

ID:	2522
INPUT:	Jaunaren legean ezarritako oparia ere eskaini zuten : bi usapal edo bi usakume .
PRED:	They carried the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant into the place of worship , two young women , and two young women .
GOLD:	So they offered the sacrifice required in the law of the Lord — “ either a pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons . ”

ID:	2523
INPUT:	Susako juduak , berriz , bildu ziren Adar hilaren hamalauan ere , eta hirurehun gizaseme hil zituzten Susan ; hala ere , ez zituzten haien ondasunak ostu .
PRED:	But when the Jews arrived at Susa , they killed 500 men in the fortress of Susa and killed 500 men .
GOLD:	Then the Jews at Susa gathered together on March 8 and killed 300 more men , and again they took no plunder .

ID:	2524
INPUT:	Zure bizia niretzat gaur hain baliotsua izan den bezala , hala izan bedi nirea Jaunarentzat . Libra nazala atsekabe orotatik !
PRED:	I am giving you today today , so that you may keep my promise to the Lord as a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	Now may the Lord value my life , even as I have valued yours today . May he rescue me from all my troubles . ”

ID:	2525
INPUT:	Zuetako norbait gaixo dagoela ? Dei egin diezaiela eliz arduradunei , gaixoaren alde otoitz egin eta Jaunaren izenean olioz i<unk> dezaten .
PRED:	Do you realize that some of you are sick ? Do you pray to those who pray in the Lord 's sight ? When you pray to the Lord , you will be healed .
GOLD:	Are any of you sick ? You should call for the elders of the church to come and pray over you , anointing you with oil in the name of the Lord .

ID:	2526
INPUT:	Ene seme , zergatik liluratuko zaitu lotsabako batek ? Zergatik besarkatuko duzu emakume arrotzaren gerria ?
PRED:	My child , if you do n't have a long time ? Why have you been defiled by a woman ? ”
GOLD:	Why be captivated , my son , by an immoral woman , or fondle the breasts of a promiscuous woman ?

ID:	2527
INPUT:	Baina epel zarelako eta ez bero , ez hotz , botagura emateraino nazkatzen nauzu .
PRED:	But if you refuse to obey me , you must not destroy me with a heavy hand .
GOLD:	But since you are like lukewarm water , neither hot nor cold , I will spit you out of my mouth !

ID:	2528
INPUT:	Bederatzigarren izurria : ilunpeak
PRED:	A Plague of darkness
GOLD:	A Plague of Darkness

ID:	2529
INPUT:	Iruten trebeak ziren emakumeek beren eskuz ehunduriko purpura more , gorri eta gorrimina eta liho fina ekarri zituzten .
PRED:	These women were made of blue , purple , and scarlet thread and blue , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	All the women who were skilled in sewing and spinning prepared blue , purple , and scarlet thread , and fine linen cloth .

ID:	2530
INPUT:	Han , Edom lurraldearen mugan , Jaunak esan zien Moisesi eta Aaroni :
PRED:	There , the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	There , on the border of the land of Edom , the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,

ID:	2531
INPUT:	Goretsazue Jauna , nazio guztiok , ospa ezazue , herri guztiok !
PRED:	Praise the Lord , all you nations ! Praise him , all you people of Israel !
GOLD:	Praise the Lord , all you nations.Praise him , all you people of the earth .

ID:	2532
INPUT:	Ezin dugu atzeman Ahaltsua , nagusi da indar eta zuzenbidez , justiziaz aberatsa , ez du inor zanpatzen .
PRED:	For we can not see the power of the Almighty , and he is powerful and powerful , and he will not be ashamed .
GOLD:	We can not imagine the power of the Almighty ; but even though he is just and righteous , he does not destroy us .

ID:	2533
INPUT:	Begiak nahigabez lausotuak ditut , horrenbeste zorigaitzez ahulduak .
PRED:	My eyes are filled with sorrow , and their eyes are filled with sorrow .
GOLD:	Go away , all you who do evil , for the Lord has heard my weeping .

ID:	2534
INPUT:	Hamateko errege <unk> -k jakin zuen hondatua zuela Davidek Hadadezerren gudaroste osoa .
PRED:	The king of Gad and the entire army of King David heard that the king of Israel had anointed .
GOLD:	When King Toi of Hamath heard that David had destroyed the entire army of Hadadezer ,

ID:	2535
INPUT:	Erdiko solairurako sarrera tenpluaren eskuinaldeko saihetsean zegoen ; eskailera biribil batetik igo zitekeen erdiko solairura eta hemendik gorenekora .
PRED:	In the south side of the Temple , the south side of the Temple will come down to the south side of the Temple , where the cloud of the Temple will come down from the south .
GOLD:	The entrance to the bottom floor was on the south side of the Temple . There were winding stairs going up to the second floor , and another flight of stairs between the second and third floors .

ID:	2536
INPUT:	Magdalako Maria eta beste Maria hilobi aurrean eserita zeuden .
PRED:	Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were sitting on the tomb .
GOLD:	Both Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were sitting across from the tomb and watching .

ID:	2537
INPUT:	Goraintziak Priska eta Akilari , Jesu Kristoren zerbitzuan laguntzaile izan ditudanei .
PRED:	I am writing to the church in Christ Jesus Christ , who has been a servant of Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	Give my greetings to Priscilla and Aquila , my co-workers in the ministry of Christ Jesus .

ID:	2538
INPUT:	Eman dezagun besteak barrutik erantzuten diola : “ Utz nazak bakean , atea itxia zegok eta haurrak eta neu oheratuak ; ezin naitekek ematera jaiki ” .
PRED:	Let us say , ‘ Let 's go out to the other side of the same way , let 's go down to the baby 's younger brother and mother . '
GOLD:	And suppose he calls out from his bedroom , ‘ Do n't bother me . The door is locked for the night , and my family and I are all in bed . I ca n't help you . '

ID:	2539
INPUT:	Egon erne , iraun sendo sinesmenean , joka gizonki eta izan indartsu .
PRED:	Be strong and courageous , all who have faith in Christ , be strong and strong .
GOLD:	Be on guard . Stand firm in the faith . Be courageous . Be strong .

ID:	2540
INPUT:	Kristau-jokabidea
PRED:	Paul 's Final Advice
GOLD:	Concluding Words

ID:	2541
INPUT:	Esauren ondorengoak
PRED:	The descendants of Esau 's descendants
GOLD:	Descendants of Esau

ID:	2542
INPUT:	Behin batean , Jakob lapikokoa egosten ari zela , iritsi zen Esau oihanetik , oso nekatua ,
PRED:	One day Jacob 's servant , Jacob 's servant , came out of the wilderness , near Bethel , and Ithamar .
GOLD:	One day when Jacob was cooking some stew , Esau arrived home from the wilderness exhausted and hungry .

ID:	2543
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	2544
INPUT:	Jainkoaren maitasun gupidatsua
PRED:	True and False Worship
GOLD:	The

ID:	2545
INPUT:	« Egun hartan , Jerusalemi erasoka etor dakizkion guztiak hondatuko ditut .
PRED:	“ In that day I will destroy Jerusalem , ” says the Lord . “ I will destroy all the people of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	For on that day I will begin to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem .

ID:	2546
INPUT:	eta , anaiengana itzulirik , esan zien : « Ez dago mutikoaren arrastorik ! Zer egin behar dut nik orain ? »
PRED:	Then Elisha returned to his brother and said , “ I wo n't have a little boy ! What can I do ? ”
GOLD:	Then he went back to his brothers and lamented , “ The boy is gone ! What will I do now ? ”

ID:	2547
INPUT:	Jaitsi berehala eta zoaz beroriekin kezkarik gabe , neuk bidali dizkizut eta » .
PRED:	Go down and prepare your mat , and send them to the ground . I will send them to you , and I will send them to you . ”
GOLD:	Get up , go downstairs , and go with them without hesitation . Do n't worry , for I have sent them . ”

ID:	2548
INPUT:	Judaren eta Israelen zoria aldatuko dut , eta behinolako egoeran ezarriko ditut berriro ;
PRED:	I will restore the fortunes of Israel , and I will restore the fortunes of the fortified towns of Judah .
GOLD:	I will restore the fortunes of Judah and Israel and rebuild their towns .

ID:	2549
INPUT:	Horrela , itun bikainagoaren bermatzaile da Jesus .
PRED:	This is the Good News that Jesus is the first of the church .
GOLD:	Because of this oath , Jesus is the one who guarantees this better covenant with God .

ID:	2550
INPUT:	Ez duzue surik ere egingo larunbatez zeuen bizilekuetan » .
PRED:	You must not sacrifice a Sabbath day for yourselves . ”
GOLD:	You must not even light a fire in any of your homes on the Sabbath . ”

ID:	2551
INPUT:	Aldi hartan gaixotu egin zitzaion Jeroboami bere seme Abias .
PRED:	About that time Jeroboam son of Nebat became sick .
GOLD:	At that time Jeroboam 's son Abijah became very sick .

ID:	2552
INPUT:	ez dut begirik itxiko , ez loak hartzen utziko ,
PRED:	I will not boast about the things I do , and I will not boast about it .
GOLD:	I will not let my eyes sleepnor close my eyelids in slumber

ID:	2553
INPUT:	eta txingarraz ahoa ukitu zidan , esanez : « Begira , txingar honekezpainak ukitu dizkizu . Kendu zaizu , beraz , gaiztakeria , barkatu bekatua » .
PRED:	Then he touched me and said to me , “ Get rid of your mouth , your mouth , and give me your mouth . Get rid of your sins . ”
GOLD:	He touched my lips with it and said , “ See , this coal has touched your lips . Now your guilt is removed , and your sins are forgiven . ”

ID:	2554
INPUT:	Jainkoak Jeroboami emaniko hitza
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Blind Men
GOLD:	Jeroboam Rebels against Solomon

ID:	2555
INPUT:	Hark erantzun zien : “ Etsaiaren lana da hori ” . Eta morroiek : “ Joango al gara olo gaiztoa biltzera ? ”
PRED:	He replied , ‘ The master of the enemy 's enemies ' So they said , ‘ Should they go to war against Joseph ? '
GOLD:	“ ‘ An enemy has done this ! ' the farmer exclaimed . “ ‘ Should we pull out the weeds ? ' they asked .

ID:	2556
INPUT:	Isuri olioa erre-oparien aldarearen eta bertako tresna guztien gainera . Honela sagaratuko duzu , eta guztiz sakratua izango da aldarea .
PRED:	Then burn the incense altar and burn it on the altar , and burn it on the altar . This is the most holy altar . It must be most holy .
GOLD:	Anoint the altar of burnt offering and its utensils to consecrate them . Then the altar will become absolutely holy .

ID:	2557
INPUT:	Dixon , Etzer eta Dixan . Horiek ziren Seirren ondorengoak , hortarren leinuburuak Edomen .
PRED:	The clans of Edom were named after their clan , named after their clan , named after their clans . These were the clans of the tribe of Seir .
GOLD:	Dishon , Ezer , and Dishan . These were the Horite clan leaders , the descendants of Seir , who lived in the land of Edom .

ID:	2558
INPUT:	nik ez baitut neure kabuz hitz egin , baizik eta bidali nauen Aitak agindu dit zer esan eta irakatsi .
PRED:	But I did n't speak , but I did n't understand what he told me , ‘ Father has taught me . '
GOLD:	I do n't speak on my own authority . The Father who sent me has commanded me what to say and how to say it .

ID:	2559
INPUT:	Jauna zeuen Jainkoa aurretik doakizue eta zuen alde borrokatuko da , Egipton zuen begi-bistan egin zuen bezala ;
PRED:	You must remember that the Lord your God is giving you as your ancestors did , just as the Lord your God did .
GOLD:	The Lord your God is going ahead of you . He will fight for you , just as you saw him do in Egypt .

ID:	2560
INPUT:	Jaunak bere herria indar dezala ! Jaunak bere herria bakeaz bedeinka dezala !
PRED:	For the Lord is my people , and he will bless his people !
GOLD:	The Lord gives his people strength.The Lord blesses them with peace .

ID:	2561
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Bene-benetan diotsuet : Abraham sortu baino lehenagokoa naiz ni .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I tell you the truth , I tell you the truth , I am the First . ”
GOLD:	Jesus answered , “ I tell you the truth , before Abraham was even born , ! ”

ID:	2562
INPUT:	Gemaliren seme Amiel , Danen leinukoa ;
PRED:	AsherSethuel son of Maki
GOLD:	DanAmmiel son of Gemalli

ID:	2563
INPUT:	Biharamun goizean David jaiki zenerako , zuzendua zion Jaunak bere hitza <unk> -i , Daviden zerbitzura zegoen profetari , esanez :
PRED:	The next morning David got up early the next morning , and the Lord gave a message to David . He said ,
GOLD:	The next morning the word of the Lord came to the prophet Gad , who was David 's seer . This was the message :

ID:	2564
INPUT:	« Egizu proba gurekin hamar egunez : ez eman jaten eta edaten barazkiak eta ura besterik .
PRED:	“ You are ten men who have ten prophets , but you do n't know what they 're doing .
GOLD:	“ Please test us for ten days on a diet of vegetables and water , ” Daniel said .

ID:	2565
INPUT:	( 2 Erg 24 , 18 — 25 , 21 ; 39 , 1-20 ; 52 , <unk> )
PRED:	The Death of Jeroboam
GOLD:	Zedekiah Rules in Judah

ID:	2566
INPUT:	nik ezarri nion muga , ateak eta morroiloak jarriz ,
PRED:	placed the boundaries of the Covenant , and set up its bolts and bars .
GOLD:	For I locked it behind barred gates , limiting its shores .

ID:	2567
INPUT:	Egun haietan judu jainkozale asko ziren Jerusalemen , eguzkiaren azpian diren nazio guztietatik etorriak .
PRED:	On that day many Jews from Jerusalem began to end the Jewish gods in Jerusalem , all the people of Judah came from Jerusalem .
GOLD:	At that time there were devout Jews from every nation living in Jerusalem .

ID:	2568
INPUT:	Lotsaz eta laidoz geldituko dirazure aurka lehiatzen direnak ; ezerezean galduko dirazure kontra liskarrean ari direnak .
PRED:	They will be clothed with shame , and they will stand against you , and they will be killed in the Philistines .
GOLD:	“ See , all your angry enemies lie there , confused and humiliated.Anyone who opposes you will dieand come to nothing .

ID:	2569
INPUT:	Gog , Jainkoaren baliabide
PRED:	The
GOLD:	A Message for Gog

ID:	2570
INPUT:	gizonetan jakintsuena izan baitzen : Etam ezratarra , Mahol-en seme Heman , Kalkol eta Darda baino jakintsuago . Salomonen izena inguruetako lurralde guztietan zabaldu zen .
PRED:	When the wise men heard this , he became the next king , his adviser , and his adviser in the land of Canaan , where he was buried with Solomon .
GOLD:	In return , Solomon sent him an annual payment of 100,000 bushels of wheat for his household and 110,000 gallons of pure olive oil .

ID:	2571
INPUT:	« Edozein herri edo auzotara iristen zaretela , jakizue ba ote den konfiantzako inor zuek etxean hartzeko , eta geldi zaitezte harenean herri hartatik atera arte .
PRED:	“ When you arrive in your home , you will know that you are a virgin , and you will be at home among you , and you will be amazed .
GOLD:	“ Whenever you enter a city or village , search for a worthy person and stay in his home until you leave town .

ID:	2572
INPUT:	alderantziz , nire agindu guztiak gogoan eduki eta bete egingo dituzue , eta zeuen Jainko honentzat sagaratuak izango zarete .
PRED:	If you obey my commands , you will be careful to obey all the commands you have given to me , and you will be holy .
GOLD:	The tassels will help you remember that you must obey all my commands and be holy to your God .

ID:	2573
INPUT:	Erregeak agindu hau eman zien Joabi , Abixairi eta Itairi : — Hartu eztiki Absalom gaztea . Gudaroste osoak aditu zuen erregeak Absalomi buruz gudalburu guztiei agindutakoa .
PRED:	So the king told Joab , “ Take Joab and all the army of the army . ” So Absalom told Absalom , “ Take all the army of the army . ”
GOLD:	And the king gave this command to Joab , Abishai , and Ittai : “ For my sake , deal gently with young Absalom . ” And all the troops heard the king give this order to his commanders .

ID:	2574
INPUT:	Behin batean , Josek amets bat izan zuen eta , kontatu zienean , are gehiago gorrotatu zuten anaiek .
PRED:	One day Joseph had a dream , and he told his brothers what had happened .
GOLD:	One night Joseph had a dream , and when he told his brothers about it , they hated him more than ever .

ID:	2575
INPUT:	Han , Italiara zihoan Alexandriako ontzi bat aurkitu zuen ehuntariak , eta denok bertara aldatu gintuen .
PRED:	There he traveled to Egypt to Egypt , where he found a Roman officer named Apollos , who had fled to Egypt .
GOLD:	There the commanding officer found an Egyptian ship from Alexandria that was bound for Italy , and he put us on board .

ID:	2576
INPUT:	Zure hitzaren funtsa leialtasuna da , zure betiko erabakien muina justizia .
PRED:	Your righteousness will be known as your own possession , and your righteousness will be exalted .
GOLD:	The very essence of your words is truth ; all your just regulations will stand forever .

ID:	2577
INPUT:	eta ipini efodaren sorbalda-babeskietan . Honela , israeldarren izenak oroigarri gisa eramango ditu Aaronek Jaunaren aurrera .
PRED:	Then make the chestpiece to the ephod , and he will give it to the Lord . He will give it to the people of Israel , just as the Lord had commanded .
GOLD:	Fasten the two stones on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod as a reminder that Aaron represents the people of Israel . Aaron will carry these names on his shoulders as a constant reminder whenever he goes before the Lord .

ID:	2578
INPUT:	Jaunaren deiak esklabo dena libre egiten du , eta libre dena Kristoren esklabo bihurtzen .
PRED:	The slave of the Lord is a slave to the slave of the Lord , who makes us free from Christ .
GOLD:	And remember , if you were a slave when the Lord called you , you are now free in the Lord . And if you were free when the Lord called you , you are now a slave of Christ .

ID:	2579
INPUT:	Izreel , Jokdeam , Zanoah ,
PRED:	Elon , Mizpeh , Jezreel ,
GOLD:	Jezreel , Jokdeam , Zanoah ,

ID:	2580
INPUT:	Eta lurreko bizilagun guztiek gurtuko dute , lepo eginiko Bildotsaren biziaren liburuan beren izenak munduaren hasieratik idatzirik dituztenak izan ezik .
PRED:	And all the people who live in the land of the Lamb , who had been defiled by the names of the Lamb who had been made by the names of the world .
GOLD:	And all the people who belong to this world worshiped the beast . They are the ones whose names were not written in the Book of Life that belongs to the Lamb who was slaughtered before the world was made .

ID:	2581
INPUT:	Zeure gaiztakeria izango duzu zigor , zeure desleialkeria zentzabide . Kontura zaitez eta ikasizein gogorra eta garratza denJauna , zeure Jainkoa , baztertzea , nireganako begirunerik ez izatea . Nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak , esana .
PRED:	Do not turn away from your wickedness , for your sins will be unfaithful to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . Do not turn away from the Temple of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken !
GOLD:	Your wickedness will bring its own punishment.Your turning from me will shame you.You will see what an evil , bitter thing it isto abandon the Lord your God and not to fear him.I , the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken !

ID:	2582
INPUT:	Zenbatu zituen Akabek eskualdeburuen laguntzaile ziren gazte haiek : berrehun eta hogeita hamabi ziren . Ondoren , israeldar gudarosteko gainerako jendea zenbatu zuen : zazpi mila gizon ziren .
PRED:	But Ahab asked the commander of the army of Israel , who had been appointed by the army of Israel , who had been appointed by the army of Israel .
GOLD:	So Ahab mustered the troops of the 232 provincial commanders . Then he called out the rest of the army of Israel , some 7,000 men .

ID:	2583
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Badator Israel herriari eta Juda herriari egin diedan promesa beteko dudan garaia .
PRED:	“ The time of judgment is coming , ” says the Lord , “ I will destroy the people of Israel and Judah .
GOLD:	“ The day will come , says the Lord , when I will do for Israel and Judah all the good things I have promised them .

ID:	2584
INPUT:	Beste hau ere agintzen dut : norbait nire agindu honetatik aldentzen bada , beraren etxetik habe bat kendu , zorroztu eta sar dezatela bertan , beraren etxea zabor-pila bihurtuz .
PRED:	I tell you this : If someone leaves me from my house , I will enter my house 's house , and if someone else has stolen its house and has been broken into its home .
GOLD:	“ Those who violate this decree in any way will have a beam pulled from their house . Then they will be lifted up and impaled on it , and their house will be reduced to a pile of rubble .

ID:	2585
INPUT:	Eta onartzen ez bazaituzte , herri hartatik alde egitean , astindu zeuen oinetako hautsa , beraien kontrako seinaletzat » .
PRED:	And if you refuse to welcome you , do n't let them go out to the place where you are going . ”
GOLD:	And if a town refuses to welcome you , shake its dust from your feet as you leave to show that you have abandoned those people to their fate . ”

ID:	2586
INPUT:	Baina Jesusek , itzulirik , esan zion Pedrori : — Alde nire ondotik , Satanas ! Oztopo haiz niretzat , hire asmoak ez baitituk Jainkoarenak , gizakiarenak baizik .
PRED:	But Jesus turned around and said to Peter , “ Get out of my family . Get out of my family , for I want you to see God 's grace . ”
GOLD:	Jesus turned to Peter and said , “ Get away from me , Satan ! You are a dangerous trap to me . You are seeing things merely from a human point of view , not from God 's . ”

ID:	2587
INPUT:	Orduan , Jainkoak etorrarazi zuen Babiloniako erregea jende haren kontra , eta hark hango gazteak ezpataz hil zituen tenpluan bertan ; ez zien barkatu ez mutilei , ez neskei , ez zaharrei , ez agureei : Jainkoak dena haren esku utzi zuen .
PRED:	Then the king of Babylon came to the king of Babylon , and he killed all the people of Babylon . He killed them in the temple of the Lord his God , and he refused to let them marry his young men .
GOLD:	So the Lord brought the king of Babylon against them . The Babylonians killed Judah 's young men , even chasing after them into the Temple . They had no pity on the people , killing both young men and young women , the old and the infirm . God handed all of them over to Nebuchadnezzar .

ID:	2588
INPUT:	Adituko dit , bai , erregeak eta libratuko gaitu neure semea eta biok , Jainkoak emandako lurraldetik desagerrarazi nahi gaituenaren eskutik » .
PRED:	For the king of Assyria will rescue me from his power , and he will rescue us from the land of the north . ”
GOLD:	and rescue us from those who would cut us off from the inheritance God has given us .

ID:	2589
INPUT:	( Mt 19 , 1-9 ; Lk 16 , 18 )
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Blind Woman
GOLD:	Jesus Blesses the Children

ID:	2590
INPUT:	Nik gidatzen zaitut zuhurtziaren bidetik , nik ibilarazten zuzentasunaren ildotik .
PRED:	I will make you wise , but I will make you no pleasure in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	I will teach you wisdom 's waysand lead you in straight paths .

ID:	2591
INPUT:	Inork , tentaldirik duenean , ez beza esan Jainkoak tentatzen duenik . Jainkoak ez du gaizkirako tentaziorik eta ez du inor gaizkirako tentatzen ere .
PRED:	No one knows what God has said to them , “ God will not let them go unpunished , and no one will help them . ”
GOLD:	And remember , when you are being tempted , do not say , “ God is tempting me . ” God is never tempted to do wrong , and he never tempts anyone else .

ID:	2592
INPUT:	Haiek , ostera , goi-goiko Jainkoa probatu zuten , haren kontra altxatuz ; haren xedapenak ez zituzten gorde .
PRED:	But they rebelled against the Lord their God , and they refused to obey him .
GOLD:	But they kept testing and rebelling against God Most High.They did not obey his laws .

ID:	2593
INPUT:	Bigarren hilaren hamalauan Pazko-bildotsa hil zuten . Apaizek eta lebitarrek , garbikuntza egin ezaz lotsaturik , garbikuntza egin eta erre-opariak eskaini zituzten Jaunaren etxean .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the Passover celebration , the priests and Levites killed some of the Levites . They offered sacrifices to the Lord , and they sacrificed to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	On the fourteenth day of the second month , one month later than usual , the people slaughtered the Passover lamb . This shamed the priests and Levites , so they purified themselves and brought burnt offerings to the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	2594
INPUT:	Amnonen heriotzaren samina eztiturik , ordea , baretu zitzaion Davidi Absalomen kontrako haserrea .
PRED:	But Amnon 's Revenge on Amnon 's head , but Amnon became angry with her .
GOLD:	And King David , now reconciled to Amnon 's death , longed to be reunited with his son Absalom .

ID:	2595
INPUT:	Burugabeak ez du zentzu ona gogoko , nahiago du barruan duena aldarrikatu .
PRED:	A wise person is n't wise , but a fool is forgiven .
GOLD:	Fools have no interest in understanding ; they only want to air their own opinions .

ID:	2596
INPUT:	Zer da errazago : « Barkatuak dituzu bekatuak » esatea ala « Jaiki eta zabiltza » esatea ?
PRED:	“ What is your sins ? ” says the Lord . “ Get up and pick up your mat , and pick up your mat ! ”
GOLD:	Is it easier to say ‘ Your sins are forgiven , ' or ‘ Stand up and walk ' ?

ID:	2597
INPUT:	Erre-opari eta bekatuen barkamen-oparirik ez duzu atsegin izan .
PRED:	You must offer sacrifices to the Lord your God , and you must not offer sacrifices .
GOLD:	You were not pleased with burnt offeringsor other offerings for sin .

ID:	2598
INPUT:	Orduan , nik ere onak ez ziren legeak eman nizkien , eta bizira eramaten ez zuten erabakiak .
PRED:	Then I gave them the law of Moses , and they refused to obey them .
GOLD:	I gave them over to worthless decrees and regulations that would not lead to life .

ID:	2599
INPUT:	Neu naiz Jauna , zuen Jainkoa . Gorde garbi zeuen buruak , santu izan zaitezten , ni santua naiz eta . Ez zaitezte kutsa lurrean narraska dabiltzan piztia horiekin .
PRED:	“ I am the Lord your God . Do not defile yourselves by telling you , ‘ You must not defile yourselves . Do not defile yourselves by touching the ground . '
GOLD:	For I am the Lord your God . You must consecrate yourselves and be holy , because I am holy . So do not defile yourselves with any of these small animals that scurry along the ground .

ID:	2600
INPUT:	Atzerritarrak kikildu egin ziren , eta beren gordelekuetatikdar-darka irten .
PRED:	Praise the Lord ! Praise the Lord ! Praise his name !
GOLD:	They all lose their courageand come trembling from their strongholds .

ID:	2601
INPUT:	zeren eta , geure kontzientziak kondenatzen bagaitu ere , gure kontzientziaren gainetik baitago Jainkoa eta dena ezagutzen baitu .
PRED:	And if we keep on sinning , we will remain confident in the presence of our God , but we will remain confident in our lives .
GOLD:	Even if we feel guilty , God is greater than our feelings , and he knows everything .

ID:	2602
INPUT:	Izan beti gogoan gaur ematen dizkizudan agindu guztiok ;
PRED:	For today I am giving you today today , just as I have commanded you today .
GOLD:	And you must commit yourselves wholeheartedly to these commands that I am giving you today .

ID:	2603
INPUT:	Jainkoak ez gaitu moralgabekerian bizitzeko deitu , berarentzat sagaraturik bizitzeko baizik .
PRED:	God will not change the hearts of evil people , but he will not send them to his life .
GOLD:	God has called us to live holy lives , not impure lives .

ID:	2604
INPUT:	Irten , gero , Ben-Hinom haranera , Ontzi-pusken ate aurrera , eta aldarrikatu bertan orain emango dizudan mezua .
PRED:	So go out into the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and then I will pour out the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and then I will give it to you .
GOLD:	Go out through the Gate of Broken Pots to the garbage dump in the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and give them this message .

ID:	2605
INPUT:	Lebitarrak onartu zuen gizon haren etxean bizitzea , eta gizonak bere semeetako bat bezala hartu zuen .
PRED:	So the Levites took a man 's house , just as the man had said , “ A man was a man like a man . ”
GOLD:	The Levite agreed to this , and the young man became like one of Micah 's sons .

ID:	2606
INPUT:	Jaunak galdetu zidan : — Zer ikusten duzu , Amos ? — Berun-haria — erantzun nion . Eta Jaunak : — Horra , berun-hari honetaz , neure herria zuzen ote dabilen ikusi nahi dut . Ez baitut gehiago ez ikusiarenik egingo .
PRED:	“ What do you see ? ” the Lord asked me . “ What sorrow awaits you ! ” And the Lord replied , “ I will see this disaster , for I will see it , for I will never see it . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord said to me , “ Amos , what do you see ? ” I answered , “ A plumb line . ” And the Lord replied , “ I will test my people with this plumb line . I will no longer ignore all their sins .

ID:	2607
INPUT:	« Zoaz ihesi , ene maitea , gazela edo oreinkumea irudi , usain gozoko mendietan barrena » .
PRED:	“ Go and see the harvesters , ” says the Lord . “ The grass on the mountain , and the wild animals will be filled with the dew of heaven . ”
GOLD:	Come away , my love ! Be like a gazelleor a young stag on the mountains of spices .

ID:	2608
INPUT:	gero , Santiagori agertu zitzaion , ondoren apostolu guztiei .
PRED:	After this , the Good News appeared to the apostles and to the apostles .
GOLD:	Then he was seen by James and later by all the apostles .

ID:	2609
INPUT:	Baina ni zurekin izango naiz beti : eskutik hartua naukazu ;
PRED:	But I will be with you , and I will be with you .
GOLD:	Yet I still belong to you ; you hold my right hand .

ID:	2610
INPUT:	Beste profetak , alabaina : — Profeta nauzu ni ere zu bezala , eta mezulari bat mintzatu zait Jaunaren izenean , esanez : « Itzularazi hori zeure etxera ; jan dezala ogia eta edan ura » . Gezurra zioen .
PRED:	But the prophet said , “ You have a prophet like me , and you have said to me , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I have given you a prophet to eat . ' ” And he said , “ Go home and eat it . ”
GOLD:	But the old prophet answered , “ I am a prophet , too , just as you are . And an angel gave me this command from the Lord : ‘ Bring him home with you so he can have something to eat and drink . ' ” But the old man was lying to him .

ID:	2611
INPUT:	urrea baino desiragarriago , urre araztua baino ere bai ; eztia baino gozoago , ezti berria baino ere bai .
PRED:	They are more valuable than gold , even more than gold than silver or gold .
GOLD:	They are a warning to your servant , a great reward for those who obey them .

ID:	2612
INPUT:	Gerra kanpoan , izurria eta gosea etxean . Landan dagoena gerran hilko da , hirian dagoena goseak eta izurriak irentsita .
PRED:	They will go out to war against famine , famine , and disease . The famine is filled with famine , and disease .
GOLD:	There is war outside the cityand disease and famine within.Those outside the city wallswill be killed by enemy swords.Those inside the citywill die of famine and disease .

ID:	2613
INPUT:	Orduan , honela mintzatu zitzaion Samuel Israel herri osoari : « Jaunarengana bihotz-bihotzez itzuli nahi baduzue , jaurti zeuen artetik sasijainko arrotz guztiak eta Astarteren irudiak ; bizi zaitezte Jaunari zeharo emanak eta ez zerbitza bera besterik . Askatuko zaituzte orduan filistearren eskuetatik » .
PRED:	Then Samuel said to the people of Israel , “ If you refuse to obey the Lord 's commands , you will worship the gods of your ancestors , and you will worship other gods , and you will serve the Lord by worshiping other gods . ”
GOLD:	Then Samuel said to all the people of Israel , “ If you want to return to the Lord with all your hearts , get rid of your foreign gods and your images of Ashtoreth . Turn your hearts to the Lord and obey him alone ; then he will rescue you from the Philistines . ”

ID:	2614
INPUT:	Izarren kopurua finkatzen dueta bakoitzari bere izena ematen .
PRED:	He created the stars in the sky , and he created everything he created .
GOLD:	He counts the starsand calls them all by name .

ID:	2615
INPUT:	Erregeak , herri osoarekin , sakrifizioak eskaini zizkion Jaunari .
PRED:	Then the king gave all the people burnt offerings to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices to the Lord .

ID:	2616
INPUT:	Beraz , limosna egitean , ez ibili turuta joka , itxurazaleek sinagogetan eta kaleetan egin ohi duten bezala , jendearen txaloak irabazteko . Benetan diotsuet : Hartua dute beren ordaina .
PRED:	For example , you are poor and needy , but you are deaf to the synagogues and do n't want to catch up . I want you to catch up to the poor , but I tell you the truth , they are poor .
GOLD:	When you give to someone in need , do n't do as the hypocrites do — blowing trumpets in the synagogues and streets to call attention to their acts of charity ! I tell you the truth , they have received all the reward they will ever get .

ID:	2617
INPUT:	Honela , edomdarrak Judaren agintepetik libratu egin ziren gaur arte . Libna hiria ere aldi hartan bertan libratu zen .
PRED:	This is what the Edomites did when the Edomites returned from the town of Edom , the town of Edom had been captured .
GOLD:	So Edom has been independent from Judah to this day . The town of Libnah also revolted about that same time .

ID:	2618
INPUT:	Jaitsi zen Moises menditik , eta garbikuntza eginarazi eta arropa garbiarazi zien israeldarrei .
PRED:	So Moses went down from the mountain and purified the entire community of Israel .
GOLD:	So Moses went down to the people . He consecrated them for worship , and they washed their clothes .

ID:	2619
INPUT:	« Gosearen gezi hilgarriak bota eta suntsitu egingo zaituztet ; gosea areagotuko dizuet , ogi-hornidura guztia kenduz .
PRED:	“ But I will destroy you , and I will destroy you and destroy you . I will destroy you completely .
GOLD:	“ I will shower you with the deadly arrows of famine to destroy you . The famine will become more and more severe until every crumb of food is gone .

ID:	2620
INPUT:	Moisesen aurka matxinatu ziren beste berrehun eta berrogeita hamar israeldarrekin batera . Hauek israeldar elkarteko buruzagi ziren , batzarrean kargu eta itzal handia zituztenak .
PRED:	Then the people of Israel came to Moses and told them , “ We are ten men of Israel . We are together together together with the leaders of Israel , together with the leaders of Israel . ”
GOLD:	They incited a rebellion against Moses , along with 250 other leaders of the community , all prominent members of the assembly .

ID:	2621
INPUT:	Atzetik hurbildu eta soineko-ertza ukitu zion Jesusi ; eta bat-batean odoljarioa gelditu egin zitzaion .
PRED:	When she approached him , she got up and touched him and touched him . And when she heard him , she was healed .
GOLD:	Coming up behind Jesus , she touched the fringe of his robe . Immediately , the bleeding stopped .

ID:	2622
INPUT:	Erortzear direnei Jaunak die eusten , lur joak ditu altxatzen .
PRED:	The Lord protects the people of Egypt , but he destroys them .
GOLD:	The Lord helps the fallenand lifts those bent beneath their loads .

ID:	2623
INPUT:	Zuek , ene maiteok , gogoratu Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren apostoluek aurrez iragarria :
PRED:	Dear friends , dear brothers and sisters , you yourselves yourselves yourselves before the Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	But you , my dear friends , must remember what the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ predicted .

ID:	2624
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Gorroto eta higuin ditutzuen jaiak , ez ditut atseginzuen kultu-batzarrak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I hate the sins of the wicked , and I will not destroy the pagan shrines .
GOLD:	“ I hate all your show and pretense — the hypocrisy of your religious festivals and solemn assemblies .

ID:	2625
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , hau diotsot nik , Jainko Jaunak , Israel herriari : Amaiera ! Badator amaiera herrialde honetako lau bazterretaraino .
PRED:	“ Son of man , this is what the Sovereign Lord , the God of Israel , says : The people of Israel will be scattered on the earth .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , this is what the Sovereign Lord says to Israel : “ The end is here ! Wherever you look — east , west , north , or south — your land is finished .

ID:	2626
INPUT:	Herritarrak zenbat ziren adierazi zion Joabek erregeari : Israelen zortziehun mila ziren ezpata erabil zezaketen gerra-gizonak , eta Judan bostehun mila .
PRED:	Then Joab told the people of Israel , “ This is what the king of Israel had taken by the sword of the army of Judah and Benjamin . ”
GOLD:	Joab reported the number of people to the king . There were 800,000 capable warriors in Israel who could handle a sword , and 500,000 in Judah .

ID:	2627
INPUT:	Eta zer esango duzu , Jerusalem , adiskidetzat eduki ohi dituzunekberen agintea ezartzeaneta zu menderatzean ? Oinaze bizitan aurkituko zara , emakumea erdiminetan bezala .
PRED:	Then you will say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : If you want to live in Jerusalem , why should you be put to death ? '
GOLD:	What will you say when the Lord takes the allies you have cultivatedand appoints them as your rulers ? Pangs of anguish will grip you , like those of a woman in labor !

ID:	2628
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Galdu egingo ditut Moaben , muinoetako kultu-lekuetan beren jainkoei intsentsua erretzen dieten guztiak » .
PRED:	“ I will destroy the pagan shrines , ” says the Lord . “ I will destroy all the pagan shrines and burn incense altars . ”
GOLD:	“ I will put an end to Moab , ” says the Lord , “ for the people offer sacrifices at the pagan shrines and burn incense to their false gods .

ID:	2629
INPUT:	Hau , berehala soldadu eta ehuntariak bildurik , lasterka joan zen ; gudalburua eta soldaduak ikustean , juduek utzi egin zioten Paulo jotzeari .
PRED:	As soon as the soldiers approached , the commander of the soldiers returned to the Roman soldiers , the commander of the soldiers returned to the Roman soldiers , and the soldiers returned to the Roman soldiers .
GOLD:	He immediately called out his soldiers and officers and ran down among the crowd . When the mob saw the commander and the troops coming , they stopped beating Paul .

ID:	2630
INPUT:	Izan ere , Liburu Santuak dio : Izan santu , ni santua naiz eta .
PRED:	For the Scriptures say , “ Yes , I am the Holy One . ”
GOLD:	For the Scriptures say , “ You must be holy because I am holy . ”

ID:	2631
INPUT:	Jainkoaren semeek gizakien alabekin batu eta haurrak izan zituztenean , baita geroago ere , baziren erraldoiak munduan : antzinako heroiak dira hauek , izen handikoak .
PRED:	And when the Son of God created the children of God , they were like children of the world , and they were like the stars of the world .
GOLD:	In those days , and for some time after , giant Nephilites lived on the earth , for whenever the sons of God had intercourse with women , they gave birth to children who became the heroes and famous warriors of ancient times .

ID:	2632
INPUT:	eta esan zuen : « Hara , guztiak herri bat bera dira , hizkuntza bat berekoak . Hau beren lehenengo lana badute , ez zaie aurrerantzean egin nahiko duten ezer ezinezko gertatuko .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Look , all the people of Israel are greater than any nation . This is a permanent law for these people who have been appointed before the first time .
GOLD:	“ Look ! ” he said . “ The people are united , and they all speak the same language . After this , nothing they set out to do will be impossible for them !

ID:	2633
INPUT:	Ozpina edan zuenean , Jesusek esan zuen : « Betea da dena » . Eta , burua makurtuz , azken arnasa eman zuen .
PRED:	As he was speaking , he said , “ Look , the man is coming , ” And he lay his head on his head .
GOLD:	When Jesus had tasted it , he said , “ It is finished ! ” Then he bowed his head and gave up his spirit .

ID:	2634
INPUT:	Betiko baztertu ote gaituzu , bada ? Zure haserreak ez ote du mugarik ?
PRED:	Will you keep on angry ? Will you be angry ? Will you be angry ?
GOLD:	Or have you utterly rejected us ? Are you angry with us still ?

ID:	2635
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jaunarentzako bereizitako eremu guztiz sakratuaren zati bat dagokie , lebitarrenaren ondoan .
PRED:	This is the land that is set aside for the Lord 's holy land , and it must be set apart for the Lord .
GOLD:	It will be their special portion when the land is distributed , the most sacred land of all . Next to the priests ' territory will lie the land where the other Levites will live .

ID:	2636
INPUT:	Jaunak esana baitzion Moisesi : « Esan israeldarrei : Herri burugogorra zarete ! Apur batez zuekin joango banintz , hondatu egingo zintuzketet . Erantzi , bada , festa-jantziak , eta ikusiko dut zer egin zuekin » .
PRED:	But the Lord said to Moses , “ Say to the people of Israel , ‘ Look , I 'm going to go with you , but I will eat with you , and I will eat with you . ' ”
GOLD:	For the Lord had told Moses to tell them , “ You are a stubborn and rebellious people . If I were to travel with you for even a moment , I would destroy you . Remove your jewelry and fine clothes while I decide what to do with you . ”

ID:	2637
INPUT:	Dolutan , akiturik dago lurraldea , lotsaz eta zimel Libanoko basoa , Xaron lautada basamortu bihurtua , Baxan eta Karmel mendiak gorri .
PRED:	The king of Babylon will be captured , and the land of Carmel will be buried in the wilderness of Maon in the wilderness of Carmel , Mount Carmel , Mount Carmel , Carmel , and Mount Carmel .
GOLD:	The land of Israel wilts in mourning.Lebanon withers with shame.The plain of Sharon is now a wilderness.Bashan and Carmel have been plundered .

ID:	2638
INPUT:	Haiek , entzutean , Jainkoa goretsi zuten ; gero , Paulori esan zioten : « Anaia , ikusten duzu zenbat milaka judu egin diren fededun , baina denak legezale sutsuak dira .
PRED:	When they heard this , they turned to God and said , “ You are a brother of God , but you are a member of the Jewish synagogue . ”
GOLD:	After hearing this , they praised God . And then they said , “ You know , dear brother , how many thousands of Jews have also believed , and they all follow the law of Moses very seriously .

ID:	2639
INPUT:	Gero , Akrabim maldaren hegoaldera okertuko da eta , <unk> dik jarraituz , Kadex-Barnearen hegoaldera iritsiko . Ondoren , Hatzar-Adarretik jarraituz , Atzmonetik pasatuko da .
PRED:	The king of Aroer will go south to the south of Lower Beth-horon , then go south of Kadesh-barnea to the south of Kadesh-barnea to the south side of Kadesh-barnea , and then it will then turn from it .
GOLD:	It will then run south past Scorpion Pass in the direction of Zin . Its southernmost point will be Kadesh-barnea , from which it will go to Hazar-addar , and on to Azmon .

ID:	2640
INPUT:	Israel herriak , erregeak kasurik ere ez ziola egiten oharturik , ihardetsi zion : « Ez dugu deus ere nahi Davidekin ! Ez dugu parterik nahiJeseren semearekin ! Zeuen etxoletara , israeldarrok ! Zaindu zeuk zeure etxea , David ! » Horrela , bada , israeldarrak beren etxoletara joan ziren .
PRED:	When the people of Israel realized that the king of Israel had not been captured , they said to David , “ We have no interest to the dynasty of David , O people of Israel , may we go home to the homes of the dynasty of David ! ” So David and the people of Israel returned to the dynasty of Israel .
GOLD:	When all Israel realized that the king had refused to listen to them , they responded , “ Down with the dynasty of David ! We have no interest in the son of Jesse.Back to your homes , O Israel ! Look out for your own house , O David ! ” So all the people of Israel returned home .

ID:	2641
INPUT:	Zertarako dut nikSabako intsentsua , zertarako urrutiko lurraldeetakokanabera usaintsua ? Ez ditut atsegin zuen erre-opariak , ez ditut gogoko zuen sakrifizioak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will bring you fragrant incense for the people of Israel . I will not offer sacrifices for your burnt offerings , and I will not offer sacrifices to you .
GOLD:	There 's no use offering me sweet frankincense from Sheba.Keep your fragrant calamus imported from distant lands ! I will not accept your burnt offerings.Your sacrifices have no pleasing aroma for me . ”

ID:	2642
INPUT:	Zoazte Tarsiseraino , egizue garrasi , kostaldeko jendeok !
PRED:	Look , you people of Tarshish , you people of Tarshish , you people of Tarshish !
GOLD:	Send word now to Tarshish ! Wail , you people who live in distant lands !

ID:	2643
INPUT:	Hala egin zuen Balakek , eta bien artean zekor eta ahari bana eskaini zituzten aldare bakoitzean .
PRED:	So Balak did as Balaam commanded Balak , and he offered a young bull and a ram on each altar .
GOLD:	Balak followed his instructions , and the two of them sacrificed a young bull and a ram on each altar .

ID:	2644
INPUT:	« Beraz , Egiptotik atera eta basamortura eraman nituen .
PRED:	“ So I brought them out of Egypt and brought them out of the wilderness .
GOLD:	So I brought them out of Egypt and led them into the wilderness .

ID:	2645
INPUT:	Nik esan nuen : « Ene Jainko , ez nazazu eraman sasoirik onenean ! » Zure urteek gizaldiz gizaldi diraute .
PRED:	I said to them , “ O Sovereign Lord , do n't let me sit on your shoulders . ”
GOLD:	Long ago you laid the foundation of the earthand made the heavens with your hands .

ID:	2646
INPUT:	Izan bedi gurekin Jauna , gure Jainkoa , gure gurasoekin izan zen bezala . Ez gaitzala utz , ez baztertu ;
PRED:	For the Lord our God is with us , just as our ancestors did with us . Do n't let us leave us alone .
GOLD:	May the Lord our God be with us as he was with our ancestors ; may he never leave us or abandon us .

ID:	2647
INPUT:	« Norbaitek bere alaba esklabotzat saltzen badu , ez da libre geldituko beste esklaboen erara .
PRED:	“ If a slave has a slave to his slave , the slave must be free .
GOLD:	“ When a man sells his daughter as a slave , she will not be freed at the end of six years as the men are .

ID:	2648
INPUT:	Nork aldenduko gaitu Kristok digun maitasunetik ? Atsekabeak , larriak , erasoaldiak , goseak , jantzirik ezak , arriskuak , ezpatak ?
PRED:	Who is able to save us from the oppression of Christ ? Who is the source of his clothes ?
GOLD:	Can anything ever separate us from Christ 's love ? Does it mean he no longer loves us if we have trouble or calamity , or are persecuted , or hungry , or destitute , or in danger , or threatened with death ?

ID:	2649
INPUT:	Judakoek erantzun zioten : — Hil , ez zaitugu hilko ; baina ongi lotu eta filistearren esku utzi , bai . Orduan , bi soka berriz lotu eta atera egin zuten haitzartetik .
PRED:	The men of Judah replied , “ We will not kill you , but we will kill him . ” So they left him and put him out of the Philistines .
GOLD:	“ We will only tie you up and hand you over to the Philistines , ” they replied . “ We wo n't kill you . ” So they tied him up with two new ropes and brought him up from the rock .

ID:	2650
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Nola nahi duzue ezteietara deituek barau egitea , senar berria berekin dutelarik ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ What do you want to eat with the wedding feast ? Do you fast while celebrating with them ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus responded , “ Do wedding guests fast while celebrating with the groom ? Of course not .

ID:	2651
INPUT:	gizakiak , berriz , hau da , neskatxa birjinak , 32 . 000 guztira .
PRED:	But the young girls , young women , old , and old .
GOLD:	and 32,000 virgin girls .

ID:	2652
INPUT:	Nazireu-garai guztian Jaunari sagaraturik dago .
PRED:	They must not sacrifice a vow to the Lord .
GOLD:	This requirement applies as long as they are set apart to the Lord .

ID:	2653
INPUT:	Baina altxor baliotsu hau buztinezko ontzitan daramagu , garbi ager dadin honenbesteko indarra Jainkoarengandik datorrela eta ez guregandik .
PRED:	But the Lord has given us a clay jar of pure gold , a clay pot filled with fresh water , so that we can not be able to come from God .
GOLD:	We now have this light shining in our hearts , but we ourselves are like fragile clay jars containing this great treasure . This makes it clear that our great power is from God , not from ourselves .

ID:	2654
INPUT:	Hau dio Jaunak : « Ez izan beldur , Israel , Jakoben herri , hartxo bat bezain ezerezeta ahul zaren hori ! Neuk laguntzen dizut ; ni , Israelen Jainko santua , nauzu askatzaile .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Do not be afraid of Jacob , Jacob , Jacob , the people of Israel , says : I am the Holy One of Israel , the Holy One of Israel .
GOLD:	Though you are a lowly worm , O Jacob , do n't be afraid , people of Israel , for I will help you.I am the Lord , your Redeemer.I am the Holy One of Israel . '

ID:	2655
INPUT:	Baina esango didazu : « Zergatik haserretzen da , hortaz , Jainkoa , inork ere ezin badio beraren nahiari aurre egin ? »
PRED:	“ Why are you angry ? ” they asked . “ Why ca n't this be angry with God ? ”
GOLD:	Well then , you might say , “ Why does God blame people for not responding ? Have n't they simply done what he makes them do ? ”

ID:	2656
INPUT:	Jakobek bere eskuak luzatu eta eskuina Efraim seme gazteenaren buru gainean ezarri zuen eta ezkerra Manases lehen-semearen buru gainean , eskuak gurutzatuz .
PRED:	Then Jacob took his right hand to his right hand , and he placed the head of his head on his head . He put the head of his head on the head of his head .
GOLD:	But Jacob crossed his arms as he reached out to lay his hands on the boys ' heads . He put his right hand on the head of Ephraim , though he was the younger boy , and his left hand on the head of Manasseh , though he was the firstborn .

ID:	2657
INPUT:	Jainkoaren etxean sartu , Jaunari eskainiriko ogiak hartu eta jan egin zituen , eta bere lagunei ere eman zizkien , legez apaizek bakarrik jan zitzaketen ogiak izanik .
PRED:	Then he went into the Temple of the Lord , and he ate it and gave it to the priests and Levites who were allowed to eat the meat of the Lord 's Temple .
GOLD:	He went into the house of God and broke the law by eating the sacred loaves of bread that only the priests can eat . He also gave some to his companions . ”

ID:	2658
INPUT:	Ondoren , Daniel , Babiloniako jakitunak hiltzeko erregearen agindua hartua zuen Ariokengana joan zen , esanez : « Ez hil Babiloniako jakitunik ! Aurkez nazazu erregeagana , neuk argituko baitiot ametsa » .
PRED:	Then Daniel , the king of Babylon , had killed the king of Babylon , who had killed the king of Babylon . He said , “ I will not destroy the king of Babylon , but I will not destroy the king of Babylon . ”
GOLD:	Then Daniel went in to see Arioch , whom the king had ordered to execute the wise men of Babylon . Daniel said to him , “ Do n't kill the wise men . Take me to the king , and I will tell him the meaning of his dream . ”

ID:	2659
INPUT:	Herriak , ordea , esan zion Sauli : — Hil beharra duela Jonatanek , Israeli halako garaipena ekarri ondoren ? Inola ere ez ! Ala Jauna ! Buruko ile bat ere ez zaio eroriko lurrera . Jainkoaren laguntzaz egin du gaur egin duena . Honela libratu zuen herriak Jonatan heriotzatik .
PRED:	But the people of Israel said to Saul , “ Why did n't Saul kill him ? The Lord has given him victory over Israel ! He has not defeated you from the land of the Lord , the God of Israel , who has rescued you from the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	But the people broke in and said to Saul , “ Jonathan has won this great victory for Israel . Should he die ? Far from it ! As surely as the Lord lives , not one hair on his head will be touched , for God helped him do a great deed today . ” So the people rescued Jonathan , and he was not put to death .

ID:	2660
INPUT:	Etxera baraurik bidaltzen baditut , ahuleziak joko ditu bidean , urrutitik etorriak ere badira eta .
PRED:	I will send them home to my home , and I will send them home to distant lands .
GOLD:	If I send them home hungry , they will faint along the way . For some of them have come a long distance . ”

ID:	2661
INPUT:	Baina orain arte bezainbat adreilu egitera behartuko dituzue , ezta bakar bat ere gutxiago . Alfer batzuk besterik ez dira ! Horregatik ari dira beren Jainkoari sakrifizioak eskaintzera joan behar dutela esaten .
PRED:	But now you must make a small flock of sheep and goats to make one of them . But if you do n't want to offer one of them to offer a sacred offering to God , you will worship the Lord your God . ”
GOLD:	But still require them to make the same number of bricks as before . Do n't reduce the quota . They are lazy . That 's why they are crying out , ‘ Let us go and offer sacrifices to our God . '

ID:	2662
INPUT:	Goiza arte negar-zotinka ari naiz , lehoiak bezala haustenbaitizkidazu hezurrak . Gau eta egun hilzorian naukazu .
PRED:	My enemies surround me like a lion , for you have killed me like a lion , and you have killed me .
GOLD:	I waited patiently all night , but I was torn apart as though by lions.Suddenly , my life was over .

ID:	2663
INPUT:	Eta zuek izan zaitezte Jaunaren , zeuen Jainkoaren , esaneko , beraren lege-bidean ibiliz eta beraren aginduak betez , gaur egin duzuen bezala » .
PRED:	So be careful to obey the commands of the Lord your God , just as he commanded you , and you must obey all the commands of the Lord your God today . ”
GOLD:	And may you be completely faithful to the Lord our God . May you always obey his decrees and commands , just as you are doing today . ”

ID:	2664
INPUT:	Judasek ere , Jesus salduko zuenak , ezagutzen zuen leku hura , askotan bildua baitzen Jesus han bere ikasleekin .
PRED:	Jesus knew what Jesus was going to betray him , for he knew he was looking for a few days .
GOLD:	Judas , the betrayer , knew this place , because Jesus had often gone there with his disciples .

ID:	2665
INPUT:	Zuena baino herri handiago eta ahaltsuagoak bota ditu , zuek haien lurraldera eraman eta lurraldea zuei ondaretzat emateko , gaur egun gertatzen den bezala .
PRED:	For you are greater than your people , and you will drive out the land you have given to your ancestors .
GOLD:	He drove out nations far greater than you , so he could bring you in and give you their land as your special possession , as it is today .

ID:	2666
INPUT:	Koreren ardurapean , Edenek , Miniaminek , Jexuak , Xemaiasek , Amariasek eta Xekaniasek beren apaiz-lagunen artean xuxen banatu behar zituzten emaitzak apaizak bizi ziren hirietan , bakoitzari , handi nahiz txiki , bere mailaren arabera .
PRED:	These were the leaders of the guard , Nehemiah , Shemaiah , Shemaiah , and Micaiah , the high priest , who had been appointed by the leading priests and Levites . They were also responsible for their work .
GOLD:	His faithful assistants were Eden , Miniamin , Jeshua , Shemaiah , Amariah , and Shecaniah . They distributed the gifts among the families of priests in their towns by their divisions , dividing the gifts fairly among old and young alike .

ID:	2667
INPUT:	Aurretik zihoazenek gogor egiten zioten , isil zedin ; baina hark areago oihu : — Daviden Semea , erruki zakizkit !
PRED:	They were blind because they refused to kill him , but he shouted , “ Son of David , have mercy on me ! ”
GOLD:	“ Be quiet ! ” the people in front yelled at him.But he only shouted louder , “ Son of David , have mercy on me ! ”

ID:	2668
INPUT:	Bat-batean , ordea , erorieta txiki-txiki egin da Babilonia . « “ Egin intziri berarengatik , lagunok ! Bila sendagaiak haren zaurientzat , ea sendatzen den ” .
PRED:	But when the sun falls , it will say , ‘ Babylon has become a heap of religious law , for the sake of the captives are healed . '
GOLD:	But suddenly Babylon , too , has fallen.Weep for her.Give her medicine.Perhaps she can yet be healed .

ID:	2669
INPUT:	Jesusek bere ikasleei dei egin eta esan zien : — Errukia ematen dit jende honek : badaramatzate hiru egun nirekin eta ez dute deus ere jateko . Eta ez ditut etxera baraurik bidali nahi , ahuleziak joko bailituzke bidean .
PRED:	Then Jesus called his disciples and said to his disciples , “ I have stayed for three days for three days , but I would n't send them into three days . I would n't send them back to my home . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus called his disciples and told them , “ I feel sorry for these people . They have been here with me for three days , and they have nothing left to eat . I do n't want to send them away hungry , or they will faint along the way . ”

ID:	2670
INPUT:	eta egite txarrez salatzen du orain , ez dela birjina esanez . Hona , ordea , nire alabaren bir<unk> tasunaren froga-agiria ” . « Eta gurasoek herri-arduradunen aurrean zabalduko dute <unk> direa ezkontza-gaueko odol-aztarnekin .
PRED:	But now they say , ‘ This is true . ' But I say , ‘ This is true that I am telling you the story of my ancestors . ' But the whole family of those who do n't know about me .
GOLD:	He has accused her of shameful conduct , saying , “ I discovered that your daughter was not a virgin . ” But here is the proof of my daughter 's virginity . ' Then they must spread her bed sheet before the elders .

ID:	2671
INPUT:	Urri bitez haren egunak , har beza beste batek haren kargua .
PRED:	It must be better to be one of us , and one of us must be alone .
GOLD:	Let his years be few ; let someone else take his position .

ID:	2672
INPUT:	Saul mendi-malda batetik zihoan ; David , berriz , bere gizonekin beste maldatik . David lasterka zihoan , Saulengandik ihesi . Saul bere gizonekin David eta beronen gizonak inguratzen ari zen , harrapatzeko .
PRED:	So Saul and his men went out into the hill country , David and his men were afraid of Saul 's men .
GOLD:	Saul and David were now on opposite sides of a mountain . Just as Saul and his men began to close in on David and his men ,

ID:	2673
INPUT:	Hildakoen Egoitza agerian dago Jainkoaren aurrean , Hondamen Leizea estalkirik gabe .
PRED:	No one can stand before God at the ends of the grave , and no one knows what is happening .
GOLD:	The underworld is naked in God 's presence.The place of destruction is uncovered .

ID:	2674
INPUT:	Aldi hartan , bi profeta , Ageo eta Idoren seme Zakarias , Juda eta Jerusalemgo juduei hitz egiten hasi ziren , beren Jaun Israelgo Jainkoaren izenean .
PRED:	About that time two prophets and Zechariah son of Iddo , Zechariah son of Amoz , began to speak in the name of the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	At that time the prophets Haggai and Zechariah son of Iddo prophesied to the Jews in Judah and Jerusalem . They prophesied in the name of the God of Israel who was over them .

ID:	2675
INPUT:	Nora joan zure espiritutik urruti ? Nora ihes egin zure aurretik ?
PRED:	Where did you walk through the spirit ? Why did you escape from your presence ?
GOLD:	I can never escape from your Spirit ! I can never get away from your presence !

ID:	2676
INPUT:	Hel bekizu nire otoitza , makur belarria nire garrasira !
PRED:	O Lord , listen to my prayer ; pay attention to my cry .
GOLD:	For my life is full of troubles , and death draws near .

ID:	2677
INPUT:	Luzatu zuen eskua Aaronek Egiptoko uren gainera eta atera zituen igelek Egipto osoa estali zuten .
PRED:	So the hand of Egypt led the hand to Egypt , and he sent the hand of Egypt to hand the king of Egypt .
GOLD:	If you refuse to let them go , I will send a plague of frogs across your entire land .

ID:	2678
INPUT:	Agarrek « Zeu zara ikusi nauzun Jainkoa » eman zion izen mintzatu zitzaion Jainkoari , hau baitzioen : « Ez dut , bada , ni ikusi nauena bera ikusi ? »
PRED:	Then you saw me , and God said to him , “ I have seen God ! ” And God said , “ I have seen him ! ”
GOLD:	Thereafter , Hagar used another name to refer to the Lord , who had spoken to her . She said , “ You are the God who sees me . ” She also said , “ Have I truly seen the One who sees me ? ”

ID:	2679
INPUT:	Belardia bezala haziko dira , ibai ondoko sahatsa bezala .
PRED:	They are like animals that grow up , like chaff blown away like a bird .
GOLD:	They will thrive like watered grass , like willows on a riverbank .

ID:	2680
INPUT:	Kutxaren gainean bi izaki hegaldun zeuden , Jainkoaren presentzia aintzatsua adierazten zuten kerubinak , beren hegoez kutxa gaineko estalkia babesten zutenak . Baina hau ez da gai hauetaz xehetasunez hitz egiteko unea .
PRED:	When you cross the Ark of God , you are being defiled by the glory of the Lord your God . But if you do n't understand these things , you will not understand these things . But if you do n't understand these things , you will not understand these things .
GOLD:	Above the Ark were the cherubim of divine glory , whose wings stretched out over the Ark 's cover , the place of atonement . But we can not explain these things in detail now .

ID:	2681
INPUT:	Ez isuri odolik ! Jaurti ezazue eremuko putzu batera , baina ez kalterik egin . Jose haien eskuetatik libratu egin nahi zuen , aitari itzultzeko .
PRED:	Do n't let him die ! Do n't let him kill him ! Do n't let him kill him ! ” So Joseph put him away from his father 's hand .
GOLD:	“ Why should we shed any blood ? Let 's just throw him into this empty cistern here in the wilderness . Then he 'll die without our laying a hand on him . ” Reuben was secretly planning to rescue Joseph and return him to his father .

ID:	2682
INPUT:	Zazpigarren egunean , egunsentian jaiki eta itzulia egin zuten hiriaren inguruan , aurreko egunetakoaren arabera , baina egun hartan zazpi itzuli egin zizkioten hiriari .
PRED:	On the seventh day of the festival , when they returned to the town , they returned to the town of the town . They returned to the town , but they returned to the town .
GOLD:	On the seventh day the Israelites got up at dawn and marched around the town as they had done before . But this time they went around the town seven times .

ID:	2683
INPUT:	orduan dei egingo didazue , baina ez dizuet erantzungo ; bilatu , baina ez nauzue aurkituko .
PRED:	But I will call on you , but you wo n't answer me , but you wo n't answer me .
GOLD:	“ When they cry for help , I will not answer.Though they anxiously search for me , they will not find me .

ID:	2684
INPUT:	horrela , zuen sinesmena Jainkoaren indarrean oinarri zedin eta ez giza jakindurian .
PRED:	As for you , you will be strong in the power of God , and you will know that we are not wise .
GOLD:	I did this so you would trust not in human wisdom but in the power of God .

ID:	2685
INPUT:	Alabaina , Juda erreinuan izana zen gertakari harrigarriaren berri jakitera , Babiloniako agintariek mandatariak bidali zizkiotenean , Jainkoak Ezekias eskutik utzi bazuen , probatzeko izan zen : nolako asmoak zituen ikusteko .
PRED:	But when King Asa of Judah arrived in the land of Judah , he sent messengers to Babylon to tell the people of Judah to send them back to Babylon , he sent them to see what had happened to Hezekiah .
GOLD:	However , when ambassadors arrived from Babylon to ask about the remarkable events that had taken place in the land , God withdrew from Hezekiah in order to test him and to see what was really in his heart .

ID:	2686
INPUT:	Horrela , emakume lotsagabeeta lausengariagandik aldenduko zara ,
PRED:	That is why a woman named a woman , a woman from a dead time , and she will be healed .
GOLD:	Wisdom will save you from the immoral woman , from the seductive words of the promiscuous woman .

ID:	2687
INPUT:	Betel eta Aikoak 123 ;
PRED:	The people of Anathoth128
GOLD:	The people of Bethel and Ai123

ID:	2688
INPUT:	Benaias , Joiadaren semea , keretarren eta peletarren buruzagi . Daviden semeak , berriz , apaiz ziren .
PRED:	Benaiah son of Jehoiada son of Jehoiada the priest , the priest , and his personal priest .
GOLD:	Benaiah son of Jehoiada was captain of the king 's bodyguard . And David 's sons served as priestly leaders .

ID:	2689
INPUT:	Jakinarazten dio Jaunak begirune dionarizein jokabide behar duen hautatu .
PRED:	The Lord is good to those who fear the Lord ; he will forgive those who fear him .
GOLD:	Who are those who fear the Lord ? He will show them the path they should choose .

ID:	2690
INPUT:	Izan ikara , arduragabeok ! Egin dardara , axolagabeok ! Erantzi , kendu soineko horiek , eta estali dolu-jantziz .
PRED:	Be glad ! Be strong and courageous ! Be glad , you people of Israel ! Get away from their clothes and dress them in burlap .
GOLD:	Tremble , you women of ease ; throw off your complacency.Strip off your pretty clothes , and put on burlap to show your grief .

ID:	2691
INPUT:	Joramen erregealdia
PRED:	Jotham Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Jehoram Rules in Judah

ID:	2692
INPUT:	Egun berean batzar sakratua egingo duzue eta ez da ohiko lan arruntik egingo . Betiko lege izango duzue hau belaunez belaun , biziko zareten edonon .
PRED:	On that day you must celebrate the Festival of Shelters , and you must be observed from generation to generation to generation . This is a permanent law for you , and you must be observed from generation to generation .
GOLD:	That same day will be proclaimed an official day for holy assembly , a day on which you do no ordinary work . This is a permanent law for you , and it must be observed from generation to generation wherever you live .

ID:	2693
INPUT:	« Aita nahiz ama ni baino maiteago duena ez da niretzat gai ; semea nahiz alaba ni baino maiteago duena ez da niretzat gai .
PRED:	“ I am more important than I am not greater than my father or daughter . Anyone who loves me is greater than I am not greater than my daughter .
GOLD:	“ If you love your father or mother more than you love me , you are not worthy of being mine ; or if you love your son or daughter more than me , you are not worthy of being mine .

ID:	2694
INPUT:	Baina obeditzen ez didan nazioa errotik aterako dut behin betiko eta suntsitu egingo . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	But I will not destroy them because of their sins , and I will destroy them all . I will destroy them , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	But any nation who refuses to obey me will be uprooted and destroyed . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	2695
INPUT:	bertan egiten dute txoriek habia , ipuruetan zikoinak etxea .
PRED:	They are responsible for the entrance of the Tabernacle , but each of the houses are found in a house .
GOLD:	There the birds make their nests , and the storks make their homes in the cypresses .

ID:	2696
INPUT:	Geldi bitez umezurtz haren haurrak , alargun haren emaztea .
PRED:	Get rid of the child 's children , orphans , and widows .
GOLD:	May his children become fatherless , and his wife a widow .

ID:	2697
INPUT:	Judasek diru-poltsaren ardura zuenez , jairako behar zena erosteko edota pobreei zerbait emateko esan ziola uste izan zuen zenbaitek .
PRED:	But when he was in charge of money , he was forced to sell some money to the poor and forced to sell some money to the poor .
GOLD:	Since Judas was their treasurer , some thought Jesus was telling him to go and pay for the food or to give some money to the poor .

ID:	2698
INPUT:	Orduan , herensugea , emakumearen aurka amorraturik , beronen gainerako ondorengoak borrokatzera joan zen , Jainkoaren aginduak bete eta Jesusen testigantza leial egiten dutenak , alegia .
PRED:	Then the woman turned against him and put him on the edge of the wilderness to fight against the Lord Jesus , who commanded him to do what he had commanded him .
GOLD:	And the dragon was angry at the woman and declared war against the rest of her children — all who keep God 's commandments and maintain their testimony for Jesus .

ID:	2699
INPUT:	Zuek zoriontsu egiten eta ugaltzen izan zuen adinako atsegina izango du Jaunak zuek galtzen eta suntsitzen : jaurti egingo zaituzte jabetzan hartzera zoazten lurraldetik .
PRED:	But you will be strong and courageous , for the Lord will destroy you , and you will drive you out of the land .
GOLD:	“ Just as the Lord has found great pleasure in causing you to prosper and multiply , the Lord will find pleasure in destroying you . You will be torn from the land you are about to enter and occupy .

ID:	2700
INPUT:	Zif , Telem , Bealot ,
PRED:	Besides these , there were Maon , Ziph ,
GOLD:	Ziph , Telem , Bealoth ,

ID:	2701
INPUT:	Memukan mintzatu zen erregearen eta buruzagien aitzinean : « Erregea ez ezik , buruzagiak eta Asuero erregearen erresumako eskualde guztietan bizi diren herriak ere iraindu egin ditu Baxti erreginak .
PRED:	Then the king said to the king , “ This is what the king of Assyria says : ‘ Do n't burn the queen of the king 's people on the royal behalf of the king 's people .
GOLD:	Memucan answered the king and his nobles , “ Queen Vashti has wronged not only the king but also every noble and citizen throughout your empire .

ID:	2702
INPUT:	hain zuzen , apaizaren labore-opari guztiak erabatekoak dira ; ez dituzte jango » .
PRED:	The priest will eat any meat of the grain offerings , nor eat it . ”
GOLD:	Aaron and his sons may eat the rest of the flour , but it must be baked without yeast and eaten in a sacred place within the courtyard of the Tabernacle .

ID:	2703
INPUT:	Haiek erantzun zuten : — Israelen Jainkoaren kutxa itzuli nahi baduzue , ez bidali hutsik ; emaiozue zerbait ordain-oparitzat eta sendatuko zarete . Eta jakinen duzue zergatik ez zuen Jainkoak bere eskua kentzen zuen gainetik .
PRED:	They replied , “ If you do n't want to bring the Ark of God , do n't want to bring a young bull to the God of Israel . If you do n't want him to eat it , you wo n't need it to eat it . ”
GOLD:	“ Send the Ark of the God of Israel back with a gift , ” they were told . “ Send a guilt offering so the plague will stop . Then , if you are healed , you will know it was his hand that caused the plague . ”

ID:	2704
INPUT:	Beste eratako eskaintzak egiteko seiehun zezen eta hiru mila ardi ekarri zituzten .
PRED:	At that time the sacrifice of the sacrifice , the number of cattle , sheep , goats , and goats .
GOLD:	They also brought 600 cattle and 3,000 sheep and goats as sacred offerings .

ID:	2705
INPUT:	Ikuskari hau ez da beteko , epea burutu arte , baina badoa helbururantz , ez du huts egingo . Luzatzen bada , zuk itxaron , iritsiko baita , berandu gabe iritsi ere .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ If you see this , you will have no hope , but you will have no hope , but you will have no hope . ”
GOLD:	This vision is for a future time.It describes the end , and it will be fulfilled.If it seems slow in coming , wait patiently , for it will surely take place.It will not be delayed .

ID:	2706
INPUT:	Osabak Sauli : — Eta zer esan zizuen Samuelek ?
PRED:	“ What are Samuel ? ” he asked .
GOLD:	“ Oh ? And what did he say ? ” his uncle asked .

ID:	2707
INPUT:	Jainkoaren aginduak betetzen baditugu , ziur dakigu bera ezagutzen dugula .
PRED:	If we obey God 's commands , we know that we are like a prostitute .
GOLD:	And we can be sure that we know him if we obey his commandments .

ID:	2708
INPUT:	Honela jakingo dute Jauna naizela ni , beraien Jainkoa , eta beren artean bizitzeko atera nituela Egiptotik . Neu naiz Jauna , haien Jainkoa .
PRED:	They will know that I am the Lord , the God of their ancestors , and they will live in the land of Egypt . I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	and they will know that I am the Lord their God . I am the one who brought them out of the land of Egypt so that I could live among them . I am the Lord their God .

ID:	2709
INPUT:	apaizek sua egingo dute aldare gainean eta egurra jarriko sutan ;
PRED:	Then the priests must burn the altar on the altar and burn it on the altar .
GOLD:	The sons of Aaron the priest will build a wood fire on the altar .

ID:	2710
INPUT:	Jainko ahaltsua lagun , aurki dezazuela gupida gizon haren aurrean , eta Benjaminekin eta beste anaiarekin , Simeonekin , itzuli etxera . Niri dagokidanez , semerik gabe gelditu behar badut , geldi nadila .
PRED:	“ In that day , the Almighty is a man of God and his brother , Benjamin , and Benjamin , will return to his brothers and sisters , and I will stay in my home . ”
GOLD:	May God Almighty give you mercy as you go before the man , so that he will release Simeon and let Benjamin return . But if I must lose my children , so be it . ”

ID:	2711
INPUT:	Moises eta Aaron lurreraino ahuspeztu ziren israeldar elkarte osoaren aurrean .
PRED:	So Moses and Aaron bowed low before the people of Israel before Moses .
GOLD:	Then Moses and Aaron fell face down on the ground before the whole community of Israel .

ID:	2712
INPUT:	« Egizu lebitarren izen-bilketa , senitarteka eta familiaka , hilabetez gorako gizonezkoak erroldatuz » .
PRED:	“ These are the clans of the tribe of Levi , who were members of the Kohathite clans and families . ”
GOLD:	“ Record the names of the members of the tribe of Levi by their families and clans . List every male who is one month old or older . ”

ID:	2713
INPUT:	Betsabek erantzun zion : — Ederki . Hitz egingo diot , bada , erregeari zure alde .
PRED:	“ All right , ” Jacob replied . “ I 'll say it , ” she replied . “ What is your request ? ”
GOLD:	“ All right , ” Bathsheba replied . “ I will speak to the king for you . ”

ID:	2714
INPUT:	Ez ahaztu hau esatea : Jakob zure zerbitzaria bera dator gure atzetik » . Bere baitarako honela pentsatzen zuen : « Aurretik bidaltzen diodan opari honekin bigunduko dut . Gero ni neu agertuko natzaio . Beharbada , ongietorria egingo dit » .
PRED:	“ Do n't forget this , ” he said , “ for I know that I am going to be with you , for I am sending you out of the sea , and I will give it to you as my possession . ”
GOLD:	So the gifts were sent on ahead , while Jacob himself spent that night in the camp .

ID:	2715
INPUT:	« Ai zuek , lege-maisu eta fariseu itxurazaleok ! Edalontzia eta platera kanpotik garbitzen dituzue , barrutik lapurretaz eta gutiziaz gainezka beterik dauden bitartean !
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law , you Pharisees , and you who are teachers of religious law . You are like a person outside the outside the outside outside the town .
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law and you Pharisees . Hypocrites ! For you are so careful to clean the outside of the cup and the dish , but inside you are filthy — full of greed and self-indulgence !

ID:	2716
INPUT:	« Izan ere , besteei beren hutsegiteak barkatzen badizkiezue , zuei ere barkatuko dizkizue zeruko Aitak ;
PRED:	“ If you forgive your sins , you will forgive your sins and forgive your sins .
GOLD:	“ If you forgive those who sin against you , your heavenly Father will forgive you .

ID:	2717
INPUT:	Zeu izango zara , bada , nire jauregiko buru , eta zuk esana egingo du herri osoak . Neu bakarrik izango nauzu gainetik , errege naizenez .
PRED:	You will be my lord , and you will be my lord , and you will be my lord , and you will be my kingdom .
GOLD:	You will be in charge of my court , and all my people will take orders from you . Only I , sitting on my throne , will have a rank higher than yours . ”

ID:	2718
INPUT:	Neuk gerizatuko duteta salbatuko hiri hau , naizena naizenagatiketa neure zerbitzari Davidengatik ” » .
PRED:	I will be the one who rescued me , and I will rescue my servant David from my servant David . ' ”
GOLD:	‘ For my own honor and for the sake of my servant David , I will defend this city and protect it . ' ”

ID:	2719
INPUT:	Zebedeoren emaztea bere semeekin Jesusi hurbildu eta aurrean ahuspeztu zitzaion eskabide bat egiteko .
PRED:	The wife of Jesus came with her , and she bowed low before him and bowed low before him .
GOLD:	Then the mother of James and John , the sons of Zebedee , came to Jesus with her sons . She knelt respectfully to ask a favor .

ID:	2720
INPUT:	« Jainkoaren erregetzarekin , atzerrira irten behar zuen gizonarekin bezala gertatzen da . Bere morroiei dei egin eta ondasunak utzi zizkien :
PRED:	“ If the Kingdom of Heaven is like a man of Heaven 's Armies , he sent his servants to go with him , and he called them to his servants .
GOLD:	“ Again , the Kingdom of Heaven can be illustrated by the story of a man going on a long trip . He called together his servants and entrusted his money to them while he was gone .

ID:	2721
INPUT:	Auzoan bizi ez bada edo ezezaguna baduzue , eraman aberea zeuen ukuilura eta eduki bertan , herritarra beraren bila etorri arte ; orduan , itzuli egingo diozue .
PRED:	If you do n't have a case , you must not return to the place where you are going , and you will return to the place where you return . Then you will return to the place where you return .
GOLD:	If its owner does not live nearby or you do n't know who the owner is , take it to your place and keep it until the owner comes looking for it . Then you must return it .

ID:	2722
INPUT:	Neftali eta beronen semeok : Jahtzeel , Guni , Jetzer eta Xilem .
PRED:	These were the sons of Naphtali : The sons of Naphtali were Sered on their behalf .
GOLD:	The sons of Naphtali were Jahzeel , Guni , Jezer , and Shillem .

ID:	2723
INPUT:	« Ez hartu , ez dastatu , ez ukitu » esaten dizuete .
PRED:	“ Do n't eat anything , ” they say . “ Do n't eat it . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't handle ! Do n't taste ! Do n't touch ! ” ?

ID:	2724
INPUT:	ereilearen parabola argitu :
PRED:	Parable of the Wheat and Weeds
GOLD:	Jesus Rejected at Nazareth

ID:	2725
INPUT:	Suzkoak bezalako izaki batzuk zituen gainean . Seina hegal zituzten : bi hegalez aurpegia estaltzen zuten , beste biz gorputza , eta beste biz hegaz egiten zuten .
PRED:	The cherubim spread their wings like a cherubim , and they were two wings like two cherubim . They were placed on the wings of the wings of the two cherubim .
GOLD:	Attending him were mighty seraphim , each having six wings . With two wings they covered their faces , with two they covered their feet , and with two they flew .

ID:	2726
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak , zuzena baita , hautsi egin du gaiztoen uztarria » .
PRED:	But the Lord struck the wicked , but he struck the wicked with the wicked . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord is good ; he has cut me free from the ropes of the ungodly .

ID:	2727
INPUT:	Eskaintza hau honetarako izanen da : Jaunari eskainiriko ogitarako , eguneroko oparietarako , larunbat , ilberri eta jai nagusietako oparietarako , beste eskaintza sakratuetarako , Israelen bekatuen ordain-oparietarako eta gure Jainkoaren etxeko beste eginkizunetarako .
PRED:	This is the regular burnt offering to the Lord : It is a Sabbath day for the Sabbath day of the festival , a day for holy day , and it must be offered to the Temple of the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	“ We have cast sacred lots to determine when — at regular times each year — the families of the priests , Levites , and the common people should bring wood to God 's Temple to be burned on the altar of the Lord our God , as is written in the Law .

ID:	2728
INPUT:	Judako Azariasen erregealdiko berrogeita hamargarren urtean hasi zen Israelgo errege izaten Samarian Pekah , Ramaliasen semea ; hogei urtez izan zen errege .
PRED:	Uzziah began to rule over Israel in the twentieth year of King Uzziah 's reign in Israel . He reigned in Samaria forty years .
GOLD:	Pekah son of Remaliah began to rule over Israel in the fifty-second year of King Uzziah 's reign in Judah . He reigned in Samaria twenty years .

ID:	2729
INPUT:	Apaizak miatu egingo du eta ikusten badu larruazalean handitu zuria duela , gaineko ilea zurituz doala eta haragi bizia ageri dela handituan ,
PRED:	If the priest finds that the priest will pronounce the person ceremonially clean , then he will pronounce the person ceremonially unclean . If he finds that he is a serious skin disease and finds that he is a serious skin disease .
GOLD:	If the priest finds a white swelling on the skin , and some hair on the spot has turned white , and there is an open sore in the affected area ,

ID:	2730
INPUT:	Deiadar egiten didate : “ Israelen Jainko aitortzen zaitugu ” .
PRED:	They will cry out , ‘ We will call on the name of the God of Israel . '
GOLD:	Now Israel pleads with me , ‘ Help us , for you are our God ! '

ID:	2731
INPUT:	Zulatua izan den hirira bezalazure ateetatik erregea sartzean , haren zalditeria ugariakharroturiko hautsakestali egingo zaitu ; zalditeriaren harrabotseta gurdien burrunbadazzure harresiekdardara egingo dute .
PRED:	For the city will be captured , and the kings of the city will be captured . They will be captured by the sound of their chariots , and their horses will be thrown into heaps of rubble .
GOLD:	The hooves of his horses will choke the city with dust , and the noise of the charioteers and chariot wheels will shake your walls as they storm through your broken gates .

ID:	2732
INPUT:	Josueren heriotza
PRED:	The Burial of Joshua
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	2733
INPUT:	Bai , hau esango dizuete segur aski : « Egiezue kontsultanekromante eta igarleei , isil-misilean eta marmarkaari ohi diren horiei . Herri batek ez ote dizkiebizien gorabeherak beren jainkoeieta hildakoei galdetu behar ? »
PRED:	“ Yes , ” he said , “ and tell you the truth , ‘ Do you want to go to the mediums and those who consult the spirits of the dead , and they will die in their streets ? '
GOLD:	Someone may say to you , “ Let 's ask the mediums and those who consult the spirits of the dead . With their whisperings and mutterings , they will tell us what to do . ” But should n't people ask God for guidance ? Should the living seek guidance from the dead ?

ID:	2734
INPUT:	Baina aingeruak esan zidan : « Zergatik harritzen zara ? Nik adieraziko dizut emakumearen eta berau gainean daraman eta zazpi buru eta hamar adar dituen piztiaren esanahia .
PRED:	But the angel said to me , “ Why are you trying to help me ? I will give you seven horns of the beast , and he gave me seven horns . ”
GOLD:	“ Why are you so amazed ? ” the angel asked . “ I will tell you the mystery of this woman and of the beast with seven heads and ten horns on which she sits .

ID:	2735
INPUT:	Ondoren , Jair agertu zen , Galaadekoa . Hogeita bi urtez gobernatu zuen Israel .
PRED:	After Amaziah died , he reigned in Gilead . He judged Israel for two years .
GOLD:	After Tola died , Jair from Gilead judged Israel for twenty-two years .

ID:	2736
INPUT:	( Mt 26 , 6-13 ; Mk 14 , <unk> )
PRED:	Jesus Is Betrayed and Arrested
GOLD:	Jesus ' Triumphant Entry

ID:	2737
INPUT:	Zure lepoamarfilezko dorrea . Zure begiak Hexbongo bi uraska , hiri jendetsu horren sarreran . Zure sudur-hegiaDamaskora begira dagoenLibanoko dorre .
PRED:	Your branches will flow from Heshbon , and your branches will flow into the fields . Your branches will be like a great tree in Damascus , and you will be like the cedars of Damascus .
GOLD:	Your head is as majestic as Mount Carmel , and the sheen of your hair radiates royalty.The king is held captive by its tresses .

ID:	2738
INPUT:	« Ez ote dira bi txori sos batean saltzen ? Hala ere , ez da bat bakarra ere lurrera erortzen zuen Aitaren baimenik gabe .
PRED:	“ Do n't two small coins ? Do n't someone go into two small coins ? For there is no one in the heavenly Father in the world .
GOLD:	What is the price of two sparrows — one copper coin ? But not a single sparrow can fall to the ground without your Father knowing it .

ID:	2739
INPUT:	behiak 36 . 000 ,
PRED:	72,000 cattle ,
GOLD:	36,000 cattle ,

ID:	2740
INPUT:	ez du gaiztoa bizirik uzten , zanpatuei justizia egiten die ;
PRED:	The wicked will not be punished , but the justice of the wicked will be destroyed .
GOLD:	He does not let the wicked livebut gives justice to the afflicted .

ID:	2741
INPUT:	eta esan zidan : “ Kornelio , entzun du Jainkoak zure otoitza eta gogora ekarri zure limosnak .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Cornelius has heard your prayer and prayer .
GOLD:	He told me , ‘ Cornelius , your prayer has been heard , and your gifts to the poor have been noticed by God !

ID:	2742
INPUT:	Zezenaren eta ahariaren buztanak , heste gaineko gantza , giltzurrunak eta gibela estaltzen zuena eraman zizkioten
PRED:	The fat around the internal organs and the fat around the internal organs , the fat around the internal organs , the fat around the internal organs , the long lobe of the liver , and the fat around them .
GOLD:	Then he took the fat of the bull and the ram — the fat of the broad tail and from around the internal organs — along with the kidneys and the long lobes of the livers .

ID:	2743
INPUT:	Gedeoni eman zizkioten urrezko eraztunek hogei kilo pisatu zuten , apaindurak , belarritakoak , Madiango erregeek zeramatzaten purpurazko jantziak eta gameluek lepoan zeramatzaten lepokoak kontatu gabe .
PRED:	They made gold rings and attached them to the king 's ambassadors . They put their clothes in blue , purple , and scarlet thread in fine linen cloth , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	The weight of the gold earrings was forty-three pounds , not including the royal ornaments and pendants , the purple clothing worn by the kings of Midian , or the chains around the necks of their camels .

ID:	2744
INPUT:	Boozek , orduan , herriko hamar nagusi hartu zituen lekuko eta han esertzeko erregutu zien . Eseri zirenean ,
PRED:	So Boaz took ten of the people to kill them , and he was very angry with them .
GOLD:	Then Boaz called ten leaders from the town and asked them to sit as witnesses .

ID:	2745
INPUT:	Eta galdetzen dut : Ez al dute entzun ? Bai , noski . Lurbira guztira zabaldu da haien hotsa , munduaren bazterreraino haien mezua .
PRED:	“ Do n't I hear ? ” he asked . “ Yes , I have heard all this , and the trees of the earth has been scattered . ”
GOLD:	But I ask , have the people of Israel actually heard the message ? Yes , they have : “ The message has gone throughout the earth , and the words to all the world . ”

ID:	2746
INPUT:	eta bildu elkarte osoa elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran » .
PRED:	The whole community of Israel gathered at the entrance of the Tabernacle . ”
GOLD:	and call the entire community of Israel together at the entrance of the Tabernacle . ”

ID:	2747
INPUT:	Nola ordainduko diot Jaunari egin didan on guztia ?
PRED:	Should I pay for the Lord 's Temple to him ? ”
GOLD:	What can I offer the Lordfor all he has done for me ?

ID:	2748
INPUT:	Bitartean , eduki zuk eskuan , haien begi-bistan , makila idatziak .
PRED:	As they open their hands , they opened their hands on them .
GOLD:	“ Then hold out the pieces of wood you have inscribed , so the people can see them .

ID:	2749
INPUT:	Bekatua onginahi eta leialtasunaz ezabatzen da , gaizkiari Jaunarenganako begiruneaz egiten zaio ihes .
PRED:	If you refuse to fear the Lord , you will turn away from doing what is right , and you will flee to the Lord .
GOLD:	Unfailing love and faithfulness make atonement for sin.By fearing the Lord , people avoid evil .

ID:	2750
INPUT:	Berdin zuek ere : hartu kontuan bekatuarentzat hilda zaudetela eta Jainkoarentzat bizirik , Jesu Kristorekin bat eginik .
PRED:	For you have been taught by the dead , and you will die with Christ Jesus Christ , who is the one who raised Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	So you also should consider yourselves to be dead to the power of sin and alive to God through Christ Jesus .

ID:	2751
INPUT:	Izan ere , juduek aspalditik irakurtzen eta azaltzen dute Moisesen legea larunbatero herri guztietako sinagogetan » .
PRED:	For the Jewish leaders read to the Jewish law and the law of Moses and the law of Moses . ”
GOLD:	For these laws of Moses have been preached in Jewish synagogues in every city on every Sabbath for many generations . ”

ID:	2752
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jainkoaren tronu aurrean daude , gau eta egun hura bere tenpluan zerbitzatzen , eta tronuan eseria dagoena horiekin biziko da .
PRED:	That night the throne of God is in the throne of God and night , and we are sitting on the throne of the Lord our God and his throne .
GOLD:	“ That is why they stand in front of God 's throneand serve him day and night in his Temple.And he who sits on the thronewill give them shelter .

ID:	2753
INPUT:	Gatzik gabe jaten al da janari zozoaedo gusturik hartzen al zaio zapore gabekoari ?
PRED:	Do n't you think it is like a fool ? Is it like a little honey ?
GOLD:	Do n't people complain about unsalted food ? Does anyone want the tasteless white of an egg ?

ID:	2754
INPUT:	Bere zurikeriaz menderatu egiten du , bere hitz goxoez erakarri .
PRED:	He rescues them from his power ; he wo n't speak his words .
GOLD:	So she seduced him with her pretty speechand enticed him with her flattery .

ID:	2755
INPUT:	Jesus artean herrixkan sartu gabe zegoen , Martak topatu zuen lekuan bertan .
PRED:	So Jesus entered the village of Jericho , where he found the town where he had been staying .
GOLD:	Jesus had stayed outside the village , at the place where Martha met him .

ID:	2756
INPUT:	Aztikeria adinako bekatua dadesleial izatea , sasijainkokeria bezain hutsala setakeria . Jaunaren esana baztertu duzulako , berak baztertzen zaitu orain erregetzatik .
PRED:	But you have rejected me as worthless as worthless as a sin offering to the Lord . But now you have rejected the law of the Lord . So now you have rejected the king of Assyria .
GOLD:	Rebellion is as sinful as witchcraft , and stubbornness as bad as worshiping idols.So because you have rejected the command of the Lord , he has rejected you as king . ”

ID:	2757
INPUT:	Handik , Etiopiako errege Tirhaka borrokatzeko asmoz zetorkiola jakin zuelarik , Senakeribek mezulariak bidali zizkion berriro Ezekiasi ,
PRED:	After this , King Sennacherib of Elah began to attack Tirzah , he sent messengers to attack King Sennacherib of Assyria to attack Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Soon afterward King Sennacherib received word that King Tirhakah of Ethiopia was leading an army to fight against him . Before leaving to meet the attack , he sent messengers back to Hezekiah in Jerusalem with this message :

ID:	2758
INPUT:	Ahuntz-ilezko beste hamaika zapi ere egin zituzten , egoitza estaliko zuen oihal-etxola eratzeko .
PRED:	Next Bezalel made the curtains of the Tabernacle for the Tabernacle , just as the tent covering of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	He made eleven curtains of goat-hair cloth to serve as a tent covering for the Tabernacle .

ID:	2759
INPUT:	nire oinak katez lotzen dituzu , nire pauso guztiak zelatatzen , oinatzak aztertzen .
PRED:	Do n't put my foot on the earth , for the light of the earth will cover the earth .
GOLD:	You put my feet in stocks.You examine all my paths.You trace all my footprints .

ID:	2760
INPUT:	Bihurritu zaitez , bai , egin aiene , Siongo herri , emakumeak erdiminetan bezala ; orain hiritik aterako baitzareteeta landan biziko . Babiloniara joango zarete , baina han salbatuko zaituzteJaunak , zeuen etsaien eskuetatik askatuko .
PRED:	Listen to me , my father , O daughter of Zion , and I will send you out of the land of Aram . I will send you out of the land , but I will rescue you from your enemies , for I will rescue you from your enemies .
GOLD:	Writhe and groan like a woman in labor , you people of Jerusalem , for now you must leave this cityto live in the open country.You will soon be sent in exileto distant Babylon.But the Lord will rescue you there ; he will redeem you from the grip of your enemies .

ID:	2761
INPUT:	Honela diotso JaunakZiro erregeari , berak aukeratu eta sagaratuari : « Eskutik heldurik eusten dizut , nazioak zure menpean jarrieta erregeei soinetikarmak kentzeko , zure aurrean hiri-ateak zabaltzeko , guzti-guztiak zabaldu ere .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will bring justice to the king of Babylon , the king of Babylon , says : “ I will hand you over all your enemies , and all your enemies will be stripped away from your enemies .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says to Cyrus , his anointed one , whose right hand he will empower.Before him , mighty kings will be paralyzed with fear.Their fortress gates will be opened , never to shut again .

ID:	2762
INPUT:	Jesusen ama eta anai-arrebak iritsi ziren . Kanpoan gelditurik , deiarazi egin zuten .
PRED:	When Jesus arrived , the mother of his brothers came out and stood outside the courtyard .
GOLD:	Then Jesus ' mother and brothers came to see him . They stood outside and sent word for him to come out and talk with them .

ID:	2763
INPUT:	Ohean etorkizunaz pentsatzen hasi zinen , eta misterioak argitzen dituen Jainkoak zer gertatuko den eman dizu aditzera .
PRED:	When you heard what he had happened , you will understand what God has revealed his lightning .
GOLD:	“ While Your Majesty was sleeping , you dreamed about coming events . He who reveals secrets has shown you what is going to happen .

ID:	2764
INPUT:	On egiozu zeure zerbitzari honi , Jauna , zeure promesaren arabera !
PRED:	Let them think of your servant , O Lord , your servant , and give them this message .
GOLD:	You have done many good things for me , Lord , just as you promised .

ID:	2765
INPUT:	Gizakiaren kreazioa
PRED:	The
GOLD:	The Man and Woman in Eden

ID:	2766
INPUT:	Ezekias eta jende guztia pozik zegoen , Jainkoak herri osoari horrela eragin ziolako ; dena bat-batean eratua baitzuten .
PRED:	So Hezekiah and all the people began praising God , for all the people began to listen to him . But when all the people heard him , they all listened to him .
GOLD:	And Hezekiah and all the people rejoiced because of what God had done for the people , for everything had been accomplished so quickly .

ID:	2767
INPUT:	Behinola , Jeroboam Jerusalemdik atera zen batean , Xiloko Ahias profetak aurkitu zuen bidean ; soingaineko berria zeraman honek soinean . Biak bakarrik gertatu ziren landan .
PRED:	So Jeroboam went to Jerusalem to Jerusalem , where the prophet had arrived at Shiloh in Jerusalem . The prophet was wearing a prophet 's robe , and he was buried in the field .
GOLD:	One day as Jeroboam was leaving Jerusalem , the prophet Ahijah from Shiloh met him along the way . Ahijah was wearing a new cloak . The two of them were alone in a field ,

ID:	2768
INPUT:	Senarraren ezjakinean beste gizon batekin sexu-harremanak izan ditu eta kutsaturik gelditu da ; baina ez dago lekukorik , ez du inork horretan harrapatu .
PRED:	If a man has sexual relations with her husband , she must be defiled by her husband , but she must never be defiled . But no one has sexual intercourse with her .
GOLD:	and has sex with another man , but neither her husband nor anyone else knows about it . She has defiled herself , even though there was no witness and she was not caught in the act .

ID:	2769
INPUT:	Lehenengo ibilaldia ( 13 , 1 — 14 , 28 )
PRED:	Paul 's First Response to Spiritual Growth
GOLD:	Barnabas and Saul Are Commissioned

ID:	2770
INPUT:	Bete egingo du nire aurkako epaia , beste erabaki guztiak bezalaxe .
PRED:	He will judge everyone else , and he will judge everyone else .
GOLD:	So he will do to me whatever he has planned.He controls my destiny .

ID:	2771
INPUT:	Azken egunak hurbiltzen ari zitzaizkiolarik , agindu hauek eman zizkion Davidek bere seme Salomoni :
PRED:	So David and his officials came to David and told him ,
GOLD:	As the time of King David 's death approached , he gave this charge to his son Solomon :

ID:	2772
INPUT:	Eta ez esan : “ Aurkitu dugun jakinduri<unk> koak bakarrik mendera dezake , ez gizakiak ” .
PRED:	And they said , ‘ We have n't brought us to the hills , but we can not be brought to the mountains . '
GOLD:	And do n't tell me , ‘ He is too wise for us.Only God can convince him . '

ID:	2773
INPUT:	Ilunpetan argia ageri da zuzenentzat : Jainko errukiorra , bihozbera eta zintzoa .
PRED:	For the light of the darkness is the light of the wicked , but the Kingdom of God is righteous .
GOLD:	Light shines in the darkness for the godly.They are generous , compassionate , and righteous .

ID:	2774
INPUT:	Anari , berriz , puska berezia eskuratzen zion , oso maitea baitzuen , nahiz eta Jaunak haurrik ematen ez zion .
PRED:	But the Lord gave him a little child , and he gave him a little child , for the child had no children .
GOLD:	And though he loved Hannah , he would give her only one choice portion because the Lord had given her no children .

ID:	2775
INPUT:	Errementariak burdin puska hartu eta , txingarretan goriturik , mailuka moldeatzen du , beso indartsuz lantzen . Baina gose baldin bada , indarrak galtzen ditu , eta edaten ez badu , leher egiten .
PRED:	Even if the mountains falls into a field , it will be too heavy for a great fire , and it will grow in a field . But if it is too weak , it 's too . But if it 's not a single fault , it 's not a single fault .
GOLD:	The blacksmith stands at his forge to make a sharp tool , pounding and shaping it with all his might.His work makes him hungry and weak.It makes him thirsty and faint .

ID:	2776
INPUT:	Judako erregearen jauregira joan eta mezu hau aldarrikatzeko agindu zion Jaunak Jeremiasi :
PRED:	Then the Lord gave this message to Jeremiah :
GOLD:	This is what the Lord said to me : “ Go over and speak directly to the king of Judah . Say to him ,

ID:	2777
INPUT:	<unk> , Rimon , Eter eta Axan : lau hiri eta beraien herrixkak .
PRED:	The towns of Benjamin included two towns with their surrounding villages , and their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	It also included Ain , Rimmon , Ether , and Ashan — four towns with their villages ,

ID:	2778
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaien Jauna Moisesi eta Aaroni :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,

ID:	2779
INPUT:	Aitzitik , atseginetara emanik dagoena , bizi delarik ere , hilda dago .
PRED:	For the Father is watching , and he will die . ”
GOLD:	But the widow who lives only for pleasure is spiritually dead even while she lives .

ID:	2780
INPUT:	Jauna zurekin . Jainkoaren grazia zuekin .
PRED:	May the grace of the Lord your God be with you .
GOLD:	May the Lord be with your spirit . And may his grace be with all of you .

ID:	2781
INPUT:	Judako Asaren erregealdiaren bigarren urtean hasi zen Jeroboamen seme Nadab Israelgo errege izaten . Bi urtez izan zen Israelgo errege .
PRED:	Jeroboam son of Nebat began to rule over Israel in the twentieth year of Jeroboam 's reign in Israel . He reigned in Israel two years .
GOLD:	Nadab son of Jeroboam began to rule over Israel in the second year of King Asa 's reign in Judah . He reigned in Israel two years .

ID:	2782
INPUT:	Eta hark erantzun : “ Zoaz orain , Daniel ! Mezu hau isilean gordea eta zigilatua egongo da azken garaia arte .
PRED:	“ Go and tell him , ‘ You are the Messiah , the Messiah , the Messiah , the Messiah , and the time will come . '
GOLD:	But he said , “ Go now , Daniel , for what I have said is kept secret and sealed until the time of the end .

ID:	2783
INPUT:	Joan Bataiatzaileak Mesiasen egintzen berri izan zuen kartzelan , eta bere ikasle batzuk bidali zizkion
PRED:	When John had finished saying these things , he sent some of the Jewish believers to teach them and sent some of them to follow him .
GOLD:	John the Baptist , who was in prison , heard about all the things the Messiah was doing . So he sent his disciples to ask Jesus ,

ID:	2784
INPUT:	Izan ere , lapur , hiltzaile eta adulteriogile izan , gezurretan zin egin , Baali intsentsua erre , zuekin zerikusirik ez duten jainko arrotzen atzetik ibili
PRED:	You must murder and murder . You must not commit adultery by worshiping other gods . You must not commit any other gods or worship other gods .
GOLD:	Do you really think you can steal , murder , commit adultery , lie , and burn incense to Baal and all those other new gods of yours ,

ID:	2785
INPUT:	Janari-arazo batengatik , ez hondatu Jainkoaren egintza . Janari guztiak garbiak dira ; hala ere , ez dago ongi besteak galbidean jarriz zerbait jatea .
PRED:	I am about to destroy the homes of the wicked , but God has not turned away from all the things he has done . But there is no food to eat .
GOLD:	Do n't tear apart the work of God over what you eat . Remember , all foods are acceptable , but it is wrong to eat something if it makes another person stumble .

ID:	2786
INPUT:	Jesusek inori ez adierazteko agindu zion eta esan : — Zoaz , azaldu apaizarengana eta eskaini garbikuntzaren ordainez Moisesek agindutakoa , ezaugarri izan dezaten .
PRED:	Jesus told them , “ Go back and tell anyone what you have done . ” So Jesus told them , “ Go to the priest and make you ceremonially clean . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus instructed him not to tell anyone what had happened . He said , “ Go to the priest and let him examine you . Take along the offering required in the law of Moses for those who have been healed of leprosy . This will be a public testimony that you have been cleansed . ”

ID:	2787
INPUT:	Ea Jaunari erregutzen dioten eta itzultzen diren beren jokabide gaiztotik , handia baita herri honen aurka Jaunak agertu duen haserre-sumina » .
PRED:	The Lord will return to his people and return to their wicked ways , for he will pour out their anger against them . ”
GOLD:	Perhaps even yet they will turn from their evil ways and ask the Lord 's forgiveness before it is too late . For the Lord has threatened them with his terrible anger . ”

ID:	2788
INPUT:	Damu zaitez , beraz ; bestela , zuregana joango naiz laster eta horien aurka borroka egingo dut neure ahoko ezpataz .
PRED:	So I will send you into the fortified city , and I will go out to war with my sword .
GOLD:	Repent of your sin , or I will come to you suddenly and fight against them with the sword of my mouth .

ID:	2789
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Guztiz suntsituko zaitudanean , herrialde osoa poztuko da .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The people of Israel will be destroyed , and they will rejoice in peace .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The whole world will rejoice when I make you desolate .

ID:	2790
INPUT:	Jaunak gaixotasun guztiak urrunduko ditu zuengandik ; ez dizkizue bidaliko ongi ezagutzen dituzuen Egiptoko izurri ikaragarriak , baizik eta gorrotoa dizuetenei bidaliko dizkie .
PRED:	The Lord will destroy all your sick people , but you will not find out of the land of Egypt , but you will not turn away from the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	And the Lord will protect you from all sickness . He will not let you suffer from the terrible diseases you knew in Egypt , but he will inflict them on all your enemies !

ID:	2791
INPUT:	Jesusek Gerasako deabruduna sendatu
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Man
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Man

ID:	2792
INPUT:	Jaunak Moisesi agindutakoa agindu zion Moisesek Josueri , eta honek bete ; ez zuen bete gabe utzi Jaunak Moisesi agindutako ezer ere .
PRED:	So Moses did what the Lord had commanded Moses , and Moses did not obey all these commands , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	As the Lord had commanded his servant Moses , so Moses commanded Joshua . And Joshua did as he was told , carefully obeying all the commands that the Lord had given to Moses .

ID:	2793
INPUT:	Uztaroan , bostetik bat faraoiari emango diozue eta beste laurak zuentzat izango dituzue , ereiteko eta zeuek , zeuen haurrak eta etxekoak mantentzeko .
PRED:	On the seventh day you will give this message to Pharaoh , and you will be given to your children and your children , and your children will be your home .
GOLD:	Then when you harvest it , one-fifth of your crop will belong to Pharaoh . You may keep the remaining four-fifths as seed for your fields and as food for you , your households , and your little ones . ”

ID:	2794
INPUT:	« Entzun , Israel , ene herri , zure kontra egingo dudan aitorpena . Neu naiz Jainkoa , zure Jainkoa !
PRED:	“ Listen to me , O people of Israel , I am your God . I am the God of your people , and I am your God .
GOLD:	“ O my people , listen as I speak.Here are my charges against you , O Israel : I am God , your God !

ID:	2795
INPUT:	Baratzeko hesia bezala bota ditu haren harresiak , haren batzarlekua xehatu . Jaiegunak eta larunbata ahaztarazi ditu Jaunak Sionen . Errege-apaizak gaitzetsi ditu haserrearen haserrez .
PRED:	The Lord has cut down the walls of the city , and he has broken down his fierce fury on the Sabbath day of the Lord 's anger . He has broken the anger of the Lord 's anger .
GOLD:	He has broken down his Templeas though it were merely a garden shelter.The Lord has blotted out all memoryof the holy festivals and Sabbath days.Kings and priests fall togetherbefore his fierce anger .

ID:	2796
INPUT:	Honen ondoren , Absalomek guda-gurdi bat , zaldiak eta aurretik joango zitzaizkion berrogeita hamar gizon eskuratu zituen .
PRED:	Abraham had a huge chariots coming out of the chariots and horses , and he stationed some men with him .
GOLD:	After this , Absalom bought a chariot and horses , and he hired fifty bodyguards to run ahead of him .

ID:	2797
INPUT:	Batek esan zion : — Adizu , ama eta anai-arrebak dituzu kanpoan , zurekin hitz egin nahian .
PRED:	One of them said , “ Your mother is your brothers and sisters , and your brothers are talking with you . ”
GOLD:	Someone told Jesus , “ Your mother and your brothers are standing outside , and they want to speak to you . ”

ID:	2798
INPUT:	Jende askok jarraituko die beren jokabide biziotsuan , eta , horiek direla eta , gaitzetsia izango da kristau-bidea .
PRED:	Many of the people will live in their lives , and they will live in fellowship with the truth , and they will be Christ .
GOLD:	Many will follow their evil teaching and shameful immorality . And because of these teachers , the way of truth will be slandered .

ID:	2799
INPUT:	Jeroboam hil nahian ibili zen Salomon ; hark , ordea , Egiptora egin zuen ihes , Egiptoko errege Xi<unk> -engana , eta han egon zen , Salomon hil arte .
PRED:	When Jeroboam died , he fled to the land of Egypt , but he fled to Egypt to Egypt , where he fled to Egypt .
GOLD:	Solomon tried to kill Jeroboam , but he fled to King Shishak of Egypt and stayed there until Solomon died .

ID:	2800
INPUT:	Jainko Jaun ahalguztidunak errege-jauregiko arduradun zen Xebna agintariagana bidali ninduen , esatera :
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : I sent me to the palace of the palace ,
GOLD:	This is what the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , said to me : “ Confront Shebna , the palace administrator , and give him this message :

ID:	2801
INPUT:	Ikusi eta entzun duzunaren lekuko izango baitzaitu hark gizon-emakume guztien aurrean .
PRED:	And everyone who heard him will see him , for he will be a man who has heard him .
GOLD:	For you are to be his witness , telling everyone what you have seen and heard .

ID:	2802
INPUT:	begiak erreak ditut zuk hitzemanaren zain : noiz kontsolatuko nauzu ?
PRED:	My eyes are like a passing shadow , and you will comfort me .
GOLD:	My eyes are straining to see your promises come true.When will you comfort me ?

ID:	2803
INPUT:	Horrelako horrek badu nahikoa zuetako gehienek ezarri dioten zigorraz ;
PRED:	That is why the king 's decree was put to death .
GOLD:	Most of you opposed him , and that was punishment enough .

ID:	2804
INPUT:	Lagun-talde handia berekin zuela eta usaingarriz , urre ugariz eta harribitxiz zamaturiko gameluak zekartzala heldu zen Jerusalemera . Salomonengana joanik , buruan zituen arazo guztiez mintzatu zitzaion .
PRED:	She was very beautiful and beautiful , beautiful , beautiful , beautiful , and beautiful jewels . She came to Jerusalem with beautiful jewels . She went to Jerusalem , but she did n't go to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	She arrived in Jerusalem with a large group of attendants and a great caravan of camels loaded with spices , large quantities of gold , and precious jewels . When she met with Solomon , she talked with him about everything she had on her mind .

ID:	2805
INPUT:	eta auzitara eramana ( 21 , 17 — 23 , 35 )
PRED:	Moses and the Israelite army
GOLD:	Paul Speaks to the Crowd

ID:	2806
INPUT:	Zorionekoa zu , Jaunak esan dizuna beteko dela sinetsi duzulako ! »
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who have said , ‘ The Lord will believe you ! ' ”
GOLD:	You are blessed because you believed that the Lord would do what he said . ”

ID:	2807
INPUT:	Orotariko zuhaitzak sorrarazi zituen lurretik , ikusgarriak eta fruitu gozodunak . Baratze erdian bi zuhaitz ernearazi zituen : batak bizia ematen zuen eta besteak dena ezagutzeko ahalmena .
PRED:	He also saw the fruit trees that had been seen by the dream , and he saw two trees that had two trees . He had two trees that had been sent by the dream .
GOLD:	The Lord God made all sorts of trees grow up from the ground — trees that were beautiful and that produced delicious fruit . In the middle of the garden he placed the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil .

ID:	2808
INPUT:	eta mendeku-eskubidea duenak , babes-hiriaren mugetatik kanpo aurkitu eta hiltzen badu , ez du hilketarik egiten .
PRED:	And if someone dies and finds that a person dies in the camp , he will not die . But if he dies , he will not die .
GOLD:	and the avenger finds him outside the city and kills him , it will not be considered murder .

ID:	2809
INPUT:	Erregea ospetsu ikusiko duzu , luze eta zabal lurraldea .
PRED:	You will see the king of the earth , and you will see a vast land .
GOLD:	Your eyes will see the king in all his splendor , and you will see a land that stretches into the distance .

ID:	2810
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaien Hamor : « Sikem nire semea zuen arrebaz maitemindua dago ; emaiozue , arren , emaztetzat .
PRED:	Then he said to his brothers , “ Shechem , the daughter of Shechem , the daughter of Shechem , who loves another man .
GOLD:	Hamor tried to speak with Jacob and his sons . “ My son Shechem is truly in love with your daughter , ” he said . “ Please let him marry her .

ID:	2811
INPUT:	Behin batean , Jesus honela mintzatu zen : « Goresten zaitut , Aita , zeru-lurren Jauna , gauza hauek jakintsu eta ikasiei ezkutatu dizkiezulako eta jende xumeari agertu .
PRED:	One day Jesus said to them , “ Praise the Father , the Father of heaven and earth . Let the earth see the wisdom of the earth , the Lord , who has appeared to you .
GOLD:	At that time Jesus prayed this prayer : “ O Father , Lord of heaven and earth , thank you for hiding these things from those who think themselves wise and clever , and for revealing them to the childlike .

ID:	2812
INPUT:	Handik , kostarik kosta Regiora heldu ginen . Biharamunean hego-haizeak jo zuen eta bi egunetan Potzuolira iritsi ginen .
PRED:	As soon as they arrived , the man arrived at the forest . The next morning passed along the road and went out into the field .
GOLD:	From there we sailed across to Rhegium . A day later a south wind began blowing , so the following day we sailed up the coast to Puteoli .

ID:	2813
INPUT:	Ea , bada ! Eraso diezaiogun gauez ! E<unk> ditzagun horren jauregiak ! »
PRED:	Now get up ! Let 's destroy this very day ! Tell us about this very day ! ”
GOLD:	‘ Well then , let 's attack at nightand destroy her palaces ! ' ”

ID:	2814
INPUT:	Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : « Ahizparen kopa edango duzu , kopa zabal eta sakona , bete-betea . ( Irrigarri eta iseka-gai izango zara ) .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : You will be a great feast for the people of Israel , and give thanks to the Lord your God , Isaac , and Jacob .
GOLD:	“ Yes , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ You will drink from your sister 's cup of terror , a cup that is large and deep.It is filled to the brimwith scorn and derision .

ID:	2815
INPUT:	Gero , Jainkoaren etxea erre , Jerusalemgo harresia bota eta su eman zien jauregiei eta bertako gauza ederrei , dena hondatuz .
PRED:	Then he burned the Temple of God in Jerusalem , and he burned down the walls of Jerusalem and destroyed all the people of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Then his army burned the Temple of God , tore down the walls of Jerusalem , burned all the palaces , and completely destroyed everything of value .

ID:	2816
INPUT:	Beldur naizenean , zuregan dut konfiantza .
PRED:	I am afraid , O Lord , and I will trust in you .
GOLD:	I praise God for what he has promised.I trust in God , so why should I be afraid ? What can mere mortals do to me ?

ID:	2817
INPUT:	« Horregatik , nik , Jainko Jaunak , zin dagit neure biziarengatik , zigortu egingo dudala nirekiko leialtasun-zina mespretxatu eta ituna hautsi duelako .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : As surely as I live , I will break my covenant with them , and they will break my covenant .
GOLD:	“ So this is what the Sovereign Lord says : As surely as I live , I will punish him for breaking my covenant and disregarding the solemn oath he made in my name .

ID:	2818
INPUT:	jende xehealurreko hautsaren kontrazapaltzen dute , eta jende errukarriaren eskubideabaztertzen . Aita-semeakneska bat berarekin dabiltza , nire izen santua laidotuz .
PRED:	Let the people of the land worship other gods — the people of the earth — the kings of the earth — the people of the earth — the Holy One — the holy ones — the most holy ones —
GOLD:	They trample helpless people in the dustand shove the oppressed out of the way.Both father and son sleep with the same woman , corrupting my holy name .

ID:	2819
INPUT:	« Judaren zatiaren ondoren , ekialdeko mugatik Mediterraneo itsasoraino , Jaunarentzat bereizitako zatia egongo da : hamabi kilometro eta erdi izango da luze , leinu bakoitzaren zatia bezalaxe ; erdian santutegia egongo da .
PRED:	“ In the south side of Judah will be given to the east side of the Mediterranean Sea , and it will be 81/3 miles long and 31/3 miles wide , and it will be 81/3 miles long and 31/3 miles wide .
GOLD:	“ South of Judah is the land set aside for a special purpose . It will be 81/3 miles wide and will extend as far east and west as the tribal territories , with the Temple at the center .

ID:	2820
INPUT:	Pilatok galdetu zion : — Egia , zer da egia ? Hori esanik , Pilatok berriro irten eta judu-agintariei esan zien : — Nik ez dut gizon hau kondenatzeko batere arrazoirik aurkitzen .
PRED:	Pilate asked him , “ What is it right ? ” And Pilate demanded , “ I do n't want to release this man to the Jewish leaders . ”
GOLD:	“ What is truth ? ” Pilate asked . Then he went out again to the people and told them , “ He is not guilty of any crime .

ID:	2821
INPUT:	Egin negar isilean , baina ez egin ohiko dolurik ; jarri buruzapia , jantzi sandaliak , ez estali aurpegia eta ez jan hileta-ogirik » .
PRED:	Do n't weep or weep or weep or mourn for the dead . Instead , do n't weep or mourn for the meat , and do n't eat it . ”
GOLD:	Groan silently , but let there be no wailing at her grave . Do not uncover your head or take off your sandals . Do not perform the usual rituals of mourning or accept any food brought to you by consoling friends . ”

ID:	2822
INPUT:	Amondarren erregeak erantzun zien Jefteren mezulariei : « Egiptotik igotzean , nire lurraldean sartu eta Arnon errekatik Jabok erreka eta Jordan ibaia artekoa hartu zidaten israeldarrek . Itzul iezadazu orain bakean lurralde hori » .
PRED:	Then the king of Ammon replied to the king of Ammon , “ Go ahead of you to the land of Canaan , for you have brought us out of the Jordan River . ” So the Israelites returned to the Jordan River .
GOLD:	The king of Ammon answered Jephthah 's messengers , “ When the Israelites came out of Egypt , they stole my land from the Arnon River to the Jabbok River and all the way to the Jordan . Now then , give back the land peaceably . ”

ID:	2823
INPUT:	Kristo niregan bizi dela bezain egia da harrotzeko bide hori inork ere ez didala kenduko Akaia osoan .
PRED:	As Christ lives in Christ , no one can be able to take away his life . No one can snatch them away from the whole community .
GOLD:	As surely as the truth of Christ is in me , no one in all of Greece will ever stop me from boasting about this .

ID:	2824
INPUT:	Neskatxaren nagusiek , beren irabazpidea bukatzen zitzaiela ikustean , Paulori eta Silasi eskua bota eta hiriko plazara eraman zituzten agintariengana ,
PRED:	When the young women saw that Paul was dead , they went to the synagogue and saw that Paul had been arrested and brought him to the town of Shechem and ordered him to bring him back to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Her masters ' hopes of wealth were now shattered , so they grabbed Paul and Silas and dragged them before the authorities at the marketplace .

ID:	2825
INPUT:	Izan ere , barrutik , gizakiaren bihotzetik , ateratzen dira asmo txarrak , lizunkeria , lapurretak , hilketak ,
PRED:	For you are like a human heart , that is hidden from the heart of every kind of sexual immorality , or greed .
GOLD:	For from within , out of a person 's heart , come evil thoughts , sexual immorality , theft , murder ,

ID:	2826
INPUT:	Aurreraturik , hilkutxa ukitu zuen , eta zeramatenak gelditu egin ziren . Orduan , esan zuen : « Gazte , zuri diotsut : Jaiki ! »
PRED:	When the young woman died , she became pregnant and gave birth to her , and she said , “ Stand up , pick up your mat ! ”
GOLD:	Then he walked over to the coffin and touched it , and the bearers stopped . “ Young man , ” he said , “ I tell you , get up . ”

ID:	2827
INPUT:	Jakinduria deika ari da , zuhurtziak oihu egiten du ;
PRED:	Wisdom is wise , but the wise are crowned with fools .
GOLD:	Listen as Wisdom calls out ! Hear as understanding raises her voice !

ID:	2828
INPUT:	Jaunaren espirituak harturik , Samsonek , eskuetan deus ere ez zuen arren , zatikatu egin zuen lehoia , antxumea zatikatu ohi den bezala . Baina ez zien esan gurasoei zer egin zuen .
PRED:	Then Samson took the Spirit of the Lord 's hand with his hand , and he did n't want him to be like a young lion . But he did n't know what he had said . But he did n't know what he had done .
GOLD:	At that moment the Spirit of the Lord came powerfully upon him , and he ripped the lion 's jaws apart with his bare hands . He did it as easily as if it were a young goat . But he did n't tell his father or mother about it .

ID:	2829
INPUT:	beste sail batek Bet-Horonerako bidea hartu zuen , eta hirugarrenak Tzeboim haran gainean dagoen mugarantz jo zuen , basamortu aldera .
PRED:	One day a third of the valley near Beth-peor , along the third of the Jordan Valley , near the third of the Dead Sea .
GOLD:	another went west to Beth-horon , and the third moved toward the border above the valley of Zeboim near the wilderness .

ID:	2830
INPUT:	lehoia , animalien arteko ausartena , inoren aurrean atzera egiten ez duena ;
PRED:	The lion who are like a lion 's roar , but they do n't dare to boast about it .
GOLD:	the lion , king of animals , who wo n't turn aside for anything ,

ID:	2831
INPUT:	Ez zaitez elkartu zurruteroekin , ezta tripazainekin ibili ere ;
PRED:	Do n't let them deceive you , and do not deceive you with them .
GOLD:	Do not carouse with drunkardsor feast with gluttons ,

ID:	2832
INPUT:	Eta nire mihiak zure justizia iragarriko du , egunero zu goratuko !
PRED:	I will praise you , O Lord , for you have rejected me .
GOLD:	Then I will proclaim your justice , and I will praise you all day long .

ID:	2833
INPUT:	« Ez duzu sexu-harremanik izango zeure aitaren arrebarekin : zure aitaren odol berekoa da .
PRED:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your father 's sister , for your father is your father 's blood .
GOLD:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your father 's sister , for she is your father 's close relative .

ID:	2834
INPUT:	Ikuskari ikaragarria
PRED:	Vision of a Vision
GOLD:	Jeremiah 's Vision of Coming Disaster

ID:	2835
INPUT:	Brontzezko aldarea ere eginarazi zuen Salomonek ; hamar metro zen luze-zabal eta bost metro gora .
PRED:	Solomon also made a bronze bronze grating for the bronze altar , 30 feet wide , and 41/2 feet high .
GOLD:	Solomon also made a bronze altar 30 feet long , 30 feet wide , and 15 feet high .

ID:	2836
INPUT:	Sionek , eskuak otoitzean luzatu arren , ez du nork kontsolaturik . Jaunak eraginik , auzoko herriak etsai bihurtu zaizkio Israeli . Haien artean higuingarri bihurtu da Jerusalem .
PRED:	“ O Jerusalem , no one will comfort them ; no one will comfort them , ” says the Lord . “ The people of Israel have sinned against their enemies , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Jerusalem reaches out for help , but no one comforts her.Regarding his people Israel , the Lord has said , “ Let their neighbors be their enemies ! Let them be thrown away like a filthy rag ! ”

ID:	2837
INPUT:	Jaunarekin elkartzen dena , berriz , berarekin espiritu bat bera egiten da .
PRED:	But the Lord is with the Spirit , and he lives with the Spirit of the Lord .
GOLD:	But the person who is joined to the Lord is one spirit with him .

ID:	2838
INPUT:	Emazteak semea izan zuen eta Moisesek Gerxom — hau da , « Etorkin hemen » — eman zion izen , esanez : « Etorkin bilakatu naiz lurralde arrotzean » .
PRED:	Moses named the son of Isaac , and he named him the son of Isaac . “ I have come with you , ” he said , “ I have come with you . ”
GOLD:	Later she gave birth to a son , and Moses named him Gershom , for he explained , “ I have been a foreigner in a foreign land . ”

ID:	2839
INPUT:	Haren erregealdi<unk> da salbatua izango da , Israel seguru biziko . “ Jauna gure salbamena ” emango diote izen » .
PRED:	The king of Israel will be saved , and the kingdom of Israel will be saved , and the Lord will give us victory over Israel . ”
GOLD:	And this will be his name : ‘ The Lord Is Our Righteousness . 'In that day Judah will be saved , and Israel will live in safety .

ID:	2840
INPUT:	Eta bihotz-barrua ezagutzen duen Jainkoak onartzen dituela azaldu du , haiei ere guri bezala Espiritu Santua emanez .
PRED:	And anyone who believes in God 's hearts will be forgiven by the Holy Spirit , just as the Holy Spirit gives us the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	God knows people 's hearts , and he confirmed that he accepts Gentiles by giving them the Holy Spirit , just as he did to us .

ID:	2841
INPUT:	Bet-Xemexeko jendea garia igitatzen ari zen haranean ; begiak jaso eta kutxa ikustean , biziki poztu ziren .
PRED:	When the men of Beth-shemesh , they saw the town of Beth-shemesh , and the Ark was filled with joy .
GOLD:	The people of Beth-shemesh were harvesting wheat in the valley , and when they saw the Ark , they were overjoyed !

ID:	2842
INPUT:	zuk eman zenion erregeari garaipena , zuk askatu zenuen David , zeure zerbitzaria .
PRED:	You gave me victory over your servant David , and you rescued me from your servant David .
GOLD:	For you grant victory to kings ! You rescued your servant David from the fatal sword .

ID:	2843
INPUT:	Erne dira zelaietan loreak , heldu da kanturako garaia , entzun daiteke gure zelaietan usapalen urruma .
PRED:	In the same way , my people will go up to the camp , and they will hear the sound of the alarm in the sky .
GOLD:	The flowers are springing up , the season of singing birds has come , and the cooing of turtledoves fills the air .

ID:	2844
INPUT:	Jose bere aita ehorztera joan zen . Harekin batera joan ziren faraoiaren funtzionario guztiak , jauregiko eta Egipto osoko handiki guztiak ;
PRED:	So Joseph went to Egypt with his father , Joseph , and all his officials went to Egypt with all his officials and all the people of Egypt .
GOLD:	So Joseph went up to bury his father . He was accompanied by all of Pharaoh 's officials , all the senior members of Pharaoh 's household , and all the senior officers of Egypt .

ID:	2845
INPUT:	Refatarren ondorengoetarikoa zen Ixbi-Benobek David hilko zuela esan zuen ; guda-jantzi berria zeraman ; lantzaren punta hiru kilo baino gehiago zen .
PRED:	When Joab died , he was buried with Ishbosheth 's family , had been killed by the soldiers who had been killed by three groups .
GOLD:	Ishbi-benob was a descendant of the giants ; his bronze spearhead weighed more than seven pounds , and he was armed with a new sword . He had cornered David and was about to kill him .

ID:	2846
INPUT:	Orduan , Davidek esan zien Abixairi eta bere zerbitzari guztiei : — Nire erraietatik ateratako semea ni hil nahian badabil , ez da harritzekoa benjamindar hori horrela ari izatea . Utziozue madarika nazan , Jaunak aginduko baitzion hori .
PRED:	Then David said to Joab and all his servants , “ You must kill my son , for I am going to kill the Lord 's son . ” So the Lord did not kill him .
GOLD:	Then David said to Abishai and to all his servants , “ My own son is trying to kill me . Does n't this relative of Saul have even more reason to do so ? Leave him alone and let him curse , for the Lord has told him to do it .

ID:	2847
INPUT:	Betetzen ditut zure lege eta xedapenak : begi aurrean dituzu nire ibilbide guztiak .
PRED:	I will obey your laws , and all your laws are my laws .
GOLD:	Yes , I obey your commandments and lawsbecause you know everything I do .

ID:	2848
INPUT:	Bizia duen Aitak bidali ninduen eta hari esker dut nik bizia ; halaxe , ni jaten nauenak ere niri esker izango du bizia .
PRED:	I sent my Father and the Father who sent me , and he will give me eternal life . He will have eternal life , and he will have eternal life .
GOLD:	I live because of the living Father who sent me ; in the same way , anyone who feeds on me will live because of me .

ID:	2849
INPUT:	ez zaitezen haien jokabideetara ohitueta zeure bizia arriskuan jarri .
PRED:	Do n't lose your lives , and do n't lose your lives .
GOLD:	or you will learn to be like themand endanger your soul .

ID:	2850
INPUT:	Nobeko apaizak hilarazi Saulek
PRED:	Saul Defeats the priest
GOLD:	The Slaughter of the Priests

ID:	2851
INPUT:	Zeuk zerikusirik ez zenuela esan arren , adi dago kontzientziak aztertzen dituena , badaki zuri begira dagoenak : nori bere egintzen arabera ordaintzen dio hark .
PRED:	You know how much I have told you , ‘ You are careful to pay attention to what you have done . If you do , you must pay attention to what you have done . '
GOLD:	Do n't excuse yourself by saying , “ Look , we did n't know . ” For God understands all hearts , and he sees you.He who guards your soul knows you knew.He will repay all people as their actions deserve .

ID:	2852
INPUT:	Honek esan zien : — Zein da zuen lanbidea ? Haiek erantzun : — Gu eta gure gurasoak artzain izan gara betidanik .
PRED:	“ What is your flock ? ” he asked . “ We are our ancestors , ” they replied . “ We are our ancestors , and we are our ancestors . ”
GOLD:	And Pharaoh asked the brothers , “ What is your occupation ? ” They replied , “ We , your servants , are shepherds , just like our ancestors .

ID:	2853
INPUT:	Egipton izu-ikaraz ikusi zenituzten izurri guztiak etorriko zaizkizue gainera eta zuen artean zabalduko .
PRED:	All the nations of Egypt will see that I have seen you , and you will spread out the face of the earth .
GOLD:	He will afflict you with all the diseases of Egypt that you feared so much , and you will have no relief .

ID:	2854
INPUT:	Ea zuetariko zeinek aurpegiratzen didan bekaturik ! Baina egia badiot , zergatik ez didazue sinesten ?
PRED:	“ But what do you think about me ? But if you do n't believe me , I do n't believe him ? ”
GOLD:	Which of you can truthfully accuse me of sin ? And since I am telling you the truth , why do n't you believe me ?

ID:	2855
INPUT:	Eta , larriak harturik , oraindik lehiatsuago egiten zuen otoitz . Izerdia tantaka zerion lurrera , odola bezain lodi .
PRED:	Then the poor widow came out of the town , and he prayed to the Lord , “ Be like the grass of the earth ! ”
GOLD:	He prayed more fervently , and he was in such agony of spirit that his sweat fell to the ground like great drops of blood .

ID:	2856
INPUT:	Nik ez bainekien auzi hura nondik nora eraman , Jerusalemera joan nahi al zuen galdetu nion , han epai zezaten .
PRED:	But I did n't want him to go to Jerusalem , where he tried to go to Jerusalem and meet him there .
GOLD:	I was at a loss to know how to investigate these things , so I asked him whether he would be willing to stand trial on these charges in Jerusalem .

ID:	2857
INPUT:	Horregatik , beharrezkoa iruditu zait , ni heldu aurretik anaia horiei zuengana joateko eskatzea , zuek agindutako emaitza prestaturik eduki dezaten . Prest egongo delarik , eskuzabaltasunaren adierazgarri izango da , eta ez zimurkeriaz egindako emaitza .
PRED:	That is why I am going to look favorably on you , and I will bring you back to you . If you do n't want to go , you will be able to pay attention to what you have done , you will have done .
GOLD:	So I thought I should send these brothers ahead of me to make sure the gift you promised is ready . But I want it to be a willing gift , not one given grudgingly .

ID:	2858
INPUT:	Baina guardiek , joan zirenean , ez zituzten aurkitu , eta berri ematera itzuli ziren :
PRED:	But when they returned to the town , they returned to the town and told them ,
GOLD:	But when the Temple guards went to the jail , the men were gone . So they returned to the council and reported ,

ID:	2859
INPUT:	Jaunaren hitzaHadrak lurraldera dator , eta Damaskon gelditzen da ; Jaunarena baita Siriako hiriburua , Israelgo leinuak bezala ;
PRED:	The people of Judah will be returning to this land of Damascus , and it will be found in battle , just as the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	This is the message from the Lord against the land of Aram and the city of Damascus , for the eyes of humanity , including all the tribes of Israel , are on the Lord .

ID:	2860
INPUT:	Jainko handi eta santua naizela agertuko dut eta nazio askok aitortuko naute . Orduan jakingo dute ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	And many nations will know that I am the Lord , and many will know me . Then they will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	In this way , I will show my greatness and holiness , and I will make myself known to all the nations of the world . Then they will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	2861
INPUT:	Zergatik izutzen nauzu eta erasotzen ? Ez naiz airean doan hosto eta lasto iharra baizik .
PRED:	Why do you look for me ? Why do n't I tell you the dream ? I am like a tree in the garden ?
GOLD:	Would you terrify a leaf blown by the wind ? Would you chase dry straw ?

ID:	2862
INPUT:	« Nire herria desbideratu dute “ Bakea ! ” esanez , bake-arrastorik ez zegoenean ; nire herriak harresi pitzatua eraikitzen zuen bitartean , hauek kareorez estaltzen zuten .
PRED:	“ You have led my people to commit adultery , saying , ‘ You are my people , but you did n't know where they were scattered by the Spirit . '
GOLD:	“ This will happen because these evil prophets deceive my people by saying , ‘ All is peaceful ' when there is no peace at all ! It 's as if the people have built a flimsy wall , and these prophets are trying to reinforce it by covering it with whitewash !

ID:	2863
INPUT:	Bueltaka eta balantzaka , mozkorraren antzera , beren trebetasun guztia alferrik zutela .
PRED:	You are like a crown of blue , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	They reeled and staggered like drunkardsand were at their wits ' end .

ID:	2864
INPUT:	Apaizak , errituzko keinua eginez aurkeztuko dio Jaunari , atseginez onar dezan . Larunbat biharamunean aurkeztuko du .
PRED:	Then the priest will present the oil to the Lord as a special offering to the Lord . He must present it to the Lord as a special offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	On the day after the Sabbath , the priest will lift it up before the Lord so it may be accepted on your behalf .

ID:	2865
INPUT:	« Irakurri didate argi eta garbi zuek bidali didazuen gutuna .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : You must read to me and understand what he wrote .
GOLD:	“ The letter you sent has been translated and read to me .

ID:	2866
INPUT:	Salomonen zerbitzarien ondorengoak : Sotai , Hasoferet eta Perudaren ondorengoak ;
PRED:	These were the descendants of Solomon who returned from exile : The descendants of the following towns of exile : The descendants of King Solomon )
GOLD:	The descendants of these servants of King Solomon returned from exile : Sotai , Hassophereth , Peruda ,

ID:	2867
INPUT:	Haren mezua onartzen duenarengan , berriz , Jainkoaren maitasuna bere betera iritsi da : horrela dakigu berarekin bat eginik gaudena .
PRED:	But anyone who believes in him is good in God 's love , who lives in God 's love is working with him .
GOLD:	But those who obey God 's word truly show how completely they love him . That is how we know we are living in him .

ID:	2868
INPUT:	Goratua zu , Jauna , onik atera bainauzu ! Nire etsaiei ez diezu nire lepotik pozten utzi .
PRED:	Praise the Lord , for he is my God , for you have refused to let my enemies gloat over me .
GOLD:	O Lord my God , I cried to you for help , and you restored my health .

ID:	2869
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak agindu zion Moisesi : « Altxa eskua zerurantz , Egipto osoan kazkabarra eror dadin gizaki , abere eta landareen gainera » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Get out of the land of Egypt , and bring rain on the ground . Let the rain fall on the ground , and bring it to the ground . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Lift your hand toward the sky so hail may fall on the people , the livestock , and all the plants throughout the land of Egypt . ”

ID:	2870
INPUT:	Gero , menditik jaitsi eta kutxan sartu nituen , eta han gelditu ziren , Jaunak agindu bezala .
PRED:	Then I took the Ark and placed it on the mountain , just as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	Then I turned and came down the mountain and placed the tablets in the Ark of the Covenant , which I had made , just as the Lord commanded me . And the tablets are still there in the Ark . ”

ID:	2871
INPUT:	Izan ere , honela dio Jaunak Judako erregearen jauregiaz : « Galaad lurraldeaeta Libanoko tontorra bezain ederbazara ere niretzat , basamortu , bizilagunik gabeko hiriaren antzeko , bihurtuko zaitut dudarik gabe .
PRED:	For this is what the Lord says : “ As surely as you live in the land of Gilead , you will live in the fields of Gilead , as well as you live in the wilderness of Gilead .
GOLD:	Now this is what the Lord says concerning Judah 's royal palace : “ I love you as much as fruitful Gileadand the green forests of Lebanon.But I will turn you into a desert , with no one living within your walls .

ID:	2872
INPUT:	Oparitzat abere itsua eskaintzea ez al dago gaizki ? Eta abere herrena edo gaixoa eskaintzea ez al dago gaizki ? Eskaini , bada , horiek zeuen gobernariari , ea atsegin dituen edota aurpegi alaia jartzen dizuen . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak .
PRED:	Do n't you sacrifice a sacrifice to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies ? Should I bring an animal on the Sabbath ? Should I sacrifice a sacrifice to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken !
GOLD:	When you give blind animals as sacrifices , is n't that wrong ? And is n't it wrong to offer animals that are crippled and diseased ? Try giving gifts like that to your governor , and see how pleased he is ! ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	2873
INPUT:	« Ez daukat nik » dio Ur Leizeak , « Ez dago nirekin » esaten du Ozeanoak .
PRED:	“ No , ” says the Lord , “ I am not the one who speaks against me . ”
GOLD:	‘ It is not here , ' says the ocean . ‘ Nor is it here , ' says the sea .

ID:	2874
INPUT:	« Nork itxi zizkion ateak itsasoari , amaren sabeletik indarrez irten zenean ?
PRED:	“ Who gave birth to a little , so who could n't be born from the sea ?
GOLD:	“ Who kept the sea inside its boundariesas it burst from the womb ,

ID:	2875
INPUT:	SARRERA ( 1 , <unk> )
PRED:	Jesus Is God 's Message
GOLD:	God Offers Comfort to All

ID:	2876
INPUT:	Jatorrak , ostera , asmo jatorrak , eta egintzak ere jatorrak .
PRED:	When he came , he revealed his mysterious plan to understand what he had done .
GOLD:	But generous people plan to do what is generous , and they stand firm in their generosity .

ID:	2877
INPUT:	Beraz , ohikune hau eskumuturrean edo bekokian ipintzen diren seinaleen gisako izango duzue , Jaunak ahalmen handiz Egiptotik atera zaituztela oroitarazteko » .
PRED:	That is why the Lord will hand you over to me in the place you are set aside for the Lord your God , who will drive you out of the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	This ceremony will be like a mark branded on your hand or your forehead . It is a reminder that the power of the Lord 's mighty hand brought us out of Egypt . ”

ID:	2878
INPUT:	Eramango ditut , ostera , zuen seme-alabak , gatibu eroriko zirela zeniotenak , zuek gutxietsi duzuen lurraldera , hartaz gozatzeko .
PRED:	I will give you the glory of your sons and daughters , your daughters , and your daughters will be carried away to your land .
GOLD:	“ ‘ You said your children would be carried off as plunder . Well , I will bring them safely into the land , and they will enjoy what you have despised .

ID:	2879
INPUT:	Zer da basamortuan gora datorren hori ? Intsentsu , mirra eta beste hainbat usaingarrizkoke-zutabea dirudi .
PRED:	What are you looking for ? Why are you looking for burning incense ? It 's all fragrant incense for you ?
GOLD:	Who is this sweeping in from the wildernesslike a cloud of smoke ? Who is it , fragrant with myrrh and frankincenseand every kind of spice ?

ID:	2880
INPUT:	eta gazteek emana ziotenari jarraiki . Hau esan zion jendeari : « Gure aitak uztarri astuna ezarri zizuela ? Astunagoa ezarriko dizuet nik ! Gure aitak larruzko zartailuz zigorkatzen zintuztela ? Burdinazko muturdunez zigorkatuko zaituztet nik ! »
PRED:	Then the younger men got up and said to the crowd , “ My father , my father , have a heavy yoke of iron , so I could beat you with whips , but I would beat you with scorpions ! ”
GOLD:	and followed the counsel of his younger advisers . He told the people , “ My father laid heavy burdens on you , but I 'm going to make them even heavier ! My father beat you with whips , but I will beat you with scorpions ! ”

ID:	2881
INPUT:	Hark , orduan , eskua jaso eta zin egin zuenbasamortuan hilko zituela ,
PRED:	But he did n't know that he was dead , and he would not die in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Therefore , he solemnly sworethat he would kill them in the wilderness ,

ID:	2882
INPUT:	Abere , zeruko hegazti eta lurrean narraska dabiltzan bizidun guztiei , berriz , belar hezea ematen diet janari » . Eta hala izan zen .
PRED:	I will give you small animals that scurry along the ground and wild animals that scurry along the ground and wild animals that scurry along the ground . ”
GOLD:	And I have given every green plant as food for all the wild animals , the birds in the sky , and the small animals that scurry along the ground — everything that has life . ” And that is what happened .

ID:	2883
INPUT:	Urruti dago gaiztoengandik zure salbazioa , ez baitute jotzen zure arauetara .
PRED:	The wicked are far away from the wicked , for they refuse to obey your decrees .
GOLD:	The wicked are far from rescue , for they do not bother with your decrees .

ID:	2884
INPUT:	Baina Liburu Santuak ez du hori harengatik bakarrik esaten ,
PRED:	But the Scriptures say , “ No one can ever be saved . ”
GOLD:	And when God counted him as righteous , it was n't just for Abraham 's benefit . It was recorded

ID:	2885
INPUT:	Zuzen dena izan duzu maite eta oker dena gorroto ; horregatik , Jainkoak , zeure Jainkoak , gantzutu zaitu , jai-giro pozgarrian , lagunen artean aukeraturik .
PRED:	You love the truth , and you love the truth . For God has given you great joy in his presence , and you have been very happy .
GOLD:	You love justice and hate evil.Therefore , O God , your God has anointed you , pouring out the oil of joy on you more than on anyone else . ”

ID:	2886
INPUT:	Jonatanek ihardetsi zion bere aita Sauli : — Zergatik du hil beharra ? Zer egin du , bada ?
PRED:	Jonathan replied , “ Why did Saul kill Saul ? Why did he kill him ? Why did he kill him ? ”
GOLD:	“ But why should he be put to death ? ” Jonathan asked his father . “ What has he done ? ”

ID:	2887
INPUT:	Aldatu zuen Saulek bere itxura beste soineko batzuk jantziz eta bi gizonekin joan zen . Gauez emakumeagana heldu eta esan zion Saulek : — Igar iezadazu etorkizuna , hilei dei eginez . Agerrarazi esango dizudan hildakoa .
PRED:	One day Saul went to the other men with Saul 's clothes , and he went into the night with two women and said , “ Let me go to the dead . ” So Saul said , “ Let 's kill me . ”
GOLD:	So Saul disguised himself by wearing ordinary clothing instead of his royal robes . Then he went to the woman 's home at night , accompanied by two of his men . “ I have to talk to a man who has died , ” he said . “ Will you call up his spirit for me ? ”

ID:	2888
INPUT:	Kiriataim , Sibma eta Tzeret-Xahar , haranaren gainaldean dagoen mendixkan ;
PRED:	on Dibon and Beth-gamul , in the hill country of Debir ( which means “ near Mount Nebo . )
GOLD:	Kiriathaim , Sibmah , Zereth-shahar on the hill above the valley ,

ID:	2889
INPUT:	Mendialdeko , Xefela lautadako eta Negeveko hirietan , Benjaminen herrialdean , Jerusalemgo inguruetan eta Judako hirietan ikusiko dira oraindik artzainak ardiak zenbatzen . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	In the hill country of Judah and Jerusalem , in the hill country of Judah , Benjamin , will see that the towns of Judah and Judah will see the towns of Judah and Judah , says the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Once again shepherds will count their flocks in the towns of the hill country , the foothills of Judah , the Negev , the land of Benjamin , the vicinity of Jerusalem , and all the towns of Judah . I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	2890
INPUT:	Hogeita bost urte zituen errege izaten hastean , eta hamasei urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen . Haren amak Jeruxa zuen izena eta Tzadoken alaba zen .
PRED:	He was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years . His mother was Jecoliah from Jerusalem .
GOLD:	He was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years . His mother was Jerusha , the daughter of Zadok .

ID:	2891
INPUT:	Ertzak lotzeko xingola efodari atxikia egongo da , eta urrez , purpura more , gorri eta gorriminez eta liho-hari bihurrituz egina .
PRED:	The decorative sash of the ephod must be made of finely woven linen and embroidered it with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	The decorative sash will be made of the same materials : finely woven linen embroidered with gold and with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .

ID:	2892
INPUT:	Legamia gabeko Ogien Jaiko lehen egunean , ikasleak hurbildu ziren Jesusengana , galdetuz : — Non egin behar ditugu Pazko-afarirako prestaketak ?
PRED:	On the first day the Festival of Unleavened Bread , the disciples came to Jesus and asked , “ Where are you going to prepare our Passover meal ? ”
GOLD:	On the first day of the Festival of Unleavened Bread , the disciples came to Jesus and asked , “ Where do you want us to prepare the Passover meal for you ? ”

ID:	2893
INPUT:	Eta orain Jainkoaren eskuetan eta haren onginahizko mezuaren babesean uzten zaituztet ; hark badu ahalmena eliz elkartea eraikitzeko eta sagaratu guztiei bere ondarea emateko .
PRED:	And now I am sending you into the hands of God , and he has given you the ability to give you all the churches . He has given you everything he promised , and he has given you his inheritance .
GOLD:	“ And now I entrust you to God and the message of his grace that is able to build you up and give you an inheritance with all those he has set apart for himself .

ID:	2894
INPUT:	ur-putzu honen ondoan geldituko naiz ; eta neskatxaren bat ura ateratzera datorrenean , hau esango diot : “ Emadazu , arren , ur pixka bat zeure pegarretik ” .
PRED:	I will stay away from the pool of water , and I will pour out the water of water , and I will pour out the water of the Holy Place . '
GOLD:	See , I am standing here beside this spring . This is my request . When a young woman comes to draw water , I will say to her , “ Please give me a little drink of water from your jug . ”

ID:	2895
INPUT:	eskaini elkartasun-opariak ere eta jan bertan , Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren aurrean festa eginez .
PRED:	You may eat the food offered to the Lord your God , and you must celebrate the presence of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Also sacrifice peace offerings on it , and celebrate by feasting there before the Lord your God .

ID:	2896
INPUT:	hau esatean : « Zuei dizuet emango Kanaan lurraldea , hauxe da zuen ondare-zatia » .
PRED:	“ I will give this land to you in Canaan , which I am giving you as your possession . ”
GOLD:	“ I will give you the land of Canaanas your special possession . ”

ID:	2897
INPUT:	Israelgo erregea honela mintzatu zitzaion Josafati : — Nik jantziak aldatuko ditut borroka hasteko ; zuk jarraitu zeure errege-jantziekin . Hala , Israelgo erregea jantziz aldatu zenean , borrokara abiatu ziren .
PRED:	Then the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat , “ I will put your clothes in burlap , and I will put your clothes in burlap to battle . ” So the king of Israel tore their clothes in burlap .
GOLD:	The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat , “ As we go into battle , I will disguise myself so no one will recognize me , but you wear your royal robes . ” So the king of Israel disguised himself , and they went into battle .

ID:	2898
INPUT:	Egin poz-oihu Jaunari , zintzook ! Zuzenek behar dute Jainkoa goretsi .
PRED:	Let the godly rejoice in the presence of the Lord your God !
GOLD:	Let the godly sing for joy to the Lord ; it is fitting for the pure to praise him .

ID:	2899
INPUT:	eta atxilotu egin zituen guardiaburuaren etxeko kartzelan ezarriz , Jose preso zegoen tokian hain zuzen .
PRED:	He put them in charge of the captain of the guard , and he put Joseph in charge of Joseph 's palace .
GOLD:	and he put them in the prison where Joseph was , in the palace of the captain of the guard .

ID:	2900
INPUT:	Eta ikusiko dutenazioek zure salbamena , errege guztiek zure ospea . Izen berria emango dizute , Jaunak berak ezarria .
PRED:	And you will see the salvation of your salvation , and you will be praised by the Lord .
GOLD:	The nations will see your righteousness.World leaders will be blinded by your glory.And you will be given a new nameby the Lord 's own mouth .

ID:	2901
INPUT:	Honetan , Paulori ezpainetako bat emateko agindu zien Ananias apaiz nagusiak bere laguntzaileei .
PRED:	In this way , Paul ordered a high priest to be appointed by the high priest to the high priest .
GOLD:	Instantly Ananias the high priest commanded those close to Paul to slap him on the mouth .

ID:	2902
INPUT:	Orduan , apostoluak Jerusalemera itzuli ziren Oliamenditik — mendi hau Jerusalemdik hurbil dago , kilometro batera eskas — .
PRED:	Then the apostles returned to Jerusalem to Jerusalem to Jerusalem , where they returned to Jerusalem to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Then the apostles returned to Jerusalem from the Mount of Olives , a distance of half a mile .

ID:	2903
INPUT:	Beraiek hitz egin dute gure eliz elkartearen aurrean zure harrera onaz . Ongi egingo duzu biderako behar dutena Jainkoari berari bezala ematen badiezu .
PRED:	Then you will prophesy against the churches in your presence , just as you do . Then you will know that God is giving you his gift .
GOLD:	They have told the church here of your loving friendship . Please continue providing for such teachers in a manner that pleases God .

ID:	2904
INPUT:	Liburu Santuak dioen bezala : Hona nik Sionen behaztopa-harria ipini , erorarazteko harkaitza . Baina harengan sinesten duenak ez du huts egingo .
PRED:	As the Scriptures say , “ As surely as the Scriptures say , ‘ It is a rock that makes a rock , but it will never be saved . '
GOLD:	God warned them of this in the Scriptures when he said , “ I am placing a stone in Jerusalem that makes people stumble , a rock that makes them fall.But anyone who trusts in himwill never be disgraced . ”

ID:	2905
INPUT:	Behin batean , larunbatez , fariseu-buruetako baten etxera joan zen Jesus bazkaltzera , eta fariseuak zelatan zegozkion .
PRED:	One Sabbath day some Pharisees went to the home of the synagogue , and he went home to meet Jesus .
GOLD:	One Sabbath day Jesus went to eat dinner in the home of a leader of the Pharisees , and the people were watching him closely .

ID:	2906
INPUT:	Zergatik ekarri duzue Jaunaren elkartea basamortu honetara ? Geu eta gure abereak hil nahi ote gaituzue ?
PRED:	Why have you given the whole community of the Lord ? Why should you bring us into the wilderness ? Why should you treat our brothers and sisters ? ”
GOLD:	Why have you brought the congregation of the Lord 's people into this wilderness to die , along with all our livestock ?

ID:	2907
INPUT:	ezker-eskuin haziko baitzara ; zure ondorengoeknazio asko berenganatuko dituzteeta orain hondaturik daudenhirietan biziko dira .
PRED:	Your descendants will go to the north of the north , and your descendants will live there in the cities of refuge .
GOLD:	For you will soon be bursting at the seams.Your descendants will occupy other nationsand resettle the ruined cities .

ID:	2908
INPUT:	Orduan , Nataniasen seme Jehudi bidali zuten Barukengana — Natanias , Xelemiasen seme eta Kuxiren biloba zen — , herriaren aurrean irakurritako erroiluarekin etortzeko esatera . Erroilua hartu eta haien aurrean aurkeztu zenean ,
PRED:	Then Jeremiah sent Nathan son of Nathan the prophet from the land of Shemaiah , Shemaiah , and grandson of Nathan the prophet from the land of Judah . He went to the gate of the palace gate , and he went to the gate of the palace .
GOLD:	the officials sent Jehudi son of Nethaniah , grandson of Shelemiah and great-grandson of Cushi , to ask Baruch to come and read the messages to them , too . So Baruch took the scroll and went to them .

ID:	2909
INPUT:	Gaiztoren batek hil egin behar duela esaten badut , eta bere jokabidea alda dezan zuk ez baduzu ohartarazten , hil egingo da bere erruarengatik , baina zuri eskatuko dizut haren heriotzaren kontu .
PRED:	But if I warn them that they would die , then they will die and die . But if you do n't repent of their sins , I will give you the guilt of the dead . ”
GOLD:	If I announce that some wicked people are sure to die and you fail to tell them to change their ways , then they will die in their sins , and I will hold you responsible for their deaths .

ID:	2910
INPUT:	Bide-ertzean eserita zeuden bi itsu , Jesus igarotzen ari zela entzunik , oihuka hasi ziren : — Erruki zakizkigu , Jauna , Daviden Semea !
PRED:	As Jesus was walking along the road , two disciples were blind and began to hear Jesus , “ Son of David , have mercy on us ! ” they shouted .
GOLD:	Two blind men were sitting beside the road . When they heard that Jesus was coming that way , they began shouting , “ Lord , Son of David , have mercy on us ! ”

ID:	2911
INPUT:	Zu izan zaitut euskarri amaren sabeletik , zuk atera nauzu amaren erraietatik . Zuri etengabe nire gorespena !
PRED:	For you have rescued me from your womb , and you have rescued me from your throne .
GOLD:	Yes , you have been with me from birth ; from my mother 's womb you have cared for me.No wonder I am always praising you !

ID:	2912
INPUT:	Aldi horren buruan , zazpigarren hilaren hamarrean , Barkamen Egunean , alegia , adarra joko duzue ozenki lurralde osoan .
PRED:	On the third day of the month , on the tenth day of the first month , on the tenth day of the first month , you must follow the Lord 's instructions .
GOLD:	Then on the Day of Atonement in the fiftieth year , blow the ram 's horn loud and long throughout the land .

ID:	2913
INPUT:	Jainkoak bere asmoa bete behar dutela sartu die buruan : elkar hartzera eragingo die , beren erregetza piztiari emateko , harik eta Jainkoaren esana erabat bete arte .
PRED:	Then God will be able to enter the Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies . He will be able to enter the Kingdom of God , and he will give it to you .
GOLD:	For God has put a plan into their minds , a plan that will carry out his purposes . They will agree to give their authority to the scarlet beast , and so the words of God will be fulfilled .

ID:	2914
INPUT:	Pauloren ibilaldi-asmoak
PRED:	Paul 's Apollos and Apollos
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Greetings

ID:	2915
INPUT:	PROFETAREN BI<unk> ZAKO GORABEHERAK ( 26 , 1 — 29 , 32 )
PRED:	Philip Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Jeremiah 's Escape from Death

ID:	2916
INPUT:	Bekatu eta bekatu egin du Jerusalemek ; horregatik , higuingarri bihurtu da . Begirune ziotenek mespretxatu egiten dute , biluzia ikusirik . Aieneka ari da , beraz , aurpegia lotsaz gordeta .
PRED:	The sins of Jeroboam and Jerusalem are detestable to the people of Jerusalem . They despise the sins of the wicked , and their sins are terrified by their sins .
GOLD:	Jerusalem has sinned greatly , so she has been tossed away like a filthy rag.All who once honored her now despise her , for they have seen her stripped naked and humiliated.All she can do is groanand hide her face .

ID:	2917
INPUT:	Kalteen ordainketa
PRED:	Abram 's Message for Abram
GOLD:	Protecting Marital Faithfulness

ID:	2918
INPUT:	eta Judako gobernari Zorobabeli mezu hau emateko agindu zion : « Zeru-lurrak dardaraziko ditut .
PRED:	Then he sent this message to the people of Judah : “ What sorrow awaits you from the earth ?
GOLD:	“ Tell Zerubbabel , the governor of Judah , that I am about to shake the heavens and the earth .

ID:	2919
INPUT:	Norbaitek hirugarren egunean jango balu , ez litzaioke Jaunari atsegin izango : gaitzesgarria da haragi hori .
PRED:	If a man has eaten on the third day , it must be detestable to the Lord . It is a disgrace for the sins of the Lord .
GOLD:	If any of the sacrifice is eaten on the third day , it will be contaminated , and I will not accept it .

ID:	2920
INPUT:	Kerubinak hegalpean giza besoaren antzeko zerbait zuela ikusi nuen .
PRED:	I looked like a cherubim in the wings of the cherubim , and I saw that it was like a human beings .
GOLD:	( All the cherubim had what looked like human hands under their wings . )

ID:	2921
INPUT:	Hauxe zen niretzat garrantzizkoena : Kristoren izena entzuna ere ez zen tokietan berri ona zabaltzea . Ez nuen nahi bestek ipinitako oinarrien gainean eraiki ,
PRED:	This is the message I said to you , “ This is what the message I said : Do n't want to preach the Good News about Christ 's possessed by another spirit .
GOLD:	My ambition has always been to preach the Good News where the name of Christ has never been heard , rather than where a church has already been started by someone else .

ID:	2922
INPUT:	Jainkoa gurtu ohi zuteneko gailurrera heldu zenean , Huxai arkitarra atera zitzaion Davidi bidera , jantziak urraturik eta burua hautsez beterik .
PRED:	When the man of God arrived at the threshing floor of the Jordan River , he went to meet David and put his clothes in burlap and went to his clothes .
GOLD:	When David reached the summit of the Mount of Olives where people worshiped God , Hushai the Arkite was waiting there for him . Hushai had torn his clothing and put dirt on his head as a sign of mourning .

ID:	2923
INPUT:	Nire zauriak gaiztotuak daude eta zornetan , nire zorakeriaren ondorioz .
PRED:	My life is filled with pain , and my grief is filled with grief .
GOLD:	I am bent over and racked with pain.All day long I walk around filled with grief .

ID:	2924
INPUT:	Lehen ikuskaria : zaldizkoak
PRED:	A Vision of a Vision
GOLD:	A Man among the Myrtle Trees

ID:	2925
INPUT:	Baliteke , ni ukitu eta iruzur egiten diodala aita ohartzea . Orduan , bedeinkazioaren ordez madarikazioa erakarriko nuke neure gain .
PRED:	But if I am allowed to pour out my blood on my head , I would bless my father and bless them . Then I would bless them in my name .
GOLD:	What if my father touches me ? He 'll see that I 'm trying to trick him , and then he 'll curse me instead of blessing me . ”

ID:	2926
INPUT:	Izan ere , pozaren pozez , Samson ateratzeko eskatua zuten , beraren kontura barre egiteko gogoz . Atera zuten , beraz , Samson espetxetik eta beraren bizkar egin zuten barre . Gero , bi zutaberen erdian utzi zuten .
PRED:	When Samson was in the prison , he released him to bring him back to the prison . So they put him back to the home of Samson 's house and put him on his own house . So they left him and put him in his hands .
GOLD:	Half drunk by now , the people demanded , “ Bring out Samson so he can amuse us ! ” So he was brought from the prison to amuse them , and they had him stand between the pillars supporting the roof .

ID:	2927
INPUT:	Erregea , berriz , zuhaitz batetik zintzilikatu zuen arratsa arte ; eguzkia sartzean , gorpua zuhaitzetik eraisteko agindu zuen Josuek . Gero , hiriaren sarreran bota eta harri-pilo handia ezarri zioten gainean . Han dago oraindik harri-piloa .
PRED:	So the king ordered you to enter the garden until the evening , and he put the body out of the trees and throw it into the cistern . Then Joshua took the stone and put it on a stone pile of stones .
GOLD:	Joshua impaled the king of Ai on a sharpened pole and left him there until evening . At sunset the Israelites took down the body , as Joshua commanded , and threw it in front of the town gate . They piled a great heap of stones over him that can still be seen today .

ID:	2928
INPUT:	Izan ere , hiri honen gain ezarri ditut begiak , baina ez beraren onerako , kalterako baizik : Babiloniako erregearen esku utziko dut eta honek erre egingo du . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	For I will put my mouth on all the nations , but I will not destroy the king of Babylon . I will hand them over to the king of Babylon , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	For I have decided to bring disaster and not good upon this city , says the Lord . It will be handed over to the king of Babylon , and he will reduce it to ashes . '

ID:	2929
INPUT:	« Sarraskia hazitarako den ale gainera jausten bada , haziak garbi dirau ;
PRED:	“ If the field falls into the field , it will be a field , it will be broken .
GOLD:	If the carcass falls on seed grain to be planted in the field , the seed will still be considered clean .

ID:	2930
INPUT:	Hau zen , hain zuzen , nire gutunaren helburua : zuengana joatean , ez nazatela nahigabetu poztu behar ninduketenek ; zeren ziur bainago , zuei guztioi dagokizuenez , nire poza zeuen poz egiten duzuela .
PRED:	This is what I said to you , “ I have not heard you , but I did n't rejoice , but I was glad when I heard you were filled with joy , for you were filled with joy .
GOLD:	That is why I wrote to you as I did , so that when I do come , I wo n't be grieved by the very ones who ought to give me the greatest joy . Surely you all know that my joy comes from your being joyful .

ID:	2931
INPUT:	Berea du itsasoa , berak egina , eta lehorra , bere eskuz moldatua .
PRED:	He has made the sea , and he formed the sea , and he formed it with human hands .
GOLD:	The sea belongs to him , for he made it.His hands formed the dry land , too .

ID:	2932
INPUT:	Ez daude antzina eroritako heroiekin , beren armaz horniturik Hildakoen Egoitzara jaitsi zirenekin ; hauei ezpata burupean eta babeskia bular gainean jarri zizkieten . Heroi hauek ere bizidunen artean izu-ikara ezarri zuten .
PRED:	They did not have the bodies of the dead bodies of the dead bodies of the dead . They also took their bodies in the sky and put them on their heads and put them on their heads .
GOLD:	They are not buried in honor like their fallen heroes , who went down to the grave with their weapons — their shields covering their bodies and their swords beneath their heads . Their guilt rests upon them because they brought terror to everyone while they were still alive .

ID:	2933
INPUT:	Baina guk eskerrak eman behar dizkiogu beti Jainkoari zuengatik , senideok , Jaunaren maiteok : Jainkoak lehen salbatuak izateko aukeratu baitzaituzte , Espiritu Santuaz sagaratuz eta egia fedez onartzea emanez .
PRED:	But we must give thanks to the Lord our God for you , dear brothers and sisters , and sisters , that the Holy Spirit has given you the Holy Spirit through the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	As for us , we ca n't help but thank God for you , dear brothers and sisters loved by the Lord . We are always thankful that God chose you to be among the first to experience salvation — a salvation that came through the Spirit who makes you holy and through your belief in the truth .

ID:	2934
INPUT:	Baina Balaamek erantzun zien Balaken zerbitzariei : — Nahiz eta Balakek jauregia bete urre eta zilar eman , ezin dut ezertxo ere egin , ez handi ez txiki , Jaunaren , nire Jainkoaren , aginduaren kontra .
PRED:	But Balaam replied to Balak , “ You are the servants of Babylon , the king of Babylon , the palace , and the silver , gold , or gold , or silver , or gold , or gold .
GOLD:	But Balaam responded to Balak 's messengers , “ Even if Balak were to give me his palace filled with silver and gold , I would be powerless to do anything against the will of the Lord my God .

ID:	2935
INPUT:	Bereako juduek , Tesalonikakoak baino jatorragoak izaki eta , gogo biziz hartu zuten mezua ; egunero aztertu ohi zituzten Liburu Santuak , gauzak hala ote ziren ikusteko .
PRED:	When the Jews learned that Paul had been preaching in Thessalonica , they decided to know what the Scriptures had happened to them . They wanted to know that the Scriptures had been fulfilled , so they could see that the Scriptures had been fulfilled .
GOLD:	And the people of Berea were more open-minded than those in Thessalonica , and they listened eagerly to Paul 's message . They searched the Scriptures day after day to see if Paul and Silas were teaching the truth .

ID:	2936
INPUT:	« Bai , badakit horrela dela , gizakiak ez duela arrazoi Jainkoaren kontra .
PRED:	“ Yes , I know that you are wrong , but I know that God is not against you .
GOLD:	“ Yes , I know all this is true in principle.But how can a person be declared innocent in God 's sight ?

ID:	2937
INPUT:	HASIE<unk> ( 1 , 1 — 11 , 32 )
PRED:	John the Baptist Prepares the Way
GOLD:	The Account of Creation

ID:	2938
INPUT:	Zulatu eta ebakiz osatzen da gaitza , zigorrez izakiaren barrena .
PRED:	If you love your body , it 's like a person 's bed .
GOLD:	Physical punishment cleanses away evil ; such discipline purifies the heart .

ID:	2939
INPUT:	Sinetsi zuen herriak , eta Jauna alde jarri zitzaiela eta beren atsekabean begiak jarriak zituela jakitean , ahuspeztu eta gurtu egin zuten .
PRED:	When the people of Jerusalem heard that the Lord had done to them , they bowed low before him and bowed low before him .
GOLD:	Then the people of Israel were convinced that the Lord had sent Moses and Aaron . When they heard that the Lord was concerned about them and had seen their misery , they bowed down and worshiped .

ID:	2940
INPUT:	berau zela eta , herritar askok alde egiten baitzien eta Jesusengan sinesten .
PRED:	Many of the people believed in Jesus , and many people believed in him .
GOLD:	for it was because of him that many of the people had deserted them and believed in Jesus .

ID:	2941
INPUT:	Erabat hondatuko dut tenplu hau , eta tenplu honen aurretik igaroko diren guztiek , harriturik eta txistuka , galdetuko dute : “ Zergatik egin ote die hau Jaunak lurralde honi eta tenplu honi ? ”
PRED:	I will destroy this Temple and destroy all the ruins of this Temple . They will say , ‘ Why did this Temple be destroyed ? Why did the Lord make this Temple ? '
GOLD:	And though this Temple is impressive now , all who pass by will be appalled and will gasp in horror . They will ask , ‘ Why did the Lord do such terrible things to this land and to this Temple ? '

ID:	2942
INPUT:	ERANSKINA
PRED:	The Fall of Jerusalem
GOLD:	Epilogue : Jesus Appears to Seven Disciples

ID:	2943
INPUT:	Orain , ordea , inguru hauetan nuen lana bukatu dut eta , aspaldiko urte hauetan zuek ikusi nahian bainago ,
PRED:	But now I have seen these things , and I have seen many things in the streets of the enemy .
GOLD:	But now I have finished my work in these regions , and after all these long years of waiting , I am eager to visit you .

ID:	2944
INPUT:	Gogoan izan , Jauna , gertatu zaiguna ; begira eta ikus nola iraintzen gaituzten .
PRED:	Remember , O Lord , do n't let us see what we have seen .
GOLD:	Lord , remember what has happened to us.See how we have been disgraced !

ID:	2945
INPUT:	« Izan ere , nola sar daiteke inor indartsu baten etxera lapurretara , aldez aurretik hura lotzen ez badu ? Orduan bai , harrapa ditzake haren etxeko ondasunak .
PRED:	“ For if someone enter the house , how can he enter the house ? If someone falls into a house , how can he enter his house ?
GOLD:	For who is powerful enough to enter the house of a strong man and plunder his goods ? Only someone even stronger — someone who could tie him up and then plunder his house .

ID:	2946
INPUT:	Haiek isilik gelditu ziren ; ez zioten hitzik erantzun , erregeak agindua baitzien ez erantzuteko .
PRED:	But they refused to answer the king , for they refused to answer the king 's answer .
GOLD:	But the people were silent and did not utter a word because Hezekiah had commanded them , “ Do not answer him . ”

ID:	2947
INPUT:	Berrogei urtez jan zuten mana israeldarrek , jendedun lurraldeetara , Kanaango lur-mugetara , iritsi arte alegia .
PRED:	For forty years the Israelites ate and drank from the land of Canaan , where the people of Canaan was camped at Kadesh .
GOLD:	So the people of Israel ate manna for forty years until they arrived at the land where they would settle . They ate manna until they came to the border of the land of Canaan .

ID:	2948
INPUT:	Berritsuen mihia ezpata zorrotza , zuhurrena osasunbidea .
PRED:	Listen to the words of the poor and destroy the city .
GOLD:	Some people make cutting remarks , but the words of the wise bring healing .

ID:	2949
INPUT:	Sarrerako atalondoan bina mahai zeuden alde bietan , eta haietan hiltzen ziren erre-oparitarako nahiz barkamen- eta ordain-oparitarako abereak .
PRED:	There were also on the entry room of the gateway leading to the entry room , and the guilt offering on the Sabbath day , and the guilt offering on the north side of the gateway .
GOLD:	On each side of this entry room were two tables , where the sacrificial animals were slaughtered for the burnt offerings , sin offerings , and guilt offerings .

ID:	2950
INPUT:	manasestarren leinukoa Pedahtzurren seme Gamelielen agindupean
PRED:	Manasseh son of JosephElishama son of Manasseh son of Joseph.Interlude
GOLD:	They were joined by the troops of the tribe of Manasseh , led by Gamaliel son of Pedahzur ,

ID:	2951
INPUT:	Lehen baino izen handiagoa emango didazu , berriro kontsolatuko .
PRED:	You will give me more than the new wine , and you will comfort me .
GOLD:	You will restore me to even greater honorand comfort me once again .

ID:	2952
INPUT:	baita Damasko aldameneko Hamateta hain trebe direnTiro eta Sidon ere .
PRED:	This message came to Damascus and Tyre , Sidon , Sidon , and Sidon .
GOLD:	Doom is certain for Hamath , near Damascus , and for the cities of Tyre and Sidon , though they are so clever .

ID:	2953
INPUT:	« Hilabetetik bost urte artekoa bada , mutikoarentzat bost txanpon , eta neskatoarentzat hiru .
PRED:	“ A total of land was valued at five shekels of silver and five shekels of silver .
GOLD:	A boy between the ages of one month and five years is valued at five shekels of silver ; a girl of that age is valued at three shekels of silver .

ID:	2954
INPUT:	Zurginak , berriz , erregelaz neurtu , arkatzez eta konpasez marraztu eta gubiaz lantzen du eta , giza gorpuzkera eta edertasuna emanik , tenpluan kokatzen .
PRED:	But the Lord says , “ With your unfailing love , I will punish you , famine , and disease , and disease . I will destroy you in the Temple . ”
GOLD:	Then the wood-carver measures a block of woodand draws a pattern on it.He works with chisel and planeand carves it into a human figure.He gives it human beautyand puts it in a little shrine .

ID:	2955
INPUT:	Auzokoek eskuzabal lagundu zieten , eta zilar eta urrezko ontziak , ondasunak , abereak eta bitxi ederrak eman zizkieten , nork bere borondatez eskainitakoaz gainera .
PRED:	The men brought gifts of silver and gold , gold , silver , gold , gold , and gold , and gold . They also brought them to the top of the altar .
GOLD:	And all their neighbors assisted by giving them articles of silver and gold , supplies for the journey , and livestock . They gave them many valuable gifts in addition to all the voluntary offerings .

ID:	2956
INPUT:	Orduan , mandatari bat etorri zitzaion Sauli , esanez : « Zatoz bizkor , filistearrak sartu zaizkigu geure lurraldean » .
PRED:	Then one of Saul sent a report to Saul , “ Come , let us go into the land of the Philistines . ”
GOLD:	an urgent message reached Saul that the Philistines were raiding Israel again .

ID:	2957
INPUT:	Haien alabak emaztetzat hartu eta beren alabak haien semeei eman zizkieten eta haien sasijainkoak gurtu zituzten .
PRED:	They took their wives and children to their sons and daughters and daughters to their idols and their gods .
GOLD:	and they intermarried with them . Israelite sons married their daughters , and Israelite daughters were given in marriage to their sons . And the Israelites served their gods .

ID:	2958
INPUT:	« Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak ematen dizuen lurraldera iristean , ez jarraitu hango herrien jokabide higuingarriei :
PRED:	“ When you enter the land the Lord your God is giving you , you must not follow the detestable practices of the detestable practices of your detestable sins .
GOLD:	“ When you enter the land the Lord your God is giving you , be very careful not to imitate the detestable customs of the nations living there .

ID:	2959
INPUT:	Txoroak ongi deritzo bere jokabideari ; zuhurra , berriz , adi egoten da besteen iritziari .
PRED:	A wise person is a trap for a fool , but a fool is a fool .
GOLD:	Fools think their own way is right , but the wise listen to others .

ID:	2960
INPUT:	Hiria ez da zuentzat tupina izango , ezta zuek ere haren barruan seguru dagoen haragia . Israelen bertan emango dizuet zigor-epaia .
PRED:	There will be no pity on you , and your hearts will be no longer within you . I will punish you for three days .
GOLD:	No , this city will not be an iron pot for you , and you will not be like meat safe inside it . I will judge you even to the borders of Israel ,

ID:	2961
INPUT:	Egoera aldatzearren egin dizu hori Joabek . Zu , ene errege jauna , Jainkoaren aingerua bezain argia zara , eta badakizu mundu honetan gertatzen den guztia .
PRED:	O God of Heaven 's Armies , you are my lord the king . You are my lord the king , and you are my lord the king .
GOLD:	He did it to place the matter before you in a different light . But you are as wise as an angel of God , and you understand everything that happens among us ! ”

ID:	2962
INPUT:	( Lk 14 , <unk> )
PRED:	Teaching about Serving Others
GOLD:	Taxes for Caesar

ID:	2963
INPUT:	israeldar elkartea iristean Jaunak konkistatu duen lurralde hau , aukerakoa da abeltzaintzarako ; eta guk , zure zerbitzariok , abere asko dugu .
PRED:	When the Lord has done this to us , the Lord has chosen this land to return to his servant , we will take possession of the land , and we will return to you .
GOLD:	The Lord has conquered this whole area for the community of Israel , and it is ideally suited for all our livestock .

ID:	2964
INPUT:	Izarrak atsentsio-belar du izena ; uren herena atsentsio-belarra bezain mingots bihurtu zen , eta gizon-emakume asko hil zen ur haiek edateagatik .
PRED:	Then he put the olive oil into the olive oil , and sprinkle it with olive oil . He went out to meet them , and he slaughtered them from the table .
GOLD:	The name of the star was Bitterness . It made one-third of the water bitter , and many people died from drinking the bitter water .

ID:	2965
INPUT:	Amalektar bekatari horiek suntsitzera bidali zaitu , denak birrindu arte borrokatzera .
PRED:	But the Amalekites have sent for battle , and the army has destroyed you for battle .
GOLD:	And the Lord sent you on a mission and told you , ‘ Go and completely destroy the sinners , the Amalekites , until they are all dead . '

ID:	2966
INPUT:	Orduan , ikasleek esan zioten : — Senar-emazteen arteko lotura horrelakoa bada , ez du merezi ezkontzea .
PRED:	Then the disciples said to his disciples , “ If a man has sex with her , he must not marry her . ”
GOLD:	Jesus ' disciples then said to him , “ If this is the case , it is better not to marry ! ”

ID:	2967
INPUT:	( 2 Kro 18 , 1-3 )
PRED:	Asa Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Micaiah Prophesies against Ahab

ID:	2968
INPUT:	Eta uretako aingeruari entzun nion esaten : « Zuzena zara eta justizia egin duzu , Santu horrek , zaren eta zinen horrek :
PRED:	Then I heard the angel speaking to the angel , “ Your name is true and right , ” the angel said . “ You are the one who is good . ”
GOLD:	And I heard the angel who had authority over all water saying , “ You are just , O Holy One , who is and who always was , because you have sent these judgments .

ID:	2969
INPUT:	Horiek dira Sinai mendian Jaunak Moisesi israeldarrentzat emandako aginduak .
PRED:	These are the instructions the Lord gave Moses concerning Sinai .
GOLD:	These are the commands that the Lord gave through Moses on Mount Sinai for the Israelites .

ID:	2970
INPUT:	eta beraren bihotzeko ezkutukoak agerian geldituko dira . Orduan , ahuspeztu eta Jainkoa gurtu egingo du , eta esango : « Jainkoa benetan zuekin dago » .
PRED:	They will bow down to their homes , and they will bow down and worship God . Then they will worship him , saying , “ God is with you , and he will be with you . ”
GOLD:	As they listen , their secret thoughts will be exposed , and they will fall to their knees and worship God , declaring , “ God is truly here among you . ”

ID:	2971
INPUT:	“ Hiri Santukoak ” omen duzue izen , Israelen Jainkoa , Jaun ahalguztidun deritzana , euskarri .
PRED:	The Scriptures say , ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : '
GOLD:	even though you call yourself the holy cityand talk about depending on the God of Israel , whose name is the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	2972
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : — Tximista bezala zerutik erortzen ikusi dut Satanas .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I saw the stars in heaven , and I saw Satan . ”
GOLD:	“ Yes , ” he told them , “ I saw Satan fall from heaven like lightning !

ID:	2973
INPUT:	harribitxiak eta zura lantzeko , eta beste edozein langintzatarako .
PRED:	The walls of the field will be used to plant and gardens , and they will plant it .
GOLD:	He is skilled in engraving and mounting gemstones and in carving wood . He is a master at every craft .

ID:	2974
INPUT:	Herri asko eta nazio indartsuak etorriko dira horrela Jerusalemera , nire , Jaun ahalguztidun honen , bila eta niri mesede eske .
PRED:	“ The nations of Jerusalem will come to Jerusalem , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies says :
GOLD:	Many peoples and powerful nations will come to Jerusalem to seek the Lord of Heaven 's Armies and to ask for his blessing .

ID:	2975
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunaknire herria desbideratzen dutenprofetei buruz : « Jatekoa ematen dieteneibakea iragartzen diete ; ahora ezer ematenez dietenei , berriz , gerra santua .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : The prophets of the prophets of the prophets of the prophets of the prophets who say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : The people of Israel have said to me , ‘ They are bringing food to those who follow their own desires . '
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ You false prophets are leading my people astray ! You promise peace for those who give you food , but you declare war on those who refuse to feed you .

ID:	2976
INPUT:	Ordezkari nagusiak ihardetsi zuen : — Zer uste duzu ? Mezu hau zure erregeari eta zuri bakarrik esatera bidali nauela neure jaunak ? Harresi gainean dagoen jende horrentzat ere bada , horiek ere beren kaka jan eta pixa edan beharko baitute , zuek bezalaxe .
PRED:	Then the chief of staff came to him and asked , “ What are you doing this ? ” And the king sent me to tell me , “ This is what the king says : Why should I eat it ? ”
GOLD:	But Sennacherib 's chief of staff replied , “ Do you think my master sent this message only to you and your master ? He wants all the people to hear it , for when we put this city under siege , they will suffer along with you . They will be so hungry and thirsty that they will eat their own dung and drink their own urine . ”

ID:	2977
INPUT:	Beraz , Kristo Jesus Jauna onartu duzuenez gero , jarraitu berari dagokionez bizitzen .
PRED:	So the Lord Jesus Christ has made you right with the Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	And now , just as you accepted Christ Jesus as your Lord , you must continue to follow him .

ID:	2978
INPUT:	Goretsazue , eguzki eta ilargi , goretsi , izar argitsu !
PRED:	Praise him , O Lord , above all the stars ! Praise him !
GOLD:	Praise him , sun and moon ! Praise him , all you twinkling stars !

ID:	2979
INPUT:	nire aholkuak ez dituzuenez onartueta bai zentzarazpen guztiak mespretxatu ,
PRED:	You must not listen to my commands and obey all my commands .
GOLD:	They rejected my adviceand paid no attention when I corrected them .

ID:	2980
INPUT:	Gero , agindu zion Akaz erregeak Urias apaizari : « Aldare handiaren gainean egin behar dituzu goizeko erre-oparia eta arratseko labore-oparia , erregearen erre-oparia eta labore-oparia , baita herriaren erre-opari , labore- eta isur-opariak ere . Orobat , aldare handiaren gaina zirtatuko duzu erre-oparietako eta sakrifizioetako odol guztiaz . Brontzezko aldareari buruzkoa neuk erabakiko dut » .
PRED:	Then Eleazar the priest ordered , “ Make a burnt offering for the burnt offering . Make it a burnt offering for the burnt offering , a burnt offering for the burnt offering , a burnt offering , a burnt offering , a burnt offering , a pleasing aroma to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	He told Uriah the priest , “ Use the new altar for the morning sacrifices of burnt offering , the evening grain offering , the king 's burnt offering and grain offering , and the burnt offerings of all the people , as well as their grain offerings and liquid offerings . Sprinkle the blood from all the burnt offerings and sacrifices on the new altar . The bronze altar will be for my personal use only . ”

ID:	2981
INPUT:	eta Jesek David erregea . Davidek Salomon sortu zuen , Uriasen emazte izanarengandik ;
PRED:	David became king , and David became the next king . He married the wife of Uriah the wife of King David .
GOLD:	Jesse was the father of King David.David was the father of Solomon ( whose mother was Bathsheba , the widow of Uriah ) .

ID:	2982
INPUT:	( Zen 35 , <unk> )
PRED:	Building the Ark 's Covenant
GOLD:	Concern for Justice

ID:	2983
INPUT:	Baina ikusi zituen Jaunak beren larrialdianeta haien garrasiak entzun .
PRED:	But the Lord appeared to them , and he heard their cries of their ears .
GOLD:	Even so , he pitied them in their distressand listened to their cries .

ID:	2984
INPUT:	Fededunen poza
PRED:	The Faith of Peter
GOLD:	A Call to Holy Living

ID:	2985
INPUT:	Bada , neuk ere suminez jokatuko dut ; ez diet errukirik izango , ezta barkatuko ere ; oihu handiz egingo didate dei , baina ez diet entzungo » .
PRED:	I will pour out my fury on them . I will not forgive them , but I will not forgive them , but they will call on their tongues . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , I will respond in fury . I will neither pity nor spare them . And though they cry for mercy , I will not listen . ”

ID:	2986
INPUT:	Orduan , Pedro biraoka eta maldizioka hasi zen : — Ez dut ezagutzen gizon hori . Une hartan oilarrak jo zuen .
PRED:	Then Peter and John ran out to him and said , “ I do n't know what he thinks . ” So the rooster crowed .
GOLD:	Peter swore , “ A curse on me if I 'm lying — I do n't know the man ! ” And immediately the rooster crowed .

ID:	2987
INPUT:	« Adi egon , ene herri , entzun arretaz , ene hiri : neure irakaspena emango dut , eta nire esanakherrientzat argi izango dira .
PRED:	“ Listen to my people , my people , and listen to me . I will give them everything I say , and I will give them everything they need .
GOLD:	“ Listen to me , my people.Hear me , Israel , for my law will be proclaimed , and my justice will become a light to the nations .

ID:	2988
INPUT:	Goretsazue Jauna , ona baita , haren maitasuna betikoa baita .
PRED:	Give thanks to the Lord , for he is good ! His faithful love endures forever .
GOLD:	Give thanks to the Lord , for he is good ! His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	2989
INPUT:	Lurralde honetakoemaitza aberatsakatzerriko erregeentzat dira gaur , geure bekatuengatik nagusiezarri dizkiguzun erregeentzat ; geu eta geure abereakmenpean gauzkate beren gogara . Guztiz atsekabetuak gaude ! »
PRED:	We have been unfaithful to the king of the land , for we have sinned against the kings of the land , and we have been destroyed by the kings of the land . We have been destroyed , and we have been destroyed by our kings . ”
GOLD:	The lush produce of this land piles up in the hands of the kings whom you have set over us because of our sins . They have power over us and our livestock . We serve them at their pleasure , and we are in great misery . ”

ID:	2990
INPUT:	« Zeuei eta zuen arbasoei hitzeman bezala , Jaunak Kanaan lurraldera eraman eta lurraren jabe egingo zaituztenean ,
PRED:	“ When you give your ancestors to your ancestors , you will possess the land the Lord swore to give you ,
GOLD:	“ This is what you must do when the Lord fulfills the promise he swore to you and to your ancestors . When he gives you the land where the Canaanites now live ,

ID:	2991
INPUT:	Hildakoen Egoitzako barrunbeetansartu arren , handik ere aterako ditu nire eskuak ; zeru-goietara igo arren , handik ere jaitsaraziko ditut ;
PRED:	I will go into the grave , and I will go out into the grave . I will lift my hands into the sky , and I will leave them alone .
GOLD:	“ Even if they dig down to the place of the dead , I will reach down and pull them up.Even if they climb up into the heavens , I will bring them down .

ID:	2992
INPUT:	Eman nizun hitzari eutsiko diot , ene Jainko , eta esker onez beteko .
PRED:	I will keep on loving you , O God , and I will give you whatever you need .
GOLD:	For you have rescued me from death ; you have kept my feet from slipping.So now I can walk in your presence , O God , in your life-giving light .

ID:	2993
INPUT:	Egin aiene eta garrasi , Filisteako hiriok ! Ikaratu , lurralde osoa ! Hor baitator iparraldetikgudarostea , ke-laino trinko baten antzera , inortxo ere bere lerrotikokertzen ez dela .
PRED:	O Lord , you people of Israel ! Listen to this message from the Philistines ! Look , you armies of the land of Egypt , like a forest forest forest forest forest ; no one has attacked you like a field .
GOLD:	Wail at the gates ! Weep in the cities ! Melt with fear , you Philistines ! A powerful army comes like smoke from the north.Each soldier rushes forward eager to fight .

ID:	2994
INPUT:	Baina Jesusek esan zion emakumeari : « Zeure sinesmenak salbatu zaitu ; zoaz bakean » .
PRED:	But Jesus said to her , “ Your faith has been healed ! Your faith has healed you . ”
GOLD:	And Jesus said to the woman , “ Your faith has saved you ; go in peace . ”

ID:	2995
INPUT:	Ez gaitu erabiltzen gure bekatuek merezi bezala , ez digu ordaintzen geure erruen arabera .
PRED:	Do n't let us go to the sins of our sins , just as we are circumcised .
GOLD:	He does not punish us for all our sins ; he does not deal harshly with us , as we deserve .

ID:	2996
INPUT:	Lebi eta beronen semeok : Gerxon , Kehat eta Merari .
PRED:	The sons of Levi were descendants of Levi , listed according to the clans of the tribe of Levi , listed according to the clans of the tribe of Levi .
GOLD:	The sons of Levi were Gershon , Kohath , and Merari .

ID:	2997
INPUT:	Haren burua urrea , urrerik garbiena ; haren ile-kizkurrak palmondoaren luku , beleak baino beltzago .
PRED:	In the third year of the year of King Jehoiachin 's reign , the Lord , will turn his face to the Ammonites .
GOLD:	His head is finest gold , his wavy hair is black as a raven .

ID:	2998
INPUT:	Bizidun orok ikusiko du nik , Jaunak , piztu dudala eta ez dela itzaliko » .
PRED:	Everyone who believes in him will see that the Lord has raised him from the dead . ”
GOLD:	Yes , I will cut off both the righteous and the wicked ! I will draw my sword against everyone in the land from south to north .

ID:	2999
INPUT:	Salbatzaile duzun Jainkoaahaztu egin baituzu , babesten zaituen Harkaitzazez zara oroitu . Lorategi atsegingarriaklandatzen dituzueta kanpoko landare-haziak ereiten .
PRED:	You have forgotten the God of Israel , for he has forgotten you , and he has made you fruitful and planted your fruit .
GOLD:	Why ? Because you have turned from the God who can save you.You have forgotten the Rock who can hide you.So you may plant the finest grapevinesand import the most expensive seedlings .

ID:	3000
INPUT:	Zure aurretik izan direnek baino gaiztakeria handiagoa egin duzu , sasijainkoak eta irudiak eginez , ni haserrarazteko . Niri , berriz , bizkarra eman didazu .
PRED:	For you have sinned against me , O God , and you have made me very angry with all my people . But you have made me angry with me .
GOLD:	You have done more evil than all who lived before you . You have made other gods for yourself and have made me furious with your gold calves . And since you have turned your back on me ,

ID:	3001
INPUT:	Era berean , emakumea abere batekin elkar batzen bada , heriotzara emango dituzte emakumea eta aberea . Berena izango dute heriotzaren errua .
PRED:	If the woman has sex with her , she will be put to death with her , and she will be put to death .
GOLD:	“ If a woman presents herself to a male animal to have intercourse with it , she and the animal must both be put to death . You must kill both , for they are guilty of a capital offense .

ID:	3002
INPUT:	« Entzun beste parabola hau : Behin batean , nagusi batek mahastia landatu zuen eta harresiz inguratu ; lurrean dolarea egin eta mahastizainaren dorrea eraiki zuen . Gero , nekazari batzuei errentan utzirik , urrutira joan zen .
PRED:	“ Listen to this story : One day a vineyard of vineyard , a vineyard planted a vineyard in a vineyard . One day he began to tear the walls into the fields . Then he returned to the top of the wall and sat down to the ground .
GOLD:	“ Now listen to another story . A certain landowner planted a vineyard , built a wall around it , dug a pit for pressing out the grape juice , and built a lookout tower . Then he leased the vineyard to tenant farmers and moved to another country .

ID:	3003
INPUT:	Gose-egarriz hilzorian zeuden , adorea galdurik .
PRED:	But when you die , you will die in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	Hungry and thirsty , they nearly died .

ID:	3004
INPUT:	Beraz , Jainkoaren jatorrikoak bagara , ez genezake pentsa Jainkoa giza trebetasunak eta irudimenak landutako urre , zilar edo harrizko irudien antzeko denik .
PRED:	That is why God has not heard the meaning of his understanding and understanding . He is not like silver , gold , silver , gold , gold , and gold , and gold .
GOLD:	And since this is true , we should n't think of God as an idol designed by craftsmen from gold or silver or stone .

ID:	3005
INPUT:	Atari inguruko oihal guztiak liho-hari bihurrituzkoak ziren ;
PRED:	the curtains of the courtyard were made of finely woven linen .
GOLD:	All the curtains used in the courtyard were made of finely woven linen .

ID:	3006
INPUT:	Ilunabarrean , Jose zeritzan Arimateako gizon aberats bat etorri zen , Jesusen ikaslea .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Joseph was a man named Joseph , a man named Joseph , a man named Joseph .
GOLD:	As evening approached , Joseph , a rich man from Arimathea who had become a follower of Jesus ,

ID:	3007
INPUT:	Erruak kontuan badituzu , Jauna , oi Jauna , nork iraun bizirik ?
PRED:	O Lord , how can we keep on loving you ? Who is able to live forever ?
GOLD:	Lord , if you kept a record of our sins , who , O Lord , could ever survive ?

ID:	3008
INPUT:	Ananias izeneko gizon batek eta beronen emazte Safirak soro bat saldu zuten .
PRED:	A man named Ananias , who had a man named Ananias , and he saved her .
GOLD:	But there was a certain man named Ananias who , with his wife , Sapphira , sold some property .

ID:	3009
INPUT:	utzi joaten amari eta hartu kumeak . Horrela , zoriontsu izango zarete eta luzaro biziko .
PRED:	So they took her and took her to her , and she will live in sorrow . ”
GOLD:	You may take the young , but let the mother go , so that you may prosper and enjoy a long life .

ID:	3010
INPUT:	Hau esan nahi zuen : « Eraman egin dute Israelen ospea , Jainkoaren kutxa harrapatu baitute » .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Give the Ark of the God of Israel , for the Ark of God has been dedicated to Israel . ”
GOLD:	Then she said , “ The glory has departed from Israel , for the Ark of God has been captured . ”

ID:	3011
INPUT:	Jesus eta Beeltzebul
PRED:	The Sign of Jonah
GOLD:	Receiving the Light

ID:	3012
INPUT:	Baina beren larrialdian Jaunarengana , Israelen Jainkoarengana , jo eta beraren bila ibili zirenean , aurkitu ahal izan zuten .
PRED:	But they turned away from the Lord their God , the God of Israel , and they went to meet him .
GOLD:	But whenever they were in trouble and turned to the Lord , the God of Israel , and sought him out , they found him .

ID:	3013
INPUT:	Beraz , Jaunak zure profeta hauen guztien ahoan gezur-espiritua ezarri duenez , garbi dago erabaki duela zure hondamena .
PRED:	So now the Lord will remove all these false prophets and put them on a plague that has been broken .
GOLD:	“ So you see , the Lord has put a lying spirit in the mouths of all your prophets . For the Lord has pronounced your doom . ”

ID:	3014
INPUT:	Mundua eta munduko guztia egin duen Jainkoa zeru-lurren Jauna da eta ez da giza eskuz egindako tenpluetan bizi ;
PRED:	He created all the world and earth , but he does not worship the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies . He will not live in the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ He is the God who made the world and everything in it . Since he is Lord of heaven and earth , he does n't live in man-made temples ,

ID:	3015
INPUT:	Hango sinagogetan irakasten zuen , denek goraipatzen zutela .
PRED:	While he was teaching , he taught his disciples that he was teaching .
GOLD:	He taught regularly in their synagogues and was praised by everyone .

ID:	3016
INPUT:	baina itsas eta ibai-uretako bizidunen artean , hegal eta ezkata gabeak debekatuak dituzue :
PRED:	But you will live in the sea , and you will live in the sea , and you will lose your sins .
GOLD:	But you must never eat animals from the sea or from rivers that do not have both fins and scales . They are detestable to you . This applies both to little creatures that live in shallow water and to all creatures that live in deep water .

ID:	3017
INPUT:	ikasi onbidea , saiatu zuzenbidean : lagundu zapalduari , egin justizia umezurtzari , defendatu alarguna ! »
PRED:	Give thanks to the Lord , who gives justice to those who are wicked ; rescue them from their oppressors . ”
GOLD:	Learn to do good.Seek justice.Help the oppressed.Defend the cause of orphans.Fight for the rights of widows .

ID:	3018
INPUT:	Eta , pasatzean , jantziak zabaltzen zituzten bidean .
PRED:	And when they were opened , their garments were opened , and their clothes were opened .
GOLD:	As he rode along , the crowds spread out their garments on the road ahead of him .

ID:	3019
INPUT:	Ez uste izan Aitaren aurrean nik salatuko zaituztedanik ; Moisesek berak , zeuen esperantza duzuenak , salatuko zaituzte .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of your Father , and you will obey all these things , just as Moses had promised .
GOLD:	“ Yet it is n't I who will accuse you before the Father . Moses will accuse you ! Yes , Moses , in whom you put your hopes .

ID:	3020
INPUT:	Aldarea sagaratzeko egunean , familiaburuek aldarearen inaugurazioko opariak eraman zituzten eta aldare aurrean ezarri .
PRED:	On the eighth day , the leaders of the altar was presented to the Lord , and they laid their blood on the altar .
GOLD:	The leaders also presented dedication gifts for the altar at the time it was anointed . They each placed their gifts before the altar .

ID:	3021
INPUT:	Horrela , kanpalekutik urruti utzi zuten Miriam zazpi egunez . Herria ez zen abiatu Miriam bildu zitzaien arte .
PRED:	So Miriam left the camp at the camp , and the other half of the people assembled at the camp .
GOLD:	So Miriam was kept outside the camp for seven days , and the people waited until she was brought back before they traveled again .

ID:	3022
INPUT:	Ondoren , herriaren barkamen-oparirako akerra hilko du ; honen odola errezelaz barrualdera eramango du eta zekorraren odolaz eginikoa bera egingo : estalkia zipriztinduko du eta estalki aurrean zirtatuko .
PRED:	Then he will offer the blood of the sin offering to the Lord . He will bring the blood of the blood against the altar , and he will sprinkle it on the front of the altar .
GOLD:	“ Then Aaron must slaughter the first goat as a sin offering for the people and carry its blood behind the inner curtain . There he will sprinkle the goat 's blood over the atonement cover and in front of it , just as he did with the bull 's blood .

ID:	3023
INPUT:	Harpak , zitarak eta turutak joz sartu ziren Jerusalemen Jaunaren etxeraino .
PRED:	So they went to the Temple of the Lord in Jerusalem to worship the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	They marched into Jerusalem to the music of harps , lyres , and trumpets , and they proceeded to the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	3024
INPUT:	horrela bereiziko dituzu lebitarrak gainerako israeldarren artetik eta neureak izango ditut .
PRED:	I will drive out the people of Israel out of the land , and I will drive them out of the land of Israel .
GOLD:	In this way , you will set the Levites apart from the rest of the people of Israel , and the Levites will belong to me .

ID:	3025
INPUT:	Zure irakaspena izan ez banu gozamen , honezkero galdua nintzatekeen atsekabez .
PRED:	You were not like me , O Lord , for I would forget your word .
GOLD:	If your instructions had n't sustained me with joy , I would have died in my misery .

ID:	3026
INPUT:	Horregatik , bere maitaleen esku utzi nuen , bere amorante asiriarren esku .
PRED:	So I turned my hand over to you , and I abandoned them to their own hands .
GOLD:	“ And so I handed her over to her Assyrian lovers , whom she desired so much .

ID:	3027
INPUT:	Edomen kontrako mezua
PRED:	A Message for Edom
GOLD:	A Message for Philistia

ID:	3028
INPUT:	Siriako Antiokiara itzuli
PRED:	The Return to Antioch of Syria
GOLD:	Paul and Barnabas Return to Antioch of Syria

ID:	3029
INPUT:	Baina ez dituzue Jaunaren hitzak aditu nahi izan eta zeuen idolatriazko jardueraz iraintzen jarraitu duzue , zigorra zeuen gainera erakarriz .
PRED:	But you must not neglect the word of the Lord . Instead , you must follow the instructions of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ But you would not listen to me , ” says the Lord . “ You made me furious by worshiping idols you made with your own hands , bringing on yourselves all the disasters you now suffer .

ID:	3030
INPUT:	zatitu egingo duzue , zatien gainera olioa isuriz ; labore-oparia da hau .
PRED:	You must use all the grain offering to the Lord . This is a grain offering for the grain offering .
GOLD:	Break it in pieces and pour olive oil on it ; it is a grain offering .

ID:	3031
INPUT:	Eta , Jaunaren esanari jaramonik egin gabe , Egiptora joan eta Tafnes hiriraino iritsi ziren .
PRED:	Then they came to Egypt in the presence of the Lord , in the direction of Egypt , and when they arrived at Tahpanhes , they came to Egypt .
GOLD:	The people refused to obey the voice of the Lord and went to Egypt , going as far as the city of Tahpanhes .

ID:	3032
INPUT:	Bidez zihoala , jaiotzatik itsua zen gizon bat ikusi zuen Jesusek .
PRED:	As Jesus saw a man coming from the blind man , he saw a man coming from the blind man .
GOLD:	As Jesus was walking along , he saw a man who had been blind from birth .

ID:	3033
INPUT:	Hilobian sarturik , gazte bat ikusi zuten eskuinaldean eseria , soineko zuriz jantzia , eta erabat izutu ziren .
PRED:	When they arrived in the tomb , they saw a young man sitting in his right hand and put a robe in his right hand .
GOLD:	When they entered the tomb , they saw a young man clothed in a white robe sitting on the right side . The women were shocked ,

ID:	3034
INPUT:	Ohar zaitezte , beraz , ez dela bete gabe gelditu Jaunak Akaben senitartearen kontra esaniko hitz bat ere . Bete du Jaunak bere zerbitzari Eliasen bitartez esana zuena .
PRED:	So be careful to obey the Lord 's command , just as the Lord had spoken through his servant Ahab 's servant Ahab .
GOLD:	You can be sure that the message of the Lord that was spoken concerning Ahab 's family will not fail . The Lord declared through his servant Elijah that this would happen . ”

ID:	3035
INPUT:	orduan , zuekin biziko naiz toki honetan , zuen gurasoei aspaldidanik eta betiko eman nien lurraldean .
PRED:	But I will send you home with your ancestors , and I will give you your ancestors long ago .
GOLD:	Then I will let you stay in this land that I gave to your ancestors to keep forever .

ID:	3036
INPUT:	Efraim Egiptora itzuliko da , Asiria izango du nagusi , ez baitu niregana itzuli nahi izan .
PRED:	The people of Israel will return to Egypt , but they will not return to me , but they would not return to me .
GOLD:	“ But since my people refuse to return to me , they will return to Egyptand will be forced to serve Assyria .

ID:	3037
INPUT:	Eta besteei , berriz : — Larunbatez zer dugu legezko , on egitea ala gaitz egitea , bizia salbatzea ala kentzea ? Haiek , ordea , isilik .
PRED:	Then he said to his disciples , “ Is it the law for us to save us from the Sabbath ? But why should we be saved ? ”
GOLD:	Then he turned to his critics and asked , “ Does the law permit good deeds on the Sabbath , or is it a day for doing evil ? Is this a day to save life or to destroy it ? ” But they would n't answer him .

ID:	3038
INPUT:	Bihotz zintzoz zaindu zituen , esku trebez eraman .
PRED:	That same way , the Lord gave us a strong hand . He gave it to them , and he gave it to them .
GOLD:	He cared for them with a true heartand led them with skillful hands .

ID:	3039
INPUT:	Honela , bosgarren eguna burutu zen .
PRED:	On the fifth day , the fifth day of the second month , the fifth day of the second month .
GOLD:	And evening passed and morning came , marking the fifth day .

ID:	3040
INPUT:	Lurrak gutiziatzen dituztela ? Lapurtu egiten dituzte . Etxeak irrikatzen dituztela ? Hartu egiten dituzte . Indarrez hartzen dute nagusia , bere familia eta etxaldearekin .
PRED:	“ Or does the people go out into the fields ? Are they caught up the houses of thieves ? Or if the houses have the property of a thief and property ? ”
GOLD:	When you want a piece of land , you find a way to seize it.When you want someone 's house , you take it by fraud and violence.You cheat a man of his property , stealing his family 's inheritance .

ID:	3041
INPUT:	Bota egin dituzue Jaunaren egiazko apaizak , Aaronen ondorengoak , baita lebitarrak ere , eta , herri arrotzek bezala , zeuen apaizak izendatu . Norbait apaiz izan nahian , bere abere-taldeko zekor bat eta zazpi ahari dakartzala etortzen bazaizue , berehala egiten duzue gezurrezko jainko horien apaiz .
PRED:	“ You must break the covenant of the Lord , for the priests and Levites will serve as priests and Levites . You must serve as priests as priests , priests , Levites , and Levites , along with the sacred offerings . If you do this , you will be a priest , and you will be a priest who is a priest .
GOLD:	But you have chased away the priests of the Lord ( the descendants of Aaron ) and the Levites , and you have appointed your own priests , just like the pagan nations . You let anyone become a priest these days ! Whoever comes to be dedicated with a young bull and seven rams can become a priest of these so-called gods of yours !

ID:	3042
INPUT:	Asiriarren inbasioa iragarri
PRED:	A Call to Holy Living
GOLD:	A Call to Trust the

ID:	3043
INPUT:	Saulo triskantza ikaragarria egiten ari zen eliz elkartean : etxeetan sartu , gizon-emakumeak atxilotu eta kartzelara eramaten zituen .
PRED:	So Saul and Barnabas brought the entire body into the house of the church , and he brought everyone into the house of a woman .
GOLD:	But Saul was going everywhere to destroy the church . He went from house to house , dragging out both men and women to throw them into prison .

ID:	3044
INPUT:	Kartzelazainak Paulori berri eman zion , esanez : — Epaileek zuek askatzeko esan dute . Atera , bada , eta zoazte bakean .
PRED:	Then Paul said to the Roman officers , “ If you are going to take some of you , go ahead and get it . ”
GOLD:	So the jailer told Paul , “ The city officials have said you and Silas are free to leave . Go in peace . ”

ID:	3045
INPUT:	Begira zer-nolako lurraldea den , hango biztanleak indartsuak ala ahulak , gutxi ala asko diren .
PRED:	The people of the land will become like a mighty nation.It will become like a mighty nation.It will be like a strong wind .
GOLD:	See what the land is like , and find out whether the people living there are strong or weak , few or many .

ID:	3046
INPUT:	Haiek , berriro : — Zer egin dizu ? Nola ireki dizkizu begiak ?
PRED:	“ What do you do ? ” they asked . “ What are you doing ? ”
GOLD:	“ But what did he do ? ” they asked . “ How did he heal you ? ”

ID:	3047
INPUT:	Jainkoa daizar-multzoak sortu dituena , iluna egunsentieta eguna gau <unk> hurtzen duena ; itsas urak biltzeneta lur gainera isurtzen dituena . Jauna du izena .
PRED:	God has placed the stars in the heavens , and he has made the day of the night and night . The earth trembles at night , and the dew of the earth is filled with dew .
GOLD:	It is the Lord who created the stars , the Pleiades and Orion.He turns darkness into morningand day into night.He draws up water from the oceansand pours it down as rain on the land.The Lord is his name !

ID:	3048
INPUT:	Guztiok Jainkoaren seme-alaba zarete , Jesu Kristogan duzuen sinesmenari esker .
PRED:	And all of you are children of God 's children , who are children of Christ Jesus , who believes in Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	For you are all children of God through faith in Christ Jesus .

ID:	3049
INPUT:	Silas eta Timoteo Mazedoniatik etorri zirenean , Paulok mezuaren predikuari eman zion erabat , Jesus zela Mesias juduen aurrean aitortuz .
PRED:	When Paul arrived at Bethany , he gave Paul a message to the Jewish synagogue . As he arrived , a Jewish synagogue came to the synagogue .
GOLD:	And after Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia , Paul spent all his time preaching the word . He testified to the Jews that Jesus was the Messiah .

ID:	3050
INPUT:	Nagusiak erantzun zien : “ Fruitua dakarrenari eman egingo zaio ; fruiturik ez dakarrenari , ordea , daukan apurra ere kendu egingo zaio .
PRED:	He told them , ‘ It is good and good fruit , and it will produce good fruit . But it will be taken away , but it will be taken away . '
GOLD:	“ ‘ Yes , ' the king replied , ‘ and to those who use well what they are given , even more will be given . But from those who do nothing , even what little they have will be taken away .

ID:	3051
INPUT:	Artilea bezala erorarazten du elurra , hautsa bezala zabaltzen antzigarra .
PRED:	He makes the rain fall like the sky , like a eagle that spread on the ground .
GOLD:	He sends the snow like white wool ; he scatters frost upon the ground like ashes .

ID:	3052
INPUT:	Hala ere , Pedro jaiki eta hilobira joan zen lasterka ; makurturik , barrura begiratu eta oihal-zerrendak bakarrik ikusi zituen , eta etxera itzuli zen gertatuaz harriturik .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Peter ran up to the tomb and ran to the tomb , where he could n't see him . So he returned home and saw the house where he was going home .
GOLD:	However , Peter jumped up and ran to the tomb to look . Stooping , he peered in and saw the empty linen wrappings ; then he went home again , wondering what had happened .

ID:	3053
INPUT:	iluntasun eta nahas-mahas hutseko , argi-izpirik gabeko herrialdera » .
PRED:	Let the darkness be filled with grief ; there is a day of darkness and gloom . ”
GOLD:	It is a land as dark as midnight , a land of gloom and confusion , where even the light is dark as midnight . ' ”

ID:	3054
INPUT:	Hartu ahariaren buztaneko gantza , hesteen gainekoa eta gibela estaltzen duena , giltzurrunak eta itsatsirik daukaten gantza , eta eskuineko izterra ; apaizen sagarapenerako aharia da hau .
PRED:	the fat around the internal organs , the long lobe of the liver , and the fat around the internal organs , the fat around the internal organs , the long lobe of the liver , and the fat around the altar .
GOLD:	“ Since this is the ram for the ordination of Aaron and his sons , take the fat of the ram , including the fat of the broad tail , the fat around the internal organs , the long lobe of the liver , and the two kidneys and the fat around them , along with the right thigh .

ID:	3055
INPUT:	Judako herri osoa , emakume , seme-alaba eta haurtxoak ere bai , Jaunaren aurrean zegoen zutik .
PRED:	All the people of Judah , women , children , and children , stood before the Lord .
GOLD:	As all the men of Judah stood before the Lord with their little ones , wives , and children ,

ID:	3056
INPUT:	Saulek , orduan : — Zergatik ari zarete Jeseren semea eta biok nire kontra azpilanean ? Ogia eta ezpata eman zenizkion ; kontsulta egin zenion Jainkoari Davidi buruz , ea nire aurka jaiki eta zelatak ipiniko ote zizkidan . Horretan ari da , hain zuzen , orain .
PRED:	“ Why are you looking for me ? ” Saul asked . “ Why did you bring me a sword ? ” And Saul asked him , “ Why did you ask me about me ? ” And the spirit of God came down to me ? ”
GOLD:	“ Why have you and the son of Jesse conspired against me ? ” Saul demanded . “ Why did you give him food and a sword ? Why have you consulted God for him ? Why have you encouraged him to kill me , as he is trying to do this very day ? ”

ID:	3057
INPUT:	Ahaztu egin zaituzte adiskideek , ez dira zutaz axola . Etsai batek bezala jo zaitut , gogor zigortu , zeure erru kontaezinengatik , zeure bekatu izugarriengatik .
PRED:	Do n't forget your friends , as though you were afraid of them . But if you were afraid of me , I will punish you for your sins .
GOLD:	All your lovers — your allies — have left youand do not care about you anymore.I have wounded you cruelly , as though I were your enemy.For your sins are many , and your guilt is great .

ID:	3058
INPUT:	Haran bere sorterrian , kaldearren Ur hirian , hil zen , oraino bere aita bizi zela .
PRED:	But when he died , he died because he died , and he died in the grave .
GOLD:	But Haran died in Ur of the Chaldeans , the land of his birth , while his father , Terah , was still living .

ID:	3059
INPUT:	Brontzezko uraska
PRED:	Instructions for the Priests
GOLD:	The Anointing Oil

ID:	3060
INPUT:	Begiratu zuen Eliasek eta horra non ikusten dituen , bere buru aldean , harri goritu baten gainean erretako sutopila eta anto<unk> bat ur . Jan eta edan ondoren , etzan egin zen berriro .
PRED:	When Elijah saw this , he looked up and saw that he was walking along the ground , he took some of the dust on the ground . Then he sat down on the ground and ate it .
GOLD:	He looked around and there beside his head was some bread baked on hot stones and a jar of water ! So he ate and drank and lay down again .

ID:	3061
INPUT:	Hala ere , ez dut neure onginahia harengandik baztertuko , Saulengandik baztertu nuen bezala , baztertu egin bainuen neure aurretik bera .
PRED:	But I did not reject my father , for I refused to turn from Saul 's descendants , just as Saul had done for me .
GOLD:	But my favor will not be taken from him as I took it from Saul , whom I removed from your sight .

ID:	3062
INPUT:	eta oinaze eta zauriengatik zeruko Jainkoa madarikatzen hasi ziren , baina ez ziren beren egintzez damutu .
PRED:	They begged him to cast out the sky , but they refused to obey God 's command , but they did n't obey him .
GOLD:	and they cursed the God of heaven for their pains and sores . But they did not repent of their evil deeds and turn to God .

ID:	3063
INPUT:	Bazen Lazaro izeneko eskale bat ere , haren ate ondoan egoten zena ; zauriz josia zegoen .
PRED:	Then a man named Lazarus , who was sitting on him , but he was sitting on his side .
GOLD:	At his gate lay a poor man named Lazarus who was covered with sores .

ID:	3064
INPUT:	Zitara eta harpa , danbolin eta txistu-soinuaeta ardoa ugari zuen janaldietan ; baina Jaunaren ekintzazez zarete ohartzen , haren egintzakez dituzue aintzakotzat hartzen .
PRED:	You will be filled with tambourine and dancing , and you will be filled with joy in the Lord 's presence . But you do n't need to receive the glory of the Lord .
GOLD:	They furnish wine and lovely music at their grand parties — lyre and harp , tambourine and flute — but they never think about the Lordor notice what he is doing .

ID:	3065
INPUT:	( 35 , <unk> )
PRED:	Building the Ark of the Covenant
GOLD:	Instructions for the Sabbath

ID:	3066
INPUT:	Gupida izango die gizagaixo eta pobreei , bizia salbatuko behartsuei .
PRED:	He will be rich and rich in poverty , but he will save those who are rich .
GOLD:	He feels pity for the weak and the needy , and he will rescue them .

ID:	3067
INPUT:	Gazte izan nintzen , orain zaharturik nago : ez dut sekula ikusi zintzoa bertan behera utzia , ezta haren ondorengorik ere ogi eskean .
PRED:	I became young , and I did n't have a younger son . I saw that he was righteous , and he was buried in his hand .
GOLD:	Once I was young , and now I am old.Yet I have never seen the godly abandonedor their children begging for bread .

ID:	3068
INPUT:	Eta hori guzti<unk> koben ondorengoenerrebeldiagatik , Israelgo erreinuaren bekatuagatik . Nork daramatzaJakoben ondorengoak errebeldiara ? Ez ote Samaria hiriburuak ? Nork darama Judamuinoetako sasikultura ? Ez ote Jerusalemek berak ?
PRED:	I will give you some of the descendants of Hagar , a descendant of Jacob , a son of Hagar , a descendant of Jacob . Who will bring you out of Jerusalem ? Who will bring the hill country of Israel out of Jerusalem ?
GOLD:	And why is this happening ? Because of the rebellion of Israel — yes , the sins of the whole nation.Who is to blame for Israel 's rebellion ? Samaria , its capital city ! Where is the center of idolatry in Judah ? In Jerusalem , its capital !

ID:	3069
INPUT:	eta itun berriaren bitarteko den Jesusengana , Abelena baino indartsuago mintzo den odolaz garbitu gaituenarengana .
PRED:	And to the governor , who is governor of the church , who is greater than the new teaching of the Lord Jesus .
GOLD:	You have come to Jesus , the one who mediates the new covenant between God and people , and to the sprinkled blood , which speaks of forgiveness instead of crying out for vengeance like the blood of Abel .

ID:	3070
INPUT:	Zeuentzako dituzue profeten agintzariak , baita Jainkoak zuen arbasoekin egin zuen ituna ere ; hau esan baitzion Abrahami : Zure ondorengoen bidez lurreko herri guztiak bedeinkatuko ditut .
PRED:	You must listen to your ancestors and obey the commands of your ancestors , for God said to Abraham , “ I will give you the descendants of Abraham , the descendants of Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob . ”
GOLD:	You are the children of those prophets , and you are included in the covenant God promised to your ancestors . For God said to Abraham , ‘ Through your descendants all the families on earth will be blessed . '

ID:	3071
INPUT:	« Errege-agintea hartzean , lege hau kopiaraziko du beretzat , apaiz lebitarren zainpean egongo den liburutik .
PRED:	“ As a result , the king of Israel must keep a covenant between the priests and Levites and Levites .
GOLD:	“ When he sits on the throne as king , he must copy for himself this body of instruction on a scroll in the presence of the Levitical priests .

ID:	3072
INPUT:	Hark , esnaturik , haserre egin zion haizeari , eta aintzirari esan : — Hago isilik ! Geldi ! Gelditu zen haizea eta barealdi handia egin zen .
PRED:	But he was angry with them , and he said to his angel , “ Please let 's go down to the south . ” So he got up and died .
GOLD:	When Jesus woke up , he rebuked the wind and said to the waves , “ Silence ! Be still ! ” Suddenly the wind stopped , and there was a great calm .

ID:	3073
INPUT:	Barneko atariko ateetatik sartzean , lihozko jantziak eramango dituzte soinean ; ez dute artilezko jantzirik eramango zerbitzugintzan barneko atarian eta tenpluan ari direnean .
PRED:	When they entered the courtyard , they must wash their clothes and put their clothes in burlap and put them on their clothes . They must wear clothes , and they will wear their clothes in the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ When they enter the gateway to the inner courtyard , they must wear only linen clothing . They must wear no wool while on duty in the inner courtyard or in the Temple itself .

ID:	3074
INPUT:	Haren egintza harrigarriak gogora ditzagun nahi du : errukior eta bihozbera da Jauna .
PRED:	They are proud and proud , and they are proud and compassionate . They are filled with fear of the Lord .
GOLD:	He causes us to remember his wonderful works.How gracious and merciful is our Lord !

ID:	3075
INPUT:	Honela ziotson Anak : « Barka , ene Jauna ! Neu nauzu zure aurrean Jaunari otoizka ari izan zitzaion emakumea .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” the Lord said , “ I have sinned against you , O Lord , for you have kept me in my presence . ”
GOLD:	“ Sir , do you remember me ? ” Hannah asked . “ I am the very woman who stood here several years ago praying to the Lord .

ID:	3076
INPUT:	Hartu nuen kopa Jaunaren eskutik , eta Jaunak bidali ninduen nazio guztiei edanarazi nien .
PRED:	So I took a cup of the Lord 's hand and sent me to all the nations .
GOLD:	So I took the cup of anger from the Lord and made all the nations drink from it — every nation to which the Lord sent me .

ID:	3077
INPUT:	« Ez kutsatu horrelako jokaerez ; horrela kutsatu dira , hain zuzen , zuen aurretik jaurtiko ditudan herriak .
PRED:	“ You must not defile yourselves by touching them . You must not touch any of these detestable practices that I am going ahead of you .
GOLD:	“ Do not defile yourselves in any of these ways , for the people I am driving out before you have defiled themselves in all these ways .

ID:	3078
INPUT:	« Ohoratu aita-amak , luzaro bizi zaitezen , Jaunak , zeure Jainkoak , ematen dizun lurraldean .
PRED:	“ Honor your father and mother , and you will live in the land the Lord your God is giving you .
GOLD:	“ Honor your father and mother . Then you will live a long , full life in the land the Lord your God is giving you .

ID:	3079
INPUT:	Eta , Jauna lagun zutenez , askok sinetsi zuten eta Jaunarengana bihurtu ziren .
PRED:	Many of the people believed in the Lord 's sight , and many who believed him .
GOLD:	The power of the Lord was with them , and a large number of these Gentiles believed and turned to the Lord .

ID:	3080
INPUT:	Modu ikaragarrian hilko dira eta ez dute hiletarik , ez hilobirik izango : simaurra bezala geldituko dira lurrazalean . Gerrak eta goseak hilko ditu , eta gorpuak hegazti harrapariek eta basapiztiek jango dituzte » .
PRED:	They will die in the land of Moab , and they will no longer be buried in the streets . They will bury their bodies in the bodies of the dead bodies , and their bodies will die in the dead bodies of the dead bodies . ”
GOLD:	They will die from terrible diseases . No one will mourn for them or bury them , and they will lie scattered on the ground like manure . They will die from war and famine , and their bodies will be food for the vultures and wild animals . ”

ID:	3081
INPUT:	Egin duen bekatuaz jabetzean , elkarte osoak zekorra eskainiko du barkamen-oparitzat . Elkarketa-etxolara eramango du ,
PRED:	You must present them to the Lord as a sin offering to purify them , making them right with the Lord .
GOLD:	When they become aware of their sin , the people must bring a young bull as an offering for their sin and present it before the Tabernacle .

ID:	3082
INPUT:	« Zorionekoak Jainkoaren nahia betetzeagatik erasotuak , haiek baitute Jainkoa errege .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits those who obey God 's law , for they have made the Kingdom of God .
GOLD:	God blesses those who are persecuted for doing right , for the Kingdom of Heaven is theirs .

ID:	3083
INPUT:	Jerusalemen hondamena
PRED:	Jehoiachin Rules in Judah
GOLD:	The Temple Destroyed

ID:	3084
INPUT:	Gudari ausart haien ofizialak bi mila eta seiehun familiaburu ziren .
PRED:	These are the leaders of the army who had been appointed by the command of command .
GOLD:	These regiments of mighty warriors were commanded by 2,600 clan leaders .

ID:	3085
INPUT:	Burugabe hori , konturatuko al zara behingoz egintzarik gabeko fedea alferrikakoa dena ?
PRED:	Do n't you think we are so wise ? Are you trying to save us ?
GOLD:	How foolish ! Ca n't you see that faith without good deeds is useless ?

ID:	3086
INPUT:	Zure erabakiak fidagarri dira , zure etxea santutasunez eder , Jauna , egun eta beti .
PRED:	Your homes are glorious , O Lord , and your glorious home is glorious .
GOLD:	Your royal laws can not be changed.Your reign , O Lord , is holy forever and ever .

ID:	3087
INPUT:	Soberako lehen-semeak berreskuratzeko ordain-dirua Aaroni eta beronen semeei emango diezu » .
PRED:	The firstborn sons of Sodom will be bought as a permanent law for Aaron and his sons . ”
GOLD:	Give the silver to Aaron and his sons as the redemption price for the extra firstborn sons . ”

ID:	3088
INPUT:	Jokabide zuzenekoak begirune dio Jainkoari , bide okerretik dabilenak mespretxatu egiten du .
PRED:	Those who fear God will live in heaven , and those who despise the commands of the wicked .
GOLD:	Those who follow the right path fear the Lord ; those who take the wrong path despise him .

ID:	3089
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion Pedrori : « Itzuli ezpata zorrora . Ez ote dut , bada , edan behar Aitak leporatu didan edari samina ? »
PRED:	Jesus said to Peter , “ I have a sword and a sword , and I wo n't have a miraculous signs among the Father ? ”
GOLD:	But Jesus said to Peter , “ Put your sword back into its sheath . Shall I not drink from the cup of suffering the Father has given me ? ”

ID:	3090
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jaunak lur osoa arakatzen du bere begiz , zintzo direnak adoretzeko . Oraingo honetan , ordea , burugabe jokatu duzu ; horregatik , aurrerantzean gerrak izango dira zure aurka » .
PRED:	For the Lord is the one who sits on the earth , and he will punish you for doing what is right . But when you do , you will be terrified , and you will be able to stand against you . ”
GOLD:	The eyes of the Lord search the whole earth in order to strengthen those whose hearts are fully committed to him . What a fool you have been ! From now on you will be at war . ”

ID:	3091
INPUT:	Zahartzaroaz
PRED:	A Message about Zebulun
GOLD:	Concluding Thoughts about the Teacher

ID:	3092
INPUT:	Hodeiz inguratu zara , gure erregua hel ez dakizun .
PRED:	Let us walk through the sun , and he will not destroy you .
GOLD:	You have hidden yourself in a cloudso our prayers can not reach you .

ID:	3093
INPUT:	Estrategiaz egiten da gerra , aholku egokien poderioz lortzen garaipena .
PRED:	It is a trap for a fool , but a fool gives birth to a fool .
GOLD:	So do n't go to war without wise guidance ; victory depends on having many advisers .

ID:	3094
INPUT:	Eraman zeuen anaia eta itzuli gizon harengana .
PRED:	So he returned to Egypt and returned to his brother .
GOLD:	Then take your brother , and go back to the man .

ID:	3095
INPUT:	Jarraitu Jaunari zeuen Jainkoari eta izan begirune berari , gorde aginduak eta egin haren esana , eman kultu Jaunari eta atxiki berari .
PRED:	Put your trust in the Lord your God and do what is good . Follow him and do what is right with the Lord your God .
GOLD:	The false prophets or visionaries who try to lead you astray must be put to death , for they encourage rebellion against the Lord your God , who redeemed you from slavery and brought you out of the land of Egypt . Since they try to lead you astray from the way the Lord your God commanded you to live , you must put them to death . In this way you will purge the evil from among you .

ID:	3096
INPUT:	Berehala , Jesusengana hurbildu eta esan zion : « Agur , Maisu ! » Eta musu eman zion .
PRED:	As soon as Jesus approached him , he called out , “ Rabbi , ” he said . “ Rabbi , ” he said .
GOLD:	So Judas came straight to Jesus . “ Greetings , Rabbi ! ” he exclaimed and gave him the kiss .

ID:	3097
INPUT:	zuk izan ezik , zapuztuak gaituzun Jainko horrek , jadanik gure gudarostearekin gudura joaten ez zaren horrek ?
PRED:	For you have rejected us , O God , who gives us victory over our enemies ?
GOLD:	Oh , please help us against our enemies , for all human help is useless .

ID:	3098
INPUT:	Paulo , Onesimo esklaboaren alde mesede eske
PRED:	Paul 's Call to Persevere
GOLD:	Paul 's Appeal for Onesimus

ID:	3099
INPUT:	Urreztatu urre garbiz , eta ezarri urrezko hegala inguru guztian .
PRED:	Make pure gold rings and attach them to the sides of the altar .
GOLD:	Overlay it with pure gold and run a gold molding around the edge .

ID:	3100
INPUT:	Eta ni ikusten nauenak ni bidali nauena ere ikusten du .
PRED:	And I am the one who sent me , and I am the one who sent me .
GOLD:	For when you see me , you are seeing the one who sent me .

ID:	3101
INPUT:	Bete zuen Aaronek Jaunak Moisesi agindua , eta argimutilaren aurrealdea argitzeko eran egokitu zituen kriseiluak .
PRED:	So Moses did as the Lord commanded Moses and Aaron , and he put the lamps in front of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	So Aaron did this . He set up the seven lamps so they reflected their light forward , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	3102
INPUT:	Benaias , Bedias , Keluhi ,
PRED:	Benaiah , Sherebiah , Shebaniah ,
GOLD:	Benaiah , Bedeiah , Keluhi ,

ID:	3103
INPUT:	Zergatik nahi nauzue salatu , zeuek izanik nire aurka altxatuak ? Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	Why do you want me to stand against me ? ” says the Lord . “ I have waited for you , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	Why do you accuse me of doing wrong ? You are the ones who have rebelled , ” says the Lord .

ID:	3104
INPUT:	Oheratzen naiz eta lokartzen , eta berriro esnatzen , Jauna baitut euskarri .
PRED:	My bed is broken , and I hold back to the Lord , but I hold back to the proud .
GOLD:	I am not afraid of ten thousand enemieswho surround me on every side .

ID:	3105
INPUT:	Entzun iezadazue , beraz , eta jaregin iezaieizue preso hartu dituzuen zeuen senide horiei ; bestela , zuen kontra ere biziki haserretuko da Jauna » .
PRED:	Therefore , listen to me and listen to me , and you will know that I am the Lord your God , who has spoken against you . ”
GOLD:	Listen to me and return these prisoners you have taken , for they are your own relatives . Watch out , because now the Lord 's fierce anger has been turned against you ! ”

ID:	3106
INPUT:	Egun osoan luzatuak nituen eskuakbide txarretik , bere nahierara dabilenherri errebeldeagana ,
PRED:	“ In that day my people will cry out to me , ‘ The land of Egypt is filled with grief .
GOLD:	All day long I opened my arms to a rebellious people.But they follow their own evil pathsand their own crooked schemes .

ID:	3107
INPUT:	Egun hartan , emakumeen antzeko izango dira egiptoarrak ; beldur-ikarak hartuko ditu , Jaun ahalguztidunak eskua beraien aurka jasotzen duela ikustean .
PRED:	On that day the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will be terrified by the power of Egypt , and the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will see that he is going to see the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	In that day the Egyptians will be as weak as women . They will cower in fear beneath the upraised fist of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	3108
INPUT:	Salomonek denei eman zien erantzuna ; ez zen izan erregeak erantzunezineko galdera ilunik .
PRED:	Solomon replied , “ Do n't answer the king , but he would n't answer them . ”
GOLD:	Solomon had answers for all her questions ; nothing was too hard for the king to explain to her .

ID:	3109
INPUT:	« Sarri itzaltzen ote da gaiztoen kriseilua , sarri jausten ote ezbeharra haien gainera , sarri ematen ote Jainkoak zigorra bere suminean ?
PRED:	“ Can the wicked be silent ? Can the wicked be carried into the wilderness ? Does the fierce anger of the wicked be carried into the fire ?
GOLD:	“ Yet the light of the wicked never seems to be extinguished.Do they ever have trouble ? Does God distribute sorrows to them in anger ?

ID:	3110
INPUT:	Ezezagunaren fidatzaileak bere buruari kalte , konpromisorik hartzen ez duenak lasaitasuna ziur .
PRED:	Those who trust in the Lord 's name will be put to trust in him .
GOLD:	There 's danger in putting up security for a stranger 's debt ; it 's safer not to guarantee another person 's debt .

ID:	3111
INPUT:	Gainaldea ere harri bikainez egina zegoen , neurrira landuriko harriz eta zedro-zurez .
PRED:	The total weight of the Temple was also measured by the weight of the cedar trees .
GOLD:	The blocks of high-quality stone used in the walls were also cut to measure , and cedar beams were also used .

ID:	3112
INPUT:	Kenan izan zuenetik , beste zortziehun eta hamabost urtez bizi izan zen , eta seme-alabak izan zituen .
PRED:	After the birth of Mahalalel , Mahalalel lived another 830 years , and he had other sons and daughters .
GOLD:	After the birth of Kenan , Enosh lived another 815 years , and he had other sons and daughters .

ID:	3113
INPUT:	Jaunak bete eta burutu egin du berak iragarria . Jaunaren aurka bekatu egin eta obeditu ez diozuelako gertatu zaizue guztia .
PRED:	The Lord has sinned against you and has sinned against you . He has sinned against you , and he will never sinned against you .
GOLD:	just as he said he would . For these people have sinned against the Lord and disobeyed him . That is why it happened .

ID:	3114
INPUT:	Beraz , eman agindu hori eta sinatu , aldatua izan ez dadin , mediarren eta pertsiarren aldaezineko beste legeak bezala » .
PRED:	So be careful to obey the law and keep it safe because of the law , and it will be different from the other churches . ”
GOLD:	So King Darius signed the law .

ID:	3115
INPUT:	« Zuek sendo iraun duzue nirekin nire probaldietan .
PRED:	“ You must keep my covenant with me and keep my covenant with me .
GOLD:	“ You have stayed with me in my time of trial .

ID:	3116
INPUT:	Baina Paulok erantzun zigun : « Zer dela-eta ari zarete negarrez ? Bihozgabetu egin nahi al nauzue ? Prest nago , lotua izateko ez ezik , Jerusalemen hiltzeko ere , Jesus Jaunarengatik » .
PRED:	But Paul replied , “ What are you doing ? Why are you willing to weep for me ? Do you want me to repent of my sins and turn away from the Lord Jesus Christ ? ”
GOLD:	But he said , “ Why all this weeping ? You are breaking my heart ! I am ready not only to be jailed at Jerusalem but even to die for the sake of the Lord Jesus . ”

ID:	3117
INPUT:	Bigarren hegaztia erre-opari gisa eskainiko du , arautua dagoen eran . Era honetan egingo du apaizak bekatuaren barkamen-ohikunea eta barkatua izango du pertsona horrek bekatua .
PRED:	The priest will offer the bird as a burnt offering to the Lord . Through this process , the priest will purify the person from the community , making them right with the Lord , making them right with the Lord .
GOLD:	The priest will then prepare the second bird as a burnt offering , following all the procedures that have been prescribed . Through this process the priest will purify you from your sin , making you right with the Lord , and you will be forgiven .

ID:	3118
INPUT:	Anaiak Joseren aurrez aurre zeuden eseriak , zaharrenetik gazteenera , eta harriturik elkarri begira .
PRED:	When Joseph 's brothers were old , he took some of the young men and brought them out of the town .
GOLD:	Joseph told each of his brothers where to sit , and to their amazement , he seated them according to age , from oldest to youngest .

ID:	3119
INPUT:	Biguna naiz , errege gantzutua izan arren . Gizon hauek , ordea , Tzeruiaren semeok , ni baino gogorragoak dira . Baina itzul diezaiola Jaunak gaizkileari berak besteri egindako kaltea ! »
PRED:	But I am the king of Israel , but you are my lord the king . But you are my own flesh , but I do n't need to do what I have done . ”
GOLD:	And even though I am the anointed king , these two sons of Zeruiah — Joab and Abishai — are too strong for me to control . So may the Lord repay these evil men for their evil deeds . ”

ID:	3120
INPUT:	Geziontziak durundi egiten du beraren gainean , lantzak eta azkonak distira ;
PRED:	They keep on the Sabbath day of the boat , and their eyes were on the side of the boat .
GOLD:	The arrows rattle against it , and the spear and javelin flash .

ID:	3121
INPUT:	Zeuena ez duzuen aberastasunarekin fidatzekoak izan ez bazarete , nork eman benetan dagokizuena ?
PRED:	Do n't you remember what you have done to you ? Do n't you know what you have done ?
GOLD:	And if you are not faithful with other people 's things , why should you be trusted with things of your own ?

ID:	3122
INPUT:	Horregatik , madarikazioak hartua du lurra , eta bertan bizi direnekzigorra jasan behar . Horregatik , lurreko bizilagunak galtzen ari dira ; banaka batzuk besterikez dira gelditzen .
PRED:	That is why the body of death is given to those who live in the dead , and those who live in the dead will die . That is why the dead will not die .
GOLD:	Therefore , a curse consumes the earth.Its people must pay the price for their sin.They are destroyed by fire , and only a few are left alive .

ID:	3123
INPUT:	Zatirik onena aukeratu du beretzat , zeren eta , buruzagiaren partea non , han biltzen baitiraherriko nagusiak . Jaunaren nahia bete du , Jaunak Israelen aldehartutako erabakiak » .
PRED:	The Lord has chosen a case against his people , and he will gather his chosen people in the south , for he will restore the fortunes of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	The people of Gad took the best land for themselves ; a leader 's share was assigned to them.When the leaders of the people were assembled , they carried out the Lord 's justiceand obeyed his regulations for Israel . ”

ID:	3124
INPUT:	« Abrahamen , Isaaken eta Jakoben Jainkoak , gure arbasoen Jainkoak , aintzaz bete du Jesus bere zerbitzaria , zuek agintarien eskuetara eman eta Pilatoren aurrean ukatu zenutena , honek askatzea erabaki zuen arren .
PRED:	“ This is the God of Jacob , the God of Jacob , the God of his ancestors , the God of Abraham , had given him his servant Isaac , and he released him to release him .
GOLD:	For it is the God of Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob — the God of all our ancestors — who has brought glory to his servant Jesus by doing this . This is the same Jesus whom you handed over and rejected before Pilate , despite Pilate 's decision to release him .

ID:	3125
INPUT:	Jaitsi zen , bada , berehala eta pozik hartu zuen etxean .
PRED:	So he got up and took the door and took it home .
GOLD:	Zacchaeus quickly climbed down and took Jesus to his house in great excitement and joy .

ID:	3126
INPUT:	Gero , zazpi ogiak eta arrainak hartu eta , Jainkoari esker oneko otoitza egin ondoren , zatitu eta bere ikasleei eman zizkien , eta ikasleek jendeari .
PRED:	Then he took seven loaves of bread and gave thanks to God and gave thanks to God , and he gave thanks to his disciples and taught them to the disciples .
GOLD:	Then he took the seven loaves and the fish , thanked God for them , and broke them into pieces . He gave them to the disciples , who distributed the food to the crowd .

ID:	3127
INPUT:	Behin batean , Jaunaren aurrera aurkeztu ziren beraren zeruko zerbitzariak , eta han zen Satan ere .
PRED:	One day they went to the Lord 's Temple , and the servant of the Lord came to appear before him .
GOLD:	One day the members of the heavenly court came again to present themselves before the Lord , and the Accuser , Satan , came with them .

ID:	3128
INPUT:	gizarte maltzur eta gaizto honen erdian garbi eta akats gabe , Jainkoaren seme-alaba errugabe , izan zaitezten ; gizarte honetan izarrek munduan bezala egiten duzue argi ,
PRED:	You are wicked and blameless in the sight of the wicked , and you are blameless in the sight of God . You are blameless in this world .
GOLD:	so that no one can criticize you . Live clean , innocent lives as children of God , shining like bright lights in a world full of crooked and perverse people .

ID:	3129
INPUT:	Damaskorentzat
PRED:	A Message about Damascus
GOLD:	A Message about Damascus

ID:	3130
INPUT:	Hogeita bat urte zituen Sedekiasek errege izaten hastean , eta hamaika urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen . Haren amak Hamutal zuen izena , eta Libnako Jeremiasen alaba zen .
PRED:	Zedekiah was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years . His mother was Libnah . His mother was Libnah .
GOLD:	Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years . His mother was Hamutal , the daughter of Jeremiah from Libnah .

ID:	3131
INPUT:	Agian , atzera egineta damutuko da , eta ondasunez bedeinkatukozaituzte ostera . Orduan , labore-opariaketa isur-opariakegin ahal izango dizkiozueJaunari , zeuen Jainkoari .
PRED:	Then the Lord will bless you , and he will bless you . Then he will bless you with a blessing of blessing . Then you will be a great offering to the Lord your God , the God of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	Who knows ? Perhaps he will give you a reprieve , sending you a blessing instead of this curse.Perhaps you will be able to offer grain and wineto the Lord your God as before .

ID:	3132
INPUT:	Zeruak baino garaiagoa da : zer egingo duzu ? Leizeak baino sakonagoa : nola ezagutuko duzu ?
PRED:	You are more valuable than the heavens , and you are more wonderful than the stars ?
GOLD:	Such knowledge is higher than the heavens — and who are you ? It is deeper than the underworld — what do you know ?

ID:	3133
INPUT:	Horra beren harrokeriagatikjasoko duten zigorra , Jaun ahalguztidunaren herriairaindu baitute eta gutxietsi .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has broken all his people . ”
GOLD:	They will receive the wages of their pride , for they have scoffed at the people of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	3134
INPUT:	Barauaren barauz , zangoak koloka ditut , gorputza argal eta ihar .
PRED:	I will be the one who attacks me , and I will break my chains .
GOLD:	My knees are weak from fasting , and I am skin and bones .

ID:	3135
INPUT:	Badakit , bai , handia dela Jauna , jainko guztien aldean handia gure Jauna .
PRED:	O Lord , I know that the Lord is great , and he is our God .
GOLD:	I know the greatness of the Lord — that our Lord is greater than any other god .

ID:	3136
INPUT:	Oraingo honetan ez zaituztet bidenabar bakarrik ikusi nahi . Badut itxaropen luzaroxeago egongo naizela zuekin , Jaunak hala nahi badu .
PRED:	I am not writing to you , dear brothers and sisters , if I do n't want to visit you , I will go with you as though I am the Lord .
GOLD:	This time I do n't want to make just a short visit and then go right on . I want to come and stay awhile , if the Lord will let me .

ID:	3137
INPUT:	Noiz arte horrela ? Zer dute buruan profeta horiek , gezurra eta beren burutazio hutsalak iragartzeko ?
PRED:	How long will these people go ? Why are they ashamed of their lies ? They are all ashamed of their lies ?
GOLD:	How long will this go on ? If they are prophets , they are prophets of deceit , inventing everything they say .

ID:	3138
INPUT:	Ez zaitez bizkorregi haserretu , ergelena baita haserretzea .
PRED:	Do n't be angry with anger , but do n't be angry with anger .
GOLD:	Control your temper , for anger labels you a fool .

ID:	3139
INPUT:	Honela esaten zion Joanek bataiatzera zetorkion jendeari : « Sugekumeok ! Nork esan dizue gainean duzuen haserre-zigorrari ihes egingo diozuela ?
PRED:	When John heard this , he was baptized with a crowd . “ Who will betray you ? ” he asked . “ How can you escape the anger of the Jews ? ”
GOLD:	When the crowds came to John for baptism , he said , “ You brood of snakes ! Who warned you to flee the coming wrath ?

ID:	3140
INPUT:	Neskatxa Pauloren eta gure atzetik zetorren , deiadarka : « Gizon hauek goi-goiko Jainkoaren zerbitzariak dira , eta salbamen-bidea iragartzen dizuete » .
PRED:	She came from the Ark of the Covenant and shouted , “ The people of the Tabernacle are God 's servants , and they are watching over the mountain of God . ”
GOLD:	She followed Paul and the rest of us , shouting , “ These men are servants of the Most High God , and they have come to tell you how to be saved . ”

ID:	3141
INPUT:	Hala ere , zuei dagokizuenez , badut konfiantza Jaunak iritzi bereko egingo zaituztela gai honetan ; baina zuek nahasten zaituenak , edozein dela ere , izango du bere zigorra .
PRED:	But I will give you your kindness to those who trust in the Lord , just as the Lord has promised you , but you will not be punished for your own sake .
GOLD:	I am trusting the Lord to keep you from believing false teachings . God will judge that person , whoever he is , who has been confusing you .

ID:	3142
INPUT:	Joiakimen erregealdian guda-ateraldi bat egin zuen Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosorrek , eta Joiakim hiru urtez haren menpeko izan zen ; gero , hau berriro jaiki zen haren kontra .
PRED:	At the end of the reign of Jehoiakim , the king of Babylon , had become king of Babylon , and he reigned in Jerusalem three years . Then he became the next king .
GOLD:	During Jehoiakim 's reign , King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon invaded the land of Judah . Jehoiakim surrendered and paid him tribute for three years but then rebelled .

ID:	3143
INPUT:	Hori dela eta , zuhurrak nahiago du isildugaiztoaldi honetan .
PRED:	The words of the wicked will be silent ; the mouth of the wicked will be silent .
GOLD:	So those who are smart keep their mouths shut , for it is an evil time .

ID:	3144
INPUT:	Oraindik hiritik urrutira gabe zeudela , Josek etxeko arduradunari esan zion : « Zoaz gizon horien atzetik eta , atzemandakoan , esaiezu : Zergatik itzuli duzue gaizkia ongiaren truke ?
PRED:	So Joseph left the distance and said to Joseph , “ Go home and tell me , ‘ Go back to your family , and tell me what you have done for me . Why have you returned from your land ? '
GOLD:	But when they had gone only a short distance and were barely out of the city , Joseph said to his palace manager , “ Chase after them and stop them . When you catch up with them , ask them , ‘ Why have you repaid my kindness with such evil ?

ID:	3145
INPUT:	« Bidali erbesteratu guztiei Nehlamgo Xemaiasi buruzko nire mezu hau : Nik bidalia izan gabe , nire izenean hitz egin eta gezurrezko konfiantza ematen dizuenez gero ,
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says to Shemaiah , the prophet of Babylon , says : I have told you what I have done to you , and I have told you what I have done .
GOLD:	“ Send an open letter to all the exiles in Babylon . Tell them , ‘ This is what the Lord says concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite : Since he has prophesied to you when I did not send him and has tricked you into believing his lies ,

ID:	3146
INPUT:	Zortzigarren urtean berriro ereingo duzue ; baina bitartean , bederatzigarren urtean uzta bildu artean , uzta zaharretik jan ahal izango duzue .
PRED:	On the seventh year you must plant the crops that grow up , but you must eat the crops that grow up . Then you may eat the crops of the harvest .
GOLD:	When you plant your fields in the eighth year , you will still be eating from the large crop of the sixth year . In fact , you will still be eating from that large crop when the new crop is harvested in the ninth year .

ID:	3147
INPUT:	Zer ikustera irten zineten bestela ? Soineko apainez jantzitako gizona ? Jantzi apainekoak errege-jauregietan bizi ohi dira .
PRED:	What do you want to see the man dressed in clothes ? Why are you dressed in the royal palace ? ”
GOLD:	Or were you expecting to see a man dressed in expensive clothes ? No , people with expensive clothes live in palaces .

ID:	3148
INPUT:	Bere zaldien apa<unk> kale guztiak zanpatuko dizkizu , bizilagunak ezpataz garbitukoeta zutabe sendoakbotako behera .
PRED:	You will be the sword of your sword , and your sword will be destroyed by your sword , and your sword will be cut down .
GOLD:	His horsemen will trample through every street in the city . They will butcher your people , and your strong pillars will topple .

ID:	3149
INPUT:	Bere etxea ongi gobernatzen eta seme-alabak mendetasunean eta errespetuan hezten jakin behar du ;
PRED:	She sits at home in her house , and her children stay in the hill country .
GOLD:	He must manage his own family well , having children who respect and obey him .

ID:	3150
INPUT:	Eta erantsi zuen : — Gizakiaren barrutik irteten denak , horrek bai egiten duela gizakia zikin !
PRED:	And he replied , “ This man 's blood has taken from human eyes , so that everyone can see it ! ”
GOLD:	And then he added , “ It is what comes from inside that defiles you .

ID:	3151
INPUT:	Akazia-zurezko mahaia egin zuen : metro bat luze , metro erdi bat zabal eta hirurogeita hamabost zentimetro gora .
PRED:	Then Bezalel made a table of acacia wood , 27 inches wide , 27 inches wide , and 27 inches wide .
GOLD:	Then Bezalel made the table of acacia wood , 36 inches long , 18 inches wide , and 27 inches high .

ID:	3152
INPUT:	Zeure oinak galbidean jartzen bazaitu , moztu ; hobe duzu hankamotz betiko bizitzan sartu , bi oinekin infernura jaurtia izan baino . (
PRED:	If you turn away from your feet , cut off your head and throw it into two feet , for it is better than twelve feet than twelve feet .
GOLD:	If your foot causes you to sin , cut it off . It 's better to enter eternal life with only one foot than to be thrown into hell with two feet .

ID:	3153
INPUT:	Hori ikusi zuen gizon batek adierazi zion Joabi : — Absalom arteondo batetik zintzilik ikusi dut .
PRED:	Then a man saw this man coming to Joab and said , “ I saw two men coming out of the battle . ”
GOLD:	One of David 's men saw what had happened and told Joab , “ I saw Absalom dangling from a great tree . ”

ID:	3154
INPUT:	<unk> TU ERA<unk> DEEN <unk> TOLAKUNTZA ( 35 , 1 — 40 , 38 )
PRED:	The
GOLD:	Instructions for the Sabbath

ID:	3155
INPUT:	ez du inor zapaltzen eta bahituran hartua itzuli egiten du ; ez du lapurretarik egiten , baizik eta jatekoa ematen dio gosetuari , eta jantzia biluzik dagoenari ;
PRED:	For no one can rob them of the poor and rob them of the poor . Instead , they are poor and naked , naked , and naked , and naked .
GOLD:	He is a merciful creditor , not keeping the items given as security by poor debtors . He does not rob the poor but instead gives food to the hungry and provides clothes for the needy .

ID:	3156
INPUT:	Bekarzkigute bi zekor . Aukera bezate horiek bat , zatikatu eta ezar bezate egur-sortaren gainean , baina surik eman gabe . Nik ere horixe bera eginen dut beste zekorrarekin : egur-sortaren gainean ezarri , baina surik eman gabe .
PRED:	Let us say , “ Let 's go down to the hills . Let us go down into the fire , for I have placed them on the fire of the fire . I have placed them on the fire on the fire . ”
GOLD:	Now bring two bulls . The prophets of Baal may choose whichever one they wish and cut it into pieces and lay it on the wood of their altar , but without setting fire to it . I will prepare the other bull and lay it on the wood on the altar , but not set fire to it .

ID:	3157
INPUT:	Hitz hauek esan ondoren , Jerusalemera bidean gora jarraitu zuen Jesusek , denen aurretik .
PRED:	As soon as Jesus left Jerusalem , he left the city and followed him .
GOLD:	After telling this story , Jesus went on toward Jerusalem , walking ahead of his disciples .

ID:	3158
INPUT:	Handia da zuengan dudan konfiantza eta harro nago zuengatik . Adorez betea nago eta pozez gainezka neure atsekabe guztien artean .
PRED:	Then I will give you a new heart , and I will give you great joy . I will delight in you , and I will delight in you .
GOLD:	I have the highest confidence in you , and I take great pride in you . You have greatly encouraged me and made me happy despite all our troubles .

ID:	3159
INPUT:	Aholkatu behin eta berriz gauza hauek , akats gabeak izan daitezen .
PRED:	Teach these things to encourage each other , and make them holy .
GOLD:	Give these instructions to the church so that no one will be open to criticism .

ID:	3160
INPUT:	<unk> gauean , nire jabea den eta nik zerbitzatzen dudan Jainkoaren aingerua agertu zait ,
PRED:	In the same way , I have learned that I have seen the angel of God , and I have seen the angel of God .
GOLD:	For last night an angel of the God to whom I belong and whom I serve stood beside me ,

ID:	3161
INPUT:	Israeldarrek , indartsuago egin zirenean , esklabo-lanetara behartu zituzten kanaandarrak , baina ezin izan zituzten handik egotzi .
PRED:	When the Israelites oppressed the Israelites , they forced them to drive out the slaves of the land , but they could n't help them .
GOLD:	Later , however , when the Israelites became strong enough , they forced the Canaanites to work as slaves . But they did not drive them out of the land .

ID:	3162
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak setatsu bihurtu zuen faraoia , israeldarrei joaten ez uzteko .
PRED:	But the Lord hardened Pharaoh 's heart , and the people of Israel refused to let them go .
GOLD:	But the Lord hardened Pharaoh 's heart again , so he refused to let the people go .

ID:	3163
INPUT:	Israeldarrek , berriz , esan zioten Jaunari : « Bekatu egin dugu , bai . Egizu gurekin egokien iruditzen zaizuna . Baina gaur bederen salba gaitzazu ! »
PRED:	But the Israelites said to the Lord , “ We have sinned against the Lord , and we have made you a covenant with you . ”
GOLD:	But the Israelites pleaded with the Lord and said , “ We have sinned . Punish us as you see fit , only rescue us today from our enemies . ”

ID:	3164
INPUT:	Jakin behar duzue , senideok , bizi dudan egoera berri onaren aurrerapenerako lagungarri gertatu dela .
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , listen to me , you who live in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	And I want you to know , my dear brothers and sisters , that everything that has happened to me here has helped to spread the Good News .

ID:	3165
INPUT:	« Zergatik eman argia zoritxarrekoari , zergatik bizia atsekabea baizik ez dutenei ?
PRED:	“ Why are you doing wrong ? Why are you doing wrong ? Why are you trying to do wrong ?
GOLD:	“ Oh , why give light to those in misery , and life to those who are bitter ?

ID:	3166
INPUT:	Jende guztiak Jesus ukitu nahi zuen , denak sendatzen zituen halako indar bat baitzerion .
PRED:	So the crowds began to destroy Jesus , for he healed a huge crowd that had healed him .
GOLD:	Everyone tried to touch him , because healing power went out from him , and he healed everyone .

ID:	3167
INPUT:	Jainkoa dut lekuko ez diodala gezurrik idazten dizuedan honetan .
PRED:	I am writing to you that I am not writing to you in my liars .
GOLD:	I declare before God that what I am writing to you is not a lie .

ID:	3168
INPUT:	Egiptotik , burdina urtzeko labe hartatik , atera nituenean , zuen gurasoekin egin nuen ituna bera da . Orduan agindu nien : “ Nire mintzoa aditu eta nik agindutako guztia betetzen baduzue , nire herri izango zarete eta ni zuen Jainko ,
PRED:	When I brought you out of Egypt , I will bring you out of Egypt with your ancestors , and you will say , ‘ You will be my God , and you will be my people , and you will be my God .
GOLD:	For I said to your ancestors when I brought them out of the iron-smelting furnace of Egypt , “ If you obey me and do whatever I command you , then you will be my people , and I will be your God . ”

ID:	3169
INPUT:	Hain zuzen , hauxe eskatu genizun Egipton geundela : « Utzi egiptoarrentzat lanean jarraitzen . Hobe dugu hemen esklabo izan , basamortuan hil baino » .
PRED:	That is why I begged you to live in Egypt , “ We have been slaves in Egypt , but we have been slaves to Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Did n't we tell you this would happen while we were still in Egypt ? We said , ‘ Leave us alone ! Let us be slaves to the Egyptians . It 's better to be a slave in Egypt than a corpse in the wilderness ! ' ”

ID:	3170
INPUT:	Salba nazazu , ene Jainko , zarena zarelako ! Defenda nazazu zeure ahalmenaz !
PRED:	Rescue me from my enemies ; rescue me from your power ; rescue me from your power .
GOLD:	For strangers are attacking me ; violent people are trying to kill me.They care nothing for God.Interlude

ID:	3171
INPUT:	Egiptoarrak gizaki dira , ez jainko , haien zaldiak hezur eta mami huts , ez espiritu . Luzatuko du Jaunak eskua , eta babeslea nahiz babestuabiak eroriko dira , biak batera galduko .
PRED:	The gods of Egypt will not worship idols of Egypt , nor any other gods , nor the other gods , or the other gods , or the other gods , or the other gods will be destroyed .
GOLD:	For these Egyptians are mere humans , not God ! Their horses are puny flesh , not mighty spirits ! When the Lord raises his fist against them , those who help will stumble , and those being helped will fall.They will all fall down and die together .

ID:	3172
INPUT:	Izan ere , ongi finkaturiko arrazoien bidez egiten zien aurre juduei denen aurrean , Liburu Santuen bidez Jesus zela Mesias frogatuz .
PRED:	For he decided that the Messiah was appointed by the Jewish leaders to be appointed by the Jewish leaders to prove that the Messiah was the Messiah .
GOLD:	He refuted the Jews with powerful arguments in public debate . Using the Scriptures , he explained to them that Jesus was the Messiah .

ID:	3173
INPUT:	JA<unk> DURIA ( 28 , <unk> )
PRED:	The Land Given to the
GOLD:	Job Speaks of Wisdom and Understanding

ID:	3174
INPUT:	Jesus Kafarnaum herrian sartu zenean , erromatar ehuntari bat hurbildu zitzaion
PRED:	When Jesus arrived in Capernaum , a man named Simon ( a man named Simon ) ,
GOLD:	When Jesus returned to Capernaum , a Roman officer came and pleaded with him ,

ID:	3175
INPUT:	Beldurra sartu nahi ziguten , adorea galdu eta lana utziko genuen ustetan . « Eta orain , Jauna , sendotu nire asmoa ! »
PRED:	They were afraid of them , and they were afraid of them , so we thought , “ The Lord has healed me ! ”
GOLD:	They were just trying to intimidate us , imagining that they could discourage us and stop the work . So I continued the work with even greater determination .

ID:	3176
INPUT:	Horrela , etsaiek atzerriratuko dituzten lurralde horretan , beren bihotz osoz eta gogo guztiz zuregana itzuli eta beren gurasoei eman zenien lurralderantz begira , zuk hautatu duzun hirirantz eta nik eraiki dizudan tenplurantz begira , otoitz egiten badizute ,
PRED:	That is why I will bring you into the land I have given to your ancestors , Isaac , and Jacob , and Jacob , Isaac , and Jacob , Isaac , and Jacob , and Jacob , Isaac , and Jacob .
GOLD:	If they turn to you with their whole heart and soul in the land of their captivity and pray toward the land you gave to their ancestors — toward this city you have chosen , and toward this Temple I have built to honor your name —

ID:	3177
INPUT:	Eta israeldarrakberriro jabetu ahal izango diraEdom lurraldetiketa nireak izan dirennazio guztietatikgeratzen denaz . Hala diot nik , hori guztia egingo du<unk> honek » .
PRED:	Then I will cleanse the land of Edom , and all the people of Edom will be able to obey all the commands I have given them . I will remove all their pagan shrines , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	And Israel will possess what is left of Edomand all the nations I have called to be mine . ” The Lord has spoken , and he will do these things .

ID:	3178
INPUT:	Judara iritsiko da , urpean hartuko du , dena leporaino estaliko . Haren ur-adarrekluze-zabal osoanestaliko dute zure lurraldea , oi Emmanuel ! »
PRED:	The people of Judah will go up to the land of Judah , and the people of Judah will cry out to him , and they will give glory to your name . ”
GOLD:	and sweep into Judah until it is chin deep . It will spread its wings , submerging your land from one end to the other , O Immanuel .

ID:	3179
INPUT:	SARRERA ( 1 , <unk> )
PRED:	Jesus Is God 's Message
GOLD:	God 's Good News

ID:	3180
INPUT:	Orduan , adarrak ekartzera joan eta etxolak egin zituen herriak : batak bere etxe gainean , besteak Jainkoaren etxeko atarietan nahiz Ur-ateko plazan nahiz Efraimen ateko plazan .
PRED:	Then he brought the people back to the homes of the Tabernacle and set them up to the Temple of God . He also built the Temple of the Lord , the God of Ephraim , and all the people of Ephraim .
GOLD:	So the people went out and cut branches and used them to build shelters on the roofs of their houses , in their courtyards , in the courtyards of God 's Temple , or in the squares just inside the Water Gate and the Ephraim Gate .

ID:	3181
INPUT:	Zorionaren zain , eta zoritxarra etorri zait ; argia itxaroten , eta iluntasuna iritsi .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who wait for me , for the light shines on the darkness and the darkness .
GOLD:	So I looked for good , but evil came instead.I waited for the light , but darkness fell .

ID:	3182
INPUT:	bide latzetan sendo ezarri ditut oinak ; zure arrastotik ez dira aldendu nire urratsak .
PRED:	I will walk in your path , and you will not abandon me .
GOLD:	My steps have stayed on your path ; I have not wavered from following you .

ID:	3183
INPUT:	Zergatik mintzo den Jesus parabola bidez
PRED:	Parable of the Mustard Seed
GOLD:	Parable of the Yeast

ID:	3184
INPUT:	Horregatik , honela dio Jaunak : « Hara , zorigaitza dara<unk> gogoanjende horren kontra ; ezin izango dute handik lepoa atera , ezta burua tente ibili ere , zorigaitz-egunak izango baitira » .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says : “ Look , the people of Israel are planning to destroy the people of Israel . They will have a single one of them , but a single one of them will be alone . ”
GOLD:	But this is what the Lord says : “ I will reward your evil with evil ; you wo n't be able to pull your neck out of the noose.You will no longer walk around proudly , for it will be a terrible time . ”

ID:	3185
INPUT:	Egun txarraketorraraziko dizkizue Jaunakzuri , zeure herriari eta familiari , Israelgo erreinua Judarengandikbereizi zenez geroizan ez diren bezalako egunak ; hots , Asiriako erregeabidaliko dizue .
PRED:	On that day you will come to the Lord your God , the king of Israel , and your descendants will be like a king of Assyria . You will not serve the king of Assyria .
GOLD:	“ Then the Lord will bring things on you , your nation , and your family unlike anything since Israel broke away from Judah . He will bring the king of Assyria upon you ! ”

ID:	3186
INPUT:	Orduan , Saulek mandatariak igorri zizkion Jeseri , esatera : « Bidal iezadazu artzain dabilen zeure seme David » .
PRED:	Then Saul sent messengers to Saul and told him , “ Send me into a shepherd . Send me a shepherd , my son David . ”
GOLD:	So Saul sent messengers to Jesse to say , “ Send me your son David , the shepherd . ”

ID:	3187
INPUT:	Mexulam , Abias , Miiamin ,
PRED:	Azariah , Azariah , Meshullam ,
GOLD:	Maaziah , Bilgai , and Shemaiah . These were the priests .

ID:	3188
INPUT:	Bai , libratu dit bizia heriotzatik , begiak negarretik , oinak erortzetik .
PRED:	For he rescues me from the grave ; he rescues me from the dust .
GOLD:	He has saved me from death , my eyes from tears , my feet from stumbling .

ID:	3189
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Oraindik pixka batean argia zeuen artean duzue ; ibili argia duzuen bitartean , ilunpeak harrapa ez zaitzaten , ilunpetan dabilenak ez baitaki nora doan .
PRED:	Jesus told them , “ Do n't let your light shine out among you . You will see the light of darkness , but when you do n't look at darkness , you wo n't look at the darkness . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ My light will shine for you just a little longer . Walk in the light while you can , so the darkness will not overtake you . Those who walk in the darkness can not see where they are going .

ID:	3190
INPUT:	Etsaiak begira ditut , niri zelatan daudenek elkar hartu dute .
PRED:	My enemies surround me ; they are my enemies ; they have scattered my enemies .
GOLD:	For my enemies are whispering against me.They are plotting together to kill me .

ID:	3191
INPUT:	Gogoan ditut , Jauna , zure egintza handiak , gogoan , bai , zure aspaldiko mirariak .
PRED:	I will praise you , O Lord , for I will rescue you from your power .
GOLD:	They are constantly in my thoughts.I can not stop thinking about your mighty works .

ID:	3192
INPUT:	Eta geldi litekeen zilar eta urrearekin , zeuk eta zure ahaideek hobekien deritzozuena egingo duzu , zeuen Jainkoaren borondatearen arabera .
PRED:	Give them your gifts and gold , gold , silver , gold , and gold , and your descendants will be your God .
GOLD:	Any silver and gold that is left over may be used in whatever way you and your colleagues feel is the will of your God .

ID:	3193
INPUT:	Lurraldearen banaketa zozketaz bakarrik egingo da , leinu bakoitzeko senitarteen ondare-zatia lagun-kopuruaren araberakoa izango bada ere .
PRED:	The land will be divided among the tribes of Israel , and each tribe will be assigned to the clans of the tribe of Levi will be assigned to the clans of the tribe of Levi .
GOLD:	But you must assign the land by lot , and give land to each ancestral tribe according to the number of names on the list .

ID:	3194
INPUT:	Desbideraturik dabiltza gaizkileak ; onginahia eta leialtasuna ongileentzat .
PRED:	There is a reward for those who do evil , but the tongue of a person is a father .
GOLD:	If you plan to do evil , you will be lost ; if you plan to do good , you will receive unfailing love and faithfulness .

ID:	3195
INPUT:	Zaturenak <unk> ;
PRED:	The family of Hashum223
GOLD:	The family of Zattu945

ID:	3196
INPUT:	Efraimekin batera Manases eta Benjaminen leinuak etxolatuko dira . Manasestarren buruzagia Pedahtzurren seme Gameliel izango da ,
PRED:	The clans of Ephraim and Ephraim will be the leader of the clans of Ephraim . One of the clans of Ephraim will be the leader of the clans of Ephraim .
GOLD:	ManassehGamaliel son of Pedahzur32,200

ID:	3197
INPUT:	Jauna Sinai mendiaren gailurrera jaitsi eta bertara dei egin zion Moisesi . Igo zen Moises ,
PRED:	Then Moses went down to Mount Sinai and went down to Mount Sinai .
GOLD:	The Lord came down on the top of Mount Sinai and called Moses to the top of the mountain . So Moses climbed the mountain .

ID:	3198
INPUT:	Hona hemen Jaunak Amotzen seme Isaiasi Juda eta Jerusalemi buruz agertu zion mezua , Uzias , Jotam , Akaz eta Ezekias Judako errege zirela .
PRED:	This is the message that Isaiah son of Amoz received concerning Judah and Jerusalem : Uzziah son of Uzziah , Ahaz , the king of Judah , had appeared to King Uzziah of Judah .
GOLD:	These are the visions that Isaiah son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem . He saw these visions during the years when Uzziah , Jotham , Ahaz , and Hezekiah were kings of Judah .

ID:	3199
INPUT:	Pilatok esan zion : — Ez al duzu ezer erantzun behar ? Begira zenbat gauzaz salatzen zaituzten .
PRED:	Pilate replied , “ Do n't you think you 're going to eat something like to eat ? ”
GOLD:	and Pilate asked him , “ Are n't you going to answer them ? What about all these charges they are bringing against you ? ”

ID:	3200
INPUT:	Haiek , Jesus ahuspez gurtu ondoren , Jerusalemera itzuli ziren poz-pozik .
PRED:	Then Jesus bowed low to Jerusalem and worshiped Jesus .
GOLD:	So they worshiped him and then returned to Jerusalem filled with great joy .

ID:	3201
INPUT:	eta honela mintzatu zitzaien : « Zergatik ari zarete jendeak adierazi dizkidan gauza izugarri horiek egiten ?
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Why are you looking for these people ? Why did you look like these people ?
GOLD:	Eli said to them , “ I have been hearing reports from all the people about the wicked things you are doing . Why do you keep sinning ?

ID:	3202
INPUT:	« Ez gaitzetsi inor »
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	Do Not Judge Others

ID:	3203
INPUT:	Agripak Festori esan zion : — Gizon hau aska zitekeen , enperadoreagana jo izan ez balu .
PRED:	Then Festus said to him , “ This man has been arguing with this man , but he did n't have any more kind . ”
GOLD:	And Agrippa said to Festus , “ He could have been set free if he had n't appealed to Caesar . ”

ID:	3204
INPUT:	Mikak erantzun : — Neuk egindako jainko-irudiak eta apaiza osturik zoazte ; ezer gabe utzi nauzue , eta zer dudan galdetu , gainera ?
PRED:	But Micah replied , “ I am the gods of heaven and the other gods , and you have left me . Why have you abandoned me ? Why have you abandoned me ? ”
GOLD:	“ What do you mean , ‘ What 's the matter ? ' ” Micah replied . “ You 've taken away all the gods I have made , and my priest , and I have nothing left ! ”

ID:	3205
INPUT:	Jehu jaiki eta etxean sartu zen . Orduan , profetak olioa isuri zion buru gainera , esanez : « Hau dio Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak : “ Ene herri Israelen errege gantzutzen zaitut ” .
PRED:	Then Jesus went into his home . Then the prophet went into his home and said , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : ‘ The Lord , the God of Israel , have spoken ! '
GOLD:	So Jehu left the others and went into the house . Then the young prophet poured the oil over Jehu 's head and said , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : I anoint you king over the Lord 's people , Israel .

ID:	3206
INPUT:	Datorrela , bai , zuzenbideaura bezala , datorrela justizia , beti darion erreka bezala .
PRED:	You have come to the humble , just as Christ lives , just as he is righteous .
GOLD:	Instead , I want to see a mighty flood of justice , an endless river of righteous living .

ID:	3207
INPUT:	Bere seme Isaak eta Ismaelek ehortzi zuten Makpelako harpean , Tzohar hititaren seme Efronen soroan , Mambreren aurrez aurre .
PRED:	The sons of Abraham and his sons were buried in the cave of Machpelah , near Mamre , near Mamre .
GOLD:	His sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah , near Mamre , in the field of Ephron son of Zohar the Hittite .

ID:	3208
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Nik testigantza neure buruaren alde egiten badut ere , nire testigantzak balio du , ongi baitakit nik nondik etorria naizen eta nora noan ; baina zuek ez dakizue , ez nondik natorren , ez nora noan .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I am the head of my witnesses . If I tell you the truth , my testimony is not from me , I 'm not here , but you do n't know where I am . But you do n't know where I am . ”
GOLD:	Jesus told them , “ These claims are valid even though I make them about myself . For I know where I came from and where I am going , but you do n't know this about me .

ID:	3209
INPUT:	Herri berria sortuko
PRED:	A Son of Man
GOLD:	The Scattering of the Sheep

ID:	3210
INPUT:	Gau hartan bertan , Jaunaren aingeruak ehun eta laurogeita bost mila gizon jo eta hil zituen asiriarren kanpalekuan ; denak hilda aurkitu zituzten biharamun goizean , jaiki zirenean .
PRED:	That night the angel of the Lord appeared to him and killed 600 men who had died in the camp . The next morning the Lord struck them down in the next morning .
GOLD:	That night the angel of the Lord went out to the Assyrian camp and killed 185,000 Assyrian soldiers . When the surviving Assyrians woke up the next morning , they found corpses everywhere .

ID:	3211
INPUT:	Herrian behartsuakzapaltzen dituztela , gogorki epaitzeneta zuzenbidea desegiten dutelaikusten baduzu , ez harritu horregatik . Handikiak , beste handikiago batdu babesle , eta biok , goitiago daudenak dituzte babesle .
PRED:	You are proud and arrogant , but you are proud and arrogant , and you are proud and arrogant , but you do n't know that there is no more wonderful than the other nations .
GOLD:	Talk is cheap , like daydreams and other useless activities . Fear God instead .

ID:	3212
INPUT:	« Hilobian amaitzen da gaiztoen zalapartaeta han aurkitzen atseden indargetuek ;
PRED:	“ The wicked are buried in the streets , and the wicked are buried in the streets of the wicked .
GOLD:	For in death the wicked cause no trouble , and the weary are at rest .

ID:	3213
INPUT:	Zoazte , bada , Xiloko nire santutegira , antzina nire egoitza izateko aukeratu nuen tokira ; ikusi zer egin nion , neure herri Israelen gaiztakeriagatik .
PRED:	Now go to Shiloh , my sanctuary , and I saw my chosen ones . I saw what I had done to my people Israel .
GOLD:	“ ‘ Go now to the place at Shiloh where I once put the Tabernacle that bore my name . See what I did there because of all the wickedness of my people , the Israelites .

ID:	3214
INPUT:	Apostoluek , itzultzean , egin zuten guztia kontatu zioten Jesusi . Orduan , haiek berekin hartu eta Betsaida zeritzan herrialdera joan zen bakarrik .
PRED:	When the apostles returned to the synagogue , they told him what had happened to the crowd , and they went to the land where they were going .
GOLD:	When the apostles returned , they told Jesus everything they had done . Then he slipped quietly away with them toward the town of Bethsaida .

ID:	3215
INPUT:	« Jakin beza ongi , beraz , Israel herri osoak Jaun eta Mesias egin duela Jainkoak , zuek gurutziltzatu zenuten Jesus hau » .
PRED:	“ Therefore , the people of Israel , heard that the Lord , the God of Israel , was crucified with Jesus . ”
GOLD:	“ So let everyone in Israel know for certain that God has made this Jesus , whom you crucified , to be both Lord and Messiah ! ”

ID:	3216
INPUT:	Honela esan baitigu Jaunak : « Nazioen argitzat ezarri zaitut , salbamena lurraren bazterreraino eraman dezazun » .
PRED:	For this is what the Lord said to Nathan , “ I will rescue you from the earth , for I have given you victory over the earth . ”
GOLD:	For the Lord gave us this command when he said , ‘ I have made you a light to the Gentiles , to bring salvation to the farthest corners of the earth . ' ”

ID:	3217
INPUT:	hautsak lokatz bihurtueta zokorrak elkar batu daitezen ?
PRED:	How can the man be tied up with a kiss ?
GOLD:	when the parched ground is dryand the soil has hardened into clods ?

ID:	3218
INPUT:	Orduan , Zorobabel eta familiaburuengana hurbildurik , esan zieten : — Zuekin lan egin nahi genuke ; geuk ere zuen Jainkoa gurtzen baitugu eta berari eskaintzen dizkiogu opariak , Asiriako errege Asarhadonek hona ekarri gintuenez geroztik .
PRED:	Then they came to him and said , “ We want to eat with you , but we want you to drink with the wine of the Lord your God , and we will offer it to the king of Assyria . ”
GOLD:	So they approached Zerubbabel and the other leaders and said , “ Let us build with you , for we worship your God just as you do . We have sacrificed to him ever since King Esarhaddon of Assyria brought us here . ”

ID:	3219
INPUT:	Hau al da mundua basamortueta hiriak errauts bihurtzen zituena ? Hau gatibuak sekulaaskatzen ez zituena ? ”
PRED:	Is this the Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies , the cities of ashes ? Is it not enough to survive ? '
GOLD:	Is this the one who destroyed the worldand made it into a wasteland ? Is this the king who demolished the world 's greatest citiesand had no mercy on his prisoners ? '

ID:	3220
INPUT:	zabaldu haren ospea atzerrietan , haren mirariak herri guztietan !
PRED:	All the nations of the earth will be praised , and all the nations will be shaken .
GOLD:	Publish his glorious deeds among the nations.Tell everyone about the amazing things he does .

ID:	3221
INPUT:	Txerri-talde handia zebilen mendi inguru hartan , uxarrean .
PRED:	The vast Philistine rulers were surrounding villages , with their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	There happened to be a large herd of pigs feeding on the hillside nearby .

ID:	3222
INPUT:	Aarondar apaizok , izan konfiantza Jaunarengan : bera duzue laguntzaile eta babesle !
PRED:	O priests , you have not yet been loyal to the Lord . You have been your helper and your shield .
GOLD:	O priests , descendants of Aaron , trust the Lord ! He is your helper and your shield .

ID:	3223
INPUT:	Jauna , Jainko ahalguztiduna , Israelen Jainkoa , susper zaitez sinesgabeok zigortzeko , ez izan traidore zital horien gupidarik .
PRED:	O Lord , God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , have made you a covenant with all your own people .
GOLD:	They come out at night , snarling like vicious dogsas they prowl the streets .

ID:	3224
INPUT:	Jesusek negarrari eman zion .
PRED:	Jesus told him what he had said .
GOLD:	Then Jesus wept .

ID:	3225
INPUT:	Nahigabetu egin zen Samuel « izenda iezaguzu errege bat , gida gaitzan » esan ziotenean . Eta otoitz egin zion Jaunari .
PRED:	So Samuel became the next king , and he said , “ You are a king to pray to the Lord . ” So Samuel prayed to the Lord .
GOLD:	Samuel was displeased with their request and went to the Lord for guidance .

ID:	3226
INPUT:	Etiopiar eta libiar gudarostea ere izugarria zen , beren guda-gurdi eta zalditeria handiarekin , eta Jaunak , bera hartu zenuelako lagun , eskuetara eman zizkizun .
PRED:	Then the Babylonian army came to the Babylonian army and horses and chariots , along with chariots , horses , horses , and chariots , and horses .
GOLD:	Do n't you remember what happened to the Ethiopians and Libyans and their vast army , with all of their chariots and charioteers ? At that time you relied on the Lord , and he handed them over to you .

ID:	3227
INPUT:	Saul eta zure anaiak eta israeldar guztiak Terebinto haranean daude filistearren aurka borrokan .
PRED:	The rest of the people of Israel and the rest of the Philistines , and the rest of the Philistines fought against the Philistines .
GOLD:	David 's brothers were with Saul and the Israelite army at the valley of Elah , fighting against the Philistines .

ID:	3228
INPUT:	Izan ere , bazituen erregeak , Huram erregearen itsasontziekin batera , Tarsisera joan ohi ziren merkataritza-ontziak ; hiru urtez behin , ur handietako merkataritza-ontzi haiek urrez , zilarrez , marfilez , tximinoz eta indioilarrez beteak itzuli ohi ziren .
PRED:	King Hiram of Tarshish , King Hiram of Tyre , came to King Hiram of Tarshish , who had been given to King Hiram of Tarshish , the ships of Tarshish , silver , and gold , and gold .
GOLD:	The king had a fleet of trading ships of Tarshish manned by the sailors sent by Hiram . Once every three years the ships returned , loaded with gold , silver , ivory , apes , and peacocks .

ID:	3229
INPUT:	Horregatik diotsuet : Otoitzean eskatzen duzuen edozer gauza , sinetsi lortu duzuela , eta emango dizue Jainkoak .
PRED:	Therefore , I tell you the truth , when you pray , you will know that God will give you whatever you ask .
GOLD:	I tell you , you can pray for anything , and if you believe that you 've received it , it will be yours .

ID:	3230
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , proposatu alegia edo parabola bat Israel herriari ,
PRED:	“ Son of man , give a message to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , give this riddle , and tell this story to the people of Israel .

ID:	3231
INPUT:	Izan ere , miragarriro sendaturiko gizonak bazituen berrogeitik gora urte .
PRED:	For when he healed the man , he healed the man who had been healed .
GOLD:	for this miraculous sign — the healing of a man who had been lame for more than forty years .

ID:	3232
INPUT:	Brontzezko hamar ur-ontzi ere egin zituen , orga bakoitzerako bana ; bina metroko diametroa zuten , eta mila eta seiehuna litro ur hartzen .
PRED:	He made ten bronze basin called the bronze pool of bronze , each 15 feet tall and 6 feet wide .
GOLD:	Huram also made ten smaller bronze basins , one for each cart . Each basin was six feet across and could hold 220 gallons of water .

ID:	3233
INPUT:	Orduan , Temango Elifazek esan zuen .
PRED:	Then Eliphaz the Temanite replied to Eliphaz the Temanite .
GOLD:	Then Eliphaz the Temanite replied to Job :

ID:	3234
INPUT:	Etengabe egin behar zutela otoitz eta ez zutela etsi behar adierazteko , parabola hau esan zien Jesusek :
PRED:	So Jesus left them and pray that he would not listen to them . He said , “ This is what Jesus says :
GOLD:	One day Jesus told his disciples a story to show that they should always pray and never give up .

ID:	3235
INPUT:	Gero , Eliasek esan zion Akabi : — Zoaz jatera eta edatera , zaparrada handi baten hotsa sumatzen da eta .
PRED:	Then Elijah said to Elijah , “ Go back to the poor and eat it , and it is a great fire . ”
GOLD:	Then Elijah said to Ahab , “ Go get something to eat and drink , for I hear a mighty rainstorm coming ! ”

ID:	3236
INPUT:	Orduan , ozenki deiadar egiten entzun nuen Jauna : « Hurbildu hiriaren zigortzaileok , bakoitza bere arma suntsitzailearekin ! »
PRED:	Then I heard the voice of the Lord , “ Look , you people of Israel ! The Lord has prepared a city for his flock . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord thundered , “ Bring on the men appointed to punish the city ! Tell them to bring their weapons with them ! ”

ID:	3237
INPUT:	Edozein haritzeta zuhaitz handiren azpianberotzen zarete lizunkeriatan ; erreka ondoko haitzarteetanhiltzen dituzue umeak oparitzat .
PRED:	You are like trees that grow in every green tree , and you will grow in sexual immorality . You will be like a wild tree in every green tree .
GOLD:	You worship your idols with great passionbeneath the oaks and under every green tree.You sacrifice your children down in the valleys , among the jagged rocks in the cliffs .

ID:	3238
INPUT:	Emagaldua ogi-zati batez asetzen baita , baina adulteriogileak bizitza osoa harrapatzen du .
PRED:	A man who commits adultery is a neighbor , but a man who commits adultery is adultery .
GOLD:	For a prostitute will bring you to poverty , but sleeping with another man 's wife will cost you your life .

ID:	3239
INPUT:	iparraldeko herriei eta Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosor nire zerbitzariari deituko diet herrialde honen aurka , eta hemengo bizilagunen eta inguruko herrien aurka bidaliko . Erabat suntsituko ditut eta betiko eremu eta hondakin bihurtuko , jendearen iseka-gai .
PRED:	I will send a nation to the nations of the land of Babylon , a king of Babylon , to the nations of the land of Babylon , and I will destroy them and destroy them . I will destroy them and destroy them , and I will destroy them and destroy them .
GOLD:	I will gather together all the armies of the north under King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon , whom I have appointed as my deputy . I will bring them all against this land and its people and against the surrounding nations . I will completely destroy you and make you an object of horror and contempt and a ruin forever .

ID:	3240
INPUT:	Gogora ezazue Akan , Zerahen semea . Ez zuen leial jokatu , Jerikon dena suntsitzeko agindua hautsi zuelako , eta Israel herri osoak jasan behar izan zuen Jaunaren haserrea , erruduna bera bakarrik izan arren » .
PRED:	Remember , you are faithful to the Lord . Do n't you realize that the tribe of Judah has destroyed the people of Israel , just as the Lord had commanded you to destroy them . ”
GOLD:	Did n't divine anger fall on the entire community of Israel when Achan , a member of the clan of Zerah , sinned by stealing the things set apart for the Lord ? He was not the only one who died because of his sin . ”

ID:	3241
INPUT:	Eta Jesu Kristorenak direnek gurutzean hilarazi dute bekatuzko beren giza izaera beronen gurari eta grinekin .
PRED:	And when we are united with Christ Jesus , we are trying to sin with the sinful nature and sinful nature and sinful nature .
GOLD:	Those who belong to Christ Jesus have nailed the passions and desires of their sinful nature to his cross and crucified them there .

ID:	3242
INPUT:	Sar bedi etsaia mahastianeta hondatu , baina erabat deuseztatu ez ! Erauz bitza mahats-aihenak , ez baitira nireak !
PRED:	Praise the Lord ! Let the wicked be destroyed , but he will not destroy the grapes of the forest ; he will not break out the grapes of the forest .
GOLD:	“ Go down the rows of the vineyards and destroy the grapevines , leaving a scattered few alive.Strip the branches from the vines , for these people do not belong to the Lord .

ID:	3243
INPUT:	Pedro , Jesusi urrutitik jarraituz , apaiz nagusiaren jauregiraino joan eta , barrura sarturik , morroiekin eseri zen , hura guztia zertan amaitzen zen ikusteko .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Peter went up to the high council , where the high priest went into the palace , and he went into the gate of the palace , where he sat down .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Peter followed him at a distance and came to the high priest 's courtyard . He went in and sat with the guards and waited to see how it would all end .

ID:	3244
INPUT:	Gure aitaren senitartean denok merezi genuen heriotza zure eskutik , ene errege jauna . Baina zeure mahaian jarri ninduzun , zeure zerbitzari hau . Ba ote dut oraindik eskubiderik erregeari zerbait eskatzeko ? »
PRED:	“ My father , my lord the king , have you brought me out of my lord the king 's palace . But why did you ask me to ask me to ask me ? ”
GOLD:	“ You 've said enough , ” David replied . “ I 've decided that you and Ziba will divide your land equally between you . ”

ID:	3245
INPUT:	Akaben senitartekoak hilarazi Jehuk
PRED:	Jehu 's Death and Ahab
GOLD:	Jehu Kills Ahab 's Family

ID:	3246
INPUT:	Orduan , honela egin nuen otoitz : « Zu , Jaun ahalguztiduna , epaile zuzena zara , gizakiaren buru-bihotzakaztertzen dituena . Zure esku utzi dut neure auzia : ikusiko ahal dut zure mendekuaetsaien bizkar ! »
PRED:	Then I prayed , “ O Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , have mercy on you , and I will hand you over to your enemies . ”
GOLD:	O Lord of Heaven 's Armies , you make righteous judgments , and you examine the deepest thoughts and secrets.Let me see your vengeance against them , for I have committed my cause to you .

ID:	3247
INPUT:	kendu egingo diet ahotikodola darion okela , haginetatik idoloei eskainitako jakiak ; hala ere , geldituko dira batzuk biziriketa neure-neureak izango ditut , Judako leinuak bezala ; Ekrongoak jebustarrak bezalaizango dira .
PRED:	I will take away the blood of the idols of the dead , just as I have promised to give to the gods of the dead bodies of the living in the towns of Judah , the foothills of Judah , Ekron , and Ekron , just as I will live in the land of Ekron .
GOLD:	I will grab the bloody meat from their mouthsand snatch the detestable sacrifices from their teeth.Then the surviving Philistines will worship our Godand become like a clan in Judah.The Philistines of Ekron will join my people , as the ancient Jebusites once did .

ID:	3248
INPUT:	eta mihi orok aitor de<unk> su Kristo dela Jauna , Jainko Aitaren aintzarako .
PRED:	And I want you to know that Christ is the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	and every tongue declare that Jesus Christ is Lord , to the glory of God the Father .

ID:	3249
INPUT:	Jainkoaren asmo ezkutuaren berri izan ote duzu , jakinduriaren jabe bihurtuz ?
PRED:	Do you understand the word of God ? Do you understand the meaning of the wisdom of the wise ?
GOLD:	Were you listening at God 's secret council ? Do you have a monopoly on wisdom ?

ID:	3250
INPUT:	Behinola , beren jainko Dagoni opari handi bat eskaintzeko eta jai alaia egiteko bildu ziren filistearren buruzagiak . Hau zioten : « Gure jainkoak eskura eman diguSamson gure etsaia ! »
PRED:	As they arrived at the pagan shrines , they sacrificed a great sacrifice to the Philistines and sacrificed to the Philistines , saying , “ Our enemies have brought us victory over our enemies ! ”
GOLD:	The Philistine rulers held a great festival , offering sacrifices and praising their god , Dagon . They said , “ Our god has given us victory over our enemy Samson ! ”

ID:	3251
INPUT:	zuek , haren zerbitzari Abrahamen jatorrikook , Jakoben ondorengook , haren aukeratuok !
PRED:	These are his servants — descendants of Abraham , descendants of Jacob , descendants of Jacob — descendants of Jacob — descendants of Jacob — descendants of Jacob — descendants of Jacob .
GOLD:	you children of his servant Abraham , you descendants of Jacob , his chosen ones .

ID:	3252
INPUT:	ea aurrerakoan fruiturik ematen duen ; eta bestela , moztu ” » .
PRED:	They eat the fruit of the trees , and it will be cut off . ' ”
GOLD:	If we get figs next year , fine . If not , then you can cut it down . ' ”

ID:	3253
INPUT:	Horrela , bada , zergatik tentatzen duzue orain Jainkoa , gure gurasoek eta guk ere ezin eraman izan dugun uztarria ikasle horiei leporatzen saiatuz ?
PRED:	So why are you trying to obey us ? For God has given us the inheritance of our ancestors , so that we can not break the yoke of his teaching ?
GOLD:	So why are you now challenging God by burdening the Gentile believers with a yoke that neither we nor our ancestors were able to bear ?

ID:	3254
INPUT:	Zeuen baitan diozue : « Noiz amaitu behar ote <unk> berri-jaiak , laborea saltzeko ? Noiz larunbatak , garia salmentan ateratzeko ? Neurria txikiagotueta prezioak handituko ditugu , okerreko pisuak erabiliz .
PRED:	“ How long must you be ? ” he asked . “ How long must I go down to war ? How long will we be saved ? How long will we be saved ? ”
GOLD:	You ca n't wait for the Sabbath day to be overand the religious festivals to endso you can get back to cheating the helpless.You measure out grain with dishonest measuresand cheat the buyer with dishonest scales .

ID:	3255
INPUT:	Antzina , Davidek Edom lurraldea menderatu zuenean , haren gudalburu Joabek , israeldar hilei lur ematera joan zelarik , hil egin zituen Edomgo gizaseme guztiak .
PRED:	When David learned that the army of Edom had killed the army of Edom , he killed the army of Edom , and he killed all the other sons of Edom .
GOLD:	Years before , David had defeated Edom . Joab , his army commander , had stayed to bury some of the Israelite soldiers who had died in battle . While there , they killed every male in Edom .

ID:	3256
INPUT:	Bereizkuntza egingo dut ene herriaren eta zurearen artean . Bihar gertatuko da mirari hau » .
PRED:	I will be able to understand the meaning of my people and animals . This is a permanent law for you . ”
GOLD:	“ This is the finger of God ! ” the magicians exclaimed to Pharaoh . But Pharaoh 's heart remained hard . He would n't listen to them , just as the Lord had predicted .

ID:	3257
INPUT:	Behin eta berriz sareak hustuz , herriak gupidagabe hiltzenjarraituko ote dute ?
PRED:	And why should we lie before him ? Can they lie down in the dust ?
GOLD:	Will you let them get away with this forever ? Will they succeed forever in their heartless conquests ?

ID:	3258
INPUT:	zuhaitza jotzen ari zen bati aizkora kirtenetik atera eta uretara jausi zitzaion . Garrasika hasi zen hura , esanez : — Ai ene jauna ! Bestek utzia nuen !
PRED:	As soon as she approached the ax of the ax , she ran out to the palace and began to speak . “ Oh , my lord , my lord the king ! ” she said , “ My lord , my lord the king ! ”
GOLD:	But as one of them was cutting a tree , his ax head fell into the river . “ Oh , sir ! ” he cried . “ It was a borrowed ax ! ”

ID:	3259
INPUT:	Oi lur , ez estali nire odola , ez bedi isildua izan nire garrasia !
PRED:	O earth , do n't let me say , “ Do n't be silent ! ”
GOLD:	“ O earth , do not conceal my blood.Let it cry out on my behalf .

ID:	3260
INPUT:	« Ez gero utzi lebitarren artean desagertzen Kehaten senitarteak !
PRED:	“ Do not neglect the Levites who were trying to drive out the sacred lots .
GOLD:	“ Do not let the Kohathite clans be destroyed from among the Levites !

ID:	3261
INPUT:	Piztuerakoan , noren emazte izango da , zazpiek izan baitzuten emazte ? »
PRED:	And tell us , how can this be married ? For the wife who has married her ? ”
GOLD:	So tell us , whose wife will she be in the resurrection ? For all seven were married to her ! ”

ID:	3262
INPUT:	Zabulonen leinuko senitarteak : Seredengandik se<unk> tarrak , Elonengandik elondarrak eta Jahleelengandik jahleeldarrak .
PRED:	These were the clans descended from the clans of Zebulun : The sons of Zebulun were named after their ancestor Puah , named after their ancestor Pallu .
GOLD:	These were the clans descended from the sons of Zebulun : The Seredite clan , named after their ancestor Sered.The Elonite clan , named after their ancestor Elon.The Jahleelite clan , named after their ancestor Jahleel .

ID:	3263
INPUT:	« Nola larraina gari-jotzean , hala geratuko daBabilonia hiri ederra : denbora gutxi barrubere egiteen uzta jasoko du . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak , Israelen Jainkoak » .
PRED:	“ When the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says , ‘ As surely as the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken ! ' ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : “ Babylon is like wheat on a threshing floor , about to be trampled.In just a little whileher harvest will begin . ”

ID:	3264
INPUT:	Hiltzeko moduko harria jaurtiz norbait jo eta hiltzen duena , hilketa-errudun da : heriotzara emango dute .
PRED:	If someone dies and grabbed it , it must be put to death . If someone dies , it must be put to death .
GOLD:	Or if someone with a stone in his hand strikes and kills another person , it is murder , and the murderer must be put to death .

ID:	3265
INPUT:	Orduan , israeldarrak itzuli ziren eta benjamindarrak izuturik gelditu , ikusi baitzuten nolako hondamena zetorkien .
PRED:	Then the Israelites returned to the town of Benjamin and saw what had happened to the men of Benjamin .
GOLD:	the men of Israel turned and attacked . At this point the men of Benjamin became terrified , because they realized disaster was close at hand .

ID:	3266
INPUT:	Zatoz Libanotik , ene emaztegaia , zatoz ! Jaitsi zaitez Libanotik , jaitsi Amanako gailurretik , Senir eta Hermon tontorretatik . Utzi lehoien eta panteren mendi-zuloak .
PRED:	Come , my wife , my wife ! Come , let 's go down from the land of Lebanon , from the mountains of Lebanon , and all the nations of the earth .
GOLD:	Come with me from Lebanon , my bride , come with me from Lebanon.Come down from Mount Amana , from the peaks of Senir and Hermon , where the lions have their densand leopards live among the hills .

ID:	3267
INPUT:	Zuen jabetza den lurraldea kutsatua dagoela eta Jaunaren kulturako desegokia dela iruditzen bazaizue , zatozte Jaunaren jabetza den herrialdera , han baitu Jaunak bere bizilekua , eta jar zaitezte gure artean bizitzen . Baina ez zaitezte Jaunaren kontra eta gure kontra jarri , Jaunaren , gure Jainkoaren , aldareaz gainera beste bat zeuentzat eraikiz .
PRED:	You may know that the land of the Lord your God is giving you . If you are defiled by worshiping other gods , you will know that the Lord your God is giving you . But if you do not know the Lord your God , he will personally personally personally personally personally personally personally personally personally personally personally personally personally personally personally personally personally personally personally personally personally personally personally personally personally personally destroy you .
GOLD:	“ If you need the altar because the land you possess is defiled , then join us in the Lord 's land , where the Tabernacle of the Lord is situated , and share our land with us . But do not rebel against the Lord or against us by building an altar other than the one true altar of the Lord our God .

ID:	3268
INPUT:	Orduan , amari eman zizkion zilarrezko mila eta ehun txanponak ; baina amak esan zion : — Jaunari eskainia nion zilar hau zure alde , ene seme , zurezko idoloa metalez jantzia egiteko .
PRED:	Then the Lord gave him a gift of silver , silver , and gold . He said , “ My child , please give me a piece of silver , and a piece of silver . ”
GOLD:	He returned the money to her , and she said , “ I now dedicate these silver coins to the Lord . In honor of my son , I will have an image carved and an idol cast . ”

ID:	3269
INPUT:	Job
PRED:	Job 's Seventh Speech : A Response to Bildad
GOLD:	Job 's Eighth Speech : A Response to Eliphaz

ID:	3270
INPUT:	Esan zidan jendeak : « Ez al diguzu azaldu behar zer esan nahi duen egiten ari zarenak ? »
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Do n't you want to understand what you want to do ? ”
GOLD:	Then the people asked , “ What does all this mean ? What are you trying to tell us ? ”

ID:	3271
INPUT:	Zuen gorpuak zeruko hegazti eta lurreko piztien janari izango dira , eta ez da inor ere izango haiek uxatzeko .
PRED:	You will eat the birds of the sky and wild animals that scurry along the ground , and no one will eat them .
GOLD:	Your corpses will be food for all the scavenging birds and wild animals , and no one will be there to chase them away .

ID:	3272
INPUT:	Baina esan dizuedanagatik , barrua tristuraz bete zaizue ;
PRED:	But you have said to me , ‘ My heart is filled with grief . '
GOLD:	Instead , you grieve because of what I 've told you .

ID:	3273
INPUT:	Jesus munduko argia
PRED:	Jesus Again Predicts His Death
GOLD:	A Woman Caught in Adultery

ID:	3274
INPUT:	Honek herriakamorruz jotzen zituen , aspertu gabe jo ere ; nazioak suminez zapaltzen zituen , etengabe pertsegituz .
PRED:	That was why the people of the wilderness , and he struck them with fury . He did not stop them .
GOLD:	You struck the people with endless blows of rageand held the nations in your angry gripwith unrelenting tyranny .

ID:	3275
INPUT:	Baniren ondorengoetan : Maadai , Amram , Uel ,
PRED:	The descendants of Elam were the ancestor of King Baasha of Israel , tore down from the land of Babylonia ,
GOLD:	From the family of Bani : Maadai , Amram , Uel ,

ID:	3276
INPUT:	Benetan alferrik botatzen da sarea , hegaz doazenek ikusten badute ;
PRED:	Their actions are like a wind , and their bones are like smoke .
GOLD:	If a bird sees a trap being set , it knows to stay away .

ID:	3277
INPUT:	Eta haiei ere esan zien Gedeonek : — Garaile etortzean , eraitsi egingo dut zuen dorre hau .
PRED:	Then Gideon said to his men , “ I will attack you in Galilee , and I will rebuild this wall . ”
GOLD:	So he said to the people of Peniel , “ After I return in victory , I will tear down this tower . ”

ID:	3278
INPUT:	Baina zuen gorabeherak hitz eta izen batzuei buruzkoak eta zuen lege horri buruzkoak direnez gero , hor konpon zeuek . Nik ez dut arazo horietan epaile izan nahi » .
PRED:	But if you listen to me , I will tell you the truth , and I 'll tell you what you are doing . I want you to do such a thing . ”
GOLD:	But since it is merely a question of words and names and your Jewish law , take care of it yourselves . I refuse to judge such matters . ”

ID:	3279
INPUT:	Abiamen gainerako jarduerak eta egintza guztiak « Judako Erregeen Kronika » liburuan daude idatziak . Abiamen eta Jeroboamen artean ere izan zen borroka .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Asa 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Abijam 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah . There was constant war between Abijam and Jeroboam .

ID:	3280
INPUT:	Madongoa , Hatzorrekoa ,
PRED:	Hazor , Hazor , Sipho ,
GOLD:	The king of MadonThe king of Hazor

ID:	3281
INPUT:	« Baina zuei , entzuleoi , hau diotsuet : Maitatu etsaiak , egin ongi gorroto dizuetenei ,
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : Teacher , hear the cries of those who hate you ,
GOLD:	“ But to you who are willing to listen , I say , love your enemies ! Do good to those who hate you .

ID:	3282
INPUT:	Zenbait egunez geldi-geldi ibili ondoren , nekez iritsi ginen <unk> do hirira : haizea kontra genuenez , Kretaren babesera joan ginen , Salmon * lurmuturraren ondotik igaroz .
PRED:	Those who were left in the town of Crete , so we could n't go to the town of Crete , and we sailed along the shore of the island of Crete .
GOLD:	We had several days of slow sailing , and after great difficulty we finally neared Cnidus . But the wind was against us , so we sailed across to Crete and along the sheltered coast of the island , past the cape of Salmone .

ID:	3283
INPUT:	sugeak bezain mihi zorrotza dute , sugegorriaren pozoia ezpainetan .
PRED:	Their mouths are full of cursing , but their mouths are full of lies .
GOLD:	O Lord , keep me out of the hands of the wicked.Protect me from those who are violent , for they are plotting against me .

ID:	3284
INPUT:	Negevetik igo eta Hebronera iritsi ziren — Hebron Egiptoko Tanis baino zazpi urte lehenago eraikia zen — . Han bizi ziren Anaken ondorengo Ahiman , Xexai eta Talmai .
PRED:	Then they went to the land of Canaan , where they fled to Egypt to Egypt , where they lived in the land of Canaan , where they continued to live in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	Going north , they passed through the Negev and arrived at Hebron , where Ahiman , Sheshai , and Talmai — all descendants of Anak — lived . ( The ancient town of Hebron was founded seven years before the Egyptian city of Zoan . )

ID:	3285
INPUT:	Ezekiasek dei egin zien Israel eta Judako guztiei , eta Efraim eta Manasesen lurraldeetakoei ere dei-gutunak bidali zizkien , Jerusalemera , Jaunaren etxera , etor zitezen , Jaunaren , Israelen Jainkoaren , Pazko-jaia ospatzera .
PRED:	Hezekiah called for all Israel and Judah to all the towns of Ephraim , Ephraim , and all the people of Ephraim , and Manasseh , the people of Israel , who returned to Jerusalem to the Temple of the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	King Hezekiah now sent word to all Israel and Judah , and he wrote letters of invitation to the people of Ephraim and Manasseh . He asked everyone to come to the Temple of the Lord at Jerusalem to celebrate the Passover of the Lord , the God of Israel .

ID:	3286
INPUT:	Azter ezazue zer zaion Jaunari atsegin
PRED:	The
GOLD:	Carefully determine what pleases the Lord .

ID:	3287
INPUT:	Indarrez jantzi ninduzun gudurako , menpean jarri zenizkidan arerioak .
PRED:	You placed my foot on their necks.I have destroyed all who hated me .
GOLD:	You have armed me with strength for the battle ; you have subdued my enemies under my feet .

ID:	3288
INPUT:	« Sionek esaten zuen : “ Jaunak utzia nauka , ene Jaunak ahaztua ” .
PRED:	“ The Lord said , ‘ My enemies have forgotten me , and the Lord has forgotten me . '
GOLD:	Yet Jerusalem says , “ The Lord has deserted us ; the Lord has forgotten us . ”

ID:	3289
INPUT:	Bet-Togarmakoek ibiltzeko edo garraiorako zaldiak eta mandoak ekartzen zizkizuten .
PRED:	They also sent messengers to the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and they brought their horses to the banquet hall .
GOLD:	“ From Beth-togarmah came riding horses , chariot horses , and mules , all in exchange for your goods .

ID:	3290
INPUT:	« Hegoaldetik , Tzin basamortutik hasi eta Edomgo mugaraino hedatuko da . Ekialdean , hegoaldeko muga , Itsaso Hilaren hego-ertzetik hasiko da .
PRED:	“ From the wilderness of Zin and camped at Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin . The waters of Zin will go south to the Dead Sea .
GOLD:	The southern portion of your country will extend from the wilderness of Zin , along the edge of Edom . The southern boundary will begin on the east at the Dead Sea .

ID:	3291
INPUT:	Pozik da Sion mendia , poz-pozik Judako hiriak , zure probidentzia dela eta .
PRED:	Be glad in Jerusalem , O Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and I will rejoice in your towns .
GOLD:	Go , inspect the city of Jerusalem.Walk around and count the many towers .

ID:	3292
INPUT:	Bizi-iturri da zuhurraren irakaspenaherioaren sareetatik ihes egiteko .
PRED:	The waters of death are like a life-giving fountain ; the waters of death flowed from the Dead Sea .
GOLD:	The instruction of the wise is like a life-giving fountain ; those who accept it avoid the snares of death .

ID:	3293
INPUT:	Goraintziak <unk> fena eta <unk> fosari , Jaunarengatik gogoz lanean jardun duten horiei ; baita Jaunarengatik hainbeste lan egin duen nire Perside maiteari ere .
PRED:	Greet the governor of the high council , so he decided to visit the Lord 's people , for he taught me to the other believers in the synagogue .
GOLD:	Give my greetings to Tryphena and Tryphosa , the Lord 's workers , and to dear Persis , who has worked so hard for the Lord .

ID:	3294
INPUT:	Ra<unk> , Kixion , E<unk> ,
PRED:	Elon , Ramah , Ithlah ,
GOLD:	Rabbith , Kishion , Ebez ,

ID:	3295
INPUT:	Gedeonen azken egintza
PRED:	Gideon 's Final Instructions
GOLD:	Gideon 's Sacred Ephod

ID:	3296
INPUT:	Honela diotso Jainko JaunakIsrael herriari : « Gerrara mila gizonbidaltzen dituen hiriariehun itzuliko zaizkio ; ehun bidaltzen dituenari , hamar » .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : “ I will bring them back to the remnant of Israel . ”
GOLD:	The Sovereign Lord says : “ When a city sends a thousand men to battle , only a hundred will return.When a town sends a hundred , only ten will come back alive . ”

ID:	3297
INPUT:	etxe gainean dagoena ez bedi jaits etxeko gauzak hartzera ,
PRED:	For the one who sits on the house of the house is thrown into the house of night .
GOLD:	A person out on the deck of a roof must not go down into the house to pack .

ID:	3298
INPUT:	Gezi-uztaiez eta lantzazarmatuak datoz ; ankerrak dira eta gupidagabeak ; itsas orroa bezalako deiadarrez , zaldiz datoz , borrokarako lerroturik , zure aurka , Sion hiri eder » .
PRED:	He did not plant the fields with bows and bows and bows down on the ground . But his horses will be like a warrior 's horses , but he will attack you . ”
GOLD:	They are armed with bows and spears.They are cruel and show no mercy.They sound like a roaring seaas they ride forward on horses.They are coming in battle formation , planning to destroy you , beautiful Jerusalem . ”

ID:	3299
INPUT:	Zortzigarren egunean , bi usapal edo bi usakume harturik , Jaunaren aurrera , elkarketa-etxolaren sarrerara , joango da eta apaizari emango dizkio .
PRED:	On the eighth day , on the eighth day , the priest must return to the entrance of the Tabernacle , and the priest must return to the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	On the eighth day he must get two turtledoves or two young pigeons and come before the Lord at the entrance of the Tabernacle and give his offerings to the priest .

ID:	3300
INPUT:	Gainera , bada hirurehun urte israeldarrok Hexbon eta Aroer hirietan eta berauen inguruetan bizi garela , baita Arnon erreka-ertzetako hirixketan ere . Zergatik ez dituzue libratu denboraldi horretan guztian ?
PRED:	“ Why did you make a distance from Heshbon ? Why did you drive out the towns of Heshbon and half towns of Aroer ? Why did n't you drive out the towns of Gilead ? Why did n't you drive out all the towns of Gilead ? ”
GOLD:	“ Israel has been living here for 300 years , inhabiting Heshbon and its surrounding settlements , all the way to Aroer and its settlements , and in all the towns along the Arnon River . Why have you made no effort to recover it before now ?

ID:	3301
INPUT:	Hona zer diotsuedan nik , Jaun ahalguztidun honek : Ekarri osorik zeuen hamarrenak tenpluko altxortegira , nire etxean zer jana egon dadin . Proba nazazue horretan , eta ikusiko duzue nola zeruko atexkak irekitzen dizkizuedan eta bedeinkazioa ugari isurtzen .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : The Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , says : “ Do n't let me see what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : You are saying , ‘ Do n't let the rain fall on the Sabbath . '
GOLD:	Bring all the tithes into the storehouse so there will be enough food in my Temple . If you do , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , “ I will open the windows of heaven for you . I will pour out a blessing so great you wo n't have enough room to take it in ! Try it ! Put me to the test !

ID:	3302
INPUT:	Zaudete , beraz , adi orain , Jaunak zuen aurrean eginen duen gauza harrigarri hau ikusteko .
PRED:	So now , be very careful to see the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Now stand here and see the great thing the Lord is about to do .

ID:	3303
INPUT:	Bada , ostera , zeruan misterioak azaltzen dituen Jainkoa . Honexek jakinaraziko dizu , Nabukodonosor errege , gerora gertatuko dena . Hona , bada , lo zeundela ametsetan ikusi zenuena :
PRED:	Then King Nebuchadnezzar of heaven opened his glory , and he showed them the wisdom God had revealed to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon . You saw that it was a dream , and you saw that it was a dream .
GOLD:	But there is a God in heaven who reveals secrets , and he has shown King Nebuchadnezzar what will happen in the future . Now I will tell you your dream and the visions you saw as you lay on your bed .

ID:	3304
INPUT:	Ekaitza haize gozo bihurtu zueneta olatuen orroa isildu .
PRED:	A bitter tree grew in a trap , and a bitter storm grew in a trap .
GOLD:	He calmed the storm to a whisperand stilled the waves .

ID:	3305
INPUT:	Gogorkeriaz eta bidegabezeraman zuten ; baina haren zoria nori axola ? Bizidunen lurretik kanporaatera zuten , bere herriaren errebeldiagatik jota .
PRED:	But they kept looking forward to him , but they were afraid of him . But they came out of the land , but they were afraid of him .
GOLD:	Unjustly condemned , he was led away.No one cared that he died without descendants , that his life was cut short in midstream.But he was struck downfor the rebellion of my people .

ID:	3306
INPUT:	Bere haragiaren samina baizik ez du sentitzen , bere buruaren atsekabea besterik ez » .
PRED:	Their words are like a thousand , but their words are never satisfied . ”
GOLD:	They suffer painfully ; their life is full of trouble . ”

ID:	3307
INPUT:	Bataiatu eta berehala , Jesus uretatik irten zen . Hortan , zerua zabaldu zen , eta Jainkoaren Espiritua ikusi zuen Jesusek uso-tankeran jaisten eta beregana etortzen .
PRED:	Jesus was baptized with water , and the water was filled with water . Then he saw the Holy Spirit , and the Spirit of God appeared to him .
GOLD:	After his baptism , as Jesus came up out of the water , the heavens were opened and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and settling on him .

ID:	3308
INPUT:	Filistearrak israeldarren aurka borrokatzeko asmotan
PRED:	War between Israel and Moab
GOLD:	Saul Consults a Medium

ID:	3309
INPUT:	« Gizakia pipiak jotako zura bezala birrintzen da , sitsak jandako soinekoa bezala .
PRED:	“ People who are like the fig tree is like a rich man , but they are like a robe .
GOLD:	I waste away like rotting wood , like a moth-eaten coat .

ID:	3310
INPUT:	zeure maitasunagatik , suntsi itzazu nire etsaiak , hondatu nire erasotzaileak , zeure zerbitzari nauzunez gero .
PRED:	Because of your unfailing love , I will destroy your enemies , and I will destroy your enemies .
GOLD:	In your unfailing love , silence all my enemiesand destroy all my foes , for I am your servant .

ID:	3311
INPUT:	Nire hondamen bila dabiltzanak , ordea , bihoaz lurpe sakonera !
PRED:	But I am the most important of those who live in the land of the earth .
GOLD:	They will die by the swordand become the food of jackals .

ID:	3312
INPUT:	Hebrear batzuk Jordanez beste aldera igaro ziren , Gad eta Galaad lurraldeetara . Saulek , aldiz , Gilgalen jarraitu zuen , berarekin zen jende guztia beldur-ikaraz zegoelarik .
PRED:	One day Saul went to the land of Gilead and camped at Gilgal . But Saul and his men were afraid of Gibeon , but they were afraid of the people of Gilead .
GOLD:	Some of them crossed the Jordan River and escaped into the land of Gad and Gilead.Meanwhile , Saul stayed at Gilgal , and his men were trembling with fear .

ID:	3313
INPUT:	Eskuan du sardea garia garbitu eta alea bere mandioan jasotzeko ; lastoa , berriz , inoiz itzaliko ez den sutan erreko du » .
PRED:	When the priest returns and finds it , he will give it to the Lord . But when he returns , he will not enter his place . ”
GOLD:	He is ready to separate the chaff from the wheat with his winnowing fork . Then he will clean up the threshing area , gathering the wheat into his barn but burning the chaff with never-ending fire . ”

ID:	3314
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , zure herritarrak zutaz ari dira harresi ondoan eta etxe-atarietan , elkarri esanez : “ Goazen , ea zein mezu ematen digun Jaunak ” .
PRED:	“ Son of man , give the following instructions to the people of Israel . Say to the people of Israel , ‘ Let 's go home and tell us what the Lord says . '
GOLD:	“ Son of man , your people talk about you in their houses and whisper about you at the doors . They say to each other , ‘ Come on , let 's go hear the prophet tell us what the Lord is saying ! '

ID:	3315
INPUT:	Orduan , Moisesek , Jaunarengana itzulirik , esan zion : — Jauna , zergatik erabiltzen duzu hain gaizki herri hau ? Zertarako bidali nauzu ?
PRED:	Then Moses returned to the Lord and said to Moses , “ Why are you trying to serve me ? Why are you doing such evil ? ”
GOLD:	Then Moses went back to the Lord and protested , “ Why have you brought all this trouble on your own people , Lord ? Why did you send me ?

ID:	3316
INPUT:	« Israeldarrek Jaunari eskainiko dizkioten opari sakratuak apaizarentzat izango dira .
PRED:	“ These are the instructions regarding the people of Israel . If you present a burnt offering to the Lord , you must present it to the Lord .
GOLD:	All the sacred offerings that the Israelites bring to a priest will belong to him .

ID:	3317
INPUT:	Zoritxarrekoakzuzengabeko legeak emateneta jasanezineko dekretuakidazten dituztenak !
PRED:	What sorrow awaits the kings of the kings of the forest , the kings of the forest , the kings of the forest .
GOLD:	What sorrow awaits the unjust judgesand those who issue unfair laws .

ID:	3318
INPUT:	« Ni izango ote naiz , bada , erantzungo diona ? Nik aurkituko ote argudioak beraren aurka ?
PRED:	“ I will answer them , and they will reply , ‘ Am I the one who will answer us ? '
GOLD:	“ So who am I , that I should try to answer Godor even reason with him ?

ID:	3319
INPUT:	Bat-batean , hain lurrikara gogorra izan zen , non kartzelaren oinarriei ere dar-dar eragin baitzien . Eta kolpetik ate guztiak zabaldu ziren eta denen kateak askatu .
PRED:	Suddenly , the Lord opened the earth , and the foundations of the earth opened the foundation of the foundation of the enemy , and he opened the foundation of the enemy 's foundation .
GOLD:	Suddenly , there was a massive earthquake , and the prison was shaken to its foundations . All the doors immediately flew open , and the chains of every prisoner fell off !

ID:	3320
INPUT:	Horiek ziren Efraimen leinuko senitarteak : 32 . 500 gizonezko guztira . Horiek ziren Joseren ondorengoak , senitarteka erroldaturik .
PRED:	These were the clans of Ephraim . Their registered troops numbered 64,400 . Their families were the clans of the clans of Ephraim .
GOLD:	These were the clans of Ephraim . Their registered troops numbered 32,500.These clans of Manasseh and Ephraim were all descendants of Joseph .

ID:	3321
INPUT:	Azken afaria : hona nire gorputz-odolak !
PRED:	And I will say , “ Look , my tongue will be my head . ”
GOLD:	Peter Denies Jesus

ID:	3322
INPUT:	Jainkoaren guda-gurdiak milaka eta milaka , ezin konta ahalakoa haren gudarostea : horien artean aintzaz beterik dago Jauna santutegian .
PRED:	O God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of our God , and he will not be able to stand against his holy mountain .
GOLD:	When you ascended to the heights , you led a crowd of captives.You received gifts from the people , even from those who rebelled against you.Now the Lord God will live among us there .

ID:	3323
INPUT:	Eliz elkartean bakoitzari bere tokia ezarri dio Jainkoak : lehenengo apostoluak , bigarren profetak , hirugarren irakasleak ; ondoren , mirarigileak datoz ; gero , sendatzeko edo behartsuei laguntzeko , elkartea gidatzeko edo hizketa arrotzez mintzatzeko dohaina dutenak .
PRED:	He has appointed each other to be appointed by the church . He is the one who appointed by the apostles , the prophets , who are appointed by the word of God . He is a witness to encourage those who are appointed by the word of the Lord .
GOLD:	Here are some of the parts God has appointed for the church : first are apostles , second are prophets , third are teachers , then those who do miracles , those who have the gift of healing , those who can help others , those who have the gift of leadership , those who speak in unknown languages .

ID:	3324
INPUT:	eta esan zion Jaunari : — Zergatik hartu duzu hain gaizki zeure zerbitzari hau ? Zergatik jarri nauzu zoritxarrean , herri honen zama neuri ezarriz ?
PRED:	Then he said to the Lord , “ Why have you rejected me ? Why did you look favorably on me ? Why did you look favorably on me ? ”
GOLD:	And Moses said to the Lord , “ Why are you treating me , your servant , so harshly ? Have mercy on me ! What did I do to deserve the burden of all these people ?

ID:	3325
INPUT:	Gero , Jaun ahalguztidunaren , Israelgo Jainkoaren , mezu hau adierazi zien Jeremiasek Rekaben leinukoei : « Zuen arbaso Jonadaben agindua aditu eta hark agindutako guztiak arretaz bete dituzuelako ,
PRED:	Then Jeremiah said to them , “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : ‘ You are the ancestor of your ancestors , the God of Israel , and everything he has commanded you .
GOLD:	Then Jeremiah turned to the Recabites and said , “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : ‘ You have obeyed your ancestor Jehonadab in every respect , following all his instructions . '

ID:	3326
INPUT:	Nagusiak esan zion : “ Ederki , morroi ona ! Gauza gutxian leial izan zarenez gero , hartzazu hamar hirietako agintea ” .
PRED:	“ But the master said to him , ‘ Do you think you are a faithful servant ? Do n't you think about ten of us ? '
GOLD:	“ ‘ Well done ! ' the king exclaimed . ‘ You are a good servant . You have been faithful with the little I entrusted to you , so you will be governor of ten cities as your reward . '

ID:	3327
INPUT:	Hamaika ikasleak Galileara joan ziren , Jesusek esandako mendira .
PRED:	When Jesus and his disciples went to the Mount of Olives , they went to Mount Hor .
GOLD:	Then the eleven disciples left for Galilee , going to the mountain where Jesus had told them to go .

ID:	3328
INPUT:	Zein dira Jainkoaren mintzoa entzun eta beraren kontra errebelatu zirenok ? Moisesek Egiptotik atera zituen haiek , noski .
PRED:	“ What have you heard the voice of God and the voice of the Lord , the God of Israel , who spoke against them ?
GOLD:	And who was it who rebelled against God , even though they heard his voice ? Was n't it the people Moses led out of Egypt ?

ID:	3329
INPUT:	Goizero , kriseiluak prest jartzean , intsentsu usaintsua erreko du Aaronek aldare honen gainean ,
PRED:	the lamps for the Most High , the lampstand , and the fragrant incense altar ;
GOLD:	“ Every morning when Aaron maintains the lamps , he must burn fragrant incense on the altar .

ID:	3330
INPUT:	Esker oneko otoitza Espirituaren eraginez bakarrik egiten baduzu , dohain hori ez duen entzule hutsak nola erantzungo dio « Amen » zure esker oneko otoitzari , zer diozun ulertzen ez badu ?
PRED:	And if you pray to the Holy Spirit , why do you hear the prayers of the Holy Spirit ? Do n't you understand what you say , ‘ You ca n't understand what 's right ? '
GOLD:	For if you praise God only in the spirit , how can those who do n't understand you praise God along with you ? How can they join you in giving thanks when they do n't understand what you are saying ?

ID:	3331
INPUT:	« Horregatik , hona hemen ni , nire hitzak elkarri lapurtzen dizkioten profeten kontra . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Lord says : I am sending my people out of the community , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , ” says the Lord , “ I am against these prophets who steal messages from each other and claim they are from me .

ID:	3332
INPUT:	Ez naiz , bada , neurriz gain ari , besteen lanaz baliatuz . Hau da , ordea , nire itxaropena : zuen sinesmena haziz doan neurrian , nire lanak gero eta fruitu handiagoa ekarriko duela zuen artean , ezarri zaizkidan mugen barruan ;
PRED:	I am not based on each other 's way . But I am telling you the truth , that I am the one who has given you the Good News about me , and I have given you the Good News about the work I had given you .
GOLD:	Nor do we boast and claim credit for the work someone else has done . Instead , we hope that your faith will grow so that the boundaries of our work among you will be extended .

ID:	3333
INPUT:	Horrela bada , ene senideok , zuek ere hil zen Kristoren gorputzeko eginak izan zaretenez gero , legearentzat hilda zaudete , eta beste batenak zarete jadanik — hildakoen artetik piztu zenarenak , alegia — , Jainkoarentzat fruitu onak emateko .
PRED:	So now , dear brothers and sisters , if you are dead , you will die in the body of Christ . But if you are dead , you will be raised from the dead , you will be raised from the dead .
GOLD:	So , my dear brothers and sisters , this is the point : You died to the power of the law when you died with Christ . And now you are united with the one who was raised from the dead . As a result , we can produce a harvest of good deeds for God .

ID:	3334
INPUT:	Hona hemen Joseren seme zaharrena zen Manasesen leinuari eroritako lurralde zatia . Ma<unk> , Galaaden aita , Manasesen seme zaharrena zen eta , gerrazalea zenez , Galaad eta Baxan lurraldeak eman zizkioten ondaretzat , Jordanez ekialdera .
PRED:	This is the homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Manasseh son of Manasseh , Manasseh , the half-tribe of Manasseh , Manasseh , Manasseh , had been given to the land of Gilead , and the land of Gilead .
GOLD:	The next allotment of land was given to the half-tribe of Manasseh , the descendants of Joseph 's older son . Makir , the firstborn son of Manasseh , was the father of Gilead . Because his descendants were experienced soldiers , the regions of Gilead and Bashan on the east side of the Jordan had already been given to them .

ID:	3335
INPUT:	esnegaina irabiatuz gurina ateratzen da , sudurra jota odola , haserreari eraginez liskarra .
PRED:	He leads us into a blazing anger , and he is so angry with the Philistines .
GOLD:	As the beating of cream yields butterand striking the nose causes bleeding , so stirring up anger causes quarrels .

ID:	3336
INPUT:	Haiekin zuen egina Jaunak ituna eta haiei zien honako agindu hau emana : « Ez duzue beste jainkorik gurtuko ; ez zarete halakoen aitzinean ahuspeztuko . Ez diezue kulturik emango , ez oparirik eskainiko .
PRED:	And the Lord said to them , “ You must not worship other gods . You must not worship other gods or worship other gods . You must not worship any other gods or worship other gods or worship other gods .
GOLD:	For the Lord had made a covenant with the descendants of Jacob and commanded them : “ Do not worship any other gods or bow before them or serve them or offer sacrifices to them .

ID:	3337
INPUT:	Hizketa arrotzez mintzatzekotan , bi izan daitezela edo hiru gehienez mintzo direnak , eta txandaka ; eta argi dezala beste batek esanahia .
PRED:	For two words are willing to speak with two words and two words . And one of them spoke to me and say , “ Do n't speak with me . ”
GOLD:	No more than two or three should speak in tongues . They must speak one at a time , and someone must interpret what they say .

ID:	3338
INPUT:	Bilarazi zituzten berengana filistearren buruzagi guztiak eta esan zieten : — Zer egin ote dezakegu Israelen Jainkoaren kutxarekin ? Haiek erantzun : — Israelen Jainkoaren kutxarekin ? Eraman dezatela Gatera . Eraman zuten , beraz , Israelen Jainkoaren kutxa .
PRED:	The Philistines replied , “ Why are you doing such a thing ? ” And the Philistines replied , “ We have helped the Ark of God , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , the Ark of the God of Israel ? ” So they took him back to the Ark of God of Israel .
GOLD:	So they called together the rulers of the Philistine towns and asked , “ What should we do with the Ark of the God of Israel ? ” The rulers discussed it and replied , “ Move it to the town of Gath . ” So they moved the Ark of the God of Israel to Gath .

ID:	3339
INPUT:	Horregatik , hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Neu ere zure kontra nator , Jerusalem ; zeuregan betearaziko dut epaia , nazioen aurrean ;
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am coming against you , and I will judge your people in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Therefore , I myself , the Sovereign Lord , am now your enemy . I will punish you publicly while all the nations watch .

ID:	3340
INPUT:	« Horregatik , honela diot nik , Jaunak : Ez didazue aditu zeuen senide esklaboak libre uzteko agindu dizuedanean . Orain , beraz , neuk uzten ditut libre ezpata , izurria eta gosea , zuen aurka ekiteko . Munduko erresuma guztiak izuturik geldituko dira zuei gertatua ikustean . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Lord says : Do not let me be your slave , for I have given you the yoke of your slavery in the land of your slavery , and I will bring you back to the nations of the earth .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Lord says : Since you have not obeyed me by setting your countrymen free , I will set you free to be destroyed by war , disease , and famine . You will be an object of horror to all the nations of the earth .

ID:	3341
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Gibeako garaian hasita , bekatuan ari da Israel . Orduz gero , ez da aldatu . Beraz , guduak Gibean bertanharrapatuko ditu gaizkileak .
PRED:	“ Son of man , ” says the Lord , “ when the people of Israel have sinned , the Lord will again again again again again be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	The Lord says , “ O Israel , ever since Gibeah , there has been only sin and more sin ! You have made no progress whatsoever.Was it not right that the wicked men of Gibeah were attacked ?

ID:	3342
INPUT:	Apaiz nagusiak bere jantziak urratu zituen eta esan : — Ba ote dugu lekuko beharrik ?
PRED:	The high priest tore his clothes in burlap and asked , “ Are we trying to arrest us ? ”
GOLD:	Then the high priest tore his clothing to show his horror and said , “ Why do we need other witnesses ?

ID:	3343
INPUT:	Gau hartan bertan , Abimelek eta beronen jende guztia jaiki eta Sikemgo inguruetan gorde ziren , lau taldetan antolaturik .
PRED:	That same night Abimelech and all the citizens of Shechem got up to Shechem and four of Shechem .
GOLD:	So Abimelech and all his men went by night and split into four groups , stationing themselves around Shechem .

ID:	3344
INPUT:	Aska nazazu ezpata zitaletik , libratu atzerritarren eskutik ! Haien ahoari faltsukeria dario , haien eskuinak gezurrezko zina dagi .
PRED:	I will rescue you from the power of my enemies , and I will rescue them from the power of the Lord .
GOLD:	Save me ! Rescue me from the power of my enemies.Their mouths are full of lies ; they swear to tell the truth , but they lie instead .

ID:	3345
INPUT:	Ai ene ! Izugarria izango da egun hura , berdinik gabea , larrialdi-egu<unk> koben herriarentzat . Baina onik aterako da » .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you , my people , says the Lord , “ I will restore the fortunes of the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	In all history there has never been such a time of terror.It will be a time of trouble for my people Israel.Yet in the end they will be saved !

ID:	3346
INPUT:	Emaguzu , bada , zeure iritzia : zilegi al da Zesarri zerga ordaintzea , bai ala ez ?
PRED:	Well , why are you trying to enter the ceremony ? Do n't you dare to enter the ceremony ?
GOLD:	Now tell us what you think about this : Is it right to pay taxes to Caesar or not ? ”

ID:	3347
INPUT:	Henadaden seme Bi<unk> Azariasen etxetik Zokorainoko sailean .
PRED:	Now go to the house of Zechariah son of Hilkiah , from the house of Zechariah son of Amoz .
GOLD:	Next was Binnui son of Henadad , who rebuilt another section of the wall from Azariah 's house to the angle and the corner .

ID:	3348
INPUT:	Janari guztiei nazka zieten , eta heriotzaren atarian zeuden .
PRED:	So they all cried out to the crowd , and they were afraid of their bones .
GOLD:	They could n't stand the thought of food , and they were knocking on death 's door .

ID:	3349
INPUT:	« Ez gogortu bihotzak zuen gurasoek Meriban bezala , Masako egun hartan basamortuan bezala ,
PRED:	“ You must not treat our ancestors in the wilderness of Zin , just as you did in the wilderness of Zin .
GOLD:	The Lord says , “ Do n't harden your hearts as Israel did at Meribah , as they did at Massah in the wilderness .

ID:	3350
INPUT:	Jakoben ondorengoaksu izango dira , Joserenak gar ; Esaurenak , berriz , lasto . Lastoa suak hartuko dueta irentsiko . Eta Esauren ondorengorikez da bizirik aterako » . Jaunak esan du .
PRED:	All the descendants of Jacob will mourn for Egypt , but the Lord will provide for Jacob 's descendants , Isaac , and Jacob 's descendants , and Jacob will be scattered . ” And the Lord said , “ The Lord will no longer say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : '
GOLD:	The people of Israel will be a raging fire , and Edom a field of dry stubble.The descendants of Joseph will be a flameroaring across the field , devouring everything.There will be no survivors in Edom.I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	3351
INPUT:	Egun hartan hogeita bost mila gudari benjamindar erori ziren , denak gizon ausartak .
PRED:	On that day the men of Benjamin were about 5,000 men and Benjamin .
GOLD:	So that day the tribe of Benjamin lost 25,000 strong warriors armed with swords ,

ID:	3352
INPUT:	Alabarik ere ez badu , beraren anaiei emango zaie ondarea .
PRED:	If he refuses to obey his brother 's brother , he will give his inheritance to his brothers .
GOLD:	And if he has no daughter either , transfer his inheritance to his brothers .

ID:	3353
INPUT:	Salomonen jakinduria ekialdekoena eta egiptoarrena baino handiagoa izan zen ,
PRED:	Solomon was greater than any other gods , and he became more powerful than the Egyptians .
GOLD:	So Hiram supplied as much cedar and cypress timber as Solomon desired .

ID:	3354
INPUT:	Ez da gehiago zure herrialdeangogorkeri hotsik entzungo , ez zure mugetanhondamendi eta triskantzarik izango ; “ Salbamen ” deituko diezuzeure harresiei , “ Gorespen ” zeure ateei .
PRED:	Your people will no longer say , ‘ Do n't be angry with your people , your cities will be deserted . ' But no one will cry out , ‘ We will praise your name . '
GOLD:	Violence will disappear from your land ; the desolation and destruction of war will end.Salvation will surround you like city walls , and praise will be on the lips of all who enter there .

ID:	3355
INPUT:	Gero , esan zion Tomasi : — Ekarri atzamarra eta aztertu nire eskuak ; ekarri eskua eta sartu nire saihets-zuloan . Eta ez izan sinesgogor , sinestedun baizik .
PRED:	Then he said to her , “ Bring me some of your hands and your fingers . ” And she said to her , “ Do n't believe me . ” And she did n't believe her .
GOLD:	Then he said to Thomas , “ Put your finger here , and look at my hands . Put your hand into the wound in my side . Do n't be faithless any longer . Believe ! ”

ID:	3356
INPUT:	Harentzat ez dago ez greziarrik eta ez judurik , ez erdaindurik eta ez erdaingaberik , ez kultura handiagoko nahiz txikiagokorik , ez esklaborik eta ez librerik : Kristo da dena , eta denetan bizi da .
PRED:	There is no resurrection of the Jews and Greeks — not even though they are circumcised , they are not circumcised . They are not a slave to God , and Christ is not a slave or a slave or a slave to Christ .
GOLD:	In this new life , it does n't matter if you are a Jew or a Gentile , circumcised or uncircumcised , barbaric , uncivilized , slave , or free . Christ is all that matters , and he lives in all of us .

ID:	3357
INPUT:	« Apaizak zure eskuetatik saskia hartu eta Jaunaren zure Jainkoaren aldare aurrean ipiniko du .
PRED:	“ Then the priest will take the basket of bread and burn it before the Lord your God .
GOLD:	The priest will then take the basket from your hand and set it before the altar of the Lord your God .

ID:	3358
INPUT:	Berehala alde egin zion legenak , eta garbi gelditu zen .
PRED:	So the king went to Bethel , and he remained clean .
GOLD:	Instantly the leprosy disappeared , and the man was healed .

ID:	3359
INPUT:	Judea herrialde osoa eta jerusalemdar guztiak harengana zihoazen eta , beren bekatuak aitortzen zituztela , Joanek bataiatu egiten zituen Jordan ibaian .
PRED:	So all the people of Judah and all the people of Judah came to their father and mother , who had been baptized in the Jordan River .
GOLD:	All of Judea , including all the people of Jerusalem , went out to see and hear John . And when they confessed their sins , he baptized them in the Jordan River .

ID:	3360
INPUT:	Eta esan zidan : “ Ez beldurtu , Jainkoak bereziki maite zaitu ! Egon lasai ! Izan bihotz eta indarberritu ! ” Haren hitzak bizkortu egin ninduen . Orduan , honela esan nion : “ Ene Jauna , mintza zaitez , indarberritu nauzu eta ” .
PRED:	Then he said to me , ‘ Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid of me , for the Lord has spoken ! ' Then he said , ‘ Do n't be afraid of me , O Lord , for you have spoken ! '
GOLD:	“ Do n't be afraid , ” he said , “ for you are very precious to God . Peace ! Be encouraged ! Be strong ! ” As he spoke these words to me , I suddenly felt stronger and said to him , “ Please speak to me , my lord , for you have strengthened me . ”

ID:	3361
INPUT:	Tristura poz bilakatuko
PRED:	Rachel 's Prophecy
GOLD:	Sadness Will Be Turned to Joy

ID:	3362
INPUT:	Herriak legea beteko duela hitzeman
PRED:	The King of Israel 's Leaders
GOLD:	The Vow of the People

ID:	3363
INPUT:	Zentzuzko jokabidetik okertzen denakhildakoen artean amaituko du .
PRED:	Those who love evil will die ; those who love the poor will die .
GOLD:	The person who strays from common sensewill end up in the company of the dead .

ID:	3364
INPUT:	« Ez da aski zu nire zerbitzari izate<unk> koben leinuak susperrarazieta berritzekoeta Israelen bizirik geldituakitzularazteko ; nazioen argitzat ezarriko zaitut , nire salbamenalurraren bazterrerainoeraman dezazun » .
PRED:	“ Do n't be kind to me , O God of Israel , and I will bring you back to the tribes of Israel . I will drive you back to the land of Israel , and I will rescue you from your salvation . ”
GOLD:	He says , “ You will do more than restore the people of Israel to me.I will make you a light to the Gentiles , and you will bring my salvation to the ends of the earth . ”

ID:	3365
INPUT:	Joan Bataiatzailearen jaiotza iragarri
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	Mary Visits Elizabeth

ID:	3366
INPUT:	Ez dezazuela , beraz , epea baino lehen epai . Itxaron Jauna etorri arte . Berak argituko du ilunpean ezkutatua dagoena , berak agertuko bihotzeko asmo gordeak . Eta orduan , nork bere merezia jasoko du Jainkoarengandik .
PRED:	So do n't be upset , for it is better to wait until it comes . The Lord will judge the light of the darkness , but he will never see it until he has revealed his entire life .
GOLD:	So do n't make judgments about anyone ahead of time — before the Lord returns . For he will bring our darkest secrets to light and will reveal our private motives . Then God will give to each one whatever praise is due .

ID:	3367
INPUT:	Israelek , Daviden erreinutik bereizi zen hartan , Nebaten seme Jeroboam izendatu zuen errege , eta errege honek aldendu egin zuen Israel Jaunaren esanetatik , bekatu handia eginaraziz .
PRED:	So Jeroboam son of Nebat received the example of Jeroboam son of Nebat , king of Israel , and he followed the example of Jeroboam son of Nebat , the king of Israel .
GOLD:	For when the Lord tore Israel away from the kingdom of David , they chose Jeroboam son of Nebat as their king . But Jeroboam drew Israel away from following the Lord and made them commit a great sin .

ID:	3368
INPUT:	Gizaki guztien aldeko otoitza
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Instructions about Worship

ID:	3369
INPUT:	« Oraindik ohean nengoela , zerutik zetorren aingeru zaindari bat ikusi nuen ikuskarian .
PRED:	“ As soon as I was in the sky , I saw a angel coming from heaven .
GOLD:	“ ‘ While I was lying in my bed , this is what I dreamed . I saw a large tree in the middle of the earth .

ID:	3370
INPUT:	Kristauen biziera berria
PRED:	Living to the Church in Christ
GOLD:	Sin 's Power Is Broken

ID:	3371
INPUT:	Elkarri zor diozuen maitasunari buruz , ez duzue nik idatzi beharrik , Jainkoak berak irakasten baitizue elkar maitatzen ,
PRED:	Do n't let me teach you the truth , for God has given you his greetings . Instead , you do n't need to love each other .
GOLD:	But we do n't need to write to you about the importance of loving each other , for God himself has taught you to love one another .

ID:	3372
INPUT:	Zure ondorengoaklurreko hautsa bezain ugariizango dira . Mendebalde eta ekialdera , iparralde eta hegoalderahedatuko zara . Zure eta zure ondorengoen bitartezlurreko senitarte guztiakbedeinkatuko ditut .
PRED:	Your descendants will be as numerous as the hill country . Your descendants will be as the south as the north as the north as the south as the north as the north as your possession .
GOLD:	Your descendants will be as numerous as the dust of the earth ! They will spread out in all directions — to the west and the east , to the north and the south . And all the families of the earth will be blessed through you and your descendants .

ID:	3373
INPUT:	« Beraz , urtean hiru aldiz aurkeztuko dira gizaseme guztiak Jainko Jaunaren aurrera .
PRED:	“ At that time you must present three times before the Lord your God .
GOLD:	At these three times each year , every man in Israel must appear before the Sovereign , the Lord .

ID:	3374
INPUT:	( 18 , <unk> ; 19 , 7-9 ; Mk 9 , <unk> ; 10 , <unk> . 10-12 ; Lk 16 , 18 )
PRED:	Jesus Feeds Five Thousand
GOLD:	Teaching about Love for Enemies

ID:	3375
INPUT:	Eta jarraitu zuen : — Lasai zokoratzen duzue Jainkoaren agindua zeuen usadioak ezartzeko !
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ If you obey God 's commands , you will carry out the commands of God . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ You skillfully sidestep God 's law in order to hold on to your own tradition .

ID:	3376
INPUT:	Hadadezerrek Eufrates ibaiaren ekialdeko aramearrei etortzeko agindu zien , eta Helam-en bildu ziren , Hadadezerren gudalburu zen Xobak buruzagi zutela .
PRED:	So the king of Babylon sent messengers to the Euphrates River to the king of Babylon , along with the officials of Elam , the commander of the province of Babylonia , and the commander of the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	they were joined by additional Aramean troops summoned by Hadadezer from the other side of the Euphrates River . These troops arrived at Helam under the command of Shobach , the commander of Hadadezer 's forces .

ID:	3377
INPUT:	egon ziur , Jaunak , zuen Jainkoak , ez duela herri horiek zuen aurretik botatzen jarraituko . Sare eta tranpa izango dituzue , saihetsean eztenkada eta begietan arantza bezain mingarri , Jaunak , zeuen Jainkoak , eman dizuen lurralde eder honetatik zuek desagerrarazi arte .
PRED:	That is why the Lord your God will drive you out of the nations , so that you will be able to stand against you , and you will be able to lie down in your own land . You will be like a sign of your people , just as the Lord your God has promised you .
GOLD:	then know for certain that the Lord your God will no longer drive them out of your land . Instead , they will be a snare and a trap to you , a whip for your backs and thorny brambles in your eyes , and you will vanish from this good land the Lord your God has given you .

ID:	3378
INPUT:	Horregatik , Babel — hau da , « Nahasketa » — , eman zioten izena , han nahasi baitzuen Jaunak mundu osoko hizkuntza eta handik sakabanatu baitzituen mundu zabalera .
PRED:	That is why King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon named Nathan , for he had said , “ As surely as the Lord lives , the God of all the world began to repent of the world . ”
GOLD:	That is why the city was called Babel , because that is where the Lord confused the people with different languages . In this way he scattered them all over the world .

ID:	3379
INPUT:	Salomon erregeak berrehun babeski handi egin zituen urre garbiz , babeski bakoitza egiteko ia zazpi kilo urre behar izan zelarik .
PRED:	King Solomon made 200 bronze shields of hammered gold , hammered gold , each of the second pounds of pure gold .
GOLD:	King Solomon made 200 large shields of hammered gold , each weighing more than 15 pounds .

ID:	3380
INPUT:	Zazpigarren zigilua . Jainkoaren herriaren otoitzak
PRED:	The Festival of Shelters
GOLD:	The Lamb Breaks the Seventh Seal

ID:	3381
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	3382
INPUT:	Eta jendea txutxu-mutxuka ari zen hartaz ; batzuek zioten : « Gizon ona da » . Beste batzuek , ordea : « Ez , herria engainatzen ari da » .
PRED:	As a man approached the crowd , the crowds were amazed and said , “ The crowd is n't telling us , ” they said , “ but the people do n't hear it . ”
GOLD:	There was a lot of grumbling about him among the crowds . Some argued , “ He 's a good man , ” but others said , “ He 's nothing but a fraud who deceives the people . ”

ID:	3383
INPUT:	« Ipini seinaleak bide-erakusgarri , begira ongi nondik zoazen : itzuli , Israel neskatxa eder , itzuli zeure hirietara .
PRED:	“ When the Spirit saw the miraculous signs and wonders , he returned to the town of Israel . When he returned home , he returned to the town of Israel .
GOLD:	Set up road signs ; put up guideposts.Mark well the pathby which you came.Come back again , my virgin Israel ; return to your towns here .

ID:	3384
INPUT:	Gainerako ikasleak txalupaz joan ziren , sarea arrainekin tiraka zekartela , lehorretik hurbil baitziren , ehunen bat metrora .
PRED:	There were a boat for a long time , for it was a boat with a large crowd , where it was a boat with its entrance .
GOLD:	The others stayed with the boat and pulled the loaded net to the shore , for they were only about a hundred yards from shore .

ID:	3385
INPUT:	Ahiasek , emakumearen oin-hotsak ate ondoan sumatzean , esan zion : — Sar zaitez , Jeroboamen emazte hori . Zergatik zatozkit itxuraldatua ? Berri txarra eman behar dizut Jaunaren izenean .
PRED:	When he arrived at the town , he said to the woman , “ Go into the boat with my wife , why should I send you out of the land ? ”
GOLD:	So when Ahijah heard her footsteps at the door , he called out , “ Come in , wife of Jeroboam ! Why are you pretending to be someone else ? ” Then he told her , “ I have bad news for you .

ID:	3386
INPUT:	( Mt 26 , 1-5 ; Lk 22 , 1-2 ; Jn 11 , 45-53 )
PRED:	Judas Agrees to Betray Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Predicts Peter 's Denial

ID:	3387
INPUT:	Horrela , beraz , gurtzen zuten Jauna ; baina , erbesteratu baino lehen beren jatorrizko hirietan zituzten kultuen arabera , beren jainkoak ere gurtu ohi zituzten .
PRED:	So they worshiped the Lord , but they worshiped the images of Baal . So they worshiped the gods of the gods that had worshiped other gods .
GOLD:	And though they worshiped the Lord , they continued to follow their own gods according to the religious customs of the nations from which they came .

ID:	3388
INPUT:	zuri idazten dizut , ene seme maite Timoteo . Jainko Aitak eta Kristo Jesus gure Jaunak eman biezazkizute grazia , errukia eta bakea .
PRED:	I am writing to you , my Father , my dear brothers and sisters , the Lord Jesus Christ , who has given you grace and peace .
GOLD:	I am writing to Timothy , my dear son.May God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord give you grace , mercy , and peace .

ID:	3389
INPUT:	Geletatik bi ate zeuden hutsarte hartara : bata iparraldera eta bestea hegoaldera . Hutsartearen inguruko hormaren lodiera bi metro eta erdikoa zen .
PRED:	There were two rooms on the north side of the inner courtyard . The rooms on the north side of the inner courtyard , and the inner courtyard were two rooms .
GOLD:	Two doors opened from the side rooms into the terrace yard , which was 83/4 feet wide . One door faced north and the other south .

ID:	3390
INPUT:	Ez iezadazu larrialdian aurpegia ezkuta , makur belarria niregana , dei egitean : erantzun bizkor !
PRED:	Do n't let me go ahead of me , for I am surrounded by the blind , and I pray to you .
GOLD:	For my days disappear like smoke , and my bones burn like red-hot coals .

ID:	3391
INPUT:	idolatria , sorginkeria , etsaigoak , haserreak , bekaizkeria , gorrotoak , norgehiagokeria , alderdikeria , zatiketak ,
PRED:	They are jealous of wickedness , jealousy , slander , and jealousy , slander , and jealousy .
GOLD:	idolatry , sorcery , hostility , quarreling , jealousy , outbursts of anger , selfish ambition , dissension , division ,

ID:	3392
INPUT:	Eta Jakobek : — Egidazu zin ! Josek zin egin zion . Orduan , Jakob oheburura makurtu zen .
PRED:	“ No ! ” Jacob exclaimed . “ Do n't do it ! ” So Jacob took his body into his bed .
GOLD:	“ Swear that you will do it , ” Jacob insisted . So Joseph gave his oath , and Jacob bowed humbly at the head of his bed .

ID:	3393
INPUT:	Gutxietsi egin zituzten bai beraien gurasoekin Jaunak egin zuen ituna , bai eman zizkien burubideak ere . Horrela , idolo hutsalen ondoren joanez , hutsal bihurtu ziren beraiek ere . Inguruko herrien antzeko egin ziren , Jainkoak haien antzera ez jokatzeko agindu zien arren .
PRED:	So the Lord made their ancestors with their ancestors , and he led them to the land of Egypt with their ancestors . So they turned their backs on their heads , and they turned their backs on their heads .
GOLD:	They rejected his decrees and the covenant he had made with their ancestors , and they despised all his warnings . They worshiped worthless idols , so they became worthless themselves . They followed the example of the nations around them , disobeying the Lord 's command not to imitate them .

ID:	3394
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaien Jauna Moisesi eta Aaroni , israeldarrak Egiptotik ateratzeko mandatua emanez , eta aginduak eman zizkien israeldarrentzat eta Egiptoko errege faraoiarentzat .
PRED:	Then the Lord gave these instructions to Moses and Aaron , who brought the people of Israel out of Egypt . He gave them this command to Pharaoh , the king of Egypt , and he gave them all the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	But the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron and gave them orders for the Israelites and for Pharaoh , the king of Egypt . The Lord commanded Moses and Aaron to lead the people of Israel out of Egypt .

ID:	3395
INPUT:	Beraz , haien erortzea munduarentzat aberasbide , hau da , haien hutsegitea jentilentzat aberasbide gertatu bada , zenbatez aberasgarriago ez ote da izanen Israel osoak salbamena iristea !
PRED:	Therefore , it is a reward for those who are rich in the world , for it is good to those who are rich . They are rich to be saved , but they will be saved .
GOLD:	Now if the Gentiles were enriched because the people of Israel turned down God 's offer of salvation , think how much greater a blessing the world will share when they finally accept it .

ID:	3396
INPUT:	Zuen lurraldea hondatua dago , zuen hiriak suak erreta . Soroetako uztaatzerritarrek dizuete i<unk> zeuen begi aurrean . Dena hondamendi , Sodomaren porrokaldikoan bezala .
PRED:	You will destroy the land of Sodom and Gomorrah , just as the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah . Your land will be destroyed in every hill country of Sodom and Gomorrah .
GOLD:	Your country lies in ruins , and your towns are burned.Foreigners plunder your fields before your eyesand destroy everything they see .

ID:	3397
INPUT:	Eta hauengatik ematen dizut erabat neure burua , hauek ere egiaren bidez zeuretzat har ditzazun .
PRED:	I have given you this gift from my heart , and you are my own special possession .
GOLD:	And I give myself as a holy sacrifice for them so they can be made holy by your truth .

ID:	3398
INPUT:	Jariodunak erabilitako eserlekuan esertzen denak arropak eta gorputza garbituko ditu eta kutsaturik geldituko da arratsa arte .
PRED:	If you touch the water , you must wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water , and you will remain unclean until evening .
GOLD:	If you sit where the man with the discharge has sat , you must wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water , and you will remain unclean until evening .

ID:	3399
INPUT:	Joan zitzaizkion jauregiko arduradunak lurretik jaikiarazteko asmotan , baina hark ez zuen nahi izan , ezta deus jan ere haiekin .
PRED:	Then Joseph looked at the palace gate , but he refused to eat the food he had told him , but he refused to eat with them .
GOLD:	The elders of his household pleaded with him to get up and eat with them , but he refused .

ID:	3400
INPUT:	ergela toki gorenean jarriaeta aberatsa behean eseria .
PRED:	So the king got up and put the dust on his shoulders .
GOLD:	when they give great authority to foolish people and low positions to people of proven worth .

ID:	3401
INPUT:	Bere guardiako bat bidali zuen , Joanen burua ekartzeko aginduz . Joan zen hura kartzelara eta lepoa moztu zion ,
PRED:	So he sent a chief of John , and he sent him to his head , and he put him on his head .
GOLD:	So he immediately sent an executioner to the prison to cut off John 's head and bring it to him . The soldier beheaded John in the prison ,

ID:	3402
INPUT:	Jaitsi zen Moises eta israeldarrei hitz egin zien .
PRED:	So Moses went down and spoke to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	So Moses went down to the people and told them what the Lord had said .

ID:	3403
INPUT:	Judeako eliz elkarteek ez ninduten oraindik begiz ezagutzen .
PRED:	The churches did n't understand me when I was in the churches .
GOLD:	And still the churches in Christ that are in Judea did n't know me personally .

ID:	3404
INPUT:	Jainkoaren agintzaria Jesusengan burutua
PRED:	A New Copy of God
GOLD:	God 's Promises Bring Hope

ID:	3405
INPUT:	Bigbairenak 2 . <unk> ;
PRED:	The family of Hashum328
GOLD:	The family of Bigvai2,056

ID:	3406
INPUT:	Ondoren , ezarri itun-kutxaren gaineko estalkia toki santu-santuan .
PRED:	Then he placed the Ark of the Covenant on the Ark of the Covenant of the Covenant .
GOLD:	“ Then put the Ark 's cover — the place of atonement — on top of the Ark of the Covenant inside the Most Holy Place .

ID:	3407
INPUT:	David eta Tziba
PRED:	David 's Kindness to David
GOLD:	David and Ziba

ID:	3408
INPUT:	Haien aurretik suak irentsi , haien atzetik garrak kiskali . Lehen , lurra baratze eder ; gero , eremu gorri . Ez die ezerk ihes egiten .
PRED:	He led them out of the fire and threw them out of the Nile , and it will be a dry ground . You must not flee to the ground .
GOLD:	Fire burns in front of them , and flames follow after them.Ahead of them the land liesas beautiful as the Garden of Eden.Behind them is nothing but desolation ; not one thing escapes .

ID:	3409
INPUT:	Jaiegunari buruzko eztabaida
PRED:	On the eighth day of the festival , the priest may eat it .
GOLD:	A Discussion about the Sabbath

ID:	3410
INPUT:	Ezin konta ahala dira gure erruak , baina zuk barkatu egiten dizkiguzu hobenak .
PRED:	You can not forgive our sins , but you can not forgive our sins .
GOLD:	What joy for those you choose to bring near , those who live in your holy courts.What festivities await usinside your holy Temple .

ID:	3411
INPUT:	Entzun dudanean , ikarak hartu dit barrua . Zarata aditzean , dardaraz ditut ezpainak . Ahulezia sartu zait hezurretaraino , koloka ditut oinak . Geldi nago ni , egun larriaren zain , zapaltzen gaituen herriari datorkionegunaren zain .
PRED:	My enemies have heard me , and I have heard my groans , and I have heard the groans of the enemy , and I have heard the sound of the enemy 's horn . They are like a warrior 's builders rejectedhas now on the day of battle .
GOLD:	I trembled inside when I heard this ; my lips quivered with fear.My legs gave way beneath me , and I shook in terror.I will wait quietly for the coming daywhen disaster will strike the people who invade us .

ID:	3412
INPUT:	David eta Betsabe
PRED:	David and Nabal at David
GOLD:	David Arranges for Uriah 's Death

ID:	3413
INPUT:	Jake-ren seme Agur-en esanak . Hona gizon honen mezua , Itieli eta Ukali emana .
PRED:	These were the sons of Esau . This man was the son of Isaac , and he sent a man named after Isaac .
GOLD:	The sayings of Agur son of Jakeh contain this message.I am weary , O God ; I am weary and worn out , O God .

ID:	3414
INPUT:	Ismaelek eta berekin zituen hamar gizonek , jaiki , ezpataz jo eta hil egin zuten Gedalias , Babiloniako erregeak Judako gobernari ezarria .
PRED:	Then Ishmael took ten of his men and killed ten of the king of Israel . Then he killed the king of Judah , where he killed the king of Judah .
GOLD:	Ishmael and his ten men suddenly jumped up , drew their swords , and killed Gedaliah , whom the king of Babylon had appointed governor .

ID:	3415
INPUT:	Arduradunek eta herri osoak erantzun zioten : — Ez iezaiozu entzun , ez onartu .
PRED:	The shepherds replied , “ Do n't listen to this message . ” And the elders replied , “ Do n't listen . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't give in to any more demands , ” all the elders and the people advised .

ID:	3416
INPUT:	Egin beza nire ahoak Jaunaren gorespenaeta bedeinka bezate izaki guztiek haren izen santuabeti eta beti !
PRED:	Let them praise the name of the Lord forever and ever ! Let them praise his holy name forever .
GOLD:	I will praise the Lord , and may everyone on earth bless his holy nameforever and ever .

ID:	3417
INPUT:	Zeren Kristorengatik abiatu baitira , jentilengandik ezer ere hartu gabe .
PRED:	For Christ has brought us out of the Gentiles to the Gentiles , too , to save us from the Gentiles .
GOLD:	For they are traveling for the Lord , and they accept nothing from people who are not believers .

ID:	3418
INPUT:	Nik , senideok , ezin izan nizuen hitz egin Espiritua dutenei bezala , pertsona heldugabeei bezala baizik , kristau-mailan umetxo direnei bezala .
PRED:	And I , dear brothers and sisters , do n't let the Holy Spirit give you the ability to comfort those who are willing to help the believers .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , when I was with you I could n't talk to you as I would to spiritual people . I had to talk as though you belonged to this world or as though you were infants in Christ .

ID:	3419
INPUT:	Job
PRED:	Job 's Seventh Speech : A Response to Bildad
GOLD:	Job 's Second Speech : A Response to Eliphaz

ID:	3420
INPUT:	Gauerdian jaiki eta , ni lo nengoen bitartean , nire ondotik nire haurra hartu eta bere ondoan etzan zuen ; bere seme hila , berriz , nire ondoan ezarri .
PRED:	At midnight I got up and stood up in the middle of the sea , and I took my child in the bank of the Nile River .
GOLD:	Then she got up in the night and took my son from beside me while I was asleep . She laid her dead child in my arms and took mine to sleep beside her .

ID:	3421
INPUT:	Jainko ahalguztiduna , itzuli , arren ! Begira zerutik , ikus ! Hartzazu zeure mahastiaren ardura ,
PRED:	Look , O God of Heaven 's Armies , you have seen the light of the sky ! Take your grapes from the sky , and put them into the sky .
GOLD:	that you yourself have planted , this son you have raised for yourself .

ID:	3422
INPUT:	Ez zetozen beren artean bat , eta , alde egitera zihoazela , Paulok azkenik esan zien : « Ederki asko esan zien Espiritu Santuak zuen arbasoei Isaias profetaren bidez :
PRED:	As Paul was there , he took a quiet man and said to them , “ Paul , the Holy Spirit , the Holy Spirit , the Holy Spirit , the Holy Spirit ,
GOLD:	And after they had argued back and forth among themselves , they left with this final word from Paul : “ The Holy Spirit was right when he said to your ancestors through Isaiah the prophet ,

ID:	3423
INPUT:	Zuen erruek , aldiz , nahastu egin dute ordena hau ; zeuen bekatuengatikez zarete lurreko ondasunezgozatzen .
PRED:	But you have refused to pay attention to what you have done . But you have done to the land of the earth .
GOLD:	Your wickedness has deprived you of these wonderful blessings.Your sin has robbed you of all these good things .

ID:	3424
INPUT:	Jaunaren espirituz jantzirik , Gedeonek adarra jo eta bere ondoan bildu zituen Abiezerren senitartekoak .
PRED:	Then the Spirit of the Lord struck them with his finger and put them on their journey .
GOLD:	Then the Spirit of the Lord clothed Gideon with power . He blew a ram 's horn as a call to arms , and the men of the clan of Abiezer came to him .

ID:	3425
INPUT:	Bai , Jainkoa da Kristoren bitartez mundua berekin adiskidetu duena , gizon-emakumeei bekatuen kontuak eskatu gabe , eta adiskidetzearen mezu hau gure esku utzi duena .
PRED:	For God has given us the world to be with Christ , who has given us the power of Christ , and he has given us right with his hands .
GOLD:	For God was in Christ , reconciling the world to himself , no longer counting people 's sins against them . And he gave us this wonderful message of reconciliation .

ID:	3426
INPUT:	« Bil bitez nazio guztiak , elkar bitez herriak : horietako zeinek iragarri zuenhau guztiaedo lehengo gertakizunakjakinarazi ? Aurkez bitzate lekukoak , beren buruak zuri ditzaten , entzun diezaieguneta aitortu egia zela .
PRED:	“ Gather together together all the people of Israel . Let them gather together together together , all the people of Israel , who have heard that all the things of the Lord has revealed to you . How long will you hear about this ?
GOLD:	Gather the nations together ! Assemble the peoples of the world ! Which of their idols has ever foretold such things ? Which can predict what will happen tomorrow ? Where are the witnesses of such predictions ? Who can verify that they spoke the truth ?

ID:	3427
INPUT:	« Auzitegira zaramatzatela , ez egon zer esango duzuen kezkatan ; une hartan bertan Jainkoak adieraziko dizuena , esan huraxe , ez baitzarete zuek mintzatuko , Espiritu Santua baizik .
PRED:	“ If you do n't want to take action , you will be able to teach you the truth , but you wo n't understand the Holy Spirit . But you wo n't understand the Holy Spirit , but you will not be the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	But when you are arrested and stand trial , do n't worry in advance about what to say . Just say what God tells you at that time , for it is not you who will be speaking , but the Holy Spirit .

ID:	3428
INPUT:	« Horrela bada , Jordanez beste aldeko , ekialdeko , bi errege amortar haien lurraldeak eskuratu genituen , Arnon errekatik Hermon mendiraino
PRED:	“ That is why the kings of the Jordan River ruled by two kings east of the Jordan River , east of the Jordan River , and the kings of the Amorites .
GOLD:	“ So we took the land of the two Amorite kings east of the Jordan River — all the way from the Arnon Gorge to Mount Hermon .

ID:	3429
INPUT:	Joan zen , bada , Samuel Saulen ondoren eta honek gurtu egin zuen Jauna .
PRED:	So Samuel went to Saul and worshiped the Lord .
GOLD:	So Samuel finally agreed and went back with him , and Saul worshiped the Lord .

ID:	3430
INPUT:	« Ez zabaldu funsgabeko esamesarik ; ez atera gaiztoaren alde , zuzengabeko testigantza eginez .
PRED:	“ Do not listen to the word of the wicked , for they will not testify against the wicked .
GOLD:	“ You must not pass along false rumors . You must not cooperate with evil people by lying on the witness stand .

ID:	3431
INPUT:	Izan ere , oraindik bekatupean indargabe ginela , Jainkoak erabakitako garaian , gaiztoen alde hil zen Kristo .
PRED:	For when God had done this , he died because of his sinful nature , he died in the sight of Christ .
GOLD:	When we were utterly helpless , Christ came at just the right time and died for us sinners .

ID:	3432
INPUT:	« Aitzitik , gaur ematen dizkizuedan agindu eta legeak betetzen saiatu ez eta Jaunari zeuen Jainkoari obeditzen ez badiozue , madarikazio hauek guztiak bete-betean iritsiko zaizkizue .
PRED:	“ That is why I am giving you today , and if you obey the commands of the Lord your God and obey all the commands that I am giving you today .
GOLD:	“ But if you refuse to listen to the Lord your God and do not obey all the commands and decrees I am giving you today , all these curses will come and overwhelm you :

ID:	3433
INPUT:	galdetuko dute : « Zertan gelditu da Kristo etorriko zela zioen agintzaria ? Izan ere , gure gurasoak hil ziren , eta geroztik denak berdin jarraitzen du , mundua mundu denetik bezalaxe » .
PRED:	“ Why did the world be found in Christ ? ” he asked . “ For when he returns , he will die in the world , and he will die in the world . ”
GOLD:	They will say , “ What happened to the promise that Jesus is coming again ? From before the times of our ancestors , everything has remained the same since the world was first created . ”

ID:	3434
INPUT:	Eta deiadarka esan zion : — Zer duzu nirekin , Jesus , goi-goiko Jainkoaren Seme horrek ? Jainkoarren , ez nazazu oinazetu !
PRED:	Then he shouted to him , “ What are you looking for me ? Why are you the Son of God , the Son of God , the Son of God ? ”
GOLD:	With a shriek , he screamed , “ Why are you interfering with me , Jesus , Son of the Most High God ? In the name of God , I beg you , do n't torture me ! ”

ID:	3435
INPUT:	Eta apaiz edo profeta nahiz herrikoren batek “ Jaunaren mezua ( zama ) ” esaten badu , zigortu egingo ditut bera eta bere etxekoak .
PRED:	And if the high priest or the people of Israel say , ‘ If you obey the word of the Lord , I will punish you for your sake . '
GOLD:	“ If any prophet , priest , or anyone else says , ‘ I have a prophecy from the Lord , ' I will punish that person along with his entire family .

ID:	3436
INPUT:	Gero , agindu zion Gehazi bere morroiari : — Deitu emakume xunemdar horri . Egin zion dei eta etorri zen emakumea morroiarengana .
PRED:	Then Gideon said to Gehazi , “ Call a woman from Shunem . ” So she called the woman , and she called her servant .
GOLD:	He said to his servant Gehazi , “ Tell the woman from Shunem I want to speak to her . ” When she appeared ,

ID:	3437
INPUT:	« Baina Hexbongo Sihon erregeak ez zigun bere lurraldetik igarotzen utzi . Jaunak gure Jainkoak burugogor eta setatsu bihurtu zuen , bera guri eskura emateko asmoz , gaur ikus daitekeen bezala .
PRED:	“ But the land of Heshbon , the Lord our God has given us victory over the land of King Sihon of his people , and he has given us victory over you today .
GOLD:	“ But King Sihon of Heshbon refused to allow us to pass through , because the Lord your God made Sihon stubborn and defiant so he could help you defeat him , as he has now done .

ID:	3438
INPUT:	artelanak asmatzeko , urre , zilar eta brontzezko lanak egiteko ,
PRED:	He also made many articles of gold , silver , gold , bronze , and bronze ;
GOLD:	He is a master craftsman , expert in working with gold , silver , and bronze .

ID:	3439
INPUT:	Jonasek erantzun zien : — Hebrearra naiz eta Jauna gurtzen dut , zeruko Jainkoa , itsasoa eta lehorra egin zituena .
PRED:	“ I am the Lord , ” Joseph replied . “ I am the Lord , the God of heaven and the sea , and the sea made a covenant with the sea . ”
GOLD:	Jonah answered , “ I am a Hebrew , and I worship the Lord , the God of heaven , who made the sea and the land . ”

ID:	3440
INPUT:	Egin duen bekatuaz jabetzean , ahuntz akats gabea eramango du barkamen-oparitzat .
PRED:	Then he must give them a young goat as a sin offering , and he must offer a young goat as a sin offering .
GOLD:	When they become aware of their sin , they must bring as an offering for their sin a female goat with no defects .

ID:	3441
INPUT:	Gero , miraririk gehienak egin zitueneko herriak madarikatzen hasi zen Jesus , bihozberritu ez zirelako .
PRED:	Then Jesus began to repent of their sins , and he began to repent of their sins and repent of their sins .
GOLD:	Then Jesus began to denounce the towns where he had done so many of his miracles , because they had n't repented of their sins and turned to God .

ID:	3442
INPUT:	Ikusi zuenak berak testigatzen du eta haren testigantza egiazkoa da . Berak badaki egia dioena , zuek ere sinets dezazuen .
PRED:	Everyone who believes in him will believe him . Everyone who believes in him will believe him will believe in him .
GOLD:	( This report is from an eyewitness giving an accurate account . He speaks the truth so that you also may continue to believe . )

ID:	3443
INPUT:	Santutegiko artisauak
PRED:	The lights in the Temple
GOLD:	Craftsmen : Bezalel and Oholiab

ID:	3444
INPUT:	Bere amaren sabeletikbiluzik irten zen , halaxe da itzuliko , bere lanaren saririk batereez du berekin eramango .
PRED:	His mother will be born in the womb , and his close relative will be rewarded with her .
GOLD:	Money is put into risky investments that turn sour , and everything is lost . In the end , there is nothing left to pass on to one 's children .

ID:	3445
INPUT:	Gero , Jehu eta Rekaben seme Jonadab Baalen jauretxean sartu ziren . Jehuk esan zien Baalen adoratzaileei : — Begira ezazue ongi hemen , zeuen artean , Jaunaren adoratzailerik ba ote dagoen , ala Baalenak bakarrik zaudeten .
PRED:	Then Jehu son of Recab and Jacob went into the palace of Baal , and he said to his sons , “ You are going to worship the Lord 's Temple . ” So Jehu said , “ You are going to worship the Lord your God . ”
GOLD:	Then Jehu went into the temple of Baal with Jehonadab son of Recab . Jehu said to the worshipers of Baal , “ Make sure no one who worships the Lord is here — only those who worship Baal . ”

ID:	3446
INPUT:	Israel desleial Jaunarekin
PRED:	A Call to Obey the
GOLD:	Judah Follows Israel 's Example

ID:	3447
INPUT:	Horrexegatik , hain zuzen , onartu egin zuen Jainkoak .
PRED:	That is why God was so strong , and God blessed him .
GOLD:	And because of Abraham 's faith , God counted him as righteous .

ID:	3448
INPUT:	zedroak gure etxe-habe , nekostak etxe-gain .
PRED:	A great cedar timber is left in the house of the forest .
GOLD:	fragrant cedar branches are the beams of our house , and pleasant smelling firs are the rafters .

ID:	3449
INPUT:	Zure zerbitzarien gorpuakzeruko hegaztiei eman dizkiete janari , zure fededunen haragia basapiztiei .
PRED:	Your servants are the birds of the sky , the birds of the sky , and all the wild animals that scurry along the ground .
GOLD:	They have left the bodies of your servantsas food for the birds of heaven.The flesh of your godly oneshas become food for the wild animals .

ID:	3450
INPUT:	Auzitegietan salatzen zaituztenagorrotatzen duzue , eta egia dioena gaitzesten .
PRED:	If you choose to commit adultery , you will be condemned to commit adultery .
GOLD:	How you hate honest judges ! How you despise people who tell the truth !

ID:	3451
INPUT:	Neure herri Israeli santu naizela aitorraraziko diot , eta ez diot utziko neure izen santua gehiago belzten . Orduan jakingo dute nazioek ni naizela Jauna , Israelen Santua .
PRED:	I will bring my people Israel back to my holy people Israel , and I will not let them go unpunished . Then they will know that I am the Holy One of Israel .
GOLD:	“ In this way , I will make known my holy name among my people of Israel . I will not let anyone bring shame on it . And the nations , too , will know that I am the Lord , the Holy One of Israel .

ID:	3452
INPUT:	Goretsazue Jauna , dei egin berari , jakinarazi herrien artean haren egintza bikainak !
PRED:	Praise the Lord ! Praise him , for he has made the nations among the nations .
GOLD:	Give thanks to the Lord and proclaim his greatness.Let the whole world know what he has done .

ID:	3453
INPUT:	zilarrezko ehun txanponeko isuna , israeldar birjina bati izen ona kentzeagatik , eta dirua neskaren aitari emango diote ; gainera , emaztetzat onartu beharko du eta ezin izango du bizitza osoan zapuztu .
PRED:	The silver coins from the community of Israel must be cut off from the community of Israel . If they are married to her father , they will not marry her , and she will not be married to her husband .
GOLD:	They must also fine him 100 pieces of silver , which he must pay to the woman 's father because he publicly accused a virgin of Israel of shameful conduct . The woman will then remain the man 's wife , and he may never divorce her .

ID:	3454
INPUT:	Jauna ihesleku da zapalduarentzat , ihesleku larrialdian .
PRED:	The Lord is a fortress for mercy ; he is crushed in the east of the sea .
GOLD:	Those who know your name trust in you , for you , O Lord , do not abandon those who search for you .

ID:	3455
INPUT:	aita nahiz ama , anaia nahiz arreba hiltzen bazaio ere , ez da kutsatuko , Jaunari sagaratua baitu bere burua .
PRED:	But if a father or mother or mother or mother is unclean , she must not defile her , for she is defiled by the Lord .
GOLD:	Even if the dead person is their own father , mother , brother , or sister , they must not defile themselves , for the hair on their head is the symbol of their separation to God .

ID:	3456
INPUT:	Esdras Jainkoaren etxe aurretik Eliaxiben seme Johananen gelara joan zen , eta bertan eman zuen gaua . Ez zuen ezer jan , ez edan , erbestetik etorritakoen desleialtasunak nahigabeturik .
PRED:	Then Ezra returned to the Temple of God in the Temple of God , and he did n't eat it . He did n't eat any other alcoholic drink anything from the Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	Then Ezra left the front of the Temple of God and went to the room of Jehohanan son of Eliashib . He spent the night there without eating or drinking anything . He was still in mourning because of the unfaithfulness of the returned exiles .

ID:	3457
INPUT:	Beraz , beren fruituetatik antzemango diezue sasiprofetei .
PRED:	So you will eat the fruit of the prophets of the prophets .
GOLD:	Yes , just as you can identify a tree by its fruit , so you can identify people by their actions .

ID:	3458
INPUT:	Horregatik ikaratzen nau haren presentziak ; zenbat eta gehiago pentsatu , are gehiago beldurtzen nau .
PRED:	That is why I am bound by the prisoners of Cyprus ; even though I were afraid of him .
GOLD:	No wonder I am so terrified in his presence.When I think of it , terror grips me .

ID:	3459
INPUT:	« Badakizue legean aurrekoei agindu zitzaiena : Ez hil inor ; eta hiltzailea kondenatua izango da .
PRED:	“ You know what the law says to the people , ‘ You must not murder . Anyone who kills another person must be killed .
GOLD:	“ You have heard that our ancestors were told , ‘ You must not murder . If you commit murder , you are subject to judgment . '

ID:	3460
INPUT:	halakoak ez duela aitarekiko agindu hori bete beharrik ; horrela , Jainkoaren hitza baliogabe uzten duzue , zeuen usadioengatik .
PRED:	But if you do n't need to obey the commands of God 's commands , you must not neglect the word of God . You must not neglect the word of God .
GOLD:	In this way , you say they do n't need to honor their parents . And so you cancel the word of God for the sake of your own tradition .

ID:	3461
INPUT:	Haiek okertu , erori egiten dira ; guk , berriz , zutik eta sendo irauten .
PRED:	Their actions are good and good , but we are stronger than we obey .
GOLD:	Give victory to our king , O Lord ! Answer our cry for help .

ID:	3462
INPUT:	Saia gaitezen guztiok lagun hurkoari atsegin ematen , ona eta fedean hazteko lagungarri zaiona bilatuz .
PRED:	Work at last , let us be very careful to forget what is good and pleasing to God . Do n't forget what you have done .
GOLD:	We should help others do what is right and build them up in the Lord .

ID:	3463
INPUT:	Ez al dakizue zuen gorputza Jainkoak eman dizuen eta zuengan bizi den Espiritu Santuaren tenplu dela ? Beraz , ez zarete jadanik zeuenak ,
PRED:	Do n't you realize that the Holy Spirit has given you the Holy Spirit , just as you live in the Temple of the Holy Spirit ?
GOLD:	Do n't you realize that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit , who lives in you and was given to you by God ? You do not belong to yourself ,

ID:	3464
INPUT:	« Dan-ek bere herriadu gobernatuko , Israelgo beste leinuek bezala .
PRED:	“ These are the tribes of Israel — the tribes of Israel — like the tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Dan will govern his people , like any other tribe in Israel .

ID:	3465
INPUT:	Merariren ondorengoen senitarteak mahlitarrak eta muxitarrak ziren .
PRED:	The clans of the Kohathite clan , and the half-tribe of Manasseh was the ancestor of the Amorites .
GOLD:	The descendants of Merari were composed of the clans descended from Mahli and Mushi .

ID:	3466
INPUT:	Jainko Jaunakhitz egiteko trebatu nau , bihotz-eroriak adore-hitzezbizkor ditzadan . Goizero dit belarria ernearazten , ikasle onak bezalaentzun diezaiodan .
PRED:	For the Sovereign Lord has spoken to me , and he has made me a great bronze bow down to the gates of the Most High Priest who gives me great joy .
GOLD:	The Sovereign Lord has given me his words of wisdom , so that I know how to comfort the weary.Morning by morning he wakens meand opens my understanding to his will .

ID:	3467
INPUT:	Eta hark erantzun : — Babiloniara ; han santutegia eraikiko diote , eta prest dagokeenean , oin-aulki gainean jarriko dute .
PRED:	Then he told them , “ Go to Babylon , where there is a place where you can worship at the place where you are going . ”
GOLD:	He replied , “ To the land of Babylonia , where they will build a temple for the basket . And when the temple is ready , they will set the basket there on its pedestal . ”

ID:	3468
INPUT:	Ordezkari haiek ahots handiz eta hebreeraz mintzo zitzaizkion Jerusalemgo harresi gainean zegoen jendeari , ikara eta beldur zedin , horrela hiriaz jabetu ahal izateko .
PRED:	Then the leaders of the synagogue spoke to the people of Jerusalem and began talking about the people of Jerusalem . He was afraid of the crowds , so he could be afraid of them .
GOLD:	The Assyrian officials who brought the letters shouted this in Hebrew to the people gathered on the walls of the city , trying to terrify them so it would be easier to capture the city .

ID:	3469
INPUT:	Hona hemen nire zerbitzaria , nik hautatua , nire maitea , atsegin dudana . Beronen gain ezarriko dut neure espiritua : nazioei justizia iragarriko die .
PRED:	This is my servant , my servant , my servant , and I will put my hope on my head , and I will put my hope on the name of my name .
GOLD:	“ Look at my Servant , whom I have chosen.He is my Beloved , who pleases me.I will put my Spirit upon him , and he will proclaim justice to the nations .

ID:	3470
INPUT:	Goretsiko dut Jauna bizi naizen artean , soinua joko neure Jainkoari naizen artean .
PRED:	I will praise the Lord my God , for I will praise my God .
GOLD:	I will praise the Lord as long as I live.I will sing praises to my God with my dying breath .

ID:	3471
INPUT:	aitak ez bezala : sasikultu-lekuetako otorduetan parte hartzen du , lagun hurkoaren emaztea desohoratzen ;
PRED:	You must not worship any of the pagan shrines . If your neighbor 's wife dies , it is a neighbor 's neighbor 's wife .
GOLD:	And that son does all the evil things his father would never do — he worships idols on the mountains , commits adultery ,

ID:	3472
INPUT:	Etsaia ikusiko duzu zeurean ; Israel herriari , ordea , dena ongi aterako zaio . Zure etxean , berriz , bakar bat ere ez da zahartzarora inoiz helduko .
PRED:	But when you see your enemies , you will see the land of Israel . But if you do n't have a house , you will have no one else .
GOLD:	You will watch with envy as I pour out prosperity on the people of Israel . But no members of your family will ever live out their days .

ID:	3473
INPUT:	Ezekias erregeak ere , hori entzutean , jantziak urratu zituen eta , doluz jantzirik , Jaunaren etxera jo zuen .
PRED:	When King Hezekiah heard what was happening , he tore his clothes in burlap and put on burlap and went to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	When King Hezekiah heard their report , he tore his clothes and put on burlap and went into the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	3474
INPUT:	eta hala jakinarazi zion Davidi , Natan profetaren bidez . Orduan , Jaunaren omenez , Jedidias ipini zion izena , hau da , « Jaunaren Maitea » .
PRED:	And he told David that the prophet had been sent by David , “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ Teacher , the Holy One of David , the Lord , have spoken ! ' ”
GOLD:	and sent word through Nathan the prophet that they should name him Jedidiah ( which means “ beloved of the Lord ” ) , as the Lord had commanded .

ID:	3475
INPUT:	itzul niregana , erruki zakizkit , eman indar zeure zerbitzari honi , salba zeure zerbitzari apala .
PRED:	Turn to me , O Lord , and help me , for I am your servant .
GOLD:	Look down and have mercy on me.Give your strength to your servant ; save me , the son of your servant .

ID:	3476
INPUT:	lurralde guztian izango dituzue olibondoak , baina ez zarete olioz gantzutuko , erori egingo baitira olibak ;
PRED:	They will be your olive trees , but they will never be olive oil , olive oil , olive oil , and olive oil .
GOLD:	You will grow olive trees throughout your land , but you will never use the olive oil , for the fruit will drop before it ripens .

ID:	3477
INPUT:	Benetan diotsuet : Dena barkatuko die Jainkoak gizakiei , bekatuak eta egin litzaketen birao guztiak ;
PRED:	I tell you the truth , God will forgive all these sins , and they will forgive their sins .
GOLD:	“ I tell you the truth , all sin and blasphemy can be forgiven ,

ID:	3478
INPUT:	Zure merkantziak lehorreratzean , herri asko hornitzen zenuen ; zeure ondasuneta merkantzia ugarizmunduko erregeakaberasten zenituen .
PRED:	Your merchants brought merchants to you in your land , your merchants , merchants , and merchants of merchants .
GOLD:	The merchandise you tradedsatisfied the desires of many nations.Kings at the ends of the earthwere enriched by your trade .

ID:	3479
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Zer dago idatzia Moisesen legean ? Zer irakurtzen duzu ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ What are you going to read to Moses ? What do you read to Moses ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ What does the law of Moses say ? How do you read it ? ”

ID:	3480
INPUT:	baina eguzkiak jo orduko , erre egin zen eta , sustrairik ez zuelako , ihartu .
PRED:	But the hot seed fell on the ground , and it did n't grow up .
GOLD:	But the plant soon wilted under the hot sun , and since it did n't have deep roots , it died .

ID:	3481
INPUT:	Haiek esan zioten : — Jauna , baditugu hemen bi ezpata . Baina Jesusek erantzun : — Aski da !
PRED:	“ Sir , ” they said , “ we have two swords and two swords . ” But Jesus replied , “ Yes , we are ! ”
GOLD:	“ Look , Lord , ” they replied , “ we have two swords among us . ” “ That 's enough , ” he said .

ID:	3482
INPUT:	Zutabe-buruetan zeuden kapitel haietarako sare antzeko apaindurak egin zituen eta kate-sortak , kapitel bakoitzerako zazpi .
PRED:	The capitals on each side of the pillars were decorated with carved palm trees , and each decorated with carved palm trees .
GOLD:	Each capital was decorated with seven sets of latticework and interwoven chains .

ID:	3483
INPUT:	hala ere , hau erantzun zion hark : « Erregeak berak erabaki du zuek zer jan behar duzuen ; horregatik naiz beldur , zeren eta , beste gazteei baino itxura txarragoa ikusiko balizue , nire bizia jarriko baitzenukete arriskuan » .
PRED:	But he replied , “ If you want to eat the meat and eat it , it will be better for you to eat . If you want to eat it , you will have a young goat to eat . ”
GOLD:	But he responded , “ I am afraid of my lord the king , who has ordered that you eat this food and wine . If you become pale and thin compared to the other youths your age , I am afraid the king will have me beheaded . ”

ID:	3484
INPUT:	horixe agertu digu Jainkoak Espirituaren bidez . Espirituak , izan ere , guztia aztertzen du , baita Jainkoaren barne-sakona ere .
PRED:	This is the Holy Spirit within us , for the Holy Spirit has given us the Spirit of God . But he knows everything he tells us .
GOLD:	But it was to us that God revealed these things by his Spirit . For his Spirit searches out everything and shows us God 's deep secrets .

ID:	3485
INPUT:	lehen-semea izan zuen ; oihaletan bildu eta abere-aska batean ezarri zuen , ez baitzen ostatuan haientzat tokirik .
PRED:	The firstborn sons were born to his oldest son , and he laid his feet on a donkey 's side . But he did n't need to celebrate the Passover meal .
GOLD:	She gave birth to her firstborn son . She wrapped him snugly in strips of cloth and laid him in a manger , because there was no lodging available for them .

ID:	3486
INPUT:	Ez nazazu eraman gaiztoekin batera , gaizkile horiekin batera : besteren aurrean bakezko hitzak dituzte , baina barruan txarkeria .
PRED:	Do n't let them go with them , for they are the evil they are doing evil , but they are stubborn and rebellious .
GOLD:	Do not drag me away with the wicked — with those who do evil — those who speak friendly words to their neighborswhile planning evil in their hearts .

ID:	3487
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : « Ez beldurtu ! Zoazte eta esan nire senideei Galileara joateko ; han ikusiko naute » .
PRED:	Jesus told them , “ Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid of my brothers and sisters . Go to the land of Galilee . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus said to them , “ Do n't be afraid ! Go tell my brothers to leave for Galilee , and they will see me there . ”

ID:	3488
INPUT:	Meribako iturrian Jainkoa haserretu zuten , eta haien erruz Moisesek jasan zuen kaltea .
PRED:	So Moses was very angry with the water of God , and he told them about it .
GOLD:	At Meribah , too , they angered the Lord , causing Moses serious trouble .

ID:	3489
INPUT:	Davidena . Ez zaitez gaiztoengatik haserretu , ezta gaizkileen inbidiatan egon ere ,
PRED:	Do n't be angry with the wicked , and do n't be angry with the wicked .
GOLD:	Do n't worry about the wickedor envy those who do wrong .

ID:	3490
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Nik ezarritako lege hauekinoiz huts egingo ez duten bezala , Israel herriak ere ez du huts egingo , betiko iraungo du nire aurrean .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ When you do , you will never be a permanent law for all Israel , you will remain silent before my people .
GOLD:	“ I am as likely to reject my people Israelas I am to abolish the laws of nature ! ”

ID:	3491
INPUT:	Goazen , bada , gu ere Jesusengana , kanpalekutik kanpora , haren desohorea bera eramanez ,
PRED:	So we came out of the camp and brought him out of the camp .
GOLD:	So let us go out to him , outside the camp , and bear the disgrace he bore .

ID:	3492
INPUT:	Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren ahalmenezko etorrerari buruz hitz egin genizuenean , ez ginen oinarritu irudipenezko ipuinetan , geure esperientzian baizik , geure begiz ikusi baikenuen haren handitasuna .
PRED:	I have heard the authority of the Lord Jesus Christ , who has not heard about me . But I did n't need to write out the truth , but we could n't see him about the truth .
GOLD:	For we were not making up clever stories when we told you about the powerful coming of our Lord Jesus Christ . We saw his majestic splendor with our own eyes

ID:	3493
INPUT:	Agindu hau bete zuten , baina « hildakoen artetik pizte » horrekin zer adierazi nahi ote zien ziharduten beren artean .
PRED:	They told him , “ This is the resurrection of the dead , ” they told him , “ they want to know what he wants . ”
GOLD:	So they kept it to themselves , but they often asked each other what he meant by “ rising from the dead . ”

ID:	3494
INPUT:	Neftaliren leinutik , Enanen seme Ahira » .
PRED:	From Naphtali the tribe of Naphtali , Manasseh son of Naphtali . ”
GOLD:	NaphtaliAhira son of Enan

ID:	3495
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jaunak Sion aukeratu dueta gogoko izan bertan bizitzea :
PRED:	For the Lord said to Jerusalem , “ The Lord has chosen us to live in Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	For the Lord has chosen Jerusalem ; he has desired it for his home .

ID:	3496
INPUT:	Ofizialek esan zioten Siriako erregeari : — Mendietako jainkoa dute israeldarrek beren jainko . Horregatik izan dira gu baino indartsuago . Borroka ditzagun , beraz , lautadan ; baietz izan orduan gu haiek baino indartsuago !
PRED:	Then the king of Aram said to King Sihon of Israel , “ We will attack the hill country of Israel . ” So the people of Israel said , “ We will be greater than we can fight the forces of battle . ”
GOLD:	After their defeat , Ben-hadad 's officers said to him , “ The Israelite gods are gods of the hills ; that is why they won . But we can beat them easily on the plains .

ID:	3497
INPUT:	« Esan Aaroni : Etorkizunean , gorputz-akatsen bat duen zuen ondorengoetariko inor ere ez da aldarera hurbilduko Jainkoaren oparia eskaintzera .
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to Aaron : If you have a defect , you must have a defect for the sin offering to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to Aaron : In all future generations , none of your descendants who has any defect will qualify to offer food to his God .

ID:	3498
INPUT:	Emakumeek ere agurgarri izan behar dute eta ez maiseatzaile ; neurritsu eta gauza guztietan fidagarri .
PRED:	All the women who are poor must be able to be rich . They must be rich in everything they do .
GOLD:	In the same way , their wives must be respected and must not slander others . They must exercise self-control and be faithful in everything they do .

ID:	3499
INPUT:	Ezagun-ezagunak ditut zure egintzak , eta inork itxi ezin duen atea utzi dut zure aurrean zabalik . Indar handirik ez duzun arren , onartu duzu nire mezua eta ez duzu ukatu nire izena .
PRED:	I know you , and no one can help you , and no one can help you . I have given you great strength and powerful arm , but you have no strength for me .
GOLD:	“ I know all the things you do , and I have opened a door for you that no one can close . You have little strength , yet you obeyed my word and did not deny me .

ID:	3500
INPUT:	« Ez du inork bere aitaren emazte batekin sexu-harremanik izango , aitaren eskubidea hautsiko bailuke .
PRED:	“ Do not have sexual relations with her father 's wife , for he would marry his father 's wife .
GOLD:	“ If a man 's testicles are crushed or his penis is cut off , he may not be admitted to the assembly of the Lord .

ID:	3501
INPUT:	Nahiz argiaren sorlekurantz hegaldatu , nahiz mendebaldeko itsas mugetan kokatu ,
PRED:	Even if you open toward the sea , you will stagger from the sea , or the sea will search for the sea .
GOLD:	If I ride the wings of the morning , if I dwell by the farthest oceans ,

ID:	3502
INPUT:	Neure eskuz sinatzen dizut ordain-agiria : Paulok ; eta ez dizut aipatu nahi zuk zeure burua bera zor didazula .
PRED:	I 'll ask you the truth , but I want you to pay attention to my father . I want you to pay attention to my father .
GOLD:	I , Paul , write this with my own hand : I will repay it . And I wo n't mention that you owe me your very soul !

ID:	3503
INPUT:	« Taberan , Masan eta Kibrot-Taaban ere sumindu zenuten Jauna .
PRED:	“ They camped at Kibroth-hattaavah and camped at Kibroth-hattaavah ( which means of the Lord ) .
GOLD:	“ You also made the Lord angry at Taberah , Massah , and Kibroth-hattaavah .

ID:	3504
INPUT:	Norbait Jaunarengana itzultzen denean bakarrik kentzen zaio estalkia .
PRED:	If you return to the Lord , you must return to the Lord .
GOLD:	But whenever someone turns to the Lord , the veil is taken away .

ID:	3505
INPUT:	Eta Dario mediarra egin zen hango errege , hirurogeita bi urte zituela .
PRED:	Then Daniel became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem two years .
GOLD:	Darius the Mede decided to divide the kingdom into 120 provinces , and he appointed a high officer to rule over each province .

ID:	3506
INPUT:	Neu naiz atea ; ate honetan zehar sartzen dena , onik izango da , eta ez du inolako eragozpenik izango larreak aurkitzeko .
PRED:	This is what I am going to enter the city , and it will be no one else . I will be able to go through the gate , and no one will be found .
GOLD:	Yes , I am the gate . Those who come in through me will be saved . They will come and go freely and will find good pastures .

ID:	3507
INPUT:	Gizonezkoak ere , berez dagozkien emakumeekiko harremanak utzirik , elkarren irrikaz suturik dabiltza : gizonezkoek gizonezkoekin itsuskeriak egiten dituzte eta , horrela , beren jokabide okerraz merezitako zigorra berengan hartzen .
PRED:	For the man who has sexual intercourse with a woman , a woman who has sexual intercourse with her . She is a man who has committed adultery with her , a man who has committed adultery with her , and everyone who has been put to death .
GOLD:	And the men , instead of having normal sexual relations with women , burned with lust for each other . Men did shameful things with other men , and as a result of this sin , they suffered within themselves the penalty they deserved .

ID:	3508
INPUT:	Pisga mendi-gailurreko begiraleku batera eraman zuen . Han ere zazpi aldare eraiki eta bakoitzean zekor eta ahari bana eskaini zituen .
PRED:	Then Moses placed the Ark of the Covenant on the east side of the Ark , where he built a burnt offering and a ram for a burnt offering .
GOLD:	So Balak took Balaam to the plateau of Zophim on Pisgah Peak . He built seven altars there and offered a young bull and a ram on each altar .

ID:	3509
INPUT:	Jauna , ordea , leiala da , eta beronek sendotuko zaituzte eta gaiztoarengandik zainduko .
PRED:	But the Lord will keep you safe , and he will protect you from the wicked .
GOLD:	But the Lord is faithful ; he will strengthen you and guard you from the evil one .

ID:	3510
INPUT:	Josueren seme eta Mitzpako buru zen Ezerrek harresiaren ertzean dagoen armategiko aldapa-aurrealdea konpondu zuen .
PRED:	Then Joshua son of Jehozadak rebuilt the wall of Mizpah , and he repaired the wall at Mizpah .
GOLD:	Next to them , Ezer son of Jeshua , the leader of Mizpah , repaired another section of wall across from the ascent to the armory near the angle in the wall .

ID:	3511
INPUT:	« Agindu israeldarrei jabetzan hartuko duten ondaretik lebitarrei zenbait hiri emateko , inguruko lurrekin batera , haietan bizi daitezen .
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel . If any of these towns are set apart from among the foreigners living among the Israelites , they may live in their towns .
GOLD:	“ Command the people of Israel to give to the Levites from their property certain towns to live in , along with the surrounding pasturelands .

ID:	3512
INPUT:	Opariak dakarzkizute errege<unk> rusalemgo zeure tenplura ;
PRED:	You are the king of Jerusalem , and you are the people of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Rebuke these enemy nations — these wild animals lurking in the reeds , this herd of bulls among the weaker calves.Make them bring bars of silver in humble tribute.Scatter the nations that delight in war .

ID:	3513
INPUT:	nire hezur-mamiak ez ziren zuretzat ezkutu , isilpean eratzen ari nintzela , lurraren barruan ehunduz nindoala .
PRED:	I thought about my bones , but I did n't hide my bones in my bones . I was found in the dust of the earth .
GOLD:	You watched me as I was being formed in utter seclusion , as I was woven together in the dark of the womb .

ID:	3514
INPUT:	Daviden poema . Zoriontsua Jainkoak hobena kendu eta bekatua barkatu diona !
PRED:	How joyful are your mother , O Lord , who has taken away the sins of your sin .
GOLD:	Oh , what joy for thosewhose disobedience is forgiven , whose sin is put out of sight !

ID:	3515
INPUT:	Ez jo zeure burua jakintsutzat ; izan , ordea , begirune Jaunari eta ihes egin gaizkiari .
PRED:	Do n't be wise , but do n't be afraid of the wicked , but do n't turn away from the Lord .
GOLD:	Do n't be impressed with your own wisdom.Instead , fear the Lord and turn away from evil .

ID:	3516
INPUT:	Salomonen esaera zaharrak . Seme zuhurra aitaren pozbide , seme zentzugabea amaren atsekabe .
PRED:	My child , listen to Solomon 's son , for she is a child 's child .
GOLD:	The proverbs of Solomon : A wise child brings joy to a father ; a foolish child brings grief to a mother .

ID:	3517
INPUT:	Hobe behartsu eta prestu izan , mihi maltzurreko eta zentzugabe baino .
PRED:	It is better to be a poor and a liar and without knowledge .
GOLD:	Better to be poor and honestthan to be dishonest and a fool .

ID:	3518
INPUT:	Izan bedi beti errege zure begiradapean ! Izan bitza zure maitasun eta leialtasuna zaindari !
PRED:	May your unfailing love be king forever ! Let your unfailing love shine over your unfailing love and faithfulness .
GOLD:	Then I will sing praises to your name foreveras I fulfill my vows each day .

ID:	3519
INPUT:	Salomonen jauregia
PRED:	Summary of Solomon 's Reign
GOLD:	Solomon Builds His Palace

ID:	3520
INPUT:	Davidek ez zion inori bizia barkatzen , ez gizonei , ez emakumeei , Gatera inor ez eramatearren ; beraren jokabidearen berri inork eman ez zezan . Horrela jokatu zuen Davidek filistearren artean bizi izan zen denboraldi guztian .
PRED:	But David did not spare the women or women or women or women or women or women from Jabesh-gilead to go back to the Philistines . So David did n't let anyone go back to the Philistines .
GOLD:	No one was left alive to come to Gath and tell where he had really been . This happened again and again while he was living among the Philistines .

ID:	3521
INPUT:	Tiro hiria erregaliekin datorkizu , herriko handikiak zure abegi onaren bila .
PRED:	You will come to Tyre and Tyre , just as your people have done .
GOLD:	The bride , a princess , looks gloriousin her golden gown .

ID:	3522
INPUT:	horrela , ondaretzat zuek bezala lursailik hartu ez duen lebitarrak eta zuekin bizi diren etorkin , umezurtz eta alargunek zer jana izango dute ; eta Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak eginkizun guztiak ongi burutzeko bidea emango dizue .
PRED:	But you must be careful to obey the Lord your God . You must not test the Levites and foreigners living among you , orphans , and widows , and widows , and widows .
GOLD:	Give it to the Levites , who will receive no allotment of land among you , as well as to the foreigners living among you , the orphans , and the widows in your towns , so they can eat and be satisfied . Then the Lord your God will bless you in all your work .

ID:	3523
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Zuei eman zaizue Jainkoaren erregetzaren misterioak ezagutzea ; horiei , ordea , ez .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ You are permitted to understand the meaning of the Kingdom of God . But you do n't understand what it means . ”
GOLD:	He replied , “ You are permitted to understand the secrets of the Kingdom of Heaven , but others are not .

ID:	3524
INPUT:	Itzultzean , mendian barrena zeuden hilobiak begiztatu zituen Josiasek , eta hilobi haietako hezurrak hartu eta aldare gainean erretzeko agindu zuen . Horrela profanatu zuen aldare hura . Hala agindua zuen Jaunak , gauza hauek hots egin zituen profetaren bidez .
PRED:	So Joseph returned to the hill country and put them into the tomb , and he put them on the bones of the tomb that had been dedicated to the Lord 's command . So the Lord gave these instructions to you .
GOLD:	Then Josiah turned around and noticed several tombs in the side of the hill . He ordered that the bones be brought out , and he burned them on the altar at Bethel to desecrate it . ( This happened just as the Lord had promised through the man of God when Jeroboam stood beside the altar at the festival . ) Then Josiah turned and looked up at the tomb of the man of God who had predicted these things .

ID:	3525
INPUT:	ez beza zuetako inork semea nahiz alaba oparitzat erre ; ez bedi izan zuen artean geroa igartzeko magiazko baliabide , sorginkeria nahiz aztikeriarik erabiliko duenik ,
PRED:	Do n't have any of your sons or daughters or daughters or their flocks or herds or herds or herds . Do n't use anything to use for your own good work .
GOLD:	For example , never sacrifice your son or daughter as a burnt offering . And do not let your people practice fortune-telling , or use sorcery , or interpret omens , or engage in witchcraft ,

ID:	3526
INPUT:	Israelgo errege Joax , Joakazen semea , hil eta gero , beste hamabost urtez bizi izan zen Judako errege Amatzias , Joaxen semea .
PRED:	Jehoash son of Jehoash died , and he reigned over Israel for five years . He reigned in Judah for fifteen years .
GOLD:	King Amaziah of Judah lived for fifteen years after the death of King Jehoash of Israel .

ID:	3527
INPUT:	Egundoko kazkabar-aleak erori ziren zerutik gizon-emakumeen gainera , eta hauek madarikatu egin zuten Jainkoa kazkabar-izurriagatik , benetan zigor ikaragarria izan baitzen .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the hail , the hail , had dried up from the sky , and the other men chased them away from the hail .
GOLD:	There was a terrible hailstorm , and hailstones weighing as much as seventy-five pounds fell from the sky onto the people below . They cursed God because of the terrible plague of the hailstorm .

ID:	3528
INPUT:	Osasuntsu iraunaraziko nauzu , zutik eutsiko zeure aurrean betiko .
PRED:	I will praise you , O Lord , for you will keep me safe from your presence .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , who lives from everlasting to everlasting.Amen and amen !

ID:	3529
INPUT:	Jainkoak Moisesi Egiptora itzultzeko agindu
PRED:	Israel 's Journey to Egypt
GOLD:	's Power

ID:	3530
INPUT:	Ez da jadanik bereizketarik juduaren eta judu ez denaren artean , esklaboaren eta librearen artean , gizonezkoaren eta emakumezkoaren artean , zuek guztiok bat baitzarete Kristo Jesusengan .
PRED:	There is no difference between the Jews and the Jews and the slave of the Jews and the slave of the free woman , and the man of Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	There is no longer Jew or Gentile , slave or free , male and female . For you are all one in Christ Jesus .

ID:	3531
INPUT:	Ondoren , Jaunak erraietako gaixotasun sendaezinaz jo zuen Joram .
PRED:	Then the Lord struck King Ahaziah of Judah with a sick spirit .
GOLD:	After all this , the Lord struck Jehoram with an incurable intestinal disease .

ID:	3532
INPUT:	Nik galdetu nuen : “ Zer egin behar dut , Jauna ? ” Eta Jaunak erantzun : “ Jaiki , zoaz Damaskora , eta han esango dizute Jainkoak zuretzat ezarria daukan egiteko guztia ” .
PRED:	“ What should I do ? ” I asked . “ What should I say , ‘ Go up to the Temple of the Lord , the God of Damascus , and everything in Damascus . '
GOLD:	“ I asked , ‘ What should I do , Lord ? ' “ And the Lord told me , ‘ Get up and go into Damascus , and there you will be told everything you are to do . '

ID:	3533
INPUT:	Gora , bada , alaitasuna ! Ez baitu gizakiakeguzkipean beste onik , jan , edan eta gozatzea baizik . Horixe bakarrik atera dezakebere eginahaletik , Jainkoak mundu honetan bizitzekoeman dizkion egunetan .
PRED:	So let the cloud be filled with joy , but do n't want to eat anything . Instead , it is good to eat from the rest of the world , for it is good to God for us .
GOLD:	So I recommend having fun , because there is nothing better for people in this world than to eat , drink , and enjoy life . That way they will experience some happiness along with all the hard work God gives them under the sun .

ID:	3534
INPUT:	Beren idolo higuingarriak ipini dituzte niri sagaraturiko etxean , berau profanatuz .
PRED:	They commit idols to me by worshiping idols , and they have defiled my Temple .
GOLD:	They have set up their abominable idols right in my own Temple , defiling it .

ID:	3535
INPUT:	eta berak ematen dio gorputz osoari barne-lotura eta batasuna , atal guztiek , bakoitzak bere jarduera bereziaren arabera , gorputz osoaren alde egiten duten elkarlanaren bitartez ; horrela , gorputza haziz eta maitasunean osoki eraikiz doa .
PRED:	He makes the whole body into one body , and his body is put into one body . His body is put to death , and his body is filled with love , and his body is filled with love .
GOLD:	He makes the whole body fit together perfectly . As each part does its own special work , it helps the other parts grow , so that the whole body is healthy and growing and full of love .

ID:	3536
INPUT:	Ez al duzue nahikoa larre bikainetan bazkatzea ? Zergatik zapaldu hankapean gainerako larrea ? Ez al duzue nahikoa ur garbia edatea ? Zergatik zikindu gainerakoa zeuen hankaz ?
PRED:	Do n't you think you are like a widow ? Why ca n't you eat it ? Why do n't you keep it from the threshing floor ? Why are you so angry with me ?
GOLD:	Is n't it enough for you to keep the best of the pastures for yourselves ? Must you also trample down the rest ? Is n't it enough for you to drink clear water for yourselves ? Must you also muddy the rest with your feet ?

ID:	3537
INPUT:	Hurbildu ziren haiek eta , beren tuniketan bildurik , kanpalekutik atera zituzten , Moisesek agindu bezala .
PRED:	So they approached the camp and camped outside the camp , just as Moses had commanded .
GOLD:	So they came forward and picked them up by their garments and carried them out of the camp , just as Moses had commanded .

ID:	3538
INPUT:	Erromes-kanta . Davidena . Jauna , nire bihotza ez da handi-min , ez nire begiak gorazale ; ez nabil gauza handien atzetik , ez neurriz gainekoen atzetik .
PRED:	O Lord , you are my God , and you are my strength ; there is no need to be no peace .
GOLD:	Lord , my heart is not proud ; my eyes are not haughty.I do n't concern myself with matters too greator too awesome for me to grasp .

ID:	3539
INPUT:	umezurtz eta zapalduaren eskubideak babesteko . Ez beza gehiago beldurrik emanbuztinez eginiko gizakiak !
PRED:	Instead , they will serve other gods , and they will not be afraid of the clay pot .
GOLD:	You will bring justice to the orphans and the oppressed , so mere people can no longer terrify them .

ID:	3540
INPUT:	Benetan profeta badira eta Jaunaren hitza hartu badute , erregutu diezaiotela Jaun ahalguztidunari , Babiloniara eraman ez ditzaten , tenpluan , Judako erregearen jauregian eta Jerusalemen oraindik gelditzen diren tresnak .
PRED:	They will worship the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , have spoken !
GOLD:	If they really are prophets and speak the Lord 's messages , let them pray to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . Let them pray that the articles remaining in the Lord 's Temple and in the king 's palace and in the palaces of Jerusalem will not be carried away to Babylon ! '

ID:	3541
INPUT:	Gudalburuak , hurbildurik , preso hartu zuen Paulo eta bi katez lotzeko agindu . Gero , ea nor zen eta zer egin zuen galdetu zuen ;
PRED:	Then the commander ordered Paul and ordered him to take him back to the Roman soldiers , and he asked him what he had done .
GOLD:	Then the commander arrested him and ordered him bound with two chains . He asked the crowd who he was and what he had done .

ID:	3542
INPUT:	Horregatik , bidea sasiz itxiko diot , inguruan hesia jarriko , bere bidezidorrik gehiagoaurki ez dezan .
PRED:	Therefore , I will send him down to the walls of the city , and there will be no more room for the city .
GOLD:	She does n't realize it was I who gave her everything she has — the grain , the new wine , the olive oil ; I even gave her silver and gold.But she gave all my gifts to Baal .

ID:	3543
INPUT:	Kristori esker eta beronengan dugun sinesmenaren bitartez ausartzen gara konfiantza osoz Jainkoarengana hurbiltzera .
PRED:	For we have been made right with Christ , and we are trying to stand firm in God 's favor .
GOLD:	Because of Christ and our faith in him , we can now come boldly and confidently into God 's presence .

ID:	3544
INPUT:	« Gudagizon haiek guztiak hil zirenean ,
PRED:	“ After all , the men killed all the men who had died .
GOLD:	“ When all the men of fighting age had died ,

ID:	3545
INPUT:	Herriko jende xehea baizik ez zuen utzi , alorrak eta mahastiak landu zitzaten .
PRED:	But the people of the village did n't plant their fields and harvest their crops .
GOLD:	But the captain of the guard allowed some of the poorest people to stay behind to care for the vineyards and fields .

ID:	3546
INPUT:	Jainkoaren espirituak harturik , Joiada apaizaren seme Zakariasek , jendeari aurre eginez , esan zuen : « Hau dio Jainkoak : “ Zergatik hautsi dituzue Jaunaren aginduak ? Gaizki bukatu behar duzue . Zuek ni baztertu nauzuelako , nik ere baztertu egiten zaituztet ” » .
PRED:	Then the Spirit of God came upon Jehoiada son of Jehoiada the priest and said , “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Why have you rejected me ? Why have you rejected me ? Why have you rejected me ? ”
GOLD:	Then the Spirit of God came upon Zechariah son of Jehoiada the priest . He stood before the people and said , “ This is what God says : Why do you disobey the Lord 's commands and keep yourselves from prospering ? You have abandoned the Lord , and now he has abandoned you ! ”

ID:	3547
INPUT:	Jauna , zuk sarrarazten duzu zeure herriaeta zeure mendian landatzen , zeure ondarean , zeure egoitza egin duzun lekuan , zeure eskuz eraiki duzunsantutegian .
PRED:	O Lord , you have entered your land and put your trust in your own land , and you have made them in your own hands .
GOLD:	You will bring them in and plant them on your own mountain — the place , O Lord , reserved for your own dwelling , the sanctuary , O Lord , that your hands have established .

ID:	3548
INPUT:	Jainkoaren santutegian sartu nintzen arte ; orduan ulertu nuen zein den haien atarramentua .
PRED:	I went into the sanctuary of the Most High , but I did n't understand what it meant .
GOLD:	Then I went into your sanctuary , O God , and I finally understood the destiny of the wicked .

ID:	3549
INPUT:	Eta mintzoak bigarrenez esan zion : — Jainkoak garbi egin duena , zuk ez esan kutsatua denik .
PRED:	Then the voice said to him , “ God has made two unclean for you , but you have not defiled yourself . ”
GOLD:	But the voice spoke again : “ Do not call something unclean if God has made it clean . ”

ID:	3550
INPUT:	Jesusek elbarria sendatu
PRED:	Jesus Again Predicts His Death
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Paralyzed Man

ID:	3551
INPUT:	Danielek erantzun zion : — Errege jauna , ez dut erregalu edo sari beharrik , gorde zeuretzat edo eman besteren bati . Baina hor idatzia irakurriko dizut eta esanahia azalduko .
PRED:	Daniel replied , “ My lord the king , my lord the king , I have not given you the king 's secret . But I will tell you the truth , and I will tell you everything you need . ”
GOLD:	Daniel answered the king , “ Keep your gifts or give them to someone else , but I will tell you what the writing means .

ID:	3552
INPUT:	Ihartuta zeuzkaten goseak eta miseriak , marraska ibiltzen ziren eremuan , lur ilun idorretan .
PRED:	They were hungry and thirsty , and they were hungry and thirsty . They were thirsty and thirsty .
GOLD:	They are gaunt from poverty and hunger.They claw the dry ground in desolate wastelands .

ID:	3553
INPUT:	eskuetan hartzean , apurtueta eskuzabala zulatzen zenien ; zure gainean jartzen zirenean , hautsieta erorarazi egiten zenituen .
PRED:	I took my hand and put it on my hand and put it on it . Then I put it on my head and put it on the ground .
GOLD:	When Israel leaned on you , you splintered and brokeand stabbed her in the armpit.When she put her weight on you , you collapsed , and her legs gave way .

ID:	3554
INPUT:	Ordurako , Jekonias erregea , ama erregina , jauregiko funtzionarioak , Judako eta Jerusalemgo buruzagiak , artisauak eta errementariak Jerusalemdik erbestera joanak ziren .
PRED:	Then King Zedekiah of Judah , the officials of Jerusalem , officials , officials , officials , officials , officials , and officials from Jerusalem .
GOLD:	This was after King Jehoiachin , the queen mother , the court officials , the other officials of Judah , and all the craftsmen and artisans had been deported from Jerusalem .

ID:	3555
INPUT:	Entzun , arren , niri ! Libra nazazu , ez luza ! Izan zakizkit harkaitz babesle , gaztelu salbatzaile .
PRED:	Listen to me , O Lord ! Rescue me from my enemies ! Rescue me from a rock of refuge , a fortress of refuge .
GOLD:	You are my rock and my fortress.For the honor of your name , lead me out of this danger .

ID:	3556
INPUT:	Morroiak eta guardiak sua egin eta berotzen ari ziren , hotz baitzegoen . Pedro ere haiekin zegoen berotzen .
PRED:	So the master took the sheep and goats , along with his master 's servants , and he looked at Peter 's table .
GOLD:	Because it was cold , the household servants and the guards had made a charcoal fire . They stood around it , warming themselves , and Peter stood with them , warming himself .

ID:	3557
INPUT:	Aita ehortzi ondoren , Egiptora itzuli zen Jose , bere anaiekin eta aita ehorztera joan ziren guztiekin .
PRED:	Then Joseph left Egypt and returned to Egypt with Joseph , and he went to Egypt with Joseph and his brothers .
GOLD:	After burying Jacob , Joseph returned to Egypt with his brothers and all who had accompanied him to his father 's burial .

ID:	3558
INPUT:	Horrela , bada , guda-gurditeriaren arduradunek , Josafat ikustean , esan zuten : — Horra Israelgo erregea ! Eta inguratu egin zuten , erasotzeko asmoz . Baina Josafat deiadarka hasi zen , eta Jaunak lagundu egin zion : atzera eginarazi zien Jainkoak erasotzaileei ,
PRED:	So Jehoshaphat and his chariot commanders went to worship King Jehoshaphat of Israel . “ Look , the king of Israel ! ” So the king of Israel shouted , “ But the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies , and the God of Israel cried out to help him . ”
GOLD:	So when the Aramean chariot commanders saw Jehoshaphat in his royal robes , they went after him . “ There is the king of Israel ! ” they shouted . But Jehoshaphat called out , and the Lord saved him . God helped him by turning the attackers away from him .

ID:	3559
INPUT:	Ordezkari nagusiak ihardetsi zuen : — Zer uste duzu ? Mezu hau zure erregeari eta zuri bakarrik esatera bidali nauela neure jaunak ? Harresi gainean dagoen jende horrentzat ere bada , horiek ere beren kaka jan eta pixa edan beharko baitute , zuek bezalaxe .
PRED:	Then the chief of staff came to him and asked , “ What are you doing this ? ” And the king sent me to tell me , “ This is what the king says : Why should I eat it ? ”
GOLD:	But Sennacherib 's chief of staff replied , “ Do you think my master sent this message only to you and your master ? He wants all the people to hear it , for when we put this city under siege , they will suffer along with you . They will be so hungry and thirsty that they will eat their own dung and drink their own urine . ”

ID:	3560
INPUT:	Jesus bere jaioterrian gaitzetsia
PRED:	The Birth of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Rejected at Nazareth

ID:	3561
INPUT:	eta jakinarazi zioten erregeari Natan profeta etorri zela . Erregearen aitzinera sartu eta ahuspeztu egin zen .
PRED:	When they heard that the king had told Nathan the prophet had arrived , they bowed low to the king and bowed low before him .
GOLD:	The king 's officials told him , “ Nathan the prophet is here to see you . ” Nathan went in and bowed before the king with his face to the ground .

ID:	3562
INPUT:	Roboamek , ordea , ez zuen aintzat hartu kontseilarien aholkua ; baizik eta berarekin batera hazi ziren eta bere zerbitzura zituen gazteei galdegin zien :
PRED:	But Rehoboam rejected the advice of the older counselors and the advice of the older men . He also asked his advisers ,
GOLD:	But Rehoboam rejected the advice of the older men and instead asked the opinion of the young men who had grown up with him and were now his advisers .

ID:	3563
INPUT:	Hiltzear zegoen Rakel . Azken arnasa emateko zegoela , Ben-Oni — hau da , « Ene oinazetako seme » — eman zion izen ; baina aitak Benjamin — hau da , « Eskuineko seme » — eman zion izen .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the waters of the Babylonians rose up against Rabbah , and he named the south of the south . He said , “ My son , my father , is the son of Benjamin . ” And the boy named him Reuben , the son of Benjamin .
GOLD:	Rachel was about to die , but with her last breath she named the baby Ben-oni ( which means “ son of my sorrow ” ) . The baby 's father , however , called him Benjamin ( which means “ son of my right hand ” ) .

ID:	3564
INPUT:	Gorenera igo zinen , gatibuak harturik ; zerga ordaindu zizuten gizakiek , baita errebeldeek ere , Jainko Jaun horrek bizilekua izan zenezan .
PRED:	When they were circumcised , they were circumcised , but they were not circumcised , for the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies was the God of Israel .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ; praise God our savior ! For each day he carries us in his arms.Interlude

ID:	3565
INPUT:	Babilonia eroriko eta Israel salbatuko
PRED:	Hope for Israel and Israel
GOLD:	A Message about Babylon

ID:	3566
INPUT:	Gorets bezate Jauna bere maitasunagatik , gizakien alde egiten dituen gauza harrigarriengatik .
PRED:	Let them praise the Lord for all the wonderful things he has done for them .
GOLD:	Let them praise the Lord for his great loveand for the wonderful things he has done for them .

ID:	3567
INPUT:	Orain , adore zaitezte eta izan sendo . Hil zaizue Saul zeuen jauna , bai ; baina Judakoek ni gantzutu naute beren errege » .
PRED:	Now go and kill me , and kill me . You have killed me , but you have anointed me king of Judah . ”
GOLD:	Now that Saul is dead , I ask you to be my strong and loyal subjects like the people of Judah , who have anointed me as their new king . ”

ID:	3568
INPUT:	Jesusek legenduna sendatu
PRED:	The Faith of a Roman Officer
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Paralyzed Man

ID:	3569
INPUT:	Noiz arte ahoberoak lotsagabe erronkan , gaizkile guztiak harropuzturik ?
PRED:	How long will you be disgraced ? How long will you be destroyed ?
GOLD:	How long will they speak with arrogance ? How long will these evil people boast ?

ID:	3570
INPUT:	Jariodunak erabilitako etzalekua nahiz eserlekua kutsatua gelditzen da .
PRED:	If you touch anything that is unclean , you will be unclean . If you are unclean , you will be unclean .
GOLD:	Any bed on which the man with the discharge lies and anything on which he sits will be ceremonially unclean .

ID:	3571
INPUT:	Joan Bataiatzaileak Jesusen etorrera hots egin
PRED:	The Plot to Kill Jesus
GOLD:	The Baptism and Temptation of Jesus

ID:	3572
INPUT:	Gero , Penuelgo dorrea eraitsi eta hil egin zuen hango jendea .
PRED:	Then Gideon killed the town of Peniel and killed it .
GOLD:	He also tore down the tower of Peniel and killed all the men in the town .

ID:	3573
INPUT:	« Badoaz nire egunak , porrot dagite nire egitasmo eta ametsek .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : My words are clever and can not understand it .
GOLD:	My days are over.My hopes have disappeared.My heart 's desires are broken .

ID:	3574
INPUT:	Jesus bere ikasleen oinak garbitzen
PRED:	Jesus and the Twelve Apostles
GOLD:	Jesus Predicts His Betrayal

ID:	3575
INPUT:	Txiki eta handi , denak hilko dira herrialde honetan ; ez dute hiletarik , ez hilobirik izango ; ez du inork dolua adierazteko gorputza urratuko , ez burua soilduko .
PRED:	They will die in the land of the Babylonians , and their neighboring towns will no longer be disgraced . They will bury their bodies , but no one will bury them .
GOLD:	Both the great and the lowly will die in this land . No one will bury them or mourn for them . Their friends will not cut themselves in sorrow or shave their heads in sadness .

ID:	3576
INPUT:	« Sutan zegoen menditik jaitsi nintzen , itunaren harlauzak eskuetan nituela ,
PRED:	“ At the time I came down on the mountain of the Covenant , I saw that I was on the mountain of Succoth .
GOLD:	“ So while the mountain was blazing with fire I turned and came down , holding in my hands the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant .

ID:	3577
INPUT:	Sakrifiziorik bikainena , damuz hautsiriko espiritua ; zuk ez duzu gutxiesten , ene Jainko , bihotz-hautsi eta umildua .
PRED:	You are the one who sits on the rocks , and you will groan with joy , O God of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	Then you will be pleased with sacrifices offered in the right spirit — with burnt offerings and whole burnt offerings.Then bulls will again be sacrificed on your altar .

ID:	3578
INPUT:	Zuek , Jaunari begirune diozueneta haren zerbitzariaren ahotsaentzuten duzuenok , ilunpetan eta argi-izpirik gabebizi baldin bazarete ere , jarri konfiantza Jaunarengan , hartu Jainkoa euskarri .
PRED:	O Lord , listen to the Lord your God and serve him , as you live in darkness and darkness , so that you might be filled with fear of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Who among you fears the Lordand obeys his servant ? If you are walking in darkness , without a ray of light , trust in the Lordand rely on your God .

ID:	3579
INPUT:	Zuk , ordea , zeure erruki handiaz , ez zenituen basamortuan baztertu , laino-adarra ez zenhaiengandik aldenduegunez bidean gidatzeko , ez eta su-adarra gauezbidean argi egiteko .
PRED:	But when you refused to listen to me , you would not reject the pillar of cloud , and you would not turn away from the pillar of cloud and refuse to turn away from them .
GOLD:	“ But in your great mercy you did not abandon them to die in the wilderness . The pillar of cloud still led them forward by day , and the pillar of fire showed them the way through the night .

ID:	3580
INPUT:	Ritmatik Rimon-Peretzera ;
PRED:	They left Tahath and camped at Terah .
GOLD:	They left Rithmah and camped at Rimmon-perez .

ID:	3581
INPUT:	Zuek , esklabook , izan errespetu osoz zeuen nagusien menpeko , ez on eta bihozbera direnen menpeko bakarrik , baizik eta gogorrak direnen menpeko ere bai .
PRED:	Do n't be slaves to your masters . Be careful to obey the example of your faith , and you will be patient with God .
GOLD:	You who are slaves must submit to your masters with all respect . Do what they tell you — not only if they are kind and reasonable , but even if they are cruel .

ID:	3582
INPUT:	Aleluia ! Gora Jauna ! Goretsazue , Jaunaren zerbitzariok , goretsi Jaunaren izena !
PRED:	Praise the Lord ! Praise the Lord ! Praise the Lord ! Praise the name of the Lord !
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! Yes , give praise , O servants of the Lord.Praise the name of the Lord !

ID:	3583
INPUT:	Jesus haziz zihoan , bai jakinduriaz , bai gorputzez , eta Jainkoak eta gizakiek gero eta gogokoago zuten .
PRED:	And when Jesus knew this , he was filled with wisdom and knowledge and understanding . And the bodies of God 's body was filled with you .
GOLD:	Jesus grew in wisdom and in stature and in favor with God and all the people .

ID:	3584
INPUT:	Une honetan zeure begiz ikus dezakezunez , nire esku utzi zaitu gaur Jaunak leize-zuloan . Zu hiltzeko esaten zidaten , baina errukitu egin natzaizu , neure buruari hau esanez : « Ez diot erantsiko eskurik nire jaunari , Jaunak gantzutua baita » .
PRED:	“ Let me see that you have been buried with my hand , ” they said , “ for the Lord has made you a solemn oath that you have made me swear by my lord the Lord . ” And the Lord said , “ I will not hand you over to you , but I will not reject my lord the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Look , my father , at what I have in my hand . It is a piece of the hem of your robe ! I cut it off , but I did n't kill you . This proves that I am not trying to harm you and that I have not sinned against you , even though you have been hunting for me to kill me .

ID:	3585
INPUT:	Artzainak , entzun eta ikusi zutenarengatik Jainkoari aintzaka eta goraka itzuli ziren , dena aingeruak esan bezala gertatu baitzitzaien .
PRED:	When the man heard what was happening , the angel of God appeared to him and began talking about him . But the angel of God appeared to them .
GOLD:	The shepherds went back to their flocks , glorifying and praising God for all they had heard and seen . It was just as the angel had told them .

ID:	3586
INPUT:	Labean bezala erretzen daukagu larrua , gosearen erreminez .
PRED:	We are like a rebellion of our sins , but our sins are like a half troubles .
GOLD:	The famine has blackened our skinas though baked in an oven .

ID:	3587
INPUT:	Akaben etxekoren bat hirian hiltzen delarik , zakurrek jango dute , eta landan hiltzen delarik , zeruko hegaztiek jango dute » .
PRED:	The dead will die in the house of Ahab 's family , and the birds will die in the open fields , and the birds will die . ”
GOLD:	“ The members of Ahab 's family who die in the city will be eaten by dogs , and those who die in the field will be eaten by vultures . ”

ID:	3588
INPUT:	Joseren seme Igal , Isakarren leinukoa ;
PRED:	The sons of Issachar were given to the clans of Issachar .
GOLD:	IssacharIgal son of Joseph

ID:	3589
INPUT:	Mendi-gailurretik , Neftoah errekastoaren iturburu aldera egiten zuen mugak eta Efron mendiko herrixketara luzatzen , gero Baalarantz — hau da , Kiriat-Jearimerantz — okertzeko .
PRED:	Then they left the hill country of Naphtali and camped at the hill country of Ephraim , north of the hill country of Ephraim , and Kiriath-jearim .
GOLD:	From there the boundary extended from the top of the mountain to the spring at the waters of Nephtoah , and from there to the towns on Mount Ephron . Then it turned toward Baalah ( that is , Kiriath-jearim ) .

ID:	3590
INPUT:	bata , amondarren Raba hirira ; bestea , Judako Jerusalem hiri gotortura .
PRED:	The city of Ammon , and the city of Rabbah , will come to Jerusalem to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	“ O you corrupt and wicked prince of Israel , your final day of reckoning is here !

ID:	3591
INPUT:	Jaunak ituna proposatu israeldarrei
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	3592
INPUT:	Hori dela eta , ni Paulo , jentil zaretenon onerako Kristo Jesusen preso naizen <unk>
PRED:	As Paul and Barnabas and Barnabas in the synagogue , I am in Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	When I think of all this , I , Paul , a prisoner of Christ Jesus for the benefit of you Gentiles . . .

ID:	3593
INPUT:	Egon prest bihar goizean mendira igotzeko ; nire aurrean aurkeztuko zara han , mendi-gailurrean .
PRED:	You must be ready to be ready for the mountain , and you will stand on the mountain where you can stand on the mountain .
GOLD:	Be ready in the morning to climb up Mount Sinai and present yourself to me on the top of the mountain .

ID:	3594
INPUT:	Jaunak segurtatzen ditu gizakiaren pausoak ; nola jakin lezake gizakiak nora doan ?
PRED:	If the Lord does n't know how to send rain on the ground , how can he find it ?
GOLD:	The Lord directs our steps , so why try to understand everything along the way ?

ID:	3595
INPUT:	metro batekoa zen zoruan zegoen oinarritik lehen plataformaraino ; hau metro erdi bat zen zabal . Bi metroko altuera zegoen plataforma hartatik hurrengora , hura ere metro erdi bat zabal zelarik .
PRED:	The inner curtain on the front of the Temple was 30 feet wide , and it was 101/2 feet high . It was 101/2 feet high . It was 101/2 feet wide , and it was 101/2 feet high .
GOLD:	From the gutter the altar rises 31/2 feet to a lower ledge that surrounds the altar and is 21 inches wide . From the lower ledge the altar rises 7 feet to the upper ledge that is also 21 inches wide .

ID:	3596
INPUT:	Faraoiak ikertzeko agindu zuen , eta egia zen israeldarren abererik ez zela galdu . Hala ere , bere teman jarraitu zuen faraoiak eta ez zien israeldarrei joaten utzi .
PRED:	Pharaoh did not listen to Pharaoh 's command , and he did not let the people of Israel go . But Pharaoh did n't let them go out to Pharaoh 's land .
GOLD:	Pharaoh sent his officials to investigate , and they discovered that the Israelites had not lost a single animal ! But even so , Pharaoh 's heart remained stubborn , and he still refused to let the people go .

ID:	3597
INPUT:	Goretsazue txilin ozenez , goretsi txilin durunditsuz .
PRED:	Give thanks to the Lord with those who love him .
GOLD:	Praise him with a clash of cymbals ; praise him with loud clanging cymbals .

ID:	3598
INPUT:	Biharamun goizean , Saulek hiru sailetan antolatu zuen gudarostea ; egunsentian etsaiaren kanpaleku erdiraino sartu eta , eguerdiraino amondarrak triskatzen jardun zuen . Bizirik iraun zutenak sakabanatu egin ziren , bi lagun batera ez gelditzeraino .
PRED:	So Saul got up early the next morning and killed three of the army . So Saul 's troops went out to the camp and started out to fight the enemy camp . The three days of the Ammonites had been killed by three days .
GOLD:	But before dawn the next morning , Saul arrived , having divided his army into three detachments . He launched a surprise attack against the Ammonites and slaughtered them the whole morning . The remnant of their army was so badly scattered that no two of them were left together .

ID:	3599
INPUT:	Argibiderik nahi balute , galde biezaiete etxean beren senarrei , ez baita egoki emakumeek batzarrean hitz egitea .
PRED:	If you refuse to find a long time , do n't worry about her husband 's house , for she is n't talking about her husband .
GOLD:	If they have any questions , they should ask their husbands at home , for it is improper for women to speak in church meetings .

ID:	3600
INPUT:	O<unk> profetaren hitzok entzutean , suspertu egin zen Asa , eta Juda eta Benjaminen lurraldeetan eta Efraimgo mendialdean eskuratutako herrixketan zeuden idolo higuingarriak suntsitu egin zituen , eta tenpluko atalondo aurrean zegoen aldarea berriztatu .
PRED:	As soon as Ahab heard this , he went to the hill country of Ephraim and Benjamin , and Benjamin , along with the hill country of Ephraim and Benjamin . He also killed the people in the hill country of Ephraim and Benjamin . He also killed them in the entry room of the Lord 's Temple .
GOLD:	When Asa heard this message from Azariah the prophet , he took courage and removed all the detestable idols from the land of Judah and Benjamin and in the towns he had captured in the hill country of Ephraim . And he repaired the altar of the Lord , which stood in front of the entry room of the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	3601
INPUT:	Gorritua dut aurpegia negarrez , estaliak begiak iluntasun beltzez .
PRED:	I am the light of the darkness , and the darkness covered the darkness .
GOLD:	My eyes are red with weeping ; dark shadows circle my eyes .

ID:	3602
INPUT:	« Ba al da inor zuen artean nire tenplua bere lehengo eder-handian ikusi zuenik ? Eta orain nola dagoela iruditzen zaizue ? Ez al duzue ikusten ezereztua dagoela ?
PRED:	“ Do n't you see me in the Temple ? Have you seen me now ? Have you seen me now ? You know that I have seen your vision ? Do n't you know that I know that I am going to see you ?
GOLD:	‘ Does anyone remember this house — this Temple — in its former splendor ? How , in comparison , does it look to you now ? It must seem like nothing at all !

ID:	3603
INPUT:	Horrela , israeldarren artean ez da ondare-zatirik leinu batetik bestera aldatuko ; israeldarrek nork bere aitaren ondareari atxikirik jarraituko dute .
PRED:	That is why the people of Israel are not part of the tribe of Levi , who are not faithful to the tribe of Israel .
GOLD:	None of the territorial land may pass from tribe to tribe , for all the land given to each tribe must remain within the tribe to which it was first allotted .

ID:	3604
INPUT:	Emakumeak , mendira Jainkoaren gizonarengana heldu zenean , oinak besarkatu zizkion Eliseori . Hurbildu zen Gehazi emakumea apartatzeko , baina Jainkoaren gizonak esan zion : — Utzi , atsekabetua baitago . Hala ere , Jaunak ez dit agertu zergatik ; ez dit deus ere jakinarazi .
PRED:	When she arrived at the mountain of God , she went to meet the man of God at the foot of the man of God . She told him , “ The man of God has brought me back to the man of God . ” So the woman said , “ He did n't tell me what is right , but he did n't have done . ”
GOLD:	But when she came to the man of God at the mountain , she fell to the ground before him and caught hold of his feet . Gehazi began to push her away , but the man of God said , “ Leave her alone . She is deeply troubled , but the Lord has not told me what it is . ”

ID:	3605
INPUT:	Ez bedi Miriam amaren sabeletik irten orduko haragia erdi janik duen hilaurraren pareko gerta !
PRED:	Do not take a ram from the town , and offer it a burnt offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	Do n't let her be like a stillborn baby , already decayed at birth . ”

ID:	3606
INPUT:	« Mundu guztian erori da jendea , Babiloniak hilik ; orain Babilonia eroriko da , berak Israelen hildakoengatik » .
PRED:	“ All nations will fall into the world , ” says the people of Babylon . “ But now the city of Babylon will be killed by the sword of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ Just as Babylon killed the people of Israeland others throughout the world , so must her people be killed .

ID:	3607
INPUT:	Bazen han eserita zenbait lege-maisu , eta hau zioten beren baitan :
PRED:	There were some teachers of religious law and some teachers of religious law , for they said ,
GOLD:	But some of the teachers of religious law who were sitting there thought to themselves ,

ID:	3608
INPUT:	Berak emango die epai-mahaikoeizuzenbide-senaeta hiriaren defendatzaileei kemena .
PRED:	He will give justice to the poor , and he will bring justice to the poor .
GOLD:	He will give a longing for justiceto their judges.He will give great courageto their warriors who stand at the gates .

ID:	3609
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin zaiona egin zuen Asak , bere arbaso Davidek bezala .
PRED:	He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , just as his ancestor David had done .
GOLD:	Asa did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , as his ancestor David had done .

ID:	3610
INPUT:	“ Jainkoa baino zuzenagoa izango ote da gizakia ? Egilea bera baino garbiagoa izango ote ?
PRED:	‘ Is it better than the one who is your God than the Creator of breaking the bread ?
GOLD:	‘ Can a mortal be innocent before God ? Can anyone be pure before the Creator ? '

ID:	3611
INPUT:	Aaron bera ere suntsitu nahi izateraino zegoen Jauna haserre , eta Aaronen alde ere erregutu nuen .
PRED:	When Aaron attacked the Lord 's anger , he burned up his anger against the Lord and his anger .
GOLD:	The Lord was so angry with Aaron that he wanted to destroy him , too . But I prayed for Aaron , and the Lord spared him .

ID:	3612
INPUT:	Hirugarrenari Tigris , Axurko ekialdetik doana . Laugarrenari Eufrates .
PRED:	This is the word of King Tiglath-pileser of Assyria , who is the source of the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	The third branch , called the Tigris , flowed east of the land of Asshur . The fourth branch is called the Euphrates .

ID:	3613
INPUT:	Zuen maitasuna izan bedi itxurakeriarik gabea ; gorrotatu gaizkia eta itsatsi ongiari .
PRED:	All your love is a fool , but do n't be punished for the sins of the wicked .
GOLD:	Do n't just pretend to love others . Really love them . Hate what is wrong . Hold tightly to what is good .

ID:	3614
INPUT:	Aitortuko al duzue behintzat nik ez dudala eskas atera !
PRED:	Do n't you remember that I am the Father who will not leave him .
GOLD:	As you test yourselves , I hope you will recognize that we have not failed the test of apostolic authority .

ID:	3615
INPUT:	Sakrifizioak eskaintzea dute atsegin , hildako abereen okela jateko ; baina nik , Jaunak , ez ditut sakrifizio horiek atsegin . Horien bekatuak gogora dakartzat , beren hutsegiteengatikkontuak eskatuko dizkiet , eta Egiptora itzuli beharko dute .
PRED:	They will offer sacrifices to the Lord , for they have committed sacrifices to the Lord . I will punish them for sacrifices , but I will bring them out of the land of Egypt . I will bring them back to Egypt and bring them back to Egypt .
GOLD:	The people love to offer sacrifices to me , feasting on the meat , but I do not accept their sacrifices.I will hold my people accountable for their sins , and I will punish them.They will return to Egypt .

ID:	3616
INPUT:	Heldu zen , bada , behin Eliseo eta , goiko gelara sarturik , oheratu egin zen .
PRED:	So Elisha arrived at the door of the upper room , and he went into the upper room .
GOLD:	One day Elisha returned to Shunem , and he went up to this upper room to rest .

ID:	3617
INPUT:	Amatziasen gainerako jarduerak , lehenengotik azkenera , « Judako eta Israelgo Erregeen Liburuan » daude idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Amaziah 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Amaziah 's reign , from beginning to end , are recorded in The Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel .

ID:	3618
INPUT:	Jainkoaren maitasunari gorazarrea
PRED:	Salvation Is for God 's People
GOLD:	Nothing Can Separate Us from God 's Love

ID:	3619
INPUT:	Ez dira gose , ez egarri izango , ez ditu sargoriak , ez eguzkiak joko , gupidaz hartuko baitituteta gidatuko , iturburu freskoetara eramango .
PRED:	They will never be hungry or thirsty , for they will never be thirsty . Instead , they will be thirsty and thirsty .
GOLD:	They will neither hunger nor thirst.The searing sun will not reach them anymore.For the Lord in his mercy will lead them ; he will lead them beside cool waters .

ID:	3620
INPUT:	Josafaten gainerako jarduerak , haren egintza adoretsuak eta izan zituen borrokak « Judako Erregeen Kronika » liburuan daude idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Jehoshaphat 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .
GOLD:	He banished from the land the rest of the male and female shrine prostitutes , who still continued their practices from the days of his father , Asa .

ID:	3621
INPUT:	Handia zara , mirarigilea , zu bakarrik Jainkoa !
PRED:	You alone are a great nation , a God of peace , and you alone are God .
GOLD:	For you are great and perform wonderful deeds.You alone are God .

ID:	3622
INPUT:	« Lehen hilaren lehen egunean eraikiko duzu egoitza , elkarketa-etxola .
PRED:	“ On the first day of the first month , you must present the Tabernacle to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Set up the Tabernacle on the first day of the new year .

ID:	3623
INPUT:	Hadadezerren hiri ziren Betah eta Berotaitik brontze ugari eraman zuen .
PRED:	So all of the people of Dan , who had been baptized from bronze chains .
GOLD:	along with a large amount of bronze from Hadadezer 's towns of Tebah and Berothai .

ID:	3624
INPUT:	Anak ihardetsi zion : — Ez , ene jauna . Erabat nahigabetua nauzu . Ez dut ardorik edan , ezta inolako edari mozkorgarririk ere . Neure barrua hustu dut Jaunaren aurrean .
PRED:	“ No , my lord , ” the Lord replied . “ I will not take a cup of wine , but I will not be drunk with wine , and I will pour out my blood on my head . ”
GOLD:	“ Oh no , sir ! ” she replied . “ I have n't been drinking wine or anything stronger . But I am very discouraged , and I was pouring out my heart to the Lord .

ID:	3625
INPUT:	nahiz eta olatuek apar-bitsetan orro eginedota mendiak itsasoaren oldarrez ikaratu .
PRED:	Even if they labor by the Lord 's work , they rushed out into the sea , and they rushed out into the sea .
GOLD:	A river brings joy to the city of our God , the sacred home of the Most High .

ID:	3626
INPUT:	Jaunak ordain diezazula egin duzun guztia eta eman diezazula saria luzaroan Israelgo Jainko Jaunak , honen babesera etorri baitzara .
PRED:	Then you will fear the Lord your God and your God , for he will give you a solemn oath that the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	May the Lord , the God of Israel , under whose wings you have come to take refuge , reward you fully for what you have done . ”

ID:	3627
INPUT:	Lurrak zuek ase arte jateko adina uzta emango du , eta kezkarik gabe bizi ahal izango zarete bertan .
PRED:	They will possess the land and give it to you , and you will have no food to eat .
GOLD:	Then the land will yield large crops , and you will eat your fill and live securely in it .

ID:	3628
INPUT:	Orduan , hiru hiri aukeratu zituen Moisesek Jordanen ekialdean ,
PRED:	So Moses gave these three tribes to the Jordan River ,
GOLD:	Then Moses set apart three cities of refuge east of the Jordan River .

ID:	3629
INPUT:	Jaunaren zain nago , zain bihotz-bihotzez , haren erantzuna dut itxaro .
PRED:	I hope in the Lord , for I hope in the Lord .
GOLD:	I am counting on the Lord ; yes , I am counting on him.I have put my hope in his word .

ID:	3630
INPUT:	Beraz , hitz egin nire izenean horien aurka , hitz egin , gizaseme » .
PRED:	So I spoke to you in my mouth , and you speak against me . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , son of man , prophesy against them loudly and clearly . ”

ID:	3631
INPUT:	Hark erantzun zien : — Zergatik zenbiltzaten nire bila ? Ez al zenekiten nik neure Aitaren gauzetan jardun behar dudala ?
PRED:	“ Why are you looking for me ? ” he asked . “ Why are you looking for me to my Father ? ”
GOLD:	“ But why did you need to search ? ” he asked . “ Did n't you know that I must be in my Father 's house ? ”

ID:	3632
INPUT:	Izan ere , bizia maite duenak , luzaroan bizi eta zoriontsu izan nahi duenak , mihia gorde behar du gaitzetik eta ezpainak engainutik .
PRED:	For those who love their lives are poor , and those who love their lives will be punished for their lives .
GOLD:	For the Scriptures say , “ If you want to enjoy lifeand see many happy days , keep your tongue from speaking eviland your lips from telling lies .

ID:	3633
INPUT:	Deabru asko botatzen zuten eta gaixo asko sendatzen , olioz igurtziz .
PRED:	They cast out demons , and he healed many demons .
GOLD:	And they cast out many demons and healed many sick people , anointing them with olive oil .

ID:	3634
INPUT:	Galaziar zentzugabeok , nork liluratu zaituzte ? Ez nizuen , bada , nik Jesu Kristo gurutziltzatua begien aurrean ipini ?
PRED:	Do you think of fools ? Do n't you think about me , or should I be crucified with Christ ?
GOLD:	Oh , foolish Galatians ! Who has cast an evil spell on you ? For the meaning of Jesus Christ 's death was made as clear to you as if you had seen a picture of his death on the cross .

ID:	3635
INPUT:	Nire gau-ikuskarietan laugarren piztia bat ikusi nuen : beldurgarria zen , izugarria eta guztiz indartsua ; burdinazko hagin handiak zituen ; dena irensten eta txikitzen zuen , jan gabe uzten zuena hankapean apurtzen zuelarik . Beste piztiak ez bezalakoa zen ; hamar adar zituen .
PRED:	I saw a great beast coming out of the field , and I saw a great beast and a mighty army . He was great and great , and he grew more numerous than the ground . He was reduced to pieces , but he did not eat it .
GOLD:	Then in my vision that night , I saw a fourth beast — terrifying , dreadful , and very strong . It devoured and crushed its victims with huge iron teeth and trampled their remains beneath its feet . It was different from any of the other beasts , and it had ten horns .

ID:	3636
INPUT:	Beste hamabost urtez luzatuko dizut bizia . Libratuko zaituztet zu eta Jerusalem Asiriako erregearen eskuetatik eta babestuko dut hiri hau , naizena naizenagatik eta neure zerbitzari Davidengatik ” » .
PRED:	I will give you five years to keep you from the king of Jerusalem . I will hand you over to the king of Jerusalem . I will hand you over to my brother David , David , and he will rescue you from my brother David . ”
GOLD:	I will add fifteen years to your life , and I will rescue you and this city from the king of Assyria . I will defend this city for my own honor and for the sake of my servant David . ' ”

ID:	3637
INPUT:	Israel neskatxa ederra erori da , ez da gehiago jaikiko ; lur jota dago , ez da altxatuko duenik .
PRED:	The young women of Israel are beautiful and beautiful , but they will never return to the land , and they will never return to the ground .
GOLD:	“ The virgin Israel has fallen , never to rise again ! She lies abandoned on the ground , with no one to help her up . ”

ID:	3638
INPUT:	Bota urrea hautsetara , Ofirko metala errekako uharrien artera .
PRED:	They brought from Ophir , and we brought gold from Ophir .
GOLD:	If you give up your lust for moneyand throw your precious gold into the river ,

ID:	3639
INPUT:	Gerra-hotsak lurralde hartan , hondamendi izugarria .
PRED:	Her land is filled with ruins , and the land is filled with ruins .
GOLD:	“ Let the battle cry be heard in the land , a shout of great destruction .

ID:	3640
INPUT:	Honela ziharduen Jaunak berekiko : « Egingo dudanaren berri eman gabe utzi behar ote dut Abraham ?
PRED:	Then the Lord said to them , “ Should I give it to Abraham ? Should I give it to Abraham ? ”
GOLD:	“ Should I hide my plan from Abraham ? ” the Lord asked .

ID:	3641
INPUT:	Beraz , zuhur jokatu beharrean gaude , areago ugal ez daitezen ; bestela , guduren bat sortuko balitz , gure etsaiekin elkartu eta gure aurka egingo lukete borroka , eta gero Egiptotik alde egingo ligukete » .
PRED:	So if you turn away from the night , then you will be sure that if you were too proud to fight us , then we will fight against our enemies . ”
GOLD:	We must make a plan to keep them from growing even more . If we do n't , and if war breaks out , they will join our enemies and fight against us . Then they will escape from the country . ”

ID:	3642
INPUT:	( Mt 16 , <unk> ; Mk 8 , 34 — 9 , 1 )
PRED:	Parable of the Law
GOLD:	Opposition from Samaritans

ID:	3643
INPUT:	Ohartu zen , beraz , Esau , aitak ez zituela begiko Kanaango emakumeak ,
PRED:	So Esau realized that his father had not obeyed his father , Jacob , had not been like a prostitute .
GOLD:	It was now very clear to Esau that his father did not like the local Canaanite women .

ID:	3644
INPUT:	Lasai bizi nintzen , eta birrindu egin nau , lepotik heldu eta zati-zati egin , bere gezien jo-puntu bihurtu .
PRED:	If I tried to find him , I could have a target for a target for a target for a target for a target .
GOLD:	“ I was living quietly until he shattered me.He took me by the neck and broke me in pieces.Then he set me up as his target ,

ID:	3645
INPUT:	Jantzi bordatuak eman nizkizun , larru finezko oinetakoak , lihozko gerrikoa eta zetazko gainjantzia .
PRED:	You have given me fine linen cloth , fine linen cloth , fine linen cloth , and fine linen cloth .
GOLD:	I gave you expensive clothing of fine linen and silk , beautifully embroidered , and sandals made of fine goatskin leather .

ID:	3646
INPUT:	« Jauna ez da gauza izan hitzeman zion lurraldera herri hau eramateko ; horregatik sarraskitu ditu basamortuan » .
PRED:	“ No , the Lord has given this land to the people of Israel . This is what the Lord has promised through the wilderness to enter the wilderness . ”
GOLD:	‘ The Lord was not able to bring them into the land he swore to give them , so he killed them in the wilderness . '

ID:	3647
INPUT:	Herri osoak sumatzen zituen trumoi eta tximistak , turuta-hotsak eta mendia ketan , eta , beldurrez dar-dar , urrutian zeuden geldi .
PRED:	Then the Lord sent thunder and lightning flashed , lightning , and thunder , lightning , and thunder , and lightning . The earth was terrified by the sound of the earth .
GOLD:	When the people heard the thunder and the loud blast of the ram 's horn , and when they saw the flashes of lightning and the smoke billowing from the mountain , they stood at a distance , trembling with fear .

ID:	3648
INPUT:	Baina judua zela jabetu bezain laster , denak aho batez oihuka hasi ziren : « Gora Efesoko Artemisa ! » Eta ia bi ordu egin zituzten halaxe oihuka .
PRED:	But some of the Jews began to shout , “ Let 's kill him ! ” And they shouted , “ Let 's kill him ! ” So they shouted , “ Let 's kill him ! ”
GOLD:	But when the crowd realized he was a Jew , they started shouting again and kept it up for about two hours : “ Great is Artemis of the Ephesians ! Great is Artemis of the Ephesians ! ”

ID:	3649
INPUT:	Babiloniarekin prostituzioan eta atseginkerian ibiliak diren munduko erregeek negar eta dolu egingo dute , haren sutearen ke-mordoa ikustean .
PRED:	They will live in prostitution by worshiping other gods , and they will weep with her in the wilderness . They will mourn for her in the wilderness , and they will see her there .
GOLD:	And the kings of the world who committed adultery with her and enjoyed her great luxury will mourn for her as they see the smoke rising from her charred remains .

ID:	3650
INPUT:	Nire herriaren zauriaazaletik sendatu nahi dute . “ Dena ongi doa , oso ongi ” diote , baina ez doa ongi , ez .
PRED:	My people are coming out of my people , but they say , ‘ Look , I am well aware of what is good . '
GOLD:	They offer superficial treatmentsfor my people 's mortal wound.They give assurances of peacewhen there is no peace .

ID:	3651
INPUT:	Davidek kutxa Jerusalemera eraman
PRED:	David Sends for Jerusalem
GOLD:	Moving the Ark to Jerusalem

ID:	3652
INPUT:	Iron , Migdal-El , Horem , Bet-Anat , Bet-Xemex ; guztira hemeretzi hiri ziren , beren herrixkekin .
PRED:	From the tribe of Pahath-moab ( also known as Luz ) , the following towns with their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	Yiron , Migdal-el , Horem , Beth-anath , and Beth-shemesh — nineteen towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	3653
INPUT:	Baina Joakazek otoitz egin zion Jaunari eta honek entzun , ikusi baitzuen zein gogor menderatzen zuen Siriako erregeak Israel .
PRED:	But Jonathan prayed to the Lord , for he heard what he had said to the king of Aram , for he refused to listen to the king of Aram .
GOLD:	Then Jehoahaz prayed for the Lord 's help , and the Lord heard his prayer , for he could see how severely the king of Aram was oppressing Israel .

ID:	3654
INPUT:	Zorabio-haizeasartu die Jaunak barruan : bere egiteko guztietanoker daramate Egipto ; eta hala dabil , botaka eta balantzaka , mozkor baten antzera .
PRED:	“ Go into the fields , ” says the Lord . “ The Lord will remove every male and female animal that falls into the fields and wild animals that grow into the fields . ”
GOLD:	The Lord has sent a spirit of foolishness on them , so all their suggestions are wrong.They cause Egypt to staggerlike a drunk in his vomit .

ID:	3655
INPUT:	Legendunen garbikuntza
PRED:	The Faith of a Gentile Woman
GOLD:	Cleansing from Skin Diseases

ID:	3656
INPUT:	Hilaren zazpian , gauza bera egingo duzue nahi edo jakin gabe bekatu egin duenaren alde . Horrela egingo da tenpluaren garbikuntza .
PRED:	On the seventh day you must eat any animal that has been set apart for the Lord 's Temple . This is a permanent law for you to purify you from the Temple .
GOLD:	Do this also on the seventh day of the new year for anyone who has sinned through error or ignorance . In this way , you will purify the Temple .

ID:	3657
INPUT:	hau da , Jainkoak agintzari guztiei baietza eman die harengan ; horregatik , Kristoren bitartez esaten diogu « Amen » Jainkoari , berau goresten dugunean .
PRED:	For God has given us this command to all these things , for he has given us the eternal life of Christ , which means “ Amen . ”
GOLD:	For all of God 's promises have been fulfilled in Christ with a resounding “ Yes ! ” And through Christ , our “ Amen ” ( which means “ Yes ” ) ascends to God for his glory .

ID:	3658
INPUT:	« Horrela , azkenekoak lehenengo izango dira eta lehenengoak azkeneko » .
PRED:	“ These are the first ones who seem least important now will be the first end of the first month . ”
GOLD:	“ So those who are last now will be first then , and those who are first will be last . ”

ID:	3659
INPUT:	Jeremias profetak honela erantzun zion Hananias profetari tenpluan bilduta zeuden apaizen eta herriaren aurrean :
PRED:	Jeremiah replied to Hananiah , “ This is what Jeremiah the prophet wrote in the Temple of the Lord and all the people standing before him .
GOLD:	Jeremiah responded to Hananiah as they stood in front of all the priests and people at the Temple .

ID:	3660
INPUT:	Eta erantzungo diete : “ Beren gurasoek Egiptotik atera zituen Jauna , beren Jainkoa , utzi eta jainko arrotzengana jo dutelako , haien aurrean ahuspeztuz eta haiei kultua emanez . Horregatik ekarri die Jaunak halako zoritxarra ” » .
PRED:	They will reply , ‘ The Lord our ancestors brought out of Egypt from the land of Egypt , the God of Egypt , who abandoned them to worship the gods of Egypt , and they will worship other gods . ' ”
GOLD:	“ And the answer will be , ‘ Because his people abandoned the Lord their God , who brought their ancestors out of Egypt , and they worshiped other gods instead and bowed down to them . That is why the Lord has brought all these disasters on them . ' ”

ID:	3661
INPUT:	Joan nintzen aingeruagana eta liburuxka emateko esan nion . Hark esan zidan : « Tori eta irentsi : sabela garraztuko dizu , baina ahorako eztia bezain gozo izango duzu » .
PRED:	Then the angel spoke to me and said , “ My mother is a heavy man , and he said to me , ‘ This is what the Lord says : You will be like this , but you will be like this . ' ”
GOLD:	So I went to the angel and told him to give me the small scroll . “ Yes , take it and eat it , ” he said . “ It will be sweet as honey in your mouth , but it will turn sour in your stomach ! ”

ID:	3662
INPUT:	Pedro eta lagunak logaleak jota zeuden ; baina esnatu ziren eta Jesusen aintza eta harekin zeuden bi gizonak ikusi zituzten .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Peter and John went into the synagogue , but they saw two men coming with Jesus and saw two disciples .
GOLD:	Peter and the others had fallen asleep . When they woke up , they saw Jesus ' glory and the two men standing with him .

ID:	3663
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Ahal dudan diozu ? Dena ahal du sinesten duenak .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do you understand all these things ? Do you believe me ? ”
GOLD:	“ What do you mean , ‘ If I can ' ? ” Jesus asked . “ Anything is possible if a person believes . ”

ID:	3664
INPUT:	Gorpuak erre eta errautsak zabaltzen direneko haran osoa eta Zedron erreka inguruko landa , ekialderantz dagoen Zaldien Atearen izkinaraino , niri sagaraturiko esparru izango da . Ez dute sekula erauziko , ez hondatuko » .
PRED:	He will remove the ashes from the wilderness and burn it into the Kidron Valley , and it will be set aside for the top of the Kidron Valley . It will be an end to the top of the altar . ”
GOLD:	And the entire area — including the graveyard and ash dump in the valley , and all the fields out to the Kidron Valley on the east as far as the Horse Gate — will be holy to the Lord . The city will never again be captured or destroyed . ”

ID:	3665
INPUT:	Jainkoaren zerbitzari baitira , zuri ongi jokatzen laguntzeko . Gaizki egiten baduzu , ordea , izan beldur , zigortzeko ahalmena ez baitute alferrik . Izan ere , Jainkoaren zerbitzari dira , justizia egin eta gaizkileak zigortzeko .
PRED:	But if you do what is right , do n't be afraid to do what is right . But if you refuse to do what is right , you will be punished for doing what is right , you will be punished for doing what is right .
GOLD:	The authorities are God 's servants , sent for your good . But if you are doing wrong , of course you should be afraid , for they have the power to punish you . They are God 's servants , sent for the very purpose of punishing those who do what is wrong .

ID:	3666
INPUT:	Senideok , egon zaitezte pozik edozein eratako tentaldik erasotzen dizuenean .
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , stay away from every part of your hearts .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , when troubles of any kind come your way , consider it an opportunity for great joy .

ID:	3667
INPUT:	Berehala , Jesusek ikasleak txalupan sarrarazi eta bere aurretik beste aldera , Betsaidarantz , joateko agindu zien , berak jendeari agur egin bitartean .
PRED:	As Jesus went into the boat , he sent his disciples into the boat and started back to the other side of the lake , and he sent them home to the other side .
GOLD:	Immediately after this , Jesus insisted that his disciples get back into the boat and head across the lake to Bethsaida , while he sent the people home .

ID:	3668
INPUT:	baina Jaunarenak dira zuzen epaitzeko tresnak , neurgailu guztiak berak eginak dira .
PRED:	But the Lord is the same judge , and all its utensils are made of pure gold .
GOLD:	The Lord demands accurate scales and balances ; he sets the standards for fairness .

ID:	3669
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Zer ari da Israel , ene maitea , nire tenpluan ? Zer , hainbeste gaiztakeriaegin ondoren ? Promesek eta sakrifizioetakoabereekzoritxarra aldenduko diotelauste ote du ? Orduan bai egingo lukeelapozarren oihu !
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ What sorrow awaits Israel who love me ? What sorrow awaits the people of Israel , my people , says the Lord , “ What sorrow awaits you , and I will bring disaster on you ? ”
GOLD:	“ What right do my beloved people have to come to my Temple , when they have done so many immoral things ? Can their vows and sacrifices prevent their destruction ? They actually rejoice in doing evil !

ID:	3670
INPUT:	haren ituna gordetzen eta legeak betetzen dituztenentzat .
PRED:	Those who obey him will be punished for the law of God 's law .
GOLD:	of those who are faithful to his covenant , of those who obey his commandments !

ID:	3671
INPUT:	Ni ere seme izana nauzue , seme bakarra bezala maite ninduen amak .
PRED:	My child , my son , have been my mother 's mother , just as I love .
GOLD:	For I , too , was once my father 's son , tenderly loved as my mother 's only child .

ID:	3672
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jainkoak herri santuko kide egin eta zerurako deitu zaituztenok , begira iezaiozue Jesusi : bera da guk aitortzen dugun fedearen apostolu eta apaiz nagusi .
PRED:	That is why God called you into heaven and called you to be called by his holy people , and we are called by the name of Jesus , the high priest .
GOLD:	And so , dear brothers and sisters who belong to God and are partners with those called to heaven , think carefully about this Jesus whom we declare to be God 's messenger and High Priest .

ID:	3673
INPUT:	Deika nauzu , Jainko ; erantzungo al didazu ! Itzul niregana belarria , entzun nire mintzoa .
PRED:	O God , answer me , for I cry out to you for help ; answer me , for I have heard my prayer .
GOLD:	I am praying to you because I know you will answer , O God.Bend down and listen as I pray .

ID:	3674
INPUT:	Asto zuri baten gainean , tapiz gainean eseriak zoaztenoketa oinez zoaztenok , entzun
PRED:	At the end of the Tabernacle , the curtains of the curtains were listening to the last curtains .
GOLD:	“ Consider this , you who ride on fine donkeys , you who sit on fancy saddle blankets , and you who walk along the road .

ID:	3675
INPUT:	Erregea eta beronen zerbitzaria zetozkiola ikustean , Araunak , bidera irten eta erregearen aurrean ahuspezturik ,
PRED:	When the king and his officials saw that they were ready to meet him , they bowed low before the king and bow before him .
GOLD:	When Araunah saw the king and his men coming toward him , he came and bowed before the king with his face to the ground .

ID:	3676
INPUT:	Ez aditu Ezekiasi ; entzun Asiriako erregeak dioena : « Egin bakezkoak nirekin eta jar zaitezte nire menpe . Horrela nork bere mahatsondoaren eta pikondoaren fruituak jan ahal izanen ditu eta bere putzuko ura edan .
PRED:	Do n't listen to Hezekiah , the king of Assyria , and say , “ Make me some of the king of Assyria , and bring you some of you into my own grapevine , and you will eat the fruit of your own blood .
GOLD:	“ Do n't listen to Hezekiah ! These are the terms the king of Assyria is offering : Make peace with me — open the gates and come out . Then each of you can continue eating from your own grapevine and fig tree and drinking from your own well .

ID:	3677
INPUT:	Israeldarrak eta filistearrak aurrez aurre jarri ziren lerroka .
PRED:	The Philistines fought against the Philistines , and the Philistines fought against Philistia .
GOLD:	Soon the Israelite and Philistine forces stood facing each other , army against army .

ID:	3678
INPUT:	Jaunak lagundu ez balit , herio-isilpean nengokeen dagoeneko .
PRED:	But the Lord has spoken ; he did n't let me be silent when I died .
GOLD:	Unless the Lord had helped me , I would soon have settled in the silence of the grave .

ID:	3679
INPUT:	Saul apaizarekin hizketan ari zen bitarte hartan , ordea , gero eta handiagoa bihurtu zen zalaparta filistearren kanpalekuan . Saulek esan zion apaizari : — Uztazu !
PRED:	But Saul and his army went out to fight the Philistine army , and he said to Saul , “ You are a witness to the Philistine army , and you are a witness to the Philistine army . ”
GOLD:	But while Saul was talking to the priest , the confusion in the Philistine camp grew louder and louder . So Saul said to the priest , “ Never mind ; let 's get going ! ”

ID:	3680
INPUT:	hirugarrengoak zuriak , eta laugarrengoak nabarrak .
PRED:	The third of the second month , and the fourth was the second month .
GOLD:	the third by white horses , and the fourth by powerful dappled-gray horses .

ID:	3681
INPUT:	Besteek heldu eta atxilotu egin zuten .
PRED:	Others grabbed him and beat him up and beat him up .
GOLD:	Then the others grabbed Jesus and arrested him .

ID:	3682
INPUT:	Jendearengana itzuli zirenean , gizon bat ondoratu zitzaion Jesusi eta , aurrean belaunikatuz ,
PRED:	When a man returned to the crowd , he saw a man sitting on the plains of Jericho and saw him coming toward him .
GOLD:	At the foot of the mountain , a large crowd was waiting for them . A man came and knelt before Jesus and said ,

ID:	3683
INPUT:	Beraz , bekatua ez bedi gehiago nagusi izan zuen gorputz hilkorrean . Ez jarri beraren grinen menpean ,
PRED:	So you must not have children of your sinful nature , but you would n't have enough to satisfy your sinful nature .
GOLD:	Do not let sin control the way you live ; do not give in to sinful desires .

ID:	3684
INPUT:	Oraindik gehiago egiten duzue : malkoz betetzen duzue Jaunaren aldarea , negar-zotinka ari ohi zarete zuen eskaintzei Jaunak arretarik egiten ez dielako eta gogo onez hartzen ez dituelako .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : You are saying , ‘ This is what the Lord says : O people of Israel , do not offer sacrifices to the Lord your God . '
GOLD:	Here is another thing you do . You cover the Lord 's altar with tears , weeping and groaning because he pays no attention to your offerings and does n't accept them with pleasure .

ID:	3685
INPUT:	Zain itzazue zeuen buruak eta artalde osoa , honen zaindari jarri baitzaituzte Espiritu Santuak ; larra ezazue Jainkoaren Eliza , hark bere Semearen odolaz eskuratu zuena .
PRED:	You must keep watch over your head , and keep watch over the Holy Spirit . For the Holy Spirit has given you the Holy Spirit , and he has given you the Son of God .
GOLD:	“ So guard yourselves and God 's people . Feed and shepherd God 's flock — his church , purchased with his own blood — over which the Holy Spirit has appointed you as leaders .

ID:	3686
INPUT:	Errudun izanez gero , ai ene ! Errugabe izanik ere , ezin izango dut bururik altxatu , lotsaz betea bainago , miseria beti begi aurrean .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who have been married , for I have no reason to punish her , for I have no reason to punish her for her .
GOLD:	If I am guilty , too bad for me ; and even if I 'm innocent , I ca n't hold my head high , because I am filled with shame and misery .

ID:	3687
INPUT:	Tenpluan zegoen zutoin sakratua Jerusalemdik kanpora aterarazi eta Zedron errekan erre zuen ; erabat erraustu eta errautsak jende arruntaren hilobira bota zituen .
PRED:	He set up the Asherah pole and set up from Jerusalem from the Kidron Valley to the Kidron Valley , where he burned it into the Kidron Valley .
GOLD:	The king removed the Asherah pole from the Lord 's Temple and took it outside Jerusalem to the Kidron Valley , where he burned it . Then he ground the ashes of the pole to dust and threw the dust over the graves of the people .

ID:	3688
INPUT:	Horregatik , gero eta beldur handiagoa zion Davidi . Harrezkero , Saulek beti izan zion gorroto Davidi .
PRED:	That is why Saul was afraid of him , and David became a great king .
GOLD:	Saul became even more afraid of him , and he remained David 's enemy for the rest of his life .

ID:	3689
INPUT:	Azaldu zeure hitz argigarriak , eman ulermena heldugabeei .
PRED:	Though you speak , you will understand what is right ; you will understand what it means .
GOLD:	The teaching of your word gives light , so even the simple can understand .

ID:	3690
INPUT:	Harresia burutu zenean eta ate-alderdiak jaso , atezainak , kantariak eta lebitarrak beren eginkizunetan jarri nituen .
PRED:	At the end of the sky , he took the doors of the sky and set up the sacred pillars , and the Levites , just as I had commanded you .
GOLD:	After the wall was finished and I had set up the doors in the gates , the gatekeepers , singers , and Levites were appointed .

ID:	3691
INPUT:	Gainerako lebitarrei , hots , Merariren ondorengo senitarteei , lau hiri eman zizkieten Zabulonen leinuaren ondaretik : Jokneam , Karta , Rimon eta Nahalal , herri-lur eta guzti .
PRED:	The following towns were given to the clans of the tribe of Levi ( also known as the clans of the tribe of Carmel ) , Hamonah , Asshur , and Zebulun , and Zebulun .
GOLD:	The rest of the Levites — the Merari clan — were given the following towns with their pasturelands from the tribe of Zebulun : Jokneam , Kartah ,

ID:	3692
INPUT:	Horrela erakutsi nahi izan zuen zein eskuzabal zen errukiz hartu zituenekin , bere aintza azaltzeko aukeratu zituenekin .
PRED:	So he showed them how much he wanted . He chose them to be with his own hands , and he chose them to be with his own hands .
GOLD:	He does this to make the riches of his glory shine even brighter on those to whom he shows mercy , who were prepared in advance for glory .

ID:	3693
INPUT:	Eta egunean zazpi aldiz iraintzen bazaitu eta zazpi aldiz etortzen bazaizu “ Damu dut ” esanez , barkatu » .
PRED:	And if you keep seven times seven times , I will deny you seven times and say , ‘ I have forgiven you . ' ”
GOLD:	Even if that person wrongs you seven times a day and each time turns again and asks forgiveness , you must forgive . ”

ID:	3694
INPUT:	Esango dizuet nori izan beldur : Izan beldur hiltzeko eta ondoren infernura jaurtitzeko ahalmena duenari . Bai , izan beldur horri !
PRED:	I will say to you , ‘ Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid to kill you , for I am afraid of the power of the Almighty . '
GOLD:	But I 'll tell you whom to fear . Fear God , who has the power to kill you and then throw you into hell . Yes , he 's the one to fear .

ID:	3695
INPUT:	“ Neure herri Israel Egiptotik atera nuen egunetik ez dut Israelgo leinu guztien artean inongo hiririk hautatu , nire egoitza izango zen etxea egin ziezadaten ; baizik eta David aukeratu nuen , ene herri Israelen buruzagi izan zedin ” .
PRED:	“ I will bring my people out of Egypt from all the tribes of Israel , from the tribe of Israel . I will not allow them to be my own family , and I will choose them to be my own people Israel . '
GOLD:	‘ From the day I brought my people Israel out of Egypt , I have never chosen a city among any of the tribes of Israel as the place where a Temple should be built to honor my name . But I have chosen David to be king over my people Israel . ' ”

ID:	3696
INPUT:	Otoi , ez joan hemendik nik eskaintza zure aurrera ekarri arte . Berehala itzuliko naiz . Jaunak erantzun zion : — Hementxe egongo naiz zu etorri arte .
PRED:	Now go to the mountain where you can worship the Lord . ” And the Lord replied , “ I will return to you . ” And the Lord replied , “ I will return to you . ”
GOLD:	Do n't go away until I come back and bring my offering to you . ” He answered , “ I will stay here until you return . ”

ID:	3697
INPUT:	Orain , berriz , zer ari naiz ikusten ? Nire herria hutsaren trukeeraman dute gatibu , eta menderatzaileekulu dagite harro , nire izena egun osoanetengabe gaitzetsiz .
PRED:	But now , I see how can I see the land of Egypt ? Why did I bring my people back to the land of Egypt ?
GOLD:	What is this ? ” asks the Lord . “ Why are my people enslaved again ? Those who rule them shout in exultation . My name is blasphemed all day long .

ID:	3698
INPUT:	Jaiki zen hildakoa eta hizketan hasi , eta Jesusek amari bihurtu zion .
PRED:	So Jesus got up and began to kill him , and he got up into the boat .
GOLD:	Then the dead boy sat up and began to talk ! And Jesus gave him back to his mother .

ID:	3699
INPUT:	<unk> txoek arrazoi gabe pertsegitzen naute , baina zure hitzek bakarrik ikaratzen ni .
PRED:	I am telling you the truth , but I am telling you the truth .
GOLD:	Powerful people harass me without cause , but my heart trembles only at your word .

ID:	3700
INPUT:	Erosta-doinuan . Davidena . Kux benjamindarra zela eta , Jaunari abestu ziona .
PRED:	We were filled with fear of the Lord . The men of Benjamin were filled with fear of the Lord .
GOLD:	I come to you for protection , O Lord my God.Save me from my persecutors — rescue me !

ID:	3701
INPUT:	Egia da neure kontzientziak ez nauela ezertan salatzen ; baina horrek ez du esan nahi neure burua errugabetzat dudanik , Jaunak bainau epaitzen .
PRED:	For my conscience is against me , but it does n't say that I am not a fool . For the Lord is a judge for me , for I am the Lord .
GOLD:	My conscience is clear , but that does n't prove I 'm right . It is the Lord himself who will examine me and decide .

ID:	3702
INPUT:	Jaunak ez du bere herria zapuztuko , ez bere ondarea bertan behera utziko .
PRED:	The Lord will not abandon his people ; he will never abandon them .
GOLD:	The Lord will not reject his people ; he will not abandon his special possession .

ID:	3703
INPUT:	« Hilerokoa izanik , odoljarioa duen emakumea zazpi egunez geldituko da kutsaturik ; emakumea ukitzen duena kutsaturik geldituko da arratsa arte .
PRED:	“ The man who is ceremonially unclean during the period of menstrual period will be ceremonially unclean until she is ceremonially unclean until she is ceremonially unclean until she is ceremonially unclean until evening .
GOLD:	“ Whenever a woman has her menstrual period , she will be ceremonially unclean for seven days . Anyone who touches her during that time will be unclean until evening .

ID:	3704
INPUT:	Gero , zuk hitz egin eta nik erantzungo dizut , edota nik hitz egin eta zuk erantzungo .
PRED:	Then you will answer me again and answer me , and you will answer me .
GOLD:	Now summon me , and I will answer ! Or let me speak to you , and you reply .

ID:	3705
INPUT:	esanez : — Benetan gorroto zeniola uste nuen eta zure adiskideari eman nion emaztetzat . Hori baino hobea duzu ahizpa gaztea . Hartzazu zeuretzat , bestearen ordez .
PRED:	“ My friend , ” he said , “ you have been my friend , and you gave me my younger daughter . Take her to your younger sister , for you are my younger daughter . ”
GOLD:	“ I truly thought you must hate her , ” her father explained , “ so I gave her in marriage to your best man . But look , her younger sister is even more beautiful than she is . Marry her instead . ”

ID:	3706
INPUT:	Fedeari esker ez zen hondatu Rahab emagaldua sinesgabeekin batera , israeldar ikertzaileei harrera ona egin zielako .
PRED:	It was by faith that the people of Israel had not yet been a prostitute , so that the people of Israel had committed adultery with her .
GOLD:	It was by faith that Rahab the prostitute was not destroyed with the people in her city who refused to obey God . For she had given a friendly welcome to the spies .

ID:	3707
INPUT:	esan zuen : « Desagerrarazi egingo dut mundutik egin dudan gizakia , eta gizakia ez ezik , baita abereak , narrastiak eta zeruko hegaztiak ere , damu bainaiz hauek egin izanaz » .
PRED:	He told them , “ I will make you ruler over the world , but I will destroy the birds of the sky and animals . I will make the birds of the sky , and I will destroy the birds of the sky . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord said , “ I will wipe this human race I have created from the face of the earth . Yes , and I will destroy every living thing — all the people , the large animals , the small animals that scurry along the ground , and even the birds of the sky . I am sorry I ever made them . ”

ID:	3708
INPUT:	Hau dio Jaunak : « Egiaz , nire egitasmoakez dira zuenak bezalakoak , ezta nire jokabidea erezuena bezalakoa .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Do n't wait for me to do what is right , for I will not do what is right .
GOLD:	“ My thoughts are nothing like your thoughts , ” says the Lord . “ And my ways are far beyond anything you could imagine .

ID:	3709
INPUT:	( 1 Erg 10 , 1-13 )
PRED:	The Death of Athaliah
GOLD:	Solomon 's Wealth and Splendor

ID:	3710
INPUT:	Egidazu zin , Jaunaren izenean , ez dituzula nire ondorengoak suntsituko , ezta nire izena ezabatuko ere nire aitaren senitartetik .
PRED:	When you swear by the name of the Lord , you will not destroy the descendants of my descendants .
GOLD:	So David promised this to Saul with an oath . Then Saul went home , but David and his men went back to their stronghold .

ID:	3711
INPUT:	Jaunak erraustu egin zituen hiriak eta bertako bizilagunak , lautada osoa eta lurralde hartako landaretza .
PRED:	So the Lord destroyed the land and destroyed all the towns that had been destroyed , just as the Lord had promised .
GOLD:	He utterly destroyed them , along with the other cities and villages of the plain , wiping out all the people and every bit of vegetation .

ID:	3712
INPUT:	Heldu ziren Hebronera eta David erregeari eraman zioten Ix-Boxeten burua , esanez : — Hona Ix-Boxeten burua ; zu hil nahi izan zintuen zure etsai Saulen semea zen . Honela eman dio Jaunak Davidi Saulen eta beronen ondorengoen lepotik mendekatzeko aukera .
PRED:	When David arrived at Hebron , they told him , “ The Lord has given you victory over all the tribes of Israel , ” they said , “ for the Lord has given you victory over Saul and his family . ”
GOLD:	When they arrived at Hebron , they presented Ishbosheth 's head to David . “ Look ! ” they exclaimed to the king . “ Here is the head of Ishbosheth , the son of your enemy Saul who tried to kill you . Today the Lord has given my lord the king revenge on Saul and his entire family ! ”

ID:	3713
INPUT:	Izan zaitezte elkarren menpeko , Kristori diozuen begiruneagatik .
PRED:	Be sure to be united with Christ , so that you will be made right with Christ .
GOLD:	And further , submit to one another out of reverence for Christ .

ID:	3714
INPUT:	« Zuen artean jarriko dut neure egonlekua eta ez zaituztet zapuztuko .
PRED:	“ I will put you in my place , and I will never abandon you .
GOLD:	I will live among you , and I will not despise you .

ID:	3715
INPUT:	Inbasioaren arrazoiak : Jerusalemen bekatuak
PRED:	Hope for Jerusalem 's Sin
GOLD:	The Sins of Judah

ID:	3716
INPUT:	Hitz hauek entzutean , atsekabez alde egin zuen gazteak , ondasun handien jabe baitzen .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ What sorrow awaits you , for you have been taught by the young women . ”
GOLD:	But when the young man heard this , he went away sad , for he had many possessions .

ID:	3717
INPUT:	Lasterka bideratuz , Esauk , besarkatu eta lepotik heldurik , laztandu egin zuen Jakob , eta negarrari eman zioten biek .
PRED:	“ Yes , Esau ran away and kissed Jacob , and he kissed Jacob , and he embraced them . So Jacob kissed them , and Jacob , and they ate them .
GOLD:	Then Esau ran to meet him and embraced him , threw his arms around his neck , and kissed him . And they both wept .

ID:	3718
INPUT:	Ondoren , mezu hau bidali zion Judako errege Josafati : « Moabeko erregea kontra jarri zait . Etorriko al zara moabdarrak borrokatzera ? » Hark erantzun : « Joango naiz . Biok bat gara ; nire gudarostea eta zurea , nire zalditeria eta zurea bat dira » .
PRED:	Then King Jehoshaphat sent this message to King Jehoshaphat of Judah : “ Why are you fighting against me ? Why are you going to fight against me ? ” And he replied , “ I will go out to war against you . ”
GOLD:	On the way , he sent this message to King Jehoshaphat of Judah : “ The king of Moab has rebelled against me . Will you join me in battle against him ? ” And Jehoshaphat replied , “ Why , of course ! You and I are as one . My troops are your troops , and my horses are your horses . ”

ID:	3719
INPUT:	Baina indartsuago batek eraso eta menderatzen badu , segurantza ematen zioten armak kendu eta hari harrapatutako gauzak banatu egingo ditu .
PRED:	But if one of them attacked a mighty army , the widow will be taken away from his weapons , and the priest will take off his weapons .
GOLD:	until someone even stronger attacks and overpowers him , strips him of his weapons , and carries off his belongings .

ID:	3720
INPUT:	Israeldarrak geroz eta gogorrago izan ziren Kanaango errege Jabinekin , erabat hondatu zuten arte .
PRED:	But the Israelites had become a king of Canaan , a king of Canaan , and the king of Canaan was completely destroyed .
GOLD:	And from that time on Israel became stronger and stronger against King Jabin until they finally destroyed him .

ID:	3721
INPUT:	Orduan , bidera atera zen profeta , erregeari itxarotera . Ezin zitzaion igarri nor zen , begiak zapi batez estaliak baitzituen .
PRED:	Then the prophet went out to the king and told him what had happened to the king , for he could n't see seven months .
GOLD:	The prophet placed a bandage over his eyes to disguise himself and then waited beside the road for the king .

ID:	3722
INPUT:	Emateko borondatea zuten bihotz-zabaleko israeldar guztiek Jaunarentzat oparia ekarri zuten , elkarketa-etxola eraikitzeko , hango zerbitzu eta jantzi sakratuetarako .
PRED:	These are the instructions to the people of Israel . They brought the sacred offerings to the Lord , the sacred offerings , and the sacred offerings to the Lord .
GOLD:	All whose hearts were stirred and whose spirits were moved came and brought their sacred offerings to the Lord . They brought all the materials needed for the Tabernacle , for the performance of its rituals , and for the sacred garments .

ID:	3723
INPUT:	Larunbata
PRED:	The Sabbath and Lazarus
GOLD:	Passover and the Festival of Unleavened Bread

ID:	3724
INPUT:	Zer egin behar dizugu , itsasoa baretzeko ? Izan ere , itsasoa gero eta haserreago baitzegoen .
PRED:	What should we continue to live in the sea ? For we will be angry with the sea , for the sea will become angry with them .
GOLD:	And since the storm was getting worse all the time , they asked him , “ What should we do to you to stop this storm ? ”

ID:	3725
INPUT:	gainera hustu zien bere haserre-sua , bere sumin , amorru eta suntsipena : zoritxar-mandatari taldea ,
PRED:	He struck them with his anger , and he will destroy them with a terrible fury .
GOLD:	He loosed on them his fierce anger — all his fury , rage , and hostility.He dispatched against thema band of destroying angels .

ID:	3726
INPUT:	Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak emango dizuen lurraldera joateko Jordan ibaia igaroko duzuen egunean , harritzar batzuk hartu , tente ipini eta karez zurituko dituzue .
PRED:	When you arrive in the land the Lord your God is giving you , you will cross the Jordan River to the assembly of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	When you cross the Jordan River and enter the land the Lord your God is giving you , set up some large stones and coat them with plaster .

ID:	3727
INPUT:	Kito Israelgo profetak , Jerusalemi nire izenean hitz egin eta , bakerik ez zegoenean , bake-ikuskariak azaltzen zizkiotenak ! Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana .
PRED:	When the people of Israel saw that the prophets of Israel were talking about me , they would n't speak to me , says the Sovereign Lord . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !
GOLD:	They were lying prophets who claimed peace would come to Jerusalem when there was no peace . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! '

ID:	3728
INPUT:	— Zergatik ez duzue barkamen-oparigaia toki sakratuan jan ? Guztiz sakratua da , elkartearen errua kentzeko eta Jaunaren aurrean haren aldeko barkamen-ohikunea egiteko Jaunak zuei emana .
PRED:	“ Why have you not eaten any of these offerings ? ” the Lord asked . “ It is a sacred offering to purify you from the Lord 's presence , making you right with the Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ Why did n't you eat the sin offering in the sacred area ? ” he demanded . “ It is a holy offering ! The Lord has given it to you to remove the guilt of the community and to purify the people , making them right with the Lord .

ID:	3729
INPUT:	Harkaitzetik ur-lasterrak atera zituen , ura ibaika isurarazi .
PRED:	The water flowed from the water , for the water had dried up , and the water flowed from the Nile .
GOLD:	He made streams pour from the rock , making the waters flow down like a river !

ID:	3730
INPUT:	Horrek arindu egingo ninduke . Eta pozez salto egingo nuke tortura latz honetan , ez niekeelako horrela Santuaren hitzei uko egingo .
PRED:	Then I would be glad , and I would be able to rescue them . Then I would be able to help them , and I would not deny three months .
GOLD:	At least I can take comfort in this : Despite the pain , I have not denied the words of the Holy One .

ID:	3731
INPUT:	Gutako batzuk ere izan dira hilobian eta emakumeek esan bezala aurkitu dute guztia ; baina bera ez dute ikusi .
PRED:	Even though some of the women and women are dead , they did n't understand what they have seen .
GOLD:	Some of our men ran out to see , and sure enough , his body was gone , just as the women had said . ”

ID:	3732
INPUT:	« Zuek bakarrikhautatu zaituztetlurreko familia guztien artetik ; horregatik , bada , zuen bekatu guztienkontua eskatuko dizuet » .
PRED:	“ And I will bring you out of all the earth , a thousand of you , and I will bring you out of all your sins . ”
GOLD:	“ From among all the families on the earth , I have been intimate with you alone.That is why I must punish youfor all your sins . ”

ID:	3733
INPUT:	Zeure ospez , izan garaile egia eta justiziaren aldeko borrokan . Jaurti zeure eskuaz
PRED:	Let your glory be glorious and glorious , and your enemies ignore your enemies .
GOLD:	Your arrows are sharp , piercing your enemies ' hearts.The nations fall beneath your feet .

ID:	3734
INPUT:	Baina israeldarrek garaitu egin zuten eta haren lurraldeaz jabetu , Arnon errekatik Jabok errekaraino , hau da , amondarren lurralderaino , hauek gotortua baitzuten muga .
PRED:	But the people of Israel did as far as the land of Aroer , from the Arnon Gorge , and from the territory of the Ammonites .
GOLD:	But the Israelites slaughtered them with their swords and occupied their land from the Arnon River to the Jabbok River . They went only as far as the Ammonite border because the boundary of the Ammonites was fortified .

ID:	3735
INPUT:	dei egin eta esan zion : — Ez al nizun Jaunarengatik zin eginarazi eta ez al nizun zorrotz esan norabait ateratzen bazinen , ziur hilko zinela ? Ongi zela erantzun zenidan , bazenekiela .
PRED:	“ Do n't you remember me ? ” he asked . “ Do n't you realize that you would not die in the Lord 's name ? ” And he replied , “ I know that you would die . ”
GOLD:	So the king sent for Shimei and demanded , “ Did n't I make you swear by the Lord and warn you not to go anywhere else or you would surely die ? And you replied , ‘ The sentence is fair ; I will do as you say . '

ID:	3736
INPUT:	Handia izango da , Goi-goikoaren Seme deituko diote , eta bere aita Daviden tronua emango dio Jainko Jaunak .
PRED:	The Most High will be called the Most High , and the Son of David will be his father , David , and his father will be their God .
GOLD:	He will be very great and will be called the Son of the Most High . The Lord God will give him the throne of his ancestor David .

ID:	3737
INPUT:	« Zatozte niregana , nekatu eta zamatu guztiok , eta neuk emango dizuet atseden .
PRED:	“ Come and prepare for me , and I will give you whatever you need .
GOLD:	Then Jesus said , “ Come to me , all of you who are weary and carry heavy burdens , and I will give you rest .

ID:	3738
INPUT:	eta sartuko den etxeko nagusiari esan : « Maisuak galdetzen du non duen ikasleekin Pazko-bildotsa jateko tokia » .
PRED:	And he will enter the house of the house and said , “ Teacher , the teachers of religious law will eat with the Passover meal . ”
GOLD:	At the house he enters , say to the owner , ‘ The Teacher asks : Where is the guest room where I can eat the Passover meal with my disciples ? '

ID:	3739
INPUT:	Uzielen semeak : Mixael , Eltzafan eta Si<unk> .
PRED:	These were the clans of the tribe of Reuben , Gad , and Shaul .
GOLD:	The sons of Uzziel were Mishael , Elzaphan , and Sithri .

ID:	3740
INPUT:	Zure etxekoren bat hirian hiltzen delarik , zakurrek jango dute ; landan hiltzen delarik , zeruko hegaztiek jango dute » .
PRED:	Those who die in your house will die in your house , and you will eat the birds of the sky . ”
GOLD:	The members of Baasha 's family who die in the city will be eaten by dogs , and those who die in the field will be eaten by vultures . ”

ID:	3741
INPUT:	Saul , beronen seme Jonatan eta biekin zen jendea Benjamingo Gibean zeuden ; filistearrak , berriz , Mikmasen , etxolatuak .
PRED:	Saul son of Saul and his army went to Gibeah , the Philistine army of Benjamin , but the Philistines had been killed .
GOLD:	Saul and Jonathan and the troops with them were staying at Geba in the land of Benjamin . The Philistines set up their camp at Micmash .

ID:	3742
INPUT:	Zanoahen , Adulamen eta inguruko herrixketan , Lakixen eta inguruetan , Azekan eta inguruetan . Beer-Xeba eta Hinom harana bitartean jarri ziren bizitzen .
PRED:	In the same day the people of Judah and their surrounding villages at Beth-shemesh , near the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and the valley of Ben-Hinnom , where the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and the valley of Ben-Hinnom , where the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and the valley of Ben-Hinnom .
GOLD:	Zanoah , and Adullam with their surrounding villages . They also lived in Lachish with its nearby fields and Azekah with its surrounding villages . So the people of Judah were living all the way from Beersheba in the south to the valley of Hinnom .

ID:	3743
INPUT:	Abiam , Judako errege
PRED:	Ahaziah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Abijam Rules in Judah

ID:	3744
INPUT:	Haien aurrean ikara dira herriak , zurbil jartzen aurpegi guztiak .
PRED:	All the nations run before him , and all the nations run before him .
GOLD:	Fear grips all the people ; every face grows pale with terror .

ID:	3745
INPUT:	Beste hau esan behar zenukete : « Jaunak nahi badu eta bizi bagara , hau eta bestea egingo dugu » .
PRED:	Then I said to them , “ If we want to live , we will live in this way , and we will live . ”
GOLD:	What you ought to say is , “ If the Lord wants us to , we will live and do this or that . ”

ID:	3746
INPUT:	« Ez zapaldu lagun hurkoa , ez larrutu . Ez utzi biharamuna arte ordaindu gabe langilearen lansaria .
PRED:	“ You must not covet your neighbor 's neighbors . You must not pay attention to the number of silver , but you must not pay attention to the number of silver .
GOLD:	“ Do not defraud or rob your neighbor . “ Do not make your hired workers wait until the next day to receive their pay .

ID:	3747
INPUT:	Handik Karmel mendira joan zen eta , gero , Samariara itzuli .
PRED:	After they went to Mount Carmel and returned to Carmel .
GOLD:	From there Elisha went to Mount Carmel and finally returned to Samaria .

ID:	3748
INPUT:	Hau esango dute : “ Ai Jaunaren ezpata ! Noiz hartu behar duzu atseden ? Bildu zorrora , zaude , gelditu ! ”
PRED:	They will say , ‘ How long will you catch up ? How long will you catch up ? How long will you catch up ? '
GOLD:	“ Now , O sword of the Lord , when will you be at rest again ? Go back into your sheath ; rest and be still .

ID:	3749
INPUT:	hau Xalumena , hau Tzadokena , hau Ahitubena ,
PRED:	Zadok son of Zadok was the court secretary , son of Zadok was the son of Zadok .
GOLD:	son of Shallum , son of Zadok , son of Ahitub ,

ID:	3750
INPUT:	Biltzarraren jardun-haria
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	Paul and Barnabas Separate

ID:	3751
INPUT:	« Horregatik diotsuet : Jainkoaren erreinua zuei kendu eta fruitua aterako dion herri bati emango zaio .
PRED:	“ Therefore , I tell you the truth , the Kingdom of Heaven will be given to you .
GOLD:	I tell you , the Kingdom of God will be taken away from you and given to a nation that will produce the proper fruit .

ID:	3752
INPUT:	Paulo berri onaren zerbitzari leial
PRED:	Paul 's Call to Repentance
GOLD:	Treasure in Fragile Clay Jars

ID:	3753
INPUT:	« Aita zuzen hori , munduak ez zaitu ezagutu ; nik , ordea , ezagutu zaitut , eta hauek jakin dute zuk bidali nauzula .
PRED:	“ Father , you have not been the world , but you have not sent me to you . But you have sent me , and you have sent me to you .
GOLD:	“ O righteous Father , the world does n't know you , but I do ; and these disciples know you sent me .

ID:	3754
INPUT:	Jesus preso hartu eta apaiz nagusiaren etxera eraman zuten . Pedrok urrutitik jarraitzen zion .
PRED:	Then Jesus took Peter and took him to the home of the high priest .
GOLD:	So they arrested him and led him to the high priest 's home . And Peter followed at a distance .

ID:	3755
INPUT:	Jaiki zaitez , Jauna ! Salba nazazu , ene Jainko ! Nire etsaiak masailean jotzen dituzu , gaizkileei hortzak hausten dizkiezu .
PRED:	Arise , O Lord ! Rescue me from my enemies ! Rescue me from my enemies !
GOLD:	Victory comes from you , O Lord.May you bless your people.Interlude

ID:	3756
INPUT:	Entzun , Jauna ! Erruki nitaz ! Jauna , zatozkit lagun ! »
PRED:	Hear me , O Lord , all you who fear me ! ”
GOLD:	You have turned my mourning into joyful dancing.You have taken away my clothes of mourning and clothed me with joy ,

ID:	3757
INPUT:	Pedrok galdetu zion : — Esadazu , honenbestean saldu al zenuten soroa ? — Bai , horrenbestean — erantzun zuen hark .
PRED:	Then Peter asked him , “ Is it the one who sold me ? ” “ Yes , ” he replied , “ Yes , it 's all ! ”
GOLD:	Peter asked her , “ Was this the price you and your husband received for your land ? ” “ Yes , ” she replied , “ that was the price . ”

ID:	3758
INPUT:	Josuek eta israeldar arduradunek jantziak urratu zituzten , buru gainera hautsa bota eta ahuspezturik egon ziren Jaunaren kutxa aurrean arratsa arte .
PRED:	So Joshua and the elders of Israel tore their clothes in burlap and put dust on their heads . They stood before the Ark of the Lord .
GOLD:	Joshua and the elders of Israel tore their clothing in dismay , threw dust on their heads , and bowed face down to the ground before the Ark of the Lord until evening .

ID:	3759
INPUT:	Baxango mendi , mendi gorena , gailur garaidun Baxango mendia ,
PRED:	The land of Bashan are the kings of Bashan ; the mountains of Bashan are covered with milk and honey .
GOLD:	Why do you look with envy , O rugged mountains , at Mount Zion , where God has chosen to live , where the Lord himself will live forever ?

ID:	3760
INPUT:	Fedea eta egintzak
PRED:	The Faith of Philip
GOLD:	Faith without Good Deeds Is Dead

ID:	3761
INPUT:	Barkamen-oparirako zekorra eta akerra , zeinen odola barkamen-ohikunea egiteko santutegira eramana izan baita , kanpalekutik aterako dituzte eta haien larru , haragi eta hesteak erreko .
PRED:	“ As a sin offering , the priest will offer a young bull for a sin offering and a burnt offering to the Lord , and he will remove all the pagan shrines and the fat around the camp .
GOLD:	“ The bull and the goat presented as sin offerings , whose blood Aaron takes into the Most Holy Place for the purification ceremony , will be carried outside the camp . The animals ' hides , internal organs , and dung are all to be burned .

ID:	3762
INPUT:	Baina bazen Gabaonen , Jaunaren egoitza aurrean , Uriren seme eta Hurren biloba Betzalelek egindako brontzezko aldare bat , eta bertan egin zioten kontsulta Jaunari Salomonek eta biltzar osoak .
PRED:	But there was a new place in the presence of the Lord , who had been made of bronze , a bronze grating for the entrance of the Temple of the Lord . Then Solomon returned to the entire assembly of the Lord and the entire community .
GOLD:	But the bronze altar made by Bezalel son of Uri and grandson of Hur was there at Gibeon in front of the Tabernacle of the Lord . So Solomon and the people gathered in front of it to consult the Lord .

ID:	3763
INPUT:	Ogi-irinaren katilua ez zen hustu , ezta oliontzia agortu ere , Jaunak Eliasen bidez esana zuen bezala .
PRED:	This was the Lord 's good deed ; he refused to obey the commands of Elijah , just as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	There was always enough flour and olive oil left in the containers , just as the Lord had promised through Elijah .

ID:	3764
INPUT:	Saiatu nintzen ulertzen begi aurreko arazo hori ,
PRED:	Instead , I am determined to understand how to understand what I am doing .
GOLD:	So I tried to understand why the wicked prosper.But what a difficult task it is !

ID:	3765
INPUT:	Nik esan nuen : « Ai ene , galdua naiz ! Ezpain kutsatuak baititut eta kutsaturiko ezpainak dituen herrian bizi bainaiz . Bekatari izanik , Errege eta Jaun ahalguztiduna ikusi baitut neure begiz » .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits me , ” I said , “ for I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . I will punish the people who are defiled by the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Then I said , “ It 's all over ! I am doomed , for I am a sinful man . I have filthy lips , and I live among a people with filthy lips . Yet I have seen the King , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . ”

ID:	3766
INPUT:	Gero , jaitsi ziren muinotik hirira , eta Samuel hizketan aritu zen Saulekin etxe gainean .
PRED:	Then Samuel went up to the hill country of Samuel , and Samuel went home with Samuel .
GOLD:	When they came down from the place of worship and returned to town , Samuel took Saul up to the roof of the house and prepared a bed for him there .

ID:	3767
INPUT:	Jerusalem inguratua eta askatua
PRED:	The Fall of Jerusalem
GOLD:	Future Deliverance for Jerusalem

ID:	3768
INPUT:	Hona arduradun hauen izenak : « Judaren leinutik , Jefuneren seme Kaleb ;
PRED:	These are the names of the tribes of Judah : “ The descendants of Caleb son of Jephunneh and Caleb son of Jephunneh .
GOLD:	These are the tribes and the names of the leaders : JudahCaleb son of Jephunneh

ID:	3769
INPUT:	Gizasemeak
PRED:	Young Woman
GOLD:	Young Woman

ID:	3770
INPUT:	Benjaminentzat esan zuen : « Seguru bizi daJaunaren leinu kutuna , Goi-goikoak babesten du egunero , beraren mendi gainean bizi da » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to them , “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : The Lord of Heaven 's Armies will live in the morning . ”
GOLD:	Moses said this about the tribe of Benjamin : “ The people of Benjamin are loved by the Lordand live in safety beside him.He surrounds them continuouslyand preserves them from every harm . ”

ID:	3771
INPUT:	Jaiki , egizu aiene gau osoan etengabe ; hustu ezazu bihotza Jaunaren aurrean ; jaso eskuak hari , kaleburu guztietangoseak hiltzen dauden zeure haurren alde otoika .
PRED:	Get up , my father , and listen to me . Let me go down to the Lord 's presence , for your children are dead , and your children are dead .
GOLD:	Rise during the night and cry out.Pour out your hearts like water to the Lord.Lift up your hands to him in prayer , pleading for your children , for in every streetthey are faint with hunger .

ID:	3772
INPUT:	( Mt 19 , 13-15 ; Mk 10 , 13-16 )
PRED:	Jesus Again Predicts His Death
GOLD:	The Rich Man

ID:	3773
INPUT:	Halakoaren etxera joatea heriotzarantz joatea da , beraren bideak ilunpeetara eramaten zaitu .
PRED:	Look at the door of the house of the house , where it is dark , and it leads to darkness .
GOLD:	Entering her house leads to death ; it is the road to the grave .

ID:	3774
INPUT:	Honek jaso , urrea urtu eta , zizelez landuz , zekor-irudia moldeatu zuen . Orduan , israeldarrek esan zuten : — Hau da zure jainkoa , Israel , Egiptotik atera zintuena !
PRED:	The gold altar was very gold , and he made a calf that was made from heaven , and he said , “ This is what the Lord says : The people of Israel have brought you out of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Then Aaron took the gold , melted it down , and molded it into the shape of a calf . When the people saw it , they exclaimed , “ O Israel , these are the gods who brought you out of the land of Egypt ! ”

ID:	3775
INPUT:	Norbaitek esan dezake egia dela ez natzaizuela nekagarri gertatu , baina , begi argikoa naizenez , engainuz harrapatu zaituztedala .
PRED:	If someone claims to say , “ I 'm not trying to tell you what I have done to you , but I 'm not trying to do what I have done . ”
GOLD:	Some of you admit I was not a burden to you . But others still think I was sneaky and took advantage of you by trickery .

ID:	3776
INPUT:	Hau entzutean , harritu egin zen Jesus eta ondoren zetozkionei esan zien : « Benetan diotsuet : Israel guztian ez dut aurkitu horrelako sinestedunik .
PRED:	When Jesus heard this , he turned around and said , “ I tell you the truth , I tell you the truth , I tell you the truth , I wo n't believe that you have faith in Israel .
GOLD:	When Jesus heard this , he was amazed . Turning to those who were following him , he said , “ I tell you the truth , I have n't seen faith like this in all Israel !

ID:	3777
INPUT:	Jaunak gidatuko zaitu beti , basamorturik gorrienean ereasebetekoeta zure gorputza indarberrituko . Ongi bustiriko baratze izango zara , agortzen ez den iturburu .
PRED:	The Lord will punish you in the wilderness , and he will bring you into the wilderness . Then he will put you into a pot with fresh water , and he will cover you with fresh water .
GOLD:	The Lord will guide you continually , giving you water when you are dryand restoring your strength.You will be like a well-watered garden , like an ever-flowing spring .

ID:	3778
INPUT:	« Hurbilarazi Aaron eta beronen semeak elkarketa-etxolaren sarrerara eta garbi daitezela urez .
PRED:	“ Next Aaron and the sons of Aaron and the sons of Aaron and his sons must go into the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ Present Aaron and his sons at the entrance of the Tabernacle , and wash them with water .

ID:	3779
INPUT:	Jakingo dute hori kanaandarrek eta lurralde honetako beste bizilagunek , altxatuko dira gure kontra eta gure oroitzapena ere desagerrarazi egingo dute lurrazaletik . Zer eginen duzu , orduan , zeure izen handiaren alde ?
PRED:	But you will know that the land of Egypt will become like a prostitute , and you will bring us back to your land . Why did you bring us out of this land ? Why did you bring us out of the land ? ”
GOLD:	For when the Canaanites and all the other people living in the land hear about it , they will surround us and wipe our name off the face of the earth . And then what will happen to the honor of your great name ? ”

ID:	3780
INPUT:	Adar-hots luzea entzun bezain laster , herri osoak irrintzi handia egingo du eta hiriko harresia behera etorriko da . Orduan , eraso diezaiola jende guztiak , nork bere aurrean izango duen tartetik »
PRED:	Listen to the sound of the sound of the sound of loud thunder , and the whole town will be called out to the city gate , and all the people will stand before him . ”
GOLD:	When you hear the priests give one long blast on the rams ' horns , have all the people shout as loud as they can . Then the walls of the town will collapse , and the people can charge straight into the town . ”

ID:	3781
INPUT:	Gure aita Davidek izan zuen Jaunarentzat , Israelen Jainkoarentzat , tenplua eraikitzeko asmoa .
PRED:	David wanted to build the Temple of the Lord , the God of Israel , to build the Temple of the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	Then Solomon said , “ My father , David , wanted to build this Temple to honor the name of the Lord , the God of Israel .

ID:	3782
INPUT:	Mutzritik ekarritako guda-gurdi batek zilarrezko seiehun txanpon balio zuen , eta zaldi batek ehun eta berrogeita hamar . Salomonen merkatariek hititen eta aramearren errege guztientzat ekarri ohi zituzten halakoak .
PRED:	All of Egypt 's horses were silver , silver , silver , and gold . All the horses were paid to King Solomon 's traders , and all the kings of Egypt .
GOLD:	At that time chariots from Egypt could be purchased for 600 pieces of silver , and horses for 150 pieces of silver . They were then exported to the kings of the Hittites and the kings of Aram .

ID:	3783
INPUT:	Morroi eta mirabeei ereneure espiritua isuriko dietegun haietan .
PRED:	He will take my servant in his own household , and he will feed them in his own household .
GOLD:	I will gather the armies of the worldinto the valley of Jehoshaphat.There I will judge themfor harming my people , my special possession , for scattering my people among the nations , and for dividing up my land .

ID:	3784
INPUT:	Nire herriko gizagaixoenek ereizango dute non bazkatu , behartsuek lasaihartuko dute atseden ; filistearrak , ordea , goseak hilaraziko ditut , bat bakarrik ereez da bizirik geldituko .
PRED:	My people will be sick in the land , but they will be scattered by the Philistines , but they will die in peace . But I will never be destroyed , but I will never die .
GOLD:	I will feed the poor in my pasture ; the needy will lie down in peace.But as for you , I will wipe you out with famineand destroy the few who remain .

ID:	3785
INPUT:	Eta ilberri oro eta larunbateronire aurrean ahuspezteraetorriko dira gizaki guztiak . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	Then I will again bow before the Sabbath day and bow down before the Sabbath days of the festival , says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ All humanity will come to worship mefrom week to weekand from month to month .

ID:	3786
INPUT:	Libnakoa , Adulamgoa ,
PRED:	The king of Elam
GOLD:	The king of LibnahThe king of Adullam

ID:	3787
INPUT:	— Jauna , gizaki orori bizi-arnasa ematen diozun Jainkoa , izendatu elkartearen buru izango den norbait ,
PRED:	“ Lord , God , give you the life of life , and he will give you a piece of bread . ”
GOLD:	“ O Lord , you are the God who gives breath to all creatures . Please appoint a new man as leader for the community .

ID:	3788
INPUT:	Bi ume ari zitzaizkion sabelean elkarren lehian . Rebekak zioen berekiko : « Zergatik gertatu zait gero niri horrelakorik ? » Jaunarengana jo zuen argitasun eske ,
PRED:	When Isaac 's two sons were there , she told her , “ Why did this happen to me ? ” And she asked her , “ Why did I look for the Lord ? ”
GOLD:	But the two children struggled with each other in her womb . So she went to ask the Lord about it . “ Why is this happening to me ? ” she asked .

ID:	3789
INPUT:	Josuek bidali egin zuen herria , eta israeldarrak nor bere lurraldearen jabetza hartzera joan ziren .
PRED:	So Joshua sent the people of Israel to explore the land , and they returned to their own land .
GOLD:	After Joshua sent the people away , each of the tribes left to take possession of the land allotted to them .

ID:	3790
INPUT:	Eta honako promes hau egin zion Jaunari : « Amondarrak eskura ematen badizkidazu ,
PRED:	Then he said to the Lord , “ If you give me victory over the Ammonites , I will give you victory over the Ammonites .
GOLD:	And Jephthah made a vow to the Lord . He said , “ If you give me victory over the Ammonites ,

ID:	3791
INPUT:	Izan ere , ez zieten israeldarrei lagundu ogia eta ura emanez . Moabdarrek Balaam erosi zuten , israeldarrak madarika zitzan ; baina gure Jainkoak madarikazioa bedeinkapen bihurtu zuen .
PRED:	But the people of Israel did n't realize that the people of Moab had been too hard to curse the people of Moab . But the people of Israel had become a curse , but God blessed them .
GOLD:	For they had not provided the Israelites with food and water in the wilderness . Instead , they hired Balaam to curse them , though our God turned the curse into a blessing .

ID:	3792
INPUT:	Ondoren , Pisidian barrena , Panfiliara iritsi ziren .
PRED:	Then we went on to the region of Cilicia , we landed at the port near the province of Asia .
GOLD:	Then they traveled back through Pisidia to Pamphylia .

ID:	3793
INPUT:	Moisesek Josue bere ondorengo izendatu
PRED:	Joshua Chosen to Lead Israel
GOLD:	Public Reading of the Book of Instruction

ID:	3794
INPUT:	Kafarnaumen sartu ziren . Eta , larunbatean sinagogara joanik , irakasten hasi zen Jesus .
PRED:	As soon as they entered Capernaum , Jesus went into the synagogue , and he went to Capernaum .
GOLD:	Jesus and his companions went to the town of Capernaum . When the Sabbath day came , he went into the synagogue and began to teach .

ID:	3795
INPUT:	Egiptotik atera den herriak lurralde osoa estali du . Zatoz berehala herri hori madarikatzera ; beharbada , borrokatu ahal izango dut eta bota .
PRED:	So the people of Egypt will come out of Egypt , and I will send them out of the land of Egypt . I will drive them out of the land of Egypt , and I will drive them out of Egypt .
GOLD:	‘ Look , a vast horde of people has arrived from Egypt , and they cover the face of the earth . Come and curse these people for me . Then perhaps I will be able to stand up to them and drive them from the land . ' ”

ID:	3796
INPUT:	Baina alarguntsak semeak nahiz bilobak baditu , hauek ikasi behar dute lehenik beren etxekoenganako eginbeharrak betetzen eta gurasoei zor dietena itzultzen , hori baitu atsegin Jainkoak .
PRED:	But if the poor and their children have sold themselves to their relatives , they must pay attention to their pay attention to the Temple of God . They have returned to their ancestors , for they have returned to their God .
GOLD:	But if she has children or grandchildren , their first responsibility is to show godliness at home and repay their parents by taking care of them . This is something that pleases God .

ID:	3797
INPUT:	bata iparraldean zegoen , Mikmasen aurrean ; bestea hegoaldean , Gebaren aurrean .
PRED:	From the north on the north side of the north , on the south side of the Jordan Valley .
GOLD:	The cliff on the north was in front of Micmash , and the one on the south was in front of Geba .

ID:	3798
INPUT:	Jesusen ondora iristean , han ikusi zuten deabruduna , eserita , jantzirik eta bere onean , lehen deabru-taldearen menpe zegoen huraxe bera , eta biziki izutu ziren .
PRED:	When Jesus arrived at the city , he saw the devil and put him in his clothes and put him on the head of the devil . And when they arrived , they took him to the statue of the devil .
GOLD:	A crowd soon gathered around Jesus , and they saw the man who had been possessed by the legion of demons . He was sitting there fully clothed and perfectly sane , and they were all afraid .

ID:	3799
INPUT:	Gainera , nik , zure zerbitzari honek , neure gain hartua dut mutikoaren erantzukizuna ; hitza eman nion aitari ; berekiko errudun izango nintzateke betiko , itzuliko ez banio .
PRED:	And I have given my servant to you , my servant , my servant , and I would not be guilty of any kind . I would not be guilty of any kind . I would not be guilty of any kind .
GOLD:	My lord , I guaranteed to my father that I would take care of the boy . I told him , ‘ If I do n't bring him back to you , I will bear the blame forever . '

ID:	3800
INPUT:	Betozkie gainera txingar goriak , a<unk> bitez leize sakonera , eta gehiago jaiki ez !
PRED:	Come , let 's weep and sing for joy , for I will weep for you , too , and pay attention to your word .
GOLD:	Do n't let liars prosper here in our land.Cause great disasters to fall on the violent .

ID:	3801
INPUT:	Zoazte Kalne hirira eta begira , hurbil zaitezte handikHamat handira , eta jaitsi hortik Filisteako Gat-era . Erresuma horiek baino hobeaote da zuena ? Zuen lurraldeahoriena baino zabalagoa ote ?
PRED:	“ Go down to the city of Hamath and the great army of Hamath , and the five of the Philistine army of Jezreel . Why did you go to war ? Why are you going to war ? ”
GOLD:	But go over to Calnehand see what happened there.Then go to the great city of Hamathand down to the Philistine city of Gath.You are no better than they were , and look at how they were destroyed .

ID:	3802
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin ez zaiona egin zuen , Nebaten seme Jeroboamek Israeli eginarazi zizkion bekatuetatik aldendu gabe .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , following the example of Jeroboam son of Nebat , the example of Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel to commit .
GOLD:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight . He refused to turn from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel to commit .

ID:	3803
INPUT:	Etorri zen Nikodemo ere — behin batean gauez Jesus ikustera joan zen hura — hogeita hamarren bat kiloko mirra- eta aloe-nahastura zekarrela .
PRED:	One day Jesus went out to the synagogue , but he did n't visit his brother ( which means “ Teacher ' ) , a man named Simon ( which means ‘ I 'm going to meet ) .
GOLD:	With him came Nicodemus , the man who had come to Jesus at night . He brought about seventy-five pounds of perfumed ointment made from myrrh and aloes .

ID:	3804
INPUT:	Jaelen oinetara makurtu zen , erori eta lurrean gelditu zerraldo . Beraren oinetaramakurtu zen tokianerori zen hi<unk> .
PRED:	When Jacob arrived at home , he took his staff and took it to the ground , and he stooped and looked at his feet .
GOLD:	He sank , he fell , he lay still at her feet.And where he sank , there he died .

ID:	3805
INPUT:	Harresia , E<unk> hilaren hogeita bostean bukatu zen , hasi eta berrogeita hamabi egunera .
PRED:	At that time the Jews began to speak , and they began to curse them .
GOLD:	So on October 2 the wall was finished — just fifty-two days after we had begun .

ID:	3806
INPUT:	Hizketa arrotzez mintzo denak , beraz , eska biezaio Jainkoari esaten duena argitzeko dohaina ere .
PRED:	So if you are willing to speak in tongues , you will be able to speak with words , and you will understand what you say .
GOLD:	So anyone who speaks in tongues should pray also for the ability to interpret what has been said .

ID:	3807
INPUT:	« Ez eman aurrerantzean israeldarrei adreiluak egiteko lastorik , orain arte bezala ; doazela beraiek lasto bila .
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel , just as they were scattered through the Nile River , so you can know that you are like straw .
GOLD:	“ Do not supply any more straw for making bricks . Make the people get it themselves !

ID:	3808
INPUT:	Konbertsiorako deia
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	A Call to Repentance

ID:	3809
INPUT:	Nire gauza santuak mespretxatzen dira , nire larunbata hausten .
PRED:	I despise my sanctuary , and they keep my Sabbath ; they despise me .
GOLD:	You despise my holy things and violate my Sabbath days of rest .

ID:	3810
INPUT:	Egun hartan , agindu hau eman zion Moisesek herriari :
PRED:	That same day Moses told the people ,
GOLD:	That same day Moses also gave this charge to the people :

ID:	3811
INPUT:	Baina israeldar lehen-semeen ordez lebitarrak hartu ditut
PRED:	But now I have given the Levites to the Levites ,
GOLD:	Yes , I have claimed the Levites in place of all the firstborn sons of Israel .

ID:	3812
INPUT:	laurehun granada-fruitu , bi sareetan ezartzeko , bina lerro sare bakoitzean , zutabeburuetan zeuden kapiteletako bi bolak apaintzeko ;
PRED:	decorated the pomegranates along the hem of the hem of the pomegranates along the hem of the capitals , two rows of pomegranates to decorate the capitals on the pillars .
GOLD:	the 400 pomegranates that hung from the chains on the capitals ( two rows of pomegranates for each of the chain networks that decorated the capitals on top of the pillars ) ;

ID:	3813
INPUT:	Parabola-hitzaldia ( 4 , 1-34 )
PRED:	Parable of the Temple
GOLD:	Parable of the Farmer Scattering Seed

ID:	3814
INPUT:	Han zeudenetako batzuek , ahotsa entzunik , trumoia izan zela zioten ; beste batzuek , ordea , aingeru batek hitz egin ziola .
PRED:	There were a voice standing there , but the voice of the thunder appeared to him . But one of them spoke to him , but the angel spoke to him .
GOLD:	When the crowd heard the voice , some thought it was thunder , while others declared an angel had spoken to him .

ID:	3815
INPUT:	Jeremias profetaren otoitza
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Complaint
GOLD:	Jeremiah 's Prayer

ID:	3816
INPUT:	Zuk , gure Jainko horrek , bota zenituen lurralde honetako herriak zure herri Israel sartu ahala , eta zeure adiskide Abrahamen ondorengoei eman zenien betiko .
PRED:	O our God , the God of your people , your descendants , your descendants , Isaac , and Jacob — your descendants — your descendants , Isaac , and Jacob .
GOLD:	O our God , did you not drive out those who lived in this land when your people Israel arrived ? And did you not give this land forever to the descendants of your friend Abraham ?

ID:	3817
INPUT:	Goizean atera zen Jehu kanpora eta , zutik , esan zion jendeari : — Zuek errugabe zarete . Ni ibili nintzen azpilanean Israelgo errege Joramen aurka , eta nik hil nuen . Baina nork hil ditu hauek guztiak ?
PRED:	Suddenly , Jehu shouted out to the crowd and said , “ You are my lord the king , but you did n't kill me , but you killed all the kings of Israel . Why did you kill me ? Why did you kill me ? ”
GOLD:	In the morning he went out and spoke to the crowd that had gathered around them . “ You are not to blame , ” he told them . “ I am the one who conspired against my master and killed him . But who killed all these ?

ID:	3818
INPUT:	Ezkondua zarela ? Ez ibili banandu nahian . Ezkongabea zarela ? Ez hasi emazte bila .
PRED:	Do n't you realize that we are married ? Are n't we trying to marry her ? Of course not ! ”
GOLD:	If you have a wife , do not seek to end the marriage . If you do not have a wife , do not seek to get married .

ID:	3819
INPUT:	Ilunabarrean , joan zen Jesus Hamabiekin
PRED:	So Jesus went on , and he went with the Twelve .
GOLD:	In the evening Jesus arrived with the Twelve .

ID:	3820
INPUT:	Neurria hartzerakoan , ordea , ez zuen sobera asko bildu zuenak , ez eta eskas gutxi bildu zuenak ere . Bakoitzak jateko behar adina zuen .
PRED:	The Lord has given you great strength , and he has not given you a large harvest , and he will have no need to need .
GOLD:	But when they measured it out , everyone had just enough . Those who gathered a lot had nothing left over , and those who gathered only a little had enough . Each family had just what it needed .

ID:	3821
INPUT:	Orduan , joan eta beste zazpi espiritu hartzen ditu berekin , bera baino gaiztoagoak , eta gizakiagan sartu eta bertan jartzen da bizitzen ; horrela , pertsona horren azken egoera lehengoa baino okerragoa gertatzen da . Gauza bera gertatuko zaio gizaldi gaizto honi ere » .
PRED:	Then the spirit finds seven times more evil than seven times , and the evil spirit finds that the spirit of the wicked will be changed into sin , and it will be changed to the end of this evil generation . ”
GOLD:	Then the spirit finds seven other spirits more evil than itself , and they all enter the person and live there . And so that person is worse off than before . That will be the experience of this evil generation . ”

ID:	3822
INPUT:	Berak atera gaitu ilunpearen menpetik eta bere Seme maitearen erreinura aldatu ;
PRED:	He led us out of the darkness , and he loves his Son .
GOLD:	For he has rescued us from the kingdom of darkness and transferred us into the Kingdom of his dear Son ,

ID:	3823
INPUT:	Gauza hauetaz ez dugu giza jakinduriak irakatsitako hizkeraz hitz egiten , Espirituak irakatsitakoaz baizik , espirituzko gaiak Espiritua hartu duten gizon-emakumeei adieraziz .
PRED:	We do n't understand these things , but we are talking about the Spirit that the Spirit speaks through the Spirit of the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	When we tell you these things , we do not use words that come from human wisdom . Instead , we speak words given to us by the Spirit , using the Spirit 's words to explain spiritual truths .

ID:	3824
INPUT:	Eta beste hau ere badio : Jauna , hasieratik sendo ezarri zenuen lurra , zure eskuek egina da zerua ;
PRED:	And this is what the Lord says : “ Look , the heavens above the earth , and the stars are in heaven .
GOLD:	He also says to the Son , “ In the beginning , Lord , you laid the foundation of the earthand made the heavens with your hands .

ID:	3825
INPUT:	Orduan , esan nien : “ Zer da zuek joaten zareteneko muino hori ? ” Eta “ Muino ” — sasikultu-leku — deitu izan dute gaur arte .
PRED:	Then I said , ‘ What did you go to the hills ? ' And why did the hills say , ‘ Why did the hills be called today ? '
GOLD:	I said to them , ‘ What is this high place where you are going ? ' ( This kind of pagan shrine has been called Bamah — ‘ high place ' — ever since . )

ID:	3826
INPUT:	Entzun sorrarazi zintuen aitari , ez mespretxatu ama , zahartu egin dela eta .
PRED:	“ Listen to what you have said , ‘ You must not despise the proud . '
GOLD:	Listen to your father , who gave you life , and do n't despise your mother when she is old .

ID:	3827
INPUT:	Eskatzen dizunari eman , eta dirua uzteko eskatzen dizunari ez ukatu .
PRED:	If you ask for a hand , you wo n't pay attention to what you ask .
GOLD:	Give to those who ask , and do n't turn away from those who want to borrow .

ID:	3828
INPUT:	Baina Jainkoak bere tokia jarri zion atal bakoitzari gorputzean , berak nahi bezala .
PRED:	But God gave his body to each of his body as his body , as members of his body .
GOLD:	But our bodies have many parts , and God has put each part just where he wants it .

ID:	3829
INPUT:	Ai ene ! Hobe nuen atzerrian urruti bizi izan banintz , Mexeken edo Kedarko oihal-etxoletan !
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who lived in the land of the Babylonians , who lived in the tents of Kedar , the tents of Kedar , and the half-tribe of Manasseh .
GOLD:	How I suffer in far-off Meshech.It pains me to live in distant Kedar .

ID:	3830
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak zuen arbasoak bakarrik izan zituen atsegin eta maite , eta segidan zuek , haien ondorengoak , hautatu zintuzten herri guztien artean , gaur egun gertatzen denez .
PRED:	But the Lord made a covenant with the ancestors , and he loved you and gave you rest to the descendants of all the descendants of Israel . That is why I am giving you today .
GOLD:	Yet the Lord chose your ancestors as the objects of his love . And he chose you , their descendants , above all other nations , as is evident today .

ID:	3831
INPUT:	Leize-zulo sakona emagalduaren ahoa ; bertara amilduko Jaunak gaitzetsia .
PRED:	The grave will be destroyed , and the grave will be destroyed by the sword of the grave .
GOLD:	The mouth of an immoral woman is a dangerous trap ; those who make the Lord angry will fall into it .

ID:	3832
INPUT:	Aztertu dut neure jokabidea , eta neure pausoak zure xedapenetara nahi ditut bideratu .
PRED:	I will go to the land of the earth , and I will send down my enemies .
GOLD:	I pondered the direction of my life , and I turned to follow your laws .

ID:	3833
INPUT:	23 , 9
PRED:	Parable of the Lost Sheep
GOLD:	The Festival of Trumpets

ID:	3834
INPUT:	Ezkututik daude zelatan , nondik nora nabilen begira , niri bizia kentzeko zain .
PRED:	They are so far from the road , where we are looking for life to life .
GOLD:	Do n't let them get away with their wickedness ; in your anger , O God , bring them down .

ID:	3835
INPUT:	Izan ere , barrua samindu zioten , eta hark zentzugabe hitz egin .
PRED:	For they kept praying to him , and he spoke to them .
GOLD:	They made Moses angry , and he spoke foolishly .

ID:	3836
INPUT:	Bizia da Jainkoaren hitza , bizia eta eragin handikoa , aho biko ezpata bera baino sarkorragoa : gogo eta espirituaren sakon-sakoneraino sartzen da , pertsonaren zokorik ezkutueneraino , eta barneko pentsamendu eta asmo guztiak miatzen ditu .
PRED:	This is the word of God and the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of his holy people , and he will put them on his sword . He will not permit them to keep his promises to anyone else .
GOLD:	For the word of God is alive and powerful . It is sharper than the sharpest two-edged sword , cutting between soul and spirit , between joint and marrow . It exposes our innermost thoughts and desires .

ID:	3837
INPUT:	Noiz arte , Jauna ? Betiko al zaude ezkutuan ? Betiko al dago zure haserrea su eta gar ?
PRED:	O Lord , how long will you see ? How long will you be angry ? How long will you be angry ?
GOLD:	Remember how short my life is , how empty and futile this human existence !

ID:	3838
INPUT:	Baina salatzaileak aurkeztu zirenean , ez zioten nik uste nuen okerrik batere leporatu .
PRED:	But when I discovered it , I did n't find it , I did n't find it .
GOLD:	But the accusations made against him were n't any of the crimes I expected .

ID:	3839
INPUT:	Ahimaatzek esan zion oihuka erregeari : — Agur , jauna ! Eta , erregearen aurrean lurreraino ahuspeztuz , jarraitu zuen : — Bedeinkatua Jauna , zure Jainkoa , menderatu baititu ene errege jaunaren kontra jaiki ziren gizonak !
PRED:	Then the king said to the king , “ Go and worship the king ! ” So the king bowed low before the ground before the Lord , and the king bowed down to the ground before him .
GOLD:	Then Ahimaaz cried out to the king , “ Everything is all right ! ” He bowed before the king with his face to the ground and said , “ Praise to the Lord your God , who has handed over the rebels who dared to stand against my lord the king . ”

ID:	3840
INPUT:	Zoko ilunetan pilaturiko altxorrak , ongi gorderiko ondasunakemango dizkizut . Horrela jakingo duzuneu naizela Jauna , Israelen Jainkoa , zeure izenez dei egiten dizuna .
PRED:	I will give you a long life in the treasury . I will give you the wealth I give you . Then you will know that I am the Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	And I will give you treasures hidden in the darkness — secret riches.I will do this so you may know that I am the Lord , the God of Israel , the one who calls you by name .

ID:	3841
INPUT:	« Orain , bada , nik , Jaun ahalguztidun honek , Israelen Jainkoak , galdetzen dizuet : Zergatik nahi duzue zeuen buruen galbide izaten jarraitu eta , horrela , Judako gizon eta emakumeak , umetxo eta bularreko haurrak suntsiarazi eta zeuen herria bizilagunik gabe utzi ?
PRED:	“ So now , this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : Why do you think you want to live in Judah ? Why have you abandoned your children and children ? Why have you abandoned your children and children ?
GOLD:	“ And now the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , asks you : Why are you destroying yourselves ? For not one of you will survive — not a man , woman , or child among you who has come here from Judah , not even the babies in your arms .

ID:	3842
INPUT:	Hilkias apaizak Jaunaren etxean aurkitu zuen lege-liburuko aginduak betez , Josiasek desagerrarazi egin zituen Jerusalemdik eta Juda lurralde osotik hildakoen espirituei dei egiten zieten guztiak eta igarleak ; eta etxe-jainkoen irudiak , idoloak eta irudi nazkagarriak hautsi egin zituen .
PRED:	When Josiah had finished speaking to the Temple of the Lord , he told them everything he had done in Jerusalem and had done to the people of Judah and Jerusalem , he destroyed all the pagan shrines and from the pagan shrines .
GOLD:	Josiah also got rid of the mediums and psychics , the household gods , the idols , and every other kind of detestable practice , both in Jerusalem and throughout the land of Judah . He did this in obedience to the laws written in the scroll that Hilkiah the priest had found in the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	3843
INPUT:	Hauen ordez , Roboamek brontzezko babeskiak egin eta jauregiko sarrera zaintzen zuen taldearen buru zirenei utzi zizkien .
PRED:	But Rehoboam also made a bronze bronze rings and attached them to the entrance of the guard .
GOLD:	King Rehoboam later replaced them with bronze shields as substitutes , and he entrusted them to the care of the commanders of the guard who protected the entrance to the royal palace .

ID:	3844
INPUT:	ez diot neure ahoari bekatu egiten utzi , harentzako heriotza eskatuz .
PRED:	I will not turn away from my presence , for I have given them my death .
GOLD:	No , I have never sinned by cursing anyoneor by asking for revenge .

ID:	3845
INPUT:	Baina zuek eta zuen seme-alabak niregandik urruntzen bazarete , nik eman dizkizuedan agindu eta legeak betetzen ez badituzue , beste jainko batzuk zerbitzatzera jo eta haien aurrean ahuspezten bazarete ,
PRED:	But if you follow me and obey my commands , you must follow my commands and decrees and regulations , and if you refuse to serve other gods and worship other gods and worship other gods , then you will bow down to worship other gods .
GOLD:	“ But if you or your descendants abandon me and disobey the commands and decrees I have given you , and if you serve and worship other gods ,

ID:	3846
INPUT:	Ilea motz-motz egingo du nazireuak elkarketa-etxolako sarreran eta bere sagarapenaren ezaugarri duen ile moztua elkartasun-oparia erretzen deneko sutara botako du .
PRED:	The priest must then present the oil to the entrance of the Tabernacle , including the guilt offering and the guilt offering . It must be a special offering for the guilt offering .
GOLD:	“ Then the Nazirites will shave their heads at the entrance of the Tabernacle . They will take the hair that had been dedicated and place it on the fire beneath the peace-offering sacrifice .

ID:	3847
INPUT:	Moisesek Jaunari aurkeztu zion arazoa ,
PRED:	Then Moses gave the following instructions to the Lord .
GOLD:	So Moses brought their case before the Lord .

ID:	3848
INPUT:	adinekoek izaten dute jakinduria , urtetan aurreratuek zuhurtzia .
PRED:	Wise words are wise in knowledge , but wisdom is wise .
GOLD:	Wisdom belongs to the aged , and understanding to the old .

ID:	3849
INPUT:	Jakobek hamabi semeak bedeinkatu
PRED:	Jacob Blesses Jacob
GOLD:	Jacob 's Last Words to His Sons

ID:	3850
INPUT:	« Egun hartan ez duzu gehiagolotsatu beharrik izangonire aurka egin dituzunerrebeldiengatik . Izan ere , erronka harroakahotik kenduko dizkizut , eta ez zara harrezkero harropuztukonire mendi santuan .
PRED:	“ In that day you will not be ashamed of me because you have rejected me because I have not sinned against you . I will not drive you out of my holy mountain , and I will destroy you with great authority .
GOLD:	On that day you will no longer need to be ashamed , for you will no longer be rebels against me.I will remove all proud and arrogant people from among you.There will be no more haughtiness on my holy mountain .

ID:	3851
INPUT:	Poz gaitezen eta egin festa , eman diezaiogun aintza , heldu baitira Bildotsaren ezteiak . Apaindurik dagoberaren emaztegaia :
PRED:	Let us be glad and rejoice , for the glorious presence of the Lamb has arrived at the wedding feast in the Lamb .
GOLD:	Let us be glad and rejoice , and let us give honor to him.For the time has come for the wedding feast of the Lamb , and his bride has prepared herself .

ID:	3852
INPUT:	Hartu zuen , orduan , Samuelek oliontzia eta Sauli burura isuri zion ; gero , besarkatuz , esan zion : « Hara , Jaunak bere herri Israelen buruzagi gantzutu zaitu .
PRED:	So Samuel took the head of Saul , and he said to him , “ The Lord has made you ruler over all Israel ! ”
GOLD:	Then Samuel took a flask of olive oil and poured it over Saul 's head . He kissed Saul and said , “ I am doing this because the Lord has appointed you to be the ruler over Israel , his special possession .

ID:	3853
INPUT:	Lekuko egiazaleak biziak salbatzen ditu , iruzurtiak gezurra barra-barra .
PRED:	A false witness makes a person ceremonially unclean , but a false person is broken .
GOLD:	A truthful witness saves lives , but a false witness is a traitor .

ID:	3854
INPUT:	Biharamun goizean Tekoako basamorturantz abiatu ziren . Ateratzean , Josafat zutitu eta honela mintzatu zitzaien : « Entzun , Juda eta Jerusalemgo gizonok . Izan uste on Jaunarengan , zeuen Jainkoarengan , eta seguru izango zarete . Izan konfiantza beraren profetengan , eta garaile aterako zarete ! »
PRED:	The next morning King Jehoshaphat went up to the wilderness of Terah , and he said to Jehoshaphat , “ Listen to this message from the Lord your God , and you will be a prophet in Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	Early the next morning the army of Judah went out into the wilderness of Tekoa . On the way Jehoshaphat stopped and said , “ Listen to me , all you people of Judah and Jerusalem ! Believe in the Lord your God , and you will be able to stand firm . Believe in his prophets , and you will succeed . ”

ID:	3855
INPUT:	eta apaizen gelen artean hamar metroko hutsartea zegoen , tenpluaren inguru guztian .
PRED:	The inner courtyard of the Temple was built on the north side of the Temple . The inner courtyard was also built on the north side of the Temple .
GOLD:	and the row of rooms along the outer wall of the inner courtyard . This open area was 35 feet wide , and it went all the way around the Temple .

ID:	3856
INPUT:	Emakumeei dagokienez , dabiltzala egoki jantzita , lotsaz eta eratsu atondurik ; ez daitezela apain orrazkera nabarmenez , urrez , harribitxiz edota soineko aberatsez ,
PRED:	She is clothed with beautiful women , clothed with beautiful clothes and beautiful clothes . She is clothed with beautiful , purple , and scarlet thread , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	And I want women to be modest in their appearance . They should wear decent and appropriate clothing and not draw attention to themselves by the way they fix their hair or by wearing gold or pearls or expensive clothes .

ID:	3857
INPUT:	« Zuk ematen al diozu zaldiari azkartasuna , zuk janzten ote lepoa ile-zurdaz ?
PRED:	“ Have you given me the finest of olive oil ? Why are you so sad ?
GOLD:	“ Have you given the horse its strengthor clothed its neck with a flowing mane ?

ID:	3858
INPUT:	Baina batez ere , senideok , ez egin zinik , ez zeruarengatik , ez lurrarengatik , ezta beste edozergatik ere . Zuek esan « bai » , bai denean , eta « ez » , ez denean , Jainkoak kondena ez zaitzaten .
PRED:	But not , dear brothers and sisters , do n't mourn for the sake of heaven or other nations , for they would not say , “ Your servants , and your servants are saying , ‘ We are not worthy of any other . ' ”
GOLD:	But most of all , my brothers and sisters , never take an oath , by heaven or earth or anything else . Just say a simple yes or no , so that you will not sin and be condemned .

ID:	3859
INPUT:	Zure borreroei emango diet , zuri esaten zizutenei : “ Etzan lurrean , gainetik igaro gaitezen ! ” Eta bizkarraeskaini behar izan zenien , zoru eta kale gisa , gainetik igaro zitezen » .
PRED:	I will give you the following armies to your allies . They will say to you , ‘ Bring them on the ground , and pour out the blood on the ground . ' So I will make them a piece of bread . ”
GOLD:	Instead , I will hand that cup to your tormentors , those who said , ‘ We will trample you into the dustand walk on your backs . ' ”

ID:	3860
INPUT:	Harpe hau Makpela soroan dago , Mambre parean . Abrahamek hilobitarako erosia zion , soro eta guzti , Efron hititari .
PRED:	So Abraham bought the cave in the field of Machpelah , near Mamre ( also called Hebron ) , and Mamre .
GOLD:	This is the cave in the field of Machpelah , near Mamre in Canaan , that Abraham bought from Ephron the Hittite as a permanent burial site .

ID:	3861
INPUT:	Behinola esan zion amari : — Oroitzen al zara nola ostu zizkizuten zilarrezko mila eta ehun txanpon ? Madarikazioa bota zenuen orduan nire aurrean . Begira , neuk ditut txanpon haiek , neuk ostu bainizkizun . Tori dirua ! Amak esan zion : — Bedeinka zaitzala Jaunak , ene seme !
PRED:	“ Do you realize that I had a gift to you ? ” they demanded . “ Do you realize that I was a widow ? ” And the Lord told him , “ I am a member of my family , and I have been very angry with you ! ” And the Lord said , “ Yes , I will bless you ! ”
GOLD:	One day he said to his mother , “ I heard you place a curse on the person who stole 1,100 pieces of silver from you . Well , I have the money . I was the one who took it . ” “ The Lord bless you for admitting it , ” his mother replied .

ID:	3862
INPUT:	Gaizkilea onik irteten da hondamendikoan , babesean egoten zigor-egunean .
PRED:	The violence of the wicked will be destroyed , and the day of disaster will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Evil people are spared in times of calamityand are allowed to escape disaster .

ID:	3863
INPUT:	Hamar egun ingururen buruan , heriotzaz jo zuen Jaunak Nabal eta hil egin zen .
PRED:	After that , the Lord struck him on his head , and he died .
GOLD:	About ten days later , the Lord struck him , and he died .

ID:	3864
INPUT:	Denboralditxo bat iragan ondoren , nagusiaren emazteak , Joserengan begiak jarri eta esan zion : — Zatoz nirekin ohera .
PRED:	About this time , a little child named Joseph , and his wife said to him , “ Come with me , my wife , and come with me . ”
GOLD:	and Potiphar 's wife soon began to look at him lustfully . “ Come and sleep with me , ” she demanded .

ID:	3865
INPUT:	Ene maiteok , egiten dizuedan bigarren gutuna dut hau . Eta biotan zenbait gauza gogoratuz bizkortu nahi izan zaituztet , zuzen irizteko gai izan zaitezten .
PRED:	Dear friends , I want you to do what I say . I want you to do what I want you to do . I want you to do so much .
GOLD:	This is my second letter to you , dear friends , and in both of them I have tried to stimulate your wholesome thinking and refresh your memory .

ID:	3866
INPUT:	Paulo hiltzeko zorian
PRED:	Paul 's Journey to Kill Paul
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Greetings

ID:	3867
INPUT:	Abrahamek Isaak sortu zuen ; Isaakek Jakob ; Jakobek Juda eta honen anaiak ;
PRED:	When Isaac was born , Jacob became the father of Isaac , and Jacob .
GOLD:	Abraham was the father of Isaac.Isaac was the father of Jacob.Jacob was the father of Judah and his brothers .

ID:	3868
INPUT:	Nahiz eta zeruraino hazi eta bere buruaz hodeiak ukitu ,
PRED:	He calls his clouds to the sky , and he covered the clouds with clouds .
GOLD:	Though the pride of the godless reaches to the heavensand their heads touch the clouds ,

ID:	3869
INPUT:	Ez dezatela nire odola lurrera isuri , Jaunarengandik urrun ! Israelgo erregea arkakuso baten bila dabil , ehiztaria mendiz mendi eperraren atzetik bezala .
PRED:	Do n't let me go out to the land of the Lord , like a great nation of Israel , like a great nation of Israel .
GOLD:	Must I die on foreign soil , far from the presence of the Lord ? Why has the king of Israel come out to search for a single flea ? Why does he hunt me down like a partridge on the mountains ? ”

ID:	3870
INPUT:	« Eser zaitez isilik , babiloniarren hiriburu , zoaz ilunpetara : ez dizute deituko gehiago “ Erreinuen erregina ” .
PRED:	“ But when you are dead , you will be buried in the darkness , and you will no longer say , ‘ The Kingdom of Heaven will be like you . '
GOLD:	“ O beautiful Babylon , sit now in darkness and silence.Never again will you be known as the queen of kingdoms .

ID:	3871
INPUT:	Seme-alabok , azken ordua da . Entzuna duzue antikristoak etorri behar duela . Hara bada , antikristo asko agertu da dagoeneko , eta hori da azken orduaren seinalea .
PRED:	But now , dear brothers and sisters , listen to what I have done . If you come , you will know that the time has come , and the end will come .
GOLD:	Dear children , the last hour is here . You have heard that the Antichrist is coming , and already many such antichrists have appeared . From this we know that the last hour has come .

ID:	3872
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : — Zeri buruz zoazte bidean elkarrekin hizketan ? Haiek gelditu egin ziren , aurpegia ilun ,
PRED:	Jesus asked them , “ What do these things mean ? ” And they were terrified when they saw them , they were terrified .
GOLD:	He asked them , “ What are you discussing so intently as you walk along ? ” They stopped short , sadness written across their faces .

ID:	3873
INPUT:	Bertan Adoni-Bezek zeritzan erregea aurkitu eta eraso egin zioten hari ere . Kanaandarrak eta periztarrak garaitu zituztela ikustean ,
PRED:	Meanwhile , the king of Aram attacked the king and his army , and the Israelites saw that the Amalekites had been built in the land of Canaan and Canaan .
GOLD:	While at Bezek they encountered King Adoni-bezek and fought against him , and the Canaanites and Perizzites were defeated .

ID:	3874
INPUT:	Jauna , ene Jainkoa , oihuz laguntza eskatu dizut , eta sendatu nauzu .
PRED:	I cried out to you , O Lord my God , and I will help you for help .
GOLD:	You brought me up from the grave , O Lord.You kept me from falling into the pit of death .

ID:	3875
INPUT:	Hebron hiria Kalebentzat
PRED:	The Land Given to Caleb
GOLD:	Caleb Requests His Land

ID:	3876
INPUT:	Zintzoari zuzentasunak bidea prestatzen , gaiztoa bere maltzurkeriak erorarazten .
PRED:	The godly care for the godly , but the advice of the wicked conceal violent intentions .
GOLD:	The godly are directed by honesty ; the wicked fall beneath their load of sin .

ID:	3877
INPUT:	Hona Jaunaren atea : sar bitez hemendik garaileak !
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : Be careful to enter the gates of the Lord !
GOLD:	These gates lead to the presence of the Lord , and the godly enter there .

ID:	3878
INPUT:	Jaunaren egintzak israeldarren begi-bistan
PRED:	A Call to Trust in the
GOLD:	The Blessings of Obedience

ID:	3879
INPUT:	Baina apaizak ezkabiak jotako aldea miatzean , azalekoa baino sakonagoa ez dela eta ilea ez dela belztu ikusten badu , aparte edukiko du gaixoa zazpi egunez .
PRED:	But the priest must examine the sore on the sides of the skin disease . If the priest finds that the sore has not changed his blood , he will quarantine the person for seven days .
GOLD:	If the priest examines the scabby sore and finds that it is only skin-deep but there is no black hair on it , he must quarantine the person for seven days .

ID:	3880
INPUT:	Orduan , Ekronera igorri zuten Jainkoaren kutxa . Heldu zenean , Ekrongo jendeak esan zuen oihuka : « Gu eta gure herria hil gaitzan ekarri digute Israelen Jainkoaren kutxa ! »
PRED:	Then the Ark of God came to Ekron , and the Ark of God said to the people of Ekron , “ We have been killed by the Ark of the Lord our God , the God of Israel . ”
GOLD:	So they sent the Ark of God to the town of Ekron , but when the people of Ekron saw it coming they cried out , “ They are bringing the Ark of the God of Israel here to kill us , too ! ”

ID:	3881
INPUT:	Gizakiaren egunak belarraren pareko : zelaiko lorea bezala loratzen da
PRED:	They are like a flower in the air , like a flower in the air .
GOLD:	Our days on earth are like grass ; like wildflowers , we bloom and die .

ID:	3882
INPUT:	Erregearen funtzionario nagusienetakoren batek soinekoak hartu eta erregeak ohoratu nahi duenari janzten lagundu beharko lioke ; gero , zaldi gainera igoarazi eta hiriko kale nagusian barrena erabili beharko luke , beraren aurretik honela oihukatuz : « Hona hemen zer egiten zaion erregeak ohoratu nahi duen gizonari ! »
PRED:	But if the king 's officials were thrown into the royal palace , he put on his royal robes and put it on his head , he would tell him , “ That 's why the king should be put to death . ” So the king ordered , “ That 's why he will be put to death . ”
GOLD:	Let the robes and the horse be handed over to one of the king 's most noble officials . And let him see that the man whom the king wishes to honor is dressed in the king 's robes and led through the city square on the king 's horse . Have the official shout as they go , ‘ This is what the king does for someone he wishes to honor ! ' ”

ID:	3883
INPUT:	Zaindu zeuen buruak edonolako gaiztakeriatik .
PRED:	May the rest of your own sins be cut off from the community .
GOLD:	Stay away from every kind of evil .

ID:	3884
INPUT:	Eta hauxe eskatzen dut otoitzean : zuen maitasuna izan dadila ezagueraz geroz eta jantziagoa eta sentiberatasunez biziagoa ,
PRED:	I pray to you , ‘ Love your love , just as I love you . ' So I will show you your unfailing love and faithfulness .
GOLD:	I pray that your love will overflow more and more , and that you will keep on growing in knowledge and understanding .

ID:	3885
INPUT:	Zuregan da biziaren iturriaeta zure argiaz ikusten dugu argia .
PRED:	Your life is within you , and your light is light .
GOLD:	Pour out your unfailing love on those who love you ; give justice to those with honest hearts .

ID:	3886
INPUT:	Ez , sutara botatzen da erregai : suak irensten du bi muturretatik , eta erdia ere suak hartzen dio ; balioko ote du ezertarako ?
PRED:	Do n't throw it into a fire ? Even if it becomes a fire , it will be burned up , and the fire will be burned up .
GOLD:	No , it can only be used for fuel , and even as fuel , it burns too quickly .

ID:	3887
INPUT:	Nire eskuak sendo eutsiko dio , nire besoak indartsu egingo .
PRED:	My hands will flow from my hands , and my strength will fall .
GOLD:	His enemies will not defeat him , nor will the wicked overpower him .

ID:	3888
INPUT:	Saridetik ekialdera bihurtzen zen , Kis<unk> -Taborreko mugetaraino ; gero , Daberateraino luzatzen zen eta Jafiara igotzen .
PRED:	So he went to the people of Judah , and he went to the town of Gibeah , where he was at the place where he was , and he went .
GOLD:	In the other direction , the boundary went east from Sarid to the border of Kisloth-tabor , and from there to Daberath and up to Japhia .

ID:	3889
INPUT:	Berak jo zituen Egiptoko lehen-sortuak , gizaki eta abere .
PRED:	He struck the Egyptians with the sun , and he opened the eyes of Egypt .
GOLD:	He destroyed the firstborn in each Egyptian home , both people and animals .

ID:	3890
INPUT:	Baina ez duzue odola jango , lurrera isuriko baizik , ura bezala .
PRED:	But you must not eat the blood of the earth , but you will have water from the ground .
GOLD:	But you must not consume the blood . You must pour it out on the ground like water .

ID:	3891
INPUT:	Horrela , gauzak ongi ulertzen omen dituzun horrek galdu egingo zenuke kontzientzi hezigabeko zeure senidea , harengatik ere Kristo hila izan den arren .
PRED:	But if you understand this , you will understand that you would lose your request , you would be sure that you would be our brother and Christ .
GOLD:	So because of your superior knowledge , a weak believer for whom Christ died will be destroyed .

ID:	3892
INPUT:	Aitzitik , beren joera gaiztoen ondoren , gurasoengandik hartutako Baalen ondoren , ibili dira .
PRED:	Instead , they followed the example of the wicked ways of Baal , and they turned away from the land of Baal .
GOLD:	The Lord replies , “ This has happened because my people have abandoned my instructions ; they have refused to obey what I said .

ID:	3893
INPUT:	Bizkorrenak ereezin izango du ihes egin , indartsuenaezin izango da bere indarraz baliatu , oldartsuaez da bizirik aterako .
PRED:	For the strong and courageous will not escape the mighty power of the powerful arm , and the powerful will be shaken .
GOLD:	Your fastest runners will not get away.The strongest among you will become weak.Even mighty warriors will be unable to save themselves .

ID:	3894
INPUT:	Horretarako , hirurogeita hamar mila zamaketari bildu zituen eta laurogei mila hargin mendian , hiru mila eta seiehun lan-arduradunen menpean .
PRED:	So he took a census of the Lord 's Temple , just as he had promised . He made a census that he had taken from the work of the mountain .
GOLD:	Solomon decided to build a Temple to honor the name of the Lord , and also a royal palace for himself .

ID:	3895
INPUT:	Gizakia bada ere , ez daiteke berreskura : heriotzara emango dute .
PRED:	People can not be bought back to life ; they will be put to death .
GOLD:	No person specially set apart for destruction may be bought back . Such a person must be put to death .

ID:	3896
INPUT:	Horiek beren ondasunetan oinarritzen diraeta beren aberastasun handiaz harrotzen .
PRED:	Their riches are full of riches , and their riches are full of riches .
GOLD:	Yet they can not redeem themselves from deathby paying a ransom to God .

ID:	3897
INPUT:	Hartu zituen Davidek emakumeak ekarritakoak eta esan zion : — Igo bakean zeure etxera . Aditu dut zure ahotsa . Onartu dut zure eskaria .
PRED:	So David brought the woman back to the woman and said , “ Go home to your house , and I will take your hand to your house . ”
GOLD:	Then David accepted her present and told her , “ Return home in peace . I have heard what you said . We will not kill your husband . ”

ID:	3898
INPUT:	« Behar bada galdegingo duzue : “ Zer jango dugu zazpigarren urtean , ezin badugu erein , ez uztarik bildu ? ”
PRED:	“ So you will ask , ‘ What should we eat during the seventh year of the harvest ? What should we plant ? '
GOLD:	But you might ask , ‘ What will we eat during the seventh year , since we are not allowed to plant or harvest crops that year ? '

ID:	3899
INPUT:	Aurrez eskuak uretan garbitzeke , jariodunak norbait ukitzen badu , honek arropak eta gorputza garbituko ditu eta kutsaturik geldituko da arratsa arte .
PRED:	If any of you touch the water , you must wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water , and you will wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water .
GOLD:	If the man touches you without first rinsing his hands , you must wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water , and you will remain unclean until evening .

ID:	3900
INPUT:	Lebaot , Xil<unk> , <unk> , Rimon : hogeita bederatzi hiri eta beraien inguruko herrixkak .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : two towns with their surrounding villages , and their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	Lebaoth , Shilhim , Ain , and Rimmon — twenty-nine towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	3901
INPUT:	GEDE<unk> ( 6 , 1 — 8 , 35 )
PRED:	The Ark of the Covenant
GOLD:	Gideon Becomes Israel 's Judge

ID:	3902
INPUT:	ile-adatsa emakumeena bezalakoa , eta hortzak lehoiarenak bezalakoak ;
PRED:	They are like a lioness , like a lioness , like a lion , like a lion .
GOLD:	They had hair like women 's hair and teeth like the teeth of a lion .

ID:	3903
INPUT:	Hau jakin zuenean , Baxa Tirtzan gelditu zen , Rama gotortzeari utzirik .
PRED:	About this time King Baasha of Baasha of Israel arrived at Tirzah .
GOLD:	As soon as Baasha of Israel heard what was happening , he abandoned his project of fortifying Ramah and withdrew to Tirzah .

ID:	3904
INPUT:	« Badakizue legean agindua : Begia begiaren ordain , hortza hortzaren ordain .
PRED:	“ You know that the law says , ‘ It is a permanent law for a tooth for a tooth , a tooth for a tooth , a tooth for a tooth , a tooth for a tooth , a tooth , a tooth for a tooth for a tooth .
GOLD:	“ You have heard the law that says the punishment must match the injury : ‘ An eye for an eye , and a tooth for a tooth . '

ID:	3905
INPUT:	« Gorde , beraz , nire lege eta erabakiak : bizia ematen diote betetzen dituenari . Neu naiz Jauna .
PRED:	“ Therefore , obey my decrees and regulations and regulations . I am the Lord who keeps them alive . I am the Lord .
GOLD:	If you obey my decrees and my regulations , you will find life through them . I am the Lord .

ID:	3906
INPUT:	Izan ere , kontzientzia hezigabeko batek zu , gauzak behar bezala ulertzen dituzun hori , sasijainkoen jauretxeko otorduetan parte hartzen ikusten bazaitu , ez ote da sasijainkoei eskainitako haragia jatera bultzatua sentituko , jokabide hori beraren hezigabeko kontzientziaren kontrakoa izanda ere ?
PRED:	For if you refuse to listen to me , what will you understand that the temple of the god of the god of the god of the god of the god of the god of the god of the god of the dead ? Do n't you think about me ? ”
GOLD:	For if others see you — with your “ superior knowledge ” — eating in the temple of an idol , wo n't they be encouraged to violate their conscience by eating food that has been offered to an idol ?

ID:	3907
INPUT:	Eta horra non datorren gizon batbi zaldiko gurdi gainean . Hau dio ozenki : “ Erori da Babilonia , erori da ! Haren jainko-irudi guztiaklurrean gelditu dira apurtuta ” » .
PRED:	As a man approached him , he will say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : Babylon is the god of Babylon , the god of Babylon , and the god of Babylon will be broken . ' ”
GOLD:	Now at last — look ! Here comes a man in a chariotwith a pair of horses ! ” Then the watchman said , “ Babylon is fallen , fallen ! All the idols of Babylonlie broken on the ground ! ”

ID:	3908
INPUT:	Egiptoko herri , presta erbesterako hornidura : eremu bihurtuko da Menfis , bizilagunik gabeko lur erraustu .
PRED:	This city will become a desolate wasteland , a desolate wasteland , a desolate wasteland , cities , and cities will become a desolate wilderness .
GOLD:	Pack up ! Get ready to leave for exile , you citizens of Egypt ! The city of Memphis will be destroyed , without a single inhabitant .

ID:	3909
INPUT:	prest dituzte bi eskuakkalte egiteko : buruzagiak eta epaileakeskupekoa eskatzen dute , handikiekberen diru-gosea adierazten ; eta bat datoz denaknork berea egiteko .
PRED:	They are ready to harm them , and they sit on their heads . They sit on their swords and burn their hands on their heads , and they are all satisfied .
GOLD:	Both their hands are equally skilled at doing evil ! Officials and judges alike demand bribes.The people with influence get what they want , and together they scheme to twist justice .

ID:	3910
INPUT:	Eta maitasuna Jainkoaren aginduen arabera bizitzea da . Eta hasieratik entzun duzuen bezala , agindu hau da zuen jokabidea arautu behar duena .
PRED:	And it is good for you to obey God 's commands and obey his commands . This is what you have done , just as God commanded you to obey his commands .
GOLD:	Love means doing what God has commanded us , and he has commanded us to love one another , just as you heard from the beginning .

ID:	3911
INPUT:	Ezaguna duzue Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren eskuzabaltasuna : aberats izanik , behartsu egin zen zuengatik , bere behartsu izateaz zuek aberats egiteko .
PRED:	For you know the Lord Jesus Christ , who has given you great wealth . He has given you great wealth , so that you will be rich and poor .
GOLD:	You know the generous grace of our Lord Jesus Christ . Though he was rich , yet for your sakes he became poor , so that by his poverty he could make you rich .

ID:	3912
INPUT:	Bertan bizi ziren guztiak ezpataz hil eta erabat suntsitu zituen , bat ere bizirik utzi gabe , eta hiriari su eman zion .
PRED:	He killed everyone in the crowd and completely destroyed everyone . He completely destroyed everyone , and he completely destroyed it .
GOLD:	The Israelites completely destroyed every living thing in the city , leaving no survivors . Not a single person was spared . And then Joshua burned the city .

ID:	3913
INPUT:	Jaunak ez zaitu erortzen utziko , zure zaintzailea ez dago lo .
PRED:	The Lord will not abandon you ; he will never abandon you .
GOLD:	He will not let you stumble ; the one who watches over you will not slumber .

ID:	3914
INPUT:	Zintzoaren mihia zilar garbi-garbia , gaiztoaren bihotza hutsaren parekoa .
PRED:	The words of the godly are pure ; the words of the wicked are detestable to the wicked .
GOLD:	The words of the godly are like sterling silver ; the heart of a fool is worthless .

ID:	3915
INPUT:	Gorputzak , bat izan arren , atal asko ditu , baina atal guztiek , asko izan arren , gorputz bat osatzen dute . Gauza bera gertatzen da Kristorekin ere .
PRED:	There are many parts that are many parts , but many parts are many parts of one body . And the body is Christ 's body .
GOLD:	The human body has many parts , but the many parts make up one whole body . So it is with the body of Christ .

ID:	3916
INPUT:	Ez begira nire azal ilunari , eguzkiak bainau kiskali : neure anaiek , nirekin haserre , mahastiak zaintzen jarri naute . Eta neure mahastia utzi dut zaindu gabe !
PRED:	Do n't let me go into my field , for I am not a burden to my brother , for I am very angry with my vineyard . I have put my vineyard in my vineyard .
GOLD:	Do n't stare at me because I am dark — the sun has darkened my skin.My brothers were angry with me ; they forced me to care for their vineyards , so I could n't care for myself — my own vineyard .

ID:	3917
INPUT:	Begira , bada , zure barruan argi behar lukeena ez dadin ilun gerta .
PRED:	Look , there is no light for the light , and the light is hidden from them .
GOLD:	Make sure that the light you think you have is not actually darkness .

ID:	3918
INPUT:	Baina zenbat eta gehiago deitu nik , hainbat eta urrutiagoalde egiten zidaten . Baalei sakrifizioakeskaintzen zizkieten , sasijainkoei intsentsua erretzen .
PRED:	But some of the people listened to the king 's message , and they offered sacrifices to the gods of Baal . They offered sacrifices to the gods of Baal and burned incense there .
GOLD:	But the more I called to him , the farther he moved from me , offering sacrifices to the images of Baaland burning incense to idols .

ID:	3919
INPUT:	Anitz sasiprofeta altxatuko dira eta asko engainatuko dituzte .
PRED:	I will pay attention to many prophets and many prophets .
GOLD:	And many false prophets will appear and will deceive many people .

ID:	3920
INPUT:	Harimenak 1 . 017 .
PRED:	The family of Shephatiah372
GOLD:	The family of Harim1,017

ID:	3921
INPUT:	nire zerbitzariekpoz-oihu egingo dutebihotza bete zorionez ; zuek , berriz , garrasi egingo bihotzeko nahigabez , aiene barruko saminez .
PRED:	My servants will cry out to me , but they will weep and sing for joy , but they will weep for me .
GOLD:	My servants will sing for joy , but you will cry in sorrow and despair .

ID:	3922
INPUT:	« Horregatik maite nau Aitak , neure bizia ematen dudalako eta horrela eskuratzen berriro .
PRED:	“ That is why my Father loves me and shows me my Father .
GOLD:	“ The Father loves me because I sacrifice my life so I may take it back again .

ID:	3923
INPUT:	azpian zilarrezko berrogei oin zituztela : ohol bakoitzak bi oin beste horrenbeste mingainentzat ;
PRED:	Also make forty silver bases under each frame , two bases under each frame .
GOLD:	He also made forty silver bases — two bases under each frame , with the pegs fitting securely into the bases .

ID:	3924
INPUT:	Jainkoak sabaia egin zuen eta sabai azpiko urak sabai gainekoetatik bereizi zituen .
PRED:	For God created the flesh of the earth , and he planted the water from the water .
GOLD:	And that is what happened . God made this space to separate the waters of the earth from the waters of the heavens .

ID:	3925
INPUT:	gizakiari auzia oker egiten diotenean , Jaunak ez ote du ikusten ?
PRED:	For the Lord is good to do good , and he does n't see what is right ?
GOLD:	if they twist justice in the courts — does n't the Lord see all these things ?

ID:	3926
INPUT:	Kasu bereziak
PRED:	The Danger of Canaan
GOLD:	Sins Requiring a Sin Offering

ID:	3927
INPUT:	Zekor bat , ahari bat eta urtebeteko zazpi arkume — denak akats gabeak — eskainiko dituzue erre-oparitzat , eta Jaunak atseginez onartuko ditu .
PRED:	You must present a burnt offering to the Lord , seven one-year-old male lambs , a one-year-old male lambs , a pleasing aroma to the Lord , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	You must present a burnt offering as a special gift , a pleasing aroma to the Lord . It will consist of one young bull , one ram , and seven one-year-old male lambs , all with no defects .

ID:	3928
INPUT:	Zazpi egunez etxoletan biziko zarete jaiotzaz israeldar zareten guztiok ,
PRED:	For seven days you must live in the Tabernacle for seven days .
GOLD:	For seven days you must live outside in little shelters . All native-born Israelites must live in shelters .

ID:	3929
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Moisesi : « Hartu orotariko usainkiak , neurri bera bakoitzetik : erretxina , anbarra , galbanoa eta intsentsu garbia ;
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Take all the fragrant incense , all the people of Israel , along with pure gold , and each piece of pure gold .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Gather fragrant spices — resin droplets , mollusk shell , and galbanum — and mix these fragrant spices with pure frankincense , weighed out in equal amounts .

ID:	3930
INPUT:	eta purpura morezko lokarriak ipini zituzten bi zapi-sailen ertzetan :
PRED:	They made two rings at the edge of the curtain at the edge of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	He made fifty loops of blue yarn and put them along the edge of the last curtain in each set .

ID:	3931
INPUT:	Zuk ezarritako bidetikgoaz gu ere , Jauna , itxaropena zuregan dugula . Zutaz oroitzea , zu goratzea : horixe dugu irrika .
PRED:	O Lord , we will sing your praises to your name , O Lord , for we are your helper and your hope .
GOLD:	Lord , we show our trust in you by obeying your laws ; our heart 's desire is to glorify your name .

ID:	3932
INPUT:	leporainoko uholde oldartsuaharen arnasak . Galbahean bezalaastinduko ditu nazioak , muturrekoaz bezalamasailetik lotuko , hondamenera eramateko .
PRED:	The waters of the earth will burst like a mighty waters , and the waters of a mighty waters would burst out from the Nile , and the breath of the enemy will be swept away .
GOLD:	His hot breath pours out like a floodup to the neck of his enemies.He will sift out the proud nations for destruction.He will bridle them and lead them away to ruin .

ID:	3933
INPUT:	Horrela , bada , atera zen gudarostea zelaira , israeldarrei aurre egitera . Efraimgo oihanean ekin zioten guduari .
PRED:	So the people of Israel went out to fight the troops of Ephraim , and they gathered at Gibeah to battle .
GOLD:	So the battle began in the forest of Ephraim ,

ID:	3934
INPUT:	Pahat-Moaben ondorengoetan : Adna , Kelal , Benaias , Maaseias , Matanias , Betzalel , Binui eta Manases .
PRED:	From the family of Pahath-moab : The family of Pahath-moab ( also known by the family of Elam ) , Hananiah , Hananiah , Hananiah , Hananiah , Hananiah , Hananiah , Hananiah , and Hananiah .
GOLD:	From the family of Pahath-moab : Adna , Kelal , Benaiah , Maaseiah , Mattaniah , Bezalel , Binnui , and Manasseh .

ID:	3935
INPUT:	gero , sinagogetan predikatzen hasi zen , Jesus Jainkoaren Semea dela hots eginez .
PRED:	Then Jesus began preaching the Good News about Jesus , the Son of God , the Son of God .
GOLD:	And immediately he began preaching about Jesus in the synagogues , saying , “ He is indeed the Son of God ! ”

ID:	3936
INPUT:	Moises mendira igo zen Jainkoarengana . Jaunak menditik dei egin eta esan zion : « Mintza zakizkie Jakoben ondorengoei , israeldarrei , eta adierazi hau :
PRED:	Then Moses returned to the mountain of the Lord , and the Lord called out to Moses , “ Call the mountain of the Lord , and give it to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Then Moses climbed the mountain to appear before God . The Lord called to him from the mountain and said , “ Give these instructions to the family of Jacob ; announce it to the descendants of Israel :

ID:	3937
INPUT:	Handikien ahotsa ito egiten zen , mihia ahosabaiari erantsita geratzen .
PRED:	A human voice was a dream , and the mouth of a fool spoke to them .
GOLD:	The highest officials of the city stood quietly , holding their tongues in respect .

ID:	3938
INPUT:	ur handietako itsasontziak egiteko . Etzion-Geber zeritzan hirian egin zituzten ontziak .
PRED:	These ships were the Sea of Xerxes and the ships of Syria . Their ships were imported from the sea .
GOLD:	Together they built a fleet of trading ships at the port of Ezion-geber .

ID:	3939
INPUT:	eta apaizak erabakiko du ordaindu beharrekoa , aberea zer-nolakoa den kontuan harturik . Apaizaren erabakia atzeraezina da .
PRED:	But if the priest has been circumcised , the priest must pay the value of the person 's value . The priest must be required by the priest 's decision , and the priest must be required by the priest .
GOLD:	He will assess its value , and his assessment will be final , whether high or low .

ID:	3940
INPUT:	Jendea haien aurka altxatu zen , eta epaileek jantziak kendu eta zigorkatzeko agindu zuten .
PRED:	When the crowd heard him , they tore their clothes in burlap and put them on their heads .
GOLD:	A mob quickly formed against Paul and Silas , and the city officials ordered them stripped and beaten with wooden rods .

ID:	3941
INPUT:	Justizia eta zuzenbidea maite ditu ; Jaunaren maitasunaz betea da lurra .
PRED:	Those who love the Lord will be clothed with love , and the earth will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	He loves whatever is just and good ; the unfailing love of the Lord fills the earth .

ID:	3942
INPUT:	Orduan , agindu hau eman zien Josuek herriko funtzionarioei :
PRED:	Then Joshua gave this command to all the people :
GOLD:	Joshua then commanded the officers of Israel ,

ID:	3943
INPUT:	Eta orain , hona agertu behar dizudan egiazko mezua : « “ Begira , hiru errege izango dira oraindik Pertsian . Eta horien ondoren , aurrekoak baino aberastasun gehiago izango duen laugarren bat . Bere aberastasunek nahiko indarra emango diotenean , inon direnak egingo ditu Greziako erregeari erasotzeko .
PRED:	And now , this is what the Lord says : “ Look ! The king of Assyria will rule over the kingdom of Persia , and he will rule over the kingdom of Persia , and he will rule over the kingdom of Persia .
GOLD:	“ Now then , I will reveal the truth to you . Three more Persian kings will reign , to be succeeded by a fourth , far richer than the others . He will use his wealth to stir up everyone to fight against the kingdom of Greece .

ID:	3944
INPUT:	horregatik , orduko mundua uholdeko urek estalirik galdu zen .
PRED:	But the floodwaters covered the earth with water , and the water covered the earth .
GOLD:	Then he used the water to destroy the ancient world with a mighty flood .

ID:	3945
INPUT:	Mikak pentsatu zuen : « Orain bai izanen dudala Jauna neure alde , lebitarra baita nire apaiza » .
PRED:	Then Micah said , “ You are my witness , for I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ I know the Lord will bless me now , ” Micah said , “ because I have a Levite serving as my priest . ”

ID:	3946
INPUT:	Libra nazazu ezpataz hila izatetik , atera nire bizi hau zakur horien atzaparretatik .
PRED:	Do n't let me go out to the city of the Lord , for I will send them out of the city where they live .
GOLD:	Snatch me from the lion 's jawsand from the horns of these wild oxen .

ID:	3947
INPUT:	Herri bat etorri da iparraldetikBabiloniaren aurka , haren lurraldeabasamortu bihurtuko duena : inor ere ez da gelditukohan bizitzen , gizaki eta abereakihesi joango dira » .
PRED:	There will be a nation in the north of the north and the north of the north , and there will be no one living in the wilderness , and there will be no one living in the wilderness . ”
GOLD:	For a nation will attack her from the northand bring such destruction that no one will live there again.Everything will be gone ; both people and animals will flee .

ID:	3948
INPUT:	bahituran hartutakoa bueltatu , ostutakoa itzuli eta , bidegabekeria egiteari utziz , bizia ematen duten aginduetan badabil , bizi egingo da , bai , eta ez da hilko .
PRED:	If the Israelite army finds that the whole community of Israel must return to the town , they will live in safety , and they will die . They will not die , but they will not die .
GOLD:	For instance , they might give back a debtor 's security , return what they have stolen , and obey my life-giving laws , no longer doing what is evil . If they do this , then they will surely live and not die .

ID:	3949
INPUT:	Gantzak apaizak erreko ditu aldarean ; aurkezturiko bularra , berriz , Aaron eta beronen ondorengoentzat izango da .
PRED:	The priests must then present the fat around the altar , but the anointing oil will be lifted up for Aaron and his descendants .
GOLD:	Then the priest will burn the fat on the altar , but the breast will belong to Aaron and his descendants .

ID:	3950
INPUT:	Berak ematen die arrakasta zintzoeieta babesa jokabide zuzenekoei ;
PRED:	He gives justice to the godly , and he leads to those who follow the right path .
GOLD:	He grants a treasure of common sense to the honest.He is a shield to those who walk with integrity .

ID:	3951
INPUT:	Berehala ekarriko dizuet ura , oinak garbitzeko . Hartzazue atseden bitartean , zuhaitzaren itzalpean .
PRED:	I will send you water to wash your feet and wash your feet in rest . ”
GOLD:	Rest in the shade of this tree while water is brought to wash your feet .

ID:	3952
INPUT:	Ondoren , Davidek kontsulta egin zion Jaunari : — Igoko al naiz Judako hiriren batera ? — Bai , igo — erantzun zion Jaunak . — Zeinetara igoko naiz ? — Davidek , berriro . — Hebronera — esan zion Jaunak .
PRED:	Then David asked the Lord , “ Should I go back to the city of Judah ? ” And David replied , “ Yes , I am the Lord ! ” And David replied , “ I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	After this , David asked the Lord , “ Should I move back to one of the towns of Judah ? ” “ Yes , ” the Lord replied.Then David asked , “ Which town should I go to ? ” “ To Hebron , ” the Lord answered .

ID:	3953
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunari dei egin diezaionasalbatuko da . Jerusalemen , Sion mendian , izango da salbaturik , Jaunak esan bezala . Jaunak deituakgeldituko dira bizirik .
PRED:	Then he will call on the name of the Lord , and he will save you from Jerusalem , ” says the Lord . “ He will be saved , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	You have taken my silver and gold and all my precious treasures , and have carried them off to your pagan temples .

ID:	3954
INPUT:	Buztina ez ote dago buztinlariaren esku , honek lur beretik ontzi baliotsuak nahiz ontzi arruntak egiteko ?
PRED:	Is n't it not a clay pot with clay ? Does the clay pot be made of clay ? Does the clay pot be made of clay ?
GOLD:	When a potter makes jars out of clay , does n't he have a right to use the same lump of clay to make one jar for decoration and another to throw garbage into ?

ID:	3955
INPUT:	Ez dezatela pentsa : « A zer gozamena ! » Ez dezatela esan : « Horrenak egin ditugu ! »
PRED:	Do n't say , “ How can we say , ” they say , “ we do n't know what it means . ”
GOLD:	Do n't let them say , “ Look , we got what we wanted ! Now we will eat him alive ! ”

ID:	3956
INPUT:	Honek bere ama Sararena izandako oihal-etxolara eraman zuen Rebeka . Emaztetzat hartu eta maite izan zuen . Honela poztu zuen Isaakek bere burua , ama hil ondoren .
PRED:	This is the account of Solomon 's mother , the daughter of Bethuel , and she took Rebekah 's wife , and she became pregnant and gave birth to a son .
GOLD:	And Isaac brought Rebekah into his mother Sarah 's tent , and she became his wife . He loved her deeply , and she was a special comfort to him after the death of his mother .

ID:	3957
INPUT:	harrikatu egin zituzten , zerraz ebaki , ezpataz hil ; noraezean ibili ziren , a<unk> nahiz ardi-larruz jantzirik , premia gorrian , erasopean eta tratu txarrak hartuz .
PRED:	So they took their swords and killed them . They killed the Egyptian officer who had been killed by the sword and killed by the sword .
GOLD:	Some died by stoning , some were sawed in half , and others were killed with the sword . Some went about wearing skins of sheep and goats , destitute and oppressed and mistreated .

ID:	3958
INPUT:	Kanpora zeramatela , Tamarrek bere aitaginarrebari mandatu hau bidali zion : « Gauza hauen jabe denarengandik nago haurdun . Ikus norenak diren zigilua , honen lokarria eta makila » .
PRED:	When the woman arrived at Tamar , she told her , “ This is what the Lord has told her , ‘ I will see the baby 's wife , and she will have a son . ' ”
GOLD:	But as they were taking her out to kill her , she sent this message to her father-in-law : “ The man who owns these things made me pregnant . Look closely . Whose seal and cord and walking stick are these ? ”

ID:	3959
INPUT:	Gaua zelarik altxatu ziren ohetik faraoia , funtzionarioak eta egiptoar guztiak . Garrasi latzak izan ziren Egipto osoan , ez baitzen hildakorik gabeko etxerik .
PRED:	So Pharaoh 's chief cup-bearer came out of the land of Egypt , and all the people of Egypt had died . But all the people of Egypt could not die in Egypt .
GOLD:	Pharaoh and all his officials and all the people of Egypt woke up during the night , and loud wailing was heard throughout the land of Egypt . There was not a single house where someone had not died .

ID:	3960
INPUT:	Apaiz nagusiak galdetu zion Estebani : « Egia al da hori guztia ? »
PRED:	Then the high priest asked him , “ Is it all right ? ”
GOLD:	Then the high priest asked Stephen , “ Are these accusations true ? ”

ID:	3961
INPUT:	Esdras apaiza Jerusalemen
PRED:	Exiles Who Returned with Ezra
GOLD:	Artaxerxes ' Letter to Ezra

ID:	3962
INPUT:	Eta hori , nire erabakiak mespretxatu zituztelako , ez zutelako nire legeen arabera jokatu eta bai nire larunbatak hautsi ; izan ere , haien bihotzak idoloei atxikiak zeuden guztiz .
PRED:	And if they despise me , they would not despise my decrees and obey my decrees and regulations and regulations , and they did not worship me .
GOLD:	For they had rejected my regulations , refused to follow my decrees , and violated my Sabbath days . Their hearts were given to their idols .

ID:	3963
INPUT:	izuaren erasotik ihes egin dezanazuloan jausiko da ; zulotik ihes egin dezanazepoan harrapatua geldituko . Zigorra bidaliko diot Moabikontuak hartzeko egunean . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	I will chase you from the grave , and you will escape from the sword of the enemy . I will bring disaster upon you , ” says the Lord . “ I will send disaster on Moab , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Those who flee in terror will fall into a trap , and those who escape the trap will step into a snare.I will see to it that you do not get away , for the time of your judgment has come , ” says the Lord .

ID:	3964
INPUT:	Bere begi-bistan botarazi zituen Baalen aldareak , berauen gainean zeuden intsentsu-ontziak hautsiz ; zutoin sakratu eta zurezko nahiz metalezko idoloak xehatu eta puskak halakoei sakrifizioak eskaintzen zizkietenen hilobi gainean barreiatu zituen .
PRED:	He removed the pagan shrines and Asherah poles from Baal and burned them on the Asherah poles . He smashed the Asherah poles and Asherah poles and Asherah poles . He smashed the sacred pillars and cut down the Asherah poles .
GOLD:	He ordered that the altars of Baal be demolished and that the incense altars which stood above them be broken down . He also made sure that the Asherah poles , the carved idols , and the cast images were smashed and scattered over the graves of those who had sacrificed to them .

ID:	3965
INPUT:	Haiek , berriz , alde guztietara joan ziren berri ona hots egitera . Eta Jauna bera ari zen haiekin , egiten zituzten mirarien bidez mezua baietsiz .
PRED:	So they went and preached the Good News about the Good News and preached to the Lord 's message .
GOLD:	And the disciples went everywhere and preached , and the Lord worked through them , confirming what they said by many miraculous signs .

ID:	3966
INPUT:	Molok jainkoarenganajoaten zinen , olioa eta lurrinak ugari eramanez ; urrutiraino bidali zenituenmandatariak , Hildakoen Egoitzaraino jaitsarazi .
PRED:	They went to Moab to the gods of Moab , and he sent them down to the depths of the heavens , and he sent them down to the depths of the grave .
GOLD:	You have gone to Molechwith olive oil and many perfumes , sending your agents far and wide , even to the world of the dead .

ID:	3967
INPUT:	« Bete arretaz nire lege eta erabaki guztiak . Neu naiz Jauna » .
PRED:	“ I am careful to obey all my decrees and regulations . I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ You must be careful to keep all of my decrees and regulations by putting them into practice . I am the Lord . ”

ID:	3968
INPUT:	Jaunak galdetu zion : — Ohartu al haiz Job ene zerbitzariaz ? Ez dik parekorik munduan : gizon zintzo eta zuzena duk , Jainkoa errespetatu eta gaiztakeriatik urruti dabilena . Arrazoirik gabe berari kalte egitera bultzatu ninduan arren , bere zintzotasunean tinko irauten dik .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Job , “ You are my servant Job , but you have not been a man of God . You have not been a man of God , but you have refused to turn away from me .
GOLD:	Then the Lord asked Satan , “ Have you noticed my servant Job ? He is the finest man in all the earth . He is blameless — a man of complete integrity . He fears God and stays away from evil . And he has maintained his integrity , even though you urged me to harm him without cause . ”

ID:	3969
INPUT:	Izan ere , benetako judua ez da kanpotik hala dena ; eta benetako erdainkuntza ez da kanpotik gorputzean egiten dena .
PRED:	For the Jewish law has been circumcised , and it is not a permanent law for everyone who has been circumcised .
GOLD:	For you are not a true Jew just because you were born of Jewish parents or because you have gone through the ceremony of circumcision .

ID:	3970
INPUT:	Hain zuzen , honetarako ere idatzi nizuen : zuek probatzeko , gauza guztietan esaneko zareten ala ez jakiteko , alegia .
PRED:	This is what I told you about to do . I told you everything I did to do . I did n't want you to understand what I did to do .
GOLD:	I wrote to you as I did to test you and see if you would fully comply with my instructions .

ID:	3971
INPUT:	« Bai , gauza ona da gatza ; baina gatza gezatzen bada , nola gazitu berriro ?
PRED:	“ How much more can we be ? How can we be ? How can we be ?
GOLD:	“ Salt is good for seasoning . But if it loses its flavor , how do you make it salty again ?

ID:	3972
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Zoaz etxera , dei egiozu zeure senarrari eta itzuli hona .
PRED:	Jesus told him , “ Go home to your house , and go home to your husband . ”
GOLD:	“ Go and get your husband , ” Jesus told her .

ID:	3973
INPUT:	gauza guztiengatik Jainko Aitari etengabe eskerrak emanez , Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren izenean .
PRED:	God our Father , who is not able to teach us through the name of our Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	And give thanks for everything to God the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ .

ID:	3974
INPUT:	« Artaxerxes erregeen erregeak , Esdras apaizari , zeruetako Jainkoaren legean maisu denari , osasuna !
PRED:	“ Artaxerxes , Ezra , Ezra the priest , the priest , the law of God , the law of God .
GOLD:	“ From Artaxerxes , the king of kings , to Ezra the priest , the teacher of the law of the God of heaven . Greetings .

ID:	3975
INPUT:	Ondoren , herri osoari , israeldar jendetza guztiari , gizaseme nahiz emakume , opil bana , haragi-zati bana eta mahaspasa-opil bana eman zizkien . Orduan , jende guztiak nork bere etxera alde egin zuen .
PRED:	Then he brought all the people of Israel all the people of Israel into a basket of bread , a man , a man , a man with a basket of bread , a vineyard , and a large crowd brought them to his own family .
GOLD:	Then he gave to every Israelite man and woman in the crowd a loaf of bread , a cake of dates , and a cake of raisins . Then all the people returned to their homes .

ID:	3976
INPUT:	baita erregeen eta agintea duten guztien alde ere , bizitza bare eta baketsuan bizi gaitezen , jainkozaletasunez eta gizabidez .
PRED:	For he did everything he did , and he did everything he had done through his ways . He was pleasing in the ways of the Lord , who is powerful and powerful .
GOLD:	Pray this way for kings and all who are in authority so that we can live peaceful and quiet lives marked by godliness and dignity .

ID:	3977
INPUT:	Bedeinkatua izan bedi Jaunaren izena orain eta beti !
PRED:	Praise the name of the Lord ! Let the name of the Lord !
GOLD:	Blessed be the name of the Lordnow and forever .

ID:	3978
INPUT:	Berriro ere errukituko zara gutaz , lurperatuko dituzugure gaiztakeriak , eta itsas hondora botakogure bekatu guztiak .
PRED:	Again and again you will be destroyed , and you will be destroyed by your wickedness .
GOLD:	Once again you will have compassion on us.You will trample our sins under your feetand throw them into the depths of the ocean !

ID:	3979
INPUT:	Horrela , bekatuak ez du zuen gain aginterik izango , ez baitzaudete legepean , Jainkoaren onginahiaren eraginpean baizik .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : Do n't punish anyone who refuses to obey God 's commands , but do n't obey God 's commands .
GOLD:	Sin is no longer your master , for you no longer live under the requirements of the law . Instead , you live under the freedom of God 's grace .

ID:	3980
INPUT:	Jango dute , baina ez dira aseko ; emagaldu sakratueki<unk> kartuko dira , baina ez dute haurrik izango ; Jauna bazter utzi baitute , beste jainkoei jarraitzeko .
PRED:	They will strip their beautiful desires , but they will not be brought to the people of Israel . They will have abandoned their gods , but they will have abandoned their gods , but they will have abandoned their gods .
GOLD:	They will eat and still be hungry.They will play the prostitute and gain nothing from it , for they have deserted the Lord

ID:	3981
INPUT:	Baina desagertu da , ez da jadanik , bila ibili eta ezin izan dut aurkitu .
PRED:	But it is not good for me , and I can not find it .
GOLD:	But when I looked again , they were gone ! Though I searched for them , I could not find them !

ID:	3982
INPUT:	Moisesek eta Aaronek Jaunak agindu bezala egin zuten zehatz-mehatz .
PRED:	So Moses and Aaron did as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	So Moses and Aaron did just as the Lord had commanded them .

ID:	3983
INPUT:	<unk> egin eta botatakoaren jirabiran dabilen txakurra bezalakoa dabehin eta berriz ergelkeria berera itzultzen den zentzugabea .
PRED:	A wise person who builds a cornerstone is a fool , and a fool 's purpose is to return to its owner .
GOLD:	As a dog returns to its vomit , so a fool repeats his foolishness .

ID:	3984
INPUT:	Ur sakratua hartuko du buztinezko ontzi batean eta egoitzako zorutik hartutako hautsaz nahasiko du .
PRED:	He will take a clay pot on top of a single piece of blue , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	He must take some holy water in a clay jar and pour into it dust he has taken from the Tabernacle floor .

ID:	3985
INPUT:	Orduan , emakumeak : — Jauna , emadazu ur horretatik , berriro egarri ez nadin , eta hona uretara etorri beharrik izan ez dezadan .
PRED:	Then the woman said to her , “ Lord , please give me water from the water , so I can never see it again . ”
GOLD:	“ Please , sir , ” the woman said , “ give me this water ! Then I 'll never be thirsty again , and I wo n't have to come here to get water . ”

ID:	3986
INPUT:	Zerbitzariek erregea bere guda-gurditik hartu , beste guda-gurdi batera igo eta Jerusalemera eraman zuten . Han hil zen , eta bere arbasoen hilobian ehortzi zuten . Juda eta Jerusalem osoak egin zuen dolu Josiasengatik .
PRED:	So the king and his chariot commanders took him out of the chariot chariot chariots , and he buried him in Jerusalem . There he buried him in Jerusalem and buried him in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	So they lifted Josiah out of his chariot and placed him in another chariot . Then they brought him back to Jerusalem , where he died . He was buried there in the royal cemetery . And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for him .

ID:	3987
INPUT:	Azkenik , zekorretik gelditzen dena — larrua eta haragia , burua , hankak eta hesteak —
PRED:	The internal organs , the internal organs , the internal organs , the legs , the internal organs , the legs , and the internal organs ,
GOLD:	But he must take whatever is left of the bull — its hide , meat , head , legs , internal organs , and dung —

ID:	3988
INPUT:	« Bere erregealdiaren lehen urtean , Ziro erregeak agindu hau eman du Jerusalemgo Jainkoaren etxeari buruz : eraiki bedi berriro Jerusalemen Jainkoaren etxea , opariak eskaintzen diren eta lehengo zimentarrien toki berean ; hogeita zazpi metro izango da gora eta beste horrenbeste zabal .
PRED:	“ On the first year of King Cyrus of Jerusalem , during the reign of Cyrus , the Temple of God , the God of Jerusalem , will be rebuilt by the Temple of the Lord , and he will restore the Temple of our God .
GOLD:	“ In the first year of King Cyrus 's reign , a decree was sent out concerning the Temple of God at Jerusalem . “ Let the Temple be rebuilt on the site where Jews used to offer their sacrifices , using the original foundations . Its height will be ninety feet , and its width will be ninety feet .

ID:	3989
INPUT:	Jasaten duzuena zuek zentzarazteko da ; Jainkoak seme-alaba bezala tratatzen zaituzte . Izan ere , zein seme-alaba ez du aitak zentzarazten ?
PRED:	How can you say , “ God 's children are like children ? Why do you treat you like children ? Why do n't you treat your father like children ? ”
GOLD:	As you endure this divine discipline , remember that God is treating you as his own children . Who ever heard of a child who is never disciplined by its father ?

ID:	3990
INPUT:	Jonatanek Davidi ihes egiten lagundu
PRED:	Jonathan Speaks of the Philistines
GOLD:	Jonathan Helps David

ID:	3991
INPUT:	Ez badakizu , oi emakumerik ederren , zoaz ardien oinatzen ondoreneta larratu zeure antxumeakartzainen txabola ondoan .
PRED:	Do n't be surprised when you are young , you are like a woman who laid your hands on your shoulders .
GOLD:	If you do n't know , O most beautiful woman , follow the trail of my flock , and graze your young goats by the shepherds ' tents .

ID:	3992
INPUT:	eta , ondoren , nire aurrera zatozte , niri sagaratua dagoen tenplu honetara , “ Seguru gaude ” esaten duzuela , segidan egintza higuingarri guztiok egiten jarraitzeko .
PRED:	Come , let me go to the Temple of the Lord , for I have heard the miraculous signs I say , ‘ This is what the Lord says . '
GOLD:	and then come here and stand before me in my Temple and chant , “ We are safe ! ” — only to go right back to all those evils again ?

ID:	3993
INPUT:	Kanaandar kultuen aurkako oharpena
PRED:	Israel 's Trust in Canaan
GOLD:	's Chosen Place for Worship

ID:	3994
INPUT:	Josiasen seme Joiakim Judako erregearen bosgarren urtean , bederatzigarren hilean , barau-eguna aldarrikatu zuten Jaunaren ohorez , eta Jerusalemen bildu ziren bertako jendea eta Judako hirietatik etorriak .
PRED:	During the reign of Josiah son of Josiah 's reign in Jerusalem , during the reign of Josiah 's reign , the people of Judah gathered in Jerusalem and began to return to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	He did this on a day of sacred fasting held in late autumn , during the fifth year of the reign of Jehoiakim son of Josiah . People from all over Judah had come to Jerusalem to attend the services at the Temple on that day .

ID:	3995
INPUT:	Gero , Kana errekaraino jaisten zen muga . Errekaz hegoaldeko hiriak Efraimen leinuak Manasesen lurraldean zituenak ziren . Manasesen muga errekaren iparraldeko ertzetik zihoan eta Mediterraneo itsasoan bukatzen zen .
PRED:	Then he went south to the south side of the Jordan Valley to the south side of the Jordan Valley of Manasseh , and the territory of Manasseh . The boundary extended from the Mediterranean Sea to the Mediterranean Sea to the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	From the spring of Tappuah , the boundary of Manasseh followed the Kanah Ravine to the Mediterranean Sea . Several towns south of the ravine were inside Manasseh 's territory , but they actually belonged to the tribe of Ephraim .

ID:	3996
INPUT:	Jaunak gauza berriak iragarri
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	God 's Stubborn People

ID:	3997
INPUT:	Larri zeuden egun hartan israeldarrak , Saulek honelako zin-hitzez mehatxatu baitzuen jendea : « Madarikatua ilunabarra baino lehen , neure etsaiez mendeka nadin arte , zerbait jan dezana ! » Hala , inork ez zuen deus ere jan .
PRED:	That very day Saul was about to take Saul 's heart , for he said , “ Why did n't someone feel sorry about me ? If someone else has been allowed to eat or drink anything from me ? ”
GOLD:	Now the men of Israel were pressed to exhaustion that day , because Saul had placed them under an oath , saying , “ Let a curse fall on anyone who eats before evening — before I have full revenge on my enemies . ” So no one ate anything all day ,

ID:	3998
INPUT:	eta barkatu gure bekatuak , guk ere zor diguten guztieibarkatzen baitiegu , eta ez utzi gu tentaldian erortzen » .
PRED:	And we forgive our sins and forgive our sins , for we are not able to forgive our sins . ”
GOLD:	and forgive us our sins , as we forgive those who sin against us.And do n't let us yield to temptation . ”

ID:	3999
INPUT:	David , aldi hartan , bere babeslekuan zegoen ; filistearrek , berriz , gudari-toki bat zuten Belenen .
PRED:	At that time David saw a Philistine army , but the Philistines had a Philistine army .
GOLD:	David was staying in the stronghold at the time , and a Philistine detachment had occupied the town of Bethlehem .

ID:	4000
INPUT:	Gainera , bere janari eta edari beretik emateko agindu zuen erregeak . Hiru urtez horrela hezi ondoren , erregearen zerbitzari izango ziren .
PRED:	He also issued these orders to the king , and he commanded him to be the next year of the reign of the reign of the king .
GOLD:	The king assigned them a daily ration of food and wine from his own kitchens . They were to be trained for three years , and then they would enter the royal service .

ID:	4001
INPUT:	sasizientziaren zenbait jarraitzaile aldendu egin baita fede-bidetik . Jainkoaren grazia zuekin .
PRED:	They were appointed by the grace of the living God , who had been exiled from the grace of God .
GOLD:	Some people have wandered from the faith by following such foolishness.May God 's grace be with you all .

ID:	4002
INPUT:	Egiptoarren jakintza guztia ikasi zuen Moisesek , eta hizketan eta ekintzan trebea izan zen .
PRED:	Moses knew what Moses had done to the people of Egypt , so he became wise and became wise .
GOLD:	Moses was taught all the wisdom of the Egyptians , and he was powerful in both speech and action .

ID:	4003
INPUT:	buruzagiei sena kentzen dieeta biderik gabeko eremuetan galbideratzen ;
PRED:	A wise person is hungry , and a person stays on safely through the road .
GOLD:	He strips kings of understandingand leaves them wandering in a pathless wasteland .

ID:	4004
INPUT:	Jobek erantzun zuen :
PRED:	Then Job spoke again :
GOLD:	Then Job spoke again :

ID:	4005
INPUT:	Bekokia altxaturik , ez da arduratzen : « Ez da Jainkorik » , pentsatzen du .
PRED:	He is n't looking forward , and he does n't know what it means . ”
GOLD:	The wicked are too proud to seek God.They seem to think that God is dead .

ID:	4006
INPUT:	Ehun eta hirurogeita hamabost urtez bizi izan zen Abraham .
PRED:	After the father of Isaac , he lived another 430 years .
GOLD:	Abraham lived for 175 years ,

ID:	4007
INPUT:	Jafeten semeak Gomer , Magog , Madai , Jaban , Tubal , Mexek eta Tiras izan ziren .
PRED:	These were the sons of Asher , Jadmaph , Asid , and Nebo .
GOLD:	The descendants of Japheth were Gomer , Magog , Madai , Javan , Tubal , Meshech , and Tiras .

ID:	4008
INPUT:	Jaunak justizia egiten du , zapalduen eskubideak defendatzen .
PRED:	The Lord protects the humble , and he gives justice to the oppressed .
GOLD:	The Lord gives righteousnessand justice to all who are treated unfairly .

ID:	4009
INPUT:	Jaunak beste behin ere hitz egin zion Jeremiasi . Sedekias erregeak esklaboak askatzeko hitzarmena egin zuen Jerusalemgo jendearekin :
PRED:	Then the Lord gave another message to Jeremiah . He said to the people of Jerusalem , “ This is what King Zedekiah of Jerusalem says :
GOLD:	This message came to Jeremiah from the Lord after King Zedekiah made a covenant with the people , proclaiming freedom for the slaves .

ID:	4010
INPUT:	Baina handik berehala , euroakiloi deitzen zuten haize-erauntsi batek eraso zion lehorraldetik ontziari ;
PRED:	But as soon as they left the place , someone called out from the place where he had been called out of the wilderness .
GOLD:	But the weather changed abruptly , and a wind of typhoon strength ( called a “ northeaster ” ) burst across the island and blew us out to sea .

ID:	4011
INPUT:	Gobernariak gutuna irakurri eta Paulo zein probintziatakoa zen galdetu zuen . Ziliziakoa zela jakinik ,
PRED:	When Paul heard that Paul had been preaching in the province of Asia had been preaching in the province of Asia , he learned that Paul was there .
GOLD:	He read it and then asked Paul what province he was from . “ Cilicia , ” Paul answered .

ID:	4012
INPUT:	Jaunari oparitzat aurkezturiko brontzea , bi mila hirurehun eta hogeita hamasei kilo izan zen ;
PRED:	The Lord gave these offerings to the Lord as a burnt offering to the Lord , and it was 475 pounds of bronze .
GOLD:	The people also brought as special offerings 5,310 pounds of bronze ,

ID:	4013
INPUT:	Moises eta Aaron faraoiagana
PRED:	Moses and Aaron
GOLD:	Moses and Aaron Speak to Pharaoh

ID:	4014
INPUT:	Baina luzatu eskua eta uki iezaiozu daukan guztia ; baietz madarikatu aurpegira !
PRED:	But you have touched him and touched him , and he will surely curse you . ”
GOLD:	But reach out and take away everything he has , and he will surely curse you to your face ! ”

ID:	4015
INPUT:	Joan zen , bada , Tamar bere anaia Amnonen etxera ; hau ohean zetzan . Tamarrek ogi-irina hartu , orea egin , anaiaren aurrean opilak prestatu eta erre zituen .
PRED:	So Amnon went to his brother Tamar to bed with Tamar . So Tamar took his body to the place where he had prepared .
GOLD:	When Tamar arrived at Amnon 's house , she went to the place where he was lying down so he could watch her mix some dough . Then she baked his favorite dish for him .

ID:	4016
INPUT:	« Madarikatua arrebaordearekin , aitaren nahiz amaren alabarekin , oheratzen dena ! » Eta herri osoak erantzungo du : « Amen » .
PRED:	“ Cursed is anyone who tries to live with her father 's father or mother or mother 's sister , ” says the Lord . “ Amen . ”
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who has sexual intercourse with his sister , whether she is the daughter of his father or his mother . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	4017
INPUT:	Gorets bezate Jauna bere maitasunagatik , gizakien alde egiten dituen gauza harrigarriengatik .
PRED:	Let them praise the Lord for all the wonderful things he has done for them .
GOLD:	Let them praise the Lord for his great loveand for the wonderful things he has done for them .

ID:	4018
INPUT:	Egitasmo handiak dituzu eta huts egin gabe burutzen . Gizakien jokabide guztiak begi-bistan dituzu , nori bere jokaeraren ordaina , bere egiteen merezia , emateko .
PRED:	Do n't let them talk about their own eyes , and do n't forgive them , for they refuse to listen to their own eyes .
GOLD:	You have all wisdom and do great and mighty miracles . You see the conduct of all people , and you give them what they deserve .

ID:	4019
INPUT:	Jaunak , ordea , esan zion : « Jeroboamen emaztea datorkizu , gaixorik duen semeari zer gertatuko zaion galdetzera . Hau eta hau erantzun behar diozu . Beste baten itxurak eginez etorriko zaizu » .
PRED:	But the Lord said to Jeroboam , “ Now tell me the truth , the son of Jeroboam son of man is sick . If you do n't realize this , you will know what it means . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord had told Ahijah , “ Jeroboam 's wife will come here , pretending to be someone else . She will ask you about her son , for he is very sick . Give her the answer I give you . ”

ID:	4020
INPUT:	Jaunak mezu hau eman zion Jeremias profetari filistearrentzat , faraoiak Gazari eraso baino lehen .
PRED:	This message came to Jeremiah from the Lord concerning the Philistines , just as Pharaoh had predicted .
GOLD:	This is the Lord 's message to the prophet Jeremiah concerning the Philistines of Gaza , before it was captured by the Egyptian army .

ID:	4021
INPUT:	Jainko Ahaltsu bezala agertu nintzaien Abrahami , Isaaki eta Jakobi ; baina ez nintzaien nire egiazko izenaz , Jauna bezala alegia , ezagutzera eman .
PRED:	Then God appeared to Abraham , Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob . He did not know that I was the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , just as he had promised me .
GOLD:	I appeared to Abraham , to Isaac , and to Jacob as El-Shaddai — ‘ God Almighty ' — but I did not reveal my name , Yahweh , to them .

ID:	4022
INPUT:	Eta mutila atzetik joaten zaio berehala , hiltegira doan idia bezala , lakioan jausten den oreina legez ,
PRED:	As surely as the boy dies , the seed will be broken , as the seed falls on the ground .
GOLD:	He followed her at once , like an ox going to the slaughter.He was like a stag caught in a trap ,

ID:	4023
INPUT:	Zuek ere , emazteok , izan zaitezte zeuen senarren menpeko ; horrela , horietakoren batzuek salbamen-mezua onartzen ez badute ere , emazteen jokabideak , eta ez hitzek , salbamenerako irabaz ditzan ,
PRED:	So you wives , your wives , and your children will be saved . But if you refuse to obey the word of God , you will be saved , and you will not be saved .
GOLD:	In the same way , you wives must accept the authority of your husbands . Then , even if some refuse to obey the Good News , your godly lives will speak to them without any words . They will be won over

ID:	4024
INPUT:	Bera da batzuk apostolu egin zituena , beste batzuk profeta , beste batzuk berri onaren hotsegile , beste batzuk artzain eta irakasle .
PRED:	So some of the apostles and other prophets worked so that some of the apostles and other prophets were filled with the same shepherd .
GOLD:	Now these are the gifts Christ gave to the church : the apostles , the prophets , the evangelists , and the pastors and teachers .

ID:	4025
INPUT:	Gero , mahasti artean , albotara bi harresi zituen bide estu batean gelditu zen Jaunaren aingerua .
PRED:	Then he went to the vineyard and sat down to the ground . Then he stayed in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the angel of the Lord stood at a place where the road narrowed between two vineyard walls .

ID:	4026
INPUT:	Josuek agindu zuen : « Eraman biraka harri handi batzuk leize-ahoraino eta ezarri bertan zaintzaileak .
PRED:	Then Joshua told them , “ Bring some of the tribes and some of the tribe of Levi to protect them .
GOLD:	he issued this command : “ Cover the opening of the cave with large rocks , and place guards at the entrance to keep the kings inside .

ID:	4027
INPUT:	Baina ekialdera joan , eta ez dago han ; mendebaldera jo , eta ez dut sumatzen .
PRED:	But when I go , I wo n't go to the hills , and I wo n't go back to the hills .
GOLD:	I go east , but he is not there.I go west , but I can not find him .

ID:	4028
INPUT:	Salaminara heldurik , juduen sinagogetan Jainkoaren mezua hots egiten hasi ziren ; Joan ere berekin zuten laguntzaile .
PRED:	When the Jews arrived in Jerusalem , they began preaching the Good News about the Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	There , in the town of Salamis , they went to the Jewish synagogues and preached the word of God . John Mark went with them as their assistant .

ID:	4029
INPUT:	Jauna , ez ukatu niri zeure errukia ! Zure maitasun eta leialtasunak gorde nazatela beti !
PRED:	Do n't abandon me , O Lord , for your unfailing love is faithfulness and unfailing love .
GOLD:	For troubles surround me — too many to count ! My sins pile up so highI ca n't see my way out.They outnumber the hairs on my head.I have lost all courage .

ID:	4030
INPUT:	Kibrot-Taabatik Hatzerotera joan zen herria eta han gelditu .
PRED:	They left Kibroth-hattaavah and camped at Kibroth-hattaavah .
GOLD:	From Kibroth-hattaavah the Israelites traveled to Hazeroth , where they stayed for some time .

ID:	4031
INPUT:	Hara , zure aurka noa , haranaren gainaldean , harkaitza bezain tinkolautadaren gainaldean zaudenerrege-jauregi horren aurka . “ Nork guri eraso ? — diozue — . Nor iritsi gure gordelekuetara ? ”
PRED:	“ Look ! ” they shouted . “ Who is the one who is as weak as the king ? Who is the one who sits on the royal palace ? Who is this ? ”
GOLD:	I will personally fight against the people in Jerusalem , that mighty fortress — the people who boast , “ No one can touch us here.No one can break in here . ”

ID:	4032
INPUT:	urre askoren jabe izandako printzeekin , jauregiak zilarrez beteak zituztenekin batera .
PRED:	For many years you will be led by the sword of silver , gold , and silver , and gold .
GOLD:	I would rest with princes , rich in gold , whose palaces were filled with silver .

ID:	4033
INPUT:	Baina juduek kontra egiten baitzioten eta irainka erantzuten , Paulok , jantziak astinduz , esan zien : « Zeuek zarete gerta dakizuekeenaren erantzule bakar ; nik ez dut errurik . Aurrerantzean jentilengana joango naiz » .
PRED:	But some of the Jews rebelled against Paul and declared , “ Paul , Paul , and he said , “ You must be handed over to me , and I will not be handed over to you . ”
GOLD:	But when they opposed and insulted him , Paul shook the dust from his clothes and said , “ Your blood is upon your own heads — I am innocent . From now on I will go preach to the Gentiles . ”

ID:	4034
INPUT:	Joan ziren , bada , eta hilobia segurtatu zuten , harria zigilatuz eta guardia ipiniz .
PRED:	So they went to the tomb and worshiped the idols of the Babylonians , and they took care of them .
GOLD:	So they sealed the tomb and posted guards to protect it .

ID:	4035
INPUT:	Ikusi dut mundu honetanbidegabekeria dagoelazuzenbidearen ordez , eta gaiztakeriazuzentasunaren ordez .
PRED:	I have seen the evil things of the world , but I have seen the wickedness of the wickedness of the wicked .
GOLD:	I also noticed that under the sun there is evil in the courtroom . Yes , even the courts of law are corrupt !

ID:	4036
INPUT:	Orduan , Joan Bataiatzaileaz ari zitzaiela jabetu ziren ikasleak .
PRED:	Then the disciples began to understand that Jesus was baptized with his disciples .
GOLD:	Then the disciples realized he was talking about John the Baptist .

ID:	4037
INPUT:	Behinola , Judaren leinuko batzuk Josuerengana etorri ziren , Gilgalera , eta haietariko batek , Jefuneren seme Kaleb keniztarrak , esan zion : « Badakizu zer esan zion Jaunak Moisesi , Jainkoaren gizonari , zuri eta niri buruz Kadex-Barnean .
PRED:	One day some of the tribe of Judah came to Gilgal and told Joshua son of Jephunneh , Caleb son of Jephunneh , and Caleb son of Jephunneh , told him , “ You are the Lord your God , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel . ”
GOLD:	A delegation from the tribe of Judah , led by Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite , came to Joshua at Gilgal . Caleb said to Joshua , “ Remember what the Lord said to Moses , the man of God , about you and me when we were at Kadesh-barnea .

ID:	4038
INPUT:	eta han ere berri ona zabaltzen jardun zuten .
PRED:	And they found him there .
GOLD:	And there they preached the Good News .

ID:	4039
INPUT:	Jaiki zaitez eta agindu herriari garbikuntza egiteko . Esaiozu : « Egin garbikuntza biharko . Hau dio Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak : Erabat suntsitu behar zenuten zerbait duzue zeuen artean , israeldarrok ; hori desagerrarazi arte , ezin izango diezue aurre egin etsaiei .
PRED:	Go and tell the people of Israel , “ Get up and purify yourselves , ” says the Lord . “ This is what the Sovereign Lord , the God of Israel , says : ‘ You must destroy your enemies , O Israel , and you will not destroy your enemies . '
GOLD:	“ Get up ! Command the people to purify themselves in preparation for tomorrow . For this is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : Hidden among you , O Israel , are things set apart for the Lord . You will never defeat your enemies until you remove these things from among you .

ID:	4040
INPUT:	berak du jende xeheahauts artetik jasotzen , behartsua satsetik ateratzen , handikiekin eser dadineta aulki ospetsuan jarri . Jaunarenak dira lurraren zutoinak , mundua haien gainean du kokatua .
PRED:	They turn from their ancestors from their mouths , and they humble themselves from their slavery in the dust . They sit on their heads , and the Lord has brought them down on the earth .
GOLD:	He lifts the poor from the dustand the needy from the garbage dump.He sets them among princes , placing them in seats of honor.For all the earth is the Lord 's , and he has set the world in order .

ID:	4041
INPUT:	Adierazi nire , Jainko Jaun honen , mezua : Gog , zure kontra nator , Mexek eta Tubalgo buruzagi nagusi horren kontra .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will stand against you , Gog , the leader of the army of Israel .
GOLD:	Give him this message from the Sovereign Lord : Gog , I am your enemy !

ID:	4042
INPUT:	Horrela jokatuz , beren buruak kutsatueta Jainkoari desleial izan zitzaizkion .
PRED:	That is why God punished them by worshiping other sins and led them to commit adultery .
GOLD:	They defiled themselves by their evil deeds , and their love of idols was adultery in the Lord 's sight .

ID:	4043
INPUT:	Izan ere , honela agintzen du Jaunaren legeak : Lehen-seme guztiak Jaunari sagaratuko zaizkio .
PRED:	For this is what the Lord says : “ I will not be the firstborn son of all the firstborn sons of Israel . ”
GOLD:	The law of the Lord says , “ If a woman 's first child is a boy , he must be dedicated to the Lord . ”

ID:	4044
INPUT:	Eta Bet-Xemexeko jendeak honela zioen : « Nork iraun dezake zutik Jainko Jaun santu honen aurrean ? Nori eramango genioke kutxa gure artetik bidaltzeko ? »
PRED:	Then he said to the people of Beth-shemesh , “ Who can live in the presence of the Lord our God ? ”
GOLD:	“ Who is able to stand in the presence of the Lord , this holy God ? ” they cried out . “ Where can we send the Ark from here ? ”

ID:	4045
INPUT:	Moisesek israeldarrak abiarazi zituen Itsaso Gorritik . Xur basamortura jo zuten eta hiru eguneko bidea egin basamortuan barrena , urik aurkitu gabe .
PRED:	So Moses led the people of Israel out of the Red Sea and went through the wilderness toward the wilderness . After that , they went through the wilderness toward the wilderness .
GOLD:	Then Moses led the people of Israel away from the Red Sea , and they moved out into the desert of Shur . They traveled in this desert for three days without finding any water .

ID:	4046
INPUT:	Honela , galarazi egin zion Edom herriak Israeli bere lurraldetik igarotzea , eta israeldarrak urrundu egin ziren , zeharbidea hartuz .
PRED:	After this , the people of Edom returned from Edom , the people of Edom returned from the land of Edom , and they took possession of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Because Edom refused to allow Israel to pass through their country , Israel was forced to turn around .

ID:	4047
INPUT:	Zuk kendu duzu zentzu ona horiengandik , ez utzi garaile atera daitezen .
PRED:	You have turned away from these things ; you have turned away from your mouth .
GOLD:	You have closed their minds to understanding , but do not let them triumph .

ID:	4048
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak Jerubaal , Bedan , Jefte eta Samuel bidali eta askatu egin zintuzten inguruan zenituzten etsaien eskuetatik , eta lasai bizi izan zarete .
PRED:	Then the Lord sent me to Samuel , and he sent you away from the land of Gibeon , and he rescued you from your enemies .
GOLD:	Then the Lord sent Gideon , Bedan , Jephthah , and Samuel to save you , and you lived in safety .

ID:	4049
INPUT:	Israelgo errege Joaxek , aldiz , beste erantzun hau bidali zion Judako errege Amatziasi : « Behin batez , garduak esan omen zion Libanoko zedroari : “ Emaiok alaba nire semeari emaztetzat ” . Baina Libanoko basabere batek hankazpian hartu zuen gardua .
PRED:	But King Jehoash of Israel sent this message to King Jehoash of Israel : “ This is what King Ahab of Israel says : You are saying , ‘ This is what the Lord says : My daughter , the daughter of Heaven 's Armies , the daughter of Heaven 's Armies . '
GOLD:	But King Jehoash of Israel replied to King Amaziah of Judah with this story : “ Out in the Lebanon mountains , a thistle sent a message to a mighty cedar tree : ‘ Give your daughter in marriage to my son . ' But just then a wild animal of Lebanon came by and stepped on the thistle , crushing it !

ID:	4050
INPUT:	bizi bagara , Jaunarentzat gara bizi ; eta hiltzen bagara , Jaunarentzat gara hiltzen . Beraz , nahiz bizi nahiz hil , Jaunarenak gara .
PRED:	But if we live in the Lord , we will die for the Lord 's life , whether we are alive or alive or alive or alive or alive . ”
GOLD:	If we live , it 's to honor the Lord . And if we die , it 's to honor the Lord . So whether we live or die , we belong to the Lord .

ID:	4051
INPUT:	Jainkoak esan zion : « Jakob duzu izena . Baina ez zara aurrerantze<unk> kob deituko : Israel izango duzu izen » . Eta Israel izena eman ondoren ,
PRED:	Then God said to Jacob , “ Do n't be afraid , but you will not say , ‘ You will be my name , Jacob , and Jacob will be your son . ' ”
GOLD:	saying , “ Your name is Jacob , but you will not be called Jacob any longer . From now on your name will be Israel . ” So God renamed him Israel .

ID:	4052
INPUT:	« Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak emango dizuen lurraldeko hiriren batean zuen herritarren bat behartsu bada , ez izan bihozgabe , ez laguntzarik ukatu senide behartsuari ;
PRED:	“ If you refuse to obey the Lord your God , you must not repent of the land the Lord your God has given you , and you must not repent of their sins .
GOLD:	“ But if there are any poor Israelites in your towns when you arrive in the land the Lord your God is giving you , do not be hard-hearted or tightfisted toward them .

ID:	4053
INPUT:	Zerahengandik zerahtarrak eta Saulengandik <unk> darrak .
PRED:	But the father of David , the father of David , had descended from the father of David .
GOLD:	The Zoharite clan , named after their ancestor Zohar.The Shaulite clan , named after their ancestor Shaul .

ID:	4054
INPUT:	Nola urrezko eraztuna txerriaren muturrean , hala da zentzugabeko emakume ederra .
PRED:	The gold lampstands will be like a woman in the spring , like a woman in the spring .
GOLD:	A beautiful woman who lacks discretionis like a gold ring in a pig 's snout .

ID:	4055
INPUT:	Jainkoarengandikoak badira , berriz , ezin izango dituzue desegin . Ez dakizuela gerta Jainkoarekin borrokan aritzea ! » Haren iritzia onartu zuten .
PRED:	But if you do not have God 's children , you will never be able to obey him , and you will know that God is with you . ”
GOLD:	But if it is from God , you will not be able to overthrow them . You may even find yourselves fighting against God ! ”

ID:	4056
INPUT:	Gomerren semeak , Axkenaz , Rifat eta Togarma .
PRED:	The sons of Ashdod were also killed , famine , and Ashkelon , and Ekron .
GOLD:	The descendants of Gomer were Ashkenaz , Riphath , and Togarmah .

ID:	4057
INPUT:	Jesusek , ikustean , esan zien : — Joan eta azaldu apaizengana . Bidean zihoazela , garbi gelditu ziren .
PRED:	When Jesus saw this , he said to them , “ John , the priest has been healed . ” And they were healed .
GOLD:	He looked at them and said , “ Go show yourselves to the priests . ” And as they went , they were cleansed of their leprosy .

ID:	4058
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Zoaz etxera , semea onik duzu eta . Gizonak sinetsi egin zuen Jesusek esandakoa eta joan egin zen .
PRED:	“ Go home , ” Jesus said , “ go home . ” So the man went home and believed in the Scriptures .
GOLD:	Then Jesus told him , “ Go back home . Your son will live ! ” And the man believed what Jesus said and started home .

ID:	4059
INPUT:	Bai ugariak , Jauna , zuk eginak ! Denak jakinduriaz egin dituzu , zure sorkariz betea da lurra .
PRED:	O Sovereign Lord , you have rejected me , but you have made the land of the earth .
GOLD:	O Lord , what a variety of things you have made ! In wisdom you have made them all.The earth is full of your creatures .

ID:	4060
INPUT:	Han zeuen jokabideaz oroituko zarete , zeuen buruak kutsatu zituzten egintza txar guztiez ; orduan , zeuen buruaren nazka sentituko duzue egindako gaiztakeria guztiengatik .
PRED:	You will remember what you have done , but you will not defile yourselves . But you will be destroyed by all the evil things you have done for all the evil you have done .
GOLD:	You will look back on all the ways you defiled yourselves and will hate yourselves because of the evil you have done .

ID:	4061
INPUT:	Nik , Jainko Jaunak , zin dagit neure biziarengatik , ahalmen handiz , esku indartsuz eta neure sumina isuriz erreinatuko dudala zuen gain .
PRED:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , I will not reject the mighty power of my powerful arm , and I will pour out my fury on you .
GOLD:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , I will rule over you with an iron fist in great anger and with awesome power .

ID:	4062
INPUT:	piku-opil puska bat eta bi mahaspasa-mordo ere eman zizkioten . Jan zituen eta indarrak hartu , hiru gau eta hiru egun ogirik jan gabe eta urik edan gabe baitzegoen .
PRED:	He gave two quarts of choice flour mixed with olive oil , and he ate it . He ate it without three loaves of bread , three loaves of bread , and without three loaves of bread without yeast .
GOLD:	They also gave him part of a fig cake and two clusters of raisins , for he had n't had anything to eat or drink for three days and nights . Before long his strength returned .

ID:	4063
INPUT:	Joramek mugaz beste aldera jo zuen bere buruzagiekin eta guda-gurdi guztiekin . Gauez jaiki eta garaitu egin zituen setiatua zeukaten edomdarrak eta hauen guda-gurdien buruzagiak .
PRED:	But Gideon attacked the entire army with his army , and he built an army with all the chariots of Edom . He attacked them with their chariots and their chariot commanders .
GOLD:	So Jehoram went out with his full army and all his chariots . The Edomites surrounded him and his chariot commanders , but he went out at night and attacked them under cover of darkness .

ID:	4064
INPUT:	Hauek dira Esauren , hots , Edomen ondorengoak .
PRED:	These are the descendants of Esau 's descendants : The descendants of Esau 's descendants , Esau 's descendants .
GOLD:	This is the account of the descendants of Esau ( also known as Edom ) .

ID:	4065
INPUT:	Itzul zaitez , Israel , zeure Jainko Jaunarengana , bekatuan estropezu egin baituzu .
PRED:	O people of Israel , do n't turn back to the Lord your God , for you have made a footstool under your feet .
GOLD:	Bring your confessions , and return to the Lord.Say to him , “ Forgive all our sins and graciously receive us , so that we may offer you our praises .

ID:	4066
INPUT:	Amaitu ote erabat haren maitasuna ? Bukatu ote betiko haren agintzaria ?
PRED:	And how can he love him ? Will he show his unfailing love to him ?
GOLD:	Has God forgotten to be gracious ? Has he slammed the door on his compassion ? Interlude

ID:	4067
INPUT:	« Abia zaitez hemendik , zoaz ekialderantz eta gorde zaitez Jordan ibaiaz beste aldera dagoen Kerit erreka inguruan .
PRED:	“ Go back to the east of the Jordan River , east of the Jordan River , and as far as the Brook of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	“ Go to the east and hide by Kerith Brook , near where it enters the Jordan River .

ID:	4068
INPUT:	Eutsi niri , zeuk hitzeman bezala , eta biziko naiz ; ez dakidala neure esperantza huts gerta .
PRED:	Keep me , O Lord , as I have promised . You are my hope , and I will not be disgraced .
GOLD:	Lord , sustain me as you promised , that I may live ! Do not let my hope be crushed .

ID:	4069
INPUT:	« Bidal itzazu gizaseme batzuk israeldarrei ematen diedan Kanaan lurraldea ikertzera . Bidali leinu bakoitzetik gizaseme bana , israeldarren arduradunen artetik aukeraturik » .
PRED:	“ Now send messengers to the people of Israel to explore the land of Canaan , which I am giving to the tribes of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ Send out men to explore the land of Canaan , the land I am giving to the Israelites . Send one leader from each of the twelve ancestral tribes . ”

ID:	4070
INPUT:	Gau hartan Jauna agertu zitzaion Salomoni eta esan zion : — Eskatu nahi duzuna ; emango dizut .
PRED:	That night the Lord appeared to Solomon and said , “ I will give you whatever you ask . ”
GOLD:	That night God appeared to Solomon and said , “ What do you want ? Ask , and I will give it to you ! ”

ID:	4071
INPUT:	Moabeko lautadan , Jordan ondoan etxolatu ziren , Bet-Jeximotetik Abel-Xi<unk> bitartean .
PRED:	As soon as they were camped at the plains of Moab beside the Jordan River , east of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	Along the Jordan River they camped from Beth-jeshimoth as far as the meadows of Acacia on the plains of Moab .

ID:	4072
INPUT:	Misiako mugara iritsi zirenean , Bitiniarantz jo nahi izan zuten , baina Jesusen Espirituak ez zien utzi .
PRED:	As soon as they arrived , they went to the synagogue for the Holy Spirit , but Jesus did n't let them go on to the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	Then coming to the borders of Mysia , they headed north for the province of Bithynia , but again the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them to go there .

ID:	4073
INPUT:	Honela esan zion Boozek : — Ekarri zeure soingainekoa eta zabaldu . Hala egin zuen Rutek , eta Boozek hogeiren bat kilo garagar bota zizkion eta bizkarrean hartzen lagundu . Honela , herrira itzuli zen Rut bere zamarekin .
PRED:	Then Boaz said to Boaz , “ Take your cloak and put it on your head . ” So Ruth took her back to her husband , and she took her back to her husband , and she returned to her husband .
GOLD:	Then Boaz said to her , “ Bring your cloak and spread it out . ” He measured six scoops of barley into the cloak and placed it on her back . Then he returned to the town .

ID:	4074
INPUT:	Hiramek emanak zizkion Salomoni lau tona inguru urre .
PRED:	But Abram also made fourteen years old when he became king , and he was fourteen years old .
GOLD:	Nevertheless , Hiram paid Solomon 9,000 pounds of gold .

ID:	4075
INPUT:	Behartsuarena
PRED:	poor and poor
GOLD:	Procedures for the Guilt Offering

ID:	4076
INPUT:	Herria begira zegoen . Agintariek , berriz , Jesusi burla egiten zioten , esanez : « Besteak salbatu ditik ; salba dezala bere burua , Jainkoaren Mesias , hautatua , baldin bada » .
PRED:	But the crowd followed him , and they began shouting , “ The Savior of the synagogue has been saved by the power of Jesus . He is the Messiah , the one who is the Messiah , the one who is the Messiah . ”
GOLD:	The crowd watched and the leaders scoffed . “ He saved others , ” they said , “ let him save himself if he is really God 's Messiah , the Chosen One . ”

ID:	4077
INPUT:	Gebal , Amon eta Amalekek , filistear eta tiroarrek .
PRED:	Gideon , the Philistines , and Amalek .
GOLD:	Assyria has joined them , too , and is allied with the descendants of Lot.Interlude

ID:	4078
INPUT:	Jaiki zaitez , irten eta gogoberotu zeure gudariak . Hara , Jaunarengatik zin degizut : ateratzen ez bazara , ez da inor ere geldituko zurekin gaur gauean ; orduan , zeure bizitza osoan ikusi izan dituzunak baino gorriagoak ikusi beharko dituzu .
PRED:	Arise , O Lord , and I will gather you out of the land . I will not destroy you with your ancestors , but I will never see you again . But you will see what you have done to your ancestors , and you will have seen your ancestors . ”
GOLD:	So the king went out and took his seat at the town gate , and as the news spread throughout the town that he was there , everyone went to him.Meanwhile , the Israelites who had supported Absalom fled to their homes .

ID:	4079
INPUT:	« Beren fruituetatik antzemango diezue »
PRED:	“ If you eat from the fruit of your fruit , you will be blessed . ”
GOLD:	Building on a Solid Foundation

ID:	4080
INPUT:	Salomonek Roboam ; Roboamek Abia ; Abiak Asaf ;
PRED:	Rehoboam was the father of Solomon , and the father of Rehoboam was the father of David .
GOLD:	Solomon was the father of Rehoboam.Rehoboam was the father of Abijah.Abijah was the father of Asa .

ID:	4081
INPUT:	Ez dute Jaunaren lurraldeanbizitzerik izango : Efraim Egiptora itzuliko da , eta janari kutsatuakjango dituzte Asirian .
PRED:	They will not live in the land of Egypt , for they will eat the food of the Lord . They will eat them in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	You may no longer stay here in the Lord 's land.Instead , you will return to Egypt , and in Assyria you will eat foodthat is ceremonially unclean .

ID:	4082
INPUT:	Gero , Saul kendu eta David jarri zuen errege , eta aitorpen hau egin zuen honetaz : “ David , Jeseren semea , aurkitu dut neure gogoko gizon ; nik nahi guztia egingo du honek ” .
PRED:	Then David took Saul and took him away from the king and said , ‘ My father , David , the son of David , who is my son David . '
GOLD:	But God removed Saul and replaced him with David , a man about whom God said , ‘ I have found David son of Jesse , a man after my own heart . He will do everything I want him to do . '

ID:	4083
INPUT:	Zerua Jaunarena da ; lurra , berriz , gizakien esku utzi du .
PRED:	For the Lord is the one who holds the earth , but he has given it to the earth .
GOLD:	The heavens belong to the Lord , but he has given the earth to all humanity .

ID:	4084
INPUT:	eta bi litro ardo isur-oparitzat , eta Jaunak atseginez onartuko du oparia .
PRED:	You must also offer two quarts of choice flour moistened with olive oil , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	and give a third of a gallon of wine as a liquid offering . This will be a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	4085
INPUT:	Larunbatero , betierean , ezarriko dituzte Jaunaren aurrean . Betiko betebeharra izango dute hau israeldarrek .
PRED:	On the Sabbath day you will be set aside for the Lord 's presence , and it will be a special possession .
GOLD:	Every Sabbath day this bread must be laid out before the Lord as a gift from the Israelites ; it is an ongoing expression of the eternal covenant .

ID:	4086
INPUT:	Fededunen aldeko diru-laguntzari buruz ez duzue nik gehiago idatzi beharrik .
PRED:	It is by faith that you do n't know the word we have given you .
GOLD:	I really do n't need to write to you about this ministry of giving for the believers in Jerusalem .

ID:	4087
INPUT:	Ahoa bai , eta hitzik ez dute ; begiak bai , eta ikusten ez ;
PRED:	They say , ‘ They do n't understand , and they do n't understand . '
GOLD:	They have mouths but can not speak , and eyes but can not see .

ID:	4088
INPUT:	Gainerako hilak ez ziren bizira itzuli , harik eta mila urteak bete arte . Hau lehen piztuera da .
PRED:	The other five of them did n't return to the city until the first month of the first month . This is the first month of the Dead Sea .
GOLD:	This is the first resurrection . ( The rest of the dead did not come back to life until the thousand years had ended . )

ID:	4089
INPUT:	Orduan , honela hitz egin zion Jaunak Jeremiasi :
PRED:	Then the Lord gave this message to Jeremiah :
GOLD:	So the Lord gave them this message through Jeremiah :

ID:	4090
INPUT:	Herriaren buruzagiak : Pa<unk> , Pahat-Mohab , Elam , Zatu , Bani ,
PRED:	These are the leaders of the people of Judah : Pahath-moab , Pahath-moab , Elam , Elam , Elam , and Elam .
GOLD:	Bunni , Azgad , Bebai ,

ID:	4091
INPUT:	Esan duzuen hori ez dizue inork ere onartuko , zeren eta , « nolako zatia borrokara doanak , halakoa tresneria zaindu duenak . Berdin hartuko dute denek » .
PRED:	Then you will not accept this message from the Lord . No one will help you , for he will fight against you . ”
GOLD:	Who will listen when you talk like this ? We share and share alike — those who go to battle and those who guard the equipment . ”

ID:	4092
INPUT:	Oi Jainko , eraberri gaitzazu , erakutsi guri aurpegi argia , salba gaitezen !
PRED:	O God , rescue us from our enemies ; rescue us from the face of the earth .
GOLD:	O Lord God of Heaven 's Armies , how long will you be angry with our prayers ?

ID:	4093
INPUT:	izan ere , kanporatu egingo dituzte gaizkileak ; herrialdeaz jabetuko dira , ordea , Jaunaz fio direnak .
PRED:	For the Lord will drive out his people out of the land , but he will give them the land the Lord has given them .
GOLD:	For the wicked will be destroyed , but those who trust in the Lord will possess the land .

ID:	4094
INPUT:	Labore-oparia
PRED:	Further Instructions for the Peace Offering
GOLD:	Procedures for the Grain Offering

ID:	4095
INPUT:	Gauza bera gertatzen da musika-tresnekin ere , txirula edota zitararekin , adibidez : notak argi eta garbi ematen ez badituzte , nola jakin zer jotzen duten ?
PRED:	For there is a small lampstand with its accessories , a small lampstand , its center stem , and the other articles of pure gold . Why do n't you understand what is going to do ?
GOLD:	Even lifeless instruments like the flute or the harp must play the notes clearly , or no one will recognize the melody .

ID:	4096
INPUT:	Faraoiak , orduan : — Bai , eta Jauna izan dezazuela lagun ! Baina zuen haur eta guzti joaten utziko dizuedala uste al duzue ? Ez horixe ! Argi dago asmo txarretan zabiltzatela .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” Pharaoh said , “ for the Lord has given you a little child . But do n't you think about me ? But do n't you think about me ? Do n't you think about me ? Do n't you think about me ? ”
GOLD:	Pharaoh retorted , “ The Lord will certainly need to be with you if I let you take your little ones ! I can see through your evil plan .

ID:	4097
INPUT:	Danielen lagunak Jainkoarekiko leial
PRED:	Daniel 's Call to Obey the
GOLD:	The Blazing Furnace

ID:	4098
INPUT:	Horiek dira Sinai mendian Jaunak Moisesen bidez israeldarrei eman zizkien lege , erabaki eta irakaspenak , beraren eta israeldarren arteko harremanak zehazteko .
PRED:	These are the instructions the Lord gave to Moses through Mount Sinai , decrees , regulations , regulations , regulations , and regulations , and regulations that the people of Israel .
GOLD:	These are the decrees , regulations , and instructions that the Lord gave through Moses on Mount Sinai as evidence of the relationship between himself and the Israelites .

ID:	4099
INPUT:	Ardoak iluntzen ditu haren begiak , esneak zuritzen haren hortzak !
PRED:	Evil people walk in darkness , and the darkness sing for joy .
GOLD:	His eyes are darker than wine , and his teeth are whiter than milk .

ID:	4100
INPUT:	Baina Egiptoko aztiek , beren aztikeriez baliaturik , gauza bera egin ahal izan zutenez gero , faraoiak bere teman jarraitu zuen eta ez zien Moisesi eta Aaroni jaramonik egin , Jaunak esan bezala .
PRED:	But the Egyptians did not follow the example of the land of Egypt , just as the Lord had commanded Moses . So Moses did not leave the land of Egypt , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	But again the magicians of Egypt used their magic , and they , too , turned water into blood . So Pharaoh 's heart remained hard . He refused to listen to Moses and Aaron , just as the Lord had predicted .

ID:	4101
INPUT:	Egunero esan eta esan ari zitzaion arren , Josek ez zion onartu berarekin oheratzea .
PRED:	On the day Joseph said to Joseph , “ Do n't let anyone go with her . ”
GOLD:	She kept putting pressure on Joseph day after day , but he refused to sleep with her , and he kept out of her way as much as possible .

ID:	4102
INPUT:	Hizketa arrotzez mintzatzea , beraz , sinesgogorrentzat da seinale , ez sinestedunentzat ; profeta bezala hitz egitea , berriz , ez da sinesgogorrentzat , sinestedunentzat baizik .
PRED:	So if you are jealous with tongues , you are jealous and do n't believe in me . But you do n't believe that you do n't believe what is right , but you do n't believe it .
GOLD:	So you see that speaking in tongues is a sign , not for believers , but for unbelievers . Prophecy , however , is for the benefit of believers , not unbelievers .

ID:	4103
INPUT:	Judako errege Joaxek , ordea , bere aurretik Judan errege izaniko Josafat , Joram eta Akaziasek Jaunari sagaraturiko eskaintza guztiak Siriako errege Hazaeli igorri zizkion , baita Joaxek berak egindakoak eta Jaunaren etxeko nahiz erregearen jauregiko altxortegian zegoen urre guztia ere . Orduan , Hazaelek alde egin zuen Jerusalemdik .
PRED:	But King Ahaziah of Judah sent King Ahaziah of Judah to bring King Ahaziah of Judah to King Ahaziah of Judah and Jerusalem . He sent King Ahaziah of Judah to destroy all the treasuries of the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Joash 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .

ID:	4104
INPUT:	Akabek Jezabeli adierazi zion Eliasek egin zuen guztia eta Baalen profetak oro ezpataz hilarazi zituela .
PRED:	So Ahab sent this message to Baal , and he told him everything the prophet Baal had done .
GOLD:	When Ahab got home , he told Jezebel everything Elijah had done , including the way he had killed all the prophets of Baal .

ID:	4105
INPUT:	Tenpluaren behea ere , nahiz barnean nahiz kanpoan , urrez estali zuen .
PRED:	When the Temple was in the Temple , he covered the outside the Temple and overlaid it with gold .
GOLD:	He overlaid the floor in both rooms with gold .

ID:	4106
INPUT:	Kristau-bizitza jentilen artean
PRED:	Living in the Church in Christ
GOLD:	Respecting People in Authority

ID:	4107
INPUT:	Eskuzabala bedeinkatua izango dabere ogia behartsuarekin banatzeagatik .
PRED:	If you bless the poor , you will be blessed with the poor and needy .
GOLD:	Blessed are those who are generous , because they feed the poor .

ID:	4108
INPUT:	Gerora , beste gatazka bat izan zen God hirian filistearren kontra . Huxako Sibe<unk> hil egin zuen <unk> , refatarren ondorengoa hau ere .
PRED:	Then a fight against the Philistines , who had been killed by the Philistines . He killed 3,000 people of Shechem , just as King Nebuchadnezzar of Aram had been killed .
GOLD:	After this , there was another battle against the Philistines at Gob . As they fought , Sibbecai from Hushah killed Saph , another descendant of the giants .

ID:	4109
INPUT:	hartzaileak Jaunaren izenean zin egingo dio jabeari , berari utzitakoa ez duela ukitu aitortuz . Jabeak haren zin-hitza onartuko du , eta hark ez du ordaindu beharrik izango .
PRED:	When the Lord has finished eating the meat from the Lord 's presence , he will not pay attention to his father 's father . But he will pay attention to his father , and he will not pay attention to his father .
GOLD:	“ Now suppose someone leaves a donkey , ox , sheep , or any other animal with a neighbor for safekeeping , but it dies or is injured or is taken away , and no one sees what happened .

ID:	4110
INPUT:	eta bere senarra utzi eta beste bat hartzen duen emakumeak adulterio egiten du era berean .
PRED:	And if her husband refuses to take her husband 's wife and marries someone commits adultery , she is unfaithful to her .
GOLD:	And if a woman divorces her husband and marries someone else , she commits adultery . ”

ID:	4111
INPUT:	Horrela zaintzen du hilobian eror ez dadin , heriotzaren muga pasa ez dezan .
PRED:	That is why I can not be put to death , so I can not be put to death .
GOLD:	He protects them from the grave , from crossing over the river of death .

ID:	4112
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jainkoa Moisesi : « Neu naiz Jauna !
PRED:	Then God said to Moses , “ I am the Lord . I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And God said to Moses , “ I am Yahweh — ‘ the Lord . '

ID:	4113
INPUT:	Oinetaraino makurtuz , esan zion : « Neurea , bai , neurea dut errua , jauna ! Uztazu , otoi , mintzatzen eta entzun zeure mirabe honen hitzak .
PRED:	She lay his feet in his head and said , “ My lord , please listen to my lord the king ! Let me speak your words and speak to me .
GOLD:	She fell at his feet and said , “ I accept all blame in this matter , my lord . Please listen to what I have to say .

ID:	4114
INPUT:	Zintzoa estuasunetik atera duteeta gaiztoa sartu da haren lekura .
PRED:	The godly walk through the path of the godly , and the wicked will enter the place of the wicked .
GOLD:	The godly are rescued from trouble , and it falls on the wicked instead .

ID:	4115
INPUT:	Jefte , Efraimen leinuaren kontra
PRED:	The Land Given to Ephraim
GOLD:	Ephraim Fights with Jephthah

ID:	4116
INPUT:	« Badut oraindik hamaika gauza esateko , baina oraingoz ez zarete gauza ondo ulertzeko .
PRED:	“ I am not trying to speak , but I wo n't understand what I am doing .
GOLD:	“ There is so much more I want to tell you , but you ca n't bear it now .

ID:	4117
INPUT:	Talentuen parabola
PRED:	The Sisera and Sisera
GOLD:	Parable of the Three Servants

ID:	4118
INPUT:	Gosea bidaliko dut zuen aurka , eta seme-alabarik gabe utziko zaituzteten basapiztiak ; izurria eta hilketak izango dituzue , eta gerra sorraraziko dut zuen aurka . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	I will send you to war against you and famine , and if you refuse to repent and wild animals and wild animals , I will cause you to die . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	And along with the famine , wild animals will attack you and rob you of your children . Disease and war will stalk your land , and I will bring the sword of the enemy against you . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	4119
INPUT:	Eta , esan ere , esan nien handiki , agintari eta herriko gainerako jendeari : « Lana handia eta zabala dugulako , harresi gainean sakabanatuta gabiltza , bata bestearengandik urrun .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Let me go down to the people of Israel and say , ‘ You are a great nation , a large crowd , a large crowd , and a large crowd that comes from me . '
GOLD:	So I placed armed guards behind the lowest parts of the wall in the exposed areas . I stationed the people to stand guard by families , armed with swords , spears , and bows .

ID:	4120
INPUT:	Inola ere ez ! Hala balitz , nola epai lezake Jainkoak mundua ?
PRED:	Do n't you realize that God would n't judge the world ? How can he judge the world ?
GOLD:	Of course not ! If God were not entirely fair , how would he be qualified to judge the world ?

ID:	4121
INPUT:	« Ez eraman urrerik , ez zilarrik , ez dirurik gerrikoan ,
PRED:	“ You must not have any silver or silver or gold or silver or gold .
GOLD:	“ Do n't take any money in your money belts — no gold , silver , or even copper coins .

ID:	4122
INPUT:	Hogeita hamar urte zituen Davidek errege izaten hasi zenean , eta berrogei urtez izan zen errege .
PRED:	David was thirty years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem forty years .
GOLD:	David was thirty years old when he began to reign , and he reigned forty years in all .

ID:	4123
INPUT:	Orduan , berarekin zintzo eztabaidatueta behin betiko irabaziko nuke auzia .
PRED:	But if you were faithful to me , you would have a case with the Lord 's judgment .
GOLD:	Honest people can reason with him , so I would be forever acquitted by my judge .

ID:	4124
INPUT:	Burdina ihia bezalakoa da harentzat , brontzea egur ustela .
PRED:	But as iron is as iron , as iron is as bronze as iron .
GOLD:	Lightning leaps from its mouth ; flames of fire flash out .

ID:	4125
INPUT:	Abner eta beronen gizonak gau osoz ibili ziren Araba ibarrean barna ; Jordan ibaia igaro eta , Bi<unk> osoa zeharkaturik , Mahanaimera heldu ziren .
PRED:	So Abner and his men traveled through the Jordan Valley , and they crossed the Jordan into the Jordan River .
GOLD:	All that night Abner and his men retreated through the Jordan Valley . They crossed the Jordan River , traveling all through the morning , and did n't stop until they arrived at Mahanaim .

ID:	4126
INPUT:	Lebik , dena utzirik , zutitu eta jarraitu egin zion .
PRED:	Levi followed the following instructions and gave thanks to him .
GOLD:	So Levi got up , left everything , and followed him .

ID:	4127
INPUT:	Harresiaren sagarapen-jaia
PRED:	The Birth of the Messiah
GOLD:	Dedication of Jerusalem 's Wall

ID:	4128
INPUT:	Erakutsi guri , Jauna , zeure maitasuna , eman zeure salbamena !
PRED:	O Lord , hear your unfailing love ; teach me your unfailing love .
GOLD:	I listen carefully to what God the Lord is saying , for he speaks peace to his faithful people.But let them not return to their foolish ways .

ID:	4129
INPUT:	Profeta guztiek testigantza hau egiten dute hartaz : harengan sinets dezaten guztiek bekatuen barkamena hartuko dutela beraren bitartez » .
PRED:	Everyone who believes in him will believe in him . Everyone who believes in him will believe in him will be forgiven . ”
GOLD:	He is the one all the prophets testified about , saying that everyone who believes in him will have their sins forgiven through his name . ”

ID:	4130
INPUT:	Apaizen lurrak bakarrik utzi zituen erosi gabe , haien alde lege bat baitzuen faraoiak emana ; honek ematen zien jateko behar zutena . Honengatik , ez zuten beren lurrak saldu beharrik izan .
PRED:	Then the priests brought the money to Pharaoh , but he refused to pay attention to Pharaoh 's command , but he refused to pay attention to this land .
GOLD:	The only land he did not buy was the land belonging to the priests . They received an allotment of food directly from Pharaoh , so they did n't need to sell their land .

ID:	4131
INPUT:	Judas irten zenean , esan zien Jesusek : « Oraintxe azaltzen da Gizonaren Semearen aintza , eta haren bidez Jainkoarena .
PRED:	Jesus said to them , “ Judas , the Son of Man is the Son of Man , and the Son of Man is the Son of God .
GOLD:	As soon as Judas left the room , Jesus said , “ The time has come for the Son of Man to enter into his glory , and God will be glorified because of him .

ID:	4132
INPUT:	Berriro lokartu eta amets egin zuen . Gerri beretik , zazpi galburu aletsu eta mardul sortu ziren ;
PRED:	Then he released him and brought him out of the dream , and he threw seven heads of grain into song .
GOLD:	But he fell asleep again and had a second dream . This time he saw seven heads of grain , plump and beautiful , growing on a single stalk .

ID:	4133
INPUT:	Hala , Loten bi alabak haurdun gelditu ziren beren aitarengandik .
PRED:	So Lot 's two sons were daughters , and they left their father 's father .
GOLD:	As a result , both of Lot 's daughters became pregnant by their own father .

ID:	4134
INPUT:	gaizkileak , berriz , jo eta garbitu egingo dituzte mundutik , eta maltzurrak desagerrarazi bertatik .
PRED:	But the wicked will be destroyed , and they will rise from the face of the earth .
GOLD:	But the wicked will be removed from the land , and the treacherous will be uprooted .

ID:	4135
INPUT:	« Ozeanoa edo Itsas Mamua ote naizzaintzailea jar diezadazun ?
PRED:	“ Where are you like the waters of Meribah at the waters of Meribah at the waters of Midian ?
GOLD:	Am I a sea monster or a dragonthat you must place me under guard ?

ID:	4136
INPUT:	Hirurak inguruan , Jesusek oihu handiz esan zuen : « Eli , Eli , lema sabaktani ? » ( Hau da : « Ene Jainko , ene Jainko , zergatik utzi nauzu ? » ) .
PRED:	Then Jesus shouted to the crowd , “ My God , why are you crying ? ” And he said , “ My God , my God , why have you abandoned me ? ”
GOLD:	At about three o'clock , Jesus called out with a loud voice , which means “ My God , my God , why have you abandoned me ? ”

ID:	4137
INPUT:	Asak eta beronen gudarosteak aurrean eraman zituzten Gerar-eraino . Ez zen bizirik bat ere gelditu ; denak erori ziren eta hondatu Jaunaren eta beronen gudarostearen aurrean . Asaren gizonek harrapakin asko eskuratu zuten .
PRED:	Asa also killed all his warriors in Gerar with his army , and all his warriors died . But all the people of Judah were completely destroyed by the Lord 's army .
GOLD:	So the Lord defeated the Ethiopians in the presence of Asa and the army of Judah , and the enemy fled .

ID:	4138
INPUT:	« Ba al dakizu noiz erditzen diren basahuntzak ? Ikusi al dituzu oreinak umea egiten ?
PRED:	“ Do you know how can you see if you see the Son of Man ?
GOLD:	“ Do you know when the wild goats give birth ? Have you watched as deer are born in the wild ?

ID:	4139
INPUT:	« Txarra , txarra » esaten du erosleak ; baina hor doa gero , pozik asko egindako erosketaz .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” says the Lord , “ the people of Israel will buy grain , but they will buy it back . ”
GOLD:	The buyer haggles over the price , saying , “ It 's worthless , ” then brags about getting a bargain !

ID:	4140
INPUT:	ez gogortu bihotzak , errebelde izan zinetenean bezala , tentaldi-egunean basamortuan bezala .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of them ; do n't be afraid of them when you live in the wilderness .
GOLD:	do n't harden your heartsas Israel did when they rebelled , when they tested me in the wilderness .

ID:	4141
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	4142
INPUT:	Jaunak lasaitasuna eman zien beren lur-muga osoan , beraien arbasoei zin egin bezala . Etsaietako batek ere ezin izan zien aurre egin , Jaunak eskura eman baitzizkien guztiak .
PRED:	So the Lord gave the whole land to the waters of the earth , just as the Lord had promised to give them victory over all the enemies of the earth , for the Lord had given them victory over everything he had done .
GOLD:	And the Lord gave them rest on every side , just as he had solemnly promised their ancestors . None of their enemies could stand against them , for the Lord helped them conquer all their enemies .

ID:	4143
INPUT:	Zahatoko ura ahitu zitzaionean , zuhaitz baten azpian utzi zuen haurra
PRED:	As soon as they got up , they got up into the boat .
GOLD:	When the water was gone , she put the boy in the shade of a bush .

ID:	4144
INPUT:	Eta ase zirenean , esan zien Jesusek ikasleei : « Bil itzazue hondarrak , ezer gal ez dadin » .
PRED:	Then Jesus sat down to the disciples and said to the disciples , “ Let 's go to the ground , so that you wo n't be able to destroy it . ”
GOLD:	After everyone was full , Jesus told his disciples , “ Now gather the leftovers , so that nothing is wasted . ”

ID:	4145
INPUT:	« Hartzazu , beraz , onez zeure zerbitzari honen eskaria eta zeure herri Israelen otoitza ; entzun iezaiezu dei eginen dizuten bakoitzean .
PRED:	“ Take your servant , your servant , and ask the people of Israel , ‘ Listen to this message from the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	“ May your eyes be open to my requests and to the requests of your people Israel . May you hear and answer them whenever they cry out to you .

ID:	4146
INPUT:	Hona hemen Jainkoaren tenplua eraikitzeko Salomonek erabaki zituen neurriak : hogeita hamar metro luze eta hamar metro zabal .
PRED:	This is the account of the Temple of God 's Temple , which was 30 feet long and 75 feet wide .
GOLD:	These are the dimensions Solomon used for the foundation of the Temple of God ( using the old standard of measurement ) . It was 90 feet long and 30 feet wide .

ID:	4147
INPUT:	Bildotsak hirugarren zigilua ireki zuenean , hirugarren izakiak hau esaten zuela entzun nuen : « Zatoz » . Begiratu eta zaldi beltz bat ikusi nuen . Haren gainekoak balantza bat zuen eskuan ,
PRED:	When the Lamb broke the third seal , I heard that the third of the Lamb had heard this , I said , “ Look , I have heard that you are standing in the field . ”
GOLD:	When the Lamb broke the third seal , I heard the third living being say , “ Come ! ” I looked up and saw a black horse , and its rider was holding a pair of scales in his hand .

ID:	4148
INPUT:	eta morroia bidaliko dut , esanez : “ Hoa eta bila itzak geziak ” . Morroiari “ Hi baino honantzago dituk geziak , har itzak ” esango banio , orduan etor zaitezke , dena bakean izango baita . Ez da arriskurik izango , ala Jauna !
PRED:	And I will tell you , ‘ This is what the servant says : The servant of the servant of the servant , ‘ You are one of your servants , and you will be the one who comes . ' But if you do n't know that the Lord is going , you will never see .
GOLD:	Then I will send a boy to bring the arrows back . If you hear me tell him , ‘ They 're on this side , ' then you will know , as surely as the Lord lives , that all is well , and there is no trouble .

ID:	4149
INPUT:	Jainkoak bedeinkatu eta erruz ugaltzen dira , haien abere-taldeei ez die urritzen uzten .
PRED:	God blesses those who are rich in the land , and they do n't multiply their crops .
GOLD:	How he blesses them ! They raise large families there , and their herds of livestock increase .

ID:	4150
INPUT:	Hemendik ere lotsaz irtengo zara , eskuak buruan dituzula . Izan ere , nik , Jaunak , mespretxatu egiten ditutzure konfiantza-euskarriak ; ez duzu horiekin ezer onik lortuko » .
PRED:	Those who hate you will be clothed in shame , and you will be clothed with shame , and you will have no hope , but you will have nothing to trust in them . ”
GOLD:	In despair , you will be led into exilewith your hands on your heads , for the Lord has rejected the nations you trust.They will not help you at all .

ID:	4151
INPUT:	Zazpi egunez , aldarearen garbikuntza-ohikunea egingo da , garbi eta sagaratua geldi dadin .
PRED:	On the seventh day the priest will purify the altar , and it will be ceremonially clean . Through this process , the priest will be ceremonially clean , and he will be ceremonially clean .
GOLD:	Do this each day for seven days to cleanse and make atonement for the altar , thus setting it apart for holy use .

ID:	4152
INPUT:	Nori egiten diozue barre ? Noren kontra zabaltzen duzue ahoaeta luzatzen mihia ? Ez zarete , bada , zeuek erebekatukume eta sasi-umealdi ?
PRED:	Do n't you realize that your heart is against you ? Do n't you realize that it is like a woman ? Do n't you realize that your sins are like a woman ?
GOLD:	Whom do you mock , making faces and sticking out your tongues ? You children of sinners and liars !

ID:	4153
INPUT:	Alabaina , hango jendea indartsua da , hango hiriak gotorrak eta izugarri handiak . Gainera , Anak erraldoiaren ondorengoak ere ikusi ditugu .
PRED:	But the people of the town is great and powerful , and the people of Assyria have seen the great city . We have seen the descendants of Anak .
GOLD:	But the people living there are powerful , and their towns are large and fortified . We even saw giants there , the descendants of Anak !

ID:	4154
INPUT:	Hau dio Jaunak , Jakoben herriaren erregeak : « Aurkeztu zeuen auzia , idolook , ekarri frogak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The king of Israel chose to prove your plans , you must prove that you are going to prove your plans .
GOLD:	“ Present the case for your idols , ” says the Lord . “ Let them show what they can do , ” says the King of Israel .

ID:	4155
INPUT:	Pisu faltsuak , neurgailu faltsuak : biak ditu higuingarri Jaunak .
PRED:	All liars are liars , and liars are detestable to the Lord .
GOLD:	False weights and unequal measures — the Lord detests double standards of every kind .

ID:	4156
INPUT:	Jaunak jakinduriaz oinarritu zuen lurraeta zentzuz ezarri zerua ;
PRED:	The Lord gave wisdom to the earth , and wisdom he created the earth .
GOLD:	By wisdom the Lord founded the earth ; by understanding he created the heavens .

ID:	4157
INPUT:	Egiptoko lehen-semeak jo zituen , haren maitasuna betikoa baita .
PRED:	He struck the firstborn son of Egypt , but his unfailing love endures forever .
GOLD:	Give thanks to him who killed the firstborn of Egypt.His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	4158
INPUT:	Bertan zeudenetariko batzuek esan zieten : « Zer ari zarete hor astakumea askatzen ? »
PRED:	Some of the others began to eat and said , “ What are you going to eat ? ”
GOLD:	As they were untying it , some bystanders demanded , “ What are you doing , untying that colt ? ”

ID:	4159
INPUT:	Absalomen mutilek , etxe hartara heldurik , galdetu zioten etxekoandreari : — Non dira Ahimaatz eta Jonatan ? Etxekoandreak erantzun : — Alde egin dute hemendik uretara . Ibili ziren bila , baina aurkitzen ez eta Jerusalemera itzuli ziren .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Absalom arrived at the home of the Temple , and he asked , “ Where are you going to marry her ? ” So Ahimaaz replied , “ She is n't here to marry her . ” So they returned to Jerusalem and returned to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	When Absalom 's men arrived , they asked her , “ Have you seen Ahimaaz and Jonathan ? ” The woman replied , “ They were here , but they crossed over the brook . ” Absalom 's men looked for them without success and returned to Jerusalem .

ID:	4160
INPUT:	Beste hau ere erakutsi zidan Jaunak : horma baten ondoan zegoen bera , eskuan berun-haria zuela .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ This is what the Lord has commanded me to sit on the Sabbath day . ”
GOLD:	Then he showed me another vision . I saw the Lord standing beside a wall that had been built using a plumb line . He was using a plumb line to see if it was still straight .

ID:	4161
INPUT:	Ondoren , Salomon jarri zen bere aita Daviden errege-aulkian eta sendotu egin zuen haren erregetza .
PRED:	Then Solomon became the next king , and he strengthened his throne in his place .
GOLD:	Solomon became king and sat on the throne of David his father , and his kingdom was firmly established .

ID:	4162
INPUT:	Ordutik , apostoluekin batera ibili ohi zen Saulo Jerusalemen , Jaunari buruz ausardiaz hitz eginez .
PRED:	So Saul went to Jerusalem with the leading priests and Saul to Jerusalem to speak to the Lord in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	So Saul stayed with the apostles and went all around Jerusalem with them , preaching boldly in the name of the Lord .

ID:	4163
INPUT:	Binuirenak <unk> ;
PRED:	The family of Arah775
GOLD:	The family of Bani648

ID:	4164
INPUT:	Lebitarren familiaburuen izenak Kronika liburuetan idatzita daude Eliaxiben seme Johananen garaia arte .
PRED:	The names of the members of the Kohathite clan , including the heads of the History of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	A record of the heads of the Levite families was kept in The Book of History down to the days of Johanan , the grandson of Eliashib .

ID:	4165
INPUT:	Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Barreiaturik egon deneko herrien artetik Israel bilduko dudanean , neure santutasuna agertuko dut nazioen aurrean , eta israeldarrak neure zerbitzari Jakobi eman nion lurraldean biziko dira berriro .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will gather the people of Israel from the community of Israel from the community of Israel , and I will bring them back to the land of Israel .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The people of Israel will again live in their own land , the land I gave my servant Jacob . For I will gather them from the distant lands where I have scattered them . I will reveal to the nations of the world my holiness among my people .

ID:	4166
INPUT:	guregan irauten duen eta betiko gurekin izango den egiarengatik .
PRED:	Anyone who believes in him will be with him and will be with him .
GOLD:	because the truth lives in us and will be with us forever .

ID:	4167
INPUT:	Behinola , Zerah etiopiarra Asaren kontra abiatu zen , milioi bat gudari eta hirurehun guda-gurdirekin , eta Marexaraino heldu zen .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the town of Zerah attacked the town of Zerah , and the army of Zerah attacked Judah . So they went with their chariots and went with their chariots .
GOLD:	King Asa had an army of 300,000 warriors from the tribe of Judah , armed with large shields and spears . He also had an army of 280,000 warriors from the tribe of Benjamin , armed with small shields and bows . Both armies were composed of well-trained fighting men .

ID:	4168
INPUT:	Sar zaitez gero etxean zeure semeekin eta itxi atea . Isuri olioa ontzi guztietara eta , bete ahala , eraman denak bazterrera .
PRED:	Go back into the house , and go back into the boat . Take the boat with the olive oil , and go out into the boat with the olive oil .
GOLD:	Then go into your house with your sons and shut the door behind you . Pour olive oil from your flask into the jars , setting each one aside when it is filled . ”

ID:	4169
INPUT:	eta su-labera botako . Negarra eta hortz-karraska izango da han » .
PRED:	There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . ”
GOLD:	throwing the wicked into the fiery furnace , where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth .

ID:	4170
INPUT:	« Horrela ere obeditzen ez badidazue , zazpi bider gogorrago zigortuko zaituztet zeuen bekatuengatik .
PRED:	“ If you refuse to obey me , I will not punish you seven times . I will punish you for your sins .
GOLD:	“ And if , in spite of all this , you still disobey me , I will punish you seven times over for your sins .

ID:	4171
INPUT:	ez ditu begiak zuzenengandik kentzen , errege-aulkietan ezartzen ditueta hantxe betiko goraipatzen .
PRED:	Do n't let the king break his throne from his throne , and he will put them on his throne .
GOLD:	He never takes his eyes off the innocent , but he sets them on thrones with kingsand exalts them forever .

ID:	4172
INPUT:	Eta Jesusek , zuhurki erantzun ziola ikusirik , esan zion : — Ez zaude Jainkoaren erreinutik urruti . Eta harrezkero , ez zen inor galderarik egitera ausartzen .
PRED:	But Jesus told him , “ Do n't see the Kingdom of God ? ” And Jesus replied , “ No one can enter the Kingdom of God . ”
GOLD:	Realizing how much the man understood , Jesus said to him , “ You are not far from the Kingdom of God . ” And after that , no one dared to ask him any more questions .

ID:	4173
INPUT:	Atsekabetu egin zen David , Jaunak Uza jo eta ebaki zuelako , eta toki hari Pe<unk> -Uza esan zion , hau da , « Uzaren Ebakidura » , eta horrela deritza egundaino .
PRED:	So David became very upset , and the Lord blessed him with a voice . He said to Uriah , “ This is what the Lord says : You are going to help us . ”
GOLD:	David was angry because the Lord 's anger had burst out against Uzzah . He named that place Perez-uzzah ( which means “ to burst out against Uzzah ” ) , as it is still called today .

ID:	4174
INPUT:	Kristo , betiko salbamenaren iturri ( 10 , <unk> )
PRED:	Christ , Christ , the Savior of Christ ,
GOLD:	Christ 's Sacrifice Once for All

ID:	4175
INPUT:	Orduan , adierazpenak egiten zizkidan aingerua aurreratu zen eta bidera zetorkion beste aingeru bati
PRED:	Then the angel spoke to me , and the angel flew into the sky , and the other angels came to him .
GOLD:	Come away , people of Zion , you who are exiled in Babylon ! ”

ID:	4176
INPUT:	Esauren seme Reuelen semeak , berriz , hauek izan ziren : Nahat , Zerah , Xama eta Miza . Hauek izan ziren Esauren emazte Basmaten ondorengoak .
PRED:	These were the sons of Esau 's sons : Eliphaz the sons of Esau 's wife became the father of Esau . These are the sons of Esau 's wife Adah . These are the sons of Esau 's wife Adah .
GOLD:	The descendants of Reuel were Nahath , Zerah , Shammah , and Mizzah . These are the descendants of Esau 's wife Basemath .

ID:	4177
INPUT:	Zein ederrak zure maite-laztanak , ene arreba , ene emaztegaia ! Ardoa baino gozoago dira ! Zure ukenduen usaina lurrin guztiak baino gozoago !
PRED:	How beautiful is your love , my daughter , my sister , my daughter , my daughter , is more beautiful than all the fruit of your enemies .
GOLD:	Your love delights me , my treasure , my bride.Your love is better than wine , your perfume more fragrant than spices .

ID:	4178
INPUT:	Egin promesak Jaunari , zeuen Jainkoari , eta bete ; haren inguruan bilduok , ekarri emaitzak Jainko beldurgarriari ,
PRED:	Do not fear the word of the Lord your God , all you who fear him and fear him .
GOLD:	For he breaks the pride of princes , and the kings of the earth fear him .

ID:	4179
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jesu Kristori esker , bizia ematen duen Espirituaren legeak askatu egin zaitu bekatuaren eta heriotzaren legetik .
PRED:	For the Spirit of Christ Jesus Christ , who gives you life through the Holy Spirit and death .
GOLD:	And because you belong to him , the power of the life-giving Spirit has freed you from the power of sin that leads to death .

ID:	4180
INPUT:	Hori izan zen Judaren leinuko senitarteek hartu zuten ondarea .
PRED:	This was the homeland allocated to the clans of Judah .
GOLD:	This was the homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Judah .

ID:	4181
INPUT:	Mendiak argizaria bezala urtzen diraJaunaren aurrean , lur osoaren Jabearen aurrean .
PRED:	My heart is like a breath of the Lord , like a breath of the earth , like a breath of the earth .
GOLD:	The mountains melt like wax before the Lord , before the Lord of all the earth .

ID:	4182
INPUT:	Neuk bilduko ditut bizirik geldituriko neure ardiak , sakabanatu nituen herrialde guztietatik . Beren larreetara ekarriko ditut berriro , hazi egingo dira eta erruz ugalduko .
PRED:	I will drive out the nations of the world , and I will leave them alone . I will drive them out of the land , and they will lose their sins .
GOLD:	But I will gather together the remnant of my flock from the countries where I have driven them . I will bring them back to their own sheepfold , and they will be fruitful and increase in number .

ID:	4183
INPUT:	Horrela , senideok , gure atsekabe eta estualdi guztien artean , adorez beterik utzi gaituzue zeuen sinesmenagatik .
PRED:	So , dear brothers and sisters , do n't beg you to stay away from the trials you have given us .
GOLD:	So we have been greatly encouraged in the midst of our troubles and suffering , dear brothers and sisters , because you have remained strong in your faith .

ID:	4184
INPUT:	Zuei , Jainkoaren Semearengan sinetsi duzuenoi , idatzi dizkizuet gauza hauek , betiko bizia duzuela jakin dezazuen .
PRED:	I have given you the Son of God , just as I have given you the Son of God , who has given you all these things .
GOLD:	I have written this to you who believe in the name of the Son of God , so that you may know you have eternal life .

ID:	4185
INPUT:	Baal-Hananen ondoren Hadar , <unk> hirikoa ( Mehetabel izan zuen emazte , Matreden alaba , eta hau Mezahabena ) .
PRED:	Here is the list of the family of the tribe of Babylon , the wife of Meshullam , the daughter of Meshullam , the daughter of Meshullam , the daughter of Meshullam , the daughter of Meshullam , was the son of Beor .
GOLD:	When Baal-hanan son of Acbor died , Hadad became king in his place and ruled from the city of Pau . His wife was Mehetabel , the daughter of Matred and granddaughter of Me-zahab .

ID:	4186
INPUT:	Elbarri bat ekarri zioten , ohatilan etzana . Jesusek , lagun haien sinesmena ikusirik , esan zion elbarriari : — Izan bihotz , seme ! Barkatuak dituzu bekatuak .
PRED:	One day one of them brought one of them to him , and he said to him , “ My child , please forgive the sins of the paralyzed man . ”
GOLD:	Some people brought to him a paralyzed man on a mat . Seeing their faith , Jesus said to the paralyzed man , “ Be encouraged , my child ! Your sins are forgiven . ”

ID:	4187
INPUT:	jakinik , Jesus Jauna piztu duenak piztu egingo gaituela gu ere Jesusekin eta beronen ondoan ipiniko gaituela zuekin batera .
PRED:	This is what the Lord Jesus raised up from the dead , and we will be buried with you in the Spirit of Jesus .
GOLD:	We know that God , who raised the Lord Jesus , will also raise us with Jesus and present us to himself together with you .

ID:	4188
INPUT:	Eufrates ibaiaz mendebaldera , Tifsahetik Gazaraino , Salomonek agintzen zuen ; ibaiaz mendebaldeko errege guztiak haren menpeko ziren , eta bakean bizi zen inguruetako lurralde guztietakoekin .
PRED:	So the hill country of the province west of the Euphrates River , including all the kings of Gilead , and all the kings of the province west of the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	But now the Lord my God has given me peace on every side ; I have no enemies , and all is well .

ID:	4189
INPUT:	Joan ziren , orduan , morroiak etxeko nagusiari esatera : “ Jauna , ez al zenuen hazi ona erein soroan ? Nondik du , bada , olo gaiztoa ? ”
PRED:	“ Then the master of his master 's household said to the master , ‘ Is n't it the one who planted a field ? '
GOLD:	“ The farmer 's workers went to him and said , ‘ Sir , the field where you planted that good seed is full of weeds ! Where did they come from ? '

ID:	4190
INPUT:	Eta emaginei beraiei , Jainkoari begirune izan ziotenez gero , ondorengoak eman zizkien .
PRED:	Then he gave them all to those who fear God , and he gave them their children to all who fear him .
GOLD:	And because the midwives feared God , he gave them families of their own .

ID:	4191
INPUT:	ohol bakoitza bost metro luze eta hirurogeita hamabost zentimetro zabal izango da ;
PRED:	Each frame will be 75 feet long and 27 inches wide .
GOLD:	Each frame must be 15 feet high and 27 inches wide ,

ID:	4192
INPUT:	Beste apostolurik ez nuen ikusi , Jaunaren anaia Santiago izan ezik .
PRED:	When I saw the apostle of the Lord , I saw the Holy One of the Lord .
GOLD:	The only other apostle I met at that time was James , the Lord 's brother .

ID:	4193
INPUT:	Basamortuan ere eraiki zituen dorreak , putzu ugari zulatu zuen , abere-talde asko baitzuen Xefela lautadan eta goi-lautadan ; baita nekazariak eta mahastilariak ere mendietan eta alorretan , nekazaritza gogoko baitzuen .
PRED:	He rebuilt the walls of the wilderness , where he built a well of the fields . He also built a well of the hill country of the hill country of the Negev and other towns in the hill country . He also rebuilt the walls of the hill country .
GOLD:	He also constructed forts in the wilderness and dug many water cisterns , because he kept great herds of livestock in the foothills of Judah and on the plains . He was also a man who loved the soil . He had many workers who cared for his farms and vineyards , both on the hillsides and in the fertile valleys .

ID:	4194
INPUT:	eta haren gorpua simaur bihurtuko zela alorrean , Izreelgo landan ; inork ere ezin izango zuela « Hau Jezabel da » esan .
PRED:	And when they are buried in the field of Jezreel , no one will bury her . No one will bury her . ”
GOLD:	Her remains will be scattered like dung on the plot of land in Jezreel , so that no one will be able to recognize her . ' ”

ID:	4195
INPUT:	Utz beza gaiztoak bere bidea , gaizkileak bere asmo txarrak . Bihur dadila Jaunarengana , gupidaz hartuko baitu ; bihurtu gure Jainkoarengana , guztiz barkabera baita .
PRED:	Let the wicked be filled with grief , for the Lord our God is planning to forgive us , but he is our God . But he is our God , and he is our God .
GOLD:	Let the wicked change their waysand banish the very thought of doing wrong.Let them turn to the Lord that he may have mercy on them.Yes , turn to our God , for he will forgive generously .

ID:	4196
INPUT:	Erregeak , epaimahaian esertzean , begiratu hutsez haizatzen du gaiztakeria guztia .
PRED:	For the king is angry with the wicked , and he destroys them .
GOLD:	When a king sits in judgment , he weighs all the evidence , distinguishing the bad from the good .

ID:	4197
INPUT:	Ondoren , harri-pilo handia ezarri zioten gainean Akani . Han dago oraindik harri-piloa . Horregatik deritza toki hari gaurdaino « Akor ibarra » , hau da , « Ezbehar-ibarra » . Orduan baretu zen Jaunaren haserrea .
PRED:	Then they piled up a stone pile of stones , and there was a new stone that could be poured out on it . That is why the Lord 's anger has been poured out on it . ” So the anger of the Lord was very angry with them .
GOLD:	They piled a great heap of stones over Achan , which remains to this day . That is why the place has been called the Valley of Trouble ever since . So the Lord was no longer angry .

ID:	4198
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaun ahalguztidunak , Israelgo Jainkoak : « Eskaini nahi adina erre-opari eta sakrifizio eta jan berorien haragia .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : “ You must offer a burnt offering to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : “ Take your burnt offerings and your other sacrifices and eat them yourselves !

ID:	4199
INPUT:	« Jauna dela Jainkoa jakin dezazuen ikusarazi zaizue hori guztia : ez da bera besterik .
PRED:	“ You know that the Lord your God is with you , and he is not your own .
GOLD:	“ He showed you these things so you would know that the Lord is God and there is no other .

ID:	4200
INPUT:	Ez zekiten Josek ulertzen ziela , itzultzaile baten bitartez mintzatzen baitzitzaien .
PRED:	So Joseph did n't understand how he was talking about John , for he had told them what he had said .
GOLD:	Of course , they did n't know that Joseph understood them , for he had been speaking to them through an interpreter .

ID:	4201
INPUT:	Nahastu , Jauna , horien mihi maltzurra . Gogorkeria eta haserrea besterik ez baitut ikusten hirian ,
PRED:	O Lord , I will pour out my fury on them , for I am very angry with them .
GOLD:	Its walls are patrolled day and night against invaders , but the real danger is wickedness within the city .

ID:	4202
INPUT:	Izan ere , Jaunarenak zeuen Jainkoarenak dira zeru zabalak , lurra eta bertako guztia .
PRED:	For the Lord your God is your God , the Creator of all the kingdoms of the earth .
GOLD:	“ Look , the highest heavens and the earth and everything in it all belong to the Lord your God .

ID:	4203
INPUT:	Jaunari honako hauek aurkeztuko zaizkio , beraren ohorez erretzeko opari gisa : heste inguru eta gaineko gantza ,
PRED:	These are the instructions to the Lord , including the fat around the internal organs , the fat around the internal organs , the fat around the internal organs ,
GOLD:	The priest must present part of this offering as a special gift to the Lord . This includes all the fat around the internal organs ,

ID:	4204
INPUT:	Eraiki , bada , hiriak zeuen familientzat eta artegiak artaldeentzat . Baina eutsi emandako hitzari .
PRED:	So you have built an ambush for your flocks and herds and herds of cattle , sheep , and goats .
GOLD:	Go ahead and build towns for your families and pens for your flocks , but do everything you have promised . ”

ID:	4205
INPUT:	« Gizonaren Semea , aingeru guztiak lagun dituela , aintzaz beterik etortzean , bere errege-aulkian eseriko da .
PRED:	“ Son of Man will be like the Son of Man coming on his throne , and he will sit on his throne .
GOLD:	“ But when the Son of Man comes in his glory , and all the angels with him , then he will sit upon his glorious throne .

ID:	4206
INPUT:	Haiekin batera , berealdiko jende-multzoa zihoan , baita abere-talde handiak ere .
PRED:	As they were there , the people of the land were filled with their flocks and herds , and their flocks were filled with fear .
GOLD:	A rabble of non-Israelites went with them , along with great flocks and herds of livestock .

ID:	4207
INPUT:	Hala egin zuten . Aaronek eskuan zeraman makila luzatu eta lurra jo zuen , eta Egiptoko hauts guztia gizaki eta abereentzat gogaikarri zen eltxo-izurri bihurtu zen .
PRED:	So Aaron and his hand went out to Egypt . Then he took the staff and put it on the ground , and he turned it to dust and fled to Egypt .
GOLD:	And the Lord did just what Moses had predicted . The frogs in the houses , the courtyards , and the fields all died .

ID:	4208
INPUT:	meta ditzala : errugabeak jantziko ditu , eta dirua zintzoak bereganatuko .
PRED:	They will wear their garments for their sins , and they will be innocent .
GOLD:	But the righteous will wear that clothing , and the innocent will divide that money .

ID:	4209
INPUT:	Ez ziren izango beren gurasoen antzeko : jende ez-esaneko eta errebeldea , gizaldi bihotz-arina , Jainkoarekiko barru desleialekoa .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of their ancestors , for they will not be afraid of their sins . They will be like a man of God , a man of God .
GOLD:	Then they will not be like their ancestors — stubborn , rebellious , and unfaithful , refusing to give their hearts to God .

ID:	4210
INPUT:	Ezin zen jakin zenbat pisatzen zuen Salomonek Jaunaren etxerako eginak ziren bi zutabeen , uraskaren eta orgen brontzeak .
PRED:	Solomon could not destroy the Temple of the Lord because of Solomon 's Temple , and the water carts had made from the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	The weight of the bronze from the two pillars , the Sea , and the water carts was too great to be measured . These things had been made for the Lord 's Temple in the days of Solomon .

ID:	4211
INPUT:	Badut zuri kalte egiteko ahalbiderik , baina zuen arbasoen Jainkoak esan dit bart : « Ez , gero , esan ezertxo ere Jakobi » .
PRED:	I will destroy you with the power of your ancestors , but God told me , “ Do n't be angry with me . ”
GOLD:	I could destroy you , but the God of your father appeared to me last night and warned me , ‘ Leave Jacob alone ! '

ID:	4212
INPUT:	Jendea entzuten ari zitzaiola , Jesusek beste parabola bat kontatu zien , Jerusalemdik hurbil baitzen eta jendeak Jainkoaren erregetza une batetik bestera azalduko zela uste baitzuen :
PRED:	Many of the crowds heard that Jesus had been telling others about the story of the story of the story of the Kingdom of God , for he was near the Kingdom of God .
GOLD:	The crowd was listening to everything Jesus said . And because he was nearing Jerusalem , he told them a story to correct the impression that the Kingdom of God would begin right away .

ID:	4213
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Ez beronek , ez beronen gurasoek , ez zuten bekatu egin , baizik eta Jainkoaren egintzak honengan ager daitezen jaio zen itsu .
PRED:	Jesus told them , “ Do n't obey the commands of our ancestors , but they would n't obey God 's commands , and they will be born . ”
GOLD:	“ It was not because of his sins or his parents ' sins , ” Jesus answered . “ This happened so the power of God could be seen in him .

ID:	4214
INPUT:	Zilarra labearen erdian urtzen den bezala , hala urtuko zaituztet Jerusalemen erdian ; orduan jakingo duzue ni naizela Jauna , zuen kontra bere sumina isurtzen duena » .
PRED:	As soon as I live in Jerusalem , you will know that I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and you will know that I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	and you will melt like silver in fierce heat . Then you will know that I , the Lord , have poured out my fury on you . ' ”

ID:	4215
INPUT:	Kanta bezate nazioek pozaren pozez , herriak justiziaz gobernatzen baitituzu , nazioak munduan zuk gidatzen .
PRED:	For the world is filled with joy , for the nations of the world is filled with joy .
GOLD:	May the nations praise you , O God.Yes , may all the nations praise you .

ID:	4216
INPUT:	Ez nau gehiago ikusiko so egiten zidanak ; zuk begiratzean , ez naiz jadanik munduan izango .
PRED:	I will never see me again , and you will see me in the face of the earth .
GOLD:	You see me now , but not for long.You will look for me , but I will be gone .

ID:	4217
INPUT:	Argizagi handiak egin ditu , haren maitasuna betikoa baita ;
PRED:	Give thanks to him who made him great , His faithful love endures forever .
GOLD:	Give thanks to him who made the heavenly lights — His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	4218
INPUT:	Aditu zuen Jainkoak haien negar-zotina , Abraham , Isaak eta Jakobekin egindako ituna gogora ekarriz .
PRED:	Then God blessed them , and Abraham , Isaac , Isaac , and Jacob , and Jacob , and Jacob .
GOLD:	God heard their groaning , and he remembered his covenant promise to Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob .

ID:	4219
INPUT:	Orduan , jaiki , bere jantzia urratu eta ilea zeharo moztu zuen Jobek . Gero , lurreraino ahuspeztuz , otoitz egin zuen ,
PRED:	Then Joab got up and stood at his feet , dressed him in burlap and prayed to the ground . Then Joab bowed low to the ground .
GOLD:	Job stood up and tore his robe in grief . Then he shaved his head and fell to the ground to worship .

ID:	4220
INPUT:	Eta begiraleak erantzun : « Egunsentia badator , baina gaua ere bai berriro . Oraindik galdetu nahi baduzue , etorri berriz ere , eta galdetu » .
PRED:	And the man replied , “ The time is coming , but when you come , you will find out again . But if you do n't want to find him , you will find him . ”
GOLD:	The watchman replies , “ Morning is coming , but night will soon return.If you wish to ask again , then come back and ask . ”

ID:	4221
INPUT:	Jaun ahalguztidunak hau azaldu dit : « Bekatu hau ez dizuet barkatukozeuen bizialdi guztian » . Jainko Jaun ahalguztidunakesan du .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ I will not forgive your sins , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has revealed this to me : “ Till the day you die , you will never be forgiven for this sin . ” That is the judgment of the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	4222
INPUT:	Hitz egin nuen Jaunaren izenean berak agindu bezala , eta hitz egin bitartean hots bat izan zen : lurrak dardara egin zuen eta hezurrak bata bestearekin elkartzen hasi .
PRED:	As soon as I was in the Lord 's presence , I spoke to the Lord 's command , and he spoke to the bones of the earth and began talking about it .
GOLD:	So I spoke this message , just as he told me . Suddenly as I spoke , there was a rattling noise all across the valley . The bones of each body came together and attached themselves as complete skeletons .

ID:	4223
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Itzuli niregana , herri fedegabe hori , neu bakarrik nauzu zeure nagusia eta . Banan-banan bilduko zaituztet hiri eta familia bakoitzetik eta Sion mendira eramango .
PRED:	“ Go back to me , ” says the Lord . “ I will bring you back to the people of Israel , and I will gather you out of Mount Carmel . I will send you out of Mount Zion . ”
GOLD:	“ Return home , you wayward children , ” says the Lord , “ for I am your master.I will bring you back to the land of Israel — one from this town and two from that family — from wherever you are scattered .

ID:	4224
INPUT:	Orduan , Salomon erregeak Joiadaren seme Benaias bidali , eta honek Adonias hil egin zuen .
PRED:	Then King Solomon sent Benaiah son of Jehoiada the priest to kill him .
GOLD:	So King Solomon ordered Benaiah son of Jehoiada to execute him , and Adonijah was put to death .

ID:	4225
INPUT:	Emagaldu batengana bezala zihoazen beraiengana , Ohola eta Oholibagana , emakume li<unk> haiengana .
PRED:	A prostitute was very bitter , and she was very hard to go to her , and she said , “ I am very innocent . ”
GOLD:	And that is what they did . They had sex with Oholah and Oholibah , these shameless prostitutes .

ID:	4226
INPUT:	Saulo , ordea , gero eta kementsuago agertzen zen eta nahasturik uzten zituen Damaskoko juduak , argi frogatzen baitzuen Jesus Mesias zela .
PRED:	But Saul went to the high council , and he decided to prove that the Jewish law was going to prove that Jesus was the Messiah .
GOLD:	Saul 's preaching became more and more powerful , and the Jews in Damascus could n't refute his proofs that Jesus was indeed the Messiah .

ID:	4227
INPUT:	Esan zidan Jaunak : « Gizaseme , jarri arreta , begira erne eta entzun adi tenpluari buruz emango dizkizudan lege eta arau guztiak ; hartu gogoan , batez ere , tenpluan sartzeko eskubideari buruzkoak .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Son of man , listen to me and listen to me , and I will teach you everything I need . I will teach you about the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	And the Lord said to me , “ Son of man , take careful notice . Use your eyes and ears , and listen to everything I tell you about the regulations concerning the Lord 's Temple . Take careful note of the procedures for using the Temple 's entrances and exits .

ID:	4228
INPUT:	Betiko lege izango duzue hau belaunez belaun ; horrela , zer den sakratu eta zer profano , zer garbi eta zer kutsatu bereizi ahal izango duzue ,
PRED:	This is a permanent law for you , and it must be ceremonially clean . This is a permanent law for you , and you must be ceremonially clean .
GOLD:	You must distinguish between what is sacred and what is common , between what is ceremonially unclean and what is clean .

ID:	4229
INPUT:	Asiria neure lurralde Israelenbirrinduko dut , neure mendietan zapalduko . Kenduko zaio haren uztarrianire herriari , eroriko haren zama bizkarretik .
PRED:	I will give you the land of Assyria to my people Israel . I will break my yoke from the oppression of my people .
GOLD:	I will break the Assyrians when they are in Israel ; I will trample them on my mountains.My people will no longer be their slavesnor bow down under their heavy loads .

ID:	4230
INPUT:	Izan ere , duenari eman egingo zaio , eta gainezka izango du ; ez duenari , ordea , daukan apurra ere kendu egingo zaio .
PRED:	For the one who has given him authority , and he will be able to be taken away . But he will be taken away , and he will be taken away .
GOLD:	To those who listen to my teaching , more understanding will be given , and they will have an abundance of knowledge . But for those who are not listening , even what little understanding they have will be taken away from them .

ID:	4231
INPUT:	Bizi zelarik , eraikia zuen beretzat Absalomek Errege Haranean dagoen oroitarria , berekiko esanez : « Ez dut ene izena oroitaraziko duen semerik » . Eta bere izena ezarri zion oroitarriari . Horregatik deritza gaurdaino « Absalomen oroitarria » .
PRED:	So Abraham named Absalom , the king of Babylon , and he told him , “ I will not let my son Absalom 's son Absalom 's son Absalom 's son Absalom . ” So he said , “ I will set an oath to this day , and it will be known to this day . ”
GOLD:	During his lifetime , Absalom had built a monument to himself in the King 's Valley , for he said , “ I have no son to carry on my name . ” He named the monument after himself , and it is known as Absalom 's Monument to this day .

ID:	4232
INPUT:	hau Matusalemena , hau Henokena , hau Jaretena , hau Maleleelena , hau Kainamena ,
PRED:	Enoch was the son of Lamech , the son of Lamech was the son of Lamech .
GOLD:	Lamech was the son of Methuselah.Methuselah was the son of Enoch.Enoch was the son of Jared.Jared was the son of Mahalalel.Mahalalel was the son of Kenan .

ID:	4233
INPUT:	Zuen arbasoak ahaztu egin ziren , ordea , Jaunaz , beren Jainkoaz , eta Jaunak Hatzorko gudarostearen buruzagi zen Sisera-ren eskuetara eman zituen , baita filistearren eta Moabeko erregearen eskuetara ere , eta hauek gudukatu egin zituzten zuen arbasoak .
PRED:	But the Lord of Heaven 's Armies did not forget what he had done . So the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies was determined to destroy the Philistine army of Aram and the army of Moab and the army of Moab .
GOLD:	But the people soon forgot about the Lord their God , so he handed them over to Sisera , the commander of Hazor 's army , and also to the Philistines and to the king of Moab , who fought against them .

ID:	4234
INPUT:	Joiakimen gainerako jarduerak , egin zituen gauza higuingarriak eta gertatu zitzaiona « Israelgo eta Judako Erregeen Liburuan » daude idatziak . Hurrengo erregea haren seme Joiakin izan zen .
PRED:	The king of Judah did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , and he followed all the detestable practices of the Kings of Israel and Judah .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Jehoiakim 's reign , including all the evil things he did and everything found against him , are recorded in The Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah . Then his son Jehoiachin became the next king .

ID:	4235
INPUT:	Gauerdian jaikitzen naiz zu gorestera , zure erabakiak zuzenak direlako .
PRED:	You are born in the night , O God , and your gates will shine down on your gates .
GOLD:	I rise at midnight to thank youfor your just regulations .

ID:	4236
INPUT:	Handik bi egunera , Pazko-jaia eta Legamia gabeko Ogien Jaia ospatzen ziren . Apaizburu eta lege-maisuak Jesus maltzurkeriaz nola atxilotuko zebiltzan , hiltzeko .
PRED:	From the Festival of Unleavened Bread , the Festival of Unleavened Bread , and the leading priests and the teachers of religious law began to kill Jesus .
GOLD:	It was now two days before Passover and the Festival of Unleavened Bread . The leading priests and the teachers of religious law were still looking for an opportunity to capture Jesus secretly and kill him .

ID:	4237
INPUT:	Izu-ikara bidaliko dizut , bada , alde guztietatik . Nork bere aldetikemango dio ihesari , eta inor ez sakabanatuak biltzeko . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak .
PRED:	I will send you out of the land , and I will send you out of the south , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken !
GOLD:	But look ! I will bring terror upon you , ” says the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . “ Your neighbors will chase you from your land , and no one will help your exiles as they flee .

ID:	4238
INPUT:	bi alboetatik sei beso ateratzen zitzaizkion , hiruna beso albo bakoitzetik .
PRED:	There were six curtains on each side of the six steps , and each of the six posts set up on each side .
GOLD:	The lampstand had six branches going out from the center stem , three on each side .

ID:	4239
INPUT:	« Aita , nahi baduzu , urrun ezazu niregandik edari samin hau . Hala ere , egin bedi zure nahia , ez nirea » .
PRED:	“ My Father , if you want me to repent of my cup , you would have enough to drink it . ”
GOLD:	“ Father , if you are willing , please take this cup of suffering away from me . Yet I want your will to be done , not mine . ”

ID:	4240
INPUT:	Bide okerretara makurtzen direnak , berriz , desagerraraz bitza Jaunak gaizkileekin batera ! Bakea Israeli !
PRED:	But the Lord says , “ I will bring peace upon the people of Israel , and I will bring peace upon Israel . ”
GOLD:	But banish those who turn to crooked ways , O Lord.Take them away with those who do evil.May Israel have peace !

ID:	4241
INPUT:	Gutxi al deritzozue Israelgo Jainkoak herri osoaren artetik zuek hautatuak izateari , harengana hurbildu , Jaunaren egoitzako zerbitzuaren ardura izan eta herri osoaren izenean jarduteko ?
PRED:	Do n't you think of the righteous people of Israel , the God of Israel , has chosen them to serve the Lord your God . Why did you walk in the morning ?
GOLD:	Does it seem insignificant to you that the God of Israel has chosen you from among all the community of Israel to be near him so you can serve in the Lord 's Tabernacle and stand before the people to minister to them ?

ID:	4242
INPUT:	Garaia baino lehen eraman zituzten , ibaiak ura bezala , haien oinarriak urtuta .
PRED:	It was the first time for the time of the boat , and the water covered them with water .
GOLD:	They were snatched away in the prime of life , the foundations of their lives washed away .

ID:	4243
INPUT:	Hala egin zuen Josuek .
PRED:	So Joshua did as Joshua did .
GOLD:	So Joshua gave the command .

ID:	4244
INPUT:	Kalebek , jendeak Moisesen aurka ziharduen zurrumurrua isilaraziz , esan zuen : « Ea , goazen ! Igo eta jabe gaitezen lurralde hartaz , bagara horretarako gauza eta » .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the people of Israel rebelled against Moses and said to them , “ Look , I am about to take away the land of Canaan . ”
GOLD:	But Caleb tried to quiet the people as they stood before Moses . “ Let 's go at once to take the land , ” he said . “ We can certainly conquer it ! ”

ID:	4245
INPUT:	Hondamendiahondamendiaren gainetorriko da , albiste txarrak albiste txarren gain ; ikuskaria eskatuko diote profetari ; apaizak ez du irakaspenik emango , ezta kontseilariek ere aholkurik .
PRED:	They will see the destruction of the destruction of the destruction of their destruction , and they will see what they have done . They will not see the advice of the destruction of the wicked .
GOLD:	Calamity will follow calamity ; rumor will follow rumor.They will look in vainfor a vision from the prophets.They will receive no teaching from the priestsand no counsel from the leaders .

ID:	4246
INPUT:	Dohain hutsez zarete salbatuak sinesmenaren bidez ; eta hau ez dator zuengandik , baizik eta Jainkoaren emaitza da ;
PRED:	For God 's grace is given to those who believe in him , but he is not from God 's grace .
GOLD:	God saved you by his grace when you believed . And you ca n't take credit for this ; it is a gift from God .

ID:	4247
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun : — Benetan diotsut : Gaur gauean , oilarrak jo baino lehen , hiru aldiz ukatuko nauzu .
PRED:	“ I tell you the truth , ” Jesus replied . “ At midnight , you will deny three times . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ I tell you the truth , Peter — this very night , before the rooster crows , you will deny three times that you even know me . ”

ID:	4248
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , zure begien pozgarri dena kenduko dizut bat-batean . Baina zuk ez egin dolu , ez hasi aieneka edo negarrez .
PRED:	“ Son of man , I will rejoice in your presence , but I will not weep or weep or weep or mourn for you .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , with one blow I will take away your dearest treasure . Yet you must not show any sorrow at her death . Do not weep ; let there be no tears .

ID:	4249
INPUT:	Jesusek agindu bezala egin zuten ikasleek , eta Pazko-afaria prestatu zuten .
PRED:	So the disciples did as Jesus commanded . They prepared the Passover meal and prepared the Passover meal .
GOLD:	So the disciples did as Jesus told them and prepared the Passover meal there .

ID:	4250
INPUT:	« Espiritu gaiztoa , norbaitengandik irten ondoren , leku idorretan barrena ibili ohi da atseden bila ; baina , aurkitzen ez duelarik ,
PRED:	“ For the Holy Spirit is coming from the wicked , but anyone who tries to find it , but anyone who refuses to find it , but anyone who refuses to find it .
GOLD:	“ When an evil spirit leaves a person , it goes into the desert , seeking rest but finding none .

ID:	4251
INPUT:	Lagundu , gure Jainko salbatzaile horrek ; zeure izenaren ohoreagatik , libra gaitzazu , barkatu gure bekatuak .
PRED:	O Lord our God , rescue us from your power ; rescue us from your sins .
GOLD:	Help us , O God of our salvation ! Help us for the glory of your name.Save us and forgive our sinsfor the honor of your name .

ID:	4252
INPUT:	bizi dadila Kristo zuen bihotzetan sinesmenaren bidez eta izan dadila maitasuna zuen bizitzaren erro eta oinarri .
PRED:	As Christ lives in you , he loved you by the love of Christ , and he loved you by the mercy of Christ .
GOLD:	Then Christ will make his home in your hearts as you trust in him . Your roots will grow down into God 's love and keep you strong .

ID:	4253
INPUT:	Hau nioen neurekiko : « Palmondora igoko naizharen fruituak hartzera » . Mahats-lukuen gozoa dute niretzat zure bularrek , sagar-usain eztia zure arnasak .
PRED:	Then I said to myself , “ I will bring back to the spring of the fruit of the fruit of the enemy trees of the Dead Sea . ” And the fragrance of my perfume .
GOLD:	May your kisses be as exciting as the best wine — Yes , wine that goes down smoothly for my lover , flowing gently over lips and teeth .

ID:	4254
INPUT:	Joiadaren berrikuntzak
PRED:	Jehoiachin Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Jehoiada 's Religious Reforms

ID:	4255
INPUT:	Eta badakizue bekatuak kentzeko agertu zela Kristo , eta harengan ez da bekaturik .
PRED:	And you know that Christ is not worthy of sin , and he will never be forgiven .
GOLD:	And you know that Jesus came to take away our sins , and there is no sin in him .

ID:	4256
INPUT:	Neure baitan diot : « Ai uso-hegalak banitu ! Hegan egingo nuke , beste nonbait pausatzeko .
PRED:	For I said to myself , “ If only I would die , I would n't find it .
GOLD:	I would fly far awayto the quiet of the wilderness.Interlude

ID:	4257
INPUT:	Orduan , Sedekias erregeak Jeremias kartzela-atarian zainpean jartzeko agindu zuen eta egunero opil bat emateko okinen kaletik , hirian ogia ahitu arte . Hala , kartzelako atarian gelditu zen Jeremias .
PRED:	Then King Zedekiah ordered Jeremiah to bring him out of the guard , and he ordered one of the men to bring him out of the city . So Jeremiah ordered him to bring him out of the city .
GOLD:	So King Zedekiah commanded that Jeremiah not be returned to the dungeon . Instead , he was imprisoned in the courtyard of the guard in the royal palace . The king also commanded that Jeremiah be given a loaf of fresh bread every day as long as there was any left in the city . So Jeremiah was put in the palace prison .

ID:	4258
INPUT:	Nork ezagutu bere hutsegiteak ? Aska nazazu oharkabeko erruetatik .
PRED:	Who is able to save us from your sins ? Who can help you from heaven ?
GOLD:	Keep your servant from deliberate sins ! Do n't let them control me.Then I will be free of guiltand innocent of great sin .

ID:	4259
INPUT:	Sedekias , Judako errege
PRED:	Zedekiah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	The Fall of Jerusalem

ID:	4260
INPUT:	Seme-alabatxook , zuek Jainkoarenak zarete , eta garaituak dituzue sasiprofeta horiek , zuengan dagoena munduan dagoena baino handiagoa baita .
PRED:	Dear children , you are children of God 's children , and you have been taught by the word of God . You are greater than these things , and you are greater than all the world .
GOLD:	But you belong to God , my dear children . You have already won a victory over those people , because the Spirit who lives in you is greater than the spirit who lives in the world .

ID:	4261
INPUT:	Zuzena baitzara , libra nazazu , askatu , makur belarria niregana eta salba nazazu .
PRED:	But you are my fortress , O Lord , for you have rebelled against me .
GOLD:	Save me and rescue me , for you do what is right.Turn your ear to listen to me , and set me free .

ID:	4262
INPUT:	Davidek , orduan : — Dei egin Tzadok apaizari , Natan profetari eta Joaiadaren seme Benaiasi . Hauek sartu zirenean ,
PRED:	“ Tell Zadok the priest , ” David replied . “ You are my father , David 's brother , and his brothers went into the courtyard . ”
GOLD:	Then King David ordered , “ Call Zadok the priest , Nathan the prophet , and Benaiah son of Jehoiada . ” When they came into the king 's presence ,

ID:	4263
INPUT:	eta Jainkoak apaiz nagusi izendatu zuen Melkisedeken antzera .
PRED:	And Melchizedek received God 's order to be a priest in order of Melchizedek .
GOLD:	And God designated him to be a High Priest in the order of Melchizedek .

ID:	4264
INPUT:	Artean gizona nire ondoan zegoela , norbaitek tenplu barrutik hitz egiten zidala ohartu nintzen .
PRED:	As soon as I was walking along the road , someone told me about the Temple .
GOLD:	And I heard someone speaking to me from within the Temple , while the man who had been measuring stood beside me .

ID:	4265
INPUT:	Hala ere , Jainkoak ezarritako oinarri sendoak tinko dirau eta idazkun hau darama : Ezagutzen ditu Jaunak bereak dituenak , eta « Ihes egin beza gaiztakeriatik Jainkoaren izenari dei egiten dionak » .
PRED:	But God will lay his feet on his head , and he will change his finger and say , “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies , who calls on his name . ”
GOLD:	But God 's truth stands firm like a foundation stone with this inscription : “ The Lord knows those who are his , ” and “ All who belong to the Lord must turn away from evil . ”

ID:	4266
INPUT:	Itsasoan zabaldutako lehor-bidetik igaro ziren israeldarrak , urak ezker-eskuin zituztela harresi gisa .
PRED:	Then the waters of the sea opened the south side of the Dead Sea , and all the people of Israel were built on the south side .
GOLD:	So the people of Israel walked through the middle of the sea on dry ground , with walls of water on each side !

ID:	4267
INPUT:	Ordain-opariko ahariaren bidez , bekatuaren barkamen-ohikunea egingo du apaizak Jaunaren aurrean eta barkatua izango du gizonak bekatua .
PRED:	Then the priest will purify the person with a sin offering , making it right with the Lord . Through this process , the priest will purify the person before the Lord .
GOLD:	The priest will then purify him before the Lord with the ram of the guilt offering , and the man 's sin will be forgiven .

ID:	4268
INPUT:	Eta honela bukatu zuen Josuek : « Jaunak , zuen Jainkoak , Jordango urak lehortu ditu zuen aurrean zuek igaro ahal izateko , lehen Itsaso Gorria gure aurrean gu igarotzeko lehortu zuen bezala .
PRED:	Then Joshua said to them , “ This is what the Lord your God has commanded you to enter the land of the Jordan River , just as the Lord your God has commanded us .
GOLD:	For the Lord your God dried up the river right before your eyes , and he kept it dry until you were all across , just as he did at the Red Sea when he dried it up until we had all crossed over .

ID:	4269
INPUT:	« Nik , Jaunak , lau zigor-mota bidaliko dizkiet : gerra , hiltzeko ; txakurrak , zati-zati egiteko ; hegazti harrapariak eta basapiztiak , irentsi eta haiekikoa egiteko .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will punish the birds of the sky and wild animals , the birds of the sky , the birds of the sky , and the wild animals that scurry along the ground .
GOLD:	“ I will send four kinds of destroyers against them , ” says the Lord . “ I will send the sword to kill , the dogs to drag away , the vultures to devour , and the wild animals to finish up what is left .

ID:	4270
INPUT:	Gero , parabola hau kontatu zien : « Gizon aberats bati lurrak uzta handia eman zion .
PRED:	Then Jesus told the story : “ A poor man planted a rich nation , and he gave the rich harvest .
GOLD:	Then he told them a story : “ A rich man had a fertile farm that produced fine crops .

ID:	4271
INPUT:	Zure ondotik berriro pasatu eta amodio-garaian zeundela ikusi nuen . Zure gorputz biluzia estali eta zutaz arduratu nintzen ; ezkontza-hitzarmena egin nuen zurekin eta nirea izan zinen . Honela diot nik , Jainko Jaunak .
PRED:	Then I saw your own blood , and I saw that you were dead . Then I looked up and saw that you were dead , and I was with you . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !
GOLD:	And when I passed by again , I saw that you were old enough for love . So I wrapped my cloak around you to cover your nakedness and declared my marriage vows . I made a covenant with you , says the Sovereign Lord , and you became mine .

ID:	4272
INPUT:	baina nire partea etekinik gabeko egunak dira , eta gau nekagarriak dagozkit .
PRED:	But I have no idea what I have done , and my days are too hard for me .
GOLD:	I , too , have been assigned months of futility , long and weary nights of misery .

ID:	4273
INPUT:	Izan ere , gezurrezko mesiasak eta sasiprofetak agertuko dira eta aukeratuak berak ere , ahal balitz , engainatzeko moduko mirariak eta egintza harrigarriak egingo dituzte .
PRED:	For the king of Babylon will fulfill his vows to his prophet , and he will fulfill his vows to fulfill his vows , and he will fulfill his vows to fulfill his vows .
GOLD:	For false messiahs and false prophets will rise up and perform signs and wonders so as to deceive , if possible , even God 's chosen ones .

ID:	4274
INPUT:	Gaiztakeria sortzen du , zoritxarra ematen argitara , iruzurkeriaz bete-betea du barrua » .
PRED:	But the wicked are full of cursing , but they are full of lies . ”
GOLD:	They conceive trouble and give birth to evil.Their womb produces deceit . ”

ID:	4275
INPUT:	Zazpi egun eta zazpi gau eman zituzten berarekin lurrean eserita , hitzik ere esan gabe , ikusten baitzuten zein handia zen haren samina .
PRED:	After seven days they were fed with seven days , and they were never satisfied . They did n't see the miraculous signs and wonders they had seen .
GOLD:	Then they sat on the ground with him for seven days and nights . No one said a word to Job , for they saw that his suffering was too great for words .

ID:	4276
INPUT:	Laugarren egunean Beraka haranean , hau da , « Bedeinkapen-haranean » , bildu eta Jauna bedeinkatu zuten ; horregatik du toki horrek izen hori gaurdaino .
PRED:	On the fourth day of the fourth day of the fourth day of the second month , the Lord blessed him , and he blessed him from this day .
GOLD:	On the fourth day they gathered in the Valley of Blessing , which got its name that day because the people praised and thanked the Lord there . It is still called the Valley of Blessing today .

ID:	4277
INPUT:	Israeldarrek gatibu hartu zituzten madiandar emakume eta haurrak , eta abere , azienda eta ondasunak harrapatu .
PRED:	The armies of Midian were captured , and the women of Israel were captured by the sword , and their children were captured .
GOLD:	Then the Israelite army captured the Midianite women and children and seized their cattle and flocks and all their wealth as plunder .

ID:	4278
INPUT:	Jonatanek eman zizkion mutikoari bere iskiluak eta esan zion : — Hoa , eraman hirira .
PRED:	Then Jonathan said to the people of Israel , “ This is what the Lord says . ”
GOLD:	Then Jonathan gave his bow and arrows to the boy and told him to take them back to town .

ID:	4279
INPUT:	Han izango nauzu ni , Horeb mendiko harkaitzean . Harkaitza jo eta ura sortuko da , herriak edan dezan . Hala egin zuen Moisesek , Israelgo arduradunen aurrean .
PRED:	There you will be a rock in Mount Sinai . You will be a rock in a rock , and you will become a rock among the people of Israel .
GOLD:	I will stand before you on the rock at Mount Sinai . Strike the rock , and water will come gushing out . Then the people will be able to drink . ” So Moses struck the rock as he was told , and water gushed out as the elders looked on .

ID:	4280
INPUT:	esanez : “ Gure arbasoen garaian bizi izan bagina , ez genukeen profeten hilketan haiekin parterik izango ” .
PRED:	He said , ‘ Our ancestors did n't live in peace with us , for they would not die in the wilderness . '
GOLD:	Then you say , ‘ If we had lived in the days of our ancestors , we would never have joined them in killing the prophets . '

ID:	4281
INPUT:	Baina iparraldetik eta ekialdetik etorriko zaizkion albisteek asaldatu egingo dute ; orduan , amorru bizian irtengo da jende asko suntsitzeko asmoz .
PRED:	But they will come from the north and run away from the north , and they will destroy many nations . But many nations will be destroyed , and many will be destroyed .
GOLD:	“ But then news from the east and the north will alarm him , and he will set out in great anger to destroy and obliterate many .

ID:	4282
INPUT:	Samsonek egarri handia sumatu zuen ; Jaunari dei egin eta esan zion : « Garaipen handi hau eman ondoren , egarriak hiltzen utziko ote nauzu eta jentil arrotz horien esku erortzen ? »
PRED:	Samson cried out to the Lord with a loud voice , and he called to the Lord , “ By this time the great power you have given me victory over the people of Gilead . ”
GOLD:	Samson was now very thirsty , and he cried out to the Lord , “ You have accomplished this great victory by the strength of your servant . Must I now die of thirst and fall into the hands of these pagans ? ”

ID:	4283
INPUT:	Begira : neuk , Jaun honek , eman dizuet larunbata , atseden hartzeko ; horregatik , seigarren egunean bi egunerako janaria ematen dizuet . Beraz , zazpigarren egunean zaudete nor bere tokian , kanpora atera gabe » .
PRED:	“ Look , this is what the Lord says : I have given you a Sabbath day of complete rest on the Sabbath day of the Sabbath days of complete rest . I have given you a Sabbath day of complete rest on the Sabbath day . ”
GOLD:	They must realize that the Sabbath is the Lord 's gift to you . That is why he gives you a two-day supply on the sixth day , so there will be enough for two days . On the Sabbath day you must each stay in your place . Do not go out to pick up food on the seventh day . ”

ID:	4284
INPUT:	Ez nien ukatu neure begieieskatzen zidatenik deus ere , ezta neure bihotzaripozik batere . Nire lan guztietanatsegin hartu nuen ; hauxe izan zennire lan guztien saria .
PRED:	I did n't turn away from my suffering , for I refused to share my joy . I was filled with joy , and I did everything I worked for myself .
GOLD:	Anything I wanted , I would take . I denied myself no pleasure . I even found great pleasure in hard work , a reward for all my labors .

ID:	4285
INPUT:	Moab , zeure indar eta ondasunetanfidatu zara : hara orain zu ere konkistatua ! Zure jainko Kemox erbestera doa , bere apaiz eta buruzagiekin .
PRED:	O Moab , Moab , and its beauty is gone ! You are the god of Moab , the god of Moab , and the other god of Moab 's god is like an idol .
GOLD:	Because you have trusted in your wealth and skill , you will be taken captive.Your god Chemosh , with his priests and officials , will be hauled off to distant lands !

ID:	4286
INPUT:	Bere hirietan ezpatak erasoko dio , babeslekuak hauts bihurtuko dizkio , beraien burutazioengatik .
PRED:	They will offer their swords from their hordes , even though they have sold themselves to their ancestors , even though they have been driven from their land .
GOLD:	War will swirl through their cities ; their enemies will crash through their gates.They will destroy them , trapping them in their own evil plans .

ID:	4287
INPUT:	Baina nik Jaunarengan ditut begiak , salbatzen nauen Jainkoarengankonfiantza ; entzungo dit , bai , Jainkoak .
PRED:	But I trust in the Lord , for he rescues me from all my enemies .
GOLD:	As for me , I look to the Lord for help.I wait confidently for God to save me , and my God will certainly hear me .

ID:	4288
INPUT:	zedrozko oholez estali zituen tenplu barneko hormak , behetik hasi eta goiko habeetaraino , barne osoa zurez jantziz . Tenpluaren behea zipres-oholez estali zuen .
PRED:	He also built the cedar beams between the walls of the Temple . He also built a cedar beams between the walls of the Temple , and he overlaid it with cedar timber .
GOLD:	The entire inside , from floor to ceiling , was paneled with wood . He paneled the walls and ceilings with cedar , and he used planks of cypress for the floors .

ID:	4289
INPUT:	Egurra amaitzean , sua itzali ; iraintzailerik gabe , kito liskarra !
PRED:	As soon as they arrived , let 's go , let 's go back to the Philistines .
GOLD:	Fire goes out without wood , and quarrels disappear when gossip stops .

ID:	4290
INPUT:	Jauna biziki haserretu zitzaion Uzari ; bertan zauritu zuen eta han hil zen , Jainkoaren kutxa ondoan .
PRED:	The Lord was very angry with him , and he struck the Ark of God , and he died there .
GOLD:	Then the Lord 's anger was aroused against Uzzah , and God struck him dead because of this . So Uzzah died right there beside the Ark of God .

ID:	4291
INPUT:	Batzuk egun osoan irrikaz bila , zintzoak ezer gorde gabe eman .
PRED:	But some of the righteous people are trying to wash their lives , and do n't let them die .
GOLD:	Some people are always greedy for more , but the godly love to give !

ID:	4292
INPUT:	Jainkoak esan du — behin eta berriro entzun diot — berari dagokiola ahalmena .
PRED:	Then God said to them , “ I have heard that I have heard the power of the Almighty . ”
GOLD:	unfailing love , O Lord , is yours.Surely you repay all peopleaccording to what they have done .

ID:	4293
INPUT:	Barneko ataria eta tenplua
PRED:	Offerings for the Temple
GOLD:	The South Gateway

ID:	4294
INPUT:	Beraz , guztira bederatziehun eta hamabi urtez bizi izan ondoren , hil egin zen .
PRED:	Mahalalel lived 969 years , and then he died .
GOLD:	Seth lived 912 years , and then he died .

ID:	4295
INPUT:	Beste hamarrak , hori entzutean , Santiago eta Joanen aurka haserre jarri ziren .
PRED:	When James heard this , the Holy One of James , and John became angry with them .
GOLD:	When the ten other disciples heard what James and John had asked , they were indignant .

ID:	4296
INPUT:	Kendu nire bekatua , eta ur bizia baino gardenago izango naiz ; garbi nazazu , eta elurra baino zuriago izango .
PRED:	Take off your sins and make me clean , and I will be clean . I will be ceremonially clean , and you will be clean .
GOLD:	Do n't keep looking at my sins.Remove the stain of my guilt .

ID:	4297
INPUT:	Bere biziaren jabe izan nahian dabilenak galdu egingo du ; bere bizia niregatik galtzen duenak , ordea , eskuratu egingo du .
PRED:	Those who live in their lives will be destroyed , but those who do n't lose their lives . But those who do n't lose their lives , they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	If you cling to your life , you will lose it ; but if you give up your life for me , you will find it .

ID:	4298
INPUT:	eta , Bet-Hoglaren iparraldeko malda igaroz , Itsaso Hilera heltzen zen , Jordan ibaia itsasoratzen den lekuan . Hau zen Benjaminen leinuaren hegoaldeko muga .
PRED:	From the boundary on the west side of the Jordan River , east of the Jordan River , near the Sea of the Jordan River . This was the homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Benjamin .
GOLD:	ran past the north slope of Beth-hoglah , and ended at the north bay of the Dead Sea , which is the southern end of the Jordan River . This was the southern boundary .

ID:	4299
INPUT:	Izan ere , duenari eman egingo zaio ; ez duenari , ordea , daukan apurra ere kendu egingo » .
PRED:	For he will give you whatever he tells you , but he will not take it away . ”
GOLD:	To those who listen to my teaching , more understanding will be given . But for those who are not listening , even what little understanding they have will be taken away from them . ”

ID:	4300
INPUT:	Gari-hautsa bera eresaldu egingo dugu . Jende xehea dirutan erosiko dugu , eta behartsuakoinetako pare baten truke » .
PRED:	“ We are rich in the dust , but we are rich in the land . We are poor and poor and poor . ”
GOLD:	And you mix the grain you sellwith chaff swept from the floor.Then you enslave poor peoplefor one piece of silver or a pair of sandals .

ID:	4301
INPUT:	Hari lotuak zeuden , bada , bere aztikeriaz txunditurik baitzeuzkan aspaldidanik .
PRED:	There is a disgrace for your sins , for they have been a ruin for all their sins .
GOLD:	They listened closely to him because for a long time he had astounded them with his magic .

ID:	4302
INPUT:	Ez bedi zure bihotza horrelako emakumearen atzetik abia , ez zaitez berarengatik galbidean jar ,
PRED:	Do not neglect your mother 's heart , for he will not spare you from all your possessions .
GOLD:	Do n't let your hearts stray away toward her.Do n't wander down her wayward path .

ID:	4303
INPUT:	Erregeagana hurbildu zirenen artean zeuden Karxena , Xetar , Admata , Tar<unk> , Meres , Marsena eta Memukan , Pertsia eta Mediako zazpi buruzagiak ; hauek sar zitezkeen erregearen aurrera , erreinuko mailarik gorenetakoak zirelako .
PRED:	So the king of Judah went to the king of Carmel and Cilicia , the leader of the tribe of Carmel . These are the half of the kingdom of King Sihon of the kingdom of Persia , and he divided the kingdom to the kingdom of Persia .
GOLD:	The names of these men were Carshena , Shethar , Admatha , Tarshish , Meres , Marsena , and Memucan — seven nobles of Persia and Media . They met with the king regularly and held the highest positions in the empire .

ID:	4304
INPUT:	Moisesen gorazarrea
PRED:	Moses ' Death and Aaron
GOLD:	A Song of Deliverance

ID:	4305
INPUT:	Josuek Ruben eta Gaden leinuetakoei eta Manasesen leinu erdikoei dei egin
PRED:	Then Joshua called the tribes of Reuben and Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh called the half-tribe of Manasseh .
GOLD:	Then Joshua called together the tribes of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh .

ID:	4306
INPUT:	Horra Salomonen esku-aulkia . Hirurogei gudari ditu inguruan , Israelgo ausartenak ;
PRED:	So Solomon 's hand will lay his hand on his head , for he has chosen for forty days .
GOLD:	Look , it is Solomon 's carriage , surrounded by sixty heroic men , the best of Israel 's soldiers .

ID:	4307
INPUT:	Orduan , aurreratu zen espirituetariko bat , Jaunaren aitzinean gelditu eta esan zuen : « Neuk konbentzituko dut » . Jaunak galdetu zion : « Nola ? »
PRED:	Then a spirit approached the Spirit of the Lord , and he said to them , “ How can I do this ? ” And the Lord asked him , “ How can I do it ? ”
GOLD:	and finally a spirit approached the Lord and said , ‘ I can do it ! '

ID:	4308
INPUT:	Urte hartan bertan , Sedekiasen erregealdiko laugarren urtean , bosgarren hilean , Hananias profetak , jatorriz Gabaongoa zen Azurren semeak , Jeremiasekin topo egin zuen tenpluan , eta apaizen eta jende guztiaren aurrean esan zion :
PRED:	On January 15 , during the fourth year of King Zedekiah 's reign , during the fourth year of King Zedekiah 's reign , the prophet of Judah came to him and said ,
GOLD:	One day in late summer of that same year — the fourth year of the reign of Zedekiah , king of Judah — Hananiah son of Azzur , a prophet from Gibeon , addressed me publicly in the Temple while all the priests and people listened . He said ,

ID:	4309
INPUT:	Baina Asahelen seme Jonatan eta Tikbaren seme Jahzias erabaki honen kontra atera ziren , Mexulam eta Xabtai lebitarrak ere alde zituztela .
PRED:	But some of the sons of Judah were Sered on the towns of Judah , Jahaz , and liquid offerings to the Levites who were in charge of their work .
GOLD:	Only Jonathan son of Asahel and Jahzeiah son of Tikvah opposed this course of action , and they were supported by Meshullam and Shabbethai the Levite .

ID:	4310
INPUT:	Gogoan izan zuen bere agintzari sakratua , Abraham bere zerbitzariari egina .
PRED:	Remember that he had commanded his servant Abraham , his servant Abraham , his servant Abraham .
GOLD:	For he remembered his sacred promiseto his servant Abraham .

ID:	4311
INPUT:	Menfis eta Tafneskoek ereburezurra apurtu diote .
PRED:	All who are in the land of Egypt will be put in charge of murder .
GOLD:	Egyptians , marching from their cities of Memphis and Tahpanhes , have destroyed Israel 's glory and power .

ID:	4312
INPUT:	« Hona hemen labore-opariei buruzko ohikunea : Aaronen ondorengoei dagokie Jaunaren aurrean , aldarearen aitzinean , aurkeztea .
PRED:	“ These are the instructions regarding the guilt offering to the Lord . This is a permanent law for the Lord , for it is a special offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	Through this process , the priest will purify you before the Lord , making you right with him , and you will be forgiven for any of these sins you have committed . ”

ID:	4313
INPUT:	Hodias , Haxum , Be<unk> ,
PRED:	This is the following leaders : Meshullam , Meshullam ,
GOLD:	Hariph , Anathoth , Nebai ,

ID:	4314
INPUT:	Sare horretan <unk> tengatzen bada , sareak ez du jasaten , heldu egiten badio , ez dio eusten .
PRED:	Those who say this is not bringing against Satan , but those who do n't know it .
GOLD:	They cling to their home for security , but it wo n't last.They try to hold it tight , but it will not endure .

ID:	4315
INPUT:	Jesusek ihardetsi zien : — Ez al zaituztet neuk aukeratu Hamabiok ? Halere , zuetariko bat deabru da .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't I have chosen you to be chosen by the devil ? You are a prince of demons . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus said , “ I chose the twelve of you , but one is a devil . ”

ID:	4316
INPUT:	Israeldarrekin bake-hitzarmena egin zuen hiri bakarra hibiarrak bizi zireneko Gabaon izan zen . Beste guztiak armen indarrez hartu zituzten .
PRED:	There was peace with the people of Israel , who lived in peace with the rest of the people of Gilead .
GOLD:	No one in this region made peace with the Israelites except the Hivites of Gibeon . All the others were defeated .

ID:	4317
INPUT:	<unk> ETA ELKARTEAREN <unk> TOLAKETA ( 7 , <unk> )
PRED:	Listen to my prayer
GOLD:	Ezra Arrives in Jerusalem

ID:	4318
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	4319
INPUT:	Atalondoaren luzera hamar metrokoa zen , eta zabalera seikoa ; hamar harmaila igo behar ziren hara iristeko . Atearen bi aldeetara zutabe bana zegoen .
PRED:	The entry room of the gateway leading into the inner courtyard , and the entry room was 30 feet wide , and it had two steps leading to the entry room of the gateway .
GOLD:	The entry room was 35 feet wide and 21 feet deep . There were ten steps leading up to it , with a column on each side .

ID:	4320
INPUT:	« Ez dute emaztetzat hartuko emagaldu edo desohoratua izandako emakumerik , ezta senarrak zapuztutakorik ere , apaizak Jainkoari sagaratuak baitaude .
PRED:	“ You must not marry a man or a wife or a woman , for she is a husband or a wife or a husband , for she is a husband who has been married to God .
GOLD:	“ Priests may not marry a woman defiled by prostitution , and they may not marry a woman who is divorced from her husband , for the priests are set apart as holy to their God .

ID:	4321
INPUT:	Herri horien erlijioahutsaren pareko : horien idoloakbasoan ebakitako egur-puskak dira , artisauaren eskuak zizelez landuak ,
PRED:	These are the people of Israel who were like the middle of the middle of the sea , the middle of the sea , and the craftsmen were made of wood .
GOLD:	Their ways are futile and foolish.They cut down a tree , and a craftsman carves an idol .

ID:	4322
INPUT:	Nork eman dizkie jakinduria eta senai<unk> hegaztiari eta oilarrari ?
PRED:	Who gave me wisdom ? Who gave me the young men to lie down ?
GOLD:	Who gives intuition to the heartand instinct to the mind ?

ID:	4323
INPUT:	Eta zuek ez egon hor geldirik . Zoazte etsaien ondoren eta moztu ihesbideak ; ez utzi beren hirietan sartzen , Jaunak , zeuen Jainkoak , eskura eman dizkizue eta » .
PRED:	Do not stay away ! Do not stay away from your enemies . Do n't let them go into the city , for the Lord your God has given you . ”
GOLD:	The rest of you continue chasing the enemy and cut them down from the rear . Do n't give them a chance to get back to their towns , for the Lord your God has given you victory over them . ”

ID:	4324
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Gedeoni : « Gudaroste handiegia dakarzu , madiandarrak zuri eskura nik emateko . Harrotu egingo litzaidake Israel , garaipena bere eskuz lortu duela pentsatuz .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Gideon , “ Go and fight the army of Israel , and give them victory over the Midianites . If you can know that I am going to save you , you will know that Israel will know how to save you . ”
GOLD:	The Lord said to Gideon , “ You have too many warriors with you . If I let all of you fight the Midianites , the Israelites will boast to me that they saved themselves by their own strength .

ID:	4325
INPUT:	Ez du giza adimenik izango , abereen sena baizik . Zazpi urtez biziko da horrela !
PRED:	He will not have a human son , but he will never be seven years old or older .
GOLD:	“ ‘ Then as I lay there dreaming , I saw a messenger , a holy one , coming down from heaven .

ID:	4326
INPUT:	hiri batekoak bestekoengana joango dira eta esango diete : “ Goazen Jaunaren bila , berari mesede eske ” . Eta erantzungo diete : “ Bai , bagoaz gu ere ” .
PRED:	They will say to each other , ‘ Let 's go and say , ‘ Let 's go to the land of the Lord 's return to us . ' But we will say , ‘ Yes , we will be able to answer the Lord . '
GOLD:	The people of one city will say to the people of another , ‘ Come with us to Jerusalem to ask the Lord to bless us . Let 's worship the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . I 'm determined to go . '

ID:	4327
INPUT:	Harremanetan zebilen Tzeruiaren seme Joabekin eta Abiatar apaizarekin ; bere alde zituen hauek .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Amasa son of Zeruiah , the priest of Zeruiah , and all the other priests .
GOLD:	Adonijah took Joab son of Zeruiah and Abiathar the priest into his confidence , and they agreed to help him become king .

ID:	4328
INPUT:	Erantzun ezinik gelditu ziren .
PRED:	And they replied , “ All right , ” they replied .
GOLD:	Again they could not answer .

ID:	4329
INPUT:	Kezka guztiak kendu nahi nizkizueke . Ezkongabea Jaunaren gauzez kezkatzen da , Jaunari atsegin nola emango ;
PRED:	I would give you whatever you want . I want to give you wisdom to the Lord . I will give it to you , and I will give it to you .
GOLD:	I want you to be free from the concerns of this life . An unmarried man can spend his time doing the Lord 's work and thinking how to please him .

ID:	4330
INPUT:	eta zeuen behi eta arkumeak , zilar eta urreak eta era guztietako ondasunak gehitzean ,
PRED:	and your flocks and herds , herds , herds , herds , herds , herds , and everything that belongs to the Lord .
GOLD:	and when your flocks and herds have become very large and your silver and gold have multiplied along with everything else , be careful !

ID:	4331
INPUT:	Eta nik hau diotsut : Pedro zara zu , eta harkaitz horren gainean eraikiko dut nik neure eliza ; eta herioaren indarrak ere ez du menderatuko .
PRED:	Then Peter said , “ I will make a rock of rock and a rock that makes it a rock , and it will never be broken . ”
GOLD:	Now I say to you that you are Peter ( which means ‘ rock ' ) , and upon this rock I will build my church , and all the powers of hell will not conquer it .

ID:	4332
INPUT:	« Esan beste hau ere : Niretzat zatirik hoberena bereizi ondoren , hartu gainerakoa zeuentzat , beste israeldarrek garia eta olio-ardoak berentzat hartzen dituzten bezala .
PRED:	“ Say to me , ‘ This is what the people of Israel have been chosen by eating and drinking the blood of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Also , give these instructions to the Levites : When you present the best part as your offering , it will be considered as though it came from your own threshing floor or winepress .

ID:	4333
INPUT:	Prezioa ezartzeko , honako baliokidetza hauek erabiliko dira : « Pertsona hogei urtetik hirurogei artekoa bada , gizonezkoarentzat berrogeita hamar zilarrezko txanpon , santutegiko dirutan ,
PRED:	The rest of the church at the Tabernacle , which means “ the end of the Tabernacle , which means ‘ It is twenty years old or older than forty years . It will be valued at the sanctuary of the Most Holy Place .
GOLD:	here is the scale of values to be used . A man between the ages of twenty and sixty is valued at fifty shekels of silver , as measured by the sanctuary shekel .

ID:	4334
INPUT:	« Hori da kutsagarri diren sexu-jarioari eta hazi-isurketari buruzko legea ,
PRED:	“ This is a permanent law for the discharge , and it is a permanent law for a skin disease .
GOLD:	These are the instructions for dealing with anyone who has a bodily discharge — a man who is unclean because of an emission of semen

ID:	4335
INPUT:	zeure eskulan guztien buru egin duzu , denak haren menpean jarri :
PRED:	You made all your hands on your head , and you put them under your authority .
GOLD:	the flocks and the herdsand all the wild animals ,

ID:	4336
INPUT:	Bakea eta errukia arau horri lotuak bizi direnei , baita Jainkoaren Israel herriari ere .
PRED:	For the people of Israel have listened to the word of the God of Israel .
GOLD:	May God 's peace and mercy be upon all who live by this principle ; they are the new people of God .

ID:	4337
INPUT:	( Mt 10 , 1-4 ; Mk 3 , <unk> )
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Blind Beggar
GOLD:	Love for Enemies

ID:	4338
INPUT:	Orain arte hor ibili gara goseak , egarriak , larrugorri eta gaizki erabiliak ; ez daukagu non bildurik ,
PRED:	So now they are stubborn and stubborn and stubborn and stubborn and rebellious , and their evil deeds are gone .
GOLD:	Even now we go hungry and thirsty , and we do n't have enough clothes to keep warm . We are often beaten and have no home .

ID:	4339
INPUT:	Eta lebitarren ondoren , Jauna , Israelen Jainkoa , benetan gurtu nahi zuten guztiak ere Jerusalemera etorri ziren Israelgo leinu guztietatik , Jaunari , beren arbasoen Jainkoari , opariak eskaintzera .
PRED:	Then they went to the Temple of the Lord , the God of Israel , to worship the Lord , the God of Israel , from all the tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	From all the tribes of Israel , those who sincerely wanted to worship the Lord , the God of Israel , followed the Levites to Jerusalem , where they could offer sacrifices to the Lord , the God of their ancestors .

ID:	4340
INPUT:	eta gauza bera ilunabarrean , kriseiluak piztean ; etengabe erreko duzue intsentsua Jaunaren aurrean belaunez belaun .
PRED:	Put on the lamps , and keep the lamps burning incense in the Lord 's presence . This is a permanent law for you , and it must be observed from the Lord .
GOLD:	And each evening when he lights the lamps , he must again burn incense in the Lord 's presence . This must be done from generation to generation .

ID:	4341
INPUT:	Zergatik esaten ote du “ Nire bila ibiliko zarete , baina ez nauzue aurkituko ; zeren eta , ni egongo naizen tokira , zuek ezin baitzarete joan ” ? »
PRED:	They will say , ‘ You are my messenger , but you will never find me , but you wo n't find me , for I am going to meet you . ' ”
GOLD:	What does he mean when he says , ‘ You will search for me but not find me , ' and ‘ You can not go where I am going ' ? ”

ID:	4342
INPUT:	Jainkoak idatziriko epaia betetzeaohoragarri da haren fededun guztientzat ! Aleluia ! Gora Jauna !
PRED:	For the Lord is the God of his priests ; he is good to the Lord ! Praise the Lord !
GOLD:	to execute the judgment written against them.This is the glorious privilege of his faithful ones.Praise the Lord !

ID:	4343
INPUT:	Bizirako bidea erakutsiko didazu : alaitasun betea zure aurrean , betiko zoriona zure ondoan .
PRED:	Your life will guide you with your heart , and your heart will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	You will show me the way of life , granting me the joy of your presenceand the pleasures of living with you forever .

ID:	4344
INPUT:	zeuekin eramango dituzue , Damaskotik harantz atzerrira bidaliko zaituztedanean » . Jainko Jaun ahalguztiduna , hori du izena .
PRED:	Then you will be with him , and he will bring you out of Damascus . ” This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	So I will send you into exile , to a land east of Damascus , ” says the Lord , whose name is the God of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	4345
INPUT:	Gogoratu esan nizuena : morroia ez da nagusia baino handiago . Ni pertsegitu banaute , zuek ere pertsegituko zaituztete ; nire mezua nola hartu , hala hartuko dute zuena ere .
PRED:	Remember , my master is not greater than your master 's master . But you are my master , and you will be very proud and arrogant .
GOLD:	Do you remember what I told you ? ‘ A slave is not greater than the master . ' Since they persecuted me , naturally they will persecute you . And if they had listened to me , they would listen to you .

ID:	4346
INPUT:	Orduan , Daniel purpuraz janzteko eta lepoan urrezko katea jartzeko agindu zuen Belxatzarrek , eta agintez hirugarren zela erreinuan aldarrikatu zuen .
PRED:	Then Daniel ordered Daniel to make a beautiful robe and put it in fine linen cloth , and he ordered that his kingdom to rise again .
GOLD:	Then at Belshazzar 's command , Daniel was dressed in purple robes , a gold chain was hung around his neck , and he was proclaimed the third highest ruler in the kingdom .

ID:	4347
INPUT:	Zenbait apaiz ere egoera berean zeuden : Hobaias , Hakotz eta Barzilairen ondorengoak ziren . Azken honek Galaadeko Barzilairen alaba batekin ezkondu zelako zeraman izen hori .
PRED:	Three days later some of the priests who had returned to the family of Barzillai of Gilead . ( This was a descendant of Barzillai of Gilead , a descendant of Barzillai of Gilead . )
GOLD:	Three families of priests — Hobaiah , Hakkoz , and Barzillai — also returned . ( This Barzillai had married a woman who was a descendant of Barzillai of Gilead , and he had taken her family name . )

ID:	4348
INPUT:	Baina zuzen jokatzeagatik sufritu beharrean gertatzen bazarete , zorionekoak zuek ! Ez izan inoren beldur , ez ikaratu !
PRED:	But if you suffer for suffering and suffering , you will suffer for your sake . Do n't be afraid of them ! Do n't be afraid !
GOLD:	But even if you suffer for doing what is right , God will reward you for it . So do n't worry or be afraid of their threats .

ID:	4349
INPUT:	eta beste bi atzealdeko kantoietarako .
PRED:	along with two additional frames to make the rear corners of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	along with two additional frames to reinforce the rear corners of the Tabernacle .

ID:	4350
INPUT:	Egun hartan , Jaunari sagaraturiko aldare bat egongo da Egiptoren erdian , eta Jaunaren ohorezko oroitarri bat muga ondoan .
PRED:	On that day of Egypt will be an altar in the Lord 's presence at the end of the Lord 's presence , and there will be a special gift to the Lord .
GOLD:	In that day there will be an altar to the Lord in the heart of Egypt , and there will be a monument to the Lord at its border .

ID:	4351
INPUT:	( 38 , 8 )
PRED:	Instructions for a Guilt Offering
GOLD:	The Incense

ID:	4352
INPUT:	gizakia etzan eta ez da berriro jaikiko , ortzia desagertu eta gero ere , ez da itzartuko , ez da bere loalditik esnatuko .
PRED:	But if you do n't know , you will be born again , and you will never be able to rise again , and you will never be put to shame .
GOLD:	people are laid to rest and do not rise again.Until the heavens are no more , they will not wake upnor be roused from their sleep .

ID:	4353
INPUT:	Ikusi zuen Jaunak handituz zihoala munduan gizakiaren gaiztakeria eta honen burubide guztiek txarrera jotzen zutela beti .
PRED:	When the Lord saw that I had seen the evil spirit of the wicked , they followed all their evil desires .
GOLD:	The Lord observed the extent of human wickedness on the earth , and he saw that everything they thought or imagined was consistently and totally evil .

ID:	4354
INPUT:	Aurrekoetan baino ere oparoago bedeinkatu zuen Jaunak Job bere ondorengo urteetan : hamalau mila ardi , sei mila gamelu , mila idi-pare eta mila asteme izan zituen .
PRED:	Then the Lord blessed Job in the land of Egypt , for he had six sons and daughters . He had six sons and daughters . He had six sons and daughters .
GOLD:	So the Lord blessed Job in the second half of his life even more than in the beginning . For now he had 14,000 sheep , 6,000 camels , 1,000 teams of oxen , and 1,000 female donkeys .

ID:	4355
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Jehuri : « Niri atsegin zaidana eginez ongi jokatu duzulako , eta Akaben errege-etxeari nik nahi nuena egin diozulako , zure ondorengoak jarriko dira , laugarren belaunaldiraino , Israelgo errege-aulkian » .
PRED:	The Lord said to Jehu , “ Because you have sinned against me , I will show you your unfailing love for the dynasty of Ahab , the dynasty of Ahab , the dynasty of Ahab of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Nonetheless the Lord said to Jehu , “ You have done well in following my instructions to destroy the family of Ahab . Therefore , your descendants will be kings of Israel down to the fourth generation . ”

ID:	4356
INPUT:	Eta Jaunaren aldarea berriztaturik , elkartasun- eta esker oneko opariak eskaini zituen bertan , eta Jauna , Israelen Jainkoa , gurtzeko agindu zion Judari .
PRED:	Then King Hezekiah gave a peace offering to the Lord , a sacrifice of peace offering , a peace offering , a pleasing aroma to the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	Then he restored the altar of the Lord and sacrificed peace offerings and thanksgiving offerings on it . He also encouraged the people of Judah to worship the Lord , the God of Israel .

ID:	4357
INPUT:	Etorri den bidetik itzuliko da ; ez da sartuko hiri honetan . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	The Lord will return to Elijah 's paths , and he will never enter the city , says the Lord .
GOLD:	The king will return to his own countryby the same road on which he came.He will not enter this city , 'says the Lord .

ID:	4358
INPUT:	Ni mendian nintzen , Jaunak zuekin eginiko itunaren harlauzak jasotzera igota . Berrogei egun eta berrogei gau egin nituen mendian ezer jan eta edan gabe .
PRED:	When I was in the mountain , the Lord took me up to the mountain of the Lord , and I ate no food for forty days and forty nights .
GOLD:	This happened when I was on the mountain receiving the tablets of stone inscribed with the words of the covenant that the Lord had made with you . I was there for forty days and forty nights , and all that time I ate no food and drank no water .

ID:	4359
INPUT:	Jerusalem mendeku eske
PRED:	The Fall of Jerusalem
GOLD:	's Vengeance on Babylon

ID:	4360
INPUT:	Judak Jaunaren ituna hautsi
PRED:	Judah 's Judah and Judah
GOLD:	A Call to Faithfulness

ID:	4361
INPUT:	Pertsona zentzudunei bezala mintzo natzaizue ; juzgatu zeuek diodana .
PRED:	The wicked will comfort you , but they will comfort you .
GOLD:	You are reasonable people . Decide for yourselves if what I am saying is true .

ID:	4362
INPUT:	Lehorte handia
PRED:	The Festival of Shelters
GOLD:	Judah 's Terrible Drought

ID:	4363
INPUT:	« Joani entzun zion herri osoak , baita zergalariek ere , Jainkoak arrazoi zuela aitortu zuten , haren bataioa hartuz .
PRED:	“ All the people listened to me , for they said , ‘ You are the God of our ancestors , and you believed him . '
GOLD:	When they heard this , all the people — even the tax collectors — agreed that God 's way was right , for they had been baptized by John .

ID:	4364
INPUT:	Delaias , Tobias eta Nekodaren ondorengoak ziren , 652 lagun .
PRED:	These were the families of Tobiah , Tobiah , and Azariah , who were descendants of Meshullam .
GOLD:	This group included the families of Delaiah , Tobiah , and Nekoda — a total of 652 people .

ID:	4365
INPUT:	Lebana , Hagaba eta Xalmairenak ;
PRED:	The family of Hashum223
GOLD:	Lebanah , Hagabah , Shalmai ,

ID:	4366
INPUT:	Hildakoagandik hurbilen legokeen hiriko arduradunek bigai bat hartuko dute , behin ere lanean jardun edo uztarrian lotu gabea .
PRED:	Those who have been raised from the dead will be put to death , and those who have been put to death . They must put their trust in the grave .
GOLD:	When the nearest town has been determined , that town 's elders must select from the herd a heifer that has never been trained or yoked to a plow .

ID:	4367
INPUT:	Jaunak Jeremiasi beste mezu hau eman zion :
PRED:	Then this message came to Jeremiah from the Lord :
GOLD:	The Lord gave another message to Jeremiah . He said ,

ID:	4368
INPUT:	« Abereei dagokienez , abelgorria nahiz abere xehea izan , hamarretik bat Jaunari sagaratuko zaio , zozketa bidez aukeratuz .
PRED:	“ If you are guilty , you must be considered guilty as a sacred portion of land , whether a sacred portion of land must be considered holy to the Lord .
GOLD:	Count off every tenth animal from your herds and flocks and set them apart for the Lord as holy .

ID:	4369
INPUT:	hasieran begizko testigu eta gero berri onaren predikari izandakoek jakinarazi digutenaren arabera .
PRED:	And we can tell you the truth , and we will be able to tell you the truth .
GOLD:	They used the eyewitness reports circulating among us from the early disciples .

ID:	4370
INPUT:	Horrela , erosi nion Anatoteko alorra neure lehengusu Hanameli . Zilarrezko hamazazpi txanpon ordaindu nizkion .
PRED:	So I bought him back to the field of burnt offering . I gave him a full price of silver for the number of silver .
GOLD:	So I bought the field at Anathoth , paying Hanamel seventeen pieces of silver for it .

ID:	4371
INPUT:	Beraz , jendea bildu zenean , Pilatok galdetu zien : — Zein nahi duzue askatzea , Barrabas ala Jesus , Mesias delakoa ?
PRED:	So Pilate called out to the crowd , “ Who want you to release one of the Roman soldiers ? ”
GOLD:	As the crowds gathered before Pilate 's house that morning , he asked them , “ Which one do you want me to release to you — Barabbas , or Jesus who is called the Messiah ? ”

ID:	4372
INPUT:	baina oihuka eta deiadarka hasi naizenean , bere soinekoa utzi eta ihes egin du kanpora » .
PRED:	But when I cried out , ‘ My Lord , ' he got away , leaving his cloak and ran away . ”
GOLD:	“ But when I screamed , he ran outside , leaving his cloak with me ! ”

ID:	4373
INPUT:	Dena dela , zuetariko bakoitzak maita beza emaztea bere burua bezala , eta emazteak izan biezaio begirune senarrari .
PRED:	But if you love each of your wives and your wives , let them marry her as wives and her husband .
GOLD:	So again I say , each man must love his wife as he loves himself , and the wife must respect her husband .

ID:	4374
INPUT:	Leak zioen : « Jainkoak saritu egin nau senarrari neskamea eman diodalako » . Eta Isakar eman zion izen .
PRED:	Then Leah said , “ God has given me a son . ” And Isaac named him Isaac , and she gave him a son .
GOLD:	She named him Issachar , for she said , “ God has rewarded me for giving my servant to my husband as a wife . ”

ID:	4375
INPUT:	« Nola ausartzen zarete , moabdarrok , adoretsu , borrokan zaildutakogudari zaretela esaten ?
PRED:	“ How can you enter the land of Moab ? How can you be sure that you know that you will know that you will soon be in battle ?
GOLD:	“ You used to boast , ‘ We are heroes , mighty men of war . '

ID:	4376
INPUT:	Hori guztia gertatuko zaie nire hitzak aditu nahi izan ez dituztelako eta behin eta berriro , etengabe , bidali dizkiedan profetei jaramonik egin ez dietelako . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	And this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will not bring you back again and again , and I will send them back again to the prophets of the prophets and told them , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : '
GOLD:	For they refuse to listen to me , though I have spoken to them repeatedly through the prophets I sent . And you who are in exile have not listened either , ” says the Lord .

ID:	4377
INPUT:	esaten : « Gizaseme , israeldarrengana bidaltzen zaitut , jende errebelde horrengana ; horiek eta horien arbasoak nire aurka altxatu dira gaur arte .
PRED:	“ Son of man , give this message to the people of Israel : I am sending you to the people of Israel , and they have rebelled against me .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , ” he said , “ I am sending you to the nation of Israel , a rebellious nation that has rebelled against me . They and their ancestors have been rebelling against me to this very day .

ID:	4378
INPUT:	Kristo Melkisedeken antzera apaiz ( 7 , <unk> )
PRED:	Jesus Christ Is the High Priest
GOLD:	Melchizedek Is Greater Than Abraham

ID:	4379
INPUT:	Ez fidatu , “ Jaunaren tenplua , Jaunaren tenplua ” errepikatuz engainatzen zaituzteten horietaz .
PRED:	Do n't trust in the Temple of the Lord , for he will protect you from the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	But do n't be fooled by those who promise you safety simply because the Lord 's Temple is here . They chant , “ The Lord 's Temple is here ! The Lord 's Temple is here ! ”

ID:	4380
INPUT:	eta ez ziren leial izan Jerubaal-Gedeonen senitartekoekin , hark israeldarrei hainbeste on egin zien arren .
PRED:	And he did not have any of the tribes of Israel who lived in the land of Gideon , the half-tribe of Manasseh .
GOLD:	Nor did they show any loyalty to the family of Jerub-baal ( that is , Gideon ) , despite all the good he had done for Israel .

ID:	4381
INPUT:	ez dute ezagutzen bake-bidea .
PRED:	They do n't know the truth , but they do n't understand it .
GOLD:	They do n't know where to find peace . ”

ID:	4382
INPUT:	Zahagi zaharretan ere ez da ardo berririk sartzen ; bestela , zahagiak lehertu egingo lirateke , eta ardoa isuri eta zahagiak galdu . Ez ! Ardo berria zahagi berrietan sartzen da , eta batak eta besteak irauten dute » .
PRED:	You will be like a new wine , new wine , new wine , and other nations will burst into the streets , and the wine would burst out , and the wine would burst into the sky . ”
GOLD:	“ And no one puts new wine into old wineskins . For the old skins would burst from the pressure , spilling the wine and ruining the skins . New wine is stored in new wineskins so that both are preserved . ”

ID:	4383
INPUT:	Gau-ikuskari batean , zaldizko bat ikusi nuen zaldi gorri baten gainean , zulogune batean geldirik , sastraka artean ; haren atzean , zenbait zaldi gorri , nabar eta zuri .
PRED:	I saw a vision in the night when I saw a wild donkey coming on the ground , and some wild donkeys fell on the ground .
GOLD:	In a vision during the night , I saw a man sitting on a red horse that was standing among some myrtle trees in a small valley . Behind him were riders on red , brown , and white horses .

ID:	4384
INPUT:	Paulok honela esan zien ehuntari eta soldaduei : « Horiek ontzian gelditzen ez badira , zuek ez zarete bizirik aterako » .
PRED:	Paul said to the soldiers , “ That 's why the soldiers are n't trying to live in the city , so you can not live . ”
GOLD:	But Paul said to the commanding officer and the soldiers , “ You will all die unless the sailors stay aboard . ”

ID:	4385
INPUT:	Zu hari begira zeundela , harri bat atera zen menditik , inork ere bultzatu gabe , eta irudiaren burdinazko eta buztinezko oinak jo eta txiki-txiki egin zituen .
PRED:	As soon as you were there , no one could catch up from the mountain , no one attacked them and attacked them . They attacked them with a clay pot .
GOLD:	As you watched , a rock was cut from a mountain , but not by human hands . It struck the feet of iron and clay , smashing them to bits .

ID:	4386
INPUT:	Jakobengatik dolua
PRED:	Jacob 's Family
GOLD:	Joseph Reassures His Brothers

ID:	4387
INPUT:	Heriotza-zigorra merezi duen hiltzailearen bizia ezin izango da ordaindu diruaren truke ; heriotzara emango dute .
PRED:	The owner of death will be punished for the death of the dead , but the animal must be put to death .
GOLD:	Also , you must never accept a ransom payment for the life of someone judged guilty of murder and subject to execution ; murderers must always be put to death .

ID:	4388
INPUT:	Benjaminen leinutik , Gideoniren seme Abidan ;
PRED:	From the tribe of Benjamin
GOLD:	BenjaminAbidan son of Gideoni

ID:	4389
INPUT:	Itsasoak ditu azpiratu , hondora jaitsi diraharritzarraren antzera .
PRED:	They came down to the Red Sea , and they came down to the Red Sea .
GOLD:	The deep waters gushed over them ; they sank to the bottom like a stone .

ID:	4390
INPUT:	Ona denak ona ateratzen du bere barneko ontasun-altxorretik ; eta gaiztoak gaitza bere gaiztakeri altxorretik . Ahoak esan , bihotzari gainezka darionetik esaten baitu .
PRED:	The good person produces good things from the heart of life , and the good things from the treasury . This is what a good life from the treasury , for it is good .
GOLD:	A good person produces good things from the treasury of a good heart , and an evil person produces evil things from the treasury of an evil heart . What you say flows from what is in your heart .

ID:	4391
INPUT:	Ohartu , bada , Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak lurralde eder horren jabetza ez dizuela zeuen merezimenduengatik ematen ; izan ere , herri burugogor baitzarete .
PRED:	So now the Lord your God is giving you a special possession of the land you have given to your people , for you have been stubborn and rebellious .
GOLD:	You must recognize that the Lord your God is not giving you this good land because you are good , for you are not — you are a stubborn people .

ID:	4392
INPUT:	« Esan Aaroni , beronen semeei eta israeldar guztiei : Norbaitek , israeldarra nahiz Israelen bizi den etorkina izan , botoren bat betetzeko edo norberaren borondatez egin ohi diren erre-oparietakoren bat Jaunari eskaini nahi badio ,
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to Aaron and his sons , to all the people of Israel . “ If you want to bring a burnt offering to the Lord , whether a vow or a voluntary offering or a voluntary offering to the Lord ,
GOLD:	“ Give Aaron and his sons and all the Israelites these instructions , which apply both to native Israelites and to the foreigners living among you . “ If you present a gift as a burnt offering to the Lord , whether it is to fulfill a vow or is a voluntary offering ,

ID:	4393
INPUT:	Ken iezaiozue , bada , talentua eta eman hamar dituenari .
PRED:	Get out of the forest , and give it ten pieces of silver . ”
GOLD:	“ Then he ordered , ‘ Take the money from this servant , and give it to the one with the ten bags of silver .

ID:	4394
INPUT:	« Nire gau-ikuskarietan , gizaseme antzeko bat ikusi nuen zeruetako hodeietan etortzen . Gizon zaharrarengana hurbildu zenean , honi aurkeztu zioten .
PRED:	“ When you saw me , you saw a man who was like a man sitting on the bank of the sky . When you came to him , you came to me .
GOLD:	As my vision continued that night , I saw someone like a son of man coming with the clouds of heaven . He approached the Ancient One and was led into his presence .

ID:	4395
INPUT:	Hurbil zakizkit , defenda nazazu , askatu etsaien eskutik .
PRED:	Come and rescue me from my enemies ; rescue me from the power of my enemies .
GOLD:	You know of my shame , scorn , and disgrace.You see all that my enemies are doing .

ID:	4396
INPUT:	Xunemgo emakumearen istorioa bukatu
PRED:	Gehazi 's Prophecy
GOLD:	The Woman from Shunem Returns Home

ID:	4397
INPUT:	urrezko bi katetxoak bularreko ertzen eraztunetan katigatu zituzten ,
PRED:	They made two gold rings and attach them to the top of the chestpiece .
GOLD:	They tied the two gold cords to the rings on the chestpiece .

ID:	4398
INPUT:	( 2 Erg 23 , <unk> — 24 , 17 )
PRED:	Ahaziah 's Prophecy
GOLD:	Jehoiakim Rules in Judah

ID:	4399
INPUT:	Egin lurraldearen planoa , zazpi zatitan banatuz , eta ekarri niri . Nik hemen , Jaunaren , gure Jainkoaren , aurrean , zotz egingo dut .
PRED:	So I will set up seven sections of land seven sections , and I will give it to the Lord my God . I will give it to the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	And when you record the seven divisions of the land and bring them to me , I will cast sacred lots in the presence of the Lord our God to assign land to each tribe .

ID:	4400
INPUT:	Laugarren egunean , esan zioten Samsonen emazteari : — Atera iezaiozu azpikeriaz senarrari igarkizunak zer esan nahi duen ; bestela , su emango dizugu , baita zuen aitaren etxeari ere . Guri lapurtzeko asmoz gonbidatu al gaituzue ?
PRED:	On the fourth day , Samson 's wife said to his wife , “ If you want to enter your house , we will give you everything you want to do . If you want to invite your father 's house , do you want to invite us to enter your house ? ”
GOLD:	On the fourth day they said to Samson 's wife , “ Entice your husband to explain the riddle for us , or we will burn down your father 's house with you in it . Did you invite us to this party just to make us poor ? ”

ID:	4401
INPUT:	Izan ere , zuenetik zabaldu da Mazedonia eta Akaiara Jaunaren mezua ; eta eskualde horietara ez ezik , bazter guztietara ere heldu da Jainkoarengan duzuen sinesmenaren entzutea , guk ezer esan beharrik gabe .
PRED:	For you have been taught by the word of the Lord your God , and you have refused to listen to the word of the Lord your God . But you have n't believed in him .
GOLD:	And now the word of the Lord is ringing out from you to people everywhere , even beyond Macedonia and Achaia , for wherever we go we find people telling us about your faith in God . We do n't need to tell them about it ,

ID:	4402
INPUT:	kanpalekura bertara erorarazi zituen , oihal-etxolen ingurura .
PRED:	He brought them into the camp and attacked them at the camp .
GOLD:	He caused the birds to fall within their campand all around their tents .

ID:	4403
INPUT:	baina apaizak ikusten badu lizuna ez dela zabaldu esandako gauza horietako batean ,
PRED:	But if the priest finds that he does n't understand what he has said , “ If you do n't understand what it means . ”
GOLD:	“ But if the priest examines it and finds that the contaminated area has not spread in the clothing , the fabric , or the leather ,

ID:	4404
INPUT:	Jaunak , ordea , erantzun zion : — Marta , Marta , gauza askorengatik zabiltza kezkaz eta larri ;
PRED:	But the Lord said to Joshua , “ Take off Mordecai , Peter , and put it on the fire . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord said to her , “ My dear Martha , you are worried and upset over all these details !

ID:	4405
INPUT:	Orduan , Saulek esan zien berekin zituenei : — Begiratu eta ikusi nor joan den gure artetik . Begiratu zuten , bada , eta Jonatan eta ezkutaria falta ziren .
PRED:	Then Saul said to his men , “ We have seen the truth , and we met together with you . ” So Jonathan and his troops went out into battle .
GOLD:	“ Call the roll and find out who 's missing , ” Saul ordered . And when they checked , they found that Jonathan and his armor bearer were gone .

ID:	4406
INPUT:	Zabulondarren buruzagia Helonen seme Eliab izango da ,
PRED:	Zebulun son of Zebulun will be the leader of the clans of Zebulun .
GOLD:	ZebulunEliab son of Helon57,400

ID:	4407
INPUT:	Baina ikusten ez duguna itxaro badugu , iraupenez behar dugu zain egon .
PRED:	But if we do n't see it , we will have a hope for a long time .
GOLD:	But if we look forward to something we do n't yet have , we must wait patiently and confidently . )

ID:	4408
INPUT:	Handik , biharamunean , Kio pareraino iritsi ginen itsasoz ; hurrengo egunean Samosera heldu ginen , eta hurrengoan Miletora .
PRED:	After this , the next morning passed on to the Mediterranean Sea and went to the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	The next day we sailed past the island of Kios . The following day we crossed to the island of Samos , and a day later we arrived at Miletus .

ID:	4409
INPUT:	egoitzaren beste aldera , iparraldera , beste hogei ohol ,
PRED:	for the north side of the Tabernacle — twenty frames ,
GOLD:	For the north side of the Tabernacle , he made another twenty frames ,

ID:	4410
INPUT:	eta guk erantzun genion ez gintezkeela etor geure anaia gazteena geurekin ez bagenekarren , hura gabe ezin ginela zure aurrera agertu .
PRED:	And we replied , “ We have not obeyed our command , but we are not a younger brother 's younger brother , and we could not stand before you . ”
GOLD:	we replied , ‘ We ca n't go unless you let our youngest brother go with us . We 'll never get to see the man 's face unless our youngest brother is with us . '

ID:	4411
INPUT:	Behin batean , Joabi dei egin zion , erregeagana bidaltzeko asmoz ; Joabek , ordea , ez zuen Absalomengana joan nahi izan . Bigarrenez egin zion dei ; baina etorri nahi izan ez zuenez ,
PRED:	One day Joab called for two of them to go to the king , but he refused to go to the king . But Joab called for a second time , but he refused to appear before him .
GOLD:	Then Absalom sent for Joab to ask him to intercede for him , but Joab refused to come . Absalom sent for him a second time , but again Joab refused to come .

ID:	4412
INPUT:	Eta esan zien : — Zoazte mendira , zuen bila dabiltzanek harrapa ez zaitzaten . Egon bertan hiru egun ezkutaturik , zuen pertsegitzaileak hirira itzuli arte . Gero , jarraitu zeuen bideari .
PRED:	Then he told them , “ Go back to the hills , and do n't panic until three days . ” So he sent them back to the town . So he sent them back to the town .
GOLD:	“ Escape to the hill country , ” she told them . “ Hide there for three days from the men searching for you . Then , when they have returned , you can go on your way . ”

ID:	4413
INPUT:	Uziasen erregealdia
PRED:	Uzziah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Uzziah Rules in Judah

ID:	4414
INPUT:	Egiteko hau bete eta bildutako dirua haien esku jarri ondoren , Espainiara abiatuko naiz , zuen hiritik igaroz .
PRED:	I will give these instructions to you and to the priests and Levites . I will send them out of the city , and I will send them out of the city .
GOLD:	As soon as I have delivered this money and completed this good deed of theirs , I will come to see you on my way to Spain .

ID:	4415
INPUT:	Baina hondar-meta batean hondoa jo zuten ; branka hondarretan sartua gelditu zen , mugitu ezinik ; txopa , berriz , zartatuz zihoan olatuen kolpez .
PRED:	But the people got up and hurried out into the sea , and they got up into the sea . But he put them on the shore , and he put them on the ground .
GOLD:	But they hit a shoal and ran the ship aground too soon . The bow of the ship stuck fast , while the stern was repeatedly smashed by the force of the waves and began to break apart .

ID:	4416
INPUT:	Nik ere biluztu egingo zaitut , zure lotsariak bistan jarriko .
PRED:	I will drive you out of Egypt , and I will put you in your face .
GOLD:	I myself will strip youand expose you to shame .

ID:	4417
INPUT:	Gaiztoak harrokeriaz erasotzen dio errukarriari , asmatzen dituen azpikeriez dauka harrapatua .
PRED:	The violence of the wicked are piled up , and the breath of the wicked are blown away .
GOLD:	The wicked arrogantly hunt down the poor.Let them be caught in the evil they plan for others .

ID:	4418
INPUT:	Jainkoak zuen aurretik bidali nau , zuentzat behar adina janari gordetzeko eta zuek harrigarriro salbatzeko .
PRED:	God has sent me ahead of you , and he has sent me to rescue me .
GOLD:	God has sent me ahead of you to keep you and your families alive and to preserve many survivors .

ID:	4419
INPUT:	Sasoi bikaina izango duzu hilobia arte , gari-balak uztaroan bezala .
PRED:	My life will be a short time for a time , and your harvest will be like a harvest .
GOLD:	You will go to the grave at a ripe old age , like a sheaf of grain harvested at the proper time !

ID:	4420
INPUT:	Davidek , orduan , Akixi : — Zer egin dut , baina ? Ikusi al duzu zeure zerbitzari honengan deus txarrik zuregana heldu nintzenez geroztik ? Zergatik ezin naiz , bada , joan ene errege jaunaren etsaiak borrokatzera ?
PRED:	“ What have you done to me ? ” David asked . “ What have you done to me ? Why have I done nothing to kill me ? Why should I go to war against my enemies ? ”
GOLD:	“ What have I done to deserve this treatment ? ” David demanded . “ What have you ever found in your servant , that I ca n't go and fight the enemies of my lord the king ? ”

ID:	4421
INPUT:	Liztortzarrak bidaliko ditu Jaunak zuen Jainkoak haien kontra , ezkutuan gordeta bizirik gelditutako azkenak ere garbitu arte .
PRED:	For the Lord your God will punish you for all who hate you , and all your enemies will be destroyed .
GOLD:	And then the Lord your God will send terror to drive out the few survivors still hiding from you !

ID:	4422
INPUT:	Bukatzean , esan zioten : — Non da Sara zure emaztea ? — Oihal-etxolan — erantzun zuen Abrahamek .
PRED:	“ Where is your wife ? ” they demanded . “ Where is your wife ? ” And Abraham replied , “ She is your wife ! ”
GOLD:	“ Where is Sarah , your wife ? ” the visitors asked . “ She 's inside the tent , ” Abraham replied .

ID:	4423
INPUT:	Bai , egia da diotsuedana , higuingarri zait maltzurki hitz egitea .
PRED:	My advice is full of lies ; my words are telling lies about me .
GOLD:	for I speak the truthand detest every kind of deception .

ID:	4424
INPUT:	Esna zaitez , Sion , esnatu , jantzi indarrez ! Jantzi soinekorik ederrenak , Jerusalem , hiri santu horrek ! Atzerritar sinesgaberik , kutsaturiko inorez baita berriro zuregan sartuko .
PRED:	Wake up , O beautiful Zion , and put your clothes in beautiful clothes , O Jerusalem ! For the people of Jerusalem have been defiled by the Lord , who has been defiled by the people of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Wake up , wake up , O Zion ! Clothe yourself with strength.Put on your beautiful clothes , O holy city of Jerusalem , for unclean and godless people will enter your gates no longer .

ID:	4425
INPUT:	Bazen Samarian Jaunaren profeta bat , O<unk> izenekoa . Samariara itzulian zetorren gudarosteari bidera atera eta esan zien : « Jaunak , gure arbasoen Jainkoak , zuen esku utzi ditu Judakoak , berauen kontra haserre zegoelako . Baina zuek halako amorruz hil dituzue , ezen zeruraino heldu baita zuen egintzaren oihartzuna .
PRED:	One day a prophet came to Samaria and told the people of Samaria to attack the land of Samaria . He said , “ The Lord our God has given us victory over us , but he did not destroy the pagan nations of Judah . ” But the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies did not destroy them .
GOLD:	But a prophet of the Lord named Oded was there in Samaria when the army of Israel returned home . He went out to meet them and said , “ The Lord , the God of your ancestors , was angry with Judah and let you defeat them . But you have gone too far , killing them without mercy , and all heaven is disturbed .

ID:	4426
INPUT:	Eguna zabaltzean , zenbait juduk elkar hartu zuten eta zin egin , ez zutela ez jango eta ez edango Paulori bizia kendu arte .
PRED:	As soon as the Jewish leaders tried to kill some Jews , they would n't drink wine or cause Paul to drink .
GOLD:	The next morning a group of Jews got together and bound themselves with an oath not to eat or drink until they had killed Paul .

ID:	4427
INPUT:	Hona hemen israeldarren arbasoen familiaburuak : Israelen lehen-seme Rubenen semeak Henok , Palu , Hetzron eta Karmi izan ziren . Hauek dira Rubenen jatorriko familiak .
PRED:	These are the names of the clans of Israel : The names of the clans of Reuben 's oldest son , Reuben , Reuben , Gad , and the clans of Israel . These are the clans of Reuben , Reuben , Gad , and the clans of Reuben .
GOLD:	These are the ancestors of some of the clans of Israel : The sons of Reuben , Israel 's oldest son , were Hanoch , Pallu , Hezron , and Carmi . Their descendants became the clans of Reuben .

ID:	4428
INPUT:	Zuei , seme-ala<unk> , diotsuet : Ezagutzen duzue Aita . Zuei , gurasooi , diotsuet : Ezagutzen duzue hasieratik zen hura . Zuei , gazteoi , diotsuet : Indartsu zarete eta Jainkoaren mezua zuengan tinko dago eta garaitu duzue gaiztoa .
PRED:	I say to you , dear brothers and sisters , I tell you the truth , the Father , and you are saying , “ You are a mighty warrior , but you are a mighty warrior , and you are a strong warrior .
GOLD:	I have written to you who are God 's childrenbecause you know the Father.I have written to you who are mature in the faithbecause you know Christ , who existed from the beginning.I have written to you who are young in the faithbecause you are strong.God 's word lives in your hearts , and you have won your battle with the evil one .

ID:	4429
INPUT:	Eta eskatu eta hartzen ez baduzue , gaizki eskatzen duzuelako da , zeuen grina txarrak asetzeko .
PRED:	And if you do n't need to satisfy your evil desires , you will satisfy your evil desires .
GOLD:	And even when you ask , you do n't get it because your motives are all wrong — you want only what will give you pleasure .

ID:	4430
INPUT:	Marfilezko errege-aulki bikain bat ere eginarazi zuen erregeak , eta urre hutsez jantzi .
PRED:	So the king made a huge feast for the king , and he put a royal robe on his throne .
GOLD:	Then the king made a huge throne , decorated with ivory and overlaid with pure gold .

ID:	4431
INPUT:	Denak harriturik gelditu ziren ikusten zutenaz : mutuak hizketan , elbarriak sendaturik , herrenak ibiltzen eta itsuak ikusten . Eta Israelen Jainkoa goresten hasi ziren .
PRED:	When all the people saw this , they were amazed at the center of the people of Israel , and they began praising God , the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	The crowd was amazed ! Those who had n't been able to speak were talking , the crippled were made well , the lame were walking , and the blind could see again ! And they praised the God of Israel .

ID:	4432
INPUT:	Ai ni errespetatzeko eta nire aginduak betetzeko jarrera hori izango balute beti ! Zoriontsu izango lirateke beti , bai beraiek , bai ondorengoak .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who fear me and obey my commands , and they will always be my descendants forever .
GOLD:	Oh , that they would always have hearts like this , that they might fear me and obey all my commands ! If they did , they and their descendants would prosper forever .

ID:	4433
INPUT:	Izen bat darama bere jantzian eta bere izterrean idatzia : « erregeen Errege eta jaunen Jaun » .
PRED:	The meat was placed in his robe , and he said , “ This is what the Lord says : The king of Israel is king ! ”
GOLD:	On his robe at his thigh was written this title : King of all kings and Lord of all lords .

ID:	4434
INPUT:	Gero , batzar osoak mandatariak igorri zizkien Rimon harkaitzean gorderik zeuden benjamindarrei , bakea eskainiz .
PRED:	Then the entire assembly turned to the entire community of Benjamin , and he gave them a vow to the Lord .
GOLD:	The Israelite assembly sent a peace delegation to the remaining people of Benjamin who were living at the rock of Rimmon .

ID:	4435
INPUT:	Jakoben ondorengoen artean , bakar batzuk besterikez dira itzuli<unk> indartsuagana .
PRED:	When the family of Jacob heard about the plot of land , some of the men of Israel came to Balaam .
GOLD:	A remnant will return ; yes , the remnant of Jacob will return to the Mighty God .

ID:	4436
INPUT:	Balaamek erantzun zion : — Orain hemen nauzu ! Baina , zer esan dezaket ? Jainkoak ahoan jarriko dizkidan hitzak bakarrik esan ditzaket .
PRED:	But Balaam replied , “ Look , here is here ! I am here , but I can talk to you . ” But Balaam replied , “ I ca n't give it to you . ”
GOLD:	Balaam replied , “ Look , now I have come , but I have no power to say whatever I want . I will speak only the message that God puts in my mouth . ”

ID:	4437
INPUT:	nire legeen arabera joka eta nire erabakiak betetzen saia zaitezten . Zuek nire herri izango zarete eta ni zuen Jainko .
PRED:	And if you follow my decrees and obey my decrees and regulations , you will be my people , and you will be my God .
GOLD:	so they will obey my decrees and regulations . Then they will truly be my people , and I will be their God .

ID:	4438
INPUT:	Eta hauxe da Jainkoaren asmo ezkutua : Kristo Jesusen bitartez eta berri onari esker , jentilok oinordekide izatea , Kristorekin gorputz bat bera osatzea eta agintzari beraren partaide izatea .
PRED:	This is the plan of Christ Jesus Christ . He is the one God of the church , and through Christ Jesus Christ , who gives us his body to his own body .
GOLD:	And this is God 's plan : Both Gentiles and Jews who believe the Good News share equally in the riches inherited by God 's children . Both are part of the same body , and both enjoy the promise of blessings because they belong to Christ Jesus .

ID:	4439
INPUT:	Dohatsuak zure emazteak ! Dohatsuak zure jakinduria entzunez beti zure aurrean dauden zerbitzari hauek !
PRED:	How joyful are your wife ! How lovely are your officials who hear your wisdom !
GOLD:	How happy your people must be ! What a privilege for your officials to stand here day after day , listening to your wisdom !

ID:	4440
INPUT:	Salomonek otoitza bukatzean , zerutik jaitsitako suak kiskali egin zituen erre-opariak eta eskaintzak , eta Jaunaren aintzak bete zuen tenplua .
PRED:	Solomon offered sacrifices to the Lord and burned up the fire from the fire . He offered sacrifices to the Lord , and he burned up the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	When Solomon finished praying , fire flashed down from heaven and burned up the burnt offerings and sacrifices , and the glorious presence of the Lord filled the Temple .

ID:	4441
INPUT:	Bi eskuak aker biziaren buruan ezarriz , israeldarren gaiztakeria , errebeldia eta bekatu guztien aitormena egingo du . Honela , akerraren burura botako ditu guztiak , eta horren kargu duenaren eskuz basamortura bidaliko du .
PRED:	But if two of the people of Israel swear by the sins of the wicked , they will be punished for their sins , and their sins will be thrown into the wilderness . They will be thrown into the wilderness , and it will be thrown into the wilderness .
GOLD:	He will lay both of his hands on the goat 's head and confess over it all the wickedness , rebellion , and sins of the people of Israel . In this way , he will transfer the people 's sins to the head of the goat . Then a man specially chosen for the task will drive the goat into the wilderness .

ID:	4442
INPUT:	Orduan , marmarka hasi ziren entzuleak , « Neu naiz zerutik jaitsiriko ogia » esan zuelako ,
PRED:	Then they began talking about him , “ I am coming down from heaven , ” they said .
GOLD:	Then the people began to murmur in disagreement because he had said , “ I am the bread that came down from heaven . ”

ID:	4443
INPUT:	Felipe Andresi esatera joan zen , eta biek , Andresek eta Felipek , Jesusi jakinarazi zioten .
PRED:	Peter and John went up to visit him , and Andrew came to Peter and told him what he had happened .
GOLD:	Philip told Andrew about it , and they went together to ask Jesus .

ID:	4444
INPUT:	Jaunaren izen ahaltsua iragarriko dute Sionen , haren gorespena Jerusalemen ,
PRED:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies will be exalted by his power .
GOLD:	when multitudes gather togetherand kingdoms come to worship the Lord .

ID:	4445
INPUT:	baita geroago ere , Josiasen seme Joiakim Judako errege izan zen garaitik Josiasen beste seme baten , Sedekiasen , erregealdiko hamaikagarren urtearen azkena arte . Urte horretako bosgarren hilean Jerusalemgo bizilagunak erbesteratu zituzten .
PRED:	Josiah son of Josiah was the next king of Judah , the next king of Judah , who had been exiled to Jerusalem to Jerusalem , during the fourth year of King Josiah 's reign , during the fourth year of King Josiah 's reign .
GOLD:	The Lord 's messages continued throughout the reign of King Jehoiakim , Josiah 's son , until the eleventh year of the reign of King Zedekiah , another of Josiah 's sons . In August of that eleventh year the people of Jerusalem were taken away as captives .

ID:	4446
INPUT:	Apaizek eta lebitarrek , beren buruaren garbikuntza egin ondoren , herriaren , harresiaren eta ateen garbikuntza egin zuten .
PRED:	Then the priests and Levites purified themselves and purified themselves with the blood of the priests and Levites .
GOLD:	The priests and Levites first purified themselves ; then they purified the people , the gates , and the wall .

ID:	4447
INPUT:	Madarikatua , artaldeko abere osasuntsu bat eskainiko didala agindu eta gero gaixoa eskaintzen didan gezurtia ! Errege handia naiz ni , eta begirune didate herriek . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak .
PRED:	I will destroy the sheep and goats , goats , goats , and goats , and disease . I will pour out my anger on them , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	“ Cursed is the cheat who promises to give a fine ram from his flock but then sacrifices a defective one to the Lord . For I am a great king , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , “ and my name is feared among the nations !

ID:	4448
INPUT:	Emazte asko zuenez , hirurogeita hamar seme-alaba izan zituen .
PRED:	He also had many wives , and he had other sons and daughters .
GOLD:	He had seventy sons born to him , for he had many wives .

ID:	4449
INPUT:	Eta nik erregetza ematen dizuet , Aitak neuri eman zidan bezala :
PRED:	I am giving you the king of my Father , just as he gave me .
GOLD:	And just as my Father has granted me a Kingdom , I now grant you the right

ID:	4450
INPUT:	Moisesek , Jaunaren zerbitzariak , eta israeldarrek menderatu egin zituzten bi errege haiek . Moisesek , Jaunaren zerbitzariak , Ruben eta Gaden leinuei eta Manasesen leinu erdiari eman zizkien jabetzan haien lurraldeak .
PRED:	So Moses and the people of Israel followed the example of the Lord 's servant Moses , the two of the tribes of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh .
GOLD:	Moses , the servant of the Lord , and the Israelites had destroyed the people of King Sihon and King Og . And Moses gave their land as a possession to the tribes of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh .

ID:	4451
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin ez zaiona egin zuen , Joiakimek bezalaxe .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as Jehoiakim had done .
GOLD:	But Zedekiah did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as Jehoiakim had done .

ID:	4452
INPUT:	Hau dio Jaunak , zuen askatzaileak , Israelen Jainko santuak : « Zuen onerako , gudarostea bidaliko dut Babiloniaraeta denak ihesi aterako dira , ihesi babiloniarrak , beren ontzietan babesturik .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ I will bring you back to the land of Israel , says : I will bring you out to Babylon , and I will send you out of the land of Babylon .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says — your Redeemer , the Holy One of Israel : “ For your sakes I will send an army against Babylon , forcing the Babylonians to flee in those ships they are so proud of .

ID:	4453
INPUT:	Begiratu eta zaldi horixka bat ikusi nuen . Gainekoak Herio zuen izena , eta bere erreinukoek jarraitzen zioten . Lurraren laurdenaren gain ahalmena eman zion Jainkoak , ezpata , gosete , heriotza eta lurreko piztien bitartez jendea hiltzeko .
PRED:	He looked up and saw a white horse coming with him . He named him the greatest of the kingdoms of the world , and he placed the eternal tree on the ground . He also gave it to the people of the dead .
GOLD:	I looked up and saw a horse whose color was pale green . Its rider was named Death , and his companion was the Grave . These two were given authority over one-fourth of the earth , to kill with the sword and famine and disease and wild animals .

ID:	4454
INPUT:	« Horrekin guztiarekin gantzuketa-olioa egingo duzu , lurringileak egiten duen bezala usainkiak nahasiz . Hori izango da sagarapenetarako gantzuketa-olioa .
PRED:	“ These are the anointing oil , the anointing oil , the anointing oil , and the fragrant incense ; the anointing oil will be made of fragrant incense .
GOLD:	Like a skilled incense maker , blend these ingredients to make a holy anointing oil .

ID:	4455
INPUT:	Amaitu ziren Egipton ugaritasunezko zazpi urteak ,
PRED:	There were seven years old enough water for seven years .
GOLD:	At last the seven years of bumper crops throughout the land of Egypt came to an end .

ID:	4456
INPUT:	Intziriz eta negar-zotinka nago , garrasi bizian Moabengatik , Kir-Heresko jendearengatik .
PRED:	My heart is like a Tyre , and the people of Moab came out of Moab .
GOLD:	So now I wail for Moab ; yes , I will mourn for Moab.My heart is broken for the men of Kir-hareseth .

ID:	4457
INPUT:	Txundi zaitezte , beraz , zeruok ! Izu zaitezte eta ikaratu ! Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	Look , look at the heavens ! Stand up , and go back to heaven ! ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	The heavens are shocked at such a thingand shrink back in horror and dismay , ” says the Lord .

ID:	4458
INPUT:	Egun hartan garaipena dolu bihurtu zen gudaroste osoarentzat , entzun baitzuten gudariek erregea atsekabetua zegoela bere semearengatik .
PRED:	On that day the king of Aram had a great army for battle , for the king had heard that his son was dead .
GOLD:	They crept back into the town that day as though they were ashamed and had deserted in battle .

ID:	4459
INPUT:	Orduan , Jainko Jauna laino batean jaitsi eta Moisesekin egon zen , eta bere izena hots egin zuen : « Jauna » .
PRED:	Then the Lord appeared to Moses in the cloud of the Lord , and he said , “ Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord came down in a cloud and stood there with him ; and he called out his own name , Yahweh .

ID:	4460
INPUT:	Eta emakumeari esan zion : « Barkatuak dituzu zeure bekatuak » .
PRED:	She said to her , “ Your sins are forgiven , and your sins are forgiven . ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus said to the woman , “ Your sins are forgiven . ”

ID:	4461
INPUT:	Jesusek , bere hamabi ikasleei dei eginik , ahalmena eman zien espiritu gaiztoak botatzeko eta gaitz eta eritasun guztiak sendatzeko .
PRED:	Jesus called twelve disciples to the disciples , and he gave them authority to cast out evil spirits and evil spirits .
GOLD:	Jesus called his twelve disciples together and gave them authority to cast out evil spirits and to heal every kind of disease and illness .

ID:	4462
INPUT:	Ez ekialdetik eta ez mendebaldetik , ez basamortutik ere , ez dator goraldia :
PRED:	Do n't come from the eastern border of the land , and it will be extended from the eastern wilderness .
GOLD:	It is God alone who judges ; he decides who will rise and who will fall .

ID:	4463
INPUT:	Besteek erantzun zioten : — Zu ere galilearra ote zaitugu ? Aztertu Liburu Santuak , eta ikusiko duzu Galileatik ez dela inoiz profetarik sortu .
PRED:	They replied , “ You are the prophets , and we will see the Scriptures say , ‘ You will never see the prophets of Galilee , and you will never see the prophets of Galilee . ' ”
GOLD:	They replied , “ Are you from Galilee , too ? Search the Scriptures and see for yourself — no prophet ever comes from Galilee ! ” -- -- -- -- -- [ The most ancient Greek manuscripts do not include John 7:53–8:11 . ]

ID:	4464
INPUT:	Egin lau adar lau ertzetarako , aldarearekin gorputz bat bera eginez ; estali brontzez aldarea .
PRED:	Then make four horns of the altar , and horns of the altar with a bronze altar .
GOLD:	Make horns for each of its four corners so that the horns and altar are all one piece . Overlay the altar with bronze .

ID:	4465
INPUT:	Zeuen elkarte-otorduetarako biltzen zaretenean , egiten duzuena ez da Jaunaren afaria ,
PRED:	When you come to the whole community of Israel , you must not eat any meat from the Lord 's presence .
GOLD:	When you meet together , you are not really interested in the Lord 's Supper .

ID:	4466
INPUT:	Ez duzu nahi izan sakrifizio eta eskaintzarik , ez erre-opari , ez bekatuen barkamen-oparirik ; baizik eta belarriak ireki dizkidazu , zuri entzuteko .
PRED:	You must not offer any sacrifice to the Lord . You must not offer a burnt offering to the Lord . You must not offer a burnt offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then I said , “ Look , I have come.As is written about me in the Scriptures :

ID:	4467
INPUT:	« Horregatik , nik , Jainko Jaunak , zin dagit neure biziarengatik , zeure idolatria eta jokaera higuingarriaz nire santutegia kutsatu duzulako , nik ere baztertu egingo zaitudala ; ez dizut batere errukirik izango , ezta barkatuko ere .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ As surely as I live , I will not defile you by worshiping other gods , and I will not make you ceremonially unclean . I will not spare you from your sins .
GOLD:	“ As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , I will cut you off completely . I will show you no pity at all because you have defiled my Temple with your vile images and detestable sins .

ID:	4468
INPUT:	baina Abimelekek pertsegitu egin zuen eta Gaal ihesi joan zen . Ugari izan ziren hiriko sarrera bitartean eroriak .
PRED:	But Abimelech chased Abimelech and fled to Gath , where he lived in the town of Galilee .
GOLD:	But Abimelech chased him , and many of Shechem 's men were wounded and fell along the road as they retreated to the city gate .

ID:	4469
INPUT:	Horregatik , beharrezko da agintarien menpeko izatea , baina zigorraren beldurrez ez ezik , baita kontzientziaren eraginez ere .
PRED:	Therefore , this is why you are so proud of them , but you are afraid of what you have done .
GOLD:	So you must submit to them , not only to avoid punishment , but also to keep a clear conscience .

ID:	4470
INPUT:	Lekuko faltsua galdu egingo da ; entzuten dakiena ez da hitzik gabe geldituko .
PRED:	A false witness is full of justice , but those who say nothing will be done .
GOLD:	A false witness will be cut off , but a credible witness will be allowed to speak .

ID:	4471
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaun ahalguztidunak : « Ebaki zuhaitzak , egin betelana Jerusalemi erasotzeko . Hiria zigortzea erabaki dut , zapalkuntza baita nagusi bertan .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : “ I have decided to destroy the pagan shrines , for I have decided to destroy Jerusalem .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ Cut down the trees for battering rams.Build siege ramps against the walls of Jerusalem.This is the city to be punished , for she is wicked through and through .

ID:	4472
INPUT:	« Ba ote da zuen artean aitarik , semeak arraina eskatu eta arrainaren ordez sugea emango dionik ?
PRED:	“ Do n't you think about your father 's children ? Can you give him the inheritance to your father ?
GOLD:	“ You fathers — if your children ask for a fish , do you give them a snake instead ?

ID:	4473
INPUT:	Badakit Jaunak dohakabeari justizia egiteneta behartsuen eskubideak defendatzen dituela .
PRED:	I know that the Lord is good , and he brings justice to the poor .
GOLD:	Surely righteous people are praising your name ; the godly will live in your presence .

ID:	4474
INPUT:	« Eskatu , eta emango dizue Jainkoak ; bilatu , eta aurkituko duzue ; jo atea , eta zabalduko zaizue .
PRED:	“ Then you will ask , and God will help you , and you will stand before you . Then you will be opened , and you will be opened .
GOLD:	“ Keep on asking , and you will receive what you ask for . Keep on seeking , and you will find . Keep on knocking , and the door will be opened to you .

ID:	4475
INPUT:	Bertako jauregien artean , gotorleku seguru ageri da Jainkoa .
PRED:	We are in the palaces of the palace , but we are starving in the palace of God .
GOLD:	The kings of the earth joined forcesand advanced against the city .

ID:	4476
INPUT:	Baina faraoiak erantzun zien : — Eta nor da Jaun hori , nik haren esana bete eta israeldarrei joaten uzteko ? Ez dut halako Jaunik ezagutzen , eta israeldarrei ez diet joaten utziko .
PRED:	But Pharaoh replied , “ Who is this that the Lord says to the people of Israel , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will not let the people go to the land of Israel . '
GOLD:	“ Is that so ? ” retorted Pharaoh . “ And who is the Lord ? Why should I listen to him and let Israel go ? I do n't know the Lord , and I will not let Israel go . ”

ID:	4477
INPUT:	Liburu Santuaren arabera , hauxe da lege nagusia : Maitatulagun hurkoa zeure burua bezala ; eta hori benetan betetzen baduzue , ondo baino hobeto .
PRED:	As the Scriptures say , ‘ Love your neighbor as your neighbor as your neighbor as yourself , ' or ‘ Love your neighbor as yourself . '
GOLD:	Yes indeed , it is good when you obey the royal law as found in the Scriptures : “ Love your neighbor as yourself . ”

ID:	4478
INPUT:	Danen leinutik , Jogliren seme Buki ;
PRED:	from the tribe of Dan
GOLD:	DanBukki son of Jogli

ID:	4479
INPUT:	ahotik ahora hitz egiten diot , aurrez aurre eta ez hitz-erdika . Hark nire irudia ikusten du , Jaun honena . « Nola ausartzen zarete , beraz , Moisesez gaizki-esaka jardutera ? »
PRED:	I speak against them , and they speak against me . They are talking about me , saying , “ Lord , how can I see Moses ' words ? ”
GOLD:	I speak to him face to face , clearly , and not in riddles ! He sees the Lord as he is.So why were you not afraidto criticize my servant Moses ? ”

ID:	4480
INPUT:	Zabulonen leinutik hamabi mila ; Joseren leinutik hamabi mila ; Benjaminen leinutik hamabi mila zigilatu .
PRED:	From the tribe of Zebulun were chosen from the tribe of Benjamin , from the tribe of Benjamin .
GOLD:	from Zebulun12,000from Joseph12,000from Benjamin12,000

ID:	4481
INPUT:	SALBAMEN MEZUAK : HERRIAREN BERRIZTAPENA ( 30 , 1 — 33 , 26 )
PRED:	Job 's First Response to Job
GOLD:	Promises of Deliverance

ID:	4482
INPUT:	Eguerdian , Ben-Hadad , bere laguntzaile zituen hogeita hamabi erregeekin batera , horditu arte oihal-etxoletan edaten ari zen bitartean , irtenaldi bat egin zuten israeldarrek ,
PRED:	In the same day King Ben-hadad of Aram attacked the king of Aram , who had two Amorite kings of Israel . The Israelites chased him up and settled in the camp .
GOLD:	About noontime , as Ben-hadad and the thirty-two allied kings were still in their tents drinking themselves into a stupor ,

ID:	4483
INPUT:	Halaxe izan zen . Biharamun goizean jaiki , ardi-larrua hartu eta , ihintza ateratzeko bihurritu zuenean , anto<unk> bat bete zuen urez .
PRED:	The next morning the next morning . The next morning the boy got up , and he got up and got up into the dew .
GOLD:	And that is just what happened . When Gideon got up early the next morning , he squeezed the fleece and wrung out a whole bowlful of water .

ID:	4484
INPUT:	( Mt 4 , 1-11 ; Lk 4 , 1-13 )
PRED:	The Faith of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Man with Leprosy

ID:	4485
INPUT:	GEROAGO <unk> <unk> <unk> KOA ( 4 , 1 — 22 , 21 )
PRED:	The Prophecy of Simeon
GOLD:	Worship in Heaven

ID:	4486
INPUT:	Izu-ikarek inguratzen dute alde guztietatik , urratsez urrats jarraitzen diote .
PRED:	They have been driven from the lands of the lands.They are far away from their lands .
GOLD:	“ Terrors surround the wickedand trouble them at every step .

ID:	4487
INPUT:	Horrela egingo dugu , beraz , Jainkoa lagun .
PRED:	So we will be like this , and we will be God .
GOLD:	And so , God willing , we will move forward to further understanding .

ID:	4488
INPUT:	Honela ezarri zuen Josek Egiptoko lurretan bildutako bostetik bat faraoiari emateko legea . Lege honek gaurdaino dirau . Apaizen lurrak bakarrik gelditu ziren faraoiarenak bihurtu gabe .
PRED:	So Joseph put a solemn oath in the land of Egypt in the fifth year of Pharaoh 's reign in Pharaoh 's reign . So the priest did not stay in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	Joseph then issued a decree still in effect in the land of Egypt , that Pharaoh should receive one-fifth of all the crops grown on his land . Only the land belonging to the priests was not given to Pharaoh .

ID:	4489
INPUT:	Zoaz bizkor , ez baitezaket ezer egin zu hara iritsi arte . Honengatik , herri hari Tzoar — hau da , « Txiki » — deritza .
PRED:	Go ahead and look at me , for I have not been ready to go to war against the nations . ”
GOLD:	But hurry ! Escape to it , for I can do nothing until you arrive there . ” ( This explains why that village was known as Zoar , which means “ little place . ” )

ID:	4490
INPUT:	Honela , agindutako ondasun baliotsu eta bikainak ere eman dizkigu , grina txarrek munduan eragiten duten ustelkeriatik ihes eginez , jainkozko izaeraren partaide izan zaitezten .
PRED:	If we are pure and sinful , we will give birth to our own desires and sinful nature , but you will escape from the oppression of the world .
GOLD:	And because of his glory and excellence , he has given us great and precious promises . These are the promises that enable you to share his divine nature and escape the world 's corruption caused by human desires .

ID:	4491
INPUT:	Jabeak langile bat bezala hartuko du berekin emango dituen urteetan ; ez diozue utziko herritarrari tratu txarra ematen .
PRED:	You will plant a field in a field , and you will never deny it . You must never deny the land you have given to other nations .
GOLD:	The foreigner must treat them as workers hired on a yearly basis . You must not allow a foreigner to treat any of your fellow Israelites harshly .

ID:	4492
INPUT:	— Ez ote zen , bada , Jauna ohartzen , zuek eta zuen guraso , errege eta buruzagiek , herritarrok oro , Judako hirietan eta Jerusalemgo kaleetan intsentsua erretzen zenutela ? Horixe zuen gogoan , hain zuzen ,
PRED:	“ O Lord , do n't you realize that the kings of Judah and the kings of Judah and Jerusalem are bringing incense to the people of Judah and Jerusalem ? Why did you burn incense in Jerusalem ?
GOLD:	“ Do you think the Lord did not know that you and your ancestors , your kings and officials , and all the people were burning incense to idols in the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem ?

ID:	4493
INPUT:	Baina ihesleku duen babes-hiriaren mugetatik irteten bada ,
PRED:	But if they are at the fortress of the fortress , it will be taken away from the fortress of the town .
GOLD:	“ But if the slayer ever leaves the limits of the city of refuge ,

ID:	4494
INPUT:	Abereak eta konkistatu genituen hirietako ondasunak bakarrik gorde genituen guda-harrapakin gisa .
PRED:	I took the plunder of the kings of Assyria and burned them with the sword of the plunder I had given them .
GOLD:	We took all the livestock as plunder for ourselves , along with anything of value from the towns we ransacked .

ID:	4495
INPUT:	Eta , otoitzean ari zela , aurpegiko itxura aldatu egin zitzaion , eta jantziak zuri distiratsu bihurtu .
PRED:	As soon as he was praying , he stood up and stood before him , his clothes became a white robe .
GOLD:	And as he was praying , the appearance of his face was transformed , and his clothes became dazzling white .

ID:	4496
INPUT:	Zazpigarren hilean , ordea , Netaniasen seme eta Elixamaren biloba Ismael , errege-jatorrikoa bera , Mitzpara joan zen hamar gizonekin eta hil egin zuen bertan Godalias , baita honekin ziren judatarrak eta babiloniarrak ere .
PRED:	Then the seventh year of Gedaliah son of Ahikam and grandson of Shaphan returned to Mizpah . He killed some of the men of Israel at Mizpah , and he killed some of the men of Israel in the land of Mizpah .
GOLD:	But in midautumn of that year , Ishmael son of Nethaniah and grandson of Elishama , who was a member of the royal family , went to Mizpah with ten men and killed Gedaliah . He also killed all the Judeans and Babylonians who were with him at Mizpah .

ID:	4497
INPUT:	Paulok bere konbertsioa kontatu
PRED:	Paul Appears before Festus
GOLD:	Paul Reveals His Roman Citizenship

ID:	4498
INPUT:	harribitxiak eta zura lantzeko nahiz beste edozein langintzatarako .
PRED:	Those who use stones to use as workers to plant or planted in the fields .
GOLD:	He is skilled in engraving and mounting gemstones and in carving wood . He is a master at every craft !

ID:	4499
INPUT:	Horrelako parabola askoren bidez , Jesusek mezua iragartzen zien , beraiek ulertzeko eran .
PRED:	So Jesus told many stories and parables , so he could understand what he meant .
GOLD:	Jesus used many similar stories and illustrations to teach the people as much as they could understand .

ID:	4500
INPUT:	Gaiztoentzat oinaze ugari ; Jaunarengan konfiantza duena , berriz , haren maitasunak inguratzen .
PRED:	The wicked are like a deer , but the Lord protects those who trust in him .
GOLD:	Many sorrows come to the wicked , but unfailing love surrounds those who trust the Lord .

ID:	4501
INPUT:	Tenpluaren barneneko azken hamar metroak , berriz , zedrozko oholez estali zituen , behetik hasi eta goiko habeetaraino , eta toki hori santutegia , hots , toki santu-santua , izateko antolatu zuen .
PRED:	He also built ten rooms along the walls of the Temple , along with cedar timber , and he also built a cedar room for the Most Holy Place . He also built the sanctuary to the Most Holy Place , and he built the sanctuary for the Most Holy Place .
GOLD:	He partitioned off an inner sanctuary — the Most Holy Place — at the far end of the Temple . It was 30 feet deep and was paneled with cedar from floor to ceiling .

ID:	4502
INPUT:	Erre-oparia ere eskaini zuen , arautua zegoen eran .
PRED:	He offered the burnt offering to the regular burnt offering , just as he had commanded .
GOLD:	Then he presented the burnt offering and sacrificed it in the prescribed way .

ID:	4503
INPUT:	Davidekin zeuden gizonek , ordea , esaten zioten : — Hemen Judan beldurrez bagaude , zer izango ote da Keilara filistear taldeen kontra borrokara joaten bagara ?
PRED:	But David and his men were afraid , “ Do n't be afraid to go to Keilah ? ” they asked . “ Why did the Philistines go to war against Keilah ? ”
GOLD:	But David 's men said , “ We 're afraid even here in Judah . We certainly do n't want to go to Keilah to fight the whole Philistine army ! ”

ID:	4504
INPUT:	Baina Jesusek esan zuen : « Utzi ! Aski da ! » Eta , belarria ukiturik , sendatu egin zion .
PRED:	But Jesus said , “ Let 's get out ! ” So he got up , and he healed him .
GOLD:	But Jesus said , “ No more of this . ” And he touched the man 's ear and healed him .

ID:	4505
INPUT:	Beraz , Jainkoak hala nahirik sufritzen dutenek jar dezatela beren burua leiala den Egilearen eskuetan , on egiteari utzi gabe .
PRED:	That is why God wants you to suffer so that you will be faithful to those who are faithful to him .
GOLD:	So if you are suffering in a manner that pleases God , keep on doing what is right , and trust your lives to the God who created you , for he will never fail you .

ID:	4506
INPUT:	Hala , Akab jatera eta edatera joan zen ; bitartean , Karmel mendiaren gailurrera igo zen Elias eta ahuspeztu , aurpegia belaun artean jarriz .
PRED:	So Ahab went out to war against Ahab and went out to the Mount Carmel . He went to Mount Carmel and bowed low before him .
GOLD:	So Ahab went to eat and drink . But Elijah climbed to the top of Mount Carmel and bowed low to the ground and prayed with his face between his knees .

ID:	4507
INPUT:	« Une berean , adimena eman zitzaidan berriro , eta neure erregetzaren aintzarako , neure ohore eta ospe guztiaz jabetu nintzen . Bila etorri zitzaizkidan kontseilari eta handikiak . Errege-aulkian jarri ninduten berriro eta lehen baino ohore handiagoa izan nuen .
PRED:	“ My lord , my lord the king again again again , and I brought my glory to my lord the king and his glory . I saw that I was greater and greater than I was on my throne .
GOLD:	“ That same hour the judgment was fulfilled , and Nebuchadnezzar was driven from human society . He ate grass like a cow , and he was drenched with the dew of heaven . He lived this way until his hair was as long as eagles ' feathers and his nails were like birds ' claws .

ID:	4508
INPUT:	Diotre<unk> handizalea
PRED:	The Futility of Work
GOLD:	Conclusion

ID:	4509
INPUT:	basamortuan ere ikusi ahal izan duzue nola Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak , aitak bere haurra bezala , ekarri zaituzten honaino bide guztian zehar .
PRED:	You have seen the Lord your God in the wilderness , just as the Lord your God has promised you .
GOLD:	And you saw how the Lord your God cared for you all along the way as you traveled through the wilderness , just as a father cares for his child . Now he has brought you to this place . '

ID:	4510
INPUT:	Nik , Paulok , ez giza aginduz edo izendapenez , Jesu Kristoren eta hau hildakoen artetik piztu zuen Jainko Aitaren izendapenez baizik apostolu naizen honek ,
PRED:	This letter is from Paul , not by the authority of Christ Jesus , who was raised from the dead . He was the Father of the Father , who was raised from the dead .
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , an apostle . I was not appointed by any group of people or any human authority , but by Jesus Christ himself and by God the Father , who raised Jesus from the dead .

ID:	4511
INPUT:	Leiho-ertzean eseria zegoen Eutiko izeneko mutil gazte bat ; Paulok hitzaldia amaitzen ez zuenez , logaletu egin zen mutila ; azkenean , loak harturik , hirugarren solairutik behera erori zen , eta hilda jaso zuten .
PRED:	As Paul was in the middle of the boat , a young man named Paul . As he grew up , he did n't even kill him , he fell down on his head , and he died and died .
GOLD:	As Paul spoke on and on , a young man named Eutychus , sitting on the windowsill , became very drowsy . Finally , he fell sound asleep and dropped three stories to his death below .

ID:	4512
INPUT:	Beraz , Jainkoak sinesmenaren bidez onartu gaituelarik , bakean gaude berarekin , Jesu Kristo gure Jaunari esker .
PRED:	So God 's grace has made us right with God through Christ Jesus Christ , who has made us right with the Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	Therefore , since we have been made right in God 's sight by faith , we have peace with God because of what Jesus Christ our Lord has done for us .

ID:	4513
INPUT:	Zer gelditzen zaio gizakiarieguzkipean egin duenhainbeste lan eta eginahaletatik ?
PRED:	What do you find for all these things ? Do you remember all these things ?
GOLD:	So what do people get in this life for all their hard work and anxiety ?

ID:	4514
INPUT:	Daviden salmoa . Jauna , deika naukazu , zatozkit bizkor ! Entzun nire ahotsa , nik dei egitean .
PRED:	O Lord , listen to my cry ; pay attention to my prayer . Hear me , O Lord !
GOLD:	O Lord , I am calling to you . Please hurry ! Listen when I cry to you for help !

ID:	4515
INPUT:	Horregatik , nahiago dut alarguntsa gazteak ezkontzea , seme-alabak sortu eta etxeaz arduratzea , etsaiari inolako hizpiderik eman ez diezaioten .
PRED:	Therefore , I will give you a young young widow , a widow who has been like a mother or a mother or a mother or a mother or a mother .
GOLD:	So I advise these younger widows to marry again , have children , and take care of their own homes . Then the enemy will not be able to say anything against them .

ID:	4516
INPUT:	gauez Jesusengana etorri eta esan zion : — Maisu , ziur gaude Jainkoak guri irakasteko bidali zaituena , inork ez baititzake egin zuk egiten dituzun mirarizko seinaleak , Jainkoa berekin ez badu .
PRED:	But Jesus told him , “ Teacher , God , ” Jesus told him , “ you do n't know what God has done to us , but you do n't do with him . If you do n't know what you do , you will not do with him . ”
GOLD:	After dark one evening , he came to speak with Jesus . “ Rabbi , ” he said , “ we all know that God has sent you to teach us . Your miraculous signs are evidence that God is with you . ”

ID:	4517
INPUT:	Nagusiak ihardetsi zion : — Ez gara israeldarrik bizi ez den hiri arrotz batera joango ; Gibearaino joango gara .
PRED:	“ No ! ” the master replied . “ Do n't go to the town of Gibeah , but you wo n't go to the town of Gibeah . ”
GOLD:	“ No , ” his master said , “ we ca n't stay in this foreign town where there are no Israelites . Instead , we will go on to Gibeah .

ID:	4518
INPUT:	Eta egun asko egin baitzituzten han , Festok Pauloren arazoaren berri eman zion erregeari , esanez : « Badut hemen Felixek preso utzi zuen gizon bat .
PRED:	So Festus took Paul before Festus , and he said to him , “ I have a Roman man named Philip , who was from Bethlehem .
GOLD:	During their stay of several days , Festus discussed Paul 's case with the king . “ There is a prisoner here , ” he told him , “ whose case was left for me by Felix .

ID:	4519
INPUT:	Lebitarrak arduratuko dira elkarketa-etxolako zerbitzuaz , eta beren hutsegiteen erantzule izanen dira . Betiko lege izango duzue hau belaunez belaun . Lebitarrek , beraz , ez dute Israelen lursailik izango ondare .
PRED:	The Levites will serve as a permanent law for the Levites , and they will be observed from generation to generation to generation to generation . This is a permanent law for you , and it will be observed from generation to generation to generation .
GOLD:	Only the Levites may serve at the Tabernacle , and they will be held responsible for any offenses against it . This is a permanent law for you , to be observed from generation to generation . The Levites will receive no allotment of land among the Israelites ,

ID:	4520
INPUT:	Esklaboak nagusien menpeko izan daitezela gauza guztietan : bete dezatela beraien gogoa , ezezkorik esan gabe
PRED:	You will be slaves to your masters , but you will never be destroyed . But you would n't know it , but you would n't know it .
GOLD:	Slaves must always obey their masters and do their best to please them . They must not talk back

ID:	4521
INPUT:	Izan bedi nagusi itsasotik itsasora , lurraren bazter batetik bestera .
PRED:	For the Red Sea came down from the sea , and from the Red Sea .
GOLD:	May he reign from sea to sea , and from the Euphrates River to the ends of the earth .

ID:	4522
INPUT:	Janari sendoa , berriz , pertsona helduentzat da , ona eta txarra bereizteko eskarmentua dutenentzat .
PRED:	But when it is good , it is good for those who are wrong , it is good for those who are wrong .
GOLD:	Solid food is for those who are mature , who through training have the skill to recognize the difference between right and wrong .

ID:	4523
INPUT:	Ez zen han herriarentzat urik , eta Moisesen eta Aaronen aurka bildu ziren israeldarrak .
PRED:	So the people of Israel did not listen to Moses and Aaron .
GOLD:	There was no water for the people to drink at that place , so they rebelled against Moses and Aaron .

ID:	4524
INPUT:	hiru hiri aukeratuko dituzue Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak jabetzan emandako lurraldean .
PRED:	You must choose three months from the land the Lord your God is giving you .
GOLD:	Then you must set apart three cities of refuge in the land the Lord your God is giving you .

ID:	4525
INPUT:	Baina Sihonek ez zion Israel herriari lurraldea zeharkatzen utzi ; aitzitik , bere herria bildu eta bidera atera zitzaion basamortuan eta , Jahtzara etorririk , eraso egin zion .
PRED:	But Simon , the people of Israel , would n't let them go to the land of Canaan , where they were going to live in the wilderness .
GOLD:	But King Sihon refused to let them cross his territory . Instead , he mobilized his entire army and attacked Israel in the wilderness , engaging them in battle at Jahaz .

ID:	4526
INPUT:	Badakit , Jauna , zuzena zarela zeure erabakietan , leiala zarelako atsekabetu nauzula .
PRED:	O Lord , I know that you are my helper and your shield .
GOLD:	I know , O Lord , that your regulations are fair ; you disciplined me because I needed it .

ID:	4527
INPUT:	Hara , misterio bat adierazten dizuet : ez gara denok hilko , baina izatez aldatuak izango gara denok
PRED:	I tell you the truth , anyone who speaks to you will not die , but everyone will die .
GOLD:	But let me reveal to you a wonderful secret . We will not all die , but we will all be transformed !

ID:	4528
INPUT:	Ez da lotsagabea , ez berekoia , ez haserrekorra ; kaltea ez du gogoan hartzen .
PRED:	You must not defile yourselves by worshiping idols , but you wo n't be angry .
GOLD:	or rude . It does not demand its own way . It is not irritable , and it keeps no record of being wronged .

ID:	4529
INPUT:	Egun batez , Jesus irakasten ari zen , eta han zeuden eserita fariseu eta lege-maisu batzuk , Galileako auzo guztietatik , Judeatik eta Jerusalemdik etorriak . Jaunaren indarra berekin zuen eta sendatzera eragiten zion .
PRED:	One day Jesus and teachers of religious law saw that some of the Pharisees and teachers of religious law and teachers of religious law and teachers of religious law were standing in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	One day while Jesus was teaching , some Pharisees and teachers of religious law were sitting nearby . ( It seemed that these men showed up from every village in all Galilee and Judea , as well as from Jerusalem . ) And the Lord 's healing power was strongly with Jesus .

ID:	4530
INPUT:	Hain zuzen , behin eta berriz lotua zuten girgiluz eta katez , baina hark beti kateak eten eta girgiluak puskatu egiten zituen , eta ez zen inor ere hura menderatzeko gauza .
PRED:	So they made a covenant and made it a long time , and he sinned and made them a long time , and he did not destroy them .
GOLD:	Whenever he was put into chains and shackles — as he often was — he snapped the chains from his wrists and smashed the shackles . No one was strong enough to subdue him .

ID:	4531
INPUT:	Orduan , Moises eta Aaron elkarketa-etxolaren aurrera joan ziren ,
PRED:	So Moses and Aaron returned to the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	When he went into the Tabernacle of the Covenant the next day , he found that Aaron 's staff , representing the tribe of Levi , had sprouted , budded , blossomed , and produced ripe almonds !

ID:	4532
INPUT:	Isaakek Xibea eman zion izen ; horregatik , gaurdaino Beer-Xeba — hau da , « Zin-Putzu » — deitzen zaio hiri hari .
PRED:	Isaac named him Shiloh , for he was named Beersheba in the valley of Debir ( which means “ the town of Debir ) , ” ) .
GOLD:	So Isaac named the well Shibah ( which means “ oath ” ) . And to this day the town that grew up there is called Beersheba ( which means “ well of the oath ” ) .

ID:	4533
INPUT:	Pedrok , berriro : — Jauna , zergatik ezin dizut jarraitu orain ? Neure burua emango dut zuregatik .
PRED:	Peter replied , “ Lord , why are you doing this ? I will give you victory over my head ? ”
GOLD:	“ But why ca n't I come now , Lord ? ” he asked . “ I 'm ready to die for you . ”

ID:	4534
INPUT:	eta gelditutako o<unk> eta arrain-hondarrez hamabi saski bete zituzten .
PRED:	So the twelve baskets of leftovers came to Jesus and began to destroy two baskets of leftovers !
GOLD:	and afterward , the disciples picked up twelve baskets of leftover bread and fish .

ID:	4535
INPUT:	Erregeak galdegin zion : — Onik al da Absalom gaztea ? Ahimaatzek erantzun : — Iskanbila handia ikusi nuen , Joabek ni , zure zerbitzari hau , zuregana bidali ninduenean ; baina ez dakit zer gertatuko zen .
PRED:	“ Is this the king ? ” the king asked . “ It 's true , ” Joab replied , “ I have seen the great army of Israel . ” So Joab sent me to tell me , but I did n't know what it means . ”
GOLD:	“ What about young Absalom ? ” the king demanded . “ Is he all right ? ” Ahimaaz replied , “ When Joab told me to come , there was a lot of commotion . But I did n't know what was happening . ”

ID:	4536
INPUT:	Lege hau entzutean , atzerritarrak oro batzarretik botatzea erabaki zuten .
PRED:	When the people heard this , they decided to drive out the people out of the community .
GOLD:	When this passage of the Law was read , all those of foreign descent were immediately excluded from the assembly .

ID:	4537
INPUT:	Izan bedi gari ugari lurraldean , mendi gainetan kulunkan ; sor beza fruitua Libanok bezala , zelaiko belarra bezain ugari !
PRED:	You will possess the land of the darkness , like the mountains of the world , like smoke in the sky .
GOLD:	May there be abundant grain throughout the land , flourishing even on the hilltops.May the fruit trees flourish like the trees of Lebanon , and may the people thrive like grass in a field .

ID:	4538
INPUT:	ez itzazu gal ontasuna eta leialtasuna , eramatzazu beti zeurekin , ezarri barru-barruan .
PRED:	Do n't lose your unfailing love , and keep them safe in the presence of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Never let loyalty and kindness leave you ! Tie them around your neck as a reminder.Write them deep within your heart .

ID:	4539
INPUT:	Jauna da nire haitza , nire geriza , bera nire askatzailea ; ene Jainko , nire harkaitz babesgarria , nire babeski eta indar salbatzailea , nire gotorlekua .
PRED:	For the Lord is my rock , and my God is my rock . My God is my rock , my fortress , and my fortress is my fortress .
GOLD:	I called on the Lord , who is worthy of praise , and he saved me from my enemies .

ID:	4540
INPUT:	eta Jehuk Israel osora zabalarazi zuen . Baalen adoratzaile guztiak etorri ziren , ez zen bat ere gelditu etorri gabe . Sartu zirenean , Baalen jauretxea erabat bete zen .
PRED:	Then Jehu summoned all Israel and all the people of Israel . As soon as they arrived , a man who had not yet arrived at the home of Baal .
GOLD:	He sent messengers throughout all Israel summoning those who worshiped Baal . They all came — not a single one remained behind — and they filled the temple of Baal from one end to the other .

ID:	4541
INPUT:	Neure ahotsez iragartzen ditut zuk emaniko erabaki guztiak .
PRED:	I will pour out my fury on them , and I will destroy them all .
GOLD:	I have recited aloudall the regulations you have given us .

ID:	4542
INPUT:	Maitasuna ospatuz
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Young Woman

ID:	4543
INPUT:	beraren mezu hau Judako eta Jerusalemgo jendeari adieraztera joateko agindu zion : « Nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak , Israelen Jainkoak , galdetzen dizuet : Ez al duzue rekabetarren ikasbidea jaso behar eta nire esanak aditu ?
PRED:	Then this message came to the people of Judah and said to the people of Judah , “ Did n't I tell you what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : Do n't you think about me ?
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : Go and say to the people in Judah and Jerusalem , ‘ Come and learn a lesson about how to obey me .

ID:	4544
INPUT:	eta , berak ezarritako garaia iristean , bere mezua agerrarazi du Jainko gure Salbatzailearen aginduz gomendatu zaidan predikuaren bitartez .
PRED:	And when he comes , he will give you the word of our Savior , the Savior of our Savior , the Savior of our Savior , the Savior of our Savior , has promised you .
GOLD:	And now at just the right time he has revealed this message , which we announce to everyone . It is by the command of God our Savior that I have been entrusted with this work for him .

ID:	4545
INPUT:	« Ikasi pikondoaren irudi honetatik : kimua berritzen eta hostoa zabaltzen zaioneko , badakizue uda hurbil dela .
PRED:	“ This message came from the fig tree : If you see the fig tree , you will know that summer is near , you will know that summer is near .
GOLD:	“ Now learn a lesson from the fig tree . When its branches bud and its leaves begin to sprout , you know that summer is near .

ID:	4546
INPUT:	Lebitarrak , berriz , itunaren egoitzaren inguruan etxolatuko dira ; honela libratuko dute israeldarren elkartea Jaunaren haserretik . Itunaren egoitzako zerbitzuaz arduratuko dira » .
PRED:	But the Levites will turn away from the Tabernacle , and they will be rescued from the Tabernacle . They will turn from the Lord 's anger , and they will serve the Lord . ”
GOLD:	But the Levites will camp around the Tabernacle of the Covenant to protect the community of Israel from the Lord 's anger . The Levites are responsible to stand guard around the Tabernacle . ”

ID:	4547
INPUT:	Hura etzanda edo eserita egondako lekuan dagoen edozer gauza kutsaturik geldituko da arratsa arte .
PRED:	She will lie down and sleep with her , and she will be unclean until she is unclean until she is unclean until she is unclean until evening .
GOLD:	This includes her bed or any other object she has sat on ; you will be unclean until evening if you touch it .

ID:	4548
INPUT:	Gizon horiek urik gabeko iturri dira , ekaitzak eramaten duen laino . Ilunpe beltzak dauzkate zain .
PRED:	These men are like animals that walk in the darkness , but they are as sweet as the darkness .
GOLD:	These people are as useless as dried-up springs or as mist blown away by the wind . They are doomed to blackest darkness .

ID:	4549
INPUT:	Urrutitik ikusi zutenean , ia ezin zuten ezagutu ere , eta aiene bizian egin zuten negar . Jantziak urratu eta hautsa bota zuten beren buru gainera .
PRED:	When they saw the gold , they could n't be able to wash their clothes and put on burlap , and they tore their clothes in burlap and ashes .
GOLD:	When they saw Job from a distance , they scarcely recognized him . Wailing loudly , they tore their robes and threw dust into the air over their heads to show their grief .

ID:	4550
INPUT:	Poztu egin zen Egipto haiek irteteaz , haienganako beldur-ikarak hartuak baitzituen .
PRED:	The people of Egypt were terrified when they were afraid of them , for they were afraid of them .
GOLD:	Egypt was glad when they were gone , for they feared them greatly .

ID:	4551
INPUT:	Baina Jainkoak haiek hiltzea erabakitzen zuen orduko , harengana jotzen zuten , damutu eta hura bilatzen saiatzen ziren ,
PRED:	But if they kill God 's word , they went to the pit to kill him . But they were trying to kill him .
GOLD:	When God began killing them , they finally sought him.They repented and took God seriously .

ID:	4552
INPUT:	Moisesek esan zion herriari : « Gogoan izan egun honetan irten zaretela Egiptotik , esklabotzatik , ahalmen handiz atera baitzaituzte bertatik Jaunak . Beraz , ez duzue legamiadun ogirik jango .
PRED:	Then Moses said to the people , “ Let us go out of Egypt , for the Lord has rescued us from the slavery of Egypt . That is why the Lord has rescued you from Egypt . ”
GOLD:	So Moses said to the people , “ This is a day to remember forever — the day you left Egypt , the place of your slavery . Today the Lord has brought you out by the power of his mighty hand . ( Remember , eat no food containing yeast . )

ID:	4553
INPUT:	Adam berriro batu zitzaion bere emazteari ; honek semea sortu eta <unk> eman zion izen . Orduan , esan zuen : « Jainkoak sorrarazi dit beste seme hau , Kainek hil zigun Abelen ordez » .
PRED:	Then a man named Adam , who had a son named him . She named him a son , and he said , “ God has become a son of Cain . ” So Cain told him , “ He is the son of Cain . ”
GOLD:	Adam had sexual relations with his wife again , and she gave birth to another son . She named him Seth , for she said , “ God has granted me another son in place of Abel , whom Cain killed . ”

ID:	4554
INPUT:	Artisauak urtzen du idoloa , zilarginak estaltzen urrezeta apaintzen zilarrezko katez .
PRED:	The craftsmen made gold thread for gold ; they made gold rings and overlaid them with gold .
GOLD:	Can he be compared to an idol formed in a mold , overlaid with gold , and decorated with silver chains ?

ID:	4555
INPUT:	Aitzitik , Jeremias profeta eta Baruk idazkaria atxilotzeko agindu zien erregeak Jerahmeel errege-familiako printzeari , Azrielen seme Seraiasi eta Abdeelen seme Xelemiasi . Baina Jaunak ezkutuan jarriak zituen .
PRED:	Then Jeremiah took Jeremiah the prophet Jeremiah , the priest , the priest , and the king of Babylon , the king of Babylon , and the king of Judah . But the Lord gave this message to Jeremiah :
GOLD:	Then the king commanded his son Jerahmeel , Seraiah son of Azriel , and Shelemiah son of Abdeel to arrest Baruch and Jeremiah . But the Lord had hidden them .

ID:	4556
INPUT:	Nabot harrikatu eta hil zutela jakitean , Jezabelek esan zion Akabi : — Jaiki eta egin zaitez Izreelgo Nabotek diruaren truke ere eman nahi izan ez zizun mahastiaren jabe . Ez da bizi Nabot , hil da .
PRED:	So Naboth went to Naboth 's death and told him , “ Go back to Naboth 's vineyard and bury him . ” So Naboth 's vineyard .
GOLD:	When Jezebel heard the news , she said to Ahab , “ You know the vineyard Naboth would n't sell you ? Well , you can have it now ! He 's dead ! ”

ID:	4557
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak esan zion : Erantzioinetakoak , zu zauden lekua lur santua baita .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ You are standing in the dust , for you are standing on the ground . ”
GOLD:	“ Then the Lord said to him , ‘ Take off your sandals , for you are standing on holy ground .

ID:	4558
INPUT:	Justiziak bakea ekarriko du , patxada eta konfiantza betiko .
PRED:	He will give justice to the oppressed , and he will put them in confidence .
GOLD:	And this righteousness will bring peace.Yes , it will bring quietness and confidence forever .

ID:	4559
INPUT:	Hori izango duzue zeuen eskaintza Jaunarentzat , beste israeldarrek beren garitik nahiz olio eta ardo berritik egin ohi dutenaren parekoa .
PRED:	These are the instructions you must present to the Lord as a special gift to the people of Israel . You must be considered holy by the Lord your God .
GOLD:	The Lord will consider this offering to be your harvest offering , as though it were the first grain from your own threshing floor or wine from your own winepress .

ID:	4560
INPUT:	Ez dagokit niri kanpokoak epaitzea ; horiek Jainkoak epaituko ditu . Zuek elkartekideak epaitu behar dituzue . Liburu Santuak dio : Bota gaiztoa zeuen artetik .
PRED:	No , I know that God has chosen you to serve me , and you will judge the people of Israel . The Scriptures say , “ You are the one who judges fairly . ”
GOLD:	It is n't my responsibility to judge outsiders , but it certainly is your responsibility to judge those inside the church who are sinning .

ID:	4561
INPUT:	Horra zergatik agindu dien Jaunak israeldarrei , ez dezala inork odolik jan , ezta haien artean bizi den etorkinak ere .
PRED:	That is why the Lord commanded the people of Israel to eat any meat or drink anything that has been allowed to eat .
GOLD:	That is why I have said to the people of Israel , ‘ You must never eat or drink blood — neither you nor the foreigners living among you . '

ID:	4562
INPUT:	Era ezberdinean azaltzen da bakoitzarengan Jainkoak ematen duen Espiritua , baina beti denen onerako .
PRED:	And anyone who lives under the new teaching will receive eternal life , but anyone who gives eternal life will receive eternal life .
GOLD:	A spiritual gift is given to each of us so we can help each other .

ID:	4563
INPUT:	Zintzotasunak eta leialtasunak zaintzen dute erregea , zintzotasunean dago sendo errege-aulkia .
PRED:	The righteous will be filled with integrity , and the kings of the godly will be secure in the royal throne .
GOLD:	Unfailing love and faithfulness protect the king ; his throne is made secure through love .

ID:	4564
INPUT:	Kutsaturiko pertsonak bereiz ezarri
PRED:	Offerings for the Festival of Shelters
GOLD:	Purity in Israel 's Camp

ID:	4565
INPUT:	Kutxa filistearren esku
PRED:	The Ark of the Philistines
GOLD:	The Ark in Philistia

ID:	4566
INPUT:	Joax , Israelgo errege
PRED:	Joash Rules in Israel
GOLD:	Jehoash Rules in Israel

ID:	4567
INPUT:	Gizakiak egitasmoak , Jaunak azken hitza .
PRED:	We can understand the plans of the Lord , but the end of the night will come true .
GOLD:	We can make our own plans , but the Lord gives the right answer .

ID:	4568
INPUT:	Orduan , zentzugabeek zentzudunei esan zieten : “ Emaguzue olio pixka bat , kriseiluak itzaltzera doazkigu eta ” .
PRED:	Then the disciples said to each other , ‘ We are like a lamp to pour out the bowl on the ground . '
GOLD:	Then the five foolish ones asked the others , ‘ Please give us some of your oil because our lamps are going out . '

ID:	4569
INPUT:	Gauza bera egin zuen iparralde , hegoalde eta mendebaldeko alderdiekin , eta denek luzera bera zuten : berrehun eta berrogeita hamar metro .
PRED:	He made the north side of the north side of the north side of the north , and it was 101/2 feet long and 35 feet wide .
GOLD:	Then he measured the north side , and it was also 875 feet .

ID:	4570
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Ikusi , bada ; zeure sinesmenak sendatu zaitu .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to him , “ Your faith has healed you . ”
GOLD:	And Jesus said , “ All right , receive your sight ! Your faith has healed you . ”

ID:	4571
INPUT:	Zaindu eta gorde , Jerusalemera iritsi eta Jaunaren etxeko aretoetan , apaiz , lebitar eta Israelgo familiaburuen aurrean pisatuko dituzuen arte » .
PRED:	Go to Jerusalem to the Temple of the Lord , to the priests and Levites , who are in charge of the Temple of the Lord , will be put to the rest of the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Guard these treasures well until you present them to the leading priests , the Levites , and the leaders of Israel , who will weigh them at the storerooms of the Lord 's Temple in Jerusalem . ”

ID:	4572
INPUT:	Babiloniaren konkistarenoihartzunaklurra dardararaziko du , garrasiak nazio guztietan entzungo » .
PRED:	But the land of Babylon will be destroyed , the pride of the earth will be heard , and all the nations will be heard . ”
GOLD:	The earth will shake with the shout , “ Babylon has been taken ! ” and its cry of despair will be heard around the world .

ID:	4573
INPUT:	Horrela , zuek ere harri biziaz osaturiko espirituzko tenplu egingo zaituzte Jainkoak eta apaiz sagaratuko , Jainkoari atsegin zaizkion espirituzko opariak Jesu Kristoren bitartez eskaintzeko .
PRED:	Therefore , you will be honored in the Temple of the Lord your God , and you will be holy by the Lord Jesus Christ , who made you holy .
GOLD:	And you are living stones that God is building into his spiritual temple . What 's more , you are his holy priests . Through the mediation of Jesus Christ , you offer spiritual sacrifices that please God .

ID:	4574
INPUT:	Igarotzen zituen lurraldeetan senideak hizketaldi askoren bidez adoretzen zituen . Greziara iritsi
PRED:	So the people of Israel went to the land of the land , giving them a foreigner living among the people .
GOLD:	While there , he encouraged the believers in all the towns he passed through . Then he traveled down to Greece ,

ID:	4575
INPUT:	Judako errege Josiasen seme Sedekias errege izaten hasi zen garaian , Jaunak agindu hau eman zion Jeremiasi :
PRED:	This message came to King Josiah son of Josiah son of Josiah son of Josiah , king of Judah :
GOLD:	This message came to Jeremiah from the Lord early in the reign of Zedekiah son of Josiah , king of Judah .

ID:	4576
INPUT:	Erregeak galdetu zion : — Ez al dabil Joaben eskua zurekin arazo honetan guztian ? Emakumeak erantzun : — Ala ene errege jauna ! Bete-betean asmatu duzu esan duzun guztian . Bai , zure zerbitzari Joabek agindu dit , ene errege jauna , zer esan behar nizun .
PRED:	“ Do n't you know , my lord the king ? ” the king asked . “ Do n't you know what I have done to you , my lord the king ? ” “ Yes , my lord the king , ” the king replied .
GOLD:	“ Did Joab put you up to this ? ” And the woman replied , “ My lord the king , how can I deny it ? Nobody can hide anything from you . Yes , Joab sent me and told me what to say .

ID:	4577
INPUT:	Salu , Amok , Hilkias eta Jedaias . Horiek ziren apaiz-familien eta ahaideen buru Josueren garaian .
PRED:	These are the names of the priests who were Jeshua , the priest , and the leader of the family of Jeshua the priest .
GOLD:	Sallu , Amok , Hilkiah , and Jedaiah.These were the leaders of the priests and their associates in the days of Jeshua .

ID:	4578
INPUT:	« Ituna egiten dut zuekin eta zuen ondorengoekin ,
PRED:	“ I have made a covenant with you and your descendants ,
GOLD:	“ I hereby confirm my covenant with you and your descendants ,

ID:	4579
INPUT:	Zaingelek , hormek eta atalondoak besteen neurri berberak zituzten . Sarrerak , atalondoa barne , leihoak zituen inguru guztian , eta hogeita bost metro zen luze eta hamabi eta erdi zabal . (
PRED:	The entry room of the guard alcoves , dividing walls , and the entry room of the gateway passage passage passage passage was 101/2 feet long and 433/4 feet wide . The gateway passage measured 871/2 feet long and 433/4 feet wide .
GOLD:	Its guard alcoves , dividing walls , and entry room were the same size as those in the others . It also had windows along its walls and in the entry room . And like the others , the gateway passage was 871/2 feet long and 433/4 feet wide .

ID:	4580
INPUT:	Xemaias , Joiarib , Jedaias ,
PRED:	Shelemiah , Malkijah , Malkijah ,
GOLD:	Shemaiah , Joiarib , Jedaiah ,

ID:	4581
INPUT:	Ez al dakizue , senideok — legeen berri dakizuenoi mintzo natzaizue — , gizakia bizi den bitartean bakarrik behartzen duela legeak ?
PRED:	Do n't you realize that the law of Moses , you who are in the law of Moses , who are trying to live in the law of Moses ?
GOLD:	Now , dear brothers and sisters — you who are familiar with the law — do n't you know that the law applies only while a person is living ?

ID:	4582
INPUT:	Horregatik , hildakoen artetik piztu zenean , esandako hori gogoratu zitzaien haren ikasleei , eta sinetsi egin zuten Liburu Santuko eta Jesusek esandako hitza .
PRED:	That is why Jesus raised from the dead , and he taught his disciples to teach them to teach them the Scriptures . And the Scriptures say , “ The Holy One of the dead will be holy . ”
GOLD:	After he was raised from the dead , his disciples remembered he had said this , and they believed both the Scriptures and what Jesus had said .

ID:	4583
INPUT:	Jainkoak ez zien barkatu bekatu egin zuten aingeruei , eta , infernuko barrunbe ilunetara jaurtiz , han utzi zituen auzirako gordeta .
PRED:	And God did not forgive their sins , and I took them into the presence of the Lord 's presence and threw them away .
GOLD:	For God did not spare even the angels who sinned . He threw them into hell , in gloomy pits of darkness , where they are being held until the day of judgment .

ID:	4584
INPUT:	Ondoren , ikasleei esan zien : — Falta izan al zenuten ezer , poltsarik eta zakutorik eta oinetakorik gabe bidali zintuztedanean ? Haiek erantzun : — Ezer ere ez .
PRED:	Then the disciples said to his disciples , “ May the Lord cut off your sandals ? ” And they said , “ Why did n't you take any of you ? ” And they replied , “ What do you do ? ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus asked them , “ When I sent you out to preach the Good News and you did not have money , a traveler 's bag , or an extra pair of sandals , did you need anything ? ” “ No , ” they replied .

ID:	4585
INPUT:	Orduan , zaldien hanka-hotsaentzun zen , lurra joz , zaldiak bizkor lauoinka .
PRED:	Then he heard the sound of the sea , and the horses were terrified by the sea .
GOLD:	Then the horses ' hooves hammered the ground , the galloping , galloping of Sisera 's mighty steeds .

ID:	4586
INPUT:	« Agindua nion neure buruariez niela irrikaz begiratuko neska<unk> .
PRED:	“ I did n't remember that I was trying to do the same thing I had done .
GOLD:	“ I made a covenant with my eyesnot to look with lust at a young woman .

ID:	4587
INPUT:	Ez dugu , beraz , beldurrik , nahiz eta lurrak dardara eginedota mendiak itsas hondora amildu ,
PRED:	So we have no fear or fear or discouraged , the mountains , hills , and the ravines of the sea .
GOLD:	Let the oceans roar and foam.Let the mountains tremble as the waters surge ! Interlude

ID:	4588
INPUT:	Iraunkor izateko nire agindua gorde duzulako , nik ere gordeko zaitut , lurreko bizilagunak probatzeko mundu osora iristear dagoen probaldikoan .
PRED:	I will punish you with my command , and I will punish you for all the nations of the earth . I will send you out of the land of the earth .
GOLD:	“ Because you have obeyed my command to persevere , I will protect you from the great time of testing that will come upon the whole world to test those who belong to this world .

ID:	4589
INPUT:	Hilobira erortzetik libratu nau , argiz beterik biziko naiz ” .
PRED:	He will rescue me from the grave ; he will rescue me from the grave . '
GOLD:	God rescued me from the grave , and now my life is filled with light . '

ID:	4590
INPUT:	Jesusen Jaiotza
PRED:	The Birth of Jesus
GOLD:	The Birth of Jesus

ID:	4591
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : — Bene-benetan diotsuet : Nire bila zabiltzate , ez ikusi dituzuen mirarizko seinaleengatik , ogia asetzeraino jan duzuelako baizik .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I tell you the truth , you wo n't see me unless you see the miraculous signs you have seen .
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ I tell you the truth , you want to be with me because I fed you , not because you understood the miraculous signs .

ID:	4592
INPUT:	Saulek Davidi : — Bedeinkatua zu , ene seme David ! Handiak eginen dituzu eta garaile izango egintza guztietan ! David bere bidetik joan zen , eta Saul etxera itzuli .
PRED:	“ Praise me , my son David ! ” Saul replied . “ You will be my son David , and he will go home to his home . ” So David returned home and returned home .
GOLD:	And Saul said to David , “ Blessings on you , my son David . You will do many heroic deeds , and you will surely succeed . ” Then David went away , and Saul returned home .

ID:	4593
INPUT:	Gero , esan nien : « Ondo baderitzozue , ordaindu lansaria ; bestela , utzi » . Haiek zilarrezko hogeita hamar txanpon ordaindu zizkidaten .
PRED:	Then I said to them , “ You must pay the money to pay for five pieces of silver , and pay them thirty pieces of silver . ” So they gave him thirty pieces of silver .
GOLD:	And I said to them , “ If you like , give me my wages , whatever I am worth ; but only if you want to . ” So they counted out for my wages thirty pieces of silver .

ID:	4594
INPUT:	Orduan , gizaki guztiek ikusiko dute Jainkoak ematen duen salbamena .
PRED:	And everyone who believes in him will see God 's salvation .
GOLD:	And then all people will seethe salvation sent from God . ' ”

ID:	4595
INPUT:	Nork ez du maite bizia ? Nork ez du nahi luzaroan bizi eta zoriontsu izan ?
PRED:	Who does n't love the one who loves the person ? Who is a solid rock ?
GOLD:	Then keep your tongue from speaking eviland your lips from telling lies !

ID:	4596
INPUT:	Hurbildu zitzaion , orduan , tentatzailea eta esan zion : — Jainkoaren Semea zarenez , agindu harri hauek ogi bihurtzeko .
PRED:	So the man approached him and said , “ The Son of God has given you the Son of God . ”
GOLD:	During that time the devil came and said to him , “ If you are the Son of God , tell these stones to become loaves of bread . ”

ID:	4597
INPUT:	Nire ondasunak arakatzean , aurkitu al duzu ezer zeure etxeko gauzetarik ? Hala bada , ekarri hona , nire eta zure ahaideen aurrera , eta erabaki dezatela hauek nork duen arrazoi !
PRED:	“ Have you always found me in my house ? Why did you bring me back to my house ? ” I asked . “ I have only one of you , and you can stand before me ? ”
GOLD:	You have rummaged through everything I own . Now show me what you found that belongs to you ! Set it out here in front of us , before our relatives , for all to see . Let them judge between us !

ID:	4598
INPUT:	mendietako zaparradak blai egiten ditu , non babesturik ez , eta harkaitzaren kontra jartzen dira .
PRED:	“ Look at the mountains of the north , and call out the troops of the hills , and no one can help them . ”
GOLD:	They are soaked by mountain showers , and they huddle against the rocks for want of a home .

ID:	4599
INPUT:	« Emakumeagandik sortutako gizakiakegunak gutxi eta kezkak ugari ;
PRED:	“ If a woman from a woman 's womb , she must pay a little compensation from the mouth of a woman .
GOLD:	“ How frail is humanity ! How short is life , how full of trouble !

ID:	4600
INPUT:	Damaskon nengoela , Are<unk> erregearen gobernariak zaintzaileak ezarri zituen hirian ni harrapatzeko ;
PRED:	As soon as I was in Damascus , the king of Damascus appointed an army to plunder them .
GOLD:	When I was in Damascus , the governor under King Aretas kept guards at the city gates to catch me .

ID:	4601
INPUT:	Orobat , berarekin gurutzean josiak zeuden lapurrek ere irain egiten zioten .
PRED:	As soon as they were with him , the people who were thieves came with him .
GOLD:	Even the revolutionaries who were crucified with him ridiculed him in the same way .

ID:	4602
INPUT:	Ogia erretzean , labealdi bakoitzeko opil bat eskainiko diozue hasikin gisa , uzta-sasoian lehen fruituak eskaintzen dituzuen bezala .
PRED:	As for each of the altar , bring a special gift to each of the altar , offer it to the Lord .
GOLD:	Present a cake from the first of the flour you grind , and set it aside as a sacred offering , as you do with the first grain from the threshing floor .

ID:	4603
INPUT:	Joan ziren ikasleak eta , hirira iristean , dena Jesusek esan bezala gertatu zitzaien , eta Pazko-afaria prestatu zuten .
PRED:	When Joseph arrived at the city , he told his disciples , “ Let 's go to the Passover meal . ” So they prepared the Passover meal .
GOLD:	So the two disciples went into the city and found everything just as Jesus had said , and they prepared the Passover meal there .

ID:	4604
INPUT:	Hildakoen Egoitzan oinazez zegoela , begiak jaso eta Abraham ikusi zuen urruti , eta Lazaro haren ondoan .
PRED:	When he learned that God was in the grave , he saw that Abraham was in the grave , and he looked up and looked up toward heaven .
GOLD:	and he went to the place of the dead . There , in torment , he saw Abraham in the far distance with Lazarus at his side .

ID:	4605
INPUT:	Nik Kixon errekara ekarriko dizut Sisera , Jabinen gudarostearen buruzagia , bere guda-gurdi eta gudari-taldearekin , eta eskura emango » .
PRED:	I will give them the clans of the clans of the tribe of Simeon , the leaders of the tribe of Simeon , and the leaders of the tribe of Simeon . ”
GOLD:	And I will call out Sisera , commander of Jabin 's army , along with his chariots and warriors , to the Kishon River . There I will give you victory over him . ”

ID:	4606
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaun ahalguztidunak : « Oi zu , Sionen bizi zaren nire herria ! Ez izan Asiriaren beldurrik , zigorrez jotzen bazaitu ereeta zure aurkamakila jasotzen badu ere , behinola egiptoarrek bezala .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : “ O Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	So this is what the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , says : “ O my people in Zion , do not be afraid of the Assyrians when they oppress you with rod and club as the Egyptians did long ago .

ID:	4607
INPUT:	Barak Siseraren ondoren zebilen . Jaelek , bidera irtenik , esan zion : « Zatoz , neuk erakutsiko dizut bila zabiltzan gizona » . Sartu zen Barak oihal-etxolara eta Sisera hila aurkitu zuen , ziria buruan sartua zuela .
PRED:	When Sisera arrived at Shechem , he said to Jacob , “ Come , I will meet you , ” Jacob said , “ I will meet you in the tent where you are going into the tent . ” So he went into the tent .
GOLD:	When Barak came looking for Sisera , Jael went out to meet him . She said , “ Come , and I will show you the man you are looking for . ” So he followed her into the tent and found Sisera lying there dead , with the tent peg through his temple .

ID:	4608
INPUT:	Elkartu zirenean , beste ikasleek esan zioten : — Jauna ikusi dugu . Tomasek erantzun zien : — Haren eskuetan iltzeen seinalea ikusten ez badut , eta nire atzamarra iltze-zuloetan eta nire eskua haren saihets-zuloan sartzen ez badut , ez dut inola ere sinetsiko .
PRED:	Then he said to his disciples , “ Lord , we want to see the miraculous signs we have done to you . ” So he said , “ I do n't see the bodies of the Presence on my head , and I will never see it . ”
GOLD:	They told him , “ We have seen the Lord ! ” But he replied , “ I wo n't believe it unless I see the nail wounds in his hands , put my fingers into them , and place my hand into the wound in his side . ”

ID:	4609
INPUT:	gaizki-esaka ari zaizkigu eta guk gozoki erantzun . Orain artean , munduko simaurra bezala gara , guztien hondakin .
PRED:	“ We will throw us into the fields , and we will throw us into the fields . We will put on the ground , and we will fill the ground with the ground .
GOLD:	We appeal gently when evil things are said about us . Yet we are treated like the world 's garbage , like everybody 's trash — right up to the present moment .

ID:	4610
INPUT:	« Landan dabilela , hila izan den nahiz berez hildako norbaiten gorpua edota giza hezurrak nahiz hilobia ukitzen dituena kutsaturik geldituko da zazpi egunez .
PRED:	“ If a man dies , whether a man or a dead animal dies or animal dies , it must be ceremonially unclean for seven days , and it must be ceremonially unclean for seven days .
GOLD:	And if someone in an open field touches the corpse of someone who was killed with a sword or who died a natural death , or if someone touches a human bone or a grave , that person will be defiled for seven days .

ID:	4611
INPUT:	eta , seme-alaba bagara , baita oinordeko ere , Jainkoaren oinordeko eta Kristoren oinordekide ; zeren , nekeetan Kristoren kideko garenez gero , aintzan ere beraren kideko izango baikara .
PRED:	And if you are children of God 's children , we will be put into the place of honor , and we will be made right with Christ . We will be made right with Christ , for we will be made right with Christ .
GOLD:	And since we are his children , we are his heirs . In fact , together with Christ we are heirs of God 's glory . But if we are to share his glory , we must also share his suffering .

ID:	4612
INPUT:	Tronutik tximistak , danbatekoak eta trumoiak ateratzen ziren ; aulkiaren aurrean zazpi argi-zuzi zeuden sutan , Jainkoaren zazpi espirituak adierazten zituztenak ,
PRED:	The voice of the lightning flashed through the thunder of lightning , and the seven angels who were standing in the presence of God .
GOLD:	From the throne came flashes of lightning and the rumble of thunder . And in front of the throne were seven torches with burning flames . This is the sevenfold Spirit of God .

ID:	4613
INPUT:	Naamanek Israelgo erregeari eman zion gutunak hau zioen : « Gutun hau eramanez Naaman neure gudalburua bidaltzen dizut , legena senda diezaiozun » .
PRED:	The king of Israel gave this letter to King Nebuchadnezzar of Israel : “ I am sending you to the commander of the army of Israel . ”
GOLD:	The letter to the king of Israel said : “ With this letter I present my servant Naaman . I want you to heal him of his leprosy . ”

ID:	4614
INPUT:	Egun hartan , bertsoak aterako dizkizuete , eta eresi hau kantatuko : « Zeharo larruturik gaude ! Jaunaren herriaren ondareaarrotzen eskuetara joan da ; nolatan kendu diote gero ? Sinesgabeen arteanbanatzen dituzte gure soroak » .
PRED:	On that day the Lord will cry out , “ What sorrow awaits you ? What sorrow awaits you who are in the land of the Lord ? How can we go to the land of the Lord ? ”
GOLD:	In that day your enemies will make fun of youby singing this song of despair about you : “ We are finished , completely ruined ! God has confiscated our land , taking it from us.He has given our fieldsto those who betrayed us . ”

ID:	4615
INPUT:	« Erosta kantatuko dizute : « “ Nola dagoen hondatua , itsasoetako erregina , hiri ospetsua ! Bera eta bertako bizilagunakindartsu ziren itsasoaneta izua sorrarazten zutenalde guztietan ” .
PRED:	“ Then they will sing , ‘ Noah , the great army of the sea , the cities of the sea , and the waves of the sea will become a great and mighty nation . '
GOLD:	Then they will wail for you , singing this funeral song : “ O famous island city , once ruler of the sea , how you have been destroyed ! Your people , with their naval power , once spread fear around the world .

ID:	4616
INPUT:	Eta basoan geldituko direnzuhaitzakhain gutxi izango dira , ezen ume batek erekontatu ahal izango baititu .
PRED:	And when he returns , he will be able to be able to give birth to a son , for he will be able to give birth to a son .
GOLD:	Of all that glorious forest , only a few trees will survive — so few that a child could count them !

ID:	4617
INPUT:	Agripak esan zion Paulori : — Beste pixka bat , eta kristau bihurtuko nauzu .
PRED:	Then Agrippa said to Paul , “ If you are willing , you will become a little longer . ”
GOLD:	Agrippa interrupted him . “ Do you think you can persuade me to become a Christian so quickly ? ”

ID:	4618
INPUT:	Jesus Jerusalemen Mesias bezala sartu
PRED:	Jesus Clears the Temple
GOLD:	Jesus Clears the Temple

ID:	4619
INPUT:	Artalde eta abere-taldeak ere eskuratu zituen . Jendeak abereak hartu eta Daviden aitzinera eraman zituen , esanez : « Hona Davidentzako harrapakinak » .
PRED:	He took his sheep and goats and goats , and he took them to David . He said , “ My father , David , ‘ This is what the Lord says : '
GOLD:	He also recovered all the flocks and herds , and his men drove them ahead of the other livestock . “ This plunder belongs to David ! ” they said .

ID:	4620
INPUT:	« Apaiz-tunika liho finez bordatua egingo duzu , eta buruzapia ere liho finezkoa izango da ; gerrikoa apain bordatua egingo duzu .
PRED:	“ Then make a crown of blue , purple , and scarlet thread , and scarlet thread . Make it with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	“ Weave Aaron 's patterned tunic from fine linen cloth . Fashion the turban from this linen as well . Also make a sash , and decorate it with colorful embroidery .

ID:	4621
INPUT:	Batek garrantzi berezia ematen dio egun bati ; beste batentzat , berriz , egun guztiak berdinak dira . Joka dezala bakoitzak bere kontzientziaren arabera .
PRED:	They gave a second reply to him , but one of them is a gift to each other . But the whole family of John the Baptist , each of the other 's words are recorded in each of them .
GOLD:	In the same way , some think one day is more holy than another day , while others think every day is alike . You should each be fully convinced that whichever day you choose is acceptable .

ID:	4622
INPUT:	Oi nire anaia bazina , nire amaren bularrean hazia ! Musu emango nizuke kalean aurkitzean , inoren iseka-beldurrik gabe .
PRED:	O my brother , if you are my mother , I would give you a little boy . I would have no fear for you , and you would have no fear .
GOLD:	Oh , I wish you were my brother , who nursed at my mother 's breasts.Then I could kiss you no matter who was watching , and no one would criticize me .

ID:	4623
INPUT:	Tenpluari buruz hitzaldia
PRED:	Peter Preaches in the Temple
GOLD:	Jeremiah Speaks at the Temple

ID:	4624
INPUT:	Herri guztiak zuk eginak : adoratzera etorriko zaizkizu , zuri , Jauna , ohore ematera .
PRED:	All the nations will come to you , for they will come to you , O Lord .
GOLD:	All the nations you madewill come and bow before you , Lord ; they will praise your holy name .

ID:	4625
INPUT:	Manasesen leinukoek ezin izan zituzten hartu Bet-Xan , Taanak , Dor , Ibleam eta Megido hiriak , ezta haien inguruak , ez bizilagunak ere ; kanaandarrek jarraitu zuten bertan bizitzen .
PRED:	These were the descendants of Manasseh , the descendants of the tribe of Manasseh , who lived in the towns of Manasseh , and the towns of the Canaanites , who lived in the towns of Manasseh .
GOLD:	The tribe of Manasseh failed to drive out the people living in Beth-shan , Taanach , Dor , Ibleam , Megiddo , and all their surrounding settlements , because the Canaanites were determined to stay in that region .

ID:	4626
INPUT:	( Mk 14 , <unk> ; Jn 12 , 1-8 )
PRED:	Jesus Is Betrayed and Arrested
GOLD:	Jesus Predicts Peter 's Denial

ID:	4627
INPUT:	Bataioaz Jesusen garaipenaren partaide
PRED:	Jesus Christ Is the Holy Spirit
GOLD:	Suffering for Doing Good

ID:	4628
INPUT:	Juduak Pazko-jaia ospatu
PRED:	Passover and Jerusalem
GOLD:	Celebration of Passover

ID:	4629
INPUT:	Jaunak bedeinkazioa agindu
PRED:	The Coming of the Earth
GOLD:	Promises for Zerubbabel

ID:	4630
INPUT:	Jesusek berriro jendeari dei egin eta esan zion : « Entzun niri denok eta ulertu ongi !
PRED:	Then Jesus called to the crowd and said , “ Listen to me and understand what I am doing .
GOLD:	Then Jesus called to the crowd to come and hear . “ All of you listen , ” he said , “ and try to understand .

ID:	4631
INPUT:	Gosea erakarri zuen lurraldera , janari-hornidura oro kendu .
PRED:	Give them food to the land I have given you , and you must take possession of the land .
GOLD:	He called for a famine on the land of Canaan , cutting off its food supply .

ID:	4632
INPUT:	edo irakurtzen ez dakien bati eman eta « Irakurri hau » esaten diote , eta hark « Ez dakit irakurtzen » erantzuten .
PRED:	He did n't read it to them and read it : “ I am going to read it , ” they say , “ I do n't understand what it means . ”
GOLD:	When you give it to those who can not read , they will say , “ We do n't know how to read . ”

ID:	4633
INPUT:	Senarrok , maitatu emazteak eta ez izan horiekin zakar .
PRED:	Dear friends , do not have sexual relations with this man 's wife .
GOLD:	Husbands , love your wives and never treat them harshly .

ID:	4634
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Koreren semeen salmoa .
PRED:	Shout to God , O Lord , for you are my salvation .
GOLD:	Listen to this , all you people ! Pay attention , everyone in the world !

ID:	4635
INPUT:	Baina orain ez oroitu antzinakoez , ez gogoratu lehenago gertatuez .
PRED:	But now , I 'm not like the stars in the future .
GOLD:	“ But forget all that — it is nothing compared to what I am going to do .

ID:	4636
INPUT:	« Esan israeldarrei : Gizonezkoa , sexu-jarioa duenean , kutsatu bihurtzen da .
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel : If a man dies , she is ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel . “ Any man who has a bodily discharge is ceremonially unclean .

ID:	4637
INPUT:	Joanek noren aginduz bataiatzen zuen , Jainkoaren aginduz ala giza aginduz ? Haiek honela zioten beren artean : « Jainkoaren aginduz ari zela esaten badiogu , zergatik ez genion sinetsi erantzungo digu .
PRED:	John was baptized by the authority of God , and they asked him , “ If we had been baptized , we would say , ‘ We would n't believe God 's command , ' they would n't believe him .
GOLD:	“ Did John 's authority to baptize come from heaven , or was it merely human ? ” They talked it over among themselves . “ If we say it was from heaven , he will ask us why we did n't believe John .

ID:	4638
INPUT:	Ez gehiago harropuzkeriarik , beraz , kateak estuagobihur ez dakizkizuen . Izan ere , zuen lurralde osoasuntsitzeko erabakia hartua duelajakinarazi dit Jainko Jaunak .
PRED:	So do not reject the word of the Lord your God . Do not reject me , for I will destroy the land the Lord your God has given me .
GOLD:	For the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , has plainly said that he is determined to crush the whole land.So scoff no more , or your punishment will be even greater .

ID:	4639
INPUT:	Baziren han emakume asko ere , urrutitik begira ; Jesusi jarraituz Galileatik etorriak ziren , beraren zerbitzari ;
PRED:	There were many years old when they arrived from Galilee , they followed Jesus and followed the example of Galilee .
GOLD:	And many women who had come from Galilee with Jesus to care for him were watching from a distance .

ID:	4640
INPUT:	Ene seme , ez baztertu Jaunaren heziketa , ez haserretu zentzarazten bazaitu ,
PRED:	My child , do n't neglect the discipline of the Lord 's anger , or if you refuse to turn away from the heart of the Lord ,
GOLD:	My child , do n't reject the Lord 's discipline , and do n't be upset when he corrects you .

ID:	4641
INPUT:	Harri gaineko hazia bezalakoak , hauek dira : mezua entzutean , pozik onartzen dutenak ; baina , sustrairik gabeak izanik , denboraldi batean sinesten dute , baina tentaldi-garaian huts egiten .
PRED:	They are saying , “ Look , these are the ones who hear these instructions , but they are not like a little children , but they have not been cut off , but they have no children . ”
GOLD:	The seeds on the rocky soil represent those who hear the message and receive it with joy . But since they do n't have deep roots , they believe for a while , then they fall away when they face temptation .

ID:	4642
INPUT:	gogoko dute plazetan jendeak agur egitea eta guztiek “ maisu ” deitzea .
PRED:	They will sit in the streets and say , ‘ Rabbi , the teachers of religious law and all the teachers of religious law . '
GOLD:	They love to receive respectful greetings as they walk in the marketplaces , and to be called ‘ Rabbi . '

ID:	4643
INPUT:	« Norbaitek bere abereak sorora nahiz mahastira larratzera atera eta beste baten soroan larratzen uzten baditu , bere soro nahiz mahastiko emaitzarik hoberenez ordainduko du .
PRED:	“ If a man has planted a field , he must pay the money to sell the field and sell it to his field , and he must pay it to his field .
GOLD:	If someone steals an ox or a donkey or a sheep and it is found in the thief 's possession , then the thief must pay double the value of the stolen animal .

ID:	4644
INPUT:	entzuiozu zerutik , bizi zaren toki horretatik , eta barkatu . Egizu nork bere jokaeraren ordaina har dezan , ongi baitakizu halakoaren barruaren berri ; jakin ere , zuk bakarrik dakizu gizon-emakume guztien barruaren berri .
PRED:	then hear from heaven and forgive them from heaven , but do n't forgive them . But please forgive them , but do n't forgive them , but do n't forgive them . ”
GOLD:	then hear from heaven where you live , and forgive . Give your people what their actions deserve , for you alone know each human heart .

ID:	4645
INPUT:	Haren aginduz eguzkia ez da ateratzen , izarrak ezkutuan uzten ditu .
PRED:	But the sun is not allowed to carry out everything he does .
GOLD:	If he commands it , the sun wo n't riseand the stars wo n't shine .

ID:	4646
INPUT:	esku hartuko duzu zeuk ere irabazietan , gordailu bakarra izango dugu eta » .
PRED:	You will hand them over to your hand , and we will throw them away . ”
GOLD:	Come , throw in your lot with us ; we 'll all share the loot . ”

ID:	4647
INPUT:	Hodeiaren erdian lau izaki bizidun zeuden , gizaki-itxurakoak .
PRED:	There are four living being four living in the four corners of the living beings .
GOLD:	From the center of the cloud came four living beings that looked human ,

ID:	4648
INPUT:	Seigarren ikuskaria : liburua
PRED:	A Vision of a Plumb Line
GOLD:	A Flying Scroll

ID:	4649
INPUT:	Ala ni , Jainko Jauna ! Nire artaldea larrutua eta basapiztia guztien harrapakin izan da artzainik ez zuelako , eta artzainak ez dira nire artaldeaz arduratu ; aitzitik , artzainek beren buruak zaindu dituzte eta ez nire artaldea ;
PRED:	As for me , O Sovereign Lord , I will scatter my sheep and goats , sheep , goats , sheep , goats , goats , sheep , goats , and goats , and goats , and goats .
GOLD:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , you abandoned my flock and left them to be attacked by every wild animal . And though you were my shepherds , you did n't search for my sheep when they were lost . You took care of yourselves and left the sheep to starve .

ID:	4650
INPUT:	Eraman egin zioten . Jesus ikusteaz batera , espirituak gogor astindu zuen mutikoa , eta lurrean iraulka eta lerdea zeriola utzi .
PRED:	So they began to see Jesus , and he began breaking the hands into the hands of the wind . He threw the dust into the sky , and the dust into the ground .
GOLD:	So they brought the boy . But when the evil spirit saw Jesus , it threw the child into a violent convulsion , and he fell to the ground , writhing and foaming at the mouth .

ID:	4651
INPUT:	Josuek agindu bezala egin zuten israeldarrek : Jordan erditik hamabi harri , israeldar leinuak hainbat harri , hartu , gaua igaroko zuten lekura eraman eta bertan ezarri zituzten , Jaunak Josueri agindu bezala .
PRED:	So Joshua did as the Lord had commanded . The Israelites to cross the Jordan River , one of the twelve tribes of Israel , just as the Lord had commanded Joshua .
GOLD:	So the men did as Joshua had commanded them . They took twelve stones from the middle of the Jordan River , one for each tribe , just as the Lord had told Joshua . They carried them to the place where they camped for the night and constructed the memorial there .

ID:	4652
INPUT:	Hori esatean , ahaztu egiten dute aspaldi bazirela zeruak , eta baita lurra ere , Jainkoaren hitzak uretatik sorrarazia eta uren erdian finkatua ;
PRED:	They forgot God about the things he had done , and he chose them to grow in the sky , and he created the heavens and the earth .
GOLD:	They deliberately forget that God made the heavens long ago by the word of his command , and he brought the earth out from the water and surrounded it with water .

ID:	4653
INPUT:	Hirira heltzean , oihu egin zieten atezainei eta berri eman , esanez : — Siriarren kanpalekuan izan gara , eta han ez dago inor ; ez da giza hotsik aditzen . Zaldiak eta astoak lotuak eta oihal-etxolak zeuden zeudenean utziak besterik ez dago han .
PRED:	When they arrived , they shouted to the elders of the city and said to the elders , “ There is no one else , but there is no one else . There is no one in the tent . ”
GOLD:	So they went back to the city and told the gatekeepers what had happened . “ We went out to the Aramean camp , ” they said , “ and no one was there ! The horses and donkeys were tethered and the tents were all in order , but there was n't a single person around ! ”

ID:	4654
INPUT:	Hortan , honela mintzatu zitzaion Elkana bere senarra : — Ana , zergatik ari zara negarrez eta ez duzu jaten ? Zergatik zaude goibel ? Ez al naiz , bada , ni zuretzat hamar seme baino hobe ?
PRED:	Then she said to her husband , “ Why are you willing to eat ? Why are you willing to eat ? Why do n't you eat it ? Why do n't you eat it ? ”
GOLD:	“ Why are you crying , Hannah ? ” Elkanah would ask . “ Why are n't you eating ? Why be downhearted just because you have no children ? You have me — is n't that better than having ten sons ? ”

ID:	4655
INPUT:	Errautsa dut janari , malkoak edari .
PRED:	I have heard my tears , and I have heard my tears .
GOLD:	because of your anger and wrath.For you have picked me up and thrown me out .

ID:	4656
INPUT:	Baina Sanbalat horondarrak eta Tobias amondar funtzionarioak , zertara nentorren jakitean , oso gaizki hartu zuten israeldarren egoera ontzeko norbait etortzea .
PRED:	But the father of Sanballat , Tobiah , and the other officials of the land of Canaan , heard that some of the people of Israel had heard about it .
GOLD:	But when Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the Ammonite official heard of my arrival , they were very displeased that someone had come to help the people of Israel .

ID:	4657
INPUT:	Zeren , egia esan , niregan bete beharra baita Liburu Santuak dioena : Bekatarien kidekotzat jo zuten . Izan ere , nireak laster egingo du .
PRED:	For the Scriptures say , “ As surely as the Scriptures say , ‘ You will be tested , and you will be called my own sake . ' ”
GOLD:	For the time has come for this prophecy about me to be fulfilled : ‘ He was counted among the rebels . ' Yes , everything written about me by the prophets will come true . ”

ID:	4658
INPUT:	Roboamek , Jerusalemen kokatu zenean , Judako zenbait hiri gotortu egin zuen .
PRED:	When Rehoboam learned that Rehoboam had fled to Jerusalem , he went to Jerusalem to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Rehoboam remained in Jerusalem and fortified various towns for the defense of Judah .

ID:	4659
INPUT:	Aintziraz beste aldera iritsi ziren , gerasatarren lurraldera .
PRED:	So they went to the region of the lake , where they landed at the lake .
GOLD:	So they arrived at the other side of the lake , in the region of the Gerasenes .

ID:	4660
INPUT:	« Zaude tenpluko atarian zutik , eta hitz egin Judako hirietatik Jauna gurtzera tenplura datozen guztiei . Hots egin zehatz-mehatz haiei esateko agindu dizkizudan hitzak , bakar bat ere utzi gabe .
PRED:	“ Stand up in the Temple , and go out to the Lord 's presence to all the people of Judah . He told them everything the Lord had commanded you to do .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord says : Stand in the courtyard in front of the Temple of the Lord , and make an announcement to the people who have come there to worship from all over Judah . Give them my entire message ; include every word .

ID:	4661
INPUT:	eta ezarri Jaunaren aurrean , urre garbizko mahai gainean , seina opileko bi lerrotan .
PRED:	Place the Bread of the Presence on the Bread of the Presence on the pure table .
GOLD:	Place the bread before the Lord on the pure gold table , and arrange the loaves in two stacks , with six loaves in each stack .

ID:	4662
INPUT:	Begira , zeurekin nauzu ! Noranahi zoazela , zainduko zaituteta lurralde honetara itzularaziko . Ez , ez zaitut eskutik utziko , esan dizudana bete arte » .
PRED:	Look , I am with you , and I will lead you into your land , and you will never see you . I will give you the land I have given you . ”
GOLD:	What 's more , I am with you , and I will protect you wherever you go . One day I will bring you back to this land . I will not leave you until I have finished giving you everything I have promised you . ”

ID:	4663
INPUT:	Deabruei eskaini zizkietensakrifizioak , ezagutzen ez zituzten sasijainkoei , arestian etorritako jainko berriei , arbasoek inoiz gurtu ez zituztenei .
PRED:	They offered sacrifices to the gods of the devil , who had not yet worshiped other gods . They did not worship other gods or worship other gods .
GOLD:	They offered sacrifices to demons , which are not God , to gods they had not known before , to new gods only recently arrived , to gods their ancestors had never feared .

ID:	4664
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jainko Jauna , handia zara , ez baita zu adinakorik . Ez da jainkorik zu baizik , geure belarriz entzun izan dugun bezala .
PRED:	That is why the Lord our God is great and awesome than you , but you have no fear .
GOLD:	“ How great you are , O Sovereign Lord ! There is no one like you . We have never even heard of another God like you !

ID:	4665
INPUT:	Omri erregearen aginduaketa Akaben familiaren ohiturakgordetzen dituzu : haien esanetara zabiltza . Horregatik , zuen hiria hondatua utziko duteta bizilagunak lotsa gorrian . Nire herriaren lotsaizunajasan beharko duzue » .
PRED:	But the king of Assyria will destroy the pagan shrines , and the people of Israel will be destroyed by the sword of their enemies . They will be destroyed by the sword of the enemy , and you will be destroyed by my sword . ”
GOLD:	You keep only the laws of evil King Omri ; you follow only the example of wicked King Ahab ! Therefore , I will make an example of you , bringing you to complete ruin.You will be treated with contempt , mocked by all who see you . ”

ID:	4666
INPUT:	Ene maiteok , ihes egiozue , beraz , idolatriari .
PRED:	Dear friends , do n't flee ! Do n't let them escape !
GOLD:	So , my dear friends , flee from the worship of idols .

ID:	4667
INPUT:	esan zion emazteari : — Seguru hilko garela , Jainkoa ikusi baitugu .
PRED:	She said to her , “ We have seen the Son of God , for we have seen God . ”
GOLD:	and he said to his wife , “ We will certainly die , for we have seen God ! ”

ID:	4668
INPUT:	Nork ezagutzen du zure haserrearen indarra ? Nork dio aski beldur zure suminari ?
PRED:	Who is angry with you ? Who is your wrath ? Who is able to save you ?
GOLD:	Who can comprehend the power of your anger ? Your wrath is as awesome as the fear you deserve .

ID:	4669
INPUT:	Hogei urte zituen Akazek errege izaten hastean , eta hamasei urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen . Ez zuen Jaunari atsegin zaiona egin , bere arbaso Davidek ez bezala jokatuz .
PRED:	Amaziah was forty years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem six years . He did n't do what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight .
GOLD:	Ahaz was twenty years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years . He did not do what was pleasing in the sight of the Lord , as his ancestor David had done .

ID:	4670
INPUT:	Ez egin jaramonik Babiloniako erregeak ez zaituztela menderatuko esaten dizueten profetei , gezurra esaten baitizuete .
PRED:	Do not listen to the king of Babylon , for they will not worship the false prophets of the prophets .
GOLD:	Do not listen to the false prophets who keep telling you , ‘ The king of Babylon will not conquer you . ' They are liars .

ID:	4671
INPUT:	Ez izan zeure baitan beste jainkorik , ez dezazula adora jainko arrotzik .
PRED:	You must not worship other gods , nor worship other gods .
GOLD:	For it was I , the Lord your God , who rescued you from the land of Egypt.Open your mouth wide , and I will fill it with good things .

ID:	4672
INPUT:	Sei urtez egon zen Joax bi emakumeekin Jainkoaren etxean gorderik , Atalia lurralde hartan erregina izan zen bitarte guztian .
PRED:	The woman had six years old when he became king , and he reigned in the land of God .
GOLD:	Joash remained hidden in the Temple of God for six years while Athaliah ruled over the land .

ID:	4673
INPUT:	Hilaurra bezala , ez nintzatekeen izan ere egingo , argirik ikusi ez duten umeen pareko .
PRED:	There was no peace for me , so I could not see the meaning of the lambs or goats .
GOLD:	Why was n't I buried like a stillborn child , like a baby who never lives to see the light ?

ID:	4674
INPUT:	Jeroboamek kultu-lekuak egin zituen muinoetan eta , haietarako , Lebiren ondorengoak ez ziren apaizak izendatu zituen jende artetik .
PRED:	Jeroboam did not destroy the pagan shrines and the priests and Levites who had left the pagan shrines , for the priests had not yet left the pagan shrines .
GOLD:	Jeroboam also erected buildings at the pagan shrines and ordained priests from the common people — those who were not from the priestly tribe of Levi .

ID:	4675
INPUT:	Jehuk gora , leihora , begiratu eta esan zuen : — Nor dut neure aldeko ? Bizpahiru zerbitzari atera ziren orduan leihora eta Jehuri begira jarri .
PRED:	Then Jehu stood at the window , and he said , “ Who is my servant ? Who is my servant ? ” So he went to Jerusalem and stood up to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Jehu looked up and saw her at the window and shouted , “ Who is on my side ? ” And two or three eunuchs looked out at him .

ID:	4676
INPUT:	ostera , ostatu-emailea behar du izan , ongia maite duena , zentzuduna , zuzena , jainkozalea , bere buruaren jabea ;
PRED:	Those who love to honor the name of the Lord must be given to those who love him , but they will be rich in their own name .
GOLD:	Rather , he must enjoy having guests in his home , and he must love what is good . He must live wisely and be just . He must live a devout and disciplined life .

ID:	4677
INPUT:	Apaizak miatu egingo du eta aparte edukiko zazpi egunez .
PRED:	The priest will then take some of the fat around the internal organs and the priest 's fat , and the priest will quarantine the seven days .
GOLD:	After examining the affected spot , the priest will put the article in quarantine for seven days .

ID:	4678
INPUT:	Behin batez , ordea , hiru urteren buruan , Ximeiren bi mor<unk> ihes egin eta Gateko errege Akixengana , Maakaren semearengana , jo zuten . Morroiak Gaten zirela salatu ziotenean ,
PRED:	Three years later , during the third year of the reign of the king of Gilead , the king of Gilead , was the son of Asaph , the king of Gilead .
GOLD:	But three years later two of Shimei 's slaves ran away to King Achish son of Maacah of Gath . When Shimei learned where they were ,

ID:	4679
INPUT:	bata ertz batean eta bestea bestean , estalkiarekin gorputz bat bera egiten zutelarik .
PRED:	There were only one piece of cloth , one piece of cloth , one piece of cloth , and one piece of one piece .
GOLD:	He molded the cherubim on each end of the atonement cover , making it all of one piece of gold .

ID:	4680
INPUT:	Ez du gezurrik esaten Israelen ospea denak , eta ez da damutuko , bera ez baita gizakumea , damutzen ibiltzeko .
PRED:	A false prophet is not a liar , for he is not a liar , and he is not like a boy .
GOLD:	And he who is the Glory of Israel will not lie , nor will he change his mind , for he is not human that he should change his mind ! ”

ID:	4681
INPUT:	Sedekiasen semeei lepoa moztu zieten aitaren aurrean , Riblan bertan , baita Judako buruzagiei ere .
PRED:	They slaughtered Zedekiah son of Zedekiah 's sons , Zedekiah son of Riblah in the land of Riblah in the land of Babylon .
GOLD:	The king of Babylon made Zedekiah watch as he slaughtered his sons . He also slaughtered all the officials of Judah at Riblah .

ID:	4682
INPUT:	Orduan , faraoiak Moisesi eta Aaroni dei egin eta esan zien : — Eskaini , bai , sakrifizioak zeuen Jainkoari , baina lurralde honetan bertan .
PRED:	Then Pharaoh called out to Moses and Aaron , “ All right , ” he said , “ and offer sacrifices to the Lord your God . ”
GOLD:	If you refuse , then I will send swarms of flies on you , your officials , your people , and all the houses . The Egyptian homes will be filled with flies , and the ground will be covered with them .

ID:	4683
INPUT:	Hona hemen lagunduko dizueten familiaburuak : Rubenen leinutik , Xedeurren seme Elitzur ;
PRED:	These are the names of the clans of the tribe of Reuben : The leader of the clans of the tribe of Reuben was leader of the clans of the tribe of Simeon .
GOLD:	“ These are the tribes and the names of the leaders who will assist you : ReubenElizur son of Shedeur

ID:	4684
INPUT:	Atalondoko ateak itxi zituzten eta argiak itzali ; ez zuten intsentsurik erre , ez erre-oparirik eskaini Israelen Jainkoaren tenpluan .
PRED:	The entry room of the inner courtyard were shut , and there were no more valuable wine or incense for the Temple of God , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	They also shut the doors to the Temple 's entry room , and they snuffed out the lamps . They stopped burning incense and presenting burnt offerings at the sanctuary of the God of Israel .

ID:	4685
INPUT:	Zekorraren okela , larrua eta hondakinak kanpalekutik aparte erreko dituzu , bekatuaren barkamenerako sakrifizioa da eta .
PRED:	You must offer a sacrifice of a male goat for a burnt offering , a pleasing aroma to the Lord , and you must offer it to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then take the rest of the bull , including its hide , meat , and dung , and burn it outside the camp as a sin offering .

ID:	4686
INPUT:	Goretsi Jauna , munduko herriok , goretsi Jaunaren ospea eta indarra ,
PRED:	Praise the Lord , you nations of the earth ! Praise the Lord !
GOLD:	O nations of the world , recognize the Lord ; recognize that the Lord is glorious and strong .

ID:	4687
INPUT:	Goxen , Holon , Gilo : hamaika hiri eta beraien herrixkak .
PRED:	This is the following towns of Zebulun : The towns of Zebulun and their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	Goshen , Holon , and Giloh — eleven towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	4688
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Entzun ! Aieneak eta negar samina Raman ! Rakel ari dabere haurrengatik negarrez : ez du kontsolatu nahi , ez baitira bizi » .
PRED:	“ Listen , my Father ! ” says the Lord . “ My Father has given her children Rachel and her children , for she has no children to comfort her . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ A cry is heard in Ramah — deep anguish and bitter weeping.Rachel weeps for her children , refusing to be comforted — for her children are gone . ”

ID:	4689
INPUT:	« Nola ikusten duzu senidearen begiko lasto-izpia eta zeure begiko hagaz ohartzen ez ?
PRED:	“ How can you see that your brother 's eye is like a friend 's eye ? Is n't your eye on a bit of your eye ?
GOLD:	“ And why worry about a speck in your friend 's eye when you have a log in your own ?

ID:	4690
INPUT:	Jaun ahalguztidunakgutariko batzukbizirik utzi ez balitu , Sodoma eta Gomorraren azkenaizango genukeen guk ere .
PRED:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , will destroy all the people of Sodom and Gomorrah .
GOLD:	If the Lord of Heaven 's Armieshad not spared a few of us , we would have been wiped out like Sodom , destroyed like Gomorrah .

ID:	4691
INPUT:	Tziklag , Madmana , Sansana ,
PRED:	Jair , the people of Ziklag ,
GOLD:	Ziklag , Madmannah , Sansannah ,

ID:	4692
INPUT:	Urte hartan janaria ahitu zen hirian eta jendearen gosea izugarria zen . Laugarren hilaren bederatzian ,
PRED:	At that time the famine began to be rebuilt , during the fourth year of the famine , and the famine was severe in the city .
GOLD:	By July 18 in the eleventh year of Zedekiah 's reign , the famine in the city had become very severe , and the last of the food was entirely gone .

ID:	4693
INPUT:	Apaizek ez dute galdetu : “ Non da Jauna ? ” Lege-maisuek ez naute aintzat hartu , buruzagiak kontra jaiki zaizkit , profetek Baalen izeneanhitz egin dute , ezertarako ez diren idoloen ondorenjoan dira .
PRED:	Then the priests asked , ‘ Where is the teachers of religious law ? ' But the angel of the Lord says , ‘ Where are you born in the land of Baal ? They will not go to Babylon , and they will not worship me .
GOLD:	The priests did not ask , ‘ Where is the Lord ? 'Those who taught my word ignored me , the rulers turned against me , and the prophets spoke in the name of Baal , wasting their time on worthless idols .

ID:	4694
INPUT:	Hondatuak izango diramuinoetako sasikultu-lekuak , Israeli huts egitera eragin ziotenak . Sasiak eta laharrakhartuko ditu aldareak . Orduan , honela esango diete mendiei : « Ezkuta gaitzazue » , eta muinoei : « Eror zaitezte gure gainera » .
PRED:	I will destroy all the pagan shrines , and they will worship the images of Baal , and they will worship the images of Baal . Then they will say , “ Do n't be able to worship the mountains and hills , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	And the pagan shrines of Aven , the place of Israel 's sin , will crumble.Thorns and thistles will grow up around their altars.They will beg the mountains , “ Bury us ! ” and plead with the hills , “ Fall on us ! ”

ID:	4695
INPUT:	“ Herrialde honetan bizitzen gelditzen bazarete , eraitsi ordez eraiki egingo zaituztet eta erauzi ordez landatu , damutu egin bainaiz egin dizuedan kalteaz .
PRED:	“ When you begin to live in this land , I will destroy you , and I will destroy you and destroy you .
GOLD:	‘ Stay here in this land . If you do , I will build you up and not tear you down ; I will plant you and not uproot you . For I am sorry about all the punishment I have had to bring upon you .

ID:	4696
INPUT:	eta esan zien : « Zoazte Jaunaren , zeuen Jainkoaren , itun-kutxaren aurrera Jordan erdiraino eta hartu harri bana sorbaldan , israeldar leinuak hainbat harri .
PRED:	Then he told them , “ Go and see the Ark of the Lord your God , the God of the Covenant of the Covenant of the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	He told them , “ Go into the middle of the Jordan , in front of the Ark of the Lord your God . Each of you must pick up one stone and carry it out on your shoulder — twelve stones in all , one for each of the twelve tribes of Israel .

ID:	4697
INPUT:	Oroitarri gisa eraiki dudan harri <unk> koaren etxe izango da . Jaunari , ematen didan guztitikhamarrena bihurtuko diot » .
PRED:	I will restore the Temple of the Lord , and it will be an end to the Temple of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	And this memorial pillar I have set up will become a place for worshiping God , and I will present to God a tenth of everything he gives me . ”

ID:	4698
INPUT:	aski ezaguna baita Judaren leinutik datorrela gure Jauna , eta Moisesek aipatu ere ez zuen egin leinu hori apaizei buruz hitz egitean .
PRED:	But many of the people of Judah came from the tribe of Judah , just as Moses had said , “ This is what the Lord has said . ”
GOLD:	What I mean is , our Lord came from the tribe of Judah , and Moses never mentioned priests coming from that tribe .

ID:	4699
INPUT:	« Bazen hiri batean epaile bat , ez Jainkoari beldurrik , ez gizakiari begirunerik ez ziona .
PRED:	“ There was no peace in the city , no fear of God . It was no fear or fear of God .
GOLD:	“ There was a judge in a certain city , ” he said , “ who neither feared God nor cared about people .

ID:	4700
INPUT:	« Siseraren amak , leihotik begira , leiho-saretik oihuka , zioen : “ Zergatik dator hain beranduharen guda-gurdia ? Zergatik hain geldoharen zaldiak ? ”
PRED:	“ Men from Mount Zion , ” he said , “ why are the troops of the tribe of Simeon , ‘ Why are the horses of chariots ? '
GOLD:	“ From the window Sisera 's mother looked out.Through the window she watched for his return , saying , ‘ Why is his chariot so long in coming ? Why do n't we hear the sound of chariot wheels ? '

ID:	4701
INPUT:	« Guk ere berri on hau iragartzen dizuegu : gure arbasoei egindako agintzaria ,
PRED:	“ We also said to our ancestors , ‘ We are our ancestors , our ancestors ,
GOLD:	“ And now we are here to bring you this Good News . The promise was made to our ancestors ,

ID:	4702
INPUT:	Hauek bertan kokatu eta santutegia eraiki zizuten , esanez :
PRED:	Then the men opened their sanctuary and built an altar to say ,
GOLD:	Your people settled here and built this Temple to honor your name .

ID:	4703
INPUT:	Hona hemen Aaronen eta Moisesen ondorengoak , Sinai mendian Jauna Moisesi mintzatu zitzaionean .
PRED:	These are the instructions regarding Moses and Aaron , the Lord gave these instructions to Moses in the land of Sinai .
GOLD:	This is the family line of Aaron and Moses as it was recorded when the Lord spoke to Moses on Mount Sinai :

ID:	4704
INPUT:	Zortzi urte zituen Josiasek errege izaten hastean , eta hogeita hamaika urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen . Haren amak Jedida zuen izena eta Botzkateko Adaiaren alaba zen .
PRED:	Josiah was eight years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years . His mother was Jecoliah from Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Josiah was eight years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem thirty-one years . His mother was Jedidah , the daughter of Adaiah from Bozkath .

ID:	4705
INPUT:	Herioarekin zenuten itunahautsi egingo da , Hildakoen Egoitzarekiko tratuakez du iraungo . Ezbehar suntsigarriak joeta zapalduko zaituzte .
PRED:	The grave will be crushed with the grave , and the grave will be destroyed , and the grave will be destroyed .
GOLD:	I will cancel the bargain you made to cheat death , and I will overturn your deal to dodge the grave.When the terrible enemy sweeps through , you will be trampled into the ground .

ID:	4706
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	This message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	4707
INPUT:	« Halaber , ospatu uzta-jaia , soroan erein duzuenaren lehen fruituena ; baita urteburuko uzta-biltzearena ere , zeuen soroetako lanaren fruituak biltzen dituzuenekoa .
PRED:	“ When you harvest the crops of the harvest , you must harvest the crops of your crops , but you may plant your crops .
GOLD:	“ Second , celebrate the Festival of Harvest , when you bring me the first crops of your harvest . “ Finally , celebrate the Festival of the Final Harvest at the end of the harvest season , when you have harvested all the crops from your fields .

ID:	4708
INPUT:	Honela jango duzue : gerrikoa loturik , oinetakoak jantzirik eta makila eskuan , abiatzeko prest ; presaka jango duzue , Jaunaren Pazkoa baita .
PRED:	You must wear clothes and wear clothes , wear clothes , wear clothes , and wear clothes , and wear clothes for the Lord 's Passover . You must eat the meat of the Lord 's Passover .
GOLD:	“ These are your instructions for eating this meal : Be fully dressed , wear your sandals , and carry your walking stick in your hand . Eat the meal with urgency , for this is the Lord 's Passover .

ID:	4709
INPUT:	Kea zerion sudurretik , su kiskalgarria , ikatz goriak ahotik .
PRED:	A great fire came from the sea , and burning coals blazed forth from the fire .
GOLD:	Smoke poured from his nostrils ; fierce flames leaped from his mouth.Glowing coals blazed forth from him .

ID:	4710
INPUT:	Arren , Jainko , izan zeu nire bermatzaile ; nor jarriko , bestela , nire alde ?
PRED:	You are my God , my God , and you have put me on my way .
GOLD:	“ You must defend my innocence , O God , since no one else will stand up for me .

ID:	4711
INPUT:	Hasi ziren berriro borrokan filistearrak israeldarren aurka . Jaitsi zen David bere gizonekin filistearren kontra gudukatzera , baina nekatu egin zen .
PRED:	So the Philistines began to fight the Philistines , and the Philistines fought against David . But the Philistines fought against the Philistines , but they fought against him .
GOLD:	Once again the Philistines were at war with Israel . And when David and his men were in the thick of battle , David became weak and exhausted .

ID:	4712
INPUT:	Zuregan ditut begiak , ene Jaun eta Jainko , zuregan naiz babesten , ez ni hiltzen utzi .
PRED:	I trust in you , O Lord my God , and I will not let you die .
GOLD:	I look to you for help , O Sovereign Lord.You are my refuge ; do n't let them kill me .

ID:	4713
INPUT:	Zuei , jaiotzaz jentil zaretenoi , juduek , gorputzean egina duten erdainkuntzagatik « erdainduak » direneko horiek , « erdaingabe » deitzen zizueten . Ez ahaztu
PRED:	Some Jews who are Jews who are circumcised to be circumcised , for those who are circumcised to be circumcised . They were circumcised , “ Do n't be circumcised . ” But they did n't forget it .
GOLD:	Do n't forget that you Gentiles used to be outsiders . You were called “ uncircumcised heathens ” by the Jews , who were proud of their circumcision , even though it affected only their bodies and not their hearts .

ID:	4714
INPUT:	Orduan , Judako herri osoak Azarias , hamasei urteko gaztea , izendatu zuen errege , bere aita Amatziasen ordez .
PRED:	Then King Amaziah of Judah gave orders to all the people of Judah . He also appointed his father , Amaziah , and his father .
GOLD:	All the people of Judah had crowned Amaziah 's sixteen-year-old son , Uzziah , as king in place of his father , Amaziah .

ID:	4715
INPUT:	Jerusalemen jendeak dio : « Horren berri jakitean , indarge gaude , estu eta larri , emakumea erdiminetan bezala .
PRED:	“ This is what the people of Jerusalem says : The people of Jerusalem are like a woman in the city , like a woman in labor .
GOLD:	We have heard reports about the enemy , and we wring our hands in fright.Pangs of anguish have gripped us , like those of a woman in labor .

ID:	4716
INPUT:	Jainko Jaun ahalguztidunak lurra joeta lurrak dardara , bizilagun guztiek dolu ; Egiptoko Nilo ibaiaren antzeralur guztia puztu eta hustu ;
PRED:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , has spoken !
GOLD:	The Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , touches the land and it melts , and all its people mourn.The ground rises like the Nile River at floodtime , and then it sinks again .

ID:	4717
INPUT:	Josuek ikertzaileak bidali Jerikora
PRED:	Joshua Sends Out the Twelve Apostles
GOLD:	Rahab Protects the Spies

ID:	4718
INPUT:	Baina , oraindik pozaren pozez sinetsi ezinik eta guztiz harriturik zeudenez , Jesusek esan zien : « Ba al duzue hemen jatekorik ? »
PRED:	But when he was filled with joy , he was amazed at the door and asked , “ Is it the one who is here ? ”
GOLD:	Still they stood there in disbelief , filled with joy and wonder . Then he asked them , “ Do you have anything here to eat ? ”

ID:	4719
INPUT:	Asna , Meunim eta Nefusimenak ;
PRED:	Bazluth , Giddel , Gahar ,
GOLD:	Asnah , Meunim , Nephusim ,

ID:	4720
INPUT:	Egunero bedeinkatuko zaitut , zure izena beti goretsiko .
PRED:	I will praise you , O Lord , for I will praise you forever .
GOLD:	I will praise you every day ; yes , I will praise you forever .

ID:	4721
INPUT:	ez zangoa edo besoa hautsirik duena ,
PRED:	They will not break the oath of their ancestors , and they will never be destroyed .
GOLD:	or has a broken foot or arm ,

ID:	4722
INPUT:	nire ondoren datorrena , eta ni ez naiz inor hari oinetako lokarriak askatzeko ere .
PRED:	I have come to rescue me , and no one can help me .
GOLD:	Though his ministry follows mine , I 'm not even worthy to be his slave and untie the straps of his sandal . ”

ID:	4723
INPUT:	Uko egin diegu isilpeko baliabide lotsagarriei ; ez dugu azpikeriaz jokatzen , ezta Jainkoaren mezua faltsifikatzen ere . Aitzitik , egia argi eta garbi azalduz , geure buruak sinesgarri bihurtzen dizkiegu gizon-emakume guztiei Jainkoaren aurrean .
PRED:	We are ashamed of what we say , but we are ashamed of the evil spirit of the living God . We are telling you the truth , and we are telling you the truth , and we are true in God 's sight .
GOLD:	We reject all shameful deeds and underhanded methods . We do n't try to trick anyone or distort the word of God . We tell the truth before God , and all who are honest know this .

ID:	4724
INPUT:	Ongi ezagutzen dugu hau esan zuena : Niri dagokit mendekua , neuk emango dut ordaina . Eta beste hau ere esan zuen : Jaunak epaituko du bere herria .
PRED:	“ We know that this is what the Lord says : I will give you victory over my people , ” says the Lord . “ I will judge your people , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	For we know the one who said , “ I will take revenge.I will pay them back . ” He also said , “ The Lord will judge his own people . ”

ID:	4725
INPUT:	Arabiaren aurka
PRED:	A Message about Philistia
GOLD:	A Message about Arabia

ID:	4726
INPUT:	Zein ugari , Jauna , nire etsaiak ! Zein ugari aurka altxa zaizkidanak !
PRED:	O Lord , you are my enemies ; you are my enemies !
GOLD:	So many are saying , “ God will never rescue him ! ” Interlude

ID:	4727
INPUT:	Ez lurreko erregeek , ezta munduko inork ere , ez zuen uste etsaia Jerusalemgo ateetan sekula sartuko zenik .
PRED:	You will not enter the land of the earth , nor any of your enemies in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Not a king in all the earth — no one in all the world — would have believed that an enemycould march through the gates of Jerusalem .

ID:	4728
INPUT:	Haren eskuak urretan biribilduak , topazioz tarteka apainduak . Haren bularramarfilez landua , zafiroz estalia .
PRED:	They were made of gold , and they were made of fine linen . They were made of fine linen with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	His arms are like rounded bars of gold , set with beryl.His body is like bright ivory , glowing with lapis lazuli .

ID:	4729
INPUT:	Honen guztiaren ondoren , Jerusalemera joatea erabaki zuen Paulok Mazedonia eta Akaiatik igaroz . Eta han izan ondoren , Erromara ere joan behar zuela pentsatu zuen .
PRED:	After this , Paul went to Jerusalem to Jerusalem to Jerusalem , where he left Macedonia and camped at Macedonia .
GOLD:	Afterward Paul felt compelled by the Spirit to go over to Macedonia and Achaia before going to Jerusalem . “ And after that , ” he said , “ I must go on to Rome ! ”

ID:	4730
INPUT:	Zuek zerbitzatu ahal izateko , beste eliz elkarteei kendu behar izan nien neuretzako behar nuena .
PRED:	You must be my servant , and you must be my slaves in the church .
GOLD:	I “ robbed ” other churches by accepting their contributions so I could serve you at no cost .

ID:	4731
INPUT:	Artilea eta lihoa eskuratzen ditu , gogotsu lan egiten haren eskuek .
PRED:	Their hands are as strong as the dawn , and they are stronger than the dawn .
GOLD:	She finds wool and flaxand busily spins it .

ID:	4732
INPUT:	Gedeonek Israelgo gizon gehienak bidali zituen nor bere etxera , hirurehun haiekin bakarrik geldituz ; hauek beren lagunen jakiak eta adarrak hartu zituzten . Madiandarren kanpalekua israeldarrena baino beherago zegoen , lautadan .
PRED:	Gideon sent the men of Israel back to the town of Ai , and the men of Israel stayed with their flocks and herds . So the Israelites took the Ark of Midian , and the Israelite army was camped at the plains of Midian .
GOLD:	So Gideon collected the provisions and rams ' horns of the other warriors and sent them home . But he kept the 300 men with him.The Midianite camp was in the valley just below Gideon .

ID:	4733
INPUT:	Pilatok galdetu zion : — Zu al zara juduen erregea ? Jesusek erantzun zion : — Zeuk diozu .
PRED:	“ Are you the King of the Jews ? ” Pilate asked . “ You are the King of the Jews ? ”
GOLD:	Pilate asked Jesus , “ Are you the king of the Jews ? ” Jesus replied , “ You have said it . ”

ID:	4734
INPUT:	Baina , gau hartan , Jainkoa agertu zitzaion Abimeleki ametsetan , esanez : « Hil egingo zara , hartu duzun emakumea ezkondua baita » .
PRED:	That night God appeared to Abimelech , and he told him , “ You will kill the woman , for you will die . ”
GOLD:	But that night God came to Abimelech in a dream and told him , “ You are a dead man , for that woman you have taken is already married ! ”

ID:	4735
INPUT:	Emakumeak
PRED:	Young Women of Jerusalem
GOLD:	Young Man

ID:	4736
INPUT:	Jaunak Moisesek eskatua egin zuen : etxe , atari eta landetan zeuden igelak hil egin ziren .
PRED:	So Moses asked the Lord , “ Get up and killed the houses where you killed the house and killed it . ”
GOLD:	“ You set the time ! ” Moses replied . “ Tell me when you want me to pray for you , your officials , and your people . Then you and your houses will be rid of the frogs . They will remain only in the Nile River . ”

ID:	4737
INPUT:	Amasari , berriz , esan : « Ez al zaitut neure odolekoa ? Zigor nazala Jainkoak gogor , baldin eta gudalburu egiten ez bazaitut betiko , Joaben ordez ! »
PRED:	But he said to Abimelech , “ Should I not punish you for my sake ? Should I not be the commander of the army of Joab and his army be thrown into battle ? ”
GOLD:	Then Amasa convinced all the men of Judah , and they responded unanimously . They sent word to the king , “ Return to us , and bring back all who are with you . ”

ID:	4738
INPUT:	neska gazteei beren senarrak eta haurrak maitatzen irakats diezaieten ,
PRED:	She gives birth to her children , and she gives birth to her children .
GOLD:	These older women must train the younger women to love their husbands and their children ,

ID:	4739
INPUT:	Jatun handia bazara , eutsi zeure jangurari .
PRED:	Teach us a wise youth , O Lord , and give us a crown of rain .
GOLD:	If you are a big eater , put a knife to your throat ;

ID:	4740
INPUT:	Asiriar ordezkari nagusiak esan zien : — Eramaiozue Ezekias erregeari errege handiaren , Asiriako erregearen , mezu hau : « Zer dela-eta zaude hain ziur ?
PRED:	But the chief of staff said to Hezekiah , “ This is what the king of Assyria says : What are you trusting in the king of Assyria ? What are you doing this ? ”
GOLD:	Then the Assyrian king 's chief of staff told them to give this message to Hezekiah : “ This is what the great king of Assyria says : What are you trusting in that makes you so confident ?

ID:	4741
INPUT:	Egun hartan bertan , ezaugarri bat eman zuen Jainkoaren gizonak , esanez : « Honetan igarriko duzue Jaunak hitz egin duela : Zartatu egingo da aldarea eta lurrera isuriko gainean duen errautsa » .
PRED:	On that day the man of God gave a second message to the man of God : “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : This is what the Lord says : You must burn it on the altar and burn it on the altar . ”
GOLD:	That same day the man of God gave a sign to prove his message . He said , “ The Lord has promised to give this sign : This altar will split apart , and its ashes will be poured out on the ground . ”

ID:	4742
INPUT:	Zer egin , bada , senideok ? Biltzen zaretenean , batek kantua egin dezala , besteak irakatsi edota goi-agerpen bat eman , hizketa arrotzez mintzatu edota mintzaira hori argitu ; baina guztia elkarteari hazten laguntzeko izan dadila .
PRED:	So , dear brothers and sisters , why are you living in the outside the camp ? And if someone has been speaking to another person , he has been speaking to the other churches , and he has forgotten the word of the Lord .
GOLD:	Well , my brothers and sisters , let 's summarize . When you meet together , one will sing , another will teach , another will tell some special revelation God has given , one will speak in tongues , and another will interpret what is said . But everything that is done must strengthen all of you .

ID:	4743
INPUT:	Joan ziren , bada , haiek Jesusengana eta esan zioten : — Joan Bataiatzaileak bidali gaitu zuri galdetzera : « Zu al zara “ Etortzekoa ” ala besteren baten zain egon behar dugu ? »
PRED:	So the disciples began to betray Jesus and said , “ Are you trying to be baptized ? Are you trying to be baptized ? ”
GOLD:	John 's two disciples found Jesus and said to him , “ John the Baptist sent us to ask , ‘ Are you the Messiah we 've been expecting , or should we keep looking for someone else ? ' ”

ID:	4744
INPUT:	Turuta , txirula , zitara , alboka , harpa eta beste musika-tresnen hotsa entzun orduko , lurreraino ahuspeztuz , Nabukodonosor erregeak eraiki duen urrezko irudia gurtuko duzue .
PRED:	Then they will bow down to the sound of the trumpet , and the other nations will bow down to the ground . Then they will worship the gold statue of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon .
GOLD:	When you hear the sound of the horn , flute , zither , lyre , harp , pipes , and other musical instruments , bow to the ground to worship King Nebuchadnezzar 's gold statue .

ID:	4745
INPUT:	Eskerrak ematen dizkiot Jainkoari , Kristoren bidez lortu duen garaipenaren partaide egiten gaituelako beti , eta , gure bitartez , Kristoren ezagutza usain gozoa bezala leku guztietan zabaltzen duelako .
PRED:	I pray to God , who is the one who sent us through Christ , who gives us his life through Christ 's eyes . He is filled with the eyes of Christ , and his eyes are filled with eyes .
GOLD:	But thank God ! He has made us his captives and continues to lead us along in Christ 's triumphal procession . Now he uses us to spread the knowledge of Christ everywhere , like a sweet perfume .

ID:	4746
INPUT:	Beraz , hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Zeuek salatu duzue zeuen errua eta agerian jarri zeuen hobenak ; zeuek nabarmendu dituzue zeuen bekatu eta egintza txarrak ; zeuen buruak salatu dituzue ; horregatik , preso hartuko zaituztete bortxaz .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : You have made a vow to the king and your officials , and you have followed the example of your own desires .
GOLD:	Your prophets have given false visions , and your fortune-tellers have told lies.The sword will fall on the necks of the wickedfor whom the day of final reckoning has come .

ID:	4747
INPUT:	zuen arbasoak bezalaxe , nire aginduetatik aldendu egin zarete , ez dituzue bete . Itzuli , beraz , zuek niregana , eta itzuliko naiz ni zuengana . Hala diot nik , Jaun ahalguztidunak . Baina hau diozue : “ Zergatik behar dugu zuregana itzuli ? ”
PRED:	So why did you turn away from my ancestors ? Why did n't you listen to me ? For you refuse to listen to me , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , “ Why should I listen to you ? ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	Ever since the days of your ancestors , you have scorned my decrees and failed to obey them . Now return to me , and I will return to you , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . “ But you ask , ‘ How can we return when we have never gone away ? '

ID:	4748
INPUT:	« Zoaz Davidengana eta esaiozu : “ Hau dio Jaunak : Hiru zigor ipiniko dizkizut aukeran ; hautatu bat eta huraxe ezarriko dizut ” » .
PRED:	“ Go to David and tell him , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will make you a thousand times of safety . ' ”
GOLD:	“ Go and say to David , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will give you three choices . Choose one of these punishments , and I will inflict it on you . ' ”

ID:	4749
INPUT:	eta Zesarean lehorreratu zen ; handik Jerusalemgo eliz elkartea agurtzera igo zen eta gero Antiokiara jaitsi .
PRED:	He traveled through Jerusalem to Jerusalem to Jerusalem , where he traveled to Antioch of Syria and traveled to Antioch .
GOLD:	The next stop was at the port of Caesarea . From there he went up and visited the church at Jerusalem and then went back to Antioch .

ID:	4750
INPUT:	Davidek galdetu zion berria zekarkion gazteari : — Nola dakizu hilak direla Saul eta beronen seme Jonatan ?
PRED:	Then David asked David , “ Why are you my youngest son ? ” And David asked him , “ Why are you my son Jonathan ? ”
GOLD:	“ How do you know Saul and Jonathan are dead ? ” David demanded of the young man .

ID:	4751
INPUT:	Berrogei egunen buruan , Noek , berak egindako ontziko leihoa irekiz ,
PRED:	For forty days Noah , the leader of the clans of the tribe of Reuben , and the half-tribe of Manasseh .
GOLD:	After another forty days , Noah opened the window he had made in the boat

ID:	4752
INPUT:	« Orduan , zuen etsaien artean erbesteraturik emango duzuen denboraldi guztian , lurrak , bertan behera utzia egongo delarik , atseden hartu ahal izango du : zor zitzaizkion atsedenaldiak izango ditu .
PRED:	“ Then the Lord will give you a vow to your enemies in all the land he had given to your enemies , and he will let them rest in the land of the enemy .
GOLD:	Then at last the land will enjoy its neglected Sabbath years as it lies desolate while you are in exile in the land of your enemies . Then the land will finally rest and enjoy the Sabbaths it missed .

ID:	4753
INPUT:	« Jerusalemera itzuli nintzen eta , tenpluan otoitzean ari nintzela , goi-ikuskari bat izan nuen .
PRED:	“ When I returned to Jerusalem , I returned to Jerusalem to the Temple and saw a vision in the Temple .
GOLD:	“ After I returned to Jerusalem , I was praying in the Temple and fell into a trance .

ID:	4754
INPUT:	Aldarea zartatu egin zen eta errautsa aldaretik behera isuri , Jainkoaren gizonak , Jaunaren aginduz , emaniko ezaugarriaren arabera .
PRED:	Then he placed the altar from the altar and burned it on the altar and burned it on the altar of the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	At the same time a wide crack appeared in the altar , and the ashes poured out , just as the man of God had predicted in his message from the Lord .

ID:	4755
INPUT:	Deboraren kantua
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	The Song of Deborah

ID:	4756
INPUT:	Orduan , Abrahamek , ahuspezturik , irri egin zuen . Pentsatu zuen bere baitan : « Ehun urteko gizakumeari sortu al lekioke semerik ? Edota , izan ote dezake semerik Sarak bere laurogeita hamarrekin ? »
PRED:	Then Abraham bowed low before him and worshiped him . He said to him , “ Is he a hundred years old or older son ? ” And he asked him , “ Is he a son of Jesse ? ”
GOLD:	Then Abraham bowed down to the ground , but he laughed to himself in disbelief . “ How could I become a father at the age of 100 ? ” he thought . “ And how can Sarah have a baby when she is ninety years old ? ”

ID:	4757
INPUT:	Ate ondora irten zen , eta beste neskame batek ikusi eta han zeudenei esan zien : — Jesus nazaretarrarekin ibilia da hau .
PRED:	Then one of the other men went into the boat and said to the other , “ This man is a Galilean . ”
GOLD:	Later , out by the gate , another servant girl noticed him and said to those standing around , “ This man was with Jesus of Nazareth . ”

ID:	4758
INPUT:	Berehala zutitu eta ibiltzen hasi zen , hamabi urte bazituen eta . Jende guztia harri eta zur gelditu zen .
PRED:	As soon as they approached him and began twelve years , he got up and took twelve baskets of leftovers .
GOLD:	And the girl , who was twelve years old , immediately stood up and walked around ! They were overwhelmed and totally amazed .

ID:	4759
INPUT:	Apaizari eramaten zaizkion opari sakratuak apaizarentzat dira » .
PRED:	The priest will offer a burnt offering to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Each priest may keep all the sacred donations that he receives . ”

ID:	4760
INPUT:	Eta deabrua , haiek liluratu zituena , su eta sufrezko aintzirara jaurtia izan zen ; hantxe daude piztia eta sasiprofeta ere . Gau eta egun oinazetuko dituzte han menderen mendetan .
PRED:	Then the devil threw him into the blazing furnace , and he was thrown into the blazing furnace , where the wild animals had been thrown into the hill country .
GOLD:	Then the devil , who had deceived them , was thrown into the fiery lake of burning sulfur , joining the beast and the false prophet . There they will be tormented day and night forever and ever .

ID:	4761
INPUT:	Josuek Ai hiria erre eta zeharo hondatua utzi zuen , hondakin-pilo bihurtua betiko ; eta horrela dirau gaur arte .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits Joshua and the city of the city , so the city will be destroyed , and it will be destroyed .
GOLD:	So Joshua burned the town of Ai , and it became a permanent mound of ruins , desolate to this very day .

ID:	4762
INPUT:	Zelatan egoten da lapurra bezalaeta desleialtasun asko sorrarazten gizonen artean .
PRED:	Even though they are unfaithful to their neighbors , they are led away by their own sins .
GOLD:	She hides and waits like a robber , eager to make more men unfaithful .

ID:	4763
INPUT:	Mesede bat eskatu nahi dizut , ez ukatu . Betsabek , orduan : — Esazu .
PRED:	“ I want you to ask me , ” he said . “ Do n't let me go . ”
GOLD:	So now I have just one favor to ask of you . Please do n't turn me down . ” “ What is it ? ” she asked .

ID:	4764
INPUT:	Gizon hura itzularazia zuen profeta zaharrak , berri hori jakitean , esan zuen : « Jainkoaren gizona da ! Ez du bete Jaunaren agindua , eta Jaunak lehoiaren atzaparretara eman du ; lehoiak zatikatu eta hil egin du , Jaunak aurrez esana zion bezala » .
PRED:	When the man heard this , he took the prophet and told him , “ The man of God has given him victory over the man of God ! The Lord has commanded him to kill him , ” the Lord said . “ The Lord has commanded him to kill him ! ”
GOLD:	When the prophet heard the report , he said , “ It is the man of God who disobeyed the Lord 's command . The Lord has fulfilled his word by causing the lion to attack and kill him . ”

ID:	4765
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . « Ez suntsitu » doinuan . Davidena . Miktam . Davidek Saulengandik haitzulora ihes egin zuenekoa .
PRED:	O God , you have rejected me , O God , for you have fled to my enemies .
GOLD:	Have mercy on me , O God , have mercy ! I look to you for protection.I will hide beneath the shadow of your wingsuntil the danger passes by .

ID:	4766
INPUT:	ohoratzen gaituztela nahiz iraintzen , gutaz ongi hitz egiten dutela nahiz gaizki . Gezurtitzat jotzen gaituzte , egia esaten dugun arren ;
PRED:	They say , ‘ As surely as I speak , ' and they say , ‘ They are telling lies , but they are telling lies about it . '
GOLD:	We serve God whether people honor us or despise us , whether they slander us or praise us . We are honest , but they call us impostors .

ID:	4767
INPUT:	Haren esanera , haizea altxatu zen , olatu handiak harrotu zituen ekaitza .
PRED:	So the wind got up and got up , and the rocks grew up .
GOLD:	He spoke , and the winds rose , stirring up the waves .

ID:	4768
INPUT:	Eta hemen bilduak diren guztiek jakinen dute , Jaunak ez duela behar ezpatarik , ez lantzarik gu salbatzeko , Jaunak baitu gudua erabakitzen . Gure esku jarriko zaituzte berak .
PRED:	These are the people of Israel who are left in battle , for the Lord has given us victory over us , for we are not able to save you .
GOLD:	And everyone assembled here will know that the Lord rescues his people , but not with sword and spear . This is the Lord 's battle , and he will give you to us ! ”

ID:	4769
INPUT:	lizun eta homosexualentzat , esklabo-salerosle , gezurti eta zinausleentzat , eta irakaspen osasungarriaren kontra jartzen den edonorentzat ;
PRED:	You are a permanent member of your father 's household , a permanent law for you , and you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	The law is for people who are sexually immoral , or who practice homosexuality , or are slave traders , liars , promise breakers , or who do anything else that contradicts the wholesome teaching

ID:	4770
INPUT:	Gure herria Egipton egon zenetik gaur arte , mirariak eta egintza harrigarriak burutu dituzu , eta izen ospetsua zeureganatu bai Israelen , bai gizaki guztien artean .
PRED:	“ today , today , today , today , and today you have made a miraculous signs and wonders in the land of Egypt . You have made a great nation of Israel as your own possession .
GOLD:	You performed miraculous signs and wonders in the land of Egypt — things still remembered to this day ! And you have continued to do great miracles in Israel and all around the world . You have made your name famous to this day .

ID:	4771
INPUT:	Harria bezain gogorra dute bihotza ; nik zure irakaspena dut gozamen .
PRED:	They are as weak as dust , but they teach me your instructions .
GOLD:	Their hearts are dull and stupid , but I delight in your instructions .

ID:	4772
INPUT:	Jobek bere burua errugabetzat zuenez gero , hiru gizonek ez zioten gehiago erantzun .
PRED:	Then Job spoke to the head of his head , and the three men refused to answer him .
GOLD:	Job 's three friends refused to reply further to him because he kept insisting on his innocence .

ID:	4773
INPUT:	Eta ereiten duzuna ez da gero haziko den landarea , hazi hutsa baizik , gari-hazia nahiz beste edozein hazi izan .
PRED:	And the seed that fell on the ground , but it does not produce a seed that was planted by the seed .
GOLD:	And what you put in the ground is not the plant that will grow , but only a bare seed of wheat or whatever you are planting .

ID:	4774
INPUT:	Irentsitako ondasunak oka egingo ditu , Jainkoak botarazi egingo dizkio sabeletik .
PRED:	But everyone will declare , “ God will surely be cut off from the community . ”
GOLD:	They will vomit the wealth they swallowed.God wo n't let them keep it down .

ID:	4775
INPUT:	Orain ikusiko duzue , bada , Gizonaren Semeak baduela mundu honetan bekatuak barkatzeko ahalmena . Eta esan zion elbarriari :
PRED:	And now , when you see that the Son of Man has been forgiven , you will forgive the sins of the Son of Man . ”
GOLD:	So I will prove to you that the Son of Man has the authority on earth to forgive sins . ” Then Jesus turned to the paralyzed man and said ,

ID:	4776
INPUT:	Handik alde egin eta Adulamgo leizean ezkutatu zen David . Anaiak eta aitaren senitarte osoa , hori entzun zutelarik , hara jaitsi zitzaizkion .
PRED:	About this time David went to Adullam , where David and his brothers returned to the land of Elam , and his brothers returned to the land of Elam .
GOLD:	So David left Gath and escaped to the cave of Adullam . Soon his brothers and all his other relatives joined him there .

ID:	4777
INPUT:	eta soroan dena ez bedi itzul soingaineko bila .
PRED:	And do n't return to his coat , but do n't return to his coat .
GOLD:	A person out in the field must not return even to get a coat .

ID:	4778
INPUT:	« Zorionekoak errukitsu direnak , haiek baititu Jainkoak erruki izango .
PRED:	“ God blesses those who are poor , for they will be mercy on them .
GOLD:	God blesses those who are merciful , for they will be shown mercy .

ID:	4779
INPUT:	Ez dut gogoratuko egindako gaiztakeriarik , baizik eta bere egintza zuzenengatik biziko da .
PRED:	I will not remember the evil deeds of the wicked , but I will do what is right , and you will live forever .
GOLD:	All their past sins will be forgotten , and they will live because of the righteous things they have done .

ID:	4780
INPUT:	Hil zenean , bere arbaso Daviden Hirian ehortzi zuten . Ondorengo erregea haren seme Josafat izan zen .
PRED:	When Jehoshaphat died , he was buried in the City of David . Then his son Jehoshaphat became the next king .
GOLD:	When Asa died , he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David.Then Jehoshaphat , Asa 's son , became the next king .

ID:	4781
INPUT:	Igo mendi garai batera , Sion , albiste pozgarria hots egitera ; goratu indarrez ahotsa , Jerusalem , goratu beldurgabe ahotsa , esan Judako hiriei : « Hemen da zuen Jainkoa !
PRED:	On the Mount Zion of Zion , the sound of the sound of the sound of the alarm . The voice of the Lord said , “ Listen , O Jerusalem , O Jerusalem , O Jerusalem ! The city of Jerusalem is gone !
GOLD:	O Zion , messenger of good news , shout from the mountaintops ! Shout it louder , O Jerusalem.Shout , and do not be afraid.Tell the towns of Judah , “ Your God is coming ! ”

ID:	4782
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Aaroni :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Aaron ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Aaron ,

ID:	4783
INPUT:	Herri honen buru egingo baninduzue , berehala urrunaraziko nuke Abimelek hori . Bere gudarostea indartu eta borrokara ateratzeko esango nioke » .
PRED:	But if you would make me ruler over this city , I would have fought against Abimelech and his army and his army . ”
GOLD:	If I were in charge here , I would get rid of Abimelech . I would say to him , ‘ Get some soldiers , and come out and fight ! ' ”

ID:	4784
INPUT:	Horrelakoak egiten dituen oro higuingarri zaio Jaunari ; hain zuzen , higuingarritasun horiengatik botatzen ditu Jaunak zuen Jainkoak herri horiek zuen aurretik .
PRED:	All these detestable sins are detestable to the Lord your God . This is what the Lord your God has done for you .
GOLD:	Anyone who does these things is detestable to the Lord . It is because the other nations have done these detestable things that the Lord your God will drive them out ahead of you .

ID:	4785
INPUT:	Azkenik , barkamen-oparigaiaren gantza aldarean erreko du .
PRED:	The priest will then offer a sin offering for the sin offering , and he will burn it on the altar .
GOLD:	He must then burn all the fat of the sin offering on the altar .

ID:	4786
INPUT:	Hona hemen Davidi Hebronen jaio zitzaizkion semeak : zaharrena Amnon , Izreelgo Ahinoamengandik ;
PRED:	These are the sons of Hebron , the sons of David 's son , descended from Jezreel .
GOLD:	These are the sons who were born to David in Hebron : The oldest was Amnon , whose mother was Ahinoam from Jezreel .

ID:	4787
INPUT:	( Dt 5 , <unk> )
PRED:	David 's Prayer of Praise
GOLD:	Proper Use of Altars

ID:	4788
INPUT:	Nahiago Jaunak gizakiak justiziaz eta zuzenbidez jokatzea , sakrifizioak eskaintzea baino .
PRED:	The Lord is good to do good , and he shows justice to the Lord .
GOLD:	The Lord is more pleased when we do what is right and justthan when we offer him sacrifices .

ID:	4789
INPUT:	bizi-bizirik irentsiko gintuzketen : hain haserre-suminduak zeuden gure kontra ;
PRED:	They will be angry with your anger ; they will be angry with your anger .
GOLD:	They would have swallowed us alivein their burning anger .

ID:	4790
INPUT:	Beste hau ere badio : Jainkoarengan jarriko dut nik konfiantza . Baita ere : Hona ni eta hona Jainkoak eman dizkidan haurrak .
PRED:	And this is what God says : “ I will put my trust in you , and I will give you the children and their children . ”
GOLD:	He also said , “ I will put my trust in him , ” that is , “ I and the children God has given me . ”

ID:	4791
INPUT:	Tira ! Ekardazue harpa-jotzaile bat . Eta harpa-jotzailea jotzen ari zela , Jaunaren indarrak hartu zuen Eliseo ,
PRED:	Now go out to Tyre and Tyre . A warrior came to meet him , and he was too strong for the Lord 's command .
GOLD:	Now bring me someone who can play the harp . ” While the harp was being played , the power of the Lord came upon Elisha ,

ID:	4792
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zien : — Nire garaia ez da oraino iritsi ; zuentzat , aldiz , edozein garai da ona .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ My time is n't working for you , but it is time when it was time , it is time . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ Now is not the right time for me to go , but you can go anytime .

ID:	4793
INPUT:	Biderako gudari- eta zaldizko-talde bat ere eman zidan . Eufrates ibaiaren mendebaldeko gobernariengana iritsi nintzenean , erregearen agiriak aurkeztu nizkien .
PRED:	I also gave him a vast army of many kings , and he gave me a message from the province of the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	When I came to the governors of the province west of the Euphrates River , I delivered the king 's letters to them . The king , I should add , had sent along army officers and horsemen to protect me .

ID:	4794
INPUT:	eta mailegua lukurreriaz egin eta interesak kobratzen ditu . Zin dagit neure biziarengatik hori ez dela biziko ; gauza higuingarri horiek guztiak egin dituenez , hil egingo da , eta bera izango da bere heriotzaren errudun .
PRED:	I am poor and needy , and I will break my life in my life . I will not break my covenant with my people , and they will die . They will be punished for their sins , and their sins will die .
GOLD:	and lends money at excessive interest . Should such a sinful person live ? No ! He must die and must take full blame .

ID:	4795
INPUT:	ikara bizian barrua . Eta zu , Jauna , noiz arte geldi ?
PRED:	O Lord , why are you looking for me ? O Lord , how long will you laugh ?
GOLD:	Return , O Lord , and rescue me.Save me because of your unfailing love .

ID:	4796
INPUT:	mendebaldetik , hogeita bost metro luzeko oihalak , hamar zutabe eta hamar oin zituztelarik ; zutabeen kakoak eta ziriak zilarrezkoak ziren ;
PRED:	He also made five bases for the rear — 150 feet long , curtains for the posts set securely securely in the bases . He hung the curtains with silver hooks and rings .
GOLD:	The curtains on the west end of the courtyard were 75 feet long , hung with silver hooks and rings and supported by ten posts set into ten bases .

ID:	4797
INPUT:	Hala ere , alai nago ni Jaunarekin , pozaren pozezsalbatzaile dudan Jainkoarekin .
PRED:	But I will rejoice in the Lord , but you refused to abandon me .
GOLD:	yet I will rejoice in the Lord ! I will be joyful in the God of my salvation !

ID:	4798
INPUT:	guztiek , bera ohoratzen duten bezala , Semea ere ohora dezaten . Semea ohoratzen ez duenak , hura bidali duen Aita ere ez du ohoratzen .
PRED:	Anyone who speaks to this Son is like this , just as the Son of Man is the Son of Man . But anyone who sent his Son into the Father and does n't understand him .
GOLD:	so that everyone will honor the Son , just as they honor the Father . Anyone who does not honor the Son is certainly not honoring the Father who sent him .

ID:	4799
INPUT:	Elamenak 1 . 254 ;
PRED:	The family of Elam1,254
GOLD:	The family of Elam1,254

ID:	4800
INPUT:	« Zerbait kutsatua ukitzen duena , hala nola basabere nahiz etxabere kutsatu baten edo piztiaren baten sarraskia , konturatu gabe izanda ere , kutsatu bihurtzen da eta errudun .
PRED:	“ If you touch anything that is unclean , you may be unclean by touching a dead animal or unclean animal . If you touch the carcass , you must be ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	“ Or suppose you unknowingly touch something that is ceremonially unclean , such as the carcass of an unclean animal . When you realize what you have done , you must admit your defilement and your guilt . This is true whether it is a wild animal , a domestic animal , or an animal that scurries along the ground .

ID:	4801
INPUT:	Judas Iskariotek , salduko zuen ikasleak , esan zuen :
PRED:	Judas Iscariot , one of the twelve disciples , said ,
GOLD:	But Judas Iscariot , the disciple who would soon betray him , said ,

ID:	4802
INPUT:	Moisesek esan zien Aaroni eta beronen semeei : « Egosi haragia elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran ; han bertan jango duzue sagarapenerako prestaturiko saskian dagoen ogiarekin batera , nik jaso nuen aginduaren arabera : “ Aaronek eta beronen semeek jango dute ” .
PRED:	Then Moses said to Aaron and his sons , “ Tell Aaron and his sons to enter the entrance of the Tabernacle . You must eat the meat at the entrance to the entrance of the Tabernacle , and you will eat it . ”
GOLD:	Then Moses said to Aaron and his sons , “ Boil the remaining meat of the offerings at the Tabernacle entrance , and eat it there , along with the bread that is in the basket of offerings for the ordination , just as I commanded when I said , ‘ Aaron and his sons will eat it . '

ID:	4803
INPUT:	Esadazu , ene bihotzeko kutuna , non duzun larratzen artaldea , non abaroan uzten eguerdian . Ez nadin isil-gorderik ibil , zure lagunen artaldeen atzetik .
PRED:	My heart is like a flock of sheep , a stranger , and if you refuse to hide in the middle of the pasture , do n't let me look at the threshing floor .
GOLD:	Tell me , my love , where are you leading your flock today ? Where will you rest your sheep at noon ? For why should I wander like a prostituteamong your friends and their flocks ?

ID:	4804
INPUT:	« Klaudio Lisiasek Felix gobernari agurgarri horri , agur !
PRED:	“ Philip Preaches in Galilee , ” he said , “ go back to the province of Asia . ”
GOLD:	“ From Claudius Lysias , to his Excellency , Governor Felix : Greetings !

ID:	4805
INPUT:	baina , sasi eta sastrakak ematen baditu , ez du ezertarako balio , Jainkoak madarikatu egingo du eta , azkenik , erre egingo dute .
PRED:	But if the wild donkeys and the wild animals refuse to listen to God , they will be punished . They will be burned up , and they will be burned up .
GOLD:	But if a field bears thorns and thistles , it is useless . The farmer will soon condemn that field and burn it .

ID:	4806
INPUT:	Erregeak mahai-zerbitzariei esan zien , orduan : “ Lot ezazue hanka eta esku , eta bota kanpora , ilunpetara . Negarra eta hortz-karraska izango da han ” .
PRED:	Then the king said to his servants , ‘ Go and tell them , ‘ Go into the house and throw it into the darkness , and there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . '
GOLD:	Then the king said to his aides , ‘ Bind his hands and feet and throw him into the outer darkness , where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . '

ID:	4807
INPUT:	Erregeak erantzun zion : — Babiloniarren aldera igaro diren judatarren beldur naiz ; haien eskuetan eroriz gero , tratu txarra emango baitidate .
PRED:	But the king said to Balaam , “ I am afraid of the Jews , and I will be afraid of the Jews . I will hand them over to the land of the Babylonians . ”
GOLD:	“ But I am afraid to surrender , ” the king said , “ for the Babylonians may hand me over to the Judeans who have defected to them . And who knows what they will do to me ! ”

ID:	4808
INPUT:	« Behin batez , zuhaitzek erregea izendatu nahi zuten berentzat . Eta esan zioten olibondoari : “ Izan hadi gure errege ! ”
PRED:	“ One day the Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies said to him , ‘ Let 's reign be our king ! '
GOLD:	Once upon a time the trees decided to choose a king.First they said to the olive tree , ‘ Be our king ! '

ID:	4809
INPUT:	Judaren leinutik hamabi mila zigilatu ; Rubenen leinutik hamabi mila ; Gaden leinutik hamabi mila ;
PRED:	From the tribe of Judah came from the tribe of Reuben , from the tribe of Reuben , from the tribe of Gad .
GOLD:	from Judah12,000from Reuben12,000from Gad12,000

ID:	4810
INPUT:	Nik , ordea , zure indarra dut kantatuko , goizean zure maitasuna poz-oihuz ospatuko ; zu izan zaitut gotorleku , larrialdian ihesleku .
PRED:	But I will praise your mighty deeds , and I will sing your praises to the Most High .
GOLD:	O my Strength , to you I sing praises , for you , O God , are my refuge , the God who shows me unfailing love .

ID:	4811
INPUT:	« Orduan , madarikazio-hitzok idatzi eta idazkia ur garratzetan garbituko du apaizak .
PRED:	“ Then the priest will write this message to the priest , and he will tell me what it means .
GOLD:	And the priest will write these curses on a piece of leather and wash them off into the bitter water .

ID:	4812
INPUT:	Erbestetik etorritako guztiek egin zituzten etxolak eta horietan jarri ziren bizitzen . Nunen seme Josueren garaietatik ez zuten halako jairik egin israeldarrek ! Hango poza guztiena !
PRED:	So Joshua and all the other men of Israel came out of the tent and Joshua son of Nun and Joshua son of Nun . But Joshua son of Nun , Joshua son of Nun , and Joshua son of Nun .
GOLD:	So everyone who had returned from captivity lived in these shelters during the festival , and they were all filled with great joy ! The Israelites had not celebrated like this since the days of Joshua son of Nun .

ID:	4813
INPUT:	Eta zerbait gaizki egina badizu edota zerbait zor , utzi hori nire gain .
PRED:	And if someone hates another person and one of them , then let it be my servant .
GOLD:	If he has wronged you in any way or owes you anything , charge it to me .

ID:	4814
INPUT:	Jaiki eta Jainkoaren mendira igo zen Moises , Josue bere laguntzailearekin .
PRED:	So Moses got up and went up to the mountain of God , and Moses and Aaron .
GOLD:	So Moses and his assistant Joshua set out , and Moses climbed up the mountain of God .

ID:	4815
INPUT:	Haiekin hitz egiten jardun zuen erregeak , eta Daniel , Hananias , Mixael eta Azarias adinakorik ez zuen aurkitu . Harrezkero , beraz , bere zerbitzurako hartu zituen .
PRED:	While Daniel was talking with them , Daniel , Hananiah , Mishael , and Azariah , Mishael , and Azariah , Azariah , and Azariah , and Azariah were not one of them .
GOLD:	The king talked with them , and no one impressed him as much as Daniel , Hananiah , Mishael , and Azariah . So they entered the royal service .

ID:	4816
INPUT:	Ez duzue zeuen baitan esaten : “ Errespeta dezagun Jauna , geure Jainkoa ! Berak bidaltzen dizkigugaraian garaiko euriak , berak zaintzen uzta biltzeko sasoiak ” .
PRED:	Do n't let them say , ‘ We are the Lord our God , for we are looking for battle , and the Lord our God will protect us from his threshing floor . '
GOLD:	They do not say from the heart , ‘ Let us live in awe of the Lord our God , for he gives us rain each spring and fall , assuring us of a harvest when the time is right . '

ID:	4817
INPUT:	Eta guardiaburuarekin batera zetorren babiloniar gudarosteak Jerusalemgo harresi guztia bota egin zuen .
PRED:	Then the captain of the guard came to Jerusalem with all the army of Jerusalem , and all the people of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Then he supervised the entire Babylonian army as they tore down the walls of Jerusalem on every side .

ID:	4818
INPUT:	Alde batera utzi baitu Jaunakzure aurkako epaia , uxatu ditu zure etsaiak . Jauna , Israelgo erregea , zurekin dago : ez zara gehiagoezeren beldur izango .
PRED:	For the Lord has abandoned your enemies and turned away from your enemies , and you will not be afraid of the kings of Israel . You will not be afraid of the king of Israel .
GOLD:	For the Lord will remove his hand of judgmentand will disperse the armies of your enemy.And the Lord himself , the King of Israel , will live among you ! At last your troubles will be over , and you will never again fear disaster .

ID:	4819
INPUT:	Hiria Babiloniako erregearen eskuetan eroriko da erremediorik gabe , eta konkistatu egingo du . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	The king of Babylon will be captured by the king of Babylon , and the king of Babylon will burn against the king of Babylon , says the Lord . ”
GOLD:	The Lord also says : ‘ The city of Jerusalem will certainly be handed over to the army of the king of Babylon , who will capture it . ' ”

ID:	4820
INPUT:	Ene laztana , errege-karroza daraman behorra dirudizu .
PRED:	You are my lord , my lord the king , and I have given you the money you have given .
GOLD:	You are as exciting , my darling , as a mare among Pharaoh 's stallions .

ID:	4821
INPUT:	Azkena ezereztuko den etsaia heriotza izango da .
PRED:	But the end of the enemy will be the enemy .
GOLD:	And the last enemy to be destroyed is death .

ID:	4822
INPUT:	Salomonek lau mila zalditegi zituen bere guda-gurdietarako zaldientzat eta hamabi mila zaldizko .
PRED:	Solomon 's horses will be chariots and horses . He will give them two chariots and horses .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , please command that cedars from Lebanon be cut for me . Let my men work alongside yours , and I will pay your men whatever wages you ask . As you know , there is no one among us who can cut timber like you Sidonians ! ”

ID:	4823
INPUT:	« Jaunari elkartasun-opariak egitean , eskaini hark atseginez onartzeko eran :
PRED:	“ When you present a peace offering to the Lord , offer sacrifices to the Lord ,
GOLD:	“ When you sacrifice a peace offering to the Lord , offer it properly so you will be accepted by God .

ID:	4824
INPUT:	baina agurtzean esan zien : « Berriz ere etorriko natzaizue , Jainkoa lagun » . Efesotik ontziz atera
PRED:	But he said to them , “ This is what the Lord our God has done through the entire land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	As he left , however , he said , “ I will come back later , God willing . ” Then he set sail from Ephesus .

ID:	4825
INPUT:	Judatarrek Simeonen leinuko beren senideekin joan eta Tzefat hirian bizi ziren kanaandarrak garaitu zituzten eta hiria erabat suntsitu . Horma deitu zioten hiriari , hau da , « Suntsipen » .
PRED:	The Israelites went to war with King Sihon of the tribe of Judah and Ahaziah , who lived in the towns of Judah and destroyed them . ( This is what the towns of Judah ) .
GOLD:	Then Judah joined with Simeon to fight against the Canaanites living in Zephath , and they completely destroyed the town . So the town was named Hormah .

ID:	4826
INPUT:	Astemeak esan zion : — Ez al nauzu , bada , zeure astemea , betidanik gainean eraman zaituena ? Eta inoiz portatu al naiz honela zurekin ? — Ez ! — erantzun zion Balaamek .
PRED:	“ Do n't you think about me ? ” he asked . “ Do n't you think about me ? ” But Balaam replied , “ Do n't you realize that I am with you ? ” But Balaam replied , “ I 'm not with you ! ”
GOLD:	“ But I am the same donkey you have ridden all your life , ” the donkey answered . “ Have I ever done anything like this before ? ” “ No , ” Balaam admitted .

ID:	4827
INPUT:	Eskutik heldu eta esan zion : « Ta<unk> ha <unk> » ( hau da : « Neskatxa , zuri diotsut : Jaiki zaitez » ) .
PRED:	When she arrived , she said to her , “ This is what the father said to me , “ Get up ! Get up ! ”
GOLD:	Holding her hand , he said to her , which means “ Little girl , get up ! ”

ID:	4828
INPUT:	Jaunaren ezpata odolez betea , gantzetan bustia dago : sakrifizioetako bildotseta akerren odolezeta aharien giltzurrun-gantzez . Izan ere , sakrifizioa burutu behar du JaunakBotzra hirian , hilketa izugarria Edom herrian .
PRED:	The fat around the internal organs , the fat around the altar , the fat around the altar , the fat around the altar , and the fat around the internal organs , the fat around the altar , and the people of Edom must be killed by the Lord .
GOLD:	The sword of the Lord is drenched with bloodand covered with fat — with the blood of lambs and goats , with the fat of rams prepared for sacrifice.Yes , the Lord will offer a sacrifice in the city of Bozrah.He will make a mighty slaughter in Edom .

ID:	4829
INPUT:	mundu guztia epaitzera eta gaizkile guztiak kondenatzera , egin dituzten gaiztakeria guztiengatik eta bekatari sinesgabeok Jainkoaren kontra esan dituzten irain guztiengatik » .
PRED:	He has made all the nations to judge the world , and he has sinned against all the evil things he has done . And now we have heard the same things God has done for us . ”
GOLD:	to execute judgment on the people of the world . He will convict every person of all the ungodly things they have done and for all the insults that ungodly sinners have spoken against him . ”

ID:	4830
INPUT:	Eta zuek ere egingo duzue testigantza , hasieratik nirekin egon baitzarete .
PRED:	And you will be witnesses , for you will believe me because you are my followers .
GOLD:	And you must also testify about me because you have been with me from the beginning of my ministry .

ID:	4831
INPUT:	Zu zaitut ene gordeleku eta babes , zure hitza ene itxaropen .
PRED:	I will wait for you , Lord , and my hope will wait for protection .
GOLD:	You are my refuge and my shield ; your word is my source of hope .

ID:	4832
INPUT:	Oi Jainko , geure belarriz entzuna dugu , gurasoek kontaturik , zuk haien garaian , aspaldi hartan , eginaren berri .
PRED:	O our God , our ancestors , our ancestors , and our ancestors have been captured by our enemies .
GOLD:	You drove out the pagan nations by your powerand gave all the land to our ancestors.You crushed their enemiesand set our ancestors free .

ID:	4833
INPUT:	Jaitsi zen hura , zeru gorenera dena betetzera igo dena bera da .
PRED:	So the man went up to the gate , but it is going to be the same .
GOLD:	And the same one who descended is the one who ascended higher than all the heavens , so that he might fill the entire universe with himself .

ID:	4834
INPUT:	Orduan , Daniel ekarri eta lehoien zulora jaurtitzeko agindu zuen . Erregeak esan zion : « Halako iraupen handiz zerbitzatzen duzun Jainkoak bakarrik salba zaitzake ! »
PRED:	Then Daniel threw him into a den of lions and threw him into a lion . “ Your Majesty , ” he said , “ for God has given you victory over you ! ”
GOLD:	A stone was brought and placed over the mouth of the den . The king sealed the stone with his own royal seal and the seals of his nobles , so that no one could rescue Daniel .

ID:	4835
INPUT:	Badakigu Jainkoak bera maite dutenen onerako bideratzen dituela gauza guztiak , bere aurre-erabakiz deitu dituenen onerako , alegia .
PRED:	And we know that God loves us , and he will show us his kindness to his brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	And we know that God causes everything to work together for the good of those who love God and are called according to his purpose for them .

ID:	4836
INPUT:	Pedrok berriro ukatu zuen . Geroxeago , ingurukoek ere esan zioten : — Bai , haietakoa haiz , noski , galilearra haiz eta .
PRED:	Then Peter touched him and touched him . “ Yes , ” he said , “ you are one of us , and we are one of you . ”
GOLD:	But Peter denied it again.A little later some of the other bystanders confronted Peter and said , “ You must be one of them , because you are a Galilean . ”

ID:	4837
INPUT:	Izu-garrasitik ihes egin dezanazuloan jausiko da ; zulotik ihes egin dezanazepoan harrapatua geldituko . Zeru goitik uholdeak eraso , lurraren oinarriek dardara .
PRED:	You will flee from the grave , and you will flee from the grave , and you will escape from the farthest ends of the earth .
GOLD:	Those who flee in terror will fall into a trap , and those who escape the trap will be caught in a snare.Destruction falls like rain from the heavens ; the foundations of the earth shake .

ID:	4838
INPUT:	Santutegirako zerga
PRED:	The Holy Place
GOLD:	Plans for the Washbasin

ID:	4839
INPUT:	Heriotzatik libratu zaretenok , alde egin luzatzeke ! Oroitu Jaunaz urrutitik , ekarri gogora Jerusalem .
PRED:	O Jerusalem , you who are far away from the grave , will rejoice in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	Get out , all you who have escaped the sword ! Do not stand and watch — flee while you can ! Remember the Lord , though you are in a far-off land , and think about your home in Jerusalem . ”

ID:	4840
INPUT:	zerez ordaindurik ez baduzu , etzateko duzun ohea ere kenduko baitizute .
PRED:	But if you have not been circumcised , you wo n't be circumcised .
GOLD:	If you ca n't pay it , even your bed will be snatched from under you .

ID:	4841
INPUT:	Efraimen leinuko gizonak bildu , Jordan ibaia igaro eta Tzafon hirira joan ziren . Eta esan zioten Jefteri : — Zergatik joan zara amondarren kontra borrokara guri dei egin gabe ? Su emango diogu zure etxeari , zu barrenean zarela !
PRED:	Then the men of Ephraim came to Succoth and camped at Succoth . They said , “ Why are you going to fight against us ? Why are you going to fight against us ? ”
GOLD:	Then the people of Ephraim mobilized an army and crossed over the Jordan River to Zaphon . They sent this message to Jephthah : “ Why did n't you call for us to help you fight against the Ammonites ? We are going to burn down your house with you in it ! ”

ID:	4842
INPUT:	Espiritu gaiztoa zeukala ziotenei erantzun zien hau .
PRED:	But the Spirit replied to those who were evil in the evil spirit .
GOLD:	He told them this because they were saying , “ He 's possessed by an evil spirit . ”

ID:	4843
INPUT:	Hara , ahalmen osoz da<unk> ko Jauna , bere nagusigoa indartsu ezarriz . Hara , berekin dakar garaipen-agiria , berak askaturiko herria .
PRED:	Look , I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , and I will establish the nations with his people .
GOLD:	Yes , the Sovereign Lord is coming in power.He will rule with a powerful arm.See , he brings his reward with him as he comes .

ID:	4844
INPUT:	Janaria ematen die abereeieta karranka ari zaizkion belakumeei .
PRED:	He gives me food and bitter cup , and he gave it to those who drink it .
GOLD:	He gives food to the wild animalsand feeds the young ravens when they cry .

ID:	4845
INPUT:	Ondoren , Jaunak lau errementari erakutsi zizkidan .
PRED:	Then the Lord gave me four horns of the mountain .
GOLD:	Then the angel who was with me went to meet a second angel who was coming toward him .

ID:	4846
INPUT:	Nire erreinuko jende hau opariak eskaintzeko Jerusalemera , Jaunaren etxera , igotzen bada , Judako errege Roboamengana , lehengo bere jaunarengana , itzuli egingo da jende honen bihotza . Orduan , hil egingo naute eta Judako errege Roboamengana itzuliko dira » .
PRED:	The people of Judah and Jerusalem will return to Jerusalem to the Temple of the Lord , for they will return to Jerusalem to the king of Judah . Then they will return to the king of Judah , and he will return to the king of Judah . ”
GOLD:	When these people go to Jerusalem to offer sacrifices at the Temple of the Lord , they will again give their allegiance to King Rehoboam of Judah . They will kill me and make him their king instead . ”

ID:	4847
INPUT:	Lehen , Jainkoa ezagutzen ez zenutelarik , izatez jainko ez direnen menpeko zineten ;
PRED:	You were not like the first of God , but you would not worship other gods .
GOLD:	Before you Gentiles knew God , you were slaves to so-called gods that do not even exist .

ID:	4848
INPUT:	Liburu Santuak dioenez : Hitz egingo diet zutaz neure senideei , goretsiko zaitut batzarraren erdian .
PRED:	“ I will tell you , ” the Scriptures say , “ so I will show you all my brothers and sisters . ”
GOLD:	For he said to God , “ I will proclaim your name to my brothers and sisters.I will praise you among your assembled people . ”

ID:	4849
INPUT:	Ez du oihu egingo , ez ahotsa goratuko , ez kaleetan bere mintzoaentzunaraziko .
PRED:	Do n't sound the alarm in the sound of the righteous ; do n't cry out to the godly .
GOLD:	He will not shoutor raise his voice in public .

ID:	4850
INPUT:	« Jose , ubide ondoanlandare emankor , honen adarrak harresian gora .
PRED:	“ Joseph , give the crops to Joseph 's descendants , Joseph , so he will give them plenty of grain .
GOLD:	“ Joseph is the foal of a wild donkey , the foal of a wild donkey at a spring — one of the wild donkeys on the ridge .

ID:	4851
INPUT:	lurrean arrastaka dabiltzan narrasti- nahiz lur azpiko uretan dabiltzan arrain-irudiak .
PRED:	In all the small animals that scurry along the ground , all sorts of animals , small animals , small animals that scurry along the ground .
GOLD:	a small animal that scurries along the ground , or a fish in the deepest sea .

ID:	4852
INPUT:	Goraintziak Apelesi , kristau zintzo dela erakutsi duen horri ; baita Aristobuloren familiakoei ere .
PRED:	Remember , I am writing to you who are faithful to Christ , who has been faithful to God 's holy people .
GOLD:	Greet Apelles , a good man whom Christ approves . And give my greetings to the believers from the household of Aristobulus .

ID:	4853
INPUT:	Bukatu zutenean , Santiagok hitza hartu eta esan zuen : « Entzun , anaiok :
PRED:	When the captain of the guard , he said , “ Listen to me , you and I said ,
GOLD:	When they had finished , James stood and said , “ Brothers , listen to me .

ID:	4854
INPUT:	Pedro eta Joan sartzen ikusirik , limosna eskatu zien .
PRED:	Peter went into the courtyard and saw what he had happened .
GOLD:	When he saw Peter and John about to enter , he asked them for some money .

ID:	4855
INPUT:	Bernaberi <unk> deitzen zioten eta Paulori Hermes , hau baitzen hitz egiten zuena .
PRED:	So they called the apostles and brought them back to the people , but they talked about it .
GOLD:	They decided that Barnabas was the Greek god Zeus and that Paul was Hermes , since he was the chief speaker .

ID:	4856
INPUT:	Baina Jesusek erantzun : — Ez eragotzi , zeren zuen kontra ez dagoena zuen alde baitago .
PRED:	But Jesus replied , “ Do n't let anyone mislead you , but he is not against you . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus said , “ Do n't stop him ! Anyone who is not against you is for you . ”

ID:	4857
INPUT:	Sukoteko gazte bat atzeman eta galdeketa egin zion . Gazteak idatziz eman zizkion Sukoteko buruzagi eta arduradunen izenak , orotara hirurogeita hamazazpi gizonen izenak .
PRED:	The younger young men asked him , and he gave him a young young young man named him Joseph . He gave him seven of the elders , who had been appointed by the elders of Susa .
GOLD:	There he captured a young man from Succoth and demanded that he write down the names of all the seventy-seven officials and elders in the town .

ID:	4858
INPUT:	Baina herriek iseka egingo dioteeta koplak aterako , denek batera . Hara zer esango duten : « Zoritxarrekoa zu , besteren ondasunezaberasten zaren hori — noiz arte ? — , zeure zorra gero eta astunagoegiten ari baitzara !
PRED:	But the people of Israel will mock him and sing , “ What sorrow awaits you ? ” they said , “ What sorrow awaits you who say , ‘ What do you think about this ? '
GOLD:	“ But soon their captives will taunt them.They will mock them , saying , ‘ What sorrow awaits you thieves ! Now you will get what you deserve ! You 've become rich by extortion , but how much longer can this go on ? '

ID:	4859
INPUT:	Egunez gordeta egoten dira , ez dute argia maite .
PRED:	They love him and love him , but they love him .
GOLD:	Thieves break into houses at nightand sleep in the daytime.They are not acquainted with the light .

ID:	4860
INPUT:	Ez , baizik eta Joel profetak esan zuena ari da hemen gertatzen :
PRED:	But do n't tell John the prophet , the prophet said , “ Look , here is here ! ”
GOLD:	No , what you see was predicted long ago by the prophet Joel :

ID:	4861
INPUT:	Jakoben semeek aitak agindu bezala egin zuten .
PRED:	The sons of Jacob did as Joseph commanded .
GOLD:	So Jacob 's sons did as he had commanded them .

ID:	4862
INPUT:	gainera nire seme-alabak lepo egin eta haien ohorez erretzeko ?
PRED:	And why have you been led to my children ? Why did they burn their hands on their heads ?
GOLD:	Must you also slaughter my children by sacrificing them to idols ?

ID:	4863
INPUT:	Zorionekoa zuzenbidea errespetatueta etengabe justizia egiten duena !
PRED:	What joy for those who fear the truth , and those who do what is right .
GOLD:	There is joy for those who deal justly with othersand always do what is right .

ID:	4864
INPUT:	Izan ere , horrela hitz egiten dutenek garbi adierazten dute aberriaren bila dabiltzala .
PRED:	For they are telling these things , so they can understand that they are cleansed from their sins .
GOLD:	Obviously people who say such things are looking forward to a country they can call their own .

ID:	4865
INPUT:	Horregatik , lebitarrek ez dute ondare-zatirik beste israeldarrek bezala , Jauna baitute beren ondare , Jaunak gure Jainkoak hitzeman dien bezala .
PRED:	That is why the Lord our God has given us as his special possession , just as the Lord our God has promised us .
GOLD:	That is why the Levites have no share of property or possession of land among the other Israelite tribes . The Lord himself is their special possession , as the Lord your God told them . )

ID:	4866
INPUT:	Bazen , aldi hartan , Kix zeritzan gizon handiki bat , Abielen semea , Tzeror , Bekorat eta Afiasen ondorengoetarikoa . Benjaminen leinukoa zen .
PRED:	There was a man named Succoth , who was a great man named Succoth ( also known as the father of Benjamin ) , Ephraim , and the tribe of Benjamin .
GOLD:	There was a wealthy , influential man named Kish from the tribe of Benjamin . He was the son of Abiel , son of Zeror , son of Becorath , son of Aphiah , of the tribe of Benjamin .

ID:	4867
INPUT:	Baina Joanek aurpegira botatzen zizkion Herodes agintariari bere anaiaren emazte Herodiasekin elkartu izana eta gainerako gaiztakeria guztiak .
PRED:	But when Herod heard this , he sent his brothers to find his brother Herod , the wife of Herod 's brother , and all the brothers of the church .
GOLD:	John also publicly criticized Herod Antipas , the ruler of Galilee , for marrying Herodias , his brother 's wife , and for many other wrongs he had done .

ID:	4868
INPUT:	« Juda , zeure senideekgoretsiko zaituzte , etsaiei eskua erantsiko diezu lepoan , zeure aitaren semeakahuspeztuko zaizkizu .
PRED:	“ My brothers and sisters , you will bow down to the land of the enemy , and your children will bow down in your presence .
GOLD:	“ Judah , your brothers will praise you.You will grasp your enemies by the neck.All your relatives will bow before you .

ID:	4869
INPUT:	« Seme zaharrena soroan zen . Etxerakoan , hurbildu ahala , soinua eta dantzak sumatu zituen .
PRED:	“ Son of man , son of man , came into the palace . And when he saw it , he tore his clothes in mourning .
GOLD:	“ Meanwhile , the older son was in the fields working . When he returned home , he heard music and dancing in the house ,

ID:	4870
INPUT:	Hona zer dioen Davidek berak Espiritu Santuaren argiz : « Hona Jaunak ene Jaunari esana : “ Eseri nire eskuinean , zure etsaiak oinazpian jartzen dizkizudan bitartean ” .
PRED:	This is what the Holy Spirit says : “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ I will put my right hand on your left hand and under your feet . '
GOLD:	For David himself , speaking under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit , said , ‘ The said to my Lord , Sit in the place of honor at my right handuntil I humble your enemies beneath your feet . '

ID:	4871
INPUT:	Israeldarren ondaretik lebitarrei hiriak ematerakoan , leinu bakoitzak egokitu zaion ondare-zatiaren arabera emango dizkie : ondare handiagoa jaso duenak hiri gehiago , txikiagoa jaso duenak gutxiago » .
PRED:	The tribe of Israel will take possession of the tribe of Israel from the tribe of Levi , assigned an allotment of land to the tribe of Levi , and it will be allotted to the tribe of Israel . ”
GOLD:	These towns will come from the property of the people of Israel . The larger tribes will give more towns to the Levites , while the smaller tribes will give fewer . Each tribe will give property in proportion to the size of its land . ”

ID:	4872
INPUT:	Jerikoko bizilagunak honela mintzatu zitzaizkion Eliseori : — Zeuk , gure jaun horrek , ikus dezakezunez , gure hiri hau toki ederrean egina dago ; baina ura txarra dugu eta lurraldea agorra .
PRED:	When the men of Jericho heard that Elisha had said to Elisha , “ Let us see this man , we will see it , but we will see it is a beautiful land . ”
GOLD:	One day the leaders of the town of Jericho visited Elisha . “ We have a problem , my lord , ” they told him . “ This town is located in pleasant surroundings , as you can see . But the water is bad , and the land is unproductive . ”

ID:	4873
INPUT:	Baina Jainkoaren laguntzari esker , handi eta txikien aurrean testigantza egiten jarraitu dut gaurdaino ; nik ez dut profetek eta Moisesek aurrez iragarria besterik esaten , hau da ,
PRED:	But if I call the name of God , then I will call upon the great power of God and the prophets and the prophets of God , and I do not believe this day .
GOLD:	But God has protected me right up to this present time so I can testify to everyone , from the least to the greatest . I teach nothing except what the prophets and Moses said would happen —

ID:	4874
INPUT:	« Madarikatua lege honen xedapenak gogoan hartzen eta betetzen ez dituena ! » Eta herri osoak erantzungo du : « Amen » .
PRED:	“ Cursed is anyone who obeys God 's laws and laws and laws , ” says the Lord . “ Amen . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who does not affirm and obey the terms of these instructions . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	4875
INPUT:	zure kontra eta Niloren kontra nator . Basamortu eta hondamendi bihurtuko dut Egipto , Migdoletik Asuaneraino eta Etiopiako mugaraino .
PRED:	I will destroy the land of Egypt , and all its allies will fall into the wilderness of Migdol and Ethiopia .
GOLD:	I am now the enemy of both you and your river . I will make the land of Egypt a totally desolate wasteland , from Migdol to Aswan , as far south as the border of Ethiopia .

ID:	4876
INPUT:	Nire mahastiahondamendi bihurtzen dute , nire pikondoa ezpal ; dena karraskatzen eta zuritzen , abarrak larrutuz .
PRED:	My vineyard is broken , and my vineyard is broken .
GOLD:	It has destroyed my grapevinesand ruined my fig trees , stripping their bark and destroying it , leaving the branches white and bare .

ID:	4877
INPUT:	Epai latzak ematen dituzu ene aurka , gaztaroko erruak egotziz ;
PRED:	You have fought against me , O Lord , and you have fought against me .
GOLD:	“ You write bitter accusations against meand bring up all the sins of my youth .

ID:	4878
INPUT:	Eta hau da Kristok egin zigun agintzaria : betiko bizia .
PRED:	This is the message Christ gave us through Christ : “ He is life forever . ”
GOLD:	And in this fellowship we enjoy the eternal life he promised us .

ID:	4879
INPUT:	Hara , suak irensten duenlastoaren antzeko izango dira ; ezin izango dituzte beren buruaksugarretatik libratu . Ez da , ez , txingar-sua izango , ondoan eseri eta berotzekoa .
PRED:	They will devour their horses , and their riches will be completely destroyed . They will not be able to devour their heads , and their heads will be consumed by fire .
GOLD:	But they are like straw burning in a fire ; they can not save themselves from the flame.You will get no help from them at all ; their hearth is no place to sit for warmth .

ID:	4880
INPUT:	18
PRED:	A Message about Jerusalem
GOLD:	Resh

ID:	4881
INPUT:	Jakin zuen , ordea , Davidek bera hondatzeko prestatzen ari zela Saul , eta esan zion Abiatar apaizari : — Ekatzu efod apaiz-jantzia .
PRED:	But David took a solemn oath to David , and he said to Saul , “ You are a priest , a priest , and you must eat it . ”
GOLD:	But David learned of Saul 's plan and told Abiathar the priest to bring the ephod and ask the Lord what he should do .

ID:	4882
INPUT:	Erregeak , aldiz , erantzun zion Araunari : — Ez , balio duena ordainduz erosi nahi dizut . Jaunari , ene Jainkoari , ez diot eskainiko kostatu ez zaidan erre-oparirik . Horrela bada , zilarrezko berrogeita hamar txanponetan erosi zizkion Davidek larraina eta idiak .
PRED:	But the king replied to the king , “ I want you to pay attention to the Lord your God . I want you to sacrifice a burnt offering to the Lord your God , and I will give it to you . ” So David did n't need it .
GOLD:	But the king replied to Araunah , “ No , I insist on buying it , for I will not present burnt offerings to the Lord my God that have cost me nothing . ” So David paid him fifty pieces of silver for the threshing floor and the oxen .

ID:	4883
INPUT:	Etxeko ate-alboetanezarri zenituenidolatriazko zeure oroigarriak . Ni alde batera utzirik , biluzik jarri , zeure ohe zabalean etzaneta maitaleez aprobetxatzen zinen . Atsegin zenuen haiekin oheratzea .
PRED:	You placed my pagan shrines in the house of the house of worship at the end of my house , and you refused to worship the idols of the living God . But you refused to listen to me , and you refused to listen to me .
GOLD:	You have put pagan symbolson your doorposts and behind your doors.You have left meand climbed into bed with these detestable gods.You have committed yourselves to them.You love to look at their naked bodies .

ID:	4884
INPUT:	SARRERA : E<unk> KIELEN PROFETA BOKAZIOA ( 1 , 1 — 3 , 27 )
PRED:	Eliphaz 's First Response to Job
GOLD:	A Vision of Living Beings

ID:	4885
INPUT:	Gelditu zen Jesus , dei egin eta esan zien : — Zer nahi duzue niregandik ?
PRED:	So Jesus called out to them and said , “ What are you willing to help me ? ”
GOLD:	When Jesus heard them , he stopped and called , “ What do you want me to do for you ? ”

ID:	4886
INPUT:	Orduan , israeldarrek , Jaunak agindu bezala , beren ondaretik hiriak , beren herri-lur eta guzti , eman zizkieten lebitarrei .
PRED:	So the Lord gave these instructions to the people of Israel , just as the Lord had commanded them .
GOLD:	So by the command of the Lord the people of Israel gave the Levites the following towns and pasturelands out of their own grants of land .

ID:	4887
INPUT:	eta honela egin zion oihu Judatik etorritako Jainkoaren gizonari : — Hona zer dioen Jaunak : « Ez duzu egin Jaunaren esana ; ez duzu bete Jaunak , zeure Jainkoak , eman zizun agindua .
PRED:	Then he shouted to the man of Judah , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : Do n't do what you have done to you , for you have obeyed the commands of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	He cried out to the man of God from Judah , “ This is what the Lord says : You have defied the word of the Lord and have disobeyed the command the Lord your God gave you .

ID:	4888
INPUT:	Jaunak ezarri du eguzkiaeguna argitzeko , ilargia eta izarrakgaua argitzeko ; hark itsasoa astindueta olatuek orro dagite . Jaun ahalguztiduna , hori du izena !
PRED:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has placed the light from the sun , and he will make the stars in the sky . The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has poured out the heavens on them .
GOLD:	It is the Lord who provides the sun to light the dayand the moon and stars to light the night , and who stirs the sea into roaring waves.His name is the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and this is what he says :

ID:	4889
INPUT:	Orduan , Pilatok haien esku utzi zuen gurutziltza zezaten . Hartu zuten , beraz , Jesus ,
PRED:	So Pilate handed him over to the soldiers , crucified him with a whip , and crucified him .
GOLD:	Then Pilate turned Jesus over to them to be crucified.So they took Jesus away .

ID:	4890
INPUT:	Behin betiko egin dut zin neure buruarengatik , eta ez natzaio sekula Davidi desleial izango .
PRED:	I have sworn an oath to my own family , and he will never be unfaithful to David .
GOLD:	His dynasty will go on forever ; his kingdom will endure as the sun .

ID:	4891
INPUT:	Sei egunez egingo duzu lan eta zeure eginbehar guztiak burutuko ;
PRED:	You have six days each week for your ordinary work .
GOLD:	You have six days each week for your ordinary work ,

ID:	4892
INPUT:	Buruko ileak baino gehiago diraarrazoirik gabe gorroto didatenak , nire tximak baino ugariago nire erasotzaileak , nire etsai gezurtiak . Lapurtu ez dudana itzuli behar ote dut ?
PRED:	They are more valuable than the teachers of religious law , but they are not greater than my enemies . They are my enemies , and I would not return to my enemies .
GOLD:	O God , you know how foolish I am ; my sins can not be hidden from you .

ID:	4893
INPUT:	Zelaietako belarra bezain mardul hazarazi zintudan ; hazi , handia egin eta sasoira iritsi zinen : bularrak hazi zitzaizkizun eta bi<unk> ka atera ; baina jantzirik gabe zeunden , larrugorrian .
PRED:	The Lord has given me great joy ! He has made you great ! He has made you great , and he gave you a piece of finest gold , and you were naked .
GOLD:	And I helped you to thrive like a plant in the field . You grew up and became a beautiful jewel . Your breasts became full , and your body hair grew , but you were still naked .

ID:	4894
INPUT:	Jesusen ezagun guztiak , baita Galileatik jarraitu zioten emakumeak ere , urrutixeago zeuden begira .
PRED:	So the crowd followed Jesus and followed him . They followed him and followed him in the distance .
GOLD:	But Jesus ' friends , including the women who had followed him from Galilee , stood at a distance watching .

ID:	4895
INPUT:	Sedekiasen hamaikagarren urtean , laugarren hilaren bederatzian , babiloniarrek zuloa ireki zuten hiriko harresian .
PRED:	On January 15 , during the eleventh year of King Zedekiah 's reign , during the eleventh year of King Zedekiah 's reign .
GOLD:	Two and a half years later , on July 18 in the eleventh year of Zedekiah 's reign , a section of the city wall was broken down .

ID:	4896
INPUT:	Ez irten landara , ez ibili bideetan ! Hor dago etsaia armaturik , nonahi beldurra nagusi ! »
PRED:	Do n't go out into the fields ! Look ! Look ! Look ! Look ! Look ! Look ! Look ! ”
GOLD:	Do n't go out to the fields ! Do n't travel on the roads ! The enemy 's sword is everywhereand terrorizes us at every turn !

ID:	4897
INPUT:	Ez bedi fida itxura engainagarriaz , horixe izango du ordainsari eta .
PRED:	It wo n't be a reward for you , for it will be a reward for you .
GOLD:	Let them no longer fool themselves by trusting in empty riches , for emptiness will be their only reward .

ID:	4898
INPUT:	Jauna hartu baituzu babesleku , Goi-goikoa bizileku .
PRED:	But you have made a refuge in the shelter of the Most High , safe from the Most High .
GOLD:	If you make the Lord your refuge , if you make the Most High your shelter ,

ID:	4899
INPUT:	Eskua buruan ezarri ondoren , hil egingo du erre-oparietako abereak hiltzen diren tokian .
PRED:	He will lay his hand on the head of his head , and he will slaughter it at the place where the burnt offering is slaughtered .
GOLD:	They must lay a hand on the head of the sin offering and slaughter it at the place where burnt offerings are slaughtered .

ID:	4900
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak etsaiak xaxatu dizkioeta aurka altxarazi :
PRED:	But the Lord has spoken to King Baasha of Israel and turned his face against him .
GOLD:	They said , “ We will replace the broken bricks of our ruins with finished stone , and replant the felled sycamore-fig trees with cedars . ”

ID:	4901
INPUT:	Jokaera prestua duena , justiziaren arabera ari dena , bihotz barrutik egia dioena ;
PRED:	The righteous are fair to those who are righteous , but those who are honest and good .
GOLD:	Those who lead blameless lives and do what is right , speaking the truth from sincere hearts .

ID:	4902
INPUT:	Israeldar gudariak onik itzuli ziren Josuerengana , Makedako kanpalekura . Inor ez zen israeldarren kontra hitzik ere egitera ausartu .
PRED:	When Joshua returned to Egypt , they returned to war against the camp . No one of the Israelite army had gathered against them .
GOLD:	Then the Israelites returned safely to Joshua in the camp at Makkedah . After that , no one dared to speak even a word against Israel .

ID:	4903
INPUT:	Beraz , nirekin Zesareara etorri ziren haiek eta , hurrengo egunean , batere luzapenik gabe , auzi-mahaian eseri nintzen eta gizon hori ekartzeko agindu nuen .
PRED:	So I came with them to the wall of the city , and they tried to fight against me . I was only a man who was working on the day , and I gave it to them .
GOLD:	“ When his accusers came here for the trial , I did n't delay . I called the case the very next day and ordered Paul brought in .

ID:	4904
INPUT:	Ibili beti Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak erakutsitako bidetik , bizirik iraun eta zoriontsu izan zaitezten , eta luzaro biziko zarete jabetzan hartuko duzuen lurraldean .
PRED:	Instead , you will live in the land the Lord your God is giving you , and you will live in a long life , and you will live in the land you have given you .
GOLD:	Stay on the path that the Lord your God has commanded you to follow . Then you will live long and prosperous lives in the land you are about to enter and occupy .

ID:	4905
INPUT:	Jakin zuten Moab , Amon , Edom eta beste herrialdeetara ihesi joanak ziren judatarrek ere , Babiloniako erregeak judatar batzuk beren herrialdean utzi zituela , eta Gedalias , Ahikamen seme eta Xafanen biloba , ezarri zuela gobernari .
PRED:	When the people of Moab heard that the people of Edom had fled to the towns of Edom and Judah had been exiled to Babylon , some of the people of Judah , along with the towns of Judah , and Azariah son of Ahikam and grandson of Ahikam and grandson of Shaphan .
GOLD:	When the Judeans in Moab , Ammon , Edom , and the other nearby countries heard that the king of Babylon had left a few people in Judah and that Gedaliah was the governor ,

ID:	4906
INPUT:	Israeldarrak , ordea , itsas erditik oinik busti gabe igaro ziren , urak ezker-eskuin zituztela harresi gisa .
PRED:	But the people of Israel saw the middle of the sea , though it was all on the south side of the Jordan Valley .
GOLD:	But the people of Israel had walked through the middle of the sea on dry ground , as the water stood up like a wall on both sides .

ID:	4907
INPUT:	Zeukan guztia Isaaki utzi zion Abrahamek .
PRED:	So Abraham left Isaac , and Isaac left him .
GOLD:	Abraham gave everything he owned to his son Isaac .

ID:	4908
INPUT:	Gerora , Absalomen alaba Maaka ere hartu zuen emazte , eta honek Abias , Atai , Ziza eta Xelomit ekarri zizkion .
PRED:	Then Abram took his wife and took his wife with his wife , and he married two wives .
GOLD:	Later Rehoboam married another cousin , Maacah , the granddaughter of Absalom . Maacah gave birth to Abijah , Attai , Ziza , and Shelomith .

ID:	4909
INPUT:	Gainerakoetarako , bereiz itzazu herri osoaren artetik gizon iaioak , Jainkoari begirune diotenak , fidagarriak eta eskupeko-zale ez direnak , eta ezarri mila , ehun , berrogeita hamar eta hamarreko taldeen buru .
PRED:	And you are all the people of Israel , from the whole community of Israel , from all the people of the land , the God of Israel , who have been appointed to serve as judges , and all the elders of Israel .
GOLD:	But select from all the people some capable , honest men who fear God and hate bribes . Appoint them as leaders over groups of one thousand , one hundred , fifty , and ten .

ID:	4910
INPUT:	Hau da zuk eta zure ondorengoek nirekiko duzuen konpromisoa : zuetako gizaseme oro erdaintzea .
PRED:	This is what you have said to me , ‘ You are my son , for you have been circumcised . '
GOLD:	This is the covenant that you and your descendants must keep : Each male among you must be circumcised .

ID:	4911
INPUT:	Hauek ere Babiloniara eramango dituzte eta hantxe geldituko dira , toki honetara berriro ekartzea neuk erabakiko dudan arte . Nik , Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	These are the people of Babylon , and they will be able to rebuild the Temple , says the Lord . I will bring them back to Babylon . ”
GOLD:	‘ They will all be carried away to Babylon and will stay there until I send for them , ' says the Lord . ‘ Then I will bring them back to Jerusalem again . ' ”

ID:	4912
INPUT:	Eremu horretatik , zati bat , karratua — berrehun eta berrogeita hamar metrokoa luze-zabalean — , tenpluarentzat izango da , eta hogeita bost metro zabaleko hutsartea izango du inguru guztian .
PRED:	From the north side of the Temple will be an end of the Temple . It will be an end of the Temple , and it will be 81/3 miles long and 75 feet wide .
GOLD:	A section of this land , measuring 875 feet by 875 feet , will be set aside for the Temple . An additional strip of land 871/2 feet wide is to be left empty all around it .

ID:	4913
INPUT:	Erantzun laster , Jauna , arnasarik gabe bainago . Ez ezkutatu niri zeure aurpegia , zulora doazenekin bat egin ez dezadan .
PRED:	I replied to the Lord , “ Do n't let me go into the prison , but do n't let me go with me . ”
GOLD:	Come quickly , Lord , and answer me , for my depression deepens.Do n't turn away from me , or I will die .

ID:	4914
INPUT:	Hauek dira edomdarren arbaso Esauren ondorengoak Seir mendialdean .
PRED:	These are the clans of Edom , the descendants of Esau , who lived in Seir .
GOLD:	This is the account of Esau 's descendants , the Edomites , who lived in the hill country of Seir .

ID:	4915
INPUT:	Baina ezin du inork mihia hezi , gaiztoa eta menderagaitza baita , pozoi hilgarriz betea .
PRED:	But no one can ever say , “ No one can suffer for the murder of the wicked . ”
GOLD:	but no one can tame the tongue . It is restless and evil , full of deadly poison .

ID:	4916
INPUT:	Hondamen Leizeak eta Herioak esaten dute : « Hari buruz zer edo zer entzun dugu , bai » .
PRED:	The grave is their ears , and their ears will say , “ We know what we have said . ”
GOLD:	Destruction and Death say , ‘ We 've heard only rumors of where wisdom can be found . '

ID:	4917
INPUT:	« Sinagogetara eta buruzagien eta agintarien aurrera eramango zaituztetenean , ez egon kezkatan nola egin edo zer esan zeuen alde ,
PRED:	“ When you are in the synagogues and present you to the officials , do n't worry about the situation . Do n't worry about what you have done .
GOLD:	“ And when you are brought to trial in the synagogues and before rulers and authorities , do n't worry about how to defend yourself or what to say ,

ID:	4918
INPUT:	Gurekin ez doala ohartu orduko , hilko litzateke ; geure aita zaharra atsekabez hilobiratuko genuke .
PRED:	If we have died , we would not die with her father 's grave . But if we were bound by a sword , we would cause her to die .
GOLD:	If he sees that the boy is not with us , our father will die . We , your servants , will indeed be responsible for sending that grieving , white-haired man to his grave .

ID:	4919
INPUT:	Jesus Jaunari eta fededun guztiei dizkiezun maitasun eta leialtasunaren berri izan baitut .
PRED:	I love the Lord Jesus and love all the people of the Lord Jesus , for I love them .
GOLD:	because I keep hearing about your faith in the Lord Jesus and your love for all of God 's people .

ID:	4920
INPUT:	Eta Jaunak esan zion Oseasi : « Jarriozu izena “ Ez-nire-herria ” , zuek ez baitzarete jadanik nire herria eta ni ez bainaiz zuen Jainkoa » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Stand up and say , ‘ Follow my people , ' but you are my people . You are my people , for I am the God of your people . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord said , “ Name him Lo-ammi — ‘ Not my people ' — for Israel is not my people , and I am not their God .

ID:	4921
INPUT:	Jaunaren eskua ez da , ez , laburregia zuek salbatzeko , ezta haren belarria eregogorregia zuei entzuteko :
PRED:	No , the Lord is not able to save you ! Do n't be afraid of those who fear him , for your faithfulness is filled with fear .
GOLD:	Listen ! The Lord 's arm is not too weak to save you , nor is his ear too deaf to hear you call .

ID:	4922
INPUT:	Eta nik erantzun : “ Iruzur egin ote diezaioke gizakiak Jainkoari , zuek niri egiten didazuen bezala ? ” “ Zertan egiten dizugu , bada , iruzur ? ” , galdetzen duzue oraindik . Hamarrenak eta dohainak ematerakoan egiten didazue iruzur .
PRED:	“ Then they say , ‘ What can you say to God ? What do you say to me ? What do you say , ‘ What do you say ? ' And why do you say , ‘ That 's why are you trying to eat ? '
GOLD:	“ Should people cheat God ? Yet you have cheated me ! “ But you ask , ‘ What do you mean ? When did we ever cheat you ? ' “ You have cheated me of the tithes and offerings due to me .

ID:	4923
INPUT:	Pauloren mintzaira , jakintsuena ez bezalakoa
PRED:	Paul 's Wise words are foolish , but they are not wise .
GOLD:	Paul 's Message of Wisdom

ID:	4924
INPUT:	( 1 Erg 22 , 1-3 )
PRED:	Joash Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Micaiah Prophesies against Ahab

ID:	4925
INPUT:	Adama , Rama , Hatzor ,
PRED:	Hazor , Hazor , Hazor ,
GOLD:	Adamah , Ramah , Hazor ,

ID:	4926
INPUT:	Senideok , hauxe da nire bihotzeko irrikarik handiena eta israeldarren alde Jainkoari eskatzen diodana : salbamenera hel daitezela .
PRED:	This is how my dear brothers and sisters , I want you to repent of their sins and turn away from God .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , the longing of my heart and my prayer to God is for the people of Israel to be saved .

ID:	4927
INPUT:	Eta dirua Aaroni eta beronen semeei eman zien , Jaunak agindu bezala .
PRED:	Then Moses gave his sons to Aaron and his sons , just as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	And Moses gave the silver for the redemption to Aaron and his sons , just as the Lord had commanded .

ID:	4928
INPUT:	Orobat , bik , batera lotaratuz , elkar dute berotuko ; bakarrik dagoena nola berotu ?
PRED:	And if you are a believer , why are you a believer ? Of course not ? Of course not !
GOLD:	Likewise , two people lying close together can keep each other warm . But how can one be warm alone ?

ID:	4929
INPUT:	Hala ere , ez diet zuen alabeikonturik eskatuko , emagaldu bihurtu direlako ; ezta zuen errainei ere , adulteriogile bihurtu direlako . Apaizak berak baitoazemagalduekin , tenpluko emagaldueki<unk> kartzen baitirasakrifizioak eskaintzeko . Eta hala , zentzugabeko herriahondamendira doa .
PRED:	But I will not turn away from you and refuse to turn away from your prostitution . You must not commit adultery . You must not commit adultery with the priests , priests , Levites , and other religious law , and they will be brought to the Lord .
GOLD:	But why should I punish themfor their prostitution and adultery ? For your men are doing the same thing , sinning with whores and shrine prostitutes.O foolish people ! You refuse to understand , so you will be destroyed .

ID:	4930
INPUT:	eta esan zion : — Ireki ekialdeko leihoa . Erregeak leihoa irekitzean , Eliseok agindu zion : — Jaurti ! Eta erregeak gezia jaurti zuenean , Eliseok esan zuen : — Jaunaren garaipen-gezia ! Siriarren kontrako garaipen-gezia ! Suntsitzeraino hondatuko dituzu siriarrak Afeken .
PRED:	Then the king said to the king , “ Get rid of the tribe of Judah . ” So the king told him , “ Get rid of the king of Aram , and go out to war against the king of Aram . ” So the king of Aram said , “ You will attack the city of Aram . ”
GOLD:	Then he commanded , “ Open that eastern window , ” and he opened it . Then he said , “ Shoot ! ” So he shot an arrow . Elisha proclaimed , “ This is the Lord 's arrow , an arrow of victory over Aram , for you will completely conquer the Arameans at Aphek . ”

ID:	4931
INPUT:	Biltzarraren zergatia
PRED:	Building the Covenant
GOLD:	The Letter for Gentile Believers

ID:	4932
INPUT:	Begira , Jaunak zeuen Jainkoak eskura ematen dizue lurraldea . Joan eta jabetu hartaz , Jaunak zuen arbasoen Jainkoak hitzeman bezala . Ez izan beldur ! Ez kikildu !
PRED:	Look , the Lord your God is giving you the land the Lord your God is giving you as your ancestors did . Do n't be afraid of them ! Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! ”
GOLD:	Look ! He has placed the land in front of you . Go and occupy it as the Lord , the God of your ancestors , has promised you . Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be discouraged ! '

ID:	4933
INPUT:	Hanani , neure anaietako bat , etorri zitzaidan Judatik , gizon-talde batekin . Erbestealditik libre gelditu ziren juduen eta Jerusalem hiriko berriak eskatu nizkien .
PRED:	But I came to my brothers and sisters , who had been brought out of the country of Judah and Jerusalem . I also brought them out of the city , and I brought them back to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Hanani , one of my brothers , came to visit me with some other men who had just arrived from Judah . I asked them about the Jews who had returned there from captivity and about how things were going in Jerusalem .

ID:	4934
INPUT:	Orduan , Joabek , erregeagana joan eta halaxe jakinarazi zion . Orduan , erregeak dei egin zion Absalomi ; hau erregeagana etorri eta lurreraino ahuspeztu zitzaion . Erregeak besarkatu egin zuen Absalom .
PRED:	Then Joab went to the king and told Absalom what he had happened to the king . Then the king called for Absalom , and he bowed low to the ground before the king .
GOLD:	So Joab told the king what Absalom had said . Then at last David summoned Absalom , who came and bowed low before the king , and the king kissed him .

ID:	4935
INPUT:	Txalupara igo zirenean , haizea baretu egin zen .
PRED:	As soon as he got into the boat , he got up into the boat .
GOLD:	When they climbed back into the boat , the wind stopped .

ID:	4936
INPUT:	Jesusek jendetzari bigarrenez jaten eman
PRED:	Jesus Predicts His Death
GOLD:	Jesus Feeds Four Thousand

ID:	4937
INPUT:	Orduan , eman zizkion Jakobek anaiari ogia eta platerkada dilista . Hark jan , edan , mahaitik altxa eta alde egin zuen . Honela gutxietsi zuen Esauk bere lehen-semetzaren eskubidea .
PRED:	Then Jacob gave Jacob his brother , Jacob , and he ate the food and drank from the ground . Then he ate the Ark of the Lord 's brother , Esau 's brother , Esau , and his brother , Esau .
GOLD:	Then Jacob gave Esau some bread and lentil stew . Esau ate the meal , then got up and left . He showed contempt for his rights as the firstborn .

ID:	4938
INPUT:	« Larunbatezzeure eginkizunak uzteneta nire egun santuannegoziotan jarduten ez baduzu , larunbatari zeure atsegin deitzeneta Jaunaren egun santuaohoragarritzat hartzen baduzu , zeure eginkizun , negozio eta arazoak baztertuz ,
PRED:	“ Stand up to the Sabbath day of your holy work , and do n't work on the Sabbath day of the Sabbath day of your holy name , and if you obey the commands of the Lord your God ,
GOLD:	“ Keep the Sabbath day holy.Do n't pursue your own interests on that day , but enjoy the Sabbathand speak of it with delight as the Lord 's holy day.Honor the Sabbath in everything you do on that day , and do n't follow your own desires or talk idly .

ID:	4939
INPUT:	« Eta zuk , gizaseme , egin negar eta intziri beraien aurrean , bihotza hautsia eta samindua bazenu bezala .
PRED:	“ Son of man , weep and weep for me , and weep for this message I said , ‘ My heart is like this ! '
GOLD:	Yes , the sword is now being sharpened and polished ; it is being prepared for the executioner .

ID:	4940
INPUT:	Ekialdetik mendebaldera , herri guztiek aitortzen dute nire izen handia , eta nonahi erretzen didate intsentsua eta behar bezalako oparia eskaintzen . Herri guztiek aitortzen dute nire izen handia — dio Jaun ahalguztidunak — .
PRED:	I am going to travel through the west of the hill country , and I will bring an incense offering to the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the people of Israel , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	But my name is honored by people of other nations from morning till night . All around the world they offer sweet incense and pure offerings in honor of my name . For my name is great among the nations , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	4941
INPUT:	Esan zidan : « Gizaseme , zulatu horma hortxe bertan » . Zulatu nuen horma eta irekidura bat egin zen .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Son of man , this man was a mother . ” And he was a mother named him there .
GOLD:	He said to me , “ Now , son of man , dig into the wall . ” So I dug into the wall and found a hidden doorway .

ID:	4942
INPUT:	Benetan diotsuet : Gizaldi honetakoak hil baino lehen gertatuko dira gauza guztiok .
PRED:	I tell you the truth , this generation will die before all these things .
GOLD:	I tell you the truth , this generation will not pass from the scene until all these things have taken place .

ID:	4943
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion hau : — Erregeak ongi baderitzo eta ni begiko baldin banau , eskari hau erregeari egoki iruditzen bazaio eta ni atsegin baldin banau , agindu beza idatziz , Hamedataren seme eta Agagen jatorriko Hamanek , asmo maltzurrez , erreinuko eskualde guztietan bizi diren juduak oro hondatzearren , emaniko gutunak baliogabe ditzaten .
PRED:	Then the king said to the king , “ If it pleases the king , then if it pleases me , the king and he will change my mind and restore it to the royal family of Ahab , and he will rebuild the kingdom of the Jews . ”
GOLD:	Esther said , “ If it please the king , and if I have found favor with him , and if he thinks it is right , and if I am pleasing to him , let there be a decree that reverses the orders of Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite , who ordered that Jews throughout all the king 's provinces should be destroyed .

ID:	4944
INPUT:	« Ondoren , neure espirituaisuriko diet gizaki guztiei . Zuen seme-alabekprofetizatu egingo dute , zuen zaharrekametsak egingo dituzte , zuen gazteek ikuskariak izango .
PRED:	“ Then I will give you the Spirit of my father and mother , who will tell you the truth , and you will be able to tell you the truth .
GOLD:	“ At the time of those events , ” says the Lord , “ when I restore the prosperity of Judah and Jerusalem ,

ID:	4945
INPUT:	Orduan , Israelgo erregeak agindu zuen : — Heldu Mikeasi ! Eraman hiri-gobernari Amonengana eta Joax printzearengana .
PRED:	Then the king of Israel ordered , “ Take him to Amon , the king of Israel ! ”
GOLD:	“ Arrest him ! ” the king of Israel ordered . “ Take him back to Amon , the governor of the city , and to my son Joash .

ID:	4946
INPUT:	Jordan ibaiaz beste aldera , Jerikotik ekialdera , Betzer aukeratu zuten , basamortuan , Rubenen leinuaren lautadan ; Ramot , Galaaden , Gaden leinuaren lurraldean , eta Golan , Baxanen , Manasesen leinuaren lurraldean .
PRED:	From the tribe of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh gave orders for the tribe of Reuben , Gad , and Gad . The half-tribe of Manasseh was located in the land of Gilead .
GOLD:	On the east side of the Jordan River , across from Jericho , the following cities were designated : Bezer , in the wilderness plain of the tribe of Reuben ; Ramoth in Gilead , in the territory of the tribe of Gad ; and Golan in Bashan , in the land of the tribe of Manasseh .

ID:	4947
INPUT:	Maaseias , Baruken semea — hau Kol-Hozerena , hau Hazaiasena , hau Adaiasena , hau Joiaribena , hau Zakariasena , hau Haxilonirena — .
PRED:	These are the names of the clans : Azariah son of Meshullam , son of Meshullam , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Mattaniah , son of Jehoiada the priest .
GOLD:	Also Maaseiah son of Baruch , son of Col-hozeh , son of Hazaiah , son of Adaiah , son of Joiarib , son of Zechariah , of the family of Shelah .

ID:	4948
INPUT:	Euri-jasa izan zen berrogei egun eta berrogei gauez .
PRED:	For forty days the floodwaters covered the earth , and there was forty days .
GOLD:	The rain continued to fall for forty days and forty nights .

ID:	4949
INPUT:	Eta morroiek belarrira esan zizkioten hitz horiek Davidi . Baina honek erantzun zien : — Gauza hutsa iruditzen al zaizue erregearen suhi izatea ? Gizon behartsu eta ezereza nauzue ni horretarako .
PRED:	“ Do you think about this ? ” the young man replied . “ Do you think you are a fool ? ” And the king replied , “ You are a man who is a poor man ? ”
GOLD:	When Saul 's men said these things to David , he replied , “ How can a poor man from a humble family afford the bride price for the daughter of a king ? ”

ID:	4950
INPUT:	Libanoko zedro handi eta tantaiaketa Baxango haritz guztiak ,
PRED:	He will destroy all the cedar trees of Lebanon , and all the cedars of Lebanon .
GOLD:	He will cut down the tall cedars of Lebanonand all the mighty oaks of Bashan .

ID:	4951
INPUT:	Horrelakoak ez beza uste Jaunarengandik ezer iritsiko duenik ,
PRED:	These things are different from the Lord , and they will say nothing about it .
GOLD:	Such people should not expect to receive anything from the Lord .

ID:	4952
INPUT:	elkarketa-etxolako sarrerara eramango du aberea , Jaunari eskaintzeko ; bestela , herritik bota egingo dute .
PRED:	If you enter the Tabernacle , you must present it to the Lord . If you present it to the Lord , you must be cut off from the community .
GOLD:	but does not bring it to the entrance of the Tabernacle to offer it to the Lord , that person will be cut off from the community .

ID:	4953
INPUT:	Jerusalemgo neskatxok , basoetako orein eta gazelen izenean , otoi , ez iratzarri ene maitea , utzi lo egiten , nahi duen arte .
PRED:	O women of Jerusalem , give you this message from the Lord : “ O women of Jerusalem , do n't let me go unpunished ! ”
GOLD:	Promise me , O women of Jerusalem , by the gazelles and wild deer , not to awaken love until the time is right .

ID:	4954
INPUT:	Zu Seirtik ateratzean , Jauna , Edomgo zelaietan barrenaaurrera egitean , lurra ikaratu egin zen , ortzia dardaratu ; hodeiek euria isuri zuten ,
PRED:	When you came from Edom , the Lord of Edom came out of Edom in the valley of Edom , the Lord called out the rain on the ground .
GOLD:	“ Lord , when you set out from Seirand marched across the fields of Edom , the earth trembled , and the cloudy skies poured down rain .

ID:	4955
INPUT:	« Zeruko izarrak bezain ugari izan ondoren , banaka batzuk besterik ez zarete bizirik geldituko , Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren esana ez egiteagatik .
PRED:	“ For some of the stars will be as numerous as the stars , so none of them will survive the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Though you become as numerous as the stars in the sky , few of you will be left because you would not listen to the Lord your God .

ID:	4956
INPUT:	Babilonia behin betiko gaitzetsia
PRED:	Hope for Israel 's People
GOLD:	A Hymn of Praise to the

ID:	4957
INPUT:	« Izan gogoan zeuek ere esklabo izan zinetela Egipton ; horregatik agintzen dizuet xedapen horiek betetzeko .
PRED:	“ Remember that your slaves were slaves in Egypt , so I am slaves to your slavery in Egypt .
GOLD:	Remember that you were slaves in the land of Egypt . That is why I am giving you this command .

ID:	4958
INPUT:	Gero , Jakobek otoitz hau egin zuen : « Jauna , gure guraso Abrahamen eta Isaaken Jainkoa , zuk esan didazu : “ Itzul zaitez zeure lurraldera eta zeure ahaideengana , eta bedeinkatuko zaitut ” .
PRED:	Then Jacob prayed , “ O Lord our God , the God of Abraham , the God of Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob , says , ‘ Go back to your land , and I will bless you and bless you . '
GOLD:	I am not worthy of all the unfailing love and faithfulness you have shown to me , your servant . When I left home and crossed the Jordan River , I owned nothing except a walking stick . Now my household fills two large camps !

ID:	4959
INPUT:	Jesus Hamaikei eta ikasleei agertu
PRED:	Jesus and the disciples
GOLD:	Jesus Appears to the Disciples

ID:	4960
INPUT:	Ez dugu inola ere Jaunaren kontra errebelatu nahi izan , ez Jaunarengandik aldendu , ezta Jaunaren , gure Jainkoaren , egoitza aurrean dagoen aldareaz gainera , erre-opariak , labore-opariak eta gainerako sakrifizioak eskaintzeko beste bat eraiki ere » .
PRED:	So we must not worship the Lord our God . We must not offer sacrifices to the Lord our God . We must not offer any burnt offerings to the Lord our God . ”
GOLD:	Far be it from us to rebel against the Lord or turn away from him by building our own altar for burnt offerings , grain offerings , or sacrifices . Only the altar of the Lord our God that stands in front of the Tabernacle may be used for that purpose . ”

ID:	4961
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	4962
INPUT:	zezenen eta akerren odolak ez baititzake bekatuak desegin .
PRED:	Their actions are crooked , and their actions are never satisfied .
GOLD:	For it is not possible for the blood of bulls and goats to take away sins .

ID:	4963
INPUT:	Zeren indar gaizto eta misteriotsu hori lanean ari da dagoeneko ; baina orain erabat agertzea galarazten dion hura desagertu bezain laster ,
PRED:	For when he speaks to the wicked , he will happen to the thunder of the wicked , but now it will soon be as soon as soon as he was revealed .
GOLD:	For this lawlessness is already at work secretly , and it will remain secret until the one who is holding it back steps out of the way .

ID:	4964
INPUT:	Entzun , zeru-lurrok ! Honela mintzo da Jauna : « Haurrak sortu ditut eta hazi , baina aurka altxatu zaizkit .
PRED:	Listen to this message from heaven : “ O Lord , I have become pregnant and gave birth to a child .
GOLD:	Listen , O heavens ! Pay attention , earth ! This is what the Lord says : “ The children I raised and cared forhave rebelled against me .

ID:	4965
INPUT:	Zeuk utzi nauzu , zeuk bizkarra eman . Hala , zure aurka luzatu dut eskua , zu suntsitzeko , zutaz erruki izateaz aspertuta .
PRED:	You have turned me and turned me away , but you have turned me into your hand , and I will destroy you .
GOLD:	You have abandoned meand turned your back on me , ” says the Lord . “ Therefore , I will raise my fist to destroy you.I am tired of always giving you another chance .

ID:	4966
INPUT:	Izugarrizko eskarmentu izango dira munduko erreinu guztientzat ; lotsaizun eta iseka-gai izango dira , koplak aterako dizkiete eta madarikatu egingo jaurtiko ditudan toki guztietan .
PRED:	And you will be able to be a sign to all the kingdoms of the earth , and you will be able to stand up to the nations of the earth . They will mock you and destroy all the nations .
GOLD:	I will make them an object of horror and a symbol of evil to every nation on earth . They will be disgraced and mocked , taunted and cursed , wherever I scatter them .

ID:	4967
INPUT:	« Zuei , nire artaldekoei , hau diotsuet nik , Jainko Jaunak : Nik erabakiko dut ardien arteko auzia , ahari eta akerren artekoa .
PRED:	“ I tell you the truth , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will judge between the sheep and goats , goats , sheep , goats , and goats .
GOLD:	“ And as for you , my flock , this is what the Sovereign Lord says to his people : I will judge between one animal of the flock and another , separating the sheep from the goats .

ID:	4968
INPUT:	baina Nekok mezulariak bidali zizkion esatera : « Ez dugu deus ere elkarren kontra , Judako errege . Ez nator zure kontra , gerra egiten ari zaidan beste errege-etxe baten kontra baizik . Bizkor ibiltzeko esan dit Jainkoak . Ez jarri zuk eragozpenik Jainkoari , neure alde baitut ; bestela , hondatu egingo zaitu » .
PRED:	But many of them sent messengers to tell him , “ We have no king to fight against the king of Judah . We have not rebelled against the king of Judah , but I will destroy you , but I will not destroy you . ”
GOLD:	But King Neco sent messengers to Josiah with this message : “ What do you want with me , king of Judah ? I have no quarrel with you today ! I am on my way to fight another nation , and God has told me to hurry ! Do not interfere with God , who is with me , or he will destroy you . ”

ID:	4969
INPUT:	ardoa kopa handitan edaten duzue , olio usaintsu onenezigurzten zarete . Eta ez zaizue axolaIsrael herriaren hondamendia !
PRED:	You have made a great cup of wine with olive oil and fragrant incense , for you have rejected the people of Israel .
GOLD:	You drink wine by the bowlfuland perfume yourselves with fragrant lotions.You care nothing about the ruin of your nation .

ID:	4970
INPUT:	Eliudek Eleazar ; Eleazarrek Matan ; Matanek Jakob ,
PRED:	Eleazar was leader of the priest . Manasseh was leader of the father of Jacob .
GOLD:	Eliud was the father of Eleazar.Eleazar was the father of Matthan.Matthan was the father of Jacob .

ID:	4971
INPUT:	Orduan , israeldar elkarte osoa oihu batean hasi zen eta gau osoa negarrez eman zuen .
PRED:	Then the whole community of Israel began to shout , and the whole community of Israel began to shout .
GOLD:	Then the whole community began weeping aloud , and they cried all night .

ID:	4972
INPUT:	Harritu zen Pilato ordurako hila izateaz , eta ehuntariari dei egin eta galdetu zion ea egia zen hilda zegoela .
PRED:	So Pilate called out to the Roman officer , and he called out to the Roman officer , and he was dead .
GOLD:	Pilate could n't believe that Jesus was already dead , so he called for the Roman officer and asked if he had died yet .

ID:	4973
INPUT:	Dorreak eraiki zituen Jerusalemen , Kantoiko ate gainean , Haranekoaren gainean eta Izkinan , eta sendotu egin zituen .
PRED:	So he built up the Temple of the Lord in Jerusalem , and he tore down his head on his head , and he healed the temple of Jezreel .
GOLD:	Uzziah built fortified towers in Jerusalem at the Corner Gate , at the Valley Gate , and at the angle in the wall .

ID:	4974
INPUT:	Aaronek erantzun zien : — Kendu zeuen emazte eta seme-alabei urrezko belarritakoak eta ekarzkidazue .
PRED:	“ Get up , ” Aaron replied . “ Take your children and your children and your children and your children . ”
GOLD:	So Aaron said , “ Take the gold rings from the ears of your wives and sons and daughters , and bring them to me . ”

ID:	4975
INPUT:	Kontuz lagun gaiztoekin
PRED:	Warning against False Prophets
GOLD:	Wisdom Shouts in the Streets

ID:	4976
INPUT:	Beldurtu ziren Joseren senideak haren etxera eraman zituztenean . Pentsatu zuten : « Gari-zakuetan aurreko txandan itzulitako diruarengatik eramaten gaituzte . Orain , gainera oldartuko zaizkigu , esklabotzat hartzeko , geure asto eta guzti » .
PRED:	The brothers were afraid of Joseph 's brothers , and they were afraid of them . “ We are going to go to war against you , ” they said . “ We are going to go out to war against us . ”
GOLD:	The brothers were terrified when they saw that they were being taken into Joseph 's house . “ It 's because of the money someone put in our sacks last time we were here , ” they said . “ He plans to pretend that we stole it . Then he will seize us , make us slaves , and take our donkeys . ”

ID:	4977
INPUT:	biziaren sorburua hil zenuten , baina Jainkoak piztu egin du hildakoen artetik ; gu gara horren testigu .
PRED:	And we died because we had raised from the dead , but God raised us from the dead . We have been raised from the dead .
GOLD:	You killed the author of life , but God raised him from the dead . And we are witnesses of this fact !

ID:	4978
INPUT:	Joan zitzaien hirugarren aldiz eta esan zien : « Egin lo eta hartu atseden ! Kito ! Iritsi da ordua : hona Gizonaren Semea bekatarien eskuetara emana .
PRED:	Then Joseph went to the third time and said , “ Get up ! The Son of Man is coming , but the Son of Man is coming to the Son of Man . ”
GOLD:	When he returned to them the third time , he said , “ Go ahead and sleep . Have your rest . But no — the time has come . The Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners .

ID:	4979
INPUT:	Beren ahaide Bakbukiasek eta Unik laguntzen zieten betebehar horretan .
PRED:	This was the father of Lamech , who was the father of Bethuel .
GOLD:	Their associates , Bakbukiah and Unni , stood opposite them during the service .

ID:	4980
INPUT:	Baina jabe izateko bertara sartu zirenean , ez ziren zure esaneko izan , ez zituzten zure legeak bete , ez zuten zuk aginduaren arabera jokatu . Horregatik bidali diezu zoritxar handi hau .
PRED:	But they did n't know what they had done . They did n't tell them , but they did n't obey them because you did n't obey the commands you have warned them , ‘ You have warned us about this terrible troubles . ' ”
GOLD:	Our ancestors came and conquered it and lived in it , but they refused to obey you or follow your word . They have not done anything you commanded . That is why you have sent this terrible disaster upon them .

ID:	4981
INPUT:	Asper-asper egina daukazue Jauna zeuen hizketaz . « Zertan asperrarazi dugu , bada ? » , galdetzen duzue hala ere . Hona , gaizki egiten duena Jainkoari begiko eta atsegin zaiola esaten duzuelako , eta Jainkoa zuzena ote den galdezka ari zaretelako .
PRED:	“ O Lord , please forgive me , ” says the Lord . “ Why are you doing wrong ? ” I asked . “ Why do you think you are wrong ? ”
GOLD:	You have wearied the Lord with your words . “ How have we wearied him ? ” you ask.You have wearied him by saying that all who do evil are good in the Lord 's sight , and he is pleased with them . You have wearied him by asking , “ Where is the God of justice ? ”

ID:	4982
INPUT:	Hiltzeko moduko zurezko tresna jaurtiz norbait jo eta hiltzen duena , hilketa-errudun da : heriotzara emango dute .
PRED:	Anyone who grabbed him must kill him and throw him into the dead . Anyone who killed him must be put to death .
GOLD:	Or if someone strikes and kills another person with a wooden object , it is murder , and the murderer must be put to death .

ID:	4983
INPUT:	Horrez gain , legamiadun ogia eskainiko da , esker onez eskaintzen den elkartasun-opariarekin batera .
PRED:	So if you present an offering to the Lord , you must present a peace offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	This peace offering of thanksgiving must also be accompanied by loaves of bread made with yeast .

ID:	4984
INPUT:	Beste aingeru bat ikusi nuen ekialdetik igotzen , Jainko biziaren zigilua zuelarik , eta ozenki egin zien deiadar lurra eta itsasoa hondatzeko ahalmena eman zitzaien lau aingeruei ,
PRED:	Then I saw another angel coming from heaven and saw the angel of God coming out of the sea , and he called the angel of the sea and the great sea .
GOLD:	And I saw another angel coming up from the east , carrying the seal of the living God . And he shouted to those four angels , who had been given power to harm land and sea ,

ID:	4985
INPUT:	« Zure baitan Israelgo printzeek odola isurtzen dute , nor bere indarraz baliatuz .
PRED:	“ For the prince of Israel , says the Lord , ‘ You must commit murder . '
GOLD:	“ Every leader in Israel who lives within your walls is bent on murder .

ID:	4986
INPUT:	esanez : « Ez ekarri hona preso horiek , Jaunaren aurrean bekatu egingo baikenuke . Bekatu eta oker gehiago egin nahi al duzue , gure errua aski handia ez delakoan eta Jauna Israelen kontra aski haserre eta sumindua ez dagoelakoan ? »
PRED:	“ Do n't you realize that the Lord has sinned against you , for you have rebelled against the Lord , and you have rebelled against the king of Israel and rebelled against the Lord and against Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ You must not bring the prisoners here ! ” they declared . “ We can not afford to add to our sins and guilt . Our guilt is already great , and the Lord 's fierce anger is already turned against Israel . ”

ID:	4987
INPUT:	Teofilo agurgarria , askok ekin diote gure artean izan diren gertakarien historia idazteari ,
PRED:	Many of the people in Thessalonica , the captain of the guard ; the captain of the guard ;
GOLD:	Many people have set out to write accounts about the events that have been fulfilled among us .

ID:	4988
INPUT:	Horregatik , hala diot nik , Jaunak : Neure haserrea eta sumina hustuko ditut toki honen gain , gizaki eta abere , landako zuhaitz eta lurreko fruituen gain : itzaliko ez den sua izango da » .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says : I will pour out my fury on my fierce anger , and I will pour out my fury on the ground , and I will not produce a tree on the ground . ”
GOLD:	So this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ I will pour out my terrible fury on this place . Its people , animals , trees , and crops will be consumed by the unquenchable fire of my anger . ”

ID:	4989
INPUT:	Kristorengan uste on izan eta bizi
PRED:	A Message about Christ
GOLD:	Pressing toward the Goal

ID:	4990
INPUT:	Zuzena zarelako , Jauna , urrundu Jerusalemdik , zeure hiri eta mendi santutik , zeure haserrea eta sumina . Gure hoben eta gurasoen egintza gaiztoengatik irainez betetzen dituzte Jerusalem eta zure herria inguruan bizi diren guztiek .
PRED:	You are the Lord , the God of Jerusalem , from your holy mountain , and your anger is poured out on your holy mountain . The Lord has made you holy because of your ancestors , and all the evil things you have done in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	In view of all your faithful mercies , Lord , please turn your furious anger away from your city Jerusalem , your holy mountain . All the neighboring nations mock Jerusalem and your people because of our sins and the sins of our ancestors .

ID:	4991
INPUT:	« Orduan , nagusiagatik gaizki-esaka hasi ziren ; eta esan zioten berari :
PRED:	“ Then the crowd began to speak evil , and they began to tell him ,
GOLD:	When they received their pay , they protested to the owner ,

ID:	4992
INPUT:	Eta zuri , artzain-dorre , Sion hiriko gotorleku horri , berriro itzuliko zaizuantzinako agintea , zuri , Jerusalem hiriburu , lehen zenuen erregetza » .
PRED:	And I will return to you in the fortified towns of Jerusalem , and you will return to the city of Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	As for you , Jerusalem , the citadel of God 's people , your royal might and powerwill come back to you again.The kingship will be restoredto my precious Jerusalem .

ID:	4993
INPUT:	Hauei guztiei bidali zizkieten emaitzak : Betelen , Negeveko Ramoten , Jatiren ,
PRED:	These are the names of the tribes of Judah : The kings of the Negev , Ramah ,
GOLD:	The gifts were sent to the people of the following towns David had visited : Bethel , Ramoth-negev , Jattir ,

ID:	4994
INPUT:	Zuen artetik ere aterako dira batzuk irakaspen okerrak zabalduz , ikasleak beren atzetik eramateko .
PRED:	Some of your followers will be taught by the Good News that Paul should teach them to preach the Good News .
GOLD:	Even some men from your own group will rise up and distort the truth in order to draw a following .

ID:	4995
INPUT:	Apaizburuek eta zaharrek salaketa asko egiten zuten haren aurka , baina hark ez zuen ezer erantzuten .
PRED:	The leading priests and the leading priests and the leading priests , but they did n't answer him .
GOLD:	But when the leading priests and the elders made their accusations against him , Jesus remained silent .

ID:	4996
INPUT:	zeren Jaunaren gorputza dela kontuan izan gabe jan-edaten duenak , bere gaitzespena baitu jaten eta edaten .
PRED:	For the body of the Lord is not innocent , but anyone who eats the dead will die .
GOLD:	For if you eat the bread or drink the cup without honoring the body of Christ , you are eating and drinking God 's judgment upon yourself .

ID:	4997
INPUT:	Jauna zuen Jainkoa zuekin doa , etsaien aurka borrokatzeko eta garaipena zuei emateko ” .
PRED:	For the Lord your God is with you , and he will fight your enemies . ' ”
GOLD:	For the Lord your God is going with you ! He will fight for you against your enemies , and he will give you victory ! '

ID:	4998
INPUT:	Egin diezaiogun goian gelatxo bat , horma batzuk jasoz ; ohea , mahaia , aulkia eta argiontzia ipiniko dizkiogu bertan . Horrela , etxera etortzean , geldi dadila bertan .
PRED:	In that day some of you will know that some of us is dead , and we will find some bread and new wine . So we will stay in the house . ”
GOLD:	Let 's build a small room for him on the roof and furnish it with a bed , a table , a chair , and a lamp . Then he will have a place to stay whenever he comes by . ”

ID:	4999
INPUT:	Maita ezazue , bada , etorkina , zeuek ere etorkin izan baitzineten Egipton .
PRED:	So be patient with you , for you have lived in Egypt .
GOLD:	So you , too , must show love to foreigners , for you yourselves were once foreigners in the land of Egypt .

ID:	5000
INPUT:	Honela eratua zegoen , beraz , santutegia . Lehenengo aldean edozein garaitan sartzen dira apaizak beren kultu-zerbitzua betetzeko ;
PRED:	These are the instructions for the priests , who work on the first day must be purified by the priests and Levites .
GOLD:	When these things were all in place , the priests regularly entered the first room as they performed their religious duties .

ID:	5001
INPUT:	Salomonek , orduan : — Jator jokatzen badu , ez zaio ile bat ere eroriko lurrera ; baina nolabaiteko gaiztakeriarik aurkitzen badiogu , heriotza izango du .
PRED:	But Solomon replied , “ If you do n't go , we will not go to war against the earth . But if we do n't have any other evil deeds , we will be put to death . ”
GOLD:	Solomon replied , “ If he proves himself to be loyal , not a hair on his head will be touched . But if he makes trouble , he will die . ”

ID:	5002
INPUT:	Lurrak , zabaldurik , irentsi egin zituen Korerekin batera , honen taldea hil eta suak berrehun eta berrogeita hamar gizon suntsitu zituenean ; herriaren eskarmenturako izan zen hori .
PRED:	Then the earth opened the boat with Korah , the people of Reuben , and all the people of Israel died . After that , Joshua killed 10,000 men in all the land .
GOLD:	But the earth opened up its mouth and swallowed them with Korah , and fire devoured 250 of their followers . This served as a warning to the entire nation of Israel .

ID:	5003
INPUT:	Lursaila Jubileu Urtetik bertatik sagaratzen bada , ezarritako prezioa ordainduko da ;
PRED:	If the land is set free from the Year of Jubilee , it will be set free from the Year of Jubilee .
GOLD:	If the field is dedicated to the Lord in the Year of Jubilee , then the entire assessment will apply .

ID:	5004
INPUT:	Hartu arkume ederrena ; gero , pilatu azpian egurra , irakin dezala borbor , hezurrak ere ongi egosteko .
PRED:	As a young woman approached , she must go with her as a beautiful heifer , and her bones will be like a murderer . ”
GOLD:	Use only the best sheep from the flock , and heap fuel on the fire beneath the pot.Bring the pot to a boil , and cook the bones along with the meat .

ID:	5005
INPUT:	« Eleazar apaiza eta Nunen seme Josue izango dira lurraldearen banaketa egingo dutenak ;
PRED:	“ Eleazar son of Nun , Joshua son of Nun , Joshua son of Nun , and Joshua son of Nun .
GOLD:	“ Eleazar the priest and Joshua son of Nun are the men designated to divide the grants of land among the people .

ID:	5006
INPUT:	Hogeita hamasei mila gudari zenbatu zituzten egun hartan hirietatik etorriak , Gibeako bertako bizilagunak sartu gabe .
PRED:	There was eight days old when they entered the town of Gibeah , each month old or older among the people who entered the town .
GOLD:	In all , 26,000 of their warriors armed with swords arrived in Gibeah to join the 700 elite troops who lived there .

ID:	5007
INPUT:	Izu-ikarak menpean hartzen nau , haizea bezala desagertzen nire duintasuna , hodeia bezala ezerezten nire ongizatea .
PRED:	My strength is like a warrior who makes me beautiful , like a crown of wood , like a crown of wood .
GOLD:	I live in terror now.My honor has blown away in the wind , and my prosperity has vanished like a cloud .

ID:	5008
INPUT:	Eta zuek gure eta Jaunaren ereduari jarraitu zenioten , atsekabe askoren artean izanik ere , Espiritu Santuaren pozez onartu baitzenuten Jainkoaren mezua .
PRED:	And you refused to obey the word of the Lord our God and keep on praying for the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	So you received the message with joy from the Holy Spirit in spite of the severe suffering it brought you . In this way , you imitated both us and the Lord .

ID:	5009
INPUT:	Bazen Efraimgo mendialdean Elkana zeritzan Ramako gizaseme bat , Tzufen ondorengoetakoa . Jerohamen semea zen , eta hau Elihurena , eta hau Tohurena , eta hau Tzufena . Elkana efratar leinukoa zen .
PRED:	One of the tribe of Ephraim , a descendant of the tribe of Ephraim , a descendant of the tribe of Ephraim , was the ancestor of the tribe of Ephraim , a descendant of Ephraim , was the tribe of Ephraim .
GOLD:	There was a man named Elkanah who lived in Ramah in the region of Zuph in the hill country of Ephraim . He was the son of Jeroham , son of Elihu , son of Tohu , son of Zuph , of Ephraim .

ID:	5010
INPUT:	Amaitu dira labore-opariaketa isur-opariak Jaunaren etxean . Dolu dagite apaizek , Jaunaren zerbitzariek .
PRED:	The priests and Levites are allowed to offer sacrifices to the Lord 's Temple , and the priests are allowed to serve the Lord .
GOLD:	For there is no grain or wineto offer at the Temple of the Lord.So the priests are in mourning.The ministers of the Lord are weeping .

ID:	5011
INPUT:	faraoia eta honen gudarostea Itsaso Gorrian amildu zituen , haren maitasuna betikoa baita .
PRED:	Pharaoh threw his troops into the Red Sea , and he fell into the Red Sea . His faithful love endures forever .
GOLD:	but he hurled Pharaoh and his army into the Red Sea.His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	5012
INPUT:	Nik eman diot landa zabala bizitoki , lurralde gazia , egoitza izan dezan .
PRED:	I have built a field for a land , a land where I have lived for the land where I have lived .
GOLD:	I have placed it in the wilderness ; its home is the wasteland .

ID:	5013
INPUT:	Eta honela esan zuen : « Hara , zerua zabalik ikusten dut eta Gizonaren Semea zutik Jainkoaren eskuinaldean » .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Look , I see the Son of Man coming down from heaven and see the Son of Man coming from heaven . ”
GOLD:	And he told them , “ Look , I see the heavens opened and the Son of Man standing in the place of honor at God 's right hand ! ”

ID:	5014
INPUT:	Orduan , ikasleetako batzuk honela ari ziren beren artean : « Zer ote da esaten digun hau : “ Gutxi barru ez nauzue gehiago ikusiko , baina pixka bat geroago , berriro ikusiko nauzue ” eta “ Aitarengana noa ” ?
PRED:	Then some of the disciples began talking about this . “ What 's this ? ” they said , “ This is only a little while you see me , but you will see me again . ”
GOLD:	Some of the disciples asked each other , “ What does he mean when he says , ‘ In a little while you wo n't see me , but then you will see me , ' and ‘ I am going to the Father ' ?

ID:	5015
INPUT:	Pedro , Santiago eta Joan eraman zituen berekin . Ikara eta larria sentitzen hasi zen ,
PRED:	Meanwhile , Peter took Peter and John , James , and John , and he healed him .
GOLD:	He took Peter , James , and John with him , and he became deeply troubled and distressed .

ID:	5016
INPUT:	Hala , lehertu egin da nire haserre-sumina , eta erre egin ditu Judako hiriak eta Jerusalemgo kaleak : hondamendi eta eremu bihurtu dira , eta halaxe daude orain .
PRED:	But I am very angry with the nations of Judah and Jerusalem , and the cities of Judah will become desolate and desolate . They will become desolate and desolate .
GOLD:	And so my fury boiled over and fell like fire on the towns of Judah and into the streets of Jerusalem , and they are still a desolate ruin today .

ID:	5017
INPUT:	Indar handia izango du eta izugarrizko hondamena egingo . Ongi aterako da bere egintza guztietan , jende ahaltsua eta herri santua bera ere suntsitu arte .
PRED:	All the nations of the earth will be destroyed , and all the nations will be destroyed , and all the nations will be destroyed .
GOLD:	He will become very strong , but not by his own power . He will cause a shocking amount of destruction and succeed in everything he does . He will destroy powerful leaders and devastate the holy people .

ID:	5018
INPUT:	Huts eragiten diet aztien zantzuei , zentzugabe bihurtzen igarleak ; jakintsuak hankaz gora botatzeneta haien zientziazorakeria bilakarazten .
PRED:	I tell you the truth , but I do n't want to show mercy to those who are wise and wrong to show mercy to those who do wrong .
GOLD:	I expose the false prophets as liarsand make fools of fortune-tellers.I cause the wise to give bad advice , thus proving them to be fools .

ID:	5019
INPUT:	Zeren eta judu-elkartetik bota egingo baitzaituztete ; are gehiago , badator ordua , zuek hilko zaituztenak Jainkoari kultu ematen diola uste izango duena .
PRED:	For I will drive you out of the Jews , and you will be condemned to repent of their sins . But they will be condemned to worship God .
GOLD:	For you will be expelled from the synagogues , and the time is coming when those who kill you will think they are doing a holy service for God .

ID:	5020
INPUT:	Jakobek erantzun zion bere ama Rebekari : — Baina Esau iletsua da , eta ni azal leunekoa .
PRED:	Jacob replied , “ My mother is Esau , but Rebekah is poor and needy . ”
GOLD:	“ But look , ” Jacob replied to Rebekah , “ my brother , Esau , is a hairy man , and my skin is smooth .

ID:	5021
INPUT:	Idatzia Danielek azaldu
PRED:	Daniel Calls for Daniel
GOLD:	Daniel Explains the Writing

ID:	5022
INPUT:	Giza indarra baizik ez du horrek ; guk , ordea , Jauna , geure Jainkoa , dugu geurekin , laguntzeko eta gurekin borrokatzeko » . Judako errege Ezekiasen hitz hauek bizkortu egin zuten herria .
PRED:	We are not greater than we are , but the Lord our God has given us victory over our people , and we will fight against the kings of Judah . ”
GOLD:	He may have a great army , but they are merely men . We have the Lord our God to help us and to fight our battles for us ! ” Hezekiah 's words greatly encouraged the people .

ID:	5023
INPUT:	Egun osoan gudukatu zen Abimelek hiriaren kontra , hartu eta hango bizilagun guztiak hil zituen arte . Gero , hiria desegin eta gatzez estali zuen .
PRED:	About that time Abimelech attacked Abimelech , and he killed all the towns of the town , and he killed all his sons and killed them .
GOLD:	The battle went on all day before Abimelech finally captured the city . He killed the people , leveled the city , and scattered salt all over the ground .

ID:	5024
INPUT:	Esan zidan Jaunak : « Ikusten al duzu , gizaseme ? Bada , ikusiko duzu oraindik hau baino higuingarritasun handiagorik » .
PRED:	“ Have you seen me ? ” the Lord asked me , “ Have you seen me more detestable than these detestable sins ? ”
GOLD:	“ Have you seen this ? ” he asked . “ But I will show you even more detestable sins than these ! ”

ID:	5025
INPUT:	Zenbatu zituen Saulek Bezek-en : hirurehun mila israeldar ziren eta hogeita hamar mila Judako seme .
PRED:	Saul took the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant , and he took the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant .
GOLD:	When Saul mobilized them at Bezek , he found that there were 300,000 men from Israel and 30,000 men from Judah .

ID:	5026
INPUT:	Oroitu zen Pedro , eta Jesusi esan zion : — Maisu , begira , zuk madarikatutako pikondoa dena ihartu da .
PRED:	Peter and said to him , “ Teacher , Teacher , the one who has taken away the fig tree . ”
GOLD:	Peter remembered what Jesus had said to the tree on the previous day and exclaimed , “ Look , Rabbi ! The fig tree you cursed has withered and died ! ”

ID:	5027
INPUT:	Salba nazazu lehoiaren ahotik , bufaloen adarretatik . Erantzun didazu !
PRED:	You are like a lion , a lion from the forest ; you answer me from your mouth .
GOLD:	I will proclaim your name to my brothers and sisters.I will praise you among your assembled people .

ID:	5028
INPUT:	Jonasek Niniven mezua aldarrikatu . Ninivetarren konbertsioa
PRED:	The Land Given to Nineveh and the land of Nineveh .
GOLD:	Jonah Goes to Nineveh

ID:	5029
INPUT:	Ez dute gogoeta egiten , ez dute zentzurik , ez ulermenik , esateko : « Egurraren erdia sutara bota dut , ogia eta okela txingarretan erre eta jan egin dut . Eta gainerakoarekin , jainko-irudi higuingarria egin ? Egur-puska baten aurrean ahuspeztu ? »
PRED:	Do n't you understand the meaning of the word ? Do n't you understand the meaning of the fire ? ” says the Lord , “ I 'm a fire and burning incense to the gods of the fire and burning incense on the ground ? ”
GOLD:	The person who made the idol never stops to reflect , “ Why , it 's just a block of wood ! I burned half of it for heatand used it to bake my bread and roast my meat.How can the rest of it be a god ? Should I bow down to worship a piece of wood ? ”

ID:	5030
INPUT:	Mikeasek erantzun : — Zeuk ikusiko duzu , gelaz gela gordeka joan beharko duzun egunean .
PRED:	But Micaiah replied , “ You will find out that you wo n't find out the secret room . ”
GOLD:	And Micaiah replied , “ You will find out soon enough when you are trying to hide in some secret room ! ”

ID:	5031
INPUT:	Honela esan zion , bada , Seraiasi : « Babiloniara iristean , irakurri hitz horiek denen aurrean .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to the people , “ Go to Babylon , where the people of Babylon are going to read to me .
GOLD:	He said to Seraiah , “ When you get to Babylon , read aloud everything on this scroll .

ID:	5032
INPUT:	Buruzapiekin eta sandaliekin jarraituko duzue , ez duzue dolu egingo , ezta negarrik ere , baizik eta zeuen erruengatik galduko zarete eta elkarren artean jardungo negar-zotinka .
PRED:	You must present them to me and make them holy . You must not offer any other alcoholic drink any other alcoholic drink from the guilt of the community of Israel , and you will be scattered among the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Your heads will remain covered , and your sandals will not be taken off . You will not mourn or weep , but you will waste away because of your sins . You will groan among yourselves for all the evil you have done .

ID:	5033
INPUT:	Jendeak oihu dagi : « Geure bekatueksalatzen bagaituzte ere , ekin , Jauna , zeu zarena zarelako ! Asko dira gure errebeldiak , zure aurka egin dugu bekatu .
PRED:	“ O people of Israel , ” the people shouted . “ If you do n't know , you will be angry with us , O Lord , you have sinned against us . ”
GOLD:	The people say , “ Our wickedness has caught up with us , Lord , but help us for the sake of your own reputation.We have turned away from youand sinned against you again and again .

ID:	5034
INPUT:	Hark epaituko ditu nazioak , erabakiko herrialde askoren auziak . Ezpatak golde bihurtuko dituzteeta lantzak igitai . Ez da nazioriknazioren aurka altxatuko , ez dira gehiagogudurako prestatuko .
PRED:	The Lord will judge the nations with a sword , with a sword , a severe sword will devour them . They will devour their swords and spears , spears , bows , bows , and arrows will never stand against them .
GOLD:	The Lord will mediate between nationsand will settle international disputes.They will hammer their swords into plowsharesand their spears into pruning hooks.Nation will no longer fight against nation , nor train for war anymore .

ID:	5035
INPUT:	Hala ere , jende arrotz hark , bizi zen hiri guztietan , nork bere jainkoen irudiak egin eta samariarrek muinoetan eraikitako jauretxeetan ezarri zituen .
PRED:	But the people of the world also lived in the towns of the Lord , and he built pagan shrines in the temple of the gods .
GOLD:	But these various groups of foreigners also continued to worship their own gods . In town after town where they lived , they placed their idols at the pagan shrines that the people of Samaria had built .

ID:	5036
INPUT:	Gezurrezkoa da xarma , hutsala edertasuna ; goresgarria , ordea , Jauna errespetatzen duen emakumea .
PRED:	His pride is like a lovely robe , but the glory of the Lord is broken . But the glory of the Lord is filled with victory .
GOLD:	Charm is deceptive , and beauty does not last ; but a woman who fears the Lord will be greatly praised .

ID:	5037
INPUT:	Gaizki tratatu zuten , eta bera apaldu egin zen , ahorik zabaldu gabe ; hiltzera daramatenarkumeak bezala , moztaileen aurrean isilik dagoenardiak bezala , ez zuen ahorik zabaldu .
PRED:	So they struck the wicked and struck them down , so they could not be silent before the dead . But when they were silent , they could not be silent before their husband , just as they were dead .
GOLD:	He was oppressed and treated harshly , yet he never said a word.He was led like a lamb to the slaughter.And as a sheep is silent before the shearers , he did not open his mouth .

ID:	5038
INPUT:	Gaiztakeria ez da oinarri sendoa inorentzat ; zintzoaren sustraia , ordea , iraunkorra .
PRED:	No , it is a reward for the godly , but it is a reward for the godly .
GOLD:	Wickedness never brings stability , but the godly have deep roots .

ID:	5039
INPUT:	eta beteko dut zuen gurasoei zin egindakoa , alegia , esnea eta eztia darizkion lurraldea emango niela ” . Lurralde hori orain daukazuena da , hain zuzen » . Nik erantzun nion : « Bai , Jauna » .
PRED:	I will give you a solemn oath to your ancestors , a land flowing with milk , honey , honey , honey , and honey , and honey , ” says the Lord . “ Yes , I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	I said this so I could keep my promise to your ancestors to give you a land flowing with milk and honey — the land you live in today . ' ” Then I replied , “ Amen , Lord ! May it be so . ”

ID:	5040
INPUT:	kanta haren omenez , eman ohore hari gorespenez .
PRED:	And he gave thanks to his praises to him forever .
GOLD:	Sing about the glory of his name ! Tell the world how glorious he is .

ID:	5041
INPUT:	sasi eta laharrak haziko diranire herriaren lurraldean ; dolu egin , bai , alaitasunez beterik zeudenetxeengatik , hiri festazaleagatik .
PRED:	I began to bring my people out of the land , and they have been filled with grief . They have been filled with grief to the Lord 's Temple .
GOLD:	For your land will be overgrown with thorns and briers.Your joyful homes and happy towns will be gone .

ID:	5042
INPUT:	« Honela agintzen du Pertsiako errege Zirok : Lurreko erreinu guztiak eman dizkit Jaunak , zeruetako Jainkoak , eta Judako Jerusalemen berari tenplua eraikitzeko agindu dit .
PRED:	“ This is what King Cyrus of Persia , King Cyrus of Persia , says the Lord , the God of Judah , have given me the Temple of the Lord , and he has given me .
GOLD:	“ This is what King Cyrus of Persia says : “ The Lord , the God of heaven , has given me all the kingdoms of the earth . He has appointed me to build him a Temple at Jerusalem , which is in Judah .

ID:	5043
INPUT:	Ez nahasi zuen inguruan gelditzen diren arrotzekin , ez aipatu ere egin horien jainkoen izenak , ez egin zinik beraien izenean , ez gurtu eta ez ahuspeztu beraien aurrean .
PRED:	So he did not worship the gods of his father , or he did not worship other gods or worship other gods . He did not worship the gods of his gods , nor bowed low before him .
GOLD:	Make sure you do not associate with the other people still remaining in the land . Do not even mention the names of their gods , much less swear by them or serve them or worship them .

ID:	5044
INPUT:	Ondoren , esan zion Xafan idazkariak erregeari : — Hilkias apaizak liburu hau eman dit . Eta Xafanek irakurri egin zuen liburua erregearen aitzinean .
PRED:	Then Shaphan said to Shaphan , “ Shaphan the priest , the priest , and he wrote this scroll to the king . ” So Shaphan read it to the Book of the king .
GOLD:	Shaphan also told the king , “ Hilkiah the priest has given me a scroll . ” So Shaphan read it to the king .

ID:	5045
INPUT:	Dolu-egunak amaitu zirenean , honela mintzatu zitzaien Jose faraoiaren jauregikoei : « Gogoko banauzue , esaiozue , arren , faraoiari :
PRED:	When Joseph was in mourning , he said to Pharaoh , “ Let 's go to Pharaoh , for he said to Pharaoh , “ Let me go to Pharaoh 's palace .
GOLD:	When the period of mourning was over , Joseph approached Pharaoh 's advisers and said , “ Please do me this favor and speak to Pharaoh on my behalf .

ID:	5046
INPUT:	Hiriaren lau aldeetan ehun eta hogeita bost metro zabaleko hiri-lurrak izango dira .
PRED:	The walls of the city will be 45 feet long and 6 feet wide .
GOLD:	Open lands will surround the city for 150 yards in every direction .

ID:	5047
INPUT:	Zeren , egia ezagutu ondoren , nahita bekatu egiten jarraitzen badugu , ez dago gehiago bekatuen barkamenerako oparirik :
PRED:	For if we have sinned , we will not turn away from their sins and turn away from their sins , and we will never be forgiven .
GOLD:	Dear friends , if we deliberately continue sinning after we have received knowledge of the truth , there is no longer any sacrifice that will cover these sins .

ID:	5048
INPUT:	Jaunak Moisesen bidez aginduriko guztia egin zuten Aaronek eta beronen semeek .
PRED:	So Moses did everything just as the Lord had commanded Moses and Aaron and his sons .
GOLD:	So Aaron and his sons did everything the Lord had commanded through Moses .

ID:	5049
INPUT:	Ondoren , Hiramek brontzea urtu eta « Itsaso » deitu zuen uraska biribil bat egin zuen ; ertz batetik bestera bost metroko diametroa zuen , bi metro eta erdiko sakona eta hamabost metroko ingurua .
PRED:	Then he made a bronze basin called the Sea of the Sea , and he measured the Sea of the Sea of the Sea . He also measured the walls of the Sea , and it was 71/2 feet wide .
GOLD:	Then Huram cast a great round basin , 15 feet across from rim to rim , called the Sea . It was 71/2 feet deep and about 45 feet in circumference .

ID:	5050
INPUT:	Eta gauzok idatzi , gure poza bete-betea izan dadin idazten ditugu .
PRED:	This is the account of these things we need to write out the commands that we are written in the name of our God .
GOLD:	We are writing these things so that you may fully share our joy .

ID:	5051
INPUT:	Oi Jainko , hautsi horiei hortzak ahoan ! Jauna , puskatu lehoien haginak !
PRED:	O God , you have broken these lions , and the teeth of lions !
GOLD:	May they disappear like water into thirsty ground.Make their weapons useless in their hands .

ID:	5052
INPUT:	Jokatu argiaren partaide zaretenez
PRED:	John 's Baptist
GOLD:	Living in the Light

ID:	5053
INPUT:	Hobe eroapena adorea baino , nor bere buruaren jabe izatea hiriak menderatzea baino .
PRED:	It is better to be better than to boast about it , for it is better than to take it .
GOLD:	Better to be patient than powerful ; better to have self-control than to conquer a city .

ID:	5054
INPUT:	Purim Jaiaren sorrera
PRED:	The Prophecy of Asher
GOLD:	The Festival of Purim

ID:	5055
INPUT:	Neuk jasoko dut eskua haien aurka , beren esklaboek dituzte larrutuko » . Orduan jakingo duzueJaun ahalguztidunak bidali nauela .
PRED:	And I will raise my hand against them , and they will know that I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	Be silent before the Lord , all humanity , for he is springing into action from his holy dwelling . ”

ID:	5056
INPUT:	Nemuel , Datan eta Abiramen aita . Datan eta Abiram hauek Moises eta Aaronen aurka altxatutako elkarte-ordezkariak ziren ; Koreren taldearekin bat egin zuten , hau Jaunaren aurka altxatu zenean .
PRED:	These are the leaders of the tribe of Dan , Dathan , and Abiram , the sons of Eliab , and Aaron , who were joined in front of the altar . Then they shouted to the Lord for help .
GOLD:	and Eliab was the father of Nemuel , Dathan , and Abiram . This Dathan and Abiram are the same community leaders who conspired with Korah against Moses and Aaron , rebelling against the Lord .

ID:	5057
INPUT:	Erakustazu , Jauna , zeure bidea , eraman nazazu bide zuzenetik , etsaiak ugari baititut .
PRED:	O Lord , you have seen me , for I have given you victory over your enemies .
GOLD:	Teach me how to live , O Lord.Lead me along the right path , for my enemies are waiting for me .

ID:	5058
INPUT:	Baina nor zara zu , gizagaixo hori , Jainkoari kontuak eskatzeko ? Buztinezko ontziak esango ote dio buztinlariari : « Zergatik egin nauzu honelakoa ? »
PRED:	But you are a strong man , but you have made a clay pot with a clay pot ? How can you say , “ Why have you made me a clay pot ? ”
GOLD:	No , do n't say that . Who are you , a mere human being , to argue with God ? Should the thing that was created say to the one who created it , “ Why have you made me like this ? ”

ID:	5059
INPUT:	oinak zepoan sartzen dizkit , nire ibilbide guztiak zelatatzen ” .
PRED:	I walk in the sun , and all who walk in my path . '
GOLD:	He puts my feet in the stocksand watches my every move . '

ID:	5060
INPUT:	Bortxakeriak zuhurra ereergel du bihurtzen , eta eskupekoak bihotza usteltzen .
PRED:	The wise are like fools , but fools are wise , but fools are like a fool .
GOLD:	Extortion turns wise people into fools , and bribes corrupt the heart .

ID:	5061
INPUT:	Hala egingo dute apaiz nagusi sagaratuak izango diren Aaronen ondorengo guztiek ere . Betiko legea da . Jaunarentzat erreko dute oso-osorik oparia ;
PRED:	The priests will serve as priests , and all the descendants of Aaron will be given as a permanent law for all his descendants . This is a permanent law for the Lord .
GOLD:	The priest on duty will take from the grain offering a handful of the choice flour moistened with olive oil , together with all the frankincense . He will burn this representative portion on the altar as a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	5062
INPUT:	Moabeko bizilagunok , utzi hiriak , joan harkaitzetara bizitzera , koba-zuloetan habia egiten dutenusoen antzera .
PRED:	O Moab , you people of Moab , flee to the towns of Moab , where you live in the streets .
GOLD:	“ You people of Moab , flee from your towns and live in the caves.Hide like doves that nestin the clefts of the rocks .

ID:	5063
INPUT:	David Jerusalemera itzularazi nahi
PRED:	David Warns David to Jerusalem
GOLD:	David 's Return to Jerusalem

ID:	5064
INPUT:	Bestela , lehoiak bezala harrapatueta zati-zati egingo naute , eta ezin izango nau inork libratu .
PRED:	You will be like a lion , and you will be like a lion , and no one will rescue me .
GOLD:	O Lord my God , if I have done wrongor am guilty of injustice ,

ID:	5065
INPUT:	Ene maitearen ahotsa ! Horra , hor dator bera , mendiz mendi saltari , muinoz muino jauzika ;
PRED:	O earth , you have heard the sound of destruction ; you have heard me , O mountains !
GOLD:	Ah , I hear my lover coming ! He is leaping over the mountains , bounding over the hills .

ID:	5066
INPUT:	Agurtu Priska eta Akila , baita Onesifororen etxekoak ere .
PRED:	along with the ephod , the priest , and the household of the Lord 's Temple .
GOLD:	Give my greetings to Priscilla and Aquila and those living in the household of Onesiphorus .

ID:	5067
INPUT:	Harengan errotuak eta oinarrituak , iraun sendo sinesmenean , irakatsi zaizuen bezala , eta eman eskerrak etengabe .
PRED:	All who trust in him will be strong in him , just as God has promised you , and he will keep you safe from doing what is right .
GOLD:	Let your roots grow down into him , and let your lives be built on him . Then your faith will grow strong in the truth you were taught , and you will overflow with thankfulness .

ID:	5068
INPUT:	Ezarri bertan itun-kutxa eta estali errezelaz .
PRED:	Place the Ark of the Covenant with the Ark of the Covenant , and the Ark of the Covenant .
GOLD:	Place the Ark of the Covenant inside , and install the inner curtain to enclose the Ark within the Most Holy Place .

ID:	5069
INPUT:	Ikertzaileen kontakizuna
PRED:	Judgment against False Prophets
GOLD:	Tribe

ID:	5070
INPUT:	Bere egintzen misterioagatik zor zaio aintza Jainkoari , arazoak aztertu eta argitzeagatik erregeari .
PRED:	He has revealed his mysterious plan to the angel of God , and he has made you right with him .
GOLD:	It is God 's privilege to conceal thingsand the king 's privilege to discover them .

ID:	5071
INPUT:	( 10 , 12-16 )
PRED:	Jesus Heals Many People
GOLD:	Babylon 's Great Punishment

ID:	5072
INPUT:	Egin dituzten gaiztakeriengatik gertatu zaie hori : iraindu egin naute , ez zuek , ez zuen gurasoek , ez beraiek ezagutzen ez zenituzten jainkoei intsentsua errez eta kultua emanez .
PRED:	Because of this , you have sinned against me . You have not sinned against me , and you did not worship me because you did not worship other gods .
GOLD:	They provoked my anger with all their wickedness . They burned incense and worshiped other gods — gods that neither they nor you nor any of your ancestors had ever even known .

ID:	5073
INPUT:	Gaiztoen hitzak heriotzako tranpa dira ; zintzoenak , berriz , salbameneko bide .
PRED:	The godly care for the godly , but the godly care for the godly .
GOLD:	The words of the wicked are like a murderous ambush , but the words of the godly save lives .

ID:	5074
INPUT:	Ekialdeko jakintsu batzuek Jesus gurtu
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Visitors from the East

ID:	5075
INPUT:	Jainkoak bere eskuinaldera altxatu du , buru eta salbatzaile eginez , Israeli bihozberritzea eta bekatuen barkamena emateko .
PRED:	Then God opened his right hand , and he sent his right hand to save the people of Israel and repent of their sins and turn away from their sins .
GOLD:	Then God put him in the place of honor at his right hand as Prince and Savior . He did this so the people of Israel would repent of their sins and be forgiven .

ID:	5076
INPUT:	ez baitira Jainkoaren aurrean zuzen legea entzun bakarrik egiten dutenak , bete ere egiten dutenak baizik .
PRED:	But God did n't listen to the law of Moses , but anyone who obeys God 's commandments .
GOLD:	For merely listening to the law does n't make us right with God . It is obeying the law that makes us right in his sight .

ID:	5077
INPUT:	Bere isatsez zeruko izarren herena herrestan hartu eta lurrera jaurti zuen . Herensugea , haurra izateko zegoen emakumearen aitzinean gelditu zen , jaio bezain laster semea irensteko .
PRED:	He threw his finger into the sky and threw it into the sky , and it took a fire to the ground . He threw the child into the sky , just as the child had been born to the ground .
GOLD:	His tail swept away one-third of the stars in the sky , and he threw them to the earth . He stood in front of the woman as she was about to give birth , ready to devour her baby as soon as it was born .

ID:	5078
INPUT:	Davidek Ximeiri barkatu
PRED:	David 's Kindness to Shimei
GOLD:	David 's Mercy to Shimei

ID:	5079
INPUT:	Joab eta beronekin ziren mutil guztiak heldu zirenean , honela esan zioten batzuek Joabi : « Ner-en seme Abner etorri zaio erregeari eta , honek agur eginik , bakean joan da hura » .
PRED:	So Joab and all the men went with him and said to him , “ Abner son of Ner , Abner son of Ner , the king of Ner , have come to spy out the king 's army . ”
GOLD:	When Joab arrived , he was told that Abner had just been there visiting the king and had been sent away in safety .

ID:	5080
INPUT:	Anaiek bekaitzez begiratzen zioten ; aitak , ordea , gauza hauek sarritan hausnartzen zituen .
PRED:	But his brothers were filled with the blood of his father 's father , but they did n't understand these things .
GOLD:	But while his brothers were jealous of Joseph , his father wondered what the dreams meant .

ID:	5081
INPUT:	Lotsaz eta laidoz beterik , bai , laidoz estalirikdoaz idologileak .
PRED:	Come , let 's drink of wine , wine , olive oil , and wine , and olive oil .
GOLD:	All craftsmen who make idols will be humiliated.They will all be disgraced together .

ID:	5082
INPUT:	zuek bildu gabeko ondasun-mota guztiz beteriko etxeak , zuek zulatu gabeko putzuak , zuek landatu gabeko mahasti eta olibadiak . Asetzeraino jan ahal izango duzue .
PRED:	You will plant all the crops of your homes , and your houses will be ruined . You will eat the vineyards of your fields , and you will eat it .
GOLD:	The houses will be richly stocked with goods you did not produce . You will draw water from cisterns you did not dig , and you will eat from vineyards and olive trees you did not plant . When you have eaten your fill in this land ,

ID:	5083
INPUT:	Ikus nire atsekabea eta pena , barka nire bekatu guztiak .
PRED:	Let them be ashamed of my sins , and all my sins be forgiven .
GOLD:	Feel my pain and see my trouble.Forgive all my sins .

ID:	5084
INPUT:	Askatu gizagaixo eta behartsuak , libratu gaizkileen eskutik ! »
PRED:	Get rid of the poor and helpless , and rescue them from the power of the wicked . ”
GOLD:	Rescue the poor and helpless ; deliver them from the grasp of evil people .

ID:	5085
INPUT:	Zabulonen leinukoek ezin izan zituzten bota Ki<unk> eta Naha<unk> hirietako bizilagunak . Kanaandarrak zabulondarren artean bizi izan ziren , baina lanera behartuak .
PRED:	These were the names of the clans of the tribe of Zebulun , and they were afraid of the tribe of Canaan . The rest of the clans of Canaan were also part of the tribe of Canaan .
GOLD:	The tribe of Zebulun failed to drive out the residents of Kitron and Nahalol , so the Canaanites continued to live among them . But the Canaanites were forced to work as slaves for the people of Zebulun .

ID:	5086
INPUT:	Ondoren , Etzion-Geber eta Elatera joan zen Salomon . Hiri hauek Itsaso Gorriaren ertzean daude , Edom lurraldean .
PRED:	Then Solomon went to the Red Sea and went to the Red Sea . These are the Red Sea in the Red Sea .
GOLD:	Later Solomon went to Ezion-geber and Elath , ports along the shore of the Red Sea in the land of Edom .

ID:	5087
INPUT:	Jehu hiriko atetik sartzean , Jezabelek esan zuen : — Ongi al zara , Zimri zeure jaunaren hiltzaile hori ?
PRED:	When Jezebel arrived at the city gate , he asked , “ Are you trying to kill him ? ”
GOLD:	When Jehu entered the gate of the palace , she shouted at him , “ Have you come in peace , you murderer ? You 're just like Zimri , who murdered his master ! ”

ID:	5088
INPUT:	Mendiak landatuak izan aurretik , muinoak baino lehen izan nintzen sortua ;
PRED:	When I was before the mountains , I was born before the mountains .
GOLD:	Before the mountains were formed , before the hills , I was born —

ID:	5089
INPUT:	Esterrek ihardetsi zion : — Erregeak ongi baderitzo , utz diezaiela Susako juduei bihar ere gaurko aginduaren arabera egiten , eta zintzilika ditzatela urkabean Hamanen hamar semeen gorpuak .
PRED:	Esther replied to the king , “ That is why the king of Edom should keep on doing what is right . That is why the king of Susa will be put to death . ”
GOLD:	Esther responded , “ If it please the king , give the Jews in Susa permission to do again tomorrow as they have done today , and let the bodies of Haman 's ten sons be impaled on a pole . ”

ID:	5090
INPUT:	Ez al dakizue harresi gainetik jaurtika egiten dutela ? Ez al zarete oroitzen nola hil zuen emakume batek Te<unk> hirian Jerubexeten seme Abimelek , harresi gainetik errotarri bat jaurtiz ? Zergatik hurbildu zarete harresiraino ? ” Orduan , zuk erantzun : “ Zure zerbitzari Urias hitita ere hila da ” » .
PRED:	Do n't you realize that you are trying to kill me ? Are you trying to kill me ? Do n't you realize that the young women of Ephraim , the son of Beor to kill you ? ” “ Why are you trying to kill me ? ” they said , “ Why are you trying to kill me ? ”
GOLD:	Was n't Abimelech son of Gideon killed at Thebez by a woman who threw a millstone down on him from the wall ? Why would you get so close to the wall ? ' Then tell him , ‘ Uriah the Hittite was killed , too . ' ”

ID:	5091
INPUT:	Eta hori , nik ere badudalarik giza mailako gauzetan uste ona jartzeko arrazoia . Norbaitek gauza horietan uste ona jar dezakeela pentsatzen badu , nik gehiago :
PRED:	And if someone claims to marry her , she must be a friend to marry her . But if anyone is wrong , she is willing to marry her , she will say ,
GOLD:	though I could have confidence in my own effort if anyone could . Indeed , if others have reason for confidence in their own efforts , I have even more !

ID:	5092
INPUT:	Egin zuen , beraz , Samuelek Jaunak esandakoa , eta Belenera joan zen . Hiri hartako zaharrak bidera irten zitzaizkion arduratsu , eta galdetu zioten : — Bake onean al zatoz ?
PRED:	So Samuel did what the Lord had said to Samuel , and the Lord went to Bethel and asked him , “ Should you go out to the city ? ” And the people asked him , “ Do you know that the Lord is good ? ”
GOLD:	So Samuel did as the Lord instructed . When he arrived at Bethlehem , the elders of the town came trembling to meet him . “ What 's wrong ? ” they asked . “ Do you come in peace ? ”

ID:	5093
INPUT:	Orroka ari den lehoia eta hartz gosetia bezalakoagobernari gaiztoa herri xehearentzat .
PRED:	A lion is like a lioness , a lioness , and a lion is like a lion .
GOLD:	A wicked ruler is as dangerous to the pooras a roaring lion or an attacking bear .

ID:	5094
INPUT:	Moisesek lehengoak bezalako bi harlauza ebaki zituen . Eta biharamunean , goizean goiz , harlauza biak harturik , Sinai mendira igo zen , Jaunak agindu bezala .
PRED:	Moses took two stone tablets at Mount Sinai , just as the Lord had commanded Moses . On the third day he set up the mountain of Sinai , just as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	So Moses chiseled out two tablets of stone like the first ones . Early in the morning he climbed Mount Sinai as the Lord had commanded him , and he carried the two stone tablets in his hands .

ID:	5095
INPUT:	Herri honetako gorpuak hegazti harraparien eta basapiztien janari izango dira , eta haiek uxatzeko inor ez da izango .
PRED:	These are the birds of the sky , the small animals that scurry along the ground , and the birds of the sky will be destroyed .
GOLD:	The bodies of my people will be food for the vultures and wild animals , and no one will be left to scare them away .

ID:	5096
INPUT:	Altxatzen badut , berriz , lehoiak bezala harrapatuko nauzu , zure balentriak nire kontra berreginez ,
PRED:	But if I have a lion like a lion , I will stand against you like a lion .
GOLD:	And if I hold my head high , you hunt me like a lionand display your awesome power against me .

ID:	5097
INPUT:	Egurraren erdiarekin sua egiten du , eta gainean okela erre eta asetzeraino jaten . Ondoren , su ondoan berotzen da eta esaten : « Ederki ! Bero-bero nago ! A zer lamada ! »
PRED:	Then they burn the wood and burn it on the fire and burned it on the fire . Then they burn it on the fire , saying , “ How beautiful it is ! ”
GOLD:	He burns part of the tree to roast his meatand to keep himself warm.He says , “ Ah , that fire feels good . ”

ID:	5098
INPUT:	« Madarikatua errugabea hiltzeagatik eskupekoa onartzen duena ! » Eta herri osoak erantzungo du : « Amen » .
PRED:	“ Cursed is anyone who sins against the dead , ” says the Lord . “ All the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who accepts payment to kill an innocent person . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	5099
INPUT:	Efraimgo mendialdean gorderik zeuden israeldar guztiak ere , filistearrak ihesi zihoazela ohartzean , beretarrengana bildu ziren , filistearren ondoren erasoka joateko .
PRED:	When the Philistines arrived at the hill country of Ephraim , the Philistines began to attack the Philistines , they returned to fight the Philistines .
GOLD:	Likewise , the men of Israel who were hiding in the hill country of Ephraim joined the chase when they saw the Philistines running away .

ID:	5100
INPUT:	Deitu zien honek Kareahen seme Johanani , gudalburuei eta beraiekin zen jende guztiari , txiki nahiz handiei ,
PRED:	So Johanan son of Kareah and all the other military officers and all the other military officers , and all the people .
GOLD:	So he called for Johanan son of Kareah and the other military leaders , and for all the people , from the least to the greatest .

ID:	5101
INPUT:	Jesus mendira igo eta han eseri zen bere ikasleekin .
PRED:	Jesus and his disciples went to the Mount of Olives .
GOLD:	Then Jesus climbed a hill and sat down with his disciples around him .

ID:	5102
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Daviden salmoa . Kanta .
PRED:	O God , do n't let me be disgraced , for he will give you victory over all your enemies .
GOLD:	Rise up , O God , and scatter your enemies.Let those who hate God run for their lives .

ID:	5103
INPUT:	Honek , lagun haien sinesmena ikusirik , esan zuen : — Gizona , barkatuak dituzu bekatuak .
PRED:	That same day the young women saw their faith and said , “ Lord , forgive them , and forgive them . ”
GOLD:	Seeing their faith , Jesus said to the man , “ Young man , your sins are forgiven . ”

ID:	5104
INPUT:	« Kedemot basamortutik mezulariak bidali nizkion Hexbongo Sihon erregeari bakezko mezu honekin :
PRED:	“ You sent messengers from the wilderness of King Sihon of the Amorites to King Sihon of Heshbon , and you gave it to King Sihon of Heshbon .
GOLD:	Moses continued , “ From the wilderness of Kedemoth I sent ambassadors to King Sihon of Heshbon with this proposal of peace :

ID:	5105
INPUT:	Kutxa abiatzerakoan , Moisesek zioen : « Jaiki , Jauna , eta sakabana daitezela zure etsaiak , bihoaz ihesi gorroto dizutenak ! »
PRED:	So Moses took the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant and said , “ Stand up , pick up your hands , and let your enemies fall into the forest . ”
GOLD:	And whenever the Ark set out , Moses would shout , “ Arise , O Lord , and let your enemies be scattered ! Let them flee before you ! ”

ID:	5106
INPUT:	Atzerrietan putzuak egin dituteta bertako ura edan ; oinpean zapalduz lehortu egin ditutEgiptoko ubide guztiak ” .
PRED:	The people of Israel have sinned , and I will take away the land of Edom , and I will take away all the land of Egypt . '
GOLD:	I have dug wells in many foreign landsand refreshed myself with their water.With the sole of my footI stopped up all the rivers of Egypt ! '

ID:	5107
INPUT:	Orduan , esan zien ikasleei : — Non da zuen sinesmena ? Haiek , beldurrez eta harriturik , elkarri ziotsaten : « Nor ote dugu hau , haizeari eta urari ere agindu eta esana egiten baitiote ? »
PRED:	Then he asked his disciples , “ Where are you afraid ? Where are you afraid ? ” They asked each other , “ Who is this man ? ” And they said , “ He is the one who commanded us to do such things ? ”
GOLD:	Then he asked them , “ Where is your faith ? ” The disciples were terrified and amazed . “ Who is this man ? ” they asked each other . “ When he gives a command , even the wind and waves obey him ! ”

ID:	5108
INPUT:	edertu egingo zaituzte , koroak burua eta idunekoak lepoa bezala .
PRED:	Your head will be beautiful , and your head will be clothed with joy .
GOLD:	What you learn from them will crown you with graceand be a chain of honor around your neck .

ID:	5109
INPUT:	Igaro zirenean , esan zion Eliasek Eliseori : — Esadazu zer nahi duzun nik zure alde egitea , Jaunak zure ondotik eraman nazan baino lehen . Eliseok erantzun : — Izan nadila , otoi , zure profeta-espirituaren oinordeko .
PRED:	Then Elijah said to Elijah , “ Tell me what you want to do for me , for the Lord has given you . ” And Elijah replied , “ But if you do n't want to take it from your faith . ”
GOLD:	When they came to the other side , Elijah said to Elisha , “ Tell me what I can do for you before I am taken away . ” And Elisha replied , “ Please let me inherit a double share of your spirit and become your successor . ”

ID:	5110
INPUT:	« Ez naiz aurrerantzean munduan egongo ; hauek , ordea , bai , munduan jarraituko dute . Ni zuregana noa . Aita santu horrek , zaindu zeure ahalmenaz zuk eman dizkidazunok , bat izan daitezen gu geu bat garen bezala .
PRED:	“ I will not stand before you in the world , but you will keep on sinning , but you will know that I am the Father , who chose you , and you will know that you are dead .
GOLD:	Now I am departing from the world ; they are staying in this world , but I am coming to you . Holy Father , you have given me your name ; now protect them by the power of your name so that they will be united just as we are .

ID:	5111
INPUT:	Kristoren zerbitzariak direla ? Ni gehiago , nahiz zorakeria izan hori esatea . Haiek baino neke gehiago jasan dut , kartzela gehiago , zigorradak zer esanik ez ; hilzorian ere egona naiz hamaika aldiz .
PRED:	For the law of Christ is the one who sent me , whether I am the one who sent me , and I 'm not trying to kill him . But I 'm not trying to kill him , but I would not kill him .
GOLD:	Are they servants of Christ ? I know I sound like a madman , but I have served him far more ! I have worked harder , been put in prison more often , been whipped times without number , and faced death again and again .

ID:	5112
INPUT:	Efraimen leinuko senitarteak : Xutelahengandik xute<unk> tarrak , Bekerrengandik bekertarrak , Tahanengandik tahandarrak ,
PRED:	These were the clans descended from the clans of Ephraim : The oldest clan , named after their ancestor Carmi , named after their ancestor Carmi .
GOLD:	These were the clans descended from the sons of Ephraim : The Shuthelahite clan , named after their ancestor Shuthelah.The Bekerite clan , named after their ancestor Beker.The Tahanite clan , named after their ancestor Tahan .

ID:	5113
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Bata bestearen aurkabultzatuko ditut egiptoarrak , eta elkarren aurkaborrokatuko dira : senidea senideareneta adiskidea adiskidearen aurka , hiria hiriareneta erresuma erresumaren aurka .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will scatter the Egyptians against the Egyptians and their brothers and sisters in the land of Egypt and their brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	“ I will make Egyptian fight against Egyptian — brother against brother , neighbor against neighbor , city against city , province against province .

ID:	5114
INPUT:	Aldi txarren ondoren , lasai biziarazten duzu , gaiztoentzat hilobia zulatzen duten bitartean .
PRED:	But when disaster comes , you will live in safety , while the wicked are buried in the grave .
GOLD:	You give them relief from troubled timesuntil a pit is dug to capture the wicked .

ID:	5115
INPUT:	berrogeita zortzi hiri , beraz , guztira , bakoitza bere herri-lurrekin .
PRED:	In all , there were eight years old , and all the towns of the earth .
GOLD:	In all , forty-eight towns with the surrounding pastureland will be given to the Levites .

ID:	5116
INPUT:	« Gaden eta Rubenen ondorengoei , Jaunaren agindura borrokatzeko armaturik zuekin batera Jordan ibaia igarotzen badute , lurraldea menderatu ondoren , Galaad eskualdea emango diezue ondare .
PRED:	“ When you cross the Jordan into the land of Gilead , you will lead the Israelites into the land of Gilead to the Lord . If you do , you will hand them over to the land of Gilead .
GOLD:	He said , “ The men of Gad and Reuben who are armed for battle must cross the Jordan with you to fight for the Lord . If they do , give them the land of Gilead as their property when the land is conquered .

ID:	5117
INPUT:	Beste anaia bat ere bidaltzen dizuet berarekin , berri onaren zerbitzuan egin duen lanarengatik eliz elkarte guztiek goraipatzen dutena .
PRED:	I am sending you another brother , and I am sending you to the church in the church . I am sending you out of the church .
GOLD:	We are also sending another brother with Titus . All the churches praise him as a preacher of the Good News .

ID:	5118
INPUT:	Bidea zabalagotu didazueta nire oinak ez dira oztopatu .
PRED:	My enemies have conquered me , and I did not stop until they were conquered .
GOLD:	You have made a wide path for my feetto keep them from slipping .

ID:	5119
INPUT:	Haizea bezala , batera nahiz bestera , aurrera doaz . Indarra dute beren jainko » .
PRED:	They are like the wind , and they worship other gods , and they will worship other gods . ”
GOLD:	They sweep past like the windand are gone.But they are deeply guilty , for their own strength is their god . ”

ID:	5120
INPUT:	Ondoren , ikuskari bat izan nuen . Irekitako ate bat ikusi nuen zeruan , eta lehen mintzatua zitzaidan turuta-hotsa bezalako ahotsak esan zuen : « Igo hona , eta ondoren gertatzekoak direnak erakutsiko dizkizut » .
PRED:	Then I looked up and saw a vision . Then I saw a vision from heaven , and I saw a voice from heaven and said , “ I will tell you the truth , ” I said , “ I will see you . ”
GOLD:	Then as I looked , I saw a door standing open in heaven , and the same voice I had heard before spoke to me like a trumpet blast . The voice said , “ Come up here , and I will show you what must happen after this . ”

ID:	5121
INPUT:	Moisesek zenbait gizon bidali zituen Jazer hiria ikertzera , eta israeldarrek Jazer eta inguruko hiriak eskuratu zituzten , beraietako amortarrak jaurtiz .
PRED:	So Moses sent some of the men of Israel to explore the town . They attacked the town and attacked it and attacked it . They attacked it , too , and they attacked it .
GOLD:	After Moses sent men to explore the Jazer area , they captured all the towns in the region and drove out the Amorites who lived there .

ID:	5122
INPUT:	Jauna , ene Jainkoa , zu nire indar salbatzailea , guduan burua babesten didazuna .
PRED:	O Lord my God , you have mercy on me , for I have heard my salvation .
GOLD:	Lord , do not let evil people have their way.Do not let their evil schemes succeed , or they will become proud.Interlude

ID:	5123
INPUT:	Rubenen ondorengoek Hexbon , Elale , Kiriataim , Nebo , Baal-Meon eta Sibma berreraiki zituzten , eta berreraikitako hiriei izena aldatu zieten .
PRED:	The tribes of Reuben , Heshbon , Jazer , and Nebo , and Jazer , and Jazer , and all the towns of Heshbon , and all the towns of Gilead .
GOLD:	The descendants of Reuben built the towns of Heshbon , Elealeh , Kiriathaim ,

ID:	5124
INPUT:	Mirariak eta egintza harrigarriakegin zenituen faraoiaren kontra , honen zerbitzarieta Egiptoko herriaren kontra ; bazenekien , bai , harrokeriaz jokatu zute<unk> raeldarrekin . Horrela zeureganatu zenuengaurdaino duzun izen ospetsua .
PRED:	Because of the miraculous signs I commanded Pharaoh and his officials to fight against Pharaoh , the people of Egypt , and the people of Egypt — the people of Egypt — the people of Israel — to this very day .
GOLD:	You displayed miraculous signs and wonders against Pharaoh , his officials , and all his people , for you knew how arrogantly they were treating our ancestors . You have a glorious reputation that has never been forgotten .

ID:	5125
INPUT:	Neftali , Efraim eta Manasesena , Judaren lurralde guztia Mediterraneo itsasoraino ,
PRED:	Naphtali , Naphtali , and all the people of Ephraim , all the way to the Mediterranean Sea , to the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	all the land of Naphtali ; the land of Ephraim and Manasseh ; all the land of Judah , extending to the Mediterranean Sea ;

ID:	5126
INPUT:	Hori ikustean , harritu egingo dira zintzoaketa barre egingo diote , esanez :
PRED:	When you see this , you will see the righteous , and you will say , ‘ The righteous will be rebuilt . '
GOLD:	But I am like an olive tree , thriving in the house of God.I will always trust in God 's unfailing love .

ID:	5127
INPUT:	Lehen-astakumea arkume edo antxumearekin trukatuko duzue ; trukatzen ez baduzue , hil egingo duzue , lepoa hautsiz . Zuen lehen-semeak oro berreskuratu egingo dituzue , ordezko eskaintza eginez . Ez da inor nire aurrera esku-hutsik agertuko .
PRED:	“ If you present a young goat as a young goat , you must not slaughter it with the young goat . You must not offer it to the first portion of your firstborn sons , but you must not offer it to the Lord .
GOLD:	A firstborn donkey may be bought back from the Lord by presenting a lamb or young goat in its place . But if you do not buy it back , you must break its neck . However , you must buy back every firstborn son . “ No one may appear before me without an offering .

ID:	5128
INPUT:	Haragia egosi deneko ontzia buztinezkoa bada , hautsi egingo da ; brontzezkoa bada , berriz , gogor igurtzi eta uretan garbituko .
PRED:	He will make a clay pot filled with bronze , a clay pot filled with bronze , and it will be smashed .
GOLD:	It must be carefully mixed with olive oil and cooked on a griddle . Then slice this grain offering and present it as a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	5129
INPUT:	Gu , berriz , Pazko-jaien ondoren atera ginen itsasoz Filipotik , eta bost egunen buruan bildu ginen haiekin Troaden , eta astebete egin genuen bertan .
PRED:	But we were on the first day of the Passover celebration , some of the people who were near the coast of the Dead Sea . We were also on the coast of the island .
GOLD:	After the Passover ended , we boarded a ship at Philippi in Macedonia and five days later joined them in Troas , where we stayed a week .

ID:	5130
INPUT:	Aldi hartan , Adoni-Tzedek zeritzan Jerusalemgo erregeak jakin zuen Josuek Ai hiria hartu eta erabat suntsitu zuela , Ai hiriari eta bertako erregeari , lehen Jerikori eta bertako erregeari egindakoa bera eginez . Jakin zuen , orobat , Gabaongo bizilagunek bake-hitzarmena egin zutela israeldarrekin eta beraiekin elkartu zirela .
PRED:	At that time King Amaziah of Judah mobilized the army of Samaria and destroyed the towns of Israel . So Joshua destroyed the town of Jericho , and the king of Jericho , and he prepared a treaty with the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Adoni-zedek , king of Jerusalem , heard that Joshua had captured and completely destroyed Ai and killed its king , just as he had destroyed the town of Jericho and killed its king . He also learned that the Gibeonites had made peace with Israel and were now their allies .

ID:	5131
INPUT:	Jaunak agindu zion Jeremiasi : « Zoaz eta erosi buztinezko pitxer bat . Eraman zeurekin herri-agintari eta apaiz-kontseiluko batzuk .
PRED:	Then the Lord gave this command to Jeremiah : “ Take a clay pot with a clay pot . Take some of the clay pot , and some of the priests .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord said to me : “ Go and buy a clay jar . Then ask some of the leaders of the people and of the priests to follow you .

ID:	5132
INPUT:	Baina gudari batek gezia itsu-itsuan jaurti eta Israelgo erregea zauritu zuen bular-oskolaren juntura artetik . Orduan , erregeak esan zion gurdi-gidariari : — Itzuli eta atera nazazu guda-zelaitik . Zauritu egin naute .
PRED:	But one of the men of Israel ran out and struck him with a sword and hit the king of Israel 's armor . He said to his armor bearer , “ Go ahead of me and kill me ! ” So the king said , “ Let me go out of bed ! ”
GOLD:	An Aramean soldier , however , randomly shot an arrow at the Israelite troops and hit the king of Israel between the joints of his armor . “ Turn the horses and get me out of here ! ” Ahab groaned to the driver of the chariot . “ I 'm badly wounded ! ”

ID:	5133
INPUT:	Nork aurpegi eman haren etorrera-egunari ? Nork zutik iraun hura agertzean ? Metala birfintzeko sua bezala , arropa garbitzeko lixiba bezala izango da .
PRED:	Who will bring him out of his presence ? Who will bring him out of the church ? Who will be like a Messiah ? Who will be like a Messiah ? ”
GOLD:	“ But who will be able to endure it when he comes ? Who will be able to stand and face him when he appears ? For he will be like a blazing fire that refines metal , or like a strong soap that bleaches clothes .

ID:	5134
INPUT:	Nik , Jaunarengatik preso nagoen honek , hartu duzuen deiari dagokionez bizi zaiteztela eskatzen dizuet .
PRED:	This letter is from the Lord , who has called you out of the prison , and I will send you out of the prison .
GOLD:	Therefore I , a prisoner for serving the Lord , beg you to lead a life worthy of your calling , for you have been called by God .

ID:	5135
INPUT:	« Gora Jauna , bedeinkatua ene harkaitza ! Goretsia Jainkoa , salbatzen nauen haitza !
PRED:	“ Praise the Lord , who gives me victory ; he is my God !
GOLD:	“ The Lord lives ! Praise to my Rock ! May God , the Rock of my salvation , be exalted !

ID:	5136
INPUT:	Davidek bizia barkatu Sauli
PRED:	David Again Predicts Saul 's Death
GOLD:	David Spares Saul 's Life

ID:	5137
INPUT:	Israelgo erregeak erantzun zion Josafati . — Bai , bada beste gizon bat : Mikeas , Imlaren semea . Galdegin diezaiokegu Jaunari horren bidez ; baina nik gorroto dut , gauza txarrak bakarrik iragartzen baitizkit , onak iragarri beharrean . Josafatek esan zion : — Ez zaitez horrela mintza , errege jauna .
PRED:	The king of Israel replied to Jehoshaphat , “ There is another man who is one of the men of Israel . He said , “ We have sinned against the Lord , but we have only one of you . ” But the king said , “ No one can heal you . ”
GOLD:	The king of Israel replied to Jehoshaphat , “ There is one more man who could consult the Lord for us , but I hate him . He never prophesies anything but trouble for me ! His name is Micaiah son of Imlah . ” Jehoshaphat replied , “ That 's not the way a king should talk ! Let 's hear what he has to say . ”

ID:	5138
INPUT:	Bata barkamen-oparitzat eta bestea erre-oparitzat eskainiko ditu apaizak , eta haren alde barkamen-ohikunea egingo du , gorpua ukitzean eginiko hobenagatik . Egun horretan berriro sagaratuko dio nazireuak bere burua Jaunari .
PRED:	And the priest must offer a burnt offering to the Lord as a burnt offering to the Lord . Through this process , the priest will purify his people , making them right with the Lord , making them right with the Lord .
GOLD:	The priest will offer one of the birds for a sin offering and the other for a burnt offering . In this way , he will purify them from the guilt they incurred through contact with the dead body . Then they must reaffirm their commitment and let their hair begin to grow again .

ID:	5139
INPUT:	Emazte jatorra senarraren koroa , emazte lotsagabea minbiziaren parekoa .
PRED:	The wife of her husband came to her husband 's wife , the wife of a man who had sexual intercourse with a wife .
GOLD:	A worthy wife is a crown for her husband , but a disgraceful woman is like cancer in his bones .

ID:	5140
INPUT:	Zentzugabearen hitzek liskarra sortzen , beraren mintzoak kolpeak erakartzen .
PRED:	Wise words are like a fool , but the words of a fool gives knowledge .
GOLD:	Fools ' words get them into constant quarrels ; they are asking for a beating .

ID:	5141
INPUT:	Zuregatik jasan ditut irainak , zuregatik estali dit lotsak aurpegia .
PRED:	That is why I said , “ I am innocent , but I am innocent ! ”
GOLD:	Even my own brothers pretend they do n't know me ; they treat me like a stranger .

ID:	5142
INPUT:	« Jerusalemgo hiriak hamabi ate izango ditu , eta bakoitzak Israelgo leinu baten izena izango du . Iparraldeko harresiak , bi kilometro eta laurden luze , hiru ate izango ditu : Ruben , Juda eta Lebirenak .
PRED:	“ The city will be twelve towns of Jerusalem , one of the tribes of Israel , one of the tribes of Israel , one of the tribes of Israel , one piece of wood , and twelve towns of Judah .
GOLD:	“ These will be the exits to the city : On the north wall , which is 11/2 miles long ,

ID:	5143
INPUT:	Etorriko zaie , bai , senar berria kenduko dieten eguna ; orduan , egun hartan , egingo dute barau .
PRED:	But the groom will be taken away from them , but they will fast and fast . But then they will fast and fast .
GOLD:	But someday the groom will be taken away from them , and then they will fast .

ID:	5144
INPUT:	atxilotu eta ekartzeko aginduko dute beraren hiriko arduradunek eta mendeku-eskubidea duenaren esku utziko , hil dezan .
PRED:	They must be put to death and put to death , and the elders of the city will be put to death . They will be put to death .
GOLD:	In that case , the elders of the murderer 's hometown must send agents to the city of refuge to bring him back and hand him over to the dead person 's avenger to be put to death .

ID:	5145
INPUT:	Isaiasek Jesusi buruz esan zuen hau , ikusia baitzuen beraren Jainko-aintza .
PRED:	When Jesus saw this , he saw this , for he had seen the glory of God .
GOLD:	Isaiah was referring to Jesus when he said this , because he saw the future and spoke of the Messiah 's glory .

ID:	5146
INPUT:	Horra ! Gizakiak ezin du bere burua salbatu , ezta Jainkoari bere biziaren erospen-saria ordaindu ere .
PRED:	No , it can not be saved ! For God has sold his money to buy back his life .
GOLD:	Redemption does not come so easily , for no one can ever pay enough

ID:	5147
INPUT:	Horregatik ziotson Abrahamek Jainkoari : — Ai , Ismaeli bederen bizirik eutsiko bazenio !
PRED:	“ Yes , ” Abraham said to Abraham , “ the God of Israel , would surely send him away . ”
GOLD:	So Abraham said to God , “ May Ishmael live under your special blessing ! ”

ID:	5148
INPUT:	Jaunak zabaltzen itsuen begiak , Jaunak altxatzen lur jota daudenak . Jaunak maitatzen zintzoak ,
PRED:	The Lord sees the righteous , and he sees the earth ! The Lord protects the godly .
GOLD:	The Lord opens the eyes of the blind.The Lord lifts up those who are weighed down.The Lord loves the godly .

ID:	5149
INPUT:	Bitartean , aukerako hamar mila gudari , Israel osokoak , Gibearen aurrez aurre jarri ziren . Gudua latza izan zen eta benjamindarrak ez ziren ohartu gainera zetorkien hondamenaz .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the men of Israel had ten thousand men of Israel against the king of Israel . But the men of Benjamin did n't realize that the men of Benjamin had killed them .
GOLD:	There were 10,000 elite Israelite troops who advanced against Gibeah . The fighting was so heavy that Benjamin did n't realize the impending disaster .

ID:	5150
INPUT:	Etsaiak gaizki-esaka ari zaizkit : « Noiz hil behar ote du ? Noiz galduko ote honen izena ? »
PRED:	“ How long will I die ? ” they asked . “ How long will this be ? ”
GOLD:	They visit me as if they were my friends , but all the while they gather gossip , and when they leave , they spread it everywhere .

ID:	5151
INPUT:	Goratu Jauna , gure Jainkoa , ahuspeztu haren oin-aulki aurrean ! Santua da bera !
PRED:	Praise the Lord our God ! Let us worship his throne in the place of worship !
GOLD:	Exalt the Lord our God ! Bow low before his feet , for he is holy !

ID:	5152
INPUT:	Gedeonek jendea errekara jaitsarazi zuenean , Jaunak esan zion : « Bereiz itzazu ura eskuan hartu eta zakurrek bezala miazkatuz edango dutenak , edateko belauniko jarriko direnengandik » .
PRED:	Then Gideon returned to the land of the Lord , and he said to the people , “ If you are willing to eat the water that has been set apart from the Lord , you will eat from the waters of the earth . ”
GOLD:	When Gideon took his warriors down to the water , the Lord told him , “ Divide the men into two groups . In one group put all those who cup water in their hands and lap it up with their tongues like dogs . In the other group put all those who kneel down and drink with their mouths in the stream . ”

ID:	5153
INPUT:	Etiopia , Put , Lud eta Arabia osoa , Libia eta herrialde aliatu honetakojendea gerran eroriko daegiptoarrekin batera .
PRED:	Men from Ethiopia , Ethiopia , and Mount Seir , and all the people of Assyria . They will attack the land of Egypt , and all the people of Egypt .
GOLD:	Ethiopia , Libya , Lydia , all Arabia , and all their other allieswill be destroyed in that war .

ID:	5154
INPUT:	Orduan , apaiz nagusiak zutitu eta galdetu zion : — Ez al diezu deus erantzun behar zure kontra ateratzen dituztenei ?
PRED:	Then the high priest asked the high priest , “ Do n't you realize what you 're doing ? ”
GOLD:	Then the high priest stood up and said to Jesus , “ Well , are n't you going to answer these charges ? What do you have to say for yourself ? ”

ID:	5155
INPUT:	Bihotz-bihotzez bilatzen dut zure mesedea : erruki nitaz , hitzemana duzunez !
PRED:	I pray to you , O Lord , for you have obeyed me .
GOLD:	With all my heart I want your blessings.Be merciful as you promised .

ID:	5156
INPUT:	Hots handiko hitzaldi hutsak egiten dituzte eta grina lizunen bitartez okerbidetik aldendu berriak liluratzen .
PRED:	The words of the wise are like a shelter from the mouth of the wicked , and the words of the wicked will be scattered .
GOLD:	They brag about themselves with empty , foolish boasting . With an appeal to twisted sexual desires , they lure back into sin those who have barely escaped from a lifestyle of deception .

ID:	5157
INPUT:	Eta Jainkoak aldi hori laburtuko ez balu , ez litzateke inortxo ere bizirik aterako ; baina , aukeratuak direla eta , laburtu egingo ditu egun horiek .
PRED:	And if God is not a single one of them , not a single one of them will be able to save them , they will be saved .
GOLD:	In fact , unless that time of calamity is shortened , not a single person will survive . But it will be shortened for the sake of God 's chosen ones .

ID:	5158
INPUT:	hurrengo sailean , aldiz , Xelemiasen seme Hananiasek eta Tzalafen seigarren seme Hanunek bere etxebizitzaren aurrean .
PRED:	Mattaniah son of Mattaniah , Bani , and Azariah son of Bani , and Azariah son of Meshullam son of Mattaniah , his family .
GOLD:	Next Hananiah son of Shelemiah and Hanun , the sixth son of Zalaph , repaired another section , while Meshullam son of Berekiah rebuilt the wall across from where he lived .

ID:	5159
INPUT:	herri ankerra , zaharrentzat errespeturik eta haurrentzat errukirik izango ez duena .
PRED:	You will be a refuge for the people of Israel , but no one will be given to the Lord .
GOLD:	a fierce and heartless nation that shows no respect for the old and no pity for the young .

ID:	5160
INPUT:	esan zien : « Gogoan hartu nik gaur agindu dizuedan guztia , eta agindu zeuen seme-alabei lege honen xedapen guztiak betetzen saiatzeko ,
PRED:	Then he told them , “ Let all these instructions be careful to obey all the commands I have given to your children , decrees , and commands that I have given you .
GOLD:	he added : “ Take to heart all the words of warning I have given you today . Pass them on as a command to your children so they will obey every word of these instructions .

ID:	5161
INPUT:	Hautsi da indartsuen uztaia ; ahulak , berriz , indarrez jantzi dira .
PRED:	These are the power of the poor.The strong are the ones who wear their clothes , and their clothes are given to the poor.They are clothed with strength .
GOLD:	The bow of the mighty is now broken , and those who stumbled are now strong .

ID:	5162
INPUT:	Benetan gizon apala zen Moises , munduko gizonik apalena .
PRED:	So Moses , the man of the world , came to Moses .
GOLD:	( Now Moses was very humble — more humble than any other person on earth . )

ID:	5163
INPUT:	Intsentsu-aldarea
PRED:	Offerings for the incense
GOLD:	Plans for the Incense Altar

ID:	5164
INPUT:	Hark profezi dohaina zuten lau alaba ezkongabe zituen .
PRED:	And the man who had sexual relations with a prophet 's daughters .
GOLD:	He had four unmarried daughters who had the gift of prophecy .

ID:	5165
INPUT:	Bere ikasleek erantzun zioten : — Hainbeste jendek estutzen zaituela ikusi eta nork ukitu zaituen galdetzen duzu ?
PRED:	His disciples replied , “ How much more do you see ? ” And the disciples asked him , “ Who healed you ? ”
GOLD:	His disciples said to him , “ Look at this crowd pressing around you . How can you ask , ‘ Who touched me ? ' ”

ID:	5166
INPUT:	Non dira zure kontseilari jakintsuak , faraoi ? Jaun ahalguztidunakEgiptoren aurka dituen asmoakiragar diezazkizutela , bada , gauza badira !
PRED:	Where are your wise men , O Lord of Heaven 's Armies ? The Lord of Heaven 's Armies 's Armies , who sits at Mount Sinai .
GOLD:	Where are your wise counselors , Pharaoh ? Let them tell you what God plans , what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies is going to do to Egypt .

ID:	5167
INPUT:	Goizero berritzen dira . Bai handia , Jauna , zure leialtasuna !
PRED:	O Lord , you are a mighty nation ; your faithfulness reaches beyond the nations .
GOLD:	Great is his faithfulness ; his mercies begin afresh each morning .

ID:	5168
INPUT:	Efratan entzun genuen kutxaren berrieta Jaar aldean aurkitu .
PRED:	When I heard this , I heard the report of the people of Israel .
GOLD:	We heard that the Ark was in Ephrathah ; then we found it in the distant countryside of Jaar .

ID:	5169
INPUT:	Ez zaiteztela marmarrean ari ere , haietako batzuk ari izan ziren bezala , gero aingeru suntsitzailearen esku hil zirelarik .
PRED:	Do n't use any of these offerings to the people who were nearby , just as the angel had killed them .
GOLD:	And do n't grumble as some of them did , and then were destroyed by the angel of death .

ID:	5170
INPUT:	Nolanahi ere , gorputzean nahiz gorputzetik kanpo , Jaunari atsegingarri izaten ahalegintzen gara ,
PRED:	If you are trying to wash your body and put it in a body , you must wash your clothes in the Lord 's presence .
GOLD:	So whether we are here in this body or away from this body , our goal is to please him .

ID:	5171
INPUT:	Zorigaitz guztiak geure egintza gaizto eta erru handiengatik gertatu zaizkigu . Hala ere , zuk , gure Jainko horrek , gure bekatuek merezi baino gutxiago zigortu gaituzu , eta bizirik atera gaituzu hemen gaudenok .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who are evil and evil , and you have sinned against us . But you are too precious to us , but you have been judged by the death of our sins .
GOLD:	“ Now we are being punished because of our wickedness and our great guilt . But we have actually been punished far less than we deserve , for you , our God , have allowed some of us to survive as a remnant .

ID:	5172
INPUT:	Jaunak emandako lurraldeak ekarritako emaitza guztien lehen fruituak saski batean hartu eta Jaunak zure Jainkoak bizileku eta kultu-lekutzat aukeratuko duen tokira joango zara .
PRED:	And the Lord your God will give you the good crops you have planted in the land of the Lord your God is giving you . He will bring you home to the place where the Lord your God is giving you .
GOLD:	put some of the first produce from each crop you harvest into a basket and bring it to the designated place of worship — the place the Lord your God chooses for his name to be honored .

ID:	5173
INPUT:	Fariseu batzuek hurbildu eta , zertan harrapatuko , gizonak bere emaztea uztea zilegi ote zuen galdetu zioten .
PRED:	But some of the Pharisees and the teachers of religious law came to him , and they asked him what he had done .
GOLD:	Some Pharisees came and tried to trap him with this question : “ Should a man be allowed to divorce his wife ? ”

ID:	5174
INPUT:	Ester , erregina izendatu
PRED:	Queen Esther 's King
GOLD:	Esther Becomes Queen

ID:	5175
INPUT:	Adoniasen gonbidatu guztiak , izuturik , jaiki eta nor bere aldetik joan ziren .
PRED:	As soon as they stood , they stood up and stood before him , and they stood up and stood before him .
GOLD:	Then all of Adonijah 's guests jumped up in panic from the banquet table and quickly scattered .

ID:	5176
INPUT:	Bebairenak <unk> ;
PRED:	The family of Hashum328
GOLD:	The family of Bebai623

ID:	5177
INPUT:	Eta honela egin zion otoitz Jaunari : « Ai ene , Jauna ! Neure herrian nengoenean , iruditu zitzaidan , bai , horrela gertatuko zela ! Horregatik , hain zuzen , nahi izan nuen Tarsisera ihes egin . Banekien nik Jainko bihozbera eta errukiorra zarena , haserregaitza eta onginahiz betea , bere mehatxuez damutzen dena .
PRED:	Then he prayed to the Lord , “ O Sovereign Lord , I know that my people are my people , but I did n't want them to repent of their sins and turn away from their sins . But I did not repent of their sins and turn away from their sins .
GOLD:	So he complained to the Lord about it : “ Did n't I say before I left home that you would do this , Lord ? That is why I ran away to Tarshish ! I knew that you are a merciful and compassionate God , slow to get angry and filled with unfailing love . You are eager to turn back from destroying people .

ID:	5178
INPUT:	Baina beste behin ere bere teman jarraitu zuen faraoiak eta ez zien israeldarrei joaten utzi .
PRED:	But Pharaoh did not let his people go to Pharaoh and let them go .
GOLD:	“ All right , go ahead , ” Pharaoh replied . “ I will let you go into the wilderness to offer sacrifices to the Lord your God . But do n't go too far away . Now hurry and pray for me . ”

ID:	5179
INPUT:	Oraindik Pedro eta Joan herriari mintzatzen ari zitzaizkiola , apaizak , tenpluko guardiaburua eta saduzearrak agertu zitzaizkien .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Peter and John spoke to the people in the Temple , the priests , and the elders of the Temple guards appeared to him .
GOLD:	While Peter and John were speaking to the people , they were confronted by the priests , the captain of the Temple guard , and some of the Sadducees .

ID:	5180
INPUT:	jendeak ohi duen bezala ; gorde dut zure hitza ,
PRED:	I want you to do good , just as I do .
GOLD:	I have followed your commands , which keep me from following cruel and evil people .

ID:	5181
INPUT:	Onar ezazu , bada , nire aholkua , eta izan dezazula lagun Jainkoa ! Zu herriaren ordezkari zara Jainkoaren aurrean eta herriaren arazoak aurkeztu behar dizkiozu berari ;
PRED:	Come , let me see the wisdom of the Lord your God , for you are my people . But you are my people , and give them the glory of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Now listen to me , and let me give you a word of advice , and may God be with you . You should continue to be the people 's representative before God , bringing their disputes to him .

ID:	5182
INPUT:	Izan zaitezte , beraz , Jainkoaren antzekoak , beraren seme-alaba maite zaretenez .
PRED:	So be like this , you are like children of God 's children .
GOLD:	Imitate God , therefore , in everything you do , because you are his dear children .

ID:	5183
INPUT:	gudari-gezi zorrotzen , ipuru-ikatz gorien antzeko zaren hori !
PRED:	He knocked them with a snake ; he attacked them with a snake .
GOLD:	You will be pierced with sharp arrowsand burned with glowing coals .

ID:	5184
INPUT:	Niri , berriz , egia diodalako , ez didazue sinesten .
PRED:	But if you do n't believe me , you wo n't believe me .
GOLD:	So when I tell the truth , you just naturally do n't believe me !

ID:	5185
INPUT:	Abraham , Sara eta Abimelek
PRED:	Abraham and Lot
GOLD:	Abraham Deceives Abimelech

ID:	5186
INPUT:	Badaki Jaunak giza asmoak hutsak direla .
PRED:	The voice of the Lord is good , but the rich of the rich are rich .
GOLD:	The Lord knows people 's thoughts ; he knows they are worthless !

ID:	5187
INPUT:	Nik esan nuen : — Ene Jainko Jauna , zaude geldi ! Nola eutsiko dio , bada , Israel herriak bere biziari , hain txikia izanik ?
PRED:	But I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , why should you keep on looking for the sake of the people of Israel ? ”
GOLD:	Then I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , please stop or we will not survive , for Israel is so small . ”

ID:	5188
INPUT:	Arratsean , Jesusen ikasleak aintzirara jaitsi
PRED:	When Jesus arrived at the place of honor
GOLD:	That evening Jesus ' disciples went down to the shore to wait for him .

ID:	5189
INPUT:	Jaunak bere haserrea hustu du , bere sumina isuri . Sioni su eman dio eta oinarrietaraino kiskali .
PRED:	The Lord is angry with his anger ; his fierce anger burns against Jerusalem .
GOLD:	But now the anger of the Lord is satisfied.His fierce anger has been poured out.He started a fire in Jerusalemthat burned the city to its foundations .

ID:	5190
INPUT:	Errege izaten hastean , Baxak Jeroboamen etxeko guztiak hilarazi zituen . Ez zuen Jeroboamen etxeko bat ere utzi hil gabe , halaxe esana baitzuen Jaunak Xiloko Ahias bere zerbitzariaren bidez .
PRED:	King Baasha of Babylon began to destroy King Baasha of Israel . He did not destroy the pagan shrines , just as the Lord had commanded Jeroboam son of Nebat , the Lord , had promised him .
GOLD:	He immediately slaughtered all the descendants of King Jeroboam , so that not one of the royal family was left , just as the Lord had promised concerning Jeroboam by the prophet Ahijah from Shiloh .

ID:	5191
INPUT:	Paulok jasandako nekeak
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Paul 's Many Trials

ID:	5192
INPUT:	Ateratzean , honela ziotsaten elkarren artean : — Gizon honek ez du ez heriotza , ez kartzela merezi duenik ezer egin .
PRED:	As they were crossing the sea , the man said to each other , “ This man is not a murderer . ”
GOLD:	As they went out , they talked it over and agreed , “ This man has n't done anything to deserve death or imprisonment . ”

ID:	5193
INPUT:	Orduan , erregeak deitu eta esan zien : — Zer dela-eta uzten dituzue mutikoak bizirik ?
PRED:	Then the king called out to the king and asked , “ What are you going to live ? ”
GOLD:	So the king of Egypt called for the midwives . “ Why have you done this ? ” he demanded . “ Why have you allowed the boys to live ? ”

ID:	5194
INPUT:	« Ez uste izan Moisesen legea edo profeten esanak huts bihurtzera etorria naizenik ; ez naiz huts bihurtzera etorri , beren betera eramatera baizik .
PRED:	“ Do n't be a prophet or a prophet who refuses to obey the law of Moses or the law of Moses . If I came to meet them , I would not come to meet them .
GOLD:	“ Do n't misunderstand why I have come . I did not come to abolish the law of Moses or the writings of the prophets . No , I came to accomplish their purpose .

ID:	5195
INPUT:	Sarraskia egiteko zorroztua , distira botatzeko leundua .
PRED:	The Sea of the Dead Sea will also be as the Sea .
GOLD:	Let their hearts melt with terror , for the sword glitters at every gate.It flashes like lightningand is polished for slaughter !

ID:	5196
INPUT:	— Gogora ezazue Moisesek , Jaunaren zerbitzariak , agindu zizuena : « Jaunak , zeuen Jainkoak , atseden harrarazi dizue lurralde hau zuei emanez .
PRED:	“ Give thanks to the Lord your God , the servant of the Lord your God , and give this land to you . This is what the Lord your God has commanded you .
GOLD:	“ Remember what Moses , the servant of the Lord , commanded you : ‘ The Lord your God is giving you a place of rest . He has given you this land . '

ID:	5197
INPUT:	eta bere gutizia aseezina izan zuenez , ondasun guztiak galduko ditu .
PRED:	He will give you everything you have done , and he will lose everything you have done .
GOLD:	They were always greedy and never satisfied.Nothing remains of all the things they dreamed about .

ID:	5198
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak honela dio : « Zer egin dezaket zuretzat , Efraim ? Eta zer zuretzat , Juda ? Zuen maitasunagoiz-lainoa bezala doa , berehala kentzen duengoiz-ihintza bezala .
PRED:	But the Lord says , “ What have I done for you ? Why are you like the people of Israel ? Why are you like the dew of the earth ?
GOLD:	“ O Israel and Judah , what should I do with you ? ” asks the Lord . “ For your love vanishes like the morning mistand disappears like dew in the sunlight .

ID:	5199
INPUT:	Nork egin eta burutu duhori guztia ? Ni , Jauna , neu naiz lehena , hasieratik gizaldiak munduraekartzen dituena , eta azkenekoak iristean ereni betiko berbera .
PRED:	Who created these things and earth ? I am the Lord , who made me the one who sent me out of the world , and I will bring them home to the end of the world .
GOLD:	Who has done such mighty deeds , summoning each new generation from the beginning of time ? It is I , the Lord , the First and the Last.I alone am he . ”

ID:	5200
INPUT:	Labanek Jegar Sahaduta deitu zuen harri-pila hura ; Jakobek , berriz , Galed .
PRED:	Then Laban called out to meet him , but he called out to the people of Israel .
GOLD:	To commemorate the event , Laban called the place Jegar-sahadutha ( which means “ witness pile ” in Aramaic ) , and Jacob called it Galeed ( which means “ witness pile ” in Hebrew ) .

ID:	5201
INPUT:	Orduan , bi gizonek menditik jaitsi eta ibaia igaro zuten . Eta , Nunen seme Josuerengana itzulirik , gertatu zitzaien guztiaren berri eman zioten ,
PRED:	Then the man came up from the mountain , and Joshua son of Nun , and Joshua son of Nun . So Joshua returned to Joshua son of Nun .
GOLD:	Then the two spies came down from the hill country , crossed the Jordan River , and reported to Joshua all that had happened to them .

ID:	5202
INPUT:	Horrela bete zen Liburu Santuak dioena : Abrahameksinetsi egin zion Jainkoari eta , horregatik , Jainkoak zuzenetsi egin zuen , eta « Jainkoaren adiskide » deitu zitzaion .
PRED:	As the Scriptures say , “ That is the same thing God had done to Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob left him . ” And God called him to him , “ God , ” he called his name , and he called his name . ”
GOLD:	And so it happened just as the Scriptures say : “ Abraham believed God , and God counted him as righteous because of his faith . ” He was even called the friend of God .

ID:	5203
INPUT:	Josue Jordan igarotzeko prestatu
PRED:	Joshua Anointed at the Jordan
GOLD:	's Charge to Joshua

ID:	5204
INPUT:	Nondik sortzen dira zeuen artean dituzuen borroka eta haserreak ? Ez ote zuen baitan borrokan dabiltzan grina txarretatik ?
PRED:	Where are you going to get rid of your anger ? Do n't you know what 's happening ? Do n't you know what 's happening ?
GOLD:	What is causing the quarrels and fights among you ? Do n't they come from the evil desires at war within you ?

ID:	5205
INPUT:	Gero , Israel lurraldeko hazia hartueta soroan erein zuen , ur ugariren ondoan .
PRED:	Then he planted the land and planted it in the fields and planted crops .
GOLD:	He also took a seedling from the landand planted it in fertile soil.He placed it beside a broad river , where it could grow like a willow tree .

ID:	5206
INPUT:	Harmailetara iritsi zirenean , soldaduek airean eraman behar izan zuten Paulo jendearen erasoagatik ,
PRED:	When the soldiers arrived at the gate , the soldiers took Paul to the soldiers , the soldiers took him to the synagogue ,
GOLD:	As Paul reached the stairs , the mob grew so violent the soldiers had to lift him to their shoulders to protect him .

ID:	5207
INPUT:	Abrahamekin mintzatzen amaitu ondoren , alde egin zuen Jaunak . Eta Abraham bere oihal-etxolara itzuli zen .
PRED:	Then the Lord remembered Abraham 's wife , and the Lord sent Abram back to his tent , and he returned to his tent .
GOLD:	When the Lord had finished his conversation with Abraham , he went on his way , and Abraham returned to his tent .

ID:	5208
INPUT:	ez , ordea , hegal eta ezkata gabeak : kutsatutzat edukiko dituzue .
PRED:	But you must not be unclean and unclean . You must be unclean because you are ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	You may not , however , eat marine animals that do not have both fins and scales . They are ceremonially unclean for you .

ID:	5209
INPUT:	Senideok , neure aldetik , ziur dakit zuek onginahiz beterik eta jakite guztiz horniturik zaudetena , eta elkarri argi egiteko gai zaretena .
PRED:	Dear brothers , dear brothers and sisters , I know that you are going to know what you are doing , so that you can understand all the wonderful things you do .
GOLD:	I am fully convinced , my dear brothers and sisters , that you are full of goodness . You know these things so well you can teach each other all about them .

ID:	5210
INPUT:	Eta zoritxar eta atsekabe izugarri horiek gertatzean , kantika hau lekuko izango dute beren kontra , ondorengoek ere gogoan eta ahoan izango baitute . Izan ere , ondotxo dakit zer asmo darabiltzan gogoan herri honek , zin eginez agindutako lurraldera eraman baino lehenagotik ere » .
PRED:	“ When you see this , this is what the Lord has done to you in the land of Egypt , it will be against you and your descendants . That is why I am going to bring you out of this land . ”
GOLD:	And when great disasters come down on them , this song will stand as evidence against them , for it will never be forgotten by their descendants . I know the intentions of these people , even now before they have entered the land I swore to give them . ”

ID:	5211
INPUT:	Ene maiteok , geure kontzientziak kondenatzen ez bagaitu , berriz , uste osoz jo dezakegu Jainkoarengana ,
PRED:	Dear friends , dear friends , if we keep on sinning , we do n't believe God 's kindness .
GOLD:	Dear friends , if we do n't feel guilty , we can come to God with bold confidence .

ID:	5212
INPUT:	Idoloei desafioa
PRED:	A Message for Babylon
GOLD:	Restoration for Jerusalem

ID:	5213
INPUT:	Baina hemendik aurrera Gizonaren Semea Jainko ahalguztidunaren eskuinean eserita egongo da .
PRED:	But the Son of Man will go down to the place where the Son of Man is coming to the place of honor .
GOLD:	But from now on the Son of Man will be seated in the place of power at God 's right hand . ”

ID:	5214
INPUT:	Entzutez bakarrik ezagutzen zintudan ; orain , neure begiz ikusi zaitut !
PRED:	I have heard you alone , and now you see me ! I have seen you !
GOLD:	I had only heard about you before , but now I have seen you with my own eyes .

ID:	5215
INPUT:	Bet-Hogla aldetik igotzen zen eta , Bet-Arabaren iparraldetik igaroz , Rubenen seme Bohan-en Harkaitzeraino zihoan .
PRED:	One day passed through the hill country of Beth-aven , on the east side of the hill country of Reuben , Gad , and Beth-shemesh .
GOLD:	went up from there to Beth-hoglah , then proceeded north of Beth-arabah to the Stone of Bohan . ( Bohan was Reuben 's son . )

ID:	5216
INPUT:	mespretxua botatzen du handikien gaineraeta ahaltsuak indarge uzten ;
PRED:	He gives justice to the poor , and the mighty power of the powerful .
GOLD:	He pours disgrace upon princesand disarms the strong .

ID:	5217
INPUT:	Emadazu eskua eta salbatuko naiz , begi aurrean izango ditut beti zure arauak .
PRED:	I will rescue you from your hand , and I will obey your decrees .
GOLD:	Sustain me , and I will be rescued ; then I will meditate continually on your decrees .

ID:	5218
INPUT:	Tenpluan sartzeko eskubidea
PRED:	The East of the Temple
GOLD:	The Prince , Levites , and Priests

ID:	5219
INPUT:	Gizon hari Elimelek zeritzan , emazteari Noemi eta semeei Mahlon eta Kilion . Efratar leinukoak ziren , Judako Belengoak . Moaben bizi zirelarik ,
PRED:	The man named Ruth , Abram 's wife , Abigail , the wife of Bethuel , and the tribe of Levi ( also known as the tribe of Judah ) .
GOLD:	The man 's name was Elimelech , and his wife was Naomi . Their two sons were Mahlon and Kilion . They were Ephrathites from Bethlehem in the land of Judah . And when they reached Moab , they settled there .

ID:	5220
INPUT:	Israelen argi den Jainkoasu bihurtuko da , Israelen Santua sugar , eta bat-batean erreko ditu , sasia eta laharra bailiran .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Holy One of Israel , says : “ I will weep and shake it with a fire . ”
GOLD:	The Lord , the Light of Israel , will be a fire ; the Holy One will be a flame.He will devour the thorns and briers with fire , burning up the enemy in a single night .

ID:	5221
INPUT:	« Era berean , zuetako inor ez daiteke izan nire ikasle , dituen guztiei uko egiten ez badie .
PRED:	“ If you are not my followers , you must not deny any of these things , you must not deny any of these things .
GOLD:	So you can not become my disciple without giving up everything you own .

ID:	5222
INPUT:	Bera ere biluztu eta beste guztiekin batera sartu zen profeta-trantzean Samuelen aitzinean . Han egon zen etzana , larrugorri , egun eta gau osoan . Hortik dator esaera : « Saul ere profeta artean ? »
PRED:	So Saul went into the fields and went into the fields , and Samuel stayed there with a prophet in the synagogue . He said , “ That 's why are you looking for a prophet ? ”
GOLD:	He tore off his clothes and lay naked on the ground all day and all night , prophesying in the presence of Samuel . The people who were watching exclaimed , “ What ? Is even Saul a prophet ? ”

ID:	5223
INPUT:	neuk adieraziko dizuet zer eta nola esan , eta zuen etsaietako inork ez du zuei aurre ematerik edo erantzuterik izango .
PRED:	I will tell you what I told you , and no one will help your enemies , and no one will answer your enemies .
GOLD:	for I will give you the right words and such wisdom that none of your opponents will be able to reply or refute you !

ID:	5224
INPUT:	David eta Betsabe ( 11 , 1 — 12 , 25 )
PRED:	David Becomes the Red Sea
GOLD:	David and Bathsheba

ID:	5225
INPUT:	« Halere , badaki hark zein den nire jokabidea ; proba nazala , urrea bezain garbi aterako naiz .
PRED:	“ But if I am pure , my daughter is as pure as pure as I live , I will be pure .
GOLD:	“ But he knows where I am going.And when he tests me , I will come out as pure as gold .

ID:	5226
INPUT:	Beraz , bi gauza ditugu Jainkoaren asmoa aldaezina dela adierazten digutenak : agintzaria eta zin-hitza — eta horietan Jainkoak ez dezake gezurrik esan — ; horietan oinarriturik , adorez beteak sentitzen gara aurrean dugun itxaropenari eusteko .
PRED:	So we are confident in God 's grace , and we are not worthy to obey the word of God . We say , “ If we do n't obey God 's commandments , we will be put to death . ”
GOLD:	So God has given both his promise and his oath . These two things are unchangeable because it is impossible for God to lie . Therefore , we who have fled to him for refuge can have great confidence as we hold to the hope that lies before us .

ID:	5227
INPUT:	Gizon-emakume berrien jokabidea
PRED:	Living by the Son of Man
GOLD:	Living the New Life

ID:	5228
INPUT:	Baina ez dute guztiek hau behar bezala ulertzen . Batzuek , oraintsu arte idolatrian ibiliak , haragi hori sasijainkoei eskainia balitz bezala jaten dute eta , beraien kontzientzia ongi hezigabea denez , errudun bihurtzen dira .
PRED:	But they do n't understand these things , so they can understand that they are saying , ‘ You must worship idols in the worship of gods , for they have been unfaithful to their gods . '
GOLD:	However , not all believers know this . Some are accustomed to thinking of idols as being real , so when they eat food that has been offered to idols , they think of it as the worship of real gods , and their weak consciences are violated .

ID:	5229
INPUT:	Sakrifizioa eskaini zuen Jakobek mendian , eta bere ahaideak otordura gonbidatu . Otordua egin ondoren , mendian igaro zuten gaua .
PRED:	Then Jacob stood at the place of worship at the mountains of Israel , and they prepared a place for the night .
GOLD:	Then Jacob offered a sacrifice to God there on the mountain and invited everyone to a covenant feast . After they had eaten , they spent the night on the mountain .

ID:	5230
INPUT:	Kiriat-Arban hil zen , Hebronen alegia , Kanaan lurraldean . Abrahamek dolu egin zuen haren heriotzagatik .
PRED:	So Abraham died at Kadesh in the land of Canaan , which was buried in the land of Canaan , which was buried in the valley of Canaan .
GOLD:	she died at Kiriath-arba ( now called Hebron ) in the land of Canaan . There Abraham mourned and wept for her .

ID:	5231
INPUT:	Egizu negar , neskatxa batekhil zaion senar berriazdoluz jantzitanegar dagien bezala .
PRED:	Then make a young girl who was killed by her husband , dressed in burlap , like a bridegroom .
GOLD:	Weep like a bride dressed in black , mourning the death of her husband .

ID:	5232
INPUT:	Gordelekutzat hartu zituen ilunpeak , etxola gisa bere inguruan hodei-laino euritsuak .
PRED:	He led them to the Red Sea , and he led them into the darkness .
GOLD:	Thick clouds shielded the brightness around himand rained down hail and burning coals .

ID:	5233
INPUT:	Noeren hiru seme hauetatik sorturiko ondorengoak munduan barrena hedatu ziren .
PRED:	These three sons were the same sons of Noah , born into the boat .
GOLD:	From these three sons of Noah came all the people who now populate the earth .

ID:	5234
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Babiloniako erregeNabukodonosorren bitartezamaiaraziko dutEgiptoren harropuzkeria .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says concerning Elam , the king of Egypt , says : I will bring war against Elam , and the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	“ For this is what the Sovereign Lord says : By the power of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon , I will destroy the hordes of Egypt .

ID:	5235
INPUT:	Ezinbestekoa Jainkoaren zigorra
PRED:	Hope for God 's Coming
GOLD:	The Certainty of the

ID:	5236
INPUT:	Jesusek esan zion : — Zoaz , zeure sinesmenak sendatu zaitu . Une berean ikusmena etorri zitzaion berriro , eta Jesusen ondoren zihoan bidean .
PRED:	Jesus told him , “ Go and see your faith . ” And Jesus told him , “ Go back and see the Good News about Jesus . ” So they went back to Jesus .
GOLD:	And Jesus said to him , “ Go , for your faith has healed you . ” Instantly the man could see , and he followed Jesus down the road .

ID:	5237
INPUT:	baita haren arrantzu-lagun Santiago eta Joan Zebedeoren semeak ere . Baina Jesusek esan zion Simoni : — Ez beldurtu , hemendik aurrera giza arrantzale izango zara .
PRED:	But Jesus replied , “ John , John , the son of John , the son of John , ” Jesus said . “ Do n't be afraid of you . ”
GOLD:	His partners , James and John , the sons of Zebedee , were also amazed.Jesus replied to Simon , “ Do n't be afraid ! From now on you 'll be fishing for people ! ”

ID:	5238
INPUT:	Alai zaitezte egun horretan eta egin pozez jauzi , handia izango baita zuen saria zeruan ; gauza bera egin zieten profetei jende horren gurasoek .
PRED:	Be glad , and rejoice in the palace , for the people of the forest will be filled with joy and the people of the forest .
GOLD:	When that happens , be happy ! Yes , leap for joy ! For a great reward awaits you in heaven . And remember , their ancestors treated the ancient prophets that same way .

ID:	5239
INPUT:	Moisesek , beraz , Kanaan lurraldea ikertzera bidali zituen , esanez : — Zoazte Negevetik eta igo mendialdera .
PRED:	So Moses sent the people of Canaan to explore the land of Canaan . “ Go and go to the hill country of Nineveh . ”
GOLD:	Moses gave the men these instructions as he sent them out to explore the land : “ Go north through the Negev into the hill country .

ID:	5240
INPUT:	Israelgo Jainkoaren aintza , euskarritzat zituen kerubinen gainetik altxaturik , tenpluko sarrerarantz joan zen . Orduan , lihozko jantzia eta gerrian idazteko tresnak zeuzkan gizonari dei egin
PRED:	Then the glory of the God of Israel brought them out of the Temple of the Lord , the God of Israel , went to the entrance of the Temple of the Lord , and he stood in front of the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the glory of the God of Israel rose up from between the cherubim , where it had rested , and moved to the entrance of the Temple . And the Lord called to the man dressed in linen who was carrying the writer 's case .

ID:	5241
INPUT:	Baina arropak eta gorputza garbitzen ez baditu , bere hobenaren ondorenak jasan beharko ditu » .
PRED:	But if you wash your clothes , you must wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water . ”
GOLD:	But if they do not wash their clothes and bathe themselves , they will be punished for their sin . ”

ID:	5242
INPUT:	Nob-en da dagoeneko erasotzaileaeta eskua altxatzen du mehatxukaSion mendiaren aurka , Jerusalemgo muinoaren aurka .
PRED:	The king of Babylon has sent me a hand against Jerusalem . He has sent a hand against Mount Zion , and he will stand against Jerusalem .
GOLD:	The enemy stops at Nob for the rest of that day.He shakes his fist at beautiful Mount Zion , the mountain of Jerusalem .

ID:	5243
INPUT:	Nik emandako ogia , elikatzeko ematen nizkizun irin garbia , olioa eta eztia eskaini zenizkien opari atsegingarri gisa . Honela diot nik , Jainko Jaunak .
PRED:	I will give you a piece of olive oil , a grain offering of olive oil , a pleasing aroma to the Lord , says the Sovereign Lord .
GOLD:	Imagine it ! You set before them as a sacrifice the choice flour , olive oil , and honey I had given you , says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	5244
INPUT:	Printzea sarrerako atalondotik sartu/irtengo da beti .
PRED:	The entry room will enter the inner courtyard at the entrance to the inner courtyard .
GOLD:	“ The prince must enter the gateway through the entry room , and he must leave the same way .

ID:	5245
INPUT:	Zigilupean gordea uzten dutirakaspen eta aitorpen hauneure ikasleentzat .
PRED:	I am writing to those who follow my teaching and teachings about my teaching .
GOLD:	Preserve the teaching of God ; entrust his instructions to those who follow me .

ID:	5246
INPUT:	« Ez al dakizu , betidanik , gizakia lurrean jarria izan denetik ,
PRED:	“ Do n't you realize that you are the one who created the earth ?
GOLD:	“ Do n't you realize that from the beginning of time , ever since people were first placed on the earth ,

ID:	5247
INPUT:	Jaunarengandik hartu nuen nik , neure aldetik zuei eskualdatu dizuedan hau : Jesus Jaunak , saldu zuten gauean , ogia hartu zuela
PRED:	Then I took my hand from the Lord , who rescued me from the hands of the Lord Jesus . This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	For I pass on to you what I received from the Lord himself . On the night when he was betrayed , the Lord Jesus took some bread

ID:	5248
INPUT:	esanez : « Horra ! Filistearrak , Samson ! » Esnatu zen Samson eta aurrekoetan bezala libratuko zela uste izan zuen ; baina ez zekien Jaunak zapuztua zuela .
PRED:	“ Samson ! ” he said , “ Samson ! ” And when he was in the Philistines , he did n't realize that the Lord had rescued him from the Philistines .
GOLD:	Then she cried out , “ Samson ! The Philistines have come to capture you ! ” When he woke up , he thought , “ I will do as before and shake myself free . ” But he did n't realize the Lord had left him .

ID:	5249
INPUT:	Egun hartan Jaunaren beldur izan zen David . Honela zioen : « Nola ekarriko dut , bada , nirera Jaunaren kutxa ? »
PRED:	That very day David was afraid of the Lord . “ How can I go to the Ark of the Lord ? ” he asked .
GOLD:	David was now afraid of the Lord , and he asked , “ How can I ever bring the Ark of the Lord back into my care ? ”

ID:	5250
INPUT:	Salomon erregeak erantzun zion bere amari : — Zergatik eskatzen didazu Abixag xunemdarra Adoniasentzat ? Nire anaia zaharragoa dela eta , Abiatar apaiza eta Tzeruiaren seme Joab bere alde dituela eta , horrentzat erregetza eskatzea besterik ez zaizu falta .
PRED:	Then King Solomon replied , “ Why are you asking me to help me ? Why are you willing to help me ? ” And Abishai son of Zeruiah , Abishai son of Zeruiah , Abishai son of Zeruiah , the king of Zeruiah , and Abishai son of Zeruiah ? ”
GOLD:	“ How can you possibly ask me to give Abishag to Adonijah ? ” King Solomon demanded . “ You might as well ask me to give him the kingdom ! You know that he is my older brother , and that he has Abiathar the priest and Joab son of Zeruiah on his side . ”

ID:	5251
INPUT:	Orduan , apostoluek eta arduradunek , eliz elkarte osoarekin bat , beren arteko batzuk hautatu eta Paulo eta Bernaberekin Antiokiara bidaltzea erabaki zuten . Judas Barsaba eta Silas hautatu zituzten , senideen artean itzal handiko gizonak biak ,
PRED:	Then the apostles and the elders of the church took some of the church , and some of the church in Antioch of Paul and Barnabas and Barnabas and Barnabas and Barnabas and Barnabas in Antioch . They were sent by some of the people of Judah and Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Then the apostles and elders together with the whole church in Jerusalem chose delegates , and they sent them to Antioch of Syria with Paul and Barnabas to report on this decision . The men chosen were two of the church leaders — Judas ( also called Barsabbas ) and Silas .

ID:	5252
INPUT:	Utzi egin beharko duzueman nizun ondarea . Zeure etsaien esklabo egingo zaitutezagutzen ez duzun lurralde batean , nire haserrearen sua harrotu baituzuitzalezineko sugarretan » .
PRED:	You must take away your enemies , and you will be slaves in the land of your enemies . If you do n't be angry with them , you will be angry with the whole land . ”
GOLD:	The wonderful possession I have reserved for youwill slip from your hands.I will tell your enemies to take youas captives to a foreign land.For my anger blazes like a firethat will burn forever . ”

ID:	5253
INPUT:	Hegoaldeko gelen azpian , pasabidearen muturrean , sarrera bat zegoen , babes-hormaren aurrez aurre ; ekialdetik sartzen zen .
PRED:	There was a man sitting on the south side of the gateway leading to the south side of the inner curtain , and there was a distance between the entrance .
GOLD:	So there was an entrance in the wall facing the doors of the inner block of rooms , and another on the east at the end of the interior walkway .

ID:	5254
INPUT:	eta Jakobek Jose , Mariaren senarra ; eta Mariagandik jaio zen Jesus , Mesias deritzana .
PRED:	And Joseph , Joseph , came to his husband , Mary , the mother of Joseph , and the mother of the Messiah .
GOLD:	Jacob was the father of Joseph , the husband of Mary.Mary gave birth to Jesus , who is called the Messiah .

ID:	5255
INPUT:	Lurreko lehen emaitza eta fruituen eta niretzat bereizitako opari guztien zatirik onena apaizentzat izango da . Labealdi bakoitzeko ogirik onenak emango dizkiete israeldarrek , berauen etxeak bedeinka ditzadan .
PRED:	I will give you the crops of the first harvest and the crops you have given to the priests and Levites . If you present it to the Lord , you will bless the people of Israel and bless them , and I will bless them .
GOLD:	The first of the ripe fruits and all the gifts brought to the Lord will go to the priests . The first batch of dough must also be given to the priests so the Lord will bless your homes .

ID:	5256
INPUT:	Zoritxarrekoa zu , Moab ! Galdua zara , Kemox jainkoaren herri hori ! Bizirik geldituriko zure seme-alabakgatibu eraman dituSihon errege amortarrak .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you , O Moab , Moab , the god of Moab , the god of Moab , the god of King Sihon of the Amorites , who has been captured .
GOLD:	What sorrow awaits you , O people of Moab ! You are finished , O worshipers of Chemosh ! Chemosh has left his sons as refugees , his daughters as captives of Sihon , the Amorite king .

ID:	5257
INPUT:	baina jendaurrean ukatzen nauena ukatu egingo dute Jainkoaren aingeruen aurrean .
PRED:	But everyone who denies me to hear me , and they will deny me in the presence of God .
GOLD:	But anyone who denies me here on earth will be denied before God 's angels .

ID:	5258
INPUT:	Etxegileek bazterturiko harria giltzarri gertatu da .
PRED:	The house of the builders rejectedhas now become the cornerstone .
GOLD:	The stone that the builders rejectedhas now become the cornerstone .

ID:	5259
INPUT:	Haren aginduak oro aurrean izan ditut beti , ez naiz saihestu haren arauetatik .
PRED:	I have obeyed all my commands , and I have never abandoned my decrees .
GOLD:	I am blameless before God ; I have kept myself from sin .

ID:	5260
INPUT:	Seir lurraldean , berriz , hortarrak bizi izan ziren lehenago ; baina Esauren ondorengoek lurralde hartatik bota eta suntsitu egin zituzten eta bertan jarri ziren bizitzen , israeldarrek Jaunak jabetzan eman dien lurraldean egin duten bezala ) .
PRED:	So the people of Seir , who lived in the land of Seir , who lived in the land of Seir and destroyed them , just as the Lord had commanded them . The Israelites to destroy them , just as the Lord had commanded them .
GOLD:	In earlier times the Horites had lived in Seir , but they were driven out and displaced by the descendants of Esau , just as Israel drove out the people of Canaan when the Lord gave Israel their land . )

ID:	5261
INPUT:	Honela dio Judako herriak : « Ezaguna duguMoaben gehiegizko harrokeria , haren oilarkeria eta handiustea , haren handi-iritzi hutsalak .
PRED:	This is what the people of Judah says : “ The pride of the people of Moab will be like an iron pot , and its ropes are as precious as iron .
GOLD:	We have heard about proud Moab — about its pride and arrogance and rage.But all that boasting has disappeared .

ID:	5262
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak herri honi buruz : « Maite du honek harat-honat ibiltzea , ez ditu oinak lotzen . Ez dut gogoko . Gogora dakart honen jokaera gaiztoa , eta zigortu egingo dut bere bekatuengatik » .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ My heart is like this nation , ” says the Lord . “ I will not turn away from their sins , and I will bring disaster on them . ”
GOLD:	So this is what the Lord says to his people : “ You love to wander far from meand do not restrain yourselves.Therefore , I will no longer accept you as my people.Now I will remember all your wickednessand will punish you for your sins . ”

ID:	5263
INPUT:	Lurrean eserita , isilik daude Sion hiri ederreko zaharrak , beren buruetara hautsa bota eta dolu-jantziaz estalirik . Jerusalemgo neskatxak burumakur dabiltza .
PRED:	The poor and beautiful Jerusalem are dead , and the princes of the dead will bow down to the ground and dress themselves in burlap . They are allowed to eat the food from the dead .
GOLD:	The leaders of beautiful Jerusalemsit on the ground in silence.They are clothed in burlapand throw dust on their heads.The young women of Jerusalemhang their heads in shame .

ID:	5264
INPUT:	Norbaitek galde dezake : Eta hilak nola pizten dira ? Nolako gorputzez itzuliko dira bizira ?
PRED:	“ What are you looking for ? ” they ask . “ Why are you looking for the dead ? ”
GOLD:	But someone may ask , “ How will the dead be raised ? What kind of bodies will they have ? ”

ID:	5265
INPUT:	Geure bekatuak aitortzen baditugu , ordea , leiala eta zuzena den Jainkoak bekatuak barkatu eta gaiztakeria orotatik garbituko gaitu .
PRED:	But if we know that we are righteous , we have sinned , and God 's sins are forgiven .
GOLD:	But if we confess our sins to him , he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all wickedness .

ID:	5266
INPUT:	Zedro , arkazi , mirto eta olibondoaklandatuko ditut basamortuan ; zipres , zumar eta izeiak eremuan .
PRED:	I will send olive groves and olive trees , along with olive oil , and all your olive trees . I will also be your servants , along with all kinds of olive oil .
GOLD:	I will plant trees in the barren desert — cedar , acacia , myrtle , olive , cypress , fir , and pine .

ID:	5267
INPUT:	dakidana hauxe da : hiriz hiri , Espiritu Santuak garbi esaten didala kateak eta nekeak ditudala zain .
PRED:	This is what the Holy Spirit says : “ As surely as the Holy Spirit lives , the Holy Spirit is like those who are as weak as stone . ”
GOLD:	except that the Holy Spirit tells me in city after city that jail and suffering lie ahead .

ID:	5268
INPUT:	Hau da abestuko duten eresia : nazio orotako emakumeekabestuko dute , Egipto eta hangojende guztiarengatik abestuko . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ I will punish the people of Egypt , and all the other nations of Egypt , says the Sovereign Lord . I , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Yes , this is the funeral songthey will sing for Egypt.Let all the nations mourn.Let them mourn for Egypt and its hordes.I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	5269
INPUT:	Eraikia zuen Davidek oihal-etxola Jaunarentzat , eta han sartu zuten Jaunaren kutxa , eta erdian ezarri , bere tokian . Orduan , erre-opariak eskaini zizkion Davidek Jaunari , baita elkartasun-opariak ere .
PRED:	So David took the Ark of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies and placed it on the Ark of the Lord . Then David placed the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant with a burnt offering and peace offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	They brought the Ark of the Lord and set it in its place inside the special tent David had prepared for it . And David sacrificed burnt offerings and peace offerings to the Lord .

ID:	5270
INPUT:	Erdiminetan zegoela , emaginak esan zion : « Ez izan beldur ; mutikoa duzu berriro ! »
PRED:	While he was still speaking , he said , “ Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! ”
GOLD:	After a very hard delivery , the midwife finally exclaimed , “ Do n't be afraid — you have another son ! ”

ID:	5271
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , hitz egin nire izenean nire , Jainko Jaun honen , mezua adieraziz : « Ezpata ! Ezpata zorrotzaeta ongi leundua !
PRED:	“ Son of man , give me this message : ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : My sword is a sword , a sword , a sword , a sword , a sword , and a sword . '
GOLD:	“ Son of man , prophesy to themand clap your hands.Then take the sword and brandish it twice , even three times , to symbolize the great massacre , the great massacre facing them on every side .

ID:	5272
INPUT:	« Esan Aaronen seme Eleazarri ateratzeko errautsontziak sutatik urrutira , sagaratuak baitaude , eta sakabanatzeko txingarrak .
PRED:	“ Next Aaron son of Aaron the priest will remove all the incense altar from the center of the incense altar , for it is most holy .
GOLD:	“ Tell the people of Israel to bring you twelve wooden staffs , one from each leader of Israel 's ancestral tribes , and inscribe each leader 's name on his staff .

ID:	5273
INPUT:	« Egokiera hartan , honela erregutu nion Jaunari :
PRED:	“ At that time the Lord said to me ,
GOLD:	“ At that time I pleaded with the Lord and said ,

ID:	5274
INPUT:	Bestela , ene errege jauna , zu hiltzean , neure seme Salomon eta biok hil egin nahi izango gaituzte .
PRED:	But if you kill me , my lord the king will kill me , my son Solomon will die . ”
GOLD:	If you do not act , my son Solomon and I will be treated as criminals as soon as my lord the king has died . ”

ID:	5275
INPUT:	Lurrera erori nintzen , eta mintzo hau entzun nuen : “ Saulo , Saulo , zergatik pertsegitzen nauzu ? ”
PRED:	When I heard this , I fell to the ground and said , ‘ Saul , why did you look for me ? Why are you persecuting me ? '
GOLD:	I fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to me , ‘ Saul , Saul , why are you persecuting me ? '

ID:	5276
INPUT:	Ezin izan zuten ezertan ere herriaren aurrean harrapatu eta , haren erantzunaz harriturik , hitzik gabe gelditu ziren .
PRED:	They could not stand before him , and they were amazed at the gates of the town , and they could n't answer him .
GOLD:	So they failed to trap him by what he said in front of the people . Instead , they were amazed by his answer , and they became silent .

ID:	5277
INPUT:	Zuek sortu umeak , ugaldu , zabaldu munduaneta bete ezazue jendez ” » .
PRED:	You have many children , but you have many children ! ”
GOLD:	Now be fruitful and multiply , and repopulate the earth . ”

ID:	5278
INPUT:	Etorri da Gizonaren Semea , jaten eta edaten duela , eta esaten duzue : “ A zer tripazain eta mozkorra , zergalari eta bekatarien laguna ! ”
PRED:	This is what the Son of Man is coming , and you say to the Son of Man , ‘ You eat grass like a drunkard , and eat it . '
GOLD:	The Son of Man , on the other hand , feasts and drinks , and you say , ‘ He 's a glutton and a drunkard , and a friend of tax collectors and other sinners ! '

ID:	5279
INPUT:	Jaunaren etxea , bere jauregia , Milo-ko lubeta , Jerusalemgo harresia , Hatzor , Megido eta Gezer egiteko , lan behartuak antolatu zituen Salomon erregeak .
PRED:	The palace of the Temple of the Lord , the king of Babylon , was like Hazor , which was like Hazor , which was like Hazor , which was like King Solomon of Judah .
GOLD:	This is the account of the forced labor that King Solomon conscripted to build the Lord 's Temple , the royal palace , the supporting terraces , the wall of Jerusalem , and the cities of Hazor , Megiddo , and Gezer .

ID:	5280
INPUT:	Hark baimena eman zien . Espiritu gaiztoak gizonarengandik atera eta txerrietan sartu ziren ; eta txerri-taldea ezpondan behera aintzirara amildu zen ; bi milaren bat txerri ito ziren .
PRED:	But the man brought the spirit into the pigs , and the man who had been thrown into the pigs . So the two demons were thrown into the pigs , and they were thrown into the lake .
GOLD:	So Jesus gave them permission . The evil spirits came out of the man and entered the pigs , and the entire herd of about 2,000 pigs plunged down the steep hillside into the lake and drowned in the water .

ID:	5281
INPUT:	Errukitu zen Jainko Jauna , eta esan zuen : — Hau ere ez da gertatuko !
PRED:	But the Lord God of heaven said , “ This is what the Lord says : This will happen to you . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord relented from this plan , too . “ I will not do that either , ” said the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	5282
INPUT:	aita semearen aurka eta semea aitaren aurka , ama alabaren kontra eta alaba amaren kontra , amaginarreba errainaren kontra eta erraina amaginarrebaren kontra » .
PRED:	And if the father of his father against his father and mother , the daughter of a daughter-in-law against against her , the daughter-in-law , the daughter of a daughter-in-law against her . ”
GOLD:	‘ Father will be divided against sonand son against father ; mother against daughterand daughter against mother ; and mother-in-law against daughter-in-lawand daughter-in-law against mother-in-law . ' ”

ID:	5283
INPUT:	honela , Baal-Peorren kultuetara makurtu zen herria eta Jaunaren haserre-sua piztu zen Israelen aurka .
PRED:	But when Baasha had finished speaking to the pagan shrines , he was very angry with the Lord 's anger against Israel .
GOLD:	In this way , Israel joined in the worship of Baal of Peor , causing the Lord 's anger to blaze against his people .

ID:	5284
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunaren eraginez , mendebaldeko haizeak jo zuen indartsu ; honek larrapoteak aurrean eraman eta Itsaso Gorrira jaurti zituen . Ez zen larrapote bat bera ere Egipto osoan gelditu .
PRED:	Then the Lord struck the people with fear of the Lord , and he threw them into the Red Sea . He threw them into the Red Sea into the sea , and no one left them .
GOLD:	The Lord responded by shifting the wind , and the strong west wind blew the locusts into the Red Sea . Not a single locust remained in all the land of Egypt .

ID:	5285
INPUT:	« Niri sagaraturiko pertsonak behar duzue izan . « Ez jan piztiek oihanean sarraskituriko abereen okelarik ; zakurrei botako diezue .
PRED:	“ You must eat the meat that are ceremonially clean . You must not eat any meat from the ground . You must not eat any meat from the ground .
GOLD:	“ You must also give me the firstborn of your cattle , sheep , and goats . But leave the newborn animal with its mother for seven days ; then give it to me on the eighth day .

ID:	5286
INPUT:	Jaunaren aurrean dagoen aldareko ikatz goriz errautsontzia betez eta bi eskutada intsentsu-hauts usaintsu hartuz , errezelaz barrualdera eramango ditu .
PRED:	Then the incense altar of the Lord will burn incense burner and burn incense incense on the altar . He must sprinkle it with ashes on the altar .
GOLD:	he will fill an incense burner with burning coals from the altar that stands before the Lord . Then he will take two handfuls of fragrant powdered incense and will carry the burner and the incense behind the inner curtain .

ID:	5287
INPUT:	buruz gain ustetsuen burlaz , harroen mespretxuz .
PRED:	For I was the precious to the poor , so I could be crucified with contempt .
GOLD:	We have had more than our fill of the scoffing of the proudand the contempt of the arrogant .

ID:	5288
INPUT:	Horrelaxe eratu zen egun hartan Jaunaren zerbitzua Pazkoa ospatzeko eta Jaunaren aldarean erre-opariak eskaintzeko , Josias erregeak agindu bezala .
PRED:	This was the Passover celebration that the Lord had commanded him to celebrate the Passover festival , just as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	The entire ceremony for the Lord 's Passover was completed that day . All the burnt offerings were sacrificed on the altar of the Lord , as King Josiah had commanded .

ID:	5289
INPUT:	Amorru biziz zapaldu ditut herriak , neure sumin-edariz mozkortueta haien odola lurrean isuri .
PRED:	I will pour out my fury on the nations , and I will pour out my fury on the earth .
GOLD:	I crushed the nations in my angerand made them stagger and fall to the ground , spilling their blood upon the earth . ”

ID:	5290
INPUT:	Jakina da gaiztakeria eta miseriaez direla berez sortzen lurrean :
PRED:	The evil of the wicked are like their wickedness , and their wickedness will never be satisfied .
GOLD:	But evil does not spring from the soil , and trouble does not sprout from the earth .

ID:	5291
INPUT:	Tenpluko tresnak
PRED:	The Temple of the Temple
GOLD:	Furnishings for the Temple

ID:	5292
INPUT:	Ismaelek gatibu zeraman jendea , Johanan eta beronen gudalburuak ikustean , pozez bete zen .
PRED:	When Johanan was captives , the commander of the army of Israel began to see the commander of the army .
GOLD:	The people Ishmael had captured shouted for joy when they saw Johanan and the other military leaders .

ID:	5293
INPUT:	Eufrates ibaiaz beste aldetik hartu eta Kanaan lurraldean barrena ibilarazi nuen zuen aita Abraham . Semea eman nion , Isaak , eta ondorengotza ugaldu .
PRED:	So I took the hill country of Canaan and settled in the hill country of Canaan and gave it to the east of the Euphrates River , and the descendants of Isaac , Isaac , and Isaac .
GOLD:	But I took your ancestor Abraham from the land beyond the Euphrates and led him into the land of Canaan . I gave him many descendants through his son Isaac .

ID:	5294
INPUT:	Entzun mezu hau : Badator herri batiparraldetik istilu handiz , Judako hiriakbasamortu eta txakal-zulobihurtzera .
PRED:	Listen to this message from the people of Israel : “ Look , the great city of Judah is a desolate wilderness , a great city of Judah . ”
GOLD:	Listen ! Hear the terrifying roar of great armiesas they roll down from the north.The towns of Judah will be destroyedand become a haunt for jackals .

ID:	5295
INPUT:	Erdiminak baino lehenizan du Sionek haurra , oinazeak baino lehenekarri du umea .
PRED:	For the Lord has given birth to a child than a child named Simon Peter .
GOLD:	“ Before the birth pains even begin , Jerusalem gives birth to a son .

ID:	5296
INPUT:	alde bakoitzetik bi mila berrehun eta berrogeita hamar metro dituen karratua izango da .
PRED:	For each of the altar will be 75 feet long and 75 feet wide .
GOLD:	The city will measure 11/2 miles on each side — north , south , east , and west .

ID:	5297
INPUT:	Sararen heriotza eta e<unk> ta
PRED:	Summary of Solomon 's Reign
GOLD:	The Burial of Sarah

ID:	5298
INPUT:	Neskameek arroztzat naukate , kanpotartzat hartzen naute .
PRED:	My children care about me , for I am deeply troubled and sing about me .
GOLD:	My servants and maids consider me a stranger.I am like a foreigner to them .

ID:	5299
INPUT:	Baina orain , lotuak gintuen legearentzat hilak gaudelarik , legetik aske gaude ; horrela , Espirituaren bizi berriaren arabera zerbitza dezakegu Jauna , eta ez lege idatziaren arau zaharraren arabera .
PRED:	But now we are bound by the law of the law , just as we live by the law of the Holy Spirit . But we have not obeyed the commands of the Lord , and we are not trying to obey him .
GOLD:	But now we have been released from the law , for we died to it and are no longer captive to its power . Now we can serve God , not in the old way of obeying the letter of the law , but in the new way of living in the Spirit .

ID:	5300
INPUT:	Nire bitartez esan zuena bete du Jaunak : zure eskuetatik erregetza kendu eta beste bati eman dio , Davidi .
PRED:	Give me this message from the Lord : “ The Lord has given me from your hand , David , and he has given me the king of David . ”
GOLD:	The Lord has done just as he said he would . He has torn the kingdom from you and given it to your rival , David .

ID:	5301
INPUT:	3
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Blind Men
GOLD:	He

ID:	5302
INPUT:	Hain zuzen , faraoia , gertatuaren berri jakin zuelarik , Moises hil nahian zebilen , baina honek faraoiagandik ihes egin zuen eta Madian eskualdera joan zen bizitzera . Han , putzu baten ondoan eseri zen .
PRED:	So Pharaoh returned to Pharaoh 's family , where he died . But when he died , he fled to Pharaoh 's body , he fled to his body , where he fled to his body .
GOLD:	And sure enough , Pharaoh heard what had happened , and he tried to kill Moses . But Moses fled from Pharaoh and went to live in the land of Midian.When Moses arrived in Midian , he sat down beside a well .

ID:	5303
INPUT:	lurrikara handiak izango dira , eta izurrite eta goseteak han eta hemen ; gauza ikaragarriak gertatuko dira , eta ortzian seinale handiak azalduko .
PRED:	There will be a great famine and disease , famine , and disease and disease . In fact , there will be a miraculous signs and wonders in the sky .
GOLD:	There will be great earthquakes , and there will be famines and plagues in many lands , and there will be terrifying things and great miraculous signs from heaven .

ID:	5304
INPUT:	Hau dio Jainko Jaunak : « Egin txalo eta dantza ! Zoriondu Israel herria bere jokabide guztiz higuingarriagatik ! Gerraz , gosez eta izurriz eroriko dira .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ What sorrow awaits the people of Israel ! Blessed are those who commit adultery , famine , and disease .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Clap your hands in horror , and stamp your feet . Cry out because of all the detestable sins the people of Israel have committed . Now they are going to die from war and famine and disease .

ID:	5305
INPUT:	Gero , leinuen ordezkari bezala izen-bilketa egiten jardun zuten familiaburuek
PRED:	Then the leaders of the tribe of Levi called together the leaders and the leaders of the tribe of Levi .
GOLD:	Then the leaders of Israel — the tribal leaders who had registered the troops — came and brought their offerings .

ID:	5306
INPUT:	Jaunak zigortu egin zituen Bet-Xemexekoak ere , Jaunaren kutxari ikusmiraz begira egon zirelako ; herri hartako hirurogeita hamar gizaseme zigortu zituen Jaunak . Atsekabe handia izan zuen herriak , Jaunak oso gogor zigortu zuelako .
PRED:	The Lord punished the people of Beth-shemesh in Beth-shemesh , for he had made them very angry with the people of Judah . So the Lord punished them for seventy years .
GOLD:	But the Lord killed seventy men from Beth-shemesh because they looked into the Ark of the Lord . And the people mourned greatly because of what the Lord had done .

ID:	5307
INPUT:	Jesus nola atxilotuko
PRED:	The Last Supper
GOLD:	Jesus Anointed at Bethany

ID:	5308
INPUT:	Habia bati bezala erantsi diet eskuaherrien aberastasunei . Habian utzitako arrautzakhartzen diren bezalaxehartu dut neuretzat lur guztia , eta ez zuen inork hegalik mugitu , ez txio egiteko mokorik zabaldu » .
PRED:	I will give them a solemn oath to the people of Israel . I will give them the wealth of the people of Israel , and they will be able to be able to open their heads , and no one will be able to open them . ”
GOLD:	I have robbed their nests of richesand gathered up kingdoms as a farmer gathers eggs.No one can even flap a wing against meor utter a peep of protest . ”

ID:	5309
INPUT:	Zu zara , oi Jainko , zu betidanik nire errege . Zuk lortu zenuen lurrean garaipena :
PRED:	O God , you are my God , and you made the nations of the earth .
GOLD:	You , O God , are my king from ages past , bringing salvation to the earth .

ID:	5310
INPUT:	Nork bere biziaren ordain Jaunarentzat zerga ematean , ez du aberatsak bost gramo baino gehiago ordainduko , ezta pobreak ere gutxiago .
PRED:	No one can pay attention to the Lord 's Temple , for he will pay five pounds of silver or gold .
GOLD:	When this offering is given to the Lord to purify your lives , making you right with him , the rich must not give more than the specified amount , and the poor must not give less .

ID:	5311
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun zion : — Itxurazaleok ! Zuetako nork ez du larunbatez ere idia nahiz astoa ukuilutik askatu eta ura edatera eramaten ?
PRED:	“ Look ! ” the Lord replied . “ No one can ever catch it ! ” And the Lord replied , “ No one ca n't let your hand go on the Sabbath ? ”
GOLD:	But the Lord replied , “ You hypocrites ! Each of you works on the Sabbath day ! Do n't you untie your ox or your donkey from its stall on the Sabbath and lead it out for water ?

ID:	5312
INPUT:	Ohoratu aita-amak : hori da berekin agintzari bat daraman lehen mandamendua , hau da :
PRED:	This is what the father of mother says : “ This is what the Lord has commanded :
GOLD:	“ Honor your father and mother . ” This is the first commandment with a promise :

ID:	5313
INPUT:	Bildu zituen Saulek bere gizonak Telamen eta zenbatu : berrehun mila oinezko eta Judaren leinuko hamar mila gizon .
PRED:	So Saul took some of the men of Benjamin and Benjamin 's troops , along with the warriors of Judah .
GOLD:	So Saul mobilized his army at Telaim . There were 200,000 soldiers from Israel and 10,000 men from Judah .

ID:	5314
INPUT:	Judako jende guztia pozik zegoen zin eginarengatik , bihotz-bihotzez egin baitzuten . Eta Jaunaren bila gogo osoz ibili zirenez , aurkitu ahal izan zuten eta hark bakea eman zien alde guztietatik .
PRED:	So all the people of Judah did not leave the presence of the Lord , for they followed him and followed the example of the Lord 's ways and followed him .
GOLD:	All in Judah were happy about this covenant , for they had entered into it with all their heart . They earnestly sought after God , and they found him . And the Lord gave them rest from their enemies on every side .

ID:	5315
INPUT:	Eta errege nahi ez ninduten etsai horiek , berriz , ekarri hona eta hil itzazue nire aurrean ” » .
PRED:	But you would n't want me to kill me , but you would not kill me . ' ”
GOLD:	And as for these enemies of mine who did n't want me to be their king — bring them in and execute them right here in front of me . ' ”

ID:	5316
INPUT:	Egun hartan , nire eraginez , Judako buruzagiek aldameneko herri guztiak irentsiko dituzte , ezker-eskuin , suteak sasia bezala , zuziak lasto-balak bezala ; Jerusalemgo bizilagunek , ordea , beren hirian jarraituko dute bizitzen .
PRED:	On that day , all the people of Judah and Jerusalem — all the people of Judah — all the houses of the forest — all the cities of Judah — will be built on the walls of Jerusalem . But the city will be rebuilt , just as the city of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	“ On that day I will make the clans of Judah like a flame that sets a woodpile ablaze or like a burning torch among sheaves of grain . They will burn up all the neighboring nations right and left , while the people living in Jerusalem remain secure .

ID:	5317
INPUT:	eta , Jaunak zuen Jainkoak hura zuen esku jartzean , bertako gizonezko guztiak ezpataz hilko dituzue .
PRED:	And now , the Lord your God will hand you over to you , and you will be able to kill you .
GOLD:	When the Lord your God hands the town over to you , use your swords to kill every man in the town .

ID:	5318
INPUT:	« Hauxe da nik , Nabukodonosor erregeak , izan dudan ametsa . Orain zuk , Beltxatzar , azaldu ametsaren esanahia . Erreinuko jakitun guztiak ez dira gai izan hori azaltzeko ; zuk , ordea , egin dezakezu , jainko santuen espirituak gidatzen baitzaitu » .
PRED:	“ This is the dream , King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon , the dream , and you can know the meaning of the meaning of the meaning of the meaning of the meaning of the meaning of the dream . But you will know what you have done . ”
GOLD:	But leave the stump and the roots in the ground , bound with a band of iron and bronzeand surrounded by tender grass.Now let him be drenched with the dew of heaven , and let him live with the wild animals among the plants of the field .

ID:	5319
INPUT:	Aurrerantzean , ez duzuAbram izango izen , Abraham baizik , herri askoren sorburuegingo baitzaitut .
PRED:	But Abram replied , “ No , Abram 's name will be Abram , but he will become the leader of the nations . ”
GOLD:	What 's more , I am changing your name . It will no longer be Abram . Instead , you will be called Abraham , for you will be the father of many nations .

ID:	5320
INPUT:	Orobat , Baalat eta beronenak ziren biltegi-herrixkak berreraiki zituen , baita guda-gurdi eta zaldiak gordetzekoak ere . Nahi izan zuen guztia eraiki zuen Salomonek , nola Jerusalemen hala Libanon eta bere menpeko lurralde osoan .
PRED:	One of his brothers and sisters , he stationed some of the surrounding villages , along with their chariots , and all their chariots , as well as King Solomon had instructed . He decided to build the hill country of King Solomon as well as King Solomon had promised .
GOLD:	He also rebuilt Baalath and other supply centers and constructed towns where his chariots and horses could be stationed . He built everything he desired in Jerusalem and Lebanon and throughout his entire realm .

ID:	5321
INPUT:	Jaunak Daviden erreinua berregin
PRED:	David 's Prosperity and Wisdom
GOLD:	A Promise of Restoration

ID:	5322
INPUT:	Orduan , erregeak eraztuna bere behatzetik atera eta juduen etsai zen Hamani , Hamedataren seme eta Agagen jatorrikoari , eman zion ,
PRED:	So the king appointed his son , and he went out to the city of Haman son of Haman 's son , the son of Ahab 's son , and he told him everything he had done .
GOLD:	The king agreed , confirming his decision by removing his signet ring from his finger and giving it to Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite , the enemy of the Jews .

ID:	5323
INPUT:	Hauek dira Moisesek Israel herri osoari zuzenduriko hitzaldiak , Jordanez beste aldean , basamortuan , Sufen aurrez aurre dagoen haranean , hau da , Paran eta Tofel , Laban , Hatzerot eta Di-Zahaben arteko haranean .
PRED:	These are the names of the people of Israel who lived in the hill country of Ephraim , in the hill country of Susa ( also known as the ancestor of Jair ) , the rest of the hill country of Ephraim , and the rest of the Jordan Valley .
GOLD:	These are the words that Moses spoke to all the people of Israel while they were in the wilderness east of the Jordan River . They were camped in the Jordan Valley near Suph , between Paran on one side and Tophel , Laban , Hazeroth , and Di-zahab on the other .

ID:	5324
INPUT:	Bai , badator eguna , Efraimgo mendialdeanzaintzaileek oihu egingo dutena : “ Ea , igo gaitezen Sionera , goazen Jaunarengana , geure Jainkoarengana ” » .
PRED:	Yes , it is the day of Ephraim , the people of Ephraim , will cry out , ‘ We will be like the Lord our God , who sits on the mountain of the Lord our God . ' ”
GOLD:	The day will come when watchmen will shoutfrom the hill country of Ephraim , ‘ Come , let us go up to Jerusalemto worship the Lord our God . ' ”

ID:	5325
INPUT:	Judako Asaren erregealdiko hogeita hemezortzigarren urtean hasi zen Omriren seme Akab Israelgo errege izaten . Hogeita bi urtez izan zen errege Samarian .
PRED:	Asa son of Omri began to rule over Israel in the second year of King Asa 's reign in Israel . He reigned in Samaria two years .
GOLD:	Ahab son of Omri began to rule over Israel in the thirty-eighth year of King Asa 's reign in Judah . He reigned in Samaria twenty-two years .

ID:	5326
INPUT:	Emaiezu beren egintzen ordaina , beren gaiztakerien ordaina . Emaiezu egin dutenaren saria , itzuli merezi dutena .
PRED:	Give them the following instructions to those who love them , for they have refused to pay attention to what they have done .
GOLD:	Give them the punishment they so richly deserve ! Measure it out in proportion to their wickedness.Pay them back for all their evil deeds ! Give them a taste of what they have done to others .

ID:	5327
INPUT:	eta berorien ahaideok : Xebanias , Hodias , Kelita , Pelaias , Hanan ,
PRED:	From the family of Harim : Shemaiah , Hananiah , Hananiah , Shemaiah , and Hananiah ,
GOLD:	Mica , Rehob , Hashabiah ,

ID:	5328
INPUT:	Ez jo auzitara zeure zerbitzari honekin , ez baita bizidunik zure aurrean errugabe .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of your servant , for your servant is with you , for you have no mercy .
GOLD:	Do n't put your servant on trial , for no one is innocent before you .

ID:	5329
INPUT:	Rubenekin batera Simeon eta Gaden leinuak etxolatuko dira . Simeondarren buruzagia Tzurixadairen seme Xelumiel izango da ,
PRED:	The leaders of the tribe of Reuben and Simeon will be assigned to the clans of the tribe of Simeon . The leader of the tribe of Simeon will be their leader .
GOLD:	SimeonShelumiel son of Zurishaddai59,300

ID:	5330
INPUT:	Hark erantzun zien : — Zer agindu zizuen horretaz Moisesek ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ What do these things mean ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus answered them with a question : “ What did Moses say in the law about divorce ? ”

ID:	5331
INPUT:	« Ezertarako ez diren gezurrezko arrazoietan sinesten duzue .
PRED:	“ You must not commit adultery . You must not testify falsely .
GOLD:	“ ‘ Do n't be fooled into thinking that you will never suffer because the Temple is here . It 's a lie !

ID:	5332
INPUT:	Ene Jainko Jauna , gure aita Daviden ordez ni , zeure zerbitzari hau , egin nauzu errege . Ni , berriz , mutil gaztea nauzu eta gobernatzen ikasi gabea .
PRED:	O Lord my God , you have made me your servant David , your servant , and I have made you a young young boy .
GOLD:	“ Now , O Lord my God , you have made me king instead of my father , David , but I am like a little child who does n't know his way around .

ID:	5333
INPUT:	Zoaz zeu hurrengo barau-egunean eta irakurri tenpluan , herriaren aurrean , nik esanik erroiluan idatzi duzun Jaunaren mezua ; irakurri Judako hirietatik etorriko diren guztiei ere .
PRED:	Go and read to the Temple of the Lord and read it to the people of Judah . I wrote this message from the Lord to the people of Judah from all the towns of Judah .
GOLD:	So you go to the Temple on the next day of fasting , and read the messages from the Lord that I have had you write on this scroll . Read them so the people who are there from all over Judah will hear them .

ID:	5334
INPUT:	Horiren seme Xafat , Simeonen leinukoa ;
PRED:	Manasseh son of Ahilud was the royal historian .
GOLD:	SimeonShaphat son of Hori

ID:	5335
INPUT:	Ni , Paulo , Jainkoaren zerbitzari eta Jesu Kristoren apostolu naiz , Jainkoak hautatuak sinesmenera ekartzeko eta betiko biziaren itxaropenean oinarritzen den egiazko erlijioaren egia ezagutarazteko . Gezurrik ez dioen Jainkoak mundua izaten hasi baino lehen agindua zuen betiko bizi hori ,
PRED:	I am the one of God and the apostle of Christ Jesus Christ . I am writing to God 's holy people who belong to God and obey him and obey the law of God and obey the law of Moses .
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , a slave of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ . I have been sent to proclaim faith to those God has chosen and to teach them to know the truth that shows them how to live godly lives .

ID:	5336
INPUT:	( Lk 11 , 2-4 )
PRED:	Building the Temple
GOLD:	Teaching about Money and Possessions

ID:	5337
INPUT:	Goretsazue adar-soinuz , goretsi harpa eta zitaraz .
PRED:	Praise the Lord with music , praise him , and praise him with music .
GOLD:	Praise him with a blast of the ram 's horn ; praise him with the lyre and harp !

ID:	5338
INPUT:	Sarrera eta printzipio nagusia
PRED:	The Coming of Jerusalem
GOLD:	Everything Is Meaningless

ID:	5339
INPUT:	Jainkoaren sumin-ardoa edan beharko du , haren zigor-kopan nahasgabe garbi prestatua dagoena . <unk> eta sufrez oinazetuko dute aingeru santuen eta Bildotsaren aurrean .
PRED:	Then I will preach the Good News about God 's grace , which means of God 's grace , which would be poured out into the Most High . He will suffer for the holy assembly of the Most High and the Lamb .
GOLD:	must drink the wine of God 's anger . It has been poured full strength into God 's cup of wrath . And they will be tormented with fire and burning sulfur in the presence of the holy angels and the Lamb .

ID:	5340
INPUT:	Hona hemen seme-alaba zaretenaren seinalea : Jainkoak bere Semearen Espiritua bidali du gure bihotzetara , eta Espirituak « Abba ! » , hau da , « Aita ! » dio oihuka .
PRED:	This is the Holy Spirit , the Son of God , the Holy Spirit , who sent us to be the Son of God . He is the Holy Spirit , and he is the Holy Spirit . ”
GOLD:	And because we are his children , God has sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts , prompting us to call out , “ Abba , Father . ”

ID:	5341
INPUT:	Gerxondarren familiaburua Laelen seme Eliasaf zen .
PRED:	The leader of the clans of the tribe of Eliab , was the ancestor of the clans of the Merarite clans .
GOLD:	The leader of the Gershonite clans was Eliasaph son of Lael .

ID:	5342
INPUT:	eta esan zion : — Etor hakit , bai . Zeruko hegaztiei eta lurreko piztiei emango zieat hire haragia .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” he said , “ I 'll tell you the birds of the sky , and I will give you food to the ground . ”
GOLD:	“ Come over here , and I 'll give your flesh to the birds and wild animals ! ” Goliath yelled .

ID:	5343
INPUT:	Begira , ni basamortuko lautadetan geldituko naiz , zuen berririk izan dezadan arte .
PRED:	I will search for you in the wilderness until I will stay in the wilderness until I have been watching for you .
GOLD:	I will stop at the shallows of the Jordan River and wait there for a report from you . ”

ID:	5344
INPUT:	Maltzurra , berriz , azpijokoz ari daeta zitalkeriaz baliatzen , dohakabe eta behartsueneskubideak gezurrez deuseztatzeko .
PRED:	But if they are full of lies , they are more powerful than the poor and poisonous snakes , and they will be carried away by the sword .
GOLD:	The smooth tricks of scoundrels are evil.They plot crooked schemes.They lie to convict the poor , even when the cause of the poor is just .

ID:	5345
INPUT:	Horregatik , prestatu zeuen gogoa zerbitzurako eta bizi neurritasunez . Jar ezazue zeuen itxaropen osoa Jesu Kristoren agerpenak ekarriko dizuen dohainean .
PRED:	That is why you are going to prepare for yourselves to serve as your own special possession . Instead , you yourselves yourselves yourselves yourselves yourselves yourselves yourselves with Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	So prepare your minds for action and exercise self-control . Put all your hope in the gracious salvation that will come to you when Jesus Christ is revealed to the world .

ID:	5346
INPUT:	Geldi bekit mihia ahosabaian itsatsirik , beti gogoan ez bazaitut , zu , Jerusalem , neure pozik handiena ez bazaitut .
PRED:	Let me look at my mouth , for I am not ashamed of you , but I will not be ashamed of you .
GOLD:	May my tongue stick to the roof of my mouthif I fail to remember you , if I do n't make Jerusalem my greatest joy .

ID:	5347
INPUT:	Itzuli zen Balaam Balakengana eta erre-oparien ondoan aurkitu zuen moabdar buruzagi guztiekin .
PRED:	So Balaam returned to Balak and took him away from the burnt offerings and the people of Moab .
GOLD:	So Balaam returned and found the king standing beside his burnt offerings with all the officials of Moab .

ID:	5348
INPUT:	Belztu eta erori egiten zait larruazala , hezurrak ere bai sukarraz .
PRED:	My boasting about me and my bones ; my bones are broken .
GOLD:	My skin has turned dark , and my bones burn with fever .

ID:	5349
INPUT:	Daviden hirian beretzat eginarazia zuen hilobian ehortzi zuten . Lurrin eta usainki gozoak nahasiz eginiko ukenduz betetako etzalekuan ezarri ondoren , su handia egin zuten haren ohorez .
PRED:	When David heard this , he was buried in the City of David . So he took the fragrant incense and threw it into the ground , and he threw it into the fire .
GOLD:	He was buried in the tomb he had carved out for himself in the City of David . He was laid on a bed perfumed with sweet spices and fragrant ointments , and the people built a huge funeral fire in his honor .

ID:	5350
INPUT:	Hori gertatzean , jakingo dute egiptoarrek ni naizela Jauna » .
PRED:	The Egyptians will know that I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	When my glory is displayed through them , all Egypt will see my glory and know that I am the Lord ! ”

ID:	5351
INPUT:	Ugari baino ugariago nuen esnea , harkaitzek ere olio-errekak isurtzen zituztenniretzat .
PRED:	You were better off than streams of water , but you were poured out the bowl on water .
GOLD:	My steps were awash in cream , and the rocks gushed olive oil for me .

ID:	5352
INPUT:	<unk> tarren buruzagia Reuelen seme Eliasaf izango da ,
PRED:	Reuel , the leader of the clans of the tribe of Reuel , the leader of the clans of the tribe of Reuel .
GOLD:	GadEliasaph son of Deuel45,650

ID:	5353
INPUT:	hodei guztien gainetik igoko naizeta Goi-goikoaren antzeko izango ” .
PRED:	He will call on the name of the Most High , who will lead us into the Most High . '
GOLD:	I will climb to the highest heavensand be like the Most High . '

ID:	5354
INPUT:	Hark , orduan : — Maisu , gazte-gaztetandik bete izan dut hori guztia .
PRED:	“ Teacher , ” he said , “ I have obeyed all these commandments . ”
GOLD:	“ Teacher , ” the man replied , “ I 've obeyed all these commandments since I was young . ”

ID:	5355
INPUT:	Hau esaten duzue eta ez dakizue zuen bizitza bihar zer izango den . Une batez agertu eta berehala desagertzen den lainoa besterik ez zarete eta !
PRED:	You are saying , ‘ This is what you do , ' so that you wo n't know what it means . You will be like a dove !
GOLD:	How do you know what your life will be like tomorrow ? Your life is like the morning fog — it 's here a little while , then it 's gone .

ID:	5356
INPUT:	Jeremiasen esanera Barukek idatzitako erroilua erregeak erre ondoren , Jaunak agindu hau eman zion Jeremiasi :
PRED:	This message came to Jeremiah from the king of Babylon from the king of Babylon :
GOLD:	After the king had burned the scroll on which Baruch had written Jeremiah 's words , the Lord gave Jeremiah another message . He said ,

ID:	5357
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Moisesi : « Egizu israeldarren lehen-semeen izen-bilketa , hilabetez gorako gizonezkoak erroldatuz .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Take all the firstborn sons of Israel , all the firstborn sons of Israel .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Now count all the firstborn sons in Israel who are one month old or older , and make a list of their names .

ID:	5358
INPUT:	Israelen leinu guztietarik zuen aita hautatu nuen apaizgorako , nire aldarera igo zedin , intsentsua erre ziezadan eta nire santutegian efod delakoa jantzi zezan . Era berean , israeldarrek egindako eskaintza guztietarik beren zatia hartzeko eskubidea eman nien zuen aitaren ondorengoei .
PRED:	He took all the sacred objects from the tribe of Israel , along with the sacred ephod and placed it in the sacred ephod . Then he took some of the sacred offerings to the Lord , just as he had commanded .
GOLD:	I chose your ancestor Aaron from among all the tribes of Israel to be my priest , to offer sacrifices on my altar , to burn incense , and to wear the priestly vest as he served me . And I assigned the sacrificial offerings to you priests .

ID:	5359
INPUT:	Zuen abereek eta basabereek , berriz , lurrak berez ematen duena izango dute janari .
PRED:	But if you are the same ones , you will possess the land .
GOLD:	Your livestock and the wild animals in your land will also be allowed to eat what the land produces .

ID:	5360
INPUT:	Aramearrei , moabdarrei , amondarrei , filistearrei , amalektarrei eta Tzobako errege Hadadezerri , Rehoben semeari , harrapatua zen hura guztia .
PRED:	the Ammonites , the commander of the Ammonites , the army of Ammon , and the army of Ammon , and the king of Ammon , were also king of Ammon .
GOLD:	from Edom , Moab , Ammon , Philistia , and Amalek — and from Hadadezer son of Rehob , king of Zobah .

ID:	5361
INPUT:	Zatozte , egiogun poz-oihu Jaunari , poz-irrintzi salbatzen gaituen harkaitzari !
PRED:	Come , let us rejoice in the presence of the Lord ! Let us sing his praises to the Lord !
GOLD:	Come , let us sing to the Lord ! Let us shout joyfully to the Rock of our salvation .

ID:	5362
INPUT:	baina elkarte osoarentzako eta Jaunaren aldarerako , Jaunak aukeratuko zuen tokian , egurgile eta ur-ekarle izatera behartu zituen . Eta eginkizun hori bera dute gaur egun ere .
PRED:	But the whole community of Israel must be chosen to serve the Lord as a special possession of the land that the Lord has commanded you to worship the Lord , and he has commanded you today . ”
GOLD:	But that day he made the Gibeonites the woodcutters and water carriers for the community of Israel and for the altar of the Lord — wherever the Lord would choose to build it . And that is what they do to this day .

ID:	5363
INPUT:	Xalum , Amarias eta Jose .
PRED:	The families of Shallum , Shallum , and Joseph .
GOLD:	Shallum , Amariah , and Joseph .

ID:	5364
INPUT:	« Hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Filistearrek mendekuz jokatu dute , gogor eta mespretxu biziz mendekatu dira , beren betidaniko etsaiak suntsitzeraino ;
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The Philistines have struck them with the rod of the Philistines , and they have rebelled against me .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The people of Philistia have acted against Judah out of bitter revenge and long-standing contempt .

ID:	5365
INPUT:	Bai handi eta sakonak Jainkoaren eskuzabaltasuna , jakinduria eta ezaguera ! Bai aztergaitzak beraren erabakiak eta sumaezinak haren bideak !
PRED:	Yes , it is good to see God and knowledge of God and power and knowledge and understanding . Yes , it is meaningless !
GOLD:	Oh , how great are God 's riches and wisdom and knowledge ! How impossible it is for us to understand his decisions and his ways !

ID:	5366
INPUT:	lurralde lehorrean sargoria bezala . Zuk mututu duzuatzerritarren zalaparta-hotsa ; lainoaren itzalak beroa bezala , hala ito dituzujende ankerraren oihuak .
PRED:	Your people are like a whirlwind , like a whirlwind from the north , like a whirlwind from the north , like a whirlwind from a whirlwind .
GOLD:	or like the relentless heat of the desert.But you silence the roar of foreign nations.As the shade of a cloud cools relentless heat , so the boastful songs of ruthless people are stilled .

ID:	5367
INPUT:	Biziki haserretu ziren biak , eta nor bere aldetik joan zen . Bernabek Markos hartu zuen eta Ziprera atera zen itsasoz ;
PRED:	So the man was furious with them , and he went out to the island of Cyprus and then went to Cyprus .
GOLD:	Their disagreement was so sharp that they separated . Barnabas took John Mark with him and sailed for Cyprus .

ID:	5368
INPUT:	Moisesen eta Aaronen arbasoak
PRED:	The Death of Moses
GOLD:	The Ancestors of Moses and Aaron

ID:	5369
INPUT:	Hau entzutean , bertan zeuden batzuek esan zuten : « Eliasi deika ari da » .
PRED:	When they heard this , they were saying , “ Elijah 's going , ” they said .
GOLD:	Some of the bystanders misunderstood and thought he was calling for the prophet Elijah .

ID:	5370
INPUT:	Itsas herrietako printze guztiak beren tronuetatik jaitsiko dira , beren soingainekoak kendu eta jantzi bordatuak erantziko dituzte ; ikaraz beteko dira eta , lurrean eseririk , dardara egingo dute etengabe , zuregatik txundituta .
PRED:	All the princes of the world will bow down from the middle of the river , wearing off their robes and put them on their heads . They will wear their robes , and they will be destroyed by their heads .
GOLD:	All the seaport rulers will step down from their thrones and take off their royal robes and beautiful clothing . They will sit on the ground trembling with horror at your destruction .

ID:	5371
INPUT:	Ez duzue elkarketa-etxolaren sarreratik alde egingo zazpi egunez , apaiz-sagarapena burutu arte ; zazpi egun iraungo baitu apaizgoa hartzeko ohikuneak .
PRED:	You must not enter the Tabernacle for seven days , for seven days the priesthood will be set apart for seven days . For seven days the priesthood will be ceremonially unclean for seven days .
GOLD:	You must not leave the Tabernacle entrance for seven days , for that is when the ordination ceremony will be completed .

ID:	5372
INPUT:	Davidek honela zioen bere baitan : « Halakoren batean , Saulen eskuak galdu behar nau ! Filistearren lurraldera ihes egin eta neure burua salbatzea izanen dut hoberena . Horrela , etsiko du Saulek eta ez da nire bila ibiliko Israel lurraldean , eta ni libre izango naiz haren eskuetatik » .
PRED:	But David said , “ I will rescue Saul from the land of the Philistines , for I have killed the Philistine army of Israel . I will rescue them from the land of the Philistines , and I will rescue them from the land of Israel . ”
GOLD:	But David kept thinking to himself , “ Someday Saul is going to get me . The best thing I can do is escape to the Philistines . Then Saul will stop hunting for me in Israelite territory , and I will finally be safe . ”

ID:	5373
INPUT:	Eguzkia ateratzen ari zuen Lot Tzoarrera iritsi zenean .
PRED:	Then Lot went to war with Abram , and he went to war with them .
GOLD:	Lot reached the village just as the sun was rising over the horizon .

ID:	5374
INPUT:	Baina barkatuko al dit hauxe Jaunak : nire nagusia , niri besotik heldurik , Rimon jainkoa bere jauretxean gurtzera sartzean , nik ere harekin batera ahuspeztu beharra izatea . Barkatuko al dit Jaunak ekintza hori !
PRED:	But this is what the Lord says : “ Do n't you turn away from my master 's house to worship me ? For the Lord has brought me down to his own house , and he will worship me ! ”
GOLD:	However , may the Lord pardon me in this one thing : When my master the king goes into the temple of the god Rimmon to worship there and leans on my arm , may the Lord pardon me when I bow , too . ”

ID:	5375
INPUT:	Jaunaren aginduak ez dira beteezinak
PRED:	The
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	5376
INPUT:	Jauna , senda nazazueta sendatua geldituko naiz , salba nazazueta salbatua izango . Zu zaitut goresten !
PRED:	I will praise you , O Lord , and you will be saved . I will praise you , and you will be saved .
GOLD:	O Lord , if you heal me , I will be truly healed ; if you save me , I will be truly saved.My praises are for you alone !

ID:	5377
INPUT:	Gurpil haien tankera guda-gurdiena bezalakoxea zen . Haien ardatzak , uztaiak , erradioak eta gurpegiak ere brontzezkoak ziren denak .
PRED:	The wheels of the wheels were like a cart , and the wheels of the wheels were like bronze , and the wheels were bronze .
GOLD:	and were similar to chariot wheels . The axles , spokes , rims , and hubs were all cast from molten bronze .

ID:	5378
INPUT:	Tenpluan irakasten ari zela , galdera hau egin zuen Jesusek : « Nola esan dezakete lege-maisuek Mesias Daviden ondorengo dela ?
PRED:	When Jesus was teaching the Temple , he asked them , “ Why are you the teachers of David the Messiah ? ”
GOLD:	Later , as Jesus was teaching the people in the Temple , he asked , “ Why do the teachers of religious law claim that the Messiah is the son of David ?

ID:	5379
INPUT:	Israeldarrek esan zioten : — Bai , emango dizkizugu . Eta , soingaineko bat zabaldurik , bertara bota zuen nork bere harrapakinetarik eraztun bana .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” the people of Israel said , “ we will give you a cloak with you , and we will take a cloak with you . ”
GOLD:	“ Gladly ! ” they replied . They spread out a cloak , and each one threw in a gold earring he had gathered from the plunder .

ID:	5380
INPUT:	heldugabeko gazte batzuen arteanzentzubako bat zegoela ohartu nintzen .
PRED:	When I arrived , I learned that I was a young young man named me .
GOLD:	I saw some naive young men , and one in particular who lacked common sense .

ID:	5381
INPUT:	Herriko jende xehea baizik ez zuen utzi , alorrak eta mahastiak landu zitzaten .
PRED:	But the people of the village did n't plant their fields and harvest their crops .
GOLD:	But Nebuzaradan allowed some of the poorest people to stay behind to care for the vineyards and fields .

ID:	5382
INPUT:	Haserretzen bazarete ere , ez heldu bekatu egiteraino ; zuen haserreak ez beza eguzkia sartu arte iraun .
PRED:	Even though they are angry with them , they are not angry with them . Instead , they are being angry with them .
GOLD:	And “ do n't sin by letting anger control you . ” Do n't let the sun go down while you are still angry ,

ID:	5383
INPUT:	Dar-dar egingo du zeruaketa lurrak oinarritik ikara , Jaun ahalguztidun honekneure haserrea eta sumin goriaazalduko dudan egunean .
PRED:	Praise the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , from the heavens , and all the nations of the earth will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	For I will shake the heavens.The earth will move from its placewhen the Lord of Heaven 's Armies displays his wrathin the day of his fierce anger . ”

ID:	5384
INPUT:	Honekin , hau adierazi nahi digu Espiritu Santuak : lehenengo santutegiak irauten zuen bitartean , benetako santutegirako bidea ez zegoela zabalik .
PRED:	This is what the Holy Spirit says : As the Holy Spirit lives within us , we will live in the Holy Place by the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	By these regulations the Holy Spirit revealed that the entrance to the Most Holy Place was not freely open as long as the Tabernacle and the system it represented were still in use .

ID:	5385
INPUT:	Larunbatean , hiritik kanpora atera eta ibai ondora joan ginen , han juduen otoizleku bat zegoela uste baikenuen . Bertan eseri eta bilduak ziren emakumeei hitz egiten hasi ginen .
PRED:	On the Sabbath day I went out to the city of the city , where we stayed there in the synagogue for the Sabbath day . I saw a woman sitting on the Sabbath day , and I began talking about it .
GOLD:	On the Sabbath we went a little way outside the city to a riverbank , where we thought people would be meeting for prayer , and we sat down to speak with some women who had gathered there .

ID:	5386
INPUT:	Jaunaren aingerua aurreratu eta inori eskuin-ezkerrera egiten ez uzteko moduko estugune batean gelditu zen .
PRED:	Then the angel of the Lord will appear before the angel of the Lord , and he will no longer sit on his right hand .
GOLD:	Then the angel of the Lord moved farther down the road and stood in a place too narrow for the donkey to get by at all .

ID:	5387
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun zien : « Galilear horiek gainerakoak baino bekatariago zirela uste al duzue , heriotza hori izan zutelako ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do you think we are going to commit adultery ? Do you think you are going to die ?
GOLD:	“ Do you think those Galileans were worse sinners than all the other people from Galilee ? ” Jesus asked . “ Is that why they suffered ?

ID:	5388
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Kanta . Salmoa . Egin irrintzi Jainkoari , lurtar guztiok ,
PRED:	Sing to the Lord , all you people of Israel ! Shout to him , all you people of the earth !
GOLD:	Shout joyful praises to God , all the earth !

ID:	5389
INPUT:	Jeremias preso
PRED:	Jeremiah and Pashhur
GOLD:	Jeremiah Is Imprisoned

ID:	5390
INPUT:	mespretxu eta irainak direla eta , mendeku bila dabilen etsaia dela eta .
PRED:	Those who trust in him will be destroyed , and those who trust in him will be destroyed .
GOLD:	All this has happened though we have not forgotten you.We have not violated your covenant .

ID:	5391
INPUT:	Izendatu zioten , beraz , egun bat , eta asko joan zitzaizkion bera zegoen etxera . Paulo Jainkoaren erregetzaren azalpena eta testigantza egiten jardun zitzaien goizetik arratsaldera eta , Moisesen legea eta profetak oinarri hartuz , Jesusen mezua sinestarazten ahalegindu zen .
PRED:	So Paul and Barnabas went to the house of God , and they went to the house of God . They went to the place of worship of the Kingdom of God and told him about the law of Moses , the prophets , and the law of Moses .
GOLD:	So a time was set , and on that day a large number of people came to Paul 's lodging . He explained and testified about the Kingdom of God and tried to persuade them about Jesus from the Scriptures . Using the law of Moses and the books of the prophets , he spoke to them from morning until evening .

ID:	5392
INPUT:	egun batean galtzen dengari-hautsa bezalasakabanatuak izan baino lehen , Jaunaren haserre-suminazuen gainera jausi baino lehen , bai , Jaunaren haserre-egunazuen gainera jausi baino lehen .
PRED:	On that day the Lord was very angry with the people of Israel , even though the anger of the Lord was very angry , even though the anger of the Lord was very angry .
GOLD:	Gather before judgment begins , before your time to repent is blown away like chaff.Act now , before the fierce fury of the Lord fallsand the terrible day of the Lord 's anger begins .

ID:	5393
INPUT:	David eta Absalom adiskidetu
PRED:	David 's Kindness to Absalom
GOLD:	Absalom Reconciled to David

ID:	5394
INPUT:	Aitak ez zion sekula haserrerik egin , ezta galdetu ere zergatik jokatzen zuen horrela . Bestalde , Adonias oso liraina zen ; Absalomen ondoren jaioa Davidi .
PRED:	But his father did n't realize that he was angry with his father , and he was very angry with his father , Isaac , and his flocks .
GOLD:	Now his father , King David , had never disciplined him at any time , even by asking , “ Why are you doing that ? ” Adonijah had been born next after Absalom , and he was very handsome .

ID:	5395
INPUT:	« Agor egingo zaituzte Jaunak , bai zeuek , bai zuen lur eta abereak , eta antzu zuen behi eta ardiak .
PRED:	“ You will be stubborn and rebellious , just as the Lord has commanded you . You will be like cattle , sheep , goats , and goats .
GOLD:	Your children and your cropswill be cursed.The offspring of your herds and flockswill be cursed .

ID:	5396
INPUT:	ez du sasikultu-lekuetako otorduetan parte hartzen , ezta uste ona jartzen ere Israelgo idoloetan ; ez du lagun hurkoaren emaztea desohoratzen , ez da hurbiltzen ere hilerokoa duen emakumeagana ;
PRED:	Anyone who refuses to worship idols is not a permanent law , but anyone who refuses to marry another person 's wife will be married to marry her .
GOLD:	He does not feast in the mountains before Israel 's idols or worship them . He does not commit adultery or have intercourse with a woman during her menstrual period .

ID:	5397
INPUT:	Alderantziz , amaigabeko poza eta alaitasunaizango duzuenik sortuko dudanagatik , poz-hiri bihurtuko baitut Jerusalem , alaitasun-herri bertako jendea .
PRED:	Instead , I will give you a glad heart , and you will be filled with joy , for I will make you glad because the people of Jerusalem will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Be glad ; rejoice forever in my creation ! And look ! I will create Jerusalem as a place of happiness.Her people will be a source of joy .

ID:	5398
INPUT:	Horregatik , basoko lehoiek zaurituko dituzte , basamortuko otsoek txikituko ; lehoinabarrak zelatan daudehaien hiri inguruan , handik irteten diren guztiaksarraskitzeko . Izan ere , asko baitira haien errebeldiak , izugarri larriak haien desleialkeriak .
PRED:	That is why you are like a lion , a lion will feed them in the wilderness . They are slaughtered by the wind , and there will be many calamity in the south . They will go out to the south side of the Jordan Valley .
GOLD:	So now a lion from the forest will attack them ; a wolf from the desert will pounce on them.A leopard will lurk near their towns , tearing apart any who dare to venture out.For their rebellion is great , and their sins are many .

ID:	5399
INPUT:	Israeldar ororekin batera ibili izan naizen bitarte osoan , esan al diet inoiz ene herri Israel zaintzeko agindu nien buruzagiei , niretzat zedrozko etxerik egiteko ? »
PRED:	When the people of Israel returned to their own land , I told them , ‘ Should I bring a cedar cedar timber to the people of Israel ? ' ”
GOLD:	Yet no matter where I have gone with the Israelites , I have never once complained to Israel 's tribal leaders , the shepherds of my people Israel . I have never asked them , “ Why have n't you built me a beautiful cedar house ? ” '

ID:	5400
INPUT:	Aita , azaldu zeure aintza ! » Ahots bat entzun zen orduan zerutik : « Azaldu dut , eta berriro ere azalduko dut » .
PRED:	And the Father said to him , “ I have heard a voice from heaven , ” he said , “ I will tell you the truth , and I will rise again . ”
GOLD:	Father , bring glory to your name . ” Then a voice spoke from heaven , saying , “ I have already brought glory to my name , and I will do so again . ”

ID:	5401
INPUT:	Filistearren kontra abiaturik , Gat , Jabne eta Axdodeko harresiak eraitsi zituen , eta gero hiriak eraiki Axdod eskualdean eta filistearren lurraldean .
PRED:	So the Philistines captured the Philistine army of Ashkelon , Gath , and all the towns of Ashkelon , and all the towns of Ashdod , and the Philistines captured it .
GOLD:	Uzziah declared war on the Philistines and broke down the walls of Gath , Jabneh , and Ashdod . Then he built new towns in the Ashdod area and in other parts of Philistia .

ID:	5402
INPUT:	Arduratu erbesteraturik zaudeteneko herrialdearen ongizateaz eta egin otoitz Jaunari haren alde , haren ongizatea zeuen onerako izango baita .
PRED:	Keep watch over the nations of the land and pray to the Lord , for he will bless you and pray to the Lord .
GOLD:	And work for the peace and prosperity of the city where I sent you into exile . Pray to the Lord for it , for its welfare will determine your welfare . ”

ID:	5403
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then another message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	5404
INPUT:	Eta horretarako bidaltzen dizuet Timoteo , neure seme maite eta kristau zintzoa . Berak gogoratuko dizkizue kristau-bizitzarako nire burubideak , eliz elkarte guztiei han eta hemen irakasten dizkiedan bezala .
PRED:	I am sending you to the church in Timothy , my dear brothers and sisters , and sisters , I am writing to you who are faithful to you . I am writing to you that you are my followers , and you are my followers .
GOLD:	That 's why I have sent Timothy , my beloved and faithful child in the Lord . He will remind you of how I follow Christ Jesus , just as I teach in all the churches wherever I go .

ID:	5405
INPUT:	« Norbaiti larruazalean handitua , zornea edota orbaina ateratzen bazaio , legenarena bezalako zauria sortuz , Aaron apaizarengana edo beronen ondorengoetariko apaiz batengana eramango dute .
PRED:	“ If you have a serious skin disease , you must have a serious skin disease , but you must be a priest who has a priest who has been set apart for the descendants of Aaron and his descendants .
GOLD:	“ If anyone has a swelling or a rash or discolored skin that might develop into a serious skin disease , that person must be brought to Aaron the priest or to one of his sons .

ID:	5406
INPUT:	Gilboako muinoak , ez ihintzik , ez euririk zuen gainera ! Ez bedi zuetanalor emankorrik izan ! Paraje horretan gelditu baitzenSaulen ezkutua , olioz ez , hildakoen odolez baizik ,
PRED:	Do n't let them go down to Gilgal ; do n't let them fall into the hills . Instead , they will be thrown into the blazing furnace , and they will be killed by the blood of Saul .
GOLD:	O mountains of Gilboa , let there be no dew or rain upon you , nor fruitful fields producing offerings of grain.For there the shield of the mighty heroes was defiled ; the shield of Saul will no longer be anointed with oil .

ID:	5407
INPUT:	Begira zeruko zeure egoitza santu horretatik eta bedeinka itzazu Israel zeure herria eta , arbasoei zin egin bezala , eman diguzun lurraldea , esnea eta eztia darizkion lurraldea ” .
PRED:	Instead , you have made a solemn oath to the people of Israel , so you can not bless the people of Israel . You have made a land flowing with milk and honey . '
GOLD:	Now look down from your holy dwelling place in heaven and bless your people Israel and the land you swore to our ancestors to give us — a land flowing with milk and honey . '

ID:	5408
INPUT:	Berarekin elkartasunean bizi garela esan eta ilunpetan baldin bagabiltza , gezurra diogu eta ez gara egiaren arabera ari .
PRED:	And if we are in the light , we will live in darkness and darkness , and we will not go into the darkness .
GOLD:	So we are lying if we say we have fellowship with God but go on living in spiritual darkness ; we are not practicing the truth .

ID:	5409
INPUT:	abere arra eta akats gabea aurkeztuko du , Jaunak atseginez onar diezaion : zekorra , aharia nahiz akerra .
PRED:	The Lord will give you a sheep and goats , a pleasing aroma to the Lord . It will be a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	you will be accepted only if your offering is a male animal with no defects . It may be a bull , a ram , or a male goat .

ID:	5410
INPUT:	Une honetan , zuek sobera duzuenak haien eskasia konponduko du , eta egunen batean haien ugaritasunak zuen eskasia . Honela , berdintasuna izango da nagusi ,
PRED:	At the end of the field , he asked the money to pay the construction supervisors , so he could have a large crop for the others .
GOLD:	Right now you have plenty and can help those who are in need . Later , they will have plenty and can share with you when you need it . In this way , things will be equal .

ID:	5411
INPUT:	Aurrez aurre hitz egin zizuen Jaunak mendian , suaren erditik .
PRED:	The Lord spoke to them in front of them , and he spoke to them from the fire .
GOLD:	At the mountain the Lord spoke to you face to face from the heart of the fire .

ID:	5412
INPUT:	Davidek Ahimeleken seme Abiatar apaizari dei egin eta esan zion : — Ekatzu , mesedez , efod hori . Ekarri zion Abiatarrek Davidi efoda .
PRED:	Then David called the priest to the priest , and he called to the priest , “ Take a sacred ephod , a priest . ”
GOLD:	Then he said to Abiathar the priest , “ Bring me the ephod ! ” So Abiathar brought it .

ID:	5413
INPUT:	Astakumea askatzen ari zirela , jabeek galdetu zieten : — Zergatik askatzen duzue astakumea ?
PRED:	The donkey asked the donkey , “ Why are you going out ? ” And the donkey asked , “ Why are you going to buy grain ? ”
GOLD:	And sure enough , as they were untying it , the owners asked them , “ Why are you untying that colt ? ”

ID:	5414
INPUT:	Baduzu eroapenik eta niregatik nekeak jasan dituzu , etsi gabe .
PRED:	You have rejected me and said , ‘ You have taught me by my troubles . '
GOLD:	You have patiently suffered for me without quitting .

ID:	5415
INPUT:	Idatz iezaiozu Tiatirako eliz elkartearen aingeruari : Hona zer dioen Jainkoaren Semeak , begiak sugarra bezalako eta oinak brontze goriaren antzeko dituenak :
PRED:	Write this letter to the angel of the church in Tyre : “ This is what the Son of Heaven 's Armies says : The Son of Man will be like bronze ,
GOLD:	“ Write this letter to the angel of the church in Thyatira . This is the message from the Son of God , whose eyes are like flames of fire , whose feet are like polished bronze :

ID:	5416
INPUT:	Atzo bertakoak gara gu , ez dakigu ezer , gure egunak ez baitira itzala baizik munduan .
PRED:	We are confident in our hearts , but we do n't know that we do n't belong to the world .
GOLD:	For we were born but yesterday and know nothing.Our days on earth are as fleeting as a shadow .

ID:	5417
INPUT:	Askapen Urtea ( Jubileu Urtea )
PRED:	The Year of Jubilee
GOLD:	Redemption of the Poor and Enslaved

ID:	5418
INPUT:	Orduan , Jehuk agindu zion jantzi sakratuen arduradunari : — Atera jantzi sakratuak Baalen adoratzaile guztientzat . Eta atera zituen .
PRED:	Then Jehu said to Aaron , “ Take off all the sacred garments that has been set apart for Baal . ” So Jehu took all the sacred garments to Baal and set them apart for Baal .
GOLD:	And Jehu instructed the keeper of the wardrobe , “ Be sure that every worshiper of Baal wears one of these robes . ” So robes were given to them .

ID:	5419
INPUT:	Aita gaizki hartu eta ama etxetik bidaltzen duenaseme lotsabako eta ohoregabea da .
PRED:	But if the father of mother is an evil man , she must be defiled by her father 's mother .
GOLD:	Children who mistreat their father or chase away their motherare an embarrassment and a public disgrace .

ID:	5420
INPUT:	Egun horretatik aurrera , jakingo dute israeldarrek ni naizela Jauna , beraien Jainkoa .
PRED:	In that day Israel will know that I am the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	And from that time on the people of Israel will know that I am the Lord their God .

ID:	5421
INPUT:	Ater , Hizkias , Azur ,
PRED:	Malluch , Harim , and Baanah .
GOLD:	Hodiah , Hashum , Bezai ,

ID:	5422
INPUT:	Harbonak , erregearen aurrean zeuden laguntzaileetariko batek , esan zuen : — Hamanek prestatua du , hain zuzen , urkabea Mardokeorentzat , bizia salbatu zizunarentzat . Hamanen etxean dago eraikia , hogeita bost metro ditu . — Zintzilika bezate Haman bertan ! — esan zuen erregeak .
PRED:	So one of the king 's men went to the king and told him , “ Haman has prepared a pole for Mordecai . ” So Haman said to Haman , “ It is a year for the sake of Haman 's reign . ”
GOLD:	Then Harbona , one of the king 's eunuchs , said , “ Haman has set up a sharpened pole that stands seventy-five feet tall in his own courtyard . He intended to use it to impale Mordecai , the man who saved the king from assassination . ” “ Then impale Haman on it ! ” the king ordered .

ID:	5423
INPUT:	Xaaraim , Aditaim , Gedera , Gederotaim : hamalau hiri eta beraien herrixkak .
PRED:	Look , the warriors of Nebo and burn their surrounding villages with their surrounding villages .
GOLD:	Shaaraim , Adithaim , Gederah , and Gederothaim — fourteen towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	5424
INPUT:	Baduzu itxaropenik etorkizunerako : zure seme-alabakaberrira itzuliko dira . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	You will stumble and fall , says the Sovereign Lord , ‘ I will return to your children , and I will return to you . '
GOLD:	There is hope for your future , ” says the Lord . “ Your children will come again to their own land .

ID:	5425
INPUT:	Eta une berean , ireki egin zitzaizkion belarriak , mihia askatu eta garbi hitz egiten hasi zen .
PRED:	As soon as he grew up , he grew up and grew up , and he began talking about many words .
GOLD:	Instantly the man could hear perfectly , and his tongue was freed so he could speak plainly !

ID:	5426
INPUT:	Zeure haserreaz inguratu zara , eta pertsegitu egin gaituzu , erruki gabe sarraskitu .
PRED:	You are very angry with us , and you have made us very angry .
GOLD:	“ You have engulfed us with your anger , chased us down , and slaughtered us without mercy .

ID:	5427
INPUT:	« Aberea hiltzen duenak , aberea itzuliko du ; gizakia hiltzen duena heriotzara emango dute .
PRED:	“ Anyone who eats the animal 's blood must be put to death . If the animal dies , the animal must be put to death .
GOLD:	“ Whoever kills an animal must pay for it in full , but whoever kills another person must be put to death .

ID:	5428
INPUT:	Herri jendetsua erregearen ohore , jende gutxiko herria printzearen hondamendi .
PRED:	A king of the nation is a king , a king of the nation of the nation , a king of Babylon .
GOLD:	A growing population is a king 's glory ; a prince without subjects has nothing .

ID:	5429
INPUT:	« Jubileu Urtean zuetako bakoitzak bere lurren jabetza berreskuratuko du .
PRED:	“ If any of the Year of Jubilee , you may buy back the land of Judah .
GOLD:	In the Year of Jubilee each of you may return to the land that belonged to your ancestors .

ID:	5430
INPUT:	Baina zu zara , Jauna , nire babeski , zu nire ohore . Zuk didazu burua jasotzen .
PRED:	But you are my strength , O Lord , for you have made me my head .
GOLD:	I cried out to the Lord , and he answered me from his holy mountain.Interlude

ID:	5431
INPUT:	Babiloniaren zigorra
PRED:	The Fall of Babylon
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	5432
INPUT:	Ez arbuiatu erregearen nagusigoa , eta ez jardun gaiztakerian , nahi duen guztiaegiten baitu erregeak .
PRED:	Do n't be willing to reject the king 's law , for he is willing to do what is right .
GOLD:	Do n't try to avoid doing your duty , and do n't stand with those who plot evil , for the king can do whatever he wants .

ID:	5433
INPUT:	Aurkitu ez zituztelarik , Jason eta beste zenbait senide hiriko agintarien aurrera eraman zituzten arrastaka , eta oihuka zioten : « Mundu guztia nahastu duten horiek bertaraino iritsi zaizkigu ,
PRED:	But some of the believers did n't realize that some of the brothers were dead , and they were brought out to the ground , shouting , “ We have heard the Good News about this world . ”
GOLD:	Not finding them there , they dragged out Jason and some of the other believers instead and took them before the city council . “ Paul and Silas have caused trouble all over the world , ” they shouted , “ and now they are here disturbing our city , too .

ID:	5434
INPUT:	Erbestetik etorritakoen desleialtasuna izugarria zela eta , Israelen Jainkoaren hitzari begirune zioten guztiak nire ondoan bildu ziren . Ni , lur jota , eserita egon nintzen arratsaldeko oparia arte .
PRED:	They turned away from their sins and turned away from the community of Israel to commit adultery . They came to me and stood before me , and they stood before me .
GOLD:	Then all who trembled at the words of the God of Israel came and sat with me because of this outrage committed by the returned exiles . And I sat there utterly appalled until the time of the evening sacrifice .

ID:	5435
INPUT:	Bildu zituen Israelgo erregeak profetak , laurehun inguru , eta galdegin zien : — Joango al naiz Galaadeko Ramoti erasotzera , ala utzi egingo dut ? Profetek erantzun zioten : — Eraso ! Zeure eskuetara emango dizu Jaunak .
PRED:	Then the king of Israel summoned 400 men of Israel and asked them , “ Should I go to war against Ramoth-gilead ? ” “ Yes , I will hand them over to Ramoth-gilead , ” the Lord replied . “ I will hand them over to you ! ”
GOLD:	So the king of Israel summoned the prophets , about 400 of them , and asked them , “ Should I go to war against Ramoth-gilead , or should I hold back ? ” They all replied , “ Yes , go right ahead ! The Lord will give the king victory . ”

ID:	5436
INPUT:	Neskatxaren aitak emaztetzat eman nahi ez badio , berriz , neska birjinei dagokien dotea eman beharko du .
PRED:	But if her father refuses to marry her , she must pay her to her husband , she must pay her to her husband .
GOLD:	“ If a man seduces a virgin who is not engaged to anyone and has sex with her , he must pay the customary bride price and marry her .

ID:	5437
INPUT:	« Gizakia Jainkoarentzat izaten ote onuragarri ? Zentzu onekoa bere buruarentzat da onuragarri !
PRED:	“ Son of man , what can you say to God ? How can I say it ? How can I say it ?
GOLD:	“ Can a person do anything to help God ? Can even a wise person be helpful to him ?

ID:	5438
INPUT:	Jandakoa bota egin beharko duzueta zure hitz atseginak alferrikakoak izango lirateke .
PRED:	You will be beautiful and beautiful , and your words will be painful to you .
GOLD:	You will throw up what little you 've eaten , and your compliments will be wasted .

ID:	5439
INPUT:	Jesus eta haurrak
PRED:	Jesus Blesses the Children
GOLD:	The Rich Man

ID:	5440
INPUT:	baizik eta lurrera isuriko duzue , ura bezala .
PRED:	but you will have water on earth , just as the waters of the earth .
GOLD:	Instead , pour out the blood on the ground like water .

ID:	5441
INPUT:	Larrialdi eta atsekabe arteanbizi beharko baduzue ere , irakasle duzuen Jaunaez zaizue gehiago ezkutatuko ; zeuen begiz ikusiko duzue .
PRED:	If you live in distress , you will know the Lord your God , and you will never see you . You will see the word of the Lord .
GOLD:	Though the Lord gave you adversity for foodand suffering for drink , he will still be with you to teach you.You will see your teacher with your own eyes .

ID:	5442
INPUT:	Zatozte eta entzun , ene semeok ; entzun arretaz zeuen aita Israeli :
PRED:	Come and listen to me , my sons , and listen to me .
GOLD:	“ Come and listen , you sons of Jacob ; listen to Israel , your father .

ID:	5443
INPUT:	Abram Kanaan lurraldean jarri zen bizitzen , eta Lot ibarreko hirietan . Honen oihal-etxolak Sodoma bertaraino hedatzen ziren .
PRED:	Abram lived in Canaan , where Abram lived in the land of Canaan , and Lot lived in the south of Sodom and Gomorrah .
GOLD:	So Abram settled in the land of Canaan , and Lot moved his tents to a place near Sodom and settled among the cities of the plain .

ID:	5444
INPUT:	Josiasen gainerako jarduerak , Jaunaren legea betetzeko izan zuen leialtasuna
PRED:	The rest of the events in Josiah 's reign , and he refused to obey the law of the Lord .
GOLD:	The rest of the events of Josiah 's reign and his acts of devotion ( carried out according to what was written in the Law of the Lord ) ,

ID:	5445
INPUT:	Lebiri deia . Jesus bekatariekin bazkaltzen
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	A Discussion about the Sabbath

ID:	5446
INPUT:	Berriro ezarri nituen epe jakinetan egin behar ziren egur-eskaintzak , baita lurraren lehen fruituen eskaintzak ere . « Oi ene Jainko , gogora zaitez nitaz , eta har nazazu onez ! »
PRED:	Then I took them to the ground and drank from the wine of the first kind of animal . I had dedicated to the Lord , the God of Israel , and you will know me , and you are my God . ”
GOLD:	I also made sure that the supply of wood for the altar and the first portions of the harvest were brought at the proper times.Remember this in my favor , O my God .

ID:	5447
INPUT:	NEKALDIA ETA PIZTUERA ( 26 , 1 — 28 , 15 )
PRED:	Jesus Anointed at Bethany
GOLD:	The Plot to Kill Jesus

ID:	5448
INPUT:	Zentzarazi semea , itxaropena dagoen bitartean ; baina ez hartu gogorregi , hiltzeraino zigortuz .
PRED:	The child is stronger than the child , but the child is not dead , but he will not die .
GOLD:	Discipline your children while there is hope.Otherwise you will ruin their lives .

ID:	5449
INPUT:	« Adi , zeruok , eta mintzatuko naiz , entzun , lurra , nire ahoko esanak ;
PRED:	“ Listen to me , you heavens , and earth will hear my voice .
GOLD:	“ Listen , O heavens , and I will speak ! Hear , O earth , the words that I say !

ID:	5450
INPUT:	Beraz , senideok , Jesu Kristoren odolari esker konfiantza dugu santutegian sartzeko ,
PRED:	So now , dear brothers and sisters , we will put our trust in Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	And so , dear brothers and sisters , we can boldly enter heaven 's Most Holy Place because of the blood of Jesus .

ID:	5451
INPUT:	Mespretxatua zen , eta jendeak baztertua , oinaze-gizona , sufritzen ikasia . Ikusteak ere nazka ematen duennorbait bezalaxe , mespretxatu egin genuen , eta aintzakotzat hartu ez .
PRED:	But the Lord was rejected by the wind , and he rejected those who do n't believe in him . But if someone was rejected by the angel of God , you did not despise them and despise them .
GOLD:	He was despised and rejected — a man of sorrows , acquainted with deepest grief.We turned our backs on him and looked the other way.He was despised , and we did not care .

ID:	5452
INPUT:	Orobat bi talentu hartu zituenak : inbertitu eta beste bi irabazi zituen .
PRED:	He took two bags of silver , two bags of silver , and two bags of silver .
GOLD:	The servant with two bags of silver also went to work and earned two more .

ID:	5453
INPUT:	Eta apaizei esan zien : « Hartu itun-kutxa eta jar zaitezte herriaren aurrean » . Apaizak itun-kutxa hartu eta herriaren aurretik abiatu ziren .
PRED:	Then he said to the priests , “ Take the Ark of the Covenant and put it on the Ark of the Covenant . ” So the priests took the Ark of the Covenant with the Ark of the Covenant .
GOLD:	In the morning Joshua said to the priests , “ Lift up the Ark of the Covenant and lead the people across the river . ” And so they started out and went ahead of the people .

ID:	5454
INPUT:	Eta niregatik Jainkoa goresten zuten .
PRED:	And they sang the praise of God .
GOLD:	And they praised God because of me .

ID:	5455
INPUT:	Ez naiz atsegin bila ari izanfes<unk> eta algarazaleekin batera ; bakarrik ibiltzera behartu nauzu , zeure suminaz betea nauzu eta .
PRED:	I have not been praying for you , and I have been with you . You have made me very angry with me , and you have made me very angry with me .
GOLD:	I never joined the people in their merry feasts.I sat alone because your hand was on me.I was filled with indignation at their sins .

ID:	5456
INPUT:	Jaunak itsasoaren aurkaluzatu du eskua , erreinuak dardarazi ditu ; Kanaango gotorlekuakdesegiteko agindu du .
PRED:	The Lord will hand over the sea , and the people of Israel will be destroyed , and the fortress of Canaan will be destroyed .
GOLD:	The Lord held out his hand over the seaand shook the kingdoms of the earth.He has spoken out against Phoenicia , ordering that her fortresses be destroyed .

ID:	5457
INPUT:	Eta luze hitz egin zien parabola bidez . Honela mintzatu zitzaien : « Atera zen behin ereilea hazia ereitera .
PRED:	He spoke to them in a dream . He told them , “ A farmer planted a farmer 's seed .
GOLD:	He told many stories in the form of parables , such as this one : “ Listen ! A farmer went out to plant some seeds .

ID:	5458
INPUT:	hau Zerahiasena , hau Uzirena , hau Bukirena ,
PRED:	son of Pezai was the son of Pezai was the son of Seth.Seth was the son of Pezai was the son of Sethuel .
GOLD:	son of Zerahiah , son of Uzzi , son of Bukki ,

ID:	5459
INPUT:	Hemezortzi mila gudari benjamindar ausart erori ziren .
PRED:	The warriors of Benjamin had been killed in Benjamin .
GOLD:	That day 18,000 of Benjamin 's strongest warriors died in battle .

ID:	5460
INPUT:	Jesusek erantzun : — Ez dakizue zer eskatzen ari zareten . Gauza al zarete nik edan behar dudan edari saminetik edateko ? — Bai , gauza gara — esan zioten .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't you know what I have to do ? ” And Jesus replied , “ Yes , what is I want to do ? ” “ Yes , ” they replied .
GOLD:	But Jesus answered by saying to them , “ You do n't know what you are asking ! Are you able to drink from the bitter cup of suffering I am about to drink ? ” “ Oh yes , ” they replied , “ we are able ! ”

ID:	5461
INPUT:	Benetan ikasbide ona da nik emandakoa , ez baztertu nire irakaspena .
PRED:	Anyone who eats good teaching is not good , but anyone who refuses to obey my teaching is from me .
GOLD:	for I am giving you good guidance.Do n't turn away from my instructions .

ID:	5462
INPUT:	Israelgo buruzagien aurkako mezua
PRED:	A Message for Israel
GOLD:	The Shepherds of Israel

ID:	5463
INPUT:	Akab erregea hil zenean , Israelen kontra jaiki ziren moabdarrak .
PRED:	When Ahab died , the king of Israel rebelled against King Ahab of Israel .
GOLD:	After King Ahab 's death , the land of Moab rebelled against Israel .

ID:	5464
INPUT:	Jesusek eskua hartu zion eta sukarrak alde egin ; orduan , emakumea jaiki eta zerbitzatzen hasi zitzaion .
PRED:	Then Jesus took her hand and brought her to her , and she began to leave her alone .
GOLD:	But when Jesus touched her hand , the fever left her . Then she got up and prepared a meal for him .

ID:	5465
INPUT:	Hitz hauekin , nekez bada ere , kendu zioten jendeari oparia eskaintzeko asmoa .
PRED:	So the people began to take some of these gifts offered to the Lord .
GOLD:	But even with these words , Paul and Barnabas could scarcely restrain the people from sacrificing to them .

ID:	5466
INPUT:	ez dezan etsaiak esan : « Garaitu dut » . Ez bedi nire arerioa nire hondamendiaz poztu !
PRED:	“ Do n't be afraid , ” the Lord said , “ I will not be glad . ”
GOLD:	But I trust in your unfailing love.I will rejoice because you have rescued me .

ID:	5467
INPUT:	Mihia zaintzen duenak bizia babesten du ; mintzatzeak sobera darama kaltera .
PRED:	The tongue of a fool leads to a fool , but one who speaks to harm them .
GOLD:	Those who control their tongue will have a long life ; opening your mouth can ruin everything .

ID:	5468
INPUT:	Morroiak galdetu zion : — Nola banatuko dut hau ehun gizonen artean ? Eliseok erantzun : — Banatu jendeari , eta jan dezatela . Hau baitio Jaunak : « Jango dute eta sobera geldituko da » .
PRED:	“ What can I do ? ” the young man asked . “ What will I eat ? ” “ Yes , ” the man replied , “ for the Lord has commanded you to eat . ”
GOLD:	“ What ? ” his servant exclaimed . “ Feed a hundred people with only this ? ” But Elisha repeated , “ Give it to the people so they can eat , for this is what the Lord says : Everyone will eat , and there will even be some left over ! ”

ID:	5469
INPUT:	Bietarik bat eroriko balitz , besteak jasoko luke ; baina urrikalgarri bakarrik dagoena ; eroriko balitz , ez bailuke izango nork jaso .
PRED:	If one of them would have a long time , there would have a long time for a long time . If only one of them would have a long time , there would be no one .
GOLD:	If one person falls , the other can reach out and help . But someone who falls alone is in real trouble .

ID:	5470
INPUT:	Gaiztoak zelatan egoten zaizkio zintzoari , nola hilko asmatzen .
PRED:	The godly care for the godly , but the godly will die .
GOLD:	The wicked wait in ambush for the godly , looking for an excuse to kill them .

ID:	5471
INPUT:	Biharamunean , Santiagoren etxera joan ginen Paulo eta gainerakook ; han zeuden bilduak arduradun guztiak ere .
PRED:	The next day Paul and Silas went to the home of the Temple , where Paul and all his friends were standing there .
GOLD:	The next day Paul went with us to meet with James , and all the elders of the Jerusalem church were present .

ID:	5472
INPUT:	« Zortzigarren egunean , amaierako batzarra izango duzue eta ez da ohiko lan arruntik egingo .
PRED:	“ On the eighth day you must celebrate the Festival of Shelters , and you must not be set aside for holy assembly .
GOLD:	“ On the eighth day of the festival , proclaim another holy day . You must do no ordinary work on that day .

ID:	5473
INPUT:	Etsaiak atzetik harrapatu eta jo egin zitueneta behin betiko porrokatu .
PRED:	He will chase them from their enemies , making them a footstool under their enemies .
GOLD:	He routed his enemiesand sent them to eternal shame .

ID:	5474
INPUT:	begi harroak , mihi gezurtia , errugabearen odola isurtzen duten eskuak ,
PRED:	They rush to commit adultery , but they rush to commit murder .
GOLD:	haughty eyes , a lying tongue , hands that kill the innocent ,

ID:	5475
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Apaiz eta profetak erefedegabe bihurtu dira , neure tenpluan bertan ereaurkitu dituthorien gaiztakerien aztarnak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will go down to the Temple of the Lord , the people of Israel , says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Even the priests and prophetsare ungodly , wicked men.I have seen their despicable actsright here in my own Temple , ” says the Lord .

ID:	5476
INPUT:	Eguna zabaldu zuenean , oso urduri zegoen faraoia eta , Egiptoko azti eta jakintsu guztiei deiturik , ametsa kontatu zien . Baina inor ez zen gauza izan faraoiaren ametsak argitzeko .
PRED:	But when Pharaoh heard that he was in Egypt , he was very angry with Pharaoh and all his wise men . But no one was able to hear the dream . But no one was able to tell Pharaoh 's dream .
GOLD:	The next morning Pharaoh was very disturbed by the dreams . So he called for all the magicians and wise men of Egypt . When Pharaoh told them his dreams , not one of them could tell him what they meant .

ID:	5477
INPUT:	Jarri ziren , beraz , eta jan eta edan zuten biek elkarrekin . Gero , neskaren aitak esan zion : — Igaro ezazu , arren , beste gau bat hemen eta alai zaitez .
PRED:	So they ate and drank and drank with me . Then they said to each other , “ My father , leave me alone . ”
GOLD:	So the two men sat down together and had something to eat and drink . Then the woman 's father said , “ Please stay another night and enjoy yourself . ”

ID:	5478
INPUT:	Orduan , Ehudek ezker-eskua luzatu , eskuineko izterrean zekarren ezpata hartu eta sabelean sartu zion erregeari
PRED:	So David took the thigh of his right hand and placed it in his right hand , and he took it to the king 's left hand .
GOLD:	Ehud reached with his left hand , pulled out the dagger strapped to his right thigh , and plunged it into the king 's belly .

ID:	5479
INPUT:	Mikmasekoak 122 ;
PRED:	The people of Anathoth128
GOLD:	The people of Micmash122

ID:	5480
INPUT:	Barneko atariak ere bazuen sarrera bat hegoaldera . Bi sarreren arteko distantzia neurtu zuen gizonak : berrogeita hamar metro .
PRED:	He also measured the walls of the gateway leading into the inner courtyard , and the entry room was 101/2 feet long .
GOLD:	And here again , directly opposite the outer gateway , was another gateway that led into the inner courtyard . The distance between the two gateways was 175 feet .

ID:	5481
INPUT:	Horretarako , lurraldea hiru zatitan banatuko duzue eta hiri haietarako bideak egokituko , edozein hiltzailek nora ihes egin izan dezan .
PRED:	That is why you will live in the land where you live , and you will die in the land where you live . ”
GOLD:	Survey the territory , and divide the land the Lord your God is giving you into three districts , with one of these cities in each district . Then anyone who has killed someone can flee to one of the cities of refuge for safety .

ID:	5482
INPUT:	Horrela , beraz , aurrera egin zuten bidean . Benjaminen dagoen Gibea herritik hurbil zirelarik , gorde egin zen eguzkia .
PRED:	So they went to the town of Benjamin , where the people of Benjamin had fled to the town of Benjamin .
GOLD:	So they went on . The sun was setting as they came to Gibeah , a town in the land of Benjamin ,

ID:	5483
INPUT:	Tenpluaren eta hiriaren aurkako zigorra
PRED:	A Message for the Temple
GOLD:	The Slaughter of Idolaters

ID:	5484
INPUT:	( Mt 15 , <unk> )
PRED:	The Message about Jesus
GOLD:	Pharisees Demand a Miraculous Sign

ID:	5485
INPUT:	Hik ez duk honetan eskurik , ez parterik , hire kontzientzia ez baita zuzena Jainkoaren aurrean .
PRED:	What ? What did n't you say ? What did you say , ‘ What is your request ? '
GOLD:	You can have no part in this , for your heart is not right with God .

ID:	5486
INPUT:	Haiek erantzun : — Egiptoar batek defendatu gaitu artzainen kontra . Gainera , berak atera digu putzutik ura eta ardiei edaten eman .
PRED:	They replied , “ We have brought us out of Egypt , and we have brought us out of Egypt . We have brought us out of the fields and goats . ”
GOLD:	“ An Egyptian rescued us from the shepherds , ” they answered . “ And then he drew water for us and watered our flocks . ”

ID:	5487
INPUT:	« Jainkoaren erregetzarekin , landan ezkutatua dagoen altxorrarekin bezala gertatzen da . Norbaitek aurkitzen duelarik , berriro ezkutatu egiten du , eta pozaren pozez joan , dituen guztiak saldu eta landa hura erosten du .
PRED:	“ The Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who is in charge of the royal treasury . If anyone finds that a person has been found , it will be thrown into the fields , and it will be thrown into battle , and it will be thrown into battle .
GOLD:	“ The Kingdom of Heaven is like a treasure that a man discovered hidden in a field . In his excitement , he hid it again and sold everything he owned to get enough money to buy the field .

ID:	5488
INPUT:	Norbaitek , heriotzara ez daraman bekaturen bat egiten ikusten badu bere senidea , egin beza otoitz eta Jainkoak bizia emango dio ; heriotzara ez daraman bekatua egiten dutenei buruz diot hau . Izan ere , bada heriotzara daraman bekatua ere , eta ez dut esaten horren alde eskatzeko .
PRED:	“ If someone has not been put to death , it is not a sin offering to God . If anyone who believes in him , I will give him life to those who refuse to repent of their sins and turn away from their sins , then I will give them back to those who refuse to death .
GOLD:	If you see a fellow believer sinning in a way that does not lead to death , you should pray , and God will give that person life . But there is a sin that leads to death , and I am not saying you should pray for those who commit it .

ID:	5489
INPUT:	Hurrengo urtean , siriar gudarosteak eraso egin zion Joaxi . Judan eta Jerusalemen sartu , herriko agintariak hil eta harrapakin guztiak Damaskoko erregeari igorri zizkioten .
PRED:	On the third day of the Babylonian army began to attack King Jehoash of Judah , and he killed all the people of Judah . He killed all the people of Damascus and all the people of Damascus .
GOLD:	In the spring of the year the Aramean army marched against Joash . They invaded Judah and Jerusalem and killed all the leaders of the nation . Then they sent all the plunder back to their king in Damascus .

ID:	5490
INPUT:	Ahabara doan ibaiaren ondoan bildu nituen gizon horiek , eta han gelditu ginen hiru egunez . Herriko jendea eta apaizak han zeudela ohartu nintzen , baina ez nuen lebitarrik aurkitu .
PRED:	As soon as they arrived at the town , I took some of the men and some of the people standing there there . But the priests did n't find him there , but I did n't find him there .
GOLD:	I assembled the exiles at the Ahava Canal , and we camped there for three days while I went over the lists of the people and the priests who had arrived . I found that not one Levite had volunteered to come along .

ID:	5491
INPUT:	Zoraturik dago erregea zure edertasunaz . Bera da zure jaun ; egiozu agur .
PRED:	What is the King of the king 's palace ? What is your lord the king ? ”
GOLD:	The princess of Tyre will shower you with gifts.The wealthy will beg your favor .

ID:	5492
INPUT:	Lursailik , mahastirik eta olibadirik ederrenak kenduko dizkizue , bere zerbitzariei emateko .
PRED:	Even if you are dead , you must take off your beautiful vineyards and give your servants to your servants and your servants .
GOLD:	He will take away the best of your fields and vineyards and olive groves and give them to his own officials .

ID:	5493
INPUT:	Horregatik , estali dolu-jantziz , egin negar eta intziri ; ez , ez da Jaunaren haserre-sumi<unk> darengandik aldendu .
PRED:	Therefore , turn away from their clothes and weep ; do n't weep or weep or weep or weep for them .
GOLD:	So put on clothes of mourningand weep with broken hearts , for the fierce anger of the Lordis still upon us .

ID:	5494
INPUT:	Orduan , mezu hau igorri zion Salomonek Tiroko errege Hurami : « Zedro-zura bidali zenion gure aita Davidi , bere jauregia eraikitzeko .
PRED:	Then King Solomon sent this message to King Solomon : “ Go down to the palace of my father , David , your father , David .
GOLD:	He enlisted a force of 70,000 laborers , 80,000 men to quarry stone in the hill country , and 3,600 foremen .

ID:	5495
INPUT:	Xedapen zuzenak ezarri dituzu , zeharo fidagarriak .
PRED:	You are the stars in the heavens , and your wonderful deeds are true .
GOLD:	Your laws are perfectand completely trustworthy .

ID:	5496
INPUT:	Orduan , itsuekikusi egingo dute berriroeta gorrek entzun .
PRED:	Then the poor will see what they have seen , and the shepherds will hear them .
GOLD:	And when he comes , he will open the eyes of the blindand unplug the ears of the deaf .

ID:	5497
INPUT:	Nagusiak , errukiturik , dena barkatu eta libre utzi zuen zerbitzaria .
PRED:	But the king turned away , and he released his servants .
GOLD:	Then his master was filled with pity for him , and he released him and forgave his debt .

ID:	5498
INPUT:	« Erantzun , ahal baduzu , presta zaitez aurre egiteko .
PRED:	“ If you want me to prepare your meal , then let me prepare for you .
GOLD:	Answer me , if you can ; make your case and take your stand .

ID:	5499
INPUT:	Libratuko zaituztet zu eta Jerusalem Asiriako erregearen eskuetatik eta babestuko dut hiri hau » .
PRED:	I will keep you from the king of Assyria , and I will hand you over to the city of Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	and I will rescue you and this city from the king of Assyria . Yes , I will defend this city .

ID:	5500
INPUT:	Eta Judako Baalatik abiatu zen , bere jende guztiarekin , Jaunaren kutxa handik ekartzeko asmoz . Kutxa hau Jaunaren izenari eskainia dago , izaki hegaldunen gainean jarria dagoen Jaun ahalguztidunaren izenari .
PRED:	So the people of Judah went out to meet the Ark of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . He brought this place to the Ark of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	He led them to Baalah of Judah to bring back the Ark of God , which bears the name of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who is enthroned between the cherubim .

ID:	5501
INPUT:	haserre bizitan jarriko naiz eta gerraz hilko zaituztet ; orduan , zuen emazteak bihurtuko dira alargun eta zuen seme-alabak umezurtz .
PRED:	I will put your anger on you , and I will die in your home . But I will send you to your children , orphans , and widows .
GOLD:	If you exploit them in any way and they cry out to me , then I will certainly hear their cry .

ID:	5502
INPUT:	Esauk begitan hartu zuen Jakob , honek aitarengandik lortutako bedeinkazioagatik . Honela zioen berekiko : « Hurbil duk gure aitaren hileta-eguna ; orduan , Jakob nire anaia hilko diat » .
PRED:	Esau took Esau 's father 's father , Jacob , and he blessed his father from his father . He said , “ You are my father , Jacob , my father , Jacob 's brother , Jacob . ”
GOLD:	From that time on , Esau hated Jacob because their father had given Jacob the blessing . And Esau began to scheme : “ I will soon be mourning my father 's death . Then I will kill my brother , Jacob . ”

ID:	5503
INPUT:	Erregeak oso zakar erantzun zion herriari , kontseilariek emana zioten aholkua aintzat hartu gabe ,
PRED:	The king replied to the people , “ Do n't let the advice of the older counselors , too , for the advice of the wise men . ”
GOLD:	But Rehoboam spoke harshly to the people , for he rejected the advice of the older counselors

ID:	5504
INPUT:	Samuelek esan zuen : « Bil ezazue herri osoa Mitzpan eta nik otoitz eginen diot Jaunari zuen alde » .
PRED:	Then Samuel said to the people , “ Bring me together to the people of Mizpah and pray to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Then Samuel told them , “ Gather all of Israel to Mizpah , and I will pray to the Lord for you . ”

ID:	5505
INPUT:	Mirabeagandikoa giza sorbide hutsez jaio zen ; emazte librearengandikoa , berriz , Jainkoaren agintzariaren indarrez .
PRED:	For the Son of God came from the dead , but the Son of God came from him . But the power of God came from him , and the power of God .
GOLD:	The son of the slave wife was born in a human attempt to bring about the fulfillment of God 's promise . But the son of the freeborn wife was born as God 's own fulfillment of his promise .

ID:	5506
INPUT:	Azkenik , bertso hauek abestu zituen : « Ai ene ! Nor aterako da bizi<unk> koak ekingo dionean ?
PRED:	Finally , this message came to me : “ Who is this to me ? Who can bring me to wisdom ?
GOLD:	Balaam concluded his messages by saying : “ Alas , who can surviveunless God has willed it ?

ID:	5507
INPUT:	Ez ugaritu hitzaldi handizaleak , ez izan harrokeriarik zeuen ahoan ; dena dakien Jainkoa baitugu Jauna , berak epaitzen ditu egintzak .
PRED:	Do n't be surprised when you are proud , do n't be surprised when you obey the commands of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Stop acting so proud and haughty ! Do n't speak with such arrogance ! For the Lord is a God who knows what you have done ; he will judge your actions .

ID:	5508
INPUT:	Labanek Zilpa bere neskamea eman zion bere alaba Leari neskametzat .
PRED:	Soon Zilpah gave her a servant to her , and she gave her a daughter .
GOLD:	( Laban had given Leah a servant , Zilpah , to be her maid . )

ID:	5509
INPUT:	Izan Jaunari begirune zuek , hari sagaratuok , ez baitzaie ezer faltako begirune diotenei .
PRED:	Remember the word of the Lord , all you who fear him , for they have no fear of the Lord .
GOLD:	Even strong young lions sometimes go hungry , but those who trust in the Lord will lack no good thing .

ID:	5510
INPUT:	Berehala aurkeztu zitzaizkion apaizburuak eta judu handikiak , Paulo salatzera .
PRED:	The leading priests and the teachers of religious law , and the leading priests took Paul to the synagogue .
GOLD:	where the leading priests and other Jewish leaders met with him and made their accusations against Paul .

ID:	5511
INPUT:	« Egin itzazu hedeak eta uztarria , eta hartu lepoan .
PRED:	“ Make them a yoke of your neck , a place where you can break the yoke of your neck .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord said to me : “ Make a yoke , and fasten it on your neck with leather straps .

ID:	5512
INPUT:	Gaiztoen aginpideak ez du iraun<unk> nak zintzoei emandako lurraldean , zintzoak ere has ez daitezen bidegabekeria egiten .
PRED:	The wicked will not enter the land of the godly , but the godly will not be punished for the godly .
GOLD:	The wicked will not rule the land of the godly , for then the godly might be tempted to do wrong .

ID:	5513
INPUT:	Nola gorde dezake gazteak bere burua garbi ? Bere bizimodua zure hitzera egokituz .
PRED:	How can your thoughts be pure , O Lord ? How can your tongue be filled with kindness ?
GOLD:	How can a young person stay pure ? By obeying your word .

ID:	5514
INPUT:	Handikiak ezereztu egiten ditu , munduko gobernariakhutsaren pareko bihurtzen .
PRED:	You are more valuable than the nations , but you are the greatest of the world .
GOLD:	He judges the great people of the worldand brings them all to nothing .

ID:	5515
INPUT:	Ankerra da kumeekin , bereak ez balitu bezala ; ez zaio axola bere nekeak alferrikako gertatzea .
PRED:	She is like a woman , but she wo n't be sick or useless .
GOLD:	She is harsh toward her young , as if they were not her own.She does n't care if they die .

ID:	5516
INPUT:	entzun zuk zerutik , bizi zaren toki horretatik , eta barkatu . Egizu har dezala nork bere jokaeraren ordaina , ongi baitakizu halakoaren barruaren berri ; izan ere , zuk bakarrik dakizu gizon-emakume guztien barruaren berri .
PRED:	then hear from heaven and forgive them , but do n't forgive them . But please forgive them , but do n't forgive anyone 's sins . But please forgive them , but you have only one of them . ”
GOLD:	then hear from heaven where you live , and forgive . Give your people what their actions deserve , for you alone know each human heart .

ID:	5517
INPUT:	Sasijainkoei eskainitako haragiaz , denok dakigu , noski , jakin behar dena . Baina jakiteak harrotu egiten du ; maitasunak bakarrik hazarazten du fedean .
PRED:	For we know that Satan is a god of wood , but we know that he loves us . But we know that he loves us , and he loves us .
GOLD:	Now regarding your question about food that has been offered to idols . Yes , we know that “ we all have knowledge ” about this issue . But while knowledge makes us feel important , it is love that strengthens the church .

ID:	5518
INPUT:	Ni , Kohelet , Israel herriaren errege izana naizJerusalemen .
PRED:	Listen to me , O people of Israel , you king of Israel !
GOLD:	I , the Teacher , was king of Israel , and I lived in Jerusalem .

ID:	5519
INPUT:	Ez izan beldurrik gorputza hil bai , baina bizia hondatu ezin dutenei ; izan beldur , gorputza ez ezik , pertsona osoa infernuan honda dezakeenari .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of them , but do n't be afraid , for they are afraid to kill those who do n't lose your body .
GOLD:	“ Do n't be afraid of those who want to kill your body ; they can not touch your soul . Fear only God , who can destroy both soul and body in hell .

ID:	5520
INPUT:	Jainko salbatzaile dugu Jainkoa , Jainko Jaunari esker libratu gara heriotzatik .
PRED:	God will rescue us from the power of the Lord our God , who rescued us from the power of the dead .
GOLD:	But God will smash the heads of his enemies , crushing the skulls of those who love their guilty ways .

ID:	5521
INPUT:	Joiakimen gainerako jarduerak eta egintzak « Judako Erregeen Kronika » liburuan daude idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Jehoram 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Jehoiakim 's reign and all his deeds are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .

ID:	5522
INPUT:	Ez egin jaramonik esamesa guztiei ; horrela , ez diozu entzungo zeure morroiarizutaz gaizki-esaka .
PRED:	Do n't listen to these words , for they will listen to your servants . Do n't listen to your servant , and do n't listen to me .
GOLD:	Do n't eavesdrop on others — you may hear your servant curse you .

ID:	5523
INPUT:	Ez gara zuregandik inoiz aldenduko ; bizia emango diguzu eta guk zuri dei egingo .
PRED:	They will never return to you , and we will give you eternal life . We will call on you , and you will call on you . ”
GOLD:	Turn us again to yourself , O Lord God of Heaven 's Armies.Make your face shine down upon us.Only then will we be saved .

ID:	5524
INPUT:	Emakumeak , orduan , Eliseori : — Eskatu al nizun nik semerik ? Ez al nizun esan ez engainatzeko ?
PRED:	Then the woman asked Gehazi , “ Did n't you bring me to my son ? Do n't I tell you not to listen ? ”
GOLD:	Then she said , “ Did I ask you for a son , my lord ? And did n't I say , ‘ Do n't deceive me and get my hopes up ' ? ”

ID:	5525
INPUT:	Berrogei urte zituen Saulen seme Ix-Boxetek Israelen errege izaten hasi zenean , eta bi urtez izan zen errege . Judak , aldiz , David onartu zuen errege .
PRED:	Saul was twenty years old when he became king , and he reigned in Israel two years . But he reigned in Judah for two years .
GOLD:	Ishbosheth , Saul 's son , was forty years old when he became king , and he ruled from Mahanaim for two years . Meanwhile , the people of Judah remained loyal to David .

ID:	5526
INPUT:	Ipini mahaia errezelaren aurrealdean , egoitzaren iparraldera , eta argimutila mahaiaren parean , hegoaldera .
PRED:	There was a table on the south side of the south side of the south side of the inner courtyard , and on the south side .
GOLD:	Place the table outside the inner curtain on the north side of the Tabernacle , and place the lampstand across the room on the south side .

ID:	5527
INPUT:	Emakumeak
PRED:	Young Women of Jerusalem
GOLD:	1:1

ID:	5528
INPUT:	Gogora ezazu zeure ituna , beteak baitaude herrialdeko bazterrak gogorkeriaz .
PRED:	Give them your unfailing love , but do n't ignore the land of the Canaanites .
GOLD:	Remember your covenant promises , for the land is full of darkness and violence !

ID:	5529
INPUT:	Handik Gibeara zihoazelarik , hara non datorkien profeta-taldea . Hartu zuen Saul Jaunaren espirituak eta , besteekin batera , profeta-trantzean jarri zen bera ere .
PRED:	From there he went to the group of prophets , where Saul had been a prophet from the Lord 's group of prophets , and he went out to the other group of prophets .
GOLD:	When Saul and his servant arrived at Gibeah , they saw a group of prophets coming toward them . Then the Spirit of God came powerfully upon Saul , and he , too , began to prophesy .

ID:	5530
INPUT:	emaguzu egunean eguneko ogia ,
PRED:	On the day of judgment , you will know the day of judgment .
GOLD:	Give us each day the food we need ,

ID:	5531
INPUT:	Baina , egun hartatik aurrera , nire gizonen erdiak lan egiten zuen bitartean , beste erdia lantzaz , ezkutuz , gezi-uz<unk> eta korazaz armaturik egon ohi zen . Buruzagiek judu guztien ardura zuten .
PRED:	But that day the men of Israel came out of the country , and they tried to hide the fields from the fields . They were allowed to eat the food from the fields and drinking wine .
GOLD:	Then the people of Judah began to complain , “ The workers are getting tired , and there is so much rubble to be moved . We will never be able to build the wall by ourselves . ”

ID:	5532
INPUT:	Eramatzazu beti zeurekin , ezarri barru-barruan .
PRED:	Put your trust in your hearts , and put them on your head .
GOLD:	Tie them on your fingers as a reminder.Write them deep within your heart .

ID:	5533
INPUT:	Ez ahaztu zuekin egin duen ituna . Ez duzue beste jainkorik gurtuko .
PRED:	Do not forget what you have done . You must not worship other gods . You must not worship other gods .
GOLD:	Do not forget the covenant I made with you , and do not worship other gods .

ID:	5534
INPUT:	Haiek , ordea , ez zuten entzun ; burugogor izan ziren , beraien gurasoak bezalaxe , ez baitzuten uste onik izan Jaunarengan , beren Jainkoarengan .
PRED:	But they did n't listen to him . But they did n't listen to him , for they did n't believe in the Lord their God .
GOLD:	But the Israelites would not listen . They were as stubborn as their ancestors who had refused to believe in the Lord their God .

ID:	5535
INPUT:	Hauek ez dira giza odolekoak , ezta gizakiaren borondatezsortuak ere , Jainkoarengandik jaioak baizik .
PRED:	These people are not human praise , but you are children of God . And you are children of God .
GOLD:	They are reborn — not with a physical birth resulting from human passion or plan , but a birth that comes from God .

ID:	5536
INPUT:	ERREGE ETA PROFE<unk> AURKAKO MEZUAK ( 21 , 1 — 24 , 10 )
PRED:	Joab 's First Response to Job
GOLD:	No Deliverance from Babylon

ID:	5537
INPUT:	Eta elkarteari esan zion : « Alde gizon gaizto horien etxola ingurutik eta ez ukitu horienik ezer , horien bekatuengatik zeuek ere gal ez zaitezten » .
PRED:	Then the man said to each other , “ Get rid of this man , and do n't turn away from your sins . Do n't turn away from your sins . ”
GOLD:	“ Quick ! ” he told the people . “ Get away from the tents of these wicked men , and do n't touch anything that belongs to them . If you do , you will be destroyed for their sins . ”

ID:	5538
INPUT:	Jaunak bere zigor-epaiabeteko duenean , Siongo bizilagunen zikinakkenduko ditueta Jerusalemen isuritakoodola garbituko .
PRED:	For the Lord will punish those who live in Jerusalem , and he will remove all the sins of Jerusalem and Jerusalem .
GOLD:	The Lord will wash the filth from beautiful Zionand cleanse Jerusalem of its bloodstainswith the hot breath of fiery judgment .

ID:	5539
INPUT:	Bide zuzena utzirik , galdu egin dira , Bosorren seme Balaam profetaren jokabideari jarraituz . Honek bidegabeko irabazia irrikatu zuen ;
PRED:	As soon as they left , Naomi son of Abinoam followed the example of the prophet Isaiah son of Nebat , the prophet of Baal .
GOLD:	They have wandered off the right road and followed the footsteps of Balaam son of Beor , who loved to earn money by doing wrong .

ID:	5540
INPUT:	Beraz , ez zaie zilegi israeldarrei landan abererik hiltzea , baizik eta apaizari eraman behar diote elkarketa-etxolaren sarrerara , eta Jaunari eskaini elkartasun-oparitzat .
PRED:	So do not bring the following instructions to the people of Israel . You must not bring the sacred offerings to the Lord . You must present it to the Lord as a burnt offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	The purpose of this rule is to stop the Israelites from sacrificing animals in the open fields . It will ensure that they bring their sacrifices to the priest at the entrance of the Tabernacle , so he can present them to the Lord as peace offerings .

ID:	5541
INPUT:	ez die inork esaten , ondotik pasatzean : « Bedeinka zaitzatela Jaunak ! Jaunaren izenean bedeinkatzen zaituztegu » .
PRED:	No one can ever say , “ Praise the Lord ! Blessed are those who bless you in the name of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	And may those who pass byrefuse to give them this blessing : “ The Lord bless you ; we bless you in the Lord 's name . ”

ID:	5542
INPUT:	Jakobek aitari : — Esau zure seme nagusia . Bete dut eskatu didazuna . Jaiki , mesedez , eseri eta jan nik ehizatua , bedeinka nazazun .
PRED:	Jacob said to his father , Esau , “ I have been your master . Go and eat your meal , and eat it . ”
GOLD:	Jacob replied , “ It 's Esau , your firstborn son . I 've done as you told me . Here is the wild game . Now sit up and eat it so you can give me your blessing . ”

ID:	5543
INPUT:	Zure balentria ikaragarriak aipatzen dituzte , eta nik zure egintza handiak kontatzen .
PRED:	Your servants are your servants , your servants , your servants , and your commands are filled with your commands .
GOLD:	Your awe-inspiring deeds will be on every tongue ; I will proclaim your greatness .

ID:	5544
INPUT:	« Lehorrean dituzun hiriaksuntsituko dizkizu gerraz ; gerlariek eraso-dorreakjarriko dituzte zure kontra , lubetak eraikiko zuri erasotzekoeta ezkutu-hesia jarrikoberen babeserako .
PRED:	“ You will destroy all the towns of the city , and your ancestors will be destroyed . They will fall against you , like a wall of the enemy , and you will be slaughtered by the sword .
GOLD:	First he will destroy your mainland villages . Then he will attack you by building a siege wall , constructing a ramp , and raising a roof of shields against you .

ID:	5545
INPUT:	« Zuek , Jainkoaren agindua bazterrera utzi eta giza ohiturari eusten diozue » .
PRED:	“ You have rejected the word of God and keep it safe . ”
GOLD:	For you ignore God 's law and substitute your own tradition . ”

ID:	5546
INPUT:	badatorren , lurra gobernatzera datorren Jaunaren aurrean . Justiziaz gobernatuko du mundua eta leialtasunez herriak .
PRED:	Those who come to the ends of the earth will come before the Lord , who will walk in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	before the Lord , for he is coming ! He is coming to judge the earth.He will judge the world with justice , and the nations with his truth .

ID:	5547
INPUT:	beste erresumak baino apalagoa , eta ez da berriro nazioen gain jarriko . Txiki egingo dut , nazioak mendera ez ditzan .
PRED:	I will go down to war against the other side of the fire , and I will not be destroyed .
GOLD:	It will be the lowliest of all the nations , never again great enough to rise above its neighbors .

ID:	5548
INPUT:	Entzun , Jauna , errukarrien desioak , emaiezu adore , adi izan belarria haiengana ,
PRED:	O Lord , listen to the cries of your cries for help , for you have been greatly encouraged by their distress .
GOLD:	Lord , you know the hopes of the helpless.Surely you will hear their cries and comfort them .

ID:	5549
INPUT:	Jaun ahalguztidunak erantzun hau eman zidan ,
PRED:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies replied to me ,
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies sent me this message in reply :

ID:	5550
INPUT:	Eglonengana hurbildu zen Ehud . Erregea beretzat bakarrik zuen goiko gela freskoan zegoen eseria . Ehudek esan zion : — Jainkoaren mandatua dut zuretzat . Erregea jaiki egin zen aulkitik .
PRED:	After Ehud arrived at Eglon , he went up to the king 's home , and he asked him , “ I will give you the honor of God . ” So David got up from the throne of God .
GOLD:	Ehud walked over to Eglon , who was sitting alone in a cool upstairs room . And Ehud said , “ I have a message from God for you ! ” As King Eglon rose from his seat ,

ID:	5551
INPUT:	Ez duzu , hil eta gero , beste erregeen zoria izango , zeure lurraldea hondatu baituzueta zeure herriko jendea hil . Zure , gaizkile horren , ondorengotzakez du luzaroan iraungo .
PRED:	You will not kill the king , and you will be destroyed , for your people will be destroyed , and your people will never be destroyed .
GOLD:	You will not be given a proper burial , for you have destroyed your nationand slaughtered your people.The descendants of such an evil personwill never again receive honor .

ID:	5552
INPUT:	( 2 Erg 18 , 2-3 )
PRED:	Uzziah 's Sin and Punishment
GOLD:	Hezekiah Reopens the Temple

ID:	5553
INPUT:	Zure ontasun neurrigabearen berri zabaltzen duteeta zure salbamena pozik oihukatzen .
PRED:	Your faithfulness is good to those who obey your word , and your salvation will be saved .
GOLD:	Everyone will share the story of your wonderful goodness ; they will sing with joy about your righteousness .

ID:	5554
INPUT:	Azkenean , Juda eta Jerusalemgo gizon guztiak , Josafat aurretik zutela , Jerusalemera itzuli ziren bozkarioz beterik , Jaunak poztu egin baitzituen beraien etsaiengandik libratuz .
PRED:	So King Jehoshaphat of Judah and all the people of Judah went to Jerusalem to Jerusalem , for the Lord had rescued them from his enemies .
GOLD:	Then all the men returned to Jerusalem , with Jehoshaphat leading them , overjoyed that the Lord had given them victory over their enemies .

ID:	5555
INPUT:	« Madarikatua abereekin haragizko bekatua egiten duena ! » Eta herri osoak erantzungo du : « Amen » .
PRED:	“ Cursed is anyone who commits adultery with her , ” says the Lord . “ All the people must reply , ‘ Amen . '
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who has sexual intercourse with an animal . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	5556
INPUT:	Beldurgarri gertatuko zaie Jauna : lurreko jainko guztiakezereztuko ditu , eta herri guztiek gurtuko dute , baita urrutienekoek ere , nork bere lurraldean .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ You will worship all the nations of the earth , and you will worship the gods of the nations .
GOLD:	The Lord will terrify themas he destroys all the gods in the land.Then nations around the world will worship the Lord , each in their own land .

ID:	5557
INPUT:	Ez dut neure barnean <unk> tengurik aurkitzen , ez dut inolako laguntzarik .
PRED:	I do n't know what I have done ; I do n't need to help me .
GOLD:	No , I am utterly helpless , without any chance of success .

ID:	5558
INPUT:	Emakumeak erantzun zien : — Ongi . Hala bedi ! Eta agur egin zien . Alde egin zutenean , emakumeak lokarri gorria lotu zuen leihoan .
PRED:	“ All right , ” the woman said . “ Let 's go ! ” So she took her back and put her in a window .
GOLD:	“ I accept your terms , ” she replied . And she sent them on their way , leaving the scarlet rope hanging from the window .

ID:	5559
INPUT:	Babesle izan genituen , gau eta egun , beraien artean artzain ibili ginen bitarte guztian .
PRED:	For I took them all night and night until the night I sent them out of the land .
GOLD:	In fact , day and night they were like a wall of protection to us and the sheep .

ID:	5560
INPUT:	Hain bihotzeko zintuztegunez , prest geunden , Jainkoaren berri ona ez ezik , baita geure bizia ere zuei emateko . Hainbesteraino maite zintuztegun !
PRED:	I want you to live in this way , but we also want you to live in God 's love for you , too , for we have worked for you .
GOLD:	We loved you so much that we shared with you not only God 's Good News but our own lives , too .

ID:	5561
INPUT:	Sinesgabeei dagokien heriotza lotsagarria izango duzu atzerritarren eskutik . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	You will be ashamed of the shame of the nations , and you will be defiled by the Lord your God . ”
GOLD:	You will die like an outcastat the hands of foreigners.I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	5562
INPUT:	Bere bidean zihoala , Jainkoaren aingeru batzuekin egin zuen topo Jakobek .
PRED:	When Jacob heard that the angel of God was with him , Jacob went into the presence of God .
GOLD:	When Jacob saw them , he exclaimed , “ This is God 's camp ! ” So he named the place Mahanaim .

ID:	5563
INPUT:	Aldi hartan Heber kendarra beste kendarrengandik , hau da , Moisesen aitaginarreba zen Hobaben ondorengoengandik banandu eta Kedex ondoan zegoen etxolatua , Tzaanaimgo artearen inguruan .
PRED:	These are the names of the clans of the tribe of Reuben , who was from the tribe of Levi , who was from the tribe of Reuben , Gad , and Zebulun .
GOLD:	Now Heber the Kenite , a descendant of Moses ' brother-in-law Hobab , had moved away from the other members of his tribe and pitched his tent by the oak of Zaanannim near Kedesh .

ID:	5564
INPUT:	Baditut , dagoeneko , laurogei urte . Uste al duzu badudala ahalmenik ona eta txarra bereizteko ? Edota janari-edariez gozatzeko ? Edota kantariei entzuteko ? Zuretzat oztopo baizik ez nintzateke izango , ene errege jauna .
PRED:	Have I ever been able to help me ? Have I ever heard about it ? Have I ever heard about it ? Have I ever heard that I would not listen to my lord the king , and I would not listen to my lord the king ? ”
GOLD:	Just to go across the Jordan River with the king is all the honor I need !

ID:	5565
INPUT:	benjamindarrak , eta inguratu , pertsegitu eta Gibearen ekialderaino atsedenik eman gabe oinperatu zituzten .
PRED:	So the men of Benjamin chased them and attacked them , and they carried them back to the east side of the town .
GOLD:	The Israelites surrounded the men of Benjamin and chased them relentlessly , finally overtaking them east of Gibeah .

ID:	5566
INPUT:	Zuen alde otoitz egitean , eskerrak ematen dizkiogu etengabe Jainkoari , Jesu Kristo gure Jaunaren Aitari ,
PRED:	I pray to you in the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ , who is our Lord Jesus Christ , the Father of our Lord .
GOLD:	We always pray for you , and we give thanks to God , the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ .

ID:	5567
INPUT:	Eta Aaroni esan zion : « Hartu zekor bat barkamen-oparirako eta ahari bat erre-oparirako , akats gabeak biak , eta aurkez itzazu Jaunaren aurrean .
PRED:	Then Aaron said to Aaron , “ Take a young bull and a ram for a sin offering and a burnt offering to the Lord . You must not present a burnt offering to the Lord as a burnt offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	He said to Aaron , “ Take a young bull for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering , both without defects , and present them to the Lord .

ID:	5568
INPUT:	Hogeita hamabi urte zituen errege izaten hastean eta zortzi urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen .
PRED:	He was twelve years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years .
GOLD:	Jehoram was thirty-two years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years .

ID:	5569
INPUT:	Gaurdanik zuenganako izua eta beldurra sartuko diet munduko herri guztiei : zuen berri jakitean , ikara larriak hartuko ditu .
PRED:	I will make you tremble in fear of all the nations of the earth , and you will know what I have done to you .
GOLD:	Beginning today I will make people throughout the earth terrified because of you . When they hear reports about you , they will tremble with dread and fear . ' ”

ID:	5570
INPUT:	Ez aldatu lekuz antzinako mugarririk , zure arbasoek jarritakoak dira eta .
PRED:	Do n't waste your hair on the edge of your ancestors , for your ancestors have done .
GOLD:	Do n't cheat your neighbor by moving the ancient boundary markersset up by previous generations .

ID:	5571
INPUT:	Bilarazi zituzten , orduan , filistearren buruzagi guztiak eta esan zieten : « Bidal ezazue Israelen Jainkoaren kutxa . Itzul bedi bere tokira ; bestela , hil egingo gaitu geu eta geure herria » . Hiri osoa guztiz izutua zegoen , oso gogor jo baitzituen Jainkoak .
PRED:	So the Philistines took all the Philistine rulers and told them , “ Send them to the Ark of God , the God of Israel , ” they said , “ for the Ark of the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies has killed us . ”
GOLD:	The people summoned the Philistine rulers again and begged them , “ Please send the Ark of the God of Israel back to its own country , or it will kill us all . ” For the deadly plague from God had already begun , and great fear was sweeping across the town .

ID:	5572
INPUT:	( 2 Kro 7 , <unk> )
PRED:	Balaam Rules in Israel
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	5573
INPUT:	Jehuren gainerako jarduerak , egin zuen guztia eta egintza bizkorrak « Israelgo Erregeen Kronika » liburuan daude idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Jeroboam 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Jehu 's reign — everything he did and all his achievements — are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	5574
INPUT:	Judako errege Sedekias eta bere funtzionarioak , beraiek galdu nahian dabiltzan etsaien esku utziko ditut , orain hiriari erasotzeari utzi dion Babiloniako erregearen gudarostearen menpe eroriko dira .
PRED:	Then King Zedekiah of Judah and his officials will ask King Zedekiah of Judah to hand him over to King Zedekiah of Babylon . I will drive out the Babylonian army of Babylon .
GOLD:	“ I will hand over King Zedekiah of Judah and his officials to the army of the king of Babylon . And although they have left Jerusalem for a while ,

ID:	5575
INPUT:	Morroiak kanpora bota zuen neska eta atea giltzaz itxi . Soineko luze ederrez jantzia zegoen neska , halaxe janzten baitziren errege-alaba ezkongabeak .
PRED:	So the servant took a beautiful girl and put him into a beautiful robe . He dressed in a beautiful robe , and dressed in clothes . He dressed his clothes in mourning .
GOLD:	So the servant put her out and locked the door behind her . She was wearing a long , beautiful robe , as was the custom in those days for the king 's virgin daughters .

ID:	5576
INPUT:	Eta ezin du inork apaiz nagusigoaren ohorea beretzat hartu , Jainkoak dei eginik ez bada , Aaronek bezala .
PRED:	And no one can be able to be called the high priest to be called by God , “ No one can help him . ”
GOLD:	And no one can become a high priest simply because he wants such an honor . He must be called by God for this work , just as Aaron was .

ID:	5577
INPUT:	Josek bere burua ezagutzera eman anaiei
PRED:	Joseph Appears to His brother
GOLD:	Joseph Reveals His Identity

ID:	5578
INPUT:	Nor bere zentzu onaren arabera txalotuko dute , bihotz okerrekoak mespretxua izango du .
PRED:	Wise words are wise , but the mouth of a wise person is treacherous .
GOLD:	A sensible person wins admiration , but a warped mind is despised .

ID:	5579
INPUT:	Tinko ezarriak ditut oinak ; Jauna bedeinkatuko dut batzarrean .
PRED:	I will praise the Lord , and I will praise him .
GOLD:	Now I stand on solid ground , and I will publicly praise the Lord .

ID:	5580
INPUT:	Bidean zihoala , putzu bat begiztatu zuen landan eta hiru artalde putzu ondoan etzanak , handik edaten baitzuten artaldeek . Harri handi batek estaltzen zuen putzuko ahoa .
PRED:	There was a man who had a basket of cloth , along with a blue cloth , and the flocks of sheep and goats . And the flocks of sheep took care of the flock and goats that were about to cover it .
GOLD:	He saw a well in the distance . Three flocks of sheep and goats lay in an open field beside it , waiting to be watered . But a heavy stone covered the mouth of the well .

ID:	5581
INPUT:	Erreinuko ministro , eskualdeburu , kontseilari eta gobernariek aho batez eskatzen dizute errege-agindu hau eman eta aldarrika dezazun : Errege jauna , hogeita hamar egun hauetan , zuri ez beste jainko nahiz gizonen bati otoitz egingo diona , jaurti dezatela lehoien zulora .
PRED:	But if the king of Babylon 's empire , Daniel , Daniel , and the other officers of the king 's officers , tell him , ‘ This is what the king of Israel says : If you do , you will be thrown into the den of lions , and you will be thrown into a lion . '
GOLD:	And now , Your Majesty , issue and sign this law so it can not be changed , an official law of the Medes and Persians that can not be revoked . ”

ID:	5582
INPUT:	Esan zuen , gainera : « Bedeinkatua Jauna , Semen Jainkoa ! Izan bedi Kanaan Semen esklabo !
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Praise the Lord , the God of Israel ! The Son of Ham is the slave of Canaan .
GOLD:	Then Noah said , “ May the Lord , the God of Shem , be blessed , and may Canaan be his servant !

ID:	5583
INPUT:	Joseren leinukoak Betel hiriaren kontra abiatu ziren , Jauna lagun zutela ,
PRED:	Meanwhile , the people of the tribe of Asher attacked the Lord , just as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	The descendants of Joseph attacked the town of Bethel , and the Lord was with them .

ID:	5584
INPUT:	Tzenan , Hadaxa , Migdal-Gad ,
PRED:	Malluch , Shemariah ,
GOLD:	Also included were Zenan , Hadashah , Migdal-gad ,

ID:	5585
INPUT:	Antola zaitezte senitarteka zeuen eginkizunen arabera , Israelgo errege Daviden eta beronen seme Salomonen idatzietan agindua dagoenez .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Solomon 's reign and his son Solomon , who had been king 's son Solomon , just as Solomon had commanded him .
GOLD:	Report for duty according to the family divisions of your ancestors , following the directions of King David of Israel and the directions of his son Solomon .

ID:	5586
INPUT:	Eta osabarik ere ez badu , gainerako ahaideetatik hurbilenekoari emango zaio ondarea eta bera izango da jabe . Lege izango dute hau israeldarrek , nik , Jaunak , Moisesi agindutakoaren arabera » .
PRED:	And if you refuse to obey the commands of the Lord , you will be careful to obey all the commands that Moses , the people of Israel , and they will be careful to obey the commands of Moses . ”
GOLD:	But if his father has no brothers , give his inheritance to the nearest relative in his clan . This is a legal requirement for the people of Israel , just as the Lord commanded Moses . ”

ID:	5587
INPUT:	Oraindik haragia hagin artean zerabiltela , biziki haserretu zen Jauna israeldarren aurka , eta izurri ikaragarriz zigortu zituen .
PRED:	So the Lord was very angry with Israel , and he was very angry with them , and he struck them with anger .
GOLD:	But while they were gorging themselves on the meat — while it was still in their mouths — the anger of the Lord blazed against the people , and he struck them with a severe plague .

ID:	5588
INPUT:	Lukas bakarrik dago nirekin . Har ezazu Markos eta ekarri zeurekin , lanerako oso ona baitut .
PRED:	Mark out the boat with me , and send them into the boat . Take them with him , for I am with you .
GOLD:	Only Luke is with me . Bring Mark with you when you come , for he will be helpful to me in my ministry .

ID:	5589
INPUT:	Ondoren , kanpoko atarira eraman eta hango lau kantoien aurretik pasarazi ninduen : kantoi bakoitzean patio txiki bat zegoen .
PRED:	Then he brought me out of the courtyard , and he brought me out of the courtyard . He gave me a great courtyard for each of the camp .
GOLD:	Then he brought me back to the outer courtyard and led me to each of its four corners . In each corner I saw an enclosure .

ID:	5590
INPUT:	« Seme nahiz alabagatik garbikuntza-egunak betetzean , apaizarengana joango da , elkarketa-etxolaren sarrerara , eta urteko bildotsa eramango dio erre-oparirako eta usakumea edo usapala barkamen-oparirako .
PRED:	“ If a man has been purified by the purification ceremony , the priest must go to the entrance of the Tabernacle , and the priest must present the guilt offering to the Lord , and he must offer it to the Lord as a burnt offering .
GOLD:	“ When the time of purification is completed for either a son or a daughter , the woman must bring a one-year-old lamb for a burnt offering and a young pigeon or turtledove for a purification offering . She must bring her offerings to the priest at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	5591
INPUT:	Adiskide maite , espirituz ongi doakizun bezala , beste gauza guztietan ere ongi joan dakizula eta osasuna izan dezazula .
PRED:	Dear friend , be patient with your spirit , just as you do . And you know that your love is true .
GOLD:	Dear friend , I hope all is well with you and that you are as healthy in body as you are strong in spirit .

ID:	5592
INPUT:	Akabek hirurogeita hamar ondorengo zituen Samarian . Jehuk gutunak igorri zizkien Samariara Izreelgo buruzagi , arduradun eta Akaben ondorengo haien hezitzaileei , esanez :
PRED:	Joab was buried with his ancestors in Samaria , and he sent them to Jezreel , who was buried with the heads of Ahab 's family , who had been killed by King Ahab of Israel .
GOLD:	Ahab had seventy sons living in the city of Samaria . So Jehu wrote letters and sent them to Samaria , to the elders and officials of the city , and to the guardians of King Ahab 's sons . He said ,

ID:	5593
INPUT:	Leial izango natzaio betiko , harekin dudan itunari sendo eutsiko .
PRED:	For I will always be with him , for I will send him with the rain .
GOLD:	I will preserve an heir for him ; his throne will be as endless as the days of heaven .

ID:	5594
INPUT:	Andreak , bere eskuetan soinekoa utzita kanpora ihes egin ziola ikusirik ,
PRED:	When he saw his hand , he ran out into the boat and ran out to the camp .
GOLD:	When she saw that she was holding his cloak and he had fled ,

ID:	5595
INPUT:	Utz itzazu berriketa hutsalak , horietara emanak gero eta gehiago aldentzen baitira benetako erlijiotik .
PRED:	Let us travel through the streets , for we are better off to travel through the land of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Avoid worthless , foolish talk that only leads to more godless behavior .

ID:	5596
INPUT:	Rakelek , orduan : — Hor duzu nire neskame Bilha . Elkar zaitez berarekin eta emango dizu semerik nire ordez ; honela , nik ere izango dut semerik , hura bitarteko .
PRED:	Rachel replied , “ Bring me my servant , my servant , and give me the sons of Jacob . Then I will give you the inheritance of my descendants , and I will give you a son . ”
GOLD:	Then Rachel told him , “ Take my maid , Bilhah , and sleep with her . She will bear children for me , and through her I can have a family , too . ”

ID:	5597
INPUT:	Itzharren semeak : Kore , Ne<unk> eta Zikri .
PRED:	These are the clans of the tribe of Benjamin : The sons of Korah , who were registered troops ,
GOLD:	The sons of Izhar were Korah , Nepheg , and Zicri .

ID:	5598
INPUT:	Bada , nire herria ahaztu egin da nitaz , intsentsua erretzen die sasijainkoei . Desbideratu egin daantzinako bidetik , sekula ibili gabekobideetan ibiltzeko .
PRED:	You have forgotten me , and I have forgotten my people . You have made me a pagan shrines , like a god who sent me to search for me .
GOLD:	But my people are not so reliable , for they have deserted me ; they burn incense to worthless idols.They have stumbled off the ancient highwaysand walk in muddy paths .

ID:	5599
INPUT:	PROFETAREN BI<unk> ZAKO GORABEHERAK ( 34 , 1 — 45 , 5 )
PRED:	Philip Rules in Judah
GOLD:	A Warning for Zedekiah

ID:	5600
INPUT:	Zeruetan zure agintzari miragarria goresten dute , Jauna , aingeruen batzarrean zure leialtasuna .
PRED:	In your mighty power , O Lord , all your angels will praise you in the presence of the Lord .
GOLD:	For who in all of heaven can compare with the Lord ? What mightiest angel is anything like the Lord ?

ID:	5601
INPUT:	( Is 38 , 1-8 ; 2 Kro 32 , 24 )
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Envoys from Babylon

ID:	5602
INPUT:	eta biak bat izango dira . Beraz , aurrerantzean ez dira bi , bat baino .
PRED:	There will be one of you , and there will be two of you . ”
GOLD:	and the two are united into one . ' Since they are no longer two but one ,

ID:	5603
INPUT:	Jaunaren aintza tenplura sartu zen ekialdeko atetik .
PRED:	Then the glory of the Lord went into the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	And the glory of the Lord came into the Temple through the east gateway .

ID:	5604
INPUT:	Izan ere , beste horiek guztiek sobera dutenetik egin dute limosna ; honek , ordea , bere eskasian , bizitzeko zeukan guztia eman du » .
PRED:	For everything you have done for these things , but you will have treasure everything you need . But when you do , you will have treasure everything you need . ”
GOLD:	For they have given a tiny part of their surplus , but she , poor as she is , has given everything she has . ”

ID:	5605
INPUT:	Davidek galdetu zuen : « Gelditzen ote da bizirik Saulen senitartekoren bat ? Neure onginahia agertu nahi nioke Jonatanengatik » .
PRED:	“ Do n't you stay here ? ” David asked . “ Why are you trying to kill me ? ”
GOLD:	One day David asked , “ Is anyone in Saul 's family still alive — anyone to whom I can show kindness for Jonathan 's sake ? ”

ID:	5606
INPUT:	aurrez aurre etengabeiraintzen nauen herriarengana : baratze sakratuetansakrifizioak eskaintzen dituzteeta adreiluzko aldareetanintsentsua erretzen ,
PRED:	I would return to the people of Israel , bringing sacrifices to the Lord . I brought them to the people of Israel , bringing sacred offerings , gold , and gold , and sacred offerings to the Lord .
GOLD:	All day long they insult me to my faceby worshiping idols in their sacred gardens.They burn incense on pagan altars .

ID:	5607
INPUT:	Filistearra ere bazetorren eta Davidengana hurbiltzen ari zen , ezkutaria aurretik zuela .
PRED:	As soon as the Philistines came to David , they came to meet David .
GOLD:	Goliath walked out toward David with his shield bearer ahead of him ,

ID:	5608
INPUT:	jakintzaz janzten dira gelakmota guztietako ondasun baliotsu eta atseginez .
PRED:	He will take all the parts of the world , and he will put it in sorrow .
GOLD:	Through knowledge its rooms are filledwith all sorts of precious riches and valuables .

ID:	5609
INPUT:	Izaki haiek aurrera egitean , gurpilek ere aurrera egiten zuten ondoan , eta izakiak lurretik altxatzean , gurpilak ere altxatu .
PRED:	As soon as the beings moved , the wheels rose up , and the wheels rose up from the four corners of the altar .
GOLD:	When the living beings moved , the wheels moved with them . When they flew upward , the wheels went up , too .

ID:	5610
INPUT:	Hizketa ugari , huts egitea sarri ; mihiari eusten dakiena , hori bai zuhurra !
PRED:	Wise words are like a fool , but words are like a fool .
GOLD:	Too much talk leads to sin.Be sensible and keep your mouth shut .

ID:	5611
INPUT:	Eberrek bi seme izan zituen : batak Pe<unk> , hau da , « Zatiketa » , zuen izena , bere garaian zatitu baitzen mundua ; anaiak , berriz , Joktan .
PRED:	Then the two sons of Reuben said to them , “ This is what the Lord says : My brother is here in the world , but there is no other . ”
GOLD:	Eber had two sons . The first was named Peleg ( which means “ division ” ) , for during his lifetime the people of the world were divided into different language groups . His brother 's name was Joktan .

ID:	5612
INPUT:	Goretsazue bere egite ahaltsuengatik , goretsi bere neurrigabeko handitasunagatik .
PRED:	Praise him , O Lord , for he has brought us out of the Almighty .
GOLD:	Praise him for his mighty works ; praise his unequaled greatness !

ID:	5613
INPUT:	Jesusen gorpua bien artean hartu eta oihal-zerrendaz lotu zuten , tartean lurringaiak ezarriz , juduek hobiratzeko zuten ohiturari jarraituz .
PRED:	Then Jesus took the body into the cistern and put it on his head . But his body laid his head on his head , and laid it on the cross of the Jews .
GOLD:	Following Jewish burial custom , they wrapped Jesus ' body with the spices in long sheets of linen cloth .

ID:	5614
INPUT:	Jesusek , ikasleei begira , honela esan zuen : « Zorionekoak behartsuok , zuek baituzue Jainkoa errege .
PRED:	Jesus looked around and said to his disciples , “ Blessed are those who are poor . You are the Kingdom of God .
GOLD:	Then Jesus turned to his disciples and said , “ God blesses you who are poor , for the Kingdom of God is yours .

ID:	5615
INPUT:	Neure lurraldearen jagole izango naizinguruan dabiltzangudari-taldeen aurka ; zapaltzailea ez da gehiagolurralde honetan sartuko , orain neure begiz zaintzen dut eta » .
PRED:	I will take care of you , and I will gather you in the land of the enemy . I will gather you in the land of the enemy , and I will see you there . ”
GOLD:	I will guard my Templeand protect it from invading armies.I am watching closely to ensurethat no more foreign oppressors overrun my people 's land .

ID:	5616
INPUT:	Bestela , zuek lurralde hartako biztanleekin hitzarmena egingo bazenute , haiek , beren sasikultuak egitean eta beren jainkoei opariak eskaintzean , zuek ere gonbidatuko zintuzketete eta haien oparietatik jango zenukete ;
PRED:	You must break the pagan shrines in the land of worship at the pagan shrines , and you must worship the gods of Baal . You must offer sacrifices to your gods , and you must offer sacrifices to your gods .
GOLD:	“ You must not make a treaty of any kind with the people living in the land . They lust after their gods , offering sacrifices to them . They will invite you to join them in their sacrificial meals , and you will go with them .

ID:	5617
INPUT:	eta dei egin zioten erregeari . Hilkiasen seme Eliakim jauregizaina , Xebna idazkaria eta Asafen seme Joah , erregearen bozeramailea , atera ziren haiengana .
PRED:	Then they called Eliakim son of Hilkiah , Shebna the court secretary , and Joah son of Hilkiah , Shebna the court secretary , and Joah son of Asaph , the court secretary , and Joah son of Asaph .
GOLD:	They summoned King Hezekiah , but the king sent these officials to meet with them : Eliakim son of Hilkiah , the palace administrator ; Shebna the court secretary ; and Joah son of Asaph , the royal historian .

ID:	5618
INPUT:	Turuta-hotsa irrintziz lagundua bada , lehenengo joaldian ekialdean etxolaturiko kanpamenduak abiatuko dira ;
PRED:	If the trumpet calls for the sound of the trumpet , the Lord will appear at the camp at the camp .
GOLD:	“ When you sound the signal to move on , the tribes camped on the east side of the Tabernacle must break camp and move forward .

ID:	5619
INPUT:	Jatorriz zeurea zenuen basaolibondotik moztu eta zeurea ez zenuen olibondoan txertatu bazintuen , askoz errazago izango du olibondotik sortutakoak beren berezko olibondoan txertatzea .
PRED:	You also received the olive branches from the olive trees that had not been cut off from the olive trees . And if you were wild olive tree on the ground , you will be made of olive trees .
GOLD:	You , by nature , were a branch cut from a wild olive tree . So if God was willing to do something contrary to nature by grafting you into his cultivated tree , he will be far more eager to graft the original branches back into the tree where they belong .

ID:	5620
INPUT:	Gertatua ikusi zutenek deabruduna nola sendatua izan zen kontatu zioten jendeari .
PRED:	When the crowd saw that the demon had been healed , he was healed by the demon .
GOLD:	Then those who had seen what happened told the others how the demon-possessed man had been healed .

ID:	5621
INPUT:	Jaunak onez begiratu zion Anari , eta honek sabelean sortu eta hiru seme eta bi alaba izan zituen . Bitartean , Samuel mutikoa hazten ari zen Jaunarenean .
PRED:	Then the Lord made a solemn oath to Aaron , and he had two sons and daughters . He had two sons and daughters in the Lord 's presence , and Samuel became the next king .
GOLD:	And the Lord blessed Hannah , and she conceived and gave birth to three sons and two daughters . Meanwhile , Samuel grew up in the presence of the Lord .

ID:	5622
INPUT:	Danen leinuko seiehun gizon haiek , berriz , atarian gelditu ziren .
PRED:	After the tribe of Dan , the 600 men of Dan remained in the tribe of Dan .
GOLD:	As the 600 armed warriors from the tribe of Dan stood at the entrance of the gate ,

ID:	5623
INPUT:	Horretatik guztitik , bereizi zati bat Jaunarentzat : gudura borrokatzera joan direnei dagokienetik , bostehuneko bat , bai gizakietatik , bai behi , asto nahiz ardietatik ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord has commanded you to go to the people of the land to come to fight for the Lord . He will provide for each of you , and he will do whatever pleases you .
GOLD:	From the army 's portion , first give the Lord his share of the plunder — one of every 500 of the prisoners and of the cattle , donkeys , sheep , and goats .

ID:	5624
INPUT:	Abram , Egiptotik Negev aldera abiatu zen bere emazte eta ondasun guztiekin . Lot ere berarekin zihoan .
PRED:	Abram left Abram and Lot with Abram 's wife , along with his wife , Abram , and Lot with his wife .
GOLD:	So Abram left Egypt and traveled north into the Negev , along with his wife and Lot and all that they owned .

ID:	5625
INPUT:	Beraz , hau diotsuet : Ez ditut jende horiek botako zuen aurretik ; ondoan izanen dituzue eta beraien jainkoak tranpa gertatuko dira zuentzat » .
PRED:	So I tell you the truth , I will drive out the people of the nations ahead of you , so that you will worship idols of your gods . ”
GOLD:	So now I declare that I will no longer drive out the people living in your land . They will be thorns in your sides , and their gods will be a constant temptation to you . ”

ID:	5626
INPUT:	Gure izate ustelkorra bizi ustelezinez jantziko denean , eta izate hilkorra hilezkortasunez , orduan beteko da Liburu Santuak dioena : Behin betiko galdua gertatu da heriotza .
PRED:	For our dying bodies will be transformed into a dying bodies , and they will die in the grave . But the Scriptures say , “ He will die in eternal life , and his life will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	Then , when our dying bodies have been transformed into bodies that will never die , this Scripture will be fulfilled : “ Death is swallowed up in victory .

ID:	5627
INPUT:	Madiandik atera eta Paranera heldu ziren ; Parango gizon batzuek berekin hartu eta Egiptora jo zuten , hango errege faraoiagana . Honek etxebizitza eman zion Hadadi , baita janaria eta lurzati bat ere .
PRED:	Then they came to the king of Midian , and they brought him to the king of Egypt . They attacked the king of Egypt and brought him to Pharaoh and his entire land of Egypt .
GOLD:	They set out from Midian and went to Paran , where others joined them . Then they traveled to Egypt and went to Pharaoh , who gave them a home , food , and some land .

ID:	5628
INPUT:	Apaizburu eta lege-maisuak Jesus nola hilko zebiltzan , baina herriaren beldur ziren .
PRED:	The leading priests and the teachers of religious law were afraid of Jesus , but they were afraid of him .
GOLD:	The leading priests and teachers of religious law were plotting how to kill Jesus , but they were afraid of the people 's reaction .

ID:	5629
INPUT:	Hau ikustean , herri osoa lurreraino ahuspeztu zen , esanez : « Jauna da Jainkoa ! Jauna da Jainkoa ! »
PRED:	When the people saw this , they worshiped the Lord , saying , “ The Lord is God ! ”
GOLD:	And when all the people saw it , they fell face down on the ground and cried out , “ The Lord — he is God ! Yes , the Lord is God ! ”

ID:	5630
INPUT:	Handik bi urtera , Absalomek errege-seme guztiak gonbidatu zituen Efraim ondoko Baal-Hatzorren egiten ari zen ardi-mozketako jaira .
PRED:	After this , Abram 's two years went to the king of Ephraim , and he prepared a drink of wine for a drink of wine .
GOLD:	Two years later , when Absalom 's sheep were being sheared at Baal-hazor near Ephraim , Absalom invited all the king 's sons to come to a feast .

ID:	5631
INPUT:	Guk goresten dugu Jauna , orain eta beti . Aleluia ! Gora Jauna !
PRED:	We praise the Lord , and we praise him ! Praise the Lord !
GOLD:	But we can praise the Lordboth now and forever ! Praise the Lord !

ID:	5632
INPUT:	Mesias etorriko denean , ez du inork jakingo nongoa den ; hau , ordea , badakigu nongoa den » .
PRED:	But when the Messiah comes , no one can know what it means . But we know what it means . ”
GOLD:	But how could he be ? For we know where this man comes from . When the Messiah comes , he will simply appear ; no one will know where he comes from . ”

ID:	5633
INPUT:	Zein ederki dakizunmaitaleen etxerako bidea ! Zein maisu zarengaiztakeriarako bidean !
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who love me ! How long will you love your wickedness ?
GOLD:	“ How you plot and scheme to win your lovers.Even an experienced prostitute could learn from you !

ID:	5634
INPUT:	« Negar-zotinak ditut ogi , urak bezala gainezka egiten nire intziriek .
PRED:	“ I am worn out like water , and my eyes are like water .
GOLD:	I can not eat for sighing ; my groans pour out like water .

ID:	5635
INPUT:	Hona hemen , Jerusalemen sortu zitzaizkion semeen izenak : Xamua , Xobab , Natan , Salomon ,
PRED:	These are the names of the people who were born in Jerusalem : Jedaiah son of Amon , who was the son of Amon , who was king of Judah .
GOLD:	These are the names of David 's sons who were born in Jerusalem : Shammua , Shobab , Nathan , Solomon ,

ID:	5636
INPUT:	« Nik , Danielek , begiratu eta beste bi gizon ikusi nituen zutik ibaiaren alde banatan .
PRED:	“ As I looked up , Daniel saw two men coming out of the world , and one of them looked at me .
GOLD:	Then I , Daniel , looked and saw two others standing on opposite banks of the river .

ID:	5637
INPUT:	Satanasen esku utziko duzue hori , ea horrela , beraren bekatuzko izaera suntsiturik , Jaunaren egunean salbatzen den .
PRED:	You will drive out Satan 's hand , just as the Lord has commanded you to destroy the day of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then you must throw this man out and hand him over to Satan so that his sinful nature will be destroyed and he himself will be saved on the day the Lord returns .

ID:	5638
INPUT:	Horrela bada , Espirituaren dohainak irrikatzen dituzuenez gero , saia zaitezte dohainok ugari izaten , baina eliz elkarteari hazten laguntzeko .
PRED:	This is the Holy Spirit within you , so that you will forget the Holy Spirit , but you will forget the churches .
GOLD:	And the same is true for you . Since you are so eager to have the special abilities the Spirit gives , seek those that will strengthen the whole church .

ID:	5639
INPUT:	Atze eta aurre , estu bildua naukazu , zeure eskua nire gain ezarrita .
PRED:	You have made me a grapevine , and you have placed me on my head .
GOLD:	You go before me and follow me.You place your hand of blessing on my head .

ID:	5640
INPUT:	Gu ere , noizbait , burugabe , errebelde , bide-galdu , edozein grina eta atseginkeriaren menpeko izanak gara , gaiztakerian eta bekaizkerian bizi izanak , gorrotagarri eta elkarren gorrotatzaile .
PRED:	For though we are not guilty of wickedness , we are not guilty of wickedness . We are jealous of every kind of wickedness , but we are jealous and hate each other . We are suffering and hate each other .
GOLD:	Once we , too , were foolish and disobedient . We were misled and became slaves to many lusts and pleasures . Our lives were full of evil and envy , and we hated each other .

ID:	5641
INPUT:	ez ilunpetan zabaltzen den izurriari , ez egun-argitan jotzen duen gaitzari .
PRED:	They do n't lie in the darkness , but they refuse to help them .
GOLD:	Do not dread the disease that stalks in darkness , nor the disaster that strikes at midday .

ID:	5642
INPUT:	Harroputzek zuloak egin dizkidate bidean , zure legea aintzat hartu gabe .
PRED:	Pride goes into the proud , but they are not found in your glorious presence .
GOLD:	These arrogant people who hate your instructionshave dug deep pits to trap me .

ID:	5643
INPUT:	Jaunarengana bidali zituen galdetzera : « Zu al zara “ Etortzekoa ” , ala besteren baten zain egon behar dugu ? »
PRED:	Then the Lord sent them to ask , “ Are you trying to kill us ? Are you trying to kill us ? ”
GOLD:	and he sent them to the Lord to ask him , “ Are you the Messiah we 've been expecting , or should we keep looking for someone else ? ”

ID:	5644
INPUT:	Hirurogeita hamar urte zituela , Kenanek Mahalalel izan zuen .
PRED:	When Mahalalel was 30 years old , he became the father of Jared .
GOLD:	When Kenan was 70 years old , he became the father of Mahalalel .

ID:	5645
INPUT:	Nire erabakiak gutxietsiz , Jerusalemgo Jainkoaren etxea hondatzeko eskua luzatzen duen edozein errege edo herri eraitsi dezala bertan bizi den Jainkoak . Neuk , Dariok , ematen dut agindu hau ; bete bedi zehatz-mehatz » .
PRED:	I am determined to destroy the Temple of God , just as I have commanded you to destroy the Temple of God , the God of Israel . I have made this Temple of the Lord , the God of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	May the God who has chosen the city of Jerusalem as the place to honor his name destroy any king or nation that violates this command and destroys this Temple . “ I , Darius , have issued this decree . Let it be obeyed with all diligence . ”

ID:	5646
INPUT:	Brontzezko berrogeita hamar katigailu ere egin zituzten , oihal-etxola osoa lotu eta bat eginik geldi zedin .
PRED:	Then the curtain for the entrance of the Tabernacle , and the tent was set up for the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	He also made fifty bronze clasps to fasten the long curtains together . In this way , the tent covering was made of one continuous piece .

ID:	5647
INPUT:	Josafatek aginduok eman zizkien : « Jaunarekiko begirunez , leial eta jator jardun behar duzue .
PRED:	Then Jehoshaphat gave them this command : “ Tell them to fear the Lord , and you are faithful to him .
GOLD:	These were his instructions to them : “ You must always act in the fear of the Lord , with faithfulness and an undivided heart .

ID:	5648
INPUT:	« Emaztea utzi eta beste batekin ezkontzen denak adulterio egiten du ; eta senarrak utzitako emakume batekin ezkontzen denak adulterio egiten du .
PRED:	“ If a man commits adultery with her , she must marry her , and her husband must marry her .
GOLD:	“ For example , a man who divorces his wife and marries someone else commits adultery . And anyone who marries a woman divorced from her husband commits adultery . ”

ID:	5649
INPUT:	Media eta Pertsiako Erregeen Kronika Liburuan daude idatzirik erregearen egintza indartsu eta bizkor hauek , baita erregeak Mardokeo nola altxatu eta handi egin zuen ere .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Amon 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of the Kings of Judah and Jerusalem .
GOLD:	His great achievements and the full account of the greatness of Mordecai , whom the king had promoted , are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Media and Persia .

ID:	5650
INPUT:	Trebatzen dizkit eskuak gudurako , eta besoak brontzezko uztaia tenkatzeko .
PRED:	He trains my hands for battle ; he strengthens my arm to draw a bronze bronze bronze bow .
GOLD:	You have given me your shield of victory.Your right hand supports me ; your help has made me great .

ID:	5651
INPUT:	Honek esan zien : « Zuei eman zaizue Jainkoaren erregetzaren misterioak ezagutzea ; gainerakoei , ordea , parabola bidez hitz egiten diet . Horrela , ikusten dute , bai , baina ohartzen ez ; entzuten dute , bai , baina ulertzen ez .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ You know that the Kingdom of God is written in the Kingdom of God , but you do n't understand what it means . But I do n't understand it , but you do n't understand it .
GOLD:	He replied , “ You are permitted to understand the secrets of the Kingdom of God . But I use parables to teach the others so that the Scriptures might be fulfilled : ‘ When they look , they wo n't really see.When they hear , they wo n't understand . '

ID:	5652
INPUT:	Errautsez janaritzen da , gezurrezko burutapen zoroek okerbidetik daramate ; idoloak ez du salbatuko , baina ez du , hala ere , aitortuko gezur huts dela eskuetan duena .
PRED:	They commit adultery , but they are false teachers of religious law . They must not break the blood of murder , but they will not be put to death .
GOLD:	The poor , deluded fool feeds on ashes.He trusts something that ca n't help him at all.Yet he can not bring himself to ask , “ Is this idol that I 'm holding in my hand a lie ? ”

ID:	5653
INPUT:	Orduan , erregeak askarazi egin zuen , herrien nagusiak giltzapetik libre utzi .
PRED:	Then the king released the king of the Babylonians , and he released him from the power of the Babylonians .
GOLD:	Then Pharaoh sent for him and set him free ; the ruler of the nation opened his prison door .

ID:	5654
INPUT:	Harroputza zigortzean , zuhur bihurtzen da heldugabea , eta zuhurrari dagokion heziketaz lortzen du jakintza .
PRED:	A wise person who loves wisdom is wise , but wisdom brings knowledge to wisdom .
GOLD:	If you punish a mocker , the simpleminded become wise ; if you instruct the wise , they will be all the wiser .

ID:	5655
INPUT:	Horiek ziren Manasesen senitarteak : 52 . <unk> gizonezko guztira .
PRED:	These were the clans of Manasseh . Their registered troops numbered 64,400 .
GOLD:	These were the clans of Manasseh . Their registered troops numbered 52,700 .

ID:	5656
INPUT:	Han , giza eskuz eginiko zurezko eta harrizko jainkoak gurtu beharko dituzue , ez ikusi eta ez entzun , ez jan eta ez usaindu egiten ez dutenak .
PRED:	There you can worship idols of wood and stone , and you must not eat any other gods . You must not eat any gods or eat or drink anything that has not heard .
GOLD:	There , in a foreign land , you will worship idols made from wood and stone — gods that neither see nor hear nor eat nor smell .

ID:	5657
INPUT:	Esnatutakoan ametsa bezala , gutxietsi egingo dituzu , Jauna , mamuen erreinuan .
PRED:	In the same way , you will know the Lord , just as the Lord has commanded you to enter the Kingdom of Heaven .
GOLD:	When you arise , O Lord , you will laugh at their silly ideasas a person laughs at dreams in the morning .

ID:	5658
INPUT:	Etsaiak ateetan
PRED:	The Futility of Work
GOLD:	Jerusalem 's Last Warning

ID:	5659
INPUT:	Jaunaren aingeruak Manoahi : — Zure emazteak bete dezala esan nion guztia .
PRED:	The angel of the Lord said to Mary , “ You are my wife , just as I said . ”
GOLD:	The angel of the Lord replied , “ Be sure your wife follows the instructions I gave her .

ID:	5660
INPUT:	Filistearrak , hara heltzean , Refaim haranean zabaldu ziren .
PRED:	As soon as the Philistines arrived at the valley of Rephaim , the Philistines returned from the valley of Rephaim .
GOLD:	The Philistines arrived and spread out across the valley of Rephaim .

ID:	5661
INPUT:	baina Lot Sodomatik atera zen egunean , su eta sufrezko euria egin zuen zerutik eta denak galdu zituen .
PRED:	But Abram left Sodom and Gomorrah and burned it on the ground , and he destroyed them from heaven and destroyed them .
GOLD:	until the morning Lot left Sodom . Then fire and burning sulfur rained down from heaven and destroyed them all .

ID:	5662
INPUT:	esan zion Noeri : « Izaki oro suntsitzea erabaki dut , gizakien erruz indarkeriaz betea baitago mundua ; gizakia eta mundua , biak suntsituko ditut .
PRED:	Then Noah said to Noah , “ Get up and destroy the earth , for I will destroy the earth . I will destroy the earth , and I will destroy the earth .
GOLD:	So God said to Noah , “ I have decided to destroy all living creatures , for they have filled the earth with violence . Yes , I will wipe them all out along with the earth !

ID:	5663
INPUT:	Aldareak ezarri zituen Jaunaren etxean jainko arrotzentzat , tenplu hartaz Jaunak hau esana zuen arren : « Jerusalem dut neure egoitza » .
PRED:	He placed the pagan shrines in the Temple of the Lord , and he said , “ This is what the Lord says : I have made this Temple of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	He built pagan altars in the Temple of the Lord , the place where the Lord had said , “ My name will remain in Jerusalem forever . ”

ID:	5664
INPUT:	neure zerbitzari Davidi emandakoa ere hautsezina da : ez zaio faltako inoiz ere bere tronuan eseriko den ondorengorik . Ez da inoiz hautsiko ere apaiz eta lebitarrei , nire zerbitzariei , emandako hitza .
PRED:	I will give you a solemn pact with my servant David , and he will never sit on the throne of David . He will never be his priests , priests , Levites , and other priests , and Levites .
GOLD:	only then will my covenant with my servant David be broken . Only then will he no longer have a descendant to reign on his throne . The same is true for my covenant with the Levitical priests who minister before me .

ID:	5665
INPUT:	Beraz , bete Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren aginduak , ibili berak erakutsitako bidetik eta bizi berarenganako begirunean .
PRED:	So be careful to obey the commands of the Lord your God , and he will send them away from their sins .
GOLD:	“ So obey the commands of the Lord your God by walking in his ways and fearing him .

ID:	5666
INPUT:	Israel ere filistearren eskuetara emango du Jaunak zurekin batera . Bihar zure semea eta biok nirekin izanen zarete , eta Israelen gudarostea ere filistearren eskuetara emango du Jaunak .
PRED:	The Lord will give you victory over Israel , and you will be with my sons and daughters . The Lord will give you victory over Israel , and you will be victorious , and you will hand them over to the Philistines .
GOLD:	What 's more , the Lord will hand you and the army of Israel over to the Philistines tomorrow , and you and your sons will be here with me . The Lord will bring down the entire army of Israel in defeat . ”

ID:	5667
INPUT:	Haiek ikusi orduko , Jakobek esan zuen : « Jainkoaren kanpalekua da hau ! » Eta leku hari Mahanaim — hau da , « Kanpaleku-bieta » — eman zion izen .
PRED:	Then Jacob looked at him and said , “ This is the place of the camp , the place of a place of worship ! ” And Jacob named him the place where he had said , “ It is the place of worship ! ”
GOLD:	Then Jacob sent messengers ahead to his brother , Esau , who was living in the region of Seir in the land of Edom .

ID:	5668
INPUT:	Xiloko kultu-lekuari eman nion tratu bera emango diot tenplu honi ; hiri hau , berriz , nire madarikazioaren adierazgarri izango da munduko nazio guztientzat » .
PRED:	I will destroy my pagan shrines , and I will give them this Temple to honor my name . I will give them this Temple to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	then I will destroy this Temple as I destroyed Shiloh , the place where the Tabernacle was located . And I will make Jerusalem an object of cursing in every nation on earth . ' ”

ID:	5669
INPUT:	Eta ohar hau egin zien Jesusek : « Ulertzeko gauza denak uler beza » .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to them , “ Anyone with ears to hear must understand what he is going to understand . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ Anyone with ears to hear should listen and understand . ”

ID:	5670
INPUT:	Ezekias , Judako errege
PRED:	Hezekiah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Assyria Invades Judah

ID:	5671
INPUT:	Jezabel emaztea etorri zitzaion , esanez : — Zer duzu goibel egoteko ? Zergatik ez duzu ezer ere jan nahi ?
PRED:	“ What do you want to eat ? ” he asked . “ What do you want to eat ? ”
GOLD:	“ What 's the matter ? ” his wife Jezebel asked him . “ What 's made you so upset that you 're not eating ? ”

ID:	5672
INPUT:	Zilarra arragoan , urrea labean , gizakia goratzen duenaren ahoan .
PRED:	Fire tests the purity of silver , and the words of the chestpiece .
GOLD:	Fire tests the purity of silver and gold , but a person is tested by being praised .

ID:	5673
INPUT:	hau Melearena , hau Menarena , hau Matatarena , hau Natanena , hau Davidena ,
PRED:	the son of Levi was the son of Nathan was the son of David , the son of David was the son of David .
GOLD:	Eliakim was the son of Melea.Melea was the son of Menna.Menna was the son of Mattatha.Mattatha was the son of Nathan.Nathan was the son of David .

ID:	5674
INPUT:	Jehuren erregealdiko zazpigarren urtea zen , eta berrogei urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen . Haren amak Tzibia zuen izena eta Beer-Xebakoa zen .
PRED:	The next year of Jeroboam 's reign , and he reigned in Jerusalem forty years . His mother was Abijah , the daughter of Anah and grandson of Zibeon .
GOLD:	All his life Joash did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight because Jehoiada the priest instructed him .

ID:	5675
INPUT:	Honela , Josue lurralde osoaz jabetu zen : mendialdeaz , Negev basamortuaz , Xefela lautadaz eta alderdi menditsuez , eta errege guztiak hil zituzten . Erabat suntsitu zituen bizidun guztiak , bat ere utzi gabe , Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak , agindu bezala .
PRED:	So Joshua killed all the people of the hill country of the Negev , in the hill country of the Negev , the kings of the Negev , the kings of the Negev , and the kings of Israel had killed them , just as the Lord had commanded .
GOLD:	So Joshua conquered the whole region — the kings and people of the hill country , the Negev , the western foothills , and the mountain slopes . He completely destroyed everyone in the land , leaving no survivors , just as the Lord , the God of Israel , had commanded .

ID:	5676
INPUT:	Hau bai gaitz negargarria : etorri bezalaxe joan behar . Eta zein fruitu atera dioegin duen lanari ?
PRED:	This is what the more important and evil people do . Are they eating and drinking ? Of course not !
GOLD:	We all come to the end of our lives as naked and empty-handed as on the day we were born . We ca n't take our riches with us .

ID:	5677
INPUT:	Gero , eguzki-haizea aterarazi zuen zerutiketa hego-haizea bidali bere gotorlekutik .
PRED:	Then he sent the wind to open the sky , and he sent them out of the sky .
GOLD:	He released the east wind in the heavensand guided the south wind by his mighty power .

ID:	5678
INPUT:	Ez zaitez indarkeria-zalearen inbidiaz bizi , ezta haren biderik hartu ere .
PRED:	Do n't envy the power of the power of the power of the Lord .
GOLD:	Do n't envy violent peopleor copy their ways .

ID:	5679
INPUT:	Egosi genuen , beraz , nire semea eta jan . Biharamunean , berea emateko esan nion , jan egin behar genuela eta . Baina gorde egin du .
PRED:	So I began to eat and eat it . I gave it to my son , and I ate it . But I did n't eat it . ”
GOLD:	So we cooked my son and ate him . Then the next day I said to her , ‘ Kill your son so we can eat him , ' but she has hidden her son . ”

ID:	5680
INPUT:	dardara egin zuen lurrak , urtu egin zen Jainkoaren aurrean zerua , Sinaiko Jainkoaren , Israelen Jainkoaren aurrean .
PRED:	When the earth grew up , the God of Israel lived in the heavens , and he found favor of the God of Israel .
GOLD:	You sent abundant rain , O God , to refresh the weary land .

ID:	5681
INPUT:	Baina hau zioten : « Ez gero jaiegunean , herrian iskanbilarik sor ez dadin » .
PRED:	But they said to them , “ Do n't go back to the people of Israel who live in the camp . ”
GOLD:	“ But not during the Passover celebration , ” they agreed , “ or the people may riot . ”

ID:	5682
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	5683
INPUT:	erre-oparien aldarea bere tresnekin , uraska bere oinarekin ,
PRED:	the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils ; the washbasin with its stand ;
GOLD:	the altar of burnt offering with all its utensils ; the washbasin with its stand ;

ID:	5684
INPUT:	Horrela , Zakariasen aita Joiadak erregearekiko izan zuen onginahia ahazturik , haren semea hilarazi zuen Joax erregeak . Baina hiltzeko zorian zegoela , Zakariasek esan zuen : « Ikus beza hau Jaunak eta eska biezazkizu kontuak » .
PRED:	Then Jehoiada son of Jehoiada became the next king , and he had forgotten the next king 's son Joash . But his son Amaziah had forgotten him , saying , “ May the Lord show him that he will die in front of you . ”
GOLD:	That was how King Joash repaid Jehoiada for his loyalty — by killing his son . Zechariah 's last words as he died were , “ May the Lord see what they are doing and avenge my death ! ”

ID:	5685
INPUT:	« Haien zoria aldatuko dut , Sodoma eta hirien zoria , Samaria eta hirien zoria ( zure zoria ere aldatuko dut haiena bezala ) ,
PRED:	“ I will restore the city of Sodom and Samaria , just as I had done . I will restore the fortunes of Samaria , just as I had commanded you .
GOLD:	“ But someday I will restore the fortunes of Sodom and Samaria , and I will restore you , too .

ID:	5686
INPUT:	« Elkartasun-opariko aberetik , Jaunari honako hauek aurkeztuko zaizkio , beraren ohorez erretzeko opari gisa : heste inguru eta gaineko gantza ,
PRED:	“ If you present it to the Lord , you must present it to the Lord as a burnt offering to the Lord , the fat around the internal organs , the internal organs ,
GOLD:	The priest must present part of this peace offering as a special gift to the Lord . This includes all the fat around the internal organs ,

ID:	5687
INPUT:	Zeure etxeko janari guriz asetzen dituzu , zeure atseginen ibaian edanarazten .
PRED:	When you build your house to your house , you will keep your trust in your unfailing love .
GOLD:	For you are the fountain of life , the light by which we see .

ID:	5688
INPUT:	Ez zen aurrerantzean gerrarik izan Asaren erregealdiko hogeita hamabosgarren urtea arte .
PRED:	So Asa did n't tell the king of Assyria , and he reigned in the fifth year of King Asa 's reign .
GOLD:	So there was no more war until the thirty-fifth year of Asa 's reign .

ID:	5689
INPUT:	Ikusi duzue zer egin diedan egiptoarrei , eta nola , arranoak bere kumeak hegaletan bezala hartuz , niregana ekarri zaituztedan .
PRED:	You have seen what I have done to the Egyptians , just as I did to give you the cattle , sheep , goats , goats , and goats .
GOLD:	‘ You have seen what I did to the Egyptians . You know how I carried you on eagles ' wings and brought you to myself .

ID:	5690
INPUT:	Sion hiri , Jaunak zu maiteago Israelgo herri guztiak baino .
PRED:	The Lord said to the people of Israel , “ The whole community of Israel are greater than all the nations . ”
GOLD:	He loves the city of Jerusalemmore than any other city in Israel .

ID:	5691
INPUT:	Harrotzeko nire bidea neure kontzientziaren aitorpena da ; kontzientziak esaten dit Jainkoak emandako xalotasun eta zintzotasunez jokatu dudala edonon , eta gehiago zuen artean ; eta hori , ez giza jakintzak eraginda , Jainkoaren onginahiak baizik .
PRED:	I have told you that my father is my sister , and he does n't listen to me . I will give you the privilege of serving God , and he will give you the ability to do what is right , and he will do what is right .
GOLD:	We can say with confidence and a clear conscience that we have lived with a God-given holiness and sincerity in all our dealings . We have depended on God 's grace , not on our own human wisdom . That is how we have conducted ourselves before the world , and especially toward you .

ID:	5692
INPUT:	« Horregatik diotsuet : Ez kezkatu bizitzeko zer jan edo edango , edota gorputza zerez jantziko . Ez ote da bizia janaria baino gehiago , eta gorputza jantzia baino gehiago ?
PRED:	“ I tell you the truth , you must not eat any meat or drink anything that has been made without yeast . It is better to eat or drink from the blood of the dead .
GOLD:	“ That is why I tell you not to worry about everyday life — whether you have enough food and drink , or enough clothes to wear . Is n't life more than food , and your body more than clothing ?

ID:	5693
INPUT:	Bazen Jerusalemen Simeon izeneko bat , gizon zintzo eta jainkozalea , Jainkoak Israel noiz kontsolatuko zain zegoena . Espiritu Santua berekin zuen
PRED:	One day a man named Simon , who lived in Jerusalem , was a man named the Holy One of Israel . He was as strong as the Holy One of Israel .
GOLD:	At that time there was a man in Jerusalem named Simeon . He was righteous and devout and was eagerly waiting for the Messiah to come and rescue Israel . The Holy Spirit was upon him

ID:	5694
INPUT:	Orduan , Jaunak : « Zoaz Judako hirietara eta Jerusalemgo kaleetara eta hots egin nire mezu hau : Onartu nire aginduak eta bete .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Go to Jerusalem and tell me , ‘ Go to Jerusalem and prophesy to the people of Judah and Jerusalem . '
GOLD:	Then the Lord said , “ Broadcast this message in the streets of Jerusalem . Go from town to town throughout the land and say , ‘ Remember the ancient covenant , and do everything it requires .

ID:	5695
INPUT:	Amalektarren aurkako gudua
PRED:	A Message about Philistia
GOLD:	Israel Defeats the Amalekites

ID:	5696
INPUT:	eta , Zifronetik jarraituz , Hatzar-Enanen amaituko da . Hori izango da iparraldeko muga .
PRED:	Therefore , listen to my prayer , and say , “ Listen to my warning . This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	and Ziphron to Hazar-enan . This will be your northern boundary .

ID:	5697
INPUT:	« Era askotan hitz egiten du Jainkoak , baina jendea ez da ohartzen :
PRED:	“ God speaks to many people , but they do n't understand what they say .
GOLD:	For God speaks again and again , though people do not recognize it .

ID:	5698
INPUT:	Eta horien guztien gainetik , eguneroko nire buru-haustea : eliz elkarte guztien ardura .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ All the days of every kind of covenant between me and the other churches .
GOLD:	Then , besides all this , I have the daily burden of my concern for all the churches .

ID:	5699
INPUT:	Egun hartan zigortuko ditut , baita , atalarri gainetik salto egineztenplura sartzen direnaketa beren Jaunaren etxeagogorkeriaz eta iruzurrezirabazitakoarekinbetetzen dutenak » .
PRED:	In that day I will punish those who fear the Lord for help , and I will break out the Temple of the Lord . I will break the bones of the Temple of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Yes , I will punish those who participate in pagan worship ceremonies , and those who fill their masters ' houses with violence and deceit .

ID:	5700
INPUT:	Ez dezatela gauza sakraturik ikus , ezta begirada bizkor batez ere , hil nahi ez badute » .
PRED:	Do n't let them see the sacred offerings , nor let them be able to kill them . ”
GOLD:	The Kohathites must never enter the sanctuary to look at the sacred objects for even a moment , or they will die . ”

ID:	5701
INPUT:	Zoaz , bada , eta hots egin mezu hau iparraldekoei : « Itzul niregana , Israel fedegabe hori ! Ez dizut ipiniko aurpegi ilunik , errukibera bainaiz ; nire haserrea ez da betiko . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	Go and say to the people of Israel , “ Go back to the north and give them this message . I will not test them , for I am the Lord . I will pour out my anger on them , for I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , go and give this message to Israel . This is what the Lord says : “ O Israel , my faithless people , come home to me again , for I am merciful.I will not be angry with you forever .

ID:	5702
INPUT:	Abramek ihardetsi zion : — Jaunarengatik , zeru-lurren egile den Goi-goiko Jainkoarengatik , dagit zin
PRED:	But Abraham replied , “ As surely as I live , I swear by the name of the Most High , the Most High ,
GOLD:	Abram replied to the king of Sodom , “ I solemnly swear to the Lord , God Most High , Creator of heaven and earth ,

ID:	5703
INPUT:	Saldu egin baikaituzte ni eta nire herritarrak , hondatu , hil eta suntsi gaitzaten . Gizonak eta emakumeak esklabo saldu izan bagintuzte ere , isilduko nintzatekeen , ez baitzukeen horrek erregea nekaraztea merezi izango .
PRED:	For I took my people away , and they killed my people and destroyed them . But they did n't believe me , and they did not turn away from me .
GOLD:	For my people and I have been sold to those who would kill , slaughter , and annihilate us . If we had merely been sold as slaves , I could remain quiet , for that would be too trivial a matter to warrant disturbing the king . ”

ID:	5704
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Luzaro egon naiz geldi , ezer esan eta egin gabe ; baina orain garrasika ari naiz , intzirika eta aienez , emakumea erdiminetan bezala .
PRED:	“ I have waited for a long time , ” says the Lord . “ I have sinned , but now I am deeply troubled by my father and mother .
GOLD:	He will say , “ I have long been silent ; yes , I have restrained myself.But now , like a woman in labor , I will cry and groan and pant .

ID:	5705
INPUT:	Sem eta Jafetek , soingaineko bat hartu , sorbaldan bien artean ipini eta , atzeraka joanez , aita biluzia estali egin zuten . Beste aldera begiratzen zutenez , ez zuten aita biluzik ikusi .
PRED:	One of his father 's brothers went out into the boat and put a robe on his head , and he sent his father to ask for his father and mother , and he did n't see what he had done .
GOLD:	Then Shem and Japheth took a robe , held it over their shoulders , and backed into the tent to cover their father . As they did this , they looked the other way so they would not see him naked .

ID:	5706
INPUT:	Bihotz zuhurrekoak hitzak ere egokiak ; are eraginkorragoak halakoaren esanak .
PRED:	Wise words are wise , but their words are wise , but their words are wise .
GOLD:	From a wise mind comes wise speech ; the words of the wise are persuasive .

ID:	5707
INPUT:	Salomonek Jaunaren etxe aurreko atariaren erdigunea sagaratu egin zuen , erre-opariak eta elkartasun-oparietako gantzak bertan eskaintzeko . Izan ere , Salomonek eginiko brontzezko aldarea txikiegi gertatu zen hainbeste erre-opari , labore-opari eta gantz hartzeko .
PRED:	Solomon built a burnt offering for the Lord 's Temple , and he offered a burnt offering to the Lord . He offered a burnt offering to the Lord as a burnt offering for the burnt offering , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	Solomon then consecrated the central area of the courtyard in front of the Lord 's Temple . He offered burnt offerings and the fat of peace offerings there , because the bronze altar he had built could not hold all the burnt offerings , grain offerings , and sacrificial fat .

ID:	5708
INPUT:	zu , oi Jainko , epaia ematera jaikitzean , munduko dohakabeak salbatzera .
PRED:	O God , you have come down to the earth , to save the nations of the world .
GOLD:	Human defiance only enhances your glory , for you use it as a weapon .

ID:	5709
INPUT:	eta , zuen egintza gaizto eta higuingarriak jasanezinak zitzaizkiolako , zuen lurraldea hondamendi eta eremu bihurtu zuen Jaunak , gaitzetsi eta bizilagunik gabe utzi . Eta halaxe dago gaur ere .
PRED:	And I will destroy your pagan nations and destroy them , just as the Lord had promised them . I will destroy them and destroy the land that I have given them today .
GOLD:	It was because the Lord could no longer bear all the disgusting things you were doing that he made your land an object of cursing — a desolate ruin without inhabitants — as it is today .

ID:	5710
INPUT:	Izan zen beste profeta bat ere Jaunaren izenean hitz egin zuena : Urias , Xemaiasen semea , Kiriat-Jearimgoa . Jeremiasek bezala , Jerusalemen eta Judaren aurka hitz egin zuen .
PRED:	For another prophet had another prophet in the Lord 's sight . He said , “ Shemaiah son of Shemaiah , Shemaiah , and Jeremiah , the prophet of Judah . ” So Jeremiah returned to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	At this time Uriah son of Shemaiah from Kiriath-jearim was also prophesying for the Lord . And he predicted the same terrible disaster against the city and nation as Jeremiah did .

ID:	5711
INPUT:	Bestela , hil ere askotan hil behar izango zuen mundua mundu denetik gaur arte . Baina ez , Kristo behin bakarrik agertu da orain , azkenak diren garai hauetan , bere buruaren opariaz bekatua desegiteko .
PRED:	You must die until the time of Christ has died . But now you will have no rest until now the last day of Christ has been revealed to this world . But now you will be destroyed in this world .
GOLD:	If that had been necessary , Christ would have had to die again and again , ever since the world began . But now , once for all time , he has appeared at the end of the age to remove sin by his own death as a sacrifice .

ID:	5712
INPUT:	Esauren ezkontza
PRED:	Jacob 's Prayer of Esau
GOLD:	Isaac 's Covenant with Abimelech

ID:	5713
INPUT:	eta egite txarrez salatu eta izen txarra jartzen diola , esanez : “ Emakume honekin ezkondu eta , bereganatzean , ez dela birjina konturatu naiz ” .
PRED:	So he turned around and said , ‘ I 'm a woman who was married to her , and she said , ‘ I 'm married to marry her . '
GOLD:	and publicly accuses her of shameful conduct , saying , ‘ When I married this woman , I discovered she was not a virgin . '

ID:	5714
INPUT:	Haserre baitago Jauna nazioekin , sumindua haien gudarosteekin : erabat suntsitzea erabaki du , hilketara eman ditu .
PRED:	But the Lord was angry with them , and he told them , “ If a single one of them has killed a single one of them . ”
GOLD:	For the Lord is enraged against the nations.His fury is against all their armies.He will completely destroy them , dooming them to slaughter .

ID:	5715
INPUT:	Hauxe agindu nien bakar-bakarrik : “ Aditu nire mintzoa , eta ni izango nauzue zeuen Jainko eta zuek izango zaituztet neure herri . Ibili beti nik agindutako bidean , eta zorioneko izango zarete ” .
PRED:	And this is my command : ‘ You will say , ‘ You will be my God , and you will be my people , and you will be my people , and you will be my people . '
GOLD:	This is what I told them : ‘ Obey me , and I will be your God , and you will be my people . Do everything as I say , and all will be well ! '

ID:	5716
INPUT:	Egoitzaren gainean egun bi , hilabete edo urtebete geldituz gero , israeldarrak geldi egoten ziren eta ez ziren abiatzen . Baina lainoa aldendu orduko , abiatu egiten ziren .
PRED:	On that day the Tabernacle was two years old or two years old or older or older or older , they would not return to them . But they did not live in the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Whether the cloud stayed above the Tabernacle for two days , a month , or a year , the people of Israel stayed in camp and did not move on . But as soon as it lifted , they broke camp and moved on .

ID:	5717
INPUT:	Jaunak erantzun zion Samueli : « Onar iezaiezu eskaria eta eman erregea » . Orduan , Samuelek esan zien israeldarrei : « Zoazte nor bere herrira » .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Samuel , “ Go down and worship the king of Israel . ” So Samuel said , “ Go ahead and worship the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	and the Lord replied , “ Do as they say , and give them a king . ” Then Samuel agreed and sent the people home .

ID:	5718
INPUT:	Baina nagusiak : “ Ez , ez dadila gerta olo gaiztoa biltzean garia ere ateratzea .
PRED:	“ But the master said , ‘ Do n't get out of the weeds , and weeds are harvesting grain . '
GOLD:	“ ‘ No , ' he replied , ‘ you 'll uproot the wheat if you do .

ID:	5719
INPUT:	Paulo Antiokiara itzuli
PRED:	Paul Appears to Caesarea
GOLD:	Paul Returns to Antioch of Syria

ID:	5720
INPUT:	Zotz eginez amaitzen dira eztabaidak , lehiakideen arteko auzia erabakiz .
PRED:	For the Lord is a rock among the nations , and he chose to bring them out of the land .
GOLD:	Flipping a coin can end arguments ; it settles disputes between powerful opponents .

ID:	5721
INPUT:	zeuen erruek ezarri dute hesiazuen eta Jainkoaren artean ; zeuen bekatuekezkutarazi diote aurpegia , zuen otoitzik ez entzuteko .
PRED:	You must lay your hands on the head of your ancestors , and you will be able to listen to what you have done .
GOLD:	It 's your sins that have cut you off from God.Because of your sins , he has turned awayand will not listen anymore .

ID:	5722
INPUT:	bere morroikideak jotzen eta mozkorrekin jan-edanean hasten bada ,
PRED:	If the master dies , he is drunk with his master 's household ,
GOLD:	and he begins beating the other servants , partying , and getting drunk ?

ID:	5723
INPUT:	Horrela , bada , ahalik lasterren bidali dizuet , hura berriro ikustean poz zaitezten eta ni lasaiago senti nadin .
PRED:	So I will send you back again , and I will see you again again , so I will rejoice in your joy .
GOLD:	So I am all the more anxious to send him back to you , for I know you will be glad to see him , and then I will not be so worried about you .

ID:	5724
INPUT:	Oraindik loretan dagoela , eta inork atera gabe , beste edozein belar baino lehen ihartzen da ” .
PRED:	There is no more valuable than silver or silver or silver or other alcoholic drinks . '
GOLD:	While they are still flowering , not ready to be cut , they begin to wither more quickly than grass .

ID:	5725
INPUT:	Joabek Absalom hil
PRED:	Joab 's Plot against Absalom
GOLD:	David Mourns Absalom 's Death

ID:	5726
INPUT:	ISRAELEN AURKA MEZUAK ( 3 , 1 — 6 , 14 )
PRED:	Judgment against Israel
GOLD:	Witnesses against Guilty Israel

ID:	5727
INPUT:	Gero , beste aingeru bat irten zen zeruko tenplutik , hura ere eskuan igitai zorrotza zuela .
PRED:	Then another angel came out of the Temple , a man from the Lord appeared to him .
GOLD:	After that , another angel came from the Temple in heaven , and he also had a sharp sickle .

ID:	5728
INPUT:	« Eska , bila , jo atea »
PRED:	The Coming Day of Jesus
GOLD:	The Golden Rule

ID:	5729
INPUT:	Josuek erantzun zien : — Hain herri ugaria bazarete eta Efraimgo mendialdea estuegia iruditzen bazaizue , igo zaitezte oihanera eta soildu periztarren eta refatarren lurraldea .
PRED:	Then Joshua replied , “ If the people of Israel are divided into the hill country of Ephraim , you will be thrown into the hill country of Ephraim , and your land will be thrown into a field . ”
GOLD:	Joshua replied , “ If there are so many of you , and if the hill country of Ephraim is not large enough for you , clear out land for yourselves in the forest where the Perizzites and Rephaites live . ”

ID:	5730
INPUT:	Hadad , ordea , mutiko gazte zelarik , ihesi joan zen Egiptora , bere aitaren zerbitzari ziren edomdar batzuekin .
PRED:	But when the young men returned to Egypt , they returned to Egypt with his father , Esau , his father , Esau , had settled in Egypt .
GOLD:	But Hadad and a few of his father 's royal officials escaped and headed for Egypt . ( Hadad was just a boy at the time . )

ID:	5731
INPUT:	Abiasen gainerako jarduerak , ibilerak eta egintzak « Ido Profetaren Azalpenak » izeneko liburuan daude idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Amaziah 's reign and everything he did , saying , “ The Prophet are recorded in The Book of the Prophet are recorded in The Book of Life . ”
GOLD:	The rest of the events of Abijah 's reign , including his words and deeds , are recorded in The Commentary of Iddo the Prophet .

ID:	5732
INPUT:	Ruben eta Gaden leinuetakoei eta Manasesen leinu erdikoei esan zien Josuek :
PRED:	Then Joshua said to the tribes of Reuben and Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh ,
GOLD:	Then Joshua called together the tribes of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh . He told them ,

ID:	5733
INPUT:	Zaldiari zigorra , astoari aho-soka , zentzugabearen bizkarrari egurra .
PRED:	Its rider is a small ox , a small ox , its rider , and its carrying poles .
GOLD:	Guide a horse with a whip , a donkey with a bridle , and a fool with a rod to his back !

ID:	5734
INPUT:	Bildotsa Sion mendian
PRED:	The Lamb of Simeon
GOLD:	The Lamb and the 144,000

ID:	5735
INPUT:	Hezurrak ere mailatuak ditut , etsaiek iseka egiten didate , etengabe ari zaizkidala : « Non duk Jainkoa ? »
PRED:	My love is mine , and my enemies taunt me , saying , “ Where is the God of Heaven 's Armies ? ”
GOLD:	Why am I discouraged ? Why is my heart so sad ? I will put my hope in God ! I will praise him again — my Savior and my God !

ID:	5736
INPUT:	Eta , eroapenez itxaron ondoren , eskuratu egin zuen Abrahamek Jainkoaren agintzaria .
PRED:	Then Abraham lifted up his hands toward Abraham , and God commanded him to follow Abraham .
GOLD:	Then Abraham waited patiently , and he received what God had promised .

ID:	5737
INPUT:	Kontsolatu nire herria
PRED:	The Fall of Jerusalem
GOLD:	The

ID:	5738
INPUT:	Josiasek Pazkoa ospatu zuen Jerusalemen , Jaunaren ohoretan . Lehen hilabeteko hamalauan Pazko-bildotsa hil zuten .
PRED:	So Josiah celebrated Passover in Jerusalem in the Lord 's Passover . They celebrated Passover in the Lord 's Passover .
GOLD:	Then Josiah announced that the Passover of the Lord would be celebrated in Jerusalem , and so the Passover lamb was slaughtered on the fourteenth day of the first month .

ID:	5739
INPUT:	« Borroka da gizakiaren bizitza lurrean , lanera behartuarenak bezalakoak haren egunak .
PRED:	“ The earth is like a warrior who lives in battle , like those who are being attacked by the battle .
GOLD:	“ Is not all human life a struggle ? Our lives are like that of a hired hand ,

ID:	5740
INPUT:	Lau urteren buruan , behin batean , esan zion Absalomek erregeari : — Joan al naiteke Hebronera , Jaunari hitzeman nion eskaintza egitera ?
PRED:	As soon as they were there , Abram said to the king , “ Should I bring my hand to the Lord ? ”
GOLD:	After four years , Absalom said to the king , “ Let me go to Hebron to offer a sacrifice to the Lord and fulfill a vow I made to him .

ID:	5741
INPUT:	Gaizkile-taldeak inguratu nau , zakur-tropelak erdian hartu , esku-oinak zulatu dizkidate .
PRED:	My enemies surround me , and my enemies have broken my feet in the hands of my enemies .
GOLD:	I can count all my bones.My enemies stare at me and gloat .

ID:	5742
INPUT:	Zuk ez nauzu musu emanez agurtu ; hau , berriz , sartu denetik ez da gelditu nire oinei musuka .
PRED:	You must not worship me , but you must not go into my presence . But you must not leave me alone .
GOLD:	You did n't greet me with a kiss , but from the time I first came in , she has not stopped kissing my feet .

ID:	5743
INPUT:	Legamia gabeko ogien egunei buruzko legeak
PRED:	Instructions for the Law
GOLD:	Dedication of the Firstborn

ID:	5744
INPUT:	Jendeak gogor egiten zien , isilarazteko ; baina haiek areago oihu : — Erruki zakizkigu , Jauna , Daviden Semea !
PRED:	But the people were determined to kill them , but the people shouted , “ Son of David , have mercy on us ! ”
GOLD:	“ Be quiet ! ” the crowd yelled at them.But they only shouted louder , “ Lord , Son of David , have mercy on us ! ”

ID:	5745
INPUT:	Egun hartan , zilarrezko mila txanpon balio zituen mila landareko mahastia sasi- eta lahar-toki bihurtuko da .
PRED:	On that day of judgment , a person will become a serious skin disease and a single piece of thorns that is a serious disease .
GOLD:	In that day the lush vineyards , now worth 1,000 pieces of silver , will become patches of briers and thorns .

ID:	5746
INPUT:	ez duela arbasoei hitzemandako lurraldea ikusiko mespretxatu nauten horietako inork , Egipton eta basamortuan nire aintza eta mirariak ikusi arren , behin eta berriro ni auzitan jarri eta desobeditu egin baitidate .
PRED:	I will not see the land I swore to give to the ancestors of Egypt , and no one will see me in the wilderness of Egypt . I have seen them in the wilderness , and I have chosen them to return to the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	not one of these people will ever enter that land . They have all seen my glorious presence and the miraculous signs I performed both in Egypt and in the wilderness , but again and again they have tested me by refusing to listen to my voice .

ID:	5747
INPUT:	Zuen lurraldea hegoaldeko basamortutik iparraldean dagoen Libanoraino eta ekialdeko ibai handitik , Eufratesetik , hititen lurraldean zehar , mendebaldean dagoen Mediterraneo itsasoraino hedatuko da .
PRED:	“ Your territory will extended from the north to the north and west of the Jordan River , east of the hill country , and west , and west of the Jordan River will be extended from the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	from the Negev wilderness in the south to the Lebanon mountains in the north , from the Euphrates River in the east to the Mediterranean Sea in the west , including all the land of the Hittites . '

ID:	5748
INPUT:	Iseka egiten didate etsaiek ; areago , neure auzokoek . Beldurra ematen diet adiskideei : ni kalean ikustean , ihesi doaz .
PRED:	My enemies are terrified , and my enemies are afraid of me . I am terrified by my friends , and they see me there .
GOLD:	I am ignored as if I were dead , as if I were a broken pot .

ID:	5749
INPUT:	« Zuek , ordea , ez zenuten igo nahi izan , baizik eta Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren esana desobeditu
PRED:	“ But you are not like this , but you refused to obey the commands of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ But you rebelled against the command of the Lord your God and refused to go in .

ID:	5750
INPUT:	Ruben eta Gaden leinuetako gizonak utzirik , Pinhas , Eleazar apaizaren semea , eta herri-ordezkariak Galaadetik Kanaanera itzuli ziren , mendebaldeko israeldarrengana , eta gertatuaren berri eman zieten .
PRED:	Then the men of Reuben , Gad , and Phinehas , the priest of the tribe of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh returned to the land of Canaan , and the Israelites returned to the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	Then Phinehas son of Eleazar , the priest , and the other leaders left the tribes of Reuben and Gad in Gilead and returned to the land of Canaan to tell the Israelites what had happened .

ID:	5751
INPUT:	Baina niregana itzultzen bazarete eta nire aginduak gorde eta betetzen badituzue , zeruko azken muturreraino jaurtiko bazintuztete ere , bildu egingo zintuzketet eta bizileku eta kultu-lekutzat aukeratu dudan tokira ekarriko ” .
PRED:	But if you return to me , I will bring you back to the waters of heaven and send you out of heaven , and I will send you out to the place where you can worship me . '
GOLD:	But if you return to me and obey my commands and live by them , then even if you are exiled to the ends of the earth , I will bring you back to the place I have chosen for my name to be honored . '

ID:	5752
INPUT:	Elkarketa-etxolan sartzean , esku-oinak garbituko dituzte , hil nahi ez badute ; orobat , beren zerbitzua betetzeko , Jaunari opariak erretzeko , aldarera hurbiltzean .
PRED:	When they enter the Tabernacle , they must wash their hands and bathe themselves in water , but they must not go to the Lord 's presence . They must present a burnt offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	They must wash with water whenever they go into the Tabernacle to appear before the Lord and when they approach the altar to burn up their special gifts to the Lord — or they will die !

ID:	5753
INPUT:	epaiari buruz , mundu honetako buruzagia jadanik gaitzetsia dagoelako .
PRED:	I know that the world is going to judge the world , but it is good to do what is right .
GOLD:	Judgment will come because the ruler of this world has already been judged .

ID:	5754
INPUT:	Ez dut harkaitzaren sendotasunik , ez da brontzezkoa nire haragia .
PRED:	I will not need a bronze bronze bronze bronze , or a bronze bronze bronze grating for my sake .
GOLD:	Do I have the strength of a stone ? Is my body made of bronze ?

ID:	5755
INPUT:	« Errege horien garaian , erreinu bat ezarriko du zeruko Jainkoak : ez dute inoiz ere hondatuko eta haren agintea ez da beste herri baten eskuetara aldatuko . Beste guztiak suntsitu eta desagerturik ere , erreinu horrek betiko iraungo du .
PRED:	“ In this way , the Kingdom of Heaven will be issued by the Kingdom of Heaven will be destroyed , and it will be destroyed by the kingdom of Heaven 's Armies . He will destroy all the kingdoms of the earth , and it will be completely destroyed .
GOLD:	“ During the reigns of those kings , the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed or conquered . It will crush all these kingdoms into nothingness , and it will stand forever .

ID:	5756
INPUT:	Moises Jaunari barkamen eske
PRED:	's Glory to the
GOLD:	Moses Intercedes for the People

ID:	5757
INPUT:	« Jaun ahalguztidunak badu beste zerbait ere esateko , zutabeei , brontzezko uraskari , orgei eta hiri honetan oraindik gelditzen diren gainerako tresnei buruz :
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : I will make a bronze bronze bronze basins , or even twenty bronze , or even twenty bronze bases .
GOLD:	“ For the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has spoken about the pillars in front of the Temple , the great bronze basin called the Sea , the water carts , and all the other ceremonial articles .

ID:	5758
INPUT:	baina zazpigarrena atseden-eguna duzu , Jaunari , zeure Jainkoari , sagaratua . Ez egin inolako lanik egun horretan , ez zuk , ez zure seme-alabek , ez zure morroi-mirabeek , ez zure abereek , ezta zure herrian bizi den etorkinak ere .
PRED:	But the seventh day of the Lord your God will give you a Sabbath day of rest . Do n't let your daughters go on to your own sons , daughters , or daughters , or goats , or male or female servants , or female servants , or female servants .
GOLD:	but the seventh day is a Sabbath day of rest dedicated to the Lord your God . On that day no one in your household may do any work . This includes you , your sons and daughters , your male and female servants , your livestock , and any foreigners living among you .

ID:	5759
INPUT:	Espiritua , ura eta odola , eta hirurok bat datoz .
PRED:	Then the Spirit and the blood of the Holy Spirit , and all who drink it .
GOLD:	the Spirit , the water , and the blood — and all three agree .

ID:	5760
INPUT:	Lau gurpilak panelen azpialdean zeuden eta haien ardatzak orgari atxikiak . Gurpil bakoitzak hirurogeita hamabost zentimetroko altuera zuen .
PRED:	Each of the four cherubim were placed on each side of the four wheels , and each of the four wheels was 101/2 feet tall .
GOLD:	Under the panels were four wheels that were connected to axles that had been cast as one unit with the cart . The wheels were 21/4 feet in diameter

ID:	5761
INPUT:	« Ene herri , zer egin dizut nik zuri , zertan izan natzaizu nekagarri ? Erantzun , mesedez !
PRED:	“ I have sinned , O people of Israel , but you have refused to answer me .
GOLD:	“ O my people , what have I done to you ? What have I done to make you tired of me ? Answer me !

ID:	5762
INPUT:	giltzurrunak gaineko gantzarekin , saihetsei itsatsia dagoen gantza eta gibela estaltzen duena ; hori guztia kendurik ,
PRED:	the two kidneys and the fat around the internal organs , the long lobe of the liver , and the kidneys and the long lobe of the liver .
GOLD:	the two kidneys and the fat around them near the loins , and the long lobe of the liver . These must be removed with the kidneys ,

ID:	5763
INPUT:	astoak 30 . 500 ,
PRED:	donkeys donkeys , and donkeys .
GOLD:	30,500 donkeys ,

ID:	5764
INPUT:	Nik lurreko gauzak esatean sinesten ez badidazue , nola sinetsiko didazue zerukoak esatean ?
PRED:	“ But if you do n't believe me , how can you believe in the heavens ? Do you believe in heaven ?
GOLD:	But if you do n't believe me when I tell you about earthly things , how can you possibly believe if I tell you about heavenly things ?

ID:	5765
INPUT:	Faraoiak entzungor egin Moisesi eta Aaroni
PRED:	Pharaoh 's ears to Moses and Aaron
GOLD:	A Plague of Blood

ID:	5766
INPUT:	« Guztiarekin ere nire zentzarazpena onartu ez eta aurka egiten badidazue ,
PRED:	“ If you refuse to listen to me , you must not testify against me .
GOLD:	“ And if you fail to learn the lesson and continue your hostility toward me ,

ID:	5767
INPUT:	Gau-ikuskari batean , Jainkoak dei egin zion Jakobi : — Jakob ! Jakob ! Jakobek erantzun : — Hemen nauzu .
PRED:	When God saw this , he called out to Jacob , “ Jacob ! ” Jacob replied , “ Jacob ! ” Jacob replied , “ Jacob . ”
GOLD:	During the night God spoke to him in a vision . “ Jacob ! Jacob ! ” he called . “ Here I am , ” Jacob replied .

ID:	5768
INPUT:	Uztazu , otoi , Jordanez beste aldera igarotzen , hango lurralde ederra , hango mendialdea eta Libano ikus ahal ditzadan .
PRED:	Please let me go to the Jordan River to the east side of the Jordan River , where you can see the land of Lebanon .
GOLD:	Please let me cross the Jordan to see the wonderful land on the other side , the beautiful hill country and the Lebanon mountains . '

ID:	5769
INPUT:	Zure egunak eta urteak gizakiarenak bezain laburrak ote ,
PRED:	Your eyes are as precious as your eyes , as hard as iron as stone .
GOLD:	Is your lifetime only as long as ours ? Is your life so short

ID:	5770
INPUT:	Emakumeak joan ondoren , guardiako batzuk hirira etorri ziren gertaturiko guztiaren berri apaizburuei ematera .
PRED:	Some of the women who came to the city gate , and some of the leading priests who came to the elders of the city .
GOLD:	As the women were on their way , some of the guards went into the city and told the leading priests what had happened .

ID:	5771
INPUT:	Zuen arbasoei eman nien lurraldean biziko zarete ; nire herri izango zarete eta ni zuen Jainko .
PRED:	Your ancestors will live among you , and you will be my people . You will be my people .
GOLD:	“ And you will live in Israel , the land I gave your ancestors long ago . You will be my people , and I will be your God .

ID:	5772
INPUT:	Juduen apaizburuek esan zioten Pilatori : — Ez idatzi « juduen erregea » , « juduen erregea dela dioena » baizik .
PRED:	Then the leading priests said to the leading priests , “ Do n't let the Jews say , ‘ This is the King of the Jews . ' ”
GOLD:	Then the leading priests objected and said to Pilate , “ Change it from ‘ The King of the Jews ' to ‘ He said , I am King of the Jews . ' ”

ID:	5773
INPUT:	Baina Benjaminen atera iritsi zenean , han zegoen Ierias guardiaburua , Xelemiasen seme eta Hananiasen biloba , eta Jeremias profetari alto eman eta esan zion : — Babiloniarrengana igarotzeko asmotan zabiltza zu .
PRED:	But when Jeremiah arrived at the fortress of Benjamin , he went to the captain of the guard , Jeremiah , Shemaiah , and Jeremiah . He told him , “ You are my sister , Jeremiah , the prophet , and Jeremiah . ”
GOLD:	But as he was walking through the Benjamin Gate , a sentry arrested him and said , “ You are defecting to the Babylonians ! ” The sentry making the arrest was Irijah son of Shelemiah , grandson of Hananiah .

ID:	5774
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	5775
INPUT:	ez zakutorik biderako , ez soinekorik aldatzeko , ez oinetakorik , ezta makilarik ere , zor baitzaio langileari behar duen janaria .
PRED:	They are not allowed to wear sandals or not to wear sandals . They are not allowed to pay the money to pay for food . They must pay the money to pay for food .
GOLD:	Do n't carry a traveler 's bag with a change of clothes and sandals or even a walking stick . Do n't hesitate to accept hospitality , because those who work deserve to be fed .

ID:	5776
INPUT:	Han zeuden juduek esan zuten : — Bai maite zuela !
PRED:	But some of the Jews said , “ Yes , it 's all ! ”
GOLD:	The people who were standing nearby said , “ See how much he loved him ! ”

ID:	5777
INPUT:	Josafat , Paruahen semea , Isakarren ;
PRED:	Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was the royal historian .
GOLD:	Jehoshaphat son of Paruah , in Issachar .

ID:	5778
INPUT:	“ Nor zaitut , Jauna ? ” galdetu nion nik . Eta Jaunak erantzun : “ Jesus naiz , zuk pertsegitzen duzuna .
PRED:	“ Who are you ? ” I asked . “ I replied , ‘ I am the Lord Jesus , and you are persecuting . '
GOLD:	“ ‘ Who are you , lord ? ' I asked . “ And the Lord replied , ‘ I am Jesus , the one you are persecuting .

ID:	5779
INPUT:	Larunbatekoa
PRED:	The Festival of Shelters
GOLD:	Offerings for the Festival of Harvest

ID:	5780
INPUT:	Zentzugabeari harrokeria dario ahotik , zuhurra bere hitzek babesten dute .
PRED:	Wise words are wise , but fools are wise .
GOLD:	A fool 's proud talk becomes a rod that beats him , but the words of the wise keep them safe .

ID:	5781
INPUT:	Presta zaitez , presta zeu eta inguruan duzun gudarostea , eduki ezazu erne .
PRED:	Get up and prepare your army for battle , for you have prepared a battle for battle .
GOLD:	“ Get ready ; be prepared ! Keep all the armies around you mobilized , and take command of them .

ID:	5782
INPUT:	Adierazi zion , beraz , Samuelek errege eske ari zitzaion herriari Jaunak esandako guztia ,
PRED:	So Samuel asked the Lord , “ This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	So Samuel passed on the Lord 's warning to the people who were asking him for a king .

ID:	5783
INPUT:	Jesusen berri entzunik , judu-buruzagi batzuk bidali zizkion , morroia sendatzera etortzeko erreguaz .
PRED:	When Jesus heard this , he sent some of the Jews to ask him to send him to the Roman soldiers .
GOLD:	When the officer heard about Jesus , he sent some respected Jewish elders to ask him to come and heal his slave .

ID:	5784
INPUT:	Hiri santua ikusi nuen , Jerusalem berria , zerutik , Jainkoarengandik , jaisten , emaztegaia bere senarrarentzat bezala apaindua .
PRED:	Then I saw the holy city of Jerusalem , just as the Lord our God had said , “ He is the wife of his wife , the daughter of God . ”
GOLD:	And I saw the holy city , the new Jerusalem , coming down from God out of heaven like a bride beautifully dressed for her husband .

ID:	5785
INPUT:	Israelgo errege hark , Remaliasen seme Pekahek , Judako ehun eta hogei mila gudari ausart hil zituen egun berean , Judakoek Jauna , beren arbasoen Jainkoa , baztertua zutelako .
PRED:	Pekah son of Remaliah , the king of Israel , had killed 500 men of Judah , who killed 10,000 warriors in all the towns of Judah , the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	In a single day Pekah son of Remaliah , Israel 's king , killed 120,000 of Judah 's troops , all of them experienced warriors , because they had abandoned the Lord , the God of their ancestors .

ID:	5786
INPUT:	Profeta batek Akab gaitzetsi
PRED:	Parable of the False Prophets
GOLD:	A Prophet Condemns Ahab

ID:	5787
INPUT:	Ez dago hemen , piztua baita , esan zuen bezala . Zatozte eta ikusi ezarria egon zeneko tokia .
PRED:	Do n't be raised from the dead , for he said , “ Come , let me see ! Come and see him ! ”
GOLD:	He is n't here ! He is risen from the dead , just as he said would happen . Come , see where his body was lying .

ID:	5788
INPUT:	Espiritua duenak , berriz , dena juzgatzen du ; bera , ordea , ez dezake inork juzga .
PRED:	But the Holy Spirit is the Holy Spirit , but the Spirit can not be put to death .
GOLD:	Those who are spiritual can evaluate all things , but they themselves can not be evaluated by others .

ID:	5789
INPUT:	Agintekeria
PRED:	The Futility of Work
GOLD:	Approaching God with Care

ID:	5790
INPUT:	Lau eraztun egin zituen brontzezko sarearen lau izkinetarako , haietatik hagak pasarazteko .
PRED:	He made four bronze rings at the entrance of the four corners of the four corners of the altar .
GOLD:	He cast four rings and attached them to the corners of the bronze grating to hold the carrying poles .

ID:	5791
INPUT:	Ezekiasek eta agintariek , hainbeste multzo ikustean , Jauna eta beronen herri Israel bedeinkatu zituzten .
PRED:	So Hezekiah and all the other nations saw that the Lord had commanded him to bless the people of Israel .
GOLD:	When Hezekiah and his officials came and saw these huge piles , they thanked the Lord and his people Israel !

ID:	5792
INPUT:	Bete zerbitzari honi zeure promesa , begirune dizutenei egina .
PRED:	May your servant be gracious to those who fear me .
GOLD:	Reassure me of your promise , made to those who fear you .

ID:	5793
INPUT:	Honek esan zion Amasari : — Ongi al zara , ene anaia ? Eta eskuineko eskuaz bizarretik heldu zion musu emateko .
PRED:	“ Is it good for you ? ” Aaron asked . “ Is it right with my right hand and put it on his left hand ? ”
GOLD:	“ How are you , my cousin ? ” Joab said and took him by the beard with his right hand as though to kiss him .

ID:	5794
INPUT:	Arabiako errege guztiei ; basamortuan bizi diren populazio nahasien erregeei ;
PRED:	All the kings of Assyria will live in the wilderness , but the king of Assyria will live in the wilderness .
GOLD:	I gave it to the kings of Arabia , the kings of the nomadic tribes of the desert ,

ID:	5795
INPUT:	baina orain nola ikusten duen edo begiak nork ireki dizkion , hori ez dakigu . Galdegin berari , badu adina-eta bere buruaren berri emateko .
PRED:	But now we see that no one has seen or seen him . But we are looking for him , but we are looking for him to him . ”
GOLD:	but we do n't know how he can see or who healed him . Ask him . He is old enough to speak for himself . ”

ID:	5796
INPUT:	« Esaiozu Aaroni , zazpi kriseiluak pizterakoan , argimutilaren aurrealdea argitzeko eran egokitzeko » .
PRED:	“ Then make the lamps for the lampstand , and put the lamps on the front of the altar . ”
GOLD:	“ Give Aaron the following instructions : When you set up the seven lamps in the lampstand , place them so their light shines forward in front of the lampstand . ”

ID:	5797
INPUT:	eta zu hil nahian dabiltzan eta beldurrik handiena diezun etsaien esku utziko , Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosor eta beraren gudarostearen esku , alegia .
PRED:	They will kill you and kill you , and you will be afraid of the kings of Babylon . They will hand you over to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon .
GOLD:	I will hand you over to those who seek to kill you , those you so desperately fear — to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon and the mighty Babylonian army .

ID:	5798
INPUT:	Gero , irakasten hasi zitzaien , esanez : « Ez al dio Liburu Santuak : Nire etxea otoitz-etxe izango da herri guztientzat ? Zuek , berriz , lapur-zulo egina duzue » .
PRED:	Then the disciples began to teach them , “ Is n't it the Scriptures say , ‘ My Temple is a house for the sake of my Temple ? '
GOLD:	He said to them , “ The Scriptures declare , ‘ My Temple will be called a house of prayer for all nations , ' but you have turned it into a den of thieves . ”

ID:	5799
INPUT:	<unk> ta , Kiriat-Arba — hau da , Hebron — , Tzior : bederatzi hiri eta beraien herrixkak .
PRED:	“ This is the homeland allocated to the towns of Kiriath-arba ( also included these towns with their surrounding villages . )
GOLD:	Humtah , Kiriath-arba ( that is , Hebron ) , and Zior — nine towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	5800
INPUT:	aurreko biztanleak lurraldetik garbituz . Sustraiak bota zituen eta lurraldea bete .
PRED:	So I will turn away from the land of the earth , and I will turn away from their land .
GOLD:	Our shade covered the mountains ; our branches covered the mighty cedars .

ID:	5801
INPUT:	balio gabeko arrazoiez argudiatuz , alferrikakoa dena esanez ?
PRED:	Do n't you think you are wrong ? Do you think you are wrong ?
GOLD:	The wise do n't engage in empty chatter.What good are such words ?

ID:	5802
INPUT:	Orduan jakingo dute egiptoarrek ni naizela Jauna , Egipto zigortu eta bertatik israeldarrak aterako ditudanean .
PRED:	Then they will know that I am the Lord , who rescued Israel from the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	When I raise my powerful hand and bring out the Israelites , the Egyptians will know that I am the Lord . ”

ID:	5803
INPUT:	Jendetza handia bildu zitzaion , herren , itsu , besamotz , mutu eta bestelako gaixo asko berekin zituztela . Ondoan ipintzen zizkioten eta Jesusek sendatu egiten zituen .
PRED:	The crowds gathered around him , and the crowds prepared a huge crowd for a guest of honor . Then Jesus healed the sick man , and he healed them .
GOLD:	A vast crowd brought to him people who were lame , blind , crippled , those who could n't speak , and many others . They laid them before Jesus , and he healed them all .

ID:	5804
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	5805
INPUT:	Eta gizonari esan zion : « Emaztearen esanari jaramon egineta galarazi nizun zuhaitzetikjan duzunez gero , madarikatua lurra zure erruz ! Nekearen nekezaterako diozu janariazeure bizitzako egun guztietan .
PRED:	Then the man said to his wife , “ Go back to Solomon 's wife and eat the food I had commanded you to eat . Let me eat the food you have given to your father , Isaac , and all your family . ”
GOLD:	And to the man he said , “ Since you listened to your wife and ate from the treewhose fruit I commanded you not to eat , the ground is cursed because of you.All your life you will struggle to scratch a living from it .

ID:	5806
INPUT:	Jainkoa , ez gelditu niregandik urrun , ene Jainko , zatoz laster laguntzera !
PRED:	O God , do not stay away from my enemies , for they try to abandon me , O God of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	O God , do n't stay away.My God , please hurry to help me .

ID:	5807
INPUT:	Denek nahi zuten Salomon ikusi , Jainkoak eman zion jakinduriaren berri izateko .
PRED:	When Solomon saw what had happened , he asked the wisdom God had given him .
GOLD:	Kings from every nation came to consult him and to hear the wisdom God had given him .

ID:	5808
INPUT:	Alaba Merab Davidi emateko garaia heltzean , ordea , Saulek Meholako Adrieli eman zion emazte .
PRED:	When David arrived at the time , he gave the daughter of David , the wife of Nabal from the tribe of Nabal from the tribe of David .
GOLD:	So when the time came for Saul to give his daughter Merab in marriage to David , he gave her instead to Adriel , a man from Meholah .

ID:	5809
INPUT:	Gero , haurraren gainean etzan zen , bere ahoa haurraren aho gainean , begiak begi gainean eta eskuak esku gainean ezarriz . Horrela , haurraren gainean etzana zegoelarik , berotzen hasi zen haurraren gorputza .
PRED:	Then she lay on her head on her head , and she lay on her head on her head and lay on her head on her head . Then she sat on her head , and she sat down on her head .
GOLD:	Then he lay down on the child 's body , placing his mouth on the child 's mouth , his eyes on the child 's eyes , and his hands on the child 's hands . And as he stretched out on him , the child 's body began to grow warm again !

ID:	5810
INPUT:	Egin poz-oihu Jainkoari , gure indarrari , egin irrintzi Jakoben Jainkoari !
PRED:	Sing to the Lord our God , for he has given us victory over Israel .
GOLD:	Sing ! Beat the tambourine.Play the sweet lyre and the harp .

ID:	5811
INPUT:	Beste hirurehun babeski txiki ere egin zituen urre garbiz , babeski bakoitza egiteko ia bi kilo urre behar izan zelarik . Eta « Libanoko Oihana » zeritzan jauregian ipini zituen .
PRED:	He also made two more gold shields of hammered gold , each weighing more than two pounds of pure gold . He also made two quarts of pure gold , each weighing more than the Palace of the palace .
GOLD:	He also made 300 smaller shields of hammered gold , each weighing nearly four pounds . The king placed these shields in the Palace of the Forest of Lebanon .

ID:	5812
INPUT:	zentzugabeko eta barregarri ; Jaunak hondatuko ditukontuak hartzeko egunean .
PRED:	The Lord will restore the fortunes of fools , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Idols are worthless ; they are ridiculous lies ! On the day of reckoning they will all be destroyed .

ID:	5813
INPUT:	Bizi-arbolarena bezalakoa da zintzoaren fruitua ; zuhurrak jendearen onespena bereganatzen du .
PRED:	The light of the godly leads to the godly , but the godly care for the godly .
GOLD:	The seeds of good deeds become a tree of life ; a wise person wins friends .

ID:	5814
INPUT:	Ez dago , ordea , beste berri onik ; baina badabiltza hor norbaitzuk zuek nahasten eta Kristoren berri ona goitik behera irauli nahian .
PRED:	But they do n't know the Good News about Christ . But some of them did n't want to preach the Good News about Christ .
GOLD:	but is not the Good News at all . You are being fooled by those who deliberately twist the truth concerning Christ .

ID:	5815
INPUT:	Animalia gehiago naiz gizon baino , ez dut giza adimenik ;
PRED:	I am greater than a man , but I 'm not a man .
GOLD:	I am too stupid to be human , and I lack common sense .

ID:	5816
INPUT:	Hona hemen gotortu zituen hiriak : Belen , Etam , Tekoa ,
PRED:	This is the father of Eliphaz : Eliphaz the father of Eliphaz , Eliphaz ,
GOLD:	He built up Bethlehem , Etam , Tekoa ,

ID:	5817
INPUT:	Goraintziak Justo deritzan Jesusen izenean ere . Judu-jatorrikoetatik hauek dira Jainkoaren erregetza zabaltzen nirekin lanean ari diren bakarrak , eta oso kontsolagarri gertatu zaizkit .
PRED:	I am writing to you who are believers in Judea , who are far from Judea , who are far away from the Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies , too , will comfort me .
GOLD:	Jesus ( the one we call Justus ) also sends his greetings . These are the only Jewish believers among my co-workers ; they are working with me here for the Kingdom of God . And what a comfort they have been !

ID:	5818
INPUT:	Eta Belenerantz abiatu ziren . Iristean , herri osoa asaldatu zen eta emakumeek hau zioten : — Noemi bera ote da hau ?
PRED:	When they came to Bethlehem , they came back to Bethlehem . “ Where is this man ? ” they asked . “ Is this the woman who is the son of Isaac ? ”
GOLD:	So the two of them continued on their journey . When they came to Bethlehem , the entire town was excited by their arrival . “ Is it really Naomi ? ” the women asked .

ID:	5819
INPUT:	Jaunak esan zion Moisesi : « Igo Abarim mendiaren gailur horretara eta israeldarrei emango diedan lurraldea ikusi ahal izango duzu bertatik .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ These are the people of Israel , ‘ This is what the Lord has given to you from the land I have given to the people of Israel . '
GOLD:	One day the Lord said to Moses , “ Climb one of the mountains east of the river , and look out over the land I have given the people of Israel .

ID:	5820
INPUT:	Jaunaren indarrak eraginik , Elias jantzia gerrian lotu eta lasterka joan zen Akaben aurretik Izreeleraino .
PRED:	When Athaliah heard what had happened to the Lord , he tore his clothes in burlap and went to Jezreel to Jezreel .
GOLD:	Then the Lord gave special strength to Elijah . He tucked his cloak into his belt and ran ahead of Ahab 's chariot all the way to the entrance of Jezreel .

ID:	5821
INPUT:	edo ehunean , larruan nahiz edozein larrukitan mantxa agertzen bada ,
PRED:	If the mildew on the ground , whether the mildew or fabric or the leather or the mildew on the ground ,
GOLD:	woolen or linen fabric , the hide of an animal , or anything made of leather .

ID:	5822
INPUT:	Ez horixe ! Uste dugu Jesus Jaunaren onginahiari esker salbatzen gaituela Jainkoak , bai gu eta bai jentilak » .
PRED:	This is the Good News of the Lord Jesus Christ , who is able to save us from the salvation of our Lord Jesus . ”
GOLD:	We believe that we are all saved the same way , by the undeserved grace of the Lord Jesus . ”

ID:	5823
INPUT:	Eta esaiozu : Jaunak , hebrearren Jainkoak , zuregana bidali nau bere herriari joaten uzteko esatera , basamortuan gurtza eman diezaioten . Zuk muzin egin duzu orain arte ,
PRED:	Say to them , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord your God , the God of Israel , who sent me to the wilderness of the Hebrews , the Hebrews , and now you can worship me . '
GOLD:	Then announce to him , ‘ The Lord , the God of the Hebrews , has sent me to tell you , “ Let my people go , so they can worship me in the wilderness . ” Until now , you have refused to listen to him .

ID:	5824
INPUT:	Igo Pisga mendiaren gailurrera eta begira bertatik iparralde zein hegoaldera , ekialde zein mendebaldera ; zabaldu ongi begiak eta begiratu , ez baituzu Jordan hori zeharkatuko .
PRED:	Then the Ark of the Covenant will go down to the east of the Jordan River , where the east and west of the Jordan River will lead them into the Jordan Valley , and you will not understand the Jordan Valley .
GOLD:	But go up to Pisgah Peak , and look over the land in every direction . Take a good look , but you may not cross the Jordan River .

ID:	5825
INPUT:	Baina horren ondoren , errukitu egingo natzaie , eta herri bakoitza , nor bere ondarera eta lurraldera itzuliko dut .
PRED:	But if you do this , you must return to the land I have given to each other , and I will return to the land I have given them .
GOLD:	But afterward I will return and have compassion on all of them . I will bring them home to their own lands again , each nation to its own possession .

ID:	5826
INPUT:	Galdu egin da haren oroitzapena herrialdean , izena ere ez dute gogoratzen inguruetan .
PRED:	“ But the Lord has done for his people , and he does n't know what he thinks .
GOLD:	All memory of their existence will fade from the earth ; no one will remember their names .

ID:	5827
INPUT:	Zure hildakoak bai , berpiztuko dira , haien gorpuak altxatuko ! Lurpean etzanak esnatuko diraeta pozez oihuka ekingo . Izan ere , zuk , Jauna , argia bidaltzen duzu ihintza bezala , eta lurpetik argitaraateratzen hildakoak .
PRED:	But the dead will rise again , and the dead will rise again . Then you will be able to rise again , but you will know that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will be raised from the dew of the earth .
GOLD:	But those who die in the Lord will live ; their bodies will rise again ! Those who sleep in the earthwill rise up and sing for joy ! For your life-giving light will fall like dewon your people in the place of the dead !

ID:	5828
INPUT:	Ondoren , jendeak Baalen jauretxera joan eta lurrera bota zuen ; xehe-xehe egin zituen hango aldare eta irudiak , eta Baalen apaiza zen Matan hil egin zuten aldarearen aitzinean . Joiada apaizak zaintzaileak ipini zituen Jaunaren etxean .
PRED:	Then the people of Babylon went into the temple of Baal and put them into the temple of Baal , and he killed them in the temple of Baal . He killed the priests in the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	And all the people of the land went over to the temple of Baal and tore it down . They demolished the altars and smashed the idols to pieces , and they killed Mattan the priest of Baal in front of the altars.Jehoiada the priest stationed guards at the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	5829
INPUT:	Ez izan , beraz , burugogor , zeuen gurasoen antzera . Hurbil zaitezte Jaunarengana , eta zatozte berak betiko sagaratu duen santutegira . Obeditu Jaunari , zeuen Jainkoari , eta berak aldenduko du zuengandik bere haserre-sumina .
PRED:	So do n't be stubborn and stubborn , for the Lord your God will come to you . Come , let them go to the sanctuary of the Lord your God , and he will pour out his anger on you .
GOLD:	Do not be stubborn , as they were , but submit yourselves to the Lord . Come to his Temple , which he has set apart as holy forever . Worship the Lord your God so that his fierce anger will turn away from you .

ID:	5830
INPUT:	Baina hark esan zien : « Ez izutu ! Nazareteko Jesus gurutziltzatuaren bila zabiltzate . Piztua da , ez dago hemen . Ikusi jarri zuteneko tokia .
PRED:	But he told them , “ Do n't be crucified ! Do n't be handed over to the cross of the dead . The man who has been raised from the dead . ”
GOLD:	but the angel said , “ Do n't be alarmed . You are looking for Jesus of Nazareth , who was crucified . He is n't here ! He is risen from the dead ! Look , this is where they laid his body .

ID:	5831
INPUT:	Neriasen seme Barukek zirikatu zaitu gure kontra : babiloniarren esku jarri nahi gaitu , hil edo Babiloniara gatibu eraman gaitzaten » .
PRED:	This message came to King Zedekiah of Babylon : “ If you have rebelled against the Babylonians , you will be killed by the Babylonians . ”
GOLD:	Baruch son of Neriah has convinced you to say this , because he wants us to stay here and be killed by the Babylonians or be carried off into exile . ”

ID:	5832
INPUT:	Larrainera jaitsi zen Rut eta amaginarrebak gomendatua zehatz-mehatz egin zuen .
PRED:	So Ruth went down to the Mount of Olives , where he had done this day .
GOLD:	So she went down to the threshing floor that night and followed the instructions of her mother-in-law .

ID:	5833
INPUT:	Jaunak dio : « Badator , gorputzean bakarrik erdainduak direnak zigortuko ditudan eguna :
PRED:	“ The time is coming when the Lord says , “ If you are circumcised , you will be circumcised ,
GOLD:	But those who wish to boastshould boast in this alone : that they truly know me and understand that I am the Lordwho demonstrates unfailing loveand who brings justice and righteousness to the earth , and that I delight in these things.I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	5834
INPUT:	harriak jaurtitzeko garaiaeta harriak biltzeko garaia , besarkatzeko garaiaeta banantzeko garaia ,
PRED:	They must throw them into a stone and throw them into a stone , and they will go down to the entrance to the lake .
GOLD:	A time to scatter stones and a time to gather stones.A time to embrace and a time to turn away .

ID:	5835
INPUT:	eta Jordanen ekialdeko Araba haran guztian zehar Pisga mendiaren magaleko Itsaso Hileraino .
PRED:	and on the east of the Jordan Valley to Pisgah , near the slopes of Pisgah .
GOLD:	And they conquered the eastern bank of the Jordan River as far south as the Dead Sea , below the slopes of Pisgah . )

ID:	5836
INPUT:	Landatzen dituzun egun bereanloratzen dira , ereiten dituzun egun bereanernetzen , baina , azkenean , bertan behera galduko da fruitua , zoritxarrak , sendaezineko gaitzak jota .
PRED:	If you do n't plant the fertile soil , it will be like a farmer who planted good seed on the ground . But when disaster comes , it will produce good fruit , and evil people will produce good fruit .
GOLD:	They may sprout on the day you set them out ; yes , they may blossom on the very morning you plant them , but you will never pick any grapes from them.Your only harvest will be a load of grief and unrelieved pain .

ID:	5837
INPUT:	Israeldarrentzat oroigarri zen hori , Aaronen ondorengo ez zen inor Jaunaren aurrean intsentsua erretzera hurbil ez zedin ohartarazteko ; horrela , ez zitzaien gertatuko Koreri eta beronen taldekoei gertaturiko ezbeharra , Jaunak Moisesen bitartez aldez aurretik adierazitakoa .
PRED:	Then Moses gave these instructions to the people of Israel as a special offering to the Lord , so no one could approach the altar to burn incense to the people of Israel . This is what the Lord had commanded through Moses , the people of Israel , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	Buds will sprout on the staff belonging to the man I choose . Then I will finally put an end to the people 's murmuring and complaining against you . ”

ID:	5838
INPUT:	Danen leinuko Ahisamaken seme Oholiab eman diot lankide . Gainera , artisau guztiak trebeago egiten ditut , agindu dizudan guztia egin dezaten :
PRED:	I will give you this message from the tribe of Dan , along with all the Hittite elders of the tribe of Dan , and I will do whatever I say .
GOLD:	“ And I have personally appointed Oholiab son of Ahisamach , of the tribe of Dan , to be his assistant . Moreover , I have given special skill to all the gifted craftsmen so they can make all the things I have commanded you to make :

ID:	5839
INPUT:	Judaren leinua aukeratu zuen , Sion mendia , bere maitea .
PRED:	He chose the tribe of Simeon , and he loved his chosen ones .
GOLD:	He chose instead the tribe of Judah , and Mount Zion , which he loved .

ID:	5840
INPUT:	Jaunarengan jarria nuen itxaropen guztia : makurtu eta entzun du nire deiadarra .
PRED:	I put my hope in the name of the Lord , and he has heard my voice .
GOLD:	He lifted me out of the pit of despair , out of the mud and the mire.He set my feet on solid groundand steadied me as I walked along .

ID:	5841
INPUT:	Bizirik gelditu diren eta itzuli nahi duten israeldarrei lagun biezaie inguruko jendeak ; eman biezazkie zilarra , urrea , ondasunak , abereak eta nork bere borondatezko opariak , Jerusalemen dagoen Jainkoaren etxerako » .
PRED:	“ Go back to the people of Israel and return to the remnant of the people of Israel . Take care of the people of Israel for seven years , so no one can bring them back to the Temple of God . ”
GOLD:	Wherever this Jewish remnant is found , let their neighbors contribute toward their expenses by giving them silver and gold , supplies for the journey , and livestock , as well as a voluntary offering for the Temple of God in Jerusalem . ”

ID:	5842
INPUT:	Jesusen piztueraren berria
PRED:	The Burial of Jesus
GOLD:	The Resurrection

ID:	5843
INPUT:	« Ez joan festa-otordua egiten ari diren etxera , bertakoekin jan-edatera .
PRED:	“ You must not celebrate the Festival of Shelters , for you may eat the food you eat .
GOLD:	“ And do not go to their feasts and parties . Do not eat and drink with them at all .

ID:	5844
INPUT:	Egin otoitz gure alde ere , Jainkoak mezua hots egiteko eta Kristoren misterioa adierazteko aukera eman diezagun , misterio horrengatik bainago kartzelan .
PRED:	Pray that God will send us to pray for you , and he will bring us glory to God . He will give us the ability to be able to bring us out of the church .
GOLD:	Pray for us , too , that God will give us many opportunities to speak about his mysterious plan concerning Christ . That is why I am here in chains .

ID:	5845
INPUT:	Hau dago idatzia , hain zuzen , Salmoen liburuan : « Bihur bedi haren bizilekua basamortu , geldi bedi inor gabe . « Eta beste hau ere bai : « Har beza beste batek haren kargua .
PRED:	Then he turned his face to the top of his head . He said , “ Let 's go into the wilderness , let anyone else be alone . ” So he said , “ Let 's be alone .
GOLD:	Peter continued , “ This was written in the book of Psalms , where it says , ‘ Let his home become desolate , with no one living in it . ' It also says , ‘ Let someone else take his position . '

ID:	5846
INPUT:	Presta zaitezte , bada , haren seme-alabak hiltzeko ; gurasoek egindakogaiztakeriengatikbehar dute hil , sekula berriz altxaeta lurraldeaz jabe ez daitezen , mundua berriro hirizbete ez dezaten » .
PRED:	Get up ! Let the children of your children die ! Let their children die in their land , and they will die in their land , and they will never die again . ”
GOLD:	Kill this man 's children ! Let them die because of their father 's sins ! They must not rise and conquer the earth , filling the world with their cities . ”

ID:	5847
INPUT:	Paulori entzuten zegoen batean , Paulo begira-begira jarri zitzaion eta , sendatzeko adinako fedea bazuela ikusirik ,
PRED:	When Paul heard Paul , he tried to listen to Paul , so he could see that he was healed .
GOLD:	and listening as Paul preached . Looking straight at him , Paul realized he had faith to be healed .

ID:	5848
INPUT:	Izan ere , bekatuak , agindutik bide hartuta , liluratu egin ninduen eta aginduaren bidez hil .
PRED:	For he did what was right , and he took me out of the boat and killed me .
GOLD:	Sin took advantage of those commands and deceived me ; it used the commands to kill me .

ID:	5849
INPUT:	Emakume zaharrei , amari bezala . Eta neska<unk> , arrebei bezala , garbitasun osoz .
PRED:	Give the following instructions to the women , women , women , cattle , donkeys , and donkeys .
GOLD:	Treat older women as you would your mother , and treat younger women with all purity as you would your own sisters .

ID:	5850
INPUT:	« Esan israeldarrei : Norbaitek , israeldarra nahiz Israelen bizi den etorkina izan , seme-alabaren bat Molok jainkoari oparitan eskaintzen badio , heriotza-zigorra izango du : harrika hilko du herriko jendeak .
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel . “ If a man dies , he must be put to death by worshiping other gods , he will be put to death . He will be put to death .
GOLD:	“ Give the people of Israel these instructions , which apply both to native Israelites and to the foreigners living in Israel . “ If any of them offer their children as a sacrifice to Molech , they must be put to death . The people of the community must stone them to death .

ID:	5851
INPUT:	Jaunaren aintzak tenplutik alde egin
PRED:	The Temple of the Lord
GOLD:	The

ID:	5852
INPUT:	Jesusek jarraitu zuen : — Zuek behekoak zarete , ni goikoa naiz ; zuek mundu honetakoak zarete , ni ez naiz mundu honetakoa .
PRED:	Jesus told them , “ You are my followers , but you are the ones who belong to me . I do n't belong to this world . ”
GOLD:	Jesus continued , “ You are from below ; I am from above . You belong to this world ; I do not .

ID:	5853
INPUT:	Daviden zahartzaroa
PRED:	David 's Kindness to Wisdom
GOLD:	Adonijah Claims the Throne

ID:	5854
INPUT:	itsasoko hondarrak baino gehiago egingo lukete ; horregatik dira hain neurrigabeak ene hitzak .
PRED:	They are more valuable than the sea , and they are filled with fear .
GOLD:	they would outweigh all the sands of the sea.That is why I spoke impulsively .

ID:	5855
INPUT:	« Jainkoaren erregetzarekin , uretara botatzen den eta mota guztietako arrainak biltzen dituen sarearekin bezala gertatzen da .
PRED:	“ If you go to the Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies , you will drive out all the animals that scurry along the ground .
GOLD:	“ Again , the Kingdom of Heaven is like a fishing net that was thrown into the water and caught fish of every kind .

ID:	5856
INPUT:	Kantu berria ipini dit ezpainetan , gure Jainkoarentzat gorespen-kanta . Askok ikusiko dute hau eta , ikaraturik , Jaunarengan konfiantza izango .
PRED:	The Lord has made me a new covenant with all my people , and many who have seen him , and they will trust in the name of the Lord .
GOLD:	Oh , the joys of those who trust the Lord , who have no confidence in the proudor in those who worship idols .

ID:	5857
INPUT:	Azaleko kultua eta obedientziarik eza
PRED:	Israel 's Sin and goat
GOLD:	Judah 's Persistent Idolatry

ID:	5858
INPUT:	Gizonak , garaitu ezin zuela ikusirik , borrokaldian izter-giltza ukitu zion Jakobi eta koloka jarri .
PRED:	When the man saw that the man could n't see how he could n't touch it , he put it on the bank of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	Then the man said , “ Let me go , for the dawn is breaking ! ” But Jacob said , “ I will not let you go unless you bless me . ”

ID:	5859
INPUT:	Nire zintzoa fedeari esker biziko da , baina atzera egiten badu , ez dut atsegin izango .
PRED:	But if you do n't have faith , I will have a reward for the righteous life of the godly .
GOLD:	And my righteous ones will live by faith.But I will take no pleasure in anyone who turns away . ”

ID:	5860
INPUT:	entzuten zidaten eta esana betetzen , arrotzek lausengatzen ninduten .
PRED:	When I heard this , they were terrified , and they were terrified by the light of the earth .
GOLD:	They all lose their courageand come trembling from their strongholds .

ID:	5861
INPUT:	Baina ez harrotu adar moztuen lepotik . Eta harrotzeko tentazioa baduzu , izan gogoan ez diozula zuk eusten sustraiari , sustraiak zuri baizik .
PRED:	But do n't boast about their hair and cut off his head . But if you do n't grow up , it is the roots of your roots .
GOLD:	But you must not brag about being grafted in to replace the branches that were broken off . You are just a branch , not the root .

ID:	5862
INPUT:	Bitartean , faraoiaren gudarostea Egiptotik atera zen . Hori jakitean , Jerusalem inguraturik zeukaten gudari babiloniarrak , erasoari utzirik , urrundu egin ziren hiritik .
PRED:	As soon as Pharaoh 's army came out of Egypt , the army of Egypt came out of the land of Egypt , and all the people who had fled from the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	At this time the army of Pharaoh Hophra of Egypt appeared at the southern border of Judah . When the Babylonian army heard about it , they withdrew from their siege of Jerusalem .

ID:	5863
INPUT:	Garailea neurekin eseraraziko dut neure tronuan , neu ere garaile izan eta neure Aitarekin beronen tronuan eseri naizen bezala .
PRED:	I will establish my throne with my throne , and I will be my throne forever and ever , as my Father is my throne .
GOLD:	Those who are victorious will sit with me on my throne , just as I was victorious and sat with my Father on his throne .

ID:	5864
INPUT:	Ez egin zinik zeure buruarengatik ere , ez baitezakezu zeure ile bakar bat ere zuri edo beltz bihur .
PRED:	Do n't lose your own head , for you have no reason to stumble .
GOLD:	Do not even say , ‘ By my head ! ' for you ca n't turn one hair white or black .

ID:	5865
INPUT:	Erru guztiak barkatzen dizkit , gaitz guztiak sendatzen ;
PRED:	My heart is sick , but I do everything I do .
GOLD:	He forgives all my sinsand heals all my diseases .

ID:	5866
INPUT:	esaiezu i<unk> eta amaigabeko jatorri-zerrendetan arretarik ez jartzeko ; izan ere , honelakoak egokiagoak dira eztabaidak sortzeko , sinesmenez onartzen den Jainkoaren salbamen-asmoan hezteko baino .
PRED:	Do n't be kind to wisdom and understanding . Do n't be kind to wisdom , for it is good to teach us to do what is right for you to believe in the faith of God .
GOLD:	Do n't let them waste their time in endless discussion of myths and spiritual pedigrees . These things only lead to meaningless speculations , which do n't help people live a life of faith in God .

ID:	5867
INPUT:	baliogabetu egin du legea bere agindu eta arauekin , eta bi herriekin gizadi berri bakarra sortu du bere baitan , bakeak eginez .
PRED:	He has made a covenant with his decrees and regulations , and he has made two people right with him . He has made two people right with himself .
GOLD:	He did this by ending the system of law with its commandments and regulations . He made peace between Jews and Gentiles by creating in himself one new people from the two groups .

ID:	5868
INPUT:	Entzun hau , Jakoben herriaren buruzagiok , Israelgo agintariok , zuzentasuna higuintzeneta zuzenbidea okertzen duzuenok :
PRED:	Listen , you people of Israel , you leaders of Israel , you leaders of Israel , but you are detestable to the Lord .
GOLD:	Listen to me , you leaders of Israel ! You hate justice and twist all that is right .

ID:	5869
INPUT:	Pertza bezala jartzen du irakiten ur azpia , lurrinontzian bezala lurrinarazten gaineko ura .
PRED:	He watches over the heart of Christ , like the waters of the earth , like water covered the earth .
GOLD:	Its flesh is hard and firmand can not be penetrated .

ID:	5870
INPUT:	Entzun hau , herri guztiok , egon adi , munduko biztanleok ,
PRED:	Listen to this , you people of the earth , you people of the earth !
GOLD:	High and low , rich and poor — listen !

ID:	5871
INPUT:	Gau horretan Egipto osoan zehar igaroko naiz , eta hil egingo ditut Egiptoko lehen-seme eta lehen abere-kumeak oro eta neure epaia emango diet Egiptoko jainkoei . Ala ni Jauna !
PRED:	That night I will make the land of Egypt , and I will slaughter the firstborn sons of Egypt and the firstborn sons of Egypt . I will give them the firstborn sons of Egypt , the Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	On that night I will pass through the land of Egypt and strike down every firstborn son and firstborn male animal in the land of Egypt . I will execute judgment against all the gods of Egypt , for I am the Lord !

ID:	5872
INPUT:	erruduna salatzen duena onetsia izaten da , jendeak zoriondu egingo du .
PRED:	Anyone who speaks to evil will be destroyed , and those who follow the advice of the godly will be destroyed .
GOLD:	But it will go well for those who convict the guilty ; rich blessings will be showered on them .

ID:	5873
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , artean beren herrialdean bizi zirenean , israeldarrek kutsatu egin zuten lurraldea beren jokabide eta egintza txarrez ; kutsatua zen haien portaera , hilerokoan botatako odola bezain kutsatua .
PRED:	“ Son of man , when the Israelites live in the land of Egypt , the Israelites lived in the land of Egypt . They were as defiled by the idols of the people of Israel , just as the Lord had commanded them .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , when the people of Israel were living in their own land , they defiled it by the evil way they lived . To me their conduct was as unclean as a woman 's menstrual cloth .

ID:	5874
INPUT:	Sinesgarria eta guztiok onartzekoa da doktrina hau : Kristo Jesus bekatariak salbatzera etorri zela mundura . Eta inor ez ni baino bekatariagorik ;
PRED:	This is a trustworthy saying , “ This is what the Lord Jesus Christ says : I am going to save you from the world , and no one can help you . ”
GOLD:	This is a trustworthy saying , and everyone should accept it : “ Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners ” — and I am the worst of them all .

ID:	5875
INPUT:	eta bertan ezarri dut Jaunak israeldarrekin eginiko itunaren agiria daukan kutxa » .
PRED:	I will put the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant with the Ark of the Covenant . ”
GOLD:	There I have placed the Ark , which contains the covenant that the Lord made with the people of Israel . ”

ID:	5876
INPUT:	Siria guztian zabaldu zen Jesusen entzutea . Edozein gaitz edo oinazek jotakoak — deabrudun , epileptiko nahiz elbarriak — eramaten zizkioten , eta hark sendatu egiten zituen .
PRED:	So Jesus spread throughout the entire lifetime of Simon , and the spirit of Jesus ' feet , and the demons begged him , “ He healed the sick man and healed them . ”
GOLD:	News about him spread as far as Syria , and people soon began bringing to him all who were sick . And whatever their sickness or disease , or if they were demon possessed or epileptic or paralyzed — he healed them all .

ID:	5877
INPUT:	Neuk , Jaunak , ikertzen eta aztertzen ditutgizakiaren buru-bihotzak , nori bere jokaeraren ordaina , bere egiteen merezia emateko .
PRED:	I , the Lord , have spoken ! I will send down the heart of the earth , and I will punish them for their own sins .
GOLD:	But I , the Lord , search all heartsand examine secret motives.I give all people their due rewards , according to what their actions deserve . ”

ID:	5878
INPUT:	Lehen fruituen eskaintza eta fede-aitorpena
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	Harvest Offerings and Tithes

ID:	5879
INPUT:	Ezereztuko ditutzure lurraldeko hiriak , eta zure gotorleku guztiakerraustuko .
PRED:	You will destroy all the towns of the earth , and your cities will be destroyed .
GOLD:	“ In that day , ” says the Lord , “ I will slaughter your horsesand destroy your chariots .

ID:	5880
INPUT:	Lehorrari « lur » eman zion izen eta ur-multzoari « itsaso » . Eta Jainkoak ona zela ikusi zuen .
PRED:	The first was named the waters of the sea ( which means “ The Red Sea is dry ! ” And God saw that it was good .
GOLD:	God called the dry ground “ land ” and the waters “ seas . ” And God saw that it was good .

ID:	5881
INPUT:	Betiko izu-ikaraz eta lotsaz beterik , gal bitez desohorez !
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of all who fear you , and all your possessions will be saved .
GOLD:	Then they will learn that you alone are called the Lord , that you alone are the Most High , supreme over all the earth .

ID:	5882
INPUT:	« Burdinazko tresnaz norbait jo eta hiltzen duena , hilketa-errudun da : heriotzara emango dute .
PRED:	“ Anyone who kills another person must be put to death and murder . If they are put to death , they must be put to death .
GOLD:	“ But if someone strikes and kills another person with a piece of iron , it is murder , and the murderer must be executed .

ID:	5883
INPUT:	Zeure behatzez eratu duzun ortziaeta ezarri dituzun ilargi-izarrak ikusita ,
PRED:	You placed your covenant with your ancestors , and you saw the stars in the sky and stars .
GOLD:	what are mere mortals that you should think about them , human beings that you should care for them ?

ID:	5884
INPUT:	Jordan ibaia igarotzean , beraz , gaur agindu dizuedanez , Garizim mendian harriak tente ipini eta karez zurituko dituzue .
PRED:	So today I am giving you today today , as well as I have commanded you today , and you must prophesy on Mount Hor and prophesy on Mount Hor .
GOLD:	When you cross the Jordan , set up these stones at Mount Ebal and coat them with plaster , as I am commanding you today .

ID:	5885
INPUT:	« Etxe batean sartzean , esan : « Bakea zuekin » ;
PRED:	“ Stand up ! ” they said , “ Peace be with you . ”
GOLD:	When you enter the home , give it your blessing .

ID:	5886
INPUT:	Baina bai estua dela bizirako atea eta meharra bidea , eta gutxi dira aurkitzen dutenak .
PRED:	But those who are wise will be shut , and they will be shut up , and they will be shut up .
GOLD:	But the gateway to life is very narrow and the road is difficult , and only a few ever find it .

ID:	5887
INPUT:	Ez dezagun tenta Jauna , haietako batzuek egin zuten bezala , eta sugeek zizta eginda hil ziren .
PRED:	So they did n't realize that the Lord had commanded them to die , just as they had commanded him .
GOLD:	Nor should we put Christ to the test , as some of them did and then died from snakebites .

ID:	5888
INPUT:	Jesusen jatorriaz eztabaida
PRED:	A New Copy of Jesus
GOLD:	Is Jesus the Messiah ?

ID:	5889
INPUT:	Israeldarrek , segika atera zitzaizkien Aiko gizonak landa zabalean azkeneraino garbitu ondoren , Aira itzuli eta hiriko bizilagun guztiak hil zituzten .
PRED:	The people of Israel were coming out to the land of Ai , where the people of Israel had fled to the town of Ai , where the Father had killed them .
GOLD:	When the Israelite army finished chasing and killing all the men of Ai in the open fields , they went back and finished off everyone inside .

ID:	5890
INPUT:	Jesusek , gupidaturik , begiak ukitu zizkien , eta une berean ikusmena etorri zitzaien berriro . Eta Jesusen ondoren joan ziren .
PRED:	When Jesus saw them , he touched their eyes and touched them again . Then they returned to Jesus and again .
GOLD:	Jesus felt sorry for them and touched their eyes . Instantly they could see ! Then they followed him .

ID:	5891
INPUT:	Zure gorespenez eta ekintza ospetsuezbetea nuen ahoa egun osoan .
PRED:	Let the glory of your knowledge and knowledge be filled with knowledge .
GOLD:	That is why I can never stop praising you ; I declare your glory all day long .

ID:	5892
INPUT:	izaki ororen bizia odolean baitago . Horregatik agindu die Jaunak israeldarrei inolako izakiren odolik ez jateko , izaki ororen bizia odolean dagoelako ; jaten duena herritik bota egingo dute .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says to the people of Israel . This is what the Lord says : When you break the blood of the blood of the people of Israel 's blood , you will be cut off from the community of Israel .
GOLD:	The life of every creature is in its blood . That is why I have said to the people of Israel , ‘ You must never eat or drink blood , for the life of any creature is in its blood . ' So whoever consumes blood will be cut off from the community .

ID:	5893
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , ohartarazi Jerusalem bere jokabide higuingarriaz .
PRED:	“ Son of man , listen to this message from Jerusalem .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , confront Jerusalem with her detestable sins .

ID:	5894
INPUT:	<unk> katik Haxmonara ;
PRED:	They left Moseroth and camped at Moseroth .
GOLD:	They left Mithcah and camped at Hashmonah .

ID:	5895
INPUT:	Amondarrek Daviden mandatariak iraindu
PRED:	David Sends Out the Ammonites
GOLD:	David Defeats the Ammonites

ID:	5896
INPUT:	Hala ere , Davidengatik bederen , Jaunak , haren Jainkoak , ez zuen errege-etxearen argia itzaltzen utzi Jerusalemen ; seme bat eman zion , beraren ondoren errege izan zedin eta Jerusalemen iraun zezan .
PRED:	So David left the Temple of the Lord his God , and he refused to abandon the Temple of the Lord , the God of Jerusalem . He had given him a son of David , a descendant of David , a descendant of David , and he reigned in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	But for David 's sake , the Lord his God allowed his descendants to continue ruling , shining like a lamp , and he gave Abijam a son to rule after him in Jerusalem .

ID:	5897
INPUT:	Larunbatero hitz egiten zuen Paulok sinagogan , eta bai juduak , bai greziarrak , sinesmenera ekartzen saiatzen zen .
PRED:	As Paul was speaking in the synagogue , the Jewish synagogue was in the synagogue , and the Jews believed in Christ .
GOLD:	Each Sabbath found Paul at the synagogue , trying to convince the Jews and Greeks alike .

ID:	5898
INPUT:	Efraim , Benjamin eta Manases leinuei ! Suspertu zeure ahalmena eta zatozkigu salbatzera !
PRED:	Ephraim , Benjamin , and Manasseh , have turned away from the power of the tribe of Benjamin .
GOLD:	Turn us again to yourself , O God.Make your face shine down upon us.Only then will we be saved .

ID:	5899
INPUT:	Hexbongo deiadarrak Elale eta Jahatzeraino iristen dira ; garrasiak entzuten Tzoartik Horonaimeraino , Eglat-Xelixiaraino , Nimrimgo urak ere agortu egin baitira .
PRED:	When the people of Heshbon heard this , they cry out to King Sihon of Heshbon , from Heshbon , where he fled to Beersheba in the valley of Debir ( which means “ From there is no water . )
GOLD:	“ Instead , their awful cries of terror can be heard from Heshbon clear across to Elealeh and Jahaz ; from Zoar all the way to Horonaim and Eglath-shelishiyah . Even the waters of Nimrim are dried up now .

ID:	5900
INPUT:	Behartsuei bahitutakosoineko gaineanetzaten dira edozein kultu-lekutan , eta bidegabekeriaz bildutakoardoa edaten duteberen Jainkoaren etxean .
PRED:	If you ignore the poor , you may worship the Lord your God 's Temple and worship at the place where you worship at the Temple of God .
GOLD:	At their religious festivals , they lounge in clothing their debtors put up as security.In the house of their gods , they drink wine bought with unjust fines .

ID:	5901
INPUT:	Orduan , Davidek mandatariak bidali zituen , emakume hura ekar ziezaioten . Etortzean , David berarekin etzan zen ; hilerokoaren garbikuntza egin berria zen emakumea . Ondoren , bere etxera itzuli zen Betsabe .
PRED:	So David sent messengers to meet David , and he sent messengers to meet the woman who had been ceremonially clean . Then David returned home to the house of David , and he returned home .
GOLD:	Then David sent messengers to get her ; and when she came to the palace , he slept with her . She had just completed the purification rites after having her menstrual period . Then she returned home .

ID:	5902
INPUT:	Labanek , etxean sartu , gameluei zamak kendu eta lastoa eta belarra eman zizkien . Ondoren , ura ekarri zien morroiari eta honen bidelagunei , oinak garbitzeko .
PRED:	So Laban took the camels and took them into the camels , and he brought them back to the banquet hall . Then he sent them to the men who were left in the house .
GOLD:	So the man went home with Laban , and Laban unloaded the camels , gave him straw for their bedding , fed them , and provided water for the man and the camel drivers to wash their feet .

ID:	5903
INPUT:	argiz inguratua soinekoz bezala . Oihal-etxola bezala zabaltzen duzu zerua ,
PRED:	On the day of battle , you will wear out like a tent in the sky like a tent .
GOLD:	You are dressed in a robe of light.You stretch out the starry curtain of the heavens ;

ID:	5904
INPUT:	den-denek jokaera makurra baitzeramaten . Jainkoak , mundua hain gaiztotua ikustean ,
PRED:	For God is going to read to them , for they are trying to see the evil of the wicked .
GOLD:	God observed all this corruption in the world , for everyone on earth was corrupt .

ID:	5905
INPUT:	Bost errege amortarrak , ihes egin eta Makedan , leize-zulo batean , gorde ziren .
PRED:	The five kings of Israel fled to the land of Midian , and they fled to the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	During the battle the five kings escaped and hid in a cave at Makkedah .

ID:	5906
INPUT:	Gezurtiak gorroto dio biktimari , lausengariak hondamendira darama .
PRED:	My bones are filled with pain , and my bones are filled with pain .
GOLD:	A lying tongue hates its victims , and flattering words cause ruin .

ID:	5907
INPUT:	Baina Jehuk uztaia eskuetan hartu , gezia jaurti eta bizkarraren erdian jo zuen Joram , bihotza zauritu eta aurretik ateraz . Hilik erori zen bere guda-gurdian .
PRED:	But Jehu threw his hand into his hand and threw him into his hand , and he turned his hand and struck him with his chariots . So he went ahead of his chariot and worshiped him .
GOLD:	But Jehu drew his bow and shot Joram between the shoulders . The arrow pierced his heart , and he sank down dead in his chariot .

ID:	5908
INPUT:	Baina Jaunak esan zion : — Luzatu eskua eta heldu isatsetik ! Eskua luzatu eta heldu egin zion , eta sugea makila bihurtu zen berriro eskuan .
PRED:	But the Lord said to him , “ Hold out your hand ! ” And the Lord reached out his hand and grabbed his hand , and then the hand touched her .
GOLD:	Then the Lord told him , “ Reach out and grab its tail . ” So Moses reached out and grabbed it , and it turned back into a shepherd 's staff in his hand .

ID:	5909
INPUT:	haustura hausturaren ordain , begia begiaren ordain , hortza hortzaren ordain ; egin duen zauria egingo diote .
PRED:	You must repay the guilty of an eye for a tooth , a tooth for a tooth , a tooth for a tooth , a tooth for a tooth , a tooth , a tooth , a tooth , a tooth for a tooth , a tooth for a tooth .
GOLD:	a fracture for a fracture , an eye for an eye , a tooth for a tooth . Whatever anyone does to injure another person must be paid back in kind .

ID:	5910
INPUT:	Madarikazioak
PRED:	Building the Altar
GOLD:	Punishments for Disobedience

ID:	5911
INPUT:	Bakea ekarriko dien ituna egingo dut neure artaldearekin : basapiztiak desagerraraziko ditut herrialdetik , seguru biziko dira landa zabalean eta lasai lo egingo basoetan .
PRED:	I will bring peace with the Babylonians , and I will bring my people out of the land of Egypt . I will bring them out of the fields , and they will live in safety .
GOLD:	“ I will make a covenant of peace with my people and drive away the dangerous animals from the land . Then they will be able to camp safely in the wildest places and sleep in the woods without fear .

ID:	5912
INPUT:	Emagaldu handiaren gaitzespena
PRED:	A Plot against Sin
GOLD:	The Great Prostitute

ID:	5913
INPUT:	Egiaz zuk agindurik egin al dute hori ? Guri , zeure zerbitzarioi , ez diguzu esan nor izanen den zure hurrengo erregea .
PRED:	Are you the king of Israel ? Do you think we are your servants ? No one can say , ‘ You are the king of the king ! '
GOLD:	Has my lord the king really done this without letting any of his officials know who should be the next king ? ”

ID:	5914
INPUT:	Ni eta gainerako gerra-gizonak hirira hurbilduko gara eta , aurrekoan bezala , hirikoak guri erasotzera ateratzean , guk ihesari emango diogu .
PRED:	They will come to war against me , and they will come to war against us . They will go to war against the whole community .
GOLD:	When our main army attacks , the men of Ai will come out to fight as they did before , and we will run away from them .

ID:	5915
INPUT:	« Korrikalaria baino bizkorrago doaz nire egunak : zoriona ikusi gabe doaz ihesi ,
PRED:	“ Cornelius Calls for a few days , who have seen me without first arrived .
GOLD:	“ My life passes more swiftly than a runner.It flees away without a glimpse of happiness .

ID:	5916
INPUT:	Berrogeita hamarnaka eta ehunaka eseri ziren .
PRED:	And all the leaders of the Pharisees and all sat down .
GOLD:	So they sat down in groups of fifty or a hundred .

ID:	5917
INPUT:	Izan itzazue zeuen artean Kristo Jesusek izan zituen sentipen berak .
PRED:	For you have been filled with Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	You must have the same attitude that Christ Jesus had .

ID:	5918
INPUT:	Haiek galdu nahian dabiltzan etsaien esku utziko ditut , eta haien gorpuak hegazti harraparien eta basapiztien janari izango dira .
PRED:	I will hand them over to their enemies , and I will drive them out of the wild animals and wild animals that scurry along the ground .
GOLD:	I will give you to your enemies , and they will kill you . Your bodies will be food for the vultures and wild animals .

ID:	5919
INPUT:	Erantzun zion Simon Pedrok : — Jauna , norengana joango gara ? Betiko bizia dute zure irakatsiek .
PRED:	Simon Peter replied , “ Lord , why are you looking for ? Why are you looking for ? ”
GOLD:	Simon Peter replied , “ Lord , to whom would we go ? You have the words that give eternal life .

ID:	5920
INPUT:	« Beraz , honela diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Nik sorraraziko dut gerra zure kontra , eta gizakiak eta abereak erauziko ditu .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will bring war against you , and I will destroy you and destroy them .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will bring an army against you , O Egypt , and destroy both people and animals .

ID:	5921
INPUT:	Artzain gabe , ardiak sakabanatu egin dira eta basapiztien harrapakin bihurtu .
PRED:	They have made a shepherd 's sheep and goats , goats , and goats , and goats .
GOLD:	So my sheep have been scattered without a shepherd , and they are easy prey for any wild animal .

ID:	5922
INPUT:	A bai , Estebanen etxekoak ere nik bataiatu nituen , baina ez dut uste beste inor bataiatu dudanik .
PRED:	But if I have been baptized with my own household , I have not been baptized , but anyone who has been baptized .
GOLD:	( Oh yes , I also baptized the household of Stephanas , but I do n't remember baptizing anyone else . )

ID:	5923
INPUT:	Gogora ezazue , bada , bekatarien aldetik halako eraso gogorra jasan zuen hura , adorea galdu eta etsi ez dezazuen .
PRED:	So do n't remember what was happening to you from the land you have said , ‘ Go ahead of you , and do n't lose it . '
GOLD:	Think of all the hostility he endured from sinful people ; then you wo n't become weary and give up .

ID:	5924
INPUT:	Abrahamen beste ondorengo batzuk
PRED:	The descendants of Abraham
GOLD:	The Death of Abraham

ID:	5925
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin zaiona egin zuen , beraren aita Amatziasek bezalaxe .
PRED:	He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , just as his father had done .
GOLD:	He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , just as his father , Amaziah , had done .

ID:	5926
INPUT:	Gero , apaizak Jaunari aurkeztuko dio hori guztia : gauza sakratua da eta apaizari dagokio , aurkezturiko bularra eta aparte utzitako izterra bezala . Horren guztiaren ondoren , ardoa edan ahal izango du nazireu-botoa zuenak .
PRED:	Then the priest must present these offerings to the Lord as a special offering to the Lord . It must be a special offering to the priest as a special offering to the Lord . This is a permanent share of the special gifts presented to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the priest will lift them up as a special offering before the Lord . These are holy portions for the priest , along with the breast of the special offering and the thigh of the sacred offering that are lifted up before the Lord . After this ceremony the Nazirites may again drink wine .

ID:	5927
INPUT:	Aaronen seme Eleazar Putielen alabetariko batekin ezkondu zen . Honek Pinhas sortu zion . Hauek guztiak lebitar familiaburuak dira beren jatorriko familiekin .
PRED:	Eleazar son of Eleazar the priest of Eleazar son of Eleazar the priest , was the leader of the family of Eli . These are the leaders of the clans of the clans of Israel .
GOLD:	Eleazar son of Aaron married one of the daughters of Putiel , and she gave birth to his son , Phinehas.These are the ancestors of the Levite families , listed according to their clans .

ID:	5928
INPUT:	Judan Salomonen seme Roboam zen errege . Berrogeita bat urte zituen Roboamek errege izaten hastean , eta hamazazpi urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen , Jaunak Israelgo leinu guztien artetik bere egoitza jartzeko hautatu zuen hirian . Roboam erregearen amak Naama zuen izena eta amondarra zen .
PRED:	Rehoboam son of Rehoboam began to rule over Israel for seven years . He reigned in Jerusalem seven years , and he reigned in Jerusalem seven years . He reigned in Jerusalem seven years .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Rehoboam son of Solomon was king in Judah . He was forty-one years old when he became king , and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem , the city the Lord had chosen from among all the tribes of Israel as the place to honor his name . Rehoboam 's mother was Naamah , an Ammonite woman .

ID:	5929
INPUT:	Libra nazazu , arren , neure anaia Esauren eskutik , ni eta ama-semeak hiltzeko etorriko den beldur bainaiz .
PRED:	They are trying to kill me , for I am afraid of the hands of Esau 's brother . I am afraid to come , for I am afraid .
GOLD:	But you promised me , ‘ I will surely treat you kindly , and I will multiply your descendants until they become as numerous as the sands along the seashore — too many to count . ' ”

ID:	5930
INPUT:	Etsai indartsuagandiksalbatu ninduen , ni baino indartsuago ziren arerioengandik .
PRED:	He rescued me from my enemies ; he rescued me from their distress .
GOLD:	He rescued me from my powerful enemies , from those who hated me and were too strong for me .

ID:	5931
INPUT:	Alde gaitzetik , egin on dena , bila bakea eta jarrai haren bidetik .
PRED:	Turn away from evil , and get away from the end of his life .
GOLD:	The eyes of the Lord watch over those who do right ; his ears are open to their cries for help .

ID:	5932
INPUT:	« Judako errege Manasesek bere aurretiko amortarrek baino egintza higuingarriagoak egin dituenez eta , sasijainkoak direla eta , judatarrei bekatu eginarazi dienez ,
PRED:	“ Because of the kings of Judah , the kings of Judah followed the detestable practices of the detestable practices of the pagan nations and other gods ,
GOLD:	“ King Manasseh of Judah has done many detestable things . He is even more wicked than the Amorites , who lived in this land before Israel . He has caused the people of Judah to sin with his idols .

ID:	5933
INPUT:	Ez du inork bere gorputza gorrotatzen , baizik eta jaten eman eta zaindu egiten du , Kristok Elizarekin egiten duen bezala ;
PRED:	For no one can win the body , but he gives it to the body of Christ , just as Christ gives us his body .
GOLD:	No one hates his own body but feeds and cares for it , just as Christ cares for the church .

ID:	5934
INPUT:	Ix-Boxet israeldarren errege izendatua
PRED:	The Murder of Ishbosheth
GOLD:	Ishbosheth Proclaimed King of Israel

ID:	5935
INPUT:	Jauna , barkatzeko prest
PRED:	Lord
GOLD:	Blessings for the

ID:	5936
INPUT:	Etxera bidean , morroiak atera zitzaizkion bere semea onik zuela esatera .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the servant 's servants went home to his house and told him that he was your son .
GOLD:	While the man was on his way , some of his servants met him with the news that his son was alive and well .

ID:	5937
INPUT:	Argimutilaren gerritik ateratzen diren sei besoetariko bakoitzak almendra-lore gisako hiru kopa izango ditu , beren kukulu , lore-hosto eta guzti ;
PRED:	center stem , lamp cups shaped like almond blossoms , complete with buds and petals .
GOLD:	Each of the six branches will have three lamp cups shaped like almond blossoms , complete with buds and petals .

ID:	5938
INPUT:	Halaber , emaztetzat hartzen dut Rut moabdarra , Mahlonen alarguntsa ; honela , Mahlonen familian iraungo du jabegoak eta Elimeleken izenak bere senideen artean eta herri honetan jarraituko du . Zuek zarete , gaur , honen guztiaren lekuko .
PRED:	I have married a man named her husband , a man named Naomi , a man named her husband . She is a descendant of her husband , a descendant of her husband , and she will be her husband , and she will be her husband .
GOLD:	And with the land I have acquired Ruth , the Moabite widow of Mahlon , to be my wife . This way she can have a son to carry on the family name of her dead husband and to inherit the family property here in his hometown . You are all witnesses today . ”

ID:	5939
INPUT:	Zeure etsaien esklabo egingo zaitut , ezagutzen ez duzun lurraldean ; piztu baita nire haserrea , sutan dago zure aurka ) .
PRED:	I will crush you with your enemies , but you will not be angry with my fierce anger .
GOLD:	I will tell your enemies to take youas captives to a foreign land.For my anger blazes like a firethat will burn forever . ”

ID:	5940
INPUT:	Behin batean , baziren zazpi anaia . Zaharrena ezkondu eta seme-alabarik gabe hil zen .
PRED:	One day there were seven brothers . The oldest brother married and died without children .
GOLD:	Well , suppose there were seven brothers . The oldest one married and then died without children .

ID:	5941
INPUT:	hegoek elkar ukitzen zuten . Ibiltzerakoan zuzen zihoazen aurrera , inoiz itzuli gabe .
PRED:	As soon as they approached the water , they went back to the place where he was going .
GOLD:	The wings of each living being touched the wings of the beings beside it . Each one moved straight forward in any direction without turning around .

ID:	5942
INPUT:	Zifeko batzuek Gibeara igo eta esan zioten Sauli : — Ez al dakizu David gure artean gordetzen dela , Horexeko haitzarteetan , basamortuaren hegoalderantz dagoen Hakila mendixkan ?
PRED:	Some of the prophets went to Saul and told him , “ Do n't you realize that Saul is n't hiding in the hill country of the hill country of the hill country ? ”
GOLD:	But now the men of Ziph went to Saul in Gibeah and betrayed David to him . “ We know where David is hiding , ” they said . “ He is in the strongholds of Horesh on the hill of Hakilah , which is in the southern part of Jeshimon .

ID:	5943
INPUT:	« Eta urrutiko lurraldetik , zure izen handiaren eta zure egintza ahaltsuen berri aditurik , zure herri Israelgoa ez den arrotzen bat
PRED:	“ A man from far away from the land of the Amorites , who had not yet yet yet heard the power of the Almighty .
GOLD:	“ In the future , foreigners who do not belong to your people Israel will hear of you . They will come from distant lands because of your name ,

ID:	5944
INPUT:	Eta Kristo honela zerbitzatzen duena Jainkoari atsegin zaio eta gizon-emakumeek onartua da .
PRED:	And everyone who believes in Christ is God 's work . And everyone who believes in God 's sight is true .
GOLD:	If you serve Christ with this attitude , you will please God , and others will approve of you , too .

ID:	5945
INPUT:	« Geure lehen-semeak eta abereen lehen-umeak gure Jainkoaren etxean zerbitzua betetzen duten apaizei aurkeztuko dizkiegu , legeak agintzen duenez .
PRED:	“ We are the firstborn sons of our firstborn sons and animals , who work at the Temple of our God , and we are giving thanks to the Lord our God .
GOLD:	We will store the produce in the storerooms of the Temple of our God . We will bring the best of our flour and other grain offerings , the best of our fruit , and the best of our new wine and olive oil . And we promise to bring to the Levites a tenth of everything our land produces , for it is the Levites who collect the tithes in all our rural towns .

ID:	5946
INPUT:	Zenbait filosofo epikureo eta estoikok ere jardun ohi zuen harekin eztabaidan . Batzuek zioten : « Zer ote dio berritsu honek ? » Beste batzuek , berriz : « Jainko arrotzen predikari dirudi » . Izan ere , Jesusen eta piztueraren berri ematen zien Paulok .
PRED:	The leaders of the household and the other items that Paul would say to them , “ What are these people who want to hear the Good News ? ” And they said , “ The poor and the dead will be raised from the dead . ”
GOLD:	He also had a debate with some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers . When he told them about Jesus and his resurrection , they said , “ What 's this babbler trying to say with these strange ideas he 's picked up ? ” Others said , “ He seems to be preaching about some foreign gods . ”

ID:	5947
INPUT:	Hauxe da Jainkoaren agindua : sinets dezagula beraren Seme Jesu Kristogan eta maita dezagula elkar , berak agindu bezala .
PRED:	This is the same God 's command : Christ lives in us , just as he loved us , just as he loved us .
GOLD:	And this is his commandment : We must believe in the name of his Son , Jesus Christ , and love one another , just as he commanded us .

ID:	5948
INPUT:	Esnez hazi zintuztedan , ez janari sendoz , hau hartzeko ez baitzineten oraindik gauza . Orain ere ez zarete gauza ,
PRED:	Then I begged you not to drink wine or drink wine or drink anything that is good . So now you do n't know how much more .
GOLD:	I had to feed you with milk , not with solid food , because you were n't ready for anything stronger . And you still are n't ready ,

ID:	5949
INPUT:	Jesusek Jainko Aitarengandik hartu zituen ohorea eta aintza , honela esan baitzion Jainkoaren ospe bikainetik etorritako mintzoak : « Hauxe dut neure Seme maitea , hauxe dut nik atsegin » .
PRED:	Jesus took them from the Father , and he took them from the glory of God . He said , “ My child is the one who loves me , my Son , and I have loved them . ”
GOLD:	when he received honor and glory from God the Father . The voice from the majestic glory of God said to him , “ This is my dearly loved Son , who brings me great joy . ”

ID:	5950
INPUT:	Faraoia hurbil zen . Israeldarrak , egiptoarrak atzean zituztela ohartzean , izutu eta oihuka hasi zitzaizkion Jaunari .
PRED:	When Pharaoh heard that the people of Israel were near Egypt , they cried out to the Lord for help , and they cried out to the Lord for help .
GOLD:	As Pharaoh approached , the people of Israel looked up and panicked when they saw the Egyptians overtaking them . They cried out to the Lord ,

ID:	5951
INPUT:	gaizki-esale , Jainkoaren etsai , iraintzaile , harro handiputz , gaizkirako trebe eta gurasoekin bihurri dira ;
PRED:	The wicked are proud of God 's enemies , and they are proud and arrogant , and they are proud and arrogant .
GOLD:	They are backstabbers , haters of God , insolent , proud , and boastful . They invent new ways of sinning , and they disobey their parents .

ID:	5952
INPUT:	Etsaiek Danieli tranpa jarri
PRED:	The Fall of Babylon
GOLD:	Daniel in the Lions ' Den

ID:	5953
INPUT:	Ontzako urreen parabola
PRED:	Parable of the Great Feast
GOLD:	Parable of the Ten Servants

ID:	5954
INPUT:	Kontu izan zuk ere horrekin , gogor jarri baitzen gure irakatsien kontra .
PRED:	For you are so angry with us , for you have rebelled against us .
GOLD:	Be careful of him , for he fought against everything we said .

ID:	5955
INPUT:	Lagundu fededunei beren beharretan ; eman gogoz ostatu arrotzari .
PRED:	He has given the people to the poor , but he took them to the poor .
GOLD:	When God 's people are in need , be ready to help them . Always be eager to practice hospitality .

ID:	5956
INPUT:	Gero , berrogeita hamar lokarri ipini zituzten elkarrekin jositako sail bakoitzaren ertzean .
PRED:	Then they brought ten curtains together to the other ends of the community , along with each other , and each other with each other .
GOLD:	He made fifty loops for the edge of each large curtain .

ID:	5957
INPUT:	Han ehortzi zituzten Abraham eta honen emazte Sara ; han Isaak eta honen emazte Rebeka ere . Eta hantxe ehortzi nuen Lea .
PRED:	There were buried with Abraham and his wife , Sarah , and Rebekah . She was buried with her wife , and Rebekah .
GOLD:	There Abraham and his wife Sarah are buried . There Isaac and his wife , Rebekah , are buried . And there I buried Leah .

ID:	5958
INPUT:	Eta ahotsa sortu zen izakien buru gainean zegoen sabai gainetik .
PRED:	Then he flew into the sky , and he flew into the sky .
GOLD:	As they stood with wings lowered , a voice spoke from beyond the crystal surface above them .

ID:	5959
INPUT:	Esan zidan gizonak : « Gizaseme , begira erne , entzun adi eta jarri arreta erakutsiko dizudan guztiari , erakuts diezazudan ekarri baitzaituzte hona . Gero , kontatu israeldarrei ikusiko duzun guztia » .
PRED:	Then the man said to me , “ Son of man , listen to me and listen to me . Then you will see all the words I have seen . Then you will see the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	He said to me , “ Son of man , watch and listen . Pay close attention to everything I show you . You have been brought here so I can show you many things . Then you will return to the people of Israel and tell them everything you have seen . ”

ID:	5960
INPUT:	Erregeak ongi baderitzo , eman bedi berorren izenean eta ezarri Pertsia eta Mediako legeen artean aldaezineko agindu hau : “ Ez dadila Baxti aurrerantzean Asuero erregeagana inoiz agertu eta hura baino hobea izanen denari eman diezaiola berorrek erregina izatea ” .
PRED:	When the king of Persia heard that the king of Persia had been put to death , he said , ‘ This is what the king of Persia says : You must not commit to the king of Persia . '
GOLD:	“ So if it please the king , we suggest that you issue a written decree , a law of the Persians and Medes that can not be revoked . It should order that Queen Vashti be forever banished from the presence of King Xerxes , and that the king should choose another queen more worthy than she .

ID:	5961
INPUT:	Zergatik ahaztu nahi gaituzu betiko ? Zergatik utzi nahi bertan behera bizi guztirako ?
PRED:	Why do you want me to forget me ? Why do you want me to die ? ”
GOLD:	Why do you continue to forget us ? Why have you abandoned us for so long ?

ID:	5962
INPUT:	Erortzear nagoela uste dudanean , zure maitasunak eusten dit , Jauna .
PRED:	The Lord says , “ I have mercy on you , but he delights in me . ”
GOLD:	I cried out , “ I am slipping ! ” but your unfailing love , O Lord , supported me .

ID:	5963
INPUT:	Kadex-Barneatik atera eta Zered erreka igaro arteko bidean hogeita hemezortzi urte eman genituen . Ordurako desagertua zen kanpalekutik , Jaunak zin egin zien bezala , gerra-gizonen belaunaldi hura guztia .
PRED:	So Moses left Kadesh and camped at Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin . Then he brought them out of the camp to the camp , just as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	“ Thirty-eight years passed from the time we first left Kadesh-barnea until we finally crossed the Zered Brook ! By then , all the men old enough to fight in battle had died in the wilderness , as the Lord had vowed would happen .

ID:	5964
INPUT:	Horregatik , beraien bidea labainkor egingo dut : ilunpera bultzatuak , bertan eroriko dira . Zoritxarra bidaliko diet gainerakontuak hartzeko egunean . Hala diot nik , Jaunak .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord says : “ I will go down to the darkness , and I will send disaster upon them . I will send disaster on them , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , the paths they takewill become slippery.They will be chased through the dark , and there they will fall.For I will bring disaster upon themat the time fixed for their punishment.I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	5965
INPUT:	Bidaliak , beraz , Antiokiara jaitsi ziren eta , biltzarra bildurik , gutuna eman zieten .
PRED:	So they went up to Antioch of Antioch , and they called together together to the assembly .
GOLD:	The messengers went at once to Antioch , where they called a general meeting of the believers and delivered the letter .

ID:	5966
INPUT:	alargun gelditu zen , eta bazituen laurogeita lau urte . Ez zen tenplutik ateratzen , eta gau eta egun Jainkoa zerbitzatzen zuen bertan , barau eta otoitz .
PRED:	On that day he remained in the Temple of God , and there was four years old enough for three days . He prayed , “ Get up and pray for the Temple of God . ”
GOLD:	Then she lived as a widow to the age of eighty-four . She never left the Temple but stayed there day and night , worshiping God with fasting and prayer .

ID:	5967
INPUT:	Nikodemo zeritzan gizon batek , fariseuen taldekoa eta juduen buruetakoa bera ,
PRED:	One of the Pharisees and the Pharisees , looked up to the synagogue , and the leader of the synagogue .
GOLD:	There was a man named Nicodemus , a Jewish religious leader who was a Pharisee .

ID:	5968
INPUT:	Orduan , nazio artean sakabanatu eta herrialde artean barreiatuko ditudanean , jakingo dute ni naizela Jauna .
PRED:	Then they will know that I am among the nations , and they will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And when I scatter them among the nations , they will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	5969
INPUT:	Liburu Santuetan , hain zuzen , hauxe esana du norbaitek : Zer da gizona , zu hartaz oroitzeko , zer gizakia , zu hartaz arduratzeko ?
PRED:	As the Scriptures say , “ This is what the Scriptures say , ‘ What do you want to do with me ? '
GOLD:	For in one place the Scriptures say , “ What are mere mortals that you should think about them , or a son of man that you should care for him ?

ID:	5970
INPUT:	Bakea ekarriko dien ituna egingo dut beraiekin , betiko balioko duena . Herrialdean ezarri eta ugaldu egingo ditut . Neure santutegia beraien artean jarriko dut betiko .
PRED:	I will give them peace with them , and I will make them a solemn oath that I will make them holy . I will make them an object of mockery and ridicule among the nations .
GOLD:	And I will make a covenant of peace with them , an everlasting covenant . I will give them their land and increase their numbers , and I will put my Temple among them forever .

ID:	5971
INPUT:	Hogeita hamaseiren bat israeldar hil zituzten Aikoek eta hiriko ateetatik harrobietaraino pertsegitu zituzten , maldan behera denak porrokatuz . Israeldarrak adoregabeturik gelditu ziren ; hauen kemena urtu eta ura bezala isuri zen .
PRED:	The people of Israel killed another miraculous signs and wonders in the land of Ai , just as the Israelites had done . They chased them away from the land of Israel , just as the Lord had promised them .
GOLD:	chased the Israelites from the town gate as far as the quarries , and they killed about thirty-six who were retreating down the slope . The Israelites were paralyzed with fear at this turn of events , and their courage melted away .

ID:	5972
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , begira Israelgo mendietarantz eta hitz egin nire izenean berorien aurka .
PRED:	“ Son of man , turn toward the mountains of Israel and prophesy against me .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , turn and face the mountains of Israel and prophesy against them .

ID:	5973
INPUT:	Ez izan horrelakoaz gupidarik ! Horrela ezabatuko duzue errugabearen hilketa Israeldik , eta zoriontsu izango zarete .
PRED:	You must not have sexual relations with such an animal , for you will die for yourselves , and you will die .
GOLD:	Do not feel sorry for that murderer ! Purge from Israel the guilt of murdering innocent people ; then all will go well with you .

ID:	5974
INPUT:	Lege bera izango duzue oharkabean huts egin duenarentzat , bertakoa nahiz zuen artean bizi den etorkina izan .
PRED:	You must be careful to obey all the commands you have given to the Lord your God , and you must live among you .
GOLD:	These same instructions apply both to native-born Israelites and to the foreigners living among you .

ID:	5975
INPUT:	Samsonek esan zien : — Hori egin al duzue ? Ba , nik ez dut etsiko zuei mendeku egin arte .
PRED:	Samson replied , “ Do n't you realize what I have done to you ? Do n't I do n't want to help you ? ”
GOLD:	“ Because you did this , ” Samson vowed , “ I wo n't rest until I take my revenge on you ! ”

ID:	5976
INPUT:	Egiptora ihesi
PRED:	Egypt 's Journey to Egypt
GOLD:	The Escape to Egypt

ID:	5977
INPUT:	Bazen entzuleen artean Lidia izeneko emakume bat , izatez Tiatirakoa , purpurazko oihalen saleroslea ; Israelen Jainkoa gurtzen zuen . Jaunak barrutik eragin zion , Pauloren hitzak gogoz onar zitzan .
PRED:	When she heard this , she sent a woman from the well of Tyre , she sent a beautiful robe to the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	One of them was Lydia from Thyatira , a merchant of expensive purple cloth , who worshiped God . As she listened to us , the Lord opened her heart , and she accepted what Paul was saying .

ID:	5978
INPUT:	« Lizuna ikertzera sartu baino lehen , etxea husteko aginduko du apaizak , etxean dagoen guztia kutsa ez dadin ; ondoren , etxea miatzera sartuko da .
PRED:	“ When you enter the house , the priest will enter the house of the priest 's house , and the priest will not enter the house of the house .
GOLD:	Before the priest goes in to inspect the house , he must have the house emptied so nothing inside will be pronounced ceremonially unclean .

ID:	5979
INPUT:	Ondoren , berrehun eta zazpi urtez bizi izan zen , eta seme-alabak izan zituen .
PRED:	After the birth of Arphaxad , Arphaxad lived another 200 years and had other sons and daughters .
GOLD:	After the birth of Serug , Reu lived another 207 years and had other sons and daughters .

ID:	5980
INPUT:	SA<unk> KOEI ES<unk> <unk> RIKO HARAGIA ( 8 , 1 — 11 , 1 )
PRED:	The Call to Repentance
GOLD:	Food Sacrificed to Idols

ID:	5981
INPUT:	Gu , berriz , Jainkoak , Espirituaren egitez eta sinesmenari esker , salbamena emango digun itxaropenez bizi gara .
PRED:	But if we are the Holy Spirit , we will receive the Holy Spirit by God , then we will give him hope for salvation .
GOLD:	But we who live by the Spirit eagerly wait to receive by faith the righteousness God has promised to us .

ID:	5982
INPUT:	Babiloniako errege Nabukodonosorrek Babiloniara gatibu eramandako judu asko Jerusalemera eta Judako beste herrietara , nor bere herrira , itzuli zen .
PRED:	Then King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon led King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon to Babylon , and he returned to Babylon to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Here is the list of the Jewish exiles of the provinces who returned from their captivity . King Nebuchadnezzar had deported them to Babylon , but now they returned to Jerusalem and the other towns in Judah where they originally lived .

ID:	5983
INPUT:	Juduak mirarizko seinale eske dabiltza , eta jentilak jakinduria bila ;
PRED:	The leaders of Judah are like a miraculous sign , and the people of Judah are destroyed .
GOLD:	It is foolish to the Jews , who ask for signs from heaven . And it is foolish to the Greeks , who seek human wisdom .

ID:	5984
INPUT:	Ulertzeko gauza denak uler beza » .
PRED:	Anyone with ears to hear must listen and understand . ”
GOLD:	Anyone with ears to hear should listen and understand . ”

ID:	5985
INPUT:	Jauna , zuri dei egitean , ez dakidala neure ustea huts gerta ! Huts egin biezaie , ordea , beren usteak gaiztoei , gal bitez Herio Leizeko isilpean !
PRED:	O Lord , do n't call on me , but do n't let me be ashamed of my sins , but do n't let them be ashamed of their evil deeds .
GOLD:	Silence their lying lips — those proud and arrogant lips that accuse the godly .

ID:	5986
INPUT:	Netziah eta Hatifarenak .
PRED:	Neziah , and Hatipha .
GOLD:	Neziah , and Hatipha .

ID:	5987
INPUT:	« Zuen lehen-semeak oro nireak dira , baita lehen abere-kume arrak ere , zekor nahiz arkume .
PRED:	“ You are the firstborn sons of your firstborn sons , the firstborn lambs , sheep , goats , sheep , goats , goats , and goats .
GOLD:	“ The firstborn of every animal belongs to me , including the firstborn males from your herds of cattle and your flocks of sheep and goats .

ID:	5988
INPUT:	( Mk 15 , 1 ; Lk 23 , 1-2 ; Jn 18 , 28 )
PRED:	Jesus Predicts His Death
GOLD:	Jesus ' Trial before Pilate

ID:	5989
INPUT:	inurriak , herri ahula izan arren , udan beren ogia ziurtatzen dutenak ;
PRED:	For the people of the thirsty people were wise , but they were thirsty .
GOLD:	Ants — they are n't strong , but they store up food all summer .

ID:	5990
INPUT:	Zuzentasunik geratzen ez
PRED:	The teachers of religious law
GOLD:	Misery Turned to Hope

ID:	5991
INPUT:	« Ez duzue bahituran hartuko , ez errota , ez errotarria , bahituran bizia bera hartzea izango bailitzateke hori .
PRED:	“ You must not have an animal that has been set apart for a town , and it must be set apart for the Lord .
GOLD:	“ It is wrong to take a set of millstones , or even just the upper millstone , as security for a loan , for the owner uses it to make a living .

ID:	5992
INPUT:	Simon Zelote eta Judas Iskariote , Jesus saldu zuena .
PRED:	Simon ( Judas Iscariot ) , one of the twelve disciples , one who later betray Jesus .
GOLD:	Simon ( the zealot ) , Judas Iscariot ( who later betrayed him ) .

ID:	5993
INPUT:	Hilaraz itzazue , beraz , zeuen baitan mundu honen araberako jarrerak : lizunkeria , zikinkeria , irrits eta grina txarrak eta idolatria den diru-gosea .
PRED:	So do n't be afraid of this world , for this is what you want to live in the wickedness of the world . So you will rest on the heads of the living desires and the rest of you .
GOLD:	So put to death the sinful , earthly things lurking within you . Have nothing to do with sexual immorality , impurity , lust , and evil desires . Do n't be greedy , for a greedy person is an idolater , worshiping the things of this world .

ID:	5994
INPUT:	Gainera , aker bat eskainiko zaio Jaunari barkamen-oparitzat , eguneroko erre-opari eta isur-opariez gain .
PRED:	You must offer one male goat as a sin offering to the Lord , a pleasing aroma to the Lord . You must not offer a liquid offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ On the first day of each month , you must also offer one male goat for a sin offering to the Lord . This is in addition to the regular burnt offering and its accompanying liquid offering .

ID:	5995
INPUT:	Hogeita hiru urte predikatzen
PRED:	Jesus Heals in Response to Faith
GOLD:	The Cup of the

ID:	5996
INPUT:	Diru-bilketa Jerusalemgo kristauen alde
PRED:	Paul and Silas in Jerusalem
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Instructions

ID:	5997
INPUT:	Arnon erreka ondoan dagoen Aroer hiritik eta lautadaren erdian dagoen hiritik , Madaba lautada osoa Diboneraino
PRED:	The territory extended from Aroer to the edge of the Arnon Gorge ( also known as the homeland allocated to the clans of the Arnon River . )
GOLD:	Their territory extended from Aroer on the edge of the Arnon Gorge ( including the town in the middle of the gorge ) to the plain beyond Medeba , as far as Dibon .

ID:	5998
INPUT:	Alargun gelditu eta benetan bakarrik dagoenak Jainkoarengan jarria du itxaropena , eta etengabe ari zaio eskean , gau eta egun otoitzean .
PRED:	In that day God will keep on loving you , and he will keep you safe on praying and night .
GOLD:	Now a true widow , a woman who is truly alone in this world , has placed her hope in God . She prays night and day , asking God for his help .

ID:	5999
INPUT:	Hamateko sarreratik Araba itsasorainoko lurraldea berreskuratu zuen Israelentzat , Gat-Heferreko Amitairen seme Jonas bere zerbitzari profetaren bidez Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak , esana zuen bezala .
PRED:	They went to the border of the Red Sea , east of the sea , east of the Mediterranean Sea , east of the Mediterranean Sea , to serve the Lord , the God of Israel .
GOLD:	Jeroboam II recovered the territories of Israel between Lebo-hamath and the Dead Sea , just as the Lord , the God of Israel , had promised through Jonah son of Amittai , the prophet from Gath-hepher .

ID:	6000
INPUT:	Bizirik geldituriko israeldarrak , herri askotan sakabanatuak , lehoia basapiztien artean bezala , lehoikumea ardien artean bezalaizango dira : edonon sartzen direlarik , harrapatu eta txikitu egiten dute , eta ez da inorhaien eskutik libratuko .
PRED:	The people of Israel will be scattered by a lion , like sheep , goats , goats , sheep , goats , sheep , goats , goats , and goats , and goats , and goats . They will be able to rescue them from their prey , and no one will rescue them .
GOLD:	Then the remnant left in Israelwill take their place among the nations.They will be like dew sent by the Lordor like rain falling on the grass , which no one can hold backand no one can restrain .

ID:	6001
INPUT:	« Simeon eta Lebi anaiakindarkeria erabiltzeko bat datoz .
PRED:	“ The first of the elders of Aram and the elders of Israel approached him .
GOLD:	“ Simeon and Levi are two of a kind ; their weapons are instruments of violence .

ID:	6002
INPUT:	Nola elurraren freskotasuna uzta-garaian , hala mezulari fidagarria igorlearentzat : ugazaba indarberritu egiten du .
PRED:	Jesus Heals on the shore of the Good News , and the Son of Man is like a bowl on the ground .
GOLD:	Trustworthy messengers refresh like snow in summer.They revive the spirit of their employer .

ID:	6003
INPUT:	batzarrak harrikatu eta ezpataz hilko ditu ; seme-alabak hilko dizkie eta etxeak erreko .
PRED:	He will slaughter them with a sword and slaughter them with a sword , and they will die .
GOLD:	For their enemies will stone them and kill them with swords . They will butcher their sons and daughters and burn their homes .

ID:	6004
INPUT:	Aberatsek ur bilabidaltzen dituzte morroiak : badoaz putzuetara , baina urik ez , eta ontziak hutsik itzuli behar , lotsaz gorri eta burumakur .
PRED:	Their young men are like young women , and their young men will die , but their bodies will be silent . They will be silent , and their bodies will be silent .
GOLD:	The nobles send servants to get water , but all the wells are dry.The servants return with empty pitchers , confused and desperate , covering their heads in grief .

ID:	6005
INPUT:	Etsaien aurrean ihes eragin diguzu , eta gorroto digutenek larrutu egiten gaituzte .
PRED:	You have fled to battle , and our enemies have fought against us .
GOLD:	You have butchered us like sheepand scattered us among the nations .

ID:	6006
INPUT:	Daviden mutilak eta Joab irtenaldi bat egitetik zetozen , harrapakin ugari zekartela . Abner ez zegoen Hebronen Davidekin , ordurako joana baitzen bakean .
PRED:	So David and his men went out to Hebron and attacked Abner with him . But Abner did n't go with him with him , but he would n't go with him .
GOLD:	But just after David had sent Abner away in safety , Joab and some of David 's troops returned from a raid , bringing much plunder with them .

ID:	6007
INPUT:	Anitz mirari eta egintza harrigarri gertatzen ziren herrian apostoluen eskuz . Fededun guztiak Salomonen aterpean bildu ohi ziren gogo batez ;
PRED:	This miraculous signs and wonders in every province of Asia came to Solomon . Many of the apostles were eager to go on to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	The apostles were performing many miraculous signs and wonders among the people . And all the believers were meeting regularly at the Temple in the area known as Solomon 's Colonnade .

ID:	6008
INPUT:	Neuk ere ez nuen ezagutzen ; baina ni urez bataiatzera etorri banaiz , bera Israel herriari agerrarazteko izan da » .
PRED:	I am not the one who sent me to baptize with water , but I will come to the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	I did not recognize him as the Messiah , but I have been baptizing with water so that he might be revealed to Israel . ”

ID:	6009
INPUT:	Zure legeek egiten naute ulertzeko gai ; horregatik , gorroto dut jokabide maltzur oro .
PRED:	For I am determined to understand what I am doing , and I am going to do it .
GOLD:	Your commandments give me understanding ; no wonder I hate every false way of life .

ID:	6010
INPUT:	« Gizaseme , hitz egin nire izenean eta adierazi nire , Jainko Jaun honen , mezua : « Egin aienezoritxarreko egunarengatik !
PRED:	“ Son of man , prophesy against me and said , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I have sinned against you !
GOLD:	“ Son of man , prophesy and give this message from the Sovereign Lord : “ Weep and wailfor that day ,

ID:	6011
INPUT:	Jeroboamek , gainera , Judan egin ohi zenaren antzeko jai bat egin zuen zortzigarren hilabeteko hamabosgarren egunean . Betelen ere bera igo zen aldarera , berak egindako zekor-irudiei opariak eskaintzera , eta bertan izendatu zituen berak eginiko kultu-lekuetako apaizak .
PRED:	Jeroboam made a covenant with Israel at the appointed time to celebrate the Festival of Shelters , for the fifteenth day of Jeroboam 's reign . He also made a covenant with the priests and Levites to offer sacrifices to the Lord 's Temple .
GOLD:	And Jeroboam instituted a religious festival in Bethel , held on the fifteenth day of the eighth month , in imitation of the annual Festival of Shelters in Judah . There at Bethel he himself offered sacrifices to the calves he had made , and he appointed priests for the pagan shrines he had made .

ID:	6012
INPUT:	Orduan , zaharretariko batek esan zidan : « Ez egin negarrik ; hara , Judaren leinuko lehoiak , Daviden kimuak eskuratu du garaipena , eta beronek irekiko ditu liburua eta zazpi zigiluak » .
PRED:	Then one of the men said to me , “ Do n't weep or mourn for me , for the tribe of David has been ruled by the tribe of David . ”
GOLD:	But one of the twenty-four elders said to me , “ Stop weeping ! Look , the Lion of the tribe of Judah , the heir to David 's throne , has won the victory . He is worthy to open the scroll and its seven seals . ”

ID:	6013
INPUT:	ezagut dezan munduak zure nagusitza , jentil-herriek zure garaipena .
PRED:	For you know the Lord our God , who gives us victory over the nations .
GOLD:	May the nations praise you , O God.Yes , may all the nations praise you .

ID:	6014
INPUT:	Zoritxarrekoa aitari esaten diona : « Zergatik sortu ninduzun ? » , eta amari : « Zergatikekarri ninduzun mundura ? »
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you ? ” they asked . “ Why did you say , “ Why are you going to bring me into the world ? ”
GOLD:	How terrible it would be if a newborn baby said to its father , ‘ Why was I born ? 'or if it said to its mother , ‘ Why did you make me this way ? ' ”

ID:	6015
INPUT:	eta pozten naiz han ez izanaz , zeuen onerako izango baita , horrela sinets dezazuen . Goazen , bada , haren etxera .
PRED:	I am glad that you will not be glad , for you will be filled with joy , and you will be honored .
GOLD:	And for your sakes , I 'm glad I was n't there , for now you will really believe . Come , let 's go see him . ”

ID:	6016
INPUT:	Hogeita hamabost kilo urre garbi erabili zituen argimutila eta hornigaiak egiteko .
PRED:	He also found 75 pounds of pure gold and 75 pounds of pure gold .
GOLD:	The entire lampstand , along with its accessories , was made from 75 pounds of pure gold .

ID:	6017
INPUT:	Bai , zuek , israeldarrok , nire mendi santuanzigor-kopatik edan zenuten bezala , hala beharko dute edannazio guztiek etengabe , azken hondarreraino edan ere . Eta aztarnarik utzi gabegalduko dira .
PRED:	“ But you , O people of Israel , this is what the Lord says : I will punish you for all the people of Israel , and you will be forgotten . I will drive them out of the land that I have abandoned them .
GOLD:	Just as you swallowed up my peopleon my holy mountain , so you and the surrounding nationswill swallow the punishment I pour out on you.Yes , all you nations will drink and staggerand disappear from history .

ID:	6018
INPUT:	Non duk , Herio , heure garaipena ? Non heure eztena ?
PRED:	So why are you doing everything ? So why do you look for him ?
GOLD:	O death , where is your victory ? O death , where is your sting ? ”

ID:	6019
INPUT:	Ez naiz inoiz ere etxe batean bizi izan , israeldarrak Egiptotik atera nituenetik egundaino ; bizilekutzat oihal-etxola nuela ibilia naiz .
PRED:	I have never lived in the home of the people of Israel to live in Egypt , just as I live in the Tabernacle . I have seen that I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	I have never lived in a house , from the day I brought the Israelites out of Egypt until this very day . I have always moved from one place to another with a tent and a Tabernacle as my dwelling .

ID:	6020
INPUT:	Orduan , Judak esan zion Onani : « Ezkon zaitez zeure anaiaren emaztearekin , eta bete koinatuari dagokion eginbidea , anaiari ondorengoa emateko » .
PRED:	Then Judah said to Judah , “ My brother , have married your brother 's brother , and she will marry one of his brother 's brother . ”
GOLD:	Then Judah said to Er 's brother Onan , “ Go and marry Tamar , as our law requires of the brother of a man who has died . You must produce an heir for your brother . ”

ID:	6021
INPUT:	Eta zuek Jaunarengandik aldentzen zarete gaur ! Zuek gaur beraren kontra errebelatzeagatik , Jauna bihar haserretu egingo da Israel herri osoarekin .
PRED:	And now , you have turned away from the Lord ! Today you have rebelled against the Lord , the God of Israel , will be angry with Israel .
GOLD:	And yet today you are turning away from following the Lord . If you rebel against the Lord today , he will be angry with all of us tomorrow .

ID:	6022
INPUT:	Diakonoak
PRED:	The Futility of Wealth
GOLD:	The Truths of Our Faith

ID:	6023
INPUT:	Ez nuen hartu janari goxorik , ez haragirik , ez ardorik , eta ez nuen erabili usain gozoko lurrinik ere , hiru asteak amaitu arte .
PRED:	I did n't see the meaning of my eyes , and I did n't see the meaning of my eyes . He did n't even see the meaning of his eyes , and he did n't see the meaning of his eyes .
GOLD:	All that time I had eaten no rich food . No meat or wine crossed my lips , and I used no fragrant lotions until those three weeks had passed .

ID:	6024
INPUT:	( Mt 4 , 1-11 ; Mk 1 , 12-13 )
PRED:	Jesus Curses the Fig Tree
GOLD:	Jesus Rejected at Nazareth

ID:	6025
INPUT:	Hona , bada , Jaunak Ageo profetaren bidez eman zuen mezua :
PRED:	This is what the Lord says through the prophet Haggai .
GOLD:	Then the Lord sent this message through the prophet Haggai :

ID:	6026
INPUT:	Hezur guztiak zaintzen dizkio , bat bakarra ere ez diote hautsiko .
PRED:	They will take care of him , but they will never be put to death .
GOLD:	Calamity will surely destroy the wicked , and those who hate the righteous will be punished .

ID:	6027
INPUT:	Saia zaitez Jainkoaren aurrean onesgarri agertzen , zertan lotsaturik ez duen langilea bezala , egiaren mezua zuzen irakasten duena bezala .
PRED:	Work at God 's grace , just as you do . Remember that you do n't know God 's word , just as you do .
GOLD:	Work hard so you can present yourself to God and receive his approval . Be a good worker , one who does not need to be ashamed and who correctly explains the word of truth .

ID:	6028
INPUT:	Bularreko haurrasuge-zuloetan jolastuko da , sugegorri-habian sartuko du eskua .
PRED:	A little child will fly away into a poisonous snake ; a poisonous snake will fly away from the poisonous snake .
GOLD:	The baby will play safely near the hole of a cobra.Yes , a little child will put its hand in a nest of deadly snakes without harm .

ID:	6029
INPUT:	Neure in<unk> dira jaitsi naiz , ibarretako landaretza ikustera , mahastiak kimuberritzen , granadondoak loratzen ikustera .
PRED:	I have come to see the grapevines and fig trees of the trees of the pomegranates along the coast of the Temple .
GOLD:	I went down to the grove of walnut treesand out to the valley to see the new spring growth , to see whether the grapevines had buddedor the pomegranates were in bloom .

ID:	6030
INPUT:	garbitzeko aginduko du , eta beste zazpi egunez aparte edukiko .
PRED:	On the seventh day the priest will return to the priest , and he will quarantine the seven days .
GOLD:	the priest will order the object to be washed and then quarantined for seven more days .

ID:	6031
INPUT:	Kristorengan jarria dugun itxaropenak bizitza honetarako bakarrik balio badu , gizaki guztietan errukarrienak gara .
PRED:	For we put our hope in Christ , and we will put our hope in God 's mercy .
GOLD:	And if our hope in Christ is only for this life , we are more to be pitied than anyone in the world .

ID:	6032
INPUT:	Zeruek Jainkoaren aintza kontatzen dute , ortziak haren eskuen lana adierazten .
PRED:	For the Son of Heaven 's Armies is the one who speaks against him .
GOLD:	Day after day they continue to speak ; night after night they make him known .

ID:	6033
INPUT:	« Hilabete beraren hamabostean Legamia gabeko Ogien Jaia ospatuko duzue Jaunaren ohorez . Zazpi egunez legamia gabeko ogia jango duzue .
PRED:	“ On the fifteenth day of the month , you must celebrate the Festival of Unleavened Bread for seven days . On the first day of the festival , you must celebrate the Festival of Unleavened Bread .
GOLD:	On the next day , the fifteenth day of the month , you must begin celebrating the Festival of Unleavened Bread . This festival to the Lord continues for seven days , and during that time the bread you eat must be made without yeast .

ID:	6034
INPUT:	Lurra danbadaka zapaltzen zutengudari-botaketa odolez zikinduriko jantziaksuak erreko ditu eta irentsiko .
PRED:	You will bow down to the ground with blood of your blood , and you will eat the blood of the earth .
GOLD:	For you will break the yoke of their slaveryand lift the heavy burden from their shoulders.You will break the oppressor 's rod , just as you did when you destroyed the army of Midian .

ID:	6035
INPUT:	ez lurrarengatik , haren oin-aulkia baita ; ezta Jerusalemengatik ere , Errege handiaren hiria baita .
PRED:	Do n't let them sit down from the ground , for the throne of Jerusalem is safe from the city of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	And do not say , ‘ By the earth ! ' because the earth is his footstool . And do not say , ‘ By Jerusalem ! ' for Jerusalem is the city of the great King .

ID:	6036
INPUT:	Orduan , parabola hau esan zion Jesusek herriari : « Gizon batek mahastia landatu zuen eta , nekazari batzuei errentan utzirik , urrutira joan zen aldi baterako .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to the crowd , “ A man planted a vineyard in a vineyard , and he sent a vineyard to eat .
GOLD:	Now Jesus turned to the people again and told them this story : “ A man planted a vineyard , leased it to tenant farmers , and moved to another country to live for several years .

ID:	6037
INPUT:	Hil , denok hil behar dugu ; lurrera isuri eta berriro bildu ezin den ura bezala gara . Jainkoak , aldiz , ez du bizia kentzen ; aitzitik , erabaki du zuk atzerriratua berak ez atzerriratzea .
PRED:	But now , we will die in the land of the dead , but we will not take away the land of the living God . But if you do not let the pagan nations live in this land , you will not let them live .
GOLD:	All of us must die eventually . Our lives are like water spilled out on the ground , which can not be gathered up again . But God does not just sweep life away ; instead , he devises ways to bring us back when we have been separated from him .

ID:	6038
INPUT:	salbatuko gintuelagure etsaien menpetik , gorroto gaituzten guztien eskutik ;
PRED:	He saved us from our enemies ; he rescued us from all their enemies .
GOLD:	Now we will be saved from our enemiesand from all who hate us .

ID:	6039
INPUT:	ilargi betearen aurpegia iluntzen du , haren gain bere hodeia hedatuz ;
PRED:	He makes the light of the darkness ; his darkness shines on the clouds .
GOLD:	He covers the face of the moon , shrouding it with his clouds .

ID:	6040
INPUT:	Israeldarrok , ez gero profanatu nire izen santua , baizik eta aitortu santua naizela . Neu naiz Jauna , neuretzat sagaratzen zaituztedana ,
PRED:	O Israel , you have not defiled my holy name , but I am the Lord . I am the Holy One of Israel . I am the Lord who made you holy .
GOLD:	Do not bring shame on my holy name , for I will display my holiness among the people of Israel . I am the Lord who makes you holy .

ID:	6041
INPUT:	Orduan jabetu ziren ez ziela esan ogi-legamiarekin kontuz ibiltzeko , fariseu eta saduzearren irakaspenekin baizik .
PRED:	Then the Pharisees did n't realize that they were Sadducees with the Pharisees and Sadducees — religious law and the Pharisees and Sadducees .
GOLD:	Then at last they understood that he was n't speaking about the yeast in bread , but about the deceptive teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees .

ID:	6042
INPUT:	« Ez da israeldarren artean prostituzio sakratura emaniko inor izango , ez gizonezkorik , ez emakumezkorik .
PRED:	“ You must not commit any of the people of Israel . You must not marry any other women or women or women .
GOLD:	When you are bringing an offering to fulfill a vow , you must not bring to the house of the Lord your God any offering from the earnings of a prostitute , whether a man or a woman , for both are detestable to the Lord your God .

ID:	6043
INPUT:	Festaburuetan Jaunari sagaratzeko Jerusalemera eramaten diren ardiak bezain ugari izango dira hiri hondatuak beteko dituzten gizataldeak ; orduan jakingo dute denek ni naizela Jauna » .
PRED:	On the third day of the Lord 's Temple will be like a group of mourning in Jerusalem , so they will know that I am the Lord . Then you will know that I am the Lord . ”
GOLD:	They will be as numerous as the sacred flocks that fill Jerusalem 's streets at the time of her festivals . The ruined cities will be crowded with people once more , and everyone will know that I am the Lord . ”

ID:	6044
INPUT:	Itzul belarria niregana , Jauna , eta entzun . Zabaldu begiak , Jauna , eta ikusi . Entzun nolako irainak zuzendu dizkizun Senakeribek zuri , Jainko bizi horri .
PRED:	Come and listen to me , O Lord , and listen to me . Open your eyes , O Lord , and see how you have seen these things .
GOLD:	Bend down , O Lord , and listen ! Open your eyes , O Lord , and see ! Listen to Sennacherib 's words of defiance against the living God .

ID:	6045
INPUT:	Eman dezagun , ordea , emazteak , artean senarraren etxean bizi dela , botoz nahiz edozein zin-hitzez bere burua lotzen duela .
PRED:	But when she finds that her husband is dead , she may live in her husband 's home , whether she sits on her head or in her bed .
GOLD:	If her husband hears of it and does not object to it , her vow or pledge will stand .

ID:	6046
INPUT:	Jesusen senideek sinetsi ez
PRED:	Jesus and the Prince of Demons
GOLD:	Jesus and His Brothers

ID:	6047
INPUT:	Egun batez esan zion Noemik Ruti : — Ez ote dizut egokitu behar bizitzan zorioneko egingo zaituen etxerik ?
PRED:	“ Let 's go to Naomi , ” Naomi said . “ Let me go home to the home of the man who lives in your home . ”
GOLD:	One day Naomi said to Ruth , “ My daughter , it 's time that I found a permanent home for you , so that you will be provided for .

ID:	6048
INPUT:	Ez ! Ardo berria zahagi berrietan sartu behar da .
PRED:	You must never enter the new wine , and it must be new .
GOLD:	New wine must be stored in new wineskins .

ID:	6049
INPUT:	hau esango diozu : “ Jakob zure zerbitzariarena ; Esauri bidaltzen dion oparia da ; eta bera dator atzetik ” » .
PRED:	“ Then you will say , ‘ This is what Jacob says : I am sending my servant , and I will send you out of Egypt . ' ”
GOLD:	Jacob gave the same instructions to the second and third herdsmen and to all who followed behind the herds : “ You must say the same thing to Esau when you meet him .

ID:	6050
INPUT:	Horra hor , bada , Eleazar apaizak , Nunen seme Josuek eta israeldar leinuetako senitarteburuek Xilon , Jaunaren aurrean , elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran zotz eginez , izendatu zituzten ondareak . Horrela burutu zuten lurraldearen banaketa .
PRED:	So Joshua son of Eleazar the priest , Joshua son of Nun , and the leaders of the tribe of Levi went into the sacred tent . So they went into the sacred tent of the Lord at Shiloh .
GOLD:	These are the territories that Eleazar the priest , Joshua son of Nun , and the tribal leaders allocated as grants of land to the tribes of Israel by casting sacred lots in the presence of the Lord at the entrance of the Tabernacle at Shiloh . So the division of the land was completed .

ID:	6051
INPUT:	Ebaki beza Jaunak ezpain lausengari oro , handikeriaz mintzo diren mihiak .
PRED:	For the Lord is good to those who are wise , and he delights in the mouth of the Lord .
GOLD:	They say , “ We will lie to our hearts ' content.Our lips are our own — who can stop us ? ”

ID:	6052
INPUT:	Aita-amak harriturik zeuden Simeonek haurraz esaten zuenarengatik .
PRED:	His mother was amazed to be your mother 's son .
GOLD:	Jesus ' parents were amazed at what was being said about him .

ID:	6053
INPUT:	« Egin akazia-zurezko kutxa : metro bat eta hogeita bost zentimetro luze , hirurogeita hamabost zentimetro zabal eta beste hainbeste gora izango da .
PRED:	“ Then make a Ark of acacia wood , and make it 18 feet long and 27 inches wide . It must be 45 inches long and 27 inches wide .
GOLD:	“ Have the people make an Ark of acacia wood — a sacred chest 45 inches long , 27 inches wide , and 27 inches high .

ID:	6054
INPUT:	Zeukan guztia ere errekaz beste aldera igaroarazi zuen .
PRED:	You put the whole body on the side of the altar , and you gave it to the altar .
GOLD:	This left Jacob all alone in the camp , and a man came and wrestled with him until the dawn began to break .

ID:	6055
INPUT:	Jendea hiri handietara aldarazi zuen lurraldearen ertz batetik bestera .
PRED:	He brought the people out of the land , one from one end of the other .
GOLD:	As for the people , he made them all slaves , from one end of Egypt to the other .

ID:	6056
INPUT:	Efraimdarrek menderatu duteAmalek ; haien atzetik benjamindarrak datoz , beraien gudari artean . Makirren senitartetik datozzure gudalburuaketa Zabulonengandikaginte-makila dutenak .
PRED:	The warriors of Ephraim had taken from the hill country of Ephraim , the commander of the army of Ephraim , the commander of the army of Ephraim , and the commander of the army of Ephraim .
GOLD:	They came down from Ephraim — a land that once belonged to the Amalekites ; they followed you , Benjamin , with your troops.From Makir the commanders marched down ; from Zebulun came those who carry a commander 's staff .

ID:	6057
INPUT:	Ondoren , begiak jasorik , lau adar ikusi nituen .
PRED:	Then I saw four horns of the earth , and I saw four horns .
GOLD:	When I looked again , I saw a man with a measuring line in his hand .

ID:	6058
INPUT:	Geroago , Artaxerxesen garaian , <unk> lam , Mitridates , Tabeel eta beste funtzionarioek Pertsiako errege Artaxerxesi idatzi zioten ; gutuna arameera-idazkeraz eta <unk> keraz idatzia zegoen .
PRED:	These are the names of the clans of Asher , Asher , and the other leaders of the province west of the Euphrates River , who had been given by King Artaxerxes of Persia , who had been writing to the king of Persia .
GOLD:	Even later , during the reign of King Artaxerxes of Persia , the enemies of Judah , led by Bishlam , Mithredath , and Tabeel , sent a letter to Artaxerxes in the Aramaic language , and it was translated for the king .

ID:	6059
INPUT:	Badator garaia , bertan da eguna ! Eroslea ez dadila poz , saltzailea ez dadila atsekabe , guztiak harrapatuko baititu nire suminak .
PRED:	“ But now the time is coming , ” says the Lord . “ I will not rejoice , for my fury has no peace . ”
GOLD:	Yes , the time has come ; the day is here ! Buyers should not rejoice over bargains , nor sellers grieve over losses , for all of them will fallunder my terrible anger .

ID:	6060
INPUT:	Eskaintzaileak , eskua buruan ezarri ondoren , elkarketa-etxolaren sarreran hilko du ; gero , apaizek , Aaronen ondorengoek , haren odolaz aldarea zipriztinduko dute alde guztietatik .
PRED:	Then the priest will lay his hands on the altar at the entrance of the Tabernacle . Then the priests will splatter the blood of the blood against the altar .
GOLD:	Lay your hand on the animal 's head , and slaughter it at the entrance of the Tabernacle . Then Aaron 's sons , the priests , will splatter its blood against all sides of the altar .

ID:	6061
INPUT:	Kanta Jaunari , gauza harrigarriak egin baititu ; mundu osoan jakin bezateharen berri .
PRED:	Sing to the Lord , for he has done great things in the earth .
GOLD:	Sing to the Lord , for he has done wonderful things.Make known his praise around the world .

ID:	6062
INPUT:	Izan ere , zer axola zaizkio etxekoak , hil eta gero , bere hilabete-kopurua amaitu ondoren ?
PRED:	For how can I die ? For the dead will die and die in the dead ? ”
GOLD:	For they will not care what happens to their familyafter they are dead .

ID:	6063
INPUT:	Jesusek , berriz , erantzun zion : — Nor da nire ama eta zein nire anai-arrebak ?
PRED:	But Jesus replied , “ Who is my mother ? Who is my mother ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus asked , “ Who is my mother ? Who are my brothers ? ”

ID:	6064
INPUT:	« Zuk , Israel , Jakoben herri horrek , ez didazu dei egin , nitaz asperturik .
PRED:	“ O Israel , Israel , you are my people Israel , but you did not call me .
GOLD:	“ But , dear family of Jacob , you refuse to ask for my help.You have grown tired of me , O Israel !

ID:	6065
INPUT:	Zazpi mila handiki ere eraman zituen Babiloniako erregeak , baita mila errementari eta sarrailgile ere , denak gudari izateko gai . Babiloniara eraman zituen denak gatibu .
PRED:	He gave seven large baskets of land , and the leaders of the land of Babylonia , craftsmen , craftsmen , and all who were in charge of the land of Babylon . They were all taken away to Babylon .
GOLD:	He also exiled 7,000 of the best troops and 1,000 craftsmen and artisans , all of whom were strong and fit for war .

ID:	6066
INPUT:	erreinuaren oinordeko zirenak , berriz , kanpora , ilunpetara , botako ditu Jainkoak . Negarra eta hortz-karraska izango dira han » .
PRED:	They will go out into the Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies , and there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . ”
GOLD:	But many Israelites — those for whom the Kingdom was prepared — will be thrown into outer darkness , where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . ”

ID:	6067
INPUT:	Ez egin jaramonik ! Jarri Babiloniako erregearen menpe , eta biziko zarete . Zertan bihurtu herri hau hondakin-pila ?
PRED:	Do n't be silent ! Do n't you realize that the king of Babylon is near to Babylon ? Why are you going to destroy this city ?
GOLD:	Do not listen to them . Surrender to the king of Babylon , and you will live . Why should this whole city be destroyed ?

ID:	6068
INPUT:	Gertakari guztiotaz mintzo ziren elkarrekin .
PRED:	All the other churches were talking with each other .
GOLD:	As they walked along they were talking about everything that had happened .

ID:	6069
INPUT:	Jainkoaren hitzak eta gure otoitzak sakratu bihurtzen baitu .
PRED:	For we are praying for God 's holy people , for he destroys us .
GOLD:	For we know it is made acceptable by the word of God and prayer .

ID:	6070
INPUT:	Hiria eta bertan den guztia erabat suntsitu behar da Jaunaren ohorez . Rahab emagaldua eta beronen etxean direnak bakarrik geldituko dira bizirik , guk bidalitako mandatariak gorde zituelako .
PRED:	So the Lord will destroy every town and destroy it with the villages of the town , and he will destroy it with her curses . So we will live in the home of the Lord .
GOLD:	Jericho and everything in it must be completely destroyed as an offering to the Lord . Only Rahab the prostitute and the others in her house will be spared , for she protected our spies .

ID:	6071
INPUT:	Bigarren ikuskaria : adarrak eta errementariak
PRED:	Daniel 's Vision of a Vision
GOLD:	Future Prosperity of Jerusalem

ID:	6072
INPUT:	Dalila , egunero , nazkatzeraino galdezka ari zitzaionez , bizitzaz ere asperturik ,
PRED:	After this , Daniel , had been reduced to finest wheat , and olive oil , and olive oil ,
GOLD:	She tormented him with her nagging day after day until he was sick to death of it .

ID:	6073
INPUT:	Pilato barrura sartu zen berriro eta , Jesusi deituz , galdegin zion : — Zu al zara juduen erregea ?
PRED:	Pilate went into the crowd and asked Jesus , “ Are you the King of the Jews ? ”
GOLD:	Then Pilate went back into his headquarters and called for Jesus to be brought to him . “ Are you the king of the Jews ? ” he asked him .

ID:	6074
INPUT:	David Saulengana joaten zen eta Belenera etortzen , aitaren artaldea zaintzera .
PRED:	David went to Bethlehem , where David and his father came to Bethlehem .
GOLD:	but David went back and forth so he could help his father with the sheep in Bethlehem .

ID:	6075
INPUT:	Eliren semeek oker jokatu
PRED:	Elisha 's sons and Children
GOLD:	Eli 's Wicked Sons

ID:	6076
INPUT:	Haien asmoaksuge-arrautzak bezain zital : arrautzok jaten dituenahil egiten da , <unk> katzen dituenarisugegorria ateratzen . Haien emaitzakarmiarma-sareen antzeko : hauekin inor ezin jantzi , ez estali . Egintza guztiak gaiztoak dituzte , gogorkeria besterik ez dute egiten .
PRED:	Their tongues are as weak as fire , and they refuse to listen to me and destroy them . They are like snakes , but they refuse to obey their own desires , but they are not allowed to eat their evil desires . They are not allowed to eat their evil desires .
GOLD:	They hatch deadly snakesand weave spiders ' webs.Whoever eats their eggs will die ; whoever cracks them will hatch a viper .

ID:	6077
INPUT:	Hitzok entzutean , ikasleek , erabat nahasturik , honela zioten : — Nor salba daiteke , orduan ?
PRED:	When the disciples heard this , he asked them , “ Who can this be saved ? ”
GOLD:	The disciples were astounded . “ Then who in the world can be saved ? ” they asked .

ID:	6078
INPUT:	Halaxe gu ere : adingabekoak ginen bitartean , munduan agintzen duten indarren menpe geunden .
PRED:	So we are looking for the rest of the world , and we were under the command of the world .
GOLD:	And that 's the way it was with us before Christ came . We were like children ; we were slaves to the basic spiritual principles of this world .

ID:	6079
INPUT:	Oraindik fariseuak bildurik zeudela , Jesusek galdera hau egin zien :
PRED:	When the Pharisees heard that Jesus was happening , he asked them ,
GOLD:	Then , surrounded by the Pharisees , Jesus asked them a question :

ID:	6080
INPUT:	Eliasek erantzun : — Bere zerbitzari nauen Jaun ahalguztiduna bizi dela bezain egia da , ni gaur bertan agertuko naizela Akaben aurrera .
PRED:	Then Elijah replied , “ I am the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	But Elijah said , “ I swear by the Lord Almighty , in whose presence I stand , that I will present myself to Ahab this very day . ”

ID:	6081
INPUT:	Israeldarrak , Hor menditik abiaturik , Tzalmonara iritsi ziren ;
PRED:	Then Zebah and Zalmunna were camped at Mount Hor .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the Israelites left Mount Hor and camped at Zalmonah .

ID:	6082
INPUT:	Bai , nola urak itsasoa , hala beteko du lurraJaunaren aintzaren ezagupenak .
PRED:	How long the waters of the sea , and the strength of the sea will be filled with strength .
GOLD:	For as the waters fill the sea , the earth will be filled with an awarenessof the glory of the Lord .

ID:	6083
INPUT:	Guregana bedi Jaunaren , gure Jainkoaren , gozoa ! Burutu bitza ongi gure eginbeharrak , burutu ongi gure eginbehar guztiak !
PRED:	O Lord our God , you are our God , for he has made us ruler over everything we do .
GOLD:	And may the Lord our God show us his approvaland make our efforts successful.Yes , make our efforts successful !

ID:	6084
INPUT:	« Baina kontuz ! Ez gero engainatu zeuen buruak , ez saihestu Jaunarengandik , jainko arrotzak gurtuz eta haien aurrean ahuspeztuz ;
PRED:	“ But do n't turn away from the Lord 's ways . Do not turn away from the ways of the Lord , or worship other gods .
GOLD:	“ But be careful . Do n't let your heart be deceived so that you turn away from the Lord and serve and worship other gods .

ID:	6085
INPUT:	Jesusek entzun eta esan zien : — Ez dute osasundunek behar sendagilea , gaixoek baizik .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't need a doctor — sick people who are sick . ”
GOLD:	When Jesus heard this , he said , “ Healthy people do n't need a doctor — sick people do . ”

ID:	6086
INPUT:	Nolanahi ere , sekula ez da berrogei zigorrada baino gehiago emango , zigorraldia gogorregia gerta eta herritarra denen aurrean laidotua geldi ez dadin .
PRED:	For the Lord will not destroy the land for forty days , for he will punish the people of Israel , and he will not be put to death .
GOLD:	But never give more than forty lashes ; more than forty lashes would publicly humiliate your neighbor .

ID:	6087
INPUT:	Zatozkit zeure gupidaz , biziberri nadin , zure irakaspena baitut gozamen !
PRED:	Come , let me live in your presence , for I will praise you .
GOLD:	Surround me with your tender mercies so I may live , for your instructions are my delight .

ID:	6088
INPUT:	Lege-maisu eta fariseuak beren onetik aterata gelditu ziren , eta Jesusi zer egingo ari ziren beren artean .
PRED:	The teachers of religious law and the Pharisees were amazed at the Temple and began talking about Jesus .
GOLD:	At this , the enemies of Jesus were wild with rage and began to discuss what to do with him .

ID:	6089
INPUT:	Zuek bertan bizi zinetela izan ez zituen atsedenaldiak , bertan behera utzia egongo den aldian beteko ditu .
PRED:	When you live in your life , you will have no rest on the east side of your life .
GOLD:	As long as the land lies in ruins , it will enjoy the rest you never allowed it to take every seventh year while you lived in it .

ID:	6090
INPUT:	Eta loturik , beren jantzi eta guzti , <unk> ka , soingaineko eta burukoekin , labeko su bizira jaurti zituzten .
PRED:	So they took all their garments and threw off their garments and threw it into the boat . They threw it into the fire , and threw it into a blazing fire .
GOLD:	So they tied them up and threw them into the furnace , fully dressed in their pants , turbans , robes , and other garments .

ID:	6091
INPUT:	Mahastiaren maite-kanta
PRED:	's Vineyard
GOLD:	A Song about the

ID:	6092
INPUT:	Hau dio Jainko Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak : « Geldi eta lasai egoteada zuen salbabidea ; patxada eta konfiantza , zuen indarra » . Ez duzue , ordea , hala nahi izan ,
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord , the God of Israel , says : “ Do n't let your hope be saved , but you can not save them . ”
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord , the Holy One of Israel , says : “ Only in returning to meand resting in me will you be saved.In quietness and confidence is your strength.But you would have none of it .

ID:	6093
INPUT:	Elihuren hirugarren hitzaldia ( 35 , <unk> )
PRED:	The Ark of God 's Covenant
GOLD:	Elihu Reminds Job of God 's Justice

ID:	6094
INPUT:	« Hori guztia lege izango duzue belaunez belaun , biziko zareten edonon .
PRED:	“ This is a permanent law for you , and you must be observed from generation to generation .
GOLD:	These are legal requirements for you to observe from generation to generation , wherever you may live .

ID:	6095
INPUT:	Izan ere , honela dio Jaunak Judako errege Josiasen seme eta ondorengo Xalum erregeari buruz : « Joan da hemendik eta ez da berriro itzuliko .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the king of Judah , says : “ The king of Judah will never again again again return again to King Jehoash of Israel .
GOLD:	For this is what the Lord says about Jehoahaz , who succeeded his father , King Josiah , and was taken away as a captive : “ He will never return .

ID:	6096
INPUT:	dorre trinkoaketa harresi menderagaitzak ,
PRED:	He will cut down the top of the forest ; he will cut down the top of the forest .
GOLD:	He will break down every high towerand every fortified wall .

ID:	6097
INPUT:	Morroiak onartu zuen proposamena , eta hamar eguneko proba egin zuen haiekin .
PRED:	So the servant took his servant , and he took ten of his servants , along with his servants .
GOLD:	The attendant agreed to Daniel 's suggestion and tested them for ten days .

ID:	6098
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaion Jauna Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	6099
INPUT:	Lur eman ondoren , esan zien bere semeei : — Ni hil nadinean , ehortz nazazue Jainkoaren gizona ehortzia dagoeneko hilobian . Ezarri nire hezurrak haren hezurren ondoan .
PRED:	Then he said to his sons , “ I will kill you , my son , and I will put my bones in my bed . ” So he put my bones on my bones .
GOLD:	Afterward the prophet said to his sons , “ When I die , bury me in the grave where the man of God is buried . Lay my bones beside his bones .

ID:	6100
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . Daviden salmoa .
PRED:	O God , listen to my cry ; listen to my prayer .
GOLD:	The heavens proclaim the glory of God.The skies display his craftsmanship .

ID:	6101
INPUT:	Ondoren , santutegia , itunaren egoitza , ikusi nuen zeruan irekitzen ,
PRED:	Then I saw the Most Holy Place , and I saw the Most High in heaven .
GOLD:	Then I looked and saw that the Temple in heaven , God 's Tabernacle , was thrown wide open .

ID:	6102
INPUT:	utzi oparia han , aldare aurrean , eta zoaz lehenbizi senidearekin bakeak egitera ; itzuli gero zeure oparia eskaintzera .
PRED:	So offer your burnt offerings to your relatives and your relatives and your relatives , and bring them back to the altar .
GOLD:	leave your sacrifice there at the altar . Go and be reconciled to that person . Then come and offer your sacrifice to God .

ID:	6103
INPUT:	Ez izan beldur , ene artaldetxo hori , atsegin izan baitu zuen Aitak zuen alde errege izatea .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid , my lord , for you have been afraid of your Father , for your Father has made you king .
GOLD:	“ So do n't be afraid , little flock . For it gives your Father great happiness to give you the Kingdom .

ID:	6104
INPUT:	Tanisko buruzagiak erotuak daude , Menfisko buruzagiak engainatuak . Oker daramate Egiptobere eskualde-buruek .
PRED:	The rest of his officials — all the houses of Egypt — all the houses of Egypt — the officials of Egypt — their hands , their hands , and their hands are shaped by the power of Egypt .
GOLD:	The officials of Zoan are fools , and the officials of Memphis are deluded.The leaders of the peoplehave led Egypt astray .

ID:	6105
INPUT:	Labore-opariak , nahiz labean erreak nahiz eltzean edo zartaginean prestatuak , eskaintzen dituen apaizari dagozkio .
PRED:	If you present a burnt offering or a burnt offering or a burnt offering or a young goat as a guilt offering , you must present it to the Lord .
GOLD:	Any grain offering that has been baked in an oven , prepared in a pan , or cooked on a griddle belongs to the priest who presents it .

ID:	6106
INPUT:	Zeure mehatxuaz , Jakoben Jainkoa , zurrun utzi dituzu gurdi eta zaldiak .
PRED:	You have rejected the word of Jacob , the God of Jacob , and you have rejected him .
GOLD:	No wonder you are greatly feared ! Who can stand before you when your anger explodes ?

ID:	6107
INPUT:	Baina Jainkoaren gizon batek etorri eta esan zion : — Errege jauna , ez eraman zeurekin Israelgo gizon horiek , Jauna ez baitago israeldarrekin , Efraimen ondorengo horiekin .
PRED:	But one of the man of God came to him and said , “ The king of Israel will not go with you , but you will not be with this man of Israel . ”
GOLD:	But a man of God came to him and said , “ Your Majesty , do not hire troops from Israel , for the Lord is not with Israel . He will not help those people of Ephraim !

ID:	6108
INPUT:	Horregatik , gizasemeak bere aita-amak utziko ditu eta emazteari elkartuko zaio , eta biak batizango dira .
PRED:	Therefore , the man must wash his father 's mother and mother 's wife , and he will be his wife .
GOLD:	As the Scriptures say , “ A man leaves his father and mother and is joined to his wife , and the two are united into one . ”

ID:	6109
INPUT:	Ibhar , Elixua , Ne<unk> , Jafia ,
PRED:	Elon , the father of Elon ,
GOLD:	Ibhar , Elishua , Nepheg , Japhia ,

ID:	6110
INPUT:	Hiru urteren buruan hartu zuten asiriarrek Samaria . Ezekiasen erregealdiko seigarren urtea eta Israelgo Oseasen erregealdiko bederatzigarren urtea zen Samaria hartu zutenean .
PRED:	During the third year of King Hezekiah 's reign , the king of Israel began to rule over Israel in the eleventh year of King Hezekiah 's reign .
GOLD:	Three years later , during the sixth year of King Hezekiah 's reign and the ninth year of King Hoshea 's reign in Israel , Samaria fell .

ID:	6111
INPUT:	Kutsaturik egon eta garbikuntza egiten ez duena bota egingo dute elkartetik , Jaunaren santutegia profanatu baitu . Garbikuntzako urez zipriztindua izan ez denez , kutsaturik jarraitzen du .
PRED:	If you are ceremonially unclean , you must not wash your clothes and bathe yourself in water , and you must never be purified by the Lord 's blood . Then you must never be ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	“ But those who become defiled and do not purify themselves will be cut off from the community , for they have defiled the sanctuary of the Lord . Since the water of purification has not been sprinkled on them , they remain defiled .

ID:	6112
INPUT:	Nire ahaideengana joan ondoren , zin-hitzetik aske geldituko zara . Emaztea eman nahi ez badizute ere , zin-hitzetik aske geldituko zara » .
PRED:	If you refuse to listen to me , you would not go to my wife . If you do n't want to marry you , you will be your wife . ”
GOLD:	Then you will have fulfilled your obligation . But if you go to my relatives and they refuse to let her go with you , you will be free from my oath . '

ID:	6113
INPUT:	Josue , beronen seme eta ahaide Kadmiel , Binui eta Hodabiasek elkarrekin zuzentzen zituzten Jaunaren etxeko lanak ; orobat Henadaden seme eta ahaide lebitarrek ere .
PRED:	So Joshua son of Nun , Binnui , Kadmiel , Kadmiel , Sherebiah , Shebaniah , and other other associates , and other associates , who were in charge of the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	The workers at the Temple of God were supervised by Jeshua with his sons and relatives , and Kadmiel and his sons , all descendants of Hodaviah . They were helped in this task by the Levites of the family of Henadad .

ID:	6114
INPUT:	Zuzena naizelako eta salbatzailea , askatu egingo dut Sion , askatu niregana itzul daitezenak .
PRED:	I will rescue you , and I will save you , and I will bring you back to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Zion will be restored by justice ; those who repent will be revived by righteousness .

ID:	6115
INPUT:	Dolu-jantziz dabiltza kalean ; aieneka eta negarrez urtzen denak , etxe gain eta plazetan .
PRED:	They dress themselves in burlap and overlaid them with pure gold , and on every street corner .
GOLD:	They will wear burlap as they wander the streets.From every home and public square will come the sound of wailing .

ID:	6116
INPUT:	Nahiz eta alearekin batera burugabea errotarrian xehatu , ez diozu ergelkeria kenduko .
PRED:	If you are careful to obey the Book of the Law , you must not remove the guilt of the Lord .
GOLD:	You can not separate fools from their foolishness , even though you grind them like grain with mortar and pestle .

ID:	6117
INPUT:	<unk> . ( <unk> . ) SALMOA
PRED:	Book One
GOLD:	Aleph

ID:	6118
INPUT:	bost anaia ditut eta ; jar ditzala jakinaren gainean , beraiek ere oinaze-toki honetara etor ez daitezen ” .
PRED:	I have five brothers and sisters , but they have already decided to build them up to the place where they can not go . '
GOLD:	For I have five brothers , and I want him to warn them so they do n't end up in this place of torment . '

ID:	6119
INPUT:	Horregatik , hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Zure aurka nator , Tiro . Nazio ugari altxaraziko dutzure kontra , itsasoak uhinakharrotzen dituen bezala .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ I will bring disaster upon you , and you will know that your ancestors will soon destroy you .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am your enemy , O Tyre , and I will bring many nations against you , like the waves of the sea crashing against your shoreline .

ID:	6120
INPUT:	ekialdeko haizeak ur handietako ontziakpuskatzen dituenean bezala .
PRED:	They are like trees planted in the middle of the river , like streams of water .
GOLD:	We had heard of the city 's glory , but now we have seen it ourselves — the city of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies.It is the city of our God ; he will make it safe forever.Interlude

ID:	6121
INPUT:	« Herriak zure kontra bekatu egin duelako zerua itxi eta euririk egin ez dezanean , toki honetarantz begira otoitz egin eta zure izena goresten badute , eta zuk emaniko zigorrarengatik beren bekatuaz damutzen badira ,
PRED:	“ When the people of Israel have sinned against you , they have made no rain or pray to the Lord , and they will turn away from their sins , and if you refuse to turn away from their sins and turn away from their sins and refuse to save them .
GOLD:	“ If the skies are shut up and there is no rain because your people have sinned against you , and if they pray toward this Temple and acknowledge your name and turn from their sins because you have punished them ,

ID:	6122
INPUT:	Hara — erantsi zuen Abramek — , semerik ez didazu eman eta neure etxeko morroia izango dut oinordeko !
PRED:	“ No , ” Abraham replied . “ I will not give you my son , and I will give you a son . ”
GOLD:	You have given me no descendants of my own , so one of my servants will be my heir . ”

ID:	6123
INPUT:	Urte eta erdi egin zuen han Paulok , Jainkoaren mezua irakasten .
PRED:	They left Paul and Silas in the place of God at the place where he had been teaching .
GOLD:	So Paul stayed there for the next year and a half , teaching the word of God .

ID:	6124
INPUT:	Beraz , arrats hartan ihesi joanak ziren , beren oihal-etxola , zaldi , asto eta kanpalekua bera ere zegoen zegoenean utziz . Ihes egin zuten , bizia salbatzearren .
PRED:	So the dawn they fled to their tents , and they fled to the tents of the enemy camp . They fled to their tents , and they fled to their tents .
GOLD:	So they panicked and ran into the night , abandoning their tents , horses , donkeys , and everything else , as they fled for their lives .

ID:	6125
INPUT:	bere zerbitzari Israeli eman zion ondare , haren maitasuna betikoa baita .
PRED:	He sent his servant to Israel , but he gave him his faithful love and faithfulness .
GOLD:	a special possession to his servant Israel.His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	6126
INPUT:	Josueri jakinarazi zioten : — Makedan aurkitu ditugu bost erregeak , leize-zulo batean gordeta .
PRED:	Then Joshua told the king , “ We have found five loaves of barley , five loaves of barley , and five loaves of seed . ”
GOLD:	When Joshua heard that they had been found ,

ID:	6127
INPUT:	Kiriat-Arba — hau da , Hebron — eta beraren herri-lurrak , Judako mendialdean ( Arba Anaken aita zen ) ;
PRED:	( that is the towns of Anak , Kiriath-arba ( also called Hebron ) , Hebron , and the hill country of Anak .
GOLD:	Kiriath-arba ( that is , Hebron ) , in the hill country of Judah , along with its surrounding pasturelands . ( Arba was an ancestor of Anak . )

ID:	6128
INPUT:	Guk geuk entzun genuen zerutik etorritako mintzo hori , mendi santuan Jesusekin geundela .
PRED:	We heard that we were from heaven , and we spoke to you in the holy mountain of Jesus .
GOLD:	We ourselves heard that voice from heaven when we were with him on the holy mountain .

ID:	6129
INPUT:	Euri-jasak izan ziren , uholdeak etorri , mendebalak jo , eta etxeari eraso zioten ; baina ez zen erori , oinarriak harkaitzean zituelako .
PRED:	When the floodwaters grew up , the floodwaters struck down the mountain , and the foundation of the house was laid . But the foundation of the house was laid .
GOLD:	Though the rain comes in torrents and the floodwaters rise and the winds beat against that house , it wo n't collapse because it is built on bedrock .

ID:	6130
INPUT:	Kanpoko atarira herriarengana irtetean , zerbitzugintzan erabilitako jantziak kendu eta santutegiko geletan utziko dituzte . Beste jantzi batzuk jarriko dituzte , bestela beren jantzi sakratuez herria sagaratuko bailukete .
PRED:	When the people enter the land , they must wear their clothes and dress themselves in burlap , and they will dress themselves in burlap to wear their clothes . They must not wear any forbidden food for their holy clothes . They must not wear any longer eat their sacred offerings .
GOLD:	When they return to the outer courtyard where the people are , they must take off the clothes they wear while ministering to me . They must leave them in the sacred rooms and put on other clothes so they do not endanger anyone by transmitting holiness to them through this clothing .

ID:	6131
INPUT:	Orduan , mahastizainari esan zion : “ Begira , badira hiru urte pikondo honetara piku bila natorrela , eta ez dut aurkitzen . Moztu ezazu . Zertarako egongo da hor lurra alferrik jaten ? ”
PRED:	“ Then he said to her , ‘ Look , where are you going into the fields and vineyards ? Why did n't you hide me ? Why are you going on ? Why are you going to bed ? Why are you trying to eat it ? '
GOLD:	Finally , he said to his gardener , ‘ I 've waited three years , and there has n't been a single fig ! Cut it down . It 's just taking up space in the garden . '

ID:	6132
INPUT:	« Gaur nik ematen dizuedan agindua ez da zuen indarrez gaindikoa , ezta eskuraezina ere .
PRED:	“ Today I have given you strength , and you have not yet given me strength and strength .
GOLD:	“ This command I am giving you today is not too difficult for you , and it is not beyond your reach .

ID:	6133
INPUT:	Zaldizkoaren ahotik ezpata zorrotza ateratzen zen , herriak zauritzeko : burdinazko makilaz gobernatuko ditu . Hark dolarea zapaldu eta Jainko ahalguztidunaren haserre biziaren zigor-ardoa aterako du .
PRED:	He will break his sword from his power , and his power will be cut off from his power . He will crush the nations with his rod , and he will strike them with his fierce anger .
GOLD:	From his mouth came a sharp sword to strike down the nations . He will rule them with an iron rod . He will release the fierce wrath of God , the Almighty , like juice flowing from a winepress .

ID:	6134
INPUT:	Aaronek eta semeek eskainitako lehen sakrifizioak
PRED:	Aaron and the sons of Aaron
GOLD:	The Priests Begin Their Work

ID:	6135
INPUT:	Ez erantzun gaiztakeriari gaiztakeriaz , ezta irainari irainaz ere , bedeinkazioz baizik , Jainkoak bere bedeinkazioa jasotzeko deitu zaituzte eta .
PRED:	Do n't answer evil people , but do n't be afraid of them , for God has blessed you , and he will bless you with blessings .
GOLD:	Do n't repay evil for evil . Do n't retaliate with insults when people insult you . Instead , pay them back with a blessing . That is what God has called you to do , and he will grant you his blessing .

ID:	6136
INPUT:	Absalomek Joabi : — Hara , etortzeko eskatu nizun , erregeari hau esan zeniezaion : « Zertarako etorri nintzen Gexurtik ? Hobeki nengoen han . Erregea ikusi nahi nuke . Errudun banaiz , hil nazala » .
PRED:	Then Absalom said to Joab , “ Why did you go to the king of Geshur ? Why did you want me to kill me ? I want you to kill me ? ”
GOLD:	And Absalom replied , “ Because I wanted you to ask the king why he brought me back from Geshur if he did n't intend to see me . I might as well have stayed there . Let me see the king ; if he finds me guilty of anything , then let him kill me . ”

ID:	6137
INPUT:	Eta eltzegilearen soroa erosteko erabili zituzten , Jaunak agindu zidan bezala .
PRED:	So the whole community of Israel sent out to fight against the Lord , just as the Lord had commanded me .
GOLD:	and purchased the potter 's field , as the Lord directed . ”

ID:	6138
INPUT:	eta jende asko joaten zitzaion . Honela zioten : « Joanek , egia esan , ez zuen mirarizko seinalerik batere egin , baina honetaz esan zuen guztia egia zen » .
PRED:	And many of the crowd followed him . They said , “ John , do n't do such miraculous signs , but he did n't do such miraculous signs as he did . ”
GOLD:	And many followed him . “ John did n't perform miraculous signs , ” they remarked to one another , “ but everything he said about this man has come true . ”

ID:	6139
INPUT:	Joax Jainkoarengandik aldendu
PRED:	The Death of Joash
GOLD:	The End of Joash 's Reign

ID:	6140
INPUT:	Urre-harizko apaingarriak eginen dituzu
PRED:	Parable of the Lost Sheep
GOLD:	Make the settings of gold filigree ,

ID:	6141
INPUT:	Horrela , janari hori gorderik geldituko da Egipto lurraldean izango diren zazpi gose-urteetarako , eta goseteak ez du lurralde hau hondatuko » .
PRED:	This is what the land of Egypt will be destroyed in the land of Egypt , and there will be seven years old enough to enter the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	That way there will be enough to eat when the seven years of famine come to the land of Egypt . Otherwise this famine will destroy the land . ”

ID:	6142
INPUT:	« Orduan jabetzan hartu genuen lurraldea honela banatu genuen : Arnon erreka ondoan dagoen Aroertik hasita Galaadeko mendialdearen erdia bertako hiriekin Ruben eta Gaden leinuei eman nien .
PRED:	“ Then he took possession of the tribes of Reuben and Gad , along with the territory of the Canaanites , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh , and the half-tribe of Manasseh .
GOLD:	“ When we took possession of this land , I gave to the tribes of Reuben and Gad the territory beyond Aroer along the Arnon Gorge , plus half of the hill country of Gilead with its towns .

ID:	6143
INPUT:	Sinai basamortuan , lehen hilaren hamalauko ilunabarrean ospatu zuten . Israeldarrek zehatz-mehatz bete zuten Jaunak Moisesi agindurikoa .
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of Mount Sinai , the Israelites camped at Mount Sinai , just as the Lord commanded Moses .
GOLD:	in the wilderness of Sinai as twilight fell on the fourteenth day of the month . And they celebrated the festival there , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	6144
INPUT:	Isaias , bere aldetik , hau esatera ausartzen da : Nire bila ez zebiltzanei atera nintzaien bidera ; nitaz galdetzen ez zutenei agertu nintzaien .
PRED:	This is what Isaiah had said to his family : “ As surely as I came to the Gentiles , I would n't find him . I would n't find him . ”
GOLD:	And later Isaiah spoke boldly for God , saying , “ I was found by people who were not looking for me.I showed myself to those who were not asking for me . ”

ID:	6145
INPUT:	Eta , gainera , esan zien : — Larunbataren nagusi da Gizonaren Semea .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to them , “ The Son of Man is the Sabbath . ”
GOLD:	And Jesus added , “ The Son of Man is Lord , even over the Sabbath . ”

ID:	6146
INPUT:	Orduan , berriro galdetu zioten itsuari : — Eta zuk , zer diozu begiak ireki dizkizunaz ? Hark erantzun : — Profeta dela .
PRED:	Then they asked the blind man , “ What are you doing ? ” And the prophet replied , “ You know that the prophet is going . ”
GOLD:	Then the Pharisees again questioned the man who had been blind and demanded , “ What 's your opinion about this man who healed you ? ” The man replied , “ I think he must be a prophet . ”

ID:	6147
INPUT:	« Ez naiz zuek guztiotaz ari ; badakit , bai , zein aukeratu ditudan , baina bete beharra du Liburu Santuak dioen honek : Neure mahaikide nuena kontra altxatu zait .
PRED:	“ I do n't know what I am doing , but I am chosen by the Scriptures say , “ I have chosen my chosen people to stand against me , ” says the Scriptures .
GOLD:	“ I am not saying these things to all of you ; I know the ones I have chosen . But this fulfills the Scripture that says , ‘ The one who eats my food has turned against me . '

ID:	6148
INPUT:	eta honek bertan hilarazi , Hamat eskualdean . Horrela erbesteratu zuten Judako jendea bere lurraldetik urruti .
PRED:	So the king of Babylon sent his army to Riblah in the land of Hamath , along with the other army of Judah .
GOLD:	And there at Riblah , in the land of Hamath , the king of Babylon had them all put to death . So the people of Judah were sent into exile from their land .

ID:	6149
INPUT:	« Sar zaitezte ate estutik ; zabala baita hondamenerako atea eta lasaia bidea , eta asko dira hortik doazenak .
PRED:	“ Get out of the boat , and go out into the boat , for it will be torn down from the door to the left .
GOLD:	“ You can enter God 's Kingdom only through the narrow gate . The highway to hell is broad , and its gate is wide for the many who choose that way .

ID:	6150
INPUT:	Obotetik Moabeko mugaldean dagoen Iie-Abarimera ;
PRED:	They left Iye-abarim and camped beside the border of Moab .
GOLD:	They left Oboth and camped at Iye-abarim on the border of Moab .

ID:	6151
INPUT:	Joab eta Abixai Abnerren atzetik joan ziren . Eguzkia sartzen ari zen Gabaon basamorturako bidean , Gia-ren ekialdera dagoen Amma mendixkara heldu zirenean .
PRED:	So Joab went down to the wilderness of Jezreel . So Abner went on to the hill country of Gibeon , where he arrived at the hill country of Gilead .
GOLD:	When Joab and Abishai found out what had happened , they set out after Abner . The sun was just going down as they arrived at the hill of Ammah near Giah , along the road to the wilderness of Gibeon .

ID:	6152
INPUT:	Jakin nuen , gainera , lebitarrei ez zitzaiela ematen zegokien partea eta , horregatik , lebitarrek eta kantariek , beren zerbitzua bete beharrean , beren herrietara alde egin zutela .
PRED:	As soon as we were with the Levites , the Levites were not part of the land , the Levites , and the Levites who were left in the land of the Lord 's Temple .
GOLD:	I also discovered that the Levites had not been given their prescribed portions of food , so they and the singers who were to conduct the worship services had all returned to work their fields .

ID:	6153
INPUT:	Zilegi al zaigu Zesarri zerga ordaintzea , bai ala ez ?
PRED:	Is n't it the Messiah to pay the tribute ? Of course not !
GOLD:	Now tell us — is it right for us to pay taxes to Caesar or not ? ”

ID:	6154
INPUT:	Bere hilobian ehortzi zuen gorpua eta negar egin zion , esanez : « Ai , ene anaia ! »
PRED:	He buried his body in his tomb , and he said , “ Oh , my brother ! ”
GOLD:	He laid the body in his own grave , crying out in grief , “ Oh , my brother ! ”

ID:	6155
INPUT:	badakizu noiz esertzen naizen eta noiz jaikitzen . Urrutitik sumatzen dituzu nire burutapenak .
PRED:	If you are angry with me , you are angry with me , and you are my head .
GOLD:	You know when I sit down or stand up.You know my thoughts even when I 'm far away .

ID:	6156
INPUT:	Atsegingarriak dira haren bideak , zorionera eramaten dute .
PRED:	Those who weep for their lives , and those who work hard work hard .
GOLD:	She will guide you down delightful paths ; all her ways are satisfying .

ID:	6157
INPUT:	Horra non datozen urrutitik : ipar eta mendebaldetik datoz , Egipto aldetik ere bai .
PRED:	That is why the north and north , north , north , north , north , and west .
GOLD:	See , my people will return from far away , from lands to the north and west , and from as far south as Egypt . ”

ID:	6158
INPUT:	Errege-alabak dituzu inguruan , zure eskuinean erregina , urre finez apaindurik .
PRED:	Your children are like the king , and your right hand is in your right hand .
GOLD:	Listen to me , O royal daughter ; take to heart what I say.Forget your people and your family far away .

ID:	6159
INPUT:	Jaunak honela hitz egin zion Eliasi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Elijah ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Elijah ,

ID:	6160
INPUT:	Zaude erne , eta indarberri ezazu oraindik bizirik daukazuna , erabat hil baino lehen . Zure jokabidea nire Jainkoaren aurrean behar bezain ona ez dela ikusi dut .
PRED:	Keep watch over me , and make me your life as you live . I want you to die in the presence of God . I want you to die before God .
GOLD:	Wake up ! Strengthen what little remains , for even what is left is almost dead . I find that your actions do not meet the requirements of my God .

ID:	6161
INPUT:	Ez dira konturatzenberaien gaiztakeria guztiakgogoan ditudala . Beren okerretan sartuak daudeleporaino , eta begi aurrean ditut nik guztiak .
PRED:	Do n't let them go into the streets of the wicked , and I will remember all the evil things I have done .
GOLD:	Its people do n't realizethat I am watching them.Their sinful deeds are all around them , and I see them all .

ID:	6162
INPUT:	Berriz ere oihu egin zion Jonatanek atzetik mutikoari : — Bizkor ! Habil agudo ! Ez hadi geldi ! Hartu zuen Jonatanen morroiak gezia eta bere nagusiagana itzuli zen .
PRED:	“ Quick ! ” Jonathan shouted . “ Quick ! Get up ! ” So Joshua shouted , “ Quick ! Do n't be quiet ! ” So the master returned home and returned to his master .
GOLD:	Hurry , hurry , do n't wait . ” So the boy quickly gathered up the arrows and ran back to his master .

ID:	6163
INPUT:	Erregea ez du gudaroste handiak salbatzen , ezta gudaria ere indar handiak libratzen .
PRED:	For the king is not great , and his power is mighty , and his power is mighty .
GOLD:	The best-equipped army can not save a king , nor is great strength enough to save a warrior .

ID:	6164
INPUT:	Izugarrizko iskanbila sortu zen . Fariseuen alderdiko lege-maisu batzuek altxatu eta gogor esan zuten : « Ez dugu honengan errurik aurkitzen . Eta espiritu edo aingeruren batek hitz egin badio , zer ? »
PRED:	As the Pharisees grew up , the teachers of religious law came to Jesus and asked , “ We have no mercy on the heads of the teachers of religious law , but we have not heard the angel of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	So there was a great uproar . Some of the teachers of religious law who were Pharisees jumped up and began to argue forcefully . “ We see nothing wrong with him , ” they shouted . “ Perhaps a spirit or an angel spoke to him . ”

ID:	6165
INPUT:	Bai handia niretzat duzun maitasuna : Herio Leize sakonetik libratu nauzu !
PRED:	I long for you , O Lord , for you have rescued me from my enemies .
GOLD:	for your love for me is very great.You have rescued me from the depths of death .

ID:	6166
INPUT:	« Jaunak , Israelen Jainkoak mezu bat eman dit zuretzat , Baruk .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord , the God of Israel , says : You gave me a drink of Baal .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says to you , Baruch :

ID:	6167
INPUT:	ezaugarri handiak , mirari eta egintza ikaragarriak .
PRED:	He has performed great wonders and awesome deeds ; he has performed great wonders .
GOLD:	Moses summoned all the Israelites and said to them , “ You have seen with your own eyes everything the Lord did in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh and to all his servants and to his whole country —

ID:	6168
INPUT:	Kadexetik abiaturik Edom lurraldeko mugan dagoen Hor mendian etxolatu ziren hurrengo .
PRED:	They left Kadesh and camped at Kadesh in the hill country of Edom in the hill country of Seir .
GOLD:	They left Kadesh and camped at Mount Hor , at the border of Edom .

ID:	6169
INPUT:	<unk> tzotan pilatu zituzten eta kiratsez bete zen lurralde osoa .
PRED:	So the five of the godly people went into the land and filled the entire land with their ancestors .
GOLD:	“ Do it tomorrow , ” Pharaoh said . “ All right , ” Moses replied , “ it will be as you have said . Then you will know that there is no one like the Lord our God .

ID:	6170
INPUT:	Neure maitaleei egin diet dei , baina zapuztu egin naute . Nire apaizak eta zaharrak hirian hil dira , biziari eusteko janari bila zebiltzan bitartean .
PRED:	I call to those who love me , but they have rejected me . They are trying to kill me and kill me , and they will die in their lives .
GOLD:	“ I begged my allies for help , but they betrayed me.My priests and leadersstarved to death in the city , even as they searched for foodto save their lives .

ID:	6171
INPUT:	Seme zuhurrak aitari poz ematen , seme zentzugabeak ama mespretxatzen .
PRED:	My child , pay attention to a child ; pay attention to a child .
GOLD:	Sensible children bring joy to their father ; foolish children despise their mother .

ID:	6172
INPUT:	Beste guztiei agertu ondoren , neuri ere agertu zitzaidan , garaiz kanpo jaiotako haurra bezalakoa naizen honi ;
PRED:	If I have done this , I have been a burden to the child who has been a new child , now I have been a baby .
GOLD:	Last of all , as though I had been born at the wrong time , I also saw him .

ID:	6173
INPUT:	Isaiasek , orduan , Ezekiasi : — Entzun Jaun ahalguztidunak dioena :
PRED:	Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah , “ Listen to what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says :
GOLD:	Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah , “ Listen to this message from the Lord of Heaven 's Armies :

ID:	6174
INPUT:	Ben-Hadadek esan zuen : — Bake-asmoz atera baldin badira , atzeman itzazue bizirik ; borroka-asmoz atera badira ere , atzeman itzazue bizirik .
PRED:	But Ben-hadad said , “ If you go to war against you and go to war against you , let me go to war against you . ”
GOLD:	“ Take them alive , ” Ben-hadad commanded , “ whether they have come for peace or for war . ”

ID:	6175
INPUT:	Nire aurrekoek hondatu zituzten nazio horietako jainkoetarik batek ere libratu ahal izan ote du bere herria nire eskuetatik ? Eta zeuen Jainkoak libratuko zaituztela nire eskuetan erortzetik ?
PRED:	For the gods of the nations who had rescued me from the power of the gods of the nations , who had rescued you from the power of the Lord your God , who rescued you from my power ?
GOLD:	Which of their gods was able to rescue its people from the destructive power of my predecessors ? What makes you think your God can rescue you from me ?

ID:	6176
INPUT:	Gose banintz , ez nizuke zuri eskatuko , neurea baitut mundua eta bertako guztia .
PRED:	But if I would n't give you my request , then I would give you everything I would do .
GOLD:	If I were hungry , I would not tell you , for all the world is mine and everything in it .

ID:	6177
INPUT:	Nik , Jainko Jaunak , zin dagit neure biziarengatik , ez duzuela berriro esango esaera hau Israelen !
PRED:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , I will not say , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says :
GOLD:	As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , you will not quote this proverb anymore in Israel .

ID:	6178
INPUT:	Honela mintzatu zitzaidan Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	6179
INPUT:	Santutegia eta tenpluko gotorlekua profanatu egingo dituzte haren gudariek , eguneroko oparia kendu eta idolo higuingarria ezarriko aldare gainean .
PRED:	They must be ceremonially unclean by the Lord 's Temple , and they must remove all the detestable practices of the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ His army will take over the Temple fortress , pollute the sanctuary , put a stop to the daily sacrifices , and set up the sacrilegious object that causes desecration .

ID:	6180
INPUT:	Santutegira sartuko diren apaizak ezin izango dira kanpoko atarira irten , Jaunaren zerbitzuan erabilitako jantziak aurrez gela horietan utzi gabe , sakratuak baitira jantzi horiek . Arropaz aldatuko dira herriari dagokion esparrura ateratzeko » .
PRED:	The priests will not enter the Temple of the Lord , for they will go out into the inner courtyard of the Lord 's Temple . They will wear it into the sacred tent , and they will wear it into the Holy Place . ”
GOLD:	When the priests leave the sanctuary , they must not go directly to the outer courtyard . They must first take off the clothes they wore while ministering , because these clothes are holy . They must put on other clothes before entering the parts of the building complex open to the public . ”

ID:	6181
INPUT:	Eta honela hasi zen berekiko pentsatzen : “ Zer egin , ez baitut uzta non jasorik ? ”
PRED:	And he began talking about him , ‘ What do I want to pay attention to the sea ? '
GOLD:	He said to himself , ‘ What should I do ? I do n't have room for all my crops . '

ID:	6182
INPUT:	Zelatan dago ezkutuan , lehoia bere zuloan bezala , zelatan , dohakabea harrapatzeko : bere sarera erakarriz harrapatzen du .
PRED:	Its young lions will fall like a lion , like a lion in its prey , and its prey will be carried away like a sword .
GOLD:	Like lions crouched in hiding , they wait to pounce on the helpless.Like hunters they capture the helplessand drag them away in nets .

ID:	6183
INPUT:	Ikasleetako bat , Jesusek gehien maite zuen hura , beraren ondoan zegoen mahaian .
PRED:	One day Jesus was teaching about the disciples , so he followed the example of the disciples .
GOLD:	The disciple Jesus loved was sitting next to Jesus at the table .

ID:	6184
INPUT:	Bazen Tzoran Manoah izeneko gizon bat , Danen leinukoa . Haren emazteak ez zuen haurrik izan , agorra baitzen .
PRED:	One of the men of Asher had a man named Micah , for his wife had no wife .
GOLD:	In those days a man named Manoah from the tribe of Dan lived in the town of Zorah . His wife was unable to become pregnant , and they had no children .

ID:	6185
INPUT:	Errugabea al naiz ? Neuk ere ez dakit . Nazkatua nago bizitzaz !
PRED:	I am deeply troubled , and I am deeply troubled .
GOLD:	“ I am innocent , but it makes no difference to me — I despise my life .

ID:	6186
INPUT:	Joabek erregeagana joan eta esan zion : « Zer egin duzu ? Abner etorri omen zaizu . Zergatik utzi diozu joaten ?
PRED:	Then Joab went to the king and asked him , “ What have you done to me ? ”
GOLD:	Joab rushed to the king and demanded , “ What have you done ? What do you mean by letting Abner get away ?

ID:	6187
INPUT:	Hau idatzi zuen gutunetan : « Agindu ezazue baraualdia egiteko . Eserarazi Nabot biltzarraren aurrean ;
PRED:	So he wrote this letter to Aaron : “ Take a solemn oath in the presence of Naboth . ”
GOLD:	In her letters she commanded : “ Call the citizens together for a time of fasting , and give Naboth a place of honor .

ID:	6188
INPUT:	Adar sendoak zituen , aginte-makila bihurtu zirenak ; hodeietaraino hazi zen : nabarmena zen bere altueragatiketa adar-ugaritasunagatik .
PRED:	Then he ordered the woman to walk through the middle of the water , and he shouted , “ A basket of bread was filled with fresh water . ”
GOLD:	Its branches became strong — strong enough to be a ruler 's scepter.It grew very tall , towering above all others.It stood out because of its heightand its many lush branches .

ID:	6189
INPUT:	Lege-liburua irakurtzeko biltzarra
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	Lord

ID:	6190
INPUT:	Zerura igota ere , zu hantxe ! Hildakoen Egoitzara jaitsita ere , zu bertan !
PRED:	Rescue me from the grave , from the dead , and you will die in the grave .
GOLD:	If I go up to heaven , you are there ; if I go down to the grave , you are there .

ID:	6191
INPUT:	Egun hartan , gizakiak bere Egilearibegiratuko dioeta Israelgo Santuarenganazuzenduko ditu begiak .
PRED:	In that day , people of Israel will be called by the Holy One of Israel , and they will serve the Holy One of Israel .
GOLD:	Then at last the people will look to their Creatorand turn their eyes to the Holy One of Israel .

ID:	6192
INPUT:	Hiru mila inguru gizon joan ziren Ai hiriari erasotzera , baina ihes egin behar izan zuten Ai hirikoengandik .
PRED:	There were three men who fled to their town , but they fled to the town of Ai , but they fled to their town .
GOLD:	So approximately 3,000 warriors were sent , but they were soundly defeated . The men of Ai

ID:	6193
INPUT:	neureak baititut israeldar lehen-semeak oro , baita lehen abere-kumeak ere . Egiptoko lehen-seme guztiak hil nituenean , neuretzat sagaratu nituen .
PRED:	For I have chosen all the firstborn sons of Israel to be my firstborn sons , and I killed all the firstborn sons of Israel .
GOLD:	For all the firstborn males among the people of Israel are mine , both of people and of animals . I set them apart for myself on the day I struck down all the firstborn sons of the Egyptians .

ID:	6194
INPUT:	Izan zaitezte neurritsu eta egon erne . Zuen etsaia , deabrua , zuen inguruan dabil , goseak dagoen lehoia bezala , nor irentsiko .
PRED:	Be strong and courageous ! Do n't be afraid of your enemies ! Your enemies are like a lion , like a lioness , like a lion .
GOLD:	Stay alert ! Watch out for your great enemy , the devil . He prowls around like a roaring lion , looking for someone to devour .

ID:	6195
INPUT:	Ohol hauek behealdean bereiz jarriko dituzu eta gainaldean , lehenengo eraztunaren parean , ongi lotuak . Egin honela bi kantoietarako bi oholak ere .
PRED:	Make these frames for the rear of the Tabernacle , on the east side of the Tabernacle , and make two bases under each frame .
GOLD:	These corner frames will be matched at the bottom and firmly attached at the top with a single ring , forming a single corner unit . Make both of these corner units the same way .

ID:	6196
INPUT:	Orduan , erregeak esan zuen : — Ez hil haurra . Emaiozue lehenengoari ; horixe da haurraren ama .
PRED:	Then the king said to the king , “ Do n't die ! Your mother is dead . ”
GOLD:	Then the king said , “ Do not kill the child , but give him to the woman who wants him to live , for she is his mother ! ”

ID:	6197
INPUT:	Zerbitzariek esan zioten : — Zertan ari zara ? Haurra bizi zela barau eta negar egiten zenuen . Hil da haurra , eta zu jaiki eta jaten ?
PRED:	“ Why are you looking for a child ? ” the young woman asked . “ Why did you fast and wept ? Why did you die ? ”
GOLD:	His advisers were amazed . “ We do n't understand you , ” they told him . “ While the child was still living , you wept and refused to eat . But now that the child is dead , you have stopped your mourning and are eating again . ”

ID:	6198
INPUT:	« Israeldarren izen-bilketa egitean , ez duzu erroldatuko Lebiren leinua .
PRED:	“ These are the names of the tribes of Israel , listed according to the clans of the tribe of Israel .
GOLD:	“ Do not include the tribe of Levi in the registration ; do not count them with the rest of the Israelites .

ID:	6199
INPUT:	Zeren eskatzen duenak hartu egiten baitu , bilatzen duenak aurkitu , eta atea jotzen duenari zabaldu egiten baitzaio .
PRED:	For anyone who finds it is good , and anyone who finds it finds it is true , and everyone who finds it is spread .
GOLD:	For everyone who asks , receives . Everyone who seeks , finds . And to everyone who knocks , the door will be opened .

ID:	6200
INPUT:	Aingeruak Jaun ahalguztidunaren hitzok Zorobabeli adierazteko agindu zidan : « Zeure eginkizuna ez duzu boterez , ez indarrez beteko , nire espirituaz baizik .
PRED:	Then the angel of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies said to me , “ Go and prophesy to you , but do n't work with you , but you do n't obey me .
GOLD:	Then he said to me , “ This is what the Lord says to Zerubbabel : It is not by force nor by strength , but by my Spirit , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	6201
INPUT:	Heziketa maite duenak maite du jakinduria ; zentzapena gorrotatzen duena , inozoa galanta !
PRED:	Those who love wisdom and knowledge are discipline ; those who love correction will be punished .
GOLD:	To learn , you must love discipline ; it is stupid to hate correction .

ID:	6202
INPUT:	« Semetxook , ez zait denbora asko gelditzen zuekin egoteko . Nire bila ibiliko zarete , baina juduei esan niena bera diotsuet zuei ere : ni noan tokira zuek ezin zarete joan .
PRED:	“ My children , do n't stay away from me , for I am going to stay with you . But I tell you the truth , I am going to bring you to the Jews .
GOLD:	Dear children , I will be with you only a little longer . And as I told the Jewish leaders , you will search for me , but you ca n't come where I am going .

ID:	6203
INPUT:	Haiek erantzun : — Ikusi dugu lurralde hori eta oso ederra da . Jaiki ! Eraso diezaiogun ! Zertan zaudete hor ezer egin gabe ? Ez egon geldi eta abia zaitezte lurralde horretaz jabetzera .
PRED:	“ We have seen this land ! ” they replied . “ Get up ! Go and get up ! Why are you going to get up ! Why are you going to stay here in your land ? Why should n't you leave this land ? ”
GOLD:	The men replied , “ Come on , let 's attack them ! We have seen the land , and it is very good . What are you waiting for ? Do n't hesitate to go and take possession of it .

ID:	6204
INPUT:	« Arrazoia dute Tzelofhaden alabek ; lur-ondarea emango diezu jabetzan , beraien aitaren anaiei bezala : aitaren ondarea emango diezu .
PRED:	“ The daughters of Zelophehad will give them a grant of land as a grant of land . If you give them their father 's inheritance , you will give them a grant of land as your father 's possession .
GOLD:	“ The claim of the daughters of Zelophehad is legitimate . You must give them a grant of land along with their father 's relatives . Assign them the property that would have been given to their father .

ID:	6205
INPUT:	Joan ziren Moises eta Aaron faraoiagana eta Jaunak agindua egin zuten : Aaronek lurrera jaurti zuen makila faraoiaren eta funtzionarioen aurrean , eta makila suge bihurtu zen .
PRED:	So Moses and Aaron did as the Lord commanded Moses and Aaron . He threw his staff into the ground , and he threw it into the ground .
GOLD:	So Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and did what the Lord had commanded them . Aaron threw down his staff before Pharaoh and his officials , and it became a serpent !

ID:	6206
INPUT:	Izan ere , kanpoko atari aldera jotzen zuten gela haien luzera ere hogeita bost metrokoa zen ; tenplura jotzen zuten gelena , berriz , berrogeita hamarrekoa .
PRED:	For the outer courtyard of the Temple was also 175 feet wide , and it was 101/2 feet thick . But the Temple was 30 feet tall .
GOLD:	This wall added length to the outer block of rooms , which extended for only 871/2 feet , while the inner block — the rooms toward the Temple — extended for 175 feet .

ID:	6207
INPUT:	mundu osoan guduak geldiarazi , uztaiak puskatu , lantzak apurtu , babeskiak sutan erre .
PRED:	So the whole world remained silent at the sound of the field , but the fire has broken the fire .
GOLD:	“ Be still , and know that I am God ! I will be honored by every nation.I will be honored throughout the world . ”

ID:	6208
INPUT:	Arin ! Egin ihes , Babilonian bizi zaretenSiongo seme-alabok ! »
PRED:	Shout to Babylon , you people of Babylon , and you will live in peace ! ”
GOLD:	Many nations will join themselves to the Lord on that day , and they , too , will be my people . I will live among you , and you will know that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies sent me to you .

ID:	6209
INPUT:	Hain zuzen , Satanas ere bere baitan zatiturik badago , nola iraun dezake haren erreinuak ? Nik deabruak Beeltzebulen indarrez botatzen ditudala baitiozue zuek .
PRED:	And if Satan was casting out Satan , how can he cast out demons ? For I am casting out demons by the prince of demons .
GOLD:	You say I am empowered by Satan . But if Satan is divided and fighting against himself , how can his kingdom survive ?

ID:	6210
INPUT:	Astemeak ikusi eta hiru bider saihestu nau . Bestela , hila zintudan dagoeneko , bera bizirik utziko nuelarik .
PRED:	When I saw three times , I will find you again . I will find you again , and I will let you live there . ”
GOLD:	Three times the donkey saw me and shied away ; otherwise , I would certainly have killed you by now and spared the donkey . ”

ID:	6211
INPUT:	Gero , ikasleei esan zien : « Iritsiko zaizue Gizonaren Semearen etorrerako egun bat bederen ikusi nahi izango duzuen garaia , baina ez duzue ikusiko .
PRED:	Then he said to his disciples , “ Go back to the Son of Man and see the Son of Man coming to see the Son of Man , but you will never see it .
GOLD:	Then he said to his disciples , “ The time is coming when you will long to see the day when the Son of Man returns , but you wo n't see it .

ID:	6212
INPUT:	horrela jakingo duteEgiptoko bizilagun guztiekni naizela Jauna , kanabera bezain euskarri ahulaizan baitzara Israel herriarentzat ;
PRED:	They will know that I am the Lord , who made Egypt as strong as a remnant of Israel , but the people of Israel are as strong as the Lord .
GOLD:	All the people of Egypt will know that I am the Lord , for to Israel you were just a staff made of reeds .

ID:	6213
INPUT:	Berriro diotsuet : Orratzaren begitik gamelua igarotzea errazago , aberatsa Jainkoaren erreinuan sartzea baino .
PRED:	And I tell you the truth , it 's better for a camel to enter the Kingdom of God .
GOLD:	I 'll say it again — it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich person to enter the Kingdom of God ! ”

ID:	6214
INPUT:	Izan ere , Gizonaren Semea galdua zegoena bilatzera eta salbatzera etorri da .
PRED:	For the Son of Man is going to save the Son of Man , and he is going to save us .
GOLD:	For the Son of Man came to seek and save those who are lost . ”

ID:	6215
INPUT:	Berezko adar zirenekin Jainkoak begiramenik izan ez bazuen , beharbada zurekin ere ez du izango .
PRED:	For God has made a covenant with you , and he will not be with you .
GOLD:	For if God did not spare the original branches , he wo n't spare you either .

ID:	6216
INPUT:	Emakumeak , orduan : — Antzina esan ohi zuten : « Galdetzekotan , galdetu Abel hirian , eta kito » .
PRED:	Then the woman said , “ What do you want ? ” And the woman said , “ What 's happening ? ”
GOLD:	Then she continued , “ There used to be a saying , ‘ If you want to settle an argument , ask advice at the town of Abel . '

ID:	6217
INPUT:	Une hartan , erregea altxatu egin zen , baita gobernaria , Berenize eta haiekin zeudenak ere .
PRED:	At that time the king got up , and the brook grew up and grew up with me .
GOLD:	Then the king , the governor , Bernice , and all the others stood and left .

ID:	6218
INPUT:	Jaunari atsegin ez zaiona egin zuen Salomonek , eta ez zen bere aita David bezain zintzo izan Jaunarentzat .
PRED:	Solomon did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , and Solomon did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight .
GOLD:	In this way , Solomon did what was evil in the Lord 's sight ; he refused to follow the Lord completely , as his father , David , had done .

ID:	6219
INPUT:	Orduan , oihu egin zioten Jaunari , esanez : « Bekatu egin dugu , baztertu egin dugu Jauna , Baalen eta Astarteren irudiak gurtzeko . Aska gaitzazu orain geure etsaien eskuetatik eta zerbitzatuko zaitugu » .
PRED:	Then they cried out to the Lord , “ We have sinned against the Lord , for we have sinned against the Lord , and we will worship you from the oppression of our enemies . ”
GOLD:	“ Then they cried to the Lord again and confessed , ‘ We have sinned by turning away from the Lord and worshiping the images of Baal and Ashtoreth . But we will worship you and you alone if you will rescue us from our enemies . '

ID:	6220
INPUT:	Morroiak jarraitu zuen : — Abrahamen morroia nauzu .
PRED:	The servant said to Abraham , “ Here is your servant . ”
GOLD:	“ I am Abraham 's servant , ” he explained .

ID:	6221
INPUT:	Buruargitasuna behar da hemen . Zazpi buruak , emakumea gainean eseria dagoen zazpi muinoak dira ; zazpi errege ere esan nahi dute :
PRED:	The seven lampstands are the head of the seven times . The seven lamps represent seven days of the king 's sons , and the seven kings of the earth .
GOLD:	“ This calls for a mind with understanding : The seven heads of the beast represent the seven hills where the woman rules . They also represent seven kings .

ID:	6222
INPUT:	Egun hartan , etxe gainean dagoena eta bere gauzak etxean dituena ez bedi hartzera jaits ; era berean , soroan dena ez bedi atzera itzul .
PRED:	On that day the house is gone , and the house is gone , and the house of the house is gone ! The Lord is coming down to the ground , but he ca n't return to the ground .
GOLD:	On that day a person out on the deck of a roof must not go down into the house to pack . A person out in the field must not return home .

ID:	6223
INPUT:	Orduan , Manoahek : — Zuk hitzemana betetzean , zein arau eta zein jokabide hartu beharko du haurrak ?
PRED:	Then Manoah asked , “ What do you fast ? Why do you fast and fast ? ”
GOLD:	So Manoah asked him , “ When your words come true , what kind of rules should govern the boy 's life and work ? ”

ID:	6224
INPUT:	Bigarren egunean , akats gabeko ahuntz bat eskainiko duzu barkamen-oparitzat , eta aldarearen garbikuntza-ohikunea egingo duzu , zezenarekin bezalaxe .
PRED:	On the second day you must present a young goat as a sin offering , offer a young goat as a sin offering , and burn it on the altar . Through this process , you must present it to the Lord .
GOLD:	“ On the second day , sacrifice as a sin offering a young male goat that has no physical defects . Then cleanse and make atonement for the altar again , just as you did with the young bull .

ID:	6225
INPUT:	Koru-zuzendariarentzat . « Jedutun » en doinuaz . Asafen salmoa .
PRED:	O God of Heaven 's Armies , you are our God , who gives us victory .
GOLD:	I cry out to God ; yes , I shout.Oh , that God would listen to me !

ID:	6226
INPUT:	Zortzigarren egunean , guztiok apaizari eramango dizkio bere garbikuntzarako , elkarketa-etxolaren sarrerara , Jaunaren aurrera .
PRED:	On the eighth day , you must present the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant to purify the entrance of the Tabernacle , and present it to the Lord .
GOLD:	On the eighth day of the purification ceremony , the person being purified must bring the offerings to the priest in the Lord 's presence at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	6227
INPUT:	« Madarikatua lagun hurkoa azpikeriaz hiltzen duena ! » Eta herri osoak erantzungo du : « Amen » .
PRED:	“ Cursed is anyone who takes another person 's death , ” says the Lord . “ All the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '
GOLD:	‘ Cursed is anyone who attacks a neighbor in secret . 'And all the people will reply , ‘ Amen . '

ID:	6228
INPUT:	Eroapenez buruzagiak ere konbentzi daitezke , mihi eztiak hezurrak ere hautsi .
PRED:	Those who hate their own desires will be cut off from their bones .
GOLD:	Patience can persuade a prince , and soft speech can break bones .

ID:	6229
INPUT:	Biharamunean , alaba zaharrenak gazteenari esan zion : « <unk> ni egon <unk> aitarekin . Mozkor dezagun berriro eta gaur gauean hi joango haiz harekin etzatera ; horrela , biok izango dizkinagu semeak geure aitarengandik » .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the young men said to him , “ Let 's be drunk with me and drunk with the flocks of sheep and goats . Let 's go with us , and we will be our father , and we will be our father . ”
GOLD:	The next morning the older daughter said to her younger sister , “ I had sex with our father last night . Let 's get him drunk with wine again tonight , and you go in and have sex with him . That way we will preserve our family line through our father . ”

ID:	6230
INPUT:	Lauso bitez haien begiak , ez dezaten ikus , makur bekie bizkarra betiko .
PRED:	Let them be filled with fear , and they will never see him .
GOLD:	Let their eyes go blind so they can not see , and let their backs be bent forever . ”

ID:	6231
INPUT:	Bizidun guztiak hil ziren : narrastiak , hegaztiak , abereak eta piztiak , eta lurrazalean mugitzen den oro , eta gizaki guztiak .
PRED:	There were all small animals that scurry along the ground , birds , small animals , and all the animals that scurry along the ground .
GOLD:	All the living things on earth died — birds , domestic animals , wild animals , small animals that scurry along the ground , and all the people .

ID:	6232
INPUT:	gizonak , emakumeak , haurrak , erregearen alabak eta Nebuzaradan guardiaburuak Ahikamen seme eta Xafanen biloba Gedaliasi utzitako denak ; baita Jeremias profeta eta Neriasen seme Baruk ere .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the women and children of the king , the officials of the guard , and the officials of the city officials , and the leaders of the city officials , and Jeremiah , and Jeremiah , and Jeremiah .
GOLD:	In the crowd were men , women , and children , the king 's daughters , and all those whom Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , had left with Gedaliah . The prophet Jeremiah and Baruch were also included .

ID:	6233
INPUT:	Nik , berriro : — Ez dago ondo egiten ari zaretena . Ez al duzue gure Jainkoaren beldurrean bizi nahi , atzerriko gure etsaien aurrean barregarri gerta ez gaitezen ?
PRED:	“ No , ” says the Lord , “ do n't you fear the God of Heaven 's Armies . Do n't let us live in the presence of our enemies ? ”
GOLD:	Then I pressed further , “ What you are doing is not right ! Should you not walk in the fear of our God in order to avoid being mocked by enemy nations ?

ID:	6234
INPUT:	Hogei zutabe eta hogei oinak brontzezkoak izango dira ; zutabeen kako eta ziriak , berriz , zilarrezkoak .
PRED:	For twenty posts set securely securely securely securely in bronze bases . He hung the curtains with silver hooks and rings .
GOLD:	They will be held up by twenty posts set securely in twenty bronze bases . Hang the curtains with silver hooks and rings .

ID:	6235
INPUT:	Ikusi eta entzun duguna dizuegu zuei ere iragartzen , zuek ere gurekin elkartasunean bizi zaitezten . Eta gure elkartasuna Aitarekin eta honen seme Jesu Kristorekin da .
PRED:	Yes , we have heard about your teaching , and you will live in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ . Then you will live with the Father and the Son of Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	We proclaim to you what we ourselves have actually seen and heard so that you may have fellowship with us . And our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son , Jesus Christ .

ID:	6236
INPUT:	Beraz , hau diot nik , Jainko Jaunak : Egiptoko errege faraoiaren kontra nator . Bi besoak hautsiko dizkiot , ongi duena eta jadanik hautsia duena , eta ezpata eroraraziko diot eskutik .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will destroy Pharaoh , the king of Egypt , and he will destroy all his descendants . I will hand them over to them , and I will hand them over to them .
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am the enemy of Pharaoh , the king of Egypt ! I will break both of his arms — the good arm along with the broken one — and I will make his sword clatter to the ground .

ID:	6237
INPUT:	Garaipen handiak eman dizkiobere erregeari , maitasunez jokatu dubere gantzutuarekin , Davidekineta beraren ondorengoekin betiko » .
PRED:	He has given great honor to the king of Gilead , his unfailing love for his descendants , David , and his descendants forever . ”
GOLD:	You give great victories to your king ; you show unfailing love to your anointed , to David and all his descendants forever . ”

ID:	6238
INPUT:	Nor biziko da heriotzarik ikusi gabe ? Nork ihes egin Herio Leizearen atzaparretatik ?
PRED:	Who is able to escape the path of death ? Who can escape from the north ? Who can escape from the north ?
GOLD:	Lord , where is your unfailing love ? You promised it to David with a faithful pledge .

ID:	6239
INPUT:	Jaunaren espiritua nire gainean dago , berak bainau sagaratu behartsuei berri ona adierazteko ; berak nau bidali gatibuei askatasuna eta itsuei ikusmena hots egitera eta zapalduak askatzera ,
PRED:	For the Spirit of the Lord is poured out on me , but he has sent me to preach the Good News to the poor , and he sent me to see the Good News .
GOLD:	“ The Spirit of the is upon me , for he has anointed me to bring Good News to the poor.He has sent me to proclaim that captives will be released , that the blind will see , that the oppressed will be set free ,

ID:	6240
INPUT:	eta esan zien : « Baditut dagoeneko ehun eta hogei urte eta ez naiz gauza daukadan kargurako ; gainera , Jaunak esan dit : “ Ez duzu horko Jordan hori igaroko ” .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ I will give them a hundred times and forty years . I will not go on to the Jordan River , for the Lord has told me , ‘ This is what the Lord says : '
GOLD:	he said , “ I am now 120 years old , and I am no longer able to lead you . The Lord has told me , ‘ You will not cross the Jordan River . '

ID:	6241
INPUT:	Beren egunak gozo-gozo pasatueta lasai asko jaisten dira lurpera .
PRED:	Their words are like honey , and the words of the wise will fall into the land .
GOLD:	They spend their days in prosperity , then go down to the grave in peace .

ID:	6242
INPUT:	Hitzaurrea
PRED:	The Festival of Harvest
GOLD:	Prologue

ID:	6243
INPUT:	bi zutabe , zutabe horien buruetan zeuden kapiteletarako bola bana , zutabeburuetako kapiteletan zeuden bola haiek apaintzeko sare bana ,
PRED:	There were two rows of stones on top of the pillars , cut down two pillars , and cut them on the capitals on the pillars .
GOLD:	the two pillars ; the two bowl-shaped capitals on top of the pillars ; the two networks of interwoven chains that decorated the capitals ;

ID:	6244
INPUT:	Eta Saulek agindu zien bere morroiei : « Esaiozue ahapeka Davidi : “ Erregearen begiko zara eta maite zaituzte beraren zerbitzari guztiek . Egin zaitez erregearen suhi ” » .
PRED:	Then Saul said to his servants , “ Say to David , ‘ You are the king of David , the king of all his servants , and all his servants will serve him . ' ”
GOLD:	Then Saul told his men to say to David , “ The king really likes you , and so do we . Why do n't you accept the king 's offer and become his son-in-law ? ”

ID:	6245
INPUT:	Ez dut hau esaten giza testigantzaren beharrik dudalako , zuek salba zaitezten baizik .
PRED:	I do n't tell you these things , but you do n't believe it . Instead , you are my witnesses .
GOLD:	Of course , I have no need of human witnesses , but I say these things so you might be saved .

ID:	6246
INPUT:	Mahalatek hiru seme ekarri zizkion : Jeux , Xemarias eta Zaham .
PRED:	These three sons were born to their sons : Shem , Shemaiah , and Uzziel .
GOLD:	Mahalath had three sons — Jeush , Shemariah , and Zaham .

ID:	6247
INPUT:	Orain itsasoak suntsiturik zaude , urpean galdurik , zure merkantziaketa tripulazio guztia erehondoratuta .
PRED:	You have been destroyed by the sea , and you have destroyed all the treasures of merchants and merchants .
GOLD:	Now you are a wrecked ship , broken at the bottom of the sea.All your merchandise and crewhave gone down with you .

ID:	6248
INPUT:	itsasoan jaun eta jabe zinen , ontzi eder bat bezalakoaeraiki zintuzten zeure egileek :
PRED:	There was a young man who was there , so they picked up your altars .
GOLD:	You extended your boundaries into the sea.Your builders made your beauty perfect .

ID:	6249
INPUT:	Geure begiak ez ditugu ipintzen ikusten diren gauzetan , ikusten ez direnetan baizik ; ikusten direnak behin-behinekoak baitira ; ikusten ez direnak , berriz , behin betikoak .
PRED:	For we are not like the one who sees the night , but we do n't see the night . But if we see the one who sees the night , then we can see it , but we do n't see it .
GOLD:	So we do n't look at the troubles we can see now ; rather , we fix our gaze on things that can not be seen . For the things we see now will soon be gone , but the things we can not see will last forever .

ID:	6250
INPUT:	Akatsik gabeak izan behar zuten , itxura ederrekoak , jakinduriaz , adimenez eta zuhurtasunez beteak , erregearen jauregian zerbitzatzeko modukoak . Babiloniarren hizkera eta idazkera irakatsiko zizkieten .
PRED:	They became pregnant and gave birth to a beautiful banquet , and they gave wisdom to the king of Babylon . They also appointed him to be exiled to Babylon .
GOLD:	“ Select only strong , healthy , and good-looking young men , ” he said . “ Make sure they are well versed in every branch of learning , are gifted with knowledge and good judgment , and are suited to serve in the royal palace . Train these young men in the language and literature of Babylon . ”

ID:	6251
INPUT:	« Zuek , bidean zoaztenok , begira eta ikus : ba ote da nirea bezainbateko oinazerik ? Bai mingarria zaidalaJaunak bere haserre-suminean eman didan oinazea !
PRED:	“ Look , you who are now looking for me and see me , ” says the Lord . “ I am going to see you , and I will pour out my fury on them ! ”
GOLD:	“ Does it mean nothing to you , all you who pass by ? Look around and see if there is any suffering like mine , which the Lord brought on mewhen he erupted in fierce anger .

ID:	6252
INPUT:	Ospatu Jauna zitaraz , zitaraz eta kantu ederrez !
PRED:	So the Lord said to them , “ Praise the Lord ! ”
GOLD:	Sing your praise to the Lord with the harp , with the harp and melodious song ,

ID:	6253
INPUT:	Ez eduki zorrik inorekin , elkar maitatzekoa baizik , zeren lagun hurkoa maite duenak betea baitu legea .
PRED:	Do n't have sexual relations with each other , but do n't love one another . For the law loves a neighbor to love one another .
GOLD:	Owe nothing to anyone — except for your obligation to love one another . If you love your neighbor , you will fulfill the requirements of God 's law .

ID:	6254
INPUT:	harri hutsez eraikiko duzue aldarea . Ondoren , erre-opariak eskainiko dizkiozue bertan Jaunari zeuen Jainkoari ;
PRED:	You must sacrifice a drink of blood . Then you must offer a burnt offering to the Lord your God . You must offer it to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Build the altar of uncut stones , and use it to offer burnt offerings to the Lord your God .

ID:	6255
INPUT:	Samsonen heriotza
PRED:	Samson 's Riddle
GOLD:	Samson 's Final Victory

ID:	6256
INPUT:	Eta honek aitortzen du ikusitako guztia Jainkoaren mezua dela , Jesu Kristok baieztatua .
PRED:	And everyone who believes in Christ Jesus will see that God is the Son of Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	who faithfully reported everything he saw . This is his report of the word of God and the testimony of Jesus Christ .

ID:	6257
INPUT:	Gertakari honen ondoren , Jeroboamek , bere jokabide okerretik aldendu ordez , kultu-lekuetako apaizak herriko jende xehearen artetik hartzen jarraitu zuen . Kargu hori gogoko zuen edonor sagaratu ohi zuen kultu-lekuetako apaiz izateko .
PRED:	But when Jeroboam had left the pagan shrines , he left the pagan shrines and set up the pagan shrines for the people of Israel to worship the pagan gods of Baal .
GOLD:	But even after this , Jeroboam did not turn from his evil ways . He continued to choose priests from the common people . He appointed anyone who wanted to become a priest for the pagan shrines .

ID:	6258
INPUT:	Jaunaren epaia : desleialarentzat zigorra , zintzoarentzat zoriona
PRED:	The Lord is a life-giving fountain ; the righteous person is punished for the godly .
GOLD:	Judgment and Final Salvation

ID:	6259
INPUT:	Orduan , Pedrok , hamaika apostoluen artean zutik , honela hitz egin zien : « Juduok eta Jerusalemen zaudeten guztiok : entzun arretaz nire hitzak , otoi , hemen gertatzen denaz ongi jabe zaitezten .
PRED:	Then Peter and John said to them , “ Brothers , you people of Judah ! Listen to me , you people of Judah , you people of Judah , and you are saying , ‘ Listen to this city . '
GOLD:	Then Peter stepped forward with the eleven other apostles and shouted to the crowd , “ Listen carefully , all of you , fellow Jews and residents of Jerusalem ! Make no mistake about this .

ID:	6260
INPUT:	« Norbait emakumeekin ohi bezala gizonezkoarekin oheratzen bada , higuingarritasuna egiten dute biek : heriotza-zigorra izango dute . Berena izango dute heriotzaren errua .
PRED:	“ If a man commits adultery with a man who commits adultery , the man who commits adultery must be put to death . They must be put to death , and they must be put to death .
GOLD:	“ If a man practices homosexuality , having sex with another man as with a woman , both men have committed a detestable act . They must both be put to death , for they are guilty of a capital offense .

ID:	6261
INPUT:	Ez utzi zeure ahoaribekatu eginarazten , ez esan gero Jainkoariohartu gabe egin duzula . Ea haserretzen zaizun Jainkoazeure hitzengatiketa zeure lanak orodesegiten dizkizun !
PRED:	Do n't turn away from your sins ; do n't let them curse you . Instead , you will be angry with your people , and your children will be angry with you .
GOLD:	It is better to say nothing than to make a promise and not keep it .

ID:	6262
INPUT:	Ason elkartu zitzaigunean , ontzian hartu genuen geurekin eta Mitilenera joan ginen .
PRED:	When we arrived in the province of Asia , we went with the believers in Athens , and we went with the believers .
GOLD:	He joined us there , and we sailed together to Mitylene .

ID:	6263
INPUT:	Jaunak , aldiz , esan zion Samueli : — Ez begiratu horren itxura eta luzerari . Alde batera utzia dut hori . Kontua ez da gizakiak zeri begiratzen dion , gizakiak itxurari begiratzen baitio ; Jaunak , berriz , bihotzari .
PRED:	But the Lord said to Samuel , “ Do n't pick up your eyes , and do n't pick up your eyes . Do n't pick up your eyes , for I do n't know what is right , for it is good . ”
GOLD:	But the Lord said to Samuel , “ Do n't judge by his appearance or height , for I have rejected him . The Lord does n't see things the way you see them . People judge by outward appearance , but the Lord looks at the heart . ”

ID:	6264
INPUT:	Erauziko ditutzure zutoin sakratuak , eta zure hiriak erraustuko .
PRED:	He will destroy your pagan shrines , and he will destroy your towns .
GOLD:	I will destroy all your idols and sacred pillars , so you will never again worship the work of your own hands .

ID:	6265
INPUT:	Jainkoak Horeb menditik abiatzeko agindu
PRED:	A Call from Mount Sinai
GOLD:	Moses Appoints Leaders from Each Tribe

ID:	6266
INPUT:	Jauna errespetatzea da zuhurtziaren ikasbidea ; apaltasuna lehenengo , ohorea gero .
PRED:	Fear of the Lord is good to those who reject the law of the Lord .
GOLD:	Fear of the Lord teaches wisdom ; humility precedes honor .

ID:	6267
INPUT:	Ene maiteok , honelako agintzariak ditugunez gero , garbi gaitezen gorputzeko eta espirituko zikin guztietatik , eta eraman dezagun bere betera geure sagarapena , Jainkoarenganako begirunean biziz .
PRED:	Dear friends , dear friends , we will also live in the bodies of our bodies , and we will share with the Holy Spirit , just as we live in the Spirit of our God .
GOLD:	Because we have these promises , dear friends , let us cleanse ourselves from everything that can defile our body or spirit . And let us work toward complete holiness because we fear God .

ID:	6268
INPUT:	« Geroago , morroiak esan zion : “ Egin dut , jauna , zuk agindua , eta oraindik badago tokia ” .
PRED:	“ Then the servant said to Gehazi , ‘ I have done to you , and then I will go out to the palace . '
GOLD:	After the servant had done this , he reported , ‘ There is still room for more . '

ID:	6269
INPUT:	Bekaturik ez dugula esaten badugu , geure burua engainatzen dugu , eta egia ez dago gure baitan .
PRED:	If we say , we do n't know that we do n't know what we are doing , for we do n't know it .
GOLD:	If we claim we have no sin , we are only fooling ourselves and not living in the truth .

ID:	6270
INPUT:	Baina Jainkoak entzun egin zidan , nire otoitz-oihua aditu .
PRED:	But God heard me , and I cried out to him , “ My prayer is my God ! ”
GOLD:	But God did listen ! He paid attention to my prayer .

ID:	6271
INPUT:	Zeren eta , etsai ginelarik , Jainkoak bere Semearen heriotzari esker berekin baketu bagintuen , behin baketuz gero , zenbatez gehiago ez ote gaitu salbatuko beraren biziaz !
PRED:	For if the Son of Heaven 's Armies has put his enemies in death , then he will save them by his power . But if he did n't save us , he will save us .
GOLD:	For since our friendship with God was restored by the death of his Son while we were still his enemies , we will certainly be saved through the life of his Son .

ID:	6272
INPUT:	Pedrok esan zion : — Zergatik hartu duzue elkar Jaunaren Espiritua tentatzeko ? Hara , atean dira dagoeneko zure senarrari lur eman diotenak ; zu eramango zaituzte orain .
PRED:	Peter said to him , “ Why are you sleeping with the Spirit of the Lord ? Will you give you the Spirit of the Lord ? Then you will give you the land of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	And Peter said , “ How could the two of you even think of conspiring to test the Spirit of the Lord like this ? The young men who buried your husband are just outside the door , and they will carry you out , too . ”

ID:	6273
INPUT:	Maitemindua nauzu , ene arreba , ene emaztegaia ! Maitemindua nauzu zeure begirada bakar batez , bihotz-lotua zeure lepoko kate-bira batez .
PRED:	My lover is my sister , my daughter , my daughter , my daughter , and if you love me , let me be ashamed of your labor .
GOLD:	You have captured my heart , my treasure , my bride.You hold it hostage with one glance of your eyes , with a single jewel of your necklace .

ID:	6274
INPUT:	« Bigarren egunetik zazpigarrenera , eguneroko erre-opari eta berauei dagozkien labore- eta isur-opariez gain , akats gabeko abereak eskainiko dituzue erre-oparitzat , dagozkien labore- eta isur-opariekin , eta aker bat barkamen-oparitarako . Hona erre-oparitzat eskaini beharreko abereak : « Bigarren egunean , hamabi zekor , bi ahari eta urtebeteko hamalau arkume ; hirugarren egunean , hamaika zekor , bi ahari eta urtebeteko hamalau arkume ; laugarren egunean , hamar zekor , bi ahari eta urtebeteko hamalau arkume ; bosgarren egunean , bederatzi zekor , bi ahari eta urtebeteko hamalau arkume ; seigarren egunean , zortzi zekor , bi ahari eta urtebeteko hamalau arkume ; zazpigarren egunean , zazpi zekor , bi ahari eta urtebeteko hamalau arkume .
PRED:	“ On the eighth day of the festival , offer a burnt offering to the Lord , six quarts of choice flour , six quarts of choice flour , six one-year-old male lambs , and a one-year-old male lambs with no defects .
GOLD:	“ On the second day of this seven-day festival , sacrifice twelve young bulls , two rams , and fourteen one-year-old male lambs , all with no defects .

ID:	6275
INPUT:	Beraz , Semeak askatzen bazaituzte , benetan aske izango zarete .
PRED:	So if you have many children , you will be able to have many children .
GOLD:	So if the Son sets you free , you are truly free .

ID:	6276
INPUT:	Baina bihotza idolatria eta jokaera higuingarrietara makurtzen dutenei beren jokabidearen ordaina emango diet . Nik , Jainko Jaunak , esana » .
PRED:	But if they refuse to commit adultery , I will punish them for their detestable sins and detestable sins , says the Sovereign Lord . I , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	But as for those who long for vile images and detestable idols , I will repay them fully for their sins . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	6277
INPUT:	Neure morroi eta mirabeei ere neure espiritua isuriko diet egun haietaneta profetizatu egingo dute .
PRED:	I will give them my servant , and they will prophesy on my own behalf .
GOLD:	In those days I will pour out my Spiriteven on my servants — men and women alike — and they will prophesy .

ID:	6278
INPUT:	Horregatik , Jesus Jaunarengan nola sinesten duzuen eta fededun guztiak nola maite dituzuen jakinik ,
PRED:	That is why you are believers in the name of the Lord Jesus , who love him and understand all that I love you .
GOLD:	Ever since I first heard of your strong faith in the Lord Jesus and your love for God 's people everywhere ,

ID:	6279
INPUT:	Jesus aintziraren beste bazterrera itzuli zenean , jende-talde handia bildu zitzaion ondora . Oraindik aintzira ondoan zegoela ,
PRED:	When Jesus returned to the lake , the crowds gathered around to the shore of the Sea . As soon as the Sea was walking along the shore , they left the Sea .
GOLD:	Jesus got into the boat again and went back to the other side of the lake , where a large crowd gathered around him on the shore .

ID:	6280
INPUT:	Simonek , apostoluek jendeari eskuak ezartzean Espiritua etortzen zitzaiela ikusirik , dirua eskaini zien ,
PRED:	When the apostles saw that the Holy Spirit was in the hands of the Holy Spirit came upon them , he saw that he was a human hand .
GOLD:	When Simon saw that the Spirit was given when the apostles laid their hands on people , he offered them money to buy this power .

ID:	6281
INPUT:	Ilunabarrean siriarren kanpalekura abiatu ziren . Kanpaleku-ertzera heltzean , inor ere ez zegoela ikusi zuten .
PRED:	When they arrived at the camp at the camp , they saw that no one had seen in the camp .
GOLD:	So at twilight they set out for the camp of the Arameans . But when they came to the edge of the camp , no one was there !

ID:	6282
INPUT:	berak emango dio lurrari sasoian sasoiko euria , eta garia , ardoa eta olioa izango dituzue ;
PRED:	When the rains will flow from the rains , the rains will flow from the desert , and the new wine will yield bountiful crops .
GOLD:	then he will send the rains in their proper seasons — the early and late rains — so you can bring in your harvests of grain , new wine , and olive oil .

ID:	6283
INPUT:	Utzi zuten , bada , Jaunaren mendia eta hiru eguneko bidean joan ziren . Jaunaren itun-kutxa aurretik joan zitzaien hiru egunetan , kanpatu behar zuten tokia jakinarazteko .
PRED:	So they carried off the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant , and they went to the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant . So they went out to the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant .
GOLD:	They marched for three days after leaving the mountain of the Lord , with the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant moving ahead of them to show them where to stop and rest .

ID:	6284
INPUT:	Aspalditik ezagutzen zutenek , profetekin batera profeta-trantzean ikusi zutenean , honela ziotsoten elkarri : — Zer gertatzen ote zaio Kixen semeari ? Saul ere profeta artean ?
PRED:	At that time the people of Israel saw that Saul had been a prophet in the synagogue , and they said , “ What happened to Saul , my son Saul , the prophet of Saul ? ”
GOLD:	When those who knew Saul heard about it , they exclaimed , “ What ? Is even Saul a prophet ? How did the son of Kish become a prophet ? ”

ID:	6285
INPUT:	Hori guztia etortzeko ziren gauzen itzala besterik ez da ; errealitatea Kristo da .
PRED:	This is all the way to come to Christ , and there is no other fault .
GOLD:	For these rules are only shadows of the reality yet to come . And Christ himself is that reality .

ID:	6286
INPUT:	Nire esana beti egin duzuenez gero , ene maiteok , egizue orain ere , hor ez nagoelarik ; ez hor nagoenean bezala bakarrik , askoz gehiago baizik . Saia zaitezte zeuen salbamena begirune santuz burutzen ;
PRED:	I have worked hard to love you , dear brothers and sisters , and sisters , stay here in your own way . Now let me think you are n't doing this , but now you can be judged by the Good News .
GOLD:	Dear friends , you always followed my instructions when I was with you . And now that I am away , it is even more important . Work hard to show the results of your salvation , obeying God with deep reverence and fear .

ID:	6287
INPUT:	Jauna , ez ni zigortu haserre , ez ni zentzatu sumindurik .
PRED:	O Lord , pay attention to my anger ; pay attention to my anger .
GOLD:	Have compassion on me , Lord , for I am weak.Heal me , Lord , for my bones are in agony .

ID:	6288
INPUT:	Jainkoa goresten zuten , eta herri osoaren estimazioa zuten . Eta Jaunak egunetik egunera gehitzen zizkion elkarteari salbatzen zirenak .
PRED:	They sang a song of praise and praise to the Lord , and the God of Israel brought him out of the entire community .
GOLD:	all the while praising God and enjoying the goodwill of all the people . And each day the Lord added to their fellowship those who were being saved .

ID:	6289
INPUT:	Neu bainaiz Jauna , zure Jainkoa , Israelen Jainko santua dazure salbatzailea . Egipto eman dut zure askapen-sari , Etiopia eta Seba , zure ordainetan
PRED:	But I am the Lord your God , the Holy One of Israel , who rescued me from Egypt . I have given you the power of Egypt , and I have given you the power of Egypt .
GOLD:	For I am the Lord , your God , the Holy One of Israel , your Savior.I gave Egypt as a ransom for your freedom ; I gave Ethiopia and Seba in your place .

ID:	6290
INPUT:	Jaiki zen , bada , Jakob eta bere seme-alabak eta emazteak gamelu gainera igoarazi zituen .
PRED:	So Jacob got up and returned to his children , and he brought them to his sons and daughters .
GOLD:	So Jacob put his wives and children on camels ,

ID:	6291
INPUT:	Aberastasunak zuhurren koroa , zentzugabeen ergelkeria beti ergelkeria .
PRED:	The wealth of the wise will be destroyed , but fools will be completely destroyed .
GOLD:	Wealth is a crown for the wise ; the effort of fools yields only foolishness .

ID:	6292
INPUT:	Denak negarrez eta aieneka ari ziren neskarengatik . Jesusek esan zien : « Ez egin negarrik ; ez dago hilda , lo dago » .
PRED:	So the disciples were weeping and weeping , and Jesus said to them , “ No , it 's not a single one . ”
GOLD:	The house was filled with people weeping and wailing , but he said , “ Stop the weeping ! She is n't dead ; she 's only asleep . ”

ID:	6293
INPUT:	Bai , zuregandik urrun doazenak galduak dira , desleial zaizkizunak suntsitu egingo dituzu .
PRED:	You will turn away from your sins , and you will destroy them .
GOLD:	Those who desert him will perish , for you destroy those who abandon you .

ID:	6294
INPUT:	( 38 , 1-7 )
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	Plans for the Courtyard

ID:	6295
INPUT:	Hartzeko gelditzen ziren lurraldeak
PRED:	The Land Given to the Halted
GOLD:	The Land Yet to Be Conquered

ID:	6296
INPUT:	Joan zen , beraz , Naaman bere zaldi , guda-gurdi eta guzti , eta Eliseoren etxeko ate aurrean gelditu zen .
PRED:	So Joseph took all his horses and chariots , along with the chariots , and all the houses of Elisha 's house .
GOLD:	So Naaman went with his horses and chariots and waited at the door of Elisha 's house .

ID:	6297
INPUT:	Bai , zu izan zaitut laguntzaile ; kantuz ariko naiz pozik zure hegalen itzalean .
PRED:	I will praise you , and I will sing your praises in the shadow of your wings .
GOLD:	I cling to you ; your strong right hand holds me securely .

ID:	6298
INPUT:	Erre-oparitarako abereak ere hara eramango dituzue eta , haragi eta odol , oso-osorik erreko Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren aldarean . Beste sakrifizioetako odola Jaunaren zeuen Jainkoaren aldare gainean isuriko duzue ; haragia , berriz , jan egingo .
PRED:	You must present the burnt offering to the Lord your God , and you must present it to the Lord your God . You must present it to the Lord your God , and you must offer it to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	You must offer the meat and blood of your burnt offerings on the altar of the Lord your God . The blood of your other sacrifices must be poured out on the altar of the Lord your God , but you may eat the meat .

ID:	6299
INPUT:	ikusi hango harresiak , ikertu jauregiak , hurrengo gizaldiari esateko :
PRED:	A wise person will see him , and many will see him .
GOLD:	For that is what God is like.He is our God forever and ever , and he will guide us until we die .

ID:	6300
INPUT:	Egun hartan , Jaun ahalguztidunariopariak ekarriko dizkioherri lerden eta beltzaranak , edonon beldurrasortzen duen jendeak , ibaiz ureztaturiko lurraldeanbizi denherri gogor eta menderatzaileak . Opariak ekarriko ditu Sion mendira , Jaun ahalguztidunaren bizilekura .
PRED:	In that day the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , who is a great nation of Israel , a great nation of Israel , a great nation , a great nation of Israel , and a great nation of Zion .
GOLD:	At that time the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will receive giftsfrom this land divided by rivers , from this tall , smooth-skinned people , who are feared far and wide for their conquests and destruction.They will bring the gifts to Jerusalem , where the Lord of Heaven 's Armies dwells .

ID:	6301
INPUT:	Zazpigarren hilean , Netaniasen seme eta Elixamaren biloba Ismael , errege-jatorrikoa bera , Mitzpara joan zen hamar gizonekin , Gedalias ikustera . Elkarrekin otordua egiten ari zirela ,
PRED:	On the seventh year of Gedaliah son of Ahikam and grandson of Gedaliah , the daughter of Gedaliah , came to meet Gedaliah son of Gedaliah , who was at Mizpah .
GOLD:	But in midautumn of that year , Ishmael son of Nethaniah and grandson of Elishama , who was a member of the royal family and had been one of the king 's high officials , went to Mizpah with ten men to meet Gedaliah . While they were eating together ,

ID:	6302
INPUT:	Jaunaren menpean jarri
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	Drawing Close to God

ID:	6303
INPUT:	Baina gaiztoaren gaiztoz oker jokatzen baduzue , galdu egingo zarete bai zuek , bai zuen erregea .
PRED:	But if you refuse to obey the king 's orders , you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	But if you continue to sin , you and your king will be swept away . ”

ID:	6304
INPUT:	errugabea zarela diozu , Jauna ez dagoela inola erezurekin haserre . Hara , epaitu egingo zaitut , huts egin ez duzula esaka ari zarelako .
PRED:	O Lord , you have not rebelled against me , for I am very angry with you , and I will not destroy you .
GOLD:	And yet you say , ‘ I have done nothing wrong.Surely God is n't angry with me ! 'But now I will punish you severelybecause you claim you have not sinned .

ID:	6305
INPUT:	Jesus fariseuekin eztabaidan ( 5 , 17 — 6 , 11 )
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Boy
GOLD:	A Discussion about Fasting

ID:	6306
INPUT:	Israeldarrak Sinai basamortuan zeudelarik , Jauna mintzatu zitzaion Moisesi elkarketa-etxolan . Egiptotik irten eta hurrengo urtea zen , bigarren hilaren lehen eguna . Hau esan zion :
PRED:	Then the Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai and said to Moses , “ This is what the Lord said to Moses , ‘ This is what the Lord says concerning the land of Egypt . '
GOLD:	A year after Israel 's departure from Egypt , the Lord spoke to Moses in the Tabernacle in the wilderness of Sinai . On the first day of the second month of that year he said ,

ID:	6307
INPUT:	Biharamun goizean , berriro hirira zetorrela , Jesus gosetu egin zen .
PRED:	Early the next morning , Jesus went up to the town of Jericho .
GOLD:	In the morning , as Jesus was returning to Jerusalem , he was hungry ,

ID:	6308
INPUT:	Dohakabeari eskua zabaltzen dioeta behartsuari laguntza ematen .
PRED:	The poor are more powerful ; the poor give birth to the poor .
GOLD:	She extends a helping hand to the poorand opens her arms to the needy .

ID:	6309
INPUT:	Xefatiasen ondorengoetatik Zebadias , Mikaelen semea , beste laurogei gizonekin ;
PRED:	From the family of Bani : Shemaiah son of Hashabiah , and 70 other men .
GOLD:	From the family of Shephatiah : Zebadiah son of Michael and 80 other men .

ID:	6310
INPUT:	Moisesek legean honelakoak harrika hiltzeko agindu zigun ; zuk zer diozu ?
PRED:	When Moses had finished saying these things to kill us , what have you done to us ? ”
GOLD:	The law of Moses says to stone her . What do you say ? ”

ID:	6311
INPUT:	Poz bitez basamortuaeta bertako kanpalekuak , Kedar leinuaren bizilekuak . Sela hiriko bizilagunekegin bezate poz-oihu , mendi-gailurretan irrintzi .
PRED:	O Lord , rejoice in the wilderness ! Let the towns of the Amorites sing for joy , for the city of refuge is filled with joy and joy .
GOLD:	Join in the chorus , you desert towns ; let the villages of Kedar rejoice ! Let the people of Sela sing for joy ; shout praises from the mountaintops !

ID:	6312
INPUT:	Ea , sal diezaiegun ismaeldarrei , kalterik egin gabe , anaia hau geure odolekoa dugu eta » . Amore eman zuten anaiek .
PRED:	It is not a permanent law for the people of Israel , for we have sworn an oath to our brother , Aaron , and his brother , too . ”
GOLD:	Instead of hurting him , let 's sell him to those Ishmaelite traders . After all , he is our brother — our own flesh and blood ! ” And his brothers agreed .

ID:	6313
INPUT:	Orduan , esan zien Jesusek sinetsi zioten juduei : — Nire mezuan tinko irauten baduzue , zinez nire ikasle izango zarete ;
PRED:	Then Jesus said to the crowds , “ If you obey me , you will be my disciple , you will be my disciple . ”
GOLD:	Jesus said to the people who believed in him , “ You are truly my disciples if you remain faithful to my teachings .

ID:	6314
INPUT:	Nahiz eta zeure buruaxa<unk> eta lixibaz garbitu , ez da nire begi aurretik aldentzenzure bekatuaren zikina . Hala diot nik , Jainko Jaunak .
PRED:	Even if some of the heads of Naboth 's family were dead , I would not find some of his family , says the Sovereign Lord .
GOLD:	No amount of soap or lye can make you clean.I still see the stain of your guilt.I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !

ID:	6315
INPUT:	( Mt 9 , 1-8 ; Lk 5 , 17-26 )
PRED:	Jesus Calls Matthew
GOLD:	A Discussion about Fasting

ID:	6316
INPUT:	eta azkengabeko otoitzen aitzakiaz , emakume alargunen ondasunak irensten dituzte . Epairik zorrotzena izango dute horrelako horiek » .
PRED:	They must remove their pagan shrines and remove their father 's bones . They will be cut off from their mouths , and they will be killed by the sword . ”
GOLD:	Yet they shamelessly cheat widows out of their property and then pretend to be pious by making long prayers in public . Because of this , they will be severely punished . ”

ID:	6317
INPUT:	Ga<unk> , Uza eta Paseahenak ;
PRED:	Uzza , Giddel , Gahar ,
GOLD:	Gazzam , Uzza , Paseah ,

ID:	6318
INPUT:	Zeure jaunaren etxea eman dizut , eta altzoan jarri dizkizut zeure jaunaren emazteak . Israel eta Juda erreinuak eman dizkizut . Eta hori gutxi balitz , askoz handiagoak emanen dizkizut .
PRED:	I have given you the honor of my lord , and I will give you the king of Israel . I will give you the royal palace , and I will give you many gifts to you . ”
GOLD:	I gave you your master 's house and his wives and the kingdoms of Israel and Judah . And if that had not been enough , I would have given you much , much more .

ID:	6319
INPUT:	Alferrik zigortu ditutzuen seme-alabak , ez baituzue eskarmenturik hartu . Zeuek hil dituzue profetak ezpataz , lehoi amorratuak bezala .
PRED:	You have rejected your children , but you have no children , for you have killed them . You have killed them like lions ! ”
GOLD:	“ I have punished your children , but they did not respond to my discipline.You yourselves have killed your prophetsas a lion kills its prey .

ID:	6320
INPUT:	Begira Jainkoak eginari : nork zuzen ote dezakehark okertua ?
PRED:	No one can see what God says : “ No one can do what is right ? ”
GOLD:	Accept the way God does things , for who can straighten what he has made crooked ?

ID:	6321
INPUT:	Jainkoak Moisesi esan zion , gainera : — Esan israeldarrei : Jaunak , zuen arbaso Abraham , Isaak eta Jakoben Jainkoak , zuengana bidali nau . Horixe izango da nire izena betiko ; hala deituko naute belaunez belaun .
PRED:	Then God said to Moses , “ Say to the people of Israel , ‘ This is what the Lord your God , the God of Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob , says : ‘ This is a permanent law for me . '
GOLD:	God also said to Moses , “ Say this to the people of Israel : Yahweh , the God of your ancestors — the God of Abraham , the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob — has sent me to you.This is my eternal name , my name to remember for all generations .

ID:	6322
INPUT:	Apaizburuek eta herriak ere okerkeria okerkeriaren gainean egiten zuten , arrotzen ohitura higuingarriak hartuz . Jaunak Jerusalemen beretzat sagaratua zuen tenplua ere kutsatu egin zuten .
PRED:	The leading priests and the people of Jerusalem did not worship the images of Baal . They offered sacrifices to the Lord , just as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	Likewise , all the leaders of the priests and the people became more and more unfaithful . They followed all the pagan practices of the surrounding nations , desecrating the Temple of the Lord that had been consecrated in Jerusalem .

ID:	6323
INPUT:	Eta zeu , Paxhur , eta zure familia osoa gatibu eramango zaituztete Babiloniara . Han hilko zara eta han hilobiratuko zaituzte , gezurrezko profeta-mezua ematen zenien adiskide guztiekin batera » .
PRED:	Now Pashhur , Jeremiah , and Pashhur , will be able to bring you back to Babylon . You will be buried in Babylon , and you will be buried with all your prophets . ”
GOLD:	As for you , Pashhur , you and all your household will go as captives to Babylon . There you will die and be buried , you and all your friends to whom you prophesied that everything would be all right . ' ”

ID:	6324
INPUT:	Eta eroapenak lortuko du bere helburua , heldutasun beteko pertsonak izan zaitezten , ezertan akatsik gabeak .
PRED:	And those who trust in their own desires will be caught , and those who trust in their own desires will be saved .
GOLD:	So let it grow , for when your endurance is fully developed , you will be perfect and complete , needing nothing .

ID:	6325
INPUT:	Eta hori ere gutxitzat jota , Jainko Jauna , zure morroi honen etxeari luzarorako hitza eman diozu . Hori ez da maiz gertatzen , Jainko Jauna .
PRED:	O Lord our God , you are my servant and your servant , and you will have a long time . This is what the Sovereign Lord our God has commanded you .
GOLD:	And now , Sovereign Lord , in addition to everything else , you speak of giving your servant a lasting dynasty ! Do you deal with everyone this way , O Sovereign Lord ?

ID:	6326
INPUT:	Ondoren , beste zazpi behi itxura txarreko eta argal atera ziren . Haiek bezain eskasik ez zen inoiz ordu arte ikusi Egipto lurraldean .
PRED:	Then the seven more cows came up to the land of Egypt , so they could not see the next morning . But when they saw the Egyptians , they were afraid of the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	But then I saw seven sick-looking cows , scrawny and thin , come up after them . I 've never seen such sorry-looking animals in all the land of Egypt .

ID:	6327
INPUT:	Simonek erantzun zion : — Gehien barkatu zionak , nik uste . Jesusek esan zion : — Zuzen diozu .
PRED:	Simon replied , “ The Lord has forgiven you , ” he said . “ You are going to forgive your sins . ”
GOLD:	Simon answered , “ I suppose the one for whom he canceled the larger debt . ” “ That 's right , ” Jesus said .

ID:	6328
INPUT:	Orduan , bisitariek heldu eta etxe barrura erakarri zuten Lot , eta atea itxi .
PRED:	So the owner grabbed him and beat him back to the door and beat him back .
GOLD:	But the two angels reached out , pulled Lot into the house , and bolted the door .

ID:	6329
INPUT:	Haren ondoren , erroldatzea egin zen garaian , Judas galilearra * atera zen , eta hainbat jende bereganatu zuen ; baina hil egin zuten hura ere , eta jarraitzaile guztiak sakabanatu ziren .
PRED:	But when they were trying to kill Judas , one of the people of Judah , they killed one of the Jews . So they killed him , and he killed all the people who had died .
GOLD:	After him , at the time of the census , there was Judas of Galilee . He got people to follow him , but he was killed , too , and all his followers were scattered .

ID:	6330
INPUT:	Seme-alabek egurra biltzen dute , gurasoek sua pizten eta emakumeek orea egiten , Istar-i , zeruko erregina deitzen diotenari , opilak eskaintzeko ; gainera , jainko arrotzei isur-opariak eskaintzen dizkiete , ni iraintzeko .
PRED:	They worship the gods of Israel — the wood of the field — the wood , the wood , and the other gods — the wood of Israel — the wood , the wood , and the wood on the altar .
GOLD:	No wonder I am so angry ! Watch how the children gather wood and the fathers build sacrificial fires . See how the women knead dough and make cakes to offer to the Queen of Heaven . And they pour out liquid offerings to their other idol gods !

ID:	6331
INPUT:	Lege eta ohikune bat bera izango duzue , bai zuek , bai zuen artean bizi den etorkinak » .
PRED:	You will have a permanent law for you , and you will live among you . ”
GOLD:	The same instructions and regulations will apply both to you and to the foreigners living among you . ”

ID:	6332
INPUT:	« Kartzela arreta guztiaz itxia aurkitu dugu eta zaintzaileak ateetan erne , baina irekitzean barruan ez dugu inor aurkitu » .
PRED:	“ We have found everything in the fields and goats , but we have found no pity on the edge of the guard . ”
GOLD:	“ The jail was securely locked , with the guards standing outside , but when we opened the gates , no one was there ! ”

ID:	6333
INPUT:	Irents beza gau hura iluntasunak , ez beza inork urteko egunen artean sar , ezta zenbatu ere hilekoen artean !
PRED:	Let all night be thrown into the darkness , so no one can enter the night . Instead , no one may enter the city .
GOLD:	Let that night be blotted off the calendar , never again to be counted among the days of the year , never again to appear among the months .

ID:	6334
INPUT:	Hauek ziren Lebiren semeak : Gerxon , Kehat eta Merari .
PRED:	These were the clans of the tribe of Levi , listed according to the clans of the tribe of Levi .
GOLD:	Levi had three sons , whose names were Gershon , Kohath , and Merari .

ID:	6335
INPUT:	Ez diegu jaramonik egin zure zerbitzari profetei , zure izenean gure errege eta buruzagiei , gure arbaso eta herri osoari hitz egin dietenean .
PRED:	We have not heard the prophets of your servants , the prophets , the prophets , the prophets , the prophets , and prophets , too .
GOLD:	We have refused to listen to your servants the prophets , who spoke on your authority to our kings and princes and ancestors and to all the people of the land .

ID:	6336
INPUT:	ez du haurrik , ez ondorengorik herrian , ez da inor bizirik gelditzen haren egoitzan .
PRED:	No one has ever been born to the children , for no one lives in the morning .
GOLD:	They will have neither children nor grandchildren , nor any survivor in the place where they lived .

ID:	6337
INPUT:	etengabeko sesioak ; horietan aritzen direnak burua galdutako jendea da , egiaren axolarik gabea ; horiek erlijioa irabazpide bihurtzen dute .
PRED:	A person who believes in their hearts are hungry , but those who do evil will become foolish and foolish . They are foolish to foolish , but they are foolish and foolish .
GOLD:	These people always cause trouble . Their minds are corrupt , and they have turned their backs on the truth . To them , a show of godliness is just a way to become wealthy .

ID:	6338
INPUT:	ez dute legamiarekin erreko , neure ohorez erretako oparietatik ematen diedan partea baita . Guztiz sakratua da , barkamen-oparia eta ordain-oparia bezainbeste .
PRED:	You must not offer any baked goods with the fat of my sin offering . It is a pleasing aroma to the Lord . It is a permanent law for you , a burnt offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	In the morning , after the priest on duty has put on his official linen clothing and linen undergarments , he must clean out the ashes of the burnt offering and put them beside the altar .

ID:	6339
INPUT:	santutegiko liturgi zerbitzurako jantziak , Aaron apaizaren jantzi sakratuak eta beronen semeen apaiz-zerbitzurako jantziak » .
PRED:	the beautifully stitched garments for the priests , the sacred garments for Aaron and his sons , and the garments for the sacred garments . ”
GOLD:	the beautifully stitched garments for the priests to wear while ministering in the Holy Place — the sacred garments for Aaron the priest , and the garments for his sons to wear as they minister as priests . ”

ID:	6340
INPUT:	Betea dago lurraldea idoloz : beren eskuz eginaren aurreandira ahuspezten , beren behatzez landuaren aurrean .
PRED:	He is the one who lives in the land of the earth , with the powers of the heavens , and his bow before him .
GOLD:	Their land is full of idols ; the people worship things they have madewith their own hands .

ID:	6341
INPUT:	Jerusalem berriaren distira
PRED:	The Fall of Jerusalem
GOLD:	Future Glory for Jerusalem

ID:	6342
INPUT:	Handik hiru urtera Jerusalemera igo nintzen Pedro ezagutzera , eta hamabost egun egin nituen berarekin .
PRED:	After three years I went up to Jerusalem , Peter took me to Jerusalem , and he took five of them to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Then three years later I went to Jerusalem to get to know Peter , and I stayed with him for fifteen days .

ID:	6343
INPUT:	Haren barruan izango dute etzalekuartalde eta mota guztietakoabereek . Hango zutabeburuetanemango dute gauahontzak eta trikuak . Leiho eta ateburuetankarranka egingo du beleak . Zedrozko oholeriagorri agertuko da .
PRED:	They will cover their bones with their flocks and herds , and they will cover their heads with their heads . Then they will shave their heads and shave their heads . They will remove all their pagan shrines and cut down their bones .
GOLD:	The proud city will become a pasture for flocks and herds , and all sorts of wild animals will settle there.The desert owl and screech owl will roost on its ruined columns , their calls echoing through the gaping windows.Rubble will block all the doorways , and the cedar paneling will be exposed to the weather .

ID:	6344
INPUT:	Zintzoak , ongi pentsatu eta gero erantzun ; gaiztoak , gaiztakeria botatzen ahotik .
PRED:	When the godly succeed , the godly answer , but the wicked take away from the wicked .
GOLD:	The heart of the godly thinks carefully before speaking ; the mouth of the wicked overflows with evil words .

ID:	6345
INPUT:	Behia eta hartz emeaelkarrekin larratuko diraeta haien umeak batera etzango . Lehoiak lastoa jango du , idiaren antzera .
PRED:	The young men of Bethel will be taken away with their young men , and their young men will eat their flesh .
GOLD:	The cow will graze near the bear.The cub and the calf will lie down together.The lion will eat hay like a cow .

ID:	6346
INPUT:	eta , hilobitik itzulirik , gertatutako guztiaren berri eman zieten Hamaikei eta gainerako ikasleei .
PRED:	As soon as he returned from the tomb , many of the teachers of religious law appeared to the disciples and began teaching them .
GOLD:	So they rushed back from the tomb to tell his eleven disciples — and everyone else — what had happened .

ID:	6347
INPUT:	( Ir 21 , 1-6 )
PRED:	Edom 's Sin and Punishment
GOLD:	Sacrificing Firstborn Male Animals

ID:	6348
INPUT:	Kuxek Nimrod izan zuen . Hau izan zen lehenengo gizon boteretsua munduan ;
PRED:	There was a man named Micah , who was the least of the world .
GOLD:	Cush was also the ancestor of Nimrod , who was the first heroic warrior on earth .

ID:	6349
INPUT:	Bat bakarra epailea
PRED:	The Widow 's Judge
GOLD:	Warning against Judging Others

ID:	6350
INPUT:	Eta ongi egiten dizuetenei bakarrik egiten badiezue ongi , zer esker on zor zaizue ? Bekatariek ere egiten dute beste horrenbeste .
PRED:	And if you are good to those who do good to those who are good to those who do what is right , why should you do such a good thing ?
GOLD:	And if you do good only to those who do good to you , why should you get credit ? Even sinners do that much !

ID:	6351
INPUT:	Horientzat egunsentia gau iluna da , ohituak baitaude iluntasuneko izuetara » .
PRED:	That night it will be night for night , but the darkness will be night . ”
GOLD:	The black night is their morning.They ally themselves with the terrors of the darkness .

ID:	6352
INPUT:	Baina hark erantzun zion aitari : “ Hainbeste urte da zure agindu bat ere sekula huts egin gabe zerbitzatzen zaitudala , eta ez didazu egundaino antxume bat ere eman , lagunekin festa egiteko ;
PRED:	But he replied to his father , ‘ There is no more years for you , my servant , and if you do n't have a single day , you wo n't have a young man who has no idea what you have done .
GOLD:	but he replied , ‘ All these years I 've slaved for you and never once refused to do a single thing you told me to . And in all that time you never gave me even one young goat for a feast with my friends .

ID:	6353
INPUT:	« Eman dezagun norbaitek okela sagaratua daramala bere jantzian eta jantzi-ertzak ogia , eltzekoa , ardoa , olioa nahiz bestelako janariren bat ukitzen duela ; janari hauek sagaratu bihurtzen ote dira ? » Apaizek ezetz erantzun zuten .
PRED:	“ Suppose someone has sexual relations with a man who has been eaten by bread , bread , meat , meat , meat , meat , and bread , meat , and bread , and olive oil , and eat it . ”
GOLD:	‘ If one of you is carrying some meat from a holy sacrifice in his robes and his robe happens to brush against some bread or stew , wine or olive oil , or any other kind of food , will it also become holy ? ' ” The priests replied , “ No . ”

ID:	6354
INPUT:	Beraz , adieraz iezaiezu nire , Jainko Jaun honen , mezua : Zuek haragia odolarekin jaten duzue , idoloetan uste ona jarri eta hilketak egiten dituzue . Nola nahi duzue , bada , lurralde honen jabetza izan ?
PRED:	Therefore , tell them , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : You are saying , ‘ You are the blood of the Babylonians , and you will die in the land of the Babylonians , and you will die . '
GOLD:	So tell these people , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : You eat meat with blood in it , you worship idols , and you murder the innocent . Do you really think the land should be yours ?

ID:	6355
INPUT:	Israeldarrei zegokien zatitik , gizaki eta abere-mota bakoitzetik berrogeita hamarreko bat bereizi zuen , eta Jaunaren egoitzako zerbitzuaz arduratzen ziren lebitarrei eman zien , Jaunak agindu bezala .
PRED:	He set out from the tribes of Israel from all the tribes of Israel , and he gave them a sacred tithe from the Lord 's presence , just as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	From the half-share given to the people , Moses took one of every fifty prisoners and animals and gave them to the Levites , who maintained the Lord 's Tabernacle . All this was done as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	6356
INPUT:	Haren aurreko distiraz , tximista eta sugarrezko ikatz goribihurtzen ziren hodeiak .
PRED:	They were burning with fire and burning coals , and burning coals blazed forth .
GOLD:	The Lord thundered from heaven ; the voice of the Most High resoundedamid the hail and burning coals .

ID:	6357
INPUT:	Jesus Espiritu Santuaz betea itzuli zen Jordandik . Espirituak eramanik , basamortuan barrena ibili zen
PRED:	When Jesus returned to the Holy Spirit , the Holy Spirit returned from the wilderness of the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	Then Jesus , full of the Holy Spirit , returned from the Jordan River . He was led by the Spirit in the wilderness ,

ID:	6358
INPUT:	baina munduak jakin behar du nik Aita maite dudala eta hark agindua zintzo betetzen dudala . Jaiki , goazen hemendik !
PRED:	But the Father who loves the Father and how he loves his Father and how he loves you . Get up ! ”
GOLD:	but I will do what the Father requires of me , so that the world will know that I love the Father . Come , let 's be going .

ID:	6359
INPUT:	bere nagusiaren etxean kartzelatuak zeuden faraoiaren funtzionarioak eta galdegin zien : — Zergatik zaudete hain aurpegi-ilun ?
PRED:	When Pharaoh 's brothers were brought into his palace , he asked Pharaoh , “ Why are you so frightened ? ”
GOLD:	“ Why do you look so worried today ? ” he asked them .

ID:	6360
INPUT:	Esterrek otordura deitu erregea eta Haman
PRED:	Esther 's banquet for Esther 's Kings
GOLD:	Esther 's Request to the King

ID:	6361
INPUT:	Hogeita hamabost urte zituen Josafatek Judako errege izaten hastean , eta hogeita bost urtez izan zen errege Jerusalemen . Beraren amak Azuba zuen izena eta Xilhiren alaba zen .
PRED:	Jehoshaphat was twenty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem twenty-five years . His mother was Jecoliah from Jerusalem . His mother was the daughter of Hezekiah .
GOLD:	So Jehoshaphat ruled over the land of Judah . He was thirty-five years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem twenty-five years . His mother was Azubah , the daughter of Shilhi .

ID:	6362
INPUT:	Joan zen , bada , agindutakoa hartzera , eta amarengana itzuli zen . Honek jaki goxoa prestatu zuen , aitak atsegin zuen bezalakoa .
PRED:	So John returned to his father , and he told him what he had said . So he prepared a meal for his father 's father , for he prepared a meal for his father 's father .
GOLD:	So Jacob went out and got the young goats for his mother . Rebekah took them and prepared a delicious meal , just the way Isaac liked it .

ID:	6363
INPUT:	goizero ikuskatzeko , uneoro aztertzen jarduteko ?
PRED:	When you see the morning , how long will you understand what is right ?
GOLD:	For you examine us every morningand test us every moment .

ID:	6364
INPUT:	Lemuel erregearen esanak , bere amak irakatsitakoak .
PRED:	The Birth of the king 's law , and the whole law of the wicked will be destroyed .
GOLD:	The sayings of King Lemuel contain this message , which his mother taught him .

ID:	6365
INPUT:	zeure desohorea har dezazun eta lotsa zaitezen egin duzun guztiaz ; horrela , kontsolatu egingo dira haiek .
PRED:	You will be ashamed of your own shame , and you will comfort you .
GOLD:	Then you will be truly ashamed of everything you have done , for your sins make them feel good in comparison .

ID:	6366
INPUT:	Senideok , guri dagokigunez , aldi batez zuengandik urruti aurkitu ginelarik — gorputzez , ez bihotzez — , eginahalak eta gehiago egin genituen zuek aurrez aurre ikustera joateko . Hain baitzen kartsua gure gogoa ,
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , dear brothers and sisters , we have found favor with you , so that we could see that we could see the truth , and we could see that we could see the truth . ”
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , after we were separated from you for a little while ( though our hearts never left you ) , we tried very hard to come back because of our intense longing to see you again .

ID:	6367
INPUT:	Gero , esan zuen filistearrak : — Erronka hau botatzen dizuet gaur , israeldar guda-lerroetakooi ! Bidal iezadazue gizon bat , eta ekin diezaiogun borrokari !
PRED:	Then he said to the Philistines , “ This is what the Philistines have done to me today , for I am sending you victory over the army of Israel . ”
GOLD:	I defy the armies of Israel today ! Send me a man who will fight me ! ”

ID:	6368
INPUT:	Han zihoan ura aldare inguru guztian , erretena betetzeraino .
PRED:	There was an altar there on the east side of the altar , where the altar was built .
GOLD:	and the water ran around the altar and even filled the trench .

ID:	6369
INPUT:	Jainkoaren alde jarri nahi al duzueeta haren defendatzaile bihurtu ?
PRED:	Do you think of God 's justice ? Do you want to defend the law of God ?
GOLD:	Will you slant your testimony in his favor ? Will you argue God 's case for him ?

ID:	6370
INPUT:	Saulek , orduan , esan zion Jaunari : — Israelen Jainko , ager iezaguzu egia osoa . Zotz egin eta Jonatan eta Saul izendatu zituen Jainkoak ; herria , aldiz , libre atera zen .
PRED:	Then Saul said to the Lord , “ You are the God of Israel , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , and he rescued them from the land of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Then Saul prayed , “ O Lord , God of Israel , please show us who is guilty and who is innocent . ” Then they cast sacred lots , and Jonathan and Saul were chosen as the guilty ones , and the people were declared innocent .

ID:	6371
INPUT:	Ez dago han zeruan , zuek honela esan behar izateko : “ Nor joango zaigu zerura , agindua ekarri eta guri jakinarazteko , bete ahal izan dezagun ? ”
PRED:	Do n't you say , ‘ Who should we go to the heavenly heaven ? Who will we go to the heavenly Father ? '
GOLD:	It is not kept in heaven , so distant that you must ask , ‘ Who will go up to heaven and bring it down so we can hear it and obey ? '

ID:	6372
INPUT:	Agindu maitagarri horiek ditut besarkatzen , zure arauak darabilzkit gogoan .
PRED:	I love your commands , O God , for I have scattered my enemies .
GOLD:	I honor and love your commands.I meditate on your decrees .

ID:	6373
INPUT:	Honela dio Jaunak : « Mugarriak aurreratzendituztenek bezalajokatzen dute Judako buruzagiek . Ura bezala isuriko dietneure haserrea .
PRED:	“ As soon as I live , ” says the Lord , “ I will pour out my fury on the people of Judah . ”
GOLD:	“ The leaders of Judah have become like thieves.So I will pour my anger on them like a waterfall .

ID:	6374
INPUT:	ez dago ilunperik , ez itzal edo gerizperik , gaizkileen gordeleku izan daitekeenik .
PRED:	They do n't make the light of the wicked , but they do n't obey the law of the wicked .
GOLD:	No darkness is thick enoughto hide the wicked from his eyes .

ID:	6375
INPUT:	Horrelako horiek sasiapostolu dira , gezurrezko langile , Kristoren apostolu-itxura baino ez dutenak .
PRED:	That is why the apostles are saying , “ We are apostles are apostles , but we are apostles are not greater than God . ”
GOLD:	These people are false apostles . They are deceitful workers who disguise themselves as apostles of Christ .

ID:	6376
INPUT:	Hartzazue Jaunaren izenean poz handiz , eta ohoratu beti hori bezalakoak direnak .
PRED:	Let me rejoice in the Lord 's presence , for the Lord has given me great joy .
GOLD:	Welcome him in the Lord 's love and with great joy , and give him the honor that people like him deserve .

ID:	6377
INPUT:	Ezar nazazu bihotzean zigilu bezala , besoan zigilu bezala . Herioa bezain gogorra maitasuna , Hildakoen Egoitza bezain iraunkorra maite-grina . Su eta gar da maitasuna , Jaunarengandiko sugar .
PRED:	Give them a crown in the sky , like a field in a field , like a fire of fire . It is like a fire of fire , a fire of fire , a fire of fire , a fire of fire .
GOLD:	Place me like a seal over your heart , like a seal on your arm.For love is as strong as death , its jealousy as enduring as the grave.Love flashes like fire , the brightest kind of flame .

ID:	6378
INPUT:	Jauna , zer da gizakia , zu hartaz arduratzeko , zer gizasemea , zuk harengan pentsatzeko ?
PRED:	O Lord , what can you think about it ? How can you think about it ?
GOLD:	O Lord , what are human beings that you should notice them , mere mortals that you should think about them ?

ID:	6379
INPUT:	“ Sortzen al da kanabera paduratik kanpo , hazten ote ihia urik gabe ?
PRED:	Can they walk through the sea ? Can they never forget it ?
GOLD:	“ Can papyrus reeds grow tall without a marsh ? Can marsh grass flourish without water ?

ID:	6380
INPUT:	Israeldarrak berriro abiatu eta Moabeko lautadan ezarri zuten kanpalekua , Jordanez ekialdera , Jerikoren parean .
PRED:	Then the Israelites crossed the Jordan River and camped beside the plains of Moab beside the Jordan River .
GOLD:	Then the people of Israel traveled to the plains of Moab and camped east of the Jordan River , across from Jericho .

ID:	6381
INPUT:	Gaiztoari hil egingo dela esaten badiot , eta hark bekatutik aldendu eta zuzenbidez eta justiziaz jokatzen badu ,
PRED:	But if I warn the wicked , I will turn away from their sins and turn away from their sins and do what is right and right .
GOLD:	And suppose I tell some wicked people that they will surely die , but then they turn from their sins and do what is just and right .

