BLEU:	0.11609414207021057
ID:	0
INPUT:	▁Jaunari ▁atsegin ▁ez ▁zaiona ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁Nebaten ▁seme ▁Jeroboamek ▁Israeli ▁eginarazi ▁zizkion ▁bekatu etatik ▁aldendu ▁gabe .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , but he refused to turn from the sins of Israel .
GOLD:	But he did what was evil in the Lord 's sight . He followed the example of Jeroboam son of Nebat , continuing the sins that Jeroboam had led Israel to commit .

ID:	1
INPUT:	▁Z ap iak ▁elkarrekin ▁josi ▁zituzten , ▁bost ▁alde ▁batetik ▁eta ▁sei ▁beste tik .
PRED:	They were joined together with each other , and five of the other with six feet long .
GOLD:	Bezalel joined five of these curtains together to make one long curtain , and the other six were joined to make a second long curtain .

ID:	2
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁egintza ▁gores garriak , haren ▁garaipena ▁eta ▁egin ▁dituen ▁mirariak ez ▁dizkie gu ▁ezku tatuko ▁geure ▁haur rei , b aizik ▁eta ▁datorren ▁belaunaldi ari ▁kon tatuko .
PRED:	Let us praise the Lord , and let us tell us what he has done . Let us tell us about our children , and we will tell the truth about this generation .
GOLD:	We will not hide these truths from our children ; we will tell the next generationabout the glorious deeds of the Lord , about his power and his mighty wonders .

ID:	3
INPUT:	▁Apaizak : ▁J ed aias en ▁ondorengoak , ▁hots , ▁Josueren ▁jatorriko ak , ▁ <unk> ;
PRED:	From the priests : Jeshua son of Jeshua , the descendants of Jeshua ,
GOLD:	These are the priests who returned from exile : The family of Jedaiah ( through the line of Jeshua ) 973

ID:	4
INPUT:	▁S un tsitu ▁egingo ▁ditut
PRED:	The Lord 's Promise of Victory
GOLD:	Jeremiah Weeps for Sinful Judah

ID:	5
INPUT:	▁Zoritx ar ▁biok ▁gertatuko ▁zaizkizu , bat - batean , ▁egun ▁berean : h aur rik ▁gabe ▁eta ▁alargun geldi tuko ▁zara — z oritx arraren ▁zoritxarra ! — ; ez ▁dizute ▁balio ko zeure ▁sor gin keria ▁ugari ek eta ▁az tik eri en ▁ahalmen ▁handiak .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who have fallen on your own day , and your sons will be left , and you will sit on your heads .
GOLD:	Well , both these things will come upon you in a moment : widowhood and the loss of your children.Yes , these calamities will come upon you , despite all your witchcraft and magic .

ID:	6
INPUT:	▁Den bora l dia ▁zeraman ▁Isaakek ▁Ger ar - en . ▁Behin ▁batez , ▁filistearren ▁errege ▁Abimelek ▁leiho ra ▁atera ▁zen . ▁Eta ▁hona ▁non ▁ikusten ▁dituen ▁Isaak ▁eta ▁R eb eka ▁emaztea ▁harreman ▁gox oan .
PRED:	So Isaac 's wife was filled with a period of water , and he went out to the Philistine side of the Philistines . So Isaac 's wife was buried with her in a bed .
GOLD:	But some time later , Abimelech , king of the Philistines , looked out his window and saw Isaac caressing Rebekah .

ID:	7
INPUT:	▁Lur rean ▁eztia ▁barre ia tua ▁zegoen ▁oih an ▁batera ▁heldu ▁zen ▁giza talde ▁osoa .
PRED:	He reached the ground of the earth , and all the people of the earth was filled with human branches .
GOLD:	even though they had all found honeycomb on the ground in the forest .

ID:	8
INPUT:	▁Tenpluaren ▁barn en eko ▁azken ▁hamar ▁metro ak , ▁berriz , ▁zedro zko ▁ohol ez ▁estali ▁zituen , ▁beh etik ▁hasi ▁eta ▁goiko ▁h abe etaraino , ▁eta ▁toki ▁hori ▁santutegia , ▁hots , ▁toki ▁santu - s antua , ▁izateko ▁antolatu ▁zuen .
PRED:	The Temple also made ten steps of the Temple , and he overlaid it with cedar , with cedar , and the doors of the Temple . The Temple was located in the inner courtyard of the Holy Place .
GOLD:	He partitioned off an inner sanctuary — the Most Holy Place — at the far end of the Temple . It was 30 feet deep and was paneled with cedar from floor to ceiling .

ID:	9
INPUT:	▁baita ▁espiritu ▁gaizto etatik ▁eta ▁gaitz etatik ▁sendatu ak ▁zituen ▁zenbait ▁emakume ▁ere : ▁Mag dalako ▁Maria ▁— h onen gandik ▁zazpi ▁deabru ▁bota ▁zituen —,
PRED:	For he healed the evil spirits from the evil spirits from the evil spirits and the women who had been healed from the demons .
GOLD:	along with some women who had been cured of evil spirits and diseases . Among them were Mary Magdalene , from whom he had cast out seven demons ;

ID:	10
INPUT:	▁« Egun ▁hau ▁gogoan garri ▁izango ▁duzue ▁eta , ▁Jaunaren ▁ohorez , ▁festa ▁nagus iz ▁ospatuko . ▁ F esta ▁hau ▁lege - indar rez ▁ezarriko ▁duzue ▁belaunez ▁belaun .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : You must be set aside for all the days of the Lord your God . You must be observed from generation to generation to generation .
GOLD:	“ This is a day to remember . Each year , from generation to generation , you must celebrate it as a special festival to the Lord . This is a law for all time .

ID:	11
INPUT:	▁alargun tsak ▁esku - hutsik ▁bidaltzen ▁zenituen , um ezur tzak ▁gaizki ▁hartzen .
PRED:	You sent a widow to feed the widow of widows .
GOLD:	You must have sent widows away empty-handedand crushed the hopes of orphans .

ID:	12
INPUT:	▁Zintz ilik atu ▁erre z ela ▁zapi en ▁k ati gail uen ▁p ean , ▁eta ▁sartu ▁haren ▁atzean ▁itun - kutxa . ▁Er rez el ak ▁bereiz iko ▁ditu ▁toki ▁santua ▁eta ▁toki ▁santu - s antua .
PRED:	Give the following instructions to the Lord : “ Give the Ark of the Covenant to lead the Ark of the Covenant , the Most Holy Place , and the Ark of the Covenant , the Most Holy Place will be holy .
GOLD:	Hang the inner curtain from clasps , and put the Ark of the Covenant in the room behind it . This curtain will separate the Holy Place from the Most Holy Place .

ID:	13
INPUT:	▁Gaur ▁jakingo ▁duzue ▁Jauna ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoa ▁aurretik ▁igaroko ▁zaizu ela ▁Jordan ▁zehar ka tzean , ▁su ▁kiskal garria ▁bezala : ▁berak ▁suntsitu ▁eta ▁makur raraziko ▁ditu ▁herri ▁horiek ▁zuen ▁aurrean , ▁eta ▁zuek ▁beren ▁lurraldetik ▁bota ▁eta ▁deus ez tatu ▁egingo ▁dituzue ▁berehala , ▁Jaunak ▁hitzeman ▁bezala .
PRED:	This is what the Lord your God says : When you cross the Jordan River , you will pass through the Jordan River , you will drive out the land of the Jordan , and you will completely destroy them as the Lord had promised .
GOLD:	But recognize today that the Lord your God is the one who will cross over ahead of you like a devouring fire to destroy them . He will subdue them so that you will quickly conquer them and drive them out , just as the Lord has promised .

ID:	14
INPUT:	▁si tsak ▁jan dako ▁jantzia ▁bezala , h arrak ▁jo tako ▁ar til ea ▁bezal agaldu ko ▁baitira . Baina ▁nire ▁garai penak beti ▁iraungo ▁du , nire ▁salbamen ak ▁giz aldiz ▁gizaldi ».
PRED:	O God , let the earth be like a prostitute , like a prostitute , and it will be like a flood . ”
GOLD:	For the moth will devour them as it devours clothing.The worm will eat at them as it eats wool.But my righteousness will last forever.My salvation will continue from generation to generation . ”

ID:	15
INPUT:	▁«“ Jainko ▁ahal tsuak b edeinka ▁zaitzala , eman kor ▁egin ▁eta ▁ugaldu ▁zaitzala , herri ▁askoren ▁sor tzaile bihur ▁zaitezen !
PRED:	“ May God bless you , and I will praise you , and you will be blessed .
GOLD:	May God Almighty bless you and give you many children . And may your descendants multiply and become many nations !

ID:	16
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁duzu ▁herri ▁zapaldu a ▁salbatzen , eta ▁harro pu tzen ▁handik eria ▁makur rarazten .
PRED:	You light , O Lord , my God , lights up my darkness .
GOLD:	You rescue the humble , but your eyes watch the proud and humiliate them .

ID:	17
INPUT:	▁« Jaunak ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoak ▁jabetzan ▁emango ▁dizuen ▁lurraldean ▁norbait ▁landan ▁lurrean ▁hilda ▁azaldu ▁eta ▁nork ▁hil ▁duen ▁ez ▁badakizue ,
PRED:	“ When you arrive in the land the Lord your God has given you , you will die in the fields .
GOLD:	“ When you are in the land the Lord your God is giving you , someone may be found murdered in a field , and you do n't know who committed the murder .

ID:	18
INPUT:	▁Ez kon tza ▁eta ▁di b ortzi oa
PRED:	Teaching about Adultery
GOLD:	Discussion about Divorce and Marriage

ID:	19
INPUT:	▁« Hori ek ▁dira ▁Jaunaren ▁festa buruak , ▁eta ▁horietan ▁batzar ▁sakratua ▁ospatuko ▁duzue , ▁Jaunaren ▁ohorez ▁opariak ▁eskaintzeko : ▁erre - opariak ▁eta ▁labore - opariak , ▁elkartasun - opariak ▁eta ▁isur - opariak , ▁jai ▁bakoitzari ▁dagokion ▁arabera ;
PRED:	“ These are the official days of the Lord must present all the offerings to the assembly of the Lord . They must present burnt offerings for burnt offerings and peace offerings , peace offerings , peace offerings , peace offerings , peace offerings , and peace offerings , and peace offerings , and peace offerings .
GOLD:	( “ These are the Lord 's appointed festivals . Celebrate them each year as official days for holy assembly by presenting special gifts to the Lord — burnt offerings , grain offerings , sacrifices , and liquid offerings — each on its proper day .

ID:	20
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁Jainkoaren ▁asm oen ▁ar ab erako ▁nahi gabeak ▁salbamen era ▁gar am atz an ▁bizi - al dak eta ▁dakar ▁ondori o , ▁eta ▁horretaz ▁damutu ▁beharrik ▁ez ▁dago . ▁Mundu ▁honetatik ▁dator ki gun ▁nahi gabeak , ▁berriz , ▁heriotzara ▁eramaten ▁gaitu .
PRED:	For this is the authority of God , who wants us to live in this world , but it is a witness of God 's life , but it is not trying to save us from this world .
GOLD:	For the kind of sorrow God wants us to experience leads us away from sin and results in salvation . There 's no regret for that kind of sorrow . But worldly sorrow , which lacks repentance , results in spiritual death .

ID:	21
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁galdegin ▁zion :— Zer ▁nahi ▁duzu ▁niregandik ? I tsuak ▁erantzun :— B erri ro ▁ikus tea , ▁Jauna .
PRED:	“ What do you want ? ” Jesus asked . “ What do you want ? ”
GOLD:	“ What do you want me to do for you ? ” Jesus asked. “ My Rabbi , ” the blind man said , “ I want to see ! ”

ID:	22
INPUT:	▁« Z il arra ▁kal era ▁botako ▁dute , ur rea ▁zab or tzat ▁hartuko . Ez ▁urre ak , ▁ez ▁zil arrak , ez ▁ditu ▁libratuko Jaunaren ▁sumin - egunean , ur re ak ▁eta ▁zil arrak era gin ▁baitzi eten ▁bekatu . Ez ▁diete ▁gosea ▁as eko , ezta ▁sabel ak ▁ere ▁beteko .
PRED:	“ They will not be able to stumble , but they will not be angry with gold . They will not be angry with gold , but they will not be angry with the Lord 's anger .
GOLD:	“ They will throw their money in the streets , tossing it out like worthless trash.Their silver and gold wo n't save themon that day of the Lord 's anger.It will neither satisfy nor feed them , for their greed can only trip them up .

ID:	23
INPUT:	▁Emakumeak , ▁orduan :— An tz ina ▁esan ▁ohi ▁zuten : ▁« G alde tzeko tan , ▁galdetu ▁Abel ▁hirian , ▁eta ▁ki to ».
PRED:	The woman said to her , “ The woman is coming to attack the town of Rabbah . ”
GOLD:	Then she continued , “ There used to be a saying , ‘ If you want to settle an argument , ask advice at the town of Abel . '

ID:	24
INPUT:	▁Entzun ▁zenuten ▁iragar pena : den - dena ▁bete ▁dela ▁ikusirik , ez ▁ote ▁duzue ▁iragarriko ? Eta ▁orain ▁gauza ▁berriak adi eraz iko ▁dizkizuet , ez ▁dak izk izuen ▁gerta ▁gauza ▁ezku tuak ;
PRED:	“ Listen to me , you know what the Lord says : How can you see that you have been destroyed ? ”
GOLD:	You have heard my predictions and seen them fulfilled , but you refuse to admit it.Now I will tell you new things , secrets you have not yet heard .

ID:	25
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zaitzatela ▁inork ▁ar gu dio ▁hutsal ez ▁lilura , ▁horre xe gatik ▁pizten ▁baita ▁Jainkoaren ▁haserrea ▁errebelde en ▁aurka .
PRED:	Do n't let no one rescue you ; let 's fall upon you , for they are against God .
GOLD:	Do n't be fooled by those who try to excuse these sins , for the anger of God will fall on all who disobey him .

ID:	26
INPUT:	▁Zakarias , ▁haur raren ▁aita , ▁Espiritu ▁Santuaz ▁beterik , ▁profeta ▁bezala ▁mintzatu ▁zen , ▁esanez :
PRED:	Zechariah was filled with the Holy Spirit , just as the Holy Spirit said ,
GOLD:	Then his father , Zechariah , was filled with the Holy Spirit and gave this prophecy :

ID:	27
INPUT:	▁Emakumeak ▁erantzun ▁zion ▁Eliasi :— Orain ▁badakit ▁Jainkoaren ▁gizona ▁z arena , ▁eta ▁zuk ▁diozun a ▁egiaz ▁Jaunaren ▁hitza ▁dena .
PRED:	The woman replied , “ I know that the man of God is coming , and you are a word of God . ”
GOLD:	Then the woman told Elijah , “ Now I know for sure that you are a man of God , and that the Lord truly speaks through you . ”

ID:	28
INPUT:	▁Judak ▁ere , ▁ordea , ▁Jaunaren , ▁bere ▁Jainkoaren , ▁aginduak ▁bete ▁ordez , ▁Israelen ▁er ara ▁jokatu ▁zuen .
PRED:	But Judah did not obey the commands of the Lord , the God of Israel , just as he had done .
GOLD:	But even the people of Judah refused to obey the commands of the Lord their God , for they followed the evil practices that Israel had introduced .

ID:	29
INPUT:	▁Gaiz tak eriak ▁hilko ▁du ▁gaiztoa , zintz o ari ▁gorroto ▁dioten ek ▁zigorra ▁izango .
PRED:	But those who hate the wicked will be punished , but the godly will be punished .
GOLD:	But the Lord will redeem those who serve him.No one who takes refuge in him will be condemned .

ID:	30
INPUT:	▁Samuelek ▁erantzun ▁zion ▁Sauli :— Neu ▁nauzu ▁ikus lea . ▁Igo ▁nire ▁aurretik ▁muin ora ▁eta ▁nirekin ▁jango ▁duzue ▁gaur . ▁Bihar ▁goizean ▁utziko ▁dizut ▁joaten , ▁jakin ▁nahi ▁duzun ▁guztia ▁esan ▁ondoren .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” Samuel replied , “ I am the one who is here ahead of me , and you may eat the head of me and eat it . ”
GOLD:	“ I am the seer ! ” Samuel replied . “ Go up to the place of worship ahead of me . We will eat there together , and in the morning I 'll tell you what you want to know and send you on your way .

ID:	31
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁pentsa : ▁Moisesek ▁erdain kun tzaren ▁legea ▁ezarri ▁zizuen ▁ ( egia ▁esan , ▁ohitura ▁hau ▁ez ▁zen ▁Moises ekin ▁hasi , ▁arbasoekin ▁baino ) , ▁eta ▁larunbatez ▁ere ▁erdaindu ▁ohi ▁duzue ▁gizona .
PRED:	But Moses gave this instructions to the law of Moses : “ You must not be circumcised on the law of Moses , and you must not be circumcised on the Sabbath .
GOLD:	But you work on the Sabbath , too , when you obey Moses ' law of circumcision . ( Actually , this tradition of circumcision began with the patriarchs , long before the law of Moses . )

ID:	32
INPUT:	▁Goi - goiko aren ▁aurka ▁bira o ka ▁ari tuko ▁da ▁eta ▁herri ▁santua ▁gaizki ▁erabiliko ▁du : ▁jai ak ▁eta ▁legea ▁aldatu ▁nahi ▁izango ▁ditu . ▁Hiru ▁urte ▁eta ▁er diz ▁egongo ▁da ▁herri ▁santua ▁haren ▁menpean .
PRED:	The Most High will be divided against the Most High , and he will turn against the holy city and be punished for three years . This will be holy , and he will be holy .
GOLD:	He will defy the Most High and oppress the holy people of the Most High . He will try to change their sacred festivals and laws , and they will be placed under his control for a time , times , and half a time .

ID:	33
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁erantsi ▁zidan : ▁« Gizaseme , ▁ogi - hor ni dura ▁kenduko ▁diot ▁Jerusalemi ; ▁mug atua ▁eta ▁larri ▁jango ▁dute ▁ogia , ▁ura ▁ere ▁neur tua ▁eta ▁ikaraz ▁edango .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Son of man , I will take it on the border of Jerusalem , and they will eat it with water and drink . ”
GOLD:	Then he told me , “ Son of man , I will make food very scarce in Jerusalem . It will be weighed out with great care and eaten fearfully . The water will be rationed out drop by drop , and the people will drink it with dismay .

ID:	34
INPUT:	▁Samuelek , ▁zah artu ▁zenean , ▁bere ▁semeak ▁jarri ▁zituen ▁Israelen ▁buruzagi .
PRED:	When Samuel heard his old age , Samuel became the leader of Israel .
GOLD:	As Samuel grew old , he appointed his sons to be judges over Israel .

ID:	35
INPUT:	▁Begira , ▁Jainkoak ▁bere ▁jakinduria ▁agertu ▁duenean , ▁gizakiak ▁ez ▁dira ▁gauza ▁izan ▁beren ▁jakinduriaz ▁Jainkoa ▁ezagu tzeko ; ▁horregatik , ▁Jainkoak , ▁guk ▁hots ▁egiten ▁dugun ▁zor ak eri aren ▁bitartez ▁salbatu ▁nahi ▁izan ▁ditu ▁fededun ak .
PRED:	See how God has appeared to his wisdom , but God has given us wisdom . That is why we want to understand God 's people to be saved .
GOLD:	Since God in his wisdom saw to it that the world would never know him through human wisdom , he has used our foolish preaching to save those who believe .

ID:	36
INPUT:	▁Israeldarrek ▁galdetzen ▁zuten : ▁« Israelgo ▁leinu etatik ▁zein ▁da ▁Jaunaren ▁aitzinean ▁egiten ▁ari ▁garen ▁biltzar rera ▁etorri ▁ez ▁dena ?» ▁Izan ▁ere , ▁zin ▁handia ▁egina ▁zuten , ▁hil ▁egingo ▁zutela ▁Mitz para , ▁Jaunaren ▁aurreko ▁biltzar rera , ▁joan ▁ez ▁zedin a .
PRED:	The people of Israel asked , “ What are we doing ? ” The people of Israel said , “ This is what the Lord has commanded us to take a solemn oath in the presence of the Lord 's Temple ? ” So they went to Mizpah to Mizpah .
GOLD:	Then they said , “ Who among the tribes of Israel did not join us at Mizpah when we held our assembly in the presence of the Lord ? ” At that time they had taken a solemn oath in the Lord 's presence , vowing that anyone who refused to come would be put to death .

ID:	37
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁dio :« B as amor tuko ▁haizeak ▁daraman las toa ▁bezal as ak aban atuko ▁zaituztet .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ You will desert you like a wind , like a wind .
GOLD:	“ I will scatter you like chaffthat is blown away by the desert winds .

ID:	38
INPUT:	▁« Kontuz ▁lege - maisu ekin ! ▁Gogo ko ▁baitute ▁harro - harro ▁jantz ita ▁ibil tzea ▁eta ▁plaz etan ▁jendeak ▁beraiei ▁agur ▁egitea ; ▁gogoko ▁dituzte ▁sinagog etan ▁lehenengo ▁aul kiak ▁eta ▁jai - otor du etan ▁mahai buruak ;
PRED:	“ Beware of the teachers of religious law , for they teach in the synagogues and in the synagogues and in the synagogues . They love to sit on the seats of honor and sit in the synagogues and sit in the synagogues .
GOLD:	“ Beware of these teachers of religious law ! For they like to parade around in flowing robes and love to receive respectful greetings as they walk in the marketplaces . And how they love the seats of honor in the synagogues and the head table at banquets .

ID:	39
INPUT:	▁Zeure ▁maita leen ▁esku ▁utziko ▁zaitut ; ▁zure ▁prostituzio - lekuak ▁suntsitu ▁eta ▁erai tsiko ▁dituzte ; ▁soinekoak ▁erantzi , ▁bitx i ▁zora garriak ▁kendu ▁eta ▁jantzirik ▁gabe ▁utziko ▁zaituzte , ▁larrugorri an .
PRED:	I will cut off your lovers , and you will cut off your clothing and cut off your clothing . They will cut off your clothes and clothing , and you will be cut off naked .
GOLD:	Then I will give you to these many nations who are your lovers , and they will destroy you . They will knock down your pagan shrines and the altars to your idols . They will strip you and take your beautiful jewels , leaving you stark naked .

ID:	40
INPUT:	▁izan ▁ere , ▁Jainkoak ▁zerbait ▁hobea ▁prestatu ▁zuen ▁guretzat , ▁eta ▁ez ▁zuen ▁nahi ▁izan ▁haiek ▁hel mu g ara ▁gu ▁gabe ▁iris terik .
PRED:	For God has prepared for us to prepare for us , and there is no need for us to go .
GOLD:	For God had something better in mind for us , so that they would not reach perfection without us .

ID:	41
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁dio ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak :« K e inu ▁egingo ▁diet ▁nazio ei , neure ▁bandera ▁jasoko ▁herri entzat : bes o etan ▁ekarriko ▁dituzte zure ▁semeak , le p oan ▁zure ▁alabak .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ I will bring my attention to the nations of the nations , for they will bring their daughters into exile .
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ See , I will give a signal to the godless nations.They will carry your little sons back to you in their arms ; they will bring your daughters on their shoulders .

ID:	42
INPUT:	▁Ogi - oparia
PRED:	Procedures for the Priests
GOLD:	Penalty for Breaking the Sabbath

ID:	43
INPUT:	▁Emakumeak ▁esan ▁zion :— Jauna , ▁profeta ▁zarela ▁ikusten ▁dut .
PRED:	“ Lord , ” the woman said , “ I see that you see . ”
GOLD:	“ Sir , ” the woman said , “ you must be a prophet .

ID:	44
INPUT:	▁Biho z berri ▁zaitezte , ▁bada , ▁eta ▁itzuli ▁Jainkoarengana , ▁bekatuak ▁ken ▁dak izk izuen ;
PRED:	So be ashamed to be forgiven , and if you return to God , you will be forgiven .
GOLD:	Now repent of your sins and turn to God , so that your sins may be wiped away .

ID:	45
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁esan ▁zion :« Ni ▁Jainko ▁Ahal tsua ▁naiz . Ondoren go ▁ugari ▁izango ▁duzu . A re ▁gehiago , nazio ▁asko ▁sortuko ▁dituzu , eta ▁erregeak ▁aterako ▁dira zure gandik .
PRED:	Then God said to him , “ I am the Almighty , the Almighty , and you will be great , and many nations will be exalted .
GOLD:	Then God said , “ I am El-Shaddai — ‘ God Almighty . ' Be fruitful and multiply . You will become a great nation , even many nations . Kings will be among your descendants !

ID:	46
INPUT:	▁Jakobek , ▁zu m itz - , ▁hur ri tz - ▁eta ▁p l atan o - z iri ▁hez e ▁batzuk ▁harturik , ▁zuri tu ▁egin ▁zituen .
PRED:	Now Jacob was very upset , and he took some of his belongings , and he took some of them .
GOLD:	Then Jacob took some fresh branches from poplar , almond , and plane trees and peeled off strips of bark , making white streaks on them .

ID:	47
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁ez ▁dugu ▁par terik ▁izango ▁Jordanez ▁beste ▁aldeko ▁lur - ban ak etan , ▁guri ▁dagoki gun ▁ondarea ▁Jordanez ▁alde ▁honetan , ▁ekialdean , ▁baita uk agu .
PRED:	But we will not fight against us from the Jordan River . We will have a gift of land from the Jordan River .
GOLD:	But we do not claim any of the land on the other side of the Jordan . We would rather live here on the east side and accept this as our grant of land . ”

ID:	48
INPUT:	▁k arra tua : ▁metro ▁erdi ▁bat ▁luze - zabal ▁eta ▁metro ▁bat ▁gora . ▁Aldar e - ertzeko ▁a darrek ▁gorputz ▁bat ▁bera ▁egingo ▁dute ▁aldare arekin .
PRED:	It will be 71/2 feet wide , 30 feet wide , and 41/2 feet wide . It will be an end of the four corners of the altar .
GOLD:	Make it 18 inches square and 36 inches high , with horns at the corners carved from the same piece of wood as the altar itself .

ID:	49
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁lege - maisuak ▁salatu
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Man
GOLD:	The Widow 's Offering

ID:	50
INPUT:	▁Zu ▁nor ▁zaren ▁jakinarazi ▁diet , ▁eta ▁aurrerantzean ▁ere ▁jakin araziko , ▁zuk ▁didazun ▁maitasuna ▁hauen gan ▁izan ▁dadin , ▁eta ▁ni ▁neu ▁ere ▁hauen gan ▁izan ▁nadin ».
PRED:	I will tell you what you have done , and you will know that you have been faithful and love for me . ”
GOLD:	I have revealed you to them , and I will continue to do so . Then your love for me will be in them , and I will be in them . ”

ID:	51
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁begira tzean , ▁erregea ▁ikusi ▁zuen ▁ohol tzaren ▁gainean ▁zutik , ▁tenpluaren ▁sarreran . ▁B uruzagi ak ▁eta ▁turuta - jo tzaileak ▁erregearen ▁ondoan ▁zeuden ; ▁herriko ▁jendea , ▁berriz , ▁pozez ▁beterik ▁zebilen , ▁turu taren ▁soin ura . ▁Kan tariek , ▁beren ▁musika - tresn ak ▁joz , ▁gorespen - k antu ak ▁zuzen tzen ▁zituzten . ▁Orduan , ▁Atal iak , ▁bere ▁soinekoak ▁ur ra tuz , ▁garrasi ▁egin ▁zuen :— T ra iz ioa ! ▁T ra iz ioa !
PRED:	When the king saw the king sitting on the side of the Temple , he stood at the entrance of the Temple and shouted to the Temple , “ Be quiet ! ” So the people of Israel shouted to the king , “ Stand up with joy ! ”
GOLD:	When she arrived , she saw the newly crowned king standing in his place of authority by the pillar at the Temple entrance . The commanders and trumpeters were surrounding him , and people from all over the land were rejoicing and blowing trumpets . Singers with musical instruments were leading the people in a great celebration . When Athaliah saw all this , she tore her clothes in despair and shouted , “ Treason ! Treason ! ”

ID:	52
INPUT:	▁Jainko ▁gure ▁Aitak ▁eman ▁biez az kizue ▁grazia ▁eta ▁bakea .
PRED:	May God give you grace and peace .
GOLD:	We are writing to God 's holy people in the city of Colosse , who are faithful brothers and sisters in Christ.May God our Father give you grace and peace .

ID:	53
INPUT:	▁Ken azen ▁seme ▁eta ▁Kaleb en ▁anaia ▁gazte enak , ▁O t ni elek , ▁hartu ▁zuen ▁hiria , ▁eta ▁Kal ebek ▁bere ▁alaba ▁Ak s a ▁eman ▁zion ▁emaztetzat .
PRED:	Caleb son of Jephunneh , who was the son of Jephunneh and gave birth to Caleb son of Jephunneh .
GOLD:	Othniel , the son of Caleb 's younger brother , Kenaz , was the one who conquered it , so Acsah became Othniel 's wife .

ID:	54
INPUT:	▁Pedro ▁eta ▁Kor n el io
PRED:	Peter 's Declaration about Jesus
GOLD:	Cornelius Calls for Peter

ID:	55
INPUT:	▁hau ▁Joan an ena , ▁hau ▁R es arena , ▁hau ▁Zorobabel ena , ▁hau ▁Sal ati el ena , ▁hau ▁N eri rena ,
PRED:	This is the son of Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel , son of Shealtiel , son of Shealtiel , son of Zerubbabel .
GOLD:	Joda was the son of Joanan.Joanan was the son of Rhesa.Rhesa was the son of Zerubbabel.Zerubbabel was the son of Shealtiel.Shealtiel was the son of Neri .

ID:	56
INPUT:	▁Samu elen ▁azken ▁hitzaldia
PRED:	Samuel 's Last Words to Samuel
GOLD:	Samuel 's Farewell Address

ID:	57
INPUT:	▁Morro i ek ▁adierazi ▁zioten ▁Sauli :— Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zaigu ▁David .
PRED:	Then the servant said to Saul , “ My son David has said to me . ”
GOLD:	When Saul 's men reported this back to the king ,

ID:	58
INPUT:	▁S ol da du ek ▁ere ▁galdetu ▁zioten :— Eta ▁guk , ▁zer ▁egin ▁behar ▁dugu ? Joan ek ▁erantzun ▁zien :— Ez ▁atera ▁inori ▁diru rik ▁gogor keriaz , ▁ezta ▁gezurrezko ▁salak un tzaz ▁ere ; ▁kon f or ma ▁zaitezte ▁dauk azuen ▁sol dat arekin .
PRED:	The soldiers asked Jesus , “ What should we do ? ” So he asked them , “ We ca n't tell anyone about this , ” he said . “ Do n't tell anyone about this , or tell us how to tell you about this . ”
GOLD:	“ What should we do ? ” asked some soldiers.John replied , “ Do n't extort money or make false accusations . And be content with your pay . ”

ID:	59
INPUT:	▁mundu ak ▁balio gabe tzat ▁eta ▁mespretx agarri tzat ▁duena , ▁munduaren ▁begi tan ▁ezerez ▁dena , ▁aukeratu ▁du ▁Jainkoak , ▁zerbait ▁direla ▁uste ▁dutenak ▁ezerez teko ;
PRED:	But the world is a master , and he has chosen people to become a nation , and he has chosen them to live .
GOLD:	God chose things despised by the world , things counted as nothing at all , and used them to bring to nothing what the world considers important .

ID:	60
INPUT:	▁« Hau ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak : ▁Hon daturiko ▁hiri ▁bihurtuko ▁zaitudan ean ▁— j en derik ▁gabeko ▁hiriak ▁bezala —, ▁itsas ▁leiz ea ▁zure ▁aurka ▁altx arazi ▁eta ▁ur ▁handi ek ▁estaliko ▁zaituzten ean ,
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will make you a proud city with no defects .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will make Tyre an uninhabited ruin , like many others . I will bury you beneath the terrible waves of enemy attack . Great seas will swallow you .

ID:	61
INPUT:	▁Mesias ▁etorriko ▁denean , ▁ez ▁du ▁inork ▁jakingo ▁non goa ▁den ; ▁hau , ▁ordea , ▁bad akigu ▁non goa ▁den ».
PRED:	When you do n't know that anyone who is the Messiah is the Messiah . ”
GOLD:	But how could he be ? For we know where this man comes from . When the Messiah comes , he will simply appear ; no one will know where he comes from . ”

ID:	62
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁batean , ▁Siriako ▁errege ▁Ben - Hada dek , ▁bere ▁gudaroste ▁osoa ▁bildurik , ▁setiatu ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Samaria .
PRED:	One day Ben-hadad 's chief cup-bearer and all the fighting men had gathered for battle .
GOLD:	Some time later , however , King Ben-hadad of Aram mustered his entire army and besieged Samaria .

ID:	63
INPUT:	▁Hon ako ▁hauek ▁ziren ▁Judaren ▁leinukoek ▁hegoaldeko ▁er tzean , ▁Edomgo ▁muga ▁inguruan , ▁zituzten ▁hiriak : ▁K ab tze el , ▁E der , ▁J ag ur ,
PRED:	The following towns were given to the clans of the tribe of Edom : The towns of Edom were also known as the towns of Edom .
GOLD:	The towns of Judah situated along the borders of Edom in the extreme south were Kabzeel , Eder , Jagur ,

ID:	64
INPUT:	▁Zuek ▁ez ▁jokatu ▁horrela . ▁Zuen ▁artean ▁nagusi ena ▁izan ▁bedi ▁gazteen aren ▁pareko , ▁eta ▁agin taria ▁zerbitzari aren ▁pareko .
PRED:	But do n't be afraid of your servant , for all who are wise .
GOLD:	But among you it will be different . Those who are the greatest among you should take the lowest rank , and the leader should be like a servant .

ID:	65
INPUT:	▁Am ets a ▁eta ▁esanahia ▁entzun ▁zituenean , ▁Gedeonek , ▁makur tuz , ▁Jainkoa ▁gurtu ▁zuen . ▁Gero , ▁israeldarren ▁kanpalekura ▁itzuli ▁zen ▁oihuka :— Jaiki ! ▁Gure ▁esku ▁utzi ▁du ▁Jaunak ▁madian darren ▁kanpalekua !
PRED:	When Gideon heard what was happening , he fell at the camp at the camp and worshiped God . Then the Lord said to Gideon , “ Stand up in battle ! ” And the Lord said , “ Stand up ! ”
GOLD:	When Gideon heard the dream and its interpretation , he bowed in worship before the Lord . Then he returned to the Israelite camp and shouted , “ Get up ! For the Lord has given you victory over the Midianite hordes ! ”

ID:	66
INPUT:	▁Lurralde a ▁estaltzen ▁duen ▁hodei ▁bel tzak ▁bezala , ▁nire ▁herri ▁Israeli ▁erasoko ▁diozu . ▁Azken ▁garaia ▁iristean , ▁neure ▁herriaren ▁kontra ▁etor raraziko ▁zaitut , ▁neure ▁santu tasuna ▁zure ▁bitartez , ▁oi ▁Go g , ▁beraien ▁aurrean ▁agertuko ▁dudanean , ▁nazio ek ▁aitor ▁naz aten .
PRED:	When you enter the cloud of cloud , you will attack my people , you will attack my people Israel . I will bring you back to the land of my holy people , I will bring you back to their land .
GOLD:	and you will attack my people Israel , covering their land like a cloud . At that time in the distant future , I will bring you against my land as everyone watches , and my holiness will be displayed by what happens to you , Gog . Then all the nations will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	67
INPUT:	▁Jauna ▁nazio ▁guztien ▁gainean ▁garai , haren ▁ospea ▁zeruak ▁baino ▁gora go .
PRED:	The Lord is greater than all the nations , and his glory is higher than all the heavens .
GOLD:	For the Lord is high above the nations ; his glory is higher than the heavens .

ID:	68
INPUT:	▁Ber aiek ▁kon tatzen ▁dute , ▁hain ▁zuzen , ▁nolako ▁har rera ▁egin ▁zeni gu ten ▁zuengana ▁joan ▁ginen ean ▁eta ▁nola , ▁sasijainko ak ▁utzirik , ▁Jainko ▁bizi ▁eta ▁egiazko agana ▁itzuli ▁zineten , ▁berau ▁zerbitz atzeko
PRED:	And when you come with him , you know how you have made us right with us , and we went to worship the gods of gods , and you left him and worshiped the truth .
GOLD:	for they keep talking about the wonderful welcome you gave us and how you turned away from idols to serve the living and true God .

ID:	69
INPUT:	▁L ab ore - opari ▁eta ▁isur - opari ▁berdin a ▁egingo ▁duzu ▁ilun abarrean ▁beste ▁arkume arekin , ▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁atseginez ▁onartuko ▁du ▁bere ▁ohorez ▁erretako ▁oparia .
PRED:	On the same grain offering of liquid offering , you must also be a pleasing aroma to the Lord . It will be a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	Offer the other lamb in the evening , along with the same offerings of flour and wine as in the morning . It will be a pleasing aroma , a special gift presented to the Lord .

ID:	70
INPUT:	▁geure ▁bekatuengatik ▁hilik ▁geun d elarik , ▁bizia ▁eman ▁zigun ▁Kristorekin ▁batera ▁— on gin ahi ▁hutsez ▁salbatu ▁zaituzte ! — ;
PRED:	We also had died with Christ , and we also saved you from our own life .
GOLD:	that even though we were dead because of our sins , he gave us life when he raised Christ from the dead . ( It is only by God 's grace that you have been saved ! )

ID:	71
INPUT:	▁G azte ▁izan ▁nintzen , ▁orain ▁zahar turik ▁nago : ez ▁dut ▁sekula ▁ikusi ▁zintzoa ▁bertan ▁behera ▁utzia , ezta ▁haren ▁ondorengo rik ▁ere ▁ogi ▁esk ean .
PRED:	I was old when I was old , I saw the old ones who had never deserted the children .
GOLD:	Once I was young , and now I am old.Yet I have never seen the godly abandonedor their children begging for bread .

ID:	72
INPUT:	▁Eraman go ▁ditut , ▁ostera , ▁zuen ▁seme - alabak , ▁gatibu ▁eroriko ▁zirela ▁zenio tenak , ▁zuek ▁gutxietsi ▁duzuen ▁lurraldera , ▁hartaz ▁goza tzeko .
PRED:	Then I brought you out to the land of Canaan , and you will be led to the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	“ ‘ You said your children would be carried off as plunder . Well , I will bring them safely into the land , and they will enjoy what you have despised .

ID:	73
INPUT:	▁Isma elek ▁erro mes - taldea ▁hil
PRED:	Ishmael 's Final Advice
GOLD:	The Murder of Gedaliah

ID:	74
INPUT:	▁Esan dako ▁on ▁guztiak ▁emango ▁dizkizu ▁Jaunak ▁eta ▁zu , ▁ene ▁jauna , ▁Israelen ▁buruzagi ▁eginen ▁zaitu .
PRED:	The Lord will give you all of you , my lord , and I will make you victory over all the leaders of Israel .
GOLD:	When the Lord has done all he promised and has made you leader of Israel ,

ID:	75
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁haserrea . ▁Ur ruti ko ▁herri ▁bati ▁dei
PRED:	A fierce anger from the Lord 's anger will be poured out from the dust .
GOLD:	Judah 's Guilt and Judgment

ID:	76
INPUT:	▁Guk ▁bad akigu ▁heriotz atik ▁bizira ▁iragan ▁g arena , ▁eta ▁hau ▁jakin , ▁senideak ▁maite ▁ditugu lako ▁dakigu . ▁Maite ▁ez ▁duena ▁heriotzaren ▁menpe ▁dago .
PRED:	We know that we have been raised from death , and we know that we love our brothers and sisters , we love him .
GOLD:	If we love our brothers and sisters who are believers , it proves that we have passed from death to life . But a person who has no love is still dead .

ID:	77
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁neuk ▁buru tuko ▁dut ▁ituna ▁zurekin , ▁eta ▁orduan ▁jakingo ▁duzu ▁ni ▁naizela ▁Jauna .
PRED:	I will make a covenant with you , and you will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	And I will reaffirm my covenant with you , and you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	78
INPUT:	▁Zer tan ▁ekarri ▁gaitu ▁Jaunak ▁lurralde ▁honetara : ▁gu ▁gerran ▁eror tzeko ▁eta ▁gure ▁emazte ▁eta ▁seme - alabak ▁gatibu ▁bihur tzeko ? ▁Ez ▁ote ▁genuke ▁hobe ▁Egiptora ▁itzuli ?»
PRED:	The Lord brought us back to this land of Egypt , and the sword of our wives and daughters and daughters and daughters to Egypt . What have we been brought to Egypt to Egypt ? ”
GOLD:	“ Why is the Lord taking us to this country only to have us die in battle ? Our wives and our little ones will be carried off as plunder ! Would n't it be better for us to return to Egypt ? ”

ID:	79
INPUT:	▁Noem ik ▁esan ▁zion ▁Ru ti :— Bai , ▁alaba , ▁askoz ▁hobe ▁duzu ▁Booz en ▁soroan ▁beraren ▁morroi ekin ▁lan ▁egin , ▁beste ▁inoren ▁soro tan ▁go gai taraz ▁ez ▁zaitzaten .
PRED:	Ruth said to Ruth , “ It 's better better to get better than the field , and she is better to get a field with you . ”
GOLD:	“ Good ! ” Naomi exclaimed . “ Do as he said , my daughter . Stay with his young women right through the whole harvest . You might be harassed in other fields , but you 'll be safe with him . ”

ID:	80
INPUT:	▁Nik , ▁Paulok , ▁ez ▁giza ▁aginduz ▁edo ▁izen da penez , ▁Jesu ▁Kristoren ▁eta ▁hau ▁hildakoen ▁artetik ▁piztu ▁zuen ▁Jainko ▁Aitaren ▁izen da penez ▁baizik ▁apostolu ▁naizen ▁honek ,
PRED:	This letter was from Paul , Paul , who was not called the name of Jesus Christ Jesus Christ , who raised from the dead .
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , an apostle . I was not appointed by any group of people or any human authority , but by Jesus Christ himself and by God the Father , who raised Jesus from the dead .

ID:	81
INPUT:	▁H ogei ▁gizonekin ▁joan ▁zen ▁Hebron era , ▁Davidengana . ▁Honek ▁otordua ▁eman ▁zien ▁Abn erri ▁eta ▁beronekin ▁joan ▁ziren ei .
PRED:	After that , Absalom and his men went to Hebron to Hebron and gave him a feast for Abner .
GOLD:	When Abner and twenty of his men came to Hebron , David entertained them with a great feast .

ID:	82
INPUT:	▁Aur ki tzen ▁zituen ▁edon or ki ren sten ▁zituen ; ets aiek ▁honela ▁zioten :“ G uk ▁ez ▁dugu ▁erru rik , ber ori ek ▁egin ▁baitute ▁bekatu Jaunaren ▁aurka ”». Jauna ▁da ▁justiz iaren ▁barru ti , gu raso en ▁itxaropen !
PRED:	But when the people went down , they said , “ We have no sinned , for we have sinned against the Lord , for we have sinned against the Lord 's glory . ”
GOLD:	All who found them devoured them.Their enemies said , ‘ We did nothing wrong in attacking them , for they sinned against the Lord , their true place of rest , and the hope of their ancestors . '

ID:	83
INPUT:	▁Gaba onen ▁dagoen ▁harri ▁handiaren ▁inguru ra ▁heltzean , ▁han ▁non ▁dator kien ▁Am asa . ▁Joabek ▁guda - jantzia ▁zeraman ▁soinean , ▁gerri ko z ▁loturik ▁eta ▁gerri ko tik ▁zintzilik ▁ezpata ▁bere ▁zorro an . ▁Am as arengana ▁aurrera tzean , ▁ezpata ▁erori ▁zitzaion ▁Joabi .
PRED:	When Joab arrived at the great stone of the great stone of the great army , he was wearing burlap and laid it on the cart . The sword was poured out his sword on Joab 's side .
GOLD:	As they arrived at the great stone in Gibeon , Amasa met them . Joab was wearing his military tunic with a dagger strapped to his belt . As he stepped forward to greet Amasa , he slipped the dagger from its sheath .

ID:	84
INPUT:	▁Bi g bai renak ▁ 2 . <unk> ;
PRED:	The family of Zaccai760
GOLD:	The family of Bigvai2,067

ID:	85
INPUT:	▁eta ▁esan :— J arri ▁tra pu ▁zahar ▁horiek ▁bes ap ean , ▁sok aren ▁azpi tik . Hala ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Jeremiasek ,
PRED:	“ All right , ” Jeremiah said , “ the old old man was filled with ropes . ”
GOLD:	Ebed-melech called down to Jeremiah , “ Put these rags under your armpits to protect you from the ropes. ” Then when Jeremiah was ready ,

ID:	86
INPUT:	▁« Zure ▁esku ina , ▁Jauna , izu garri ▁indartsu ! Ets aia ▁desegin ▁du .
PRED:	“ O Lord , you have broken your enemies ; you have broken your enemies .
GOLD:	“ Your right hand , O Lord , is glorious in power.Your right hand , O Lord , smashes the enemy .

ID:	87
INPUT:	▁Ai ▁zuek , ▁etxea ▁etxe ari eta ▁sor oa ▁soro ari eran sten ▁diozuen ok , beste ak ▁bizi toki rik ▁gabe ▁utziz , lurralde ▁osoaren j aun ▁eta ▁jabe ▁bakar ▁izateko !
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who live in the grave , and you who live in the field will live in the land where they live .
GOLD:	What sorrow for you who buy up house after house and field after field , until everyone is evicted and you live alone in the land .

ID:	88
INPUT:	▁Horiek ▁dira ▁L eak ▁Jakobi ▁Mesopotam ian ▁sortu ▁zizkion ▁semeak , ▁D ina ▁bere ▁alab az ▁gainera ; ▁hogeita ▁hamahiru ▁guztira , ▁seme - alaba ▁eta ▁bilob en ▁artean .
PRED:	These are the names of Jacob 's descendants , Jacob 's sons , Jacob 's daughter , and his daughters were his daughters .
GOLD:	These were the sons of Leah and Jacob who were born in Paddan-aram , in addition to their daughter , Dinah . The number of Jacob 's descendants ( male and female ) through Leah was thirty-three .

ID:	89
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁apal ▁eta ▁egon ▁erne
PRED:	The Hope of the Firstborn
GOLD:	Peter 's Final Greetings

ID:	90
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁duzu ▁sexu - harremanik ▁izango ▁zeure ▁arreba orde arekin , ▁aitaren ▁nahiz ▁amaren ▁alab arekin , ▁ezta ▁etxe ▁berean ▁haz iak ▁ez ▁bazarete ▁ere .
PRED:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your sister 's sister or sister , or if you have sexual relations with your mother 's sister , or if you have sexual relations with your mother 's sister .
GOLD:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your sister or half sister , whether she is your father 's daughter or your mother 's daughter , whether she was born into your household or someone else 's .

ID:	91
INPUT:	▁Ea ▁bada , ▁sendotu ▁beso ▁ahul duak ▁eta ▁belaun ▁mak aldu ak ,
PRED:	So take care of them and strengthen them .
GOLD:	So take a new grip with your tired hands and strengthen your weak knees .

ID:	92
INPUT:	▁« H ego alderantz , ▁ondorengo ▁beste ▁leinu ▁hauen ▁zat iak ▁daude , ▁ekialdeko ▁mu gatik ▁Mediterraneo ▁itsaso raino ▁hedatu z , ▁ord ena ▁honetan : ▁Benjamin , ▁Simeon , ▁Isak ar , ▁Zabul on ▁eta ▁Gad .
PRED:	“ The descendants of the north will be given to the east of the east of the east side of the Dead Sea , Benjamin , and Benjamin , Benjamin , Benjamin , Benjamin , and Benjamin , Benjamin , and Benjamin , and Benjamin .
GOLD:	“ These are the territories allotted to the rest of the tribes . Benjamin 's territory lies just south of the prince 's lands , and it extends across the entire land of Israel from east to west .

ID:	93
INPUT:	▁eta ▁haren ▁gorpua ▁s im aur ▁bihurtuko ▁zela ▁al orrean , ▁Izreelgo ▁landan ; ▁inork ▁ere ▁ezin ▁izango ▁zuela ▁« Hau ▁Jezabel ▁da » ▁esan .
PRED:	and his body will be buried in the land of Jezreel , and no one will be left in Jezreel . ”
GOLD:	Her remains will be scattered like dung on the plot of land in Jezreel , so that no one will be able to recognize her . ' ”

ID:	94
INPUT:	▁G ore tsiko ▁dut ▁Jauna ▁bizi ▁naizen ▁artean , so inua ▁joko ▁neure ▁Jainkoari ▁naizen ▁artean .
PRED:	O Lord , I will praise you among you , O Lord , my God !
GOLD:	I will praise the Lord as long as I live.I will sing praises to my God with my dying breath .

ID:	95
INPUT:	▁Ne gar ▁eta ▁negar ▁ari ▁da ▁gauean , ▁masail ak ▁mal ko z ▁bete ta . Bere ▁maita leen ▁artean , ▁ez ▁du ▁nork ▁kontsol aturik . Adi skide ▁guztiek ▁zapuztu ▁egin ▁dute , ▁etsai ▁bihurtu ▁zaizkio .
PRED:	Her children weep and cry out , and when they cry out to their backs , they will not be comforted among themselves .
GOLD:	She sobs through the night ; tears stream down her cheeks.Among all her lovers , there is no one left to comfort her.All her friends have betrayed herand become her enemies .

ID:	96
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Eman ▁dezagun ▁zuetako ▁batek ▁adiskide ▁bat ▁duela ▁eta ▁gau erdian ▁dator ki ola , ▁esanez : ▁“ Adi s ki dea , ▁em azki dak ▁hiru ▁ogi , ▁bihurtuko ▁di ti at ▁eta ;
PRED:	Then a man said to them , “ Let 's become pregnant and say , ‘ A little night has come , and I will give you three loaves of bread and three loaves of bread . '
GOLD:	Then , teaching them more about prayer , he used this story : “ Suppose you went to a friend 's house at midnight , wanting to borrow three loaves of bread . You say to him ,

ID:	97
INPUT:	▁zuek , ▁berriz , ▁Jaunari ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoari ▁atxik irik ▁iraun ▁zenuten ok , ▁bizirik ▁zaudete ▁oraindik .
PRED:	But you have remained faithful in the Lord your God .
GOLD:	But all of you who were faithful to the Lord your God are still alive today — every one of you .

ID:	98
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁belaun iko ▁jartzen ▁naiz ▁Aitaren ▁aurrean ,
PRED:	So I am blameless before the Father 's Father ,
GOLD:	When I think of all this , I fall to my knees and pray to the Father ,

ID:	99
INPUT:	▁Jaitsi ▁eta ▁han ▁mintzatuko ▁natzaizu ▁eta , ▁zuk ▁duzun ▁espiritu tik ▁harturik , ▁haien gan ▁isuriko ▁dut , ▁herria ▁gidatzen ▁lagun ▁diez azu ten . ▁Horrela ▁ez ▁zara ▁bakarrik ▁izango .
PRED:	I will speak to you , and you will be able to pour out demons . I will pour out demons , but you will not be able to pour out demons .
GOLD:	I will come down and talk to you there . I will take some of the Spirit that is upon you , and I will put the Spirit upon them also . They will bear the burden of the people along with you , so you will not have to carry it alone .

ID:	100
INPUT:	▁Gu dari ▁ausar t ▁haien ▁ofizi alak ▁bi ▁mila ▁eta ▁seiehun ▁familia buru ▁ziren .
PRED:	The soldiers were anointed with one of the soldiers , and the leader of the men were anointed .
GOLD:	These regiments of mighty warriors were commanded by 2,600 clan leaders .

ID:	101
INPUT:	▁Israeldarrek ▁kontsulta ▁egin ▁zioten ▁Jaunari ; ▁izan ▁ere , ▁egun ▁haietan ▁Betelen ▁zegoen ▁Jainkoaren ▁itun - kutxa
PRED:	The people of Israel asked the Lord , “ The Ark of the Covenant , the Covenant of God , and the Ark of God .
GOLD:	The Israelites went up seeking direction from the Lord . ( In those days the Ark of the Covenant of God was in Bethel ,

ID:	102
INPUT:	▁zergatik ▁zaudete , ▁gailur ▁garai ok , ▁in bi di az ▁begira Jainkoak ▁bizitzeko ▁des i ratu ▁duen ▁mendi ari , Jaunak ▁betiko ▁bizileku ▁egin ▁duenari ?
PRED:	So now , you who live in the hills and live in the hills , for the Lord has given you eternal life .
GOLD:	Surrounded by unnumbered thousands of chariots , the Lord came from Mount Sinai into his sanctuary .

ID:	103
INPUT:	▁Ikusten ▁nauten ek ▁bur la ▁egiten ▁didate , ke inu ka ▁eta ▁ze inu ka .
PRED:	My eyes surround me , for those who try to trap me .
GOLD:	“ Is this the one who relies on the Lord ? Then let the Lord save him ! If the Lord loves him so much , let the Lord rescue him ! ”

ID:	104
INPUT:	▁Bi ▁herriak ▁Jainkoarekin ▁adiskide tu ▁ditu ▁eta ▁guru tzeko ▁heriotzaren ▁bidez ▁gorputz ▁bakar ▁batean ▁elkartu , ▁beraien ▁arteko ▁etsai goa ▁suntsi tuz .
PRED:	The people of Israel are God 's friends , and they are members of the cross of the cross .
GOLD:	Together as one body , Christ reconciled both groups to God by means of his death on the cross , and our hostility toward each other was put to death .

ID:	105
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jakob ▁Egiptora ▁joan ▁zen eta ▁K amen ▁lurraldean ▁atzerritar ▁gisa ▁bizi ▁izan .
PRED:	Then Jacob went to Egypt and lived as a foreigner in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	Then Israel arrived in Egypt ; Jacob lived as a foreigner in the land of Ham .

ID:	106
INPUT:	▁« Ez - mai tea » ▁bul arretik ▁kendu ▁ondoren , ▁Gom er - ek ▁berriro ▁haurdun ▁gelditu ▁eta ▁semea ▁izan ▁zuen .
PRED:	“ Do n't be cut off like Sodom and Gomorrah , and then she became pregnant again .
GOLD:	After Gomer had weaned Lo-ruhamah , she again became pregnant and gave birth to a second son .

ID:	107
INPUT:	▁Jakobek , ▁zahar da dez ▁begiak ▁lau so turik , ▁ezin ▁zuen ▁ikusi . ▁Josek ▁bere ▁semeak ▁aurrera ▁eraman ▁zizkion ean , ▁laztan du ▁eta ▁besarkatu ▁egin ▁zituen .
PRED:	Jacob looked at his eyes , and he could n't see his eyes . When Joseph saw him , he led his arms and kissed him .
GOLD:	Jacob was half blind because of his age and could hardly see . So Joseph brought the boys close to him , and Jacob kissed and embraced them .

ID:	108
INPUT:	▁Bai ▁zera ! ▁Bihotz ▁makur rez ▁jokatzen ▁duzue , zeuen ▁egite ez ▁lurraldean ▁bide gabek eriak ▁zabaltzen .
PRED:	For you know how much you are doing , and you feed them in the land .
GOLD:	These wicked people are born sinners ; even from birth they have lied and gone their own way .

ID:	109
INPUT:	▁Jeroboamen ▁gainerako ▁jarduerak , ▁egintza ▁guztiak , ▁ekin tza ▁bizkor rak ▁eta ▁Judaren ak ▁izandako ▁Damasko ▁eta ▁Ham at ▁hiriak ▁Israelen tzat ▁berreskura tzeko ▁eginiko ▁gu duak ▁« Israelgo ▁Erregeen ▁Kronika » ▁liburuan ▁daude ▁idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Jeroboam 's reign and everything he did , including the towns of Judah , including the towns of Judah and Jerusalem , are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in the reign of Jeroboam II and everything he did — including the extent of his power , his wars , and how he recovered for Israel both Damascus and Hamath , which had belonged to Judah — are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	110
INPUT:	▁Atzerri etan ▁putzu ak ▁zulatu ▁ditu teta ▁bertako ▁ura ▁edan ; han ka pean ▁zapaldu z leh ortu ▁egin ▁ditut Egipto ko ▁u bide ▁guztiak ”.
PRED:	I have dug a pit to dug a pit to drink , and I have dug all the rivers of Egypt . '
GOLD:	I have dug wells in many foreign landsand refreshed myself with their water.With the sole of my foot , I stopped up all the rivers of Egypt ! '

ID:	111
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁erreinuko ▁gil tzak ▁emango ▁dizkizut ; ▁zuk ▁mundu ▁honetan ▁lotua ▁zeruan ▁ere ▁loturik ▁geldituko ▁da , ▁eta ▁zuk ▁mundu ▁honetan ▁as katua ▁zeruan ▁ere ▁askatu rik ▁geldituko ▁da .
PRED:	I will put you in the Kingdom of God in the world , and you will be bound in heaven . And you will be released in heaven .
GOLD:	And I will give you the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven . Whatever you forbid on earth will be forbidden in heaven , and whatever you permit on earth will be permitted in heaven . ”

ID:	112
INPUT:	▁Haren ▁gantz ▁guztiak ▁aurkeztuko ▁dira : ▁buz tan a , ▁heste ▁inguruko ▁gantza ,
PRED:	The fat of the altar will present all the fat around the internal organs , the long lobe of the liver ,
GOLD:	The priest will then offer all its fat on the altar , including the fat of the broad tail , the fat around the internal organs ,

ID:	113
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁orain , ▁Sik u t ▁zuen ▁jainko - errege aren ▁eta ▁K i ion ▁zuen ▁jainko - iz arraren ▁irudiak ▁egin ▁dituzuen ez ,
PRED:	But instead , he made them gods of gods , and he made them gods of gods .
GOLD:	No , you served your pagan gods — Sakkuth your king god and Kaiwan your star god — the images you made for yourselves .

ID:	114
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁zera ▁esan ▁nion : ▁« Nire kin ▁egongo ▁zara ▁luzaro , ▁prostituzioan ▁ibili ▁gabe ▁eta ▁zeure ▁burua ▁inongo ▁gizon i ▁eman ▁gabe . ▁Nik ▁ere ▁ez ▁dizut ▁neure ▁burua ▁emango ».
PRED:	Then I said to them , “ You will be a long time with me , and you will have sex with me , and you will not have sex with me . ”
GOLD:	Then I said to her , “ You must live in my house for many days and stop your prostitution . During this time , you will not have sexual relations with anyone , not even with me . ”

ID:	115
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁Paulo ▁eta ▁Sil as ▁ F ri gia ▁eta ▁Gal azia ▁eskualde etan ▁barrena ▁joan ▁ziren , ▁Espiritu ▁Santuak ▁erago tzi ▁egin ▁baitzi en ▁Asia ▁prob intzi an ▁mezua ▁zabal tzea .
PRED:	Then Paul and Silas traveled through the region of Galilee , preaching the Good News and preached the Holy Spirit in the province of Asia .
GOLD:	Next Paul and Silas traveled through the area of Phrygia and Galatia , because the Holy Spirit had prevented them from preaching the word in the province of Asia at that time .

ID:	116
INPUT:	▁Larri aldi - ▁eta ▁piztuera - gar aia
PRED:	The Resurrection
GOLD:	The Time of the End

ID:	117
INPUT:	▁Behin , ▁Jesus ▁herri ▁batean ▁zela , ▁legen az ▁josi tako ▁gizon ▁bat ▁azaldu ▁zen ; ▁Jesus ▁ikustean , ▁ahuspez ▁lurrera ▁erori ▁eta ▁erregutu ▁zion :— Jauna , ▁nahi ▁baduzu , ▁garbi ▁naz ak ezu .
PRED:	One day Jesus saw that a man with leprosy had a serious skin disease , and when Jesus saw that Jesus was healed , he fell down to the ground and pleaded with him , “ If you want me to bow down to worship him . ”
GOLD:	In one of the villages , Jesus met a man with an advanced case of leprosy . When the man saw Jesus , he bowed with his face to the ground , begging to be healed . “ Lord , ” he said , “ if you are willing , you can heal me and make me clean . ”

ID:	118
INPUT:	▁« G aria ▁jaso ▁eta ▁ardoa ▁u p el era tu ▁ondoren , ▁Etx ola ▁Jaia ▁ospatuko ▁duzue ▁zazpi ▁egunez .
PRED:	“ You must celebrate the wine for seven days and celebrate the Festival of Shelters for seven days .
GOLD:	“ You must observe the Festival of Shelters for seven days at the end of the harvest season , after the grain has been threshed and the grapes have been pressed .

ID:	119
INPUT:	▁« Horregatik , ▁hau ▁dio ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak : ▁Nire ▁hitzak ▁aditu ▁nahi ▁izan ▁ez ▁dituzu elako ,
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : You would not listen to me .
GOLD:	And now the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Because you have not listened to me ,

ID:	120
INPUT:	▁erantzun ▁nion :— Errege ▁jauna , ▁ongi ▁ba der itz ozu ▁eta ▁begiko ▁baldin ▁banauzu , ▁bidal ▁nazazu ▁Ju dara , ▁nire ▁gurasoak ▁hilobi ratu ak ▁dauden ▁hirira , ▁berriro ▁eraiki ▁dezadan .
PRED:	I replied , “ If you have a favor with me , if I have found me in Jerusalem , if I have been here in Jerusalem , please take care of my ancestors in Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	I replied , “ If it please the king , and if you are pleased with me , your servant , send me to Judah to rebuild the city where my ancestors are buried . ”

ID:	121
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁honela ▁jarraitu ▁zuen ▁Jaunak : ▁« Judako ▁jendea ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁bizilagunak ▁azpi j oko an ▁ari ▁dira ▁nire ▁aurka .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to them , “ The people of Judah and Jerusalem are about in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Again the Lord spoke to me and said , “ I have discovered a conspiracy against me among the people of Judah and Jerusalem .

ID:	122
INPUT:	▁« Horregatik ▁maite ▁nau ▁Aitak , ▁neure ▁bizia ▁ematen ▁du dalako ▁eta ▁horrela ▁esku ratzen ▁berriro .
PRED:	“ That is why my Father loved me , and my Father gives me life .
GOLD:	“ The Father loves me because I sacrifice my life so I may take it back again .

ID:	123
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zion ▁Moisesi : ▁« Egun ▁bakoitzean ▁familia buru ▁des berdin ak ▁eramango ▁du ▁oparia ▁aldarearen ▁in au gu raz i orako ».
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ This is what the Lord says : Each of the altar will be given to the altar . ”
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses , “ Let one leader bring his gift each day for the dedication of the altar . ”

ID:	124
INPUT:	▁hil arazteko ▁garaia eta ▁sen datzeko ▁garaia , hon datzeko ▁garaia eta ▁eraikitzeko ▁garaia ,
PRED:	A time to bring a time to a time , a time to rebuild the time of time .
GOLD:	A time to kill and a time to heal.A time to tear down and a time to build up .

ID:	125
INPUT:	▁Beren ▁abereak ▁eta ▁Kanaan ▁lurraldean ▁pil atu tako ▁ondasunak ▁ere ▁eraman ▁zituzten .
PRED:	Instead , they took their livestock and livestock in the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	They also took all their livestock and all the personal belongings they had acquired in the land of Canaan . So Jacob and his entire family went to Egypt —

ID:	126
INPUT:	▁Jauna ▁agertu ▁zitzaion ▁Abra mi ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« Hau ▁da ▁zure ▁ondorengoei ▁emango ▁diedan ▁lurraldea ». Eta ▁aldarea ▁eraiki ▁zion ▁bertan ▁Abra mek ▁agertu ▁zitzaion ▁Jaunari .
PRED:	Then the Lord appeared to Abram and said to Abram , “ This is what the Lord says : The land I have built an altar to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord appeared to Abram and said , “ I will give this land to your descendants. ” And Abram built an altar there and dedicated it to the Lord , who had appeared to him .

ID:	127
INPUT:	▁« As ko ▁dira ▁emakume ▁jator rak , baina ▁zuk ▁ez ▁duzu ▁pareko rik !»
PRED:	“ You have no king , but you are not like a woman . ”
GOLD:	“ There are many virtuous and capable women in the world , but you surpass them all ! ”

ID:	128
INPUT:	▁Ai , ▁basamortuan ▁egon lekua aur ki tuko ▁banu , neure ▁herria ▁utzi eta ▁harengandik ▁urruti ▁bizitzeko ! D es leial ak ▁baitira ▁guztiak , tra i dore ▁huts ak ▁denak .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits those who were in the wilderness , and they would have abandoned me , for they are far away .
GOLD:	If only my head were a pool of waterand my eyes a fountain of tears , I would weep day and nightfor all my people who have been slaughtered .

ID:	129
INPUT:	▁Zab aldu ▁zuen ▁Esdras ek ▁liburua ▁herri ▁osoaren ▁aurrean , ▁denak ▁begira ▁zituela ; ▁liburua ▁zabal tze arekin ▁batera , ▁herri ▁osoa ▁zutitu ▁egin ▁zen .
PRED:	So Ezra took the Book of the scroll , and all the people stood in front of the scroll , and all the people stood outside .
GOLD:	Ezra stood on the platform in full view of all the people . When they saw him open the book , they all rose to their feet .

ID:	130
INPUT:	▁eta ▁erregeari ▁jakinarazi ▁zion ▁oihuka . ▁Erregeak ▁esan ▁zuen :— B ak arrik ▁baldin ▁badator , ▁berri ▁onak ▁dakar tza . L as ter karia ▁hurbildu ▁ahala , ▁ordea ,
PRED:	Then the king told the king , “ If the king is coming , he is coming ! ” But the king said , “ It is good ! ”
GOLD:	He shouted the news down to David , and the king replied , “ If he is alone , he has news. ” As the messenger came closer ,

ID:	131
INPUT:	▁“ Zoritx arren ▁bat , ▁gerra ▁nahiz ▁zigorra , ▁izurri tea ▁nahiz ▁gosete a , ▁gerta tzean , ▁zu ▁zauden eko ▁tenplu ▁honetara ▁zure ▁aitzin era ▁etorri ▁eta ▁geure ▁atsek abean ▁zuri ▁oihu ▁eginez ▁gero , ▁zuk ▁entzun ▁eta ▁salbatu ▁egingo ▁gaituzu ”.
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you who fight against you , famine , famine , famine , disease , and disease , and disease , and disease , and you will come to this Temple and say , ‘ We will come to this Temple , and you will be saved . '
GOLD:	They said , ‘ Whenever we are faced with any calamity such as war , plague , or famine , we can come to stand in your presence before this Temple where your name is honored . We can cry out to you to save us , and you will hear us and rescue us . '

ID:	132
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁agindu ▁hau ▁eman ▁zien ▁Josuek ▁herriko ▁funtzionario ei :
PRED:	Then Joshua gave this command :
GOLD:	Joshua then commanded the officers of Israel ,

ID:	133
INPUT:	▁Pedrok ▁esan ▁zion :— Zergatik ▁hartu ▁duzue ▁elkar ▁Jaunaren ▁Espiritua ▁ten tatzeko ? ▁Hara , ▁atean ▁dira ▁dagoeneko ▁zure ▁senarrari ▁lur ▁eman ▁diotenak ; ▁zu ▁eramango ▁zaituzte ▁orain .
PRED:	Peter said to him , “ Why are you the Spirit of the Lord ? The Spirit of the Lord has already given you today ? ”
GOLD:	And Peter said , “ How could the two of you even think of conspiring to test the Spirit of the Lord like this ? The young men who buried your husband are just outside the door , and they will carry you out , too . ”

ID:	134
INPUT:	▁baina ▁Jainkoak , ▁handikiak ▁mespretx atzen eta ▁bid erik ▁gabeko ▁basamortuan ▁nora gab ei bil arazten ▁dituenak ,
PRED:	But God 's people are filled with contempt , and he makes them free from the wilderness .
GOLD:	the Lord pours contempt on their princes , causing them to wander in trackless wastelands .

ID:	135
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ikara , ▁ardura gabe ok ! Egin ▁dardara , ▁ax ol ag abe ok ! Er antz i , ▁kendu ▁soineko ▁horiek , eta ▁estali ▁dolu - jantziz .
PRED:	Do n't be clothed in mourning ; let 's hide in mourning . Do not wear burlap and cover them in mourning .
GOLD:	Tremble , you women of ease ; throw off your complacency.Strip off your pretty clothes , and put on burlap to show your grief .

ID:	136
INPUT:	▁Lehen ▁ase ▁ziren ek , orain ▁ogi ▁or de ▁egin ▁behar ▁lan ; go se tu ek , ▁aldiz , ats eden ▁har ▁dezakete . A gor ▁zena , ▁haur ▁askoz ▁erdi ▁da ; asko ren ▁ama , ▁berriz , ▁agor tu .
PRED:	They were hungry and old enough to eat the old bread , but the old is old enough to have a little child , and the child was old enough to have a little child , but the child is old enough to have children .
GOLD:	Those who were well fed are now starving , and those who were starving are now full.The childless woman now has seven children , and the woman with many children wastes away .

ID:	137
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁Jainkoak ▁ez ▁gaitu ▁bere ▁haserre - zigorra ▁jas ateko ▁nahi , ▁Jesu ▁Kristo ▁gure ▁Jaunaren ▁bitartez ▁salbamena ▁iris teko ▁baizik .
PRED:	For God has not been angry with us , for he is ready to be angry with us through our Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	For God chose to save us through our Lord Jesus Christ , not to pour out his anger on us .

ID:	138
INPUT:	▁harro putz ei ▁iseka ▁egiten ▁die eta ▁apal ▁direnei ▁babesa ▁ematen .
PRED:	He makes the proud of those who fear him , and he rescues them from those who fear him .
GOLD:	The Lord mocks the mockersbut is gracious to the humble .

ID:	139
INPUT:	▁Mundu arentzat ▁g atz ▁eta ▁argi
PRED:	A Call to Trust the Lord
GOLD:	Teaching about Salt and Light

ID:	140
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁esan ▁zion :— Zeure ▁erruz ▁hiltzen ▁zara ! ▁Zeure ▁ahoak ▁salatu ▁zaitu , ▁Jaunaren ▁gantzu tua ▁hil ▁duzula ▁esatean .
PRED:	Then David said to him , “ You will kill you because you have killed the sword of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	“ You have condemned yourself , ” David said , “ for you yourself confessed that you killed the Lord 's anointed one . ”

ID:	141
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁kontu ! ▁Era bat ▁suntsitu ▁behar ▁da ▁guztia . ▁Zeu entzat ▁zerbait ▁hartuko ▁bazenu te , ▁suntsi pena ▁eta ▁ez beharra ▁ekarriko ▁zeni tuzkete ▁israeldar ron ▁kanpalekura .
PRED:	But you know that I am the one who says to you , “ I will bring disaster upon you , and you will not be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	“ Do not take any of the things set apart for destruction , or you yourselves will be completely destroyed , and you will bring trouble on the camp of Israel .

ID:	142
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁zuen ▁sinesmenaren ▁kultu - zerbitz ua ▁buru tzeko ▁nire ▁bizia ▁opari ▁eskaini ▁behar ▁badut ▁ere , ▁pozik ▁nago ▁eta ▁alai tu ▁egiten ▁naiz ▁zuekin ▁guztiok in .
PRED:	And if I serve God for you , I must offer my life as a sacrifice for you , and I am with you .
GOLD:	But I will rejoice even if I lose my life , pouring it out like a liquid offering to God , just like your faithful service is an offering to God . And I want all of you to share that joy .

ID:	143
INPUT:	▁Apaiz en ▁lurrak ▁bakarrik ▁utzi ▁zituen ▁erosi ▁gabe , ▁haien ▁alde ▁lege ▁bat ▁baitzuen ▁faraoiak ▁emana ; ▁honek ▁ematen ▁zien ▁jateko ▁behar ▁zutena . ▁Hon engatik , ▁ez ▁zuten ▁beren ▁lurrak ▁saldu ▁beharrik ▁izan .
PRED:	The land was not ready for the land of Egypt , and he sold them as well as Pharaoh had done for them . So the land was sold for their property .
GOLD:	The only land he did not buy was the land belonging to the priests . They received an allotment of food directly from Pharaoh , so they did n't need to sell their land .

ID:	144
INPUT:	▁zapuztu ▁egin ▁dut ▁eta ▁munduko ▁erre gerik ▁ahaltsu en aren ▁esku ▁utzi , ▁beraren ▁gaiztakeriak ▁merezi ▁bezala ▁erabil ▁dezan .
PRED:	I have acted like an army of the world and powerful arm , as he has done for him .
GOLD:	I will hand it over to a mighty nation that will destroy it as its wickedness deserves . I have already discarded it .

ID:	145
INPUT:	▁Den bora ldi ▁luze ▁baten ▁ondoren , ▁hil ▁zen ▁Judaren ▁emaztea , ▁X uaren ▁alaba . ▁D olu aldia ▁bukatu ▁zuenean , ▁Tim n ara ▁igo ▁zen ▁Juda ▁ardi - moz tera ▁Adul am go ▁bere ▁adiskide ▁H ir arekin .
PRED:	After that , the daughter of Judah lived for a long time , she returned to Timnah for his wife . When she returned to Timnah , she returned to Timnah for her to Timnah with her .
GOLD:	Some years later Judah 's wife died . After the time of mourning was over , Judah and his friend Hirah the Adullamite went up to Timnah to supervise the shearing of his sheep .

ID:	146
INPUT:	▁Jauna , ▁ikus ▁nire ▁larri aldia ! ▁I rak i ten ▁daukat ▁barrua . I ra ul ia ▁dut ▁bihotza ▁barn ean , ▁errebelde ▁izan ▁bainaiz , ▁errebelde . K al ean ▁ezpatak ▁hil ▁dizkit ▁haurrak , ▁etxean ▁herio a ▁jabe .
PRED:	The Lord says , “ My heart is troubled , and my heart is filled with bitter tears , for I have heard my suffering .
GOLD:	“ Lord , see my anguish ! My heart is brokenand my soul despairs , for I have rebelled against you.In the streets the sword kills , and at home there is only death .

ID:	147
INPUT:	▁zure ▁aurrean ▁alai tzen ▁da ▁egunero , zure ▁justizia ▁du ▁bozkari o .
PRED:	Yes , your love endures forever .
GOLD:	You are their glorious strength.It pleases you to make us strong .

ID:	148
INPUT:	▁ez ▁zan goa ▁edo ▁besoa ▁hauts irik ▁duena ,
PRED:	He will not destroy them or destroy them .
GOLD:	or has a broken foot or arm ,

ID:	149
INPUT:	▁Kor n el io ▁begira ▁gelditu ▁zitzaion ▁eta , ▁beldur rak ▁harturik , ▁galdetu ▁zion :— Zer ▁duzu , ▁Jauna ? A in ger uak ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Zure ▁otoitz ▁eta ▁l im os n ak ▁atsegin ▁izan ▁zaizkio ▁Jainkoari ▁eta ▁gogoan ▁ditu .
PRED:	She looked at her head , and she asked him , “ What are you afraid ? ” “ What do you mean ? ” she replied , “ O Lord , the God of heaven and pray for us ? ”
GOLD:	Cornelius stared at him in terror . “ What is it , sir ? ” he asked the angel.And the angel replied , “ Your prayers and gifts to the poor have been received by God as an offering !

ID:	150
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁aingeruak ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« L o tu ▁gerrikoa ▁eta ▁jantzi ▁oin etakoak ». ▁Hala ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁eta ▁aingeruak , ▁berriro : ▁« J antz i ▁soingainekoa ▁eta ▁jarraitu ▁niri ».
PRED:	Then the angel said to the angel , “ Take fine linen clothing and sandals , and put it on your feet . ” So the angel said , “ Go back again again and follow me . ”
GOLD:	Then the angel told him , “ Get dressed and put on your sandals. ” And he did . “ Now put on your coat and follow me , ” the angel ordered .

ID:	151
INPUT:	▁I rain du ▁zuen arentzat ▁barkamena
PRED:	Jesus Heals Many People
GOLD:	Forgiveness for the Sinner

ID:	152
INPUT:	▁X un em go ▁emakumearen ▁is to ri oa ▁bukatu
PRED:	A Plague of Restoration
GOLD:	The Woman from Shunem Returns Home

ID:	153
INPUT:	▁B urua ▁galduko ▁dute eta ▁beren ▁asmoak ▁hautsiko ▁dizkiet . Orduan , ▁idolo ▁eta ▁zori lari engana , hil dakoen ▁espiritu ▁eta ▁azti engana j oko ▁dute ▁kontseil u ▁eske .
PRED:	They will break their mouths in their presence , and they will break down their idols in the presence of the dead .
GOLD:	The Egyptians will lose heart , and I will confuse their plans.They will plead with their idols for wisdomand call on spirits , mediums , and those who consult the spirits of the dead .

ID:	154
INPUT:	▁Zatoz kit ▁lehen bai lehen ,
PRED:	Come , let 's see what is going to do .
GOLD:	Timothy , please come as soon as you can .

ID:	155
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁Daniel , ▁Babiloniako ▁jaki tun ak ▁hiltzeko ▁erregearen ▁agindua ▁hartua ▁zuen ▁Ari ok engana ▁joan ▁zen , ▁esanez : ▁« Ez ▁hil ▁Babiloniako ▁jaki tun ik ! ▁Aur k ez ▁nazazu ▁erregeagana , ▁neuk ▁argi tuko ▁baiti ot ▁ametsa ».
PRED:	Then Daniel said to the king of Babylon , “ Daniel , had given me this message from the king of Babylon : ‘ Do n't let me kill me . ' ”
GOLD:	Then Daniel went in to see Arioch , whom the king had ordered to execute the wise men of Babylon . Daniel said to him , “ Do n't kill the wise men . Take me to the king , and I will tell him the meaning of his dream . ”

ID:	156
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁herriak ▁aho ▁batez ▁erantzun ▁zuen : ▁« Jaunak ▁agindu ▁guztia ▁beteko ▁dugu ». Herri aren ▁erantzuna ▁Jaunari ▁eram atera ▁joan ▁zen ▁Moises .
PRED:	Then the people said to Moses , “ The Lord has commanded us everything the Lord has commanded Moses . ”
GOLD:	And all the people responded together , “ We will do everything the Lord has commanded. ” So Moses brought the people 's answer back to the Lord .

ID:	157
INPUT:	▁Errege ▁hauek ▁gudu ▁egin ▁zieten ▁Sodo mako ▁Bera , ▁Gom or rako ▁B ir x a , ▁Ad mako ▁X in ab , ▁Tz eb o im go ▁X eme ber ▁erregeei ▁eta ▁B elako , ▁hau ▁da , ▁Tz o ar ko , ▁erregeari .
PRED:	But all the kings of Sodom , Gomorrah , and Gomorrah , became the king of Sodom and Gomorrah .
GOLD:	fought against King Bera of Sodom , King Birsha of Gomorrah , King Shinab of Admah , King Shemeber of Zeboiim , and the king of Bela ( also called Zoar ) .

ID:	158
INPUT:	▁Gainera , ▁nik , ▁zure ▁zerbitzari ▁honek , ▁neure ▁gain ▁hartua ▁dut ▁mutiko aren ▁erantz uk izuna ; ▁hitza ▁eman ▁nion ▁aitari ; ▁berekiko ▁errudun ▁izango ▁nintza teke ▁betiko , ▁itzuliko ▁ez ▁ban io .
PRED:	And I gave him a servant to my servant , and she was married to her . If she was guilty , I would not be guilty , I would not be guilty .
GOLD:	My lord , I guaranteed to my father that I would take care of the boy . I told him , ‘ If I do n't bring him back to you , I will bear the blame forever . '

ID:	159
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁bere ▁bizia ▁gorde ▁nahi ▁duenak ▁galdu ▁egingo ▁du ; ▁bere ▁bizia ▁niregatik ▁galtzen ▁duenak , ▁ordea , ▁eskuratu ▁egingo ▁du .
PRED:	For if you want to live , you will lose my life , but you will lose my life .
GOLD:	If you try to hang on to your life , you will lose it . But if you give up your life for my sake , you will save it .

ID:	160
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁dio : ▁« Hara , ▁laster ▁nator . ▁Zorionekoa ▁liburu ▁honetan ▁ematen ▁den ▁Jainkoaren ▁mezua ▁kontuan ▁hartzen ▁duena !»
PRED:	“ Look , I am coming , ” Jesus said , “ I am the one who speaks in this book . ”
GOLD:	“ Look , I am coming soon ! Blessed are those who obey the words of prophecy written in this book . ”

ID:	161
INPUT:	▁Jo ▁bularra ▁eta ▁egin ▁dolu : lan da ▁zora garri eta ▁mahasti ▁eman kor rak am aitu ▁dira ▁eta ;
PRED:	The breasts of mourning ; the breasts of the wicked are filled with grief .
GOLD:	Beat your breasts in sorrow for your bountiful farmsand your fruitful grapevines .

ID:	162
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁esan ▁zuen : ▁« Izan ▁bedi ▁sab aia ▁ur en ▁artean , ▁goiko ▁eta ▁beh eko ▁urak ▁bereiz ▁ditzan ». Eta ▁hala ▁izan ▁zen .
PRED:	Then God said to them , “ May the waters of the waters be poured out from the waters of the waters . ”
GOLD:	Then God said , “ Let there be a space between the waters , to separate the waters of the heavens from the waters of the earth . ”

ID:	163
INPUT:	▁otoitza ▁egin ▁zuen : ▁« Jauna , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoa , ▁ez ▁da ▁zu ▁bezalako ▁beste ▁jainkorik , ▁ez ▁goian ▁zeruan , ▁ez ▁beh ean ▁lurrean . ▁Bete tzen ▁duzu ▁ituna ▁eta ▁on bera ▁zara ▁zure ▁aurrean ▁bihotzez ▁zintzo ▁dabiltzan ▁zeure ▁mirabe entzat .
PRED:	He prayed , “ O Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , who is not like you in heaven , and do not obey your covenant . You must not obey all the commands of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	and he prayed , “ O Lord , God of Israel , there is no God like you in all of heaven above or on the earth below . You keep your covenant and show unfailing love to all who walk before you in wholehearted devotion .

ID:	164
INPUT:	▁K im uak ▁botako ▁ditu ; haren ▁ederra ▁olibondo aren abez alako a ▁izango ▁da , haren ▁us aina Liban o koa ▁bezain ▁gozoa .
PRED:	The proud of the wicked will be like a olive trees , like a tree of Lebanon ; the cedars of Lebanon will be as sweet as the Lebanon .
GOLD:	My people will again live under my shade.They will flourish like grain and blossom like grapevines.They will be as fragrant as the wines of Lebanon .

ID:	165
INPUT:	▁Abimelekek ▁bere ▁talde arekin ▁aurrera tu ▁eta ▁hiriko ▁sarrera ▁hartu ▁zuen ; ▁bitartean , ▁beste ▁bi ▁talde ek ▁landar a ▁atera ▁ziren ei ▁eraso ▁eta ▁xehatu ▁egin ▁zituzten .
PRED:	Then Abimelech took some of his men and went out to the gates of the city and attacked them .
GOLD:	Abimelech and his group stormed the city gate to keep the men of Shechem from getting back in , while Abimelech 's other two groups cut them down in the fields .

ID:	166
INPUT:	▁Atera tzean , ▁Z iren eko ▁gizon ▁bat ▁aurkitu ▁zuten , ▁Simon ▁zeritz ana , ▁eta ▁Jesusen ▁guru tzea ▁eram atera ▁behartu ▁zuten .
PRED:	When they came to Simon ( who was a man named Simon ) , a man named Simon ( who was crucified . )
GOLD:	Along the way , they came across a man named Simon , who was from Cyrene , and the soldiers forced him to carry Jesus ' cross .

ID:	167
INPUT:	▁O toitz ean ▁sinesmen ez ▁eskatzen ▁duzuen ▁edo zer ▁gauza ▁lor tuko ▁duzue .
PRED:	When you pray for joy , you will pray for your faith .
GOLD:	You can pray for anything , and if you have faith , you will receive it . ”

ID:	168
INPUT:	▁« Z euen ▁herritar rari ▁zerbait ▁— di ru a , ▁janaria ▁nahiz ▁beste ▁edo zer ▁gauza — ▁maile guz ▁em atean , ▁ez ▁diozue ▁eskatuko ▁in ter es ik .
PRED:	“ If you lend money to your neighbor , do not pick up your food or clothing or clothing or clothing .
GOLD:	You may charge interest to foreigners , but you may not charge interest to Israelites , so that the Lord your God may bless you in everything you do in the land you are about to enter and occupy .

ID:	169
INPUT:	▁David ▁errege ▁izendatu ▁Hebronen
PRED:	David Becomes Hebron
GOLD:	David Anointed King of Judah

ID:	170
INPUT:	▁Haren ▁hitz - hotsa ▁entzutean , ▁kon or te ▁gabe ▁gelditu ▁nintzen ▁eta ▁ahuspez ▁lurrera ▁erori .
PRED:	When I heard the sound of the ram 's horn , I fell down on the ground .
GOLD:	Then I heard the man speak , and when I heard the sound of his voice , I fainted and lay there with my face to the ground .

ID:	171
INPUT:	▁Goiz ean ▁goiz ▁jaiki ▁eta ▁hiri - sarrerako ▁ate ▁ondoan ▁jarri ▁ohi ▁zen . ▁Norbaitek ▁araz oren ▁baten gatik ▁erregeagana ▁zuzenbide ▁eske ▁etorri ▁beharra ▁zuenean , ▁Absalomek ▁dei ▁egin ▁eta ▁galdetu ▁ohi ▁zion :— Zein ▁hiri takoa ▁zara ? Eta ▁besteak ▁erantzuten :— Israelgo ▁halako ▁leinukoa .
PRED:	When Absalom got up early the next morning , he went to the entrance to the gate of the city and asked him , “ Why are you going to ask the king of Israel ? ”
GOLD:	He got up early every morning and went out to the gate of the city . When people brought a case to the king for judgment , Absalom would ask where in Israel they were from , and they would tell him their tribe .

ID:	172
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁non ▁datoz ki gun ▁eraso an ▁orain ▁amondarrak , ▁moab darrak ▁eta ▁Seir ▁mendi etakoak . ▁Gure ▁arbasoei , ▁Egiptotik ▁etortzean , ▁ez ▁zenien ▁haien ▁lurralde etan ▁sartzen ▁utzi ; ▁israeldarrek ▁itzul inguru a ▁egin ▁zuten ▁eta ▁ez ▁zituzten ▁hondatu .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The armies of Edom are like the mountains of Edom , Edom , and the people of Israel did not return to their ancestors , and they did not return to their land .
GOLD:	“ And now see what the armies of Ammon , Moab , and Mount Seir are doing . You would not let our ancestors invade those nations when Israel left Egypt , so they went around them and did not destroy them .

ID:	173
INPUT:	▁Aingeruak ▁adierazi ▁zidan :— G aiz tak eria ▁da . On tzi ▁barrura ▁bultza ▁egin ▁zion ▁emakumeari ▁eta ▁ber un ezko ▁estal kia ▁ezarri ▁gainean .
PRED:	Then the angel said to me , “ The angel has given the woman 's head , and he laid it on the head . ”
GOLD:	The angel said , “ The woman 's name is Wickedness , ” and he pushed her back into the basket and closed the heavy lid again .

ID:	174
INPUT:	▁Zintzoa ▁zara ▁zu , ▁Jauna , ▁zuzena ▁zeure ▁erabaki etan .
PRED:	O Lord , you have obeyed your regulations ; your regulations are right .
GOLD:	O Lord , you are righteous , and your regulations are fair .

ID:	175
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁ez ▁dut ▁atsegin ▁inoren ▁heriotza ; ▁itzuli , ▁bada , ▁eta ▁bizi ▁zaitezte ! ▁Nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	“ But now , I will not be put to death , ” says the Sovereign Lord , “ I have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	I do n't want you to die , says the Sovereign Lord . Turn back and live !

ID:	176
INPUT:	▁Israeli ▁buruzko ▁Jaunaren ▁mezua . ▁Jaunak ▁zabaldu ▁du ▁zerua , ▁berak ▁oinarri tu ▁lurra , ▁berak ▁eman ▁dio ▁gizakiari ▁bizi - arnasa .
PRED:	This message came to the Lord , the heavens , and he has given the heavens , and he has given breath to the earth .
GOLD:	This message concerning the fate of Israel came from the Lord : “ This message is from the Lord , who stretched out the heavens , laid the foundations of the earth , and formed the human spirit .

ID:	177
INPUT:	▁herri ▁guztien ▁aurrean ▁zuk ▁aurkez tua :
PRED:	Then you will stand before all the people ,
GOLD:	which you have prepared for all people .

ID:	178
INPUT:	▁Akab , ▁Israelgo ▁errege
PRED:	Jehoshaphat Rules in Israel
GOLD:	Ahab Rules in Israel

ID:	179
INPUT:	▁aitak ▁ez ▁bezala : ▁sas ikultu - leku etako ▁otordu etan ▁parte ▁hartzen ▁du , ▁lagun ▁hurkoaren ▁emaztea ▁desoho ratzen ;
PRED:	The father of Israel did not commit adultery , for she has sexual relations with a wife 's wife .
GOLD:	And that son does all the evil things his father would never do — he worships idols on the mountains , commits adultery ,

ID:	180
INPUT:	▁ez ▁ilunpetan ▁zabaltzen ▁den ▁izurri ari , ez ▁egun - argi tan ▁jotzen ▁duen ▁gaitz ari .
PRED:	It is not going to spread on the sun , but the sun is filled with violence .
GOLD:	Do not dread the disease that stalks in darkness , nor the disaster that strikes at midday .

ID:	181
INPUT:	▁Baina , ▁Jesus ▁bera ▁ez ▁zen ▁fi datzen ▁hai etaz , ▁guztiak ▁ezagutzen ▁baitzituen ,
PRED:	But Jesus did n't trust him because he did n't know everything he had done .
GOLD:	But Jesus did n't trust them , because he knew all about people .

ID:	182
INPUT:	▁Ai ▁jaitsiko ▁baz ina , s as t raka ▁erretzen edo ▁ur ari ▁irak in arazten ▁dion sua ▁bezala ! Horrela , ▁zure ▁etsaiek nor ▁zaren ▁jakingo ▁l ukete , nazio ek ▁zure ▁aurrean ▁dar - dar ▁egingo ,
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you ? Why do you think you can not be thrown into the dust ? Why do you think you will know that your enemies will know that you will be destroyed ?
GOLD:	Oh , that you would burst from the heavens and come down ! How the mountains would quake in your presence !

ID:	183
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁Jerusalemera ▁bidaliko ▁dudan ▁hondamen ▁hori ▁ikusi ▁baino ▁lehen ▁zeure ▁guraso engana ▁bilduko ▁zaitut , ▁eta ▁bakean ▁ehor tziko ▁zaituzte ▁zeure ▁hilobian ”». Hala , ▁mandatari ek ▁eraman ▁zioten ▁erregeari ▁erantzuna .
PRED:	So now I will send you home in Jerusalem , and you will be buried in peace until you have been buried in the grave . ” So they returned to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	So I will not send the promised disaster until after you have died and been buried in peace . You will not see the disaster I am going to bring on this city . ' ” So they took her message back to the king .

ID:	184
INPUT:	▁Bets abe ▁ahuspeztu ▁egin ▁zen ▁erregearen ▁aurrean . ▁Honek ▁esan ▁zion :— Zer ▁duzu ?
PRED:	She bowed low before the king , and she asked him , “ What do you mean ? ”
GOLD:	Bathsheba bowed down before the king. “ What can I do for you ? ” he asked her .

ID:	185
INPUT:	▁Berriro ▁ere ▁bidali ▁zituen ▁Saulek ▁mandatariak , ▁David ▁ikus ▁zezaten . ▁Esan ▁zien : ▁« E kar dazue ▁ohean ▁bada ▁ere , ▁hil ▁egin ▁behar ▁dut ▁eta ».
PRED:	When Saul sent messengers to see him , he said to them , “ Please kill me and kill me . ”
GOLD:	But Saul sent the troops back to get David . He ordered , “ Bring him to me in his bed so I can kill him ! ”

ID:	186
INPUT:	▁Jainko ▁gure ▁Aitak ▁eta ▁Jesu ▁Kristo ▁Jaunak ▁eman ▁biez azkizu ete ▁grazia ▁eta ▁bakea .
PRED:	May God our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace .
GOLD:	May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace .

ID:	187
INPUT:	▁Jendea ▁marm arrean ▁hasi ▁zen ▁Moisesen ▁aurka , ▁esanez : ▁« Zer ▁edan ▁behar ▁dugu ?»
PRED:	But the crowd began to complain , “ What should we drink ? ”
GOLD:	Then the people complained and turned against Moses . “ What are we going to drink ? ” they demanded .

ID:	188
INPUT:	▁Israel ▁handik ▁irten arazi ▁zuen , haren ▁maitasuna ▁betikoa ▁baita ;
PRED:	Give thanks to the people of Israel who led Israel through His faithful love endures forever .
GOLD:	He brought Israel out of Egypt.His faithful love endures forever .

ID:	189
INPUT:	▁Zen tza ▁gaitzazu ▁neur riz , ez ▁haser rez , ez ▁gaitz azun ▁ezerez tu .
PRED:	He has done us from war , famine , and disease .
GOLD:	So correct me , Lord , but please be gentle.Do not correct me in anger , for I would die .

ID:	190
INPUT:	▁Nire ▁izenean ▁eskatuko ▁duzuen ▁guztia ▁emango ▁dizuet ▁nik .
PRED:	I will ask you everything you say , ‘ I will do . '
GOLD:	Yes , ask me for anything in my name , and I will do it !

ID:	191
INPUT:	▁H ustu ▁zuen ▁p egarra ▁as kan , ▁eta ▁lasterka ▁joan ▁zen ▁putzu ra ▁ur ▁gehiago ▁hartzera , ▁gamelu ▁guztiei ▁eman ▁zien ▁arte .
PRED:	So she ran to the ground and ran to the water and found it until the water had dried up .
GOLD:	So she quickly emptied her jug into the watering trough and ran back to the well to draw water for all his camels .

ID:	192
INPUT:	▁B atz l it , ▁M eh i da ▁eta ▁Har x arenak ;
PRED:	They left Hashmonah and camped at Hashmonah .
GOLD:	Bazluth , Mehida , Harsha ,

ID:	193
INPUT:	▁P ax hur , ▁Am arias , ▁Mal k ias ,
PRED:	Pashhur , Amariah , Malluch ,
GOLD:	Hattush , Shebaniah , Malluch ,

ID:	194
INPUT:	▁Zab al ean ▁sobera ▁dutena ▁bi ▁albo etatik ▁zintzilik ▁geldituko ▁da ▁— m etro ▁erdia ▁alde ▁bakoitzetik —, ▁egoitza ▁estal tzeko .
PRED:	The top of the Tabernacle will be set out of the Tabernacle , and it will be a part of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Allow 18 inches of remaining material to hang down over each side , so the Tabernacle is completely covered .

ID:	195
INPUT:	▁Lib n atik ▁Lakix era ▁jo ▁zuen ▁Josuek ▁israeldar ▁guztiekin ; ▁hiria ▁inguratu ▁eta ▁eraso ▁egin ▁zion .
PRED:	So Joshua and all the people of Israel attacked Libnah and attacked it .
GOLD:	From Libnah , Joshua and the Israelites went to Lachish and attacked it .

ID:	196
INPUT:	▁Moisesek , ▁beraz , ▁Kanaan ▁lurraldea ▁iker tzera ▁bidali ▁zituen , ▁esanez :— Zoazte ▁Negev etik ▁eta ▁igo ▁mendi aldera .
PRED:	So Moses sent the land of Canaan to explore the land of Canaan , and he told them , “ Go and leave the hill country . ”
GOLD:	Moses gave the men these instructions as he sent them out to explore the land : “ Go north through the Negev into the hill country .

ID:	197
INPUT:	▁Agur ▁ezazue ▁elkar ▁besar ka da ▁santu az . ▁Kristoren ▁eliz ▁elkarte ▁guztiek ▁agur tzen ▁zaituztete .
PRED:	Greet each other with each other , and all the churches in Christ .
GOLD:	Greet each other with a sacred kiss . All the churches of Christ send you their greetings .

ID:	198
INPUT:	▁D ar - dar ▁egingo ▁du ▁zeru aketa ▁lurrak ▁oinarri tik ▁ikara , Jaun ▁ahalguztidun ▁honek neure ▁haserrea ▁eta ▁sumin ▁gori a az aldu ko ▁dudan ▁egunean .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , has spoken !
GOLD:	For I will shake the heavens.The earth will move from its placewhen the Lord of Heaven 's Armies displays his wrathin the day of his fierce anger . ”

ID:	199
INPUT:	▁« Norbaitek ▁bere ▁esklab oa , ▁giz as emea ▁nahiz ▁emakumea , ▁begi an ▁jotzen ▁badu ▁eta ▁be gia ▁hondatzen , ▁libre ▁utziko ▁du ▁hondatu tako ▁begi aren ▁ordain .
PRED:	“ If a male man marries a slave or a male goat or female slave or a slave or a slave , he will be punished for a tooth .
GOLD:	“ If a man hits his male or female slave in the eye and the eye is blinded , he must let the slave go free to compensate for the eye .

ID:	200
INPUT:	▁U s ain ez ▁goza tzeko ▁antzeko ▁intsentsu rik ▁egiten ▁duena , ▁herritik ▁bota ▁egingo ▁dute ».
PRED:	Those who are like straw for burning incense will be cut off from the community . ”
GOLD:	Anyone who makes incense like this for personal use will be cut off from the community . ”

ID:	201
INPUT:	▁Aho a ▁bai , ▁eta ▁hitzik ▁ez ▁dute ; ▁begiak ▁bai , ▁eta ▁ikusten ▁ez ;
PRED:	The words of the word and can not speak , but the eyes can not see .
GOLD:	They have mouths but can not speak , and eyes but can not see .

ID:	202
INPUT:	▁Horiek ▁dira ▁Isma elen ▁semeen ▁izenak ; ▁hamabi ▁buruzagi ▁beste ▁hainbeste ▁le in ur entzat ; ▁izen ▁horiek ▁eman ▁zitzaizkien ▁haien ▁bizileku ▁eta ▁kanpaleku ei ▁ere .
PRED:	These are the names of the names of the twelve sons of Ishmael . Their names were named after their names , and their names are their names .
GOLD:	These twelve sons of Ishmael became the founders of twelve tribes named after them , listed according to the places they settled and camped .

ID:	203
INPUT:	▁Biho a ▁ene ▁jauna ▁bere ▁zerbitzari ▁honen ▁aurretik , ▁eta ▁nik ▁pol iki - p ol iki ▁egingo ▁dut ▁bidea , ▁aurrean ▁doazen ▁abereen ▁eta ▁haur ren ▁mar tx an , ▁Seir rera , ▁ene ▁jaun arengana , ▁iritsi ▁arte .
PRED:	My lord , my lord , my lord , and I will make a beautiful craftsman , and I will make your flocks and herds and herds and herds of camels until all the flocks of Seir have arrived at Mount Seir .
GOLD:	Please , my lord , go ahead of your servant . We will follow slowly , at a pace that is comfortable for the livestock and the children . I will meet you at Seir . ”

ID:	204
INPUT:	▁Booz , ▁jan ▁eta ▁edan ▁ondoren , ▁um ore tsu ▁jarri ▁zen , ▁eta ▁jarra ian ▁garagar - pila ▁baten ▁ondoan ▁etzan ▁zen ▁lo tarako . ▁Rut ▁isil ka ▁hurbildu , ▁haren ▁estal kia ▁altxatu ▁eta ▁haren ▁oinetan ▁etzan ▁zen .
PRED:	Then Boaz ate the meal with her , and she got up and sat down at her head . She sat down at her head at her head , and she sat down at her feet .
GOLD:	After Boaz had finished eating and drinking and was in good spirits , he lay down at the far end of the pile of grain and went to sleep . Then Ruth came quietly , uncovered his feet , and lay down .

ID:	205
INPUT:	▁g euk ▁entzun ▁diogu ▁esaten , ▁Jesus ▁Nazar et arra ▁delako ▁horrek ▁tenplua ▁suntsituko ▁duela ▁eta ▁Moisesek ▁eman ▁zizki gun ▁ohitu rak ▁aldatuko ▁dituela ».
PRED:	We say , ‘ We will rebuild the Temple of Nazareth , and I will rebuild the Temple of Jesus . ' ”
GOLD:	We have heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth will destroy the Temple and change the customs Moses handed down to us . ”

ID:	206
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁dio ▁Jaunak :« G aza ▁herriak gaiztakeri arik ▁asko ▁egin ▁du , zein ▁baino ▁zein ▁handiago . Eta ▁beraz , ▁zigortu ▁egingo ▁dut ! Herri ▁osoak ▁erbesteratu ▁baititu , edo m darren ▁esku ▁uzteko ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Judah have sinned again and again , and I will not let them fall into exile .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Gaza have sinned again and again , and I will not let them go unpunished ! They sent whole villages into exile , selling them as slaves to Edom .

ID:	207
INPUT:	▁Liburu ▁Santuak ▁dioen ▁bezala : ▁Jainkoak ▁adimena ▁itsu tu ▁egin ▁zien . ▁Begiak ▁eman ▁zizkien , ▁baina ▁ez ▁ikusteko , ▁belarriak ▁ere ▁bai , ▁baina ▁ez ▁entzuteko ▁Eta ▁horrela ▁gaur ▁arte .
PRED:	As the Scriptures say , “ The Scriptures do n't see what God had done , but he did n't hear it . ”
GOLD:	As the Scriptures say , “ God has put them into a deep sleep.To this day he has shut their eyes so they do not see , and closed their ears so they do not hear . ”

ID:	208
INPUT:	▁Al tx or ▁bikain ▁eta ▁opar oa ▁zuhur raren ▁etxean ; zentzu gabeak ▁dena ▁era l gi tzen ▁du .
PRED:	A wise person leads to a rich person , but fools make fools prosper in their house .
GOLD:	The wise have wealth and luxury , but fools spend whatever they get .

ID:	209
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁guztien ▁gainetik , ▁jantz ▁zaitezte ▁maitasunez , ▁hau ▁baita ▁elkartasun ▁bete aren ▁lok arria .
PRED:	And be clothed in love , for all who love him .
GOLD:	Above all , clothe yourselves with love , which binds us all together in perfect harmony .

ID:	210
INPUT:	▁Gorets ia ▁Zu ! D ei ▁egin ▁nion ▁Jaunari , eta ▁etsaien gandik ▁salbatu ▁ninduen .
PRED:	He rescued me from the Lord , and he saved me from their enemies .
GOLD:	I called on the Lord , who is worthy of praise , and he saved me from my enemies .

ID:	211
INPUT:	▁« Israel , ▁Jakoben ▁herri ▁horrek , go goan ▁izan ▁nire ▁zerbitzari ▁zarela . Nik ▁eratu ▁zaitut , eta ▁nire ▁zerbitzari ▁zara . Israel , ▁ez ▁zaitut ▁ahaz tuko .
PRED:	“ O Israel , Israel , are my servant , the one who has chosen me , and you have forgotten me . I will not forget you , and you will not forget me .
GOLD:	“ Pay attention , O Jacob , for you are my servant , O Israel.I , the Lord , made you , and I will not forget you .

ID:	212
INPUT:	▁Senideok , ▁ep ea ▁lab urtu ▁egin ▁dela ▁diotsuet . ▁Beraz , ▁gelditzen ▁zai gun ▁den bor an , ▁ezkon duak ▁bizi ▁bitez ▁ezkon durik ▁ez ▁bal eude ▁bezala ;
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , I tell you the truth , dear brothers and sisters , if you are willing to marry one who has no respect for us .
GOLD:	But let me say this , dear brothers and sisters : The time that remains is very short . So from now on , those with wives should not focus only on their marriage .

ID:	213
INPUT:	▁« O r tzi tik ▁trumo ia jo arazi ▁zuen ▁Jaunak , de iadar ▁egin ▁Goi - goiko ak .
PRED:	“ At last the Lord said , “ The Lord has spoken ! ”
GOLD:	The Lord thundered from heaven ; the voice of the Most High resounded .

ID:	214
INPUT:	▁Horra ▁non ▁datoz en ▁urrutitik : i par ▁eta ▁mendeb aldetik ▁datoz , Egipto ▁aldetik ▁ere ▁bai .
PRED:	Look at the end of the land of Egypt , and the east will come from Egypt .
GOLD:	See , my people will return from far away , from lands to the north and west , and from as far south as Egypt . ”

ID:	215
INPUT:	▁G antz ▁guztiak ▁aldarean ▁erreko ▁ditu , ▁elkartasun - opari g aien ▁gantz ak ▁bezala . ▁Era ▁honetan ▁egingo ▁du ▁apaizak ▁bekatuaren ▁barkamen - ohikunea ▁eta ▁bar katua ▁izango ▁du ▁buruzagiak ▁bekatua .
PRED:	Then he will burn all the fat on the altar , just as the fat of the sin offering . Through this process , the priest will purify the fat of the sin offering . Through this process , the priest will purify the priest .
GOLD:	Then he must burn all the goat 's fat on the altar , just as he does with the peace offering . Through this process , the priest will purify the leader from his sin , making him right with the Lord , and he will be forgiven .

ID:	216
INPUT:	▁L ein uen ▁ko k agun ea ▁kanpalekuan
PRED:	The Council at the camp
GOLD:	Organization for Israel 's Camp

ID:	217
INPUT:	▁Zeren , ▁goian ger uaren ▁ahots ez ▁eta ▁Jainkoaren ▁turuta - hots ez ▁seinalea ▁emanik , ▁Jauna ▁bera ▁jaitsiko ▁baita ▁zerutik , ▁eta ▁aur rena ▁Kristorekin ▁bat ▁eginik ▁hildakoak ▁piztuko ▁dira ;
PRED:	For the voice of God appeared to him , and the voice of God will come upon them , and they will be raised from the dead . For the resurrection of the dead will be raised from the dead .
GOLD:	For the Lord himself will come down from heaven with a commanding shout , with the voice of the archangel , and with the trumpet call of God . First , the believers who have died will rise from their graves .

ID:	218
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunak ▁sua ▁bidali ▁zuen ▁eta ▁dena ▁kiskali : ▁erre - opari gaia , ▁egurra , ▁baita ▁harriak ▁eta ▁errauts a ▁ere , ▁eta ▁erre ten eko ▁ura ▁i d ortu ▁egin ▁zuen .
PRED:	Then the Lord sent a fire on the fire and burned it on the altar . He also burned it on a altar and burned it on a pole .
GOLD:	Immediately the fire of the Lord flashed down from heaven and burned up the young bull , the wood , the stones , and the dust . It even licked up all the water in the trench !

ID:	219
INPUT:	▁zure ▁gora l penak ▁kontatu ▁ahal ▁ditza dan Sion ▁hiri ▁eder reko ▁sarreran , al aitu ▁ahal ▁nadin ▁zuk ▁emaniko ▁garaipen az .
PRED:	I will praise you with joy , O Lord , and I will praise you .
GOLD:	The nations have fallen into the pit they dug for others.Their own feet have been caught in the trap they set .

ID:	220
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁ere ▁esan ▁zidan ▁Jaunak : ▁« Ez ▁joan ▁hil etak ▁egiten ▁ari ▁diren ▁etxera , ▁dol uan ▁parte ▁hartzeko ▁eta ▁atsek abean ▁lagun ▁egiteko : ▁ukatu ▁egin ▁baitizki ot ▁herri ▁honi ▁neure ▁bakea , ▁maitasuna ▁eta ▁errukia .
PRED:	This is what the Lord said to me , “ Do not go home to the church in mourning for eating and drinking wine , for they have done in mourning for me , for they have mercy on me and have mercy .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Do not go to funerals to mourn and show sympathy for these people , for I have removed my protection and peace from them . I have taken away my unfailing love and my mercy .

ID:	221
INPUT:	▁Neh em iasek ▁Jerusalemera ▁itzultzeko ▁baimena ▁lortu
PRED:	Nehemiah 's Return to Jerusalem
GOLD:	Nehemiah Goes to Jerusalem

ID:	222
INPUT:	▁Sin esten ▁eta ▁bataiatzen ▁den ▁oro ▁salb atua ▁izango ▁da ; ▁sinesten ▁ez ▁duena , ▁berriz , ▁kondenatua .
PRED:	Yes , everyone who believes in it will be saved , but anyone who believes in him will not be punished .
GOLD:	Anyone who believes and is baptized will be saved . But anyone who refuses to believe will be condemned .

ID:	223
INPUT:	▁Des ira tzen ▁zuena ▁eman ▁diozu eta ▁esk atua ▁ez ▁diozu ▁ukatu .
PRED:	You say , “ You are you trying to say , ‘ You do n't say it ! '
GOLD:	You welcomed him back with success and prosperity.You placed a crown of finest gold on his head .

ID:	224
INPUT:	▁Hatz ar - X u al , ▁Beer - X eba ▁eta ▁inguru ak ,
PRED:	Ziklag , Hebron , and all its surrounding villages .
GOLD:	Hazar-shual , Beersheba , Biziothiah ,

ID:	225
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁zu , ▁Jauna , ▁ez ▁egon ▁urrun ! Ene ▁indar , ▁lagundu ! ▁Ez ▁luzatu !
PRED:	But you have turned away from the Lord ; do n't ignore my strength .
GOLD:	Save me from the sword ; spare my precious life from these dogs .

ID:	226
INPUT:	▁B ih urri tu ▁zaitez , ▁bai , egin ▁ai ene , ▁Sion go ▁herri , emakumeak ▁erdimin etan ▁bezala ; orain ▁hiritik ▁aterako ▁baitzarete eta ▁landan ▁biziko . Babiloni ara ▁joango ▁zarete , baina ▁han ▁salbatuko ▁zaituzte Jaunak , zeuen ▁etsaien ▁eskuetatik ▁askatuko .
PRED:	Turn from Jerusalem , O people of Jerusalem , and your people will be saved , as you live in the fields , and you will be saved from the land of the Lord .
GOLD:	Writhe and groan like a woman in labor , you people of Jerusalem , for now you must leave this cityto live in the open country.You will soon be sent in exileto distant Babylon.But the Lord will rescue you there ; he will redeem you from the grip of your enemies .

ID:	227
INPUT:	▁Gainerako ▁gudariak ▁bere ▁anaia ▁Abix airen ▁gidari tzapean ▁utzi ▁zituen ▁lerro tan .
PRED:	The other members of the family of Benjamin had put in charge of the men in charge of him .
GOLD:	He left the rest of the army under the command of his brother Abishai , who was to attack the Ammonites .

ID:	228
INPUT:	▁Hurbil ▁zaitezte ▁Jaunarengana . ▁Bera ▁da ▁harri ▁bizia , ▁gizonek ▁bazter tua , ▁baina ▁Jainkoaren ▁begietan ▁aukeratua ▁eta ▁bikaina .
PRED:	Yes , the Lord is the one who is the one who is the one who is the Lord , and he is the one who made a new life for the sake of the Lord .
GOLD:	You are coming to Christ , who is the living cornerstone of God 's temple . He was rejected by people , but he was chosen by God for great honor .

ID:	229
INPUT:	▁Jakin duria , ▁altxor ▁prez ia tua
PRED:	Wisdom from the treasury
GOLD:	The Benefits of Wisdom

ID:	230
INPUT:	▁Manasesen ▁beste ▁sei ▁semeen ▁ondorengoei ▁ere , ▁Abi ezer , ▁H elek , ▁As ri el , ▁Sikem , ▁H ef er ▁eta ▁Xem i daren ▁ondorengoei , ▁alegia , ▁beren ▁ondarea ▁izendatu ▁zieten , ▁senitarteka ▁ban atua . ▁Horiek ▁ziren ▁Joseren ▁seme ▁Manasesen ▁semeak .
PRED:	From the family of Manasseh , the descendants of Manasseh , Izhar , Hebron , and Uzziel . These were the descendants of Joseph 's descendants , the descendants of Joseph , the descendants of Joseph 's descendants .
GOLD:	So the allotment on the west side of the Jordan was for the remaining families within the clans of the tribe of Manasseh : Abiezer , Helek , Asriel , Shechem , Hepher , and Shemida . These clans represent the male descendants of Manasseh son of Joseph .

ID:	231
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁erregeak ▁hartu riko ▁erabakia , ▁hain ▁zabala ▁den ▁in p erio ▁osora ▁he datuko ▁da . ▁Orduan , ▁emazte ▁guztiek ▁beren ▁sen arrei , ▁nola ▁handien ei ▁hala ▁apal en ei , ▁begirune ▁izanen ▁diete ».
PRED:	So the king will punish those who trust in him , and he will rule over those who fear him . Then everyone will respect for those who fear him . ”
GOLD:	When this decree is published throughout the king 's vast empire , husbands everywhere , whatever their rank , will receive proper respect from their wives ! ”

ID:	232
INPUT:	▁Jakin arazi ▁zieten ▁israeldarrei ▁Ruben ▁eta ▁Gaden ▁leinuetako ▁eta ▁Manasesen ▁leinu ▁erdiko ▁gizonek ▁aldarea ▁eraiki ▁zutela ▁Jordan ▁ibai ▁inguruan , ▁Kanaanen ▁aurrez ▁aurre , ▁israeldar ▁lurraldeaz ▁beste ▁aldera ;
PRED:	When the Israelites heard this , the tribes of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh , and the half-tribe of Manasseh .
GOLD:	The rest of Israel heard that the people of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh had built an altar at Geliloth at the edge of the land of Canaan , on the west side of the Jordan River .

ID:	233
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁ahuspeztu ▁haien ▁aurrean , ▁ezta ▁gur tzarik ▁eman ▁ere , ▁ni , ▁Jauna , ▁zure ▁Jainkoa , ▁Jainko ▁jelos korra ▁bainaiz : ▁gorroto ▁didaten ▁gurasoen ▁gaiztakeria ▁ondorengoen gan ▁zigortzen ▁dut ▁hirugarren ▁eta ▁laugarren ▁belaunaldi raino ▁ere ;
PRED:	Do not worship idols or worship idols or worship other gods , for I am the Lord your God , who hates me , for I am the one who hates you .
GOLD:	You must not bow down to them or worship them , for I , the Lord your God , am a jealous God who will not tolerate your affection for any other gods . I lay the sins of the parents upon their children ; the entire family is affected — even children in the third and fourth generations of those who reject me .

ID:	234
INPUT:	▁Azken ▁agurra
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Paul 's Final Greetings

ID:	235
INPUT:	▁Batzu ek ▁atxilotu ▁egin ▁nahi ▁zuten , ▁baina ▁inork ▁ez ▁zion ▁eskurik ▁ezarri .
PRED:	But some tried to arrest Jesus , but they did n't arrest him .
GOLD:	Some even wanted him arrested , but no one laid a hand on him .

ID:	236
INPUT:	▁Babilonia ▁hori , bi ▁ibai ▁handi ren ▁artean ▁zaude , abera s tasun ▁handiak ▁dituzu ! I ri tsi ▁zaizu , ▁ordea , ▁azkena , ak ab o ▁zure ▁irabaz iak !
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who are rich in the land of Babylon ! But you are rich and rich ! But you are rich !
GOLD:	You are a city by a great river , a great center of commerce , but your end has come.The thread of your life is cut .

ID:	237
INPUT:	▁Gizon ▁bakar raren ▁bekatu agatik ▁heriotza ▁nagusi ▁gertatu ▁bazen , ▁zen batez ▁gehiago ▁ez ▁ote ▁dira ▁bakar ▁baten gatik , ▁Jesu ▁Kristo gatik , ▁nagusi ▁izango ▁betiko ▁biz itzan ▁Jainkoaren ▁salb azio aren ▁dohain ▁opar oa ▁hartzen ▁dutenak !
PRED:	For this man was a righteous man for a sin , because it was no better to have eternal life for Christ Jesus , who lives for the privilege of eternal life .
GOLD:	For the sin of this one man , Adam , caused death to rule over many . But even greater is God 's wonderful grace and his gift of righteousness , for all who receive it will live in triumph over sin and death through this one man , Jesus Christ .

ID:	238
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁mendi - gai lurra ▁igaro ▁zuen eko , ▁Tzib a , ▁Mefi - Box eten ▁morroia , ▁atera ▁zitzaion ▁bidera . ▁Ber ekin ▁zek ar tzan ▁bi ▁asto ▁tx alm aturik ▁eta ▁berrehun ▁o giz , ▁ehun ▁mahas p asa - mor do z , ▁garai ko ▁ehun ▁fruitu - multz oz ▁eta ▁ardo - z ah agi ▁batez ▁zam aturik .
PRED:	David then crossed the ground with the ground , along with the ground , and he took care for Abner 's servants . “ Let 's go out to meet him , and let 's be a feast for a feast . ”
GOLD:	When David had gone a little beyond the summit of the Mount of Olives , Ziba , the servant of Mephibosheth , was waiting there for him . He had two donkeys loaded with 200 loaves of bread , 100 clusters of raisins , 100 bunches of summer fruit , and a wineskin full of wine .

ID:	239
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zion ▁Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	This was the Lord 's reply to Moses .

ID:	240
INPUT:	▁Aitaren ▁testigantza ▁eta ▁Joan ▁Bataia tzaile arena
PRED:	Jesus and John the Baptist
GOLD:	Witnesses to Jesus

ID:	241
INPUT:	▁goretsi ▁Jaunaren ▁izen ▁ospetsua ! Ah uspez tu ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrean , ▁bere ▁santu tasunez ▁ager tzean !
PRED:	When the name of the Lord , he will praise his holy name .
GOLD:	Honor the Lord for the glory of his name.Worship the Lord in the splendor of his holiness .

ID:	242
INPUT:	▁Hogeita ▁hamar ▁urte ▁zituela , ▁P el eg ek ▁R eu ▁izan ▁zuen .
PRED:	When Kenan was 30 years old , he became the father of Kenan .
GOLD:	When Peleg was 30 years old , he became the father of Reu .

ID:	243
INPUT:	▁Roboamek , ▁ordea , ▁ez ▁zuen ▁aintzat ▁hartu ▁kontseilari en ▁aholkua ; ▁baizik ▁eta ▁berarekin ▁batera ▁hazi ▁ziren ▁eta ▁bere ▁zerbitzura ▁zituen ▁gazte ei ▁galdegin ▁zien :
PRED:	But Rehoboam was not trying to kill the advice of the wise men who were in him .
GOLD:	But Rehoboam rejected the advice of the older men and instead asked the opinion of the young men who had grown up with him and were now his advisers .

ID:	244
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁ez ▁bakarrik ▁haren ▁etor rer arekin , ▁baita ▁zuengandik ▁ekarri ▁zizkidan ▁berri ▁poz garri ekin ▁ere : ▁berak ▁jakinarazi ▁zizkidan ▁ni ▁ikusteko ▁duzuen ▁irrika , ▁zuen ▁damu - n egarra ▁eta ▁nire kiko ▁maitasuna . ▁Horre k ▁oraindik ▁gehiago ▁poztu ▁ninduen .
PRED:	And because I was not with you , who brought me to you . For I told you , “ I have seen him with joy because you have been comforted , my love , and you have been filled with joy . ”
GOLD:	His presence was a joy , but so was the news he brought of the encouragement he received from you . When he told us how much you long to see me , and how sorry you are for what happened , and how loyal you are to me , I was filled with joy !

ID:	245
INPUT:	▁As to ▁zuri ▁baten ▁gainean , ta p iz ▁gainean ▁eser iak ▁zoazten ok eta ▁oinez ▁zoazten ok , ▁entzun
PRED:	You sit on a tree on a tree and sits on it , you who are going to pass through you .
GOLD:	“ Consider this , you who ride on fine donkeys , you who sit on fancy saddle blankets , and you who walk along the road .

ID:	246
INPUT:	▁Neure ▁artean ▁diot : ▁Jauna ▁da ▁nire ▁on ▁guztia ! Haren gan ▁dut , ▁beraz , ▁itxaropen .
PRED:	“ The Lord is my fortress , and he is my hope .
GOLD:	I say to myself , “ The Lord is my inheritance ; therefore , I will hope in him ! ”

ID:	247
INPUT:	▁« Bar au ▁egitean , ▁ez ▁zaitezte ▁ager ▁kop et ilun , ▁itxura zale ek ▁ohi ▁duten ▁bezala : ▁aurpegia ▁its us ten ▁dute , ▁barau ▁egiten ▁dutela ▁jendeari ▁azal tzeko . ▁Benetan ▁diotsuet : ▁Har tua ▁dute ▁beren ▁ordaina .
PRED:	“ When you tell us , do n't be angry with a human spirit , like a person who does n't know what is happening to the people . They know the truth , they do n't know the truth .
GOLD:	“ And when you fast , do n't make it obvious , as the hypocrites do , for they try to look miserable and disheveled so people will admire them for their fasting . I tell you the truth , that is the only reward they will ever get .

ID:	248
INPUT:	▁Ar ro tzen ▁esku ▁utziko ▁dut ▁lurraldea , so il ▁dezaten ; herri aldeko ▁gaizkile en ▁esku , harrapakin ▁gerta ▁dadin . Eta ▁profanatu ▁egingo ▁dute .
PRED:	I will hand them over to the land of the wicked , and they will be defiled by their enemies .
GOLD:	I will give it as plunder to foreigners , to the most wicked of nations , and they will defile it .

ID:	249
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁izena ▁ai patuko ▁duten ire ▁aukeratu ek nor bait ▁madarika tzean , ▁eta ▁esango :“ Hala xe ▁hilko ▁ahal ▁zaitu Jainko ▁Jaunak !” Nire ▁zerbitzarien ▁gain , ▁ordea , beste ▁izen ▁bat ▁ai patuko ▁da , guz tiz ▁beste lako a .
PRED:	For the name of the Lord has chosen me to curse those who say , ‘ The Lord has spoken ! ' But this is what the Lord says : ‘ The Lord , the God of Heaven 's servants will die . '
GOLD:	Your name will be a curse word among my people , for the Sovereign Lord will destroy youand will call his true servants by another name .

ID:	250
INPUT:	▁J atu n ▁handia ▁bazara , ▁eutsi ▁zeure ▁jan gur ari .
PRED:	If you get a great coat for your neck , you must wear out your neck .
GOLD:	If you are a big eater , put a knife to your throat ;

ID:	251
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Judako ▁herriak ▁hil ▁egin ▁zituen ▁Amon ▁erregearen ▁aurka ▁jaiki ▁ziren ▁guztiak , ▁eta ▁beraren ▁seme ▁Josias ▁izendatu ▁zuten ▁errege , ▁bere ▁aitaren ▁ordez .
PRED:	But the kings of Judah killed the king of Judah , and his son Josiah became king .
GOLD:	But the people of the land killed all those who had conspired against King Amon , and they made his son Josiah the next king .

ID:	252
INPUT:	▁haize - oih alak , ▁zure ▁ezau garriz iren ak , ▁Egiptoko ▁liho ▁bor datu z ; zure ▁gain es tal kiak El ix a ▁u har te etako ▁purpura eta ▁gorrimin ezko ▁oihal ez .
PRED:	The breath of the sea will be made of fine linen , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	Your sails were made of Egypt 's finest linen , and they flew as a banner above you.You stood beneath blue and purple awningsmade bright with dyes from the coasts of Elishah .

ID:	253
INPUT:	▁Zintz oaren ▁nahia ▁bete ▁egiten ▁da , gaizto aren ▁itxaro penak ▁huts ▁egiten .
PRED:	The godly care for the godly ; the wicked are like a shadow of the wicked .
GOLD:	The godly can look forward to a reward , while the wicked can expect only judgment .

ID:	254
INPUT:	▁Sedekias ▁erregeari
PRED:	Zedekiah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	No Deliverance from Babylon

ID:	255
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁ez ▁dute ▁berreskura tuko ▁behi , ▁ardi ▁nahiz ▁ahun tzen ▁lehen - k um erik : ▁niretzat ▁sagaratuak ▁dira . ▁Hil ▁egingo ▁dituzu , ▁odola ▁aldare ▁gainean ▁isuri ▁eta ▁gantza ▁nire ▁ohorez ▁erre . ▁Nik ▁atseginez ▁onartuko ▁dut ▁oparia .
PRED:	But the Lord will not bring back back back back again , and he will be cut off from the head of sheep and goats . This is what the Lord says : I will bring it to me .
GOLD:	“ However , you may not redeem the firstborn of cattle , sheep , or goats . They are holy and have been set apart for the Lord . Sprinkle their blood on the altar , and burn their fat as a special gift , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	256
INPUT:	▁« O toitz ▁egitean , ▁ez ▁ari ▁esan ▁eta ▁esan , ▁jentil ek ▁ohi ▁duten ▁bezala , ▁uste ▁baitute ▁beren ▁hitz - j ario ari ▁esker ▁entzungo ▁di ela ▁Jainkoak .
PRED:	“ When you pray , you wo n't pray for those who say to the Gentiles , for they will hear God 's word .
GOLD:	“ When you pray , do n't babble on and on as the Gentiles do . They think their prayers are answered merely by repeating their words again and again .

ID:	257
INPUT:	▁Israeldarrak ▁eta ▁jentil ak
PRED:	The Egyptians and Israel
GOLD:	God 's Mercy Is for Everyone

ID:	258
INPUT:	▁Ap ur tua ▁baituzu ▁lepoan ▁zeramaten uz tarri ▁astuna , z apal tzailearen ▁aginte - makila , M adi ango ▁gudarostea ap urtu ▁zenuen ▁bezalaxe .
PRED:	Give the command of your servant , and you laid heavy crown on your head , just as you did .
GOLD:	You will enlarge the nation of Israel , and its people will rejoice.They will rejoice before youas people rejoice at the harvestand like warriors dividing the plunder .

ID:	259
INPUT:	▁Aitak , ▁ordea , ▁esan ▁zien ▁morroi ei : ▁“ E karri ▁bizkor ▁jantzirik ▁on ena ▁eta ▁jantz io zue , ▁ipin io zue ▁eraz tuna ▁eta ▁jantzi ▁oin etakoak ;
PRED:	But the father said to the servants , ‘ Bring your servant , and take your clothes in fine linen clothing . Take your clothes and fine linen clothing .
GOLD:	“ But his father said to the servants , ‘ Quick ! Bring the finest robe in the house and put it on him . Get a ring for his finger and sandals for his feet .

ID:	260
INPUT:	▁Bet oz ▁opari ▁bik ainak ▁Egiptotik , dak ar zki ola ▁arin ▁E tio p iak ▁esku - erakutsi ak ▁Jainkoari .
PRED:	These are the gifts that came to the Lord , the God of Egypt , are those who belong to the God of Egypt .
GOLD:	Sing to God , you kingdoms of the earth.Sing praises to the Lord.Interlude

ID:	261
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁emazte ▁Zer ex i ▁eta ▁adiskide ▁guztiei ▁adierazi ▁zien ▁gertatu ▁zitzaion a . ▁Bere ▁adiskide ▁jakintsu ▁haiek ▁eta ▁emazteak ▁esan ▁zioten :— M ar doke o ▁judu ▁izanik , ▁beraren ▁aurrean ▁atz er aka ▁hasi ▁baldin ▁bazara , ▁ezin ▁izango ▁duzu ▁deus ▁ere ▁horren ▁aurka . ▁Aitzitik , ▁hondo raino ▁eroriko ▁zara ▁horren ▁aurrean .
PRED:	This is what happened to his wife , and she said to all his friends and wise men , “ This is what the Jewish leaders have said to him , “ If you have done this , you wo n't be angry with him , you will be too . ”
GOLD:	When Haman told his wife , Zeresh , and all his friends what had happened , his wise advisers and his wife said , “ Since Mordecai — this man who has humiliated you — is of Jewish birth , you will never succeed in your plans against him . It will be fatal to continue opposing him . ”

ID:	262
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁garb itzat ▁aitor tua ▁izan ▁ondoren , ▁ez kab ia ▁larruazal ean ▁zabaltzen ▁bazaio ,
PRED:	But if the affected area has not spread , the skin has not spread ,
GOLD:	But if the scabby sore begins to spread after the person is pronounced clean ,

ID:	263
INPUT:	▁Abraham ekin ▁mintzatu ▁ondoren , ▁alde ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Jainkoak .
PRED:	After Abraham had done this , he said to Abraham ,
GOLD:	When God had finished speaking , he left Abraham .

ID:	264
INPUT:	▁Zu tarri ▁eta ▁zutoin ▁sakratuak ▁ezarri ▁zituzten ▁muino ▁guztietan ▁eta ▁zuhaitz ▁handi ▁guztien ▁azpian ;
PRED:	They placed the foundation of the Asherah poles and Asherah poles and under every green tree .
GOLD:	They set up sacred pillars and Asherah poles at the top of every hill and under every green tree .

ID:	265
INPUT:	▁— Zergatik ▁hausten ▁dute ▁zure ▁ikasleek ▁zaharren ▁ohitura ? ▁Ez ▁dute ▁otordu ▁aurretik ▁esku en ▁garbikuntza ▁egiten .
PRED:	“ Why do you remember that your parents get drunk ? ” they asked .
GOLD:	“ Why do your disciples disobey our age-old tradition ? For they ignore our tradition of ceremonial hand washing before they eat . ”

ID:	266
INPUT:	▁Hurrengo ▁goizean , ▁jaik itz ean , ▁D ag on ▁aurp eg iz ▁aurrera ▁lurrean ▁erori a ▁aurkitu ▁zuten ▁berriro , ▁Jaunaren ▁kutxaren ▁aitzinean . ▁D ag onen ▁burua ▁eta ▁bi ▁besoak ▁hautsi ak ▁zeuden ▁atarian ; ▁soin - en b orra ▁baino ▁ez ▁zuen ▁os orik ▁D ag onek .
PRED:	Early the next morning , the next morning they went to the ground . They found the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant and bowed before the ground before the ground before the Lord , and the Ark of the Lord had anointed him .
GOLD:	But the next morning the same thing happened — Dagon had fallen face down before the Ark of the Lord again . This time his head and hands had broken off and were lying in the doorway . Only the trunk of his body was left intact .

ID:	267
INPUT:	▁Eg izue ▁otoitz ▁gure gatik . ▁Gure ▁us tez , ▁garbi ▁dauk agu ▁kontzi entzia , ▁gauza ▁guztietan ▁zintzo ▁jokatu ▁nahian ▁baik abiltza .
PRED:	Run for us , dear brothers and sisters , we want to pray for our faith .
GOLD:	Pray for us , for our conscience is clear and we want to live honorably in everything we do .

ID:	268
INPUT:	▁Joanek ▁ez ▁zion ▁utzi ▁nahi ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion : - Neu ▁naiz ▁zuk ▁bataiatu ▁beharrekoa , ▁eta ▁zu ▁zatoz ▁niregana ?
PRED:	John wanted to leave him and said to him , “ I am baptized with you ? ”
GOLD:	But John tried to talk him out of it . “ I am the one who needs to be baptized by you , ” he said , “ so why are you coming to me ? ”

ID:	269
INPUT:	▁Denak ▁hilko ▁zirelako aren ▁beldurrez , ▁pres a ▁eman ▁zieten ▁egiptoarrek ▁israeldarrei , ▁ahal ik ▁eta ▁laster ren ▁abia ▁zitezen ▁beren ▁lurraldetik .
PRED:	The people of Israel would die because they were afraid of the Egyptians , and they turned their land into exile .
GOLD:	All the Egyptians urged the people of Israel to get out of the land as quickly as possible , for they thought , “ We will all die ! ”

ID:	270
INPUT:	▁Hiri ok ▁hauek ▁ziren : ▁Be tz er , ▁basamortuan , ▁lautadan , ▁Rubenen ▁leinuko entzat ; ▁Ram ot , ▁Gala aden , ▁Gaden ▁leinuko entzat , ▁eta ▁G olan , ▁Bax anen , ▁Manasesen ▁leinu - er diko entzat .
PRED:	These are the towns of the tribe of Reuben , Gad , the tribe of Reuben , Gad , and the tribe of Reuben , Gad , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh .
GOLD:	These were the cities : Bezer on the wilderness plateau for the tribe of Reuben ; Ramoth in Gilead for the tribe of Gad ; Golan in Bashan for the tribe of Manasseh .

ID:	271
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁A ge ok , ▁Jaunaren ▁mandatariak , ▁hau ▁adierazi ▁zion ▁herriari ▁Jaunaren ▁izenean : ▁« Jaunak ▁dio : ▁Zu ekin ▁naiz ▁ni ».
PRED:	Then the Lord said to him , “ This is what the Lord says : I am the one who is with you . ”
GOLD:	Then Haggai , the Lord 's messenger , gave the people this message from the Lord : “ I am with you , says the Lord ! ”

ID:	272
INPUT:	▁Al derantz iz ▁baizik , ▁maitasunean <unk> etakoak ▁izanez , ▁hazi ▁gaitezen ▁gauza ▁guztietan , ▁Kristori ▁gero ▁eta ▁gehiago ▁egoki tuz . ▁Bera ▁da ▁burua
PRED:	Instead , let 's get the new love of love , just as we live in Christ . And we are more important than all of us .
GOLD:	Instead , we will speak the truth in love , growing in every way more and more like Christ , who is the head of his body , the church .

ID:	273
INPUT:	▁honek ▁esan ▁zuen :— A d izu , ▁Ah itu ben ▁seme ! H onek ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Hemen ▁nauzu , ▁jauna .
PRED:	“ Sir , ” he said , “ I have done , my lord , my lord the king ! ”
GOLD:	When they arrived , Saul shouted at him , “ Listen to me , you son of Ahitub ! ” “ What is it , my king ? ” Ahimelech asked .

ID:	274
INPUT:	▁oinetako ▁zahar ▁eta ▁birj os iak ▁jantzi ▁zituzten ▁oinetan ▁eta ▁zar pa ▁zaharrak ▁soinean ; ▁zeramaten ▁ogia ▁gogorra ▁eta ▁apur ▁egina ▁zegoen .
PRED:	They took their clothes and put them in their feet , and they were wearing clothes in their feet .
GOLD:	They put on worn-out , patched sandals and ragged clothes . And the bread they took with them was dry and moldy .

ID:	275
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁badut ▁konfiantza , ▁Jauna ▁lagun , ▁neu ▁ere ▁zuengana ▁laster ▁joango ▁naizela .
PRED:	But now , O Lord , I will come to visit you .
GOLD:	And I have confidence from the Lord that I myself will come to see you soon .

ID:	276
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁erregea ▁haserre ▁gorri tan ▁jarri ▁zen , ▁eta ▁Babiloniako ▁jaki tun ▁guztiak ▁hiltzeko ▁agindu ▁zuen .
PRED:	Then the king of Babylon took his fierce anger and killed all the men of Babylon .
GOLD:	The king was furious when he heard this , and he ordered that all the wise men of Babylon be executed .

ID:	277
INPUT:	▁erre - opariak , ▁labore - ▁eta ▁isur - opariak ▁egin ▁zituen , ▁eta ▁elkartasun - oparien ▁odolaz ▁zir tatu ▁zuen ▁aldarea .
PRED:	He also offered burnt offerings and peace offerings and peace offerings and peace offerings and peace offerings and peace offerings .
GOLD:	He presented a burnt offering and a grain offering , he poured out a liquid offering , and he sprinkled the blood of peace offerings on the altar .

ID:	278
INPUT:	▁ez ▁naiz ▁zintzo ei ▁dei ▁egitera ▁etorri , ▁bekatari ei ▁baizik , ▁bihozberri ▁daitezen .
PRED:	I am blameless , but they have come to repent of their sins .
GOLD:	I have come to call not those who think they are righteous , but those who know they are sinners and need to repent . ”

ID:	279
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁ihardetsi ▁zien :— Ez ▁ari ▁marm ar ka ▁zeuen ▁artean .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't you think about yourself . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus replied , “ Stop complaining about what I said .

ID:	280
INPUT:	▁Salomon ▁erregeak ▁ere , ▁Sabako ▁erreginak ▁nahi ▁zuen ▁eta ▁eskatu ▁zion ▁guztia ▁eman ▁zion ; ▁gainera , ▁erregeak ▁ohi ▁zuen ▁eskuzabal tasunez , ▁erregal i ▁ugari ▁egin . ▁Ondoren , ▁erregina ▁bere ▁lurraldera ▁itzuli ▁zen ▁bere ▁zerbitzari ekin .
PRED:	King Solomon wanted to give him great joy , and the king had given him everything he had given him . Then he returned to his land .
GOLD:	King Solomon gave the queen of Sheba whatever she asked for , besides all the customary gifts he had so generously given . Then she and all her attendants returned to their own land .

ID:	281
INPUT:	▁S aia ▁gaitezen , ▁bada , ▁atseden ▁horretan ▁sartzen , ▁eta ▁ez ▁dadila ▁inor ▁sinesgogor kerian ▁eror , ▁gure ▁aurreko en ▁ets enpl u ari ▁jarraituz .
PRED:	But if we enter the rest of you 's rest , let us be cursed , and let no one be cursed .
GOLD:	So let us do our best to enter that rest . But if we disobey God , as the people of Israel did , we will fall .

ID:	282
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁gurasoak ▁ere ▁alai ▁daitezela ▁zure gatik , eta ▁poz ▁dadila ▁mundura ▁ekarri ▁zin tuen ▁ama !
PRED:	Let your children rejoice because of your unfailing love , and rejoice in the world !
GOLD:	So give your father and mother joy ! May she who gave you birth be happy .

ID:	283
INPUT:	▁Eraman ▁zuen , ▁bada , ▁ehun tariak ▁gudalburu agana ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion :— P aul o ▁preso ak ▁deitu ▁dit ▁eta ▁gazte ▁hau ▁zuregana ▁ekartzeko ▁eskatu ; ▁zerbait ▁omen ▁du ▁zuri ▁esateko .
PRED:	So the officer took the commander of the commander , and he said to him , “ He is my slave , and I tell you what I say to you . ”
GOLD:	So the officer did , explaining , “ Paul , the prisoner , called me over and asked me to bring this young man to you because he has something to tell you . ”

ID:	284
INPUT:	▁ez ▁zegoen ▁oraindik ▁landar erik ▁lurrean , ▁ezta ▁bel arrik ▁ere ▁ern eta , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak ▁ez ▁baitzion ▁oraindik ▁lurrari ▁euririk ▁eman , ▁eta ▁ez ▁baitzen ▁lurra ▁lantz eko ▁giz akirik .
PRED:	There was no rain or rain or rain or rain or rain or rain , for the Lord our God had no rain or rain .
GOLD:	neither wild plants nor grains were growing on the earth . For the Lord God had not yet sent rain to water the earth , and there were no people to cultivate the soil .

ID:	285
INPUT:	▁eta ▁jabetza ▁zeuen ▁ondorengoei ▁betiko ▁utzi . ▁Horiek , ▁bai , ▁esklabo tzat ▁eduki ▁ditzak ezue , ▁baina ▁herritarren ▁artean , ▁israeldarren ▁artean , ▁ez ▁duzue ▁batak ▁bestea ▁gogor ▁hartuko .
PRED:	You must take possession of the land of Canaan , but you must not be slaves among the people of Israel . But you will not be slaves among the people of Israel .
GOLD:	passing them on to your children as a permanent inheritance . You may treat them as slaves , but you must never treat your fellow Israelites this way .

ID:	286
INPUT:	▁Jendea ▁igarotzen ▁sum aturik , ▁zer ▁gertatzen ▁zen ▁galdetu ▁zuen .
PRED:	As the crowds heard what happened , he asked him what happened .
GOLD:	When he heard the noise of a crowd going past , he asked what was happening .

ID:	287
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁erantzun :— Ez ▁al ▁duzue ▁inoiz ▁irakurri ▁zer ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Davidek ▁beharra ldi ▁batean , ▁bera ▁eta ▁bere ▁lagunak ▁goseak ▁aurkitu ▁zirenean ?
PRED:	The man replied , “ Did n't you read it to him ? ” When David found him , he found him hungry .
GOLD:	Jesus said to them , “ Have n't you ever read in the Scriptures what David did when he and his companions were hungry ?

ID:	288
INPUT:	▁Mu tila ▁zetorrela , ▁deabruak ▁lurrera ▁bota ▁eta ▁gogor ▁astindu ▁zuen . ▁Jesusek ▁mehatx u ▁egin ▁zion ▁espiritu ▁gaizto ari , ▁mutikoa ▁sendatu ▁zuen ▁eta ▁aitari ▁itzuli ▁zion .
PRED:	As soon as Jesus was going down to the ground , he rebuked the ground and beat him with the evil spirit .
GOLD:	As the boy came forward , the demon knocked him to the ground and threw him into a violent convulsion . But Jesus rebuked the evil spirit and healed the boy . Then he gave him back to his father .

ID:	289
INPUT:	▁Abner rek ▁Ix - Boxet ▁utzi
PRED:	Ishbosheth 's Kindness to Ishbosheth
GOLD:	Abner Joins Forces with David

ID:	290
INPUT:	▁jan ▁errege , ▁gudalburu ▁eta ▁gudari ▁indartsu en ▁haragia , ▁zaldi ▁eta ▁zaldizko en ▁haragia , ▁era ▁guztietako ▁jendearen , ▁libre ▁nahiz ▁esklab oen , ▁txiki ▁nahiz ▁handien , ▁haragia ».
PRED:	The flesh of the officers and the officers of the army , including all kinds of iron , including all kinds , sheep , goats , goats , and all kinds of cattle , sheep , sheep , goats , goats , and goats , and all kinds of iron . ”
GOLD:	Come and eat the flesh of kings , generals , and strong warriors ; of horses and their riders ; and of all humanity , both free and slave , small and great . ”

ID:	291
INPUT:	▁Zu ▁otoitzean ▁hasi ▁bezain ▁laster , ▁mezu ▁bat ▁eman ▁du ▁Jainkoak , ▁eta ▁horren ▁berri ▁ematera ▁n at orkizu , ▁berez iki ▁maite ▁baitzaitu ▁Jainkoak . ▁Ahal egin ▁zaitez , ▁beraz , ▁mezua ▁eta ▁ikuskari aren ▁esanahia ▁ulertzen .
PRED:	A voice of the Lord says , “ The Lord has given you a message from the Almighty , and you are filled with the words of the Almighty . For you know what the Almighty says , ‘ Go and understand . '
GOLD:	The moment you began praying , a command was given . And now I am here to tell you what it was , for you are very precious to God . Listen carefully so that you can understand the meaning of your vision .

ID:	292
INPUT:	▁Aitak ▁Semea ▁maite ▁du , ▁eta ▁haren ▁esku ▁jarri ▁du ▁dena .
PRED:	The Father loves the Son , and he loves everything he loved .
GOLD:	The Father loves his Son and has put everything into his hands .

ID:	293
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁kez ka ▁gehi eg ik am es gaizto a ▁dakar , eta ▁hitz - jari oak z oro - berri ketak ▁egitea .
PRED:	For she has done great joy for those who are clothed in constant cause .
GOLD:	Do n't make rash promises , and do n't be hasty in bringing matters before God . After all , God is in heaven , and you are here on earth . So let your words be few .

ID:	294
INPUT:	▁Abner ▁Hebron era ▁itzuli ▁zenean , ▁Joabek ▁aparte ▁hartu ▁zuen , ▁hiri - sar rer an ▁bertan , ▁isil pean ▁hitz ▁egiteko ▁bezala . ▁Orduan , ▁sabelean ▁jo ▁eta ▁hil ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁bere ▁anaia ▁As ah elen ▁odola ▁mendekatu z .
PRED:	When Joab returned to Hebron at Hebron , he held in charge of the gates at the entrance of the city . Then Abner 's brother laid his cloak on his brother 's side .
GOLD:	When Abner arrived back at Hebron , Joab took him aside at the gateway as if to speak with him privately . But then he stabbed Abner in the stomach and killed him in revenge for killing his brother Asahel .

ID:	295
INPUT:	▁Go gor tu ▁haien ▁barrena : ▁madarika ▁itzazu !
PRED:	Let them curse curse them ; let them curse curse them .
GOLD:	Give them hard and stubborn hearts , and then let your curse fall on them !

ID:	296
INPUT:	▁« Egin ▁zilar ▁landu zko ▁bi ▁turuta : ▁elkartea ▁biltzeko ▁eta ▁kanpalekua ▁utzi ▁eta ▁abia tzeko ▁seinalea ▁emateko ▁izango ▁dira .
PRED:	“ Then make two small animal that has been set up and set up the ram 's horn , and they will be able to take some of them .
GOLD:	“ Make two trumpets of hammered silver for calling the community to assemble and for signaling the breaking of camp .

ID:	297
INPUT:	▁eta ▁fariseuak ▁eta ▁lege - maisuak ▁marm arrean ▁ari ▁ziren ▁esanez : ▁« Horre k ▁har rera ▁ona ▁egiten ▁die ▁bekatari ei , ▁baita ▁beraiekin ▁jan ▁ere !»
PRED:	The Pharisees and the teachers of religious law said to Jesus , “ The man who eats their own hands , too , will eat them ! ”
GOLD:	This made the Pharisees and teachers of religious law complain that he was associating with such sinful people — even eating with them !

ID:	298
INPUT:	▁Egin ▁kontu ▁zeure ▁buruari ▁eta ▁irakasten ▁duzun ari ; ▁eutsi ▁tinko , ▁hori ▁eginez , ▁bai ▁zeure ▁burua , ▁bai ▁entzu leak ▁salbatuko ▁baititu zu .
PRED:	Do n't teach yourself what you have taught . Instead , be sure to believe that you will be saved .
GOLD:	Keep a close watch on how you live and on your teaching . Stay true to what is right for the sake of your own salvation and the salvation of those who hear you .

ID:	299
INPUT:	▁Den etan ▁aberats ▁zarete , ▁den etan ▁eskuzabal ▁izateko ; ▁horrela , ▁nire ▁bitartez , ▁zuen ▁eskuzabal tasunak ▁Jainkoarentzat ▁esker ▁ona ▁sortuko ▁du .
PRED:	You have great joy for those who need to produce good fruit for me , to be good to God .
GOLD:	Yes , you will be enriched in every way so that you can always be generous . And when we take your gifts to those who need them , they will thank God .

ID:	300
INPUT:	▁Zen bat ▁egunez ▁bizi ▁n aiteke ▁oraindik ? Noiz ▁zigortuko ▁dituzu ▁nire ▁pertsegi tzaileak ?
PRED:	How long will I die ? How long will I come to me ? ”
GOLD:	How long must I wait ? When will you punish those who persecute me ?

ID:	301
INPUT:	▁Azken ▁auzia
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	The Final Judgment

ID:	302
INPUT:	▁Danen ▁leinuko ▁Ah is amak en ▁seme ▁Oho l ia b ▁eman ▁diot ▁lan kide . ▁Gainera , ▁artisau ▁guztiak ▁treb eago ▁egiten ▁ditut , ▁agindu ▁dizudan ▁guztia ▁egin ▁dezaten :
PRED:	I gave this message to the tribe of Dan , son of Dan , son of Dan , and I have given everything I said .
GOLD:	“ And I have personally appointed Oholiab son of Ahisamach , of the tribe of Dan , to be his assistant . Moreover , I have given special skill to all the gifted craftsmen so they can make all the things I have commanded you to make :

ID:	303
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁azalduko ▁Jaunaren ▁egintza ▁handiak ? Nork ▁aski ▁goretsiko ▁hura ?
PRED:	Who can tell us about the Lord ? Who can praise him ?
GOLD:	Who can list the glorious miracles of the Lord ? Who can ever praise him enough ?

ID:	304
INPUT:	▁Ets aiak ▁bidaliko ▁ditut Babiloni aren ▁aurka : g aria ▁bezala ▁haiz era tuko ▁dute eta ▁herrialde ▁osoa ▁hus tuko . Zoritx ar - egunean , alde ▁guztietatik ▁erasoko ▁diote .
PRED:	I will send you out against Babylon , like a sword against you , and they will attack you in a distant land .
GOLD:	Foreigners will come and winnow her , blowing her away as chaff.They will come from every sideto rise against her in her day of trouble .

ID:	305
INPUT:	▁Zuen gatik ▁esan ▁ditut ▁gauza ▁hauek , ▁Ap ol oren ▁eta ▁neure ▁adi bidea ▁jarriz , ▁gure gandik ▁ikas ▁dezazuen ▁idatzirik ▁dagoena ▁baino ▁har antz ago ▁ez ▁joaten , ▁eta ▁inor ▁ez ▁dadin ▁baten gatik ▁harro ▁bes teren ▁bizkar .
PRED:	I say to you , ‘ I want you to listen to what you have done , and you do n't know that anyone who does n't obey me . '
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , I have used Apollos and myself to illustrate what I 've been saying . If you pay attention to what I have quoted from the Scriptures , you wo n't be proud of one of your leaders at the expense of another .

ID:	306
INPUT:	▁Bo torik ▁egiten ▁ez ▁baduzue , ▁ez ▁zarete ▁izango ▁errudun .
PRED:	You will not be cursed ; you will not be guilty .
GOLD:	But once you have voluntarily made a vow , be careful to fulfill your promise to the Lord your God .

ID:	307
INPUT:	▁Espiritu ▁batek ▁hartzen ▁du ▁menpean , ▁eta ▁bat - batean ▁garrasika ▁hasten ▁da ; ▁gogor ▁astin tzen ▁du ▁eta ▁ler dea ▁dari ola ▁jartzen , ▁eta ▁oso ▁nek ez ▁alde ▁egiten ▁du ▁beraren gandik , ▁hauts ▁eginda ▁uzten ▁du elarik .
PRED:	One day a new Spirit will cry out to the Spirit , and he will turn away from the mouth of the Holy Spirit , and he will turn away from the dust .
GOLD:	An evil spirit keeps seizing him , making him scream . It throws him into convulsions so that he foams at the mouth . It batters him and hardly ever leaves him alone .

ID:	308
INPUT:	▁Batzu etan , ▁nazio ▁edo ▁erreinu ▁bat ▁lurretik ▁era uzi , ▁iraul i ▁edo ▁hondatzeko ▁erabakia ▁hartzen ▁dut .
PRED:	But some nations will be destroyed by the world , and I will destroy the kingdoms of the world or destroy it .
GOLD:	If I announce that a certain nation or kingdom is to be uprooted , torn down , and destroyed ,

ID:	309
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁kaleetan intz iri a ▁eta ▁dol ua ▁izango ▁dira , eta ▁zu , ▁atsekabe aren ▁atsekabez , lur rean ▁eser iko .
PRED:	Your children will sit in the streets of the streets , and your sorrow will sit in grief .
GOLD:	The gates of Zion will weep and mourn.The city will be like a ravaged woman , huddled on the ground .

ID:	310
INPUT:	▁Om ri ▁erregearen ▁aginduak eta ▁Akaben ▁famil iaren ▁ohitu rak gor de tzen ▁dituzu : haien ▁esan etara ▁zabiltza . Horregatik , zuen ▁hiria ▁hondatua ▁utziko ▁dute ta ▁bizilagunak ▁lotsa ▁gorri an . Nire ▁herriaren ▁lots aiz una j as an ▁beharko ▁duzue ».
PRED:	But the leaders of Ahab 's family will be destroyed by the leaders of Ahab 's family , and you will be ashamed to shame the people of Israel . You will be ashamed of shame , and you will be ashamed of shame . ”
GOLD:	You keep only the laws of evil King Omri ; you follow only the example of wicked King Ahab ! Therefore , I will make an example of you , bringing you to complete ruin.You will be treated with contempt , mocked by all who see you . ”

ID:	311
INPUT:	▁J aso ▁zeure ▁herria ▁azkenik ▁gabeko ▁hondakin ▁hau etatik : ets aiak ▁den - dena ▁erraustu ▁du ▁santutegian .
PRED:	The people of Israel will be cut down from a heap of ruins , and it will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Walk through the awful ruins of the city ; see how the enemy has destroyed your sanctuary .

ID:	312
INPUT:	▁Ainger u ei ▁buruz ▁hau ▁dio ▁Jainkoak : ▁Haiz earen ▁antzeko ▁egiten ▁ditu ▁bere ▁aingeruak , ▁sugar raren ▁antzeko ▁bere ▁zerbitzariak ▁.
PRED:	The angel of the Lord says , “ The Lord has spoken ! The angel of his servants are like his servants . ”
GOLD:	Regarding the angels , he says , “ He sends his angels like the winds , his servants like flames of fire . ”

ID:	313
INPUT:	▁Ara un ak ▁Davidi :— Har ▁beza ▁ene ▁errege ▁jaun ak ▁nahi ▁duen ▁guztia ▁erre - oparia ▁eskaintzeko . ▁Horra , ▁hor ▁dituzu ▁i diak ▁erre - oparitarako , ▁e ul tzia ▁eta ▁idi en ▁uztarria ▁egur re tarako .
PRED:	“ Let my lord the king , ” David said . “ Let all the burnt offerings be given to me , and you must offer a yoke of grain offering to me . ”
GOLD:	“ Take it , my lord the king , and use it as you wish , ” Araunah said to David . “ Here are oxen for the burnt offering , and you can use the threshing boards and ox yokes for wood to build a fire on the altar .

ID:	314
INPUT:	▁Gure ▁gurasoak ▁zurekin ▁fidatu ▁ziren ; fi datu ▁ziren , ▁eta ▁zuk ▁libratu .
PRED:	The descendants of our ancestors were filled with awe of your ancestors .
GOLD:	They cried out to you and were saved.They trusted in you and were never disgraced .

ID:	315
INPUT:	▁Hamar garren ▁urtean , ▁hamargarren ▁hilaren ▁hamabi an , ▁honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaidan ▁Jauna :
PRED:	On the eighth day of the second year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	On January 7 , during the tenth year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	316
INPUT:	▁nork ▁bere ▁makila ▁jaurti ▁eta ▁suge ▁bihurtu ▁zen . ▁Baina ▁Aaronen ▁mak ilak ▁irentsi ▁egin ▁zituen ▁jaki tun ▁eta ▁azti enak .
PRED:	They threw their staff into a snake into a shepherd 's staff and threw it into the mouth of Aaron 's staff .
GOLD:	They threw down their staffs , which also became serpents ! But then Aaron 's staff swallowed up their staffs .

ID:	317
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁ez ▁ote ▁zaituzte , ▁bada , ▁biok ▁gorputz ▁bakar ▁bat ▁eta ▁espiritu ▁bakar ▁bat ▁egin ? ▁Eta ▁zer tarako ▁bat ? ▁Jainkoaren gandik ▁haurrak ▁izateko . ▁Argi ▁ibili , ▁beraz , ▁eta ▁ez ▁izan ▁desleial ▁gazte tan ▁aukeratu tako ▁emazteari .
PRED:	“ Is n't you a single one of your body ? Should I have a different spirit from one another person to be born ? Why should I be put to his wife ? For the children of God has chosen to be his wife ?
GOLD:	Did n't the Lord make you one with your wife ? In body and spirit you are his . And what does he want ? Godly children from your union . So guard your heart ; remain loyal to the wife of your youth .

ID:	318
INPUT:	▁horrela , ▁ondaretzat ▁zuek ▁bezala ▁lursail ik ▁hartu ▁ez ▁duen ▁lebitarrak ▁eta ▁zuekin ▁bizi ▁diren ▁etorkin , ▁umezurtz ▁eta ▁alargun ek ▁zer ▁jan a ▁izango ▁dute ; ▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoak ▁eginkizun ▁guztiak ▁ongi ▁buru tzeko ▁bidea ▁emango ▁dizue .
PRED:	This is what the Lord your God says : Do not take possession of you and foreigners living among you and foreigners living among you , orphans , orphans , orphans , and widows . They will eat whatever the Lord your God is giving you .
GOLD:	Give it to the Levites , who will receive no allotment of land among you , as well as to the foreigners living among you , the orphans , and the widows in your towns , so they can eat and be satisfied . Then the Lord your God will bless you in all your work .

ID:	319
INPUT:	▁Den bora ▁berean , ▁Jauna ▁ere ▁gurtu ▁ohi ▁zuten . ▁K ultu - leku etako ▁apaizak ▁izendatu ▁zituzten ▁beren ▁artetik , ▁muinoetako ▁jaure txe etan ▁apaiz - zerbitz ua ▁egin ▁zezaten .
PRED:	In the same way , the priests worshiped the Lord at the pagan shrines , and the priests set up for their pagan shrines .
GOLD:	These new residents worshiped the Lord , but they also appointed from among themselves all sorts of people as priests to offer sacrifices at their places of worship .

ID:	320
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁Jainkoaren ▁herria ▁haien gana ▁bihurtzen ▁da , haien ▁hitz ▁guztiak ▁ura ▁bezala ▁iren ts iz .
PRED:	That is why the people of God has said to them , “ The water of God has spoken ! ”
GOLD:	And so the people are dismayed and confused , drinking in all their words .

ID:	321
INPUT:	▁J ustiz iaren ▁bidetik ▁nabil ▁ni , ▁zuzenbide aren ▁erdi - erdi tik .
PRED:	For I am like a shadow of justice , like a shadow of justice .
GOLD:	I walk in righteousness , in paths of justice .

ID:	322
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁jokatzen ▁du ▁emakume ▁adulterio gileak : jan , ▁ahoa ▁garbitu ▁eta « Ez ▁dut ▁ezer ▁txarrik ▁egin » ▁esaten ▁du .
PRED:	This is what the woman says : “ I have sex with such a woman , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	An adulterous woman consumes a man , then wipes her mouth and says , “ What 's wrong with that ? ”

ID:	323
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁aingeruak ▁esan ▁zion ▁Satan i : ▁« I s il araz ▁haz ala ▁Jaunak , ▁Satan , ▁isil araz ▁haz ala ▁Jerusalem ▁aukeratu ▁duen ▁Jaunak . ▁Josue ▁su tatik ▁ater at ako ▁il in tia ▁bezala ▁da ».
PRED:	Then Satan said to Satan , “ This is what the Lord says : Satan , Satan , the Lord , has chosen you as a sign of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Satan , “ I , the Lord , reject your accusations , Satan . Yes , the Lord , who has chosen Jerusalem , rebukes you . This man is like a burning stick that has been snatched from the fire . ”

ID:	324
INPUT:	▁El karri ▁laguntzen ▁diote ▁idolo gile ek eta ▁adore - hitz ak ▁esaten ▁elkarri .
PRED:	Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , and encourage each other to each other .
GOLD:	The idol makers encourage one another , saying to each other , “ Be strong ! ”

ID:	325
INPUT:	▁Berak ▁libratuko ▁zaitu ▁ehiz tari aren ▁sar etik eta ▁izurri ▁gal garri tik .
PRED:	He rescues you from the grave ; he will save you from the hungry .
GOLD:	For he will rescue you from every trapand protect you from deadly disease .

ID:	326
INPUT:	▁Gor putz - arik etek ▁ezer ▁gutx ir ako ▁balio ▁dute ; ▁jainko zal etasun ak , ▁berriz , ▁guzti rako ▁balio ▁du , ▁oraingo ▁eta ▁gero ko ▁biziaren ▁agintzaria ▁baitu ▁berekin .
PRED:	They have no faith in faith , but it is good to be offered to God for all who have eternal life .
GOLD:	“ Physical training is good , but training for godliness is much better , promising benefits in this life and in the life to come . ”

ID:	327
INPUT:	▁Salomonek , ▁orduan :— J ator ▁jokatzen ▁badu , ▁ez ▁zaio ▁ile ▁bat ▁ere ▁eroriko ▁lurrera ; ▁baina ▁n ol ab ai teko ▁gaiztakeri arik ▁aurkitzen ▁badio gu , ▁heriotza ▁izango ▁du .
PRED:	Solomon replied , “ If only a hair falls on the ground , it will fall to the ground . But if it is evil , it will be killed . ”
GOLD:	Solomon replied , “ If he proves himself to be loyal , not a hair on his head will be touched . But if he makes trouble , he will die . ”

ID:	328
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁bedi ▁fi da ▁itxura ▁engain agarri az , hori xe ▁izango ▁du ▁ordain sari ▁eta .
PRED:	Do n't trust in your lips , but it will be ashamed .
GOLD:	Let them no longer fool themselves by trusting in empty riches , for emptiness will be their only reward .

ID:	329
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁ez , ▁atal ak ▁asko ▁dira ; ▁gorputza , ▁ordea , ▁bat ▁bakarra .
PRED:	But many parts are not part of many parts , but only one body is one part of it .
GOLD:	Yes , there are many parts , but only one body .

ID:	330
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁esan ▁zien ▁Aaroni ▁eta ▁beronen ▁semeei : ▁« E go si ▁haragia ▁elkarketa - etxolaren ▁sarreran ; ▁han ▁bertan ▁jango ▁duzue ▁sagarapen erako ▁prestatu riko ▁sas kian ▁dagoen ▁ogi arekin ▁batera , ▁nik ▁jaso ▁nuen ▁agindu aren ▁arabera : ▁“ A ar onek ▁eta ▁beronen ▁semeek ▁jango ▁dute ”.
PRED:	Then Moses said to Aaron and his sons and his sons , “ Take it outside the Tabernacle at the entrance of the Tabernacle , where it has been eaten in the Tabernacle . The next day I told them , ‘ The sons will eat it . '
GOLD:	Then Moses said to Aaron and his sons , “ Boil the remaining meat of the offerings at the Tabernacle entrance , and eat it there , along with the bread that is in the basket of offerings for the ordination , just as I commanded when I said , ‘ Aaron and his sons will eat it . '

ID:	331
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak , ▁beraz , ▁grina ▁lotsagarri etara ▁eman ▁ditu : ▁emakumezko ek ▁ber ezko ▁sexu - harreman ak ▁utzi ▁eta ▁n atu raren ▁kontrako etara ▁jo ▁dute .
PRED:	Therefore , God has given them a man 's wife , and he has sexual relations with a woman .
GOLD:	That is why God abandoned them to their shameful desires . Even the women turned against the natural way to have sex and instead indulged in sex with each other .

ID:	332
INPUT:	▁« Bekatu aren ▁barkamen - oparitzat ▁ark umea ▁bad ak ar , ▁akats ▁gabea ▁eta ▁em ea ▁izango ▁da .
PRED:	“ If you present a goat as a goat as a goat as a female goat , it will be no defects .
GOLD:	“ If the people bring a sheep as their sin offering , it must be a female with no defects .

ID:	333
INPUT:	▁« Egin ▁a taria ▁egoitz ari . ▁H ego aldetik , ▁liho - hari ▁bihurri tuzko ▁oih alak ▁izango ▁ditu , ▁berrogeita ▁hamar ▁metro ▁luz ekoak .
PRED:	“ Then make the courtyard of the inner courtyard of finely woven linen . The curtains will be made of finely woven linen .
GOLD:	“ Then make the courtyard for the Tabernacle , enclosed with curtains made of finely woven linen . On the south side , make the curtains 150 feet long .

ID:	334
INPUT:	▁Lebitar - hiri etako ▁herri - lurrak ▁ez ▁daitezke ▁sal , ▁lebitarren ▁behin ▁betiko ▁jabetza ▁baitira .
PRED:	The Levites must not enter the land of the tribe of Levi , and the Levites will never be forever .
GOLD:	The open pastureland around the Levitical towns may never be sold . It is their permanent possession .

ID:	335
INPUT:	▁Egun ▁berean , ▁Josuek ▁M ake da ▁hiria ▁hartu ▁zuen . ▁Era bat ▁suntsitu ▁zuten ▁hiria , ▁eta ▁erregea ▁eta ▁bizilagunak ▁ezpataz ▁hil ▁zituzten ; ▁ez ▁zuten ▁bat ▁ere ▁bizirik ▁utzi , ▁eta ▁M ake dako ari ▁Jeriko ko ▁erregeari ▁egindakoa ▁bera ▁egin ▁zioten .
PRED:	In that day Joshua destroyed the town of Libnah and destroyed it . They destroyed the city and destroyed it as well as well as the king had killed the king of Jericho .
GOLD:	That same day Joshua captured and destroyed the town of Makkedah . He killed everyone in it , including the king , leaving no survivors . He destroyed them all , and he killed the king of Makkedah as he had killed the king of Jericho .

ID:	336
INPUT:	▁Jende - talde ▁handi ek ▁jarraitu ▁zioten ▁alde ▁guztietatik : ▁Gal ilea , ▁D ek ap ol is , ▁Jerusalem ▁eta ▁Jude atik ▁eta ▁Jordanez ▁beste ▁aldetik .
PRED:	The people of Israel followed all around the towns of Galilee , from Galilee , from Galilee , and all the people of Judea .
GOLD:	Large crowds followed him wherever he went — people from Galilee , the Ten Towns , Jerusalem , from all over Judea , and from east of the Jordan River .

ID:	337
INPUT:	▁hauek ▁beren ▁emazteak ▁bidal tzeko ▁hitza ▁eman ▁eta ▁beren ▁erru aren ▁ordain etan ▁ahari ▁bana ▁eskaini ▁zuten .
PRED:	So they sent messengers to pay their wives for their sin , and they offered a young bull as a ram .
GOLD:	They vowed to divorce their wives , and they each acknowledged their guilt by offering a ram as a guilt offering .

ID:	338
INPUT:	▁or gak ▁eta ▁hauetan ▁ur - ontziak ;
PRED:	the table were made of the carts , the basins ,
GOLD:	the water carts holding the basins ;

ID:	339
INPUT:	▁Sus ako ▁juduak , ▁aldiz , ▁hamahiru an ▁eta ▁hamalau an ▁bildu ▁ziren ▁etsaiak ▁hiltzeko , ▁eta ▁hamabos tean ▁atseden ▁hartu ▁zuten , ▁otordu - ▁eta ▁jai egun ▁bihur tuz .
PRED:	Three days later , during the reign of Susa , and fourteen days later the rest of the Jews came to celebrate the Festival of Shelters .
GOLD:	( The Jews at Susa killed their enemies on March 7 and again on March 8 , then rested on March 9 , making that their day of feasting and gladness . )

ID:	340
INPUT:	▁Jesu ▁Kristo ▁bata io ko ▁u raz ▁eta ▁heriotz ako ▁odolaz ▁etorri ▁zen ; ▁ez ▁zen ▁u raz ▁bakarrik ▁etorri , ▁u raz ▁eta ▁odolaz ▁baizik . ▁Eta ▁Espiritua ▁da ▁horren ▁testigantza ▁egiten ▁duena , ▁Espiritua ▁egia ▁baita .
PRED:	And Christ came to the blood of Jesus Christ , and he was raised from the blood of the blood of the blood of Jesus . And the Spirit of God came with the Spirit of the Spirit .
GOLD:	And Jesus Christ was revealed as God 's Son by his baptism in water and by shedding his blood on the cross — not by water only , but by water and blood . And the Spirit , who is truth , confirms it with his testimony .

ID:	341
INPUT:	▁Benjamin ▁eta ▁Hax ub ek ▁beren ▁etxe ▁aurreko ▁sail ean ▁egin ▁zuten ▁lan , ▁eta ▁An an iasen ▁il oba ▁eta ▁Maase iasen ▁seme ▁Azarias ek , ▁aldiz , ▁bere ▁etxe ▁ondoan .
PRED:	From the family of Benjamin , Benjamin , son of Benjamin , son of Nethaniah , and Azariah son of Asaph , son of Pashhur , and Azariah son of Maaseiah .
GOLD:	After them , Benjamin and Hasshub repaired the section across from their house , and Azariah son of Maaseiah and grandson of Ananiah repaired the section across from his house .

ID:	342
INPUT:	▁Gora z arre ak ▁kan tatu ▁ondoren , ▁Olia mendi ra ▁abiatu ▁ziren .
PRED:	Then they sang a song of praise to the Mount of Olives .
GOLD:	Then they sang a hymn and went out to the Mount of Olives .

ID:	343
INPUT:	▁Hexb on ▁zen ▁amortarren ▁errege ▁S ih onen ▁hiri burua ; ▁honek , ▁Moabeko ▁lehengo ▁erregeari ▁eraso ▁eta ▁lurraldea ▁ken dua ▁zion ▁Arnon ▁erre kar aino .
PRED:	King Sihon of Heshbon , King Sihon of the Amorites , along with the entire territory of Moab . He also conquered the territory of Moab and the Arnon Gorge to the Arnon Gorge .
GOLD:	Heshbon had been the capital of King Sihon of the Amorites . He had defeated a former Moabite king and seized all his land as far as the Arnon River .

ID:	344
INPUT:	▁Al fer rak ▁dio : ▁« Leh oi ▁bat ▁dago ▁bidean , ▁basapiz tia ▁kal ean ».
PRED:	A lazy person says , “ Look , a wild animal has a dry wasteland . ”
GOLD:	The lazy person claims , “ There 's a lion on the road ! Yes , I 'm sure there 's a lion out there ! ”

ID:	345
INPUT:	▁Mundu ▁guztiak ▁gorroto ▁izango ▁dizue ▁niregatik ;
PRED:	All who hate you will hate you .
GOLD:	And everyone will hate you because you are my followers .

ID:	346
INPUT:	▁Hori ▁ikustean , ▁ikasleek , ▁haserre , ▁honela ▁zioten :— Zergatik ▁alferrik ▁galdu ▁horrela ?
PRED:	When the disciples saw this , they asked him , “ Why have you been lost ? ”
GOLD:	The disciples were indignant when they saw this . “ What a waste ! ” they said .

ID:	347
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁aingeruak ▁esan ▁zion :— Itzul i ▁zeure ▁etxeko andre agana , ▁eta ▁izan ▁zakizki o ▁menpeko .
PRED:	The angel of the Lord said to him , “ Return to your master 's house , and let me kill him . ”
GOLD:	The angel of the Lord said to her , “ Return to your mistress , and submit to her authority . ”

ID:	348
INPUT:	▁Bigarren ▁ikuskaria : ▁adarrak ▁eta ▁erre men tariak
PRED:	A Vision of the Altar
GOLD:	Future Prosperity of Jerusalem

ID:	349
INPUT:	▁Lurralde ▁osoak ▁egingo ▁du ▁hil eta - n egarra , ▁senitarte ek ▁senitarteka , ▁gizonezko ek ▁batetik ▁eta ▁emakumeek ▁beste tik : ▁Daviden ▁senitarteak ▁eta ▁Natan enak ,
PRED:	All the people of Israel will die , and the sons of David , the sons of David , Benjamin , and all the men of David .
GOLD:	“ All Israel will mourn , each clan by itself , and with the husbands separate from their wives . The clan of David will mourn alone , as will the clan of Nathan ,

ID:	350
INPUT:	▁ F i d agarria ▁da ▁benetan ▁eginkizun ▁horretarako ▁izendatu ▁duen ▁Jainkoaren ▁aurrean , ▁Moises ▁ere ▁haren ▁etxeko ▁ziren ▁israeldar ▁guztientzat ▁fid agarria ▁izan ▁zen ▁bezalaxe .
PRED:	Moses was a trustworthy saying , “ Moses , who is a trustworthy person who was faithful to all the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	For he was faithful to God , who appointed him , just as Moses served faithfully when he was entrusted with God 's entire house .

ID:	351
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁jendetza ▁agurtu ▁eta ▁etxera tu ▁egin ▁zen . ▁Hurbildu ▁zitzaizkion , ▁orduan , ▁ikasleak ▁eta ▁eskatu ▁zioten : ▁« Ar gi ▁iezaguzu ▁sor oko ▁ol o ▁gaiztoaren ▁parabola ».
PRED:	Then Jesus went home to the village and went home to the village and asked him , “ Come , let 's tell us how to be rich . ”
GOLD:	Then , leaving the crowds outside , Jesus went into the house . His disciples said , “ Please explain to us the story of the weeds in the field . ”

ID:	352
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁gorespen ez ▁eta ▁ekin tza ▁ospetsu ez betea ▁nuen ▁ahoa ▁egun ▁osoan .
PRED:	I was filled with joy , O God , and I heard all day long ago .
GOLD:	That is why I can never stop praising you ; I declare your glory all day long .

ID:	353
INPUT:	▁Lur reko ▁hautsa ▁bezala x eh atu ▁nituen , kal eko ▁lo ka tza ▁bezala oin pean ▁zapaldu .
PRED:	I destroyed the dust like the dust , like a trap for their hands .
GOLD:	I ground them as fine as the dust of the earth ; I trampled them in the gutter like dirt .

ID:	354
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zion , ▁gainera :— Ongi ▁ikusia ▁dut ▁nire ▁herriaren ▁atsekabea ▁Egipton ▁eta ▁entzun a ▁haien ▁oih ua ▁zapal tzaileen ▁zigor pean ; ▁bai , ▁ohartu ▁naiz ▁haien ▁oinaze az .
PRED:	The Lord said to him , “ I have seen the anguish of my people in Egypt , and I heard their evil deeds in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	Then the Lord told him , “ I have certainly seen the oppression of my people in Egypt . I have heard their cries of distress because of their harsh slave drivers . Yes , I am aware of their suffering .

ID:	355
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁aginduz ▁igotzen ▁al ▁da ▁arran oa ▁gora eta ▁bere ▁hab ia ▁gailur retan ▁egiten ?
PRED:	Did you ever ever ever ever ever come ? Can you walk in the hill ?
GOLD:	Is it at your command that the eagle risesto the heights to make its nest ?

ID:	356
INPUT:	▁Gogoan ▁har , ▁Jauna , ▁zeure ▁zerbitzari ▁irain dua , herri engandik ▁jasan ▁behar ▁ditudan ▁hainbat ▁ez ten ka da !
PRED:	Remember , O Lord , rescue me from all the nations of Israel , and I am not able to destroy all the nations .
GOLD:	Your enemies have mocked me , O Lord ; they mock your anointed king wherever he goes .

ID:	357
INPUT:	▁Asko k ▁hitz ▁egiten ▁dute ▁ongi ▁handik iaz , mundu ▁guztia ▁eskuzabal aren ▁lagun .
PRED:	Many of the poor have great confidence in the world , and all who trust in him .
GOLD:	Many seek favors from a ruler ; everyone is the friend of a person who gives gifts !

ID:	358
INPUT:	▁Gu ▁gaitz esten ▁gintuen ▁epai - agiria ▁suntsitu ▁egin ▁du ▁eta ▁guru tzean ▁jos iz ▁deus ez tatu .
PRED:	He has seen us , and he has completely destroyed us with his cross .
GOLD:	He canceled the record of the charges against us and took it away by nailing it to the cross .

ID:	359
INPUT:	▁Egiptotik ▁atera ▁eta ▁hirugarren ▁hila ▁bete ▁zen ▁egunean ▁iritsi ▁ziren ▁israeldarrak ▁Sinai ▁basamortura .
PRED:	When the third day of the third day , the Israelites left Egypt in the wilderness of Sinai .
GOLD:	Exactly two months after the Israelites left Egypt , they arrived in the wilderness of Sinai .

ID:	360
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁zuek ▁ere ▁bereizi ▁egingo ▁dituzue ▁abere ▁garbi ak ▁kutsatu etatik , ▁hegazti ▁garbi ak ▁kutsatu etatik . ▁Ez ▁dezazuela ▁bihur ▁zeuen ▁burua ▁higuingarri , ▁abereak , ▁hegaztiak ▁eta ▁n arraska ▁dabiltzan ▁piztiak ▁direla ▁eta ; ▁neuk ▁egin ▁dut ▁bere izk eta , ▁kutsatu ak ▁zein ▁diren ▁jakin ▁dezazuen .
PRED:	So you must be ceremonially clean from the community of animals . You must not defile yourselves and make yourselves ceremonially clean . You must not defile yourselves by touching yourselves and make yourselves ceremonially unclean because of all the animals that are ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	“ You must therefore make a distinction between ceremonially clean and unclean animals , and between clean and unclean birds . You must not defile yourselves by eating any unclean animal or bird or creature that scurries along the ground . I have identified them as being unclean for you .

ID:	361
INPUT:	▁honela ▁egin ▁zion ▁otoitz :
PRED:	Then Jesus prayed to him ,
GOLD:	And Hezekiah prayed this prayer before the Lord :

ID:	362
INPUT:	▁Ber aren ▁aita ▁Ezekiasek ▁desegin ak ▁zituen ▁muinoetako ▁kultu - lekuak ▁berreraiki ▁zituen ▁eta ▁aldareak ▁egin ▁Baalen ▁kultu rako . ▁Zu to in ▁sakratua ▁ere ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁Israelgo ▁errege ▁Akabek ▁garai ▁batean ▁bezala ▁eta ▁izar ▁guztiei ▁kultu ▁eman ▁zien , ▁haien ▁aurrean ▁ahuspeztuz .
PRED:	Hezekiah removed the pagan shrines , and he rebuilt the pagan shrines and worshiped Baal and worshiped Baal , just as he had done . He also rebuilt the pagan shrines and worshiped Baal , just as King Ahab of Israel had done .
GOLD:	He rebuilt the pagan shrines his father , Hezekiah , had destroyed . He constructed altars for Baal and set up an Asherah pole , just as King Ahab of Israel had done . He also bowed before all the powers of the heavens and worshiped them .

ID:	363
INPUT:	▁Han ▁izango ▁nauzu ▁ni , ▁Horeb ▁mendi ko ▁hark ai tzean . ▁Hark aitza ▁jo ▁eta ▁ura ▁sortuko ▁da , ▁herriak ▁edan ▁dezan . Hala ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Moisesek , ▁Israelgo ▁arduradun en ▁aurrean .
PRED:	I will search for Mount Sinai and water at Mount Sinai , and he will be able to drink the mountain of Israel . The people of Israel will drink their treaty with the elders of Israel .
GOLD:	I will stand before you on the rock at Mount Sinai . Strike the rock , and water will come gushing out . Then the people will be able to drink. ” So Moses struck the rock as he was told , and water gushed out as the elders looked on .

ID:	364
INPUT:	▁Orduan ▁esango ▁dute : ▁“ Hon datua ▁zegoen ▁lurralde ▁hau ▁E den go ▁bara tzea ▁bezala ▁dago ▁orain . ▁Hon datu ak , ▁erraus tuak ▁eta ▁erori ak ▁zeuden ▁hiriak ▁gotor turik ▁daude ▁eta ▁jen dez ▁beterik ”.
PRED:	Then they will say to me , ‘ Look , there is a desolate land , and it lies in ruins , and they will be destroyed . '
GOLD:	And when I bring you back , people will say , ‘ This former wasteland is now like the Garden of Eden ! The abandoned and ruined cities now have strong walls and are filled with people ! '

ID:	365
INPUT:	▁Hamabi garren ▁urtean , ▁hamabi garren ▁hilaren ▁batean , ▁honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaidan ▁Jauna :
PRED:	On the fourteenth day of the second year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	On March 3 , during the twelfth year of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	366
INPUT:	▁Gaiztoak ▁agin tean , ▁bidegabekeria ▁ugari ; haien ▁er ork etaren ▁lekuko ▁izango ▁zintzoak .
PRED:	The wicked will be destroyed , and everyone will be a witness of the godly .
GOLD:	When the wicked are in authority , sin flourishes , but the godly will live to see their downfall .

ID:	367
INPUT:	▁« Bet iko ▁lege ▁izango ▁duzue ▁hau : ▁zazpigarren ▁hilaren ▁ham arrean ▁barau ▁egingo ▁duzue ; ▁ez ▁duzue ▁inolako ▁lanik ▁egingo , ▁ez ▁bertako ek , ▁ez ▁zuen ▁artean ▁bizi ▁diren ▁etorkin ek ,
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : On the seventh day you must celebrate the seventh day of the seventh year of all the people living among you . You must not celebrate the foreigners living among foreigners living among you .
GOLD:	“ On the tenth day of the appointed month in early autumn , you must deny yourselves . Neither native-born Israelites nor foreigners living among you may do any kind of work . This is a permanent law for you .

ID:	368
INPUT:	▁Zorionekoa ▁beti ▁begirun ez ▁jokatzen ▁duena ; bihotz ▁go gorre koa ▁zoritx arrean ▁jau s iko ▁da .
PRED:	It is good to fear , but a fool is a fool .
GOLD:	Blessed are those who fear to do wrong , but the stubborn are headed for serious trouble .

ID:	369
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁aipatu ▁dugun ▁pas ar tean , ▁Ez ▁dira ▁nire ▁atseden ean ▁sartuko ▁esan ▁zaigu .
PRED:	But now we will never enter my place ; they will never enter my place .
GOLD:	But in the other passage God said , “ They will never enter my place of rest . ”

ID:	370
INPUT:	▁harkaitz ▁artean ▁bizi ▁ziren , ▁ko ba ▁eta ▁hai tzul o etan ,
PRED:	As they live among the rocks , the rocks were broken into the rock .
GOLD:	So now they live in frightening ravines , in caves and among the rocks .

ID:	371
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁duzue ▁zeuen ▁hiri ▁f es taz alea , as paldi danik ▁eraik ia ? Hau , ▁urruti an ▁kol on iak j artzen ▁zituena ?
PRED:	You will not be crushed by the wheat , and if you have been set apart for yourself , how long will you be able to be able to be able to be disgraced ?
GOLD:	Is this silent ruin all that is left of your once joyous city ? What a long history was yours ! Think of all the colonists you sent to distant places .

ID:	372
INPUT:	▁Izu garrizko ▁esk armen tu ▁izango ▁dira ▁munduko ▁erreinu ▁guztientzat ; ▁lots aiz un ▁eta ▁iseka - gai ▁izango ▁dira , ▁ko pl ak ▁aterako ▁dizkiete ▁eta ▁madarikatu ▁egingo ▁jaurtiko ▁ditudan ▁toki ▁guztietan .
PRED:	I will make a great nation a great fear of all the kingdoms of the earth , and all the kingdoms of the earth will be ashamed .
GOLD:	I will make them an object of horror and a symbol of evil to every nation on earth . They will be disgraced and mocked , taunted and cursed , wherever I scatter them .

ID:	373
INPUT:	▁Seme ▁zentzu gabea ▁aitaren ▁zoritxarra , emazte ▁lis kar tia ▁eten gabeko ▁ito gina .
PRED:	My child is full of grief ; a disgrace is filled with grief .
GOLD:	A foolish child is a calamity to a father ; a quarrelsome wife is as annoying as constant dripping .

ID:	374
INPUT:	▁Hala , ▁Rek aben ▁seme ▁Jonadab ▁gure ▁arbaso ari ▁obedi tuz , ▁ez ▁dugu ▁ardorik ▁inoiz ▁ere ▁edaten , ▁ez ▁guk , ▁ez ▁gure ▁emazte ▁eta ▁seme - alabek ▁ere ;
PRED:	But the descendants of Jehonadab son of Recab , whom our ancestor Jehonadab son of Recab have never obeyed our ancestor Jehonadab son .
GOLD:	So we have obeyed him in all these things . We have never had a drink of wine to this day , nor have our wives , our sons , or our daughters .

ID:	375
INPUT:	▁M adarik azio pean ▁erori ak ▁zaudete , ▁beraz , ▁den - den ok ▁iruzur ▁egiten ▁didazue ▁eta .
PRED:	So you will fall on the earth , and you will devour me .
GOLD:	You are under a curse , for your whole nation has been cheating me .

ID:	376
INPUT:	▁Herodesek ▁begirune ▁baitzion ; ▁gizon ▁zuzen ▁eta ▁santu tzat ▁zeukan , ▁eta ▁babestu ▁egiten ▁zuen . ▁Joanen ▁hitz ek ▁buru hau s terik ▁sortzen ▁baz io ten ▁ere , ▁gogoz ▁entzuten ▁zion .
PRED:	Herod wanted to fear him , and he was a man who taught him as a person to speak . But she listened to a person 's message .
GOLD:	for Herod respected John ; and knowing that he was a good and holy man , he protected him . Herod was greatly disturbed whenever he talked with John , but even so , he liked to listen to him .

ID:	377
INPUT:	▁Jerusalem , ▁estali ▁dolu - jantziz , ira ul i ▁hauts etan , egin ▁dolu ▁seme ▁bakar raren herio tzako an ▁bezala , egin ▁negar ▁samin ki , bat - batean ▁etorriko ▁baita hon da tzailea ▁zure ▁gainera .
PRED:	She must wear burlap in mourning in mourning in mourning , and he will weep in mourning in mourning , for she will weep in mourning .
GOLD:	Oh , my people , dress yourselves in burlapand sit among the ashes.Mourn and weep bitterly , as for the loss of an only son.For suddenly the destroying armies will be upon you !

ID:	378
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁preso ak ▁hiltzea ▁pentsatu ▁zuten ▁soldadu ek , ▁inork ▁ere ▁i ger ian ▁ihes ▁egin ▁ez ▁zezan .
PRED:	Then the soldiers killed everyone in prison , but no one tried to kill him .
GOLD:	The soldiers wanted to kill the prisoners to make sure they did n't swim ashore and escape .

ID:	379
INPUT:	▁H izk eta ▁arrotzez ▁mintzo ▁dena , ▁bere ▁buruari ▁bakarrik ▁zaio ▁lagun garri ; ▁profeta ▁bezala ▁mintzo ▁denak , ▁berriz , ▁eliz ▁elkartea ▁haz arazten ▁du .
PRED:	Those who speak in tongues will speak in tongues like a prophet , but anyone who speaks in tongues like a prophet .
GOLD:	A person who speaks in tongues is strengthened personally , but one who speaks a word of prophecy strengthens the entire church .

ID:	380
INPUT:	▁« El kar tasun - oparia ▁bo toren ▁bat ▁betetzeko ▁edo ▁nor beraren ▁borondatez ▁egina ▁bada , ▁opari gaia ▁op aldu a ▁izan ▁den ▁egunean ▁jango ▁da ; ▁sobera ▁geldi tua ▁hurrengo ▁egunean ▁jan ▁daiteke ;
PRED:	“ If you present a burnt offering to fulfill a vow or a voluntary offering , you must eat it as a voluntary offering .
GOLD:	“ If you bring an offering to fulfill a vow or as a voluntary offering , the meat must be eaten on the same day the sacrifice is offered , but whatever is left over may be eaten on the second day .

ID:	381
INPUT:	▁esklabo tza ▁eta ▁hondamendi tik ▁as katua ▁izan ▁eta ▁Jainkoaren ▁seme - alaben ▁aintz azko ▁aska tasunean ▁parte ▁izateko .
PRED:	In fact , the glory of God and his children will be given to the children of God .
GOLD:	the creation looks forward to the day when it will join God 's children in glorious freedom from death and decay .

ID:	382
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁mendi ▁horretan ▁hilko ▁zara ▁eta ▁zure ▁arbasoekin ▁bilduko , ▁zure ▁anaia ▁Aaron ▁Hor ▁mendian ▁hil ▁eta ▁arbasoekin ▁bildu ▁zen ▁bezala ;
PRED:	Then you will die in the hill country and slaughter your brother , Aaron , and his brother Aaron died at Mount Sinai .
GOLD:	Then you will die there on the mountain . You will join your ancestors , just as Aaron , your brother , died on Mount Hor and joined his ancestors .

ID:	383
INPUT:	▁Hau ei ▁jakinarazi ▁nahi ▁izan ▁die ▁Jainkoak ▁zein ▁aberats ▁eta ▁aintzat su ▁den ▁jentil entzat ▁asmo ▁ezku tu ▁hori ; ▁zuengan ▁den ▁eta ▁aintz arako ▁itxaropen ▁duzuen ▁Kristori ▁buruz ▁ari ▁natzaizue .
PRED:	For God has told you what God has revealed to the Gentiles and the Gentiles , and we have hope in you .
GOLD:	For God wanted them to know that the riches and glory of Christ are for you Gentiles , too . And this is the secret : Christ lives in you . This gives you assurance of sharing his glory .

ID:	384
INPUT:	▁Zure ak ▁dira ▁gau - egunak , ▁zuk ▁era tuak ▁eguzki - il argi ak ;
PRED:	Your days are confident in the sun , for the sun is filled with light .
GOLD:	Both day and night belong to you ; you made the starlight and the sun .

ID:	385
INPUT:	▁Asu er oren ▁erregealdiaren ▁zazpigarren ▁urteko ▁hamargarren ▁hilean , ▁hots , ▁T eb et ▁hilean , ▁eraman ▁zuten ▁Ester ▁erregearen ▁aurrera .
PRED:	On the third year of King Xerxes 's captivity , during the seventh year of King Xerxes 's reign , the next year of Mordecai 's reign .
GOLD:	Esther was taken to King Xerxes at the royal palace in early winter of the seventh year of his reign .

ID:	386
INPUT:	▁Z ul ora ▁doazen ekin ▁bat ▁egina ▁nau kate , ▁hain ▁nago ▁indar gabe tua .
PRED:	My strength is mine , and my strength is mine .
GOLD:	They have left me among the dead , and I lie like a corpse in a grave.I am forgotten , cut off from your care .

ID:	387
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁beste ▁buruzagi ▁bat ▁hautatu : ▁Josue
PRED:	Then God chose one of the leaders of the Levites ,
GOLD:	The Lord 's Charge to Joshua

ID:	388
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁noiz ▁onartu ▁zuen ? ▁Er dain du ▁aurretik ▁ala ▁ondotik ? ▁Aur retik , ▁noski , ▁ez ▁ondotik .
PRED:	But when he asked him , “ Did n't you come from me ? ”
GOLD:	But how did this happen ? Was he counted as righteous only after he was circumcised , or was it before he was circumcised ? Clearly , God accepted Abraham before he was circumcised !

ID:	389
INPUT:	▁Jakin arazten ▁dizuet , ▁gainera , ▁ez ▁dela ▁zilegi ▁Jainkoaren ▁etxe ▁honetako ▁apaiz , ▁lebitar , ▁atezain , ▁laguntzaile ▁eta ▁zerbitzariei ▁zer gar ik , ▁p etx arik ▁eta ▁bide sari rik ▁ken tzea .
PRED:	I know that it is not a permanent law of God , a priest , the Levites , and the Levites , and all the sacred articles used to eat .
GOLD:	I also decree that no priest , Levite , singer , gatekeeper , Temple servant , or other worker in this Temple of God will be required to pay tribute , customs , or tolls of any kind . '

ID:	390
INPUT:	▁Egin ▁ai ene , Hiri ▁barren eko ▁bizilagunak , mer k atari enak ▁egin ▁baitu , di ru dunak ▁galdu ak ▁baitira .
PRED:	For the people of the city will be filled with the gates of the city , for the godly are lost .
GOLD:	Wail in sorrow , all you who live in the market area , for all the merchants and traders will be destroyed .

ID:	391
INPUT:	▁Zeren ▁eta ▁jende ▁zintzoa ▁atsekabe tu ▁baituzue ▁gezur rekin , ▁nik ▁neuk ▁atsekabe tu ▁nahi ▁ez ▁nuen ean , ▁eta ▁gaiztoa ▁bere ▁asmo etan ▁sendotu ▁baituzue , ▁bere ▁jokabide ▁gaizto tik ▁itzul ▁ez ▁zedin ▁eta , ▁horrela , ▁bizirik ▁iraun ▁ez ▁zezan ;
PRED:	For I am suffering and ashamed of you , for I want you to be ashamed of you , for I have not been able to harm you , for I have not been able to turn away from the evil of the wicked .
GOLD:	You have discouraged the righteous with your lies , but I did n't want them to be sad . And you have encouraged the wicked by promising them life , even though they continue in their sins .

ID:	392
INPUT:	▁Une ▁hartan , ▁s uz koak ▁bezalako ▁izaki ▁haietako ▁bat ▁niregana ▁etorri ▁zen ▁he gan , ▁su - h atz ez ▁aldar etik ▁hartu riko ▁txin gar ▁bat ▁eskuan ▁zek arre la ,
PRED:	At that time , a man appeared to me , and a fire came to me from the altar .
GOLD:	Then one of the seraphim flew to me with a burning coal he had taken from the altar with a pair of tongs .

ID:	393
INPUT:	▁« Entzun ▁Jaunaren ▁trumoi - ah o tsa , entzun ▁haren ▁ahotik ▁irteten ▁den ▁d ur un dia ;
PRED:	“ Listen to the voice of the Lord , the voice of the Lord : The voice of the voice of the earth is full of bitter .
GOLD:	Listen carefully to the thunder of God 's voiceas it rolls from his mouth .

ID:	394
INPUT:	▁eta ▁barkatu ▁gure ▁bekatuak , gu k ▁ere ▁zor ▁digu ten ▁guztiei bar katzen ▁baiti e gu , eta ▁ez ▁utzi ▁gu ▁tental dian ▁erortzen ».
PRED:	Even if we forgive our sins , we will never be punished for all who try to be saved . ”
GOLD:	and forgive us our sins , as we forgive those who sin against us.And do n't let us yield to temptation . ”

ID:	395
INPUT:	▁Jaunak , ▁bere ▁Jainkoak , ▁siri arren ▁erregearen ▁esku ▁utzi ▁zuen ▁Akaz ; ▁haiek ▁menderatu ▁egin ▁zuten ▁eta , ▁beste ▁gatibu ▁asko rekin ▁batera , ▁Damasko ra ▁eraman ▁zuten . ▁Israelgo ▁erregearen ▁esku ▁ere ▁utzi ▁zuen , ▁eta ▁honek ▁ere ▁hondamen ▁ikaragarria ▁egin ▁zion .
PRED:	The Lord had given him victory over the Aramean army of Aram and led him away to the kings of Damascus . They were killed by the king of Damascus , and he led them into exile .
GOLD:	Because of all this , the Lord his God allowed the king of Aram to defeat Ahaz and to exile large numbers of his people to Damascus . The armies of the king of Israel also defeated Ahaz and inflicted many casualties on his army .

ID:	396
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁As ah elek ▁ez ▁zuen ▁alde ▁egin ▁nahi ▁izan . ▁Orduan , ▁Abner rek ▁lantz aren ▁a tzeko ▁mutur ra ▁sabelean ▁sartu ▁eta ▁atze aldetik ▁atera ▁zion . ▁Ber tan ▁erori ▁zen ▁hila ▁As ah el . ▁Ondoren ▁zetozen ▁guztiak , ▁As ah el ▁hila ▁erori ▁zen ▁tokira ▁heltzean , ▁gelditu ▁egiten ▁ziren .
PRED:	So Abner went out to meet him , and Abner went out to the camp . Then Abner went out to the camp and attacked him .
GOLD:	But Asahel refused to turn back , so Abner thrust the butt end of his spear through Asahel 's stomach , and the spear came out through his back . He stumbled to the ground and died there . And everyone who came by that spot stopped and stood still when they saw Asahel lying there .

ID:	397
INPUT:	▁M ir ari ▁bat ▁bezala ▁gertatu ▁nintzen ▁askoren tzat , zu ▁zintudan ▁neure ▁babesleku ▁seguru .
PRED:	I was a leader of many years , as I lived in safety .
GOLD:	My life is an example to many , because you have been my strength and protection .

ID:	398
INPUT:	▁Jordan ▁inguru ra ▁heldu ▁zirenean , ▁artean ▁Kanaanen ▁zirela , ▁aldare ▁handi ▁eta ▁ikus garria ▁eraiki ▁zuten .
PRED:	When they arrived at the Jordan River , they saw that the Lord had built a great altar .
GOLD:	But while they were still in Canaan , and when they came to a place called Geliloth near the Jordan River , the men of Reuben , Gad , and the half-tribe of Manasseh stopped to build a large and imposing altar .

ID:	399
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁aitak ▁nire ▁galdera ▁egiten ▁badu , ▁esaiozu : ▁« Bere ▁sor terri ▁Belen era ▁al bait ▁lehen ▁joaten ▁uzteko ▁eskatu ▁zidan ▁Davidek , ▁ur ter oko ▁oparia ▁bere ▁ahaide ▁guztiekin ▁egiteko ».
PRED:	And if she refuses to explain to me , “ Tell me to go to Bethlehem in Bethlehem , let 's go to Bethlehem in Bethlehem in Bethlehem . ”
GOLD:	If your father asks where I am , tell him I asked permission to go home to Bethlehem for an annual family sacrifice .

ID:	400
INPUT:	▁Lur s aila ▁Jubileu ▁Ur tetik ▁bertatik ▁sagaratzen ▁bada , ▁ezarritako ▁prez ioa ▁ordainduko ▁da ;
PRED:	If the field comes from the field , the priest will pay it to the priest .
GOLD:	If the field is dedicated to the Lord in the Year of Jubilee , then the entire assessment will apply .

ID:	401
INPUT:	▁On tzi ▁haiek ▁hartu ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁tenplura ▁eramateko ▁esan ▁zion ▁eta ▁Jainkoaren ▁etxea ▁lehengo ▁toki ▁berean ▁eraikitzeko .
PRED:	Then the disciples took him to the Temple of God and prayed to the Temple of God .
GOLD:	The king instructed him to return the cups to their place in Jerusalem and to rebuild the Temple of God there on its original site .

ID:	402
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁jo ▁nek ro man te engana , ▁ez ▁ibili ▁igar leak ▁kontsul tatzen , ▁kutsaturik ▁geldi ▁ez ▁zaitezten . ▁Neu ▁naiz ▁Jauna , ▁zuen ▁Jainkoa .
PRED:	“ Do n't go to the poor , but do n't go to the masters . If you go , I am the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Do not defile yourselves by turning to mediums or to those who consult the spirits of the dead . I am the Lord your God .

ID:	403
INPUT:	▁Ene ▁us o , gor deleku ▁hai tzul oak , lab arreko ▁zir ri ki tuak , ▁dituzun ▁hori , ikus ▁dez adala ▁zure ▁irudia , entzun ▁dez adala ▁zure ▁ahotsa ! G oz oa ▁baita ▁zure ▁ahotsa , e der ra ▁zure ▁irudia !
PRED:	My heart is like a lion 's flock , for I am praying to you , for you have heard me , O God , for you have heard me , for you have heard your voice , for you have heard me !
GOLD:	My dove is hiding behind the rocks , behind an outcrop on the cliff.Let me see your face ; let me hear your voice.For your voice is pleasant , and your face is lovely .

ID:	404
INPUT:	▁« Ea , ▁bada , ▁itzuli ▁arin ▁aitaren gana ▁eta ▁es aiozue : ▁Hau ▁dio ▁zure ▁seme ▁Josek : ▁Jainkoak ▁Egipto ▁osoko ▁buru ▁jarri ▁nau . ▁Zatoz ▁niregana ! ▁Ez ▁luzatu !
PRED:	“ Come and tell me , ‘ Come and tell me , ‘ Come and tell me , your son Joseph , the God of Egypt , and he has given me victory over all the land of Egypt . '
GOLD:	“ Now hurry back to my father and tell him , ‘ This is what your son Joseph says : God has made me master over all the land of Egypt . So come down to me immediately !

ID:	405
INPUT:	▁eta ▁eman ▁mezu ▁hau : ▁“ Honela ▁dio ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoak : ▁Babiloniako ▁errege ▁Nabukodonosor ▁neure ▁zerbitzaria ▁ekar raraziko ▁dut , ▁eta ▁Jeremiasek ▁lurrean ▁sartu ▁dituen ▁harri ▁horien ▁gainean ▁ezarriko ▁ditut ▁haren ▁tronua ▁eta ▁gaineko ▁oihal - es tal dura .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : I will bring them on the ground , and I will put them on the ground in the ground . '
GOLD:	Then say to the people of Judah , ‘ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : I will certainly bring my servant Nebuchadnezzar , king of Babylon , here to Egypt . I will set his throne over these stones that I have hidden . He will spread his royal canopy over them .

ID:	406
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaidan ▁Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Again a message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	407
INPUT:	▁X uf amen gandik ▁x uf am darrak , ▁H uf amen gandik ▁h uf am darrak ,
PRED:	From the exile : Zorah , named after their ancestor Abraham , named after their ancestor Shaul .
GOLD:	The Shuphamite clan , named after their ancestor Shupham.The Huphamite clan , named after their ancestor Hupham .

ID:	408
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Herri etako ▁erregeek ▁menpean ▁hartzen ▁dituzte ▁herriak , ▁eta ▁aginte dun ek ▁“ On gile ” ▁izena ▁nahi ▁izaten ▁dute ▁beren tzat .
PRED:	Jesus told them , “ These kings are the kings of the world . They are clothed in honor and honor .
GOLD:	Jesus told them , “ In this world the kings and great men lord it over their people , yet they are called ‘ friends of the people . '

ID:	409
INPUT:	▁Orain , ▁Aita , ▁em adazu ▁aintza ▁zeure ▁ondoan , ▁eman ▁mundua ▁mundu ▁izan ▁baino ▁lehen ▁zure ▁ondoan ▁nuen ▁aintza .
PRED:	Now please give me your Father to the earth , and I gave me glory to the world .
GOLD:	Now , Father , bring me into the glory we shared before the world began .

ID:	410
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁zu , ▁Daniel , ▁izan ▁leial ▁azkena ▁arte . ▁Orduan ▁hartuko ▁duzu ▁atseden , ▁eta ▁garai aren ▁azkenean ▁altxatuko ▁zara ▁saria ▁jasotzeko ”».
PRED:	You will be faithful to Daniel until the end of the end of the end , and you will be rewarded . ”
GOLD:	“ As for you , go your way until the end . You will rest , and then at the end of the days , you will rise again to receive the inheritance set aside for you . ”

ID:	411
INPUT:	▁eta , ▁Jordan en ▁zehar ▁beh erantz ▁jarraituz , ▁Itsaso ▁Hil ean ▁amai tuko .« Hori ▁izango ▁duzue ▁zeuen ▁lurraldea , ▁eta ▁horiek ▁berau ▁inguratzen ▁duten ▁mugak ».
PRED:	When you cross the Jordan River , follow the Red Sea , you must follow the boundaries of the Jordan . This is what you have done . ”
GOLD:	and then along the Jordan River to the Dead Sea . These are the boundaries of your land . ”

ID:	412
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁hau ▁guztia , ▁Jainkoa ▁bila ▁zezaten , ▁ea ▁its um ustu ka ▁be deren ▁aurkitzen ▁zuten ; ▁izan ▁ere , ▁ez ▁dago ▁gure tako ▁bakoitz arengandik ▁urruti ,
PRED:	And if they were waiting for him , they would be able to find him . They did n't find him from one of them .
GOLD:	“ His purpose was for the nations to seek after God and perhaps feel their way toward him and find him — though he is not far from any one of us .

ID:	413
INPUT:	▁zeure ▁maitasun agatik , ▁suntsi ▁itzazu ▁nire ▁etsaiak , hon datu ▁nire ▁eraso tzaileak , zeure ▁zerbitzari ▁nau zun ez ▁gero .
PRED:	You crushed me with your unfailing love , O Lord , and you have broken me .
GOLD:	In your unfailing love , silence all my enemiesand destroy all my foes , for I am your servant .

ID:	414
INPUT:	▁T re ba tzen ▁dizkit ▁eskuak ▁gudurako , eta ▁besoak b rontzezko ▁uztaia ▁ten katzeko .
PRED:	He has given me his hand ; he has laid my hands on me .
GOLD:	He trains my hands for battle ; he strengthens my arm to draw a bronze bow .

ID:	415
INPUT:	▁T esal onik arrak ▁salbamen erako ▁aukeratuak
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Believers Should Stand Firm

ID:	416
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁dei ▁egineta ▁hark ▁erantzun ▁egingo ▁dizu , zuk ▁laguntza ▁eskatu eta ▁hark ▁esango : ▁« Hemen ▁nauzu !» Uz tarri ▁oro ▁bazter tzen eta ▁salak etak ▁eta ▁gaizki - es ate ak ux atzen ▁baditu zu ,
PRED:	“ O Lord , ” he replied , “ I will answer you , and you will say , ‘ Where are you ready ? '
GOLD:	Then when you call , the Lord will answer. ‘ Yes , I am here , ' he will quickly reply. “ Remove the heavy yoke of oppression.Stop pointing your finger and spreading vicious rumors !

ID:	417
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁nagusiak : ▁“ Ez , ▁ez ▁dadila ▁gerta ▁ol o ▁gaiztoa ▁bil tzean ▁garia ▁ere ▁atera tzea .
PRED:	But the master will say , ‘ Do n't let the wheat go out to the wheat . '
GOLD:	“ ‘ No , ' he replied , ‘ you 'll uproot the wheat if you do .

ID:	418
INPUT:	▁Ats egin etara ▁emanak ▁behartsu ▁bu katuko , ardo zal ea ▁eta ▁lurrin zal ea ▁ez ▁da ▁aberas tuko .
PRED:	The poor will be poor , and the poor will be poor and poor .
GOLD:	Those who love pleasure become poor ; those who love wine and luxury will never be rich .

ID:	419
INPUT:	▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak , ▁Israelgo ▁Jainkoak , ▁mezua ▁zuzendu ▁zion ▁Jeremiasi ▁Neh l am go ▁Xemaias entzat . ▁Honek ▁gutun ▁bat ▁bidalia ▁zien ▁Jerusalemen ▁gelditutako ▁jendeari , ▁Maase iasen ▁seme ▁So fon ias ▁apaizari ▁eta ▁beste ▁apaiz ▁guztiei . ▁Honela ▁idazten ▁zion ▁So fon iasi :
PRED:	This message came to Jeremiah from the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , Shemaiah , Shemaiah , Shemaiah , the letter of the Lord , the God of Israel , who had been exiled to the people of Judah . This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says :
GOLD:	The Lord sent this message to Shemaiah the Nehelamite in Babylon :

ID:	420
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁zer ▁ikusi ▁nuen : ▁Elam ▁eskualdean ▁dagoen ▁Sus a ▁gotorleku an ▁aurkitzen ▁nintzen , ▁U l ai ▁ibai ▁ondoan .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : I saw that I found in the province of Susa in the province of Susa .
GOLD:	In this vision I was at the fortress of Susa , in the province of Elam , standing beside the Ulai River .

ID:	421
INPUT:	▁« Ikus karia ▁neuk ▁bakarrik ▁ikusi ▁nuen . ▁Nire kin ▁zeuden ek ▁ez ▁zuten ▁ezer ▁ikusi ; ▁baizik ▁eta , ▁ikara ▁handiak ▁harturik , ▁ihesi ▁joan ▁ziren ▁eta ▁ezkutatu .
PRED:	“ The king was alone alone alone alone , but I saw that no one was with me . They were afraid of them and fled .
GOLD:	Only I , Daniel , saw this vision . The men with me saw nothing , but they were suddenly terrified and ran away to hide .

ID:	422
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁herri ▁osoak ▁Uz ias , ▁hamasei ▁urteko ▁gaztea , ▁errege ▁izendatu ▁zuen , ▁bere ▁aita ▁Amatz iasen ▁ordez .
PRED:	All the people of Judah had become king of Judah , as his father , Amaziah , Amaziah , was in charge of his father .
GOLD:	All the people of Judah had crowned Amaziah 's sixteen-year-old son , Uzziah , as king in place of his father .

ID:	423
INPUT:	▁H ots ▁handiz ▁zioen : ▁« Izan ▁begirune ▁Jainkoari ▁eta ▁eman ▁aintza ▁berari , ▁etorri ▁baita ▁berak ▁mundua ▁epaituko ▁duen ▁ordua ; ▁adora ▁ezazue , ▁zerua ▁eta ▁lurra , ▁itsasoa ▁eta ▁ur - itur riak ▁egin ▁zituena ».
PRED:	“ Praise God ! ” he said , “ Praise God , for he has given him victory over the earth , for he is the one who comes from the earth . ”
GOLD:	“ Fear God , ” he shouted . “ Give glory to him . For the time has come when he will sit as judge . Worship him who made the heavens , the earth , the sea , and all the springs of water . ”

ID:	424
INPUT:	▁Siri a ▁guztian ▁zabaldu ▁zen ▁Jesusen ▁entzu tea . ▁Edo zein ▁gaitz ▁edo ▁oinaz ek ▁jo takoak ▁— de abru dun , ▁ep ile p tiko ▁nahiz ▁elb arriak — ▁eramaten ▁zizkioten , ▁eta ▁hark ▁sendatu ▁egiten ▁zituen .
PRED:	When Jesus heard this , he began to hear about a great crowd , and the demons had been healed . He was healed of the demons , and he healed Jesus , and he healed his leprosy .
GOLD:	News about him spread as far as Syria , and people soon began bringing to him all who were sick . And whatever their sickness or disease , or if they were demon possessed or epileptic or paralyzed — he healed them all .

ID:	425
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁zer ▁oihu katzen ▁duen ▁Jaunak lur - bazter re taraino :« Esan ▁Sion ▁hiri ▁eder rari : Hara , ▁badator ▁zure ▁salbatzailea ! Ber ekin ▁dakar ▁garaipen - agiria , berak ▁askatu riko ▁herria ».
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The Lord is coming ! The time is coming when he has redeemed Jerusalem ! ”
GOLD:	The Lord has sent this message to every land : “ Tell the people of Israel , ‘ Look , your Savior is coming.See , he brings his reward with him as he comes . ' ”

ID:	426
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁inori ▁ez ▁diot ▁hiz pi derik ▁emango ▁horren besteko ▁diru tza ▁neure ▁esku ▁dauka dal arik .
PRED:	So I will not give you a gift of money , and I will give it to you .
GOLD:	We are traveling together to guard against any criticism for the way we are handling this generous gift .

ID:	427
INPUT:	▁O in ▁bakoitzean ▁gel ak ▁zabala goak ▁ziren , ▁eta ▁tenpluko ▁horma , ▁berriz , ▁es tua goa . ▁B arren eko ▁oin etik ▁bitar teko ra ▁igarotzen ▁zen , ▁eta ▁honetatik ▁goren eko ra .
PRED:	There was an outer wall of the wall , and the walls of the Temple of the Lord , who repaired another section of this wall .
GOLD:	Each level was wider than the one below it , corresponding to the narrowing of the Temple wall as it rose higher . A stairway led up from the bottom level through the middle level to the top level .

ID:	428
INPUT:	▁urre ▁eta ▁zilarre z ▁apain duak eta ▁il tzez ▁eta ▁mai luz ▁jos iak , er or ▁ez ▁daitezen .
PRED:	There is no foundation of silver and fine gold , and there will be no joy .
GOLD:	They decorate it with gold and silverand then fasten it securely with hammer and nailsso it wo n't fall over .

ID:	429
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zion ▁Moisesi : ▁« Al txa ▁ezazu ▁eskua ▁zerurantz ▁eta ▁uki tzeko ▁mo duko ▁ilunp eak ▁izango ▁dira ▁Egipton ».
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Stand up in the sky and make it happen to heaven . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Lift your hand toward heaven , and the land of Egypt will be covered with a darkness so thick you can feel it . ”

ID:	430
INPUT:	▁I tsas oa ▁erdi bi ▁egin ▁zuen ▁haiek ▁p asa tzeko , hor ma ▁bat ▁bezala ▁u rei ▁tinko ▁e uts iz .
PRED:	He overlaid the sea with a sea , like a ocean ocean depths .
GOLD:	For he divided the sea and led them through , making the water stand up like walls !

ID:	431
INPUT:	▁Hori entzat ▁egunsen tia ▁gau ▁ilun a ▁da , oh itu ak ▁baita ude ▁ilun tasun eko ▁izu etara ».
PRED:	Everything in the night , for the moon and night are as bright as darkness . ”
GOLD:	The black night is their morning.They ally themselves with the terrors of the darkness .

ID:	432
INPUT:	▁Handik ▁eki alderantz ▁jarraituz , ▁G at - H ef er ▁eta ▁I ta - K az in dik ▁igarotzen ▁zen ▁eta ▁R imon ▁aldera ▁hartzen ▁zuen , ▁N ea ▁aldera ▁oker tzeko .
PRED:	From the boundary went north to the border of Gezer and went to the border of Gezer .
GOLD:	Then it continued east to Gath-hepher , Eth-kazin , and Rimmon and turned toward Neah .

ID:	433
INPUT:	▁Giz ona ▁sartu ▁zenean , ▁k erub inak ▁tenpluaren ▁eskuin aldera ▁zeuden , ▁eta ▁laino ak ▁barru ko ▁a taria ▁betetzen ▁zuen .
PRED:	As soon as they were human , the cloud covered the feet of the Temple , and the inner curtain was filled with the feet of the Temple .
GOLD:	The cherubim were standing at the south end of the Temple when the man went in , and the cloud of glory filled the inner courtyard .

ID:	434
INPUT:	▁Hogeita ▁hamalau ▁urte ▁zituela , ▁E ber rek ▁P el eg ▁izan ▁zuen .
PRED:	When Nahor was 30 years old , he became the father of Eber .
GOLD:	When Eber was 34 years old , he became the father of Peleg .

ID:	435
INPUT:	▁Jainko ▁dei tuak ▁zeruan ▁nahiz ▁lurrean ▁asko ▁izan ▁arren ▁— eta ▁benetan ▁horrelako ▁jainko ▁eta ▁jaun ▁asko ▁dago —,
PRED:	In the same way , there is many things in heaven and in the heavens .
GOLD:	There may be so-called gods both in heaven and on earth , and some people actually worship many gods and many lords .

ID:	436
INPUT:	▁Edo men ▁aurkako ▁mendekua ▁neure ▁herri ▁Israelen ▁bidez ▁buru tuko ▁dut : ▁nire ▁haserre - sum inaren ▁arabera ▁erabiliko ▁dut ▁Edom ; ▁orduan ▁ezagutuko ▁dute ▁nire ▁mendekua . ▁Nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak , ▁esana .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says concerning Israel : I will take revenge on my fierce anger against Edom , ” says the Sovereign Lord , “ I have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	I will accomplish this by the hand of my people of Israel . They will carry out my vengeance with anger , and Edom will know that this vengeance is from me . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken !

ID:	437
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁ez ▁deitu ▁lurrean ▁inori ▁“ ai ta ”, ▁bat ▁bakarra ▁baita ▁zuen ▁aita , ▁zeru koa .
PRED:	He called to anyone who calls on earth , ‘ He is the one who is the Father . '
GOLD:	And do n't address anyone here on earth as ‘ Father , ' for only God in heaven is your Father .

ID:	438
INPUT:	▁Jaunari ▁esker , ▁israeldarrek ▁egiptoarren ▁ab egi ▁ona ▁irabazi ▁zuten . ▁Are ▁gehiago , ▁Moises ▁bera ▁ap ar teko ▁gizon tzat ▁zeuk aten , ▁bai ▁faraoiaren ▁funtzionario ek , ▁bai ▁Egiptoko ▁herri ▁osoak .
PRED:	So the people of Israel followed the Lord 's good news . The whole community of Egypt were once more numerous than all the people of Egypt .
GOLD:	( Now the Lord had caused the Egyptians to look favorably on the people of Israel . And Moses was considered a very great man in the land of Egypt , respected by Pharaoh 's officials and the Egyptian people alike . )

ID:	439
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁poz aren ▁pozez , ▁Samson ▁ateratzeko ▁esk atua ▁zuten , ▁beraren ▁kontura ▁barre ▁egiteko ▁gogoz . ▁Atera ▁zuten , ▁beraz , ▁Samson ▁esp etx etik ▁eta ▁beraren ▁bizkar ▁egin ▁zuten ▁barre . ▁Gero , ▁bi ▁zuta beren ▁erdian ▁utzi ▁zuten .
PRED:	As soon as Samson was glad , they shouted louder , “ Samson , take some of them ! ” So they took him out of the middle of the lake , and they left the middle of the lake .
GOLD:	Half drunk by now , the people demanded , “ Bring out Samson so he can amuse us ! ” So he was brought from the prison to amuse them , and they had him stand between the pillars supporting the roof .

ID:	440
INPUT:	▁M ir ariak ▁eginak ▁zituen ▁haien ▁gurasoen ▁begi ▁aurrean Egi p ton , ▁T an is ko ▁lurraldean .
PRED:	He built pagan shrines to them in Egypt , in addition to them in the land of Zoan .
GOLD:	the miracles he did for their ancestorson the plain of Zoan in the land of Egypt .

ID:	441
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁zerbitzari etako ▁ham arri ▁dei ▁egin ▁eta ▁hamar ▁on tzako ▁urre ▁banatu ▁zizkien , ▁esanez : ▁“ J arri ▁irabazi an , ▁ni ▁itzuli ▁bitartean ”.
PRED:	He called ten of his servant , and he called ten bags of silver . He told them , ‘ Let me return to me . '
GOLD:	Before he left , he called together ten of his servants and divided among them ten pounds of silver , saying , ‘ Invest this for me while I am gone . '

ID:	442
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁etxearen ▁iparraldeko ▁ate ▁ondora ▁eraman ▁ninduen ; ▁han ▁emakumeak ▁zeuden ▁eserita ▁Tam uz ▁jainko arengatik ▁dolu ▁egiten .
PRED:	The women took me in the Temple of the Lord , along with me , and she dressed me in burlap .
GOLD:	He brought me to the north gate of the Lord 's Temple , and some women were sitting there , weeping for the god Tammuz .

ID:	443
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁dio :« A tz erri tar ▁jendeak ber rera ikiko ▁ditu ▁zure ▁harresiak , eta ▁haien ▁erregeak zerbitz ari ▁izango ▁dituzu ; izan ▁ere , ▁neure ▁haserre an zigor tu ▁zintudan ▁arren , neure ▁ongin ah ian gu pi datu ▁egin ▁naiz ▁zutaz .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Israel will be their special possession , and I will protect you as their own possession . I will protect you as my enemies , the Lord , have mercy on you , and I will make you strong .
GOLD:	“ Foreigners will come to rebuild your towns , and their kings will serve you.For though I have destroyed you in my anger , I will now have mercy on you through my grace .

ID:	444
INPUT:	▁ez ▁du ▁egiten ▁harekin ▁igi tariak ▁esku ta darik , ez ▁bil tzaileak ▁bes ak adarik ;
PRED:	The officer who does n't oppress him , but he does not reject the wicked .
GOLD:	ignored by the harvester , despised by the binder .

ID:	445
INPUT:	▁aita ▁nahiz ▁ama , ▁anaia ▁nahiz ▁arreba ▁hiltzen ▁bazaio ▁ere , ▁ez ▁da ▁kuts atuko , ▁Jaunari ▁sagaratua ▁baitu ▁bere ▁burua .
PRED:	If any of your father or mother or sister or sister or sister or woman dies , she will be holy .
GOLD:	Even if the dead person is their own father , mother , brother , or sister , they must not defile themselves , for the hair on their head is the symbol of their separation to God .

ID:	446
INPUT:	▁Hiru ▁seme ▁izan ▁zituen ▁Saulek : ▁Jonatan , ▁Ix bi ▁eta ▁Mal ki - X ua ; ▁baita ▁bi ▁alaba ▁ere : ▁Mer ab ▁zaharren a ▁eta ▁Mik al ▁gazteena .
PRED:	From three years Saul 's son Jonathan , Jonathan , the daughter of Jonathan , who had two sons , Benjamin , and the oldest son of Ner .
GOLD:	Saul 's sons included Jonathan , Ishbosheth , and Malkishua . He also had two daughters : Merab , who was older , and Michal .

ID:	447
INPUT:	▁Ben e - benetan ▁diotsut : ▁G aztea go ▁zinen ean , ▁zeuk ▁lotzen ▁zenuen ▁gerrikoa ▁eta ▁nora ▁joan ▁erabaki tzen ; ▁zahar tzean , ▁ordea , ▁zuk ▁besoak ▁luzatu ▁eta ▁beste ▁batek ▁lo tuko ▁dizu ▁gerrikoa ▁eta ▁nahi ▁izango ▁ez ▁duzun ▁lekura ▁eramango ▁zaitu .
PRED:	I tell you the truth , the truth , you were sitting on the threshing floor . But when you went to the ground , you would n't go to the place where you want to go . But you would n't go to the place where you are going to the place where you are going .
GOLD:	“ I tell you the truth , when you were young , you were able to do as you liked ; you dressed yourself and went wherever you wanted to go . But when you are old , you will stretch out your hands , and others will dress you and take you where you do n't want to go . ”

ID:	448
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion ▁Jauna ▁Moisesi ▁Moabeko ▁lautadan , ▁Jordan ▁ondoan , ▁Jeriko ▁parean :
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	While Israel was camped beside the Jordan on the plains of Moab across from Jericho , the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	449
INPUT:	▁belarriak ▁bai , ▁eta ▁entzuten ▁ez ; ▁ez ▁dute ▁arnas arik ▁ahoan .
PRED:	The ear can hear and hear , but the breath of the breath of a breath .
GOLD:	They have ears but can not hear , and mouths but can not breathe .

ID:	450
INPUT:	▁Zain ▁eta ▁zain ▁egon ▁ondoren , ▁kez katzen ▁hasi ▁ziren , ▁goiko ▁g elako ▁ateak ▁ireki tzen ▁ez ▁zirelako . ▁Gil tza ▁hartu ▁eta ▁atea ▁ireki tzean , ▁han ▁aurkitu ▁zuten ▁beren ▁nagusia ▁lurrean ▁zer ra ldo , ▁hila .
PRED:	When they were waiting for him , they opened the gates of the city and opened the gates of Philip 's gates , they found the door of the battle and opened the door of the battle .
GOLD:	so they waited . But when the king did n't come out after a long delay , they became concerned and got a key . And when they opened the doors , they found their master dead on the floor .

ID:	451
INPUT:	▁Negev etik ▁igo ▁eta ▁Hebron era ▁iritsi ▁ziren ▁— H eb ron ▁Egiptoko ▁T an is ▁baino ▁zazpi ▁urte ▁lehenago ▁eraik ia ▁zen —. ▁Han ▁bizi ▁ziren ▁Anak en ▁ondorengo ▁Ah i man , ▁X ex ai ▁eta ▁T al mai .
PRED:	After the Negev came to Hebron and camped at the Negev . The two years of Egypt had been set up in the Tabernacle , and the descendants of Anak . The descendants of Anak , and the descendants of Anak .
GOLD:	Going north , they passed through the Negev and arrived at Hebron , where Ahiman , Sheshai , and Talmai — all descendants of Anak — lived . ( The ancient town of Hebron was founded seven years before the Egyptian city of Zoan . )

ID:	452
INPUT:	▁Luz aro egi ▁bizi ▁izan ▁naiz ▁hemen ▁bakea ▁gorroto ▁duten ekin !
PRED:	I hate those who hate me , but they hate peace .
GOLD:	I am tired of livingamong people who hate peace .

ID:	453
INPUT:	▁Erre - opari aren ▁eskaintza ▁bukatu ▁zuenean , ▁Jehuk ▁gudari ▁eta ▁buruzagiei ▁agindu ▁zien :— Aur rera ! ▁Hil ▁itzazue ! ▁Ez ▁dezala ▁inork ▁ere ▁ihes ▁egin ! Ez pataz ▁hil ▁eta ▁kanpora ▁bota ▁zituzten . ▁Gero , ▁gudari ▁eta ▁buruzagiek , ▁Baalen ▁jauretx eko ▁barne - gel ara ▁sartu ,
PRED:	When Jehu finished giving the army of Baal , he told them , “ Take care of all the men of Baal ! Take care of them and kill them ! ” So Jehu ordered them to kill them .
GOLD:	As soon as Jehu had finished sacrificing the burnt offering , he commanded his guards and officers , “ Go in and kill all of them . Do n't let a single one escape ! ” So they killed them all with their swords , and the guards and officers dragged their bodies outside . Then Jehu 's men went into the innermost fortress of the temple of Baal .

ID:	454
INPUT:	▁Egin ▁urrezko ▁lau ▁eraztun ▁eta ▁erantsi ▁lau ▁oin en ▁ertz etan ,
PRED:	Then make four gold rings and attached them to the four corners of the four corners .
GOLD:	Make four gold rings for the table and attach them at the four corners next to the four legs .

ID:	455
INPUT:	▁Zuk , ▁ordea , ▁hurbil etik ▁jarraitu ▁diezu ▁nire ▁irakaspen ▁eta ▁bizi er ari ; ▁zeure ▁egin ▁dituzu ▁nire ▁asmo , ▁sinesmen ▁eta ▁pazi entzia , ▁nire ▁maitasun ▁eta ▁eroapena ,
PRED:	But you have come from the teaching of my teaching , and you have heard my teaching and comfort me .
GOLD:	But you , Timothy , certainly know what I teach , and how I live , and what my purpose in life is . You know my faith , my patience , my love , and my endurance .

ID:	456
INPUT:	▁Azkenik , ▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zidan :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me ,
GOLD:	“ Then at last the Lord said to me ,

ID:	457
INPUT:	▁On a ▁eta ▁zuzena ▁da ▁Jauna , eta ▁bidea ▁jakin arazten ▁die ▁bekatari ei .
PRED:	The Lord is good and good , and he makes the way sinners .
GOLD:	The Lord is good and does what is right ; he shows the proper path to those who go astray .

ID:	458
INPUT:	▁Behar tsu ari ▁iseka ▁egiten ▁dionak ▁irain ▁egiten ▁dio ▁E gile ari , haren ▁zoritxarra z ▁poz ten ▁dena ▁ez ▁da ▁zigor ▁gabe ▁gera tuko .
PRED:	The poor despise those who hate their heads , but those who hate themselves will not be punished .
GOLD:	Those who mock the poor insult their Maker ; those who rejoice at the misfortune of others will be punished .

ID:	459
INPUT:	▁haien ▁aberastasun ▁guztiak ; ▁haien ▁haur ▁eta ▁emazteak ▁bahitu ▁zituzten , ▁eta ▁etxe etako ▁gauza ▁guztiak ▁ostu .
PRED:	He gave all their wives to their wives and their wives and their wives .
GOLD:	They looted all their wealth and plundered their houses . They also took all their little children and wives and led them away as captives .

ID:	460
INPUT:	▁umezurtz ▁eta ▁zapaldu aren ▁eskubideak ▁babes teko . Ez ▁beza ▁gehiago ▁beldurrik ▁eman b uz tin ez ▁eginiko ▁gizakiak !
PRED:	Give justice to the poor , orphans , and widows .
GOLD:	You will bring justice to the orphans and the oppressed , so mere people can no longer terrify them .

ID:	461
INPUT:	▁Noiz ▁arte ▁ah ob ero ak ▁lots ag abe ▁er ron kan , gaiz kile ▁guztiak ▁harro puz turik ?
PRED:	How long will you be ashamed , O Lord ? How long will all be disgraced ?
GOLD:	How long will they speak with arrogance ? How long will these evil people boast ?

ID:	462
INPUT:	▁Haren ▁muga , ▁iparraldetik , ▁Jordan en ▁hasten ▁zen , ▁Jeriko ren ▁iparraldeko ▁saihets etik ▁igo ▁eta , ▁mendi aldetik ▁mendeb alderantz ▁jarraituz , ▁Bet - A ben ▁basamortura ▁heltzen ▁zen .
PRED:	The eastern boundary extended from the north side of the Jordan River to the north of the north side of the north side of the Jordan River .
GOLD:	The northern boundary of Benjamin 's land began at the Jordan River , went north of the slope of Jericho , then west through the hill country and the wilderness of Beth-aven .

ID:	463
INPUT:	▁I dol o ei ▁des af ioa
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	Restoration for Jerusalem

ID:	464
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁esan ▁zioten ▁Sauli : ▁« Hara , ▁David ▁Ram ako ▁N ai oten ▁dago !»
PRED:	So Saul said to Saul , “ Look ! The king is coming to Ramah ! ”
GOLD:	When the report reached Saul that David was at Naioth in Ramah ,

ID:	465
INPUT:	▁« B edein katuak on fiantza ▁niregan ▁duena , e us karri ▁ni ▁nauena !
PRED:	“ To those who trust me , but I trust in me .
GOLD:	“ But blessed are those who trust in the Lordand have made the Lord their hope and confidence .

ID:	466
INPUT:	▁baina ▁Jesusek ▁eskutik ▁hartu ▁eta ▁altx arazi ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁eta ▁mutikoa ▁zutitu ▁egin ▁zen .
PRED:	But Jesus took his hand and followed him . Then the boy jumped up and stood up .
GOLD:	But Jesus took him by the hand and helped him to his feet , and he stood up .

ID:	467
INPUT:	▁« Nire ▁bihotza ▁ere ▁dardar ka ▁dago bere ▁leku tik ▁irten ▁nahian .
PRED:	“ The Lord is my rock ; my heart is my rock !
GOLD:	“ My heart pounds as I think of this.It trembles within me .

ID:	468
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zen ▁janari rik ▁lurralde ▁osoan ▁gosete ▁larri arengatik . ▁Gos eak ▁jota ▁utzi ▁zituen ▁Egipto ▁eta ▁Kanaan ▁lurraldeak .
PRED:	He did not famine in the land of Egypt , famine , and famine throughout the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the famine became so severe that all the food was used up , and people were starving throughout the lands of Egypt and Canaan .

ID:	469
INPUT:	▁Lehen danik , ▁Saul ▁gure ▁errege ▁zenean ▁ere , ▁zuk ▁zenituen ▁Israelen ▁joan - etorri ak ▁gidatzen . ▁Jaunak ▁esana ▁dizu : ▁“ Zuk ▁gidatuko ▁duzu ▁ene ▁herri ▁Israel ▁eta ▁zu ▁izanen ▁zara ▁israeldarren ▁agintari ”».
PRED:	When you heard me , you are the king of Israel , you led me into battle , and the Lord has commanded you , ‘ The Lord has commanded you , and you will lead my people Israel . ' ”
GOLD:	In the past , when Saul was our king , you were the one who really led the forces of Israel . And the Lord told you , ‘ You will be the shepherd of my people Israel . You will be Israel 's leader . ' ”

ID:	470
INPUT:	▁Gizonak ▁erakutsi ▁egin ▁zien ▁nondik ▁sartzen ▁zen ▁hirira . ▁Orduan , ▁hiriko ▁guztiak ▁hil ▁zituzten ▁ezpataz , ▁gizon ▁hura ▁eta ▁beraren ▁senitarteko ak ▁izan ▁ezik .
PRED:	Then the man showed him everything he had done in the city , and he killed everyone who had killed him .
GOLD:	So he showed them a way in , and they killed everyone in the town except that man and his family .

ID:	471
INPUT:	▁A hots ▁bat ▁oihuka ▁ari ▁da ▁basamortuan : ▁Pres tatu ▁bidea ▁Jaunari , ▁zuzendu ▁bide xkak ▁hari .
PRED:	A voice shouting , “ The voice shouting , ‘ Prepare for the wilderness ! '
GOLD:	He is a voice shouting in the wilderness , ‘ Prepare the way for the Lord 's coming ! Clear the road for him ! ' ”

ID:	472
INPUT:	▁Jaunarentzat ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoarentzat ▁sagaraturiko ▁herri ▁zarete : ▁berak ▁hautatu ▁zaituzte ▁munduko ▁herri ▁guztien ▁artean ▁bere ▁herri , ▁bere ▁jabe go ▁ber ezi , ▁izateko .
PRED:	For the Lord has chosen you to be a holy nation , for he has chosen you to be his own people .
GOLD:	For you are a holy people , who belong to the Lord your God . Of all the people on earth , the Lord your God has chosen you to be his own special treasure .

ID:	473
INPUT:	▁Haza elek ▁galdetu ▁zion :— Zergatik ▁ari ▁zara ▁negarrez , ▁ene ▁jauna ? El ise ok ▁erantzun :— Bad aki dalako ▁nolako ▁kal tea ▁eginen ▁diez un ▁israeldarrei : ▁su ▁emango ▁diezu ▁haien ▁gotorleku ei , ▁ezpataz ▁hilko ▁dituzu ▁haien ▁gazteak , ▁harri en ▁kontra ▁botako ▁haien ▁haur txoak , ▁sabela ▁ireki ko ▁diezu ▁hango ▁emakume ▁haurdun ei .
PRED:	Then Hazael asked him , “ Why are you crying for me ? ” Elisha asked . “ What will I tell you to ask the people of Israel , ‘ What will you say to the people of Israel ? '
GOLD:	“ What 's the matter , my lord ? ” Hazael asked him.Elisha replied , “ I know the terrible things you will do to the people of Israel . You will burn their fortified cities , kill their young men with the sword , dash their little children to the ground , and rip open their pregnant women ! ”

ID:	474
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Joabek , ▁erregeagana ▁joan ▁eta ▁halaxe ▁jakinarazi ▁zion . ▁Orduan , ▁erregeak ▁dei ▁egin ▁zion ▁Absalomi ; ▁hau ▁erregeagana ▁etorri ▁eta ▁lurreraino ▁ahuspeztu ▁zitzaion . ▁Erregeak ▁besarkatu ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Absalom .
PRED:	Then Joab went to the king and told Absalom what had happened to Absalom . Then Absalom went to the ground and bowed down to the ground .
GOLD:	So Joab told the king what Absalom had said . Then at last David summoned Absalom , who came and bowed low before the king , and the king kissed him .

ID:	475
INPUT:	▁Etx eko ▁arduradunak ▁honela ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Z audete ▁lasai ! ▁Ez ▁kezkatu ! ▁Zeuen ▁Jainkoak , ▁zeuen ▁aitaren ▁Jainkoak , ▁ezarriko ▁zizuen ▁altxor ▁hori ▁gari - zak u etan , ▁nik ▁jas oa ▁baitut ▁zuen ▁dirua ». S im e on ▁aske ▁utzi ▁eta
PRED:	Then the manager said to them , “ Be quiet ! Do n't be able to tell you what God said to you , ‘ Do n't let me be able to take away from your father 's home . '
GOLD:	“ Relax . Do n't be afraid , ” the household manager told them . “ Your God , the God of your father , must have put this treasure into your sacks . I know I received your payment. ” Then he released Simeon and brought him out to them .

ID:	476
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁galdetu ▁zidan : ▁« Nor ▁zara ?» ▁Nik ▁erantzun : ▁« Am alek tarra ▁nauzu ».
PRED:	He asked me , “ Who are you ? ” He replied , “ I am the father of Joseph . ”
GOLD:	“ He responded , ‘ Who are you ? ' “ ‘ I am an Amalekite , ' I told him .

ID:	477
INPUT:	▁Morroiak ▁onartu ▁zuen ▁propos amena , ▁eta ▁hamar ▁eguneko ▁proba ▁egin ▁zuen ▁haiekin .
PRED:	So the servant agreed to test him for ten days .
GOLD:	The attendant agreed to Daniel 's suggestion and tested them for ten days .

ID:	478
INPUT:	▁Goraintziak ▁Jaunarengan ▁oso ▁maite ▁dudan ▁An pl i at ori .
PRED:	Give my greetings to the Lord , who loved me from the Lord .
GOLD:	Greet Ampliatus , my dear friend in the Lord .

ID:	479
INPUT:	▁Paulo ▁zain pean ▁eduki tzeko ▁agindu ▁zion ▁ehuntari ari , ▁baina ▁lasai ▁sam ar ▁utziz , ▁berari ▁laguntzera ▁jo atea ▁adiskide ei ▁debekatu ▁gabe .
PRED:	Paul was waiting for the Roman officer , but he ordered him to care for him , but he refused to help him .
GOLD:	He ordered an officer to keep Paul in custody but to give him some freedom and allow his friends to visit him and take care of his needs .

ID:	480
INPUT:	▁sal tzeko ▁niri ▁bere ▁sor oaren ▁ondoan ▁dagoen ▁Mak p elako ▁har pea . ▁Eman ▁diez adala ▁balio ▁duen ▁diru aren ▁truke , ▁zuen ▁lurraldean ▁hilobi aren ▁jabetza ▁u kan ▁dezadan .
PRED:	“ Give me an allotment of land for the foreigners living in the land of the field , for I am giving you as a ransom for your ancestors . ”
GOLD:	to let me buy his cave at Machpelah , down at the end of his field . I will pay the full price in the presence of witnesses , so I will have a permanent burial place for my family . ”

ID:	481
INPUT:	▁Senakerib ▁berriro ▁mehatx uka
PRED:	Hezekiah 's Sickness and Recovery
GOLD:	Hezekiah Seeks the Lord 's Help

ID:	482
INPUT:	▁Pedrok ▁denak ▁irten arazi ▁zituen ▁eta , ▁belaun ik aturik , ▁otoitz ▁egin ▁zuen ; ▁gero , ▁gorp ura ▁bihur turik , ▁esan ▁zuen : ▁« T ab ita , ▁jaiki !» Hark ▁begiak ▁ireki ▁zituen ▁eta , ▁Pedro ▁ikustean , ▁eseri ▁egin ▁zen .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Peter jumped up and prayed to the dead , and he prayed to the dead . Then he got up and prayed , “ Come and see him ! ” So he got up and opened the eyes and saw Peter 's eyes .
GOLD:	But Peter asked them all to leave the room ; then he knelt and prayed . Turning to the body he said , “ Get up , Tabitha. ” And she opened her eyes ! When she saw Peter , she sat up !

ID:	483
INPUT:	▁Jesusen ▁hitz ok ▁entzutean , ▁batzuek ▁zioten : ▁« Benetan ▁hauxe ▁da ▁itxaron ▁dugun ▁profeta ».
PRED:	Some of the disciples heard that Jesus was saying , “ We have the truth . ”
GOLD:	When the crowds heard him say this , some of them declared , “ Surely this man is the Prophet we 've been expecting . ”

ID:	484
INPUT:	▁Apaizak ▁aldarean ▁aurkeztuko ▁du ▁eta , ▁burua ▁moztu ▁eta ▁odola ▁aldarearen ▁albo ▁batean ▁isuri ▁ondoren , ▁aldarean ▁erreko .
PRED:	Then the priest will lay the blood on the altar and burn it on the altar . Then he will burn it on the altar .
GOLD:	The priest will take the bird to the altar , wring off its head , and burn it on the altar . But first he must drain its blood against the side of the altar .

ID:	485
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁erantzun ▁hau ▁jasoko ▁dute : ▁“ Jaunaren , ▁beren ▁Jainkoaren , ▁ituna ▁bazter ▁utzi ▁eta ▁jainko ▁arrotzak ▁gurtu ▁eta ▁zerbitzatu ▁dituzte lako ”».
PRED:	They replied , ‘ This is what the Lord says : They will worship the gods of the Lord their God and worship other gods . ' ”
GOLD:	And the answer will be , ‘ Because they violated their covenant with the Lord their God by worshiping other gods . ' ”

ID:	486
INPUT:	▁Sartu ▁zen ▁Joab ▁erregearen ▁etxera ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion :— L ots arazi ▁egin ▁dituzu ▁gaur , ▁zuri ▁eta ▁zure ▁seme - alabei , ▁zure ▁emazte ▁eta ▁ohaide ei ▁bizia ▁salbatu ▁dizueten ▁gudari ▁guztiak .
PRED:	So Joab went into the palace and said to Joab , “ Take your wives and daughters , and you have saved your wives and daughters . ”
GOLD:	You seem to love those who hate you and hate those who love you . You have made it clear today that your commanders and troops mean nothing to you . It seems that if Absalom had lived and all of us had died , you would be pleased .

ID:	487
INPUT:	▁Zu ei ▁dago kizuen ez , ▁egin ▁bira ▁eta ▁jo ▁basamortu rantz , ▁Itsaso ▁Gorri rantz .
PRED:	Yes , I am sending out to you out of the Red Sea , and they turned toward the Red Sea .
GOLD:	As for you , turn around now and go on back through the wilderness toward the Red Sea . '

ID:	488
INPUT:	▁O to iz l ekura ▁gin do azen ▁batean , ▁neskatxa ▁bat ▁atera ▁zitzai gun ▁bidera : ▁gero a ▁igar tzeko ▁ahalmena ▁ematen ▁zion ▁espiritu ▁batek ▁hartua ▁zen , ▁eta ▁bere ▁igar pen en ▁bidez ▁irabazi ▁ederra ▁ematen ▁zien ▁nagusi ei .
PRED:	One day the girl came to meet us , and a girl who had given us a gift from the Spirit of God . He was given to those who had given him , and he was given to those who consult the spirits of the Most High .
GOLD:	One day as we were going down to the place of prayer , we met a slave girl who had a spirit that enabled her to tell the future . She earned a lot of money for her masters by telling fortunes .

ID:	489
INPUT:	▁« Hartu ▁beste ▁erro ilu ▁bat ▁eta ▁idatzi ▁bertan ▁Judako ▁errege ▁Joiaki mek ▁erretako an ▁zetorren ▁mezu ▁bera .
PRED:	“ Take a scroll and write down all the kingdoms of Judah on the ground .
GOLD:	“ Get another scroll , and write everything again just as you did on the scroll King Jehoiakim burned .

ID:	490
INPUT:	▁« Bizi ▁bedi ▁Ruben , ▁ez ▁bedi ▁hil , gu tx i ▁izan ▁arren ▁beraren ▁gizonak ».
PRED:	“ Let 's die in the land of Reuben , but we would not die . ”
GOLD:	Moses said this about the tribe of Reuben : “ Let the tribe of Reuben live and not die out , though they are few in number . ”

ID:	491
INPUT:	▁Itzuli ▁zen ▁Balaam ▁Balak engana ▁eta ▁erre - oparien ▁ondoan ▁aurkitu ▁zuen ▁moabdar ▁buruzagi ▁guztiekin .
PRED:	So Balaam returned to Balaam and found a burnt offering to Balak and all the leaders of Moab .
GOLD:	So Balaam returned and found the king standing beside his burnt offerings with all the officials of Moab .

ID:	492
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁Hebron , ▁Jef un eren ▁seme ▁Kaleb ▁ken iz tar raren ▁ondorengo ena ▁da ▁gaurdaino , ▁hau ▁Jaun arekiko , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoarekiko , ▁leial ▁izan ▁zelako .
PRED:	So Caleb son of Jephunneh and his son Caleb was the son of Jephunneh as the Lord had promised to this day .
GOLD:	Hebron still belongs to the descendants of Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite because he wholeheartedly followed the Lord , the God of Israel .

ID:	493
INPUT:	▁Josuek ▁bost ▁mila ▁inguru ▁gudari ▁hartu ▁eta ▁zelatan ▁ipini ▁zituen ▁Betel ▁eta ▁Ai ▁artean , ▁hiriaren ▁mendebaldera .
PRED:	So Joshua took five of the army and set out to the town of Bethel and the town of Bethel .
GOLD:	That night Joshua sent about 5,000 men to lie in ambush between Bethel and Ai , on the west side of the town .

ID:	494
INPUT:	▁« P er tsia , ▁L u d ▁eta ▁P u t ▁herrialde etako ▁ger l ariak ▁zen e uz kan ▁zeure ▁ar ma dan , ▁babeski ▁eta ▁buru - os kol ak ▁zintzilik atuz ▁apain tzen ▁zintuzten .
PRED:	“ At the end of the land of Hamath , and there was a large crown for your beauty .
GOLD:	“ Men from distant Persia , Lydia , and Libya served in your great army . They hung their shields and helmets on your walls , giving you great honor .

ID:	495
INPUT:	▁Mu ti koak ▁jarriko ▁dizkie ▁nagusi , beren ▁nahi er ara ▁gobern a ▁ditzaten .
PRED:	Let the nations conquer their masters with their princes , and they will rule over them .
GOLD:	I will make boys their leaders , and toddlers their rulers .

ID:	496
INPUT:	▁Jauna ▁Ezekiasen ▁alde ▁egon ▁zenez , ▁onik ▁atera ▁zen ▁hau ▁bere ▁egintza ▁guztietan . ▁Asiriako ▁erregearen ▁kontra ▁jaiki ▁eta ▁haren ▁menpeko ▁izate ari ▁utzi ▁zion .
PRED:	The Lord was afraid of what was happening to Hezekiah , so he left the king of Assyria and left him .
GOLD:	So the Lord was with him , and Hezekiah was successful in everything he did . He revolted against the king of Assyria and refused to pay him tribute .

ID:	497
INPUT:	▁Inork , ▁tental di rik ▁duenean , ▁ez ▁beza ▁esan ▁Jainkoak ▁ten tatzen ▁duenik . ▁Jainkoak ▁ez ▁du ▁gaizki rako ▁ten taz iorik ▁eta ▁ez ▁du ▁inor ▁gaizki rako ▁ten tatzen ▁ere .
PRED:	No one can be able to help him , for God has given them what God has done , and he has done wrong .
GOLD:	And remember , when you are being tempted , do not say , “ God is tempting me. ” God is never tempted to do wrong , and he never tempts anyone else .

ID:	498
INPUT:	▁Haiek ▁erantzun ▁zioten :— Ju de ako ▁Belen en , ▁honela ▁idatzi ▁baitzuen ▁profetak :
PRED:	They said to him , “ The prophets of Bethlehem in Bethlehem in Bethlehem in Bethlehem ,
GOLD:	“ In Bethlehem in Judea , ” they said , “ for this is what the prophet wrote :

ID:	499
INPUT:	▁Eguzkia ▁sartzean , ▁garbi ▁geldituko ▁da ▁eta ▁jan ▁ahal ▁izango ▁ditu ▁opari ▁sakratuak , ▁beraren tzako ▁janari ▁baitira .
PRED:	When the sun returns to the sun , the sun will be eaten , and they will eat their sacred offerings .
GOLD:	When the sun goes down , he will be ceremonially clean again and may eat from the sacred offerings , for this is his food .

ID:	500
INPUT:	▁Al dik a ▁l oz orro an , ▁al dik a ▁erdi ▁lo , al dik a ▁besoak ▁uztar tu ▁eta ▁atseden ean :
PRED:	Lazy people have little sleep , but the little little little little little sleep .
GOLD:	A little extra sleep , a little more slumber , a little folding of the hands to rest —

ID:	501
INPUT:	▁egun do ko ▁altxor rak ▁eskuratu eta ▁harrapakin ez ▁beteko ▁dugu ▁etxea ;
PRED:	We will give you great treasures of silver , and we will take care of the plunder .
GOLD:	Think of the great things we 'll get ! We 'll fill our houses with all the stuff we take .

ID:	502
INPUT:	▁Jaun ▁hori , ▁berriz , ▁Espiritua ▁da , ▁eta ▁Jaunaren ▁Espiritua ▁non , ▁aska tasuna ▁han .
PRED:	But this is what the Lord says : “ The Spirit of the Lord has saved us . ”
GOLD:	For the Lord is the Spirit , and wherever the Spirit of the Lord is , there is freedom .

ID:	503
INPUT:	▁Hil ▁bitez ▁ezpataz , ▁bihur ▁az eri en ▁janari !
PRED:	Give them food for food , and feed them with food .
GOLD:	But the king will rejoice in God.All who swear to tell the truth will praise him , while liars will be silenced .

ID:	504
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁morroi ▁honek ▁haietan ▁du ▁argia , benetan ▁on ura garri ▁haiek ▁bete tzea .
PRED:	I tell you the truth , the truth of those who do good .
GOLD:	How can I know all the sins lurking in my heart ? Cleanse me from these hidden faults .

ID:	505
INPUT:	▁Sedek iasen ▁erregealdiko ▁hamargarren ▁urtean , ▁Nabukodonos orren ▁erregealdiko ▁hemezortzi garren ean , ▁Jaunak ▁bere ▁mezua ▁adierazi ▁zion ▁Jeremiasi .
PRED:	This message came to Jeremiah in the eighteenth year of King Zedekiah 's reign in the eighteenth year of King Zedekiah 's reign .
GOLD:	The following message came to Jeremiah from the Lord in the tenth year of the reign of Zedekiah , king of Judah . This was also the eighteenth year of the reign of King Nebuchadnezzar .

ID:	506
INPUT:	▁ez ▁dira ▁nek atzen , ez ▁estropezu ▁egiten ; ez ▁ditu ▁lo ak , ez ▁lo gal eak ▁geldi arazten ; ez ▁zaie ▁gerrikoa ▁as katzen , ez ▁eta ▁oinetako ▁lok arria ▁e te ten .
PRED:	They do n't know how much to be asleep , but they ca n't get drunk with the pomegranates and cover it .
GOLD:	They will not get tired or stumble.They will not stop for rest or sleep.Not a belt will be loose , not a sandal strap broken .

ID:	507
INPUT:	▁I bai ko ▁ura ▁jo ▁zuen etik ▁zazpi ▁egunera , ▁Jaunak
PRED:	Three days later the Lord struck down seven days after seven days .
GOLD:	Seven days passed from the time the Lord struck the Nile .

ID:	508
INPUT:	▁J az er gatik ▁egin ▁nuen ▁bain on egar ▁gehiago ▁dagit ▁zure gatik , S ib mako ▁mahasti ▁horren gatik . Zure ▁a ih enak I tsaso ▁Gorri raino ▁luzatzen ▁ziren , J az er eraino ▁iristen : zure ▁gain ▁ere ol dar tu ▁da ▁suntsitz ailea , uz ta ▁eta ▁mahats - bilketa ▁hondatu z .
PRED:	I called for you , “ I have already done for you , for you have been called the vineyards of the Red Sea , for you have been killed by the Red Sea .
GOLD:	“ You people of Sibmah , rich in vineyards , I will weep for you even more than I did for Jazer.Your spreading vines once reached as far as the Dead Sea , but the destroyer has stripped you bare ! He has harvested your grapes and summer fruits .

ID:	509
INPUT:	▁Israeldarren ▁elkarte ▁osoa ▁Elim dik ▁irten ▁eta ▁Elim ▁eta ▁Sinai ▁artean ▁dagoen ▁Sin ▁basamortura ▁heldu ▁zen . ▁Bigarren ▁hilaren ▁hamabos ta ▁zen ▁Egiptotik ▁irten ez ▁gero .
PRED:	The whole community of Israel left Egypt and went out to the wilderness of Sinai at the wilderness of Sinai . The first month of Moses left Egypt .
GOLD:	Then the whole community of Israel set out from Elim and journeyed into the wilderness of Sin , between Elim and Mount Sinai . They arrived there on the fifteenth day of the second month , one month after leaving the land of Egypt .

ID:	510
INPUT:	▁J akizue ▁Jaunak ▁harrigarri ro ▁jokatzen ▁du el abere ▁fededun aren ▁alde , entzun ▁egiten ▁did ala ▁deitzen ▁diodan ean .
PRED:	You know what the Lord has done for doing , for he has done for all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Do n't sin by letting anger control you.Think about it overnight and remain silent.Interlude

ID:	511
INPUT:	▁« Adi tu ▁zituen ▁Jaunak ▁zuen ▁marm ari oak ▁eta , ▁sumin durik , ▁honela ▁egin ▁zuen ▁zin :
PRED:	“ The Lord was very angry , and he made a solemn oath .
GOLD:	“ When the Lord heard your complaining , he became very angry . So he solemnly swore ,

ID:	512
INPUT:	▁J ario dunak ▁zaldiz ▁ibil tzean ▁erabili tako ▁zela ▁kutsatua ▁geldituko ▁da .
PRED:	When the man was riding on the horse , he will be ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	Any saddle blanket on which the man rides will be ceremonially unclean .

ID:	513
INPUT:	▁gure ▁salbatzaile ▁den ▁Jainko ▁bakar rari , ▁Jesu ▁Kristo ▁gure ▁Jaunaren ▁bitartez , ▁aintza , ▁handitasuna , ▁ahalmena ▁eta ▁agintea ▁betidanik , ▁orain ▁eta ▁beti ! ▁Amen .
PRED:	This is the power of our God , the Savior of our Lord Jesus Christ , through the power of our Lord Jesus Christ . Amen .
GOLD:	All glory to him who alone is God , our Savior through Jesus Christ our Lord . All glory , majesty , power , and authority are his before all time , and in the present , and beyond all time ! Amen .

ID:	514
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁balio tsu tzat ▁nituen ▁gauza ▁guztiok , ▁balio gabe tzat ▁jo ▁nituen ▁Kristoren gatik .
PRED:	But I have given all these things for me , for I have nothing for Christ .
GOLD:	I once thought these things were valuable , but now I consider them worthless because of what Christ has done .

ID:	515
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁bakar ▁batzuk bizirik ▁geldituko ▁dira ▁Jerusalemen , onik ▁aterako ▁Sion ▁mendian . Jaun ▁ahalguztidun aren mai te min ▁su tsuak ▁egingo ▁du ▁hori !
PRED:	For a remnant of Jerusalem will be a remnant of Jerusalem , a remnant of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , will be a fire of fire .
GOLD:	For a remnant of my people will spread out from Jerusalem , a group of survivors from Mount Zion.The passionate commitment of the Lord of Heaven 's Armieswill make this happen !

ID:	516
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁jarraitu ▁zuen :— L as ai ▁z oko ratzen ▁duzue ▁Jainkoaren ▁agindua ▁zeuen ▁us adi oak ▁ezar tzeko !
PRED:	Then Jesus said , “ You must follow the commands of the Lord your God . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ You skillfully sidestep God 's law in order to hold on to your own tradition .

ID:	517
INPUT:	▁« Zuk ▁eta ▁zure ▁semeek , ▁elkarketa - etxolan ▁sartu ▁behar ▁duzuen ean , ▁ez ▁duzue ▁ardorik , ▁ez ▁al ko ho l - ed ari rik ▁edango , ▁hil ▁nahi ▁ez ▁baduzue .
PRED:	“ If you enter the Tabernacle , you must not enter the Tabernacle , you must not drink wine or drink wine or drink wine or drink wine or drink wine .
GOLD:	“ You and your descendants must never drink wine or any other alcoholic drink before going into the Tabernacle . If you do , you will die . This is a permanent law for you , and it must be observed from generation to generation .

ID:	518
INPUT:	▁Ne gar - kanta
PRED:	The Lord 's Chosen Servant
GOLD:	A Call to Repentance

ID:	519
INPUT:	▁beste ▁Elam ▁bateko ak ▁ 1 . 254 ;
PRED:	The rest of the events of Ahaz
GOLD:	The citizens of West Elam1,254

ID:	520
INPUT:	▁Samarian ▁bizitzen ▁hastean , ▁arrotz ▁haiek ▁ez ▁zuten ▁Jauna ▁gurtzen ; ▁orduan , ▁Jaunak ▁leh oiak ▁bidali ▁zizkien , ▁jendea ▁hiltzeko .
PRED:	They were afraid to live in Samaria , but the Lord sent a lion to kill them .
GOLD:	But since these foreign settlers did not worship the Lord when they first arrived , the Lord sent lions among them , which killed some of them .

ID:	521
INPUT:	▁On ▁egiozu ▁zeure ▁zerbitzari ▁honi , Jauna , ▁zeure ▁promes aren ▁arabera !
PRED:	May your servant be your servant , Lord , just as you promised .
GOLD:	You have done many good things for me , Lord , just as you promised .

ID:	522
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , zen bat ▁eta ▁jakinduria ▁ugariago , ats ek abea ▁handiago , zen bat ▁eta ▁ezagu era ▁sakona go , nahi gabea ▁larri ago .
PRED:	For wisdom is better than knowledge , and the rich are more than knowledge .
GOLD:	The greater my wisdom , the greater my grief.To increase knowledge only increases sorrow .

ID:	523
INPUT:	▁Hark , ▁orduan , ▁eskua ▁jaso ▁eta ▁zin ▁egin ▁zuen bas amortuan ▁hilko ▁zituela ,
PRED:	Then he pulled out his hand and took an oath in the desert ,
GOLD:	Therefore , he solemnly sworethat he would kill them in the wilderness ,

ID:	524
INPUT:	▁Ben - H in om ▁deritzan ▁haranean ▁zegoen ▁T of eteko ▁erre tegia ▁ere ▁profanatu ▁zuen ; ▁horrela , ▁ezin ▁izango ▁zion ▁inork ▁ere ▁su ari ▁eman ▁bere ▁seme ▁nahiz ▁alab arik , ▁M ol ok ▁sasijainko ari ▁eskaintzeko .
PRED:	One day at the valley of Ben-Hinnom , at the valley of Ben-Hinnom , and there will no longer be defiled by fire . Not one of them will be defiled by worshiping idols or burned incense to idols .
GOLD:	Then the king defiled the altar of Topheth in the valley of Ben-Hinnom , so no one could ever again use it to sacrifice a son or daughter in the fire as an offering to Molech .

ID:	525
INPUT:	▁Bet - A ben eraino ▁zabaldu ▁zen ▁g a taz ka . ▁Egun ▁hartan ▁Israeli ▁eman ▁zion ▁Jaunak ▁garaipena .
PRED:	When the people of Benjamin heard that the Lord had victory over Israel , the Lord defeated Israel .
GOLD:	So the Lord saved Israel that day , and the battle continued to rage even beyond Beth-aven .

ID:	526
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁begira tzean , ▁erregea ▁ikusi ▁zuen ▁ohol tza ▁gainean ▁zutik , ▁ohi ▁zen ▁bezala . ▁B uruzagi ak ▁eta ▁turuta - jo tzaileak ▁erregearen ▁ondoan ▁zeuden ; ▁herriko ▁jendea , ▁berriz , ▁pozez ▁beterik ▁zebilen , ▁turu ten ▁soin ura . ▁Atal iak , ▁bere ▁soinekoak ▁ur ra tuz , ▁garrasi ▁egin ▁zuen :— T ra iz ioa ! ▁T ra iz ioa !
PRED:	As soon as the king saw the king sitting on the south side of the Tabernacle , he stood in front of the royal robes and shouted , “ Be quiet ! The people of the king of the royal palace ! ” And the king said , “ The king was filled with joy ! ”
GOLD:	When she arrived , she saw the newly crowned king standing in his place of authority by the pillar , as was the custom at times of coronation . The commanders and trumpeters were surrounding him , and people from all over the land were rejoicing and blowing trumpets . When Athaliah saw all this , she tore her clothes in despair and shouted , “ Treason ! Treason ! ”

ID:	527
INPUT:	▁Hirugarren ▁ikuskaria : ▁liho z ▁jantzi tako ▁gizona
PRED:	A Vision of Man
GOLD:	Daniel 's Vision of a Messenger

ID:	528
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁honela ▁bedeinkatu ▁zuen ▁Jose :« Nire ▁guraso ▁Abrahamek ▁eta ▁Isaakek zerbitz atu ▁duten ▁Jainkoak , j aio ▁nintzen etik ▁gaurdaino artz ain ▁gisa ▁gidatu ▁nauen ▁Jainkoak ,
PRED:	Then Isaac blessed him and said , “ I have served as my ancestors as my ancestors , who served me as my God . ”
GOLD:	Then he blessed Joseph and said , “ May the God before whom my grandfather Abrahamand my father , Isaac , walked — the God who has been my shepherdall my life , to this very day ,

ID:	529
INPUT:	▁Gizonaren ▁Semearen ▁kontra ▁zerbait ▁esaten ▁duenari ▁barkatuko ▁dio ▁Jainkoak ; ▁baina ▁Espiritu ▁Santuaren ▁kontra ▁bira o ▁egiten ▁duenari , ▁ez ▁dio ▁barkatuko .
PRED:	Anyone who speaks against the Son of Man will be forgiven , but anyone who speaks against the Holy Spirit will be forgiven .
GOLD:	Anyone who speaks against the Son of Man can be forgiven , but anyone who blasphemes the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven .

ID:	530
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁Asaren ▁erregealdiko ▁hogeita ▁ham aik ag arren ▁urtea ▁zen ▁Om ri ▁Israelgo ▁errege ▁izaten ▁hasi ▁zenean . ▁Hamabi ▁urtez ▁izan ▁zen ▁errege ▁eta ▁hori etatik ▁sei ▁Tir tzan .
PRED:	In the eleventh year of King Asa 's reign , Omri began to rule over Israel for six years . He reigned in Tirzah for six years .
GOLD:	Omri began to rule over Israel in the thirty-first year of King Asa 's reign in Judah . He reigned twelve years in all , six of them in Tirzah .

ID:	531
INPUT:	▁Kan p oko ▁atari ▁eta ▁sarrer ak
PRED:	The courtyard of the Priests
GOLD:	The East Gateway

ID:	532
INPUT:	▁« Beraz , ▁urtean ▁hiru ▁aldiz ▁aurkeztuko ▁dira ▁gizaseme ▁guztiak ▁Jainko ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrera .
PRED:	“ Therefore , every year every male man must appear before the Lord .
GOLD:	At these three times each year , every man in Israel must appear before the Sovereign , the Lord .

ID:	533
INPUT:	▁Egun ez ▁deika ▁ari ▁natzaizu , ▁ene ▁Jainko , ▁eta ▁zuk ▁erantzun ik ▁ez ; baita ▁gauez ▁ere , ▁eta ▁bak erik ▁ez ▁dut .
PRED:	I am saying to you , ‘ I am the Sovereign Lord , and you do n't care for peace . '
GOLD:	Yet you are holy , enthroned on the praises of Israel .

ID:	534
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁du ▁inolako ▁ordain ik ▁onartuko , ezta ▁zeure ▁eskaintza ▁bider katu ta ▁ere .
PRED:	You must not sacrifice any of your grain offering for your burnt offering .
GOLD:	He will accept no compensation , nor be satisfied with a payoff of any size .

ID:	535
INPUT:	▁ F araoiak , ▁zure ▁izenean ▁mintza tzera ▁etorri ▁natzai on etik , ▁are ▁gaiz k iago ▁erabili ▁du ▁zure ▁herria ▁eta ▁zuk ▁ez ▁duzu ▁deus ▁ere ▁egin ▁libra tzeko .
PRED:	When Pharaoh 's people came to speak in the name of the Lord 's name , you will not be able to rescue you .
GOLD:	Ever since I came to Pharaoh as your spokesman , he has been even more brutal to your people . And you have done nothing to rescue them ! ”

ID:	536
INPUT:	▁Arrats ean , ▁deabru dun ▁asko ▁eraman ▁zizkioten ▁Jesusi . ▁Honek ▁deabruak ▁bere ▁hitzez ▁bota ▁eta ▁gaixo ▁guztiak ▁sendatu ▁zituen .
PRED:	At that time , the devil brought him out of demons , and he healed all who had healed him .
GOLD:	That evening many demon-possessed people were brought to Jesus . He cast out the evil spirits with a simple command , and he healed all the sick .

ID:	537
INPUT:	▁Are ▁gehiago , ▁Rebek ak ▁bik iak ▁izan ▁zituen ▁Isaak ▁gure ▁arbaso agandik .
PRED:	Then Rebekah became pregnant again and gave birth to the ancestor of our ancestor Abraham .
GOLD:	This son was our ancestor Isaac . When he married Rebekah , she gave birth to twins .

ID:	538
INPUT:	▁Bes o ▁eta ▁kop ek ▁gorputz ▁bat ▁bera ▁egiten ▁zuten ▁argimutil arekin . ▁Guz tia ▁urre ▁garbiz ▁lan dua ▁zen .
PRED:	There was an almond bud beneath the center stem , and each of the lampstand was made of pure gold .
GOLD:	The almond buds and branches were all of one piece with the center stem , and they were hammered from pure gold .

ID:	539
INPUT:	▁Zuek ▁guztiok ▁ikusi ▁ahal ▁izan ▁baduzue , zer gatik ▁hainbeste ▁jardun ▁hutsal ?
PRED:	You have seen all these things , and you have seen all these things .
GOLD:	But you have seen all this , yet you say all these useless things to me .

ID:	540
INPUT:	▁Zuen gan ▁espiri tuzko ▁ondasunak ▁erein ▁baditu gu , ▁gehi egi ▁ote ▁da ▁zuengandik ▁lurreko ▁ondasunak ▁jaso tzea ?
PRED:	But if you have nothing to you , how can we use your wealth ?
GOLD:	Since we have planted spiritual seed among you , are n't we entitled to a harvest of physical food and drink ?

ID:	541
INPUT:	▁Handik ▁laster , ▁babiloni ar ▁batzuk ▁juduak ▁sala tzera ▁joan ▁ziren ▁Nabukodonosor ▁erregeagana .
PRED:	Some time later King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon went to meet King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon .
GOLD:	But some of the astrologers went to the king and informed on the Jews .

ID:	542
INPUT:	▁Nik , ▁Paulok ▁ , ▁Jainkoak ▁hala ▁nahirik ▁eta ▁berak ▁dei turik , ▁Jesu ▁Kristoren ▁apostolu ▁naizen ▁honek , ▁eta ▁S os ten es ▁anaiak
PRED:	This letter is from Paul , an apostle of Christ Jesus , and from the apostle of Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	This letter is from Paul , chosen by the will of God to be an apostle of Christ Jesus , and from our brother Sosthenes .

ID:	543
INPUT:	▁As paldi ko ▁garai ez ▁gogo ratzen ▁naiz , antz inako ▁urte ez ▁oroi tzen ;
PRED:	For I long ago , I will remember the ancient years long ago .
GOLD:	when my nights were filled with joyful songs.I search my soul and ponder the difference now .

ID:	544
INPUT:	▁« Eta ▁orain , ▁gure ▁Jainko , ▁zer ▁esan ▁hori ▁guztia ▁ikus ita ? ▁B azter ▁utzi ▁ditugu ▁zure ▁aginduak ,
PRED:	“ And now , what are our God ? We have done all this to you , obeying your commands and commands .
GOLD:	“ And now , O our God , what can we say after all of this ? For once again we have abandoned your commands !

ID:	545
INPUT:	▁Zuek ▁ni ▁hil ▁nahian ▁zabiltzate , ▁Jainkoaren gandik ▁ikasi ▁nuen ▁egia ▁esan ▁dizu ed alako ; ▁Abrahamek ▁ez ▁zuen ▁horrelakorik ▁egin .
PRED:	You are trying to kill me , but I learned that Abraham was trying to do it .
GOLD:	Instead , you are trying to kill me because I told you the truth , which I heard from God . Abraham never did such a thing .

ID:	546
INPUT:	▁An anias ▁eta ▁S af ira
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Ananias and Sapphira

ID:	547
INPUT:	▁Ikusi ▁orduko ▁ezagutu ▁zituen ▁Josek ▁bere ▁senideak . ▁Baina ▁ez ▁zien ▁bere ▁burua ▁ezagu tarazi ; ▁gainera , ▁zak ar ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaien :— Non dik ▁zatoz te ? Haiek ▁erantzun :— K ana an ▁lurraldetik , ▁garia ▁eros tera .
PRED:	When Joseph saw his brothers , he saw his brothers and sisters , he said to them , “ Where are you going to eat ? ” “ Where are you going to buy food ? ” “ Where are you going to buy food ? ”
GOLD:	Joseph recognized his brothers instantly , but he pretended to be a stranger and spoke harshly to them . “ Where are you from ? ” he demanded. “ From the land of Canaan , ” they replied . “ We have come to buy food . ”

ID:	548
INPUT:	▁Urias ▁apaizak , ▁beraz , ▁Akaz ▁erregeak ▁Damasko tik ▁bidali ▁zion ▁eredu aren ▁arabera ▁egin ▁zuen ▁aldarea , ▁Akaz ▁erregea ▁itzuli ▁baino ▁lehen .
PRED:	So Uriah the priest sent Uriah the priest from Damascus to see King Ahaz of Damascus .
GOLD:	Uriah followed the king 's instructions and built an altar just like it , and it was ready before the king returned from Damascus .

ID:	549
INPUT:	▁Ham asei ▁urte ▁zituen ▁errege ▁izaten ▁hastean , ▁eta ▁berrogeita ▁bi ▁urtez ▁izan ▁zen ▁errege ▁Jerusalemen . ▁Am ak ▁J eko l ias ▁zuen ▁izena ▁eta ▁Jerusalem goa ▁zen .
PRED:	He was sixteen years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years . He reigned in Jerusalem eight years .
GOLD:	Uzziah was sixteen years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem fifty-two years . His mother was Jecoliah from Jerusalem .

ID:	550
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁gogor tu ▁bihotzak ▁zuen ▁gurasoek ▁Mer ib an ▁bezala , M as ako ▁egun ▁hartan ▁basamortuan ▁bezala ,
PRED:	“ Do not turn your hearts from the wilderness of Zin , just as you did in the wilderness .
GOLD:	The Lord says , “ Do n't harden your hearts as Israel did at Meribah , as they did at Massah in the wilderness .

ID:	551
INPUT:	▁esan ▁zion :— Jainkoaren ▁Semea ▁zaren ez , ▁bota ▁zeure ▁burua ▁behera , ▁idatzia ▁baitago : ▁Bere ▁aingeru ei ▁aginduko ▁die ▁zu ▁zaintzeko . ▁Eta ▁beso etan ▁eramango ▁zaituzte , ▁harri ekin ▁estropezu ▁egin ▁ez ▁dezazun .
PRED:	“ The Son of God will throw you into the Son of God , ” the angel of God said to him , “ for you will be able to take some of you , and you will not be able to take away . ”
GOLD:	and said , “ If you are the Son of God , jump off ! For the Scriptures say , ‘ He will order his angels to protect you.And they will hold you up with their handsso you wo n't even hurt your foot on a stone . ' ”

ID:	552
INPUT:	▁Nola ▁zerua ▁lurraren ▁gainetik ▁garai , halaxe ▁nire ▁jokabide azuen aren ▁gainetik eta ▁nire ▁egitasmoak ▁zuen en ▁gainetik .
PRED:	He existed like the heavens like the heavens , and I can light light all my plans .
GOLD:	For just as the heavens are higher than the earth , so my ways are higher than your waysand my thoughts higher than your thoughts .

ID:	553
INPUT:	▁bai , ▁bizitza ▁guztian ▁bedeinkatuko ▁zaitut , zuri ▁dei ▁eginez ▁altxatuko ▁eskuak .
PRED:	I will bless you and bless you ; I will praise you .
GOLD:	You satisfy me more than the richest feast.I will praise you with songs of joy .

ID:	554
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁zein ▁egunetan ▁edo ▁ordu tan ▁gertatuko ▁den , ▁ez ▁daki ▁inork , ▁ez ▁zeruko ▁aingeru ek , ▁ez ▁Semeak , ▁Aitak ▁baizik .
PRED:	But in the days of this hour , no one knows what will happen to the Father in heaven or angels .
GOLD:	“ However , no one knows the day or hour when these things will happen , not even the angels in heaven or the Son himself . Only the Father knows .

ID:	555
INPUT:	▁Zuk , ▁ordea , ▁irakatsi ▁d ok t rina ▁osasun garria .
PRED:	But you teach them a wonderful teacher , teaching the truth .
GOLD:	As for you , Titus , promote the kind of living that reflects wholesome teaching .

ID:	556
INPUT:	▁Goretsazue , ▁eguzki ▁eta ▁ilargi , ▁goretsi , ▁izar ▁argi tsu !
PRED:	Praise him from the sun , moon , and the stars of the heavens .
GOLD:	Praise him , sun and moon ! Praise him , all you twinkling stars !

ID:	557
INPUT:	▁Bi ▁zekor , ▁ahari ▁bat ▁eta ▁urtebeteko ▁zazpi ▁arkume ▁eskainiko ▁dituzue ▁erre - oparitzat , ▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁atseginez ▁onartuko ▁ditu .
PRED:	Each of you must present a young bull as a burnt offering and seven one-year-old male lambs , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	Present a special burnt offering on that day as a pleasing aroma to the Lord . It will consist of two young bulls , one ram , and seven one-year-old male lambs .

ID:	558
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁larrialdian ▁Jaunari ▁oihu ▁egin ▁eta ▁salbatu ▁egin ▁zituen ▁estu alditik .
PRED:	But in the Lord , he saved them from their distress .
GOLD:	“ Lord , help ! ” they cried in their trouble , and he saved them from their distress .

ID:	559
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁honetan ▁ere ▁ez ▁zetozen ▁bat ▁beren ▁esan etan .
PRED:	But in this way , no one dared to say to them .
GOLD:	But even then they did n't get their stories straight !

ID:	560
INPUT:	▁Zuek ▁indartsu ▁izanez ▁gero , ▁ni ▁pozik ▁nago , ▁ah u la ▁izan ▁arren . ▁Hau ▁da ▁Jainkoari ▁eskatzen ▁diodana : ▁zuek ▁bete - beteko ▁izatea .
PRED:	For I am strong , as if I have been strong , I am the one who wants to serve God .
GOLD:	We are glad to seem weak if it helps show that you are actually strong . We pray that you will become mature .

ID:	561
INPUT:	▁Bai ▁zera ! ▁Sen idea ▁senide arekin ▁auzitan ▁zabiltzate , ▁eta ▁epaile ▁jentilen ▁aurrean ▁gainera !
PRED:	Yes , a fellow believer who are preaching the Good News about this fellow believer and the Gentiles .
GOLD:	But instead , one believer sues another — right in front of unbelievers !

ID:	562
INPUT:	▁esan ▁zion ▁Amn onek ▁Tam arri :— E kar ▁iezadazu ▁janaria ▁gel ara . ▁Zure ▁eskutik ▁nahi ▁dut ▁jan ▁eta . T am arrek ▁eginiko ▁opil ak ▁hartu ▁eta ▁gel ara ▁eraman ▁zizkion ▁bere ▁anaia ▁Amn oni .
PRED:	But Amnon said to Amnon , “ Please give me food for me . I want it to eat it . ” So Amnon took the loaves of bread and ate it .
GOLD:	Then he said to Tamar , “ Now bring the food into my bedroom and feed it to me here. ” So Tamar took his favorite dish to him .

ID:	563
INPUT:	▁Jo ▁dezadan ▁handik ien gana , ber ai ei ▁hitz ▁egiteko ; h aiek ▁bai ▁ezagutuko ▁dutela Jaunaren ▁bidea , beren ▁Jainkoaren ▁agindua . Baina ▁era ▁berean ▁hautsi ▁dute ▁denek Jaunaren ▁uztarria , eten ▁har ekiko ▁lokarriak .
PRED:	And I will know that the Lord is coming to his people , and they will know that they have made the yoke of the Lord , the God of his people.He will break the yoke of their chains .
GOLD:	So I will go and speak to their leaders.Surely they know the ways of the Lordand understand God 's laws. ” But the leaders , too , as one man , had thrown off God 's yokeand broken his chains .

ID:	564
INPUT:	▁Joseren ▁amets ak
PRED:	Joseph 's Dream about Joseph
GOLD:	Joseph 's Dreams

ID:	565
INPUT:	▁Pen inak , ▁ar erio ak , ▁gogor ki ▁iraindu ▁eta ▁nahigabe tu ▁ohi ▁zuen ▁An a , ▁Jaunak ▁haurrik ▁ematen ▁ez ▁zi olako .
PRED:	But when she became proud , she became very distressed , and the Lord blessed her .
GOLD:	So Peninnah would taunt Hannah and make fun of her because the Lord had kept her from having children .

ID:	566
INPUT:	▁Jainko ▁Ahal tsu ▁bezala ▁agertu ▁nin tzai en ▁Abrahami , ▁Isaaki ▁eta ▁Jakobi ; ▁baina ▁ez ▁nin tzai en ▁nire ▁egiazko ▁izen az , ▁Jauna ▁bezala ▁alegia , ▁ezagu tzera ▁eman .
PRED:	When I was with God , I was the God of Jacob , I was the true God of Jacob . I was the true one who was the true .
GOLD:	I appeared to Abraham , to Isaac , and to Jacob as El-Shaddai — ‘ God Almighty ' — but I did not reveal my name , Yahweh , to them .

ID:	567
INPUT:	▁« Gau za ▁txiki etan ▁fid agarria , ▁handi etan ▁ere ▁fid agarri ▁da , ▁eta ▁gauza ▁txiki etan ▁zuzen gabea , ▁handi etan ▁ere ▁zuzen gabe .
PRED:	“ You are great and small , who are honest and honest and honest , and those who are honest .
GOLD:	“ If you are faithful in little things , you will be faithful in large ones . But if you are dishonest in little things , you wo n't be honest with greater responsibilities .

ID:	568
INPUT:	▁Zen batu ▁ondoren , ▁Jaunaren ▁etxean ▁egiten ▁ari ▁ziren ▁lan en ▁arduradun ei ▁ematen ▁zieten ▁dirua , ▁eta ▁hauek ▁Jaunaren ▁etxea ▁konpon tzen ▁ari ▁ziren ▁langile ei ▁ordaintzen : ▁zur gin , ▁etx egile ,
PRED:	After this , the elders of the Temple of the Lord came to the elders of the Temple of the Lord . They wanted to pay their money to repair the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	the masons , and the stonecutters . They also used the money to buy the timber and the finished stone needed for repairing the Lord 's Temple , and they paid any other expenses related to the Temple 's restoration .

ID:	569
INPUT:	▁Berak ▁askatuko ▁du ▁Israel ▁erru ▁guztietatik .
PRED:	He will rescue Israel from all the sins of all Israel .
GOLD:	He himself will redeem Israelfrom every kind of sin .

ID:	570
INPUT:	▁Hartan , ▁ziren e ar ▁eta ▁al ex an d ri arrez ▁os atua ▁zegoen ▁eta ▁« As katu ena » ▁zeritzan ▁sinagog akoak , ▁zil izi ar ▁eta ▁as i ar ▁batzu ekin ▁batera , ▁Este ban ekin ▁eztabaidan ▁hasi ▁ziren .
PRED:	There was a man named Zerah , and there was an illustration of the local synagogues and a local synagogue in the synagogues . ( This is a member of the local synagogue ) , and they began to argue with a Roman synagogues and arguing with him .
GOLD:	But one day some men from the Synagogue of Freed Slaves , as it was called , started to debate with him . They were Jews from Cyrene , Alexandria , Cilicia , and the province of Asia .

ID:	571
INPUT:	▁Handik ▁sei ▁egunera , ▁Jesusek ▁Pedro , ▁Santiago ▁eta ▁Joan ▁hartu ▁eta ▁mendi ▁garai ▁batera ▁eraman ▁zituen ▁aparte . ▁Eta ▁antz al datu ▁egin ▁zen ▁haien ▁aurrean :
PRED:	Three days later Jesus took Peter and took John into the hills and took John to the high mountain .
GOLD:	Six days later Jesus took Peter , James , and John , and led them up a high mountain to be alone . As the men watched , Jesus ' appearance was transformed ,

ID:	572
INPUT:	▁Bi ▁guda - gurdi ▁beren ▁zaldi ekin ▁prestatu ▁eta ▁siri ar ▁gudarostearen ▁az tar na ▁bila ▁bidali ▁zituen ▁erregeak , ▁esanez :— Zoazte ▁eta ▁ikus !
PRED:	So the king sent messengers to the Aramean army of chariots and horses to search for horses . “ Go ahead and see what the king had happened . ”
GOLD:	So two chariots with horses were prepared , and the king sent scouts to see what had happened to the Aramean army .

ID:	573
INPUT:	▁Joram , ▁Judako ▁errege
PRED:	Joram Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Jehoram Rules in Judah

ID:	574
INPUT:	▁H asi eratik ▁sendo ▁ezarri ▁zenuen ▁lurra , zure ▁esku ek ▁egina ▁da ▁zerua :
PRED:	You placed the foundation of the earth , and the heavens made the heavens .
GOLD:	They will perish , but you remain forever ; they will wear out like old clothing.You will change them like a garmentand discard them .

ID:	575
INPUT:	▁Sei ▁gauza ▁gorro tatzen ▁ditu ▁Jaunak eta ▁zazpigarren ▁bat ▁erabat ▁du ▁higuingarri :
PRED:	The Lord detests six steps , and he detests the seventh seventh seventh seventh seventh seventh seventh seventh seventh seventh seventh day .
GOLD:	There are six things the Lord hates — no , seven things he detests :

ID:	576
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁israeldarrak ▁itzuli ▁ziren ▁eta ▁benjamin darrak ▁izu turik ▁gelditu , ▁ikusi ▁baitzuten ▁nolako ▁hondamena ▁zet or kien .
PRED:	Then the Israelites returned to Benjamin and saw that they had seen the news of the men of Benjamin had been killed .
GOLD:	the men of Israel turned and attacked . At this point the men of Benjamin became terrified , because they realized disaster was close at hand .

ID:	577
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁zerua ▁itxi ▁eta ▁euririk ▁ez ▁egitean , ▁larra po te ei ▁lurralde ▁hau ▁iren s teko ▁agin tzean ▁edota ▁nire ▁herriari ▁izurri tea ▁bidal tzean ,
PRED:	“ If you enter the sky , you would not send a rain or rain or a locusts or a locusts , or if I sent a plague to send a plague among the nations .
GOLD:	At times I might shut up the heavens so that no rain falls , or command grasshoppers to devour your crops , or send plagues among you .

ID:	578
INPUT:	▁Entzun ▁sorrarazi ▁zin tuen ▁aitari , ez ▁mespretxatu ▁ama , ▁zah artu ▁egin ▁dela ▁eta .
PRED:	May the Lord give you a solemn oath to his father , and he has heard that he is dead .
GOLD:	Listen to your father , who gave you life , and do n't despise your mother when she is old .

ID:	579
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁jantzi ▁sakratuak
PRED:	The Priests and Levites
GOLD:	Additional Clothing for the Priests

ID:	580
INPUT:	▁Bat - batean , ▁giza ▁esku ▁bat ▁agertu ▁zen ▁eta ▁ar et oko ▁par etan , ▁argimutil aren ▁atzean , ▁behatz ez ▁idazten ▁hasi ▁zen . ▁I daz ten ▁ari ▁zen ▁eskua ▁ikustean ,
PRED:	Suddenly , a human hand appeared in human hands , and a stand in the middle of the atonement cover of the atonement cover .
GOLD:	Suddenly , they saw the fingers of a human hand writing on the plaster wall of the king 's palace , near the lampstand . The king himself saw the hand as it wrote ,

ID:	581
INPUT:	▁Ai , ▁Jainkoak ▁suntsituko ▁ban indu eta ▁bere ▁eskuaz ▁desegin !
PRED:	I will destroy them , and God will destroy them .
GOLD:	I wish he would crush me.I wish he would reach out his hand and kill me .

ID:	582
INPUT:	▁Hiriko ▁gizonak ▁oihuka ▁atera ▁ziren ▁israeldarren ▁ondoren ▁eta ▁Josueri ▁seg ika ▁hiritik ▁urruti ratu ▁egin ▁ziren .
PRED:	The men of the city were shouting for Joshua and the men of Israel , who had lived in safety .
GOLD:	Then all the men in the town were called out to chase after them . In this way , they were lured away from the town .

ID:	583
INPUT:	▁Han ▁bildu tako ▁guar di en ▁eta ▁jendearen ▁zarata - hotsa ▁entzutean , ▁Jaunaren ▁etxera ▁jo ▁zuen ▁Atal iak , ▁jende arengana .
PRED:	When the guards heard about the Temple of the Lord , the guards of the Temple of the Lord came to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	When Athaliah heard the noise made by the palace guards and the people , she hurried to the Lord 's Temple to see what was happening .

ID:	584
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁galdetu ▁zion ▁faraoiak :— Zenbat ▁urte ▁dituzu ?
PRED:	“ How much more will you be ? ” Pharaoh asked .
GOLD:	“ How old are you ? ” Pharaoh asked him .

ID:	585
INPUT:	▁Egoitz aren ▁beste ▁aldera , ▁iparraldera , ▁beste ▁hogei ▁ohol ▁jarriko ▁dituzu ,
PRED:	Make twenty frames for the north side of the north side of the Tabernacle ,
GOLD:	For the north side of the Tabernacle , make another twenty frames ,

ID:	586
INPUT:	▁Judak ▁erantzun :— Ar taldeko ▁antx ume ▁bat ▁bidaliko ▁dizut . T am arrek , ▁orduan :— Baina ▁beste ▁zerbait ▁utzi ▁beharko ▁didazu ▁bahituran , ▁antx umea ▁bidali ▁bitartean .
PRED:	Judah replied , “ I will send a young goat as a young goat for a young goat , but you will take a young goat as a young goat as a young goat . ”
GOLD:	“ I 'll send you a young goat from my flock , ” Judah promised. “ But what will you give me to guarantee that you will send the goat ? ” she asked .

ID:	587
INPUT:	▁Sara ▁ehun ▁eta ▁hogeita ▁zazpi ▁urtez ▁bizi ▁izan ▁zen .
PRED:	Abraham lived for seven years , and he lived for seven years .
GOLD:	When Sarah was 127 years old ,

ID:	588
INPUT:	▁Horregatik ▁huts ▁egin ▁dizute ho dei - z ap arra dek , ez ▁da ▁u d ab erri ko ▁euririk ▁izan . Baina ▁zuk em agaldu aren ▁ko peta ▁zenuen , eta ▁zeure ▁izen ▁txarrak ▁ax olarik ▁ez .
PRED:	That is why you have acted like a spring of rain , and it is a spring of rain . But you have a prostitute , and you have become stubborn and rebellious and rebellious .
GOLD:	That 's why even the spring rains have failed.For you are a brazen prostitute and completely shameless .

ID:	589
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁elkartea ▁bildurik ▁dagoen ean , ▁nah iago ▁dut ▁beste entzat ▁irakas garri ▁izango ▁diren ▁bost ▁hitz ▁uler garri ▁esan , ▁hizk era ▁uler tez inean ▁hamar ▁mila ▁baino .
PRED:	So I will be able to teach the church , and I will teach ten of the church to teach ten of the church .
GOLD:	But in a church meeting I would rather speak five understandable words to help others than ten thousand words in an unknown language .

ID:	590
INPUT:	▁Go ibel ▁jarri ▁zen ▁erregea , ▁baina , ▁mah aiki de en ▁aurrean ▁egindako ▁zin arengatik , ▁esk atua ▁emateko ▁agindu ▁zuen ,
PRED:	He prayed to the king , but he made a solemn oath in front of the Temple for him .
GOLD:	Then the king regretted what he had said ; but because of the vow he had made in front of his guests , he issued the necessary orders .

ID:	591
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁gertatzen ▁zen ▁beti : ▁egunez ▁laino ak ▁estaltzen ▁zuen ▁egoitza ▁eta ▁gauez ▁su - itx ura ▁hartzen ▁zuen .
PRED:	On the day of the cloud was set aside for a cloud , and it was a pillar of fire .
GOLD:	This was the regular pattern — at night the cloud that covered the Tabernacle had the appearance of fire .

ID:	592
INPUT:	▁El on
PRED:	Eli Becomes Israel 's Judge
GOLD:	Elon Becomes Israel 's Judge

ID:	593
INPUT:	▁Jo pe ▁osoak ▁izan ▁zuen ▁gertatuaren ▁berri , ▁eta ▁askok ▁sinetsi ▁zuten ▁Jaunarengan .
PRED:	When all the people heard what had happened , they believed in the Lord 's sight .
GOLD:	The news spread through the whole town , and many believed in the Lord .

ID:	594
INPUT:	▁Bete ▁haien ▁aurpegia ▁lotsa ▁gorriz , zeure ▁burua ▁mendekatu z , ▁Jauna .
PRED:	The Lord has commanded us , “ The Lord is your enemy ; he is your shield .
GOLD:	Let them be ashamed and terrified forever.Let them die in disgrace .

ID:	595
INPUT:	▁eta ▁beste ▁hiru ▁litro ▁ardo ▁isur - oparitarako . ▁Eta ▁Jaunak ▁atseginez ▁onartuko ▁du ▁bere ▁ohorez ▁erretako ▁oparia .
PRED:	and six quarts of wine , a liquid offering , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	and give two quarts of wine as a liquid offering . This will be a special gift , a pleasing aroma to the Lord .

ID:	596
INPUT:	▁Honen gan ▁bakarrik ▁dugu ▁salbamena , ▁ez ▁baiti gu ▁Jainkoak ▁gizon - emakume oi ▁beste ▁inor ▁eman ▁eguzki aren ▁azpian , ▁salba ▁gai tzak een ik ».
PRED:	For we have been made right with salvation , for God has given power to save us from the earth . ”
GOLD:	There is salvation in no one else ! God has given no other name under heaven by which we must be saved . ”

ID:	597
INPUT:	▁Esan ▁zidan : ▁« Gizaseme , ▁zulatu ▁horma ▁hor txe ▁bertan ». ▁Z ul atu ▁nuen ▁horma ▁eta ▁ireki dura ▁bat ▁egin ▁zen .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Son of man , I dug a robe that had been opened . ”
GOLD:	He said to me , “ Now , son of man , dig into the wall. ” So I dug into the wall and found a hidden doorway .

ID:	598
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁esan ▁dit : ▁“ S abel ean ▁sortu ▁eta ▁semea ▁izanen ▁duzu . ▁Ez ▁edan ▁ardorik , ▁ez ▁beste ▁edari ▁mozkor garri rik , ▁eta ▁ez ▁jan ▁ezer ▁kutsaturik ; ▁amaren ▁sabelean ▁sortu ▁eta ▁hil ▁arte , ▁“ n az ire u ” ▁izan ▁behar ▁baitu ▁haurrak , ▁hau ▁da , ▁Jaunarentzat ▁sagaratua ”».
PRED:	But he said to me , ‘ My child is indeed drunk with wine , and you must not drink wine or drink wine or drink wine or drink wine or drink wine . ' ”
GOLD:	But he told me , ‘ You will become pregnant and give birth to a son . You must not drink wine or any other alcoholic drink nor eat any forbidden food . For your son will be dedicated to God as a Nazirite from the moment of his birth until the day of his death . ' ”

ID:	599
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁egin ▁hitz armen ik ▁haiekin , ▁ezta ▁haien ▁jainko ekin ▁ere .
PRED:	Do not listen to them or teach them or worship other gods .
GOLD:	“ Make no treaties with them or their gods .

ID:	600
INPUT:	▁Haiek ▁erantzun ▁zioten : ▁“ Jauna , ▁lehen dik ▁hamar ▁on tzako ▁ez ▁ditu , ▁bada ?”
PRED:	They replied , ‘ Lord , ' they replied , ‘ He is the good for the money . '
GOLD:	“ ‘ But , master , ' they said , ‘ he already has ten pounds ! '

ID:	601
INPUT:	▁ilea ▁moz teko ▁aginduko ▁dio ▁gaixo ari , ▁ez kab ia ▁duen ▁lekuan ▁izan ▁ezik , ▁eta ▁aparte ▁edukiko ▁beste ▁zazpi ▁egunez .
PRED:	If the affected area has been reduced to a place , he must not be ceremonially unclean for seven days .
GOLD:	the person must shave off all hair except the hair on the affected area . Then the priest must quarantine the person for another seven days .

ID:	602
INPUT:	▁Orduan txe ▁kendu ▁behar ▁izan ▁zituen ▁Judako ▁errege ▁Ezekiasek , ▁berak ▁lehen ▁urrez ▁jantziak ▁zituen ▁Jaunaren ▁tenpluko ▁ateak ▁eta ▁ate - e us karri ak , ▁Asiriako ▁erregeari ▁emateko .
PRED:	Then Hezekiah removed the doors of the Temple of the Lord , and he put the doors of the Temple of the Lord . He overlaid the doors of the Temple of Assyria .
GOLD:	Hezekiah even stripped the gold from the doors of the Lord 's Temple and from the doorposts he had overlaid with gold , and he gave it all to the Assyrian king .

ID:	603
INPUT:	▁Erru ▁asko ▁eta ▁bide gabeko ▁merkatari tzaz ▁profanatu ▁duzu ▁zeure ▁santutegia . ▁Zeure ▁baita tik ▁sua ▁sorrarazi ▁dut ▁eta ▁irentsi ▁egin ▁zaitu ; ▁errauts ▁bihurtu ▁zaitut , ▁guztien ▁begi ▁aurrean .
PRED:	You have defiled many foreign gods , and you have defiled your Temple by burning fire . I have raised you out of all the sins of all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	You defiled your sanctuarieswith your many sins and your dishonest trade.So I brought fire out from within you , and it consumed you.I reduced you to ashes on the groundin the sight of all who were watching .

ID:	604
INPUT:	▁Den bora ▁asko ▁galdua ▁genuen , ▁eta ▁arrisku ▁handia ▁zuen ▁ordu tik ▁aurrera ▁bideak , ▁ne gu a ▁gainean ▁baitzen . ▁Paulok ▁ohar ▁hau ▁egin ▁zien :
PRED:	There was great joy for many days , and there was a long time for a long time .
GOLD:	We had lost a lot of time . The weather was becoming dangerous for sea travel because it was so late in the fall , and Paul spoke to the ship 's officers about it .

ID:	605
INPUT:	▁Zazpigarren ▁egunean ▁batzar ▁sakratua ▁izango ▁duzue ▁berriro ▁eta ▁ez ▁da ▁ohiko ▁lan ▁arrun tik ▁egingo .
PRED:	On the seventh day you must no ordinary work for holy assembly , and you must no ordinary work .
GOLD:	The seventh day of the festival will be another official day for holy assembly , and no ordinary work may be done on that day .

ID:	606
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁ihardetsi ▁zion :— Nire gatik ▁jelos kor ? ▁Nah iago ▁nuke ▁herri ▁osoa ▁profeta ▁bihur tzea , ▁Jaunak ▁bere ▁espiritua ▁den ei ▁ematea !
PRED:	Moses replied , “ How could I be a jealous of my own people ? ” So Moses asked the Lord , “ The Lord is a prophet who is a prophet . ”
GOLD:	But Moses replied , “ Are you jealous for my sake ? I wish that all the Lord 's people were prophets and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them all ! ”

ID:	607
INPUT:	▁esanez :— Z il arra ▁zuretzat . ▁Herri ▁horri ▁buruz , ▁egizu ▁nahi ▁duzuna .
PRED:	“ What do you think you are talking to me , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	The king said , “ The money and the people are both yours to do with as you see fit . ”

ID:	608
INPUT:	▁izu aren ▁eraso tik ▁ihes ▁egin ▁dezan azu l oan ▁jau s iko ▁da ; zulo tik ▁ihes ▁egin ▁dezan az ep oan ▁harrap atua ▁geldituko . Z igor ra ▁bidaliko ▁diot ▁Moab ikon tuak ▁hartzeko ▁egunean . Hala ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jaunak .
PRED:	The sword will flee from the pit , and the sword will fall into the pit of Moab . They will kill him , ” says the Lord. “ The Lord will strike them in the pit of Moab .
GOLD:	“ Those who flee in terror will fall into a trap , and those who escape the trap will step into a snare.I will see to it that you do not get away , for the time of your judgment has come , ” says the Lord .

ID:	609
INPUT:	▁Al bis tariak ▁erantzun :— Israeldar rek ▁ihes ▁egin ▁behar ▁izan ▁dute ▁filistearren ▁aurrean , ▁eta ▁hondamena ▁izugarria ▁izan ▁da ▁gure ▁gudaros tean . ▁Zure ▁bi ▁seme ▁H of ni ▁eta ▁Pinh as ▁ere ▁hilak ▁dira , ▁eta ▁harrapatu ▁egin ▁digu te ▁Jainkoaren ▁kutxa .
PRED:	The soldiers replied , “ The Israelites have fled to the Philistines and fled to the Philistines , and the Philistines have been very great enough to escape the Ark of our God . They have been killed by the Ark of our God , and the Lord , the God of our God has killed us . ”
GOLD:	“ Israel has been defeated by the Philistines , ” the messenger replied . “ The people have been slaughtered , and your two sons , Hophni and Phinehas , were also killed . And the Ark of God has been captured . ”

ID:	610
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁lurraldea ▁hegoaldeko ▁basamortutik ▁iparralde an ▁dagoen ▁Liban o raino ▁eta ▁ekialdeko ▁ibai ▁handi tik , ▁Eufrates etik , ▁hiti ten ▁lurraldean ▁zehar , ▁mendeb aldean ▁dagoen ▁Mediterraneo ▁itsaso raino ▁he datuko ▁da .
PRED:	The land of the north will extend from the east of the north and from the east of the north to the west of the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	from the Negev wilderness in the south to the Lebanon mountains in the north , from the Euphrates River in the east to the Mediterranean Sea in the west , including all the land of the Hittites . '

ID:	611
INPUT:	▁Nagus iak ▁esan ▁zion : ▁“ Eder ki , ▁morroi ▁on ▁eta ▁leiala ! ▁Gauza ▁gutx ian ▁leial ▁izan ▁zara , ▁askoren ▁buru ▁ipiniko ▁zaitut ; ▁sartu ▁zeure ▁jaunaren ▁festa ▁ospa tzera ”.
PRED:	He said to the master , ‘ You are faithful and faithful servant . You have been faithful to celebrate the Festival of Shelters , and you have been faithful to celebrate the Passover celebration . '
GOLD:	“ The master was full of praise . ‘ Well done , my good and faithful servant . You have been faithful in handling this small amount , so now I will give you many more responsibilities . Let 's celebrate together ! '

ID:	612
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁entzungo ▁dizuet ▁niri ▁dei ▁egitera ▁eta ▁otoitz ▁egitera ▁etorriko ▁zareten ean .
PRED:	Then I will hear you and pray for me and pray for me .
GOLD:	In those days when you pray , I will listen .

ID:	613
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁haiek ▁erregeari :— Ba , ▁errege ▁jauna , ▁Jud atik ▁gatibu ▁ekarri tako ▁Daniel ▁horrek ▁ez ▁dizue ▁batere ▁begirunerik , ▁ez ▁zuri , ▁ez ▁zure ▁agindu ei : ▁bere ▁Jainkoari ▁hiru ▁aldiz ▁egiten ▁dio ▁otoitz ▁egunean .
PRED:	Then the king said to the king , “ Your Majesty , I have brought you out of exile , Daniel , and you have no respect for you . ”
GOLD:	Hearing this , the king was deeply troubled , and he tried to think of a way to save Daniel . He spent the rest of the day looking for a way to get Daniel out of this predicament .

ID:	614
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁egintzen ▁misterio agatik ▁zor ▁zaio ▁aintza ▁Jainkoari , araz oak ▁aztertu ▁eta ▁argi tzeagatik ▁erregeari .
PRED:	In fact , God 's secret plan was determined to find wisdom .
GOLD:	It is God 's privilege to conceal thingsand the king 's privilege to discover them .

ID:	615
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁errege ▁Joiakin , ▁hogeita ▁hamazazpi ▁urtez ▁gatibu ▁egon ▁ondoren , ▁E bil - M ero dak ek ▁askatu ▁egin ▁zuen ▁gil tza petik , ▁Babiloniako ▁errege ▁egin ▁zen ▁urte ▁berean , ▁hamabi garren ▁hilaren ▁hogeita ▁bos tean .
PRED:	Jehoiachin lived in Judah for seven years , during the captivity of King Jehoiachin 's reign , during the reign of King Jehoiachin 's reign , he released him from the second year of King Jehoiachin 's reign .
GOLD:	In the thirty-seventh year of the exile of King Jehoiachin of Judah , Evil-merodach ascended to the Babylonian throne . He was kind to Jehoiachin and released him from prison on March 31 of that year .

ID:	616
INPUT:	▁« Z intz oa ▁palm ondo a ▁bezala ▁gar atuko ▁da , Liban oko ▁ze d roa ▁bezala ▁haz iko ;
PRED:	“ The tree will be like a palm tree , like a palm tree , and its branches will grow tall .
GOLD:	For they are transplanted to the Lord 's own house.They flourish in the courts of our God .

ID:	617
INPUT:	▁ F ariseu ak ▁etorri ▁eta ▁Jesusekin ▁eztabaidan ▁hasi ▁ziren : ▁Jainkoarengan diko ▁seinale ▁bat ▁eskatzen ▁zioten ▁azpikeriaz , ▁bera ▁nola ▁harrapatuko .
PRED:	One day the Pharisees came to Jesus and began to trap him with Jesus . They tried to trap him .
GOLD:	When the Pharisees heard that Jesus had arrived , they came and started to argue with him . Testing him , they demanded that he show them a miraculous sign from heaven to prove his authority .

ID:	618
INPUT:	▁Daviden ▁anaia ▁Xim aren ▁seme ▁zen ▁Jonadab ek , ▁ordea , ▁esan ▁zuen :— Ez ▁uste ▁izan , ▁ene ▁jauna , ▁erregearen ▁seme ▁guztiak ▁hilak ▁diren ik . ▁Am non ▁bakarrik ▁hil ▁da . ▁Era b akia ▁zuen ▁hori ▁Absalomek , ▁hark ▁bere ▁arreba ▁Tamar ▁bor txatu ▁zuenez ▁geroztik .
PRED:	But the brother of David 's brother David , said , “ My son , my lord , my lord , my lord the king 's son , has n't been killed by the king 's son , for he was dead . So Absalom 's sister was dead .
GOLD:	But just then Jonadab , the son of David 's brother Shimea , arrived and said , “ No , do n't believe that all the king 's sons have been killed ! It was only Amnon ! Absalom has been plotting this ever since Amnon raped his sister Tamar .

ID:	619
INPUT:	▁K akoak ▁jarriko ▁dizkizut ▁mutur retan , N il oko ▁arrainak zure ▁ez kate tan ▁eran ts araziko ▁ditut ; ib ai aren ▁erditik ▁kanpora at erako ▁zaitut , N il oko ▁arrain ▁guztiak ez kate tan ▁erantsi ak ▁dituzu la .
PRED:	I will throw them into the middle of you , and I will make you a fish in the middle of you . I will make you a fish in the middle of the fish in the middle of the fish , and you will be thrown into the fish .
GOLD:	I will put hooks in your jawsand drag you out on the landwith fish sticking to your scales .

ID:	620
INPUT:	▁O de den ▁seme ▁Azarias ek , ▁Jainkoaren ▁espiritu aren ▁eraginez ,
PRED:	Azariah son of Azariah , son of Azariah , led by the Spirit of God .
GOLD:	Then the Spirit of God came upon Azariah son of Oded ,

ID:	621
INPUT:	▁G el etatik ▁bi ▁ate ▁zeuden ▁huts arte ▁har tara : ▁bata ▁iparraldera ▁eta ▁bestea ▁hegoaldera . ▁H uts arte aren ▁inguruko ▁horm aren ▁lo di era ▁bi ▁metro ▁eta ▁erdi koa ▁zen .
PRED:	There were two blocks of rooms on the south side of the south side of the south side of the south side of the south .
GOLD:	Two doors opened from the side rooms into the terrace yard , which was 83/4 feet wide . One door faced north and the other south .

ID:	622
INPUT:	▁gizon ▁batzuk ▁erosi ▁zituzten , ▁zurru mur ru ▁hau ▁zabal ▁zezaten : ▁Este ban i ▁Moisesen ▁eta ▁Jainkoaren ▁kontra ▁hitz ▁egiten ▁entzun ▁zio tela , ▁alegia .
PRED:	Some of the men of Israel met together with Stephen , and they heard the word of God .
GOLD:	So they persuaded some men to lie about Stephen , saying , “ We heard him blaspheme Moses , and even God . ”

ID:	623
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunaren ▁aurretik ▁sua ▁atera ▁eta ▁kiskali ▁egin ▁zituen ; ▁hantxe ▁bertan ▁hil ▁ziren .
PRED:	Then the fire of the Lord led them out of the fire and burned it before him .
GOLD:	So fire blazed forth from the Lord 's presence and burned them up , and they died there before the Lord .

ID:	624
INPUT:	▁era ▁berean , nazio ▁asko ▁harri tuko ▁dira , errege ak ▁haren ▁aurrean mu tu ▁geldituko , in oiz ▁esan ▁gabeko ▁zerbait ▁ikustean , in oiz ▁entzun ▁gab ekoa ▁adi tzean ».
PRED:	In the same way , many kings will stand before him in front of the world , and they will be able to listen ! ”
GOLD:	And he will startle many nations.Kings will stand speechless in his presence.For they will see what they had not been told ; they will understand what they had not heard about .

ID:	625
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁zu ▁zara , ▁Jauna , ▁nire ▁babeski , ▁zu ▁nire ▁ohore . Zuk ▁didazu ▁burua ▁jasotzen .
PRED:	But you are my fortress , O Lord , who saves me .
GOLD:	I cried out to the Lord , and he answered me from his holy mountain.Interlude

ID:	626
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁zuek , ▁norbait ▁hil ▁edo ▁gorp uren ▁bat ▁ukitu ▁duzuenok , ▁zazpi ▁egunez ▁kanpalekutik ▁aparte ▁egongo ▁zarete ▁etxol aturik . ▁Bai ▁zuek , ▁bai ▁gatibu ek , ▁garbikuntza ▁egingo ▁duzue ▁hirugarren ▁eta ▁zazpigarren ▁egunetan .
PRED:	All who touch a dead body or touch a dead body or touch it for seven days . In fact , you will be put to death for seven days . The third day you will be purified by the third day you will be purified .
GOLD:	And all of you who have killed anyone or touched a dead body must stay outside the camp for seven days . You must purify yourselves and your captives on the third and seventh days .

ID:	627
INPUT:	▁Ni ▁ere ▁hala ▁ari tzen ▁naiz ; ▁ez ▁lasterka ▁itsu - i tsu an ▁egiten ▁duena ▁edo ▁u k abil ka dak ▁huts ean ▁jotzen ▁dituen ▁borro kal aria ▁bezala ;
PRED:	I am saying , “ I 'm not deaf or blind or blind or blind . I 'm not one who has a hand or fight against you . ”
GOLD:	So I run with purpose in every step . I am not just shadowboxing .

ID:	628
INPUT:	▁Haren ▁hos toak ▁ederrak ▁ziren , eta ▁fruituak ▁ugari , s ork ari ▁guztiak ▁ase tzeko ▁adina . B as apiz tiek ▁haren ▁itzal ean egiten ▁zuten ▁ab aro eta ▁hegazti ek ▁haren ▁adar retan ▁hab ia . Bizi dun ▁ororen ▁janari ▁zen .
PRED:	There were many branches of every kind of fruit , and there was plenty to be plenty of wild animals , and there was plenty of wild animals , and the birds of its branches , and it was allowed to eat .
GOLD:	“ I said to him , ‘ Belteshazzar , chief of the magicians , I know that the spirit of the holy gods is in you and that no mystery is too great for you to solve . Now tell me what my dream means .

ID:	629
INPUT:	▁« Eg izu ▁lebitarren ▁izen - bilketa , ▁senitarteka ▁eta ▁familiak a , ▁hilabetez ▁gorako ▁gizonezko ak ▁errol datu z ».
PRED:	“ All of the Levites who are one month old or older among the Merarite clans . ”
GOLD:	“ Record the names of the members of the tribe of Levi by their families and clans . List every male who is one month old or older . ”

ID:	630
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁aita ▁Asaren ▁jokabidea ▁hartu ▁zuen , ▁ezertan ▁ere ▁okertu ▁gabe . ▁Jaunaren ▁begietan ▁zuzen ▁dena ▁egin ▁zuen .
PRED:	He followed the example of Asa 's father , but he did not turn away from the Lord .
GOLD:	Jehoshaphat was a good king , following the ways of his father , Asa . He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight .

ID:	631
INPUT:	▁metro ▁bateko a ▁zen ▁zor uan ▁zegoen ▁oinarri tik ▁lehen ▁p la ta f or m araino ; ▁hau ▁metro ▁erdi ▁bat ▁zen ▁zabal . ▁Bi ▁metroko ▁altu era ▁zegoen ▁p la ta f or ma ▁hartatik ▁hurrengo ra , ▁hura ▁ere ▁metro ▁erdi ▁bat ▁zabal ▁zelarik .
PRED:	The next day it was 101/2 feet across from the middle of the inner courtyard was 101/2 feet tall . It was 71/2 feet long , and it was 101/2 feet long .
GOLD:	From the gutter the altar rises 31/2 feet to a lower ledge that surrounds the altar and is 21 inches wide . From the lower ledge the altar rises 7 feet to the upper ledge that is also 21 inches wide .

ID:	632
INPUT:	▁Erregeak , ▁eta ▁Israel ▁osoak ▁harekin ▁batera , ▁sakrifizioak ▁eskaini ▁zizkion ▁Jaunari .
PRED:	Then the king summoned the people of Israel and presented them to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the king and all Israel with him offered sacrifices to the Lord .

ID:	633
INPUT:	▁baizik ▁eta ▁neure ▁gorputza ▁hezi ▁eta ▁menpean ▁jartzen ▁dut , ▁besteei ▁irakatsi ▁ondoren ▁neu ▁bazter tua ▁gerta ▁ez ▁nadin .
PRED:	I have put my flesh on them , and I have not been given to anyone who does not have been given to me .
GOLD:	I discipline my body like an athlete , training it to do what it should . Otherwise , I fear that after preaching to others I myself might be disqualified .

ID:	634
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁berez ▁oho ragarri ▁direnek ▁ez ▁dute ▁arreta ▁horien ▁beharrik . ▁Jainkoak ▁berak , ▁gorputza ▁era tzean , ▁berez ▁ohore ▁gabeko ▁ziren ▁atal ei ▁oh or erik ▁handiena ▁eman ▁zien .
PRED:	For this is the honor of the honor of the honor of the church , and there was no resurrection of the human body .
GOLD:	while the more honorable parts do not require this special care . So God has put the body together such that extra honor and care are given to those parts that have less dignity .

ID:	635
INPUT:	▁« Nik , ▁Ar taxerxes ▁erregeak , ▁Eufrates ▁ibaiaren ▁mendebaldeko ▁diruz ain ▁guztiei ▁agintzen ▁dizuet ▁eman ▁diez aiozu ela ▁zehatz - mehatz ▁Esdras ▁apaizari , ▁zeru etako ▁Jainkoaren ▁lege - maisu ari , ▁eskatu tako ▁guztia :
PRED:	“ This letter is what King Artaxerxes of the province west of the Euphrates River , the governor of the province west of the Euphrates River , and to Ezra the priest , the priest , the priest of heaven .
GOLD:	“ I , Artaxerxes the king , hereby send this decree to all the treasurers in the province west of the Euphrates River : ‘ You are to give Ezra , the priest and teacher of the law of the God of heaven , whatever he requests of you .

ID:	636
INPUT:	▁ez ▁dago ▁ilunp erik , ▁ez ▁itzal ▁edo ▁ger iz p erik , gaiz kile en ▁gordeleku ▁izan ▁daiteke enik .
PRED:	Those who live in darkness will never be disgraced , for you are safe from the wicked .
GOLD:	No darkness is thick enoughto hide the wicked from his eyes .

ID:	637
INPUT:	▁Ur ruti ko ▁herri ▁bati egingo ▁dio ▁dei ▁Jaunak , ban dera ▁jas oz ▁eta ▁tx is tu ka , eta ▁lurraren ▁azken ▁bazter retatik etor raraziko ▁du . Hor ▁non ▁datoz en ▁arin ▁eta ▁bizkor :
PRED:	The Lord says , “ I will send a sword from the distant lands of Memphis and Tahpanhes , and the earth will bring them down to the depths of the earth .
GOLD:	He will send a signal to distant nations far awayand whistle to those at the ends of the earth.They will come racing toward Jerusalem .

ID:	638
INPUT:	▁Judas ▁Is kari ote , ▁Hamabi etako ▁bat , ▁apaizburu engana ▁joan ▁zen , ▁Jesus ▁beraiei ▁eskuetara ▁emateko ▁asmotan .
PRED:	Judas Iscariot , one of the twelve disciples , one of the twelve disciples , who went to betray Jesus .
GOLD:	Then Judas Iscariot , one of the twelve disciples , went to the leading priests to arrange to betray Jesus to them .

ID:	639
INPUT:	▁Ar do - z ah agi ▁hauek ▁berriak ▁ziren ▁bete ▁genituen ean , ▁eta ▁orain ▁urratu ak ▁daude . ▁Gure ▁jantzi ▁eta ▁oin etakoak ▁ere ▁zar p ail du ▁egin ▁zaizki gu ▁hain ▁bide ▁luz ean .
PRED:	We were filled with new wineskins , and we have been cut off , and we have put our clothes in burlap .
GOLD:	These wineskins were new when we filled them , but now they are old and split open . And our clothing and sandals are worn out from our very long journey . ”

ID:	640
INPUT:	▁Jaunari ▁bizilekua , Jakoben ▁Jainko ▁indartsu ari ▁egoitza ▁aurkitu ▁bitartean ».
PRED:	As surely as the Lord , the God of Israel , the place of the Lord , the God of Israel ! ”
GOLD:	until I find a place to build a house for the Lord , a sanctuary for the Mighty One of Israel . ”

ID:	641
INPUT:	▁harik ▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁zerutik ▁begiratu ▁eta ▁ikusi ▁arte .
PRED:	When the Lord saw what the Lord had done , he saw heaven until he saw it was still alive .
GOLD:	until the Lord looks downfrom heaven and sees .

ID:	642
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁arrats ▁hartan ▁ihesi ▁joan ak ▁ziren , ▁beren ▁oihal - etxola , ▁zaldi , ▁asto ▁eta ▁kanpalekua ▁bera ▁ere ▁zegoen ▁zegoen ean ▁utziz . ▁I hes ▁egin ▁zuten , ▁bizia ▁salba tzearren .
PRED:	So they fled to the camp at the threshing floor and cut off their horses . The horses had been cut off from the camp , and then he would save them .
GOLD:	So they panicked and ran into the night , abandoning their tents , horses , donkeys , and everything else , as they fled for their lives .

ID:	643
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁antz al datu ▁egin ▁zen ▁haien ▁aurrean : ▁aurpegia ▁eguzkia ▁bezain ▁distiratsu ▁bihurtu ▁zitzaion ▁eta ▁jantziak ▁argia ▁bezain ▁zuri .
PRED:	And as he was in his face , his face became as thick as the sun , and his clothes were as white as the sun .
GOLD:	As the men watched , Jesus ' appearance was transformed so that his face shone like the sun , and his clothes became as white as light .

ID:	644
INPUT:	▁Urre ▁harekin ▁irudi ▁bat ▁egin ▁eta ▁Of ran , ▁bere ▁herrian , ▁ipini ▁zuen ▁Gedeonek ; ▁israeldar ▁guztiek ▁irudi ▁hura ▁ado ratu ▁zuten , ▁Jainkoarekin ▁desleial ▁jokatuz . ▁I rudi ▁hura ▁gal bide ▁gertatu ▁zitzaien ▁Gede oni ▁eta ▁beronen ▁senitarteko ei .
PRED:	Then Gideon made a gold statue of pure gold , and his men had been made of gold , and all the people of Israel had committed . The people of Israel had committed a man named Gideon and his family , and the family of Gideon .
GOLD:	Gideon made a sacred ephod from the gold and put it in Ophrah , his hometown . But soon all the Israelites prostituted themselves by worshiping it , and it became a trap for Gideon and his family .

ID:	645
INPUT:	▁Behin ▁batean , ▁Joanen ▁ikasleek ▁eta ▁fariseuek ▁barau - eguna ▁zuten . ▁Jesusengana ▁joan ▁eta ▁esan ▁zioten :— Nola ▁egiten ▁dugu ▁barau ▁Joanen ▁ikasle ok ▁eta ▁fariseu ok , ▁eta ▁zure ▁ikasleek ▁ez ?
PRED:	One day the Pharisees and John the Pharisees went to Jesus and told him , “ What do we want to eat ? ”
GOLD:	Once when John 's disciples and the Pharisees were fasting , some people came to Jesus and asked , “ Why do n't your disciples fast like John 's disciples and the Pharisees do ? ”

ID:	646
INPUT:	▁Gainera , ▁aker ▁bat ▁barkamen - oparitarako , ▁Bar k amen ▁Egun ▁handiko ▁barkamen - opari az ▁eta ▁eguneroko ▁erre - opari ez ▁gain , ▁berau ei ▁dagozki en ▁labore - ▁eta ▁isur - opari ekin .
PRED:	In addition , a male goat presented as a sin offering to the Lord at the regular burnt offering , a burnt offering , and a liquid offering with its accompanying grain offering .
GOLD:	You must also sacrifice one male goat for a sin offering . This is in addition to the sin offering of atonement and the regular daily burnt offering with its grain offering , and their accompanying liquid offerings .

ID:	647
INPUT:	▁Eta , ▁apostol uak ▁deitu ▁eta ▁zigor katu ▁ondoren , ▁Jesusi ▁buruz ▁hitzik ▁esatea ▁zorrotz ▁debekatu ▁zieten . ▁Ondoren , ▁askatu ▁egin ▁zituzten .
PRED:	So the apostles called together to the apostles , and they sent word to Jesus . Then he released them to speak .
GOLD:	The others accepted his advice . They called in the apostles and had them flogged . Then they ordered them never again to speak in the name of Jesus , and they let them go .

ID:	648
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁txalu pa ▁prest ▁eduki tzeko ▁agindu ▁zien ▁ikasleei , ▁hainbeste ▁jen deren ▁artean ▁zapal ▁ez ▁zezaten .
PRED:	He ordered his disciples to be ready to go into the boat so they could n't be afraid .
GOLD:	Jesus instructed his disciples to have a boat ready so the crowd would not crush him .

ID:	649
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Jerusalemen ▁eta ▁beste ▁hiri ▁guztietan ▁hauxe ▁iragarri ▁behar ▁zutela : ▁« Atera ▁mendira ▁eta ▁ekarri ▁handik ▁olibondo , ▁p inu , ▁mir to , ▁palm ondo ▁eta ▁or ri dun ▁zuh aitzen ▁adarrak , ▁etxol ak ▁egiteko ».
PRED:	At that time the people of Jerusalem began to say , “ This is the sound of the twelve olive trees , frankincense , and palm trees of frankincense , and palm trees . ”
GOLD:	He had said that a proclamation should be made throughout their towns and in Jerusalem , telling the people to go to the hills to get branches from olive , wild olive , myrtle , palm , and other leafy trees . They were to use these branches to make shelters in which they would live during the festival , as prescribed in the Law .

ID:	650
INPUT:	▁A ten asen : ▁hitzaldia ▁Are o p ag on
PRED:	Jesus before the Council
GOLD:	Paul Preaches in Athens

ID:	651
INPUT:	▁eta ▁etxol etan ▁marm arrean ▁hasi ▁zineten , ▁esanez : ▁Gorro toa ▁digu lako ▁atera ▁gaitu ▁Jaunak ▁Egiptotik , ▁amortarren ▁esku ▁utzi ▁eta ▁suntsitzeko .
PRED:	“ Do n't remember what the Lord had said to us , “ The Lord has given us victory over the Amorites , the Amorites , the Amorites , and the people of Egypt .
GOLD:	You complained in your tents and said , ‘ The Lord must hate us . That 's why he has brought us here from Egypt — to hand us over to the Amorites to be slaughtered .

ID:	652
INPUT:	▁Ezin ▁zen ▁jakin ▁zenbat ▁pis atzen ▁zuen ▁Salomonek ▁Jaunaren ▁etxerako ▁eginak ▁ziren ▁bi ▁zutabe en , ▁uras karen ▁eta ▁or g en ▁bron tzeak .
PRED:	The weight of the Temple was not measured by the weight of the Lord 's Temple , and the water carts was made of bronze .
GOLD:	The weight of the bronze from the two pillars , the Sea , and the water carts was too great to be measured . These things had been made for the Lord 's Temple in the days of Solomon .

ID:	653
INPUT:	▁E gur - puska ▁bati ▁esaten ▁diote :“ Zeu ▁zara ▁nire ▁aita ”; harri ari : ▁“ Zeuk ▁nauzu ▁sortu ”. B izk arra ▁ematen ▁didate , ez ▁aurpegia ; z oritx ar - egunean , ▁ordea , “ Zatoz ki gu ▁salbatzera ” ▁diote .
PRED:	They say to me , ‘ You are my father , and you are my father , and you have given me victory . '
GOLD:	To an image carved from a piece of wood they say , ‘ You are my father . 'To an idol chiseled from a block of stone they say , ‘ You are my mother . 'They turn their backs on me , but in times of trouble they cry out to me , ‘ Come and save us ! '

ID:	654
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁dute ▁burua ▁zeharo ▁soil duko , ▁ezta ▁ilea ▁gehi egi ▁luzatzen ▁utziko ▁ere ; ▁tx uk un ▁moztuko ▁dute .
PRED:	They must not shave their heads or shave their hair on their heads .
GOLD:	“ They must neither shave their heads nor let their hair grow too long . Instead , they must trim it regularly .

ID:	655
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁agintari ek ▁erabaki tako ▁hiru ▁eguneko ▁e pean ▁etortzen ▁ez ▁zen ari , ▁zigor ▁gisa , ▁ondasun ▁guztiak ▁kenduko ▁zitzaizkion ▁Jaunari ▁sagara tzeko , ▁eta ▁erbeste tik ▁itzuli tako en ▁elkarte tik ▁bota ▁egingo ▁zuten .
PRED:	The leaders of the town had been set apart for three days , as well as well as the Lord had promised . And all the people returned from exile , and they returned to the Lord .
GOLD:	Those who failed to come within three days would , if the leaders and elders so decided , forfeit all their property and be expelled from the assembly of the exiles .

ID:	656
INPUT:	▁hiriaren ▁sarrerako ▁plazan , p as agun e etan , ▁aldarri katzen ▁du :
PRED:	She calls out to the city , “ She calls on the walls of the city . ”
GOLD:	By the gates at the entrance to the town , on the road leading in , she cries aloud ,

ID:	657
INPUT:	▁Erregearen ▁haserre ak ▁heriotza ▁iragartzen ▁du , baina ▁zuhur rak ▁bare tzea ▁lortzen ▁du .
PRED:	The king will tell the king , but the wise will bring disaster upon the wise .
GOLD:	The anger of the king is a deadly threat ; the wise will try to appease it .

ID:	658
INPUT:	▁eta ▁esan ▁zuten : ▁« O dola ▁da ▁hori ! ▁Errege ▁horiek ▁borroka ▁egin ▁dute ▁eta ▁elkar ▁hil . ▁Ea , ▁moabdar rok , ▁harrapakin etara !»
PRED:	They said , “ This is what the king says : The kings of Moab have done against each other , and they will kill each other . ”
GOLD:	“ It 's blood ! ” the Moabites exclaimed . “ The three armies must have attacked and killed each other ! Let 's go , men of Moab , and collect the plunder ! ”

ID:	659
INPUT:	▁Bekatu ▁egin ▁dute ▁israeldarrek , ▁nik ▁ezarri ▁diedan ▁konpromis oa ▁hauts iz . ▁S un tsitu ▁behar ▁zuten etik ▁hartu ▁dute , ▁lap urtu ▁eta ▁beren ▁gau zen ▁artean ▁gorde .
PRED:	For the people of Israel have set apart as a covenant between the Lord and the people of Israel . They have refused to obey them and keep it safe among them .
GOLD:	Israel has sinned and broken my covenant ! They have stolen some of the things that I commanded must be set apart for me . And they have not only stolen them but have lied about it and hidden the things among their own belongings .

ID:	660
INPUT:	▁Gu tun ▁txiki ▁bat ▁idatzia ▁diot ▁eliz ▁elkarteari , ▁baina ▁D io t ref es ek , ▁dena ▁bere ▁esku ▁izan ▁nahi ▁duen ▁horrek , ▁ez ▁du ▁gure ▁aginpi dea ▁onartzen .
PRED:	I have one of the church in the church , but the one who wants to do it .
GOLD:	I wrote to the church about this , but Diotrephes , who loves to be the leader , refuses to have anything to do with us .

ID:	661
INPUT:	▁Bada ▁aberats arena ▁egin ▁eta ▁ezer ▁ez ▁duenik , baita ▁behartsu - itx urak ▁egin ▁eta ▁asko ▁duenik .
PRED:	Oh , how many are poor and poor and needy , and many are weak .
GOLD:	Some who are poor pretend to be rich ; others who are rich pretend to be poor .

ID:	662
INPUT:	▁Ez kon ▁zaitezte ▁eta ▁sortu ▁seme - alabak ; ▁ezkondu ▁seme - alabak ▁ere , ▁um eak ▁sor ▁ditzaten . ▁U gal ▁zaitezte ▁bizi ▁zareten ▁tokian , ▁ez ▁gutx itu .
PRED:	Do not let your children marry her children , and if you are children , let them live in the place where you live .
GOLD:	Marry and have children . Then find spouses for them so that you may have many grandchildren . Multiply ! Do not dwindle away !

ID:	663
INPUT:	▁« Hara , ▁auker an ▁jartzen ▁dizkizuet ▁gaur ▁bizia ▁eta ▁zoriona , ▁heriotza ▁eta ▁zoritxarra .
PRED:	“ Look , I am giving you today today today and death .
GOLD:	“ Now listen ! Today I am giving you a choice between life and death , between prosperity and disaster .

ID:	664
INPUT:	▁Ar raz oirik ▁gabe gau zak ▁bahituran ▁hartzen ▁zen izkien ▁anaiei , jantz iak ▁kentzen ▁biluzik ▁uz teraino .
PRED:	So I did n't let them stay in the night , and they took him clothes as security as a loan .
GOLD:	“ For example , you must have lent money to your friendand demanded clothing as security.Yes , you stripped him to the bone .

ID:	665
INPUT:	▁Labanek ▁bi ▁alaba ▁zituen : ▁nagusi en ari ▁Lea ▁zeritz on ▁eta ▁gazteen ari ▁Rakel .
PRED:	Laban had two sons and Leah ( which means “ Leah and Leah . )
GOLD:	Now Laban had two daughters . The older daughter was named Leah , and the younger one was Rachel .

ID:	666
INPUT:	▁Eki aldetik ▁mendebaldera , ▁herri ▁guztiek ▁aitortzen ▁dute ▁nire ▁izen ▁handia , ▁eta ▁non ahi ▁erretzen ▁didate ▁intsentsua ▁eta ▁behar ▁bezalako ▁oparia ▁eskaintzen . ▁Herri ▁guztiek ▁aitortzen ▁dute ▁nire ▁izen ▁handia ▁— dio ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak —.
PRED:	The people of the east will burn incense to the east of the east and burn incense and burn incense to me as a burnt offering , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : ”
GOLD:	But my name is honored by people of other nations from morning till night . All around the world they offer sweet incense and pure offerings in honor of my name . For my name is great among the nations , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	667
INPUT:	▁« Egin ▁dezagun ▁ituna ▁bion ▁artean , ▁zuen ▁aitak ▁eta ▁gure ak ▁beren ▁artean ▁egin ▁zuten ▁bezala . ▁Hona , ▁zilarra ▁eta ▁urrea ▁i gor tzen ▁dizkizut ▁esku - erakutsi . ▁Hau ts ▁ezazu ▁Israelgo ▁errege ▁Bax arekin ▁egina ▁duzun ▁ituna ; ▁horrela , ▁utzi ▁egin ▁beharko ▁dio ▁nire ▁aurkako ▁borro kari ».
PRED:	“ Let 's make a covenant between us and my father and Jerusalem , just as I have done . This is what the father of Israel , says : I will give you a gift from silver and gold and gold offering to the Lord , the God of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ Let there be a treaty between you and me like the one between your father and my father . See , I am sending you a gift of silver and gold . Break your treaty with King Baasha of Israel so that he will leave me alone . ”

ID:	668
INPUT:	▁Norbaitek ▁hondatu ▁nahi ▁baditu , ▁sua ▁aterako ▁da ▁haien ▁ahotik ▁eta ▁etsaiak ▁kiskal iko ▁ditu ; ▁horrela xe ▁hilko ▁da ▁berori ek ▁hondatu ▁nahi ▁dituen ▁oro .
PRED:	If you want to become a fire , it will be a fire , and it will be destroyed .
GOLD:	If anyone tries to harm them , fire flashes from their mouths and consumes their enemies . This is how anyone who tries to harm them must die .

ID:	669
INPUT:	▁Handik ▁I tur riko ▁ate ▁aldera ▁eta ▁Erregearen ▁urtegi rantz ▁jo ▁nuen , ▁baina ▁gainean ▁nin dera man ▁abereak ▁ez ▁zuen ▁handik ▁igarotzeko ▁leku rik .
PRED:	One day I went to the gate , but I stayed beside the pool of water , but there was no water .
GOLD:	Then I went to the Fountain Gate and to the King 's Pool , but my donkey could n't get through the rubble .

ID:	670
INPUT:	▁Neure ▁herria ▁jo ▁duen hondamen az ▁nago ▁jota , go ibel ▁eta ▁iz uak ▁hartu ta .
PRED:	My people lies in ruins , and I am filled with grief .
GOLD:	I hurt with the hurt of my people.I mourn and am overcome with grief .

ID:	671
INPUT:	▁U gari ▁baino ▁ugariago ▁nuen ▁esnea , hark aitz ek ▁ere ▁olio - errek ak ▁isurtzen ▁zituzten nire tzat .
PRED:	I took the rocks of the desert , the olive oil , and the streams of olive oil .
GOLD:	My steps were awash in cream , and the rocks gushed olive oil for me .

ID:	672
INPUT:	▁Egun ▁batzu en ▁buruan , ▁hondatu ▁eginen ▁dut ▁zure ▁eta ▁zure ▁aitaren ▁senitarte aren ▁agintea . ▁Zure ▁etxean ▁ez ▁da ▁inor ▁zahar tzar ora ▁helduko .
PRED:	In that day I will make a ruin of your father 's family , and no one will be able to rule over your family 's family .
GOLD:	The time is coming when I will put an end to your family , so it will no longer serve as my priests . All the members of your family will die before their time . None will reach old age .

ID:	673
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁seinale ▁bat ▁agertu ▁zen ▁zeruan : ▁herensuge ▁gorri ▁handi ▁bat , ▁zazpi ▁buru ▁eta ▁hamar ▁adar ▁zituena , ▁eta ▁buru etan ▁koroa ▁bana .
PRED:	Then another sign appeared to him from heaven , a great beast , and seven heads of the dragon , who was the head of the dragon .
GOLD:	Then I witnessed in heaven another significant event . I saw a large red dragon with seven heads and ten horns , with seven crowns on his heads .

ID:	674
INPUT:	▁« Em azue ▁zuetako ▁batek ▁morroi ▁bat ▁duela ▁soro - lan ▁edo ▁artzain tzarako . ▁Morro ia ▁etxera tzean , ▁“ H ator ▁berehala ▁mahai ra ” ▁esaten ▁ote ▁dio ?
PRED:	“ One day a servant of your servant , who is the master of your master 's household , and if someone asks , ‘ What is it right to eat ? '
GOLD:	“ When a servant comes in from plowing or taking care of sheep , does his master say , ‘ Come in and eat with me ' ?

ID:	675
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion ▁Jauna ▁Moisesi :
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	The Lord also said to Moses ,

ID:	676
INPUT:	▁eta ▁poz ten ▁naiz ▁han ▁ez ▁izan az , ▁zeuen ▁onerako ▁izango ▁baita , ▁horrela ▁sinets ▁dezazuen . ▁G oazen , ▁bada , ▁haren ▁etxera .
PRED:	I am afraid to be glad , for you will be ready to believe that you have been ready to believe in him .
GOLD:	And for your sakes , I 'm glad I was n't there , for now you will really believe . Come , let 's go see him . ”

ID:	677
INPUT:	▁A izko ra ▁galdu ▁eta ▁aurkitu
PRED:	Paul 's Final Instructions
GOLD:	The Floating Ax Head

ID:	678
INPUT:	▁Horra ▁hor , ▁bada , ▁Eleazar ▁apaizak , ▁Nunen ▁seme ▁Josuek ▁eta ▁israeldar ▁leinuetako ▁senitarte buruek ▁Xil on , ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrean , ▁elkarketa - etxolaren ▁sarreran ▁zotz ▁eginez , ▁izendatu ▁zituzten ▁ondar eak . ▁Horrela ▁burutu ▁zuten ▁lurraldearen ▁ban aketa .
PRED:	That is why Joshua son of Nun , Eleazar son of Nun , the priest , the leader of the tribes of Israel , and Joshua son of Nun . They set up camp at the entrance of the Tabernacle at the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	These are the territories that Eleazar the priest , Joshua son of Nun , and the tribal leaders allocated as grants of land to the tribes of Israel by casting sacred lots in the presence of the Lord at the entrance of the Tabernacle at Shiloh . So the division of the land was completed .

ID:	679
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁beste ▁gora beh er arik ▁baldin ▁baduzue , ▁leg ezko ▁batzar ▁batean ▁erabakiko ▁da .
PRED:	If you need a case , if you present a case to the assembly of the community , it must be required .
GOLD:	And if there are complaints about other matters , they can be settled in a legal assembly .

ID:	680
INPUT:	▁Bata , ▁Hexb onen ▁bizi ▁zen ▁Sihon ▁errege ▁amortar ra ▁izan ▁zen ; ▁honen ▁menpeko ▁erreinua ▁Arnon ▁erreka ▁ondoan ▁dagoen ▁Aro er ▁hiritik ▁amondarren ▁lur - mu ga ▁den ▁Jab ok ▁erre kar aino ▁hedatzen ▁zen , ▁Ar n onen ▁ib arra ▁eta ▁Galaad ▁lurralde ▁erdia ▁hartzen ▁zitu elarik ;
PRED:	After King Sihon of Heshbon , he lived in Heshbon . He also lived in the area of the Arnon Gorge to the Arnon Gorge ( which extended from Aroer to the Arnon Gorge ( which extended from the Arnon Gorge ) to the territory of Gilead .
GOLD:	King Sihon of the Amorites , who lived in Heshbon , was defeated . His kingdom included Aroer , on the edge of the Arnon Gorge , and extended from the middle of the Arnon Gorge to the Jabbok River , which serves as a border for the Ammonites . This territory included the southern half of the territory of Gilead .

ID:	681
INPUT:	▁Su ge a ▁zen ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak ▁egindako ▁pizti arik ▁maltzur rena . S u ge ak ▁esan ▁zion ▁emakumeari :— Jainkoak ▁debekatu ▁egin ▁dizue , ▁beraz , ▁bara tzeko ▁arb ola ▁guztietako ▁fruitu etarik ▁j atea ?
PRED:	The Lord your God burned fire on the wild animal , and he said to the woman , “ Why are you the firstborn of all the wild animals that scurry along the garden ? ”
GOLD:	The serpent was the shrewdest of all the wild animals the Lord God had made . One day he asked the woman , “ Did God really say you must not eat the fruit from any of the trees in the garden ? ”

ID:	682
INPUT:	▁Noem ik ▁erantzuten ▁zien :— Ez ▁deitu ▁niri ▁gehiago ▁Noem i ▁— z orion eko —, ▁M ara ▁— z oritx arreko — ▁baizik , ▁Jainko ▁Ahal tsuak ▁zoritx arrez ▁bete ▁bainau .
PRED:	“ No , ” Naomi said , “ for Naomi is too great for me , for the Almighty is coming , who is on me . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't call me Naomi , ” she responded . “ Instead , call me Mara , for the Almighty has made life very bitter for me .

ID:	683
INPUT:	▁Hona , ▁bada , ▁Jaunak ▁esan : ▁“ Ez ▁zara ▁ja ikiko ▁etzana ▁zauden ▁oh etik ; ▁hil ▁eginen ▁zara ”». ▁Eta ▁joan ▁egin ▁zen ▁Elias .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : ‘ You are not going to die , and you will die . ' ” So Elijah went home .
GOLD:	Now , therefore , this is what the Lord says : You will never leave the bed you are lying on ; you will surely die . ' ” So Elijah went to deliver the message .

ID:	684
INPUT:	▁Biltzar ▁Nagus iaren ▁aurrera ▁eraman ▁zituzten ▁eta ▁apaiz ▁nagusiak ▁esan ▁zien :
PRED:	Then the high priest took the high council and said to them ,
GOLD:	Then they brought the apostles before the high council , where the high priest confronted them .

ID:	685
INPUT:	▁Ar n asa ▁galtzen ▁ari ▁naiz , ▁bihotza ▁barruan ▁lehor .
PRED:	My heart is full of food , and I give them dry ground .
GOLD:	I am losing all hope ; I am paralyzed with fear .

ID:	686
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁du ▁maite ▁zaldi aren ▁indarra , ez ▁du ▁es tim atzen ▁gizakiaren ▁bizkor tasuna .
PRED:	He loves his horses , but he delights in them .
GOLD:	He takes no pleasure in the strength of a horseor in human might .

ID:	687
INPUT:	▁Opari tik ▁irin - esku ta da ▁hartuko ▁du ▁oroigarri ▁gisa ▁eta ▁aldare ▁gainean ▁erreko . ▁Ondoren , ▁ura ▁edan araziko ▁dio ▁emakumeari .
PRED:	This is a guilt offering to the priest , and he must burn it on the altar . Then he will burn it on the altar .
GOLD:	He will take a handful of the flour as a token portion and burn it on the altar , and he will require the woman to drink the water .

ID:	688
INPUT:	▁orain , ▁ordea , ▁barkatu ▁eta ▁adorea ▁eman ▁behar ▁diozue , ▁gehi eg izko ▁nahi gabeak ▁lur ▁jo a ▁utz ▁ez ▁dezan .
PRED:	But now , you should be ashamed , and do n't let them be ashamed of them .
GOLD:	Now , however , it is time to forgive and comfort him . Otherwise he may be overcome by discouragement .

ID:	689
INPUT:	▁Eman ▁dezagun , “ Ar doa ▁eta ▁pat tarra u gari ▁emango ▁dizut ” esaka ▁ari ▁dela ▁norbait ; horre lako ▁mezu ▁hutsal eta ▁gezur rez koa ▁l ek ar keen aizango ▁litza tek eh erri ▁honek ▁merezi ▁duen ▁profeta !
PRED:	“ Come , ” says the Lord , “ I will give you some of you to say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : We will have been a prophet , a prophet who has been a prophet , a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet who is a prophet
GOLD:	Suppose a prophet full of lies would say to you , “ I 'll preach to you the joys of wine and alcohol ! ” That 's just the kind of prophet you would like !

ID:	690
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁inork ▁ez ▁dezake ▁esan ▁nire ▁izenean ▁bataia tua ▁izan ▁denik .
PRED:	In fact , no one can be baptized in my name .
GOLD:	for now no one can say they were baptized in my name .

ID:	691
INPUT:	▁eta ▁barkatu ▁gure ▁erru en ▁z orra , gu k ▁ere ▁geure ▁zor dun ei bar katu ▁di egun ez ▁gero ;
PRED:	Even the Lord our God , you should forgive us , and if we are caught up , we will not be punished .
GOLD:	and forgive us our sins , as we have forgiven those who sin against us .

ID:	692
INPUT:	▁Egin ▁zion , ▁bada , ▁dei ▁Samuelek ▁Jaunari ▁eta ▁honek ▁trumo iak ▁eta ▁euria ▁bidali ▁zituen ▁egun ▁hartan . ▁Herri ▁osoak ▁Jaunari ▁eta ▁Samueli ▁beldur ▁ikaragarria ▁hartu ▁zien .
PRED:	So Samuel summoned the Lord and said to the Lord , “ The Lord has sent a rain and the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	So Samuel called to the Lord , and the Lord sent thunder and rain that day . And all the people were terrified of the Lord and of Samuel .

ID:	693
INPUT:	▁Berehala , ▁atzera ▁begiratu ▁eta ▁Jesus ▁ikusi ▁zuen ▁zutik , ▁baina ▁ez ▁zen ▁konturatu ▁Jesus ▁zela .
PRED:	As soon as Jesus saw that Jesus had n't seen him , he did n't know how he was .
GOLD:	She turned to leave and saw someone standing there . It was Jesus , but she did n't recognize him .

ID:	694
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁eskain tzaileak ▁erre - opari gaia ▁larru tu ▁eta ▁zatitu ▁egingo ▁du ;
PRED:	Then the priest will slaughter it with a burnt offering and slaughter it with pieces .
GOLD:	Then skin the animal and cut it into pieces .

ID:	695
INPUT:	▁Ai , ▁nire ▁hitzak ▁idatziak ▁geldituko ▁balira , ▁liburuan ▁ezarri ak !
PRED:	What sorrow awaits me , but they would be read to me .
GOLD:	“ Oh , that my words could be recorded.Oh , that they could be inscribed on a monument ,

ID:	696
INPUT:	▁Z orre tan ▁nago , ▁izan ▁ere , ▁g rezi ar ▁herriarekin ▁nahiz ▁g rezi ar ▁ez ▁diren ekin , ▁ikasi ekin ▁nahiz ▁ezik asi ekin .
PRED:	I am not a message for Jews or Greeks , who have not been unfaithful or Greeks alike .
GOLD:	For I have a great sense of obligation to people in both the civilized world and the rest of the world , to the educated and uneducated alike .

ID:	697
INPUT:	▁Neure ▁gain ▁hartzen ▁dut ▁zure ▁semearen ▁erantz uk izuna ; ▁neu ri ▁eskatu ▁kontuak . ▁Itzul tzen ▁ez ▁badizu t ▁eta ▁aurrera ▁ekartzen ▁ez , ▁errudun ▁izango ▁nauzu ▁betiko !
PRED:	If I want to take my son , I want it to bring it to you . If you have not sinned , you will not be punished . ”
GOLD:	I personally guarantee his safety . You may hold me responsible if I do n't bring him back to you . Then let me bear the blame forever .

ID:	698
INPUT:	▁Hamabi ▁urte ▁zituen ▁Manases ek ▁errege ▁izaten ▁hastean ▁eta ▁berrogeita ▁hamabost ▁urtez ▁izan ▁zen ▁errege ▁Jerusalemen . ▁Haren ▁amak ▁H ef tzi - Ba ▁zuen ▁izena .
PRED:	Manasseh was twelve years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years .
GOLD:	Manasseh was twelve years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem fifty-five years . His mother was Hephzibah .

ID:	699
INPUT:	▁baina ▁besteei ▁barkatzen ▁ez ▁bad izki ezue , ▁zuei ▁ere ▁ez ▁dizkizue ▁barkatuko ▁zeuen ▁hutsegi teak ▁zeruko ▁Aitak .
PRED:	But if you refuse to forgive your sins , you will never forgive you .
GOLD:	But if you refuse to forgive others , your Father will not forgive your sins .

ID:	700
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁aska tasuna ▁ematen ▁duen ▁lege ▁bikaina ▁hausn artu ▁eta ▁horri ▁tinko ▁eusten ▁diona ▁— ez ▁er raz ▁ahaz ten ▁duen ▁entzu le ▁bezala , ▁benetako ▁bete tzaile ▁bezala ▁baizik —, ▁hori ▁zoriontsu ▁izango ▁da ▁legea ▁betez .
PRED:	But this is what the law of Moses says : “ This is what the law who does not forget it , just as you have done . But this is the law who does not obey the law of Moses .
GOLD:	But if you look carefully into the perfect law that sets you free , and if you do what it says and do n't forget what you heard , then God will bless you for doing it .

ID:	701
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁herriaren ▁bekatua
PRED:	Judgment for Israel 's Kings
GOLD:	Judah 's Sin and Punishment

ID:	702
INPUT:	▁Azkenik , ▁senideok , ▁poz ▁zaitezte , ▁saiatu ▁bete - bete ak ▁izaten ▁eta ▁izan ▁adore . ▁Bizi ▁zaitezte ▁elkar ▁ongi ▁hartuz ▁eta ▁bakean . ▁Eta ▁maitasun aren ▁eta ▁bak earen ▁Jainkoa ▁zuekin ▁izango ▁da .
PRED:	Finally , dear brothers and sisters , be careful to obey one another day . Be strong and courageous ! Be strong in peace and courageous ! May God be with you and be with you .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , I close my letter with these last words : Be joyful . Grow to maturity . Encourage each other . Live in harmony and peace . Then the God of love and peace will be with you .

ID:	703
INPUT:	▁egipto ar , ▁judat ar , ▁edom dar , ▁amon dar , ▁moabdar ▁eta ▁be du ino ▁guztiak . ▁Izan ▁ere , ▁herri ▁horiek , ▁eta ▁Israelek ▁berak , ▁ez ▁dute ▁ezarri ▁bihotzean ▁itunaren ▁seinale ▁den ▁erdain kuntza ».
PRED:	Judah , Edom , Edom , Edom , Edom , Edom , and Ammon , and all the people of Israel have been circumcised . They have not been circumcised in their hearts , for they have not been circumcised . ”
GOLD:	“ A time is coming , ” says the Lord , “ when I will punish all those who are circumcised in body but not in spirit —

ID:	704
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁dio :« Entzun ▁niri , ▁Jaun ▁honi , zuzen bide aren ▁atzetik ▁leh iatzen eta ▁nire ▁bila ▁z abil tz aten ok . Begira ▁zein ▁harkaitz etan ▁ebaki ak , n ongo ▁harro bi tik at er at akoak ▁zareten :
PRED:	“ Listen to me , this is what the Lord says : Listen to me , you who are hiding in the rock where you are camped at the rock of refuge .
GOLD:	“ Listen to me , all who hope for deliverance — all who seek the Lord ! Consider the rock from which you were cut , the quarry from which you were mined .

ID:	705
INPUT:	▁I kara ▁zaitezte ▁eta ▁ez ▁egin ▁bekaturik , azter tu ▁zeuen ▁barru ak , ▁egin ▁negar ▁oh e ▁gainean .
PRED:	Do not turn away from your heart , and weep on your bed .
GOLD:	Offer sacrifices in the right spirit , and trust the Lord .

ID:	706
INPUT:	▁Saul , ▁errege ▁izendatu a ▁herriaren ▁aurrean
PRED:	Saul Defeats the people of Israel
GOLD:	Samuel Anoints Saul as King

ID:	707
INPUT:	▁S ol da du ek , ▁Jesus ▁gurutziltzatu ▁ondoren , ▁haren ▁jantziak ▁hartu ▁eta ▁lau ▁zati ▁egin ▁zituzten , ▁bakoitz arentzat ▁bana ; ▁gero ▁ tun ika ▁hartu ▁zuten , ▁baina ▁jos tur arik ▁gabea ▁zenez , ▁goitik ▁behera ▁eh undu a ,
PRED:	When Jesus was crucified , he took four of his robe and hung on each side . Then he took some of his robe , and he took some of them into one piece of cloth .
GOLD:	When the soldiers had crucified Jesus , they divided his clothes among the four of them . They also took his robe , but it was seamless , woven in one piece from top to bottom .

ID:	708
INPUT:	▁Erregearen ▁laguntzaile ▁nagusiak , ▁ordea , ▁esan ▁zion ▁Jainkoaren ▁gizonari :— Jaunak ▁zeruko ▁ate xkak ▁ireki ko ▁bal itu ▁ere , ▁gertatuko ▁ote ▁litzateke ▁horrelakorik ? El ise ok ▁ihardetsi ▁zion :— Zeuk ▁ikusiko ▁duzu ▁zeure ▁begiz , ▁baina ▁ez ▁duzu ▁hartatik ▁jango .
PRED:	But the king of heaven said to the man of God , “ The Lord has opened the door of heaven ! What did you see ? ” So Elisha said , “ You wo n't see it like this ? ”
GOLD:	The officer assisting the king said to the man of God , “ That could n't happen even if the Lord opened the windows of heaven ! ” But Elisha replied , “ You will see it happen with your own eyes , but you wo n't be able to eat any of it ! ”

ID:	709
INPUT:	▁Ai atera ▁iritsi ▁da ▁eraso tzailea , M i g ronen ▁barrena ▁dator , M ik m asen ▁egin ▁du armen ▁ikus ka pena ,
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you who come to war , and then come down to see Satan , and he has done to us .
GOLD:	Look , the Assyrians are now at Aiath.They are passing through Migronand are storing their equipment at Micmash .

ID:	710
INPUT:	▁Ez , ▁baizik ▁eta ▁Jo el ▁profetak ▁esan ▁zuena ▁ari ▁da ▁hemen ▁gertatzen :
PRED:	But the prophets did n't say , “ The prophet is here here here is the Messiah .
GOLD:	No , what you see was predicted long ago by the prophet Joel :

ID:	711
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁hamabi ▁apostol uak ▁izendatu
PRED:	The First Disciples
GOLD:	Jesus Sends Out the Twelve Apostles

ID:	712
INPUT:	▁De abru aren ▁menpe ▁zegoen ▁gizon ▁bat ▁eraman ▁zioten ▁Jesusi , ▁i tsua ▁eta ▁mu tua . ▁Hark ▁sendatu ▁egin ▁zuen ▁eta ▁gizona ▁hitz ▁egiten ▁eta ▁ikusten ▁hasi ▁zen .
PRED:	The demons was possessed by demons by the demons , and the man who had been healed . He was healed , and he healed him .
GOLD:	Then a demon-possessed man , who was blind and could n't speak , was brought to Jesus . He healed the man so that he could both speak and see .

ID:	713
INPUT:	▁Kris tau ▁ez ▁dena , ▁ordea , ▁banan du ▁nahi ▁balu , ▁banan du ▁bedi ; ▁horrelako etan ▁kris ta ua ▁— gizon ▁nahiz ▁emakume — ▁aske ▁gelditzen ▁da , ▁Jainkoak ▁bakean ▁bizitzera ▁deitu ▁baitzaituzte .
PRED:	But if any person who wants to be kind to live , let 's be put to anyone who wants to live in peace or in peace , whether you are called to live in peace .
GOLD:	( But if the husband or wife who is n't a believer insists on leaving , let them go . In such cases the believing husband or wife is no longer bound to the other , for God has called you to live in peace . )

ID:	714
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁zuei ▁zer ▁axola ? Nire ▁herria ▁zapaltzen ▁duzue eta ▁hanka pean ▁hartzen behar tsuen ▁duin tasuna ». Jainko ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak esan ▁du .
PRED:	But what will you oppress you ? The Lord of Heaven 's Armies 's Armies , the God of Israel , says , “ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies ! ”
GOLD:	How dare you crush my people , grinding the faces of the poor into the dust ? ” demands the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	715
INPUT:	▁B uka tzeko , ▁sendo ▁zaitzatela ▁Jaunak ▁bere ▁indar ▁ahaltsu az .
PRED:	May the Lord bless you with his mighty power , and he will strengthen you .
GOLD:	A final word : Be strong in the Lord and in his mighty power .

ID:	716
INPUT:	▁Era ▁berean , ▁apaizburu , ▁lege - maisu ▁eta ▁zah arrek ▁ere ▁irri ▁egiten ▁zioten , ▁esanez :
PRED:	The leading priests , teachers of religious law , and the teachers of religious law said , “ What sorrow awaits you ? ”
GOLD:	The leading priests , the teachers of religious law , and the elders also mocked Jesus .

ID:	717
INPUT:	▁Sak rifizio ▁horiek ▁eskaintzen ▁dituenak ▁litro ▁eta ▁erdi ren ▁bat ▁oliotan ▁oraturiko ▁lau ▁kilo ▁ogi - ir in ▁garbi ▁erantsiko ▁dizkie
PRED:	Now present an offering to be accompanied by twelve quarts of choice flour moistened with olive oil , four quarts of choice flour moistened with olive oil .
GOLD:	When you present these offerings , you must also give the Lord a grain offering of two quarts of choice flour mixed with one quart of olive oil .

ID:	718
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁dio , ▁izan ▁ere , ▁Liburu ▁Santuak : ▁Hona ▁nik ▁Sionen ▁harri ▁bat ▁ipini , ▁g iltz arri ▁aukeratu ▁eta ▁bikaina . ▁Horre tan ▁sinesten ▁duenak ▁ez ▁du ▁huts ▁egingo .
PRED:	This is what the Scriptures say , “ This is what the Scriptures say : I have chosen one who has chosen him to become a rock . ”
GOLD:	As the Scriptures say , “ I am placing a cornerstone in Jerusalem , chosen for great honor , and anyone who trusts in himwill never be disgraced . ”

ID:	719
INPUT:	▁Akaz ▁Damasko ra ▁joan ▁zen ▁Asiriako ▁errege ▁Ti g l at - P il es er ▁ikus tatzera . ▁Orduan , ▁ikusi ▁zuen ▁Damasko ko ▁aldarea , ▁eta ▁beronen ▁neurri - egi tu rak ▁bidali ▁zizkion ▁Urias ▁apaizari , ▁nolako a ▁egin ▁jaki teko .
PRED:	Then Ahaz went to Damascus to see King Ahaz of Damascus . Then he saw that he had seen the altar of Damascus and his altar . Then he sent Uriah the priest to tell Uriah the priest what had happened to do .
GOLD:	King Ahaz then went to Damascus to meet with King Tiglath-pileser of Assyria . While he was there , he took special note of the altar . Then he sent a model of the altar to Uriah the priest , along with its design in full detail .

ID:	720
INPUT:	▁Danielek ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Errege ▁jauna , ▁ez ▁dut ▁erregal u ▁edo ▁sari ▁beharrik , ▁gorde ▁zeuretzat ▁edo ▁eman ▁bes teren ▁bati . ▁Baina ▁hor ▁idatzia ▁irakur riko ▁dizut ▁eta ▁esanahia ▁azalduko .
PRED:	Daniel replied , “ I have given him a gift of gift or gift or gift or gift or gift . But I will tell you what the Scriptures say . ”
GOLD:	Daniel answered the king , “ Keep your gifts or give them to someone else , but I will tell you what the writing means .

ID:	721
INPUT:	▁eta ▁gure ▁Jainkoarentzat errege - herri ▁eta ▁apaiz ▁egin ▁dituzu , eta ▁lur ▁osoan ▁errege ▁izango ▁dira ».
PRED:	You have made a High Priest over all the nations , and you will be kings and kings . ”
GOLD:	And you have caused them to becomea Kingdom of priests for our God.And they will reign on the earth . ”

ID:	722
INPUT:	▁Esan ▁zuen : Ez ku tatu ▁egingo ▁diet ▁aurpegia , eta ▁ikusiko ▁dut ▁zer ▁amai era ▁duten , jende ▁gaizto tua ▁baita , leial tasun ik ▁gabeko ▁seme - alabak .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ I will see what the wicked will happen to you , and I will see your own children .
GOLD:	He said , ‘ I will abandon them ; then see what becomes of them.For they are a twisted generation , children without integrity .

ID:	723
INPUT:	▁Zeure ▁eskuaz ▁kanpora ▁bota ▁zenituen ▁beste ▁nazioak , gure ▁gurasoak ▁bertan ▁lan datzeko ; beste ▁herriak ▁gogor ▁jo ▁zenituen , gure ▁gurasoak ▁bertan ▁haz arazteko .
PRED:	You drove out the nations of the nations , and their ancestors carried them out of our ancestors , and they destroyed them .
GOLD:	They did not conquer the land with their swords ; it was not their own strong arm that gave them victory.It was your right hand and strong armand the blinding light from your face that helped them , for you loved them .

ID:	724
INPUT:	▁« N ol az ▁ausartzen ▁zara ▁esaten :“ Ez ▁naiz ▁kutsatu , ez ▁naiz ▁Baalen ▁idoloen ondoren ▁ibili ” ? Ikus ▁zeure ▁urrats ak ▁haranean eta ▁aitortu ▁zeure ▁jokabidea ; har at - honat ▁dabilen g am el uk ume ▁kas kar inaren antz eko ▁zara ,
PRED:	“ O Lord , do n't you say , ‘ I have not been defiled by the images of Baal , but you have not done in the valley of Baal . Why are you doing this ? '
GOLD:	“ You say , ‘ That 's not true ! I have n't worshiped the images of Baal ! 'But how can you say that ? Go and look in any valley in the land ! Face the awful sins you have done.You are like a restless female cameldesperately searching for a mate .

ID:	725
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁zuzen ▁joka tzeagatik ▁sufritu ▁beharrean ▁gertatzen ▁bazarete , ▁zorion ekoak ▁zuek ! ▁Ez ▁izan ▁inoren ▁beldur , ▁ez ▁ikaratu !
PRED:	But if you suffer with integrity , you wo n't be afraid of those who do n't be afraid .
GOLD:	But even if you suffer for doing what is right , God will reward you for it . So do n't worry or be afraid of their threats .

ID:	726
INPUT:	▁Zer uko ▁izarrak ▁bezain batu gari tu ▁zen izkien ▁seme - alabak , haien ▁gurasoei ▁agindu ▁lurraldera ek arri ▁zenituen .
PRED:	I took them as strong as the stars , the stars of the sky , and they gave their ancestors to their ancestors .
GOLD:	You made their descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and brought them into the land you had promised to their ancestors .

ID:	727
INPUT:	▁P ro b etx u ▁gabeko ▁hitzarmena
PRED:	A Call to Obey
GOLD:	Judah 's Worthless Treaty with Egypt

ID:	728
INPUT:	▁Gu ▁gara ▁honen ▁guztiaren ▁lekuko , ▁gu ▁eta ▁esaneko ▁zaizkion ei ▁Jainkoak ▁ematen ▁dien ▁Espiritu ▁Santua .
PRED:	We know that God is his witnesses , and he is the Holy One who gives us great power .
GOLD:	We are witnesses of these things and so is the Holy Spirit , who is given by God to those who obey him . ”

ID:	729
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁beste ▁hirietako ek , ▁baita ▁haietan ▁bizi ▁ziren ▁israeldarrek ▁ere , ▁beren ▁behi , ▁ardi ▁eta ▁beren ▁Jainko ▁Jaunari ▁sagaraturiko ▁beste ▁eskaintzen ▁hamarrenak ▁eman ▁zituzten . ▁Horrela , ▁ondasun - multzo ▁handiak ▁egin ▁ziren .
PRED:	The people of Judah also lived in the land of Judah , including their herds , cattle , sheep , goats , and cattle , and cattle , and the people of Judah .
GOLD:	The people who had moved to Judah from Israel , and the people of Judah themselves , brought in the tithes of their cattle , sheep , and goats and a tithe of the things that had been dedicated to the Lord their God , and they piled them up in great heaps .

ID:	730
INPUT:	▁Joan ▁zen ▁Gede on ▁eta ▁antx ume ▁bat ▁prestatu ▁zuen ▁eta , ▁hogei ▁kilo - edo ▁irin ez , ▁legamia ▁gabeko ▁ogiak ▁egin . ▁Gero , ▁okela ▁o tar rean ▁eta ▁sal da ▁el tzean ▁harturik , ▁arte ondo ▁azpi ra ▁eraman ▁eta ▁Jaunari ▁eskaini ▁zion ▁dena .
PRED:	Then Gideon prepared a young goat for a young goat , and he prepared a grain offering to the Lord . Then he took the bread and made it with a grain offering . Then he took it into the basket of bread and made it right with the Lord .
GOLD:	Gideon hurried home . He cooked a young goat , and with a basket of flour he baked some bread without yeast . Then , carrying the meat in a basket and the broth in a pot , he brought them out and presented them to the angel , who was under the great tree .

ID:	731
INPUT:	▁Emakumeak ▁erantzun ▁zien :— Ongi . ▁Hala ▁bedi ! Eta ▁agur ▁egin ▁zien . ▁Alde ▁egin ▁zutenean , ▁emakumeak ▁lok arri ▁gor ria ▁lotu ▁zuen ▁leiho an .
PRED:	The woman replied , “ Let 's be right , and let her go out into the window . Then the woman tied up into the window . ”
GOLD:	“ I accept your terms , ” she replied . And she sent them on their way , leaving the scarlet rope hanging from the window .

ID:	732
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁ordu tik ▁aurrera , ▁Jesus ▁nola ▁hilko ▁pents atzen ▁hasi ▁ziren ;
PRED:	So Jesus ' disciples began to kill him .
GOLD:	So from that time on , the Jewish leaders began to plot Jesus ' death .

ID:	733
INPUT:	▁Jakin ▁zuten ▁apostolu ek ▁eta ▁Jude ako ▁senideek , ▁jentil ek ▁ere ▁Jainkoaren ▁hitza ▁onartu ▁zutela .
PRED:	When the apostles heard that the apostles were apostles were apostles , they accepted the word of God .
GOLD:	Soon the news reached the apostles and other believers in Judea that the Gentiles had received the word of God .

ID:	734
INPUT:	▁L itx ar r eriaz ▁jan ▁ohi ▁zutenak ▁ah itu rik ▁erortzen ▁dira ▁kaleetan . L ux u ▁artean ▁hazi ek ▁zab or tegian ▁dute ▁bizileku .
PRED:	They will fall in the streets , and those who trust in the streets will fall into the streets .
GOLD:	The people who once ate the richest foodsnow beg in the streets for anything they can get.Those who once wore the finest clothesnow search the garbage dumps for food .

ID:	735
INPUT:	▁Abraham ▁zaharra ▁izan ▁arren , ▁Sara ▁haurdun ▁gertatu ▁zen , ▁eta ▁semea ▁eman ▁zion , ▁Jainkoak ▁iragarri tako ▁garaian .
PRED:	Abraham , Sarah , Sarah , and Sarah , had given birth to a son of God .
GOLD:	She became pregnant , and she gave birth to a son for Abraham in his old age . This happened at just the time God had said it would .

ID:	736
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁diote : ▁« Ea , ▁go azen ▁ardo tara . M oz kor ▁gaitezen ▁pat tar rez ! Eta ▁bihar ▁beste ▁horrenbeste , n ah ikoa ▁baitago !»
PRED:	They say , “ Come , let 's go into the courtyard of wine ! Let 's go into the courtyard . ”
GOLD:	“ Come , ” they say , “ let 's get some wine and have a party.Let 's all get drunk.Then tomorrow we 'll do it againand have an even bigger party ! ”

ID:	737
INPUT:	▁kontuan ▁hartu ▁behar ▁da ▁legea ▁ez ▁dela ▁ezarri ▁zintzo entzat , ▁beste ▁hau entzat ▁baizik : ▁gaizto , ▁errebelde , ▁erlijio gabe ▁eta ▁bekatari entzat , ▁sak ri le go ▁eta ▁prof ana tzaile entzat , ▁aita - amen ▁hiltzaile ▁eta ▁giza ▁hiltzaile entzat ,
PRED:	This is the law of the law for those who are righteous , but they have no respect for themselves . Instead , they have rebelled against sinners , slander , and their father , children , children , and children , and children , children , children , children , and children , children , and children , children , children , and children , and children , children , and children , and children , and children .
GOLD:	For the law was not intended for people who do what is right . It is for people who are lawless and rebellious , who are ungodly and sinful , who consider nothing sacred and defile what is holy , who kill their father or mother or commit other murders .

ID:	738
INPUT:	▁Amon darrak ▁irten ▁eta ▁hiriko ▁ate ▁aurrean ▁prestatu ▁ziren ▁borro karako ▁lerro tan . ▁Bai ▁Tz oba ▁eta ▁Reh ob eko ▁arame arrak , ▁bai ▁Tob ▁eta ▁M aak ako ▁gizonak , ▁berriz , ▁beste ▁toki ▁batean ▁ziren , ▁landan .
PRED:	The armies of Ammon went out to the city of Rabbah , son of Rehob , grandson of Rehob , and Hadadezer 's army went out into the fields .
GOLD:	The Ammonite troops came out and drew up their battle lines at the entrance of the city gate , while the Arameans from Zobah and Rehob and the men from Tob and Maacah positioned themselves to fight in the open fields .

ID:	739
INPUT:	▁Isaiasek ▁Jesusi ▁buruz ▁esan ▁zuen ▁hau , ▁ikusia ▁baitzuen ▁beraren ▁Jainko - ain tza .
PRED:	When Isaiah heard that the Lord had seen him , he was very great .
GOLD:	Isaiah was referring to Jesus when he said this , because he saw the future and spoke of the Messiah 's glory .

ID:	740
INPUT:	▁Seme , ▁entzun ▁aitaren ▁oh arrak eta ▁ez ▁baztertu ▁amaren ▁irakas penak ;
PRED:	My child , listen to my father 's mother , and do n't ignore my mother 's mother .
GOLD:	My child , listen when your father corrects you.Do n't neglect your mother 's instruction .

ID:	741
INPUT:	▁Esan , ▁bada , ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak , ▁diodan ▁hau : ▁Ez ▁da ▁nire ▁hitzik ▁atzera tuko , ▁bete ▁egingo ▁da ▁esaten ▁dudana . ▁Nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ I will not speak to you , ” says the Sovereign Lord . “ This is what I have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Therefore , tell them , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : No more delay ! I will now do everything I have threatened . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ' ”

ID:	742
INPUT:	▁Erromes - kanta . B egi ak ▁mendi etara ▁ditut ▁jasotzen : non dik ▁etorriko ▁ote ▁zait ▁laguntza ?
PRED:	I look to the hills , but my way will go to the hills .
GOLD:	I look up to the mountains — does my help come from there ?

ID:	743
INPUT:	▁Horrelako ak ▁ez ▁beza ▁uste ▁Jaunarengandik ▁ezer ▁iritsiko ▁duenik ,
PRED:	Do n't say , ‘ What will you turn away from the Lord ? '
GOLD:	Such people should not expect to receive anything from the Lord .

ID:	744
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁nik ▁erantzungo ▁diet : ▁“ Ez ▁zaituztet ▁inoiz ▁ezagutu ; ▁alde ▁niregandik , ▁gaizkile ok !”
PRED:	“ But I will answer you , ‘ Do n't let me escape from me . '
GOLD:	But I will reply , ‘ I never knew you . Get away from me , you who break God 's laws . '

ID:	745
INPUT:	▁Benjaminen ▁leinua ▁ber p iztu
PRED:	The Land Given to Benjamin
GOLD:	Israel Provides Wives for Benjamin

ID:	746
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁etiopi arrak ▁agertu ▁eta ▁esan ▁zuen :— B erri ▁onak ▁dakar z kizu t , ▁ene ▁errege ▁jauna . ▁Alde ▁atera ▁zaizu ▁gaur ▁Jauna ▁eta ▁libratu ▁zaitu ▁aurka ▁jaiki tako ▁guztien ▁eskuetatik .
PRED:	Then the Ethiopian appeared to the king and said , “ You have good good good news that I have done to you , my lord the Lord , and he has rescued you from all the power of all the earth . ”
GOLD:	Then the man from Ethiopia arrived and said , “ I have good news for my lord the king . Today the Lord has rescued you from all those who rebelled against you . ”

ID:	747
INPUT:	▁ ( Zuek , ▁orain ▁bizi ▁zaretenok , entzun ▁ardura z ▁Jaunaren ▁hitza ) . Israel , ▁eremu ▁soil bihur tu ▁ote ▁naiz ▁zuretzat ? Ala ▁beti ▁ilunpe ▁bel tzean da goen ▁lurralde ? Zergatik ▁diote ▁nire ▁herritar rek :“ N ahi ▁dugun a ▁egingo ▁dugu , ez ▁g atzaiz kizu ▁inoiz ▁ere ▁itzuliko ?”
PRED:	“ But now , O people of Israel , listen to this message from the Lord , the God of Israel , says : Why have you forgotten me ? Why have I done this to you ? Why have I been able to listen to you ? ”
GOLD:	“ O my people , listen to the words of the Lord ! Have I been like a desert to Israel ? Have I been to them a land of darkness ? Why then do my people say , ‘ At last we are free from God ! We do n't need him anymore ! '

ID:	748
INPUT:	▁B ien ▁bitartean , ▁Amatziasek ▁berekin ▁gudura ▁eraman ▁ordez ▁etxera ▁bidali ▁zuen ▁gudari - taldea ▁Judako ▁hirietan ▁barrena ▁ibili ▁zen , ▁Samari atik ▁Bet - Hor on eraino , ▁hiru ▁mila ▁pertsona ▁hil ez ▁eta ▁harrapakin ▁ugari ▁os tuz .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Amaziah sent his army into battle , and he led his troops into the towns of Judah to the towns of Judah . He killed everyone in the towns of Judah and Benjamin .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the hired troops that Amaziah had sent home raided several of the towns of Judah between Samaria and Beth-horon . They killed 3,000 people and carried off great quantities of plunder .

ID:	749
INPUT:	▁Jaunarengandik ▁dator kit ▁laguntza , zeru - lurrak ▁egin ▁zituen agandik .
PRED:	For he has rescued me from the Lord from heaven and earth .
GOLD:	My help comes from the Lord , who made heaven and earth !

ID:	750
INPUT:	▁« Zorion ekoa ▁Jainkoak ▁zentzarazten ▁duen ▁gizakia ! Ez ▁mespretxatu ▁Ahal tsuaren ▁hez iketa .
PRED:	How joyful are those who fear God ; do not despise those who hate the Almighty .
GOLD:	“ But consider the joy of those corrected by God ! Do not despise the discipline of the Almighty when you sin .

ID:	751
INPUT:	▁Jauna ▁arduratzen ▁da ▁pres tuen ▁bizitz az eta ▁beren ▁ondare aren ▁jabe ▁izango ▁dira ▁betiko .
PRED:	The godly care for their lives , and they will inherit eternal land .
GOLD:	Day by day the Lord takes care of the innocent , and they will receive an inheritance that lasts forever .

ID:	752
INPUT:	▁Or dua ▁etorri ▁zenean , ▁Jesus ▁mahaian ▁jarri ▁zen ▁apostolu ekin .
PRED:	When Jesus arrived at the table , he went with the apostles .
GOLD:	When the time came , Jesus and the apostles sat down together at the table .

ID:	753
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁horretarako ▁bidaltzen ▁dizuet ▁Timoteo , ▁neure ▁seme ▁maite ▁eta ▁kristau ▁zintzoa . ▁Berak ▁gogo ratuko ▁dizkizue ▁kristau - biz itz arako ▁nire ▁buru bideak , ▁eliz ▁elkarte ▁guztiei ▁han ▁eta ▁hemen ▁irakasten ▁dizkie dan ▁bezala .
PRED:	Yes , I am sending Timothy to Timothy to you and to all who belong to Christ Jesus , who loved you and to all the churches .
GOLD:	That 's why I have sent Timothy , my beloved and faithful child in the Lord . He will remind you of how I follow Christ Jesus , just as I teach in all the churches wherever I go .

ID:	754
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁maitasuna ▁izan ▁bedi ▁itx urak eri arik ▁gabea ; ▁gorro tatu ▁gaizkia ▁eta ▁itsats i ▁ongi ari .
PRED:	Your love is full of love , but you hate violence .
GOLD:	Do n't just pretend to love others . Really love them . Hate what is wrong . Hold tightly to what is good .

ID:	755
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Jesusek ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Ikus ten ▁duzue ▁hori ▁guztia , ▁ezta ? ▁Ba , ▁benetan ▁diotsuet : ▁Ez ▁da ▁hemen ▁harri rik ▁harri ▁gainean ▁geldituko : ▁dena ▁suntsituko ▁dute ».
PRED:	But Jesus told them , “ Do n't you see everything you do ? I tell you , ‘ Look ! '
GOLD:	But he responded , “ Do you see all these buildings ? I tell you the truth , they will be completely demolished . Not one stone will be left on top of another ! ”

ID:	756
INPUT:	▁Garai ▁hartan , ▁prof ezi ▁dohaina ▁zuten ▁senide ▁batzuk ▁jaitsi ▁ziren ▁Jerusalemdik ▁Antioki ara .
PRED:	At that time some of the prophets went to Antioch of prophecy from Jerusalem .
GOLD:	During this time some prophets traveled from Jerusalem to Antioch .

ID:	757
INPUT:	▁Orain ▁den ▁guztia iz en datua ▁zuen ▁jadanik ▁Jainkoak eta ▁baz ekien ▁zer ▁den ▁gizona . Ez in ▁dio ▁gizonak ▁auz ian ▁aurre ▁egin bera ▁baino ▁indartsua goa ▁denari .
PRED:	And now , there is a time for a time , a man who had a mighty hand , and he is greater than someone who is greater than someone else .
GOLD:	Everything has already been decided . It was known long ago what each person would be . So there 's no use arguing with God about your destiny .

ID:	758
INPUT:	▁Israelen ▁its us keriak ▁egin ▁dituzte lako ▁gertatuko ▁zaie ▁hori : ▁lagun ▁hurkoaren ▁emazte arekin ▁adulterio ▁egin ▁eta ▁nik ▁agindu ▁gabeko ▁gezurrezko ▁mezua ▁nire ▁izenean ▁iragarri ▁dutelako . ▁Neuk ▁dakit ▁hori ▁eta ▁neu ▁naiz ▁horren ▁testigu . ▁Nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	The Lord has spoken against Israel , ” says the Lord. “ They have committed adultery against me and have sexual relations with her , for I have said , ‘ I have spoken ! '
GOLD:	For these men have done terrible things among my people . They have committed adultery with their neighbors ' wives and have lied in my name , saying things I did not command . I am a witness to this . I , the Lord , have spoken . ”

ID:	759
INPUT:	▁Absalomek ▁agindu ▁bezala , ▁morroi ek ▁hil ▁egin ▁zuten ▁Am non . ▁Errege - seme ▁guztiek ▁jaiki ▁eta ▁nork ▁bere ▁man do z ▁ihes ▁egin ▁zuten .
PRED:	So Absalom 's servant had commanded him to kill him , and all the men of Judah jumped up and fled .
GOLD:	So at Absalom 's signal they murdered Amnon . Then the other sons of the king jumped on their mules and fled .

ID:	760
INPUT:	▁Zuzen bidez ▁eta ▁justiziaz ▁jokatu ▁dut : ez ▁utzi ▁ni ▁zapal tzaileen ▁esku .
PRED:	The Lord has done this , and I have acted with violence .
GOLD:	Do n't leave me to the mercy of my enemies , for I have done what is just and right .

ID:	761
INPUT:	▁« D an - ek ▁bere ▁herria du ▁gobern atuko , Israelgo ▁beste ▁leinu ek ▁bezala .
PRED:	“ From the people of Israel will judge his people , just as the tribes of Israel , says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Dan will govern his people , like any other tribe in Israel .

ID:	762
INPUT:	▁Oi ▁Jainko , ▁iker ▁nazazu ▁eta ▁ezagutu ▁nire ▁bihotza , pro ba ▁nazazu ▁eta ▁ezagutu ▁nire ▁ardur ak .
PRED:	O God , hear my heart and listen to me , and I know that my heart is mine .
GOLD:	Search me , O God , and know my heart ; test me and know my anxious thoughts .

ID:	763
INPUT:	▁Han , ▁basamortuan , ▁elkarte ▁osoa ▁marm arrean ▁hasi ▁zen ▁Moises ▁eta ▁Aaronen ▁aurka ,
PRED:	“ Do not forget the whole community , Moses , and Moses rebelled against Aaron and Aaron .
GOLD:	There , too , the whole community of Israel complained about Moses and Aaron .

ID:	764
INPUT:	▁i gel ts ero ▁eta ▁har gin ei . ▁Oro bat ▁erosi ▁ahal ▁izan ▁zituzten ▁Jaunaren ▁etxeko ▁hond ak etak ▁konpon tzeko ▁behar ▁ziren ▁ohol ▁eta ▁har lan duak , ▁baita ▁ordaindu ▁ere ▁tenpluaren ▁konpon k etako ▁g as tu ▁guztiak .
PRED:	There were too large to repair the Temple of the Lord 's Temple . They also used it to repair the Temple of the Temple and repair the Temple of the Temple .
GOLD:	The money brought to the Temple was not used for making silver bowls , lamp snuffers , basins , trumpets , or other articles of gold or silver for the Temple of the Lord .

ID:	765
INPUT:	▁Ehun tariak ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Jauna , ▁ni ▁ez ▁naiz ▁inor ▁zu ▁nire ▁etxean ▁sartzeko ; ▁aski ▁duzu ▁hitz ▁bat ▁esatea , ▁nire ▁morroia ▁sen datzeko .
PRED:	The armor of the Lord replied , “ I 'm not one of you , and you are willing to speak to my master 's household . ”
GOLD:	But the officer said , “ Lord , I am not worthy to have you come into my home . Just say the word from where you are , and my servant will be healed .

ID:	766
INPUT:	▁Abram ▁Kanaan ▁lurraldean ▁jarri ▁zen ▁bizitzen , ▁eta ▁Lot ▁ib arreko ▁hirietan . ▁Honen ▁oihal - etxolak ▁Sodoma ▁ber taraino ▁hedatzen ▁ziren .
PRED:	Abram lived in the land of Canaan , and Abram lived in the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah .
GOLD:	So Abram settled in the land of Canaan , and Lot moved his tents to a place near Sodom and settled among the cities of the plain .

ID:	767
INPUT:	▁Argi tzen ▁eta ▁azaltzen ▁bad izki dazue , ▁ordea , ▁emaitz ez , ▁erregal uz ▁eta ▁ohorez ▁beteko ▁zaituztet . ▁Az aldu , ▁beraz , ▁ametsa ▁eta ▁beronen ▁esanahia .
PRED:	But if you give me the ability to give me a gift , I will give you a dream and give you a dream .
GOLD:	But if you tell me what I dreamed and what the dream means , I will give you many wonderful gifts and honors . Just tell me the dream and what it means ! ”

ID:	768
INPUT:	▁Uz tar oa ▁zen , ▁eta ▁urte - s aso i ▁horretan ▁Jordan ▁ibaia ▁gainezka ▁etorri ▁ohi ▁da . ▁Ku txa ▁zeramaten ▁apaizak ▁Jordan era ▁heldu ▁eta ▁haien ▁oin ek ▁ur - er tza ▁ukitu ▁bezain ▁laster ,
PRED:	It was the first month old when the priest came to the Jordan River , and the priests blew the Jordan River in the middle of the Jordan River , as well as far as the Lord had commanded them .
GOLD:	It was the harvest season , and the Jordan was overflowing its banks . But as soon as the feet of the priests who were carrying the Ark touched the water at the river 's edge ,

ID:	769
INPUT:	▁orain , ▁ordea , ▁Jainkoa ▁ezagutu ▁duzu elarik ▁edota , ▁hob eki ▁esan , ▁Jainkoak ▁ezagutu ▁zaituzte larik , ▁n olatan ▁itzultzen ▁zarete ▁berriro ▁f un ts ik ▁eta ▁indarrik ▁gabeko ▁mundu tar ▁erre al ita te etara ? ▁Berriro ▁ere ▁berauen ▁menpeko ▁izan ▁nahi ▁ote ▁duzue ?
PRED:	But if you know God had recognized you , do n't you know what God said to you , ‘ Why do you know ? Why are you going ? Why do you know that the power of the world ? Why are you going to bring them back ? '
GOLD:	So now that you know God ( or should I say , now that God knows you ) , why do you want to go back again and become slaves once more to the weak and useless spiritual principles of this world ?

ID:	770
INPUT:	▁B azuen ▁Saulek ▁R itz pa ▁izeneko ▁ohaide ▁bat , ▁A ia - ren ▁alaba . ▁Ix - Box etek ▁esan ▁zion ▁Abn erri :— Zergatik ▁ohera tu ▁zara ▁gure ▁aitaren ▁ohaide arekin ?
PRED:	When Saul heard that Saul had become a concubine , he said to Ishbosheth , “ Why have you sex with me ? ” “ Why have you sex with me ? ”
GOLD:	One day Ishbosheth , Saul 's son , accused Abner of sleeping with one of his father 's concubines , a woman named Rizpah , daughter of Aiah .

ID:	771
INPUT:	▁I tur ri aren ▁aurrera ▁heltzean , ▁Daviden ▁Hiriko ▁har m ail etan ▁gora ▁igo ▁ziren , ▁harres iko ▁alda pan ▁gora , ▁Daviden ▁etxearen ▁gain aldetik , ▁eki alderantz , ▁Ur - at eraino ▁heldu ▁arte .
PRED:	When the water was at the center of the city , the city was repaired by the wall of David , the wall of the City of David .
GOLD:	At the Fountain Gate they went straight up the steps on the ascent of the city wall toward the City of David . They passed the house of David and then proceeded to the Water Gate on the east .

ID:	772
INPUT:	▁H enok ▁izan ▁zuen etik , ▁beste ▁zortzi ehun ▁urtez ▁bizi ▁izan ▁zen , ▁eta ▁seme - alabak ▁izan ▁zituen .
PRED:	After the birth of Enosh , Kenan lived another eight years and had other sons and daughters .
GOLD:	After the birth of Enoch , Jared lived another 800 years , and he had other sons and daughters .

ID:	773
INPUT:	▁O pa ▁biezaio te ▁bakea ▁Jerusalemi :« L as ai ▁bizi ▁bitez ▁maite ▁zaituzten ak !
PRED:	May those who love Jerusalem be with peace : “ May those who love you .
GOLD:	Pray for peace in Jerusalem.May all who love this city prosper .

ID:	774
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁eratu ▁didazu ▁gorputza , zuk ▁zaindu ▁nauzu ▁amaren ▁sabeletik .
PRED:	You brought me out of my body , and you took me into the moment .
GOLD:	You made all the delicate , inner parts of my bodyand knit me together in my mother 's womb .

ID:	775
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁ikasleei ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« I ri tsiko ▁zaizue ▁Gizonaren ▁Semearen ▁etor rerako ▁egun ▁bat ▁be deren ▁ikusi ▁nahi ▁izango ▁duzuen ▁garaia , ▁baina ▁ez ▁duzue ▁ikusiko .
PRED:	Then he said to his disciples , “ The Son of Man will be able to be able to be able to see the day of Man , but you will not be able to see it .
GOLD:	Then he said to his disciples , “ The time is coming when you will long to see the day when the Son of Man returns , but you wo n't see it .

ID:	776
INPUT:	▁« Eta ▁gaiztakeria ▁hauen ▁guztien ▁ondoren ▁— Ai ▁ene , ▁zoritx arrekoa ▁zu ! , ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak —
PRED:	“ At the end of all the wicked , ” says the Sovereign Lord .
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you , says the Sovereign Lord . In addition to all your other wickedness ,

ID:	777
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁dio ▁zuen ▁Jainkoak :« Kon ts ola ▁ezazue , kon ts ol atu ▁nire ▁herria !
PRED:	This is what God says : “ If you curse my people , do not forgive me .
GOLD:	“ Comfort , comfort my people , ” says your God .

ID:	778
INPUT:	▁Sin ets ▁iez adazue : ▁ni ▁A itar ekin ▁bat ▁eginda ▁nago ▁eta ▁Aita ▁nirekin . ▁Bes terik ▁ez ▁bada , ▁sinetsi ▁egiten ▁ditudan ▁egintzen gatik .
PRED:	“ Give me some of you who belong to me , and I do n't believe in me .
GOLD:	Just believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me . Or at least believe because of the work you have seen me do .

ID:	779
INPUT:	▁Itzuli ▁zen ▁bigarren ▁aldiz ▁Jaunaren ▁aingerua , ▁ukitu ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« Jaiki ▁eta ▁jan , ▁oso ▁bide ▁luz ea ▁baituzu ».
PRED:	Then the angel of the Lord appeared to him and said , “ Stand up and eat it ! ”
GOLD:	Then the angel of the Lord came again and touched him and said , “ Get up and eat some more , or the journey ahead will be too much for you . ”

ID:	780
INPUT:	▁« Horregatik , ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak , ▁zin ▁dagit ▁neure ▁biziarengatik , ▁zeure ▁idolat ria ▁eta ▁jokaera ▁higuingarri az ▁nire ▁santutegia ▁kutsatu ▁duzulako , ▁nik ▁ere ▁baztertu ▁egingo ▁zaitu dala ; ▁ez ▁dizut ▁batere ▁errukirik ▁izango , ▁ezta ▁barkatuko ▁ere .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : As surely as I have vowed to you , ‘ You will not abandon me , and I will not abandon you . '
GOLD:	“ As surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , I will cut you off completely . I will show you no pity at all because you have defiled my Temple with your vile images and detestable sins .

ID:	781
INPUT:	▁Mu ino ▁eder , ▁lur ▁osoaren ▁poz garri ! Sion ▁mendi , ▁Jainkoaren ▁egoitza , ▁errege ▁handiaren ▁hiri !
PRED:	Praise the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of his holy mountain , the great city of Jerusalem !
GOLD:	God himself is in Jerusalem 's towers , revealing himself as its defender .

ID:	782
INPUT:	▁Balaamek ▁erantzun :— Jaunak ▁adierazi takoa ▁behar ▁dut ▁esan .
PRED:	Balaam said to Balaam , “ I want you to say , ‘ The Lord has given me understanding . '
GOLD:	But Balaam replied , “ I will speak only the message that the Lord puts in my mouth . ”

ID:	783
INPUT:	▁Ga taz kak ▁filistearren ▁aurka
PRED:	Parable of the Philistines
GOLD:	Battles against Philistine Giants

ID:	784
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁da ▁haren tzat ▁munduan ▁ezer ▁gor derik ; ▁dena ▁dago ▁agerian ▁eta ▁zabalik , ▁kontuak ▁eman ▁beharko ▁dizkio gun ▁haren tzat .
PRED:	It is not more valuable to the earth , and it will be exposed to all the world .
GOLD:	Nothing in all creation is hidden from God . Everything is naked and exposed before his eyes , and he is the one to whom we are accountable .

ID:	785
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁Pilat oren ▁aurrean
PRED:	Jesus ' Trial before Pilate
GOLD:	The Soldiers Mock Jesus

ID:	786
INPUT:	▁maite ▁duenari ▁egiten ▁baitio ▁Jaunak ▁agi raka , ai tak ▁seme ▁ku tun ari ▁bezalaxe .
PRED:	He loves the Lord , just as the Lord loved him , as he loved him .
GOLD:	For the Lord corrects those he loves , just as a father corrects a child in whom he delights .

ID:	787
INPUT:	▁Ene ▁seme , ▁gorde ▁zentzu tasuna ▁eta ▁ohar mena , ez ▁itzazu ▁ken ▁zeure ▁aurretik ;
PRED:	My child , pay attention to what you have done . Do n't take away your own ways .
GOLD:	My child , do n't lose sight of common sense and discernment.Hang on to them ,

ID:	788
INPUT:	▁eta ▁morroi ari ▁galdegin :— Nor ▁da ▁landan ▁zehar ▁bidera ▁dator ki gun ▁gizon ▁hori ? M orro iak ▁erantzun :— Ene ▁nagusia . Orduan , ▁Rebek ak ▁bere ▁aurpegia ▁estali ▁zuen ▁zapi ▁batez .
PRED:	“ Who are you going through the field ? ” she asked . “ Come , my master , ” she replied . “ Go and get her face , ” Laban replied .
GOLD:	“ Who is that man walking through the fields to meet us ? ” she asked the servant.And he replied , “ It is my master. ” So Rebekah covered her face with her veil .

ID:	789
INPUT:	▁Agindu ▁guri , ▁jauna , ▁zeure ▁esan etara ▁gaituzu ▁zeure ▁zerbitzariok ; ▁bil atuko ▁dugu ▁zitara ▁jotzen ▁daki en ▁norbait . ▁Horrela , ▁Jaunak ▁bidalitako ▁espiritu ▁gaiztoak ▁eraso ▁diez azun ean , ▁hark ▁zitara ▁jo ▁eta ▁on ▁egingo ▁dizu .
PRED:	So listen to us , O Lord , your servants , your servants , your servants , and servants will be able to fear the Lord .
GOLD:	Let us find a good musician to play the harp whenever the tormenting spirit troubles you . He will play soothing music , and you will soon be well again . ”

ID:	790
INPUT:	▁asto ak ▁ 30 . 500 ,
PRED:	plunder for the donkeys .
GOLD:	30,500 donkeys ,

ID:	791
INPUT:	▁eta ▁gaizki - esaka ▁hasi ▁ziren ▁Jainkoaren ▁eta ▁Moisesen ▁aurka : ▁« Zer tarako ▁atera ▁gin tu zuen ▁Egiptotik ? ▁Bas amortuan ▁hil arazteko ? ▁Ez ▁dugu ▁urik , ▁ez ▁j akirik , ▁eta ▁m ana ▁delako ▁janari ▁kas kar ▁honetaz ▁as per - as per ▁eginak ▁gaude !»
PRED:	They tried to obey the word of Moses and Moses . “ What are you doing ? ” they asked . “ Why should we bring us out of Egypt ? We have no water in the wilderness ? ”
GOLD:	and they began to speak against God and Moses . “ Why have you brought us out of Egypt to die here in the wilderness ? ” they complained . “ There is nothing to eat here and nothing to drink . And we hate this horrible manna ! ”

ID:	792
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁Josek , ▁ama ▁berarengan diko ▁senide ▁zuen ▁Benjaminen gan ▁begiak ▁jarri rik , ▁esan ▁zuen :— Hori ▁al ▁da ▁zuek ▁aipatu ▁zenidaten ▁anaia ▁gazteena ? ▁Be j on d ai ala , ▁seme !
PRED:	Then Joseph looked at the mother of Benjamin , and he said to him , “ Who is your youngest brother ? ” “ Who is your brother ? ”
GOLD:	Then Joseph looked at his brother Benjamin , the son of his own mother . “ Is this your youngest brother , the one you told me about ? ” Joseph asked . “ May God be gracious to you , my son . ”

ID:	793
INPUT:	▁Ez tia ▁eskuan ▁hartu ▁eta ▁bidean ▁jan ez ▁joan ▁zen ▁aita - amen gana ; ▁eman ▁zien ▁eztia ▁eta ▁jan ▁zuten ▁haiek ▁ere . ▁Baina ▁ez ▁zien ▁esan ▁ezti ▁hura ▁lehoi aren ▁hezur ▁artetik ▁hartua ▁zuen ik .
PRED:	So he went to the village and ate it as honey . But he ate it , and honey , and honey , and honey .
GOLD:	He scooped some of the honey into his hands and ate it along the way . He also gave some to his father and mother , and they ate it . But he did n't tell them he had taken the honey from the carcass of the lion .

ID:	794
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁ezarri ▁zuen eko ▁lur s aila ▁Sikemgo ▁buruzagi ▁zen ▁Ham orren ▁semeei ▁erosi ▁zien , ▁zilarrezko ▁ehun ▁txanpon ▁ordain duz .
PRED:	He set the leader of the town of Shechem to pay the price for 100 pieces of silver .
GOLD:	Jacob bought the plot of land where he camped from the family of Hamor , the father of Shechem , for 100 pieces of silver .

ID:	795
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁Dani elen ▁sala tzaileak ▁ekartzeko ▁agindu ▁zuen ▁erregeak , ▁eta ▁lehoi - zul ora ▁jaurti ▁zituzten ▁beren ▁emazte ▁eta ▁seme - alabekin ▁batera . ▁Eta ▁zu lo ▁barren era ▁heldu ▁baino ▁lehen , ▁lehoi ek ▁beren ▁a tza p arretan ▁hartu ▁eta ▁txiki - tx iki ▁egin ▁zituzten .
PRED:	Then the king ordered the king to bring him out of the lion and cut off their heads and cut off their heads in the dust .
GOLD:	Then King Darius sent this message to the people of every race and nation and language throughout the world : “ Peace and prosperity to you !

ID:	796
INPUT:	▁halako ari ▁eus tea ▁haize ari ▁eus tea eta ▁eskuaz ▁olioa ▁hartzea ▁bezala ▁da .
PRED:	They capture it like a storm ; it is a trap for it .
GOLD:	Stopping her complaints is like trying to stop the windor trying to hold something with greased hands .

ID:	797
INPUT:	▁Herria ▁erbeste tik ▁itzuli
PRED:	Restoration for Israel
GOLD:	A Taunt for Babylon 's King

ID:	798
INPUT:	▁ F ede aren ▁ahalmena : ▁ep ile p tiko aren ▁sen dak eta
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Boy
GOLD:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Boy

ID:	799
INPUT:	▁jantzi ▁do tore , ▁m antu , le p oko ▁zapi ▁eta ▁pol tsak , g ona ▁fin , ▁d ur ban te ▁eta ▁man til ak .
PRED:	Come , let 's sing with fine linen clothing , and sing with fine linen clothing .
GOLD:	party clothes , gowns , capes , and purses ;

ID:	800
INPUT:	▁egun ▁horretan ▁egingo ▁baita ▁zuen ▁aldeko ▁barkamen - ohikunea , ▁garbi ▁zaitezten ; ▁bekatu ▁guztietatik ▁garbi ▁geldituko ▁zarete ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrean .
PRED:	On that day you will be cleansed from the Lord 's presence , for you will be cleansed from all the sins of the Lord .
GOLD:	On that day offerings of purification will be made for you , and you will be purified in the Lord 's presence from all your sins .

ID:	801
INPUT:	▁Jende - multzo ▁handi ek ▁jarraitu ▁zioten ▁eta ▁Jesusek ▁gaix oak ▁sendatu ▁zizkien .
PRED:	But the crowd followed Jesus , and Jesus healed the sick .
GOLD:	Large crowds followed him there , and he healed their sick .

ID:	802
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁neure ▁osasun a ▁zela - eta ▁nek agarri ▁izan ▁banintz aiz uen ▁ere , ▁zuek ▁ez ▁nindu zuen ▁mespretxatu , ▁ez ▁gaitzetsi ; ▁bestela ▁baizik , ▁Jainkoaren ▁mezulari tzat ▁hartu ▁nindu zuen , ▁Jesu ▁Kristo ▁bera ▁banintz ▁bezala .
PRED:	But if I were looking for you , I would n't be afraid of you , but if you were not trying to obey God 's messengers , you would not be called me .
GOLD:	But even though my condition tempted you to reject me , you did not despise me or turn me away . No , you took me in and cared for me as though I were an angel from God or even Christ Jesus himself .

ID:	803
INPUT:	▁Axdo d ▁eta ▁G aza ▁eta ▁beraien ▁herri ▁eta ▁herrixkak , ▁Egiptoko ▁erre kar aino . ▁Mediterraneo ▁itsasoa ▁zen ▁muga .
PRED:	From the border of Ashdod and the surrounding towns of Egypt , along with their surrounding settlements , and the border of Egypt .
GOLD:	It also included Ashdod with its surrounding settlements and villages and Gaza with its settlements and villages , as far as the Brook of Egypt and along the coast of the Mediterranean Sea .

ID:	804
INPUT:	▁eta ▁arkume ▁bakoitzeko ▁lau ▁kilo .
PRED:	and two quarts with each of the fourteen lambs .
GOLD:	and two quarts with each of the seven lambs .

ID:	805
INPUT:	▁Israel ▁da Jaun ▁ahalguztidun aren ▁mahastia ; Judako ▁herria , haren ▁landar e - sail ▁ku tuna . Z uzen bidea ▁espero ▁zuen haren gandik , eta ▁horra : ▁zuzen gabekeria ! J ustizia ▁espero ▁zuen , eta ▁horra : ▁aien eak !
PRED:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies says , “ The people of Israel are filled with songs of salvation , but the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has saved us , but he saved us .
GOLD:	The nation of Israel is the vineyard of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies.The people of Judah are his pleasant garden.He expected a crop of justice , but instead he found oppression.He expected to find righteousness , but instead he heard cries of violence .

ID:	806
INPUT:	▁zeure ▁goi - gel etan ▁p ila tzen ▁ura ; ho dei ▁gainean ▁ko katzen ▁duzu ▁zeure ▁kar ro za , haize - h eg al etan ▁zabiltza .
PRED:	Your life is filled with water , and it lies in the darkness .
GOLD:	you lay out the rafters of your home in the rain clouds.You make the clouds your chariot ; you ride upon the wings of the wind .

ID:	807
INPUT:	▁Neuk ▁agertuko ▁diot ▁zenbat ▁sufritu ▁beharko ▁duen ▁niregatik .
PRED:	Yes , I will suffer for the more than I will suffer for me .
GOLD:	And I will show him how much he must suffer for my name 's sake . ”

ID:	808
INPUT:	▁profeta ▁bat ▁bidali ▁zien ▁Jaunak , ▁esatera : ▁« Hau ▁dio ▁Jaunak , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoak : ▁Nik ▁ekarri ▁zaituztet ▁Egiptotik ▁eta ▁nik ▁atera ▁esklabo tzatik .
PRED:	Then this message came to them from the Lord : “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : I brought you out of Egypt , and I brought you out of Egypt .
GOLD:	the Lord sent a prophet to the Israelites . He said , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : I brought you up out of slavery in Egypt .

ID:	809
INPUT:	▁Jerusalem , gar bi tu ▁zeure ▁barru ko ▁gaiztakeria , bizirik ▁atera ▁nahi ▁baduzu . Noiz ▁arte izango ▁ote ▁dituzu ▁zeure ▁baitan buru bide ▁gaizto ▁horiek ?
PRED:	How long will you turn away from your wickedness ? How long will you be destroyed ?
GOLD:	O Jerusalem , cleanse your heartthat you may be saved.How long will you harboryour evil thoughts ?

ID:	810
INPUT:	▁Biz ir ako ▁bidea ▁erakutsiko ▁didazu : alai tasun ▁betea ▁zure ▁aurrean , ▁betiko ▁zoriona ▁zure ▁ondoan .
PRED:	I will give you great joy to you , and you will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	You will show me the way of life , granting me the joy of your presenceand the pleasures of living with you forever .

ID:	811
INPUT:	▁U rez ▁ase ▁dira ▁Jaunaren ▁zuhaitzak , hark ▁landatu riko ▁Libanoko ▁zedro ak ;
PRED:	They are filled with trees , the cedars of Lebanon , the cedars of Lebanon .
GOLD:	The trees of the Lord are well cared for — the cedars of Lebanon that he planted .

ID:	812
INPUT:	▁« Ea , ▁jan ▁nire ▁ogia ▁eta ▁edan ▁nik ▁nahas tu riko ▁ardoa .
PRED:	“ Come , eat food and drink wine , and drink wine .
GOLD:	“ Come , eat my food , and drink the wine I have mixed .

ID:	813
INPUT:	▁Le inu ▁bakar rarekin ▁geldituko ▁da ▁hura , ▁eta ▁hori ▁ere ▁David ▁ene ▁zerbitzari agatik ▁eta ▁Israelgo ▁hiri ▁guztien ▁artetik ▁hautatu ▁dudan ▁Jerusalem ▁hiri arengatik .
PRED:	David will also be with David , my servant David , and all the people of Israel , for I have chosen Jerusalem from all the towns of Israel .
GOLD:	But I will leave him one tribe for the sake of my servant David and for the sake of Jerusalem , which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel .

ID:	814
INPUT:	▁« E txe ▁batean ▁sartzean , ▁esan : ▁« Bakea ▁zuekin » ;
PRED:	When you enter the palace , he said , “ May you be with you . ”
GOLD:	When you enter the home , give it your blessing .

ID:	815
INPUT:	▁Merari tarren ▁ardurapean ▁zeuden ▁egoitz ako ▁ohol ak , ▁zehar - eg urrak , ▁zutabeak , ▁oinak ▁eta ▁beste ▁os ag ai ▁guztiak ;
PRED:	all the furnishings of the Tabernacle , frames , crossbars , frames , crossbars , and bases .
GOLD:	These two clans were responsible for the care of the frames supporting the Tabernacle , the crossbars , the pillars , the bases , and all the equipment related to their use .

ID:	816
INPUT:	▁eta ▁ez ▁zuen ▁inoren ▁aitor pen - beh arrik , ▁ongi ▁ezagutzen ▁baitzuen ▁berak ▁gizakiaren ▁baitan ▁dagoena .
PRED:	He did n't know how to do it , for he knows where people are living .
GOLD:	No one needed to tell him about human nature , for he knew what was in each person 's heart .

ID:	817
INPUT:	▁« Norbaitek ▁bere ▁alaba ▁esklabo tzat ▁saltzen ▁badu , ▁ez ▁da ▁libre ▁geldituko ▁beste ▁esklab oen ▁er ara .
PRED:	“ If someone has a slave of a slave , he will not be slaves to the slave of the slave .
GOLD:	“ When a man sells his daughter as a slave , she will not be freed at the end of six years as the men are .

ID:	818
INPUT:	▁N iko de m ok ▁galdetu :— Nola ▁jaio ▁daiteke ▁norbait , ▁jadanik ▁zaharra ▁izanik ? ▁Sar ▁ote ▁daiteke ▁amaren ▁sabelean ▁eta ▁berriro ▁jaio ?
PRED:	“ How can you be born ? ” the woman asked . “ How can you be born ? ”
GOLD:	“ What do you mean ? ” exclaimed Nicodemus . “ How can an old man go back into his mother 's womb and be born again ? ”

ID:	819
INPUT:	▁Lan ean ▁araz oak
PRED:	Paul 's Final Instructions
GOLD:	The Ironies of Life

ID:	820
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁du ▁lapur rak ▁mespretx urik ▁merezi , gos ea ▁kentzeko ▁os ten ▁badu .
PRED:	It is not a fool to disgrace , but if it is good , you will not be cut off .
GOLD:	Excuses might be found for a thiefwho steals because he is starving .

ID:	821
INPUT:	▁Izen datu ▁zioten , ▁beraz , ▁egun ▁bat , ▁eta ▁asko ▁joan ▁zitzaizkion ▁bera ▁zegoen ▁etxera . ▁Paulo ▁Jainkoaren ▁erregetzaren ▁azal pena ▁eta ▁testigantza ▁egiten ▁jardun ▁zitzaien ▁goiz etik ▁arrats aldera ▁eta , ▁Moisesen ▁legea ▁eta ▁profetak ▁oinarri ▁hartuz , ▁Jesusen ▁mezua ▁sines taraz ten ▁ahalegin du ▁zen .
PRED:	So they went to the Temple of God for many days and went home to the Kingdom of God , where it was written in the Kingdom of God and the law of Moses and the law of Moses and the law of Moses .
GOLD:	So a time was set , and on that day a large number of people came to Paul 's lodging . He explained and testified about the Kingdom of God and tried to persuade them about Jesus from the Scriptures . Using the law of Moses and the books of the prophets , he spoke to them from morning until evening .

ID:	822
INPUT:	▁« K artz ela ▁arreta ▁guztiaz ▁itx ia ▁aurkitu ▁dugu ▁eta ▁zain tzaileak ▁ate etan ▁erne , ▁baina ▁ireki tzean ▁barruan ▁ez ▁dugu ▁inor ▁aurkitu ».
PRED:	“ At the end of the tent , we found everything in the open fields . But when we find no one split open the door , we wo n't be opened . ”
GOLD:	“ The jail was securely locked , with the guards standing outside , but when we opened the gates , no one was there ! ”

ID:	823
INPUT:	▁Nola ▁morro ien ▁begiak ▁nagusi en ▁eskuetara , nola ▁neskam earen ▁begiak ▁etxeko andre aren ▁eskuetara , halaxe ▁daude ▁gure ▁begiak Jaunaren gana , ▁gure ▁Jainkoarengana , haren ▁errukia ▁iritsi ▁zain .
PRED:	He has been able to rescue the servant of our master , and he has been able to save us from the house of the Lord our God .
GOLD:	We keep looking to the Lord our God for his mercy , just as servants keep their eyes on their master , as a slave girl watches her mistress for the slightest signal .

ID:	824
INPUT:	▁N eska ▁heldu ▁zenean , ▁bere ▁aitari ▁lursail ▁bat ▁eska tzera ▁bultzatu ▁zuen ▁O t ni elek . ▁N eska ▁asto ▁gainetik ▁jaitsi ▁zenean , ▁galdetu ▁zion ▁aitak :— Zer ▁nahi ▁d un ?
PRED:	When she returned to his father 's father , she asked her to ask her , “ Why do you want me to ask me ? ”
GOLD:	When Acsah married Othniel , she urged him to ask her father for a field . As she got down off her donkey , Caleb asked her , “ What 's the matter ? ”

ID:	825
INPUT:	▁Zen batez inak ▁dira ▁haren ▁gudarosteak , guzti en ▁gain ▁altxatzen ▁haren ▁argia .
PRED:	When the godly laid their glory on him , the light of his life will shine on him .
GOLD:	Who is able to count his heavenly army ? Does n't his light shine on all the earth ?

ID:	826
INPUT:	▁As paldi tik ▁ira garriak ▁nituen ger tatu ▁direnak , neuk ▁hitzeman ▁nituen ▁eta ▁adierazi ; bat - batean ▁ekin ▁nion eta ▁denak ▁gertatu .
PRED:	When I woke up , I said to them , “ I have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Long ago I told you what was going to happen.Then suddenly I took action , and all my predictions came true .

ID:	827
INPUT:	▁Hitz aldia ▁bukatu rik , ▁belaun iko ▁jarri ▁eta ▁otoitz ▁egin ▁zuen ▁beste ▁guztiekin ▁batera .
PRED:	After this , he finished giving thanks to everyone and prayed to him .
GOLD:	When he had finished speaking , he knelt and prayed with them .

ID:	828
INPUT:	▁aurrez ▁aurre ▁eten gab ei rain tzen ▁nauen ▁herriaren gana : b ara tze ▁sakratu etan sak rifizio ak ▁eskaintzen ▁dituzte eta ▁a dre il uzko ▁aldare etan in tsen tsua ▁erretzen ,
PRED:	He has led me to fight against me , and they have defiled me in the sacred offerings . They have defiled the pagan shrines , and they burn incense at the pagan shrines .
GOLD:	All day long they insult me to my faceby worshiping idols in their sacred gardens.They burn incense on pagan altars .

ID:	829
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁moztu ▁ile - ad ats aren ▁er tzak ▁inguru ▁guztian , ▁ezta ▁biz arraren ▁er tzak ▁ere .
PRED:	The hair of their hair will be cut off , and their bones will be cut off .
GOLD:	“ Do not trim off the hair on your temples or trim your beards .

ID:	830
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion ▁Jauna ▁Moisesi :
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	831
INPUT:	▁Gu tun ak ▁igorri ▁zituen ▁erreinuko ▁eskualde ▁guztietara , ▁eskualde ▁bakoitzeko ▁idaz ker an ▁eta ▁herri ▁bakoitzeko ▁hiz ker an ▁emanak , ▁gizaseme ▁guztiak ▁nor ▁bere ▁etxeko ▁nagusi ▁izan ▁zitezen ▁aginduz .
PRED:	So he sent messengers to all the provinces of all the provinces of all the provinces and languages of every province in the empire .
GOLD:	He sent letters to all parts of the empire , to each province in its own script and language , proclaiming that every man should be the ruler of his own home and should say whatever he pleases .

ID:	832
INPUT:	▁Luz atu ▁zuen ▁Moisesek ▁eskua ▁itsaso ▁gainera ▁eta , ▁Jaunak ▁eraginda , ▁ekialdeko ▁haize ▁indar tsuak ▁jo ▁zuen ▁gau ▁osoan . ▁Haiz eak ▁itsasoa ▁leh ortu ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁urak ▁bi ▁m ultz otan ▁ban atuz .
PRED:	So Moses raised his hand over the sea and threw it into the east side of the east side of the sea . He divided the sea , and the waters of Egypt .
GOLD:	Then Moses raised his hand over the sea , and the Lord opened up a path through the water with a strong east wind . The wind blew all that night , turning the seabed into dry land .

ID:	833
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁alai ▁nago ▁ni ▁Jaunarekin , poz aren ▁pozez salba tzaile ▁dudan ▁Jainkoarekin .
PRED:	But I am glad , O Lord , for I am the Lord , the God of my God .
GOLD:	yet I will rejoice in the Lord ! I will be joyful in the God of my salvation !

ID:	834
INPUT:	▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak ▁hartu ▁duen erab akia ▁nork ▁galarazi ? Jaunak ▁luz atua ▁duen ▁esku ar in ork ▁atzera ▁eragin ?»
PRED:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has already already been able to do anything ? ”
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has spoken — who can change his plans ? When his hand is raised , who can stop him ? ”

ID:	835
INPUT:	▁Zeren , ▁bihotzez ▁sinesten ▁duena ▁onartu ▁egiten ▁baitu ▁Jainkoak , ▁eta ▁ahoz ▁aitortzen ▁duena ▁salbatu ▁egiten ▁da .
PRED:	For the hearts of those who believe in their hearts , and those who believe in him will be saved .
GOLD:	For it is by believing in your heart that you are made right with God , and it is by openly declaring your faith that you are saved .

ID:	836
INPUT:	▁Gizaki aren ▁ek intz ak ▁gizakia gan ▁eragin a
PRED:	A Message about Worship
GOLD:	Elihu Reminds Job of God 's Justice

ID:	837
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jainkoaren ▁izena ▁kan tuz ▁goretsiko ▁dut , es ker ▁onez ▁handi ets iko .
PRED:	Then I will praise the name of God ; I will praise you with great strength .
GOLD:	For this will please the Lord more than sacrificing cattle , more than presenting a bull with its horns and hooves .

ID:	838
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁duzu ▁sexu - harremanik ▁izango ▁zeure ▁errain arekin , ▁zure ▁semearen ▁emaztea ▁baita .
PRED:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your wife , for she has sexual relations with your son .
GOLD:	“ Do not have sexual relations with your daughter-in-law ; she is your son 's wife , so you must not have sexual relations with her .

ID:	839
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁herriaren ▁barkamen - oparirako ▁aker ra ▁hilko ▁du ; ▁honen ▁odola ▁errezel az ▁barru aldera ▁eramango ▁du ▁eta ▁zekor raren ▁odolaz ▁eginiko a ▁bera ▁egingo : ▁estal kia ▁zipriztinduko ▁du ▁eta ▁estalki ▁aurrean ▁zir tatuko .
PRED:	Then he will slaughter the goat for a sin offering and slaughter it with the blood of the Holy Place . Then he must sprinkle it with the blood of the Holy Place and cover it with blood .
GOLD:	“ Then Aaron must slaughter the first goat as a sin offering for the people and carry its blood behind the inner curtain . There he will sprinkle the goat 's blood over the atonement cover and in front of it , just as he did with the bull 's blood .

ID:	840
INPUT:	▁Ham aika ▁larrialdi ▁eta ▁zoritxar ▁pas arazi ▁didazu . Baina ▁berriro ▁bizi araziko ▁nauzu , Herio ▁Le ize ▁sakon etik ▁altxatuko .
PRED:	For I will give you victory over my years , but I will give you victory .
GOLD:	You have allowed me to suffer much hardship , but you will restore me to life againand lift me up from the depths of the earth .

ID:	841
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁ tun ika ▁jantzi ▁zion ▁Aaroni , ▁gerri ko az ▁lotu ▁eta ▁man tua ▁jarri ; ▁gainetik ▁efo da ▁ezarri ▁zion ▁eta ▁x in go laz ▁lotu .
PRED:	Then he clothed Aaron with a robe , and put it on his shoulders . He overlaid the ephod with blue , and put it on the ephod .
GOLD:	He put the official tunic on Aaron and tied the sash around his waist . He dressed him in the robe , placed the ephod on him , and attached the ephod securely with its decorative sash .

ID:	842
INPUT:	▁Begira , ▁Jainkoa ▁dugu ▁geure ▁buruzagi , ▁eta ▁geure kin ▁ditugu ▁haren ▁apaizak , ▁baita ▁turuta ▁ozen ak ▁ere ▁zuen ▁kontra ▁jo tzeko . ▁Israeldar rok , ▁ez ▁borrokatu ▁Jaunaren , ▁zeuen ▁arbasoen ▁Jainkoaren , ▁kontra , ▁ez ▁baituzue ▁garaipen ik ▁izango ».
PRED:	Let our God be with us , the leaders of our leaders , and we will stand against him and fight against the Lord our God , the God of Israel , who has chosen us to fight the Lord our God of our ancestors . ”
GOLD:	So you see , God is with us . He is our leader . His priests blow their trumpets and lead us into battle against you . O people of Israel , do not fight against the Lord , the God of your ancestors , for you will not succeed ! ”

ID:	843
INPUT:	▁Haur ra ▁haz iz ▁eta ▁sendo tuz ▁zihoan ; ▁jakinduriaz ▁betea ▁zegoen ▁eta ▁Jainkoaren ▁onginahia ▁berekin ▁zuen .
PRED:	She grew up and grew up , and he was filled with joy .
GOLD:	There the child grew up healthy and strong . He was filled with wisdom , and God 's favor was on him .

ID:	844
INPUT:	▁denek ▁egin ▁baitzuten ▁bekatu ▁eta ▁denak ▁aurkitzen ▁dira ▁geroztik ▁Jainkoaren ▁aintz arik ▁gabe .
PRED:	All the people have sinned , and they did not find it for God 's glory .
GOLD:	For everyone has sinned ; we all fall short of God 's glorious standard .

ID:	845
INPUT:	▁Hau ex ek ▁dira ▁Ar taxerxes en ▁erregealdi an ▁Babiloniatik ▁nirekin ▁etorri ▁ziren ▁familia buruak , ▁beren ▁jatorri ekin :
PRED:	These are the names of King Artaxerxes of Judah , who came with me in the land of Judah .
GOLD:	Here is a list of the family leaders and the genealogies of those who came with me from Babylon during the reign of King Artaxerxes :

ID:	846
INPUT:	▁Horrela ▁makur rarazi ▁zuen ▁Jainkoak ▁israeldarren ▁aurrean ▁Kana ango ▁errege ▁Jab in .
PRED:	In this way , the God of Israel would rule over the people of Israel .
GOLD:	So on that day Israel saw God defeat Jabin , the Canaanite king .

ID:	847
INPUT:	▁Nesk ame ▁batek , ▁Pedro ▁su t ondo an ▁eseria ▁ikustean , ▁begira ▁jarri ▁eta ▁esan ▁zuen :— Hau ▁ere ▁Jesusekin ▁zebilen .
PRED:	Meanwhile , a man sitting on a fire , sitting on a fire , and she looked at him . “ This is what happened . ”
GOLD:	A servant girl noticed him in the firelight and began staring at him . Finally she said , “ This man was one of Jesus ' followers ! ”

ID:	848
INPUT:	▁Erregeak ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Ez ▁izan ▁beldur . ▁Zer ▁ikusten ▁duzu ? Emakumeak ▁Sauli :— Es piritu ▁bat ▁dak us at ▁lur petik ▁igotzen .
PRED:	“ Why do n't you be afraid ? ” the king asked . “ What do you see ? ” “ What do you see ? ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't be afraid ! ” the king told her . “ What do you see ? ” “ I see a god coming up out of the earth , ” she said .

ID:	849
INPUT:	▁Jendeak ▁erantzun ▁zion :— B uru tik ▁zaude ! ▁Nor ▁dabil ▁zu ▁hil ▁nahian ?
PRED:	But the people said to him , “ What are you trying to kill you ? ”
GOLD:	The crowd replied , “ You 're demon possessed ! Who 's trying to kill you ? ”

ID:	850
INPUT:	▁Ene ▁Jainko ▁Jauna , ▁gure ▁aita ▁Daviden ▁ordez ▁ni , ▁zeure ▁zerbitzari ▁hau , ▁egin ▁nauzu ▁errege . ▁Ni , ▁berriz , ▁mutil ▁gaztea ▁nauzu ▁eta ▁gobern atzen ▁ikasi ▁gabea .
PRED:	O Lord , the God of our father , David , was your servant , who made me right with me , but you have not followed me .
GOLD:	“ Now , O Lord my God , you have made me king instead of my father , David , but I am like a little child who does n't know his way around .

ID:	851
INPUT:	▁Gar es ti ▁ordain duz ▁eskuratu ▁zaituzte ▁Jainkoak : ▁ez ▁bihurtu , ▁beraz , ▁gizakien ▁esklabo .
PRED:	God bought you into a stranger , a stranger , and he must not be a slave .
GOLD:	God paid a high price for you , so do n't be enslaved by the world .

ID:	852
INPUT:	▁Nire ▁aurreko ek ▁hondatu ▁zituzten ▁nazio ▁horietako ▁jainko etarik ▁batek ▁ere ▁libratu ▁ahal ▁izan ▁ote ▁du ▁bere ▁herria ▁nire ▁eskuetatik ? ▁Eta ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoak ▁libratuko ▁zaituzte la ▁nire ▁eskuetan ▁eror tzetik ?
PRED:	Have any other gods ever rescued them from the gods of the nations ? Have he rescued you from my enemies ?
GOLD:	Which of their gods was able to rescue its people from the destructive power of my predecessors ? What makes you think your God can rescue you from me ?

ID:	853
INPUT:	▁Zigor - eguna
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	The Desolation of Israel

ID:	854
INPUT:	▁Adi erazi ▁nire , ▁Jainko ▁Jaun ▁honen , ▁mezua : ▁Zure ▁aurka ▁nator , ▁Sidon , ▁zure ▁kontura ▁jantziko ▁naiz ▁os pez . ▁Zure ▁aurka ▁epaia ▁bete ▁eta ▁neure ▁santu tasuna ▁ager tzean , ▁denek ▁jakingo ▁dute ▁ni ▁naizela ▁Jauna .
PRED:	Say to them , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am coming against you , the pride of the Sidonians , and they will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	Give the people of Sidon this message from the Sovereign Lord : “ I am your enemy , O Sidon , and I will reveal my glory by what I do to you.When I bring judgment against youand reveal my holiness among you , everyone watching will knowthat I am the Lord .

ID:	855
INPUT:	▁J akizue , ▁batez ▁ere , ▁azken ▁garai etan ▁gizon ▁isek ariak , ▁beren ▁grina ▁tx arrei ▁jarraituz ▁biziko ▁direnak , ▁etorriko ▁direla . ▁Eta ▁ir riz
PRED:	You know that some of you have been very early in the same way . And you will live in their own desires .
GOLD:	Most importantly , I want to remind you that in the last days scoffers will come , mocking the truth and following their own desires .

ID:	856
INPUT:	▁Oho l ▁hauek ▁beh e aldean ▁bereiz ▁jarriko ▁dituzu ▁eta ▁gain aldean , ▁lehenengo ▁eraztun aren ▁parean , ▁ongi ▁lo tuak . ▁Egin ▁honela ▁bi ▁kan toi etarako ▁bi ▁ohol ak ▁ere .
PRED:	Make these frames on each side of these frames , along with the frames , along with two frames , along with two frames .
GOLD:	These corner frames will be matched at the bottom and firmly attached at the top with a single ring , forming a single corner unit . Make both of these corner units the same way .

ID:	857
INPUT:	▁Akaben ▁errege - etx ea ▁suntsitu ▁Jehuk
PRED:	Jehu Kills the Priests of Ahab
GOLD:	The Death of Jehu

ID:	858
INPUT:	▁horregatik , ▁su ▁emango ▁diet T iro ko ▁harresi ei , eta ▁bertako ▁jauregi aki ren tsi ▁egingo ▁ditu ».
PRED:	So I will send down fire on fire , and it will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	So I will send down fire on the walls of Tyre , and all its fortresses will be destroyed . ”

ID:	859
INPUT:	▁Jauna ▁bera ▁joango ▁zaizu ▁aurretik ▁eta ▁zeurekin ▁izango ▁duzu ; ▁ez ▁zaitu ▁inola ▁ere ▁utziko . ▁Ez ▁izan ▁beldur ! ▁Ez ▁kik ildu !»
PRED:	The Lord will go ahead ahead ahead ahead ahead of you , and you will never be afraid . Do n't be afraid or discouraged . ”
GOLD:	Do not be afraid or discouraged , for the Lord will personally go ahead of you . He will be with you ; he will neither fail you nor abandon you . ”

ID:	860
INPUT:	▁Horiek ▁izan ▁ziren ▁No eren ▁semeen ▁leinuak , ▁nor ▁bere ▁ondorengo ▁eta ▁herrien ▁arabera . ▁Hori engandik ▁sortu ▁ziren ▁herriak ▁uholde aren ▁ondoren ▁eta ▁hedatu ▁munduan ▁zehar .
PRED:	These were the descendants of Noah , who had the descendants of Noah and all the nations of the earth , and they spread the earth on the earth .
GOLD:	These are the clans that descended from Noah 's sons , arranged by nation according to their lines of descent . All the nations of the earth descended from these clans after the great flood .

ID:	861
INPUT:	▁Lege az ▁harro tzen ▁zaren ▁horrek , ▁nola ▁desoho ratzen ▁duzu ▁Jainkoa , ▁legea ▁hauts iz ?
PRED:	But if you love God 's law , how can you be ashamed ?
GOLD:	You are so proud of knowing the law , but you dishonor God by breaking it .

ID:	862
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁alde ▁izan ▁zuen ▁Jauna ▁Josafatek , ▁bere ▁arbaso ▁Daviden ▁lehenengo ▁jokaera ▁bera ▁izan ▁zuelako , ▁Baalen ▁idolo etara ▁jo ▁gabe .
PRED:	When Jehoshaphat had done this , he became the Lord 's ancestor David , for he had not abandoned the images of Baal .
GOLD:	The Lord was with Jehoshaphat because he followed the example of his father 's early years and did not worship the images of Baal .

ID:	863
INPUT:	▁Nor ▁gaixo tzen ▁da , ▁ni ▁gaixo tu ▁gabe ? ▁Nor ▁erortzen , ▁ni ▁erre min du ▁gabe ?
PRED:	How can I be sick ? Who can be sick ? What sorrow awaits me ?
GOLD:	Who is weak without my feeling that weakness ? Who is led astray , and I do not burn with anger ?

ID:	864
INPUT:	▁Dei tu ▁zuen ▁Esterrek ▁H atak , ▁bere ▁zerbitzura ▁erregeak ▁jarri ▁zizkion ▁iren etariko ▁bat , ▁eta ▁Mardokeo gana ▁igorri ▁zuen , ▁zer ▁gertatzen ▁eta ▁zergatik ▁zen ▁jaki tera .
PRED:	So Esther called the king to find him as he was staying and asked Mordecai what Mordecai had happened to eat .
GOLD:	Then Esther sent for Hathach , one of the king 's eunuchs who had been appointed as her attendant . She ordered him to go to Mordecai and find out what was troubling him and why he was in mourning .

ID:	865
INPUT:	▁Behin , ▁barau - egun ez , ▁Jaunaren ▁kultu - os pak izun ▁batean ▁zeudela , ▁Espiritu ▁Santuak ▁honela ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Bere izi ▁niretzat ▁Bernabe ▁eta ▁Saulo , ▁nik ▁dei ▁egin ▁diedan ▁egiteko rako ».
PRED:	One day as soon as the Lord was fasting , the Holy Spirit of the Lord appeared to them , and he said to them , “ You are Saul , for I am going to call Saul . ”
GOLD:	One day as these men were worshiping the Lord and fasting , the Holy Spirit said , “ Appoint Barnabas and Saul for the special work to which I have called them . ”

ID:	866
INPUT:	▁Benetan ▁diotsuet : ▁Ez ▁dut ▁gehiago ▁ardorik ▁edango , ▁Jainkoaren ▁erreinuan ▁ardo ▁berria ▁edan ▁arte ».
PRED:	I tell you the truth , I will never drink wine until the new wine of the Kingdom of God . ”
GOLD:	I tell you the truth , I will not drink wine again until the day I drink it new in the Kingdom of God . ”

ID:	867
INPUT:	▁Jonatanek ▁erantzun :— Hon d amena ▁ekarri ▁dio ▁herri ▁osoari ▁gure ▁aitak ! ▁Ikusi ▁nola ▁argitu ▁zaizki dan ▁begiak ▁ezti ▁p it tin ▁bat ▁jan ▁du dalako .
PRED:	“ Give me this message to us , ” Jonathan replied . “ He is a good life that I have given you a little honey . ”
GOLD:	“ My father has made trouble for us all ! ” Jonathan exclaimed . “ A command like that only hurts us . See how refreshed I am now that I have eaten this little bit of honey .

ID:	868
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁ahots ak ▁ur ▁gainean ▁d ur un da : Jainko ▁aintzat suak ▁trumo ia ▁jo ▁du . Jauna ▁ur ▁handien ▁gainean ▁garai .
PRED:	The voice of the Lord , the voice of the Lord , the thunder of the earth , and the thunder of the earth trembled .
GOLD:	The voice of the Lord echoes above the sea.The God of glory thunders.The Lord thunders over the mighty sea .

ID:	869
INPUT:	▁eta ▁litro ▁eta ▁erdi ren ▁bat ▁ardo ▁isur - oparitzat ▁arkume ▁bakoitzeko .
PRED:	and two quarts with each lamb as a liquid offering .
GOLD:	For each lamb offered as a burnt offering or a special sacrifice , you must also present one quart of wine as a liquid offering .

ID:	870
INPUT:	▁Zuek , ▁berriz , ▁lotsaz ▁betetzen ▁duzue ▁pob rea . ▁Ez ▁ote ▁dira ▁aberats ak ▁zuek ▁zapaltzen ▁eta ▁auzi tegira ▁eramaten ▁zaituzte tenak ?
PRED:	But you are rich and rich , who are rich to help you ? Why are you rich to help you ?
GOLD:	But you dishonor the poor ! Is n't it the rich who oppress you and drag you into court ?

ID:	871
INPUT:	▁Nor ▁bere ▁mahats - p arra pean es eriko ▁da , bere ▁pikondo pean , in oren ▁beldurrik ▁gabe . Honela ▁agindu ▁du Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak .
PRED:	Wisdom is a third of his oldest son , for the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has commanded you to be afraid .
GOLD:	Everyone will live in peace and prosperity , enjoying their own grapevines and fig trees , for there will be nothing to fear.The Lord of Heaven 's Armieshas made this promise !

ID:	872
INPUT:	▁Es n atu ▁zen ▁kartzel az aina ▁eta , ▁esp etx eko ▁ateak ▁zabalik ▁ikustean , ▁ezpata ▁atera ▁zuen ▁bere ▁burua ▁hiltzeko , ▁preso ek ▁ihes ▁egin ▁zutelako an .
PRED:	When the guards saw him , he looked up and saw the gates , and when he saw his sword , he fled to death .
GOLD:	The jailer woke up to see the prison doors wide open . He assumed the prisoners had escaped , so he drew his sword to kill himself .

ID:	873
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Balak ek , ▁eta ▁bi en ▁artean ▁zekor ▁eta ▁ahari ▁bana ▁eskaini ▁zituzten ▁aldare ▁bakoitzean .
PRED:	So Balak offered Balaam and offered two young bull as a burnt offering and a ram on each altar .
GOLD:	Balak followed his instructions , and the two of them sacrificed a young bull and a ram on each altar .

ID:	874
INPUT:	▁« Es piritu ▁gaiztoa , ▁norbai ten gandik ▁irten ▁ondoren , ▁leku ▁i d orre tan ▁barrena ▁ibili ▁ohi ▁da ▁atseden ▁bila ; ▁baina , ▁aurkitzen ▁ez ▁du elarik , ▁bere ▁buruari ▁esaten ▁dio : ▁“ N oan ▁berriro , ▁atera ▁nintzen eko ▁neure ▁etxera ”.
PRED:	“ But if someone leaves a person in a field , the place where it goes into a field , it will be found , but it wo n't find it .
GOLD:	“ When an evil spirit leaves a person , it goes into the desert , searching for rest . But when it finds none , it says , ‘ I will return to the person I came from . '

ID:	875
INPUT:	▁Bar au ari ▁buruz . ▁Zah arra ▁eta ▁berria
PRED:	A Discussion about Fasting
GOLD:	A Discussion about Fasting

ID:	876
INPUT:	▁« Beraz ▁— esan ▁zien —, ▁zuen ▁artean ▁agin terik ▁dutenak ▁bet oz ▁nirekin ▁Zesare ara ▁eta , ▁gizon ▁honek ▁erru rik ▁badu , ▁sala ▁bezate ».
PRED:	“ Well , ” he said , “ if anyone who has been put to Caesarea and then let anyone be put to death . ”
GOLD:	So he said , “ Those of you in authority can return with me . If Paul has done anything wrong , you can make your accusations . ”

ID:	877
INPUT:	▁Z an oah , ▁En - G an im , ▁T ap u ah , ▁En am ,
PRED:	The family of Pahath-moab ( Shaul )
GOLD:	Zanoah , En-gannim , Tappuah , Enam ,

ID:	878
INPUT:	▁« Hau tsia ▁utzi ▁dute ▁Moab , h aur ren ▁garras iak ▁entzuten ▁dira .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : My enemies have heard me , and they hear their cries .
GOLD:	All Moab is destroyed.Her little ones will cry out .

ID:	879
INPUT:	▁Zer tarako ▁du ▁gizakiak lur ▁honetan ▁leher ▁egitea ?
PRED:	What does the rain for the earthand broken broken the soil
GOLD:	What do people get for all their hard work under the sun ?

ID:	880
INPUT:	▁Men diak ▁landatu ak ▁izan ▁aurretik , mu in oak ▁baino ▁lehen ▁izan ▁nintzen ▁sor tua ;
PRED:	I planted the mountains in the desert , and I had been destroyed .
GOLD:	Before the mountains were formed , before the hills , I was born —

ID:	881
INPUT:	▁Jakobek ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Ongi ▁dakizu ▁zenbat ▁lan ▁egin ▁dudan ▁zuretzat ▁eta ▁zenbat eraino ▁hazi ▁zaiz un ▁abere - taldea ▁niri ▁esker .
PRED:	Jacob replied to him , “ You know how I have done to you and the flocks of sheep and goats . ”
GOLD:	Jacob replied , “ You know how hard I 've worked for you , and how your flocks and herds have grown under my care .

ID:	882
INPUT:	▁baita ▁gero ago ▁ere , ▁Josiasen ▁seme ▁Joiakim ▁Judako ▁errege ▁izan ▁zen ▁garai tik ▁Josiasen ▁beste ▁seme ▁baten , ▁Sedek iasen , ▁erregealdiko ▁ham aik ag arren ▁urte aren ▁azkena ▁arte . ▁Urte ▁horre tako ▁bosgarren ▁hilean ▁Jerusalemgo ▁bizilagunak ▁erbesteratu ▁zituzten .
PRED:	For during the reign of Josiah son of Josiah son of Josiah son of Josiah son of Josiah , king of Judah , had reigned in the days of Zedekiah son of Josiah , during the reign of King Zedekiah of Judah .
GOLD:	The Lord 's messages continued throughout the reign of King Jehoiakim , Josiah 's son , until the eleventh year of the reign of King Zedekiah , another of Josiah 's sons . In August of that eleventh year the people of Jerusalem were taken away as captives .

ID:	883
INPUT:	▁Hira mek ▁emanak ▁zizkion ▁Salomoni ▁lau ▁t ona ▁inguru ▁urre .
PRED:	He also made Solomon a gold molding around the edge of Solomon 's twelve gold .
GOLD:	Nevertheless , Hiram paid Solomon 9,000 pounds of gold .

ID:	884
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁Moisesen ▁bitartez ▁agindu ▁bezala , ▁israeldarrek ▁zotz ▁eginez ▁izendatu ▁zizkieten ▁lebitarrei ▁hiriak , ▁herri - lur ▁eta ▁guzti .
PRED:	The Lord gave through Moses through Moses through the land of Israel , just as the Lord had commanded them .
GOLD:	So the Israelites obeyed the Lord 's command to Moses and assigned these towns and pasturelands to the Levites by casting sacred lots .

ID:	885
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Liburu ▁Santuak ▁um etan dik ▁ez agunak ▁dituzu la . ▁Liburu ▁Santuek ▁emango ▁dizute ▁Kristo ▁Jesusen ganako ▁sinesmenaren ▁bidez ▁salbamen era ▁daraman ▁jakinduria .
PRED:	As the Scriptures say , “ I know that you are not the Scriptures of Christ Jesus Christ Jesus , the Spirit of Jesus Christ . ”
GOLD:	You have been taught the holy Scriptures from childhood , and they have given you the wisdom to receive the salvation that comes by trusting in Christ Jesus .

ID:	886
INPUT:	▁« Sar ▁zaitezte ▁ate ▁estu tik »
PRED:	The Resurrection
GOLD:	Parable of the Yeast

ID:	887
INPUT:	▁Bigarren ▁ikuskari aren ▁azal pena
PRED:	The Most Important Commandment
GOLD:	Gabriel Explains the Vision

ID:	888
INPUT:	▁Israeli ▁buruz , ▁berriz , ▁hau ▁dio : ▁Egun ▁osoan ▁luz atuak ▁nituen ▁eskuak , ▁herri ▁sinesgogor ▁eta ▁errebelde agana .
PRED:	But I said , “ At that time I will put my hands on all the people of Israel .
GOLD:	But regarding Israel , God said , “ All day long I opened my arms to them , but they were disobedient and rebellious . ”

ID:	889
INPUT:	▁Jainko zko ▁ikuskari tan ▁Israel ▁lurraldera ▁eraman ▁eta ▁mendi ▁garai ▁baten ▁gainean ▁utzi ▁ninduen , ▁eta ▁haren ▁gailur rean , ▁hegoaldera , ▁eraik in - multzo ▁bat ▁zegoen , ▁hiri ▁baten ▁antzekoa .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : He led me into a large heap of ruins , and it was like a large heap of ruins .
GOLD:	In a vision from God he took me to the land of Israel and set me down on a very high mountain . From there I could see toward the south what appeared to be a city .

ID:	890
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁mintzo ▁bat ▁entzun ▁nuen , ▁niri ▁esaten : ▁“ Ea , ▁Pedro , ▁hil ▁eta ▁jan ”.
PRED:	Then I heard a voice saying to me , ‘ Come , let 's kill Peter and eat it . '
GOLD:	And I heard a voice say , ‘ Get up , Peter ; kill and eat them . '

ID:	891
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁apaiz ▁edo ▁profeta ▁nahiz ▁herriko ren ▁batek ▁“ Jaunaren ▁mezua ▁ ( z ama ) ” ▁esaten ▁badu , ▁zigortu ▁egingo ▁ditut ▁bera ▁eta ▁bere ▁etxekoak .
PRED:	And if one of the priests or prophets , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will punish you and be punished . '
GOLD:	“ If any prophet , priest , or anyone else says , ‘ I have a prophecy from the Lord , ' I will punish that person along with his entire family .

ID:	892
INPUT:	▁« Hau ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak : ▁Zuk ▁jokatu ▁duzun ▁bezalaxe ▁jokatuko ▁dut ▁nik ▁ere ▁zurekin , ▁zina ▁mespretxatu ▁eta ▁ituna ▁hautsi ▁baituzu .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I have acted with you as your ancestors , says the Lord , and I have broken my covenant with you .
GOLD:	“ Now this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will give you what you deserve , for you have taken your solemn vows lightly by breaking your covenant .

ID:	893
INPUT:	▁Lan ▁egiten ▁duenari , ▁saria ▁ez ▁zaio ▁dohain ▁huts ▁bezala ▁ematen , ▁zor ▁zaion ▁zerbait ▁bezala ▁baizik .
PRED:	A person who gives good advice is not good , like a person who does good things .
GOLD:	When people work , their wages are not a gift , but something they have earned .

ID:	894
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁altxor ▁balio tsu ▁hau ▁buztin ezko ▁ontzi tan ▁daram agu , ▁garbi ▁ager ▁dadin ▁honen besteko ▁indarra ▁Jainkoaren gandik ▁dat orrela ▁eta ▁ez ▁gure gandik .
PRED:	But this is a jar that makes us pure , and we will know that the power of our God is alive .
GOLD:	We now have this light shining in our hearts , but we ourselves are like fragile clay jars containing this great treasure . This makes it clear that our great power is from God , not from ourselves .

ID:	895
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁gonbidatu ▁zuen ari ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« B az kari ▁edo ▁af ari ren ▁bat ▁em atean , ▁ez ▁gonbidatu ▁zeure ▁adiskide ak , ▁ezta ▁senide , ▁ahaide ▁edo ▁auzoko ▁aberats ak ▁ere ; ▁zeren ▁beraiek ▁ere ▁gonbidatu ▁egingo ▁zin tuzkete , ▁eta , ▁horrela , ▁ordaina ▁hartuko ▁zen uke .
PRED:	He invited the guests to the guests , and he said , “ There is a widow or a widow who invited invited invited you to attend a feast for your relatives , and his relatives , who invited you to take care of you .
GOLD:	Then he turned to his host . “ When you put on a luncheon or a banquet , ” he said , “ do n't invite your friends , brothers , relatives , and rich neighbors . For they will invite you back , and that will be your only reward .

ID:	896
INPUT:	▁zuen ▁lehen - semeak ▁oro ▁eta ▁lehen ▁abere - k ume ▁ar rak ▁Jaunari ▁eskainiko ▁dizkio zue , ▁beraren ak ▁baitira :
PRED:	The firstborn of all the firstborn males from all the firstborn of the firstborn of the firstborn of the firstborn males from the Lord .
GOLD:	you must present all firstborn sons and firstborn male animals to the Lord , for they belong to him .

ID:	897
INPUT:	▁Zentzu dunak ▁menderatu ▁egiten ▁du ▁haserrea , oho ragarri ▁zaio ▁irain a ▁kontuan ▁ez ▁hartzea .
PRED:	A fierce anger is filled with anger , and his anger has turned against them .
GOLD:	Sensible people control their temper ; they earn respect by overlooking wrongs .

ID:	898
INPUT:	▁eta ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« D ak izuen ▁bezala , ▁judu ▁batek ▁debekatu a ▁dauka ▁atzerritar rekin ▁inolako ▁harreman ik ▁izatea ▁nahiz ▁haien ▁etxean ▁sar tzea . ▁Baina ▁niri ▁Jainkoak ▁erakutsi ▁dit ▁ez ▁dudala ▁inor ▁lo hi ▁edo ▁kutsatutzat ▁hartu ▁behar .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ You are a Jew like a Jew . You are not a foreigner or a foreigner or a foreigner or a foreigner or a foreigner to me , but I 'm not trying to eat any of them . ”
GOLD:	Peter told them , “ You know it is against our laws for a Jewish man to enter a Gentile home like this or to associate with you . But God has shown me that I should no longer think of anyone as impure or unclean .

ID:	899
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁ituna ▁iragarri ▁zizuen , ▁bete ▁behar ▁zenituzten ▁hamar ▁aginduak , ▁eta ▁bi ▁harlau z atan ▁idatzi ▁zituen .
PRED:	The Lord gave this covenant to Moses : He made ten stone tablets of stone , and he wrote them on two stone tablets .
GOLD:	He proclaimed his covenant — the Ten Commandments — which he commanded you to keep , and which he wrote on two stone tablets .

ID:	900
INPUT:	▁Samu elen ▁jaio tza ▁eta ▁haur tzar oa
PRED:	The Birth of Samuel
GOLD:	Hannah 's Prayer for a Son

ID:	901
INPUT:	▁Horrela ▁prob atuko ▁zituen ▁Jaunak ▁israeldarrak ▁eta ▁jakingo ▁beraien ▁gurasoei ▁Moisesen ▁bitartez ▁emaniko ▁aginduak ▁betetzen ▁zituzten ▁ala ▁ez .
PRED:	So the Lord gave this command to Moses and Aaron , who did not obey the commands of Moses .
GOLD:	These people were left to test the Israelites — to see whether they would obey the commands the Lord had given to their ancestors through Moses .

ID:	902
INPUT:	▁Dan ▁eta ▁beronen ▁semea : ▁Hux im .
PRED:	and his son Hushai was in Dan .
GOLD:	The son of Dan was Hushim .

ID:	903
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁Davidek ▁otoitz ▁egin ▁zuen :— Jauna , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoa , ▁Saul ▁K eil ara ▁dat orrela ▁eta ▁niregatik ▁hiria ▁hondatzeko ▁asmotan ▁dela ▁entzun ▁dut ▁nik , ▁zure ▁morroi ▁honek .
PRED:	Then David prayed , “ O Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , and I have heard that you are my servants .
GOLD:	Then David prayed , “ O Lord , God of Israel , I have heard that Saul is planning to come and destroy Keilah because I am here .

ID:	904
INPUT:	▁Haur ▁bat ▁jaio ▁zaigu , Jainkoak ▁seme ▁bat ▁eman ▁digu . Ber oni ▁ezarri ▁zaio ▁aginpi dea , eta ▁honela ▁deitzen ▁diote :« Kon ts eil ari ▁mira garri , Jainko ▁indartsu , Aita ▁betier eko , ▁Errege ▁bake - em aile ».
PRED:	The child was born to us , and he has given us a son who has given us victory . He said , “ He is the one who is the one who calls us to Keilah , and he will rule the kings of Keilah . ”
GOLD:	The boots of the warriorand the uniforms bloodstained by warwill all be burned.They will be fuel for the fire .

ID:	905
INPUT:	▁Ep aile ek ▁zehatz - mehatz ▁iker tuko ▁dute ▁auzia ; ▁ikusten ▁bada ▁leku koa ▁fal tsua ▁dela ▁eta ▁herritar ra ▁gezur rez ▁salatu ▁duela ,
PRED:	“ If the judges of the city will be punished , the owner will be divided into a rage .
GOLD:	The judges must investigate the case thoroughly . If the accuser has brought false charges against his fellow Israelite ,

ID:	906
INPUT:	▁M adarikatua ▁Jauna ▁maite ▁ez ▁duena ! ▁Mar ana ▁t h a ! ▁ ( Zatoz , ▁Jauna ! ) .
PRED:	Cursed is those who love the Lord , those who love him ! ”
GOLD:	If anyone does not love the Lord , that person is cursed . Our Lord , come !

ID:	907
INPUT:	▁As etz eraino ▁jan ▁zuten ▁denek , ▁eta ▁gelditutako ▁hondar rez ▁hamabi ▁saski ▁bete ▁zituzten .
PRED:	They ate as much as they were told , and twelve disciples were stored up twelve baskets of bread .
GOLD:	They all ate as much as they wanted , and afterward , the disciples picked up twelve baskets of leftovers .

ID:	908
INPUT:	▁Bi g bai renak ▁ 2 . <unk> ;
PRED:	The family of Zaccai760
GOLD:	The family of Bigvai2,056

ID:	909
INPUT:	▁Amon darren ▁erregeari ▁eraso ▁eta ▁nagusitu ▁egin ▁zitzaion ; ▁urte ▁hartan ▁eta ▁hurrengo ▁bi etan ▁amon darrek ▁zerga ▁handia ▁ordaindu ▁behar ▁izan ▁zioten : ▁hiru ▁t ona ▁zilar , ▁hiru ▁mila ▁t ona ▁gari ▁eta ▁beste ▁horrenbeste ▁garagar .
PRED:	At that time the king of Ammon became king , and the five years of Ammon had been sold , and the five years were paid .
GOLD:	Jotham went to war against the Ammonites and conquered them . Over the next three years he received from them an annual tribute of 7,500 pounds of silver , 50,000 bushels of wheat , and 50,000 bushels of barley .

ID:	910
INPUT:	▁H af ar aim , ▁X ion , ▁An ahar at ,
PRED:	Ziklag , Baalath ,
GOLD:	Hapharaim , Shion , Anaharath ,

ID:	911
INPUT:	▁Es aiozu , ▁bada , ▁bake - itu na ▁egiten ▁dudala ▁berarekin :
PRED:	Give thanks to the peace of prosperity of prosperity ,
GOLD:	Now tell him that I am making my special covenant of peace with him .

ID:	912
INPUT:	▁baita ▁atari ▁inguruko ▁zutabeak ▁beren ▁oin ekin , ▁hes olak ▁eta ▁sok ak ▁ere .
PRED:	For the posts and their bases ; their ropes and ropes around their ropes and ropes .
GOLD:	They were also responsible for the posts of the courtyard and all their bases , pegs , and ropes .

ID:	913
INPUT:	▁Profeta ▁bat ▁profeta ▁delako ▁onartzen ▁duenak ▁profetari ▁zor ▁zaion ▁saria ▁jasoko ▁du ; ▁eta ▁gizon ▁zuzen ▁bat ▁zuzena ▁delako ▁onartzen ▁duenak ▁gizon ▁zuzen ari ▁zor ▁zaion ▁saria ▁jasoko ▁du ;
PRED:	Those who obey God 's command will receive a prophet who sent a person to receive a person who accepts a person who wants to receive a person .
GOLD:	If you receive a prophet as one who speaks for God , you will be given the same reward as a prophet . And if you receive righteous people because of their righteousness , you will be given a reward like theirs .

ID:	914
INPUT:	▁Herri ko ▁jende ▁xehea ▁baizik ▁ez ▁zuen ▁utzi , ▁al or rak ▁eta ▁mahastiak ▁landu ▁zitzaten .
PRED:	Those who oppress the poor , however , did n't let their vineyards and vineyards and vineyards .
GOLD:	But Nebuzaradan allowed some of the poorest people to stay behind to care for the vineyards and fields .

ID:	915
INPUT:	▁O dol jari oa ▁zuen ▁emakumea ▁eta ▁buruzagi aren ▁alaba
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Man
GOLD:	Jesus Heals in Response to Faith

ID:	916
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁piztu ▁ondoren , ▁aurretik ▁joango ▁natzaizue ▁Galile ara ».
PRED:	But I will go out to Galilee , and I will go to Galilee . ”
GOLD:	But after I am raised from the dead , I will go ahead of you to Galilee and meet you there . ”

ID:	917
INPUT:	▁Era baki tako ▁egunean , ▁Herodesek , ▁errege - jantzi tan ▁eta ▁bere ▁aul kian ▁eser irik , ▁hitzaldia ▁egin ▁zien .
PRED:	On the day he sat on the day of King Herod , and he sat on on the ground .
GOLD:	and an appointment with Herod was granted . When the day arrived , Herod put on his royal robes , sat on his throne , and made a speech to them .

ID:	918
INPUT:	▁Egia ▁esan , ▁ez ▁dut ▁ausar di arik ▁beren ▁buruak ▁gorai patzen ▁dituzten ▁horien ▁pareko ▁edo ▁kide ko tzat ▁neure ▁burua ▁emateko . ▁Horrelako ▁horiek ▁zentzu ▁ona ▁galdu ▁dute : ▁lehenengo ▁beren ▁burua ▁hartzen ▁dute ▁neurri tzat ▁eta , ▁gero , ▁neurri ▁horrekin ▁balio z tatzen ▁dituzte ▁beren ▁buruak .
PRED:	I say , “ I have no respect for themselves , foolish and foolish people who are foolish . They are foolish and foolish and foolish . They are foolish to be saved , and they are honest . They are honest and foolish .
GOLD:	Oh , do n't worry ; we would n't dare say that we are as wonderful as these other men who tell you how important they are ! But they are only comparing themselves with each other , using themselves as the standard of measurement . How ignorant !

ID:	919
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁besterik ▁fro g atu ▁nahi ▁baduzue , ▁e ka tzu e ▁hona ▁zeuen ▁anaia ▁gazteena . ▁B ien ▁bitartean , ▁ala ▁faraoia ! , ▁ez ▁zarete ▁hemendik ▁aterako .
PRED:	And if you want to know what you want to say , ‘ Look , ' if you are going to Pharaoh 's youngest brother , you will not be able to go . '
GOLD:	This is how I will test your story . I swear by the life of Pharaoh that you will never leave Egypt unless your youngest brother comes here !

ID:	920
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁haien ▁hezurrak ▁Jabe xeko ▁ tam ar in do aren ▁p ean ▁ehortzi ▁zituzten , ▁eta ▁zazpi ▁egunez ▁barau ▁egin ▁zuten .
PRED:	Then the bones of their bones , and they buried him for seven days .
GOLD:	Then they took their bones and buried them beneath the tamarisk tree at Jabesh , and they fasted for seven days .

ID:	921
INPUT:	▁Jauna ▁errespeta tzeak ▁konfiantza ▁osoa ▁sortzen ▁du , eta ▁ondorengoak ▁ere ▁horretan ▁babes tuko ▁dira .
PRED:	Fear of the Lord , and all the descendants of the godly will be saved .
GOLD:	Those who fear the Lord are secure ; he will be a refuge for their children .

ID:	922
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁semeak ▁aita ▁iraintzen ▁du , alaba ▁amaren ▁aurka ▁ateratzen ▁daeta ▁errain a ▁amagin arreb aren ▁aurka . Nork ▁bere ▁etxekoak ▁ditu ▁etsai .
PRED:	For the children of their father will be forgiven , and he will rise against his own household .
GOLD:	For the son despises his father.The daughter defies her mother.The daughter-in-law defies her mother-in-law.Your enemies are right in your own household !

ID:	923
INPUT:	▁itsas ▁hon darra ▁bezain ▁ugari izango ▁lira teke ▁zure ▁ondorengoak , hon dar - aleak ▁bezain ba tzure ▁seme - alabak ; haien ▁izena ▁ez ▁litzateke ▁suntsituko , in oiz ▁ere ▁ez nire ▁aurretik ▁ezab atuko ».
PRED:	I will be as numerous as the sand on the seashore , the descendants of your descendants will be as strong as the sand on the ground , and I will never be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	Your descendants would have been like the sands along the seashore — too many to count ! There would have been no need for your destruction , or for cutting off your family name . ”

ID:	924
INPUT:	▁Sar des ko ▁eliz ▁elkarteari
PRED:	The Message to the Church
GOLD:	The Message to the Church in Sardis

ID:	925
INPUT:	▁« Zure ▁senide ▁batek ▁bekatu ▁egiten ▁badu , ▁zoaz ▁berarengana ▁eta ▁zentz arazi ▁bak arrean . ▁Jar am on ▁egiten ▁badizu , ▁irabaz ia ▁duzu ▁sen idea .
PRED:	“ If you are forgiven , if you are willing to love your fellow believers , go to him and live in peace .
GOLD:	“ If another believer sins against you , go privately and point out the offense . If the other person listens and confesses it , you have won that person back .

ID:	926
INPUT:	▁Joram ek ▁Tz ai r rera ▁jo ▁zuen ▁bere ▁guda - gurdi ▁guztiekin . ▁Gau ez ▁jaiki ▁eta ▁set iatzen ▁ari ▁zitzaizkion ▁edom darrak ▁eta ▁hauen ▁guda - gurdi etan ▁zeuden ▁buruzagiak ▁garaitu ▁zituen ▁arren , ▁Judako ▁gudari ek ▁ihes ▁egin ▁zuten ▁nork ▁bere ▁etxol ara .
PRED:	So Jehoram and his chariot commanders went out to the chariot of his chariot and attacked them . They attacked them and attacked them at night .
GOLD:	So Jehoram went with all his chariots to attack the town of Zair . The Edomites surrounded him and his chariot commanders , but he went out at night and attacked them under cover of darkness . But Jehoram 's army deserted him and fled to their homes .

ID:	927
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁erantzun ▁zien :— Orain dik ▁pixka ▁batean ▁argia ▁zeuen ▁artean ▁duzue ; ▁ibili ▁argia ▁duzuen ▁bitartean , ▁ilunp eak ▁harrapa ▁ez ▁zaitzaten , ▁ilunpetan ▁dabil enak ▁ez ▁bait aki ▁nora ▁doan .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Stay here among you , for you have hidden hidden hidden hidden in darkness while you walk in darkness . Do n't let you walk in darkness .
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ My light will shine for you just a little longer . Walk in the light while you can , so the darkness will not overtake you . Those who walk in the darkness can not see where they are going .

ID:	928
INPUT:	▁Hor ▁duzu ▁G era - ren ▁seme ▁Ximei ▁ere , ▁B ah uri mgo ▁benjamin darra ; ▁izu garrizko ▁madarikazio ak ▁bota ▁zizkidan ▁Mah an aim era ▁nin do al arik . ▁Alabaina , ▁bera ▁ere ▁etorri ▁zitzaidan ▁gero ▁bila ▁Jordan era , ▁eta ▁nik ▁Jaunarengatik ▁zin ▁egin ▁nion ▁ez ▁nuela ▁ezpataz ▁hilko .
PRED:	The Lord gave me this message from the tribe of Benjamin : “ At that time I took a solemn oath in the valley of Benjamin , ” I said , “ I took a solemn oath that the Lord would not kill me . ”
GOLD:	“ And remember Shimei son of Gera , the man from Bahurim in Benjamin . He cursed me with a terrible curse as I was fleeing to Mahanaim . When he came down to meet me at the Jordan River , I swore by the Lord that I would not kill him .

ID:	929
INPUT:	▁Hori ▁ikusi ▁zuen ▁gizon ▁batek ▁adierazi ▁zion ▁Joabi :— Ab s alom ▁arte ondo ▁batetik ▁zintzilik ▁ikusi ▁dut .
PRED:	Then one of the men said to Joab , “ Absalom has already seen it until I see it . ”
GOLD:	One of David 's men saw what had happened and told Joab , “ I saw Absalom dangling from a great tree . ”

ID:	930
INPUT:	▁Hamar ▁egun ▁in gur uren ▁buruan , ▁heriotz az ▁jo ▁zuen ▁Jaunak ▁Nab al ▁eta ▁hil ▁egin ▁zen .
PRED:	The Lord laid his cloak on Naboth 's head , and he died .
GOLD:	About ten days later , the Lord struck him , and he died .

ID:	931
INPUT:	▁« Er res peta tu ▁nik ▁aginduriko ▁atseden - eguna ▁eta ▁izan ▁begirune ▁nire ▁santutegi ari . ▁Neu ▁naiz ▁Jauna .
PRED:	“ Be careful to obey my Sabbath day , for I am the Lord . I am the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Keep my Sabbath days of rest , and show reverence toward my sanctuary . I am the Lord .

ID:	932
INPUT:	▁Jeroboamen ▁semearen ▁heriotza
PRED:	The Death of Jeroboam
GOLD:	Ahijah 's Prophecy against Jeroboam

ID:	933
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁beraien ▁menpe ▁jartzen ▁ez ▁bazara , ▁hiria ▁babiloniarren ▁esku ▁eroriko ▁da ▁eta ▁erre ▁egingo ▁dute , ▁eta ▁zeu ▁ere ▁ez ▁zara ▁libratuko ▁haien ▁eskuetatik .
PRED:	But if you refuse to kill them , you will be killed by the Babylonians , and you will be able to kill them .
GOLD:	But if you refuse to surrender , you will not escape ! This city will be handed over to the Babylonians , and they will burn it to the ground . ' ”

ID:	934
INPUT:	▁B orro ka ▁hastean , ▁Galaadeko ▁arduradunak ▁Tob era ▁joan ▁ziren ▁Jef teren ▁bila ,
PRED:	When Jephthah 's brothers heard what had happened , they went to find him .
GOLD:	When the Ammonites attacked , the elders of Gilead sent for Jephthah in the land of Tob .

ID:	935
INPUT:	▁Zer uko ▁gudaroste ek , ▁liho ▁zuri ▁garbiz ▁jantzirik , ▁zaldi ▁gainean ▁jarraitzen ▁zioten .
PRED:	The chariots and horses were beautifully dressed in fine linen clothing .
GOLD:	The armies of heaven , dressed in the finest of pure white linen , followed him on white horses .

ID:	936
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁erantzun ▁zion ▁Natan i :— Bekatu ▁egin ▁dut ▁Jaunaren ▁aurka . N atan ek ▁Davidi :— Jaunak , ▁hala ▁ere , ▁barkatzen ▁dizu ▁bekatua . ▁Ez ▁zara ▁hilko .
PRED:	“ I have sinned against the Lord , ” David replied . “ I have sinned against the Lord , and you will not forgive your sins . ”
GOLD:	Then David confessed to Nathan , “ I have sinned against the Lord. ” Nathan replied , “ Yes , but the Lord has forgiven you , and you wo n't die for this sin .

ID:	937
INPUT:	▁Israeldar rekin ▁bake - hitz armena ▁egin ▁zuen ▁hiri ▁bakarra ▁hibi arrak ▁bizi ▁ziren eko ▁Gabaon ▁izan ▁zen . ▁Beste ▁guztiak ▁ar men ▁indarrez ▁hartu ▁zituzten .
PRED:	Then the people of Israel made peace peace with a peace treaty with all the people of Israel , along with their own special possession .
GOLD:	No one in this region made peace with the Israelites except the Hivites of Gibeon . All the others were defeated .

ID:	938
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Moisesek ▁oihu ▁egin ▁zion ▁Jaunari . ▁Eta ▁Jaunak ▁zuh aix ka ▁bat ▁erakutsi ▁zion . ▁Moisesek ▁zuh aix ka ▁u retara ▁jaurti ▁eta ▁ura ▁gez atu ▁egin ▁zen . T oki ▁hartan ▁pro batu ▁zituen ▁Jaunak , ▁eta ▁arau ▁eta ▁us adi oak ▁ezarri ▁zizkien .
PRED:	Then Moses cried out to the Lord , “ A tree is a tree of water , and Moses threw the water into the water and threw it into the water . He threw it into the water and threw it into a winepress .
GOLD:	So Moses cried out to the Lord for help , and the Lord showed him a piece of wood . Moses threw it into the water , and this made the water good to drink.It was there at Marah that the Lord set before them the following decree as a standard to test their faithfulness to him .

ID:	939
INPUT:	▁eta ▁zu ▁hil ▁nahian ▁dabiltzan ▁eta ▁beldurrik ▁handiena ▁diez un ▁etsaien ▁esku ▁utziko , ▁Babiloniako ▁errege ▁Nabukodonosor ▁eta ▁beraren ▁gudarostearen ▁esku , ▁alegia .
PRED:	I will kill you and be afraid to kill you , and you will be the greatest among the nations .
GOLD:	I will hand you over to those who seek to kill you , those you so desperately fear — to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon and the mighty Babylonian army .

ID:	940
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁Zil izi ako ▁eta ▁P an f il i ako ▁itsaso etan ▁barrena , ▁L izi ako ▁M ira ▁hirira ▁iritsi ▁ginen .
PRED:	And we traveled through Ephesus and traveled through the sea , along with us , along with us , along with us .
GOLD:	Keeping to the open sea , we passed along the coast of Cilicia and Pamphylia , landing at Myra , in the province of Lycia .

ID:	941
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Moisesek , ▁bere ▁Jainko ▁Jaunaren ▁sumina ▁baretu ▁nahiz , ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« Jauna , ▁nola ▁jarriko ▁zara , ▁bada , ▁haserre - su tan , ▁hain ▁ahalmen ▁handiz ▁Egiptotik ▁atera ▁duzun ▁zeure ▁herri ▁honen ▁aurka ?
PRED:	Then Moses prayed to his fierce anger , “ O Lord , if you have sinned against the Lord , how can you be angry with a powerful arm ? Why are you angry with a powerful arm ?
GOLD:	But Moses tried to pacify the Lord his God . “ O Lord ! ” he said . “ Why are you so angry with your own people whom you brought from the land of Egypt with such great power and such a strong hand ?

ID:	942
INPUT:	▁Maite ▁duzue ▁Jesu ▁Kristo , ▁gaurdaino ▁ikusi ▁ez ▁duzuen ▁arren . ▁Eta , ▁ikusi ▁gabe ▁berarengan ▁sinets iz , ▁esanez in ▁ahal ako ▁pozez , ▁poz ▁distira tsuz , ▁beteak ▁zaudete ▁jadanik ,
PRED:	For you have seen Christ Jesus , but you have never seen him . And now you have seen him with joy because you have been filled with joy .
GOLD:	You love him even though you have never seen him . Though you do not see him now , you trust him ; and you rejoice with a glorious , inexpressible joy .

ID:	943
INPUT:	▁Gaiztoak ▁harro keriaz ▁erasotzen ▁dio ▁erru karri ari , as m atzen ▁dituen ▁azpik eri ez ▁dauka ▁harrap atua .
PRED:	The wicked plot against the wicked ; the wicked plot against him .
GOLD:	The wicked arrogantly hunt down the poor.Let them be caught in the evil they plan for others .

ID:	944
INPUT:	▁Bide tik ▁oker tzen ▁dena ▁gogor ▁zentz araziko ▁dute ; zen tz araz pena ▁gorro tatzen ▁duena ▁hil ▁egingo ▁da .
PRED:	Those who hate discipline will be discipline ; those who hate bribes will be hated .
GOLD:	Whoever abandons the right path will be severely disciplined ; whoever hates correction will die .

ID:	945
INPUT:	▁Ez p atak ▁jo ▁eta ▁ez ▁dio ▁ezer ▁egiten , ezta ▁lantz ak , ▁az kon ak ▁eta ▁geziak ▁ere .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Do n't go with spear and spears and arrows .
GOLD:	“ When it sneezes , it flashes light ! Its eyes are like the red of dawn .

ID:	946
INPUT:	▁Bizi , ▁bada , ▁Jainkoa ▁etorriko ▁den ▁egun aren ▁zain ▁eta ▁lan ▁egin ▁lehen bai lehen ▁irits ▁dadin . ▁Egun ▁hartan , ▁sutan ▁desegingo ▁dira ▁zeruak , ▁eta ▁munduaren ▁os ag aiak ▁kiskal ita ▁ezerez tuko ▁dira .
PRED:	And now the God of heaven will come and watch over the day of judgment , and it will be destroyed . In that day the heavens will be destroyed , and all the earth will be destroyed .
GOLD:	looking forward to the day of God and hurrying it along . On that day , he will set the heavens on fire , and the elements will melt away in the flames .

ID:	947
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁begi - bistan ▁bo tarazi ▁zituen ▁Baalen ▁aldareak , ▁berauen ▁gainean ▁zeuden ▁intsentsu - ontziak ▁hauts iz ; ▁zutoin ▁sakratu ▁eta ▁zurezko ▁nahiz ▁metal ezko ▁idoloak ▁xehatu ▁eta ▁pus kak ▁halako ei ▁sakrifizioak ▁eskaintzen ▁zizkieten en ▁hilobi ▁gainean ▁barre iatu ▁zituen .
PRED:	The eyes of the Lord had commanded them to worship idols of Baal , the images of Baal , and the images of Baal were made of wood . They offered sacrifices and burned incense to the images of Baal and made them as a pleasing aroma to the Lord .
GOLD:	He ordered that the altars of Baal be demolished and that the incense altars which stood above them be broken down . He also made sure that the Asherah poles , the carved idols , and the cast images were smashed and scattered over the graves of those who had sacrificed to them .

ID:	948
INPUT:	▁Norbaitek ▁zergatik ▁as katzen ▁duzuen ▁galde tuko ▁bal izue , ▁erantzun : ▁“ Jaunak ▁behar ▁du ”».
PRED:	If you ask , ‘ What will you ask , ‘ The Lord answer you ? '
GOLD:	If anyone asks , ‘ Why are you untying that colt ? ' just say , ‘ The Lord needs it . ' ”

ID:	949
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Paulok , ▁P an f il ian ▁alde ▁egin ▁eta ▁lanean ▁lagundu ▁ez ▁zien ▁gizona ▁berriro ▁berekin ▁hartzea ▁ez ▁zuen ▁ongi ▁ikusten .
PRED:	But Paul continued to help him , and he did n't help him . He did n't see him again .
GOLD:	But Paul disagreed strongly , since John Mark had deserted them in Pamphylia and had not continued with them in their work .

ID:	950
INPUT:	▁Josek ▁eta ▁bere ▁aitaren ▁famili ako ek ▁Egipton ▁bizitzen ▁jarraitu ▁zuten . ▁Ehun ▁eta ▁hamar ▁urte ▁bizi ▁izan ▁zen ▁Jose ,
PRED:	Joseph continued to live in Egypt , and he lived in Egypt for seventy years .
GOLD:	So Joseph and his brothers and their families continued to live in Egypt . Joseph lived to the age of 110 .

ID:	951
INPUT:	▁Kanta ▁Jaunari , gauza ▁harrigarriak ▁egin ▁baititu ; mundu ▁osoan ▁jakin ▁bezate haren ▁berri .
PRED:	He has done great joy to the Lord throughout all his holy world .
GOLD:	Sing to the Lord , for he has done wonderful things.Make known his praise around the world .

ID:	952
INPUT:	▁Bekatu ▁egiten ▁duena , ▁hori ▁hilko ▁da ; ▁semeak ▁ez ▁ditu ▁aitaren ▁erru aren ▁ondoren ak ▁jasan ▁beharko , ▁ezta ▁aitak ▁ere ▁seme arenak . ▁Gizon ▁zintzo ari ▁bere ▁zintzo tasunaren ▁ordaina ▁emango ▁zaio , ▁gaizto ari ▁bere ▁gaiztakeri arena .
PRED:	Anyone who sins will die for sin , but he will not be punished for his father 's father , and he will not be punished for doing evil .
GOLD:	The person who sins is the one who will die . The child will not be punished for the parent 's sins , and the parent will not be punished for the child 's sins . Righteous people will be rewarded for their own righteous behavior , and wicked people will be punished for their own wickedness .

ID:	953
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁espiritu ▁gaiztoak ▁erantzun ▁zien : ▁« Ez agutzen ▁dut ▁Jesus ▁eta ▁badakit ▁Paulo ▁nor ▁den . ▁Baina ▁nor ▁zarete ▁zuek ?»
PRED:	But Jesus replied , “ No , I know that Paul is the one who knows where you are ? ”
GOLD:	But one time when they tried it , the evil spirit replied , “ I know Jesus , and I know Paul , but who are you ? ”

ID:	954
INPUT:	▁Dei ▁degizu t : ▁salba ▁nazazu , eta ▁beteko ▁ditut ▁zure ▁xedapenak .
PRED:	I called for you , and I will continue to obey your commandments .
GOLD:	I cry out to you ; rescue me , that I may obey your laws .

ID:	955
INPUT:	▁Or duz ▁geroztik , ▁larunbat - b ez per an , ▁ilun tzen ▁hasi ▁bezain ▁laster , ▁Jerusalemgo ▁ateak ▁i x teko ▁agindu ▁nuen , ▁eta ▁larunbat - bi har amun a ▁arte ▁ez ▁ireki tzeko . ▁Eta ▁nire ▁gizon etako ▁batzuk ▁jarri ▁nituen ▁atean , ▁larun batean ▁inolako ▁zam arik ▁sar ▁ez ▁zedin .
PRED:	The Sabbath day I began to celebrate the Sabbath day of Jerusalem , as I stood on the Sabbath day , the gates of Jerusalem , and the gates were closed on the Sabbath day , and the gates were not ready to open the Sabbath .
GOLD:	Then I commanded that the gates of Jerusalem should be shut as darkness fell every Friday evening , not to be opened until the Sabbath ended . I sent some of my own servants to guard the gates so that no merchandise could be brought in on the Sabbath day .

ID:	956
INPUT:	▁Davidek , ▁orduan , ▁Uri asi :— Geldi ▁zaitez ▁gaur ▁hemen . ▁Bihar ▁utziko ▁dizut ▁joaten . Egun ▁hartan , ▁beraz , ▁Jerusalemen ▁gelditu ▁zen ▁Urias ; ▁biharamun ean ,
PRED:	Then David said to Uriah , “ Go ahead and let me go to the next day of the next day of the next day . ”
GOLD:	“ Well , stay here today , ” David told him , “ and tomorrow you may return to the army. ” So Uriah stayed in Jerusalem that day and the next .

ID:	957
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁dio : ▁« Gar ai ▁berria ▁dator . ▁Garai ▁horretan , ▁jendeak ▁ez ▁du ▁honela ▁zin ▁egingo : ▁“ Ala ▁Jauna , ▁israeldarrak ▁Egiptotik ▁atera ▁zituena !” ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ As surely as the people of Israel , the people of Israel will say , ‘ As surely as the Lord lives of the land of Egypt . '
GOLD:	“ In that day , ” says the Lord , “ when people are taking an oath , they will no longer say , ‘ As surely as the Lord lives , who rescued the people of Israel from the land of Egypt . '

ID:	958
INPUT:	▁Ber din ▁fedea ▁ere : ▁bera ▁bakarrik , ▁egin tzetan ▁ez ▁bada ▁azaltzen , ▁hila ▁dago .
PRED:	But Jesus was buried with him , but he is dead .
GOLD:	So you see , faith by itself is n't enough . Unless it produces good deeds , it is dead and useless .

ID:	959
INPUT:	▁Moises ▁menditik ▁jaitsi ▁zen , ▁legearen ▁harlau zak ▁eskuetan ▁zituela . ▁Har lau zak ▁bi ▁alde etatik ▁idatziak ▁zeuden :
PRED:	So Moses went down to the mountain of Moses and placed the stone tablets of the covenant with two stone tablets .
GOLD:	Then Moses turned and went down the mountain . He held in his hands the two stone tablets inscribed with the terms of the covenant . They were inscribed on both sides , front and back .

ID:	960
INPUT:	▁Hori en ▁aldamen ean ▁Gaba ongo ▁Mel at iasek ▁eta ▁Mer on o teko ▁J ad onek ▁jardun ▁zuten ▁lanean , ▁Gaba ongo ▁eta ▁Mitz p ako ▁beste ▁gizon ▁batzu ekin ▁batera , ▁Eufrates ▁ibaiaren ▁mendebaldeko ▁gobernari aren ▁kontura .
PRED:	This was the leader of the district of Gibeon , the leader of the district of Gibeon , and at Gibeon , the leader of the province west of Gibeon , in Gibeon , the province west of the Euphrates River .
GOLD:	Next to them were Melatiah from Gibeon , Jadon from Meronoth , people from Gibeon , and people from Mizpah , the headquarters of the governor of the province west of the Euphrates River .

ID:	961
INPUT:	▁Gu tun aren ▁arraz oia : ▁S as im ai suak
PRED:	Paul 's Prayer of Plans
GOLD:	The Danger of False Teachers

ID:	962
INPUT:	▁Babiloniako ▁Nabukodonos orren ▁erregealdiko ▁hemere tzi garren ▁urtean , ▁bosgarren ▁hilaren ▁ham arrean , ▁Neb uz ara dan , ▁Babiloniako ▁erregearen ▁funtzionario ▁eta ▁guardia burua , ▁etorri ▁zen ▁Jerusalemera .
PRED:	In the eighteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon 's reign , during the eleventh year of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon , Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	On August 17 of that year , which was the nineteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar 's reign , Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard and an official of the Babylonian king , arrived in Jerusalem .

ID:	963
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁zenbait ▁ale ▁sasi ▁artean ▁erori ▁zen , ▁eta ▁sasi ek , ▁harekin ▁batera ▁ern erik , ▁ito ▁egin ▁zuten .
PRED:	Other seed fell among thorns and thorns that grew up with thorns and thorns .
GOLD:	Other seed fell among thorns that grew up with it and choked out the tender plants .

ID:	964
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Naam ako ▁Tz of arrek ▁hitz ▁egin ▁zuen :
PRED:	Then Job spoke again :
GOLD:	Then Zophar the Naamathite replied to Job :

ID:	965
INPUT:	▁Hai etako ▁batzuk ▁ez ▁zirela ▁leial ▁izan ? ▁Eta ▁zer ? ▁Haien ▁leial tasun - ez ak ▁huts ▁bihurtuko ▁ote ▁du ▁Jainkoaren ▁leialtasuna ?
PRED:	Some of them were eager to understand what they were doing ? They will be ashamed of God 's people ?
GOLD:	True , some of them were unfaithful ; but just because they were unfaithful , does that mean God will be unfaithful ?

ID:	966
INPUT:	▁Norbaitek ▁galde ▁dezake : ▁Eta ▁hilak ▁nola ▁pizten ▁dira ? ▁N olako ▁gorpu tzez ▁itzuliko ▁dira ▁bizira ?
PRED:	If you can ask , how can you be dead ? Can anyone return to life ?
GOLD:	But someone may ask , “ How will the dead be raised ? What kind of bodies will they have ? ”

ID:	967
INPUT:	▁Begira ▁etxe ▁honi ▁gau ▁eta ▁egun , ▁zure ▁bizilekua ▁hau ▁izanen ▁dela ▁esan ▁baituzu . ▁Entzun , ▁zure ▁zerbitzariak ▁toki ▁hon etarantz ▁begira ▁eginiko ▁otoitza .
PRED:	Think about this day and day , this place where you have said , ‘ May your servants be honored in this place of honor . '
GOLD:	May you watch over this Temple day and night , this place where you have said you would put your name . May you always hear the prayers I make toward this place .

ID:	968
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁erabili ▁gaizki ▁alargun tsak ▁eta ▁umezur tzak ;
PRED:	“ Do not let widows marry widows .
GOLD:	“ You must not mistreat or oppress foreigners in any way . Remember , you yourselves were once foreigners in the land of Egypt .

ID:	969
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁Bernabe ▁eta ▁Saulo , ▁Espiritu ▁Santuak ▁bidal irik , ▁S el e uzi ara ▁jaitsi ▁ziren , ▁eta ▁handik ▁Zi p rera ▁jo ▁zuten ▁itsas oz .
PRED:	So Saul and Barnabas went to the Holy Spirit , and the spirits went down to Cyprus and attacked them .
GOLD:	So Barnabas and Saul were sent out by the Holy Spirit . They went down to the seaport of Seleucia and then sailed for the island of Cyprus .

ID:	970
INPUT:	▁Am non ▁eta ▁Tamar
PRED:	The Hittites and Tamar
GOLD:	The Rape of Tamar

ID:	971
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁dio ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak : ▁« Hona ▁hemen , ▁Israelgo ▁hamabi ▁leinuen ▁artean ▁banatuko ▁duzuen ▁lurraldearen ▁mugak ▁ ( Jos eren ▁ondorengoek ▁bi ▁zati ▁hartuko ▁dituzte ) .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ This is the leader of the twelve tribes of Israel will be given to the twelve tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ Divide the land in this way for the twelve tribes of Israel : The descendants of Joseph will be given two shares of land .

ID:	972
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁esan ▁zion ▁Jaunari :— Herri a ▁ez ▁da ▁ausar tuko ▁Sinai ▁mendira ▁igo tzera , ▁zuk ▁zeuk ▁ohar tarazi ▁baiti guzu ▁eta ▁agindu ▁mendi ari ▁mugak ▁ezar tzeko ▁eta ▁sakratu tzat ▁hartzeko .
PRED:	Moses said to the Lord , “ The people of Sinai will not go up to the mountain of Sinai , for they have been set up to the mountain and set up to the sacred mountain . ”
GOLD:	“ But Lord , ” Moses protested , “ the people can not come up to Mount Sinai . You already warned us . You told me , ‘ Mark off a boundary all around the mountain to set it apart as holy . ' ”

ID:	973
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak makur raraziko ▁ditu harro , ▁handi putz eta ▁buru - ten te ▁guztiak :
PRED:	Then the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will destroy all the proud , and the proud will be destroyed .
GOLD:	For the Lord of Heaven 's Armieshas a day of reckoning.He will punish the proud and mightyand bring down everything that is exalted .

ID:	974
INPUT:	▁Jakob ▁Laban en ▁etxean . ▁Lea ▁eta ▁Rakel
PRED:	Jacob and Leah were Leah to Laban 's home .
GOLD:	Jacob Arrives at Paddan-Aram

ID:	975
INPUT:	▁Hemen ▁adierazten ▁dena , ▁berriz , ▁Jesus ▁gure ▁Jauna ▁alegia , ▁beste ▁leinu ▁bateko a ▁da , ▁inoiz ▁aldare - gizon ik ▁izan ▁ez ▁duen ▁leinukoa ,
PRED:	Now this is the Lord Jesus , who is the one who is talking with the twelve tribes of the tribe of Levi .
GOLD:	For the priest we are talking about belongs to a different tribe , whose members have never served at the altar as priests .

ID:	976
INPUT:	▁El ih uk ▁jarraitu ▁zuen :
PRED:	Then Elihu said to Job ,
GOLD:	Then Elihu said :

ID:	977
INPUT:	▁O in orde - esku bidea ▁duten ▁emakume en ▁ezkon tzarako ▁arauak
PRED:	Love for those who are honest and refuse to obey God 's commandments .
GOLD:	Women Who Inherit Property

ID:	978
INPUT:	▁Emakumeak , ▁berriz , ▁basamortura ▁egin ▁zuen ▁ihes ; ▁han ▁bazter ▁bat ▁prestatua ▁zion ▁Jainkoak , ▁mila ▁berrehun ▁eta ▁hirurogei ▁egunez ▁bertan ▁bizi ▁zedin .
PRED:	But she fled to the wilderness , where she had fled to the wilderness for six days .
GOLD:	And the woman fled into the wilderness , where God had prepared a place to care for her for 1,260 days .

ID:	979
INPUT:	▁ezagu t ▁dezan ▁mundu ak ▁zure ▁nagus itza , j en til - herri ek ▁zure ▁garaipena .
PRED:	When you see the world , you will be destroyed by the nations of the world .
GOLD:	May the nations praise you , O God.Yes , may all the nations praise you .

ID:	980
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁nik ▁ere ▁mespretx agarri ▁eta ▁kas kar ▁egingo ▁zaituztet ▁herri ▁guzti arentzat , ▁nire ▁bideak ▁jarraitu ▁ez ▁dituzu elako ▁eta ▁erabakiak ▁zein ▁nor ▁den ▁begira tuz ▁hartu ▁dituzu elako ».
PRED:	So I will turn to you and be careful to obey my decrees and regulations , for you have not followed my regulations . ”
GOLD:	“ So I have made you despised and humiliated in the eyes of all the people . For you have not obeyed me but have shown favoritism in the way you carry out my instructions . ”

ID:	981
INPUT:	▁Aaron ▁bera ▁ere ▁suntsitu ▁nahi ▁iz at eraino ▁zegoen ▁Jauna ▁haserre , ▁eta ▁Aaronen ▁alde ▁ere ▁erregutu ▁nuen .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ The Lord , the God of Aaron , and I said to Aaron ,
GOLD:	The Lord was so angry with Aaron that he wanted to destroy him , too . But I prayed for Aaron , and the Lord spared him .

ID:	982
INPUT:	▁« Zuen ▁artean ▁jarriko ▁dut ▁neure ▁egon lekua ▁eta ▁ez ▁zaituztet ▁zap uz tuko .
PRED:	“ I will scatter you among you and lie among you , and I will not reject you .
GOLD:	I will live among you , and I will not despise you .

ID:	983
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁erregeek ▁ezarri ak ▁zituzten ▁sas ia paiz ak ▁Judako ▁hiri xka ▁eta ▁Jerusalem ▁inguru etako ▁kultu - leku etan , ▁toki ▁horietan ▁intsentsua ▁erre ▁zezaten ; ▁Josiasek ▁kendu ▁egin ▁zituen ▁halako ak ; ▁baita ▁Baal i , ▁eguzki ▁nahiz ▁ilargi ari ▁nahiz ▁izar - multzo ▁eta ▁izar ▁guztiei ▁intsentsua ▁erretzen ▁zieten ak ▁ere .
PRED:	Then Josiah appointed the kings of Judah and all the towns of Judah to worship the pagan shrines of the pagan shrines and the pagan shrines and the pagan shrines of the pagan shrines and the pagan shrines and the new moon celebrations , the new moon , the moon , and all the stars , the stars , the stars , the stars , the new moon , the stars , the stars , the stars , and the stars , the stars , the stars , the stars , the stars , the stars , the stars , and the new moon , the new moon , the new moon , the new moon , the new moon , the new moon , and the new moon , and the new moon , and the stars , and all the new moon , and the new moon , and the new moon , and the new moon , the new moon , and all the stars , and all the new moon , and all the stars , and the stars , the kings of Judah , the new moon , and the new moon , the stars
GOLD:	He did away with the idolatrous priests , who had been appointed by the previous kings of Judah , for they had offered sacrifices at the pagan shrines throughout Judah and even in the vicinity of Jerusalem . They had also offered sacrifices to Baal , and to the sun , the moon , the constellations , and to all the powers of the heavens .

ID:	984
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁erregeak ▁eskuineko ei ▁esango ▁die : ▁“ Zatozte , ▁nire ▁Aitaren ▁bedeinkatu ok ; ▁hartz azue ▁munduaren ▁sor tzetik ▁zuentzat ▁prestatua ▁dagoen ▁erreinua .
PRED:	Then the king will say to the king , ‘ Come , let me tell you , ‘ Come , the Kingdom of the Father who has blessed you . '
GOLD:	“ Then the King will say to those on his right , ‘ Come , you who are blessed by my Father , inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the creation of the world .

ID:	985
INPUT:	▁Ai ▁ene ! ▁L eiala ▁zen ▁hiria em agaldu ▁bihur tua ! B ehin ola ▁justiziaz ▁betea , zuzen bide - leku ▁zena , orain ▁hil tzaileen ▁bizileku .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits me , my life is filled with a prostitute , and righteousness is filled with justice .
GOLD:	See how Jerusalem , once so faithful , has become a prostitute.Once the home of justice and righteousness , she is now filled with murderers .

ID:	986
INPUT:	▁K uts aturiko ▁perts on ak ▁bereiz ▁ezarri
PRED:	Teaching about Money and Possessions
GOLD:	Purity in Israel 's Camp

ID:	987
INPUT:	▁gizakiaren ▁jardu era ▁ger arazten ▁du , berak ▁egindako az ▁guztiak ▁ohar ▁daitezen .
PRED:	He makes everything they do , but they do n't understand everything they do .
GOLD:	Then everyone stops workingso they can watch his power .

ID:	988
INPUT:	▁ahun tzak , ▁es ne az ▁zeu ▁eta ▁familia ▁elik atu eta ▁zerbitzariak ▁manten tzeko .
PRED:	“ If you eat the meal , eat the food and the servants and the servants to eat .
GOLD:	And you will have enough goats ' milk for yourself , your family , and your servant girls .

ID:	989
INPUT:	▁Hor ▁bidaliko ▁dizkizuet ▁nik ▁profetak , ▁jakin tsuak ▁eta ▁lege - maisuak , ▁eta ▁zuek ▁batzuk ▁hil ▁eta ▁gurutziltzatu , ▁besteak ▁sinagog etan ▁zigortu ▁eta ▁herri rik ▁herri ▁eraso ka ▁erabiliko ▁dituzue .
PRED:	I will send the prophets and teachers of religious law and the teachers of religious law and the teachers of religious law and the teachers of religious law , and you will be crucified .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , I am sending you prophets and wise men and teachers of religious law . But you will kill some by crucifixion , and you will flog others with whips in your synagogues , chasing them from city to city .

ID:	990
INPUT:	▁On ak ▁Jaunaren ▁onespena ▁lortzen ▁du , as mo ▁tx arrekoak ▁gaitz espena .
PRED:	The wise are full of the Lord , but the words of the Lord gives justice to you .
GOLD:	The Lord approves of those who are good , but he condemns those who plan wickedness .

ID:	991
INPUT:	▁horregatik , ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak , ▁zin ▁dagit ▁neure ▁biziarengatik , ▁zuk ▁gorroto aren ▁eraginez ▁israeldarren ▁kontra ▁azaldu ▁duzun ▁amorru ▁eta ▁grina ▁ber ber az ▁jokatuko ▁dudala . ▁Zigor tuko ▁zaitudan ean , ▁orduan ▁aitortuko ▁naute ▁israeldarrek .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : As surely as surely as I hate you , says the Sovereign Lord , that I am giving you an oath that I will show you what I am doing .
GOLD:	Therefore , as surely as I live , says the Sovereign Lord , I will pay back your angry deeds with my own . I will punish you for all your acts of anger , envy , and hatred . And I will make myself known to Israel by what I do to you .

ID:	992
INPUT:	▁Salomonen ▁jauregia
PRED:	Solomon 's Kindness to Solomon
GOLD:	Solomon Builds His Palace

ID:	993
INPUT:	▁bertan ▁behera ▁utzi ▁zuen ▁Xil oko ▁egoitza , giz ar tean ▁bizitzeko ▁eraiki ▁zuen ▁etxola .
PRED:	So he left Shiloh and built it in the Tabernacle to live in the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Then he abandoned his dwelling at Shiloh , the Tabernacle where he had lived among the people .

ID:	994
INPUT:	▁Maite ▁izango ▁zaituzte , ▁bedeinkatu ▁eta ▁ugalduko , ▁eman kor ▁egingo ▁zaituzte ▁zeuek , ▁zuen ▁abereak ▁eta ▁lurrak : ▁garia , ▁ardoa ▁eta ▁olioa ▁oparo ▁emango ▁dizkizue , ▁eta ▁zekor ▁eta ▁ark umeak ▁ugalduko , ▁zuen ▁arbasoei ▁zin ▁egindako aren ▁arabera ▁emango ▁dizuen ▁lurraldean .
PRED:	He will bless you and blessed you , and he will give you the crops of cattle , sheep , goats , herds , cattle , cattle , and cattle , and cattle , and olive oil , and olive oil , and cattle , and olive oil .
GOLD:	He will love you and bless you , and he will give you many children . He will give fertility to your land and your animals . When you arrive in the land he swore to give your ancestors , you will have large harvests of grain , new wine , and olive oil , and great herds of cattle , sheep , and goats .

ID:	995
INPUT:	▁Joseren ▁an aien ▁mendekua
PRED:	Joseph 's Final Words
GOLD:	Joseph Sold into Slavery

ID:	996
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁aingeruak ▁ihardetsi ▁zion : ▁“ Bi ▁mila ▁eta ▁hirurehun ▁arrats alde ▁eta ▁goiz ▁igaro ▁beharko ▁dira . ▁Gero , ▁santutegia ▁berriro ▁sagaratua ▁izango ▁da ”.
PRED:	“ Then the angel said to him , ‘ You must be able to build an altar for holy assembly . '
GOLD:	The other replied , “ It will take 2,300 evenings and mornings ; then the Temple will be made right again . ”

ID:	997
INPUT:	▁Jende tz agatik ▁ez ▁baitzuten ▁nondik ▁sartu ▁aurkitzen , ▁te il atu ra ▁igo ▁eta , ▁te ilak ▁kendu rik , ▁oh atila ▁eta ▁guzti ▁jaitsi ▁zuten ▁erdi - erdi ra , ▁Jesusen ▁aurrera .
PRED:	The people did n't go into the village , for they went to see him , and they took him up and put the mat .
GOLD:	but they could n't reach him because of the crowd . So they went up to the roof and took off some tiles . Then they lowered the sick man on his mat down into the crowd , right in front of Jesus .

ID:	998
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaien ▁Ham or : ▁« S ik em ▁nire ▁semea ▁zuen ▁arre baz ▁maitemin dua ▁dago ; ▁em aiozue , ▁arren , ▁emaztetzat .
PRED:	Then she said to her , “ She 's sister has married her son , she has married her . ”
GOLD:	Hamor tried to speak with Jacob and his sons . “ My son Shechem is truly in love with your daughter , ” he said . “ Please let him marry her .

ID:	999
INPUT:	▁Koru - zuzendari arentzat . ▁Koreren ▁seme ena . ▁O bo ez ▁. ▁Kanta .
PRED:	O God , you are your children , and you will not be disgraced .
GOLD:	God is our refuge and strength , always ready to help in times of trouble .

ID:	1000
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁da ▁esaten ▁ari ▁garen aren ▁gai lurra : ▁hain ▁handia ▁da ▁gure ▁apaiz ▁nagusia , ▁ez en ▁Jainko ▁handiaren ▁eskuinaldean ▁eseria ▁baitago ▁zeruan ,
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : Our High Priest is the great King of heaven , for he is sitting on the throne of heaven .
GOLD:	Here is the main point : We have a High Priest who sat down in the place of honor beside the throne of the majestic God in heaven .

ID:	1001
INPUT:	▁Em aten ▁al ▁du ▁egur rik ▁ezer ▁egiteko ? Egi ten ▁al ▁da ▁beraren ▁zu raz ▁k ako rik ezer ▁zintz il ika tzeko ?
PRED:	“ Have you seen anything from the wood of wood ? Why are you trying to catch up ? Why do you look for yourself ?
GOLD:	Can its wood be used for making things , like pegs to hang up pots and pans ?

ID:	1002
INPUT:	▁Zuhur tzia ▁eskura ezina ▁da ▁buru gabe arentzat , ez ▁da ▁gauza ▁jen da urrean ▁ahoa ▁zabal tzeko .
PRED:	Wise people care for themselves , but the mouth of the wicked are shut .
GOLD:	Wisdom is too lofty for fools.Among leaders at the city gate , they have nothing to say .

ID:	1003
INPUT:	▁Jaunari ▁atsegin ▁ez ▁zaiona ▁egin ▁zuen ; ▁ez ▁zen ▁aldendu ▁Nebaten ▁seme ▁Jeroboamek ▁Israeli ▁eginarazi ▁zizkion ▁bekatu etatik .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , but he refused to turn from the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat .
GOLD:	But Pekahiah did what was evil in the Lord 's sight . He refused to turn from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel to commit .

ID:	1004
INPUT:	▁Nahi ▁dudan ▁ongia ▁ez ▁dut ▁egiten , ▁eta ▁nahi ▁ez ▁dudan ▁gaizkia ▁egiten ▁dut .
PRED:	I have done what I have done , and I do n't want to do what I do .
GOLD:	I want to do what is good , but I do n't . I do n't want to do what is wrong , but I do it anyway .

ID:	1005
INPUT:	▁Mak ila ▁bat ▁hartuko ▁duzue ▁zeuekin ▁eta , ▁sabela ▁hus tera ▁irte tean , ▁berarekin ▁zuloa ▁egin ▁eta ▁gor o tza ▁lur rez ▁estaliko ▁duzue .
PRED:	I will take a meal with you , and you will go with him , and you will cover him with him .
GOLD:	The camp must be holy , for the Lord your God moves around in your camp to protect you and to defeat your enemies . He must not see any shameful thing among you , or he will turn away from you .

ID:	1006
INPUT:	▁Era ikuntza ▁hauek ▁guztiak , ▁nola ▁barn etik ▁hala ▁kanpotik , ▁neurri ra ▁landu ▁eta ▁zer ratu riko ▁harri ▁bikain ez ▁egin ▁zituzten ▁oinarri etatik ▁h abe etaraino , ▁etxearen ▁kanpo aldetik ▁ar eto ▁nagusi raino .
PRED:	He also made all the furnishings of the church that had been used to write down all the furnishings of the Tabernacle , along with the walls of the Tabernacle and all the furnishings of the Temple .
GOLD:	From foundation to eaves , all these buildings were built from huge blocks of high-quality stone , cut with saws and trimmed to exact measure on all sides .

ID:	1007
INPUT:	▁Bas amortu ra ▁joan ▁behar ▁dugu ▁hiru ▁eguneko ▁bidean , ▁geure ▁Jainko ▁Jaunari ▁sakrifizioak ▁eskaintzeko , ▁berak ▁agindu ▁digun ▁eran .
PRED:	We must go to the Lord for three days to offer sacrifices to the Lord our God .
GOLD:	I will make a clear distinction between my people and your people . This miraculous sign will happen tomorrow . ' ”

ID:	1008
INPUT:	▁Bet i ▁izan ▁naiz ▁Jainkoaren ▁zigor raren ▁beldur , ezin ▁nuen ▁ezer ▁haren ▁handi tasunaren ▁aurrean .
PRED:	I was afraid of God , and I was afraid of God 's great power .
GOLD:	That would be better than facing God 's judgment.For if the majesty of God opposes me , what hope is there ?

ID:	1009
INPUT:	▁H alab er , ▁ekartzen ▁dizki daten ▁uzta ▁guztien ▁lehen ▁emaitzak ▁zure ak ▁izango ▁dira . ▁Zure ▁senitarte tik ▁garbi ▁dagoen ▁edon ork ▁jan ▁dezake ▁hori etatik .
PRED:	They will give you gifts from all your families , for you will be saved from all your families .
GOLD:	All the first crops of their land that the people present to the Lord belong to you . Any member of your family who is ceremonially clean may eat this food .

ID:	1010
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁hirurehun ▁babeski ▁txiki ▁ere ▁egin ▁zituen ▁urre ▁garbiz , ▁babeski ▁bakoitza ▁egiteko ▁hiru ▁kilo ▁eta ▁erdi ▁urre ▁behar ▁izan ▁zelarik . ▁Eta ▁« Liban oko ▁Oih ana » ▁zeritzan ▁jauregian ▁ipini ▁zituen .
PRED:	He also made 200 large shields of hammered gold , each weighing three quarts of pure gold , and each of the Forest of Lebanon . Then he put them in the royal palace .
GOLD:	He also made 300 smaller shields of hammered gold , each weighing more than 71/2 pounds . The king placed these shields in the Palace of the Forest of Lebanon .

ID:	1011
INPUT:	▁H atu x , ▁Xeb anias , ▁Mal uk ,
PRED:	Shecaniah , Bani , and Baanah .
GOLD:	Harim , Meremoth , Obadiah ,

ID:	1012
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁jakin tsua ▁buru argi ; er g ela , ▁ordea , ▁ilunpetan ▁dabil . Bad akit , ▁hala ▁ere , bi ek ▁etorkizun ▁bera ▁dutela .
PRED:	For you know the truth , but the secret is coming , but those who do n't know the future is coming .
GOLD:	For the wise can see where they are going , but fools walk in the dark. ” Yet I saw that the wise and the foolish share the same fate .

ID:	1013
INPUT:	▁Sen arrak , ▁horren ▁berri ▁jakitean , ▁deus ▁ere ▁esaten ▁ez ▁badio , ▁on iri tzia ▁ematen ▁dio , ▁eta ▁bo toak ▁zein ▁konpromis oak ▁balio zko ak ▁izango ▁dira .
PRED:	When he heard this , he said , “ If you say , ‘ If you are unfaithful , your vow will be punished . '
GOLD:	But if her husband refuses to accept it on the day he hears of it , her vow or pledge will be nullified , and the Lord will forgive her .

ID:	1014
INPUT:	▁Hobe ▁zuek ▁nahas ten ▁ari ▁diren ▁horiek ▁erabat ▁iren duko ▁balira !
PRED:	It is better to be better for those who are better to be punished .
GOLD:	I just wish that those troublemakers who want to mutilate you by circumcision would mutilate themselves .

ID:	1015
INPUT:	▁Aitari ▁isek az ▁begiratu ▁eta ▁amari ▁esana ▁egiten ▁ez ▁dion ari bel e ek ▁begiak ▁aterako ▁dizkiote ▁eta ▁arran o ek ▁irentsiko .
PRED:	The Father 's mother was amazed at his mother 's mother , and his eyes will not be covered with the eagle .
GOLD:	The eye that mocks a fatherand despises a mother 's instructionswill be plucked out by ravens of the valleyand eaten by vultures .

ID:	1016
INPUT:	▁Salomonen ▁jakinduria ▁ekialdeko ena ▁eta ▁egiptoarren a ▁baino ▁handiagoa ▁izan ▁zen ,
PRED:	wisdom was greater than Solomon , than Solomon , and he became greater than the Red Sea .
GOLD:	So Hiram supplied as much cedar and cypress timber as Solomon desired .

ID:	1017
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁ez ▁du ▁baztertu ▁beretzat ▁aukeratu ▁zuen ▁herria . ▁Gogoan ▁duzue , ▁noski , ▁Liburu ▁Santuak ▁Eliasi ▁buruz ▁dioena , ▁nola ▁hitz ▁egiten ▁zion ▁Jainkoari ▁Israelen ▁aurka :
PRED:	For God has rejected the people of Israel because of this Scripture : “ This is what the Scriptures say , “ This is what the Scriptures says :
GOLD:	No , God has not rejected his own people , whom he chose from the very beginning . Do you realize what the Scriptures say about this ? Elijah the prophet complained to God about the people of Israel and said ,

ID:	1018
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren , ▁lur ▁osoko ▁jabe aren , ▁itun - kutxa ▁daram aten ▁apaizen ▁oin ek ▁Jordan ▁ibai ko ▁urak ▁ukitu ▁bezain ▁laster , ▁ur - kor ron tea ▁eten ▁eta ▁urak ▁gelditu ▁egingo ▁dira , ▁harresia ▁bailiran ».
PRED:	When you enter the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant , the Ark of the Lord 's Covenant will be like a river , and the waters of the Jordan will be as bright as the waters of the Jordan . ”
GOLD:	The priests will carry the Ark of the Lord , the Lord of all the earth . As soon as their feet touch the water , the flow of water will be cut off upstream , and the river will stand up like a wall . ”

ID:	1019
INPUT:	▁Oi ▁Sionen ▁zauden ▁Jainkoa , zuri ▁zor ▁zaizu ▁gorespena , ▁zuri ▁bete ▁behar ▁promes ak ,
PRED:	O God , you must celebrate the vows of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	for you answer our prayers.All of us must come to you .

ID:	1020
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁Jerusalemen gatik ▁aieneka
PRED:	Jesus Anointed at Jerusalem
GOLD:	Jesus Grieves over Jerusalem

ID:	1021
INPUT:	▁Babiloniako ▁errege ▁Nabukodonos orrek ▁Josiasen ▁seme ▁Sedekias ▁Judako ▁errege ▁ezarri ▁zuen , ▁Joiaki men ▁seme ▁J eko n iasen ▁ordez .
PRED:	Nebuchadnezzar appointed Josiah son of Josiah son of Josiah son of Jehoiakim son of Jehoiakim son of Josiah , king of Judah .
GOLD:	Zedekiah son of Josiah succeeded Jehoiachin son of Jehoiakim as the king of Judah . He was appointed by King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon .

ID:	1022
INPUT:	▁Jaunari , ▁bere ▁Jainkoari , ▁atsegin ▁ez ▁zaiona ▁egin ▁zuen . ▁Eta ▁Jeremias ▁profetak ▁Jaunaren ▁izenean ▁hitz ▁egin ▁zion ▁arren , ▁Sedekias ▁ez ▁zen ▁apaldu .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as Jeremiah had done in the name of the Lord , just as he had done .
GOLD:	But Zedekiah did what was evil in the sight of the Lord his God , and he refused to humble himself when the prophet Jeremiah spoke to him directly from the Lord .

ID:	1023
INPUT:	▁« Bete , ▁bada , ▁gaur ▁ematen ▁dizkizuedan ▁agindu ▁guztiak , ▁adoretsu ▁izan ▁eta ▁hartzera ▁zoazten ▁lurraldeaz ▁jabe tzeko ▁gauza ▁izan ▁zaitezten
PRED:	“ Therefore , listen to all the commands I am giving you today . I am giving you today and occupy the land you are giving you today .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , be careful to obey every command I am giving you today , so you may have strength to go in and take over the land you are about to enter .

ID:	1024
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁hemen ▁ni , ▁gezurrezko ▁amets en ▁z ale ▁diren ▁profeten ▁kontra ; ▁amets ak ▁konta tuz , ▁des bidera tu ▁egiten ▁dute ▁nire ▁herria ▁beren ▁gezur ▁eta ▁neurri gabekeri ez . ▁Ez ▁ditut ▁nik ▁bidali , ▁ez ▁diet ▁nik ▁ezer ▁agindu . ▁Horregatik , ▁ez ▁diote ▁inolako ▁onik ▁egiten ▁herri ▁honi . ▁Nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	These false false prophets are false prophets who are false prophets . They have not sinned against me , and they have not sinned against me . They have not sinned against me , and I have not sent them to sin . ”
GOLD:	I am against these false prophets . Their imaginary dreams are flagrant lies that lead my people into sin . I did not send or appoint them , and they have no message at all for my people . I , the Lord , have spoken !

ID:	1025
INPUT:	▁Juda ▁eta ▁Simeonen ▁leinu ek ▁kanaan darrei ▁eraso
PRED:	The Land Given to Judah
GOLD:	Judah and Simeon Conquer the Land

ID:	1026
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁janari ▁hori ▁gor derik ▁geldituko ▁da ▁Egipto ▁lurraldean ▁izango ▁diren ▁zazpi ▁gose - ur te etarako , ▁eta ▁gosete ak ▁ez ▁du ▁lurralde ▁hau ▁hondatuko ».
PRED:	In this way , the land of Egypt will be hungry and famine in the land of Egypt , and all the land of Egypt will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	That way there will be enough to eat when the seven years of famine come to the land of Egypt . Otherwise this famine will destroy the land . ”

ID:	1027
INPUT:	▁Hartan , ▁inguru ▁haietan ▁bizi ▁zen ▁emakume ▁kanaandar ▁bat ▁deiadarka ▁hasi ▁zitzaion :— Erru ki ▁zakizkit , ▁Jauna , ▁Daviden ▁Semea ! ▁O in az e ▁gorri tan ▁dauka ▁deabruak ▁nire ▁alaba .
PRED:	As a result , a woman began shouting , “ The Lord , have mercy on me ! ” And the Son of David said , “ The Son of David has been healed ! ”
GOLD:	A Gentile woman who lived there came to him , pleading , “ Have mercy on me , O Lord , Son of David ! For my daughter is possessed by a demon that torments her severely . ”

ID:	1028
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁Asaren ▁erregealdiko ▁hogeita ▁hamasei garren ▁urtean , ▁Israelgo ▁errege ▁Bax a ▁Judaren ▁kontra ▁borrokatzera ▁abiatu ▁zen . ▁R ama ▁hiria ▁gotortu ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁Asaren ▁joan - etorri ak ▁era goz teko .
PRED:	In the eighth year of King Asa 's reign in Judah , Asa 's reign in Judah , led the city of Baasha of Judah to attack Jerusalem . He went to attack the city of King Asa of Judah and fortified towns .
GOLD:	In the thirty-sixth year of Asa 's reign , King Baasha of Israel invaded Judah and fortified Ramah in order to prevent anyone from entering or leaving King Asa 's territory in Judah .

ID:	1029
INPUT:	▁Nagus iak , ▁bere ▁asmo aren ▁kontra , ▁emaztetzat ▁hartzen ▁ez ▁badu , ▁atsegin ▁ez ▁duelako , ▁ez ▁du ▁haren ▁ber rer os pena ▁gal araziko ; ▁dena ▁den , ▁ez ▁du ▁atzerritar rei ▁sal tzeko ▁esku biderik , ▁iruzur ▁egingo ▁l io ke ▁eta .
PRED:	If the master 's master has done this , he does n't want her to marry her . And if he does n't want to marry her , he will not take care of these foreigners , or even if you refuse to take any of these foreigners living among you .
GOLD:	If she does not satisfy her owner , he must allow her to be bought back again . But he is not allowed to sell her to foreigners , since he is the one who broke the contract with her .

ID:	1030
INPUT:	▁ F edeari ▁esker , ▁Isaakek ▁etorkizun erako ▁bedeinkazioa ▁eman ▁zien ▁Jakobi ▁eta ▁Esau ri .
PRED:	It was by faith that Isaac was given to Jacob , and Jacob gave thanks to Jacob .
GOLD:	It was by faith that Isaac promised blessings for the future to his sons , Jacob and Esau .

ID:	1031
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁esan ▁zidan : ▁« Gizaseme , ▁ikusten ▁duzu ▁zertan ▁ari ▁diren ? ▁Ikusten ▁Israel ▁herriak ▁hemen ▁egiten ▁dituen ▁higuingarri tasunak , ▁ni ▁neure ▁santutegi tik ▁alde ▁egitera ▁behar tuz ? ▁Baina ▁higuingarri tasun ▁handia goak ▁ere ▁ikusiko ▁dituzu ▁oraindik ».
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Son of man , what are you doing ? What are you doing ? Why are you doing this ? Why are you doing this ? ”
GOLD:	“ Son of man , ” he said , “ do you see what they are doing ? Do you see the detestable sins the people of Israel are committing to drive me from my Temple ? But come , and you will see even more detestable sins than these ! ”

ID:	1032
INPUT:	▁M ariak ▁hirur en ▁bat ▁hilabete ▁egin ▁zituen ▁El is abe tekin ; ▁gero , ▁etxera ▁itzuli ▁zen .
PRED:	Then she went to the home of Eli , and then returned home .
GOLD:	Mary stayed with Elizabeth about three months and then went back to her own home .

ID:	1033
INPUT:	▁Zuek ▁ere , ▁nagus iok , ▁joka ▁ezazue ▁era ▁berean ▁esklabo ekin , ▁mehatx urik ▁egin ▁gabe ; ▁hartu ▁kontuan ▁haien ▁eta ▁zuen ▁nagusia ▁zeruan ▁dagoela , ▁eta ▁hark ▁ez ▁duela ▁bereiz keriarik ▁egiten .
PRED:	But if you are slaves , do n't be slaves . If you refuse to obey God 's command , you will be punished .
GOLD:	Masters , treat your slaves in the same way . Do n't threaten them ; remember , you both have the same Master in heaven , and he has no favorites .

ID:	1034
INPUT:	▁Liburu ▁Santu etan , ▁hain ▁zuzen , ▁hauxe ▁esana ▁du ▁norbaitek : ▁Zer ▁da ▁gizona , ▁zu ▁hartaz ▁oro itzeko , ▁zer ▁gizakia , ▁zu ▁hartaz ▁ardura tzeko ?
PRED:	This is what the Scriptures say : ‘ You are the one who is coming to be made , and everything you are destroyed . '
GOLD:	For in one place the Scriptures say , “ What are mere mortals that you should think about them , or a son of man that you should care for him ?

ID:	1035
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁orduan , ▁Ezek i elek ▁egin ▁duena ▁egingo ▁duzue : ▁ez ▁duzue ▁aurpegia ▁estaliko , ▁ezta ▁hil eta - ogi rik ▁jango ▁ere .
PRED:	And if you have done this , you must not be able to cover the face of your face , you must never eat it .
GOLD:	Then you will do as Ezekiel has done . You will not mourn in public or console yourselves by eating the food brought by friends .

ID:	1036
INPUT:	▁« Honela ▁diotsuet ▁nik , Jaun ▁ahalguztidun ▁honek : Izan ▁bihotz , Jaun ▁ahalguztidun aren etx ea ▁jasotzeko oin arriak ▁jarri ▁ziren ▁egun ▁haietan prof eten ▁ahotik hitz ▁hauek ▁entzun ▁zenituzten ok .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says :
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Be strong and finish the task ! Ever since the laying of the foundation of the Temple of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , you have heard what the prophets have been saying about completing the building .

ID:	1037
INPUT:	▁heldu ▁eta ▁putzu ▁batera ▁jaurti ▁zuten . ▁H uts ik ▁zegoen ▁putzu a , ▁urik ▁gabe .
PRED:	When they reached the well and found it , they found no water without water .
GOLD:	Then they grabbed him and threw him into the cistern . Now the cistern was empty ; there was no water in it .

ID:	1038
INPUT:	▁Hil ▁zenean , ▁bere ▁arbasoen ▁ondoan ▁ehortzi ▁zuten ▁Jotam , ▁David ▁bere ▁arbaso aren ▁Hirian . ▁Ondorengo ▁erregea ▁haren ▁seme ▁Akaz ▁izan ▁zen .
PRED:	When Jotham died , he was buried with his ancestors in the City of his ancestors . Then he became the next king .
GOLD:	When Jotham died , he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David . And his son Ahaz became the next king .

ID:	1039
INPUT:	▁azpian ▁zilarrezko ▁berrogei ▁oin ▁dituztela , ▁ohol ▁bakoitzeko ▁bi ▁oin .
PRED:	Also make forty silver bases for forty silver bases — two bases under each frame .
GOLD:	with their forty silver bases , two bases under each frame .

ID:	1040
INPUT:	▁Harri ▁bat ▁ekarriz , ▁lehoi - zulo aren ▁sarreran ▁jarri ▁zuten , ▁eta ▁erregeak ▁bere ▁errege - zi gil uz ▁eta ▁funtzionari oen ▁zigil uz ▁zigil atu ▁zuen , ▁Dani eli ▁buruz ▁erabaki takoa ▁inork ▁alda ▁ez ▁zezan .
PRED:	There was a lion sitting on the throne of a lion , and the king sitting on his throne . The king was sealed with the seal of the scroll , and it was not sealed .
GOLD:	Then the king returned to his palace and spent the night fasting . He refused his usual entertainment and could n't sleep at all that night .

ID:	1041
INPUT:	▁Hitz ▁hutsez ▁ez ▁da ▁morroia ▁zentzarazten ; ul er tu ▁egin ▁arren , ▁ez ▁du ▁esanik ▁egingo .
PRED:	But the servant does n't know , but he will not punish them .
GOLD:	Words alone will not discipline a servant ; the words may be understood , but they are not heeded .

ID:	1042
INPUT:	▁Jesusek , ▁u retatik ▁atera tzerakoan , ▁zerua ▁ur ratzen ▁ikusi ▁zuen ▁eta ▁Espiritua , ▁us o - tan ker an , ▁beregana ▁jaisten .
PRED:	As soon as Jesus was walking through the water , he saw the Holy Spirit , and the Holy Spirit came down into the water .
GOLD:	As Jesus came up out of the water , he saw the heavens splitting apart and the Holy Spirit descending on him like a dove .

ID:	1043
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jef tek , ▁Galaadeko ▁gizonak ▁bildurik , ▁e fraim darrei ▁eraso ▁eta ▁menderatu ▁egin ▁zituen . ▁Efraim darrek ▁esan ▁ohi ▁zuten , ▁Efraim ▁eta ▁Manasesen ▁lurralde ▁artean ▁bizi ▁ziren ▁g ala ad tarrak ▁e fraim darren ▁artetik ▁alde ▁eginak ▁zirela .
PRED:	Then Jephthah killed the men of Gilead , and the men of Ephraim , the tribe of Ephraim , and the descendants of Ephraim , and Ephraim , as far as Ephraim and Ephraim and Ephraim . The Israelites left the land of Ephraim .
GOLD:	The people of Ephraim responded , “ You men of Gilead are nothing more than fugitives from Ephraim and Manasseh. ” So Jephthah gathered all the men of Gilead and attacked the men of Ephraim and defeated them .

ID:	1044
INPUT:	▁gauza ▁guztietan ▁zeu ▁egintza ▁on en ▁eredu ▁ager tuz : ▁irakaspen ▁garb iko ▁eta ▁giz abide tsu ;
PRED:	In all , you must teach the good things of the church . He must be pure and pure gold .
GOLD:	And you yourself must be an example to them by doing good works of every kind . Let everything you do reflect the integrity and seriousness of your teaching .

ID:	1045
INPUT:	▁Hauxe ▁jakin arazten ▁diogu , ▁beraz , ▁erregeari : ▁juduek ▁hiria ▁berriro ▁eraiki ▁eta ▁harresiak ▁jasotzen ▁badituzte , ▁laster ▁galduko ▁dituela ▁erregeak ▁Eufrates ▁ibaiaren ▁mendebaldeko ▁lurraldeak ».
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ We have built a city and build it back to the province west of the Euphrates River . ”
GOLD:	We declare to the king that if this city is rebuilt and its walls are completed , the province west of the Euphrates River will be lost to you . ”

ID:	1046
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁hiriak ▁hondatu rik ▁utziko ▁ditut , eta ▁zu ▁zeu ▁basamortu ▁bihurtuko ; orduan ▁jakingo ▁duzun i ▁naizela ▁Jauna .
PRED:	I will destroy your cities , and I will make you desolate , and you will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	I will demolish your citiesand make you desolate.Then you will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	1047
INPUT:	▁eta ▁diru arekin ▁batera ▁nire ▁edal ontzia , ▁zilarre z koa , ▁gazteen aren ▁zaku - mutur rean ». Hark ▁Joseren ▁esana ▁bete ▁zuen .
PRED:	He took the cup of wine , and he took care for his sack ! ” So he did as he had promised .
GOLD:	Then put my personal silver cup at the top of the youngest brother 's sack , along with the money for his grain. ” So the manager did as Joseph instructed him .

ID:	1048
INPUT:	▁Herodesek ▁hura ▁atera ▁behar ▁zuen ▁aurreko ▁gauean , ▁Pedro ▁lo ▁zegoen ▁bi ▁solda dur en ▁artean , ▁bi ▁katez ▁loturik , ▁eta ▁guar diak ▁atean ▁kartz ela ▁zaintzen .
PRED:	Herod went out to the prison , where Peter was imprisoned in chains , and he was imprisoned in chains .
GOLD:	The night before Peter was to be placed on trial , he was asleep , fastened with two chains between two soldiers . Others stood guard at the prison gate .

ID:	1049
INPUT:	▁Zeren ▁Jainkoarengan ▁zor akeria ▁dirudi ena ▁gizakiak ▁baino ▁jakin tsuago ▁baita , ▁eta ▁Jainkoarengan ▁ahul ezia ▁dirudi ena ▁gizakiak ▁baino ▁indartsuago .
PRED:	For the godless are like people , even though they are stronger than they are stronger than they are stronger than they are .
GOLD:	This foolish plan of God is wiser than the wisest of human plans , and God 's weakness is stronger than the greatest of human strength .

ID:	1050
INPUT:	▁Zeure ▁gaiztakeri an ▁seguru ▁zeun den , pen ts atuz : ▁“ Ez ▁nau ▁inork ▁ikusten ”. Zeure ▁jakinduri ak ▁eta ▁zien tziak des bidera tu ▁zaituzte , eta ▁pents arazi :“ Neu , ▁eta ▁beste ▁inor ▁ez !”
PRED:	You said , ‘ You did n't see me , ' but no one can see me , and I did n't see you . '
GOLD:	“ You felt secure in your wickedness. ‘ No one sees me , ' you said.But your ‘ wisdom ' and ‘ knowledge ' have led you astray , and you said , ‘ I am the only one , and there is no other . '

ID:	1051
INPUT:	▁Jakin ▁zuen ▁Herodes ▁agintariak ▁gertatzen ▁zen ▁guztia , ▁eta ▁zer ▁pentsa ▁ez ▁z eki ela ▁zegoen . ▁Batzu ek ▁Joan ▁hildakoen ▁artetik ▁piztu ▁zela ▁zioten ;
PRED:	When Herod learned that he was talking about all this , he was n't talking about John the Baptist , and some of the dead came from the dead .
GOLD:	When Herod Antipas , the ruler of Galilee , heard about everything Jesus was doing , he was puzzled . Some were saying that John the Baptist had been raised from the dead .

ID:	1052
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zien ▁Moisesi ▁eta ▁Aaroni :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,
GOLD:	and the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,

ID:	1053
INPUT:	▁aurrez ▁betidanik ▁berak ▁zuen ▁eta ▁Kristo ▁Jesus ▁gure ▁Jaunarengan ▁bete ▁duen ▁asmo aren ▁jakinduria .
PRED:	He was in the past of Christ Jesus was revealed to the wisdom of our Lord .
GOLD:	This was his eternal plan , which he carried out through Christ Jesus our Lord .

ID:	1054
INPUT:	▁« Han ▁da tza ▁Elam go ▁erregea ▁bere ▁ger lari ▁guztien ▁hilobi ez ▁inguratua ; ▁gerran ▁hilak ▁dira ▁denak . ▁Sines gabe ▁horiek , ▁bizi en ▁artean ▁izu - ikara ▁ezartzen ▁zutenak , ▁lur ▁azpiko ▁mundura ▁jaitsi ▁dira , ▁desoho rez ▁beterik , ▁hildako ekin ▁elkar tzera .
PRED:	“ The king of Babylon will be surrounded by the graves of all the hordes , surrounded by the sword , and those who are slaughtered by the sword . They are slaughtered by the sword , and those who were slaughtered by the sword .
GOLD:	“ Elam lies there surrounded by the graves of all its hordes , those who were slaughtered by the sword . They struck terror in the hearts of people everywhere , but now they have descended as outcasts to the world below . Now they lie in the pit and share the shame of those who have gone before them .

ID:	1055
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁ote ▁dira ▁bi ▁txori ▁s os ▁batean ▁saltzen ? ▁Hala ▁ere , ▁ez ▁da ▁bat ▁bakarra ▁ere ▁lurrera ▁erortzen ▁zuen ▁Aitaren ▁bai men ik ▁gabe .
PRED:	“ Is n't it any kind of seed ? Is it only one piece of seed that fell into the ground ?
GOLD:	What is the price of two sparrows — one copper coin ? But not a single sparrow can fall to the ground without your Father knowing it .

ID:	1056
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁itzuli ▁eta ▁usain ▁goz oko ▁u ken duak ▁prestatu ▁zituzten . L arun batean ▁atseden ▁hartu ▁zuten , ▁agindua ▁zegoen ▁bezala .
PRED:	Then they returned and prepared the spices for the Sabbath , just as the Sabbath was waiting for the Sabbath .
GOLD:	Then they went home and prepared spices and ointments to anoint his body . But by the time they were finished the Sabbath had begun , so they rested as required by the law .

ID:	1057
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁onginahia ▁ez ▁dut ▁alferrik ako ▁bihurtu ▁nahi . ▁Baina ▁Jainkoak ▁legea ▁bete tzeagatik ▁onartzen ▁gaitu ela ▁egia ▁balitz , ▁alferrik ▁hila ▁izango ▁zen ▁Kristo .
PRED:	For God is not pleased with God 's law , but if he is right with God 's law , he would be transformed into the truth .
GOLD:	I do not treat the grace of God as meaningless . For if keeping the law could make us right with God , then there was no need for Christ to die .

ID:	1058
INPUT:	▁Zazpi ▁egun ▁horien ▁buruan ▁berriro ▁m iatuko ▁du , ▁eta ▁zau ria , ▁azal ean ▁zabaldu ▁gabe , ▁zur bil duz ▁do ala ▁ikusten ▁badu , ▁garb itzat ▁aitortuko ▁du ; ▁zor ne ▁hutsa ▁da . ▁G aix oak ▁arropak ▁garbituko ▁ditu ▁eta ▁garbi ▁geldituko ▁da .
PRED:	The priest must examine them again again again again , and he must pronounce the person ceremonially clean . If he finds that the person ceremonially clean , he will pronounce the person ceremonially clean , and he will pronounce the person ceremonially clean .
GOLD:	On the seventh day the priest will make another examination . If he finds the affected area has faded and has not spread , the priest will pronounce the person ceremonially clean . It was only a rash . The person 's clothing must be washed , and the person will be ceremonially clean .

ID:	1059
INPUT:	▁Is uri ▁olioa ▁erre - oparien ▁aldarearen ▁eta ▁bertako ▁tresna ▁guztien ▁gainera . ▁Honela ▁sagaratuko ▁duzu , ▁eta ▁guztiz ▁sakratua ▁izango ▁da ▁aldarea .
PRED:	Give the grain offering to the altar of burnt offering and the altar for all the altar . It will be holy , and it will be holy to be holy .
GOLD:	Anoint the altar of burnt offering and its utensils to consecrate them . Then the altar will become absolutely holy .

ID:	1060
INPUT:	▁zeru - s ab aia ▁lurrean ▁oinarri tzen ▁du , eta ▁horren ▁gainean ▁eraikitzen bere ▁jauregia ; itsas ▁urak ▁bildu eta ▁lur ▁gainera ▁isurtzen ▁ditu . Jauna ▁du ▁izena .
PRED:	It is the foundation of the heavens , and the foundation of the earth is laid on the foundation of the earthand laid it on the earth .
GOLD:	The Lord 's home reaches up to the heavens , while its foundation is on the earth.He draws up water from the oceansand pours it down as rain on the land.The Lord is his name !

ID:	1061
INPUT:	▁entzun ▁zuk ▁zerutik , ▁bizi ▁zaren ▁toki ▁horretatik , ▁eta ▁barkatu . ▁Eg izu ▁har ▁dezala ▁nork ▁bere ▁joka eraren ▁ordaina , ▁ongi ▁bai tak izu ▁halako aren ▁barru aren ▁berri ; ▁izan ▁ere , ▁zuk ▁bakarrik ▁dakizu ▁gizon - emakume ▁guztien ▁barru aren ▁berri .
PRED:	Now hear from heaven where you live , and if you hear what you have done , forgive your good deeds . You have heard all the things you have done .
GOLD:	then hear from heaven where you live , and forgive . Give your people what their actions deserve , for you alone know each human heart .

ID:	1062
INPUT:	▁Babiloniako ▁erregearen ▁besoak ▁indar tuko ▁ditut , ▁faraoiaren ak ▁ahul du ta ▁eroriko ▁diren ▁bitartean . ▁Nire ▁ezpata ▁Babiloniako ▁erregearen ▁eskuan ▁jarri ▁eta ▁hark ▁Egiptoren ▁kontra ▁astin duko ▁duenean , ▁orduan ▁jakingo ▁dute ▁ni ▁naizela ▁Jauna .
PRED:	I will hand them over to Pharaoh 's king , the sword of the Babylonians , and the sword of Pharaoh 's hand will fall into the hand of Egypt . Then they will know that I am the Lord . Then they will know that I am the Lord .
GOLD:	I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon , while the arms of Pharaoh fall useless to his sides . And when I put my sword in the hand of Babylon 's king and he brings it against the land of Egypt , Egypt will know that I am the Lord .

ID:	1063
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁diot ▁nik , Jainko ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak : Hona ▁hemen ▁ni ▁zure ▁aurka , lots ag abe ▁halako a ! H eldu ▁da ▁zure ▁eguna , kon tuak ▁emateko ▁ordua !
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ This is what the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : The day is coming !
GOLD:	“ See , I am your enemy , you arrogant people , ” says the Lord , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies. “ Your day of reckoning has arrived — the day when I will punish you .

ID:	1064
INPUT:	▁Gau ▁eta ▁egun ▁gainean ▁nuen ▁zure ▁esku ▁gogorra , in darrak ▁mak al tzen ▁ari ▁zitzaizki dan , ▁u dako ▁sar go ri tan ▁bezala .
PRED:	At night I began to fall on the night and surrounded by grief .
GOLD:	Day and night your hand of discipline was heavy on me.My strength evaporated like water in the summer heat.Interlude

ID:	1065
INPUT:	▁Os asun tsu ▁iraun araziko ▁nauzu , zu tik ▁eutsiko ▁zeure ▁aurrean ▁betiko .
PRED:	I will keep you safe from your presence ; you will be rescued from your presence .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , who lives from everlasting to everlasting.Amen and amen !

ID:	1066
INPUT:	▁H orren beste ▁abere ▁izanik , ▁lurralde ▁hark ▁ez ▁zien ▁denak ▁batera ▁bizitzeko ▁egoki er arik ▁eskaintzen ;
PRED:	He gave them some of these animals to live in the land where they have not given to you .
GOLD:	But the land could not support both Abram and Lot with all their flocks and herds living so close together .

ID:	1067
INPUT:	▁Ip arraldeko ▁eraso a ▁iragarri
PRED:	A Message about Assyria
GOLD:	Coming Judgment against Judah

ID:	1068
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁baiti ot ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak : ▁Gorro ta garri ▁eta ▁naz k agarri ▁egin ▁zaiz kizun ▁haien ▁esku ▁utziko ▁zaitut ;
PRED:	For this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will make you sick and cover you with grief .
GOLD:	“ For this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will surely hand you over to your enemies , to those you loathe , those you rejected .

ID:	1069
INPUT:	▁lurrari ▁bere ▁ertz etatik ▁heldu rik gaizto ak ▁bertatik ▁astin ▁ditzan ?
PRED:	Let the earth fall from the earth to the ends of the earth .
GOLD:	Have you made daylight spread to the ends of the earth , to bring an end to the night 's wickedness ?

ID:	1070
INPUT:	▁Haren ▁buruko ▁ilea ▁zu ria ▁zen , ▁ar til ea ▁eta ▁el urra ▁bezalakoa , ▁begiak ▁su garra ▁bezalakoak ,
PRED:	His head was covered with fire , and the hair of fire were like fire .
GOLD:	His head and his hair were white like wool , as white as snow . And his eyes were like flames of fire .

ID:	1071
INPUT:	▁« Honela ▁dio ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoak : ▁Ikus iak ▁dituzue ▁Jerusalemen ▁eta ▁Judako ▁hiri en ▁aurka ▁bidali ▁ditudan ▁zori gai tzak : ▁hondatu rik ▁eta ▁bizilagun ik ▁gabe ▁daude .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : The Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : There are no object of horror and Judah .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : You saw the calamity I brought on Jerusalem and all the towns of Judah . They now lie deserted and in ruins .

ID:	1072
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁alden duko ▁gaitu ▁Kristok ▁digun ▁maitasun etik ? ▁Ats ek abeak , ▁l arriak , ▁eraso aldiak , ▁goseak , ▁jantzirik ▁ez ak , ▁arrisku ak , ▁ezpatak ?
PRED:	Who will rescue us from the love of Christ ? He will tell us how long will we fall into famine ?
GOLD:	Can anything ever separate us from Christ 's love ? Does it mean he no longer loves us if we have trouble or calamity , or are persecuted , or hungry , or destitute , or in danger , or threatened with death ?

ID:	1073
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁ez ▁zion ▁ondaretzat ▁lurrik ▁eman , ▁ezta ▁oin ▁bat ▁ere ; ▁baina ▁berari ▁eta ▁beraren ▁ondorengoei ▁emango ▁zi ela ▁agindu ▁zion , ▁oraindik ▁Abrahamek ▁seme - alabarik ▁ez ▁zuen ▁arren .
PRED:	But in fact , there was no respect for him . But Abraham did not give him his descendants , Isaac , and his son Abraham would not have children .
GOLD:	“ But God gave him no inheritance here , not even one square foot of land . God did promise , however , that eventually the whole land would belong to Abraham and his descendants — even though he had no children yet .

ID:	1074
INPUT:	▁A gian ▁adi tuko ▁dizute ▁eta ▁beren ▁jokabide ▁oker retik ▁bihurtuko ▁dira . ▁Horrela ▁baldin ▁bada , ▁damutu ▁egingo ▁naiz ▁eta ▁ez ▁dut ▁beteko ▁beraien ▁egite ▁gaizto engatik ▁ematea ▁pents atua ▁dudan ▁zigorra .
PRED:	But you will hear what they have done , and they will turn away from their evil ways . I will not punish them for doing what I have done .
GOLD:	Perhaps they will listen and turn from their evil ways . Then I will change my mind about the disaster I am ready to pour out on them because of their sins .

ID:	1075
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁bedeinkatu ▁egin ▁zuen ▁zazpigarren ▁eguna ▁eta ▁sagaratu , ▁egun ▁horretan ▁hartu ▁baitzuen ▁atseden ▁k re azio - lan etik .
PRED:	Then he blessed it and set it apart for the seventh day , for it was set apart for rest .
GOLD:	And God blessed the seventh day and declared it holy , because it was the day when he rested from all his work of creation .

ID:	1076
INPUT:	▁« Hala ▁gertatuko ▁da ▁Gizonaren ▁Semea ▁agertuko ▁den ▁egunean ▁ere .
PRED:	“ The Son of Man will be revealed to the Son of Man .
GOLD:	Yes , it will be ‘ business as usual ' right up to the day when the Son of Man is revealed .

ID:	1077
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁espirituak ▁eragin ik , ▁Galaad ▁eta ▁Manasesen ▁lurraldeak ▁igaro ▁eta ▁Galaadeko ▁Mitz para ▁heldu ▁zen ▁Jef te , ▁eta ▁hemendik ▁amondarren ▁lurraldera ▁jo ▁zuen .
PRED:	But the Spirit of the Lord came down to Mizpah , and the land of Gilead went to Mizpah to Gilead .
GOLD:	At that time the Spirit of the Lord came upon Jephthah , and he went throughout the land of Gilead and Manasseh , including Mizpah in Gilead , and from there he led an army against the Ammonites .

ID:	1078
INPUT:	▁Tenpluaren ▁mendeb aldean , ▁eraik in ▁bat ▁zegoen ▁huts arte aren ▁azkenean : ▁berrogeita ▁bost ▁metro ▁zen ▁luze ▁eta ▁hogeita ▁hamabost ▁zabal ; ▁hormak , ▁berriz , ▁bi ▁metro ▁eta ▁erdi ▁lo di .
PRED:	There was an end of the Temple , surrounded by walls , and 45 feet wide , and 45 feet wide , and 45 feet wide .
GOLD:	A large building stood on the west , facing the Temple courtyard . It was 1221/2 feet wide and 1571/2 feet long , and its walls were 83/4 feet thick .

ID:	1079
INPUT:	▁Gaden ▁eta ▁Rubenen ▁ondorengoek ▁erantzun ▁zioten ▁Moisesi :— Pres t ▁gaude ▁zure ▁agindua ▁betetzeko , ▁jauna .
PRED:	The sons of Reuben and Reuben replied , “ We want us to obey your commands . ”
GOLD:	Then the men of Gad and Reuben replied , “ We , your servants , will follow your instructions exactly .

ID:	1080
INPUT:	▁ F ariseu ek , ▁hori ▁ikustean , ▁esan ▁zieten ▁ikasleei :— N olatan ▁jaten ▁du ▁zuen ▁mai suak ▁zergal ari ▁eta ▁bekatari ekin ?
PRED:	When the Pharisees saw this , they said to his disciples , “ Why are you eating with sinners ? ”
GOLD:	But when the Pharisees saw this , they asked his disciples , “ Why does your teacher eat with such scum ? ”

ID:	1081
INPUT:	▁« Etor ri ▁ziren , ▁bada , ▁arrats aldeko ▁bos te takoak , ▁eta ▁zilarrezko ▁txanpon ▁bana ▁jaso ▁zuten .
PRED:	“ So the ten pieces of silver was thirty pieces of silver , and the total of silver was thirty pieces .
GOLD:	When those hired at five o'clock were paid , each received a full day 's wage .

ID:	1082
INPUT:	▁eta ▁ezarri ▁saski ▁batean ; ▁gero , ▁aurkeztu ▁sas kia ▁zekor rarekin ▁eta ▁bi ▁ahari ekin ▁batera .
PRED:	Then he placed the basket in a basket and placed it with two quarts with two rams .
GOLD:	Place them all in a single basket , and present them at the entrance of the Tabernacle , along with the young bull and the two rams .

ID:	1083
INPUT:	▁« Zu , ▁Israel , ▁nire ▁zerbitzaria ; zu , ▁Jakob , ▁nik ▁aukeratu riko ▁herria , nire ▁adiskide ▁Abrahamen ondoren goa .
PRED:	“ O Israel , my servant , Jacob , has chosen my servant to be my own people Israel .
GOLD:	“ But as for you , Israel my servant , Jacob my chosen one , descended from Abraham my friend ,

ID:	1084
INPUT:	▁“ Aur kitu tako ▁harrapakin ak b ana tzen ▁ari ▁dira , ▁noski ! B ana , ▁b ina ▁neskatx agu dari ▁bakoitzari , ko lo rezko ▁ehun ak ▁Sis er arentzat , ko lo rezko ▁oih alak : kol ore tan ▁bor daturiko ▁oih alak haren ▁lep orako ”.
PRED:	‘ The young men have been killed , for they have been killed by the young women , but the young women are skilled with their weapons . '
GOLD:	‘ They must be dividing the captured plunder — with a woman or two for every man.There will be colorful robes for Sisera , and colorful , embroidered robes for me.Yes , the plunder will includecolorful robes embroidered on both sides . '

ID:	1085
INPUT:	▁— Zer ▁da ? ▁— g aldetu ▁nion . Hark ▁erantzun ▁zidan :— On tzi ▁handi ▁bat ▁da : ▁lurralde ▁guztiaren ▁bekatua ▁adierazten ▁du .
PRED:	“ What are you ? ” I asked . “ He is a good man , and he has given me a good land . ”
GOLD:	“ What is it ? ” I asked.He replied , “ It is a basket for measuring grain , and it 's filled with the sins of everyone throughout the land . ”

ID:	1086
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaidan ▁Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	1087
INPUT:	▁T re beak ▁eta ▁laguntzeko ▁gogo tsu ▁ziren ▁emakumeek ▁ahuntz - ilea ▁eh undu ▁zuten .
PRED:	And many of this , dear brothers and sisters , were a beautiful goat 's goat 's hair .
GOLD:	All the women who were willing used their skills to spin the goat hair into yarn .

ID:	1088
INPUT:	▁« Zure ▁emazteak ▁eta ▁seme - alabak ▁babiloni arrei ▁emango ▁dizkiete ▁eta ▁zeu ▁ere ▁ez ▁zara ▁libratuko : ▁Babiloniako ▁erregeak ▁preso ▁hartuko ▁zaitu , ▁eta ▁hiria ▁erre ▁egingo ▁du ».
PRED:	“ Your wives and daughters will be killed , and your daughters will be taken from the land of Babylon , and you will be killed . ”
GOLD:	All your wives and children will be led out to the Babylonians , and you will not escape . You will be seized by the king of Babylon , and this city will be burned down . ”

ID:	1089
INPUT:	▁P rintz een ▁eskubideak ▁eta ▁bete beh arrak
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	Rules for the Princes

ID:	1090
INPUT:	▁Sei ▁urtez ▁erein go ▁duzue ▁zeuen ▁soro etan , ▁sei ▁urtez ▁in aus iko ▁mahastiak ▁eta ▁bilduko ▁uz tak ;
PRED:	You will plant your crops for six years , and you will harvest your crops for six years .
GOLD:	For six years you may plant your fields and prune your vineyards and harvest your crops ,

ID:	1091
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁salbatu ▁zituen ▁arren , bere ▁izen aren ▁ohore agatik ▁eta ▁bere ▁ahalmena ▁azal tzeko .
PRED:	The Lord rescued them for his glory ; he made his glory for his power .
GOLD:	Even so , he saved them — to defend the honor of his nameand to demonstrate his mighty power .

ID:	1092
INPUT:	▁eta ▁esan ▁zien :— Bad akit ▁Jaunak ▁lurralde ▁hau ▁eman ▁dizu ela . ▁Hemen , ▁hirian , ▁izu turik ▁gaude ▁eta ▁herrialdeko ▁jende ▁guztia ▁ere ▁ikaraz ▁dago ▁zuen ▁aurrean ,
PRED:	“ I know that the Lord has given you this land , ” the Lord said , “ we are standing here in the land of the land . ”
GOLD:	“ I know the Lord has given you this land , ” she told them . “ We are all afraid of you . Everyone in the land is living in terror .

ID:	1093
INPUT:	▁Go ibel ▁jarri ▁zen ▁erregea , ▁baina ▁mah aiki de en ▁aurrean ▁egindako ▁zin arengatik , ▁ez ▁zion ▁ukatu ▁nahi ▁izan .
PRED:	He prayed to the king , but the king refused to do it .
GOLD:	Then the king deeply regretted what he had said ; but because of the vows he had made in front of his guests , he could n't refuse her .

ID:	1094
INPUT:	▁Nola ▁oz p ina ▁ah orako ▁eta ▁k ea ▁begi etarako , hala ▁al fer ra ▁lanean ▁hartzen ▁duenaren tzako .
PRED:	How much as hard as hard as hard as hard as a person who work hard for money .
GOLD:	Lazy people irritate their employers , like vinegar to the teeth or smoke in the eyes .

ID:	1095
INPUT:	▁Atal ondoak ▁kanpoko ▁atari rantz ▁jotzen ▁zuen ; ▁hor mek ▁palm ondoak ▁zituzten ▁alde ▁ban atan ▁zizel katu ta . ▁Zortzi ▁har mai la ▁igo ▁behar ▁ziren ▁sarrerara ▁iris teko .
PRED:	The entry room of the outer courtyard were decorated with palm trees , and there were eight palm trees . There were eight steps leading to the entrance to its entrance .
GOLD:	Its entry room faced into the outer courtyard , and it had palm tree decorations on the columns . There were eight steps leading to its entrance .

ID:	1096
INPUT:	▁eraso pean ▁bai , ▁baina ▁eskutik ▁utzi ta ▁ez ; ▁lurrera ▁botatzen ▁gaituzte , ▁baina ▁suntsi tzen ▁ez ;
PRED:	But the sword of the wicked will not let us go down to the ground , but we will not be destroyed .
GOLD:	We are hunted down , but never abandoned by God . We get knocked down , but we are not destroyed .

ID:	1097
INPUT:	▁Elkar keta - etxolaren ▁aurrera ▁eraman ▁zuten ▁Moisesek ▁agindu ▁zi ena ; ▁elkarte ▁osoa ▁hurbildu ▁zen ▁eta ▁zutik ▁zegoen ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrean .
PRED:	So Moses took some of the community of Israel as well as Moses had commanded him to stand before the Lord .
GOLD:	So the people presented all these things at the entrance of the Tabernacle , just as Moses had commanded . Then the whole community came forward and stood before the Lord .

ID:	1098
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁orduan ▁eta ▁gehiago ▁ezku tatuko ▁diet ▁aurpegia , ▁jainko ▁arrotzen gana ▁bihur tuz ▁egingo ▁duten ▁gaiztakeria gatik .
PRED:	But I will turn away again and be ashamed , and they will turn away from other gods .
GOLD:	At that time I will hide my face from them on account of all the evil they commit by worshiping other gods .

ID:	1099
INPUT:	▁zi mur rez ▁bete ▁eta ▁hezur ▁eta ▁azal ▁utzi ▁nauzu : horre k ▁salatzen ▁eta ▁ak us atzen ▁nau .
PRED:	I was filled with my bones and covered me with a rod .
GOLD:	As if to prove I have sinned , you 've reduced me to skin and bones.My gaunt flesh testifies against me .

ID:	1100
INPUT:	▁Damasko ko ▁sinagog etarako ▁gutun ak ▁eskatu ▁zizkion , ▁aurkitzen ▁zituen ▁kristau - bide aren ▁jarraitz ai leak , ▁gizaseme ▁nahiz ▁emakume , ▁Jerusalemera ▁preso ▁eraman ▁ahal ▁izateko .
PRED:	He wanted to search for the church in Damascus to search for those who had been exiled to Jerusalem or to Jerusalem .
GOLD:	He requested letters addressed to the synagogues in Damascus , asking for their cooperation in the arrest of any followers of the Way he found there . He wanted to bring them — both men and women — back to Jerusalem in chains .

ID:	1101
INPUT:	▁Hurbil ▁da ▁Jaunaren ▁etor rera
PRED:	Paul 's Final Advice
GOLD:	Jesus Is Coming

ID:	1102
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunak ▁hitz ▁egin ▁zidan
PRED:	Then the Lord spoke to me ,
GOLD:	Then I received this message from the Lord :

ID:	1103
INPUT:	▁Gainera , ▁erri tuzko ▁aurkez pen - k einua ▁eginez ▁eskaintzen ▁dizki daz un ▁beste ▁opari g aien ▁zati ▁bat ▁ematen ▁dizuet , ▁zuri ▁eta ▁zure ▁ondorengoei , ▁gizonezko ▁nahiz ▁emakumezko : ▁garbi ▁dagoen ▁edon ork ▁jan ▁dezake ▁hori etatik . ▁Betiko ▁lege ▁izango ▁duzue ▁hau .
PRED:	And you must present a special offering to the Lord as a special gift to you . I have given you as a special offering to you and your sons and daughters . This is what you have been cleansed from your sons and daughters .
GOLD:	“ All the sacred offerings and special offerings presented to me when the Israelites lift them up before the altar also belong to you . I have given them to you and to your sons and daughters as your permanent share . Any member of your family who is ceremonially clean may eat of these offerings .

ID:	1104
INPUT:	▁Ets ai ▁indartsu agandik ▁salbatu ▁ninduen , ni ▁baino ▁indartsuago ▁ziren ▁ar erio engandik .
PRED:	He rescued me from the power of the Lord , who rescued me from their enemies .
GOLD:	They attacked me at a moment when I was in distress , but the Lord supported me .

ID:	1105
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁Josue ▁bere ▁ondorengo ▁izendatu
PRED:	Joshua Becomes Israel 's Judge
GOLD:	Joshua Becomes Israel 's Leader

ID:	1106
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zaitzatela , ▁beraz , ▁inork ▁gaitzets ▁jan - edan ak ▁edo ▁jai egun , ▁ilberri ▁nahiz ▁larunbat ak ▁direla ▁eta .
PRED:	So do not eat or drink wine or drink wine or drink wine or drink .
GOLD:	So do n't let anyone condemn you for what you eat or drink , or for not celebrating certain holy days or new moon ceremonies or Sabbaths .

ID:	1107
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁Jakobek ▁otoitz ▁hau ▁egin ▁zuen : ▁« Jauna , ▁gure ▁guraso ▁Abrahamen ▁eta ▁Isaaken ▁Jainkoa , ▁zuk ▁esan ▁didazu : ▁“ Itzul ▁zaitez ▁zeure ▁lurraldera ▁eta ▁zeure ▁ahaide engana , ▁eta ▁bedeinkatuko ▁zaitut ”.
PRED:	Then Jacob prayed to Jacob , “ O Lord our ancestors , the God of our ancestors , Isaac , and your ancestors , and your ancestors will return to your relatives and your relatives and your relatives . '
GOLD:	I am not worthy of all the unfailing love and faithfulness you have shown to me , your servant . When I left home and crossed the Jordan River , I owned nothing except a walking stick . Now my household fills two large camps !

ID:	1108
INPUT:	▁Az ter ▁dezagun ▁arretaz ▁geure ▁jokabidea , eta ▁itzul ▁gaitezen ▁Jaunarengana .
PRED:	So let us return to the Lord , and let us return to the Lord .
GOLD:	Instead , let us test and examine our ways.Let us turn back to the Lord .

ID:	1109
INPUT:	▁Bet erik ▁b eude ▁gure ▁bi hi tegi ak , den etariko ▁fru i tuz ▁hornitu ak ; u gal ▁bitez ▁artalde ak ▁milaka ▁eta ▁milaka ▁gure ▁zelai etan ;
PRED:	There are many parts of our wives , and our flocks and herds of our flocks and herds .
GOLD:	May our barns be filledwith crops of every kind.May the flocks in our fields multiply by the thousands , even tens of thousands ,

ID:	1110
INPUT:	▁P iz tiak ▁eta ▁ikusi ▁dituzun ▁hamar ▁a darrek ▁gorroto ▁izango ▁diote ▁emagaldu ari , ▁biluzik ▁eta ▁ezer ▁gabe ▁utziko ▁dute ; ▁haren ▁haragia ▁irentsi ▁egingo ▁dute ▁eta ▁hon darrak ▁sutan ▁erreko ;
PRED:	The wild animals that scurry along the ground , and you will hate it . They will never throw it into the fire . They will throw it into the fire , and they will burn it on fire .
GOLD:	The scarlet beast and his ten horns all hate the prostitute . They will strip her naked , eat her flesh , and burn her remains with fire .

ID:	1111
INPUT:	▁M eun dar rok ▁zerga ▁ordaindu ▁zioten ▁Uz iasi . H onen ▁izena ▁Egiptoko ▁mug etaraino ▁zabaldu ▁zen , ▁oso ▁indartsu ▁izatera ▁heldu ▁baitzen .
PRED:	The descendants of Jotham 's pay attention to the following towns of Egypt , as far as the border of Egypt .
GOLD:	The Meunites paid annual tribute to him , and his fame spread even to Egypt , for he had become very powerful .

ID:	1112
INPUT:	▁Begira , ▁senideok : ▁hizketa ▁arrotzez ▁hitz ▁eginez ▁aurkeztuko ▁banintz aiz ue , ▁zer ▁on ▁ekarriko ▁l izu eke ▁horrek , ▁nire ▁hitzak ▁ez ▁bal izue ▁emango ▁ager penik , ▁ez ▁ezagu er arik , ▁ez ▁Jainkoarengan diko ▁mezu rik , ▁ezta ▁irakaspen ik ▁ere ?
PRED:	Look , my dear brothers and sisters , I will give you what I say to you . I will give you a message from God , and you will not know what I say , ‘ Do n't you say ? '
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , if I should come to you speaking in an unknown language , how would that help you ? But if I bring you a revelation or some special knowledge or prophecy or teaching , that will be helpful .

ID:	1113
INPUT:	▁— Maisu , ▁zein ▁da ▁lege ko ▁agindu rik ▁nagusi ena ?
PRED:	“ Teacher , what is the law of religious law ? ” he asked .
GOLD:	“ Teacher , which is the most important commandment in the law of Moses ? ”

ID:	1114
INPUT:	▁Dam u tu ▁zen ▁Jauna ▁gizakia ▁egin ▁izan az ▁eta , ▁bihoz min durik ,
PRED:	The Lord was in Damascus , and he became very wicked .
GOLD:	So the Lord was sorry he had ever made them and put them on the earth . It broke his heart .

ID:	1115
INPUT:	▁Z o raturik ▁dago ▁erregea ▁zure ▁eder tasun az . B era ▁da ▁zure ▁jaun ; ▁egiozu ▁agur .
PRED:	Your Majesty , your king is filled with wine , and your master is your master .
GOLD:	The princess of Tyre will shower you with gifts.The wealthy will beg your favor .

ID:	1116
INPUT:	▁Zor o ▁itsu ok ▁halako ok ! ▁Zer ▁da ▁handiago , ▁urrea ▁ala ▁urrea ▁sagaratzen ▁duen ▁tenplua ?
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who have been blind , or gold ? What is the gold and gold ?
GOLD:	Blind fools ! Which is more important — the gold or the Temple that makes the gold sacred ?

ID:	1117
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁dio ▁Jaunak : ▁Jo ka ▁ezazue ▁zuzenbidez ▁eta ▁justiziaz , ▁askatu ▁zapaldu a ▁zapal tzailearen ▁eskutik , ▁ez ▁eman ▁tratu ▁txarrik ▁etorkin , ▁umezurtz ▁eta ▁alargun ei , ▁ez ▁egin ▁indar keriarik , ▁ez ▁hil ▁erru gab erik ▁toki ▁honetan .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Love your right hand and justice and justice , orphans , and widows , orphans , and widows , orphans , orphans , orphans , and widows .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : Be fair-minded and just . Do what is right ! Help those who have been robbed ; rescue them from their oppressors . Quit your evil deeds ! Do not mistreat foreigners , orphans , and widows . Stop murdering the innocent !

ID:	1118
INPUT:	▁Gar b ikuntza - ohikun e ▁hau ▁erabiliko ▁duzu : ▁garbikun tzako ▁urez ▁zipriztinduko ▁dituzu ; ▁ondoren , ▁gorpu tzeko ▁ile ▁guztia ▁moztuko ▁dute ▁eta ▁arropak ▁garbituko . ▁H orren beste z , ▁garbi ▁geldituko ▁dira .
PRED:	They must wash their feet and bathe themselves in water . Then they will wash their clothes and bathe themselves in water . They will wash their clothes and wash their clothes and bathe themselves in water .
GOLD:	Do this by sprinkling them with the water of purification , and have them shave their entire body and wash their clothing . Then they will be ceremonially clean .

ID:	1119
INPUT:	▁Auz oko ▁guztiak ▁beldur rak ▁hartu ▁zituen , ▁eta ▁Jude ako ▁mendi alde ▁guztian ▁zabaldu ▁zen ▁gertatuaren ▁berri .
PRED:	He was afraid of all the people of Judea , and the news about the hill country of Judea .
GOLD:	Awe fell upon the whole neighborhood , and the news of what had happened spread throughout the Judean hills .

ID:	1120
INPUT:	▁Adi - adi ▁entzun ▁diet , baina ▁ez ▁dira ▁hitz eko ▁jendea , ez ▁da ▁inor bere ▁gaiztakeri az ▁damu tzen , bere ▁hutsegi teak ▁aitor tuz . D enak ▁beren ▁bidean ▁zuzen ▁aurrera , z iztu ▁bizian ▁borrokara ol dar tzen ▁den ▁z aldia ▁bezala .
PRED:	I have heard their messages , but no one has spoken to them , but no one will turn away from their sins . Instead , they turn away from their sins .
GOLD:	I listen to their conversationsand do n't hear a word of truth.Is anyone sorry for doing wrong ? Does anyone say , “ What a terrible thing I have done ” ? No ! All are running down the path of sinas swiftly as a horse galloping into battle !

ID:	1121
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaidan ▁Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	The Lord gave me this message :

ID:	1122
INPUT:	▁Leh er ▁eginda ▁nago , ▁guztiz ▁lur ▁jota , garras ika ▁eta ▁aieneka ▁barru - barru tik .
PRED:	But in the ground , I cried out , “ My heart is filled with grief .
GOLD:	You know what I long for , Lord ; you hear my every sigh .

ID:	1123
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁bere ▁bizia ▁gorde ▁nahi ▁duenak ▁galdu ▁egingo ▁du ; ▁bere ▁bizia ▁niregatik ▁eta ▁berri ▁on agatik ▁galtzen ▁duenak , ▁ordea , ▁gorde ▁egingo ▁du .
PRED:	For if you want to live , you will lose my life , but you will lose my life for me .
GOLD:	If you try to hang on to your life , you will lose it . But if you give up your life for my sake and for the sake of the Good News , you will save it .

ID:	1124
INPUT:	▁Erantzun ▁nion : ▁« Ai ▁ene , ▁Jainko ▁Jauna ! ▁Baina ▁ez ▁duela ▁ez ▁ger r arik , ▁ez ▁gos erik ▁izango ▁ari ▁zaizkio ▁esaten ▁profetak , ▁eta ▁toki ▁honetan ▁egiazko ▁bakea ▁emango ▁diozu la ».
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits me , O Sovereign Lord , ” I said , “ I have no war or famine or famine in this land , and you will have no peace . ”
GOLD:	Then I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , their prophets are telling them , ‘ All is well — no war or famine will come . The Lord will surely send you peace . ' ”

ID:	1125
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁Jerusalemen ▁Mesias ▁bezala ▁sartu
PRED:	Jesus ' Triumphant Entry
GOLD:	Jesus ' Triumphant Entry

ID:	1126
INPUT:	▁Egiptotik ▁igo tzean , ▁israeldarrak ▁basamortuan ▁barrena ▁Itsaso ▁Gorri ra ▁jo ▁eta ▁Kadex ▁o asi raino ▁heldu ▁ziren .
PRED:	When the people of Israel arrived at the Red Sea , they went up into the wilderness of Zin .
GOLD:	When the people of Israel arrived at Kadesh on their journey from Egypt after crossing the Red Sea ,

ID:	1127
INPUT:	▁Jar ▁zaitezte ▁horrelako ▁perts onen ▁gidari tzapean ▁eta ▁hori ena ▁bezalako ▁lanean ▁saiatzen ▁diren ▁guztien ean .
PRED:	Just as you were in charge of them in charge of all the things you do .
GOLD:	to submit to them and others like them who serve with such devotion .

ID:	1128
INPUT:	▁Apaizak ▁senitarteka ▁sartu ▁ohi ▁zituzten ▁errol dan ; ▁lebitarrak , ▁berriz , ▁hogei ▁urtez ▁goiko ak , ▁beren ▁eginkizun ▁eta ▁mai l en ▁arabera .
PRED:	The priests went to the clans of the tribe of Levi , but twenty years old enough to serve their fellow Levites .
GOLD:	They distributed gifts to the priests who were listed by their families in the genealogical records , and to the Levites twenty years old or older who were listed according to their jobs and their divisions .

ID:	1129
INPUT:	▁« Herri tar ▁bi ▁elkarrekin ▁borrokan ▁ari ▁badira ▁eta ▁haietako ▁baten ▁emazteak , ▁senarra ▁j ip oi tik ▁libra tzeko , ▁eskua ▁luzatu ▁eta ▁besteari ▁lots ari etatik ▁heltzen ▁badio ,
PRED:	“ Suppose two men have sex with each other , some of them , and if they are put to shame , they will be ashamed .
GOLD:	“ If two Israelite men get into a fight and the wife of one tries to rescue her husband by grabbing the testicles of the other man ,

ID:	1130
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁mutil aren ▁aitari ▁galdetu ▁zion :— Noiz tik ▁dago ▁horrela ? Hark ▁erantzun :— U m etan dik .
PRED:	Jesus asked her , “ How long are you going out ? ” “ Yes , ” he replied .
GOLD:	“ How long has this been happening ? ” Jesus asked the boy 's father.He replied , “ Since he was a little boy .

ID:	1131
INPUT:	▁eta ▁bere ▁zerbitzariei ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Joan ▁Bataia tzailea ▁da ! ▁Hildakoen ▁artetik ▁piztu ▁da , ▁eta ▁horregatik ▁dauka ▁mirariak ▁egiteko ▁ahalmen ▁hori ».
PRED:	She said to his wife , “ John , the Baptist is coming from the dead ! That is why he is the power of the dead . ”
GOLD:	he said to his advisers , “ This must be John the Baptist raised from the dead ! That is why he can do such miracles . ”

ID:	1132
INPUT:	▁Jende ▁guztia ▁bozkari oz ▁bete ▁zen ▁eta ▁hiria ▁baretu , ▁Atal ia ▁hila ▁baitzuten ▁jauregian ▁ezpataz .
PRED:	So all the people rejoiced in the palace , for the city was killed in the palace .
GOLD:	So all the people of the land rejoiced , and the city was peaceful because Athaliah had been killed at the king 's palace .

ID:	1133
INPUT:	▁Kon tura ▁zaitezte , ▁bada , ▁ergel ok ! Zen tzu gabe ok , ▁noiz ▁ulertu ▁behar ▁duzue ?
PRED:	How foolish are you wise ? How can you understand ? How can you understand ?
GOLD:	Think again , you fools ! When will you finally catch on ?

ID:	1134
INPUT:	▁Jaun ▁ahalguztiduna ▁Egiptoko ▁lurraldean ▁dagoen aren ▁ezaugarri ▁izango ▁dira . ▁Z apal tzen ▁dituzten en ▁aurka ▁Jaunari ▁laguntza ▁eske ▁dei ▁egingo ▁dioten ean , ▁hark ▁salbatzailea ▁bidaliko ▁die ▁defen da tzera ▁eta ▁aska tzera .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies will punish those who oppose the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , and he will send them into battle .
GOLD:	It will be a sign and a witness that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies is worshiped in the land of Egypt . When the people cry to the Lord for help against those who oppress them , he will send them a savior who will rescue them .

ID:	1135
INPUT:	▁Begira , ▁jentil ek , ▁Moisesen ▁legea ▁ezagutu ▁gabe ▁ere , ▁lege ari ▁dagoki ona ▁berez ▁egiten ▁duten ean , ▁nahiz ▁legea ▁ez ▁ezagutu , ▁beraiek ▁bihurtzen ▁dira ▁beren ▁buru arentzat ▁lege .
PRED:	Look at the law of Moses , the law of Moses and the law of Moses , whether they do n't know the law of Moses or the law of Moses .
GOLD:	Even Gentiles , who do not have God 's written law , show that they know his law when they instinctively obey it , even without having heard it .

ID:	1136
INPUT:	▁hiltzeko ▁tresnak ▁gertatzen ▁ditu , ▁s uzko ▁geziak ▁pizten .
PRED:	The wicked will be killed by fire , and the arrows of fire will fall .
GOLD:	The wicked conceive evil ; they are pregnant with troubleand give birth to lies .

ID:	1137
INPUT:	▁Egun ▁batez , ▁Kar e ahen ▁seme ▁Johan an ▁eta ▁lan de tan ▁zebiltzan ▁gudari en ▁buruzagiak ▁Gedal iasen gana ▁joan ▁ziren ▁Mitz para ,
PRED:	One day Johanan son of Kareah and the other leaders went to Mizpah to meet Gedaliah .
GOLD:	Soon after this , Johanan son of Kareah and the other military leaders came to Gedaliah at Mizpah .

ID:	1138
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁prestatu riko ▁okela ▁eta ▁ogia ▁bere ▁seme ▁Jakoben ▁eskuetan ▁jarri ▁zituen .
PRED:	So he prepared his food and presented them to Jacob .
GOLD:	Then she gave Jacob the delicious meal , including freshly baked bread .

ID:	1139
INPUT:	▁Oroit ▁zaitezte ▁Jainkoaren ▁hitza ▁hots ▁egin ▁zizu eten ▁zeuen ▁zuzen dari ez , ▁eta ▁jarraitu ▁berorien ▁fede ari , ▁nola ▁bizi ▁eta ▁nola ▁hil ▁diren ▁kontuan ▁hartuz .
PRED:	Remember that the word of God came to you and encouraged you to continue to hear about your faith and your faith .
GOLD:	Remember your leaders who taught you the word of God . Think of all the good that has come from their lives , and follow the example of their faith .

ID:	1140
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁senarrak ▁sus mo ▁txarra ▁hartu ▁dio ▁emazteari , ▁hau ▁egiaz ▁errudun ▁delarik . ▁Baina ▁gerta ▁daiteke ▁emaztea ▁errugabea ▁izanik ▁ere ▁senarrak ▁sus mo ▁txarra ▁hartzea .
PRED:	But if the woman is guilty , the woman who is guilty and is guilty . But if she is guilty , the woman who is guilty and is guilty .
GOLD:	If her husband becomes jealous and is suspicious of his wife and needs to know whether or not she has defiled herself ,

ID:	1141
INPUT:	▁Eliasek ▁lehor tea ▁iragarri
PRED:	The First Disciples
GOLD:	Elijah Fed by Ravens

ID:	1142
INPUT:	▁Zer bai ten gatik ▁esan ▁zuen ▁Jainkoak ▁bere ▁jakinduri an : ▁“ Prof etak ▁eta ▁apostol uak ▁bidaliko ▁dizkiet ▁eta ▁batzuk ▁hil ▁eta ▁besteak ▁eraso ka ▁erabiliko ▁dituzte ”.
PRED:	Then God said to his disciples , ‘ I will send some of the apostles and Silas and Silas will be killed . '
GOLD:	This is what God in his wisdom said about you : ‘ I will send prophets and apostles to them , but they will kill some and persecute the others . '

ID:	1143
INPUT:	▁Israeldarrak ▁Sinai ▁basamortuan ▁zeu d elarik , ▁Jauna ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion ▁Moisesi ▁elkarketa - etxolan . ▁Egiptotik ▁irten ▁eta ▁hurrengo ▁urtea ▁zen , ▁bigarren ▁hilaren ▁lehen ▁eguna . ▁Hau ▁esan ▁zion :
PRED:	At that time the Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai , the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	A year after Israel 's departure from Egypt , the Lord spoke to Moses in the Tabernacle in the wilderness of Sinai . On the first day of the second month of that year he said ,

ID:	1144
INPUT:	▁« Ondoren , ▁neure ▁espiritu ai su riko ▁diet ▁gizaki ▁guztiei . Zuen ▁seme - alabek prof et iz atu ▁egingo ▁dute , zuen ▁zah arrek am ets ak ▁egingo ▁dituzte , zuen ▁gazte ek ▁ikus kariak ▁izango .
PRED:	“ Then I will give you authority to all the spirits of your children , and your children will tell you , ‘ Your children will see your old age . '
GOLD:	“ At the time of those events , ” says the Lord , “ when I restore the prosperity of Judah and Jerusalem ,

ID:	1145
INPUT:	▁Era iki ▁egoitza , ▁mendian ▁erakutsi ▁zaiz un ▁eredu aren ▁arabera .
PRED:	You made the Tabernacle to make it the Tabernacle at Mount Sinai .
GOLD:	“ Set up this Tabernacle according to the pattern you were shown on the mountain .

ID:	1146
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁erosi ▁zituen ▁Josek ▁Egiptoko ▁lur ▁guztiak ▁faraoi arentzat . ▁Egipto arrek ▁nork ▁bere ▁lurra ▁saldu ▁zuten , ▁gainean ▁zuten ▁gosete ▁l atz arengatik ; ▁hala , ▁lurralde ▁osoaren ▁jabe ▁bil akatu ▁zen ▁faraoia .
PRED:	So Joseph bought all the land of Egypt , and he sold them into the land of Egypt . But the land of Egypt had sold them as a famine in the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	So Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh . All the Egyptians sold him their fields because the famine was so severe , and soon all the land belonged to Pharaoh .

ID:	1147
INPUT:	▁« Alde ▁talde ▁horretatik , ▁hor ▁bertan ▁galduko ▁baititut !»
PRED:	“ Get out of these men , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Get away from all these people so that I may instantly destroy them ! ”

ID:	1148
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁lehenengo ▁ituna ▁ere ▁ez ▁zen ▁odol - is ur k etarik ▁gabe ▁egin .
PRED:	So there was no covenant with his covenant .
GOLD:	That is why even the first covenant was put into effect with the blood of an animal .

ID:	1149
INPUT:	▁Ar ren , ▁beraz , ▁ager ▁iez aiozue ▁berriro ▁ere ▁zeuen ▁maitasuna .
PRED:	So be sure to tell everyone about your love .
GOLD:	So I urge you now to reaffirm your love for him .

ID:	1150
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁oparia ▁aurretik ▁bidali ▁zuen , ▁eta ▁bera ▁kanpalekuan ▁gelditu ▁zen ▁gau ▁hartan .
PRED:	So Moses sent a sacrifice to the camp at the camp , and he stayed there .
GOLD:	During the night Jacob got up and took his two wives , his two servant wives , and his eleven sons and crossed the Jabbok River with them .

ID:	1151
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁beste ▁zazpi ▁behi ▁irten ▁ziren ▁Nilo tik , ▁itxura ▁tx arrekoak ▁eta ▁ar g alak , ▁eta ▁beste ▁beh ien ▁ondoan ▁jarri ▁ziren , ▁ibai ertzean .
PRED:	Then the seven healthy cows came out of the Nile River , cut off the heads of the Nile , and the other heads of the Nile River .
GOLD:	Then he saw seven more cows come up behind them from the Nile , but these were scrawny and thin . These cows stood beside the fat cows on the riverbank .

ID:	1152
INPUT:	▁Orain , ▁ordea , ▁Jerusalem ▁hautatu ▁dut ▁neure ▁bizileku ▁eta ▁David ▁neure ▁herri ▁Israelen ▁buruzagi ”.
PRED:	But now I have chosen Jerusalem to be my own people , and my chosen ones . '
GOLD:	But now I have chosen Jerusalem as the place for my name to be honored , and I have chosen David to be king over my people Israel . ' ”

ID:	1153
INPUT:	▁ar tiz arra ▁bere ▁garaian ▁ater arazi edo ▁Hartz ▁Em e ▁Han dia ▁eta ▁Tx ik ia ▁gidatu ?
PRED:	Give him an oath in the days of the Lord 's reign , and let him catch them in a rage .
GOLD:	Can you direct the constellations through the seasonsor guide the Bear with her cubs across the heavens ?

ID:	1154
INPUT:	▁Oi ▁emakum erik ▁eder ren , n ora ▁joan ▁zaizu ▁maitea ? Nor antz ▁abiatu ▁da ? Zu rekin ▁nahi ▁dugu ▁bila ▁joan .
PRED:	O women , O beautiful women , are your lover ? Who is your lover ? Who is you looking for me ?
GOLD:	Where has your lover gone , O woman of rare beauty ? Which way did he turnso we can help you find him ?

ID:	1155
INPUT:	▁Hiri tik ▁kanpora ▁zapaldu ▁zuten ▁mahats a ▁eta , ▁dol ar etik ▁hainbeste ▁odol ▁atera ▁zenez , ▁zaldi en ▁mutur reko etaraino ▁iritsi ▁zen , ▁hirurehun ▁kilometro ko ▁zabal eran .
PRED:	The towns of the city was set out from the city , and they were driven from the entry room to the four corners of the Dead Sea .
GOLD:	The grapes were trampled in the winepress outside the city , and blood flowed from the winepress in a stream about 180 miles long and as high as a horse 's bridle .

ID:	1156
INPUT:	▁Hau tsi ▁zenituen ▁harlau z etan ▁idatziak ▁zeuden ▁hitz ▁ber berak ▁ida tziko ▁ditut ; ▁gero , ▁kutx an ▁sartuko ▁dituzu .
PRED:	You placed them on the stone tablets of the stone tablets inscribed with them . I will enter the Ark of the Covenant .
GOLD:	and I will write on the tablets the same words that were on the ones you smashed . Then place the tablets in the Ark . '

ID:	1157
INPUT:	▁Horrela ▁arduratzen ▁da ▁herri ez , zer ▁jan a ▁ematen ▁ugari .
PRED:	The people care for their neighbors , for they give many people their wealth .
GOLD:	By these mighty acts he nourishes the people , giving them food in abundance .

ID:	1158
INPUT:	▁Har ▁itzazu ▁jarrai bide tzat ▁Kristo ▁Jesusengan ▁oinarri tzen ▁diren ▁sinesmen ▁eta ▁maitasun ari ▁buruz ▁niregandik ▁entzun ▁dituzun ▁hitz ▁osasun garriak .
PRED:	Please give you an example of Christ Jesus Christ as you have been telling you about Christ .
GOLD:	Hold on to the pattern of wholesome teaching you learned from me — a pattern shaped by the faith and love that you have in Christ Jesus .

ID:	1159
INPUT:	▁K ez kar ik ▁gabe ▁haiekin ▁joateko ▁agindu ▁zidan ▁Espirituak . ▁Sei ▁senide ▁hauek ▁joan ▁ziren ▁nirekin , ▁eta ▁gizon ▁haren ▁etxean ▁sartu ▁ginen .
PRED:	Then the Spirit said to me , “ The Spirit has come with me and went with me . ”
GOLD:	The Holy Spirit told me to go with them and not to worry that they were Gentiles . These six brothers here accompanied me , and we soon entered the home of the man who had sent for us .

ID:	1160
INPUT:	▁Az tiek , ▁berriro ▁ere , ▁erregeari :— Errege ▁jauna , ▁konta guzu ▁zer ▁amets ▁egin ▁duzun ▁eta ▁azalduko ▁dizugu ▁esanahia .
PRED:	The king said to the king , “ We will tell the king what you have done . ”
GOLD:	They said again , “ Please , Your Majesty . Tell us the dream , and we will tell you what it means . ”

ID:	1161
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Babiloniako ▁erregearen ▁uztar pean ▁jar tzea ▁eta ▁haren ▁menpeko ▁izatea ▁onartzen ▁duen ▁nazio a , ▁lasai ▁utziko ▁dut ▁bere ▁lurraldean , ▁landu ▁dezan ▁eta ▁bertan ▁bizi ▁dadin . ▁Nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	But the king of Babylon will be sure to submit to the king of Babylon , and I will let them live in the land of Babylon . I will let them live there in the land of Babylonia . ”
GOLD:	But the people of any nation that submits to the king of Babylon will be allowed to stay in their own country to farm the land as usual . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ' ”

ID:	1162
INPUT:	▁De abru a ▁garai tua
PRED:	The demons of demons
GOLD:	The Defeat of Satan

ID:	1163
INPUT:	▁An imal ia ▁garbi ak ▁eta ▁kutsatu ak
PRED:	Teaching about Money and Possessions
GOLD:	The Giving of Tithes

ID:	1164
INPUT:	▁Hil ▁zen , ▁bada , ▁Akab ▁eta ▁ondorengo ▁erregea ▁haren ▁seme ▁Akazias ▁izan ▁zen .
PRED:	So Ahab died , and he became the next king .
GOLD:	So Ahab died , and his son Ahaziah became the next king .

ID:	1165
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁hau ▁ere ▁buru ratu ▁zitzaidan :« Jainkoak ▁pro batu ▁egin ▁nahi ▁ditu gizon - emakumeak , aber eak ▁bezalakoak ▁direla ikus arazteko ».
PRED:	Then Job said to me , “ God has set me apart for people . ”
GOLD:	I also thought about the human condition — how God proves to people that they are like animals .

ID:	1166
INPUT:	▁Lur sail ik , ▁mahasti rik ▁eta ▁olib adi rik ▁eder renak ▁kenduko ▁dizkizue , ▁bere ▁zerbitzariei ▁emateko .
PRED:	Your fruit will be taken from the vineyards of fruit , and it will be taken from its vineyards .
GOLD:	He will take away the best of your fields and vineyards and olive groves and give them to his own officials .

ID:	1167
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁etsaiak , ▁berriz , ▁lotsaz ▁beteko ▁dira , gaizto en ▁egoitza ▁desagertu ▁egingo ▁da ».
PRED:	But your enemies will be crushed , O God , and the wicked will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	Those who hate you will be clothed with shame , and the home of the wicked will be destroyed . ”

ID:	1168
INPUT:	▁hiri ▁bateko ak ▁bes teko engana ▁joango ▁dira ▁eta ▁esango ▁diete : ▁“ Goazen ▁Jaunaren ▁bila , ▁berari ▁mesede ▁eske ”. ▁Eta ▁erantzungo ▁diete : ▁“ Bai , ▁ba go az ▁gu ▁ere ”.
PRED:	The town will say , ‘ Let 's go to the city and ask , ‘ Let 's go to the Lord , ' they will reply , ‘ We will ask him . '
GOLD:	The people of one city will say to the people of another , ‘ Come with us to Jerusalem to ask the Lord to bless us . Let 's worship the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . I 'm determined to go . '

ID:	1169
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁mendira ▁igo ▁zen ▁Moises . ▁L aino ak ▁mendia ▁estali ▁zuen ,
PRED:	Then Moses climbed up Mount Sinai , and the mountain covered the mountain .
GOLD:	Then Moses climbed up the mountain , and the cloud covered it .

ID:	1170
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁zuek , ▁ene ▁maiteok , ▁jarrai ▁ezazue ▁zeuen ▁bizitza ▁sinesmen ▁tx it ▁santuaren ▁oinarri ▁gainean ▁eraikitzen . ▁Egin ▁otoitz ▁Espiritu ▁Santuaren ▁eraginez ;
PRED:	But you are my dear friends , dear friends , you must pray for the Holy Spirit .
GOLD:	But you , dear friends , must build each other up in your most holy faith , pray in the power of the Holy Spirit ,

ID:	1171
INPUT:	▁haren ▁lekuan ▁handi tu ▁zu ria ▁edo ▁mantxa ▁zuri - gorri xka ▁ateratzen ▁bazaio ▁norbai ti , ▁apaiz arengana ▁joango ▁da .
PRED:	If any of the house has become a small area or a small animal , it will be a serious skin disease .
GOLD:	but a white swelling or a reddish white spot develops in its place , that person must go to the priest to be examined .

ID:	1172
INPUT:	▁Zoazte ▁esnea ▁eta ▁eztia ▁darizkion ▁lurraldera ; ▁baina ▁ni ▁ez ▁naiz ▁zuekin ▁joango , ▁burugogor ▁baitzarete ; ▁bestela , ▁bidean ▁hondatuko ▁zin tuzkete t ».
PRED:	Now go to the land of Egypt , but I will not go to the land of Egypt , but you will not be with milk and honey . ”
GOLD:	Go up to this land that flows with milk and honey . But I will not travel among you , for you are a stubborn and rebellious people . If I did , I would surely destroy you along the way . ”

ID:	1173
INPUT:	▁Kristo ▁behin ▁betiko ▁sartu ▁da ▁santutegian , ▁ez ▁aker ▁eta ▁zekor ren ▁odola ▁eskainiz , ▁berea ▁baizik , ▁horrela ▁betiko ▁salbamena ▁lortu ▁digu larik .
PRED:	And Christ has entered the sanctuary , and he is not a male goat for us . And so that the law is made right with us .
GOLD:	With his own blood — not the blood of goats and calves — he entered the Most Holy Place once for all time and secured our redemption forever .

ID:	1174
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁eta ▁bere ▁gizonek , ▁heldu ▁zirenean , ▁hiria ▁sutan ▁eta ▁beren ▁emazte ▁eta ▁seme - alabak ▁gatibu ▁eraman ▁zituztela ▁aurkitu ▁zuten .
PRED:	When David saw that his men had been taken into the fire , they brought him into the fire .
GOLD:	When David and his men saw the ruins and realized what had happened to their families ,

ID:	1175
INPUT:	▁Haur ▁hauxe ▁eskatzen ▁nion ▁Jaunari ▁eta ▁eman ▁dit ▁eskatzen ▁ni ona .
PRED:	I asked the Lord , “ My child has given me to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	I asked the Lord to give me this boy , and he has granted my request .

ID:	1176
INPUT:	▁Atz eman ▁zituen , ▁orduan , ▁Han un ek ▁Daviden ▁mandatariak ▁eta ▁alder di ▁bateko ▁biz arra ▁moztu ▁zien , ▁baita ▁jantziak ▁ere ▁erditik ▁behera , ▁ip ur m as ail etatik ▁behera . ▁Eta ▁joaten ▁utzi ▁zien .
PRED:	Then he seized the messengers and cut off his neck and cut off the head of David 's head . He also cut off the head of David 's head , and he carried them away from his shoulders .
GOLD:	So Hanun seized David 's ambassadors and shaved off half of each man 's beard , cut off their robes at the buttocks , and sent them back to David in shame .

ID:	1177
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion ▁Jauna ▁Moisesi :
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1178
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁ordu ▁arte ▁ez ▁zuten ▁ikasleek ▁ulertu ▁Liburu ▁Santuak ▁dioena , ▁Jesusek ▁hildakoen ▁artetik ▁piztu ▁behar ▁zuela , ▁alegia .
PRED:	For the disciples did n't understand that the Scriptures say , “ This is what the Scriptures mean that Jesus will be raised from the dead . ”
GOLD:	for until then they still had n't understood the Scriptures that said Jesus must rise from the dead .

ID:	1179
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁eman ▁zeni dan ▁aintza ▁bera ▁eman ▁diet ▁nik , ▁bat ▁izan ▁daitezen , ▁gu ▁biok ▁bat ▁garen ▁bezala :
PRED:	You gave me glory to me , and I have given him a glorious blessing .
GOLD:	“ I have given them the glory you gave me , so they may be one as we are one .

ID:	1180
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁hau ▁eraman ▁eta ▁zoritx arren ▁bat ▁gertatuko ▁balitz aio , ▁ni , ▁a gure ▁hau , ▁atsekabez ▁hilko ▁nintza teke ».
PRED:	But if someone was talking about him , I would die in the old age of death , I would die . ”
GOLD:	Now if you take his brother away from me , and any harm comes to him , you will send this grieving , white-haired man to his grave . '

ID:	1181
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁salb azioa ▁ez ▁dut ▁kol kor ako ▁gorde , zure ▁leial tasun ▁eta ▁salbamen aren ▁berri ▁eman ▁dut , zure ▁maitasun ▁eta ▁fin tasuna ▁ez ▁ditut ba tzar ▁nagusi an ▁isil du .
PRED:	My rescue me from your rescue , and I have always been faithful to you . I have not seen your love and comfort you .
GOLD:	Lord , do n't hold back your tender mercies from me.Let your unfailing love and faithfulness always protect me .

ID:	1182
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion ▁Jauna ▁Moisesi :
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1183
INPUT:	▁Em azue , ▁bada , ▁lan ▁hori ▁geldi arazteko ▁agindua ; ▁ez ▁dezatela ▁eraiki ▁hiria , ▁beste ▁agindu rik ▁ematen ▁ez ▁dudan ▁bitartean .
PRED:	So be sure that you must be careful to let it go . Let the city be given to you as I have commanded .
GOLD:	Therefore , issue orders to have these men stop their work . That city must not be rebuilt except at my express command .

ID:	1184
INPUT:	▁zeuen ▁joka eraren ▁fruituak ▁jango ▁dituzue , zeuen ▁egitas mo ▁gaizto ez ▁as eb eteko .
PRED:	When you eat the fruit of your fruit , you will eat the fruit of the wicked .
GOLD:	Therefore , they must eat the bitter fruit of living their own way , choking on their own schemes .

ID:	1185
INPUT:	▁eta , ▁etxera tzean , ▁adiskide ak ▁eta ▁auzoko ak ▁bildu ▁eta ▁esaten ▁die : ▁“ Egin ▁festa ▁nirekin , ▁aurkitu ▁baitut ▁galdu tako ▁ar dia !”
PRED:	As soon as soon as they say , ‘ Come and pay attention to my friends , for I have found a feast for you . '
GOLD:	When he arrives , he will call together his friends and neighbors , saying , ‘ Rejoice with me because I have found my lost sheep . '

ID:	1186
INPUT:	▁A gian , ▁atzera ▁egineta ▁damu tuko ▁da , eta ▁ondasunez ▁bedeinkatuko z ai tuzte ▁ostera . Orduan , ▁labore - opariak eta ▁isur - opariak egin ▁ahal ▁izango ▁dizkio zue Jaunari , ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoari .
PRED:	Who will be able to turn away from the land of the Lord , and you will receive no grain from the land of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Who knows ? Perhaps he will give you a reprieve , sending you a blessing instead of this curse.Perhaps you will be able to offer grain and wineto the Lord your God as before .

ID:	1187
INPUT:	▁Eman ▁ohore ▁Jaunari , ira garri ▁urrutiko ▁herri etan go res garri ▁dela .
PRED:	Give glory to the Lord , far from distant lands , far from distant lands .
GOLD:	Let the whole world glorify the Lord ; let it sing his praise .

ID:	1188
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁berriro ▁galdetu ▁zien :— Eta ▁zuek , ▁nor ▁naizela ▁diozue ? P ed rok ▁erantzun :— Zu ▁Mesias ▁zara .
PRED:	Jesus asked them , “ You are the Messiah ? ” “ You are the Messiah . ”
GOLD:	Then he asked them , “ But who do you say I am ? ” Peter replied , “ You are the Messiah . ”

ID:	1189
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁dio ▁Jaunak :« Baina ▁ni , ▁Jaun ▁hau , zure ▁Jainkoa ▁naiz Egi p ton ▁zeun den etik . Ez ▁duzu ▁ni ▁beste ▁jainkorik ai tor tu ▁behar , ez ▁baita ▁nitaz ▁kanp ob este ▁salba tzail erik .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I am the Lord , the God of Israel , says : I will bring you out from Egypt , and you will take refuge from distant lands .
GOLD:	“ I have been the Lord your Godever since I brought you out of Egypt.You must acknowledge no God but me , for there is no other savior .

ID:	1190
INPUT:	▁gure ▁eta ▁zuen ▁artean ▁eta ▁gure ▁ondorengo ▁belaunaldi en ▁artean ▁ezaugarri ▁izateko ▁baizik ; ▁hau ▁da , ▁beraren ▁tenpluan ▁geure ▁erre - opari ▁eta ▁elkartasun - opariak ▁eskainiz ▁Jaunari ▁kultu ▁eman ▁nahi ▁diogu la ▁adierazteko ▁ezaugarri . ▁Horrela , ▁zuen ▁seme - alabek ▁ezin ▁esango ▁diete ▁gure ei ▁Jaunarekin ▁zerikus irik ▁ez ▁dutela .
PRED:	This is the account of our descendants who belong to the Lord our God . This is what we have said to us , “ This is what we have done to the Lord our God , and we will never accept the peace offerings of our children . ”
GOLD:	but as a memorial . It will remind our descendants and your descendants that we , too , have the right to worship the Lord at his sanctuary with our burnt offerings , sacrifices , and peace offerings . Then your descendants will not be able to say to ours , ‘ You have no claim to the Lord . '

ID:	1191
INPUT:	▁Hax ab ias ▁eta ▁Isaias ▁ere , ▁Merari ren ▁semeak , ▁bidali ▁zizki gu ten , ▁beren ▁seme ▁eta ▁anai ekin ; ▁guztira ▁hogei ▁lagun ;
PRED:	The descendants of Elam were also sent by the clans of the Merarite clans of the Merarite clans of the Merarite clans of the Levites .
GOLD:	They also sent Hashabiah , together with Jeshaiah from the descendants of Merari , and twenty of his sons and brothers ,

ID:	1192
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁zu , ▁zer ▁zabiltza ▁purpura z ▁jantzia , ur rezko ▁bitx iz ▁apain dua , begiak ▁bel tzez ▁p in tatu rik ? Al ferrik ▁apain tzen ▁zara , mai ta leek ▁zapuztu ▁egin ▁zaituzte , biz ia ▁kendu ▁nahi ▁dizute .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who are clothed in fine linen clothing ? How are you clothed in fine linen and beautiful clothes ? How long are you ? What sorrow awaits you who live in the world ?
GOLD:	What are you doing , you who have been plundered ? Why do you dress up in beautiful clothingand put on gold jewelry ? Why do you brighten your eyes with mascara ? Your primping will do you no good ! The allies who were your loversdespise you and seek to kill you .

ID:	1193
INPUT:	▁Gainerako ▁ikasleak ▁txalu p az ▁joan ▁ziren , ▁sar ea ▁arrain ekin ▁ti raka ▁zek ar tela , ▁leh orre tik ▁hurbil ▁baitziren , ▁ehun en ▁bat ▁metro ra .
PRED:	The rest of the disciples went into the boat , and they were terrified by a large fish .
GOLD:	The others stayed with the boat and pulled the loaded net to the shore , for they were only about a hundred yards from shore .

ID:	1194
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁orain , ▁joan ▁eta ▁nire ▁nagusiari ▁« Hemen ▁da ▁Elias » ▁adierazteko ▁esango ▁didazu , ▁bada ? ▁Hil ▁egingo ▁nau !
PRED:	So I went to the master and said , “ Look , I will say , ‘ Look ! '
GOLD:	And now you say , ‘ Go and tell your master , “ Elijah is here. ” ' Sir , if I do that , Ahab will certainly kill me . ”

ID:	1195
INPUT:	▁Josafaten ▁ber rik un tzak
PRED:	The Death of Jehoshaphat
GOLD:	Jehoshaphat Appoints Judges

ID:	1196
INPUT:	▁I rakas pen ▁hauek ▁guztiak ▁parabola ▁bidez ▁eman ▁zizkion ▁Jesusek ▁jendeari , ▁eta ▁ez ▁zien ▁ezer ▁irakasten ▁parab ol az ▁izan ▁ezik .
PRED:	Jesus gave these instructions to the people everything Jesus had done through the crowd and teach them not to teach .
GOLD:	Jesus always used stories and illustrations like these when speaking to the crowds . In fact , he never spoke to them without using such parables .

ID:	1197
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁Siri a ▁eta ▁Zil iz ia ▁eskualde etara ▁joan ▁nintzen .
PRED:	Then I went to the Aramean army of Gilead , and I went to the region of Gilead .
GOLD:	After that visit I went north into the provinces of Syria and Cilicia .

ID:	1198
INPUT:	▁Bere iz ▁gaitezen , ▁beraz . ▁Hor ▁duzu ▁aurrean ▁eskualde ▁guztia ; ▁zuk ▁ezker rera ▁jotzen ▁baduzu , ▁ni ▁eskuin era ▁joango ▁naiz ; ▁zuk ▁eskuin era ▁jotzen ▁baduzu , ▁ni ▁ezker rera ▁joango ▁naiz ».
PRED:	So let us go and stand at the place where you are going . If you go , I will go to the place where you are going , I will go to the left . ”
GOLD:	The whole countryside is open to you . Take your choice of any section of the land you want , and we will separate . If you want the land to the left , then I 'll take the land on the right . If you prefer the land on the right , then I 'll go to the left . ”

ID:	1199
INPUT:	▁Guz tiak ▁profeta ▁bezala ▁mintzo ▁badira , ▁ordea , ▁eta ▁entzu le ▁huts ▁den ▁edota ▁kristau ▁ez ▁den ▁bat ▁sartzen ▁bada , ▁bere ▁erruak ▁aitor tzera ▁eramango ▁dute ▁denen ▁artean ,
PRED:	But if there are a prophet or a prophet or a prophet or John , they must not listen to his own body or be put to his own eyes .
GOLD:	But if all of you are prophesying , and unbelievers or people who do n't understand these things come into your meeting , they will be convicted of sin and judged by what you say .

ID:	1200
INPUT:	▁Ti rok ▁gotor lekua ▁jaso ▁du , hau tsa ▁adina ▁zilar ▁pil atu ▁du , k ale etako ▁lo ka tza ▁adina ▁urre ;
PRED:	He has taken the fortress of the fortress of Babylonia , and he has fine fine gold , and she has fine fine fine gold .
GOLD:	Tyre has built a strong fortressand has made silver and goldas plentiful as dust in the streets !

ID:	1201
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁itzazue ▁gogor ▁erabil ; ▁horrela ▁erakutsiko ▁duzue ▁begirune ▁diozu ela ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoari .
PRED:	You must not fear God because you fear God .
GOLD:	Show your fear of God by not treating them harshly .

ID:	1202
INPUT:	▁Korin ton ▁dagoen ▁Jainkoaren ▁eliz ▁elkarteari ▁idazten ▁diogu . ▁Jesu ▁Kristok ▁sagaratu ▁zaituzte ▁eta ▁Jainkoak ▁bere ▁herri ▁santu ▁izateko ▁deitu , ▁edozein ▁leku tan ▁Jesu ▁Kristo ▁gure ▁Jaunari ▁dei ▁egiten ▁dioten ▁guztiekin ▁batera , ▁hauek ▁eta ▁guk ▁Jaun ▁bat ▁bera ▁onartzen ▁baitugu .
PRED:	This letter is from Paul , the church that is from the church in Christ Jesus , who called you to be called to the Lord Jesus Christ , and we are called to the Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	I am writing to God 's church in Corinth , to you who have been called by God to be his own holy people . He made you holy by means of Christ Jesus , just as he did for all people everywhere who call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ , their Lord and ours .

ID:	1203
INPUT:	▁Horrelako en ▁azkena ▁hondamena ▁da ; ▁sabela ▁dute ▁jainko , ▁beren ▁lots ari etan ▁harro tzen ▁dira ▁eta ▁lurreko ▁gauz etan ▁bakarrik ▁pents atzen ▁dute .
PRED:	They are ashamed of their sinful deeds , and they are ashamed of their sinful deeds , and they are all living in the world .
GOLD:	They are headed for destruction . Their god is their appetite , they brag about shameful things , and they think only about this life here on earth .

ID:	1204
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁izan ▁zaldi ▁eta ▁man do ▁adimen gabe en ▁antzeko : gal g az ▁eta ▁ah oko z ▁eutsi ▁behar ▁zaio ▁haien ▁indar rari ; beste la , ▁ezin ▁zara ▁hurbildu ».
PRED:	Do n't be like a horse , Daniel , and a reed stick in the middle of the sky , so you can not be able to stand up . ”
GOLD:	Do not be like a senseless horse or mulethat needs a bit and bridle to keep it under control . ”

ID:	1205
INPUT:	▁Ira tzar , ▁ip ar - haize ! ▁H ator , ▁hego - haize ! Z ab aldu ▁aire an ▁nire ▁bara tzeko ▁lurrin ak . Eta ▁zu , ▁ene ▁maitea , ▁sar ▁zeure ▁bara tzean , jan ▁bertako ▁fruitu ▁zora garriak .
PRED:	Your breath is like a grapevine , and it is like a spring of olive trees , and it is like a garden , and it will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	Awake , north wind ! Rise up , south wind ! Blow on my gardenand spread its fragrance all around.Come into your garden , my love ; taste its finest fruits .

ID:	1206
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁alde ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Tam arrek . ▁Es tal tzen ▁zuen ▁zap ia ▁kendu ▁eta ▁alargun - soin ekoak ▁jantzi ▁zituen ▁berriro .
PRED:	Then she returned to me and tore down the widow of widows . Then he put his clothes on his robe .
GOLD:	Afterward she went back home , took off her veil , and put on her widow 's clothing as usual .

ID:	1207
INPUT:	▁Mez ul ariak ▁hi riz ▁hiri ▁ibili ▁ziren ▁Efraim ▁eta ▁Manasesen ▁lurralde etan ▁zehar , ▁eta ▁Zabul on ▁lurral deraino ▁ere ▁heldu ▁ziren ; ▁baina ▁bur la ▁eta ▁barre ▁egin ▁zieten .
PRED:	The messengers went through the land of Ephraim , Benjamin , and Zebulun , Benjamin , and Zebulun , and the people of Ephraim .
GOLD:	The runners went from town to town throughout Ephraim and Manasseh and as far as the territory of Zebulun . But most of the people just laughed at the runners and made fun of them .

ID:	1208
INPUT:	▁Moisesen ▁legean ▁idatzirik ▁dagoen ▁bezalaxe , ▁hain ▁zuzen , ▁etorri ▁zaigu ▁gainera ▁hain besteko ▁zoritxar ▁hau ; ▁hala ▁ere , ▁Jauna , ▁ez ▁gara ▁zure ▁haserrea ▁bare tzen ▁ahalegin du , ▁gure ▁bekatu etatik ▁urrundu z ▁eta ▁zure ▁leialtasuna ▁aitor tuz .
PRED:	This is what the law of Moses had commanded us to bring disaster upon us . We have never sinned against you , and we have turned away from the Lord 's anger and turned away from us .
GOLD:	Every curse written against us in the Law of Moses has come true . Yet we have refused to seek mercy from the Lord our God by turning from our sins and recognizing his truth .

ID:	1209
INPUT:	▁Gau ean , ▁Jainkoa ▁Balaam i ▁agertu ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« Gizon ▁horiek ▁zure ▁bila ▁etorri ▁badira , ▁zoaz ▁beraiekin ; ▁baina ▁nik ▁esango ▁dizu dana ▁bakarrik ▁egingo ▁duzu ».
PRED:	At night God appeared to Balaam , and he said to Balaam , “ If you are looking for me , you wo n't find me . ”
GOLD:	That night God came to Balaam and told him , “ Since these men have come for you , get up and go with them . But do only what I tell you to do . ”

ID:	1210
INPUT:	▁Israelgo ▁gudarostea ▁os atzeko ▁gai ▁ziren ▁hogei ▁urtetik ▁gorako ▁israeldarren ▁izen - bil ketak
PRED:	There were twenty years old or older or twenty years old or twenty years old or twenty years old .
GOLD:	They were registered by families — all the men of Israel who were twenty years old or older and able to go to war .

ID:	1211
INPUT:	▁David ▁Mah an aim era ▁heldu ▁zen . ▁Bitartean , ▁Absalom ▁Jordanez ▁beste ▁aldera ▁igaro ▁zen , ▁berekin ▁zituen ▁israeldar ▁guztiekin .
PRED:	So David arrived at Mahanaim . Meanwhile , Absalom and all the men of Israel went across to the Jordan River .
GOLD:	David soon arrived at Mahanaim . By now , Absalom had mobilized the entire army of Israel and was leading his troops across the Jordan River .

ID:	1212
INPUT:	▁egia ▁ezagu t ▁dezazun eta ▁hartu ▁duzun ▁mandatu ari ▁leial ki ▁erantzun .
PRED:	And you know how to understand the truth , and you teach the truth .
GOLD:	In this way , you may know the truthand take an accurate report to those who sent you .

ID:	1213
INPUT:	▁Hiri a ▁Babiloniako ▁erregearen ▁eskuetan ▁eroriko ▁da ▁erre m edi orik ▁gabe , ▁eta ▁konkis tatu ▁egingo ▁du . ▁Nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	The city of Babylon will fall into the city of Babylon , and it will be destroyed . The Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	The Lord also says : ‘ The city of Jerusalem will certainly be handed over to the army of the king of Babylon , who will capture it . ' ”

ID:	1214
INPUT:	▁« A bere ▁xehea ▁eskaini ▁behar ▁duenak , ▁akats ▁gabea ▁eskainiko ▁du , ▁arra ▁nahiz ▁em ea .
PRED:	“ If you present a animal to the poor , you must offer a female animal or a female goat or a female goat .
GOLD:	“ If you present an animal from the flock as a peace offering to the Lord , it may be a male or a female , but it must have no defects .

ID:	1215
INPUT:	▁ F araoi aren ▁ametsa ▁argitu ▁Josek
PRED:	Joseph 's Dream at Egypt
GOLD:	Pharaoh 's Dreams

ID:	1216
INPUT:	▁Etor kizun eko ▁tenplua
PRED:	Registration of the Temple
GOLD:	The New Temple Area

ID:	1217
INPUT:	▁Ar tz ain en ▁kontra ▁ekingo ▁diot : ▁neure ▁artaldea ▁itzul tzera ▁behar tuko ▁ditut ▁eta ▁artzain - kar gu tik ▁botako , ▁ez ▁dituzte ▁aurrerantzean ▁beren ▁buruak ▁baz katuko ; ▁horien ▁hor tz ▁artetik ▁aterako ▁ditut ▁ardiak ▁eta ▁ez ▁dituzte ▁berriro ▁elik ag ai ▁izango .
PRED:	I will raise my fist against my flock , and I will return to my sheep and goats . I will take them out of their sheep and goats , and they will never leave them .
GOLD:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I now consider these shepherds my enemies , and I will hold them responsible for what has happened to my flock . I will take away their right to feed the flock , and I will stop them from feeding themselves . I will rescue my flock from their mouths ; the sheep will no longer be their prey .

ID:	1218
INPUT:	▁« Hartu ▁lebitarrak ▁israeldarren ▁lehen - seme ▁guztien ▁ordez ▁eta ▁lebitarren ▁abereak ▁israeldarren en ▁ordez : ▁neure ak ▁ditut ▁lebitarrak . ▁Neu ▁naiz ▁Jauna .
PRED:	“ Take the Levites of all the Levites in place of honor in the presence of all the Levites . I am the Lord . I am the Levites .
GOLD:	“ Take the Levites as substitutes for the firstborn sons of the people of Israel . And take the livestock of the Levites as substitutes for the firstborn livestock of the people of Israel . The Levites belong to me ; I am the Lord .

ID:	1219
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁diot : ▁« O i ▁Jauna , ▁zu ▁zaitut ▁ene ▁Jaun , zure gan ▁baizik ▁ez ▁dut ▁zori onik ».
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I trust in you , but you are not trying to trust in you . ”
GOLD:	I said to the Lord , “ You are my Master ! Every good thing I have comes from you . ”

ID:	1220
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁ahizpa ▁zaharren a ▁Samaria ▁da , ▁bere ▁hiri ekin ▁zure ▁iparraldera ▁bizi ▁dena . ▁Zure ▁ahizpa ▁txiki ena ▁Sodoma , ▁bere ▁hiri ekin ▁zure ▁hegoaldera ▁bizi ▁dena .
PRED:	Your sister , Samaria , and your sister , the north of Sodom , north , and all the towns of Sodom .
GOLD:	“ Your older sister was Samaria , who lived with her daughters in the north . Your younger sister was Sodom , who lived with her daughters in the south .

ID:	1221
INPUT:	▁Bi ▁ate - orri ak ▁olibondo - zurezko ak ▁ziren ; ▁haietan ▁ere ▁hegaldun ▁izaki - irudiak , ▁palm ondo - ▁eta ▁lore - sor ten ▁irudiak ▁zizel katu ▁zituen , ▁guztiak ▁urrez ▁estal iz .
PRED:	There were two olive trees of acacia wood , palm trees , palm trees , and palm trees , and palm trees .
GOLD:	These double doors were decorated with carvings of cherubim , palm trees , and open flowers . The doors , including the decorations of cherubim and palm trees , were overlaid with gold .

ID:	1222
INPUT:	▁Ez agutzen ▁ez ▁duten ▁bidetik eraman go ▁ditut ▁i tsuak , i bil bide ▁ezez agun etan ▁barrena . I l un pea ▁argi ▁bihurtuko ▁diet , para j e ▁mal kar rak ▁bide ▁lau . Horra ▁zer ▁egiteko ▁asmotan ▁naizen , eta ▁ez ▁dut ▁ets iko .
PRED:	I saw the poor , but I will never be driven from the winds . I will never be driven from the mountains , and I will make it a light from the west . I will make it a light from the west , but I will not go to the west .
GOLD:	I will lead blind Israel down a new path , guiding them along an unfamiliar way.I will brighten the darkness before themand smooth out the road ahead of them.Yes , I will indeed do these things ; I will not forsake them .

ID:	1223
INPUT:	▁Go dal ias , ▁Judako ▁gobernari
PRED:	governor of Judah
GOLD:	Hope for Israel 's Royal Line

ID:	1224
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁s aduze ar ▁batzuk ▁etorri ▁zitzaizkion ▁Jesusi . ▁Hauek ▁ez ▁dute ▁sinesten ▁hildakoak ▁pizten ▁diren ik . ▁Eta ▁honela ▁galdegin ▁zioten :
PRED:	Then some of the Sadducees came from the Sadducees , who believe in the resurrection of the dead .
GOLD:	Then Jesus was approached by some Sadducees — religious leaders who say there is no resurrection from the dead . They posed this question :

ID:	1225
INPUT:	▁mendekatu ▁eta ▁merezia emango ▁diedan ▁arte , Israelen ▁etsaiek ▁lur ▁jo ▁dezaten ▁arte . H ur bil ▁dago ▁haien ▁hondamendia , ber andu ▁gabe ▁etorriko ▁da haien tzat ▁prestatu rik ▁dagoena .
PRED:	The Lord will give them victory until I will bring disaster on the land of Israel 's enemies . They will wait for their work until they have prepared for them .
GOLD:	I will take revenge ; I will pay them back.In due time their feet will slip.Their day of disaster will arrive , and their destiny will overtake them . '

ID:	1226
INPUT:	▁Bala amen ▁astem ea
PRED:	Balaam Becomes Israel 's Judge
GOLD:	Balaam and His Donkey

ID:	1227
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁ez ▁du ▁bere ▁sum inean ▁amore ▁ematen , bere ▁oin pean ▁hartzen ▁ditu ▁R ah ab - en ▁indarrak .
PRED:	God has not spoken to me , but he has given me strength to the grave .
GOLD:	And God does not restrain his anger.Even the monsters of the sea are crushed beneath his feet .

ID:	1228
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁salatzen ▁ba gai tu zu , ▁aske ▁geldituko ▁gara ▁eginarazi ▁di guz un ▁zin etik .
PRED:	But if we have sworn an oath , we will be taken away from the land .
GOLD:	If you betray us , however , we are not bound by this oath in any way . ”

ID:	1229
INPUT:	▁Oraindik ▁kartz elako ▁atarian ▁atxilo tua ▁zegoela , ▁Jaunak ▁Jeremiasi ▁hitz ▁egin ▁zion ,
PRED:	As soon as the Lord was imprisoned in the courtyard of the guard , he spoke to Jeremiah .
GOLD:	The Lord had given the following message to Jeremiah while he was still in prison :

ID:	1230
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁bainau zu ▁Herio ▁Leiz era ▁botako , ▁zure ▁fededun a ▁ez ▁duzu ▁hilobian ▁galtzen ▁utziko .
PRED:	Do n't let me go into the grave , but you will not let me go into the grave .
GOLD:	For you will not leave my soul among the deador allow your Holy One to rot in the grave .

ID:	1231
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁aurkituko ▁etxeko andre ▁jator ra ? K ora l ek ▁baino ▁askoz ▁gehiago ▁balio ▁du .
PRED:	Who can find wisdom from the family of wisdom ? Who can compare with much more than this ?
GOLD:	Who can find a virtuous and capable wife ? She is more precious than rubies .

ID:	1232
INPUT:	▁Sines mena ▁salbamen aren ▁iturri
PRED:	The Hope of Jesus
GOLD:	Christ Took Our Punishment

ID:	1233
INPUT:	▁« Haren ▁gorpu tzak harri bitx ia ▁zirudi en , aurp egi ak ▁tximis taren ▁distira ▁zuen ; begiak ▁s uzko ▁zuz iak b ez alako ak ▁zituen , bes o ▁eta ▁zango ak b ron tze ▁le undu a ▁bezain ▁distira tsuak . Haren ▁ahots ak ▁jendetza ▁handi ▁baten z ara ta - hotsa ▁zirudi en .
PRED:	“ The sun was like a horse , and its wings were covered with its wings , and the wheels were covered with fire . He looked like a man 's horn , and his feet were covered with a huge horn , and his feet were covered with a large horn .
GOLD:	His body looked like a precious gem . His face flashed like lightning , and his eyes flamed like torches . His arms and feet shone like polished bronze , and his voice roared like a vast multitude of people .

ID:	1234
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁oroi tzen ▁naiz ▁itxaropena ▁sus per rarazten ▁didan ▁zerbai tez :
PRED:	But now I hope in God 's light , who is better than any human hope .
GOLD:	Yet I still dare to hopewhen I remember this :

ID:	1235
INPUT:	▁Hor ▁datoz ▁m atxinsal toak ▁p ilo ka , herri ▁indartsu ▁eta ▁konta ezin b aten ▁antzeko , nire ▁lurraldearen ▁aurka . Leh oiak ▁bezalako ▁hor tzak ▁dituzte , dena ▁tris katzen ▁dute .
PRED:	Its branches are like a lion , like a roaring lion , and its teeth are like a lion .
GOLD:	A vast army of locusts has invaded my land , a terrible army too numerous to count.Its teeth are like lions ' teeth , its fangs like those of a lioness .

ID:	1236
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁printz eak ▁emaitza ▁bere ▁menpeko ren ▁bati ▁egiten ▁badio , ▁ondare - zati ▁hori ▁aska pen - ur tera ▁arte ▁bakarrik ▁izango ▁da ▁menpeko arena ; ▁gero , ▁printz eari ▁itzuliko ▁zaio . ▁Izan ▁ere , ▁beronen ▁semeei ▁bakarrik ▁dagoki e ▁heren tzi an ▁ondare ▁hori .
PRED:	But if the prince gives a gift to one of his sons , he will be bought as a gift to a slave , and it will be given to the property of his sons .
GOLD:	But if the prince gives a gift of land from his inheritance to one of his servants , the servant may keep it only until the Year of Jubilee , which comes every fiftieth year . At that time the land will return to the prince . But when the prince gives gifts to his sons , those gifts will be permanent .

ID:	1237
INPUT:	▁« Ba ▁al ▁da ▁inor ▁zuen ▁artean ▁nire ▁tenplua ▁bere ▁lehengo ▁eder - han dian ▁ikusi ▁zuen ik ? ▁Eta ▁orain ▁nola ▁dagoela ▁iruditzen ▁zaizue ? ▁Ez ▁al ▁duzue ▁ikusten ▁ezerez tua ▁dagoela ?
PRED:	“ Is it any of the Temple ? ” he asked . “ There is no one here on earth , how can you see ? ”
GOLD:	‘ Does anyone remember this house — this Temple — in its former splendor ? How , in comparison , does it look to you now ? It must seem like nothing at all !

ID:	1238
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁hiri ▁gotortu ez ▁jabetu ▁ondoren , ▁Jerusalem eraino ▁heldu ▁zen .
PRED:	After the fortified towns of Judah , he captured the fortified towns of Judah .
GOLD:	Shishak conquered Judah 's fortified towns and then advanced to attack Jerusalem .

ID:	1239
INPUT:	▁jokabide ▁tx arretik ▁alden araziko ▁zaituzte eta ▁hitz ▁maltzur reko engandik ,
PRED:	They will drive out you from the wicked , but they will be driven from the wicked .
GOLD:	Wisdom will save you from evil people , from those whose words are twisted .

ID:	1240
INPUT:	▁Sar ▁bedi ▁etsaia ▁mahasti an eta ▁hondatu , baina ▁erabat ▁deus ez tatu ▁ez ! Era uz ▁bitza ▁mahats - ai h enak , ez ▁baitira ▁nire ak !
PRED:	May the enemy be destroyed , but they will not be cut off , but they will not be saved .
GOLD:	“ Go down the rows of the vineyards and destroy the grapevines , leaving a scattered few alive.Strip the branches from the vines , for these people do not belong to the Lord .

ID:	1241
INPUT:	▁guri , ▁berriz , ▁zuzen ▁dena ▁bereiz tea eta ▁ongi ▁zer ▁dagoen ▁azter tzea .
PRED:	But it is good to us , as well as well as well as you do .
GOLD:	So let us discern for ourselves what is right ; let us learn together what is good .

ID:	1242
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁egun ▁berean etor riko ▁zaizkio ▁gainera mer ezi tako ▁zigor rak : herio tza , ▁dol ua ▁eta ▁gosea , eta ▁kiskali ▁egingo ▁da ▁sutan ; ahal tsua ▁baita bera ▁epaitu ▁duen ▁Jainko ▁Jauna ».
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will punish you for a single day of death , a famine , and disease will fall into a winepress of famine , for the Lord your God will punish you . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , these plagues will overtake her in a single day — death and mourning and famine.She will be completely consumed by fire , for the Lord God who judges her is mighty . ”

ID:	1243
INPUT:	▁J ustiz ian ▁sendo ▁ezarria ▁egongo ▁zara . Z apal kun tzatik ▁libre ▁izango ▁zara eta ▁ez ▁duzu ▁ezeren ▁beldurrik ▁izango , ikara ▁ez ▁zaizu ▁inoiz ▁hurbilduko .
PRED:	For the Lord will command you , O Lord , who will not harm you ; you will never be afraid of your enemies .
GOLD:	You will be secure under a government that is just and fair.Your enemies will stay far away.You will live in peace , and terror will not come near .

ID:	1244
INPUT:	▁hau ▁agindu ▁zien ▁Hilk ias ▁apaizari , ▁Xaf anen ▁seme ▁Ah ik am i , ▁Mike asen ▁seme ▁Ak b orri , ▁Xaf an ▁idazkari ari ▁eta ▁erregearen ▁minis tro ▁zen ▁As aiasi :
PRED:	Then Hilkiah said to Hilkiah , Shaphan son of Hilkiah , Shaphan son of Hilkiah , the court secretary , and the court secretary .
GOLD:	Then he gave these orders to Hilkiah the priest , Ahikam son of Shaphan , Acbor son of Micaiah , Shaphan the court secretary , and Asaiah the king 's personal adviser :

ID:	1245
INPUT:	▁Ho dei ek , ▁as eak ▁dau d elarik , eu ria ▁egin ▁ohi ▁dute ▁lur ▁gainera . Zu h aitza , h e gor antz ▁nahiz ▁ip ar rer antz ▁erori , han ▁geldituko ▁da , erori ▁den ▁tokian .
PRED:	The eternal life will be left , and the earth will rise again , and you will lie down on the ground .
GOLD:	When clouds are heavy , the rains come down.Whether a tree falls north or south , it stays where it falls .

ID:	1246
INPUT:	▁Esklab o ok , ▁izan ▁beti ▁mundu ▁honetan ▁nagusi ▁dituzuen en ▁esaneko ; ▁ez ▁j ago le aren ▁begira da pean ▁edo ▁gizaki ei ▁atsegin ▁izateko ▁bakarrik , ▁bihotz - bihotzez ▁baizik , ▁Jaunarengan ako ▁begirune agatik .
PRED:	Slaves who serve in this world in this world , obey the Lord 's discipline . Instead , do not fear the Lord . Instead , do not fear the Lord .
GOLD:	Slaves , obey your earthly masters in everything you do . Try to please them all the time , not just when they are watching you . Serve them sincerely because of your reverent fear of the Lord .

ID:	1247
INPUT:	▁« Baina ▁zeuen ▁jokabidea ▁eta ▁egintzak ▁benetan ▁zuzen tzen ▁badituzue , ▁giz arte - harreman etan ▁justizia ▁defen datzen ▁baduzue ,
PRED:	“ But if you do evil , if you are honest and faithfulness to the church ,
GOLD:	But I will be merciful only if you stop your evil thoughts and deeds and start treating each other with justice ;

ID:	1248
INPUT:	▁Hil tzeko ▁mo duko ▁zurezko ▁tresna ▁jaur tiz ▁norbait ▁jo ▁eta ▁hiltzen ▁duena , ▁hilketa - erru dun ▁da : ▁heriotzara ▁emango ▁dute .
PRED:	If someone kills another person who kills it , it will be murder and murder , and the innocent will be put to death .
GOLD:	Or if someone strikes and kills another person with a wooden object , it is murder , and the murderer must be put to death .

ID:	1249
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , zentzu gabeak ▁zor akeria ▁ahoan , eta ▁asmo ▁txarrak ▁besterik ▁ez barru an ; Jaun az ▁arduratu ▁gabe ▁bizi ▁daeta ▁hari ▁irain ka ▁mintzo ; go se ▁dena ▁hutsik ▁bidaltzen ▁dueta ▁egarri ▁denari ez ▁dio ▁edaten ▁ematen .
PRED:	For the wicked plot evil in their mouths , and their words are filled with bitter words . The Lord 's anger is filled with bitter cause , and their wrath is filled with bitter cause .
GOLD:	For fools speak foolishnessand make evil plans.They practice ungodlinessand spread false teachings about the Lord.They deprive the hungry of foodand give no water to the thirsty .

ID:	1250
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁erantzun :
PRED:	The Lord replied ,
GOLD:	And the Lord replied to Moses ,

ID:	1251
INPUT:	▁Auz oko ▁herriak ▁zigor tuak ▁eta ▁salbatu ak
PRED:	The Lord 's Promise of Victory
GOLD:	The Lord 's Reply to Jeremiah

ID:	1252
INPUT:	▁N ek az ari ▁hil tzaileen ▁parabola
PRED:	Parable of the Evil Farmers
GOLD:	Parable of the Evil Farmers

ID:	1253
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁erregeari , ▁esatera : ▁« U s tea ▁berarengan ▁duzun ▁arren , ▁ez ▁zaitzala ▁engaina ▁zeure ▁Jainko ▁horrek , ▁Jerusalem ▁nire ▁eskuetan ▁ez ▁dela ▁eroriko ▁esaten ▁badizu ▁ere .
PRED:	This message came to King of Judah : “ If you do n't let the king of Judah , let you fall into the hands of Jerusalem . But if you say , ‘ May you fall into the hands of Jerusalem . '
GOLD:	“ This message is for King Hezekiah of Judah . Do n't let your God , in whom you trust , deceive you with promises that Jerusalem will not be captured by the king of Assyria .

ID:	1254
INPUT:	▁Jakin ▁bezate ▁zure ▁eskua ▁dela , zu ▁zeu , ▁Jauna , ▁nire ▁alde ▁ari ▁dena .
PRED:	Let all your hand know that I am the Lord ; do everything I say .
GOLD:	Let them see that this is your doing , that you yourself have done it , Lord .

ID:	1255
INPUT:	▁j abea ▁bertan ▁bazen , ▁berriz , ▁ez ▁du ▁ordaindu ▁beharrik ▁izango . ▁B al din ▁aberea ▁al ok atua ▁badu , ▁al ok ai ru - saria ▁bakarrik ▁emango ▁dio ».
PRED:	But if he finds it , it must be no longer need to pay compensation to the owner . But if it happens , you must pay it back . ”
GOLD:	“ If someone borrows an animal from a neighbor and it is injured or dies when the owner is absent , the person who borrowed it must pay full compensation .

ID:	1256
INPUT:	▁Kon ber tsi orako ▁deia
PRED:	The Lord 's Chosen Servant
GOLD:	A Call to Repentance

ID:	1257
INPUT:	▁« Bihar ▁edo ▁e tzi ▁zuen ▁seme - alabek ▁galde tzean : ▁“ Zer ▁esan ▁nahi ▁dute ▁Jaunak ▁geure ▁Jainkoak ▁agindu ▁dizki gun ▁lege , ▁xedapen ▁eta ▁erabaki ▁horiek ?” ,
PRED:	“ At that time your children will ask , ‘ What is the Lord our God has given us this command ? '
GOLD:	“ In the future your children will ask you , ‘ What is the meaning of these laws , decrees , and regulations that the Lord our God has commanded us to obey ? '

ID:	1258
INPUT:	▁Isak arren ▁leinutik , ▁T zu arren ▁seme ▁Netan el ;
PRED:	From the family of Issachar was the family of Issachar .
GOLD:	IssacharNethanel son of Zuar

ID:	1259
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁haserrea j as an ▁beharra ▁dut , haren ▁aurka ▁egin ▁baitut ▁bekatu ; baina ▁laster ▁erabakiko ▁du ▁Jaunak nire ▁auzia ▁eta ▁nire ▁alde ▁aterako ▁da ; argi tara ▁eramango ▁nau , eta ▁ikusi ▁ahal ▁izango ▁dut haren ▁salbamena .
PRED:	For the anger of the Lord has sinned against me , for I have sinned against the Lord , and he will rise against me , and he will stand against me .
GOLD:	I will be patient as the Lord punishes me , for I have sinned against him.But after that , he will take up my caseand give me justice for all I have suffered from my enemies.The Lord will bring me into the light , and I will see his righteousness .

ID:	1260
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zion ▁Moisesi : ▁« Esan ▁Aaron ▁zeure ▁anaiari ▁ez ▁dadila ▁noiz nahi ▁sar ▁santutegian ▁errezel az ▁barru aldera , ▁kutxa ▁gaineko ▁estalki aren ▁aurrera ; ▁hil ▁egingo ▁litzateke ▁bestela , ▁zeren ▁kutxaren ▁estalki ▁gainean ▁agertzen ▁bainaiz ▁ni ▁laino an .
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses , “ Give the following instructions to Moses . If you were still allowed to enter the inner curtain on the inner curtain , you must be put to the Ark of the Covenant , for I will be put to the Ark of the Covenant .
GOLD:	The Lord said to Moses , “ Warn your brother , Aaron , not to enter the Most Holy Place behind the inner curtain whenever he chooses ; if he does , he will die . For the Ark 's cover — the place of atonement — is there , and I myself am present in the cloud above the atonement cover .

ID:	1261
INPUT:	▁Apaizak ▁erantzun :— Hemen txe ▁dut , ▁zeuk ▁T er eb in to ▁haranean ▁hil ▁zenuen ▁G ol i at ▁filiste arraren ▁ezpata , ▁oihal ▁batean ▁bildu a , ▁efo d ▁delako ▁apaiz - jantz iaren ▁atzean . ▁Hartz azu , ▁nahi ▁baduzu , ▁ez ▁baitago ▁besterik . Davi dek ▁esan ▁zuen :— Ez ▁da ▁hori ▁baino ▁hober ik . ▁Em adazu !
PRED:	“ Yes , ” the priest replied , “ I have killed you in the valley of Ben-Hinnom , but you are killed by the ephod ! Let 's kill him ! ” So he said , “ Let 's kill him ! ”
GOLD:	So David escaped from Saul and went to King Achish of Gath .

ID:	1262
INPUT:	▁A tez ainak : ▁Xalum , ▁A ter , ▁T alm on , ▁A ku b , ▁H at ita ▁eta ▁X o bai ren ▁ondorengoak , ▁guztira , ▁ <unk> .
PRED:	From the gatekeepers : Shallum son of Shallum , Kadmiel , Akkub , Akkub , and Uzziel .
GOLD:	The gatekeepers of the families of Shallum , Ater , Talmon , Akkub , Hatita , and Shobai139

ID:	1263
INPUT:	▁nazioak ▁argi tzeko ▁argi eta ▁zure ▁herri ▁Israelen ▁ospe ».
PRED:	The nations of Israel will sing for your glory , and the nations of Israel will be given to the nations . ”
GOLD:	He is a light to reveal God to the nations , and he is the glory of your people Israel ! ”

ID:	1264
INPUT:	▁Go gor keria ▁gogor keriaren ▁gain , f al tsu keria ▁faltsu keriaren ▁gain , eta ▁ni ▁ez ▁naute ▁aintzat ▁hartu ▁nahi ».
PRED:	My heart is full of lies in trouble , and I do n't try to help me . ”
GOLD:	They all fool and defraud each other ; no one tells the truth.With practiced tongues they tell lies ; they wear themselves out with all their sinning .

ID:	1265
INPUT:	▁Ego itzan ▁erabili tako ▁meta lak
PRED:	Instructions for the Life
GOLD:	Building the Courtyard

ID:	1266
INPUT:	▁O re in - eme ▁maita garri , ▁gaz ela ▁eder ▁duzu . As e ▁zaitzatela ▁une ▁oroz ▁beraren ▁bul arrek , l il ura ▁zaitzala ▁beti ▁beraren ▁am o di oak !
PRED:	You have one male and female servant , and you have given you great joy . May you be his son forever ! May you give you his son forever .
GOLD:	She is a loving deer , a graceful doe.Let her breasts satisfy you always.May you always be captivated by her love .

ID:	1267
INPUT:	▁ F araoiak ▁Joseri ▁esan ▁zion :— Aita ▁eta ▁senideak ▁etorri ▁zaizkizu .
PRED:	Then Pharaoh said to Joseph , “ My brothers and sisters , come to your brothers . ”
GOLD:	Then Pharaoh said to Joseph , “ Now that your father and brothers have joined you here ,

ID:	1268
INPUT:	▁Haiek , ▁orduan :— Ez ▁dauk agu ▁hemen ▁bost ▁ogi ▁eta ▁bi ▁arrain ▁besterik .
PRED:	“ No , ” they said , “ we have two loaves of bread and two fish . ”
GOLD:	“ But we have only five loaves of bread and two fish ! ” they answered .

ID:	1269
INPUT:	▁« L ot ▁al ▁ditzak ezu ▁zuk ▁izar - multz oak edo ▁kon s tel azio en ▁lotu rak ▁aska ,
PRED:	“ These are the stars of the sky : Can you be disgraced ?
GOLD:	“ Can you direct the movement of the stars — binding the cluster of the Pleiadesor loosening the cords of Orion ?

ID:	1270
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁Noem ik ▁erantzun :— Orain , ▁Rut , ▁zaude ▁lasai ▁arazoa ▁zer - nola ▁bu katuko ▁den ▁jakin ▁arte . ▁Boozek ▁ez ▁du ▁ets iko ▁gaur ▁bertan ▁auzia ▁erabaki ▁arte .
PRED:	And Naomi replied , “ The time is coming to her , and you will remain here until the next day . ”
GOLD:	Then Naomi said to her , “ Just be patient , my daughter , until we hear what happens . The man wo n't rest until he has settled things today . ”

ID:	1271
INPUT:	▁Laugarren ▁egunean , ▁esan ▁zioten ▁Sams onen ▁emazteari :— Atera ▁iez aiozu ▁azpikeriaz ▁senarrari ▁igar kizun ak ▁zer ▁esan ▁nahi ▁duen ; ▁bestela , ▁su ▁emango ▁dizugu , ▁baita ▁zuen ▁aitaren ▁etxe ari ▁ere . ▁Gu ri ▁lapur tzeko ▁asmoz ▁gonbidatu ▁al ▁gaitu zue ?
PRED:	The following day they said to Samson , “ Give her this message to Samson : ‘ Let 's tell us what you want to say to me , ‘ If you want us to kill us ? '
GOLD:	On the fourth day they said to Samson 's wife , “ Entice your husband to explain the riddle for us , or we will burn down your father 's house with you in it . Did you invite us to this party just to make us poor ? ”

ID:	1272
INPUT:	▁Jauna ▁gure ▁alde ▁izan ▁ez ▁balitz , ▁etsaiek ▁eraso ▁ziguten ean ,
PRED:	If our enemies were unable to fight us , we would not attack us .
GOLD:	What if the Lord had not been on our sidewhen people attacked us ?

ID:	1273
INPUT:	▁Horrelako rik ▁salatzen ▁badizu ete ▁edo , ▁zeuen ▁kabuz , ▁horrelako ▁zerbai ten ▁berri ▁jaki ten ▁baduzue , ▁iker tu ▁zehatz - mehatz ▁arazoa ; ▁Israelen ▁horrelako ▁gaiztakeria ▁egiaz ▁gertatu ▁dela ▁ikusten ▁baduzue ,
PRED:	If you hear what you are going to do , you must hear what you have done . If you have done , you will be able to say , ‘ If you see these things are doing this , you will be done . '
GOLD:	When you hear about it , investigate the matter thoroughly . If it is true that this detestable thing has been done in Israel ,

ID:	1274
INPUT:	▁Ai patu riko ▁kas u az ▁aparte , ▁jarrai ▁beza ▁bakoitzak ▁Jaunak ▁ezarri ▁dion ▁bizi - ego eran , ▁hots , ▁Jainkoak ▁f e dera ▁dei ▁egitean ▁zuen ▁ego eran . ▁Hau ▁da ▁eliz ▁elkarte ▁guztietan ▁ematen ▁dudan ▁arau a .
PRED:	When the Lord heard what the Lord had said to them , “ Let 's be called out to be called the church in the beginning of the church , which is written in all the churches . ”
GOLD:	Each of you should continue to live in whatever situation the Lord has placed you , and remain as you were when God first called you . This is my rule for all the churches .

ID:	1275
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁beren ▁garbikuntza ▁egin ▁eta ▁ateak ▁zain tzera ▁joateko ▁agindu ▁nien ▁lebitarrei , ▁larunbat aren ▁santu tasuna ▁errespeta tua ▁izan ▁zedin .« Izan ▁gogoan ▁hau ▁ere , ▁ene ▁Jainko ; ▁erruki ▁nitaz , ▁hain ▁on bera ▁baitzara !»
PRED:	Then I ordered the Levites to leave their gates and leave the gates of the Levites to be prepared for holy days , for you have always been faithful to me , O God , for you have mercy , for you have mercy on me . ”
GOLD:	Then I commanded the Levites to purify themselves and to guard the gates in order to preserve the holiness of the Sabbath.Remember this good deed also , O my God ! Have compassion on me according to your great and unfailing love .

ID:	1276
INPUT:	▁Aitzitik , ▁harresi ▁gabeko ▁herri ▁ireki etako ▁etxeak ▁bas erri - lurren ▁arabera ▁hartuko ▁dira : ▁berreskura tze - esku bidea ▁noiz n ah ikoa ▁da ▁eta , ▁dena ▁dela , ▁Jubileu ▁Ur tean ▁etxea ▁bere ▁jator rizko ▁jabe ari ▁itzuliko ▁zaio .
PRED:	However , the city will be opened , and it will be bought back to the city where it will be bought back to the Year of Jubilee . It will return to the Year of Jubilee .
GOLD:	But a house in a village — a settlement without fortified walls — will be treated like property in the countryside . Such a house may be bought back at any time , and it must be returned to the original owner in the Year of Jubilee .

ID:	1277
INPUT:	▁Zuhur ra ▁bazara , ▁zeure ▁onerako ▁da ; harro putza ▁bazara , ▁zeure ▁kal terako .
PRED:	Wise words will be filled with your strong ; if you turn away from your land .
GOLD:	If you become wise , you will be the one to benefit.If you scorn wisdom , you will be the one to suffer .

ID:	1278
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁isil tzeko ▁ke inu ▁egin ▁zien ▁eskuaz , ▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁kartzel atik ▁nola ▁atera ▁zuen ▁kontatu ▁zien . ▁Azken ean , ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Jakin arazi ▁hau ▁Santiago ri ▁eta ▁beste ▁senide ei ». ▁Ondoren , ▁atera ▁eta ▁beste ▁toki ▁batera ▁joan ▁zen .
PRED:	He told them what the Lord had said to them and told them , “ The Lord had said to them , ‘ He was in the middle of the village , James , and John , and John went to the other side . '
GOLD:	He motioned for them to quiet down and told them how the Lord had led him out of prison . “ Tell James and the other brothers what happened , ” he said . And then he went to another place .

ID:	1279
INPUT:	▁Zatoz te , ▁ikus ▁Jaunaren ▁egintzak , lur rean ▁egin ▁duen ▁iraul keta :
PRED:	Come , let us see what the Lord has done to us :
GOLD:	He causes wars to end throughout the earth.He breaks the bow and snaps the spear ; he burns the shields with fire .

ID:	1280
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁esandako ▁hitzak ▁aditu ▁zituz te larik , ▁Sauli ▁jakinarazi ▁zioten . ▁Saulek ▁etorrarazi
PRED:	So David told Saul what Saul had said to Saul .
GOLD:	Then David 's question was reported to King Saul , and the king sent for him .

ID:	1281
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁aingerua ▁Jerusalem ▁hondatzeko ▁eskua ▁luzatzen ▁ari ▁zelarik , ▁atzera ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Jaunak ▁kalte ▁hura ▁bidal tzetik ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion ▁herria ▁xeh atzen ▁ari ▁zen ▁aingeruari :— A tzera ▁esku ▁hori ! ▁As ki ▁da ! U ne ▁hartan ▁Jaunaren ▁aingerua ▁Ara una ▁jebus tar raren ▁larra in ▁ondoan ▁zegoen .
PRED:	As soon as the angel of the Lord was coming out of the city , the Lord sent a message to the angel of the Lord , and he said to the angel of the Lord , “ The angel of the Lord is coming to destroy the land of Canaan . ”
GOLD:	But as the angel was preparing to destroy Jerusalem , the Lord relented and said to the death angel , “ Stop ! That is enough ! ” At that moment the angel of the Lord was by the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite .

ID:	1282
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁Saul ▁baztertu
PRED:	Saul Defeats the Lord
GOLD:	The Lord Rejects Saul

ID:	1283
INPUT:	▁Josek ▁faraoiari ▁berri ▁ematera ▁joan ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« Nire ▁aita ▁eta ▁senideak ▁etorri ▁dira ▁Kanaan dik ▁ardi ▁eta ▁behi ekin ▁eta ▁dauk aten ▁guzti arekin . ▁Orain ▁Go xen ▁eskualdean ▁aurkitzen ▁dira ».
PRED:	Joseph went to Egypt and told Pharaoh , “ My father has come to Pharaoh and his brothers and your brothers and sisters , where they have arrived at the region of Canaan . ”
GOLD:	Then Joseph went to see Pharaoh and told him , “ My father and my brothers have arrived from the land of Canaan . They have come with all their flocks and herds and possessions , and they are now in the region of Goshen . ”

ID:	1284
INPUT:	▁eta ▁esan ▁zion ▁Jaunak ▁Moisesi :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	and the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	1285
INPUT:	▁S uz koak ▁bezalako ▁izaki ▁batzuk ▁zituen ▁gainean . ▁S e ina ▁hegal ▁zituzten : ▁bi ▁hegal ez ▁aurpegia ▁estaltzen ▁zuten , ▁beste ▁biz ▁gorputza , ▁eta ▁beste ▁biz ▁hegaz ▁egiten ▁zuten .
PRED:	Then he looked like a living living beings on each side of his wings , and his wings had two wings .
GOLD:	Attending him were mighty seraphim , each having six wings . With two wings they covered their faces , with two they covered their feet , and with two they flew .

ID:	1286
INPUT:	▁Erregeak ▁agindu ▁zion :— Eg on ▁hor ▁atzean ! Joan ▁zen ▁atzera ▁eta ▁han ▁gelditu ▁zen .
PRED:	“ Well , ” the king said to him , “ go out and see it ! ”
GOLD:	“ Wait here , ” the king told him . So Ahimaaz stepped aside .

ID:	1287
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zion :— Jai tsi ▁eta ▁ohar tarazi ▁herriari , ▁ez ▁dadila ▁ni ▁ikusten ▁ahalegin du , ▁asko ▁eta ▁asko ▁hilik ▁eror ▁ez ▁daitezen .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Go and see the people of Israel , and they will not be afraid to be killed . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord told Moses , “ Go back down and warn the people not to break through the boundaries to see the Lord , or they will die .

ID:	1288
INPUT:	▁Aitak ▁hilak ▁piztu ▁eta ▁bizia ▁ematen ▁dien ▁bezala , ▁Semeak ▁ere ▁bizia ▁ematen ▁die ▁berak ▁nahi ▁duen ei .
PRED:	He gives eternal life to those who belong to the dead , and he gives eternal life .
GOLD:	For just as the Father gives life to those he raises from the dead , so the Son gives life to anyone he wants .

ID:	1289
INPUT:	▁Hori en ▁ahoan ▁ezer ▁ez ▁fid agarri rik , horien ▁barrena ▁leize - zul oa , ez tarria ▁hilobi ▁zabaldu a , m ih ia , ▁berriz , ▁le un ▁eta ▁lab aina .
PRED:	The words of the godless are like a pit , but their words are thrown into a pit , but the breath of a pit is broken into a pit .
GOLD:	O God , declare them guilty.Let them be caught in their own traps.Drive them away because of their many sins , for they have rebelled against you .

ID:	1290
INPUT:	▁Jendeak ▁su - eg ur re tarako ▁erabili ▁ohi ▁ditu : ▁nahiz ▁su ▁egin ▁eta ▁bero tzeko , ▁nahiz ▁ogia ▁erretzeko . ▁Baina ▁berak ▁jainko - irudi ▁bat ▁egiteko ▁erabiltzen ▁du . ▁Eta ▁gurtu ▁egiten , ▁ahuspezturik .
PRED:	The people of the fire will be burned with fire or fire or fire or fire or fire or fire . But if they worshiped idols , they worshiped idols , they bowed low before him and worshiped him .
GOLD:	Then he uses part of the wood to make a fire.With it he warms himself and bakes his bread.Then — yes , it 's true — he takes the rest of itand makes himself a god to worship ! He makes an idoland bows down in front of it !

ID:	1291
INPUT:	▁Bera ▁da ▁gure ▁Jainkoa , eta ▁gu ▁hark ▁larra tu riko ▁herria , ▁haren ▁gidari tza peko ▁artaldea . Egin go ▁al ▁diozue ▁gaur ▁kas u ▁haren ▁esan ari :
PRED:	He is our God , and he is our special possession — the sheep of the sheep , goats , and give us today .
GOLD:	for he is our God.We are the people he watches over , the flock under his care.If only you would listen to his voice today !

ID:	1292
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁haren ▁ahots ak ▁orro ▁egiten ▁dut ru mo iak ▁ozenki ▁jotzean , eta ▁ez ▁ditu ▁oinaz t arriak ▁gehiago ▁lotzen t ru mo iak ▁jotzen ▁duen ▁bitartean .
PRED:	Then I shouted to his voice , “ I saw the sound of lightning ! I 'm in darkness , and the lightning flashed toward the crowd .
GOLD:	Then comes the roaring of the thunder — the tremendous voice of his majesty.He does not restrain it when he speaks .

ID:	1293
INPUT:	▁Elkar keta - etxola ▁eta ▁aldarea ▁sagaratuko ▁ditut ; ▁baita ▁Aaron ▁eta ▁beronen ▁semeak ▁ere , ▁nire ▁apaiz - zerbitz urako .
PRED:	I will serve Aaron and his sons and Aaron and his sons and his sons .
GOLD:	Yes , I will consecrate the Tabernacle and the altar , and I will consecrate Aaron and his sons to serve me as priests .

ID:	1294
INPUT:	▁alegia , ▁Nabukodonosor ▁erregeak ▁— J oi aki men ▁seme ▁J eko n ias ▁Judako ▁erregea , ▁Judako ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁handiki ekin ▁batera , ▁Babiloniara ▁erbesteratu ▁zuenean — ▁eraman ▁ez ▁zituen ▁tresn ei ▁buruz .
PRED:	King Nebuchadnezzar of Judah , king of Judah , and all the princes of Judah , along with all the nobles of Judah , as well as he had exiled them to Babylon .
GOLD:	King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon left them here when he exiled Jehoiachin son of Jehoiakim , king of Judah , to Babylon , along with all the other nobles of Judah and Jerusalem .

ID:	1295
INPUT:	▁— Zer ▁ikusten ▁duzu , ▁Am os ? ▁— g aldetu ▁zidan .— S as kia ▁bete ▁fruitu ▁heldu ▁— erantzun ▁nion . Jaunak ▁esan ▁zidan :— Bai , ▁hel dua ▁da ▁amai era ▁nire ▁herri ▁Israelen tzat . ▁Ez ▁dut ▁gehiago ▁ez ▁ikusi aren ik ▁egingo .
PRED:	“ What do you see ? ” he asked me , “ I have seen it ? ” “ Yes , ” I asked. “ Yes , ” says the Lord , “ I have seen it , ” says the Lord , “ I will never see it . ”
GOLD:	“ What do you see , Amos ? ” he asked.I replied , “ A basket full of ripe fruit. ” Then the Lord said , “ Like this fruit , Israel is ripe for punishment ! I will not delay their punishment again .

ID:	1296
INPUT:	▁« S im e on ▁eta ▁Lebi ▁anai akin dar keria ▁erabil tzeko ▁bat ▁datoz .
PRED:	“ A son of Levi and mother are permitted to be forgiven .
GOLD:	“ Simeon and Levi are two of a kind ; their weapons are instruments of violence .

ID:	1297
INPUT:	▁Itzul ▁zaitez , ▁beraz , ▁eta ▁zoaz ▁bakean . ▁Horrela , ▁ez ▁dira ▁sumin duko ▁filistearren ▁buruzagiak .
PRED:	Go and live in peace and live in peace , for the Philistines will be angry with the Philistines .
GOLD:	Please do n't upset them , but go back quietly . ”

ID:	1298
INPUT:	▁Tenpluko ▁atalondo ra ▁eraman ▁ninduen ▁gizonak ▁eta ▁neurtu ▁egin ▁zuen : ▁sarrerako ▁hor mek , ▁ate aren ▁bi ▁alde etako ek , ▁bi ▁metro ▁eta ▁erdiko ▁lo di era ▁zuten , ▁ateak ▁zazpi ▁metroko ▁zabalera ▁eta ▁ate aren ▁mun ta g ek ▁metro ▁eta ▁erdiko ▁zabalera ▁bakoitzak .
PRED:	The man measured the entry room of the Temple , and he measured the entry room of the entry room . The gateway was 101/2 feet long , and the doors were 101/2 feet long . The doors were 101/2 feet long , and the doors were 101/2 feet of the gateway passage .
GOLD:	Then he brought me to the entry room of the Temple . He measured the walls on either side of the opening to the entry room , and they were 83/4 feet thick . The entrance itself was 241/2 feet wide , and the walls on each side of the entrance were an additional 51/4 feet long .

ID:	1299
INPUT:	▁Begira ▁zegoela , ▁aberats ▁batzuk ▁ikusi ▁zituen ▁Jesusek ▁tenpluko ▁diru tegian ▁l im os na ▁botatzen .
PRED:	When Jesus saw a rich rich rich rich rich man , he put the money in the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	While Jesus was in the Temple , he watched the rich people dropping their gifts in the collection box .

ID:	1300
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁Kristoren ak ▁baldin ▁bazarete , ▁Abrahamen ▁ondorengo ▁zarete , ▁Jainkoaren ▁agintzari aren ▁oinordeko .
PRED:	And if you are descendants of Christ , you are the inheritance of God 's promise .
GOLD:	And now that you belong to Christ , you are the true children of Abraham . You are his heirs , and God 's promise to Abraham belongs to you .

ID:	1301
INPUT:	▁J antz ▁bitez ▁zure ▁apaizak ▁salbamen - indar rez , ekin ▁biezaio te ▁poz - oih uka ▁zure ▁fededun ek .
PRED:	Let the priests sing for joy to you with joy , for the holy ones who belong to your holy people .
GOLD:	May your priests be clothed in godliness ; may your loyal servants sing for joy .

ID:	1302
INPUT:	▁Eliz ▁elkarte ak ▁fedean ▁sendo tuz ▁eta ▁egunetik ▁egunera ▁ugaldu z ▁zihoazen .
PRED:	Let the church share of the church , and the Festival of Unleavened Bread .
GOLD:	So the churches were strengthened in their faith and grew larger every day .

ID:	1303
INPUT:	▁Zuri ▁esker ▁jo ▁ditugu ▁etsaiak , zure ▁bidez ▁zapaldu ▁eraso tzaileak .
PRED:	O Lord , rescue us from your enemies ; let us rescue us from your enemies .
GOLD:	I do not trust in my bow ; I do not count on my sword to save me .

ID:	1304
INPUT:	▁« S ina go g etara ▁eta ▁buruzagi en ▁eta ▁agintari en ▁aurrera ▁eramango ▁zaituzteten ean , ▁ez ▁egon ▁kez k atan ▁nola ▁egin ▁edo ▁zer ▁esan ▁zeuen ▁alde ,
PRED:	“ Some of the leaders of the leaders and leaders of the leaders of the leaders who are in charge of you . Do n't worry about how to tell you what you have done for me .
GOLD:	“ And when you are brought to trial in the synagogues and before rulers and authorities , do n't worry about how to defend yourself or what to say ,

ID:	1305
INPUT:	▁B akoitz ari ▁merezi ▁duena emango ▁dio ▁ordain etan , baita ▁urrutiko ▁herri etako ei ▁ere ; men d ekua ▁eta ▁haserre - zigorra emango ▁die ▁etsaiei .
PRED:	Anyone who judges will be put to death , including the people of Israel , will be able to take revenge on their enemies , and he will put them on their enemies .
GOLD:	He will repay his enemies for their evil deeds.His fury will fall on his foes.He will pay them back even to the ends of the earth .

ID:	1306
INPUT:	▁akab o ▁Moaben ▁harro tasun ▁zena ! H exb onen ▁prestatu ▁dituzte Moab ▁gal tzeko ▁bideak :“ S un tsi ▁dezagun ▁nazio a !” , ▁zioten . Zu ▁ere ▁bai , ▁M ad men , mu tu ▁gelditu ▁zara : gain ean ▁duzu ▁ezpata .
PRED:	The enemy has fallen on Moab , for they have been cut off from Moab , and they will say , ‘ Come , let 's fall into the valley of Moab . '
GOLD:	No one will ever brag about Moab again , for in Heshbon there is a plot to destroy her. ‘ Come , ' they say , ‘ we will cut her off from being a nation . 'The town of Madmen , too , will be silenced ; the sword will follow you there .

ID:	1307
INPUT:	▁Emakumeak ▁eliz ▁batz arretan
PRED:	The Message about the Church
GOLD:	Instructions for Public Worship

ID:	1308
INPUT:	▁Zu ▁zaitut ▁ene ▁gordeleku ▁eta ▁babes , zure ▁hitza ▁ene ▁itxaropen .
PRED:	I trust in you , O God , and my hope is safe .
GOLD:	You are my refuge and my shield ; your word is my source of hope .

ID:	1309
INPUT:	▁Es n atu ▁eta ▁zatoz ▁nire ▁eskubide aren ▁alde , j ok atu ▁auz ian ▁nire ▁alde , ▁ene ▁Jaun ▁eta ▁Jainko !
PRED:	Come and stand at me , O Lord , for you have done right with me , O Sovereign Lord .
GOLD:	Wake up ! Rise to my defense ! Take up my case , my God and my Lord .

ID:	1310
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁lapur , ▁hiltzaile ▁eta ▁adulterio gile ▁izan , ▁gezur retan ▁zin ▁egin , ▁Baal i ▁intsentsua ▁erre , ▁zuekin ▁zerikus irik ▁ez ▁duten ▁jainko ▁arrotzen ▁atzetik ▁ibili
PRED:	For if you have committed adultery , you must have an object of adultery and adultery , you have sworn to worship other gods .
GOLD:	Do you really think you can steal , murder , commit adultery , lie , and burn incense to Baal and all those other new gods of yours ,

ID:	1311
INPUT:	▁Dena ▁jarri ▁du ▁Jainkoak ▁Kristoren ▁oin azpian , ▁eta ▁berau ▁egin ▁du ▁denen ▁gainetik ▁Eliz aren ▁buru .
PRED:	So God has made it all its utensils ; he has made the responsibility of the church and set it apart for the church .
GOLD:	God has put all things under the authority of Christ and has made him head over all things for the benefit of the church .

ID:	1312
INPUT:	▁O toi , ▁bar ka ▁iezadazu ▁bekatua , ▁eta ▁zatoz ▁nirekin ▁Jauna ▁gurtzera .
PRED:	Please forgive me , Lord , and let me worship me .
GOLD:	But now , please forgive my sin and come back with me so that I may worship the Lord . ”

ID:	1313
INPUT:	▁« Baina ▁Jauna ▁haserretu ▁egin ▁zitzaidan ▁zuen ▁erruz ▁eta ▁ez ▁zidan ▁erregua ▁onartu . ▁Esan ▁zidan : ▁As ki ▁da ! ▁Ez ▁zakizkit ▁mintza ▁berriro ▁horretaz .
PRED:	“ But the Lord was angry with me , and he followed me . He said , “ The Lord has n't done this . ”
GOLD:	“ But the Lord was angry with me because of you , and he would not listen to me . ‘ That 's enough ! ' he declared . ‘ Speak of it no more .

ID:	1314
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunarekin ▁alai tuko ▁naiz , sal batu ▁nau elako ▁poz - pozik ▁izango .
PRED:	Then I will rejoice at the Lord , for he has given me great joy .
GOLD:	Then I will rejoice in the Lord.I will be glad because he rescues me .

ID:	1315
INPUT:	▁B ihur ▁bedi ▁haien ▁kanpalekua ▁basamortu , geldi ▁bitez ▁inor ▁gabe ▁haien ▁bizileku ak !
PRED:	Let them stay in ruins , and let no one stay in the wilderness .
GOLD:	To the one you have punished , they add insult to injury ; they add to the pain of those you have hurt .

ID:	1316
INPUT:	▁ez ▁duela ▁arbasoei ▁hitzemandako ▁lurraldea ▁ikusiko ▁mespretxatu ▁nauten ▁horietako ▁inork , ▁Egipton ▁eta ▁basamortuan ▁nire ▁aintza ▁eta ▁mirariak ▁ikusi ▁arren , ▁behin ▁eta ▁berriro ▁ni ▁auzitan ▁jarri ▁eta ▁des ob edi tu ▁egin ▁baiti date .
PRED:	I will not see the land of Egypt , and no one will rescue me from the wilderness , though I have seen the miraculous signs I have punished for my ancestors .
GOLD:	not one of these people will ever enter that land . They have all seen my glorious presence and the miraculous signs I performed both in Egypt and in the wilderness , but again and again they have tested me by refusing to listen to my voice .

ID:	1317
INPUT:	▁leg enak ▁jota ▁dago ▁gizona ; ▁kutsatu ta ▁dago ▁eta ▁hala ▁aitortuko ▁du ▁apaizak ▁buruan ▁duen ▁gaitz arengatik .
PRED:	The man is defiled by the law , and the priest will pronounce the person ceremonially unclean .
GOLD:	the man is indeed infected with a skin disease and is unclean . The priest must pronounce him ceremonially unclean because of the sore on his head .

ID:	1318
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁legeak ▁erregeen ▁aurrean ▁azalduko ▁ditut ▁lots arik ▁gabe .
PRED:	I will tell you about your commandments , for I will not be ashamed of your commandments .
GOLD:	I will speak to kings about your laws , and I will not be ashamed .

ID:	1319
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁erdain kuntza ▁eman ▁zion ▁itunaren ▁ezaugarri ; ▁hala , ▁Isaak ▁jaio ▁zitzaion ean , ▁zortzi garren ▁egunean ▁erdaindu ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Abrahamek ; ▁berdin ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Isaakek ▁ere ▁Jakob ekin , ▁eta ▁Jakobek ▁hamabi ▁pat ri ar k ekin .
PRED:	After Isaac had been circumcised , Isaac was circumcised with the covenant he had been circumcised . In the eighth day Isaac had been circumcised , and Jacob had been circumcised .
GOLD:	“ God also gave Abraham the covenant of circumcision at that time . So when Abraham became the father of Isaac , he circumcised him on the eighth day . And the practice was continued when Isaac became the father of Jacob , and when Jacob became the father of the twelve patriarchs of the Israelite nation .

ID:	1320
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁hark ▁gaixo ▁asko ▁sendatu ▁zituen , ▁edozein ▁zela ▁ere ▁haien ▁gaitza , ▁eta ▁deabru ▁asko ▁bota ▁ere ▁bai . ▁De abru ei ▁ez ▁zien ▁hitzik ▁egiten ▁uzten , ▁baz ekiten - eta ▁nor ▁zen .
PRED:	He healed many sick people , too , had been healed , and many of those who were possessed by demons . And he did n't listen to the demons .
GOLD:	So Jesus healed many people who were sick with various diseases , and he cast out many demons . But because the demons knew who he was , he did not allow them to speak .

ID:	1321
INPUT:	▁Isaiasek ▁berak ▁esan ▁zuen ▁zergatik ▁ezin ▁zuten ▁sinetsi :
PRED:	Then Isaiah said to him ,
GOLD:	But the people could n't believe , for as Isaiah also said ,

ID:	1322
INPUT:	▁Emakume ▁zuhur rak ▁eraiki ▁egiten ▁du ▁etxea , zentzu gabeak ▁bere ▁esku ez ▁desegin .
PRED:	Evil people have built their own house , and their homes will be destroyed .
GOLD:	A wise woman builds her home , but a foolish woman tears it down with her own hands .

ID:	1323
INPUT:	▁Joben ▁egun go ▁egoera ▁ tam al garria
PRED:	Job 's Prayer
GOLD:	Job Speaks of His Anguish

ID:	1324
INPUT:	▁Kehaten ▁ondorengo ▁lebitarren ▁gainerako ▁senitarteei ▁Efraimen ▁leinuaren ▁zenbait ▁hiri ▁atera ▁zitzaien :
PRED:	The rest of the Levites came to the clans of the tribe of Ephraim .
GOLD:	The rest of the Kohathite clan from the tribe of Levi was allotted the following towns and pasturelands from the tribe of Ephraim :

ID:	1325
INPUT:	▁Zazpi ▁kriseil u ▁egin ▁zituen ▁urre ▁garbiz ; ▁su - h atzak ▁eta ▁errauts ontziak ▁ere ▁urre ▁garbiz koak ▁ziren .
PRED:	He made seven lamps of pure gold , lamp snuffers , lamp snuffers , and the total of pure gold .
GOLD:	He also made seven lamps for the lampstand , lamp snuffers , and trays , all of pure gold .

ID:	1326
INPUT:	▁Larri aldian ▁dei ▁egin ▁nion ▁Jaunari , ▁deiadar ▁ene ▁Jainkoari . Eta ▁aditu ▁zuen ▁bere ▁tenplutik ▁nire ▁oih ua , haren ▁belarri etaraino ▁heldu ▁zen ▁nire ▁deiadarra .
PRED:	When I cried out to the Lord , I cried out to the Temple of the Lord , “ I heard my prayer . ”
GOLD:	Then the earth quaked and trembled.The foundations of the mountains shook ; they quaked because of his anger .

ID:	1327
INPUT:	▁Israeldarrak ▁ere , ▁beren ▁sinesgogor keri ari ▁uko ▁egiten ▁badio te , ▁tx er tatuko ▁ditu , ▁bai ▁baitu ▁Jainkoak ▁ahalmen ik ▁haiek ▁berriro ▁tx er tatzeko .
PRED:	But if the people of Israel do n't turn away from their wickedness , they will never be punished .
GOLD:	And if the people of Israel turn from their unbelief , they will be grafted in again , for God has the power to graft them back into the tree .

ID:	1328
INPUT:	▁Hiru ▁hil abet eren ▁buruan ▁atera ▁ginen , ▁ne gu a ▁u har tean ▁egina ▁zuen ▁A le xan d ri ako ▁ontzi ▁batean ; ▁K as tor ▁eta ▁P ol ux ▁zeramatz an ▁ik ur tzat .
PRED:	Three days later we left Bethlehem and died . We also had been cut off from the island of Rephaim .
GOLD:	It was three months after the shipwreck that we set sail on another ship that had wintered at the island — an Alexandrian ship with the twin gods as its figurehead .

ID:	1329
INPUT:	▁Ira gan ▁da ▁bigarren ▁zoritxarra ! ▁Baina ▁laster ▁etorriko ▁da ▁hirugarren a .
PRED:	The second time will come , but the third will rise again .
GOLD:	The second terror is past , but look , the third terror is coming quickly .

ID:	1330
INPUT:	▁bakoitza ▁ondoko ari ▁itsatsia ▁du , el karri ▁atxik iak , ▁ezin ▁bereiz iak .
PRED:	Each wise are too weak to stand up , but they ca n't understand it .
GOLD:	No , it is useless to try to capture it.The hunter who attempts it will be knocked down .

ID:	1331
INPUT:	▁E dan ▁as etz eraino haren ▁bular ▁gozo tik ! X ur g atu ▁atseginez haren ▁ug atz ▁oparo tik !
PRED:	Instead , you sing to your unfailing love ; yes , you are filled with joy .
GOLD:	Drink deeply of her gloryeven as an infant drinks at its mother 's comforting breasts . ”

ID:	1332
INPUT:	▁Jeroboamen ▁heriotza
PRED:	The Death of Jeroboam
GOLD:	Rehoboam Rules in Judah

ID:	1333
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁idia ▁zeuen ▁begi ▁aurrean ▁lepo ▁egingo ▁dute , ▁eta ▁ez ▁duzue ▁haragi rik ▁jango ; ▁astoa ▁zeuen ▁aurrean ▁lap urtu , ▁eta ▁ez ▁duzue ▁berreskura tuko ; ▁zuen ▁ardiak ▁etsaiei ▁emango ▁dizkiete , ▁eta ▁ez ▁dizue ▁inork ▁lagun duko .
PRED:	You must not slaughter your neighbor as a burnt offering , and you must not eat any of your sheep or goats . You must not return to your enemies , and you will not return to your enemies .
GOLD:	Your ox will be butchered before your eyes , but you will not eat a single bite of the meat . Your donkey will be taken from you , never to be returned . Your sheep and goats will be given to your enemies , and no one will be there to help you .

ID:	1334
INPUT:	▁Pen tsa ▁ongi ▁zeure ▁oinak ▁non ▁jarri , izan ▁bitez ▁seguru ak ▁zure ▁ibil bide ▁guztiak .
PRED:	May your feet be put to your feet , and let all your feet succeed .
GOLD:	Mark out a straight path for your feet ; stay on the safe path .

ID:	1335
INPUT:	▁Neure kin ▁dut ▁bidali ▁nauena ; ▁ez ▁nau , ▁ez , ▁bakarrik ▁utzi , ▁hark ▁atsegin ▁duena ▁egiten ▁baitut ▁beti .
PRED:	I am with you who sent me with me , but anyone who does n't let me trust me .
GOLD:	And the one who sent me is with me — he has not deserted me . For I always do what pleases him . ”

ID:	1336
INPUT:	▁« Eta ▁urrutiko ▁lurraldetik , ▁zure ▁izen ▁handiaren ▁eta ▁zure ▁egintza ▁ahaltsu en ▁berri ▁adi turik , ▁zure ▁herri ▁Israelgo a ▁ez ▁den ▁arrotzen ▁bat ▁tenplu ▁honetara ▁otoitz ▁egitera ▁etortzen ▁bada ,
PRED:	“ Then you will turn from distant lands and your powerful arm and your powerful arm and your powerful arm and your people will pray for you .
GOLD:	“ In the future , foreigners who do not belong to your people Israel will hear of you . They will come from distant lands when they hear of your great name and your strong hand and your powerful arm . And when they pray toward this Temple ,

ID:	1337
INPUT:	▁Nire a ▁da ▁maitea eta ▁ni ▁haren a , l il iz ain arena .
PRED:	My lover is my lover ; my lover is full of love .
GOLD:	My lover is mine , and I am his.He browses among the lilies .

ID:	1338
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁esan ▁zion ▁Xim e iri :— Ez ▁zara ▁hilko , ▁ez ! Eta ▁zin ▁egin ▁zion .
PRED:	“ You must not die , ” he said . “ You will not die ! ”
GOLD:	Now Mephibosheth , Saul 's grandson , came down from Jerusalem to meet the king . He had not cared for his feet , trimmed his beard , or washed his clothes since the day the king left Jerusalem .

ID:	1339
INPUT:	▁Horregatik ▁diot : ▁« Hemen ▁nauzu ». ▁Liburu an ▁agintzen ▁zait ▁zure ▁nahia ▁betetzeko , ▁ene ▁Jainko .
PRED:	“ That is why I command you , ” says the Scriptures , “ I have written in your plans . ”
GOLD:	Then I said , ‘ Look , I have come to do your will , O God — as is written about me in the Scriptures . ' ”

ID:	1340
INPUT:	▁Aaronek ▁lau ▁seme ▁zituen : ▁N adab ▁lehen - semea , ▁Abi hu , ▁Eleazar ▁eta ▁I tam ar .
PRED:	Aaron had four sons of Aaron , Nadab , Abihu , Eleazar , Eleazar , Eleazar , and Ithamar .
GOLD:	The names of Aaron 's sons were Nadab ( the oldest ) , Abihu , Eleazar , and Ithamar .

ID:	1341
INPUT:	▁Al eluia ! ▁Gora ▁Jauna ! G orets azue ▁Jauna ▁zerutik , ▁goretsi ▁zeru ▁go ien etik !
PRED:	Praise the Lord ! Praise the Lord ! Praise the heavens from heaven !
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! Praise the Lord from the heavens ! Praise him from the skies !

ID:	1342
INPUT:	▁Zer ▁zoritxarra ▁zuretzat , ▁Moab ! G aldu a ▁zara , ▁K em o xen ▁herri ▁hori ! Zure ▁seme - alabak g atib u ▁eraman ▁dituzte ▁atzerri ra .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you , Moab , Moab , and your children will be carried away into exile .
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you , O people of Moab ! The people of the god Chemosh are destroyed ! Your sons and your daughtershave been taken away as captives .

ID:	1343
INPUT:	▁eta ▁ipini ▁efo daren ▁sorbal da - babes ki etan . ▁Honela , ▁israeldarren ▁izenak ▁oroigarri ▁gisa ▁eramango ▁ditu ▁Aaronek ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrera .
PRED:	He must put it on the ephod and put it on the chestpiece . He must bring it on the head of the Lord 's name .
GOLD:	Fasten the two stones on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod as a reminder that Aaron represents the people of Israel . Aaron will carry these names on his shoulders as a constant reminder whenever he goes before the Lord .

ID:	1344
INPUT:	▁Entzun , ▁Jauna , ▁dei ▁degizu t ! ▁Erruki ▁nitaz ▁eta ▁erantzun !
PRED:	O Lord , listen to me , and I cry out to you .
GOLD:	Hear me as I pray , O Lord.Be merciful and answer me !

ID:	1345
INPUT:	▁Horrela ▁eman ▁zion ▁Jaunak ▁Israel ▁herriari ▁beraren ▁arbasoei ▁zin ▁eginez ▁agindutako ▁lurralde ▁osoa . ▁Israeldarrak ▁beraren ▁jabe ▁egin ▁ziren ▁eta ▁bertan ▁jarri ▁bizitzen .
PRED:	So the Lord gave this command to the people of Israel , and all the people of Israel had sworn to live there .
GOLD:	So the Lord gave to Israel all the land he had sworn to give their ancestors , and they took possession of it and settled there .

ID:	1346
INPUT:	▁« Ets aien ▁aurka ▁borrokatzeko ▁kanpalekua ▁era tzean , ▁gorde ▁zeuen ▁buruak ▁kutsa dura ▁oro tatik ▁garbi .
PRED:	“ When you arrive in the land of Canaan , you must remove all your enemies from the land of your enemies .
GOLD:	“ Any man who becomes ceremonially defiled because of a nocturnal emission must leave the camp and stay away all day .

ID:	1347
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁esan ▁zioten ▁elkarri :— Ez ▁gara ▁ongi ▁ari . ▁Berri ▁ona ▁izan ▁dugu ▁gaur ▁eta ▁gu ▁hemen ▁deus ▁ere ▁esan ▁gabe . ▁Eguna ▁argitu ▁arte ▁isilik ▁ba gau de , ▁Jainkoak ▁zigortu ▁egingo ▁gaitu . ▁G oazen , ▁beraz , ▁erregearen ▁jauregira ▁berri ▁ematera .
PRED:	Then they said to each other , “ We have n't been good in the province of Jerusalem , and we have n't been here until the time of God has told us , ‘ Let us go into the night . Let us tell us what God has done . ' ”
GOLD:	Finally , they said to each other , “ This is not right . This is a day of good news , and we are n't sharing it with anyone ! If we wait until morning , some calamity will certainly fall upon us . Come on , let 's go back and tell the people at the palace . ”

ID:	1348
INPUT:	▁Erregea ▁eta ▁beronen ▁zerbitzaria ▁zetoz ki ola ▁ikustean , ▁Ara un ak , ▁bidera ▁irten ▁eta ▁erregearen ▁aurrean ▁ahuspezturik ,
PRED:	When the king saw that the king was coming , he bowed low before the king and bowed low before the king .
GOLD:	When Araunah saw the king and his men coming toward him , he came and bowed before the king with his face to the ground .

ID:	1349
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunak ▁aingerua ▁bidali ▁zuen ▁eta ▁aingeruak ▁Asiriako ▁erregearen ▁gudaros teko ▁gudari ▁adoretsu ▁guztiak , ▁buruzagiak ▁eta ▁ofizi alak ▁hondatu ▁egin ▁zituen . S enakerib ek , ▁lotsaz ▁beterik , ▁bere ▁herrira ▁itzuli ▁behar ▁izan ▁zuen . ▁Eta ▁bere ▁jainkoen ▁jauretx era ▁sartu ▁zenean , ▁bere ▁semeek ▁hil ▁zuten ▁ezpataz .
PRED:	Then the angel of Assyria sent all the armies of Assyria and the army of Assyria and the army of Assyria , the commander of his army , and the army of Assyria , the king of Assyria , and his sons returned to their land .
GOLD:	And the Lord sent an angel who destroyed the Assyrian army with all its commanders and officers . So Sennacherib was forced to return home in disgrace to his own land . And when he entered the temple of his god , some of his own sons killed him there with a sword .

ID:	1350
INPUT:	▁Zergatik ▁ahaztu ▁nahi ▁gaituzu ▁betiko ? Zergatik ▁utzi ▁nahi ▁bertan ▁behera ▁bizi ▁guzti rako ?
PRED:	Why have you forgotten us ? Why do you let us stay forever ?
GOLD:	Why do you continue to forget us ? Why have you abandoned us for so long ?

ID:	1351
INPUT:	▁Han ▁zeuden ▁juduek ▁esan ▁zuten :— Bai ▁maite ▁zuela !
PRED:	But the Jewish leaders said , “ Yes , we love him ! ”
GOLD:	The people who were standing nearby said , “ See how much he loved him ! ”

ID:	1352
INPUT:	▁gero , ▁sinagog etan ▁predik atzen ▁hasi ▁zen , ▁Jesus ▁Jainkoaren ▁Semea ▁dela ▁hots ▁eginez .
PRED:	Then Jesus began preaching in the synagogues and preached the Son of God .
GOLD:	And immediately he began preaching about Jesus in the synagogues , saying , “ He is indeed the Son of God ! ”

ID:	1353
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁San b ala tek ▁eta ▁G ex em ek ▁mandatu ▁hau ▁bidali ▁zidaten : ▁« Zatoz ▁On o ▁haran eko ▁K ef iri m era ▁gurekin ▁hitz ▁egitera ». ▁Niri ▁kalte ▁egiteko ▁asmoa ▁zuten .
PRED:	Then the Lord sent me to Geshur and said , “ Come , let 's go with us to the valley of Rephaim . ”
GOLD:	So Sanballat and Geshem sent a message asking me to meet them at one of the villages in the plain of Ono.But I realized they were plotting to harm me ,

ID:	1354
INPUT:	▁Gizonak ▁erantzun ▁zion :— ▁Ez ! ▁Jaunaren ▁gudaros teko ▁buruzagia ▁nauzu ▁eta ▁etorri ▁berria ▁naiz . Orduan , ▁Josuek , ▁lurreraino ▁ahuspezturik , ▁esan ▁zion :— Zer ▁agintzen ▁diozu , ▁jauna , ▁zeure ▁zerbitzari ▁honi ?
PRED:	“ No , ” the man of the Lord replied , “ I have come to the Temple of the Lord ! Why have you come ? ” So Joshua said , “ What have you done to me ? ”
GOLD:	“ Neither one , ” he replied . “ I am the commander of the Lord 's army. ” At this , Joshua fell with his face to the ground in reverence . “ I am at your command , ” Joshua said . “ What do you want your servant to do ? ”

ID:	1355
INPUT:	▁Gizon ezko ek ▁bakarrik ▁jan ▁dezakete ▁opari ▁hori etatik , ▁eta ▁toki ▁sakratu an ▁jango ▁dute , ▁guztiz ▁sakratuak ▁baitira .
PRED:	The priest must eat it from the sacred offerings , and it will be eaten in the sacred place where it is holy .
GOLD:	You must eat it as a most holy offering . All the males may eat of it , and you must treat it as most holy .

ID:	1356
INPUT:	▁Begiratu ▁zuen ▁Abner rek ▁atzera ▁eta ▁esan ▁zuen :— As ah el ▁al ▁zara ? H onek ▁erantzun :— Bai !
PRED:	Then Abner looked at him and asked him , “ Are you you the man ? ”
GOLD:	When Abner looked back and saw him coming , he called out , “ Is that you , Asahel ? ” “ Yes , it is , ” he replied .

ID:	1357
INPUT:	▁Esker ▁ona ▁eta ▁eskaria
PRED:	Paul 's Final Instructions
GOLD:	Paul 's Thanksgiving and Prayer

ID:	1358
INPUT:	▁J antz iak ▁eta ▁gerri koak ▁egineta ▁merkatari ei ▁saltzen ▁dizkie .
PRED:	The merchants of Zebulun will strip away from selling grain to the Hittites .
GOLD:	She makes belted linen garmentsand sashes to sell to the merchants .

ID:	1359
INPUT:	▁Israel ▁herria ▁bidean
PRED:	The Lord 's Covenant Renewed
GOLD:	The Israelites Leave Sinai

ID:	1360
INPUT:	▁Bide an ▁zihoala , ▁putzu ▁bat ▁begiz tatu ▁zuen ▁landan ▁eta ▁hiru ▁artalde ▁putzu ▁ondoan ▁etzan ak , ▁handik ▁edaten ▁baitzuten ▁artalde ek . ▁Harri ▁handi ▁batek ▁estaltzen ▁zuen ▁putzu ko ▁ahoa .
PRED:	As soon as he was walking along the road , he took a walking along the road to a field and drank it with a shepherd 's mouth .
GOLD:	He saw a well in the distance . Three flocks of sheep and goats lay in an open field beside it , waiting to be watered . But a heavy stone covered the mouth of the well .

ID:	1361
INPUT:	▁esanez : ▁“ Ondoren go ▁ugari ▁emango ▁dizut ▁eta ▁herri ▁askoren ▁sor tzaile ▁bihurtuko ▁zaitut . ▁Zure ▁ondorengoei ▁lurralde ▁honen ▁jabetza ▁emango ▁diet ▁betiko ”.
PRED:	Then he said to them , ‘ I will give you many foreign nations , and I will make you desolate land . '
GOLD:	He said to me , ‘ I will make you fruitful , and I will multiply your descendants . I will make you a multitude of nations . And I will give this land of Canaan to your descendants after you as an everlasting possession . '

ID:	1362
INPUT:	▁Hurbil ▁zen ▁Pazkoa , ▁juduen ▁jai ▁nagusia , ▁eta ▁herri etako ▁jende ▁asko ▁Jerusalemera ▁joan ▁zen ▁Pazkoa ▁baino ▁lehen , ▁garbikuntza - ohikun e etan ▁parte ▁hartzeko .
PRED:	The Passover celebration went to Jerusalem for a Passover celebration , and many of the people who had been purified for the Passover celebration .
GOLD:	It was now almost time for the Jewish Passover celebration , and many people from all over the country arrived in Jerusalem several days early so they could go through the purification ceremony before Passover began .

ID:	1363
INPUT:	▁Han go ▁senideak , ▁bai ▁baitzuten ▁gure ▁berri , ▁bidera ▁atera ▁zitzaizki gun ▁ F oro ▁Ap io ▁eta ▁Hiru ▁Ben tara . ▁Haiek ▁ikustean , ▁Jainkoari ▁eskerrak ▁eman ▁zizkion ▁Paulok , ▁eta ▁gogoa ▁bizkor tu ▁zitzaion .
PRED:	There were many brothers and sisters , for they went out to meet him , and they met him for three years .
GOLD:	The brothers and sisters in Rome had heard we were coming , and they came to meet us at the Forum on the Appian Way . Others joined us at The Three Taverns . When Paul saw them , he was encouraged and thanked God .

ID:	1364
INPUT:	▁Gauza ▁guztiak ber onen ▁bidez ▁egin ▁ziren , eta ▁egindako tik ▁ezerez ▁da ▁berau ▁gabe ▁egin .
PRED:	He made everything he created , and everything he did .
GOLD:	God created everything through him , and nothing was created except through him .

ID:	1365
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁haurra ▁tenpluan
PRED:	Jesus Anointed at the Temple
GOLD:	The Prophecy of Anna

ID:	1366
INPUT:	▁Es n ez ▁manten tzen ▁dena , ▁ordea , ▁ez ▁da ▁gai ▁salbamen aren ▁d ok t rina ▁ulertzeko , ▁bularreko ▁haurra ▁baita .
PRED:	Give the food to eat , but it is not a message for the child , and the child is Jesus .
GOLD:	For someone who lives on milk is still an infant and does n't know how to do what is right .

ID:	1367
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁esan ▁nahi ▁dut : ▁Jainkoak ▁behar ▁bezala ▁egindako ▁ituna ▁ezin ▁zuen ▁indar gabetu ▁laurehun ▁eta ▁hogeita ▁hamar ▁urte ▁gero ago ▁agertu riko ▁lege ▁batek , ▁agintzaria ▁indarrik ▁gabe ▁utziz .
PRED:	This is what God says : “ I have made a covenant with the covenant that God made with ten years old or ten years old when he was born .
GOLD:	This is what I am trying to say : The agreement God made with Abraham could not be canceled 430 years later when God gave the law to Moses . God would be breaking his promise .

ID:	1368
INPUT:	▁Jesusek , ▁Ham ab iak ▁beregana ▁bildurik , ▁deabru ▁guztiak ▁botatzeko ▁eta ▁gai tzak ▁sen datzeko ▁indarra ▁eta ▁ahalmena ▁eman ▁zien .
PRED:	Then Jesus gave the devil to cast out demons and the devil to cast out demons .
GOLD:	One day Jesus called together his twelve disciples and gave them power and authority to cast out all demons and to heal all diseases .

ID:	1369
INPUT:	▁Han ▁hautsi ▁ditu ▁guda - ar mak : ar ku aren ▁geziak , ▁babeski ▁eta ▁ezpatak .
PRED:	Its chariots and arrows are broken ; their arrows are beneath the sword .
GOLD:	You are glorious and more majesticthan the everlasting mountains .

ID:	1370
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁badator ▁eguna , ▁neure ▁herri ▁honen , ▁Israel ▁eta ▁Judaren , ▁zoria ▁aldatuko ▁dudana . ▁Itzul arazi ▁egingo ▁ditut ▁beren ▁gurasoei ▁emandako ▁lurraldera ▁eta ▁beronen ▁jabe ▁izango ▁dira ▁berriro . ▁Nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	For the day will return to my people , and I will restore the land of Judah , and I will bring you back to the land I have given to their ancestors . I will give you their ancestors , the Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	For the time is coming when I will restore the fortunes of my people of Israel and Judah . I will bring them home to this land that I gave to their ancestors , and they will possess it again . I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	1371
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zuen : ▁« Izan ▁zaitezte ▁etx ezain ▁leial ▁eta ▁zentzu duna ▁bezala , ▁nagusiak ▁bere ▁orduan ▁otordua ▁bana tzeko ▁morro ien ▁buru ▁ipini ▁duena ▁bezala .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to his servant , “ Stand up like a man , a man who has a bodily discharge , just as the Lord had commanded his servants .
GOLD:	And the Lord replied , “ A faithful , sensible servant is one to whom the master can give the responsibility of managing his other household servants and feeding them .

ID:	1372
INPUT:	▁Erregearen ▁hitz ▁hauek ▁entzun ik , ▁abiatu ▁egin ▁ziren . ▁Bide an , ▁sor talde an ▁ikusi tako ▁iz arra ▁agertu ▁zitzaien ▁eta ▁biziki ▁poztu ▁ziren . ▁Iz arra ▁aurretik ▁joan ▁zitzaien , ▁haurra ▁zegoen ▁toki ▁gainean ▁gelditu ▁arte .
PRED:	When the king heard this , they went out to the village of the city and saw it , and they saw that the child had appeared to them .
GOLD:	After this interview the wise men went their way . And the star they had seen in the east guided them to Bethlehem . It went ahead of them and stopped over the place where the child was .

ID:	1373
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁engainatu ▁zeuen ▁buruak . ▁Ez ▁dago ▁Jainkoari ▁barre ▁egi terik . ▁B akoitz ak ▁zer ▁erein , ▁huraxe ▁bilduko ▁du :
PRED:	Do n't deceive God , but you will not be deceived by the truth . The wicked will be cut off , and you will be killed .
GOLD:	Do n't be misled — you can not mock the justice of God . You will always harvest what you plant .

ID:	1374
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁gizakia ▁bere ▁eginkizun etara ▁doa , arra tsa ▁arte ▁lan era .
PRED:	Then a person will go to their hard work , and a hard work is completed .
GOLD:	Then people go off to their work , where they labor until evening .

ID:	1375
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁buruzagiak , ▁gertatuaren ▁berri ▁jakitean , ▁erregearen ▁jauregi tik ▁tenplura ▁joan ▁eta ▁tenpluko ▁A te ▁Berri aren ▁aurrean ▁eseri ▁ziren .
PRED:	When the officers of Judah heard what had happened , they went to the Temple of the Temple and sat in front of the Temple .
GOLD:	When the officials of Judah heard what was happening , they rushed over from the palace and sat down at the New Gate of the Temple to hold court .

ID:	1376
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁Jainkoaren ▁erreinua ▁ez ▁da ▁hitz - kon tua , ▁egintza - kon tua ▁baizik .
PRED:	For it is not the Kingdom of God , but it is not good .
GOLD:	For the Kingdom of God is not just a lot of talk ; it is living by God 's power .

ID:	1377
INPUT:	▁P rez ioa ▁ezar tzeko , ▁honako ▁balio kide tza ▁hauek ▁erabiliko ▁dira :« P er ts ona ▁hogei ▁urtetik ▁hirurogei ▁arteko a ▁bada , ▁gizonezko arentzat ▁berrogeita ▁hamar ▁zilarrezko ▁txanpon , ▁santutegiko ▁diru tan ,
PRED:	This is the charge of the sanctuary , which is twenty years old or twenty pieces of silver , which is valued at the weight of the sanctuary .
GOLD:	here is the scale of values to be used . A man between the ages of twenty and sixty is valued at fifty shekels of silver , as measured by the sanctuary shekel .

ID:	1378
INPUT:	▁Joanen ▁ikasleek ▁haren ▁gorpua ▁jaso tzera ▁etorri ▁eta ▁lur ▁eman ▁zioten ; ▁gero , ▁Jesusi ▁berri ▁ematera ▁joan ▁ziren .
PRED:	So the disciples came to get his body and told him what had happened .
GOLD:	Later , John 's disciples came for his body and buried it . Then they went and told Jesus what had happened .

ID:	1379
INPUT:	▁erabat ▁ziur ▁baitzegoen ▁hark ▁hitzemana ▁betetzeko ▁zuen ▁ahalmenaz .
PRED:	And because he was sure that he was able to obey his power .
GOLD:	He was fully convinced that God is able to do whatever he promises .

ID:	1380
INPUT:	▁Neuk ▁hedatu ▁dut ▁zerua eta ▁oinarri tu ▁lurra , eta ▁Si oni ▁esaten ▁diot : ▁Zu ▁nire ▁herria ! Neure ▁mezu aren ▁boz era mai le egin ▁zaitut , eta ▁neure ▁esku pean ▁babestu ».
PRED:	I have made the heavens and the heavens , and I say , ‘ Listen to the Lord ! I have spoken ! I will protect you from the ends of the earth . ' ”
GOLD:	And I have put my words in your mouthand hidden you safely in my hand.I stretched out the sky like a canopyand laid the foundations of the earth.I am the one who says to Israel , ‘ You are my people ! ' ”

ID:	1381
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Elim as , ▁Az tia ▁— hori xe ▁esan ▁nahi ▁baitu ▁izenak —, ▁aurka ▁atera ▁zitzaien , ▁kontsul or dea ▁sinesmen etik ▁alden tzeko .
PRED:	They left Elim and said , “ My name is the names of the prophets . ”
GOLD:	But Elymas , the sorcerer ( as his name means in Greek ) , interfered and urged the governor to pay no attention to what Barnabas and Saul said . He was trying to keep the governor from believing .

ID:	1382
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁sorrarazi ▁dituzu ▁iturri ▁eta ▁erre kak , zuk ▁agor rarazi ▁inoiz ▁leh ortu ▁gabeko ▁ibai ak .
PRED:	You have given up a dry wasteland , and you have never forgotten the rivers of dry ground .
GOLD:	You caused the springs and streams to gush forth , and you dried up rivers that never run dry .

ID:	1383
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Asak , ▁Jaunaren ▁etxe ▁eta ▁bere ▁jauregiko ▁altxor tegi etan ▁gelditzen ▁zen ▁zilar ▁eta ▁urre ▁guztia ▁hartu ▁eta , ▁bere ▁zerbitzarien ▁bidez , ▁Siriako ▁erregeari ▁bidali ▁zion . ▁Ben - Hada d ▁zen ▁hura , ▁T ab ri mon - en ▁semea ▁eta ▁H ez ion - en ▁biloba ; ▁Dam as kon ▁bizi ▁zen . ▁Hon ako ▁mezu ▁hau ▁eman ▁behar ▁zioten :
PRED:	At that time King Asa 's reign , he took all the treasures of silver and gold , along with the royal palace of the Lord 's servants and all the people of Aram . He sent this message to King Ben-hadad son of Ben-hadad and grandson of Amoz .
GOLD:	Asa responded by removing all the silver and gold that was left in the treasuries of the Temple of the Lord and the royal palace . He sent it with some of his officials to Ben-hadad son of Tabrimmon , son of Hezion , the king of Aram , who was ruling in Damascus , along with this message :

ID:	1384
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁buruko ▁il eak ▁ere ▁denak ▁zenbatu ak ▁dauz ka ▁Jainkoak .
PRED:	Your head are all your head , and all the way God has given you .
GOLD:	And the very hairs on your head are all numbered .

ID:	1385
INPUT:	▁Jainkoari ▁atsegin ▁ez ▁zaiona ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁Nebaten ▁seme ▁Jeroboamek ▁Israeli ▁eginarazi ▁zizkion ▁bekatu etatik ▁aldendu ▁gabe , ▁berai etan ▁ibil iz ▁baizik .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the sight of the God of Israel , but he refused to turn from them .
GOLD:	But he did what was evil in the Lord 's sight . He refused to turn from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel to commit .

ID:	1386
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁bedi ▁zure ▁ah oaz alapar taka ▁mintza , zure ▁bihotzak ▁ere ez ▁dezala ▁bizkor ▁hitz ▁egin Jaunaren ▁aurrean ; zer uan ▁baita ▁Jainkoa eta ▁zu ▁lurrean . Ez ▁egin , ▁bada , ▁hitz ▁asko .
PRED:	Do n't be afraid to speak in me , for I am afraid to speak in you in the presence of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	As you enter the house of God , keep your ears open and your mouth shut . It is evil to make mindless offerings to God .

ID:	1387
INPUT:	▁« Ez in ▁izango ▁dizu ▁inork ▁ere ▁aurre ▁egin ▁bizi ▁zaren ▁artean , ▁zurekin ▁izango ▁bainaiz , ▁Moises ekin ▁izan ▁nintzen ▁bezala ; ▁ez ▁dizut ▁huts ▁egingo , ▁ez ▁zaitut ▁utziko .
PRED:	“ Do not stand against you , for I have lived among you . I will never be with you as you did . I will not abandon you as you did .
GOLD:	No one will be able to stand against you as long as you live . For I will be with you as I was with Moses . I will not fail you or abandon you .

ID:	1388
INPUT:	▁Orain , ▁beraz , ▁ez ▁zara ▁esklabo , ▁seme ▁baizik ▁eta , ▁seme ▁zaren ez , ▁baita ▁oinordeko ▁ere , ▁Jainkoaren ▁borondatez .
PRED:	So you are slaves to your son , but you are not slaves to the son of God .
GOLD:	Now you are no longer a slave but God 's own child . And since you are his child , God has made you his heir .

ID:	1389
INPUT:	▁bat ▁bakarra ▁Jauna , ▁bat ▁bakarra ▁sinesmena , ▁bat ▁bakarra ▁bata ioa ,
PRED:	There is only one man , the Lord , one of the faith ,
GOLD:	There is one Lord , one faith , one baptism ,

ID:	1390
INPUT:	▁Hurbildu ▁zitzaion ▁Sauli ▁emakumea ▁eta , ▁hain ▁larri tua ▁ikusirik , ▁esan ▁zion :— Nik , ▁zure ▁mirabe ▁honek , ▁entzun ▁dut ▁zure ▁hitza ▁eta ▁arrisku an ▁jarri ▁dut ▁neure ▁bizia , ▁zure ▁esana ▁bete tzearren .
PRED:	When the woman saw that she was terrified , she said to Saul , “ I have heard you , and I have listened to you , and I have listened to you . ”
GOLD:	When the woman saw how distraught he was , she said , “ Sir , I obeyed your command at the risk of my life .

ID:	1391
INPUT:	▁ikusi ▁hango ▁harresiak , ▁iker tu ▁jauregi ak , hur rengo ▁gizaldi ari ▁esateko :
PRED:	When all the people saw this , everyone who had happened to tell the people ,
GOLD:	For that is what God is like.He is our God forever and ever , and he will guide us until we die .

ID:	1392
INPUT:	▁H ik ▁ez ▁duk ▁honetan ▁eskurik , ▁ez ▁par terik , ▁hi re ▁kontzi entzia ▁ez ▁baita ▁zuzena ▁Jainkoaren ▁aurrean .
PRED:	As a result , it is not a believer or a person who is right in God 's sight .
GOLD:	You can have no part in this , for your heart is not right with God .

ID:	1393
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁harrapatu riko ▁guztia ▁— abere ▁nahiz ▁gizaki — ▁hartu
PRED:	After all , including all the people , including people and animals ,
GOLD:	After they had gathered the plunder and captives , both people and animals ,

ID:	1394
INPUT:	▁B ake aren ▁Jainkoak ▁gai ▁egin ▁zaitzatela ▁egite ▁on ▁ororen ▁bidez ▁haren ▁nahia ▁betetzeko ; ▁burutu ▁dezala ▁guregan ▁berari ▁atsegin ▁zaion ▁guztia ▁Jesu ▁Kristoren ▁bidez . ▁Ain tza ▁ber oni ▁menderen ▁mendetan ! ▁Amen .
PRED:	May God give you great power to those who do good things , and let us continue to obey him through Christ Jesus Christ Jesus Christ . Amen . Amen .
GOLD:	may he equip you with all you needfor doing his will.May he produce in you , through the power of Jesus Christ , every good thing that is pleasing to him.All glory to him forever and ever ! Amen .

ID:	1395
INPUT:	▁Lagun ▁iez adazue ▁zuek ▁ere ▁zeuen ▁otoitz ez . ▁Horrela , ▁lagun ▁askoren ▁erregu ei ▁esker ▁Jainkoak ▁emango ▁didan ▁laguntza ▁dela ▁bide , ▁eskerrak ▁ere ▁askok ▁emango ▁dizkiote ▁niri ▁egindako ▁mesede engatik .
PRED:	I pray for you , too , for God has given me great joy for me . And many of you will pray for me .
GOLD:	And you are helping us by praying for us . Then many people will give thanks because God has graciously answered so many prayers for our safety .

ID:	1396
INPUT:	▁joan ▁egin ▁zen . ▁Eta ▁han ▁aurkitu ▁zuen ▁hilo tza ▁lurrean , ▁astoa ▁eta ▁lehoia ▁aldamen ean ▁zutik ▁zituela . ▁Leh oiak ▁ez ▁zuen ▁gorpua ▁jan , ▁ezta ▁astoa ▁zatik atu ▁ere .
PRED:	Then he went to the ground and found a lion 's body . When the lion was sitting on the ground , he would not eat the lion 's body or eat it .
GOLD:	and he went out and found the body lying in the road . The donkey and lion were still standing there beside it , for the lion had not eaten the body nor attacked the donkey .

ID:	1397
INPUT:	▁Kadex tik ▁abiatu ▁eta ▁Hor ▁mendira ▁iritsi ▁zen ▁israeldar ▁elkartea .
PRED:	So Moses left Mount Hor and camped at Mount Hor .
GOLD:	The whole community of Israel left Kadesh and arrived at Mount Hor .

ID:	1398
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁dio ▁Jaunak :« B as amortuan ▁azaldu ▁diot neure ▁onginahia herio tzatik ▁ihes ▁egin ▁duen ▁herriari : bere ▁atseden - bidean ▁da ▁Israel .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The Lord has rescued me from the wilderness of death , for he has rescued Israel from Israel .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Those who survive the coming destructionwill find blessings even in the barren land , for I will give rest to the people of Israel . ”

ID:	1399
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Moisesek ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« J an ▁ezazue ▁gaur , ▁Jaunari ▁sagaraturiko ▁atseden - eguna ▁da ▁eta ; ▁gaur ▁ez ▁duzue ▁kanpoan ▁ezer ▁aurkituko .
PRED:	Then Moses said to them , “ Now go out to the Lord 's holy place . It is a holy day for holy day .
GOLD:	Moses said , “ Eat this food today , for today is a Sabbath day dedicated to the Lord . There will be no food on the ground today .

ID:	1400
INPUT:	▁E kar dazue ▁gero ▁zeuen ▁anaia ▁gazteena , ▁eta ▁orduan ▁jakingo ▁dut ▁zel atariak ▁ez , ▁baizik ▁gizon ▁zintzoak ▁zaretela . ▁Ondoren ▁itzuliko ▁dizuet ▁anaia , ▁eta ▁lurralde ▁honetan ▁ibili ▁ahal ▁izango ▁zarete ”».
PRED:	Give me your brother , your youngest brother , and you will know that I am going to be a man among you . Then I will return to you , and you will return to this land . ”
GOLD:	But you must bring your youngest brother back to me . Then I will know you are honest men and not spies . Then I will give you back your brother , and you may trade freely in the land . ' ”

ID:	1401
INPUT:	▁S eg ur tatu ▁on bidean ▁zeure ▁zerbitzari ▁hau , ez ▁naz aten ▁harro putz ek ▁zapal .
PRED:	Do n't envy your servant , but the wicked plot against me .
GOLD:	Please guarantee a blessing for me.Do n't let the arrogant oppress me !

ID:	1402
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁zuk , ▁Jauna , ▁barre ▁egiten ▁diezu , is eka ▁sinesgabe ▁horiei .
PRED:	But you laugh at the Lord , you people of Israel !
GOLD:	You are my strength ; I wait for you to rescue me , for you , O God , are my fortress .

ID:	1403
INPUT:	▁Lehen - seme en ▁hilketa ▁iragarri
PRED:	Israel 's Final Instructions
GOLD:	Death for Egypt 's Firstborn

ID:	1404
INPUT:	▁R imon - P ere tzetik ▁Lib n ara ;
PRED:	They left Libnah and camped at Libnah .
GOLD:	They left Rimmon-perez and camped at Libnah .

ID:	1405
INPUT:	▁izan ▁ere , ▁giza ▁ohorea ▁maiteago ▁zuten ▁Jainkoaren gandik ▁dator rena ▁baino .
PRED:	And the power of God loved him , and he is far greater than God .
GOLD:	For they loved human praise more than the praise of God .

ID:	1406
INPUT:	▁Gaiz k ilea ▁onik ▁irteten ▁da ▁hondamendi koan , babes ean ▁egoten ▁zigor - egunean .
PRED:	When trouble comes , when trouble comes , when trouble comes upon them .
GOLD:	Evil people are spared in times of calamityand are allowed to escape disaster .

ID:	1407
INPUT:	▁Be go ▁hau ▁idatzirik ▁hurrengo ▁gizaldi arentzat , sor tzeko ▁dagoen ▁herriak ▁Jauna ▁gore ts ▁dezan .
PRED:	The nations will be given to the foundation of the nations , for the Lord will give them victory .
GOLD:	Tell them the Lord looked downfrom his heavenly sanctuary.He looked down to earth from heaven

ID:	1408
INPUT:	▁esanez :— Hau ▁ez , ▁aita ; ▁bestea ▁da ▁lehen - semea ; ▁ezarri ▁esku ina ▁horren ▁buru ▁gainean .
PRED:	“ This is not true father , ” he said . “ The oldest son is laid on her head . ”
GOLD:	“ No , my father , ” he said . “ This one is the firstborn . Put your right hand on his head . ”

ID:	1409
INPUT:	▁Lege - maisuak , ▁orduan :— Eder ki , ▁Mai su ; ▁egia ▁diozu ▁Jainkoa ▁bakarra ▁dela ▁eta ▁ez ▁dela ▁besterik ▁esatean .
PRED:	“ Teacher , ” the man said , “ Teacher , love God ! ” “ You say , ‘ You are only the truth . '
GOLD:	The teacher of religious law replied , “ Well said , Teacher . You have spoken the truth by saying that there is only one God and no other .

ID:	1410
INPUT:	▁T ap u ah ekoa , ▁H ef er koa ,
PRED:	The people of Micmash122
GOLD:	The king of TappuahThe king of Hepher

ID:	1411
INPUT:	▁Be tzai renak ▁ <unk> ;
PRED:	The family of Zaccai760
GOLD:	The family of Bezai324

ID:	1412
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁errege ▁edo ▁handik ien ▁famili etako ▁israeldar ▁gazte ▁batzuk ▁aukera tzeko ▁agindu ▁zion ▁jauregiko ▁funtzionario buru ▁zen ▁Ax pen azi .
PRED:	Then the king of Israel , king of Israel , took some of the young men of Israel 's household , along with the royal palace .
GOLD:	Then the king ordered Ashpenaz , his chief of staff , to bring to the palace some of the young men of Judah 's royal family and other noble families , who had been brought to Babylon as captives .

ID:	1413
INPUT:	▁Denak ▁okertu ▁dira , ▁bat ▁egin ▁dute ▁galdu kerian , ez ▁da ▁inor ▁on ▁dagi enik , ▁bat ▁bera ▁ere ▁ez .
PRED:	All have turned away , and all have turned away , and no one is good .
GOLD:	Will those who do evil never learn ? They eat up my people like breadand would n't think of praying to God .

ID:	1414
INPUT:	▁Lan gile ▁fro g atua
PRED:	Teaching about Money and Possessions
GOLD:	An Approved Worker

ID:	1415
INPUT:	▁Egiptora ▁bidean ▁zurekin ▁izango ▁nauzu ▁eta ▁neuk ▁itzularaziko ▁zaitut ▁berriro . ▁Eta ▁hil tzean , ▁Josek ▁itx iko ▁dizkizu ▁begiak .
PRED:	I will bring you back to Egypt and bring you back to Egypt . I will bring you back to Egypt .
GOLD:	I will go with you down to Egypt , and I will bring you back again . You will die in Egypt , but Joseph will be with you to close your eyes . ”

ID:	1416
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁jende tzari ▁bigarren ez ▁jaten ▁eman
PRED:	Jesus Feeds Five Thousand
GOLD:	Jesus Feeds Four Thousand

ID:	1417
INPUT:	▁Hori ▁bera ▁izango ▁dut ▁salb abide , s in es gab erik ▁ezin ▁baita ▁haren ▁aurrera ▁aurkeztu .
PRED:	So I will be my rescue , for I have not been able to present to him .
GOLD:	But this is what will save me — I am not godless.If I were , I could not stand before him .

ID:	1418
INPUT:	▁G eziak ▁jaur tiz ▁sakabanatu ▁zituen , tx imis ta ▁eginez ▁ihes ▁eragin .
PRED:	He threw them out of the snake out of lightning .
GOLD:	Then at your command , O Lord , at the blast of your breath , the bottom of the sea could be seen , and the foundations of the earth were laid bare .

ID:	1419
INPUT:	▁S ina go gatik ▁atera tzean , ▁hurrengo ▁larun batean ▁ere ▁gai ▁beraz ▁hitz ▁egiteko ▁erregutu ▁zien ▁jendeak .
PRED:	When the people left the Temple , he said to them ,
GOLD:	As Paul and Barnabas left the synagogue that day , the people begged them to speak about these things again the next week .

ID:	1420
INPUT:	▁Hauek ▁u har te ▁eta ▁itsas ▁h egira ▁hedatu ▁ziren . Hori ek ▁izan ▁ziren ▁Jaf eten ▁ondorengoak ; ▁leinu ▁eta ▁herri ▁bakoitzak ▁bere ▁lurraldea ▁eta ▁hizkuntza ▁ditu .
PRED:	These were the clans descended from the middle of the seashore , the descendants of Ham , and their descendants were given to their territory .
GOLD:	Their descendants became the seafaring peoples that spread out to various lands , each identified by its own language , clan , and national identity .

ID:	1421
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁da ▁inor ▁zerura ▁igo , ▁zerutik ▁jaitsi ▁zena ▁baizik , ▁Gizonaren ▁Semea .
PRED:	“ No one can go down to heaven , but the Son of Man came down to heaven .
GOLD:	No one has ever gone to heaven and returned . But the Son of Man has come down from heaven .

ID:	1422
INPUT:	▁Hau ts ▁egin ▁ditu ▁bere ▁haserre ▁bizian ▁Israelen ▁indar ▁guztiak . Ets aia ▁iristean , ▁atzean ▁gorde ▁du ▁eskua . S ua ▁piztu ▁du ▁bere ▁herrian , ▁inguru ▁guztiak ▁iren ts iz .
PRED:	He has heard his fierce anger , and he has rejected all the people of Israel . He has rejected all the people of Israel 's land .
GOLD:	All the strength of Israelvanishes beneath his fierce anger.The Lord has withdrawn his protectionas the enemy attacks.He consumes the whole land of Israellike a raging fire .

ID:	1423
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁guardia buru arekin ▁batera ▁zetorren ▁babiloni ar ▁gudarosteak ▁Jerusalemgo ▁harresia ▁bota ▁egin ▁zuen .
PRED:	Then the captain of the guard led the Babylonian army into the city of Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Then he supervised the entire Babylonian army as they tore down the walls of Jerusalem on every side .

ID:	1424
INPUT:	▁Egun ▁batez , ▁esan ▁zion ▁Eliseok ▁semea ▁bizi arazi ▁zion ▁emakumeari :— Alde ▁egizu ▁hemendik ▁zeure ▁etxeko ekin ▁eta ▁zoaz ▁ahal ▁duzun ▁tokira , ▁zazpi ▁urteko ▁gosete a ▁bidaliko ▁baitu ▁Jaunak ▁lurralde ▁honetara .
PRED:	One day Elisha said to the woman , “ Get out of here , and go out to the village of your palace , and go to the land the Lord has promised to bring you to this land . ”
GOLD:	Elisha had told the woman whose son he had brought back to life , “ Take your family and move to some other place , for the Lord has called for a famine on Israel that will last for seven years . ”

ID:	1425
INPUT:	▁« Gizaseme , ▁Israelen ▁hirietako ▁hondakin en ▁artean ▁bizi ▁direnek ▁esaten ▁dute : ▁“ Abrah amek , ▁bakarra ▁izanik , ▁lurraldearen ▁jabetza ▁izan ▁bazuen , ▁are ▁gehiago ▁guk , ▁hain ▁ugari ▁izanik ”.
PRED:	“ Son of man , all the people of Israel have lived among you , saying , ‘ You have only one of the land of the land . '
GOLD:	“ Son of man , the scattered remnants of Israel living among the ruined cities keep saying , ‘ Abraham was only one man , yet he gained possession of the entire land . We are many ; surely the land has been given to us as a possession . '

ID:	1426
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁Jainkoaren ▁jatorriko ak ▁bagara , ▁ez ▁gen ezake ▁pentsa ▁Jainkoa ▁giza ▁treb etasun ak ▁eta ▁irudi men ak ▁landu tako ▁urre , ▁zilar ▁edo ▁harrizko ▁irudi en ▁antzeko ▁denik .
PRED:	And if we have been given to God 's descendants , we have not been given to all human wisdom and gold and gold and gold . We have been used to be used to use of silver and gold and gold and gold .
GOLD:	And since this is true , we should n't think of God as an idol designed by craftsmen from gold or silver or stone .

ID:	1427
INPUT:	▁Kris ta uen ▁alde ▁otoitza
PRED:	The Lord 's Chosen Servant
GOLD:	Christ Is Supreme

ID:	1428
INPUT:	▁Akix ek ▁uste ▁osoa ▁zuen ▁Daviden gan ▁eta ▁honela ▁zioen ▁bere ▁baitan : ▁« G orro ta garri ▁egin ▁da ▁David ▁bere ▁herri ▁Israelen tzat . ▁Neure ▁menpe ▁izanen ▁dut ▁betiko ».
PRED:	He said to them , “ My lord the king , and he will be handed over to his people , for I will rule over Israel forever . ”
GOLD:	Achish believed David and thought to himself , “ By now the people of Israel must hate him bitterly . Now he will have to stay here and serve me forever ! ”

ID:	1429
INPUT:	▁A teak ▁or p oan ▁bira , ▁al fer rak ▁ohean .
PRED:	The scales is a serious skin , and the ram is laid .
GOLD:	As a door swings back and forth on its hinges , so the lazy person turns over in bed .

ID:	1430
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Herodesek , ▁jakin tsuak ▁isil ean ▁dei turik , ▁iz arra ▁noiz ▁agertu ▁zitzaien ▁jakin ▁zuen ▁zehatz .
PRED:	When Herod heard what had happened , he was secret .
GOLD:	Then Herod called for a private meeting with the wise men , and he learned from them the time when the star first appeared .

ID:	1431
INPUT:	▁Jesusi ▁jarraitzeko ▁bal d intz ak
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Man
GOLD:	The Cost of Following Jesus

ID:	1432
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁otordu ▁handia ▁eman ▁zien ▁erregeak ▁buruzagi ▁eta ▁funtzionario ei , ▁Ester ren ▁omenez . ▁Zer gak ▁ar indu ▁zituen ▁eskualde etan , ▁eta ▁erregeari ▁dagokion ▁oparo tasunez ▁banatu ▁zituen ▁erregal iak .
PRED:	Then the king gave a great feast to Queen Esther and his attendants and his attendants . He also gave a gift to the king and gave him a gift to the king .
GOLD:	To celebrate the occasion , he gave a great banquet in Esther 's honor for all his nobles and officials , declaring a public holiday for the provinces and giving generous gifts to everyone .

ID:	1433
INPUT:	▁Aingeruak ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Ni ▁G ab ri el ▁naiz ▁eta ▁Jainkoaren ▁zerbitzura ▁nago ; ▁berak ▁bidali ▁nau ▁zuri ▁hitz ▁egitera ▁eta ▁berri ▁hau ▁ematera .
PRED:	The angel of God replied , “ I am serving in the Kingdom of God . I have sent me to tell you what I have sent me . ”
GOLD:	Then the angel said , “ I am Gabriel ! I stand in the very presence of God . It was he who sent me to bring you this good news !

ID:	1434
INPUT:	▁Den ek ▁nahi ▁zuten ▁Salomon ▁ikusi , ▁Jainkoak ▁eman ▁zion ▁jakinduri aren ▁berri ▁izateko .
PRED:	So all the people tried to hear the wisdom God had given him wisdom .
GOLD:	Kings from every nation came to consult him and to hear the wisdom God had given him .

ID:	1435
INPUT:	▁Biz iko ▁zareten ▁edozein ▁leku tan , ▁ez ▁duzue ▁hegazti - ▁edo ▁abere - o dol ik ▁jango .
PRED:	“ You must not eat any bird or animal or any bird or any bird or animal or any kind of animal or animal .
GOLD:	No matter where you live , you must never consume the blood of any bird or animal .

ID:	1436
INPUT:	▁B anias , ▁Mer em ot , ▁Elia x ib ,
PRED:	Shecaniah , Harim , Harim ,
GOLD:	Vaniah , Meremoth , Eliashib ,

ID:	1437
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁inork ▁ezin ▁jakin zer ▁gertatuko ▁den . Adi eraz ▁ote ▁diezai oke ▁norbaitek ?
PRED:	For no one can tell you , ‘ What will you say ? '
GOLD:	Indeed , how can people avoid what they do n't know is going to happen ?

ID:	1438
INPUT:	▁N adab en ▁gainerako ▁jarduerak ▁eta ▁egin ▁zuen ▁guztia ▁« Israelgo ▁Erregeen ▁Kronika » ▁liburuan ▁daude ▁idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Nadab and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Nadab 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	1439
INPUT:	▁Jakin arazi ▁zioten ▁Joabi ▁erregea ▁negarrez ▁eta ▁aieneka ▁ari ▁zela ▁Absalomen gatik .
PRED:	When Joab heard that Joab had been broken , he became very sick .
GOLD:	As all the people heard of the king 's deep grief for his son , the joy of that day 's victory was turned into deep sadness .

ID:	1440
INPUT:	▁Davidek , ▁orduan , ▁galdetu ▁zion ▁gertatuaren ▁berri ▁ekarri ▁zion ▁gazte ari :— Non goa ▁zara ?— Zuen ▁artean ▁etorkin ▁gisa ▁bizi ▁den ▁amalek tar ▁baten ▁semea ▁nauzu ▁— erantzun ▁zuen ▁hark .
PRED:	When David heard what had happened , he asked him , “ Where are you like a young man like you ? ” “ Yes , ” he replied , “ I will live among you . ”
GOLD:	Then David said to the young man who had brought the news , “ Where are you from ? ” And he replied , “ I am a foreigner , an Amalekite , who lives in your land . ”

ID:	1441
INPUT:	▁Mu tz ri tik ▁ekarri tako ▁guda - gurdi ▁batek ▁zilarrezko ▁seiehun ▁txanpon ▁balio ▁zuen ▁eta ▁zaldi ▁batek ▁ehun ▁eta ▁berrogeita ▁hamar . ▁Salomonen ▁merkatari ek ▁hiti ten ▁eta ▁arame arren ▁errege ▁guztientzat ▁ekarri ▁ohi ▁zituzten ▁halako ak .
PRED:	One of the chariot with ten pieces of silver , five pieces of silver , bronze , and ten pieces of silver , and ten pieces of silver for the Hittite .
GOLD:	At that time chariots from Egypt could be purchased for 600 pieces of silver , and horses for 150 pieces of silver . They were then exported to the kings of the Hittites and the kings of Aram .

ID:	1442
INPUT:	▁Ira u pena ▁behar ▁duzue , ▁Jainkoaren ▁boronda tea ▁betez ▁agintzaria ▁eskura tzeko .
PRED:	You must be filled with joy , and you will give thanks to God .
GOLD:	Patient endurance is what you need now , so that you will continue to do God 's will . Then you will receive all that he has promised .

ID:	1443
INPUT:	▁Honek ▁lagunen ▁aurrean ▁kantatuko ▁du ▁esanez :“ Bekatu ▁egin ▁eta ▁zuzenbidea ▁hautsi ▁nuen , baina ▁Jainkoak ▁ez ▁dit ▁merezi takoa ▁eman .
PRED:	God has poured out as a deer , saying , ‘ He has violated me , but God has not punished me . '
GOLD:	He will declare to his friends , ‘ I sinned and twisted the truth , but it was not worth it .

ID:	1444
INPUT:	▁Neure ▁herriaren ▁aurrean ▁prof ana tzen ▁nauzue ▁esku ▁bete ▁garagar ▁eta ▁ogi - zati ▁batzu engatik ; ▁honela , ▁engainatu ▁egiten ▁duzue ▁sines korra ▁den ▁nire ▁herria , ▁hiltzea ▁merezi ▁ez ▁zutenak ▁hil araziz ▁eta ▁bizitz ea ▁merezi ▁ez ▁zutenak ▁bizi araziz .
PRED:	For I have told you about all the days of barley and barley grain offerings , which is ready to kill me . You have been condemned to kill those who have been killed , but you have not been condemned to kill them .
GOLD:	You bring shame on me among my people for a few handfuls of barley or a piece of bread . By lying to my people who love to listen to lies , you kill those who should not die , and you promise life to those who should not live .

ID:	1445
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Amatziasek ▁mezulariak ▁igorri ▁zizkion ▁Israelgo ▁errege ▁Joax i , ▁Joak azen ▁seme ▁eta ▁Jeh uren ▁bilob ari , ▁esatera : ▁« Zatoz , ▁neur ▁ditzagun ▁indarrak !»
PRED:	Then Amaziah sent messengers to King Jehoash of Israel , king of Israel , and he said to Jehu , “ Come , let 's destroy him . ”
GOLD:	One day Amaziah sent messengers with this challenge to Israel 's king Jehoash , the son of Jehoahaz and grandson of Jehu : “ Come and meet me in battle ! ”

ID:	1446
INPUT:	▁Israeldarrak ▁Suko tetik ▁irten ▁eta ▁Eta men , ▁basamortu ▁er tzean , ▁kokatu ▁ziren .
PRED:	So the people of Israel left Succoth and lived in the wilderness .
GOLD:	The Israelites left Succoth and camped at Etham on the edge of the wilderness .

ID:	1447
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁ez ▁zuri ▁begirune , ▁Jauna ? Nork ▁ez ▁goretsi ▁zure ▁izena ? Zu ▁bakarrik ▁zara ▁santu ! Herri ak ▁oro ▁etorri eta ▁zure ▁aurrean ah uspez tuko ▁dira , zure ▁salbamen - as moak den en ▁aurrean ▁agertu ▁baitira ».
PRED:	Who can praise the Lord ? Who is holy ? Who is holy ? Who can stand before you before all the nations before you come before you ? They will bow before you before you , and they will bow before you . ”
GOLD:	Who will not fear you , Lord , and glorify your name ? For you alone are holy.All nations will come and worship before you , for your righteous deeds have been revealed . ”

ID:	1448
INPUT:	▁Esterrek ▁erantzun ▁hau ▁bidali ▁zion ▁Mardoke ori :
PRED:	Esther replied to Mordecai , “ Give Mordecai this message to Mordecai :
GOLD:	Then Esther sent this reply to Mordecai :

ID:	1449
INPUT:	▁Go gai tua ▁nago eguz kipean ▁egin ▁ditudan lan ▁nek ets u ez , neure ▁ondorengo ari ▁utzi behar ▁izango ▁baitizki ot .
PRED:	I have worked hard for the sun , for I have worked hard for my family .
GOLD:	I came to hate all my hard work here on earth , for I must leave to others everything I have earned .

ID:	1450
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁bakar da de an ▁otoitzean ▁ari ▁zen ▁batean , ▁ikasleak ▁bildu ▁zitzaizkion , ▁eta ▁Jesusek ▁galdetu ▁zien :— Nor ▁naizela ▁dio ▁jendeak ?
PRED:	One day Jesus was praying to the disciples , and he asked them , “ Who is this people ? ”
GOLD:	One day Jesus left the crowds to pray alone . Only his disciples were with him , and he asked them , “ Who do people say I am ? ”

ID:	1451
INPUT:	▁« Hara , ▁zoritxarra ▁bidaliko ▁dizut ; ▁desager raraziko ▁ditut ▁zure ▁ondorengoak ▁eta ▁suntsituko ▁Akaben ▁etxeko ▁gizaseme ak ▁oro , ▁libre ▁nahiz ▁esklabo , ▁Israel ▁osoan .
PRED:	“ Look , I will destroy all the descendants of Ahab 's descendants , and I will destroy all the descendants of Ahab 's household .
GOLD:	So now the Lord says , ‘ I will bring disaster on you and consume you . I will destroy every one of your male descendants , slave and free alike , anywhere in Israel !

ID:	1452
INPUT:	▁landan ▁aurkitu ▁baitu ▁gizonak ▁eta , ▁nesk ak ▁deiadar ▁eginda ▁ere , ▁ez ▁zen ▁han ▁laguntzeko ▁inor .
PRED:	For the woman found a woman in the field , and no one was in the field .
GOLD:	Since the man raped her out in the country , it must be assumed that she screamed , but there was no one to rescue her .

ID:	1453
INPUT:	▁Azkenik , ▁honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaien ▁Jose ▁bere ▁senide ei : ▁« L as ter ▁hilko ▁naiz ▁ni ; ▁baina ▁Jainkoak ▁zuen ▁alde ▁esku ▁hartuko ▁du ▁eta ▁lurralde ▁honetatik ▁eramango ▁zaituzte , ▁Abrahami , ▁Isaaki ▁eta ▁Jakobi ▁zin ▁eginez ▁hitzemandako ▁lurraldera ».
PRED:	Finally , Joseph said to his brothers and Joseph , “ I will die in this land , but I will bring you back to the land of Egypt . I will bring you to the land I swore to give you . ”
GOLD:	“ Soon I will die , ” Joseph told his brothers , “ but God will surely come to help you and lead you out of this land of Egypt . He will bring you back to the land he solemnly promised to give to Abraham , to Isaac , and to Jacob . ”

ID:	1454
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁Jainkoak ▁Isaias ▁profetaren ▁bidez ▁esana ▁bete ▁zen :
PRED:	This fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah concerning the prophet Isaiah concerning the prophet Isaiah :
GOLD:	This fulfilled what God said through the prophet Isaiah :

ID:	1455
INPUT:	▁Batzu k ▁ez ▁dira ▁ezkon tzen ▁jaio tzaz ▁ezin ▁dutelako ; ▁beste ▁batzuk , ▁giza ▁eskuz ▁ezin duak ▁izan ▁direlako ; ▁beste ▁batzuk , ▁berriz , ▁Jainkoaren ▁errege tz agatik ▁hala ▁erabaki ▁dutelako . ▁On ar ▁dezake enak ▁onar ▁beza .
PRED:	Some are children of God 's children , so they can not be able to accept it . But some of them will be able to accept the Kingdom of God . But if they are willing to accept the Kingdom of God . ”
GOLD:	Some are born as eunuchs , some have been made eunuchs by others , and some choose not to marry for the sake of the Kingdom of Heaven . Let anyone accept this who can . ”

ID:	1456
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁esan ▁zien :— Atera ▁pixka ▁bat ▁eta ▁eraman ▁mah aiz ain ari . Hala ▁egin ▁zuten ▁haiek .
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ Bring him out of the Temple , ” they said .
GOLD:	he said , “ Now dip some out , and take it to the master of ceremonies. ” So the servants followed his instructions .

ID:	1457
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁hartan , ▁inguruan ▁begiratu ▁eta ▁Jesus ▁bakarrik ▁ikusi ▁zuten ▁berekin , ▁eta ▁besterik ▁inor ▁ez .
PRED:	So Jesus and his disciples saw him , but only one of them had seen him .
GOLD:	Suddenly , when they looked around , Moses and Elijah were gone , and they saw only Jesus with them .

ID:	1458
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁seme - alabak ▁eta ▁bilob ak , ▁bere ▁ondare ▁guztia , ▁eraman ▁zituen ▁Jakobek ▁Egiptora .
PRED:	Jacob gave his sons and his descendants to Egypt , his special possession to Egypt .
GOLD:	sons and grandsons , daughters and granddaughters — all his descendants .

ID:	1459
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁askatu ▁nahian ▁Pilato ▁berriro ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaien ;
PRED:	Jesus asked them again to Pilate ,
GOLD:	Pilate argued with them , because he wanted to release Jesus .

ID:	1460
INPUT:	▁Bet - T o gar mako ek ▁ibiltzeko ▁edo ▁garra i orako ▁zaldiak ▁eta ▁man doak ▁ekartzen ▁z izkizu ten .
PRED:	Even if you were a horse , the crown of a horse , and a horse was filled with wine .
GOLD:	“ From Beth-togarmah came riding horses , chariot horses , and mules , all in exchange for your goods .

ID:	1461
INPUT:	▁Haiek , ▁berriro :— Zer ▁egin ▁dizu ? ▁Nola ▁ireki ▁dizkizu ▁begiak ?
PRED:	“ What have you done ? ” they demanded . “ What can you see ? ”
GOLD:	“ But what did he do ? ” they asked . “ How did he heal you ? ”

ID:	1462
INPUT:	▁Jabe ak ▁ez ▁du ▁onak ▁ala ▁txarrak ▁diren ▁begiratu ▁behar , ▁ezta ▁aukeratua ▁beste ▁batez ▁tru katu ▁ere . ▁Hala ▁ere ▁tru katzen ▁badu , ▁bai ▁aukeratu riko ▁aberea , ▁bai ▁ordez koa , ▁biak ▁gelditzen ▁dira ▁sagar aturik ▁eta , ▁beraz , ▁ezin ▁izango ▁dira ▁berreskuratu ».
PRED:	But if you are good or bad , do not be kind or bad to the church , or if they are set apart as holy as holy as a foreigner , they must not be set apart as holy as holy as holy as holy as holy as holy as holy as holy . ”
GOLD:	You may not pick and choose between good and bad animals , and you may not substitute one for another . But if you do exchange one animal for another , then both the original animal and its substitute will be considered holy and can not be bought back . ”

ID:	1463
INPUT:	▁esanez : ▁“ Hon ako ▁hau ▁eraikitzen ▁hasi ▁h uen ▁eta ▁ezin ▁izan ▁d ik ▁amaitu ”.
PRED:	He said to me , ‘ You have been trying to rebuild the wall . '
GOLD:	They would say , ‘ There 's the person who started that building and could n't afford to finish it ! '

ID:	1464
INPUT:	▁Gainera , ▁nor ▁zerbitz atuko ▁nuke ▁nik ▁Daviden ▁semea ▁izan ▁ezik ? ▁Zuen ▁aitaren ▁zerbitzari ▁izan ▁naizen ▁bezala ▁izango ▁naiz ▁zurea ▁ere .
PRED:	And I would serve you as my father , and I would serve you as my father .
GOLD:	“ And anyway , why should n't I serve you ? Just as I was your father 's adviser , now I will be your adviser ! ”

ID:	1465
INPUT:	▁Neb uz ara dan ▁guardia buruak ▁hartu ▁eta ▁R ib l ara ▁eraman ▁zituen , ▁Babiloniako ▁erregeagana ,
PRED:	Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , took the captain of the guard and took them to the king of Babylon .
GOLD:	Nebuzaradan , the captain of the guard , took them all to the king of Babylon at Riblah .

ID:	1466
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁parabola ▁bat ▁ere ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« I tsua ▁itsu aren ▁gidari ▁izan ▁ote ▁li teke ? ▁Ez ▁ote ▁dira ▁biak ▁zul ora ▁eroriko ?
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ How can the blind man be blind ? ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus gave the following illustration : “ Can one blind person lead another ? Wo n't they both fall into a ditch ?

ID:	1467
INPUT:	▁Hil tzailea ▁hirian ▁geldituko ▁da , ▁elkartearen ▁aurrean ▁auzitara ▁agertu ▁arte ▁edota ▁aldi ▁horretan ▁kargu an ▁egongo ▁den ▁apaiz ▁nagusia ▁hil ▁arte . ▁Gero , ▁itzul ▁daiteke ▁hil tzailea ▁bere ▁herrira ▁eta ▁etxera , ▁handik ▁egin ▁baitzuen ▁ihes ».
PRED:	A third person who is near the city must be put to court in charge of the church at the city until the high priest died . Then he fled to the home of the high priest 's home .
GOLD:	But the slayer must stay in that city and be tried by the local assembly , which will render a judgment . And he must continue to live in that city until the death of the high priest who was in office at the time of the accident . After that , he is free to return to his own home in the town from which he fled . ”

ID:	1468
INPUT:	▁Ah uspez ▁gaitezen ▁lots aturik , de so ho rez ▁beterik ; z eren ▁bekatu ▁egin ▁baitugu Jaunaren , ▁geure ▁Jainkoaren , ▁kontra ge uk ▁eta ▁geure ▁gurasoek gazte tan dik ▁gaurdaino . Ez ▁dugu ▁aditu Jaunaren , ▁geure ▁Jainkoaren , ▁esana ».
PRED:	Let us be ashamed of shame , and we will be ashamed of our ancestors . We have sinned against the Lord our God , and our ancestors have sinned against us . ”
GOLD:	Let us now lie down in shameand cover ourselves with dishonor , for we and our ancestors have sinnedagainst the Lord our God.From our childhood to this daywe have never obeyed him . ”

ID:	1469
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁laster ▁ahaztu ▁zituzten ▁haren ▁egintzak eta ▁ez ▁zuten ▁itxaropen ik ▁jarri ▁haren ▁egitas m oan .
PRED:	But they did n't forget him , and they were afraid of his hope .
GOLD:	Yet how quickly they forgot what he had done ! They would n't wait for his counsel !

ID:	1470
INPUT:	▁B azter tu ▁naute lako , ▁jainko ▁arrotz ei ▁intsentsua ▁erre ▁diete lako ▁eta ▁idoloak ▁eginez ▁iraindu ▁naute lako , ▁su tu ▁egin ▁zait ▁haserrea ▁Jerusalemen ▁kontra , ▁eta ▁ez ▁zait ▁itzal iko ”.
PRED:	My people have abandoned me , for they have abandoned me and burn incense on me . My anger has turned against me , and my anger has turned against me . '
GOLD:	For my people have abandoned me and offered sacrifices to pagan gods , and I am very angry with them for everything they have done . My anger will burn against this place , and it will not be quenched . '

ID:	1471
INPUT:	▁Zuek ▁badakizue ▁ni ▁n oan ▁toki rako ▁bidea ».
PRED:	You know where I am going . ”
GOLD:	And you know the way to where I am going . ”

ID:	1472
INPUT:	▁Zazpigarren ▁egunean ▁berriro ▁m iatuko ▁du . ▁Ikusten ▁badu ▁ez kab ia ▁ez ▁dela ▁zabaldu , ▁ezta ▁ilea ▁hori tu ▁ere , ▁eta ▁ez ▁dela ▁azal ekoa ▁baino ▁sakona goa ,
PRED:	On the seventh day the seventh day the priest must not spread a hair on it , and it is no better than skin-deep .
GOLD:	On the seventh day the priest must examine the sore again . If he finds that the scabby sore has not spread , and there is no yellow hair on it , and it appears to be only skin-deep ,

ID:	1473
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁harresi etan , ▁Jerusalem , begira leak ▁jarri ▁ditut , gau ▁eta ▁egun ▁isil du ▁gabe ari ▁daitezen . Ez ▁hartu ▁atseden , Jaunari ▁bere ▁agintz ariak gogor arazten ▁dizkio zuen ok !
PRED:	I looked at Jerusalem and stood at night at night , so that the day of the Lord will put them on night .
GOLD:	O Jerusalem , I have posted watchmen on your walls ; they will pray day and night , continually.Take no rest , all you who pray to the Lord .

ID:	1474
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁esan ▁zien ▁bere ▁ikasleei :— Benetan ▁diotsuet : ▁N ek ez ▁sartuko ▁dira ▁aberats ak ▁Jainkoaren ▁erreinuan .
PRED:	Jesus told his disciples , “ I tell you the truth , the truth will enter the Kingdom of God .
GOLD:	Then Jesus said to his disciples , “ I tell you the truth , it is very hard for a rich person to enter the Kingdom of Heaven .

ID:	1475
INPUT:	▁eta ▁hurrengo ▁ibil aldi etan , ▁Matan atik ▁Nah ali el era , ▁Nah ali el etik ▁B am o tera ,
PRED:	Its leaders were now known as their vineyards , and their vineyards , named after their business .
GOLD:	Nahaliel , and Bamoth .

ID:	1476
INPUT:	▁ez ▁lilura tzail erik , ▁ezta ▁espiritu ei ▁edo ▁hildako ei ▁deika ▁dabil keen ik ▁ere .
PRED:	There is no evil spirits or spirits or spirits who cast out demons .
GOLD:	or cast spells , or function as mediums or psychics , or call forth the spirits of the dead .

ID:	1477
INPUT:	▁I za dia ▁bera ▁ere ▁irrikaz ▁dago , ▁zain - zain , ▁Jainkoak ▁noiz ▁agertuko ▁zer ▁den ▁beraren ▁seme - alaba ▁izatea .
PRED:	In fact , there is no longer waiting for those who have been waiting for God 's children .
GOLD:	For all creation is waiting eagerly for that future day when God will reveal who his children really are .

ID:	1478
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁zu , ▁Judako ▁Belen , ▁ez ▁zara , ▁ez , ▁Judako ▁hirietan ▁txiki ena ; ▁zuregandik ▁aterako ▁baita ▁buruzagia , ▁Israel ▁nire ▁herria ▁gobern atuko ▁duena ▁.
PRED:	And you are not at Bethlehem in Bethlehem in Bethlehem , who will not be able to rule over the towns of Judah .
GOLD:	‘ And you , O Bethlehem in the land of Judah , are not least among the ruling cities of Judah , for a ruler will come from youwho will be the shepherd for my people Israel . ' ”

ID:	1479
INPUT:	▁Ba tek , ▁bizirik ▁dagoen ▁bitartean , ba du ke ▁itxaropen : ho be ▁zak ur ▁bizia , ▁lehoi ▁hila ▁baino .
PRED:	There is no resurrection of the dead , and there is no resurrection from the lions .
GOLD:	There is hope only for the living . As they say , “ It 's better to be a live dog than a dead lion ! ”

ID:	1480
INPUT:	▁Ene ▁maiteok , ▁ez ▁ahaztu ▁Jaunarentzat ▁egun ▁bat ▁mila ▁urte ▁bezala ▁dela ▁eta ▁mila ▁urte ▁egun ▁bat ▁bezala .
PRED:	Dear friends , my dear friends , as well as a day for a year .
GOLD:	But you must not forget this one thing , dear friends : A day is like a thousand years to the Lord , and a thousand years is like a day .

ID:	1481
INPUT:	▁Babiloniatik ▁bizirik ▁ihes ▁egindako ek Sion ▁hirian ▁ematen ▁dute ▁berri ▁hau :« Jaunaren , ▁gure ▁Jainkoaren , men d ekua ▁da , ten pl ua ▁hondatu ▁zuten en kon trako ▁mendekua ».
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The city of our God has given us this message from the Lord , the God of our God ! ”
GOLD:	Listen to the people who have escaped from Babylon , as they tell in Jerusalemhow the Lord our God has taken vengeanceagainst those who destroyed his Temple .

ID:	1482
INPUT:	▁Ar kul ariek ▁haser rarazten ▁dute , aur ka ▁jaiki tzen , ▁eraso ▁egiten .
PRED:	They plot against their enemiesand get angry with them .
GOLD:	Archers attacked him savagely ; they shot at him and harassed him .

ID:	1483
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁israeldarren ▁lehen - seme en ▁izen - bilketa ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁Jaunak ▁agindu ▁bezala .
PRED:	So Moses followed the names of the firstborn sons of Israel as the Lord had commanded .
GOLD:	So Moses counted the firstborn sons of the people of Israel , just as the Lord had commanded .

ID:	1484
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁dio ▁Jaunak , ▁nire ▁Jainkoak : ▁« Z ain du ▁hiltzeko ▁diren ▁ardiak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will kill my sheep and goats .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord my God says : “ Go and care for the flock that is intended for slaughter .

ID:	1485
INPUT:	▁Ezekiasek ▁erlijio - biz itza ▁ber ran tol atu
PRED:	Hezekiah 's Final Advice
GOLD:	Hezekiah 's Religious Reforms

ID:	1486
INPUT:	▁pertsegi ▁itzazu ▁zeure ▁ek aitz az , ▁izutu ▁zeure ▁haize - eraun tsi az .
PRED:	Tie them into the sea , and the storm of the sea .
GOLD:	Utterly disgrace themuntil they submit to your name , O Lord .

ID:	1487
INPUT:	▁Zoritx arrekoa ▁aitari ▁esaten ▁diona :« Zergatik ▁sortu ▁ninduzun ?» , eta ▁amari :« Zergatik ek arri ▁ninduzun ▁mundura ?»
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who say to me , “ Why are you the children of the world ? ”
GOLD:	How terrible it would be if a newborn baby said to its father , ‘ Why was I born ? 'or if it said to its mother , ‘ Why did you make me this way ? ' ”

ID:	1488
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁diozue ▁mutur reko rik ▁ipiniko ▁gari ▁jotzen ▁ari ▁den ▁idi ari .
PRED:	“ You must not use an ox for a grain offering to the foreigners .
GOLD:	“ You must not muzzle an ox to keep it from eating as it treads out the grain .

ID:	1489
INPUT:	▁T oki ▁hartatik ▁hurbil , ▁etx alde ▁bat ▁zuen ▁u har teko ▁buruak , ▁P ub l io ▁zeritzan ak . ▁Honek ▁bere ▁etxean ▁os tatu ▁eman ▁zigun ▁hiru ▁egunetan ▁arreta ▁guztiaz .
PRED:	At the end of the grape harvest , a man named Ananias . He said , “ You must celebrate three days in your home . ”
GOLD:	Near the shore where we landed was an estate belonging to Publius , the chief official of the island . He welcomed us and treated us kindly for three days .

ID:	1490
INPUT:	▁Er dain dua ▁nahiz ▁erdain gabea ▁izate ak ▁ez ▁du ▁gar rantz irik ; ▁Jainkoaren ▁aginduak ▁bete tzea ▁da ▁balio ▁duena .
PRED:	If a person who does n't be circumcised , it is not a person who does not obey God 's commandments .
GOLD:	For it makes no difference whether or not a man has been circumcised . The important thing is to keep God 's commandments .

ID:	1491
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁Ham ab iak ▁bidali
PRED:	Jesus Sends Out the Twelve Disciples
GOLD:	Jesus Sends Out the Twelve Disciples

ID:	1492
INPUT:	▁Jende ▁burugogor ▁eta ▁setatsu agana ▁bidaltzen ▁zaitut ▁nire ▁mezua ▁adieraz tera .
PRED:	I have tried to listen to you and pay attention to you .
GOLD:	They are a stubborn and hard-hearted people . But I am sending you to say to them , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says ! '

ID:	1493
INPUT:	▁gero , ▁Akaz iasen ▁bila ▁joan ▁zen . ▁Akazias ▁Samarian ▁gorde ▁zen ; ▁baina ▁harrapatu ▁eta ▁Jeh ur engana ▁eraman ▁zuten ▁eta ▁honek ▁hil ▁egin ▁zuen ▁hura ▁ere . ▁Lur ▁eman ▁zioten , ▁Jaunarengana ▁bihotzez ▁jo ▁zuen ▁Josafaten ▁semea ▁zela ▁kontuan ▁izanik . ▁Akaz iasen ▁senitar tean ▁ez ▁zegoen ▁inor ▁ere ▁errege ▁izateko ▁gai ▁zen ik .
PRED:	After King Ahaziah of Judah went to search for Ahaziah , Ahaziah , but Ahaziah had killed Ahaziah 's son Ahaziah , but he was killed by the Lord 's family . But when he died , he was not able to kill him , he was not a descendant of Ahab 's family .
GOLD:	Then Jehu 's men searched for Ahaziah , and they found him hiding in the city of Samaria . They brought him to Jehu , who killed him . Ahaziah was given a decent burial because the people said , “ He was the grandson of Jehoshaphat — a man who sought the Lord with all his heart. ” But none of the surviving members of Ahaziah 's family was capable of ruling the kingdom .

ID:	1494
INPUT:	▁« Esan ▁israeldarrei : ▁Er res peta tu ▁nire ▁larunbat ak , ▁hauxe ▁baita ▁belaunez ▁belaun ▁nire ▁eta ▁zuen ▁arteko ▁lotu raren ▁ezau garria , ▁jakin ▁dezazuen ▁nik , ▁Jaun ▁honek , ▁aukeratu ▁zaituzte dala .
PRED:	“ Give the following instructions to the people of Israel : Take charge of my Sabbath days and honor , for I have chosen you to be observed from generation to generation .
GOLD:	“ Tell the people of Israel : ‘ Be careful to keep my Sabbath day , for the Sabbath is a sign of the covenant between me and you from generation to generation . It is given so you may know that I am the Lord , who makes you holy .

ID:	1495
INPUT:	▁Goiz ean ▁goiz ▁jaik irik , ▁Abimelekek ▁bere ▁zerbitzari ▁guztiak ▁deitu ▁zituen , ▁amets aren ▁berri ▁emateko . ▁Denak ▁harriturik ▁gelditu ▁ziren .
PRED:	When Abimelech got up early early the next morning , he called all the dream .
GOLD:	Abimelech got up early the next morning and quickly called all his servants together . When he told them what had happened , his men were terrified .

ID:	1496
INPUT:	▁Sim onek ▁azaldu ▁digu , ▁nola ▁hasi era - h asi eratik ▁Jainkoak ▁jentilen ▁artetik ▁beretzat ▁herri ▁bat ▁aukeratu ▁nahi ▁izan ▁duen .
PRED:	Simon son of Simon , whom God has chosen us to live among the Gentiles . He has chosen one of the Gentiles for the Gentiles .
GOLD:	Peter has told you about the time God first visited the Gentiles to take from them a people for himself .

ID:	1497
INPUT:	▁U n etx o ▁batez ▁utzi ▁zintudan , baina ▁gupidarik ▁handien az har tuko ▁zaitut .
PRED:	I will feed you with a little owl , but I will have mercy on you .
GOLD:	“ For a brief moment I abandoned you , but with great compassion I will take you back .

ID:	1498
INPUT:	▁« Le ge ▁ber bera ▁gordeko ▁dute ▁bertan ▁jaio ek ▁eta ▁zuen ▁artean ▁bizitzen ▁jarri ▁diren ▁atzerritar rek ».
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : The foreigners living among you and foreigners living among you . ”
GOLD:	This instruction applies to everyone , whether a native-born Israelite or a foreigner living among you . ”

ID:	1499
INPUT:	▁« Bete ▁arretaz ▁itun ▁honen ▁xedapenak , ▁zeuen ▁eginkizun ▁guztietan ▁arrakas ta ▁izan ▁dezazuen .
PRED:	“ Be careful to obey all the terms of the covenant you have given to them .
GOLD:	We took their land and gave it to the tribes of Reuben and Gad and to the half-tribe of Manasseh as their grant of land .

ID:	1500
INPUT:	▁Uler tzeko ▁gauza ▁denak ▁uler ▁beza ▁Espirituak ▁eliz ▁elkarte ei ▁esaten ▁di ena . ▁Garai leak ▁ez ▁du ▁bigarren ▁heriotzaren ▁zigor rik ▁jas ango .
PRED:	Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the Spirit and understand what he says to the church . He must not listen to the second brother of death .
GOLD:	“ Anyone with ears to hear must listen to the Spirit and understand what he is saying to the churches . Whoever is victorious will not be harmed by the second death .

ID:	1501
INPUT:	▁Hildakoen ▁Ego itza ▁eta ▁Hon damen ▁Leiz ea ▁as eg aitzak ▁dira ; as eg aitzak , ▁h alab er , ▁gizakiaren ▁begiak .
PRED:	The wicked are in the grave , and the strength of the wicked are broken .
GOLD:	Just as Death and Destruction are never satisfied , so human desire is never satisfied .

ID:	1502
INPUT:	▁Zah ar ▁eta ▁gazte , hor ▁daude ▁kaleetan ▁zehar ▁lurrean ▁etzan ik ; nire ▁neska - mu til ak ▁ezpataz ▁jota ▁erori ▁dira . Zeure ▁haserre - egunean ▁hil ▁dituzu , ▁erruki ▁gabe ▁garbitu .
PRED:	“ They lie in the streets and lie down on the streets of the streets and lie down on the ground in the streets , and you have no mercy on me .
GOLD:	“ See them lying in the streets — young and old , boys and girls , killed by the swords of the enemy.You have killed them in your anger , slaughtering them without mercy .

ID:	1503
INPUT:	▁Ez pata ▁Jerusalemen ▁aurka
PRED:	The Lord 's Reign
GOLD:	The Lord 's Sword of Judgment

ID:	1504
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁hau ▁al darrik arazi ▁zuen ▁hirian : ▁« Errege aren ▁eta ▁beronen ▁gobernari en ▁aginduz , ▁gizaki ▁eta ▁abere , ▁behi ▁eta ▁ardi , ▁inork ▁ez ▁beza ▁ezer txo ▁ere ▁das ta , ▁ez ▁bitez ▁larra , ▁ez ▁bezate ▁edan ;
PRED:	He told them , “ This is what the king of the royal palace , the king , the king of the royal palace and his servants , the sheep , goats , goats , and cattle , sheep , goats , and goats , and goats , and goats .
GOLD:	Then the king and his nobles sent this decree throughout the city : “ No one , not even the animals from your herds and flocks , may eat or drink anything at all .

ID:	1505
INPUT:	▁hilobi tik ▁libra tzeko , bizi aren ▁argi az ▁horn itzeko .
PRED:	They will be cut off from the grave , and they will be put to death .
GOLD:	He rescues them from the graveso they may enjoy the light of life .

ID:	1506
INPUT:	▁Era berri ▁gaitzazu , ▁Jainko ▁gure ▁salbatzaile , ken ▁gure ▁kontra ▁duzun ▁sumina !
PRED:	May the Lord our God rescue us from our enemiesand rescue us from our enemies .
GOLD:	Will you be angry with us always ? Will you prolong your wrath to all generations ?

ID:	1507
INPUT:	▁Aita ▁Jainkoak ▁aurrez ▁erabaki ta ▁zuen aren ▁arabera ▁aukeratu ▁zaituzte ▁eta ▁Espirituaren ▁bidez ▁sagaratu , ▁Jesu ▁Kristoren ▁esan era ▁bizitzeko ▁eta ▁beronen ▁odolaz ▁garbi tuak ▁izateko . ▁G razia ▁eta ▁bakea ▁oparo ▁zuei !
PRED:	For God chose your Father and chose you to be holy by the Spirit of Jesus Christ Jesus Christ . He has chosen you to be holy and holy .
GOLD:	God the Father knew you and chose you long ago , and his Spirit has made you holy . As a result , you have obeyed him and have been cleansed by the blood of Jesus Christ.May God give you more and more grace and peace .

ID:	1508
INPUT:	▁Indar rera ▁jo ? ▁Bera ▁da ▁indartsu ena . Z uzen bidera ? ▁Nork ▁egin ▁nire ▁alde ▁testigantza ?
PRED:	Who is powerful and powerful ? Who is good to me ? Who can keep me safe ?
GOLD:	If it 's a question of strength , he 's the strong one.If it 's a matter of justice , who dares to summon him to court ?

ID:	1509
INPUT:	▁bizi ▁bagara , ▁Jaunarentzat ▁gara ▁bizi ; ▁eta ▁hiltzen ▁bagara , ▁Jaunarentzat ▁gara ▁hiltzen . ▁Beraz , ▁nahiz ▁bizi ▁nahiz ▁hil , ▁Jaunaren ak ▁gara .
PRED:	If we die , we will die and die , we will die and kill the Lord , whether we are living in the Lord 's presence . ”
GOLD:	If we live , it 's to honor the Lord . And if we die , it 's to honor the Lord . So whether we live or die , we belong to the Lord .

ID:	1510
INPUT:	▁« Honela ▁dio ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak : ▁Ep ai ▁ezazue ▁zuzen tasunez , ▁izan ▁on ▁eta ▁erruki tsu ;
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Get up and be merciful .
GOLD:	“ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Judge fairly , and show mercy and kindness to one another .

ID:	1511
INPUT:	▁Josek ▁esan ▁zion ▁herriari :— Hara , ▁gaur ▁erosi ▁zaituztet ▁zuek ▁eta ▁zuen ▁lurrak ▁faraoi arentzat . ▁Hemen ▁duzue ▁hazia ; ▁erein ▁zeuen ▁lur retan .
PRED:	Joseph said to the people , “ Look , I want you to buy it , and you will plant it on the ground .
GOLD:	Then Joseph said to the people , “ Look , today I have bought you and your land for Pharaoh . I will provide you with seed so you can plant the fields .

ID:	1512
INPUT:	▁Zein ▁ote ▁da ▁handiago , ▁mahaian ▁dagoena ▁ala ▁zerbitzatzen ▁ari ▁dena ? ▁Ez ▁ote ▁mahaian ▁dagoena ? ▁Bada , ▁ni ▁zerbitzari ▁bezala ▁nago ▁zuen ▁artean .
PRED:	What are you trying to eat anything or drinking ? Should I serve only at my table or my servant ?
GOLD:	Who is more important , the one who sits at the table or the one who serves ? The one who sits at the table , of course . But not here ! For I am among you as one who serves .

ID:	1513
INPUT:	▁« Neure ▁bizil ekura ▁itzul tzera ▁noa , beren ▁errua ▁aitortu eta ▁bila ▁naz aten ▁arte . A ts ekabe - aldian ▁niregan ab ihur tuko ▁dira ▁agi an ... ▁ ».
PRED:	“ I am ready to return to the place of safety , and they will return to me . They will protect me from this place of safety , and they will return to me . ”
GOLD:	Then I will return to my placeuntil they admit their guilt and turn to me.For as soon as trouble comes , they will earnestly search for me . ”

ID:	1514
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁adierazi ▁Israel ▁herriari ▁nire , ▁Jainko ▁Jaun ▁honen , ▁mezua : ▁Itzuli , ▁aldendu ▁zeuen ▁idolo etatik , ▁egin ▁uko ▁zeuen ▁jokabide ▁higuingarri ▁guztiei .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : Go back to all the people of Israel and turn away from your detestable sins .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , tell the people of Israel , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : Repent and turn away from your idols , and stop all your detestable sins .

ID:	1515
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁hango ▁jendea ▁irten arazi ▁eta ▁zer raz , ▁burdinazko ▁p iko tx az ▁eta ▁burdinazko ▁a izko raz ▁lan ▁egitera ▁behartu ▁zuen , ▁eta ▁a dre ilu gin tz ara ▁eraman . ▁Horixe ▁bera ▁egin ▁zuen ▁amondarren ▁hiri ▁guztietan . ▁Ondoren , ▁David ▁Jerusalemera ▁itzuli ▁zen ▁bere ▁gudaroste ▁osoarekin .
PRED:	Then the people of Israel went out to Jerusalem and made an iron iron iron iron iron iron iron iron iron iron iron iron iron iron iron iron iron iron iron iron iron iron iron iron iron iron and iron chains .
GOLD:	He also made slaves of the people of Rabbah and forced them to labor with saws , iron picks , and iron axes , and to work in the brick kilns . That is how he dealt with the people of all the Ammonite towns . Then David and all the army returned to Jerusalem .

ID:	1516
INPUT:	▁Jauna , ▁ene ▁Jainko ▁salbatzailea ! Gau ▁eta ▁egun ▁laguntza ▁eske ▁deiadar ▁degizu t .
PRED:	O Lord , do not reject me , for I cry out to you for help .
GOLD:	Now hear my prayer ; listen to my cry .

ID:	1517
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁deabruak ▁hiri ▁santu ra , ▁Jerusalemera , ▁eraman ▁zuen ▁eta , ▁tenpluaren ▁goren eko ▁er tzera ▁jasorik ,
PRED:	Then the devil took him into the city of demons , and led him to Jerusalem to rebuild the Temple .
GOLD:	Then the devil took him to the holy city , Jerusalem , to the highest point of the Temple ,

ID:	1518
INPUT:	▁Em akumea ▁eta ▁herensuge ▁gor ria
PRED:	The Lord 's Case against Israel
GOLD:	The Woman and the Dragon

ID:	1519
INPUT:	▁R efi di m dik ▁abia turik , ▁Sinai ▁basamortura ▁heldu ▁ziren ;
PRED:	They left the wilderness of Sinai and camped at the wilderness of Sinai .
GOLD:	They left Rephidim and camped in the wilderness of Sinai .

ID:	1520
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Jaunak ▁dio : ▁« Erru karri ak ▁zapaltzen ▁dituzte lako , behar tsuak ▁intziri ka ▁ari ▁direlako , orain txe ▁ja ikiko ▁naiz ▁eta ▁salbatuko ▁dut ▁has p eren ka ▁ari ▁dena ».
PRED:	But this is what the Lord says : “ I will judge the poor and poor , for I will be saved . ”
GOLD:	The Lord 's promises are pure , like silver refined in a furnace , purified seven times over .

ID:	1521
INPUT:	▁Am or ru ▁biziz ▁zapaldu ▁ditut ▁herriak , neure ▁sumin - e dar iz ▁mozkor tu eta ▁haien ▁odola ▁lurrean ▁isuri .
PRED:	I will punish the nations for their wickedness , and I will pour out my fury on the earth .
GOLD:	I crushed the nations in my angerand made them stagger and fall to the ground , spilling their blood upon the earth . ”

ID:	1522
INPUT:	▁Aro den gandik ▁ar o d tarrak ▁eta ▁Are l iren gandik ▁ar el itar rak .
PRED:	The descendants of Aroer were named after their ancestor Seir , named after their ancestor Hepher .
GOLD:	The Arodite clan , named after their ancestor Arodi.The Arelite clan , named after their ancestor Areli .

ID:	1523
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁lurreko ▁bizilagun ▁guztiek ▁gur tuko ▁dute , ▁lepo ▁eginiko ▁Bildotsaren ▁biziaren ▁liburuan ▁beren ▁izenak ▁munduaren ▁hasieratik ▁idatzirik ▁dituztenak ▁izan ▁ezik .
PRED:	And all the people of the earth will worship in the Book of the covenant of the Lamb who had been written in the creation of the Lamb .
GOLD:	And all the people who belong to this world worshiped the beast . They are the ones whose names were not written in the Book of Life that belongs to the Lamb who was slaughtered before the world was made .

ID:	1524
INPUT:	▁Josue ▁zahar tua , ▁adin ean ▁aurrera tua , ▁zegoen . ▁Eta ▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« Z ah artu ▁zara ▁eta ▁adin ean ▁aurrera tu , ▁eta ▁oso ▁handia ▁da ▁oraindik ▁eskura tzeko ▁gelditzen ▁zaiz uen ▁lurraldea .
PRED:	When Joshua was old old old , the Lord said to Joshua , “ You are like a old man , and now now you have been very old enough to stand before the Lord , and now you have been able to stand up . ”
GOLD:	When Joshua was an old man , the Lord said to him , “ You are growing old , and much land remains to be conquered .

ID:	1525
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁ezin ▁du ▁inork ▁mihia ▁hezi , ▁gaiztoa ▁eta ▁mendera gaitza ▁baita , ▁pozoi ▁hil garriz ▁betea .
PRED:	But the wicked are allowed to deceive others , and they are filled with violence .
GOLD:	but no one can tame the tongue . It is restless and evil , full of deadly poison .

ID:	1526
INPUT:	▁Eliasek ▁erantzun :— Bere ▁zerbitzari ▁nauen ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztiduna ▁bizi ▁dela ▁bezain ▁egia ▁da , ▁ni ▁gaur ▁bertan ▁agertuko ▁naizela ▁Akaben ▁aurrera .
PRED:	Elijah replied , “ This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : Look at that time I will come to meet the truth . ”
GOLD:	But Elijah said , “ I swear by the Lord Almighty , in whose presence I stand , that I will present myself to Ahab this very day . ”

ID:	1527
INPUT:	▁Dei ▁egin ▁zion , ▁beraz , ▁Akix ek ▁Davidi ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion :— Z uz ena ▁zara , ▁ala ▁Jauna ! ▁Begi ko ▁dut ▁zu ▁nirekin ▁izatea ▁gudarostearen ▁joan - etorri ▁guztietan . ▁Ez ▁dut ▁zuregan ▁deus ▁txarrik ▁ikusi , ▁niregana ▁etorri ▁zinen ez ▁geroztik . ▁B uruzagi ek , ▁ordea , ▁ez ▁zaituzte ▁begiko .
PRED:	So King Achish summoned David and said to David , “ You are trying to kill me or even if you want me to kill me , I have n't seen what you have done to me , but I did n't come to me . ”
GOLD:	So Achish finally summoned David and said to him , “ I swear by the Lord that you have been a trustworthy ally . I think you should go with me into battle , for I 've never found a single flaw in you from the day you arrived until today . But the other Philistine rulers wo n't hear of it .

ID:	1528
INPUT:	▁Hala , ▁Isaak ▁urruti ratu ▁egin ▁zen ▁leku ▁hartatik ▁eta , ▁Ger ar ko ▁ib arrean ▁oihal - etxola ▁kokatu z , ▁bertan ▁jarri ▁zen ▁bizitzen .
PRED:	So Isaac continued to live in the place where he lived in the valley of Gerar .
GOLD:	So Isaac moved away to the Gerar Valley , where he set up their tents and settled down .

ID:	1529
INPUT:	▁ene ▁maitea ▁gaz ela ▁bezalako , ore in k ume aren ▁antzeko . Gure ▁horm aren ▁atzean ▁gelditu ▁da , l ei ho etatik ▁zelatan , l ei ho - sar e etatik ▁ki ri ka .
PRED:	My lover is like a young lion , like a young lion 's hide in the middle of the wall .
GOLD:	My lover is like a swift gazelleor a young stag.Look , there he is behind the wall , looking through the window , peering into the room .

ID:	1530
INPUT:	▁Berak ▁gela ▁zabal ▁bat ▁erakutsiko ▁dizue ▁goian , ▁jantzirik ▁eta ▁aton dua ; ▁prestatu ▁hantxe ▁behar ▁ditugun ak .
PRED:	He will prepare a room to prepare a room for you and prepare a large room for us .
GOLD:	He will take you upstairs to a large room that is already set up . That is where you should prepare our meal . ”

ID:	1531
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁esan ▁zien :— Jainkoaren ▁gauz etan ▁itsu ▁zarete lako ▁eman ▁zizuen ▁lege ▁hori ▁Moisesek .
PRED:	Jesus told them , “ You are a blind man of God , just as Moses had given you . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus responded , “ He wrote this commandment only as a concession to your hard hearts .

ID:	1532
INPUT:	▁Esklab oen ▁aska pena ▁zazpigarren ▁urtean
PRED:	Registration of the Priests
GOLD:	Release for Hebrew Slaves

ID:	1533
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁neur tzeko ▁kanabera ▁eman ▁zidaten , ▁makila ▁baten ▁antzekoa , ▁esanez : ▁« Jaiki ▁eta ▁neur ▁itzazu ▁Jainkoaren ▁tenplua ▁eta ▁aldarea , ▁eta ▁zenbatu ▁bertan ▁kultu ▁egiten ▁ari ▁direnak .
PRED:	Then I gave me a reed stick to me , saying , “ Stand up in the presence of the Lord , and cast out the altar of the Temple of God .
GOLD:	Then I was given a measuring stick , and I was told , “ Go and measure the Temple of God and the altar , and count the number of worshipers .

ID:	1534
INPUT:	▁bata ▁ertz ▁batean , ▁bestea ▁bes tean ; ▁gorputz ▁bat ▁bera ▁egingo ▁dute ▁estalki arekin .
PRED:	There will be one piece of one piece of atonement cover — one piece of atonement cover —
GOLD:	Mold the cherubim on each end of the atonement cover , making it all of one piece of gold .

ID:	1535
INPUT:	▁Iz aki ▁biak ▁bos na ▁metro ▁ziren ▁gora .
PRED:	The two blocks of rooms were 15 feet long .
GOLD:	each was 15 feet tall .

ID:	1536
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁kristau ▁ez ▁direnen ▁errespe tua ▁zeuen gan atuko ▁duzue , ▁eta ▁ez ▁duzue ▁inoren ▁beharrik ▁izango .
PRED:	In this way , you must not need to honor the Lord your God . You must not need anyone to do it .
GOLD:	Then people who are not believers will respect the way you live , and you will not need to depend on others .

ID:	1537
INPUT:	▁« Ets aiak ▁ez ▁du ▁engain atuko , ▁ez ▁giz atx arrak ▁makur tuko .
PRED:	“ They will not oppress him ; they will never abandon him .
GOLD:	I will beat down his adversaries before himand destroy those who hate him .

ID:	1538
INPUT:	▁Jende ▁guztiak ▁entzun ▁zuen ▁hori ▁eta ▁ongi ▁iruditu ▁zitzaion , ▁erregeak ▁egiten ▁zuen ▁guztia ▁ongi ▁iruditzen ▁zitzaion ez .
PRED:	When the king heard all this , he became very good and good .
GOLD:	This pleased the people very much . In fact , everything the king did pleased them !

ID:	1539
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁esan ▁zien ▁Saulek ▁bere ▁laguntzaile ei :— Bil atu ▁nek ro man te - ahal mena ▁du keen ▁emakum eren ▁bat , ▁berarengana ▁joan ▁eta ▁kontsulta ▁egiteko . Lagun tzaileek ▁erantzun ▁zioten :— Ba da ▁En d or - en ▁nek ro man te - ahal mena ▁duen ▁emakume ▁bat .
PRED:	Then Saul said to the men , “ Let 's go to Jerusalem to ask him to ask him , ‘ We are going to ask him to ask him to ask him to ask him , ‘ Bring a woman to ask him a woman to ask him . '
GOLD:	Saul then said to his advisers , “ Find a woman who is a medium , so I can go and ask her what to do. ” His advisers replied , “ There is a medium at Endor . ”

ID:	1540
INPUT:	▁Salomon ▁erregeak ▁eta ▁beronekin ▁kutxaren ▁aitzinean ▁bildu a ▁zegoen ▁israeldar ▁batzar ▁osoak ▁ezin ▁zenbatu ▁ahal ako ▁ardi - ▁eta ▁idi - multzo ▁handia ▁eskaini ▁zuten ▁opari .
PRED:	Then King Solomon and all the people of Israel stood before before the Lord , and all the people of Israel could not offer sacrifices to the Lord .
GOLD:	There , before the Ark , King Solomon and the entire community of Israel sacrificed so many sheep , goats , and cattle that no one could keep count !

ID:	1541
INPUT:	▁Mardokeo ▁zein ▁herri takoa ▁zen ▁adierazi ▁ziotenean , ▁eskua ▁berari ▁bakarrik ▁eran s tea ▁gutxi ▁zelako an , ▁Asu er oren ▁erresum an ▁ziren ▁judu ▁guztiak ▁ere ▁galdu ▁egin ▁nahi ▁izan ▁zituen , ▁harekin ▁batera .
PRED:	When Mordecai had finished telling Mordecai what was happening to her , he was very few of the Jews who had been killed .
GOLD:	He had learned of Mordecai 's nationality , so he decided it was not enough to lay hands on Mordecai alone . Instead , he looked for a way to destroy all the Jews throughout the entire empire of Xerxes .

ID:	1542
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Jaunaren ▁aingeruak ▁dei ▁egin ▁zion ▁zerutik :— Abrah am ! ▁Abraham ! — Hemen ▁nauzu ! ▁— erantzun ▁zuen ▁Abrahamek .
PRED:	But the angel of the Lord called to Abraham , “ Abraham ! ” Abraham replied , “ Yes , Abraham ! ”
GOLD:	At that moment the angel of the Lord called to him from heaven , “ Abraham ! Abraham ! ” “ Yes , ” Abraham replied . “ Here I am ! ”

ID:	1543
INPUT:	▁Biharamun ▁goizean , ▁P ax hur rek ▁askatu ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Jeremias ▁egur - z e po tik . ▁Orduan , ▁Jeremiasek ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« P ax hur , ▁Jaunak ▁aldatu ▁egin ▁dizu ▁izena : ▁“ I zu - ikara ▁inguruan ” ▁izango ▁duzu ▁aurrerantzean .
PRED:	Early the next morning Jeremiah took Jeremiah from the camp in the wood of wood . Then Jeremiah said to Baruch , “ The Lord has commanded you to say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : '
GOLD:	The next day , when Pashhur finally released him , Jeremiah said , “ Pashhur , the Lord has changed your name . From now on you are to be called ‘ The Man Who Lives in Terror . '

ID:	1544
INPUT:	▁zu , ▁ordea , ▁ho bi ratu ▁gabe bo ta ▁zaituzte , gauza ▁naz k agarri aren ▁par e ; le iz eko ▁harri ▁ar ter ab o ta ▁dituzten ekin ▁zaude , ez pataz ▁hildakoen ▁gorp uen ▁artean , han ka pean ▁zapaltzen ▁den gor pu aren ▁par e .
PRED:	But you have made me furious with your skin , and you have made me furious with their swords . You are like a rock of war with swords , with swords , with swords , the sword of the dead , the sword of the dead .
GOLD:	but you will be thrown out of your gravelike a worthless branch.Like a corpse trampled underfoot , you will be dumped into a mass gravewith those killed in battle.You will descend to the pit .

ID:	1545
INPUT:	▁M akir ri ▁Galaad ▁esku aldea ▁eman ▁nion .
PRED:	So I gave Gilead to Gilead and Gilead .
GOLD:	I gave Gilead to the clan of Makir .

ID:	1546
INPUT:	▁« Hartu ▁makila ▁eta , ▁zeure ▁anaia ▁Aaron ▁lagun ▁duzula , ▁bildu ▁israeldarren ▁elkartea ; ▁gero , ▁guztien ▁aurrean , ▁agindu ▁harkaitz ari , ▁eta ▁honek ▁ura ▁emango ▁du . ▁Hark aitz etik ▁ura ▁sorraraziko ▁duzu , ▁eta ▁elkarteari ▁eta ▁abere ei ▁emango ▁diezu ▁edaten ».
PRED:	“ Take your shepherd , Aaron , your brother , Aaron , and all the people of Israel , and set apart from the community of Israel . Then you will eat the water from the rock and water , and you will drink the water . ”
GOLD:	“ You and Aaron must take the staff and assemble the entire community . As the people watch , speak to the rock over there , and it will pour out its water . You will provide enough water from the rock to satisfy the whole community and their livestock . ”

ID:	1547
INPUT:	▁« Era man ▁zeuen ▁lurreko ▁lehen ▁fruituak ▁Jaunaren , ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoaren , ▁etxera .« Ez ▁egos i ▁antx um erik ▁bere ▁amaren ▁esn etan .
PRED:	“ You must not celebrate the fruit of the Lord your God , for you have been a young goat for a young goat .
GOLD:	“ As you harvest your crops , bring the very best of the first harvest to the house of the Lord your God. “ You must not cook a young goat in its mother 's milk .

ID:	1548
INPUT:	▁norbaitek ▁kilometro ▁bat ▁egitera ▁behar tzen ▁bazaitu ▁egin ▁bi ▁berarekin .
PRED:	If you want to buy it into the town , you must be with him .
GOLD:	If a soldier demands that you carry his gear for a mile , carry it two miles .

ID:	1549
INPUT:	▁O ker turik ▁eta ▁makur ▁nabil , ▁egun ▁osoan ▁kop et ilun .
PRED:	My heart is full of pain , and my heart is full of darkness .
GOLD:	A raging fever burns within me , and my health is broken .

ID:	1550
INPUT:	▁horm etan ▁zizel katuak ▁zor u tik ▁ate buru etaraino .
PRED:	The walls of the Sheep
GOLD:	from the floor to the top of the walls , including the outer wall of the sanctuary .

ID:	1551
INPUT:	▁Salomonen ▁erregealdiko ▁laugarren ▁urteko ▁Z ib ▁hilean ▁ezarri ▁zituzten ▁Jaunaren ▁etxeko ▁oinarriak ,
PRED:	In the fourth year of Solomon 's reign in the fourth year of the reign of Solomon 's reign ,
GOLD:	The foundation of the Lord 's Temple was laid in midspring , in the month of Ziv , during the fourth year of Solomon 's reign .

ID:	1552
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁Judaren ▁eta ▁Benjaminen ▁leinuko ▁batzuk ▁Jerusalemen ▁jarri ▁ziren ▁bizitzen . Ju daren ▁leinukoak : ▁A ta ias , ▁Uz iasen ▁semea ▁— hau ▁Zakarias ena , ▁hau ▁Am arias ena , ▁hau ▁Xeb at ias ena , ▁hau ▁Mah al ale el ena —, ▁P ere tzen ▁ondorengo etakoak ;
PRED:	But some of the tribe of Judah came to live in Jerusalem , along with the tribe of Benjamin , the tribe of Judah , Benjamin , son of Uzziah , son of Uzziah , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Asaph , son of Nethaniah , and Azariah .
GOLD:	but some of the people from Judah and Benjamin resettled in Jerusalem . ) From the tribe of Judah : Athaiah son of Uzziah , son of Zechariah , son of Amariah , son of Shephatiah , son of Mahalalel , of the family of Perez .

ID:	1553
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zitzaien ▁hiltzeko ▁bai men ik ▁eman , ▁baina ▁bai ▁bost ▁hilabetez ▁oinaze tzekoa . ▁Horiek ▁emandako ▁oinaz ea ▁es kor p io ien ▁ziz ta d arena ▁bezalakoa ▁da .
PRED:	But no one was allowed to kill him , but it was like a thousand years .
GOLD:	They were told not to kill them but to torture them for five months with pain like the pain of a scorpion sting .

ID:	1554
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁deiadarka ▁esan ▁zion :— Zer ▁duzu ▁nirekin , ▁Jesus , ▁goi - goiko ▁Jainkoaren ▁Seme ▁horrek ? ▁Jainko arren , ▁ez ▁nazazu ▁oinaze tu !
PRED:	“ What do you think about me ? ” Jesus asked . “ What do you believe in me ? ”
GOLD:	With a shriek , he screamed , “ Why are you interfering with me , Jesus , Son of the Most High God ? In the name of God , I beg you , do n't torture me ! ”

ID:	1555
INPUT:	▁Hilk ias ▁apaiz ▁nagusiak ▁esan ▁zion ▁Xaf an ▁idazkari ari :— Le ge - lib urua ▁aurkitu ▁dut ▁Jaunaren ▁etxean . Eta ▁Hilk iasek ▁Xaf ani ▁eman ▁zion ▁liburua . ▁Xaf anek , ▁irakurri ▁zuelarik ,
PRED:	Hilkiah the high priest said to Shaphan , “ I have found the Book of the Law of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Hilkiah the high priest said to Shaphan the court secretary , “ I have found the Book of the Law in the Lord 's Temple ! ” Then Hilkiah gave the scroll to Shaphan , and he read it .

ID:	1556
INPUT:	▁ F untzionari o ek , ▁azpil ana ▁eginez , ▁hil ▁egin ▁zuten ▁Joax ▁Bet - M il on , ▁Sil ara ▁bidean ▁zihoala .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the officials conspired against Joash and went on the road to the way of Caesarea .
GOLD:	The assassins were Jozacar son of Shimeath and Jehozabad son of Shomer — both trusted advisers . Joash was buried with his ancestors in the City of David . Then his son Amaziah became the next king .

ID:	1557
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁profeta ▁zen ▁eta ▁baz ekien ▁hark ▁Jainkoak ▁zin ▁eginez ▁hitzeman ▁ziona : ▁beraren ▁odol eko ▁bat ▁ezarriko ▁zuela ▁bere ▁tronuan .
PRED:	But when God had heard that he had listened , he took a solemn oath that God had promised his throne .
GOLD:	But he was a prophet , and he knew God had promised with an oath that one of David 's own descendants would sit on his throne .

ID:	1558
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁Jeroboam i ▁emaniko ▁hitza
PRED:	Promises of Jeroboam
GOLD:	Jeroboam Rebels against Solomon

ID:	1559
INPUT:	▁Ahal tsua ▁izan ▁balu ▁bere ▁atsegin , un e ▁oroz ▁dei ▁egingo ▁zi ok een ▁Jainkoari ”.
PRED:	If the Almighty is good , let the Almighty call for him . '
GOLD:	Can they take delight in the Almighty ? Can they call to God at any time ?

ID:	1560
INPUT:	▁Entzun , ▁itsas ▁herri ok , adi ▁egon , ▁urrutiko ▁nazio ok . J aio ▁aurretik ▁izan ▁nindu engo goan ▁Jaunak , am aren ▁sabelean ▁nengoela , neure ▁izen ez ▁deitu .
PRED:	Listen to me , you people of the world , you who lived in distant distant lands , from the Lord , who called me to distant lands .
GOLD:	Listen to me , all you in distant lands ! Pay attention , you who are far away ! The Lord called me before my birth ; from within the womb he called me by name .

ID:	1561
INPUT:	▁« Baina ▁zerbitzari ▁hark , ▁irten ▁orduko , ▁diru ▁pixka ▁bat ▁zor ▁zion ▁zerbitzu - lagun ▁batekin ▁egin ▁zuen ▁topo ▁eta , ▁lepotik ▁heldu rik ▁eta ▁ito ▁beharrean , ▁esaten ▁zion : ▁“ Em ad ak ▁zor ▁du ana ”.
PRED:	“ But when he got into the prison , he took some of the money to meet him . He said to her , “ A man has been put to meet him , and she has been put to bed . '
GOLD:	“ But when the man left the king , he went to a fellow servant who owed him a few thousand dollars . He grabbed him by the throat and demanded instant payment .

ID:	1562
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁etxeko ▁tresnak , ▁handiak ▁nahiz ▁txik iak , ▁tenpluko ▁eta ▁jauregiko ▁altxor rak , ▁baita ▁buruzagi enak ▁ere , ▁Babiloniara ▁eraman ▁zituen ▁denak .
PRED:	He also brought all the treasures of the Temple of God and all the treasures of the Temple of God , including all the treasures of the Temple of God .
GOLD:	The king took home to Babylon all the articles , large and small , used in the Temple of God , and the treasures from both the Lord 's Temple and from the palace of the king and his officials .

ID:	1563
INPUT:	▁Ongi ▁jokatzen ▁ahalegin tzen ▁naiz , ▁Jainkoaren ▁aurrean ▁ez ▁ezik , ▁baita ▁gizakien ▁aurrean ▁ere .
PRED:	Yes , I know that God does not know that I am not with all human hands .
GOLD:	We are careful to be honorable before the Lord , but we also want everyone else to see that we are honorable .

ID:	1564
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁Abrahamek , ▁berriro :— Ger ta ▁daiteke ▁berrogei ▁besterik ▁ez ▁izatea .— Ba ▁— ihar <unk> ▁zion ▁Jaunak —, ▁ez ▁dut ▁suntsituko ▁berrogei ▁hori engatik .
PRED:	Abraham replied , “ If any of these things are left for forty days , I will not destroy it for forty days . ”
GOLD:	Then Abraham pressed his request further . “ Suppose there are only forty ? ” And the Lord replied , “ I will not destroy it for the sake of the forty . ”

ID:	1565
INPUT:	▁irakatsi ▁zaion ▁egiazko ▁mezu ari ▁atxik ia , ▁irakaspen ▁zuzen ez ▁besteak ▁ahol katzeko ▁eta ▁kontra ▁dauden en ▁irakats iak ▁gezur tatzeko ▁gai ▁izan ▁dadin .
PRED:	Teach the truth to teach the truth to teach the truth , and they are honest to teach others .
GOLD:	He must have a strong belief in the trustworthy message he was taught ; then he will be able to encourage others with wholesome teaching and show those who oppose it where they are wrong .

ID:	1566
INPUT:	▁M ate ori ▁deia . ▁Jesus ▁bekatari ekin ▁bazkal tzen
PRED:	Jesus Calls Levi ( Matthew )
GOLD:	Jesus Calls Matthew

ID:	1567
INPUT:	▁Nebaten ▁seme ▁Jeroboamen ▁eta ▁Ah iasen ▁seme ▁Bax aren ▁senitarteak ▁zigortu ▁nituen ▁bezalaxe ▁zigortuko ▁dut ▁Akaben ▁senitar tea ▁ere .
PRED:	I will punish the descendants of Jeroboam son of Nebat and the descendants of Baasha son of Nebat .
GOLD:	I will destroy the family of Ahab as I destroyed the families of Jeroboam son of Nebat and of Baasha son of Ahijah .

ID:	1568
INPUT:	▁Saulek , ▁ordea , ▁bere ▁mandatariak ▁igorri ▁zituen ▁Daviden ▁etxera , ▁zaindu ▁eta ▁biharamun ▁goizean ▁hil ▁zezaten . ▁Bere ▁emazte ▁Mik alek ▁berri ▁hau ▁eman ▁zion ▁Davidi : ▁« Orain ▁gauez ▁ihes ▁egin ▁eta ▁salbatzen ▁ez ▁bazara , ▁bihar ▁hil ▁egingo ▁zaituzte ».
PRED:	But when Saul sent messengers to his home , he sent his wife to kill him . The next morning he was killed in the next morning , he said to David , “ Stay here in the night and kill him . ”
GOLD:	Then Saul sent troops to watch David 's house . They were told to kill David when he came out the next morning . But Michal , David 's wife , warned him , “ If you do n't escape tonight , you will be dead by morning . ”

ID:	1569
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁nagusi ▁egipto arraren ▁etxean ▁bizi ▁zen ▁Jose . ▁Dena ▁ongi ▁ateratzen ▁zitzaion , ▁Jauna ▁berekin ▁baitzuen .
PRED:	So Joseph was buried in his household , and he was buried in the house of the Lord 's household .
GOLD:	The Lord was with Joseph , so he succeeded in everything he did as he served in the home of his Egyptian master .

ID:	1570
INPUT:	▁— Ez ▁dugu ▁aditu ▁nahi ▁Jaunaren ▁izenean ▁ematen ▁ari ▁zaren ▁mezu ▁hori .
PRED:	“ We do n't listen to the name of the Lord our God .
GOLD:	“ We will not listen to your messages from the Lord !

ID:	1571
INPUT:	▁Geh ien ek ▁ref atar tzat ▁zeuz k aten , ▁baina ▁moab darrek ▁em itar ▁deitzen ▁zieten .
PRED:	The captain of the Philistines had been called out , but the people of Moab had been called to the land of Moab .
GOLD:	Both the Emites and the Anakites are also known as the Rephaites , though the Moabites call them Emites .

ID:	1572
INPUT:	▁Rebek ak ▁ere ▁jaso ▁zituen ▁begiak ▁eta , ▁Isaak ▁ikusirik , ▁gamelu tik ▁jaitsi ▁zen ,
PRED:	When she saw Rebekah , she looked up from the camels and saw that Isaac had taken from the camels .
GOLD:	When Rebekah looked up and saw Isaac , she quickly dismounted from her camel .

ID:	1573
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁denek ▁bat ▁egin ▁zuten , ▁Josue ▁eta ▁Israel ▁herriaren ▁kontra ▁borrokatzeko .
PRED:	So all the people of Israel and Joshua and Joshua and Israel went to fight against the people of Israel .
GOLD:	These kings combined their armies to fight as one against Joshua and the Israelites .

ID:	1574
INPUT:	▁ F ilistearrak ▁israeldarren ▁aurka ▁borrokatzeko ▁asmotan
PRED:	The Philistines Defeats the Israelites
GOLD:	Saul Consults a Medium

ID:	1575
INPUT:	▁Lur ▁ematera ▁joan ▁zirenean , ▁ordea , ▁ez ▁zuten ▁haren ▁bu rez urra , ▁oinak ▁eta ▁eskuak ▁baizik ▁aurkitu .
PRED:	But when they went to the ground , they did n't know his hands , but they could n't find him .
GOLD:	But when they went out to bury her , they found only her skull , her feet , and her hands .

ID:	1576
INPUT:	▁Eguna ▁argitu ▁baino ▁lehen , ▁deiadar ▁degizu t ▁laguntza ▁eske : zure ▁promes etan ▁dut ▁itxaropen !
PRED:	In the morning I cry out to you in trouble , for I hope in you .
GOLD:	I rise early , before the sun is up ; I cry out for help and put my hope in your words .

ID:	1577
INPUT:	▁A gi ria ▁idatzi , ▁lekuko en ▁aurrean ▁zigil atu ▁eta ▁zilarra ▁pis atu ▁nuen .
PRED:	I wrote these words on the book of the beast and weight of the beast .
GOLD:	I signed and sealed the deed of purchase before witnesses , weighed out the silver , and paid him .

ID:	1578
INPUT:	▁L ots az ▁nahas turik ▁geldi ▁bitez ▁bur la ▁egiten ▁didaten ak !
PRED:	Let those who say to me , “ Come , let me be disgraced ! ”
GOLD:	But may all who search for yoube filled with joy and gladness in you.May those who love your salvationrepeatedly shout , “ The Lord is great ! ”

ID:	1579
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁argi ▁eta ▁garbi ▁diotsuet ▁gaur ▁ez ▁dudala ▁neure ▁gain ▁hartzen ▁inori ▁gerta ▁dak io keen aren ▁erantz uk izun ik .
PRED:	That is why I tell you the light of my light , so that I have n't done it .
GOLD:	I declare today that I have been faithful . If anyone suffers eternal death , it 's not my fault ,

ID:	1580
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁orain , ▁abiatu ▁eta ▁igaro ▁Zer ed ▁erreka .« Hala ▁egin ▁genuen .
PRED:	So we went to the Kidron Valley and went to the Kidron Valley .
GOLD:	Moses continued , “ Then the Lord said to us , ‘ Get moving . Cross the Zered Brook . ' So we crossed the brook .

ID:	1581
INPUT:	▁Zintzoa ▁estu asun etik ▁atera ▁dute eta ▁gaiztoa ▁sartu ▁da ▁haren ▁lekura .
PRED:	The godly escape from evil , and the wicked enter the place of safety .
GOLD:	The godly are rescued from trouble , and it falls on the wicked instead .

ID:	1582
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁zergatik ▁zuzendu ▁zuen ▁Jaunak ▁hitz ▁hura ▁Bax aren ▁eta ▁beronen ▁etxeko en ▁aurka , ▁Hanan iren ▁seme ▁Jehu ▁profetaren ▁bitartez : ▁alde ▁batetik , ▁Jeroboamen ▁etxeko ek ▁bezalaxe , ▁Jaunari ▁atsegin ▁ez ▁zaion ▁guztia ▁egin ▁zuelako , ▁bere ▁egintzen gatik ▁Jauna ▁haser r araziz ; ▁beste tik , ▁Jeroboamen ▁etxekoak ▁suntsitu ▁zitu elako .
PRED:	This is what the Lord had spoken against the family of Baasha son of Baasha and his family , just as the Lord had promised through Jeroboam son of Nebat . He did not destroy all the evil things he had done .
GOLD:	The message from the Lord against Baasha and his family came through the prophet Jehu son of Hanani . It was delivered because Baasha had done what was evil in the Lord 's sight ( just as the family of Jeroboam had done ) , and also because Baasha had destroyed the family of Jeroboam . The Lord 's anger was provoked by Baasha 's sins .

ID:	1583
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁erantzun ▁zidan : ▁« Eder ki , ▁giza ▁gor o tzaren ▁gainean ▁egin ▁ordez , ▁zeure ▁ogia ▁behi - gor o tzaren ▁gainean ▁pres tatzeko ▁baimena ▁ematen ▁dizut ».
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ You have made a sacrifice for your burnt offering . ”
GOLD:	“ All right , ” the Lord said . “ You may bake your bread with cow dung instead of human dung . ”

ID:	1584
INPUT:	▁Agar rek ▁« Zeu ▁zara ▁ikusi ▁nau zun ▁Jainkoa » ▁eman ▁zion ▁izen ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion ▁Jainkoari , ▁hau ▁baitzi oen : ▁« Ez ▁dut , ▁bada , ▁ni ▁ikusi ▁nauena ▁bera ▁ikusi ?»
PRED:	“ You have seen God , ” she said , “ I have seen God like this man , ” she said , “ I did n't see him . ”
GOLD:	Thereafter , Hagar used another name to refer to the Lord , who had spoken to her . She said , “ You are the God who sees me. ” She also said , “ Have I truly seen the One who sees me ? ”

ID:	1585
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁zerbitzu ▁hau ▁Jainkoak ▁bere ▁erru kiz ▁eman ▁digu la ▁jakinik , ▁ez ▁dugu ▁kemen ik ▁galtzen .
PRED:	That is why God has been revealed to us , and we have no mercy on us .
GOLD:	Therefore , since God in his mercy has given us this new way , we never give up .

ID:	1586
INPUT:	▁ondoren , ▁beste ▁zazpi ▁gal buru ▁m ehar ▁sortu ▁ziren , ▁haize ▁erre ak ▁ihartu ak .
PRED:	After the seven thin heads of grain , the east wind grew up and withered by the wind .
GOLD:	Then seven more heads of grain appeared , but these were shriveled and withered by the east wind .

ID:	1587
INPUT:	▁M ultz otan ▁pil atu ▁zituzten ▁eta ▁ki rats ez ▁bete ▁zen ▁lurralde ▁osoa .
PRED:	Then Pharaoh 's army became very upset and all the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	“ Do it tomorrow , ” Pharaoh said. “ All right , ” Moses replied , “ it will be as you have said . Then you will know that there is no one like the Lord our God .

ID:	1588
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁esan ▁zion ▁Jaunak ▁Is aiasi , ▁hau ▁jauregi tik ▁tenplua ▁bitartean ▁zelarik :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Isaiah son of Amoz ,
GOLD:	But before Isaiah had left the middle courtyard , this message came to him from the Lord :

ID:	1589
INPUT:	▁N at ana elek ▁galdetu ▁zion :— Non dik ▁ezagutzen ▁nauzu ? Jesusek ▁erantzun :— F elip ek ▁deitu ▁aurretik ▁ikusi ▁zintudan ▁pik u pean .
PRED:	“ Where do you know ? ” he asked . “ I know you , ” Jesus replied , “ I have seen you in the middle of the tree . ”
GOLD:	“ How do you know about me ? ” Nathanael asked.Jesus replied , “ I could see you under the fig tree before Philip found you . ”

ID:	1590
INPUT:	▁Gar ▁bizian ▁ari ▁da ▁gaiztakeria , sua ▁sasi ▁eta ▁l ahar ▁artean ▁bezala ; hartu ak ▁ditu ▁denak , suak ▁tx ara dia ▁bezala , k ea ▁ki ri bil ean ▁gor antz ▁do ala .
PRED:	The godless are like a swelling on thorns and thorns , like a swelling on the heads of thorns .
GOLD:	That is why the Lord takes no pleasure in the young menand shows no mercy even to the widows and orphans.For they are all wicked hypocrites , and they all speak foolishness.But even then the Lord 's anger will not be satisfied.His fist is still poised to strike .

ID:	1591
INPUT:	▁Hil ▁egin ▁ziren ▁arrainak ▁eta ▁ki ra s tua ▁gelditu ▁zen ▁ibaia ; ▁egiptoarrek ▁ezin ▁izan ▁zuten ▁bertako ▁urik ▁edan . ▁O dola ▁zegoen ▁Egipto ▁lurralde ▁osoan !
PRED:	The Egyptians died , and the Egyptians were thrown into the middle of Egypt . The Egyptians could drink the water of Egypt , so they could drink the blood of Egypt .
GOLD:	The fish in the river died , and the water became so foul that the Egyptians could n't drink it . There was blood everywhere throughout the land of Egypt .

ID:	1592
INPUT:	▁ih artzen ▁da ▁belarra , ▁zimel tzen ▁lo rea ; gure ▁Jainkoaren ▁hitzak , ▁ordea , betiko ▁dirau ».
PRED:	The grass is like grass , but our words are forever . ”
GOLD:	The grass withers and the flowers fade , but the word of our God stands forever . ”

ID:	1593
INPUT:	▁Guztiz ▁ospetsu ▁dago ▁printz es a , ur rez ▁apain ▁bor daturiko ▁jantzi tan .
PRED:	He sits in high above all the royal clothing , and he fine linen clothing .
GOLD:	In her beautiful robes , she is led to the king , accompanied by her bridesmaids .

ID:	1594
INPUT:	▁R is atik ▁Keh el at ara ;
PRED:	They left Hashmonah and camped at Hashmonah .
GOLD:	They left Rissah and camped at Kehelathah .

ID:	1595
INPUT:	▁Horra , ▁jakin aren ▁gainean ▁jarri ▁zaituztet ▁aldez ▁aurretik .
PRED:	That is why I have done to you about this ahead of you .
GOLD:	See , I have warned you about this ahead of time .

ID:	1596
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁beteko ▁dizu ▁niri ▁eman ▁didan ▁hitza : ▁“ Zure ▁semeok ▁zintzo ▁jokatzen ▁badute , ▁bihotz ▁osoz ▁eta ▁gogo ▁guztiz ▁nire ▁aurrean ▁leial ▁ibiltzen ▁badira , ▁beti ▁izanen ▁da ▁zure etariko ▁norbait ▁Israelgo ▁errege - aulkian ”.
PRED:	When the Lord has given me this message : ‘ If you obey me and obey me , you will be blameless before me , and they will rule over all the people of Israel . '
GOLD:	If you do this , then the Lord will keep the promise he made to me . He told me , ‘ If your descendants live as they should and follow me faithfully with all their heart and soul , one of them will always sit on the throne of Israel . '

ID:	1597
INPUT:	▁mundu ▁honetan ▁gelditzen ▁zaizkion ▁egunetan ▁Jainkoak ▁nahi ▁bezala ▁bizitzeko , ▁eta ▁ez ▁giza ▁grin en ▁arabera .
PRED:	In this way , you do n't want to live in this world . Instead , you do n't want to live in human desires .
GOLD:	You wo n't spend the rest of your lives chasing your own desires , but you will be anxious to do the will of God .

ID:	1598
INPUT:	▁Sis erak ▁burdinazko ▁bederatzi ehun ▁guda - gurdi ▁zituen ▁eta ▁hogei ▁urtez ▁gogor ▁zanpatu ▁zituen ▁israeldarrak ; ▁horregatik , ▁israeldarrek ▁dei ▁egin ▁zioten ▁Jaunari .
PRED:	He made ten bronze bronze bronze bronze chains for twenty years , and he led Israel to the Lord .
GOLD:	Sisera , who had 900 iron chariots , ruthlessly oppressed the Israelites for twenty years . Then the people of Israel cried out to the Lord for help .

ID:	1599
INPUT:	▁Jesusek , ▁berriz , ▁erantzun ▁zien :— Hau ek ▁ditut ▁nik ▁ama ▁eta ▁anai - arreba : ▁Jainkoaren ▁hitza ▁entzun ▁eta ▁betetzen ▁dutenak .
PRED:	But Jesus replied , “ This is what the Lord says : My brothers and sisters , are those who hear the word of God . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ My mother and my brothers are all those who hear God 's word and obey it . ”

ID:	1600
INPUT:	▁Herri aren ▁buruzagiak : ▁P aro x , ▁P ah at - M oh ab , ▁Elam , ▁Z atu , ▁B ani ,
PRED:	The leaders of the nations : Elam , Elam , Elam , Elam , Elam ,
GOLD:	Bunni , Azgad , Bebai ,

ID:	1601
INPUT:	▁Bildots ak ▁bigarren ▁zigil ua ▁ireki ▁zuenean , ▁bigarren ▁izaki ak ▁hau ▁esaten ▁zuela ▁entzun ▁nuen : ▁« Zatoz ».
PRED:	When the Lamb broke the second seal , I heard that the second angel had spoken ! ”
GOLD:	When the Lamb broke the second seal , I heard the second living being say , “ Come ! ”

ID:	1602
INPUT:	▁Leh oi ▁gaztea ▁zu , ▁Juda ! E h iz atik ▁heldu ▁zara , ▁seme ! M ak urtu ▁eta ▁luze ▁etz aten ▁d al eh oi aren ▁antzera , leh oi - eme aren ▁antzera . Nor ▁aus artu ▁aurre ▁egitera ?
PRED:	“ O Judah , you are like a lion 's son , and you are like a beautiful woman . He has been cut off like a thousand years , like a mighty army of Judah . Who has been able to stand up against you ?
GOLD:	Judah , my son , is a young lionthat has finished eating its prey.Like a lion he crouches and lies down ; like a lioness — who dares to rouse him ?

ID:	1603
INPUT:	▁Koreren ▁semeak , ▁ordea , ▁ez ▁ziren ▁hil .
PRED:	But the sons of Korah died .
GOLD:	However , the sons of Korah did not die that day .

ID:	1604
INPUT:	▁« Neu ▁naiz ▁Jauna , ▁bizidun ▁guztien ▁Jainkoa . ▁Nire tzat ▁ez ▁da ▁ezer ▁ezin ezko rik .
PRED:	“ I am the Lord , the God of all living beings , and no one can ever say .
GOLD:	“ I am the Lord , the God of all the peoples of the world . Is anything too hard for me ?

ID:	1605
INPUT:	▁ F edeari ▁esker , ▁No ek , ▁oraindik ▁ikusten ▁ez ▁ziren ▁gau zen ▁berri ▁izan ▁zuelarik , ▁ontzia ▁egin ▁zuen ▁etxekoak ▁salbatzeko , ▁Jainkoaren ▁esaneko ▁izanez . ▁Bere ▁fede az ▁gaitzetsi ▁egin ▁zuen ▁mundu ▁sines gabea , ▁eta ▁fede tik ▁datorren ▁salbamen aren ▁oinordeko ▁egin ▁zen .
PRED:	It was by faith that God had not yet gone , but it was not a new person who had been preached to God 's household . And when the grace of God came to save us from the world , he was saved by faith that comes from the world .
GOLD:	It was by faith that Noah built a large boat to save his family from the flood . He obeyed God , who warned him about things that had never happened before . By his faith Noah condemned the rest of the world , and he received the righteousness that comes by faith .

ID:	1606
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁erregutu ▁zion ▁Jaunari :— E rak us tazu , ▁otoi , ▁zeure ▁aintza .
PRED:	Then Moses said to the Lord , “ Please give me glory to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Moses responded , “ Then show me your glorious presence . ”

ID:	1607
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁beso ei ▁goian ▁eusten ▁zien ean , ▁israeldarrak ▁ziren ▁garaile ; ▁behera ▁erortzen ▁zitzaizkion ean , ▁berriz , ▁amalek tarrak .
PRED:	So Moses destroyed all the people of Israel , and the people of Israel trembled and attacked him .
GOLD:	As long as Moses held up the staff in his hand , the Israelites had the advantage . But whenever he dropped his hand , the Amalekites gained the advantage .

ID:	1608
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁ez ▁dizut ▁inolako ▁ok errik ▁egin ; ▁zu ▁ari ▁z atzaizki t ▁eraso ka . ▁Jauna ▁da ▁epaile . ▁Era baki ▁beza ▁berak ▁israeldar ▁eta ▁amondarren ▁artean ».
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will not harm you , ” says the Lord . “ Let the judge of Israel be punished among the Ammonites . ”
GOLD:	Therefore , I have not sinned against you . Rather , you have wronged me by attacking me . Let the Lord , who is judge , decide today which of us is right — Israel or Ammon . ”

ID:	1609
INPUT:	▁Hala , ▁leher tu ▁egin ▁da ▁nire ▁haserre - sumina , ▁eta ▁erre ▁egin ▁ditu ▁Judako ▁hiriak ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁kal eak : ▁hondamendi ▁eta ▁eremu ▁bihurtu ▁dira , ▁eta ▁halaxe ▁daude ▁orain .
PRED:	But my fierce anger has broken my fierce anger , and it will be filled with ruins , and it will become desolate and desolate .
GOLD:	And so my fury boiled over and fell like fire on the towns of Judah and into the streets of Jerusalem , and they are still a desolate ruin today .

ID:	1610
INPUT:	▁Bai , ▁honela ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak : ▁Den bora ▁gutxi ▁barru , ▁zeru - lur rei ▁eta ▁itsaso - leh orre i ▁dardara ▁eragin go ▁diet .
PRED:	Yes , this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : I will make a desolate wasteland , and the earth will be scattered .
GOLD:	“ For this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : In just a little while I will again shake the heavens and the earth , the oceans and the dry land .

ID:	1611
INPUT:	▁aurkitzen ▁ez ▁badute , ▁berriz , ▁etxeko ▁nagusia ▁Jainkoaren ▁aurrera ▁aurkeztuko ▁da , ▁eta ▁bere ▁lagun aren ▁ondasun ik ▁ez ▁duela ▁ukitu ▁aitortuko .
PRED:	But if the master returns to the house of God 's household , it will not be able to pronounce the property of God 's household .
GOLD:	“ Suppose someone leaves money or goods with a neighbor for safekeeping , and they are stolen from the neighbor 's house . If the thief is caught , the compensation is double the value of what was stolen .

ID:	1612
INPUT:	▁Koru - zuzendari arentzat . ▁Davidena . Jaunaren gan ▁babesten ▁naiz . ▁N olatan ▁esaten ▁didazue :« Alde ▁mendira , ▁hegaztiak ▁bezala !
PRED:	Listen to me , O Lord , you are my refuge ; you are my rock .
GOLD:	I trust in the Lord for protection.So why do you say to me , “ Fly like a bird to the mountains for safety !

ID:	1613
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁erre - oparia ▁buka tzean , ▁erregea ▁eta ▁beronekin ▁ziren ▁guztiak ▁ahuspeztu ▁egin ▁ziren .
PRED:	When the burnt offering was finished , all the king bowed low to the ground with him .
GOLD:	Then the king and everyone with him bowed down in worship .

ID:	1614
INPUT:	▁Bera , ▁berriz , ▁basamortuan ▁aurrera ▁joan ▁zen ▁eta ▁egun ▁osoan ▁ibili . ▁Azken ean , ▁ip uru ▁baten ▁azpian ▁eseri ▁zen . ▁Herio tza ▁o pa ▁zion ▁bere ▁buruari . ▁Hau ▁zioen : ▁« As ki ▁da ! ▁Orain , ▁Jauna , ▁hartz azu ▁ene ▁bizia , ▁ez ▁bainaiz ▁ni ▁neure ▁gurasoak ▁baino ▁hobea ».
PRED:	But he went into the wilderness and sat down in the wilderness . He sat down in the wilderness and sat down in the wilderness , and he sat down in the wilderness and sat down in the wilderness . He said , “ The Lord is my son ! ”
GOLD:	Then he went on alone into the wilderness , traveling all day . He sat down under a solitary broom tree and prayed that he might die . “ I have had enough , Lord , ” he said . “ Take my life , for I am no better than my ancestors who have already died . ”

ID:	1615
INPUT:	▁eduki ▁ardiak ▁ar t ile az ▁jantziak ▁egiteko , an tx umeak , ▁al or ▁bat ▁eros teko ▁beste ▁ateratzeko ,
PRED:	Also take some of the sheep and goats to buy one of the sheep and goats to buy it .
GOLD:	your sheep will provide wool for clothing , and your goats will provide the price of a field .

ID:	1616
INPUT:	▁Ar n asa ▁izango ▁dudan ▁bitartean , Jainkoaren ▁h ats a ▁nire ▁sudur retan ,
PRED:	My life will be thrown into the darkness , and my life will be crushed .
GOLD:	As long as I live , while I have breath from God ,

ID:	1617
INPUT:	▁Paulo ▁Zesare ara ▁eraman a
PRED:	Paul Arrives in Caesarea
GOLD:	Paul Is Sent to Caesarea

ID:	1618
INPUT:	▁Moisesek , ▁berriro :— Ez ▁gaitzazu ▁utz ! ▁Zuk ▁ongi ▁ezagutzen ▁dituzu ▁basamortuan ▁etxola tzeko ▁p ara j eak ▁eta ▁gidari ▁izan ▁zai tzak e gu .
PRED:	“ No , ” Moses replied . “ You know that you have been in the wilderness . ”
GOLD:	“ Please do n't leave us , ” Moses pleaded . “ You know the places in the wilderness where we should camp . Come , be our guide .

ID:	1619
INPUT:	▁Santua ▁eta ▁zuzena ▁zen , ▁baina ▁zuek ▁ukatu ▁egin ▁zenuten , ▁eta ▁hiltzaile ▁bat ▁askatzeko ▁eskatu ;
PRED:	This is the Holy Spirit , but you refused to pay it back .
GOLD:	You rejected this holy , righteous one and instead demanded the release of a murderer .

ID:	1620
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zaitzatela ▁engaina ▁Ezekiasek ; ▁ez ▁diez azuela ▁iruzur rik ▁egin . ▁Ez ▁sinetsi ! ▁In ongo ▁jainko k ▁bere ▁nazio a ▁nahiz ▁erreinua ▁ezin ▁izan ▁badu ▁ez ▁nire , ▁ez ▁nire ▁aurreko en ▁eskuetatik ▁libratu , ▁are ▁gutxiago ▁libratuko ▁zaituzte ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoak ”».
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : Do n't let Hezekiah deceive you or cheat other gods , or if you do n't believe me , you will not be able to rescue me from the gods of my ancestors . ”
GOLD:	Do n't let Hezekiah deceive you ! Do n't let him fool you like this ! I say it again — no god of any nation or kingdom has ever yet been able to rescue his people from me or my ancestors . How much less will your God rescue you from my power ! ”

ID:	1621
INPUT:	▁A izko ra ▁k am uts arekin , z orro zten ▁ez ▁baduzu , lan ▁handiagoa ▁egin ▁beharko . Jo ka ▁ezazu ▁buruz , ahal egin ari ▁on ura ▁ateratzeko .
PRED:	But if someone hates another person , do n't be able to rise again and say , “ Be patient with you ! ”
GOLD:	Using a dull ax requires great strength , so sharpen the blade.That 's the value of wisdom ; it helps you succeed .

ID:	1622
INPUT:	▁Eliseo ▁hizketan ▁ari ▁zelarik , ▁heldu ▁zen ▁mezul aria ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion :— Begira , ▁hondamendi ▁hau ▁Jaunak ▁bidalia ▁da . ▁Zer ▁itxaron ▁dezaket ▁Jaunarengandik ?
PRED:	As Elisha was talking , Elisha said to the prophet , “ Look , how can I go to the Lord ? ”
GOLD:	While Elisha was still saying this , the messenger arrived . And the king said , “ All this misery is from the Lord ! Why should I wait for the Lord any longer ? ”

ID:	1623
INPUT:	▁gaitz ▁go gorre z ▁joko ▁zaituzte ▁Jaunak , ▁bai ▁zeuek , ▁bai ▁zuen ▁ondorengoak : ▁zauri ▁izu garriz , ▁zauri ▁l atz ▁eta ▁iraun kor rez , ▁gaixo tasun ▁gaizto ▁eta ▁senda ezin ez .
PRED:	The Lord will strike you , and your descendants will be punished . Your descendants will be healed , and your descendants will be healed .
GOLD:	then the Lord will overwhelm you and your children with indescribable plagues . These plagues will be intense and without relief , making you miserable and unbearably sick .

ID:	1624
INPUT:	▁G azte ▁grin ats u ▁batek ▁bere ▁neskatx arekin ▁ez ▁dela ▁ongi ▁jokatzen ▁ari ▁eta ▁ezkondu ▁egin ▁behar ▁duela ▁uste ▁badu , ▁bete ▁dezala ▁bere ▁asmoa , ▁eta ▁ezkon ▁daitezela ; ▁ez ▁du ▁bekaturik ▁egiten .
PRED:	If a result , if she is well well well well well that she is right to marry her . If she wants to marry her , do n't let her marry her .
GOLD:	But if a man thinks that he 's treating his fiancée improperly and will inevitably give in to his passion , let him marry her as he wishes . It is not a sin .

ID:	1625
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁zuek herri ▁hez ik aitza ▁eta ▁des l eiala ▁zarete ; nire gandik ▁urruti ▁joan ▁zarete .
PRED:	But you are my rock , but you are filled with integrity .
GOLD:	But my people have stubborn and rebellious hearts.They have turned away and abandoned me .

ID:	1626
INPUT:	▁N ek ez ▁hilko ▁litzateke ▁norbait ▁pertsona ▁zuzen ▁baten ▁alde ; ▁agi an ▁bai , ▁bad aiteke ▁norbait ▁pertsona ▁on ▁baten ▁alde ▁hiltzeko ▁prest ▁ego tea .
PRED:	If someone claims to die , we will die for a while we are ready to kill someone who is ready to kill him .
GOLD:	Now , most people would not be willing to die for an upright person , though someone might perhaps be willing to die for a person who is especially good .

ID:	1627
INPUT:	▁Edo ▁d em agun ▁izurria ▁bidaltzen ▁dudala ▁herrialde aren ▁aurka ▁eta ▁heriotza ▁zabaltzen ▁dudala ▁neure ▁sumin ez , ▁gizakiak ▁eta ▁abereak ▁suntsi tuz ;
PRED:	A Plague of Edom has sent us back to the land of Edom , and I will destroy all our livestock and animals .
GOLD:	“ Or suppose I were to pour out my fury by sending an epidemic into the land , and the disease killed people and animals alike .

ID:	1628
INPUT:	▁Gu ar dia buruak ▁Joseren ▁ardurapean ▁utzi ▁zituen . D en bora ldi ▁bat ▁preso ▁egon ▁ondoren ,
PRED:	The captain of Joseph had put them in charge of the guard , and then he remained in prison .
GOLD:	They remained in prison for quite some time , and the captain of the guard assigned them to Joseph , who looked after them .

ID:	1629
INPUT:	▁Bas as toa
PRED:	The Lord 's Second Reply
GOLD:	The Lord 's Challenge Continues

ID:	1630
INPUT:	▁Entzun ▁Jaunaren ▁hitza , ▁Jakoben ▁ondorengo ok , ▁Israelgo ▁leinu ▁guztiok .
PRED:	Listen to this message from the Lord , all the tribes of Israel , all the tribes of Israel .
GOLD:	Listen to the word of the Lord , people of Jacob — all you families of Israel !

ID:	1631
INPUT:	▁Irten ▁Babiloniatik , ihes ▁egin ▁babiloniarren ▁artetik ! Adi erazi ▁mezua , ▁iragarri ▁poz - oih uz , h el arazi ▁lurraren ▁bazter re taraino :« Jaunak ▁askatu ▁du ▁Israel bere ▁zerbitzaria !»
PRED:	Give the message from the Babylonians , says the Lord , “ Listen to this message from the land of the Babylonians ! The Lord has redeemed you from his servant , and he has redeemed Israel . ”
GOLD:	Yet even now , be free from your captivity ! Leave Babylon and the Babylonians.Sing out this message ! Shout it to the ends of the earth ! The Lord has redeemed his servants , the people of Israel .

ID:	1632
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁hau ▁diotsut : ▁Bekatu ▁asko ▁ditu , ▁baina ▁hain besteko ▁maitasuna ▁ageri ▁badu , ▁Jainkoak ▁barkatu ▁dizki on ▁seinalea ▁da ; ▁gutxi ▁barkatzen ▁zaion ak ▁maitasun ▁gutxi ▁agertzen ▁du .
PRED:	So I tell you the truth , but God has given many others , but if they love each other , he will forgive those who love him .
GOLD:	“ I tell you , her sins — and they are many — have been forgiven , so she has shown me much love . But a person who is forgiven little shows only little love . ”

ID:	1633
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁bere ▁nagusi tasuna ▁azaldu ▁sinago gan
PRED:	Jesus Heals a synagogue
GOLD:	Jesus Preaches in Galilee

ID:	1634
INPUT:	▁M ih ia ▁ere ▁sua ▁da , ▁gaiztakeri azko ▁mundua : ▁gure ▁beste ▁gorputz - a tal en ▁artean ▁jarri ta , ▁gorputz ▁osoa ▁kuts atzen ▁du ▁eta , ▁in fer n uko ▁su az ▁pizturik , ▁sutan ▁jartzen ▁du ▁bizitz aren ▁gur pila .
PRED:	This is a fire of fire , a fire of fire , a fire , and a body has been set apart among the earth , and it is an object of fire , and a burning fire has been poured out on fire .
GOLD:	And among all the parts of the body , the tongue is a flame of fire . It is a whole world of wickedness , corrupting your entire body . It can set your whole life on fire , for it is set on fire by hell itself .

ID:	1635
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁erantzun ▁zidaten : ▁« Er beste alditik ▁libre ▁gelditu ▁direnak ▁zoritxar ▁handi an ▁eta ▁egoera ▁lotsagarri an ▁daude ▁Juda ▁eskualdean ; ▁Jerusalemgo ▁harresiak , ▁berriz , ▁zul oz ▁beteak ▁daude , ▁eta ▁hiriko ▁ateak ▁suak ▁kiskal iak ».
PRED:	They replied to me , “ They have been destroyed by a great army of Judah , and all the people of Judah have been defiled by the walls of Jerusalem . The gates are burned in the walls of Jerusalem , and the gates are filled with walls . ”
GOLD:	They said to me , “ Things are not going well for those who returned to the province of Judah . They are in great trouble and disgrace . The wall of Jerusalem has been torn down , and the gates have been destroyed by fire . ”

ID:	1636
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁diozue :« I tuna ▁egina ▁dugu ▁Herio arekin , tra tua ▁Hildakoen ▁Egoitz arekin : ez behar ▁suntsi garria ▁datorren ean , ez ▁gaitu ▁harrapatuko , gezur ra ▁hartu ▁baitugu ▁babes , mal tzur keria ▁gordeleku ».
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ We have put our trust in the grave , and we will protect us from the grave . We will protect us from the ends of the grave . ”
GOLD:	You boast , “ We have struck a bargain to cheat deathand have made a deal to dodge the grave.The coming destruction can never touch us , for we have built a strong refuge made of lies and deception . ”

ID:	1637
INPUT:	▁Josuek ▁agindu ▁bezala ▁egin ▁zuten ▁israeldarrek : ▁Jordan ▁erditik ▁hamabi ▁harri , ▁israeldar ▁leinuak ▁hainbat ▁harri , ▁hartu , ▁gaua ▁igaroko ▁zuten ▁lekura ▁eraman ▁eta ▁bertan ▁ezarri ▁zituzten , ▁Jaunak ▁Josueri ▁agindu ▁bezala .
PRED:	So Joshua told Joshua , “ twelve stones from the Jordan River , just as the Lord had commanded Joshua . The Israelites set up camp in the middle of the Jordan River , just as the Lord had commanded Joshua .
GOLD:	So the men did as Joshua had commanded them . They took twelve stones from the middle of the Jordan River , one for each tribe , just as the Lord had told Joshua . They carried them to the place where they camped for the night and constructed the memorial there .

ID:	1638
INPUT:	▁Jainkoari ▁eskerrak
PRED:	thanks to God
GOLD:	Encouragement to Be Faithful

ID:	1639
INPUT:	▁Zure tzat ▁ere ▁amai era ▁da ▁orain : ▁neure ▁haserrea ▁isuriko ▁dut ▁zure ▁kontra , ▁zeure ▁jokabide aren ▁arabera ▁epaituko ▁zaitut ▁eta ▁egintza ▁higuingarri ▁guztien ▁kontu ▁eskatuko .
PRED:	“ Look , I will pour out my anger against you , ” says the Lord. “ I will judge you for all your detestable sins .
GOLD:	No hope remains , for I will unleash my anger against you.I will call you to accountfor all your detestable sins .

ID:	1640
INPUT:	▁Bar n eko ▁a tariak ▁ere ▁bazuen ▁sarrera ▁bat ▁hegoaldera . ▁Bi ▁sarrer en ▁arteko ▁di s t antz ia ▁neurtu ▁zuen ▁gizonak : ▁berrogeita ▁hamar ▁metro .
PRED:	The singers also measured the gateway on the north side of the south side of the north .
GOLD:	And here again , directly opposite the outer gateway , was another gateway that led into the inner courtyard . The distance between the two gateways was 175 feet .

ID:	1641
INPUT:	▁Hara ▁iris te ar ▁zegoela , ▁Sar ai ▁bere ▁emazteari ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« A d izu , ▁badakit ▁emakume ▁ederra ▁zarela .
PRED:	As she was at his home , she said to her , “ I know that you are a beautiful woman . ”
GOLD:	As he was approaching the border of Egypt , Abram said to his wife , Sarai , “ Look , you are a very beautiful woman .

ID:	1642
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁arauak ▁nahi ▁ditut ▁gorde : ▁ez ▁nazazu ▁inoiz ▁eskutik ▁utz !
PRED:	I want you to obey your decrees ; do n't let me escape .
GOLD:	I will obey your decrees.Please do n't give up on me !

ID:	1643
INPUT:	▁Hortan , ▁mahaian ▁zeu d elarik , ▁Jainkoaren ▁hitza ▁etorri ▁zitzaion ▁itzul arazi ▁zuen ▁profeta ▁zahar rari ,
PRED:	But while the night at the table of God came to the prophet of God ,
GOLD:	Then while they were sitting at the table , a command from the Lord came to the old prophet .

ID:	1644
INPUT:	▁Bi dal ▁diez azula ▁laguntza ▁bere ▁santutegi tik , eu tsi ▁zuri ▁Sion ▁menditik !
PRED:	May you rescue us from the Most Holy Place for his sanctuary , O Jerusalem !
GOLD:	May he remember all your giftsand look favorably on your burnt offerings.Interlude

ID:	1645
INPUT:	▁Eta , ▁kopa ▁harturik , ▁esker ▁oneko ▁otoitza ▁egin ▁eta ▁esan ▁zuen : ▁« Hartz azue ▁eta ▁eman ▁elkarri .
PRED:	Then he took the cup of wine and gave thanks to God . “ Take it with each other . ”
GOLD:	Then he took a cup of wine and gave thanks to God for it . Then he said , “ Take this and share it among yourselves .

ID:	1646
INPUT:	▁L eku ▁hari ▁T abera ▁— hau ▁da , ▁« S u te »— ▁ezarri ▁zioten ▁izena , ▁Jaunaren ▁sua ▁israeldarren ▁aurka ▁bertan ▁leher tu ▁zelako .
PRED:	( which means “ The fire has been poured out against the Lord 's name , ” they made a fire against Israel .
GOLD:	After that , the area was known as Taberah ( which means “ the place of burning ” ) , because fire from the Lord had burned among them there .

ID:	1647
INPUT:	▁Sei ▁egunez ▁lan ▁egingo ▁duzue , ▁baina ▁zazpigarren a ▁larunbata ▁da , ▁Jaunari ▁sagaraturiko ▁atseden - eguna . ▁Larun batez ▁lan ▁egiten ▁duenak ▁heriotza - zigorra ▁izango ▁du .
PRED:	You have six days each week for the Sabbath days , but on the seventh day of the Lord will be put to death . The Sabbath day of complete rest will be put to death .
GOLD:	You have six days each week for your ordinary work , but the seventh day must be a Sabbath day of complete rest , a holy day dedicated to the Lord . Anyone who works on that day must be put to death .

ID:	1648
INPUT:	▁lege - maisu ▁izan ▁nahian , ▁esaten ▁eta ▁aho ▁betean ▁irakasten ▁dutena ▁ulertzen ▁ez ▁badute ▁ere .
PRED:	The teachers of religious law are trying to understand what they say .
GOLD:	They want to be known as teachers of the law of Moses , but they do n't know what they are talking about , even though they speak so confidently .

ID:	1649
INPUT:	▁A ker rak ▁berekin ▁eramango ▁ditu ▁israeldarren ▁erru ▁guztiak ▁eremu ▁el kor rera . ▁A ker ra ▁basamortura ▁bidali ▁ondoren ,
PRED:	He will bring all the people of Israel into the wilderness , and he will send them into the wilderness .
GOLD:	As the goat goes into the wilderness , it will carry all the people 's sins upon itself into a desolate land .

ID:	1650
INPUT:	▁Lurralde ak ▁beste ▁hauek ▁ere ▁hartzen ▁zituen : ▁K a ta t , ▁Nah al al , ▁Xim ron , ▁I dala ▁eta ▁Belen ; ▁guztira ▁hamabi ▁hiri ▁ziren , ▁beren ▁herrix k ekin .
PRED:	The following towns were also given to the following towns : The following towns of Bethlehem , Benjamin , and the towns of Bethlehem .
GOLD:	The towns in these areas included Kattath , Nahalal , Shimron , Idalah , and Bethlehem — twelve towns with their surrounding villages .

ID:	1651
INPUT:	▁Zu ei , ▁guraso oi , ▁diotsuet : ▁Ez agutzen ▁duzue ▁hasieratik ▁zen ▁hura . Zu ei , ▁gazte oi , ▁diotsuet : ▁Gar aitu ▁duzue ▁gaiztoa .
PRED:	I said to you , “ I know you are my ancestors , but you know the one who sits in the beginning of the beginning .
GOLD:	I am writing to you who are mature in the faithbecause you know Christ , who existed from the beginning.I am writing to you who are young in the faithbecause you have won your battle with the evil one .

ID:	1652
INPUT:	▁Azken ean , ▁har lan du zko ▁hiru ▁lerro ko ▁eta ▁zedro zko ▁h abe - ler ro ▁bateko ▁horma ▁eraik iz , ▁barneko ▁a taria ▁egin ▁zuen .
PRED:	The capitals on the walls were also 75 feet tall and cedar beams . The walls were 101/2 feet tall .
GOLD:	The walls of the inner courtyard were built so that there was one layer of cedar beams between every three layers of finished stone .

ID:	1653
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Sara ik ▁esan ▁zion ▁Abra mi : ▁« Begira , ▁Jaunak ▁agor ▁egin ▁nau . ▁Elkar ▁zaitez , ▁bada , ▁nire ▁mirabe arekin . ▁Behar bada , ▁izango ▁dut ▁semerik ▁haren ▁bitartez ». Ab ram ek ▁onartu ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Sar airen ▁propos amena ,
PRED:	Then Abram said to Abram , “ Look , I have acted with you , and now I will leave my children 's children . ”
GOLD:	So Sarai said to Abram , “ The Lord has prevented me from having children . Go and sleep with my servant . Perhaps I can have children through her. ” And Abram agreed with Sarai 's proposal .

ID:	1654
INPUT:	▁galdezka :— Zein ▁aginpi dez ▁jokatzen ▁duzu ▁horrela ? ▁Nork ▁eman ▁dizu ▁horretarako ▁aginpi dea ?
PRED:	“ Who gives you authority to him ? ” he asked .
GOLD:	They demanded , “ By what authority are you doing all these things ? Who gave you the right to do them ? ”

ID:	1655
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁gauza ▁hauek ▁esaten ▁zihardu ela , ▁emakume ▁batek ▁jen dar tetik ▁deiadarka ▁esan ▁zion :— Zorion ekoa ▁sabelean ▁eraman ▁zin tuen ▁eta ▁bularra ▁eman ▁z izun ▁emakumea !
PRED:	Then Jesus said to the crowd , “ A woman who was coming from the crowd ! ” And she said , “ You are the Most High ! ”
GOLD:	As he was speaking , a woman in the crowd called out , “ God bless your mother — the womb from which you came , and the breasts that nursed you ! ”

ID:	1656
INPUT:	▁Ur ri ▁bitez ▁haren ▁egunak , ▁har ▁beza ▁beste ▁batek ▁haren ▁kargu a .
PRED:	May his days be cursed , and let no one become stronger than the end of his birth .
GOLD:	Let his years be few ; let someone else take his position .

ID:	1657
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁daki ▁beraren ▁gonbidatu ak ▁hilik ▁dau dela , Hil dakoen ▁Ego itzan ▁dau dela ▁jadanik .
PRED:	Do n't know that his dead are dead , for they are dead .
GOLD:	But little do they know that the dead are there.Her guests are in the depths of the grave .

ID:	1658
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁esku ▁utzi ▁ditu ▁Jaunak ▁O re b ▁eta ▁Z e eb , ▁madian darren ▁buruzagiak . ▁Egin tza ▁horren ▁aldean , ▁nik ▁ez ▁dut ▁deus ▁ere ▁egin . Hau ▁es ate ak ▁baretu ▁egin ▁zituen ▁e fraim darrak .
PRED:	The Lord has abandoned your hand , and the princes of the Midianites as far as the Midianites . I have done nothing to you , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	God gave you victory over Oreb and Zeeb , the commanders of the Midianite army . What have I accomplished compared to that ? ” When the men of Ephraim heard Gideon 's answer , their anger subsided .

ID:	1659
INPUT:	▁Gainera , ▁Judako ▁erregeek ▁Ak azen ▁goi - gel aren ▁gainean ▁eraik iak ▁zituzten ▁aldareak ▁desegin ▁zituen ; ▁orobat ▁Jaunaren ▁etxeko ▁bi ▁atari etan ▁Manases ek ▁eraik iak ▁zituen ak ▁ere . ▁Ber tan ▁hautsi ▁eta ▁Z ed ron ▁erre kara ▁jaurti ▁zituen ▁pus kak .
PRED:	Solomon also removed the pagan kings of Judah and all the powers of the Lord 's Temple . He demolished all the altars and smashed the pillars of the Temple of the Lord 's Temple , and he threw them into the courtyard of the Lord 's Temple .
GOLD:	Josiah tore down the altars that the kings of Judah had built on the palace roof above the upper room of Ahaz . The king destroyed the altars that Manasseh had built in the two courtyards of the Lord 's Temple . He smashed them to bits and scattered the pieces in the Kidron Valley .

ID:	1660
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁kutxa ▁Jerusalemera ▁eraman
PRED:	David 's Return to Jerusalem
GOLD:	Moving the Ark to Jerusalem

ID:	1661
INPUT:	▁Gero ▁eta ▁ugaria goa ▁zen ▁fede aren ▁bidez ▁Jaunari ▁elkar tzen ▁zitzaizki onen ▁talde a , ▁gizon ▁eta ▁emakume .
PRED:	Then the Lord gave birth to the Lord 's share , one of the twelve men , women , and women .
GOLD:	Yet more and more people believed and were brought to the Lord — crowds of both men and women .

ID:	1662
INPUT:	▁Joiakim ▁erregeari
PRED:	Jehoiakim Rules in Judah
GOLD:	A Message about Jehoahaz

ID:	1663
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁izan ▁beldur ▁gaztea ▁zigortzeko , mak il aka da ▁batzu engatik ▁ez ▁da ▁hilko ▁eta ;
PRED:	They will not be afraid of their young men , and they will not kill them .
GOLD:	Do n't fail to discipline your children.The rod of punishment wo n't kill them .

ID:	1664
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁edom darrek ▁berriro ▁eraso tua ▁zuten ▁Juda , ▁eta ▁preso ▁asko ▁hartu ak ▁zituzten .
PRED:	The people of Judah attacked Judah and attacked them again and attacked them .
GOLD:	The armies of Edom had again invaded Judah and taken captives .

ID:	1665
INPUT:	▁Horregatik ▁diot : ▁« Hemen ▁nauzu ». Lib uru an ▁agintzen ▁zait
PRED:	“ That is why I command you , ” says the Lord . “ Here is my command ! ”
GOLD:	I take joy in doing your will , my God , for your instructions are written on my heart . ”

ID:	1666
INPUT:	▁Goraintziak ▁Ur ban ori , ▁Jesu ▁Kristoren ▁zerbitzuan ▁laguntzaile ▁izan ▁dugun ari , ▁eta ▁nire ▁Es tak is ▁maite ari .
PRED:	Give me greetings to the one of Jesus Christ , who loved us as a slave of Christ Jesus .
GOLD:	Greet Urbanus , our co-worker in Christ , and my dear friend Stachys .

ID:	1667
INPUT:	▁Joan ▁zen , ▁beraz , ▁Gad ▁Davidengana ▁eta ▁horren ▁berri ▁eman ▁zion , ▁esanez :— Zer ▁nahi ▁duzu : ▁zazpi ▁urteko ▁gose aldia ▁zeure ▁lurraldean , ▁hiru ▁hilabe teko ▁ihes aldia ▁etsaia ▁ondoren ▁duzu larik , ▁ala ▁hiru ▁eguneko ▁izurri tea ▁zeure ▁lurraldean ? ▁Hau s n ar ▁ezazu , ▁beraz , ▁ea ▁zer ▁erantzun ▁behar ▁diodan ▁bidali ▁nauen ari .
PRED:	So David returned to David and told him , “ What have you done to me ? ” So he said to David , “ That 's why are you able to kill me in the land of Israel ? ”
GOLD:	So Gad came to David and asked him , “ Will you choose three years of famine throughout your land , three months of fleeing from your enemies , or three days of severe plague throughout your land ? Think this over and decide what answer I should give the Lord who sent me . ”

ID:	1668
INPUT:	▁Jakob ▁nire ▁zerbitzari ari ▁eman ▁nion ▁lurraldean ▁biziko ▁dira , ▁non ▁bizi ▁izan ▁baitziren ▁haien ▁gurasoak ▁ere . ▁Han ▁biziko ▁dira ▁beraiek ▁eta ▁beraien ▁ondorengoak ▁betiko , ▁eta ▁David ▁nire ▁zerbitzaria ▁izango ▁dute ▁buruzagi ▁betiko .
PRED:	I gave Jacob my servant Jacob to live in the land where they lived . They will live in the land of their ancestors , and they will live forever . They will live forever and my servant David and my servant David .
GOLD:	They will live in the land I gave my servant Jacob , the land where their ancestors lived . They and their children and their grandchildren after them will live there forever , generation after generation . And my servant David will be their prince forever .

ID:	1669
INPUT:	▁errudun ari ▁diru - t ru ke arra z oi ▁ematen eta ▁errugabe ari ▁zuzenbide au katzen ▁diozuen ok !
PRED:	Listen to the poor , you who are innocent , who gives justice to the righteous .
GOLD:	They take bribes to let the wicked go free , and they punish the innocent .

ID:	1670
INPUT:	▁Begira ▁Si oni , ▁geure ▁jai ako s patzen ▁ditugun eko ▁hiriari . Ikus ▁Jerusalem , ▁bizi toki ▁las aia , ego itza ▁fin koa , in ork ▁ziri rik ▁aterako ▁ez ▁dion eta ▁sok arik ▁eten go ▁ez ▁dion oih al - etxolaren ▁pareko .
PRED:	Let us live in Jerusalem , O Lord our God , in order to see the city of Jerusalem , where no one can live in safety , and no one will remain in the place of safety .
GOLD:	Instead , you will see Zion as a place of holy festivals.You will see Jerusalem , a city quiet and secure.It will be like a tent whose ropes are tautand whose stakes are firmly fixed .

ID:	1671
INPUT:	▁Berriro ▁ere ▁haurdun ▁gelditu ▁eta ▁emazteak ▁beste ▁seme ▁bat ▁izan ▁zuen , ▁eta ▁On an ▁eman ▁zion ▁izen .
PRED:	Then she became pregnant again and gave birth to pregnant and gave birth to a son .
GOLD:	Then she became pregnant again and gave birth to another son , and she named him Onan .

ID:	1672
INPUT:	▁Haren ▁irakaspen az ▁tx unditurik ▁zegoen ▁jende ▁guztia , ▁nagusi tasunez ▁irakasten ▁baitzi en ▁eta ▁ez ▁lege - maisuek ▁bezala .
PRED:	The people were amazed at his teaching , but they were amazed at the law of religious law , just as the teachers of religious law .
GOLD:	The people were amazed at his teaching , for he taught with real authority — quite unlike the teachers of religious law .

ID:	1673
INPUT:	▁Jeremias ▁eta ▁Hananias ▁profetak ▁aurrez ▁aurre
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Final Words
GOLD:	Jeremiah Condemns Hananiah

ID:	1674
INPUT:	▁Honela xe ▁dio ▁Liburu ▁Santuak ▁ere : ▁Gizaki ▁oro ▁bel arraren ▁pareko ▁da , ▁haren ▁eder tasuna ▁lan dako ▁lore arena ▁bezalakoa : ▁ih artzen ▁da ▁belarra , ▁erortzen ▁lo rea ;
PRED:	This is what the Scriptures say : “ All the fruit of all the trees of the field will be like trees . ”
GOLD:	As the Scriptures say , “ People are like grass ; their beauty is like a flower in the field.The grass withers and the flower fades .

ID:	1675
INPUT:	▁zuzenbide ari ▁jarraitzen ▁diotenak ▁babesten ▁ditu eta ▁berarekin ▁leial ▁direnak ▁zaintzen .
PRED:	He leads to those who trust in him , and those who trust in him .
GOLD:	He guards the paths of the justand protects those who are faithful to him .

ID:	1676
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁zazpi ▁egun ▁itxaron ▁eta ▁berriro ▁bidali ▁zuen ▁us oa ▁ontzi tik .
PRED:	When Jesus was staying again , he sent him back again to the upstairs room .
GOLD:	After waiting another seven days , Noah released the dove again .

ID:	1677
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁bedi ▁handi ets ia ▁zure ▁izena ▁beti ! ▁Esan ▁bezate : ▁“ Jaun ▁ahalguztiduna ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoa !” ▁Eta ▁iraun ▁beza ▁zure ▁aurrean , ▁morroi ▁duzun ▁David ▁honen ▁ondorengo tzak .
PRED:	For the great name of your name is the name of the Lord , the God of Israel , says , ‘ May the Lord of Heaven 's Armies be his servant David and his servant David be his servant David forever . '
GOLD:	And may your name be honored forever so that everyone will say , ‘ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies is God over Israel ! ' And may the house of your servant David continue before you forever .

ID:	1678
INPUT:	▁Gu dal buruak ▁bidali ▁egin ▁zuen ▁mu tila , ▁esanez :— Ez ▁esan ▁inori ▁honen ▁berri ▁eman ▁didazun ik .
PRED:	The commander sent messengers to the village , and he told them , “ Do n't tell anyone about it . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't let anyone know you told me this , ” the commander warned the young man .

ID:	1679
INPUT:	▁« Egin ▁egoitza ▁liho - hari ▁bihurri tuz ▁eta ▁purpura ▁more , ▁gorri ▁eta ▁gorriminez ▁eginiko ▁hamar ▁zap iz , ▁eta ▁bor datu ▁horietan ▁apain ▁izaki ▁hegal dunak .
PRED:	“ Then make the Tabernacle of finely woven linen and embroidered with blue , purple , and scarlet thread and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	“ Make the Tabernacle from ten curtains of finely woven linen . Decorate the curtains with blue , purple , and scarlet thread and with skillfully embroidered cherubim .

ID:	1680
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁apostolu ei ▁agertu ▁zitzaien ▁bere ▁heriotzaren ▁ondoren ▁eta ▁bizirik ▁zegoen eko ▁fro ga ▁asko ▁eman ▁zizkien , ▁berrogei ▁egunez ▁bere ▁burua ▁ikustera ▁emanez ▁eta ▁Jainkoaren ▁errege tzaz ▁hitz ▁eginez .
PRED:	After Jesus had appeared to the apostles and had been put to death for many days , and he spoke to him for forty days . He spoke to him for forty days and gave them an example of God for forty days .
GOLD:	During the forty days after he suffered and died , he appeared to the apostles from time to time , and he proved to them in many ways that he was actually alive . And he talked to them about the Kingdom of God .

ID:	1681
INPUT:	▁Jerusalemera , ▁Jainkoaren ▁etxera , ▁itzuli ▁ondoko ▁bigarren ▁urteko ▁bigarren ▁hilean ▁ekin ▁zioten ▁lan ari ▁X e al ti elen ▁seme ▁Zorob ab elek ▁eta ▁Jo tza dak en ▁seme ▁Josuek , ▁beren ▁apaiz - ah <unk> ekin , ▁lebitar rekin ▁eta ▁gatibu alditik ▁Jerusalemera ▁etorri ekin ; ▁Jaunaren ▁etxeko ▁lan en ▁arduradun ▁hogei ▁urtez ▁gorako ▁lebitarrak ▁jarri ▁zituzten .
PRED:	They returned to Jerusalem at the second year of the second year of the second year of the new year of Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel , in Zerubbabel son of Jehozadak , the priest , the priest , and the Levites , who had been appointed to rebuild the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	The construction of the Temple of God began in midspring , during the second year after they arrived in Jerusalem . The work force was made up of everyone who had returned from exile , including Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel , Jeshua son of Jehozadak and his fellow priests , and all the Levites . The Levites who were twenty years old or older were put in charge of rebuilding the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	1682
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁ez ▁dut ▁neure ▁onginahia ▁harengandik ▁bazter tuko , ▁Saulen gandik ▁baztertu ▁nuen ▁bezala , ▁baztertu ▁egin ▁bain uen ▁neure ▁aurretik ▁bera .
PRED:	But now I have not abandoned me , just as I had rejected me , just as I had rejected me .
GOLD:	But my favor will not be taken from him as I took it from Saul , whom I removed from your sight .

ID:	1683
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁ehun tariak ▁fede ▁gehiago ▁zuen ▁l em az ain ▁eta ▁pat ro iaren gan ▁Pauloren ▁esan etan ▁baino .
PRED:	But the armor of faith was more than he spoke , and he said to Paul .
GOLD:	But the officer in charge of the prisoners listened more to the ship 's captain and the owner than to Paul .

ID:	1684
INPUT:	▁Nire ▁larruazal ▁hau ▁desegin ▁ondoren , gor putz ik ▁gabe , ▁Jainkoa ▁ikusiko ▁dut .
PRED:	I will destroy my skin with skin , but I will not see God .
GOLD:	And after my body has decayed , yet in my body I will see God !

ID:	1685
INPUT:	▁Berehala ▁egingo ▁di ela ▁justizia ▁diotsuet . ▁Baina ▁Gizonaren ▁Semea ▁datorren ean , ▁aurkituko ▁ote ▁du ▁horrelako ▁sinesmen ik ▁munduan ?»
PRED:	But I tell you the Son of Man , who will be able to see such things ? ”
GOLD:	I tell you , he will grant justice to them quickly ! But when the Son of Man returns , how many will he find on the earth who have faith ? ”

ID:	1686
INPUT:	▁Bi ▁or riko ▁ate ▁batetik ▁sala ▁handi ra ▁sartzen ▁zen , ▁eta ▁beste ▁ate ▁batetik ▁toki ▁santu - s antu ra .
PRED:	He entered the door to the door , and he was placed on the doors of the Most Holy Place .
GOLD:	Both the sanctuary and the Most Holy Place had double doorways ,

ID:	1687
INPUT:	▁Jesu ▁Kristo ▁gure ▁Jaunarengatik ▁eta ▁Espirituak ▁ematen ▁digun ▁maitasun agatik , ▁esk abide ▁hau ▁egiten ▁dizuet , ▁senideok : ▁lagun ▁diez adazu ela ▁egin ahal ean , ▁Jainkoari ▁nire ▁alde ▁otoitz ▁eginez ,
PRED:	Now I am the Lord Jesus Christ , the Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ , and my dear brothers and sisters , thank God for you .
GOLD:	Dear brothers and sisters , I urge you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to join in my struggle by praying to God for me . Do this because of your love for me , given to you by the Holy Spirit .

ID:	1688
INPUT:	▁Hala , ▁joan ▁zen ▁zaldiz koa ▁gudari - talde arengana ▁eta ▁esan ▁zuen :— Erregeak ▁bak ez ▁zatoz ten ▁galdetzen ▁du . J eh uk , ▁orduan :— Zer ▁axola ▁dizu ▁bak eak ? ▁Zatoz ▁nire ▁atzetik . Z el atariak ▁esan ▁zuen :— H eldu ▁da ▁haien gana ▁mezul aria , ▁baina ▁ez ▁dator ▁itzuli an .
PRED:	So the king went to the chariot with his horses and told him , “ Come , ” the king asked . “ What do you want me to go to me ? ” “ Come , ” he said , “ Come , ‘ Come , let me go to the king ! ”
GOLD:	So a horseman went out to meet Jehu and said , “ The king wants to know if you are coming in peace. ” Jehu replied , “ What do you know about peace ? Fall in behind me ! ” The watchman called out to the king , “ The messenger has met them , but he 's not returning . ”

ID:	1689
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁egun ▁bat ▁edo ▁bi ▁bizirik ▁irauten ▁badu , ▁ez ▁dute ▁konden atuko , ▁berea ▁baitzuen ▁esklab oa .
PRED:	But if a person dies and does not live , they will not be a slave or female slave .
GOLD:	But if the slave recovers within a day or two , then the owner shall not be punished , since the slave is his property .

ID:	1690
INPUT:	▁Adi erazi ▁nire , ▁Jainko ▁Jaun ▁honen , ▁mezua : ▁Go g , ▁zure ▁kontra ▁nator , ▁Mex ek ▁eta ▁T ub al go ▁buruzagi ▁nagusi ▁horren ▁kontra .
PRED:	Say to them , “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am the God of Meshech and Tubal .
GOLD:	Give him this message from the Sovereign Lord : Gog , I am your enemy !

ID:	1691
INPUT:	▁Apaizak ▁bata ▁barkamen - oparitzat ▁eta ▁bestea ▁erre - oparitzat ▁eskainiko ▁ditu . ▁Honela , ▁j ario dun aren ▁aldeko ▁garbikuntza - ohikunea ▁egingo ▁du ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrean .
PRED:	The priest will present one of the burnt offering and the other as a burnt offering to purify the Lord . Through this process , the priest will purify the person before the Lord .
GOLD:	The priest will offer one bird for a sin offering and the other for a burnt offering . Through this process , the priest will purify the man before the Lord for his discharge .

ID:	1692
INPUT:	▁Am asa , ▁odol etan ▁b l ai , ▁bide aren ▁erdian ▁ze tzan . ▁Jende ▁guztia ▁gorpu aren ▁ondoan ▁gelditzen ▁zela ▁ikustean , ▁gudari ▁hark ▁bidetik ▁zelai ra ▁eraman ▁eta ▁oihal ez ▁estali ▁zuen ▁Am asa ; ▁bestela , ▁haren ▁ondora ▁heltzen ▁ziren ▁guztiak ▁gelditu ▁egiten ▁baitziren .
PRED:	They were buried in the blood of the blood , and in the middle of the houses where it was still alive . When he saw that everyone was hidden in the field , he took him into his tent , he would n't go into the tent .
GOLD:	But Amasa lay in his blood in the middle of the road , and Joab 's man saw that everyone was stopping to stare at him . So he pulled him off the road into a field and threw a cloak over him .

ID:	1693
INPUT:	▁Hain ▁zen ▁izugarria ▁ikuskaria , ▁non ▁Moisesek ▁berak ▁ere ▁honela ▁baitzi oen : ▁Beldur - ikaraz ▁nago .
PRED:	While Moses was there , Moses was a vision , for he was very great . I was deeply troubled .
GOLD:	Moses himself was so frightened at the sight that he said , “ I am terrified and trembling . ”

ID:	1694
INPUT:	▁Ber ea ▁du ▁itsasoa , ▁berak ▁egina , eta ▁leh orra , ▁bere ▁eskuz ▁m ol datua .
PRED:	He has made a sea , and he makes a strong hand to the sea .
GOLD:	The sea belongs to him , for he made it.His hands formed the dry land , too .

ID:	1695
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁No eri ▁eta ▁beronen ▁semeei ▁esan ▁zien , ▁gainera :
PRED:	Then God said to Noah and his sons ,
GOLD:	Then God told Noah and his sons ,

ID:	1696
INPUT:	▁Gizon ▁hark , ▁berriz , ▁hiti ten ▁lurraldera ▁joan ▁eta ▁hiri ▁bat ▁eraiki ▁zuen ; ▁Luz ▁izena ▁eman ▁zion ▁eta ▁hala ▁der itza ▁gaurdaino .
PRED:	But he went to the land of the Hittite and built a town to live in the land .
GOLD:	Later the man moved to the land of the Hittites , where he built a town . He named it Luz , which is its name to this day .

ID:	1697
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁zazpi ▁ikas l eri ▁agertu
PRED:	The First Disciples
GOLD:	Epilogue : Jesus Appears to Seven Disciples

ID:	1698
INPUT:	▁Urre ▁garbiz ▁urrez tatu ▁zituen ▁barne ▁eta ▁kanpo alde ak , ▁eta ▁urrezko ▁heg ala ▁ezarri ▁zion ▁inguru ▁guztian .
PRED:	He overlaid the edge of pure gold and overlaid it with pure gold .
GOLD:	He overlaid it inside and outside with pure gold , and he ran a molding of gold all around it .

ID:	1699
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁jende tzari ▁jaten ▁eman
PRED:	Jesus Feeds Five Thousand
GOLD:	Jesus Feeds Five Thousand

ID:	1700
INPUT:	▁Hori ▁guztia ▁jakitean , ▁adore gabe turik , ▁arnasa ▁ere ▁galdu ta ▁gelditu ▁gara ▁zuen ▁aurrean . ▁Izan ▁ere , ▁Jauna , ▁zuen ▁Jainkoa , ▁Jainko ▁da ▁goian ▁zeruan ▁eta ▁beh ean ▁lurrean .
PRED:	When he heard this , he became the breath of the Lord , and when our God grew up in heaven , and he is in heaven and on earth .
GOLD:	No wonder our hearts have melted in fear ! No one has the courage to fight after hearing such things . For the Lord your God is the supreme God of the heavens above and the earth below .

ID:	1701
INPUT:	▁Agur ▁bezate ▁ahuspezturik ▁errege ▁guztiek , j ar ▁bek izki o ▁menpean ▁nazio ▁guztiak !
PRED:	May all who bow before God , and all the nations of the world will praise him .
GOLD:	All kings will bow before him , and all nations will serve him .

ID:	1702
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Josueren gana ▁eraman ▁zituzten . ▁Josuek ▁israeldar ▁guztiei ▁dei ▁egin ▁eta ▁guduan ▁berarekin ▁ibili tako ▁gudalburu ei ▁agindu ▁hau ▁eman ▁zien : ▁« H ur bil ▁zaitezte ▁eta ▁zapaldu ▁errege ▁hauei ▁lepoa ». ▁Halaxe ▁egin ▁zuten .
PRED:	Then Joshua brought all the people of Israel to Joshua and all the people of Israel . He said to Joshua , “ Take this charge of the army , and bring it to the kings of Israel . ”
GOLD:	When they brought them out , Joshua told the commanders of his army , “ Come and put your feet on the kings ' necks. ” And they did as they were told .

ID:	1703
INPUT:	▁Honela , ▁Horeb ▁menditik ▁aurrera , ▁ez ▁zuten ▁israeldarrek ▁festa - jantz irik ▁erabili .
PRED:	So the people of Israel did not celebrate a feast at Mount Sinai .
GOLD:	So from the time they left Mount Sinai , the Israelites wore no more jewelry or fine clothes .

ID:	1704
INPUT:	▁Hiru ▁h ek tar e ako ▁mahastiak z ah agi ▁erdi ▁bat ▁ardo ▁besterik ez ▁du ▁emango ; h amar ▁an eg a ▁haz ik an eg a ▁bat ▁ale ▁besterik ▁ez ».
PRED:	The three branches will be loaded with olive oil , and one piece of grain will cost one piece of grain . ”
GOLD:	Ten acres of vineyard will not produce even six gallons of wine.Ten baskets of seed will yield only one basket of grain . ”

ID:	1705
INPUT:	▁eta , ▁areago , ▁zu ▁juduen ▁ohitura ▁eta ▁eztabai dak ▁ongi ▁ezagutzen ▁dituzun a ▁izanik . ▁Entzun ▁iezadazu , ▁beraz , ▁otoi , ▁eroa penez .
PRED:	And I know that you are talking about the Jews , and you know me . So why should I be patient with me ?
GOLD:	for I know you are an expert on all Jewish customs and controversies . Now please listen to me patiently !

ID:	1706
INPUT:	▁Z ul oa ▁dagi ena ▁bertan ▁da ▁eroriko , hor ma ▁botatzen ▁duenari suge ak ▁ziz ta ▁egingo .
PRED:	The wicked will be cut down , and a lion will fall into a furnace .
GOLD:	When you dig a well , you might fall in.When you demolish an old wall , you could be bitten by a snake .

ID:	1707
INPUT:	▁em aguzu ▁egunean ▁eguneko ▁ogia ,
PRED:	Give us food for the food ,
GOLD:	Give us each day the food we need ,

ID:	1708
INPUT:	▁Man datu ▁bat ▁eman ▁zion ▁Jeremias ▁profetak ▁Ner iasen ▁seme ▁eta ▁Mah se iasen ▁biloba ▁Ser aiasi , ▁Judako ▁errege ▁Sedek iasen ▁laguntzaile ari , ▁erregearekin ▁batera ▁Babiloniara ▁joan ▁zenean . ▁Sedek iasen ▁erregealdiko ▁laugarren ▁urtea ▁zen .
PRED:	So Jeremiah gave messages to Baruch son of Hilkiah , the prophet of Judah and grandson of Shaphan son of Ahikam and grandson of Zedekiah son of Amoz . He went to Babylon at the fourth year of King Zedekiah 's reign in Judah .
GOLD:	The prophet Jeremiah gave this message to Seraiah son of Neriah and grandson of Mahseiah , a staff officer , when Seraiah went to Babylon with King Zedekiah of Judah . This was during the fourth year of Zedekiah 's reign .

ID:	1709
INPUT:	▁Jaunari ▁atx iki ▁zaion ▁atzerri tarrak ez ▁dezala ▁inola ▁ere ▁esan :« Bere ▁herritik ▁baztertu egin ▁nau ▁Jaunak ». I ren duak ▁ere ▁ez ▁dezala ▁esan :« Zu haitz ▁ihar tua ▁besterik ▁ez ▁naiz ».
PRED:	The Lord says to the people of Israel , “ Do not reject me from the community of Israel , ” says the Lord . “ I have never abandoned me . ”
GOLD:	“ Do n't let foreigners who commit themselves to the Lord say , ‘ The Lord will never let me be part of his people . 'And do n't let the eunuchs say , ‘ I 'm a dried-up tree with no children and no future . '

ID:	1710
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁al ▁dakizue ▁bide gabe ek ▁ez ▁dutela ▁Jainkoaren ▁erreinua ▁iritsiko ? ▁Ez ▁engaina ▁zeuen ▁buruak ! ▁L izun ek , ▁sasijainko zale ek , ▁adulterio gile ek , ▁em akeria - zale ek , ▁so do mi tek ,
PRED:	Do n't you realize that the Kingdom of God will come to you ? Do n't you realize that you have committed adultery ? What sorrow awaits you who commit adultery ?
GOLD:	Do n't you realize that those who do wrong will not inherit the Kingdom of God ? Do n't fool yourselves . Those who indulge in sexual sin , or who worship idols , or commit adultery , or are male prostitutes , or practice homosexuality ,

ID:	1711
INPUT:	▁B arra bas ▁hau , ▁hirian ▁gertatu riko ▁m atx ina da ▁eta ▁giza ▁hilketa ▁baten gatik ▁kartzelan ▁sar tua ▁zuten .
PRED:	This was a man in a city , a murder in a city , and it was in prison .
GOLD:	( Barabbas was in prison for taking part in an insurrection in Jerusalem against the government , and for murder . )

ID:	1712
INPUT:	▁Niri ▁gorroto ▁didan ak , ▁gorroto ▁dio ▁nire ▁Aitari ▁ere .
PRED:	He hates me , but he hate me .
GOLD:	Anyone who hates me also hates my Father .

ID:	1713
INPUT:	▁ F es tarako ▁pres tak etak ▁egiteko ▁eguna ▁zen ▁eta ▁larunbata ▁has tera ▁zihoan .
PRED:	The Sabbath day Jesus went to the Sabbath , and the Sabbath day .
GOLD:	This was done late on Friday afternoon , the day of preparation , as the Sabbath was about to begin .

ID:	1714
INPUT:	▁G ezi ek ▁ez ▁diote ▁ihes ▁eragiten , h ab aila - h arriak ▁lasto ▁bihurtzen ▁zaizkio .
PRED:	A person makes a trap for a fool , but a breath of straw .
GOLD:	Smoke streams from its nostrilslike steam from a pot heated over burning rushes .

ID:	1715
INPUT:	▁« E p ai leak ▁eta ▁funtzionarioak ▁ezarriko ▁dituzue ▁leinu etan , ▁Jaunak ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoak ▁emango ▁dizkizu en ▁hiri ▁bakoitzean , ▁herritarren ▁auz iak ▁zuzenbidez ▁erabaki ▁ditzaten .
PRED:	“ You must take your officials and your officials and your officials and your officials and your people , as the Lord your God has promised you .
GOLD:	“ Appoint judges and officials for yourselves from each of your tribes in all the towns the Lord your God is giving you . They must judge the people fairly .

ID:	1716
INPUT:	▁Zuek , ▁ordea , ▁beste ▁hau ▁diozue : ▁Norbaitek ▁aitari ▁edo ▁amari ▁esaten ▁badio ▁« Zu ri ▁eman ▁behar ▁nizu ke ena ▁“ K or ban ” ▁da ▁ ( hau ▁da , ▁Jainkoarentzat ▁opari ) »,
PRED:	But you say to your father , ‘ If you say to your father , ‘ If you want me to marry me , I 'm going to be my master . '
GOLD:	But you say it is all right for people to say to their parents , ‘ Sorry , I ca n't help you . For I have vowed to give to God what I would have given to you . '

ID:	1717
INPUT:	▁Gogoan ▁har , ▁Jauna : ▁etsaiak ▁irain ▁egiten ▁dizu , herri ▁buru gabeak ▁zure ▁izen ari ▁mespretx u .
PRED:	For the Lord says , “ The wicked are against you ; the wicked will be disgraced .
GOLD:	See how these enemies insult you , Lord.A foolish nation has dishonored your name .

ID:	1718
INPUT:	▁benjamin darrak , ▁eta ▁inguratu , ▁pertsegitu ▁eta ▁Gib earen ▁eki al deraino ▁atseden ik ▁eman ▁gabe ▁oin pera tu ▁zituzten .
PRED:	So the men of Benjamin attacked the tribe of Benjamin and led them to the border of Benjamin .
GOLD:	The Israelites surrounded the men of Benjamin and chased them relentlessly , finally overtaking them east of Gibeah .

ID:	1719
INPUT:	▁Natan ▁eta ▁Bets abe ▁Salomonen ▁alde
PRED:	The Lord 's Promise of Solomon
GOLD:	David Makes Solomon King

ID:	1720
INPUT:	▁Liburu a ▁hartu ▁zuenean , ▁lau ▁izaki ak ▁eta ▁hogeita ▁lau ▁zaharrak ▁Bildotsaren ▁aurrean ▁ahuspeztu ▁ziren . ▁Z itara ▁bana ▁zuten ▁eta ▁intsen tsuz ▁beteriko ▁urrezko ▁ontziak , ▁Jainkoaren ak ▁direnen ▁otoi tzen ▁adieraz garri .
PRED:	When the Scriptures heard that the Scriptures had four living beings , the elders of the Lamb , the elders of the Lamb , the Lamb , the God of Israel , were with gold and gold .
GOLD:	And when he took the scroll , the four living beings and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb . Each one had a harp , and they held gold bowls filled with incense , which are the prayers of God 's people .

ID:	1721
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁kutsatua ▁zegoela ▁ikusi ▁nuen , ▁biak ▁bide ▁ber etik ▁zebil tz ala .
PRED:	When I saw that the man had seen it , I saw that it was waiting for me .
GOLD:	I saw the way she was going , defiling herself just like her older sister .

ID:	1722
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁Le aren ▁eskaria ▁aditu ▁zuen : ▁haurdun ▁gertatu ▁eta ▁bosgarren ▁semea ▁eman ▁zion ▁Jakobi .
PRED:	God listened to her , and she became pregnant and gave birth to a son of Jacob .
GOLD:	And God answered Leah 's prayers . She became pregnant again and gave birth to a fifth son for Jacob .

ID:	1723
INPUT:	▁Hitz aldi ▁honetatik ▁zortzi ren ▁bat ▁egunera , ▁Pedro , ▁Joan ▁eta ▁Santiago ▁berekin ▁hartu ▁eta ▁mendira ▁igo ▁zen ▁Jesus , ▁otoitz era .
PRED:	Three days later Peter and John went to the mountain , James , and John went to the hills .
GOLD:	About eight days later Jesus took Peter , John , and James up on a mountain to pray .

ID:	1724
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁esan ▁zidan : ▁« S artu ▁eta ▁ikusi ▁hauek ▁hemen ▁egiten ▁ari ▁diren ▁higuingarri tasun ▁izu garriak ».
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Look , these detestable sins are detestable than any of these detestable sins . ”
GOLD:	“ Go in , ” he said , “ and see the wicked and detestable sins they are committing in there ! ”

ID:	1725
INPUT:	▁ko in atak , ▁hurbildu z , ▁san dal ia ▁erantz iko ▁dio ▁eta ▁aurpegira ▁lis tua ▁botako ▁herri - arduradun en ▁aurrean , ▁esanez : ▁“ Hara ▁zer ▁egiten ▁zaion ▁bere ▁anaiari ▁familia ▁eman ▁nahi ▁ez ▁dion ▁gizonari ”.
PRED:	So go to the man of God , and he has told him , ‘ Look , ' he said , ‘ Look , the one who has been able to take the man 's brother , ' and he said , ‘ Look , ‘ Look ! '
GOLD:	the widow must walk over to him in the presence of the elders , pull his sandal from his foot , and spit in his face . Then she must declare , ‘ This is what happens to a man who refuses to provide his brother with children . '

ID:	1726
INPUT:	▁Bi ek ▁elkar ▁harturik , mende b aldeko ▁filiste arre ia tzetik ▁erasoko ▁diete , sor taldeko ▁herri e ia b eras tasunak ▁kenduko . Edo m ▁eta ▁Moaben ▁jabe ▁egingo ▁dira , eta ▁amondarrak men peko ▁izango ▁dituzte .
PRED:	The king of the Philistines will attack the Philistines from the east of the Philistines , from the east of the Dead Sea , and the land of Edom will be cut off from Moab .
GOLD:	They will join forces to swoop down on Philistia to the west.Together they will attack and plunder the nations to the east.They will occupy the lands of Edom and Moab , and Ammon will obey them .

ID:	1727
INPUT:	▁ar giz ▁inguratua ▁soineko z ▁bezala . O ih al - etxola ▁bezala ▁zabaltzen ▁duzu ▁zerua ,
PRED:	He wore a robe in a robe , just as the heavens covered the heavens .
GOLD:	You are dressed in a robe of light.You stretch out the starry curtain of the heavens ;

ID:	1728
INPUT:	▁Jesusek , ▁bere ▁ama ▁eta ▁honen ▁ondoan ▁maite ▁zuen ▁ikas lea ▁ikusirik , ▁esan ▁zion ▁amari : ▁« Em akume , ▁horra ▁hor ▁zure ▁semea ».
PRED:	When Jesus saw that his mother was standing beside his mother , he said to his mother , “ Oh , your mother ! ”
GOLD:	When Jesus saw his mother standing there beside the disciple he loved , he said to her , “ Dear woman , here is your son . ”

ID:	1729
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁Jakoben ▁senitarte aren ▁histo ria . Jos e , ▁hamazazpi ▁urteko ▁gaztea ▁zelarik , ▁artzain tzan ▁zebilen ▁bere ▁anai ekin , ▁bere ▁aitaren ▁emazte ▁Bil h a ▁eta ▁Zil p aren ▁seme ekin . ▁Josek ▁bere ▁an aien ▁gaiztakeri aren ▁berri ▁ematen ▁zion ▁aitari .
PRED:	This is the account of the family of Jacob 's family , including the young men of Israel , who had been a shepherd 's wife , along with his father 's wife , Joseph , and his father 's wife , the father of Joseph , the father of Joseph .
GOLD:	This is the account of Jacob and his family . When Joseph was seventeen years old , he often tended his father 's flocks . He worked for his half brothers , the sons of his father 's wives Bilhah and Zilpah . But Joseph reported to his father some of the bad things his brothers were doing .

ID:	1730
INPUT:	▁Jerusalemera ▁hurbildu ▁zirenean , ▁Olia mendi ▁inguruko ▁Bet f a ge ▁eta ▁B etan ia ▁herrix k etara ▁irits irik , ▁bere ▁ikasle etako ▁bi ▁bidali ▁zituen ▁Jesusek ,
PRED:	When they came to Jerusalem at the Mount of Olives , Jesus sent two disciples to Jerusalem on the Mount of Olives .
GOLD:	As Jesus and his disciples approached Jerusalem , they came to the towns of Bethphage and Bethany on the Mount of Olives . Jesus sent two of them on ahead .

ID:	1731
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁adierazi ▁nire , ▁Jainko ▁Jaun ▁honen , ▁mezua : ▁Egon ▁diren eko ▁nazioen ▁artetik ▁b atuko ▁ditut ▁israeldarrak ; ▁alde ▁guztietatik ▁bildu ▁eta ▁beren ▁lurraldera ▁eramango ▁ditut .
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Sovereign Lord : I will bring you back from all the nations of Israel .
GOLD:	And give them this message from the Sovereign Lord : I will gather the people of Israel from among the nations . I will bring them home to their own land from the places where they have been scattered .

ID:	1732
INPUT:	▁Jaun ▁ahalguztiduna Sion ▁mendian , ▁Jerusalemen , errege ▁izango ▁denean , il argia ▁eta ▁eguzkia ez ku tatu ▁egingo ▁dira ▁lotsaz , hain ▁azalduko ▁baita ▁ospetsu , bere ▁zerbitzari ez ▁inguratu rik .
PRED:	O Lord of Heaven 's Armies , when you are at Mount Zion , when the moon , the moon , the moon , the moon , and the stars of his servants will not be destroyed .
GOLD:	Then the glory of the moon will wane , and the brightness of the sun will fade , for the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will rule on Mount Zion.He will rule in great glory in Jerusalem , in the sight of all the leaders of his people .

ID:	1733
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Jesus ▁maltzur keriaz ▁atxilo tzea ▁eta ▁hiltzea ▁erabaki ▁zuten .
PRED:	They arrested Jesus and began to kill him .
GOLD:	plotting how to capture Jesus secretly and kill him .

ID:	1734
INPUT:	▁Etorri ▁den ▁bidetik ▁itzuliko ▁da ; ez ▁da ▁sartuko ▁hiri ▁honetan . Hala ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jaunak .
PRED:	“ The king will return to this city , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	The king will return to his own countryby the same road on which he came.He will not enter this city , says the Lord .

ID:	1735
INPUT:	▁ezkon dua , ▁berriz , ▁munduko ▁gauz ez , ▁bere ▁emazteari ▁atsegin ▁nola ▁emango ,
PRED:	But if the world does n't have sexual relations with his wife , how much to have sexual relations with her .
GOLD:	But a married man has to think about his earthly responsibilities and how to please his wife .

ID:	1736
INPUT:	▁eta ▁lurralde ▁hartan ▁guztian ▁barrena ▁joan ▁ziren ; ▁eta ▁Jesus ▁non , ▁hara xe ▁eramaten ▁zizkioten ▁gaix oak ▁oh atil etan .
PRED:	So they went into the village of the village and went to the village where Jesus had been healed .
GOLD:	and they ran throughout the whole area , carrying sick people on mats to wherever they heard he was .

ID:	1737
INPUT:	▁edo ▁ehun ean , ▁larru an ▁nahiz ▁edozein ▁larru ki tan ▁mantxa ▁agertzen ▁bada ,
PRED:	If the mildew has been mildew , whether the mildew has been mildew or mildew ,
GOLD:	woolen or linen fabric , the hide of an animal , or anything made of leather .

ID:	1738
INPUT:	▁Ip arralde aren ▁aurk al uz atuko ▁du ▁eskua ▁Jaunak : Asiri a ▁erabat ▁galduko ▁dueta ▁Niniv e ▁hondamendi ▁bihurtuko , bas amor tua ▁bezain ▁gorri .
PRED:	The Lord will turn against the east of the north , and he will burn it like a heap of Nineveh .
GOLD:	And the Lord will strike the lands of the north with his fist , destroying the land of Assyria.He will make its great capital , Nineveh , a desolate wasteland , parched like a desert .

ID:	1739
INPUT:	▁Elim elek ▁eta ▁bere ▁familia ▁Moaben
PRED:	The Birth of Moses
GOLD:	Elimelech Moves His Family to Moab

ID:	1740
INPUT:	▁Ikusten ▁ari ▁gara ▁Jainkoak ▁bere ▁haserrea ▁agertzen ▁duela ▁gizon - emakume ▁guztien ▁gain ▁zerutik , ▁sinesgabe ▁eta ▁zuzen gabe ▁direlako , ▁eta ▁beren ▁zuzen gabek eriaz ▁egia ▁ito ▁egin ▁dutelako .
PRED:	We look at God 's anger , and all who are very angry and are godly , and they have faith and true things .
GOLD:	But God shows his anger from heaven against all sinful , wicked people who suppress the truth by their wickedness .

ID:	1741
INPUT:	▁Bat - batean , ▁lurrik ara ▁gogorra ▁gertatu ▁zen : ▁Jaunaren ▁aingerua ▁jaitsi ▁zen ▁zerutik ▁eta , ▁hurbildu rik , ▁harria ▁bi ratu ▁zuen ▁eta ▁gainean ▁eseri .
PRED:	Suddenly , there was an angel of the Lord , and the angel of the Lord came down from heaven and sat down on the ground .
GOLD:	Suddenly there was a great earthquake ! For an angel of the Lord came down from heaven , rolled aside the stone , and sat on it .

ID:	1742
INPUT:	▁El ik ▁El k ana ▁eta ▁beronen ▁emaztea ▁bedeinkatu ▁eta ▁esan ▁ohi ▁zuen : ▁« Eman ▁biez azu ▁Jaunak ▁seme - alabarik ▁emakume ▁honen gandik , ▁Jaunari ▁eskainitako aren ▁ordez ». Ondoren , ▁beren ▁herrira ▁itzuli ▁ohi ▁ziren .
PRED:	She blessed her and blessed her , and she said , “ May the Lord give her children to her children . ”
GOLD:	Before they returned home , Eli would bless Elkanah and his wife and say , “ May the Lord give you other children to take the place of this one she gave to the Lord . ”

ID:	1743
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁ez : ▁ongia ▁gorroto eta ▁gaizkia ▁maite ▁duzue . L arru a ▁kentzen ▁diozue ▁jendeari , eta ▁hezur ▁huts etan ▁uzten ».
PRED:	But you love to love what is right , and you love the bones of the wicked . ”
GOLD:	but you are the very oneswho hate good and love evil.You skin my people aliveand tear the flesh from their bones .

ID:	1744
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Saulek ▁esan ▁zien ▁berekin ▁zituen ei :— B egi ratu ▁eta ▁ikusi ▁nor ▁joan ▁den ▁gure ▁artetik . B egi ratu ▁zuten , ▁bada , ▁eta ▁Jonatan ▁eta ▁ezku taria ▁falta ▁ziren .
PRED:	Then Saul said to the men , “ We have seen the man who has seen us , and we have seen him . ”
GOLD:	“ Call the roll and find out who 's missing , ” Saul ordered . And when they checked , they found that Jonathan and his armor bearer were gone .

ID:	1745
INPUT:	▁Jauna , zuk ▁sar rarazten ▁duzu ▁zeure ▁herria eta ▁zeure ▁mendian ▁lan datzen , zeure ▁ondar ean , zeure ▁egoitza ▁egin ▁duzun ▁lekuan , zeure ▁eskuz ▁eraiki ▁duzun s antu tegian .
PRED:	O Lord , you have placed your people on Mount Sinai , and you have built a place of refuge in the place where you have built .
GOLD:	You will bring them in and plant them on your own mountain — the place , O Lord , reserved for your own dwelling , the sanctuary , O Lord , that your hands have established .

ID:	1746
INPUT:	▁Israeldarrak ▁kanpaleku ▁inguruan ▁nor ▁bere ▁tokian ▁zeu d elarik , ▁kanpaleku koak ▁lasterka , ▁garrasika ▁eta ▁ihes ka ▁hasi ▁ziren .
PRED:	The people of Israel around their camp and ran out to their camp at the edge of the camp .
GOLD:	Each man stood at his position around the camp and watched as all the Midianites rushed around in a panic , shouting as they ran to escape .

ID:	1747
INPUT:	▁Lan ▁egin ▁eta ▁ogia ▁irabazi
PRED:	Instructions for the food
GOLD:	An Exhortation to Proper Living

ID:	1748
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁zabalduko ▁dizkio ▁mutur reko ▁bi ▁ateak , h agin ▁beldur garriz ▁inguratu rik ▁dituenak ?
PRED:	Who can be able to catch up two gates with two gates ?
GOLD:	Will merchants try to buy itto sell it in their shops ?

ID:	1749
INPUT:	▁Baruk ek ▁Jaunaren ▁mez uak ▁tenpluan ▁irakurri
PRED:	Baruch Reads the Lord 's Temple
GOLD:	Baruch Reads the Lord 's Messages

ID:	1750
INPUT:	▁Horrela ▁bada , ▁ene ▁senideok , ▁zuek ▁ere ▁hil ▁zen ▁Kristoren ▁gorpu tzeko ▁eginak ▁izan ▁zareten ez ▁gero , ▁lege arentzat ▁hilda ▁zaudete , ▁eta ▁beste ▁bat enak ▁zarete ▁jadanik ▁— hil dakoen ▁artetik ▁piztu ▁zen arenak , ▁alegia —, ▁Jainkoarentzat ▁fruitu ▁onak ▁emateko .
PRED:	So now , my dear brothers and sisters , who was dead in the body of Christ . For you have been raised from the dead because you have been raised from the dead , and you have been raised from the dead .
GOLD:	So , my dear brothers and sisters , this is the point : You died to the power of the law when you died with Christ . And now you are united with the one who was raised from the dead . As a result , we can produce a harvest of good deeds for God .

ID:	1751
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁orain ▁zer ? ▁Ets ai ▁bihurtu ▁ote ▁natzaizue ▁egia ▁esan ▁dizu ed alako ?
PRED:	How can I be angry ? What are I thinking about your truth ?
GOLD:	Have I now become your enemy because I am telling you the truth ?

ID:	1752
INPUT:	▁Emakume ari ▁esan ▁zion :« H aur dun ▁geldi tzean , oin az eak ▁ugalduko ▁dizkizu teta ▁samin ez ▁izango ▁dituzu ▁haurrak ; ir ri tsak ▁sen arraren gan ab ultz atuko ▁zaitu , eta ▁hura ▁izango ▁duzu ▁nagusi ».
PRED:	Then the woman said to her , “ I will give birth to you , for you will have a little child , and you will have a son for him . ”
GOLD:	Then he said to the woman , “ I will sharpen the pain of your pregnancy , and in pain you will give birth.And you will desire to control your husband , but he will rule over you . ”

ID:	1753
INPUT:	▁Tx alu para ▁igo ▁zitzaien , ▁eta ▁haizea ▁baretu ▁egin ▁zen . ▁Are ▁harri tua go ▁gelditu ▁ziren ,
PRED:	Meanwhile , the disciples got up into the boat , and the wind stopped .
GOLD:	Then he climbed into the boat , and the wind stopped . They were totally amazed ,

ID:	1754
INPUT:	▁Handik , ▁Atz mon dik ▁igaroz , ▁Egiptoko ▁erre kara ▁heltzen ▁zen ▁eta ▁Mediterraneo ▁itsasoan ▁amaitzen . ▁Hau ▁zen ▁Judaren ▁leinuaren ▁hegoaldeko ▁muga .
PRED:	From the boundary went to the Mediterranean Sea and camped at the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	From there it passed to Azmon until it finally reached the Brook of Egypt , which it followed to the Mediterranean Sea . This was their southern boundary .

ID:	1755
INPUT:	▁H egazti etako ▁bat ▁iturburu ko ▁ura ▁dau kan ▁buztin ezko ▁ontzi ▁baten ▁gainean ▁hil araziko ▁du .
PRED:	He will destroy the birds of the birds of the birds in the water , and he will slaughter it with fresh water .
GOLD:	The priest will order that one bird be slaughtered over a clay pot filled with fresh water .

ID:	1756
INPUT:	▁B rontzezko ▁ateak ▁pus katu ▁zituen , b urdin azko ▁morro iloak ▁apurtu .
PRED:	He overlaid them with iron chains , and its doors .
GOLD:	For he broke down their prison gates of bronze ; he cut apart their bars of iron .

ID:	1757
INPUT:	▁Salomonek ▁bere ▁jauregia ▁ere ▁eraiki ▁zuen . ▁Ham ahiru ▁urte ▁behar ▁izan ▁zituen ▁erabat ▁bu katzeko .
PRED:	Solomon built a decree for his palace , and he built it on the second day .
GOLD:	Solomon also built a palace for himself , and it took him thirteen years to complete the construction .

ID:	1758
INPUT:	▁Abram ▁Egiptora ▁heldu ▁bezain ▁laster , ▁ikusi ▁zuten ▁egiptoarrek ▁oso ▁ederra ▁zela ▁haren ▁emaztea .
PRED:	When Abram arrived at Egypt , Abram saw that his wife was very beautiful .
GOLD:	And sure enough , when Abram arrived in Egypt , everyone noticed Sarai 's beauty .

ID:	1759
INPUT:	▁eta ▁ham aik ag arren ▁urteko ▁B ul ▁hilean , ▁hots , ▁zortzi garren ▁hilabe tean ▁bukatu ▁zuten ▁oso - osorik , ▁egi ta mu ▁guztien ▁arabera . ▁Beraz , ▁zazpi ▁urte tan ▁eraiki ▁zuen ▁tenplua ▁Salomonek .
PRED:	In the eighth year of the reign of King Jehoiachin 's captivity , all the new year of the reign of King Solomon 's reign , and all the people had built in the Temple . So Solomon built this Temple for seven years .
GOLD:	The entire building was completed in every detail by midautumn , in the month of Bul , during the eleventh year of his reign . So it took seven years to build the Temple .

ID:	1760
INPUT:	▁Jeriko n ▁zegoen ▁profeta - taldea ▁Elise oren gana ▁hurbildu ▁eta ▁honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion :— Ba ▁al ▁dakizu ▁gaur ▁mai sua ▁aire an ▁eramango ▁dizu la ▁Jaunak ? El ise ok ▁erantzun :— Bai , ▁badakit , ▁baina ▁egon ▁isilik !
PRED:	The prophet returned to Jericho , and Elisha said to Elisha , “ What are you doing this ? ” “ You know that the Lord will be with you ? ” “ Yes , ” Elijah replied , “ That 's why do you know that the Lord ? ”
GOLD:	Then the group of prophets from Jericho came to Elisha and asked him , “ Did you know that the Lord is going to take your master away from you today ? ” “ Of course I know , ” Elisha answered . “ But be quiet about it . ”

ID:	1761
INPUT:	▁Morroiak ▁esan ▁zien :— Ez ▁naz azue ▁atz er arazi , ▁Jaunak ▁nire ▁bid aiari ▁bukaera ▁ona ▁eman ▁dion ez ▁gero . ▁Uz ta zue ▁neure ▁nagusia gana ▁itzultzen .
PRED:	“ Do n't let me drink , ” the Lord told them , “ Do n't let me go to the grave . ”
GOLD:	But he said , “ Do n't delay me . The Lord has made my mission successful ; now send me back so I can return to my master . ”

ID:	1762
INPUT:	▁Bai ▁zora garria ▁zure ▁maitasuna , ▁oi ▁Jainko ! Zure ▁hegal pera ▁biltzen ▁dira ▁gizakiak .
PRED:	How lovely are your love , O God , and your wings are filled with wood .
GOLD:	You feed them from the abundance of your own house , letting them drink from your river of delights .

ID:	1763
INPUT:	▁Santu tegi rako ▁olibondo - zurezko ▁hegaldun ▁izaki ▁bi ▁egin ▁zituen , ▁bos na ▁metro ▁luz ekoak .
PRED:	Then he made the lampstand of acacia wood , overlaid them with two olive oil .
GOLD:	He made two cherubim of wild olive wood , each 15 feet tall , and placed them in the inner sanctuary .

ID:	1764
INPUT:	▁Gaiztoak ▁ez ▁du ▁onik ▁izango eta ▁ez ▁du ▁bere ▁bizia ▁luz atuko itz al ▁bat ▁adina , ez ▁baitio ▁begirunerik ▁Jainkoari ».
PRED:	The wicked will no longer be afraid , and no one will have eternal life . ”
GOLD:	The wicked will not prosper , for they do not fear God . Their days will never grow long like the evening shadows .

ID:	1765
INPUT:	▁Zintzoak ▁bizitza ▁poz garria ▁espero ▁du , gaizto aren ▁itxaro penak ▁porro t ▁egiten .
PRED:	The godly care for joy , but the wicked are broken .
GOLD:	The hopes of the godly result in happiness , but the expectations of the wicked come to nothing .

ID:	1766
INPUT:	▁I tsu ok ▁halako ok ! ▁Zer ▁da ▁handiago : ▁oparia ▁ala ▁oparia ▁sagaratzen ▁duen ▁aldarea ?
PRED:	What do you think of this sin , or you must also offer it to the altar ?
GOLD:	How blind ! For which is more important — the gift on the altar or the altar that makes the gift sacred ?

ID:	1767
INPUT:	▁An tzal dak eta : ▁nek aldi ▁os teko ▁aintza ▁aurrez ▁agertu
PRED:	The Birth of Jeshua
GOLD:	The Transfiguration

ID:	1768
INPUT:	▁nah iago ▁izan ▁zuen ▁Jainkoaren ▁herriarekin ▁batera ▁tratu ▁txarrak ▁jasan , ▁bekatuaren ▁atsegin ▁iragan kor rak ▁goz atu ▁baino .
PRED:	For if he became angry with God , he became angry with those who love him .
GOLD:	He chose to share the oppression of God 's people instead of enjoying the fleeting pleasures of sin .

ID:	1769
INPUT:	▁Zazpigarren ▁aingeruak ▁aire an ▁isuri ▁zuen ▁bere ▁ontzia , ▁eta ▁zeruko ▁tenpluko ▁tronu tik ▁ahots ▁handia ▁atera ▁zen ▁esanez : ▁« Egin a ▁dago ».
PRED:	In the seventh day the angel poured out the boat from heaven and poured out from heaven . He said , “ This is what the Lord says : ”
GOLD:	Then the seventh angel poured out his bowl into the air . And a mighty shout came from the throne in the Temple , saying , “ It is finished ! ”

ID:	1770
INPUT:	▁zeure ▁etsaiak ▁oin azpian ▁jartzen ▁dizkizu dan ▁bitartean ”.
PRED:	Your enemies lie beneath your feet . '
GOLD:	until I humble your enemies , making them a footstool under your feet . '

ID:	1771
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Espiritu ▁Santua ▁jaitsi ▁zitzaion ▁gainera , ▁us o - tan ker an ▁ager tuz . ▁Eta ▁mintzo ▁hau ▁etorri ▁zen ▁zerutik : ▁« Zu ▁zaitut ▁neure ▁Semea , ▁neure ▁maitea , ▁zu ▁zaitut ▁atsegin ».
PRED:	The Holy Spirit came down to the Holy Spirit , and he said to him , “ I have come from heaven , ” he said , “ I have loved you from heaven . ”
GOLD:	and the Holy Spirit , in bodily form , descended on him like a dove . And a voice from heaven said , “ You are my dearly loved Son , and you bring me great joy . ”

ID:	1772
INPUT:	▁O so ▁zaharra ▁zen ▁Eli . ▁Jakin ▁zuen ▁bere ▁semeek ▁israeldar ▁guztiei ▁egin ▁ohi ▁zieten a , ▁baita ▁Jaunaren ▁elkarketa - etxolaren ▁sarreran ▁zerbitzua ▁egiten ▁zuten ▁emakume ekin ▁etzan ▁ohi ▁zirela ▁ere ,
PRED:	When Eliakim 's old men heard what was happening to all the men of Israel at the entrance of the Tabernacle , for they had died at the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Now Eli was very old , but he was aware of what his sons were doing to the people of Israel . He knew , for instance , that his sons were seducing the young women who assisted at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	1773
INPUT:	▁Ar ro pa ▁sak ra tuz ▁jantziko ▁duzu ▁Aaron ▁eta , ▁gainera ▁olioa ▁isur iz , ▁nire ▁apaiz - zerbitz urako ▁sagaratuko .
PRED:	You must wear the clothing of Aaron and wear it on my head , and sprinkle it as holy as my priests .
GOLD:	Dress Aaron with the sacred garments and anoint him , consecrating him to serve me as a priest .

ID:	1774
INPUT:	▁Em aguzu ▁laguntza ▁etsaien ▁kontra , giz a ▁laguntza ▁alferrik ▁baita .
PRED:	Give us victory ! Tell us , “ Give us the Lord 's help ! ”
GOLD:	With God 's help we will do mighty things , for he will trample down our foes .

ID:	1775
INPUT:	▁bestela , ▁entzun ▁niri ; zu ▁isilik ▁egon , ▁eta ▁jakinduria ▁irakats iko ▁dizut ».
PRED:	But if you listen to me , I will teach you wisdom and knowledge . ”
GOLD:	But if not , then listen to me.Keep silent and I will teach you wisdom ! ”

ID:	1776
INPUT:	▁Nah iz ▁argi aren ▁sor l ek urantz ▁hegal datu , nahiz ▁mendebaldeko ▁itsas ▁mug etan ▁kokatu ,
PRED:	Its boundaries included the boundaries of the Dead Sea ; its wings spread out the wings of the sea .
GOLD:	If I ride the wings of the morning , if I dwell by the farthest oceans ,

ID:	1777
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁haiek ▁ere ▁joan ▁egin ▁ziren .« Atera ▁zen ▁berriro <unk> iak ▁aldera ▁eta ▁hirur ak ▁aldera , ▁eta ▁gauza ▁bera ▁egin ▁zuen .
PRED:	Then they went to the village of Jerusalem and said to him , “ Look ! ”
GOLD:	So they went to work in the vineyard . At noon and again at three o'clock he did the same thing .

ID:	1778
INPUT:	▁David ▁hiri - sarrerako ▁bi ▁ate en ▁artean ▁zegoen ▁eseria . ▁A te ▁gaineko ▁sol ai ru ra ▁igo a ▁zegoen ▁zain tzaileak ▁begiak ▁jaso ▁eta ▁gizon ▁bat ▁bakarrik ▁lasterka ▁zetorrela ▁ikusi ▁zuen ,
PRED:	When David saw two men sitting on the gates of the Temple , he was sitting on the entrance of the Temple . There he saw a man sitting on the road ,
GOLD:	While David was sitting between the inner and outer gates of the town , the watchman climbed to the roof of the gateway by the wall . As he looked , he saw a lone man running toward them .

ID:	1779
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁Em aus ko ▁ikasleei ▁agertu
PRED:	Jesus Appears to His Disciples
GOLD:	The Resurrection

ID:	1780
INPUT:	▁Zuek , ▁ordea , ▁jatorri ▁aukera tuz <unk> , ▁errege - ap aiz go , ▁nazio ▁sagaratu , ▁Jainkoak ▁beretzat ▁irabazi tako ▁herri , ▁ilunp etatik ▁bere ▁argi ▁zora garri ra ▁deitu ▁zaituzten ▁Jainkoaren ▁egintza ▁bik ainak ▁iragar ▁ditz azuen .
PRED:	But you are the next king 's descendants , the kings of the world will be set apart for all the nations of the world . For God called you to make you holy .
GOLD:	But you are not like that , for you are a chosen people . You are royal priests , a holy nation , God 's very own possession . As a result , you can show others the goodness of God , for he called you out of the darkness into his wonderful light .

ID:	1781
INPUT:	▁Honen ▁bitartez g ara ▁oinordeko ▁gu ▁ere , lehen dik ▁Mes iasen gan itx aro pen ▁genuen ok , gauza ▁guztiak ▁berak ▁nahi ▁bezala egiten ▁dituen ▁Jainkoak aur rez ▁aukeratu ▁baik aitu bere ▁asmo aren ▁arabera , bere ▁aintz aren ▁gorespen - k antu izan ▁gaitezen .
PRED:	In fact , we have been able to share the hope of our Messiah , just as God has promised us . He has chosen us to be saved , as he has chosen us to be saved .
GOLD:	Furthermore , because we are united with Christ , we have received an inheritance from God , for he chose us in advance , and he makes everything work out according to his plan .

ID:	1782
INPUT:	▁Labanek ▁esan ▁zion :— Entzun , ▁mes edez . ▁Goi - ar giz ▁jakin ▁dut ▁zuri ▁esker ▁bedeinkatu ▁nauela ▁Jaunak .
PRED:	So Laban said to him , “ Listen to me , for I have blessed you , for the Lord has blessed me . ”
GOLD:	“ Please listen to me , ” Laban replied . “ I have become wealthy , for the Lord has blessed me because of you .

ID:	1783
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁apaiza ▁seiehun ▁gizon ▁arm atu ▁haiekin ▁etxe - atari an ▁zegoen ▁bitartean , ▁lurraldea ▁iker tua ▁zuten ▁bost ▁gizon ▁haiek ▁etxean ▁sartu ▁eta ▁idol oa , ▁efo da , ▁etxe - jainko en ▁irudiak ▁eta ▁metal ▁ur tuzko ▁irudia ▁hartu ▁zituzten .
PRED:	Then the priest took the 600 men from the house of the Temple , where the men had been set into the Temple , where they had been carved into the Temple , and they took the carved image of a carved image of carved image .
GOLD:	the five scouts entered the shrine and removed the carved image , the sacred ephod , the household idols , and the cast idol . Meanwhile , the priest was standing at the gate with the 600 armed warriors .

ID:	1784
INPUT:	▁L ainoa ▁egoitzaren ▁gainean
PRED:	A Warning for the Tabernacle
GOLD:	The Fiery Cloud

ID:	1785
INPUT:	▁Eki aldetik ▁dei ▁egin ▁diot ▁gizon ▁bati , urruti ko ▁herrialde tik : h egazti ▁harrapari aren ▁antzera ▁etorri eta ▁nire ▁egitas moa ▁beteko ▁du . Hala ▁esan ▁dut ▁eta ▁hala ▁ger taraz iko , hala ▁erabaki ▁eta ▁hala ▁egingo .
PRED:	I called a man from the east , from the east of the earth , and my people will be like a wild animal , ” says the Lord. “ I have spoken to you , and I will make you an object of rubble . ”
GOLD:	I will call a swift bird of prey from the east — a leader from a distant land to come and do my bidding.I have said what I would do , and I will do it .

ID:	1786
INPUT:	▁Bai ▁denbora ▁gutx iko ▁izan ▁d el azu re ▁herri ▁santua ▁lurraldearen ▁jabe ! Prof an atua ▁dute ▁etsaiek zure ▁santutegia .
PRED:	How long will you become a long time , for the Lord has spoken to you .
GOLD:	How briefly your holy people possessed your holy place , and now our enemies have destroyed it .

ID:	1787
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁erreinuan ▁bizirik ▁geldituak , lur rean ▁sustra iak ▁botatzen eta ▁adar retan ▁fruituak ematen ▁dituzten zu haitz ▁izango ▁dira ▁berriro .
PRED:	They will take care of the olive trees of Judah , and they will be allowed to eat the fruit of the olive trees .
GOLD:	And you who are left in Judah , who have escaped the ravages of the siege , will put roots down in your own soiland grow up and flourish .

ID:	1788
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁behar tsuak ▁beti ▁dituzue ▁zeuen ▁artean , ▁eta ▁nahi ▁duzuen ean ▁egin ▁diez aiek ezue ▁on . ▁Baina ▁ni ▁ez ▁nauzue ▁betiko ▁zuekin .
PRED:	For you are honest and faithful to the poor , and you will not be with you . But you will not be with me .
GOLD:	You will always have the poor among you , and you can help them whenever you want to . But you will not always have me .

ID:	1789
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁baduzu ▁gauza ▁onik : ▁gure ▁lurraldean ▁zeuden ▁zutoin ▁sakratuak ▁erre ▁eta ▁Jaunarengana ▁jotzen ▁saiatu ▁izana ».
PRED:	But if you continue to worship the Lord in the land of our God had done , and if he refused to listen to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Even so , there is some good in you , for you have removed the Asherah poles throughout the land , and you have committed yourself to seeking God . ”

ID:	1790
INPUT:	▁Errege - alabak ▁dituzu ▁inguruan , zure ▁eskuinean ▁erregina , ▁urre ▁fin ez ▁apain durik .
PRED:	Your children and all the kingdoms of the earth , and in the place of honor .
GOLD:	Listen to me , O royal daughter ; take to heart what I say.Forget your people and your family far away .

ID:	1791
INPUT:	▁Mah aia ▁eramateko ▁hagak ▁akazia - zu rez ▁egin ▁zituen ▁eta ▁urrez tatu .
PRED:	He made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold .
GOLD:	He made these poles from acacia wood and overlaid them with gold .

ID:	1792
INPUT:	▁B ak ezko ▁garaia
PRED:	A Call to Repentance
GOLD:	A Branch from David 's Line

ID:	1793
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁bada , ▁atera ▁zen ▁gudarostea ▁zelai ra , ▁israeldarrei ▁aurre ▁egitera . ▁Efraimgo ▁oih anean ▁ekin ▁zioten ▁gudu ari .
PRED:	So the army of Israel left the land of Ephraim and went out to fight against the hill country of Ephraim .
GOLD:	So the battle began in the forest of Ephraim ,

ID:	1794
INPUT:	▁Moisesen ▁legea ▁ezagutzen ▁ez ▁duten ekin , ▁legea ▁kontuan ▁hartu ▁gabe ▁bizi ▁izan ▁naiz , ▁legea ▁ezagutzen ▁ez ▁dutenak ▁irabaz teko ; ▁ez , ▁noski , ▁Jainkoaren ▁le gerik ▁onartzen ▁ez ▁du dalako , ▁nire ▁legea ▁Kristo ▁baita .
PRED:	For I know that the law of Moses has not been given to the law of Moses . I have not been given to anyone who does not obey the law of God 's law , for I have not been given to the law of God .
GOLD:	When I am with the Gentiles who do not follow the Jewish law , I too live apart from that law so I can bring them to Christ . But I do not ignore the law of God ; I obey the law of Christ .

ID:	1795
INPUT:	▁ur ▁gainean ▁ibiltzen ▁ikusi ▁zuten ▁eta , ▁m am ua ▁zelako an , ▁oihuka ▁hasi ▁ziren ;
PRED:	When they saw him walking along , they cried out to him .
GOLD:	but when they saw him walking on the water , they cried out in terror , thinking he was a ghost .

ID:	1796
INPUT:	▁honela , ▁Baal - P e orren ▁kultu etara ▁makurtu ▁zen ▁herria ▁eta ▁Jaunaren ▁haserre - sua ▁piztu ▁zen ▁Israelen ▁aurka .
PRED:	He bowed down in worship at the Lord 's fierce anger , and he turned his fierce anger against Israel .
GOLD:	In this way , Israel joined in the worship of Baal of Peor , causing the Lord 's anger to blaze against his people .

ID:	1797
INPUT:	▁Gaizto aren ▁p atu ▁ikaragarria
PRED:	The Lord 's Second Reply
GOLD:	Bildad 's Second Response to Job

ID:	1798
INPUT:	▁David ▁Jerusalemdik ▁ihesi
PRED:	David 's Escape from Jerusalem
GOLD:	David Escapes from Jerusalem

ID:	1799
INPUT:	▁Eliasek , ▁berriro , ▁Elise ori :— Geldi tu ▁hemen ; ▁Jaunak ▁ni ▁Jordan era ▁bidaltzen ▁nau . El ise ok ▁erantzun :— Ala ▁Jauna , ▁ala ▁zu ! ▁Ez ▁zaitut ▁bakarrik ▁utziko . Eta ▁biak ▁joan ▁ziren .
PRED:	Then Elijah said to Elijah , “ The Lord has sent me into the Jordan River , ” Elijah replied . “ As surely as the Lord lives , you will not go . ”
GOLD:	Then Elijah said to Elisha , “ Stay here , for the Lord has told me to go to the Jordan River. ” But again Elisha replied , “ As surely as the Lord lives and you yourself live , I will never leave you. ” So they went on together .

ID:	1800
INPUT:	▁Jauna ▁utzi ▁eta ▁jainko ▁arrotzak ▁zerbitzatzen ▁badituzue , ▁kontra ▁jarriko ▁zaizue ▁eta , ▁hainbeste ▁on ▁egin ▁ondoren , ▁gaizki ▁erabiliko ▁zaituzte ▁eta ▁suntsituko .
PRED:	But if you serve the Lord your God and worship other gods , then you will be able to destroy you .
GOLD:	If you abandon the Lord and serve other gods , he will turn against you and destroy you , even though he has been so good to you . ”

ID:	1801
INPUT:	▁Jainkoa ▁giz adi ▁osoaren ▁salbatzaile
PRED:	God 's Love for Israel
GOLD:	Salvation Is for Everyone

ID:	1802
INPUT:	▁Aitzitik , ▁dei ▁egin ▁dizuen ▁Jainkoa ▁santu ▁den ▁bezala , ▁izan ▁zuek ▁ere ▁santu ▁zeuen ▁bizi era ▁guztian .
PRED:	Instead , God has called you as holy as holy as holy as holy as you live .
GOLD:	But now you must be holy in everything you do , just as God who chose you is holy .

ID:	1803
INPUT:	▁Niniv et arrek ▁ere ▁auzi - egunean ▁gizaldi ▁honen ▁kontra ▁altxatu ▁eta ▁konden atu ▁egingo ▁dute , ▁beraiek ▁bihozberri tu ▁egin ▁baitziren ▁Jon asen ▁predik u az , ▁eta ▁baduzue ▁hemen ▁Jonas ▁baino ▁handiagoa ▁den ▁bat .
PRED:	The people of Nineveh will stand against this generation on judgment day , and the people of Nineveh will repent of their sins and turn to God .
GOLD:	The people of Nineveh will also stand up against this generation on judgment day and condemn it , for they repented of their sins at the preaching of Jonah . Now someone greater than Jonah is here — but you refuse to repent .

ID:	1804
INPUT:	▁« Zeure ▁senideak , Jakoben ▁ondorengoak , gogor ki ▁erabili ▁baititu zu ▁eta ▁hil , lots ak ▁estaliko ▁zaitu , behin ▁betiko ▁egingo ▁du ▁zure ak .
PRED:	“ The descendants of Jacob 's brothers will be ashamed of you , and you will cover you with contempt .
GOLD:	“ Because of the violence you didto your close relatives in Israel , you will be filled with shameand destroyed forever .

ID:	1805
INPUT:	▁gari , ▁garagar , ▁mahasti , ▁pikondo , ▁grana don do , ▁olibondo ▁eta ▁ez tiz ▁horni tua ;
PRED:	olive trees , olive trees , olive trees , and olive trees .
GOLD:	It is a land of wheat and barley ; of grapevines , fig trees , and pomegranates ; of olive oil and honey .

ID:	1806
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Nabukodonosor ▁erregeak , ▁lurreraino ▁ahuspezturik , ▁ohore ▁eman ▁zion ▁Dani eli , ▁eta ▁opariak ▁eta ▁intsentsua ▁eskaintzeko ▁agindu ▁zuen .
PRED:	Then King Nebuchadnezzar bowed low to the ground and bowed low to the ground before the ground .
GOLD:	Then King Nebuchadnezzar threw himself down before Daniel and worshiped him , and he commanded his people to offer sacrifices and burn sweet incense before him .

ID:	1807
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁hau ▁ere ▁esan ▁zidan ▁Jaunak :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me ,
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	1808
INPUT:	▁Al ferrik ▁zigortu ▁ditu tzu en ▁seme - alabak , ez ▁baituzue ▁esk armen turik ▁hartu . Zeu ek ▁hil ▁dituzue ▁profetak ▁ezpataz , leh oi ▁amor ratu ak ▁bezala .
PRED:	Do n't even say , ‘ This is what you have done , for you have done , for you have killed the prophets who have killed you in battle .
GOLD:	“ I have punished your children , but they did not respond to my discipline.You yourselves have killed your prophetsas a lion kills its prey .

ID:	1809
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Ez ▁dizut , ▁bada , ▁esan , ▁sinesten ▁baduzu ▁Jainkoaren ▁aintza ▁ikusiko ▁duzula ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't you believe in the Kingdom of God ? What do you believe ? ”
GOLD:	Jesus responded , “ Did n't I tell you that you would see God 's glory if you believe ? ”

ID:	1810
INPUT:	▁Jeremias ▁bere ▁herriaren gatik ▁nahigabe tua
PRED:	Jeremiah 's Prayer for Jerusalem
GOLD:	Jeremiah Weeps for His People

ID:	1811
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁israeldarren ▁artean ▁ez ▁da ▁ondare - zat irik ▁leinu ▁batetik ▁bestera ▁aldatuko ; ▁israeldarrek ▁nork ▁bere ▁aitaren ▁ondare ari ▁atxik irik ▁jarraituko ▁dute .
PRED:	This is the homeland allocated to the people of Israel , though they have no allotment of land to their father .
GOLD:	None of the territorial land may pass from tribe to tribe , for all the land given to each tribe must remain within the tribe to which it was first allotted .

ID:	1812
INPUT:	▁Aur kitu ▁duzu ▁bere ▁burua ▁zuhur tzat ▁duen ▁norbait ? Ba , ▁gehiago ▁espero ▁daiteke ▁zentzugabe agandik .
PRED:	You have found a wise person , but a fool is even better than a fool .
GOLD:	There is more hope for foolsthan for people who think they are wise .

ID:	1813
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁naiz ▁etsai aren ▁hondamendi az ▁poztu , ezta ▁alai ▁jarri ▁ere ▁zoritx arrak ▁jo ▁duenean ;
PRED:	I will rejoice because of destruction ; I will not be filled with joy .
GOLD:	“ Have I ever rejoiced when disaster struck my enemies , or become excited when harm came their way ?

ID:	1814
INPUT:	▁Zeuk , ▁errege , ▁agindu ▁duzu , ▁turuta , ▁tx iru la , ▁zitara , ▁albo ka , ▁harpa ▁eta ▁beste ▁musika - tresn en ▁hotsa ▁entzun ▁orduko , ▁denek , ▁lurreraino ▁ahuspeztuz , ▁irudia ▁gurtzeko ,
PRED:	You must hear the sound of the ram 's horn , and the sound of the ram 's horn , the harp , and bowed down to the ground before the ground .
GOLD:	You issued a decree requiring all the people to bow down and worship the gold statue when they hear the sound of the horn , flute , zither , lyre , harp , pipes , and other musical instruments .

ID:	1815
INPUT:	▁ehiz tari ▁ap ar ta ▁izan ▁zen , ▁eta ▁hortik ▁dator ▁esaera : ▁« N im ro d ▁adinako ▁ehiz tari ▁ap ar ta ».
PRED:	It 's better to be better than a wild game , “ How can we be such a wild game in a spring ? ”
GOLD:	Since he was the greatest hunter in the world , his name became proverbial . People would say , “ This man is like Nimrod , the greatest hunter in the world . ”

ID:	1816
INPUT:	▁An tzal dak eta : ▁nek aldi ▁ondoko ▁aintza ▁aurrez ▁agertu
PRED:	The Burial of Jeshua
GOLD:	The Transfiguration

ID:	1817
INPUT:	▁Lur rean , ▁ordea , beste ▁zentzu gabekeria ▁hau ger tatu ▁ohi ▁da : zen bait ▁gizaki ▁zuzen ek gaiz kile ei ▁dagokien ▁zoria ▁dute , eta ▁zenbait ▁gizaki ▁gaizto kon gile ei ▁dagoki ena . Nire ▁us tez , ▁hau guz tiz ▁zentzu gab ekoa ▁da .
PRED:	But it is a foolish person who lives in the world , a person who builds a person 's own own eyes , and those who are righteous , who are righteous , who are righteous , but this is my own own people .
GOLD:	And this is not all that is meaningless in our world . In this life , good people are often treated as though they were wicked , and wicked people are often treated as though they were good . This is so meaningless !

ID:	1818
INPUT:	▁« Hartz azu ▁zeure ▁ardurapean ▁eta ▁ez ▁egin ▁gaitz ik ; ▁aitz itik , ▁egiozu ▁berak ▁esandako ▁guztia ».
PRED:	“ Do not neglect the foreigners living among you , and do whatever you have done . ”
GOLD:	“ See that he is n't hurt , ” he said . “ Look after him well , and give him anything he wants . ”

ID:	1819
INPUT:	▁Begiratu ▁zorrotz ▁eta ▁gal ▁itzazu mahas tia ▁moztu ▁eta ▁su ▁eman ▁diotenak .
PRED:	So I looked at the threshing floor and cut off the heads of the sky .
GOLD:	Strengthen the man you love , the son of your choice .

ID:	1820
INPUT:	▁Ar b aso ek ▁goresten ▁zintuzten eko gure ▁tenplu ▁santu ▁distiratsu as uak ▁kiskali ▁du . Mai te en ▁gen u ena ▁hondatu rik ▁dago !
PRED:	O Lord , we have seen your holy name , and our glorious name will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	Your holy cities are destroyed.Zion is a wilderness ; yes , Jerusalem is a desolate ruin .

ID:	1821
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁hartu ▁zekor raren ▁odoletik , ▁eta ▁behatz ez ▁aldare - ertzeko ▁adarrak ▁igur tziko ▁dituzu . ▁Gainerako ▁odola ▁aldare - oin ean ▁isuriko ▁duzu .
PRED:	Then take some of the bull 's blood from the blood of the altar and put it on the horns of the altar . The rest of the altar will pour out the blood of the altar .
GOLD:	Put some of its blood on the horns of the altar with your finger , and pour out the rest at the base of the altar .

ID:	1822
INPUT:	▁« Nor bait ▁emakume ekin ▁ohi ▁bezala ▁gizonezko arekin ▁ohera tzen ▁bada , ▁higuingarri tasuna ▁egiten ▁dute ▁bi ek : ▁heriotza - zigorra ▁izango ▁dute . ▁Ber ena ▁izango ▁dute ▁heriotzaren ▁errua .
PRED:	“ Suppose a man has sex with a woman who has sex with a woman 's wife , and they will be put to death .
GOLD:	“ If a man practices homosexuality , having sex with another man as with a woman , both men have committed a detestable act . They must both be put to death , for they are guilty of a capital offense .

ID:	1823
INPUT:	▁Hartu ▁zuen , ▁bada , ▁Samuelek ▁ol ion tzia ▁eta ▁an aien ▁aurrean ▁gantzutu ▁zuen . ▁Jaunaren ▁espirituak ▁hartu ▁zuen ▁David ▁egun ▁hartaz ▁geroztik . ▁B uka tzean , ▁Samuel ▁Ram ara ▁itzuli ▁zen .
PRED:	So Samuel took the olive oil and placed it before the Lord . When the Spirit of the Lord came to meet him , he returned to Ramah .
GOLD:	So as David stood there among his brothers , Samuel took the flask of olive oil he had brought and anointed David with the oil . And the Spirit of the Lord came powerfully upon David from that day on . Then Samuel returned to Ramah .

ID:	1824
INPUT:	▁beren ▁erruak ▁eta ▁guraso enak batean ▁ordainduko ▁dituzte . Men di etan in tsen tsua ▁erretzen ▁baitzuten eta ▁muino etan ▁niri ▁irain ▁egiten , orain ▁arteko ▁jokabide en kon tua ▁atera eta ▁ordain ▁bete - betea ▁emango ▁diet ». Jaunak ▁esan ▁du .
PRED:	They will pay attention to their ancestors , and they will burn incense at me . They will be ashamed of me , for they have sinned against me , and I will turn away from the dust of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	both for their own sinsand for those of their ancestors , ” says the Lord. “ For they also burned incense on the mountainsand insulted me on the hills.I will pay them back in full !

ID:	1825
INPUT:	▁Salba tzaile ▁indartsua ▁sortu ▁digu bere ▁zerbitzari ▁Daviden ondoren goen ▁artean .
PRED:	Oh , the mighty ones who belong to us ; we are his servants .
GOLD:	He has sent us a mighty Saviorfrom the royal line of his servant David ,

ID:	1826
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁Aaroni ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« H ur bildu ▁aldarera ▁eta ▁eskaini ▁zeure ▁barkamen - oparia ▁eta ▁erre - oparia , ▁zeure ▁aldeko ▁barkamen - ohikunea ▁egiteko ; ▁eskaini ▁herriaren ▁oparia ▁ere , ▁beraren ▁aldeko ▁barkamen - ohikunea ▁egiteko , ▁Jaunak ▁agindu ▁bezala ».
PRED:	Then he said to Aaron , “ Stand up and offer sacrifices to the altar and offer sacrifices to the Lord , and offer it as a burnt offering to the Lord , just as the Lord had commanded him . ”
GOLD:	Then Moses said to Aaron , “ Come to the altar and sacrifice your sin offering and your burnt offering to purify yourself and the people . Then present the offerings of the people to purify them , making them right with the Lord , just as he has commanded . ”

ID:	1827
INPUT:	▁T roa den ▁ontzia ▁hartu ▁eta ▁Sam o tra zi ara ▁joan ▁ginen ▁zuzen ean . ▁Biharamunean ▁N ea p ol is era ▁iritsi ▁ginen ,
PRED:	The next day we went to the island of Galilee , and we went to the island of Rephaim .
GOLD:	We boarded a boat at Troas and sailed straight across to the island of Samothrace , and the next day we landed at Neapolis .

ID:	1828
INPUT:	▁Asaf ek ▁Josafat ; ▁Josafatek ▁Joram ; ▁Joram ek ▁O z ias ;
PRED:	Jehoshaphat was the father of Jehoshaphat . Jehoshaphat was the father of Jehoshaphat .
GOLD:	Asa was the father of Jehoshaphat.Jehoshaphat was the father of Jehoram.Jehoram was the father of Uzziah .

ID:	1829
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁hainbeste ▁mesede ▁zor ▁dio gun ez ▁gero , ▁ez ▁zaigu ▁bidez koa ▁iruditzen ▁erregeari ▁egiten ▁zaion ▁irain a ; ▁horregatik ▁bidaltzen ▁dizkio gu ▁erregeari ▁argi bide ▁hauek ,
PRED:	So I am too much to tell us what we want to do . That 's why should we send him to the king 's justice to the king .
GOLD:	“ Since we are your loyal subjects and do not want to see the king dishonored in this way , we have sent the king this information .

ID:	1830
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁esan : ▁« Goazen ▁Jaunaren ▁egoitz ara , ah uspez ▁gaitezen ▁haren ▁oin - aulki ▁aurrean !
PRED:	Then he said , “ Let 's go down to the Tabernacle of the Lord ! Let 's stand before him .
GOLD:	Let us go to the sanctuary of the Lord ; let us worship at the footstool of his throne .

ID:	1831
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁hauxe ▁diotsuet : ▁Bizi ▁zaitezte ▁Espiritu ari ▁dagokionez , ▁eta ▁ez ▁giza ▁grin ei ▁jarraituz .
PRED:	“ This is what the Holy Spirit says : Instead , you must not follow the desires of human desires .
GOLD:	So I say , let the Holy Spirit guide your lives . Then you wo n't be doing what your sinful nature craves .

ID:	1832
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁aintza ▁hiriaren ▁erditik ▁altxatu ▁eta ▁ekialdera ▁dagoen ▁mendi ▁gainean ▁gelditu ▁zen .
PRED:	The glory of the Lord stood at the town of the city , and the east of the hill .
GOLD:	Then the glory of the Lord went up from the city and stopped above the mountain to the east .

ID:	1833
INPUT:	▁Z atik etak ▁sortzen ▁dituztenak ▁dira ▁horiek , ▁giza ▁mai lan ▁bakarrik ▁bizi ▁den ▁jendea , ▁Espirituak ▁gidatu ▁gabea .
PRED:	They are allowed to live by human hands , but the Spirit gives birth to life .
GOLD:	These people are the ones who are creating divisions among you . They follow their natural instincts because they do not have God 's Spirit in them .

ID:	1834
INPUT:	▁Moises ▁bere ▁aitagin arreb ari ▁bidera ▁atera ▁zitzaion , ▁eta , ▁ahuspezturik , ▁besarkatu ▁egin ▁zuen ; ▁elkar ▁agurtu ▁ondoren , ▁oihal - etxolan ▁sartu ▁ziren .
PRED:	When Moses left his father-in-law , he bowed low to his father-in-law , and bowed low to the ground .
GOLD:	So Moses went out to meet his father-in-law . He bowed low and kissed him . They asked about each other 's welfare and then went into Moses ' tent .

ID:	1835
INPUT:	▁« Beraz , ▁saiatu ▁Jaunak ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoak ▁agindu ▁dizuen ▁guztia ▁betetzen , ▁ezertan ▁ere ▁saihestu ▁gabe .
PRED:	“ So listen to what the Lord your God has commanded you to do .
GOLD:	So Moses told the people , “ You must be careful to obey all the commands of the Lord your God , following his instructions in every detail .

ID:	1836
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁esan ▁zuen : ▁« Orain ▁izango ▁duzue ▁fro ga ▁eta ▁jakingo ▁Jaunak ▁bidali ▁nauela ▁egiteko ▁hau ▁buru tzera , ▁eta ▁ez ▁naizela ▁neure ▁kabuz ▁ari .
PRED:	Then Moses said to them , “ Now I will know that the Lord has sent me to know that I am going to do not know that I am going to do .
GOLD:	And Moses said , “ This is how you will know that the Lord has sent me to do all these things that I have done — for I have not done them on my own .

ID:	1837
INPUT:	▁Nire ▁mih iak ▁zure ▁salbamen - as mo ai ragarri ko ▁du ▁egun ▁osoan , lots az ▁eta ▁irain ez ▁gelditu ▁baiti ran ire ▁zoritx arraren ▁bila ▁zebiltzan ak .
PRED:	The tongue of your enemy has been poured out against me , for they were ashamed to shame .
GOLD:	I will tell about your righteous deedsall day long , for everyone who tried to hurt mehas been shamed and humiliated .

ID:	1838
INPUT:	▁Bitartean , ▁han ▁ari ▁ziren ▁apaizburu ▁eta ▁lege - maisuak ▁salatu ▁eta ▁salatu .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the leading priests and teachers of religious law , the teachers of religious law and the teachers of religious law .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the leading priests and the teachers of religious law stood there shouting their accusations .

ID:	1839
INPUT:	▁eta ▁israeldar ▁gudari ek , ▁orduan , ▁aurre ▁egingo ▁zi etela ▁benjamin darrei . ▁Hauek , ▁ordurako , ▁hilak ▁zituzten ▁hogeita ▁hamarren ▁bat ▁gizon ▁israeldar ▁eta ▁pents atzen ▁ari ▁ziren , ▁aurreko ▁gudu ka tze etan ▁bezala , ▁mendera tuak ▁zituztela ▁israeldarrak .
PRED:	Then the men of Benjamin would stand before the men of Benjamin . But the men of Benjamin were killed when they were killed , they were killed . They were killed in battle , as well as the people of Israel were killed .
GOLD:	When the Israelites saw the smoke , they turned and attacked Benjamin 's warriors.By that time Benjamin 's warriors had killed about thirty Israelites , and they shouted , “ We 're defeating them as we did in the first battle ! ”

ID:	1840
INPUT:	▁eta ▁esan ▁zuen : ▁« Hil ▁nadila ▁filiste arrekin ▁batera !» ▁Egin ▁zuen ▁bultza ▁indarrez , ▁eta ▁bertan ▁zeuden ▁buruzagi ▁eta ▁jendearen ▁gainera ▁etorri ▁zen ▁jauretx ea . ▁Horrela , ▁bere ▁bizitza ▁osoan ▁baino ▁jende ▁gehiago ▁hil ez ▁hil ▁zen ▁Samson .
PRED:	Then he said to the Philistine , “ Let me kill him ! ” So the commander of the temple of the temple of the temple of the temple of the temple of the city .
GOLD:	he prayed , “ Let me die with the Philistines. ” And the temple crashed down on the Philistine rulers and all the people . So he killed more people when he died than he had during his entire lifetime .

ID:	1841
INPUT:	▁Horra ▁hor ▁Jaunaren ▁ohorez ▁erretako ▁opari etatik ▁Aaroni ▁eta ▁beronen ▁ondorengoei ▁dagokien ▁partea , ▁Jaunaren ▁apaiz ▁izateko ▁izen datuko ▁dituzten ▁egunetik .
PRED:	Here is the gifts of the Lord 's descendants and his descendants will be given to Aaron and his descendants on the day of the Lord .
GOLD:	This is their rightful share . The special gifts presented to the Lord have been reserved for Aaron and his descendants from the time they were set apart to serve the Lord as priests .

ID:	1842
INPUT:	▁eta ▁beste ▁egintzak , ▁lehenengo tik ▁azkeneko ra , ▁« Israelgo ▁eta ▁Judako ▁Erregeen ▁Liburu an » ▁daude ▁idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events of the reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	from beginning to end — all are recorded in The Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah .

ID:	1843
INPUT:	▁Biz irik ▁eutsi ▁baitzi gun eta ▁gure ▁oin ei ▁erortzen ▁utzi ▁ez .
PRED:	For his strong arm was covered with us ; it would not let them fall .
GOLD:	Our lives are in his hands , and he keeps our feet from stumbling .

ID:	1844
INPUT:	▁Eta , ▁orain , ▁Jainkoak ▁etsaiak ▁oin - aulki tzat ▁noiz ▁jarriko ▁dizki on ▁itx ar oten ▁dago .
PRED:	And now God is as strong as a strong hand , and he will lift it up .
GOLD:	There he waits until his enemies are humbled and made a footstool under his feet .

ID:	1845
INPUT:	▁Hogeita ▁hiru ▁urtez ▁gobern atu ▁zuen ▁Israel . ▁Hil ▁zenean , ▁X am ir ren ▁ehortzi ▁zuten .
PRED:	When Jeroboam died , he was buried in Israel for three years .
GOLD:	He judged Israel for twenty-three years . When he died , he was buried in Shamir .

ID:	1846
INPUT:	▁ F elipe ▁lasterka ▁hurbildu ▁zitzaion ▁eta , ▁Isaias ▁profeta ▁irakurtzen ▁entzun ik , ▁galdetu ▁zion ▁iren ari :— U ler tzen ▁al ▁duzu ▁irakurtzen ▁ari ▁z arena ?
PRED:	Meanwhile , Philip went to the prophet and asked him , “ What are you talking about ? ”
GOLD:	Philip ran over and heard the man reading from the prophet Isaiah . Philip asked , “ Do you understand what you are reading ? ”

ID:	1847
INPUT:	▁« Egun ▁hartan , ▁Jerusalemi ▁eraso ka ▁etor ▁dak izkion ▁guztiak ▁hondatuko ▁ditut .
PRED:	“ In that day , ” says the Lord , “ I will destroy all who hate him .
GOLD:	For on that day I will begin to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem .

ID:	1848
INPUT:	▁Aho ▁ber etik ▁ateratzen ▁dira ▁bedeinkazioa ▁eta ▁madarikazioa . ▁Senideok , ▁horrek ▁ez ▁du ▁horrela ▁izan ▁behar .
PRED:	This letter is the blessing of dear brothers and sisters , dear brothers and sisters , that you should not be a curse .
GOLD:	And so blessing and cursing come pouring out of the same mouth . Surely , my brothers and sisters , this is not right !

ID:	1849
INPUT:	▁zio tela : ▁« Jauna , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoa , ▁zergatik ▁gertatu ▁da ▁hori ▁Israelen ? ▁Zergatik ▁galdu ▁da ▁leinu ▁bat ?»
PRED:	He told them , “ O Lord , why have you been destroyed ? Why has it been destroyed ? ”
GOLD:	“ O Lord , God of Israel , ” they cried out , “ why has this happened in Israel ? Now one of our tribes is missing from Israel ! ”

ID:	1850
INPUT:	▁harri katu ▁egin ▁zituzten , ▁zer raz ▁ebaki , ▁ezpataz ▁hil ; ▁nora ezean ▁ibili ▁ziren , ▁ahuntz - ▁nahiz ▁ardi - l ar ruz ▁jantzirik , ▁pre m ia ▁gorri an , ▁eraso pean ▁eta ▁tratu ▁txarrak ▁hartuz .
PRED:	They cut off their heads and cut off their heads and cut them off . They cut their heads in fine linen cloth , and they cut off their heads in fine linen clothing .
GOLD:	Some died by stoning , some were sawed in half , and others were killed with the sword . Some went about wearing skins of sheep and goats , destitute and oppressed and mistreated .

ID:	1851
INPUT:	▁Itzul ▁belarria ▁niregana , ▁Jauna , ▁eta ▁entzun . ▁Zab aldu ▁begiak , ▁Jauna , ▁eta ▁ikusi . ▁Entzun ▁nolako ▁irainak ▁zuzendu ▁dizk izun ▁Senakerib ek ▁zuri , ▁Jainko ▁bizi ▁horri .
PRED:	Turn to me and listen to me , O Lord , and see what you have seen and seen the Lord your God . You have seen all the evil things you have seen .
GOLD:	Bend down , O Lord , and listen ! Open your eyes , O Lord , and see ! Listen to Sennacherib 's words of defiance against the living God .

ID:	1852
INPUT:	▁An as ▁eta ▁K ai f as ▁ziren ▁apaiz ▁nagusi . ▁Garai ▁hartan , ▁Joanek , ▁Zakarias en ▁semeak , ▁Jainkoaren ▁mezua ▁hartu ▁zuen ▁basamortuan .
PRED:	This was the High Priest , who was leader of the priests and Zechariah son of John the wilderness of God .
GOLD:	Annas and Caiaphas were the high priests . At this time a message from God came to John son of Zechariah , who was living in the wilderness .

ID:	1853
INPUT:	▁E kin ▁sinesmenaren ▁borroka ▁jator rari ▁eta ▁eskuratu ▁betiko ▁bizia , ▁har tarako ▁deitu ▁baitzaitu ▁Jainkoak , ▁eta ▁fede - ai tor men ▁bikaina ▁egin ▁baituzu , ▁testigu ▁askoren ▁aurrean .
PRED:	For God has given you an inheritance of faith and for you , and he called you to be honored in the faith of God .
GOLD:	Fight the good fight for the true faith . Hold tightly to the eternal life to which God has called you , which you have declared so well before many witnesses .

ID:	1854
INPUT:	▁Xalum , ▁Israelgo ▁errege
PRED:	Shallum Rules in Israel
GOLD:	Shallum Rules in Israel

ID:	1855
INPUT:	▁« G uk ▁ere ▁berri ▁on ▁hau ▁iragartzen ▁dizuegu : ▁gure ▁arbasoei ▁egindako ▁agintzaria ,
PRED:	“ We have heard the Good News about our ancestors , and we have given to our ancestors .
GOLD:	“ And now we are here to bring you this Good News . The promise was made to our ancestors ,

ID:	1856
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁niri ▁dagoki dan ez , ▁irrikaz ▁nago ▁zuei ▁ere , ▁erro m atar ro i , ▁berri ▁ona ▁hots ▁egiteko .
PRED:	So I have been preached to you , for I have been preached to you .
GOLD:	So I am eager to come to you in Rome , too , to preach the Good News .

ID:	1857
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁hemen ▁etorkizun ean ▁haiekin ▁egingo ▁dudan ▁ituna : ▁Biho tzean ▁ezarriko ▁dizkiet ▁neure ▁legeak , ▁buruan ▁ida tziko . ▁Hala ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jaunak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ When my heart is a covenant with my heart , I will put it on my head , says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ This is the new covenant I will makewith my people on that day , says the Lord : I will put my laws in their hearts , and I will write them on their minds . ”

ID:	1858
INPUT:	▁Atal ondo aren ▁luzera ▁hamar ▁metro koa ▁zen , ▁eta ▁zabalera ▁sei koa ; ▁hamar ▁har mai la ▁igo ▁behar ▁ziren ▁hara ▁iris teko . ▁A tearen ▁bi ▁alde etara ▁zutabe ▁bana ▁zegoen .
PRED:	The entry room was measured by the walls of the gateway , and it was six feet on each side . The next side of the Temple was on each side .
GOLD:	The entry room was 35 feet wide and 21 feet deep . There were ten steps leading up to it , with a column on each side .

ID:	1859
INPUT:	▁Erregeak ▁galdetu ▁zion :— Non ▁da ? T z ib ak ▁erregeari :— A mi elen ▁seme ▁M akir ren ▁etxean , ▁Lo - D eb arren .
PRED:	“ Where is the king ? ” the king asked the king . “ He is the son of Hushai , the son of Hushai , who was the son of Lot . ”
GOLD:	“ Where is he ? ” the king asked. “ In Lo-debar , ” Ziba told him , “ at the home of Makir son of Ammiel . ”

ID:	1860
INPUT:	▁B azter ▁itzazu ▁fede aren ▁kontrako ▁i pu in ▁zentzu gabeak , ▁eta ▁saia ▁zaitez ▁jainko zal etasun ean .
PRED:	Teach them to get away , for they are corrupt and poor .
GOLD:	Do not waste time arguing over godless ideas and old wives ' tales . Instead , train yourself to be godly .

ID:	1861
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁diezai etela ▁eska ▁lan - arduradun ei ▁beren ▁esku ▁utz iriko ▁diru aren ▁kon turik , ▁zintzo ▁jokatzen ▁baitute .
PRED:	Do n't need to ask the elders of the elders to ask their money for doing wrong .
GOLD:	But do n't require the construction supervisors to keep account of the money they receive , for they are honest and trustworthy men . ”

ID:	1862
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁Dani elen ▁kon tak izuna : ▁« Ikus kari ▁bat ▁izan ▁nuen ▁gauez : ▁Or tziko ▁lau ▁ertz etatik ▁haize ▁indartsu ▁batek ▁itsaso ▁handia ▁harro tzen ▁zuen .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I saw a vision at the end of the four corners of the sea , and there was a great sea .
GOLD:	In my vision that night , I , Daniel , saw a great storm churning the surface of a great sea , with strong winds blowing from every direction .

ID:	1863
INPUT:	▁baina ▁herri ▁larru tu ▁eta ▁p i pil dua ▁da , denak ▁pres on de gian ▁sartu eta ▁kartzelan ▁loturik ▁daude ; larru tu ▁egin ▁dituzte , eta ▁inork ▁as katzen ▁ez ; pi pil du , ▁eta ▁inork ▁ez haien ▁egoera ▁al datzeko ▁ardur arik ».
PRED:	But the people of Israel are allowed to remain in a field , and they are forced to take it in prison . They did n't take it into a heap of cloth , and no one will take it into a heap of clay pot . ”
GOLD:	But his own people have been robbed and plundered , enslaved , imprisoned , and trapped.They are fair game for anyoneand have no one to protect them , no one to take them back home .

ID:	1864
INPUT:	▁Erruki ▁gu taz , ▁Jauna , zure gan ▁baitugu ▁itxaropen ! Izan ▁gure ▁indar ▁egunero , gure ▁salbamen ▁estu aldian .
PRED:	Lord , have mercy on us , Lord , for we have saved us from our salvation .
GOLD:	But Lord , be merciful to us , for we have waited for you.Be our strong arm each dayand our salvation in times of trouble .

ID:	1865
INPUT:	▁Balaamek ▁esan ▁zion ▁B al aki : ▁« Era iki ▁hemen ▁zazpi ▁aldare ▁eta ▁prestatu ▁zazpi ▁zekor ▁eta ▁zazpi ▁ahari ».
PRED:	Then Balaam said to Balaam , “ Give me seven altars for seven young bulls and seven young bulls . ”
GOLD:	Then Balaam said to King Balak , “ Build me seven altars here , and prepare seven young bulls and seven rams for me to sacrifice . ”

ID:	1866
INPUT:	▁eta ▁arkume ▁bakoitzeko ▁lau ▁kilo .
PRED:	and two quarts with each of the fourteen lambs .
GOLD:	and two quarts of choice flour with each of the seven lambs .

ID:	1867
INPUT:	▁Begiak ▁jaso ▁eta ▁bi ▁emakume ▁ikusi ▁nituen , ▁aire an ▁hegaz . ▁H e goak ▁zi ko inaren ▁g is akoak ▁zituzten . ▁On tzia ▁hartu ▁eta ▁zerurantz ▁jaso ▁zuten .
PRED:	I looked up and saw two men living in the open fields , and they saw that they were staying in front of the courtyard .
GOLD:	Then I looked up and saw two women flying toward us , gliding on the wind . They had wings like a stork , and they picked up the basket and flew into the sky .

ID:	1868
INPUT:	▁I m erren ▁seme ▁P ax hur ▁apaizak , ▁tenpluko ▁arduradun ▁nagusiak , ▁Jeremiasen ▁hitz ok ▁entzutean ,
PRED:	When the priest heard what had happened to Jeremiah son of Pashhur ,
GOLD:	Now Pashhur son of Immer , the priest in charge of the Temple of the Lord , heard what Jeremiah was prophesying .

ID:	1869
INPUT:	▁Orduan , Jerusalem en ▁aurka ▁borrokan ari ▁diren ▁nazio ▁guztiak , s et iatzen ▁duten ▁gudari - talde eta ▁eraso - tres na ▁guztiak , am ets a ▁bezala , gau eko ▁irudi pena ▁bezala des ager tuko ▁dira .
PRED:	Then all the nations of Judah will attack Jerusalem , and their armies will attack them like a warrior . They will be cut off like a warrior , like a warrior , and all the kingdoms of the kingdoms of the world will be destroyed .
GOLD:	All the nations fighting against Jerusalemwill vanish like a dream ! Those who are attacking her wallswill vanish like a vision in the night .

ID:	1870
INPUT:	▁Bai , ▁zuregandik ▁urrun ▁doaz enak ▁galdu ak ▁dira , des leial ▁zaiz kizun ak ▁suntsitu ▁egingo ▁dituzu .
PRED:	You will be cut off from the power of the Lord , and you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Those who desert him will perish , for you destroy those who abandon you .

ID:	1871
INPUT:	▁Apaizak ▁salbamen - indar rez ▁jantziko ▁ditu teta ▁fededun ek ▁poz - oih uka ▁ekingo ▁diote .
PRED:	I will feed them with understanding , and he will sing to joy .
GOLD:	I will clothe its priests with godliness ; its faithful servants will sing for joy .

ID:	1872
INPUT:	▁A darrak ▁jotzen ▁zituzten ▁apaizen ▁aurrean ▁gizon ▁arm atuak ▁jarri ▁ziren ▁eta ▁kutxaren ▁atzean ▁gainerako ▁gudariak . ▁Adar - hots era ▁zihoazen ▁denak ▁aurrera .
PRED:	Suddenly , the priests stood in front of the priests and the priests stood in front of the Ark .
GOLD:	Some of the armed men marched in front of the priests with the horns and some behind the Ark , with the priests continually blowing the horns .

ID:	1873
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁ezpata ▁eskuan ▁bide ▁erdian ▁zegoen ▁aingerua ▁eman ▁zion ▁ikustera ▁Jaunak ▁Balaam i . ▁Lur reraino ▁ahuspeztu ▁zen ▁Balaam ,
PRED:	Then the angel named Balaam , the angel of the Lord appeared to him in the middle of the earth , and bowed low to the ground .
GOLD:	Then the Lord opened Balaam 's eyes , and he saw the angel of the Lord standing in the roadway with a drawn sword in his hand . Balaam bowed his head and fell face down on the ground before him .

ID:	1874
INPUT:	▁itzul ▁niregana , ▁erruki ▁zakizkit , eman ▁indar ▁zeure ▁zerbitzari ▁honi , salba ▁zeure ▁zerbitzari ▁ap ala .
PRED:	Give me mercy to me , for you have mercy on me , for your servants are safe .
GOLD:	Look down and have mercy on me.Give your strength to your servant ; save me , the son of your servant .

ID:	1875
INPUT:	▁Hark , ▁ordea , ▁erantzun :— Goazen ▁beste ▁nora bait , ▁inguruko ▁auzo etara , ▁horietan ▁ere ▁berri ▁ona ▁hots ▁egitera , ▁horretarako ▁atera ▁bainaiz .
PRED:	But Jesus replied , “ Let 's go and preach the Good News . Let 's go and preach the Good News for the Good News . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus replied , “ We must go on to other towns as well , and I will preach to them , too . That is why I came . ”

ID:	1876
INPUT:	▁Kendu ▁z izkizu ten ▁seme - alabek hur bildu ▁eta ▁esango ▁dizute :“ Es tu egia ▁dugu ▁toki ▁hau : em aguzu ▁l ekua ▁bizitzeko ”.
PRED:	Go and say , ‘ Come and tell us , ‘ Come , let us tell us , ‘ Come , let us live ! '
GOLD:	The generations born in exile will return and say , ‘ We need more room ! It 's crowded here ! '

ID:	1877
INPUT:	▁Zigor tzea ▁erabaki ▁dut : herriak ▁haien ▁aurka ▁bilduko ▁dira , behin ▁eta ▁berriz ko ▁bekatuen or d aina ▁emateko .
PRED:	But my regulations will be punished , but now my enemies will be punished for their sins .
GOLD:	Now whenever it fits my plan , I will attack you , too.I will call out the armies of the nationsto punish you for your multiplied sins .

ID:	1878
INPUT:	▁Hauek ▁galdetu ▁zioten :— Beraz , ▁Mesias ▁ez ▁bazara , ▁ez ▁Elias , ▁ezta ▁etor tzekoa ▁den ▁profeta ▁ere , ▁nola ▁ari ▁zara ▁bataiatzen ?
PRED:	They asked him , “ If you are the Messiah , why are you the Messiah ? ”
GOLD:	asked him , “ If you are n't the Messiah or Elijah or the Prophet , what right do you have to baptize ? ”

ID:	1879
INPUT:	▁« Baina ▁egia ▁ote , ▁Jainkoa ▁lurrean ▁biziko ▁dela ▁gizon - emakume ekin ? ▁Zeru ▁eta ▁or tzi aren ▁zabal ak ▁ezin ▁zaitu ▁eduki , ▁eta ▁nik ▁eraiki ▁dizudan ▁tenplu ▁honek ▁eduki ▁ote ▁zai tzak e , ▁bada ?
PRED:	“ But what is God of heaven and earth ? What can I live with people and earth ? What can I build you up ? Why have you built this Temple ?
GOLD:	“ But will God really live on earth among people ? Why , even the highest heavens can not contain you . How much less this Temple I have built !

ID:	1880
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁etorri ▁ziren ▁berriro ▁ere ▁gizon ▁haiek ▁eta ▁esan ▁zioten :— Errege ▁jauna , ▁ondo ▁dakizu , ▁m edi arren ▁eta ▁per tsi arren ▁legeen ▁arabera , ▁erregeak ▁sin aturiko <unk> eku ak ▁nahiz ▁aginduak ▁alda ez inak ▁direla .
PRED:	But the men came again again again again again again again and said , “ You know the law of the Jews and decrees that the king should not obey the commandments of the commandments of the Jews . ”
GOLD:	So at last the king gave orders for Daniel to be arrested and thrown into the den of lions . The king said to him , “ May your God , whom you serve so faithfully , rescue you . ”

ID:	1881
INPUT:	▁E raso - tresn az ▁joko ▁dituzte zure ▁harresiak eta ▁p iko tx ez ▁erai tsiko ▁dorre ak .
PRED:	Then the Lord will strike down the walls of the earth , and the tower of Lebanon will be rebuilt .
GOLD:	He will pound your walls with battering rams and demolish your towers with sledgehammers .

ID:	1882
INPUT:	▁J aso ▁begiak ▁gor antz ▁eta ▁ikus : Nork ▁egin ▁zuen ▁hori ▁guztia ? B an an - banan ▁ater arazten ▁dituz er uko ▁as tro ak , b akoitz ari ▁bere ▁izen ez ▁deitzen ▁dio ; hain ▁baita ▁ahaltsu , hain ▁biziki ▁indartsu , ba tek ▁ere ▁ez ▁dio haren ▁dei ari ▁huts ▁egiten .
PRED:	How can you see all this ? Who can see everything in the east ? Who is able to judge each person 's secret — the one who calls out from the east , the one who calls on his mighty power , and he called the mighty power of his mighty ones .
GOLD:	Look up into the heavens.Who created all the stars ? He brings them out like an army , one after another , calling each by its name.Because of his great power and incomparable strength , not a single one is missing .

ID:	1883
INPUT:	▁esanez : ▁« Bedeinkatua ▁Jauna , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoa , ▁bete ▁baitu ▁gure ▁aita ▁Davidi ▁hitzeman ikoa :
PRED:	“ Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , for he has promised David .
GOLD:	“ Praise the Lord , the God of Israel , who has kept the promise he made to my father , David . For he told my father ,

ID:	1884
INPUT:	▁M ariak ▁El is abet i ▁ikus tal dia
PRED:	The family of Zaccai760
GOLD:	Mary Visits Elizabeth

ID:	1885
INPUT:	▁Egiptoko ▁N eko ▁erregeak ▁Jerusalemgo ▁errege ▁izatea ▁Joak azi ▁kendu ▁eta ▁zerga ▁ezarri ▁zion ▁herriari : ▁hiru ▁mila ▁kilo ▁zilar ▁eta ▁hogeita ▁hamabost ▁kilo ▁urre ▁ordaindu ▁behar ▁zuten .
PRED:	The king of Egypt had been brought to the king of Egypt , and he put the tribute of silver for the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Then he was deposed by the king of Egypt , who demanded that Judah pay 7,500 pounds of silver and 75 pounds of gold as tribute .

ID:	1886
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁guk ▁ezagutu ▁dugu ▁eta ▁sinetsi ▁Jainkoak ▁digun ▁maitasuna . ▁Jainkoa ▁maitasuna ▁da , ▁eta ▁maitasunean ▁dirau ena ▁Jainkoarekin ▁bat ▁eginik ▁dago ▁eta ▁Jainkoa ▁harekin .
PRED:	And we know God 's love and believe in him . He is love and love endures forever .
GOLD:	We know how much God loves us , and we have put our trust in his love.God is love , and all who live in love live in God , and God lives in them .

ID:	1887
INPUT:	▁Mah ala tek ▁hiru ▁seme ▁ekarri ▁zizkion : ▁J eu x , ▁Xem arias ▁eta ▁Zah am .
PRED:	After the birth of Amariah , Amariah , son of Amariah , and Jobab .
GOLD:	Mahalath had three sons — Jeush , Shemariah , and Zaham .

ID:	1888
INPUT:	▁G aldera ▁egiten ▁dut : ▁Jainkoak ▁baztertu ▁egin ▁ote ▁du ▁bere ▁herria ? ▁In ola ▁ere ▁ez ! ▁Neu ▁ere ▁israeldar ra ▁naiz , ▁Abrahamen ▁jatorri koa , ▁Benjaminen ▁leinukoa .
PRED:	Then I rejected the people of Israel , who abandoned the Lord , the God of Israel . I am the descendants of Abraham , the tribe of Levi .
GOLD:	I ask , then , has God rejected his own people , the nation of Israel ? Of course not ! I myself am an Israelite , a descendant of Abraham and a member of the tribe of Benjamin .

ID:	1889
INPUT:	▁« Egin ▁ahuntz - il ezko ▁beste ▁hamaika ▁zapi , ▁egoitza ▁estaliko ▁duen ▁oihal - etxola ▁era tzeko .
PRED:	“ Make the Tabernacle with its tent , and put it into the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ Make eleven curtains of goat-hair cloth to serve as a tent covering for the Tabernacle .

ID:	1890
INPUT:	▁Zor o ▁hori , ▁zuk ▁erein dako a ▁ez ▁da ▁erne tzen ▁aurrez ▁hiltzen ▁ez ▁bada .
PRED:	But if it is nothing to eat , it wo n't be killed .
GOLD:	What a foolish question ! When you put a seed into the ground , it does n't grow into a plant unless it dies first .

ID:	1891
INPUT:	▁ezez agunak ▁dituzuen ▁jainko ▁arrotzen ▁atzetik ▁joan ▁eta ▁gurtzeko ▁eska tzea . ▁Ira garri takoa ▁egiaz ▁gertatuko ▁balitz ▁ere ,
PRED:	If you listen to other gods , you might ask you to worship other gods . What if you refuse to listen to me ?
GOLD:	do not listen to them . The Lord your God is testing you to see if you truly love him with all your heart and soul .

ID:	1892
INPUT:	▁Josiasen ▁errege aldia
PRED:	Josiah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Josiah Rules in Judah

ID:	1893
INPUT:	▁X aron ▁zelai ko ▁lore ▁naiz ▁ni , ib arre tako ▁lil i .
PRED:	I am the lampstand in the valley of Rephaim .
GOLD:	I am the spring crocus blooming on the Sharon Plain , the lily of the valley .

ID:	1894
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁dio ▁Jaunak :« A mon darrek gaiztakeri arik ▁asko ▁egin ▁dute , zein ▁baino ▁zein ▁handiago . Eta ▁beraz , ▁zigortu ▁egingo ▁ditut ! G ala ade ko ▁emakume ▁haurdun ei s ab ela ▁urratu ▁baitzi eten , beren ▁lurraldeaz ab aldu ▁ahal ▁izateko ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Israel have sinned again and again and again , and I will put them on their heads , and I will bring shame on their heads .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ The people of Ammon have sinned again and again , and I will not let them go unpunished ! When they attacked Gilead to extend their borders , they ripped open pregnant women with their swords .

ID:	1895
INPUT:	▁Sei garren ▁izurria : ▁zauriak
PRED:	A Plague of Blood
GOLD:	A Plague of Festering Boils

ID:	1896
INPUT:	▁L il ura tu ▁egin ▁nauzu , ▁Jauna , eta ▁ni ▁zure ▁lilura pean ▁erori ; bor txatu ▁egin ▁nauzu ▁eta ▁menderatu . B arre garri ▁gertatu ▁naiz ▁egun ▁osoan , b ur l aka ▁ari ▁zaizkit ▁denak .
PRED:	I am the Lord , the Lord , and I am the one who has rescued me from the mouth of the earth .
GOLD:	O Lord , you misled me , and I allowed myself to be misled.You are stronger than I am , and you overpowered me.Now I am mocked every day ; everyone laughs at me .

ID:	1897
INPUT:	▁Hartu ▁zituen ▁gero ▁buz tan eko ▁gantza , ▁heste ▁gain ekoa ▁eta ▁g ib ela ▁estaltzen ▁zuena , ▁gil tzur run ak ▁berauen ▁gantz arekin ▁eta ▁eskuineko ▁izter ra .
PRED:	Then he took the fat around the internal organs and the fat around the internal organs and the fat around the internal organs , and the fat around the internal organs and the fat .
GOLD:	Next Moses took the fat , including the fat of the broad tail , the fat around the internal organs , the long lobe of the liver , and the two kidneys and the fat around them , along with the right thigh .

ID:	1898
INPUT:	▁Bo ta ▁biezaio ▁berari ▁Jaunak ▁hilketa ▁horien ▁errua , ▁bera ▁baino ▁hob eak ▁ziren ▁bi ▁gizon ▁jator ▁eta ▁zuzen ▁hil ▁baitzituen ▁ezpataz , ▁David ▁gure ▁aitak ▁jakin ▁gabe : ▁Ner - en ▁seme ▁Abner , ▁Israelgo ▁gudaroste en ▁buruzagia , ▁eta ▁J et er - en ▁seme ▁Am asa , ▁Judako aren ▁buruzagia .
PRED:	For the Lord 's anger had done for him , for he had committed a man from all the fighting men and his father , Abner son David 's son David , had not killed Abner son of Ner , and Abner son of Ner .
GOLD:	The Lord will repay him for the murders of two men who were more righteous and better than he . For my father knew nothing about the deaths of Abner son of Ner , commander of the army of Israel , and of Amasa son of Jether , commander of the army of Judah .

ID:	1899
INPUT:	▁Goi tik ▁eskua ▁luz atuz ▁hartu ▁ninduen eta ▁uholde tik ▁atera .
PRED:	He pulled me down from his hand , and the waters covered me .
GOLD:	He rescued me from my powerful enemies , from those who hated me and were too strong for me .

ID:	1900
INPUT:	▁itzul er arik ▁gabe ▁joan ▁aurretik ilun pe ▁eta ▁herio - itz alen ▁herrialdera ,
PRED:	They never return to the grave , but the people of the world would not return to the land of the desert .
GOLD:	before I leave — never to return — for the land of darkness and utter gloom .

ID:	1901
INPUT:	▁Rubenen ▁ondorengoek ▁Hexb on , ▁El ale , ▁Kiri a ta im , ▁Neb o , ▁Baal - M e on ▁eta ▁S ib ma ▁berreraiki ▁zituzten , ▁eta ▁berreraiki tako ▁hiri ei ▁izena ▁aldatu ▁zieten .
PRED:	The descendants of Heshbon were named after their pasturelands : The descendants of Heshbon , Ziklag , and Uzziel . They rebuilt their towns and restored it to their towns .
GOLD:	The descendants of Reuben built the towns of Heshbon , Elealeh , Kiriathaim ,

ID:	1902
INPUT:	▁Horregatik ▁eta ▁aingeruen ganako ▁begirune agatik , ▁emakumeak ▁mende tasunaren ▁ezau garria ▁eraman ▁behar ▁du ▁buruan .
PRED:	That is why the women who fear him , for she must be punished for those who fear him .
GOLD:	For this reason , and because the angels are watching , a woman should wear a covering on her head to show she is under authority .

ID:	1903
INPUT:	▁baita ▁erregeen ▁eta ▁agintea ▁duten ▁guztien ▁alde ▁ere , ▁bizitza ▁bare ▁eta ▁bak ets uan ▁bizi ▁gaitezen , ▁jainko zal etasun ez ▁eta ▁giz abi dez .
PRED:	For the kings of the kings and kings of all the kings of the world , and let us live in peace .
GOLD:	Pray this way for kings and all who are in authority so that we can live peaceful and quiet lives marked by godliness and dignity .

ID:	1904
INPUT:	▁Ea ▁salbatzen ▁zaitu en zeure ▁idolo - multz oak , zuk ▁laguntza ▁eske ▁deiadar ▁egitean ! H aiz eak ▁eramango ▁ditu ▁denak , putz aldi ▁batek ▁desager raraziko . Nire gan ▁babesten ▁denak , ▁ordea , lurralde a ▁esku ratuko ▁du , nire ▁mendi ▁santu ahar tuko ▁jabetzan ».
PRED:	Listen to me , O Lord , you are as strong as a song for me.I will bring you out in the dust , but they will be destroyed by my people , but they will be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	Let 's see if your idols can save youwhen you cry to them for help.Why , a puff of wind can knock them down ! If you just breathe on them , they fall over ! But whoever trusts in me will inherit the landand possess my holy mountain . ”

ID:	1905
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁dago , ▁ordea , ▁beste ▁berri ▁onik ; ▁baina ▁bad abiltza ▁hor ▁norbai tzu k ▁zuek ▁nahas ten ▁eta ▁Kristoren ▁berri ▁ona ▁goitik ▁behera ▁iraul i ▁nahian .
PRED:	But it is not good , but if someone hates another person , you are trying to hear the Good News about Christ .
GOLD:	but is not the Good News at all . You are being fooled by those who deliberately twist the truth concerning Christ .

ID:	1906
INPUT:	▁Bete a ▁dute ▁ahoa ▁madarikazio z ▁eta ▁min gos tasunez .
PRED:	Your mouth is filled with wickedness , and your mouth is filled with lies .
GOLD:	“ Their mouths are full of cursing and bitterness . ”

ID:	1907
INPUT:	▁Profeta ▁guztiek ▁testigantza ▁hau ▁egiten ▁dute ▁hartaz : ▁harengan ▁sinets ▁dezaten ▁guztiek ▁bekatuen ▁barkamena ▁hartuko ▁dutela ▁beraren ▁bitartez ».
PRED:	The witnesses of the prophets who believe in him will believe in him . ”
GOLD:	He is the one all the prophets testified about , saying that everyone who believes in him will have their sins forgiven through his name . ”

ID:	1908
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁haize - b ola da ▁batek eraman go ▁ditu , eta ▁lotsa ▁izango ▁dira beren ▁sakrifizio ez .
PRED:	But a wind will be driven into their hands , and they will be destroyed .
GOLD:	So a mighty wind will sweep them away.Their sacrifices to idols will bring them shame .

ID:	1909
INPUT:	▁Ikusi ▁izan ▁ditut m orro iak ▁zaldi ▁gainean eta ▁nagusiak ▁oinez , ▁morroi ▁bailiran .
PRED:	My horses looked like horses , and the horses are like a horse .
GOLD:	I have even seen servants riding horseback like princes — and princes walking like servants !

ID:	1910
INPUT:	▁Zazpi ▁seme - alaben ▁ama ▁bera ▁ere aki tua ▁dago , ▁arnasa ▁ezin ▁harturik , lots az ▁eta ▁desoho rez ▁betea ; egun - argia ▁ilunpe ▁bihurtu ▁zaio . Eta ▁gelditzen ▁zaizkion ▁semeak etsaien ▁ezpataz ▁hilko ▁dira . Nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	He has seven sons and daughters , and he will not be able to be ashamed , and he will not be ashamed . They will be ashamed , and they will be ashamed of the Lord , the Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	The mother of seven grows faint and gasps for breath ; her sun has gone down while it is still day.She sits childless now , disgraced and humiliated.And I will hand over those who are leftto be killed by the enemy.I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	1911
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁barkamen - opariko ▁zez ena ▁hartu ▁eta ▁erre ▁egingo ▁duzu ▁horretarako ▁ezarritako ▁lekuan , ▁santutegi tik ▁kanpo .
PRED:	Then you must present an offering to the Lord at the place where he chooses for the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Then take the young bull for the sin offering and burn it at the appointed place outside the Temple area .

ID:	1912
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁semeek ▁gizakien ▁alab ekin ▁b atu ▁eta ▁haurrak ▁izan ▁zituzten ean , ▁baita ▁gero ago ▁ere , ▁baz iren ▁erra ldo iak ▁munduan : ▁antzinako ▁h ero iak ▁dira ▁hauek , ▁izen ▁handi koak .
PRED:	The sons of God had given them all the children of God 's daughters , and the children of the earth were also very numerous than the earth .
GOLD:	In those days , and for some time after , giant Nephilites lived on the earth , for whenever the sons of God had intercourse with women , they gave birth to children who became the heroes and famous warriors of ancient times .

ID:	1913
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁eduki ▁zor rik ▁in orekin , ▁elkar ▁maita tzekoa ▁baizik , ▁zeren ▁lagun ▁hurkoa ▁maite ▁duenak ▁betea ▁baitu ▁legea .
PRED:	You must not love each other , but do n't love each other . For you love your neighbor .
GOLD:	Owe nothing to anyone — except for your obligation to love one another . If you love your neighbor , you will fulfill the requirements of God 's law .

ID:	1914
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁zuk , ▁Jeremias , ▁ez ▁eskatu ▁herri ▁honen ▁alde , ▁ez ▁egin ▁erregu rik , ▁ez ▁otoitz ik , ▁ez ▁baitizu t ▁entzungo ▁zoritx arrean ▁laguntza ▁eske ▁dei ▁egitean ».
PRED:	But you ask Jeremiah , “ Listen to this city or pray for me , or if you pray for me , do n't listen to me ! ”
GOLD:	“ Pray no more for these people , Jeremiah . Do not weep or pray for them , for I will not listen to them when they cry out to me in distress .

ID:	1915
INPUT:	▁Apaizak , ▁erri tuzko ▁k einua ▁eginez ▁aurkeztuko ▁dio ▁Jaunari , ▁atseginez ▁onar ▁dezan . ▁Larun bat ▁biharamun ean ▁aurkeztuko ▁du .
PRED:	The priest will present it to the Lord as a special offering to the Lord . It will present it as a special gift to the Lord .
GOLD:	On the day after the Sabbath , the priest will lift it up before the Lord so it may be accepted on your behalf .

ID:	1916
INPUT:	▁Saulek ▁semeari :— Z igor ▁nazala ▁Jaunak ▁gogor , ▁hil arazten ▁ez ▁bazaitu t , ▁Jonatan .
PRED:	“ Please kill me , ” Saul replied . “ If I kill me , I wo n't kill him . ”
GOLD:	“ Yes , Jonathan , ” Saul said , “ you must die ! May God strike me and even kill me if you do not die for this . ”

ID:	1917
INPUT:	▁Sei ▁urtez ▁egon ▁ziren ▁in u dea ▁eta ▁biak ▁Jaunaren ▁etxean ▁gor derik , ▁Atal ia ▁lurralde ▁hartan ▁erregina ▁izan ▁zen ▁bitartean .
PRED:	There were six years old when Athaliah and the other kings of the Lord .
GOLD:	Joash remained hidden in the Temple of the Lord for six years while Athaliah ruled over the land .

ID:	1918
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁us tez , ▁hirur otan ▁zein ek ▁jokatu ▁zuen ▁lagun ▁hurko ▁bezala ▁lapur ren ▁esku ▁erori tako ▁gizon arekin ?
PRED:	“ How did you think about your neighbor ? ” he asked .
GOLD:	“ Now which of these three would you say was a neighbor to the man who was attacked by bandits ? ” Jesus asked .

ID:	1919
INPUT:	▁Horiek ▁dira , ▁Labanek ▁bere ▁alaba ▁Le ari ▁eman ▁zion ▁Zil pa ▁neskam eak ▁Jakobi ▁sortu ▁zizkion ▁semeak ; ▁hamasei ▁guztira , ▁seme ▁eta ▁bilob en ▁artean .
PRED:	These are the names of Laban 's daughters , Laban 's daughter , who had been given to Jacob 's sons .
GOLD:	These were the sons of Zilpah , the servant given to Leah by her father , Laban . The number of Jacob 's descendants through Zilpah was sixteen .

ID:	1920
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁konfiantza ▁Jaunarengan ▁eta ▁egin ▁on ▁dena , zeure ▁herrialdean ▁bizi eta ▁bertako ▁aberastasun az ▁goza tzeko .
PRED:	Trust in the Lord , and everything you have done in your land .
GOLD:	Trust in the Lord and do good.Then you will live safely in the land and prosper .

ID:	1921
INPUT:	▁M adi ango ▁bi ▁erregeek , ▁Zeb ah ek ▁eta ▁Tz alm un ak , ▁ihes ▁egin ▁zuten ; ▁baina ▁Gedeonek ▁pertsegitu ▁eta ▁harrapatu ▁egin ▁zituen , ▁eta ▁izu tua ▁utzi ▁zuen ▁gudaroste ▁osoa .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the kings of Midian , Gideon , and the kings of Midian . But Gideon chased Gideon and fled .
GOLD:	Zebah and Zalmunna , the two Midianite kings , fled , but Gideon chased them down and captured all their warriors .

ID:	1922
INPUT:	▁Esku - antz eko ▁zerbait ▁luzatu ▁eta ▁il etik ▁heldu ▁zidan ; ▁Jaunaren ▁espirituak ▁aire an ▁altxatu ▁ninduen ▁eta , ▁Jainkoarengan diko ▁ikuskari tan , ▁Jerusalemgo ▁tenplura ▁eraman , ▁iparraldera ▁jotzen ▁duen ▁barneko ▁ate aren ▁ondora ; ▁bertan ▁zegoen ▁Jaunari ▁irain garri ▁eta ▁jasan ezin ▁zitzaion ▁idol oa .
PRED:	Then the Spirit of the Lord came and looked at me , and the Spirit of the Lord appeared to me , and I saw visions at the entrance of the Temple , and the Spirit of the Lord appeared to him in front of the Temple .
GOLD:	He reached out what seemed to be a hand and took me by the hair . Then the Spirit lifted me up into the sky and transported me to Jerusalem in a vision from God . I was taken to the north gate of the inner courtyard of the Temple , where there is a large idol that has made the Lord very jealous .

ID:	1923
INPUT:	▁Las ter ka ▁datoz ▁mezulariak bata ▁bestearen ▁ondo - ondo tik , Babiloni ako ▁erregeari berri ▁ematera :“ Ets aiek ▁al derik ▁alde kon kis tatu ▁dute ▁hiria ”,
PRED:	At that time the king of Babylon began to cry out to the king of Babylon , ‘ I have given you victory over the city of Babylon . '
GOLD:	The news is passed from one runner to the nextas the messengers hurry to tell the kingthat his city has been captured .

ID:	1924
INPUT:	▁Hauek ▁esan ▁zioten ▁Davidi :— Gaur ▁bete ▁da ▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁z izun ▁hura : ▁« Zure ▁esku ▁uzten ▁dut ▁zure ▁etsaia ; ▁egiozu ▁egoki en ▁iruditzen ▁zaiz una ». Jaiki ▁zen ▁David ▁eta , ▁isil - is ilik , ▁Saulen ▁soingaineko aren ▁er tza ▁ebaki ▁zuen .
PRED:	They said to David , “ The Lord has given you today , ” they said , “ I want you to take your spear in your hand , ” So David told him , “ Let 's kill him . ”
GOLD:	But then David 's conscience began bothering him because he had cut Saul 's robe .

ID:	1925
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁eskuz ▁lurraldea ▁neurtu ▁dueta ▁bakoitzari ▁bere ▁sai la ▁izendatu . Bet iko ▁izango ▁dira ▁haren ▁jabe , men derik ▁mende ▁biziko ▁bertan .
PRED:	He has measured the land with its own hands , and it will live there .
GOLD:	He has surveyed and divided the landand deeded it over to those creatures.They will possess it forever , from generation to generation .

ID:	1926
INPUT:	▁Er dain tzera ▁behar tzen ▁zaituzteten ▁horiek ▁besteen ▁aurrean ▁ongi ▁geldi tzearren ▁bultza tzen ▁zaituztete ▁horretara , ▁eta ▁Kristoren ▁guru tzea ▁dela - eta ▁inork ▁pertsegi ▁ez ▁ditzan .
PRED:	If you want to live in front of you in front of you , you will be sure that you are going to be crucified .
GOLD:	Those who are trying to force you to be circumcised want to look good to others . They do n't want to be persecuted for teaching that the cross of Christ alone can save .

ID:	1927
INPUT:	▁Nah iz ▁hazia ▁kanpora ▁isuri ▁nahiz ▁barruan ▁gera tu , ▁sexu - jari oa ▁beti ▁da ▁kuts agarria , ▁eta ▁gizona ▁kutsatu ▁bihurtzen ▁du .
PRED:	A person who has sexual relations with a skin disease or has a bodily discharge has sexual relations with a skin disease .
GOLD:	This defilement is caused by his discharge , whether the discharge continues or stops . In either case the man is unclean .

ID:	1928
INPUT:	▁hau ▁Jes er ena , ▁hau ▁Job edena , ▁hau ▁Booz ena , ▁hau ▁Sal arena , ▁hau ▁Na as on ena ,
PRED:	Jesse was the son of Jesse , who was the son of Jesse , was the son of Jesse .
GOLD:	David was the son of Jesse.Jesse was the son of Obed.Obed was the son of Boaz.Boaz was the son of Salmon.Salmon was the son of Nahshon .

ID:	1929
INPUT:	▁Hai etarik ▁hirurogeita ▁hamar ▁mila ▁z amak etari ▁izendatu ▁zituen , ▁laurogei ▁mila ▁har gin ▁mendian ▁eta ▁hiru ▁mila ▁eta ▁seiehun ▁lan - arduradun , ▁jendeari ▁lan ▁era gi teko .
PRED:	He made ten of them to build a Temple to honor the name of the Lord and to build a Temple to work on Mount Ebal .
GOLD:	Solomon took a census of all foreigners in the land of Israel , like the census his father had taken , and he counted 153,600 .

ID:	1930
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , nik ▁ere ▁zi gorre z ▁jotzen ▁zaitut , zure ▁bekatuengatik ▁hondatu ▁egiten .
PRED:	Therefore , I will not harm you ; I will destroy you because of your sins .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , I will wound you ! I will bring you to ruin for all your sins .

ID:	1931
INPUT:	▁Zer bait ▁daki elako an ▁dago enak ▁ , ▁oraindik ▁ez ▁du ▁behar ▁bezalako ▁ezagu tzarik ;
PRED:	The Faith of a person who does n't know how can we understand .
GOLD:	Anyone who claims to know all the answers does n't really know very much .

ID:	1932
INPUT:	▁eta ▁egipto ar ▁gudaroste ari , ▁zaldi ▁eta ▁guda - gurdi ei , ▁egindakoa : ▁nola , ▁zuei ▁eraso ka ▁Itsaso ▁Gorri an ▁sartu ▁zirelarik , ▁urak ▁haien ▁gainera ▁amildu ▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁betiko ▁galdu ▁zituen .
PRED:	And as the Lord had instructed his horses and chariots and chariots and horses , as the Lord had instructed you through the Red Sea . They were thrown into the Red Sea , and the water of the Red Sea .
GOLD:	They did n't see what the Lord did to the armies of Egypt and to their horses and chariots — how he drowned them in the Red Sea as they were chasing you . He destroyed them , and they have not recovered to this very day !

ID:	1933
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Jauna ▁dut ▁laguntzaile : horregatik ▁ez ▁didate i rain ek ▁etsi arazten ; horregatik ▁gogor tu ▁dut ▁aurpegia hark aitza ▁bezala , bai ▁bait akit ▁ez ▁did alau s teak ▁huts ▁egingo .
PRED:	But the Lord says to me , “ My anger has no idea what I have done , for I have never done . ”
GOLD:	Because the Sovereign Lord helps me , I will not be disgraced.Therefore , I have set my face like a stone , determined to do his will.And I know that I will not be put to shame .

ID:	1934
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁erregeak :— Ba , ▁nik ▁lau ▁gizon ▁ikusten ▁ditut , ▁suaren ▁erdian ▁libre ▁dabil tz ala ; ▁ez ▁die ▁suak ▁kalterik ▁egin , ▁eta ▁laugarren ak ▁aingerua ▁dirudi .
PRED:	“ I see four men , ” the king said , “ I see a man like a lion , but the angel of the fire are like fire . ”
GOLD:	“ Look ! ” Nebuchadnezzar shouted . “ I see four men , unbound , walking around in the fire unharmed ! And the fourth looks like a god ! ”

ID:	1935
INPUT:	▁Bas amortuan ▁hark aitza ▁zulatu ▁zuen , lur peko ▁u retatik ▁edan arazteko .
PRED:	He dug a dry wasteland with water , and water gushed down into the desert .
GOLD:	He split open the rocks in the wildernessto give them water , as from a gushing spring .

ID:	1936
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁Jauna , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoa , ▁bete ▁ezazu ▁zeure ▁zerbitzari ▁Davidi , ▁gure ▁aitari , ▁hitzeman ▁zenion ▁beste ▁hau ▁ere : ▁“ Ez ▁zaizu ▁faltako ▁nire ▁laguntzaz ▁Israelgo ▁errege - aulkian ▁eser iko ▁den ▁ondorengo rik , ▁baldin ▁eta ▁zure ▁semeak ▁nire ▁aurrean ▁bide ▁zuzen ean ▁ibiltzen ▁badira , ▁zu ▁ibili ▁zaren ▁bezala ”.
PRED:	Therefore , the Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , says to your servant David , ‘ Please let me sit on trial before you , and if you sit on my throne , let me sit on the throne of Israel sit on trial . '
GOLD:	“ And now , O Lord , God of Israel , carry out the additional promise you made to your servant David , my father . For you said to him , ‘ If your descendants guard their behavior and faithfully follow me as you have done , one of them will always sit on the throne of Israel . '

ID:	1937
INPUT:	▁Judako en ▁biltzar ▁osoa ▁guztiz ▁alai ▁zegoen , ▁baita ▁apaizak ▁eta ▁lebitarrak ▁ere , ▁eta ▁orobat ▁Israel dik ▁etorritako ▁jende ▁guztia , ▁nahiz ▁p el eg rina j ean ▁etorri ak ▁nahiz ▁Judan ▁bertan ▁bizi ▁zirenak .
PRED:	But all the people of Judah , including all the Levites , Levites , and all the people of Judah and Levites who had returned from Judah and Jerusalem .
GOLD:	The entire assembly of Judah rejoiced , including the priests , the Levites , all who came from the land of Israel , the foreigners who came to the festival , and all those who lived in Judah .

ID:	1938
INPUT:	▁J akizue , ▁lizun , ▁zikin ▁eta ▁gutiz i ats u ▁bakar ▁batek ▁ere ▁— h alako a ▁sasijainko zal ea ▁baita — ▁ez ▁duela ▁Kristoren ▁eta ▁Jainkoaren ▁erreinuko ▁ondar ean ▁par terik ▁izango .
PRED:	You must not have sexual relations with sexual relations with sexual relations with sexual relations with sexual immorality , for you have received from God 's family .
GOLD:	You can be sure that no immoral , impure , or greedy person will inherit the Kingdom of Christ and of God . For a greedy person is an idolater , worshiping the things of this world .

ID:	1939
INPUT:	▁ura ▁hodei etan ▁pil atu eta ▁hode iak ▁ez ▁dira ▁pisu az ▁leher tzen ;
PRED:	They will trample the clouds of the clouds , but the light of the clouds .
GOLD:	He wraps the rain in his thick clouds , and the clouds do n't burst with the weight .

ID:	1940
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁bedi ▁gizon ▁hori Jaunak ▁gupi dag abe ▁erraustu ▁zituen hiri en ▁antzeko ! Entzun ▁bitza ▁goizean ▁garrasi ▁l arriak , e gu erdian ▁gerra - ir rin tziak !
PRED:	May the Lord be merciful to them , for they are like a city ! Let them cry out in battle !
GOLD:	Let him be destroyed like the cities of oldthat the Lord overthrew without mercy.Terrify him all day long with battle shouts ,

ID:	1941
INPUT:	▁Zen bat ▁aldiz ▁altxatu ▁zitzaizkion ▁kontra ▁basamortuan , zen bat ▁aldiz ▁atsekabe tu ▁zuten ▁bakar leku an !
PRED:	But when they became a hundred times in the wilderness , they became a hundred times in the wilderness .
GOLD:	Oh , how often they rebelled against him in the wildernessand grieved his heart in that dry wasteland .

ID:	1942
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁emakumea , ▁hurbildu rik , ▁ahuspez ▁jarri ▁zitzaion , ▁esanez :— Lagun ▁nazazu , ▁Jauna .
PRED:	But the woman approached him , and she said to him , “ Lord , please me . ”
GOLD:	But she came and worshiped him , pleading again , “ Lord , help me ! ”

ID:	1943
INPUT:	▁E re in ▁goizean ▁zeure ▁hazia , eta ▁arrats aldean ▁ere ▁ez ▁egin ▁op or , ez ▁bai tak izu ▁erein aldi ▁bi etan zein ▁izanen ▁duzun ▁hober ena , ezta ▁bata ▁bestea ▁bezain ▁on aizango ▁den ▁ere .
PRED:	In the morning you must not plant any of your grain on the next morning , and it will be no more than any of you . There will be no more than any of you , and one will be left in the morning .
GOLD:	Plant your seed in the morning and keep busy all afternoon , for you do n't know if profit will come from one activity or another — or maybe both .

ID:	1944
INPUT:	▁Em adazu , ▁bada , ▁Jaunak ▁egun ▁hartan ▁hitzemandako ▁mendi alde ▁hori . ▁Zeuk ▁ere ▁orduan ▁jakin ▁zenuen ▁Anak ▁erra ldo iaren ▁ondorengoak ▁bizi ▁direla ▁bertan ▁eta ▁hiri ▁handi ▁eta ▁gotor tuak ▁dituztela . ▁Jauna ▁nirekin ▁izatea ▁espero ▁dut ▁eta ▁horiek ▁beren ▁lurraldetik ▁bota tzea , ▁Jaunak ▁hitzeman ▁bezala ».
PRED:	Now tell me , ‘ This is what the Lord says : Why are you the descendants of Anak ? ' So I know that the descendants of Anak ! ”
GOLD:	So give me the hill country that the Lord promised me . You will remember that as scouts we found the descendants of Anak living there in great , walled towns . But if the Lord is with me , I will drive them out of the land , just as the Lord said . ”

ID:	1945
INPUT:	▁izan ▁ere , ▁Jainkoaren ▁ituna ▁ez ▁zuten ▁gorde , ez ▁zioten ▁haren ▁lege ari ▁jarraitu ▁nahi ▁izan ;
PRED:	The people refused to obey God 's covenant , but they refused to obey him .
GOLD:	They did not keep God 's covenantand refused to live by his instructions .

ID:	1946
INPUT:	▁Horre tarako ▁hil ▁eta ▁piztu ▁zen ▁Kristo : ▁hildakoen ▁eta ▁bizi en ▁Jauna ▁izateko .
PRED:	Then the Lord died and died in the dead . He also died for the dead .
GOLD:	Christ died and rose again for this very purpose — to be Lord both of the living and of the dead .

ID:	1947
INPUT:	▁Dena ▁den , ▁egin ▁guztia ▁duin tasunez ▁eta ▁or den az .
PRED:	So look , and everything is covered with glory and covered with glory .
GOLD:	But be sure that everything is done properly and in order .

ID:	1948
INPUT:	▁Ez ku tuko ▁opariak ▁sumina ▁bare tzen ▁du , is il k ako ▁erregal uak ▁haser rerik ▁bizi ena .
PRED:	They will not offer sacrifices to the Lord 's fierce anger .
GOLD:	A secret gift calms anger ; a bribe under the table pacifies fury .

ID:	1949
INPUT:	▁Hirugarren ▁izurria : ▁el txoak
PRED:	A Plague of Blood
GOLD:	A Plague of Frogs

ID:	1950
INPUT:	▁Il berri - egun etan ▁zezen ▁bat , ▁sei ▁arkume ▁eta ▁ahari ▁bat , ▁denak ▁akats ▁gabeak , ▁eskainiko ▁dizkit .
PRED:	You must also sacrifice a sacrifice of bulls and a young bull , a ram , and a ram , a ram , and no defects .
GOLD:	At the new moon celebrations , he will bring one young bull , six lambs , and one ram , all with no defects .

ID:	1951
INPUT:	▁Erruki ▁nitaz , ▁Jauna : ▁zuri ▁deika ▁ari ▁naiz ▁egun ▁osoan .
PRED:	I am the Lord , who is calling me out of the dead !
GOLD:	Be merciful to me , O Lord , for I am calling on you constantly .

ID:	1952
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁al ▁da , ▁bada , ▁ar o tza , ▁Mari aren ▁semea ▁eta ▁Santiago , ▁Jose , ▁Judas ▁eta ▁Sim onen ▁anaia ? ▁Eta ▁honen ▁arre bak ▁ere ▁ez ▁ote ▁dira ▁hemen ▁gure ▁artean ▁bizi ?» Eta ▁honen gatik , ▁ezin ▁zuten ▁sinetsi ▁harengan .
PRED:	Is n't it enough to Mary son of Alphaeus ( the son of Alphaeus ) , Judas , Simon , Simon , Simon , Simon , who was here here among us ? ” So they did n't believe in him .
GOLD:	Then they scoffed , “ He 's just a carpenter , the son of Mary and the brother of James , Joseph , Judas , and Simon . And his sisters live right here among us. ” They were deeply offended and refused to believe in him .

ID:	1953
INPUT:	▁ar lo tea ▁bezala ▁iritsiko ▁zaizu ▁gab ezia , esk alea ▁bezala ▁etorriko ▁mis eria .
PRED:	He will attack you like a robber ; he will attack you like a robber .
GOLD:	then poverty will pounce on you like a bandit ; scarcity will attack you like an armed robber .

ID:	1954
INPUT:	▁Esan ▁zien : ▁« Nire , ▁zuen ▁Jainko ▁Jaun ▁honen , ▁mintzoa ▁arretaz ▁entzuten ▁baduzue , ▁eta ▁niri ▁atsegin ▁zai dana ▁egiten , ▁nire ▁aginduak ▁adi tzen ▁badituzue ▁eta ▁nire ▁arauak ▁betetzen , ▁ez ▁dizuet ▁zuei ▁egipto arrei ▁bidali ▁nien ▁gaitz ik ▁i gor riko , ▁ni , ▁Jaun ▁hau , ▁sen dag ile ▁bainau zue ».
PRED:	He said to them , “ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : If you hear me and obey my commands and obey me and obey me , I will not listen to you and obey my commands , and you will not obey my commands . ”
GOLD:	He said , “ If you will listen carefully to the voice of the Lord your God and do what is right in his sight , obeying his commands and keeping all his decrees , then I will not make you suffer any of the diseases I sent on the Egyptians ; for I am the Lord who heals you . ”

ID:	1955
INPUT:	▁Ax er ▁eta ▁beronen ▁semeok : ▁I m na , ▁Ix ba , ▁Ix bi , ▁Ber ia ▁eta ▁hauen ▁arreba ▁S erah . ▁Ber iaren ▁semeak ▁H eber ▁eta ▁Mal ki el ▁izan ▁ziren .
PRED:	The sons of Zebulun were Korah , Izhar , Hebron , and Uzziel . They were the sister of Terah .
GOLD:	The sons of Asher were Imnah , Ishvah , Ishvi , and Beriah . Their sister was Serah . Beriah 's sons were Heber and Malkiel .

ID:	1956
INPUT:	▁« Eta ▁jantzi az , ▁zertan ▁kezkatu ? ▁Begira ▁nola ▁hazten ▁diren ▁lore ak ▁zelai etan : ▁ez ▁dira ▁lanean ▁p ena tzen , ▁ez ▁dute ▁iru ten ;
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you who have been thrown into the field ? They have not been planted in the field , and they do n't need it .
GOLD:	“ And why worry about your clothing ? Look at the lilies of the field and how they grow . They do n't work or make their clothing ,

ID:	1957
INPUT:	▁Aurrera tu ▁zen ▁tal en tu ▁bakarra ▁hartu ▁zuena ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion : ▁“ B anek ien ▁gizon ▁zorrotza ▁z arena , ▁erein ▁ez ▁duzun ▁tokian ▁hartzen ▁eta ▁zabaldu ▁ez ▁duzun ▁tokian ▁biltzen ▁duzuna ;
PRED:	Then Haman took one of the servant , and he said to him , ‘ Take a man from the place you do n't plant . '
GOLD:	“ Then the servant with the one bag of silver came and said , ‘ Master , I knew you were a harsh man , harvesting crops you did n't plant and gathering crops you did n't cultivate .

ID:	1958
INPUT:	▁Zeb ah ▁eta ▁Tz alm una ▁Kar kor ▁hirian ▁ziren ▁beren ▁gudaroste arekin . ▁Ham ab ost ▁mila ▁gizon ▁besterik ▁ez ▁zuten ; ▁izan ▁ere , ▁ekialdeko ▁jendearen ▁gudaros teko ▁ehun ▁eta ▁hogei ▁mila ▁gudari ▁galdu ak ▁ziren .
PRED:	Then Gideon and his army went out to the city of Rabbah . They also had 10,000 men from the east of the town of Rabbah .
GOLD:	By this time Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor with about 15,000 warriors — all that remained of the allied armies of the east , for 120,000 had already been killed .

ID:	1959
INPUT:	▁El iren ▁heriotza
PRED:	The Death of Eli
GOLD:	The Death of Eli

ID:	1960
INPUT:	▁Igo arazi ▁nituen ▁Judako ▁buruzagiak ▁harres iaren ▁gainera ▁eta ▁bi ▁abes talde ▁egin ▁nituen . ▁Lehenengo ▁abes taldea ▁eskuin era ▁joan ▁zen ▁harresi ▁gainean , ▁Zab or tegi ko ▁ate ▁aldera .
PRED:	So I led the leaders of Judah to the city of Judah and led the road to the wall of the city . Then I went to the gates of the city .
GOLD:	I led the leaders of Judah to the top of the wall and organized two large choirs to give thanks . One of the choirs proceeded southward along the top of the wall to the Dung Gate .

ID:	1961
INPUT:	▁Itzul tzean , ▁erre karen ▁alde ▁bi etan ▁zuhaitz ▁asko ▁zegoela ▁ohartu ▁nintzen .
PRED:	When I returned to the vineyards of the Sea , I saw two trees in the desert .
GOLD:	When I returned , I was surprised by the sight of many trees growing on both sides of the river .

ID:	1962
INPUT:	▁Beren ▁lurraldean ▁lan datuko ▁ditut , eta ▁nik ▁eman ▁lurretik ez ▁dituzte ▁inoiz ▁aterako ». Zure ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁du .
PRED:	I will give them their work in the land of the Sovereign Lord , ” says the Sovereign Lord .
GOLD:	I will firmly plant them therein their own land.They will never again be uprootedfrom the land I have given them , ” says the Lord your God .

ID:	1963
INPUT:	▁Bere ako ▁juduek , ▁T esal onik akoak ▁baino ▁jator ra goak ▁izaki ▁eta , ▁gogo ▁biziz ▁hartu ▁zuten ▁mezua ; ▁egunero ▁aztertu ▁ohi ▁zituzten ▁Liburu ▁Santuak , ▁gauzak ▁hala ▁ote ▁ziren ▁ikusteko .
PRED:	Some Jews were in Thessalonica , and they tried to learn what the Scriptures had happened . “ What 's the Scriptures mean ? ”
GOLD:	And the people of Berea were more open-minded than those in Thessalonica , and they listened eagerly to Paul 's message . They searched the Scriptures day after day to see if Paul and Silas were teaching the truth .

ID:	1964
INPUT:	▁S emen ▁ondorengoak ▁Abrahamen gan aino
PRED:	The Descendants of Abraham
GOLD:	The Line of Descent from Shem to Abram

ID:	1965
INPUT:	▁baizik ▁eta ▁lurrera ▁isuriko ▁duzue , ▁ura ▁bezala .
PRED:	You must pour water on the ground like water , like water .
GOLD:	Instead , pour out the blood on the ground like water .

ID:	1966
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁egintzak ▁israeldarren ▁begi - bistan
PRED:	The Lord 's Case against Israel
GOLD:	The Blessings of Obedience

ID:	1967
INPUT:	▁Biho tza ▁uki tuko ▁diet ▁israeldar ▁guztiei , ▁beren ▁idoloen gatik ▁niregandik ▁urrundu ▁diren ▁horiei .
PRED:	I will turn to all the people of Israel , for they have turned away from their idols .
GOLD:	I will do this to capture the minds and hearts of all my people who have turned from me to worship their detestable idols . '

ID:	1968
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁hogeita ▁hamarren ▁bat ▁urte ▁zituen ▁bere ▁egiteko ari ▁ekin ▁zion ean , ▁eta ▁jendearen ▁uste tan ▁Joseren ▁semea ▁zen ; ▁Jose , ▁berriz , ▁Eli rena ,
PRED:	When Jesus was in charge of his oldest son , he was in charge of the crowd . But Joseph was the son of Joseph .
GOLD:	Jesus was about thirty years old when he began his public ministry.Jesus was known as the son of Joseph.Joseph was the son of Heli .

ID:	1969
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁dago ▁batere ▁ongi ▁egin ▁duzuna . ▁Ala ▁Jainkoa ! ▁Herio tza ▁merezi ▁duzue ▁denok , ▁zeuen ▁nagusia , ▁Jaunaren ▁gantzu tua , ▁zaindu ▁ez ▁duzuelako . ▁Begira ▁non ▁dauden ▁erregeak ▁bere ▁ondoan ▁zituen ▁lantza ▁eta ▁ur - an to x ina .
PRED:	No one is good to you , for you have done good for the death of the Lord your God , for you have anointed one of your master and his master .
GOLD:	This is n't good at all ! I swear by the Lord that you and your men deserve to die , because you failed to protect your master , the Lord 's anointed ! Look around ! Where are the king 's spear and the jug of water that were beside his head ? ”

ID:	1970
INPUT:	▁Leh oi ▁gazte ▁bihur turik , leh oi ▁artean ▁ibiltzen ▁zen ; harrapakin a ▁sarraski tzen ▁ikasi eta ▁gizakiak ▁irensten ▁zituen ;
PRED:	They were like a young woman who had been cut off from a lion , and when he attacked them , he destroyed them .
GOLD:	He prowled among the other lionsand stood out among them in his strength.He learned to hunt and devour prey , and he , too , became a man-eater .

ID:	1971
INPUT:	▁Sar rer aren ▁kanpo aldetik ▁atalondo aren ▁barne al deraino , ▁guztira , ▁hogeita ▁bost ▁metro ▁zeuden .
PRED:	The entry room were at the entry room of the gateway to the east side of the gateway .
GOLD:	The full length of the gateway passage was 871/2 feet from one end to the other .

ID:	1972
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁guztiei ▁agertu ▁ondoren , ▁neu ri ▁ere ▁agertu ▁zitzaidan , ▁gar aiz ▁kanpo ▁jaio tako ▁haurra ▁bezalakoa ▁naizen ▁honi ;
PRED:	After this , I saw that the child had been born , as surely as I had been born .
GOLD:	Last of all , as though I had been born at the wrong time , I also saw him .

ID:	1973
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁dolu ▁egingo ▁du ▁lurrak , il undu ▁egingo ▁goian ▁or tzia , har tua ▁baitut ▁erabakia ; ez ▁naiz ▁damu tuko , ▁ez ▁atzera ▁egingo ».
PRED:	That is why the land will be filled with grief , for I am determined to destroy the earth , and I will not destroy it . ”
GOLD:	The earth will mournand the heavens will be draped in blackbecause of my decree against my people.I have made up my mind and will not change it . ”

ID:	1974
INPUT:	▁Haiek ▁esan ▁zioten :— Jauna , ▁baditu gu ▁hemen ▁bi ▁ezpata . Baina ▁Jesusek ▁erantzun :— As ki ▁da !
PRED:	“ Sir , ” they said , “ if the Lord is here , he is here ! ”
GOLD:	“ Look , Lord , ” they replied , “ we have two swords among us. ” “ That 's enough , ” he said .

ID:	1975
INPUT:	▁Denak ▁G aten ▁jarri ▁ziren ▁bizitzen , ▁Aki xen ▁inguruan : ▁Daviden ▁gizonak ▁nor ▁bere ▁famili arekin ▁eta ▁David ▁bera ▁bere ▁bi ▁emazte ekin , ▁Izreelgo ▁Ah ino am ekin ▁eta ▁Karmel go ▁Nab alen ▁emazte ▁izana ▁zen ▁Abigail ekin .
PRED:	All the men who lived in Gibeah , including David 's wife , David , and his wife , David 's wife , David , had two wives , and his wife , David 's wife , David 's wife , had been Ahinoam from Jezreel .
GOLD:	David and his men and their families settled there with Achish at Gath . David brought his two wives along with him — Ahinoam from Jezreel and Abigail , Nabal 's widow from Carmel .

ID:	1976
INPUT:	▁Salomonek , ▁bere ▁emazte etarik ▁bat , ▁faraoiaren ▁alaba , ▁Daviden ▁Hiri tik ▁beraren tzat ▁eraiki tako ▁jauregira ▁igo arazi ▁zuen , ▁bere ▁baitan ▁esanez : ▁« Nire ▁emazte ▁honek ▁ez ▁du ▁zilegi ▁Israelgo ▁errege ▁Daviden ▁jauregian ▁bizitz ea , ▁santuak ▁baitira ▁Jaunaren ▁kutxa ▁egon ▁den eko ▁toki ak ».
PRED:	Solomon had built a widow of his wife , a daughter of Pharaoh 's wife , who had been built in the City of David . He said to his wife , “ This is the Lord 's wife , the daughter of David , who has been allowed to live in the place of the Lord 's palace . ”
GOLD:	Solomon moved his wife , Pharaoh 's daughter , from the City of David to the new palace he had built for her . He said , “ My wife must not live in King David 's palace , for the Ark of the Lord has been there , and it is holy ground . ”

ID:	1977
INPUT:	▁bizia ▁ematen ▁duen ▁mezu ari ▁tinko ▁e uts iz . ▁Horixe ▁izango ▁dut ▁nik ▁harro tzeko ▁bide ▁Kristo ▁agertuko ▁den ▁egunean , ▁nire ▁leh ia ▁eta ▁nek eak ▁ez ▁baititut ▁alferrik ▁emanak ▁izango .
PRED:	For I am giving you this message that I am giving you this message from Christ . I will be sure that I am suffering for the day of Christ .
GOLD:	Hold firmly to the word of life ; then , on the day of Christ 's return , I will be proud that I did not run the race in vain and that my work was not useless .

ID:	1978
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Boozek ▁herriko ▁nagusi ei ▁eta ▁han ▁zeuden ▁guztiei ▁esan ▁zien :— Gaur ▁lekuko ▁zaituztet , ▁nola ▁eros ten ▁diodan ▁Noem iri ▁Elim elek ena ▁eta ▁K il ion ▁eta ▁Mah l on ena ▁zen ▁guztia .
PRED:	Then Boaz said to all the people , “ I am telling you everything I am going to buy and buy it . I am going to buy whatever I am going to buy . ”
GOLD:	Then Boaz said to the elders and to the crowd standing around , “ You are witnesses that today I have bought from Naomi all the property of Elimelech , Kilion , and Mahlon .

ID:	1979
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁erantzun ▁zion :— O gi - puska ▁bus tia ▁emango ▁diodana , ▁huraxe ▁da . Eta ▁ogi - puska ▁bat ▁b ustiz , ▁Simon ▁Is kari o teren ▁seme ▁Jud asi ▁eman ▁zion .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I will feed you with the sheep , and the one who is the one who is the one who has been given to Simon son of Simon son of Simon son of Simon son of Simon son of Simon , who is the one who is the one who has given him . ”
GOLD:	Jesus responded , “ It is the one to whom I give the bread I dip in the bowl. ” And when he had dipped it , he gave it to Judas , son of Simon Iscariot .

ID:	1980
INPUT:	▁« Men diak , ▁ohartu ▁gabe , ▁l ek uz ▁al datzen ▁ditu ▁berak , ira ul i ▁egiten ▁ditu ▁bere ▁haserre an ;
PRED:	“ Listen to the mountains , but he makes them angry , and he makes them angry .
GOLD:	“ Without warning , he moves the mountains , overturning them in his anger .

ID:	1981
INPUT:	▁Hiru ▁seme ▁izan ▁zituen : ▁S em , ▁K am ▁eta ▁Jaf et .
PRED:	The three sons of Japheth were Shem , Ham , and Japheth .
GOLD:	Noah was the father of three sons : Shem , Ham , and Japheth .

ID:	1982
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁zedro - zu ra , ▁is ip ua , ▁purpura ▁gorri mina ▁eta ▁hegazti ▁bizia ▁harturik , ▁hegazti ▁hilaren ▁odol etan ▁eta ▁iturburu ko ▁uretan ▁bus tiko ▁ditu , ▁eta ▁zazpi ▁bider ▁zipriztinduko ▁du ▁etxea .
PRED:	Then he took a cedar cedar cedar cloth , a blue cloth , a purple , and scarlet cloth , and fine linen cloth , and scarlet thread for seven times . Then he will dip the blood on the ground , and sprinkle it seven times with blood .
GOLD:	He will take the cedar stick , the hyssop branch , the scarlet yarn , and the live bird , and dip them into the blood of the slaughtered bird and into the fresh water . Then he will sprinkle the house seven times .

ID:	1983
INPUT:	▁Akaz ia - zurezko ▁intsentsu - aldar ea ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁k arra tua : ▁metro ▁erdi ▁bat ▁luze - zabal ▁eta ▁metro ▁bat ▁gora . ▁Aldar e - ertzeko ▁a darrek ▁gorputz ▁bat ▁bera ▁egiten ▁zuten ▁aldare arekin .
PRED:	Then Bezalel made the incense altar of acacia wood , 30 feet long , 30 feet wide , and 41/2 feet wide .
GOLD:	Then Bezalel made the incense altar of acacia wood . It was 18 inches square and 36 inches high , with horns at the corners carved from the same piece of wood as the altar itself .

ID:	1984
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁heriotzara ▁kondenatua
PRED:	The Death of Jesus
GOLD:	The Crucifixion

ID:	1985
INPUT:	▁Ez er tarako ▁ez ▁nituen ▁haien ▁besoak , z eh aro ▁ahul duak ▁baitz euden .
PRED:	I did not care for them , for they were afraid of them , for they were weak .
GOLD:	A lot of good they are to me — those worn-out wretches !

ID:	1986
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁faraoiak ▁Moisesi ▁eta ▁Aaroni ▁dei ▁egin ▁eta ▁esan ▁zien :— Er re gu tu ▁Jaunari ▁i gelak ▁niri ▁eta ▁nire ▁herriari ▁kentzeko , ▁eta ▁utziko ▁diot ▁zuen ▁herriari ▁Jaunari ▁sakrifizioak ▁eskaintzera ▁joaten .
PRED:	Then Pharaoh summoned Moses and Aaron and Aaron and said to the Lord , “ You will be sure to let the people go to the Lord and let them go to the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Frogs will jump on you , your people , and all your officials . ' ”

ID:	1987
INPUT:	▁Ham ateko ▁errege ▁T oi - k ▁jakin ▁zuen ▁hondatua ▁zuela ▁Davidek ▁Hada dez erren ▁gudaroste ▁osoa .
PRED:	David learned that King Hadadezer of his army had become king , and all the entire army of Zobah .
GOLD:	When King Toi of Hamath heard that David had destroyed the entire army of Hadadezer ,

ID:	1988
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁makila ▁kenduko ▁li d ake ▁gainetik eta ▁haren ganako ▁iz uak ▁ez ▁nindu ke ▁ikar atuko .
PRED:	Then he will remove me from God 's staff , and he would not reject me .
GOLD:	The mediator could make God stop beating me , and I would no longer live in terror of his punishment .

ID:	1989
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁beso - el b arri ari ▁esan ▁zion :— Jaiki ▁eta ▁zatoz ▁hona ▁erdi ra .
PRED:	Jesus said to the man , “ Stand up , and come to the side of the Jordan . ”
GOLD:	Jesus said to the man with the deformed hand , “ Come and stand in front of everyone . ”

ID:	1990
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁etorri ▁zitz aiz uen ▁Joan ▁Bataia tzailea ▁Jainkoaren ▁nahi ari ▁dagokion ▁jokabidea ▁azaldu z , ▁eta ▁ez ▁zenio ten ▁sinetsi ; ▁zergal ariek ▁eta ▁emagaldu ek , ▁ordea , ▁sinetsi ▁zioten . ▁Eta ▁zuek , ▁hori ▁ikus ita ▁ere , ▁ez ▁zarete ▁aldatu : ▁oraindik ▁ez ▁diozue ▁sinetsi .
PRED:	For you know John the Baptist came to the Baptist , and if you do n't believe in the Kingdom of God , you did n't believe it . But you did n't believe that you did n't believe that you did n't believe it .
GOLD:	For John the Baptist came and showed you the right way to live , but you did n't believe him , while tax collectors and prostitutes did . And even when you saw this happening , you refused to believe him and repent of your sins .

ID:	1991
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁jantzi ▁sakratuak
PRED:	The Priests and Levites
GOLD:	Additional Clothing for the Priests

ID:	1992
INPUT:	▁Ezekias ▁eta ▁jende ▁guztia ▁pozik ▁zegoen , ▁Jainkoak ▁herri ▁osoari ▁horrela ▁eragin ▁zi olako ; ▁dena ▁bat - batean ▁era tua ▁baitzuten .
PRED:	Hezekiah was great joy in all the people , and the people were filled with great joy .
GOLD:	And Hezekiah and all the people rejoiced because of what God had done for the people , for everything had been accomplished so quickly .

ID:	1993
INPUT:	▁Tx alo ▁eta ▁tx is tu ▁jotzen ▁diote ▁bere ▁etxetik ▁alde ▁egitean ».
PRED:	The hands of the wicked are as strong as security for his house . ”
GOLD:	But everyone jeers at themand mocks them .

ID:	1994
INPUT:	▁Isak arren ▁leinuko ▁senitarteak : ▁T ol arengandik ▁to l atarrak , ▁P ub arengandik ▁pu bat arrak ,
PRED:	These were the clans descended from the clans of the tribe of Issachar : The second was the second month old ,
GOLD:	These were the clans descended from the sons of Issachar : The Tolaite clan , named after their ancestor Tola.The Puite clan , named after their ancestor Puah .

ID:	1995
INPUT:	▁Senideok , ▁ez ▁ibili ▁bata ▁beste arengatik ▁gaizki - esaka . ▁Bere ▁senide az ▁gaizki ▁esaten ▁edo ▁hura ▁epaitzen ▁duenak ▁Jainkoaren ▁lege az ▁esaten ▁du ▁gaizki ▁eta ▁legea ▁epaitzen ▁du . ▁Eta ▁legea ▁epaitzen ▁baduzu , ▁ez ▁zara ▁legearen ▁bete tzaile , ▁epaile ▁baizik .
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , do n't believe in the law of faith , or if you say , ‘ If you do not judge the law of God 's law , you do not judge the law of God . '
GOLD:	Do n't speak evil against each other , dear brothers and sisters . If you criticize and judge each other , then you are criticizing and judging God 's law . But your job is to obey the law , not to judge whether it applies to you .

ID:	1996
INPUT:	▁Saulek ▁Davidi :— Bedeinkatua ▁zu , ▁ene ▁seme ▁David ! ▁Han diak ▁eginen ▁dituzu ▁eta ▁garaile ▁izango ▁egintza ▁guztietan ! Davi d ▁bere ▁bidetik ▁joan ▁zen , ▁eta ▁Saul ▁etxera ▁itzuli .
PRED:	Saul replied , “ Praise my son David , my son David , and I will take care of you and do everything he did .
GOLD:	And Saul said to David , “ Blessings on you , my son David . You will do many heroic deeds , and you will surely succeed. ” Then David went away , and Saul returned home .

ID:	1997
INPUT:	▁Israelen ▁argi ▁den ▁Jainko as u ▁bihurtuko ▁da , Israelen ▁Santua ▁sugar , eta ▁bat - batean ▁erreko ▁ditu , s as ia ▁eta ▁l ah arra ▁bailiran .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord , the Holy One of Israel , the Holy One of Israel , will burn up with fire .
GOLD:	The Lord , the Light of Israel , will be a fire ; the Holy One will be a flame.He will devour the thorns and briers with fire , burning up the enemy in a single night .

ID:	1998
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁dio ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak :« Hara , ▁bad atoz ▁egunak : lur rera ▁gosea ▁bidaliko ▁dut ; ez ▁ogi - gos ea , ▁eta ▁ez ▁ur - eg arria , Jaunaren ▁hitza ▁entzuteko go se - eg arria ▁baizik .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ If you have come , I will send you grain to the ground , but you will not harvest the food of the Lord , but you have not been taught .
GOLD:	“ The time is surely coming , ” says the Sovereign Lord , “ when I will send a famine on the land — not a famine of bread or waterbut of hearing the words of the Lord .

ID:	1999
INPUT:	▁Era ik in - multzo ▁hark , ▁iparraldetik , ▁berrogeita ▁hamar ▁metroko ▁luzera ▁zuen , ▁eta ▁hogeita ▁bos teko ▁zabalera .
PRED:	He measured the north side of the north side of the north , and it was 101/2 feet long .
GOLD:	This structure , whose entrance opened toward the north , was 175 feet long and 871/2 feet wide .

ID:	2000
INPUT:	▁Jubileu ▁Urte aren ▁ondoren ▁sagaratzen ▁bada , ▁berriz , ▁apaizak ▁aterako ▁du ▁prez io aren ▁kon tua , ▁hurrengo ▁Jubileu ▁Ur tea ▁arte ▁falta ▁diren ▁urte ei ▁dagoki ena ▁prez io ▁oro kor retik ▁kendu z .
PRED:	After the Year of Jubilee the priest will be set apart from the Year of Jubilee , the priest will be cut off from the Year of Jubilee .
GOLD:	But if the field is dedicated after the Year of Jubilee , the priest will assess the land 's value in proportion to the number of years left until the next Year of Jubilee . Its assessed value is reduced each year .

ID:	2001
INPUT:	▁Gabaon ▁hiriko ▁bizilagun ▁hibi arrek , ▁ordea , ▁Josuek ▁Jeriko ▁eta ▁Ai ▁hiri ei ▁egina ▁jakitean ,
PRED:	But Joshua and the people of Ai , the town of Jericho , and all the towns of Jericho had done .
GOLD:	But when the people of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done to Jericho and Ai ,

ID:	2002
INPUT:	▁Zeure ▁Jainkoaren ▁etxerako ▁behar ▁izanen ▁duzun ▁guztia , ▁erregearen ▁altxor tegi tik ▁emango ▁dizute .
PRED:	In the Temple of God will be given to you in the Temple of God .
GOLD:	If you need anything else for your God 's Temple or for any similar needs , you may take it from the royal treasury .

ID:	2003
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁ez ▁diet ▁errukirik ▁izango , ▁ezta ▁barkatuko ▁ere . ▁Beren ▁jokabide aren ▁ordaina ▁emango ▁diet ».
PRED:	So I will not forgive them , nor will be punished for their sins . ”
GOLD:	So I will not spare them or have any pity on them . I will fully repay them for all they have done . ”

ID:	2004
INPUT:	▁Baruk ek ▁liburuan ▁idatzi tako ▁Jeremiasen ▁mezua ▁irakurri ▁zuen ▁herri ▁guztiaren ▁aurrean . ▁Xaf anen ▁seme ▁G em arias ▁gor teko ▁idazkari aren ▁gel an ▁kokatu ▁zen ▁horretarako , ▁A te ▁Berri aren ▁sarreran ▁zegoen ▁goiko ▁atarian .
PRED:	Then Baruch wrote down the scroll in the book of the city and read it to the secretary .
GOLD:	Baruch read Jeremiah 's words on the scroll to all the people . He stood in front of the Temple room of Gemariah , son of Shaphan the secretary . This room was just off the upper courtyard of the Temple , near the New Gate entrance .

ID:	2005
INPUT:	▁B akoitz ari ▁al datzeko ▁jantziak ▁eman ▁zizkion . ▁Benjamin i , ▁gainera , ▁bost ▁jantzi ▁eta ▁zilarrezko ▁hirurehun ▁txanpon .
PRED:	The man gave the charge of the family of Benjamin , including Benjamin , and five pieces of silver .
GOLD:	And he gave each of them new clothes — but to Benjamin he gave five changes of clothes and 300 pieces of silver .

ID:	2006
INPUT:	▁gil tzur run ak ▁gaineko ▁gantz arekin , ▁saihets ei ▁itsatsia ▁dagoen ▁gantza ▁eta ▁g ib ela ▁estaltzen ▁duena ; ▁hori ▁guztia ▁kendu rik ,
PRED:	The two kidneys and the fat around the side of the liver , along with the long lobe of the liver , and the long lobe of the liver .
GOLD:	the two kidneys and the fat around them near the loins , and the long lobe of the liver . These must be removed with the kidneys ,

ID:	2007
INPUT:	▁Neure ▁zuzen tasun ari ▁atzera ▁egin ▁gabe ▁eutsiko ▁diot ! Ez ▁dut ▁damu rik ▁bizitz ako ▁egun ▁bakar ▁batez ▁ere .
PRED:	For I have not done for my life ; I will never be afraid of the days of death .
GOLD:	I will maintain my innocence without wavering.My conscience is clear for as long as I live .

ID:	2008
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Jehuk ▁Israel ▁osora ▁zabal arazi ▁zuen . ▁Baalen ▁adora tzaile ▁guztiak ▁etorri ▁ziren , ▁ez ▁zen ▁bat ▁ere ▁gelditu ▁etorri ▁gabe . ▁Sartu ▁zirenean , ▁Baalen ▁jauretx ea ▁erabat ▁bete ▁zen .
PRED:	So Jehu led all Israel into the temple of Baal and worshiped Baal . There was no one left in the temple of Baal , but they went into the temple of Baal .
GOLD:	He sent messengers throughout all Israel summoning those who worshiped Baal . They all came — not a single one remained behind — and they filled the temple of Baal from one end to the other .

ID:	2009
INPUT:	▁halere , ▁egia ▁diotsuet : ▁Hobe ▁da ▁zuentzat ▁ni ▁jo atea ; ▁izan ▁ere , ▁joaten ▁ez ▁banaiz , ▁ez ▁zaizue ▁etorriko ▁Lagun tzailea ; ▁joaten ▁banaiz , ▁ordea , ▁bidali ▁egingo ▁dizuet .
PRED:	I tell you the truth , it is better to be better than you . I 'm n't looking for you , but if I 'm n't going to take it . But if I 'm n't , I will go . ”
GOLD:	But in fact , it is best for you that I go away , because if I do n't , the Advocate wo n't come . If I do go away , then I will send him to you .

ID:	2010
INPUT:	▁Ip arraldeko ▁sarrer aren ▁aurrez ▁aurre , ▁barneko ▁atari rako ▁sarrera ▁zegoen , ▁ekialdetik ▁bezalaxe ; ▁sarrera ▁batetik ▁bes terako ▁tar tea ▁neurtu ▁zuen ▁gizonak : ▁berrogeita ▁hamar ▁metro .
PRED:	The man on the north side of the north side of the north side of the north side of the north side of the inner courtyard .
GOLD:	Here on the north side , just as on the east , there was another gateway leading to the Temple 's inner courtyard directly opposite this outer gateway . The distance between the two gateways was 175 feet .

ID:	2011
INPUT:	▁« Adi skide tu , ▁beraz , ▁eta ▁egin ▁bak eak ▁Jainkoarekin ; horre la ▁itzuliko ▁zaizu ▁zoriona .
PRED:	“ Therefore , you are a partner in peace , and you will return to God .
GOLD:	“ Submit to God , and you will have peace ; then things will go well for you .

ID:	2012
INPUT:	▁Hurbildu ▁zitzaien ▁Jesus , ▁ukitu ▁eta ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Zu ti ▁zaitezte . ▁Ez ▁beldurtu !»
PRED:	So Jesus touched them and touched them . “ Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus came over and touched them . “ Get up , ” he said . “ Do n't be afraid . ”

ID:	2013
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁denek ▁esan ▁zuten :— Zu ▁zara , ▁beraz , ▁Jainkoaren ▁Semea ? Hark ▁erantzun ▁zien :— Zeu ek ▁diozue , ▁neu ▁naiz .
PRED:	“ You are the Son of God , ” they asked . “ You are the Son of God ! ”
GOLD:	They all shouted , “ So , are you claiming to be the Son of God ? ” And he replied , “ You say that I am . ”

ID:	2014
INPUT:	▁Herri ▁batean ▁pertsegitzen ▁bazai tuzte te , ▁egin ▁ihes ▁beste ▁batera . ▁Benetan ▁diotsuet : ▁Gizonaren ▁Semea ▁etorri ▁aurretik , ▁ez ▁dituzue ▁Israelgo ▁herri ▁guztiak ▁igaroko .
PRED:	I tell you the truth , you will flee from the truth . I tell you the Son of Man to come ahead of you .
GOLD:	When you are persecuted in one town , flee to the next . I tell you the truth , the Son of Man will return before you have reached all the towns of Israel .

ID:	2015
INPUT:	▁gil tzur run ak ▁gaineko ▁gantz arekin , ▁saihets ei ▁itsatsia ▁dagoen ▁gantza ▁eta ▁g ib ela ▁estaltzen ▁duena ; ▁hori ▁guztia ▁kendu rik ,
PRED:	The two kidneys and the fat around the side of the liver , along with the long lobe of the liver , and the long lobe of the liver .
GOLD:	the two kidneys and the fat around them near the loins , and the long lobe of the liver . These must be removed with the kidneys ,

ID:	2016
INPUT:	▁Ar tem as ▁nahiz ▁T ikiko ▁zuregana ▁bidaliko ▁ditudan ean , ▁zatoz kit ▁lehen bai lehen ▁N iko p ol is era , ▁ne gu a ▁bertan ▁igarotzeko ▁asmoa ▁baitut .
PRED:	I will send my donkey to you , and come to you . When I come to you , I will go to the day of my return to you .
GOLD:	I am planning to send either Artemas or Tychicus to you . As soon as one of them arrives , do your best to meet me at Nicopolis , for I have decided to stay there for the winter .

ID:	2017
INPUT:	▁Profeta ▁bezala ▁mintzo ▁direnei ▁dagokienez , ▁mintza ▁daitezela ▁bi ▁edo ▁hiru , ▁eta ▁gainerako ek ▁eman ▁dezatela ▁beren ▁iri tzia .
PRED:	They must speak to the church as if they speak to them , and they will be given to them .
GOLD:	Let two or three people prophesy , and let the others evaluate what is said .

ID:	2018
INPUT:	▁Erregeak ▁bere ▁laguntzaile ▁nagusi ▁hura ▁bidali ▁zuen ▁hiri - sar rera ▁zain tzera ; ▁baina ▁jendeak ▁zanpatu ▁eta ▁hil ▁egin ▁zuen ▁bertan , ▁Jainkoaren ▁gizonak , ▁erregea ▁etortzean , ▁esan ▁bezala .
PRED:	So the king sent him to the city of the city , and the people were waiting for him to kill him . When the man of God had done , he said , “ The king of God will die like a king , just as the king had said . ”
GOLD:	The king appointed his officer to control the traffic at the gate , but he was knocked down and trampled to death as the people rushed out.So everything happened exactly as the man of God had predicted when the king came to his house .

ID:	2019
INPUT:	▁nire ▁zerbitzariek poz - oihu ▁egingo ▁dute biho tza ▁bete ▁zorion ez ; zu ek , ▁berriz , garras i ▁egingo ▁biho tzeko ▁nahi gab ez , aien e ▁barru ko ▁samin ez .
PRED:	My servants will sing with joy , but the people will sing with joy , but the guards will cry out , “ My heart will be filled with grief . ”
GOLD:	My servants will sing for joy , but you will cry in sorrow and despair .

ID:	2020
INPUT:	▁Apaiz ▁berria ▁eta ▁itun ▁berria
PRED:	Christ Is Our High Priest
GOLD:	A Call to Persevere

ID:	2021
INPUT:	▁Jerusalemgo ▁jendea , moz tu ▁ilea , ▁so ildu ▁buru ah ain ▁maite ▁dituzun zeure ▁seme - alab engatik ; so ildu ▁ezazu ▁kas koa ▁sai arena ▁bezala , er bestera tu ▁egingo ▁baiti tuzte zure gandik ▁urruti .
PRED:	The people of Jerusalem will be cut off , and you will be ashamed for your children , just as you have done for your sake .
GOLD:	Oh , people of Judah , shave your heads in sorrow , for the children you love will be snatched away.Make yourselves as bald as a vulture , for your little ones will be exiled to distant lands .

ID:	2022
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁esandako aren ▁aurrean , ▁iritzi ▁kontra j arriak ▁zeuden ▁jendearen ▁artean .
PRED:	Then Jesus told them what the crowd had happened before the crowd .
GOLD:	When he said these things , the people were again divided in their opinions about him .

ID:	2023
INPUT:	▁Lebitar rok , ▁bedeinkatu ▁Jauna ! Jaunari ▁begirune ▁diozuen ok , ▁bedeinkatu ▁Jauna !
PRED:	O Lord , you Levites , who fear the Lord ! Praise the Lord !
GOLD:	O Levites , praise the Lord ! All you who fear the Lord , praise the Lord !

ID:	2024
INPUT:	▁Asko k ▁egingo ▁dute ▁bertan ▁estropezu , ▁erori ▁eta ▁hil ▁egingo ▁dira ; ▁sar ean ▁bilduak ▁eta ▁harrapatu ak ▁geldituko ▁dira ».
PRED:	And many will fall and fall , and everyone will be killed . They will be killed , and everyone will be killed . ”
GOLD:	Many will stumble and fall , never to rise again.They will be snared and captured . ”

ID:	2025
INPUT:	▁Joan ▁zen ▁gizona , ▁eta ▁agintari ei ▁adierazi ▁zien ▁Jesus ▁zela ▁sendatu ▁zuena .
PRED:	So Jesus told the disciples what Jesus had done , and he healed the Son of Man .
GOLD:	Then the man went and told the Jewish leaders that it was Jesus who had healed him .

ID:	2026
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁hauen ▁ordez , ▁Roboam ▁erregeak ▁brontzezko ▁babes kiak ▁egin ▁eta ▁jauregiko ▁sarrera ▁zaintzen ▁zuen ▁talde aren ▁buru ▁ziren ei ▁utzi ▁zizkien .
PRED:	Then King Rehoboam took Rehoboam 's bronze shields and placed the bronze shields of the guard guard guard guard .
GOLD:	King Rehoboam later replaced them with bronze shields as substitutes , and he entrusted them to the care of the commanders of the guard who protected the entrance to the royal palace .

ID:	2027
INPUT:	▁Davidena . Es ker rak ▁ematen ▁dizkizut , ▁Jauna , ▁bihotz - bihotzez , beste ▁jainkoen ▁aurrean ▁zu ▁kan tuz ▁ospatzen .
PRED:	O Lord , give me your heart , O Lord , and I will praise you .
GOLD:	I give you thanks , O Lord , with all my heart ; I will sing your praises before the gods .

ID:	2028
INPUT:	▁Es katu ▁niri , ▁eta ▁nazioak ▁emango ▁dizkizut ▁ondare , lur ▁osoaren ▁jabe ▁egingo ▁zaitut .
PRED:	I will give you the nations of the nations , and I will give you the land of the earth .
GOLD:	Only ask , and I will give you the nations as your inheritance , the whole earth as your possession .

ID:	2029
INPUT:	▁Ez ari - ez ari an ▁botako ▁ditut ▁zuen ▁aurretik , ▁lurralde ▁hartaz ▁jabe tzeko ▁adina ▁zuek ▁ugaldu ▁arte .
PRED:	I will drive out the land of Egypt , and I will drive out the land of Egypt until you have lived .
GOLD:	I will drive them out a little at a time until your population has increased enough to take possession of the land .

ID:	2030
INPUT:	▁Mik ak , ▁orduan :— Geldi ▁zaitez ▁nirekin ; ▁kontseilari tzat ▁hartuko ▁zaitut , ▁nire ▁apaiz ▁izanen ▁zara . ▁Ordain ez , ▁urtean ▁zilarrezko ▁hamar ▁txanpon , ▁jantzi - multz oa ▁eta ▁jatekoa ▁emango ▁dizkizut .
PRED:	So Micah said to Micah , “ Leave me alone , and I will be given you thirty pieces of silver and gold . I will be given to you for seven pieces of silver . ”
GOLD:	“ Stay here with me , ” Micah said , “ and you can be a father and priest to me . I will give you ten pieces of silver a year , plus a change of clothes and your food . ”

ID:	2031
INPUT:	▁Bihotz - erori ta ▁daude ▁nekaz ariak , garras ika ▁mahas tiz ainak ; galdu ak ▁baitira ▁garia ▁eta ▁gar ag arra , hon datua ▁soro etako ▁uzta .
PRED:	My mother is gone , and the grapevines are filled with grief . They are ruined , and they have no food .
GOLD:	Despair , all you farmers ! Wail , all you vine growers ! Weep , because the wheat and barley — all the crops of the field — are ruined .

ID:	2032
INPUT:	▁A gu do ▁asko ▁aurpegira tuko ▁dizue , ez ku tuan ▁alder dik eriaz ▁jokatzen ▁baduzue .
PRED:	He will rebuke you from all who do evil , and if you do wrong ,
GOLD:	No , you will be in trouble with himif you secretly slant your testimony in his favor .

ID:	2033
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁Noe ▁eta ▁beronen ▁semeak ▁bedeinkatu ▁zituen , ▁esanez : ▁« S ortu ▁um eak , ▁ugaldu ▁eta ▁bete ▁lurra .
PRED:	Noah blessed Noah and his sons , and he said , “ How long will the earth be fruitful and multiply .
GOLD:	Then God blessed Noah and his sons and told them , “ Be fruitful and multiply . Fill the earth .

ID:	2034
INPUT:	▁Harro tu ▁nahi ▁duena , harro ▁bedi ▁honetaz : ni ▁ezagu tzeko ▁aski ▁argi ▁izate az , ni , ▁Jauna , so li dari ta tea , ▁justizia ▁eta ▁zuzenbide amun duan ▁ezartzen ▁dituena . Hori ek ▁ditut ▁atsegin . Nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	Those who want to say , ‘ I am the Lord , the one who knows the Lord , for I have heard the Lord , the Lord , have spoken ! ' ”
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says : “ Do n't let the wise boast in their wisdom , or the powerful boast in their power , or the rich boast in their riches .

ID:	2035
INPUT:	▁Joan ▁zen ▁handik ▁Elias ▁eta ▁Xaf aten ▁seme ▁Eliseo ▁aurkitu ▁zuen ▁go lde an ; ▁hamabi ▁idi - par e ▁zituen ▁aurretik , ▁Eliseok ▁hamabi garren a ▁zeram al arik . ▁On do tik ▁igarotzean , ▁Eliasek ▁bere ▁soingainekoa ▁bota ▁zion ▁Elise ori ▁gainera .
PRED:	So Elijah went out to the city and found twelve oxen in the middle of the north . He was able to take twelve oxen in the second room of Elisha 's cloak and threw it into his cloak .
GOLD:	So Elijah went and found Elisha son of Shaphat plowing a field . There were twelve teams of oxen in the field , and Elisha was plowing with the twelfth team . Elijah went over to him and threw his cloak across his shoulders and then walked away .

ID:	2036
INPUT:	▁« Izan ▁gogoan ▁zeuek ▁ere ▁esklabo ▁izan ▁zin etela ▁Egipton ; ▁horregatik ▁agintzen ▁dizuet ▁xedapen ▁horiek ▁betetzeko .
PRED:	“ You must remember that you were slaves in Egypt . That is why I command you .
GOLD:	Remember that you were slaves in the land of Egypt . That is why I am giving you this command .

ID:	2037
INPUT:	▁Izu a ▁eta ▁zuloa ▁eta ▁ze p oa ▁zuretzat , lurralde an ▁bizi ▁zaren ▁horren tzat .
PRED:	“ I have a trap for you , and you will be a foreigner in this land .
GOLD:	Terror and traps and snares will be your lot , you people of the earth .

ID:	2038
INPUT:	▁Daviden ▁eta ▁Bets ab eren ▁s em etx oa ▁hil
PRED:	David 's Return to Bathsheba
GOLD:	David Confesses His Guilt

ID:	2039
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁heste ▁gaineko ▁gantza , ▁g ib ela ▁estaltzen ▁zuena ▁eta ▁gil tzur run ak ▁berauen ▁gantz arekin ▁harturik , ▁aldarean ▁erre ▁zituen .
PRED:	Then the internal organs and the fat around the internal organs , the kidneys , and the fat around the altar .
GOLD:	Then Moses took all the fat around the internal organs , the long lobe of the liver , and the two kidneys and the fat around them , and he burned it all on the altar .

ID:	2040
INPUT:	▁Mah as tia ▁eta ▁pikondo ah on datu ▁egingo ▁dizkiot , h ai etaz ▁baitzi oen :“ Mai ta leek ▁emandako ▁sari ▁ditut ”. S as t raka ▁bihurtuko ▁ditu teta ▁basapiz tiek ▁jango ▁dituzte .
PRED:	I will feed you with your fig trees , for I will feed them , for he has given them , ‘ I will feed them for the vultures . '
GOLD:	“ But then I will win her back once again.I will lead her into the desertand speak tenderly to her there .

ID:	2041
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak ▁landar e ▁bat ▁haz arazi ▁zuen , ▁Jonas ▁baino ▁handiagoa , ▁buruan ▁itz ala ▁eman ▁ziez ai on ▁eta ▁bere ▁s uk arretik ▁libra ▁zezan . ▁Jonas ▁bizi ro ▁poztu ▁zen ▁landar e arekin .
PRED:	Then the Sovereign Lord God caused the crops to send him down on the ground , and he brought him out to the depths of the field to bring him out of the field .
GOLD:	And the Lord God arranged for a leafy plant to grow there , and soon it spread its broad leaves over Jonah 's head , shading him from the sun . This eased his discomfort , and Jonah was very grateful for the plant .

ID:	2042
INPUT:	▁A iko ▁gu dua
PRED:	The Death of Saul
GOLD:	The Lord 's Covenant Renewed

ID:	2043
INPUT:	▁munduko ▁azken ▁mutur reraino ▁bota ▁baz in tuzten ▁ere , ▁bertara ▁joan ▁eta ▁bildu ▁egingo ▁zaituzte ▁Jaunak ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoak ;
PRED:	Even though you were driven from the ends of the world , the Lord your God will bless you .
GOLD:	Even though you are banished to the ends of the earth , the Lord your God will gather you from there and bring you back again .

ID:	2044
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁dio ▁Jaunak :« K ana an dar ▁honek , ▁ordea , p is u ▁fal tsua ▁darabil , en gain ua ▁du ▁maite .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ This is what the Lord says : The breath of locusts will be saved .
GOLD:	Israel boasts , “ I am rich ! I 've made a fortune all by myself ! No one has caught me cheating ! My record is spotless ! ”

ID:	2045
INPUT:	▁« N olan ah iko ▁aber eren ▁baten ▁odola ▁jaten ▁duenari ▁— israeldar ra ▁nahiz ▁israeldarren ▁artean ▁bizi ▁den ▁etorkin a ▁izan — ▁aurpegi ▁emango ▁dio ▁Jaunak ▁eta ▁herritik ▁botako .
PRED:	“ Anyone who eats the blood of a person who eats the blood of the community of Israel will be cut off from the community of Israel , and he will be cut off from among the community of Israel .
GOLD:	“ And if any native Israelite or foreigner living among you eats or drinks blood in any form , I will turn against that person and cut him off from the community of your people ,

ID:	2046
INPUT:	▁Egin ▁promes ak ▁Jaunari , ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoari , ▁eta ▁bete ; haren ▁inguruan ▁bildu ok , ek arri ▁emaitzak ▁Jainko ▁beldur garri ari ,
PRED:	Give thanks to the Lord your God , you people of Israel , and all around him .
GOLD:	For he breaks the pride of princes , and the kings of the earth fear him .

ID:	2047
INPUT:	▁Ar men ▁indar keria - zale ▁zarete , ▁egintza ▁higuingarriak ▁egin ▁eta ▁lagun ▁hurkoaren ▁emaztea ▁desoho ratzen ▁duzue . ▁Nola ▁nahi ▁duzue , ▁bada , ▁lurralde ▁honen ▁jabetza ▁izan ?
PRED:	You have committed adultery against the land of your ancestors , and you have committed adultery . How can you treat your neighbor as a foreigner ?
GOLD:	Murderers ! Idolaters ! Adulterers ! Should the land belong to you ? '

ID:	2048
INPUT:	▁P urpura ▁more , ▁gorri ▁eta ▁gorriminez ▁egin ▁zituzten ▁santutegiko ▁litur gi ▁zerbitzurako ▁jantziak . ▁Aaronen ▁jantzi ▁sakratuak ▁ere ▁egin ▁zituzten , ▁Jaunak ▁Moisesi ▁agindu ▁bezala .
PRED:	So I made a sacred curtain for the sanctuary and put it on the sanctuary of Aaron 's sanctuary , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .
GOLD:	The craftsmen made beautiful sacred garments of blue , purple , and scarlet cloth — clothing for Aaron to wear while ministering in the Holy Place , just as the Lord had commanded Moses .

ID:	2049
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Ger ar ko ▁artzain ek ▁s es ioa ▁izan ▁zuten ▁Isaaken ▁artzain ekin . ▁Es aten ▁zuten : ▁« G eure a ▁di agu ▁ura !» Es ek ▁— hau ▁da , ▁« L is kar »— ▁izena ▁ezarri ▁zion ▁Isaakek ▁putzu ▁hari , ▁beronen gatik ▁lis kar tu ▁zirelako .
PRED:	But as Isaac 's shepherd was walking along with the shepherd 's shepherd , they said , “ We have been my shepherd ! ” So Isaac called out , “ The water has been called for us . ”
GOLD:	But then the shepherds from Gerar came and claimed the spring . “ This is our water , ” they said , and they argued over it with Isaac 's herdsmen . So Isaac named the well Esek ( which means “ argument ” ) .

ID:	2050
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁sinetsi ▁du ▁gure ▁mezua ? N ori ▁agertu ▁dio ▁Jaunak bere ▁ahalmena ?
PRED:	Who can hear the word of our Lord ? Who has revealed his power ?
GOLD:	Who has believed our message ? To whom has the Lord revealed his powerful arm ?

ID:	2051
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Paulok ▁guar di ei ▁esan ▁zien :— Gu , ▁Erro mako ▁hiri tar ▁izanik , ▁epaitu ▁gabe ▁denen ▁aurrean ▁zigor katu ▁eta ▁kartzelan ▁sartu ▁gaituzte , ▁eta ▁orain ▁ezkutuan ▁nahi ▁gaituzte la ▁atera ? ▁Ez ▁horixe ! ▁D atoz ela ▁beraiek ▁gu ▁atera tzera !
PRED:	But Paul said to the council , “ Paul , Paul , the commander of the council , and some of the people who are well well well before you , and we are going to arrest us . We are n't going to take us ! ”
GOLD:	But Paul replied , “ They have publicly beaten us without a trial and put us in prison — and we are Roman citizens . So now they want us to leave secretly ? Certainly not ! Let them come themselves to release us ! ”

ID:	2052
INPUT:	▁« H irur ogei ▁urtetik ▁gor akoa ▁bada , ▁gizonezko arentzat ▁hamabost ▁txanpon , ▁eta ▁emakume arentzat ▁hamar .
PRED:	“ So ten years later ten years old or ten pieces of silver , and ten pieces of silver .
GOLD:	A man older than sixty is valued at fifteen shekels of silver ; a woman of that age is valued at ten shekels of silver .

ID:	2053
INPUT:	▁Zoaz ▁orain ▁lurralde ▁hau ▁bere ▁luze - zabal ean ▁zehar ka tzera , ▁zeu ri ▁emango ▁baitizu t ».
PRED:	Now go ahead to the land of one land , for I will give you victory over to you . ”
GOLD:	Go and walk through the land in every direction , for I am giving it to you . ”

ID:	2054
INPUT:	▁Gizaki arentzat ▁hober ena j atea , ▁eda tea eta ▁bere ▁lan aren ▁fruitu az ▁goza tzea . Nik ▁uste ▁dut , ▁hau ▁ere Jainkoaren ▁eskutik ▁dat orrela ;
PRED:	It is better to be better to share with the fruit of the good things we think of God 's grace , and I am a gift from God .
GOLD:	So I decided there is nothing better than to enjoy food and drink and to find satisfaction in work . Then I realized that these pleasures are from the hand of God .

ID:	2055
INPUT:	▁Behin ▁garbikuntza - ohikunea ▁amaitu ta , ▁hartu ▁akats ▁gabeko ▁zezen ▁bat ▁eta ▁ahari ▁bat
PRED:	After the purification ceremony , the priest took a young bull and a ram with no defects .
GOLD:	When you have finished the cleansing ceremony , offer another young bull that has no defects and a perfect ram from the flock .

ID:	2056
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁hau ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak : ▁Egiptoko ▁errege ▁faraoiaren ▁kontra ▁nator . ▁Bi ▁besoak ▁hautsiko ▁dizkiot , ▁ongi ▁duena ▁eta ▁jadanik ▁hauts ia ▁duena , ▁eta ▁ezpata ▁eror araziko ▁diot ▁eskutik .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am coming against Pharaoh , the king of Egypt , and I will break the hand of Egypt . I will break the hand of the hand of Egypt .
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I am the enemy of Pharaoh , the king of Egypt ! I will break both of his arms — the good arm along with the broken one — and I will make his sword clatter to the ground .

ID:	2057
INPUT:	▁Ez kon du ei ▁agintzen ▁diet ▁— ez ▁nik , ▁Jaunak ▁baizik — ▁emaztea ▁ez ▁dadila ▁banan du ▁sen arraren gandik ;
PRED:	So I command the Lord , the God of Israel , says , “ No one will be put to a wife . ”
GOLD:	But for those who are married , I have a command that comes not from me , but from the Lord . A wife must not leave her husband .

ID:	2058
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁erantzun ▁zien :— Zu ei ▁eman ▁zaizue ▁Jainkoaren ▁erregetzaren ▁misterio ak ▁ezagu tzea ; ▁horiei , ▁ordea , ▁ez .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ You are permitted to understand the Kingdom of God , but the Kingdom of Heaven is n't true . ”
GOLD:	He replied , “ You are permitted to understand the secrets of the Kingdom of Heaven , but others are not .

ID:	2059
INPUT:	▁Az ok atik ▁etxera tzean ▁ere , ▁ez ▁dute ▁jaten ▁garbikuntza ▁egin ▁gabe ; ▁eta ▁badute ▁beste ▁hamaika ▁ohitu raz ko ▁bete behar : ▁hala ▁nola ▁edal ontzi , ▁p itx er ▁eta ▁su il en ▁garb iketa .
PRED:	If they eat from their home , they must not eat whatever was purified . They have been purified , and they will be purified by the blood of the poor , and they will be made of clean .
GOLD:	Similarly , they do n't eat anything from the market until they immerse their hands in water . This is but one of many traditions they have clung to — such as their ceremonial washing of cups , pitchers , and kettles . )

ID:	2060
INPUT:	▁G arras i ▁l atzak ▁izango ▁dira ▁Egipto ▁osoan , ▁inoiz ▁ere ▁izan ▁ez ▁diren ▁eta ▁berriro ▁izango ▁ez ▁diren ▁bezalakoak .
PRED:	There will be many times of Egypt , too , and there will never be no more numerous than you .
GOLD:	Then a loud wail will rise throughout the land of Egypt , a wail like no one has heard before or will ever hear again .

ID:	2061
INPUT:	▁sor oak ▁erein , ▁mahastiak ▁landatu ▁eta ▁uzta ▁opar oak ▁biltzen .
PRED:	Their crops planted crops , and planted crops for harvest .
GOLD:	They sow their fields , plant their vineyards , and harvest their bumper crops .

ID:	2062
INPUT:	▁Egoitz ako ▁a taria
PRED:	Plans for the Courtyard
GOLD:	Building the Washbasin

ID:	2063
INPUT:	▁J arri , ▁gero , ▁erre - oparien ▁aldarea ▁elkarketa - etxolako ▁egoitzaren ▁sarreran .
PRED:	Then anoint the altar at the entrance of the Tabernacle at the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	Place the altar of burnt offering in front of the Tabernacle entrance .

ID:	2064
INPUT:	▁« Gar au tegi ak ▁gainezka ▁beteko ▁dizkizue ▁eta ▁eginkizun ▁guztietan ▁arrakas ta ▁emango ▁Jaunak ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoak : ▁bedeinkatu ▁egingo ▁zaituzte ▁berak ▁emango ▁dizuen ▁lurraldean .
PRED:	“ Then he will bless you and bless you in everything the Lord your God has blessed you . He will bless you in all the land he has blessed you .
GOLD:	“ The Lord will guarantee a blessing on everything you do and will fill your storehouses with grain . The Lord your God will bless you in the land he is giving you .

ID:	2065
INPUT:	▁Uler tarazi ▁zeure ▁legea , ▁eta ▁gordeko ▁dut , bihotz - bihotzez ▁beteko .
PRED:	My heart is filled with grief , and I will obey all your soul .
GOLD:	Give me understanding and I will obey your instructions ; I will put them into practice with all my heart .

ID:	2066
INPUT:	▁Haren ▁gaz tar oko ▁urteak ▁lab urtu ▁eta ▁lotsa ▁gorriz ▁bete ▁duzu .
PRED:	You are like a mighty eagle , and your hair is covered with a thousand generations .
GOLD:	O Lord , how long will this go on ? Will you hide yourself forever ? How long will your anger burn like fire ?

ID:	2067
INPUT:	▁baina ▁gure ▁apaizburu ▁eta ▁agintari ek ▁heriotzara ▁konden atu ▁dute ▁eta ▁gurutziltzatu .
PRED:	But the leading priests and the leading priests are crucified .
GOLD:	But our leading priests and other religious leaders handed him over to be condemned to death , and they crucified him .

ID:	2068
INPUT:	▁Behinola , ▁Eliseo ▁Damasko ra ▁joan ▁zen . ▁Siriako ▁errege ▁Ben - Hada d ▁gaixo ▁zegoen . ▁Jainkoaren ▁gizona ▁etorria ▁zela ▁jakinarazi ▁ziotenean ,
PRED:	Elisha returned to the town of Damascus , and the man of Aram had been very sick . When the man of God heard what had happened .
GOLD:	Elisha went to Damascus , the capital of Aram , where King Ben-hadad lay sick . When someone told the king that the man of God had come ,

ID:	2069
INPUT:	▁O bad iasek ▁joan ▁eta ▁dena ▁jakinarazi ▁zion ▁Akab i . ▁Orduan , ▁Akab ▁Eliasen gana ▁joan ▁zen .
PRED:	So Ahab went and told Ahab what Ahab had happened to Elijah .
GOLD:	So Obadiah went to tell Ahab that Elijah had come , and Ahab went out to meet Elijah .

ID:	2070
INPUT:	▁U har tean ▁gobern atzen ▁zuen ▁Ser gi o ▁Paulo ▁kontsul orde aren ▁inguru koa ▁zen . ▁Kon tsul or dea ▁zentz uzko ▁gizona ▁zen , ▁eta ▁Bern ab eri ▁eta ▁Saul ori ▁deitu ▁zien , ▁Jainkoaren ▁mezua ▁entzun ▁nahirik .
PRED:	When Saul saw that Paul was going to rescue the man of God , he called the man of God . He was the man of God , and he called Saul and Barnabas to listen .
GOLD:	He had attached himself to the governor , Sergius Paulus , who was an intelligent man . The governor invited Barnabas and Saul to visit him , for he wanted to hear the word of God .

ID:	2071
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁bainau zu ▁Herio ▁Leiz era ▁botako , zure ▁fededun a ▁ez ▁duzu ▁hilobian ▁galtzen ▁utziko .
PRED:	Do n't let me go into the grave , but you will not let me go into the grave .
GOLD:	For you will not leave my soul among the deador allow your holy one to rot in the grave .

ID:	2072
INPUT:	▁Lebitarrak ▁erantzun :— Honela ▁eta ▁honela ▁hartu ▁nau ▁Mik ak ; ▁ordaindu ▁egiten ▁dit , ▁beraren ▁apaiz ▁izateko .
PRED:	The Levites replied , “ My son , my lord the priest has paid me the priest 's wife . ”
GOLD:	He told them about his agreement with Micah and that he had been hired as Micah 's personal priest .

ID:	2073
INPUT:	▁Ar ro tzari , ▁ordea , ▁ez ▁diote ▁jarraituko ; ▁aitz itik , ▁ihes ▁egingo ▁diote , ▁arro tzaren ▁ahotsa ▁ez aguna ▁ez ▁dutelako ».
PRED:	But they will not be put to death , but they will not find it . ”
GOLD:	They wo n't follow a stranger ; they will run from him because they do n't know his voice . ”

ID:	2074
INPUT:	▁Jaunari ▁atsegin ▁zaiona ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁beraren ▁aita ▁Amatziasek ▁bezalaxe .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as his father had done .
GOLD:	He did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , just as his father , Amaziah , had done .

ID:	2075
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« J akizu ▁zure ▁ondorengoak ▁atzerritar ▁gisa ▁biziko ▁direla ▁ber ena ▁ez ▁duten ▁lurraldean . ▁Esklab o ▁bihurtuko ▁dituzte ▁eta ▁zapaldu rik ▁edukiko ▁laurehun ▁urtez .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to him , “ You must live as a foreigner in the land of Canaan . They will not be slaves to the land of Canaan .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Abram , “ You can be sure that your descendants will be strangers in a foreign land , where they will be oppressed as slaves for 400 years .

ID:	2076
INPUT:	▁Esan ▁zidan : ▁« Gizaseme , ▁nire ▁tron uaren ▁l ekua ▁da ▁hau , ▁oinak ▁jartzen ▁ditudan ▁l ekua ; ▁hemen ▁biziko ▁naiz ▁israeldarren ▁erdian ▁betiko . ▁Ez ▁herriak , ▁ez ▁erregeek , ▁ez ▁dute ▁berriro ▁nire ▁izena ▁desoho ratuko , ▁idolat ria ▁eginez ▁edo ▁beren ▁erregeen ▁gorpuak ▁hemen ▁hilobira tuz .
PRED:	Then he said to me , “ Son of man , this is the one sitting on the throne , and I will live among the kings of Israel . I will never live in my presence , and I will never live among the kings of Israel .
GOLD:	The Lord said to me , “ Son of man , this is the place of my throne and the place where I will rest my feet . I will live here forever among the people of Israel . They and their kings will not defile my holy name any longer by their adulterous worship of other gods or by honoring the relics of their kings who have died .

ID:	2077
INPUT:	▁Bestela , ▁leh oiak ▁bezala ▁harrapatu eta ▁zati - zati ▁egingo ▁naute , eta ▁ezin ▁izango ▁nau ▁inork ▁libratu .
PRED:	If you have given me a stone , I will never be able to save me .
GOLD:	O Lord my God , if I have done wrongor am guilty of injustice ,

ID:	2078
INPUT:	▁Neure ▁sumin aren ▁sumin ez ▁zin ▁dagit ▁lurrik ara ▁handia ▁izango ▁dela ▁Israelen .
PRED:	You have made an oath in my anger , and there will be a terrible earthquake in Israel .
GOLD:	In my jealousy and blazing anger , I promise a mighty shaking in the land of Israel on that day .

ID:	2079
INPUT:	▁Zergatik ▁zoaz , ▁bada , ▁orain ▁Egiptora , N il oko ▁urak ▁ed atera ? Zergatik ▁Asiri ara , E ufrates ko ▁urak ▁ed atera ?
PRED:	Why are you going to Egypt ? Why are you drink ? Why are you drink ? Why will you drink the water ?
GOLD:	“ What have you gained by your alliances with Egyptand your covenants with Assyria ? What good to you are the streams of the Nileor the waters of the Euphrates River ?

ID:	2080
INPUT:	▁« B el x atzar ▁erregearen ▁hirugarren ▁urtean , ▁nik , ▁Danielek , ▁beste ▁ikuskari ▁bat ▁izan ▁nuen , ▁lehen ▁izandako az ▁gainera .
PRED:	“ At the third year of King Daniel 's reign , Daniel , had a dream .
GOLD:	During the third year of King Belshazzar 's reign , I , Daniel , saw another vision , following the one that had already appeared to me .

ID:	2081
INPUT:	▁Eliz ▁elkar teko ▁arduradunak
PRED:	Advice for the Church
GOLD:	Titus 's Work in Crete

ID:	2082
INPUT:	▁Zuk , ▁gizaseme , ▁egin ▁erbesteratu arena : ▁hartu ▁behar - beh arrez koa ▁eta ▁zoaz ▁erbestera ▁egun - ar giz ▁beraien ▁aurrean . ▁Z au den ▁leku tik ▁beste ▁bat erantz ▁joango ▁zara ▁beraien ▁aurrean . ▁A gian , ▁orduan ▁ohar tuko ▁dira ▁herri ▁errebel dea ▁dela .
PRED:	“ Son of man , give a sword as a sword as a sign to the people of Israel . Go back to captivity , and go out into exile , and you will be sure to return to the people of Israel . Then you will be a long time . ”
GOLD:	“ So now , son of man , pretend you are being sent into exile . Pack the few items an exile could carry , and leave your home to go somewhere else . Do this right in front of the people so they can see you . For perhaps they will pay attention to this , even though they are such rebels .

ID:	2083
INPUT:	▁Ene ▁senide ▁maiteok , ▁irrika ▁biziz ▁nago ▁zuek ▁ikusteko . ▁Zuek , ▁maiteok , ▁ene ▁poz ▁eta ▁koroa ▁zaretenok , ▁iraun ▁ezazue ▁Jaunari ▁tinko ▁atxik iak .
PRED:	Dear friends , my dear brothers and sisters , for I am filled with joy , you who live in the sight of the Lord .
GOLD:	Therefore , my dear brothers and sisters , stay true to the Lord . I love you and long to see you , dear friends , for you are my joy and the crown I receive for my work .

ID:	2084
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁al ▁gaude ▁orain ▁gari - uz tar oan ? ▁Dei ▁eginen ▁diot ▁Jaunari , ▁eta ▁berak ▁trumo iak ▁eta ▁euria ▁bidaliko ▁dizkigu . ▁Horrela ▁ikusi ▁eta ▁jakingo ▁duzue ▁zein ▁gaiztakeria ▁handia ▁egin ▁duzuen ▁Jaunaren ▁aitzinean , ▁zeuen tzat ▁erregea ▁eskatuz .
PRED:	And now , we will ask the Lord , “ We will come to the Lord , ” says the Lord , “ I will tell you what you have done , and you will happen to us , and you will know that the Lord , the king of your God , and you will forgive us . ”
GOLD:	You know that it does not rain at this time of the year during the wheat harvest . I will ask the Lord to send thunder and rain today . Then you will realize how wicked you have been in asking the Lord for a king ! ”

ID:	2085
INPUT:	▁Hamabi ei ▁dei ▁egin ▁eta ▁b in aka ▁bidaltzen ▁hasi ▁zen , ▁espiritu ▁gaiztoak ▁botatzeko ▁ahalmena ▁ematen ▁zi ela .
PRED:	Then he called out to the twelve disciples and began to cast out demons .
GOLD:	And he called his twelve disciples together and began sending them out two by two , giving them authority to cast out evil spirits .

ID:	2086
INPUT:	▁E karri ▁gogora , ▁Jauna , ▁zeure ▁errukia ▁eta ▁maitasuna : beti dan iko ak ▁dituzu .
PRED:	Save me , O Lord , and I will praise your unfailing love and faithfulness .
GOLD:	Remember , O Lord , your compassion and unfailing love , which you have shown from long ages past .

ID:	2087
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁horra , ▁santutegiko ▁oihala ▁er diz ▁erdi ▁urratu ▁zen , ▁goitik ▁beh eraino ; ▁lurrik ara ▁izan ▁zen ▁eta ▁hark aitzak ▁zar tatu ▁egin ▁ziren ;
PRED:	There was a tree in the sanctuary of the sanctuary of the sanctuary , and there was a terrible earthquake .
GOLD:	At that moment the curtain in the sanctuary of the Temple was torn in two , from top to bottom . The earth shook , rocks split apart ,

ID:	2088
INPUT:	▁Ger tu ▁dago , ▁begirune ▁diotenak ▁salbatzeko ; bai , ▁haren ▁ospea ▁gure ▁lurraldean ▁ko katuko ▁da .
PRED:	He alone is in faith , and he will be saved in the land of our ancestors .
GOLD:	Unfailing love and truth have met together.Righteousness and peace have kissed !

ID:	2089
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁hau ▁agindu ▁zion ▁mezulari ari : ▁« Gu du ari ▁buruzko ▁berri ▁guztiak ▁eman ▁ondoren ,
PRED:	Then the messengers said to the messengers , “ A man has given everything he had done .
GOLD:	He told his messenger , “ Report all the news of the battle to the king .

ID:	2090
INPUT:	▁B eh eko ▁sol ai ru a ▁bi ▁metro ▁eta ▁erdi ▁zabal ▁zen , ▁erdi koa ▁hiru ▁metro ▁eta ▁hirugarren a ▁hiru ▁metro ▁eta ▁erdi . ▁S ol ai ru ▁bakoitzean ▁tenpluko ▁horma ▁kanpo aldetik ▁m eh ea goa ▁zen , ▁mai la ▁mo duko ▁batzuk ▁eginez , ▁eta ▁mai la ▁hauen ▁gainean ▁ezarri ▁zituzten ▁h abeak , ▁tenpluko ▁hormak ▁zulatu ▁beharrik ▁gabe .
PRED:	The entry room was 871/2 feet long , 75 feet wide , and 45 feet wide . The next side of the Temple was 101/2 feet long , and the inner courtyard was built on the walls of the Temple .
GOLD:	The complex was three stories high , the bottom floor being 71/2 feet wide , the second floor 9 feet wide , and the top floor 101/2 feet wide . The rooms were connected to the walls of the Temple by beams resting on ledges built out from the wall . So the beams were not inserted into the walls themselves .

ID:	2091
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁dio ▁Jaunak , ▁zuen ▁aska tzaileak , Israelen ▁Jainko ▁santuak :« Zuen ▁onerako , gu daros tea ▁bidaliko ▁dut ▁Babiloniara eta ▁denak ▁ihesi ▁aterako ▁dira , ihes i ▁babiloni arrak , beren ▁ontzi etan ▁babes turik .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The Holy One of Israel , the Holy One of Israel , says the Sovereign Lord , “ I will send you away from the land of Egypt .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says — your Redeemer , the Holy One of Israel : “ For your sakes I will send an army against Babylon , forcing the Babylonians to flee in those ships they are so proud of .

ID:	2092
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁haserre ak ▁aki turik ▁gauz ka , ▁zure ▁sum inak ▁ikara ▁bizian .
PRED:	Your fierce anger will fall , and your arrows will fall into your presence .
GOLD:	We wither beneath your anger ; we are overwhelmed by your fury .

ID:	2093
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁salbamen - indar ▁hau ▁Jesu ▁Kristo ganako ▁sinesmenaren ▁bidez ▁heltzen ▁da , ▁fededun ▁guztien gana ▁heldu ▁ere . ▁Jainkoak ▁ez ▁du ▁bereiz keriarik ▁egiten ,
PRED:	This is why God of Christ Jesus Christ Jesus Christ Jesus , who has n't been faithful with God 's holy people .
GOLD:	We are made right with God by placing our faith in Jesus Christ . And this is true for everyone who believes , no matter who we are .

ID:	2094
INPUT:	▁Herri ▁osoak ▁negarrari ▁eman ▁zion ▁legearen ▁hitzak ▁entzutean . ▁Orduan , ▁Neh em ias ▁gobernariak , ▁Esdras ▁lege - maisuak ▁eta ▁irakasten ▁ari ▁ziren ▁lebitarrek ▁esan ▁zioten ▁herriari : ▁« Gaur ko ▁eguna ▁Jaunari , ▁gure ▁Jainkoari , ▁sagaratua ▁dugu . ▁Beraz , ▁ez ▁egon ▁tris te , ▁ez ▁egin ▁n eg arrik ».
PRED:	When all the people wept , they wept over the Law of Moses and the teachers of religious law , the teachers of religious law , the teachers of religious law , and Ezra said , “ We have not been dedicated to the Lord our God . ”
GOLD:	Then Nehemiah the governor , Ezra the priest and scribe , and the Levites who were interpreting for the people said to them , “ Do n't mourn or weep on such a day as this ! For today is a sacred day before the Lord your God. ” For the people had all been weeping as they listened to the words of the Law .

ID:	2095
INPUT:	▁Jaunak , ▁zerutik ▁begira , ▁gizaki ▁guztiak ▁ikusten ▁ditu ;
PRED:	The Lord looked down from heaven , and he sees everything he sees .
GOLD:	The Lord looks down from heavenand sees the whole human race .

ID:	2096
INPUT:	▁Egin ▁era sor ako ▁seinalea Babiloni ako ▁harres ien ▁aurka ; sen do tu ▁guardia - pos tuak , u gari tu ▁zain tzaileak , j arri ▁gudariak ▁zelatan . Izan ▁ere , ▁Jaunak ▁badu ▁asmo ▁bat , Babiloni ako ▁bizilagunen ▁aurk ai ra garria , eta ▁burutu ▁egingo ▁du ▁orain .
PRED:	Then the Lord will send the sword against the city of the city , and the captain of the guard will stand against the city of the guard , and the men of the city will stand in battle , and the Lord will attack the city .
GOLD:	Raise the battle flag against Babylon ! Reinforce the guard and station the watchmen.Prepare an ambush , for the Lord will fulfill all his plans against Babylon .

ID:	2097
INPUT:	▁Jendeak ▁gauza ▁bera ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Hau ▁eta ▁hau ▁egingo ▁diote ▁hori ▁hilko ▁duenari .
PRED:	But the crowd said to him , “ This is what the people will die . ”
GOLD:	And these men gave David the same reply . They said , “ Yes , that is the reward for killing him . ”

ID:	2098
INPUT:	▁A hots ▁honen ▁oihu az , ▁tenpluko ▁ate - or po ek ▁dar - dar ▁egin ▁zuten , ▁eta ▁tenplua ▁kez ▁bete ▁zen .
PRED:	Then the voice of the Temple shouted to him , “ Praise the Temple of the Lord ! ”
GOLD:	Their voices shook the Temple to its foundations , and the entire building was filled with smoke .

ID:	2099
INPUT:	▁Handik ▁denboraldi ▁batera , ▁juduek ▁Saulo ▁hiltzea ▁erabaki ▁zuten ;
PRED:	After that , Saul continued to kill Saul .
GOLD:	After a while some of the Jews plotted together to kill him .

ID:	2100
INPUT:	▁Ez ku tatu ▁zen , ▁bada , ▁David ▁landan . ▁Il berri - jaia ▁heltzean , ▁jarri ▁zen ▁erregea ▁otor durako , ▁bazkal tzeko .
PRED:	So David was very heavy to celebrate the crops of the field , and he prepared a banquet for a wedding feast for the king .
GOLD:	So David hid himself in the field , and when the new moon festival began , the king sat down to eat .

ID:	2101
INPUT:	▁“ Aita ” ▁deitzen ▁diot ▁ho bi an ▁ustel du tako ari , “ ama , ▁arreba ” ▁jango ▁nauten ▁har rei .
PRED:	‘ Father , ' I say , ‘ My sister is a beautiful woman who eats my sister 's sister . '
GOLD:	What if I call the grave my father , and the maggot my mother or my sister ?

ID:	2102
INPUT:	▁Mundu ▁honetako ▁agintari etatik ▁batek ▁ere ▁ez ▁du ▁jakinduria ▁hori ▁ezagutu , ▁zeren , ▁ezagutu ▁izan ▁balu te , ▁ez ▁baitzu k eten ▁gurutziltz atuko ▁Jainkoaren ▁aintza ▁berekin ▁zuen ▁Jauna .
PRED:	But if someone who does n't know this , he knows whether he was afraid of this world or even know that the glory of God would be crucified with him .
GOLD:	But the rulers of this world have not understood it ; if they had , they would not have crucified our glorious Lord .

ID:	2103
INPUT:	▁Hartu ▁zituen , ▁aldiz , ▁Ai aren ▁alaba ▁R itz pak ▁Sauli ▁eman ▁zizkion ▁bi ▁semeak , ▁Ar m oni ▁eta ▁Mefi - Boxet , ▁eta ▁Saulen ▁alaba ▁Mik alek ▁Ad ri eli , ▁M eh olako ▁B artz il airen ▁semeari , ▁eman ▁zizkion ▁bost ▁semeak ,
PRED:	Meanwhile , Michal , the daughter of Michal , had been my daughter Michal , Mephibosheth , the daughter of Mephibosheth , who was Mephibosheth , the daughter of Saul , had been his son Michal , Mephibosheth , the daughter of Saul 's son , the son of Mephibosheth , who was the son of Saul 's son of Mephibosheth .
GOLD:	But he gave them Saul 's two sons Armoni and Mephibosheth , whose mother was Rizpah daughter of Aiah . He also gave them the five sons of Saul 's daughter Merab , the wife of Adriel son of Barzillai from Meholah .

ID:	2104
INPUT:	▁Jakobek ▁Esau rekin ▁topo ▁egin
PRED:	Jacob Sends Gifts to Jacob
GOLD:	Jacob and Esau Make Peace

ID:	2105
INPUT:	▁Bitartean , ▁Babiloniako ▁erregearen ▁gudarostea ▁Jerusalemi ▁eta ▁artean ▁Judan ▁tinko ▁irauten ▁zuten ▁bi ▁hiri ▁go t orre i , ▁Lakix ▁eta ▁Az ek ari , ▁erasotzen ▁ari ▁zen .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the army of Judah and Judah were forced to attack Jerusalem and Jerusalem to attack Jerusalem .
GOLD:	At this time the Babylonian army was besieging Jerusalem , Lachish , and Azekah — the only fortified cities of Judah not yet captured .

ID:	2106
INPUT:	▁Haiek ▁utzirik , ▁berriz ▁ere ▁aldendu ▁eta ▁hirugarren ▁aldiz ▁otoitz ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁lehengo ▁hitzak ▁berriro ▁esanez .
PRED:	But when they left him , Jesus left the third times and prayed again .
GOLD:	So he went to pray a third time , saying the same things again .

ID:	2107
INPUT:	▁Zuk , ▁Jauna , ▁jende ▁leiala ▁nahi ▁duzu . Jo ▁zenituen , baina ▁ez ▁zuten ▁damu rik ▁izan ; ia ▁akab atu , ▁baina ▁ez ▁ziren ▁zentz atu . Hark aitza ▁bezain ▁gogor ▁aurpegia , ez ▁zuten ▁on bidera tu ▁nahi ▁izan .
PRED:	“ O Lord , you have said to him , “ You have never sinned , but you did not turn away from the dust , but you did not turn away from the rock .
GOLD:	Lord , you are searching for honesty.You struck your people , but they paid no attention.You crushed them , but they refused to be corrected.They are determined , with faces set like stone ; they have refused to repent .

ID:	2108
INPUT:	▁« Ondoren , ▁eraman ▁zekorra ▁elkarketa - etxolaren ▁aurrera . ▁Aaronek ▁eta ▁beronen ▁semeek ▁buruan ▁eskuak ▁ezarriko ▁dizkiote .
PRED:	“ Next Aaron and his sons must lay their hands on the Tabernacle and lay their hands on the head of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ Bring the young bull to the entrance of the Tabernacle , where Aaron and his sons will lay their hands on its head .

ID:	2109
INPUT:	▁Ilun p etan ▁zaude ▁ezer ▁ikusi ▁ezin da , u holde ek ▁azpi ratua ▁bezala .
PRED:	You can not see that the waters of darkness is covered with fire .
GOLD:	That is why you can not see in the darkness , and waves of water cover you .

ID:	2110
INPUT:	▁Hala , ▁irten ▁zen ▁H atak ▁Mardoke oren ▁bila , ▁jauregi ▁aurrean ▁zegoen ▁plaz ara .
PRED:	So Hathach went out to get Mordecai 's palace in front of the palace .
GOLD:	So Hathach went out to Mordecai in the square in front of the palace gate .

ID:	2111
INPUT:	▁Moisesek , ▁lege ▁honen ▁xedapen ▁guztiak ▁liburuan ▁idatzi ▁zituenean ,
PRED:	So Moses wrote all these instructions in the book of Moses .
GOLD:	When Moses had finished writing this entire body of instruction in a book ,

ID:	2112
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁bere ganatu ▁zituen ▁Judako ▁gizon ▁ororen ▁bihotzak ▁batean , ▁eta ▁esk ari ▁hau ▁bidali ▁zioten ▁erregeari : ▁« Itzul ▁zakizki gu , ▁zeure ▁zerbitzari ▁guztiekin ».
PRED:	So he sent this message to his people in Judah and all the people of Judah and Benjamin , “ Return to the king of Judah . ”
GOLD:	So the king started back to Jerusalem . And when he arrived at the Jordan River , the people of Judah came to Gilgal to meet him and escort him across the river .

ID:	2113
INPUT:	▁Nire ▁zitara ▁dol um inez ▁dago , tx iru la ▁negarrez .
PRED:	My heart is filled with grief , for I am filled with grief .
GOLD:	My harp plays sad music , and my flute accompanies those who weep .

ID:	2114
INPUT:	▁Zeren , ▁egia ▁esan , ▁niregan ▁bete ▁beharra ▁baita ▁Liburu ▁Santuak ▁dioena : ▁B ek atari en ▁kide ko tzat ▁jo ▁zuten . ▁Izan ▁ere , ▁nire ak ▁laster ▁egingo ▁du .
PRED:	For the Scriptures say , “ This is what the Scriptures say , ‘ This is what the Scriptures says : The poor will be saved ! ”
GOLD:	For the time has come for this prophecy about me to be fulfilled : ‘ He was counted among the rebels . ' Yes , everything written about me by the prophets will come true . ”

ID:	2115
INPUT:	▁Hara gi ▁gur iz jan ari tuko ▁ditut ▁apaizak , nire ▁ondasunez ▁as eko ▁da ▁herria . Nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	Yes , I will feed them with food , and I will feed them with grain , the Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	The priests will enjoy abundance , and my people will feast on my good gifts.I , the Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	2116
INPUT:	▁Aldi ▁hartan ▁ez ▁zen ▁erre gerik ▁Israelen . ▁Danen ▁leinukoak ▁lurralde ▁baten ▁bila ▁zebiltzan , ▁bertan ▁bizitzeko , ▁ordu ▁arte ▁z oz ketan ▁ez ▁baitz itz aien ▁atera ▁beren tzako ▁lurral derik ▁israeldarren ▁artean .
PRED:	At that time the tribe of Dan were king of Israel , for the tribe of Dan were waiting for the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Now in those days Israel had no king . And the tribe of Dan was trying to find a place where they could settle , for they had not yet moved into the land assigned to them when the land was divided among the tribes of Israel .

ID:	2117
INPUT:	▁U holde ak ▁maitasuna ▁ezin ▁itzali , ezta ▁ibai ek ▁ere ▁ito . Norbaitek ▁maitasuna ▁erosi ▁nahi ▁balu , bere ▁ondasun ▁guztiak ▁emanik ▁ere , mes pretx ua ▁baizik ▁ez ▁luke ▁aterako .
PRED:	If someone hates the flood , the flood would not be able to buy it into the river , but they would not give him money .
GOLD:	Many waters can not quench love , nor can rivers drown it.If a man tried to buy lovewith all his wealth , his offer would be utterly scorned .

ID:	2118
INPUT:	▁Zi gil uz ▁mar katuak ▁zenbat ▁ziren ▁entzun ▁nuen : ▁ehun ▁eta ▁berrogeita ▁lau ▁mila , ▁israeldar ▁leinu ▁guzti etarik ▁hartu ak :
PRED:	Now I heard the vast names of the tribes of Israel , and the four tribes of Israel had been given to them .
GOLD:	And I heard how many were marked with the seal of God — 144,000 were sealed from all the tribes of Israel :

ID:	2119
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁horrenbeste ▁egingo ▁duzue ▁herritarrak ▁galdu ▁eta ▁zuek ▁aurkitu tako ▁asto , ▁soingaineko ▁nahiz ▁beste ▁edo zer ▁gauz arekin ▁ere ; ▁ez ▁egin ▁ez ▁ikusi arena .
PRED:	And you will see that your fellow Levites have been cut off from your household , whether we do n't see or clothing or clothing or clothing .
GOLD:	Do the same if you find your neighbor 's donkey , clothing , or anything else your neighbor loses . Do n't ignore your responsibility .

ID:	2120
INPUT:	▁S ua ▁d oak io ▁aurretik , ▁inguruko ▁etsaiak ▁kiskal iz .
PRED:	He breathed his enemies ahead of him before him , and his enemies were covered with fire .
GOLD:	Fire spreads ahead of himand burns up all his foes .

ID:	2121
INPUT:	▁Ef ron ▁bera ▁eseria ▁zegoen ▁beste ▁hitita ▁guztien ▁artean , ▁hiri - sarrerako ▁plazan . ▁Den en ▁aurrean ▁erantzun ▁zion :
PRED:	Meanwhile , Festus sitting among all the other believers in the city in the city gate .
GOLD:	Ephron was sitting there among the others , and he answered Abraham as the others listened , speaking publicly before all the Hittite elders of the town .

ID:	2122
INPUT:	▁Samari ara ▁heltzean , ▁Eliseok ▁esan ▁zuen :— I reki ▁iez azki ezu ▁begiak , ▁Jauna , ▁eta ▁ikus ▁dezatela . I reki ▁zizkien , ▁beraz , ▁Jaunak ▁begiak ▁eta ▁Samaria ▁erdian ▁zeudela ▁ikusi ▁zuten .
PRED:	When Elisha arrived at Samaria , Elisha said , “ Come , let 's see and see what the Lord has seen and see the eyes of Samaria . ” So the Lord saw the eyes of Samaria .
GOLD:	As soon as they had entered Samaria , Elisha prayed , “ O Lord , now open their eyes and let them see. ” So the Lord opened their eyes , and they discovered that they were in the middle of Samaria .

ID:	2123
INPUT:	▁esanez : ▁O dol ▁hau ▁Jainkoak ▁zuekin ▁egiten ▁duen ▁itunaren ▁ezaugarri ▁da .
PRED:	Then God said to them , “ The covenant is with you . ”
GOLD:	Then he said , “ This blood confirms the covenant God has made with you . ”

ID:	2124
INPUT:	▁Egin ▁ote ▁l ez ak ete ▁lau oin k ah aitz etan ▁zaldi ek ? G ol da ▁ote ▁l ez ak ete ▁itsasoa ▁idi ek ? Zuek , ▁ordea , ▁zuzenbidea ▁pozoi bihur tu ▁duzue , ▁justizia ▁samin dura .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you with four oxen ? Why do you look at their feet ? Why are you angry with violence ? Why do you twist justice ?
GOLD:	Can horses gallop over boulders ? Can oxen be used to plow them ? But that 's how foolish you are when you turn justice into poisonand the sweet fruit of righteousness into bitterness .

ID:	2125
INPUT:	▁« Zuek , ▁Jainkoaren ▁agindua ▁bazter rera ▁utzi ▁eta ▁giza ▁ohitu rari ▁eusten ▁diozue ».
PRED:	“ You have been careful to obey the law of God . ”
GOLD:	For you ignore God 's law and substitute your own tradition . ”

ID:	2126
INPUT:	▁eta ▁esan ▁nion : ▁“ Hon aino ▁iritsiko ▁zara , ▁ez ▁aurrera go , h emen ▁amaitzen ▁da ▁zure ▁u h in en ▁harrokeria ”.
PRED:	I told you , ‘ You wo n't come to the end of your pride and pride . '
GOLD:	I said , ‘ This far and no farther will you come.Here your proud waves must stop ! '

ID:	2127
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁honela ▁dio ▁Jaunak :« Neuk ▁defen datuko ▁dut ▁zure ▁auzia , neure ▁gain ▁hartuko ▁zure ▁mendekua : Babiloni ako ▁ibai ak ▁hus tuko ▁ditut , itur buruak ▁agor tuko .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will raise my fist against you , ” says the Lord. “ I will take revenge on the rivers of Babylon .
GOLD:	This is what the Lord says to Jerusalem : “ I will be your lawyer to plead your case , and I will avenge you.I will dry up her river , as well as her springs ,

ID:	2128
INPUT:	▁Goraintziak ▁P ris ka ▁eta ▁Ak il ari , ▁Jesu ▁Kristoren ▁zerbitzuan ▁laguntzaile ▁izan ▁ditudan ei .
PRED:	Greet Paul and Timothy , whom I serve Christ Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	Give my greetings to Priscilla and Aquila , my co-workers in the ministry of Christ Jesus .

ID:	2129
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁baitan ▁aita - amak ▁desoho ratzen ▁dituzte , ▁etorkin a ▁gogor ▁hartu ▁eta ▁umezur tza ▁eta ▁alargun a ▁us tia tzen .
PRED:	But your father and mother are defiled by foreigners living among you , orphans , and widows .
GOLD:	Fathers and mothers are treated with contempt . Foreigners are forced to pay for protection . Orphans and widows are wronged and oppressed among you .

ID:	2130
INPUT:	▁Esklab oak ▁askatu ▁eta ▁berriro ▁esklabo ▁egin
PRED:	Slaves
GOLD:	Freedom for Hebrew Slaves

ID:	2131
INPUT:	▁Neuk ▁egin ▁dut ▁lurra eta ▁lur ▁gainean ▁gizakia ▁sortu ; neuk ▁hedatu ▁ditut ▁neure ▁eskuz ▁zeruak , eta ▁neuk ▁agintzen ber tako ▁as tro ▁guztiei .
PRED:	I have created the earth and the earth , the earth ! I am the one who created the heavens and earth .
GOLD:	I am the one who made the earthand created people to live on it.With my hands I stretched out the heavens.All the stars are at my command .

ID:	2132
INPUT:	▁G ol go ta ▁izeneko ▁tokira ▁eraman ▁zuten ▁Jesus ▁ ( G ol go tak ▁« B u rez ur » ▁esan ▁nahi ▁du ) .
PRED:	They took Jesus to the village where he was going to the village of Galilee . ( which means “ ” )
GOLD:	And they brought Jesus to a place called Golgotha ( which means “ Place of the Skull ” ) .

ID:	2133
INPUT:	▁As etz eraino ▁jan ▁zuten ▁denek , ▁eta ▁gelditutako ▁hondar rez ▁hamabi ▁saski ▁bete ▁zituzten .
PRED:	They ate as much as they were told , and twelve disciples were stored up twelve baskets of bread .
GOLD:	They all ate as much as they wanted , and afterward , the disciples picked up twelve baskets of leftovers !

ID:	2134
INPUT:	▁Behar tsu ▁izan ▁eta , ▁gero , ▁jende ▁xehea ▁zapaltzen ▁duen au holde ▁suntsi garria ▁da : ▁zer ▁jan ik ▁ere ▁ez ▁du ▁uzten !
PRED:	Give the poor and poor to the poor , the sword of the wicked , and the sword of the wicked will never be cut off .
GOLD:	A poor person who oppresses the pooris like a pounding rain that destroys the crops .

ID:	2135
INPUT:	▁Era bateko ▁ba tasuna
PRED:	Living as Children for Christ
GOLD:	Unity in the Body

ID:	2136
INPUT:	▁Israeldarren ▁artetik , ▁ordea , ▁ez ▁zuen ▁inor ▁ere ▁esklabo ▁izatera ▁behartu ; ▁baizik ▁eta ▁bere ▁gudari , ▁ofizi al , ▁gudalburu , ▁ezku tari ▁eta ▁bere ▁gurdi ter ia ▁eta ▁zaldi ter iaren ▁arduradun ▁egin ▁zituen .
PRED:	But no one of the Israelites who was slaves in charge of the people of Israel . Instead , the commander of his officers , the commander of his army , including his officers , officers , and his officers , and his officers .
GOLD:	But Solomon did not conscript any of the Israelites for forced labor . Instead , he assigned them to serve as fighting men , government officials , officers and captains in his army , commanders of his chariots , and charioteers .

ID:	2137
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zen ▁ohartu ▁bere ▁errain a ▁zela . ▁Hala , ▁hurbildu ▁eta ▁esan ▁zion :— Uz tazu ▁zurekin ▁ohera tzen . Hark ▁galdetu ▁zion :— Zer ▁emango ▁didazu ▁ordain etan ?
PRED:	When he realized that his mother was gone , he got up and said to his wife , “ Why have you come to bed ? ” So he asked him , “ Why do you want me to pay me ? ”
GOLD:	So he stopped and propositioned her . “ Let me have sex with you , ” he said , not realizing that she was his own daughter-in-law. “ How much will you pay to have sex with me ? ” Tamar asked .

ID:	2138
INPUT:	▁ergel ak ▁ber rik eta ▁ugari . Gizon ak ▁ez ▁daki ▁zer ▁dator kion . Eta ▁nork ▁adieraz ▁diezai oke beraren ▁ondoren ▁zer ▁gertatuko ▁den ?
PRED:	How can this man be like a fool ? What can we see ? What will you think it will be ?
GOLD:	they chatter on and on.No one really knows what is going to happen ; no one can predict the future .

ID:	2139
INPUT:	▁p ara di su an ▁bizi ▁zinen , ▁Jainkoaren ▁bara tzean , ▁mota ▁guztietako ▁harribitx iz ▁apain dua , ▁kor n al ina , ▁to p azio ▁eta ▁ber il oz , ▁k ri so li to , ▁on ize ▁eta ▁jas pez , ▁z af iro , ▁erru bi ▁eta ▁es mer al daz ▁apain dua ; ▁urrez ▁lan duak ▁ziren ▁zure ▁bitx i ▁eta ▁apain gail uak , ▁sortu ▁zintuzten ▁egun ▁berean ▁prestatu ak .
PRED:	The people of Israel were coming to the garden of God , and there was a purple robe that decorated with gold , purple , and scarlet thread and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	You were in Eden , the garden of God.Your clothing was adorned with every precious stone — red carnelian , pale-green peridot , white moonstone , blue-green beryl , onyx , green jasper , blue lapis lazuli , turquoise , and emerald — all beautifully crafted for youand set in the finest gold.They were given to youon the day you were created .

ID:	2140
INPUT:	▁Ar duradun ak ▁akats ▁gabea ▁izan ▁behar ▁du , ▁behin ▁bakarrik ▁ezkon dua ; ▁haren ▁seme - alabek ▁sineste dunak ▁izan ▁behar ▁dute , ▁jokaera ▁gaizto z ▁nahiz ▁errebeldi az ▁salatu ▁gabeak .
PRED:	“ If you are honest to be faithful to the one who has been faithful to his son , his wives , and your children are not guilty . They have no respect for their sins , and do not have sexual relations with no other .
GOLD:	An elder must live a blameless life . He must be faithful to his wife , and his children must be believers who do n't have a reputation for being wild or rebellious .

ID:	2141
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁asko ▁zituen ▁sendatu ak , ▁eta ▁gai tzen ▁bat ▁zuten ▁guztiak ▁gainera ▁zetoz kion ▁ukitu ▁nahiz .
PRED:	For he healed them , and he healed everyone who touched him and touched him .
GOLD:	He had healed many people that day , so all the sick people eagerly pushed forward to touch him .

ID:	2142
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁herritarrak zintz o ▁izango ▁dira ▁denak eta ▁lurraldearen ▁jabe bihur tuko ▁betiko : nik ▁ezarritako ▁landar e ▁berri , neure ▁ospea ▁agertzeko egin iko ▁o b ra .
PRED:	I will give you the people of the land of the Lord , the one who is good , says , “ I will give you the glory of the Lord .
GOLD:	All your people will be righteous.They will possess their land forever , for I will plant them there with my own handsin order to bring myself glory .

ID:	2143
INPUT:	▁Kristo ▁zuengan ▁baldin ▁badago , ▁berriz , ▁gorputza ▁bekatu agatik ▁hil ▁egingo ▁den ▁arren , ▁Espirituak ▁badu ▁bizia , ▁Jainkoaren ▁salbamen - indar rari ▁esker .
PRED:	But if Christ is in you , he will be put to you for the Spirit of God .
GOLD:	And Christ lives within you , so even though your body will die because of sin , the Spirit gives you life because you have been made right with God .

ID:	2144
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁ke - s ein alea ▁hiritik ▁gora ▁ateratzen ▁hasi ▁zenean , ▁benjamin darrek ▁atzera ▁begiratu ▁eta ▁hiri ▁osoa ▁zeru rain oko ▁sugar retan ▁zegoela ▁ikusi ▁zuten .
PRED:	But when they saw the ship coming out of the city , the people of Benjamin began to see him in the city of Benjamin .
GOLD:	But when the warriors of Benjamin looked behind them and saw the smoke rising into the sky from every part of the town ,

ID:	2145
INPUT:	▁Une ▁hartan , ▁Melkisedek ▁X alem go ▁erregeak ▁ogi - ardo ak ▁atera ▁zituen , ▁Goi - goiko ▁Jainkoaren ▁apaiza ▁baitzen ,
PRED:	At that time the king of Heaven 's Armies , who brought it out of the Most High Priest in the Most High Priest .
GOLD:	And Melchizedek , the king of Salem and a priest of God Most High , brought Abram some bread and wine .

ID:	2146
INPUT:	▁Zintz oen ▁salbamena ▁Jaunarengandik ▁dator : h ura ▁dute ▁gotorleku ▁arrisku - gar aian .
PRED:	The words of the Lord comes from the Lord ; the fortress of death is near .
GOLD:	The Lord rescues the godly ; he is their fortress in times of trouble .

ID:	2147
INPUT:	▁Horregatik ▁gogor arazten ▁dizut ▁indar berri ▁dez azula ▁nik ▁eskuak ▁ezar tzean ▁Jainkoak ▁eman ▁z izun ▁dohaina ,
PRED:	That 's why should I give you the power of God ? When you laid your hands on me ,
GOLD:	This is why I remind you to fan into flames the spiritual gift God gave you when I laid my hands on you .

ID:	2148
INPUT:	▁L i ho zko ▁ tun ika ▁sakratua ▁jantz ita ▁sartuko ▁da , ▁lihozko ▁gal tzaz ▁estal ita ▁eta ▁lihozko ▁gerrikoa ▁eta ▁buruz ap ia ▁jarri ta ; ▁jantzi ▁sakratuak ▁direnez ▁gero , ▁bain ua ▁hartu ▁ondoren ▁jantziko ▁ditu .
PRED:	She must take a robe in linen cloth , and he must enter the robe of linen cloth and linen cloth . He must put it in linen clothing and put it on the head of linen clothing . Then he must wear out the sacred garments for the sacred garments .
GOLD:	He must put on his linen tunic and the linen undergarments worn next to his body . He must tie the linen sash around his waist and put the linen turban on his head . These are sacred garments , so he must bathe himself in water before he puts them on .

ID:	2149
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁esaten ▁zion ▁Joanek ▁bataia tzera ▁zet or kion ▁jendeari : ▁« S u g ek ume ok ! ▁Nork ▁esan ▁dizue ▁gainean ▁duzuen ▁haserre - zigor rari ▁ihes ▁egingo ▁diozu ela ?
PRED:	John said to the people who are baptized with him , “ Who are you baptized ? Who are you going to kill you ? ”
GOLD:	When the crowds came to John for baptism , he said , “ You brood of snakes ! Who warned you to flee the coming wrath ?

ID:	2150
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁nire ▁ardi ek ▁zuek ▁zanpatu takoa ▁jan ▁behar ▁dute ▁eta ▁zuek ▁zik indu takoa ▁edan .
PRED:	And you will feed on my own flock , and you will eat what you eat .
GOLD:	Why must my flock eat what you have trampled down and drink water you have fouled ?

ID:	2151
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁aldarea ▁egin ▁Jaunari
PRED:	David Defeats the Lord
GOLD:	David Builds an Altar

ID:	2152
INPUT:	▁Hamabi ▁hauek ▁izendatu ▁zituen : ▁Simon ▁— h oni ▁Pedro ▁izena ▁jarri ▁zion —,
PRED:	Then Simon , Simon , who was the name of Simon , who was the name of Peter .
GOLD:	These are the twelve he chose : Simon ( whom he named Peter ) ,

ID:	2153
INPUT:	▁inork ▁ez ▁dezala ▁gai ▁honetan ▁bere ▁sen idea ▁irain ▁edo ▁engaina , ▁Jauna ▁bera ▁baita ▁hori ez ▁guzti ez ▁mend ek atzen ▁dena , ▁lehen ▁ere ▁behin ▁eta ▁berriro ▁zin ez ▁esan ▁gen izuen ▁bezala .
PRED:	Do n't let anyone fall on this fellow believer or sister or sister or sister in this way , for the Lord had spoken to you again , just as we said .
GOLD:	Never harm or cheat a fellow believer in this matter by violating his wife , for the Lord avenges all such sins , as we have solemnly warned you before .

ID:	2154
INPUT:	▁G eziak ▁jaur tiz ▁sakabanatu ▁zituen , tx imis ta ▁eginez ▁ihes ▁eragin .
PRED:	He threw them out of the snake out of lightning .
GOLD:	He shot arrows and scattered his enemies ; his lightning flashed , and they were confused .

ID:	2155
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁dez azula ▁orduan , ▁ez ▁kezkatu , ▁ez ▁damutu ▁beharrik ▁izan , ▁odol ▁errugabea ▁isuri ▁eta ▁mendekua ▁zeure ▁eskuz ▁egina ▁duzulako . ▁Jaunak ▁ondasunez ▁bete ▁zai tzan ean , ▁oroit ▁zaitez ▁zeure ▁mirabe ▁honetaz ».
PRED:	“ You have n't need to tell us , ‘ We have not been able to tell you what the Lord has done for you , for you have done for the sake of your own hands . ' ”
GOLD:	do n't let this be a blemish on your record . Then your conscience wo n't have to bear the staggering burden of needless bloodshed and vengeance . And when the Lord has done these great things for you , please remember me , your servant ! ”

ID:	2156
INPUT:	▁Hori ▁gertatuko ▁den ▁egunean , ▁ihes lari ▁bat ▁iritsiko ▁zaizu ▁berri ▁ematera .
PRED:	On the day of the festival will come when you come and tell you what will happen .
GOLD:	And on that day a survivor from Jerusalem will come to you in Babylon and tell you what has happened .

ID:	2157
INPUT:	▁Senideok , ▁zer tarako ▁du ▁batek ▁« Nik ▁badut ▁fedea » ▁esatea , ▁egin tzetan ▁ez ▁badu ▁azaltzen ? ▁Horrelako ▁fede ak ▁salba ▁ote ▁dezake ?
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , what can I say to you ? Is it right ? Is it right to be saved ?
GOLD:	What good is it , dear brothers and sisters , if you say you have faith but do n't show it by your actions ? Can that kind of faith save anyone ?

ID:	2158
INPUT:	▁Jendeak ▁esaera ▁hori ▁aurpegira tzen ▁dit , den ek ▁lis tua ▁botatzen ▁aurpegira .
PRED:	The people say to me , ‘ Look at me , ' says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ God has made a mockery of me among the people ; they spit in my face .

ID:	2159
INPUT:	▁Behin ▁batean , ▁honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion ▁Jauna ▁Samueli :— Noiz ▁arte ▁ari ▁behar ▁duzu ▁negarrez ▁Saul engatik ? ▁B azter tu ▁egin ▁dut , ▁Israelen ▁errege ▁izan ▁ez ▁dadin . ▁Bete ▁ezazu ▁olioz ▁adarra ▁eta ▁zoaz , ▁Belen go ▁Jes eren gana ▁bidaltzen ▁zaitut . ▁Honen ▁semeen ▁artean ▁begiz tatu ▁dut ▁errege ▁eginen ▁dudana .
PRED:	One day the Lord said to Samuel , “ How long will you look for Saul ? ” “ How long will I go to the king of Israel ? ” So Saul said to Samuel , “ I will send you out of Bethlehem , and I will send you out of Bethlehem . ”
GOLD:	Now the Lord said to Samuel , “ You have mourned long enough for Saul . I have rejected him as king of Israel , so fill your flask with olive oil and go to Bethlehem . Find a man named Jesse who lives there , for I have selected one of his sons to be my king . ”

ID:	2160
INPUT:	▁Ho de iak ▁zer um u gan ▁gora ▁igo arazten ▁ditu , eraun tsi ak ▁tximis taka ▁leher rarazten , haizea ▁bere ▁gordeleku etatik ▁ater arazten .
PRED:	His lightning flashes like clouds , and the lightning flashed through the wind , lightning flashed through the wind .
GOLD:	He causes the clouds to rise over the whole earth.He sends the lightning with the rainand releases the wind from his storehouses .

ID:	2161
INPUT:	▁Gainera , ▁aker ▁bat ▁barkamen - oparitarako , ▁eguneroko ▁erre - opari ▁eta ▁berau ei ▁dagozki en ▁labore - ▁eta ▁isur - opari ekin .
PRED:	In addition , a male goat presented as a burnt offering to the regular burnt offering and liquid offering .
GOLD:	You must also sacrifice a male goat as a sin offering , in addition to the regular burnt offering with its accompanying grain offering and liquid offering .

ID:	2162
INPUT:	▁« Jauna , ▁gure ▁Jainkoa , ▁ahalmen ▁handiz ▁atera ▁zenuen ▁herria ▁Egiptotik ▁eta ▁izen ▁handia ▁zeure ganatu ▁duzu ▁gaurdaino ; ▁guk , ▁berriz , ▁bekatu ▁egin ▁dugu ▁eta ▁gaizki ▁jokatu .
PRED:	“ O Lord our God , you have rescued us from slavery in the land of Egypt , but you have committed a great sin .
GOLD:	“ O Lord our God , you brought lasting honor to your name by rescuing your people from Egypt in a great display of power . But we have sinned and are full of wickedness .

ID:	2163
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁jakin ▁ongi , ▁ni ▁hiltzen ▁banau zue , ▁errugabe ▁baten ▁heriotzaren ▁erantzu le ▁izango ▁zaretela ▁zuek , ▁hiri ▁hau ▁eta ▁bertako ▁bizilagunak , ▁benetan ▁Jainkoak ▁bidali ▁bainau ▁zuengana , ▁esan ▁dizuedan ▁guztia ▁iragar tzera ».
PRED:	But you know that I am innocent , and if you are guilty of death , you will be innocent in this city , and you will know that I am giving you today . ”
GOLD:	But if you kill me , rest assured that you will be killing an innocent man ! The responsibility for such a deed will lie on you , on this city , and on every person living in it . For it is absolutely true that the Lord sent me to speak every word you have heard . ”

ID:	2164
INPUT:	▁Hai etako ▁bakoitz ah aiz e tean ▁babes ▁izango ▁da , ek ai tzean ▁ater pe ; lurralde ▁leh orrean ▁u bidea ▁bezala , bas amortuan ▁harkaitz ▁handi ▁baten ger iza ▁bezala .
PRED:	One day each of them will be a shelter in the wilderness , like a shelter in the desert .
GOLD:	Each one will be like a shelter from the windand a refuge from the storm , like streams of water in the desertand the shadow of a great rock in a parched land .

ID:	2165
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁utzi ▁zeure ▁aho ari bekatu ▁egin arazten , ez ▁esan ▁gero ▁Jainkoari oh artu ▁gabe ▁egin ▁duzula . Ea ▁haserre tzen ▁zaiz un ▁Jainko az eure ▁hi tzen gatik eta ▁zeure ▁lanak ▁oro des egiten ▁dizk izun !
PRED:	Do not neglect your word to God for you , saying , ‘ Come , you are angry with all your people , and do not let you go unpunished ! '
GOLD:	It is better to say nothing than to make a promise and not keep it .

ID:	2166
INPUT:	▁Egun ▁hartan ▁— hala ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak — ▁neurekin ▁hartuko ▁zaitut , ▁X e al ti elen ▁seme ▁Zorobabel ▁ene ▁zerbitzari ▁hori , ▁eta ▁neure ▁zigil u ▁egingo ▁zaitut , ▁neuk ▁aukeratu ▁baitzaitu t . ▁Hala ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak ».
PRED:	“ In that day I will give you a vow from the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , says , “ I will give you my servant , my servant , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , “ I have chosen you to be my servant , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	“ But when this happens , says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , I will honor you , Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel , my servant . I will make you like a signet ring on my finger , says the Lord , for I have chosen you . I , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken ! ”

ID:	2167
INPUT:	▁« Hil aren ▁hasi eran , ▁bi ▁zekor , ▁ahari ▁bat ▁eta ▁urtebeteko ▁zazpi ▁arkume ▁— denak ▁akats ▁gabeak — ▁aurkeztuko ▁dizkio zue ▁Jaunari ▁erre - oparitzat .
PRED:	“ In the beginning of the first month , two one-year-old male lambs , one one-year-old male lambs , and seven one-year-old male lambs with no defects .
GOLD:	“ On the first day of each month , present an extra burnt offering to the Lord of two young bulls , one ram , and seven one-year-old male lambs , all with no defects .

ID:	2168
INPUT:	▁Lur rak ▁gutiz iatzen ▁dituztela ? L ap urtu ▁egiten ▁dituzte . E tx eak ▁irri katzen ▁dituztela ? Hartu ▁egiten ▁dituzte . I n dar rez ▁hartzen ▁dute ▁nagusia , bere ▁familia ▁eta ▁etx alde arekin .
PRED:	These are the people of Israel who live in their land ? They are destroyed by their master 's household , and they enjoy their wealth .
GOLD:	When you want a piece of land , you find a way to seize it.When you want someone 's house , you take it by fraud and violence.You cheat a man of his property , stealing his family 's inheritance .

ID:	2169
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁aurpegira ▁bota ▁nien ▁hori ▁eta ▁madarikatu ▁egin ▁nituen ; ▁jo ▁ere ▁egin ▁nituen ▁batzuk ▁eta ▁il eak ▁atera ▁n izkien ; ▁gero , ▁herri ▁haietako ▁jende arekin ▁ez ▁zirela ▁ezkon duko ▁zin ▁eragin ▁nien ▁Jainkoaren ▁izenean .
PRED:	I cried out to them , “ I will curse some of them , and some of them , and some of them were left in the name of the God of them .
GOLD:	So I confronted them and called down curses on them . I beat some of them and pulled out their hair . I made them swear in the name of God that they would not let their children intermarry with the pagan people of the land .

ID:	2170
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁zuen etik ▁zabaldu ▁da ▁Mazed onia ▁eta ▁Ak ai ara ▁Jaunaren ▁mezua ; ▁eta ▁eskualde ▁hori etara ▁ez ▁ezik , ▁bazter ▁guztietara ▁ere ▁heldu ▁da ▁Jainkoarengan ▁duzuen ▁sinesmenaren ▁entzu tea , ▁guk ▁ezer ▁esan ▁beharrik ▁gabe .
PRED:	For the message of the Lord has revealed to Macedonia and throughout Macedonia and Greece , though you have not been able to continue to hear the word of the Lord our God . And you have n't need to pray that you have no need to pray for us .
GOLD:	And now the word of the Lord is ringing out from you to people everywhere , even beyond Macedonia and Achaia , for wherever we go we find people telling us about your faith in God . We do n't need to tell them about it ,

ID:	2171
INPUT:	▁I gorri ▁zituzten , ▁bada , ▁gizon ▁batzuk ▁Xil ora ▁eta ▁ekarri ▁zuten ▁handik ▁izaki ▁hegaldun en ▁gainean ▁eseria ▁dagoen ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidun aren ▁itun - kutxa . ▁Jainkoaren ▁itun - ku tx ari ▁lagun ▁eginez , ▁H of ni ▁eta ▁Pinh as , ▁El iren ▁bi ▁semeak , ▁etorri ▁ziren .
PRED:	So they brought a group of Baal on Shiloh , a man sitting on the throne of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . They were sitting on the Ark of God 's Covenant , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Covenant , and the sons of Eli .
GOLD:	So they sent men to Shiloh to bring the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , who is enthroned between the cherubim . Hophni and Phinehas , the sons of Eli , were also there with the Ark of the Covenant of God .

ID:	2172
INPUT:	▁Zuhur rekin ▁ibiltzen ▁dena ▁zuhur ▁bihurtzen ▁da , zentzu gabe ekin ▁elkar tzen ▁dena ▁galbidean ▁jartzen .
PRED:	Wise words bring knowledge to the wise , but the wise person detests a fool .
GOLD:	Walk with the wise and become wise ; associate with fools and get in trouble .

ID:	2173
INPUT:	▁Orain ▁bai , ▁badakit ▁jainko ▁guztien ▁aldean ▁handia ▁dela ▁Jauna , ▁egiptoarrek ▁herria ▁harro keriaz ▁erabili ▁zute larik , ▁haien ▁menpetik ▁libratu ▁baitu ».
PRED:	Now I know that the Lord is great and great in all the nations of the world , for he rescued them from all . ”
GOLD:	I know now that the Lord is greater than all other gods , because he rescued his people from the oppression of the proud Egyptians . ”

ID:	2174
INPUT:	▁Berak ▁aterako ▁du ▁onik ▁errugabea , eta ▁zu ▁ere ▁bai , ▁zure ▁jardu era ▁garbia ▁bada ».
PRED:	He will rescue you from the wicked , and you are pure than gold . ”
GOLD:	Even sinners will be rescued ; they will be rescued because your hands are pure . ”

ID:	2175
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁esan ▁zioten ▁entzu leek :— Ez ▁dituzu ▁oraindik ▁berrogeita ▁hamar ▁urte , ▁eta ▁Abraham ▁ikusi ▁duzula ?
PRED:	Then they said to him , “ Do n't you know Abraham and ten years ? ”
GOLD:	The people said , “ You are n't even fifty years old . How can you say you have seen Abraham ? ”

ID:	2176
INPUT:	▁Itzul arazi ▁egingo ▁zaitut , ▁mutur re takoa ▁ipini ▁eta ▁zeure ▁gudaroste ▁osoarekin ▁irten araziko ▁zaitut : ▁zaldi ▁eta ▁do tore ▁jantzi tako ▁zaldizko ekin , ▁babes kiz ▁eta ▁bular - os kol ez ▁hornitu riko ▁gudaroste ▁handi arekin , ▁denak ▁ezpata ▁eskuetan ▁dutela .
PRED:	I will send you out of your horses and feed you with your horses and horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , horses , and horses , and horses , and charioteers , and horses , and charioteers , and charioteers , and charioteers , and charioteers .
GOLD:	I will turn you around and put hooks in your jaws to lead you out with your whole army — your horses and charioteers in full armor and a great horde armed with shields and swords .

ID:	2177
INPUT:	▁M ariak ▁esan ▁zion ▁aingeruari :— Baina ▁nola ▁gerta ▁daiteke ▁hori , ▁ez ▁bainaiz ▁gizon ▁batekin ▁bizi ?
PRED:	Then she said to the angel , “ How can I live ? ”
GOLD:	Mary asked the angel , “ But how can this happen ? I am a virgin . ”

ID:	2178
INPUT:	▁« Ur rundu ▁elkarte ▁honetatik , ▁bat - batean ▁birrin duko ▁baitut ». Moises ▁eta ▁Aaron ▁lurreraino ▁ahuspeztu ▁ziren ,
PRED:	“ At this time , ” the whole community said , “ for the Lord has commanded Moses to bow down . ”
GOLD:	And the Lord said to Moses : “ Place Aaron 's staff permanently before the Ark of the Covenant to serve as a warning to rebels . This should put an end to their complaints against me and prevent any further deaths . ”

ID:	2179
INPUT:	▁Bai , ▁zure ▁maitasuna ▁zeru ▁zabala ▁baino ▁handiagoa , zure ▁leialtasuna ▁hodei etaraino koa .
PRED:	Yes , your love is higher than the clouds , and the clouds of the sky .
GOLD:	Be exalted , O God , above the highest heavens.May your glory shine over all the earth .

ID:	2180
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁agindu ▁zien : ▁« K uts atu ▁tenplua , ▁a tariak ▁hildako z ▁betez ... ▁Zoazte !» ▁Irten ▁eta ▁ekin ▁zioten ▁tris k antz ari ▁hirian .
PRED:	Then he told them , “ Go out to the Temple of the Temple , and go out into the city gate . ”
GOLD:	“ Defile the Temple ! ” the Lord commanded . “ Fill its courtyards with corpses . Go ! ” So they went and began killing throughout the city .

ID:	2181
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Lib uru ▁Santuak ▁dio : ▁Nire ▁etxea ▁otoitz - etxe ▁izango ▁da ; ▁zuek , ▁berriz , ▁lapur - zulo ▁egina ▁duzue ».
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ This is what the Scriptures say , ‘ My house will be found , but you will be destroyed . '
GOLD:	He said to them , “ The Scriptures declare , ‘ My Temple will be called a house of prayer , ' but you have turned it into a den of thieves ! ”

ID:	2182
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁Moises ▁eta ▁Aaron ▁faraoia gana ▁joan ▁eta ▁esan ▁zioten :— Hau ▁esan ▁du ▁Jaunak , ▁Israelgo ▁Jainkoak : ▁Utzi ozu ▁nire ▁herriari ▁basamortura ▁joaten , ▁ene ▁ohorez ▁festa ▁ospa tzera .
PRED:	Then Moses went to Pharaoh and said to Moses , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : Leave the wilderness of Israel to celebrate the Passover meal for the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	After this presentation to Israel 's leaders , Moses and Aaron went and spoke to Pharaoh . They told him , “ This is what the Lord , the God of Israel , says : Let my people go so they may hold a festival in my honor in the wilderness . ”

ID:	2183
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁hirira ▁sartu ▁bezain ▁laster , ▁Ismael ▁eta ▁beronen ▁gizonek ▁hil ▁egin ▁zituzten ▁eta ▁putzu ▁batera ▁bota .
PRED:	But Ishmael and his men went into the town and killed him .
GOLD:	But as soon as they were all inside the town , Ishmael and his men killed all but ten of them and threw their bodies into a cistern .

ID:	2184
INPUT:	▁« I tsaso » ▁zeritzan ▁uraska ▁handia , ▁eta ▁ber oni ▁eus teko ▁hamabi ▁zezen ;
PRED:	The Sea of the Sea
GOLD:	the Sea and the twelve oxen under it ;

ID:	2185
INPUT:	▁Neure ▁emazte ▁egingo ▁zaitut leial tasun ▁iraun kor rez . Orduan ▁ezagutuko ▁du zuz eure ▁Jaun ▁hau .
PRED:	I will make you an inheritance of my wife , and you will know that the Lord is with you .
GOLD:	Then the earth will answer the thirsty criesof the grain , the grapevines , and the olive trees.And they in turn will answer , ‘ Jezreel ' — ‘ God plants ! '

ID:	2186
INPUT:	▁Erru dun ▁izanez ▁gero , ▁ai ▁ene ! Erru gabe ▁izanik ▁ere , ▁ezin ▁izango ▁dut ▁buru rik ▁altxatu , lots az ▁betea ▁bainago , ▁mis eria ▁beti ▁begi ▁aurrean .
PRED:	But if you are my own people , I will not be ashamed , I will not be ashamed , for I will not be ashamed .
GOLD:	If I am guilty , too bad for me ; and even if I 'm innocent , I ca n't hold my head high , because I am filled with shame and misery .

ID:	2187
INPUT:	▁Oih u ▁egin , ▁baina ▁Jainkoak ▁ez ▁die ▁erantzuten , gaizto ak ▁eta ▁harro ak ▁direlako ;
PRED:	But God did not answer them , but they do not boast about the wicked .
GOLD:	And when they cry out , God does not answerbecause of their pride .

ID:	2188
INPUT:	▁Bi dali ▁zituen ▁morroiak ▁gonbidatu ei ▁dei ▁egitera . ▁Baina ▁haiek ▁ez ▁zuten ▁etorri ▁nahi ▁izan .
PRED:	So he sent messengers to the guests , but they did n't want him to go .
GOLD:	When the banquet was ready , he sent his servants to notify those who were invited . But they all refused to come !

ID:	2189
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁esan ▁zidan : ▁“ Gure ▁arbasoen ▁Jainkoak ▁hautatu ▁zaitu , ▁beraren ▁nahia ▁ezagutu , ▁Zintzoa ▁ikusi ▁eta ▁beronen ▁ahotsa ▁zuzen - zuzen ean ▁entzun ▁dezazun .
PRED:	He said to me , ‘ This is what God of your ancestors , who has chosen you to see the truth . '
GOLD:	“ Then he told me , ‘ The God of our ancestors has chosen you to know his will and to see the Righteous One and hear him speak .

ID:	2190
INPUT:	▁Al txa , ▁Jainkoa , ▁eta ▁gobern a ▁mundua , zu ▁baitzara ▁herri ▁guztien ▁jabe !
PRED:	Get up , O God , and judge the world , to rule over all the world .
GOLD:	Rise up , O God , and judge the earth , for all the nations belong to you .

ID:	2191
INPUT:	▁Hau tsa ▁m iaz katuko ▁dute , suge ek ▁eta ▁narrasti ek ▁bezala . D ar dar az ▁aterako ▁dira gor deleku etatik , ikaraz ▁joko ▁dute ▁Jaunarengana , gure ▁Jainkoarengana , eta ▁begirune ▁izango ▁diote .
PRED:	They will be cut down like a snake , like small small animals , small animals that scurry along the ground , and all who fear the Lord , and they will fear him .
GOLD:	Like snakes crawling from their holes , they will come out to meet the Lord our God.They will fear him greatly , trembling in terror at his presence .

ID:	2192
INPUT:	▁senideek ▁esan ▁zioten ▁Jesusi :— I rten ▁hemendik ▁eta ▁zoaz ▁Jude ara , ▁egiten ▁dituzun ▁egintzak ▁han ▁ere ▁zure ▁ikasleek ▁ikus ▁ditzaten .
PRED:	The brothers said to Jesus , “ Get out of Judea and go to Judea , where you see the miraculous signs you see . ”
GOLD:	and Jesus ' brothers said to him , “ Leave here and go to Judea , where your followers can see your miracles !

ID:	2193
INPUT:	▁« Ikusi ▁dituzun ▁hamar ▁adarrak , ▁oraindik ▁erregetza ▁hartu ▁ez ▁duten ▁hamar ▁errege ▁dira ; ▁pizti arekin ▁batera ▁hartuko ▁dute ▁errege - agin tea , ▁baina ▁ordu ▁baterako ▁bakarrik .
PRED:	“ The king did not hold ten horns of the king 's kingdom . The king will not be given to the king , but it will be a next king .
GOLD:	The ten horns of the beast are ten kings who have not yet risen to power . They will be appointed to their kingdoms for one brief moment to reign with the beast .

ID:	2194
INPUT:	▁Begira ▁gure ▁ogi ari : ▁zuengana ▁etortzeko ▁etxetik ▁atera ▁ginen ean , ▁bero - b ero a ▁zegoen ; ▁orain , ▁gogorra ▁eta ▁apur ▁egina ▁dago .
PRED:	Look at us , we came out to visit you at the house of our house . We have already been healed , and now it is a moment .
GOLD:	“ This bread was hot from the ovens when we left our homes . But now , as you can see , it is dry and moldy .

ID:	2195
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁oso ▁beste lako ▁asmoak ditu ▁Asiri ak ▁buruan : sun ts itz ea ▁du ▁asmo , herri ▁asko ▁bir rintz ea .
PRED:	But you will know that the Lord will rule over the nations of Assyria .
GOLD:	But the king of Assyria will not understand that he is my tool ; his mind does not work that way.His plan is simply to destroy , to cut down nation after nation .

ID:	2196
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁ez ▁al ▁dakizu , ▁Senakerib , as paldi tik ▁neuk ▁prestatua ▁nuela , antz in atik ▁neuk ▁erabakia orain ▁buru tzen ▁ari ▁naizen ▁hau ? Horregatik ▁bihurtu ▁dituzu hiri ▁gotor rak ▁zab or - pila .
PRED:	But do n't you realize that when I have come from captivity , I have given you a city that has been set apart for a city ? ”
GOLD:	“ But have you not heard ? I decided this long ago.Long ago I planned it , and now I am making it happen.I planned for you to crush fortified citiesinto heaps of rubble .

ID:	2197
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁zuen ▁Jainkoak ▁bizileku ▁eta ▁kultu - leku tzat ▁aukeratuko ▁duen ▁tokia ▁bizi ▁zareten ▁hiritik ▁urruti ▁badago , ▁berak ▁emandako ▁abere ▁handi ▁nahiz ▁txiki etatik ▁hil ▁dezak ezue ▁haragi tarako , ▁nik ▁zuei ▁agindutako aren ▁arabera , ▁eta ▁nahi ▁adina ▁jan .
PRED:	This is what the Lord your God says : If you are living in the place where you are living in the place where you have promised , you may eat and eat meat from the place where you have promised to eat .
GOLD:	It might happen that the designated place of worship — the place the Lord your God chooses for his name to be honored — is a long way from your home . If so , you may butcher any of the cattle , sheep , or goats the Lord has given you , and you may freely eat the meat in your hometown , as I have commanded you .

ID:	2198
INPUT:	▁Es aiezu , ▁bada : ▁Hau ▁dio ▁Jaunak : ▁Ala ▁ni ▁Jauna ! ▁Zeu ei ▁entzun aren ▁arabera ▁tra tatuko ▁zaituztet .
PRED:	“ Say to them , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I have spoken to you . '
GOLD:	Now tell them this : ‘ As surely as I live , declares the Lord , I will do to you the very things I heard you say .

ID:	2199
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁on tasuna ▁Israel ekin
PRED:	A Call to Trust the Lord
GOLD:	Judgment against the Lord 's Enemies

ID:	2200
INPUT:	▁G aitz ▁gal garriz , ▁s uk arrez ▁eta ▁han pa dura z ▁joko ▁zaituzte ; ▁lehor tez , ▁haize ▁erre z ▁eta ▁gor rin ez ▁hondatuko ▁dizkizue ▁uz tak : ▁ez ▁du ▁ets iko ▁zuek ▁desagerrarazi ▁arte .
PRED:	You will be cut down with a mighty storm , and you will be driven from the sea . You will be driven from the sea , and you will never be destroyed .
GOLD:	The Lord will strike you with wasting diseases , fever , and inflammation , with scorching heat and drought , and with blight and mildew . These disasters will pursue you until you die .

ID:	2201
INPUT:	▁Ruben ekin ▁batera ▁Simeon ▁eta ▁Gaden ▁leinuak ▁etxol atuko ▁dira . ▁Simeon darren ▁buruzagia ▁T zuri x ad airen ▁seme ▁Xel um iel ▁izango ▁da ,
PRED:	From the tribe of Reuben , Reuben , Gad , and Naphtali will be the leader of the tribe of Reuben .
GOLD:	SimeonShelumiel son of Zurishaddai59,300

ID:	2202
INPUT:	▁Gure ▁Jainkoaren barru ▁erruki tsu ari ▁esker , goiz - argia ▁agertuko ▁zai guz er u ▁goitik ,
PRED:	O our God , you have mercy on us , O Lord , our God , have mercy on us .
GOLD:	Because of God 's tender mercy , the morning light from heaven is about to break upon us ,

ID:	2203
INPUT:	▁astin duko ▁du ▁Jaunak ▁Israel ! ▁U retan ▁dardar atzen ▁den ▁kanabera ▁bezala ▁izango ▁da . ▁Ber aien ▁gurasoei ▁eman ▁zien ▁lurralde ▁eder ▁honetatik ▁bota ▁egingo ▁ditu ▁israeldarrak ▁eta ▁Eufrates ▁ibai az ▁beste ▁aldean ▁barre iatuko . ▁Izan ▁ere , ▁israeldarrek ▁zutoin ▁sakratuak ▁egin ▁dituzte ▁eta ▁Jauna ▁haser rarazi .
PRED:	The Lord will turn away from the mountains of Israel , as far as the dust of the earth . He will cut down this land from the Euphrates River , and he will cut down from the Euphrates River in the land of the Lord , the God of Israel , and the people of Israel .
GOLD:	Then the Lord will shake Israel like a reed whipped about in a stream . He will uproot the people of Israel from this good land that he gave their ancestors and will scatter them beyond the Euphrates River , for they have angered the Lord with the Asherah poles they have set up for worship .

ID:	2204
INPUT:	▁Esan ▁zidan ▁Jaunak : ▁« Gizaseme , ▁hartu ▁a iz to ▁zorrotz ▁bat ▁eta ▁erabili ▁biz arra ▁moz teko ▁lab ana ▁bezala : ▁moztu ▁ilea ▁eta ▁biz arra , ▁pis atu ▁eta ▁banatu ▁hiru ▁meta txo tan .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to me , “ Son of man , cut off a knife and cut off his hair like a hair .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , take a sharp sword and use it as a razor to shave your head and beard . Use a scale to weigh the hair into three equal parts .

ID:	2205
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁esan ▁zien , ▁orduan :— G aldera ▁bat : ▁Larun batez ▁zer ▁dugu ▁leg ezko , ▁on ▁egitea ▁ala ▁gaitz ▁egitea , ▁bizia ▁salba tzea ▁ala ▁ken tzea ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ It is good to the Sabbath day , how can we get the law to save us ? ”
GOLD:	Then Jesus said to his critics , “ I have a question for you . Does the law permit good deeds on the Sabbath , or is it a day for doing evil ? Is this a day to save life or to destroy it ? ”

ID:	2206
INPUT:	▁Ezekiasek ▁tenplua ▁garbitu ▁eta ▁konpon du
PRED:	Hezekiah 's Sickness and Recovery
GOLD:	Hezekiah Reopens the Temple

ID:	2207
INPUT:	▁Sei ▁mai la ▁zituen ▁errege - aul kiak ▁eta , ▁berari ▁atxik iak , ▁oin - aul kia ▁eta ▁jar leku aren ▁alde ▁ban atan , ▁besoak . ▁Bes oen ▁ondoan ▁bi ▁lehoi ▁zeuden ▁zutik ,
PRED:	He also made six branches of hammered gold and placed them on his side . He was sitting beside the throne of the lion , and he stood beside the throne .
GOLD:	The throne had six steps , with a footstool of gold . There were armrests on both sides of the seat , and the figure of a lion stood on each side of the throne .

ID:	2208
INPUT:	▁B edein katzen ▁zaitu en abe dein katu ▁egingo ▁dut ; m adarik atzen ▁zaituena , ▁berriz , m adarik atu . Zure ▁bitartez ▁bedeinkatuko ▁ditut lur reko ▁herri ▁guztiak ».
PRED:	I will bless you , who curse you , but I will curse you . I will bless you , who will bless you . ”
GOLD:	I will bless those who bless you and curse those who treat you with contempt . All the families on earth will be blessed through you . ”

ID:	2209
INPUT:	▁Aldar ea ▁zar tatu ▁egin ▁zen ▁eta ▁errauts a ▁aldar etik ▁behera ▁isuri , ▁Jainkoaren ▁gizonak , ▁Jaunaren ▁aginduz , ▁emaniko ▁ezaugarri aren ▁arabera .
PRED:	Then the man took the altar from the altar and poured out the altar of the Lord , just as the Lord had commanded him .
GOLD:	At the same time a wide crack appeared in the altar , and the ashes poured out , just as the man of God had predicted in his message from the Lord .

ID:	2210
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁egokitu ▁mundu ▁honen ▁iritzi etara , ▁erab erri ▁zaitezte ▁baizik , ▁zeuen ▁pentsa era ▁aldatu z ; ▁horrela ▁bereizi ▁ahal ▁izango ▁duzue ▁zer ▁den ▁Jainkoak ▁nahi ▁duena , ▁zer ▁den ▁ona , ▁atsegin garri ▁zaiona ▁eta ▁bikaina .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : Instead , be sure to do this so that you will be able to be able to be able to do what God wants to do .
GOLD:	Do n't copy the behavior and customs of this world , but let God transform you into a new person by changing the way you think . Then you will learn to know God 's will for you , which is good and pleasing and perfect .

ID:	2211
INPUT:	▁Entzun ▁herri - agin tari en ▁deia darrak , ar talde - gi dari en ▁garras iak : hon datu ▁ditu ▁Jaunak ber aien ▁larre ak !
PRED:	Listen to the Lord , the cries of their cries ; the Lord has heard their cries .
GOLD:	Listen to the frantic cries of the shepherds.The leaders of the flock are wailing in despair , for the Lord is ruining their pastures .

ID:	2212
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁Mardoke oren tzat ▁prestatua ▁zuen ▁ur kabean ▁zintzilik atu ▁zuten ▁Haman . ▁Orduan ▁baretu ▁zen ▁erregearen ▁haserrea .
PRED:	So Mordecai 's decree was prepared for Mordecai 's anger . So the king 's anger was filled with rage .
GOLD:	So they impaled Haman on the pole he had set up for Mordecai , and the king 's anger subsided .

ID:	2213
INPUT:	▁Ongi ▁ikusten ▁dut ▁ez ▁dagoela ▁niregan ▁— nire ▁giza ▁grin etan , ▁alegia — ▁ezer ▁onik , ▁nire ▁esku ▁baitago ▁on ▁egin ▁nahi ▁izatea , ▁baina ▁ez ▁on ▁egitea .
PRED:	I know that I do n't know that my sinful nature is good to me , for it is good to me , but it is good to do good .
GOLD:	And I know that nothing good lives in me , that is , in my sinful nature . I want to do what is right , but I ca n't .

ID:	2214
INPUT:	▁K R I S T A U ▁J O K A E R A ▁ <unk> , 1 — 15 , <unk>
PRED:	The Israelites Return to Egypt
GOLD:	A Living Sacrifice to God

ID:	2215
INPUT:	▁Horiek ▁izan ▁ziren ▁israeldar ▁elkar teko ▁ordezkari tzat ▁aukeratu riko ▁leinu buruak , ▁horiek ▁israeldar ▁gudari - talde en ▁buruzagiak .
PRED:	These are the leaders of Israel , the leaders of Israel , and the leaders of Israel .
GOLD:	These are the chosen leaders of the community , the leaders of their ancestral tribes , the heads of the clans of Israel . ”

ID:	2216
INPUT:	▁Zeru - lurrak ▁igaroko ▁dira , ▁baina ▁nire ▁hitzak ▁ez ▁dira ▁bete ▁gabe ▁igaroko .
PRED:	The heavens will disappear , but my words will never disappear .
GOLD:	Heaven and earth will disappear , but my words will never disappear .

ID:	2217
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁Jainkoak ▁nola ▁lagundu ▁zidan ▁eta ▁erregeak ▁zer ▁esan ▁zidan ▁agertu ▁nien . ▁Orduan , ▁esan ▁zuten : ▁« Goazen , ▁bada , ▁eta ▁eraiki ▁dezagun !» Eta ▁kemen tsu ▁prestatu ▁ziren ▁lan ▁eder ▁hori ▁egiteko .
PRED:	Then the king came to me and asked me what I had happened . “ Let 's go and get it ! Let 's be here ! ” So they said , “ Let 's get it be prepared . ”
GOLD:	Then I told them about how the gracious hand of God had been on me , and about my conversation with the king.They replied at once , “ Yes , let 's rebuild the wall ! ” So they began the good work .

ID:	2218
INPUT:	▁Zuzen ▁eta ▁zintzo ▁izaten ▁saiatzen ▁den al uz aro ▁eta ▁ohorez ▁betea ▁biziko ▁da .
PRED:	Listen to what is good and prosperous ; it is good to life .
GOLD:	Whoever pursues righteousness and unfailing lovewill find life , righteousness , and honor .

ID:	2219
INPUT:	▁Erre - oparitarako ▁abereak ▁hiltzeko ▁lau ▁mah aiak ▁har lan du zko ak ▁ziren : ▁hirurogeita ▁hamabost ▁zentimetro ▁ziren ▁luze - zabal ▁eta ▁berrogeita ▁hamar ▁gora ; ▁mahai ▁gainean ▁opari gaiak ▁ipin tzen ▁ziren . ▁G el aren ▁bira ▁guztian ▁sei ▁zentimetro ko ▁apal txo ▁bat ▁zegoen , ▁eta ▁bertan ▁ipin tzen ▁zen ▁opari tarako ▁abereak ▁hiltzeko ▁tresn eria .
PRED:	There were a burnt offering for the burnt offering , a great banquet for the burnt offering . It was 45 inches long and 27 inches wide , and 27 inches wide .
GOLD:	There were also four tables of finished stone for preparation of the burnt offerings , each 311/2 inches square and 21 inches high . On these tables were placed the butchering knives and other implements for slaughtering the sacrificial animals .

ID:	2220
INPUT:	▁« Orduan , ▁etxearen ▁garbikuntza ▁egiteko , ▁bi ▁hegazti , ▁zedro - zu ra , ▁purpura ▁gorri mina ▁eta ▁is ip ua ▁hartuko ▁ditu ▁apaizak .
PRED:	“ Then make the Temple for the Temple to cleanse the birds of the Temple , and burn it with blue , purple , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	To purify the house the priest must take two birds , a stick of cedar , some scarlet yarn , and a hyssop branch .

ID:	2221
INPUT:	▁Bi dal ▁dezala ▁txin garra ▁eta ▁suf re - eu ria ▁horien ▁gainera ! Izan ▁bedi ▁haize ▁kiskal garria ▁horien ▁zoria !
PRED:	Let them fall on the fire and burning sulfur in the fire .
GOLD:	He will rain down blazing coals and burning sulfur on the wicked , punishing them with scorching winds .

ID:	2222
INPUT:	▁Horrela ▁aginduko ▁diozu ▁israeldarren ▁elkarteari : ▁Hil ▁honen ▁ham arrean ▁har ▁beza ▁bakoitzak ▁familia ▁eta ▁etxe ▁bakoitzeko ▁abere ▁xehe ▁bana .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says to the people of Israel : Each of the people of Israel must take some of the sheep and goats .
GOLD:	Announce to the whole community of Israel that on the tenth day of this month each family must choose a lamb or a young goat for a sacrifice , one animal for each household .

ID:	2223
INPUT:	▁Hor ▁agertuko ▁digu ▁Jaunak bere ▁ospe ▁handia . I bai ▁eta ▁u bide ▁zabal eko lurralde a ▁izango ▁da ; baina ▁etsaien ▁arra un - tx alu p arik ez ▁da ▁handik ▁igaroko , ez ▁ontzi ▁handi rik ▁bertan ▁ibiliko .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : The whole land will be filled with fire , but the land will be filled with fire . The land will be filled with their enemies , but they will never be driven into the boat .
GOLD:	The Lord will be our Mighty One.He will be like a wide river of protectionthat no enemy can cross , that no enemy ship can sail upon .

ID:	2224
INPUT:	▁Bada , ▁Jaunaren ak ▁dira ▁jakinduria ▁eta ▁ahalmena , ber arenak ▁treb ezia ▁eta ▁zuhurtzia .
PRED:	There is the power of the Lord , wisdom , wisdom , and understanding .
GOLD:	“ But true wisdom and power are found in God ; counsel and understanding are his .

ID:	2225
INPUT:	▁Jesusekin ▁zeuden ▁fariseu etako ▁batzuek , ▁hori ▁entzun ik , ▁esan ▁zioten :— Gu ▁ere ▁itsu ▁ote ▁gara ?
PRED:	Some of the Pharisees heard that Jesus was blind , and he asked him , “ We are blind ? ”
GOLD:	Some Pharisees who were standing nearby heard him and asked , “ Are you saying we 're blind ? ”

ID:	2226
INPUT:	▁M ika , ▁Reh ob , ▁Hax ab ias ,
PRED:	Hodiah , Bani , Bani ,
GOLD:	Zaccur , Sherebiah , Shebaniah ,

ID:	2227
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁galdetu ▁zioten :— Zer ▁egin ▁behar ▁dugu ▁Jainkoak ▁nahi ▁duena ▁egiteko ?
PRED:	“ What do we want to do ? ” they asked .
GOLD:	They replied , “ We want to perform God 's works , too . What should we do ? ”

ID:	2228
INPUT:	▁Gaizto en ▁sakrifizioak ▁higuingarriak ▁dira , are ▁gehiago ▁asmo ▁tx arrez ▁eskain iak ▁badira .
PRED:	The wicked will spread their plans , and they will burn their plans .
GOLD:	The sacrifice of an evil person is detestable , especially when it is offered with wrong motives .

ID:	2229
INPUT:	▁Bern abek ▁berekin ▁eraman ▁nahi ▁zuen ▁Joan ▁Mar ko s ▁ere .
PRED:	Barnabas wanted to go with him .
GOLD:	Barnabas agreed and wanted to take along John Mark .

ID:	2230
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁parabola ▁bidez ▁hitz ▁egiten ▁hasi ▁zitzaien : ▁« Gizon ▁batek ▁mahastia ▁landatu ▁zuen ▁eta ▁harres iz ▁inguratu ; ▁lurrean ▁dol ar ea ▁egin ▁eta ▁mahas tiz ain aren ▁dorre a ▁eraiki ▁zuen . ▁Gero , ▁nekaz ari ▁batzu ei ▁er ren tan ▁utzirik , ▁urruti ra ▁joan ▁zen .
PRED:	One day Jesus told them , “ A man had planted a vineyard in the city , and a vineyard was planted in a pit . He built a pit for a vineyard , and he built a pit for a vineyard .
GOLD:	Then Jesus began teaching them with stories : “ A man planted a vineyard . He built a wall around it , dug a pit for pressing out the grape juice , and built a lookout tower . Then he leased the vineyard to tenant farmers and moved to another country .

ID:	2231
INPUT:	▁An aiek ▁bek aitz ez ▁begiratzen ▁zioten ; ▁aitak , ▁ordea , ▁gauza ▁hauek ▁s arri tan ▁hausn artzen ▁zituen .
PRED:	But his brothers were stronger than Joseph , but his father loved them .
GOLD:	But while his brothers were jealous of Joseph , his father wondered what the dreams meant .

ID:	2232
INPUT:	▁Eta , ▁aurki tzean , ▁adiskide ak ▁eta ▁auzoko ak ▁bildu ▁eta ▁esaten ▁die : ▁“ Egin ▁festa ▁nirekin , ▁aurkitu ▁baitut ▁galdua ▁nuen ▁txan p ona !”
PRED:	As soon as I searched for you , I said , ‘ Come , for I have found a week for you . '
GOLD:	And when she finds it , she will call in her friends and neighbors and say , ‘ Rejoice with me because I have found my lost coin . '

ID:	2233
INPUT:	▁ezta ▁gaur ▁adierazten ▁dizuedan ▁irakaspen ▁hau ▁bezain ▁lege ▁eta ▁erabaki ▁zuzenak ▁dituen ik ▁ere .
PRED:	I am not just as I am giving you today .
GOLD:	And what great nation has decrees and regulations as righteous and fair as this body of instructions that I am giving you today ?

ID:	2234
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁hemen ▁itunaren ▁egoitza ▁eraikitzeko ▁erabili tako ▁metal en ▁kon tua , ▁Moisesen ▁aginduz ▁eta ▁Aaron ▁apaizaren ▁seme ▁I tam arren ▁gidari tzapean ▁lebitarrek ▁jas ori koa .
PRED:	These are the Levites must be put in charge of the Tabernacle that Aaron son of Aaron son of Aaron , the priest , and Ithamar son of Aaron .
GOLD:	This is an inventory of the materials used in building the Tabernacle of the Covenant . The Levites compiled the figures , as Moses directed , and Ithamar son of Aaron the priest served as recorder .

ID:	2235
INPUT:	▁T om asek ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Ene ▁Jauna ▁eta ▁ene ▁Jainkoa !
PRED:	Thomas replied , “ O Lord , please God , my God ! ”
GOLD:	“ My Lord and my God ! ” Thomas exclaimed .

ID:	2236
INPUT:	▁Errege ▁jauna , ▁zeu ▁zara ▁zuhaitz ▁hori ! ▁Han di ▁eta ▁sendo ▁egin ▁zara ▁zeu ▁ere ; ▁zeru raino ▁iritsi ▁da ▁zure ▁handitasuna , ▁lurraren ▁ertz eraino ▁zabaldu ▁zure ▁boter ea .
PRED:	Your Majesty , your lord the king , you are strong and strong and strong , and all the kingdoms of the earth . The earth rises to the ends of the earth .
GOLD:	“ Upon hearing this , Daniel ( also known as Belteshazzar ) was overcome for a time , frightened by the meaning of the dream . Then the king said to him , ‘ Belteshazzar , do n't be alarmed by the dream and what it means . ' “ Belteshazzar replied , ‘ I wish the events foreshadowed in this dream would happen to your enemies , my lord , and not to you !

ID:	2237
INPUT:	▁Erre - oparitzat ▁eskaini ▁beharrekoa ▁ab el gor ria ▁bada , ▁zekor ▁akats ▁gabea ▁eskainiko ▁da ▁eta ▁elkarketa - etxolaren ▁sarrerara ▁eramango , ▁Jaunak ▁atseginez ▁onar ▁dezan .
PRED:	If you present a burnt offering as a burnt offering to the Tabernacle , it must be a pleasing aroma to the Lord at the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	“ If the animal you present as a burnt offering is from the herd , it must be a male with no defects . Bring it to the entrance of the Tabernacle so you may be accepted by the Lord .

ID:	2238
INPUT:	▁Orain , ▁beraz , ▁zoaz , ▁xeh a ▁itzazu ▁amalek tarrak ▁eta ▁suntsitu ▁haien ▁ondasun ▁guztiak ; ▁hil , ▁gupidarik ▁gabe , ▁gizaseme ▁eta ▁emakumeak , ▁haur ▁eta ▁bul arrekoak , ▁idi ▁eta ▁ardiak , ▁gamelu ▁eta ▁asto ak ”».
PRED:	So go to the land of the Amalekites and killed all the people of the Amalekites and all their flocks , sheep , goats , goats , and goats , cattle , cattle , donkeys , donkeys , and donkeys , camels , camels , camels , camels , donkeys , and donkeys , camels , camels , camels , camels , camels , and donkeys , and donkeys . ' ”
GOLD:	Now go and completely destroy the entire Amalekite nation — men , women , children , babies , cattle , sheep , goats , camels , and donkeys . ”

ID:	2239
INPUT:	▁beraren ▁hark aitzak ▁z af iro - toki ▁dira , beraren ▁hauts etan ▁urrea ▁aurkitzen ▁da .
PRED:	The mountains are surrounded by a rock , and they find shelter in the dust .
GOLD:	Here the rocks contain precious lapis lazuli , and the dust contains gold .

ID:	2240
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁egun ▁horietan ▁iritsi ▁baitzuten ▁juduek ▁bakea ▁beren ▁etsaien ▁aurrean ; ▁hil ▁horretan ▁aldatu ▁zitzaien ▁egoera , ▁atsekabea ▁atsegin ▁eta ▁n egarra ▁bozkari o ▁bihur tuz . ▁Egun ▁horietan , ▁bada , ▁jai ▁al aiak ▁eta ▁otor duak ▁behar ▁zituzten ▁egin , ▁elkarri ▁erregal uak ▁bidal iz ▁eta ▁behartsuei ▁esku - erakutsi ak ▁eginez .
PRED:	For during the days they came to give peace offerings and peace offerings to the Lord . And after that day they had been sold for a period of peace , and they gave a gift to those who had been prepared to give to the poor and poor .
GOLD:	He told them to celebrate these days with feasting and gladness and by giving gifts of food to each other and presents to the poor . This would commemorate a time when the Jews gained relief from their enemies , when their sorrow was turned into gladness and their mourning into joy .

ID:	2241
INPUT:	▁Hain ▁zuzen , ▁faraoia , ▁gertatuaren ▁berri ▁jakin ▁zuelarik , ▁Moises ▁hil ▁nahian ▁zebilen , ▁baina ▁honek ▁faraoia gandik ▁ihes ▁egin ▁zuen ▁eta ▁Madian ▁esku aldera ▁joan ▁zen ▁bizitzera . ▁Han , ▁putzu ▁baten ▁ondoan ▁eseri ▁zen .
PRED:	When Pharaoh heard what was happening to Pharaoh 's palace , he fled to Pharaoh . But when he saw what he had happened to Pharaoh , he fled to Midian .
GOLD:	And sure enough , Pharaoh heard what had happened , and he tried to kill Moses . But Moses fled from Pharaoh and went to live in the land of Midian.When Moses arrived in Midian , he sat down beside a well .

ID:	2242
INPUT:	▁Abimelek , ▁d or reraino ▁heldu rik , ▁eraso ▁eta ▁su ▁emateko ▁asmoz ▁ater aino ▁hurbildu ▁zenean ,
PRED:	When Abimelech arrived at the distance , he turned up to the wall and attacked him .
GOLD:	Abimelech followed them to attack the tower . But as he prepared to set fire to the entrance ,

ID:	2243
INPUT:	▁Gedeonek ▁Israelgo ▁gizon ▁gehi enak ▁bidali ▁zituen ▁nor ▁bere ▁etxera , ▁hirurehun ▁haiekin ▁bakarrik ▁geldi tuz ; ▁hauek ▁beren ▁lagunen ▁jaki ak ▁eta ▁adarrak ▁hartu ▁zituzten . ▁Madian darren ▁kanpalekua ▁israeldarren a ▁baino ▁behera go ▁zegoen , ▁lautadan .
PRED:	Gideon sent some of the men of Israel to stay in their home . He also took some of them in the middle of the Jordan River , and some of the people of Israel were still living in the plains of Midian .
GOLD:	So Gideon collected the provisions and rams ' horns of the other warriors and sent them home . But he kept the 300 men with him.The Midianite camp was in the valley just below Gideon .

ID:	2244
INPUT:	▁H arra pa ▁bitza ▁azpian ▁beren ▁harro keriak , beren ▁ah oko ▁bekatu ▁eta ▁es am es ek , z ab aldu ▁dituzten ▁madarikazio ▁eta ▁gezur rek .
PRED:	May the wicked be ashamed of their wickedness , and they are ashamed of their wickedness .
GOLD:	Destroy them in your anger ! Wipe them out completely ! Then the whole world will knowthat God reigns in Israel.Interlude

ID:	2245
INPUT:	▁Zuzen gabe ari ▁m at ra il ezur ra ▁apur tzen ▁nion h agin etatik ▁harrapakin a ▁kentzeko .
PRED:	But the mouth of a fool , but the mouth of the field is broken .
GOLD:	I broke the jaws of godless oppressorsand plucked their victims from their teeth .

ID:	2246
INPUT:	▁Aur rerantzean , ▁ez ▁duzu Ab ram ▁izango ▁izen , ▁Abraham ▁baizik , herri ▁askoren ▁sor buru egingo ▁baitzaitu t .
PRED:	You will not be saved , but you will not be descendants of Abraham 's descendants .
GOLD:	What 's more , I am changing your name . It will no longer be Abram . Instead , you will be called Abraham , for you will be the father of many nations .

ID:	2247
INPUT:	▁De dan go ek ▁zaldi ▁gainean ▁ibiltzeko ▁tresnak ▁sal eros ten ▁z izkizu ten .
PRED:	“ I am sending your horses to the horses for your horses .
GOLD:	“ Dedan sent merchants to trade their expensive saddle blankets with you .

ID:	2248
INPUT:	▁Hon etan ▁ezagutuko ▁dute ▁guztiek ▁zuek ▁nire ▁ikasle ▁zaretela : ▁zuek ▁elkar ▁maite ▁iz atean ».
PRED:	You know that you are my followers , and you love each other . ”
GOLD:	Your love for one another will prove to the world that you are my disciples . ”

ID:	2249
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁israeldarrek ▁jainko ▁arrotzen ▁irudiak ▁bota ▁eta ▁Jauna ▁gurtu ▁zuten . ▁Eta ▁Jaunak ▁ezin ▁izan ▁zuen ▁gehiago ▁jasan ▁israeldarren ▁sufrimen dua .
PRED:	Then the people of Israel worshiped the Lord and worshiped other gods . And they could not be afraid of the Israelites .
GOLD:	Then the Israelites put aside their foreign gods and served the Lord . And he was grieved by their misery .

ID:	2250
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁ilundu ▁egin ▁zitzaien ▁adimena ▁israeldarrei , ▁eta ▁gaur ▁bertan ▁ere , ▁itun ▁zah arreko ▁idaz tiak ▁irakurtzen ▁dituzten ean , ▁hor ▁irauten ▁du ▁haien tzat ▁estalki ▁horrek , ▁Kristok ▁bakarrik ▁ken ▁bai tez ake .
PRED:	But as long as the people of Israel were still dark today . In fact , they will be read to the elders of Israel and read this Book of their covenant .
GOLD:	But the people 's minds were hardened , and to this day whenever the old covenant is being read , the same veil covers their minds so they can not understand the truth . And this veil can be removed only by believing in Christ .

ID:	2251
INPUT:	▁Salomonek ▁Jaunaren ▁etxea , ▁errege - j au re gia ▁eta ▁berak ▁nahi ▁izan ▁zuen ▁guztia ▁eraiki ▁zuenean ,
PRED:	Solomon built all the Temple of the Lord , and he built everything he wanted to do .
GOLD:	So Solomon finished building the Temple of the Lord , as well as the royal palace . He completed everything he had planned to do .

ID:	2252
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁diotsuet ▁nik , Jaun ▁ahalguztidun ▁honek : Itzul iko ▁naiz ▁Sion era , Jerusalem en ▁naiz ▁biziko , Jerusalem ▁“ Hiri ▁Zintz o ” ▁deituko ▁da ; Jaun ▁ahalguztidun aren ▁Sion ▁mendia “ Men di ▁Santu ”.
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ I will live in Jerusalem , and I will live in Jerusalem , the Holy One of Jerusalem , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Holy One of Heaven 's Armies . '
GOLD:	“ And now the Lord says : I am returning to Mount Zion , and I will live in Jerusalem . Then Jerusalem will be called the Faithful City ; the mountain of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will be called the Holy Mountain .

ID:	2253
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁lurraren ▁emaitza ▁eta ▁zuen ▁neke ▁guztien ▁fruitua ▁herri ▁ezez agunak ▁irentsiko ▁ditu . ▁Jende ▁zapaldu ▁eta ▁larru tua ▁izango ▁zarete ▁bizitza ▁osoan .
PRED:	But you will know that all the people of the world will be driven from all the world , and you will be cursed .
GOLD:	A foreign nation you have never heard about will eat the crops you worked so hard to grow . You will suffer under constant oppression and harsh treatment .

ID:	2254
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁Sar aren ▁gorpua ▁ze tzan ▁l ekua ▁utzirik , ▁hiti ten gana ▁joan ▁eta ▁esan ▁zien :
PRED:	Later , Mary left the cave and left the cave at the cave of the Hittite .
GOLD:	Then , leaving her body , he said to the Hittite elders ,

ID:	2255
INPUT:	▁Koru - zuzendari arentzat . ▁Daviden ▁salmoa .
PRED:	O Lord , you have mercy on me , O God , because you have mercy on me .
GOLD:	O God , listen to my complaint.Protect my life from my enemies ' threats .

ID:	2256
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunak : ▁« Zoaz ▁Judako ▁hiri etara ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁kale etara ▁eta ▁hots ▁egin ▁nire ▁mezu ▁hau : ▁On artu ▁nire ▁aginduak ▁eta ▁bete .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to the people of Judah , “ Go and prophesy in Jerusalem and prophesy to me and obey my commands .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said , “ Broadcast this message in the streets of Jerusalem . Go from town to town throughout the land and say , ‘ Remember the ancient covenant , and do everything it requires .

ID:	2257
INPUT:	▁Joan ▁zen , ▁bada , ▁agindutako a ▁hartzera , ▁eta ▁am arengana ▁itzuli ▁zen . ▁Honek ▁jaki ▁gox oa ▁prestatu ▁zuen , ▁aitak ▁atsegin ▁zuen ▁bezalakoa .
PRED:	So he went to the village and found him as she had promised . So she prepared a baby as she had been like a child .
GOLD:	So Jacob went out and got the young goats for his mother . Rebekah took them and prepared a delicious meal , just the way Isaac liked it .

ID:	2258
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁duzu ▁ikusiko ▁gehiago herri ▁harro a , h izk untza ▁ilun a , h izk eta ▁arrotz ▁uler tez ina du en ▁herria .
PRED:	You will not understand the course of the nations , and you will understand all the things you understand .
GOLD:	You will no longer see these fierce , violent peoplewith their strange , unknown language .

ID:	2259
INPUT:	▁Horiek ▁izan ▁ziren ▁Moisesek ▁lurraldea ▁iker tzera ▁bidali ▁zituen ▁gizonak . ▁Nunen ▁seme ▁Ose asi ▁Josue ▁izena ▁ezarri ▁zion .
PRED:	So Moses sent the Israelites to explore the land of Canaan , the twelve tribes of Nun , and Joshua son of Nun .
GOLD:	These are the names of the men Moses sent out to explore the land . ( Moses called Hoshea son of Nun by the name Joshua . )

ID:	2260
INPUT:	▁“ Ez ▁al ▁dira ▁amai tuko ▁hitz ▁hutsal ▁horiek ?” edo ▁“ Zer k ▁ziri katzen ▁zaitu ▁erantzu teko ?” ▁dio s ta zue .
PRED:	“ Do n't you say to me , ‘ What are you trying to say ? '
GOLD:	Wo n't you ever stop blowing hot air ? What makes you keep on talking ?

ID:	2261
INPUT:	▁Hura ▁da ▁aska tzaile , h ura ▁salbatzaile ; egin tza ▁harrigarriak ▁eta ▁mirariak egiten ▁ditu ▁zeru - lur retan . Hark ▁askatu ▁du ▁Daniel leh oi en ▁a tza p arre tatik ».
PRED:	He has chosen his freedom , and he has redeemed his holy ones , and he has redeemed you from the earth . He has redeemed you from the earth . ”
GOLD:	So Daniel prospered during the reign of Darius and the reign of Cyrus the Persian .

ID:	2262
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁apal arazi ▁egiten ▁ditu ▁harro ak , eta ▁apal tzen ▁direnak ▁salbatu .
PRED:	God leads to humble , and he ends ends in the humble .
GOLD:	If people are in trouble and you say , ‘ Help them , 'God will save them .

ID:	2263
INPUT:	▁Kris tau ▁bezala ▁baduzue ▁irakas le ▁f ran ko , ▁ez ▁ordea ▁ai tarik ▁asko ; ▁kristau ▁bezala ▁nik ▁sortu ▁zintuzte dan ▁berri ▁onaren ▁bidez .
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , you are not a teacher , but I am not writing to you in the Spirit of the Good News .
GOLD:	For even if you had ten thousand others to teach you about Christ , you have only one spiritual father . For I became your father in Christ Jesus when I preached the Good News to you .

ID:	2264
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁betiko ▁bedeinkazioa ▁ematen ▁diozu , zeure ▁pres entzi az ▁poz arren ▁jartzen .
PRED:	For you give eternal joy to the blessings of the Almighty .
GOLD:	For the king trusts in the Lord.The unfailing love of the Most High will keep him from stumbling .

ID:	2265
INPUT:	▁Z ap uztu ▁ezazue ▁Mo re x et - G at ▁hiria . A k z ib ▁hiriaren ▁lagun tz aus tel ▁aterako ▁zaie ▁Israelgo ▁erregeei .
PRED:	You will destroy the city of Hamath , and it will be your homeland to the city of Israel .
GOLD:	Send farewell gifts to Moresheth-gath ; there is no hope of saving it.The town of Aczibhas deceived the kings of Israel .

ID:	2266
INPUT:	▁Garbi ▁itzazu ▁zeure ▁eskuz , ▁Jauna , gar bi tu ▁mundu tik ! ▁Gal ▁bitez ▁bizidun en ▁artetik ! Zuk ▁zaintzen ▁dituzun ei , ▁ordea , ▁bete ▁sabela ; ase ▁itzazu ▁horien ▁seme - alabak , eta ▁utz ▁bezate ▁sobera ▁dutena ▁beren ▁haur ren tzat .
PRED:	Turn from your own hands , O Lord , you have taken away from the world , from the ends of the earth , and let your children take care of your children .
GOLD:	By the power of your hand , O Lord , destroy those who look to this world for their reward.But satisfy the hunger of your treasured ones.May their children have plenty , leaving an inheritance for their descendants .

ID:	2267
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁dio ▁Liburu ▁Santuak : ▁Haren gan ▁sinesten ▁duenak ▁ez ▁du ▁huts ▁egingo .
PRED:	This is what the Scriptures say , “ Anyone who believes in him will never believe it . ”
GOLD:	As the Scriptures tell us , “ Anyone who trusts in him will never be disgraced . ”

ID:	2268
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁gaiztakeria ▁egiten ▁duzue eta ▁eskuak ▁odolez ▁zikin ▁dauz k azue ; gezur ra ▁dar izue ▁ezpain etatik , hitz ▁kalte garriak ▁ahotik .
PRED:	For you are full of wickedness , and you have defiled your lips with lies .
GOLD:	Your hands are the hands of murderers , and your fingers are filthy with sin.Your lips are full of lies , and your mouth spews corruption .

ID:	2269
INPUT:	▁Berak ▁al datzen ▁ditu ur tar oak ▁eta ▁garai ak ; berak ▁jartzen ▁eta ▁kentzen ▁erregeak ; berak ▁ematen ▁jakinduria ▁jakintsu eieta ▁ezagu era ▁buru tsu ei .
PRED:	He gives justice to those who are wise , and the kings of the wise are wise and wise .
GOLD:	He controls the course of world events ; he removes kings and sets up other kings.He gives wisdom to the wiseand knowledge to the scholars .

ID:	2270
INPUT:	▁Jaunak , ▁ordea , ▁esan ▁zion ▁Josueri : ▁« Ez ▁izan ▁horien ▁beldur ! ▁Bihar , ▁ordu ▁honetan , ▁hilda ▁utziko ▁ditut ▁israeldarren ▁aurrean ; ▁zuk ▁ebaki ▁horien ▁zaldi en ▁hanka - z ainak ▁eta ▁erre ▁guda - gurdiak ».
PRED:	But the Lord said to Joshua , “ Do not be afraid of these men , for tomorrow , I will be able to kill all the chariots and charioteers of Israel . ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Joshua , “ Do not be afraid of them . By this time tomorrow I will hand all of them over to Israel as dead men . Then you must cripple their horses and burn their chariots . ”

ID:	2271
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , hon ela ▁dio ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak :« Hona ▁nik ▁Sionen harri ▁aukeratua ▁ipini , gil tz arri ▁bikain ▁eta ▁oinarri ▁sendo . H ura ▁euskarri ▁duenak kol ok arik ▁ez .
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ This is what the Lord says : I will make you strong , and you will not be disgraced .
GOLD:	Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ Look ! I am placing a foundation stone in Jerusalem , a firm and tested stone.It is a precious cornerstone that is safe to build on.Whoever believes need never be shaken .

ID:	2272
INPUT:	▁Horrela ▁egingo ▁dugu , ▁beraz , ▁Jainkoa ▁lagun .
PRED:	So we will be our God , and we will be our God .
GOLD:	And so , God willing , we will move forward to further understanding .

ID:	2273
INPUT:	▁« Jainkoaren ▁barren - b arrena ▁iker tu ▁nahi ▁al ▁duzu eta ▁Ahal tsuaren ▁handitasuna ▁besarkatu ?
PRED:	“ Have you explored the Kingdom of Heaven 's Armies ? Have you given to the Almighty ?
GOLD:	“ Can you solve the mysteries of God ? Can you discover everything about the Almighty ?

ID:	2274
INPUT:	▁Erregeak , ▁herri ▁osoarekin , ▁sakrifizioak ▁eskaini ▁zizkion ▁Jaunari .
PRED:	The king then presented the entire town to the Lord , and he presented it to the Lord .
GOLD:	Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices to the Lord .

ID:	2275
INPUT:	▁Giz a ▁indarra ▁baizik ▁ez ▁du ▁horrek ; ▁guk , ▁ordea , ▁Jauna , ▁geure ▁Jainkoa , ▁dugu ▁geure kin , ▁laguntzeko ▁eta ▁gurekin ▁borrokatzeko ». Judako ▁errege ▁Ezekiasen ▁hitz ▁hauek ▁bizkor tu ▁egin ▁zuten ▁herria .
PRED:	No one can save us from our power , but the Lord our God is with us , and we will go with us . ”
GOLD:	He may have a great army , but they are merely men . We have the Lord our God to help us and to fight our battles for us ! ” Hezekiah 's words greatly encouraged the people .

ID:	2276
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁hirurehun ▁babeski ▁txiki ▁ere ▁egin ▁zituen ▁urre ▁garbiz , ▁babeski ▁bakoitza ▁egiteko ▁ia ▁bi ▁kilo ▁urre ▁behar ▁izan ▁zelarik . ▁Eta ▁« Liban oko ▁Oih ana » ▁zeritzan ▁jauregian ▁ipini ▁zituen .
PRED:	He also made 200 large shields of hammered gold , each weighing more than fifteen pounds of pure gold . Then he put them in the royal palace .
GOLD:	He also made 300 smaller shields of hammered gold , each weighing nearly four pounds . The king placed these shields in the Palace of the Forest of Lebanon .

ID:	2277
INPUT:	▁Bad akigu ▁Jainkoaren ▁Semea ▁etorri ▁dena ▁eta ▁adimena ▁eman ▁digun a ▁egiazko ▁Jainkoa ▁ezagu tzeko . ▁Egi azko ▁Jainkoarekin ▁bat ▁eginik ▁gaude , ▁beraren ▁Seme ▁Jesu ▁Kristorekin ▁bat ▁eginda ▁egon ik . ▁Hauxe ▁dugu ▁egiazko ▁Jainkoa ▁eta ▁betiko ▁bizia .
PRED:	We know that God is the Son of God , who gives us eternal life . We know that God is the true Son of God , and we have eternal life , and we have eternal life .
GOLD:	And we know that the Son of God has come , and he has given us understanding so that we can know the true God . And now we live in fellowship with the true God because we live in fellowship with his Son , Jesus Christ . He is the only true God , and he is eternal life .

ID:	2278
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁Egipto ▁zigortuko
PRED:	A Message about Egypt
GOLD:	A Sad Day for Egypt

ID:	2279
INPUT:	▁« Ur tero , ▁zeuen ▁lurreko ▁uz taren ▁em aitzen ▁hamarren a ▁bereiz iko ▁duzue .
PRED:	“ You must celebrate the Festival of Shelters for the harvest .
GOLD:	“ You must set aside a tithe of your crops — one-tenth of all the crops you harvest each year .

ID:	2280
INPUT:	▁adar - p un ta ▁ebaki , mer k atari - herri aldera ▁eraman eta ▁tratu lari en ▁hiri ▁batean lan datu ▁zuen .
PRED:	The ram 's horn was like a bear , and the lightning flashed over to a city .
GOLD:	and plucked off its highest branch.He carried it away to a city filled with merchants.He planted it in a city of traders .

ID:	2281
INPUT:	▁Egin ▁garrasi , gain ean ▁baita ▁Jaunaren ▁eguna ! Hor ▁dator ▁Jainko ▁ahaltsu aren hondamen - indar rez .
PRED:	The day of the Lord is filled with terror , for the mighty waters of the Lord is upon them .
GOLD:	Scream in terror , for the day of the Lord has arrived — the time for the Almighty to destroy .

ID:	2282
INPUT:	▁Behinola , ▁profeta - taldeak ▁esan ▁zion ▁Elise ori :— Zu rekin ▁biltzeko ▁dugun ▁biltzar - toki ▁hau ▁estu egia ▁da ▁guretzat .
PRED:	One day the prophet said to Elisha , “ You are too large to prepare for us to prepare for us . ”
GOLD:	One day the group of prophets came to Elisha and told him , “ As you can see , this place where we meet with you is too small .

ID:	2283
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁zazpi ▁ontziak ▁azken ▁zazpi ▁izurri ez ▁beterik ▁zeuz k aten ▁zazpi ▁aingeru etako ▁batek ▁etorri ▁eta ▁esan ▁zidan : ▁« Zatoz , ▁emazte gaia ▁erakutsi ▁behar ▁dizut , ▁Bildotsaren ▁emaztea ».
PRED:	Then one of the seven angels came to me seven of the dead , one of the seven angels who had appeared to me , “ Come and tell me , ‘ Come , I 'll tell you the angel of the Lamb ! ”
GOLD:	Then one of the seven angels who held the seven bowls containing the seven last plagues came and said to me , “ Come with me ! I will show you the bride , the wife of the Lamb . ”

ID:	2284
INPUT:	▁bere ▁haserre ari ▁bidea ▁libre ▁uzteko . Ez ▁zituen ▁heriotz atik ▁gorde , haien ▁bizia ▁izurri aren ▁menpe ▁utzi ▁zuen .
PRED:	He led his way to the grave , and he led them away from the grave .
GOLD:	He turned his anger against them ; he did not spare the Egyptians ' livesbut ravaged them with the plague .

ID:	2285
INPUT:	▁« Ni ▁pertsegi tzeko ▁asmoa ▁baduzue , gaitz aren ▁sustra ia ▁niregan ▁dago elako an ,
PRED:	“ But if you know that I am the one who is in me , it is the one who believes in me .
GOLD:	“ How dare you go on persecuting me , saying , ‘ It 's his own fault ' ?

ID:	2286
INPUT:	▁Erromes - kanta ▁. L arri aldian ▁Jaunari ▁egin ▁nion ▁dei ▁eta ▁hark ▁erantzun .
PRED:	I prayed to the Lord , and I prayed to the Lord .
GOLD:	I took my troubles to the Lord ; I cried out to him , and he answered my prayer .

ID:	2287
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁jendea , ▁aita ▁madarikatu eta ▁ama ▁bedein katzen ▁ez ▁duena !
PRED:	If you curse a father , you must not curse the children who curse you .
GOLD:	Some people curse their fatherand do not thank their mother .

ID:	2288
INPUT:	▁Azken ▁egunak ▁hurbiltzen ▁ari ▁zitzaizki olarik , ▁agindu ▁hauek ▁eman ▁zizkion ▁Davidek ▁bere ▁seme ▁Salomoni :
PRED:	After this , David gave birth to Solomon 's son Solomon :
GOLD:	As the time of King David 's death approached , he gave this charge to his son Solomon :

ID:	2289
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁erregeak , ▁poz aren ▁pozez , ▁Daniel ▁zu lo tik ▁ateratzeko ▁agindu ▁zuen . ▁Atera ▁zutenean , ▁ez ▁zuen ▁urratu ▁bat ▁ere , ▁Jainkoarengan ▁jarri ▁baitzuen ▁bere ▁uste ▁ona .
PRED:	Then the king said to Daniel , “ Daniel , who did n't let him go out to heaven , but he did n't listen to God .
GOLD:	Then the king gave orders to arrest the men who had maliciously accused Daniel . He had them thrown into the lions ' den , along with their wives and children . The lions leaped on them and tore them apart before they even hit the floor of the den .

ID:	2290
INPUT:	▁Ab iatu ▁ziren , ▁bada , ▁eta ▁Jainkoarekiko ▁iz uak ▁hartu ▁zuen ▁hirietako ▁jendea : ▁inork ▁ez ▁zien ▁eraso ▁Jakoben ▁semeei .
PRED:	So the people of Israel went to their camp and set them up to their camp .
GOLD:	As they set out , a terror from God spread over the people in all the towns of that area , so no one attacked Jacob 's family .

ID:	2291
INPUT:	▁« Jerusalem , ▁Jerusalem , ▁profetak ▁hiltzen ▁eta ▁Jainkoak ▁zuri ▁bidal iak ▁harri katzen ▁dituzun a ! ▁Zen bat ▁aldiz ▁ez ▁ditut ▁bildu ▁nahi ▁izan ▁zure ▁seme - alabak , ▁o iloak ▁bere ▁tx ita - taldea ▁hegal pean ▁bezala , ▁eta ▁zuek ▁ez ▁duzue ▁nahi ▁izan .
PRED:	“ This is what the prophets of Jerusalem , the prophets , prophets , prophets , prophets , and you have not been exiled in the streets . I will take care of you in the streets , and you will not take possession of your own hands .
GOLD:	“ O Jerusalem , Jerusalem , the city that kills the prophets and stones God 's messengers ! How often I have wanted to gather your children together as a hen protects her chicks beneath her wings , but you would n't let me .

ID:	2292
INPUT:	▁Hala , ▁Daviden ▁ondoren ▁ibil tzeari ▁utzi ▁eta ▁filiste arrei ▁aurre ▁egitera ▁itzuli ▁zen ▁Saul . ▁Horregatik ▁der itza ▁toki ▁hari ▁S ela - H am ah l eko t , ▁hau ▁da , ▁« Bere iz te - hark aitza ».
PRED:	After that , Saul went to fight against Saul and went to fight against Saul . That is why the place where Saul was camped at the place of safety .
GOLD:	So Saul quit chasing David and returned to fight the Philistines . Ever since that time , the place where David was camped has been called the Rock of Escape .

ID:	2293
INPUT:	▁Ikusi ▁herri ▁kos kor ▁hura . ▁Nah iko ▁hurbil ▁dago , ▁bertan ▁babes teko . ▁Ar ren , ▁uzta zu ▁herri ▁txiki ▁horre taraino ▁joaten , ▁eta ▁bizirik ▁aterako ▁naiz .
PRED:	When you see the past , it is near to distant lands , and I will send you out to distant lands , and I will send you out to distant lands .
GOLD:	See , there is a small village nearby . Please let me go there instead ; do n't you see how small it is ? Then my life will be saved . ”

ID:	2294
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Jainkoak ▁aitz aki ak ▁asm atzen ▁ditu ▁nire ▁aurka , ets ai tzat ▁hartzen ▁nau ;
PRED:	But God speaks against me , and he makes me a fool .
GOLD:	God is picking a quarrel with me , and he considers me his enemy .

ID:	2295
INPUT:	▁Bitar te ▁horretan , ▁is kan bila ▁gogorra ▁sortu ▁zen ▁Efes on , ▁kristau - bidea ▁zela ▁eta .
PRED:	This was the thinking about Ephesus , which was the truth of Ephesus and the church in Ephesus .
GOLD:	About that time , serious trouble developed in Ephesus concerning the Way .

ID:	2296
INPUT:	▁Koru - zuzendari arentzat . ▁Daviden ▁salmoa . Ene ▁Jainko , ▁ez ▁egin ▁entzun gor ▁nire ▁gorespen ari !
PRED:	O God , listen to me , O God , and do n't let me hear my prayer .
GOLD:	O God , whom I praise , do n't stand silent and aloof

ID:	2297
INPUT:	▁Ber ari ▁adieraziko ▁diozu ▁zer ▁esan ▁behar ▁duen ; ▁ni , ▁berriz , ▁zeuekin ▁biok in ▁izango ▁nauzue , ▁hitz ▁egin ▁behar ▁duzuen ▁bakoitzean . ▁Eta ▁zer ▁egin ▁eta ▁zer ▁esan ▁ere ▁irakats iko ▁dizuet .
PRED:	You must tell you what I say to you , but I will be with you , but I will be with you . And I will teach you what you have said .
GOLD:	Talk to him , and put the words in his mouth . I will be with both of you as you speak , and I will instruct you both in what to do .

ID:	2298
INPUT:	▁Berak ▁bainau ▁ek aitz az ▁zanpatu , berak ▁dizkit ▁arrazoirik ▁gabe ▁zauriak ▁ugaldu ,
PRED:	He has struck me with mighty waves , and he has struck me with bitter distress .
GOLD:	For he attacks me with a stormand repeatedly wounds me without cause .

ID:	2299
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁irakasten ▁hasi ▁zitzaien , ▁Gizonaren ▁Semeak ▁asko ▁sufritu ▁behar ▁zuela ; ▁zahar , ▁apaizburu ▁eta ▁lege - maisuek ▁gaitzetsi ▁egingo ▁zutela ▁eta ▁hil ; ▁eta ▁hiru ▁egunen ▁buruan ▁piztu ▁egingo ▁zela .
PRED:	When the Son of Man began to be ashamed , he would suffer many days and the teachers of religious law and the teachers of religious law that Jesus would be killed , and he would be killed .
GOLD:	Then Jesus began to tell them that the Son of Man must suffer many terrible things and be rejected by the elders , the leading priests , and the teachers of religious law . He would be killed , but three days later he would rise from the dead .

ID:	2300
INPUT:	▁Lur reko ▁belarra , ▁b araz kiak ▁eta ▁zuhaitzak ▁ez ▁hondatzeko ▁agindua ▁eman ▁zitzaien , ▁baizik ▁eta ▁zigil uaren ▁mar ka ▁bekokian ▁ez ▁zeramaten ▁gizakiak ▁bakarrik .
PRED:	The kings of the world began to break the trees of the sky , but it was not written on their foreheads or on their foreheads .
GOLD:	They were told not to harm the grass or plants or trees , but only the people who did not have the seal of God on their foreheads .

ID:	2301
INPUT:	▁« G al ▁bitez ▁horre l azu re ▁etsaiak , ▁Jauna . Zure ▁adiskide ak , ▁aldiz , izan ▁bitez ▁eguzkia egun sen ti an ▁bezain ▁bizi !» Hau en ▁guztien ▁ondoren , ▁bakean ▁bizi ▁izan ▁ziren ▁israeldarren ▁herrialdean ▁berrogei ▁urtez .
PRED:	“ May the Lord be your enemy , for you have defeated your enemies in peace , O Lord , and let them live in peace for all the days of all the people of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ Lord , may all your enemies die like Sisera ! But may those who love you rise like the sun in all its power ! ” Then there was peace in the land for forty years .

ID:	2302
INPUT:	▁Josue ▁hil ▁zenean , ▁israeldarrek ▁kontsulta ▁egin ▁zioten ▁Jaunari :— Gure ▁leinu etarik ▁zein ▁igoko ▁da ▁lehena ▁kanaan darrei ▁erasotzera ?
PRED:	When Joshua died , the people of Israel asked the Lord , “ Why are you going to fight against the Canaanites ? ”
GOLD:	After the death of Joshua , the Israelites asked the Lord , “ Which tribe should go first to attack the Canaanites ? ”

ID:	2303
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁hitza ▁bidali ▁zien ▁sen d agarri eta ▁hondamendi tik ▁atera .
PRED:	He sent a message to them , and he sent them out of destruction .
GOLD:	He sent out his word and healed them , snatching them from the door of death .

ID:	2304
INPUT:	▁nire ▁legeen ▁arabera ▁ibiltzen ▁da ▁eta ▁nire ▁erabakiak ▁betetzen , ▁leial ▁jokatuz . ▁Hon elako a ▁gizon ▁zintzoa ▁da ; ▁beraz , ▁bizi ▁egingo ▁da . ▁Honela ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : The righteous and regulations are faithful to those who obey my decrees , says the Sovereign Lord . So this is what the Sovereign Lord says :
GOLD:	and faithfully obeys my decrees and regulations . Anyone who does these things is just and will surely live , says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	2305
INPUT:	▁Eliz ▁elkarte ▁bakoitzean ▁arduradunak ▁izendatu ▁zituzten ▁eta , ▁otoitz ▁eta ▁barau ▁egin ▁ondoren , ▁Jaunari ▁go men datu ▁zizkioten , ▁harengan ▁sinetsi ▁baitzuten .
PRED:	Some of the church met together in the church and prayed to the Lord , for they believed in him .
GOLD:	Paul and Barnabas also appointed elders in every church . With prayer and fasting , they turned the elders over to the care of the Lord , in whom they had put their trust .

ID:	2306
INPUT:	▁Bost ▁or ga ▁tenpluaren ▁eskuinaldean ▁jarri ▁zituen ▁eta ▁beste ▁bos tak ▁ezker ra lde an ; ▁« I tsaso » ▁zeritzan ▁uraska ▁handia , ▁berriz , ▁tenpluaren ▁eskuinaldean ▁jarri ▁zuen , ▁hego - eki aldera .
PRED:	Then he made the five crossbars of the Temple , and the other side of the Temple was located in the Sea of the Sea of the Sea , and the Sea was located in the south side of the Sea .
GOLD:	He set five water carts on the south side of the Temple and five on the north side . The great bronze basin called the Sea was placed near the southeast corner of the Temple .

ID:	2307
INPUT:	▁Per ts egi tu ▁egiten ▁ditu eta ▁aurrera ▁doa ▁seguru , bere ▁oinez ▁lurrik ▁ia ▁ukitu ▁gabe .
PRED:	The people walk in peace , and there is no water ; there is no water .
GOLD:	He chases them away and goes on safely , though he is walking over unfamiliar ground .

ID:	2308
INPUT:	▁Eliseok ▁erantzun :— Zoaz ▁bakean . N a am an ▁Eliseo gandik ▁pus ka ▁bat ▁urrundu ▁zelarik ,
PRED:	Elisha replied , “ Go in peace , ” Elisha replied .
GOLD:	“ Go in peace , ” Elisha said . So Naaman started home again .

ID:	2309
INPUT:	▁Herri ▁horien ▁erlijio ah uts aren ▁pareko : horien ▁idoloak b aso an ▁ebaki tako ▁egur - pus kak ▁dira , ar tisau aren ▁eskuak ▁zizel ez ▁lan duak ,
PRED:	O people of Israel , you are like their idols , and their hands are like wood , and your hands are in your hands .
GOLD:	Their ways are futile and foolish.They cut down a tree , and a craftsman carves an idol .

ID:	2310
INPUT:	▁Haien ▁odola ▁p al as taka ▁isuri ▁dute ▁Jerusalem ▁inguruan , eta ▁lur ▁emateko ▁inor ▁ez .
PRED:	Their blood will be thrown into the city , and no one can give them victory .
GOLD:	Blood has flowed like water all around Jerusalem ; no one is left to bury the dead .

ID:	2311
INPUT:	▁D u dan ▁guztia ▁behartsu en ▁artean ▁banatu ▁eta ▁neure ▁gorputza ▁erre tzeraino ▁emanik ▁ere ▁ , ▁maitasun ik ▁ez ▁badut , ▁ez ▁naiz ▁ezer .
PRED:	I am poor among the poor and feed them with the needy , but I did not love any other .
GOLD:	If I gave everything I have to the poor and even sacrificed my body , I could boast about it ; but if I did n't love others , I would have gained nothing .

ID:	2312
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁tenplu ▁santu ra ▁begira ▁ahuspez ten ▁naiz , zuri ▁eskerrak ▁emanez : zeure ▁maitasun ▁eta ▁leial tasun az , par eg abe ▁handi ▁egin ▁dituzu ▁zeure ▁izena ▁eta ▁promes a .
PRED:	I bow down to the name of your holy Temple , and praise your name . I will praise you with your unfailing love and faithfulness .
GOLD:	I bow before your holy Temple as I worship.I praise your name for your unfailing love and faithfulness ; for your promises are backedby all the honor of your name .

ID:	2313
INPUT:	▁S aia ▁gaitezen , ▁bada , ▁bakea ▁indar tzeko ▁eta ▁elkarte - biz itza ▁eraikitzeko ▁lagun garri ▁diren ▁gauz etan .
PRED:	So we will make peace of peace and peace for us , and we will rebuild the whole church in our own homes .
GOLD:	So then , let us aim for harmony in the church and try to build each other up .

ID:	2314
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁handitasuna ▁eta ▁gizakiaren ▁hutsa
PRED:	Living as Children of God
GOLD:	Bildad 's Third Response to Job

ID:	2315
INPUT:	▁B ib l os eko ▁artisau ▁tre batu enak zen ituen ▁zeure ▁itsas ▁ar otz ; itsas ontzi ▁guztietako ▁mar in elek eros ten ▁zizuten ▁merk antz ia .
PRED:	You are skilled skilled skilled craftsmen who are skilled craftsmen who are skilled in the sea .
GOLD:	Wise old craftsmen from Gebal did the caulking.Ships from every land came with goods to barter for your trade .

ID:	2316
INPUT:	▁Isaakek ▁berrogei ▁urte ▁zituen , ▁Be tu elen ▁alaba ▁eta ▁Laban en ▁arreba ▁zen ▁Rebek arekin ▁ezkondu ▁zenean . ▁Be tu el ▁eta ▁Laban ▁Mesopotam i ako ▁arame arrak ▁ziren .
PRED:	Isaac lived for forty years , and she married Laban 's sister . When she married Laban 's sister , she became the father of Laban .
GOLD:	When Isaac was forty years old , he married Rebekah , the daughter of Bethuel the Aramean from Paddan-aram and the sister of Laban the Aramean .

ID:	2317
INPUT:	▁Hiri aren ▁per im etro a ▁bederatzi ▁kilometro koa ▁izango ▁da .« Aur rerantzean , ▁“ Jauna ▁bertan ▁dago ” ▁deituko ▁da ▁hiria ».
PRED:	This is the account of the city , the city will be called ‘ The Lord is going to be called ‘ The city of the city . '
GOLD:	“ The distance around the entire city will be 6 miles . And from that day the name of the city will be ‘ The Lord Is There . ' ”

ID:	2318
INPUT:	▁Ep ai - egunean ▁askok ▁esango ▁didate : ▁“ Jauna , ▁Jauna ! ▁Ez ▁ote ▁genuen ▁zure ▁izenean ▁hitz ▁egin ▁eta ▁zure ▁izenean ▁deabruak ▁bota ▁eta ▁zure ▁izenean ▁mirari ▁asko ▁egin ?”
PRED:	Then many of them will say , ‘ Lord , ' they said , ‘ We did n't believe in the name of the Lord your God , and many miraculous signs and wonders and wonders . '
GOLD:	On judgment day many will say to me , ‘ Lord ! Lord ! We prophesied in your name and cast out demons in your name and performed many miracles in your name . '

ID:	2319
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁nik ▁esan : ▁Inork ▁bere ▁emaztea ▁utzi ▁eta ▁beste ▁bat ▁hartzen ▁badu ▁— le ge aren ▁kontra ▁elkar tuak ▁ez ▁badira ▁behintzat — ▁adulterio ▁egiten ▁du .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : If a man marries a man who marries another person who marries another person who does n't have sexual relations with such adultery .
GOLD:	And I tell you this , whoever divorces his wife and marries someone else commits adultery — unless his wife has been unfaithful . ”

ID:	2320
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁espiritua ▁hirurogeita ▁hamar ▁herri - arduradun ei ▁eman
PRED:	A Call to Obey the Lord
GOLD:	The Lord Sends Quail

ID:	2321
INPUT:	▁Bekatu ak ▁aitortu ▁eta ▁otoitz ▁egin
PRED:	Teaching about Sin
GOLD:	Restore Wandering Believers

ID:	2322
INPUT:	▁M in duak ▁ditut ▁begiak , ▁nire ▁herriko ▁alab ei ▁gertatua ▁ikusiz .
PRED:	I eyes to see how to see how I see how to see your daughters .
GOLD:	My heart is breakingover the fate of all the women of Jerusalem .

ID:	2323
INPUT:	▁Lehen dik ▁filistearren ▁zerbitzura ▁egon ▁eta ▁berauen ▁zelai ra ▁igo tako ▁hebre arrak ▁israeldarren gana ▁igaro ▁ziren , ▁Saul ▁eta ▁Jonatan en ▁aldera .
PRED:	When Saul and his men went to the land of the Philistines , they crossed the valley of Saul and Jonathan .
GOLD:	Even the Hebrews who had previously gone over to the Philistine army revolted and joined in with Saul , Jonathan , and the rest of the Israelites .

ID:	2324
INPUT:	▁M atx ina da ▁denean , ▁herriak ▁buruzagi ▁ugari ; gizon ▁buru tsu ▁eta ▁aditu arekin ▁ord ena ▁nagusi .
PRED:	But if the people are wise , do n't pay attention to their understanding .
GOLD:	When there is moral rot within a nation , its government topples easily.But wise and knowledgeable leaders bring stability .

ID:	2325
INPUT:	▁mota ▁guztietako ▁bel eak ,
PRED:	ravens of all kinds ,
GOLD:	ravens of all kinds ,

ID:	2326
INPUT:	▁Tenpl ua ▁eraikitzen ▁bukatu ▁zutenean , ▁sab aia ▁zedro zko ▁h abez ▁eta ▁ohol ez ▁jantzi ▁zuen .
PRED:	After this , the foundation of the Temple was built in the Temple of the Lord , just as he had done .
GOLD:	After completing the Temple structure , Solomon put in a ceiling made of cedar beams and planks .

ID:	2327
INPUT:	▁Erregeak ▁luzatu ▁zuen ▁Ester ren gana ▁urrezko ▁makila , ▁eta ▁Ester ▁zutik ▁gelditu ▁zen .
PRED:	Then the king went to Queen Esther , and he stood up and stood up .
GOLD:	Again the king held out the gold scepter to Esther . So she rose and stood before him .

ID:	2328
INPUT:	▁azpikeriaz ▁zi rik atu ▁baitzaituzte te ▁beraiek ▁ere ▁P eor ko ▁auz ian , ▁baita ▁P eor ko aren ▁ondori oz ▁izandako ▁izurri - egunean ▁hildako ▁K oz bi ren ▁kas uan ▁ere , ▁buruzagi ▁madian dar raren ▁alab aren ean ».
PRED:	You know that you are telling you about the first of you — the first of you — the first month of the first month of the first month — the first of the Midianites in the land of Canaan , including the first of the Midianites . ”
GOLD:	because they assaulted you with deceit and tricked you into worshiping Baal of Peor , and because of Cozbi , the daughter of a Midianite leader , who was killed at the time of the plague because of what happened at Peor . ”

ID:	2329
INPUT:	▁Bitartean , ▁Este ban ▁hil ▁zutenean ▁sortu tako ▁eraso aldi koan ▁sakabanatu ▁ziren ▁fededun ak ▁ F en iz ia , ▁Zi pre ▁eta ▁Antioki araino ▁heldu ▁ziren ; ▁juduei ▁baizik ▁ez ▁zieten , ▁ordea , ▁mezua ▁iragartzen .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the Jewish leaders were divided into Antioch , when they arrived at Antioch of Syria , they went to Antioch . But the Jewish believers had n't come to Antioch .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , the believers who had been scattered during the persecution after Stephen 's death traveled as far as Phoenicia , Cyprus , and Antioch of Syria . They preached the word of God , but only to Jews .

ID:	2330
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁ezagutzen ▁du ▁zure ▁haserre aren ▁indarra ? Nork ▁dio ▁aski ▁beldur ▁zure ▁sumin ari ?
PRED:	Who knows your mighty arm ? Who knows how can you be angry ?
GOLD:	Who can comprehend the power of your anger ? Your wrath is as awesome as the fear you deserve .

ID:	2331
INPUT:	▁Josueren ▁heriotza
PRED:	The Lord 's Chosen Servant
GOLD:	The Lord 's Covenant Renewed

ID:	2332
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁ordea , ▁biziki ▁gorro tatu ▁zuen ▁Amn onek ▁neska , ▁lehen ▁izan ▁zion ▁am o di oa ▁baino ▁gorroto ▁askoz ▁handiago z . ▁Amn onek ▁esan ▁zion :— Jaiki ▁zaitez ! ▁Alde ▁hemendik !
PRED:	But Amnon hated her because she hated her , and she became more than she loved her . “ Stand up ! ” she exclaimed . “ Stand up ! Get up ! ”
GOLD:	Then suddenly Amnon 's love turned to hate , and he hated her even more than he had loved her . “ Get out of here ! ” he snarled at her .

ID:	2333
INPUT:	▁E duki ▁beti ▁bes oan ▁babeski tzat ▁fedea , ▁etsai aren ▁s uzko ▁geziak ▁oro ▁itzali ▁ahal ▁izateko .
PRED:	The tongue of your family will be a leader of your enemies , and your enemies will be beneath each side .
GOLD:	In addition to all of these , hold up the shield of faith to stop the fiery arrows of the devil .

ID:	2334
INPUT:	▁eta ▁hemendik ▁mendebaldera , ▁j af l et i arren ▁mug az ▁muga , ▁Bet - Hor on ▁Az p iko raino ▁eta ▁G ezer reraino ▁jaisten , ▁Mediterraneo ▁itsasoan ▁bu katzeko .
PRED:	From the boundary extended to the border of the Mediterranean Sea and the border of the Dead Sea , on the Mediterranean Sea and on the Mediterranean Sea .
GOLD:	Then it descended westward to the territory of the Japhletites as far as Lower Beth-horon , then to Gezer and over to the Mediterranean Sea .

ID:	2335
INPUT:	▁bata , ▁amondarren ▁R aba ▁hirira ; ▁bestea , ▁Judako ▁Jerusalem ▁hiri ▁gotortu ra .
PRED:	The armies of Ammon were also fortified in Jerusalem , including the fortified towns of Judah .
GOLD:	“ O you corrupt and wicked prince of Israel , your final day of reckoning is here !

ID:	2336
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁fidatu , ▁“ Jaunaren ▁tenplua , ▁Jaunaren ▁tenplua ” ▁erre pik atuz ▁engaina tzen ▁zaituzteten ▁hori etaz .
PRED:	Do not trust in the Temple of the Lord , for you are saying , ‘ What sorrow awaits you ? '
GOLD:	But do n't be fooled by those who promise you safety simply because the Lord 's Temple is here . They chant , “ The Lord 's Temple is here ! The Lord 's Temple is here ! ”

ID:	2337
INPUT:	▁Horrela ▁ulertu ▁ahal ▁izango ▁duzue , ▁fededun ▁guztiekin ▁batera , ▁zein ▁zabal ▁eta ▁luze , ▁garai ▁eta ▁sakon ▁den ▁Kristoren ▁maitasuna ;
PRED:	In this way , you will understand all the glory of God and all the people of Christ .
GOLD:	And may you have the power to understand , as all God 's people should , how wide , how long , how high , and how deep his love is .

ID:	2338
INPUT:	▁Zatoz kit ▁zeure ▁gupi daz , ▁bizi berri ▁nadin , zure ▁irakaspena ▁baitut ▁goz amen !
PRED:	Come , let me be merciful to me , for I am your instructions .
GOLD:	Surround me with your tender mercies so I may live , for your instructions are my delight .

ID:	2339
INPUT:	▁Siriako ▁erregeak ▁erantzun ▁zion :— T ira , ▁zoaz , ▁bada ! ▁Gu tuna ▁emango ▁dizut ▁Israelgo ▁erregearen tzat . Ab iatu ▁zen , ▁beraz , ▁Naam an ▁hirurehun ▁eta ▁berrogeita ▁hamarren ▁bat ▁kilo ▁zilar , ▁urrezko ▁sei ▁mila ▁txanpon ▁eta ▁hamar ▁jantzi - sor ta ▁berekin ▁zeramatz ala .
PRED:	The king of Aram replied , “ Go ahead , go ahead of the king of Israel , and I will give a gold offering to the king of Israel , and bring it to the king of Israel . ”
GOLD:	“ Go and visit the prophet , ” the king of Aram told him . “ I will send a letter of introduction for you to take to the king of Israel. ” So Naaman started out , carrying as gifts 750 pounds of silver , 150 pounds of gold , and ten sets of clothing .

ID:	2340
INPUT:	▁mahai tik ▁jaiki , ▁soingainekoa ▁erantzi ▁eta , ▁eskuz ap ia ▁harturik , ▁gerri an ▁lotu ▁zuen .
PRED:	Then he took off his cloak and put it into his robe , and put it on his robe .
GOLD:	So he got up from the table , took off his robe , wrapped a towel around his waist ,

ID:	2341
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁bidea ▁sas iz ▁itx iko ▁diot , inguru an ▁hes ia ▁jarriko , bere ▁bidez i d or rik ▁gehiago aur ki ▁ez ▁dezan .
PRED:	Therefore , I will set up the desert for jackals , and they will never march through their nets .
GOLD:	She does n't realize it was I who gave her everything she has — the grain , the new wine , the olive oil ; I even gave her silver and gold.But she gave all my gifts to Baal .

ID:	2342
INPUT:	▁Jauna ▁berriro ▁agertu ▁Salomoni
PRED:	The Lord 's Response to Solomon
GOLD:	The Lord 's Response to Solomon

ID:	2343
INPUT:	▁Saulen ▁erregealdi az ▁lab ur pena
PRED:	The Coming of Saul 's Reign
GOLD:	Saul 's Military Successes

ID:	2344
INPUT:	▁Jesu ▁Kristo gandik ▁hartu ▁dugu ▁apostolu ▁izateko ▁dohaina , ▁jentil - herri ei ▁sinesmena ▁eramateko ▁eta ▁f ed ezko ▁erantzuna ▁haien gan ▁sor tzeko .
PRED:	We also have the gift of Christ Jesus Christ Jesus Christ and the Gentiles to teach the Gentiles .
GOLD:	Through Christ , God has given us the privilege and authority as apostles to tell Gentiles everywhere what God has done for them , so that they will believe and obey him , bringing glory to his name .

ID:	2345
INPUT:	▁Jende ari ▁zel aian ▁eser tzeko ▁agindu ▁ondoren , ▁hartu ▁zituen ▁bost ▁ogiak ▁eta ▁bi ▁arrainak ▁eta , ▁begiak ▁zerura ▁jasorik , ▁bedeinkazioa ▁esan , ▁ogiak ▁zatitu ▁eta ▁ikasleei ▁eman ▁zizkien , ▁eta ▁ikasleek ▁jendeari .
PRED:	When the crowds sit on the seventh day , he took five loaves of bread and the loaves of bread , and the loaves of bread and fish . Then he gave the disciples the disciples to distribute it to the people .
GOLD:	Then he told the people to sit down on the grass . Jesus took the five loaves and two fish , looked up toward heaven , and blessed them . Then , breaking the loaves into pieces , he gave the bread to the disciples , who distributed it to the people .

ID:	2346
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁jarri ▁du ▁beraren ▁zain pean ▁lurra ? Nork ▁eman ▁dio ▁mundu ▁osoaren ▁ardura ?
PRED:	Who gives the earth to the earth ? Who gives the earth to the earth ?
GOLD:	Did someone else put the world in his care ? Who set the whole world in place ?

ID:	2347
INPUT:	▁I zer di rik ▁ater arazi ▁ez ▁dizuen ▁lurraldea ▁eman ▁dizuet , ▁eraiki ▁ez ▁dituzuen ▁hiriak , ▁eta ▁berori etan ▁bizi ▁zarete ; ▁baita ▁landatu ▁ez ▁dituzuen ▁mahasti ▁eta ▁olib adi ak ▁ere , ▁eta ▁berorien ▁fruitu ez ▁elik atzen ▁zarete ».
PRED:	I have given you the land you have given to you , and you have given it to this land you have given to your vineyards and vineyards , and you will never plant fruit . ”
GOLD:	I gave you land you had not worked on , and I gave you towns you did not build — the towns where you are now living . I gave you vineyards and olive groves for food , though you did not plant them .

ID:	2348
INPUT:	▁Em aguzu ▁garaipena ▁zeure ▁ahalmenaz , ▁eta ▁erantzun , hain ▁maite ▁dituzun ok ▁libra ▁daitezen .
PRED:	Give us your authority to rescue us from your power and rescue them .
GOLD:	Gilead is mine , and Manasseh , too.Ephraim , my helmet , will produce my warriors , and Judah , my scepter , will produce my kings .

ID:	2349
INPUT:	▁Hon elako ▁gauz ek ▁pizten ▁dute ▁Jainkoaren ▁haserrea ▁errebelde en ▁gain .
PRED:	That 's why the anger of God has turned against us , and the anger of God has turned against us .
GOLD:	Because of these sins , the anger of God is coming .

ID:	2350
INPUT:	▁Etor ra ldi ▁bakoitzean ▁joko ▁zaituzte , egun ero - egun ero , ▁gau ▁eta ▁egun . H orren ▁berri ▁jaki te ▁huts ak ikara ▁gor ria ▁emango ▁dizue .
PRED:	And now I will go ahead and watch over to you for day , and you will know that I am coming to you .
GOLD:	Again and again that flood will come , morning after morning , day and night , until you are carried away. ” This message will bring terror to your people .

ID:	2351
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁esan ▁zion ▁Hob abi , ▁bere ▁aitagin arreba ▁R eu el ▁madian dar raren ▁semeari :— Gu ▁ba go az ▁Jaunak ▁agindutako ▁lurraldera . ▁Zatoz ▁gurekin ▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁Israeli ▁hitzemandako ▁ondasun etan ▁parte ▁emango ▁dizugu .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Moses said to his father-in-law , “ If the Lord has given us his son , we will give you the land the Lord has promised us to give you . ”
GOLD:	One day Moses said to his brother-in-law , Hobab son of Reuel the Midianite , “ We are on our way to the place the Lord promised us , for he said , ‘ I will give it to you . ' Come with us and we will treat you well , for the Lord has promised wonderful blessings for Israel ! ”

ID:	2352
INPUT:	▁B abes - hiri ak
PRED:	Summary of Asa 's Reign
GOLD:	The Cities of Refuge

ID:	2353
INPUT:	▁Azken ▁toki ak ▁aukeratu ▁eta ▁behar tsuak ▁gonbidatu
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Man
GOLD:	Jesus Teaches about Humility

ID:	2354
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁artzain ok , ▁entzun ▁nire , ▁Jainko ▁Jaun ▁honen , ▁mezua :
PRED:	Therefore , listen to this message from the Sovereign Lord :
GOLD:	“ Therefore , you shepherds , hear the word of the Lord :

ID:	2355
INPUT:	▁Lebiren ▁leinuaren ▁izen - bilketa ▁senitarteka : ▁Gerx onen gandik ▁ger x on darrak , ▁Kehaten gandik ▁k eh atarrak ▁eta ▁Merari ren gandik ▁mer ari tarrak .
PRED:	The following towns were named after their clans descended from the tribe of Levi : The clan , named after their clan , named after their ancestor Merari .
GOLD:	This is the record of the Levites who were counted according to their clans : The Gershonite clan , named after their ancestor Gershon.The Kohathite clan , named after their ancestor Kohath.The Merarite clan , named after their ancestor Merari .

ID:	2356
INPUT:	▁Aldi ▁hartan ▁gaixo tu ▁egin ▁zitzaion ▁Jeroboam i ▁bere ▁seme ▁Ab ias .
PRED:	At that time Jeroboam son Abijah became very sick .
GOLD:	At that time Jeroboam 's son Abijah became very sick .

ID:	2357
INPUT:	▁Su ge gorri aren ▁poz oia ▁zen ▁x ur g atzen ▁zuena , bi per aren ▁m iz toak ▁bezala ▁hilko ▁du .
PRED:	It was like a snake like a snake ; it was like a lion .
GOLD:	They will suck the poison of cobras.The viper will kill them .

ID:	2358
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁eta ▁Pedrok ▁tenpl urako ▁zerga ▁ordaindu
PRED:	Jesus Heals the Temple
GOLD:	Payment of the Temple Tax

ID:	2359
INPUT:	▁Gizaki ▁txarra ▁higuingarri ▁da ▁zintzo entzat , j ok abide ▁zuzen ekoa ▁higuingarri ▁gaizto entzat .
PRED:	People who are detestable to the wicked , but the wicked are detestable to the wicked .
GOLD:	The righteous despise the unjust ; the wicked despise the godly .

ID:	2360
INPUT:	▁Hala , ▁ez ▁Kar e ahen ▁seme ▁Johan anek , ▁ez ▁gudalburu ek , ▁ez ▁beste ▁inork , ▁ez ▁zioten ▁Jaunari ▁aditu , ▁eta ▁ez ▁ziren ▁gelditu ▁Juda ▁lurraldean .
PRED:	But Johanan son of Kareah and the other leaders did not listen to the Lord .
GOLD:	So Johanan and the other military leaders and all the people refused to obey the Lord 's command to stay in Judah .

ID:	2361
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁denek ▁S os ten es ▁sinagog ako ▁buruzagi ari ▁heldu ▁eta ▁j ip oi ▁ederra ▁eman ▁zioten ▁auzi tegi ▁aurrean ▁bertan . ▁Gal i onek ▁ez ▁zien ▁jaramonik ▁egin .
PRED:	So all the leaders of the synagogue in charge of the synagogue , and they followed him in the region of Galilee .
GOLD:	The crowd then grabbed Sosthenes , the leader of the synagogue , and beat him right there in the courtroom . But Gallio paid no attention .

ID:	2362
INPUT:	▁Jonadab ek ▁esan ▁zion :— E tzan ▁zaitez ▁zeure ▁ohean ▁eta ▁egin ▁gaixo - itx ura . ▁Aita ▁ikustera ▁etortzean , ▁esaiozu : ▁« O toi , ▁esaiozu ▁gure ▁arreba ▁Tam arri ▁niri ▁jaten ▁ematera ▁etortzeko ; ▁hark ▁nire ▁aurrean ▁eta ▁ni ▁begira ▁nauela ▁jateko ▁zerbait ▁prestatzen ▁eta ▁bere ▁eskuz ▁ematen ▁badi t , ▁jango ▁dut ».
PRED:	He said to me , “ Go and sleep with me , for I have done to you , my Father , and if you want me to see me , let me eat my sister in my bed , I will eat it and eat it . ”
GOLD:	“ Well , ” Jonadab said , “ I 'll tell you what to do . Go back to bed and pretend you are ill . When your father comes to see you , ask him to let Tamar come and prepare some food for you . Tell him you 'll feel better if she prepares it as you watch and feeds you with her own hands . ”

ID:	2363
INPUT:	▁Badakit ▁zerutik ▁jaitsi tako ▁suak ▁kiskali ▁dituela ▁beste ▁bi ▁buruzagiak ▁eta ▁beren ▁gizonak ; ▁baina ▁ni ▁utz ▁nazazu ▁bizirik .
PRED:	But I know that the man of heaven has come down from heaven and kill me . ”
GOLD:	See how the fire from heaven came down and destroyed the first two groups . But now please spare my life ! ”

ID:	2364
INPUT:	▁Arrats ▁beh er ean , haiz eak ▁jo ▁eta ▁itz alak ▁ihes ▁egitean , itz ul ▁zaitez , ▁ene ▁maitea , g azela ▁edo ▁ore in k umea ▁bezala , mendi ▁eta ▁sak an etan ▁barrena .
PRED:	As soon as the wind blows , the dawn is like a lion , as you flee , O my lover , my lover , like a lion .
GOLD:	Before the dawn breezes blowand the night shadows flee , return to me , my love , like a gazelleor a young stag on the rugged mountains .

ID:	2365
INPUT:	▁Moisesen ▁legearen ▁bidetik ▁salbamena ▁lortu ▁nahi ▁duzuenok , ▁Kristoren gandik ▁bereizi ▁egin ▁zarete ▁eta ▁Jainkoaren ▁onginahi tik ▁saihestu .
PRED:	The law of Moses is ready to follow the law of Moses . You have turned away from the way of Christ and turned away from God .
GOLD:	For if you are trying to make yourselves right with God by keeping the law , you have been cut off from Christ ! You have fallen away from God 's grace .

ID:	2366
INPUT:	▁Des ager tu ▁egin ▁behar ▁al ▁du ▁horregatik ▁gure ▁aitaren ▁izenak ▁beraren ▁senitarte tik ? ▁Em aguzu , ▁beraz , ▁guri ▁lur - j abe tza ▁gure ▁aitaren ▁anaiei ▁bezala ».
PRED:	“ Why should we give us the names of our father ? We have given us the names of our father 's family ? ”
GOLD:	Why should the name of our father disappear from his clan just because he had no sons ? Give us property along with the rest of our relatives . ”

ID:	2367
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁engainatu ▁zuen ▁Jakobek ▁Laban ▁arame arra , ▁ez ▁baitzion ▁adierazi ▁alde ▁egiteko ▁asm orik .
PRED:	So Jacob continued to deal with Laban 's troops .
GOLD:	Jacob outwitted Laban the Aramean , for they set out secretly and never told Laban they were leaving .

ID:	2368
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion ▁Jauna ▁Moisesi :
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses ,

ID:	2369
INPUT:	▁Hurbil ▁da ▁Moaben ▁hondamena , gain ean ▁du ▁zoritxarra .
PRED:	The end of Moab will be fulfilled , and the terror of Moab will end .
GOLD:	“ Destruction is coming fast for Moab ; calamity threatens ominously .

ID:	2370
INPUT:	▁Pedro , ▁Jesusi ▁urrutitik ▁jarraituz , ▁apaiz ▁nagusiaren ▁jauregi raino ▁joan ▁eta , ▁barrura ▁sarturik , ▁morroi ekin ▁eseri ▁zen , ▁hura ▁guztia ▁zertan ▁amaitzen ▁zen ▁ikusteko .
PRED:	Meanwhile , Peter went into the village to see the high priest 's palace and went into the palace . He sat down to see everything he had done .
GOLD:	Meanwhile , Peter followed him at a distance and came to the high priest 's courtyard . He went in and sat with the guards and waited to see how it would all end .

ID:	2371
INPUT:	▁Bar e tu ▁bero aldi ▁hori , ▁itzali ▁zeure ▁haserre - sua !
PRED:	You must be angry with the fire , making them furious with fire .
GOLD:	Now restore us again , O God of our salvation.Put aside your anger against us once more .

ID:	2372
INPUT:	▁« Moises en ▁legearen ▁eta ▁profeten ▁garaia ▁Joan ▁Bataia tzaile arekin ▁bukatu ▁da ; ▁geroztik , ▁Jainkoaren ▁erregetzaren ▁berri ▁ona ▁adierazten ▁da , ▁eta ▁denek ▁indar ▁egiten ▁dute ▁bertan ▁sartzeko .
PRED:	“ The time of Moses and John the Baptist has finished the law of Moses and John the law of God , which is written in the Kingdom of God .
GOLD:	“ Until John the Baptist , the law of Moses and the messages of the prophets were your guides . But now the Good News of the Kingdom of God is preached , and everyone is eager to get in .

ID:	2373
INPUT:	▁Ezekiasen ▁errege aldia
PRED:	Hezekiah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Hezekiah Rules in Judah

ID:	2374
INPUT:	▁« Ber ro gei ▁urtez ▁ibil arazi ▁zaituzte ▁Jaunak ▁basamortuan , ▁eta ▁ez ▁zaiz kizue ▁ez ▁arropak , ▁ez ▁oin etakoak , ▁hondatu .
PRED:	“ The Lord has redeemed you for forty years , and you will not wash your clothes in the wilderness .
GOLD:	But to this day the Lord has not given you minds that understand , nor eyes that see , nor ears that hear !

ID:	2375
INPUT:	▁Zorion ekoak ▁lehen ▁piztuera ▁honetan ▁parte ▁dutenak , ▁Jainkoaren ak ▁baitira ! ▁Bigarren ▁herio tzak ▁ez ▁du ▁agin terik ▁beraien ▁gain , ▁baizik ▁eta ▁Jainkoaren ▁eta ▁Mes iasen ▁apaiz ▁izango ▁dira , ▁eta ▁beronekin ▁errege ▁mila ▁urte etan .
PRED:	Yes , those who belong to the resurrection of God will be fulfilled in this book , but they will not be handed over to them . They will rule over them and have no peace for him , and they will rule over them .
GOLD:	Blessed and holy are those who share in the first resurrection . For them the second death holds no power , but they will be priests of God and of Christ and will reign with him a thousand years .

ID:	2376
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁haiek ▁bertan ▁utzi ▁eta ▁hiritik ▁kanpora ▁atera ▁zen , ▁B etan i ara , ▁eta ▁han ▁eman ▁zuen ▁gaua .
PRED:	So the disciples left the city and went out to the city where he was staying there .
GOLD:	Then he returned to Bethany , where he stayed overnight .

ID:	2377
INPUT:	▁Herio tzatik ▁libratu ▁zaretenok , alde ▁egin ▁luz atz eke ! O ro itu ▁Jaun az ▁urrutitik , ek arri ▁gogora ▁Jerusalem .
PRED:	O Lord , you have rescued me from your unfailing love , O Lord , for you have heard your unfailing love .
GOLD:	Get out , all you who have escaped the sword ! Do not stand and watch — flee while you can ! Remember the Lord , though you are in a far-off land , and think about your home in Jerusalem . ”

ID:	2378
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaidan ▁Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	2379
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁batzuk ▁“ harri - ar tea ” ▁bezala ▁dira : ▁mezua ▁entzutean , ▁berehala ▁pozik ▁onartzen ▁dute ;
PRED:	The seed that fell on the footpath represents those who accept it .
GOLD:	The seed on the rocky soil represents those who hear the message and immediately receive it with joy .

ID:	2380
INPUT:	▁Moab , ▁zeure ▁indar ▁eta ▁ondasun etan fi datu ▁zara : h ara ▁orain ▁zu ▁ere ▁konkis tatua ! Zure ▁jainko ▁K em o x ▁erbestera ▁doa , bere ▁apaiz ▁eta ▁buruzagi ekin .
PRED:	You have become your strong , O mountains of Moab , and your wealth have been taken away from the pagan shrines .
GOLD:	Because you have trusted in your wealth and skill , you will be taken captive.Your god Chemosh , with his priests and officials , will be hauled off to distant lands !

ID:	2381
INPUT:	▁toki ▁sakratu an ▁jango ▁duzue . ▁Horixe ▁da ▁Jaunaren ▁ohorez ▁erretako ▁opari tik ▁zeu ri ▁eta ▁zure ▁semeei ▁dago kizuen ▁partea , ▁Jaunak ▁agindu ▁zidan ▁bezala .
PRED:	This is the place of the Lord 's Covenant , and it is a special gift to the Lord . It is a special gift to me , just as the Lord had commanded me .
GOLD:	You must eat it in a sacred place , for it has been given to you and your descendants as your portion of the special gifts presented to the Lord . These are the commands I have been given .

ID:	2382
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁ohorez ▁erretzeko ▁opari gai ▁den ▁abere aren ▁gantza ▁jaten ▁duena , ▁herritik ▁bota ▁egingo ▁duzue .
PRED:	You must eat the fat of the grain offering from the Lord 's presence , and you must cut off from the community of Israel .
GOLD:	Anyone who eats fat from an animal presented as a special gift to the Lord will be cut off from the community .

ID:	2383
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁erantzun ▁zuen :— S in es mena ▁bazenu te , ▁m os ta za - h azia ▁bezain ▁txik ia ▁izanik ▁ere , ▁pikondo ▁honi ▁« Atera ▁hortik ▁eta ▁landatu ▁itsasoan » ▁esango ▁zen iok ete , ▁eta ▁obedi tu ▁egingo ▁l izu eke .
PRED:	The Lord replied , “ If you have a little stone , you will be as large as a farmer , you will say , ‘ You will be a little longer , ' and you will say , ‘ You will never obey me . '
GOLD:	The Lord answered , “ If you had faith even as small as a mustard seed , you could say to this mulberry tree , ‘ May you be uprooted and be planted in the sea , ' and it would obey you !

ID:	2384
INPUT:	▁Om riren ▁gainerako ▁jarduerak ▁eta ▁egintza ▁adore tsuak ▁« Israelgo ▁Erregeen ▁Kronika » ▁liburuan ▁daude ▁idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Omri 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Omri 's reign , the extent of his power , and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	2385
INPUT:	▁K ux an darren ▁oihal - etxolak des egin ak ▁ikusi ▁ditut , ma dian darren ▁oihal - tx ab olak as tin durik .
PRED:	I have seen their camp at Shiloh , and I have seen it as a tent of safety .
GOLD:	I see the people of Cushan in distress , and the nation of Midian trembling in terror .

ID:	2386
INPUT:	▁Josuek , ▁israeldarren ▁artean ▁aukeratu ▁zituen ▁hamabi ▁gizon ei ▁— le inu ▁bakoitzeko ▁bati — ▁dei ▁egin
PRED:	Joshua chose twelve men of Israel to call one of the twelve men of Israel to call one of the twelve men of Israel .
GOLD:	So Joshua called together the twelve men he had chosen — one from each of the tribes of Israel .

ID:	2387
INPUT:	▁eskaini ▁elkartasun - opariak ▁ere ▁eta ▁jan ▁bertan , ▁Jaunaren ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoaren ▁aurrean ▁festa ▁eginez .
PRED:	And do not eat any peace offerings and peace offerings of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Also sacrifice peace offerings on it , and celebrate by feasting there before the Lord your God .

ID:	2388
INPUT:	▁Su ari ▁indartsu ▁haize ▁emanez m eta lari ▁zab orra ▁kentzen ▁zaio . Baina ▁alferrik ▁da h aiek ▁garbitzen ▁ari tzea : egi te ▁txarrak ▁ez ▁zaizkie ▁joaten .
PRED:	They fall into the sea , and they fall into a trap , but they ca n't stumble .
GOLD:	The bellows fiercely fan the flamesto burn out the corruption.But it does not purify them , for the wickedness remains .

ID:	2389
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁bada , ▁sinesmen etik ▁bizi ▁direnek ▁hartzen ▁dute ▁bedeinkazioa ▁Abraham ▁sinestedun arekin ▁batera .
PRED:	So all who live in this way will live in the faith of Abraham .
GOLD:	So all who put their faith in Christ share the same blessing Abraham received because of his faith .

ID:	2390
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁zuzen dariak , ▁Jainkoaren ▁etx ezain ▁denez ▁gero , ▁akats ▁gabea ▁izan ▁behar ▁du : ▁ez ▁harro , ▁ez ▁haserre kor , ▁ez ▁ardo zale , ▁ez ▁s es io zale , ▁ez ▁oker reko ▁irabazi en ▁gose ;
PRED:	For the time of God 's church will be a slave of God , and he must not be angry with no defects . Instead , he must not be angry with a new harvest of wine , but he will not be angry with those who are hungry .
GOLD:	A church leader is a manager of God 's household , so he must live a blameless life . He must not be arrogant or quick-tempered ; he must not be a heavy drinker , violent , or dishonest with money .

ID:	2391
INPUT:	▁Garai ▁hartan , ▁Moabeko ▁erregea ▁Tz ip orren ▁seme ▁Balak ▁zen . ▁Jakin ▁zuen ▁erregeak ▁israeldarrek ▁amortar rei ▁egindakoa , ▁eta ▁moab darrak ▁beldur rak ▁hartu ▁zituen ▁Israel ▁herria ▁hain ▁ugaria ▁zela ▁ikusirik . ▁Israeldarren ▁aurrean ▁izutu ta , ▁moab darrek ▁M adi ango ▁herri - arduradun ei ▁esan ▁zieten : ▁« I diak ▁zelai ko ▁belarra ▁bezala ▁garbituko ▁ditu ▁jen d alde ▁horrek ▁gure ▁inguru ▁guztiak ».
PRED:	At that time King Balak of Moab said to Balaam son of Zippor , “ This is what the Amorite kings of Moab had done in the land of Moab . The land of Moab had said to us , “ The king of Israel , the land of Moab , and the land of Moab , just as the land of Moab had said to us . ”
GOLD:	Balak son of Zippor , the Moabite king , had seen everything the Israelites did to the Amorites .

ID:	2392
INPUT:	▁Jaunak , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoak , ▁agindu ▁hau ▁eman ▁zion ▁Jeremiasi :
PRED:	The Lord gave this message to Jeremiah :
GOLD:	The Lord gave another message to Jeremiah . He said ,

ID:	2393
INPUT:	▁De iadar ▁egingo ▁dute ▁zure gatik , garra tz ▁egingo ▁garrasi , erra uts ez ▁burua ▁estali eta ▁lurrean ▁iraul katuko .
PRED:	The Lord will roar for those who say , “ The wicked will fall into the dust , and you will lie down on the ground .
GOLD:	They cry aloud over youand weep bitterly.They throw dust on their headsand roll in ashes .

ID:	2394
INPUT:	▁Nola ▁hitz ▁egin ▁dezaket ▁zurekin , ▁ene ▁jauna , ▁indarra ▁ez ▁ezik ▁arnasa ▁bera ▁ere ▁galdu ▁du dal arik ?”
PRED:	How can I speak with you ? My strength is left , and his breath is gone ! '
GOLD:	How can someone like me , your servant , talk to you , my lord ? My strength is gone , and I can hardly breathe . ”

ID:	2395
INPUT:	▁Entzun , ▁zeru - lur rok ! Honela ▁mintzo ▁da ▁Jauna :« H aur rak ▁sortu ▁ditut ▁eta ▁hazi , baina ▁aurka ▁altxatu ▁zaizkit .
PRED:	Listen to the heavens , O Lord , this is what the Lord says : “ My heart is against me , but I have spoken against me .
GOLD:	Listen , O heavens ! Pay attention , earth ! This is what the Lord says : “ The children I raised and cared forhave rebelled against me .

ID:	2396
INPUT:	▁Jobek ▁ez ▁dizkit ▁niri ▁zuzendu ▁bere ▁hitzak , nik ▁ere ▁ez ▁diot ▁zuen ▁arrazoi bidez ▁erantzungo .
PRED:	Then Job did n't understand what I said , ‘ I am saying , ' says the Lord .
GOLD:	If Job had been arguing with me , I would not answer with your kind of logic !

ID:	2397
INPUT:	▁Semea ▁erdaindu ▁zuelako ▁esan ▁zion ▁hori . Orduan , ▁Jaunak ▁joaten ▁utzi ▁zion .
PRED:	But the Son of Man had said to him , “ May the Lord leave him . ”
GOLD:	( When she said “ a bridegroom of blood , ” she was referring to the circumcision . ) After that , the Lord left him alone .

ID:	2398
INPUT:	▁X a al b ongo ▁Elia h ba ; ▁G un go ▁Ja xen ; ▁Jonatan ,
PRED:	Adonijah was the father of Jaddua , who was the father of Jaddua .
GOLD:	Eliahba from Shaalbon ; the sons of Jashen ; Jonathan

ID:	2399
INPUT:	▁Entzun , ▁Jauna ! ▁Erruki ▁nitaz ! ▁Jauna , ▁zatoz kit ▁lagun !»
PRED:	Lord , hear me , O Lord , and come to me . ”
GOLD:	You have turned my mourning into joyful dancing.You have taken away my clothes of mourning and clothed me with joy ,

ID:	2400
INPUT:	▁eta , ▁A te ▁E der ▁ondoan ▁eserita ▁l im os na ▁eske ▁egoten ▁zena ▁bera ▁zela ▁oharturik , ▁denak ▁zur ▁eta ▁lur ▁gelditu ▁ziren ▁gertatu tako az .
PRED:	He was sitting beside the robe , who was amazed at him . When they saw him , they were amazed at him .
GOLD:	When they realized he was the lame beggar they had seen so often at the Beautiful Gate , they were absolutely astounded !

ID:	2401
INPUT:	▁Batzu k ▁bizkor ▁guda - gurdi ekin , ▁beste ▁batzuk ▁zaldi ekin ; gu , ▁berriz , ▁Jaunarekin , ▁geure ▁Jainkoarekin .
PRED:	Some of his chariot with horses , chariots , horses , and horses were with the Lord our God .
GOLD:	Those nations will fall down and collapse , but we will rise up and stand firm .

ID:	2402
INPUT:	▁« Israelgo ▁edozein ▁hiri tan ▁bizi ▁den ▁lebitarrak , ▁Jaunak ▁beretzat ▁aukeratuko ▁duen ▁lekura ▁jo atea ▁erabaki tzen ▁badu ,
PRED:	“ However , the Levites must pay for any of the Levites to place the Lord chooses for a foreigner to the place where he chooses .
GOLD:	“ Suppose a Levite chooses to move from his town in Israel , wherever he is living , to the place the Lord chooses for worship .

ID:	2403
INPUT:	▁« I tx ar oten ▁egon ▁naiz ▁zuek ▁hitz ▁egin ▁bitartean ; er ne , ▁zuen ▁arrazoi bideak ▁adi tzen , zer ▁esan ▁asm atzen ▁ari ▁zineten ▁bitartean .
PRED:	“ But while I was in charge of you , I was praying to you .
GOLD:	“ I have waited all this time , listening very carefully to your arguments , listening to you grope for words .

ID:	2404
INPUT:	▁Neu ▁naiz ▁Jauna , ▁ez ▁da ▁besterik ; ez ▁da ▁ni ▁beste ▁jainkorik . Agin pi dez ▁jantzi ▁zaitut , ez agutzen ▁ez ▁nau zun ▁arren ,
PRED:	I am the Lord , who is my God , and you are not my own gods .
GOLD:	I am the Lord ; there is no other God.I have equipped you for battle , though you do n't even know me ,

ID:	2405
INPUT:	▁Pres t ▁nago ▁hirugarren ▁aldiz ▁zuengana ▁joateko , ▁eta ▁oraingo ▁honetan ▁ere ▁ez ▁natzaizue ▁nek agarri ▁izango . ▁Ez ▁nabil ▁zuen ▁ondasun en ▁bila , ▁zeuen ▁bila ▁baizik . ▁Izan ▁ere , ▁ez ▁dute ▁seme - alabek ▁aurrera tzen ▁guraso entzat , ▁gurasoek ▁seme - alab entzat ▁baizik .
PRED:	I am ready to be prepared for you , and I will not go to you . Instead , I will not search for you to search for your children , but you are not looking for your children . They are not looking for your children .
GOLD:	Now I am coming to you for the third time , and I will not be a burden to you . I do n't want what you have — I want you . After all , children do n't provide for their parents . Rather , parents provide for their children .

ID:	2406
INPUT:	▁gero , ▁aharia ▁eskainiko ▁du ▁elkartasun - oparitzat , ▁legamia ▁gabeko ▁ogi en ▁saski arekin ▁batera , ▁eta ▁labore - ▁eta ▁isur - opariak .
PRED:	Then the ram must present a ram as a peace offering for the peace offering . He must be made without yeast and liquid offering .
GOLD:	then the ram for a peace offering , along with the basket of bread made without yeast . The priest must also present the prescribed grain offering and liquid offering to the Lord .

ID:	2407
INPUT:	▁Adar - hots ▁luz ea ▁entzun ▁bezain ▁laster , ▁herri ▁osoak ▁irrintzi ▁handia ▁egingo ▁du ▁eta ▁hiriko ▁harresia ▁behera ▁etorriko ▁da . ▁Orduan , ▁eraso ▁diezai ola ▁jende ▁guztiak , ▁nork ▁bere ▁aurrean ▁izango ▁duen ▁tar tetik »
PRED:	The sound of the ram 's horn , and all the people will attack the city of Jerusalem . Then everyone will attack the wall of the city . Then everyone will attack the wall of the city .
GOLD:	When you hear the priests give one long blast on the rams ' horns , have all the people shout as loud as they can . Then the walls of the town will collapse , and the people can charge straight into the town . ”

ID:	2408
INPUT:	▁Israel ▁herri ▁osoak ▁hautsi ▁egin ▁du ▁zure ▁legea , ▁eta ▁bizkarra ▁eman ▁dizu ▁zure ▁esana ▁ez ▁bete tzearren . ▁Horregatik ▁erori ▁zaigu ▁gainera ▁zure ▁zerbitzari ▁Moisesen ▁legean ▁idatzi tako ▁madarikazioa , ▁zure ▁aurka ▁bekatu ▁egin ▁dugu lako .
PRED:	All the people of Israel have broken your instructions and broken your commands and turned your backs on you . This is what the command of Moses has commanded you to obey your servant Moses .
GOLD:	All Israel has disobeyed your instruction and turned away , refusing to listen to your voice. “ So now the solemn curses and judgments written in the Law of Moses , the servant of God , have been poured down on us because of our sin .

ID:	2409
INPUT:	▁Ets ai ▁gisa ▁jokatu ▁du ▁Jaunak : ▁Israel ▁desegin ▁du , haren ▁jauretx eak ▁desegin , ▁haren ▁gotor lekuak ▁ezerez tu . A ts ek abea ▁eta ▁nahi gabea ▁ugaldu ▁dizkio ▁Juda ▁lurralde ▁eder rari .
PRED:	The Lord has done this in Israel : He has destroyed the temple of the temple of the temple of the God of Israel , and he will destroy the land of Judah and Judah .
GOLD:	Yes , the Lord has vanquished Israellike an enemy.He has destroyed her palacesand demolished her fortresses.He has brought unending sorrow and tearsupon beautiful Jerusalem .

ID:	2410
INPUT:	▁Jainkoarentzat , ▁bere ▁Ait arentzat , ▁errege - herri ▁eta ▁apaiz ▁egin ▁gaituen ari , ▁aintza ▁eta ▁agintea ▁menderen ▁mendetan ! ▁Amen .
PRED:	And the Lord , who made the Father and his descendants forever and ever , forever and ever ! Amen .
GOLD:	He has made us a Kingdom of priests for God his Father . All glory and power to him forever and ever ! Amen .

ID:	2411
INPUT:	▁Hogeita ▁bat ▁urte ▁zituen ▁Sedek iasek ▁errege ▁izaten ▁hastean , ▁eta ▁hamaika ▁urtez ▁izan ▁zen ▁errege ▁Jerusalemen .
PRED:	Zedekiah was twenty-two years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years .
GOLD:	Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king , and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years .

ID:	2412
INPUT:	▁Jesus , ▁ordea , ▁zin ▁eginez ▁izendatu ▁zuen ▁Jainkoak , ▁hartaz ▁esaten ▁denez : ▁Z in ▁egina ▁du ▁Jaunak ▁eta ▁ez ▁zaio ▁damu tuko : ▁« Bet iko ▁zara ▁zu ▁apaiz ».
PRED:	But Jesus made an oath to him with a solemn oath , for the Lord Jesus has made this oath : “ You will never be condemned , ” says the Lord . “ You will never be forgiven . ”
GOLD:	but there was an oath regarding Jesus . For God said to him , “ The Lord has taken an oath and will not break his vow : ‘ You are a priest forever . ' ”

ID:	2413
INPUT:	▁Az ter tu ▁dut ▁neure ▁jokabidea , eta ▁neure ▁p au so ak ▁zure ▁xedapen etara ▁nahi ▁ditut ▁bidera tu .
PRED:	I am praying to you , and I want your words to meet your word .
GOLD:	I pondered the direction of my life , and I turned to follow your laws .

ID:	2414
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁al ▁dakizue ? Ez ▁al ▁duzue ▁inoiz ▁entzun ? Ez ▁al ▁dizuete ▁hasieratik h orren ▁berri ▁eman ? Ez ▁al ▁duzue ▁uler tun ork ▁eraiki ▁zuen ▁mundua ?
PRED:	Do n't you realize that you have not heard of you ? Do n't you realize that you have been able to understand this world ?
GOLD:	Have n't you heard ? Do n't you understand ? Are you deaf to the words of God — the words he gave before the world began ? Are you so ignorant ?

ID:	2415
INPUT:	▁« N egar - z ot inak ▁ditut ▁ogi , urak ▁bezala ▁gainezka ▁egiten ▁nire ▁intziri ek .
PRED:	“ I am saying , ‘ My bread is as weak as I am praying . '
GOLD:	I can not eat for sighing ; my groans pour out like water .

ID:	2416
INPUT:	▁Gu dariak ▁bezala ▁oldar tzen ▁dira , ger lari en ▁antzera ▁igotzen harre si etan ▁gora . B ako itza ▁bere ▁bidetik ▁doa , nor ▁bere ▁lerro tik ▁okertu ▁gabe .
PRED:	The armies of the battle will be like a mighty army , like a wall around its walls . They will never be able to attack his gates .
GOLD:	The attackers march like warriorsand scale city walls like soldiers.Straight forward they march , never breaking rank .

ID:	2417
INPUT:	▁asmo ▁tx arretan ▁dabilen ▁burua , gaiztak eria ▁egiteko ▁pres a ▁duten ▁oinak ,
PRED:	Be sure to keep on duty on the foundation of the wicked ,
GOLD:	a heart that plots evil , feet that race to do wrong ,

ID:	2418
INPUT:	▁« Ba ▁al ▁da ▁Ahal tsu arekin ▁eztabai datu ▁nahi ▁duenik ? Jainkoa ▁k ri tik atu ▁nahi ▁duenak , ▁erantzun ▁beza ».
PRED:	“ Is it the Almighty ? ” the Almighty asked . “ If someone comes from heaven , let anyone answer him . ”
GOLD:	“ Do you still want to argue with the Almighty ? You are God 's critic , but do you have the answers ? ”

ID:	2419
INPUT:	▁Bas amortu ra ▁jaurtiko ▁zaitut N il oko ▁arrain ▁guztiekin ; han ▁geldituko ▁zara ▁lur ▁gainean , in ork ▁ez ▁zaitu ▁jasoko ▁hilobira tzeko ; bas apiz tien ▁eta ▁hegazti ▁harrapari en jan ari ▁bihurtuko ▁zaitut ;
PRED:	I will throw you into a fish of fish , and you will have no fish in the grave , and I will wipe you into the grave .
GOLD:	I will leave you and all your fishstranded in the wilderness to die.You will lie unburied on the open ground , for I have given you as food to the wild animals and birds .

ID:	2420
INPUT:	▁« Hau ▁dio ▁Jaunak As iriako ▁erregeari ▁buruz :“ Ez ▁da ▁hiri ▁honetan ▁sartuko , ez ▁dio ▁gez irik ▁jaurtiko , ez ▁ezku tuen ▁babes pean ▁erasoko , ez ▁hiria ▁hartzeko ▁bete lan ik ▁egingo .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : The Lord of Heaven 's Armies will never enter the city of Assyria , and he will never enter his arrows .
GOLD:	“ And this is what the Lord says about the king of Assyria : “ ‘ His armies will not enter Jerusalem.They will not even shoot an arrow at it.They will not march outside its gates with their shieldsnor build banks of earth against its walls .

ID:	2421
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁jokabide ak ▁kontsol atu ▁egin ▁nau . Eta ▁oraindik ▁gehiago ▁poztu ▁nau ▁T it oren ▁zoriona ▁ikus teak , ▁zuek ▁guztiok ▁bizi berri tua ▁utzi ▁baituzue ▁berorren ▁bihotza .
PRED:	For I have loved me because of your unfailing love , and you have loved me because of our faith .
GOLD:	We have been greatly encouraged by this.In addition to our own encouragement , we were especially delighted to see how happy Titus was about the way all of you welcomed him and set his mind at ease .

ID:	2422
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁aurrera x eago ▁joan ik , ▁ahuspez ▁erori ▁zen ▁eta ▁otoitz ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁esanez : ▁« Ene ▁Aita , ▁ahal ▁bada , ▁urrun ▁ezazu ▁niregandik ▁edari ▁samin ▁hau . ▁Hala ▁ere , ▁egin ▁bedi ▁zuk ▁nahi ▁bezala , ▁ez ▁nik ▁nahi ▁bezala ».
PRED:	Then he fell down to the ground and fell down to the ground and prayed , “ My Father , my Father , please do n't turn away from me . ”
GOLD:	He went on a little farther and bowed with his face to the ground , praying , “ My Father ! If it is possible , let this cup of suffering be taken away from me . Yet I want your will to be done , not mine . ”

ID:	2423
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁da ▁jadanik ▁ikuskari ▁hutsal ik ▁eta ▁iragar pen ▁gezurti rik ▁izango ▁Israel ▁herrian .
PRED:	You will no longer say , ‘ You are a liar and a liar . '
GOLD:	“ There will be no more false visions and flattering predictions in Israel .

ID:	2424
INPUT:	▁Ondoren , ▁E tzion - G eber ▁eta ▁El atera ▁joan ▁zen ▁Salomon . ▁Hiri ▁hauek ▁Itsaso ▁Gorri aren ▁er tzean ▁daude , ▁Edom ▁lurraldean .
PRED:	Then King Solomon went and went to the Red Sea and went to the Red Sea of Edom .
GOLD:	Later Solomon went to Ezion-geber and Elath , ports along the shore of the Red Sea in the land of Edom .

ID:	2425
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaien ▁Jauna ▁Moisesi ▁eta ▁Aaroni :
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,

ID:	2426
INPUT:	▁Noiz ▁arte ▁egon ▁behar ▁dut ▁kezkatu rik , biho tza ▁etengabe ▁pen aturik ? ▁Noiz ▁arte ▁etsai aren ▁menpe ?
PRED:	How long will I be gone ? How long will my soul be gone ? How long will you be gone ?
GOLD:	Turn and answer me , O Lord my God ! Restore the sparkle to my eyes , or I will die .

ID:	2427
INPUT:	▁errege ▁bil ak atzen ▁den ▁esklab oa , j akia ▁sobera ▁duen ▁tx or oa ,
PRED:	A slave is a slave , but a slave has a slave .
GOLD:	a slave who becomes a king , an overbearing fool who prospers ,

ID:	2428
INPUT:	▁Sodo man ▁bizi ▁zen ▁Abra men ▁il oba ▁Lot ▁ere ▁atxilotu ▁egin ▁zuten , ▁bere ▁ondasun ▁eta ▁guzti . ▁Eta ▁alde ▁egin ▁zuten .
PRED:	Abram lived in Lot , Abram , and all his possessions . And they did everything he had done .
GOLD:	They also captured Lot — Abram 's nephew who lived in Sodom — and carried off everything he owned .

ID:	2429
INPUT:	▁Al txatu ▁eta ▁haran erantz ▁irten ▁nintzen ; ▁eta ▁hantxe ▁zegoen ▁Jaunaren ▁aintza , ▁K eb ar ▁ibai ▁ondoan ▁ikusia ▁nuena ▁bera . ▁Ah uspez ▁erori ▁nintzen ;
PRED:	So I woke up and went out to the valley of the Lord . I saw the glory of the Lord , and I fell face down to the ground .
GOLD:	So I got up and went , and there I saw the glory of the Lord , just as I had seen in my first vision by the Kebar River . And I fell face down on the ground .

ID:	2430
INPUT:	▁Haserre ▁mintzo ▁zaie , ▁bere ▁sumin az ▁ikara ▁ematen ▁die :
PRED:	He makes them angry with his words ; he makes them angry with them .
GOLD:	Then in anger he rebukes them , terrifying them with his fierce fury .

ID:	2431
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunak bere ▁ospea ▁agertuko ▁dueta ▁gizaki ▁guztiek ▁batera ikus iko ▁dute . Jaunak ▁berak ▁esan ▁du ».
PRED:	And the Lord will be filled with people , and he will destroy all people . ”
GOLD:	Then the glory of the Lord will be revealed , and all people will see it together.The Lord has spoken ! ”

ID:	2432
INPUT:	▁Hurbil ▁da ▁Jauna ▁dei ▁egiten ▁dioten engandik , benetan ▁dei ▁egiten ▁dioten engandik .
PRED:	The Lord , who calls out from the earth , and the breath of the earth will be called .
GOLD:	The Lord is close to all who call on him , yes , to all who call on him in truth .

ID:	2433
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁ondorengoen ▁bidez ▁lurreko ▁herri ▁guztiak ▁bedeinkatuko ▁ditut , ▁nire ▁esana ▁bete ▁duzulako ».
PRED:	I will bless all the people of the earth , and I will bless you . ”
GOLD:	And through your descendants all the nations of the earth will be blessed — all because you have obeyed me . ”

ID:	2434
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁kultu - lekuak ▁ez ▁ziren ▁desagertu ▁Israelen ; ▁hala ▁ere , ▁Asak ▁zintzo ▁jokatu ▁zuen ▁bere ▁bizitza ▁osoan .
PRED:	But Asa did not destroy the pagan shrines , but he did not destroy all Israel 's life .
GOLD:	Although the pagan shrines were not removed from Israel , Asa 's heart remained completely faithful throughout his life .

ID:	2435
INPUT:	▁Mundu ko ▁erresum ok , ▁kanta ▁Jainkoari , ▁jo ▁soin ua ▁Jaunari .
PRED:	Shout to the Lord , the God of the earth , and sing to the Lord .
GOLD:	Sing to the one who rides across the ancient heavens , his mighty voice thundering from the sky .

ID:	2436
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁esan ▁zion :— Eta ▁nork ▁jakinarazi ▁dizu ▁biluzik ▁zau dela ? ▁Gal arazi ▁nizun ▁arb olako ▁fruitua ▁jan ▁al ▁duzu ?
PRED:	Then God said to him , “ You have made you naked ? ” And God told him , “ Do you eat fruit from the tree ? ”
GOLD:	“ Who told you that you were naked ? ” the Lord God asked . “ Have you eaten from the tree whose fruit I commanded you not to eat ? ”

ID:	2437
INPUT:	▁Gerx onen ▁ondorengo ▁senitarteei , ▁guztira , ▁hamahiru ▁hiri ▁eman ▁zizkieten , ▁beraien ▁herri - lur ▁eta ▁guzti .
PRED:	The descendants of Gershon were given to the clan of Gershon , four towns with their pasturelands .
GOLD:	So in all , thirteen towns with their pasturelands were allotted to the clan of Gershon .

ID:	2438
INPUT:	▁Zen baitek ▁dio : ▁« Gu tun ak ▁gogor rak ▁eta ▁zorro tzak ▁dira ; ▁baina ▁bera ▁itxura ▁kas karre ko ▁gizona ▁da ▁eta ▁hiz lari ▁esk asa ».
PRED:	He said to them , “ The man is angry with you , and the man is filled with leprosy , but he is coming . ”
GOLD:	For some say , “ Paul 's letters are demanding and forceful , but in person he is weak , and his speeches are worthless ! ”

ID:	2439
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁jendeak , ▁berriz :« Zer ▁egiten ▁dugu ▁hemen ▁geldi ? Bil ▁gaitezen , ▁go azen ▁gotorleku etara , bertan ▁hil tzera , Jaunak , ▁gure ▁Jainkoak , herio tz ara ▁ematen ▁baik aitu ; ur ▁pozoi tua ▁eskaintzen ▁digu , beraren ▁aurka ▁bekatu ▁egin ▁dugu lako .
PRED:	But the people of Israel asked , “ Let us stay here , for we have been saved from the Lord our God ! We have died for their ancestors , for we have been angry with their ancestors .
GOLD:	“ Then the people will say , ‘ Why should we wait here to die ? Come , let 's go to the fortified towns and die there.For the Lord our God has decreed our destructionand has given us a cup of poison to drinkbecause we sinned against the Lord .

ID:	2440
INPUT:	▁Gaizto a ▁ausar ti ▁agertzen ▁da ; zintz oak ▁bere ▁jokabidea ▁sendo tzen ▁du .
PRED:	The wicked plot against the wicked ; the godly are powerful .
GOLD:	The wicked bluff their way through , but the virtuous think before they act .

ID:	2441
INPUT:	▁baina ▁sustra irik ▁gabeak ▁eta ▁irau pen ▁gutx iko ak ▁izanik , ▁mezua ▁dela - eta ▁estu asun ▁edo ▁eraso aldi ren ▁bat ▁sortu ▁orduko , ▁erori ▁egiten ▁dira .
PRED:	But if they have little roots grow up , they will have a little harvest , and they will fall into a field .
GOLD:	But since they do n't have deep roots , they do n't last long . They fall away as soon as they have problems or are persecuted for believing God 's word .

ID:	2442
INPUT:	▁Garai ▁hartan ▁desegin ▁zituen ▁Josuek ▁Hebron , ▁De bir ▁eta ▁An ab eko , ▁Judako ▁nahiz ▁Israelgo ▁mendi alde etako , ▁Anak en ▁ondorengoak ▁ere : ▁erabat ▁suntsitu ▁zituen ▁beraien ▁hiri ekin ▁batera .
PRED:	So Joshua destroyed the territory of Hebron and the descendants of Hebron , including the descendants of Benjamin , including the descendants of Anak .
GOLD:	During this period Joshua destroyed all the descendants of Anak , who lived in the hill country of Hebron , Debir , Anab , and the entire hill country of Judah and Israel . He killed them all and completely destroyed their towns .

ID:	2443
INPUT:	▁Horregatik ▁agintzen ▁dizuet ▁hiru ▁hiri ▁horiek ▁aukera tzeko .
PRED:	So I command you three cities to prepare three cities for three cities .
GOLD:	That is why I am commanding you to set aside three cities of refuge .

ID:	2444
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaidan ▁Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :

ID:	2445
INPUT:	▁N ori ▁izan ▁beldur ?
PRED:	The Lord 's Chosen Servant
GOLD:	Parable of the Rich Fool

ID:	2446
INPUT:	▁Aitak , ▁ordea , ▁zapal kun tzak ▁eta ▁lapurre tak ▁egin ▁eta ▁bere ▁herritarrak ▁gaizki ▁erabili ▁zituen ; ▁beraz , ▁bere ▁erru arengatik ▁hilko ▁da .
PRED:	But the Father created the rebellious and the children , and he will die .
GOLD:	But the father will die for his many sins — for being cruel , robbing people , and doing what was clearly wrong among his people .

ID:	2447
INPUT:	▁Jeremiasen ▁gutuna ▁erbesteratu ei
PRED:	A Message to Jeremiah
GOLD:	A Letter to the Exiles

ID:	2448
INPUT:	▁« Jaunak ▁apaiz ▁izendatu ▁zaitu ▁Joiadaren ▁ordez , ▁eta ▁zeu ▁zara ▁orain ▁tenpluko ▁arduradun ▁nagusi . ▁Zeu ri ▁dago kizu , ▁bada , ▁aho ber oren ▁bat ▁profeta gin tzan ▁hasten ▁bada , ▁ze p oan ▁eta ▁katez ▁loturik ▁ezar tzea .
PRED:	“ The Lord has appointed you to serve him and put you in charge of the Temple , and you have been put in chains . If you have been arrested , you are bound with a prophet , then take him in chains and put him in chains .
GOLD:	“ The Lord has appointed you to replace Jehoiada as the priest in charge of the house of the Lord . You are responsible to put into stocks and neck irons any crazy man who claims to be a prophet .

ID:	2449
INPUT:	▁Adi erazi ▁nire , ▁Jainko ▁Jaun ▁honen , ▁mezua : ▁Zure ▁biztan leek ▁hil ketak ▁egiten ▁dituzte , ▁horrela ▁zure ▁ordua ▁hurbil araziz ; ▁idoloak ▁egiten ▁dituzte , ▁horrela ▁zu ▁kuts atuz .
PRED:	Say to them , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : The people of Judah are defiled by doing this . '
GOLD:	and give her this message from the Sovereign Lord : O city of murderers , doomed and damned — city of idols , filthy and foul —

ID:	2450
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁arbasoek ▁oihu ▁egin ▁zidaten , ▁eta ▁nik ▁ilunpea ▁jarri ▁nuen ▁haien ▁eta ▁egiptoarren ▁artean , ▁eta ▁itsasoa ▁hauen ▁gainera ▁eror arazi , ▁denak ▁estali ▁zitu elarik . ▁Zeuen ▁begiz ▁ikusi ▁zenuten ▁egipto arrei ▁egin ▁ni ena . ▁Gero , ▁basamortuan ▁bizi ▁izan ▁zineten ▁luzaro .
PRED:	I cried out to my ancestors and cried out to the waters of Egypt , and I brought them out of the Red Sea and led them over to the land of Egypt . When you saw that you were in the wilderness , you saw that you lived in the wilderness for a long time .
GOLD:	When your ancestors cried out to the Lord , I put darkness between you and the Egyptians . I brought the sea crashing down on the Egyptians , drowning them . With your very own eyes you saw what I did . Then you lived in the wilderness for many years .

ID:	2451
INPUT:	▁« Zatozte ▁niregana , ▁nekatu ▁eta ▁zam atu ▁guztiok , ▁eta ▁neuk ▁emango ▁dizuet ▁atseden .
PRED:	“ Come , let me go to me , and I will give you rest .
GOLD:	Then Jesus said , “ Come to me , all of you who are weary and carry heavy burdens , and I will give you rest .

ID:	2452
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁nazio a ▁nazio aren ▁kontra ▁eta ▁erreinua ▁erreinu aren ▁kontra ▁altxatuko ▁dira ; ▁han ▁eta ▁hemen ▁lurrik ar ak ▁eta ▁gosete ak ▁izango ▁dira . ▁Hori ▁guztia ▁erdimin en ▁hasi era ▁da .
PRED:	For there will be war against nation and nation , and there will be an end of many nations . There will be an end of many nations , and there will be a famine in many years .
GOLD:	Nation will go to war against nation , and kingdom against kingdom . There will be earthquakes in many parts of the world , as well as famines . But this is only the first of the birth pains , with more to come .

ID:	2453
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁os ab arik ▁ere ▁ez ▁badu , ▁gainerako ▁ahaide etatik ▁hurbil en eko ari ▁emango ▁zaio ▁ondarea ▁eta ▁bera ▁izango ▁da ▁jabe . ▁Lege ▁izango ▁dute ▁hau ▁israeldarrek , ▁nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁Moisesi ▁agindutako aren ▁arabera ».
PRED:	And if it is no allotment of land , it will be an inheritance to the family of Levi , and it will be a special possession to the people of Israel , says the Lord . ”
GOLD:	But if his father has no brothers , give his inheritance to the nearest relative in his clan . This is a legal requirement for the people of Israel , just as the Lord commanded Moses . ”

ID:	2454
INPUT:	▁Jaunari ▁atsegin ▁ez ▁zaiona ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁Joiaki mek ▁bezalaxe .
PRED:	He did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as Jehoiakim had done .
GOLD:	But Zedekiah did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as Jehoiakim had done .

ID:	2455
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁ote ▁sen dag ai rik ▁Gala aden , ez ▁ote ▁m e dik urik ? Zergatik ▁ez ▁da ▁sendatzen nire ▁herria ?
PRED:	Did n't I have no pity for women ? Why have you sick ? Why have I healed my people ?
GOLD:	Is there no medicine in Gilead ? Is there no physician there ? Why is there no healingfor the wounds of my people ?

ID:	2456
INPUT:	▁Zintzoak , ▁berriz , ▁pozik ▁dira , Jainkoaren ▁aurrean ▁dantz an , ▁bozkari oz ▁gainezka .
PRED:	The godly were glad when they sing with joy ; they were filled with joy .
GOLD:	Sing praises to God and to his name ! Sing loud praises to him who rides the clouds.His name is the Lord — rejoice in his presence !

ID:	2457
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁jabe ▁izateko ▁bertara ▁sartu ▁zirenean , ▁ez ▁ziren ▁zure ▁esaneko ▁izan , ▁ez ▁zituzten ▁zure ▁legeak ▁bete , ▁ez ▁zuten ▁zuk ▁agindu aren ▁arabera ▁jokatu . ▁Horregatik ▁bidali ▁diezu ▁zoritxar ▁handi ▁hau .
PRED:	But when they were in charge of you , they refused to obey your commandments . So they did not obey your commands . So you sent this command to obey the command you .
GOLD:	Our ancestors came and conquered it and lived in it , but they refused to obey you or follow your word . They have not done anything you commanded . That is why you have sent this terrible disaster upon them .

ID:	2458
INPUT:	▁amets ez ▁beldur tzen ▁nauzu eta ▁ikuskari ▁gaizto z ▁izu - ikara tzen .
PRED:	I am afraid of your dream , and you are terrified by the wicked .
GOLD:	but then you shatter me with dreamsand terrify me with visions .

ID:	2459
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁gal bidera tu ▁edon olako ▁idolo ▁edo ▁jainko - irudiak ▁eginez : ▁gizonezko nahiz ▁emakumezko - irudiak ,
PRED:	Do not turn away from idols or worship idols or images of wood .
GOLD:	So do not corrupt yourselves by making an idol in any form — whether of a man or a woman ,

ID:	2460
INPUT:	▁Jobek ▁erantzun ▁zuen :
PRED:	Then Job spoke again :
GOLD:	Then Job spoke again :

ID:	2461
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁erantzun ▁zien :— Ez ▁dute ▁osasun dun ek ▁sen dag ilea ▁behar , ▁gaixo ek ▁baizik ;
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ They have a sick person , but a person who has been sick . ”
GOLD:	Jesus answered them , “ Healthy people do n't need a doctor — sick people do .

ID:	2462
INPUT:	▁Ah iz p aren ▁bidea ▁hartu ▁duzu ▁eta , ▁beraz , ▁haren ▁kopa ▁jarriko ▁dut ▁zure ▁eskuan .
PRED:	You have made the way of your way , and I will make it a cup of wine .
GOLD:	Because you have followed in your sister 's footsteps , I will force you to drink the same cup of terror she drank .

ID:	2463
INPUT:	▁An imal ia ▁garbi ak ▁eta ▁kutsatu ak
PRED:	Teaching about Money and Possessions
GOLD:	Ceremonially Clean and Unclean Animals

ID:	2464
INPUT:	▁Sedek iasen ▁erregealdiko ▁bederatzi garren ▁urtean , ▁hamargarren ▁hilaren ▁ham arrean , ▁Babiloniako ▁errege ▁Nabukodonosor ▁Jerusalemen ▁kontra ▁etorri ▁zen ▁gudaroste ▁osoarekin ▁eta ▁setiatu ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁inguru ▁guztian ▁harresia ▁eraik iz .
PRED:	On the third day of Zedekiah 's reign , during the eleventh year of King Zedekiah 's reign , King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came and besieged it .
GOLD:	So on January 15 , during the ninth year of Zedekiah 's reign , King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon led his entire army against Jerusalem . They surrounded the city and built siege ramps against its walls .

ID:	2465
INPUT:	▁Paulok , ▁aldiz , ▁Sil as ▁aukeratu ▁zuen ▁eta , ▁senideek ▁Jaunaren ▁onginahi ari ▁go men datu ▁zi ote larik , ▁atera ▁egin ▁zen .
PRED:	Paul chose Silas and Silas and Silas and Silas , along with the grace of the Lord 's unfailing love .
GOLD:	Paul chose Silas , and as he left , the believers entrusted him to the Lord 's gracious care .

ID:	2466
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁egingo ▁dizue ▁kalte , ▁zuek ▁beti ▁on ▁egiten ▁saiatzen ▁bazarete ?
PRED:	Who will keep you safe from doing good ? Who is good to you ?
GOLD:	Now , who will want to harm you if you are eager to do good ?

ID:	2467
INPUT:	▁Gau ▁horretan ▁j ago le ▁egon ▁zen ▁Jauna ▁haiek ▁Egiptotik ▁ateratzeko . ▁Horregatik , ▁Jaunaren ▁omenez , ▁israeldarrek ▁erne ▁egon ▁behar ▁dute ▁gau ▁horretan , ▁be ila ▁eginez , ▁belaunez ▁belaun .
PRED:	In that night the Lord remained at night at night , for the people of Israel are set apart for the Lord 's presence . That is why the people of Israel must be observed from generation to generation .
GOLD:	On this night the Lord kept his promise to bring his people out of the land of Egypt . So this night belongs to him , and it must be commemorated every year by all the Israelites , from generation to generation .

ID:	2468
INPUT:	▁Bakea ▁ematen ▁digun ▁Jainkoak ▁luzaro ▁gabe ▁zapalduko ▁du ▁Satan as ▁zuen ▁oin pean . ▁Jesu ▁Kristo ▁gure ▁Jaunaren ▁grazia ▁izan ▁bedi ▁zuekin .
PRED:	May God give us a long time without a long time , Satan of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you . May the grace of our Lord Jesus be with you .
GOLD:	The God of peace will soon crush Satan under your feet . May the grace of our Lord Jesus be with you .

ID:	2469
INPUT:	▁B azi ren ▁han ▁emakume ▁asko ▁ere , ▁urrutitik ▁begira ; ▁Jesusi ▁jarraituz ▁Galile atik ▁etorri ak ▁ziren , ▁beraren ▁zerbitzari ;
PRED:	There were many women living in the distance , just as Jesus had left Galilee .
GOLD:	And many women who had come from Galilee with Jesus to care for him were watching from a distance .

ID:	2470
INPUT:	▁Behin ▁batean , ▁Jesus ▁honela ▁mintzatu ▁zen : ▁« Go res ten ▁zaitut , ▁Aita , ▁zeru - lurren ▁Jauna , ▁gauza ▁hauek ▁jakintsu ▁eta ▁ikasi ei ▁ezkutatu ▁dizki ez ul ako ▁eta ▁jende ▁x ume ari ▁agertu .
PRED:	One day Jesus said to them , “ I am the Father , the Father of heaven and earth , and all the people of heaven and earth .
GOLD:	At that time Jesus prayed this prayer : “ O Father , Lord of heaven and earth , thank you for hiding these things from those who think themselves wise and clever , and for revealing them to the childlike .

ID:	2471
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁ere ▁ez ▁dut ▁errukirik ▁izango ▁lurraldeko ▁bizilagun ekin . ▁Hala ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jaun ▁honek . ▁Giz akia , ▁nor ▁bere ▁artzain aren ▁eta ▁erregearen ▁esku ▁utziko ▁dut ; ▁erregeek ▁lurraldea ▁erraus tuko ▁dute , ▁eta ▁ez ▁dut ▁inor ▁aterako ▁haien ▁eskuetatik ».
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : I will not reject the people of Israel , says the Lord , “ I will destroy them , and I will destroy them and destroy them . I will destroy them , and I will never destroy them . ”
GOLD:	Likewise , I will no longer have pity on the people of the land , ” says the Lord . “ I will let them fall into each other 's hands and into the hands of their king . They will turn the land into a wilderness , and I will not rescue them . ”

ID:	2472
INPUT:	▁Zuek ▁hiria ▁ingu ratuko ▁duzue : ▁sei ▁egunez , ▁egunero ▁itzuli ▁bat ▁eginen ▁duzue ▁gerra - gizon ▁guztiok ▁hiriaren ▁inguruan .
PRED:	You will have six days each of you , and you will attack the town of Benjamin .
GOLD:	You and your fighting men should march around the town once a day for six days .

ID:	2473
INPUT:	▁Axdo d ▁hiritik kendu ▁egingo ▁dut ▁buruzagia , A x k el on dik ▁aginte - makila ▁duena ; E k ron ▁hiriaren ▁aurka j aso ko ▁dut ▁eskua , eta ▁gainerako ▁filistear ▁ap urrak galdu ▁egingo ▁dira ». Jainko ▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁du .
PRED:	Then I will destroy the city of Ashdod , and the ruler of the city will break the ruins of the city . The enemy will rise against the city of the enemy , and the Lord , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	I will slaughter the people of Ashdodand destroy the king of Ashkelon.Then I will turn to attack Ekron , and the few Philistines still left will be killed , ” says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	2474
INPUT:	▁« A ber ea ▁hiltzen ▁duenak , ▁aberea ▁itzuliko ▁du ; ▁gizakia ▁hiltzen ▁duena ▁heriotzara ▁emango ▁dute .
PRED:	“ Anyone who kills another person must return to death , and the person who kills it will be put to death .
GOLD:	“ Whoever kills an animal must pay for it in full , but whoever kills another person must be put to death .

ID:	2475
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁behar tsuak ▁beti ▁dituzue ▁zeuen ▁artean , ▁baina ▁ni ▁ez ▁nauzue ▁betiko ▁zuekin .
PRED:	You must always keep the poor among you , but I am not with you .
GOLD:	You will always have the poor among you , but you will not always have me .

ID:	2476
INPUT:	▁Bar n eko ▁a taria ▁eta ▁tenplua
PRED:	Building the Temple
GOLD:	The North Gateway

ID:	2477
INPUT:	▁« Era man ▁zeuen ▁lurreko ▁lehen ▁fruituak ▁Jaunaren , ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoaren , ▁etxera .« Ez ▁egos i ▁antx um erik ▁bere ▁amaren ▁esn etan ».
PRED:	“ Do n't be able to celebrate the wine of the Lord your God , for you have never been able to celebrate the spring of a young goat . ”
GOLD:	“ As you harvest your crops , bring the very best of the first harvest to the house of the Lord your God. “ You must not cook a young goat in its mother 's milk . ”

ID:	2478
INPUT:	▁« Nire gan ▁sinesten ▁duten ▁txiki ▁hau etakoren ▁bat ▁galbidean ▁jartzen ▁duenak , ▁ , ▁hobe ▁luke ▁erro tarri ▁bat ▁lepotik ▁erantsi ▁eta ▁itsas ▁hondo ra ▁amil duko ▁balu te .
PRED:	“ Anyone who believes in me will be thrown into sin , and if anyone who has been broken into sin , it is better to fall into the sea .
GOLD:	But if you cause one of these little ones who trusts in me to fall into sin , it would be better for you to have a large millstone tied around your neck and be drowned in the depths of the sea .

ID:	2479
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁baten ▁bekatuak ▁gizon - emakume ▁guztiei ▁gaitz espena ▁ekarri ▁zien ▁bezala , ▁baten ▁leial tasunak ▁gizon - emakume ▁guztiei ▁salb azioa ▁eta ▁bizia ▁ekartzen ▁dizkie .
PRED:	So he brought back to all the sins of sinful people , just as you have been unfaithful , and you have been saved .
GOLD:	Yes , Adam 's one sin brings condemnation for everyone , but Christ 's one act of righteousness brings a right relationship with God and new life for everyone .

ID:	2480
INPUT:	▁erregetza ▁Saulen ▁etxe ari ▁kendu ▁eta ▁Israelen ▁eta ▁Judan , ▁Dan dik ▁hasi ▁eta ▁Beer - Xeb araino , ▁Daviden ▁errege - aul kia ▁sendo tuko ▁zuela ▁egin ▁baitzuen ▁zin .
PRED:	David removed the kingdom from the Temple and from the south and from the south of the north and the north of the north , where David had sworn an oath to Beersheba .
GOLD:	I 'm going to take Saul 's kingdom and give it to David . I will establish the throne of David over Israel as well as Judah , all the way from Dan in the north to Beersheba in the south . ”

ID:	2481
INPUT:	▁Daviden ▁hil eta - kan tua ▁Saulen ▁eta ▁Jonatan en ▁heriotz agatik
PRED:	David killed Jonathan and Jonathan 's death for Jonathan 's death .
GOLD:	David 's Song for Saul and Jonathan

ID:	2482
INPUT:	▁Arrats ean , ▁Jesusen ▁ikasleak ▁aintzi rara ▁jaitsi
PRED:	The next day Jesus went down to the lake of the lake
GOLD:	That evening Jesus ' disciples went down to the shore to wait for him .

ID:	2483
INPUT:	▁Zu ▁izan ▁zaitut ▁euskarri ▁amaren ▁sabeletik , zuk ▁atera ▁nauzu ▁amaren ▁erra i etatik . Zu ri ▁etengabe ▁nire ▁gorespena !
PRED:	O Lord , you have rescued me from your mother ; you have rescued me from your mother .
GOLD:	Yes , you have been with me from birth ; from my mother 's womb you have cared for me.No wonder I am always praising you !

ID:	2484
INPUT:	▁D el aias , ▁Tob ias ▁eta ▁N eko daren ▁ondorengoak ▁ziren , ▁ <unk> ▁lagun .
PRED:	From the family of Harim were also included in charge of the family of Shecaniah .
GOLD:	This group included the families of Delaiah , Tobiah , and Nekoda — a total of 652 people .

ID:	2485
INPUT:	▁Er antz ia ▁dut ▁soin ekoa ; n olatan ▁jantzi ▁berriro ? Gar bi tuak ▁ditut ▁oinak ; n olatan ▁zik indu ▁berriro ?
PRED:	How can I put my cloak ? How can I be my feet ? Why did I wander away ?
GOLD:	But I responded , “ I have taken off my robe.Should I get dressed again ? I have washed my feet.Should I get them soiled ? ”

ID:	2486
INPUT:	▁Ar m ate gia ▁zabaldu eta ▁armak ▁atera ▁ditut , neure ▁haserre - zigorra ▁buru tzeko : nik , ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak , egin behar ▁bat ▁dut b abiloni arren ▁herrialdean .
PRED:	For I have put an eye on my head , and I have put a spear in the land of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	The Lord has opened his armoryand brought out weapons to vent his fury.The terror that falls upon the Babylonianswill be the work of the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies .

ID:	2487
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaion ▁Jauna ▁Moisesi :
PRED:	The Lord said to Moses ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord gave these instructions to Moses :

ID:	2488
INPUT:	▁Jef tek , ▁orduan :— A mon darren ▁kontra ▁borrokatzera ▁jo atea ▁nahi ▁baduzue ▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁eskura ▁ematen ▁baldin ▁bad izki t , ▁neu ▁izango ▁nauzue ▁buruzagi .
PRED:	Then Jephthah said to Jephthah , “ If you want me to fight against you , I will hand you over to you . ”
GOLD:	Jephthah said to the elders , “ Let me get this straight . If I come with you and if the Lord gives me victory over the Ammonites , will you really make me ruler over all the people ? ”

ID:	2489
INPUT:	▁Berriro ▁Jordanez ▁beste ▁aldera ▁joan ▁zen ▁Jesus , ▁garai ▁batean ▁Joan ▁bataiatzen ▁ari ▁izan ▁zen ▁lekura . ▁Han ▁gelditu ▁zen ▁aldi ▁batez ,
PRED:	Later , Jesus went to the other side of the Jordan River , where John was staying at the place where John was standing there .
GOLD:	He went beyond the Jordan River near the place where John was first baptizing and stayed there awhile .

ID:	2490
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁leiho tik ▁behera ▁eraitsi ▁zuen . ▁Orduan , ▁Davidek ▁ihes ▁egin ▁zuen ▁eta ▁bere ▁burua ▁salbatu .
PRED:	Then David tore down the window of the palace , and he saved himself .
GOLD:	So she helped him climb out through a window , and he fled and escaped .

ID:	2491
INPUT:	▁Jakobek ▁erantzun ▁zion ▁Laban i :— B el dur ▁nintz elako ▁egin ▁dut ▁ihes , ▁zeure ▁alabak ▁kendu ▁egingo ▁zen izki dala ▁uste ▁nuen ▁eta .
PRED:	Jacob replied to Laban , “ I was afraid of you as if I was afraid of you , I would n't be afraid . ”
GOLD:	“ I rushed away because I was afraid , ” Jacob answered . “ I thought you would take your daughters from me by force .

ID:	2492
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁eman ▁dio ▁hari ▁lehenengo , ▁gero ▁hark ▁itzuli ▁behar ▁izateko ?
PRED:	Who should give him the first to whom he wants him ?
GOLD:	And who has given him so muchthat he needs to pay it back ?

ID:	2493
INPUT:	▁Men d eku - esku bidea ▁duena ▁atzetik ▁badator ki o ▁ere , ▁ezin ▁izango ▁dute ▁hil tzailea ▁beraren ▁esku ▁utzi , ▁nahi ▁gabe ▁hil ▁baitu ▁bere ▁lagun ▁hurkoa ▁eta ▁ez ▁lehen dik ▁gorroto ▁zuelako .
PRED:	The people of Israel are coming , but the judgment is coming to kill him . They wo n't kill him , for they have rejected his neighbor 's neighbor .
GOLD:	If the relatives of the victim come to avenge the killing , the leaders must not release the slayer to them , for he killed the other person unintentionally and without previous hostility .

ID:	2494
INPUT:	▁Seme - alab atx o ok , ▁ibili ▁kon tuz ▁idolo ekin .
PRED:	Children , listen to your children , and do not forget their idols .
GOLD:	Dear children , keep away from anything that might take God 's place in your hearts .

ID:	2495
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁mandatariak ▁bidali ▁n izkien ▁erantzun ▁honekin : ▁« L an ▁handi etan ▁nabil ▁eta ▁ez ▁n aiteke ▁joan . ▁Zuen gana ▁jo ate agatik ▁bakarrik ▁lanak ▁ez ▁ni tuz ke ▁utzi ▁nahi ».
PRED:	So I sent messengers to tell them , “ If I want me to do n't want me to do , I wo n't want you to do anything . ”
GOLD:	so I replied by sending this message to them : “ I am engaged in a great work , so I ca n't come . Why should I stop working to come and meet with you ? ”

ID:	2496
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁zu rik eriaz ▁menderatu ▁egiten ▁du , bere ▁hitz ▁gox o ez ▁erak arri .
PRED:	He speaks against princes , and his words stir up trouble .
GOLD:	So she seduced him with her pretty speechand enticed him with her flattery .

ID:	2497
INPUT:	▁H uts ▁egi ezu ▁eta ▁lots arazi ▁ni ▁hiltzeko ▁dabiltzanak . A tzera ▁egin ▁bezate , ▁lotsa ▁gorri an , ni ▁nondik ▁hondatuko ▁dabiltzan ek .
PRED:	They are ashamed of shame and shame , and they will be ashamed to shame shame .
GOLD:	Bring shame and disgrace on those trying to kill me ; turn them back and humiliate those who want to harm me .

ID:	2498
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁ihardetsi ▁zuen :— Ez ▁dezazuela ▁horrelakorik ▁egin , ▁ene ▁anai ok , ▁Jaunak ▁eman ▁digun arekin ! ▁Zain du ▁egin ▁gaitu ; ▁eraso ▁zigun ▁lapur - talde ▁hura ▁eskura ▁eman ▁digu .
PRED:	“ No , ” David said , “ I have done such a thing that the Lord has given us victory over us . ”
GOLD:	But David said , “ No , my brothers ! Do n't be selfish with what the Lord has given us . He has kept us safe and helped us defeat the band of raiders that attacked us .

ID:	2499
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁kontra ▁bidaliko ▁dizkizu en ▁etsaiak ▁baldin tza ▁go gorre tan ▁zerbitzatu ▁beharko ▁dituzue : ▁gose - e garriz , ▁biluzik ▁eta ▁behar ▁gorri an . ▁Le p oan ▁burdinazko ▁uztarria ▁ezarriko ▁dizuete , ▁suntsitu ▁arte .
PRED:	For the Lord will send you out against you . If you are hungry , you will be hungry and thirsty , you will be cut off with iron chains .
GOLD:	you will serve your enemies whom the Lord will send against you . You will be left hungry , thirsty , naked , and lacking in everything . The Lord will put an iron yoke on your neck , oppressing you harshly until he has destroyed you .

ID:	2500
INPUT:	▁Bera ▁da ▁Jaunaren ▁tenplua j aso ko ▁duena ; oho rez ▁betea ▁izango ▁daeta ▁errege - aulkian ▁j es arriko go bern atzeko ; ap aiz a ▁ere ▁bere ▁aul kian ▁j es arriko ▁da , eta ▁zeharo ▁bat ▁etorriko ▁dira ▁biak .
PRED:	He will make his honor at the Temple of the Lord , and he will rule the throne of the Lord . He will sit on the throne of the royal throne , and the moon will rule over the earth .
GOLD:	Yes , he will build the Temple of the Lord . Then he will receive royal honor and will rule as king from his throne . He will also serve as priest from his throne , and there will be perfect harmony between his two roles . '

ID:	2501
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁Semeak ▁as katzen ▁bazai tuzte , ▁benetan ▁aske ▁izango ▁zarete .
PRED:	So if you refuse to welcome you , you will be safe .
GOLD:	So if the Son sets you free , you are truly free .

ID:	2502
INPUT:	▁Asak ▁Jaunaren , ▁bere ▁Jainkoaren , ▁begietan ▁on ▁eta ▁zuzen ▁dena ▁egin ▁zuen .
PRED:	Asa did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , and he made everything he did .
GOLD:	When Abijah died , he was buried in the City of David . Then his son Asa became the next king . There was peace in the land for ten years .

ID:	2503
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁espero an ▁nago , gau ▁osoan ▁es na , ▁goiz a ▁arte ▁be il ari .
PRED:	I hope in the Lord 's presence until morning I find out until morning .
GOLD:	I long for the Lordmore than sentries long for the dawn , yes , more than sentries long for the dawn .

ID:	2504
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁ez ▁badio te ▁entzuten , herio tzaren ▁muga ▁pas atuko ▁dute , ▁konturatu ▁gabe ▁hilko .
PRED:	But if you listen to me , they will not find out of the mouth of death .
GOLD:	But if they refuse to listen to him , they will cross over the river of death , dying from lack of understanding .

ID:	2505
INPUT:	▁« Israel ▁ez ▁da ▁iz atez ▁esklabo , ezta ▁esklabo - seme ▁ere . Zergatik ▁bihurtu ▁da , ▁bada , bes teren ▁harrapakin ?
PRED:	“ Why do n't you be slaves to their slaves ? Why are you slaves ? Why are you slaves ?
GOLD:	“ Why has Israel become a slave ? Why has he been carried away as plunder ?

ID:	2506
INPUT:	▁Lau ▁k erubin ek ▁l aun a ▁aurpegi ▁eta ▁l aun a ▁hego ▁zituzten ▁eta , ▁hegal pean , ▁giza ▁bes oen ▁itx urako ak .
PRED:	The four cherubim had four wings over each other , and each had four wings on each side . The wings of the cherubim had each other .
GOLD:	for each had four faces and four wings and what looked like human hands under their wings .

ID:	2507
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁artetik ▁ere ▁aterako ▁dira ▁batzuk ▁irakaspen ▁oker rak ▁zabaldu z , ▁ikasleak ▁beren ▁atzetik ▁eramateko .
PRED:	Your teaching will come from your teaching , and the disciples will lead them away .
GOLD:	Even some men from your own group will rise up and distort the truth in order to draw a following .

ID:	2508
INPUT:	▁Kan abera ▁printz atua ▁ez ▁du ▁hautsiko , ▁ahul du riko ▁argi - m etx a ▁ez ▁du ▁itzal iko , ▁justizia ▁nagusi ▁ezar ▁dezan ▁arte .
PRED:	He will cut off the bones of the dead , and he will not cut off the head of the dead .
GOLD:	He will not crush the weakest reedor put out a flickering candle.Finally he will cause justice to be victorious .

ID:	2509
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁Pazkoa ▁ospa tzeko ▁agindu
PRED:	Instructions for the Passover
GOLD:	The First Passover

ID:	2510
INPUT:	▁Biharamunean , ▁goizean ▁goiz ▁jaiki ▁zen ▁Josue . ▁Apaizek ▁kutxa ▁hartu ▁zuten ,
PRED:	Early the next morning Joshua got up early the Ark of the Lord .
GOLD:	Joshua got up early the next morning , and the priests again carried the Ark of the Lord .

ID:	2511
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁inork ▁ezer ▁esaten ▁bad izue , ▁erantzun : ▁“ Jaunak ▁behar ▁ditu , ▁baina ▁berehala ▁itzuliko ▁ditu ”».
PRED:	And do n't say , ‘ This is what the Lord says : The Lord will return . ' ”
GOLD:	If anyone asks what you are doing , just say , ‘ The Lord needs them , ' and he will immediately let you take them . ”

ID:	2512
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁eta ▁nire ▁talde ak ▁adarrak ▁jotzean , ▁jo ▁zuek ▁ere ▁kanpaleku aren ▁inguru ▁guztian ▁eta ▁egin ▁oihu : ▁« Jaunaren gatik ! ▁Gede onen gatik !»
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ You marched against the edge of the camp , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	As soon as I and those with me blow the rams ' horns , blow your horns , too , all around the entire camp , and shout , ‘ For the Lord and for Gideon ! ' ”

ID:	2513
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁harlau za ▁biak ▁jaurti ▁eta ▁pus katu ▁egin ▁nituen ▁zuen ▁aurrean .
PRED:	Then I threw them into two stone , and I threw them into the stone .
GOLD:	So I took the stone tablets and threw them to the ground , smashing them before your eyes .

ID:	2514
INPUT:	▁Es m ir n ako ▁eliz ▁elkarteari
PRED:	The Message to the Church in Laodicea
GOLD:	The Message to the Church in Smyrna

ID:	2515
INPUT:	▁Horregatik ▁dira ▁haren ▁beldur ▁gizakiak , eta ▁berak ▁ez ▁ditu ▁jakintsu ▁us teko ak ▁kontuan ▁hartzen ».
PRED:	That is why the wise are afraid , and the wise are not wise . ”
GOLD:	No wonder people everywhere fear him.All who are wise show him reverence . ”

ID:	2516
INPUT:	▁Al eluia ! ▁Gora ▁Jauna ! Bai ▁eder , ▁gure ▁Jainkoa ▁kan tuz ▁ospa tzea , bai ▁gozo , ▁bera ▁doinu ▁ez tiz ▁gores tea !
PRED:	Praise the Lord , the God of our God ! It is the one who gives us the early in the evening .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! How good to sing praises to our God ! How delightful and how fitting !

ID:	2517
INPUT:	▁Emakume ▁honen gandik ▁Jaunak ▁emango ▁dizk izun ▁seme - alabek ▁egin ▁bezate ▁zure ▁familia , ▁Juda ▁eta ▁Tam arren ▁seme ▁P ere tzen ▁familia ▁bezain ▁handi .
PRED:	Then the Lord will give you all the women of Judah and daughters of Judah and Judah and her sons and daughters .
GOLD:	And may the Lord give you descendants by this young woman who will be like those of our ancestor Perez , the son of Tamar and Judah . ”

ID:	2518
INPUT:	▁Saulek ▁erantzun ▁zion ▁Samueli :— Ez ▁al ▁dut , ▁bada , ▁egin ▁Jaunaren ▁esana ? ▁Berak ▁bidali ▁ninduen ▁bidetik ▁ibili ▁naiz . ▁E karri ▁dut ▁Ag ag , ▁amalek tarren ▁erregea , ▁eta ▁suntsitu ▁ditut ▁amalek tarrak .
PRED:	But Saul replied to Samuel , “ I 'm not the way of the Lord , who sent me on the way of the Amalekites , and I will destroy the Amalekites and destroy the Amalekites . ”
GOLD:	“ But I did obey the Lord , ” Saul insisted . “ I carried out the mission he gave me . I brought back King Agag , but I destroyed everyone else .

ID:	2519
INPUT:	▁Nire ▁mai s ul ana ▁da ; neuk ▁bakarrik , ▁bere ▁eg ileak , ▁mendera ▁lezake ▁ezpataz .
PRED:	I am blameless , who is the one who created the Lord , who created them .
GOLD:	It is a prime example of God 's handiwork , and only its Creator can threaten it .

ID:	2520
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jerusalemen ▁bizi ▁ziren ▁batzuk ▁galdezka ▁hasi ▁ziren : ▁« Ez ▁al ▁da ▁hau ▁hil ▁nahi ▁dutena ?
PRED:	Then some of the people of Jerusalem began to die in Jerusalem . “ Is n't it right ? ” they asked .
GOLD:	Some of the people who lived in Jerusalem started to ask each other , “ Is n't this the man they are trying to kill ?

ID:	2521
INPUT:	▁Santua ▁da , ▁oi ▁Jainko , ▁zure ▁jardu era ! Zein ▁jainko ▁zu ▁bezain ▁handi ?
PRED:	It is the Holy One , O God , who is like a mighty nation ?
GOLD:	You are the God of great wonders ! You demonstrate your awesome power among the nations .

ID:	2522
INPUT:	▁Man dat ariak ▁bidaltzen ▁ditu N il on ▁barrena , ih izko ▁txalu p etan , ▁uretan ▁zehar . Zoazte , ▁mandatari ▁bizkor rak , ▁itzul ih erri ▁ler den ▁eta ▁bel tzar an ▁horretara , ed on on ▁beldurra ▁sortzen ▁duen jende arengana , ib aiz ▁urez tatu riko ▁lurraldean bizi ▁den herri ▁gogor ▁eta ▁mendera tzail era !
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I am sending you into a boat in a boat , and you will return to the land of Canaan , and you will return to the land of the world , and you will live in the land of the world .
GOLD:	that sends ambassadorsin swift boats down the river.Go , swift messengers ! Take a message to a tall , smooth-skinned people , who are feared far and widefor their conquests and destruction , and whose land is divided by rivers .

ID:	2523
INPUT:	▁esan ▁zien ▁Josuek : ▁« Ab eras tasun ▁handiak ▁harturik ▁z oazte ▁etxera : ▁abere - talde ▁ugari , ▁zilarra ▁eta ▁urrea , ▁brontzea , ▁burdina ▁eta ▁jan zki ▁asko . ▁B ana ▁itzazue ▁senideen ▁artean ▁etsaiei ▁kendu tako ▁harrapakin ok ».
PRED:	Then Joshua said to them , “ Get large and silver , silver , gold , silver , silver , and bronze , silver , and bronze , and silver , and bronze . Give them the plunder of silver and gold . ”
GOLD:	he said to them , “ Go back to your homes with the great wealth you have taken from your enemies — the vast herds of livestock , the silver , gold , bronze , and iron , and the large supply of clothing . Share the plunder with your relatives . ”

ID:	2524
INPUT:	▁« A k azia - zurezko ▁kutxa ▁egin , ▁lehen goak ▁bezalako ▁bi ▁harlau za ▁ebaki ▁eta , ▁harlau zak ▁eskuetan ▁nitu ela , ▁mendira ▁igo ▁nintzen .
PRED:	“ I made the Ark of acacia wood to be like a stone of stone , and I put them on the mountain of stone .
GOLD:	“ So I made an Ark of acacia wood and cut two stone tablets like the first two . Then I went up the mountain with the tablets in my hand .

ID:	2525
INPUT:	▁Abrahamek ▁Jainkoari ▁otoitz ▁egin ▁eta ▁Jainkoak ▁sendatu ▁egin ▁zituen ▁Abimelek , ▁honen ▁emaztea ▁eta ▁mira beak , ▁berriro ▁seme - alabak ▁izan ▁ahal ▁zitzaten .
PRED:	Abraham prayed to God , and he healed his son Abimelech 's wife , and he had children and children again .
GOLD:	Then Abraham prayed to God , and God healed Abimelech , his wife , and his female servants , so they could have children .

ID:	2526
INPUT:	▁Judaren ▁leinua ▁aukeratu ▁zuen , Sion ▁mendia , ▁bere ▁maitea .
PRED:	He chose the tribe of Judah ; his love endures forever .
GOLD:	He chose instead the tribe of Judah , and Mount Zion , which he loved .

ID:	2527
INPUT:	▁Ek aitza ▁p asa , ▁eta ▁ki to ▁gaiztoa ! Baina ▁betiko ▁oinarriak ▁ditu ▁zintzoak .
PRED:	The mouth of the wicked are eternal , but the light of the wicked is eternal .
GOLD:	When the storms of life come , the wicked are whirled away , but the godly have a lasting foundation .

ID:	2528
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Jesusek ▁ez ▁baitzion ▁gehiago ▁erantzun , ▁harriturik ▁gelditu ▁zen ▁Pilato .
PRED:	But Jesus was n't amazed at Pilate , but he was amazed .
GOLD:	But Jesus said nothing , much to Pilate 's surprise .

ID:	2529
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁honela ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoak : ▁Ira garriak ▁ditudan ▁zoritxar ▁guztiak ▁bidaliko ▁ditut ▁Judako ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁bizilagun on ▁gainera , ▁hitz ▁egindako an ▁aditu ▁ez ▁eta ▁dei ▁egindako an ▁erantzun ▁ez ▁didazu elako ».
PRED:	Therefore , this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : I will send disaster upon all the people of Judah and Jerusalem , and I will not listen to you . ”
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Lord God of Heaven 's Armies , the God of Israel , says : ‘ Because you refuse to listen or answer when I call , I will send upon Judah and Jerusalem all the disasters I have threatened . ' ”

ID:	2530
INPUT:	▁Paulo , ▁Ag ri p aren ▁eta ▁Beren iz eren ▁aurrean
PRED:	Paul and Silas in charge of Paul
GOLD:	Paul Speaks to Agrippa

ID:	2531
INPUT:	▁O re in arenak ▁bezain ▁arin ▁dizkit ▁oinak ▁egin , eta ▁neure ▁t on t orre tan ▁sendo ▁nau ▁ezarri .
PRED:	He has made me as surefooted as a deer , and he has laid me on my feet .
GOLD:	He trains my hands for battle ; he strengthens my arm to draw a bronze bow .

ID:	2532
INPUT:	▁Be ero tarrak ▁ihesi ▁joan ak ▁ziren ▁G ita im era , ▁eta ▁han ▁bizi ▁dira ▁etorkin ▁gisa ▁gaurdaino .
PRED:	The Israelites fled to the foreigners living among the foreigners living among you .
GOLD:	because the original people of Beeroth fled to Gittaim , where they still live as foreigners .

ID:	2533
INPUT:	▁Gizaki ak ▁egitasmoak , ▁Jaunak ▁azken ▁hitza .
PRED:	The Lord 's plans to understand all this word .
GOLD:	We can make our own plans , but the Lord gives the right answer .

ID:	2534
INPUT:	▁Egun ▁hartan txe , ▁hain ▁zuzen , ▁atera ▁zituen ▁Jaunak ▁Egiptotik ▁israeldarrak , ▁gudaroste ▁baten ▁gisa ▁lerro turik .
PRED:	On that day the Lord led Israel out of the land of Egypt , as well as the Lord had instructed .
GOLD:	On that very day the Lord brought the people of Israel out of the land of Egypt like an army .

ID:	2535
INPUT:	▁Atz eman ▁zuten , ▁bada , ▁Atal ia ▁eta ▁jauregira , ▁zaldi en ▁atera , ▁heldu ▁zenean , ▁bertan ▁hil ▁zuten .
PRED:	So she brought her out to her , and she brought her out to the palace gate .
GOLD:	So they seized her and led her out to the entrance of the Horse Gate on the palace grounds , and they killed her there .

ID:	2536
INPUT:	▁« J aso ▁begiak ▁muino etara : zein etan ▁ez ▁zar am ai tak eri atan ▁ibil ia ? B ide - bazter retan ▁egoten ▁zinen , ar abi ar ▁lapur rak bas amortuan ▁bezala , zer ▁harrapatuko ▁zain . K uts atu ▁egin ▁duzu ▁lurraldeaz eure ▁prostituzio ▁eta ▁gaiztakeri az .
PRED:	“ O mountains , do n't you look to idols in the hills ? Why do you look to idols ? Why are you going to live in the wilderness ? Why did you think you were in the wilderness to live in the wilderness ?
GOLD:	“ Look at the shrines on every hilltop.Is there any place you have not been defiledby your adultery with other gods ? You sit like a prostitute beside the road waiting for a customer.You sit alone like a nomad in the desert.You have polluted the land with your prostitutionand your wickedness .

ID:	2537
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁jendea ▁tx u tx u - mu tx uka ▁ari ▁zen ▁hartaz ; ▁batzuek ▁zioten : ▁« Gizon ▁ona ▁da ». ▁Beste ▁batzuek , ▁ordea : ▁« Ez , ▁herria ▁engaina tzen ▁ari ▁da ».
PRED:	But some of the crowd began talking with him , some people said , “ But some people are good , but some people are good . ”
GOLD:	There was a lot of grumbling about him among the crowds . Some argued , “ He 's a good man , ” but others said , “ He 's nothing but a fraud who deceives the people . ”

ID:	2538
INPUT:	▁B iok ▁elkarri ▁eman ▁dio gun ▁hitz az , ▁berriz , ▁izan ▁bedi ▁Jauna ▁gu ▁bion ▁artean ▁testigu ▁betier ean ».
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Let us be our witness , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	And may the Lord make us keep our promises to each other , for he has witnessed them . ”

ID:	2539
INPUT:	▁eta ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« B adi tu t ▁dagoeneko ▁ehun ▁eta ▁hogei ▁urte ▁eta ▁ez ▁naiz ▁gauza ▁dauka dan ▁kar gur ako ; ▁gainera , ▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁dit : ▁“ Ez ▁duzu ▁hor ko ▁Jordan ▁hori ▁igaroko ”.
PRED:	He told them , “ I have already already been twenty years old and twenty years , for I have not been able to walk on the Jordan River . The Lord has told me , ‘ You wo n't walk on the Jordan River . '
GOLD:	he said , “ I am now 120 years old , and I am no longer able to lead you . The Lord has told me , ‘ You will not cross the Jordan River . '

ID:	2540
INPUT:	▁Jauna ▁ez ▁dute ▁hildako ek ▁goresten , herio - is il pera ▁jaitsi ▁direnek .
PRED:	The dead have no fear of the Lord ; the wicked have turned away from death .
GOLD:	The dead can not sing praises to the Lord , for they have gone into the silence of the grave .

ID:	2541
INPUT:	▁Edom ▁konkis tatuko ▁du , ber onen ▁Seir ▁lurraldeaz ▁jabetuko : Israel ek ▁garaipena ▁lor tuko ▁du .
PRED:	The Lord will protect you from Seir , and he will protect you from Seir .
GOLD:	Edom will be taken over , and Seir , its enemy , will be conquered , while Israel marches on in triumph .

ID:	2542
INPUT:	▁« Z euen ▁begiz ▁ikusi ▁dituzue ▁Jaunak ▁burutu ▁dituen ▁egintza ▁handi ▁guztiok .
PRED:	“ The Lord has seen your own eyes , and you see everything the Lord has done .
GOLD:	But you have seen the Lord perform all these mighty deeds with your own eyes !

ID:	2543
INPUT:	▁Esan ▁zion , ▁beraz , ▁Jaunak ▁Abrahami : ▁« I zu garria ▁da ▁Sodoma ▁eta ▁Gom or raren ▁aurkako ▁salak untza . ▁Larri egia ▁da ▁hiri ▁horien ▁bekatua .
PRED:	So the Lord said to Abraham , “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ The city of Sodom and Gomorrah , says to the city of Sodom and Gomorrah . '
GOLD:	So the Lord told Abraham , “ I have heard a great outcry from Sodom and Gomorrah , because their sin is so flagrant .

ID:	2544
INPUT:	▁hurbil ▁g ak izkion ▁bihotz ▁zintz oz ▁eta ▁sinesmen ▁osoz , ▁barrua ▁bekatu - kon tzi entzia ▁guzti tik ▁garbi turik ▁eta ▁gorputza ▁ur ▁garbiz ▁tx uk undu rik .
PRED:	Fear of Christ Jesus and with all our faith and joy and joy . He is filled with pure gold and pure gold .
GOLD:	let us go right into the presence of God with sincere hearts fully trusting him . For our guilty consciences have been sprinkled with Christ 's blood to make us clean , and our bodies have been washed with pure water .

ID:	2545
INPUT:	▁« Utzi ▁armak ! ▁Ai tor ▁ezazue ▁Jainkoa ▁naizela , herri en ▁gain ▁eta ▁lurraren ▁gain ▁nago ela ».
PRED:	“ Oh , that I am the God of Israel ! May I am giving you victory over the nations of the earth . ”
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies is here among us ; the God of Israel is our fortress.Interlude

ID:	2546
INPUT:	▁Agin te keria
PRED:	The Faith of their wickedness
GOLD:	Approaching God with Care

ID:	2547
INPUT:	▁ez ▁zaitez tela ▁n agi ▁bihur , ▁baizik ▁eta ▁jarraitu ▁f edez ▁eta ▁eroa penez ▁Jainkoaren ▁agintz ariak ▁jasotzen ▁ari ▁direnen ▁ets enpl u ari .
PRED:	Do n't be kind to others , but do n't be patient in God 's church . May God 's grace be revealed to the Good News .
GOLD:	Then you will not become spiritually dull and indifferent . Instead , you will follow the example of those who are going to inherit God 's promises because of their faith and endurance .

ID:	2548
INPUT:	▁eta ▁ez ▁omen ▁dute ▁gorpua ▁aurkitu ; ▁gainera , ▁Jesus ▁bizi ▁dela ▁esan ▁dieten ▁aingeru ▁batzuk ▁agertu ▁zaizki ela ▁esanez ▁etorri ▁zaizki gu .
PRED:	They know that Jesus was n't dead , and some of the angels say , “ Some of the angels have come true . ”
GOLD:	They said his body was missing , and they had seen angels who told them Jesus is alive !

ID:	2549
INPUT:	▁Israeldar ▁leinu ▁bateko ▁ondare - zati ▁bat ▁heren tzi an ▁hartzen ▁duen ▁emakumea ▁ez ▁daiteke ▁ezkon ▁bere ▁aitaren ▁leinuko ▁ez ▁den ▁gizon arekin ; ▁horrela , ▁israeldarrek ▁nork ▁bere ▁aitaren ▁ondare ari ▁eutsiko ▁diote ,
PRED:	The Israelites must not marry one of the tribe of Israel as a special possession of the tribe of Levi . They must not marry one of the tribe of Israel as a special possession of the tribe of Israel .
GOLD:	The daughters throughout the tribes of Israel who are in line to inherit property must marry within their tribe , so that all the Israelites will keep their ancestral property .

ID:	2550
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁ikasleak ▁bak arrean ▁harturik , ▁esan ▁zien : ▁« Zorionekoak ▁zuek ▁ikusten ▁duzuena ▁ikusten ▁duten ▁begiak !
PRED:	Then he took his disciples and said , “ God blesses those who see you see ! ”
GOLD:	Then when they were alone , he turned to the disciples and said , “ Blessed are the eyes that see what you have seen .

ID:	2551
INPUT:	▁E rei teko ▁garaian , ▁nekaz ariak beti ▁go l dak etan ▁eta ▁lurra ▁ur ratzen eta ▁ar ea tzen ▁jardun ▁ohi ▁ote ▁du ?
PRED:	Let the farmers give their servants to the grave , and the earth gives it to the earth .
GOLD:	Does a farmer always plow and never sow ? Is he forever cultivating the soil and never planting ?

ID:	2552
INPUT:	▁Alde ▁bi etatik ▁nago ▁erak arria : ▁alde ▁batetik , ▁hil ▁egin ▁nahi ▁nuke , ▁Kristorekin ▁ego teko , ▁hau ▁asko gatik ▁on ena ▁delarik ;
PRED:	Now I am going out from the rock of Christ , who tried to kill me , for I have been a good life for Christ .
GOLD:	I 'm torn between two desires : I long to go and be with Christ , which would be far better for me .

ID:	2553
INPUT:	▁Horiek ▁ziren ▁ ru ben dar ▁senitarteak : ▁ 43 . <unk> ▁gizonezko ▁guztira .
PRED:	These were the clans descended from the clans of Reuben .
GOLD:	These were the clans of Reuben . Their registered troops numbered 43,730 .

ID:	2554
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁dio ▁Jaunak :« Bad atoz ▁egunak : h azia ▁erein ▁orduko uz ta ▁biltzeko ▁garaia ▁izango ▁da , mahats a ▁zapaldu ▁orduko ber riz ▁biltzeko ▁garaia ▁izango ▁da . Men di ek ▁eta ▁muino ek ar doa ▁isuriko ▁dute .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The time is coming , a day will be a harvest of harvest , and a harvest of grapes will be eaten , and a harvest of grapes will be picked up to a basket .
GOLD:	“ The time will come , ” says the Lord , “ when the grain and grapes will grow fasterthan they can be harvested.Then the terraced vineyards on the hills of Israelwill drip with sweet wine !

ID:	2555
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁esan ▁zuen , ▁orduan : ▁« Gaur ▁Jaunari ▁sagaratuak ▁izan ▁zarete , ▁ez bai rik ▁gabe ▁semea ▁nahiz ▁sen idea ▁hil ▁duzuelako . ▁Jaunak , ▁beraz , ▁bedeinkatu ▁egin ▁zaituzte ▁gaur ».
PRED:	Then Moses said to the Lord , “ Today you are a holy believer or a fellow believer or a fellow believer who has blessed you today . ”
GOLD:	Then Moses told the Levites , “ Today you have ordained yourselves for the service of the Lord , for you obeyed him even though it meant killing your own sons and brothers . Today you have earned a blessing . ”

ID:	2556
INPUT:	▁H ag ab , ▁Sal mai ▁eta ▁Hanan enak ;
PRED:	From the family of Harim were the family of Harim and Jedaiah .
GOLD:	Hagab , Shalmai , Hanan ,

ID:	2557
INPUT:	▁egoitz ako ▁zap iak , ▁elkarketa - etxola , ▁honen ▁gaineko ▁larru ▁fin ezko ▁estal dura , ▁elkarketa - etxolaren ▁sarrerako ▁oihala ,
PRED:	the tent covering of the Tabernacle , the tent , and the furnishings of the Tabernacle ; the curtain for the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	They must carry the curtains of the Tabernacle , the Tabernacle itself with its coverings , the outer covering of fine goatskin leather , and the curtain for the Tabernacle entrance .

ID:	2558
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Benetan ▁diotsut : ▁Gaur ▁nirekin ▁izango ▁zara ▁p ara di su an .
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ I tell you the truth , you will have the truth , and you will be healed . ”
GOLD:	And Jesus replied , “ I assure you , today you will be with me in paradise . ”

ID:	2559
INPUT:	▁Azarias , ▁Judako ▁errege
PRED:	Uzziah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	Uzziah Rules in Judah

ID:	2560
INPUT:	▁bere ▁eskuz ▁eramango ▁du ▁Jaunari ▁sagaratu ▁beharrekoa : ▁gantz ak ▁eta ▁bularra . ▁B ul arra ▁Jaunari ▁eskainiko ▁dio , ▁erri tuzko ▁aurkez pen - k einua ▁eginez .
PRED:	The fat of the Lord must present it to the Lord as a special offering to the Lord , making it right as a special offering .
GOLD:	Present it to the Lord with your own hands as a special gift to the Lord . Bring the fat of the animal , together with the breast , and lift up the breast as a special offering to the Lord .

ID:	2561
INPUT:	▁u bide ek ▁ki ra tsa ▁botako ▁dute , N il oren ▁adarrak ▁agor tzeraino jai tsiko ▁dira , kan abera ▁eta ▁ih iak ▁zimel duko .
PRED:	The fire will be thrown into the middle of the earth , and the branches will be consumed by the dew of the earth .
GOLD:	The canals of the Nile will dry up , and the streams of Egypt will stinkwith rotting reeds and rushes .

ID:	2562
INPUT:	▁ardoa ▁kopa ▁handi tan ▁edaten ▁duzue , ol io ▁usain tsu ▁on en ezi gur zten ▁zarete . Eta ▁ez ▁zaizue ▁axola Israel ▁herriaren ▁hondamendia !
PRED:	You have a cup of wine , a great cup of fragrant spices , and your heart is filled with joy .
GOLD:	You drink wine by the bowlfuland perfume yourselves with fragrant lotions.You care nothing about the ruin of your nation .

ID:	2563
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zien ▁Moisesi ▁eta ▁Aaroni :« Hau ▁da ▁Pazko - jai aren ▁arau dia :« I n ongo ▁atzerri tarrak ▁ezin ▁izango ▁du ▁opari gai rik ▁jan .
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ This is what the Lord says : The people of Israel must never eat any of their sacred offerings . '
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron , “ These are the instructions for the festival of Passover . No outsiders are allowed to eat the Passover meal .

ID:	2564
INPUT:	▁Haren ▁ikasleak ▁ez ▁ziren ▁orduan ▁prof ezia ▁honetaz ▁jabetu , ▁baina ▁gero , ▁Jesusen ▁Jainko - ain tza ▁azaldu ▁zenean , ▁konturatu ▁ziren ▁Liburu ▁Santuak ▁zioen ▁huraxe ▁egin ▁zio tela ▁Jesusi .
PRED:	The disciples did n't realize that Jesus was telling him about Jesus , “ The Scriptures mean that the Scriptures had seen him . ”
GOLD:	His disciples did n't understand at the time that this was a fulfillment of prophecy . But after Jesus entered into his glory , they remembered what had happened and realized that these things had been written about him .

ID:	2565
INPUT:	▁Argi ▁egin ▁digu ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak ▁egiaz . Egin ▁pro z es ioa , ▁ab arrak ▁eskuetan , ▁aldarearen ▁ertz etaraino .
PRED:	This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ Shout to the altar for the Lord your God .
GOLD:	The Lord is God , shining upon us.Take the sacrifice and bind it with cords on the altar .

ID:	2566
INPUT:	▁Galile atik ▁Jesusekin ▁etorritako ▁emakumeek , ▁Joseren ▁atzetik ▁joan ik , ▁hil obia ▁ikusi ▁zuten ▁eta ▁Jesusen ▁gorpua ▁nola ▁ezartzen ▁zuten ▁begiratu .
PRED:	The brothers came from Galilee to see Jesus ' body , where they saw Jesus ' body , and they saw Jesus ' body .
GOLD:	As his body was taken away , the women from Galilee followed and saw the tomb where his body was placed .

ID:	2567
INPUT:	▁N oren ▁bila ▁zabiltza , ▁zu , ▁Israelgo ▁errege ▁hori ? ▁N oren ▁atzetik ▁zoaz ? ▁Zak ur ▁akab atu aren ▁atzetik ? ▁Ar kak us oren ▁baten ▁atzetik ?
PRED:	Why are you looking for me to search for you ? Why are you going to catch up ? Why are you going to get drunk ?
GOLD:	May the Lord therefore judge which of us is right and punish the guilty one . He is my advocate , and he will rescue me from your power ! ”

ID:	2568
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁Jaunak ▁Moisesen ▁bidez ▁eman ▁zuen ▁legean ▁agindu ▁hau ▁aurkitu ▁zuten : ▁israeldarrek ▁etxol etan ▁bizi ▁behar ▁zutela ▁zazpigarren ▁hil eko ▁jai etan ,
PRED:	So the Lord gave through Moses this command : The people of Israel who had been found in early autumn , during the seventh day of the festival .
GOLD:	As they studied the Law , they discovered that the Lord had commanded through Moses that the Israelites should live in shelters during the festival to be held that month .

ID:	2569
INPUT:	▁Zazpigarren ▁egunean , ▁gorpu tzeko ▁ile ▁guztia ▁moztuko ▁du ▁— buru koa , ▁aurpegi koa , ▁bek ain ekoa ▁eta ▁gainerako ▁guztia —, ▁arropak ▁eta ▁gorputza ▁garbituko ▁ditu ▁eta ▁garbi ▁geldituko ▁da .
PRED:	On the seventh day he must wash their hair on the head of the dead , and he will wash their clothes and bathe themselves with their clothes . He will wash their clothes and bathe themselves in water .
GOLD:	On the seventh day they must again shave all the hair from their heads , including the hair of the beard and eyebrows . They must also wash their clothes and bathe themselves in water . Then they will be ceremonially clean .

ID:	2570
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁Asiri a ▁suntsituko
PRED:	The Lord 's Promise of Victory
GOLD:	A Message about Philistia

ID:	2571
INPUT:	▁Bai , ▁zorion ak ▁eta ▁leial tasunak ▁ingu ratuko ▁naute biz itz ako ▁egun ▁guztietan ; Jaunaren ▁etxean ▁biziko ▁naiz ▁amai gabeko ▁egunetan .
PRED:	Yes , those who are righteous , and they will live in all days . I will live in the days of the Lord .
GOLD:	Surely your goodness and unfailing love will pursue meall the days of my life , and I will live in the house of the Lordforever .

ID:	2572
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁egin ▁du ▁zin Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak :« Nire ▁egitasmoak buru tu ▁egingo ▁dira , nire ▁erabakiak ▁bete .
PRED:	This is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says : “ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies says :
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies has sworn this oath : “ It will all happen as I have planned.It will be as I have decided .

ID:	2573
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁bake - bal d intz ak ▁onartu ▁ez ▁eta ▁gerra ▁d ek l ara tzen ▁badizu ete , ▁setiatu ▁egingo ▁duzue ▁hiria ,
PRED:	But if you refuse to accept peace , you will not be able to attack you .
GOLD:	But if they refuse to make peace and prepare to fight , you must attack the town .

ID:	2574
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁erregeak ▁eraz tuna ▁bere ▁behatz etik ▁atera ▁eta ▁juduen ▁etsai ▁zen ▁Ham ani , ▁Ham ed at aren ▁seme ▁eta ▁Ag ag en ▁jatorriko ari , ▁eman ▁zion ,
PRED:	Then the king of the Jews took off from Haman 's signet ring from the Jews and presented him to King Xerxes of the Jews .
GOLD:	The king agreed , confirming his decision by removing his signet ring from his finger and giving it to Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite , the enemy of the Jews .

ID:	2575
INPUT:	▁Zergatik ▁ez ▁duzu ▁ene ▁errebel dia ▁barkatzen eta ▁nire ▁errua ▁ahaz ten ? Ber ehala ▁nauzu ▁hauts etan ▁etzan da . Ene ▁bila ▁ibiliko ▁zara , baina ▁ordurako ▁ez ▁naiz ▁munduan ▁izango ».
PRED:	Why have you forgotten me ? Why have you forgotten me ? Why have you forgotten me ? ”
GOLD:	Why not just forgive my sinand take away my guilt ? For soon I will lie down in the dust and die.When you look for me , I will be gone . ”

ID:	2576
INPUT:	▁Haiek ▁irain ez ▁bete ▁eta ▁esan ▁zioten :— Zeu ▁zara , ▁zu , ▁haren ▁ikasle ; ▁gu ▁Moisesen ▁ikasle ▁gara .
PRED:	They said to him , “ You are God ! You are his disciples , and we are his disciples . ”
GOLD:	Then they cursed him and said , “ You are his disciple , but we are disciples of Moses !

ID:	2577
INPUT:	▁Joben ▁hiru ▁lagun ek ▁— T emango ▁Elif az ek , ▁X u ah eko ▁Bil da dek ▁eta ▁Naam ako ▁Tz of arrek —, ▁Joben ▁zoritx arraren ▁berri ▁izan ▁zute larik , ▁bis ita ▁egitea ▁erabaki ▁zuten ▁atsek abean ▁lagundu ▁eta ▁konts ola tzeko .
PRED:	Then Eliphaz the Temanite replied , “ Eliphaz the curse of Eliphaz , Eliphaz , and Eliphaz the tears of Job 's curse . When Job heard what was happening to help them , they went to comfort them .
GOLD:	When three of Job 's friends heard of the tragedy he had suffered , they got together and traveled from their homes to comfort and console him . Their names were Eliphaz the Temanite , Bildad the Shuhite , and Zophar the Naamathite .

ID:	2578
INPUT:	▁Erregeak ▁esan ▁zien :— Era baki ▁hau ▁hartu ▁dut : ▁ametsa ▁eta ▁beronen ▁esanahia ▁argi tzen ▁eta ▁azaltzen ▁ez ▁bad izki dazue , ▁txiki - tx iki ▁egingo ▁zaituztet ▁eta ▁zuen ▁etxeak ▁zab or tegi ▁bihurtuko .
PRED:	Then the king said to them , “ I will give you a dream and its mouth . If you do n't know it , I will give you the small animals and the houses of the field . ”
GOLD:	But the king said to the astrologers , “ I am serious about this . If you do n't tell me what my dream was and what it means , you will be torn limb from limb , and your houses will be turned into heaps of rubble !

ID:	2579
INPUT:	▁« Ez tei etara ▁gonbi datzen ▁zaituzten ean , ▁ez ▁jarri ▁mahai buru an , ▁zu ▁baino ▁gonbidatu ▁ospetsu ag oren ▁bat ▁izan ▁daiteke ▁eta ;
PRED:	“ Do not invite anyone to join you with a wedding feast on the head of a wedding feast .
GOLD:	“ When you are invited to a wedding feast , do n't sit in the seat of honor . What if someone who is more distinguished than you has also been invited ?

ID:	2580
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁esan ▁zioten ▁elkarri : ▁« Ea , ▁a dre il uak ▁egin ▁eta ▁sutan ▁erre ▁ditzagun ». ▁Honela , ▁harri aren ▁ordez ▁a dre il ua ▁erabili ▁zuten ▁eta ▁kar e - ore aren ▁ordez ▁bik ea .
PRED:	Then they said to each other , “ Come , let 's throw them into the fire . ” So they took their heads in the fire .
GOLD:	They began saying to each other , “ Let 's make bricks and harden them with fire. ” ( In this region bricks were used instead of stone , and tar was used for mortar . )

ID:	2581
INPUT:	▁Apaizak ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrean ▁eskainiko ▁ditu , ▁amaren ▁aldeko ▁garbikuntza - ohikunea ▁eginez , ▁eta ▁hura ▁garbi ▁geldituko ▁da ▁bere ▁odol j ario tik .« Horra ▁hor ▁semea ▁nahiz ▁alaba ▁izaten ▁duen ▁emakumeari ▁buruzko ▁legea .
PRED:	The priest will purify the priest at the presence of the Lord . Through this process , the priest will purify the priest , and he will be defiled by the priest 's daughter , who is ceremonially clean .
GOLD:	The priest will then present them to the Lord to purify her . Then she will be ceremonially clean again after her bleeding at childbirth . These are the instructions for a woman after the birth of a son or a daughter .

ID:	2582
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁orain , ▁joan ▁eta ▁nire ▁nagusiari : ▁« Hemen ▁da ▁Elias » ▁adierazteko ▁esango ▁didazu , ▁bada ?
PRED:	So I went to the master and said , “ Look , Elijah is going to say , ‘ Look ! '
GOLD:	And now you say , ‘ Go and tell your master , “ Elijah is here . ” '

ID:	2583
INPUT:	▁Hauxe ▁da ▁lapur retan ▁dabilen ari ▁gertatzen ▁zaiona : la p ur rari ▁berari ▁kentzen ▁dio ▁bizia .
PRED:	This is what happened in the seventh year : He gives life to life .
GOLD:	Such is the fate of all who are greedy for money ; it robs them of life .

ID:	2584
INPUT:	▁nagusiak ▁Jainkoaren ▁aitzin era ▁eramango ▁du , ▁atera ▁edo ▁ate - uz ta ira ▁hurbil araziko ▁eta ▁ziri ▁batez ▁belarria ▁zul atuko ▁dio . ▁Eta ▁esklabo ▁izango ▁du ▁betiko .
PRED:	The master of God will bring you out of the house of God , and he will be able to cut off from his ear .
GOLD:	If he does this , his master must present him before God . Then his master must take him to the door or doorpost and publicly pierce his ear with an awl . After that , the slave will serve his master for life .

ID:	2585
INPUT:	▁Orain ▁ai patzen ▁ari ▁garen ▁etorkizun eko ▁mundu ▁hau ▁ez ▁zuen ▁Jainkoak ▁aingeruen ▁menpe ▁jarri .
PRED:	That is why the future generations of angels are not ready to rule over the world .
GOLD:	And furthermore , it is not angels who will control the future world we are talking about .

ID:	2586
INPUT:	▁Bedeinkatua ▁Jauna , ▁nire ▁erregu - oih ua ▁entzun ▁du ▁eta !
PRED:	Praise the Lord , who has heard my prayer , and he hears my prayers .
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! For he has heard my cry for mercy .

ID:	2587
INPUT:	▁bigarren ▁hilaren ▁hamalau ko ▁ilun abarrean ▁ospatuko ▁du . ▁Bel ar ▁min go ts ez ▁eta ▁legamia ▁gabeko ▁o giz ▁lagun durik ▁jango ▁du ▁bil dotsa ;
PRED:	On the second day of the second month , the second month of the second month will be made without yeast .
GOLD:	They must offer the Passover sacrifice one month later , at twilight on the fourteenth day of the second month . They must eat the Passover lamb at that time with bitter salad greens and bread made without yeast .

ID:	2588
INPUT:	▁giza ▁grin en ▁menpeko ▁izaten ▁jarraitzen ▁baituzue . ▁Izan ▁ere , ▁bekaiz keriak ▁eta ▁eztabai dak ▁dituzuen ▁bitartean , ▁ez ▁ote ▁zarete ▁giza ▁grin en ▁menpeko ? ▁Ez ▁ote ▁duzue ▁giza ▁i riz pi de ▁hutsez ▁jokatzen ?
PRED:	Do n't you think about sinful nature or sinful nature , or what is evil in human desires ? Do n't you think about human desires ? Do n't you think about human desires ?
GOLD:	for you are still controlled by your sinful nature . You are jealous of one another and quarrel with each other . Does n't that prove you are controlled by your sinful nature ? Are n't you living like people of the world ?

ID:	2589
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁bazkal ti arrak ▁beren ▁artean ▁hasi ▁ziren ▁esaten : ▁« Nor ▁ote ▁dugu ▁bekatuak ▁barkatu ▁ere ▁egiten ▁dituen ▁hau ?»
PRED:	Then the disciples began to eat their food , saying , “ Who is our sins ? ”
GOLD:	The men at the table said among themselves , “ Who is this man , that he goes around forgiving sins ? ”

ID:	2590
INPUT:	▁Z uz enak ▁bide ▁tx arretik ▁eramaten ▁dituena , berak ▁prestatu tako ▁tran pan ▁jau s iko ▁da ; baina ▁pres tu ek ▁zoriona ▁izango ▁dute ▁sari .
PRED:	Those who search for themselves , but they dug a trap for a trap , but it will be saved .
GOLD:	Those who lead good people along an evil pathwill fall into their own trap , but the honest will inherit good things .

ID:	2591
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁Kristo ▁Jesusengan ▁gure kiko ▁hain ▁ona ▁izanez ▁agertu ▁nahi ▁izan ▁die ▁datoz en ▁gizaldi ei ▁zein ▁ugaria ▁eta ▁eskuz ab ala ▁den ▁bere ▁onginahia .
PRED:	And Christ has appeared to the church in Christ Jesus , and if he wants his own hands to suffer for his own hands ,
GOLD:	So God can point to us in all future ages as examples of the incredible wealth of his grace and kindness toward us , as shown in all he has done for us who are united with Christ Jesus .

ID:	2592
INPUT:	▁garb ik etarako ▁ontzia ▁Moab ; o ina ▁ezarriko ▁diot ▁gainean ▁Edom i , garai pen - oihu ▁egingo ▁ F iliste ari ».
PRED:	Have you rejected us , O God ? Will you march with the armies of Edom ? ”
GOLD:	Who will bring me into the fortified city ? Who will bring me victory over Edom ?

ID:	2593
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁etor rer arekin ▁bak earen ▁berri ▁ona ▁hots ▁egin ▁zigun : ▁bakea ▁zuei , ▁urruti ▁zineten oi , ▁eta ▁bakea ▁hurbil ▁ziren ei .
PRED:	And when he told us that he was with peace , he was with peace and peace and peace .
GOLD:	He brought this Good News of peace to you Gentiles who were far away from him , and peace to the Jews who were near .

ID:	2594
INPUT:	▁Alabaina , ▁emakumea ▁haurdun ▁gertatu ▁zen ▁eta ▁hurrengo ▁urtean , ▁garai ▁berean , ▁semea ▁izan ▁zuen , ▁Eliseok ▁esana ▁zion ez .
PRED:	The next year she became pregnant and gave birth to a son , just as Elisha had said .
GOLD:	But sure enough , the woman soon became pregnant . And at that time the following year she had a son , just as Elisha had said .

ID:	2595
INPUT:	▁I da tzi , ▁beraz , ▁ez ▁nizuen ▁idatzi ▁irain a ▁egin ▁zuen arengatik , ▁ezta ▁hartu ▁zuen arengatik ▁ere , ▁Jainkoaren ▁aurrean ▁nitaz ▁duzuen ▁ardura ▁agertzeko ▁aukera ▁zuei ▁emateko ▁baizik .
PRED:	So I wrote this letter to you , and it was not trying to kill me because of what you have done for me .
GOLD:	My purpose , then , was not to write about who did the wrong or who was wronged . I wrote to you so that in the sight of God you could see for yourselves how loyal you are to us .

ID:	2596
INPUT:	▁Ara h enak ▁ <unk> ;
PRED:	The family of Pahath-moab
GOLD:	The family of Arah652

ID:	2597
INPUT:	▁Horrela , ▁madian darren gatik , ▁erabat ▁pob re tu ▁ziren ▁israeldarrak ; ▁orduan , ▁dei ▁egin ▁zioten ▁Jaunari .
PRED:	So the Israelites chased the Midianites for battle , and they cried out to the Lord .
GOLD:	So Israel was reduced to starvation by the Midianites . Then the Israelites cried out to the Lord for help .

ID:	2598
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁lagundu ▁egin ▁behar ▁diegu ▁horrelako ei , ▁egiaren ▁zerbitzuan ▁berorien ▁lan kide ▁bihur ▁gaitezen .
PRED:	We have done such wonderful things to live in the truth , and let us live in truth .
GOLD:	So we ourselves should support them so that we can be their partners as they teach the truth .

ID:	2599
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁prestatzen ▁dio ▁bel eari ▁jatekoa , beraren ▁k ume ek , ▁goseak ▁nora ezean ▁dabil tzal arik , Jainko ari ▁tx io ▁egiten ▁dioten ean ?
PRED:	Who gives the food to those who are allowed to eat the hungry ? They are allowed to stumble .
GOLD:	Who provides food for the ravenswhen their young cry out to Godand wander about in hunger ?

ID:	2600
INPUT:	▁Gu ri ▁ere ▁berri ▁ona ▁eman ▁zaigu ▁gure ▁arbasoei ▁bezala ; ▁baina ▁hauei ▁ez ▁zien ▁ezertarako ▁balio ▁izan ▁mezua ▁entzu teak , ▁entzun ▁sinetsi ▁gabe ▁entzun ▁zuten ▁eta .
PRED:	We also heard the Good News about our ancestors , but they did n't listen to their ancestors .
GOLD:	For this good news — that God has prepared this rest — has been announced to us just as it was to them . But it did them no good because they did n't share the faith of those who listened to God .

ID:	2601
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁nazazu ▁egin ▁bekatari en ▁zori ▁ber eko , ez ▁nazazu ▁bihur ▁hil tzaileen ▁kide ko ,
PRED:	Do n't let those who have done wrong , or let me die .
GOLD:	Do n't let me suffer the fate of sinners.Do n't condemn me along with murderers .

ID:	2602
INPUT:	▁Zorion tasunak ▁eta ▁madarikazio ak
PRED:	The Lord 's Second Reply
GOLD:	The Beatitudes

ID:	2603
INPUT:	▁Pedrok ▁esan ▁zion ▁Jesusi : ▁« Maisu , ▁zein ▁eder ki ▁gau den ▁hemen ! ▁Zergatik ▁ez ▁egin ▁hiru ▁etxola : ▁bata ▁zuretzat , ▁bestea ▁Moises entzat ▁eta ▁bestea ▁Eliasen tzat ?»
PRED:	Peter said to Jesus , “ Teacher , what are you doing ? ” “ Why are you looking for you ? ”
GOLD:	Peter exclaimed , “ Rabbi , it 's wonderful for us to be here ! Let 's make three shelters as memorials — one for you , one for Moses , and one for Elijah . ”

ID:	2604
INPUT:	▁Hurbildu ▁eta ▁zauriak ▁lotu ▁zizkion , ▁olioz ▁eta ▁ardo z ▁igurtzi ▁ondoren ; ▁gero , ▁bere ▁asto ▁gainean ▁ezarri , ▁os tatu ra ▁eraman ▁eta ▁bere ▁ardurapean ▁hartu ▁zuen .
PRED:	So he took the wounds and took the wine and placed it on the ground . Then he took the wine and placed it on the ground .
GOLD:	Going over to him , the Samaritan soothed his wounds with olive oil and wine and bandaged them . Then he put the man on his own donkey and took him to an inn , where he took care of him .

ID:	2605
INPUT:	▁Santiago ▁eta ▁Joanek , ▁Zeb ede oren ▁semeek , ▁Jesusengana ▁hurbildu ▁eta ▁esan ▁zioten :— Maisu , ▁eskatuko ▁dizu gun a ▁zuk ▁ematea ▁nahi ▁genuke .
PRED:	John 's sons and John the sons of Zebedee , said to Jesus , “ Teacher , we 'll ask you what you want . ”
GOLD:	Then James and John , the sons of Zebedee , came over and spoke to him . “ Teacher , ” they said , “ we want you to do us a favor . ”

ID:	2606
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁esan ▁zien :— Etor ri ▁eta ▁ikusi . Joan , ▁non ▁bizi ▁zen ▁ikusi ▁eta ▁berarekin ▁gelditu ▁ziren ▁egun ▁hartan . ▁Arrats aldeko ▁laur ak ▁al dea ▁zen .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to the village , “ Go and see where the next day , and there was three days . The next day the next day .
GOLD:	“ Come and see , ” he said . It was about four o'clock in the afternoon when they went with him to the place where he was staying , and they remained with him the rest of the day .

ID:	2607
INPUT:	▁Lebitar ren ▁hiriak <unk> , 1 ▁Lebitar ren ▁hiriak : ▁I k . ▁L b ▁ 25 , 32 ▁oh .
PRED:	The Levites of Benjamin 's family of Pahath-moab ( also known as the towns of Goshen ,
GOLD:	Towns for the Levites

ID:	2608
INPUT:	▁Eskain tzaren ▁gainerako a ▁Aaron ▁eta ▁beronen ▁ondorengoen tzat ▁izango ▁da ; ▁guztiz ▁sakratua ▁da , ▁Jaunaren ▁ohorez ▁erretako ▁opari aren ▁parte ▁baita .
PRED:	The rest of the people and his descendants will be presented to Aaron and his descendants . It is a special gift presented to the Lord .
GOLD:	The rest of the grain offering will then be given to Aaron and his sons as their food . This offering will be considered a most holy part of the special gifts presented to the Lord .

ID:	2609
INPUT:	▁Herria ▁begira ▁zegoen . ▁Agin tariek , ▁berriz , ▁Jesusi ▁bur la ▁egiten ▁zioten , ▁esanez : ▁« Beste ak ▁salbatu ▁di tik ; ▁salba ▁dezala ▁bere ▁burua , ▁Jainkoaren ▁Mesias , ▁hau tatua , ▁baldin ▁bada ».
PRED:	The people looked at him and saw Jesus ' feet , shouting , “ Let 's be saved ! ” So they said , “ May God be saved by the Messiah be saved ! ”
GOLD:	The crowd watched and the leaders scoffed . “ He saved others , ” they said , “ let him save himself if he is really God 's Messiah , the Chosen One . ”

ID:	2610
INPUT:	▁Josek ▁esan ▁zion :— Hona ▁argi bidea . ▁Hiru ▁saski ok ▁hiru ▁egun ▁adierazten ▁dute .
PRED:	Joseph said to him , “ Look , it 's three o'clock in three days .
GOLD:	“ This is what the dream means , ” Joseph told him . “ The three baskets also represent three days .

ID:	2611
INPUT:	▁Zergatik ▁utzi ▁behar ▁gaituzu ▁hiltzen ▁geure ▁lur ▁eta ▁guzti ? ▁E ros ▁gaitzazu ▁gu ▁geu ▁eta ▁gure ▁lurrak ▁janari ▁truke , ▁eta ▁faraoiaren ▁esklabo ▁bihurtuko ▁gara , ▁geure ▁lur rekin ▁batera . ▁Em aguzu ▁hazia ▁bizirik ▁iraun ▁dezagun ▁eta ▁gure ▁lurrak ▁eremu ▁bihur ▁ez ▁daitezen ».
PRED:	Why should we kill us ? We will feed our land and feed us in the land of Egypt , and we will eat the land of Egypt , and we will live in the land of Egypt , and we will never be spared . ”
GOLD:	Why should we die before your very eyes ? Buy us and our land in exchange for food ; we offer our land and ourselves as slaves for Pharaoh . Just give us grain so we may live and not die , and so the land does not become empty and desolate . ”

ID:	2612
INPUT:	▁Gauza ▁bera ▁gertatzen ▁da ▁musika - tresn ekin ▁ere , ▁tx iru la ▁edota ▁zi tar arekin , ▁adi bidez : ▁n o tak ▁argi ▁eta ▁garbi ▁ematen ▁ez ▁badituzte , ▁nola ▁jakin ▁zer ▁jotzen ▁duten ?
PRED:	What sorrow awaits you who hear about this ? What sorrow awaits you who hear ? What are you talking about ? How can I hear ? What do you know ?
GOLD:	Even lifeless instruments like the flute or the harp must play the notes clearly , or no one will recognize the melody .

ID:	2613
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁herriak ▁Pazkoa ▁ospatu
PRED:	Instructions for Passover
GOLD:	Jehoiakim Rules in Judah

ID:	2614
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Jordanez ▁ekialdeko ▁bi ▁errege ▁amortar rei ▁— H exb ongo ▁errege ▁S ih oni ▁eta ▁Ax tar oten ▁bizi ▁zen ▁Baxango ▁errege ▁Ogi — ▁egin ▁di ena .
PRED:	The kings of the Jordan and King Sihon of the Amorites who ruled from Heshbon and King Og of Bashan .
GOLD:	We have also heard what he did to the two Amorite kings east of the Jordan River — King Sihon of Heshbon and King Og of Bashan ( who lived in Ashtaroth ) .

ID:	2615
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁egin ▁zion ▁kontsulta ▁Davidek ▁Jaunari :— Joan go ▁al ▁naiz ▁lapur - talde ▁horren ▁ondoren ? ▁H arra patuko ▁ote ▁ditut ? Jaunak ▁erantzun :— Zoaz ▁ondoren ! ▁Horixe ▁harrapatuko ▁dituzu la ▁eta ▁askatuko ▁zu tarrak !
PRED:	Then David asked the Lord , “ Should I go out to the Lord ? ” “ Yes , ” David replied , “ I will search for you . ”
GOLD:	Then David asked the Lord , “ Should I chase after this band of raiders ? Will I catch them ? ” And the Lord told him , “ Yes , go after them . You will surely recover everything that was taken from you ! ”

ID:	2616
INPUT:	▁beren ▁jainkoen ▁ohorez ▁egiten ▁dituzten ▁higuingarri tasunak ▁irakats ▁ez ▁diez azkizu eten ▁eta , ▁horrela , ▁Jaunaren ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoaren ▁aurka ▁bekatu ▁egin ▁ez ▁dezazuen .
PRED:	These are detestable to you who are gods of gods , so that you can not obey the word of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	This will prevent the people of the land from teaching you to imitate their detestable customs in the worship of their gods , which would cause you to sin deeply against the Lord your God .

ID:	2617
INPUT:	▁Apaiz en ▁sagara pena
PRED:	Living for the Priests
GOLD:	Dedication of the Priests

ID:	2618
INPUT:	▁De dan goak ▁ere ▁bez ero ▁zenituen ; ▁itsas ▁herri ▁askok ▁zurekin ▁egiten ▁zituen ▁tratu ak , ▁b ol iz ▁eta ▁e ban oz ▁ordain duz .
PRED:	You also led the ship to the seashore , and many of the desert for themselves .
GOLD:	Merchants came to you from Dedan . Numerous coastlands were your captive markets ; they brought payment in ivory tusks and ebony wood .

ID:	2619
INPUT:	▁Opari a ▁borondatez koa ▁bada , ▁zilegi ▁da ▁gorputz - a tal ak ▁oker ▁dituen ▁zekorra ▁nahiz ▁aharia ▁eskain tzea ; ▁baina ▁bo toa ▁betetzeko ▁egina ▁bada , ▁ez ▁dizue ▁Jaunak ▁horrelakorik ▁onartuko .
PRED:	“ If you present a voluntary offering , it must be a burnt offering or a bull or a burnt offering or a burnt offering or a burnt offering , it will be a voluntary offering to the Lord .
GOLD:	If a bull or lamb has a leg that is too long or too short , it may be offered as a voluntary offering , but it may not be offered to fulfill a vow .

ID:	2620
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁herria ▁harrigarri ro ▁hautatu
PRED:	Blessings for the Lord 's People
GOLD:	Eastern Cities of Refuge

ID:	2621
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zien ▁Moisesi ▁eta ▁Aaroni :
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron ,

ID:	2622
INPUT:	▁« Hala ▁ere ▁obedi tu ▁ez ▁eta ▁aurka ▁egiten ▁badidazue ,
PRED:	“ But if you refuse to obey me , then if you refuse to obey me .
GOLD:	“ If in spite of all this you still refuse to listen and still remain hostile toward me ,

ID:	2623
INPUT:	▁Eskain tzaileak ▁eskua ▁ezarriko ▁dio ▁buruan , ▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁bere ▁bekatuen ▁ordain tzat ▁onartuko ▁dio .
PRED:	“ Then the Lord will hand his hand on his hand , and he will accept it as a sin offering .
GOLD:	Lay your hand on the animal 's head , and the Lord will accept its death in your place to purify you , making you right with him .

ID:	2624
INPUT:	▁Espirituak ▁mirariak ▁egiten ▁zituzten ▁deabruak ▁ziren , ▁eta ▁mundu ▁osoko ▁errege engana ▁jo ▁zuten , ▁Jainko ▁ahalguztidun aren ▁egun ▁handiko ▁borrokara ▁biltzeko .
PRED:	Then the Spirit of demons came to cast out all the spirits of the earth , and all the people of Israel came to fight against him .
GOLD:	They are demonic spirits who work miracles and go out to all the rulers of the world to gather them for battle against the Lord on that great judgment day of God the Almighty .

ID:	2625
INPUT:	▁« Ondoren , ▁honela ▁hitz ▁egin ▁zidan : ▁Laugarren ▁piztia ▁lur ▁gainean ▁izango ▁den ▁laugarren ▁erreinua ▁da , ▁beste ▁hirur ak ▁ez ▁bezalakoa . ▁Mundu ▁osoa ▁irentsiko ▁du , ▁hanka ▁azpian ▁hartuko ▁eta ▁txiki tuko .
PRED:	“ Then the second angel said to me , “ The fourth beast will be like the fourth beast , like the world , and all the kingdoms of the earth will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Then he said to me , “ This fourth beast is the fourth world power that will rule the earth . It will be different from all the others . It will devour the whole world , trampling and crushing everything in its path .

ID:	2626
INPUT:	▁Zazpi ▁zati tan ▁banatuko ▁dute ▁lurraldea , ▁Judaren ▁leinuak ▁bere ▁lurraldean , ▁hego aldean , ▁jarraituko ▁du elarik , ▁eta ▁Joseren ▁ondorengoek ▁beren ean , ▁iparralde an .
PRED:	The third allotment of land will be given to the land of Judah , and the descendants of Judah will be given to the descendants of Joseph .
GOLD:	Let them divide the land into seven sections , excluding Judah 's territory in the south and Joseph 's territory in the north .

ID:	2627
INPUT:	▁« Jaunak ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoak ▁emango ▁dizuen ▁lurraldeko ▁hiri ren ▁batean ▁zuen ▁herritarren ▁bat ▁behartsu ▁bada , ▁ez ▁izan ▁bihoz gabe , ▁ez ▁lagun tzarik ▁ukatu ▁senide ▁behartsu ari ;
PRED:	“ When the Lord your God is giving you a poor city , you will not be poor and poor , and do not oppress those who are poor .
GOLD:	“ But if there are any poor Israelites in your towns when you arrive in the land the Lord your God is giving you , do not be hard-hearted or tightfisted toward them .

ID:	2628
INPUT:	▁eta ▁beteko ▁dut ▁zuen ▁gurasoei ▁zin ▁egindakoa , ▁alegia , ▁esnea ▁eta ▁eztia ▁darizkion ▁lurraldea ▁emango ▁ni ela ”. ▁Lurralde ▁hori ▁orain ▁dauk azu ena ▁da , ▁hain ▁zuzen ». Nik ▁erantzun ▁nion : ▁« Bai , ▁Jauna ».
PRED:	I swore to give this land to your ancestors : I will give you a land flowing with milk and honey . I will give you a land flowing with milk and honey , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	I said this so I could keep my promise to your ancestors to give you a land flowing with milk and honey — the land you live in today . ' ” Then I replied , “ Amen , Lord ! May it be so . ”

ID:	2629
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁zerbitzariek ▁gurdi ▁batean ▁hartu ▁eta ▁Jerusalemera ▁eraman ▁zuten , ▁bere ▁hilobian , ▁arbasoen ▁ondoan , ▁lur ▁emateko .
PRED:	He took his chariots and brought him to Jerusalem to Jerusalem in his grave , where he was in the grave .
GOLD:	His servants took him by chariot to Jerusalem , where they buried him with his ancestors in the City of David .

ID:	2630
INPUT:	▁Jef tek ▁mezulariak ▁bidali ▁amondarren ▁erregeari
PRED:	Jephthah sent messengers to the Ammonites
GOLD:	Jephthah 's Vow

ID:	2631
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁itsas alde al arre - toki ▁bihurtuko ▁da , artz ain en ▁putzu - ▁eta ▁es kor ta - leku .
PRED:	Your cities will become a foreigner , and they will become a foreigner in the land .
GOLD:	The Philistine coast will become a wilderness pasture , a place of shepherd campsand enclosures for sheep and goats .

ID:	2632
INPUT:	▁Ner iasen ▁seme ▁Baruk ek ▁Jeremias ▁profetak ▁agindutako ▁guztia ▁egin ▁zuen : ▁tenplura ▁joan ▁eta ▁Jaunaren ▁mezua ▁irakurri ▁zuen ▁liburu tik .
PRED:	So Baruch son of Baruch went to the Temple of the Lord and read it to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	Baruch did as Jeremiah told him and read these messages from the Lord to the people at the Temple .

ID:	2633
INPUT:	▁L abe ▁gori ra ▁botako ▁dituzu , ▁zure ▁haserrea ▁ager tzean ; bere ▁sumin az ▁irentsiko ▁ditu ▁Jaunak , ▁su az ▁kiskal iko .
PRED:	Your anger will throw them into the anger of your anger , and the Lord will consume them with fire .
GOLD:	You will wipe their children from the face of the earth ; they will never have descendants .

ID:	2634
INPUT:	▁Bedeinkatua ▁zu , ▁Jauna ! ▁I rak ats ▁niri ▁zeure ▁arauak .
PRED:	Praise the Lord , who rescued me from your decrees .
GOLD:	I praise you , O Lord ; teach me your decrees .

ID:	2635
INPUT:	▁Bihotz ▁zuhur rekoak ▁onartzen ▁ditu ▁aginduak , m ih i ▁tx oro koa ▁hondamendi rantz ▁ab iatzen .
PRED:	A wise person makes a wise heart ; a wise heart is filled with words .
GOLD:	The wise are glad to be instructed , but babbling fools fall flat on their faces .

ID:	2636
INPUT:	▁H irur ogeita <unk> iak ▁bidali
PRED:	The Most Important Commandment
GOLD:	Jesus Sends Out His Disciples

ID:	2637
INPUT:	▁Ber orien ▁jokabidea ▁eta ▁egintzak ▁ikusi ▁ondoren , ▁gutxiago ▁sufri tuko ▁duzue , ▁kontu ratuko ▁baitzarete ▁ez ▁nuela ▁hirian ▁egindako ▁guztia ▁arrazoirik ▁gabe ▁egin . ▁Nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	But if you have seen him , you will know how much I have done , you will not know that I am the Sovereign Lord . ”
GOLD:	When you meet them and see their behavior , you will understand that these things are not being done to Israel without cause . I , the Sovereign Lord , have spoken ! ”

ID:	2638
INPUT:	▁moztu ▁egingo ▁diote ▁eskua . ▁Ez ▁izan ▁gupidarik !
PRED:	They must not cut off his hand .
GOLD:	you must cut off her hand . Show her no pity .

ID:	2639
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁Jaunak ▁beraien ▁aurretik ▁bota ▁zituen ▁herrien ▁ohitu rak ▁eta ▁Israelgo ▁erregeek ▁ezarritako ▁arauak ▁hartu ▁zituzten ▁israeldarrek .
PRED:	For the Lord handed them ahead of them ahead of the kings of Israel , and the kings of Israel took their decrees .
GOLD:	They had followed the practices of the pagan nations the Lord had driven from the land ahead of them , as well as the practices the kings of Israel had introduced .

ID:	2640
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Moabeko ▁lautadan , ▁Jordan ▁ondoan , ▁Jeriko ▁parean , ▁etxol aturik ▁zeuden ▁Moisesi , ▁Eleazar ▁apaizari ▁eta ▁israeldarren ▁elkarte ▁osoari ▁eraman ▁zieten .
PRED:	So the people of Moab came to Eleazar the priest at the Jordan River , Eleazar , Eleazar , Eleazar , and Eleazar the entire community of Israel .
GOLD:	they brought them all to Moses and Eleazar the priest , and to the whole community of Israel , which was camped on the plains of Moab beside the Jordan River , across from Jericho .

ID:	2641
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁saia ▁zaitezte ▁gogoz ▁zeuen ▁fede arekin ▁batera ▁ber tu tea ▁izaten , ▁ber tu te arekin ▁ezagu tza ,
PRED:	So be sure to get right with those who want to understand it .
GOLD:	In view of all this , make every effort to respond to God 's promises . Supplement your faith with a generous provision of moral excellence , and moral excellence with knowledge ,

ID:	2642
INPUT:	▁« Agindu , ▁lege ▁eta ▁erabak iok ▁zuen ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak ▁zuei ▁irakasteko ▁emanak ▁dira , ▁jabetzan ▁hartzera ▁zoazten ▁lurraldean ▁bete ▁ditz azuen .
PRED:	“ Command the Lord your God to teach you the decrees that the Lord your God chooses to teach you in the land you are giving you .
GOLD:	“ These are the commands , decrees , and regulations that the Lord your God commanded me to teach you . You must obey them in the land you are about to enter and occupy ,

ID:	2643
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁odol ▁horrekin ▁elkarketa - etxolan ▁dagoen ▁aldare - ertzeko ▁adarrak ▁igur tziko ▁ditu ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrean , ▁eta ▁zekor raren ▁gainerako ▁odola ▁elkarketa - etxolaren ▁sarreran ▁dagoen ▁erre - oparien ▁aldare - oin ean ▁isuriko .
PRED:	Then he will pour out the blood of the altar at the entrance of the Tabernacle , and he will pour out the blood of the Lord 's altar at the entrance of the Tabernacle at the entrance of the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	He will then put some of the blood on the horns of the altar for fragrant incense that stands in the Lord 's presence inside the Tabernacle . He will pour out the rest of the blood at the base of the altar for burnt offerings at the entrance of the Tabernacle .

ID:	2644
INPUT:	▁Bat ▁bakarra ▁epai lea
PRED:	Living by God 's Power
GOLD:	Warning against Judging Others

ID:	2645
INPUT:	▁Itzuli tako ▁guztiak ▁ 42 . 360 ▁ziren .
PRED:	So all the people returned to Judah ,
GOLD:	So a total of 42,360 people returned to Judah ,

ID:	2646
INPUT:	▁Bide buru ▁eta ▁plaz a ▁guztietan ▁prostituzio - lekuak ▁eraiki ▁zenituen ; ▁baina ▁ez ▁zenuen ▁emagaldu ek ▁ohi ▁bezala ▁jokatu , ▁baztertu ▁egiten ▁baitzen uen ▁lan saria .
PRED:	You have built a pagan shrine for all the people of Jerusalem , but you have not abandoned her to commit adultery . You have rejected her as a prostitute , for she has abandoned her .
GOLD:	You build your pagan shrines on every street corner and your altars to idols in every square . In fact , you have been worse than a prostitute , so eager for sin that you have not even demanded payment .

ID:	2647
INPUT:	▁Al txatu ▁zuen , ▁bada , ▁Moisesek ▁eskua ▁zerurantz ▁eta ▁Egipto ▁osoa ▁ilundu ▁zen ; ▁hain ▁zen ▁itx ia ▁ilunpea ,
PRED:	So Moses lifted his hand toward the sky , and when he lifted his hand toward heaven .
GOLD:	So Moses lifted his hand to the sky , and a deep darkness covered the entire land of Egypt for three days .

ID:	2648
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁gizonezko ek ▁toki ▁guztietan ▁otoitz ▁egin ▁dezaten ▁nahi ▁dut , ▁zerurantz ▁esku ▁garbi ak ▁jas oz , ▁haser rerik ▁eta ▁eztabai darik ▁gabe .
PRED:	So I want these men to pray for all these men to heaven and pray to heaven .
GOLD:	In every place of worship , I want men to pray with holy hands lifted up to God , free from anger and controversy .

ID:	2649
INPUT:	▁« Jos e , ▁u bide ▁ondoan lan dar e ▁eman kor , h onen ▁adarrak ▁harres ian ▁gora .
PRED:	“ At that time I gave the water to the city of Jericho , the city was located in the city .
GOLD:	“ Joseph is the foal of a wild donkey , the foal of a wild donkey at a spring — one of the wild donkeys on the ridge .

ID:	2650
INPUT:	▁Israelgo ▁erregeen ▁jokabide ari ▁baizik : ▁Juda ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁jendeari ▁sasijainko ak ▁gurtzera ▁eragin ▁diozu , ▁Akaben ▁senitarteko ek ▁bezala . ▁Gainera , ▁zu ▁baino ▁hob eak ▁ziren ▁zeure ▁anaiak , ▁zeure ▁aitaren ▁etxekoak , ▁hilarazi ▁dituzu .
PRED:	But instead of the kings of Judah , the kings of Judah , and worship the gods of the gods of Ahab 's household , as you had killed . You were killed by your father 's household .
GOLD:	Instead , you have been as evil as the kings of Israel . You have led the people of Jerusalem and Judah to worship idols , just as King Ahab did in Israel . And you have even killed your own brothers , men who were better than you .

ID:	2651
INPUT:	▁Abrahamek , ▁Isaak ▁ezarri ▁zion ▁izena ▁Sar arengandik ▁izandako ▁semeari .
PRED:	Abraham named Isaac , who was the son of Isaac , was the son of Isaac .
GOLD:	And Abraham named their son Isaac .

ID:	2652
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaidan ▁Jauna :
PRED:	Then this message came to me from the Lord :
GOLD:	It will put them all to the test.What chance do they have ? says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	2653
INPUT:	▁A ta bak an ▁diru ▁asko ▁zegoela ▁ikustean , ▁erregearen ▁idaz karia ▁eta ▁apaiz ▁nagusia ▁etorri ▁ohi ▁ziren ▁Jaunaren ▁etxean ▁bildu riko ▁dirua ▁zen ba tzera .
PRED:	When he saw a large amount of money , the high priest came to the Temple of the Lord .
GOLD:	Then they gave the money to the construction supervisors , who used it to pay the people working on the Lord 's Temple — the carpenters , the builders ,

ID:	2654
INPUT:	▁Era m aten ▁baditu zu , ▁zeu ▁borrokatu ▁eta ▁ahalegin du ▁arren , ▁Jainkoak ▁estropezu ▁egin araziko ▁dizu ▁etsaien ▁aurrean ; ▁lagun ▁bai tez ake ▁Jainkoak , ▁baina ▁hondatu ▁ere ▁bai .
PRED:	For I have fought against you , but God will protect you from all your enemies .
GOLD:	If you let them go with your troops into battle , you will be defeated by the enemy no matter how well you fight . God will overthrow you , for he has the power to help you or to trip you up . ”

ID:	2655
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁hos toak ▁ihartu riko hari tzaren ▁antzeko izango ▁zarete , urik ▁gabeko ▁bara tze aren ▁pareko .
PRED:	For you are like a tree of fruit , and it will be like a garden .
GOLD:	You will be like a great tree with withered leaves , like a garden without water .

ID:	2656
INPUT:	▁« Hartu ▁harri tzar ▁batzuk ▁eta ▁sartu ▁faraoiaren ▁T af n es ko ▁jauregi ▁aurrean ▁dagoen ▁buztin ezko ▁zor uan ; ▁egin ▁hori ▁judat arren ▁aurrean ,
PRED:	“ Take some stones in the middle of Pharaoh 's court and put it in charge of the royal palace in front of the royal palace .
GOLD:	“ While the people of Judah are watching , take some large rocks and bury them under the pavement stones at the entrance of Pharaoh 's palace here in Tahpanhes .

ID:	2657
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁prestatzen ▁dizkio ▁ibil bideak ▁euri - j as ari , nork ▁egiten ▁bidea ▁tximis ta ▁eta ▁trumoi ari ,
PRED:	Who gives the rain for the lightning ; the lightning flashes of lightning .
GOLD:	“ Who created a channel for the torrents of rain ? Who laid out the path for the lightning ?

ID:	2658
INPUT:	▁Gar agar - tal oaren ▁antzeko ▁opil ak ▁egin ▁eta ▁jen da urrean ▁giza ▁gor o tzaren ▁gainean ▁erreko ▁dituzu ».
PRED:	Make these branches from the center stem of the ram 's horn , and burn it on them . ”
GOLD:	Prepare and eat this food as you would barley cakes . While all the people are watching , bake it over a fire using dried human dung as fuel and then eat the bread . ”

ID:	2659
INPUT:	▁Jesusi ▁jende - taldea ▁bildu
PRED:	Crowds Follow Jesus
GOLD:	Crowds Follow Jesus

ID:	2660
INPUT:	▁Zi ur tatu ▁zeure ▁ogi bidea , l ortu ▁eta ▁hasi ▁lan tzen ▁zeure ▁sor oak , eta ▁gero ▁eraikiko ▁duzu ▁etxea .
PRED:	Now give it to your regular bread , and you will rebuild the Temple of your house .
GOLD:	Do your planning and prepare your fieldsbefore building your house .

ID:	2661
INPUT:	▁ez ▁dut ▁begi rik ▁itx iko , ▁ez ▁lo ak ▁hartzen ▁utziko ,
PRED:	My eyes will not be crushed , but the wicked will never be asleep .
GOLD:	I will not let my eyes sleepnor close my eyelids in slumber

ID:	2662
INPUT:	▁Gu duan ▁harrapatu ▁zuten etik ▁gelditzen ▁zena ▁hauxe ▁zen : ▁ardiak ▁ 675 . 000 ,
PRED:	He was sent by the one who was taken from the world , who was the one of the sheep .
GOLD:	The plunder remaining from everything the fighting men had taken totaled 675,000 sheep and goats ,

ID:	2663
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁Pilatok :— Zer ▁oker ▁egin ▁du , ▁bada ? Haiek , ▁are ▁eta ▁oihu ▁handiago z :— G uru tzera ▁hori !
PRED:	Pilate asked , “ What do you mean ? ” “ Crucify him ! ” “ Crucify him ! ”
GOLD:	“ Why ? ” Pilate demanded . “ What crime has he committed ? ” But the mob roared even louder , “ Crucify him ! ”

ID:	2664
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁galde tuko ▁diote : ▁“ Zer ▁ditu k , ▁bada , ▁soinean ▁darama tza an ▁zauri ▁horiek ?” ▁Eta ▁hark ▁erantzungo : ▁“ Neure ▁maita leen ▁etxean ▁zauritu ▁naute ”».
PRED:	And they will say , ‘ What sorrow awaits me , ' and he will reply , ‘ What sorrow awaits me ? '
GOLD:	And if someone asks , ‘ Then what about those wounds on your chest ? ' he will say , ‘ I was wounded at my friends ' house ! '

ID:	2665
INPUT:	▁Ak azen ▁errege aldia
PRED:	The Death of Ahaz
GOLD:	Ahaz Rules in Judah

ID:	2666
INPUT:	▁bestela , ▁Jaunaren ▁haserrea ▁piztuko ▁da ▁zuen ▁aurka , ▁zerua ▁itx iko ▁du ▁eta ▁ez ▁duzue ▁euririk ▁gehiago ▁izango ; ▁lurrak ▁ez ▁du ▁uz tarik ▁emango ▁eta ▁berehala ▁desager tuko ▁zarete ▁Jaunak ▁ematen ▁dizuen ▁lurralde ▁eder ▁horretatik .
PRED:	But if you have sinned against the Lord 's anger , you will never again be filled with rain and rain , and you will never be able to destroy the land the Lord your God has given you .
GOLD:	If you do , the Lord 's anger will burn against you . He will shut up the sky and hold back the rain , and the ground will fail to produce its harvests . Then you will quickly die in that good land the Lord is giving you .

ID:	2667
INPUT:	▁Erregeak ▁esan ▁zuen :— Etor rarazi ▁bizkor ▁Haman , ▁Ester ren ▁nahia ▁bete ▁dadin . Horrela , ▁bada , ▁Esterrek ▁prestatua ▁zien ▁otor dura ▁joan ▁ziren ▁Haman ▁eta ▁biak .
PRED:	But the king said to Esther , “ Let 's see that Queen Esther has prepared a banquet for Haman and Haman 's banquet . So Esther went to the banquet .
GOLD:	The king turned to his attendants and said , “ Tell Haman to come quickly to a banquet , as Esther has requested. ” So the king and Haman went to Esther 's banquet .

ID:	2668
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁izan ▁zen ▁Moisesek ▁Moabeko ▁lautadan , ▁Jordanez ▁beste ▁aldera , ▁Jeriko tik ▁ekialdera , ▁egin ▁zuen ▁ondare - ban aketa .
PRED:	This was the command of the Jordan River , the leader of the Jordan River , east of Jericho .
GOLD:	These are the allotments Moses had made while he was on the plains of Moab , across the Jordan River , east of Jericho .

ID:	2669
INPUT:	▁Sim onen ▁amagin arreba ▁ohera tua ▁zegoen ▁s uk arrez ; ▁berehala , ▁hartaz ▁hitz ▁egin ▁zioten ▁Jesusi .
PRED:	Soon after Simon 's mother-in-law had been at that time , they said to Jesus ,
GOLD:	Now Simon 's mother-in-law was sick in bed with a high fever . They told Jesus about her right away .

ID:	2670
INPUT:	▁G razia ▁Jesu ▁Kristo ▁gure ▁Jauna ▁maitasun ▁iraun kor rez ▁maite ▁duten ▁guztiekin .
PRED:	May the Lord Jesus Christ be with all who love our Lord Jesus Christ .
GOLD:	May God 's grace be eternally upon all who love our Lord Jesus Christ .

ID:	2671
INPUT:	▁Harri ▁gaineko ▁hazia ▁bezalakoak , ▁hauek ▁dira : ▁mezua ▁entzutean , ▁pozik ▁onartzen ▁dutenak ; ▁baina , ▁sustra irik ▁gabeak ▁izanik , ▁denboraldi ▁batean ▁sinesten ▁dute , ▁baina ▁tental di - gar aian ▁huts ▁egiten .
PRED:	The seed that fell among the seed are found , but those who are good . But they have a long life for themselves , but they have a long life .
GOLD:	The seeds on the rocky soil represent those who hear the message and receive it with joy . But since they do n't have deep roots , they believe for a while , then they fall away when they face temptation .

ID:	2672
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁grin ari ▁eutsi ▁ezin ▁badio te , ▁ezkon ▁daitezela ; ▁hobe ▁da ▁ezkon tzea ▁sutan ▁ego tea ▁baino .
PRED:	But if the sinful nature is better off , it is better to marry it . It is better to be better than to marry it .
GOLD:	But if they ca n't control themselves , they should go ahead and marry . It 's better to marry than to burn with lust .

ID:	2673
INPUT:	▁Horeb ▁mendi ko ▁itunaren ▁oroitzapena
PRED:	The Lord 's Covenant Renewed
GOLD:	Ten Commandments for the Covenant Community

ID:	2674
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁hau ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak : ▁Neure ▁haserre - sum inean ▁ek aitz - haizea ▁sorraraziko ▁dut , ▁uholde - eu riak ▁eta ▁harri ▁suntsitz ailea ▁bidaliko .
PRED:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will destroy the mighty waters of the earth , and I will destroy all the earth .
GOLD:	“ Therefore , this is what the Sovereign Lord says : I will sweep away your whitewashed wall with a storm of indignation , with a great flood of anger , and with hailstones of fury .

ID:	2675
INPUT:	▁Tx ori ak , ▁hegoak ▁zabaldu rik , h ab ia ▁zaindu ▁ohi ▁duen ▁bezala , halaxe ▁zainduko ▁du ▁Jerusalem Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak ; zain duko ▁du ▁eta ▁askatuko , bar katu ▁eta ▁salbatuko ».
PRED:	The wings of the Lord 's Armies has already been laid , and it will be saved . The Lord of Heaven 's Armies will rescue Jerusalem and rescue Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	The Lord of Heaven 's Armies will hover over Jerusalemand protect it like a bird protecting its nest.He will defend and save the city ; he will pass over it and rescue it . ”

ID:	2676
INPUT:	▁Josafat ▁gero ▁eta ▁indartsuago ▁egiten ▁ari ▁zen . ▁Go tor lekuak ▁eta ▁janari - bil tegi ▁izateko ▁hiriak ▁eraiki ▁zituen ▁Judan .
PRED:	Then Jehoshaphat became stronger than Ahab , and he built towns for the towns of Judah .
GOLD:	So Jehoshaphat became more and more powerful and built fortresses and storage cities throughout Judah .

ID:	2677
INPUT:	▁Jakin duri az ▁edo ▁indarraz ▁horni tua ▁izan da ▁ere , nork ▁egingo ▁dio ▁aurre ▁eta ▁kalte gabe ▁gelditu ?
PRED:	There is no foundation or leader who can stand against him , and who can stand against him ?
GOLD:	For God is so wise and so mighty.Who has ever challenged him successfully ?

ID:	2678
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁esan ▁zion ▁Boozek ▁Ru ti :— A d izu ! ▁Ez ▁zaitez ▁joan ▁soro ▁honetatik ▁beste ▁in ora ▁garagar buruak ▁bil tzera . ▁J arra i ▁hemen ▁lanean ▁nire ▁morroi ekin .
PRED:	Then Boaz said to Ruth , “ Let 's go to the fields , and do n't go to the fields . Do n't work here . ”
GOLD:	Boaz went over and said to Ruth , “ Listen , my daughter . Stay right here with us when you gather grain ; do n't go to any other fields . Stay right behind the young women working in my field .

ID:	2679
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁bere ▁lehen - semea ▁munduan ▁sar r araz tean , ▁berriz , ▁honela ▁esaten ▁du : ▁A do ra ▁dezatela ▁bera ▁Jainkoaren ▁aingeru ▁guztiek .
PRED:	But God 's oldest son will go out to the earth , but he said , “ Let the Son of God bless the angels . Let the angels go to the world . ”
GOLD:	And when he brought his supreme Son into the world , God said , “ Let all of God 's angels worship him . ”

ID:	2680
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁naiz ▁inoren ▁alde ▁jarriko , ez ▁dut ▁inor ▁lau sen g atuko .
PRED:	I will not judge anyone with anyone who is able to stand up with me .
GOLD:	I wo n't play favoritesor try to flatter anyone .

ID:	2681
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁ondoren , ▁beste ▁erreinu ▁bat ▁sortuko ▁da , ▁zurea ▁baino ▁txik iago a . ▁Gero ▁hirugarren ▁bat , ▁bron tzez koa , ▁mundu ▁osoa ▁mendera tuko ▁duena .
PRED:	After this , you will be greater than one kingdom , and you will be greater than the third kingdom . Then he will rule over the world .
GOLD:	“ But after your kingdom comes to an end , another kingdom , inferior to yours , will rise to take your place . After that kingdom has fallen , yet a third kingdom , represented by bronze , will rise to rule the world .

ID:	2682
INPUT:	▁Eliseok , ▁itzulirik , ▁begiratu ▁eta ▁madarikatu ▁egin ▁zituen ▁Jaunaren ▁izenean . ▁Orduan , ▁bi ▁hartz ek ▁oih an etik ▁atera ▁eta ▁mutiko ▁hai etarik ▁berrogeita ▁bi ▁txikitu rik ▁utzi ▁zituzten .
PRED:	Then Elisha turned and looked up and curse them in the name of the Lord 's name . Then the boy left the mountain and ordered him to kill him .
GOLD:	Elisha turned around and looked at them , and he cursed them in the name of the Lord . Then two bears came out of the woods and mauled forty-two of them .

ID:	2683
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁erantzun :— H aur ra ▁bizi ▁zen ▁bitartean , ▁beraren gatik ▁egiten ▁nuen ▁barau ▁eta ▁negar . ▁Neure ▁baitan ▁ni oen : ▁« Ea ▁erruki tzen ▁zaidan ▁Jauna ▁eta ▁bizirik ▁gelditzen ▁den ▁haurra ».
PRED:	But David replied , “ My child was living in grief , for I was fast and grief to me , for I am the Lord , who has mercy on me . ”
GOLD:	David replied , “ I fasted and wept while the child was alive , for I said , ‘ Perhaps the Lord will be gracious to me and let the child live . '

ID:	2684
INPUT:	▁Ai ▁ene , ▁desegin a ▁da ▁Moab ! ▁Egin ▁intziri ! ▁L ots aren ▁lotsaz ▁bizkarra ▁eman ▁du ! ▁Auz oko en ▁izu ▁eta ▁iseka - gai ▁bihurtu ▁da .
PRED:	What sorrow awaits me , O Moab , O Lord , O Israel ! Listen to me , O Lord !
GOLD:	How it is shattered ! Hear the wailing ! See the shame of Moab ! It has become an object of ridicule , an example of ruin to all its neighbors . ”

ID:	2685
INPUT:	▁Israel ▁herriak ▁berriro ▁des ob edi tu
PRED:	Judgment against Israel
GOLD:	The Lord Punishes the Israelites

ID:	2686
INPUT:	▁Jesusek , ▁inguruko ▁guztiei ▁haserre ▁begiratu rik ▁eta ▁beraien ▁s etak eriaz ▁min durik , ▁honela ▁esan ▁zion ▁gizonari :— Luz atu ▁beso ▁hori . Hark ▁luzatu , ▁eta ▁sendatu ▁egin ▁zitzaion .
PRED:	Then Jesus looked up and saw all their surrounding villages , and he said to the man , “ Son of Man , have put his hands on him , and he healed him . ”
GOLD:	He looked around at them angrily and was deeply saddened by their hard hearts . Then he said to the man , “ Hold out your hand. ” So the man held out his hand , and it was restored !

ID:	2687
INPUT:	▁Gizaki ak ▁ez ▁du ▁jakinduri aren ▁berri rik
PRED:	A Promise of Wisdom
GOLD:	Job Speaks of Wisdom and Understanding

ID:	2688
INPUT:	▁Bera ▁ere ▁neke etan ▁prob atua ▁izan ▁delako , ▁gauza ▁da ▁orain ▁prob aldian ▁dauden ei ▁laguntzeko .
PRED:	And so , we know that we have been found , just as we have done .
GOLD:	Since he himself has gone through suffering and testing , he is able to help us when we are being tested .

ID:	2689
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁garai ▁batean ▁ilunpetan ▁bizi ▁zineten ; ▁orain , ▁aldiz , ▁argitan ▁bizi ▁zarete , ▁Jaunarekin ▁bat ▁eginik . ▁Jok atu , ▁beraz , ▁argi aren ▁partaide ▁zareten ez ;
PRED:	For you were living in darkness , but you were living in darkness . When you live in darkness , you are living in the darkness , you may live in the Lord 's light .
GOLD:	For once you were full of darkness , but now you have light from the Lord . So live as people of light !

ID:	2690
INPUT:	▁Zuek ▁beteko ▁duzue ▁santutegiko ▁eta ▁aldar eko ▁zerbitzu ▁sakratua ; ▁honela , ▁ez ▁da ▁nire ▁haserrea ▁israeldarren ▁aurka ▁piztuko .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ You must not commit adultery against the sanctuary of the sanctuary , and it will be angry with the guilt of Israel .
GOLD:	“ You yourselves must perform the sacred duties inside the sanctuary and at the altar . If you follow these instructions , the Lord 's anger will never again blaze against the people of Israel .

ID:	2691
INPUT:	▁Davidena . ▁Abimelek en ▁aurrean ▁er o arena ▁egin ▁zuelarik , ▁hark ▁David ▁bota ▁eta ▁honek ▁alde ▁egin ▁zuen ekoa ▁.
PRED:	Oh , the God of Abimelech , the God of Israel , and he turned away and left him .
GOLD:	I will praise the Lord at all times.I will constantly speak his praises .

ID:	2692
INPUT:	▁ F ariseu ▁eta ▁s aduze arrak ▁mirarizko ▁seinale ▁eske
PRED:	The True Family of Jesus
GOLD:	Leaders Demand a Miraculous Sign

ID:	2693
INPUT:	▁A urp egia ▁uretan ▁is la tzen ▁da , giz akia ▁gizakiaren ▁bihotzean .
PRED:	The people are filled with water , but they are filled with their eyes .
GOLD:	As a face is reflected in water , so the heart reflects the real person .

ID:	2694
INPUT:	▁B uka ▁ezazu ▁Le aren ▁ez tei - as tea ▁eta , ▁gero , ▁Rakel ▁ere ▁emango ▁dizut ▁beste ▁zazpi ▁urteko ▁lan aren ▁truke .
PRED:	I will not send her for her young women and Leah for seven years . I will give her food for seven years .
GOLD:	“ But wait until the bridal week is over ; then we 'll give you Rachel , too — provided you promise to work another seven years for me . ”

ID:	2695
INPUT:	▁horregatik ▁piztu ▁zen ▁Jaunaren ▁haserrea ▁herrialde ▁horren ▁kontra , ▁horregatik ▁bidali ▁zizkion ▁liburu ▁honetan ▁idatzi tako ▁madarikazio ▁guztiak .
PRED:	That is why the anger of the Lord 's anger was poured out against all this book .
GOLD:	Instead , they turned away to serve and worship gods they had not known before , gods that were not from the Lord .

ID:	2696
INPUT:	▁De abru ei ▁eskaini ▁zizkieten sak rifizio ak , ez agutzen ▁ez ▁zituzten ▁sasijainko ei , ar es ti an ▁etorritako ▁jainko ▁berri ei , ar b aso ek ▁inoiz ▁gurtu ▁ez ▁zituzten ei .
PRED:	The demons offered sacrifices to the demons , who had not been offered to the gods of demons , who had not been offered to the gods of demons .
GOLD:	They offered sacrifices to demons , which are not God , to gods they had not known before , to new gods only recently arrived , to gods their ancestors had never feared .

ID:	2697
INPUT:	▁Itzul ▁belarria ▁niregana , ▁Jauna , ▁eta ▁entzun . ▁Zab al ▁begiak , ▁Jauna , ▁eta ▁ikusi . ▁Entzun ▁nolako ▁irainak ▁zuzendu ▁dizk izun ▁Senakerib ek ▁zuri , ▁Jainko ▁bizi ▁horri .
PRED:	Turn to me and listen to me , O Lord , and see what you have seen and seen with all the evil things you have seen .
GOLD:	Bend down , O Lord , and listen ! Open your eyes , O Lord , and see ! Listen to Sennacherib 's words of defiance against the living God .

ID:	2698
INPUT:	▁Josue ▁eta ▁ezpata dun ▁gizona
PRED:	The Lord 's Chosen Servant
GOLD:	The Lord 's Commander Confronts Joshua

ID:	2699
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁erantzun ▁zien :— Zu etako ▁zein ek , ▁ardi ▁bakarra ▁eduki ▁eta ▁larunbatez ▁zul ora ▁erortzen ▁bazaio , ▁ez ▁du ▁hartu ▁eta ▁aterako ?
PRED:	Jesus replied , “ If you have only only one of these animals , you will fall into the Sabbath , and if it falls on the Sabbath ? ”
GOLD:	And he answered , “ If you had a sheep that fell into a well on the Sabbath , would n't you work to pull it out ? Of course you would .

ID:	2700
INPUT:	▁Jesusen ▁gen e alo gia
PRED:	Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Man
GOLD:	The Ancestors of Jesus the Messiah

ID:	2701
INPUT:	▁leinu ▁bakoitzetik ▁familia buru ▁bat ▁lagun ▁duzu elarik .
PRED:	One of the tribe of Levi , one from the tribe of Levi .
GOLD:	and you will be assisted by one family leader from each tribe .

ID:	2702
INPUT:	▁Zintz oaren ▁bidea ▁zuzena ▁da : zuk ▁egiten ▁duzu , ▁Jauna , zintz oaren ▁bidea ▁zuzen .
PRED:	The way of the godly are right ; the godly are the path of the godly .
GOLD:	But for those who are righteous , the way is not steep and rough.You are a God who does what is right , and you smooth out the path ahead of them .

ID:	2703
INPUT:	▁Z el atari ek ▁eraso ▁zioten ▁oldar ka ▁Gib eari , ▁zabaldu ▁ziren ▁eta ▁hiriko ▁jende ▁guztia ▁hil ▁zuten ▁ezpataz .
PRED:	The people of Benjamin attacked the city , and the people of Benjamin began to kill everyone .
GOLD:	Then those who were hiding rushed in from all sides and killed everyone in the town .

ID:	2704
INPUT:	▁An anias ▁izeneko ▁gizon ▁batek ▁eta ▁beronen ▁emazte ▁S af i rak ▁soro ▁bat ▁saldu ▁zuten .
PRED:	A man named Ananias and his wife named Ananias .
GOLD:	But there was a certain man named Ananias who , with his wife , Sapphira , sold some property .

ID:	2705
INPUT:	▁Herri alde ▁horre tako ▁igar le ▁batek , ▁hain ▁zuzen , ▁hauxe ▁esan ▁zuen : K re tarrak ▁beti ▁gezurti , p iz tia ▁txar ▁eta ▁t ri p az ain ▁al fer .
PRED:	One of the people who say , “ This is what the Lord says : Just as you say , ‘ You are those who are honest , and those who oppress you . '
GOLD:	Even one of their own men , a prophet from Crete , has said about them , “ The people of Crete are all liars , cruel animals , and lazy gluttons . ”

ID:	2706
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁naiz ▁inolako ▁bide ▁tx arre tatik ▁ab iatzen , zure ▁hitza ▁gorde tzearren .
PRED:	I will not stop telling you what I have promised .
GOLD:	I have refused to walk on any evil path , so that I may remain obedient to your word .

ID:	2707
INPUT:	▁Josafat , ▁Par u ahen ▁semea , ▁Isak arren ;
PRED:	Jehoshaphat son of Jehoshaphat
GOLD:	Jehoshaphat son of Paruah , in Issachar .

ID:	2708
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁da ▁lurralde ▁honetan gizon ▁leial ik ▁gelditzen , ezta ▁giz ar tean ▁gizon ▁zuzen ik ▁ere : denak ▁odol - e garriz ▁daude , sar ea ▁jartzen ▁dio ▁batak ▁besteari ;
PRED:	No one can stand in this land or a person in this land — a person who does not take revenge on the sides of the earth .
GOLD:	The godly people have all disappeared ; not one honest person is left on the earth.They are all murderers , setting traps even for their own brothers .

ID:	2709
INPUT:	▁« On artu ▁eta ▁bete ▁ematen ▁dizkizuedan ▁agindu ▁guztiok , ▁beti ▁zoriontsu ▁izan ▁zaitezten , ▁bai ▁zeuek , ▁bai ▁ondorengoak , ▁Jaunari ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoari ▁on ▁eta ▁zuzen ▁iruditzen ▁zaiona ▁egiteagatik .
PRED:	“ Listen to what I am giving you today , and you must obey the commands of the Lord your God , and you are doing good to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Be careful to obey all my commands , so that all will go well with you and your children after you , because you will be doing what is good and pleasing to the Lord your God .

ID:	2710
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁esan ▁zion :— Baina ▁em adazu ▁honako ▁hau : ▁bi ▁hilabetez ▁men diz ▁mendi ▁neure ▁lagun ekin ▁negarrez ▁ibil tzea , ▁ezkondu ▁baino ▁lehen ▁hil ▁behar ▁du dalako .
PRED:	Then he said to him , “ I will give you two months , and I will weep for two months . ”
GOLD:	But first let me do this one thing : Let me go up and roam in the hills and weep with my friends for two months , because I will die a virgin . ”

ID:	2711
INPUT:	▁Era ▁berean , ▁sen arrek ▁ere ▁beren ▁gorputza ▁bezalaxe ▁maitatu ▁behar ▁dituzte ▁emazteak . ▁Em aztea ▁maite ▁duenak ▁bere ▁burua ▁maite ▁du .
PRED:	And if they love their bodies , they love their bodies as much as you love .
GOLD:	In the same way , husbands ought to love their wives as they love their own bodies . For a man who loves his wife actually shows love for himself .

ID:	2712
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁berak ▁jo ▁zituen , ▁kanpalekutik ▁erabat ▁desagerrarazi ▁arte .
PRED:	For the Lord has cut down all the wild animals from the camp until he destroyed them .
GOLD:	The Lord struck them down until they had all been eliminated from the community .

ID:	2713
INPUT:	▁zuhur tzi ari ▁kas u ▁egineta ▁zentzu ▁on ari ▁jaramon ▁egiten ▁badio zu ,
PRED:	If you listen to the poor , pay attention to the poor .
GOLD:	Tune your ears to wisdom , and concentrate on understanding .

ID:	2714
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁semeek , ▁gizakien ▁alabak ▁ederrak ▁zirela ▁ikusirik , ▁haien ▁artetik ▁hautatu ▁eta ▁emaztetzat ▁hartu ▁zituzten .
PRED:	When they saw that the people of God had chosen them to be his daughters , they took her away from the land of God .
GOLD:	The sons of God saw the beautiful women and took any they wanted as their wives .

ID:	2715
INPUT:	▁Kristo ▁Jesusengan ▁s ork ari ▁berri
PRED:	Jesus Teaches about Christ
GOLD:	New Bodies

ID:	2716
INPUT:	▁Nork ▁kenduko ▁dio ▁bere ▁larru - jantzia , zu la ezineko ▁os kol ▁bi ko itza ▁bezalakoa ▁dena ?
PRED:	Who will be able to take it into two leather ? Who can make it as much as you do ?
GOLD:	Can you make it a pet like a bird , or give it to your little girls to play with ?

ID:	2717
INPUT:	▁eta ▁norbaitek , ▁txiki ▁nahiz ▁handi , ▁gizaseme ▁nahiz ▁emakume , ▁Jaunarengana , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoarengana , ▁jotzen ▁ez ▁bazuen , ▁hil ▁egingo ▁zutela .
PRED:	But if a man or woman , either a small man or woman or woman , he would not listen to the Lord ,
GOLD:	They agreed that anyone who refused to seek the Lord , the God of Israel , would be put to death — whether young or old , man or woman .

ID:	2718
INPUT:	▁Sus a ▁hirian ▁bostehun ▁gizaseme ▁hil ▁eta ▁garbitu ▁zituzten ,
PRED:	About that time , the men of Susa died .
GOLD:	In the fortress of Susa itself , the Jews killed 500 men .

ID:	2719
INPUT:	▁Biho tza ▁kez kaz ▁betea ▁izan ▁arren , zeure ▁kontsol amen du az ▁goza tzen ▁nauzu .
PRED:	My heart is filled with a little child , but now my soul is filled with joy .
GOLD:	When doubts filled my mind , your comfort gave me renewed hope and cheer .

ID:	2720
INPUT:	▁Era ▁berean , ▁emakumea ▁abere ▁batekin ▁elkar ▁ba tzen ▁bada , ▁heriotzara ▁emango ▁dituzte ▁emakumea ▁eta ▁aberea . ▁Ber ena ▁izango ▁dute ▁heriotzaren ▁errua .
PRED:	“ If a man leaves another person , the woman must be put to death , and the woman must be put to death .
GOLD:	“ If a woman presents herself to a male animal to have intercourse with it , she and the animal must both be put to death . You must kill both , for they are guilty of a capital offense .

ID:	2721
INPUT:	▁H arekin ▁ibil tzeak ▁herio tzar antz ▁eramaten ▁zaitu , Hil dakoen ▁Egoitz ara ▁doaz ▁haren ▁urrats ak .
PRED:	May the grave be laid to death , but death comes to death .
GOLD:	Her feet go down to death ; her steps lead straight to the grave .

ID:	2722
INPUT:	▁« Zuek ▁niregana ▁etorri ▁eta ▁esan ▁zenidaten : ▁Bi dal ▁ditzagun ▁aurretik ▁zenbait ▁gizon ▁lurraldea ▁iker tzera , ▁zein ▁bide tatik ▁joan ▁eta ▁zein ▁hiri tara ▁sartu ▁jakin araz ▁diez agu ten .
PRED:	“ You came to me and told me , ‘ Send some men here ahead of us , and if you want us to know how to go . '
GOLD:	“ But you all came to me and said , ‘ First , let 's send out scouts to explore the land for us . They will advise us on the best route to take and which towns we should enter . '

ID:	2723
INPUT:	▁Nor ▁igo ▁Jaunaren ▁mendira ? Nor ▁egon ▁hark ▁sagaraturiko ▁tokian ?
PRED:	Who can stand up to the mountain of the Lord ? Who is the place of honor at the place of honor ?
GOLD:	Who may climb the mountain of the Lord ? Who may stand in his holy place ?

ID:	2724
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁horren ▁ondoren , ▁errukitu ▁egingo ▁natzai e , ▁eta ▁herri ▁bakoitza , ▁nor ▁bere ▁ondar era ▁eta ▁lurraldera ▁itzuliko ▁dut .
PRED:	But after this , I will give you a holy nation , and I will return to their land .
GOLD:	But afterward I will return and have compassion on all of them . I will bring them home to their own lands again , each nation to its own possession .

ID:	2725
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁filistearrek ▁galdetu ▁zuten :— Nork ▁egin ▁du ▁hori ? Er antzun ▁zieten :— Sam s onek , ▁ tim n arraren ▁su h iak , ▁zeren ▁eta ▁hark ▁Sams onen ▁emaztea ▁hartu ▁eta ▁beraren ▁lagun ari ▁eman ▁baitio . Orduan , ▁filistearrek ▁joan ▁eta ▁erre ▁egin ▁zituzten ▁aita - alabak .
PRED:	The Philistines asked him , “ Who has done this to us ? ” The Philistines asked Samson , “ He has been his wife , and he has been his father , the Philistines , and his father , and his father , the Philistines , and his father had done to him .
GOLD:	“ Who did this ? ” the Philistines demanded. “ Samson , ” was the reply , “ because his father-in-law from Timnah gave Samson 's wife to be married to his best man. ” So the Philistines went and got the woman and her father and burned them to death .

ID:	2726
INPUT:	▁Absalomek , ▁bere ▁anaiak , ▁galdetu ▁zion :— Am non ▁egon ▁al ▁d un ▁hi rekin ? ▁Is il ▁hadi , ▁ene ▁arreba , ▁heure ▁anaia ▁d un ▁eta . ▁Ez ▁kezkatu ▁horregatik . T amar , ▁hala ▁ere , ▁atsekabe tua ▁gelditu ▁zen ▁bere ▁anaia ▁Absalomen ▁etxean .
PRED:	So Absalom asked his brothers , “ Why are you going to eat ? ” So Absalom asked him , “ Come , my brother , my brother , my brother , my brother , my brother 's brother , and I have n't been a brother 's brother . ”
GOLD:	Her brother Absalom saw her and asked , “ Is it true that Amnon has been with you ? Well , my sister , keep quiet for now , since he 's your brother . Do n't you worry about it. ” So Tamar lived as a desolate woman in her brother Absalom 's house .

ID:	2727
INPUT:	▁Entzun ▁hau , ▁zuek , behar tsuak ▁zapaldu eta ▁jende ▁erru karri ah on datzen ▁duzuenok .
PRED:	Listen to the poor , you who oppress the poor , who take refuge in the oppressed .
GOLD:	Listen to this , you who rob the poorand trample down the needy !

ID:	2728
INPUT:	▁lurrean ▁arras taka ▁dabiltzan ▁narrasti - ▁nahiz ▁lur ▁azpiko ▁uretan ▁dabiltzan ▁arrain - irudiak .
PRED:	All small animals that scurry along the ground , small animals , and small animals that scurry along the ground .
GOLD:	a small animal that scurries along the ground , or a fish in the deepest sea .

ID:	2729
INPUT:	▁I bar ▁leh orra ▁igarotzean , ▁iturburu tik ▁edaten ▁dute : lehen ▁euri ek ▁ur - b eg iz ▁baitute ▁estaltzen .
PRED:	They will pass through the rivers of water , and the water fill the water with water .
GOLD:	They will continue to grow stronger , and each of them will appear before God in Jerusalem .

ID:	2730
INPUT:	▁mahaia ▁bere ▁tresn ekin , ▁argimutila ▁bere ▁tresn ekin , ▁intsentsu - aldar ea ,
PRED:	the table with its utensils ; all its utensils ; the incense altar ;
GOLD:	the table and all its utensils , the lampstand and all its accessories , the incense altar ,

ID:	2731
INPUT:	▁Ger tatua ▁ikusi ▁zutenek ▁deabru duna ▁nola ▁sendatu a ▁izan ▁zen ▁kontatu ▁zioten ▁jendeari .
PRED:	And those who had seen him , and the crowd had been healed .
GOLD:	Then those who had seen what happened told the others how the demon-possessed man had been healed .

ID:	2732
INPUT:	▁Israelen ▁begira leak ▁itsu ▁daude , ez ▁da ▁inor ▁ezer taz ▁oh artzen . Z aun kar ik ▁egin ▁ezin ▁duten tx akur ▁mu tuak ▁dira ; hor ▁daude ▁etzan da , ▁ametsetan , beti ▁lo gu ra .
PRED:	The blind people of Israel are blind , but they do n't know what they are going to live in a bed , and they can not lie in their sleep . They are in a dream , but they can not lie down in a bed .
GOLD:	For the leaders of my people — the Lord 's watchmen , his shepherds — are blind and ignorant.They are like silent watchdogsthat give no warning when danger comes.They love to lie around , sleeping and dreaming .

ID:	2733
INPUT:	▁G reko - h izk un tzako ▁judu ekin ▁ere ▁hizketan ▁eta ▁eztabaidan ▁jardu ten ▁zuen ; ▁baina ▁haiek ▁Saulo ▁hiltzeko ▁asmotan ▁zebiltzan .
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you who were talking with the Jewish leaders who were talking about him , but they were trying to kill him .
GOLD:	He debated with some Greek-speaking Jews , but they tried to murder him .

ID:	2734
INPUT:	▁S aia ▁zaitezte ▁guztiekin ▁bakean ▁bizitzen , ▁eta ▁izan ▁santu ; ▁bestela , ▁ez ▁baitu ▁inork ▁Jauna ▁ikusiko .
PRED:	If you live in peace and live in peace , you will not be holy .
GOLD:	Work at living in peace with everyone , and work at living a holy life , for those who are not holy will not see the Lord .

ID:	2735
INPUT:	▁Samuelek ▁Sauli :— As ki ▁da ! ▁Gaur ▁gauean ▁Jaunak ▁adierazi ▁didana ▁jakinarazi ▁behar ▁dizut . Eta ▁Saulek :— M intza ▁zaitez .
PRED:	Then Samuel said to Saul , “ This is what the Lord says : I will tell you what the Lord has done . ”
GOLD:	Then Samuel said to Saul , “ Stop ! Listen to what the Lord told me last night ! ” “ What did he tell you ? ” Saul asked .

ID:	2736
INPUT:	▁Hel io p ol is ▁eta ▁B u bas <unk> eko ▁gazteak ▁gerran ▁hilko ▁dituzte ▁eta ▁emakumeak ▁gatibu ▁eramango .
PRED:	They will die in charge of silver and soldiers , along with a young woman , and the women will be carried away .
GOLD:	The young men of Heliopolis and Bubastis will die in battle , and the women will be taken away as slaves .

ID:	2737
INPUT:	▁Nola ▁barru ko ▁hala ▁kanpoko ▁horm etan , ▁inguru ▁guztian , ▁hegaldun ▁izaki - irudiak , ▁palm ondo ▁eta ▁lore - sor ten ▁irudiak ▁zizel katu ▁zituen .
PRED:	He overlaid the walls of the outer courtyard with carvings of cherubim , and there were carved carved palm trees .
GOLD:	He decorated all the walls of the inner sanctuary and the main room with carvings of cherubim , palm trees , and open flowers .

ID:	2738
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁erabakiak ▁irakasten ▁dizkiote Israel i , ▁zure ▁legea ▁Jakoben ▁herriari ; in tsen tsua ▁aurkez ten ▁dute zure ▁aurrean , erre - opariak ▁zure ▁aldarean .
PRED:	They teach your decrees and regulations to the people of Israel ; they will be silent before you .
GOLD:	They teach your regulations to Jacob ; they give your instructions to Israel.They present incense before youand offer whole burnt offerings on the altar .

ID:	2739
INPUT:	▁Beldur - ikar ak ▁joko ▁ditu , eta ▁hain ▁es tua ▁eta ▁larri aizango ▁da ▁egoera , ez en ▁erdimin etan ▁dagoen em akumea ▁bez alab ih urri tuko ▁baitira . H arri ▁eta ▁zur ▁eginik begira tuko ▁diote ▁elkarri , aurp egi ak ▁lotsaz ▁gorri ▁dituztela .
PRED:	They will look at them , and they will be ashamed of us , and they will be ashamed of themselves . They will be ashamed of themselves , and they will be ashamed of themselves , and they will be ashamed of themselves .
GOLD:	and people are terrified.Pangs of anguish grip them , like those of a woman in labor.They look helplessly at one another , their faces aflame with fear .

ID:	2740
INPUT:	▁Alabaina , ene ▁herri ▁hori , zuri ▁bidea ▁zabal tzeko nik ▁suntsitu ▁nuen ▁amortar ra , z ed roa ▁bezain ▁tan tai eta ▁ar tea ▁bezain ▁sendo ▁zena ; bo ta ▁nizkion ▁fruituak ▁gainetik , eta ▁atera ▁sustra iak ▁azpi tik .
PRED:	The nations I made it as strong as the sand on the road , and I destroyed them as though they were as strong as the sand on the ground .
GOLD:	“ But as my people watched , I destroyed the Amorites , though they were as tall as cedarsand as strong as oaks.I destroyed the fruit on their branchesand dug out their roots .

ID:	2741
INPUT:	▁ F ariseu ▁eta ▁lege - maisuek , ▁ordea , ▁huts ▁eragin ▁zioten ▁Jainkoak ▁beraien tzat ▁zeukan ▁asmo ari , ▁ez ▁baitzuten ▁Joanen ▁bata ioa ▁hartu .
PRED:	But the teachers of religious law and the teachers of religious law , because God had not spoken to them .
GOLD:	But the Pharisees and experts in religious law rejected God 's plan for them , for they had refused John 's baptism .

ID:	2742
INPUT:	▁ F ilistearrek ▁G eb an ▁zuten ▁gudari - taldea ▁hil ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Jonatanek , ▁eta ▁jakin ▁zuten ▁hori ▁filistearrek . ▁Saulek , ▁orduan , ▁adarrak ▁jo arazi ▁zituen ▁lurralde ▁osoan , ▁esanez : ▁« Adi , ▁hebre arrak !»
PRED:	The Philistines heard that Saul had been killed , and Jonathan was killed by the Philistines . When Saul heard that Saul had been killed , he shouted to them , “ The Philistines have been defeated by the Philistines ! ”
GOLD:	Soon after this , Jonathan attacked and defeated the garrison of Philistines at Geba . The news spread quickly among the Philistines . So Saul blew the ram 's horn throughout the land , saying , “ Hebrews , hear this ! Rise up in revolt ! ”

ID:	2743
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁gudari ek ▁buruzagi en ▁eta ▁batzar raren ▁esku ▁utzi ▁zituzten ▁preso ak ▁eta ▁harrapakin ak .
PRED:	Then the leaders of the leaders of the leaders and the leaders of the plunder and plunder them .
GOLD:	So the warriors released the prisoners and handed over the plunder in the sight of the leaders and all the people .

ID:	2744
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁S ih onek ▁ez ▁zion ▁Israel ▁herriari ▁lurraldea ▁zehar katzen ▁utzi ; ▁aitz itik , ▁bere ▁herria ▁bildu ▁eta ▁bidera ▁atera ▁zitzaion ▁basamortuan ▁eta , ▁Jah tz ara ▁etorri rik , ▁eraso ▁egin ▁zion .
PRED:	But the people of Israel did not neglect the people of Israel to pass through their land , and they attacked them in the wilderness .
GOLD:	But King Sihon refused to let them cross his territory . Instead , he mobilized his entire army and attacked Israel in the wilderness , engaging them in battle at Jahaz .

ID:	2745
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁Jauna , ▁Jainko ▁handia , ▁goretsi ▁zuen ▁Esdras ek , ▁eta ▁herriak ▁« Amen ! ▁Amen !» ▁erantzun ▁zuen , ▁eskuak ▁jasorik ; ▁ondoren , ▁makurtu ▁eta ▁lurreraino ▁ahuspeztu ▁ziren ▁Jauna ▁gurtzeko .
PRED:	Then Ezra prayed to the Lord , the God of the great nation , and he said , “ Amen . Let the people bow down to the ground and bowed low before the ground and bowed low before the ground before the ground . ”
GOLD:	Then Ezra praised the Lord , the great God , and all the people chanted , “ Amen ! Amen ! ” as they lifted their hands . Then they bowed down and worshiped the Lord with their faces to the ground .

ID:	2746
INPUT:	▁Orain , ▁otoi , ▁entzun ▁zuk ▁ere ▁mirabe ▁honen ▁hitza . ▁Ogi - puska ▁bat ▁ekarriko ▁dizut ; ▁jan ▁ezazu , ▁indarrak ▁hartzeko ▁eta ▁bideari ▁ekin ▁ahal ▁izateko .
PRED:	Now listen to me , O Lord , and I will bring it to you , and I will take care for you .
GOLD:	Now do what I say , and let me give you a little something to eat so you can regain your strength for the trip back . ”

ID:	2747
INPUT:	▁Es tal ▁beza , ▁beraz , ▁soinekoak ▁bezala , l ot ▁beza ▁etengabe ▁gerri koak ▁bezala !
PRED:	Let them be dressed in burlap , just as he has done .
GOLD:	Now may his curses return and cling to him like clothing ; may they be tied around him like a belt . ”

ID:	2748
INPUT:	▁Zorion ekoak , ▁haren ▁xedapenak ▁betez , bihotz - bihotzez ▁harengana ▁jotzen ▁dutenak !
PRED:	Fear of all who fear him ; all who fear him .
GOLD:	Joyful are those who obey his lawsand search for him with all their hearts .

ID:	2749
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁bidali ▁ninduen ▁Jerusalemgo ▁jendeari ▁bere ▁mezu ▁hau ▁hots ▁egitera :« Go goan ▁dut , ▁Israel , nola ▁maite ▁ninduzun ▁gazte ▁zinen ean , go goan ▁zure ▁ezkon gai etako mai te - laz tan a : nola ▁ibili ▁zinen ▁nire ▁ondoren bas amortuan , ▁erein ▁gabeko ▁lurrean .
PRED:	The Lord sent me this message to the people of Jerusalem : “ Listen to this message I am coming to the people of Israel : I loved youand loved you to commit adultery . I loved you , but you loved me as though you did not commit adultery .
GOLD:	The Lord gave me another message . He said ,

ID:	2750
INPUT:	▁L iz tor tz arrak ▁bidaliko ▁ditu ▁Jaunak ▁zuen ▁Jainkoak ▁haien ▁kontra , ▁ezkutuan ▁gordeta ▁bizirik ▁gelditutako ▁az k enak ▁ere ▁garbitu ▁arte .
PRED:	For the Lord will send his anger against those who survive .
GOLD:	And then the Lord your God will send terror to drive out the few survivors still hiding from you !

ID:	2751
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁guda - gur dia ▁bi ratu ▁eta ▁ihesi ▁abiatu ▁zen ▁Joram , ▁esanez :— T ra iz ioa , ▁Akazias !
PRED:	So King Joram of his chariot and ran out to the chariot and told him , “ This is what King Ahaziah of Jerusalem . ”
GOLD:	Then King Joram turned the horses around and fled , shouting to King Ahaziah , “ Treason , Ahaziah ! ”

ID:	2752
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁eguzkia ez ▁da ▁behin ▁ere ▁jaitsiko , ezta ▁zure ▁il argia ▁gordeko ▁ere , ni , ▁Jauna , ▁izango ▁bainau zuz eure ▁argi ▁betiko , eta ▁amai tuak ▁izango ▁dira zure ▁negar - egunak .
PRED:	In the sun , you will not be able to harm me , for I will not be able to mourn for you , for you will not mourn for your days .
GOLD:	Your sun will never set ; your moon will not go down.For the Lord will be your everlasting light.Your days of mourning will come to an end .

ID:	2753
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁nuen ▁hartu ▁janari ▁gox orik , ▁ez ▁haragi rik , ▁ez ▁ardorik , ▁eta ▁ez ▁nuen ▁erabili ▁usain ▁goz oko ▁lurrin ik ▁ere , ▁hiru ▁as teak ▁amaitu ▁arte .
PRED:	I was not pleased with food , and I did n't have enough spices for three spices .
GOLD:	All that time I had eaten no rich food . No meat or wine crossed my lips , and I used no fragrant lotions until those three weeks had passed .

ID:	2754
INPUT:	▁Sei garren ▁egunean ▁bi ▁halako ▁bildu ▁ohi ▁zuten , ▁bederatzi ▁bat ▁litro ▁lagun ▁bakoitzeko ; ▁orduan , ▁elkarte - arduradun ak ▁horren ▁berri ▁ematera ▁joan ▁zitzaizkion ▁Moisesi .
PRED:	On the eighth day they gathered three times each week for each other . Then the whole community went to the whole community of Israel .
GOLD:	On the sixth day , they gathered twice as much as usual — four quarts for each person instead of two . Then all the leaders of the community came and asked Moses for an explanation .

ID:	2755
INPUT:	▁Ho dei ▁bel tz - ilun ak ▁haren ▁inguruan , j ustizia ▁eta ▁zuzenbidea ▁haren ▁tronu - oin arri .
PRED:	The light of the darkness , and the light of his righteousness is shaken .
GOLD:	Dark clouds surround him.Righteousness and justice are the foundation of his throne .

ID:	2756
INPUT:	▁Judaren ▁eta ▁Israelen ▁zoria ▁aldatuko ▁dut , ▁eta ▁behin olako ▁ego eran ▁ezarriko ▁ditut ▁berriro ;
PRED:	I will restore the fortunes of Judah , and I will restore the fortunes of Judah .
GOLD:	I will restore the fortunes of Judah and Israel and rebuild their towns .

ID:	2757
INPUT:	▁« Orduan , ▁herrien ▁ezpainak gar bi ▁bihurtuko ▁ditut , den ek ▁niri , ▁Jaun ▁honi , dei ▁egin ▁diez ad aten eta ▁denek ▁bat ▁eginik zer b itza ▁naz aten .
PRED:	“ At last I will make the nations of the Lord , and I will make you an object of honor .
GOLD:	“ Then I will purify the speech of all people , so that everyone can worship the Lord together .

ID:	2758
INPUT:	▁Etx egin tzan ▁ari ▁direnen ▁izenak ▁eman ▁behar ▁dizki guz ue ».
PRED:	Give the names of those who are wise , for you have given us the names of us . ”
GOLD:	They also asked for the names of all the men working on the Temple .

ID:	2759
INPUT:	▁« Zein ▁alde tatik ▁barre iatzen ▁da ▁argia ? Non dik ▁sartzen ▁ekialdeko ▁haizea ▁lurrera ?
PRED:	“ Where are the light of the world ? Where is the light of the east ? ”
GOLD:	Where is the path to the source of light ? Where is the home of the east wind ?

ID:	2760
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁erregeak , ▁buruzagiek ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁jendeak , ▁batzar turik , ▁Pazkoa ▁bigarren ▁hilabe tean ▁ospa tzea ▁erabakia ▁zuten .
PRED:	For the king and the elders of Jerusalem , the people of Jerusalem , and the people of Jerusalem began to celebrate the Passover Festival of Shelters .
GOLD:	The king , his officials , and all the community of Jerusalem decided to celebrate Passover a month later than usual .

ID:	2761
INPUT:	▁Niri , ▁berriz , ▁egia ▁dio dalako , ▁ez ▁didazue ▁sinesten .
PRED:	But now I am the truth , and I did n't believe me .
GOLD:	So when I tell the truth , you just naturally do n't believe me !

ID:	2762
INPUT:	▁Nire tzat ▁zat irik ▁hober ena ▁bereiz iz ▁gero , ▁ez ▁zarete ▁errudun ▁bihurtuko , ▁ez ▁dituzue ▁israeldarren ▁opari ▁sakratuak ▁profan atuko , ▁eta ▁ez ▁zarete ▁hilko ».
PRED:	You must not present the gifts of the offerings to the Lord . You must not present it to the people of Israel , and you will not be punished for the guilt of Israel . ”
GOLD:	You will not be considered guilty for accepting the Lord 's tithes if you give the best portion to the priests . But be careful not to treat the holy gifts of the people of Israel as though they were common . If you do , you will die . ”

ID:	2763
INPUT:	▁orain ▁poztu ▁egiten ▁naiz ; ▁ez , ▁noski , ▁eman ▁nizuen ▁nahigabe agatik , ▁nahigabe ▁horrek ▁zeuen ▁jar rera ▁alda tzera ▁eraman ▁zintuzte lako ▁baizik . ▁Zuen ▁nahi gabea ▁Jainkoak ▁nahi ▁bezalakoa ▁izan ▁zen ; ▁beraz , ▁ez ▁nizuen ▁inolako ▁kalterik ▁egin .
PRED:	I was glad when I was glad , I was afraid of you . I was very old , but it was not like you , but it was not like this , but you refused to harm you . That was why I wanted to do not harm you .
GOLD:	Now I am glad I sent it , not because it hurt you , but because the pain caused you to repent and change your ways . It was the kind of sorrow God wants his people to have , so you were not harmed by us in any way .

ID:	2764
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁senarrari ▁desleial ▁izan ▁baz atzaizki o ▁eta , ▁zeure a ▁ez ▁den ▁beste ▁gizon ▁batekin ▁harremanak ▁izanik , ▁desoho ratu ▁bazara
PRED:	But if you were unfaithful to her husband , you must not have sexual relations with her .
GOLD:	But if you have gone astray by being unfaithful to your husband , and have defiled yourself by having sex with another man — '

ID:	2765
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Hiri tik ▁atera ▁bezain ▁laster , ▁eskuak ▁altxatuko ▁dizkiot ▁Jaunari ▁otoitz ▁egiteko . ▁Orduan ▁ater tuko ▁du ▁kazkab ar - eraun tsia ▁eta ▁ez ▁da ▁gehiago ▁trumo irik ▁izango , ▁jakin ▁dezazun ▁Jaunaren a ▁dela ▁mundua .
PRED:	Moses replied to the Lord , “ I will bring you out of the city , and you will pray to the Lord , and the thunder of lightning will never be destroyed . ”
GOLD:	“ All right , ” Moses replied . “ As soon as I leave the city , I will lift my hands and pray to the Lord . Then the thunder and hail will stop , and you will know that the earth belongs to the Lord .

ID:	2766
INPUT:	▁— Zoaz ▁Hilk ias ▁apaiz ▁nagusia gana . ▁Zen batu ▁dezala , ▁herriak ▁Jaunaren ▁etxera ▁eraman ▁eta ▁atezain ek ▁bildu ▁duten ▁dirua .
PRED:	“ Go to Hilkiah , Hilkiah , and bring the people home of the Lord . Take the money of the Lord .
GOLD:	“ Go to Hilkiah the high priest and have him count the money the gatekeepers have collected from the people at the Lord 's Temple .

ID:	2767
INPUT:	▁Ap ol o , ▁bada , ▁sinago gan ▁ausar ki ▁hitz ▁egiten ▁hasi ▁zen . ▁P ris z ilak ▁eta ▁Ak ilak ▁entzun ▁ziotenean , ▁berekin ▁hartu ▁zuten ▁eta ▁are ▁xeh ek iago ▁azaldu ▁zioten ▁Jainkoaren ▁bidea .
PRED:	So they went to the synagogue in the synagogue , preaching the way of the synagogue , and when they heard him , they went to the way of God .
GOLD:	When Priscilla and Aquila heard him preaching boldly in the synagogue , they took him aside and explained the way of God even more accurately .

ID:	2768
INPUT:	▁Paulo ▁eta ▁sas ia p ostol uak
PRED:	Paul 's Final Greetings
GOLD:	Paul and the False Apostles

ID:	2769
INPUT:	▁Jobek ▁bere ▁burua ▁errugabe ▁aitortu
PRED:	The Lord 's Case against Job
GOLD:	Job 's Final Protest of Innocence

ID:	2770
INPUT:	▁Salomonen ▁gainerako ▁jarduerak , ▁egin ▁zuen ▁guztia ▁eta ▁haren ▁jakinduria ▁« S alom onen ▁Kronika » ▁liburuan ▁daude ▁idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events of Solomon 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Judah .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Solomon 's reign , including all his deeds and his wisdom , are recorded in The Book of the Acts of Solomon .

ID:	2771
INPUT:	▁Bada , ▁hori ▁bezain ▁egia ▁da ▁ez ▁ditu dala ▁bazter tuko ▁Jakoben ▁ondorengoak ▁eta ▁David ▁neure ▁zerbitzaria . ▁Nola ▁ez ▁ditut , ▁bada , ▁horien ▁jatorri tik ▁aukeratuko ▁Abraham , ▁Isaak ▁eta ▁Jakoben ▁ondorengoen ▁buruzagiak ? ▁Bai , ▁aldatu ▁egingo ▁dut ▁haien ▁zoria , ▁errukitu ▁egin ▁naiz ▁eta ».
PRED:	Therefore , my servant will not be as righteous as my servant , and I will not be my servant David , and I will not be my servant Abraham , the descendants of Jacob , the descendants of Jacob , and Jacob , the descendants of Jacob . ”
GOLD:	I will never abandon the descendants of Jacob or David , my servant , or change the plan that David 's descendants will rule the descendants of Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob . Instead , I will restore them to their land and have mercy on them . ”

ID:	2772
INPUT:	▁Horiek ▁Jaunaren ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoaren ▁aurrean , ▁berak ▁aukeratuko ▁duen ▁lekuan ▁jango ▁dituzue , ▁bai ▁zeuek , ▁bai ▁zuen ▁seme - alabek ▁eta ▁morroi - m ira be ek , ▁baita ▁zuekin ▁hiri ▁berean ▁bizi ▁den ▁lebitarrak ▁ere . ▁ F esta ▁ospatuko ▁duzue ▁Jaunaren ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoaren ▁aurrean , ▁zeuen ▁lan aren ▁em aitzen gatik ▁eskerrak ▁emanez .
PRED:	These are the instructions of the Lord your God at the place where you are at the place of worship at the place of worship , your children , and your wives , your children , and your children , and your children , may live in the presence of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	You must eat these in the presence of the Lord your God at the place he will choose . Eat them there with your children , your servants , and the Levites who live in your towns , celebrating in the presence of the Lord your God in all you do .

ID:	2773
INPUT:	▁Gaizto ▁horien ▁artetik ▁bizirik ▁geldituko ▁direnek ▁nah iago ▁izango ▁dute ▁heriotza ▁bizia ▁baino , ▁nik ▁sakaban atuko ▁ditudan ▁edonon . ▁Hala ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak .
PRED:	The wicked will be cut off from the wicked , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . “ The Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	And the people of this evil nation who survive will wish to die rather than live where I will send them . I , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , have spoken !

ID:	2774
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁aurrez ▁aurre ▁egiten ▁zuen ▁hitz ▁Moises ekin , ▁lagunak ▁lagun arekin ▁hitz ▁egiten ▁duen ▁bezala . ▁Ondoren , ▁Moises ▁kanpalekura ▁itzultzen ▁zen ; ▁baina ▁haren ▁laguntzaile ▁Josue , ▁Nunen ▁semea , ▁ez ▁zen ▁etxola ▁barrutik ▁aldentzen .
PRED:	The Lord spoke to Moses at the camp at the camp , just as Moses had told Moses . Then Moses left the camp and left the camp at the camp . But Moses left the camp .
GOLD:	Inside the Tent of Meeting , the Lord would speak to Moses face to face , as one speaks to a friend . Afterward Moses would return to the camp , but the young man who assisted him , Joshua son of Nun , would remain behind in the Tent of Meeting .

ID:	2775
INPUT:	▁Handik , ▁kos tarik ▁kos ta ▁R egi ora ▁heldu ▁ginen . ▁Biharamunean ▁hego - haiz eak ▁jo ▁zuen ▁eta ▁bi ▁egunetan ▁P o tzu ol ira ▁iritsi ▁ginen .
PRED:	The next day we sailed to the island of Rephaim . The next day we sailed north to the island of Rephaim .
GOLD:	From there we sailed across to Rhegium . A day later a south wind began blowing , so the following day we sailed up the coast to Puteoli .

ID:	2776
INPUT:	▁Gau erdi ▁aldera , ▁Paulo ▁eta ▁Sil as ▁otoitzean ▁ari ▁ziren , ▁Jainkoari ▁gores penak ▁kan tatzen ; ▁beste ▁preso ak ▁entzuten ▁zeuden .
PRED:	At noon , Paul and Silas were shouting , “ Praise God ! ”
GOLD:	Around midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God , and the other prisoners were listening .

ID:	2777
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁isil ean ▁mezulariak ▁igorri ▁zizkion ▁Abimelek i , ▁esatera : ▁« E be den ▁seme ▁Ga al ▁bere ▁senide ekin ▁Sikem era ▁etorri ▁eta ▁hiri ▁hau ▁zure ▁kontra ▁asal datzen ▁ari ▁da .
PRED:	One day Abimelech sent messengers to Abimelech : “ Gaal son of Abimelech , his brothers and sisters , has been very angry with Abimelech .
GOLD:	He sent messengers to Abimelech in Arumah , telling him , “ Gaal son of Ebed and his brothers have come to live in Shechem , and now they are inciting the city to rebel against you .

ID:	2778
INPUT:	▁Hanan , ▁G i del ▁eta ▁G ah arren ak ;
PRED:	Keros , Siaha , Padon ,
GOLD:	Hanan , Giddel , Gahar ,

ID:	2779
INPUT:	▁Zergatik ▁gelditu ▁zara , ▁bada , es kor te tan , ▁Ruben , artz ain - tx is tuak ▁entzuten ? R u ben darren ▁famili etan han diak ▁erabakiak !
PRED:	Why are you so upset ? Why are you frightened ? Why have you heard the names of the family of Pahath-moab ?
GOLD:	Why did you sit at home among the sheepfolds — to hear the shepherds whistle for their flocks ? Yes , in the tribe of Reubenthere was great indecision .

ID:	2780
INPUT:	▁On artu ▁zuen ▁Ben - Hada dek ▁As a ▁erregeak ▁esana , ▁eta ▁bere ▁gudaros teko ▁ofizi alak ▁Israelgo ▁hiri ei ▁erasotzera ▁bidali ▁zituen ; ▁I ion , ▁Dan , ▁Abel - Mai m ▁eta ▁Neftal i ▁esku aldeko ▁bil tegi ▁ziren ▁hiri ▁guztiak ▁hondatu ▁zituzten .
PRED:	Ben-hadad 's message went to Ben-hadad 's officers , and the commanders of his army , the army of Israel , and the troops of Israel , along with their towns . They also sent all the towns of Ephraim and all the towns of Naphtali .
GOLD:	Ben-hadad agreed to King Asa 's request and sent the commanders of his army to attack the towns of Israel . They conquered the towns of Ijon , Dan , Abel-beth-maacah , and all the store cities in Naphtali .

ID:	2781
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Jesusek ▁esan ▁zuen : ▁« Utzi ! ▁As ki ▁da !» Eta , ▁belarria ▁uki turik , ▁sendatu ▁egin ▁zion .
PRED:	But Jesus said to him , “ Leave her alone ! She has healed her , and she healed her . ”
GOLD:	But Jesus said , “ No more of this. ” And he touched the man 's ear and healed him .

ID:	2782
INPUT:	▁« Z or ob ab elek ▁bere ▁eskuz ▁jarri ▁zituen ▁etxe ▁honen ▁oinarriak ▁eta ▁bere ▁eskuz ▁buru tuko ▁du ▁etxea ». ▁Orduan ▁jakin en ▁duzue ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak ▁bidali ▁nauela ▁zuengana .
PRED:	“ May the Lord of Heaven 's Armies laid his hands on his own hands , and you will know that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has sent me to visit you . ”
GOLD:	“ Zerubbabel is the one who laid the foundation of this Temple , and he will complete it . Then you will know that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies has sent me .

ID:	2783
INPUT:	▁Zortzi garren ▁ikuskaria : ▁lau ▁gur diak
PRED:	A Vision of the Altar
GOLD:	Four Chariots

ID:	2784
INPUT:	▁Horrela ▁itzuli ▁zion ▁Jainkoak ▁Abimelek i , ▁bere ▁hirurogeita ▁hamar ▁anaiak ▁hil ▁zituenean ▁aitari ▁eginiko ▁kal tea .
PRED:	So God returned to Abimelech 's father , who had seventy years old enough to kill him .
GOLD:	In this way , God punished Abimelech for the evil he had done against his father by murdering his seventy brothers .

ID:	2785
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁eroapena ▁hitz ▁egiten ▁dudan ▁bitartean , eta ▁amai tzean , ▁egin ▁iseka , ▁nahi ▁baduzue .
PRED:	As soon as I speak , I want to speak , when you want , you will be ashamed .
GOLD:	Bear with me , and let me speak.After I have spoken , you may resume mocking me .

ID:	2786
INPUT:	▁Ap ol ok ▁Efes on ▁berri ▁ona ▁hots ▁egin
PRED:	The Good News about Ephesus
GOLD:	Apollos Instructed at Ephesus

ID:	2787
INPUT:	▁Ongi ▁ikusia ▁dut neure ▁herriaren ▁atsekabea ▁Egipton ▁eta ▁entzun ak ▁ditut ▁haren ▁intziri ak . ▁Haiek ▁salbatzera ▁etorri ▁naiz . ▁Orain , ▁zatoz ▁hona , ▁Egiptora ▁bidali ▁behar ▁zaitut ▁eta .
PRED:	I saw that I have seen in Egypt , and I have seen him in Egypt , and I have come to Egypt . Now come to Egypt and come to Egypt . ”
GOLD:	I have certainly seen the oppression of my people in Egypt . I have heard their groans and have come down to rescue them . Now go , for I am sending you back to Egypt . '

ID:	2788
INPUT:	▁Biltzar ▁osoak ▁ontzat ▁eman ▁zuen ▁propos amena , ▁eta ▁Este ban ▁— f edez ▁eta ▁Espiritu ▁Santuaz ▁betea ▁zegoen ▁gizona —, ▁ F elipe , ▁P ro ko ro , ▁Nik an or , ▁Tim on , ▁P armen as ▁eta ▁N iko las , ▁Antioki ako ▁judu berri a , ▁hautatu ▁zituzten ;
PRED:	So all the people of Jerusalem heard that Stephen was filled with the Holy Spirit . He was filled with the Holy Spirit , Philip , and he was teaching in Antioch .
GOLD:	Everyone liked this idea , and they chose the following : Stephen ( a man full of faith and the Holy Spirit ) , Philip , Procorus , Nicanor , Timon , Parmenas , and Nicolas of Antioch ( an earlier convert to the Jewish faith ) .

ID:	2789
INPUT:	▁Roboam ▁erregeak ▁oso ▁zak ar ▁erantzun ▁zien , ▁kontseil ariek ▁emana ▁zioten ▁aholkua ▁aintzat ▁hartu ▁gabe
PRED:	King Rehoboam replied to Rehoboam 's advice , “ Do n't let the advice of the wise ? ”
GOLD:	But Rehoboam spoke harshly to them , for he rejected the advice of the older counselors

ID:	2790
INPUT:	▁Egi ten ▁al ▁du ▁bas as toak ▁ar r antza ▁bel arraren ▁aurrean edo ▁i diak ▁mar ru ma ▁zer ▁jan ik ▁baldin ▁badu ?
PRED:	Will the wild animals be thrown into the wild goats ? If the wild goats have enough money to eat ?
GOLD:	Do n't I have a right to complain ? Do n't wild donkeys bray when they find no grass , and oxen bellow when they have no food ?

ID:	2791
INPUT:	▁G antz ▁guztia ▁kenduko ▁dio ▁zekor rari ▁eta ▁aldarean ▁erreko ,
PRED:	He will remove all the bull 's fat from the altar and burn it on the altar .
GOLD:	Then the priest must remove all the animal 's fat and burn it on the altar ,

ID:	2792
INPUT:	▁Haren gan ▁sinetsiko ▁zutenek ▁hartuko ▁zuten ▁Espiritu az ▁esan ▁zuen ▁hori ; ▁izan ▁ere , ▁ez ▁zen ▁artean ▁Es <unk> turik , ▁Jesusen ▁jainko zko ▁aintza ▁ez ▁zelako ▁oraindik ▁azaldu .
PRED:	And those who believe in him will believe in him because he was n't talking about Jesus , so he could n't be able to care for him .
GOLD:	( When he said “ living water , ” he was speaking of the Spirit , who would be given to everyone believing in him . But the Spirit had not yet been given , because Jesus had not yet entered into his glory . )

ID:	2793
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁libre ▁eginak ; poz - oih uka ▁etorriko ▁dira ▁Sion era : am ai gabeko ▁alai tasun ah aien ▁aurpegi an ! Z ori ona ▁eta ▁alai tasun aizango ▁dituzte ▁lagun ; nahi gabeak ▁eta ▁n egarra ▁ki to !
PRED:	The Lord will rejoice in Zion ; his throne will be filled with joy , and his people will be filled with joy .
GOLD:	Those who have been ransomed by the Lord will return.They will enter Jerusalem singing , crowned with everlasting joy.Sorrow and mourning will disappear , and they will be filled with joy and gladness .

ID:	2794
INPUT:	▁Hon d akin ▁artean ▁dabiltzan ▁az eriak ▁dira ▁zure ▁profetak , ▁Israel .
PRED:	How long are the prophets , the prophets of Israel , and your prophets are among you .
GOLD:	“ O people of Israel , these prophets of yours are like jackals digging in the ruins .

ID:	2795
INPUT:	▁B ela ▁Be orren ▁semea , ▁D <unk> aba ▁hiri koa ;
PRED:	From the Babylonian family of Pahath-moab , his son of Nethaniah , his entire town .
GOLD:	Bela son of Beor , who ruled in Edom from his city of Dinhabah .

ID:	2796
INPUT:	▁Bai ▁ospetsua , ▁Jainkoaren ▁hiri , ▁Jaunak ▁zutaz ▁dioena :
PRED:	Yes , this is what the Lord of Heaven 's Armies says :
GOLD:	O city of God , what glorious things are said of you ! Interlude

ID:	2797
INPUT:	▁Esku alde etako ▁buruzagiak , ▁errege orde ak , ▁gobernariak ▁eta ▁errege - f untzionari oak ▁juduen ▁alde ▁jarri ▁ziren , ▁Mardokeo ganako ▁beldur - ikaraz .
PRED:	The nobles of the governor , the governor of the Jews , and the nobles of the Jews were afraid to fear Mordecai .
GOLD:	And all the nobles of the provinces , the highest officers , the governors , and the royal officials helped the Jews for fear of Mordecai .

ID:	2798
INPUT:	▁Gizon ▁horrek , ▁Jainkoaren gandik ▁ez ▁bal etor , ▁ezin ▁izango ▁luke ▁ezer ▁ere ▁egin .
PRED:	But if the man of God would n't be able to be able to rescue him .
GOLD:	If this man were not from God , he could n't have done it . ”

ID:	2799
INPUT:	▁— Maisu , ▁Moisesek ▁idatzi ▁zigun : ▁Nor bai ti ▁anaia ▁ezkondu ▁bat ▁seme - alabarik ▁gabe ▁hiltzen ▁bazaio , ▁ezkon ▁bedi ▁alargun ts arekin , ▁anaiari ▁ondorengoa ▁emateko .
PRED:	“ Teacher , Moses wrote this letter to us : If anyone has married a child or children , let her marry her .
GOLD:	They posed this question : “ Teacher , Moses gave us a law that if a man dies , leaving a wife but no children , his brother should marry the widow and have a child who will carry on the brother 's name .

ID:	2800
INPUT:	▁Moises ▁eta ▁Aaron ▁hauek ▁dira ▁Egiptoko ▁errege ▁faraoiari ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaizkion ak , ▁israeldarrei ▁lurralde ▁hartatik ▁irteten ▁uzteko ▁esanez .
PRED:	So Moses and Aaron said to Pharaoh , “ These are the people of Egypt who live in the land of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	It was Moses and Aaron who spoke to Pharaoh , the king of Egypt , about leading the people of Israel out of Egypt .

ID:	2801
INPUT:	▁Ah ik amek , ▁Xaf anen ▁semeak , ▁bere ▁babes pean ▁hartua ▁zuen ▁Jeremias ▁eta , ▁horri ▁esker , ▁ez ▁zen ▁erori ▁hil ▁nahi ▁zuen ▁jendearen ▁eskuetan .
PRED:	When Micaiah son of Shaphan left the city , he refused to kill him . He would n't let him kill him in his hands .
GOLD:	Nevertheless , Ahikam son of Shaphan stood up for Jeremiah and persuaded the court not to turn him over to the mob to be killed .

ID:	2802
INPUT:	▁Lege - maisu ▁eta ▁fariseuak ▁zelatan ▁zego z kion ▁ea ▁larunbatez ▁sendatzen ▁ote ▁zuen , ▁zertan ▁salatu ▁izateko .
PRED:	The leading priests and teachers of religious law were arrested by the law of religious law .
GOLD:	The teachers of religious law and the Pharisees watched Jesus closely . If he healed the man 's hand , they planned to accuse him of working on the Sabbath .

ID:	2803
INPUT:	▁tenplu arengatik ▁zin ▁egiten ▁duenak , ▁tenplu arengatik ▁eta ▁bertan ▁bizi ▁den ▁Jainkoaren gatik ▁egiten ▁du ▁zin ;
PRED:	For if you build an oath in the Temple of God , it will be an oath of God .
GOLD:	And when you swear ‘ by the Temple , ' you are swearing by it and by God , who lives in it .

ID:	2804
INPUT:	▁« M ezu ▁bat ▁etorri ▁zait ▁isil pean , haren ▁zurru mur ru a ▁entzun ▁dut .
PRED:	“ My heart was silent in silence , and I heard my complaints .
GOLD:	“ This truth was given to me in secret , as though whispered in my ear .

ID:	2805
INPUT:	▁Israelgo ▁erregeak , ▁begiz tatu ▁zituenean , ▁esan ▁zion ▁Elise ori :— Ene ▁aita , ▁hilko ▁al ▁ditut ?
PRED:	When the king of Israel saw him , the king of Israel asked Elisha , “ Have I killed your father ? ”
GOLD:	When the king of Israel saw them , he shouted to Elisha , “ My father , should I kill them ? Should I kill them ? ”

ID:	2806
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁bere ▁gizonekin ▁eraso aldiak ▁egin ▁ohi ▁zizkien ▁g ex ur tar rei , ▁ger ez tar rei ▁eta ▁amalek tar rei ; ▁aspaldi danik ▁X ur ▁aldera ▁eta ▁Egipto ▁lurral deraino ▁bizi ▁ziren ▁herri ei , ▁alegia .
PRED:	When David and his men attacked the armies of Jerusalem , he fought against the Amalekites and the armies of the Amalekites and the armies of Egypt .
GOLD:	David and his men spent their time raiding the Geshurites , the Girzites , and the Amalekites — people who had lived near Shur , toward the land of Egypt , since ancient times .

ID:	2807
INPUT:	▁S asi - i rakas pen en ▁kontrako ▁ohar pena
PRED:	Paul 's Final Instructions
GOLD:	Warnings against False Teachings

ID:	2808
INPUT:	▁A ker raren ▁odola ▁santutegi ▁barrura ▁eraman a ▁izan ▁denez ▁gero , ▁toki ▁sakratu an ▁jan ▁behar ▁zenuten , ▁agindu ▁nizuen ▁bezala .
PRED:	You took the blood of the sanctuary as the blood of the Most Holy Place , just as you had commanded .
GOLD:	Since the animal 's blood was not brought into the Holy Place , you should have eaten the meat in the sacred area as I ordered you . ”

ID:	2809
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁esan ▁zion ▁Moisesi : ▁« Bihar ▁goizean ▁goiz ▁jaiki ▁eta ▁zoaz ▁faraoiari ▁esatera : ▁Hala ▁dio ▁Jaunak , ▁hebre arren ▁Jainkoak : ▁Utzi ozu ▁ene ▁herriari ▁ni ▁gurtzera ▁joaten ;
PRED:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Go down to Pharaoh , and go to Pharaoh 's land . Go and worship the Lord , the God of the Hebrews , and do n't let my people go .
GOLD:	Then the Lord said to Moses , “ Get up early in the morning and stand before Pharaoh . Tell him , ‘ This is what the Lord , the God of the Hebrews , says : Let my people go , so they can worship me .

ID:	2810
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁eskua ▁bikain , ▁Jaunaren ▁eskua ▁garaile ».
PRED:	Praise the Lord , the God of Israel ! ”
GOLD:	The strong right arm of the Lord is raised in triumph.The strong right arm of the Lord has done glorious things !

ID:	2811
INPUT:	▁Erantzun ▁zioten :— Gu ▁Abrahamen ▁haz iko ak ▁gara , ▁eta ▁ez ▁gara ▁inoiz ▁inoren ▁esklabo ▁izan . ▁Nola ▁diozu ▁aske ▁izango ▁garela ?
PRED:	“ No , ” they replied , “ we will never be slaves to anyone who has been slaves to us ? ”
GOLD:	“ But we are descendants of Abraham , ” they said . “ We have never been slaves to anyone . What do you mean , ‘ You will be set free ' ? ”

ID:	2812
INPUT:	▁Hara , ▁erregeek ▁elkar ▁hartu ▁zuten eta ▁denak ▁batera ▁haren ▁aurka ▁oldartu .
PRED:	Look , the kings of the king , and they fought against each other .
GOLD:	But when they saw it , they were stunned ; they were terrified and ran away .

ID:	2813
INPUT:	▁Lehen biz iko ▁gizakia ▁lurreko ▁hauts etik ▁hartua ▁izan ▁zen ; ▁bigarren a , ▁berriz , ▁zerutik ▁dator .
PRED:	In the first time , when people returned from the earth , the second time came from heaven .
GOLD:	Adam , the first man , was made from the dust of the earth , while Christ , the second man , came from heaven .

ID:	2814
INPUT:	▁Horra ▁igo ▁behar ▁dute ▁leinu ek , ▁Jaunaren ▁leinu ek , Israelen ▁lege ▁denez , ▁Jaunaren ▁izena ▁gores tera ;
PRED:	That is why the tribes of Israel must come to praise the Lord , for he is the Holy One of Israel .
GOLD:	All the tribes of Israel — the Lord 's people — make their pilgrimage here.They come to give thanks to the name of the Lord , as the law requires of Israel .

ID:	2815
INPUT:	▁I tsuak ▁atera ▁orduko , ▁deabru aren ▁menpe ▁zegoen ▁mutu ▁bat ▁ekarri ▁zioten ▁Jesusi .
PRED:	As soon as Jesus was possessed by the devil , a man possessed by a demon .
GOLD:	When they left , a demon-possessed man who could n't speak was brought to Jesus .

ID:	2816
INPUT:	▁Mazed onia ▁aldera ▁joan ▁nintzen ean , ▁Efes on ▁geldi tzeko ▁eskatu ▁nizun ; ▁jarraitu , ▁otoi , ▁bertan , ▁eta ▁zentz atu ▁d ok t rina ▁arrotzak ▁irakasten ▁ari ▁direnak ;
PRED:	When I went to Macedonia in Ephesus , I begged you to stay in Ephesus , so I begged you to speak in the province of Ephesus .
GOLD:	When I left for Macedonia , I urged you to stay there in Ephesus and stop those whose teaching is contrary to the truth .

ID:	2817
INPUT:	▁On ▁du ▁gizakiak ▁gazte tan dik ▁uztar pean ▁oh itz ea .
PRED:	Though a young woman leaves a young woman , a young person must be cut off .
GOLD:	And it is good for people to submit at an early ageto the yoke of his discipline :

ID:	2818
INPUT:	▁Aho ▁betean ▁emango ▁dizkiot ▁eskerrak ▁Jaunari , jende tzaren ▁erdian ▁goretsiko ▁dut ,
PRED:	I will give thanks to the Lord , and I will praise you .
GOLD:	But I will give repeated thanks to the Lord , praising him to everyone .

ID:	2819
INPUT:	▁arran oaren ▁bidea ▁or tzi an , ▁suge aren ▁bidea ▁hai tzean , ontzi aren ▁bidea ▁itsaso ▁zabal ean eta ▁gizonaren ▁bidea ▁emakumearen ▁baitan .
PRED:	The road is like a snake ; the waves of the sea is covered by the road , and the road on the road .
GOLD:	how an eagle glides through the sky , how a snake slithers on a rock , how a ship navigates the ocean , how a man loves a woman .

ID:	2820
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Israelgo ▁erregeak ▁agindu ▁zuen :— H eldu ▁Mike asi ! ▁Eraman ▁hiri - go bern ari ▁Am onen gana ▁eta ▁Joax ▁printze arengana .
PRED:	Then the king of Israel said to Micaiah , “ Bring him back to the city of King Joash . ”
GOLD:	“ Arrest him ! ” the king of Israel ordered . “ Take him back to Amon , the governor of the city , and to my son Joash .

ID:	2821
INPUT:	▁« Ur rundu a ▁dut ▁haien gandik ▁haserrea »
PRED:	My anger burns against me
GOLD:	Healing for the Repentant

ID:	2822
INPUT:	▁« Baina ▁jakin aren ▁gainean ▁bekatu ▁egiten ▁duenak ▁— ber takoa ▁izan ▁nahiz ▁etorkin a — ▁iraindu ▁egiten ▁nau . ▁Horrelako ▁hori ▁bota ▁egingo ▁dute ▁herritik .
PRED:	“ But if you refuse to listen to foreigners living among you , you must be cut off from the community of Israel .
GOLD:	“ But those who brazenly violate the Lord 's will , whether native-born Israelites or foreigners , have blasphemed the Lord , and they must be cut off from the community .

ID:	2823
INPUT:	▁Hexb onen ▁bizi ▁zen ▁amortarren ▁errege ▁Sihon ▁eta ▁Ax tar ot - en ▁eta ▁E d rei - n ▁bizi ▁zen ▁Baxango ▁errege ▁Og ▁garaitu ▁eta ▁gero .
PRED:	King Sihon of Heshbon and King Og of Bashan , who lived in Heshbon and Og of Bashan . He was the land of Bashan and King Og of Bashan .
GOLD:	This took place after he had defeated King Sihon of the Amorites , who ruled in Heshbon , and at Edrei had defeated King Og of Bashan , who ruled in Ashtaroth .

ID:	2824
INPUT:	▁« Gizaseme , ▁Israel ▁herriaren ▁j ago le ▁izen datzen ▁zaitut ; ▁nik ▁esandakoa ▁entzutean , ▁ohar tarazi ▁egin ▁behar ▁dituzu ▁nire ▁izenean .
PRED:	“ Son of man , listen to the people of Israel , for I have heard what I say to you .
GOLD:	“ Son of man , I have appointed you as a watchman for Israel . Whenever you receive a message from me , warn people immediately .

ID:	2825
INPUT:	▁Hurrengo , ▁merkatari en ▁herrialdean , ▁Babiloni an , ▁saiatu ▁zinen ▁prostituzioan ; ▁halere , ▁ez ▁zinen ▁ase .
PRED:	The next morning you lived in the land of the world , but you were not satisfied .
GOLD:	You added to your lovers by embracing Babylonia , the land of merchants , but you still were n't satisfied .

ID:	2826
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁dio ▁Jaunak :« G orro to ▁eta ▁higuin ▁ditu tzu en ▁jai ak , ez ▁ditut ▁atsegin zuen ▁kultu - ba tz arrak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I have done , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	“ I hate all your show and pretense — the hypocrisy of your religious festivals and solemn assemblies .

ID:	2827
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁eskua ▁kenduko ▁dut , ▁eta ▁bizk arralde a ▁ikusi ▁ahal ▁izango ▁didazu ; ▁baina ▁ene ▁aurpegia ▁ez ▁daiteke ▁ikus .
PRED:	Then I will take my hand from the north and see it , but it will never see my face .
GOLD:	Then I will remove my hand and let you see me from behind . But my face will not be seen . ”

ID:	2828
INPUT:	▁Hartu ▁gogoan , ▁beraz , ▁nondik ▁erori ▁zaren ; ▁damu ▁zaitez ▁eta ▁itzuli ▁lehengo ▁jokab i dera . ▁Bestela , ▁zuregana ▁joan ▁eta ▁bere ▁leku tik ▁kendu ▁egingo ▁dut ▁zure ▁argimutila .
PRED:	Remember that you must not be able to repent of your wicked people . If you turn from you , I will turn away from you .
GOLD:	Look how far you have fallen ! Turn back to me and do the works you did at first . If you do n't repent , I will come and remove your lampstand from its place among the churches .

ID:	2829
INPUT:	▁Biz iki ▁poztu ▁zen ▁Herodes ▁Jesus ▁ikus te az , ▁as p aldian ▁baitzuen ▁hura ▁ezagu tzeko ▁gogoa , ▁hartaz ▁entzuten ▁zituen engatik ; ▁mirari ren ▁bat ▁egiten ▁ikusiko ▁zuela ▁ere ▁espero ▁zuen .
PRED:	When Herod heard about this , he was very hard to know that Jesus had seen him because he heard that he had seen him .
GOLD:	Herod was delighted at the opportunity to see Jesus , because he had heard about him and had been hoping for a long time to see him perform a miracle .

ID:	2830
INPUT:	▁Bar au ▁eginez ▁p ena tzen ▁banaiz , i rain a ▁besterik ▁ez ▁dut ▁jasotzen ;
PRED:	My breath is full of friends , but I ca n't pay it back .
GOLD:	When I dress in burlap to show sorrow , they make fun of me .

ID:	2831
INPUT:	▁An aiek ▁esan ▁zioten :— G eure ▁errege ▁edo ▁mendera tzaile ▁izan ▁behar ▁ote ▁zaitugu ? Eta ▁are ▁gehiago ▁gorro tatu ▁zuten ▁bere ▁amets ▁eta ▁esan engatik .
PRED:	“ Well , ” the brothers said , “ You are you the one who loved you , and we hate him ! ”
GOLD:	His brothers responded , “ So you think you will be our king , do you ? Do you actually think you will reign over us ? ” And they hated him all the more because of his dreams and the way he talked about them .

ID:	2832
INPUT:	▁Zortzi ▁zentimetro ▁zabal eko ▁uzta i ▁batez ▁hornitu ▁zuen , ▁eta ▁urrezko ▁er tza ▁egin ▁uzta iari .
PRED:	It was the father of 27 inches wide , and run a gold molding around it .
GOLD:	He decorated it with a 3-inch border all around , and he ran a gold molding along the border .

ID:	2833
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁honela ▁esango ▁dute ▁kos talde ▁honetako ▁guztiek : ▁“ Horra ▁hor ▁geure ▁itxaro bide ▁genuen aren ▁a tar ramen tua ! ▁Horra ▁hor ▁noren gana ▁jo ▁dugun , ▁Asiriako ▁errege agandik ▁askatzeko ▁laguntza ▁eske ! ▁Nola ▁onik ▁atera ▁gu ▁orain ?” ▁ »
PRED:	Then everyone will say to him , ‘ This is what the king of Israel says : The king of Assyria has come to save us ! What have we done to save you ? Why have you saved us ? '
GOLD:	They will say , ‘ If this can happen to Egypt , what chance do we have ? We were counting on Egypt to protect us from the king of Assyria . ' ”

ID:	2834
INPUT:	▁Ber ez ▁hazten ▁den ▁hazi aren ▁parabola
PRED:	Parable of the Lost Sheep
GOLD:	Jesus Calms the Storm

ID:	2835
INPUT:	▁Ez ta bai da ▁sortu ▁zen ▁ikasle en ▁artean , ▁nor ▁ote ▁zen ▁berai etan ▁handiena .
PRED:	He was not talking about the disciples , and he was greatest in the world .
GOLD:	Then his disciples began arguing about which of them was the greatest .

ID:	2836
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁ez ▁ziren ▁muinoetako ▁kultu - lekuak ▁desagertu ; ▁jendeak ▁jarraitu ▁egiten ▁zuen ▁halako ▁muino etan ▁opariak ▁eskaintzen ▁eta ▁intsentsua ▁erretzen .
PRED:	But he did not destroy the pagan shrines and burned incense at the pagan shrines .
GOLD:	One day King Joash said to the priests , “ Collect all the money brought as a sacred offering to the Lord 's Temple , whether it is a regular assessment , a payment of vows , or a voluntary gift .

ID:	2837
INPUT:	▁Al eluia ! ▁Gora ▁Jauna ! G orets azue ▁Jaunaren ▁izena , gore ts azue , ▁Jaunaren ▁zerbitzariok ,
PRED:	Praise the Lord ! Praise the Lord ! Praise him ! Praise the Lord !
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! Praise the name of the Lord ! Praise him , you who serve the Lord ,

ID:	2838
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁galdetu ▁zion ▁erregeak ▁Dani eli , ▁Bel tx atzar ▁ere ▁deitu ari :— Egia ▁al ▁da ▁ametsa ▁argitu ▁eta ▁esanahia ▁azalduko ▁didazu la ?
PRED:	Then the king asked him , “ Is it the dream that I tell you the dream ? ”
GOLD:	The king said to Daniel ( also known as Belteshazzar ) , “ Is this true ? Can you tell me what my dream was and what it means ? ”

ID:	2839
INPUT:	▁Tam arri ▁esan ▁zioten ▁aitagin arreba ▁ardi - moz tera ▁zihoala ▁Tim n ara .
PRED:	So his father-in-law 's father-in-law came to Timnah for a sheep to Timnah .
GOLD:	Someone told Tamar , “ Look , your father-in-law is going up to Timnah to shear his sheep . ”

ID:	2840
INPUT:	▁Josiasek ▁lege - lib urua ▁aurkitu
PRED:	Josiah 's Final Instructions
GOLD:	Hilkiah Discovers God 's Law

ID:	2841
INPUT:	▁aurkeztu ▁zizkieten ▁apostolu ei , ▁eta ▁hauek , ▁otoitz ▁eginez , ▁eskuak ▁buruan ▁ezarri ▁zizkieten .
PRED:	Then they presented the apostles and presented their hands to the apostles .
GOLD:	These seven were presented to the apostles , who prayed for them as they laid their hands on them .

ID:	2842
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁esan ▁nuen :— Ene ▁Jainko ▁Jauna , ▁zaude ▁geldi ! ▁Nola ▁eutsiko ▁dio , ▁bada , ▁Israel ▁herriak ▁bere ▁bizi ari , ▁hain ▁txik ia ▁izanik ?
PRED:	“ O Lord , you are the Sovereign Lord , ” I said , “ How can you be able to live ? ”
GOLD:	Then I said , “ O Sovereign Lord , please stop or we will not survive , for Israel is so small . ”

ID:	2843
INPUT:	▁Judan ▁gelditu ▁ziren ▁gudalburuak , ▁Babiloniako ▁erregeak ▁Go dal ias ▁gobernari ▁ezarri ▁zuela ▁jakitean , ▁honen gana ▁joan ▁ziren ▁Mitz para ▁beren ▁gizon ▁guztiekin . ▁Hauek ▁ziren ▁gudalburuak : ▁Netan iasen ▁seme ▁Ismael , ▁Kar e ahen ▁seme ▁Johan an , ▁N et of ako ▁T an h um eten ▁seme ▁Ser aias , ▁eta ▁Ja az anias , ▁m aak arra .
PRED:	When the king of Judah heard what had happened , they went to Mizpah to meet Gedaliah son of Nethaniah and all the people of Judah . They went to Mizpah to meet Gedaliah son of Nethaniah and all the people of Judah .
GOLD:	When all the army commanders and their men learned that the king of Babylon had appointed Gedaliah as governor , they went to see him at Mizpah . These included Ishmael son of Nethaniah , Johanan son of Kareah , Seraiah son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite , Jezaniah son of the Maacathite , and all their men .

ID:	2844
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Josafat ▁lurreraino ▁ahuspeztu ▁zen ; ▁Judako ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁jende ▁guztia ▁ere ▁makurtu ▁egin ▁zen ▁Jauna ▁gurtzeko .
PRED:	Then Jehoshaphat bowed low to the ground and bowed low to the ground in Jerusalem .
GOLD:	Then King Jehoshaphat bowed low with his face to the ground . And all the people of Judah and Jerusalem did the same , worshiping the Lord .

ID:	2845
INPUT:	▁horrela ▁bada , ▁eta ▁Jaunaren ▁laguntzaz ▁lurraldea ▁menderatu ▁baino ▁lehen ▁itzultzen ▁ez ▁bazarete , ▁ez ▁duzue ▁inolako ▁erru rik ▁izango , ▁ez ▁Jaunaren , ▁ez ▁Israelen ▁aurrean , ▁eta ▁lurralde ▁hau ▁zeuen ▁jabetza ▁izango ▁duzue , ▁Jaunaren ▁on iri tzi az .
PRED:	So if you return to the Lord , you will not be able to return to the land of the Lord , you will not be punished for the land of the Lord , and you will not be able to break the land of the Lord your God .
GOLD:	then you may return when the Lord has conquered the land . You will have fulfilled your duty to the Lord and to the rest of the people of Israel . And the land on the east side of the Jordan will be your property from the Lord .

ID:	2846
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁agintari ek ▁inguratu ▁eta ▁esan ▁zioten :— Noiz ▁arte ▁eduki ▁behar ▁gaituzu ▁zal antz an ? ▁Zu ▁bazara ▁Mesias , ▁es aguzu ▁argi ▁eta ▁garbi .
PRED:	Then the leaders said to him , “ How long are you talking with us ? How long will you come ? We are the Messiah ? ”
GOLD:	The people surrounded him and asked , “ How long are you going to keep us in suspense ? If you are the Messiah , tell us plainly . ”

ID:	2847
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Moisesek ▁esan ▁zion ▁Aaroni : ▁« Hartu ▁zeure ▁errauts ontzia , ▁ipini ▁bertan ▁aldar eko ▁txin gar rak ▁eta ▁bota ▁gainean ▁intsentsua ; ▁zoaz ▁arin ▁elkar tera ▁eta ▁egizu ▁haien ▁aldeko ▁barkamen - ohikunea , ▁Jaunaren ▁haserrea ▁piztu ▁baita ▁eta ▁has ia ▁da ▁izurria ».
PRED:	Then Moses said to Aaron , “ Take the meat from the altar and put it on it . Go and pour out the altar on the altar of the Lord 's anger , for you have been poured out on the altar of the Lord 's anger . ”
GOLD:	So Moses did as the Lord commanded him .

ID:	2848
INPUT:	▁Oro tan ▁erakutsi ▁izan ▁dizuet , ▁horrela ▁behar ▁dela ▁lanean ▁saiatu ▁gauza ▁ez ▁direnei ▁laguntzeko , ▁Jesus ▁Jaunaren ▁hitz ▁haiek ▁gogora tuz : ▁“ Zorion ▁gehiago ▁du ▁em ate ak ▁har tzeak ▁baino ”».
PRED:	So I have shown you this work for doing this , so that Jesus is too hard for those who do n't believe in the Lord Jesus . He said , ‘ You have faith in the Lord 's sight ! '
GOLD:	And I have been a constant example of how you can help those in need by working hard . You should remember the words of the Lord Jesus : ‘ It is more blessed to give than to receive . ' ”

ID:	2849
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁haur txoak ▁m ag al ean ▁hartu ▁eta ▁bedeinkatu ▁egiten ▁zituen , ▁eskuak ▁ezarriz .
PRED:	He blessed the little child , and he blessed them and blessed them .
GOLD:	Then he took the children in his arms and placed his hands on their heads and blessed them .

ID:	2850
INPUT:	▁Behar tsuaren ▁deiadar rei ▁ez ▁entzun arena ▁egiten ▁dien ari , ez ▁diote ▁berari ▁ere ▁entzungo , ▁laguntza ▁eske ▁dei ▁egitean .
PRED:	The poor will not listen to those who ask for help , for they will hear him .
GOLD:	Those who shut their ears to the cries of the poorwill be ignored in their own time of need .

ID:	2851
INPUT:	▁Mik tam ▁. ▁Davidena G orde ▁nazazu , ▁Jauna , ▁zuregan ▁baitut ▁babesa .
PRED:	O Lord , rescue me from those who trust in me , for you are my refuge .
GOLD:	Keep me safe , O God , for I have come to you for refuge .

ID:	2852
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁guztia ▁guretzat ▁ikas bide ▁izateko ▁gertatu ▁zen , ▁gaiztakeri arik ▁irrika ▁ez ▁dezagun , ▁haiek ▁irrik atu ▁zuten ▁bezala .
PRED:	All these things happened to be done for us , just as they had done .
GOLD:	These things happened as a warning to us , so that we would not crave evil things as they did ,

ID:	2853
INPUT:	▁« Zorion ekoa ▁ni , ▁Ag ri pa ▁erregea , ▁juduek ▁lep ora tzen ▁dizki daten ▁erru ▁guzti ez ▁gaur ▁neure ▁burua ▁zure ▁aurrean ▁zuri tzeko ▁aukera ▁du dalako ;
PRED:	“ How joyful are those who are those who are the law of King Agrippa , for I have been punished for you today .
GOLD:	“ I am fortunate , King Agrippa , that you are the one hearing my defense today against all these accusations made by the Jewish leaders ,

ID:	2854
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁zuen ▁Jainkoak ▁aukeratuko ▁duen ▁lekuan ▁egos i ▁eta ▁jango ▁duzue ▁opari gaia , ▁eta ▁biharamun ▁goizean ▁etxera ▁itzuliko ▁zarete .
PRED:	The Lord your God must return to the place of worship at the place where you are at the next morning .
GOLD:	Roast the lamb and eat it in the place the Lord your God chooses . Then you may go back to your tents the next morning .

ID:	2855
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁nahi ▁nuke ▁zuek ▁jaki tea , ▁gizon ▁ororen ▁buru ▁Kristo ▁dela , ▁emakumearen ▁buru ▁gizona , ▁eta ▁Kristoren ▁buru ▁Jainkoa .
PRED:	But I want you to know that Christ is a man who gives birth to a man , a person who is a man of Christ .
GOLD:	But there is one thing I want you to know : The head of every man is Christ , the head of woman is man , and the head of Christ is God .

ID:	2856
INPUT:	▁« Ai ▁zuek , ▁lege - maisu ▁eta ▁fariseu ▁itxura zale ok ! ▁Nor bait ▁judu berri ▁egiteagatik ▁itsaso ▁eta ▁lehor ▁zabiltzate ▁eta , ▁egin ▁duzuen ean , ▁zeuek ▁baino ▁gai ago ▁bihurtzen ▁duzue ▁in fer n urako !
PRED:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law and teachers of religious law , you who are honest and Timothy . You are going to be saved , and you are going to be saved .
GOLD:	“ What sorrow awaits you teachers of religious law and you Pharisees . Hypocrites ! For you cross land and sea to make one convert , and then you turn that person into twice the child of hell you yourselves are !

ID:	2857
INPUT:	▁B eh i ▁ar gal ▁eta ▁esk as ▁hauek , ▁ordea , ▁lehengo ▁zazpi ▁behi ▁guri ak ▁irentsi ▁zituzten .
PRED:	But after this , the scrawny cows came to us , and the seven healthy cows came to us .
GOLD:	These thin , scrawny cows ate the seven fat cows .

ID:	2858
INPUT:	▁alegia , ▁besteak ▁gezur rez ▁salatzen , au zi tegian ▁defen tsa ▁erago zten eta ▁errugabea ▁hondamendi ra era m aten ▁dutenak .
PRED:	This is a witness to plot against against fools , and liars liars liars .
GOLD:	Those who convict the innocentby their false testimony will disappear.A similar fate awaits those who use trickery to pervert justiceand who tell lies to destroy the innocent .

ID:	2859
INPUT:	▁Elam darren tzat
PRED:	A Message about Zedekiah
GOLD:	A Message about Elam

ID:	2860
INPUT:	▁ezik asi en ▁hez itz aile ▁eta ▁ezjakin en ▁irakas le tzat , ▁eta ▁hori , ▁ezagu tzaren ▁eta ▁egiaren ▁adieraz pena ▁legean ▁duzulako .
PRED:	You must teach the truth and instruction to the truth , so that you can understand the truth and knowledge of the truth .
GOLD:	You think you can instruct the ignorant and teach children the ways of God . For you are certain that God 's law gives you complete knowledge and truth .

ID:	2861
INPUT:	▁Bi dal iak , ▁beraz , ▁Antioki ara ▁jaitsi ▁ziren ▁eta , ▁bil tz arra ▁bildurik , ▁gutuna ▁eman ▁zieten .
PRED:	So they went to Antioch and went to Antioch .
GOLD:	The messengers went at once to Antioch , where they called a general meeting of the believers and delivered the letter .

ID:	2862
INPUT:	▁« G ero , ▁ate aren ▁ondoko ▁sarrer atik , ▁iparra l derantz ▁dauden ▁apaizen ▁gela ▁sakratu etara ▁eraman ▁ninduen ▁gizonak . ▁B arren - b arren ean ▁mendebaldera ▁zegoen ▁leku ▁bat ▁erak uts iz ,
PRED:	“ The man took me from the entrance of the north and the north side of the north and the north side of the north . He took me and led me to the north side of the north .
GOLD:	In my vision , the man brought me through the entrance beside the gateway and led me to the sacred rooms assigned to the priests , which faced toward the north . He showed me a place at the extreme west end of these rooms .

ID:	2863
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁hemen zer taz ▁ohartu ▁naizen ▁ni , ▁K oh el et , argi bide ▁bila , denak ▁banan - banan azter tu ▁ditudan ean :
PRED:	This is the Teacher , the Teacher , the Teacher , who lived in the middle of the tree .
GOLD:	“ This is my conclusion , ” says the Teacher . “ I discovered this after looking at the matter from every possible angle .

ID:	2864
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁zioten : ▁« Bedeinkatua ▁Jaunaren ▁izenean ▁datorren ▁erregea ! ▁Bakea ▁zeruan ▁eta ▁aintza ▁Jainko ▁goren ari !»
PRED:	So they said , “ Praise the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the God of heaven and earth ! ”
GOLD:	“ Blessings on the King who comes in the name of the Lord ! Peace in heaven , and glory in highest heaven ! ”

ID:	2865
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁txalu para ▁igo , ▁aintzi raz ▁beste ▁aldera ▁igaro ▁eta ▁bere ▁herrira ▁etorri ▁zen .
PRED:	Then Jesus got into the boat and crossed the lake to the lake ,
GOLD:	Jesus climbed into a boat and went back across the lake to his own town .

ID:	2866
INPUT:	▁Bete a ▁du ▁ahoa ▁madarikazio z , ▁maltzur keriaz ▁eta ▁gogor keriaz ; ok erra ▁eta ▁gaiztakeria ▁ditu ▁mih ian ▁gorde ak .
PRED:	The mouth of the Lord 's curse is broken , and the tongue of lies .
GOLD:	Their mouths are full of cursing , lies , and threats.Trouble and evil are on the tips of their tongues .

ID:	2867
INPUT:	▁Adi skide ▁maite , ▁espiri tuz ▁ongi ▁d oak izun ▁bezala , ▁beste ▁gauza ▁guztietan ▁ere ▁ongi ▁joan ▁dakizu la ▁eta ▁osasun a ▁izan ▁dez azula .
PRED:	Dear friends , love your love , as you have loved you as much as you have .
GOLD:	Dear friend , I hope all is well with you and that you are as healthy in body as you are strong in spirit .

ID:	2868
INPUT:	▁Jainkoa ▁Moisesi ▁eta ▁Josueri ▁agertu
PRED:	The Lord 's Case against Joshua
GOLD:	Israel 's Disobedience Predicted

ID:	2869
INPUT:	▁« Norbaitek ▁bere ▁etxea ▁sagaratzen ▁badio ▁Jaunari , ▁apaizak ▁erabakiko ▁du ▁etxe arengatik ▁ordaindu ▁beharrekoa , ▁zer - n olako a ▁den ▁kontuan ▁harturik . ▁Apaiz aren ▁erabakia ▁atzera ezina ▁da .
PRED:	“ If someone has been set apart to the Lord 's Temple , the priest must pay it to the property of the property of the priest 's property .
GOLD:	“ If someone dedicates a house to the Lord , the priest will come to assess its value . The priest 's assessment will be final , whether high or low .

ID:	2870
INPUT:	▁Dena ▁dela , ▁zeuen ▁artean ▁auzitan ▁ibil tzea ▁bera ▁nah iko ▁pen agarria ▁da . ▁Zergatik ▁ez ▁bidegabekeria ▁jasan ▁eta ▁zeuen ▁buruak ▁larru tzen ▁utzi ?
PRED:	So why are you going to fight against you ? Why are you angry ? Why are you angry with us ?
GOLD:	Even to have such lawsuits with one another is a defeat for you . Why not just accept the injustice and leave it at that ? Why not let yourselves be cheated ?

ID:	2871
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Abimelekek ▁esan ▁zion ▁bere ▁ezku tari ari : ▁« Atera ▁ezpata ▁eta ▁hil ▁naz ak ! ▁Ez ▁dezatela ▁esan ▁emakume ▁batek ▁hil ▁nauela ». ▁Ez ku tariak ▁ezpata ▁sartu ▁eta ▁hil ▁egin ▁zuen .
PRED:	Then Abimelech said to Abimelech , “ Let 's kill me ! Let 's kill me and kill me ! Do n't let me kill me ! ”
GOLD:	He quickly said to his young armor bearer , “ Draw your sword and kill me ! Do n't let it be said that a woman killed Abimelech ! ” So the young man ran him through with his sword , and he died .

ID:	2872
INPUT:	▁Horiek ▁beren ▁ondasun etan ▁oinarri tzen ▁diraeta ▁beren ▁aberastasun ▁handiaz ▁harro tzen .
PRED:	These are those who trust in their rich , and their wealth will be filled with great power .
GOLD:	Yet they can not redeem themselves from deathby paying a ransom to God .

ID:	2873
INPUT:	▁Beren ▁ahaide ▁B ak b uk iasek ▁eta ▁U nik ▁laguntzen ▁zieten ▁bete behar ▁horretan .
PRED:	From the members of their relatives who were their families , heard the names of the Lord 's Temple .
GOLD:	Their associates , Bakbukiah and Unni , stood opposite them during the service .

ID:	2874
INPUT:	▁Akabek ▁esan ▁zuen :— N oren ▁bidez ? Prof etak ▁erantzun :— Hau ▁dio ▁Jaunak : ▁« Es ku alde buru en ▁laguntzaile ▁diren ▁gazteen ▁bidez ». A kab ek , ▁berriro :— Nork ▁ekingo ▁dio ▁borro kari ? Prof etak ▁erantzun :— Zuk .
PRED:	“ What is the prophet ? ” Ahab asked . “ This is what the Lord says : ‘ This is what the Lord says : Who are you doing ? ” “ Who are you talking about ? ” Ahab replied , “ Who is the prophet ? ”
GOLD:	Ahab asked , “ How will he do it ? ” And the prophet replied , “ This is what the Lord says : The troops of the provincial commanders will do it. ” “ Should we attack first ? ” Ahab asked. “ Yes , ” the prophet answered .

ID:	2875
INPUT:	▁« Tx arra , ▁txarra » ▁esaten ▁du ▁eros leak ; baina ▁hor ▁doa ▁gero , ▁pozik ▁asko ▁egindako ▁eros keta z .
PRED:	They say , “ A person who is innocent , but a person who can buy it or buy it .
GOLD:	The buyer haggles over the price , saying , “ It 's worthless , ” then brags about getting a bargain !

ID:	2876
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁Jaunak ▁profeta ▁baten ▁bidez atera ▁zuen ▁Israel ▁Egiptotik eta ▁profeta ▁baten ▁bidez zuen ▁zaindu .
PRED:	But the Lord has given you a prophet from the land of Egypt , and he cared for you .
GOLD:	But the people of Israelhave bitterly provoked the Lord , so their Lord will now sentence them to deathin payment for their sins .

ID:	2877
INPUT:	▁Hau tsi ▁gaiztoaren ▁indarra , es katu ▁hari ▁gaiztakeri aren ▁kontu , ez ▁utzi ▁ezer ▁azter tz eke .
PRED:	But you are the power of the wicked , but you are not trying to kill me .
GOLD:	Break the arms of these wicked , evil people ! Go after them until the last one is destroyed .

ID:	2878
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁egin , ▁bada , ▁inolako ▁lanik . ▁Betiko ▁lege ▁izango ▁duzue ▁hau ▁belaunez ▁belaun , ▁biziko ▁zareten ▁edonon .
PRED:	So do not be observed from generation to generation . This is a permanent law to be observed from generation to generation .
GOLD:	You must not do any work at all ! This is a permanent law for you , and it must be observed from generation to generation wherever you live .

ID:	2879
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁onginahia ▁ez ▁dela ▁amaitu , ▁haren ▁errukia ▁ez ▁dela ▁agor tu .
PRED:	When the grace of the Lord has finished his mercy , he will not reject his mercy .
GOLD:	The faithful love of the Lord never ends ! His mercies never cease .

ID:	2880
INPUT:	▁Dena ▁Joseren ▁gain ▁utzi ▁zuen , ▁bada , ▁P oti f arrek ▁eta ▁aurrerantzean ▁ez ▁zen ▁ezer taz ▁arduratu , ▁berak ▁jaten ▁zuen az ▁izan ▁ezik . I tx ura ▁eder rekoa ▁zen ▁Jose .
PRED:	So Joseph left Joseph 's body , and he was in charge of Joseph 's household , and he ate no food .
GOLD:	So Potiphar gave Joseph complete administrative responsibility over everything he owned . With Joseph there , he did n't worry about a thing — except what kind of food to eat ! Joseph was a very handsome and well-built young man ,

ID:	2881
INPUT:	▁« Han , ▁burdinazko ▁tresn az ▁landu ▁gabeko ▁har riz ▁eginiko ▁aldarea ▁eraikiko ▁diozue ▁Jaunari ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoari ;
PRED:	“ You must build an iron iron iron iron for the Lord your God .
GOLD:	“ Then build an altar there to the Lord your God , using natural , uncut stones . You must not shape the stones with an iron tool .

ID:	2882
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁ikasleek ▁galdetu ▁zioten :— Zergatik ▁diote , ▁bada , ▁lege - maisuek ▁lehenbizi ▁Eliasek ▁etorri ▁behar ▁duela ?
PRED:	Then the disciples asked him , “ Why should the teachers of religious law come first ? ”
GOLD:	Then his disciples asked him , “ Why do the teachers of religious law insist that Elijah must return before the Messiah comes ? ”

ID:	2883
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁haize - zur run bil oan ▁eraman ▁zuen ▁Elias ▁zerura . ▁Hona ▁nola ▁gertatu ▁zen : ▁Elias ▁eta ▁Eliseo ▁Gilgal dik ▁abia tuak ▁zirelarik ,
PRED:	The Lord took Elijah into the sky , Elijah Elijah Elijah , and Elijah was there at Gilgal .
GOLD:	When the Lord was about to take Elijah up to heaven in a whirlwind , Elijah and Elisha were traveling from Gilgal .

ID:	2884
INPUT:	▁Egun ▁tx arretan , ▁zergatik ▁izan ▁beldur in gu ratzen ▁nauten ▁maltzur ren ▁mal ezi ari ?
PRED:	In that day , why should I be afraid of those who hate me ?
GOLD:	They trust in their wealthand boast of great riches .

ID:	2885
INPUT:	▁Hobe ▁duzu ▁« Igo ▁hona !» ▁entzun , han dia go ▁baten ▁aurrean ▁apal araz ia ▁izan ▁baino . Zeure ▁begi ez ▁ikusi ▁baduzu ▁ere ,
PRED:	“ Come , let 's listen to you ! ” you said , “ If you see a humble man , you have seen your own eyes .
GOLD:	It 's better to wait for an invitation to the head tablethan to be sent away in public disgrace.Just because you 've seen something ,

ID:	2886
INPUT:	▁B or txatu ▁egin ▁dituzte ▁Sion go ▁emakumeak eta ▁Judako ▁hirietako ▁neskatx ak .
PRED:	They will live in Jerusalem , and women of Judah will live among the women of Judah .
GOLD:	Our enemies rape the women in Jerusalemand the young girls in all the towns of Judah .

ID:	2887
INPUT:	▁Bizi ▁eta ▁mugi tzen ▁den ▁guzti tik ▁jan ▁dezak ezue ; ▁lehenago ▁landar eak ▁bezala , ▁den - dena ▁ematen ▁dizuet .
PRED:	I am giving you every kind of wood , just as you can eat .
GOLD:	I have given them to you for food , just as I have given you grain and vegetables .

ID:	2888
INPUT:	▁« Ondoren , ▁hartu ▁beste ▁aharia . ▁Aaronek ▁eta ▁beronen ▁semeek ▁buruan ▁eskuak ▁ezarriko ▁dizkiote .
PRED:	“ Then Aaron and his sons must lay their hands on the head of the ram 's head .
GOLD:	“ Now take the other ram , and have Aaron and his sons lay their hands on its head .

ID:	2889
INPUT:	▁Bizi ▁garen ▁bitartean , ▁beti ▁heriotzara ▁gar ama tza te ▁Jesusen gatik , ▁gure ▁izate ▁hil kor ▁honetan ▁Jesusen ▁bizia ▁ere ▁ager ▁dadin .
PRED:	As soon as we live in this way , we will be put to death for Jesus .
GOLD:	Yes , we live under constant danger of death because we serve Jesus , so that the life of Jesus will be evident in our dying bodies .

ID:	2890
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁zuen ▁Jainkoak ▁ni ▁bezalako ▁profeta ▁sortuko ▁du ▁zuen ▁artetik , ▁herritarren ▁artetik . ▁Entzun ▁berari !
PRED:	For the Lord is like a prophet like me , and he will rescue you from his own people .
GOLD:	Moses continued , “ The Lord your God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your fellow Israelites . You must listen to him .

ID:	2891
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁artean ▁haietako ▁inoren gana ▁jaitsi ▁gabe ▁zegoen ▁Espiritua ; ▁Jesus ▁Jaunaren ▁izenean ▁bataia turik ▁bakarrik ▁zeuden .
PRED:	For the Spirit of the Lord came to them , but Jesus was baptized with them .
GOLD:	The Holy Spirit had not yet come upon any of them , for they had only been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus .

ID:	2892
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁is ats ez ▁zeruko ▁iz arren ▁her ena ▁her res tan ▁hartu ▁eta ▁lurrera ▁jaurti ▁zuen . H eren suge a , ▁haurra ▁izateko ▁zegoen ▁emakumearen ▁aitzinean ▁gelditu ▁zen , ▁jaio ▁bezain ▁laster ▁semea ▁iren s teko .
PRED:	She threw her out in the sky over the earth and threw it into the ground , and she became pregnant as a child .
GOLD:	His tail swept away one-third of the stars in the sky , and he threw them to the earth . He stood in front of the woman as she was about to give birth , ready to devour her baby as soon as it was born .

ID:	2893
INPUT:	▁Adi skide ak ▁bertako ▁jendeari ▁galdegin ▁zion :— Non ▁da ▁En ai men , ▁bide - bazter rean , ▁egon ▁ohi ▁zen ▁emagaldu a ? Haiek ▁erantzun ▁zioten :— Hemen ▁ez ▁da ▁inoiz ▁emagaldu rik ▁egon .
PRED:	“ Where are you trying to live ? ” they asked . “ Where is it like a prostitute ? ” “ Why are it right ? ” “ Look , ” they replied , “ That 's why have you been a prostitute ? ”
GOLD:	So he asked the men who lived there , “ Where can I find the shrine prostitute who was sitting beside the road at the entrance to Enaim ? ” “ We 've never had a shrine prostitute here , ” they replied .

ID:	2894
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁erantzun ▁nion :— Ene ▁Jauna , ▁zeuk ▁jakingo ▁duzu . Hark ▁esan ▁zidan :— L arri aldi ▁handi tik ▁datoz enak ▁dira ▁horiek ; ▁beren ▁soinekoak ▁Bildotsaren ▁odol ean ▁garbitu ▁dituzte ▁eta ▁zuri tu .
PRED:	“ O Lord , ” I said , “ I have come to see you , ” I said . “ They have come from the blood of the Lamb , and they will wash their clothes in blood .
GOLD:	And I said to him , “ Sir , you are the one who knows. ” Then he said to me , “ These are the ones who died in the great tribulation . They have washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb and made them white .

ID:	2895
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zaitez ▁poztu , ▁Israel , ez ▁alai tu , ▁beste ▁herriak ▁bezala , pro stituzio an ▁ibili ▁baitzara , zeure ▁Jainkoa ▁utzirik . A ts egin ▁du zuz eure ▁prostituzio aren ▁sari ag ari - l arra in ▁guztietan ▁jaso tzea .
PRED:	Do not rejoice , O Israel , and do not be glad because you have worshiped other gods , for you have committed adultery .
GOLD:	O people of Israel , do not rejoice as other nations do.For you have been unfaithful to your God , hiring yourselves out like prostitutes , worshiping other gods on every threshing floor .

ID:	2896
INPUT:	▁Jesus , ▁hori ▁jakitean , ▁Ju dea ▁utzi ▁eta ▁Galile ara ▁joan ▁zen ▁berriro .
PRED:	When Jesus heard this , he left Galilee and returned to Galilee .
GOLD:	So he left Judea and returned to Galilee .

ID:	2897
INPUT:	▁“ Entzun , ▁israeldarrok ! ▁Gaur ▁etsaien ▁aurka ▁borro katuko ▁zarete . ▁Ez ▁kik ildu , ▁ez ▁izan ▁beldur ! ▁Ez ▁asal datu , ▁ez ▁ikaratu ▁etsaien ▁aurrean !
PRED:	“ Listen to this day , O people of Israel ! Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid ! Do n't be afraid !
GOLD:	He will say to them , ‘ Listen to me , all you men of Israel ! Do not be afraid as you go out to fight your enemies today ! Do not lose heart or panic or tremble before them .

ID:	2898
INPUT:	▁Nire kin ▁auzitan ▁zebil ela , m orro i ▁nahiz ▁neskam eren ▁bati ▁eskubidea ▁ukatu ▁badi ot ,
PRED:	When I discovered that my servant has been punished , I will pay a servant to a slave or a slave ,
GOLD:	“ If I have been unfair to my male or female servantswhen they brought their complaints to me ,

ID:	2899
INPUT:	▁Han ▁zegoen ▁Jakoben ▁putzu a ▁delako a . ▁Jesus , ▁bide az ▁nekatu rik , ▁putzu - ertzean ▁eseri ▁zen . ▁E gu erdi ▁inguru a ▁zen .
PRED:	There was a hole in the well , but Jesus sat beside the well . He sat beside the well beside the well .
GOLD:	Jacob 's well was there ; and Jesus , tired from the long walk , sat wearily beside the well about noontime .

ID:	2900
INPUT:	▁Sikemgo ▁batz arra
PRED:	The Revolt of Shechem
GOLD:	The Northern Tribes Revolt

ID:	2901
INPUT:	▁Ez ta bai da ▁luze aren ▁ondoren , ▁zutitu ▁zen ▁Pedro ▁eta ▁esan ▁zuen : ▁« An ai ok , ▁dak izuen ez , ▁aspaldi ▁aukeratu ▁ninduen ▁Jainkoak ▁zuen ▁artetik , ▁jentil ek ▁nire ▁ahotik ▁berri ▁onaren ▁mezua ▁entzun ▁zezaten ▁eta ▁sinetsi .
PRED:	After Peter stood up and stood up , he said to Peter , “ You have been a long life for me , because you have been chosen by the Gentiles .
GOLD:	At the meeting , after a long discussion , Peter stood and addressed them as follows : “ Brothers , you all know that God chose me from among you some time ago to preach to the Gentiles so that they could hear the Good News and believe .

ID:	2902
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren ▁hitza ▁ezin ▁hobea : ▁gizakia ▁arnas berri tzen ▁du ; Jaunaren ▁man amen dua ▁fid agarria : ▁heldu gabea ▁zuhur rarazten ▁du ;
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ He is a breath of justice , and a person who holds it with understanding .
GOLD:	The commandments of the Lord are right , bringing joy to the heart.The commands of the Lord are clear , giving insight for living .

ID:	2903
INPUT:	▁Erregeak ▁isek az ▁dar abiltza te , handik i ei ▁irri ▁egiten . Go tor leku ek ▁barre gu ra ematen ▁diete , ondo an ▁lur - pil ak ▁eginez har tzen ▁baiti tuzte .
PRED:	The king of the earth tremble , and the princes laugh at them , for the Lord will shake their heads in the valley of Rephaim .
GOLD:	They scoff at kings and princesand scorn all their fortresses.They simply pile ramps of earthagainst their walls and capture them !

ID:	2904
INPUT:	▁B u katu ▁ziren ▁jadanik ▁haien tza ta mo di oa , ▁gorro toa ▁eta ▁grin ak . Ez ▁dute ▁aur rerako an ▁esku - har tzerik mundu ▁honetan egiten ▁diren ▁lan etan .
PRED:	Their desires were once heavy , and they hated shame . They will not stumble and fall in the streets . They will not stumble in this world .
GOLD:	Whatever they did in their lifetime — loving , hating , envying — is all long gone . They no longer play a part in anything here on earth .

ID:	2905
INPUT:	▁Bel arria ▁zabaltzen ▁die ▁zen tza ▁daitezen , gaiztakeri atik ▁itzultzeko ▁agintzen .
PRED:	He ordered them to turn away from the stone and obey them .
GOLD:	He gets their attentionand commands that they turn from evil .

ID:	2906
INPUT:	▁Jakob ▁Egiptora ▁joan ▁eta ▁zuen ▁arbasoek ▁Jaunari ▁oihu ▁egin ▁ziotenean , ▁Jaunak ▁Moises ▁eta ▁Aaron ▁igorri ▁zizkien ; ▁hauek ▁atera ▁zituzten ▁zuen ▁arbasoak ▁Egiptotik ▁eta ▁lurralde ▁honetan ▁ko k arazi .
PRED:	When Jacob went to Egypt and cried out to the Lord , he sent Moses out to the land of Egypt , and he sent them out of Egypt .
GOLD:	“ When the Israelites were in Egypt and cried out to the Lord , he sent Moses and Aaron to rescue them from Egypt and to bring them into this land .

ID:	2907
INPUT:	▁« Beste ▁batzu etan , ▁berriz , ▁nazio ▁edo ▁erreinu ▁bat ▁eraiki ▁eta ▁landa tzea ▁erabaki tzen ▁dut .
PRED:	“ But I have decided to destroy many nations , and I have built an open fields to the fields .
GOLD:	And if I announce that I will plant and build up a certain nation or kingdom ,

ID:	2908
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁esan ▁zien :— Eg izue ▁agindu ▁duzuena : ▁hartu ▁armak ▁Jaunaren ▁agindura ▁borrokatzeko ;
PRED:	Moses told them , “ Go ahead of what you have done . Go ahead and fight against the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Then Moses said , “ If you keep your word and arm yourselves for the Lord 's battles ,

ID:	2909
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁ohaide en ▁semeei ▁opariak ▁eman ▁zizkien , ▁eta ▁Isaak engandik ▁urruti ▁bidali ▁zituen ▁eki alderantz , ▁bera ▁oraindik ▁bizi ▁zela .
PRED:	He gave birth to his sons and his sons , Isaac , and settled east to the east side of the east .
GOLD:	But before he died , he gave gifts to the sons of his concubines and sent them off to a land in the east , away from Isaac .

ID:	2910
INPUT:	▁« Al di ▁hartan , ▁ni , ▁Daniel , ▁atsekabe turik ▁egon ▁nintzen ▁hiru ▁as tez .
PRED:	“ At that time I was Daniel , Daniel , was deeply troubled by three years old .
GOLD:	When this vision came to me , I , Daniel , had been in mourning for three whole weeks .

ID:	2911
INPUT:	▁esatera :— Z ahar tua ▁zaude , ▁eta ▁zure ▁semeak ▁ez ▁dabiltza ▁zure ▁bidetik . ▁Izen da ▁iezaguzu , ▁bada , ▁errege ▁bat , ▁gi da ▁gai tzan ; ▁horixe ▁egiten ▁dute ▁herrialde ▁guztietan .
PRED:	“ Look , you are your sons , ” they said . “ Come , let us marry one of you . ”
GOLD:	“ Look , ” they told him , “ you are now old , and your sons are not like you . Give us a king to judge us like all the other nations have . ”

ID:	2912
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁indar ▁lilura garria ▁bidaltzen ▁die ▁horiei ▁Jainkoak , ▁gezur rari ▁sinets ▁diezai oten ,
PRED:	That is why the power of the wicked are sent by the power of the Almighty .
GOLD:	So God will cause them to be greatly deceived , and they will believe these lies .

ID:	2913
INPUT:	▁Herodes ▁hil ▁ondoren , ▁Joseri ▁Jaunaren ▁aingerua ▁agertu ▁zitzaion ▁ametsetan ▁Egipton ,
PRED:	When Herod died , the angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in Egypt ,
GOLD:	When Herod died , an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt .

ID:	2914
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁al ▁genuen ▁aski ▁P eor - ko ▁bekatu az ? ▁Oraindik ▁ere ▁bekatu ▁haren ▁ondori oak ▁jas aten ▁ari ▁gara , ▁Jaunaren ▁elkarte ak ▁izurria ▁jasan ▁behar ▁izan ▁zuen ▁arren .
PRED:	We were not ashamed of our sins , but we were not ashamed of the Lord 's Sin . We have been transformed into sin , but we have been transformed into sin .
GOLD:	Was our sin at Peor not enough ? To this day we are not fully cleansed of it , even after the plague that struck the entire community of the Lord .

ID:	2915
INPUT:	▁« Ez in ▁izango ▁duzue , ▁ordea , ▁jan ▁biziko ▁zareten ▁hirietan ▁Jaunari ▁eskaini ▁beharrekoa : ▁gari , ▁ardo ▁eta ▁olio aren ▁hamarrenak , ▁abere ▁handi ▁eta ▁txiki en ▁lehen - k umeak , ▁bo toa ▁betetzeko ▁nahiz ▁borondatez ▁eginiko ▁opariak ▁eta ▁gainerako ▁emaitzak .
PRED:	“ But you must not eat any of your grain offerings , grain offerings , grain offerings , grain , grain , grain , grain , and olive oil , and olive oil , and olive oil , and olive oil , and olive oil , and olive oil .
GOLD:	“ But you may not eat your offerings in your hometown — neither the tithe of your grain and new wine and olive oil , nor the firstborn of your flocks and herds , nor any offering to fulfill a vow , nor your voluntary offerings , nor your sacred offerings .

ID:	2916
INPUT:	▁ibar rera ▁jaisten ▁den abere - talde aren ▁antzera . Jaunaren ▁espirituak ▁atseden era eraman ▁zituen ». Hala xe ▁eraman ▁zenuen , ▁Jauna , zeure ▁herria , iz en ▁bikaina ▁zeure gan atuz ▁horrela .
PRED:	The Spirit of the valley of the valley of the valley , and the Spirit of the Lord has spoken ! The Lord has spoken ! ”
GOLD:	As with cattle going down into a peaceful valley , the Spirit of the Lord gave them rest.You led your people , Lord , and gained a magnificent reputation . ”

ID:	2917
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁lagundu ▁egin ▁zien ▁em agin ei ▁beren ▁lanean : ▁herria ▁ugaldu ▁egin ▁zen ▁eta ▁biziki ▁indar tu .
PRED:	So God called for them , “ I have made them strong and strong . ”
GOLD:	So God was good to the midwives , and the Israelites continued to multiply , growing more and more powerful .

ID:	2918
INPUT:	▁« B ehin ▁batez , ▁zuhaitz ek ▁erregea ▁izendatu ▁nahi ▁zuten ▁beren tzat . ▁Eta ▁esan ▁zioten ▁olibondo ari : ▁“ Izan ▁hadi ▁gure ▁errege !”
PRED:	“ Then the king said to them , ‘ Be strong and olive trees , and you will be our king ! '
GOLD:	Once upon a time the trees decided to choose a king.First they said to the olive tree , ‘ Be our king ! '

ID:	2919
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁erantzun ▁zion : ▁« Gizon ▁bat ▁af ari ▁handi ▁bat ▁emateko a ▁zen ▁eta ▁jende ▁asko ▁gonbidatu ▁zuen .
PRED:	Jesus replied to the crowd , “ A large crowd had a great banquet for many people and invited him to invited him .
GOLD:	Jesus replied with this story : “ A man prepared a great feast and sent out many invitations .

ID:	2920
INPUT:	▁ez ▁erabili ▁asmo ▁txarrik elkar ren ▁aurka , ez ▁egin ▁gezurrezko ▁zin ik , gor ro to ▁baitut ▁hori ▁guztia . Nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁esana ».
PRED:	Do not harm against others , for I have spoken against you . I have spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Do n't scheme against each other . Stop your love of telling lies that you swear are the truth . I hate all these things , says the Lord . ”

ID:	2921
INPUT:	▁Sar aren ▁heriotza ▁eta ▁ehor z keta
PRED:	The Death of Jezebel
GOLD:	The Burial of Sarah

ID:	2922
INPUT:	▁« B eren ▁fruitu etatik ▁antz emango ▁diezue »
PRED:	The Futility of Jubilee
GOLD:	The Narrow Gate

ID:	2923
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁Pedro ▁jaiki ▁eta ▁hilobira ▁joan ▁zen ▁lasterka ; ▁makur turik , ▁barrura ▁begiratu ▁eta ▁oihal - zer ren dak ▁bakarrik ▁ikusi ▁zituen , ▁eta ▁etxera ▁itzuli ▁zen ▁gertatu az ▁harriturik .
PRED:	So Peter got up and went to the tomb , and he saw him . He was amazed at his home , and he was amazed .
GOLD:	However , Peter jumped up and ran to the tomb to look . Stooping , he peered in and saw the empty linen wrappings ; then he went home again , wondering what had happened .

ID:	2924
INPUT:	▁Nire ▁indarrak ▁apaldu ▁ditu ▁bere ▁ahalmenaz , nire ▁egunak ▁ur ri tu .
PRED:	For my strength has humbled me , and my strength has seen me .
GOLD:	But I cried to him , “ O my God , who lives forever , do n't take my life while I am so young !

ID:	2925
INPUT:	▁eta ▁ez ▁ote ▁duten ▁ihes ▁egingo ▁bere ▁nahi ra ▁makur tuak ▁dituen ▁deabru aren ▁sare etatik ?
PRED:	Does n't you afraid of those who fear him ? Should n't you fall from the devil ?
GOLD:	Then they will come to their senses and escape from the devil 's trap . For they have been held captive by him to do whatever he wants .

ID:	2926
INPUT:	▁Hon tza ▁eta ▁ki rik in oa j abe tuko ▁dira ▁hartaz , hon tz ▁zu ria ▁eta ▁bel ea j arriko ▁han ▁bizitzen . N ah as - mahas ▁eta ▁huts bihur tuko ▁du ▁Jaunak .
PRED:	The land will be filled with its crops , and it will be filled with milk and honey . The Lord will live there , and he will live there .
GOLD:	It will be haunted by the desert owl and the screech owl , the great owl and the raven.For God will measure that land carefully ; he will measure it for chaos and destruction .

ID:	2927
INPUT:	▁etxeko ▁nagusiak , ▁apaiz arengana ▁joan ik , ▁bere ▁etxeko ▁horm etan ▁lizun a ▁agertu ▁dela ▁adieraziko ▁dio .
PRED:	The high priest has appeared to the house of the house at the house of the house , and he will tell him what is happening .
GOLD:	The owner of such a house must then go to the priest and say , ‘ It appears that my house has some kind of mildew . '

ID:	2928
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁dio ▁Jaunak :« Orain ▁ekingo ▁diot , orain ▁altxatuko ▁naiz , orain ▁agertuko ▁handi .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ I will bring judgment upon you , ” says the Lord .
GOLD:	But the Lord says : “ Now I will stand up.Now I will show my power and might .

ID:	2929
INPUT:	▁bahituran ▁hartu takoa ▁bu el tatu , ▁ostu takoa ▁itzuli ▁eta , ▁bidegabekeria ▁egite ari ▁utziz , ▁bizia ▁ematen ▁duten ▁agindu etan ▁bad abil , ▁bizi ▁egingo ▁da , ▁bai , ▁eta ▁ez ▁da ▁hilko .
PRED:	If you harvest a donkey , take a donkey and pay it back . If you want to live , you will die , and if you do not die , you will die .
GOLD:	For instance , they might give back a debtor 's security , return what they have stolen , and obey my life-giving laws , no longer doing what is evil . If they do this , then they will surely live and not die .

ID:	2930
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Judas ▁Is kari ote , ▁Jesus ▁saldu ▁zuena .
PRED:	Judas Iscariot , Judas Iscariot , who was the Messiah .
GOLD:	Judas Iscariot ( who later betrayed him ) .

ID:	2931
INPUT:	▁Tx ik itu ▁ditut ▁zurekin gizon ▁eta ▁emakumeak , tx ik itu ▁zahar ▁eta ▁gazteak , tx ik itu ▁mutil ▁eta ▁nesk ak .
PRED:	My young women , young women , and old men , old , old , and young young men .
GOLD:	With you I will shatter men and women , old people and children , young men and young women .

ID:	2932
INPUT:	▁bizi ▁dena ; ▁hilik ▁egon ▁nintzen , ▁baina ▁orain ▁bizirik ▁nago ▁menderen ▁mendetan , ▁eta ▁neure ▁menpe ▁ditut ▁Herio a ▁eta ▁Hildakoen ▁Ego itza .
PRED:	I have died , but now I have died , but now I am the one who lives forever and ever .
GOLD:	I am the living one . I died , but look — I am alive forever and ever ! And I hold the keys of death and the grave .

ID:	2933
INPUT:	▁k ri min alak ▁bezala ▁jen da urrean ▁zigortzen ;
PRED:	A person who builds a mocker , but he does not answer them .
GOLD:	He strikes them down because they are wicked , doing it openly for all to see .

ID:	2934
INPUT:	▁Ego era ▁horretan , ▁Ezekias ▁erregeak ▁eta ▁Am o tzen ▁seme ▁Isaias ▁profetak ▁otoitz ▁egin ▁zuten , ▁zerura ▁dei tuz .
PRED:	After King Hezekiah 's reign , the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz returned to heaven and prayed to him .
GOLD:	Then King Hezekiah and the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz cried out in prayer to God in heaven .

ID:	2935
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁haiek :— Moises ek , ▁di b ortzi o - agiria ▁idatzi ▁eta ▁emaztea ▁uzteko ▁baimena ▁eman ▁zigun .
PRED:	Then Moses said to Moses , “ This is what the Lord has commanded us to take it . ”
GOLD:	“ Well , he permitted it , ” they replied . “ He said a man can give his wife a written notice of divorce and send her away . ”

ID:	2936
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁berriro ▁galdetzen ▁dut : ▁Israelek ▁ez ▁ote ▁du , ▁bada , ▁ulertu ? ▁Lehenengo , ▁hona ▁Moisesek ▁dioena : ▁Herri ▁ez ▁den ▁batekin ▁min duko ▁zaituztet , ▁nazio ▁ergel ▁baten ▁bidez ▁haser raraziko .
PRED:	“ How can I understand this ? ” says the Lord. “ What do you understand this , ‘ This is what the Lord says : I will do with you ? '
GOLD:	But I ask , did the people of Israel really understand ? Yes , they did , for even in the time of Moses , God said , “ I will rouse your jealousy through people who are not even a nation.I will provoke your anger through the foolish Gentiles . ”

ID:	2937
INPUT:	▁Jaunaren , ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoaren , ▁esan aben etan ▁betetzen ▁baduzue , urruti ▁daudenak ▁ere ▁etorriko ▁dira Jaunaren ▁tenplua ▁jaso tzera ». Orduan ▁jakingo ▁duzue Jaun ▁ahalguztidunak bi dali ▁nauela ▁zuengana .
PRED:	And if you obey the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , you will know that the Lord of Heaven 's Armies will come from the place of the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . ”
GOLD:	People will come from distant lands to rebuild the Temple of the Lord . And when this happens , you will know that my messages have been from the Lord of Heaven 's Armies . All this will happen if you carefully obey what the Lord your God says .

ID:	2938
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Judako ▁buruzagiek ▁esango ▁dute ▁beren ▁baitan : ▁“ B eren ▁Jainko ▁Jaun ▁ahalguztidun ari ▁esker , ▁indar ▁berriak ▁hartu ▁dituzte ▁Jerusalemgo ▁bizilagunek ”.
PRED:	Then the leaders of Judah will say , ‘ This is what the Sovereign Lord of Heaven 's Armies , the people of Judah have abandoned the people of Judah . '
GOLD:	And the clans of Judah will say to themselves , ‘ The people of Jerusalem have found strength in the Lord of Heaven 's Armies , their God . '

ID:	2939
INPUT:	▁I dol oak ▁baztertu
PRED:	Teaching about Money and Possessions
GOLD:	A Warning against Idolatry

ID:	2940
INPUT:	▁Or po tik ▁buru ra , ez ▁duzue ▁atal ▁bat ▁ere ▁os orik : dena ▁zauri , ▁u bel dura ▁eta ▁ebaki ▁bizi , bat ere ▁garbitu , ▁lotu eta ▁olioz ▁goz atu ▁gabe .
PRED:	You must not be cut off from a single piece of wood , and it must be covered with no defects .
GOLD:	You are battered from head to foot — covered with bruises , welts , and infected wounds — without any soothing ointments or bandages .

ID:	2941
INPUT:	▁Gero , ▁Zil pak , ▁Le aren ▁neskam eak , ▁bigarren ▁seme ▁bat ▁eman ▁zion ▁Jakobi .
PRED:	Then she gave him a servant of silver , a son of Jacob , to Jacob .
GOLD:	Then Zilpah gave Jacob a second son .

ID:	2942
INPUT:	▁santu tasun ▁eta ▁justiziaz , beraren ▁aurrean ge ure ▁bizitza ▁guztian .
PRED:	For the Lord is holy , and let them live in the presence of your life .
GOLD:	in holiness and righteousnessfor as long as we live .

ID:	2943
INPUT:	▁G ol go ta ▁izeneko ▁tokira ▁iritsi ▁zirenean ▁ ( G ol go tak ▁« B u rez ur » ▁esan ▁nahi ▁du ) ,
PRED:	When they arrived at the place where they had said , “ He is going , ”
GOLD:	And they went out to a place called Golgotha ( which means “ Place of the Skull ” ) .

ID:	2944
INPUT:	▁bila tzeko ▁garaia eta ▁gal tzeko ▁garaia , gor de tzeko ▁garaia eta ▁botatzeko ▁garaia ,
PRED:	A time to get a time for a time to attack the time , and a time to attack it .
GOLD:	A time to search and a time to quit searching.A time to keep and a time to throw away .

ID:	2945
INPUT:	▁Horregatik , ▁behar rezko ▁da ▁agintari en ▁menpeko ▁izatea , ▁baina ▁zigor raren ▁beldurrez ▁ez ▁ezik , ▁baita ▁kontzi entzi aren ▁eraginez ▁ere .
PRED:	That is why the leaders of the church should be afraid , but it would not be a clear conscience .
GOLD:	So you must submit to them , not only to avoid punishment , but also to keep a clear conscience .

ID:	2946
INPUT:	▁Zu ta be en ▁gaineko ▁h abe ▁haiek ▁berrogeita ▁bost ▁ziren , ▁lerro ▁bakoitzean ▁hamabost , ▁eta ▁h abe ▁haien ▁gain aldean ▁zedro zko ▁ohol tza .
PRED:	The capitals on the south side of the inner courtyard were also 75 feet long , six branches , and the cedar beams were also 75 feet wide .
GOLD:	The hall had a cedar roof . Above the beams on the pillars were forty-five side rooms , arranged in three tiers of fifteen each .

ID:	2947
INPUT:	▁« M undu ra ▁jaio tako ▁lehen ▁gizakia ▁ote ▁zara , ▁bada ? M u in oak ▁baino ▁lehen ▁sortu ▁ote ▁zintuzten ?
PRED:	“ Have you been born to the first of the earth ? Are you born before you born ?
GOLD:	“ Were you the first person ever born ? Were you born before the hills were made ?

ID:	2948
INPUT:	▁« Israeldar rak , ▁Ben e - J aak ango ▁putzu etatik ▁abia turik , ▁M os er ara ▁iritsi ▁ziren . ▁Han ▁hil ▁zen ▁Aaron , ▁eta ▁bertan ▁ehortzi ▁zuten . ▁Aaronen ▁ordez , ▁beraren ▁seme ▁Eleazar ▁izan ▁zen ▁hurrengo ▁apaiz .
PRED:	“ The Israelites left the land and set up camp at the well of the cistern . They buried him in the well of Aaron and his sons , Eleazar the priest , and Ithamar son of Aaron .
GOLD:	( The people of Israel set out from the wells of the people of Jaakan and traveled to Moserah , where Aaron died and was buried . His son Eleazar ministered as high priest in his place .

ID:	2949
INPUT:	▁Aur rez ▁aurre ▁hitz ▁egin ▁zizuen ▁Jaunak ▁mendian , ▁suaren ▁erditik .
PRED:	This is what the Lord had commanded Moses to prophesy from the mountain of fire .
GOLD:	At the mountain the Lord spoke to you face to face from the heart of the fire .

ID:	2950
INPUT:	▁Gau z ok ▁esan ▁zituenean , ▁askok ▁sinetsi ▁zuten ▁harengan .
PRED:	Many others believed in the night when they believed in him .
GOLD:	Then many who heard him say these things believed in him .

ID:	2951
INPUT:	▁Zuek , ▁ordea , ▁egon ▁adi i rakas pen ari ▁eta ▁aitor pen ari ! Hau etara ▁jotzen ▁ez ▁duenak ez ▁du ▁egunsenti rik ▁ikusiko .
PRED:	But you listen to what the Lord says : “ This is what the Lord says : If you ca n't see it , you will never see the morning . ”
GOLD:	Look to God 's instructions and teachings ! People who contradict his word are completely in the dark .

ID:	2952
INPUT:	▁Beldur - ikaraz ▁gelditu ▁ziren , ▁elkarri ▁esanez : ▁« Nor ▁ote ▁dugu ▁hau , ▁esana ▁egiten ▁baiti ote ▁haizeak ▁eta ▁aintzi rak ▁ere ?»
PRED:	The disciples were terrified and said to each other , “ Who is this ? ”
GOLD:	The disciples were absolutely terrified . “ Who is this man ? ” they asked each other . “ Even the wind and waves obey him ! ”

ID:	2953
INPUT:	▁Handik ▁atera ▁zenean , ▁gupidarik ▁gabe ▁eraso ▁zioten ▁lege - maisuek ▁eta ▁fariseuek , ▁handik ▁eta ▁hemendik ▁galdezka ,
PRED:	But when the Pharisees left him without mercy , the Pharisees , the Pharisees , and the Pharisees asked him ,
GOLD:	As Jesus was leaving , the teachers of religious law and the Pharisees became hostile and tried to provoke him with many questions .

ID:	2954
INPUT:	▁J ustizia ▁eta ▁zuzenbidea ▁maite ▁ditu ; Jaunaren ▁maitasun az ▁betea ▁da ▁lurra .
PRED:	The Lord love endures forever .
GOLD:	He loves whatever is just and good ; the unfailing love of the Lord fills the earth .

ID:	2955
INPUT:	▁Zorobabel , ▁Josue , ▁Neh em ias , ▁Ser aias , ▁R e el aias , ▁Mardokeo , ▁Bil xan , ▁M is par , ▁Bi g bai , ▁Reh um ▁eta ▁Ba ana ▁zituzten ▁gidari . Hona ▁israeldar ▁hauen ▁zerrenda :
PRED:	Zerubbabel son of Jeshua , Jeshua , Seraiah , Seraiah , Malkijah , Akkub ,
GOLD:	Their leaders were Zerubbabel , Jeshua , Nehemiah , Seraiah , Reelaiah , Mordecai , Bilshan , Mispar , Bigvai , Rehum , and Baanah.This is the number of the men of Israel who returned from exile :

ID:	2956
INPUT:	▁L eiala ▁ez ▁den az ▁arrisku aldi etan ▁fi da tzea , hor tz ▁hautsi az ▁j atea ▁eta ▁zango ▁bihurri tu az ▁ibil tzea ▁bezala ▁da .
PRED:	He did n't trust in his kindness with kindness , as a result , he was filled with sorrow and hung on each side .
GOLD:	Putting confidence in an unreliable person in times of troubleis like chewing with a broken tooth or walking on a lame foot .

ID:	2957
INPUT:	▁nire ▁izenean ▁egiten ▁baduzu ▁zin egi az , ▁justiziaz ▁eta ▁zuzenbidez , b edein katuko ▁ditut ▁beste ▁herriak ▁ere , eta ▁nitaz ▁harro ▁agertuko ▁dira ».
PRED:	If you listen to me , do what is right and right , I will take delight in the name of the Lord , and they will become proud . ”
GOLD:	Then when you swear by my name , saying , ‘ As surely as the Lord lives , 'you could do sowith truth , justice , and righteousness.Then you would be a blessing to the nations of the world , and all people would come and praise my name . ”

ID:	2958
INPUT:	▁Bide gabekeria ▁horren ▁aurka ▁egin ▁dut ▁oihu , eta ▁inork ▁erantzun ▁ez ; lagun tza ▁eskatu , ▁eta ▁justiz i arik ▁ez .
PRED:	In fact , I cry out against him ; no one can tell you .
GOLD:	“ I cry out , ‘ Help ! ' but no one answers me.I protest , but there is no justice .

ID:	2959
INPUT:	▁Gainerako ek ▁Af ek ▁hirira ▁egin ▁zuten ▁ihes ; ▁baina ▁harresia ▁hogeita ▁zazpi ▁mila ▁gizon ▁haien ▁gainera ▁erori ▁zen . ▁Ben - Hada dek ▁berak ▁ere ▁hiri ▁har tara ▁egin ▁zuen ▁ihes ▁eta ▁gel az ▁gela ▁ezku tatzen ▁ibili ▁behar ▁izan ▁zuen .
PRED:	The rest of the city was captured , but the walls of the city was captured . So Ben-hadad 's troops fled to the town of Ben-hadad 's capital , and he fled to the wall .
GOLD:	The rest fled into the town of Aphek , but the wall fell on them and killed another 27,000 . Ben-hadad fled into the town and hid in a secret room .

ID:	2960
INPUT:	▁Mundu a ▁mundu ▁den etik , ▁berez ▁ikus ezina ▁dena , ▁hau ▁da , ▁Jainkoaren ▁betier eko ▁ahalmena ▁eta ▁jainko tasuna , ▁ikus garri ▁gertatzen ▁zaio ▁haren ▁egintzak ▁aztertzen ▁dituen ari . ▁Ez ▁dute , ▁beraz , ▁aitz aki arik ,
PRED:	For this world is from the world , and it is the power of God . It is the power of God , and it is written to do what he wants to do .
GOLD:	For ever since the world was created , people have seen the earth and sky . Through everything God made , they can clearly see his invisible qualities — his eternal power and divine nature . So they have no excuse for not knowing God .

ID:	2961
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁loturik , ▁beren ▁jantzi ▁eta ▁guzti , ▁p raka , ▁soingaineko ▁eta ▁buruko ekin , ▁lab eko ▁su ▁bizira ▁jaurti ▁zituzten .
PRED:	So he put his clothes in fine linen and put a robe on his head , and he threw it into a blazing furnace .
GOLD:	So they tied them up and threw them into the furnace , fully dressed in their pants , turbans , robes , and other garments .

ID:	2962
INPUT:	▁Salomonek ▁elkarketa - etxolaren ▁ondoan ▁zegoen ▁aldarera ▁igo ▁eta ▁mila ▁erre - opari ▁eskaini ▁zituen ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrean .
PRED:	Solomon offered burnt offering to the Tabernacle and presented burnt offerings to the Lord .
GOLD:	There in front of the Tabernacle , Solomon went up to the bronze altar in the Lord 's presence and sacrificed 1,000 burnt offerings on it .

ID:	2963
INPUT:	▁« Egin ▁luzatu ▁gabe ▁uzta ▁guztien ▁eta ▁ardo aren ▁eskaintza .« S agar atu ▁niri ▁zeuen ▁lehen - semea ,
PRED:	“ Do not produce wine for all the firstborn of all the firstborn males from your oldest son .
GOLD:	“ You must not dishonor God or curse any of your rulers .

ID:	2964
INPUT:	▁An ai az ▁bihotz - hun ki turik , ▁negar gur ak ▁eman ▁zion ▁eta , ▁pres aka ▁bere ▁gel ara ▁joan ez , ▁negar ▁egin ▁zuen .
PRED:	She became angry with his face , and he returned to weep for his room .
GOLD:	Then Joseph hurried from the room because he was overcome with emotion for his brother . He went into his private room , where he broke down and wept .

ID:	2965
INPUT:	▁Mar tak ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Bai , ▁Jauna , ▁sinesten ▁dut ▁zeu ▁zarela ▁Mesias , ▁Jainkoaren ▁Semea , ▁mundura ▁etor tzekoa ▁zena .
PRED:	“ Yes , ” Peter said , “ I believe that you are the Messiah , the Son of God , who is the Messiah . ”
GOLD:	“ Yes , Lord , ” she told him . “ I have always believed you are the Messiah , the Son of God , the one who has come into the world from God . ”

ID:	2966
INPUT:	▁Gu daros te ▁batek ▁inguratu rik ▁ere , ▁nire ▁bihotzak ▁ikar arik ▁ez ; nire ▁aurka ▁borrokan ▁has ita ▁ere , ▁nik ▁konfiantza ▁galtzen ▁ez .
PRED:	I am surrounded by a mighty army , and no one can fight against me .
GOLD:	Though a mighty army surrounds me , my heart will not be afraid.Even if I am attacked , I will remain confident .

ID:	2967
INPUT:	▁Erre bel atu ▁egin ▁g atzaiz kizu , ▁kontra ▁altxatu , eta ▁zuk ▁ez ▁diguzu ▁barkatu , ▁Jauna .
PRED:	You have sinned against you , O Lord , and you have not sinned against you .
GOLD:	“ We have sinned and rebelled , and you have not forgiven us .

ID:	2968
INPUT:	▁Er or ▁bedi ▁hilketa ▁honen ▁errua ▁Joaben ▁eta ▁beronen ▁etxeko en ▁gain ! ▁Izan ▁bedi ▁beti ▁Joaben ▁etxean ▁odol j ario dun ik , ▁legen dun ik , ▁em e - itx urako ▁gizon ik , ▁ezpataz ▁edota ▁goseak ▁hilko ▁denik !»
PRED:	May the murder of Joab and Joab and Joab and Joab and Joab be put in charge of Joab 's household and Joab 's household be put in charge of the blood of Joab and Joab 's household . ”
GOLD:	Joab and his family are the guilty ones . May the family of Joab be cursed in every generation with a man who has open sores or leprosy or who walks on crutches or dies by the sword or begs for food ! ”

ID:	2969
INPUT:	▁Hala ▁ere , ▁ez ▁diet ▁zuen ▁alab ei kon turik ▁eskatuko , em agaldu ▁bihurtu ▁direlako ; ezta ▁zuen ▁errain ei ▁ere , a dul terio gile ▁bihurtu ▁direlako . Apaiz ak ▁berak ▁bai to az em agaldu ekin , ten pl uko ▁emagaldu ekin elkar tzen ▁baitira sak rifizio ak ▁eskaintzeko . Eta ▁hala , ▁zentzu gabeko ▁herri ah on damen dira ▁doa .
PRED:	But I will not accept any of your daughters 's daughters , for they have sex with your own sons and daughters , for they have become a prostitute . And if you have acted with integrity , they will be humiliated and prostitute , they will be angry with him .
GOLD:	But why should I punish themfor their prostitution and adultery ? For your men are doing the same thing , sinning with whores and shrine prostitutes.O foolish people ! You refuse to understand , so you will be destroyed .

ID:	2970
INPUT:	▁Ju dar ekin ▁batera ▁Isak ar ▁eta ▁Zabulonen ▁leinuak ▁etxol atuko ▁dira . ▁Isak ar tarren ▁buruzagia ▁T zu arren ▁seme ▁Netan el ▁izango ▁da ,
PRED:	From the family of Zebulun and Zebulun , Issachar , Zebulun , and Issachar . They will be the leader of the family of Zebulun .
GOLD:	IssacharNethanel son of Zuar54,400

ID:	2971
INPUT:	▁Israel ▁haiz ez ▁manten tzen ▁da , h ego - haiz earen ▁ondoren ▁dabil egun ▁osoan . G ezur ra ▁gezur raren ▁gain , gogor keria ▁gogor keriaren ▁gain . Asiri arekin ▁ituna ▁egiten ▁du , Egipto rekin ▁sal eros ketan ▁dabil ».
PRED:	You are the people of Israel , but you are trying to kill the winds , but the people of Israel are doomed to get drunk with violence . They are doomed to bring disaster upon the people of Egypt . ”
GOLD:	Now the Lord is bringing charges against Judah.He is about to punish Jacob for all his deceitful ways , and pay him back for all he has done .

ID:	2972
INPUT:	▁beldur ▁nintzen , ▁eta ▁zure ▁tal en tua ▁lurrean ▁ezkutatu ▁nuen . ▁Hona ▁zeure ▁dirua !”
PRED:	I was afraid of your servant , and I was afraid of your money . ”
GOLD:	I was afraid I would lose your money , so I hid it in the earth . Look , here is your money back . '

ID:	2973
INPUT:	▁Er or tzen ▁ari ▁naiz ▁nahi gab ez ▁ahul durik : j aso ▁nazazu , ▁zeure ▁promes aren ▁arabera !
PRED:	I 'm not looking for the wicked , but I will not keep on your word .
GOLD:	I weep with sorrow ; encourage me by your word .

ID:	2974
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁gogoan ▁zeu ▁ere ▁esklabo ▁izan ▁zin ela ▁Egipton , ▁eta ▁Jaunak ▁zeure ▁Jainkoak ▁atera ▁zintu ela ▁handik ▁ahalmen ▁handiz ▁eta ▁esku ▁indar tsuz . ▁Horregatik ▁agindu ▁dizu ▁Jaunak ▁zeure ▁Jainkoak ▁atseden - eguna ▁gordetzeko .
PRED:	Remember that the Lord your God had sworn with a solemn oath in Egypt , and you brought you out of Egypt . That is why the Lord your God has commanded you .
GOLD:	Remember that you were once slaves in Egypt , but the Lord your God brought you out with his strong hand and powerful arm . That is why the Lord your God has commanded you to rest on the Sabbath day .

ID:	2975
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁al ▁dizue ▁n atu rak ▁berak ▁erakusten ▁gizaseme arentzat ▁lotsagarri ▁dela ▁ilea ▁luze ▁era ma tea ,
PRED:	Do n't you think you are a son of man , and you have put your hair on your head .
GOLD:	Is n't it obvious that it 's disgraceful for a man to have long hair ?

ID:	2976
INPUT:	▁purpura z ▁jantzi tako ▁gobernari ▁eta ▁agintariak , ▁gazte ▁bikain ▁eta ▁zaldun ▁treb eak .
PRED:	He clothed with blue , purple , and scarlet , and scarlet thread .
GOLD:	They were all attractive young men , captains and commanders dressed in handsome blue , charioteers driving their horses .

ID:	2977
INPUT:	▁Zuk ▁egin ▁beharreko ▁ohar pen aren ▁hel burua ▁hauxe ▁da : ▁bihotz ▁garbi tik , ▁kontzi entzia ▁on etik ▁eta ▁itx urak eri arik ▁gabeko ▁sinesmen etik ▁datorren ▁maitasuna ▁indar tzea .
PRED:	But this is the same way to be respected by those who do good things . Instead , you have no pleasure in your faith , and you have no faith in faith .
GOLD:	The purpose of my instruction is that all believers would be filled with love that comes from a pure heart , a clear conscience , and genuine faith .

ID:	2978
INPUT:	▁Gaiztoak ▁bere ▁gaiztakeri an ▁egiten ▁du ▁estropezu , zintz oak ▁bere ▁pres tu tasunean ▁du ▁konfiantza .
PRED:	The wicked care for their wicked , but the godly are godly .
GOLD:	The wicked are crushed by disaster , but the godly have a refuge when they die .

ID:	2979
INPUT:	▁Efraimen ▁ikus ezina ▁galdu ▁egingo ▁daeta ▁Judaren ▁etsai goa ▁amaitu . E fraim ek ▁ez ▁du ▁Judaren tzatik us ezin ik ▁izango , ezta ▁Judak ▁ere E fra imen tzat ▁etsai go rik .
PRED:	The people of Ephraim will be cut off from Ephraim , and Israel will not be able to run from Judah . The Lord will not be able to defeat them .
GOLD:	Then at last the jealousy between Israel and Judah will end.They will not be rivals anymore .

ID:	2980
INPUT:	▁Moabeko ▁lautadan , ▁Jordan ▁ondoan ▁etxol atu ▁ziren , ▁Bet - J ex im o tetik ▁Abel - X i tim ▁bitartean .
PRED:	The people of Moab were camped at the plains of Moab beside the Jordan River .
GOLD:	Along the Jordan River they camped from Beth-jeshimoth as far as the meadows of Acacia on the plains of Moab .

ID:	2981
INPUT:	▁Jendeak , ▁hala ▁ere , ▁birrin du ▁beharreko ak ▁ziren ▁harrapakin etatik ▁ardi ▁eta ▁idi rik ▁hober enak ▁hartu ▁ditu ▁Jaunari , ▁zure ▁Jainkoari , ▁Gilgal en ▁eskaintzeko .
PRED:	But the people of Israel began to minister in the presence of the Lord your God . They took care of your flocks and herds and goats to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Then my troops brought in the best of the sheep , goats , cattle , and plunder to sacrifice to the Lord your God in Gilgal . ”

ID:	2982
INPUT:	▁Erregeak , ▁hirugarren ez , ▁beste ▁buruzagi ▁bat ▁bidali ▁zuen , ▁berrogeita ▁hamar ▁gizonekin . ▁Hirugarren ▁buruzagi ▁hau ▁ere ▁igo ▁zen ▁Eliasen gana ; ▁baina , ▁heldu ▁zenean , ▁belaun ik atu ▁egin ▁zen ▁haren ▁aitzinean ▁eta ▁honela ▁erregutu ▁zion :— Jainkoaren ▁gizon , ▁utz ▁gaitzazu ▁bizirik , ▁bai ▁ni , ▁bai ▁zeure ▁berrogeita ▁hamar ▁zerbitzariok .
PRED:	The king sent ten men to take one of the captain of the guard , and he went to the captain of the guard , and he went to meet him . He said , “ Please let us go and leave him alone . ”
GOLD:	Once more the king sent a third captain with fifty men . But this time the captain went up the hill and fell to his knees before Elijah . He pleaded with him , “ O man of God , please spare my life and the lives of these , your fifty servants .

ID:	2983
INPUT:	▁« Aur rerantzean ▁ez ▁duzu eguz ki rik ▁beharko ▁eguna ▁argi tzeko , ezta ▁ilargi - di sti r arik ▁ere ▁gauez , ni , ▁Jauna , ▁izango ▁bainau zuz eure ▁argi ▁betiko , ni , ▁zeure ▁Jainkoa , ▁distira .
PRED:	“ The sun will be dark , and the moon , and the moon , and the moon , and the moon , and the moon , and the Lord , have spoken !
GOLD:	“ No longer will you need the sun to shine by day , nor the moon to give its light by night , for the Lord your God will be your everlasting light , and your God will be your glory .

ID:	2984
INPUT:	▁Samari aren ▁hondamendia ▁berriro ▁aipatu
PRED:	The Coming of Samaria
GOLD:	Assyria Invades Judah

ID:	2985
INPUT:	▁P laz an ▁eserita , ▁marm ar ka ▁ari ▁zaizkit , moz kor rek ▁ko pl ak ▁ateratzen ▁dizki date .
PRED:	They complain about me , “ My dear friends are filled with contempt .
GOLD:	But I keep praying to you , Lord , hoping this time you will show me favor.In your unfailing love , O God , answer my prayer with your sure salvation .

ID:	2986
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Ekron era ▁igorri ▁zuten ▁Jainkoaren ▁kutxa . ▁Heldu ▁zenean , ▁Ekron go ▁jendeak ▁esan ▁zuen ▁oihuka : ▁« Gu ▁eta ▁gure ▁herria ▁hil ▁gai tzan ▁ekarri ▁digu te ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoaren ▁kutxa !»
PRED:	When the Ark of the Covenant returned to Ekron , the people of Ekron , they shouted , “ We have brought the Ark of the God of Israel to kill us ! ”
GOLD:	So they sent the Ark of God to the town of Ekron , but when the people of Ekron saw it coming they cried out , “ They are bringing the Ark of the God of Israel here to kill us , too ! ”

ID:	2987
INPUT:	▁L eak ▁esan ▁zuen : ▁« Hau ▁zoria !» ▁Eta ▁Gad ▁eman ▁zion ▁izen .
PRED:	Then he said to Gad , “ This is what the Lord says : ”
GOLD:	Leah named him Gad , for she said , “ How fortunate I am ! ”

ID:	2988
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁ez etz ▁ikusten ▁badu , ▁bestea ▁oraindik ▁urruti ▁dela , ▁mandatariak ▁bidaliko ▁dizkio ▁bakea ▁eskatuz .
PRED:	And if you see that one can not be able to do this , you will receive peace with him .
GOLD:	And if he ca n't , he will send a delegation to discuss terms of peace while the enemy is still far away .

ID:	2989
INPUT:	▁Handik ▁ere ▁abiatu , ▁eta ▁Arnon ▁erre kaz ▁beste ▁aldean ▁etxol atu ▁ziren ; ▁Arnon ▁erre kak , ▁amortarren ▁lurraldean ▁sortu ▁ondoren , ▁basamor tua ▁zehar katzen ▁du ▁eta ▁moab darren ▁eta ▁amortarren ▁lurralde en ▁muga ▁mar katzen .
PRED:	From the tribe of Levi went to the edge of the Arnon Gorge to the Arnon Gorge ( which is the Arnon Gorge ) and the Arnon Gorge to the land of the Amorites , the Amorites , the Amorites , and the land of the Amorites .
GOLD:	Then they moved out and camped on the far side of the Arnon River , in the wilderness adjacent to the territory of the Amorites . The Arnon is the boundary line between the Moabites and the Amorites .

ID:	2990
INPUT:	▁Nire gatik ▁erabiliko ▁zaituztete ▁horrela , ▁bidali ▁nauena ▁ezagutzen ▁ez ▁dutelako .
PRED:	Yes , you have sent me to be saved , and they do n't know it .
GOLD:	They will do all this to you because of me , for they have rejected the one who sent me .

ID:	2991
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunak ▁Jeremiasi ▁hitz ▁egin ▁zion
PRED:	Then the Lord gave Jeremiah this message to Jeremiah :
GOLD:	Then the Lord gave this message to Jeremiah :

ID:	2992
INPUT:	▁harri ▁hutsez ▁eraikiko ▁duzue ▁aldarea . ▁Ondoren , ▁erre - opariak ▁eskainiko ▁dizkio zue ▁bertan ▁Jaunari ▁zeuen ▁Jainkoari ;
PRED:	Then you must offer burnt offerings to the Lord your God . You must offer it to the Lord your God .
GOLD:	Build the altar of uncut stones , and use it to offer burnt offerings to the Lord your God .

ID:	2993
INPUT:	▁« On dasun ez ▁beteko ▁zaituzte ▁Jaunak : ▁eman kor ▁egingo ▁zaituzte , ▁bai ▁zeuek , ▁bai ▁zuen ▁abere ▁eta ▁lurrak , ▁Jaunak ▁arbasoei ▁zin ▁eginez ▁zuei ▁emango ▁zizu ela ▁aginduriko ▁lurraldean .
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : You will multiply your livestock and your livestock and your livestock , and the land the Lord swore to give you .
GOLD:	“ The Lord will give you prosperity in the land he swore to your ancestors to give you , blessing you with many children , numerous livestock , and abundant crops .

ID:	2994
INPUT:	▁Bad akigu ▁Kristo , ▁behin ▁hildakoen ▁artetik ▁piz tuz ▁gero , ▁ez ▁dela ▁berriro ▁hilko : ▁herio ak ▁ez ▁du ▁harengan ▁agin terik ;
PRED:	We know that Christ is raised from the dead , and he will never die again . He will never die in him .
GOLD:	We are sure of this because Christ was raised from the dead , and he will never die again . Death no longer has any power over him .

ID:	2995
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁ziren ▁beren ▁arm ei ▁esker ▁nagusitu ▁lurraldeaz , ez ▁zuten ▁beren ▁indar rari ▁esker ▁lortu ▁garaipena , zure ▁ahalmen ari ▁eta ▁indar rari eta ▁pres entzia ▁argi tsu ari ▁esker ▁baizik , ▁maite ▁zen itu elako .
PRED:	Do not let the armies of their land , who led their strength to the land of the Lord , who loved you , and he loved you as strong as strong as you loved .
GOLD:	You are my King and my God.You command victories for Israel .

ID:	2996
INPUT:	▁Har antz ago , ▁Az b uk en ▁seme ▁eta ▁Bet - T zur reko ▁barru ti ▁erdi aren ▁buru ▁zen ▁Neh em iasek ▁egin ▁zuen ▁lan , ▁Daviden ▁hilobi en ▁aurrean , ▁ur ma el eraino ▁eta ▁gudari en ▁ku arte ler aino .
PRED:	This was the homeland allocated to the son of Nehemiah son of Bicri , repaired the wall of David 's reign , as well as far as the tower of David .
GOLD:	Next to him was Nehemiah son of Azbuk , the leader of half the district of Beth-zur . He rebuilt the wall from a place across from the tombs of David 's family as far as the water reservoir and the House of the Warriors .

ID:	2997
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁zerbitzu ari ▁dagokion ean , ▁Kristorengan ▁jartzen ▁dut ▁harro tzeko ▁neure ▁bidea ;
PRED:	For in Christ is the way of Christ , and I have the way of Christ .
GOLD:	So I have reason to be enthusiastic about all Christ Jesus has done through me in my service to God .

ID:	2998
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁mandatu ▁hau ▁bidali ▁zion ▁erregeak ▁R ah abi :— I rten arazi ▁etxean ▁sartu ▁zaiz kizun ▁gizon ▁horiek , ▁gure ▁lurraldea ▁iker tzera ▁etorri ▁baitira .
PRED:	Then the king sent messengers to the king , “ Go into the house where you have arrived . ”
GOLD:	So the king of Jericho sent orders to Rahab : “ Bring out the men who have come into your house , for they have come here to spy out the whole land . ”

ID:	2999
INPUT:	▁Hori ▁da ▁agindu rik ▁nagusi ena ▁eta ▁lehena .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : The First and the Last Supper .
GOLD:	This is the first and greatest commandment .

ID:	3000
INPUT:	▁« Izan ▁al ▁zara ▁el ur - bil tegi etan ? Ikusi ▁al ▁dituzu ▁kazkab ar - gor d ail uak ?
PRED:	“ Have you seen with snow ? Have you seen the hail like lightning ?
GOLD:	“ Have you visited the storehouses of the snowor seen the storehouses of hail ?

ID:	3001
INPUT:	▁abere entzat ▁belarra ▁zelai etan ▁eta ▁zeuen tzat ▁ase tzeko ▁adina ▁janari ▁emango ▁dizue .
PRED:	You will feed your flocks and feed you in the fields and feed you in the fields .
GOLD:	He will give you lush pastureland for your livestock , and you yourselves will have all you want to eat .

ID:	3002
INPUT:	▁Pek ah iasen ▁gainerako ▁jarduerak ▁eta ▁egintza ▁guztiak ▁« Israelgo ▁Erregeen ▁Kronika » ▁liburuan ▁daude ▁idatziak .
PRED:	The rest of the events in Pekah 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .
GOLD:	The rest of the events in Pekahiah 's reign and everything he did are recorded in The Book of the History of the Kings of Israel .

ID:	3003
INPUT:	▁Hartu ▁apaiz - jantz iak ▁eta ▁jantzi ▁Aaroni ▁ tun ika , ▁man tua , ▁efo da ▁eta ▁bul arrekoa , ▁eta ▁lotu ▁efo da ▁x in go laz ;
PRED:	He took Aaron 's clothing and fine linen clothing , and blue , and fine linen cloth , and fine linen cloth .
GOLD:	Dress Aaron in his priestly garments — the tunic , the robe worn with the ephod , the ephod itself , and the chestpiece . Then wrap the decorative sash of the ephod around him .

ID:	3004
INPUT:	▁Davidek , ▁orduan , ▁Abi at arri : ▁« B anek ien , ▁bai , ▁egun ▁hartan ▁han ▁gertatu ▁zen ▁D o eg ▁edom darra ▁ez ▁zela ▁geldituko ▁Sauli ▁berri ▁eman ▁gabe . ▁Neu ▁nauzu ▁aitaren ▁senitarteko ▁guztien ▁heriotzaren ▁errudun .
PRED:	Then David said to Saul , “ This is what the Lord says : The city is still waiting for me , and it was not guilty of my father 's family . I am not guilty of all his father 's family .
GOLD:	David exclaimed , “ I knew it ! When I saw Doeg the Edomite there that day , I knew he was sure to tell Saul . Now I have caused the death of all your father 's family .

ID:	3005
INPUT:	▁Hau ▁diotsuet ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak : ▁J akizue ▁ongi , ▁ez ▁dut ▁honela ▁zuengatik ▁jokatzen . ▁Israeldar rok , ▁zeuek ▁egon ▁behar ▁duzue ▁lotsaz ▁gorri ▁zeuen ▁jokabide agatik .
PRED:	“ This is what the Sovereign Lord says : You are not faithful to you , O Israel , for you are my God .
GOLD:	But remember , says the Sovereign Lord , I am not doing this because you deserve it . O my people of Israel , you should be utterly ashamed of all you have done !

ID:	3006
INPUT:	▁Jerusalemgo ▁ekialdean ▁eta ▁Olia men diko ▁hegoaldera ▁zeuden ▁kultu - lekuak ▁ere ▁profanatu ▁zituen ▁Josiasek ; ▁kultu - leku ▁haiek ▁Israelgo ▁errege ▁Salomonek ▁eraik iak ▁ziren ▁si don darren ▁jainko s a ▁zen ▁As tar teren ▁irudi ▁higuingarri ari , ▁moab darren ▁jainko ▁zen ▁K em o xen ▁irudi ▁naz k agarri ari ▁eta ▁amondarren ▁jainko ▁zen ▁Mil ko men ▁irudi ▁n ar d agarri ari ▁kultu ▁emateko .
PRED:	Josiah also built pagan shrines at the east of Jerusalem to worship at the Temple of the Lord , the God of Israel , had built pagan shrines and worshiped the gods of Moab , the god of Moab , the god of Moab , and the god of Moab .
GOLD:	The king also desecrated the pagan shrines east of Jerusalem , to the south of the Mount of Corruption , where King Solomon of Israel had built shrines for Ashtoreth , the detestable goddess of the Sidonians ; and for Chemosh , the detestable god of the Moabites ; and for Molech , the vile god of the Ammonites .

ID:	3007
INPUT:	▁Sal batu ak ▁gaude , ▁bai , ▁baina ▁itxaropen etan ▁bakarrik . ▁Eta ▁itxaro ▁dugun a ▁begien ▁aurrean ▁bag en u , ▁hori ▁ez ▁litzateke ▁itxaropena ▁izango , ▁inork ▁ez ▁baitu ▁itx ar oten ▁begien ▁aurrean ▁duena .
PRED:	And now we are ready , but we can not be hope for ourselves . And if we have no hope in it , we will have no hope in it .
GOLD:	We were given this hope when we were saved . ( If we already have something , we do n't need to hope for it .

ID:	3008
INPUT:	▁Are ▁gehiago , ▁urrutiko ▁gizon ei ▁mezulariak ▁bidali ▁zizkieten , ▁etortzeko ▁esanez ; ▁eta ▁haiek ▁etorri ▁ondoren , ▁bain atu , ▁begiak ▁p in tatu ▁eta ▁beren ▁burua ▁bitx iz ▁apain du ▁zuten .
PRED:	The next morning they sent messengers to the city , and they said , “ I have seen my eyes and beautiful clothing . ”
GOLD:	“ You sisters sent messengers to distant lands to get men . Then when they arrived , you bathed yourselves , painted your eyelids , and put on your finest jewels for them .

ID:	3009
INPUT:	▁bosgarren a ▁sar don iz ez , ▁seigarren a ▁kor n al in az , ▁zazpigarren a ▁k ri so li toz , ▁zortzi garren a ▁ber il oz , ▁bederatzi garren a ▁to p azio z , ▁hamargarren a ▁a ga taz , ▁ham aik ag arrena ▁hi az in toz , ▁hamabi garren a ▁am at is taz .
PRED:	On the sixth day the sixth day of the sixth year , the seventh day of the second month , the seventh day of the second month , the second crop was set up to the second year of the second year , and the second year of the second month , the second month of the second month , the second month of the second month , the second month , the second month , the second year of the second month , the second month , the second month , the second month , the second month , the second year of the second month , the second month , the second year of the second year of the second month , the second month , the second month of the second month , the second , the second , the second month , the second month , the second month , the second month , the second , the second , the second month , the second , the second month , the second month , the second month , the second , the second , the second , the second month , the second month ,
GOLD:	the fifth onyx , the sixth carnelian , the seventh chrysolite , the eighth beryl , the ninth topaz , the tenth chrysoprase , the eleventh jacinth , the twelfth amethyst .

ID:	3010
INPUT:	▁Jeroboam ▁aldarean ▁intsentsua ▁erretzen ▁ari ▁zela , ▁Jainkoaren ▁gizon ▁bat ▁heldu ▁zen , ▁Jaunaren ▁aginduz , ▁Jud atik ▁Betel era .
PRED:	When Jeroboam arrived at the altar of God , he returned to the altar of the Lord ,
GOLD:	At the Lord 's command , a man of God from Judah went to Bethel , arriving there just as Jeroboam was approaching the altar to burn incense .

ID:	3011
INPUT:	▁Jauna , ▁ez ▁utzi ▁ni ! ▁Ene ▁Jainko , ▁ez ▁geldi ▁urruti !
PRED:	O Lord , do n't let me stay away from the wicked .
GOLD:	Come quickly to help me , O Lord my savior .

ID:	3012
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jaunak ▁hondatu ▁egin ▁zituen ▁etiopi arrak ▁Asaren ▁eta ▁Judako en ▁aitzinean , ▁eta ▁etiopi arrek ▁ihes ▁egin ▁zuten .
PRED:	Then the Lord destroyed the Ethiopians and killed King Asa of Judah and Judah .
GOLD:	Then Asa cried out to the Lord his God , “ O Lord , no one but you can help the powerless against the mighty ! Help us , O Lord our God , for we trust in you alone . It is in your name that we have come against this vast horde . O Lord , you are our God ; do not let mere men prevail against you ! ”

ID:	3013
INPUT:	▁Jainkoak ▁eman ▁diez azkizu laz er uko ▁ih intza eta ▁lurreko ▁guri tasuna , ogi - ardo tan ▁oparo tasuna .
PRED:	May God give you the dew of the earth , and the dew of the earth .
GOLD:	“ From the dew of heavenand the richness of the earth , may God always give you abundant harvests of grainand bountiful new wine .

ID:	3014
INPUT:	▁Judako ▁Asaren ▁erregealdiko ▁hogeita ▁zazpigarren ▁urtean ▁egin ▁zen ▁errege ▁Z im ri ; ▁zazpi ▁egunez ▁izan ▁zen ▁errege ▁Tir tzan . ▁Gu daros tea , ▁aldi ▁hartan , ▁filistearren ▁hiri ▁Gib et on ▁set iatzen ▁ari ▁zen .
PRED:	In the seventh year of King Asa 's reign , King Asa of Judah began to rule over the Philistines for seven days . The army of Tirzah , King Baasha of Israel was under siege .
GOLD:	Zimri began to rule over Israel in the twenty-seventh year of King Asa 's reign in Judah , but his reign in Tirzah lasted only seven days . The army of Israel was then attacking the Philistine town of Gibbethon .

ID:	3015
INPUT:	▁Hauxe ▁da ▁jakin ▁eta ▁ulertu ▁behar ▁duzuna : ▁Er beste tik ▁itzuli ▁eta ▁Jerusalem ▁berrera ik itzeko ▁mezua ▁agertu ▁zen etik ▁buruzagi ▁sagaratua ▁agertu ▁arte , ▁zazpi ▁urteko ▁zazpi ▁denboraldi ▁igaroko ▁dira ; ▁zazpi ▁urteko ▁hirurogeita ▁bi ▁denboraldi tan ▁erbeste tik ▁etorri ▁eta ▁hiria ▁eta ▁honen ▁kale ▁eta ▁harresiak ▁egingo ▁dituzte , ▁baina ▁garai ▁zai lak ▁izango ▁dira .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ The time has come from captivity and have been set apart for seven days , and you have appeared to the rest of the seven days . The people have been poured out for seven days and seven days , but the city will be poured out for seven days .
GOLD:	Now listen and understand ! Seven sets of seven plus sixty-two sets of seven will pass from the time the command is given to rebuild Jerusalem until a ruler — the Anointed One — comes . Jerusalem will be rebuilt with streets and strong defenses , despite the perilous times .

ID:	3016
INPUT:	▁Jainkoaren ▁ahalmen ▁bikaina
PRED:	God 's Chosen Servant
GOLD:	Future Conversion of Gentiles

ID:	3017
INPUT:	▁Al ko ho l - ed ari ei ▁buruzko ▁arauak
PRED:	Teaching about Money and Possessions
GOLD:	Instructions for Priestly Conduct

ID:	3018
INPUT:	▁kendu ▁egingo ▁diet ▁aho tiko dola ▁dari on ▁okela , h agin etatik ▁idolo ei ▁eskainitako ▁jaki ak ; hala ▁ere , geldi tuko ▁dira ▁batzuk ▁bizirik eta ▁neure - neure ak ▁izango ▁ditut , Judako ▁leinuak ▁bezala ; E k ron goak ▁jebus tarrak ▁bezal aizango ▁dira .
PRED:	I will cut off my meat from the mouths of my own meat , and they will cut off all their idols as a wild animal . They will be cut off like a remnant of Judah , and I will be cut off like a remnant of Judah .
GOLD:	I will grab the bloody meat from their mouthsand snatch the detestable sacrifices from their teeth.Then the surviving Philistines will worship our Godand become like a clan in Judah.The Philistines of Ekron will join my people , as the ancient Jebusites once did .

ID:	3019
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁engainatu ▁zeuen ▁buruak , ▁senide ▁maiteok !
PRED:	Dear brothers and sisters , why are you afraid of your brothers and sisters ?
GOLD:	So do n't be misled , my dear brothers and sisters .

ID:	3020
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁non bait ▁onartzen ▁ez ▁bazai tuzte te ▁eta ▁entzun ▁nahi ▁ez , ▁handik ▁alde ▁egitean , ▁astindu ▁zeuen ▁oinetako ▁hautsa , ▁beraien ▁kontrako ▁seinale tzat ».
PRED:	If you refuse to listen to your neighbor as if you refuse to listen , you must not listen to the dust . ”
GOLD:	But if any place refuses to welcome you or listen to you , shake its dust from your feet as you leave to show that you have abandoned those people to their fate . ”

ID:	3021
INPUT:	▁Goiz ean ▁etortzean , ▁kez k ati ▁aurkitu ▁zituen ▁Josek
PRED:	When Joseph arrived at the next morning , he found no one to find him .
GOLD:	When Joseph saw them the next morning , he noticed that they both looked upset .

ID:	3022
INPUT:	▁Tx akur ▁galdu ari ▁belarri etatik ▁hel tzea ▁bezal ain oren ▁eztabai d atan ▁sar tzea .
PRED:	The breath of a breath ; a breath of a breath is like a breath of a breath .
GOLD:	Interfering in someone else 's argumentis as foolish as yanking a dog 's ears .

ID:	3023
INPUT:	▁Jaunarengan , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoarengan , ▁ipini ▁zuen ▁bere ▁us tea . ▁Ez ▁zen ▁hura ▁bezalako ▁erre gerik ▁izan ▁Judan , ▁ez ▁aurretik , ▁ez ▁ondoren .
PRED:	He did not put in the presence of the Lord , the God of Israel , and he did not trust in Judah .
GOLD:	Hezekiah trusted in the Lord , the God of Israel . There was no one like him among all the kings of Judah , either before or after his time .

ID:	3024
INPUT:	▁Gau ez , ▁ohean , neure ▁biho tzeko ▁ku tun aren ▁bila ▁nen bil en . B ila ▁ibili , ▁bai , baina ▁aurkitu , ▁ez .
PRED:	My bed is in bed , and my strength laid me in my bed . I searched for him , but I did n't find him .
GOLD:	One night as I lay in bed , I yearned for my lover.I yearned for him , but he did not come .

ID:	3025
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁aukeratu ▁gabeak iz en datu ▁dituzte ▁errege , nire ▁on iri tz irik ▁gab eh au tatu ▁dituzte ▁buruzagiak . B eren ▁zilar ▁eta ▁urrez jainko - irudiak ▁egin ▁dituzte , beren ▁buruaren ▁gal bide .
PRED:	“ My people have chosen their king , and they have made their gold , gold , silver , gold , and gold , and gold , and silver , and gold .
GOLD:	The people have appointed kings without my consent , and princes without my approval.By making idols for themselves from their silver and gold , they have brought about their own destruction .

ID:	3026
INPUT:	▁Bad ak izkizu ▁aginduak : ▁Ez ▁egin ▁adul ter iorik , ▁ez ▁hil ▁inor , ▁ez ▁ostu , ▁ez ▁egin ▁gezurrezko ▁testig antz arik , ▁oho ratu ▁aita - amak .
PRED:	You know , ‘ You must not commit adultery . You must not commit adultery . You must not commit adultery . You must not commit yourselves . '
GOLD:	But to answer your question , you know the commandments : ‘ You must not commit adultery . You must not murder . You must not steal . You must not testify falsely . Honor your father and mother . ' ”

ID:	3027
INPUT:	▁Zigor ▁nazala ▁Jainko ▁zuzenak , ▁zentz arazi ▁Jainko ▁on berak , baina ▁ez ▁dezala ▁nire ▁buruak ▁gaiztoen ▁olioz ▁distira ▁egin . O toitz ean ▁iraungo ▁dut ▁nik , ▁haien ▁ohitura ▁oker ren ▁kontra .
PRED:	May God be kind to those who do good , but I will not forgive those who do evil , for I will not turn against you .
GOLD:	Let the godly strike me ! It will be a kindness ! If they correct me , it is soothing medicine.Do n't let me refuse it.But I pray constantlyagainst the wicked and their deeds .

ID:	3028
INPUT:	▁« L eg enak ▁jo tako ▁gizonak ▁arropak ▁urratu ak ▁eramango ▁ditu , ▁ilea ▁harro ▁eta ▁aurpegia ▁erdi ▁estalirik , ▁eta ▁“ K uts atua ! ▁K uts atua !” ▁oihu ▁eginez ▁ibiliko ▁da .
PRED:	“ The man must wash their clothes and bathe himself in mourning , and he will put his clothes in mourning . He will say , ‘ Your hair will be taken away . '
GOLD:	“ Those who suffer from a serious skin disease must tear their clothing and leave their hair uncombed . They must cover their mouth and call out , ‘ Unclean ! Unclean ! '

ID:	3029
INPUT:	▁Hiri ▁horiek ▁izango ▁dituzue ▁babesleku , ▁hildako a ▁mend eka tzeko ▁eskubidea ▁duenaren ▁eskuetatik ▁ihes ▁egin ▁ahal ▁izateko ; ▁horrela , ▁hil tzailea ▁ez ▁da ▁hilko , ▁elkartearen ▁aurrean ▁auzitara ▁agertu ▁baino ▁lehen .
PRED:	These are the foreigners who take refuge in the land of refuge to the foreigners who take refuge in the place of refuge to death . They will die before the one who kills another person 's death .
GOLD:	These cities will be places of protection from a dead person 's relatives who want to avenge the death . The slayer must not be put to death before being tried by the community .

ID:	3030
INPUT:	▁Erantzun ▁zien :— G isa ▁honetako ▁espirituak ▁botatzeko ▁bide ▁bakarra ▁otoitza ▁da .
PRED:	“ No , ” the Spirit replied . “ The spirit has the sick . ”
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ This kind can be cast out only by prayer . ”

ID:	3031
INPUT:	▁Izan ▁ere , ▁gauza ▁guztiak haren ▁menpean ▁jarri ▁ditu ▁Jainkoak . ▁Baina ▁Liburu ▁Santuak , ▁dena ▁haren ▁menpeko ▁dela ▁esatean , ▁ez ▁du , ▁noski , ▁hor ▁sartzen ▁Jainkoa ▁bera , ▁gauza ▁guztiak ▁menpean ▁jarri ▁dizki ona .
PRED:	For God has made everything he created , and he said , “ The Scriptures say that everything God wants . ”
GOLD:	For the Scriptures say , “ God has put all things under his authority. ” ( Of course , when it says “ all things are under his authority , ” that does not include God himself , who gave Christ his authority . )

ID:	3032
INPUT:	▁Hartu ▁dirua ▁ere ▁eta ▁itzuli ▁zeuen ▁zaku - mutur rean ▁ekarri takoa , ▁oker ren ▁bat ▁izan ▁da ▁eta .
PRED:	Put your money in your sacks , and take a bag of money .
GOLD:	Also take double the money that was put back in your sacks , as it was probably someone 's mistake .

ID:	3033
INPUT:	▁Beraz , ▁zuek , ▁gaiztoak ▁izanik , ▁seme - alabei ▁gauza ▁onak ▁ematen ▁baldin ▁badakizue , ▁zen batez ▁areago ▁ez ▁die ▁zeruko ▁zuen ▁Aitak ▁Espiritu ▁Santua ▁emango ▁eskatzen ▁dioten ei ?»
PRED:	So you know what is good to the children of the children of the children of heaven , and you know that the Holy Spirit is coming , who is the Holy Spirit of heaven ? ”
GOLD:	So if you sinful people know how to give good gifts to your children , how much more will your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him . ”

ID:	3034
INPUT:	▁Davidek ▁esan ▁zien ▁Joabi ▁eta ▁honekin ▁ziren ▁gizon ei : ▁« Ur ratu ▁zeuen ▁jantziak , ▁hartu ▁soinean ▁dolu - jantzia ▁eta ▁egizue ▁negar ▁Abn erren ▁aurrean ». Ondoren , ▁David ▁hil ku tx aren ▁atzetik ▁joan ▁zen .
PRED:	Then David said to Joab , “ Take charge of your clothes and wear burlap and mourning in mourning . ”
GOLD:	Then David said to Joab and all those who were with him , “ Tear your clothes and put on burlap . Mourn for Abner. ” And King David himself walked behind the procession to the grave .

ID:	3035
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁da ▁herrian ▁behartsu rik ▁faltako ; ▁horregatik ▁agintzen ▁dizuet ▁zeuen ▁herritar rekin , ▁zeuen ▁ardurapean ▁dituzuen ▁dohakabe ▁eta ▁behartsu ekin , ▁eskuzabal ▁izateko .
PRED:	“ That is why I command you to be poor and poor , for you have given the poor and poor .
GOLD:	There will always be some in the land who are poor . That is why I am commanding you to share freely with the poor and with other Israelites in need .

ID:	3036
INPUT:	▁Pedrok ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Ar ro tzen gandik . Jesusek , ▁orduan :— E tx ekoak ▁libre ▁daude , ▁beraz .
PRED:	Peter replied , “ Look , the free woman is free from the free woman . ”
GOLD:	“ They tax the people they have conquered , ” Peter replied. “ Well , then , ” Jesus said , “ the citizens are free !

ID:	3037
INPUT:	▁Nik ▁Jaunari , ▁ene ▁Jainkoari , ▁tenplua ▁eraiki ▁nahi ▁diot ▁eta ▁berari ▁sagaratu . ▁Han ▁intsentsua ▁eta ▁usain ki ▁goz oak ▁erreko ▁ditugu ▁Jaunaren ▁aurrean , ▁berari ▁eskainitako ▁ogiak ▁jarriko ▁ditugu ▁etengabe ▁eta ▁egunero , ▁goiz ▁eta ▁arrats alde ; ▁eta ▁larunba te tan , ▁ilberri - jai etan ▁eta ▁Jaunaren , ▁gure ▁Jainkoaren , ▁jai ▁nagusi etan ▁erre - opariak ▁eskainiko ▁ditugu . ▁Hala ▁eginen ▁da ▁beti ▁Israelen .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : We have built incense to the Lord our God , and we have built incense to him in the presence of the Lord our God , and he will burn incense on the Sabbath days of the Lord , and he will provide for all the days .
GOLD:	Solomon also sent this message to King Hiram at Tyre : “ Send me cedar logs as you did for my father , David , when he was building his palace .

ID:	3038
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁zaitez ▁des bidera ▁ez ▁eskuin , ▁ez ▁ezker retara ; ur rundu ▁oinak ▁gaiztakeri atik .
PRED:	Do n't turn away from evil ; do n't get away from your left hand .
GOLD:	Do n't get sidetracked ; keep your feet from following evil .

ID:	3039
INPUT:	▁Liburu ▁Santu etan ▁idatzirik ▁dagoen ▁guztia ▁Jainkoak ▁in s pi ratua ▁da ▁eta ▁irakasteko , ▁arraz oiak ▁emateko , ▁oker rak ▁zuzen tzeko ▁eta ▁bizi era ▁zuzen ean ▁hez teko ▁balia garria ;
PRED:	The Scriptures say , “ This is what the Scriptures say is true , and those who do good will be cursed .
GOLD:	All Scripture is inspired by God and is useful to teach us what is true and to make us realize what is wrong in our lives . It corrects us when we are wrong and teaches us to do what is right .

ID:	3040
INPUT:	▁Hitz ▁hauek ▁entzutean , ▁ehun tariak ▁gudalburu ari ▁jakinarazi ▁zion , ▁esanez :— Begira ▁ongi ▁zer ▁egiten ▁duzun ! ▁Gizon ▁hori ▁Erro mako ▁hiri tarra ▁duzu .
PRED:	When the commanding officer heard this , he said to the commander , “ Look , you are a Roman citizen . ”
GOLD:	When the officer heard this , he went to the commander and asked , “ What are you doing ? This man is a Roman citizen ! ”

ID:	3041
INPUT:	▁« Hiri ▁bat , ▁eraso ▁eta ▁konkis tatu ▁aurretik , ▁luzaroan ▁setiatu ▁behar ▁baduzue , ▁ez ▁dituzue ▁inguruko ▁arb olak ▁a izko raz ▁botako , ▁beraien ▁fruitu ez ▁janari tu ▁beharko ▁duzue ▁eta . ▁Gizaki ▁ote ▁dira , ▁bada , ▁arb olak , ▁setiatu tzat ▁hartzeko ?
PRED:	“ This is what the Lord says : Today you will be able to measure the siege of its siege and its walls , and you will be able to break the siege of its siege , and you will be able to break the siege of its walls .
GOLD:	“ When you are attacking a town and the war drags on , you must not cut down the trees with your axes . You may eat the fruit , but do not cut down the trees . Are the trees your enemies , that you should attack them ?

ID:	3042
INPUT:	▁O to itza
PRED:	Paul 's Prayer for Israel
GOLD:	Cyrus , the Lord 's Chosen One

ID:	3043
INPUT:	▁Zuhur rak , ▁hil etak ▁jotzen ▁ari ▁diren etx ean ▁du ▁bihotza ; ten tel ak , ▁berriz , jai etan ▁dagoen ▁etxean .
PRED:	The family of the wise will die , but the words of the wise are dead .
GOLD:	A wise person thinks a lot about death , while a fool thinks only about having a good time .

ID:	3044
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁haiek ▁belarriak ▁itxi ▁eta , ▁garrasika , ▁gainera ▁jaurti ▁zitzaizkion ▁Este ban i ▁denak ▁batean .
PRED:	Then the disciples grabbed Jesus and beat him in a rage .
GOLD:	Then they put their hands over their ears and began shouting . They rushed at him

ID:	3045
INPUT:	▁M ende b aldeko ▁muga ▁Mediterraneo ▁itsasoa ▁zen . Horra , ▁bada , ▁Judaren ▁leinuko ei ▁senitarteka ▁banatu riko ▁lurralde - zat iaren ▁mugak .
PRED:	The following boundary extended from the Mediterranean Sea to the clans of the tribe of Judah , the homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Judah .
GOLD:	The western boundary was the shoreline of the Mediterranean Sea.These are the boundaries for the clans of the tribe of Judah .

ID:	3046
INPUT:	▁Jaunari ▁atsegin ▁zaiona ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Amatziasek ; ▁ez , ▁ordea , ▁David ▁bere ▁arbasoak ▁bezain ▁zintzo . ▁Bere ▁aita ▁Joaxen ▁antzera ▁jokatu ▁zuen ▁Amatziasek ▁ere .
PRED:	But Amaziah did what was evil in the Lord 's sight , just as King Jehoash of his father , Amaziah , had done .
GOLD:	Amaziah did what was pleasing in the Lord 's sight , but not like his ancestor David . Instead , he followed the example of his father , Joash .

ID:	3047
INPUT:	▁eta ▁Josiasek ▁J eko n ias ▁eta ▁honen ▁anaiak , ▁israeldarrak ▁Babiloniara ▁erbesteratu ▁zituzten ▁garaian .
PRED:	Josiah 's brothers and his brothers were exiled to Babylon in the days of King Josiah 's reign .
GOLD:	Josiah was the father of Jehoiachin and his brothers ( born at the time of the exile to Babylon ) .

ID:	3048
INPUT:	▁Ezin ▁konta ▁ahala ▁dira ▁gure ▁erruak , baina ▁zuk ▁barkatu ▁egiten ▁dizki guzu ▁hob enak .
PRED:	Yes , we ca n't feel sorry for our sins .
GOLD:	What joy for those you choose to bring near , those who live in your holy courts.What festivities await usinside your holy Temple .

ID:	3049
INPUT:	▁Jesusek ▁galdetu ▁zien :— Zer ▁egingo ▁ote ▁die ▁nekaz ari ▁horiei ▁mahasti - j abeak ▁itzultzean ?
PRED:	Jesus asked the owner , “ What do you mean ? ”
GOLD:	“ When the owner of the vineyard returns , ” Jesus asked , “ what do you think he will do to those farmers ? ”

ID:	3050
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁gutiz iatu ▁lagun ▁hurkoaren ik ▁ezer : ▁ez ▁haren ▁em az terik , ▁ez ▁morroi - m ira ber ik , ▁ez ▁idi rik , ▁ez ▁asto rik , ▁eta ▁ez ▁beste ▁ezer txo ▁ere ».
PRED:	“ You must not steal neighbor 's neighbor 's neighbor 's neighbor . You must not steal sheep or female servants or female servants . ”
GOLD:	“ You must not covet your neighbor 's house . You must not covet your neighbor 's wife , male or female servant , ox or donkey , or anything else that belongs to your neighbor . ”

ID:	3051
INPUT:	▁Orain , ▁zeure ▁jokabide ▁zital ▁eta ▁higuingarri aren ▁ondoren ak ▁jasan ▁behar ▁dituzu . ▁Nik , ▁Jaunak , ▁esana .
PRED:	And now , your detestable sins are detestable to your detestable sins , says the Lord .
GOLD:	This is your punishment for all your lewdness and detestable sins , says the Lord .

ID:	3052
INPUT:	▁Gogo ratu ▁esan ▁nizu ena : ▁morroia ▁ez ▁da ▁nagusia ▁baino ▁handiago . ▁Ni ▁pertsegitu ▁banau te , ▁zuek ▁ere ▁pertsegi tuko ▁zaituztete ; ▁nire ▁mezua ▁nola ▁hartu , ▁hala ▁hartuko ▁dute ▁zuena ▁ere .
PRED:	I said to you , “ My master is greater than I am even greater than you , even though you beat me with me .
GOLD:	Do you remember what I told you ? ‘ A slave is not greater than the master . ' Since they persecuted me , naturally they will persecute you . And if they had listened to me , they would listen to you .

ID:	3053
INPUT:	▁Apaizek ▁nire ▁legea ▁hausten ▁dute ▁eta ▁nire ▁gauza ▁santuak ▁prof ana tzen ; ▁ez ▁dute ▁bereiz ten ▁sakratua ▁eta ▁profan oa , ▁ez ▁dute ▁ezagu taraz ten ▁garbi aren ▁eta ▁kutsatu aren ▁arteko ▁al dea ; ▁ez ▁zaie ▁axola ▁nire ▁larunbata ; ▁horrela , ▁profanatu ▁egiten ▁naute .
PRED:	The priests have made my law by the law of my law , and they have not defiled my Sabbath . They have defiled the Sabbath for doing wrong , for they have defiled my Sabbath days .
GOLD:	Your priests have violated my instructions and defiled my holy things . They make no distinction between what is holy and what is not . And they do not teach my people the difference between what is ceremonially clean and unclean . They disregard my Sabbath days so that I am dishonored among them .

ID:	3054
INPUT:	▁Samuelek ▁erantzun ▁zion :— Jauna ▁urrundu ▁baldin ▁baz aizu ▁eta ▁kontra ▁jarri , ▁zer tarako ▁egin ▁niri ▁kontsulta ?
PRED:	But Samuel replied , “ If you turn away from me and ask me what I have done ? ”
GOLD:	But Samuel replied , “ Why ask me , since the Lord has left you and has become your enemy ?

ID:	3055
INPUT:	▁Jan , ▁bada , ▁mes edez , ▁behar rez koa ▁baituzue ▁salbatzeko . ▁Ez ▁duzue ▁inork ▁buruko ▁ile ▁bat ▁ere ▁galduko ».
PRED:	So do n't be able to save me , for it is good to save me . ”
GOLD:	“ Please eat something now for your own good . For not a hair of your heads will perish . ”

ID:	3056
INPUT:	▁Era ▁berean , ▁zeruko ▁zuen ▁Aitak ▁ez ▁du ▁nahi ▁txiki ▁hau etako ▁inor ▁gal tzerik .
PRED:	In the same same way , the Father of heaven will not be able to do anything .
GOLD:	In the same way , it is not my heavenly Father 's will that even one of these little ones should perish .

ID:	3057
INPUT:	▁Zintzoa ▁eta ▁zuzena ▁salbatu ak , gaizto a ▁eta ▁mal tz urra ▁haien ▁ordez ▁gaitzets iak .
PRED:	The godly will be saved , and the wicked will be punished .
GOLD:	The wicked are punished in place of the godly , and traitors in place of the honest .

ID:	3058
INPUT:	▁Hemen ▁duzue , ▁bada , ▁zeuek ▁hautatu ▁eta ▁eskatu ▁duzuen ▁erregea . ▁Hara , ▁Jaunak ▁erregea ▁eman ▁dizue .
PRED:	And now , you have chosen to ask the king , ‘ The Lord has given you victory over you . '
GOLD:	All right , here is the king you have chosen . You asked for him , and the Lord has granted your request .

ID:	3059
INPUT:	▁Israelgo ▁zelai etan ▁dauden ▁ardi ▁edo ▁ahuntz etatik ▁berrehun eko ▁bat ▁eskainiko ▁duzue . ▁Hau ▁guztia ▁labore - oparitzat , ▁erre - oparitzat ▁nahiz ▁elkartasun - oparitzat ▁aurkeztuko ▁duzue ▁bekatuen ▁barkamen - ohikunea ▁egiteko . ▁Honela ▁diot ▁nik , ▁Jainko ▁Jaunak .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : Each male goat or female goat or female goat or female goat as a peace offering or a peace offering . This is what the Sovereign Lord says : “ This is what the Lord says :
GOLD:	and one sheep or goat for every 200 in your flocks in Israel . These will be the grain offerings , burnt offerings , and peace offerings that will make atonement for the people who bring them , says the Sovereign Lord .

ID:	3060
INPUT:	▁Begi ▁aurrean ▁dut ▁beti ▁zure ▁maitasuna eta ▁leial ▁jokatu ▁dut ▁zure kiko ;
PRED:	I love your faithfulness to you ; I love your faithfulness .
GOLD:	For I am always aware of your unfailing love , and I have lived according to your truth .

ID:	3061
INPUT:	▁Haien ▁aurrean ▁dar - dar ▁dagi ▁lurrak , ikara ▁da ▁zerua ; eguz ki - il argi ak ▁ilundu ▁egiten ▁dira , iz arrek ▁beren ▁di r dira ▁galtzen .
PRED:	Their land will be filled with fear , and the heavens will disappear , and the heavens will disappear .
GOLD:	The earth quakes as they advance , and the heavens tremble.The sun and moon grow dark , and the stars no longer shine .

ID:	3062
INPUT:	▁Gedeonek ▁esan ▁zien :— Ongi ▁da . ▁Baina ▁Jaunak ▁Zeb ah ▁eta ▁Tz alm una ▁nire ▁esku ▁uz tean , ▁basamor tuko ▁o tez ▁eta ▁gar duz ▁ur ratuko ▁zaituztet .
PRED:	Gideon replied , “ The Lord is Gideon , Gideon , Gideon , Gideon , and our livestock , and the wilderness of Zin . ”
GOLD:	So Gideon said , “ After the Lord gives me victory over Zebah and Zalmunna , I will return and tear your flesh with the thorns and briers from the wilderness . ”

ID:	3063
INPUT:	▁baina ▁egizue ▁apal tasunez ▁eta ▁errespe tuz , ▁kontzi entzia ▁garbiz ▁jokatuz . ▁Horrela , ▁Kristoren ▁sines le ▁bezala ▁duzuen ▁jokaera ▁on az ▁gaizki - esaka ▁ari ▁direnak ▁beren ▁hitz ▁gaizto ez ▁lots atuko ▁dira .
PRED:	Instead , be patient with pure and pure motives as pure as pure as pure as pure as pure as Christ .
GOLD:	But do this in a gentle and respectful way . Keep your conscience clear . Then if people speak against you , they will be ashamed when they see what a good life you live because you belong to Christ .

ID:	3064
INPUT:	▁I r te erako ▁eta pen ▁zerrenda
PRED:	The Land Given to Judah
GOLD:	Remembering Israel 's Journey

ID:	3065
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁salbatu ▁zituen ▁Jaunak ▁Ezekias ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁bizilagunak ▁Asiriako ▁errege ▁Senakerib en ▁eta ▁gainerako ▁etsaien ▁eskuetan ▁eror tzetik . ▁Eta ▁bakea ▁eman ▁zien ▁alde ▁guztietan .
PRED:	This is what the Lord said to Hezekiah and the people of Assyria and Jerusalem , along with all the people of Assyria .
GOLD:	That is how the Lord rescued Hezekiah and the people of Jerusalem from King Sennacherib of Assyria and from all the others who threatened them . So there was peace throughout the land .

ID:	3066
INPUT:	▁Hori ▁izan ▁zen ▁zab ul on darren ▁ondarea , ▁senitarteka ▁ban atua , ▁aipatu riko ▁hiri ▁eta ▁herrixkak ▁barne .
PRED:	These were the homeland allocated to the clans of the clans of the tribe of Naphtali .
GOLD:	The homeland allocated to the clans of the tribe of Zebulun included these towns and their surrounding villages .

ID:	3067
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁janaria , ▁j akirik ▁gox o ena ▁ere , n az k agarri ▁gertatzen ▁zaio .
PRED:	Then springs of food will be eaten , and it is wonderful to stumble .
GOLD:	They lose their appetitefor even the most delicious food .

ID:	3068
INPUT:	▁Zer ura ▁igo ta ▁ere , ▁zu ▁hantxe ! Hil dakoen ▁Egoitz ara ▁jaitsi ta ▁ere , ▁zu ▁bertan !
PRED:	Now go down to the grave , where you are dead .
GOLD:	If I go up to heaven , you are there ; if I go down to the grave , you are there .

ID:	3069
INPUT:	▁Irten ▁ziren , ▁orduan , ▁Sodoma , ▁Gom orra , ▁Ad ma , ▁Tz eb o im ▁eta ▁B ela ▁edo ▁Tz o ar ko ▁erregeak , ▁eta ▁eraso ▁egin ▁zieten ▁Si di mgo ▁haranean
PRED:	So the people of Sodom and Gomorrah went out to the valley of Sodom and Gomorrah .
GOLD:	Then the rebel kings of Sodom , Gomorrah , Admah , Zeboiim , and Bela ( also called Zoar ) prepared for battle in the valley of the Dead Sea .

ID:	3070
INPUT:	▁Zeuk ▁entzun ▁duzu ▁zer ▁egin ▁dieten ▁Asiriako ▁erregeek ▁herrialde ▁guztiei : ▁erabat ▁hondatu . ▁Eta ▁zu ▁libratuko ▁zarelako an ▁al ▁zaude ?
PRED:	You have heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all the kings of Assyria ?
GOLD:	You know perfectly well what the kings of Assyria have done wherever they have gone . They have completely destroyed everyone who stood in their way ! Why should you be any different ?

ID:	3071
INPUT:	▁dena ▁estaliko ▁dute , ▁lurra ▁bera ▁ezin ▁ikus teraino . ▁K azkab arrak ▁honda tz eke ▁utz iriko ▁ap urra ▁ere ▁jan ▁egingo ▁dute ▁eta ▁baita ▁lan de tan ▁erne tzen ▁ari ▁diren ▁zuhaitzak ▁ere .
PRED:	They will cover the ground with the ground , and they will cover you with all kinds of food , and they will be able to eat .
GOLD:	They will cover the land so that you wo n't be able to see the ground . They will devour what little is left of your crops after the hailstorm , including all the trees growing in the fields .

ID:	3072
INPUT:	▁Jesusen ▁agindu ▁berria
PRED:	Jesus ' Prayer of Jesus
GOLD:	Jesus Predicts Peter 's Denial

ID:	3073
INPUT:	▁Neure ▁gogoko ▁buruzagiak ▁emango ▁dizkizuet , ▁jakinduriaz ▁eta ▁zuhur tasunez ▁gidatuko ▁zaituzte tenak .
PRED:	I will show you wisdom and understanding , and you will lead you to understanding .
GOLD:	And I will give you shepherds after my own heart , who will guide you with knowledge and understanding .

ID:	3074
INPUT:	▁Israel ▁herriak ▁Jauna ▁baztertu
PRED:	The Lord 's Promise of Victory
GOLD:	The Death of Joshua

ID:	3075
INPUT:	▁Beste ▁erdi arekin , ▁berriz , ▁jainko - irudi ▁bat ▁egiten ▁du ▁eta ▁aurrean ▁ahuspezturik ▁gurtzen . ▁Eta ▁otoitz ▁egiten ▁dio , ▁esanez : ▁« Sal ba ▁nazazu , ▁zu ▁baitzaitu t ▁jainko !»
PRED:	But instead , there is a god in front of Baal and worship other gods . Then he prayed , “ Please worship me , for I am your god ! ”
GOLD:	Then he takes what 's leftand makes his god : a carved idol ! He falls down in front of it , worshiping and praying to it. “ Rescue me ! ” he says. “ You are my god ! ”

ID:	3076
INPUT:	▁E rak utsi ▁al ▁dizkizu te Herio aren ▁erreinu ▁ilun eko ▁ateak ?
PRED:	Do you think about your gates ? Can the doors of the earth be filled with light ?
GOLD:	Do you know where the gates of death are located ? Have you seen the gates of utter gloom ?

ID:	3077
INPUT:	▁“ Z il ar ▁mespretx agarri ” dei tuko ▁dituzte , mes pretx atu ▁egin ▁baititut ▁nik , Jaunak ».
PRED:	They will say , ‘ The Lord has rejected me , for I have rejected them . '
GOLD:	I will label them ‘ Rejected Silver , 'for I , the Lord , am discarding them . ”

ID:	3078
INPUT:	▁Z aldiz ko ▁gudariak ▁berrehun ▁mil io i ▁zirela ▁entzun ▁nuen .
PRED:	Then I heard that the men had been captured , and I heard the troops of the plunder .
GOLD:	I heard the size of their army , which was 200 million mounted troops .

ID:	3079
INPUT:	▁Bestela , ▁larrugorri an ▁utziko ▁dut , j aio ▁zen ▁egunean ▁bezala ▁biluzik . B as amortu aren ▁antzeko ▁egingo ▁dut , lur ▁i d or ▁bihurtuko eta ▁eg arriz ▁hil araziko .
PRED:	If you are blind , I will put away naked in the days of the Lord , I will put my clothes on the ground , and I will put them on the ground .
GOLD:	Their mother is a shameless prostituteand became pregnant in a shameful way.She said , ‘ I 'll run after other loversand sell myself to them for food and water , for clothing of wool and linen , and for olive oil and drinks . '

ID:	3080
INPUT:	▁Sartu ▁zen ▁jan to kian ▁Hero d iasen ▁alaba ▁eta ▁dantz an ▁egin ▁zuen , ▁eta ▁atsegin ▁izan ▁zitzaien ▁Herodes i ▁eta ▁honen ▁mah aiki de ei . ▁Orduan , ▁erregeak ▁neskatx ari ▁esan ▁zion :— Es katu ▁nahi ▁duzuna , ▁eta ▁emango ▁dizut .
PRED:	Meanwhile , the daughter of Herodias , the daughter of Herod 's daughter , went with a dance and prayed to Herod , “ What are you crying to King Herod , ” the king said , “ I will give you a message to you . ”
GOLD:	Then his daughter , also named Herodias , came in and performed a dance that greatly pleased Herod and his guests . “ Ask me for anything you like , ” the king said to the girl , “ and I will give it to you . ”

ID:	3081
INPUT:	▁Haserre - eguna ▁izango ▁da , l arri tasun - ▁eta ▁nahigabe - eguna , hondamen di ▁handiko ▁eguna , ilun pe - ▁eta ▁go ibel tasun - eguna , ho dei - ▁eta ▁laino ▁bel tzaren ▁eguna .
PRED:	On the day of the day , the day of sorrow will be angry and sorrow and sorrow , and the day of darkness will be dark , and the day of the moon will be dark , and the day of the moon celebrations , and the day .
GOLD:	It will be a day when the Lord 's anger is poured out — a day of terrible distress and anguish , a day of ruin and desolation , a day of darkness and gloom , a day of clouds and blackness ,

ID:	3082
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Asak ▁Jaunaren ▁etxeko ▁eta ▁bere ▁jauregiko ▁altxor tegi etan ▁zeuden ▁urre - zil arrak ▁hartu ▁eta ▁Dam as kon ▁bizi ▁zen ▁Siriako ▁errege ▁Ben - Hada di ▁bidali ▁zizkion , ▁esanez :
PRED:	Then Asa took the silver and gold from the Temple of the Lord , along with silver , gold , and the royal palace , and the king of Aram , and the king of Aram .
GOLD:	Asa responded by removing the silver and gold from the treasuries of the Temple of the Lord and the royal palace . He sent it to King Ben-hadad of Aram , who was ruling in Damascus , along with this message :

ID:	3083
INPUT:	▁« Ez ▁ote ▁hau ▁guztia , ▁Israel , bidean ▁gidatu ▁zin tuen ▁Jauna , zeure ▁Jainkoa , bazter tu ▁duzulako ?
PRED:	“ Do n't you realize that the Lord , the God of Israel , the God of Israel , have spoken !
GOLD:	And you have brought this upon yourselvesby rebelling against the Lord your God , even though he was leading you on the way !

ID:	3084
INPUT:	▁Al eluia ! ▁Gora ▁Jauna ! G orets azue , ▁Jaunaren ▁zerbitzariok , ▁goretsi ▁Jaunaren ▁izena !
PRED:	Praise the Lord ! Praise the Lord ! Praise him ! Praise the Lord !
GOLD:	Praise the Lord ! Yes , give praise , O servants of the Lord.Praise the name of the Lord !

ID:	3085
INPUT:	▁Goiz ero ▁berri tzen ▁dira . ▁Bai ▁handia , ▁Jauna , ▁zure ▁leialtasuna !
PRED:	The next morning is very early in the morning , O Lord !
GOLD:	Great is his faithfulness ; his mercies begin afresh each morning .

ID:	3086
INPUT:	▁N olatan ▁esan ▁dezak ezue jakin tsu ▁zaretela , z eu ekin ▁duzuela ▁Jaunaren ▁legea ? Z euen ▁lege - mai s uen ▁l um a ▁gezur tiak f al tsu ▁bihurtu ▁du ▁lege ▁hori !
PRED:	Why are you trusting in the law of the Lord ? Why do you think you are right with the law of the Lord ?
GOLD:	“ ‘ How can you say , “ We are wise because we have the word of the Lord , ” when your teachers have twisted it by writing lies ?

ID:	3087
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁honela ▁zioen ▁konden aren ▁arraz oia ▁adierazten ▁zuen ▁idaz kun ak : ▁« Ju du en ▁erregea ».
PRED:	Then he said to them , “ This is what the king of Judah says : A king of Judah will be king of Judah . ”
GOLD:	A sign announced the charge against him . It read , “ The King of the Jews . ”

ID:	3088
INPUT:	▁Bihar ▁edo ▁e tzi ▁zuen ▁seme - alabek ▁honek ▁guztiak ▁zer ▁esan ▁nahi ▁duen ▁galde tzean , ▁hau ▁erantzungo ▁diezue : ▁“ Jaunak ▁ahalmen ▁handiz ▁atera ▁gintuen ▁Egiptotik , ▁esklabo tzatik .
PRED:	“ If you want to ask , ‘ This is what the Lord says : If you want us to ask us , ‘ The Lord has rescued us from slavery in Egypt . '
GOLD:	“ And in the future , your children will ask you , ‘ What does all this mean ? ' Then you will tell them , ‘ With the power of his mighty hand , the Lord brought us out of Egypt , the place of our slavery .

ID:	3089
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁eraman , ▁beraz , ▁ezer ▁higuingarri rik ▁zeuen ▁etxera , ▁zuek ▁ere , ▁idoloak ▁bezala , ▁erabat ▁suntsi ▁ez ▁zaitzaten . ▁Guztiz ▁arb u ia garri ▁eta ▁higuingarri tzat ▁hartuko ▁dituzue , ▁erabat ▁suntsi tuak ▁behar ▁dute ▁izan ▁eta .
PRED:	So do not take any of your detestable sins , just as you have done . You must not be able to destroy all the detestable things you have done . They will be destroyed , and you will be destroyed .
GOLD:	Do not bring any detestable objects into your home , for then you will be destroyed , just like them . You must utterly detest such things , for they are set apart for destruction .

ID:	3090
INPUT:	▁Erre inu ▁eta ▁herriak men pean ▁jarri ▁zen izkien , eta ▁inguruko ▁lurrak ▁banatu . H exb ongo ▁errege ▁Sihon - en ▁lurralde ah artu ▁zuten , Ba x ango ▁errege ▁Og - ena .
PRED:	I gave them victory over Sihon and the nations of Bashan , and the land of King Og of Bashan .
GOLD:	“ Then you helped our ancestors conquer kingdoms and nations , and you placed your people in every corner of the land . They took over the land of King Sihon of Heshbon and the land of King Og of Bashan .

ID:	3091
INPUT:	▁Jo ka ▁ezazue ▁ongi ▁jentilen ▁artean ; ▁horrela , ▁orain ▁gaizkile tzat ▁salatzen ▁bazai tuzte te ▁ere , ▁zuen ▁egintza ▁onak ▁aitortu ▁beharko ▁dituzte ▁eta ▁Jainkoa ▁goretsiko ▁dute , ▁hura ▁kontuak ▁hartzera ▁etortzean .
PRED:	Just as if you live among the Gentiles , you will be punished because you are doing this , they will be able to bring glory to the Gentiles . They will be able to bring glory to the Gentiles .
GOLD:	Be careful to live properly among your unbelieving neighbors . Then even if they accuse you of doing wrong , they will see your honorable behavior , and they will give honor to God when he judges the world .

ID:	3092
INPUT:	▁Noiz ▁arte ▁oldartu ▁behar ▁duzue ▁gizakiaren ▁kontra , hau ▁akab atu ▁nahian ? P ar eta ▁oker tua , ▁hes i ▁koloka ▁zarete ▁guztiok !
PRED:	How long will you fight against your enemies ? How long will you be filled with violence ?
GOLD:	They plan to topple me from my high position.They delight in telling lies about me.They praise me to my facebut curse me in their hearts.Interlude

ID:	3093
INPUT:	▁Erro l datu ▁hogeita ▁hamar ▁urtetik ▁berrogeita ▁hamar ▁arteko ak , ▁elkarketa - etxolako ▁zerbitzua ▁bete ▁dezaten .
PRED:	The ten who were fifty who were fifty who were fifty and fifty who remain in the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	List all the men between the ages of thirty and fifty who are eligible to serve in the Tabernacle .

ID:	3094
INPUT:	▁Honela ▁mintzatu ▁zitzaien , ▁orduan , ▁Jesus : ▁« Kontuz ! ▁Ez ▁zaitzatela ▁inork ▁engaina .
PRED:	Then Jesus said to them , “ Do n't let anyone deceive you .
GOLD:	Jesus replied , “ Do n't let anyone mislead you ,

ID:	3095
INPUT:	▁Moisesek ▁aldarea ▁eraiki ▁zuen ▁eta ▁« Jauna , ▁nire ▁bandera » ▁ezarri ▁zion ▁izena ,
PRED:	So Moses built an altar and built the altar for the Lord 's name .
GOLD:	Moses built an altar there and named it Yahweh-Nissi ( which means “ the Lord is my banner ” ) .

ID:	3096
INPUT:	▁Er di min etan ▁zegoela , ▁em ag inak ▁esan ▁zion : ▁« Ez ▁izan ▁beldur ; ▁mutikoa ▁duzu ▁berriro !»
PRED:	When the baby was old , she said to her , “ Do n't be afraid ! ”
GOLD:	After a very hard delivery , the midwife finally exclaimed , “ Do n't be afraid — you have another son ! ”

ID:	3097
INPUT:	▁Jesus ▁eta ▁Be eltz eb ul
PRED:	Jesus and the Prince of Nazareth
GOLD:	Jesus and the Prince of Demons

ID:	3098
INPUT:	▁Joan ▁zen , ▁bada , ▁Tamar ▁bere ▁anaia ▁Amn onen ▁etxera ; ▁hau ▁ohean ▁ze tzan . ▁Tam arrek ▁ogi - ir ina ▁hartu , ▁o rea ▁egin , ▁anai aren ▁aurrean ▁opil ak ▁prestatu ▁eta ▁erre ▁zituen .
PRED:	So Amnon married Tamar to Tamar , Amnon 's brother Amnon 's home , and she ate it before her .
GOLD:	When Tamar arrived at Amnon 's house , she went to the place where he was lying down so he could watch her mix some dough . Then she baked his favorite dish for him .

ID:	3099
INPUT:	▁Moisesek , ▁Israelgo ▁arduradun ekin ▁batera , ▁agindu ▁hau ▁eman ▁zion ▁herriari : ▁« Bete ▁gaur ▁ematen ▁dizkizuedan ▁agindu ▁guztiok .
PRED:	Moses gave these instructions to the elders of Israel : “ This is what I am giving you today .
GOLD:	Then Moses and the leaders of Israel gave this charge to the people : “ Obey all these commands that I am giving you today .

ID:	3100
INPUT:	▁Asiriako ▁erregearen tzat ▁zilar - kop uru ▁hori ▁bildu ▁ahal ▁izateko , ▁Israelgo ▁aberats ▁guztiei ▁zilarrezko ▁berrogeita ▁hamar na ▁txanpon ▁eman arazi ▁zien , ▁zerga tzat . ▁Asiriako ▁erregea , ▁Israelen ▁gelditu ▁gabe , ▁bere ▁erre in ura ▁itzuli ▁zen .
PRED:	The king of Assyria gave it to the king of Israel . He gave the wealth of silver to the king of Israel for ten pieces of silver to pay for the tribute to the king of Assyria . He refused to pay it to pay the tribute for the king of Assyria .
GOLD:	Menahem extorted the money from the rich of Israel , demanding that each of them pay fifty pieces of silver to the king of Assyria . So the king of Assyria turned from attacking Israel and did not stay in the land .

ID:	3101
INPUT:	▁Israeli ▁bere ▁gaiztakeri en ▁kon tua eska ▁diezaio dan ▁egunean , Bete l go ▁aldarearen ▁kontra ekin go ▁diot : er tzak ▁apur tuko ▁dizkio teta ▁lurrera ▁botako .
PRED:	In the day I will proclaim his anger against the Lord 's holy ones , and I will hand them over to the earth .
GOLD:	“ On the very day I punish Israel for its sins , I will destroy the pagan altars at Bethel.The horns of the altar will be cut offand fall to the ground .

ID:	3102
INPUT:	▁esanez : ▁“ Horrela ▁hondo ratuko ▁da ▁Babilonia , ▁ez ▁da ▁ja ikiko ▁nik ▁bidaliko ▁diodan ▁hondamendi tik ”». Hemen ▁amaitzen ▁dira ▁Jeremiasen ▁mez uak .
PRED:	“ The enemy says to Babylon , ‘ This is what the Lord says : Look , I will bring disaster on it . ' ”
GOLD:	Then say , ‘ In this same way Babylon and her people will sink , never again to rise , because of the disasters I will bring upon her . ' ” This is the end of Jeremiah 's messages .

ID:	3103
INPUT:	▁B azi ren ▁bi ▁egun ▁Gedal ias ▁hila ▁zela , ▁gertatuaren ▁berri ▁artean ▁inork ▁ez ▁jakin ▁arren .
PRED:	Some time later Gedaliah had been killed , who had n't seen what had happened .
GOLD:	The next day , before anyone had heard about Gedaliah 's murder ,

ID:	3104
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁dut ▁gehiago ▁seme - iz enik ▁merezi . ▁Har ▁nazazu ▁zeure ▁langile etako ▁bat ▁bezala ”.
PRED:	I have no attention to my son , for I have come , just as you have done . '
GOLD:	and I am no longer worthy of being called your son . Please take me on as a hired servant . ” '

ID:	3105
INPUT:	▁mendi ko ▁hegazti ▁harrapari en tza teta ▁basapiz ti entzat ▁uzten ▁dira , h egazti ▁harrapari ek ▁u da eta ▁basapiz tiek ▁ne gu aber tan ▁igaro ▁dezaten . Hala xe ▁gertatuko ▁da et io pi arrekin ▁ere ».
PRED:	I am the wild animals for the wild animals , for I am going to feed the birds of the vultures and wild animals , too , will come to the vultures and the wild animals of the field . ”
GOLD:	Your mighty army will be left dead in the fieldsfor the mountain vultures and wild animals.The vultures will tear at the corpses all summer.The wild animals will gnaw at the bones all winter .

ID:	3106
INPUT:	▁Zure ▁tenplu ▁bikain ean ▁sartuko ▁naiz , ▁Jainko ▁Jauna , l eiala ▁zu ▁bakarrik ▁zarela ▁iragarriko .
PRED:	I will enter the Temple of the Lord , for you are faithful to him .
GOLD:	I will praise your mighty deeds , O Sovereign Lord.I will tell everyone that you alone are just .

ID:	3107
INPUT:	▁Zuen ▁gorpuak , ▁berriz , ▁basamortu ▁honetan ▁geldituko ▁dira ;
PRED:	Your bodies will be buried in ruins , and they will be buried in ruins .
GOLD:	But as for you , you will drop dead in this wilderness .

ID:	3108
INPUT:	▁Igo ▁mendi ▁garai ▁batera , ▁Sion , al bis te ▁poz garria ▁hots ▁egitera ; go ratu ▁indarrez ▁ahotsa , ▁Jerusalem , go ratu ▁beldur gabe ▁ahotsa , esan ▁Judako ▁hiri ei :« Hemen ▁da ▁zuen ▁Jainkoa !
PRED:	Now go to Jerusalem , the city of Jerusalem ! Listen to the sound of the alarm in Jerusalem : “ Listen to this city ! ” he said , “ Here is the God of Israel ! ”
GOLD:	O Zion , messenger of good news , shout from the mountaintops ! Shout it louder , O Jerusalem.Shout , and do not be afraid.Tell the towns of Judah , “ Your God is coming ! ”

ID:	3109
INPUT:	▁« Izan ▁kontu , ▁beraz ! ▁Jauna ▁suaren ▁erditik ▁Horeb ▁mendian ▁mintzatu ▁zitz aiz uen ean , ▁ez ▁zenuten ▁inolako ▁irudi rik ▁ikusi .
PRED:	“ The Lord says to you , ‘ You saw a fire that you did not understand it . '
GOLD:	“ But be very careful ! You did not see the Lord 's form on the day he spoke to you from the heart of the fire at Mount Sinai .

ID:	3110
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁beldurtu , ez ▁zara ▁barre garri ▁geldituko ; ez ▁lots atu , ▁ez ▁zaituzte ▁laido tuko . Ah az tu ▁egingo ▁duzu gazte tako ▁lots aiz una , ez ▁zara ▁oroituko al argun ▁zinen eko ▁laido az ,
PRED:	Do n't be afraid of shame , and you will be ashamed of shame . You will not be ashamed of shame , and you will be ashamed to shame you .
GOLD:	“ Fear not ; you will no longer live in shame.Do n't be afraid ; there is no more disgrace for you.You will no longer remember the shame of your youthand the sorrows of widowhood .

ID:	3111
INPUT:	▁Sen ar ▁berriak ▁ere , ▁emakume az ▁go gai turik , ▁di b ortzi o - agiria ▁idatzi , ▁emakumeari ▁eman ▁eta ▁etxetik ▁bidaltzen ▁badu ▁edota ▁senar ▁berria ▁hiltzen ▁bada ,
PRED:	If she has sex with a woman , she must bring her to her , and if she has sex with her in her house , then she will send her to her .
GOLD:	But if the second husband also turns against her , writes a document of divorce , hands it to her , and sends her away , or if he dies ,

ID:	3112
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁lagundu ▁ez ▁bal it , herio - is il pean ▁nengo keen ▁dagoeneko .
PRED:	The Lord did n't save me from the grave , for I was on the day of death .
GOLD:	Unless the Lord had helped me , I would soon have settled in the silence of the grave .

ID:	3113
INPUT:	▁Zab aldu ▁niri ▁garaile en ▁ateak , Jauna ▁gores tera ▁sar ▁nadin .
PRED:	Give me victory to the Lord ; let me go to the gates of praise .
GOLD:	Open for me the gates where the righteous enter , and I will go in and thank the Lord .

ID:	3114
INPUT:	▁Egiptoko ▁erregeak ▁Joak azen ▁anaia ▁Eli aki m ▁ezarri ▁zuen ▁Judako ▁eta ▁Jerusalemgo ▁errege ; ▁baina ▁izena ▁aldatu ▁zion , ▁Joiakim ▁dei tuz . ▁Joak az , ▁berriz , ▁Egiptora ▁eraman ▁zuen ▁preso .
PRED:	Then the king of Egypt took Josiah 's brother Josiah 's brother in Jerusalem , but he called the name of King Jehoiakim of Judah , but he called him to Egypt .
GOLD:	The king of Egypt then installed Eliakim , the brother of Jehoahaz , as the next king of Judah and Jerusalem , and he changed Eliakim 's name to Jehoiakim . Then Neco took Jehoahaz to Egypt as a prisoner .

ID:	3115
INPUT:	▁Jakin tsuaren ▁hitz ▁ez tiak erra za go ▁adi tzen ▁dira er g elen ▁buruzagi aren de ia darrak ▁baino .
PRED:	A false witness is better to speak , but the leaders of the poor are even better than the leaders .
GOLD:	Better to hear the quiet words of a wise personthan the shouts of a foolish king .

ID:	3116
INPUT:	▁bere ▁ibai adar rekin , Ar ▁ibar rera ▁jaitsi eta ▁Moabeko ▁muga ▁ondotik i gar o tzen ▁dena ».
PRED:	The mountains of Moab went down to the valley of Moab , and the border of Moab went to the valley of Moab . ”
GOLD:	and the ravines that extend as far as the settlement of Ar on the border of Moab . ”

ID:	3117
INPUT:	▁Kanta . ▁Koreren ▁semeen ▁salmoa .
PRED:	A Message about it , O Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	How great is the Lord , how deserving of praise , in the city of our God , which sits on his holy mountain !

ID:	3118
INPUT:	▁Non ahi ▁jan ▁dezak ezue ▁zeuek ▁eta ▁zuen ▁etxeko ek . ▁Hori ▁da ▁zuen ▁ordaina ▁elkarketa - etxolako ▁zerbitzu agatik .
PRED:	Where are you going to eat anything from your household , and you must pay for the Tabernacle for the Tabernacle .
GOLD:	You Levites and your families may eat this food anywhere you wish , for it is your compensation for serving in the Tabernacle .

ID:	3119
INPUT:	▁Guz tia ▁alferrik ▁zela ▁eta , ▁gainera , ▁is kan bila ▁sor tzera ▁zihoala ▁ikusirik , ▁Pilatok ▁ura ▁hartu ▁eta ▁eskuak ▁garbitu ▁zituen ▁jendearen ▁aurrean , ▁esanez :— Ez ▁naiz ▁gizon ▁honen ▁heriotzaren ▁erantzu le ! ▁Zeu ek ▁ikusi !
PRED:	When he saw this , he saw a man sitting on his side and saw the water of the city , Pilate turned his hands and asked them , “ I did n't see this man 's death ! ”
GOLD:	Pilate saw that he was n't getting anywhere and that a riot was developing . So he sent for a bowl of water and washed his hands before the crowd , saying , “ I am innocent of this man 's blood . The responsibility is yours ! ”

ID:	3120
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁hemen ▁zein ▁ziren ▁jentil - herri ▁haiek : ▁filistearren ▁bost ▁buruzagiak , ▁kanaandar ▁guztiak , ▁si don darrak ▁eta ▁Baal - H er mon ▁menditik ▁Ham ateko ▁sarrer araino ▁Libanoko ▁mendialdean ▁bizi ▁ziren ▁hibi arrak .
PRED:	This is the homeland allocated to the kings of the Philistines , the descendants of the Philistines , the descendants of the Amorites , the Amorites , the Canaanites , and the Canaanites living in the hill country of Lebanon .
GOLD:	These are the nations : the Philistines ( those living under the five Philistine rulers ) , all the Canaanites , the Sidonians , and the Hivites living in the mountains of Lebanon from Mount Baal-hermon to Lebo-hamath .

ID:	3121
INPUT:	▁Gu ar dia buruak , ▁gainera , ▁urre ▁nahiz ▁zilar ▁huts ezko ▁tresnak ▁hartu ▁zituen : ▁errauts ontziak , ▁intsentsu - ontziak , ▁isipu - ontziak , ▁el tzeak , ▁argimutil ak ▁eta ▁k atil uak .
PRED:	The captain of the guard were also made of gold , silver , basins , basins , basins , basins , basins , basins , and all the articles used for the Temple .
GOLD:	The captain of the guard also took the small bowls , incense burners , basins , pots , lampstands , ladles , bowls used for liquid offerings , and all the other articles made of pure gold or silver .

ID:	3122
INPUT:	▁eta ▁ez ▁pentsa ▁nah ikoa ▁duzuen ik ▁“ Abrah amen ▁ondorengo ▁gara ” ▁esatea . ▁Egia ▁esan , ▁honako ▁harri ▁hau etatik ▁ere ▁atera ▁ditzak e ▁Jainkoak ▁Abrahamen ▁ondorengoak .
PRED:	And you will say , ‘ We are descendants of Abraham , ' and we say , ‘ We are descendants of Abraham . That is why we have said to Abraham , ‘ You are descendants of Abraham . '
GOLD:	Do n't just say to each other , ‘ We 're safe , for we are descendants of Abraham . ' That means nothing , for I tell you , God can create children of Abraham from these very stones .

ID:	3123
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁zoritxar ▁eta ▁atsekabe ▁izugarri ▁horiek ▁gerta tzean , ▁kan tik a ▁hau ▁lekuko ▁izango ▁dute ▁beren ▁kontra , ▁ondorengoek ▁ere ▁gogoan ▁eta ▁ahoan ▁izango ▁baitute . ▁Izan ▁ere , ▁ondo txo ▁dakit ▁zer ▁asmo ▁darabil tzan ▁gogoan ▁herri ▁honek , ▁zin ▁eginez ▁agindutako ▁lurraldera ▁eraman ▁baino ▁lehenago tik ▁ere ».
PRED:	And when they are ashamed of shame , they will be ashamed and ashamed of their descendants , they will be ashamed of their descendants , for they are telling you what you have said , “ I will do to you , and you will know what you have promised to do . ”
GOLD:	And when great disasters come down on them , this song will stand as evidence against them , for it will never be forgotten by their descendants . I know the intentions of these people , even now before they have entered the land I swore to give them . ”

ID:	3124
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁eskatu ▁eta ▁hartzen ▁ez ▁baduzue , ▁gaizki ▁eskatzen ▁duzuelako ▁da , ▁zeuen ▁grina ▁txarrak ▁ase tzeko .
PRED:	And if you ask you , you ca n't get rid of your evil desires .
GOLD:	And even when you ask , you do n't get it because your motives are all wrong — you want only what will give you pleasure .

ID:	3125
INPUT:	▁S uak ▁kiskali ▁zuen ▁haien ▁talde a , ▁gar rak ▁irentsi ▁gaiztoak .
PRED:	But the Midianites were terrified by their clans , and they swallowed up the wicked .
GOLD:	Fire fell upon their followers ; a flame consumed the wicked .

ID:	3126
INPUT:	▁Lo tek ▁Jordan go ▁ibar ▁osoa ▁hautatu ▁zuen ▁beretzat ▁eta ▁eki alderantz ▁jo . ▁Honela , ▁banatu ▁egin ▁ziren ▁bata ▁beste arengandik .
PRED:	So Lot chose all the way to the valley of Rephaim . And the other members of the Jordan was given to the other .
GOLD:	Lot chose for himself the whole Jordan Valley to the east of them . He went there with his flocks and servants and parted company with his uncle Abram .

ID:	3127
INPUT:	▁Guzti ra , ▁urre ▁eta ▁zilarrezko ▁ 5 . 400 ▁ontzi . Hori ▁guztia ▁eraman ▁zuen ▁X ex ba tz arrek , ▁erbestera tuak ▁Babiloniatik ▁Jerusalemera ▁itzuli ▁zirenean .
PRED:	The rest of the great gold and silver were also brought to Jerusalem . The people of Judah returned to Jerusalem , along with the captivity of King Jehoiachin 's captivity .
GOLD:	In all , there were 5,400 articles of gold and silver . Sheshbazzar brought all of these along when the exiles went from Babylon to Jerusalem .

ID:	3128
INPUT:	▁Haserre tzen ▁bazarete ▁ere , ▁ez ▁heldu ▁bekatu ▁egi teraino ; ▁zuen ▁haserre ak ▁ez ▁beza ▁eguzkia ▁sartu ▁arte ▁iraun .
PRED:	And if you were angry with them , you wo n't be angry with the sun until the sun would be angry .
GOLD:	And “ do n't sin by letting anger control you. ” Do n't let the sun go down while you are still angry ,

ID:	3129
INPUT:	▁Apaiz ari ▁eramango ▁dizkio . ▁Apaizak ▁barkamen - oparitzat ▁eskaini ▁beharrekoa ▁aurkeztuko ▁du ▁lehenbizi ; ▁burua ▁moztuko ▁dio ▁lepo - hezur ▁ondotik , ▁baina ▁erabat ▁era uzi ▁gabe ;
PRED:	The priest must present the priests as a sin offering to the priest . The priest must present it to the mouth of the sin offering .
GOLD:	You must bring them to the priest , who will present the first bird as the sin offering . He will wring its neck but without severing its head from the body .

ID:	3130
INPUT:	▁Bizi dun ▁ororen ▁bis tatik ▁ezkutuan ▁dago , zer uko ▁hegazti entzat ▁gordeta .
PRED:	Those who are allowed to live in the heavens , and all the birds of the sky are hidden from the heavens .
GOLD:	It is hidden from the eyes of all humanity.Even the sharp-eyed birds in the sky can not discover it .

ID:	3131
INPUT:	▁Haren ▁senideek ▁ere ▁ez ▁zuten , ▁hain ▁zuzen , ▁berarengan ▁sinesten .
PRED:	And his brothers and sisters did n't believe in him .
GOLD:	For even his brothers did n't believe in him .

ID:	3132
INPUT:	▁Elkar keta - etxola ▁eramateko ▁gurdi en ▁eskaintza
PRED:	Offerings for the Priests
GOLD:	Offerings of Dedication

ID:	3133
INPUT:	▁Es n ez ▁hazi ▁zintuzte dan , ▁ez ▁janari ▁sendo z , ▁hau ▁hartzeko ▁ez ▁baitz in eten ▁oraindik ▁gauza . ▁Orain ▁ere ▁ez ▁zarete ▁gauza ,
PRED:	Instead , I 'm not strong enough to take care of you , for you have not been sold for your work .
GOLD:	I had to feed you with milk , not with solid food , because you were n't ready for anything stronger . And you still are n't ready ,

ID:	3134
INPUT:	▁Honek ▁erantzun :— Ene ▁errege ▁jauna , ▁engainatu ▁egin ▁ninduen ▁morroiak . ▁Nik , ▁zure ▁zerbitzari ▁honek , ▁astoa ▁tx al ma tzeko ▁agindu ▁nion , ▁gainean ▁jarri ▁eta ▁erregearekin ▁joateko , ▁her rena ▁naiz ▁eta .
PRED:	“ My lord , my lord the king , ” she replied . “ My servant has been deceived , and I struck down the donkey and the donkey and the donkeys on the ground . ”
GOLD:	Ziba has slandered me by saying that I refused to come . But I know that my lord the king is like an angel of God , so do what you think is best .

ID:	3135
INPUT:	▁Bet i ▁haserre ▁egon ▁behar ▁al ▁duzu ▁gurekin , men derik ▁mende ▁kop et ilun ?
PRED:	Have you been angry with us ? Have you been angry with us ?
GOLD:	Wo n't you revive us again , so your people can rejoice in you ?

ID:	3136
INPUT:	▁Hona ▁Jaunak ▁ene ▁Jaunari ▁esana : ▁« Es eri ▁nire ▁eskuinean , ▁zeure ▁etsaiak ▁oin azpian ▁jartzen ▁dizkizu dan ▁bitartean ».
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ Sit in the place of honor at your right hand . ”
GOLD:	‘ The said to my Lord , Sit in the place of honor at my right handuntil I humble your enemies beneath your feet . '

ID:	3137
INPUT:	▁H ots ▁handiko ▁hitz aldi ▁huts ak ▁egiten ▁dituzte ▁eta ▁grina ▁lizun en ▁bitartez ▁oker bide tik ▁aldendu ▁berriak ▁lilura tzen .
PRED:	These are the words of the Lord 's word , and they turn away from sexual immorality .
GOLD:	They brag about themselves with empty , foolish boasting . With an appeal to twisted sexual desires , they lure back into sin those who have barely escaped from a lifestyle of deception .

ID:	3138
INPUT:	▁Bi tan ▁banatu riko ▁ap atx ak ▁dituzten ▁eta ▁hausn ar tzaile ▁diren ▁animal ia ▁guztiak ▁jan ▁ditzak ezue .
PRED:	You may eat any of these animals , and you may eat all these animals .
GOLD:	“ You may eat any animal that has completely split hooves and chews the cud ,

ID:	3139
INPUT:	▁zuri ▁hau ▁esateko : ▁“ Bar katu , ▁mes edez , ▁zure ▁senideen ▁hob ena ▁eta ▁bekatua ; ▁kalte ▁egin ▁dizute , ▁bai , ▁baina ▁orain ▁barkatu ▁beraien ▁hob ena ▁zure ▁aitaren ▁Jainkoaren ▁zerbitzari ▁hauei ”». Hau ▁entzutean , ▁negar ▁egin ▁zuen ▁Josek .
PRED:	I tell you , ‘ Please tell us , your faith , and you have faith in your faith . Please forgive your brothers and sisters , but you have sex with all their father 's servants . ' ”
GOLD:	to say to you : ‘ Please forgive your brothers for the great wrong they did to you — for their sin in treating you so cruelly . ' So we , the servants of the God of your father , beg you to forgive our sin. ” When Joseph received the message , he broke down and wept .

ID:	3140
INPUT:	▁Haien ▁buru ▁hiru ▁minis tro ▁ezarri ▁zituen ; ▁hauei ▁eman ▁behar ▁zieten ▁eskualde buruek ▁beren ▁ad min is tra z io aren ▁kon tua , ▁erregearen ▁kalte tan ▁ibil ▁ez ▁zitezen . ▁Daniel ▁zen ▁hiru ▁minis tro ▁horietako ▁bat
PRED:	They also used three groups to be put in charge of them . They were put in charge of the royal officials , and they could not be put in charge of the king 's reign .
GOLD:	Daniel soon proved himself more capable than all the other administrators and high officers . Because of Daniel 's great ability , the king made plans to place him over the entire empire .

ID:	3141
INPUT:	▁Bere ▁etxeko ▁guztiak ▁bezala , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoa ▁gurtzen ▁zuen ▁eta ▁jainko zal ea ▁zen ; ▁l im os na ▁asko ▁ematen ▁zizkion ▁judu - herri ari ▁eta ▁otoitz ▁egiten ▁zion ▁Jainkoari ▁ohiko ▁ordu etan .
PRED:	He worshiped God and worshiped all the gods of Israel , just as he had done , and he prayed to God for many people in Jerusalem . He prayed to God for many people ,
GOLD:	He was a devout , God-fearing man , as was everyone in his household . He gave generously to the poor and prayed regularly to God .

ID:	3142
INPUT:	▁Lebiren ▁leinu ari ▁ez ▁zion ▁ondar erik ▁eman , ▁Jauna , ▁Israelen ▁Jainkoa , ▁baitzuen ▁ondare , ▁Jaunak ▁berak ▁hitzeman ▁bezala .
PRED:	But the tribe of Levi received an inheritance from the tribe of Levi , just as the Lord had promised .
GOLD:	But Moses gave no allotment of land to the tribe of Levi , for the Lord , the God of Israel , had promised that he himself would be their allotment .

ID:	3143
INPUT:	▁baina ▁eguz kiak ▁jo ▁orduko , ▁erre ▁egin ▁zen ▁eta , ▁sustra irik ▁ez ▁zuelako , ▁ihartu .
PRED:	But as soon as the sun grew up , and the roots of the sun had not planted .
GOLD:	But the plant soon wilted under the hot sun , and since it did n't have deep roots , it died .

ID:	3144
INPUT:	▁Moab
PRED:	Moab Rules in Moab
GOLD:	God 's Judgment on Judah and Israel

ID:	3145
INPUT:	▁Jauna , ▁Jainko ▁ahalguztiduna , n oiz ▁arte ▁egon ▁behar ▁duzu ▁haserre , herri a ▁oto iz ka ▁duzun ▁bitartean ?
PRED:	O Lord , God of Heaven 's Armies , will you be angry with rain ?
GOLD:	You have fed us with sorrowand made us drink tears by the bucketful .

ID:	3146
INPUT:	▁Ara b , ▁D um a , ▁E xan ,
PRED:	Hazor , Hazor , Hazor ,
GOLD:	Also included were the towns of Arab , Dumah , Eshan ,

ID:	3147
INPUT:	▁Ez ▁bedi ▁inor ▁sar ▁Jaunaren ▁etxean , ▁zerbitz aldia ▁duten ▁apaiz ▁eta ▁lebitarrak ▁izan ▁ezik ; ▁horiek ▁sar ▁daitezke , ▁sagaratuak ▁baitira . ▁Baina ▁gainerako ▁jendeak ▁bete ▁dezala ▁Jaunaren ▁agindua .
PRED:	No one can enter the house of the Lord 's Temple and serve as priests and Levites . But they will enter the Temple of the Lord . ”
GOLD:	Remember , only the priests and Levites on duty may enter the Temple of the Lord , for they are set apart as holy . The rest of the people must obey the Lord 's instructions and stay outside .

ID:	3148
INPUT:	▁« Nik , ▁Jesusek , ▁neure ▁aingerua ▁bidali ▁dut ▁eliz ▁elkarte ei ▁mezu ▁hau ▁ematera . ▁Neu ▁naiz ▁Daviden ▁ki m ua ▁eta ▁jator ria , ▁neu ▁goiz eko ▁ar tiz ar ▁distira tsua ».
PRED:	“ This is what the angel of the church says : I am the one who sent this message to the church . I am the one who was very old . ”
GOLD:	“ I , Jesus , have sent my angel to give you this message for the churches . I am both the source of David and the heir to his throne . I am the bright morning star . ”

ID:	3149
INPUT:	▁Hark ▁herri ▁asko ▁epaituko ▁ditu , nazio ▁indartsu en ▁auz iak ▁erabakiko , baita ▁urrutiko en enak ▁ere . Ez p atak ▁go lde ▁bihurtuko ▁dituzte eta ▁lantz ak ▁igi tai . Ez ▁da ▁n azi orik n azi oren ▁kontra ▁altxatuko , ez ▁dira ▁gehiago gu durako ▁pres tatuko .
PRED:	He will judge many nations with the nations , too , will come to distant lands . They will come to distant lands , and they will no longer be able to march with swords . They will no longer march against them , and their armies will no longer fight against them .
GOLD:	The Lord will mediate between peoplesand will settle disputes between strong nations far away.They will hammer their swords into plowsharesand their spears into pruning hooks.Nation will no longer fight against nation , nor train for war anymore .

ID:	3150
INPUT:	▁Baina ▁hondar - m eta ▁batean ▁hon doa ▁jo ▁zuten ; ▁b ran ka ▁hondar retan ▁sar tua ▁gelditu ▁zen , ▁mugi tu ▁ezinik ; ▁tx o pa , ▁berriz , ▁zar tatuz ▁zihoan ▁ol atu en ▁kol pez .
PRED:	But as soon as the sand on the shore , the crowds stopped , and they could n't go out to the top of the sand on the road .
GOLD:	But they hit a shoal and ran the ship aground too soon . The bow of the ship stuck fast , while the stern was repeatedly smashed by the force of the waves and began to break apart .

ID:	3151
INPUT:	▁Goretsazue ▁Jauna , ▁nazio ▁guztiok , os pa ▁ezazue , ▁herri ▁guztiok !
PRED:	Praise the Lord , all the nations of the world !
GOLD:	Praise the Lord , all you nations.Praise him , all you people of the earth .

ID:	3152
INPUT:	▁Kar aban ak ▁bidetik ▁okertu ▁egiten ▁dira : erre ka ▁leh orre i ▁ere m urantz ▁jarraitu ▁eta ▁bertan ▁galtzen .
PRED:	The kings of Tarshish are dried up from the desert , and the waters of the earth .
GOLD:	The caravans turn aside to be refreshed , but there is nothing to drink , so they die .

ID:	3153
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁erregeak ▁erantzungo ▁die : ▁“ Benetan ▁diotsuet : ▁Nire ▁sen i derik ▁txiki en ▁hau etako ▁edozein i ▁egin ▁zenio ten a , ▁neu ri ▁egin ▁zenidaten ”.
PRED:	And the king will reply , ‘ I tell you the truth , the one who has given me good advice . '
GOLD:	“ And the King will say , ‘ I tell you the truth , when you did it to one of the least of these my brothers and sisters , you were doing it to me ! '

ID:	3154
INPUT:	▁Agur tu ▁besar ka da ▁santu az ▁senide ▁guztiak .
PRED:	Greet all my brothers and sisters .
GOLD:	Greet all the brothers and sisters with a sacred kiss .

ID:	3155
INPUT:	▁Tenpluko ▁lagun tzaileak ▁Of el ▁auz a tegian ▁bizi ▁ziren ; ▁Tz ih a ▁eta ▁G ix pa ▁ziren ▁haien ▁buru .
PRED:	The men of the Temple servants who lived in the Temple of Ophel .
GOLD:	The Temple servants , however , whose leaders were Ziha and Gishpa , all lived on the hill of Ophel .

ID:	3156
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁Jainko ▁Jauna ▁laino ▁batean ▁jaitsi ▁eta ▁Moises ekin ▁egon ▁zen , ▁eta ▁bere ▁izena ▁hots ▁egin ▁zuen : ▁« Jauna ».
PRED:	Then the Lord appeared to Moses , and Moses went down to the pillar of cloud and said , “ The Lord has spoken ! ”
GOLD:	Then the Lord came down in a cloud and stood there with him ; and he called out his own name , Yahweh .

ID:	3157
INPUT:	▁D ir uz alek eria
PRED:	Uzziah Rules in Judah
GOLD:	The Futility of Wealth

ID:	3158
INPUT:	▁Jai ▁haiek ▁bukatu rik , ▁bertan ▁izan iko ▁israeldarrak ▁Judako ▁hirietan ▁barrena ▁ibili ▁ziren ▁zutarri ▁sakratuak ▁hausten , ▁zutoin ▁sakratuak ▁ebaki ▁eta ▁kultu - leku ▁eta ▁aldareak ▁des egiten , ▁denak ▁suntsitu ▁arte . ▁Eta ▁hori ▁bera ▁egin ▁zuten ▁Benjamin , ▁Efraim ▁eta ▁Manasesen ▁lurralde etan ▁ere . ▁Ondoren , ▁israeldar ▁guztiak ▁nor ▁bere ▁hiri ▁eta ▁etxera ▁itzuli ▁ziren .
PRED:	After all the people of Israel had finished building their sacred pillars , they smashed the sacred pillars and smashed the sacred pillars . They smashed the sacred pillars and smashed the sacred pillars and burned incense at the pagan shrines and destroyed all the towns of Ephraim .
GOLD:	When the festival ended , the Israelites who attended went to all the towns of Judah , Benjamin , Ephraim , and Manasseh , and they smashed all the sacred pillars , cut down the Asherah poles , and removed the pagan shrines and altars . After this , the Israelites returned to their own towns and homes .

ID:	3159
INPUT:	▁Nire ▁jantziak ▁bana tzen ▁dituzte , nire ▁soin ekoa ▁zotz ▁egiten .
PRED:	They will cover my cloak with my coat , and my coat .
GOLD:	O Lord , do not stay far away ! You are my strength ; come quickly to my aid !

ID:	3160
INPUT:	▁Z oz keta z ▁banatuko ▁duzue ▁lurraldea ▁leinu ▁eta ▁senitarte en ▁artean : ▁senitar tea ▁ugaria ▁bada , ▁ondare - zat ia ▁ere ▁handiagoa ▁emango ▁zaio , ▁eta ▁ur ria ▁bada ▁txik iago a . ▁Sen itar te ▁bakoitzak ▁z oz ketan ▁egokitu riko ▁ondarea ▁jasoko ▁du .
PRED:	If you are an allotment of land among the tribes of Israel , you must be an allotment of land among the property of land , and the number of land will be given to the number of land . It will be an allotment of land among the property of land .
GOLD:	You must distribute the land among the clans by sacred lot and in proportion to their size . A larger portion of land will be allotted to each of the larger clans , and a smaller portion will be allotted to each of the smaller clans . The decision of the sacred lot is final . In this way , the portions of land will be divided among your ancestral tribes .

ID:	3161
INPUT:	▁« I k asi ▁pikondo aren ▁irudi ▁honetatik : ▁ki m ua ▁berri tzen ▁eta ▁hos toa ▁zabaltzen ▁zaion eko , ▁badakizue ▁u da ▁hurbil ▁dela .
PRED:	“ At this point , you must spread a fig tree on a fig tree , and you know that it is near .
GOLD:	“ Now learn a lesson from the fig tree . When its branches bud and its leaves begin to sprout , you know that summer is near .

ID:	3162
INPUT:	▁Neure ▁artean ▁ni oen : ▁“ H itz ▁egin ▁beza ▁adin ak , i rak ats ▁bezate ▁urte ek ▁jakinduria ”.
PRED:	I said to you , ‘ Let me tell you the truth , so let 's find wisdom . '
GOLD:	I thought , ‘ Those who are older should speak , for wisdom comes with age . '

ID:	3163
INPUT:	▁Israel ▁herriak , ▁erregeak ▁kas urik ▁ere ▁ez ▁ziola ▁egiten ▁oharturik , ▁ihardetsi ▁zion :« Ez ▁dugu ▁deus ▁ere ▁nahi ▁David ekin ! Ez ▁dugu ▁par terik ▁nahi Jes eren ▁seme arekin ! Z euen ▁etxol etara , ▁israeldarrok ! Z ain du ▁zeuk ▁zeure ▁etxea , ▁David !» Horrela , ▁bada , ▁israeldarrak ▁beren ▁etxol etara ▁joan ▁ziren .
PRED:	When the people of Israel heard this , the king said to him , “ We do n't want us to do what you want to do . We want to do , but we want to go to your homes to your homes , O God of Israel ! ”
GOLD:	When all Israel realized that the king had refused to listen to them , they responded , “ Down with the dynasty of David ! We have no interest in the son of Jesse.Back to your homes , O Israel ! Look out for your own house , O David ! ” So the people of Israel returned home .

ID:	3164
INPUT:	▁bere ▁eskuzabal tasunaren ▁dohain ako p aro ▁isuri ▁ditu ▁gure ▁gainera , jakin duria ▁eta ▁ezagu era ▁oroz gu ▁horni tuz .
PRED:	He gives generously to the grace of our Lord our God , and all who fear him .
GOLD:	He has showered his kindness on us , along with all wisdom and understanding .

ID:	3165
INPUT:	▁eta ▁hango ▁ogia ▁ja tean , ▁zati ▁bat ▁bereizi ▁eta ▁Jaunari ▁eskainiko ▁diozue .
PRED:	You must present some of the food to the Lord and present it to the Lord .
GOLD:	and you eat the crops that grow there , you must set some aside as a sacred offering to the Lord .

ID:	3166
INPUT:	▁Ibil i ▁Jaunaren ▁bila , ▁bizi ▁zaitezten . Beste la , ▁Joseren ▁ondorengoen gain era ▁oldar tuko ▁da , itz ali ▁ezin eko ▁s uz iren tsiko ▁du ▁Betel .
PRED:	Look at the end of the Lord 's people will go down to the land of Ephraim , and the descendants of Joseph will never be able to pass through Bethel .
GOLD:	Come back to the Lord and live ! Otherwise , he will roar through Israel like a fire , devouring you completely.Your gods in Bethelwo n't be able to quench the flames .

ID:	3167
INPUT:	▁Orduan , ▁ordea , ▁bere ▁buru ra ▁hautsa ▁bota , ▁soin ekoa ▁urratu ▁eta ▁eskuak ▁buruan ▁zituela , ▁garrasika ▁joan ▁zen ▁Tamar .
PRED:	But when she tore his robe on his head , she tore his hands on burlap and wept .
GOLD:	But now Tamar tore her robe and put ashes on her head . And then , with her face in her hands , she went away crying .

ID:	3168
INPUT:	▁D il an , ▁Mitz pe , ▁Jok te el ,
PRED:	There were the towns of Mizpah , Azekah ,
GOLD:	Dilean , Mizpeh , Joktheel ,

ID:	3169
INPUT:	▁Ets aiak ▁ate etan
PRED:	The doors of the Temple
GOLD:	Jerusalem 's Last Warning

ID:	3170
INPUT:	▁Jaunak ▁hau ▁esan ▁dit :« Leh oiak ▁nahiz ▁leh o ik umeak orro ▁eginez eraso tzen ▁dio ▁harrapakin ari , eta ▁ez ▁dute ▁beldur tzen aur ka ▁dator kion artz ain - talde aren ▁oihu ek , ez ▁eta ▁uz k ur rarazten haien ▁zalapar tak . Hala xe ▁etorriko ▁da Jaun ▁ahalguztiduna Sion ▁mendira , ▁bere ▁mendira , b orro kara .
PRED:	This is what the Lord says : “ If you are like a lion or a lion , the lion will come and devour its prey , ” says the Lord of Heaven 's Armies .
GOLD:	But this is what the Lord has told me : “ When a strong young lionstands growling over a sheep it has killed , it is not frightened by the shouts and noiseof a whole crowd of shepherds.In the same way , the Lord of Heaven 's Armieswill come down and fight on Mount Zion .

ID:	3171
INPUT:	▁Eta ▁honela ▁hasi ▁zen ▁berekiko ▁pents atzen : ▁“ Zer ▁egin , ▁ez ▁baitut ▁uzta ▁non ▁jasorik ?”
PRED:	And she began to think , ‘ What 's I do ? '
GOLD:	He said to himself , ‘ What should I do ? I do n't have room for all my crops . '

